"NINTENDO  SEGA  SONY  3DO  ARCADE  ATARI  PC CD-ROM COMPUTER NINTENDO VIDEO ULTRA NINTENDO 64 .45 STOP PRESS!!! 68.00 ASCH $6.50 9,500 L IRST EVER PICTURES! FEBRUARY 1996 SONG INTENDO64 02 > THE HEDGEHOG FIGHTING GAME FROM 9 1770261\"369079 Vhiondo mun WITHOUT THIS, THERE MAY NOT BE A FUTURE FOR VIDEO GAMES: PLUS! Saturn: X-Men. PlayStation: Zero Divide Decora PC CD-ROM: The Dig HIROSHI YAMAUCHI. PRESIDENT, NINTENDO CO. LTD. Jaguar: Defender 2000. The Greatest Guide PART ONE SNES: Panel De Pon Start S SF SEGA RALLY REVIEWED RINGE RACER REVNI LITINN "


"EUROPE'S LARGEST KILLER OF TIME ZOOP YOU MAY ALREADY BE ADDICTED No one is immune (zoopx10') what Output of the Heart (gallons of blood per minute) when man is: what <.. Parents (Ganggreenus) (Fungusamungus) Resting (Mosquitick) (Martinicocki) Walking the game 4... Children... (Infectococci) (Lockjawbacilli) Playing Zoop Known carriers of Zoop A healthy iris MegadriveTM SNES USENE Game Boy  CD-ROM The same iris after Zoop * Macintosh TM PC The stages of Zoop (what to look for 0023700 001 Cupca NUDI PlayStation COMING 96 Saturn COMING 9 (level 3) How Zoop affects the brain (level 6) PES DE It attacks the frontal lobes of the Cerebrum impairing: judgement, higher learnin reason It slowly eats at the Cerebellum restricting: movement, coordination, balance (level 8) It looks like a harmless video game until it enters the blood stream and mixes with your DNA. In order to eradicate this affliction we must learn its moves, understand its thinking and anticipate its next move. Only then can we begin to battle and conquer this killer. (level 9) (this pattern continues on, and sadly always leads to one's demise) It mutates the Medulla causing irregular: digestion, respiration, heartbeat AVAILABLE AT: Dixons, Curry's, PC World, Toys R Us, Future Zone, HMV, Virgin/Our Price and all good games stockists 1995 Viacom International Inc. Zoop is a trademark of Viacom International. All Rights Reserved. Nintendo Super Nes, Game Boy and the official seal are registered trademarks of Nintendo of Europe, Inc. 1991 Nintendo of Europe, Inc. Sega M. Game Gear and Saturn are trademarks of Sega Enterprises, LTD. All rights reserved. This official seal is your assurance that this product meets the highest quality standards of Sega. Buy games and accessories with this seal to be sure that they are compatible with the Sega Mega Drive System Are you hooked yet? http://www.demon.co.uk/noonen/zoop het "


"Aaahh!!! cho Real Monster! "


"CVG CONTENTS CONTENTS CONTENTS X-MEN P 54 P 54 VIRTUA FIGHTER 2 Level ED LOMAS SPENT LONG HOURS WITH A RULER AND A PIECE OF STRING, MEASURING THE DISTANCE BETWEEN FIGHTERS AND THE LENGTH OF THEIR ENERGY BARS. WHY? OCENES 0899 1-3 HIT 5.0 ARCADE PURISTS MAY KNOCK IT FOR MINOR FLAWS, BUT WE REALLY ARE AMAZED BY THIS UNCANNY CONVERSION FROM CAPCOM. ONE MORE REASON FOR SATURN OWNERS TO CELEBRATE, THEN, STARTING ON PAGE 54. Dla 80 MPH SEGA RALLYP 38 WE COULD TALK FOREVER ABOUT THE GREATNESS OF THIS GAME. HOWEVER WE'VE SAVED YOU THE BOREDOM AND COMPRESSED ALL OUR PRAISES INTO FOUR PAGES. STILL, THIS WON'T PREVENT US RAVING ON ABOUT IT NEXT MONTH TOO. gevoel Castrol "


"CONTENTS COMPUTER REGULARS 6 EDITORIAL 8 CONNECTED 74 VIDEO DROME 92 CHEAT MODE 96 IN THE BAG 98 NEXT MONTH GAMES ISSUE # 171 FEB  PREVIEWS 84 Cyberia Saturn 85 Power Sports Soccer PlayStation 86 NBA: In the Zone PlayStation 87 Duke Nukem 3D PC 88 Guardian Heroes Saturn NINTENDO NINTENDO REVIEWS 64-BIT 28 Defender 2000 Jaguar 30 Supercross Jaguar @ @ NINTENDO ULTRA 64 LAP1/8 TOTAL 00 02 met TIME OOP 0886 (Nintendo WHY ON EARTH YOU'RE BOTHERING TO READ THIS LITTLE BOX, WHEN THERE'S ELEVEN PAGES OF CRUCIAL INFORMATION WAITING INSIDE THE MAG IS BEYOND US. SOD OFF TO... P 16 Km/h 32-BIT 32 The Dig PC CD-ROM 38 Sega Rally Saturn 42 Namco Museum PlayStation 44 Alone in the Dark PlayStation 48 Mystaria Saturn 50 Zero Divide PlayStation 54 X-Men Saturn 60 Ridge Racer Revolution PlayStation 66 Tilt PC CD-ROM 68 Baku Baku Animal Saturn 70 Krazy Ivan PlayStation RIDGE RACER REVOLUTION 34233 OH NO! JUST AS EVERYONE WAS HAPPY TO VIEW SEGA RALLY AS THE GREATEST RACING GAME IN HISTORY, NAMCO UNLEASH THE SEQUEL TO RIDGE RACER. HOLD TIGHT! 20-915 P 60 4' 11\"264 KAMCO MA namCO 16-BIT 36 Panel De Pon Super NES NAMCO 3 2ELAS PELOS "


"CVG zoromne EDITORIAL EDITORIAL CREDIT-O-DROME IT'S ONLY A BOX.. EDITOR: PAUL DAVIES DEPUTY EDITOR: TOM GUISE ART EDITOR: TOM COX DEPUTY ART EDITOR: PETREA DOYLE DESIGNER: JAIME SMITH STAFF WRITER: ED LOMAS CONTRIBUTERS: MARCUS HEARN, KATE RUSSEL, ROB BRIGHT, MATT BROUGHTON, JOHN RYDER THANKS TO: ALEX AND BARBARA AT THE FOR THE SHOSHINKAI VISIT. SPECIAL THANKS TO: VIOLET, COLIN, ROBIN, NAOMI, TINA, HER SISTER, AND MR YAMANAKA, FOR ENSURING PAUL HAD THE GREATEST TIME IN JAPAN. I've been through about as much excitement as one person can handle, I reckon and out the other side! s you might appreciate, after a concen certain kind of game. Not the other way trated few weeks of incredible hardware around. Anyone with enough money could go and software launches, the whole atmos out and buy a development kit for the current phere on the magazine has been lifted. systems, but few have the right combination of It's as though somebody has taken hold talent and inspiration to make a great game of the rug we're standing on and given it a happen. The difference with Nintendo is that good old shake. Everything's up in the air, but they know exactly why they wanted their it's exciting! machine to perform certain tasks. And exactly Just how everything settles is entirely up to you. why they required a certain kind of controller. But don't let the news of a new Nintendo Admittedly the result is something which makes machine confuse the issue too much. Though the 32-bit systems look fairly short sighted. the system is outstanding in every way, the Fair to say that every developer has their work future still lies with great, imaginative games. cut out for them this year. Which can only be a The only argument worth recognising so far, is good thing. that Shigeru Miyamoto has explained that the NU 64 came about through a desire to create a PAUL Editorial and advertising: 01 71-972 6700 Editorial fax: 0171-713 6701 Advertising fax: 0171-216 6219 Subscription and Back Issues: (9.30-5.30 Mon-Fri): 01858 468888 CVG Headquarters: Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. TWO THUMBS MY FRIENDS! ADVERTISING MANAGER: Lisa 'Hun' Hawkes DEPUTY AD MANAGER: Chris 'Linebacker' Perera PRODUCTION: Vicky 'Cracker' Jacobs SYSTEMS MANAGER: Sarah-Jane 'HAL' Leavey, PRODUCT MANAGER: Gary \"Pleasant' Lord SYSTEMS AND PRODUCTION CO-ORDINATOR: Sarah 'Sex Thimble' Best PROMOTIONS MANAGER: Saul \"Hold' Leese PRODUCT MANAGER: Tina 'Luscious' Hicks EXECUTIVE PUBLISHING DIRECTOR: Graham 'Gorgeous' Taylor SUBSCRIPTION ENQUIRIES TEL: 01858 468888 RATES (Includes postage and packing): 12 ISSUES UK: .00 AIRMAIL EUROPE: .00 AIRMAIL ZONE 1: .00 AIRMAIL ZONE 2: .00 REST OF WORLD SURFACE: .00 BFPO: .00, EIRE: .00 PRINTED IN THE UK BY: St Ives PLC, Peterborough DISTRIBUTED BY: Frontline (c) COPYRIGHT: Computer and Video Games 1994/5 ISBN NO: 0261-3597 DISCLAIMER: Although we take great care to ensure the accuracy of the information contained in this magazine, CVG and the publishers cannot be held responsible for omissions, errors, misprints or mistakes which may occur. HAPPY NEW YEAR. We're not out and out liggers here at CVG, but when the opportunity arises to meet Pop Will Eat Itself, we're hardly going to turn it down. A lot of people seem to think it's clever knocking this band, but the fact is they're a bunch of extremely cool individuals, whose music has never far from the charts for roughly ten years, and who know exactly what they're about. Recently they've been all about talking to magazines like yours truly, because their music is featured in the game Loaded, from Gremlin. Adam, Fuzz, and Clint sat down to talk, at the rented flat opposite to the recording studios where they are putting the finishing touches to their new album. TOTAL FINE FRENCH DOWO FINGERS MY FRIENDSE A Clint takes control, while Fuzz sits back reckoning he can do better. "


"EDITORIAL CVG AMAZING SEGA PAL CONVERSIONS! | TEAM-O-DROME SEG SATU By now you've probably seen official copies of Virtua Cop with the gun, in your local games shop. Then again, you probably haven't. You see, since it was released on Decemebr 8th, gun-packs of the game have completely sold out, with new supplies not set to arrive until the end of January at the earliest. If you look, you can still get the game without the gun (we don't recommend it though) or buy it as part of the new  Saturn in-game package. With no borders and full-speed action, it's a mighty impressive conversion too... ...As is the UK version of Virtua Fighter 2! Released on January 5th, the game runs at full-speed with only microscopic borders. We've played it and we can honestly say it retains all the speed and timing of the Japanese version. Although bizarrely, the character select screen has borders and Shun doesn't go red (this seems to have been a Sega of America request), although he still retains all his drunken prowess. Nonetheless, it's a cracking conversion and far superior to the slow, letterbox PAL version of Tekken. Expect to see similar brilliance from the UK version of Sega Rally, set for release on the 24th January. Incidently, an amazing 700,000 copies of VF2 were sold into homes in Japan within the first two days of release. And sales of the Saturn compared to PlayStations in Japan went up from 3:1, to 4.7:1 prior to the game's release. So there's been a bit of a VF frenzy out there, as there has been in our office, as you can see from Part One of our awesome VF2 guide on page 78. PAUL DAVIES \"Excitement.\" Let's try that again, Paul: \"Excitement!\" That's better. As you can tell, Paul's all 'excited out this month. Last minute Sonic news doesn't help either. He has been subject to so much of that particular emotion, that he is having an extra 'Glee' lobe fitted to his brain. That makes a total of three. Currently the full collection is recharging in time for next month's onslaught. 16 TOM GUISE Fans wishing to meet up with their favourite Deputy Editor of CVG this month, will find him at Universe 0 Carpets, Toothbrush Galaxy, or Mouthwash Macrocosm seeking replacements for his disasterstruck abode. However don't expect him to sign any autographs, or offer any kindly advice, because he has been practically disabled by too many VF2 beatings!!! Hah-hah! Tom's a loser! Except with Jacky but he's cheesy. U CKBUSS PRESS SIRI ED LOMAS Egg has been getting pretty brassed off with people getting his name wrong this month. It hasn't helped that his health has been suffering, due to extended hours perfecting his Virtua Fighter 2 guide which took about half the time schedule to write! Neither did the Christmas party do much to improve his spirits, as he consumed far too many...er, trifles, and mad himself very sick. Everywhere. All night. And most of the next day. Poor Mr Lomatose, eh. So the big question on everyones' lips was, are PWEI into games, or what? Adam: \"No not really. We all try to keep away from it because it takes up so much time. Games are okay for about twenty minutes or so, but you can't really play 'em like that. Not this [Loaded] anyway. We haven't got a save card either.\" Fuzz: \"I was never really into games before this [Loaded). But I think it's great!\" (Fuzz, incidentally, was still catching up on sleep after spending the best part of the previous night trying to get beyond stage 11!) Clint: \"I thought the music in Donkey Kong Country was good when you went under water, all the ambience and stuff.\" Right, okay then. So what about their involvement with Loaded? Adam: I think kids who are into our band like games. It's a sort of cross-cultural thing. Games are more popular than some films these days. If you get to do a soundtrack for a game, chances are you get to reach the best part of our market.\" He then went on to rubbish Aerosmith, and their involvement with Revolution X as it was just an excuse to show lots of girls in bikinis, and not much to do with Aerosmith at all. So would PWEI consider having their likenesses adapted for use in a video game? Adam: \"Yeh, why not.» As it turned out, the band have been keeping one eye on the video games scene for quite some time. Like Clint used to really enjoy «that WWI shooting game\" on the spectrum (1942). And \"Space Invaders was good! I'd like a copy of that», from Adam. Plus an Edgar Alan Poe style brainstorming session revealed how Clint thinks arcade Splatterhouse is cool too described as \"a Kung Fu sort of thing, where you get weapons and that, then some big bloke beats the s*** out of you.\" (The clue which finally gave it away was the Jason mask, from Friday 13th.) This isn't first time PWEI have been involved with video games on a professional level, however. 1994's Donkey Kong Country came packaged with a limited edition CD, containing one of their tracks. Before that they took to sampling bits from the Bitmap Bros classic Speedball 2, for use in one of their tracks in 1988. They've been up to similar tricks with Loaded for the album in progress. The main reason for our being there, however, was to talk about the new soundtrack for ReLoaded (Loaded 2). For this the band are writing all new tracks, specifically for that game. Work hasn't started yet, but Adam seemed fairly fired up at the prospect. Them having to consider certain moods and atmospheres that work well in a game environment. There's still a while to wait for ReLoaded. But in the meantime there's a new PWEI album to look forward to, due this Spring. Plus 1994's cool 'Dos Dedos Mis Amigos' album has just been remixed by people such as Loop Guru, Fluke, and Fun-DaMental, under the name of 'Two Fingers My Friend'. TOM COX \"Wouldn't it be good if, right, you had a game based on ACTUAL Gladiators. Romans, and that...\" Wassat, Tom?\"...an' you could have the arena with the two blokes with SWORDS, or NO! NO! YEH! You could feed people to the lions. Yeh, that's it...\" Tom! Tom! Snap out of it!\"......and part of the game could be where you have to RUN AWAY. Huhhuh. NO! NO! YEH, you could be the LION or summink and EAT THE PEOPLE...\" Sorry Tom, butSLAP! PATREA DOYLE Truth be told, if we were to write an accurate account of Trea's month, we would have spent the whole time sitting by her bedside eating grapes. Or something like that, as she's been ill. So here's what she would like to have done: \"Well, it would have been really nice if I could spend the whole month in bed. And have all my friends come round to visit me. And eat grapes. And that.\" So you see, it's been a near perfect month for Trea all round. JAIME SMITH More excessive trifle quaffing at the office party resulted in Jaime's subsequent absence from work the following day. He'd actually spent the night kipping on Tommy G's floor, and asking politely if he could empty the contents of his stomach into the sink. On his 'day off', Jaime patrolled the London underground, in search of Sustenance, clinging onto walls, and cowering in the shadows between times. So! He was faking this 'illness' all along! "


"NEWS CVG NEWS connected It's a double Tokyo show the wired-up gaming news section Mario RPG and Kirby Super Deluxe revealed on Super NES. frenzy this month, as First shots of Panzer Dragoon 2 and Magic Carpet on Saturn. Sega and Nintendo each Sega and Nintendo each HOT SUPER NES GAMES AT SHOSHINI (Nintendo) was held More on Saturn Darkstalkers 2 and Street Fighter Alpha. stage their own The development of Dark Saviour on Saturn continues. respective events to While the Shoshinkai was held primarily to showcase the SHOSHINKAI SHOW REPORT Nintendo 64, it was also used as an opportunity to unveil some of the hot Super Famicom titles scheduled for release this year. And if you thought the days of Nintendo's 16-bit console were over, you'd better think again, because there's some cracking software lined up for it. Finally, the PlayStation gets a light gun. First game revealed. unveil the upcoming Christopher Walken stars in future horror_game Ripper! titles they've got ThunderHawk 2 arrives on PlayStation and PC CD-ROM HOST SHOW IN TO lined-up for 1996. And it News of Saturn link-up cable and a possible first game for it. wasn't just NU64 at Rise Of The Robots 2 rears its cyborg head on PC and PlayStastion. Shoshinkai, you know. The launch of the Nintendo 64 at the Tokyo Shoshinkai Show might be the hottest TOSHIMAEN SHOW REPORT video gaming news of the moment, but it's not the only big console event to have happened recently. At almost exactly the same time, also in Tokyo, Sega held a show of their own, revealing some of the hot games they've got lined up for 1996. Here's a selection of the best titles from the Toshimaen 'Vs Saturn' Show. And Charlton Heston stars in a CD-ROM version of... The Bible! "


"HERE'S MARIO! GIVE Ho KONAMI. NBA SUPERI Easily the most impressive is the Mario RPG, an incredibly lavish looking production clocking in at 32 Megs. As with all the Mario games, Bowser's involved, kidnapping Princess Mushroom and leading the little plumber to his castle. However, whilst they're fighting a huge sword falls from the sky. Climactic stuff, but in fact this is only the beginning of the game! It's an RPG in the purest sense of the word, as you have to lead Mario around Mario World fighting, using magic and solving puzzles in the usual RPG tradition. You can even return to Mario's house to restore your health. What's most impressive though, are the beautifully-rendered SGI-graphics, giving the game a look that beats Diddy's kong Quest. You might think this game is overshadowed by the the bigger Mario outing on the NU64, however Paul's played the game he reckons it's one of the most impressive games he's ever seen. 2014201 242/8023 WE ONANTO KONAMI use real SPEDIRL REJ C 30) UNPORT  IS  INBayers, ! !! /. that way STORIA you'll known KON who PANZER DRAGOON 2| The hottest game to be revealed at the show had to be the sequel to last year's brilliant Panzer Dragoon. Panzer Dragoon Zwei is the bizarre Germanic name of the game and it looks totally incredible. Building on the 360 degree, 3D shoot 'em up formula of the original Panzer Dragoon, Zwei pushes the concept even further with larger levels, allowing you to select different routes through each one. All the familiar elements from the first game are in there, such as the 3D radar and lock-on/ rapid-fire shooting system. However, those of you expecting to see your trusty dragon steed from the first game you may be disappointed, as the one in Panzer Dragoon Zwei is an all-new puppy dragon hatched from an egg. As such, the early levels take place on the ground with you riding the baby dragon along the landscapes, before it finally unfolds its wings and takes to the air. Panzer Dragoon Zwei is still at a very early stage of development, however it's already clear the graphics are an improvement over the original's. Expect to see much more on this game next month. Rated 90% by Nintendo Magazine System!! FONAMI Get ready for serious hoop action with real NBA stars and teams, NBA With incredible mode 7 graphics and play by play commentary you'll feel you're on the court with the best the NBA has to offer. Can you cut it? PORT 18.10] (02:46] D one 1900 189:52 0 0 Release date: 15th November 1995 The NBA and individual NBA member tean idoritications used on or in this product are trademarks, copyrighted designs and other forms of intellectual property of NA Properties, Inc. and the respective NBA member team and may not be used, in whole or in part, without the prior written consent of NBA Properties, Inc.  NBA Toperties, Inc. All OFFICIAL J-wzowo PRODUCT "


"NEWS CVG NEWS connected Nintendo SHOSHINKAI SHOW REPORT SUPER NES RPG ONSLAUGHT! SHOSHINKAI SHOW REPORT Pictured here is another Super NES RPG from Enix the makers of the Dragon Quest games. What it's called though, is a mystery. 1 Coel Uuuuuning The latest instalment of the most popular RPG in Japan, Dragon Quest VI, was on display at Shoshinkai. Incidently.Yuji Horii, the head of Enix (the people behind the Dragon Quest series) was asked by Hiroshi Yamauchi (the head of Nintendo himself) about whether it would be possible to create a Dragon Quest game you could write your own sections into. Mr Horii reckoned it is possible, but it's going to take around one and half years to devlelop. So you can expect to see both this game and a similarly 'writeable' Zelda title from Shigeru Miyamoto in around a year on the NU64's 'bulky drive' format. You can find out more on this machine in our NU64 feature. Another RPG which, amazingly enough, was rated higher than Dragon Quest VI by Nintendo's highly critical internal games testers is Namco's Tales of Phantasia a massive 48 Meg adventure. Also quite interesting is Bahamut Lagoon, an RPG/ warstrategy title which has you breeding dragons. Most intriguing though, is Tengai Makyo Zero, a joint RPG from Hudson Soft and NCL which features the PLG time-keeping chip. This chip actually memorises what time and date it is in real-life, so if, for instance, you play the game at night, it's night in the game too. All the seasons are included too, and characters even wish you Happy Birthday on the day. There are other touches too. For instance, if your character has a pet and you fail to play the game for a couple of weeks (and thus not feed it in that time either), you'll find it starved to death when you next play the game! 211ITUKOL  = > 7113077. SEGA DARK SAVIOUR TOSHIMAEN SHOW REPORT This one has graced the news pages of CVG before, but with its appearance at the show, Dark Saviour has earned itself more coverage. And rightly so, because this game looks set to be hot stuff. Programmed by Climax, the people behind the original Shining Force and Landstalker (both excellent Megadrive RPGs incase you didn't know), the game is extremely similar to the latter. In other words, it's a 3D isometric RPG. However, instead of using 2D backdrops cleverly drawn to simulate 3D (as was done with Landstalker) all the game's background graphics are genuine 3D, created using polygons. The result is mightily impressive, with multi-height levels, packed with scenery which you can steer the hero behind or even inside! A huge ship level was demonstrated at the show, as the hero-character explored its engine room, the cabins, and even went on deck, clambering around pipes attached the hull. The game is currently 37% complete, but we hope to bring you much more coverage when we actually manage to get our hands ona preproduction copy. CAPCOM'S FIGHTING FARE... +40035 Capcom's next two big Saturn games Darkstalkers 2 and Streetfighter Alpha were previewed at the Toshimaen show, and both look set to match the arcade versions almost perfectly. Still, that should come as no surprise with Capcom's first Saturn outing, X-Men: Children of the Atom, astounding us with its arcade perfectness (you can find the review on page 54). There's not much else to say, so take a look at these pictures and look forward to the forthcoming reviews. Streetfighter Alpha should be released first, in January. 10 "


"NEWS NEWS CVG A KIRBY COLLECTION AND THE GAME TAAL por Monster.com action game in which he gains more and more powers as he progresses, stealing them off the foes he's eaten. Pocket Monsters. Below is the Green Version packaging and title screen. There were a number of other Super NES titles from Nintendo themselves at the show. Scheduled for a Feb release is Kirby Super Deluxe, a collection of six mini-games on a 32 Meg cart. There's a condensed version of the original Gameboy Kirby title. Another game in which Kirby swallows his opponents to steal their abilities (as in the NES game), this time though he's joined by a sidekick, which allows for two-player cooperative play. There's a racing game, a maze game and a 'grittier' Kirby game which has a much darker storyline. Finally, there's a Kirby Dok2 POCKET MONSTERS GAME SOY Rumour has it that the Game Boy is near enough dead in Japan, with games shops placing the cartridges in bargain buckets near the doors. Surprising then, that there was still a selection of new (and impressive) Game Boy software at the show. Takara revealed, would you believe, Game Boy versions of King Of Fighters and Toh Shin Den. Kirby's Block Ball is a rehash of the old Breakout theme. ABOVE: Kirby Block Ball GB. LEFT: Kirby Super Deluxe on Super Famicom. And, showing there's still innovation in Nintendo's little handheld, Pocket Monsters is an interesting RPG which allows you to train and then transfer monsters from your Game POCKET TO Boy to your friend's, via the link-up cable. Thus you can accumulate a cartridge packed with rare and powerful specimens with which to do KLEN battle with. The game comes in POCKET MONSTERS two versions Red and Green each with a different kind of monEl ster. We're particularly intrigued by this game, so rest assured when we The Red Version get hold of a few features a dragon copies we'll delve as your monster. further into it. FROM KONAM GAME BOY 183333 Konami provided their usual support for the Super Famicom at Shoshinkai, with Power Pro Baseball 3, the latest and most impressive instalment of their popular baseball games. They also unveiled another Parodius title. What makes this one so special is that it includes commentary, which changes according to the on-screen action, just like in the Konami sports titles. And whilst on the sports front, there's also a new Konami wrestling game, Power Pro Wrestling '96. One to look out for. Dweeb An Australian Expression For People Who Toss GumOnThe Street. GUM... ENJOY IT. WRAP IT. BINIT. CO "


"NEWS CVG NEWS connected ROBOT RESURRECTION! PLAYSTATION LIGHT GUN REVEALED! Following the success of Virtua Cop on the Saturn, it seemed inevitable the Playstation would have to follow suit with a gun game. Well Sony have the situation well in-hand and have commisioned Konami to create the required device. Presumably because they have previous experience with their own Justifier guns created for the Lethal Enforcers games on Megadrive and Super NES. Well, here's the results of their work the Playstation light gun. It's unknown when the gun is set for release or how much it's going to cost, but the first title for it, Horned Owl, (also pictured) is set for release on the December 29th in Japan, so it would make sense that the gun would be released at the same time. Strangely, the game is done by Sony in-house, not Konami, and in fact Konami have no plans to release any games for their gun. It seems likely though, that Namco are working on some gun-related titles, so we might see Time Crisis and (a Tom Guise favourite this) Point Blank on the Playstation. Remember Rise Of the Robots? If you do, hopefully it isn't because you bought it, because to be quite frank, it wasn't very good. Nonetheless, those people responsible, Mirage, have taken the game back to the drawing board and are currently warming up a sequel. Big things are promised of Rise Of The Robots 2: Resurrection however, as Mirage have taken into consideration a lot of the criticisms raised about the original game. Plus, focus groups of gameplayers have also been called in to gauge the development of the game. The result is something Mirage call \"the most heavily engineered beat 'em up in the history of the genre!\" There's now a massive 28 characters in the game, with a tons of special moves, secret special moves and terminations (fatalities to you and me). And the backgrounds are now interactive with swinging cranes and the like. Among the changes to the original Rise formula, is the smoothing out of the special moves, making them more like Street Fighter moves (that's what you like supposedly) and also the inclusion of more 'humanoid characters (you prefer those too supposedly). There are however, still a few spider-shaped combatants in there. We've seen early versions of both the PC and Playstation versions of the game and they look promising, although we found pulling off some of the moves (especially the terminations) involves some ludicrous button combinations. Look forward to a review next month. 895237 PUSH STAR RUSIA STA Horned Owl. It looks to be the usual shooting at the robots affair. Can it match Virtua Cop in the gun game stakes? MORE TALES FROM THE CRYPT! DOOM IN A MAC! RIPPER! We don't normally cover Macintosh games (In fact, we don't ever cover Macintosh games), but we do like them, because we've all got Macs. And stuff like Macman (Pacman-rip-off) is the only thing an art gorilla like Tom Cox can play. So the news that Ultimate Doom the complete Doom collection plus Thy Flesh Consumed expert levels is coming to Mac is more than welcome news to our ears. All the more so, because the game is going to be fully compatible with the PC version, allowing networking from Macs-to-PCs. Impressive huh? Of course, that's not much good for someone like Tom G who can only play the game on a Game Boy-sized window on his crappy Ilci Mac (it's like a 386, folks). No, it's not a game about some Australian blokes cracking open some tinnies in the arvo. It's a PC CD-Rom game about The Ripper! You know who 'e be. Saucy Jack! That thar gentleman what cut up them ladies down ol' Whitechapel way, sarge. Well more accurately, it's about a serial killer who \"stalks the streets of the futuristic cyberworld of New York\" (hmm, indeed) patterning his attacks on the legendary Jack The Ripper. What's more, it's a bigbudget full-motion video affair with some pretty gruesome special effects. You should see the pictures we've seen of spilled guts and opened stoma... bleurph! And just to add to that chilling atmosphere and show off the big-budget), the game stars none other than Christopher Walken as Detective Vincent Magnotta, hot on the trail of The Ripper. This could prove to be an atmospheric and gripping game, or it could be another FMV duffer. We'll find out in the upcoming months. Yes, it's another spooky game. This time it's Synergist on the PC from Twenty First Century. And in fact, this one is so mysterious that the programmers refuse to tell us anything about what happens in the game, lest they reveal some of the crucial plot devices! It's THAT complex and intriguing! However, from the parts we have seen, we can tell you that it's an RPG in the LucasArts tradition, as you lead Tim Machine, low-paid reporter of the New Arhus Chronicle on the trail of a mystery involving murder, deception and double-dealing. Mixing painted backdrops with full-motion video actors, the game uses an innovative, accessible, pointand-click interface for investigating the scenery. The game has supposedly taken four years to make, and by all accounts it looks like it could be a most involving RPG affair. Expect more, closer to its release in the next couple of months. 12 "


"NEWS KNEEL BEFORE HESTON! RIGHT IN THE GEBOCKERS! MARIO AND DONKEY KONG COME AT THE SAME TIME! Here's a Saturn game with a funny name, that's currently being developed in Japan. Nothing much is known about it (even Sega Europe haven't heard of it), but it seems basically, to be a 3D battle game in which each player takes control of a strange character and flies around, gunning the seven shades out of their opponent. Although we've seen split-screen pictures of the game, the recent ads for it in the Japanese press show two players involved in a game on two different TVs. Could this be the Saturn's first link-up cable game? Ever wondered what God * CHARLTON HESTON'S might look like? Well, the general concensus here is that he probably looks like Charlton Heston. After all, he's been the star of such biblical epics as Ben Hur and The Ten Commandments, he's almost there. Well, furthering his VOYAGE THROUGH stairway to Godness, Charlie is the star of nothing less than 5 THE BIBLE the PC-CD ROM version of The Bible, now renamed Charlton Heston's Voyage Through The Bible! Yep, the mighty Heston guides you through the complete writings of God, with location filming from Egypt and Israel, ancient art from museums, and virtual tours through 3D models of The Second Temple, Meggiddo and other ancient sites. All accompanied by majestic classical music. The New Testament is already available, with The Old Testament following soon (wrong way around surely?). Anway, here's a picture of CH himself, snapped on the finest Turin Shroud. Yes, you read that correctly. On the 5th January Donkey Kong Country 2: Diddy's kong Quest and, more impressively, Super Mario World 2: Yoshi's Island, hit the UK shops officially. So no more staring at those import copies of Yoshi's Island, with their Super FX chips, wishing you could play it. Cos you can. So go on, go and get 'em. 3D PLATFORMARAMA Although easy, there's no doubt that last year's Jumping Flash on the Playstation was one of the most innovative and entertaining games seen being, as it was, the first true 3D platformer. You'd expect to have seen more games of this type since then, but suprisingly there haven't been any. Until now that is. Floating Runner is a distinctly 3D platformer of the polygon variety, although unlike Jumping Flash's first person perspective, this one takes a more distant view of the playfield. Still, it all looks very interesting. We'll know whether that's the case when we get an import copy for a review, hopefully next month. Doik An American Expression For People Who Toss GumOnThe Street, GUM...ENJOY IT. WRAPIT.BIN II. O "


"NEWS CVG NEWS connected THE CLOCKWORK MAGIC CARPET KNIGHT RETURNS! ON SATURN Indeed, he does. Pepperouchau, star of the released over here is also unknown. two Saturn Clockwork Knight platformers is The second new Clockwork Knight game is a back, in two different games! The first one isbit of a departure from the usual platform a compilation of the two Clockwork Knight fare, as Pepperouchau enters the puzzle games, combined into the complete arena. Influenced heavily by Hudson Soft's Pepperouchau Adventure (as it was original Bomberman series, the game allows multily intended to be). You can now play as ple players (supposedly up to twelve players Ginger, Pepperouchau's fellow knight, and at once, in the final version) to move around there are also some all-new flashy animated a lego-style maze, attempting to blow up scenes throughout the game. Exactly what your opponents. It looks kind of interesting, this collection is called is a mystery (as it's but it's still at an early stage, so we'll take all in Japanese). Whether it'll ever get another look at this one in a month or so. EE That's what you're looking at. Yes, Bullfrog are converting their brilliant PC strategy shoot 'em up to the Saturn and, as you can see, it's shaping up excellently. One of the best features of the original was the excellent networking feature, something you'd wouldn't expect to see on the Saturn. However, word has it that Sega Europe already have Saturn link-up cables in the country and Bullfrog are hoping to use them with Magic Carpet. Whether that turns out to be the case deadlines withstanding and all that remains to be seen. The game won't be complete until the end of January. A BERMUDA BEWARE DUNGEONEERS! I2 HOSPITAL CASE Bermuda Syndrome might sound like the dreaded tropical plague that Ed Lomas has brought into the office, but in fact it's an impressive PC platformer in the Flashback vein. As the name suggests, it all takes place in the nefarious Bermuda Triangle during WW2, as you lead crashed American bomber pilot, Jack J Thompson around a mysterious island, armed only with a gun and a few weapons. Promising plenty of other-worldly excitement (and dinosaurs), we're looking forward to this one. So expect more next month. From the pictures, you might think Dungeon Keeper on the PC is just another maze-style RPG. And you'd be right, sort of. However, it has one big difference. Rather than being a dungeoneer, you actually control the dungeon. Yep, it's another Theme Parkstyle game from Bullfrog, only this time you use your money to create dank passages, fill them with monsters and traps, and lure adventurers in with your crocks of treasure. It all sounds highly entertaining and looks brilliant too. Expect more coverage on this one next month. Dinosaurs, folks. It's got huge dinosaurs in it. That's a good start. After the success of the 32-bit console versions of Theme Park, Bullfrog have turned their attention to an all-new Theme game. Theme Hospital is its name, and that says it all really. Building new wards, paying your nurses, making sure you've got enough cardio-scanners and the like. that's the idea behind the game. Although it might not sound as thrilling as, say, Dungeon Keeper, you can guarantee it'll be full of the usual Theme humour, although hopefully not in morbid taste. Expect to see more on PC, PlayStation and Saturn versions soon. 14 "


"NEWS NEWS CVG HARD-CORE GAMES ONSLAUGHT! Em JON Following the highly impressive ThunderHawk 2 on the Saturn last month (it scored 90%), Core Design are all set to release the game on Playstaton and PCCD. We didn't actually have enough room to review them this month, but the two versions are near identical to the Saturn version, providing you run the PC version on a powerful enough machine (we recommend no less than a P75). Core also have a number of other game lined up for release on Saturn and Playstation. The Scottish Open is a virtual golf game featuring the World-famous Carnoustie course. And Shellshock is the long-awaited Tank game in the 3D Thunderhawk mould with a cracking Techno soundtrack. Both games a rescheduled for release next month, so look out for the review next issue. KWA FLEABAG OF GOODIES To the left there you can see Shellshock. The laidback among you might be interested in The Scottish Open, above and below. To celebrate the release of their all-new flea-related game, GameTek have offered up some goodies for a competition. You can win a copy of Frantic Flea (that's the flea game folks), a Super NES and a flea-circus (without the circus) if you can answer this simple question. Where are you most likely to find fleas? 1. Paul Davies' wallet? 2. Ed Lomas' stomach? 3. A dog's bum hair? Send your entries to: Ed Lomas Is Just A Host Coccoon For Baal, Lord Of Fleas Competition, CVG, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1R 3AU. We'll draw out a winner after the closing date of February 15th. HOSER ACanadian Expression For People Who Toss GUMOnThe Street. GUM.....ENJOY IT. WRAPIT. BIN IT. 15 "


"NINTENDO ULTRA 64 CVG «Nintendo and Silicon Graphics' combined expertise in the home entertainment market and visual computing technology will allow game players to step-inside virtual worlds.» Tom Jermoluk, president and chief operating officer of Silicon Graphics. 3D-STICK To quote Nintendo, \"Enables players to identify any angle in 360°, as well as control the speed of a character's movement\". PC game-players are already familiar with the benefits of true 360° control method as most complex flight simulators require it. Console players are new to the experience, but Nintendo have introduced the idea at the most appropriate time as 64-bit, real-time 3D environments are introduced to the home. The advantages of this level of control are so great that it led Hiroshi Yamauchi, president of NCL, to state that without it \"there may not be a future for video games\". Considering how the 3D Stick may simulate the swing of a golf club, tennis racket, or baseball bat, and is obviously more adept at handling steering in a racing game, Mr Yamauchi may well have a point. Already the majority of 32-bit games look dated in the light of this, as the best they can manage is analogue control through 180° with the aid of a steering device. Most 32-bit soccer games require the use a of a run button, whereas the 3D Stick provides more natural control closer to how the mind thinks. And all at the touch of your thumb. D-PAD START BUTTON YOU SAY POTATO, I SAY POTATO FARM (THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN 32-BIT AND 64-BIT) + 8:30am on the 24th of November, I stood with my face pressed up against the window of the Makuhari Messe Centre in Japan. In the distant corner of the arena I could see Nintendo 64 banners, above banks of monitors displaying what definitely appeared to be rendered images of Super Mario's face shifting around. I could also make out indistinct demos of something which I imagined to be a showreel of more SGI demos. That these were Nintendo 64 games was too good to be true. That in less than half an hour I would be not only watching, but getting hands-on experience of the new machine was unthinkable. After all, this was press day. President Hiroshi Yamauchi wasn't due to make his address until 3pm that afternoon. Nintendo 64 would be revealed then. I thought. Well that's not how it worked out at all. At 9:00am myself and hundreds more earlybirds hurried nervously across the arena floor to where the Nintendo 64 banners oversaw their secret. And Ultra 64 was real. It was right there. I could play it. All I had to do was park my bum on the seat, take hold of a controller having my hands guided to the correct holding position by a Nintendo official and that was it. And it was awesome. THE WORLD'S FIRST TRUE 64-BIT VIDEO GAME SYSTEM The first of the facts: Nintendo 'Ultra' 64 is capable of better graphics, and sounds than any other game system. It's better than Saturn. It's better than PlayStation. It's better than the most expensive PC CD-ROM set up. Its performance is equivalent to Silicon Graphics systems costing hundreds of thousands of pounds. There is no better hardware platform that exists, purely for playing games. Remember, we're not pressured to build this thing up. We're just telling you like it is. Where the Saturn excels at some types of game, and PlayStation others, theoretically there's not much separating their performance. Nintendo and Silicon Graphics, on the other hand, have created something in a league of its own. 64-bit supremacy goes far beyond surface details the differences are much more significant than a faster processor versus Mode 7 tricks, and colour-palette variations. With 64-bit technology driving NU 64, it is the potential depth of a gaming environment that is the system's key advantage. 32-bit consoles made the step from 2D to 3D, but that technology is still limited insofar as the intelligence and realism of what that 3D world has to offer. Whereas a car on Saturn or PlayStation may be a close approximation of its real-life counterpart, on NU 64 its physics can be completely authentic. In a role-playing game, the occupants of a town or city are usually nothing more than stooges. A 64-bit environment allows many more key characters to have complex personalities. Next time Link runs into a Hyrulian ghoul, it's sure to have much more up its sleeve than the ability to home in on its target just take a look at Zelda 64 for indication of what's to come. As we talk you through the initial line-up of games, we hope to highlight those elements which elevate them from the even the most impressive 32-bit games. Before we do that, however, you need to understand why Nintendo are placing so much emphasis on their new controller. 16 "


"NINTENDO ULTRA 64 \"The video game world has started expanding into 3 dimensional space. This controller is created to give you tight control in this new world. This is the result of extensive research in the future of game play.\" Nintendo Co Ltd \"Blimey! They're not wrong either!» FEEL YOUR WAY AROUND \"Nintendo 64, not just for 3 dimensions, but also for a new dimension of game play.\" The promises Nintendo are making about their new controller are almost too good to be true. But with the dream machine as good as here we're inclined to believe most, if not all of them. Here's a breakdown of its many unique features: Paul Davies, Editor of CVG MEMORY PACK RIGHT TRIGGER BUTTON C BUTTON UNIT Used primarily to change views in a game, while direction is handled by the 3D Stick. Other uses include the more obvious pitcher control in a baseball game, or the abili ty to prompt player routines in a soccer game. The C, or 'Camera', buttons are also applied for directional purposes in much the same way that Super Smash TV does, using Y,B,X, and A on the Super NES joypad to aim weapon fire. The first game to make use of this feature is Goldeneye, from Rare. Similar to how the PlayStation memory card stores data and is slotted into the console itself, Nintendo's version sits inside the controller. This way stored data enables players to customise their controllers individual settings 3D Stick sensitivity and the like. A fighter's abilities, or machine settings in a racing game may also be remembered. The ground breaking element here is Nintendo's claim that entire races, or fights can be recorded for viewing at a later date, thus enabling players to revise a friend's strategies when they're not around. Imagine watching a Mario Kart race over and over, to learn how best to take a corner. It's this kind of prospect that contributes to the excitement around this controller. (Nintendo) OC FEEL THE DIFFERENCE IN JUST THREE WAYS A From left to right: 1. Right Position, where players take full advantage of the controller's features. 2. For left-handed people, where the cross-key replaces the C buttons. 3. The familiar Super NES position. A, B BUTTONS NINTENDO 64 ACTUAL SIZE) A Forget forking out for a multi-tap adaptor. Nintendo see four-player gaming as an essential not just a luxury. Z TRIGGER In Super Mario 64, this button is used to have Mario duck or crawl around. Obviously its main purpose is to simulate the trigger of a gun. Goldeneye again, no doubt. We imagine this could be used to pull the cord on a parachute jump in Pilotwings too anything out of the ordinary really. "


"NINTENDO ULTRA 64 CREATOR SOFTWARE CREATIONS Richard Kay, managing Director of Software Creations, mentioned that Creator is a dino-sim of sorts. Jurassic park on less than a  budget? Perhaps. We're in the process of discovering what that balloon is all about too. Also on display at the show in the Creator demo was a Triceratops, which looked every bit as large, polygonal, and texture-mapped as its partner. To end on a slightly different note, these ears hear rumour that Software Creations are putting together some strange kind of puzzle game for NU 64. You read it here first. SMELD This giant walker seen in the background is impressively detailed. STARFOX 64 NINTENDO CO LTD Most people I spoke to at Shoshinkai thought this was the least impressive demo. Not least Mr Jez San, who assured me that he had much greater plans for NU 64 than Nintendo's preview might suggest. As you can see, the Shoshinkal routine looks very similar to the Super NES StarFox environment only with better 3D and extensive texture-mapping. We're onto Argonaut's case, don't you worry! KIRBY BALL 64 NINTENDO CO LTD HIELD Used to promote the in built four-player compatibility of the Ultra 64. Kirby Ball was only 20% complete, and is so far being used by Nintendo for demonstration purposes only it may never feature as a fully fledged NU 64 release. Still, visitors got to try their hand at guiding Dreamland's super hero down chequered slopes on a snowboard, and took part in a fourplayer tournament in which Kirby, as a ball, attempts to roll into his opponents and send them flying off the edge of a tiny arena. Control is good, and certainly very different to anything this reviewer has ever played. The 3D Stick is used to gather momentum, and to choose direction, while the B button makes Kirby jump. On the slopes the 3D is fast and convincing, with a graphical effect resem, bling seaside rock or something similar, moulded into many adventurous shapes. Not one to go crazy for in its current state, but it helped to appreciate the 3D Stick's depth of control. Also, and it's a point many people seem to be missing, just look at how smooth the contours are in general. Kirby is a perfect sphere. And the light-sourcing too wow! SHIELD BODY HARVEST DMA DESIGN SHADOW OF THE EMPIRE LUCASARTS From the same people who brought you Lemmings, and subsequently UniRally, comes a weird take on the whole vehicle simulator idea. In Body Harvest, a large number of vehicles (someone said as many as 80!) are taken to hand in an attempt to thwart an alien invasion. It's a cross between War of the Worlds and EA's Jungle Strike, only running in real-time 3D. Harvest shows off NU 64's load management well, meaning there's no evidence of objects popping up in the distance. Mind you it is rather foggy. The C Button Unit also appears to play an important role, allowing players to shift viewpoints as the little \"escapees' run to take charge of each successive form of transport. No release date. More info, soon as it's available. At this stage the animation on this game is slightly jagged, but the overall impression is gobsmacking. Those ATATS tread precisely as they do in The Empire Strikes Back, and you just wouldn't believe how perfect the models are when viewed close up. No ugly pixelisation here. Sequences on show depicted some very impressive laser blasts and explosions too. The flames look as though they came straight out of an Industrial Light and Magic guide to pyrotechnics. Alongside this Snow Speeder scene, there is promise of Dark Forces style exploration levels. With NU 64 Doom being wildly enthused about by one NOA rep, the whole Shadow of the Empire package looks to be shaping up as a potential all-time classic. A In the closing seconds of the Shoshinkai demo, this chopper escapes under a barrage of alien fire. Stunning, eh! "


"NINTENDO ULTRA 64 BLASTDOZER RARE Of the developers struggling against the mammoth Nintendo constraints, Rare were the first to loosen one arm free in order to answer questions on their projects displayed at Shoshinkai. Perhaps one of the most astounding facts is that both Goldeneye and Blastdozer are being handled by teams of 15 people. Which gives some indication of the scale of an NU 64 game. We've printed what the two Martins had to say almost verbatim, as they explain their games better than we ever could at this stage. GOLDENEYE PRODUCER: MARTIN HOLLIS DEVELOPMENT DETAILS \"Work began on the Goldeneye project in January. It was absolutely essential that we worked in very-close co-operation with the film-makers at the beginning of the project. We visited the set six times during the course of the film's production, received scripts, pictures, copies of the soundtrack, etc. It is very important that the game retains the 'feel' and atmosphere that the film creates, and without the level of co-operation we are receiving the game would inevitably suffer. The film9-17974007 makers have to give final approval over certain aspects of the game but other than that we are left to our own devices to develop this game. \"All the actors' likenesses will be present in the game, bar one minor exclusion. Their faces will be texture-mapped onto the bodies of characters in the game, to increases the level of realism and help recreate the atmosphere of the film. Goldeneye makes very good use of the Ultra 64's texture-mapping abilities. The level of realism that this ability can create has never been seen before in a video game. We're also very pleased with the way our artificial intelligence works, although this isn't a feature 2-07474007 of Ultra 64, more an achievement in programming terms.\" PRODUCER: MARTIN WAKELEY DEVELOPMENT DETAILS Before handing over the floor to Martin Wakeley, here's the storyline. A truck carrying a nuclear reactor catches fire, and goes out of control. After struggling to contain the disaster, the driver and partner abandon the vehicle but not before radioing for help, and jamming the wheel so that the juggernaut remained on a fixed course. The terror of the situation is that just one jolt could cause the reactor to explode. Blastdozer is the name of a construction firm, summoned to help in this global emergency. Reason being that they are equipped with mass destruction vehicles necessary to clear a path-through forests and buildings alike for the reactor, until someone found a way to stop the truck, and scientist learned how to stabilise its deadly load... \"Work began on Blastdozer earlier this year. The original concept cam from an idea that had been floating around for some time. Chris Stamper and some other designers at the company had been looking into the possibility of creating a game based around the destruction of buildings, using dig. gers and other demolition tools. Blowing up and demolishing buildings using massive, powerful demolition equipment on a huge scale is very entertaining and provided an excellent base for a game centred around the absolute destruction of huge structures, including facto ries, towerblocks, etc. Many people are fascinated with the power and versatility of construction/ destruction vehicles used in the demolition business. most people have owned a toy dumper truck, or digger as a child, and are familiar with the way they work and their uses. They provide the ideal tool of destruction for the game. \"We are left to our own devices to develop the game. Obviously it is advantageous to have assistance from Nintendo, if we require it, but for the most part we work on our own.. The most important thing to Nintendo is that the game plays as well as possible. It is very impor. tant that we don't neglect gameplay in an effort to create a game that is full of flash, technical stunts.\"  GAMEPLAY \"The 3D stick is crucial to the degree of control the player will need over the game. Bond will move around the 3D environment, with a first-person perspective view, and a weapon or item at the bottom of the screen. The characters and backgrounds in the game are polygonal.\" \"Bond will have a number of missions to complete, some based on the film plot, while many will be created for the video game. Bond will often be given a mission objective by his superiors, such as 'collect information on the Goldeneye Project', or 'rescue this VIP'. For other missions there will be no briefing, and bond will have to rely on his intuition.\" \"Types of mission will vary, for instance: covert, sabotage, clandestine, and rescue missions are all possibilities. Bond may or may not be authorised to kill during the mission. A covert mission would require Bond to be as quiet as possible, (using a silenced pistol) and if the player disregards these instructions they will find it hard, or impossible, to complete the level. The bad guys react to the amount of noise Bond makes, and a silent attack will be rewarded with the sight of sur prised and unarmed enemies diving for their guns. In contrast, a less covert mission would have Bond storming a train, or attempting to escape from a building with more 3-1)74037 powerful unsilenced weapons a sub-machine gun for example and stiffer opposition, who hold their guns at the ready. In order to avoid monotonous and repetitive empty levels the missions will be action packed and fast-paced, with a minimum of waiting, searching and trial-and-error guesswork. \"Control of the gun is crucial, so the joystick (3D Stick] will be used to aim the gun, the joypad trigger or a keypad button will be used to fire, and movement will be on the remaining controls. It may be possible to have movement partly automatic, or on the keypad, or perhaps controlled together with the gun. Similarly, the view may be controlled by the user, or it may be possible to enhance this control automatically.\" From what Martin says here, it's obvious there's far more to Goldeneye than shallow Virtua Cop comparisons. We hope to bring you much more on this game next month. GAMEPLAY \"Blastdozer makes excellent use of the Ultra 64's 3D ability. Using a variety of different dozers the player is working against the clock to ensure the reactor doesn't come into contact wit any solid objects, thus causing its explosion and the deaths of millions. There are many different types of dozer to control in the game, each with its own unique abilities. the control method will differ with each vehicle.  "


"NINTENDO ULTRA 64 ODOOD 00' 25\" 64 SHIGERU MIYAMOTO RELATED PROJECTS W BUGGY BOOGIE ANGEL STUDIOS 85 00' 2580 Though Angel Studios are best known for their visual accomplishments in 'The Lawnmower Man', and Peter Gabriel's 'Kiss That Frog' video, their expertise is closer to games than you may know. In fact the reason they were taken on board the Dream Team is through recommendation from Silicon Graphics, after Angel produced a Virtual Reality game to promote Onyx at 1994's Siggraph show. So Boogie is more about depth and realism than spectacular CG effects alone. The game involves driving various custom buggies from A to B throughout a number of different courses. Along the way obstacles such as enemy vehicles (all ground-based in case you were wondering), and problematic terrain. In one of the examples shown, the buggy is required to make use of a lift to reach the tier above. Realism is apparent through the authentic physics of all vehicles, and the way that they show battle damage dents, and so on. Though Nintendo have been happy to leave Angel Studios to their own devices, it has been appreciated that Mr Miyamoto often \"points out the obvious things that were overlooked\", as spokesperson Shannon Stone put it. Producer Brad Hunt and his many partners believe that their game boasts more realism than most others on show at Shoshinkai. For the time being we'll just have to wait and see. HIVOS A Custom-build your own buggie from a selection of body parts. 00\" 02037 WAVERACE 64 The Girocopter, as good as we could get it. Cool, eh? PILOTWINGS 64 NINTENDO CO LTD Word is that this is the follow-up to F-Zero. It certainly looks that way, especially since the project is the work of Shigeru Miyamoto's EAD R&D team. Though there wasn't much to see of the game, some promising features made themselves apparent. The speed boats have transforming capabilities, switching from stable Catamaran to streamline Canoe presumably at the touch of a button. There are also water jumps, and long winding tunnels to negotiate. The authentic water effect specifically its natural behaviour is impossible to achieve on any other home system. Boats create a wake as they race, and certain perspectives allow players to view the race with a cross-section of the water surface. Wave Race is another Nintendo title to boast intelligent use of the 3D Stick, where \"minute manipulation\" is provided over the craft. You have to see this thing running to appreciate it fully it's fast. Plus there's not a glitch in sight, and the textures are flawless. SPEED LAPTIME 000487345 004209:52 00-177 024 136 KB PARADIGM SIMULATIONS INC CVG spoke to Dave Gatchel and Matthew Yarbrough of Paradigm Simulations at Shoshinkai, and discovered many things that weren't so obvious from the video tape. All forms of transportation are based on actual physical models, so that the Girocopter, Rocket Pack, and Hang Glider behave exactly as they ought to. No surprise considering Paradigm's company background in real-time simulation, Missions take place over and above a bite-sized representation of the United States. From what we could gather, it's one continuous land mass, featuring a variety of terrain which is required to be tackled in different ways. This as opposed to the isolated missions of the original Super NES game, where the only obstacles were floating rings and flat-as-a-pancake terrafirma. So now Rocket Packs are required to manoeuvre around Sky Scrapers, while Hang Gliding takes place near waterfalls, and the Girocopter buzzes about NASA's Space Shuttle launch pad. Pilotwings 64 exploits the four buttons in the controller's C Button Unit to gain peripheral views from any craft. Press down to experience extreme vertigo! It is also certain to maximise the potential of the 3D stick. We've studied the Pilotwings footage many times here at CVG, and have found the detail to be breathtaking: waves crash on the beach far into the distance, and traffic is seen jamming the streets below from a 200-story observation point. Closer to the player, see how the Jets of the Rocket Pack swivel it's fantastic. A cast of six new instructors await. Wonder what the other three disciplines are? Can hardly wait! LAPTIME 00 05 968 (Nintendo INK S PELD 5/5 1486 VITITI  A Catamaran is too wide to pass by that water jump. But the canoe-style version easily gives the other boats the slip. Check out the amazing water effects! You can see the waves crashing on the beach. It's THAT detailed!!! 20 "


"NINTENDO ULTRA 64 GO! Lap GO! LAP 1/3 LAP 1/3 Extreme close-up of Link, psyching out his armoured opponent. SUPER MARIO KART R NINTENDO CO LTD Simultaneous four-player action on one screen! Don't know what the R stands for, but 64-bit Mario Kart ROCKS! Though nobody could play it, everyone spent too much time scrutinising the video clips for details. There's lots to appreciate. First of all there's a cool speedometer in one-player mode, and two-player races are split vertically now as opposed to horizontal on Super NES. It appears that Wario, and Kamek the wizard have entered the tournament too, which means a whole new driving class is waiting to challenge Kart experts. Possibly ten characters to choose from, unless Nintendo have dumped Donkey Kong Jr along with somebody else (hope not!). Best of all, though, are the super contoured race circuits: Choco Island rides like a Rollercoaster, and Ghost Valley (though we have no pictures here) is hemmed in by huge walls at some points. A 64-bit Star Road wasn't on show, probably for the benefit of everybody's mental health. Shigeru Miyamoto is reported to have promised multi-player Ghost Mode, and is planning to include some form of Battle Mode too. 3D Stick precision, combined with unparalleled clarity of image even with the screen split into quarters ensure that Super Mario Kart R is destined for stardom on a Galactic scale. Coming June '96. LAPI/8 TIAL OO 0886 TIME 00 OG LEGEND OF ZELDA 64 NINTENDO CO LTD Most significant about Zelda 64 is that it is being developed specifically with the forthcoming Bulky Drive in mind. According to himself, Mr Yamauchi talked with Enix about the possibilities of an RPG in which new information could be 'written in' at a later date. When president Yuji Horii said that the idea was sound, Shigeru Miyamoto was handed a whole new brief for the 64-bit Zelda. The game should be ready in time for the Bulky Drive's launch at the 8th annual Shoshinkai at the end of this year. For the moment the only visual material is this real-time demo featuring Link in combat with an armoured guard. Animation runs super smooth, and the Alias special effects such as sparks flying are wonderful. Plus you'll never see armour looking this real on any other system. Don't you hate wishing years of your life away 'role' on November 196! Nintendo Km/h A That's definitely Wario. And, in front of him, there's Kamek. STAL 00008 00 300 000 30000 TIME 00° ano Tp 1 AD / MARIO KART KART LAPI/3 2 TIME 010 53 DTAL 00  R 21 "


"NINTENDO ULTRA 64 CVG MARIO 64 POWER TW XO1 NINTENDO CO LTD A new Mario game. Hold that thought in your head for a moment. It's easy to dismiss Nintendo's foremost video game character as old and done with, but this icon has been synonymous with the changing face of Nintendo games since the beginning. Now all those fond memories come flooding back, only this time they're replaced with something as good as real! Only 50% complete, but demonstrating the NU 64 hardware to its greatest advantage the depiction of believable 3D worlds Super Mario 64 is the perfect game to help explain Nintendo's amazing new system. And so, with only three months to wait for the game's release, here's a first look at what's in store. You'll find we have a lot to talk about. After all, Nintendo promise this will be the greatest video game in history!  Suspect bubbles emerge from the plumber's pants. X2 X(010 CHANGING FACE OF MARIO XO2 PX0i XAS Even before the game starts, play. ers have chance to toy around with NU 64's capabilities through the comically pliable face of Mario. At the title screen it's possible to stretch and change the shape of Mario's face with the 3D Stick. Rotate his head with the C Buttons and zoom in and out. A Mario is free to go wherever he likes. X02 XO1 XO2 PER X02 STARTLARARO MARK PRESS START X01 XXO1 XO2 A Bullet Bill's smoke trail obscures Mario from view. XO2 X02 X43 Sneek up on this Pirhana Plant, then give it a whallop! 22 "


"NINTENDO ULTRA 64 SUPER MARIO-NETTE The entire game takes place in a realtime 3 dimensional environment. This is Eight years beyond any other Mario game. in fact it's light years beyond any other video game ever. Now Mario exists as a kind of CG puppet, free to explore wherever he wishes at the player's command. And it appears the little plumber has more abilities than ever before. More on those later. What's so impressive at first is how players may choose to view the action from many different angles, to further appreciate the real 3D experience. Players are introduced to the 3D concept right from the start, as the viewpoint rests just behind Mario's head, and the 3D Stick is employed to take a look around in any direction. At the press of the B, or jump', button Mario is away to explore his new world... NINTENDO NINTENDO 20\" XO2 HXO1 X43 XO2 Swimming toward the hull of Bowser's Subm. DISCOVERY X02 Pow | Xi f| X43) XO1 RX0 ] XO2 You have never played a game like this before. From the very first step Super Mario 64 is a totally new experience, but at the same time feels so completely natural. Almost second nature. The 3D Stick is the key. Previously Mario could only move in two dimensions up, down, left, or right. To move faster he required the press of another button, which was the same one used to pick up an object. Nintendo, specifically Shigeru Miyamoto, succeeded in Stretch ing that basic control into something which required a great deal of skill to master, by providing ever increasing challenges through Mario's surroundings. Now Mario can move through three dimensions. Push the 3D Stick in any direction, and Mario heads off in that direction. As the 3D Stick is sensitive to pres. sure, this enables Mario's speed to be affected the harder you push, the faster he runs. Simple. And so obvious. Genius, in other words. The 3D Stick is SO sensitive, Mario can even tip-toe up behind unwary opponents and then BANG -punch them square on the nose! The helicopter jump gets Mario across to safety. Close call! 23 "


"NINTENDO ULTRA 64 CVG MX01 Xo2 SAXO X102 BEGIN TO SEE Use of the C buttons enables players to switch viewpoints at any time. Like every feature in Super Mario 64, this isn't just for show. A 3D world is full of objects that Mario could get lost behind, unless players keep a track of his position with the C buttons. For example Bowser, King of the Koopas, is so HUGE Mario is constantly in danger of being obscured as the villain stomps about the place. Also, when challenging the living walls in the World of Rocky Mountain, it helps to keep a side-on perspective in order to judge when to run for safety. Mario climbs into the mouth of a cannon, and is fired onto a flag pole that awaits in the distance. Except here he is off target! XOO HX01 WOT NO MODE 7! In 16-bit games, it was easy to spot where their 8-bit origins filtered through. 64-bit literally reinvents the whole picture. Silicon Graphics' amazing technology, combined with Alias special effects breaths exciting new life into the Mario universe. As he enters a world, Mario leaps into a painting of that scene, and the canvas ripples like water with a stone as he disappears. When Bullet Bill is fired from his cannon, a trail of translucent smoke follows in his wake. Water provides the best opportunity for showing off NU 64's tricks, however. Mario leaves a trail of pale blue as he sloshes through a shallow pond. Bubbles distort the view as our hero swims deeper for hidden treasure. Towers that rotate have been seen in many video games, but the one in Mario 64 is stupendous! So big that it's impossible to see round the corner without tactical use of the C buttons. More amazing still, and something you can't see but feel, is how deep water supports Mario with a buoyancy you'd expect real water to possess. When left alone, Mario automatically floats to the surface. And where his body is half submerged, the richness of colour used to describe the depths is marvellous. INTENDO A Wow! Players will have the choice of six extra colours when Nintendo 64 is released in Japan this April. 1994 A A better look at the Z Button, and Memory Pack slot. + 7 Here's how the controllers were set up, before people got to play on the games. You can just about make out the instructions for Kirby Bowl 64. A The two engineers who assisted television crews to get their footage, backstage. Wouldn't give Paul a jacket though (grumble, moan)! This is the crowd that waited to hear Mr Yamauchi's speech. 24 "


"EXERCISING TO KEEP WARM NINTENDO ULTRA 64 CVG At present this 50% complete version of the game finds Mario without any of his trademark suits. He cannot dress as a frog, or even throw fireballs. No matter, as Paul discovered lots for him to be getting on with in the meantime: REACH FOR THAT MAGNIFYING GLASS A once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to stare most intently at these four worlds which you have never seen before ever! Hop, Skip, and Jump After getting Mario up to speed, pressing the jump button three times in succession allows him to gain greater height. The third jump sees Mario spread his arms, whereupon they become rotor blades which can carry him over large gaps. WORLD 1 ROCKY MOUNTAIN WORLD 2 ICE Cartwheel Set off at a sprint in one direction, then quickly reverse and press jump. This allows Mario to perform a Cartwheel in the air. Ideal for giving koopas the slip, no doubt! Crawl Knew there had to be some use for the Z Trigger. Press this and Mario climbs onto his hands and knees to shuffle around the floor. WORLD 3 FIRE WORLD 4 WATER Climb Trees Worth mentioning because there's one particular tree that hides a secret bird, which carries Mario wherever he wishes to go. Don't tell anyone else about this. Hang loose Mario clings to the edges of platforms, and hauls himself up if need be. This tactic is used to reach Bowser's doorway in the Shoshinkai version of the game. WORLD'S END BOWSER!!! Carry Out Look around for objects which may prove helpful, and pick them up. Not baby penguins though-their mums tend to get really angry about it. We've talked about it enough over the past ten pages. So thought you might appreciate a decent snap shot. Wow! Baby! Whowee! Yowzer! Yowzer! Yowz... NINTENDO Super Punch Out Though everything in the game looks amaz. ing to you or I, there are some characters in this world that Mario doesn't like the look of. So... PAFF!!! 2-1-U764 NINTENDOSI A Somebody's idea of how the Bulky Drive ought to look when it's released. You can see where the Nintendo 64 is supposed to sit. Pretty cool. \" @ NINTENDO 64 Okay, the gloves are off. Which logo do you think's better? We definitely prefer the one on the right. It's closer to the feel of a video games system. 25 "


"NINTENDO ULTRA 64 SPECIFICATIONS SPECULATIONS AND PROLIFERATIONS PROJECT REALITY NINTENDO ULTRA 64 ACTUAL SPECIFICATIONS *CPU: MIPS 64-bit RISC CPU (customised R4000 series) CLOCK SPEED: 93.75MHz TARGET SPECIFICATIONS *True 64-bit MIPS RISC Microprocessor *Greater than 100 Mhz Microprocessor clock speed *Real-Time 3D Graphics, 24-bit colour, high resolution video and CD-quality audio *Greater than 100, 000 polygons (50 Pixel Meshed Triangles) Generated per second. *Exceeds 100 MIPS (Millions of instructions Per Second) *Exceeds 100 MFLOPS (Millions of Floating Point Instructions Per Second) *Real-Time Anti-aliased 3D texture-mapping, for very realistic graphic images *Resolution exceeds NTSC and PAL television standards. Compatibility with future HDTV *MEMORY: RAMBUS D-RAM 36M-bit TRANSFER SPEED: maximum 4,500M-bit/ sec *CO-PROCESSOR RCP: SP (sound and graphics processor) and DP (pixel drawing processor) incorporated CLOCK SPEED: 62.5MHz *RESOLUTION: 256 x 224 640 x 480 dots flicker free interlace mode support *COLOUR: 32-bit RGBA pixel colour frame buffer support 21-bit colour video output *GRAPHICS PROCESSING FUNCTION: Z buffer anti-aliasing realistic texture mapping: * tri-linear filtered mipmap interpolation * perspective correction * environment mapping *DIMENSIONS: W260mm (10.23\") x D!()mm (7.48\") x H73mm (2.87\"); *WEIGHT: 1.1kg (2.421b.) SELL YOUR DOG AND THE GERBIL HARD TO SWALLOW? There isn't much more to add on the NU 64 magnetic disc accessory, beyond the fact that it is read, and writeable, and is scheduled for release in November 1996. Plus developers are claiming that it increases the graphic and sound potential of NU 64. Cripes! The specifications printed below are not entirely accurate, rather somebody's 'best guess' that is being passed around at the moment. As always with a feature of this kind, CVG presents a list of all the games scheduled for release on NU 64 all of which you're going to want to buy at some stage, so start saving. Some titles are subject to change. Ace Driver (Namco) Bulky Drive Alien Trilogy (Acclaim) Mission: Impossible (Ocean) Blastdozer (Nintendo/ Rare) Monster Dunk (Mindscape) Body Harvest (DMA) Mortal Kombat 3 (Williams) Buggie Boogie (Nintendo/ Angel Pilotwings 64 (Nintendo/ Studios) Paradigm) Creator (Nintendo/ Software Prey (Apogee/ 3D Realms) Creations) Quake (id Software) Cruis'n USA (Williams) Red Baron (Sierra Online) Doom: Ultra (Williams) Robotech Academy (Gametek) Dragon Quest VII (Enix) Bulky Shadows of the Empire Drive (LucasArts) FIFA Soccer '97 (EA Sports) SoulStorm (Virtual Hollywood) Final Fantasy VII (Square) Stacker (Virgin) Bulky Drive Starfox 64 (Nintendo/ Argonaut) Frank Thomas Big Hurt Baseball Super Mario 64 (Nintendo) (Acclaim) Super Mario Kart R (Nintendo), Goldeneye (Nintendo/ Rare) Top Gun: A New Adventure Ken Griffey Jnr Baseball (Spectrum Holobyte) (Nintendo/ Angel Studios) Turok: Dinosaur Hunter Killer Instinct: Special Edition (Acclaim) (Rare) Wave Race 64 (Nintendo) Kirby Bowl 64 (Nintendo/ Wayne Gretzky Hockey (Time Halken) Warner Interactive) Legend of Zelda (Nintendo) BULKY DRIVE SPECS (not confirmed) 4\" disc caddy feed 150+ megabyte writeable discs 8 x faster than double-speed CD-ROM 2.44 megabyte per second transfer rate 13ms access time To include another 2 to 4 megabytes of RAM Price to be confirmed (around the Y20 000 ($200)) Two super cool machines, set up so you can see both ends. At the back of the system there are two ports. One for the AV lead (compatible with the Super NES one), and a huge one for the power supply unit. The entire PSU pulls out, indicating that all hardware is standard. Just the power pack is different. Interesting. CONVERSATION PIECES The next few months are sure to be rife with gossip about Nintendo's new system. So we've compiled a few discussion points to help while away the evenings until NU 64. Cartridge Size Nintendo claim that cartridge sizes could go as high as 256 megabit, though the current limit still stands at 96 megabit. It wasn't long ago since they thought 64 megabit was about all they could take. Internet Though a deal with Netscape is rumoured, Nintendo have denied it. However a recent interview printed in Nintendo Magazine System with NCL hinted strongly at the possibility of some kind of internet connection. Arcade A couple more NU 64 related coin-ops are due to hit the arcades later this year. Williams are partners in the deal, once again. Also Rare tell us K12 is exclusive to the arcade. NU 64 Kl is something entirely different. Release date It's April 21st in Japan. End of April for the US and about that time for Canada and the rest of the world. That includes us. So please don't phone us asking this same boring question. It's coming. Soon. Strange Days Shigeru Miyamoto is quoted in one Japanese interview as saying: \"We are going to make lots of strange games from now on\", after expressing the need to move on and create something different. Hallelujah to that. Cartridge versus CD for the last time! We asked Rare how their games would turn out if they were to use a CD-based storage system. Apparently Blastdozer would require more time and much more RAM. Goldeneye would require twice the RAM, and even more patience... Sorry, but we just ran out of room! If you want to know more about END OF PLAY NU 64 we've lots planned for next issue, as many of the major developers ought to be free to talk about their projects very soon. Hopefully we've made ourselves pretty clear about the signifi. cance of Ultra 64. Now we've talked about each of the projects in brief, we can begin focusing on more developments as and when they happen. 26 "


"you can't buy this. (Nintendo ) About to buy a new games machine? Is it worth waiting? Yes. 32 bit CD machines are fine, but they don't cut it where it really counts. They just don't have the power. This does. 64 bit power. Nintendo Ultra 64. The speed of silicon cartridge. Not CD s 1 0 w. You can't buy it yet. After all, nothing this good comes easy. But do you really want something less powerful? NINTENDO WAIT FOR IT.. TM and are trademarks of Nintendo Co., Ltd.  1995 Nintendo Co., Ltd. "


"REVIEW) CVG REVIEW 2009 JAGUAR SHOOT 'EM UP ATARI .99 JANUARY '96. I PLAYER Ah, Defender. Just how we remember it. And there are those sweet little humanoids. A That's what they look like now. Aargh! PC CD-ROM VERSION PLANNED ARCADE ORIGINAL EXTREMELY RARE When Tempest 2000 was released, it showed the amazing potential of Atari's Jaguar console. Two years on, can Defender 2000 restore that lost glory? DEFEND Defender Classic 48929 If a humanoid is killed, a gravestone drops onto screen. It kills you if you hit it! ou know Defender. Everyone knows the game. 351471 Even if it existed before you were born, you at least know what it looks like. Defender is one of those early coin-ops that laid down the basic Defender 2000 template for every video game that followed. In the same way that Pac-Man invented the character-led game from which platform games eventually sprung Defender gave us the horizontallyscrolling shoot 'em up. Almost any shoot 'em up you play now, 3D or otherwise, has a piece of Defender in it. It might be ancient and simple-looking with basic gameplay, but it certainly isn't dated. Defender is one of the greatest pure video games ever made. So when it was revealed that Jeff Minter was Defender Plus updating the game for the Jaguar, it sounded pretty exciting. Minter had already revamped the classic Tempest coin-op with stunning results, enhancing its wireframe visuals with splashes of technicolour and adding hypnotic rave sounds to the game. Defender, 99327 with its vector graphics, glowering particle explosions and highscore-based gameDEFENDER CLASSIC play, seemed the perfect candidate for the same treatThis is it, the game behind it all! ment. The idea of Defender And it's an excellently faithful con 2000 was incredible. And now version of original Defender. The it has arrived! look is just perfect right down to the little multi-coloured 500 points  Defender was  These 'landers' are This is your that float about the screen and actually the first your main enemy. They dragster-like ship, all the classic sounds are in there, game ever to use pick up the humanoids which shoots rapid from the metallic 'waaah' as the 'smart bombs'. and take them up to the beams of laser Starting with top of the screen. Destroy when you tap the level starts, right down to the three, these the lander and rescue the fire button fast. It phlegmy throat-clearing effect as destroy any enehumanoid before it suffers from the alien ships appear. In fact, the mies on screen. smashes on the ground. momentum when only difference we noticed, is that you turn and can hyperspace around when your ship is hit it doesn't the level. Although hover, trembling for a split-second, this should only before exploding! That's how be used in accurate it is! emergencies! If you've never experienced Defender before, here's a quick  Humanoids. The rundown of the gameplay formula object of the game that has made it the legend it is. is to protect these little fellas. Once It'll also give you a better idea of they're all the what's going on in the more confusdestroyed, the ing Plus and 2000 screenshots. game goes into space! A Once a lander and humanoid reach the top of the screen, they merge to become a mutant. Fast, unpredictable and lethal! A Another Defender first. The radar tells you what's around. With experience you can identify the various enemies by their coloured dots and movement patterns. 28 "


"REVIEW REVIEW CVG 383833 x , SCORES Going into space in Defender Plus. Namen This is how it looks in Defender 2000. Sufferin' Shad! ALLAS ER 2000 DEFENDER PLUS This is supposed to still be classic Defender, but with spruced-up graphics. However, the shocking new-look may be enough to kill some of the older gamers out there. \"What have they done to my lovely Defender?\" they'll cry. Well, they've given it shimmering metallic landscapes, changed the look of the enemies and turned your sleak space hot-rod of a ship into a clumsy big 'thing'. To compensate for your now-oversized ship, the screen is now taller and there are 'interesting' blue cubes floating around that warp you to other areas of the level. TEMPEST 2000... DEFENDER 2000 CYBERMORPH... GRAPHICS Some brilliant effects in places. Some disgusting ones too. DEFENDER 2000 It's the one you've been waiting for. Rave soundtrack? Check. Glowering particle explosions and splashes of technicolour? Check. Wireframe vector graphics? Negative. Worms-style graphics? Check. Yes, whilst you might already be prepared for the clumsy big 'thing' ship, you won't be prepared for what's been done with the super-stylish vector landscapes. Prepare for muddy dumping grounds, housing estates and oversized old drums. You almost expect to see Marko and his Magic Football bouncing along the backA The humanoids help by shooting. ANIMATION.. Excellent scrolling and super-fast sprite movement. 11572 MUSIC Entertaining techno tracks, sometimes for the wrong reasons. SOUND EFFECTS.. 78 ground. Some good Defender sounds. But where's the cool speech? GAMEPLAY Swallow the sick and it's actually quite a slick blaster. VALUE. THOSE WARPS! Just like Tempest 2000, Defender 2000 adds to the old gameplay with collectable power-ups and warps. They're essential for survival and add to pace of the game. 1 The first 2 The second and third power-up power-ups colgives you a lected give you shield that an Al Droid withstands which does all two hits. your work for you. 3 Collect four 4 Five powerpower-ups and ups give you you get a drone superfast which fires firepower crackling hom15 shots per ing bolts at second. enemies. If you own a Jag, this is your best purchase in a while. VERDICT JAGUAR Tempest 2000 has to rate as one of my favourite games ever. With its simplistic graphic-style, over-thetop psychedelic visuals, incredible sound and supertough clock-a-highscore gameplay, it's almost perfect. And Defender getting the same treatment has of be one of the things I've been waiting for the most. So when I first saw the result I was frankly horrified. Rather than upgrading the extra-cool original graphics (as with Tempest) Llamasoft have created 'real' versions of the symbolic old-school sprites. Nobby little men for humanoids, ugly spaceships and, worst of all, graduating coloured landscapes. It all looks like a hideous Amiga shoot 'em up. However, after giving it a chance and actually getting used to the revolting graphics (and in places, finding them amusing), this game grew on me. It's incredibly fast, very challenging, and actually a damn good blaster. And just like Tempest before it, the extra power-ups and warps add to the game. Even though the 'green path' isn't a new idea, it's still an entertaining extra level. It's a decent enough follow-up to Tempest, although nowhere near as cool. If the visuals had been as stylish as in original Defender (or Tempest 2000) it might have got 90%+. As it is, it doesn't, but I've still got a soft spot for the game (and it's not in my head). OVERALL Initially unimpressive, nay revolting. But give it time and it proves to be a fast, satisfying blaster. 239086 5 Once you're fullypowered, warp power-ups appear. Four of these send you into the warp zone. A variation on the second warp zone of Tempest 2000, the aim is to stay on the green path. Complete it and you skip five levels! TOM GUISE 29 "


"REVIEW CVG REVIEW JAGUAR RACING SUPER CROSS ATARI .99 OUT NOW The Jaguar has a severe deficiency of racing games. So this motorbike-scrambling type game has been eagerly awaited. 1 PLAYER NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED NO OTHER VERSION AVAILABLE Je look forward to each month's regular Jaguar instalment with great anticipation, in case we eventually get something as fantastic as Tempest 2000. Sadly, our anticipation has recently turned from looking forward to good games, to looking forward to getting a good laugh! Last month's top game in this department was Attack of the Mutant Penguins, which had tears of laughter streaming into our pizzas one night. This month's game Supercross beats that hands down. As suggested by the title, the idea of the game is to drive a motorbike very fast around in the mud, beating the other seven opponents to the finish line. As well as just racing around the dirt tracks and jumping off the ramps, it's possible to perform tricks in the air. There are 13 different tracks, distributed around the USA where tournaments which ca selection of American states, as well as the usual practice modes. The 3D texture-mapped graphics feature digitised characters, and a big TV screen above the crowd showing live pictures of the action. But how good is it to play? Lap 1 Lap 21 A This trick is known as the \"Rich Leadbetter\". Brilliant, isn't it? h orous Pause LOAD GAME OPTIONS A If only you could hear the sound at this point. VERDICT JAGUAR SCORES 21 A Perform a great «Ronnie\" and watch yourself on the giant TV screen at the back. AMAZING STUNTS!! One of the better features in Supercross is how the riders are able to pull off stunts when in the air. With a simple press of the trick button, one of a few different stunts is performed, such as one-handed jumps and other exciting moves like the one that Paul calls a \"Ronnie\", where the back foot is poked out to the side for a single animation-frame's duration. ANIMATION......9 Line UP Scats Heat MUSIC Gireland SOUND EFFECTS 9 McDonagh RACE Anyone who's played the awful 32x Motocross game, will agree that it really is so bad that it could put any one off the sport for life. Supercross is something else. The graphics feature possibly the worst 3D effect ever, with a frame update of about one frame per second, and awful animation on the stupid-looking drivers. The sound is worthy of a mention, not only because of the pitiful Spectrum-quality music but also because of the painfully bad engine noise. The best bit is when you ride over the small humps and the engine sounds like a rabid pit-bull terrier trying to choke up a cat. Despite there being 13 tracks, the variety between them only goes so far as two shades of brown mud. These problems could be forgiven if the game played reasonably well. Except it doesn't. If fact, it's probably the worst game I've ever played, with more 'bugs' than Tom G's flat. For example, if you run slightly off the texture-mapped part of the track the bike flips over and crashes in a badly-drawn heap. You can even pause the title screen, for goodness' sake! The presentation sucks, as the sadly named \"Pro, Rad and Tuff\" difficulty settings shows, Plus the badly-timed replays add to the mess (finish a race and get a replay of the bike slowing down after crossing the line!). I'm afraid that even though the game had us weeping with laughter, it's just not enough of a reason to even think about buying or even bothering to play this mouldy pile of dribbly crap. ED LOMAS RE GAMEPLAY VALUE OVERALL Dallas WCFOSS Copyright 1895 Tiertex Limited 30 "


"COMPUTER exchange BUY 18/20 BUT. OH BOY OH BOY OH BOY! I CAN'T WAIT TO TRY OUT MY NEW SONY PLAYSTATION! BUY SORRY TOBY, YOOR LITTLE BROTHER'S WATCHING HIS FAVOURITE PROGRAMME. YOU'LL HAVE TO WAIT BUY AAGH! BINKY FLUFFKIN SHOW Destruction Derby We've got stacks of titles, both New and 2nd hand, across a wide range of formats. And they re all CHEAP! I JUST BOUGHT IT FROM THE BEST GAMES SHOP IN THE KNOWN UNIVERSE THE COMPUTER EXCHANGE! YEE HAW! HALF AN HOUR LATER.. THEN BINKY HAD AN IDEA \"C'MON GANG, HE SAID, \"LET'S METHODICALLY COUNT ALL THE DAISIES IN THE MEADOW, ONE (BYONE!\" AND SO, THEY ALL BEGAN TO COUNT.. NAAAARRRGHHD TWO HOURS LATER.. \"THERE'S ANOTHER ONE\" SAID HENRY HEDGEHOG. \"SO THAT MAKES IT SIX THOUSAND, FOUR HUNDRED AND NINETY TWO.SAID BINKY,\"BUT THERE'S STILL MORE TO GO TWEWE WEEKS LATER. \"I DO BELEVE WE'VE LOST COUNT\", SIGHED BINKY, \"WE'D BETTER START ALL OVER AGAIN BETTEK SIAKI ALL OVEK AGAIN POUR UND BINKTORE TO GO SELL Mortal Kombat 3 TIME 5'06 52 LEIPO 99999 POSTS Sell your unwanted games and goodies for CASH! Decent rates and instant sales. Hoorah! OH GOD. NOW I'VE BROKEN THESUSE ME TELEVISION? OF TV. I WONDER IF THAT OL BIDDY COURSE YOU CAN, SONNY! NEXT DOOR'U LET ME USE HERS COR, THANKS! YOU DON'T MIND IF I FINISH WATCHING ME SOAP OPERA FIRST, DO YOU? HEY BRAD-WHAT'RE YOU DOING? MEMORISING THE PHONE BOOK FANCI GIVING MEA HAND? Motor Toon GP IF YOU WEREN'T SO WIZENED AND SAGGY-LOOKING 1'0 DAMN WEL KISS YOU! WHY NO, NOT AT ALL.. NO WORRIES, MATE.. EXCHANGE Tekken THREE CENTURIES LATER.. FORTE NINE MILENIA LATER OKAY, WHERE ARE WE UP TO? UP TO WAIT A MINUTE THIS IS LAST YEAR'S PHONE BOOK! SMITH, R.A. WELL HAVE TO START AGAIN OKAY NEXT. Zn3 AND... MEY! PRISON AIN'T SO BAD! I'VE GOT MY PLAYSTATION, AND I CAN GET AU THE GAMES I WANT FROM THE COMPUTER EXCHANGE ORDERING SERVICE AND THEY LET ME PART EXCHANGE! Part exchange what you've GOT towards what you WANT! Save bumloads on NEW GAMES!!! 0.A.P. TORN LIMB FROM LIMB BY MANIAC Warhawk THE COMMUNAL SHOWERS AREN'T QUITE AS MUCH FUN,BUT WE WON'T GO INTO THAT RIGHT NOW. Retail Outlets MAIL ORDER HOTLINE! (0171) 636 2666 Loaded ask for \"Mail Order.\" Get prices, availability, and an evaluation of your games! 32 Rathbone Place (just off Oxford St) London W1P 1AD (0171) 636 2666 282 Station Rd Harrow Middx HA1 2EA (0181) 427 5800 Te Olde Order Form Webheads! Point your favourite browsers at our funky WWW site! http://www.cex.co. uk/cex/ Mail Order Dept Call the hotline on (0171) 636 2666 to find out the price/availability of your desired item(s), then fill out this here form. If exchanging games towards the price of another item, please attach a list of titles-indicating which, it any, are missing instructions, etc. Dear Computer Exchange, Post completed forms Please send me Computer Exchange, 32 Rathbone Place, London W1P 1AD Address or FAX us on: (0171) 637 7898 or, if you REALLY want Postcode Telephone to show off, e-mail the mail order dept. on: enquiries@cex.co.uk I enclose a cheque Name Expiry date I enclose a P.O. Card No. Signed 32 Rathbone Place London W1P 1AD Hotline: (0271) 636 2666 just ask for \"Mail Order\" I'm paying by card All offers subject to availability. E&OE. All trademarks remain the property of their respective owners. ID required to sell or exchange goods. Terms & conditions available on request. Most credit card orders despatched same day. This ad=d: images archivelad21-10.qxd. Produced by The Unseen Forces of "


"REVIEW CVG REVIEW PC CD-ROM GRAPHIC ADVENTURE VIRGIN .99 | OUT NOW 1 DI AUFO IPLITEN... MAC VERSIONS PLANNED NO OTHER VERSION AVAILABLE There's tough, tougher and real tough... and then there's The Dig. It makes even old boots look comfy! Borneo Deep Space Observatory DON'T WORRY, I'LL ONLY BE GONE A FEW DAYS... YOU THINK! The story of The Dig takes the player on a wondrous journey to the far reaches of the galaxy. Set in the present day, Commander Boston Low is pulled reluctantly out of retirement to lead a handpicked team to halt the inevitable collision of the Asteroid Attila with our own planet Earth. With him, a world-famous geologist Dr. Ludger Brink and smart talking reporter Maggie Robbins who just happens to be the most experienced linguist the world has ever seen (as if!). The intrepid trio set off into outer-space on what should be a routine mission.... until things start to go wrong. (Well, it would hardly be an interesting plot otherwise now would it?). ith a flood of action-adventure games lining the shop shelves at the moment, it's difficult to know which one to pick. They all come in nice glossy boxes. They all boast a host of new and extremely clever graphical techniques and effects such as motion capture and cinematic sequences. And they all claim to be \"The ultimate challenge!\" or \"the most intricate plot you've ever seen!\". In fact, it seems the most challenging part of playing an adventure is the bit where you have to pick your way through the rows of boxes, deciphering the real speak from they marketing hype, only to get home and discover that what you've really bought is a donkey. But of course you know that. Which is why you rely on CVG to point you in the right direction. Well, if it's an in-depth brain-busting puzzling adventure with a great plot you're after... look no further. The Dig has it all, and more. Written by Sean Clark and based on an idea by the mighty Steven Spielberg, this graphic adventure by LucasArts takes the traditional craft of archaeology far beyond the perimeters of our galaxy. In an attempt to prevent its collision with Earth, Commander Boston Low takes a team into outer space to redirect the Asteroid Attila. But this floating hunk of granite is not all it seems to be..... A There are many different locations to explore. MK1 Examine Cristal Exit Oh, now that's pretty. What on earth do I do with this? 32 "


"REVIEW VIEW CVG NO, NO YOU FOOLS DON'T DO THAT! After about half an hour's play, the arrogant Dr. Ludger Brink carelessly falls down an old shaft and buys it. After grieving momentarily, for some inexplicable reason the remaining duo decide to split up and go their separate ways. NO! Watch any third rate suspense film and you'll know this is a recipe for disaster, but would they listen? Would they heck! A \"Oh come on Brinky, stop messin' about\". GOSH FELLAS, WHERE ARE WE? After fiddling around with some stuff that they probably shouldn't have fiddled around with, the Asteroid reveals itself as what it really is a dormant alien spacecraft and the astronauts are transported at light-speed to a strange planet on the other side of the galaxy. With no idea where they are, and even less of an idea how they are going to get home in time for tea, Boston and his pals set about exploring this strange new world, in the hope of discovering whatever secrets it holds (and you just know there's going to be a good dose of those, don't you?). Players control the heroic Boston as he leads his team in discovering hidden artifacts, and solving puzzles and conundrums as they story unfolds.... A Behind you! A Lomas, is that you? Oh well. Perhaps I can put it back together again with the help of a life crystal. A \"Hey, don't leave me chaps, this thing looks dangerous\". SMART COOKIES Through the course of the game, it transpires that the alien nation who once thrived on this planet were a pretty smart bunch. They have discovered a crystal that restores life to those deceased (lucky old Brinky he's the first person to be resurrected), and a source of power that is quite spectacular. So, if they were so smart, how comes they're all dead.... or are they? A Aaaah. Bisto. Oh no, my mistake. It's an alien spectre protecting the precious life crystals. 33 "


"CVG REVIEW REVIEW SCORES ALIEN TRAVEL Once Boston has discovered how to penetrate the underworld caverns, he discovers the aliens had a sophisticated transport network running throughout the heart of the planet. This network consists of spherical trams that run underneath the vast oceans along a maze of perspex tubing. Discover how to operate this system and a variety of new locations will be yours to explore. . A Rotostack-ahoy! Now I know how my hamster feels! THE DIG... FULL THROTTLE DAY O.T.TENTACLE GRAPHICS Store all items collected in the inventory. The game is totally controlled by the mouse, so it leaves players to get on with the serious business of enjoying the game. Spectacular backdrops if a little dated in style. A bit pixelly close up. ANIMATION.. Fluid movement with nice character expressions. A No wait. Don't pull that... Oops, too late. MUSIC Eerie and atmospheric. Just what the doctor ordered. You can talk to your absent team-mates via this transmitter but generally they're not overly helpful. SOUND EFFECTS..90 Accurate and effective. Top stuff. (GAMEPLAY Thoroughly absorbing and extremely tough. VALUE. 88 If you don't mind straining your brain, you'll love it. VERDICT PC CD-ROM LucasArts won my heart when they produced such classics as Monkey Island and Maniac Mansion, and so I was eagerly anticipating a similar style of game packed with mind-bending puzzles and plenty of humour and personality. Because of this, I was a little disappointed at first. For the first 15 minutes or so of play, the adventure seemed to be a totally linear affair, with little brainwork required to solve the puzzles, and a distinct absence of the quirky humour have grown to love. Once my quest had taken me to the planet surface however, I was instantly converted, as the plot intensified, and the puzzles became more nightmarish. I can only imagine that the possibilities in space are limited, but feel that LucasArts could have extended the stunning intro sequence to the point where you are plonked on the planet surface. It would have saved me a frustrated 5 minutes getting to the good parts. I was further heartened as a modicum of the familiar humour began to seep through. Graphically The Dig is stunning (though perhaps a little dated in its style) with a well-developed storyline and characters, and atmospheric light sourcing and sound effects that create an altogether absorbing experience. Don't think about it. Buy it. USE YOUR HEAD The puzzling aspect of The Dig is extremely tough. There is a puzzle at practically every turn, and with the exception of one or two, they are set at just the right level to tax an experienced adventurer's mind, but not so tough they might intimidate the less adept brain (it'll just take them a bit longer that's all). OVERALL Only slightly let down by the slow start. After that you live it every step of the way. KATE RUSSELL 34 "


"NOW DIRECTLY FROM ORIGIN EXPORT FROM FAR EAST AND USA ALL KINDS OF CONSOLES, VIDEO GAMES AND ACCESSORIES GOODS DELIVERED IN 72 HOURS FOR WHOLESALER OR RETAILER Visa INTERNATIONAL LTD 7TH FLOOR, PRINTING HOUSE, No. 6 DUDDELL STREET CENTRAL, HONG KONG TEL 00852 23951727 / 23951797 FAX 00852 23951797 <200 ATARI TENDO .75 . . . 447.99 Bug TTENTION ALL C&VG READERS... Want to stop paying top prices for your games ? We bring you the top games at the lowest prices. All brand new official UK products No imports. All games available. All 100% Guaranteed Compare Our Prices Today ---Small Selection below MEGADRIVE SATURN Fila 96 .75 Fita '96 .... ..25 Theme Park .E36.75 Killer Instinct ..50 Premier Manager .........25 Virtual Fighter 2 ... Doom..... ..50 Micro Machines 96 ... ... ..50 Virtua Cop + Gun.... . ..50 Theme Park .50 Mortal Kombat 3 ..75 ..75 Star Trek D89 ...........25 ..25 Circuit USA ..75 Comix Zone ............25 + Dozens more... Call for lists Earthworm Jim 2 ..75 Earthworm Jim 2 .........75 PLAYSTATION Super Bomberman 3. ..75 Sonic & Knuckles . . . . . . . ..25 Fifa 96 .25 Star Trek 089 +100's more Call for details Doom ........... ....$34.99 -Just The BEST Prices No cheap, gimmicks and no clubs to join Prices correct at 12/12/95 Please call to confirm E&OE We will also part exchange your old games whatever their age Delivery at cost from 75p per game. Call us today, or SAE for catalogue The Game Addicts Company Units 485, Trade Places, 325 Bury Rd, Bolton BL2 6BB Mail order office 01204 708780 1.00pm 7.00pm Mon-Sat Shop phone 01204 401170 9.30am 5.30pm Mon-Sat Option to pay weekly for games call for details Zoop : ......99 TORC COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES IMPORTS AND EXCHANGE 9 Wilton Parade, High Street, Feltham, Middx. TW13 4BU 0181 893 2100/844 2575 0181 844 1944 AFTER HOURS LINE 6PM-10PM 0973-552398 VISA Tiny advert = Low overheads = Lowest Prices = Happy Gamers We are NOT just a mail order company come and see us soon! We ULTRA 64 ............CALL DYNAMITE KONSOLES w ind!! ZKONSOLES S 1234 342568 S VISA TEL FAX: 01234 342568 9-7 pm Mon-Sun eseorang SWITCH Mastercard Harde lvare to bloui your mind!! SONY PSX JAP/US + GAME  SEGA SAT JAP/US + GAME  ALL MACHINES 12 MONTHS WARRANTY CONSOLES OPEN MON-FRI 8-6pm SAT 8-1pm UNIT 5. CRAYFORD WORKS, CRAYFORD RD, CRAYFORD, KENT DA1 4LA (entrance opp. Comet) PLAYSTATION SATURN NINTENDO 3DO NEO GEO CD SPECIALS PLAYSTATION GAMES FROM .99 CALL FOR LATEST PRICES PHILOSOMA $49.99 DOOM. TWISTED METAL .W.C.III KRAZY IVAN WORMS R RACER REV ASSAULT RIGS . LONE SOLDIER PRIMAL RAGE WARHAWK . EXTREME D. BALL Z .99 HORNED OWL W/GUN TEKKEN 2. ALIEN TRILOGY DARK STALKERS WINNING 11 .99 SATURN GAMES ALL AT .99 CALL FOR LATEST PRICES SHINOBI X .99 TOSHINDEN S. SF ALPHA CASPER MAGIC CARPET CYBERIA SPOT P.DRAGOON .99 GOES TO HOLLYWOOD .SEGA RALLY VIRTUA FIGHTER 2 X-MEN. C. KNIGHT II .99 DARKSTALKERS 2. CREATURE SHOCK VIRTUA COP W/GUN .99 BASEBALL .99 PADS .99 . M CARDS .99 . SAT CONVERTORS .99 RGB SCART .99  EXT CABLES .99 . LINK CABLES .99 BOXERS ROAD .99 HORI FIGHTING STICK .99 . NEGCON CONTROLLER .99 3D WRESTLING .99 PSX CONVERTER PLAY ALL SOFTWARE COMING SOON ULTRA 64 FOR CHRISTMAS PRE-ORDERS TAKEN RING FOR DETAILS ULTRA MARIO, KILLER INSTINCT 2. CRUISIN' USA, ULTRA DOOM, TOP GUN MAIL ORDER PRE ORDERS NEXT DAY DELIVERY CALLERS WELCOME BY APPOINTMENT TEL 01322 521356 (3 LINES FAX 01322 550317 TEL 0956 362968 AFTER HOURS OR 01622 873097 EVENINGS/WEEKENDS THE FOLLOWING OFFER IS FOR THE CHRISTMAS PERIOD ONLY!:SEGA SATURN SONY PLAYSTATION INC. INC. SEGA RALLY RIDGE RACER REVOLUTION VIRTUA FIGHTER II TOHSHINDEN II   Packages Inc: Scartleads/PSU/Joypads and one years warranty Dynamite Konsoles UK 31 Woodstock Road, Bedford, MK40 4JY "


"REVIEW SUPER NES PANEL DE PONCHO G PUZZLE. NINTENDO EIMPORT OUT NOW 1-2 PLAYERS This is a game about fairies, but it's not by or for fairies at all. It comes from Nintendo, and we reckon this game is for everyone, as it's superb. OH YES IT IS! UH VERSION RUMOURED NO OTHER VERSION AVAILABLE oodness knows we've had our fill of cutesy puzzle games in recent months. And we appreciate how the situation gets more confusing with every new release especially since all we ever seem to say is 'this one's great, so buy it'. As if to confound the problem yet again, this latest purveyor of all things pretty and puzzular is fantastic. But the familiar points associated with all games of this ilk to come from Japan surface once more: Panel De Pon is a success in that country. The game is almost impossible to come by on import. And Nintendo of America are stripping the game of all it's charming character, to replace it with 'alternative' Nintendo icons. On CVG, we reckon Westerners are missing out on some serious fun. Whether this is a problem brought upon ourselves through lack of enthusiasm we're not so sure. But for once we'd like you to appreciate a classic game for what it is. And Panel De Pon definitely falls into that category as it stands fairies an' all. PANEL BEATING IN FIVE EASY LESSONS Perhaps this page looks like a total mess of confusion to you. Well it won't if you take time out to appreciate what's going on: 1-SCORC 2000 SCORE 283 2000 SCORE 1789 SPEED L. SCORE 2337 SPEED LU 0350 LEVEL EASY EASY WHAT FAIRIES DO IN THEIR SPARE TIME EXCLUSIVE! In Panel De Pon players adopt the role of a fairy, from a selection of eight. Each is associated with an aspect of nature. The main character is the Leaf Fairy, whose home is the woodlands. Others represent the sea, the snow, volcanic caverns, and so on. The differences are purely cosmetic their powers are exactly the same with the main purpose being to relate some kind of story. In a one-player game, however, the fairies' methods change the further Leaf Fairy progresses. Their skill at placing the panels increases too, so learning their approach is the only way to stop them. 1. Panels are manipulated using this white-rimmed box. It swaps the contents of one square for the other. To move a Panel along, position the box so that the opposite side is in the direction you wish the panel to move. 2. When three Panels containing the same shape are aligned vertically or horizontally they disappear. However special rewards are given for the simultaneous removal of four or more Panels. Intrigued...? 3. Time is the enemy in a standard, one-player game. As the game progresses, the stacking speed increases, creating pressure to make snap decisions. Removing four or more Panels at one time momentarily freezes the clock. SCORE 103 326 PFFD1 STOP STAGE LEVEL NORMAL TIME HSCORE SCORE SPEED LL STOP 4. Versus games, against the computer or another player, reward the disappearance of four or more Panels with an obstacle dropped onto the opposition's stack. The greater the number, the larger the penalty. 5. When your observational skills have progressed enough, it's possible to see where the removal of one line of Panels could make way for the completion of several, more. This is the secret of winning big time! TIME 3* 30 A Music changes in order to suit the backgrounds. HSCORE 2000 SCORE 1706 SPEED LL. SCORE 326 ST EVEL goo 36 "


"REVIEW REVIEW CVC gelee    SCORES STAGE LEVEL NORMAL RARE JAPANESE STORY At one time Rare were approached to adapt Panel De Pon for release to the Western market. As Panel De Pon is a Nintendo game, it featured strongly in the Super Famicom area of the recent Shoshinkai. As the Rare team have played the game so much, they nominated a champion to take on the Nintendo officials at their own game. It wasn't long before the Rare boy had worked his way through the entire throng of Satin Jacketed NCL officials, without losing a single round! Sadly the conversion deal, so far as Rare are concerned, is no longer going ahead. Fingers crossed Nintendo are still considering Europe in their plans for the game. TIME 0:51 ECTION PUZLE ERSY TIME 4'52 HI-SCORE 2000 SCORE PANELDEPON..... WARIO'S WOODS ZOOP. 2309 SPEED LU. STOP GRAPHICS Great characters, and wonderful presentation. Superbly colourful. ANIMATION Basic, but still fluid. Some nice touches between stages. MUSIC Not the monotonous drivel you might expect. Very good. STAGE LEVEL NORMAL SOUND EFFECTS... 86 Spangley bursts of effects that suit the colourful presentation. GAMEPLAY (VERDICT Instantly playable and really addictive in the long term. SQUARE DEAL Point four of the \"Panel Beating...\" info box tells you how versus games are made tricky by the addition of penalty panels. These pain-in-the-neck intruders may comprise of double, triple, or even quadruple density rows of featureless panels. The only way to transform them back into something useful is by vanishing adjoining normal panels, whereupon the casing is shattered to reveal familiar multicoloured shapes beneath. Extra annoying, stone-like rows are created by disintegrating grey panels, daubed with exclamation marks. These require double the effort to remove and this game is for fairies? VALUE. A permanent fixture for your Super NES if and when it's out. SUPER NES Before telling you how brilliant Panel De Pon is, I have worrying news: Unless a large proportion of dedicated Super NES fans put pen to paper and beg Nintendo to release this game, you're unlikely ever to play it. Importers haven't taken much of an interest (I had to bring this particular copy back from Japan myself), and if they did it would cost an arm and a leg. Point is the UK is renowned for loving platform games and beat 'em ups. Oh, and we're fortunate enough to welcome the occasional RPG too. But puzzle games? Forget it! Even when, as with Panel De Pon, you have the puzzle game equivalent of Yoshi's Island or even Killer Instinct. So I can tell you that the logic in this game is perfect; that it plays brilliantly. I can say that it has beautiful presentation to match, with typically excellent music in the NO tradition. But it's no use. We showed you this game because it's interesting, and worthwhile hunting down. Everyone else, just keep those fingers crossed. Meanwhile there's Viacom's Zoop to consider. OVERAL Another classic from Nintendo of Japan. Brilliantly stylised, and perfectly thought out. Shame we might never see it in the UK... BEEG STAGE A The blue triangles here have vanished, taking the Penalty Panels with them. 1 PAUL DAVIES STAGE 5 LEVEL NORMAL 2'299 37 "


"REVIEW CVG REVIEW SATURN SEGA SEGA .99 OUT JANUARY 1-2 PLAYERS PC CO-ROM VERSION UUREN ARCADE VERSION AILARLE RALLY Here's a game guaranteed to service your need for an arcadeexperience at home; burst those adrenaline flood-gates open! xperience has taught us not to expect the impossible. Saturn appears to struggle with Daytona USA, so Sega Rally is a guaranteed non-starter on Sega's 32-bit 'toy'. At least this is the thought that humbled many Saturn owners earlier this year. While we're still recovering from the shock of a priceless Virtua Fighter 2 conversion, the merciless Sega hit home again with the unthinkable: an arcade BETTER translation of their ground-breaking off-road master work. We suspect some people won't trust us on this one, especially fashion-crippled PlayStation crusaders, intent on finding fault. But it's true nonetheless, as the ensuing four pages set out to prove. Believe it! THE LOOK POSITION TOTAL TIME 3'24\"11 TOP TIME 9115 SE TIIHE 13:25925 3:25 48 3 3'27\"83 CVG explained last month how Sega's CS division obtained the look of Rally on Saturn. For the review, we'd like to highlight just how visually faithful this  (or less) CD is to the  (or more) coin-op. ATTRACT The entire attract sequence from the arcade machine pushes those nerves to maximum revs, making players eager for a chance at the wheel. DESERT POSITION 3'24\" 11 11/15 9825 5. See that elephant on the right? It's in the arcade version too and it walks. 6. THE HELICOPTER! Looks so cool, doesn't it. Makes a heiluva noise too! TALTIME 24,\"11 1. START! The fade-in, from pure white to car at the ready, is precisely the same. TOTALTIME 3'24\"11 2. Note the spectators at the left-hand side in the approach to this right-hander. 9115 3'25\"25 2 325248 3 3:27983 147 MP4 13/15 3. Birds cooling their feet in the 1.5: 25525 mud are 3 2542 spooked by the 3:27\"8: roaring engines. NE 4. This gauntlet of bumps, hemmed in by rocky walls, looks as solid as ever. 38 "


"3/15 ZAP TIME TOTALTIME 3'31'30 LAP U&ME REVIEW REVIEW CVG 05252 32594 5 3.2798 TOTAL TIME 3'31\"30 MOUNTAIN EST Rem CHECK POINT 92 MPH 30 MPH 1. Easy to take these buildings for granted, but they're all around and very solid. 2. Another super-solidlooking, clearly-defined archway to motor beneath. 3. As the car rounds this corner, note how the scenery becomes so dense 'n HUGE! 4. Keep an eye out for the spectators perched high above this hair-pin bend. 3025925 3027983 3 3028 450 1/15 Erou om ee 10 5. This village is pretty incredible. The look is authentic, as the buildings are varied. 6. The final stretch is impressive because of the welcoming crowd, and architecture. 4. 151MPH FOREST LAKESIDE uuuu NNN Nuu M : 269 Co 2 Castro 88MP# 1. Hard to appreciate the dense forestation when managing such severe bends! 129 MPH 2. Hey! Those birds are only being used to show off this game. Call the RSPCA! 1. Arcade pros know exactly where to head, as the road appears exactly the same. 133 MPH 4. Take time to appreciate the view as the track runs by the lake. But not too much! 50 1018LIKE 3' 28\"50 6115 CHECK POINT GRUBE 44. 140 mm 2. Cool how the track opens out into this straight, and the birds fly across the trail. : 31124 4 136MPS 2 68 MP 5. No way could you negotiate this last 'S' bend, were the visuals not so effective. . 124 MP4 3. This tunnel, hewn from the hill-side, looks nigh-on identical to the arcade version. 4. It's hard to miss this rock as you swerve around it. Not a polygon out of place. 3. Despite this corner being so tight, it's still easy to make out where you're headed. 6. The elation felt as you brake into this line, crowded by fans, is second to none. 3'28\"50 511 I 135 MPM 5. Admire the view to the left as the car swerves down this lifelike muddy track. 3' 28\"50 a . MICHELIN Castrol 6. Take a glance at the spectators while power-sliding round the final right-hander. 39 "


"REVIEW CVG REVIEW 3'24\"11 FF TIME 9115 du LV 2S325225 25248 3:2783 POPCORN! ICE CREAM! FUNNY HATS! The Replay feature in Rally is unbelievably fantastic. The Beta version (almost, but not quite complete) available to us last month had this in some form. However the finished code is something else! After finishing the Mountain course, it's not necessary to come first, drivers are rewarded by a full replay of the Desert, Forest, and Mountain courses. Achieve Lakeside, and that's also included. Let's take a look at the three exhilarating viewnoints available: DRIVER'S EYES Skilled racers adopt this viewpoint for the Championship as a matter of course. Otherwise this is the next best thing for novices to appreciate the sheer wow of the driver's seat experience. ZOOM! VOTRL TIME 3 27\"53 CHASE CAMERA Always cool to watch, especially for players who raced the entire game inside the car. Outside the vehicle you can see exactly how close that last race was jeez, he was right on your tail! A special cheat allows players to employ a telephoto lens, of sorts, in Replay mode. This secret extra is especially gratifying, as it transforms a passive feature into something semi-interactive. We tell you how next month. TOTAL TIME 13°27 53 9115 BIRD'S EYE VIEW 2 1915 Zoom in on the replay to witness breathtaking moments like this! GOOD GOSH!!! This is the default option, and the most impressive by a long way! Thrill to the action viewed as though it were the attract sequence all over again only this time YOU are the star! O52\"57 O~57 1 2 12 90'52.57 Sanaan TMIOYX93HO 212 1000000 TAAT   ENDLESS ROAD Some people may consider four courses, raced under four significantly different circumstances, still aren't value enough. Say hello to Sega Rally Mirror Mode. As with the extra Replay feature, Mirror courses are only accessed after performing a mystery 'task'. For the effort, all four courses are available to race as exact mirror images of the originals. As this is an extra trick being asked of the Saturn, all co-driver's signals are omitted which increases the challenge level to some degree. Lap times are not recorded either, and Ghost Mode (the pace car in Time Attack) is disabled. Still it's nothing a pen and paper can't resolve, and it greatly extends the longevity of the game. 4. 113>* UZE OMPE Notice how the START sign is reversed. RETURN TO FORMER GLORY The three simple clues printed last month implied that the secret car available to race in Sega Rally is, of course, Lancia's infamous Stratos. This 1970s dream machine has a top speed of 152 mph, compared to just over 140 mph for the Celica, and Integrale. Its impressive rate of acceleration is both a blessing and a curse, however; the Blow Off valve being so sensitive that even the slightest shot of gas sets the wheels skidding. Also the Stratos' 2WD design makes tight control around bends a strenuous exercise. We advise that you chew a suffocating wad of gum, and strap an ice pack to your head, to maintain the level of concentration required for a Lakeside win! 123 143*** CHECK POINT 40 2. 33 "


"REVIEW STEERING Best to keep the steering column slightly looser than default setting, to manage speedy correction in the sludge. Not too loose though, as constant correction slows performance. PRECISION EXERCISES The Car Manual provided with the game informs drivers how Car Settings improve certain aspects of performance for use in Time Attack, and Two Player Battle. We thought this could do with clarifying a bit, so readers of CVG can get the upper-hand over their mates. SCORES FRONT SUSPENSION Reserve low settings for Time Attacks on the Mountain course only. Otherwise adjust it slightly high for reduced drag, and better performance over bumps and gravel surfaces. Car Settings REAR SUSPENSION Controlled power slides require the rear end set lower than normal. Too high, and the back of the car is likely to go skittering into a 360° spin out. Four out of Five is the best all round. NON LOS 1 2 3 4 5 TRANSMISSION HANDLING PONS TIRES S. SUSPENSION B. SUSPENSION BLOW OFF VALVE BLOW OFF VALVE A high setting is great for feeling the 'G's of a rocket-like acceleration rate, but the tighter hair-pins are a lost cause. Adjust to make acceleration out of tight corners as smooth as possible ie slightly low. SAVE EXIT HI-OCTANE..... SEGA RALLY... DAYTONA USA.... 1001 37 VERDICT GRAPHICS Everything from the arcade minus a few special effects. Amazing. HA 137 MPH BESTLAP -ANIMATION. 96 Very authentic. Has people leaning into corners like idiots. LEP TIME 101437 SATURN From the first time you lay eyes on it, to when the many secrets open up as reward for hours of dedicat ed play. Sega Rally is stunning. With it Sega demon strate that they make the best arcade games around, are committed to providing Saturn owners with precision conversions of the same, and, in doing so, show that Saturn is the most capable piece of 32-bit gaming hardware on this planet when handled correctly. Though not what you could call identical to the coinop in looks, Rally is every bit the game and more besides. With or without the Arcade Racer it controls brilliantly, with a learning curve perfect for everyone to appreciate, but not all to master so easily. Watching somebody slalom through Lakeside in the Stratos is as exciting as taking part yourself. And whoever succeeds in Hard Mode is a hero! The music is so good, we've been listening to it even when not playing the game. Effects are excellent too, from the co-driver's assistance to the amazing bursts of hip-hop between replays. The engine noise is terrific, with background, effects to make the experience sound all the more realistic. I love this game. I especially love watching the replays of my car after playing the game, which makes me love it even more! Just make sure you order yours before it sells out. MUSIC LAPS Bloody excellent! Definitely give it a listen through the hi-fi. 1/3 SOUND EFFECTS..93 Ha 109 MPH BEST AP APOSITION ETDTAOTIME 3'24\"572 ERE, TIMES 3 1 16 90 Totally convincing, evil-grin inducing, engine rumble. 5115 BEST TIME 1.5: 2525 3.25 48 GAMEPLAY A Here's where the Stratos is really put to the test, in a two-player battle. The split-screen action is brilliant. There's no slow-down, and hardly any clipping worth worrying about. All that's sacrificed are minor details. Eat your heart out Ridge Racer! So addictive., that hours fly by faster than the trees. PAUL DAVIES VALUE. .92 SECOND OPINION 137 MPH A One totally excellent, cool-looking motor! A worthwhile twoplayer game. Lots of one-player treats. OVERALL 12? Ryuichi Hattori SATURN We've been arguing about this game's score all day. Does it get a ludicrously high 95%? Or does it get a ludicrously higher 96%? At this point I don't know what Paul's given it, but I'd push for the 96%. You see, Sega Rally isn't just a brilliant game. It's exceptional! As an conversion of the coin-op, it's incredibly impressive. I'd say it's only nit-pickingly inferior. As a home console game though, it wipes the floor with anything else. The sheer exhilaration is heart-stopping! The speed, the scenery whipping past, the way your car rocks as the back end slides out. And it's so excellently crafted. Wait until you experience your replays, seamlessly cut together with funky tunes and MC-style commentary. If you're at all interested in video games you have to have this. It's one of those games you'll look back on and say \"Wow, I got when it came out!\" An extraordinary game. Drives home the message that Sega are masters of arcade and home excitement. A buzz for total beginners, and hard-core arcade specialists alike, You must have it! programmer Osamu Hori Kouichi Toya Yasuhiro Watanabe Koji Kaifu A Finish the extra, Lakeside course and you're treated to an amazing re-run of the last race. TOM GUISE "


"REVIEW CVG PLAYSTATION CLASSICS Old durfers rejoice! The complete time-travelling 1 arcade experience is available on one PlayStation CD(NAMCO EIMPORT OUT NOW (1-2 PLAYERS | NO OTHER VERSION PLANNED. NO OTHER VERSION AVAILABLE. Museus MANH7 amco have one of the most impressive back-catalogues of arcade games around, so this museum idea is great giving the \"mature\" gamer a blast of nostalgia with a few classics on a CD. As an added bonus to the old arcade games a whole 3D museum is included, with separate rooms dedicated to each of the games. These rooms have a selection of exhibits relating to the history of each arcade machine, as well as play instructions, a graphics viewer, and even a 3D arcade cabinet. The only thing it doens't have is that lad who always pestered you for change, and a sticky carpet. Maybe Namco have happened across the secret to eternal youth, right here? 7 Following on from the basic shooting of Galaga, Bosconian adds the ability to fly the ship around in 20000 eight directions. The 1230 main objective is to destroy the big green  motherships, either YELLOW by taking out the six circular sections or by hitting the 20000 main generator 2900 in the middle. CONDITION YELLOW CLASSIC RATING TURN IT ON! When Namco say these are arcade-perfect conversions, they don't just mean that the games are similar they're identical. All start up with the original arcade start-up screens, including all the dip-switch options. These allow the user to customise the game slightly by choosing how many points are required to gain an extra life, and so on. This adds enormously to the feeling of owning the arcade you always dreamed of so long as you're a bit of an old sod. 7/10 1440 ALS RESERVED SICE Another of Namco's more obscure coin-ops, Toypop involves two wooden toys shooting other toys and presents to receive power-ups and eventually open the level exit. The graphics are slightly more advanced than most of the other games and the two-player mode is fun. CE 1UP 100005 42 "


"REVIEW PAC-MAN CLASSIC RATING 10/10 Pac-Man is possibly the most famous game in the world. Almost everyone knows about how the yellow ball with the big mouth collects the dots, avoiding ghosts unless he's powered-up, in which case he can eat them for points. Though the game is ultra-simple, it's got all the playability, fun and addiction you could ever want. SCORES umuman DES CLASSIC RATING SLUK The car in this little-known 11540 game has to drive around the maze, avoiding the evil red cars and awkwardly-placed rocks. The object is to collect all the flags before running out of fuel, which is also used up dropping smoke in front of the baddies. Though it's fun for a while, the game is repetitive and the movement of the car is annoying. A conversion of New Rally-X is included on the CD. NAMCO MUSEUM DOOM (PAC-MAN) RIDGE RACER (PP) GRAPHICS Galaga is another of Namco's top titles and is one of the best-loved shoot-'em-ups around. The enemy ships work their way down the screen toward the player's craft at the bottom, each attacking with different patterns. There are various bonuses available, like the dual ships, and plenty of features to keep anyone entertained for ages. CLASSIC RATING 6/10 Pole Position is famous for its excellent wheel on the original arcade machine. Though it wasn't particularly good for handling, NAMCO CIRCUIT ILAP 4289M it could be flipped hard, making it spin  1992 1995 NAMCO LTD. amco around loads of times. Even though this is a perfect conversion of the racing arcade version, the wheel has been replaced by the pad, so the game loses a lot of its novelty value. Graphics are exactly as the coin-ops (rubbish). Museum 3D is smooth. START ANIMATION. SCORE All games have limited animation. The museum doesn't move much. VOL FIGHTHAT MUSIC The game music is cack. It's not much better in the museum. SEITES DAWAN ROOM SOUND EFFECTS. 47 Poor effects in the games. Basic bleeps in the museum. GAMEPLAY CLASSIC RATING Most of the games are excellent and it's easy to move around the museum. 530 7/10 ENTRANCE LOUNGE The lounge contains old Namco magazines with coverage of all of the museum's games, plus a jukebox with all the music and sound effects of the games. This is the entrance hall where the players start. There's an information droid behind the desk who'll give you help in Japanese. VALUE. To fans it'll last forever. To everyone else it's six cool games. NORMAL NECOIN: A A N QUE STARI D LI ZOON CUT STAS OVERALL DUGO Duda Fao A great package that players of the original machines will adore and younger gamers will still enjoy loads. Six classic games in one can't be bad. VERDICT PLAYSTATION Even though I didn't play most of these games much at all in the arcades, I'll admit to really enjoying almost all of them. Nearly all of the games are still excellent even with some laughably bad in-game graphics and sound. The presentation is excellent, and the 3D museum and its various rooms move around smoothly. There's so much information in the game that fans of the coin-ops will go mad over it. To sum up: Old people who used to play the originals should get this straight away as it'll provide hours of gaming and hours of nostalgia. Everyone else should consider it as it's a novel idea and a great selection of games. ED LOMAS 43 "


"CVG REVIEW REVIEW PLAYSTATION DOC INFOGRAMES .99 FEBRUARY 1 PLAYER ALONE IN THE DARK NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED PC AND 3DO VERSIONS AVAILABLE Some people will go to extraordinary lengths to get their hands on a drop of the hard stuff. But murder and kidnapping is positive proof of alcoholism! Prepare to go stumbling in the darkness. Alone. THE CHILD IN CRIME As well as taking on the character of Edward Carnby, the player also gets to experience life as a small child. When Ed finds himself all tied up, play switches to Grace Saunders who must find a way to get to Edward and release him. In her favour she is small and so able to squeeze into some tight spaces like a dumb waiter for example and she is no less cunning than Ed. Of course, being only a toddler, Grace isn't exactly that hard when it comes to fighting! muggling booze was a popular pastime for Americans in the Twenties. If you wanted to make a fast buck they didn't come much faster than a spot of moonshine under the counter. But with the liquor came an unscrupulous bunch, One-Eyed Jack being among the most unscrupulous of them all. Not only has he kidnapped a harmless child but he's also knocked off the detective sent to rescue her. Cue the arrival of Edward Carnby, another Private Dick who's out to avenge the death of his buddy and save little Grace Saunders at the same time. Inevitably however, things aren't as simple as that. Not only is One-Eyed Jack a notorious smuggler, he's also immortal. His mansion, situated on a stretch of Californian Coast known as Hell's Kitchen, isn't your run-of-themill pad either, a beacon of supernatural energy and crawling with mysterious spirits. Good material for an RPG you might think and good material it proves. Taking the role of Eddie, the player creeps about the mansion picking up guns and ammunition and pocketing just about anything else that happens to cross his path. As well as shooting various gangster types, Eddie's mission sees him struggling to make sense of cryptic clues and complicated puzzles that hinder his exploration of the mansion. But the real truth sees the budding Malone? uncover an ancient pirate ship used for smuggling... As for the rest, well, you're alone in the dark I'm afraid. "


"REVIEW HOW DO THEY DO THAT? Perhaps the best way to give you an idea of what to expect from Alone in the Dark is to guide you past one of the stumbling blocks that Edward inevitably seems to stumble upon. So, grab your Trilby and .38 and get ready to flush out your headgear! THE ACES: So what do these four playing cards mean then? Don't leap on to any of them without thinking. If you pick the wrong one, you'll die. Your investigations of the garden however should have revealed another playing card in the ground. It was an ace of diamonds and sure enough, when you tread on this one a trapdoor opens! AA search for something useful, once Eddy has entered the Attic. THE CHEST: After the weird sailor type has gone up in green smoke, Edward checks out the underground. Wandering around he stumbles upon a chest. He can't open it so why not try pushing it. Hey presto, it moves and sets off a switch which sees an altar rise up out of the floor in the distance. THE ALTAR: Pushing the chest does more than just prompt the altar's appearance. It also reveals a silver Jack of Diamonds. After Ed has seen off the spectre that floats towards him and picked up the pirate sabre, he has to find out how to get out of the underground. How does he unlock the trapdoor? A The malevolent goblin is led into the interior garden, and to its death! THE TRAP DOOR : The altar obviously has some significance where this dilema is concerned. Wandering around it doesn't reveal anything though. The solution is one you're most likely to stumble across. By taking the Jack of Diamonds he has just collected out of his inventory and placing it on the altar the trapdoor is opened and Ed can return above ground! 45 "


"REVIEW CVG REVIEW You find A TEompon SCORES SWAG BAG There are so many things to pick up in Alone in the Dark. It's best to take everything you come across no matter how insignificant it may seem. By combining objects you can then begin to solve some of the more complicated problems. For example, when Grace finds herself trapped in OneEyed Jack's room, her cunning escape involves taking the mini-cannon, filling the barrel with pepper and lighting it with her tinderbox lighter. Simple really. LEVE Take There are ammo clips for this 'Tommy' gun left lying around. ALONE IN THE DARK LOADED DOOM..........**** GRAPHICS Spectacular backdrops if a little dated in style. A bit pixelly close up. ANIMATION And in Elisabeta's Eye I could read cur desting and dentar.come an iffusion Fluid movement with nice character expressions A My dear, you look radiant this evening. A Ho-ho-ho. Who taught you how to dance? Hey...wha... ouch! Oo! Aagh! MUSIC Eerie and atmospheric. Just what the doctor ordered. SOUND EFFECTS.. 84 Accurate and effective. Top stuff. GAMEPLAY Thoroughly absorbing and extremely tough. VALUE If you don't mind straining your brain, you'll love it. OVERALL HELL'S KITCHEN : PACIFORNI (VERDICT. PLAYSTATION My usual aversion to RPGs has been considerably assuaged by Alone in the Dark. This is thanks in the most part to the inventive storyline and visual excellence of the game. While the use of cinematic editing seems a bit confusing at first and can actually prove frustrating when you are fighting someone, it goes a long way to invoke a noiristic atmosphere to the game. Likewise the sound effects are very convincing. be it the echo of footsteps down a corridor, the rumble of distant laughter or the creak of a door. Although the puzzle elements are certainly taxing on the brain they're not so obscure as to prevent progress at a fairly even pace, and the size of Alone in the Dark means that it's not going to be a five minute wonder (a memory card is recommended). OK, SO Resident Evil is going to make it look second best, but as far as RPGs go, Alone in the Dark offers some truly illuminating moments. This is a solid RPG with a gripping storyline and a complicated yet rewarding mystery to solve. Worth investigating. in the horn of Beelzebub The Flying Dutchman was calling me. It was like honey to a bee ROB BRIGHT 46 "


"201 reserve.co.us The Special Reserve Discount Club Special Reserve The Biggest Games Club in the World NOW on the Internet FREE AS ABOVE 284.99 OR 299.99 600204 WHEN YOU JOIN: GUYVER 1 ... 16.99 BALLZ * *** * SEGA SATURN ... ...309.99 PLAYSTATION REGULAR WITH ONE CONTROLLER, TV 48-PAGE COLOUR WITH ONE RF LEAD (SCART AVAILABLE) or SAVE WWW. AND PLAYABLE DEMO CD. EXTRA CLUB MAGAZINE CONTROLLER AND DEMO CD FEATURES PAD  DESTRUCTION DERBY, WIPE CHEATS & MOVES ONE GAME WORTH OUT, LOADED, BATTLE ARENA RELEASE SCHEDULE 29.99 TOSHINDEN & TOTAL NBA 96 Includes SCART lead. SALE FREE: 24 HOUR CARRIAGE If your TV does not CHARTS RRP have a SCART have a SCART  REVIEWS socket you will IN STOCK require an RF F ONLY FROM HUGE RANGE interface to connect CREDIT FACILITIES AVAILABLE SPECIAL the Saturn to it. BEBER ALL GENUINE SEGA SATURN WITH DAYTONA UK PRODUCTS USA AND ONE CONTROLLER ... ...309.99 HEAVY DISCOUNTS SEGA SATURN WITH PANZER XS SAVERS DRAGOON AND ONE CONTROLLER 309.99 WITH EXTRA 8 BUTTON We CREDIT TERMS SEGA SATURN WITH VIRTUA PROGRAMMABLE recommend a Club Shops at GREAT PRIZES TV with SCART for FIGHTER AND ONE CONTROLLER...309.99 CONTROLLER WITH a pixel perfect monitor TO BE WON CHELMSFORD, ESSEX AUTO-FIRE AND SLO-MO quality picture and crystal clear sound Saturn plays Music CD's and can be 43 Broomfield Road. PlayStation plays Music CD's with spectacular sound 10am to 8pm upgraded to Full Motion Video to play films on CD Just around the corner from the bus station. PlayStation plays Music to light visual effects. See our range of speakers. 7 days a week! SAWBRIDGEWORTH, HERTS The Maltings, Station Road. FREE 24 HOUR CARRIAGE ON ALL SATURNS AND PLAYSTATIONS 01279 A few miles from the M11, near the station. Items bought in the shops carry a 50p surcharge on the Mail Order prices. AMIGA CD32 3DO CD SEGA SATURN CD SONY PLAYSTATION CD Members only but you can order as you join. AMIGA CD32 CRITICAL ZONE PACK 139.99 GOLDSTAR 3DO ..189.99 BUG ...33.99 3D DECATHLON .........................32.99 INCLUDES ONE JOYPAD PLUS INCLUDES ONE CONTROLLER CLOCKWORK KNIGHT.. ...32.49 3D LEMMINGS ..37.99 MICROCOSM, CANNON FODDER, AND FIFA SOCCER GAME CLOCKWORK KNIGHT 2 ...31.99 ACTUA GOLF ..39.99 LIBERATION, ULTIMATE BODY BLOWS. PANASONIC FZ-10 3DO ................215.99 CYBER SPEEDWAY .31.99 ACTUA SOCCER ... PROJECT X, DIGGERS AND OSCAR CDS 39.99 INCLUDES ONE CONTROLLER AND DAYTONA USA 39.99 AGILE WARRIOR ..32.99 THREE GAMES FREE ALIEN BREED TOWER ASSAULT 20.99 BURNING SOLDIER. IRON ANGEL DIGITAL PINBALL 32.99 AIR COMBAT 37.99 ALIEN BREED 3D FIFA SOCCER 96 ......................22.49 POWERS KINGDOM AND STARBLADE SCOOP PURCHASE! BUY ANY PC CD ROM TITLE FROM OUR ENTIRE RANGE AT THE 1 32.99 ASSAULT RIGS .37.99 ARCADE POOL INTERNATIONAL VICTORY GOAL ...... 10.99 PLUS FREE SUPER STREETFIGHTER 2 35.99 BATTLE ARENA TOSHINDEN, 33.99 SAME TIME AS JOINING OR RENEWING FOR ONE YEAR AND WELL GIVE YOU CHAOS ENGINE MANSION OF HIDDEN SOULS .37.99 CHESSMASTER 3D. ......9.99 TURBO WHILE STOCKS LAST .. 33.99 MORTAL KOMBAT 2 ELITE 2, LEMMINGS & CIVILISATION ... ..39.99 CYBER SLED 37.99 CORE COMPILATION VOL 2 GOLDSTAR JOYPAD FOR 3DO ......34.99 MYST ..36.99 CYBERSPEED 33.99 ALL THREE CLASSIC GAMES ON PC CD ROM BANSHEE, SKELETON KREW LOGIC 3 SPEEDPAD FOR 3DO......... 14.99 NBA JAM TOURNAMENT EDITION ... 42.99 DESTRUCTION DERBY . .. ...36.49 HEIMDALL 2. UNIVERSE ...........15.99 SCART LEAD FOR 3DO ..37.99 DISCWORLD NHL HOCKEY ........ OR BUY ANY ONE ITEM AT THE SAME TIME AS JOINING 37.99 ... 10.99 * CORE COMPILATION VOL 3 NHL ICE HOCKEY 96 ..35.99 DOOM ..33.99 FOR A YEAR AND WE'LL SEND YOU A FREE BUBBA 'N' STIX, PREMIER ALONE IN THE DARK 2 .......... 31.99 PANZER DRAGOON 42.99 EXTREME SPORTS ..... 37.99 CHUCK ROCK 1 & 2..... ..29.99 PEBBLE BEACH GOLF ... 35.99 FIFA SOCCER 96 ...... ..34.99 99 BATTLESPORT.......... .35.99 RAYMAN...... 34.99 HI-OCTANE ... 34.99 FIELDS OF GLORY ..10.99 CANNON FODDER ....... 26.99 ROBOTICA .31.99 JOHN MADDEN 96 . 34.99 MANGA VIDEO GLOOM (DOOM CLONE) ........... 20.99 DOOM. ..31.99 SEGA RALLY ................ 43.99 JOHNNY BAZZOOKATONE.... 33.99 OR VES tape rated 15 GLOOM 2 ... 20.99 FIFA SOCCER ..29.99 SHINOBI X 32.99 JUMPING FLASH 37.99 GUARDIAN..... ... ..19.99 FLYING NIGHTMARES... ...35.99 SIM CITY 2000 ... ..36.99 KILEAK THE BLOOD 37.99 GUNSHIP 2000 .12.99 FOES OF ALI ......... ..34.99 STREETFIGHTER THE MOVIE 32.99 KRAZY IVAN 37.99 KINGPIN ...... . 12.49 GEX ...22.99 THEME PARK ...33.99 LOADED .. 39.99 top quality MOUSE MAT NIGEL MANSELL'S RACING ... .10.99 HELL (18) ..19.99 TILT ...32.99 LONE SOLDIER 34.99 OSCAR & DIGGERS ..3.99 JOHN MADDEN NFL 3DO 33.99 VICTORY BOXING.... ..39.99 MORTAL KOMBAT 3 39.99 ABSOLUTELY FREE PINBALL ILLUSIONS .19.49 KILLING TIME 31.99 VIRTUA COP (WITH LIGHT GUN) ......48.99 NHL ICE HOCKEY 96 . 34.99 ROAD KILL 12.99 NEED FOR SPEED 34.99 VIRTUA COP (WITHOUT LIGHT GUN). 37.99 NOVASTORM ..37.99 Just state your choice as you order ROBOCOD (JAMES POND 2). ..3.99 NHL ICE HOCKEY 96. 35.99 VIRTUA FIGHTER ..42.99 PANZER GENERAL 33.99 SENSIBLE SOCCER ..9.99 PGA TOUR GOLF 96 35.99 VIRTUA FIGHTER 2 ...43.99 PGA TOUR GOLF 96 Only one offer may be chosen. Existing members can renew early to take advantage of this 34,99 SHADOW FIGHTER 10.99 PO'ed. 35.99 VIRTUA HYDLIDE ...35.99 PHILOSOMO I offer we'll just add 12 months to your current expiry date. Overseas members add  SIMON THE SORCERER 14.99 PRIMAL RAGE........... 35.99 VIRTUA RACING DELUXE ..31.99 PSYCHIC DETECTIVE ... 36.99 carriage. All offers subject to stock availability SPEEDBALL 2...... .12.99 QUARANTINE.... .19.99 WING ARMS .................38.99 RAPID RELOAD ............. 37.99 --------------SPERIS LEGACY 19.99 RETURN FIRE 35.99 RAYMAN 34.99 STAR CRUSADER ..... ..19.99 RETURN FIRE MISSION DISK ...21.99 SEGA 32X RIDGE RACER 39.99 NOKIA 14\" COLOUR TV/MONITOR ...214.99 SYNDICATE 22.99 ROAD RASH 3DO 34.99 ROAD RASH THEME PARK 21.99 SEX (18) 27.99 CHAOTIX ....39.99 SHOCKWAVE ASSAULT WITH NICAM STEREO SOUND AND FASTEXT (TELETEXT) TRIVIAL PURSUIT ....................... 9.99 SLAM AND JAM 32.99 DOOM ...39.99 STARBLADE ALPHA UFO ENEMY UNKNOWN 21.99 SPACE HULK .. . ..29.99 FIFA 96 . ...38.99 STREETFIGHTER THE MOVIE ....32.99 ULTIMATE BODY BLOWS STARFIGHTER....... ...35.99 GREATEST 36 HOLES ...... 36.99 STRIKER 96 .... ..35.99 SUPER WING COMMANDER 38.99 TEKKEN . FASTEXT ...33.99 KOLIBRI.. BODY BLOWS & GALACTIC  HEADPHONE SOCKET ............9.99 ..37.99 SUPERMODELS GO WILD (18) .........27.99 METAL HEAD ....... ..29.99 THEME PARK ... 36.99  NICAM DIGITAL STEREO REMOTE CONTROL WORMS ....................................22.99 SYNDICATE ...29.99 MORTAL KOMBAT 2 ..29.99 THUNDERHAWK 2 FIRESTORM ...36.99 . SQUARE TINTED TUBE SCART SOCKET ZOOL.........................................3.99 WING COMMANDER 3 .............. ...29.99 MOTOCROSS CHAMPIONSHIP 26.99 TILT 32.99  AUTO PROGRAMMING STEREO AUDIO OUT STELLAR ASSAULT 27.99 TOTAL ECLIPSE TURBO SUPER NES 33.99 MEGADRIVE . ON SCREEN DISPLAY MADE IN GERMANY VIRTUA FIGHTER ...38.49 TWISTED METAL................... 37.99 VIRTUA RACING DELUXE ....... 34.99 VIEWPOINT 34.99 BIKER MICE FROM MARS ....... 20.99 BRIAN LARA CRICKET ..................33.49 X-MEN .... ....... . ..... 38.99 WARHAWK ... 37.99 ATARI LYNX 16 BIT HANDHELD ...29.99 CANNON FODDER 37.99 CHAOS ENGINE ... 24.99 WING COMMANDER 3........... 36.99 DONKEY KONG COUNTRY 2 ..49.99 EARTHWORM JIM ** ....34 99 PC CD ROM WIPE OUT 36.49 COMPLETE WITH DOOM 47.99 EARTHWORM JIM 2 .........................42.99 WORLD CUP GOLF . ..................33.99 BATMAN RETURNS GAME EARTHWORM JIM 2 42.99 EURO CLUB SOCCER ...9.99 7TH GUEST (15) ........9.99 WORMS .........36.99 GET YOUR HANDS ON THE MOST POWERFUL FIFA INT'L SOCCER 96 ... 36.99 FIFA INT'L SOCCER 96 ............... 33.99 ACTUA SOCCER 8MB .... ........27.99 X-COM ENEMY UNKNOWN .........29.99 ILLUSION OF TIME 26.99 LION KING HANDHELD CONSOLE IN THE WORLD. 4096 ......39.99 ASCENDANCY SV/8MB ....31.99 INT'L SUPERSTAR SOCCER DELUXE ATARI JAGUAR COLOURS, STEREO SOUND, BACKLIT SCREEN JUNGLE STRIKE ......... BITMAP BROS COLLECTION .36.99 WORLD CUP ITALIA 90. KILLER INSTINCT OVER 40 TITLES IN STOCK FROM 5.99 GODS, MAGIC POCKETS, XENON 2. ...44.99 JAGUAR PLUS CYBERMORPH MARIO ALL STARS.. 400 COLUMNS, SUPER HANG ON ........ 19.99 SPEEDBALL 2. CADAVER ...22.49 ...... AND ONE CONTROL PAD ............85.99 MICKEY MANIA ..19.99 MICRO MACHINES 2 96 ..32.99 CHAMPIONSHIP MANAGER 2 8MB 29.99 WE ONLY SUPPLY MEMBERS BUT YOU CAN ORDER AS YOU JOIN MORTAL KOMBAT 2 39.99 MORTAL KOMBAT 3. .43.99 COMMAND & CONQUER SV/8MB + ATARI CONTROL PAD 28.99 MORTAL KOMBAT 3 49.99 NBA LIVE 96 ... ...37.99 DAY OF THE TENTACLE ... FOR JAGUAR ............................ 18.99 ! MEMBERSHIP FEES UK EC WORLD NBA LIVE 96 39.99 NHL ICE HOCKEY 96 ............ ..37.99 DESTRUCTION DERBY SV 8MB ......34.99 ALIEN VS PREDATOR 49.99 TANE VEID 40.99 PGA EUROPEAN TOUR .00 .00 NHL ICE HOCKEY 96 .00 ... .. 16.99 EF2000 TFX 2) SV/8MB ...30.99 BRUTAL SPORTS FOOTBALL PGA TOUR GOLF .19.99 PGA TOUR GOLF 96 37.99 FADE TO BLACK SV/BMB .32.99 CHEQUERED FLAG.. Club benefits include regular club magazines,  worth of XS PGA TOUR GOLF 96 ,40.99 PHANTASY STAR IV 38.99 FIFA INT'L SOCCER 96 SV 8MB ....30.99 CLUB DRIVE .... ... 17.99 PRIMAL RAGE... ...44.99 POWER RANGERS THE MOVIE 35.99 FORMULA 1 GRAND PRIX 2 8MB .......32.99 DOOM Savers (coupons) per year, club competitions and huge discounts .49.99 SECRET OF MANA .... 28.99 PREMIER MANAGER 29.99 HEXEN (HERETIC 2) SV/BMB ......27.99 DOUBLE DRAGON 5 ..47.99 across the range. Members are under no obligation to buy. STREET RACER ...24.99 PSYCHO PINBALL .19.99 MECHWARRIOR 2 THE CLANS......31.99 DRAGON ..... 19.99 All prices include VAT and carriage to MOST UK mainland addresses. STUNT RACE FX......... ...27.99 ROAD RASH 2 .19.99 MORTAL KOMBAT 3 8MB .........31.99 EVOLUTION DINO DUDES ...37.99 SUPER BOMBERMAN (4 PLAYER) ... 17.99 ROAD RASH 3....... 35.99 NEED FOR SPEED SV/8MB 30.99 FLASHBACK .. ... 34.99 SUPER BOMBERMAN 2 ..22.99 RUGBY WORLD CUP 95...... 22.99 PHANTASMAGORIA (18) 8MB .........35.99 HOVERSTRIKE, Overseas orders must be paid by credit card 47.99 SUPER BOMBERMAN 3 ..38.99 SOLEIL 29.99 SAM & MAX HIT THE ROAD .............13.99 INT'L SENSIBLE SOCCER ... 14.99 I Hardware items (battery or mains) are only supplied to the UK addresses SUPER INTERNATIONAL CRICKET ...34.99 SONIC 3 24.99 SCREAMER SV 19.99 IRON SOLDIER Overseas surcharge .00 per software item or 25% on other items SUPER MARIO KART ..33.99 SUPER SKIDMARKS ..34.99 SENSIBLE WORLD OF SOCCER 29.99 KASUMI NINJA (AGES 17-) ...... SUPER PUNCH OUT 25.99 SYNDICATE ..17.99 STAR TREK TNG 8MB ...34.99 PINBALL FANTASIES THEME PARK .36.99 THEME PARK ...35.99 THE DIG... ......32.99 POWERDRIVE RALLY ... BLOCK CAPITALS please) BACK UNIRALLY 24.99 URBAN STRIKE ...20.99 THEME PARK ..... ......29.99 SYNDICATE Name & Address WORMS .36.99 VIRTUA RACING ...39.99 TILT SV 8MB ... ......24.99 TEMPEST 2000 27.991 YOSHI'S ISLAND ....49.99 WORMS .... ....33.99 WING COMMANDER 4 SV/8MB ..........40.99 THEME PARK.... ......41.99 ZELDA 3 LINK TO THE PAST ......... 19.99 ZOMBIES ............................... 19.99 WORMS......................................23.99 TROY AIKMAN (US) FOOTBALL .......48.99 SUPERMODEL KELLY NICAM DIGITAL STEREO 25 43.99 MEGA GAMES 1 ...14,99 ONE YEAP ...43.991 39.99 ! 38.99 PLAYSTATION ACCESSORIES SONY CONTROLLER FOR ASCII PLAYSTATION CONTROLLER FOR 28.99 PLAYSTATION 19.99   FIRE INFRA-RED JOYPAD SONY MOUSE FOR SYSTEM FOR PLAYSTATION ...32.99 PLAYSTATION 29.99 COMPLETE WITH DESIGNER MAT SONY SMART CARD SAVE FOR PLAYSTATION Postcode If Mac or PC please state DISK or CD ROM I Phone No _Machine I Enter membership number (if applicable) or NEW MEMBERSHIP FEE (ANNUAL UK 6.00) item item 24.99 5 SATURN ACCESSORIES COMPETITION PRO 6 BUTTON JOYPAD FOR SATURN ... ... ... 16.99 SEGA ARCADE PROFESSIONAL RACER STEERING CONTROL PAD WHEEL FOR WITH AUTO TURBO SATURN ... 49.99 FIRE AND SLOW TABLE TOP YOKE MOTION WITH 8 FIRE BUTTONS LOGIC 3 TERMINATOR SEGA EIGHT FOR SATURN BUTTON 14.99 CONTROLLER FOR WITH FIRE AND POWER SATURN INDICATORS 19.99 LOGIC 3 SEGA VIRTUA VOYAGER FOR STICK ... ... 39.99 SATURN ARCADE STYLE 16.99 EIGHT BUTTON AUTOFIRE, SLIDE JOYSTICK WITH RAPID FIRE BUTTONS AND SLOW MOTION VE LIGHT GUN FOR VIRTUA COP 24.99 PHASE 9 SEGA SATURN PHOTO CD ODYSSEY FOR OPERATING SYSTEM ............18.99 SATURN 17.99 VIDEO CD CARD FOR SATURN 159.99 WITH AUTO AND RF INTERFACE FOR SATURN ...16.99 TURBO FIRE SEGA RF UNIT FOR SATURN ...22.99 FOR CONNECTION TO NON-SCART TV QUANTUM JOYPAD FOR SATURN 15.99 SEGA MEMORY CARTRIDGE 36.99 ERGONOMICALLY FOR GAMES THAT REQUIRE DESIGNED WITH BACK UP MEMORY AUTO TURBO FIRE SEGA MULTIPLAYER ADAPTOR AND SLOW MOTION FOR SATURN item Please use this box to add any optional fast delivery charge I 1st Class Post 50p per posted item or  hardware ALL PRICES INCLUDE UK POSTAGE & VAT Cheque/P.O./Creditcharge/Access/Switch/Visa INCLUDES 2 JOYPADS AND A RECEIVER BOX WITH RECEPTION OF UP TO 18 METRES. 4 x AAA BATTERIES REQUIRED G-FORCE COMMANDER SUPER JOYPAD FOR PLAYSTATION ... 16.99 6 INDIVIDUAL AUTO & TURBO FIRE SELECTORS. 2 METRE CABLE ALLOWS YOU TO SAVE AND LOAD GAME DATA LINK CABLE FOR PLAYSTATION .............19.99 CONNECTS VIA REAR SERIAL PORT ALLOWS TWO PLAYERS EACH WITH THEIR OWN PLAYSTATION'S TO LINK UP TO PLAY WITH OR AGAINST EACH OTHER SCART LEAD FOR PLAYSTATION 9.99 CONNECTS PLAYSTATION TO TV SCART SOCKET (COMPOSITE OUTPUT)  SWITCH (ISSUE NO  ...21.99 PS PROPAD FOR PLAYSTATION 8 BUTTON PROGRAMMABLE CONTROLLER WITH AUTOFIRE AND SLOW MOTION CD WALLET 14.99 STORES UPTO 48 CD's NEATLY AND SAFELY, IDEAL FOR USE IN THE HOME, OFFICE OR CAR CREDIT CARD | EXPIRY DATE SIGNATURE Mail Order address. Cheques payable to: SPECIAL RESERVE P.O. BOX 847, HARLOW, CM21 9PH i or FAX a credit card order on 01279 726842 and we'll FAX back. Inevitably some games listed may not yet be available. Please phone to check availability. Prices may change without prior notification Sent to press 13.12.95 E.& O.E. SAVE = Saving off full retail price. Inter-Mediates Ltd, The Maltings, Sawbridgeworth, Herts. reserve.co Creditcharge! card subject to status. See the club magazine for details. "


"REVIEW SATURN Awesome ultra-powerful 3D arcade action in your home! Saturn proves that even the dull old RPG can be tarted up with 32-bits. (RPG SEGA ETBA OUT JANUARY 1 PLAYER NO OTHER VERSION PLANNED NO OTHER VERSION AVAILABLE PG's are extremely popular in Japan, with loads of them released every month. Not many of these get a UK release, partly because of the problems of translating all of the text, and partly because most games companies have decided that UK gamers don't actually like Role Playing Games. They've consistently been proven wrong, as most 16-bit RPGs have sold really well, and some of the most popular Sega-released games on the Check? Mega Drive were those in the Shining Force series. Mystaria on the Saturn is very similar to these games, meaning that it'll no doubt sell to all Saturn-owning RPG fans no matter how good it is. Being the best Saturn RPG so far isn't exactly tough, what with only Virtual Hydlide as competition but Mystaria is, in fact, a very impressive game as well. HARDCORE THREEDEE ENVIRONS 116 35 Being a three-dimensional game, Mystaria is viewed from almost any angle. This is the regular overhead playing view, where it's easy enough to see what's going on in battles. Grids appear on the floor during fights, enabling the player to see the contours and to judge distances easily. This view is handy for checking the scenery before a fight. The \"camera\" switches to inside the head of the lead adventurer, enabling the player to look at the surrounding area from a realistic perspective. Once a punch or spell is thrown in battle, the view switches to just behind the attacker. This gives a clear idea of what's happening, and lets players see the new special attacks that are learned throughout the game. 48 "


"MEET THE TEAM REVIEW Always a nice feature, the character naming is present in Mystaria. It's always more fun to control a band of your friends rather than a load of stupidly-named fairies. Here's the CVG warriors on the quest for the magic wooden console \"Karrakos\" which can produce fantastic 3D graphics with no dodgy clipping, and doesn't need plugging in (according to Tom C). SCORES PAUL (1) Lions, tigers, bears, oh my! Cowardly Lion Paul is a strong warrior who, despite being really stupid, is totally vicious with his mystical spear of Thrantos. To balance him out he's rubbish at magic. RRRRRRRRRR TOMMY G (2) Little Tom G may look weedy in his pink dress of Sindyos... and he is too. Until he learns any really awesome spells he spends his time at the back of the pack, casting \"heal\" spells on Paul when he gets beaten up. ED (3) The leader of the group, Ed is a master swordsman and born leader. He can use his magical sword to perform fantastic lightning moves and always fronts the team in battles. He's handsome too. TOMMY C (0)Tom's an aged archer, armed with a magical bow and arrow, carved by halflings from a withered crab apple tree. He may look like a mad old tramp but he's particularly useful, as he's got a long and accurate firing range. VIRTUAL HYDLIDE MYSTARIA........ SHINING FORCE MD JAIME (5)Jaime's a ninja who sided with the CVG clan when his previous master, the evil Lord Bane, killed his own troops with a large fireball at the start of the game. Jaime can throw the lightning shurikens of Borgros, and attack with his spear. GRAPHICS Detailed 3D scenery and well-rendered characters. 5 ANIMATION TREA (G)Trea was also one of Lord Bane's cronies but quit for the same reason as Jaime. She's actually a special type of tiny fairy with magical powers given to her by the druids of Aknarathrogos as well as some really deadly attacks. The character movement and landscape scrolling is jerky. MUSIC The usual fanfares and atmosphric 'toytown' music. SCRAP, SCRAP, SCRAP! MP: 177 SOUND EFFECTS.. 85 Some really cool beat-'em-up hit noises. GAMEPLAY. The battle system in Mystaria is the part which will bring the most comparisons to the Shining Force games. Firstly, a character is selected by moving the highlighting box onto him/her. Once chosen, a number of squares on the grid are lit-up showing where it is possible to walk depending on the character and items carried. Once the character has moved into position, a form of attack is selected. Each attack has a different range with the magic attacks generally reaching the furthest. The box is used to select an enemy to attack. The view switches, and the attacker swipes, hits, or throws his/her enemy. The Saturn then calculates whether or not the enemy is hit or missed, and how much damage is caused in the process. Slightly tedious fights but engrossing nevertheless. VALUE Here we see Prince Ed selecting an enemy and launching the deadly fireball of Kronos. A long-lasting adventure with loads to do all the time. VERDICT SATURN OVERAL An impressive, but not entirely original RPG which the usual band of fans will adore. For everyone else, it's perhaps not exciting enough to get hooked. Even though I used to play the old D&D games. I've never really got into any of the console RPGS. This is mainly because the fighting is always too long-winded and slow. Sadly, Mystaria is very similar to the Shining Force games, and so suffers from the same problem, The actual game has excellent graphics for an RPG, and the standard \"save the kingdom from the evil wizard\" plot is as good as ever. Problem is Mystaria is just too similar to other RPGs to make it anything, particularly special. Still, it's an impressive adventure that'll last a long time, and will no doubt please the fans who are drooling for a game like this. ED LOMAS 49 "


"REVIEW CVG REVIEW PLAYSTATION FIGHTING ZOOM PlayStation owners keen for revenge after Jast month's VF2 celebrations could find they don't have to look very far... .99 OUT FEBRUARY 1-2 PLAYERS PC CD-ROM VERSION NO OTHER VERSION AVAILABLE 3329980: ven after acknowledging Tekken's alternative approach, Zero Divide is PlayStation's first real answer to AM2's genius Virtua Fighter series. But this out-ofnowhere fighting game is more than just an imitation it's original too. While it borrows the VF control method, it introduces concepts that hitherto haven't been witnessed in a home fighter. The game has incredibly slick visuals, and some kicking techno soundtracks. Zero Divide certainly has style. But it's the performance that counts, and this aspect is placed under scrutiny by the CVG master-brain. Neurons to analytical, let the operation commence... PRESS SURRO BUSION 69230760 136380 Leaping from the edge of the ring doesn't surprise after a few fights. BACK FROM THE BRINK 1991 3225620 05'57'33 The majority of 3D fighting games involve a Ring Out strategy of sorts. And the majority of players feel pretty hard done to when on the wrong end of this rule. Zero Divide solves this by allowing droids to clutch the ringside, should they accidentally step out of the combat area. Contrary to what we said last month, we've found there is a limit to how long a droid can stay down, so it's not quite the tactical ploy we had imagined. Still, there's scope for luring opponents off the edge, as well as coming back with an almighty spring kick if their intelligence is low. An element that definitely adds to the game. PRESS STAATTI BEAT 58 192 $7540 NK 50 "


"REVIEW REVIEW CVG 2770 YO ally hurt! TELL IT LIKE IT IS We've heard some irritating voices in our time, but XTAL the tournament's resident commentator makes an afternoon listening to special offers down the market seem appealing. XTAL is the entity responsible for staging the whole tournament, and his appearance is kept secret until players are skilled enough to beat the game in hard mode. As it turns out, XTAL looks like a brain, with googly eyes and spider's legs. To give the mutant credit, he at least makes timely remarks, that take their cue from specific onscreen events. For example XTAL commends fighters on their use of a \"Great Counter\", and says \"Hey, your unit's gone\" when, in fact, it has. Novel though this feature is, we suspect that most players will want to shut XTAL the heck up. So it's nice to know this is possible from the options screen. YOU'RE SO TRANSPARENT The PlayStation's finesse with transparencies is extremely well-represented in Zero Divide. It's noticeable in the superb location backgrounds, but more functional on the droids themselves. During the course of a battle, droids sustain damage which is made obvious by sections, or 'units', becoming transparent. Unlike Sega's Fighting Vipers coin-op, the damaged areas do not suffer any extra pain if targeted. In fact there is an option to switch this graphical effect off. However battle damage looks so impressive, we recommend everyone leave it on. 28 335060 59790 23750 09903913 51 "


"REVIEW CVG REVIEW PLAYER SELECT 59 93 THE HIDDEN Part of what makes the classic games so great is the number of hidden extras they contain, and Zero Divide has them in spades! To begin with there are 16 different colours to choose from, rewarded after completing the game with every fighter; half of which have completely different textures mapped onto them for that extra custom appeal. Zulu, the boss encountered after making it through the game the first time around, is available as a playable character. Complete the game with him and there's still more secret characters available to discover. Last month we showed you how Phalanx a Super Famicom shoot 'em up is accessed, and we've since learned there is a special surprise in store for players who sit through 200 hours of total game time. With Zero Divide, a Memory Card is essential! 140 U19650 SEGRE PHALAMH TILL LON REST NO LONG ME FRODEO LONE IGURATION 1991.99 200 RONYS RERUEN PRESS BUTTON SS HYBRID First thing you need to know about Zero Divide is how the control method is identical to Virtua Fighter. Having said that, developers Zoom work the idea very well indeed. For example the juggling techniques where characters are hit several times before hitting the ground are optimised, with spectacular results. Certain special moves, known as Interrupts, cancel others out in a far more dramatic way than in the original VF. And despite the characters looking so weird, they are fairly well-balanced overall. If you've always had a problem with the way Tekken handles 3D fighting control, Zero Divide is much closer to what you know. 3528 SM 42 PRESS BUTTON GNUS 00123 SECOND OPINION PLAYSTATION The first thing I should point out is that this is Paul's review and we've left the scores as he put them. Though I reckon that ZD is a surprisingly good game, don't think it's quite as good as Paul is making out. The simple controls mean that anyone can play it but the mass of combos and secret techniques can only be accessed with some hard playing sessions, so it's going to last those who get into it for ages. There are some excellent new ideas like hanging on to the edge of the arena but there's something about the feel that isn't quite right. There's a slight time-lag between the combos being inputted and being pulled off, though this can easily be overlooked as it was just noticeable in VF and Tekken. The graphics are undeniably impressive but occasionally become cluttered and awkward and XTAL's commentary is plainly distressing. As Paul says, beat-'em-up fans will get loads out of it but most regular gamers will feel that it's nothing special. ED LOMUNG 12 52 "


"REVIEW SEAT I 0377650 59910 SCORES I SAID WATCH IT SOIN NY! Exactly when did your opponent's chest plater burst apart? Or where did you first master Zero's 9-hit combo? To help you remember, there's a replay feature in Zero Divide. And it's the most thorough replay feature we've seen anywhere! In it you can view the replays from one of four angles, the best of which is termed 'Free', meaning that the virtual camera views the fight however players wish: zooming in and out, panning left or right, and taking a high or low angle. Especially impressive bouts are saved on memory card. This way the most spectacular battles are recorded for posterity. And if you're worried about some idiot wiping over your showmanship with some laughable circus routine, there's a Data Lock facility, which hands out a simple code for players to access. Very cool. NREPL919 men NO wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww ZER 01/ 0 7 KESLO 65'33000 PRESS STARE BUTION! 56 = 56 295970 2056450   NOS ocoLAU SAVED NO TEKKEN ....... ZERO DIVIDE ..... TOH SHIN DEN... GRAPHICS.. 94 Ingenious. Superb 3D modelling of droids, and amazing locations. ANIMATION... Fluid, and perfectly in sync. Characters have great personality. 318860 L MUSIC. 91 The sounds coming off this CD are brill. SOUND EFFECTS. 86 Don't play such a major role. XTAL is a nuisance. GAMEPLAY. 02'5453 (330093 Intelligent, with great rewards. But not entirely original. VERDICT VALUE. 168660 42680 Non fight fans won't see the use of ZD. Otherwise it's a find. OVERALL It's hard to find any reasons not to recommend such a stunning, finely-tuned game as this. If only the control system were innovative. PLAYSTATION When Zero Divide became available on import some months back, it was lost in the hype surrounding Tekken. Now it has proven to be on par with the original Virtua Fighter in some ways even better and offers serious competition for Namco's game. By and large Tekken has been overrated; used as an icon to symbolise the excitement of new hardware. If that's all we're about, well Zero Divide is a better symbol all round: better looking, and more hip for sounds. Where it matters, Zero Divide's only real problem is it borrows too heavily from Virtua Fighter's methods which is more of a compliment than anything else. By its own merits, Zero Divide introduces some cool new ideas through some of the best presentation around. It's more intuitive than Tekken, although arguably less complex, and practically makes Ton Shin Den's flash veneer obsolete. You definitely won't feel let down if you choose this over Tekken, which ought to be rec, ommendation enough for anybody. PAUL DAVIES 05012961 53 "


"REVIEW Because YOU demanded it the World's greatest imutant superteam in the fight you thought you'd never see! X-Man against X-Man! And the winiet must face... the menace of MAGNETO!! SATURN BEAT EM-UP. CAPCOM. EIMPORT OUT NOW. 1-2 PLAYERS PLAYSTATION & PC CD-ROM PLANNED ARCADE VERSION AVAILABLE.. CHILDREN OF THE ATOM Level 1 REATE GUT GWH CONG hat's how they'd put it if this story ever appeared in the comics, because simply put, X-Men: Children Of The Atom is one of the most awesome superhero battle spectaculars ever brought together. All the more so, because you're not just reading it in a comic! When the game appeared in the arcades last year, it brought with it a whole new superhero gaming sensation. The usual formula of soldier-filled Shinobi-style platform levels was gone, replaced by exactly the kind of superhero game you've always wanted. One-on-one superfights with a host of incredible superpowers to unleash, and plenty of scenery to destroy in the process. What better superteam to pick than the uncannily-powered, hot-tempered X-Men? And what better programmers could you hope for than Capcom, bringing their proven Streetfighter 2 gameplay with them? Last year, it was one of the hottest coin-ops around. Not anymore though. Now it's one of the hottest console games around! 200 Level 1 SPUS ESTS ESS P1 GTET OCH CHILDREN OF THE ATIJA NOKI 54 "


"REVIEW Level 1 500-53GOOD! PONN Level \" Level 1 859ROUND 1000 60900 ASINDA C3 CSIS Bonus VITAL 40000 TIME -961 seminee 500 500 +53 Level1 Level saihet FIT 400 00 Level NAV rooman Level 1 GOOD! 55 "


"REVIEW CVG REVIEW 300841evel 2. INTRODUCING THOSE UNCANNY X-FOLK IN FULL! Okay. So you've got the X-Men to star in your beat 'em up! But WHICH X-Men do you have? Getting the right mix of superbeings was crucial to this game's success, but as you'd expect Capcom have chosen an outstanding selection of superheroes and villains for their X-Men line-up. WOLVERINE It wouldn't be an X-Men game without him! In the comics, the diminutive Canadian is portayed as a super-fast, lethally-clawed maniac. And that's how he's portrayed in the game too! In the hands of an expert he's virtually unstoppable. In fact, in the hands of beginner he's virtually unstoppable! WOLVERIILE KO APK AMERA 2012 NUDE KIES EE SILVER SAMURAL He's a samurai, he's silver and he's a supervillain. As you'd expect from a Japanese warlord, Silver Samurai's main weapon is his large katana sword, which he embues with fiery electrical energy. And you should see the size of his shuriken! A difficult character to play, but a deadly one. PRESS STAR ICEMAN Most people will remember this guy from the old 'Spiderman And His Amazing Friends' cartoons. Iceman's powers are shown off to full effect here, with icebeams and hail blasts at his disposal. And the ease at which he can drop an asteroid-sized iceball on his opponents is chilling! <<  094202 S AVRIL 18 4000 -52 ROUTER STORM Possessing no less power than the ability to control the weather, Storm is a formidable superbeing. At the lower end of her skills she can ensnare her opponents within tornadoes, with her maximum power drawing down forks of lightning upon them. And you thought the weather was boring! AUTOMOD BERE Level 1 30 86-level OMESA RED Store QUI OMEGA RED One of the X-Men's most fearsome opponents is this thawed-out Russian super-soldier. Possessing indestructible telescopic coils, Omega Red uses them to devastating effecting, wrapping them around his opponents, swinging them around the level and whipping them into the next life. GIFT The X-Men coin-op was the first Capcom beat 'em up to use the auto-block system since seen in all their fighting games. Optionally turned on during char. acter selection, it appears as a shield when the character is attacked. Perfect for beginners facing experienced players. 56 "


"REVIEW CYCLOPS If looks could kill! The co-leader of the X-Men possesses lethal eye. beam energy rays of such strength he needs special ruby-quartz goggles just to contain their uncontrollable output. This power alone makes Cyclops one of the most powerful X-Men. MASS DESTRUCTION! Citywide devastation caused by superpowered battles is commonplace in Marvel comics. So much so in fact, that Marvel even produced a comic called Damage Control that dealt solely with moping up after New York's superheroes. Following in the vandalistic tradition, X-Men features property damage on a scale unseen in any previous beat 'em up. Most of the levels are actually many storeys tall, allowing for floors to collapse from the stress of the epic battles, sending the super-combatants plunging to lower levels whilst fighting throughout the whole fall, of course! Samtlige HIT SENTINEL Created to hunt down mutants, the Sentinels are best described as big. And awesome, horrifying, formidable and armed to the teeth! The Sentinel might hardly be able to move (except when flying), but it doesn't need to. Virtually every move is a deadly special! Level PSUL. level PSYLOCKE Half-psychic, half-ninja, full-bodied! Psylocke has a few mental attacks to her name, however it's only when combined with her martial arts that her full strength is unleashed. When she manifests multiple images of herself using her Hyper-X power, she's at her deadliest! ere. Os v aror Level 1478 level DESCOBAR COLES level 8.2 Level COLOSSUS Zangief can't hope to match this fellow Russian wrestler, not unless he too can transform his flesh into an indestructible steel shell! Slow and unwieldy, but once he's got a grip on his foe his attacks are devastating. His piledrivers are enough to shatter the floor! 20028 Level 1 50096 level SPIRAL CUC.OOS DOD! SPIRAL Created to battle the X-Men purely for the amusement of the spectators of Mojo World, Spiral is one of the game's weirdest characters to look at and to play! Possessing six arms, she has the potential for some stunning combinations, even with just one punch! 57 "


"REVIEW CVG REVIEW THE X-FACTOR! Devastating special attacks are the least you'd expect from a fighting game packed with superpowered beings. So, how do the X-Men get their real kicks? Well mutant-lovers, that comes from the Hyper-X attack! By hitting your opponent or pulling off special moves, you can charge up your Mutant Power Meter. Depending on your chosen X-Man, you can release various strength Hyper-X attacks, with a full power meter unleashing simply awesome super-special attacks, some of which can clock up 50 hits or more. One of the most impressive Hyper-X moves is Spiral's, transforming her into every fighter in succession. Even Magneto and Juggernaut! Level 2 L-36-12 500--83-Level 1 Senise D2502 CUCUFS oblering CITES 0445 CEMA FiesSTORE HIT 500 Leve 5000-60Hz EPOT NOVE ne WIPZ PLAYER 1 AKUMA IS IN THERE! 3 HIT O As with the coin-op (and virtually every Capcom beat 'em up made in recent times), Akuma, the extra boss character from Super Streetfighter 2 Turbo, is hidden in the game. He's faster and even more lethal than any of the other fighters just about all his moves can be stringed together into lethal combos! Here's how to get him on both joypads for incredible head-to-head Akuma combat! Level Rax Level 1 992 PLAYER 2 Level Hax Ionto On the character select screen, follow the path shown, depending on which O BO player you are. Start at the red dor and end at the blue, pausing over each character for two seconds. On the last character, press A, Z and C EXACTLY together. Get and right and you're Akuma! 58 "


"REVIEW REVIEW CVG Level 1 SCORES Level 1 Level 584 KO CURSO DE ICEMAN 1998 cm NEL WE'VE BEEN EXPECTING YOU... Waiting at the end of the game are the two boss characters, the unstoppable Juggernaut and the XMen's arch-enemy, Magneto! In the coin-op, they are nothing more than boss characters. However, in the Saturn conversion there's a cheat allowing you to play as them! Capcom claim it's quite an easy cheat to discover, although we've yet to uncover it. Nonetheless, here's some pictures of Professor X's gigantic half-brother and the Master of Magnetism, in action! Level 2 74 VIRTUA FIGHTER 2 X-MEN .............. GOLDEN AXE..... ADEPTAMOS POLYES GRAPHICS Perfect Marvel comics look. Dynamic fighters and awesome backdrops! SECOND OPINION SATURN This IS X-Men the arcade game. And X-Men the arcade game is an awesome experience. Players in a hurry to abandon sprite-based fighting games had better get a grip, before incredible titles like this start passing you by. Just look at the incredible action sequences displayed on these pages. Does this look, old fashioned? Boring? Waste of time? Not at all. Capcom are the all-time masters of the fighting game, and X-Men is the perfect joing of forces Marvel's uncanny characters, combined with Capcom's tremendous sense of dynamism. The combo potential is unbelievable. Of course some frames of animation have been sacrificed for the greater good. But when it's this good, why worry! PAUL DAVIES TOOD! ANIMATION...94 It doesn't have to be 3D to impress. Super-smooth animation. Incredible! DISS_SSAD 92 Level 2 50MUSIC Rocking tunes give the game a quality action cartoon feel. NEEMIAN SOUND EFFECTS..93 Just wait until you hear Colossus ram you through the floor! GAMEPLAY VERDICT SATURN It's Street Fighter 2 on amphetamines! Awesome gameplay! VALUE. Another essential Saturn title. You have to own it! Level 2 SANDAM MEMUAN If you're wondering how this game could possibly be of interest in the aftermath of Sega's awesome Model 2 arcade conversions, you obviously haven't experienced the coin-op. The combination of Capcom's punchy Street Fighter 2 gameplay with the awesome X-Men under your control, makes it one of the best fighting games you'll ever play. And this Saturn conversion is virtually indistinguishable from the coin-op. The feeling of being involved in a massive Marvel superbattle is perfectly captured. Ludicrously powerfu moves, massive fantastical levels to leap around or shatter, all topped off with top-grade music and sound effects. And the fighting action is mentally fast, as you reel off super-attack after super-attack in an attempt to pound your foe into oblivion. It's a titanic experience! So, which one should you get VF2 or X-Men? I honestly think you should have both. They're drastically different and you'll enjoy owning each of them. If you have to make a desicion though, VF2 wins. It is the best game ever, after all! Yet more power to the Saturn and a brilliant taste of what we can expect from Darkstalkers 2 and Street Fighter Alpha. And roll on Marvel Super Heroes! OVERALL Proof that the Saturn is THE home coin-op machine of the moment! One of the best beat 'em ups in existence! TOM GUISE aka QUADCLOPS 59 "


"REVIEW PLAYSTATION RACING GAME NAMCO. EIMPORT What's to stop Sega Rally riding roughshod over every PlayStation racer this year? The next six pages ought to give you some idea... OUT NOW FRIDGE RACER 1-2 PLAYERS NO OTHER VERSION PLANNED NO OTHER VERSION AVAILABLE. PISU TIME POSITO '53\"290 53\"290 t's been almost three years since Ridge Racer first appeared in the arcades. THREE YEARS! And still people talk about it like it's hot property. Why? Because Namco created an arcade classic, that's why. And all arcade classics deserve a sequel or... lessee now... three: Ridge Racer 2, Rave Racer, and now Ridge Racer Revolution. What's so special about the last one is that it has been written especially for PlayStation, by the programmers of the arcade original. We're talking people who know quite a lot about what they're doing here! 2' 40\"631 * 40\"631 il PSN Though Revolution isn't due on these shores for some months from now, this is one heck of an important game for the Sony/ Namco partnership. Which is why CVG is taking the Japanese model for an exhaustive test run this month. PESTION UMES San FISHE LBP 1 | 0666 1 10\"$92 9'00765 & SEEL ING OVER RECO ED 2'41\"355 and Endinant Am REVOLUTION ANTHEMS Fans of the Bee Gees, and possibly even Kenny Rogers are in for a treat with Ridge Racer Revolution, now that the music is geared toward Middle of the Road tastes. And if you believe that, you'd believe that Tom Guise is awake at 4:30 AM each day, helping elderly birds catch the first worms. Truth is Revolution incorporates remixes of classic Ridge Racer themes such as \"Rare Hero\" and \"Rotterdam Nation\", alongside magnificent new grooves titled «Maximum Zone\" and «Drive U 2 Dancing\". As ever, the music is enough to fry your brain, without so much as laying a finger on the control pad! S400*765 WOMAN.   RIDGE RACER PROJECT ZELOS O 765 RDSVAGA "


"REVIEW REVIEW CVG REVOLUTION FROM ONE CLASSIC TO ANOTHER 125 ANKLP2 HIDDEN The cars below are (reading clockwise): 13th Racing Kid, 13th Racing, and Angel. We have Dave from Maximum magazine to thank for trashing the Angel. Er, we didn't have time. cel This word 'classic' is thrown about without too much care, but in Namco's case it usually applies in the arcade at any rate. Another of the company's best known oldies is used to pass the loading time of Revolution. This time around it's a bonus stage from Galaga 88, in which exactly 40 alien ships dance past a fancy-looking laser cannon. Bullseye them all four extra cars are made available to race, giving players a total of eight to GRT BLUE SOUIL choose from: STANDARD 1. FIA RACING 2. RT RYUKYU 3. RT YELLOW SOLVALOU 4. RT BLUE SOLVALOU 5. RT XEVIOUS GREEN 6. GALAGA RT CARROT 7. RT XEVIOUS RED 8. RT NEBULASRAY 9. RT BOSCONIAN 10. GALAGA RT PRID'S 11. BLUE MAPPY 12 PINK MAPPY CAR SELECT LORONGOR 2. TO OLALGIRT CAR 10 LIGA CHECK YOUR EYEBROWS One cool feature of Revolution, sure to raise a grumble from the Sega corner, is the Rear View Mirror. However it's more than just a decorative extra, as without it drivers are short of a crucial winning tool. On many occasions it's necessary to block the efforts of the car behind, or risk being knocked out of line. Taking corners as close to the knuckle as possible is very important too, so someone sneaking through on the inside is the last thing a driver needs. Plus cutting across a rival's line to steal a split-second victory is another key tactic on the tougher difficulties. TIME ENTHUSIASTIC OR PSYCHIATRICI Revolution features more speech than any of its predecessors. Now the commentary runs to around twice as many phrases as before, so it seems that drivers are being prompted, praised, or mocked almost without respite. The mystery voice now says \"Get ready to block\", when cars approach from behind. Questions \"Taking your time aren't you! What's wrong, engine trouble?\", if the car remains stationary for too long. And «Ha-ah! Ha-ah! You're too slow\" to indicate that you're behind time at specific points. Slightly weird is the term «Locked on target\", as though cars are equipped with missiles some hope! 0S1466 1 03\"650 1' 30\"765 4' 30\"765 4' 10\"765 61 "


"REVIEW CVG REVIEW TIME namco POSITION 0343\"733 SU VOL\"013 REFLECTING ON YOUR FAST LIFE At this stage in the review, we invite you to look back in time to the original Ridge Racer, which may prompt you into remembering a cool cheat in that game. Any ideas? No? Well, we're talking about the Mirror Mode here. The trick which allows drivers to turn right around at the beginning of a race, and power headlong into the barrier ahead without sustaining any damage. Why? Well because doing so opens up a complete mirror image of the circuit to race around a trick that works on all circuits, whether regular or extra. To give you some idea of how this affects 0-10765 the game, take a * 10\"765 look at the Heihatchi hoarding to the right here... 4' 10\"765 29 kalk TIME 10*765 BEACON Namco seem keen to pursue the effects that lighting an have in a game. Tekken 2 makes great use of light sourcing to create atmosphere, and Soul Edge recently followed suit. Only in Ridge Racer, and this sequel does light, and the lack of it, have serious repercussions on how a game plays. For example, imagine approaching a hair-pin bend, around which you are expected to power-slide at 200 km/h, in complete darkness, with only the car headlights to show the way. It's tricky! Dramatic though it is, the darkness isn't nearly so wonderful as he solar flare cutting through the Palm Trees. Or the eerie orange light cast over a lighthouse by sunset. For a racing game, Revolution goes a long way to showcasing the PlayStation's special effects library. SR TIME namco POSITION 05 PYN EXTRA O' 31\"SO V 32\" 193 5. 00*765 U NASI: 32-193 00*765 NAMco o . COURSE SELECT RIDGE RACER PRECT ZELO!  NOVICE COURSE SELECT COURSE SELECT **& ADVANCED COURSE SELECT EXPERT |  Winner TOTAL LENGTH 4260M 62 "


"REVIEW PLAINS TRAINS. AND HEIHATCHI HOARDINGS In case you hadn't guessed from the screen-shots, the majority of action in Revolution takes place on a whole new island. The circuit passes through a strange blend of modern Japan, the Bahamas, and future city. Each locale has its own distinguishing features, for example the monorail which passes overhead is identical to the one found at Narita airport in Tokyo. There are also aeroplanes seen performing aerobatics at some points. Often the sounds match the visuals for finesse, as expressed by the roar of the sea near the beach, or thunder of jets from above. Of course the helicopter remains cool in both aspects sight, and sound. ME POSITION POSITION FLEBOUCED BY namco 1' 10\"765 CONGRATULF TEENS 17 15 PRATEXIRSIC 4' 10\"765 & MAXIMUK 204 Phwaor! That helicopter is totally excellent! You wouldn't believe the crazy places it shows up. Wah! Hey, look everyone it's Heihatchi from Tekken. Don't spend too long admiring him though, this is a sharp corner! What's the Waltons' house doing in this game? Never mind that though, there's a billboard for Alpine Racer. TIME POSITION TIME POSITION 0'50\"80 tenang 130\"765 4' 30\"765 Future city, we think. And that cool helicopter again. And that girl with the stiff-legged walk. As you hurtle around this hooded corner, you get to see and hear the hellcopter buzzing overhead. Mud huts. Swarming with cannibals no doubt. Don't stop to admire the view, or you could get eaten! 28 / FISION PISTON TIME ISTON 1165 1'21\"982 L' 40°765 1'21\"982 4' 30\"765 AOKE 4 30\"765 do te te 125/ FRESH CREAM THE DEVIL RIDES OUT...AGAIN! Look who's back! The sinister black car with the unbeatable performance once again throws down the gauntlet to all those capable to meet the challenge. By this he means anyone skilled enough to achieve first place in the Novice, Advanced, and Expert courses. Prove your worth, and the 13th Racer awaits on the Novice Time Trial course where previously there was just the yellow Solvalou to overcome. Beat 13th Racer and he, once more, offers drivers the daring opportunity to take the phantom wheel! 13th Racer isn't the only super car lurking inside Revolution. It has two partners a cream-coloured 'Angel car, and a more compact black car named 13th Racer Kid. To the best of our knowledge there are no secret rewards in store for players who complete the game using either of these cars. However nobody has yet succeeded in the hardest, 'Excellent', difficulty level to find out. We'll keep you posted if our nerves hold up! 63 "


"REVIEW CVG REVIEW CAR SELECT AT BLUE SOLVALOU (VERDICT. PLAYSTATION types Type R LEVEL ADVANCED WAVE GOODBYE TO ANOTHER YEAR! Despite having only one course, Ridge Racer offers extended challenge because of the secrets it contains. You already know how Revolution has that particular area well catered for, but we'd like to draw your attention to the fact that Ridge Racer only has one difficulty setting. In Revolution there are four! After selecting a car to race, players are requested to choose the engine type. Initially there are just two S, and R which attain top speeds of 160km/h and 180 km/h respectively. After completing the game once over, a further two engine types become available X, and Z-that achieve 200km/h and 220 km/h respectively. As the speed of a car dictates how the courses are managed, these four engine types have a definite effect on how the game is played. Plus it's not just the speed of your car that is boosted the enemy cars are customised too, which increases the challenge still more! CAR SELECT E CAR SELECT RT BLUE SOLVALOD AT RYUKYU CAR SELECT RT RYUKYU It's more of the same, but since it's so much more, and the original remains fantastic to this day, I'm hardly disappointed. Still I've mixed feelings toward Revolution. On the one hand I can't believe the sheer volume of features it contains, and am constantly left awestruck by the brilliance of the presentation. Equally I'm floored by the intense gameplay, that is at least a 300% improvement over the original talk about extreme concentration! The point against Revolution is that we haven't been introduced to something entirely new. While I am dedicated to beat the game in an almost hypnotic state, there's nowhere near the same elation felt at spying the secret cars, or happening across the circuits in mirror mode. There's no magic, it's just a cold kind of satis faction not red hot and essential as before. Of course I recommend this amazing game, wholeheartedly. Just remember there's an element of been there, before attached. AT max speed 181km MT max speed 185 SPECIFICATIONS PAUL DAVIES AT mexspeed 1816 AT mexspeed 247 AT max speed 2510 DypeR M ME mexspeed 185 SIS BE COOL! narco 0'59\"636 CAR SELECT RT YELLOW SOLVALOU 4' 10\"765 Types AT max speed 171km VMT maxspeed 175km, TIME PISTON NAVIKAYA NARCO SPECIFICATIONS US RECORD TWICE THE GAME AND DOUBLE THE ACTION! We use this word a lot, you'll find, but the two-player angle on Ridge Racer Revolution really is INCREDIBLE! Not only does it make excellent use of the link cable, but the two-player link game recalls the entire race course from the first Ridge Racer game. Far more than just an open road on which to do battle with one other player, the original circuit is available to race with all 12 cars should you wish. If you're fortunate enough to take advantage of this feature, we guarantee you'll be massively impressed. Plus, we're almost certain that a cheat exists which allows players to compete on this course in one-player mode too. naTICO TIME POSITION 2:2 RIDGERA VERONA  TS TO EN LAP TIME 11.06\"900 X-3. 22. COURSE 1101\"361 1984 2 SPECIAL 2P LINK GAME NOVICE Race Slapsen F A RACING 4' 40\"765 4' 30\"765 20 SOLUZDO mexspeed 152 EXIT START TOEL LLNI SELECT 235 km/h 64 "


"REVIEW REVIEW CVG TIME namco <<<<<<. POSINON 0' 11\" 16 SCORES GALAGA STERIN 1'30\"765 EXTRA 4' 30\"765 mmmmmmmmm mm O D DRIVE U Z DANCING HARRIS 6. S ROTTERDAM ALIOS 34 TIME POSITE GIVING YOU THE TIME OF DAY Once you've gained first position in all six circuits (regular and extra) an enlightening experience awaits. It's a darkening one too. And may even have a sort of middle of the day type feel to it. Okay, we'll stop talking in riddles. When you totally complete the game, an option to change the lighting becomes available. Before a race, and before even selecting a car or race course, you are asked to select a scene: Normal changes during a race. Noon keeps everything looking crystal clear and well lit. Evening casts that ethereal yellow glaze over everything, and Nights throws everywhere into total darkness. Put Artist namanan RIDGE RACER REVOLUTION. WIPEOUT 00\"765 GRAPHICS SCENE Once more Namco have produced a showcase of the PlayStation's ability. normal noon ANIMATION Fast, fast, FAST! So up and down it'll make you car sick. Brilliant! evening nights SECOND OPINION PLAYSTATION Most of the PlayStation titles we've seen over the last couple of months have left me distinctly unimpressed. Then Ridge Racer Revolution comes along and brings back the kind of electrified excitement I felt when the PlayStation first arrived at the end of 1995. The game is incredible! Yes, it is basically Ridge Racer with an all-new track, but the fresh challenges it presents make it one of the most thrilling games I've played. As before, beating the new course in all its forms and gaining all the new cars gives the game that killer addiction that has you wanting to totally beat it. This is definitely a game for Ridge Racer fans. If you've beaten the first game, you know how exhilarating it, was and you must have been craving more of the same. Well, here it is in spades. A brilliant extension of the Ridge Racer experience! MUSIC Lovely day, chaps. What-what. Hard-core, bangin', techno choons. WICKED, GUY!!! TIME POS NON SOUND EFFECTS. 93 Engine sounds like a siren blowing. Speech is excellent. Mad! an TOM GUISE GAMEPLAY TIME namco So-oo intense! When racing the faster cars, you almost explode! S ROTTERDAM 94 I say, hark at that positively glorious sunset. Simper. Dash! It's a trifle dark around these parts. One could get lost! VALUE. So many extras. Plus it's a mark of cool to master this game. OVERALL THIRD OPINION PLAYSTATION 140*765 Everything Ridge Racer maniacs could have wanted from a sequel, especially in terms of challenge. Might not convince Sunday Drivers though. 5'00\"765 Unlike Tom and Paul, the original Ridge Racer passed straight over my head. I found the weird car handling frustrating and unrealistic so I just didn't want to play it. However, I've recently been playing the game quite a bit and think it's fantastic! Exactly the same applies to RRR. Though the car handling isn't particularly realistic or instantly accessible, with time it can be mastered along with the track(s), making for an incredible game. Personally, I slightly prefer the slidey car handling of Sega Rally but this game still deserves every percent it's got, and should be bought by every PS owner. It's the first PlayStation game since Wipeout that I've really wanted to buy. And I will. POR PARO GALAGA ED LOMAS 65 "


"REVIEW) CVG REVIEW PC CD-ROM PINBALL VIRGIN .99 OUT NOW 1-4 PLAYER SATURN VERSION PLANNED In the old days you had to go to the pub to play pinball. Not anymore though, this is the future. So take a beer pill, switch on your android mates and enjoy Tilt. NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE t is widely rumoured that the development team who worked on Tilt spent many hours visiting the shady corners of public houses across the country in order to produce the most realistic pinball simulation possible. If you ask me, that sounds like a pretty lousy excuse for submitting a somewhat dubious expenses claim \"in the pursuit of accuracy\". Whatever the reason, it seems to have paid off as Tilt is certainly one of the most realistic simulations of a pinball table we've seen so far. But then it would have to be, because it's up against some ridiculously stiff competition at the moment there's Empire's Pro Pinball, Ocean's True Pinball and 21st Century's Pinball Fantasies, to name but a few. So how does Tilt match up in the ensuing pinball war? It's got the looks, it's got the realism, and it's got a massive six tables for you to flip away at, but can it 'tilt' the scales in its favour? Ho ho. LOOKIN' GOOD The most impressive part of the game are the awesome graphics. Genuine, you've played -'em-yourself pinball machines have been painstakingly recreated, with effective use of reflective and transparent surfaces. Even the rivets and welding marks are exactly as they were on the original machines. In order to achieve this, the programming team dismantled several pinball tables, and measured all the mechanical gubbins inside. This has all been put together with an engine that allows free-flowing movement of the balls, which react naturally with the springs and buffers they encounter. The side-games and cut-scenes add an interesting dimension to Tilt, but players will have to exhibit some pretty skillful flipper work to experience these just as you do with the real thing. A It's the horror table and it's got a ball in it. How horrible. Looks like Tom Guise is having his daily lie-in, much to the disgust of the evil art master. ROADKING USA 66 ROADKING "


"REVIEW REVIEW CVG ANDROID FRIENDS ACTIVATED! Play Tilt on your own, or with up to three other players. Be careful who you invite around though, or your shift keys will never be the same again (We're speaking from experience here). SCORES Tour A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON PINBALL Tilt offers three different views for your game. 2D scrolling, 3D scrolling or 3D full table. The scrolling views offer a player's eye perspective of the ball as it ricochets off the many obstacles littered around the tables, but it can be a very disorienting way to play the game. Players can also fully customise the graphics depending on the capacity of their PC, to maximise the running speed of the game or go for the highest possible resolution. FANTASIES ILLUSIONS. GRAPHICS Impressive 3D-effect rendered graphics. ANIMATION Smooth animation creates a 3D look from rendered frames. QOUBLE URILIS SARIPLE MUSIC Pando....... 87 Appropriate but not exactly inspiring SOUND EFFECTS.. 87 SIX OF THE BEST There's an impressive six tables to choose from, all with their own theme. Horror, Myths & Magic, Space Quest, Fun Fair, Gangster and Roadking USA. All the tables offer a variety of different side-games and specials, and appropriate sound tracks have been laid over to add further atmosphere. Authentic pinball sounds add to the realism. GAMEPLAY......85 Roadking, the brilliant Proclaimers song. Oh no, that's King of the Road. Well-programmed ball movement and plenty of challenge. FUNFAIR GANGSTER VALUE. VERDICT PC CD-ROM Six tables provide plenty of pinball amusement. MYTHS & MAGIC HORROR OVERALL A graphically excellent, entertaining pinball sim. Despite the obvious effort that's gone into Tilt, it's still less realistic than Empire's Pro Pinball, which has got ball movement down to a fine art. But the option of six tables to play (as opposed to Empire's miserly one) more than makes up for this slight downgrading in performance. Although a nice a touch, I found the scrolling 2D and 3D views made me feel a bit seasick after a while and were soon dropped in favour of the full table 3-D version. Whichever view you prefer, you have to concede that Tilt is absolutely stunning, graphically speaking. Annoyingly you have to exit the program to the start up menu to sample the six different tables, which takes time and is more than a little frustrating. The side-games and video sequences add longevity to the play, and the option to choose any one of the six audio tracks on any table was a relief, as one or two of them were really annoying. Overall a great game, but ultimately something you will only want to bash away at for short bursts at a time. KATE RUSSELL SPACE QUEST ROAD KING USA "


"REVIEW CVG REVIEW SATURN PUZZLE/FEEDING SEGA BAKU BAKU EIMPORT OUT NOW 1-2 PLAYERS CD ANIMAL NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED It's a puzzle game. It's all about feeding animals. It's been done by AM3. And if you think all that's weird, you'd better take a look at the name. LESSON 1: THE FOOD CHAIN PLANNEU...*** ARCADE VERSION AVAILABLE ( LE aku-baku-baku-baku. Ah, there's nothing quite like the sound of animals eating. And that really is Yep, it's a puzzle game in that Tetris-style tradition again. Only this time nothing like the sound of animals instead of shapes, beads, ghosts, biscuits or whatever, falling down the eating. They go more like snufflescreen, it's food and animal heads. And the animals eat the food. Except scrunch-snort-yum, if they're chompeach animal only eats one type of food. And that's how you clear the ing down a trough of oats or the screen. So first of all, let's get acquainted with the animals and their like. Baku baku IS however, the chosen specialist snack. sound little computer animal-heads make when they're eating. And boy You can call is it irritating! The incessant sound of me The Ape electronic saliva washing down a and I'm quite feast of banana icons. Mind you, it's partial to a even more annoying when they're not eatbanana! Ooh ing. When you can't feed your monkeyah ooh! heads the bananas they so crave, because there's a load of carrots in I'm Scampi the way. And you can't get the the Dog. Give drooling rabbit-head to clean up me a bone. the carrots because there's a flamin' Ho ho. load of panda-heads blocking the digestive tract. Know the feeling? No? Well you'd better strap on your wipe-clean bib as we take you through Baku Baku Animal, an eating game that's less complicated than heartburn and more satisfying than a firm, solid dump. MBET 24/ Yeh hi, I'm the Panda and I just love bamboo shoots! STAGE 1 Eek eek, I'm Ed Lomas and I'd like some cheese, if you please. My name's Mr Bunny and it's carrots for me! Thank you. 264 32 BETA SALAD DRESSING! If you haven't guessed yet, Baku Baku is one weird game. And this is reflected by the bizarre SGI-generated cartoon that leads you into the game. It seems you're after the hand of a princess with hair like green chillis. To win it, you have to play against a host of strange characters, including the king, queen and princess herself. Although the FMV is quite ropey, the characters are beautifully rendered and appear during the game, chuckling if they're winning or sweating if they're losing. In fact all the graphics, including the munching animal-heads, have been impressively rendered on Silicon Graphics workstations. STAGE 261 197 68 "


"NET REVIEW REVIEW CVG (SCORES STAGE 6 38105 ONE COLONEL'S COMBO PLATTER PLEASE! Pleasant as it is feeding your little animal chums, you can't win the game by just shovelling grub down their gullets and clearing the screen. Nope, this is one of those puzzle games where you have to beat an opponent by filling up their side of the screen. And the only way to do that is by causing chain reactions of animal feasting on your side of the screen. In other words, you have to 'strategically' drop the icons, so after one animal has cleared its food, the icons above tumble down to cause another animal to feed. This as it's known in the food industry, as a celebration dinner. And, in fact, the instruction manual suggest a few celebration dinners of ts own. Trum BAKU BAKU. PUYO PUYO. HEBEREKE. By neatly arrabging the A Here's another lovely animals as shown above, the combo. Once that dog eats carrots can trigger a combo. the bone, it's set off! All very neat, but in truth it's more like this... GRAPHICS Colourful, cheery quality look gives the game a postive feel. MAS HET 19 There's too much stuff on my screen. Cheese, I need some cheese! Or panda-heads! Just give me something!! ANIMATION. Excellent muching animals and the icons even beg for the food MUSIC Catchy calypso tunes and musical box numbers for dining to. STAGE G STAGE 6 36062 35957 SOUND EFFECTS.. 91 Brilliant video game sounds. Munching, bleeping and screams! A Some coins have appeared, clearing away some icons! Criminy, everyone's eating. I'm saved! GAMEPLAY VERDICT Extremely addictive, hyper-active shapedropping laughs. VALUE 85 STAGE 6 36-105 For two-player puzzle munching laughs it's a feast of fun. SATURN So it's a puzzle game where you have to match up animals and food, eh? A novel idea, but not exactly one you'd think would set it apart from any other puzzlers. The truth though, is that Baku Baku is a wicked ly enjoyable game! It's the wackiness of the whole thing that makes it such fun. From the excellent gamey sounds (Baku Baku's effects are as catchy as those of Pacman. No small coincidence when you consider that Baku and Pac are both eating sounds), to the madcap animated animals munching their way around the screen, it's an extremely uplifting experience. I'd say it's this factor that makes Baku more accessible to non-puzzle fans than the more serious Tetris, or even Puyo Puyo. In the same respect though, Baku's gameplay seems more geared, to lighter puzzle enjoyment. Although tough against the computer, winning seems to be more a case of blind 'combo' luck than any real skill. Of course, you can plan stunning chain reactions, but most of the time they seem to happen anyway. Nonetheless though, an brilliantly fun game. OVERALL The non-thinking person's puzzle game. You CAN play it seriously, but you can't take it seriously! A Aw, does Panda want some bamboo shoots? Does he want some shootsies? TOM GUISE STAGE 36:105 69 "


"CVGA REVIEW PLAYSTATION. 3D SHOOT 'EM UP SONY .99. So many games appear to inwolve beating up Russians, it just doesn't seem fair. Vell now's the chance for pay back, so pronounce Vas W, and let's get some wodca down our necks! 19TH JANUARY (1 PLAYER SATURN VERSION PLANNED. NO OTHER VERSION AVAILABLE. e love the idea behind Krazy Ivan! Here you are, you're a mental Russian soldier, suited-up inside a massive metallic monster, armed with the latest in lasers, plasma, and energy weapons, and supplied with all manner of missile and incendiary devices. Sounds good, non? Your task is to travel the globe, dropping in (quite literally) on various crisis situations, and helping out as only you can. Each location has a number of 'arenas' where you find massive alien monstrosities; either human-based creations or robots-based upon animals. These enormous machines of death are tooled up in a similar fashion to yourself, and are more than happy to while away the hours frying you in your own juices. As you move through the gloriously 3D-fied landscape, various minor alien enemies do their best to bite chunks out of your shins, but can in fact be of great use, as their demise releases all manner of helpful items such as shield recharges, extra weapon missile replacements, and even speed-ups. Between each location you're treated to an awesome-looking cut-scene (although the intro sequence takes all the nominations as far as the 'best presentation' award goes) while a helpful coordinator appears on your screen every now and then, instructing you of your next target or helping with information about known enemy weak spots. Though you're pretty damn impressive to start with, as you progress through the levels, energy spheres can be collected and used as currency (or should that be current-cy? chortle chuckle) to buy new weapons after each successful mission. New lasers, plasma guns, and additional armour can be purchased, along with more powerful missiles and some incredible special weapons for your tankon-legs. Of the latter, you can expect massive Vortex Bombs, power beams, and even disrupters (that make the screen go 'allshakey' just like old episodes of Star Trek when they used to pretend to get hit). FENENTOR And there you have it — simple but great! Ah, but of course you've yet to see the revealing verdict. Step this way sir. ETES DESTRUSTEE 10 TERREST FURTIG LERE T CANE DIZELTE FRIDES MENONT COLOSSUS Every enemy destroyed releases a number of hostages which can be collected for extra points. Hurrah! 50925 $490 0 176 FIRE FIRE 2491 GRP 1950 DEDLOK The intro sequence is a right old treat to be sure. Though technology doesn't allow us to show it to you in all its glory, please acept these static shots instead. Sorry about that. 70 "


"REVIEW REVIEW CVG POWER-UPS There are a number of helpful icons to be collected along the way. Here's but a few: 1. Rearms your guns (all of them!) 2. Puts you in 'Schizo Mode' where you're invincible, but with (hilariously) reversed controls. Ha. 3. Replenishes your missile stock. 4. Sends you into 'Zombie Mode' where you're invincible, but move slowly. 5. This is the best. 'Energia Mode' gives you invincibility AND extra speed. Awesome! 6. This icon calls in the Air Strike, but keep out of the way as they're not too worried about who they hit. 10 usa 0 m ETER CIRES FIRE BAR S9 LED SCUTRES THE METODLE EAST TERREST SOFILATION CETTE PILE PRISOTEE TAPED UIHISIEZEL BOTE BIFFICILTY FACTOS It's not just the big guys you have to worry about there are tons of smaller gits to be dealt with as well. Unless you need to kill them for the hostages and power-ups inside, just keep moving to avoid these pests. UPGRADE TIME PSZIAS TARGET GENERATOR 5990 PAOUL QUAL FIRE After each successful mission, you return to this screen where any collected Energy Cores can be used to buy new weapons, better missiles, more powerful 'specials', or simply to improve your armour. You can only operate with one type of missile and one type of special during a given mission, but can have up to five different gun weapons. These can be cycled through during play. CES serem SLUTSE FIRE ZEERIT 5 HENES URTEX 3 Once you've cleared a location of its big robots, it's off to the big energy shield. This is all very reminiscent of Tron and Star Castle, so shoot out the shield walls and take out the source. Easy! asa VROLE "


"REVIEW THE BAD GUYS LE19D 16 18 As previously mentioned, there are tons of nasty geezers to take on, each with their own look and method of attack. Come with us now, as we take a stroll through death valley. FIRE MISSION LOCATION:RUSSIA som QULF ASESTSE S 22B2 OLARE FIRE anam os SCYTTET DWARF With his enormous twin cannons, Dwarf looks absolutely superb. He also has some damn fine animation when moving. GDS 212 1137 DEDLOK FAPTOR DEDLOK — More of a robot gorilla than anything else, Dedlok supplements his firepower by supporting himself on his arms, lifting his legs in the air, and firing energy bolts from his feet. RAPTOR — A tricky fella, if only because of his tendency to jump into the air like some demented frog every few seconds. Other than that, unremarkable. MISSION LOCATION: SAUDI ARABIA 17075 19000 SENTINEL — Known to his friends as Humpty, this enormous flying eggcome-squid is a curiosity and no mistake. What can we tell you. Shoot the freak! FIHE FIHE LIDE SOMERO WF10 GYTIE 3 PROWL This feline-esque droid is impressive to look at but, as always, a right old push-over. QUALM Sounds more like a tablet for stress than a monster, but this hard chap comes complete with his own supply of missiles. Grr. PROLIL CO2 72 "


"REVIEW REVIEW CVG MISSION LOCATION: JAPAN FIRE HAE 150 SCORES FLAMEFRONT (1) The only enemy that has realised the way to success is to constantly side-step. Fortunately, he's still not as good at it as you are! ARCLIGHT (2) A beautiful sight to behold, Arclight has huge wings that unfold and spew death in your face. He's not so tough though. BRE COLOSSUS (3) CLAW (4) Relying on pure bulk, Another very crabColossus has a penlike baddie, but chant for suddenly not one to get parrunning at you with his ticularly worried head down. Er... stepabout. Side-stepping to the side ping tends to do should sort him out the trick, surpristhen. Of course. ingly enough, MISSION LOCATION: NORTH AMERCIA KRAZY IVAN TWISTED METAL... WOOD GRAPHICS THUNDERFOOT (1) REFLEX (2) Pretty straight-forApart from looking ward this one. He like the probe droid in wanders around The Empire Strikes looking lost most of Back, this chap has the time, and apart the habit of splitting from occasionally into multiple nasties, opening his breast attacking you from all plates to lob bombs, sides. Thankfully, he's is nothing out of the actually quite weak, ordinary. and no real problem. FIREBALL (3) GRANITE (4) One of the most One of the few badimpressive to look dies that isn't a comat, and certainly not plete push-over. A bit lacking in the jellyfish-like, Granite weapons depart can retract his legs, ment, Fireball is a sit on the floor, and tasty geeza. If only lob out energy bombs. he wasn't as weak He also packs a fair as my nan's tea! old punch. Excellent 3D scenery and some amazingly impressive robots. FIRE LS ANIMATION. Very slick motion and awesomely animated enemies. 22 MUSIC Good quality and atmospheric tunes. MISSION LOCATION: FRANCE SOUND EFFECTS.. 88 Realistic explosions and clunking noises. GAMEPLAY. 82 BEHEMOTH (1) Empire Strikes Back anyone? Oh sorry, did I say that? Doh, so sorry, I don't know what came over me. Anyway, this fat elephant thing is pathetic, so just get rid of it. Our record's fifteen seconds (We kid you not). BUZZSAW (2)— One of the more colourful aliens, Buzzsaw is part-humanoid, part-wasp (or something). Anyway, he's jolly pretty, but still well worth killing ASAP. Smooth and easy to play but with a small fault. VALUE. Though it's fun, the small fault ruins its value. ARACHAN (4) One to get the ladies screaming, but other than that, not much to write home about. As always, just keep moving. CARAPACE (5) A vaguely crab-like creation that makes things slightly interesting by occasionally flying around for a bit. Egad! What will they think of next? SCORCH (3) Probably the most boring of all the enemies, only because he takes so long to kill. You can only shoot him in the head, and he keeps burrowing into the ground. Oh what fun. No, really, what a challenge. (VERDICT OVERALL A very impressive action game with loads of big robots to kill. It's a real shame the unseen fault makes doing that far too easy. PLAYSTATION From the moment Krazy Ivan loads up, it looks as though you're in for a right old treat. And then it all goes horribly wrong. Yes, sad but true, Krazy Ivan is flawed. The culprit? A simple manoeuvre I like to call the 'side-step and turn' move. What am I talking about? Well, whenever you come across something that wants to kill you, simply move to the side, but rotate at the same time so as to keep him in your sights. You can merrily blast him to hell, while he gets all grumpy and confused: shooting at the space you occupied a scant two seconds ago. Oh dear. A right shame, and no mistakin'. MATT BROUGHTON 73 "


"ARCADES You have to catch these games quick, y'know, or they're snatched away again before you get chance to enjoy them. We're talking about Namco's new batch of coin-ops, first previewed in November's JAMMA feature. Recently they were on test at Namco's Wonder Park in London, so Ed got his skates on... VIDEO SOUL EDGE EFMOERUER 00000 brry 530006 \"ITSURUG Beat-'em-up 150p per play Namco I 1-2 Players Arcade fans have been looking forward to the release of Namco's Soul Edge ever since the first pictures were released. When you see them for yourself it's easy to appreciate why as the graphics are some of the most impressive ever in a beat-'em-up. The game is essentially a Tekken-style fighting game involving weapons and not just ordinary weapons, these are MAD weapons! For example, Rock the fur wearing warrior carries around one of the most enormous axes ever seen! The game will be available across the country soon and is a hot favourite for conversion onto the PlayStation as it was created on the Super 11 system. Also, with Toh Shin Den 2 looking as good as it is, the PS may well be able to handle a fairly decent conversion! 000 S2000 The biggest new feature is the control method. Rather than going for the 3-button VF control, the 6-button SF control, the 5-button MK control or the 4-button Tekken control the designers have created a new load of controls, again featuring 4 buttons. They are Guard, Vertical, Horizontal and Kick. It's fairly obvious how the Guard buttons works, as well as the Kick but the two styles of weapon hit work in a way alien to beat-'em-up players. Though they've got fairly opposite titles, the two buttons aren't often all that different, offering various levels of attacks and specials. The stick is also used in a different way to many arcade games as tapping Down then Up will sidestep the character one way and Up then Down sidesteps the other. The characters still jump and crouch as usual by holding Up or Down. The characters range from the usual fast, weak women to the slow, hulking blokes. Though that all sounds a bit dull there are some totally fantastic and original characters like Vold a strange fighter with rotating blades for hands. Pulling off the special moves is fairly standard in that it uses pad rolls, joystick taps and button pushes, meaning that there are loads of possibilities. Sadly, there has to be at least one down side and in Soul Edge it's the speed. The game is far slower than Tekken 2 or VF2 when it's being played normally but the slow-down is particularly noticeable when pulling off a combo. If three or four buttons are hit in sequence, the character will take a few seconds to pull off the three or four attacks, completely ruining the feeling of really controlling the characters that is found in Streetfighter Alpha, for example. The graphics are totally incredible, not only in still pictures but when they are moving as well, as the items of clothing and other fine details glide around as though they were really real, as it were. The fancy lighting effects also add to create one of the best-looking arcade games at the moment but overall it's a bit of a let-down. 3/5 74 "


"ARCADES ARCADES CVG DROME TIME CRISIS ole TEKKEN 2ver base Gun game I  per play Namco 11 Player Here's the infamous Action Pedal in action. By releasing it the player can duck behind obstacles to avoid bullets. Another of Namco's direct challenges to Sega is Time Crisis a very obvious Virtua Cop-inspired gun game. Of course, there has to be at least one original feature and in Time Crisis it's the Action Pedal. It completely changes the style of the game as players can now duck behind objects to avoid being shot. The character ducks automatically and only stands up when the pedal is pressed. To make it possible to avoid shots, the bullets are visible as they fly toward the player so precise timing is required to stay alive. The graphics are incredible, as with all of Namco's Super 22 games with massive playing areas which move around in real-time 3D. The Point Blank gun is used again, mean ing that there is recoil with each shot. Though the game looks much better than Virtua Copand probably better than Cop 2 it doesn't have quite the same \"point-and-shoot\" feel of the Sega games as a lot of time is spent ducking and diving. Even still, the game is great fun and has got some really good new ideas. Sadly, there's no chance of this coming to PlayStation as Namco have said that no Super 22 system games will be converted. 3/5 LOS TM namco 01994 1995 NAMCO LID. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED SOPHITIA EV00 You may have noticed in last month's news section that we mentioned a new version of Tekken 2. The \"Version B\" upgrade is actually the version released in Japan whereby new characters are added every now and then by the use of a timing device in the machine. The new characters include Wang, P-Jack, Ganryu and Baek. As well as these new characters there are a couple of others who can be accessed with cheats: To play as ROGER, a boxing kangaroo, hold Left Punch before the game starts. When the character select screen appears, press Up twice while still holding Left Punch To play as ALEX a boxing lizard man, hold Right Punch before the game starts. When the character select screen appears, press Up twice while still holding Right Punch. Not only are the cheats to access the characters similar but their moves are all the same. 75 "


"CVG ARCADES ARCADES VIDEO DROME MARVEL SUPER HEROES Beat-'em-up Capcom's incredible X-Men 50p per play beat-'em-up has finally arrived in your home and, to keep Namco one step ahead, they ve now released what is sort of a 11-2 Players sequel Marvel Super Heroes. The game is very similar in its style of play to X-Men and it even features four of the original characters. The full cast is: Hulk, Wolverine. Spiderman, Magneto, Juggernaut, Iron Man, Psylocke, Captain America, Shuma-Gorath and Blackheart. There are two bosses Dr. Doom and Thanos and at least two secret characters Akuma and possibly Ryu. 1p 2 WINS NEW HERO 2NEW HERO Another of the big new features is the addition of the Infinity Gems. They appear on the floor during fights and can be collected by either fighter. Players can hold as many as they collect and can switch between them by pressing the Start button. Once the chosen Gem has been highlighted, roll the pad from Down to Back and press all three punches to activate it. The Gems come in six flavours Reality, Time, Soul, Mind, Space and Power and each one does something different, ranging from giving the player extra armour for a short while, performing a super move or speeding the player up for a while. An extra dimention to the game is that if an opponent has got a Gem that you require, simply batter them about until they drop it! BLACKHEART SAMA CAPTAN REPIC DANGERS 1PNEW HERO 2PNEW HERO AIN AMERICA The graphics are incredible possibly the best-looking 2D sprite-based game ever! All of the characters are animated just as you'd imagine them to from the comics and the backgrounds are amazing too. On one stage, the characters fight on a bridge across a raging river, causing damage to the bridge's supports as they throw each other around Eventually, the bridge gives way and falls into the river, where the characters keep fighting as they float along the rapids! Marvel Super Heroes is planned for release on both Saturn and PlayStation some time in '96 and should be almost arcade-perfect, judging by the incredible Saturn X-Men game. PRESS START 5/5 MOUNTAIN GARD RESTAURANT UNSER 2PEW HERO WEWENSES NEW HERO SHADOTH 1P2PNEW HERO TTY 15 IOLVERINE JUICE AMERICA WOLVERINE S 2P NEW HERO 1NEW HERO 77 29NEW HERO SPIDER W GROTE JADE KITANA REPTILE ULTIMATE MORTAL KOMBAT 3 Just a little update to last month's exclusive Ultimate MK3 information, we can now give you a little bit of info on some of the secret characters. We know that it's possible to play as a version of Sub-Zero who is still in his ninja outfit from MK2 and the moves we printed for Rain last month are, in fact, the new (or old) Sub-Zero's. It is also possible to play as Smoke in his original ninja outfit too, rather than his robotic kit. As soon as we figure out how to get these characters we'll let you know how. We've also got some more moves and kombat kodes. Stomach Shake Fatality (close) Hold BK + press U, U, D, F, HP Friendship B, D, B, B, HK Animality D, D, D, R Friendship D, B, F, F, LP Animality (close) D, D, D, U, HK Babality F, F, B, D, LK Animality (close) Hold BK + press F, U, U, HI Babality D, B, B, F, HP Fatality (sweep) D, U, D, D, D, BK Pit Fatality R, R, R, R, LK Pit Fatality D, D, D, LP SCORPION ERMAC MILEENA 76 "


"ARCADES ARCADES CVG OPEN ICE Clavenozo 2 ON 2 CHALLENGE 20N MIDWAY. ROORTSI THOMAS GILMOURE NHLPA Sport Open Ice is the latest of Midway's Midway arcade sports games. As the name suggests, it features I 1-4 Players only two players on each team (plus the goaltenders) but is still supposedly \"the most authentic sports simulation ever presented\". The simple controls of this game's close relative NBA Jam are carried on in Open Ice. One butOITECH  ton is used for shooting and blocking, another is used for passing and stealing and the third button is a special turbo but ton. The game also features all 26 of the real teams and over 100 of the real players from the NHL, meaning that it's really 2 THOMAS going to appeal to hockey fans. On top of all the realistic and regular features, Midway perform their usual magic on the sport by adding loads of new feaGOALS 3 tures. Like NBA Jam, there are special moves to perform, there are intermission TONIGHT'S film clips and digitised in-game graphics. GAME On top of all this there are more than 70 hidden characters (no doubt including the Midway crew) and over 20 special NEDVED cheats and power-up modes, including the old \"big heads\" cheat. The game should be available around the country fairly soon and we'll be covering it in more detail once we've ( had a proper playtest. PLAYER INSERT COIN CREDIT LEMIEUX JAGR MONTREAL CANADIENS COLORAZ NEDVED MESSIER Cooper. Kellogg's CORN *START ILLID WESLER PRESS SHORT TO SELECT ANAHEIM CHUCO LORIDA BOSTON CALCARY DANAS NEW JERSEY BUFFALO COLORADO DE TOT NY RANCERS RARTFORD EDMONTON ST LOUIS NY ISLANDERS MONTREAL LOS ANGELES TORONTO PRILADELPHIA OTTAWA SON JOSE WINNIDEC TAMPA BAY PITTSBURCH VANCOUVER WASHINGTON DEVILS RED WINGS M DE PIT NIR COFFEY LEMIEUX SKATE SHOOT FEDOROV SKATE IST 3100 CHECK ZION IN Text: Text: Text: Text: \"Skunky!!\" \"Don't jump at me\" \"Watch gun do?\" \"Go see Mortal Kombat live tour\" 122 221 448 844 004 400 550 550 MORTAL KODES Here are more Kombat Kodes to add to your list. Kombat Zone: Kahn's Tower 880 220 Kombat Zone: The Bridge 077 022 Kombat Zone: Soul Chamber 123 901 Kombat Zorte: Street 079 035 Kombat Zone: Kombat Temple 600 040 Kombat Zone: Kahn's Kave 004 700 Kombat Zone: River Kombat 002 003 Also, once a pit fatality has been performed on the \"Hell\" backdrop and the opponent has fallen into the lava, there are two tricks that can be done. To make the Toasty Guy pop up and say \"Crispy!\" hold HP on both sides. To make Shao Kahn say \"Crispy!\" hold Run on both sides. Fast Uppercut Recovery 788 322 77 "


"REVIEW CVG Review o Vidia T HE GREATEST GUIDE AKIRA EATEST SUIV EL THE GREATEST GUIDE TECHNIQUE Two high punches 11% pretty playing it load the CVG.com VF2 move list of the High punch, high kick 20% Elbow METHOD    B ->+ >> + > >> >>+ ->+ 10% Dashing elbow 10-20% Dashing elbow (other arm) fter last month's massive 97% review of VF2, we made it pretty obvious that we like the game. Because of this we've been playing it loads for the last few months, during which time we've compiled the CVG complete guide. We know there isn't a more comprehensive VF2 move list available anywhere. And we know that this is totally accurate. All of the moves have the damage caused rated in percentages not some stupid number like the guides downloaded from the internet. So, here is the list of all of every character's moves including Dural's for both the Saturn and Arcade versions. There are actually quite a lot more per character because there are some attacks which can be done by everyone (see STANDARD MOVES). For a completetechnique guide, look out for the next issue of CVG. PLAY AS DURAL To play as the robot boss, Dural, go to the character select screen and press Down, Up, Right, A+Left. It sort of spells DURAL. . 10-20% Dashing palm strike 10-32% -> ->+ Jumping straight kick 15% Double jumping straight kick 30% Power uppercut 25% Two-handed push 15-35% SLOW MOTION REPLAYS To slow the replays down simply hold A, B and C when you win a round until the replay starts up. -> -+  » Y+ ++ ++ >+6+0 + Gut punch C 8% Block breaker SELECT VICTORY POSE To choose your winning character's victory pose, simply hold button A, B or C when you win. There are three to choose from and there's an extra pose available if you get a perfect victory. Punch F 6% OLD MUSIC To get remixed music from the original Virtua Fighter, simply hold these buttons just before a fight starts until the music begins. For Sarah's music Ron pad 1. For Jacky's music R on pad 2. is COUNTER High Por K counter 25% COUNTER Mid P or K counter O ++ @ K+0 G 1+0 25% COUNTER Low P or K counter 25% OPTION Once the game has been completed in \"Expert\" mode, go to the \"Options\" screen and press R twice. \"Option+\" will appear where it is possible to change the ring size, select a start stage, fight underwater and watch replays of the whole round. STANDARD MOVES THROW Trip and punch 25% THROW Shoulder butt 30% THROW Back push from behind 18% THROW Two hit shoulder butt 30% Though it's fairly obvious, there are quite a few extra moves which can be performed by every character and, as such, aren't listed. The side kick (DF+K) and the pounce attacks when other players are on the floor (U+P) aren't listed and there are some moves marked \"Can start PPPK combos\". These mean that the listed move can replace the first hit of a punch-related combo which is normally found near the start of the list. There are notes stating if the move can only be performed at certain times and the numbers at the end show how much damage as a percentage the attack does if it connects. Tap the direction shown (for (G Guard characters facing right. If facing left then you must reverse P Punch the controls). Ko Kick KEY THROW Fake throw G+ K +0 + + +  + + +0+ ++ + ++G+ *+ + + ++G + + +0+0 THROW Fake throw THROW Surprise exchange THROW Trip 5% THROW Back push 10-40% 10-40% A plus sign means to push the two buttons or directions at the same time. If there isn't a plus sign linking directions or buttons, they should be pressed in sequence. This means that you should hold the direction. B Behind opponent CClose to opponent A Facing away CR Crouching opponent F Floored opponent S Start PPPK combo 78 FIGHTER "


") VIRTUAL REVIEW AREATEST GUIDE SPAL GALAU TECHNIQUE % TECHNIQUE % Two high punches 10% High punch, roundhouse 21% High punch, high kick 20% Two high punches 12% Two high punches, high kick 25% Two high punches, roundhouse 27% Three high punches 16% Three high punches 19% Three high punches, roundhouse 41% Three high punches, roundhouse 44% Three high punches, sweep 36% Three high punches, sweep 39% Three high punches, kickflip 26% Three high punches, kickflip 29% High jab 7% Mid elbow 10% Mid punch 7% Mid punch SC 8% Spinning roundhouse METHOD O                1+    + + Y+ + ++ + ++ + + + ++ + > >+< 8+ 3+  Y+ RELEASE  13-23% Overhead punch SC 7% METHOD O              L+    2+ =>+ Y+ + ++  Y+ + + ++ + RELEASE  K+ > I+ + + + + Reverse spinning roundhouse 10-20% Uppercut 10% Spinning sweep 10-20% Dashing mid punch 10% Kickflip 20% High kick 10% Finger poke 6% Spinning roundhouse 15-25% High kick 10% Spinning sweep 10-18% Dashing high kick 15% Rising spin kick RELEASE 20% Jump kick   10% Kickflip 20% Double Jump kick 13% Double kick 15% Punch F 5% Cartwheel kick 15% Rising spin kick RELEASE 20% Jump kick 16% COUNTER High Por K counter + 15% Spinning stomp F 8% COUNTER Mid Por K counter + 15% THROW Shoulder toss 20% THROW Fireman's carry 25% 6-0 ++ +  + 1 THROW Wrist throw 25% THROW Jumping slam 30% THROW D.D.T 30% @ 6+ THROW Trip 6% THROW Roll 30% +0 + ++ +   +0+0 + +++0  0+0+ THROW Trip and punch 25% THROW Roll trip 15% THROW Cartwheel behind C . THE GREATEJU 79 "


"REVIEW TOT GUIDE WOLF JEFERY TECHNIQUE TECHNIQUE METHOD 0 W High punch, high kick 22% 22% High punch, high kick Two high punches Two high punches 14% 14% 28% Two high punches, uppercut Two high punches, uppercut 28% METHOD O O 0      >+ + + >>+ Uppercut 11% Two high punches, elbow 24% + Two uppercuts (P (P 21% Uppercut 11% Uppercut 2 11% @@@* i    1 Low elbow 10% High chop 10% Low elbow, uppercut 19% Mid punch 10% Mid elbow 10% Jumping knee 15% + Mid elbow, arm hammer ->+ > ->+ @ @ 3mtttttttty @@@@tt  2001-0001 25% Running clothesline + CK Straight kick 20% 12% + + CK    Straight kick, arm hammer (P 22% Shoulder charge + ->+ + ->+ 10-35% High straight kick 20% Flip uppercut 15% High stomp 18% Drop kick 3+ 15 Poke 15% * q i Low drop kick +(K Knee 10% 18% 0 0 0 0 >+ Headbutt P + 20% Forearm smash 15% Dashing headbutt 20% Scissor kick 15% Bottom butt 15% Reverse kick 18% Two-handed overhead hit 15% Jump kick  15% Overhead elbow 15% Kick, sp mountain + C 62% Somersault kick 15% Stomp F 10% Elbow drop F 10% Somersault slam F 10% THROW Piggyback drop 30% COUNTER Mid kick grab 30% THROW Slam 25% THROW Suplex > {  ++ + >>+ + > >+ + + + + y+ + K+ +0 ++ tel + + + > 0+   0-0-0 K+0+0+ 1++0 ++0+ 30% THROW Splash mountain 40%  ->++ ++ + + >> + Das ++ Y+   + Y 0+ ++ + + + + + + + + Albeves ++ + Aheve ++ + G+ ++ + ++ Y+@+0+ THROW Body slam 25% THROW Overhead throw 30% THROW Spinning throw 1. 50% THROW Back breaker 35% THROW Frankenstein 30% THROW Hold and headbutt 10% THROW Piledriver 40% THROW Double headbutt 18% THROW German suplex B 40% THROW Triple headbutt 34% THROW Headlock German suplex B 43% THROW Backbreaker 2 B 50% THROW Crucifix suplex CR 35% THROW Iron claw (nose hold) CR 25% THROW Back slam CR 30% THROW Triple knee CR 30% THROW Crucifix piledriver CR 35% THROW Head slam CR 25% 80 THE GREATEST HUU "


"REVIEW A TIUUU TEST GUIDE QEVEM CVG SARAH 15 TECHNIQUE % TECHNIQUE % METHOD   0 0   O 20% High punch, high kick Two high punches 20% High punch, high kick High punch, high kick 10% 15% Two high punches, high kick 25% Two high punches 10% Two high punches, uppercut 16% Two high punches, high kick 25% oo 2 high punch, up'cut, spinkick 31% 2 high punches, uppercut 15% 2 high punch, up'cut, kickflip OOO 0000001 26%    + ->+0 2 high punch, up'cut, knee 35% Elbow 10% 30% 2 high punch, up'cut, kickflip 2 high punch, up'cut, jump kick Hook V +O 7% 30% Kickflip 20% Uppercut S 7% Jumping kickflip 25% Mid elbow 8% Jumping knee 19% Low punch, knee @ @@@@@@@ @@@@@ El @ 80000 oit    it it 00-0+# @ @ 0000000001 100  o doo  2009 20% Sweep 10-15% Knee 15% Two foot sweep 10% Knee, high knee 35% Overhead swipe 8% Double lightning kick 20% Overhead swipe, chop Triple lightning kick 30% Swipe 8% Straight kick 15% Swipe, chop Straight kick, side kick 25% Low swipe 8% High kick, high punch 19% Low swipe, chop 16% High knee 20% +  ++ > > >+ ESI+  + + + -)++ + 16% >++ +)++ + 16% 1+ + *+ + + 6+ + -> -->+ + -> ->+++ + ++ + ++ + 6+ + ++++ Fres Byen FT+ Bye + Spin kick 18% Dashing knee 15% Low side kick 10% Dashing spin kick Jumping spin kick 15% 15% Mid overhead kick 10% Jumping dive 20% Kick flip 25% Reverse high kick A 16% Back fist 6% + + +-+ + + Overhead chop A 11% Two hit kick 25% Reverse low trip A 8% 13% Jumping spin kick Forward jumping spin kick A 8% 13% Reverse uppercut Forward roll 31+ High forward jump' spin kick + 10-25% Backward roll Spin kick A 10% Forward roll and sweep 10-18% Double spin kick 0 20% Backward roll and sweep 10-18% Spinning roundhouse 10-15% Floating roll Hopping high kick 10% Leg drop F 8% Jumping spin kick A 22% ++ +++ Y+ + COUNTER High punch wrist throw 25% Back fist A 11% Kick F 8% THROW Shoulder toss + 1+0   + + + + 25% THROW Trip + 25% THROW Body slam 25% + THROW High toss 20% THROW Clothesline 20% THROW Trip B 25% THROW Back suplex 0+ 0 B 30% MUULI 81 TE GREATEST HULL "


"METHOD   15% Ion 26 36% Back knuckle, spin sweep elbow, kick    dow THROW Multiple punch THROW Punch and drop B 30% "


"REVIEW CREATEST GUIDE REVIEW CVG HII TECHNIQUE TECHNIQUE % METHOD     METHOD   0 High punch, high kick 21% Two high punches High punch, elbow 13% @ High punch, elbow, backfist 21% 11% 20% 25% 6% 32% Uppercut 5% + (NO Uppercut, overhead punch 15% -> + -> + KO 22% Low punch 6% Two low punches Y P P 12% B Mid elbow 10%    OOOOOOOOOOO  ttt  OOOOO Knee 16% +W 48% 25% 11% 25% 40% -> + + -> -> + -> -> -> + -> + + 15% Spinning uppercut 15% -> + + KO eo Jumping overhead punch 18% 25% Somersault kick 12% tayyaaa?atto!!! 15% Jumping spin kick 12% 18% 15% OOOOOO0t1f toti ie 080001 2000 1 1 Double jumping spin kick 35% Rising mantis punch 15% -> + ROK 30% Low jab 6% 30% 10% + Two low jabs G + + 25% 18% Jumping punch 20% 10% Low strike 8% + O 13% Hand trip 10% 12% 1+ T+ ++ + K+  > >+ + ++ >>>++ +  2+ + 2+ + + + > >> + + +  ->+ O V+  Mantis punch 15% + G + 12% Two low kicks 14% High punch, high kick Two high punches, high kick Mid elbow Elbow, kickflip Elbow, knee Two high punches, elbow 2 high punches, elbow, kickflip Elbow, arm hammer Dashing elbow Jumping poke Back push Dashing headbutt Knee Jumping knee Jumping straight kick Double jumping straight kick Kickflip High kickflip Low kickflip Jumping kick Double jumping kick Slide tackle Spinning high kick Rising spin kick Jumping triple kick Jumping dive kick Backward roll Backward roll and sweep Punch Stomp COUNTER High punch COUNTER High punch or kick COUNTER Mid punch or kick COUNTER Low punch or kick THROW Suplex THROW Shoulder butt THROW Trip THROW Hand trip THROW High toss THROW Clothesline THROW Overhead throw THROW Splash mountain THROW Frankensteiner THROW Spin throw THROW Crucifix piledriver THROW Neck throw THROW Back push from behind THROW Two hit shoulder butt Low kick, high spin kick 21% @ @ Sweep 12% Dashing sweep 12% OOO OOoodémodé ce @ Dashing sweep, mid spin kick 12% Two-footed kick 24% Sidestep, punch 10% Sidestep, hand trip 10% Sidestep forward + Sidestep backwards + Jumping spin kick Spinning punch 15% > + + TO 15% -> + G + + 20% Byens Det + 15% + F 5% + F 6% 1 + 25% 6 ++ 25% G + 25% G + 25% + 30%  + 30% + + 25% G+ + 25% + + 20%   + 0 + G + C 30% + KO 40% + + 30% FR1X+0 50% V + + + CR 35% G+ 0 B 25% + + + 18% ++ + + 30% THE 83 + ++ + + +-+ + ++ +   0+0 001011001010 Reverse kick THROW Trip 25% 20% THROW Hold and trip + P +RO 25% THROW Hold and punch 25% THROW Climbing head punch G + 35% THROW Choke +  B 25% THE GREATEST "


"PREVIEW CYBERIA Top secret fighter planes, dangerous liaisons with foxy babes, and a deadly biological weapon. All in a day's work for the hero of.... Developed by..... INTERPLAY Released by.......INTERPLAY Out................ JANUARY '96 90% complete Playstation versions planned PC versions available SATURN he 'interactive movie' style of game is notoriously difficult to crack, but Interplay have already originated one of the better examples in the form of Cyberia for PC CD-ROM. The imminent Saturn/PlayStation conversions keep the game's impressive cinematic visuals intact, together with the atmospheric synthesiser score by Thomas Dolby's Headspace. If the thought of spending some time on a Dirty Dozen-style mission, without 11 other people to bail you out, appeals, better book your ticket for those snowy wastelands. MOTION SLICKNESS Cyberia features a mix of RPG adventure with flight-based shoot 'em up sequences. 11 levels of arcade-style gunplay intermingle with the more cerebral puzzle levels which are given a truly cinematic feel with multi-camera angles, fluid animation and a 'widescreen' presentation. The shoot 'em sequences initially take place at the controls of Santos's sophisticated anti-aircraft gun, but later shift to the cockpit of the TF-22 fighter for a series of airborne sabotage missions dotted around the world. MISSION: IMPROBABLE Cyberia takes place in the dystopian hi-tech future of 2027. You play Zak, a computer hacker imprisoned in solitary confinement for the crimes of treason and espionage. Although a convicted criminal, you are offered your freedom in return for undertaking a dangerous mission you are to travel to a remote seabound rig, rendezvous with a shady character called Santos, collect an experimental fighter plane and fly it to Siberia. Once there, you are to locate and infiltrate a top secret base and steal the Cyberia biological weapon. You're on your own, the clean-up team lagging some 24 hours behind you. TRIPLE VISION Zak witnesses the game's RPG sequences through a pair of natty wrap-round shades called BLADES (Bi-optic Low Amplitude Displayed Energy System, in case you didn't know.) These have three built-in scanning options that you can access from your joypad infa red/thermal scan; magnetic resonance imaging and bioscan. The BLADES' magnetic resonance imag22.32.Z ing is useful for such functions as defusing bombs, while the bioscan function is best for detecting hostile opponents behind locked doors. 84 "


"PREVIEW (POWER SPORTS SOCCER Developed by: SONY FRANCE Released by............. *---...STI Out ..MARCH 96 VER SPORTS SOGGER 60% complete No other version planned No other version available PLAYSTATION What footie games need is a bit of ludicrous over-the| top action. Get it all here! A TIME Though we all expected vast numbers of 3D racing games and Tekken-like beat'em ups on Sony's wonder machine, we don't think anyone was ready for the amount of soccer games that have appeared in the few months that the PlayStation has existed. Striker, FIFA, and Actua are already (or soon to be out in the shops representing Warner, EA, and Gremlin Interactive respectively, but here come Sony, and as you'd expect from the company in the know PlayStation-wise, their offering looks pretty damn funky. Powersports Soccer looks more like Actua 'Soccer than any of the other footy games we've seen so far, with super-smooth motioncaptured animations and completely user-definable camera views and stadium shots. Sony's French division are also boasting more realism than ever seen before in a soccer release, having studied every footy game ever (no mean feat!) They also feel that they've combined the instinctive playability of previous games (such as old classics Sensible Soccer and Kick Off 2) with the realistic player representations the PlayStation's hardware allows them. As is always the way with motion-captured graphics, realism is the order of the day, and Sony have spared no expense to make sure that each player jiggles, wobbles and, er... moves as accurately as possible. The controls have been designed to be as instant and instinctive as possible, with the standard passes, lobs, and shots all accessible with the standard joypad buttons. Become familiar with the operating system, however, and you'll find diving headers, bicycle kicks, and special power shots' all become available to the skilled player. Set piece practising is also built in, so whether it's complicated corners, free kicks, or just penalties you want to perfect, it's only an option screen away. Power Sports Soccer features three international leagues England, France, and Germany as well as the option to have four human players; two per team. Of course, all this is of no worth whatsoever if the game play isn't up to the job, but fortunately Powersports appears to offer the player a flowing and controllable game. Passing, tackling and shooting are all easy to implement, and with the players' graphics slinking in a sexy way across the screen, it's an enjoyable game to watch even when you lose! So you're now wondering what you should spend your Crimbo money on, eh? Well, \"we don't know\" is the honest truth but we'd certainly leave a little room after dinner for Powersports Soccer -if you know what we mean. Though the players look a bit small, you can't tell from these pictures just how smoothly they move. It's lush, you know. PARASITE 1 : U GOAZ!-4 85 "


"PREVIEW CVG PREVIEW NBA IN THE ZONE *** REPLAY >>> Developed by: ........ KONAMII * REPLAY >>> Released by: ..........KONAMII Ooh, that flesh looks kinda raw! Out .SPRING'96 KONAMI 90% complete ABAN SCORE No other versions planned No other versions available PLAYSTATION A Looks like they use those wipe-clean tiles on the court. Got a PlayStation? Like basketball? If you do, you're in for a treat come the New Year, because there's going to be two to choose from. AWAY IN THE ZONE Tonight's match-up SUNS SNRA ENBA ENB MAGIC ast month we previewed Total NBA'96, Sony's upcoming basketball outing. This month, it's Konami's turn in the basketball, preview hotseat, with their Playstation slam dunkin' affair NBA Selert the CPU 127 OS In The Zone. A standard feature that sets 32-bit sports games apart from the 16-bit ones, has to be the range of realistic camera angles you get, and In The Zone is no exception to this rule. Endto-end views, side-on views, isometric REPLAY >>> views, close-up views, you can watch the game from all these angles as the action unfolds on the full 3D court. Another feature that seems standard to all basketball games nowadays (32-bit or otherwise) has to be the NBA license. And as the name subtely suggests, NBA In The Zone is another such license. However, In The Zone does a tad more with its offically branding than previous NBA titles, whilst making use of another 32-bit trait texture mapping. Yep, each of the NBA stars looks just like their real life counterparts, thanks to digitised portraits of each person being textured onto the players. Even the skin colours of the players are authentic, with some of the players looking decidely pasty-fleshed. With 29 NBA teams in the game (plus an All-Star team) that makes for lot of textured bas'ketball stars in one game. And all the other NBA features full season play-offs, exhibition matches and the like are in there as well. And, with two multi-taps, up to eight players can play a match. We've had a brief playtest of In The * REPLAY >> Zone and it seems quite impressive. Konami have already shown their Playstation expertise with the more than decent Goal Storm and it looks like In The Zone could follow suit (as opposed to following their not-sogood Give 'N' Go on SNES). We'll find out in the forthcoming review. Into-the-court viewing action as player heads for the opposition's basket! Tonight's match-up ALLSTARS-WEST BULLS Whoever's playing the All-Stars is pathetic. They've got all the best players! SINTER46 BULLS STRE WEST 1st BEER LOOK, BOTH HANDS! In The Zone's range of moves is particularly impressive. You can pull off devious no-look passes, counter a tackle with a spinning dribble and slam in impressive alley-oop dunks. You can even dribble with either your left and right hand if you want! 86 "


"REVIEW REVIEW CVG DUKE NUKEM 30 Developed by:...30 REALMS DUKE NUKEM 3D Released by.........APOGEE Out. ....... JAN 96 90% complete Yet another classic games character gets upgraded with 90's technology. And what's today's catchword, kids? 3D! No other versions planned No other versions available FOOT uke Nukem isn't actually a totally new character, though most of you won't remember his previous games. The old Duke PD (Public Domain, ie free) games on the PC were primarily platform games featuring the odd puzzle. The new, improved Duke game has got '3D' on the end of the title, instantly explaining what it's like. The game is obviously inspired by Doom, meaning that it's a first-person perspective 3D action shoot-'em-up with some searching/puzzle elements, though Duke adds enormously to the old Doom idea with loads of incredible new features. One of the unlikely new points which adds a feeling of realism is that the majority of the game is set on Earth, so the player can wander around the abandoned streets of a town, bomb a cinema, wipe out dancers in the disco, even ride on the tube. Though he's on his home planet, the enemies most definitely aren't they look more like Star Wars extras. PISTOL On the first level there's a computer screen built into the wall. By activating it, the video cameras around the level are turned on. These are used to figure out where enemies and your friends in multi-player mode are hiding. Inside the cinema there's an operating room with a switch which, when activated, turns on a rather naughty film. SHOTGUN LE TREE PORTUEES OF THE SHOTSUZ TEES PARESHINUS 33 TROUXED US THE M I28 HEXSIOR WILL BE VERY DIFFERENT FOU'LL SEE IT TO OUR FORTHCOILERE REPREY. MACHINE GUN ROCKET LAUNCHER PIPE BOMB FLAMETHROWER A Taking out the L.A.R.D cops with the pipe bombs is great fun. Hahahaha. Another new feature to the Doom-style game is that there are mirrors located around the levels. They aren't just there for fun though, occasionally they're used to trick the player by positioning them around corners, forcing Duke to fire at a reflection. As well as loads of little features, the game has got jump and crouch buttons, the ability to turn Duke's head around corners, look up and down buttons, jetpacks, sloping and moving floors as well as tons of other features not seen anywhere before. SHRINK RAY This shareware version of the game nine levels is available at the start of January, about the same time as the full registered game. We'll hopefully be reviewing the whole thing in great detail next issue. "


"REVIEW CVG REVIEW GUARDIAN HEROES Developed by:........... SEGA Released by:....... ..SEGA GUARDI Out ................... JAN96 100% complete No other versions planned No other versions available SATURN 239 240 Not enough heroes in the world eh? Rubbish! Here's some of the finest heroes you're likely to meet with Treasure software's latest classic, Guardian Heroes. 265 228 Treasure software have a reputation for producing games that seem to match the frenetic speed and exhilaration of your average G-Force cartoon. The style of games like Dynamite Headdy and Gunstar Heroes has always succeeded in remaining faithful to the Japanese cartoon ideal. With Guardian Heroes they take this approach one step further by offering the player a choice of four characters to use as they go through a magical fantasy land beating up anything that looks vaguely unfriendly. But Guardian Heroes has far more going for it than simply beat 'em up action. Each character has a range of magic spells to utilise as well as their own particular fighting style. They're going to need all of their respective talents to overcome the onslaught of assailants, each of which has their own power-bar and requires a decisive pummelling before they're dispatched. At times the screen is literally swarming with enemies and it's times like this that having a partner around is essential. The icing on the cake is the one-on-one beat 'em up option which enables up to six players at once to bash it out with one another. Heroic poses please! HAHN SAMUEL Hahn and the guardian get busy. By far the most muscle bound member of the motley bunch, Hahn is a master with the sword. After the first boss has been defeated he's given a new and more powerful broadsword with which to scythe into enemies. Among Hahn's special abilities is a power barge and a spinning swipe that takes out enemies approaching from both sides. However, Hahn is pretty pathetic when it comes to magic, only being able to pull off the fire spell. 310 250 12: 88 A Hanh demonstrates his jumping kick on one of the many armour-clad enemies. "


"REVIEW IN HEROES TBB 405 62 1040 652 STILL SOME FIGHT LEFT IN 'EM As if miles of beat 'em up platform action wasn't enough, Guardian Heroes also features a one on one beat 'em up option which enables the player to take on whoever they fancy in a face-to-face scenario. Even better than this though, is the fact that you can have six players fighting at once. The moves each character has are the same as in the game. Some of the chaotic scraps that develop are hilarious but be warned, Randy's bunny is one of the toughest fighters of them all! 814 EN36 RANDY GREEN Despite the rather unfortunate name, Randy manages to assert himself with a little help from his bunny and his impressive collection of magic spells. Physically Randy isn't all that strong but he does have a few tricks up his Arabian sleeves in the shape of a spinning attack with his staff. His staff is also used to summon up spells that include a freeze spell leaving anyone close enough in a state of chilled helplessness and a fire storm which invokes an eruption of flames around him. As for that bunny, it transforms from a cuddly hoppy thing into flames and seeks out enemies like a homing missile! A This is the first boss in the game. 90 210 120 240 A Randy goes a-swiping with his magical staff. The bunny chills out. 89 "


"CVG REVIEW REVIEW DECISIONS. DECISIONS! Guardian Heroes features a lot of dialogue with the characters yapping away at each other excitedly every time they come up against a boss. As well as developing the storyline it's also a means of making a decision of where to go next. There is usually a choice of three destinations after a boss has been defeated and the good thing about this is that even if you complete the game you can do it all again by a different route! The combo-indicator reveals how many hits you've strung together. 54 33 3555 SUUR A Hahn and chums find themselves in a vortex that leads to the evil wizard and his large beard. Albushi makes use of the lightning spell. IBUSHI GINJIRO Ibushi has the coolest set of combat moves of the four characters. He is actually a ninja, something that reveals itself in his precise and deadly attacks. His roundhouse kick is truly devastating, and this is accompanied by a speed punch and a spinning punch which sorts out assaults from both sides. He also has some useful spells such as \"teleport' which first turns him blue, before he disappears into thin air only to materialise on the other side of the screen, and an electric storm which sees a trail of electrical current emanate from his palms 240 5: Albushi gets dizzy with his spinning punch attack. 90 "


"REVIEW SA 99 This is the point at which the guardian arrives. He then kindly finishes off the first boss! Ma 46 ! THE GUARDIAN'S GUARDIAN So who's the guy in the gold armour? Well, he happens to be your bodyguard. He arrives when you confront the first boss and smites him. His exact role can be altered by using the thought bubble. Do you want him walking in front, checking the rear for surprise attacks or fighting at your side? As fearless as he is though, it doesn't mean you can let him fight your battles for you. There are so many rough types in Guardian Heroes that there's not enough time to try and make friends! 44 114 NICOLA NEIL When it comes to fighting, Nicola is dependent mostly on her spells. And whilst Randy has a lot of attack spells, Nicola's are mainly used in defence. Her smiley staff summons up smiley faces that rain down from the sky and leave enemies dazed. It is also used to create a green dome that protects her from attack or invokes pink stars that make a glow beneath her feet, keeping enemies at a distance. She can also release a power beam which sends enemies rocketing into the air if they stand too close to her. T10 A Nicola uses one of her many magic spells. "


"CVG TIPS SATURN HANG ON GP -95 To access the three extended courses without any skill, start the game up and go to the option screen. Leave the selection on \"Game Level\" and press B to exit. You'll be highlighting \"Options\". Now press R, R, L, R R with the top buttons and you'll hear a beeping noise. Now choose any of the playing modes to access the new courses. OPTION MODE SELECT COURSE SELECT COP lam Ne trells RICHSTDEUISSION FXIT OPTIONS GP KAGE HESS A OCUSE On the \"Option\" screen press B. You'll go back to the title screen. Press RRLRR. Start a race to get the three extended tracks. Welcome to Lists and Pokes where we bring you all the best lists and pokes. We've got loads of lists and pokes for you this issue including lists and pokes for Loaded on PlayStation and Victory Boxing on Saturn. As well as all of these lists and pokes we've got lists and pokes for Mortal Kombat 3 to cheer up all of you Kombatters with no lists for the game. Or pokes. Most of our Lists and Pokes Team's (Ed's)time has been spent compiling lists and pokes for Virtua Fighter 2 found earlier on in the magazine. Anyway, enough cheery banter enjoy the lists and pokes and don't forget to send us any you find as you can win lots of fantastic games! CHEAT MODE, CVG MAGAZINE, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE. LONDON, EC1R 3AU. To get \"Free\" time during timetrial races, highlight \"Timetrial\" on the main menu screen and press Right, Left, Up, Down, Z. You'll hear a beep to let you know that it's worked. Now start a timetrial and keep going until you finish the race (see right below this bit). REMOS POSITION MODE SELECT QUTO TIMITATAI THESS tort TO CHOOSE PLAYSTATION PC CD-ROM LOADED Before any of these fantastic cheats can be entered, you must go to the in-game options screen and hold L1 and L2 for ten seconds. Keep holding them and press any of the following sequences. ACTUA SOCCER If you ever get tired of Barry Davies and his comments, re-install the game in French to get a French commentator Thierry Roland. He's really famous you know, in France. LEVEL SKIP Cross, R1, Triangle, R1, Square, Circle, R2, R2, Cross, Square, Triangle, Cross. LEVEL SELECT Up, Right, Down, Left, Triangle, Circle, Cross, Square, Cross, Triangle, Square, Circle. HEALTH Right, Right, Left, Down, Down, Up, Triangle, Circle. Down, Right, Circle, Left, Right, Circle. POWER Right, Down, Right, Triangle. LIVES Left, Down, Right, Triangle, Square, Cross, Circle. SMART BOMBS R1, R2, Cross, Triangle, Square, Circle, R1, R2, Circle, Circle, Square. If you want to get a secret team the Gremlin Showbiz XI-type: SOCCER -01142475549 to run the game. Apparently they are all truly gifted. NOYONSI AMMO 4PC CD-ROM gmg go @ 32X SIM ISLE To access these cheats you should save your game with one of these file names. When you do so you'll get extra stuff in that area. ie. money, labour, etc. 1788 JACKY VIRTUA FIGHTER To play as Dural, go to the character select screen and press Left, Right, Left, Right, Left, Right, Left, Right, Left, Right. This can be done with both players. Her moves all come from other characters so just have a fiddle to find which moves she does. $10,000 Unskilled labour Skilled labour Food Building materials iaintestedtico simonschickenkb 3527490 ragschocolatestash deesextrapixel 92 "


"TIPS TIPS CVG PC THEN KING MYST SATURN HEXEN Here are all of the cheat codes for the fantastic Hexen. Enter them at any time during play and they'll work instantly. MYST There's a secret \"Making of Myst\" section of the game which can be accessed by simply going to the \"Cyan\" screen and holding L, R, A and Start. Keep them held and eventually the secret section will start up. It features interviews with the programmers, graphics designers, sound people everyone in fact. One warning: Don't try this cheat if you've got a short attention span as it goes on for ages. And ages. And ..........snore. God mode All weapons 25 of each item Level warp Clipping off Instant pig mode Show all map 100% health Change character class Kills all enemies All keys All puzzle items Shows coordinates Sound debug Run script Frame rate Reload level SATAN NRA INDIANA VISIT (then level number) CASPER DELIVERANCE MAPSCO CLUBMED ZELIG (then 0, 1 or 2) BUTCHER LOCKSMITH SHERLOCK WHERE NOISE PUKE (then number) TICKER INIT ROBYN ond RAND MILLER Co-Founders, Cyon SATURN PC CD-ROM FATAL RACING These codes should be entered on the configuration menu as names. TOH SHIN DEN S To give the characters big heads (and we mean REALLY big heads) simply hold the Land R buttons on the title screen while selecting your mode of play. Both players will then have enormous noggins, showing off the facial movements brilliantly. Aaah, aren't they cute? Various secret cars 3769S OU MONDO LOVEBUN, MAYTE, TINKLE, SUICYCO, 2X4B523P FORMULA1 SUPERMAN DR DEATH GOLDBOY MREPRISE CUP WON I WON ROLL EM DUEL TOPTUNES (Enter no name) CINEMA REMOVE Access second cars Destruction mode Invincible human cars Premier cup Bonus cup See end sequence See race win See credits Killer opponent Alternative sounds Black and white mode Widescreen mode Remove cheats RETSUDEN 0510TER REPRORAMEOR SECR 1995 Simply hold the L and R buttons when selecting any of the playing modes. The game will start up with the giant heads activated. It's most amusing. RUN-GO_ 267930 3080 A 21 SATURN Run-Go looks totally un-hard with a big head as his club looks titchy. The game's actually better with big heads as it makes it fun. Which it wasn't before. R03 1:50 R01/03 VICTORY BOXING There are four secret characters in the excellent Saturn boxing game and they can be accessed by repeatedly beating the champ when you are ranked number 1. They've all got maximum stats so fights between them not only last a long time but they are also great fun. SELECT BOXER IMPORT NEXT PREL AC NIKI AND NANA M-091) R 01/03 BOV/03 155 B0149 2:09 M-0975 A mother kangaroo with her baby joey in her pouch. The silver putty man from the boxer select screen. The silver putty woman from the female boxer select screen. Your trainer in one-player mode. A tough-looking kick boxer. SNAKE YAMATO MUTSU 93 "


"TIPS CVG TIPS MERCY To show Mercy, the two fighters must win one round each. In the third round, get the \"Finish Him/Her!\" message and move over half a screen from your opponent. Then hold Run and press Down three times, then release Run. This guide is really here to save our sanity. We've had so many 'phonecalls from readers asking for MK3 finishing moves and the bosses' special moves after last issue's boss cheats that we had to print them all. They all work on the Arcade, Mega Drive, Super NES, PlayStation and PC CD-ROM versions. If you can't get any of the moves to work, keep trying and please, don't 'phone. SONYA KEY TO MOVES HP High Punch LP Low Punch HK High Kick LK Low Kick Block Run Up Down Forwards Backwards Press both buttons (at once) Press buttons (in order) Crush Kiss Fatality (jump) Hold BK+R + press U, U, B, D Flame Kiss Fatality (anywhere) B, F, D, D, R Friendship B, F, B, D, BK ou + Babality D, D, F, LK Hawk Animality (close) Hold LP + press B, F, D, F, release LP Pit F, F, D, H SHANG TSUNG KANO SUB-ZERO press D, Floor Spikes Fatality (close) Hold LP + press D, F, F, D Green Splat Fatality (close) Hold LP + press R, BK, R, BK Friendship LK, R, R, D Babality R, R, R, LK Cobra Animality (close) Hold HP+ press R, R, R, release HP Pit Hold BK + press U, U, B, LP Skeleton Removal Fatality (close) Hol D, F, release LP Eye Laser Fatality (sweep) LP, BK, BK Friendship LK, R, R, HK Babality F, F, D, DA Spider Animality (close) Hold HP + pr release HP Pit Hold BK + press U, U, B, LK BK, BK Freeze Snap Fatality (close) BK, BK, R, BK, R Ice Blow Fatality (just outside sweep) B, B, D, BR Friendship LK, R. R. U Babality D, B, B, HK Polar Bear Animality (close) Hold BK + press F, U, U Pit B, D, F, F, HK SINDEL STRYKER Scream Fatality (close) R, BK, BK, R+BK Hair Spin Fatality (Sweep) R, R, BK, R, BK Friendship R, R, R, R, R, U Babality R,RR, U Wasp Animality (close) F, F, U, HP Pit D, D, D, LP Bomb Fatality (close) D, F, D, F, BK Stun Rod Fatality (just under full screen) F, F, F, LK Friendship LP, R, R, LP Babality D, F, F, B + HP T-Rex Animality (one step) R, R, R, BK Pit Hold BK + press F, U, U, HK CYRAX JAX LIU KANG Big Foot Fatality (jump) R, BK, R, R, LK Blade Hands Fatality (close) Hold BK + press U, D, F, U, release BK Friendship LK, R, R, LK Babality D, D, D, LK Lion Animality (close) Hold LP + press F, F, D, F, release LP Pit D, F, D, LP Fatality (anywhere) F, F, D, D, LK Fatality (anywhere) Hold BK + press U, D, U, U, release BK, BK+R Friendship R, R, R, DER Babality D, D, D, HK Dragon Animality (one step) D, D, U Pit R, BK, BK, LK Self-Destruct Fatality (close) Hold BK + press D, D, F, U, R, release BK Helicopter Head Fatality (anywhere) Hold BK + press D, D, U, D, HP, release BK Friendship R, R, R, U Babality F, F, B, HP Shark Animality (close) Hold BK + press U, U, D, Pit R, BK, R 94 "


"TIPS TIPS CVG ANIMALITIES FRIENDSHIPS & BABALITIES Once you've performed a Mercy you can knock off your opponent's remaining energy and perform an Animality on them. Friendships and Babalities can only be performed if the Block button hasn't been pressed at all during the final round of the fight. They can be performed from any where on-screen unless there is a message stating, otherwise. PIT FATALITY When fighting on the Subway, Shao Kahn Tower or Pit 3 backgrounds, perform the Pit fatality to knock your opponent into the background. the finishing moves FATALITIES SMOKE SEKTOR Fatalities require you to be in exactly the right position for them to work. The distance in brackets before the move tells you where to stand. If you have to hold a punch or kick button to do the fatality, move away and press the button, then move to the right distance otherwise you'll knock your opponent over. Platform Crush Fatality (sweep) LP, R, R, BK Flamethrower Fatality (over half screen) F, F, F, B, BK Friendship (half screen) R, R, R, D Babality B, D, D, D, HK Bat Animality (close) F, F, D, U Pit R, R, R, D Close Move so that you're touching your dazed opponent. One Step Move one tiny step away from your opponent. Sweep Stand about thrange of a sweep away. Jump Take one jump away from your opponent. Full Screen Stand as far away as possible. Use the boss cheats to access Smoke and his special moves. Harpoon B, B, LP Teleport Punch F, F, LK (can be done in air) Invisibility Hold BK + press U, U, R (repeat to reappear) Air Throw BK (in air) Earth Explode Fatality (full screen) Hold BK + press U, U, F, D, release BK Internal Bomb Fatality (sweep) Hold R+BK + press D, D, F, U Friendship (full screen) R, R, R, HK Babality D, D, B, B, HK Bull Animality (outside sweep) D, F, F, BK Pit F, F, D, LK NIGHTWOLF Light Beam Fatality (close) Hold BK + press U, U, B, F release BK, BK Lightning Axe Fatality (jump) B, B, D, HP Friendship (outside sweep) R, R, R, D Babality F, B, F, B, LP Wolf Animality (close) F, F, D, D Pit R, R, BK KABAL Scream Fatality (close) R, BK, BK, BK, HK Head Pump Fatality (sweep) D, D, B, F, BK Friendship (anywhere outside sweep) R, LK, R, R, U Babality R, R, LK Rhino Animality (close) Hold HP + press F, F, D, F, release HP Pit BK, BK, HK SHEEVA Head Pound Fatality (close) F, D, D, F, LP Skin Peel Fatality (close) Hold HK + press B, F, F, release HK Friendship F, F, D, F, wait half second, HP Babality D, D, D, B, HK Scorpion Animality (close) R, BK, BK, BK, BK Pit D, F, D, F, LP The boss cheats in the last issue let you play as Motaro and Shao Kahn on Mega Drive and Super NES. They can't perform finishing moves but here are their special moves anyhow (left). MOTARO Fireball D, B, HP Grab and Punch F, F, LP Teleport DU KUNG LAO SHAO KAHN Spin Fatality (anywhere) R, BK, R, BK, D Hat Slice Fatality (sweep) F, F, B, D, HP Friendship (anywhere outside sweep) R, LP, R, LK Babality D, F, F, HP Leopard Animality (close) R, R, R, R, BK Pit D, D, F, F, LK Fireball-B, B, F + LP Mallet B, F, HP Charge F, F, LP Jumping Charge F, F, HP Taunt D, D, LK Laugh D, D, HK 95 "


"LETTERS CVG LETTERS did, we wouldn't have a clue how to solve your problem. The only advice we can offer is to seek out a second-hand dealer of old computer goods, who's no doubt still enthusiastic about old hardware. Check the Yellow Pages. And, sorry, we don't produce any kind of leaflet about the games we 'have' this coming year. Or is this some kind of joke...? In which case: ho-ho, you had us going there. the e've yet to experience the Post-Christmas, Post-Mortem batch of letters; detailing the realities of one crucial crimble. Instead there's the usual stock of versus' letters, and submissions from the cursed confused among you. Sometimes it seems as well to say \"Don't buy anything ever! You'll regret it!\". Hopefully January will find everyone feeling considerably more cheerful about their machine. (Yeah, right!) Send news of your many happy gamesplaying excursions to: IN THE BAG, CVG, PRIORY COURT. 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON, EC1R 3AU CONSOLE HOPPING MADMAN Dear CVG, I am writing to you concerning the subject of modern day consoles, and their ever increasing numbers. More and more it seems to be that, if you had bought a console six months ago, it would already be outdated. Even the long awaited and much praised PlayStation so good it seems there can be no better will soon be superseded by such things as virtual reality systems, which will in turn be bettered. Thus, if you want to keep up with the market, you need to 'console hop' constantly. This may be alright for those with the money to do so, but many people cannot afford it, especially as today's machines are so much more expensive. Perhaps people should consider buying a PC. Even though the initial cost may be much higher, in the long run it is cheaper than several consoles, and much easier to upgrade. Add to this the fact that most of the better console games are being converted to PC Format, and offer the same fun, at a generally lower price. What are your views on the subject? A The stunning Panzer Dragoon, destined for PC. Yours Hopefully, James Stein, Bradford ERM... ERR... AH A MESSAGE FROM BEYOND cvG: Fact is James, in order to support the kinds of games that are running on the consoles at the moment, you need to spend in Dear Sir/Madam, excess of  for the necessary cards I am writing in regard to one of your edi that sit inside the PC. And, even then, to tions of C&VG Games. Especially the one take the Diamond Edge board as an examaway back in 1987 as I tried a game ple, it's unable to reproduce the complex called pontoon for the 64, by DJ Bennett. backdrops as seen in Panzer Dragoon. PC I ran the game once it was completed and CD-ROM seems like an attractive market at it came up OUT OF DATA ON LINE 110. 1 the moment, certainly for games publishers saved the game so I could try and solve it, who want to run a low risk business, but but I was unsuccessful with it. Please the most successful PC titles usually wind could you help as I have up on console at some point Doom, tried for some time with it. Descent, Quake, and so on Yours faithfully, and they usually John Sneddon, Glasgow COMPUTER turn out even better. For the moment, we PS Do you have a leaflet/ still recommend buying copy of any games you a PC, only if you want have for this year? to pursue more strategy based, simulation type CVG: games. Or if it's the We looked through the only way to coax in entire 1987 back-cataexcess of  from logue and couldn't find your folks for 'educationyour Pontoon listing, al' purposes. John. And we must confess, that even if we AUGUST 1984 Dear CVG, I had decided to buy a PlayStation, because of games like Wipeout and Destruction Derby. Then I heard that these two games, among others, will be converted to the Saturn. So now I would like to get a Saturn because, with games like Virtua Fighter 2, Virtua Cop, and Sega Rally, I think it could be the ultimate game machine to own. But then, the other night, I was watching TV, and saw a bit on the Ultra 64. I previously thought the Ultra 64 was going to be crap, but then I saw the amazing graphics and the absolutely fantastic joypad! What's more it's going to be much cheaper than the PlayStation or Saturn, at . But my only worries are about the quality of the games. That and a five-month wait until April. The games I saw on TV were all like DALLAS ADVENTURES & BRUCE LEE EXCLUSIVE Map of the ATIC ATAC CASTLE! 96 PROGRAM IN OUR EXCLUSIVE "


"LETTERS 0122.5 bag CVG: Almost, but not quite, the same question as James Stein. However the most telling question in your instance, Jonathan, is whether you still want our PC to compete as a games machine. The specs you quote as having already are impressive, and can handle most recent CD-ROM releases to a degree. But to get the most out of the amazing native PC titles coming down the line, you really ought to be thinking of a Pentium upgrade. Otherwise read what we said to the Steinmeister. By the way, the Super NES is far from dead yet. You only need to look at Super Mario RPG for proof of that it's FAN-TAS-TIC! 00:46.8 OH16.8 which point you can take your time deciding whether or not Nintendo's new technology and games are a match for Sega's cool line-up. NAPPY DAYS ARE HERE AGAIN 01:12.9 games I've seen before. For example Mario 64 will probably turn out to be nigh-on identical to previous Mario games, wit the only difference being the graphics. Also Star Fox 64 will probably turn out to be the same rubbish as Star Wing on the Super NES. I've seen it all before. I don't want to wait five months, missing all the fun until the launch of NU64, unless it will be worth it. What do you think should do? Should I wait until April or buy a Saturn now? Considering that mainly go for beat 'em ups and highspeed race games. Which machine should I buy?! Please help, as I'm a bit confused and need some advice. Cheers, James Clarke, Devon AHH... ERM... CHAMPION 5 WIN 9999 Dear CVG, I regularly read your magazine and I think the reviews are great. I own a 486 66Mhz PC with 8 RAM and a SNES. Can you advise me whether should upgrade my PC to a 100Mhz with 16 RAM or a Pentium 90 with 8 RAM Dear CVG, I would very much appreciate it if you would kindly answer these questions for me. Cheers! 1. In your opinion, what is the best shoot 'em up on either the Saturn or PlayStation? 2. Also, in your opinion, what is the best driving game on either of these formats? 3. Finally, what is the best beat 'em up on the Saturn or PlayStation? 4. Judging by your answers to the previous three questions which would you say is the better system? 5. So perhaps you can tell me why everyone is so full of how great and wonderful the PlayStation is compared to the Saturn? By now you will have hopefully realised that STATIONS ARE FOR TRAIN SPOTTERS! And SATURN RULES! Tom Cousins, Winchester CHALLENGER CHAMPIJNE 9999 CVG: Right, Cousins, OUTSIDE NOW!!! * X01 X43 CVG: No way is Mario 64 like anything you've seen before, James! In fact the only criticism you could level at the game is that many traditional Mario gameplay elements are so far missing: score multiplying from sequences of bounces, the collection of hundreds of coins for secret bonuses, and so on. All that has been exchanged for a more explorational feel, to showcase the 64-bit processor. And StarWing, to our knowledge, has never been regarded as rubbish. It blew everyone away when it was first released it was that incredible. Seems you're a Sega boy at heart, mi lad. The only way you're going to be happy is by settling for a Saturn first of all, from or should I sell my SNES and buy a PlayStation, Saturn, or Ultra 64? This, bearing quality of games, and the price of upgrading my PC in mind. Do you think the PlayStation, Saturn or Ultra 64 are better considering their technical spec, and the games which have been already developed or are in the pipeline? Finally, will Actua Soccer be better than FIFA 96 on the PC? Thank you. Jonathan Fernando, Somewhere 97 "


"CVG EXCLUSIVE PRESS STOP PRESS  STOP PRESS STOP PRESS  STOP PRESS RED HOT SPOMPA SONIC RETURNS AM2 FIGHTING CAME! SIS It's no hoax! What you see on this page are the first pictures of an all-new Sonic The Hedgehog beat 'em up created by none other than AM2, creators of the Virtua Fighter series and the stunning new Fighting Vipers coin-op. As Yu Suzuki, the head of AM2, explains it, this is the result of a totally chance happening. One of AM2's staff members put Sonic into the Fighting Vipers code as an experiment, and Yu Suzuki saw the results, liked it, and deemed it good enough to turn into a fully-blown coin-op in its own right! The result is exactly what you see. A fully-polygonised 3D beat 'em up created on the Model 2 arcade board, running at 60 frames a second, and at least at the moment using the Fighting Vipers code. After the initial experiment, Yu Suzuki was unsure about whether the game would look strange, but has since found it highly interesting. He refered to the lack of previous 'cute' arcade games, touting Super Mario as one of the rare working examples. He spoke of how the charm of cute characters cannot often be conveyed within the two or three minutes play provided by coin-ops. However, he says that whilst gamers may not fully adjust to idea of Sonic in a beat 'em up, once they see him in action, they'll be entertained. He also claims that the game is \"calmer than other beat 'em ups (laughs).\" It wil have many moves though, including the Spin Attack and a drop attack from the side ropes. Certainly, the strong theme of the Megadrive Sonic titles is being mantained. At the moment the 3D Green Hill Zone backdrop is the only level seen, but other zones from the games are sure to make up at least some of the other stages. Also, the facial features of the characters are being heavily concentrated on, so the characters are instantly recognisable to gamers. Sonic's 'cool' image is a priority. At the moment, the only other character in the game is Tails (as seen in the pictures), however there's strong speculation about other fighters. Robotnik is virtually assured, and Metal Sonic and Knuckles are distinct possibilites. It has also been confirmed that the original Sonic Team have asked AM2 to develop brand-new characters for the game. Also suggested, are the possibility of yellow SuperSonic and some form of bonus stages (of the Chaos Emerald-collecting variety). PLAYER SELECT NI SONT SATURN CONVERSION STARTS IN TWO MONTHS Yes indeed. Although the coin-op project is at an extremely early stage of development only 2 to 3% complete In fact Yu Suzuki reckons work on the Saturn version could begin in as little as two months! The arcade version is expected to be released in summer and we intend to follow this incredible news story all the way! COMPUTER VIDEO 3 on sale February 9th GAMES 98 "


"PRICE! CHOICE! QUALITY! SERVICE! THESE HAVE MADE US THE FASTEST GROWING COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES CLUB IN THE COUNTRY !!! HI OCTANE... MEGADRIVE THE NEXT GENERATION OF SPORTS GAMES IS HERE!! ALL THE FOLLOWING BLOCKBUSTERS ARE JUST NEALOUENERATION SEGA SATURN SEGA SONY PLAYSTATION LOADED ........ DAYTONA SECA SATURN .99 Com ZONE........... SEGA SATURN See RAYMAN ROBOTICA .99 ....99 SEGA RALLY *** WARHAWK....... .99 $42 06 ..99 ....99 NHL 95........... $38.99 ....99 .96 .96 MYST... h JUMPING FLASH... KILEAK THE BLOOD CHOICE 1: SATURN WITHOUT KRAZY IVAN. A GAME . .................99 USA CHOICE 2: SATURN & VIRTUA LONE SOLDER FIGHTER REMIX OR DAYTONA MADDEN '96 THE WORLD'S MOST POWERFUL OR PANZER DRAGOON......... .99 MORTAL KOMBAT 3 CHOICE 3: SATURN & VIRTUA CONSOLE AT BRITAINS LOWEST PRICE NBA JAM TOURNAMENT NOVASTORM..... WINNEN FIGHTER REMIX & EITHER DAYTONA OR PANZER DRAGOON..........99 OFF WORLD INTERCEPTOR. ALL PACKS NCLUDE NEXT DAY DELIVERY (SUBJECT TO STOCK AVALAUTY PANZER GENERAL PRICE INCLUDES NEXT DAY DELIVERY BUY AN RFLLAD AT THE SAME TIME AS A SATURN FOR JUST $14.99 PARODIUS. (SUBJECT TO STOCK AVAILABILITY) PlayStation PGA GOLF..... BUY A SECOND PAD AT THE SAME TIME AS A SATURN FOR JUST .99 PRIMAL RAGE.... PRIMA RAGE.. RAIDEN PROJECT RAPID RELOAD SEGA RALLY. .. RAYMAN. SHELL SHOCK RIDGE RACER...... SHINOBI X. ROAD RASH... SIM CITY 2000. SHOCKWAVE ASSAULT STREETFIGHTER THE MOVIE STARBLADE ALPHA THEME PARK.... STREETFIGHTER THE MOVIE THUNDER HAWK 2. STRIKER '96. TILT..... VICTORY BOXING (JVC TEKKEN... VIRTUA COP + LIGHT GUN THEME PARK VIRTUA FIGHTER REMIX TO SHIN DEN VIRTUA FIGHTER 2 3D LEMMINGS.... TRUE PINBALL. VIRTUAL HYDUDE TWISTED METAL ACTUA SOCCER... VIRTUA RAONG... WING ARMS .... ACTUA GOLF VEWPOINT AIR COMBAT.. WORMS ALONE IN THE DARK 2......... WORLD CUP GOLF PRO EDITION ... CALL WORLD SERIES BASEBALL ...... ALONE IN THE DARK 2 WORLD CUP GOLF PRO ED $36.99 BUG.. CLOCKWORK KNIGHT. $3100 XMEN.CH.DREN OF THE ATOM.. CASTLEVANIA. CLOCKWORK KNIGHT 2. ACCESSORIES CHESSMASTER 3D WING COMMANDER 3 CYBER SPEEDWAY .99 PHASE 9 ODYSSEY PAD 8 BUTTONS WITH INDEPENDANT CYBERSLED WIPEOUT.......... DAYTONA RACING TURBO FRE, AUTOFRE & Slow Monon. WRESTLEMANIA..... CYBERSPEED .99 DIGITAL PINBALL OFFICIAL SEGA SATURN CONTROL PAD .99 DESTRUCTION DERBY ARCADE RACER STEERING WHEEL ACCESSORIES ENDORFUN.. $32.99 SPARE CONTROLLERS FROM.............. DISCWORLD.... MEMORY CARTRIDGE... INT. VICTORY GOAL .99 FIFA SOCCER '96. .99 MULTI-PLAYER ADAPTER........ DOOM WIDE SELECTION AVAILABLE CALL FOR DETAILS! Hi OCTANE ...... .99 VIRTUA Snick.......... . EXTREME SPORTS UNK CABLE RF UNIT SATURN COMES WITH JUST SCART CABLE). .99 MANSION OF HIDDEN SOU ELEVENTH HOUR. 1 MEG MEMORY CARD MORTAL KOMBAT 2 .99 CDX CONVERTOR PLAY IMPORTED SATURN ENDORFUN.. MOUSE GAMES ON YOUR UK SATURN...........................99 FIFA '96... SCART CABLE. NBA JAM TOURNAMENT EDMON SATURN MPEG CARTRIDGE ALLOWS YOU TO ENJOY NHL HOCKEY............ GOAL STORM.... OFFICIAL SONY JOYPAD PANZER DRAGOON... THE HGHEST QUALITY PICTURES EVER BY PLAYING VIDEO PARODIUS... CD THROUGH YOUR SATURN............99 PEBBLE BEACH GOLF...... CALL FOR CURRENT UST OF VIDEO CDS. JAGUAR CHAMPIONSHIP MANAGER 2 .99 CD ROM DRIVE.... .....99 32X MEGA CD COMMAND & CONQUER .99 ATARI JAGUAR + CYBERMORPH ...99 DARK FORCES.... AUEN VS PREDATOR .99 SPECIAL OFFER BC RACERS.......... ..99 DISCWORLD....... $24.99 32X + VIRTUA FIGHTER................ EARTHWORM JM, CANNON FODDER ....99 .99 .99 EF2000 DOOM. .99 32X + VIRTUA RACING ........... .99 ETERNAL CHAMPIONS ....99 ... ELEVENTH HOUR FIGHT FOR LIFE...... ..CALL .99 ECCO 2 THE TIDES OF TIME 32X (No GAME........ .99 FIFA '96. EYE OF THE BEHOLDER... $32.99 IRON SOLDIER.... .99 FORMULA 1 GRAND PRIX $37.99 .99 THEME PARK..... FAHRENHEIT............ CHAOTIX..... .99 HEXEN.... 700 .99 MONIGHT RAIDERS... $32.99 MAGIC CARPET 2. DOOM.. RAYMAN .99 00 SENSIBLE SOCCER .99 FIFA '96... $27.99 MORTAL KOMBAT 3... SENSIBLE SOCCER .... .99 SHINING FORCE CD. METAL HEAD ..99 SYNDICATE............... NEED FOR SPEED .99 REBEL ASSAULT 2 MORTAL KOMBAT 2 SKULLKEEP (DUNGEON MASTERS 2). SPACE HARRIER. SNATCHER .99 FREE MEMBERSHIP STAR TREK: NEXT GENERATION .96 STAR WARS ... Soul STAR. .99 THEME PARK....... ....99 All Prices include VAT. STELLAR ASSAULT.. SURGICAL STRIKE. .99 TOP GUN...... FREE MEMBERSHIPI SIMPLY FILL IN YOUR $32.99 SUPER MOTOCROSS.... THEME PARK.. TRANSPORT TYCOON .... .99 NAME AND ADDRESS ON THE FORM ON THIS ULTIMATE DOOM.... T-MEK........ PAGE AND YOU WILL BECOME A LIFETIME .CALL ULTIMATE SOCCER MANAGER.. MEMBER ENTITLED TO HEAVY DISCOUNTS, VIRTUA FIGHTER... .99 VIRTUA KARTS ........ FREE CATALOGUES AND FREE ADVICE. LYNX VIRTUA RACING .99 WING COMMANDER 4... ...99 100'S MORE AVAILABLE CALL FOR LATEST LISTS EXTRA FAST DELIVERY, 23 WORKING DAYS ATARI ON STOCK ITEMS. (PLEASE ALLOW 7 DAYS 3DO LYNX II+ SNES FOR CLEARANCE IF SENDING A CHEQUE. ALL ITEMS ORDERED FROM US ARE FULLY CH PUGHTSTICK PRO.. ........ Batman Returns FX CONVERTOR. INSURED AGAINST LOSS OR DAMAGE BLADEFORCE.. Mains Adaptor Highly Recom ...99 CANNON FODDER.......... .99 CALIFORNIA GAMES..... ..99 FIFA SOCCER '96. ALL GOODS ARE FULLY GUARANTEED. IF CAPTAIN QUAZAR... ANY ITEM DOESN'T WORK AS IT SHOULD INTERNATIONAL SUPERSTAR SOCCER DELUXE..........99 CHECKERED FLAG...... FLYING NIGHTMARES WE'LL REPLACE IT IMMEDIATELY AT NO COST ..99 DESERT STRIKE..... KILLER INSTINCT... .99 .99 FOES OF AU ..99 TO YOU. DIRTY LARRY .... MORTAL KOMBAT 3 .99 KLUNG TIME ............... ..99 .99 NBA LIVE '96... 1000'S OF TITLES AVAILABLE, IF YOU CAN'T . .99 HOCKEY.... NEED FOR SPEED ............... ..99 NHL HOCKEY '96... .99 SEE THE ITEM YOU WANT, PLEASE RING AS PGA GOLF... LEMMINGS .99 NFL MADDEN '96. .99 STOCK ARRIVES DAILY. SOFTWARE AND POSED Ms PACMAN ..99 POWERDRIVE. ACCESSORIES AVAILABLE FOR ALL SPACE HULK... ..99 PINBALL JAM....... ..99 SUPER BOMBERMAN 3. MACHINES WAY OF THE WARRIOR....... .99 WORLD CLASS SOCCER.... THEME PARK. ..99 ORDER BY PHONE, FAX OR POST. WING COMMANDER 3......................99 MANY MORE AVAILABLE PLEASE CALLII WORMS.. .99 WE ALSO STOCK A MASSIVE RANGE OF SOFTWARE AND PERIPHERALS FOR PCS S&&  FIFA SOCCER '96. NBA LIVE '96.  NHL HOCKEY\"96PGA Gou '96. . NFL MADDEN '96. AUSTRALIA RUGBY LEAGUE .99 BATMAN FOREVER..... .99 BEARS & BUTTHEAD.. .... .99 BRAN LARA CUCKET ..99 CANNON FODDER............. ..99 ..99 DEMOUTON MAN... .99 De Roona's MEAN BEAN MACHNE .99 DYNAMTE HEADDY... .99 EARTHWORM JM 2 .99 Ecco 2-THE TOES OF TIME .99 EXO SQUAD ..CALL FEVER PITCH SOCCER...... .99 FIFA SOCCER '95. .99 FIFA SOCCER '96.......... ..99 FRANK THOMAS BASEBALL.. ..99 GAFED ............ ...99 GEORGE FOREMAN BOXING ..99 uy's QUEST FOR OLYMPIC RINGS. LIGHT CRUSADER... WARSPUM........ .99 MEGA BOMBERMAN...... ..... ..99 Maro MACHINES 2 '96 EDITION .............99   ...47.99 NBA LE '95... ...99 NBA LIVE '96................ ..99 NFL MADDEN '96. ...22.99 NHL '96..................... PETE SAPRASTENNS '96. ..99 PGA TOUR GOLF 3. $24.99 PGA Gou '96. ..99 PANTASY STAR4 ..99 PANTOM 2040.... .99 ...CALL $24.99 POWSORVE... .99 POWER RANGERS THE MOVE.. ..99 Pasher MANAGER.............. ..99 POMARAGE............. Poco Pr .................... RBI BASEBAL. 94.... .. $21.99 Rest Of The Robots ...... ..99 Boo Ras: 3...... .99 RUGBY WORLD CUP '95 ..99 SteGFORCE 2...... .99 .99 SoxT HEGEHOG $14.99 .99 Sonc & KNUCLES....... .99 SCELETON KREW... SOT GOES TO HOWYWOOD... $42.99 SETRACE..................... ..99 SPESCOMAKS... SHOCATE............. .. THEME PARK.......... ..99 TO FOOTBALL ..99 TOUCHMAN BOXING... $24.99 UASAN STIKE........ VECOMAN ..99 TOOS .99 VARAONG.............. .99 WAS NORD.......... .99 WERON LORD............ .99 .99 WESTEMANA THE ARCADE..... ...CALL ..99 Zoo........... ... ACCESSORIES ACTION REPLAY 2 CHEAT CARTRIDGE........99 PHASE 9 GRADUATE PAD 6 BUTTON WITH TURBO FRE, AUTO FRE & Slow MOTION...............99 ULTRA 2IN 1 JOYPAD WORKS ON MEGADRIVE & SNES 6 BUTTON WITH TURBO FIRE AUTO FRE & Slow Motion .... .99 MEGAMASTER CONVERTER..... ...99 AMERICAN JAPANESE CONVERTER ....99 .99 .99 .99 $29.99 .99 .99 .99 $22.99 X MEN ............. .99 100 DOOM............ .99 .99 IMEN 2............ ...CALL ..99 .99 .99 ...99 ITEM MACHINE PRICE 01924 473157 SALES HOTLINES OPEN SEVEN DAYS A WEEK 3 Cut Out This order form and post to : GAMEPLAY, 513 BRADFORD ROAD, BATLEY, W. YORKSHIRE WF 17 8LL. | FAX ORDERS ON 01924 420060 124 HOURS A DAY) NAME: ........ | ADDRESS:.. | ****............... FREE for all one per sotaremo, please order to LINES OPEN 9AM-BPM MON-FRI, 9AM 7PM SAT, 10.30AM-4PM SUN. ANSWERPHONE ALL OTHER TIMES. ORDER BY CREDIT CARD, CHEQUE POSTAL ORDERS OR CASH (PLEASE SEND CASH IN A REGISTERED ENVELOPE FOR YOUR OWN PROTECTION Postage is FREE for all orders shipped within the UK. POSTCODE: SIGNATURE:.... P&P E Overseas postage .50 per software item. Optional NEXT DAY DELIVERY available for .00. Please order TOTALE TEL:.......... ........ FAX: ......... before 3pm to ensure immediate despatch. DELTA CASH I CHEQUE I POSTAL ORDER O CARD O A Cheques payable to 'Gameplay!. Prices correctat tme of going to press. 'E & OE. CARD NUMBER CARD NUMBER 100000000000000000 EXPIRY DATE OD/Issue No. 00 EXPIRY DATE ISSUE No. CVG 2 CVG 2 --------------------SWITCH 1ST CLASS DELIVERY FREE FOR ORDERS SHIPPED WITHIN THE U.K. NEXT DAY DELIVERY .00. PLEASE ORDER BEFORE 3PM TO ENSURE IMMEDIATE DESPATCH. SWITCH ONLY "


"FRANTIC FLEA tour ...infesting a Nintendo near you Mobility ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM All game design material is  1994 HAUS TEKNIKKA. All characters and Frantic Flea are  and  1993 Andy Whitehurst and are being used under Licensed Agreement. Super Nintendo Entertainment System is a trademark of Nintendo. Distributed by Gametek UK Limited 258 Bath Road Slough Berks SL 1 4DX United Kingdom. "

