" MAY 1987 S$4.60 Dm5.50 285pta HFL 5.50 ADVENTURE EXCLUSIVE Join the COMPUTER GUILD OF THIEVES! GAMES MUTT FREE MELISSA RAVENFLAME POSTER FREE GAMES/NEW STAR TREK MOVIE REVIEWED SHADOWS OF MORDOR — LORD OF THE RINGS 2 PREVIEWED GET ON YOUR BIKE WITH MASTERTRONIC'S MILKRACE COMP RANARAMA PLAYERS GUIDE/HOT STUFF FROM THE ARCADES! "


"6 MASSIVE HITS IN ONE 6-PACK PLUS BONUS GAME DUET FIGHTING WARRIOR .95 Spectrum Cassette Commodore 64 Cassette .95 E14.95 Commodore 64 Disc Amstrad Cassette Amstrad Disc .95 .95 FIGHTING WARRIOR SCOOBY DOO 1942 THE SACRED ARMOUR OF HOT MNIRIAN El Mail order, just send a cheque or postal order payable to ELITE SYSTEMS LTD. or quote your credit card No. VISA 1942 JET SET WILLY II ANTIRIAD ANCHOR HOUSE Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands WS9 8PW Telephone: (0922) 59165 Telex: 336130 ELITE G DUET PLUS BONUS GAMEDUET. PREVIOUSLY UNRELEASED SIMULTANEOUS TWO-PLAYER ACTION. RELEASE DATE: MARCH 9th EUROPE MARCH 19th UK SPLIT PERSONALITIES DUET "


"TARIT From ATARI Cassette Cassette .95 .95 .95 Disc Spectrum Commodore Commodore THE WORLD'S MOST FOREMOST COIN-OP MANUFACTURER COMES THE WORLD'S FOREMOST ARCADE GAME Mail Order, just send a cheque or postal order payable to Elite, or quote your Cre Card number «PAPERBO?» FREERBOY Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge Walsall, West Midlands, WS9 8PW. Telephone: (0922) 59165. Telex: 336130 ELITE G. AVAILABLE SOON ON BBC, ELECTRON, C16 AND AMSTRAD \"Officially Licenced Coin Op Classic\" ATARI "


"FEATURES Se DER t the oth it will stand the ball dur 11! GUILD OF THEIVES/P64 CONTENTS 40 MONTY MOLE COMPETITION 40 RANARAMA PLAYERS GUIDE 43 I.D.E.A.S CENTRAL 50 ROBICO COMPETITION 53 PLAY-BY-MAIL 55 MUSKET AND MULES 56 WE WILL ROCK YOU 58 MELISSA RAVENFLAME POSTER 61 ADVENTURE HELPLINE 64 GUILD OF THIEVES 67 ADVENTURE REVIEWS 79 HABITAT 84 STIFFLIPS PREVIEW 87 GOLDEN JOYSTICK GAMES OFFERS 88 GRANGE HILL COMPETITION 90 FILM REVIEWS 98 CENTURIONS COMPETITION RESULTS 102 STREET SCENE 106 MAILBAG 109 LIEUT LAWW 112 NEXT MONTH 114 TONY TAKOUSHI'S HOT GOSSIP SHADOWS OF MORDOR/P102 NEWS & REVIEWS 8 NEWS + REVIEWS RAVENFLAME POSTER/P58 ZARRARIAL Fly high with Eagles from Hewson, collect Monty Mole tokens, check out the Mystery of Arkhen Manor, drool over the new Amigas. 13 REVIEWS THIS ISSUE: Arkenoid gets the C+VG Game of the Month Award. C+VG Hits go to Auf Wiedersehen, Monty, Head Over Heels and RanaRama to name but three. BARBARIANS/P102 "


"INSIDE STORY GRANGE HILL THE COMPUTER GAME The heat is on! This month's C+VG is hot property. It's a wonder the pages aren't signed. We've laid down the law and captured an exclusive on Guild of Thieves, the latest from Magnetic Scrolls and Rainbird. Seeing is believing. But you probably won't believe your eyes! Ace programmer Steve Turner has also written an exclusive players guide to his froggy smath for Hewson, RanaRama. You'll be caught on the hop without it. The exclusives keep on coming. There's Palace's Stifflips and Melbourne House's Shadows of Mordor, the follow-up to Lord of the Rings. We've also negotiated money off details from Golden Joystick winner that'll save you a smal fortune. And don't miss our Grange Hill, Robico and Mastertronic Milk Race competitions. And due to public demand we've also just a fraction of the goodies in this issue. Miss it at your peril. CRANGER AFTER HOURS GRANGE HILL COMP/58 US 082829 BBB984 182275 ARCADE ACTION/P90 BATTERY TO BRETOR BATTERY 3 MARTIANOIDS/REVIEWS/P15 BREAKFASTOO HIGH, DENMARK HTS MONEY: 550 AUF WIEDERSEHEN MONTY/P18 MUSIC/P56 MB 888 EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John ART EDITOR Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Steve Donoghue Matthew Woodley AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeley SOFTWARE CONSULTANTS Tony Takoushi PUBLICITY Clive Pembridge ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Garry Williams ADVERTISEMENT EXECUTIVE Katherine Lee AD PRODUCTION Debble Pearson PUBLISHER Rita Lewis COVER Craig Kennedy EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222 July-December 106,571 Lorean MUSIC/P56 ABC "


"GEORG TID SWEET SE PRED OT the SPECTRUM SCREENS TUROR CE T OD SCORE BUILD BOB Dan TM MP INTO THE WORLD OF ENDURO RACING! "


"This Sega coin-op conversion puts other top software houses to shame. It sets a new standard for arcade tie-ins. Sinclair User Magazine ACTIVISION ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE AMSTRAD CPC CASSETTE .99. AMSTRAD CPC DISK .99 COMMODORE 64/128 CASSETTE .99. COMMODORE 64/128 DISK .99. ZX SPECTRUM 48K/128K/ .99. TM &  SEGA 1986. All Rights Reserved. Activision, Inc, Authorized User Mall order: Activision (UK) Ltd. 23 Pond Street, Hampstead. London NW 2PN Tel: 01 431 1101 "


"Melbourne House is hoping to cast a spell over arcade adventurers with the Wiz, set in the mythical land of Midgard and Niflheim. The programmer is Simon Price, who with Mike Lewis, created the comic strip adventures Redhawk and Kwah! in th Whiteng yo saying something is terribly wrong in the village, he sends a reporter to investigate. The Mystery of Arkham Manor. The mystery deepens when the reporter finds that the Colonel has vanished, leaving his house locked and the curtains drawn. As you explore the village of Arkham and question its inhabitants, the adventure unfolds with Animated graphics, combined with text, icons and pull-down menus. The program includes some remarkable features to help your investigations and recreate the experience of being a 1902s news-hound. You must send regular telegrams to your editor, reporting your progress, and write articles to appear in the paper. To enable you to do this there are notebook and photograph facilities, with which you can record salient facts and take pictures of suspects and locations. The Mystery of Arkham Manor will be available in May 1987 for the Commodore 64 priced at .95 and Spectrum and Amstrad at .95. within it the incantations you buy from wiser Wizards, and travel the land seeking the runic ingredients which are necessary for your rites. Such spells can shield you with invisibility, transmute your opponents, and slay behemoths and necromancers. Running parallel to Midgard, sideways in time, lies Niflheim, a land of darkness and gloom, its denizens are monstrous, misshapen and grotesque. As you progress through the five levels of Midgard and Niflheim, gaining in experience, and filling the pages of your grimoire, forethought and strategy is vital. You must continually decide which spells to buy, when to use them, who to trade with and who to kill. Wiz will be available on Spectrum and Commodore 64 disc and cassette in June. Spectrum .95, C64 cassette .95 and disc .95. you Danish software house Kele Line releases two Commodore 64 titles this month, Thunder Force and Unitrax. Thunder Force is set in 2050 where two crimefighters have been taken prisoner in a Camp for the Lawless. They must break out and save the world from corruption. The price is as yet unknown. Unitrax is space shoot'em up where earth is under attack and you must blow up the reactors on the invading ship holds to defeat them. Price 95p Other Kele Line titles scheduled are The 4th Dimension, Vikings and Pirates of the Ocean. Midgard is a world populated almost entirely by magicians, sorcerers and wizards, of varying degrees. You start life as a level one apprentice magician, whose ambition it is to attain the lofty status of fifth level King Wizard. Armed only with an empty spell book, you must inscribe The town of Arkam is a sleepy backwater where nothing ever happens. So when the editor of a national newspaper receives a letter from Colonel Fortescue, a former War Cabinet Member FOR Auf Wiedersehen Monty is the latest in Gremlin Graphic's games following the adventures of Monty Mole. You should see Monty clawing his way up to the top of the charts very soon. So how would you ike to get your hands on the copy of the game for  less than you would pay in the shops? Of course you would. Well, thanks to Gremlin, that's what you can do in this Computer+Video Games coupon collection offer. Printed below is a special Monty Molehead Token. Next month we will print another one. When you have both heads you can send off to Gremlin for your copy of Auf Wiedersehen Monty for  off. The game will sell in the shops for the following: .99 Spectrum and MSX, .99 Commodore and Amstrad. But with this exclusive C+VG/ Gremlin offer you can get the games for ,.99 and .99. Send your cheques or postal orders together with the two heads to Gremlin Graphics, Mail Order, Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield 51 4SF. Make sure the cheques are payable to Gremlin and NOT C+VG and specify which computer you own. Don't forget the second head will be printed in the June issue of C+VG XOR, the maze game for the BBC launched by Logotron in January, has been licensed by Atari for the 520ST and 1040ST. Atari has also taken an option with the intention of launching the XOR moze generator software which it will market as an XOR construction set. XOR is a series of mazes through which the player has to find a way, collecting masks by defeating obstacles and rescuing the masks from the maze. It has 15 levels, each with a solution which involves strategic, chesslike thinking to attack a problem. SCORE: 1292 MEER GERHAN See MONEY: 184 LURBAROBAS.NET SRUXEMBOURG Hewson is set to launch what it hopes to be the sequel to Uridium at the end of May. It's called Eagles and has been written by Danish programmers "


"Pick up thy joystick I find your honesty appealing, Sinbad, But I fear the costs may be beyond your means. Go back to your lang Will Summon you later, hopefully arounded on Ritchie Real Cinemaware does it again Black Prince Camaral is in the midst only betterl Sinbad and the of a bid to overthrow the Caliph Throne of the Falcon is a truly and attain ultimate power. humorous and entertaining game into this chaos, comes Sinbad writes Marshal M. Rosenthal. There is much to do. You must The Caliph has been steer your ship, the Sabaralus, transformed into a falcon and the about the oceans and seek out clues and aid in the many regions of the world. Sinbad requires a quick mind, strategy, and a heck of a good joystick. Arcade-oriented sections including battling human and inhuman foes as well as sailing through treacherous waters. Sinbad and the Throne of the Falcom comes from Cinemaware for various systems including the XE/ST and the Commodore 64/Amiga. Poer Maden and Bo Nielsen. Eagles will be out on the Commodore 64, price .95 on cassette and .95 on disk. Games within the next few months an adventure game. At the moment the Spectrum game is called RaddishSecret Agent, that may change. Keshoots Don Priestley is at work on a new Trap Door game for Piranha, due for release in the autumn to coincide with a new series of the popular animated television series But before that Piranha will release another Priestley game, Flunky, apparently set in Buckingham Palace wherr strange creatures lurk in l. cellars and corridors and rooms. Playing the part of the Flunky, you must first apply for a job at the Palace. The first of the problems you encounter is how to get into Buck House's employment office. Once in and dressed in full Flunky attire, the head of the household's staff will set various problems such as lighting fires throughout the Palace. On your travels through the building there will be some pretty famous people to encounter. HRH and her family will also be setting the Flunky some pretty difficult tasks. Flunky is set for release in September on the Commodore 64, Amstrad and Spectrum at .95. If you've brought Martech's Uchi Mata on the Spectrum check it out closely. It might be slightly duff. An early preview copy of the game somehow managed to get duplicated in the first production run. You can tell if it's a bad copy if at the end of the game the as CON scores do not return to zero but continue to rise. . If this happens on your copy send it to Martech who will send you a new copy and refund the postage. A Martech man says: \"Our apologies for any inconvenience caused because of this mistake. We can only hope to relieve the 929 20. CO situation by sending out new copies as quickly as possible.\" Martech's address is Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE. Every game released by Power House will contain either a free game or audio track Dr Livingstone I presume? All the Power House music is Presume is the word 'cos these provided by the House Electronic screen shots came with a whole lot Xperience, headed by Wayne of Spanish stuff. Anyway, Allen Livingstone is a colourful Wayne, formerly of Kick looking arcade adventure from Partners, has appeared many Spanish software house times on TV. Operasoft, released in this Jon Ritman, programmer of country by Alligata. Alligata, Head Over Heels, Batman explorers, jungle? Quite apt really and Matchday, is at work on a Livingstone will be available for the new soccer game. Details are still Spectrum, C64, MSX and Amstrad secret but it's provisionally called at .95 all tape versions, .95, Soccerama. After that, Jon will Amstrad disc and .95 64 disc. start work on Matchday II. Alligata is set to release three Double fun packages on its Budgie label at .99. Each pack contains two games. The titles are Rocket Roger and Blagger, Guardian and Eagle Empire and Hyper Circuit and Killer Watt. Also coming up on the Budgie label at .99 is Table Football. Look out for something different from Addictive "


"News Silent Service, MicroProse's World War Two submarine simulation, has been released for the Amiga. Price .95. Here's Leviathan a C+VG Hit on the Commodore 64 on the Amstrad. English Software says the game -which includes three landscapes packed with buildings, missile launchers, and flying problems is due for release in the first week of May. It will cost .95 on cassette and .95 on disk. View GALES View To A Kill, based on the last Bond epic. Licensed from the producers of the James Bond films, the game of The Living Daylights follows the plot of the filmand has James Bond, played by timothy Dalton for the first time, roving the world in an attempt to save the West from a criminal scheme aimed at world domination. The game is being produced by several teams of top programmers one in the USA! Two highly-rated UK programming teams are already hard at work. Design Design are working on the Spectrum and Amstrad versions while De re Software are coding the Atari 8-bit version. In the USA Sculptured Software, of Salt Lake City, are producing the Commodore 64 and Amiga versions. The game is due for a summer launch, like the film, and will be released in mid-July. The first release will feature Amiga, Atari, Commodore 64, Spectrum 48K and 128K and Amstad CPC versions. Other versions will follow for the BBC/Electron, C16, Amstad PCW, Atari ST and MSX computers. Infogrammes departs from its normal style of arcade adventure games with the release in May of Prohibition, a gangster shoot'em up. These shots are from the Amstrad version but the game will also be released on the Atari and Commodore. No details of price are available yet. Here's IQ, CRL's new release on its Nu Wave label, due out now. It's being billed as the \"artificial intelligence arcade game.\" In it artificial beings fight each other for territory. These beings must be programmed to fight the computer or other players. It will apprently test the finest minds.\" If you fancy having your brains tested, then I will cost you .95 on cassette and .195 disk for the Commodore 64. An Atari version will follow. Now here's something to watch out for. Zynapse the first game from none other than Dominic Robinson, the ace-coder who did such a truly awesome job converting Uridium onto the Spectrum. Dominic has teamed up with John Cumming to create a game that will appeal to all dedicated zappers everywhere. Escape an alien infested space station, battle through asteroid storms, infiltrate enemy planets and attempt to win the final conflict. Zynapse, \"a horizontal scrolling epic\", will be out in June for the Spectrum, C64 and Amstrad. Keep 'em peeled for this one! Trivial Pursuit Genus Edition has been released by Domark for the IBM PC and compatibles, including the Amstrad 1512 series. It will cost .95. This picture of Domark duo Mark Strachan (blonde) and Domonic Wheatley (brunette) is not what it seems. They are not disguised to avoid people who bought Friday the 13th but to promote the launch of the Baby Boomer edition of the best-selling Trivial Pursuit. It's enough to scare the Living Daylights out of you. Which, by chance, happens to be the title of the next James Bond Film. Domark have scooped the rights to a game based on it. Domark promise the new game will be a lot better than A War Game Greats, the first compilation of SSI strategical simulation games, is to be issued by US Gold. Titles included are Battle for Normandy, Knights of the Desert, Combat Leader, and Tigers d tigers in the Snow. It will be out on the Commodore 64, price .99 cassette and .99 on disk. This is Micronaut One The Moebius Trip, fresh from the baffling brain of ace coder Pete Cooke. Can Pete match the epic addictiveness of Tau Ceti and Academy with this newie? The answer is, of course, a big affirmative. The plor is fairly simple. You play the part of a droid who inhabits a massive computer. This droids job is to transfer power around the vast brain. But, you guessed it, there are nasty lifeforms building webs and draining energy all over the place. The game is set inside the computers communication tunnels and you race through them — seeing the outside world through your Dietscreen. Micronaur looks as if it's going to be very special. Watch for it on the Spectrum in May on the nexus label. Thalamus has signed a licencing deal with Electronic Arts to distribute Sanxion and Delta in the United States. "


"Databyte presents VS Montezuma's Revenge ARCTIC ANTICSU FEATURING PANAMA JOE THE ISLAND CAPER Full scrolling screens Real Time Animation Simulvision And for the very first time in the Spy series there is Interiors and Exteriors where spies can enter igloos Your toughest challenge yet Blitz Game-You'll find ita real challenge-Computer and Video Games NEW FORMATS SPECTRUM 48128K AMSTRAD CPC It's fast it's totally playable it is fan to play and boy it really zips along and keeps you on your les -Computer and Video Games MSX Atan 400 800 XE Commodore 64/128 .95 cass. E14.95 disk Atari 400 800 T-AmstradSpectrum\" Commodore 64/128 .95.95 disk Atari 400/800 XL XT-Commodore 64/128 .95 cass. .95 disk AVAILABLE NOW  APRIL BOULDER DASH  KIT \"A Boulder Dash players dream come true-Zzap 64 Polar Pierre is a fastaction arcade game with brilliant graphics one or two players includes a Construction Kit to design your own games NEW FORMAT ATARI ST .95 OUT NOW Atari 400 800 LIT Commodore 64 128 .95 cass-.95 disk Atari 00 00 0 Commodore 64 128 .95 cass .95 disk OUT NOW Available from all good computer stores or post free from Databyte, 15 Wolsey Mews, Kentish Town, London NWS 2DX. Telephone 01-482 1758 "


"Christian Urquhart, he of Decathlon and Robot Messiah frame, has re-emerged at Hewsons with a new Speccy-blaster called Gunrunner. Claimed to be one of the most advanced games for the Spectrum to date'' Gunrunner is set on the ice planet Zero. And you'll need all that ice to stay cool as you set out to save the planet from the attentions of Destrovia, the war world. Your father has left you a detailed map giving a route across the complex plutonium pipe system which will take you to the utilities essential to combat the enemy. Your strength and agility must be at its optimum to overcome the many obstacles in your path. Seek out the jet packs, shields and deadly poisons hidden along the supply route to assist your journey to freedom. Gunrunner will be available for the Spectrum at .95. Release date, May 20. people who currently own Commodore 64s, Spectrums and BBCs. Remember Sweevo? That lovable cartoon hero of Sweevo's World the 3D arcade aventure released by Gargoyle Games last year. Well he's back and playing it for laughs again in Hydofool out soon on the FTL label. It's similar in style to Sweevo's World but set underwater. And just when you thought it was safe to go down to the beach... Hang on to your joysticks all you all action speed freaks. Check our Romulus from Quicksilva on the Commodore 64. Il bug you. Welcome to the Ingros transputer plant which is developing problems. You, playing the part of Technician Nick Bradley, have the task of de-bugging it. But watch out. These bugs are apparently intelligent The plot sounds really complicated references to \"randomising on the chip generation unit\", \"T-States\" and \"Transmition Stages.\" But when you get down to it it's a matter of piling up the points with some nippy joystick action. The Amiga A500 offers the Amiga standard Motorola 68000 plus three chip wordprocessor system with 512K RAM which is internally expandable to one megabyte. As a WIMP system the Amiga A500 comes complete with a mouse. An in-built 880K 3.5inch floppy drive is included with the opportunity to add two additional drives. It also has PC compatible parallel and serial ports, and Amiga systembus expansion. Commodore predicts there will be 300 plus software titles available when the machine goes onto sale in the second Who are these gormless looking bunch of computer industry figures caught posing in a very undignified manner hoping to attract some attention? They'll all Virgins, actually. Or more accurately they all work for Virgin Games. The only one we can identify is MD Nick Alexander. He's the one in the middle with a football stuffed up his pullover. The football is a clue to a game, FA Cup'87, a revamped version of last year's FA Cup Football. You'd think they would have better things to do with their time. The memory of Tau Ceti lingers on at CRL with the release of Traxxion, a new space shoot'em up. Traxxion is a construction site satellite orbiting around Reema one of the Tau Ceti planets. After the Tau Ceti wars Traxxion is found to be damaged. You are sent to Traxxion to repair the damage. Once there, you discover the reactor has started to melt down. You have to act fast and find the exit from the monorail system in your maintenance car in order to get off Traxxion before its inevitable meltdown and destruction. The monorail tracks will provide the player with various obstacles and robotic worker cars will hamper the player's escape and force him to shoot the cars off the tracks. The price for Traxxion is, as yet, undecided. The Commodore version will be released in May with the Spectrum and Amstrad versions following in June. Meanwhile, CRL's Wooky and Moty, two arcade strategy games for the Amstrad, should be out now. Commodore's new Amiga 500billed as \"the best home computer at any price\" will sell for  plus VAT. But on top of that you'll have to add a minimum of  plus VAT for a monitor. The machine is certainly impressive. C+VG's Hot Gossip ace Tony Takoushi declares: \"There's nothing to touch this machine.\" Commodore see the A500 as the \"ultimate upgrade\" for quarter of this year. Amiga titles already available include Rainbird's Starglider, and Mindscape's Defender of the Crown. The Amiga 500 will get its first main public showing at the Commodore show on June 12, 13 and 14. Commodore have also unveiled its news business Amiga, the A2000. The A2000 is based on the Motorola 68000 running at 7.14 MHz supported by three coprocessors, with one mega-byte of RAM which is internally expandable up to a maximum of nine mega-bytes. As standard o You collected the first coupon. Now cut out number two and be the first in your street with a FREE copy of Super Sunday, the truly wonderful American Football simulation from Nexus. We've got 200 copies of the game to GIVE AWAY to the first C+VG readers to send forth tokens and the coupon below to Nexus, DSB House, 30 High Street, Beckenham, Kent. Get yours in NOW! Hoist the main sail! Pirates from Micro Prose, is a swashbuckling simulation set on the high seas. Players are tested on a wide range of sailing skills, from navigation to battle tactics and preventing a mutiny timing the broadsides can spell victory or defeat First there's a crew to pressgang. Later, plunder ports and hunt for treasure buried by wary townsfolk. Finding valuables is not the only reward waiting for the daring sea-captain either. Get to know the Governor and there could be romance in the air with his beautiful daughter! The Governor may grant you some land and a title, to end your days in comfort as a respected nobleman. Then again, the future could see you branded as a common scoundrel. Pirates, is scheduled for release in the US late May, followed closely by its UK launch and will be available first on disc for the C64, with versions on Apple, IBM and Spectrum planned for later this year. Star Raiders II reviewed last month on the Atari will also be released on the Amstrad, Commodore and Specrum by Electric Dreams. Meanwhile Bureaucracy, written by Douglas Adams, author of the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, is due out on the new IBM, Apple II series, Macintosh, Atari ST, CBM 126, Amstrad PCW and Amiga. Price .99. May will see the relase of Space Quest by the fantasy role playing specialist Sierra On Line, best known for King's Quest and Black Cauldron. Atari's Supersprint will be released in September by electric Dreams. The player gets a choice of eight tracks to test their racing and driving skills. Data East's Firetrap, in which the player must climb burning skyscrapers, extinguishing fires and rescuing people, will be released by Electric Dreams in October. UFO Robo Dangar, the space Nichibutsu space war game which centres on a transforming warrior, will be released on CBM, and Spectrum. Prices for games released on the Spectrum, Amstrad and Commodore will be .99 and .99 on disk. C+VG NEXUS SUPER SUNDAY OFFER there are eight interfaces including serial and parallel ports and an interface for the detachable 94-key business keyboard. A mouse is included in all configurations. Prices start at ,095 (ex VAT) for an A2000 with single 3.5 inch 880K floppy drive, one mega-byte of RAM, Keyboard and mouse. Name Address Please rush me my free copy of Super Sunday. I enclose TWO +VG American Football helmets. "


"NOW AVAILABLE ON COMMODORE AMIGA SERVICE «Sonar reports distant explosions.\" ASSUBMARINE CAPTAIN WILL YOU SINKORSWIM? There are 4 skill levels and various 'reality levels so you can customize complexity. Success is rewarded with rank promotions Enrol for Silent Service. Available for the Commodore 64/128k, Spectrum 48/128k and Amstrad CPC. Cassette .95. Disk .95. You're captain of a lethal fighting submarine in the perilous South Pacific and your goal is to find, attack and sink Japanese shipping. You spot your prey through the periscope-but then-the enemy's escort sights you. Suddenly, hunter becomes hunted and survival depends on your skill and courage. Silent Service is an ultra-realistic simulation of submarine warfare. Using superb graphics and sound effects, historical combat missions are accurately recreated. The action is non-stop, the suspense gripping. Your submarine features all the critical battle stations the engine room, conning tower and ship's bridge and has a sophisticated attack plotting system. But, you must live by your wits. The Submarine Simulation MICROPROSE "


"ARKANOID   bloodshed! Yup, we've been MACHINES: SPECTRUM/C64/ fighting over the covstick again AMSTRAD/ATARI ST this time just to get to grips  SUPPLIER: IMAGINE PRICES: .95 (SPEC) .95 (C64 with Imagine's instant smash AMS) .95 (ATARI ST) C64 arcade conversion Arkanoid. VERSIONS TESTED: Our arcade ace Clare Edgeley SPECTRUM/C64 raved about the Taito coin-op REVIEWER: TIM when it first appeared and now we're going to rave about the computer conversions. OK, so in all reality Arkanoid Not since Ikari Warriors has the is a revamped version of C+VG office seen such Breakout, that ancient game ant game Gesound.ch se ota vaus which us ancient gameplayers sometimes brush the cobwebs off to relive great moments of gaming history, Trouble is Arkanoid is just awesomely addictive and extremely playable. You're hooked from the moment you load up the game. So what's it all about? Well, you're in charge of a Vaus craft sounds like some sort of German rodent--and you're supposed to be trapped in space. Armed only with an energy bolt you have to break down mysterious barriers preventing your escape. These barriers are built of bricks\" Breakout Anyway you have to blast away at these bricks by using the Vaus craft as a bat-hitting the energy bolt back and forth off the walls. Energy capsules drop down from the wall as you destroy it. Collect these, they are useful items. Each has a GAME OF THE MONTH. Bigger, better and bolder than the rest. Try it, buy it. Don't miss out. C+VG HIT Miss the hits at your peril. They are the business! ENDURO RACER THE REVIEWERS TIM METCALFE: The Ed man wields the fastest joystick of all. When his word is heard your better listen. PAUL BOUGHTON: Shoots from the lip. Likes zip in his zap. LEE BRATHWAITE: Radio Lancashire's ace games man, always ready MACHINES: SPECTRUM/C64/ reserve Judgement on the machine blasting across desert Overall Enduro situation to air his views. AMSTRAD/ATARI dirt tracks and rugged forest  SUPPLIER: ACTIVISION Bul.the Spectrum version is a trails in an effort to become CHRIS CAIN: PRICE: .99 ISPECTRUM/C64/ blast as close as this machine enduro-champ of the universe The Amiga man. But Cain AMSTRAD) .99 (ATARI ST) can get to the arcade version. You have to complete each of . ALL DISCS .99 All the obstacles are there and the five tracks in a certain time is able to be persuaded VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM even the dips and bumps in the fail and it's back to the REVIEWER: TIM that 64 isn't near track have been reproduced starting gate, But we're racing ahead a bit. The first track is relatively retirement age. Could this be the best of the there. If you've not come across Simple small rocks to avoid DAVID BISHOP: current arcade conversions? it: this epic coin-op you won't and jumps to jump. Timing is all As an Amstrad fan, The certainly comes close. But as know that it's a sort of dirt bike important here. Get your jump we went to press only the simulation. Bishop preaches what he wrong and your rider ends up Spectrum, version was You find yourself in the dangling by his handlebats high practices. He is also full of complete so we'll have to saddle of a high power enduro in the sky. Sometimes you can praise for the Atari ST. STEVE BADSEY: P1000TDTE SCORE TOE ODLOGE THE SCORE The Doctor reports from STEGECE SPEEDO STECE E 16 SPEED 165 mm the frontline about war and strategy games. NICKY TREVETT: Reclusive Nicky has the knack with the BBC. Brian Webber: Sees all, hears all, plays all. JERRY MUIR: Games expert Muir has the Atari 8-Bit between his teeth. Something he XLs at. 14 "


"MARTIANOIDS highly playable, graphically okay but without the touch of originality which marks it out from all the other Ultimate clones. Still it's nice to see the mystery men back in action but time will tell whether the name Ultimate will regain its former glory and recapture its pioneering spirit. REVIEWS GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE  PLAYABILITY 00 00 00 00 PLAYER 1 801187 HI SCORE 182275 EATTERY 3 E90FE-ITTEEN codeletter on them which lets you know what they do. $: Slows down the speed of the energy bolt, making it easier to position yourself. C: Enables you to catch the bolt, move to the desired position and then fire. E: Expands the Vaus craft, giving you more chance to deflect the bolt. D: Disrupts the bolt into three separate components thereby giving you three times the There was a time when the arrival of an Ultimate game in effect. the C+VG offices would have L: Arms your Vaus with a laser created great excitement. The allowing it to shoot bricks and aliens. review team would fight among B: Breaks the section of the wall themselves to be first to get the game, load it up and start enabling your Vaus craft an alternative escape route to slip playing. through to the next level. But since the awfulCyberun P: Awards you an extra life. was issued last year and the company was swallowed up by On screen displays show your current score, hi-score, number US Gold, nothing has been forthcoming from the secretive of lives remaining and level attained. Points are awarded software house. Rest in Peace, between 50 and 120 for we thought. knocking out a brick, depending Ultimate's past glories have on the colour. Collecting a been ripped-off, cloned and recapsule is 1000 and hitting an cycled. There have been alien scores 100 points. countless Ultimate-style games There are six levels of and the formula, although not differing complexity. You'll worn out, is a little jaded. Every need to work out a good now and then someone really strategy for each screen to comes up with an impressive 3D walkabout game. Take Head succeed—but always be ready to allow for the unexpected Over Heels from Ocean. It's in incident that odd bounce etc. the Ultimate mould but Opinion is divided here but graphically it's brilliant. the 64'ers among the team rate Now suddenly there's Krackout a nose in front of Martianoids. It's arrival created Arkanoid simply because of the no mass panic, just a passing interest. joystick response. It's the much-loved formula but with nothing truly brilliant Spec/C64 about it. It could be from GRAPHICS anybody. SOUND VALUE As always there's just the 10 10 > PLAYABILITY brief story which sets the scene 10 10 of the game. The Markon Empire has launched a vast robot ship into save him but it's more likely the depths of space on a that you'll end up in a tangled mission to find new life-forms heap at the side of the track. If and gather knowledge. It's there's time left you can pull called the Markon Dawn. yourself together and head for Controlling this ship is the the finish line. Brain of Markon, a vast and Complete a track within the powerful computer. Your role in time limit and you'll get the Martianoids is to be the extra time added on to the next guardian of the brain, to defend, track. Track two is set in the maintain and activate it in the desert and is much more event of attack. difficult. More rocks, more And that's just what happens. jumps and maniac jeep drivers Martianoids, unfriendly aliens, to watch out for have gained entry to the ship The scrolling is pretty smooth and are now interefering with and fast enoughto give you the passages of programs thrill Graphies are effective and through the brain. Their a pretty good copy of the arcade weapons are capable of original destroying all active A minor moan is that on: components in the brain. the Speccy version your rider You have to guide the is the same colour as all the programs from the transmitter others black, it would've to the receiver in each sector of been nice if he had different the brain. There are nine sectors coloured leathers to make him of the ship, shown on a display stand out a bit more to the left of the main window The game is nicely presented on the game. The robot that's with a good hi-score chrt Nice you appears as a little blip. lap times/percentade of tracks. The program to is another blip. completed display as the arcade You've got to get to the machine features at the end of machine features at the end of program and get it into each game: And there's a two position. player-option as well The robot is equipped with a Enduro Racer is the best laser with which he can zap the Activision game for ages. Get it. various aliens, who can drain away his energy in suicidal \"GRAPHICS attacks on him. It's also \"SOUND equipped with a blaster to destroy walls. PLAYABILITY Martianoids is a good game, PLAYERS 882952 HI SCORE 182275 222 BATTERY 1995 PLAYERS 882952 182275 BATTERY 3 SERRAT VALUE "


"The supreme multi-rôle arcade fantasy game! Warlock The Doomlord as WARLOCK The Doomlord as TROLL The Doomlord as GOBLIN EDGE Enter arealmofdamsels, dragons, ghouls and dwarves; of castles, dungeons, caves, and of magic. As The Doomlord, you take the form of a Warlock to do battle with the forces of good. Use your magical powers to change into Goblin or Troll forms and seek the Orb of Power which will assure you of victory in final confrontation with the White Wizard! Available Now For AMSTRAD CPC .95 (tape), .95 (disc) Coming soon for C64 and Spectrum. "


"Happy Days are here again! hival Hail Riwal Pursuit THE COMPUTERCAME TOUNOPLAYERS EDITION AMSTRAD CPC RANGE THE COMPUTER GAME ATARI 48K-GENUS EDITION Trivial Pursuit Q2o THE COMPUTER GAME BABY BOOMER« EDITION MOMO BABY BOOMER\" EDITION OUT NOW After 10 major magazine awards, the best selling computer game now has 3,000 new questions for young adults. Have you got the answers? Trivial Pursuit is available on: Spectrum, CBM 64, Amstrad CPC range, Amstrad PCW, Atari 8 bit, BBC 'B' (and Master) and IBM. HORN ABBOT INTERNATIONAL ORNARE INTERNATIONAL TRIVIAL PURSUIT is a Trade Mark owned and licensed by Horn Abbot International Lid Published by Domark Limited, 22 Hartfield Road, London SW19 3TA. Tel: 01-947 5624 Trivial Pursuit was programmed by Oxford Digital Enterprises DOMARK "


"C+VG GIVE | C AUE MIEDERSEHEN 223 The world's most hunted mole island by the name of Montos won't go to waste. now becomes the most from which there is no chance Scatttered around the playing travelled mole as Monty travels of extradition. screens are plane tickets. Europe, haunted and hunted by Basically the game comes Collect the ticket and get to an the police Intermole, actually down to a real treat for platform airport and Monty can travel to in a bid to find freedom, freaks as Monty explores screen freaks as Monty explores screen another country. peace and quiet. after screen, solving easy One piece of advice. It always Yes, Monty's back in another puzzles, difficult puzzles and pays to make Monty jump up Gremlin escapade, Auf some puzzles which unless 1 and down if he appears to be in Wiedersehen Monty. had been told the answer, an impossible position with This is Gremlin's fourth don't think I'd have got in a nowhere to go. In lots of places Monty game and the title is long long time News Bounce straight up. anything to go for the last If you take the time to hap possibly out of trouble. Somehow I dont think that will out the game you find in Il you've got all the other termout to be true turns into something which Monty games then you Anyway for those who have looks like a map of Europe. probably be panting to get to encountered Monty before, Scattered around the screens gps with this one and wont here's a brief outline of his are a multitude of objects, some need much encouragement to history. useful some lethal others red get this. However, if you want a Mr Mole was locked up by the herrings ugely challenging, addictive law for taking coal to keep Each count has an aptand entertaining platform warm. He escaped and problem to solve in France game, then Auf Wiedersehen eventually fled abroad, lying Mont might ust come across Monty is the one for you. low in Gibraltar. But his safe the Mona Lisa. If he could sell it, haven has been blown and he's the money will be useful. And in GRAPHICS on the run again. The game's Monaco Monty should really SOUND challenge is to take Monty try and repair his car so he can VALUE across Europe, raising enough compete in the Grand Prix. If he PLAYABILITY money for him to buy a Greek should win, the prize money MONT MACHINE: CBM 64/SPECTRUM AMSTRAD/MSX SUPPLIER: GREMLIN GRAPHICS PRICE: .99/.99 (CBM AND AMSTRAD CASETE AND DISK)/ E7.99 (SPECTRUM/MSX) REVIEWER: PAUL W 2070 UMW 00000000003069393939 HIUSOSLAVI 1432 MONEY: 1544 SCORE: 1488 MONEY: LUXEMBOURGOGNE 35 HI 359. HIS LUXEMBOURG EXPRESS RAIDER MACHINE:C64/SPECTRUM runs out. The first couple of AMSTRAD defenders are easy to get rid of SUPPLIER:US GOLD with a few well aimed kicks and  PRICES:.99 (C64/ punches. The next guy throws AMSTRAD).99(SPEC) ALL bottles at you which are easy to DISCS .99 pretty basic. You have to fight trains. If you lose all your lives dodge. Get in close and nail him REVIEWER:TIM your way onto a train, fight your you get the option of going back with more kicks and punches way along the top of it leaping to the beginning or hitting the The one thing that really lets Yup, it's time for some rootin' from carriage to carriage, then fire button within ten seconds the game down are the sound tootin' cowboy capers arcade it's on to horseback for a rip which places you back at the effects. Silly little tunes and style. Express Raider is a mix of roaring ride up the side of end of the train where you died poor spot effects litter the martial artistry and shooting another train shooting up the with your boots on. A useful game. C+VG's Golden Joystick skills set in the Wild West. qunmen defending the gold feature this, in advanced mode winner Rob Hubbard should If you've played the game in All this has to be done within you have to go back to the have been allowed to get to the arcades you'll know how a given time limit fail and you beginning when you've lost all grips with this game. sometimes it can be ultralose a life. The good news is your five lives. Arcade addicts may find this frustrating but fun at the that you can always restart the The action begins at the conversion doesn't come up to same time. The computer game where you left off. None railhead where your cowboy scratch. version is the same. Parts of the of this back to the beginning has to battle a few goodies as Overall not a bad game but action will make you want to nonsense. the train nice graphics here the sound and frustrating bits throw your joystick at the You can play the game in any pulls out. of gameplay let it down. screen, Parts of it will have you one of three modes. Practise If you fail to beat these on the edge of your seat. mode gives you an amazing 32 railway guards-bit like the The message is that it's worth lives--but you only get to play rush hour this part--you miss GRAPHICS getting by the irritatingly the first two trains. There are the train. SOUND difficult bits just to play the rest eight in all. Beat them and you climb VALUE of the game. In the normal mode you get aboard and begin your battle to PLAYABILITY The idea behind the game is five lives and get to try all eight reach the engine before time 100 A LOOD "


"rantama Can you escapeits slimy grasp? .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 Spectrum cassette Amstrad cassette Commodore cassette Amstrad disk Commodore disk For Mail Order senda chequeo, to Howsoir Consultants Ud. Oder by Credit Card sending your Access Barclaycard number ander speemersigpaturg, Dowf forget to enclose your name and address. HEWE.ON Sob Milton Nading Estare, Milion, Abingdon, Oxon OX1440) "


"Tail ch.... PULSATOR LIVE THE GAME! emesis THE WARLOCK (200013 . luon mortech AG PULSATOR Your 'pulsator' has no choice. He has been placed in the heart of a series of frighteningly dangerous complex mazes. To escape, he must release the five missing 'Pulsies' each one a captive on a different maze layer. But he is not alone. A variety of deadly and intelligent enemy pulsators patrol the mazes, each with its own devious way of making life difficult. Blasting them to pieces will not always be the right thing to doand anyway, it's easier said than done. A fast moving and addictive game, requiring quick reactions and quick thinking. Only for those in search of a real challenge! NEMESIS THE WARLOCK Can Nemesis the Warlock fight his way through screen after screen of vicious Terminators to find and destroy Torquemada, cruel grand Master of Termight? Wave upon wave of the evil horde fall before his gun or to crushing blows from his mighty sword Execessus, but still they come. As the battle rages, Torquemada exerts his twisted influence on the scattered corpses of his demented followers and they burst grotesquely into life as deadly scythe-wielding zombies. Become Nemesis the Warlock, from 2000 AD, and enter this nightmare world you may never retum!! cosmic Sluck absorber gr COSMIC SHOCK ABSORBER You are Cosmic Shock Absorber, Saviour of the Universe (hopefully!). Time and Space is falling apart (again?). Cocooned safely in the cockpit of your CZ Neutrozapper fighter (only four repayments left) it is your job to blast your way through the different dimensions of chaos to the source of life itself, the interstellar Lake of Protozoic Slime. If you make it, the Universe may survive, and most people will pay your bills. Can Earth possibly survive? But... wait a minute... It's worse than that. In the rush to get into the thick of the action-you forgot the \"How to Repair Circuit Boards using the Phasering Iron Manual Oh No Cosmic Catastrophe!!!! WWW Disc .95 .95 Commodore 64/128 Cassette .95 .95 .95 (Pulsator & Cosmic Shock Absorber only) Spectrum Cassette Disc .95 MSX Cassette Amstrad Cassette martech Ya "


"MOTORBIKING MVA REVIEWS OO With the release of three bike racing games at once, it like Silverstone. looks like being a rich time for motorcycle freaks In race mode there are four or everywhere. So on with your helmet and hang on tight five computer racers for the low-down on the latest two-wheeled thrills on (depending on whether a one or two player game is selected), offer for the Amstrad. making a total field of six riders. SUPER CYCLE first task is to select a skill level Control is the same as Super which affects cornering ability Cycle but the program's  MACHINE: AMSTRAD CPC 464, and computer rider behaviour response is far more sluggish 664, 6128 You can also choose between with an almost unacceptable SUPPLIER: EPYX/U.S. GOLD the one and two players gap between moving the PRICE: .99 variations each of whicn can be joystick, say to the left, and REVIEWER: DAVID played under practice or full seeing your rider actually lean Yet another racing game from race conditions. and turn that way. the Epyx stable that has, in the There are twelve international Although Microids have past, brought you Pitstop and grand prix tracks to choose performed miracles on the the brilliant Pitstop ll. In terms from, each with its own set of Amstrad, if you want a really quirks and problems -novices of graphics and gameplay, SC playable two player racing offers very little to set the world are advised to start with a track game and don't mind the extra two wheels, look seriously at on fire, but it is very playable Pitstop II (Epyx/U.S. Gold) despite the fact that cassette before picking up the keys to owners must continually this one. rewind the tape to start a new game. TT RACER Once the main code has loaded you are asked to select  MACHINE: AMSTRAD CPC 464, one of three difficulty levels. 664, 6128 Choice of level affects the time SUPPLIER: DIGITAL INTEGRATION limit within which a track must PRICE: .95 be completed, as well as the REVIEWER: DAVID amount you skid round the corners. The computer riders Digital Integration has always are also less aggressive on the had a name for producing lowest skill setting. professionally designed and The bike's dashboard is a programmed games. The simple affair consisting of a Amstrad version of TT Racer speedometer, rev counter, and will do nothing but enhance a column of lights that tell you that reputation. which gear is currently selected. TT is a genuine motorcycle Control is by joystick or simulation in the mould of keyboard. Firebird's excellent Revs. Dl has Your 750cc bike will lean into A SUPER CYCLE gone to painstaking lengths to each bend with your kneebring an air of authenticity not guard only microns above the Dwa only to the program itself, but tarmac. You'll start to drift also to the comprehensive and towards the outside of a bend if well produced documentation your speed is too ambitious for that accompanies the package. any particular bend. This can be Before each race you have the particularly tricky when option of improving your negotiating a bend and trying to default grid position (10th out of overtake a computer rider at the 12 starters) by clocking a fast same time. practice lap. Although it's not Each successive track gets obligatory, you are strongly more difficult to complete with advised to take advantage of the addition of extra hazards the practice sessions as they such as road works, oil and ice give you a chance to get used to patches, and sharper bends. each track. Many tracks are also set against If you are lucky enough to new graphical backdrops have a friend with an Amstrad ranging from the cities to the you can link your two country, via the desert and Cape computers together via the Canaveral. Some tracks must be RS232 port and then race negotiated at night. against each other. The option Overall, Super Cycle has screen lets you configure one travelled well from the C64 500cc GRAND PRIX Amstrad as the 'master' and the original. It is well programmed, second as the 'slave'. The game with smooth track scrolling, is then loaded into each good sprite design and machine separately and away animation and, most you go. importantly, it is fun to play. If The pits areas appear as a you want a no nonesense bike solid yellow building at the racing game with plenty of start. When in a race of more action then look no further. than a few laps you'll need to pay them a visit to refuel and 500cc GRAND PRIX get new tyres. The number of times you do this will depend  MACHINE: AMSTRAD CPC 464. on the set up values you chose 664, 6128 for your tyres before the race. SUPPLIER: MICROIDS Although the tilting horizon is PRICE: N/A > REVIEWER: DAVID Isis OO a little jittery the overall effect of O driving TT is very realistic, making your head sway from Grand Prix is a split screen, one side to side driving you or two player driving game completely round the bend! A designed to appeal to arcade must for all lovers of racing players looking for a little extra games, simulations, and depth. As with Super Cycle, your professionally designed and ATT RACER programmed software. MW P982 REESLAP SUPER CYCLE GRAND PRIX TT RACER GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE  PLAYABILITY CO) "


"Psi5 TRADING REVIEWS (pebis) Pais) MACHINES: C64/128  SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD PRICE: .99 VERSION TESTED: C64/128 REVIEWER: CHRIS MACHINE: SPECTRUM/C64/ The secret of success in Psi 5 in each case. It's up to you to AMSTRAD lies on the ground though. If decide whether the expert with SUPPLIER: ACCOLADE you don't obtain the right crew. blasters who knows next to PRICE: .95 it'll lead to problems when nothing about missiles is a VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM you're light years from home. better bet than the multiREVIEWER: JERRY Your ship has five posts to fill, weapon expert who lacks field in different departments, and There are two ways to trade in six individuals to choose from Even more ambitious is the space. Elite placed you alone in the cockpit. Whether you were bartering or blasting, you took overall control of the situation. Psi 5 tries for an even more ambitious format, much closer to a Star Trek scenario. You become a fully fledged Captain, commanding a full crew. I doubt that there has ever been a more ambitious game on the humble Spectrum. If ever a concept cried out for disk access, this it. But until the +3 arrives, the first adventure for tape users will be coping with Psi 5's multi-load. This is made all the more tricky by an apparent crash once the crew is loaded. But don't panic; flip the tape, hit LOAD \"\", and soon you'll be ready for take off. neser candocked coren Se condorenzen OLLI AND LISSA SHADOW  MACHINE: SPECTRUM  SUPPLIER: THE EDGE PRICE: .95  VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM REVIEWER: JERRY MUIR In space, nobody can hear you scream...\"Oh no, not that lousy job!\" The lousy job in question is a reconaissance trip round the outside of a Star Class Liner, to make sure that all's ship shape. At least you only have to do it once every five years, which wouldn't be too bad if it wasn't for the fact that the on-board computer has decided to make this the week for its nervous breakdown. So there you are, all alone at \"Humans are only scared of invisible ghosts...\" This is the opening line to Firebird's new one, Olli and Lissa. The game tells the story of a millionaire who is going to ship a castle stone by stone from Scotland to the States. This would be great, but someone is living there. The dweller in question is Sir Humphrey, a very friendly ghost who plays with Olli and Lissa. He's not to keen on travelling, and so Olli and Lissa must help him. To help him, you must gather ingredients for a potion form around the castle. This potion will make Sir Humphrey invisible, so that he can scare away the big bad American. Sir H. will tell you what he requires, and a picture of it will flash in the air, showing you what it looks like. Although this is a nice touch, it's pointless because it will be the only thing around anyway. Once you know what to get, you can guide Olli around the castle, to search for the object. Once found he must take it back to Lissa, who will mix it in a pot. Guiding Olli, you will come across some not-so friendly ghosts. These ghosts must be jumped over or avoided in true 'platform' style. After returning a piece to Lissa, you will be able to search for the next object given, but you won't have to look that hard. You see all the pieces are on a different screen, which is always linked on to the last one. To make it clearer, there are eight objects, and eight screens. One object on each screen. To collect object three you must go through screens one and two first. Should you get all eight pieces, Sir H, will become visible and the game will end. The thing that grabs me though, is the compelling gameplay. Addictive, humorous and value for money are just some of the qualities of this game. A real cheap thrill! GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY (ECO-CCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOEPEEREN OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO NOO NNNNNNNANIM "


"C way that the potential crew You just need left-right and Play for a while though, and have individualised characters, select to contact a department, you'll eventually feel like detailed in their reports. Can and then a system of subCaptain Kirk, taking messages you afford to take on the menus lets you issue from the crew and learning engineering genuis who is commands. Let's suppose that whether you made the correct headstrong and has had you're happily underway when choice. Psi 5 has a few ragged arguments with superiors in the that pirate appears. Contact the edges, but it's good to see past? Will you have time to keep navigator and bring the ship to something of this scope an eye on a navigator who is a halt. Now request scanning to attempted on the Spectrum. It's slow to initiate actions and goes examine the ship. Sit tight until exciting and different, and you to pieces under stress? it tells you what you're up should give it a try. With all these decisions it against and the best choice of obviously makes sense to weapons, then move post haste GRAPHICS choose the simplest mission to to the weapons officer. Tell him SOUND VALUE start with. This won't pay too to fire at will, using the relevant PLAYABILITY much, but there's less risk of form of attack. getting lost in space or attacked by pirates if you play things safe. After that it's the treacherous second load and you're underway. Even blast off Pals is a tricky business, but at least the instructions suggest the ideal sequence, and you'd be advised to follow it. Psi 5 doesn't present you with the elaborate graphics of Elite, you can watch through the SPACE OR ENTER TO START. view-screen as that unidentified shop swoops in and lets you know that it's also unfriendly. on board Mostly though it's a mass of menus and messages, which can take a little time to learn, but at least they avoid the confusion of keys that would take an Einstein to understand. REVIEWS 0000 MACHINE: SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: MARTECH PRICE: .95  VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD REVIEWER: PAUL UCHI MATA SKIMMER the tail of a space juggernaut, when you're moving too, which of the defence drods as they and the only entry hatch lies means you have to fly into the stream out of their ports. You for'ard, in the control section. face of the enemy to blast them. even lose strength if you do Just to spice things up the Skimmers fly low, but not so nothing, which does wonder to defence mechanisms are still low that they can't flip over on h elp maintain a sense of active and under the impression their backs. This leaves them urgency! Add the maze elemen that you're a dangerous piece of less well defended, but it also to the shooting and dodging, space debris. So, they hurl serves to sneak under some and you may wonder if you everything that they've got at deck structures. It's a crucial stand any chance at all you! manoeuvre and one that you'll Time, then, to slow down and Skimming across the surface need to perfect as soon as admire the scenery for a of space liners has become an possible if you're to progress moment. Seldom has the extremely popular pursuit, from level one. Spectrum looked so bright and following the trail-blazed by The Star Class Liner has three colourful. There's been a Uridium. But don't think for one sections, all of which are revolution in Sinclair graphics, minute that Shadow Skimmeris interlinked, but not necessarily and at last ways are being yet another clone. Overcome on the surface. Apart from found to cheat the notorious the initial similarity and you're zooming round tight corners attribute clash. This is one of playing a whole new ball game. and flipping under bulkheads, the finest examples yet. The one I have in mind is you have to descend into the The hull is a mass of girders pinball cargo holds, through hatches and pipes, the mouths of If you've ever wondered what which only open when you stop boosters and unexplained deck that silver bearing feels like as it above them. By this stage you'll machinery. It even appears to ricochets off the pillars and probably suspect that the follow a logical layout, so that if sides of a pin table, wonder no designer of this Liner was a you took the screens and layed more. Your skimmer behaves in frustrated maze freak. them side by side, you'd have a just the same fashion whenever An added complication is jigsaw of a totally believable it collides with a piece of space that, before you can progress ship design. architecture. Even worse, it from one section to another, My only fear about Shadow recoils when it's hit. Suddenly you have to destroy the key Skimmer is that, once you've you find yourself bouncing defence mechanism for the solved it, it may lose some of its wildly from screen to screen. sector. The control panel, which appeal. But possibly not, Complete control is the key to surrounds the action window, because when you know your escape. Unlike the Uridium shows you what this looks like, way through the hazards, craft, which looped and soared, but it's still fairly well hidden there's always the temptation to the skimmers really feel like and has to be shot. An fine tune your performance and they're gliding just above the accidental collision destroys it go for ever faster escape times. surface, with quite deadly but doesn't open the path to acceleration but rather less freedom!  GRAPHICS accurate brakes. Such are the You only have three shields, SOUND hazards of minimal gravity. which won't last long if you  VALUE PLAYABILITY Their pulse lasers only fire insist on straying into the path I first got to grips with the Commodore 64 version of Uchi Mata towards the end of last year. I found it frustratingly difficult to get to grips with. Sadly, I've got the same problem with the Amstrad and Spectrum conversions. And they have the added disadvantage of not lookiing as good. The graphics on the Spectrum curled lips from most people who wandered past while the games were being reviewed There's a practice made which is supposed to allow you to get to grips with your opponent who won't fight back-and practice the various moves. It's here I found things starting to go wrong. The most! could get my player to do was grab his opponent's jacket. There then followed a brief shuffle as I moved the joystick about to trying to produce a spectacular throw. Somehow I never seemed to make it. The players just stood facing each other. It doesn't make for thrilling moments. Even in fight mode it seemed to be merely luck-and frantic joystick waggling which allowed me to make some sort of throw. Most of the time! ended up the victim with the only belts achieved being the ones handed out by my opponent! Spectrum Amstrad GRAPHICS 7 SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY IT 1 UNI T ON VUKO SIDO UNOR 4 INH CHU 0 "


"BARGAIN SOFTWARE: Dept. C+VG; Unit 1; 1 Esmond Road; London W4 1JG TT BUY BY 8 PHONE ORDERS OVER  DEDUCT 10% RING 01-995 2763 PRICE OUR FISTII 7.45 7.45 PRICE PROMISE If you wish to purchase any product from our list and find that you can buy the same product cheaper from another mail order company, simply enclose the lower amount, stating the name of the other company and where you saw the advert. (It must be a current issue), Price Promise does not apply to other companies *Special Offers\". SPECTRUM COMPILATIONS COMMODORE 64 R.R.P. SPEC. AND COM. 54 IMPOSSABALL 6.70 COOP METS SOLD A MILLION R.R.P. PRICE EXPRESS RAIDER GREEN BERET EITHER FIGHTER PILOT GUNSHIP (01) 14.95 11.20 SHOCK WAY RIDER MINE. PACK RAMBO JAILBREAK NEMESIS (FINAL CHALLENGE) YIE AR KUNG FU GHOSTBUSTERS SHORT CIRCUIT 8.95 6.70 GAUNTLET II (DEEPER DUNGEONS) KUNG FU MASTER HYPER SPORTS ALIENS 10TH FRAME PING PONG SABOTEUR II (AVENGING ANGEL) 7.95 5.90 SHORT CIRCUIT STARGLIDER (01) 14.95 11.20 BANGKOK KNIGHTS TRIVIAL PURSUITS (01) 14.95 11.20 SILENT SERVICE SAMURAI TRILOGY 9.95 7.45 STAINLESS STEEL EITHER EXPRESS RAIDERS (12) 9.95 SACRED ARMOUR 7.45 THE LAST NINJA PYJAMARAMA 10TH FRAME (02) 9.95 DOUBLE TAKE 5.90 7.45 FROST BYTE OF ANTIRIAD STAR RAIDERS (02) 9.95 FOOTBALL MANAGER 6.50 BATTLE OF PLANETS JET SET WILLY PAPERBOY (02) HIT PAK SPUT PERSONALITIES S.A.S. STRIKE FORCE ENDURO RACER (02) DUET TRIVIA PURSUIT 9.95 SC000 000 7.45 14.95 10.99 LEADERBOARD EXECUTIVE (12) 9.99 7.45 JAILBREAK THE LAST NINJA PFEPROY SPESORT BOMB JACK 1&1 (12) IKARI WARRIORS NEMESIS (THE FINAL CHALLENGE) (02) 8.95 ENDURO RACER 7.95 5.90 DALEYS DECATHLON MINO SHADOW CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING (D2) RANARAMA 7.95 5.90 SABRE WULF   CYBORG 9.95 7.45 SABOTEUR 7.95 5.90 JET SET WILLY SHADOWFIRE DRAGONS LAIRS I (03) 7.45 SIGMA 7 SPY HUNTER GTRON DEATH OR GLORY (02) 6.70 ARKENOID 5.90 FIRE TRACK (D2) GREYFELL SPEC. AL GREAT ESCAPE SPEC 12 CON 6.70 TOP GUN KRAKOUT 7.995.90 STAR GAMES 1 HIT PAS FOOTBALL MANAGER STAR GLIDER 14.95 10.99 WAY OF THE TIGER PACK SKY RUNNER IRON HORSE (02) 8. MOGUIGANS BOXING  BIG TROUBLE IN LITTLE CHINA BOMBJACK 1&2 9.95 7.95 BEACH HEAD # FRANK BRUNO'S BOXING 12.45 SHADOW SKIMMER MARBLE MADNESS (02) RESCUE ON FRACTULUS AIRWOLF DELTA 9.99 DECEPTOR (2) 9.99 LEADERBOARD SPEC. AND COM. 4 ACE OF ACES (62) 9.95 7.45 NEMESIS (THE WARLOCK) TERRA CRESTA 8.95 GALAXIAN 6.70 7.99 2.99 COMP. MITS 3 COMP. HITS 2 WORLD GAMES (12) 9.95 MS PACMAN 7.99 2.99 SUPER PIPUNE 2 G. CAPES STRONOMAN MASTER OF THE UNIVERSE (D2) 9.95 7.45 STAINLESS STEEL 8.95 2.99 MUTANT MONTY ELIDON THEY STOLE A MILLION (D2) 9.95 7.45 FROST BYTE HENRYS HOUSE LITHER BLAGGER GOES TO HLLYWD GAUNTLET (02) 9.95 COBRA GRIBBLYS DAY OUT CAULDRON PACK SUPER CYCLE (02) SNOOKER HEAD OVER HELS 3D LUNAR ATTACK 9.95 7.45 ONLY INSPECTOR GADGET (12) 9.99 MAMA LLAMA BUBBLER CRAZY COMETS 7.45 17.45 KRAKOUT 02 9.99 MARTIANOIDS 7.45 DYNAMITE OAK RASKEL NETHER EARTH 9.95 7.45 SIR FRED HERBERTS DUMMY RUN AQUA RACER 3.99 THE VIKINGS D2 9.95 DEFENDER 7.45 ATTACK OF MUTANT CAMELS 2.99 FRENZY RANARAMA D3 8.95 6.70 PROJECT FUTURE (CRASH SMASH) CIRCUS BASILDON BOND TRACKER 01 14.95 11.20 THE PLANETS HIGHWAY ENCOUNTERS 9.99 THE TUBE 6.70 SPECup . . SUB BATTLE SIMULATOR (D4) 9.99 7.45 SUPERBOWL 9.95 SPOT PAC TAG TEAM WRESTLING SAILING 7.45 WORLD CUP VIEW TO A KILL KARATE CHAMP INTO THE EAGLES NEST DERBY DAY FRIDAY THE 13TH SNOOKER SAMURAI TRILOGY PACK 7.99 5.90 OLYMPICS CODENAME MAT COMBAT LEADER 14.95 MANTRONIX SNOOKER THE PYRAMID WAY OF THE TIGER 9.95 EQUINOX TEST MATCH 8.95 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE DARTS BEARY & EGG SNATCHERS BIGGLES GHOSTBUSTERS 3.99 MUTANT WINTER SPORTS SPEC. O CON MOONCRESTA 8.95 COP OUT 8.95 SKYRUNNER COMET GAME JACKS SUPERSTAR URIDIUM + PARADROID 8.95 POLE POSITION 6.70 30 STARSTRIKE 7.99 2.99 ELECTRO GLIDE LEGEND OF KAGE BLUE THUNDER EITHER COBRA 8.95 MOONCRESTA SEASIDE SPECIAL SON OF BLADDER 9.95 SKYFOX AUTO MANIA VECTRON 3-D 3.99 7.95 DEACTIVATORS 2.99 INT, KARATE 6.50 SPECIAN OPERATIONS BUGARDO HUSTLER PYSTRON HERBERTS DUMMY RUN IRON HORSE 2.99 ZZAP SIZZLERS (4 TOP GAMES) 9.95 6.50 DRAGONS LAIR SPACE PILOT WHERE 7.45 ZOIDS 8.95 2.99 CHUCKIE EGG FALL GUY GHOSTCHASER 9.95 KNOT IN 3D 7.95 2.99 SORCEROR OF 2.99 BLADE ALLEY MASTERMIND 12.95 3.99 INSPECTOR GADGET 8.95 CLAYMORQUE CASTLE PENETRATOR 6.70 KENSINGTON TERRA CRESTA 7.95 3.99 SUPERBOWL 9.95 6.50 NETHER EARTH 9.95 7.45 SPEC. AND COM. 54. SCRABBLE-MONOPOLY-CLUEDO 39.00 12.00 GEOFF CAPES STRONGMAN 8.95 3.99 DURELL PACK NDOOR SPORTS SHOOT A RAPIDS 7.95 2.99 SWORDS AND SORCERY 3.99 SABOTEUR TEN PIN BOWLING CLIFF HANGER 7.95 2.99 ROMULUS 6.70 TURBO ESPRIT DARTS * WHILE STOCKS LAST. MUTANT 5.90 CRITICAL MASS 18.70 PING PONG (01) 16.50 (02) 11.20 (03) = 10.50 (04) = 21.99 COMBAT LYNX AIR HOCKEY * WHILE STOCKS LAST X ----| BARGAIN SOFTWARE ORDER FORM Please send me the following titles. BLOCK capitals please! Date..... Type of computer Name ............. Title:Amount Address ..... 7.45 9.95 3.95 2.99 NNUNGEN FISTI 12.95 Visit our new shop 538 Chiswick High Road London Tel. No. Total Enclosed  Please make cheques or postal orders payable to BARGAIN SOFTWARE Prices include P&P within the U.K: Europe please add .75 per tape: Elsewhere please add .00 extra per tape W4 "


"NOW ON OUT ATARI ST -95 Spitfire SpiLine SLine NVIRORUT A spitfire flight simulation set in 1940. ground features and realistic air combat. ALSO AVAILABLE ON COMMODORE 64, AMSTRAD, SPECTRUM 48K, ATARI AND MSX. COMING SOON ON BBC AND IBM. ST SPITFIRE FEATURES Realistic screen scrolls from cockpit window to instrument panel and back just like raising and lowering your eyes. Ground detail down to the last patchwork field! Uses filled vector graphics to produce lifelike enemy aircraft. REWARD To rise through the ranks of the RAF elite to Group Captain, VC, DSO, DFC. Mail order and catalogue requests to: MIRRORSOFT LTD., Maxwell House, 74 Worship Street, London EC2A2EN Telephone: 01-377 4644 Trade Orders to: MIRRORSOFT LTD., Purnell Book Centre, Paulton, Bristol BS18 5LQ "


"Spell times can also be obtained randomly in certain rooms at spell points. The rooms are viewed from above and remain in darkness until Mervyn actually enters them. In this way you build up a map of the game as you go along. When you kill a wizard you can then play a little sub-game in which you have to arrange the mixed up letters of Rana Rama into the correct order. Now this appears a fairly simple task. However I still haven't managed to solve it with any degree of ease. My rare successes must be put down to luck. As with Dragontorc, To triumph against adversity, RanaRama involves a high Mervyn must take on and degree of strategy. But the destroy 12 wizards who are problems are not of such a hidden in each of the game's brain-mangling order that the eight levels. There are between game grinds to a halt. 50 and 100 rooms to each level. Good fun. A hit that shouldn't packed with a myriad of troops be missed. player's guide to RanaRama. So you can see there's quite a Hewson continue to put out That will give you some idea of lot of territory to explore. good quality games with the the complexities of this game. There are eight levels of emphasis on something new To some extent Rana Rama is missiles, eight levels of power and interesting each time. a return to Turner's Dragontorc and eight types of shield for him I look forward to Steve style of a couple of years back to acquire and use. The easiest Turner's next offering. I'm sure but with a higher degree of way is to beat wizards to win it will be every bit as good as shoot'em up to cater for current their runes and then convert Rana Rama. tastes. them into the items you require. GRAPHICS Mervyn, a sorceror's The missiles, power and SOUND apprentice, has turned himself shields are all graded and the VALUE into a frog, while trying to nasties on the later levels are PLAYABILITY evade evil warlocks. graded too. RANARAMA MACHINE: CBM 64/AMSTRAD/ SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: HEWSON PRICE: .95 (CBM 64/ AMSTRAD cass), .95 (SPECTRUM), .95 (AMSTRAD disk), .95 (CBM disk) VERSION TESTED: CBM 64 REVIEWER: PAUL Elsewhere in this issue of C+VG you will have probably have seen Steve Turner's exclusive TERROR OF THE DEEP the 19th Century after a shower energy wheel, and detonator to first, but on not too close MACHINE: COMMODORE 64 of meteorites were seen falling mention just a few by moving inspection, I realised this didn't SUPPLIER: MIRRORSOFT from the skies over Loch Ness. the joystick left and right, to have the same attraction as the PRICE: .95 CASS, .95 DISK Strange creatures are later move the hands onto the other game. The graphics in this REVIEWER: LEE reported in the Loch. An various controls, and then are quite good inside the craft, eccentric engineer living by the move the stick up or down to and on the Loch map, but the When I first sat down to play shore has developed a diving operate them. You must keep sprites are fairly chunky and the this, admittedly in a semi bell and has selected you to going up for air, as well as movement is quite jerky. The drunken state, my initial explore the loch and rid the supplies and new weapons. sound is abysmal. If you don't impressions were \"My God! waters of its alien population. To find out where the aliens reach for the off switch on the Someone's trying to do a rip off You start your mission, by are, you must follow the various TV after 45 seconds, you must of The Eidolon, and failing marking on a map of the Loch, fish to the source of the energy, be as musical as Les Dawson! miserably!\" where you want to be lowered plant some bombs, move away. This is a nice idea that hasn't Anyway, after several pints of into the dank waters. When you and detonate them. At the end quite come off, which is a great caffeine had been intravenously are underwater, the view is of the game, a newspaper pity because it could have been fed into my system, I finally from inside the diving bell reports how well you did, and in excellent came to my senses, and Control of this is via your hands my case, it usually says, realised it was nothing like The which are represented on the \"Stationary Craft Attracts Eidolon, in fact it was more like screen in graphic form. You Destruction\", even though I was GRAPHICS SOUND an underwater flight control the various items of moving at the time! VALUE simulation! equipment, including a trigger As I said, this reminded me of PLAYABILITY The game is set at the close of button, a light, thrust, rudders, The Eidolon from Activision at O WHOOL doch Ness TUOBUSHU "


"Organised by Database Exhibitions Official commodore computer show ww.ba NC The countdown has started ... for the show that unveils all that's happening in the exciting world of Commodore computing Meet Jim Butterfield The guru of the Commodore world will be flying to London for the show. This is your chance to meet the man who's the leading authority on the whole CBM range. 10th Official kcommodore computer show 10am to 6pm Friday June 12 10am to 6pm Saturday June 13 10am to 4pm Sunday June 14 Champagne Suite & Exhibition Centre Novotel, Hammersmith, London W6 Advance ticket orders HE L L Please supply: 10th Official June 12-14 Adult tickets at E2 (save 1.. commodore . computer show 1987 Under-16s tickets at E1 (save E1)...... ..... Post to: Commodore Show Tickets, Total E Europa House, 68 Chester Road, Hazel Grove. Stockport SK7 5NY. Cheque enclosed made payable to Database Publications Ltd. Name Please debit my credit card account ! Send for your advance tickets today... With them you can walk past the queues and SAVE  per head off normal prices! Address ........................ ........ .. Access Visa Signed MI MI MI M Admission at door:  (adults),  (under 165) PHONE ORDERS: Show Hotline: 061-480 0171 PRESTEL ORDERS: KEY *89, THEN 614568383 MICROLINK ORDERS: MAILBOX 72:MAG001 Please quote credit card number and full address, "


"CVG HEAD OVER HEELS Oleme egon an be..ch mir And those symbiotic creatures are Head and Heels. The game opens where Head and Heels have been captured separated and jailed in the castle headquaters of Blacktooth. The two creatures are separated by a wall. They both can set out to explore their surroundings. It appears to be a good idea to unite Head and Heels. I couldn't, but that's my problem. Once together and successfully joined their icons will light up. Besides the world of Blacktooth, there are the following worlds to explore. Egyptus, a planet with the emphasis on corpses, wrappings and stone pyramids. Could this be a clue to the layout of the place? Penitientiary, the prison planet. Mountainous and hostile. Beware the pit. \"Don't fall in,\" warns the cassette notes. If only I could find the pit I'd willingly fall in. Safari, jungle, natives and traps await you. Book World, a world devoted to the emperor's love of western books. Scattered around the screens all the ones I came across were graphically immaculate are various objects which must be collected or can be used to help you negotiate the problems. MACHINE: AMSTRAD To be honest when I first SUPPLIER: OCEAN started to play Head Over Heels PRICE: .95 I wasn't too keen. Another REVIEWER: PAUL Ultimate rip-off, I thought. But before long I found myself lured At first sight of Head Over Heels into it and, quite frankly, I was I thought I was back playing having a good time. Batman, programmer Jon Ritman's last game. To tell you GRAPHICS the truth I could have been SOUND playing any of the classic C+VG VALUE Ultimate games and the horde PLAYABILITY of clones. It's very slick, very professional, very pretty and very addictive. And like Batman MACHINE: SPECTRUM 48/128 remember the massive map SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD C+VG printed?-it appears to PRICE: .99 be a huge game, packed with REVIEWER: LEE puzzles, tricks and complexities which should keep you It's about six months ago that occupied for hours. You'll Firebird released Thrust, which probably end up bald from became one of the best selling budget games in the past year. tearing your hair out! Now, Firebird has done the In fact, programmer Jon Ritman says Head Over Heels is inevitable, and released a around twice the size of sequel, Thrust 2. Batman. Gulp! How can you The game plays in virtually the same way, only the possible get all that into a computer? storyline has altered by any On to the plot. The evil great means. For those among you who like a story with your empire of Blacktooth has enslaved four worlds, games, here's the one for this subjecting their people to a rule game. of tyranny. And the empire's The Federal Resistance force expansionary dreams are not has captured a small artificially yet fulfilled created planet, which they plan and that fills neighbouring planets with a to use as a base for the next growing sense of unease. offensive against the Empire. The planet Freedom has Unfortunately, the planet is decided to send a spy into the covered with a red dust, which Blacktooth empire with the aim prevents life existing on the to ferment rebellion among the surface, and so you get the job slave planets. To do this the spy of collecting some orbs from must find the four crowns lost underground and bringing when the empire took over. help purify the atmosphere. Why I say spy I should say spies, a pair of creatures which To make your life even harder than it already is, the orbs are can operate individually but can also unite to form one entity unstable, and will explode after a short period of time, and ACIE android guards inhabit the underground caves. To complete the game, you need to collect 16 orbs in total, and then progress to another planet. The graphics, sound, gameplay, and control methods are all virtually the same as the original, although this is slightly harder. This means that the graphics are uninspiring, almost no sound, dull gameplay, and totally uncontrollable controls! Overall, if you liked the original, you may like this, otherwise steer clear even at two quid. GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY SHIELDS 125 SCORE AGENT "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES Order by credit line 01-809 4843 VISA PRICE PRICE PRICE 795 12.95 595 AMSTRAD . NESIS-02 IMPOSSABALL-02 IMPOSSABALL THE LAST NINJA DRAGONS LAR NEM SESD2 STAR RAIDERS 02 THE DOUBLE RANA RAMA_02 DRAGONS LAR-02 SLENT SERVICE VATANDOS 7.50 9.95 6.95 7.50 395 HELLCAT ACE-02 INSPECTOR LADET TRIVIAL PURSUIT TP. YOUNG PLAYERS CONFLICT INVITUNDE ACE OF ACES-02 ACADEMY TOMAHAWK-02 705 7:50 8.96 5STARTS TOP GAMES TRIVIAL PURSUIT DALEY THOMPSON SUPERTEST.02 705 FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR -02 795 REVS TRACK-03 STAR RACERS   ooral KONAMI DINOPSHITS-02 795 THE PRESIDENT FUTE-DISK STAR GAMES ONE 4 GAMES REBEL PLANET LEADERBOARD ENDURO RACER BATTLE OF BRITAIN GREEN BERET62 GANTLET-02 WHO DARES WINS 11-12 FOOTBALLER OF YEAR FA CUP T ARKANDID STARGLIDER SILENT SERVICE-02 TOMAHAWKDE FIGHT NIGHT 02 NEMESIS THE WARLOCK THAONE OF FIRE ACE OF ACES LIGHTFORCE HYDROFOOL BISMARK ARKANOID 12295 2495 22 50 BUTES PAOK KRUKOUT52 RENAGADE 2 INDOOR SPORTS 12 SENTINAL-02 NEVISSTHE WARLOCK_02 GUNSHIP .95 795 GAUNTLET URIDIUN PARADRID-02 750 TH FRAME TRIVIAL PURSUIT-04 795 GAUNTLET-DUNGEONS TAG TEAM WRESTLING 02 7 .50 DECEPTOR-02 TP YOUNG PLAYERS 0 2 5 KONUKLEUSTERS BONS JAOK-OZ WARE DOK_02 200002 SUPER SOCCER-02 790 I NARIORS 8. CLOUGH FOOTBALL-D 145 SOLDA MILLION 3 2 795 IKARI WARRIOR-02 7.95 TOMAR ALIENS US VERSION 02 7.95 ELITE HT PACK02 SARATOUR-01 12.05 PS15-TRADING COMPANY SPACE HARRIER-02 PAPER BOY02 7.50 WINTER GAMES 02 7.50 5.95 SPNail Arhite STAR GAMES ONE-GAMES-02 7.95 THE GREAT ESCAPE 8.95 EUTE 6 PACK_02 7.95 55 NAPOLIAN AT WAR LIGHTFORCE02 6.96 DERBOARD TORM DISK 5.99) 499 THE ART STUDIO DISKO 12.95 VULCAN DELTA-02 7.96 ELITE 6 PACK 02 SPACE HURIER02 SOLD A MILLION INTO THE EAGLES NEST-D2 750 RAMBO-DISK 12.98 NADADE JEWELS OF DARKNESS-02 12.95 NICK FALDOS GOLF-CASS 299 + PLAN-IT-04 12.95 6.95 SCALEXTRIC 7.96 SHOCKWAY RAIDER-D7 6 .96 NICK FALDOS GOLF-DISK 4.99 LEADERBOARD-02 INDOOR SPORTS FIRE TRACK02 7.50 ****CUDIS SUTILES. DURELL BIG 4 D1 SPY V SPY LEVIATHAN 02 7 95 HOLLYWOOD HIJINKS 2495 STAR RAIDERS 02 12.95 5.95 TLAP FIGHT 5.95 KILLED UNTIL DEAD -02 750 PORTAL_DISK 22 50 SHOCKWAYANDER 02 6.86 7.95 NICK TALDOS GOLF 2.99 LEADERBOARD EXECUTIVE -02 7.95 THE SUIMUNE 14 KEYBOARD 1945 INDOOR SPORTS-02 7.95 595 POLE POSITION LEADERBOARD-02 NEWSROOM 7.50 DESK 39 SILENT SERVICE D2 7.95 5.95 MS PACMAN GAUNTLET-D2 7.50 OESTROVERDISK 7.50 7.95 SPECTRUM PLUS 2 LEAD 4.99 GAUNTLET-DUNGEONSD-6,99) 4.99 FLIGHT SIMULATORIIDISK 45.00 VULCAN 795 5.95 COMP PRO INTERFACE ENDURO RACER-02 9.95 BATTLEFIELD GERMANY 03 10.95 FAST HACK'EM KEMPSTON INTERFACE ACE OF ACES-D2 TOBRUK02 7.50  ACTION HEPLAY MK II 2995 7 95 TURBO INTERFACE TT IMER-02 18.00 THE LAST NINJA 2 7.50 THE FINAL CARTRIDGE 39.95 GAUNTLET02 750 5.99 MULTIFACE 128 44.95 AUF WEIDERSHEN 02 750 THE POWER CARTRIDGE 39 95 GAUNTLET DUNGEONS D-06.9999 SPECTRUM 128K TITLES SUPER SOCCER 695 THE EXPERT CARTRIDGE ESM 37 50 ATTLEFIELD GERMANY-03 10.05 ARTIST TOMAHAWK_02 7.50 FREEZE FRAME MI INTO THE EAGLES NEST 02 595 5.99 TAU CETI 7.95 SAILING 750 FREZE FRAME LAZER MULTIFACE 6.98 THE WRITER 125 FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR-02 7.50 QUICK DISK HEAD OVER HEELS 5.95 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT BISMARK02 GRAPHE 11.95 HARI WARRIORS -12 750 DISC DISCETOR VS TRIVIAL PURSUIT OCW 1750 7.50 STARS ON 123L GAMES 7.95 SABOTEURS 595 DOLPHIN DOS-10 1236996 BATMANPOW 12.95 10 95 UTTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE HEAD OVER HEELS-02 TOMA PCW) 1750 STALDER 1295 OKAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING -02 7.50 BEPLODING RST 22.50 105 PARIORS WINTERGAS 7.95 EUTE 03 12.95 KOKAMIONOPHTS 7.95 PROTOCAL SUCON DREAMS-04 125 LITE HIT PACK 1595 ALSO AVAILABLE ON DISK FORMAT D1=.95, D2=.95, D3=.95, D4-.50, D5=.50 BALANCE DF POWER PHANTASTIE 1 GAUNTLET UBERATOR AUF WIEDERSELEN MONTY KONAMI COIN HITS HEAD OVER HEELS THEATRE EUROPE DRUELL BIG 4  WORLD GAMES TRIVIAL PURSUITS SAILING INTO THE FAGLES NEST ELITE HIT PACK 10 95 GREEN BERETROM HEAD OVER HEELS WINTER GAMES GAUNTLET DUNGEONS 9 ANY KONAM CARTRIDGES 795 17.95 QUICKSHOT PLUS 5.95 \"VERCENARY CYRUSS 2 CHESS COMP PRO 5000 1496 EUROMAX PROFESSIONAL PLUS 19.96 THE TUBE CHEETAH MACH 1 BATTLEFELD GERMANY QUICK SHOT PLUS FOR MAIL ORDER CUSTOMERS PLEASE SEND CHEQ P.O. TO: S.C.S. (DEPT CVG1) 655 GREEN LANES. LONDON NB OOX P&P INCLUDED IN U.K. EUROPE ADD CI PER ITEM ELSEWHERE ADD L2 PER ITEM. SEND A SAE FOR FREE LIST C64 C16 SPEC AMSTRAD BBC MSX ATARI PERSONAL CALLERS PLEASE PRODUCE THIS ADVERT AT OUR SHOP FOR ABOVE DISCOUNTS TO SHEKHANA AT COMPUCENTRE, UNIT 5. 221. TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD, LONDON WIR QAF NEAREST TUBE STN GOODGE STOPEN 6 DAYS A WEEK 10.00AM 18.00PM (-DENOTES ITEMS ONLY AVAILABLE ON MAIL ORDER ACCESS AND VISA CARD ORDERS 01-340-8565 01-631-4627 DESPATCHED SAME DAY SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY *ALL NEW RELEASES ARE SUBJECT TO RELEASE DATES FROM SOFTWARE HOUSES PLEASE RING TO CONFIRM AVAILABILITY Pilot The World's Most Exciting Fighter Aircraft A CRASH SMASH, A ZZAP GOLD MEDAL AND NOW.. 20% OFF YOUR FIRST ORDER (Limited period only) UTILITY OF THE YEAR 10% DISCOUNT OFF ALL SOFTWARE IN INITIAL ORDERS Popular Computing Weekly Send large SAE for details FREE JOYSTICK TO ALL NEW MEMBERS Student THE GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR FROM INCENTIVE 600 I WANT ONE! PLEASE RUSH ME (post free) For my: AMSTRAD CPCD BBC BD COMMODORE 64 ELECTRON MASTER I SPECTRUM D MARCAYARD The Graphic Adventure Creator Tape .95 Disc .95 VISA The Adventure Creator (Electron, BBC B or Master) .95 Accessories The G.A.C. Adventure Writers Handbook packed with information (48pp) .25 The G.A.C. Designer Pad 200 pages double sided .20 D Medallion Adventures The Legend of Apache Gold by Peter Torrance .950 Winter Wonderland .950 Free Posters Colour Posters Free with any order I enclose a cheque P/O for ....................... ... or please debit my Credit Card | Computer Flight Simulation Association 17 High Street, Tattershall, Lincs, LN4 4LE. Telephone: (0526) 42113 Name Address incentive ALDERMASTON, BERKS. RG7 4QW. 2 MINERVA HOUSE, CALLEVA PARK, SOFTWARE LTD TELEPHONE (07356) 77288. "


"WARLOCK REVIEWS MACHINE: AMSTRAD CPC 464. 664, 6128 SUPPLIER: THE EDGE PRICE: PRICE: .95 VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD DISK REVIEWER: DAVID Things had been fairly cushy around the Fallen World for a century or two. As Doomlord of all things despicable, you had filled the post with admirable efficiency and ease. That is until the army of light, lead by that pussy-foot, The Light Wizard, started butting in where they weren't welcome-namely in your back yard! Not only has that horrid band had the affrontary to convert of goody-goodies penetrated most of your faithful and evil the defences of your castle, staff to the light. Uahl Patently 'Doomrock' but they've even this can't go on, something 900 must be done before it's too late. So now the army of light, not to mention half your trusted MACHINES: SPECTRUM/C64/ AMSTRAD/IBM/MSX SUPPLIER: MASTERTRONIC PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: TIM AMAUROTE The spectre of Ultimate rears its head again in this new budget Foldase From Mastertronic. Not quite as stylish as their last biggie, Fued, but reasonably playable to say the least! Amaurote uses 3D isometric graphics to depict a vast futuristic city. The object of the game is to destroy twenty five insect colonies. At least 60% of the city must remain intact on the destruction of each colony for the player to continue to the next district. The player is equipped with an Arachnus 4 armoured car la mechanical device with legs instead of wheels) and a small supply of \"anti-everything\" bombs. The bomb can be fired from the car at a variable angle and will continue to bounce until they hit either an insect or a building the latter are extremely fragile so the bombs must be aimed carefully). The car can only carry a limited number of bombs so the player must return periodically to the city gates for fresh supplies, and, if necessary, repairs to the Arachnus. The 25 districts of Amaurote are Tanelorn, Gotham Heliopolis, Palatine, Vilmir, Ur, Capitoline, Agrippa, Canaan, Kaneloon, Traal, Dhakos, Esquiline, Offerton, Aventine, Valeron, Garathorm, Plato, Caelian, Ionia, Quirinal, Golam, Klant, Imrryr and Viminal. Each district covers the cannot be replaced, the Queen equivalent of one hundred should be the player's main Screens although the play target, area is continuous so there are The Queen has two roles to no such divisions. play in the colony. Firstly, she The layout of each district is gives orders to the Drones unique (there are no repeated acting on information provided screens) and different building by the Scouts: these could be to, are more prominent in different collect food or to attack an parts of the city intruder (the player). On the destruction of an The Queen's other role is to insect colony the player may breed; whenever an insect is progress to any adjacent district killed, the Queen will create a making careful route-planning replacement. essential). The Queen will usually be There are four basic types of found near the centre of the insect, each with its own colony and, as she is immobile characteristics and purpose in and therefore vunerable, but life, they are: The Queen, she will always be heavily Drones, Scouts and Rogues. guarded. The Queen is the most The Drones are the most important insect in the colony. If common and least intelligent of the Queen is destroyed then the the insects. They take their whole colony is thrown into orders directly from the Queen, chaos. The Queen is the only rarely making decisions for insect in the colony which themselves. Their job is to collect food for the Queen and to defend the colony from outsiders. If you move too close to a Drone it will attack and continue to attack until either it or you, is destroyed. Drones are the strongest of the insects, it may take two or three direct shots to kill them. Scouts are the only insects with the ability to fly. They are the Queen's information gatherers, they fly around the city searching for potential, food supplies. Scouts will not attack the player but they must be avoided as they will tell the Queen of the player's whereabouts. If attacked, a Scout will retaliate but they are the weakest of the insects and are easily destroyed. Killing a Scout also means that any information it carries will be lost. Amaurote is an absorbing game, if you're into taking time and trouble to get through to the end. It's a bit short on frantic action thoughand the graphics, although well drawn, get a bit repetitive after the first few districts. A game for players with time on their hands and an attention span longer than half an hour. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY NON BODO "


"demons and ghouls (you just find it, the White Wizard would can't get the staff these days!), be putty in your hands ... are out to get you, and banish Warlock is a pretty, isometric the Darkness from the Fallen arcade adventure in which you World forever-perish the must take The Doomlord thought. And so, single-handed around his castle picking up you are about to bodly take on objects along the way, until you the hoards of Good. find the Orb. Then it's off to find Luckily, you had an inkling and defeat The White Wizard, something was afoot so, just in then home for tea. case, you've left a number of Unlike Fairlight, also from changling potions dotted about The Edge, almost the entire the castle. These marvelous screen in Warlock is taken up by concoctions allow you to some of the larger locations in change from one of your three the castle, but the refresh time forms to another, depending on between screens is still a little the colour of the bottle. Thus slow. you can change from your The effect is one of being current state as a warlock, into a deep down in a dingy dungeon troll or a goblin, each of which flanked by solid walls made out has differing powers and of immovable granite-very weaknesses. . atmospheric. Sometimes, The main difference between though, it's a little difficult to your three states lies in the see, or line up in front of, a few amount you can throw your of the exits. weight about versus your In the bottom corners of the strength in the magic screen are the remaining lives department. As a troll, for and inventory displays together instance, you could take on with 'Magic' and 'Might' meters Geoff Capes with your little which help you decide when to finger but couldn't pop the take on all-comers and when to proverbial rabbit out of a hat. As back away and look for a warlock, however, you could something tasty to give you probably give Paul Daniels a more energy. good run for his money but Castle rooms are often you're blessed with margarine divided by walls, made from muscles! lines of stone blocks. In some One problem remains, where cases these blocks can be did you leave that 'Orb of destroyed to make a path Power' thingy? If only you could through to the other side of the room. Trap doors allow you to drop down to the floor below, while stepping on a pentagram will send you back up again. Other Intense Magic Places act as transporters to other parts of the castle but, be warned, these are not always reversible. Although some objects supplement your might or magic levels, others have the opposite effect and it is important to discover which objects do which to stand any chance of defeating The White Wizard. Some room exits are locked and can only be negotiated with the aid of a key. Unfortunately the door locks again afterwards, so another key is needed to go that way again. Some doors are only locked in one direction and can be freely used when going the other way. With reasonable sound and music, good graphic design, easy keyboard or joystick control, Warlock is yet another in a string of professionally put together titles from The Edge who seem to go from strength to strength. REVIEWS MACHINE: SPECTRUM 48/128 SUPPLIER: U.S. GOLD PRICE: E9.99 REVIEWER: BRIAN CHO GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY MACHINES: C64 & AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: ACTIVISION PRICE: .95 CASS VERSION TESTED: C64 REVIEWER: CHRIS The 5th Axis made its debut on the Amstrad about nine months ago, and was quite good. The game is set in the future, and has the universe all worried about its existence. You see, this professer bloke built a time machine, and used it to collect artifacts from different times. What's wrong with a bit of the ol' time travelling? Well, while on one of his many shopping sprees, his machine exploded, and scattered itself about everywhere, and I mean everywhere! The world is now mixed up. and you must go and straighten things out, collect the parts of the machine, and return the artifacts to there corresponding time zones. To travel back and forward through time, you must use a new teleporter, which has just been invented. Very convenient. By running about collecting the souvenirs the Prof brought back, you can the transfer them back home. The teleport won't be active until you have collected all the right objects or when you kill enough of the professer's robots. These droids, built to aid the Professor, will go mad and attack you on sight. You must use your skills in the martial arts to overcome them. Once you have completed stage one, you will be teleported through time to recover a piece of the time machine. If you succeed, you will be show the piece and then you can continue collecting items. Fail and you will have to go through the last stage again. Each of the time zones has different graphics, but the lab remains the same, naturally. The graphics are quite good in some places, particually on the main character animation. He jumps and kicks very well in a sort of Impossible Mission style. The sound comes in the form of two annoying tunes, the first one's not too bad. Not up to the usual standard though. The game played better on the Amstrad, but that doesn't mean the 64 version is bad, just not as good as the original. Check it out, but don't expect too much. About eight months ago U.S. Gold said they were going to release Leaderboard on the Spectrum. An impossible task thought, but after numerous delays they have finally done it. Not only have they done the impossible but they also get full marks on this fantastic conversion. Considering the limitations of the Spectrum, U.S. Gold has produced the best sports simulation ever seen on this machine. The gameplay of Leaderboard has not changed from conversion to conversion and is very easy to get to grips with. I have been hooked on Leaderboard ever since my first stroke of the ball and now! enjoy playing all four versions of it, soon to be five when the Amstrad version is released. Leaderboard is a golf game which gives a true three dimensional perspective view of the course from behind your man. There are four courses included each consisting of 18 holes, so those of you who bought Konami Golf, throw it away and rush out for the number one choice. The club selection is from a 1W down to a PW. When you have chosen your club the strength of your shot has to be judged by means of a rising guage. After the strength comes the hook or slice which is the hardest bit to judge as the gauge falls so fast. Once you are on the green you are given a putter and have to judge the slope of the green by means of a stick in the ground and a shadow. The putter can hit the ball up to a maximum of 64 feet but can be more downhill. When everyone has holed out a score card is displayed for each player one after the other to chart your progress, then it is ont the next hole. Full marks have to go to U.S. Gold on this excellent conversion of a CBM64 classic which could have easily turned out to be utter rubbish. LEADERBOARD LEADERBO GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY LOC . NAHEILLES CHO OM GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY "


"CHINE  ATARI HITS 7 REVIEWS version is very good. The average for an Atari game but it sound and graphics are dated animation on the title screen is is four years old. The game has but that is expected for a four of the highest quality, especially a very high level of year old game. the flag waving in the wind. The addictiveness because you just Now if you want a change idea of the game is to race keep playing to see Freddy steal from the arcade element then against time around three a kiss from Felicia. Colossus Chess 3.0 is for you, different countries, with three Blue Max is another famous chess is not one of my strongest different types of steering game for the Atari and is again points as the computer found control. To hinder you on your four years old. The objective is out, it kept beating me. The progress are three dimensional to make a final assault on three instructions are concise and hazards which smash into you. specially marked targets within well set out. The board display This include a bouncing ball, a the city, you have only one is clear and easy to follow, even rotating triangle and cylinders plane and very little time to for beginners to chess. which are dropped from a accomplish the mission. On The program has got a very plane. completion you will be good reputation and is highly The music that plays while rewarded by the title \"THE recommended if you want a MACHINE: ATARI 400/800/XL/ you are racing is excellent and BLUE MAX\". This may sound good game of chess. The | XE 48K shows the music capabilities of easy but you have everything SUPPLIER: ENGLISH program allows you to record SOFTWARE the Atari at its best. Elektra Glide against you, ie, planes and antiupto 90 games on one side off a PRICE: CASSETTE .95, DISC is well worth its place on any aircraft guns. disk, so you do not have to .95 compilation, but this is its third You are able to bomb the finish the game in one sitting. REVIEWER: BRIAN time and in my opinion is too targets or go on a bombing run Smash Hits 7 comes highly much. and shoot the enemy planes recommended English Software seem to be Alley Cat is a total surprise to down during the numerous bringing out a compilation find on a compilation like this, I dogfights. At certain intervals a GRAPHICS every three to four months on for one had never heard of it chance is given to land so SOUND CHO VALUE the Atari. Atari Smash Hits was before, but I do enjoy playing it. damage can be repaired and the PLAYABILITY released about October and The idea is you play the part off plane rearm and refuel. The now Smash Hits 7 is on the Freddy the cat and have to steel market. The only problem with kisses from your beloved these compilations is that one Felicia. To succeed in this game appears on them about certain tasks must be three times. It was Jet Boot Jack performed to show your on the very first three Smash courage to Felicia. If you do Hits, now it is the time of complete a task you are given Elektra Glide, which has the chance to steal a kiss and appeared on Smash Hits 5,6 progress to the next level. The and 7. tasks vary from having to chase The other titles included on four mice out off a piece of this compilation are as follows: cheese to eating twelve goldfish Colossus Chess 3.0, Blue Max while avoiding electric eels in a and Alley Cat. The latter of goldfish bowl. If you stay on the these titles I have never heard ground too long you will be of before and it turns out to be a caught in a fight with Bowser T: 000850 GO good game. the dog. To hinder you is the Elektra Glide will be the most mad housekeeper's broom famous title out of the four. On which will sometimes call on the CBM64 I found this game a Bowser for help. bit of a let down, but the Atari The graphics and sound are MACHINES: BBC/ELECTRON left scattered around the place. There's also an energy meter SUPPLIER: AUDIOGENIC he can assemble it and use it to which shows you how fast SOFTWARE destroy the villain. Spreco is tiring and a box which PRICE: .95 (TAPE) .95 (DISK) This is a big game. There are displays the objects he's VERSION TESTED: BBC 130 locations (although I have carrying. It also gives your REVIEWER: NICKY to take the author's word for current score. that!) featuring a variety of The graphics are up to the As you might imagine from the creatures (friendly and standard of Thunderstrucktitle, this is the sequel to otherwise), hazards, objects to colourful, lively and smooth, Thunderstruck, wherein our pick up and use, and of course and the sound is OK. Like hero Spreco, the Space Refuse puzzles. Thunderstruck, though, I found Collector, found himself in a Apart from the usual keys for one or two glitches. I got caught medieval castle with puzzles to moving Spreco around (left, in an apparent dead end, and solve. right, up ladder, down ladder the only way I could get out of it Now the intergalactic and jump), you can also pick up and play again was to reload dustman is back home at the and drop objects and use the the lengthy-tape. Droidcorp factory complex on computer consoles scattered Annoying. Homebase 5, where there's just around the place. These are But there's plenty going on one snag all the humans rather a novel idea. When and plenty to do, and the game have been enslaved by the you're standing in front of one, could keep you going for a good rotten old Mindmaster, who you can examine the objects long time. now controls the complex. you're carrying, find out your Spreco has one chance to turn location, give an object to any GRAPHICS the tables. If he can find the four droids, machines or aliens that SOUND pieces of the Deacti-Unit which might be nearby, and take it VALUE the Mindmaster has carelessly back again. PLAYABILITY "


"21st CENTURY WARRIOR: Apache GUNSHIP See your software dealer today and become a part of the GUNSHIP adventure! Challenge the enemy, the sky, and YOURSELF with this extraordinary simulation GUNSHIP for Commodore 64/128. Cassette .95. Disk .95. The Apache ....Fierce and elusive, like its warrior namesake... Capable of defeating enemy tanks, infantry, and hostile aircraft on the modern electronic battlefield. Gunship's revolutionary 3-D graphics enable you, the pilot, to fly into the world's hottest trouble spots... You'll use an unbelievable array of high tech information and weapon systems, including lasers, video cameras, night viewers, radar warnings. lammers, computers, missiles, rockets Hares and a 30mm cannon! Successful missions will be rewarded with medals and rank promotions. Experience the danger and excitement of attack helicopter action your latest adventure in the ever-growing line of MicroProse Simulation Software. MICROPROSE SIMULATION SOFTWARE MICROPROSE SOFTWARE LIMITED. 2 MARKET PLACE TETBURY, GLOUCESTERSHIRE GL8 8DA. TEL: (0666) 54326. TEX 43422 MPS/UKG "


"PRESIDENT OOUUUTOBU . . 0. 0 ooo: 00 of day around the time of the PCW Show back in September. President is an update of all those \"run your own country games\" such as Kingdom and Dictator which were around about five years ago. The President, however, is a lot slicker. The setting is an unknown country, possibly Middle Eastern judging from the MACHINE: AMSTRAD, amount of oil, sand and tanks SPECTRUM/CBM 64 around the place. SUPPLIER: ADDICTIVE You have an initial choice of PRICE: .95 (AMSTRAD/CBM whether you want your country CASS) .95 (SPECTRUM) .95 to be poor, of medium wealth or (CBM DISC) filthy rich. The term of your REVIEWER: PAUL presidency before facing the electorate is two years or 24 Something tells me the complete moves of the game. POSITION THE POINTER peasants are not took keen on The monthly duties involve THEN PRESS (FIRE> my style of leadership. The oil exploration and latest opinion poll says they development, planning for and hate me. Must be something to fighting off attacks by hostile do with the war, famine, countries, food production, disease and my-sorry-our looking after the health of the *** OIL SUPPLY CONTRACT *** country's rather healthy bank nation, finding and fulfilling balance. contracts from other countries COUNTRY: UK Still the United Nations to supply oil, wheeling and THIS CONTRACT REQUIRES THE seems pretty keen on me. They dealing on the gold and reckon I'm a good leader. That currency markets. It's really like SUPPLY OF 2 KILOBARRELS makes a change from the a complicated juggling act. And PER MONTH accusations of tyranny they AT A UNIT PRICE OF K$ 57 at the same time you've got to were throwing at me last year. keep an eye on what your LENGTH OF CONTRACT = 4 MONTHS With just one month to go people think. Policies which you before I face the electorate with may be convinced will benefit N.B, FAILURE TO SUPPLY IN my main opposition party your country may tend to be FULL HILL RESULT IN IMMEDIATE sitting rather comfortably on a incredibly unpopular. CONTRACT TERMINATION 96 per cent lead in the polis, Strategy is everything in this somehow get the feeling I won't game. The graphics and sound SPOT MARKET PRICE = K$ SO be enjoying a second term of are really worth mentioning. office. Sent into a exile at an Who was it that said \"a day is KILOBARRELS REMAINING AFTER early age. a long time in politics\". Well CONTRACT SALES Well power is the name of the two years of being President game in Kevin \"Football seemed an awful lot longer. In DO YOU ACCEPT? YES NO Manager\" Toms' latest offering, many ways the fun extracted coping with economic survival, from this game is the same sort football team it may well be defence, health, famine and of fun people get from Football worth your while stepping up in GRAPHICS SOUND getting votes. It's been a long Manager -and that is a the power stakes. My own VALUE time coming as well. It was massive selling game. So if you tastes are for something a little PLAYABILITY originally meant to see the light loved managing your own more exciting. MACHINE: SPECTRUM/CBM64  SUPPLIER: MELBOURNE HOUSE PRICE: .95 VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM REVIEWER: PAUL things conspire to make Fist Il cassette contains the game really annoying. program, Side Two a combat First of all the cassette case practice program. Fairly disintigrates on first opening straightforward you would The flimsy plastic hinge had think except that the cassette broken. Okay that happens a lot label has been stuck on the these days, Side One of the wrong side of the cassette. So I loved The Way of the Exploding Fist when it came out on the Commodore 64. It was magnificent. A joy forever. Other versions on other machines, however, failed to match it. The long-awaited Fistill on the 64 was quite frankly a disappointment. Gone was the frantic action, replaced by a lot of pointless wandering broken up by a few fights. There was no sparkle, nothing to make you gasp. The legend of Fist was tarnished Sadly the Spectrum conversion of Fist Il does nothing to restore that legend. If it had just been a mediocre game which it is when compared to other martial arts games that would have been just about acceptable. But other when you loaded the game you got combat practice and viceversa. Very annoying. I was quite pleased I hadn't forked out any money for this. The idea of the game is to rid your land of an evil warlord. Again you get the same pointless wanderings or rather running about broken up by a few fights, attacks by panthers, collect scrolls, blah, blab, blah The fights at least are similar to the old Fist. All the same moves, punches, kicks, leaps etc. That's some compensation -except that during one fight my oppenent appeared to seize up giving me an easy and very boring target. Fist. Il is too lightweight to stand comparison with The Way of the Exploding Fist. All things must pass. Sad but true GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY "


"IREBIRDSOFIWAL, FIRST ELDOR Available for BBC B and soon for AMSTRAD CPC SERIES EBM 64/128 SPEETRUM 48/128 PRICED: .95 CASSETTE .95 DISC CCBM, BBC) .95 DISC AMSTRAD) FIREBIRD IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF BRITISH TELECOMMUNICA1IONS PLC PORNO || OCOIN FIREBIRD GOLD "


"C+VG 333333333333 MAGIC MADNESS control system. You activate the one shown in the top left hand corner with the space bar. There's lots of stuff at the top of the screen which can demand too much attention when you're trying to get out of tight spots. But this is a minor quibble. There are seven nasties not including Colo. They are: Marhko: Armed with a solid cudgel, he kills on contact. Not affected by shooting. Goblin: Has a severe bite. Use any weapon to kill it! Merry Goblin: Happily runs towards you and sprinkles an icy fluid to freeze your magic weapon! Use the Cross to fight him until the fluid evaporates. Skeleton: Turns you into dust on touch. It can't be destroyed by shooting or fire. Lift Genie: Desperately tries to catch you and take you down two levels. It can't be shot, but can be dodged. Nicholas: He is very dangerous. You will get 5000 points when you kill him and release birds worth 1000 points. As we've already mentioned, the game takes place on three scrolling levels. You have to explore all of them thoroughly in order to discover the four scrolls. And you need all four to defeat Colo. The graphics are colourful, the sounds are good and game play is great! Get it it's magic! MACHINE: C64/128 clouded over and with a You will have to search right SUPPLIER: ANCO deafening roar. Colo the through the cavern to find the PRICE: .95 sorcerer appeared. Powerful guardian Ant Eater, who will REVIEWER: TIM and wicked, he stole the scrolls hand over the scroll to you. and killed the magicians. The You can jump or drop to This is the best Anco release for nightmare had began. different levels in the burrow. ages. It's a fun, very playable The people of Neverland During your search, you will and extremely addictive remembered a good witch and come across chests. The chests scrolling arcade adventure with asked her for help to destroy may contain bonus points or enough features to keep you Colo. They presented her with time or a balloon to help you glued to the screen for hours. four items: a cape, a cross, a climb a level or a magic And at just .95 it's a real wand and a sand glass. weapon. bargain buy. She has to enter Colo's Use the magic weapons to The plot goes like this. A long burrow, which is well guarded exterminate Colo's henchmen. time ago, in a country called by his hench men, recover the Sounds easy. But it isn't. And And Neverland, four magicians scrolls and then destroy Colo. you'll have a whole lot of fun ruled and each one of them The burrow consists of four attempting to bring sweetness derived his knowledge from a levels: Divine, Forest, Caverns and light back to Neverland magic scroll. and Ice. One scroll is hidden at it will take you a bit of time to One day, the bright sky each level. work out the magic weapon CHVG GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY time to VAUND THE SYDNEY AFFAIR MACHINE: SPECTRUM/MSX1/ Vera Cruz, but this is a touch Witness B provides you with The only thing I don't like MSX2/AMSTRAD more sophisticated. information that you can use about The Sidney Affair is the SUPPLIER: INFOGRAMMES There are two scenes of crime this to get more out of Witness title. It sounds like an Australian PRICE: E9.95 to investigate the scene SA VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM love-match. Apart from that, it's REVIEWER: PAUL around the body of the victim. You can compare an alibi or a highly entertaining game. Mr Sidney, and the room where other evidence of one person Right. In the grand tradition of the shot was fired. with certain facts collected the whodunit I will reveal the You control a magnifying during the investigation. But murderer right at the end of this glass to zoom in on the clues. In this comparison can only be review. Oh no! Don't say I'm the man's wallet you'll find carried out on the basis of a going to run out of space! The what can best be described as a statement. You can also carry murderer was. compromising photograph. out different examinations for Could this be a reason for the example a ballistic or autopsy.  GRAPHICS killing? Once you are certain of SOUND In the room there are more someone's guilt, it only remains VALUE PLAYABILITY clues to be had a fingerprint for you to make an arrest. and bullet cartridge, for instance, Once you have discovered all A man's head appears in the of the clues you move on to the sights of a gun. A shot is fired. A second part of the game where crimson bullethole appears in you can interview witnesses his forehead and he slumps to and suspects and use the police the floor. Sirens begin to wail. Diamond Network Computer The scene switches. The man This enables you to lies dead on the pavement, his communicate with other police briefcase by his side. services, justice departments, As a Detective Sergeant in the prison administrations and the Crime Squad in the St Etienne National Police. (Loire) police you must track Unlike Vera Cruz, in the down the killer. Yes, this is S idney Affair you can interview another murder hunt from the people, providing you can find mind of former French them, more than once. For policeman Gilles Blancon. It's instance, Witness A will tell you similar to his previous game, something. But it is only when "


"EQUALISER+ TERMINATOR REVIEWS MACHINE: C64  SUPPLIER: POWERHOUSE  PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: TIM MICRO don't let them gang up on you and watch out for the flying birds who drop rocks in later screens. Reminded me a bit of Ghosts n'Goblins without the horror element. Equaliser is a really playable game, great value at this price. Which can't really be said of Gavin's other offering Terminator. This is a Uridium clone without the slickness of the C+VG game of the year. Once again it's a horizontally scrolling shoot'em up with a Scramble-type landscapes. The alien nasties are pretty fast moving which is why you need the joystick response to be a bit faster than it is. This really spoils what could be a nice cheapo blaster. Again graphics and sound are good and there are some Uridium style frills-like the fruit-machine type sub-game and the scrolling intro screens. Equaliser is the best of these two offerings by far. Well worth a couple of quid of anyone's money. And you get an audio track after the games some synthesised house music. Turn down the computer and groove along to these sounds instead! Who's a little sneaky software house then? Getting a version of Wonder Boy, called Equaliser that arcade oddity, out before the official version hits the shelves. Still, at just .99 it's a great debut for a new budget label, Powerhouse. Equaliser has been written for Powerhouse by Gavin Raeburn who is obviously into arcade games in a big way 'cos he says one of his new projects will be a version of Tony Takoushi's fave game I, Robot. Still, back to Equaliser, which isn't anything to do with that awful TV show of the same name. In fact the star of this computer version is a lot younger than the pensioner who wobbles around the streets of New York on TV. In fact his favourite streetwear appears to be an oversized nappy. But enough of these fashion notes, on with the game. Which is pretty nifty really. It's a scrolling platform style of game with a nice driving soundtrack and pretty graphics. Basically you have to guide the Equaliser through a series of scenarios, fighting off nasties and leaping chasms, all in search of your captured girlfriend. You can zap the nasties but TRIVIA Equaliser Terminator Graphics 77 Sound 7 7 Value 87 Playability  6 MACHINE: AMSTRAD PCW 8256/8512 SUPPLIER: HAROLD GALE ASSOCIATES PRICE: .77  VERSION TESTED: DISK REVIEWER: DAVID BISHOP Another trivia game, this time borrowing the noughts and crosses principal of getting a horizontal, vertical, or diagonal line of three correct answers. Micro Trivia is for one player only, a dangerous limitation for any game of this type as one of the prime attractions of trivia games is that they give a group of people the chance to show off to each other just how smart they are (or aren't). At the start of the game you are invited to set the timer at anything between one and 20 seconds. This determines how long you have to answwer each question, but it wasn't clear if you could get a better score using a shorter time limit. Once the timer is set, a three times three matrix of nine squares appears. Select your question by typing a number between one and nine (each relating to one of the nine squares). Each question is accompanied by four answers, one of which is correct. Your score is not shown until you have made a line. Each answer you get right gives you a plus score while wrong answers score minus points. The number of points scored depends on the speed with which you answer. When it becomes impossible to make a winning line, the game is unceremoniously bought to a premature end and your embarassingly puny score will be displayed. The game comes with a 1,000 'pot luck' questions of varying difficulty. Further disks, each with 1,000 more questions on specific subjects, are advertised in the instructions. Subjects include sport, soaps, TV and music. Micro Trivia is a nice variation on the trivia theme but, with only 1,000 questions on the disk and a similar number on each of the add ons, there must be cheaper ways of discovering the level of your mental agility.  GRAPHICS NA SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY a OOR D00000 Terminator REN 0 US NA "


"MUNCHER on eight planets. To stop this happening, you must fly to the final planet, and collect a cargo of alien weedkiller, codenamed Agent Orange. You start with one mothership, and eight daughter vessels, but if you play well, you can sell any successful crops, and buy better ships from your home planet. When you arrive at a planet, you must blast any aliens that are trying to plant more deadly seeds, and so stop the decaying of any valuable crops. When you fly over fertile soil with the fire button depressed, a seed is planted, and if it reaches a ripe stage, it can be picked I'm sorry to say, but this is almost as bad as Wibstars, also from An F. The screen is neither flick screen, nor scrolling, it's a sort of mixture of both. The screen stays stationary, but then scrolls to the next area. Very weird, and very infuriating, especially if PLAN B wa MAD NURSE AGENT ORANGE SELECT OPTION BE DLSURD UM OnuCARCO LEVEL LOCATION SCORE BOMBS HIPS at the bars of their cages. Once free the race off towards a rescue helicopter. If they MACHINE: AMSTRAD CPC 484. encounter a droid they end up 564, and 6128 back in their cage.  SUPPLIER: BUBBLE BUS Butch Hard Guy is fun but PRICE: .99 really not different enough to > VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD set the world on fire. It would TAPE have been better as a budget REVIEWER: DAVID game. You do, however, get a free Butch Hard Guy badge with Continuing its aptly named the game. Wow! 'Mini Bus' line of budget games, Bubble Bus has released yet GRAPHICS another version of that old SOUND classic Pacman. This one, called VALUE Muncher, has all the elements PLAYABILITY of the original including food, ghoul pills, and bonus fruits which make the ghouls flash during which time you can get them. MACHINES: BBC/ELECTRON There is a different maze SUPPLIER: BUG-BYTE design for each level. They PRICE: .99 become progressively harder to VERSION TESTED: BBC complete as the ghouls move REVIEWER: NICKY faster and flash for less time when you eat the pills. Oh no, I thought when this latest effort from Bug-Byte Control is with keyboard or joystick and can be redefined, if dropped through the letterbox. the default ones don't suit. More nasty Mode two-type Muncher has sound effects of a graphics, sluggish sprites and MACHINE: SPECTRUM  SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD poor screen response to budget nature but nothing to PRICE: .99 get excited about. grapple with REVIEWER: PAUL But I was wrong. At least, If there really is somebody Bug-Byte has come up with the This game should be taken into out there who hasn't already goods, Plan B might not be epic played Pacman to death, then council care. It needs help. Dead arcade action, but in terms of d babies for entertainment. this is for you. Otherwise keep graphics it's a million times Wonderful. your .99 as there are plenty of better than anything else I've excellent budget offerings Mad Nurse is set in a seen from the Bag-Byte stable. around that are not of antique maternity hospital erawling The scenario is simple. You with little bundles of joy. origin. control a war drone who must Trainee nurses apear to be in GRAPHICS destroy the rogue central control of the place. These SOUND computer inside the Togrian would-be Florence Nightingales VALUE computer complex, fighting off delight in such names as Nina PLAYABILITY & the guards in the process. You Nightnurse and Brenda must find the keys which open Bumwasher. Humour isn't dead the doors in the complex, and even if the babies are. finally make your escape. The babies refuse to stay put And it's slick! It's lively! and go to sleep. They crawl all Above all, it's fast! Even the over the place, swigging from sound tends to add to the medicine bottles, apparently excitement. electrocuting themselves and  MACHINES: SPECTRUM You lose energy and ammo wait for it this is the really  SUPPLIER: ADVANCE as you battle your way through cleverfalling down a liftshaft SOFTWARE the game, but both can be  PRICE: .95 and going splat at the bottom. recouped. The complex is like a REVIEWER: PAUL huge maze, in design vaguely Hi, I'm Butch. Butch Hard Guy. reminiscent of Repton, but none Rough, tough and ready to duff the worse for that. There's a anybody up. My motto?\"Who high score table so you can Cares Who Wins.\" measure your progress. TOILET Obviously Butch Hard Guy is Plan B is a lightweight game intended to be a funny take off but it's fun to play, and very of Rambo and the many other classy compared to previous macho tough guys. The Bug/Byte offerings. Definitely humour, however, stops at the worth it at .99. cassette cover and blurb. What we have is a rather GRAPHICS straightforward platform and SOUND abies:09 ladders game.  VALUE PLAYABILITY as: 02 score1888000 NURSE The evil Dr Tie Fu (is that a joke? Typhoo?) is holding captive soldiers. These are Controlling the nurse you scattered around the 20 screens must round up the babies held in cages. And an army of before harm befalls them, put near indestructible droids patrol them in bed and collecting stray Dr Fu's South Pacific Island. medicine bottles. Points are Butch only has his hands, feet MACHINE: SPECTRUM scored for babies saved. and your wits to help him 48,128,128+/COMMODORE/ During a game you have triumph. The droids proved AMSTRAD three nurses, each of which is instant death for me. SUPPLIER: A'n'E allowed three mishaps before But, apparently, if you punch PRICE: .95 VERSION REVIEWED: getting the sack. them in the middle they sit SPECTRUM I think this game is probably down and switch off for a REVIEWER: LEE the sickest game I've ever second. To destroy them Butch played. Don't buy it. has to punch them in the face This game has a very unusual and then get as far away from plot. You've got to save the > GRAPHICS them as possible because they entire universe from a gang of SOUND explode.  VALUE evil aliens. Original, eh? These PLAYABILITY To free the prisoners, Butch aliens are planting Triffid-type has to punch and kick furiously weeds, that destroy your crops BUTCH HARDGUY 05 VESTEROCR 2010 VESTEROCO ce AGENT ORANGE there's an alien who's ready to shoot you on the next screen. The scrolling, what there is, is very jerky, even for the humble Speccy, and the sound is well below average, even on the 128 Spectrum. The graphics are bland, and mainly black and white with only the odd bit of colour, and nearly all the planets look the same. Basically, it's not a brilliant game, in fact, A'n' F hasn't produced a really good game since Chuckie Egg. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY mo "


"Awarded to lop Flight Stunt Pilotsonly VT IGE ETION saa The Sports Jet Simulation The Decathlon of Sports Aviation Events is a tough and dangerous competition, the ultimate challenge for any stunt pilot. To compete in it, you must learn to fly the BD-5J-a fully acrobatic, 300 m.p.h. sports jet. To win you must be prepared to live dangerously. Acrojet puts you in the hot seat to experience the same thrill, excitement and split second action as real stunt pilots. Superb 3-D graphics, sophisticated cockpit instrumentation and lightning fast joystick response enable you to perform precision loops, rolls and Immelmanns. Even the deathdefying Cuban Eight. in this simulation there's no room for human error Only for skill, courage and nerves of steel. Up to 4 players can compete in Acrojet. Challenge your friends and become the World's Greatest Sports Pilot. Acrojet for the Commodore 64/128k, Spectrum 48/128k and Amstrad CPC series. Cassette .95. Disk E14.95. SIMULATION. SOFTWARE "


"RANA RanaRama is all set to rocket programmer Steve Turner and Hewson high into the software charts. Here C+VG presents Steve's exclusive hints and help for troubled gamesters. It's straight from the horse's mouth... The frog and a screentul of rooms. C64 version In RanaRama you control Mervyn, a Provides light and warmth in the dark and sorcerer's apprentice, a survivor of an dingy depths. invasion of alien warlocks. Bisect: Third level fighter. Formidable He managed to evade capture as he had warriors protected by their exoskeletons. inadvertently transformed himself into a Guardian: Fourth level fighter. frog whilst trying to concoct a potion to Protected by magic and resist magical make himself tall, handsome and attacks by lesser creatures. muscular. Death Serpent: Fifth level fighter. Fast You have to tackle 12 wizards per level and deadly who are guarded by troops scattered over Ghoul: Sixth level fighter. These are the 50 to 100 rooms on each level. The almost invisible and will drain energy view of the rooms is from above with five from the living. or so to a screen. A room does not become Arachnae: Seventh level fighter. Manilluminated until you visit it. eating spiders who have a taste for frogs. Once you reach a wizard, you tackle him Gargoyle: Eighth level fighter. Fast, in sub-games which require lightening cunning and very evil. reactions. Warlock: Found on levels one to four. The game is basically a shoot 'em-up. Will only attack you if your status is less where the nasties are continually than theirs. Otherwise they will run. Best generated to give a continuous action feel. defeated by magical combat rather than There are eight levels of missiles, eight missiles. levels of power and eight types of shield Necromancer: Levels five to eight. Steer for you to accumulate and use. The easiest clear unless you have a Power level four way to accumulate items is to defeat and high shield spell. wizards to win their runes and then MAGICAL WEAPONS convert the runes into the items you require. Munching Mouth: Hide or run. The missiles, power and shields are all Spinning Knives: Slow but can attack in graded and the nasties on the later levels great numbers. are graded too. Orbitor: Four steel balls rotating around Spell items can also be obtained a ball of energy. Slow enough to shoot. randomly in certain rooms at spell points. Energy Ball: Pure energy. THE MAGIC MINIONS HOW TO SURVIVE The creatures you can expect to find-orW hen you are underpowered to tackle a who will find you. level remember discretion is the better Dwarf Warrior: First level fighter. Not part of valour. very intelligent, likes gold, drink and Move quickly from room to room fighting avoiding trouble. Pick up any energy Fire Gollum: Second level fighter. crystals you find but remember your 8888888 Is this a dead end? The frog in a flap. Under attck in the Spectrum version. Is the frog in trouble here or what? "


"RAMA survival depends on locating the warlocks and winning their magic. At the start of a level many doors will be hidden so have the FIND spell ready. Later when you have explored most of the level use the SEE spell and the map to locate the remaining warlocks. Remember they move about intelligently so on your way to them check their position. A quick test to see if you have a powerful enough attack spell for a level is to shoot an object that initiates the magical attack weapons. If the object can be destroyed in one shot you have a good chance of clearing the level and can go on the offensive blasting everything in sight. If more than one shot is needed use the evasive tactics described above. If three of four shots are needed exit the level to an easier one. MEANIES Learn to recognise the meanies as there are eight types. Wounding a powerful meany will anger him and make him very aggressive. Badly wounding a meany will stop him or make him panic. Only take on the meanies if your attack spell can destroy in one or two shots. Run from the rest MAGICAL WEAPONS If you enter a room with a small scenery object, magical attack weapons will appear around it. Either destroy the object or exit the room. There are no points for destroying the attack weapons and they are quite deadly. #there are many initiators in a room, say a line of coffins, the best place to stand is at the end of the line en the attack all the other spells running. Use runes sparingly, it is not a big advantage using high level power or shields until you need them. When you tackle a new level be sure to reequip unless you have already done so in dcearing the previous level. To stand a chance on a level you need power attack and defence spells of the same level. Levels are numbered in increasing difficulty left to right then top to bottom. The shield spells are essential on the lower levels to reduce damage. Without them a single hit is fatal. OVERALL STRATEGY It pays to clear the levels one at a time in order of difficulty. To get maximum points destroy all meanies before eliminating the lat warlock on a level. When you leave a level without warlocks their minions will disappear. MAGIC GAME This is a lot easier than it seems at first Concentrate on one letter of the word at a time and sort it to its place. Tusually start with the Mor the N as they are easy to find. Some people find it easier to start with the first letter and sort out the letters one at a time left to right. You only have to place about three letters. The rest usually fall into place on there own. There is no time to think, do not try to unravel the word in your head just pick a letter and keep that fire button and joystick moving. You will soon get the knack of moving one letter right across the word by co-ordinating firing and joystick. The joystick must be centred between moves so a typical move may require left, left, left to place the cursor over the required pair of letters fire right fire right fire right fire to move the letter four places. USING YOUR RUNES If you are MORTAL use whatever runes you have to fire up a power spell or your life energy will drain away ending the game. It is wise to fire up another energy spell if you can whenever the frog starts flashing croaking and looking very miserable. They you will avoid being MORTAL and being transported to a random room where it may be difficult to find a Glyph of Magic to replenish your spell. Try to balance your spells taking note of your drain shown on the spell screen. If it shows anything other than minimum your power spell is not really high enough for Try to end each level with enough runes to give you a chance at the next level. This may mean leaving meanies alive. Only spend extra time annihilating a level if you have the spare runes to do so. PORGRAMME PROFILE Steve Turner is the man behind a whole array of top ten hits for Hewson including Dragontorc, Avalon, Astro-Clone and Quzatron. In his early thirties, Steve has been programming for 17 years. He attended one of the first schools to have its own computer club which allowed him to use a computer with 512 bytes After leaving school Steve continued to utilise his programming prowess both at work in the Civil Service and at home on his first computer, an old style ZX80. He eventually gave up job to concentrate on games programming. GLYPHS OF POWER Use these to attack all meanies in a room. Do not use them if a warlock is in the room as you may destroy him, losing the chance to win his runes. In the deeper levels use Glyphs of Power with care as they may just annoy everyone in the room so they all attack you at once! WARLOCKS Before you tackle them clear the room of other meanies so you have a good chance of picking up the runes. Try to tackle the warlock in a small room or a corner so the runes cannot go far. When you chase the runes take care not to accidently leave the room or they disappear. "


"Another Great Compilation from Beau Jolly! SPECTRUM NEW SENSATIONAL GAMES COMPILATION Only COMPL + FR .95 1 2112 AD Design Design 2 Starstrike ll Realtime Software 3 Mantronix) Probe Software 4 Attack of the Killer Tomatoes Global Software Bubblebus Software 5 Wizards Lair FIVE ORIGINAL HIT GAMES IN ONE SENSATIONAL PACK BEAU-JOLLY FIVE ORIGINAL HIT GAMES Spectrum/Commodore/Amstrad Cassette .95 Commodore/Amstrad Disk .95 Tell your friends also available for BBC, Electron & C16/Plus 4 Computers (Titles may vary by format) BEAU-JOLLY The name behind the great games Beau Jolly Ltd. 29A Bell Street Resgate, Surrey RH2 TAD. Tel: 07372 22003 "


"1.D.E.A.S After many many pleas, Jerry Paris has been persuaded to create a Melissa poster, which you will find in the middle pages. The fame of being a centrefold pin-up shall not go to my head! I would like to take this opportunity to wish farewell to Hannah Smith of Crash-in the past we may have had our differences, but, friendly rivalry never did anyone harm. Meanwhile please keep sending your hints and help to I.D.E.A.S Central. SENTINEL Darren Seyck of Enfield reckons that The Sentinel which won C+VG Golden Joystick for Best Original Game is one of the hardest games he has come across but with a little bit of patience and the hints he gives here you should be able to enjoy a truly enjoyable game. The first 10 levels are very easy as there are no sentries. Throughout the levels there is a very curious sentry-numbering systems. Although there is one sentry on levels 0012, 0169 and 202 there are 4 of them and the Sentinel on level 0115. On with the tips. Always try and gain as much energy as possible before absorbing the Sentinel. The more energy, the further you go and the less levels you have to complete. If you find yourself constantly being absorbed before you can properly move from the starting position, go in the most unexpected direction. On level 0220 there are three sentries and they all look at you within two turns. Have a few goes to find out how long you have before being spotted. Use this information to try all the possible ways you can go. and you don't always have to absorb your previous robot either. If you find that a move to a higher ledge can only be achieved, without being spotted by not absorbing your last robot then don't. As long as you don't go too far away you will only have lost a couple of energy when you take them back instead of being dead. If you find there is a level, that although you've tried really hard and you still can't do it, go back to the previous level and gain more energy to hyperspace over the offending level. There are occasions when you will hear the ominous low clicking sound made by a meanie. Don't try and look for it. It takes time to turn 360 degrees that you will be hyperspaced long before you find him. Instead, as soon as you see around the 30th level mark, the the half bar in the top right of the screen move your robot as far They first take one point and way as possible, preferably onto subsequently take three points higher square, so when you look (robot) at a time. But when you towards the previous robot you absorb a tree and make a tree will see the meanie. Absorb it symbol in the score line he takes quickly though, because it will just one point and then continues quickly turn into a tree. When you to take three. absorb a sentry place your robot As far as Darren knows the on the square where it was. You Sentinel only does this, the should now be able to absorb sentries take just one energy point most of the other sentries, for they at a time. Once you have are normally on the same level. mastered the art of disposing of a Always absorb all the sentries l and Don't forget that if you want before absorbing the Sentinel. If to absorb or create energy on top you don't then you won't be able of a boulder the cross hair need to complete the level. not move from the side of the On later levels the only way to boulder. get the Sentinel is by stacking two This is a time saving movement or three boulders. This is wasteful as you can transfer without on your energy. So before waiting for the very slow scrolling. absorbing the Sentinel turn round The cross hair is a nuisance. and get all the trees you can see. Don't switch it on unless you are For the first few levels' the creating or absorbing. Without it Sentinel and sentries only on, the scrolling is slightly faster. decrease your energy by one Moving from robot to robot is point (tree). But somewhere pointless unless you move higher. EMPEROR'S SECRET SERVICE CLS PRINT AT 19.7: FLASH 1 SETTING UP DATA FLACHO FOR X=to : LET AXTO 1 1111111111111111 LET A (X.241 TO-A3X. E NEXT X FOX -17 TO 2401 READ DE FO T O 5: LET ATY. (Y LET TET CODE DE EXT Y NEXT X IF TO90579 THEN FRINT AT 10. FLACH 11\" DATA ERROR STOR SAVE MAP DATA AC) PRINT * FRENTND TAPE AND PLAY BACK FOR VERIFICATION VERIFY \" DATA A PRINT **VERIFICATION O.. So sensitive was the information contained in On the Emperor's Secret Service listing published in January's C+VG that evil forces conspired to place a bug in the program. Star Dreams, the game programmers, says the strange graphic which appears in several places like a bracket should be a #, as in line 4500 which should read PRINT#0. Star Dreams also forgot to include a DATA program which enables OTESS to LOAD a map. DATA \"21222, 22512\", DATA \"11222223 1H22.125L2 DATA DATA DATA DATA DATA DATA \"OL 21. \"LLD21 DATA \"11111\". DATA *11112 DATA -11222,DATA 22001\" DATA\" DATA \"11211 DATA DATA You'll find that program should now work "


"GAUNTLET GAUNTLET GAUNTLET Ek *G LEVEL 5 EX LEVEL 4 MSX MSX o Here are some hints for MSX games from a regular reader of this column-Guy Langley. Look out for Guy's name elsewhere in the magazine as he is going to start reviewing the MSX games we receive in the office. Trailblazer alway move at top speed, and use the jump squares to leap rather than your own jump. On the screens that include the world 'Shaun' move to the right, and try to get up a steady rhythm of bounces. Beware of the two green patches on 'woolly jumper'. Always save at least one bounce for the second patch, and don't use them all up on the first. On Hackers Evil Holes use the white squares as though they are surrounded by normal ones. When you are stuck on the cyan patches that reverse controls, steer towards the black squares and you will finish miraculously unscathed. also beware of levels H, L and K. Guy warns that these are real killers. Valkyron the first levels don't try to shoot the diving firing droners. Try for the ones that get stuck and spin. It is also a good idea to clear the skies of motherships these take three blasts and when destroyed release three or four xeryllium (!) pods on explosion. By the way, to detonate the bomb, it is CAPS on the keyboard and not pull the joystick back. Cyberun-collect first the two rocket boosters that are close to the starting point and then go to collect the rocket launcher invaluable for exploration into caves. * BIT LEVEL 6 Here, as promised, are the next 3 levels of Gauntlet from Danny Blackman. This game by US Gold was yet another winner in the Golden Joystick Awards picking up Game of the Year and runner up in Arcade Game of the Year. ATARI More for the Atari -this time from Jonathan French of Norfolk. First of all Warhawk -after level 4, during an attack of alien craft occasionally a flashing alien different to the others will appear. Just fire one shot at it, and it will transform into a flashing spring shaped craft. Move your ship to often than not it will disappear. Bounty Bob Strikes Back Roger Wyatt is the first reader to Load the game as normal. Then send in tips for the ST and they press the option key for the game are for World Games. adjustment section. Change the Weightlifting with the snatch special code to 61,800. Then Roger is a bit stumped, but with press F key and Option together. the clean and jerk he's got it down Start the game as normal, but if to a T. Grip the bar, then pull you press any of the following forward to start the lift, as the bar keys you will have various effects. reaches your man's chest pull Q advance 1 level. A-down 1 back. Then wait for your man to level. F-toggles 'float mode b reath in and out twice. At the end on/off when on, it allows you to of the last breath pull forward and move anywhere on the screen. then wait again for the same Pressing a combination of keys amount of time as before. Pull will warp you to the screen ie 2 back to jerk the bar over your then 3 takes you to screen 23 or 0 man's head. Wait once more for a then 5 takes you to level 5. full breath and then straighten your legs and you should get a full 225. Cliff Diving-to get a high score drive straight for as long as possible and land in deep water. Logrolling-if you start the log rolling as soon as you start the game you can throw your opponent with no problem. Caber Tossing-to get up speed move your joystick twice as fast as your mans legs. Go faster and faster until your log starts to go back behind you. Keep going until the log straightens out, then begin your throw. Wait until the log is at an angle of 60°, then flip your log. firepower will increase giving you a better chance of clearing the later difficult levels. On the same game, if you are very lucky an alien ship will suddenly appear next to your ship This will cause no aliens to attack you, until the end of level. Don't move near it though, as more "


"BOMBJACK II OBOMBJACK II C later screens are difficult to clear correctly, but very easy without bothering with the order. There are two sorts of screens with special techniques-on some screens there is route around them. First go one way to pick up a sack then backtrack to pick up the next sack then the other way around. Try not to get dizzy Another Elite game to be given the low down is Paperboy. Carl smash their window-in that Brunt of Notts is the man behind order. Then in the top right of the this tip which will enable you to screen the number 99 should achieve maximum bonus points appear. When it does, do not on the C64 version shoot any graves, dustbins etc or When you start the game do not it will just revert back to zero. fire at any graves, dustbins etc. Then at the end of the BMX Just at mailboxes. When you get course you should gain an extra the fifth house post their paper, 9900 points. Works only on drop one in the bird table and then Mondays and Fridays. Bombjack ll hints and tips from sacks and get off the screen. If C+VG Readers Software House however you hang around long of the Year-Elite. enough for the nasties to mutate Survival Tips-timing is very again, they will become intelligent important, especially when and start to home in. Escape from Bombjack must jump into a short these is nearly impossible, so try platform with a monster on. Time it to clear the screen before they get so that Bombjack gets on when to this stage. there is plenty of space then either When it comes to scoring the push the monster off or jump to best tip is to collect as many open another platform quickly. Often sacks as possible. When you get can jump onto a platform and a sack, another will open showing straight off again without losing you which to get next. On getting energy to the nasty. On later that one, yet another one will levels this is necessary as the open. nasties are sometimes on very Open sacks score you 200 short platforms and thus cannot instead of the normal 100 but if be pushed off. Pushing the you collect six or more you will nasties off tends to use up a lot of receive a bonus of between 5,000 energy so it is best to wait for a and 25,000. Collecting all 10 gives nasty to get near the end of a you another extra life. platform so Bombjack does not As for strategy tips, the best bit have to push him very far. of advice here is to get used to the Repeatedly stabbing the nasty will screens and what platforms you kill him off twice as quick. can leap between. This is Only try to attack one nasty at a important as you won't have time time and be especially careful he to stop and think where to leap to doesn't push back to push you off. next. Know them off by heart as Watch out as the nasties get some of the routes are hard to stronger and then more intelligent find. If you have to stop and think -you will have little chance of you could become stuck. Try to killing them unless you have a full work out the sack order on each tank of energy. Don't kill nasties screen as all those extra lives will on your start platform as they will improve your scores. The secret is simply reappear and push you off. to find out which sack to get first If a lot of nasties gather around choose the wrong one and you the last sack, it pays to wait for will not be able to get the next one them to turn into jumping meanies without picking a sack out of so they move off the platform order. After a little trial and error letting you get the sack. It pays to you will find the right one and then hurry up and get off each screen use your arcade skill to get the before the nasties begin to jump. If others. Be careful when rushing they start jumping, keep moving about not to over-step the platform and above all don't panic. and get a sack out of sequence. At first the meanies will jump Some screens have special around aimlessly and will not techniques to complete them. home in on you giving you some Screen 3 is simply run like hell and time to pick up the remaining don't bother about order. Many SPECTRUM 1035 PRINT AT 21.2 PAPER 2050 BORDER FOR 1 TO 29 AT 18. IN 4020 DATA YOU CAN GAIN EXTRA FU 4020 DATROCK ISS ON AT 8.31 INT GO TO 75: CONTROLS -OVE THEN LET LET DOVE: Soe DATA 5020 DATA POKES POKES 3030 DATA 5040 CATA $1 THEN 90 T9 300 John Skinner of Southend on Sea Bad printing in the C+VG sent in this poke for Space Harrier February Book of Games has along with a picture of himself caused a few problems on the enjoying a drink in Ibiza. Load in listing for the Mega Elite your Space Harrier cassette and Commander for the BBC. Line set your 64 and enter these 520 should read T% 20 (LEN pokes. Poke 2213,255. Poke (SS) DIV 2) 1 8110,0. Then Sys 2128. This And Line 700 is DATA makes the game a lot easier by \"800031780000000\" getting rid of all the poles and also In Pontoon wiping out level 3 completely Line 14120 reads mt-0:ifct which is the hardest. <16thenmt=1 All the listings work but some people are having difficulty. Remember just one mistake can destroy the program. So check carefully. And now for Touchdown on the Spectrum. The graphics did not print out in the Book of Games. Here are the relevant lines which contain graphics. Hopefully everything should run properly. Seri NEINK R ETURN \" AND INK 329 THE ADE 105 LET 1 IF 31 EN FAI 450 PRINT AT 2.5 TOULADOR THE DINTAT PAUSE 3 "


"JON RITMAN AND BERNIE DRUMMOND PRESENT DOUBLE TROUBLE... ENTHRALLING COMICAL DAZZLING Hi! My name's Mr. Head. Some say I'm the one with the brains but I don't think my flat footed, friend would agree. I'm a real sharp shooter, but without my pal Mr. Heels I'd get nowhere fast...or slow! I can jump like a flea and even glide but Heels is the Daley Thompson of the two of us he's FAST! Together, if we can find each other, we really do make an awesome twosome, and that's the only way we can overcome the emperor Blacktooth. The last time we entered Castle Blacktooth we found the crowns of THREE of the supressed kingdoms but by that time I'd run out of doughnut ammunition and my buddy was lost somewhere in the Safari world it was the closest we had come to defeating that rapscallion we were jumping for joy, splitting our sides, dying with laughter...we were Head over Heels! AMSTRAD PCW COMMODORE SPECTRUM MSX .95 .95 .95 .95 AMSTRAD Ocean Software 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS, Telephone: 061 832 6633 Telex: 669977 Oceans G Ocea "


"THE TUBE ENTER THE TUBE IF YOU DARE! SURVIVE THE TRANSFER ZONE, STEER THROUGH THE INNER TUBE DEFENCE MECHANISM TO REACH THE CAPTURE AREA. THE TUBE IS AN AMAZING FAST ACTION SHOOT EM UP, WITH SUPERB GRAPHICS AND SOUND. ONLY THOSE WITH NERVES OF STEEL SHOULD APPLY. Victory House, Leicester Place, London, WC2H 7NB Tel: 01-439 0666 CBM 64 and Spectrum: .95 ORKUVA Argus Press Software Group "


"Why has the number one Stateside software house decided to invade this green and pleasant land and set up a proper HQ in the heart of the mighty metropolis? Is it because there's some really ace coders hiding out over here? Or are they trying on the hard sell to convince YOU that bigger and better games come from the US of A? C+VG went to see Trip Hawkins, big boss of Electronic Arts to find out while our American contributing editor, Marshall M. Rosenthal, brings you news of EA's latest games which show just why the company can call itself numero uno! PT. TRIP'S TOP TIPS STATUS DATE: 04. -01D DAMAGE: NOME CARGO: 2 ENERGY :3.30 SHIELDS : DONN HEAP: UMARMED @anaan STATEMENT QUESTION POSTURE TERMINATE RECEIUINGE HOT IRVING THE FUNNY STUFE ALTELE MOST PONERS SUPERIOR VELORLEN RECEIVING: (FU.S. are Gold then we Meanwhile Trip is looking must be platinum!\" forward to the development says EA boss Trip of the personal interactive Hawkins. Big words from the compact disc scene the big country but they sum next major revolution! up the reasons behind This should be like an Electronic Arts' move to set Amiga with a built in CD up a new base in London. player. Imagine that all the power few years games made in of the Amiga added to the the USA have been going Incredible storage capacity down well over here-SO of an optical disc. The mind why not cut out the middle boggles. man and bring in the games Christmas '88 is the time direct? That way EA can get Trip predicts that you'll be more feedback on the sort of seeing this wonder-gizmo. games YOU want and have Until then you'll have to make more control over the quality do with your normal run of of conversions. Simple, huh? the mill machines. But rest Well, not really. But it's a assured, Electronic Arts aim start. And in a bid to find out to make owning them a lot precisely what sort of games more fun. you want to play EA have How? With games like been running some \"focusA utoduel and Starflilght, groups\" bunches of game thats how. Let our US superfanatics gathered together spy Marshall M. Rosenthal tell to talk about what they want you ALL about them. to get out of a game. After all tarflight is a US games players are comprehensive roledifferent they often want playing game-270 things which aren't relevant star systems, 800 planets and to people in the rest of the seven alien races with their world. own language and cultures These \"focus groups\" show to figure out and explore. just how serious EA are about You begin at the Starport. claiming the number one C hoose your crew wisely. title over here too. Humans are good at STATUS RUNCH DISEMBAR PLANET HIP'S LOG ASSEMBLY SALVAGE STOP CABACE RROR RRENA SHER LAPOK JOE'S BRR CROSS KERP SHOP SESTO TE "


"learning new skills, but aren't spatial data and tactical I bought some body punchy power plant. very durable. The insect-like information during armour, and sauntered out I took to the road. Mostly Velox is good at using tools. Encounters. into the City. had an easy time of it. Radar but not too bright The Auxiliary View Screen Passing the garage, I showed any groupings of Androids are tough as indicates the ship's status as thought again of how some cars, and since bandits tend nails, but can't learn what well as sensor information drivers keep a roster of three, to hang together I just hasn't been programmed in from the Science Officer and four or more cars, but I never steered clear of them. If there them. The last two races, the Engineering. could get into that. was one thing I didn't want to Thrynn and Elowan are The Control Panel is used The Automated Assembly encounter, it was the problematic in that the two to inform/contact the crew Line complex was busy as mysterious Mr Big and his races hate each other, and about command decisions, always. I kept on moving, ratpack. will show it at every while the Text Window pinching my nose while Everything was going opportunity. contains all incoming/ going past the Salvage Yard great until this jerk of a Crews can be trained to outgoing messages. (the old weapons and professional duelist pulled become more effective in During an Encounter damaged cars there tend to up alongside and started their jobs, but it costs of (peaceful or otherwise), the stink), and went to check out making obscene gestures. course. The Science Officer Science Officer will use Uncle Albert's Auto and Next thing I know, there's can increase his ability to sensors to determine the Gunnery Shop these two jokers on my tall analyze sensor readings, mass and power status of the I know what you're fossing lead and firing heavy while the Navigator can opposing vessel. thinking. No car so why look rockets. I managed to sorch become more adept at Communications will allow at weapons? Let's just say! one of them, and he spun determining the presence of you to decide on a posture like to plan ahead. around and collided with his the continuum fluxes in — friendly, hostile or That done, I headed over buddy before exploding, space (which allows near obsequious. The decision to the Arena. Radar showed another five instantaneous interhere can make all the The schedule indicated come up fast, so I dimensional travel). difference between that A-night would be abandoned the road, and The Engineer can learn obtaining useful information, tomorrow, so I hoofed it back detoured to a mountain about the latest repair or having to shoot it out. to the Truck Stop and got a pass. techniques, while the Starflight is a rich mix of room for the night. That's where he was Communications Officer can adventure, strategy and I woke up bright and early waiting for me. As for what hone the skills needed to action. and went over to look happened, try to imagine communicate more ou're probably through the latest maps at turning a steep corner at top efficiently. Lastly, the Doctor wondering how I got the American Autoduel speed and meeting an can bone up (gettitt) on into this mess. So dm l. It Association. immovable object. surgery techniques. was supposed to be a logled the courier The crash must've knocked The Spaceport is also simple enough courier job, missions up for grabs. I had me out for a few seconds. where you check on plenty of empty highway, the smarts and skills needed came to, and found myself messages, make financial and speed keeping me for two of the three offered, stuck like a fly on a spider's arrangements and see how ahead of trouble. But here! and I could feel my blood web with doom about to many credits you've am. Pinned to the steering starting to boil. Now I was in knock on my door acquired. wheel, nothing working, and the proper mood for tonight's The driver's getting out. Perhaps the most that big sucker bearing fun 'n' games. He's just standing there, important section of the down on me for the kill. I stopped off and checked gloating. Too bad he never Spaceport is the Ship As long as I've got this my Clone-insurance. My heard Pete's last and most Outfitting radio channel open, I might other body was doing okay. important lesson: always This is where you can as well tell you unknown and the brain tape l had have an ace up your sleeve. change your vessel's listener just what led up to stored was close enough to in this case, that's the fake configuration; adding better this whole fiasco. my present status so I didn't air-scoop aimed right at his equipment and stronger After the bus dropped me have to fork over any more belly. With the little machine weapons. off at the local Truck stop, credits to update it. gun inside that's connected Once in space, turn to the rested a few minutes, and Thad the Assembly Line to the foot switch I'm tapping Ship's console which consists listened to some old geezers turn me out a hot little now. of four separate screens. The talking about the local number. Good suspension, I kind of hope he IS hungry. Main View Screen occuples bandit situation two miles out strong armour on the back 'cause he's about to eat 20 the most space, displaying of town. and sides, solid tyres and a rounds of flaming lead! 222222222 0 . 00016 7777777777 22 1 PO DO DIOCHI Power Plant 05 Driver oa Power Plant 05 Driver Paused. Paused "


"Age MILK RACE COMPETITION Name Address Please state make of computer SPECTRA competition that's gotta lotta bottle. On your bike and get pedalling like mad for the The Milk Race '87, covering more than 1,100 place during the last two weeks in May. miles between Newcastle and London, takes releasing the Milk Race computer game. And to coincide with the race, Mastertronic's So what are the prizes? First prize is an all expenses day out at the Milk Race with the of the world's best cyclists AND be presented organiser who will introduce the winner to some with a hand built Spectra 12 speed racing bike PLUS a Milk Race jersey Plus a copy of the game. The next 50 runners-up will get a copy of the your ansers to the Milk Race competition, Just answer the following questions and send Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR ZAU. The closing jersey. What is the colour? 1) The Milk Race leader wears a special coloured game. date is May 16th. Questions. 2) The best known bike race in the world is held in France. What is it called? COMPETITION MILK RACE Sshh! Don't breathe a word to anybody about this competition. It's top secret. Keep it to yourself and improve your chances of winning. Really it's two competitions in one. So if you are a BBC or Atari XL/XE owner then keep on reading. If not, just go green with envy. The common link between the two competitions is Robico's super spy hero, Rick Hanson. For BBC owners we've got 15 copies of The Rick Hanson Trilogy Saga of a Spy to give away. This consists of the three Hanson games --Rick Hanson, Project Thesius and Myorem. Prizes for Atari owners are 10 copies of Rick Hanson on disc. All you have to do is answer our spy questions and send the ans Rick Hanson Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. The closing date is May 15th and the chief spycatcher's decision is final. Questions. 1) Which secret agent is known as 007 and has a Licence to Kill? 2) The Fourth Protocol is a new blockbuster spy film. Who wrote the book on which the film is based? 3) Who played the spy-catcher George Smiley in the television series Smileys people? RICK HANSON COMPETITION RICK HANSON G-VG COMPETITION 2 Name Address C+VGC Please indicate your computer: BBC cassette Electron cassette BBC 40 track disk BBC 80 track disk DAtari XIXEL "


"SCORPION RESERVEREN THE GAME WITH THE STING IN THE TAIL pojnog The world poje SCORPION IS A MULTI-OPTION HIGH SPEED ARCADE ACTION GAME FEATURING VECTOR GRAPHICS. DECIDE IF THE APPROACHING TARGET BELONGS TO THE ENEMY OR IS ONE OF YOUR OWN FLEET. BUT DO NOT SPEND TOO LONG THINKING UNLESS YOU ARE PREPARED TO DIE. COMMODORE SPECTRUM AMSTRAD .95 ONEKTEVA Argus Press Software Victory House Leicester Place London WC2H7NB Tel: 01 439 0666 Argus Press Salware Group "


"From KJC Games, Britain's leading PBM CO. AN OFFER YOU CAN'T REFUSE! ABSOLUTELY FREE TRY A FREE TRIAL IN THE WORLDS MOST POPULAR PLAY-BY-MAIL GAME. IT'S A CRIME! All you need to do is send us your name and address and we'll send you a rulebook, start position in a new game, and credit for your first two moves. If you enjoy the game, and we think you will, you can continue playing It's a Crimel for the incredibly low price of only 62.5p a turn. THE SETTING The game is set in New York City in the late 1990's. You role-play the part of a gangleader who controls a group of misguided youths. The city has severely deteriorated. The brave citizens who remain are now in a life and death struggle with the ever increasing number of drug-crazed street gangs. The New York Police Department is severely undermanned. Your main goal is to become a very powerful gang. This is measured by building your gangs turf into one of the largest and by becoming one of the richest, toughest, and most notorious gangs in the city. This will allow you to enter the MOB, and maybe later, become the Godfather. On a typical turn you could send your Pros, Punks and Cruits out to take over a couple of city blocks and ambush an enemy gang, rob or firebomb a building, buy and sell drugs, have yourselves a party, terrorize the residents, and much more. SEND YOUR NAME AND ADDRESS TODAY FOR YOUR FREE TRIAL OF IT'S A CRIME! THE WORLDS MOST POPULAR PLAY-BY-MAIL GAME. WRITE TO: KJC GAMES, PO BOX 11, CLEVELEYS, BLACKPOOL, LANCS FY5 2UL. EARTH WOOD 25 players compete to be the ultimate ruler by controlling all the developed cities either singularly or with an alliance A typical game will last about 18 months, with the first knockouts usually starting after six months Each player is either a king of a fantasy race or a powerful charismatic character You can recruit troils wildmen and control powerful creatures such as dragons Your characters will capture and control cines upon which you can spend gold to improve security, workshop production defences and maintain and enlarge your army with gold your wirard's undertake magical research Spies search out enemy strongholds and then attempt acts of sabotage theft and assassination These are just a few options available to a player in Earthwood Earthwood is computer moderated but the turn sheets and replies are written in plain English No need to look through complex charts and code books to understand this game CRAZ QIMORO \"WORLD 8 Europe's most popular Play By Mail game the fantasy Campaign game with over 1.000 player parties already participating To enter send [600 for rules, setup first three turns and copy of latest newsletter Further turns 175 each EARTH WOOD CAPITOL To enrol in Capitol send a  cheque/PO/International Money Order payable to KJC Games For this you will receive the rulebook, setup and first two turns. Each turn of Capitol costs  for the first 60 orders Each additional 30 orders costs 75p European players are welcome Send to KJC Games, PO Box 11. Cleveleys, Blackpool, Lancashire FY5 ZUL Welcome on. (0253) 866345 To enrol in Earthwood send a .00 cheque/PO payable to KJC Games For this you receive the rulebook setup and first three turns Future turns are .50 GAMES "


"C+VG PLAY BY MAIL Muskets & Mules is covered in depth by the attractively packaged rule book for the game, which includes a very fine Hussar on the cover and extracts from contemporary newspapers inside. If, at times, the rules look like a mathematical problem that you can't solve, this is meant to reproduce the problems of controlling Napoleon's Grande effect of Armee. My own reaction was to my which is to greatly grumble about playing the rules, simplify play. Without the not the game\", and about \"hexcomputer it would take four times shaped ruts\", but Aiden has found as long to produce the material that most players prefer such each move. complex rules, and get a lot of The problem is that it costs game satisfaction from making quite a lot. The rule book must be Muskets and Mules is the only Historical Play-Bythem work. bought for just under , and It is a truism that when thereafter each move is charged at Mail game currently running in Britain. Steve refighting a historical campaign between  for the cheapest, Badsey, C+VG's History Man, bravely shoulders most wargamers will find out what Prussia, to  for the most arms and, equipped with a large supply of stamps, actually happened, avoid all the expensive, the French mistakes made by the real-life The high cost is due at least in sets out to wage war by mail. commanders, and in the process part to the game being in its early Play-By-Mail-or PBM for short betwen 1805 and 1809, at the find even more spectacular stages Aiden says that as more -is a strategy game in which height of Napleon's power. mistakes of their own to make. players start to play Muskets and players never meet but send their called Musket and Mules, the What really happened in 1805 was Mules the price will come down orders and receive reports through game has been in existence for less that Napoleon countered an and it does provide the player with the post from a central controller than a year, but already has 10 Austrian thrust into Bavaria by rapid, reliable, moves at regular Perhaps it should be called PAY participating teams. It is run from encircling the Austrians with his intervals. I have played postal By Mail, since the controller is a just outside Cambridge by the own army and forcing them to campaigns run for pleasure in business company which charges PBM firm Historical Engineering surrender at Ulm. which the only cost was the the players for each move, with whose head, Aiden Powlesland, He then pressed on to Vienna postage, but I will admit that them staying in until they've either promises \"state of the time travel and northward to his greatest moves happened at rather reached their objectives or had art\". victory, the destruction of the irregular intervals of about six enough. I met Aiden in the tea room of combined Austrian and Russian months each, and that such In return, the players get fast the Cambridge University Library armies at Austerlitz. So far in campaigns are hard to find. service, a challenging game which -well, you don't get disturbed Muskets and Mules no French As the only British historical they would otherwise never see, that way. He turned out to be a players has managed anything PBM wargame on the market it and the assurance that someone 26-year-old with a history degree, quite so flashy but then, not has already attracted a few else is looking after the game management and programming every player is Napoleon. Most overseas players, and those who mechanics or rather something training, wild staring eves and an Austrian players have begun the play it seem to devote a lot of else, since with a few exceptions Apple Macintosh Plus. game by pushing forward into thought to it. One even phoned in all PBM games are computer He started wargaming the way Bavaria, which means they a set of corrections from the bath! moderated, and PBM itself is we all did, by simply never giving haven't read their history books or If anyone is really rich, Aidan will substantially the creation of the up his toy soldiers, and in fact they think they can do better. arrange delivery of game reports computer revolution. Muskets and Mules arose from a One enterprising Austrian went by horseback for a mere ,000 a PBM began in the United ten-year-old dissatisfaction with instead for Italy, and has just time. States, and is still far more an old boardgame of the forced the French to conclude Meanwhile, an even larger PBM important there than in this Napoleonic Wars that he used to peace with a substantial loss of game is being planned, called country, but there are already 24 play. Basic historical research French-held territory. Nor have tentatively Sabres and Shadows British PBM firms, and perhaps came from a few standard the Prussians been idle in keeping and covering the entire war 30,000 players. textbooks on the period, which up diplomatic pressure. theatre in Europe, the At the moment PBM covers has provided a surprisingly Some of the diplomatic Mediterranean and the Atlantic everything from fantasy gaming, realistic setting for the game. exchanges are important, others between 1796 and 1810. including the highly popular Muskets and Mules plays on a are just for fun. \"As for your My overall impression is that Tribes of Crane game, to modern hex-patterned map representing Majesty's supply problems\", Musket and Mules is a good politics with games like Global central Europe from Metz to wrote one harrassed Austrian to mixture of the standard hex-type Supremacy, or even the futuristic Brest-Litovsk (look it up!) and his Russian ally, \"I would send game and the postal diplomatic fantasy of C+VGs very own from the Baltic to nothern Italy. I you some ink but my courier game, combining some of the best Domination (announced last was glad to see Italy included, it would probably drink it: he drinks elements of both. November). often gets left out of games, but it everything else\". The forces on all sides are But the only PBM historical had a vital effect on strategy. The The players submit their orders structured with reasonable wargame running in this four players each take one of the each turn (two or three weeks real historical accuracy, and the player country is a four player game main powers of the period time, depending on taste) both in can exercise control down about as of strategy and diplomacy in together with all their land forces writing and in the form of specially far as brigade level, which is as low central Europe -France, Prussia, Russia and marked maps. The computer then as any commander should wish to Austria generates maps fo the next move go. The game starts in 1805 with showing the players the precise However, the only way to test a France at war with Russia and location and condition of their game is to play it, and there is a Austria but Prussia neutral. Minor troops, together with anything vacancy coming up in one game states like Bavaria and the known about their enemies and shortly for Czar of all the Kingdom of Italy (northern Italy) allies. Russians. I shall enjoy playing that are either neutral or allied to one Muskets and Mules is believed role in 1805it was, after all, of the major powers. The question to be the only PBM game which only five years from when the of how these minor states behave provides this map service, the Russians invaded Switzerland! "


"C+VG PLAY BY MAIL Hi, this is Wayne again, bringing you the brightest and biggest PBM pages around. This issue there's another of my Wonder Offers, news of the recent PBM convention plus readers comments. All this and the first of our heavy metal music review columns. Enjoy! The Second British won by a gentleman who came P.B.M. Conference from Berne, Switzerland!! I've received loads of requests Other close contenders came from Holland, Belgium and to go into further detail about the conference as some people the very north of Scotland. You could even enter the couldn't make it. Your wish is C+VG Ikari Warriors my command!! competition to try and win Over 1000 P.B.M'ers from the many prizes on offer from all over Europe gathered together at the Porchester the highest score every hour! Hall, Queensway, London for There were live combat the highlight of the P.B.M. sessions in the form of tavern room brawls, with authentic calendar. costumes and weapons, from Inside the hall they had a chance to visit stalls from over various re-enactment societies. 20 companies and examine Many free turns, start up over 100 P.B.M. games at their leisure. packages and t-shirts were It was their chance to ask given away, most of them by me, to the people answering questions directly to the silly questions I was asking gamesmasters and find out exactly what their games were from the stage. all about. At the end of the day, over 300 people were still waiting Visitors could also take part in a real life roleplaying behind to hear the results of adventure which was being run the votes for the various by The Labyrinthe awards that were up for grabs. organisation-featured in It's A Crime C+VG a couple of issues ago. The first point I would like to This involved wandering into make about anyone intending smoke filled rooms, with to play this game is that it nought but a padded sword depicts American street and shield, looking for \"gang\" activities and morals. treasure and getting involved Some of the terms that are in punch-ups with real used during a gang's actions monsters. may be offensive to some There were roleplaying people. It is suggested that competitions, run by the more young children or anyone of than capable Freedom an impressionable nature Warriors with many trophies should not play this game. up for grabs. Have you ever seen the One award which was very film called 'The Warriors' in well received by the crowd was which a American street gang \"The farthest distance have to fight their way across travelled to get to the various gangs' turfs to get Conference award\". This was home? Buy: With this order you can buy either shotguns or machine-guns to increase your attacking strength. You can also buy small bombs to blow up buildings or streetdope to push and make large financial profits. Control: Probably the most important order in the game. This allows some of your gang members to enter a block and either terrify the residents or combat the ruling gang for the right to control the block and receive the protection money. Enlist: This gives you the chance to obtain some new Well, this game is very members of your gang. similar to the film. Fire bomb: To obtain You become the leader of a maximum effect you should street gang who's main aim is have already purchased some to become the meanest, small bombs (See: Buy) when roughest, toughest gang in the issuing this order. If you are area as well as controlling successful you usually receive the biggest area of Turf. a payment for your troubles. Once you have done this, a Mug: This order sends some of selected few of you become your people out to mug some noticed by the mob and they unfortunate person. promote you to Boss status. Robbery: You send some of Then it is up to you ultimately your gang to rob a particular to become The Godfather by building and you fence the wiping out all the other bosses. stolen items for cash. People intending to play It's a When you start off you only Crime should note that it is a have twelve orders to select computer moderated, fixed from. As you get further into deadline game. This means the game the number of orders that a computer processes all available increases to about your actions and these are 20. limited to the ones that are Once you have played the either printed in the rulebooks game for several turns you get or discovered as the game into the swing of things. At the progresses. bottom of your turn results Furthermore, your turns sheet is a section devoted to have to be in by a certain date special meetings and 'The New or you will be at a severe York City Post'. disadvantage. For example, You get a special meeting your turn sheet could be sitting about once every five rounds. on your mantelpiece when it Usually an ex-leader of your should have been sent in, and gang turns up and gives you another gang controlled by advice or special orders that another player has already you can use to increase your ordered an all out attack on gangs' capability. your gang!! I have had the chance to buy Once you have given your some walkie talkies, which gang an original name, no increase the defence strength longer than 20 characters, you of your blocks, recruit a send them out on the road to martial arts expert and buy fame. Look up in the rulebook some dodgy development what actions you would like shares in a building from an them to perform and set them equally dodgy relative of to it. You can do ANY of the mine. following: The building concerned Ambush: This is your chance \"mysteriously\" burnt down to ambush another gang on and I received a large their Turf. You send a bunch insurance payoff for my of your gang to attack and troubles. inflict heavy casualties on the The New York City Post is a victims of your choice. . list of random crimes and "


"FREE start ups in many other K.J.C.P.B.M. games. They will also receive the C+VG Official Champion trophy. The entries for this one off game will be dealt with on a \"first come, first served\" basis. Hints When you start, buy and sell loads of streetdope as initially you stand a smaller chance of getting caught by the narcotics squad Firebombing churches is a good way to gain rapid notoriety. Aim to control at least two blocks per turn minimum When attempting a robbery try retail areas first as they yield better profits Don't attempt a robbery when your walkie talkies are on. The police listen in and intercept you. Don't use an ambush order in your first tive rounds fights that have happened in which is complicated. out there K.J.C. Games run your game. It lists the places It costs 62.5p to issue four It's a Crime on three 20 meg where other gangs have gone orders, .25 to issue ten. You machines namely an Apricot something of note. do have a choice over the Zen, IBM XT and a Tandon. One pleasing aspect of the amount of orders you issue, as The latter have boards game is that your gang name you get further into the game specially imported from the gets mentioned on someone you will have to issue ten order USA. elses turn from time to time if turns all the time or you will you have taken part in a major get nowhere fast. Wayne's Wonder Offer crime. This really is notoriety! My main gripe about this Every C+VG reader who Gangs: You gang consists of game is that you can only writes into me, enclosing the three types of members control forty blocks per gang. C+VG P.B.M logo will Pro's, punks and Recruits. However you can \"split\" your receive: Each member of your gang has gang, which allows you to  A FREE set Up In It's A to be paid and this comes out effectively have two gangs at of the protection money you half strength and both gangs A FREE rule book. receive. Obviously if you can each coltrol forty blocks Two FREE turns. haven't enough income to pay each. Furthermore, in your gangs wages, then your The catch here is that it conjunction with K.J.C. members are going to leave to costs you another 62.5p or Games, I have arranged for a joing somebody else's gang. .25 depending on how many special game of It's A Crime to Pro's are the hardest orders you issue. So you could be set up for C+VG readers! fighters, recruits are the find yourself paying .50 per ONLY C+VG readers will be weakest. You can gain or lose turn for issuing 10 orders each able to play and therefore the members of your gang for two gangs. first player to obtain depending upon the results of If you have never played a Godfather status will become your actions. computer moderated P.B.M. C+VG's official champion You can spy on other gangs before then give It's A Crimea and will be able to play FREE and acertain their strengths if go! in another game of It's A you so wish. Conflict between for all you computer buffs Crime as well as receive gangs is resolved by comparing the amount of gang members MAIL DOMINATION, C+VG'S VERY OWN PLAY-BYavailable added to what kinds MAIL GAME, CONTINUES TO GROW. GAME MASof weapons they are carrying TER DAVID BOLTON BRINGS YOU AN UPDATE and using. Later on in the A big hello to everyone who was at the second PBM game though this may change Convention, especially the players of game 40 which was due to other factors you started on the day, discover. Quite uniquely this must be the only game in which all the Notoriety: This is the most players have met personally. Thanks to the organisers important part of the game. especially Mike McGarry and to Amstrad who lent me a This judges how well you are machine for the exhibition. doing. All the actions your We now have nearly 45 Mail Domination games on the go gang try will not automatically and have just acquired a faster printer as the printouts are our succeed. The police are out biggest bottleneck presently taking 30 minutes per game. This there to stop you and stop you should allow us to increase our throughput without slowing they will do so even if it means games down laying their life down in the GAME REPORTS line of duty. Another gang Game 10 is racing ahead and has now reached turn 13. Asit may attack you, or the has passed turn 10 no more substitutes can be put in. residents of a block may try to ot all games have reached this far, and this month's run vou off. If anytime in the winners for the highest points on turn five are: game this happens, you will Game 17 Player 11 111 points, + 5 turns. Adrian lose notoriety Neal, Boston, Lincs. However if you complete a Game 15 Player 7101 points, + 2 turns. C Murphy successful robbery or attack Birmingham another gang and win, you will Game 4 Player 9 101 points, + 2 turns. P G Dawe, gain notoriety. The person Bishops Stortford, Herts. who has the most notoriety is Thanks to all who sent in their ages and the votes for the the number one player and referendum on whether player lists should show complete you receive a list of the top 100 alliances or just who you are allied to. The overall result is a players with every turn you slight margin of Yes to No -not enough though to change it receive to see who's who. so the system will stand as it presently is. Wayne's Verdict COMPETITION RESULTS It's A Crime is, in my opinion, Quite a few of you wrote either ideas for Domination or my the easiest computer next PBM game. moderated P.B.M. to play at Anyone who wrote should have received a personal letter the moment. Issuing orders is from me by now and the best idea submissions will have easy, mapping is simple and received free turns as prizes. there is nothing in the game There are two new options for Casus 12 and 13. 12 allows canals to be dug and 13 is for reinforcing armies. Read your PRINTOUTS The winner for the new game ideas competition is: Steven Smith of Royton, Lancs, for his Tyr-Maya game. ol "


"METALLIST we will rock you When the Ed appeared in the office dressed in torn denims, studded leather jacket, dripping chains and a handful of grease in his hair, we knew something was up. \"Do ya wanna rock?» he yelled. He then introduced the mysterious Wayne Bootleg, C+VG's new music an, and made a editorial decision: WE WILL ROCK YOU. For quite a while wave of distorted, crippled and C+VG has debated twisted musical notes in their MASTER OF PUPPETS whether or not to have a wake. music page. We know you The lyrics are about darkness, The lyrics are about darkness, a competent band of musicians Q5: When the Mirror Cracks. people out there must have despondency and death and lead they are. (Music For Nations. MFN 64) other interests apart from singer Don Doty shouts them out Their music is very much in the This is another band that seems to computer-linked hobbies. fast and furiously. The opening early Rainbow style, plus a touch be quite a bit mixed up. Listening So as we like to try anything track, from which the album gets of Boston, which loads of high to the album I jotted down about once, here is Musical Mayhem. its name, literally leaps out of your pitched vocals and lead guitar, seven bands that they sounded The aim will be to review mainly speakers and hit you like a punch. speakers and hit you like a punch. supported by an able rhythm like, from Genesis to Whitesnake. rock and heavy metal albums, but STRYPER: To Hell With The section. They contrast heavy The band are based upon the we are open to suggestion if you Devil. (Music For Nations.) raunchy tracks like 'To Hell With old format of crashing choruses, want other types of music covered. A complete change of tack now. The Devil' with quiet ballads like controlled guitar bursts, and semithan just write in and tell us. Stryper are a Christian Heavy Free and Honestly, but it just romantic songs. In The Rain is a Also, continuing in great Metal band and boy do they let doesn't quite come off. typical example of this, with lead C+VG tradition of giving lots of you know it. METALLICA: Master of Puppets. singer Jonathan K screaming Will things away by running Every chance they get they ram (Music For Nations.) You LOVE me\" in between competitions, the first five people it down your throat. I was really looking forward to flashes of guitar and drums. to to write into this page and name I could handle all the songs this album after hearing their last Their melodic sound apart, the the current lead singer of Deep being about Jesus and God, I release Ride The Lightning, which album is very well produced by Purple will win a copy of any could handle all the Bible quotes was a superb album. However I Floyd Rose (their lead guitarist) album reviewed on this page. plastered all over the album, I found this album slightly and it is clear that he has all the DARK ANGEL: Darkness could even handle the way they disappointing as some of their knowledge and skill to make a Decends. (Under One Flag.) give acknowledgement to Jesus originality seems to have been potential dull album sound quite Since their formation in 1983 Christ in the special thanks lost. exciting. and despite various line-up column as if he was some kind of One point of interest is that the METAL TOP TEN changes, Dark Angel have always roadie or stage manager, but the band seem at a loss how and when 1.) Metallica: Master of been praised in the Metal clincher was the picture of the to end a song. I lost track of where band on the back cover! Four underground scene as the leaders Puppets (MFN 60). I was several times as the album of Thrash Metal. guys, standing there made up to stopped and started on various 2.) Metallica: Ride the They have released just one the nines with loads of make up occasions. Lightning (MFN 27). previous L.P. called We have so much so if it wasn't for one JOE SATRIANI: Not Of This 3.) Metallica: Kill 'em All Arrived which was hailed as a guy's hairy chest I'd swear he was Earth. ( MFN 7). metallic masterpiece and it left a a woman all dressed in skin Question: Do you like technically 4.) Anthrax: Spreading the hard act to follow. However, tight, crotch hugging yellow and brilliant guitar playing, drum follow it they have done, with an Disease (MFN 62). black outfits and one of them has machines, instrumentals plus a album that is so heavy it defies got Jesus in studs over his right selection of various shades of 5.) Manowar: Hail to belief!! breast. Not your common or rock? If your answer to the above England (MFN 19). With an obvious liking for death garden Christians by a long chalk. is yes, buy this album. 6.) Stryper: To Hell With and the dark (five of the seven Leaving the band's religious When I received this album I the Devil (MFN 70). tracks have titles that refer to stance for the moment to thought \"Joe Who? Never heard 7.) Waysted: The good, The death or darkness), Dark Angel concentrate on the album, Stryper of him\". So I went and checked up Bad, They Waysted (MFN fly through this album leaving a with this release have shown what on him. I was impressed with what Dad, I found to say the least. 43). Not only in great demand as a 8.) Wendy O'Williams: studio session player and a teacher W.O.W. (MFN 24). (some of his former pupils have 9.) Tank: This Means included such giants as Steve Vai War (MFN 3). of David Lee Roth Band, Kirk 10.) Twelfth Hammett of Metallica and Larry Lalonde of Possessed), Joe also Night: Art and writes arranges and co-produces Illusion all his own music. (MFN 36). On this album he does all the aforementioned as well as play bass, keyboards and percussion. He does lots of other things too, but to my mind what he does best is PLAY This album was a joy to listen to the absence of vocals bring a with refreshing change. hell the Sevil "


"TETESS The Final Challenge Launching soon on: For mail order enquiries please write to: Spectrum .95 Amstrad, Commodore tape .95 Amstrad, Commodore disc .95 NMC Limited, PO Box 67 London SW11 1BS or call on 01-228 6730 "


NA


NA


"Five Great Games For The Price Of One 02 MES COMMODORE 64/128 AMSTRAD .95 CASSETTE .95 DISK SPECTRUM .95 COMMODORE 64/128 PARADROID Hewson DANDY Eleyin Dreams .95 CASSETTE .95 DISK STRIKE FORCE COBRA Piranha Software WHO DARES WINS 10 Alligata Software CAULDRON II Palgee Software FIVE GREAT GAMES IN ONE GREAT PACK Also available for BBC, ELECTRON AND C16/PLUS 4 Computers (Titles may vary by System) BEAU-JOLLY The name behind the great games Beau Jolly Ltd, 29A Bell Street Reigate, Surrey RH2 7AD. (07372) 22003, "


"female, of course, due to my incredibly sexy body and dreamy good looks) swamping me. The technique of the Red The reason? ANOTHER Herring is only effective if the (swagger) mention in your useless object is truly useless, brilliant pages! The waves of and cannot possibly be used shock and happiness were too otherwise. I am now stuck at much for me, and I have been the very end of Robin of emotionally drained for nigh Sherlock, having released on a week now. Hurn from the wardrobe. He Nice one, Keith, for such a is described as being tied up, great review of Bard's Tale. I so presumably I am supposed personally am sick and tired of to free him. FREE HURN, no getting hyper-reviews for bad ... RELEASE HURN... adventures. I bought it before UNTIE HURN... UNTIE reading your review, and was ROPES, BONDS, CORDS extremely disappointed. ...! Oops, well and truly By the way, take a look at stuck. Wait a minute, what the Dr Who review (January, about the carving knife I am P23) and you will notice carrying? CUT/CARVE something very strange. The HURN/ROPE etc... NO! reviewer is \"Tim\", am I In desperation I consulted correct? Timothy my index of clues from Churchmouse? Tim the magazines, and am told it is a speaking clock? NO! Timothy dud. Assuming this is true, Metcalfe, the EDITOR! And then we have here a solution what do we notice in the where the knife could be used second column, nine lines and I long to know why the down? I quote \"(Don't start bonds cannot be cut with a that again! Ed.)\" Hee hee, I knife. The trouble is, this is thought, another jovial insert the logical thing to do, and I from Mr Big! But wait! He is cannot think on the illogical also doing the review! No wavelenght Fergus expects me wonder your adventure to. Or is just poor vocabulary I column hasn't taken over the am struggling with his not entire mag (which it should) — mine? the Ed is obviously utterly There is nothing wrong with deranged and completey off including red-herrings within his rocker he talks to games, as long as that is what himself during his OWN they are. The danger lies when REVIEWS! the author does not anticipate Mike Thomas, possible uses of the object, Caerphily. and fails to allow for them. P.S. I am in love with Clare Malcolm Harden, Edgeley. Can you please print Sheppey. a piccy of her, and give here a kiss from me? I love her, I love Your greatest fan here once her, I love her... again. And I am now Keith's reply: Printing the completely and utterly piccy is a matter for he who famous. I cannot step outside talks to himself, Mike. But my own front door without consider the other matter hordes of worshippers (mostly accomplished. We at C+VG will do anything in the interests enjoyment of the game, clues of reader service ... are a much better help source, etc. You may be interested to Why this sudden (and hear that Melbourne House, unexpected) change of policy? in whom I have great faith, I have been a loyal reader refused to exchange my tape since issue 8, and never before copy of Lord Of The Rings for have you suggested this, so a disk, even on payment of the why now? I would be most difference! I hardly think that interested to hear your type of customer service is reasons, but in the meantime, good for their reputation. In call for the series of solutions fact. I was told by a rather to be stopped. impatient sounding lady on the The adventure column in phone, that if I wanted a disk C+VG is the best on in version I should go out and Europe to my knowledge, buy one! Not that that helped, don't spoil it now... because I couldn't find an William Hern, outlet that sold them! Inverurie, Richard Dowson, Abderdeen Keith's reply. Thanks for the Newcastle compliments, William. What I Keith's reply: In my old TRSsaid about COMputer was 80 days, I dealt frequently with tongue-in-cheek, a bit of a specialist software firm called general banter between Molimerx. It was their Christian Martensen and standard practice to offer a myself! Hulk was chosen to disk upgrade for a cover start with, due to the very large charge, on return of an number of letters received original tape. Ahh-times requesting help for that game. change. You'd have thought But read on... that with the profits flying around these days, firms would I read in this month's be happy to oblige! C+VG with horror. What's this? As of next issue you'll be I lie in a darkened room printing complete solutions to suffering from possibly adventures? Oh come on! terminal shock, my new copy I've been reading C+VG of C+VG lying on the floor. Is ever since that first October the price increase of 2p issue years ago, and most of responsible for this state, or your changes have been for Tony Takoushi's rambling? the best. It was C+VG that No, it is because I see in the first caught my interest in 'Next Month' column that as computers, and C+VG more from the March issue, you will specifically your articles, that be printing COMPLETE got me into adventures. solutions to certain However, I must say that adventures. To say I am this new idea is probably the stunned is an understatement! Worst you've come up with so Only last June, in your July far. Please tell me it WASN'T issue, you criticised the Danish your idea? magazine COMputer for the Andrew Bethell printing of the solution to Walsall. Hulk (the same game as you Keith's reply. There are people plan to start your series, who want solution, and those coincidence?) Many is the that don't. I have very mixed time you have answered those feelings about it, but decided to that want such a feature, by give the idea a try for a few saying that it spoils all the months. "


"THELPLINE path in Colour Gentofte in Denmark, does not so sure that The Pawn is Of Magic, and not know what to do to the hot the best adventure ever, as every time he furnace or the fire demon in many people claim. Some of tries to do Causes of Chaos. He's also the puzzles are very nearly something, he playing another adventure. illogical, says Guy, and the gets knocked OK, so Time Search is a bad ending is a dreadful off his horse. \"Can game,\" says Aage, but by disappointment after all the you also tell me what I giving it a chance, he found he hard work. am supposed to almost liked this Duckworth Guy takes me to task for do when the gods are playing a adventure. However, he now suggesting that the parser is board game?\" he adds. needs to pass a guard, and better than that of Infocom. The only funhouse I have knows he must bribe him. Whilst the vocabulary may be ever heard of, is Scott Adams' Seems the guard won't co larger, he says, the friendliness Mystery Funhouse. But A. operate, for he won't accept and complexity of the parser Cooke of Cardiff has managed the gold coin Aage keeps understanding definitely isn't. rom one month to the to get himself stuck in another offering him. What is really The two parsers are next, it's strange how the funhouse. This one is from worrying, though, is a definitely different, and each spread of games Pacific Software, and dated hamburger that is listed as an tends to be a bit specialist at its mentioned in the Helpline 1984. Is there anyone else out object. Neither 'burger' not own thing. But overall, I find mailbag changes. Of course, there who has played it and hamburger' are understood that the Scrolls parser does there're always the old can help? by the program. Is this a bug more for me. Infocom favourites, like the Mysterious What Mr Cooke is looking that is preventing Aage from adventures often come up with Adventures, Infocom, and for is the second part of the completing the game? some very dense answers to Scott Adams classics, Golden Mask -he found the And finally, there's Stuart relatively simple commands guaranteed to bring a first part in a tank of water. In Walker, of Widnes, trying to after an agonising pause. sprinkling of problems every his search, he has killed two of kill the Roc, in Sinbad and the Of course, this varies month. And then there's the the Gromuts, but is unable to Golden Ship. depending upon which somewhat expected 'new pass the one at the south of the If you are suffering from an machine you are playing on, entries'. This month has seen a gate near the big dipper. Adventure, then don't forget and I am referring to the noticeable increase in Pawn to drop us a line. We will get Commodore 64 versions, problems only to be back to you with a good tip if bearing in mind that Infocom expected as new machine possible, but come what may, games do not have graphics to versions have started to we WILL get back to you! and fetch and display. Sometimes, appear at an increasing rate. propres of course, we'll be delighted if too, the stringing together of But an unexpected Mike Thomas (oh no, not you can help us to help other commands results in not even phenomenon has been an him AGAIN?) has moved his desperate adventurers! the first of the string being upsurge of questions on wardrobe, and discovered a There's Paul Coppins, recognised, even though Sinbad and the Golden Ship. flight of stone steps leading professional adventure-tester perfectly acce This is a Mastertronic downwards. But he can't get and inveterate bacon sandwich own. adventure, going back to 1985 much further without getting eater; Steve Donoghue, horse Guy's well-reasoned -the clues in my file, are killed by three of Dracula's problems a speciality: criticisms of my views on these dated January 1986! Perhaps female vampires. Now there's Matthew Woodley, a highly parsers, and his distress over something is going on that no a problem to get your teeth successful adventure player my Bards's Tale review, earn one has told me about! into! with cash to prove it, plus And all at once, inroads are A couple of BBC golden Daniel Gilbert and Adrian Bott. being made on Trinity, but not oldies are plaguing Martin who only play to win at home! Rainer Fuchs and Dennett of Sutton Coldfield. Here's an unsolicited Stephen Englhout are the first He can't answer the riddle at testimonial from Joanne two readers who have written the end of Kingdom of Hamil, Tucker of Croydon. \"Thanks! to say they have completed nor can he understand the You're the best. I buy both him a coveted C+VG T-shirt. this Infocom epic and both banking system in Quondam. Zzap and C+VG, but you're Which just goes to show we are from West Germany. Another oldie is causing slightly better, since you care, don't only reward 'yes' men in Adrian Smith of Cambridge and answer your this magazine! We like to be some distress. Not quite so old adventurers. Only kept on our toes! or so golden as those BBC SLIGHTLY better? Shame on Not everyone, of course has games is Inferno, where you, Joanne!! Service to our access to a disk drive, and Martin has reached inner hell, readers is the most important those of us that do tend but Titan blocks his escape. part of our job! automatically to rate disk \"I desperately need some help Typing HELP reveals he adventures more highly than with this completely mad, but needs Virgil's help -but is almost any tape-only brilliant adventure,\" writes there a special command adventure. Not so with Simon Percival of Colchester. required to get it? Gregory Quinn, himself an A troll is blocking Simon's Aage Christoffersen of Guy Thomas of Whitstable is avid Infocom player. Dracula. PROBLEMS? THEN WRITE TO KEITH CAMPBELL, COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES, ADVENTURE HELPLINE, "


"ADVENTURE CLUES a humble Quilled three-parter uoods ay 128 ueu peap iYueday on tape, is the best adventure ay Wool y olur Suro8 Emmes-s yi uo jB OL Gregory has played in ages. logq ey s. y M V.LT SVAVAS \"I just love the long NOUVO S.HOLIM atmospheric descriptions, they're just like reading a fus ay Yoroo ay ureas book,\" says Gregory, adding: Jo sea punoj aqueo sea 41 ay napun soyuq 21 JOYL \"I hope Rod Pike produces CINCI ANNOOM VInvia some more brilliant games like this.\" 19je  s  znbg I'm sure he will, Gregory, \"duunjan pe u 1489 and I look forward to them 198 01 apiray doia di  n    too. But it just goes to show yi udo oi papaau si apeds V WTH SHL that quality is in the plot and HALINTUL implementation, whatever the medium used. Disk will only Surddor insean wonoay make possble what can't be  uuq [[  poo8  Jeau Baou Suipue Yos e 10 done on tape it isn't a magic LI AIXAXIVA formula for success. INOJOLLSVINY Wojeweys leg je jersko ay Moly pue rije Roj e ure 01 jean poo e pony y je rqunu ew yi kes TIM Supp uansey i jeH IOVA   NOILVNISVWI The Pawn was responsible for what Carl Young of Nottingham described as a *rather annoying incident recently. The game asked him to type in a word from the book (part of the game's coach that it hits him. Who can Doom messages mentioned by security system) and requested help warm him up? Malcolm Harden some time page 17, line six, word eight. Paul Stapley, meanwhile, back. It appears as a message Carl looked up the word, has been both playing the when you do something entered it and it didn't game and not playing the naughty to the female android, work. \"I found the answer William Hern of Aberdeen, game. Sounds like something suggests Gareth. \"After that, after much arsing about, and has discovered some bugs in out of Hitch Hiker??! It's true! try paying her!\" adds Gareth. completely by luck,\" says the Atari ST version of some Despite having discovered a Carl. If you get stuck, then try Infocom games. Are they most complex method of page 17, line eight, word nine, present in all versions, he cheating Quilled games in such suggests Carl!! A T-shirt flies wonders? a way that he can get to any in his general direction for this In Wishbringer, after buying location, he cannot get into tip. the ticket from Miss Voss, you the mansion in Dracula Part Here's an offer Zorkers can't Meanwhile, the game-play can pick up the gold coin. Three. refuse! Anyone wanting a problems are gathering Thus you can keep buying Lost in the forest, and in complete map of Zork 1 or momentum in the Helpline tickets, and increase your search of the Carfax Estate, is Zork 2, can take advantage of mail. Two recent letters from score continually! Paul Wilkins of Leytonstone, a kind offer by Dave Owens. West Germany, showed In Zork 2, William whilst Lewis McNiece of Enclose a large stamped Reiner Wald of Bonn trying discovered that if you die after Carrickfergus, has found the addressed envelope, and write hard to rescue the princess, having killed the dragon both place, and trying to Dave at: 83 College Road, and to get her safely down the yourself and the dragon are unsuccessfully, to enter it! Trowbridge, Wilts BA14 8N2. stairs, but to no avail. Why do reincarnated. Although And some adventure people always want to rescue transparent, the dragon will support for TI owners, and B. princesses, I wonder? follow you around, and will Anderson of High Wycombe in Tim Sattelkau of melt the ice again, which it particular, comes from Kirsty Luedenscheid, on the other thinks is still there too!! Clift. Kirsty suggests hand, is bemoaning the fact No you can't, says Gareth contacting the International that he can either vote and Williams of Swansea. The TI User Group' run by Peter gain 40 points with no other crack in Twin Kingdom Valley Brooks, 96 Banbury Road, apparent advantage in the is a red herring! and it only Oxford OX26JT (tel: Oxford game. Or he can rescue the Richard Brock of Hemel appears in the C64 version of 510822). The group's princess instead, but for no Hempstead has really been the game. magazine has an adventure points. Oh ho! \"And what is feeling the cold this winter. It's Gareth has also cracked helpline, and will give advice the prism for?\" he asks. when he gets out of Dracula's how to get the strange Ship of on softwre availability. PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU "


"es produced in two separate When Keith Campbell first set eyes on The Pawn it adventure that matters at versions one for 16-bit was enough to make him go out and buy an Atari Magnetic Scrolls. Ironic computers, the other for 8-bit when you think it was the computers. Geoff Quilley uses ST just to be able to play it! That was one year ago. stunning graphics of The Pawn the Neochrome utility on the and it's seemed like an age waiting for the second which first caught people's Atari ST to produce the offering from Magnetic Scrolls' Why has it taken imagination before they were originals, which are later hooked on the subtleties of the transferred to the Amiga and so long, and what have they been up to since last parser. other 16-bit micros. April? KC went along to find out. Scrolls were so confident \"The graphics capability of about the quality of their the ST is not so advanced as system that they were busy that of the Amiga, but the working on the follow up to results are so good that there Pawn even BEFORE the seems little point in working to original QL version was the Amiga standard,\" claimed released! That follow up was Anita Sinclair. Guild of Thieves. All except that \"special\" But the success of Pawn title screen, of course, meant that every computer which is geared up to the owner under the sun wanted a full power of each copy. And that meant working machine. will do so for all machines in on conversions rather than The 8-bit pictures quick succession, since the bringing out new adventures. are manually copied donkey work of writing the Pawn was never planned to from the originals, systems has been completed. go out in so many versions as on the Commodore And then Anita and her crew now exist. But when you are 64, by artist Tristram will be able to concentrate on on to a good thing it would be Humphries, who also uses a the next title. foolish indeed not to make the graphics utility. These form It could be Upon most of it. the basis of all other 8-bit Westminster Bridge, which will During the past year, Scrolls graphics. be a completely different type have managed what they had Tristram had called in with of adventure. originally thought impossible. his first batch of screens when picture.\" Anita was quite Or it might even be one Their biggest triumph was the I arrived at Scrolls' office, and definite, confirming that presently code-named GM, full graphic version of the I was able to enjoy the indeed, it is the adventure another saga of Kerovnia. But Commodore 64. unveiling of the C64 pics. itself that comes first. Rainbird Software, the \"We didn't really think we Tristram has used different I n fact, quality is the prime publishers, will not let me could do that on the 64,\" colours in each tiny pixel to aim at MS. I quoted the view reveal the proper title. Anita Sinclair, boss of give the illusion of more of a Spectrum-owning C+VG Which it is, you won't have Magnetic Scrolls, confessed. colour than is actually there, reader, who dearly wanted to so long to wait this time. It's All this took time, for the and to add a degree of detail be able to play The Pawn, and due to hit the streets within the system had to be re-written. that is missing in the Pawn who wasn't worried about next two or three months. Roddy Pratt was engaged pictures. Each picture took being able to do things that are primarily with this task in him about 30 hours of work to irrelevant to the game just for mind, and is mainly produce. the sake of a \"clever\" parser. There comes a time when an responsible for the 'miracle The 30 or so pictures in the \"We once sat down and editor looks suspiciously at a on the 64. game, are nowhere near considered what we would reviewer who has been playing During this period, Guild enough for one per location, need to do, to achieve just a game for a long time. Could was already taking shape, for despite heavy compression that, she explained. \"We he actually be enjoying it, Artist Geoff Quilley had of the graphics code (down to would lose Eliza (the parser), rather than playing it because already been hard at work about 22%) there simply isn't half the vocabulary, and have it is his job too? producing the illustrations to enough room on one disk. to slim the game down One minute the poor fellow go with the scenario. With all When the space limitis hit, drastically, for there is 80k is working hard, and the next, the versions of Pawn nearly what takes priority if there is a that is unique to the game even though doing the same behind them, Guild was ready nice little puzzle still not itself. We would have a game, thing, he is malingering! to be implemented in earnest. implemented in the game? just, but The Pawn-or Guild Well, I have to admit to a Guild, like its predecessor, \"We go for better would be totally destroyed. good deal of malingering with has about 30 graphics complexity in the game itself. It's not what we set out to do.\" Guild of Thieves. Set in the locations, and these are rather than for the extra When Guild comes out, it legendary Kerovnia, you are HIT HOUSE Files Text b a Graphics Goodies oftari soft light which are 900 feel relaxed an asy. There are sits in the souti ad ust walls. The war glou Are the fire is reflectei in Sticket tot stand close to the grate. 33t tie soos of the fire Files Text b raphics De Goodies 33t the succulents you reach out to get the succulents the spider s e toards your landi. Esstils you stay out of reach all the site with the salt "


"of Thieves pre-production copy has been exchanged for a final version, in which the endgame will be fully implemented. THEN perhaps I'll discover what that prehistoric bird is doing flying overhead halfway through the fishing, ski-ing, billiards, game?! boating, or just plain Guild of Thieves will be gambling, if you are among available very soon after you the less active. read this. Don't hesitate to go For the more daring, there's out and buy a copy as soon as plenty of danger, too! How'd it's around! you fancy a walk across redGuild holds such a wealth of hot coals? A tussle with a puzzles and surprises, it will grizzly bear? Or a trip through make even the best budget rat-infested room? adventures look expensive in Naturally, I've got hooked, terms of what you get for your and can't wait until my very money! 233 will come across what I reckon to be the finest picture in the whole game. Working by night, a lamp on the ground nearby is a a taken by boat to a jetty, and gravedigger intent on his task, dropped off, being told to seen through the half-open ransack the local castle, by iron gates of the cemetery. way of a test assignment. The lighting and colour You must return with all the gradation of this picture are booty! Fully kitted out for the nothing short of amazing. task, you find yourself Further south is a dropped by boat at the jetty, mysterious temple. If you are wearing jeans, striped into frescos, you will no doubt sweatshirt, and carrying a recognise some famous ones swag bag. decorating its walls. The master of the castle is On the other hand, if you hiding a dark secret, whilst his are into coloured squares, you gatekeeper is running a little might eventually discover betting business on the side. some satanic secrets in the If he likes the look of your temple's deeper recesses. face, he may even invite you to The puzzles themselves are have a flutter, so it will pay not not quite so sequential, and to be penniless when the time are less devious than those in comes! Pawn, so that, to a greater But not all the action takes extent, it is possible to place in the castle. The concentrate on one at a time, surrounding countryside and then come back in a replay makes for a pleasant stroll, to follow up another one. through the golden fields of There is quite a range of wheat, and perhaps a leisurely difficulty, but even the ones chat with the friendly miller. that seem impossible at the Ooops! Watch that step on the start don't come too hard once way out! you've got the feel of the Scrub, copses, and a river game. give way to a hill, itself the If you can't make all the entrance to the inevitable) connections, don't worry complex of caves. Here you there's a wealth of clues may visit the zoological scattered around the game, so gardens (if you have the cash), make sure you read all the and try talking to a mynah magazines, books, and bird, or perhaps get wrapped pamphlets that you come up in an encounter with a across! boa-constrictor. Here is a huge adventure, Not far away is the local with seemingly endless cemetery, with a somewhat variety. There's plenty of cereal grave. This is where you scope for sport including Files 1 ,23 022 Text che oltar Graphics Tulos r , Goodies 303: Files Text Wibe Graphics foodies cols the whole contrast location by the Iron Heich ist: 8:01:2. gravedigger i bard it work bere a leger your entrance vita a rit! Mod and continu bir toile 2 out the #095_ 1. Hifi HH! ! SFiles raphics Condicis panier Text Graphics Goodies to the 9th 1 0 9. 411 ist trili 1:to 4 12.3R stres a. 1931 3 11 11 terusalus one the test's en 201 S "


"STATUS SOFTWARE THE GILT EDGED LABEL Now the Status Software label Now in your local store Tiger brings you games you can Mission. Pilot your helicopter rely on. over enemy territory. Your task Superb sounds, great graphics, to seek and destroy using the fast action. The gilt edged latest heat seeking missiles and label for people who demand bombs. Five skill levels in the best realistic settings. Buy a copy now. Available Commodore Cassette .95 Disk .95 Coming soon Amstrad/ peculum TIGERS EMISSIONS ITETIT KELE LINE AS E AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE STORES Status Software. Unit B11. Armstrong Mall. The Summit Centre, Southwood, Farnborough, Hants. GU14 ONP Tel. 0252 543303 "


"SCOTT ADAMS SCOOPS SUPPLIER: US GOLD MACHINE: SPECTRUM; AMSTRAD; C-64; C-16; BBC/ ELECTRON: ATARI (8-bit) PRICE: .99 PIRATE ADVENTURE Written jointly by Scott and his wife Alexis, this game starts off in your London flat, from where you have to travel to Pirate's Island. Here you have build a boat, but in order to sail to the nearby Treasure Island to collect your treasures, you first have to find and win over the Pirate! One of the easier of Scott's adventures. Running a Spectrum side by side with the original TRS-80 versions, I could not find any noticeable difference in the text, or the responses, at all, even down to the opening d feel that the Spectrum character set used gave a much less tidy appearance to the screen, and took away some of the original 'feel'. VOODOO CASTLE teleport device. Discovering film of the same name, which This game was written solely how it works is part of the fun was shown in the USA in 1984, by Alexis. Count Cristo is -you never quite know at but never saw the screen in the lying dead in his coffin, and what strange place you might UK. This is the first UK only by performing a strange be deposited next, from an release of the game on any ritual around it can you restore alien zoo to a methane format. him to life. First you must snowstorm. Buckaroo Banzai has a discover the ritual and then Collecting alien treasures, vehicle which will travel find the ingredients necessary, and repairing your ship are the through solid matter -just as before the final climax around main aims of this game. Oh, well for it will sure come in the coffin. by the way beware the useful in finding the nuclear Rigellian Dia-ice hound! device invading aliens planted. STRANGE ODYSSEY My least favourite of all This is a science fiction BUCKAROO BANZAI Scott's games. adventure. Your space craft is This was not one of the PA VC SO BB  VOCAB crippled, and investigation of original 14 adventures, it was a ATMOS its surroundings leads you to one-off, co-written with Phillip PERSONAL 8 4 6 3 the discovery of a strange alien Case, and was based on the  VALUE 10 10 10 10 SUPPLIER:TARTAN SOFTWARE only one bullet. One bullet surveillance devices designed PRICE:.95 MACHINE:SPECTRUM 48k means only one chance, so you to trap intruders like yourself. REVIEWER:STEVE DONOGHUE must make the most of your Once you have figured out single opportunity. what is going on in this very As the title implies, with this After figuring out a way into unusual castle, it's time to cassette for the Spectrum. you the castle, the fun really make your findings known and receive two adventures instead begins. It doesnt take long to contact the outside world, of one. Both games have realize that a gang of criminals From now on, it's a race graphics for the majority of are using the castle for their against time as the villains try locations along with the usual purposes, but exactly what for to dispose of you at the final game save and restore is not yet apparent. Between hurdle. features. dodging the forever present Shipwreck follows a nautical As the name suggests. guards, you must get around theme in which you must first Castle Eerie is set inside a the castle, making use of some plan your own survival by seemingly deserted run down of the objects to help you cross making it safely from a castle, which is apparently between rooms which are passenger cruiser which is haunted and creating quite a inaccessible due to decay after about to sink. to a desert scare among the local years of neglect. island. Once there (providing inhabitants. As special agent E very nook and cranny you make it that far you must Charlie Jones. (from the must be explored and searched find the items necessary to loading instructions you and because the castle is so bring about your rescue. appear to be a right charlie as large that's an awful lot of the story unfolds on board well!) you are assigned to find places. A well contructed map ship where an announcement out what is happening inside will help a lot at this stage. Not is made that there is a small the castle. only that, but as you move fire in the engine room. Being a right charlie means towards the centre of the although at this stage there is criminal operations, you must no cause for concem. Being a grounds with a gun containing contend with electronic rather shrewd person, you realize that all may not be well, so you plan your safe escape from the liner I soon found that once more it pays to be friendly, and tipping a bartender pays its own rewards. The purchase of a map of the surrounding ocean helps a lot, so does finding the ship's current position at sea. Once free of the ship, and with the aid of a little navigation, you find yourself washed up on the sandy beach of a nearby island. That's where the fun really begins. Finding your way around the ship was bad enough, but on the island... well there's lots of places where trouble abounds for the novice castaway. Castle Eerie Shipwreck VOCABULARY 7 ATMOSPHERE 9 999 VALUE "


"Lo 5 2 REVIEWS SAVAGE ISLAND PART 1 hurricane never left without killing me. Savage Island is too outdated now to be a decent game. It was first released on the TRS-80 back in 1982, and although it now has some nice quickly drawn graphics (the screen is split into two, with graphics in the top part and scrolling text below it) it is nothing to write ho VOCABULARY ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL VALUE been filled in with rain water to form a lake. One use of the log is as a means for floating any heavy objects across that you think will be useful.  SUPPLIER: TYNESOFT/ you very far, so you have to Also to be found in the ADVENTURE SOFT start making decisions about volcano is a rather gruesome MACHINE: SPECTRUM, grizzly bear. But the bear is what to do. COMMODORE+4, C-64, C-16, First thing on your agenda the least of your problems as BBC/ELECTRON, ATARI PRICE: .95 should be to take some the random hurricane tears REVIEWER: MATTHEW coconuts from the around the island. I call it WOODLEY conveniently positioned tree random because it is. As far as The first in the Savage Island on one of the beaches. But if n one of the beaches. But if I know whether you survive duo is, aptly enough, called you hang around too long the hurricane or not is a purely Savage Island Part One. The before finding shelter, a nasty random affair. During the game starts off with you on the hurricane called Alexis comes days I spent playing it, the beach of the island, standing and rips you apart in a very next to a large stone head unfriendly manner. rather like those found at But this ill wind there Easter Island indeed does blow some good, From this starting positon as the hurricane knocks down you can wander along three some trees which you can other beaches, and if you somehow pick up and carry for really want to, you can take a use later. SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD swim in the shark infested The island's dormant  MACHINE: COMMODORE waters. But this doesn't get volcano has a crater which has 64. AMSTRAD, SPECTRUM PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: KEITH CAMPBELL He's at it again! Peter Torrence, that prolific purveyor of adventures, is  SUPPLIER: TYNESOFT/ with a Neaderthal man. back already after Apache ADVENTURE SOFT You must experiment with MACHINE: SPECTRUM; Gold with yet another COMMODORE+4, C-64, C-16, the object you brought with offering this time on the BBC/ELECTRON, ATARI you in a rather unobvious way, Firebird label once more. PRICE: .95 and learn how to psychoREVIEWER: KEITH Imagination has you sitting transfigure, to eventually solve CAMPBELL in front of your computer with the mystery of the stone head To get into Part Two, you a disk of unknown contents on the beach, and the reason need the password that ends for the disappearance of which you picked up in a dusty Part One. But there is the snag dinosaurs from the face of the condition from under a pile of Scott has provided two earth. Be warned -it is very old games in the corner of a different passwords, one of difficult! computer store. Despite the which allows you carry And overpriced, too. I fact that the slightest bit of through a specific object with would have thought these dust on a disk will render it. you — if you are carrying it games would have been better and probably your drive, with you when you complete bundled together, and sold at unusuable, you insert it, and Part One. about .50 for the text find a menu offering four You enter the game version, and .95 for the games. completely naked, facing a graphics versions, to make Select any one of the titles, force field. One short step them comparable value to the through it, and you meet a and you are into the game of Scott Adams Scoops tape from your choice, taking part gory end in a vacuum. But US Gold. before long, you'll have solved adventure-style. \"Raid Over VOCABULARY that little problem, to find Margate\" puts you in the ATMOSPHERE yourself inside an alien space PERSONAL turret of a tank on an old ship, where you soon meet up VALUE airfield at Margate. If you choose '2002' you are transported to the inside of a time machine disguised as an AA box. (It is much smaller inside than it is out, and comes complete with a timelord.) \"The Lords of Half Past Nine\" has a scenario very similar to a well-known epic, whilst Panic Miner\" consists of a series of platforms in the form of a maze, where memory guzzling sprites form a constant danger, Within all of this, your objective, as determined by the timelord, is to find the number of stars in the universe. Not an impossible task, you might think, but the problem with Peter Torrence's games is the problems. They defy all logic, and yet seem logical enough afterwards. Imagination has graphics at most locations, and was using GAC in Peter's inimitable tongue-in-cheek text. Nothing world-shattering, but you can't help liking it! VOCABULARY ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL VALUE "


"SEEN ON TV AS GAMES SEEN ON TV SPECTRUM 4 8/128 NOW m ES VIRGIN GAMES proudly presents NOW GAMES 4! No dedicated games player can afford to miss this bumper pack. There are 5 full priced hits on one cassette, each chart-topping game works out at a budget game price. Leading the way is the incredible \"DAN DARE PILOT OF THE FUTURE\" from Virgin. There's the hit game of everyone's favourite film \"BACK TO THE FUTURE\" and a chance to crack systems with \"HACKER\", both from Activision. \"MISSION OMEGA\" from Mind Games requires strategic thinking against the clock and Jonah Barrington says \"JONAH BARRINGTON'S SQUASH\" is so realistic it may even help improve your game. This is a first for Amstrad owners as this has never been released before! AVAILABLE FROM COMMODORE 64/128, SPECTRUM 48/128 AND AMSTRAD CPC computers, on cassette for .95. Now Games 4 is available from all good software retailers or directly from Virgin Games with this coupon. You can get exceptional prices on other NOWS in this great series and the more you buy, the more you save! HACKER FIVE GREAT GAMES NOW GAMES Spectrum 48/128 and Commodore 64/128 Featuring Lords of Midnight (Beyond) Strangeloop and Falcon Patrol (Virgin Games) Pyjamerama (Mikro-Gen) Arabian Nights (Interceptor), Brian Bloodaxe (The Edge). NOW GAMES 2 Spectrum 48/128 and Commodore 64/128. Featuring: Alnwolf (Elite). Chuckle Egg 2 (AWF) Tir Na Mog (Gargoyle) Cauldron (Palace Software). World Cup (Artic) NOW GAMES 3 Spectrum 4B/128. Commodore 64/128 and Amstrad CPC . Featuring: Nick Falda Plays the Open (Mind Games Sorcery (Virgin Games). Codename Mat Iland View to a kin (Domark), Everyone's a Wally (Mikro-Gen) Please circle the software you require Send this coupon to VIRGIN GAMES LTD, 24 VERNON YARD. PORTOBELLO ROAD, LONDON WT12DX Please make cheques and postal orders payable to VIRGIN GAMES LTD. Please do not post coins of money SPECTRUM .95 .95 .95 .95 NOW GAMES 4 ONLY NOW GAMES NOW GAMES 2 NOW GAMES 3 SET WHICH INCLUDES NOW GAMES, NOW GAMES 2 and NOW GAMES 3 COMMODOREAMSTRAD .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 NAME ADDRESS AMOUNT ENCLOSED .00 .00 "


"Hildegarde days when Aunt Hildegarde thought in the parser and were not blessed warned you about going in vocabulary, for Infocom's is with children, there without a map! now beginning to look a little but and as kids, At this point the game old in the tooth, when spent you and your becomes infuriating, but what compared with that of cousins many happy are adventures about if not the Magnetic Scrolls. holidays at their satisfaction gained from A visit to the bedroom you superb seaside mansion. finding you are clever enough used to sleep in on your hols, Buddy died some years ago, to solve logical problems? So reminds you of the time when and now, following the recent there must be a way in, and you slept in the bottom bunk, death of Hildegarde, you are the means is staring you in the and cousin Herman got sick in SUPPLIER: INFOCOM/ attending the reading of her face right from the start. When the top bunk... You got your ACTIVISION will. there's nothing left to do, you own back later by sticking MACHINE: C64; SPECTRUM honey up his nose, and was PRICE: VARIES soon in trouble for being out REVIEWER: KEITH CAMPBELL of bed with a cold. That is just one small example of the This is one of Infocom's best, depth of the background theme that runs throughout written by new author \"Hollywood' Dave Anderson, the game. Imagine your amazement will turn to it, and, perhaps, it An excellent adventure with who in 1983 joined Infocom as when you hear they are will turn to you! As a puzzle a tester, and after progressing some difficult but very leaving their entire estate to sheer poetry! to manager of testing, became you, their favourite nephew! This is a house full of traps rewarding puzzles. a game writer in 1985. But there is one snag—you and surprises, and just to VOCABULARY Your Uncle Buddy Burbank must spend a night in the make you feel uneasy, the ATMOSPHERE CHVG was a Hollywood big-shot in mansion and its grounds and sound of nearby footsteps is PERSONAL HIT! HIT! 10 his time. He and his wife find ten treasures hidden on sometimes heard... VALUE the premises by morning. Something heavy falls to the On your arrival, you head to floor upstairs... Are you the porch, full of anticipation being manipulated? Or is one and find the door is locked. of your other cousins But wait, there's a back prowling, trying to prevent door, just by the patio. It just you from getting the couldn't be that easy though, treasures? There is plenty of could it? Of course, that door food for thought in many of too, is locked. There's not an the puzzles in HHJ, meaning awful lot more you can do, that they are the sort you can unless you fancy chancing your chew over, and come up with a arm in the hedge maze and number of angles of attack. how well you remember the There is also food for SUPPLIER: PLAYERS SMART SOFTWARE MACHINE: SPECTRUM 48K PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: KEITH CAMPBELL It was the review copy of yet Spectrum, and found an commands, plus FULL and another version of Colossal almost completely different BRIEF to control the amount Cave landing on my desk, that game from the standard of location text displayed prompted me to investigate Colossal. The text is enhanced However, you will not find a what Nigel Brooks and Said and completely rewritten multi-word parser. Nigel Hassan, who are Smart Egg In fact this is Colossal Cave Brooks and Said Hassan Software, were up to. Of in a very different guise, and it believe the problems in the particular interest is the fact stands playing even if you have original adventure were that a new source of adventure played the original, since constructed with two work games is not using a many of the problems have input in mind, and have stuck commercially available utility been reworked. to the same format. like the Quill, as is so often the The text system achieves A new concept in marking case, but their own, effective better than 50% compression progress in the game is the and superior system. and as extras there are GET STATUS command, which Iloaded Serf's Tale into the ALL, and DROP ALL tells you have many locations you have visited, as well as number of treasures stored. And as it does so, the existing screen is cleared with a rather neat dissolving routine. Just one black mark to Interceptor, for naming this game Serf's Tale on their Players label. There is no indication for unsuspecting customers, that this is really Colossal. But for such a smart program, .99 must be the best value Colossal ever! VOCABULARY ATMOSPHERE | CHV0 PERSONAL VALUE "


"Short of Floppy Discs ? C CF-2 DISC DISC ISC SCC COMPACT FLADY DISC Double Sec Bor Srole Sound Paco De De lecce 12C D BI2C op D12C por   DI2C CE-5 3\" Discs now available New low price for these top quality discs. Suitable for all Amstrad disc based computers. (except the PC1512) 3\" CF-2 Floppy Discs .99 Each Available from branches of:Allders, Currys, Comet, Dixons, Laskys, John Lewis, Rymans, Wildings and good independent computer stockists. AMSTRAD Amstrad Plc. Brentwood House, 169 King's Road, Brentwood Essex. CM14 4EF. "


"24 COMPUTER REPAIRS AMSTRAD APPROVED REPAIR CENTRE QUALITY APPROVED -SINCLAIR REPAIR CENTRE HOW TO GET YOUR SPECTRUM REPAIRED FOR ONLY .95 QUALITY SPECIAL OFFER! SPECIAL OFFER! WHILE YOU WAIT SERVICE CALL FOR APPOINTMENT SPECTRUM (only) KEYBOARD REPAIRS E8.95 THE CHEAPEST AROUND FOR DE USERADE KIT Bahan ZX81 SPARES NOW IN STOCK Geme THE NOISE S REPAIR CENTRE IN THE U.K OTHERS FOLLOW WHY NOT COME AND SO.FT. WORKSHOP, YOU CAN VISIT US AT OUR NEW 2.500 EVEN HAVE A CUP OF COFFEE WHILE YOU WAIT Why not upgrade your ordinary Spectrum into Why not upgrade your to Sectrum te the fantastic Fronics pewriter keyboard for only $31.50 including formes E17.95 n ing VAT post and pacing ting VAT and ou Woud is too return post and packing YOU send us .95 which is Normal recommended retail price a fully inclusive price to cover .95 Replacement printed DK Tronics key costs including return sets .50 including post ulting instructions packing supplied with every kit Issue 2 and 3 only Update Your Rubber Keyboard to a New Spectrum+ Fitted for only .90 . 150 post pacing AIO DIY Kit av forony 2495 150 post packing Your Spectrum repaired and upgraded to a Spectrum Plus for special offer price of .00 complete LIMITED OFFER Same day service KEYBOARD TEMPLATES .50 plus  p&p RUBBER MAT .50 Five top games worth $39.00 for you to plus .50 p&p ) enjoy and play with every Spectrum repair 56 Way We repair Commodore 64's, Vic 20's. ribbon cable to Commodore 16's and Plus 4's. extend your ports for T REPLACEMENT The most up to date test equipment your peripherals POWER SUPPLY developed by us to fully test and find all .95 Spectrum replacement faults within your computer plus 1.50 p&p power transformer keyboard repairs, Spectrum rubber key suitable for all makes boards only .95 of computer .95 plus .50 p&D * 3 month written guarantee on all repairs. BEST PRICES! KEYBOARD MEMBRANES EXTENSION RIBBON TEN X REPAIR SERVICE While you wait service including computer spare parts over the counter *All computers fully overhauled and fully tested before return * Fully insured for the return journey. Fixed low price of .95 including post packing and VAT. (Nota between price of really up to .00 which some of our competitors are quoting). Discounts for schools and colleges. BEST SERVICE TRADE REPAIRS welcome NEW TRADE ARE YOU ANOTHER CUSTOMER fed up waiting weeks for your estimate? ORDERS WELCOME COMMODORE POWER SUPPLY Cun Shot Rode brand Need your computer repaired fast? Then send it now to the Number One Repair interface complete ou Norm Spectrum keyboard recommended retail price 95 Company in the U.K., or call in and see us at our fully equipped 2.500 square foot workshop membranes with all the latest test equipment available. You are more than welcome. of onivE16.50 including po .50 plus .50 p&p We will repair your computer while you wait and help you with any of your technical problems. ovstick avaluable as separate tem.95 Spectrum Plus spare Commodore computers repaired for only .00. Please note we gove you a 100% low fixed pius interface available as separate tem 69.00 plus et 50 p&p keyboard membranes price of .95 which includes return post and packing, VAT, not a between price like some .90 plus .50 p&p other Repair Companies offer. We don't ask you to send a cheque in for the maximum amount and ZX 81 membranes shock you with repair bills E30 upwards. Don't forget we are Amstrad aproved for quality and speed, don't risk your computer to any other unauthorised repair centre. We dont just repair the .00 plus .50 p&D fault and send your computer back, we give your computer a:OVERHAUL WITH EVERY REPAIR WE DO:ON-OFF SWITCHES We correct colour, sound, Keyboard, Check the loading and saving chip. Put new feet on FOR THE SPECTRUM the base if required, Check for full memory, check all sockets including ear/mike and replace Commodore replacement power where needed. All for an inclusive price of .95 including VAT, all parts, Insurance and post AND SPECTRUM + transformer 629 00 and packing. No hidden extras whatsoever. We don't have to boast too much about our plus .50 D&D ORDER NO service as we have thousands of customers from all over the world highly delighted with our 1067 SPECTRUM service. A first class reputation for speed and accuracy. Don't forget, we also now have a Service Branch in Manchester City Centre for while you wait service. 1067A SPECTRUM+ USE ANY JOYSTICK WITH .95 + 1.50 p + P SPECTRUM SPARES COMMODORE SPARES YOUR Vietovauu 6526-CLA 19.00 4116 Rams 6510-Processor SPECTRUM + 2 ZTX 650 ZTX 213 6581-Sid Chip 19.00 Power Supply Transformers 9.95 906114-House Keeper 19.00 ULA 6C001 901225 Graphic Rom 19.00 Rom 16.50 901226 Basic Rom 19.00 Keyboard membrane 901227-Kernal Rom 19.00 SINCLAIR JOYSTICK 5.50 6569-VIC 25.00 We regret we cannot Keyboard membrane ADAPTOR FOR show all the components Spectrum Plus membrane 12.90 4154 Rams-Memory 3.00 CONNECTING Metal Templates Power Supply available. Just give us a Keyboard Mats SPECTRUM +2 29.00 Transformers call and we can quote you 1 membrane 500 COMPUTERS TO MOST All our prices include VAT but please add over the phone, delivery Service Manual 05000 150 on each order to cover post by 1st class post JOYSTICKS packing and handling charges ALL NEW STOCK Not like some other companies, selling second hand parts at half price. All our spares are fully guaranteed. VIDEOVAULT HEALTH WARNING!!! Sending your computer to any other Repair Centre can seriously Damage its Health ORDER No 1062 19.00 RRP.ES 95 Our Price .50 D.I.Y. CORNER POST + PACKING CHARGES UK ONLY OVERSEAS POST + PACKING CHARGES PLEASE WRITE FOR QUOTE SPECIAL OFFER NO 6 GREAT FREE GAMES RECOMMENDED E NORMAL YOURS FREE WITH EVERY SPECTRUM REPAIR Video Vault OPEN OPEN 7 A WEEK VIACovaluta DAYS A WEEK MANCHESTER MONDAY SATURDAY ROAY ONLY 140 High Street West, Glossop, Derbyshire SK13 8HJ Tel: 04574-66555/67761 Head office & access orders, queeries Manchester 061-236 0376 while you wait repair centre only. WE NOW HAVE FAX: (0) 4574 68946 "


"and COMPUTER SPARES Bergengs... STOP PRESS... STOP PRESS... A NEW EXCITING Video OFFER FROM THE DISCOUNT JOYSTICKS BUDGET SOFTWARE SPARE ARTS Solo A. DDESS PRARE Vice Vault wwwa LIMITED  WAK COMPUTER Videovault COMPANION Video Vault LIMITED SHOP UNDER A DELANO og FLO PROFILE The Videovault will shortly be releasing the most up to date and exciting catalogue ever S produced, our team of experts have scoured the globe to find you all the latest software ONE ROOF FOR ALL THES and add on's for your computer, all the TOP PRODUCTS AVAILABLET latest in joystick technology, all the top and tested software titles all at great discounts A SAMPLE OF to you. Anyone can apply now using the coupon below and enclosing 2x18p stamps OUR FANTASTIC for your free copy. We have all the top branded items available, delivery by return D DISCOUNT PRICES post (our usual standard). All goods carry The Saga Lo Profile our guarantee of satisfaction. Never has Professional keyboard such a catalogue ever been produced Recommended retail price .95 before. DISCOUNT Videovault We will be updating the products a soon as discount ce we have all the latest news available to us, price only .50+ .50 post + packing, total  on all the latest technology. Computer repair and upgrade to Saga .00 complete. SPECIAL EXCITING OFFERS ON EACH ISSUE The Saga Lo Profile Keyboard has 52 full OVERSEAS BOERS Top reviews, a 1st again for the Videovault, travel keys, featuring a separate numeric keypad and printed keys. Your Spectrum MOST the No.1 computer company in the UK, (we fits securely inside the housing. must be as all our competitors keep copying us.) Dimensions: 22x44x5cm. Suitable for WELCOME Spectrum 16/48K and Spectrum Plus. KEYBOARDS M SPECIAL BONUS I PLEASE RUSH ME YOUR EXCITING NEW CATALOGUE I I AS SOON AS IT IS AVAILABLE HOT OFF THE PRESS. I | ENCLOSE 2x 18p STAMPS TO COVER POSTAGE COSTS MR/MRS/MISS ADDRESS the 1st 500 customers ordering from our new catalogue will receive free of charge a quartz digital watch. No minimum order value required.  Copyright Videovault Ltd. No. 781022 POST CODE CUT OUT THIS COUPON AND POST IT TO: BLOCK CAPITALS PLEASE VIDEOVAULT LTD, CATALOGUE DEPT, 140 HIGH STREET WEST GLOSSOP, DERBYSHIRE, SK13 8HJ ENGLAND "


"AARRGHE  IPC MAGAZINES., 1987 on 400/806 NOW FOOTBALL MANAGEMENT LOOK\" XLUXE ST ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to:CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 3 Classic Football Management Strategy Games Each of these Quality games is packed with GENUINE FEATURES to make them the most REALISTIC available PREMIER I A COMPREHENSIVE LEAGUE GAME Pay teams home and away. Full squad detaisal teams. Injuries Team styles. In match substitutes Named recorded goalscorers Compre hensive transfermarket 5 5 ve Financal problems Job Oor More Save game and MORE! Price 4812 Spectrum (5.95 Also available on the 54128 Commodore PREMIER LEAGUE includes many of the features of Premier Price 5.50 WORLD CHAMPIONS A COMPLETE WORLD CUP SIMULATION From the first friendlies Qualifying stages, tour matches and onto the FINALS Select from squad of 25 players, 2 in-Match substitutes allowed. Discipline table 7 Skill levels and MUCH MUCH MORE Includes a full text match simulation with Injuries, Bookings Sending off, Corners, Free kicks, Malchimer, injury time. Extra time Goal times and MORE! Price 4812K Spectrum 5.95 64/128K Commodore 67.95 EUROPEAN II CAPTURES THE FULL ATMOSPHERE OF EUROPEAN COMPETITION Home & away legs, Away goals count double drawn) Ful penalty shoot out with SUDDEN DEATH, 7 Still levels, 2 subs allowed. Pre match team news, Discipline table Fuit eam & substitute selection Disal lowed Goals and MUCH MUCH MORE Plus FULL TEXT MATCH SIMULATION Price 48 128K Spectrum C95 4128K Commodore 67 95 FANTASTIC VALUE Buy any 2 games Deduct C2.00 from total Buy all games Deduct 3.00 from total All games are available for IMMEDIATE DESPATCH by 1st Class Post and include FULL Instructions add 100 outside UK) From: E&Software Room 5,37 Westmoor Road, ENFIELD, Middlesex EN3 7LE SUPA SOFT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE Present the Following Special Offers to C&VG Readers (If the software your after is not advertised below give us a ring and we will try to get it) SPECTRUM Starglider Space harrier Miami Vice Head over Heel Cobra Paperboy S Raiders Kon Coin Leaderboard Hits Pack Tri Pursuit Ghost & Goblins Bomb Jack 2 Double Take Commando B6 Airwolf 2 indoor Sports RAPOUR SPECTRUM RRP OUR CMMODORE 64/126 CASS DISK COMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK ATARIST RAPOUR AMSTRAD PC1512 RAPOUR 1495 10.95 Thanatos 9.95 675 Starglider 10.95 14.95 Master Universe 5.50 10.95 Starglider 19.95 16.95 7.95 5.25 Leaderboard 6.50 10.95 Sentina 6.50 10.05 World Games 24.95 1999 Summer G (2) 19.95 16.95 7.95 5.25 Intro 9.95 6.75 Alions 8.50 10.5 Leaderboard 24.95 19.99 Pitstop (2) 19.95 16.95 7.95 5.40 Krakout 7.99 5.25 Xevious 6.50 10.95 Lightforce 6.00 10.00 Leaderboard (T) 9.95 695 0 Desert 2495 2295 7.95 5.25 Sold a million 3 9.95 8.75 Try Pursuit 10.95 14.95 Sigma 7 6.50 NA The Pawn 26 25 1999 Silent Sor 1995 16.95 14.98 10.95 Top Gun 7.25 5.25 Paperboy 6.50 10.95 Tau Coti 2 650 10.95 Silent Serv 24.95 1999 Higgins Snok 19.95 16.95 7.95 525 Handball 8.98 5.99 Championship Wrest 5.50 10.95 Donkey Kong 8.00 0.00 Sakarrier 29 95 2495 Solo F2 19.95 16.95 8.95 8.00 Year Kung Fu 2 6 .50 10.00 Greatescape 600 000 Avena 29.95 24.95 Champ Gort 19.95 1698 995 850 Duro's Big 4 9.95 5.75 Grange Hill 29 95 2495 Beat Ace 1995 15.95 7.95 525 Xevious 7.95 25 De 6.75 0.95 World games 5.50 10.95 STK 1995 1595 Mindshadow 24.95 19.99 9.95 5.75 Spy Spy 3 6.50 10.95 Judge Dred 6.50 10.95 in Karate 19.99 15 95 Str Poker 1999 15.95 795 5.25 Aliens 9.99 850 Leviathan 6.50 10.95 Super Soccer 6.25 10.00 SDI Ciemal 45.95 3595 Spitfire Aco 19.99 16.95 9.95 5.50 Footballer Year 7.95 525 Elne 10 95 14.95 Five Star 6.50 1095 Gauntlet 24.95 1999 Pinbalcon 24.95 22.95 995 50 Toma cresta 7.95 595 SkyRunner 6 50 10.05 Ghost & gobling 5.50 10.95 Champ Wres 24.95 1999 Music Con 2495 22.05 1495 10.95 Tau-Cati Academy 9.95 6.50 Balderdash Cons 6.50 10.95 Future Knight 5.59 10 95 Si con Dream 24.99 19.99 Mean 18 19.95 16.95 7 95 5.25 Stent Service 5.50 10.95 Subbattle 7.95 5.25 Psi Trading 995 ,75 Fiat 2 6.50 10.05 Amour Antind 6.50 10.95 (FULL INFOCOM RANGE IN STOCK PLEASE RING FOR DETAILS 7.95 5.40 Butch Hard Guy 795 5.25 Xano 600 000 Silent Service 6.75 10.95 WE TAKE ACCESS OR VISA FOR ATARIST A AMSTRAD 1512 7955.25 Rana Rama 7.95 5.25 Top Gun 6.00 10.00 Acro Jet 6.50 10.95 PRODUCT ONLY RING FOR DETAILS)(1512 BUSINESS PRODUCT 795 5.25 Donkey Kong 795 5.25 Gauntlet 8.50 1035 Super Huey 2 6.50 10.95 ALSO IN STOCK RING FOR FULL LIST & PRICE 7.95 525 Grange Hill 9.95 5.75 Sold a million 3 6.50 10.95 Traber 6.50 10 95 AMSTRAD 812464 CASS DISK SPECIAL OFFERS 8.95 8.50 Super Soccer 795 5.25 1942 5.50 10.05 Warriors 6.50 10.95 Mini Office 2 1 200 14.95 DOUBLE PACKS SPECTRUM 7.95 5.25 Superbowl 5.50 10.95 Indoor Sport 11.95 1695 Hud Guy Handball 8.95 525 Matchday (128) 9.95 850 Scooby Doo 6.50 10.95 Big trouble(LC) 6.50 10.95 Solda Milo 3 695 1095 Batman Topgun C1000 795 512 W Games 395 550 Bomback 2 6.50 10 95 Shockway Rider 600 10.00 1942 695 1095 Foot of year 5.50 1035 Dracular 6.50 NA Konam Coin op 595 10.95 Super Soccer E1000 795 5.25 Commando 36 650 100 Acrojet 8.95 095 Sigma 7/Thanos 7.95 525 Masters Universe 895 625 Infiltrato 5.50 10.95 Jailbreak 6.50 10.95 Sent Service 6.95 +0.95 Paperboy Great Esc E10.00 795 525 Hive 9.95 650 Freeze Frame 3 Cart 33 95 Gunship 10.95 14.95 Starglider 11 95 16.95 Space Harry Scobby C1000 7.95 5.25 Shockway Rider 7.95 525 Export Cartride NA 25.95 Destroyer NA 10 95 Trivial Pursuit (PCW) 15.95 Donkey Kong Xevious 10.00 9.95 7.00 Gauntlet 8.99 6 25 Death or Glory 6.25 10.95 Trap Door 5.50 NA Batman 5.50 1000 SPECIAL OFFERS) 7.95 5.45 Xevious 799 525 Star Raiders 2 5 75 10.95 Sort Circuit 5.00 10.00 Green Beret 6.50 10.00 OUBLE PACKS.COMMODORE 8.95 8.25 SkyRunner 795 595 Doubletke 8.00 10.00 Nemises 6.25 10.05 Prospell NA 1995 Scooby Doo + 895 5.00 Dandy 7.99 525 The Pawn NA 1495 Eht Pak 6.50 10 95 Prospell (PCW) NA 2495 Space Harrier .00 8.95 8.00 Year Kung Fu 7.95 525 EN 6 Pak 8.75 10 95 Rouge trooper 8.50 NA Gauntlet 725 11 95 World Games 9.95 5.50 Latina 9.95 50 Arkanoid 6.00 10 00 Zap 2 850 NA Planit 12.00 1595 Cobra .00 9.95 5.75 Judge Dredd 8.95 5.25 Cobra 6.00 10.00 Graphic Ad Cre 1 7 95 225 PlanPCW NA 2095 Gunst9.95 5.50 Ace of Aces 6.50 10.95 Uridium Paradroid 600 NA Sold M on 2 695 1000 Paper Boy .00 7.95 S 25 Avenger 6.50 10 95 Shain Road 850 10.95 Tasword 6128 NA 17.95 9 75 Dan Dare 9.95 550 Footballer year 550 10.95 S on Dreams 10 95 1495 Protest NA 2195 (All of the above on 9.95 6.50 Price of Magik 9.95 6.00 Terra Cresta 6.00 10.00 Jewels Darkness 10.95 14.95 Big Four 6.95 1095 Cassette only Post & Packing Inc. Overseas Orders Please Add 75p per tape, Mail Order only. Cheques/postal orders (Sterling only please) Made Payable to: DISCOUNT SOFTWARE, Dept 3, 210 Nicholls Tower, Harlow, Essex, CM18 GEF TELEPHONE (0279 29076) WEEKDAYS ONLY PLEASE an Warrior Stars on 125 Fright 2 Shao Lins Rd Short Circuit Bogot Sabateur 2 Death or Glory Ford Avenger Dracula En Pak Dragons La "


"Is This Really Auf Wiedersehen Montu? ZEN ROUGE I wonder what's Just a few lines between continental heists and yet more hairy escapades to say hello to all my Fans and invite you on my most exciting and exacting journey to date, a whistle stop tour of the capitals of Europe acquiring more than just the local scenery on the way. Dops... must dash... gendarmes hot on my tail. Will write again soon with more news of my exhilarating escapades and growing booty bag. MONTY MOLE FANS EVERYWHERE S Monty 466 h FREE Lapel od Nemanja good CO  with all games These squeaking windmoles are driving me mad! MSX Spectrum 48K tape .99 CBM64/128 tape .99 disk .99 Amstrad tape .99 disk .99 Gremlin Graphics Software Limited, Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: 0742 753423 "


"HUBLE BUBLES BUBBLER Can you cork the bubbler? Prevent the wicked aliens from escaping the bubbling bottles by collecting corks which you will find when you fall through a trapdoor. The faster you manage to trap the aliens the sooner you can progress onto the next stage..... The game is played on a true 3 dimensional scenario featuring revolutionary smooth, fast multi directional masked scrolling techniques. Spectrum 48K Amstrad disk .99 Amstrad .99 .99 PLAY THE GEVIC MSX .99 PLAY THE GAME PLAY THE GFIVE THE BRAIN OF MARKON IS UNDER ATTACK FROM THE.. MARTIANOIDS MARTIANOIDS You are the guardian of 'The Brain of Markon .99 the large and powerful computer installed on the Robot Ship The Markon Dawn. Your ** THE MARTIANOIDS. .99 Ultimate mission is to defend, maintain and activate the brain following a sudden attack .99 on the ship by the vicious and barbaric Aliens Spectrum 48/128K MSX 64K Amstrad disk Amstrad .99 ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME, THE GREEN, ASHBY DELA ZOUCH, LEICESTERSHIRE LE6 SJU. Tel: (0530) 411485: "


"Only the honourable will Survive the bloody conflict of SUPERB 24\" X 16\" FINE ART PRINT OFFER SEE PACK FOR DETAILS. In an age in which honour was revered, from a time when grace and beauty were virtues, a class of warriors set themselves apart to dedicate their lives to a perfection in combat that in itself was an artform, to a discipline of mind that became a religion. The attaining of such excellence required an extraordinary diligence in selfdenial and training in order to achieve the ultimate accolade War Lord. Kendo, Karate and finally Samurai are the tests that must be mastered before such honour can be bestowed. doos mi Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd.. Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield Tel: 0742 753423 Amstrad .99 tape. E14.99 disk CBM64/128 .99 tape, .99 disk Spectrum  7.99 tape "


"o More adventures from the Arcade Sensation.o THE DEEPER DUNGEONS ANOTHER ALL NEW! ALL ACTION! SUPER SCREENS Bagai DOO OOOOORG Qorao oOOOO GAUDTIET MERLIN THOR THOR THYRA GOLD QUESTOR SPECTRUM 48K ATARI Did you buy the no. 1 Arcade Smash Hit of 1986 Gauntlet? If not, you certainly should have. If you did, then you'll be delighted to know that you can play another amazing 512 levels with this super add on. KV Requires original Gauntlet to run this version. CBM64/128, SPECTRUM 48/128K, AMSTRAD, MSX, ATARI .99 cassette CBM64/128, AMSTRAD, ATARI, .99 disk U.S. ATARI ST .99 disk GOLD ATARI U.S GOLD LTD., UNITS 2/3 HOLFORD WAY, HOLFORD, BIRMINGHAM B6 7AX. TEL: 021 356 3388 GAMES "


"HABITAT No, no! We're not talking about the trendy furniture store! This Habitat is the latest and possibly greatest online interactive adventure in the world. It harnesses the power of the C64 to put YOU in the centre of the action. Our Stateside newshound Marshal M. Rosenthal tells you all about the adventure and the Quantumlink system which enables you to access the wonderful world of Habitat! Who designed and created Habitat? wanted to create an automaton. A Responsible for developing this thinking, feeling being to appear in world-in-the-electronic-dimension is software. The Quantumlink network Chip Morningstar. We can never opens up an avenue for our creating a know what preparations God might unique world of alter egos that can have made, but Morningstar's three parallel human experiences. This is years at Lucasfilm's Game Division really an exciting prospect. were preceded by image processing C+VG: What have you discovered research, and software/language about your new home? design for instruments to be placed CM: Quite a lot. But first off it's called on orbital satellites. a Turf. I discovered that no one here Morningstar was working eats or drinks, although you can still feverishly one rainy evening trying to go to bars and hang out. Artifacts are complete a bit of code before calling strewn throughout, and you can it a night. purchased unusual devices and A lightning bolt struck the building Search for strange and mystical and shorted out every printed circuit, things. But nobody's running around including his terminal, just as he was in ski-masks pulling Friday the 13th in the midst of compiling a program stuff. That doesn't mean that for customizing Avatars. everybody is nice, but the general The ensuing electrical maelstrom a ttitude is for fun and adventure disintegrated his physical body, and rather than mayhem. Besides, the left him trapped within the code. Oracle provides everyone with a fat Lucasfilm personnel discovered bank account and it's real easy to live this the next morning when they off the interest. Just go to a dispenser booted the work disk to find a and get some tokens. familiar-looking figure lolling around C+VG: Can't such a life get boring? with his feet on the furniture. CM: No way! Remember, this is Morningstar was subsequently moved interactive. Everything is constantly in motion whether you're a part of it C+VG's American contributing or not. You may return to Habitat editor, Marshal M. Rosenthal, is no after a few days to find all sorts of stranger to the unexpected. But even changes. And of course there are the he found it a bit unusual to receive a other Avatars popping in and out of game designer IN a package marked your electronic life. There's unknown URGENT/DO NOT X-RAY! Rosenthal territory to discover, adventures to booted Morningstar up in a participate in, even social Commodore 64 for the following interactions like games and politics if exclusive interview. you want. Puzzles are everywhere, C+VG: How does it feel to be a part and you have to learn the different of Habitat? rules and regulations of this world the CM: It's different, but who's hard way by experience. complaining? Before this happened, C+VG: How do you do things as an members of the Games Division used to sit around having an ongoing CM: Simple. A joystick moves you debate on artificial intelligence. We around, and there are a selection menus that appear onscreen when you want to go somewhere or do something. The keyboard takes care of the rest. Talking in word balloons does take a bit of getting used to though. Still, if it's good enough for Popeye... C+VG: Did you have to create everything from scratch? CM: Fortunately, no. We could build on some existing software tools, and adapt them to work in whole new ways. Take the shape of the Avatars for example. They may seem to be of the same stuff as the characters used in our Labyrinth game, but there are entirely different techniques occurring. C+VG: So just what is going on? CM: To start, every single thing that happens is linked through the Host computer, and then into other players from all over. This kind of processing takes a lot of power, and so we're using a STRATUS non-stop super minicomputer. This baby is actually a number of processors hooked together. Eight are online right now, and more can be added as the need arises. Consider just what is going on; colour graphics, sound, disc input output, keyboard and joystick commands. ALL operating at the same time. You'd almost expect the disk drive to explode and the C64 to roll over on its back and die! C+VG: How does the software tie in with the STRATUS? CM: Well, first the program is loaded after entering the gaming section of Quantumlink. Then you put in the disk containing object data. The C64 is then controlled by three things; what your Avatar is doing, what other Avatar's are doing, and what the Master Program thinks about the whole business. Think of the data as building blocks that can be formed into just about anything. Each location (store, forest, dungeon, etc.) is called a region, and I've been able to count over a thousand of them right now. There's a lot more on the way too. Some really awesome stuff. C+VG: Any comments on how this is ffecting your social life? CM: I've no complaints. My Turf is swell, and I can change the furniture, colours or patterns in a flash. It's great . Continued on Page 80 Telecommunication services allow people from all over the world to call in using their computer and a phone modem. Unlike other telecom services, Quantumlink is designed for use only with the Commodore 64/128 computers, and even provides the software free with a purchase of the machine. Q-link performs a full range of text and information services, but because it is designed for the exclusive use of C64ers it can take advantage of the computer's graphic and sound capabilities. None of that generic stuff, with games represented by numbers and bits of graphics tossed together from letters. Here you'll find the same type of graphics as you can access from a disk. The software handles everything. Auto-dial modems can be triggered into action and the software will do the rest, even taking care of giving the correct password and name. Users select topics by pointing to options displayed on the screen. What could be simpler? There's even an online Commodore Information Network, with helpful advisors always available to chat with. Things to do include the People Connection (where special interest groups can be found), a learning center containing educational materials, and news and weather reports. Plus lots of games, where you can play against the master computer or another person. You can even sample new software provided by various companies. Possibly the best news is the price. Quantumlink gives unlimited base service for only $9.95 a month, and that's for 24 hours a day on weekends, and 6PM to 7AM weekdays. Premium services, like Habitat, cost an additional six cents a minute. Quantum Computer Services Inc. 8620 Westwood Center Drive, Vienna, Virginia 22180 ILLA "


".. takes to be answering everyone's questions about every little thing. That's why I usually respond by mail. Here we see two Avatars, for such they are called. The fountain of the city of Populopolis is one place where manifest myself, but I wish she would turn down the music. I also like the shopping on Rodeo Drive, and the Skid Row area, although it tends to get a lot less civilized there. Let's leave Valentino to bear the brunt of her bad humor, and look in on a new arrival to Habitat. His name is Kusama, and he's in the process of choosing a head to reflect his personality. He's still going to meet here though. Sometimes I think I put this in sol could watch Avatars running around like chickens with their heads cut off. Continued from Page 79 being able to swtich heads whenever you want. I've also heard that those who enter Habitat the normal way can even choose their gender. Making friends is as easy as going out the door, and you can later contact them directly with ESP. There's even a mail service and regular newspaper. Maybe I should place a classified and see if there are any others who got zapped here like I did. C+VG: How many Avatars are out there anyway? CM: Okay. Truth is who can count that high? I did limit it to six in one region at a time, because more than that makes me claustrophobic. That's all you can fit in a hot tub anyway, and that's one place I wasn't going to leave out. But I did add a ghost feature to let unlimited numbers of Avatars congregate together, although the full-bodied ones are wamed by a little icon that someone is watching and listening in. Imagine the fun of performing on stage with hundreds or thousands of invisible spectators. What an ego trip! And no food means no critics pelting you with tomatoes. C+VG: So you're happy in Habitat? CM: You bet. My friends come online and visit me, and I look forward to seeing the world evolve as Avatars interact with each other. I do miss the northern California weather though, so perhaps I'll add a tanning salon. There's no end to what can happen. It's gonna be fun. This is Valentino, and there is his home, or Turf as I have decreed it. Looks like he's gotten some mail. Dear Bali Well, he managed that all right. There he does out the door. So Swelldre is no longer mad at him, eh? At least he's smart enough to use a Teleport. Let's peek in on her. Hmm, guess she's getting tired of playing checkers and wants to use him as a pack mule for another adventure. Yeh, I thought he was heading for the bar. There's Swelldre, and she looks like she's in another one of her ogre-ish moods. Yes, I am the all-powerful Oracle. have consented to show you around HABITAT, so pay attention. Usually do not bother to make myself known directly. Imagine how much time it I wouldn't have credited Valentino with so much sense. He's checking the weekly newspaper, the RANT, to see if there's any mention of what Swelldre's been up to. He sure got into networking quick. Probably a solicitor in the other world. He'll be here for a while. |_the _ thout "


"lo in the Let's see how Swelldre and Valentino are making out. He's following her lead as always. I see a couple of Avatars hanging out around one of the bank token dispensers. Sometimes I wish I hadn't given everyone millionaire status, but at least it keeps them from spending all their time doing boring things like getting jobs and working. For shame! Who made that rude noise? Well, so much for her good luck. Say goodbye to the crystal ball, Miss S. At least the devil has a sense of humour. Looks like she's found something. Too bad she can't just tune into a pleasant forest scene like I can when there's a need for tranquility. Let's leave them to sort things out. She better be careful with that crystal ball. Oh no! She's telling Valentino to get lost and wishing that she was somewhere else. Apparently, Pratt thought Pigtace responsible. Interesting that all he did was bounce him a bit. CLIE And there's Marmalot changing her Turf again. She's never satisfied. There he goes again, frittering away tokens on vending machine stuff. Well, she got her wish. I don't think we should watch, it's going to get a bit painful. Can't fault Swelldre for trying. She's made it through the forbidden woods and isn't daunted by the mysterious dungeons. That's one tough Avatar! So the devil let Swelldre go? Doesn't look like her mood has improved by the favour. I think that you've seen enough. I have to follow along with Carnipet and Sissalay, but it's time for you to return home. MIT 14 "


"THRONE MELBOURNE HOUSE AVAILABLE FOR SPECTRUM 48/128K COMMODORE 64/128K-AMSTRAD CPC "


"IBM/AMSTRAD PC+COMPATIBLES-.95 MR WOLAD o ok dee heart of a telo SHOGU amese P oc 21 P and a ter de der gane scanalarida beberci duel Sancheggiapie 741. PAN ia tie ang Screen shots d alan de Dere So taken from f a, genegger Atari version Watéfalatot a challenge tickes beijo Emiter cartoon lacheco &   Copright 1986 James Clavell. Tal Pan is a registered trademark 1986 de Laurentis Entertainment Inc. 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS. Tel:061 832 6633. Telek: 6899 Ocean "


"OSG ou 900W BDWF DLA Rygad sir! These Binary Vision chappies are a bit clever. Not satisfied with the success of The Fourth Protocol and Zoids, they've come up with an absolutely spitting new adventure called Stifflip. What or who is Stifflip? Well, if you're a fan of those ancient black and white Fu Manchu movies, old detective films or even new game from Palace! It's enough to managed to catch the make your hair stand on end. After all brilliant Doc Savage, Man Rew things from the people who of Bronze on TV the other month you'll get an idea. brought you Cauldron and Sacred Stifflip is a combination of Armour promise to be really ace. C+VG all the best-and worsetook an early look at this surefire chart things about 30s thrillers, hit and can now bring you this up to the written or otherwise. It's full of larger than life minute report from the Palace throne characters-heroes and room! villains. Old movies have inspired control icons are ranged for countless years home they yearn for the Rupert Bowater and Paul down the left hand side of British schools have sound of willow against Norris to create this fun the screen while the main conducted a gruelling leather. icon driven adventure. picture is a cartoon style regime. Cold baths, But their contempt for Stifflip also uses the representation of the corporal punishment and foreign languages has exciting windowing location occupied by the over-cooked cabbage. forced them to colonise techniques seen in Zoids character you currently Whenever possible the other countries as the only but the whole game is control. British leave their soggy way of persuading them to much easier to get to grips B ut enough of all this Island for good, hence their take up the game. with. As you can see from technical stuff. Let's take a pre-eminence as a Now disaster looms for our screen shots the gander at the plot. seafaring nation. Far from the bowler and brolly "


"! STIFFLIP brigade. The contemptible count Chameleon, master of disguise and sworn enemy of the establishment, is determined to succeed in his latest and greatest dastardly plot. His sale of rubber goods, through mail-order ads in a civil service magazine, has lead him to develop the Rubbertronic Ray. With it he threatens to neutralise the starch in wing-collars, loosen stiff upper lips and generally relax moral standards leading to the collapse of the Empire. Worse still, it will radically and unpredictably alter the bounce of a cricket ball. This bounder must be stopped! That's where Viscount Sebastian Stifflip and his team of intrepid adventurers come in. They set off to the banana republic of Banarnian to find the dastardly count Chameleon and put a stop to his evil plans! The story unfolds on screen in a series of cartoon strip like panels. You can see two at a time so you've always know just what you did to get wourself into such BIG trouble the move before. You can talk to people, or fight them, and generally have a spiffing time. As long as you remember the British public school codePay Up and Play the Game! If you try too many dirty tricks-these are allowed you might find yourself batting on a sticky wicket. As you move through the game the cartoon \"pages\" peel off to reveal new locations. A nifty gimmick this! All this plus the Binary Vision windows which make the game so slick to look at and easy to play. We can't wait to get our hands on a finished game and we're betting that you'll feel the same way. So brush up your safari suit, look out that MCC tie you've got lurking in the back of the wardrobe and prepare to keep a stiff upper lip, play with a straight bat and all that True Brit stuff. Viscount Sebastian Professor Braindeath Colonel Bargie Stifflip Was declared clinically (G.N.T. and bar) Englishman, eccentric and dead over a decade before Of unknown wartime explorer-a comic hero in the start of our adventure. experience. Tall and every sense. Though Fortunately he has kept dashina: blue blooded, Captain of Cricket at going thanks to his yellow-bellied, red-eyed school, Sebastian grew up \"Sonneundwindhalter\" and green-fingered and in the shadow of his cousin a solar powered bow tie known to his friends as Sylvester Stuffshirt, who which can act as a windmill 'RGB' on account of his frod on a mine in World during periods of extended colourful personality. War 1, ensuring three darkness. Keen to visit the Joined our adventure to corners of a foreign field tropics on account of \"all avoid bad tempered that are forever England. that sun\". Worked for creditors at home and not a Always proud of his many years on a device to bit persuaded by talk of modesty, flying ace in the put the middle back into South American riches. Pet hates: hates pets (especially creepy crawlies). Breeds clay pigeons. Miss Palmyra Primbottom Youngest ever troop leader in the Girl Guides and first winner of the badge for deportment. Has travelled the world collecting rare skin disorders and is the authoress of \"'The Young Lady's Companion to Tropical Exploration\". Member of the Women's Temperance League for Clothing the Savages. The Contemptible Count Chameleon Started young by attempting to blow up his On the left hand side of the screen shot are six icons which Binary school and was severely Vision call icon and Bubble control. reprimanded for The first of these icons is as Chinwag, the second is the Fisticuffs icon, smouldering behind the the third is Beetle-off, the fourth is Do One's Stuff, the fifth is State of bicycle sheds. Later Play and the sixth is Change Batter. expelled for over-bidding On the right hand side of the screen shot you will see these icons at Bridge, since when he showing three different characters. The top character who has the has borne a grudge eyepatch is Colonel R. G. Bargie, the second is Professor Braindeath against the Establishment. and the third is Miss Palymra Primbottom. Founder of the Guide-dogs In the middle of the screen shot there are two illustrations, the top for the Deaf Association, represents the immediate past and the bottom the present. and last seen by the In both sections, the Viscount Sebastian Stifflip himself is depicted. captain of the Titanic The character he is standing next to in the top illustration is fairly disguised as an iceberg. A unpleasant. bad egg turned rotten -a The fact that he is next to the character in the immediate past means man who can curdle one of two things. Either he moved away very quickly by selecting the yoghurt at twenty paces. Beetle-off area, or Stifflip beat him in a fight. If Stifflip were to talk to He'd steal candy from a this character, the sort of thing he would say would be \"Now look here baby, he'd sell his own my good man\", whereupon Stifflip would be attacked. grandmother, he'd even In the bottom illustration Stifflip is seen with a barman. If Stifflip were say 'boo' to a goose. His to talk to this character he would be likely to say something on the lines villany knows no of \"Nice bar you have here.\" bounds... Great Wur, feared by his doughnuts, and went on to firends and loved by his apply the same technology foes and known by all as to toilet seats until the \"The Yellow Viscount\". bottom fell out of the After four years of tea at market-has since become five o'clock, bandits at 6 one of our backroom boys. o'clock and bed at 7.30, our Founder of the ACME have-a-go hero was corporation, Prof. promoted to inactive duty Braindeath is living (?) on the Stifflip estate in proof that not all mad darkest Surrey. Favourite professors are bad colours; red, white, blue. professors. Rupert Bowater and Paul Norris keep a stift upper lip in an abandoned bus shelter "


"Order by LOWEST1 you've PRICES ou est corrent If you've seen the title(s) I r you want currently CC advertised at a lower price (except special offers)tell us Who & Where advertised at How much and DI we will match it. EXTRA FREE POST 10% OFF NOR&P PLUS Home PLUS 2 and pay All orders over . REE SOFTWA WARE All orders received during each month will go into a prize draw and those picked will receive a credit voucher for the total of that order. Winners names will be published in a future on orders in U.K. AMST AMSTD SPEC CHCMD 58836 SPECM CMD AMST AMSTD Endring 3 AMSTO advertisment. Sec c  ROGUE TROOPER 736 LEGEND OF KAGE 5 CITY SLICKER JUDGE DREDD 6.62736 PRESIDENT LAST NINJA 735 736 11.08 ICE TEMPLE WAG MAX 588 662   5.88 662 FUTURE KNIGHT XEVIOUS HT PACK GAUNTLET BREAKTHAU AMST AMSTDI COLOUR MAGIC MASTERS UNIV 862 11.06 FBALLER YEAR DLAIR PT 2 SHADO SKIMMER 736 11.06  G STARGUDER 662 1 YR AFTER NMARE RALLY 11.09 S FORCE COBRA 5.88 GOLF 5.88 958 1495 SPEC CHACHD AMST AMSTO 1995 COBRA TRIV PURSUIT SKY RUNNER SARMOUR ANTR 736 735 9.50 662 139 ARKANOID ACROJET SOLE GRAND PRIX 10 FRAME RANARAMA TOP GUN SS PING PONG TOURNAMENT  18 6.62 11.06 ATARIST 11.06 662 6.62 6.62 958 662 GAUNTLET SKYRUNNER YA KUNG FU 2 MIAMI VICE SONG AN SUPER SOCCER MARB MADNESS 6.62 DOUBLE TAKE TRANSFORMERS 5 STAR GAMES 736 AMERICAS CUP 739 TT RACER PARACRODURICIUM COMPENCIUM SILENT SERVICE 736  ARWOLF 2 736 739 738 1106 1106 11 09 736 739 1105 11.09 1106 588 80 60110 736 1106 PARALAX HACKER 2  THAI BOXING KNIGHT GAMES SUPER CYCLE FST2 SANDCON HOT WHEELS LEADERBOARD SOLO FUGHT 2 589 EASTENDERS SUPER HUEY2 RX 6521100 6 1100 DOUBLE TAKE 6521100 HIGHLANDER FIRELORD TRABALA ERM BAZOOKA BILL WORLD GAMES YA KUNG FU 2 MALSTROM HEAD COACH GHOST & GOBS PUB GAMES CREENBERET STREETMAN NIGHT ROER SFMAREA GREAT ESCAPE 588 KUNG FU MASTRS DANDANE PAPERBOY UGHTFORCE TRAPDOOR DYNAMITE DAN 2 NOWGAMES SLENT SERVICE MERCENARY COMP WINTER GAMES TOMAHAN CWRESTLING FALLER VEAR STARGLIDER WTS 103 LEADERBOARD SLENT SERVICE VERCENARY COUP RUOTSIMULATOR ART DIRECTOR WINTER GAMES TOMAHAWK 6 5 .52 THANATOS AVENGER LABYRINTH EASTENDERS 929 9982982 388 739 110 REPTON THREE LEVIATHAN DEEPER DUNGEON ARKANDO THE SENTINAL INFODROID ACE OF ACES 6621106 665 FIRETRAOX NEMESIS  PORTAL B CLOUGHSFBALL 731109 DRAGONS LAIR ACADEVY SKATE ROCK GUNSHIP 8.2 7.39 1106 11.09 NUCLEAR EVERGO   DEFCOM SHOCKWAY RIDE HYPAPA EREBUS   PSH MARADONA 514 TH DER STROK 2 SPACE SHUTTLE HITS VOL 1 HTS VOL 2 DEEP SPACE TRIV PURSUIT PERIPHERALS 2 SUPER HUEY ARCADE KINGS DRUD FI. TRA TÔI 369 517 369 $17 the title you want is not shown phone for JOYSTICKS EXPRESS RAIDER DELTA DEEPER DUNGEON 369 EXEC ED LBOARD SAILINO GRANGE HILL STAR GAMES MPOSSABALL INFODROO 662958 1750 availability and are 55.96 7.36 11.06 (24hr answer service) 514  1109 739 882 QUICKSHOT2 REMOTE CONTROLPNR NEOS MOUSE A CHEESE DONKEY KON 1295 135.95 SPY V SPY AA C WRESTLING 5 7:39 11.09 ISM FREEPOST 1 RUSSLEY GREEN, WOKINGHAM, BERKSHIRE.RG11 1BR TEL:(0734) 774942 All orders despatched within 24hrs. MAIL-SOFT ... 5.50 10.96 ** SPECTRUM ** NEMISIS......... LIGHTFORCE ORAGONS LAIRI NAPOLEAN AT WAR... EXP FISTII THE LAST NINJA RANA RAMA SKY RUNNER.. B. CLOUGHS FOOTBALL ARKANOID SIGMA 7 STRIKEF. HARRIER HYDROFOOL  . SHOCKWAY RAIDER-02 WORLD GAMES ANNALS OF ROME SABATOUR DESERT RATS ****AMSTRAD**** NEMISIS-02...... .. ELITE14 ELITE 6 PACK-02 HEAD OVER HEELS-02. ..6.50 SENTINAL 02 HYDROFOOL-02.. ACADEMY-02... TRIVIAL PURSUIT-D4 GAUNTLET-OUNGEONS SARATOUR -01 LEADERBOARD-02 ENDURO RACER-02 MINI OFFICE 04 ELITE HIT PACK-02 BOMB JACX -D2 VERCENARY 888888888888888 COMMODORE 64 NEMISIS-02............... 6.50 HELLCAT ACE 02 . DRAGONS LAIR II-02 6 .99 ELITE 03....... PAPERBOY-02 LORO OF RINGSD39 .95 DELTA-02 KUNG FU MASTER-02 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-04....... 10.96 FIST -02 SPACE HARRIER-02...........6.99 SIDNEY AFFAIR02 6.99 B CLOUGH FOOTBALL SABATOUR II -01 5.50 BONA JACX -02 GAUNTLET-02 GAUNTLET DUNGEONS LEADER DECUTIVE02699 NOOOR SPORTS 02 HEAD OVER HEELS-02......6.50 ENDURO RACER-02 TOMAHAWK-02..............6.99 LIGHTFORCE-02 6.50 TS VILLION3-02 FLUTE MIT PACX-02 KILLED UNTIL DEAD-026 99 INSPECTOR GADGET-02 .6.99 EXPRESS RAIDER-02.........6.99 ELITE 6 PACK_02 ACE OF ACES-D2 INTO EAGLE NEST-01.........6.99 LASTNINA02 ALIENS US-DISK STAR RAIDERS 11-02.........6.99 GUNSHIP04 NEVER EARTH.... FA CUP CHOLO-04 10.95 MARBLE MADNESS FIRE TRACK_02 DESTROYER DISK 11.95 FREEZE FRAVE LAZER... 38.95 FREEZE FRAME MK IV 26.95 EXPERT + ESM . .......... ACTION REPLAY MK3.... 22.95 FINAL CARTRIDGE... 38.95 LEADERBOARD ZULU WAR BATTLEFIELD GERMANY ARTIST CRACKOUT SILENT SERVICE DOPRESS RAIDER FUTE 6 PACK GAUNTLET DUNGEONS STAR RAIDER II 10TH FRAME SOLDA MILLION 3 INDOOR SPORTS AUF WEIDERSHEN MONTY..... UCHI MATA.... HEAD OVER HEELS ENDURO RACER TRIVIAL PURSUIT GAUNTLET TRAP DOOR THEATRE EUROPE 8 ALL SOFTWARE CHECKED Maros Computers Ltd 3A Charles St. Hanley, Stoke-on-Trent, ST1 3JP COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD, MSX & ATARI, HOME and BUSINESS * 30% DISCOUNTS * on all RRP except special offers * ALL NEW GAMES COME STRAIGHT INTO STOCK * send s.a.e. for comprehensive brochure * ANY TRADE ENQURIES WELCOME PLEASE PHONE 0782 202147 please ask for lan Lowe in distribution THIS MONTH ONLY!... SPECIAL OFFERS! E SPECTRUM E AMSTRAD ... 1.99 World Cup F Ball....... 1.95 Kung Fu Master .......... 1.99 F/Ball Manager....... 4.50 Cyberun. 1.99 Superman... 2.99 Superman.... ... 2.50 Video Pool 1.99 F Ball Manager 4.50 Eureka......................2.50 Eureka 2.99 Alien 8 1.99 Fighting War Disc .......3.99 One on One.............. 1.99 Int. Karate..... Wrld Cup Football....... 1.99 William Wobbler.......... 1.50 Redhawk............. 299 Leaderboard...... 3.95 Football Manager........4.50 Exploding Fist...... 3.50 Super Zaxon Disc.....4.50 Beach-Head 2. 250 Gunfright...... 1.99 TIL 1.99 Pole Position 250 American F/Ball. William Wobbler 2 99 Dynamite Dan.. Gyroscope Disc ..........3.99 Battle of Brtain. 3.99 Battle of Britain.. .. 1.99 Pyjamarama..... Hobbit Disc..... 3.99 On the Oche......... 1.99 World Baseball.....2.99 Ghostbusters...........2.99 ATARI Assault Machine....... 2.99 Int. Karate..................299 F/Ball Manager ......... William Wobb Disc... 2.25 TLL 1.99 Superman..... Castle of Terror........... 1.50 Revolution .................. 1.99 Dambusters.... Ballblazer 3.50 Realms of Imposs. 1.99 Fighter Pilot...........250 D.T. Decathlon........... 3.50 Mission Imposs........... 1.99 Neos Mse/Cheese.... 28.95 Hotshot.............. 2.99 MSX Antics ................. 1.99 Panzadrome............... 2.50 Chuckie Egg............... 2.99 Nexus ..............2.99 Starship E/Prise.......... 1.99 All Cartridges............ 10.99 Sky Fox Disc...............4.50 Head cleaners 50p with any purchase while stocks last. All MSX Cartridges .99 GREEN BERET-02 FIGHT NIGHT-02 GAUNTLET-02 TOMAHAWK-02 SMASH HITS 7-02 SPINDUTY-02 SILENT SERVICE-02 WHO DARES WINS II 02 ATARIST GAUNTLET... . KARATE MASTER SUPER CYCLE CHAMP WRESTLING RALANCE OF POWER BERATOR TYPHOON MERCENARY COMPENDIUM 19.99 STARGLIDER 19.95 JOYSTICKS + KONEX JOYSTICK.. CHEETAH MACH 1 13.96 CHEETAH 125 7.95 QUICKSHOT II...... QUICK SHOT II PLUS QUICK SHOT I TURBO.......... 13.96 EUROMAX PROFESSIONAL... 18.00 COMP PRO 5000 ... 13.95 999 8888888 888888 11.99 6.99 KEMPSTON INTERFACE RAM TURBO INTERFACE MULTIFACE 128... 15.00 Disk version available: D1 .95, D2 .95, D3 . D4 14.95 Post & Packing included in UK Europe add li per tape. Elsewhere at cost Chg PO to: Mail-Soft PO BOX 589. London N15 6JJ. Access and Visa orders welcomed you do not see the game you want simply deduct 30 of the RRP and we will send to you (Except Budget Titles Denates new releases will be sent to you as soon as the game is released from the software house Prices incl P&P. please allow 10 days delivery Overseas add 75p per cartridge Cheques Postal Orders made payable to: Maros Computers Lid Credit card phone orders welcome "


"BARGAIN BASEMENT  OFF We'd like to thank you! The software companies would like to thank you! What for? For voting in our annual Golden Joystick Awards that's what for. And the award-winning software houses want to show YOU, the loyal C+VG readers, their appreciation for all those votes. So we've got together a very special collection of special offers. You can get  off the Golden Joystick winning game simply by Sectrum offer Price: .99 cutting out the special C+VG tokens below and GAUNTLET C64 Amstrad offer price: sending them off! What could be easier? Imagine .99 tape .95 disc MSX it, a whole two quid off games like Gauntlet, Sentinel | offer price: .99 Atari offer price: .99 tape .99 disc. and The Pawn. Just pick out the games you'd like Just tick the box for which to add to your collection and read the details on the machine version you require token carefully before cutting it out and rushing and send a cheque or postal order for the relevant amount down to your nearest post box. C+VG the only made payable to U.S. Gold magazine that gives you more! Ltd, to C+VG Golden Joysticks Offer, U. S. Gold, 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. GAME OF THE YEAR +0  OFF  OFF VIETNAM SENTINEL C64 offer price: .99 tape .95 disc. Send your cheque or postal order to made payable to U.S. Gold Ltd, to C+VG Golden Joystick Offer, U.S. Gold, 2-3 Holford Way, Holford Birmingham, B6 7AX. C640BBC offer price: .95 tape .95 disc. Tick which computer version you want and send a cheque or postal order made payable to Firebird Software, to C+VG Golden Joysticks Offer, Firebird Software, First Floor, 64-74, New Oxford Street, London WC1A 1PS. BEST ORIGINAL GAME o +0 < -STRATEGY GAME OF THE YEAR! | ADVENTURE OF THE YEAR  OFF  OFF THE PAWN SANXION C64 Atari 800 Amstrad 6128 offer price: .95 Atari ST offer price: .95. Tick which computer version you want and send a cheque or postal order made payable to Computer and Video Games, to C+VG Golden Joysticks Offer, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. DISK VERSIONS ONLY. C64 offer price: .99 tape .99 disc. Send your cheque or postal order, made payable to Thalamus Ltd, to C+VG Golden Joystick Offer, PO Box 10, Ludlow, Shropshire SY8 1DB. SOUND TRACK OF THE YEAR + <o "


"GYG COMPETITION THE SOUND OF GRANGE HILL TOSHIBA KT-4116 MIO NON School's out! And you can get your hands on one of THREE Toshiba personal stereos plus tons of other Grange Hill goodies to celebrate the release of the Grange Hill adventure out on the Argus Press label. Just answer the simple School's Out quiz questions below, fill in the coupon, rush them off to Computer and Video Games, School's Out! Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, ECIR 3AU. Closing date is May 16th and normal C+VG competition rules apply. THREE first prize winners will get a Toshiba KT4116 personal stereo plus a cassette of the brand new Grange Hill LP, plus a copy of the Grange Hill Diary for 1987 remember there's still eight months left! THREE runners-up will get a special Grange Hill cassette carrying case-just the thing to hide all your WHAM! tapes in plus the new Grange Hill After Hours book. Just the thing to read after you've finished your homework... Any and/or all of this could be yours IF you can answer these three simple questions! 1. Name the Grange Hill pupil who went on to get his own TV series. 2. What is the donkey, currently starring in Grange Hill, called? 3. Name the Grange Hill character who went on to star in EastEnders. C+VG/GRANGE HILL SCHOOL'S OUT COMPETITION STEREO RANGE HILL DE COMPUTER GAME Name GH Address My answers are: CRANGE HILL METERHOURS "


"kuni SPEED KING VR CAN YOU OW! HANDLE THIS MUCH POWER? ZAPLAR The KONIX SPEEDKING packs more punch. That's why it's fast overtaking ordinary joysticks to become one of the world's most popular hand control. As it's name suggests it's built for fast handling to give you lightening fast control. Micro switches await your slightest movement, and fly into action ZAP, POW, SPLAT, BLAM giving you instant reactions to every command. Tough, rugged and made in Britain to the very highest standards, the KONIX SPEEDKING comes with a twelve month guarantee. Available for:Spectrum and Spectrum Plus, Commodore 64, 128 Vic20. All Atari Computers, Electron, M.S.X. Computers, Amstrad and Oric at .99. Also:BBC, Commodore C16, Plus 4, and, Dragon at .99. Trade and export enquiries contact Wayne or Sandra on 049525 5913. Please send me Speedkings at .99 each. Speedkings at .99 each (Price includes postage and packing in the U.K. Overseas orders please send .50 per Speedking.) Computer make and model I enclose a Cheque/Postal Order for — made payable to KONIX. Please charge my Access/Visa No. Card holders can telephone on 049525 5913. Signature Name Address Postcode Telephone Send to Konlx Computer Products, Unit 13, Sirhowy Hill Industrial Estate, Tredegar, Gwent NP2 4QZ. U.K. "


" ROC 2. O  C+VG's Arcade reporter Clare Edgeley braves London's arcades yet again to bring you the hottest news on the very latest new games to arrive on the scene. This issue she casts her eye over Flying Shark, Psycho Soldier and the excellent Rastan Saga. ur FLYING have to make do with a steady you hit an enemy plane, it catches PSYCHO stream of bullets, though, fire, then dives into the ground. It's ARK thankfully, the supply seems growing shadow makes the effect endless. even more realistic. Further levels The odds against you in Taito's The attacking squadrons are take you over an estuary where Psycho Soldier conjures up visions Flying Shark are horrendous. colour coded and if you manage there's a nice mix of tanks, gun of an eight foot psychopath Imagine one little bi-plane against to shoot down the lot, you're ships and fighter squadrons, and rushing round Rambo style, the full and well equipped forces of awarded bonuses. An 'S' symbol then you find yourself over the sea.qunning down everything that an invading enemy. Though that's appears when the red squadron And it's at that point you realise moves. Imagine the shock when the beauty of arcade games goes down in flames and this how puny some of the enemy you're presented with a cute little anything goes! And you'll soon doubles your fire power. forces were in size. You've got to girl, called Athena, armed with a notice the resemblance to 1942 Annihilation of the blue squadron deal with monstrous battle cruisers mini-laser. the game is planed on much the gives you an extra plane, and a 'B' kitted out with anti-aircraft guns. The game is from SNK in Japan same lines. symbol occasionally appears Again, Taito has come up with and I imagine the title has suffered At first I found Flying Shark giving an extra shatter bomb. the goods. in its translation into English difficult to get into. Not because it You can fly all over the screen, However cute, Psycho Soldier is was tricky to learn control is but it's best to keep to the bottom no walkover. It can be played very simple -but because I spent half, that way you've got more time either as a one or two player for too much time chasing enemy to gun down the enemy fighters game, girl and boy in tandem fighters and not enough time before they're on top of you. aginst the forces of evil. Their dodging their bullets The graphics are great-highly mission is to \"find peace for Consequently, each game ended coloured and very detailed. I was tomorrow's people\". almost before I'd got started! especially impressed with the You get super-fast action, You soon get the hang of it Flying Shark, it tips its wings masses of artistically drawn though. Just make sure you keep realistically when banking from left attacking aliens and lots of more than half an eye on the to right and its ground shadow zapping. You can't let up for a enemy bullets which whizz over all follows faithfully, growing smaller minute. Obviously, playing with corners of the screen, and try to the higher you climb. And when both characters, the pace is faster, take out the tanks and anti-aircraft and anyway it's more fun to plan guns before they can do too much your tactics and blast in unison. damage. At the same time you're The screen is divided into four under attack from squadrons of levels, so you can hop from level to enemy fighters, so your work's cut level to escape sticky situations of out from the word go. hunt out the baddies patrolling It's just as well you're provided above and below you. with shatter bombs. These act like Added protection is given in the smart bombs, destroying form of four spheres which circle everything within a large radius, lazily round your character. If but use them sparingly as you have enemy fire or a baddie touches only three to start with. Under one, they'll be eliminated. more normal circumstances you'll In early stages of the game, the spheres move very slowly and don't repulse much. There are way to speed them up until they travel so fast round you that they are just a blur and nothing can get ATHEI "


"ma 2. O To o * o.  o pe e le mit wir ruuvi through Energy columns appear randomly just dive through one and the spheres speed up a notch. If you manage to do this a number of times you'll be rewarded by a fast spinning, totally protective ring around your character. The idea is to keep four revolving spheres at all times, and when one is damaged or disappears, make haste to collect another to complete the circle. You can also add to your weapons by collecting swords and the like giving an additional edge over the aliens when involved in a spot of close combat. Often you'll find the area swarming with nasties and by the time you've killed or escaped from them, it's too late to go back and collect the sword. Very frustrating. There are various stages in the game, each getting harder to complete than the last. On the early levels it's just a matter of dodging and killing the baddies, running over crystals and balloons for bonus points and trying to make it in time to the next column. The aliens are numerous men wearing trilbies stomp down the passageways, flying fish and bees charge at head height and innocent looking eggs hatch to release clutches of deadly green baby aliens. In fact, the first time I saw an egg, I shot at it believing it would offer a bonus os some sort and was instantly overcome by horrible little monsters which look just like the ones found in the film Alien. Yuk! Psycho Soldier is a simple game which I enjoyed tremendously. RASTAN SA G A The coin-op of the month has GOT to be Taito's superb Roslan Saga a bottle of wits and cunning with must be picked up for bonus points. work out the best way to collect For the most part, you can get them. rid of the aliens fairly easily. If On the version I played, there necessary, forget about your were no instructions and it took sword and jump over them, about as dozen abortive attempts hopefully to leave them far behind. before I realised that you have to Cliff walls are soon reached and stab the weapon with your sword these you can shin up using the to pick it up. ropes which dangle for just that Pretty tricky when you're purpose. Rivers must be negotiated dropping to the ground from a by hopping from rock to rock, and great height and the weapon has chasms must be crossed by to be stabbed as you fall past it! swinging on ropes, Tarzan-style. There are six levels in all, each Most of the hazards require careful with three separate scenes, timing in order to cross unscathed. containing a fantastic number of You have three lives, they are hazards and aliens, and some lost when the stamina grid reaches wonderful graphics which are zero. Even if the enemy does brilliantly drawn and very realistic. manage to get the better of you in Rastan Saga is fast paced and a fight, you won't die instantly if the action doesn't let up for a your stamina rating is high. minute. Highly addictive and very There are objects you can pick playable, the game has got all the up to reduce the damage from ingredients to make it a winner. enemy attacks. The Mantel reduces enemy damage by 50 per cent, the Shield also affords some protection, and the Axe, Hammer and Fire Sword increase your fire power and to your fighting skills. The Fire Sword, for instance, shoots flaming bolts at the aliens so you can stand at a safe distance to kill them The bad news is that it's difficult to collect the weapons! They are often placed in highly inaccessible spots and it takes several tries to 380 the hero. The idea is to bring back the head of the dreaded Dragon to the Princess of Siam — the Doragon is an evil creature by all accounts in exchange for all the treasures of the empire. So, with the thought of all that lovely loot as prize money, let's get going! Armed only with a sword, you're instantly set upon by bands of club wielding aliens. Easy pickings as your sword snakes in and out, slashing and stabbing, until they fall like ninepins. That early screen is a cinch but at least it gives you a chance to learn some degree of sword control. Underground passages soon appear, some with concealed entrances. In these you may find extra weapons. Other passages contain ambushes and a host of bloodthirsty fighters avoid these if you can. On you stomp, stopping only to stab at vampire bats, centaurs and other mutant monstrosities. Some of these leave behind jewels which KENSU "


"FROM THE AUTHOR OF SCREAMING WINGS COMES A NEW ATARI SPACE MEGA-BLASTI SEE US DROID ON STAND 112 114 at the ATARI USER SHOW April 24,25,26th ATARI 800 XL 180X: 65XE TAPE .95 DISK .95 LOSIN BOLDLY GOES WHERE NO 8-BIT HAS GONE BEFOREI RAPID FIRE GAME-PLAY SMOOTH SCROLLING HIGH-RES GRAPHICS BONUS SCREENS TRANSFORM OPTION MULTI-ATTACK WAVES Atari Screenshots Just One of Our Terrific Range of 8-Bit Software for your Atari Computer Also Available Utilities SPACE LOBSTERS ROBOT KNIGHTS CRUMBLE'S CRISIS LASER HAWK DOMAIN OF THE UNDEAD SCREAMING WINGS WAR COPTER DAY AT THE RACES SPRONG ESCAPE FROM DOOMWORLD PANIC EXPRESS CBMSATARI Filipples .95 tape .95 disk FREAKY FACTORY ROCKET REPAIRMAN RIVER RALLY (NEW TECHNICOLOR DREAM .95 disk GO FORTH (NEW 24.95 disk CREATOR [NEW for the ST] .95 .95 tape disk .95 22.99 tape .99 disk RED RAT SOFTWARE 11 FENNEL STREET, MANCHESTER M4 3DUC "


"   Kick and Run Psycho 5 from Jaleco is Gondomania is a shoot 'em up a game in which you have to with lots of additional weapons rescue your psychic comrades to collect and the chance to from detention. There are five join up with other friendly characters in the game each space craft so that your own with different attributes — one model increases in size and being good at flying, the next power. The third is an unusual good at jumping and so on. looking game from Namco Lots of objects to pick up, traps with the main playing area to negotiate and baddies to taking up the bottom half of the overcome. It sounds much screen, and the scoreboard more fun than Exerizer! and an extra playing window taking up the top half of the . Karnov from Data East screen. is apparently a little like Ghosts 'n' Goblins and Super Mario Bros. It's a horizontal scrolling game with you as the hero Karnov-a fattish balding creature, single handedly fighting off the forces of evil. At the recent AOU coin-op next few months. Sounds Like the Ed! (That's expo held in Japan, a number We've already had a look at enough of that! Ed). Lots of of new games were on show, Psycho Soldier, Rastan, Saga, action, ladders to climb up and which should be filtering Flying Shark and Exerizer but down, power-ups to collect through to the UK over the here's news of a few others. and bombs to throw. Two new football games, There are also three other Jong Bou is SNK's latest which we'll be looking at in games which look very exciting release and is based on Break greater detail next month are from the brochures, but as they Out and Arkanoid. It's one Taito's Kick and Run and are written in Japanese I can't difference is that your platform, even begin to tell you what Universal's American and the walls you have to they're about! Two are from Soccer. Though Taito's game break up, look like the playing is English soccer and Deco and are called This is Rygar the running, Universal's is the American pieces from a game of Mah Gondomania and Jong. Should be interesting. jumping martial arts game from Dragon Princess. version. I'm putting my money Temco. Lots of pretty graphics on Kick and Run which is a far and huge monsters attack our more detailed and exciting Kung-Fu hero as he battles for game to play ownership of power shields. Very pretty but lacking in Capcom has two new gameplay? Look out for it. games out Top Secret, and Bionic Commandos. don't know anything about Top Secret but Bionic Commandos looks lot of fun. You are part of a special 3339330SUD83 commando unit out to thwart the baddies, and to help in your task you've been kitted out with a bionic arm! This shoots out to grab onto things, like tree branches, 1) OUT RUN Now, THIS is the game you're SEGA allowing you to swing across 2) ROLLING THUNDER all going to be playing this ATARI 3) CHAMPIONSHIP SPRINT huge chasms and the like using ATARI summer. It's called your arm as a rope. The Solomon's Key and it's 4) SIDE ARMS CAPCOM totally and utterly addictive. graphics are cute with lots of 5) AMERICANO UNIVERSAL You won't care what it costs to colour. 6) BUBBLE BOBBLE TAITO play, believe us! Solomon's 7) VALTRIC TAITO Key is an awesome mixture of 8) NEMESIS KONAMI Bombjack, Pengo, and Ghost's OR 9) SOLDIER OF LIGHT TECHNOS 'n' Goblins and here at C+VG 10) SHACKLED DATA EAST we reckon it's going to be the biggest thing to hit the arcades CADEON This list is compiled with the help of one arcade in London's since Pac Man! West End, and is not necessarily the case country-wide. Thanks to John Stergides of Electrocoin. 365 "


"THE BIG SCREEN trange facts number one: Little Shop of Horrors (PG) began life as a grade-Z horror comedy, made in two days and a night back in 1960. It remained a rarely seen cult movie until somebody had the weird idea of turning it into a stage show... and a musical one at that! Now it's gone full circle and the low budget black and white chiller has become a multimillion dollar all-singing blockbuster! Seymour is a nerd, trapped in a dead-end job, sweeping up in Mushnik's flower shop. Business is so bad that even the greenfly go elsewhere. But then Seymour discovers an unknown species of plant. He calls it Audrey II, after a curvy colleague who he secretly cause he's one of their top agents, even if he is given to unorthodox methods. The tension mounts as Brosnan recieves his Airfix atomic weapon kit and Caine battles with red tape as he tries to trace him. It all culminates with some SAS heroics...but there's a sting in the tail as well. Just like the game, Forsyth's world of spies is a mixture of deduction and double-cross. Fourth Protocol is a highly competent thriller, though there are times when it looks like film making by numbers. There are one or two realistically nasty moments in Fourth Protocol. A surprise then to find that Trick or Treat (18) a wholly jokey horror movie is consedered more likely to corrupt in the eyes of the censor. Once more we're in the realm of monsters and music as a dead heavy metal singer comes back from the dead. It's all a big joke at the expense of the moral majority, who insist that Sabbath, Iron Maiden and the rest are the Street's the name Ward R. Street and films are the game. I inhabit the subterranean world of preview theatres, only surfacing to tell you what's happening at your local picture house. And I DON'T pull any punches. I praise the good but the bad and the ugly better watch out! Little Shop. Rick Moranis is brilliant as the wimpish Seymour; Ellen Greene makes a great dumb blonde. But the ultimate acting honours must be shared between Steve Martin as the dentist with a penchant for giving pain and Audrey II, one of the most brilliant puppet displays ever seen on screen. From gardening to DIY. Build a Horror: \"Hi, I'm from Inter-Flora.\" coal bunker, garden shed, an atomic bomb ... The Four Proadmires and who also longs to good enough. At first a few drops tocol (15) is just like Blue Peter, flee Skid Row. \"It seems to be of human blood are all that's only you need more than a  Trick A TriL some sort of a fly trap.\" Seymour necessary to shake up her staSqueezy bottle and make sure tells her. mens, but as she grows bigger, mummy helps you with the uraor Treat Seymour puts his cute little her appetite increases. nium. devil's disciples. bloom on display, and soon Can Seymour resist Audrey Il's Fourth Protocol shouldn't need the film makers have gone to crowds are flocking in to take a insatiable demands? Does a bikany introduction. If you didn't the extreme of casting Ozzie look at this unique specimen ing dentist look like plant food to read the best-seller, you probOsbourne as a fundamentalist Business booms, but Audrey II is you? Just where does the this jive ably racked your brain over the preacherl Bat lovers should stay hungry... and flies just aren't talking plant actually come computer game. It's lucky old away! from? And will the nerd and the Michael Caine who gets to do it Nothing too gory in this one, bird ever escape from hell hole all for real in this cat and mouse but there are lots of laughs and that is Downtown, or is the dish tale of international intrigue. and some great special effects. somebody else's dinner date? So what is the fourth Protocol? The best thing is that the film It's almost impossible to fault Quite simply, it's an agreement makers have kept their tongues Protocol: A bad between Russian and America firmly in their checks, and make that they won't let off any atomic one or two good comments abDeusiue weapons on each other's terri-out hero worship. Apparently manner tory. Lemmy of Motorhead rates itWhich is why it's a trifle naughand he should knowl ty of Ruskie agent, Pierce Bros. On the same bill are a further nan, to build a bomb in our fifty minutes of rockin' mayhem backyard perhaps he was as More Bad News takes to the miffed af not getting to play road. It's the Comic Strip crew James Bond. back in top form in a comeback But Frederick Forsyth is miles that's even more ghastly than from lan Fleming, so instead of Sammi Curr's. incessant action and gratuitous Every b and-on-the-road gadetry we get to see the spy as cliché is jammed into this furious civil servant riff of gag after gag. There's the Power struggles in the upper reunion meal in the Indian res echelons of MI5 result in Caine taurant recieving a rough ride from his \"Let's make it a hundred pints superiors, which is a pity beof lager while we decide what to "


"STAR TREK 4x Shot: \"It's my ball and I'm going home.\" somewhere along the line machine, but runs into hick town something went wrong and inconservatism at every turn. stead of tension you get a lot of The problem is that despite A Sly grin goes over the top pretty pictures and a corny tale. some great acting, the team order,\" the obligatory game of masterpiece. It's 1951 and a new coach starts to win too soon, and after wreck-the-hotel-room; and final. I had really high hopes for this. arrives in Hickory, Indiana, to that there's no real tension. Even ly Bad New's apotheosis an It's got a great cast, including teach basketball, which is pretty the games are reduced to an appearance at Castle Donning actors like Gene Hackman and much a religion in those parts. endless succession of shots of ton. Never have so many bottles Barbra Hershey. Better still, the He takes the team of undisci balls bouncing into baskets. Only gh the director is a veteran of the TV plined losers and attempts to go see this one if you love the air in such a short space of timel classic, Hill Street Blues. But drill them into a winning game. One or two of the jokes don't quite make it, but it's still far funnier than a Cliff Richard gig. From dumb music to dumb superstars. At least, that's the way the public likes to see Sly Stallone. But we know better, don't we? Inside that muscular body lurks a deep. warm, human The plot of Star Trek IV visitor will enjoy it for laughs than the other being! The Voyage Home boldly the simple three films. A greatOkay, so stop laughing. You goes where no entertainment it but obvious scene on can't accept it, and neither screenwriter has gone provides. a bus after Kirk and could the American public, before. Despite a heavy To tell you the plot of Spock have warped which has stayed away from handed ecological the film would spoil it. back through time to Over the Top (PG) in droves message and a But we can tell you that Earth circa 1987. Spock distinctly dodgy Admiral James T. Kirk deals out one of his everyday tale of a truck-driving storyline the wrinkly actually does save the brain-numbing Vulcan arm wrestler is an attempt by our Earth and saves himself neck massages to an guy Sly to escape Cobra image. crew of the Starship Even the arm wrestling is kept Enterprise manage to from a fate worse than irritating punk with in the background until the make you believe in all death after destroying ghettoblaster much to grand finale, the first part of the the implausible twists the Enterprise at the the enjoyment of the film concentrates on beefcake's and turns of this lates back end of The Search other passengers. Wish relationship with his son. Trekkie epic. for Spock. I could do the same to The kid has become a spoilt, Dedicated fans will Dedicated fans will Star Trek IV isn't people with loud upper class brat ever since dad love the movie, film heavy on special effects Walkmen on the train! walked out on the family and critics will slam it, and but it is heavy on As you'd expect rich grandfather took over. But now Stallone's mighty penithe regular cinema humour. Lots more Spock gets all the good tent. His ex-wife, who's in hospital lines. After all, Leonard Keep on Trekking: Kirk and Spock check out we about to undergo a major opng: Nrk and Spock check our Nimoy did direct the eration, suggests that Sly should Starglider picture. But you can't collect his son from the military really escape the academy and get to know him feeling that he'd been as he freks across country in his reading Douglas truck Adams' Hitchiker's There are lots of complications Guide books while on the way and it all culminates in the International Arm Wrestling working on the film. Championships in that mecca of Just remember the good taste, Las Vegas. dolphins from the first It's a story in the Rocky mould, book and you'll get the but with added depth and emoidea. tion, there are some genuinely Star Trek IV keeps to moving scenes between Stalthe spirit of the TV lone and young David Menoriginals closer than the denhall. previous films. Kirk Another out-of-the-ordinary sport, another Cinderella story of even gets the girl a losers becoming winners, but long standing feature of beside Best Shot (PG from May the TV plots. Silly but 22nd). Over the Top looks like a lots of fun. See it. "


"BUY ONE GET ONE FREE!!! With the price of quality games ever rising only Cascade brings you this outstanding offer on 3 great titles. No catches BUY ONE TITLE AT THE ADVERTISED PRICE AND MAKE ANOTHER SELECTION COMPLETELY FREE OF CHARGE!! ACE...the air combat flight simulator. Zzap! 64 and CCI Flight Simulator of the Year. Need we say more? ALL CASSETTE SKY RUNNER... An excellent and entertaining GAMES GAMES 279.95 follow up to ACE' Computer and Video Games. You play the part of future drug buster. ALL DISK DISK 50...An outstanding compilation of 50 GAMES yes 50-games on one disk. Also available CASSETTE 50... Same great value. Same great offer. Insert the number you require in the boxes below to indicate the games of your choice. Remember...Buy one cassette get one cassette free. Buy one disk get one disk free. Buy two get two free!!!! .95 ---SO SPECTRUM AMSTRAD PRICE DISK CASS. COMM. ACE SKY RUNNER DISK 50 CASSETTE 50 * INDICATES NOT AVAILABLE IN THIS FORMAT NAME ADDRESS _POSTCODE TOTALE Allow 28 days for delivery I enclose a cheque/postal order for [.............] made payable to Cascade Games Ltd. or through any Post Office by TRANSCASH (Giro No. 655 6655) For even faster ordering when charging to ACCESS, BARCLAYCARD, VISA, AMERICAN EXPRESS or DINERS CLUB use our 24 hour express order service by telephoning 0423 504663 Be sure to quote Ref. CVG, or by post tick the appropriate Credit/Charge Card and enter number here _COUNTRY Cascade Games Ltd., Harrogate, HG1 5BG, England. TIIIIIIIIIIIII TELE-GAMES Europe's Largest Stock Of Video Games & Cartridges For — BEEP CBS Case INTELLIVISION ATARI 2600 BEEPI) Nintendo IN STOCK NOW GRADIUF + COMMANDO + MUSCLE * NINJA KID CHUBBY CHERUB * 1942 * The leading Video game specialists Send for lists (state make of game) TELEGAMES, WIGSTON, LEICESTER, LES 1TE (0533-880445) GUESS.....WHOS COMING... COMPUTER MANIA 3 Bond Street Court, Winsover Road, Spalding, Lincs. PE11 1DY Telephone: (0775) 62288 CBM 64 SPECTRUM AMSTRAD disc disk 11.99 11.99 11.99 NNNNNONDU8888 TITLE tape tape Nemises 750 Gun Ship 14.49 Paper Boy 11.25 Gauntlet Star Raiders 2 11,75 The Sentinel 11.75 Leader Board EE 11.79 Short Circuit Top Gun Mutants Silent Service 11 25 Rana Rama Arkonoid 6.95 11.99 11,49 14.49 infodroid 7.25 11.79 7.25 Super Soccer 6.95 10.99 6.95 Nemisis Warlock 6.99 11 99 6.99 Deeper Dungeons 3.79 3.79 4.25 Levithan 725 11.99 Star Trek 8 99 12 99 8.95 8.99 Star Glider 11.49 14.49 11.49 11.49 Ikari Warriors 725 11.99 6.49 Please send 550 PP, O Seas sond C1.35. Please specify machine. For other software not listed above, hardware or peripherals please phone 0775 62288 Mon-Sat 9-5.30 or 0406 23244 evenings. NOODOO 98 8888 11.99 11.99 6.95 11.99 14.49 5.99 6.75 11.99 12.99 14.99 wammen "


"COMMODORE + SPECTRUM TRAIN GAME, EDDIE KIDD, ZORRO, 8122ICOM (RRP 914 95). SPIDERMAN HULK, CHIMERA THUNDERBIDS CHICKEN CHASE, ROBIN OF SHERLOCK, TWISTER SURFONAMP, SUPERSLUETH, SUPERDHESS 35. MIND SHADOW, ASHKERON, MANTRONIX .95 EACH INTERNATIONAL KARATE EQUINOX STAINLESS STEEL KOP OUT. PLANETS, FROST BYTE, CHUCKIE EGG BATTLE OF THE PLANETS, SIR FRED, RIVER RAID ADVENTURELAND/SECRET MISSION PITFALL II ENDURO SPY VS SPY, CYBERUN, ZOIDS. WHAM MUSIC BOX BOUNDER, STARSTRIKE I MOON CRESTA RESCUE ON FRACTALUS REALM OF IMPOSSIBILITY, PANZADROME THINK VALKYRIE 17. DEATH STAR INT, GUNFRIGHT SKYFOX FRANK BRUNO'S BOXING, NOMAD, WEST BANK SAM STOAT SAFEBREAKER1 OF THE MASK, ROCCO, REVOLUTION, METALROLIS. WILLIAM WOBBLER RIDDLERS DEN WINTER SPORTS, BALLBLAZER QUARTZATRON NIGHTGUNNER. FALKLANOS 82 RED ARROWS, WOW GAMES COMP. COLOSSAL ADVENTURE ADVENTURE QUEST, JET SET WILLY, HURG, OFF THE HOOK, GERRY THE GERM, RASPUTIN, COSTA CAPERS, RUNESTONE HOT SHOTS COMP. 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE JOHNNY REBM DECATHLON 14.95 1st PUBLISHING PROGRAMS ON DISC .99 EACH RED ARROWS 1495 ALL JUST 610,95 EACH FIRST WORD (WORD PROC) CHINESE JUGGLER FASSEN WHERENURD, TONY HARTS RIVER RAID 4.95 FIRSTRASE DATABASE RESCUE ONFRACTALUS ART MASTER TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY. JUMPMAN BASIC 64 BASILOON BOND, LUNAR OUTPOST. ROCK N' BOLT. PARK PATROL RUS PASCAL LANGUAGE DOUGHBOY, MASTER OF LAMPS WEB DIMENSION, DARK ADA TRAINING COURSE PITFALL TOWER STAR TROOPER QUAKE MINUS 1. DUMMY RUN 14.95 SUICIDE STRIKE JUICE,DRELBS MOEBIUS, GHOST PITFALL SPINAKER CHASER MHOTEP OUTLAWS. QUFSTPROBE, WILLOW THING ON A SPRING 695 PATTERN, GALAXON THUNDERBIRDS, CHIMERA EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE PASTFINDER 14.95 DOUGHBOY WILLIAM WOBBLER 14.95 COMMODORE .95 ALF. AGEAN VOYAGE, SONGMAKER SEA SPELLER WEB DIMENSION .95 EACH NUMBER TUMBLERS, FRACTION FEVER MAKE A FACE BEAMAIDER RANCH STONY MANCHINE ALPHA BUND, DANCE COMBAT LEADER. ONE ON ONE MATCHESHING, ARK THE TRACER SANCTION 14.95 FACTORY LOGIC LEVELS.ALPHABET 200 PANDORA, BEAVRIDER POTTY PIDGEON, CRAZY COMETS, MONTY MOLE. ZAXXON KONG STRIKES BACK DESIGNERS PENCIL SPECTRUM 1.95 4.95 TAPPER, SPIDERMAN HULK, BOMBO, WHO DARES WINS BALLBLAZER KIDS ON KEYS, FRACTION FEVER, ALPHABET 200 AGEAN 1495 GYROSCOPE FIGHTING WARRIOR FLAK, MOTOCROSS, VOYAGE, UP AND ADDOEM NUMBER TUMBLERS, LOGIC GALACTIC CONTROLLER 63 95 JET SET WILLY MONTY ON RUN, BEACHEAD STARION LEVELS, DANCE FACTORY, RANCH, MAKE A FACE. KINDER ROCK N WRESTLE MUGSYS REVENGE ZORRO, BCS HIGH FLYER 93.95 QUEST FOR TYRES MANIC MINER SPTLUNKER, COMBAT NUMBER LEARNING 3.95 IFADER JOURNEY, EDDIE KIDDS, GEOFF CAPES, FRAK M ONTY ON THE RUN 195 UTILITIES & BLACKWYTCH. PITSTOP. DRAGONSKULLE. HENRY'S HOUSE VOLIMERMAID MADNESS SPADE E ARCADE EXTRAVAGANZA PERIPHERALS CRITICAL MASS WILLIAM WOBBLER REDHAWK MONEY MANAGER 3.95 NEOS MOUSE & CHEESE Normally COMBAT LYNX WORLD SERIES BASEBALL. SURF CHAPM SUPERMAN STAFF OF KARNATH CROGS REVENGE DEAD. DAVIDS RALBOSS 129 95 MIDNIGHT MAGIC, ONE ON ONE, SKOOL DAZE PARADROID ZORKI 3.95 SIMONS BASIC EXTENSION DISCO CASS. $4.95 SPINDUZZY .96 1551 DISC DRIVERS FOR C16 and +4 .95 EACH $IAH CA FASSEM MC LANG ASS 2799 CHICKE EGG SHERLOCK, FIGHT NIGHT, TIGERS IN ZORK 0395 TOUCH TYPE CASS. SNOW, KNIGHTS OF DESERT, LAW OF THE WEST, CONGO ZORK 13 95 PROGRAMMES REF. GUIDES BONGO, WIZARDRY MOON CRESTA, QUESTPROBE STARCROSS 13.95 MACRO ASSEMBLER DEVELOPMENT (OSC) 14.95 AMAZON WOMEN BALL BLAZER, RED ARROWS. MACADAM BUMPER THING ON A SPRING, ZOIDS DEADLINE (3.95 FUTURE FINANCE (DSC) 99.99 BOUNDER HAMPSTEAD, TIME TUNNEL. BOUNCES SUSPENDED EASY SPELL DISC AOVENTURELAND SECRET MISSION, PIRATE LOGO LANGUAGE 456 COMMODORE 54 MUSIC MAKER 15.00 ADVENTURE VOO000 CASTLE, ELEKTRACLIDE FIGHTING WARRIOR 14.95 BREDENS BASIC DISC & CASS SHERLOCK THAI BOXING, BULLDOG, JOHNNY REBI 295 SUPER ZAXXION HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER DEVS EX REDHAWK 64.95 SCRIPT & WORD PROC, CART, FOR C16 & +4 .95 MACHINA LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE. JET SET WILLY II ULTIMA III 54 95 COMPANY PACK 123 ACCOUNTING CONTROL ADVENTURE QUEST, LORDS OF TIME CHIMERA WILLOW PATTERN 5 SYSTEM FOR 4 ON DISC SOLD A MILLION ASSEMBLER TUTOR DESC .95 EACH 15 GHOSTBUSTERS PROGRAMMERS UTILITY DISC THE FORCE MIG ALLEY ACE, FOREST OF DOOM-BOOK & CRITICAL MASSCOMBAT LYNX DISCS 10 FOR TAPE KETTLE SYSTEM 1500 SECOND ED, EVIL CROWN MURDER BY THE DOZEN DONKY KONG (Cart) ROBOTRON 2084 Cart.). POLE .95 POSITION (Cart.), MS PACMAN (Cart) GALAXON (Cart) SPECTRUM SOFTWARE .95 EACH BARGAINS .95 EACH VALHALA, GEOFF CAPES, MUGSY'S REVENGE, BRIAN WINTER GAMES, WHITE LIGHTNING, AMERICAS CUP FROM 1st PUBLISHING JACKS, PROJECT FUTURE, CHESS BY SINCLAIR, TEACH DRACONS VAR GOLF CONSTRUCTION SET 8 BOOKS FOR JUST E9.95 +2.50 p&p BASIC ON ZX, CONVENANT, STARBIKE WHO DARES WINS LEADERBOARD, SUPERBOWL, TOUCHDOWN FOOTBALL Normal RRP over ES000 1. PSYTRADOK JET SET WILLY BCS QUEST FOR TIRES OBERT (Cat.) YOUR 4 CASSETTE BOOK, GRAPHICS BOOK FOR THE BEACHHEAD MANIC MINER MATOH FISHING HACKER COMMODORE 64. PEERS SPOKES 064 TRICKS & TIPS SIR LANCELOT POTAGEN H USTERS MUGSY COMMODORE 64 DISCS FOR YOUR COMMODORE 64 ADVANCED MACHINE A WARRIOR, TOY POLE POSITION GYROSC LANGUAGE BOOK FOR THE C64 IOEA BOOKC64, MACHINE BIZZARE, TALOS, ALIEN. NIGHTSHADE KONG STRIKES MASTER OF LAMPS .95 LANGUAGE BOOK FOR THE C64 BACK, SHOW JUMPING, MONTY ON THE RUN, THE .95 EACH MINI OFFICE, VECTRON 3D, AMAZON WOMEN. NEVER ENDING STORY ARCADE HALL OF FAME COMP. TAU-CETI, ABERSOFT FOURTH, THE YOUNG ONES, EVIL CROWN .95 EACH SOLD A MILLION I TERRA CRESTA, PACMAN. THE KET TRILOGY, SUPERBOWL, DRAGON'S LAIR, MASTERS OF UNIVERSE, THE EIDELON, HIGHLANDER, TARZAN PRODIGY, CRYSTAL CASTLES, MEGA HITS COMP SINCLAIR UTILITIES AND PERIPHERALS CURRAN MICRO SLOT SPECORUMS ADDITIONAL DRUM ROTS 13. AFRO ELECTRO ALPHACOM PAPER 5 rolig 19.95 +1.00 p&p ALPHA COM 32 PRINTERS 3295 -1.00 pp HILL MOGIBSON EDUCATIONAL PACK & TITLES 14 95 SPECTRUM 48K128K POWER SUPPLIES .95 +1.00 p&p 1-3 titles 75p 3 or more .00 Overseas .20 per tape CHEQUES PAYABLE TO LOGIC MAIL ORDER LTD Department 4 17 Leotric Square, Eastern Industry Peterborough, Cambs. Tel: 0733 313870 MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS ... 6.95 WHOOPS.. ... MISSED HIM -7.50 SPECTRUM Deeper Dungeons ......4.95 Kiled Until Dead D1....7.95 Paper Boy 5.95 Grey Fell ... 7.95 Black Magic D1...........7.95 TT Racer .............. 7.50 Knight Orc .. 12.50 Saracen......................5.95 Strike Force Harrier ....7.50 Arkanoid...... ........5.95 Gunslinger D1 ..........7.95 Silent Service......... 7.50 Ranarama...... 5.95 Nemesis Warlock D3 6.95 Ace of Aces 6.75 Sailing .5.95 Super Soccer...........6.95 Short Circuit 5.95 Krakout... ...5.95 Auf Wieder. Monty D1 7.95 Mercenary ........ 7.95 Grange Hill.. ..795 Pulsator Bazooka Bill................... 6.75 Star Games.. ...7.95 . Star Raider Il D1. 7.95 Footballer of Year.......5.95 Into Eagles Nest ..........6.95 Head Over Heels ........6.95 Light Force 5.95 Enduro Race 5.95 Mikrogen Classics D3 7.95 Dragons Lair il......... 5.95 Terror of the Deep.......7.95 Into Eagle's Nest D3...6.95 Super Soccer......5.95 Indoor Games _ 6.95 USA AF. disk only 25.95 Cobra (Rambo Il).......5.95 Bubbler.......................6.95 Shard of Spr.dk only 17.95 10th Frame. ..... 6.95 Garfield .................... 5.95 Portal disk only........20.95 Sam Cruise................. 5.95 Pulsator 5.95 Gemst Warr.dk only 17.95 Gauntlet ..5.95 Star Raider ll. 7.95 R.D.F. 1985 dk only 20.95 Shadow Skimmer....... 5.95 Head over Heels .........5.95 Toy Shop disk only....37.50 Sky Runner.................7.50 (CRL) Image System 19.95 Print Shop disk only 34.95 Bombjack TWO............5.95 Sigma 7. ......7.95 Ace of Aces D1 ..........7.50 Airwolf Two.................5.95 Mikrogen Classics ...... 7.95 Paper Boy 7.50 7.95 Vulcan 7.95 Bombjack Two.... 7.50 Top Gun ....................5.95 Sydney Affair... 6.95 Ikari Warriors....... Ikan Warriors.............5.95 Murder Off Miami......5.95 Last Ninja ............ 7.95 World Games ............. 6.75 FA Cup '87.. 5.95 World Games ............. 7.50 Hand Ball Maradona ...5.95 COMMODORE 64 Champ. Wrestling... 7.50 Big Trouble in L. China 7.95 Headcoach 7.95 SAS Strikeforce 6.75 Space Harrier ......5.95 Gauntlet... ..7.50 Death or Glory ...... Star Glider ................ 12.50 Blitzkrieg D1............. 7.50 The Double....... Last Ninja...................7.95 Destroyer Disk Only 12.50 Deeper Dungeons ......4.95 Nemesis.....................5.95 Double Take.............. 6.75 Delta D1 .....................7.95 Bangkok Knights......795 Cobra (Rambo It)........6.75 10th Frame D1..........7.95 Saboteur il 5.95 Top Gun 6.75 L board Exec Edit. D1 7.95 Samurai .....5.95 Marble Madness D1....7.50 Express Raider D1......7.95 The Tube.....................6.95 Bismark D1... .....7.50 B. Trouble L. China D1 7.95 Quartet ...7.95 Short Circuit....... ......6.95 Apache Gunship D4 12.95 Wonder Boy... ...7.95 Saboteur ...... ......5.95 Bangkok Knights.........7.95 6 Hit Pak (Elite) ...7.95 Ranarama D3 ....6.95 Nemesis 1 Aliens US Comp. ........ 7.95 The Tube.................... 6.95 Tomahawk D1 ............ 7.95 Inspector Gadget........ 7.95 Quartet D1..................7.95 Arkenoid..... .........6.95 Tiger Mission.............7.95 Enduro Races D1 .......7.95 Sailing D1..... 7.95 Nether Earth.... ........7.95 Wonder Boy D1 .......... 7.95 Tracker... 12.95 Killed Until Dead... ..6.95 6 Hit Pak (Elite) D1......7.95 Krakout D1 .. Black Magic .6.95 Aliens US Comp. 01...7.95 Grange Hill... 7.95 Saracen....................5.95 Deceptor D1...............7.95 Tag Team Wres'ing D1 7.95 Gunslinger..........6.95 Inspector Gadget D1 7.95 Star Games 1 D1.... ... 7.95 Nemesis Warlock..... .5.95 Tiger Mission 1.........7.95 Road War 2000 Donly 17.50 Aufwieder. Monty...... 5.95 Nether Earth...............7.95 Phantasy II Dk Only 17.50 Flunky......... ............7.95 Romulus... ............... 6.95 Firetrack D1... .... 7.95 Martianoids..............6.95 Subbattle D1..............7.95 Samurai D1 ...............795 Postage Included UK. Please state which micro. Fast service. Sand cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept CVG, 49 Sutherland Street, Victoria. London SW1 V4JX MAIL ORDER ONLY: Send for FREE list Amstrad, C16, MSX, Commodore, Spectrum. D=Disks Available: D1 at C12.95, D3 at .95, 04 at .50. 6.95 8.95 MAKE SURE YOU DON'T! 6.95 "


", COMPETITION RESULTS Back in January we asked you to create your own special Centurion suite. That Ariolasoft Goodie bag stuffed full with records, books, games, Centurion model and the famous Hacker T-shirts will be going to Anthony Griffin of Nottingham. The runnersup, ares Slater, London; Greg Staples, Sheffield; Stewart Ellis, Leeds; A Higgs, Berks; Richard Rippon, Tyne & Wear; Simon Dean, Sheffield; Michael Pierrot, London; Tim Pearson, Staffs; Lee Jackson, Westerhope; Dean McQuade, Warley; Boz Groden, Dyfed; James Sharp, Sheffield; Anthony Bourne, Staffs; lan Lucas, Gateshead; Xavier Pick, York; Adrian McGuire, Berks; Emma Johnson, Birmingham; Fariukh Rahman, London, Gareth Brown, Swindon; Declan Featherstone, Birmingham; Tim Twelves, London; Daniel Ogunkoya, London; Wenchin Ng, London; Morgan Davaee, Blackburn. SURVEILLANCE THE CITY AT NIGHT ole MOVED FOR IT -POWER EKT UUGH! ORATORY, HE'THA ALLEY OLY T ALIGNT MISTER! THEYVEC quello GAT SES OLLING ANTHONY GRIFFIN POWER S XTREME! KDSSH 2000GS NOSSA ROY LEWIS GREG STAPLE AJONATHAN EGGELTON VL SLATER NONS -FONCTION BASTER PASS LEVEL. R ED BY T BEST PRED VRH "


"TREBLE TOPS ocea SOFTWARE ONSECTS care 3 ILLION BEACH-HEAD SELLING GAME COLLATIONS THEY SOBA WHION 2 BLANDUSTERS ON EACH ALBUM MORE FUNMORE EXCITEMEN SALEY THOMPSON ocea_They sold 19 oce Truelda NO BRUCE LEN FIGHTER CE PSION match point PILOR FOUR No.1 Blockbusters EXTRAERDINAIRES RAMBO GHSTBUSTERS KUNG FU MASTER THE ENVISCING PUASA SQUAD SQUAD MONSTER HITS FROM SPECTRUM AMSTRAD COMMODORE STRAD. MODORE DIS .95 .95 SQUAD $14.95 .95 EACH EACH 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Tel: 061 832 6633 Telex: 669977. "


"G-TEN LIMITED DEPT. C+VG, 1st Floor, 146/150 Commercial Street, London E1 6NU THE Mau-Order Software House CUT PRICE SOFTWARE SPECTRUM RAPOUR Eline 1 4.95 10.95 Stars On 128 9 .95 6.95 Starglider ........ 14.95 11.96 It's A Knockout........ 7.95 5.50 Konami's Golf..... 795 5.50 Leaderboard........ 995 7.25 Paperboy 7 .95 5.50 Samura........... 9.95 6.95 Konami Coin Op.....9.95 6.95 Great Escape7 95 5.50 Uchi Marta.......... 8.95 6.95 Butch Hard Guy 7.95 6.50 Now Games 3 9.95 6.95 Hit Pak 9.95 6.95 Tri Pursuit......... 14 95 11.96 Space Harrier .. .... 7.95 5.50 SPECTRUM OUR PRICE Xeno........... 895 6.50 Terra Cresta ............. 7.95 5.50 Masters of Universe...8.95 6.50 Sky Runner............. 7.95 5.50 Sold Million 3 . 9.95 6.95 Shockway Rider 7.95 5.50 Super Cycle 7.95 5.50 8.95 6.50 Avenger....... 9.95 6.95 COMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK Commando 86 695 1195 Freeze Frame 3...........Cart 35.95 Great Escape 6 .50 10.95 It's A KDut..............6.50 NA Furelord ........ .... 6.50 10.95 Double Take 8 .95 11.95 Expert Cart... NA 28.95 Five Star .............. 6.95 11.95 Destroyer.. ....NA 11.95 6.50 10.95 Fist 2 AMSTRAD TOP 10 CASS DISK Sold Millon 2........6.95 11.95 Triv Pursuit. 11.95 16.95 Mini Office 2. 11.95 14.95 Starglider .............. 11.95 16.95 Winter Games 7.25 11.95 11.00 17.95 Plan it 11.95 15.95 Scooby Doo ...... 6.95 11.95 Prospell NA 19.95 Protext. ....NA 2195 26 50 AMSTRAD Tapt Disc DRAGONS LAIR 6.75 10.75 KONAMI COIN OP HIT 725 11.25 DESERT FOX 425 NA ROCKY HORROR SHOW 6.75 NA STRYKERS RUN 6.75 N.A. COMMANDO 6.75 1125NFILTRATOR 675 11 25 RAVENSKULE 6.75 9.50 WORLD CUP CARNIVAL 6.75 11.25 SANXION 675 1125 CRYSTAL CASTLES 6.75 950 SHOGUN 675 11.25 HOT WHEELS 675 1125 DODGY GEEZERS GREEN BERET 6.50 11.25 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 6.75 10.50 VIE AR KUNG FU II 6.75 11.25 TOP GUN 6.50 NA NOW GAMES 8.75 NA FOOTBALL FORTUNES 8.25 12.75 STALLONE COBRA 6.50 NA DEACTIVATORS 5 75 11 25 ACORNSOFT X SAI COMBAT 5 50 11 25 WORLD GAMES 6.90 11.75 QUEST PROBE 4.25 NA GHOSTS 'N GOBLINS 650 11.25 STARSLIDER 11 75 1550 REBEL PLANET 4.25 NA MIAMI VICE 6.50 NA SUPERSTAR PING PONG 425 NA IMPOSSIBLE MISSION HIGHLANDER 6.50 NA SKYRUNNER 6.75 10.50 6.50 11.25 ALIENS 6 75 11.75 ATARIST Our Price DRUID 6.75 10.75 STAR RAIDER 11 6.75 11.75 THE PAWN 23 25 NOW GAMES 3 6.75 11.75 HACKER 23 25 4.25 NA GALVAN 6.50 NA STAR GLIDER 22 25 FIDOLON 6.50 NA RAZOOKA BILL 675 11.25 SUPER HUEY 17.75 THAU 6.75 11.75 THEY SOLD A MILLION 3 6.75 11.75 STRIP POKER 17.75 MARBLE MADNESS 6.75 NA GUNSHIP 11.75 14,50 THUNDER 32 25 ICON ON 6.50 NA POWERPLAY 7 25 11 25 SILENT SERVICE 22 75 GAUNTLET 6.75 1175 SENTINEL 7.25 11.25 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 1725 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 7 25 NAKNUCKLEBUSTERS 7 25 11.25 PRO SPRITE DESIGNER THEY SOLO AMALION) 725 11.25 XEVIOUS 7.25 1125 KARATE MASTER 10.50 HUMAN TORCH 325 NA MOME MONSTER GAME 675 1 35 OBSIDIAN 425 NA SHANGHAI 7.25 11.25 AMIGA BEACHEAD 4 25  AMAZON WOMEN 4.25 NA MOON MIST 22 25 AIHAN HIGHWAY 4.25 NA HUMAN TORCH 4 25 NA ARCHON BOMB JACK 2 725 12.75 HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER 25 NA ARCHON II 25 50 NEMESIS 725 NA BOMB JACK 2 8.25 12.75 ARCTIC FOX NA 12.75 OESTROVER NA 12 75 SKYFOX 26.50 THEY STOLE A MILLION 825 NA SCOTT ADAMS SCOOPS 750 NA THE PAWN SAILING 850 12 25 USA AF NA 26.25 SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD 23.00 SUPER CYCLE 750 12.25 STAR GAMES 750 1225 GRAPHICRAFT 750 NA INTO THE EAGLES NESTE 75 TO 50 TEXT CRAFT ELEVATOR ACTION 6.75 12 25 HOLLYWOOD HIJINX 26.25 COMMODORE 64/128 ARKANOID 5.75 NA PAPERBOY 7 25 1125 HITS PACK 7.50 12 25 PERIPHERALS GHOSTS 'N GOBLINS 5.75 11 25 DELTA 750 12.50 (PAP add E1.50 pitem) STALLONE COSRA 6.50 NA MARBLE MADNESS 750 1250 QUICKSHOT I NA AILBREAK 750 12 50 QUICKSHOT PLUS PARALAX 550 10.50 PHASER ONE 10.25 7.25 11 25 BBC MICRO QUICKSHOT II TURBO 12.00 GREEN BERET 6.50 11 25 COMMANDO 6.75 1125 AMX MOUSE Sto Press OP LEADERBOARD 6.75 10 75 AIRWOLF 6.75 11.25 C64) TERRA CRESTA 6.50 NA STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 675 10.50 AMX MOUSE SuperartOP TOP GUN 6.50 NA REPTON 3 725 975 BBC) 75 25 \"Game not released. Will be sent on release date Please specity machine. Please allow 14-28 days delivery. Please add 75p P&P per item (UK or BFPO only) Overseas add .50 P&P per item. Please make Cheques/Postal Orders (sterling only) made payable to G-Ten Limited. UK or BFPO orders, please send to: G-TEN LTD, DEPT. C+VG5, FREEPOST (no stamp required) London, E1 GBR COMMODORE 64/128 CASS Mini Office 2 1 1 95 Laurel & Hardey6 .95 Masters of Universe 695 Durell's B4 6 .95 Leaderboard EE........6 95 Indoor Sports 6.50 Super Huey 2 6 .95 Now Bames 3 6 .95 Triv Pursuit..... .. 11.95 Short Circuit.... 650 Space Harner.......... 6.95 Bomb Jack 2. 6 95 Sigma 7.... 9.95 Judor Dredd 6.95 Hit Pak................... 6.95 Express Raider 725 Elite........................ 11.95 Roque Trooper 6 .95 Championship Wres 6.95 Zap 2............. 6 95 Fist 2 ....... 6.95 Donkey Kong......6.50 Graphic Ad Creator. 17.00 Hypa Ball 7 25 Sold Milion 3. 6.95 1942....... ..... 6.95 Star Games One....... 7.25 Raid 2000 6.95 Bomb Jack 2 5.95 Terra Cresta.. . 6.50 Arkanoid................. 6.95 Death or Glory ......... 6.50 Bomb Jack 2 ...... 7.95 5.50 Double Take 7.94 5.50 Commando 86...... 7.95 5.50 Airwolf 2 7.95 5.50 Donky Kong........ 7.95 ........ 7.95 5.50 Scooby Doo ...... 795 5.50 Top Gun... 7.95 5.50 kari Warrior.. . 7.95 7.95 5.50 5.50 Indoor Sports .......... 8.95 6.95 Sigma 7 9.95 6.95 Deep Strike........ 9.95 .95 Dynamite Dan 2. 7.95 5.50 Xevious ......... ....7995 .50 9.95 7.25 10 Frame.............8.99 .... 8.995 .95 Jail Break.. . 795 5.50 Urdum. 8.95 6.50 Fireland 8.95 6.50 Yie Kung Fu 2... 795 5.50 Dragons Lair 2.........9.95 6.95 Judge Dredd 8 .95 6.50 Graphic Crea.......... 22.95 18.00 Theatre Europe 9.95 7.25 Cauldron 2............... 8.95 6.50 Cop Out.................8.95 6.50 Krakout ........ 7.99 5 .50 DISK 15.96 11.96 11.95 11.96 11.95 10.96 10.96 11.96 14.95 10.96 11.96 11.95 NA 11.96 11.95 11.96 14.95 11.95 11.95 NA 11.96 10.95 22.00 11.95 11.95 11.95 11.95 11.95 11.95 10.95 11.95 11.95 EXPLORER ATARI ST TOP 10 Stargilder.... ..... 1995 19.95 The Pawn 19.95 Winter Games.................. 19.95 Slent Service 1095 Super Cycle ........ 19.95 SO I Cremaware...... 39 95 Alternate Reality...... 24.95 Leaderboard 19.95 19.95 725 14.95 AMSTRAD PC W 8256 8512 Strike Force Harner 19 95 Fairlight... Triv Pursuit 1 6 95 Steve Davies Snooker.... Tau Cet Brian Clough .. ...... Batman 1995 19.95 6825 Post & Packing Inc. Overseas Orders please add 75p per tape Cheques/post orders (Sterling only please). Made payable to: VISA Cut Price Software Unit 6, Stort House, Riverway, Harlow, Essex CM202DW 24 HOUR ANSWER PHONE (0279) 24433 OR (0279) 31956 WE ALSO STOCK IBM/AMSTRAD 1512 PC COMPATIBLE SOFTWARE NOW TAKEN 47 BRIDGE STREET NEWCASTLE STAFFS ST5 2RY Tel: 0782 619159 Ext 25 AT LAST THE REAL MCCOY FOOTBALL DIRECTOR Castle Computers Quickshot (Joybal) 6.96 Cheetah +25+ + Conotte) 795 Magnum (Micro Switch 9.95 JOYSTICK PRICES INCLUDE PSP Want a game that's not on our lists? Phone our Hotline between 9.30am and 5.00pm any weekday SPECIAL OFFERS SPECTRUM RRP OUR Enduro Racer 999 695 World Games 8.95 6.50 Temple of Terror 8.99 650 Express Raider 899 650 8.99 6.50 Gunslinger 890 850 ONLY AVAILABLE ON SPECTRUM 4BK OR + FOUR LEAGUES 20 TEAMS EACH 38 GAME SEASON HOME AND AWAY FA LEAGUE CUPS REPLAYS EUROPEAN UE LA CUP WINNERS CUP 2 LECS AGGREGATE PENALTIES PLAYERS MORALE SKILL FIELD POSITION SCORED CONCEDED PLAYED FIXTURE LIST PWDLEA PTS SCOUTS COACH PHYSIO: YOUTH TEAM GAMBLE SUBSTITUTIONS : SENDING OFFS POSTPONEMENTS MIOWEEK GAMES MORE THAN 1 WEEK INJURIES FREE TRANSFERS : RETIREMENTS BUY SELL SHARES 3 PLAYER TRANSFER MARKET INTERNATIONALS EUROPEAN TOURS 3 LEVELS MANAGER RATING (1.000.000 PLAYERS PRINTER OPTION8 RESERVES PROMOTION RELEGATION WEEKLY NEWS BORROWING MORTGAGESAVE GAME INTEREST: TAX SPONSORS FULL RESULTS SEASON TICKETS NEXT GAME GATE MONEY SEASON COUNTER TV CAMERAS CROWD VIDENCE MANAGER APPROACHES TESTIMONIALS WEEK'S PROFIT LMTG COUNTER WAGES INTERNATIONAL COMMITMENTS NAME TEAM EDITOR LEAGUE TITLES AND MUCH MORE SPECIAL OFFERS ANSTRAD 999 6.95 SPECIAL OFFERS C64 Wonder Boy RAP OUR 999 695 Enduro Racer Express Rader Enduro Racer 2 PLAYER SUPER LEAGUE MANY OF THE ABOVE FEATURES BUT 2 TEAMS CAN PLAY IN THE SAME OR DIFFERENT DIVISIONS INCLUDES LOCAL DERBYS LOAN FREE TRANSFER ANO CASH SETTLEMENTS INCREASED TRANSFER MARKETS MANAGER OF THE MONTH AND TOP SCORERS LEAGUE INTERNATIONAL MANAGER 88385 QUALIFYING GROUPS. WORLD CUP EUROPEAN CUP TOURS BOOK YOUR FIXTURES FRIENDLIES HOME ANO AWAY MATCH REPOATS SUBSTITUTION NEXT FIXTURE PLAYERS MORAL FOAM TALENT CONSISTENCY CAPS AGE AVAILABILITY SUSPENSION INJURIES RETIREMENTS SCORED WORLD RANKING SEASON COUNTER EXTRA TIME PENALTIES SAVE GAME AND PRINTER OPTION BOOKINGS SENDING OFFS AND MUCH MORE 9.99 695 Wonder Boy 9.99 6.95 Ranarama Saboteur 7.95 5.50 War Time Great Korons 7.99 5.50 Karate Tag Team Wresting 999 6.95 Leaderboard Quartet 9.95 6.95 Temple of Aoshal Wonder Boy 9.996.95 Gauntlet DSC Mega Hits Games) Treasure Hunt 795 2.99 Express Rider 9.99 6.95 NEO. 999 895 Melbourne 7 95 299 Gunslinger 999 695 Three Wicks in Paradise 9.95 7 95 4.95 H Pack Il 995 695 Sam Fox Strip Poker 7.95 2.99 Leaderboard Fuc 995 695 Minder Vera Cruz 9.95 3.95 Gunsho 14 95 10 50 Dragons Lar Pil 8.95 3.50 Delta 995 695 Aker 7.95 2.99 Football Manager 9.95 4.95 Ranarama 8.95 5.50 The Apprentice Intemational Karate 6.50 2.99 Knight Games Nghegnade 9.95 2.99 Super Cycle AMSTRAD DISC N : 9.95 299 Koronis Ritt Fighting Warrior Espoong Fist 30 Stunt Rider 9.95 2.99 Assaut Machine Warrior Mercenary 128 ONLY Zrap Serest Stars on 128 9.95 695 Thing on a Spring e Computer People 996 695 Domarks Revenge n di s kt 995 695 Archon SPECIAL OFFER ATARI ST PSIS Trading Co Surt Champ SPECTRUM PERIPHERALS Labyrinth 9.95 5.95 Date Interface 795 498 24.95 18 9.95 3.95 No Games 3 Vox Box 29.95 14.95 Handball Maradona 9.95 4.95 The Mean A Team Interprinter 19.95 9.95 Elektra Gide 9.95 3.95 Light Pes 14.95 11.95 kick of 19 95 14 95 Exterior 199 Music Minstre 19.95 14 95 JOYSTICK CLEARANCE SALE We stack most Commodore Discs at the Time Bandit SELL HENCE SILLY PRICES est le preshrer Strike Force Hamer QUICKSHOT 3.95 Heine NOW before ordering from Little Computer People 34.99 26.95 order Quickshot 4.95 anywhere else Silent Service 21.98 1898 THESE PRICES ARE EXCLUSIVE TO C&VG READERS ONLY, ALL GAMES ARE ORIGINALS ORDERS UNDER  PLEASE ADD 50p FOR P&P. OVERSEAS ADD 75p PER GAME WE OFFER A FAST RELIABLE SERVICE WITH WELL PACKED GOODS! TRY US!  RECORDS FILE COMPATIBLE WITH ALMOST ANY LEAGUE TABLE ESPECIALLY DESIGNED FOR FOOTBALL DIRECTOR AND 2 PLAYER SUPER LEAGUE INTER YOUR END OF SEASON DATA AND IT WORKS OUT BEST TEAMS TEAMS AVERAGES RECORDS TITLE WINS HOW MANY SEASONS PLAYED AND OTHER INFORMATION THIS IS NOT A GAME 1995 195 INNER PLAYING TIPS ALL THE TIPS YOU NEED TO WIN AT EITHER FOOTBALL DIRECTOR 2 PLAYER SUPER LEAGUE OR INTERNATIONAL MANAGER 1.00 EACH GAME .50 ANY TWO .00 ANY THREE .00 ALL FOUR .00 Enclose cheque/PO and large s.a.e. with 20p stamp attached per cassette D & H GAMES 19 MELNE ROAD, STEVENAGE, HERTS SG2 8LL MAKES THE OTHERS LOOK LIKE THE SUNDAY LEAGUE "


"AT FIRST I THOUGHT UH, UH, I'VE NO CHANCE... BUT THEN I BECAME... MACMAX Nichibutsu ... A POWERHOUSE OF A ROBOT BUILDING UP INTO AN AWESOME FIGHTING MACHINE THAT CAN COPE WITH ALMOST ANYTHING IN THE RIGHT HANDS! NICHIBUTSU'S ARCADE THRILLER SPILLS OUT OF YOUR HOME COMPUTER WITH DEVASTATING GRAPHICS AND EXPLOSIVE ACTION JUST LIKE THE COIN-OP HOT SHOT! SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 NengM 28.95 DeGG AMSTRAD SPECTRUM Imagine Software (1984) Limited 6 Central Street Manchester M25NS. Tel: 061 834 3939. Telex: 669977 "


"9A+9 Keep a firm grip on this mag. Readers of other inferior rags will try and rip it out of your hands to read our exclusive on The Shadows of Mordor, follow up to Lord of the Rings Ayyy an overgrown hollow Welcome once again to the mysterious and enchanted world of Middle Earth and The Shadows of Mordor, Melbourne House's follow up to Lord of the Rings The Shadows of Mordor, which follows the plot of JRR Tolkien's The Two Towers Book, promises more complex problems than the first game. Lord of the Rings ended with the Frodo Baggins and Sam leaving Lothlorien, Shadows takes the story to the struggle at Shelob's lair. The second game begins at the edge of lake nen-Hithoel, at the end of an uneventful journey down the river. Frodo and Sam have left their companions on an island in the middle of the lake, and have secretly gone on alone to continue their quest. Somehow the intrepid adventurers must negotiate the desolate wastelands and cross the evil mountains which surround their enemies' homeland, The way is dangerous and unknown. One of the promised improvements of Shadows over Lord of the Rings will be the use of INGLISH for language recognition. This means you should be able to say anything and the computer can recognise sentences up to 128 characters long. Each instruction must in the form of \"vert-then-noun.\" But the programmers Australian Beam Softwaresay if the command sounds right in English will probably be all right in INGLISH. When you start the game you have a choice of playing either Frodo or Sam. The computer will control the one you reject. All the characters are rated for strength and stamina and can suffer in combat and from exhaustion. The Shadows of Mordor will be released in June on the Commodroe 64 for .95 cassette and .95 on disk, Amstrad at .95 and Spectrum including a special 128K version for .95 0090 ikke glingaglio the mossy banks of a cool deep the edge of a muddy waterhole pool beside a waterfall which is surrounded by reeds and bushes "


"ARRARI DARD ARM This is Barbarians the game inspired by Conan and Arnold Jeezivegotalotamusclesnegger. Yes, you can be transformed from a five stone weakling into a mega hunk by Palace Software's newie. Over the next few weeks the shapely form of Page 3 girl Maria Whittaker and a muscle-man built like the side of a mountain will be appearing in the pages of the computer press to promote the game. Details of the game are still under wraps just wait for the next month's C+VG to discover how Barbarians was born! Here comes summer and the first of this year's sunshine sporting games, Anco's Summer Events on the C16/Plus 4. The six events featured are the polie vault, swimming, Kyaking, high board diving, cycling and steeple chase. There will also be opening and medal ceremonies and options to practice all the events. Summer Events is written by Udo Gertz, who was responsible for Anco's Winter Events Summer Events will sell for .95.   0 0 0 0 0 0 688 FSHINES LODIE Prepare to enter The Fifth Quadrant, the next offering from Bubblebus on the Spectrum (.95). Amstrad and Commodore 64 (.95 cassette/.95 disk). The Galactic Survey Vessel Orion is engaged on a mission to map and explore the galaxies of the Hercules Cluster. After 20 years the survey has almost complete apart from one small strange looking Nebula. The crew prepares to cross the intergalactic space by putting themselves into Sustained Low Energy Expenditure Process. During the crossing, Orion is taken over by a force of stran mechanical beings Zimen. When the crew re-energise, they find that many of the ship's systems have been terminated, all the computers reprogrammed in an alien language and Zimon everywhere. This arcade adventure is set on a spaceship which will have approximately 250 rooms/locations and the player controls of four robot crew swapping from one to another as necessary. The robots glide about under the control of the player. There are lifts which transport robots between levels, and matter transmitters which will move them between fixed locations. Many of the ship's systems, including the lift and the matter transmitters, can be reprogrammed assuming the alien language can be cracked. The Robots are: Slog Ship's Captain and Pilot. He has a specialised compu-brain but is an older model He is slowing up and doesn't like it. Plot -Ship's navigator. Brilliant at any sort of calculation. Bit of a loner. Knut -Ship's Engineer Expert maintainance and respair man. Knows every zecometre of the ship, but has a screw loose! Bodd Crewman, Jack of all trades, master of none but a useful robot to have around. Looked down on by the rest of the crew, not very bright and a bit of a coward.  000000149 000 Remember Thing on a Spring, Gremlin's bouncy little game from a while back? Well Thing is all coiled up and ready to spring in to action again in Thing Bounces Back This shot is from the Commodore version of the game. Thing springs around the toy factory again which is packed with lasers, bounce pads, conveyor belts and teleporters. Meanwhile also heading yor way out of the Gremlin stable are the Amstrad and Specturm versions of Krakout, a C+VG hit on the Commodore 64. It's basically Breakout with a whole lot more. And for those of you luckily enough to have an Atari ST, here's a look at Trailblazer, (.95) action at the speed of light. Well almost. DOBO C+VG "


"TAUMAUTI ADVERTISEMENT INDEX Computer Software Exchange Activision....... .... ...........6.7 Amstrad/Sinclair ................. 71.111 Argus ............ 47,51 Konix...... Konami 98 Logic Sales....... 24 Bargain... Beau Jolly .. . ..... ..42,60 96 Cascade................. CRL 74 Computer Software Exchange 104 Comp. Flight Sim. Assoc.......... Computer Mania ...96 Charnwood....... ...74 Mailsoft Martech...a. Maros Megasav 4 HHera Melbourne House................ MGL 104 Microprose.................. 13,33,39 Mirrorsoft 29 ..74 ....27 Ocean 112,46,83,IBC.99,96,97,101 Database. Databyte...... Domark Piranha ......................... 108 Red Rat................. E & J........ Elite. ...............92 2.3 . 8888 Firebird.... ......35 Status............ Softek Sell-a-tape.......... . Shekhana..... . .... Supasoft G-Ten.. .... 100 Gremlin ...............................75.77 Hewson............... ......19 DO YOU: OWN A COMMODORE, SPECTRUM. AMSTRAD.ATARI, ETC ? I VANT TO SWAT SOFTWARE YOU NO LONGER USE? + WANT TO BUY USED SOFTWARE AT LOW PRICES ? Incentive. ISM 29 Tele Games....................... US Gold................ OBC, 76,78,105 Video Vault.........................72,73 Virgin....... IF YOU ANSVERD YES TO ANY OF THESE QUESTIONS SEND A LARGE SA E FOR FREE CLUB MAGAZINE AID KEBERSHIP TO: KJC. THE COMPUTER SOFTWARE EXCHANGE UNIT61, FAIRBURN LAVSON IND. EST. 67 WELLINGTON ST. LEEDS3 69 ATARI ST/800XLXE OWNERS 10% OFF SOFTWARE* *(WHEN RRP .95 OR OVER) LIVE IN SW LONDON AREA? HAVING TROUBLE GETTING SOFTWARE? THEN VISIT SOUTH LONDON'S PREMIER SOFTWARE RETAILER Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with the MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY. The greatest, biggest and best Atari Club on the market. Now incorporating ST software into our stocks and approaching 400 titles MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY: The company who nearly 5 years ago first conceived the idea of a software library Now approximately 2.000 titles on disc, cassette and Rom (games, business, education and Utilties. Often purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Several thousand very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast efficient and friendly service operating a computerised custom built system to keep track of all your records. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates plus other inter-club activities Important: Midland Games Library are in no way connected with or responsible for National Computers Ltd. of Worcester SEND LARGE S.A.E. TO: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos. Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programs are originals with full documentation CLASSIFIEDS GALLERY SOFTWARE 1st FLOOR, ARNDALE CENTRE WANDSWORTH, S.W. 18 TEL: 01-870 4941 ATARI 400/600/800XL/ST SOFTWARE THE STONE OF KRAAL UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64. Send s.a.e. for fast response and details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG), 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffieid S5 9GB At last a postal adventure which provides a colour photograph of each location. Play by mall gamers need no longer rely on the written word along. The stone lies deep within the inner kingdom. Only one man has ever returned alive from the quest of the stone. Did his quest drive him beyond the edge of sanity? Or are the riches and horrors he spoke of real? Could there be some truth in the legend of Kraal? The game is computer moderated and each turn costs .60 including colour photographs. The first two turns are free following set up. For more information s.a.e. to: Baronial Games, The Baronett, Main Street, Horsington, Lincoln LN3 SEX or telephone 052 685 681 anytime. We have all al round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE Apply now and hire your first four games free Around 1000 different original des For full detais send large stamp addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 Disc Drive 119.95 poste Atan 5205STM 6345 90 post free 10 free asks Casio C22305 6279.90 post free Artic and Analog magazines avalable BEST QUALITY DISCS Memorex S SS OD Discs 10 for C13.95 Unabelled 514 SSDD Discs 10 for .95 p. Unlabelled 5 \" SSDD Discs 25 for $22.95 of Unlabelled SS./00 Disc 50 for 142.95 pt Unlabelled SW SSDD DISC 100 for 179.950 f. Memorex 312 Discs Boxes of 10 S S DO 124.95 pl. Unlabelled 32SS/DD Discs 10 for .95 Atan 520 STM with Megabyte Deive 449.00 +23 discs Happy enhancement for the 1050 Drive with revision 7. 139.95 post free GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB DEPT. C-VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thornex Close, Sunderland SR3 4PD. Tel: (091) 5286351. FREE MEMBERSHIP!!! Hire CBM64, Spectrum, Vic-20 software! Write now for free exciting details! COMPUTERSOFT (cv) PO Box 28, North PDO, Nottingham NG5 2EE Please state machine Stamp appreciated) "


"ADS NIEL favourite MOUTH WATERING CHALLENGES Lode Runner's Rescue Lode Runner Championship Lode Runner An amazing trilogy of action and adventure that follows your exploits as Galactic Commando in your struggle against the power hungry leaders of the Bungeling Empire and the search for their hidden treasure. There's already one American sensation that's established itself as a firm UK favourite, now we've taken that same formula and crammed 7 succulent fillers into 2 appetising packages. Renderbus Lode Runner. Rinderhed GATO PRESENT BRODERSUNDS GAME 1 GAMEZ THREE HITS FOR ONLY... 5999 GAME 3 STEALTH RAID ON SUNDAN BAY CHOPLIFTER SPELUNKER JUICY THRILLERS 4 STATESIDE SMASH HITS FROM = Broderbund = A superheroes delight of four action packed challenges set in the past, the present and the future. big value choice Broderbund: CBM 64/128 Cassette .99 U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, GOLD: Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 "


"Computer + Video Games 30-32 Farringdon Lame  rbay Mailbage Yeah! We're really cookin' now! At last they've let good stated length of fime after their would be off the streets for years if ol' Grill back into the hot seat and give your letters the release date, or to state quite we let TT near the teapot. I can categorically that they will never be relate to BMWs in a big way. If you heat treatment. Me? Hot tempered? You better believe included on compilations. had a few bob I suppose you'd get it! There's nothing better than a real flaming argument. I wonder whether any would be a Reliant Robin or something. If And this issue we've got a few bubbling under. Let's bold enough to do this? you've got it flaunt it, that's what I kick off with the Tony Takoushi controversy My other point is to do with say! Terminal body rot. I had that Tony T. Your magazine has once when I was a mere droidling. I must confess I am not a regular and which one of this three suffered immensely since allowing Not very nice I can tell you. As for reader of C+VG but I find it an a prize for Keith he already has the excellent magazine when Could someone please tell him that wants in his own column. He's just C+VG long service merit award occasionally buy it. The reviews this is 1987 and someone has so big-headed I'm surprised the for puting up with editors cutting are excellent as is the News section actually invented the wheel! rest of you have room in the C+VG his copy! Meanwhile here's giving up to the minute information Stephen Wood office, someone with a good word for Mr on new software which I find very Lancs I don't want to know how many T... useful. One thing Tony isn't is Naff. arcade machines he owns, or how May I say, well done Tony However, your Hot Gossip He's been around in the games biz many BMW's he managed to buy Takoushi? (Oh, all right. Ed) At last section, with that %$%$* Tony for a LONG time and knows out of his royalties from a couple of someone is willing to stand up for Takoushi, is totally NAFF. I never what's what. OK, the Beeb may games. It's not something the rest the MSX. Most of the British press did like him and I think February's not be dead but it's certainly of us can relate to and many have recently either slated MSX or edition of this tripe went totally not a red hot games machine. You people will feel patronized and ignored us MSX users over the top. must admit that. And this sounds jealous. Get this lad back onto completely I am not including you I agree with his statement \"my like one of those terribly boring making the tea. as you've recently given MSX more computer is better than yours... \"my computer is better than If you're really looking for coverage. \"argument is pathetic — but he yours\" quibbles. I want red hot someone special to grace your I just hope that Mr Takoushi then proceeds to slam any scandal on these pages not pages with common sense, then doesn't come in for some criticism computer which isn't a C64. How wimpish moans! TT stays put. He's get Keith Campbell to do it. This as most supporters of MSX do. May he could call the BBC \"dead\" is the only one in the IDEAS man should be considered for a I also say, I agree totally with Mr outrageous. penthouse with a bigger mouth Nobel Prize, he's so significant. have as wide a than me! Now for some more TT T for one, would much prefer to MSX. It seems all the best games variety of games as the C64, but bashing ... be told how to kill a dragon with a are being converted to the format, the BBC wasn't originally designed I am very fond of your magazine paintbrush and a Christmas Dambusters, Super Cycle, Gauntlet as a games computer. and normally am quite happy pudding than how many Space Spitfire 40 etc etc. So obviously, The original conception of the reading it. However there are one invader machines someones got in there is a large market for MSX BBC was for it to be used in of two points I currently feel rather his lavatory. C+VG is quite games as it wouldn't pay for them education, and in this aspect it has strongly about and which justifiably the best magazine in the to convert otherwise. succeeded Fantastically. It is the prompted me to write in. shops. Here's to the next five years. I certainly have no intention of most popular micro in use in Firstly I am sick and tired of P.S.: Readers will probably be changing from MSX to any other English schools today, together software firms putting out pleased to learn that Takoushi's format, and judging by the lack of with the Research machines. compilations willy-nilly. I am rather BMW is in fact F registered and MSX machines in your for sale Where has the C64 succeeded fortunate in being able to go out has terminal body rot. pages not many MSX users are other than as a games machine, at and buy most new programmes Duncan Roper changing either. which it is ideal? O.K. so if you put like the look of, but only just mind. Wrexham Now, how about a full review of a disk drive on it and a printer it Many of your readers are young Good point here. But some Nemesis, it's a game so good that can become something resembling people however and will be saving compilations like the recent you might buy an MSX machine a business machine, but which up over many weeks for their Ultimate packages and the Five just to play it. business has time to wait for the games. Star Games compilations were I help run a MSX user group disk drive to operate? Fully I guess they feel even more really good value for money. And called MSX Link and if any of your expanded as a business machine agrieved than I do when the same not everyone can afford to buy a readers would like details, send a the BBC is unbeatable and in the game is released on an el-cheapo game a month, can they? Maybe SAE to David Webb, 11 Ayscough new Master form is FAR FROM compilation just a few short we'll see the same thing happening Ave Spalding, Lincs. We will gladly DEAD! months later, in the games world as happened in reply. Why don't you do us all a favour It's the people who buy the full the record biz with compilation Keith Neal and get rid of this imbecile. I mean, price game who make the software albums outselling the singles. But Lince just look at the letters you received houses as rich as they are, and let's hear some more views on the At last someone actually last month where he criticised they're content to reward us with a compilation issue. Back to the TT recognising that C+VG does software houses of only producing kick in the crotch.! crisis and I happen to know that actually write about the MSX clones of the same old games. Obviously they have to make he's got an I, Robot machine in the machines. Agree with you about What a load of... I totally agree money. However, I think there lav not Space Invaders. And MSX Nemesis a hot game no with the people who told him to ought to be a code of practise you've obviously never tasted his doubt about it! open his eyes and take not of such whereby software houses agree not tea! Even I of the cast iron Okay it's me, I'm back again and games as Paradroid and Uridium, to put games on a compilation for a constitution can't take it. C+VG STILL moaning. The argument is "


"still this. A company cannot sell or maybe you could add on more User writes to you, can you guess Don't believe in the Bug advertise an item or product that it pages or drop one of the what it is? That's right, not enough Hunters? You'll be telling me that does not possess or exist. And to unpopular areas of your magazine Atari game reviews. you don't believe in Santa next! take money from individuals with ie Sticky fingers, Extra Bits, and I know what your excuse is, \"the And it's Ms Ravenflame, if you the pretence of having that item is War Games. software houses just don't send us don't mind! How would YOU feel theft and to quote Mr Kaliber \"theft I do realise you have reviewed a the software\", PAH! Have you if I said I didn't believe in the is a crime\". If a company cannot small amount of games for the ST, ever thought that the reason they Atari? Which we do. The Atari is a come up with the goods we are but please make it a regular don't send you software is that they much loved machine in the C+VG forced to wait on their terms. Can feature. think that you are not interested. office. And yes we would like to you imagine the stink a company I am sure that other computer Perhaps you could send Big Red see more Atari software. so would cause if a programmer failed owners like reading super around to \"explain how you feel software houses please take note. to return a game without writing or computer reviews I am speaking (now, before I go any further I feel! And I guess you've spotted the phoning? from experience. must explain that I do not believe Greyfell/Shockway Rider picture As I said before, if a company Anon, in the Bug Hunters, they are just mix up in March issue. Thank you cannot reach a deadline Dublin the by-products of a warped VERY much Mr Printer! Another mentioned in their adverts, they  What about all the tons of ST imagination.) fine mess you've got us into! have an obligation to let people stuff we've been looking at Why don't you discuss your I recently read in Popular know. I waited four months recently. Sticky Fingers was a one problem with Atari User? They Computing Weekly that many without a word, from a certain off article and our War Games seem to have no problem getting major software companies were company until my game was features are enjoyed by many software and have reviewed some having problems finding enough replaced. readers. Extra Bits is a crucial add very good games as well as the new top class assembly language Can you tell us what lan Foster on to C+VG. Unpopular? budget titles that you seem to programmers. Well, I have a and Jon Law of CRL are up to now, Rubbish! Apart from that the ST favour. solution, why don't these software as I am still hoping, in vain will be a regular feature in this Another thing I have noticed houses employ a group of people probably, for Cyborg to mag from now on. We've even about your magazine is that in your who they can teach, train etc to materialize. Are they continuing persuaded Kaliber to cough up and Mailbag section, which I think is become top programmers? with the game? Have they kicked it get one for the penthouse. very good but is far too short (1 Obviously some \"entrance in the head? I read the interview with Gerry know, lack of space), whenever exam\" would be necessary to test How about a new section Anderson, I was transported back somebody writes, \"I know you the candidates abilities. Then this entitled \"whatever happened to to my childhood (I confess to being won't print this letter ...\". It elite (forgive the pun) crew could ...?\" and go and ask what one of your mature readers!!) always seems to get printed, sol be taught to program by the top problems programmers encounter. would like to point out that the think I'll give it a try. programers in each software Right that's it. Once again I've photo you labelled Lady Penelope I know you won't print this letter house. For example Chris Butler, moaned, but your answer to my and Jeff Tracy is in fact Venus and as some might think that it is highly Tony Crowther the king of last letter was very reassuring, Steve Zodiac from Fireball XLS, a critical. However, I feel that it is scrolling shoot-em-up's and so however the comments about series which kept me glued to the important that I should be able to on. Come on software houses, if piracy and theft I think were a little screen (albeit a black and white air my views in such a way. you can't find the talent create naive. Don't pull that five year old one). I forgive you this as I doubt Oh, just one more thing. I hope your own give us mere mortals stuff on me I'm six! whether you were old enough to se that you will ignore my spelling a shot at the pot of gold. Andy Purnell the original series. This is a mistakes, because I try my best to Oh, by the way, any companies Bristol compliment, Tim ignore yours, and the pictures reading this letter and decide to Well good news, Andy. After Roz Bridgeman being put in up-side down (you take up my idea then include me in months of waiting it's almost a Stroud even managed to put a picture of your list of possible number one year since our Cyborg cover Yeah, the person who mixed up an Alien in one issue up-side programmers as I can program in the game has arrived. We'll review the captions is now in solitary down, apologize for your mistake assembley for Z80,6502, and it in next month's issue. confinement on Tracy Island! How in another issue, and then re-print 68000 and I believe I have the Before Christmas I had a anyone could get them wrong is the same picture in another issue hidden talent imagination, flare etc Commodore 64 and nearly 100 beyond me. But did you know that up-side down again). that just need bringing out by you, games for it including classic games The Ed claims to have actually met I also ignore the pictures being in So give us a chance, eh? such as Ghosts 'n Goblins, Green Steve Zodiac? Is he OK in the head the wrong place (Big Red upsetting Mark Hula Berret and Elite. Until the or what? But no, Tim insists that the table with all the pictures on, Bristol appearance of the Arari ST and Steve came round for tea one day HA!), and your occational Atari You're full of good ideas this Amiga, I was mildly satisfied with and it's one of his claims to fame.I listings which seem to have chunks month aren't you! Here's another my 64K although its games quality think his brain has finally frazzled. missing and are full of errors which from Mark. Well, if there's a never came near the coin ops. lown an Atari 800XL computer. Jari 800XI Computer nobody seems to have spotted ( software house or programmer When I saw the reviews of the No, stop laughing. It's not that thought spotting errors was what reading this who likes the idea super computers in your magazine, funny. What? You weren't the Bug-Hunters were supposed to we're waiting for your reply. I gave up playing 64 games and put laughing. Well that's a suprise. It do. OH, I forgot, they are not real an ad in the paper to get rid of it, seems to me that whenever are they?) Yes, I ignore these things because I realised I had gone mention to somebody that I own and do not mention them because beyond the simplicity of eight bit an Atari Computer I have to endure they are of little importance to me, computers. five minutes of hysterical laughter, but if the attitude of the \"Number When I had enough money and then a further twenty-five One Computer Mag.\" and various purchased an Atari ST, because of minutes of them telling me how software houses does not improve its enormous capabilities and the great the Commodore 64 is shall inform your amazing price. Now that I have it! compared to the Atari. superior, am even more impressed and The fact that they probably have Miss M. would like to inform people who never seen the Atari in action is Ravenflame, are undecided in buying a neither here nor there. I'd just like who does computer that you cannot get your to take this opportunity to say that exist, of exist, of hands on a better computer. COULD NOT CARE LESS! I am not these errors. I would also like to offer a small interested in how good the Thank you amount of advice to the publishers graphics are, or how great the for allowing me of C+VG. Due to the growing sound is, I already know these some of your number of people seeking the things and I do not wish to hear precious space ultimate in computer games by them everytime I try to discuss my buying an Atari STit would be computer with somebody else. easily had an advert advisable to review more software Still, that's not why I am writing for a game which for this machine. I do not expect to to you now. The reason that I am will come out next see CBM, Spectrum and Amstrad writing to you seems to be the year if we're lucky on it. owners being deprived, but, same reason that every other Atari Sean Roblett Bedfordshire will "


"THE on alhas Big SLEATE THE BIG SLEAZE An adventure by Delta 4 from Piranha The time is the 1930s. The place is New York City. You are Sam Spillade, a thicko private dick operating out of 3024th street. Not a nice part of town. The story starts in Spillade's office and ends as far from New York as you can imagine. What goes on in between is a number of cases for Spillade Investigations. Crack 'em if you can. Stay alive if you're smart enough. Spectrum, Commodore and Amstrad versions -all .95 BONUS DELTA 4 The long awaited electronic mag SCEPTICAL 3 is included free with the game. Further information from Helen Holland, Piranha, 4 Little Essex Street, London WC2R 3LF. Tel: 01-836 6633. "


"E EPISODE IN THREE HOME BETTER PUT IN A CALL TO CHIEF MASON WHAT WAS THAT..? SOMETHING HIT TOPSIDE...  ON THE GODDAM TANK!! ( USE THE TURRET CANNONS... BLAST HIM... OH, GOOD IDEA, SPILLANE...AND WHAT ARE WE GONNA DO ABOUT THE CIVVIES THAT GET CAUGHT IN THE CROSSFIRE..3 VISIT 'EM IN HOSPITAL?.. Y NICE. WE'RE ON WE'RE ON C) THE LONDON BRIDGE MULTIPRIMING THE SELF-DESTRUCT... IT RIPPING THE OBSERVATION HATCH RIGHT OUT OF IT S HOUSING... THIS IS OVE STRONG MUTHER.. PRIMA I'M LET'S TAKE THIS FLYING BOMB OUT OVER THE THAMES... AND GET THE HELL OFF... "


"TIMUI MANNA 2:7 12 So:105 Nil THIS SITUATION STINKS WORSE THAN WE DO, SPILLANE... GLUMB BURBLE S > D O 32 UT SOMEONE WAS FEEDING INFORMATION ON US TO THAT CREATURE... IT KNEW OUR EVERY MOVE... BEFORE EVEN WE DID. AND THERE'S ONLY ONE PERSON WHO HAD THAT KIND OF INFORMATION... TO BE CONCLUDED... "


"FOR AS LITTLE AS  YOU CAN BE THE HOME SECRETARY. There's more to home computers than fun and games. Just add a printer (and the necessary software) and your computer becomes a word processor. And you become a very efficient secretary. If the printer you add is the Amstrad DMP 2000 your efficiency will even extend to saving quite a lot of money. Because the DMP 2000 costs just  (incl. VAT). Yet it will print draft quality text at an impressive 105 characters per second. And Near Letter Quality at 26 characters per second. As you would expect it is compatible with all Amstrad home computers. But it is also compatible with Epson and any other make that has the same Centronics Parallel Interface. AMSTRAD DMP-2000 If you've already graduated to a PC there's the Amstrad DMP 3000 printer. It's compatible with all the Amstrad PC 1512's as well as Epson and all other IBM compatible PC's. It costs just  (plus VAT). Both printers have easy front loading and both will take ordinary A4 paper. One of them is bound to be right for your particular home office. AMSTRAD DMP3000 Please send me further information on the DMP 2000 and DMP 3000 C Name Company Telephone Address DMP2000 AVAILABLE AT: ALLDERS-COMET CURRYS DIXONS LASKYSJOHN LEWIS DMP 3000 AVAILABLE AT: CPS DIXONS FIRST SOFTWARE LASKYS JOHN LEWIS MBS MICRO PERIPHERALS NORBAIN NORTHAMBER OFFICE INTERNATIONAL P&P RYMANS SANDHURST-VISTEC WILDINGS AND GOOD INDEPENDENT COMPUTER STORES AMSTRAD PRINTERS Amstrad plc., PO Box 462, Brentwood, Essex CM14 4EF Telephone: (0277) 230222. "


"Why is this man looking so happy? Is it because he's cuddling up to shapely model Maria Whittaker? Is it because he's having a good laugh at the barbarian's dodgy hairstyle? He's smiling because he's just found out about the contents of the special Swords and Sorcery issue of C+VG! FREE ARCADE ADDICTS HANDBOOK 24 full colour pages of hot news, hints and maps, reviews AND a chance to enter the great C+VG Arcade Championship Challenge. Have you got what it takes to be our Arcade Champ? FREE PULL OUT GO-BOTS COMPETITION POSTER All this PLUS inside news on Barbarians, Palace's new hack 'N' slash epic together with an awesome Barbarian competition, a barbarian's guide to role-playing games, part one of the new Living Daylights Bond game diary, a special Shadows of Mordor Competition, PLUS reviews of Cyborg, Big Trouble in Little China, Wiz, The Big Sleaze, PLUS anything else we can pack into this giant package for June! Watch out for it in your newsagents on May 15th. Get it before it's gone! COMING SOON: FREE GIANT BARBARIAN POSTER. MORE NEWS NEXT ISH! NEXT MONTH NEXT MONTH HLNOW IXEN "


"EISSEEEIT IEEE TENBURST ABSTBARTH LE  SISU ft. THE BLOCKBUSTER VALcensed from ato Cord, 1986 Programmed for Amstad Spectrum Commodicte Alcati by Imagine Sottwale COIN-OP Taito's current Arcade Hit now available for: MI SPECTRUM .95 COMMODORE & AMSTRAD .95 A ATARI ST 8 800 .95. Ask for ARKANOID The REAL thing\" at your local computer stockist. the name Screen shots taken the came/Imagine Software (1984) Limited FI 6 Central Street. Manchester M25NS Tel: 061834 3939.Telex 669977 "


"C+VG's Hot Gossip ace Tony Takoushi has the biggest eyes, nose and mighty mouth in computer games. He sees all, hears all and he then shouts about it each month exclusively in your favourite computer mag. So read on for the man who shoots from the lip at the good, the bad and the ugly in the software world. his month's offerings are (oh, no not the TREES!), bee green, blue and yellow. You have 12 lives and two very tasty pieces of hives, and a little spell thrower. This must rate as one of the countless levels to work Atari ST software, the You can play with joystick or best conversions of an arcade through, the presentation is official Crystal Castles and mouse and there is an option game to a home micro. Atari really ace with beautifully Xtron a one megabyte shootfor one or two players. should be making defined aliens and haunting 'em-up in the classic mode. The other really nice part of announcements in the near sound effects. Crystal Castles is a very such a well presented game is future as to the availability of The aliens whirl and twirl professional and definitive its playability, it plays fast. this and its other arcade around you and this is not for version of the arcade original. The game has a really zippy conversion on the ST. Xtron is the faint hearted! You take on the role of Bentley tune which makes you want to the other game this month and The two programmers Singh Bear and have to wander bounce up and down in your it is the first game to use the and Wagner recently around various castles chair. one megabyte 1040 St completed their latest game collecting gems, honey and The graphics are crisp, clear machine. It is basically a leftTyphoon which takes the hats while avoiding, amongst and very colourful and use a right shoot-'em-up but with real concept of this game a stage other things, the dreaded trees yummy colour scheme of red, class. further. Do not miss it! HIDDEN SIE His Score: 000000 000000 XTRON Crystal Castles Xtron was recently strolling thousands of freebie games! is good going on excellent. blurred and just where do you around the Virgin Games have lost touch with the reality The market is currently draw the quality line for a Centre in central London of software prices. straddled with three pricing ,2,3 game or a ,8,10 listening to young and old alike It has to be said that the points .99, .99, -9 game. deciding on what games they market has and is continuing to full price and ten pounds for Basically it is playing silly wanted to buy. develop its pricing structure. I compilations. buggers with the market. Can It really did shock me to hear was a fervent anti-budget man There are two new price We please have some sanity the vast majority of people (until recently when I sold my points soon to be attempted, and sensible pricing in the look at and then walk away own game to Mastertronic) $4.99 and the l game. These market software houses? from the full price software. thinking budget was degrading are really tearing away the As for all you joystick They complained about the and below my dignity. foundations which divide w agglers out there, what do price, or said they didn't have Budget is here to stay and it budget and full price games. you buy with your pennies? enough money to buy the performs an essential task, it  undermines the -3 area Drop me a line telling me game. bridges that huge gap in price and .99 undermines the what you think are the best One of the most painful from two pounds to ten  8-9 price tag. buys or whether you think aspects of being a reviewer is pounds. Make no mistake I cannot see these two price games are too expensive. getting free software. Having budget is an integral part of the points working, the profit been on the receiving end of market and the general quality margin for shops will become "


"HOT FROM THE ARCADES are HERE FEATURING MARIO STEPPED HIERE LUIGI oooooooooooOOOOOO OOOOOOOOOOOOOOO soos ooooooooooooo POW NEW! Nintendo Mario Bros. from Nintendo for your home computer! From the arcade original AMSTRAD SPECTRUM featuring Fireballs, Sidestepper, Shellcreeper and Fighterfly. Flip COMMODORE those pests and kick 'em off the pipes, but don't lose your footing on those slippery floors. Play as a team or against each other, either way you're in for a scream with Mario and Luigi the MARIO BROS. Ocean Software Limited Ocean House 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone 061 832 6633. Telex 669977 Oceans G COMMODORE Ocean 17.95 "


"10-9-8-7--SUCCESS-6 5.2..3..2...FAILURE --THE DIFFERENCE IS.. TIMING. METROCROSS Are you the one in a million who can think in microseconds not minutes? ...if you are, Metrocross is the challenge that's been designed to inspire you, if you're not then you'd better fast improve your skill and co-ordination. A chequered floor riddled with pitholes, a barrage of obstacles that hinder your progress and no go areas that bring you to a standstill make this race against time increasingly impossible. But not everything is against you. Springboards are primed to catapult you forward and a speeding skateboard waits ready to hurtle you along that desperate rush to the finish line. If you beat the clock the first time there's no guarantee you'll not be flattened at the next level. From the makers of GAUNIET and PAPERBO, ATARI CBM 64/128 Cassette .99 Disk .99 Amstrad Cassette .99 Disk .99 Spectrum Cassette .99 Atari ST Disk .90 GAMES U.S. GOLD: Al Ranso U.S. Gold Limited, Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 0212563388 "

