"MAY 1984 85p Dm 5.80 COMPUTER EXCLUSIVE: MR.ADVENTURE GAMES SPIDERMANLULKI SCOTT ADAMS' LATEST GAMES REVIEWED PLUS: ADVENTURE EXTRA! FEST SOLVETHE MYSTERY QUO VADIS? COLECO ADAM! AND WIN A DERE C&VG/DAILY MIRROR TOP 30 GAMES! ATARI VCS systems plus games to be won in our great ACTIVISION contest!!! GAMES for the SPECTRUM,BBC.COMMODORE 64 and many and many + more... "


"* 1984 QUICKSILVA ...THE YEAR OF THE GAME LORDS. NEW RELEASES! COMMODORE 64 STING 64 .95 Author: Anton Hinxman Hive-cave action! Bertie Bee needs help defending the hive. Fight off the invading swarms, battle the bees and defend your Queen! COMMODORE 64 BUGABOO (THE FLEA) .95 Author: Indescomp Itchy action! Jump your way out of the caves with Bugaboo the flea but beware of the fearsome Dragon as you jump around the exotic vegetation 48K SPECTRUM RAYMOND BRIGGS' THE SNOWMAN .95 Author: David Shea An enchanting game based around episodes of Raymond Briggs amazingly successful book. 48K SPECTRUM ANT ATTACK .95 Author: Sandy White Battle the Ants in the soft Solid 3D city of Antascher. 48K SPECTRUM DRAGONS BANE .95 Authors: M. Preston, P. Hunt, R. Rose, D. Moore. A mythical graphic adventure in the dark and deadly halls of Earthstone Castle. Battle Dragons, Vampires, Sphinx, Zombles, Skeletons, Gryphons and other legendary beasts to rescue the beautiful Princess Paula. 48K SPECTRUM FRED .95 Author: Indescomp Action beneath the Pyramids! Fearless Fred the Intrepid Archaeologist searches the creepy catacombs below the fornid tomb of 'Tootiecarmoon for the terrible treasures amidst monstrous mummies, ghastly ghosts, bats and rats! 48K SPECTRUMTIME GATE Author: John Hollis .95 COMMODORE 64 PURPLE TURTLES Authors: Mark & Richard Moore .95 VIC 20 + 3K or 8K RAM SKYHAWK Authors: Steve Lee/Chartec .95 DRAGON MINED OUT Authors: 1 & C Andrew/Incentive .95 BBC MODEL THE GENERATORS Author: Dave Mendes .95 All titles available from Quicksilva Mail Order P.O. Box 6, Wimborne Dorset BA21 7PY. Quicksilva programs are available from: Boots, W.H. Smiths, J. Menzies, Microdealer, HMV, Hamleys, John Lewis, Computers for All and all reputable specialist computer stockists. SEND S.A.E. FOR FULL COLOUR CATALOGUE "


"EXCLUSIVE V /SHOERMAN HUKU 52 GAMES GAMES For the SC .COMPRESA Cover illustration and lettering: Jerry Paris 9WZ 140 CREDITS 58 79 Editor Tim Metcalfe, Deputy editor Eugene Lacey, Editorial assistant Clare Edgeley, Staff writers/Reader services Robert Schifreen, Seamus St. John, Art Editor Linda Freeman, Designer Lynda Skerry, Production editor Mary Morton, Advertisement manager Rob Cameron, Assistant advertisement manager Louise Matthews, Advertising executives Bernard Dugdale, Sean Brennan, Advertisement assistant Melanie Paulo, Production assistant Roy Stephens, Publisher Rita Lewis. Editorial and advertisement offices: Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5E); Telephone Editorial 01-278 6556, Advertising 01-278 6552 COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES POSTAL SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE. By using the special Postal Subscription Service, copies of COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES can be mailed direct from our offices each month to any address throughout the world. All subscription applications should be sent for processing to COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES (Subscription Department), Competition House, Farmdon Road, Market Harborough, Leicestershire. All orders should include the appropriate remittance made payable to COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES. Annual subscription rates (12 issues): UK and Eire . Additional service information including individual overseas airmail rates available upon request. Circulation Department: EMAP National Publications. Published and distributed by EMAP National Publications Ltd. Printed by Eden Fisher (Southend) Limited. Spiderman TM and The Hulk TM copyright  1984 by Marvel Comics Group, a division of Codence Industries Corporation. FEATURES MAILBAG Atari arguments and more software shockers. TOP 30 .. 10 The latest C&VG/Daily Mirror/NOP software chart. COMPETITIONS ...... Just who is the lucky winner of the computerised chess board? Who solved the false arrest contest? And who wants to win ,500 worth of Imagine games? MR ADVENTURE MEETS THE HULK! Our exclusive interview with Scott Adams and his dealings with the comic superheroes. QUO VADIS? In the beginning there were more questions than answers. WIZARDRY 132 We take a look at an adventure series that has left Apple owners spellbound. BUGS 136 More madness in the micro. PUZZLING... Trevor Truran tries to warp your brain again! HALL OF FAME 149 Are you a games wizard? Find out here. ADVENTURE 164 Keith Campbell journeys into more weird and wonderful worlds. EXTRA BIT'S 156 Turn on, plug in, add on and read all about it! BUG HUNTER.... LISTINGS THE TOWER/SPECTRUM Kings, wizards, goblins and other odd characters fight it out in a lost fantasy world discovered somewhere in the heart of a 48k Spectrum. MICROPOLY/SPECTRUM. 62 So you want to be a millionaire? Then start here! Try out your business brain on an adaptation of the famous property purchasing board game you've all played on rainy afternoons. For Spectrum speculotors. RISING DAMP/ATARI Not so much a TV show, more a plumbers nightmare. Floodwater is filling up your country mansion and you are escaping up the stairs when you remember the Thing in the attic! Can you save your Atari from a watery grave? KRAZY KONG/VIC 20 88 TL Arcade action with that great ape and all his friends! Take on the giant gorilla with your Vic-20 plus 8k expander. TIME MACHINE/CMB 64 96 Travel through time on your CBM-64 and survive the perils of this unorthodox method of getting around. And you might even get to meet a Time Lord ........... DOTTY/BBC Maze men get your skates on. Here comes Dotty, the BBC's answer to the little yellow munching character to be found in every arcade around the world. Why feel left out, grab a bite today! PRISON RUN/1199/4a .... 110 Well, you have been a bit naughty, haven't you. Otherwise why would they stick you in this horrible prison camp on a forgotten island miles from civilisation? Can you use your Texas TI 99/4a to escape? SUPER INVADÉRS/ORIC 1. If you own an Oric 1, then something has been missing from your life until now that is. Here they come the one and only ugly alien invaders! Blast them quick! NEWS AND REVIEWS GAMES NEWS 16 Well, just what has been going on in Cricklewood? And who is the Electronic Jogger? And why is Eskimo Eddie afraid of penguins? All is revealed in these pulse pounding pages. REVIEWS .... We take a look at Matthew Smith's latest winner, Jet Set Willy — what Miner Willy did after Manic Miner! ARCADE ACTION 34 Another issue, another show. We visited the ATEI show to discover more hot new games waiting to take your local arcade by storm. Finder out about Space Ace and TX-I. VIDEO GAMING 40 ,000 worth of Atari video games systems and cartridges to be won in our great Pitfall Il contest. And find out more about this award winning Pitfall game, featuring the lovable Pitfall Harry, by ace US designer, David Crane. ADVENTURE EXTRA 124 The first in our new bi-monthly review section just for Adventurers. NEXT MONTH... ***.......... 150 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 3 Il Montakood NEXT ISSUE ON SALE 16th JUNE "


"the LAMA has LANDEDI sit and stare inng an original Chon brought to 48K SPECTRUM .... and it's breeding fast. Once upon a time, only Commodore owners could experience the thrill of playing an original game by Jeff 'Awesome' Minter. Lesser mortals could only sit and stare in wonderous rapture at the furry arcade action brought to you by Llamasoft. BUT NOW THERE IS HOPE. Dragon owners were the first to see the light of day, but now Salamander Software is pleased as punch to announce that selected titles ARE NOW AVAILABLE FOR THE 48K SPECTRUM. Yes that's right, Salamander is now producing titles for the Spectrum, and the first of these are two great arcade games. ... METAGALACTIC LLAMAS BATTLE AT THE EDGE OF TIME On a forlorn observation post at the edge of the galaxy, the Metallamas wait for a sign of Zzyaxian spaceships. Suddenly the alarm claxons blare, and the furry friends of freedom rush to the fore only to find that there are no attacking spaceships, and that they are under attack from Cyborg Arachnid Mutants and Disgusting Weeviloids... This classic arcade game, originally developed by Jeff 'Awesome' Minter of Llamasoft, features 1 and 2 player options, spitting Llamas, Cyborg Arachnid Mutants, Disgusting Weeviloids, 99 levels of play. Joystick recommended. Supports Spectrum ZX Interface 2 and Kempston joysticks. MATRIX: GRIDRUNNER II It is ten years after the infamous Grid Wars, and humanity is once again threatened by the evil droids, only this time they're back in force with new weapons and new allies. The awesome sequel to the best selling Gridrunner, Matrix features all the old favourites like Droids and Zappers, but increases the panic quotient by adding Diagonal waves, Cosmic Cameloids, Energy deflexors, the Snitch and more. Game originally developed by Jeff Awesome Minter of Llamasoft. Joystick recommended. Supports Kempston and AGF joystick interfaces. In space, only the camels can hear you scream. What some famous people have said ... \"What's an arcade game Aristotle \"Awesome\" Jeff Minter \"I prefer elephants\"... Hannibal \"Don't shoot me, I'm only the piano player\". Elton John Zebedee Please add 50p P.&P. to all orders. Send A5 SAE for full catalogue. Cheques or postal orders payable to: \"Boing\". Salamander SOFTWA R. 17 Norfolk Road, Brighton, BN1 3AA. Telephone: (0273) 771942. 48K SPECTRUM TITLES *These titles available through Quicksilva Ltd. Metagalactic Llamas Battle at the Edge of Time .95 . Matrix .95  Gridrunner .95  Traxx .95 Laser Zone .95 DRAGON 32 TITLES Gridrunner .95  Laser Zone .95 John Menzies WHSMITH SELECTED TITLES AVAILABLE FROM: GOH "


"MAILBAG Men MALBA Please drop us a line at: Computer and Video Games, EMAP, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1R 5JB. ABOUT THE ATARI COMMODORE QUESTION... KEYBOARD CONTROVERSY sales drop because we are 16k, it would run on a Vic + you are going through parts buying English goods. 16k. of the maze, you can bomb Please support the existing | It didn't. I have now through the walls. and the new Atari software. discovered that when you Vectrex games are even Dear Sir, Co-operation between users expand the Vic above 6.5k better than ColecoVision With regard to John Keogh's and software houses leads to games for discovering bugs! letter in the March edition of more software and ultimately locations change which is When will the Vectrex C&VG, I have no wish to to more people being why it won't run with my carrycase, 3D Imager and complain, only to elaborate persuaded to buy the expansion. So now I am stuck Computer adaptor be brought on a point he raised. machine. with a tape that I cannot play out? In his letter he mentioned The Spectrum is a case in and, as 3k memory M. Bocock, that the Atari computers have point, so let's make the Atari expansions cost over , I Louth, over 1,000 items of software. a best-seller. The fate of the do not feel inclined to buy Lincs But and let's face it, it is a machine lies in our, and the one just to play this game on Editor's reply: In fact big but how many of these software houses, hands. it. Vectrex is being pulled out items can we Atari users Alan Pashby, What I want to know is: is of the UK market and will actually afford? I would say Bransholme, there any way I can play only be available as long as that around 90% of this Hull. Myriad on my Vic + 16k? present stocks last. This software is American and Does this exact memory means that there won't be a therefore expensive. rule apply to all other Vic carrycase, 3D Imager or This brings me to my tapes as well? computer adaptor. second point. Actually this is Michael Brown, more of a plea to the best of Helston, the English software houses Dear Sir, Cornwall. e.g. Ultimate, Ocean etc. It I own a Commodore Vic-20 Editor's reply: I hope you has been proved by a few and later I hope to own a haven't wasted your money Commodore 64 or a BBC. Dear Sir, software houses that Atari on your Myriad game. I Software can be sold at Please could you tell me, if I I am very tired of may be able to help you reasonable prices. Imagine hearing people criticise the had a Commodore 64 and I change your 16k RAM Spectrum keyboard. Look at and English Software, to bought a book with Vic-20 cartridge into a 3K RAM games in it, could I use them the Jupiter Ace or the name but two, have done just cartridge. It has a slim on my Commodore 64 without that. Aquarius or even the CGL chance of working so So why is there still a M5. Their keyboards are changing anything in the fingers crossed and here we made of rubber and they are listings? Also, would the drastic shortage of cheap go:games be better or the same software for the Atari? I worse to type onapart POKE 641,0:POKE 642,4: on the Commodore 64? from the CGL M5 -yet I agree that a few Atari owners POKE 643,0: POKE 644,30: think that if it's under .00 haven't heard any reviewers Nigel Pearce, POKE 648,30:SYS 64824 then it's not worth buying and calling these keyboards Dudley, West Midlands. \"dead flesh\" yet! more fool them for missing Editor's reply: I'm afraid out on excellent AmericanJames Mitchell, that you wouldn't be able to quality games, like Haywards Heath Gridrunner and Diamonds. take Vic-20 programs and West Sussex But most of us are more run them on your CBM 64, Dear Sir, Nigel. Some Basic Vic than willing to buy cheap I am writing in reply to S. software even if it isn't programs which don't use Peeks or Pokes may be OK,Vectrex Games System. The Hansford's letter about the American quality. So come on THE DOCKETI all you software houses, give but for the most part you'll instructions for Minestorm Dear Sir, us some good reasonably probably have to convert definitely have an error in I am writing to tell you about priced software you can the listings to run on your them because I have reached a problem I am sure many be sure of our support 64. Minefield 64 and no new people have. You buy a new because we just can't afford universe has appeared. computer game, take it home, to pay .00 a go. There is also a very large load it and find out that you And a word to all you Atari bug in Fortress of Narzod. could have written a better owners. If we get the support When I reached the Mystic program yourself! However, from these software houses Dear Sir, Hunter with five lives left and this is not so in all cases. then we must buy their I recently bought a software killed him, I got an infinite Silversoft print a picture of goods, and the more English | tape called Myriad from number of lives! This carried the game as it is seen on software we buy may Rabbit Software for my Vic on for I don't know how long your TV on the back of the encourage the Americans to 20. The tape requires a 3k but I managed to reach level cassette. Why don't other drop their prices. For memory expansion which I four before I had to go for companies do this? instance, Centresoft have just do not have. I do however my tea. When I came back Greg Robertson, halved the price of Zaxxon have a 16k expansion and the machine had reset itself!! Dundee, and others will follow if their thought that, as 3k is less than! Also on Scramble, when Scotland COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 5 BAD NEWS that you wouldn't be able to FOR VECTREX IEN PLEA FROM THE POCKET! "


"THE CHALLENGE IS WITHIN YOUR.GRASP Compatible with Atari Commodore Spectrum  With the vast range of games now available for home computers each holds a different challenge. Now there are three Competition-Pro Joysticks in the Kempston range that will come to your aid and improve your playing capabilities. Your movements will become quicker, with finger poised over the fire button at the ready, your scores will be out of this world. Playing will be So much easier! If you're serious about the challenge your computer presents then you shouldn't be without a Kempston Competition-Pro Joystick PRO 5000 Again all the winning features of the Pro 1000 but incorporating true craftsmanship plus large 1 VA\" control knob for comfortable play. Unique tapered shalt for maximum sensitivity Dual independent fire buttons — Nylon covered steel shatt for maximum robustness KEMPSTON JOYSTICK INTERFACE FOR THE ZX SPECTRUM Allows the use of any Atari/Commodore type joystick with the popular ZX Spectrum computer With well over 100 games on the Spectrum now compatible with the joystick this is a must for any Spectrum owner who wants the power of a joystick added to the power of the Spectrum. Simply plugs into the edge connector at the back of the Spectrum No modifications necessary NEW PRO 1000 PRO 1000 Ergonomically designed handle and base. 8-way arcade quality lear switches for precision control. 5 foot cable to allow more comfortable playing positions Rubber retum for smooth control Rubber protector pads on base. Base fire bar for left or right hand control. PRO 3000 All the winning features of the Pro 1000 plus top fire button for precision one handed play trigger fire button for true arcade realism. Some games you can buy were produced before Joysticks were available for the ZX Spectrum With the aid of Kempston conversion tapes these games can now be played with any of the Kempston range of joysticks. NEW SEE US ON STAND E24 AT THE MIDLAND COMPUTER FAIR-BIRMINGHAM PRO 3000 .75 PRO 5000 .50 PRO 1000 .99 SPECTRUM JOYSTICK INTERFACE .50 CONVERSION TAPE I -Converts: Horace Goes Skling, Hungry Horace. Flight Simulation (Sinclair). Arcadia, Penetrator, Spectres CONVERSION TAPE II Converts Orbiter, Escape. Tanx Centipede, Spectral Invaders, Crunsing on Broadway Frenzy. CONVERSION TAPE III -Converts: Ah Diddums, Jumping Jack Molar Maul Androids, Horace And the Spiders, Space Ralders. Winged Avenger, Muncher. ALL $4.95 each AL TRADE Most items are available from WH Smith, Boots ENQUIRIES Spectrum Computer Centres and good WELCOME computing shops or direct from KEMPSTON MICROELECTRONICS LTD Unit 30 Singer Way. Woburn Road Industrial Estate, Kempston, Bedford. MK42 7AF Tel: (0234) 856633 Telex 826078 KEMPMIG 6 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"EMAILBAGE HINTS FOR SPECTRUM! OBSERVATION! starting from location 0. Because you have changed the value of this location, the computer will run straight through and, it appears, hit the tape loading routine or something which will have this effect, and it appears that this is what you are doing. What you have done by poking into location 56 is to alter not the amount of memory which the machine has, but the amount which it thinks it has. CLUBBING TOGETHER! at address 23677 and the Y co-ordinate of last point plotted at address 23678. Save memory : Dear Sir, Change 0 for NOT PI; for Dear Sir, Here are some hints for the SGN PI; 3 for INT PI. I have a Sinclair Spectrum Spectrum's ROM which Use VAL \"number\" for the and am writing about the should be very useful to your other numbers. game Penetrator by readers. 1000000 becomes VAL Melbourne House. The ZX Spectrum's ROM \"1000000\" or better VAL \"le6\" On this game one can contains some routines which Change also PRINT AT thrust and brake, but on the can be very useful in your X,0:\"32 spaces\" fifth stage, when one brakes programs. by PRINT AT X,0:1 and attempts to bomb the Free memory (16-48K): PRINT New : neutron bombs, it is not 65536 USR 7962: \"bytes.\" RANDOMIZE USR O : resets possible to hit the target Scrolls: all the Spectrum, including accurately because of the RANDOMIZE USR 3280 : U.D.G. scrolling system Scrolls whole page up one POKE 23755,100 : the Also on one's way back line. program disappears... through the stages, flattening RANDOMIZE USR 3330 : POKE 23755,0 : and it comes out the landscape and Scrolls whole page to first back (and stays.) maintaining the firing from line. RANDOMIZE USR 1331: the bottom of the screen at RANDOMIZE USR 3582 : exploding BORDER, it will stage 2, the points increase Scrolls whole page up one stop with the BREAK key even if one does not fire. The line. (BORDER!) Stéphane Moureau rockets and radar stations RANDOMIZE USR 3583 : Blaton blow up as well! Scrolls half bottom page up Belgium Good advice to anyone one line. (BORDER!) managing to get to the fifth RANDOMIZE USR 3652 : stage of Penetrator is not to clears half bottom page. brake right back to the edge (BORDER!) of the screen. POKE 23292,X affects scroll. Richard Wilkinson, (see Sinclair manual, Chap. 15 Epsom, Page 106) Surrey. Change cursor: (upper/lower case) This depends on the 4 bit of FLAGS 2 at address 23658. POKE 23658,0 : gives lower Dear Sir, case, 49 bit = 0 Whilst experimenting on my POKE 23658,8: gives upper Commodore 64, I found out a case, 4 bit x1 thing or two: RANDOMIZE USA 4317 : Quickshot II POKEing 0,89 starts the tape changes caps to lower case, recorder whirring round. Will and vice-versa. this do any damage to the POKE 23617,236 : to have a ? datacassette and has it any during inputs. uses? Oh, and POKE 0,255 Protections : stops it from acting in such a POKE 23659,0 : Disabling the way. BREAK key, but the program Dear Sir, While playing around with can't produce reports! (no I would like you to give your POKE 56,48 which limits stop, no bug..) opinion on the Slik Stick the memory to around 10K POKE 23606,X: deteriorates because I'm thinking of I found out that POKE 56,10 character set. (X=76/92/108/ buying a joystick and just used with POKE 56,48 then 111/164...) wondered what you thought PRINT FRE (0) gives 49K! Is X=0 restores normal about it. If it's not all that this true or is the computer character set. good, I will consider buying trying to trick me? Try also with 23607 the Quickshot or Quickshot II. Another thing using POKE 23756,0 : the first line B. Mathaven, POKE 56,10 on its own will become line ZERO. Edgware, without POKE 56,48, I found Another method for your Middlesex that I had 509 bytes left! programs: Editors reply: Here at Again is it true? 1 LET A=PEEK 23637 + 256 C&VG we're not great fans Christopher Payne X PEEK 23638:POKE of the Slick Stick St Albans A,O:POKE A+1,0 Personally I would tend Herts 2 REM !!!!........ LINE ZERO towards the Quickshot II. In Editor's reply: All you're fact, there was an extensive doing is poking random review of joysticks in our values into memory. A new kind of DRAW can be March issue which could At certain times during obtained with the X cohelp you decide which stick use, the machine will start ordinate of last point plotted to buy. running the machine code Dear Sir, I am considering starting a Spectrum Users, Club in my area. Are there any legal requirements that need to be met? Would any software houses be interested in assisting us, giving prizes for local endeavours? Neil Bennett, Barnsley, South Yorks. Editor's reply: There are no legal requirements involved in setting up a club and we're sure that if you approach software houses, they will be willing to help you out. How about trying your local computer shop? FIDDLING WITH A 64! MAKING YOUR SEARCH FOR THE STICK .. Dear Sir, I intend to purchase a computer shortly and have narrowed the choice down to either a Sinclair Spectrum or an Oric l. How could I enhance the Spectrum's inferior sound quality and would it be possible to connect a joystick to the Oric 1? Trevor Gilmore Ochtrup, West Germany. Editor's reply: I know of several companies who make Spectrum amplifiers alternatively you can put the Spectrum cassette lead into an ordinary amplifier in a home stereo. Vulcan Electronic produce a joystick interface for the Oric computers. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 7 "


"CRAZY GOLF Try our nine hole golf course and see if you > can manage it under par. We can't PROGRAM FACTORY LTD CRYSTAL SWEEP A family strategy game. Outsmart opponents by collecting the blue crystals ... are pleased to announce that they are launching a new range of products for the TEXAS INSTRUMENTS TI-99/4A to supplement their wide range of software for the Oric-1, Colour Genie, Vic 20. Spectrum and Dragon, and they all come in attractive dustproof video cases. Call in at your local software dealer to view the games or contact us at the address below for 24-hour delivery. Send stamped addresed envelope for catalogue. TRADE ENQUIRIES TO YOUR USUAL DISTRIBUTOR K.64 Can you cover every square on the chessboard once only — a real brain puzzler BLOOD BANK Steal Dracula's treasure from his castle. Beware of vampires and ghoulies. Nine levels of difficulty Fill in the order form and send to: PROGRAM FACTORY LTD, 39. Railway Road, Darwen, Lancashire Tel: (0254) 776677 Please rush me the following games (tick box) Cheques p.o. payable to Program Factory Ltd. All prices include VAT, postage & packing TI-99/4A Name (BLOCK CAPITALS PLEASE) Blood Bank .95 O Crazy Golf .95 O Nodrub's Quest .95 Address Crystal Sweep .95 O Kat Traxx .95 O Dragon Combat .95 O K.64 .95 Telephone orders accepted ACCESS TTTTT Signature by credit card VISAS UTTTTT CV5464 NODRUB'S V QUEST Two part adventure game Through the maze to the castle and rescue princess. Beware of the wizard and 'byte-sized Mike We stock over 1,000 programs on cassette, cartridge and disk for most micros. Program South London's Largest Software Centre Continuous Demonstrations NOW INTEREST FREE CREDIT ON Micro Computers and Peripherals from GAMES EDUCATIONAL BUSINESS BBC . Acorn. Commodore . Sinclair Atari . Dragon . Texas. Oric  Epson. Just a small selection of our vast inventory of software is shown here. We carry all the popular titles of arcade games for all the leading Micro Computers Plus educational Seikosha . Star Shinwa . etc ... programs for 5 year olds to 'O' level standard and Business application software Call in or phone for full details TOP SELLING SOFTWARE Program Supplier Machine Supplier Machine Snooker VISIONS Spectrum/ Pole Position Atari Atar .95 04/BBC .95 Datasoft Zaxxon NEW RELEASES JUST IN Atan .95 Android il Vortex Spex trum .95 Space Shuttle Microdeal Electron .00 Program Supplier Machine Space Shuttle Microde, Atan/64/ Zalaga AARDVARK BBC .95 Spitfire Sun Alligata .95 Spectrum .95 Chuckies Egg A and Spectrum/BBC .95 Trashman New I tell Gate Limasoft VIC 20 .50 Ali ATAC Ultimate Spectrum 1 .50 Generation Spectrum .95 Joust Atan Alari (Cart .95 | Korg Anirog ICBM64 .95 Forbidder Sy lips CBM 64 Snooker Acorsoft BBC .95 Forest Cosmi .95 CBM cass/disk) .95 Flight ZeroFortress .95 Flight Atan/64 one five AVS VIC-20 .95 Dungeon Spectrum Simulator 1 Sublogic ssdisk! .95 Fort Apocalypse Showcase Alan/CBM64 .95 Adventure Level 9 64/BBC .95 Quicksilver Spectrum | .95 Shamus Showcase Atari/CBM64 .95 Scuba Dive Durrell Spectrum/64 .95 Blagger Alligate CBM44 .95 Zork I II III Infocom Atan (Disk) .95 Space Pilot Anirog CBM 64  7.95 Dragons Bure Quicksilver Spectrum .95 Temple of Apshas Epyx Atar/CBM64 Blue Thunder Wilcox Hunchback Spex trum/64 Oce .90 (Disk/Cass) .95 Software Spectrum .95 Revenge of the Manic Mine Bug-Byte Spectrum .50 Jet Set Willy Software Mutant Camels Llamasoft CBM64 .50 Jet Pac Ultimate VIC-20 .50 Projects Spectrum .95 Manic Software Penetrator Melbourne .95 Aztec Challenge Audiogenic CBM64 Muner-64 Projects BM64 .95 House Spectrum .95 Twin Kingdom Spectrum/ Chequered Hag Pion Spectrum .95 Harner Attack Martech Oric .95 Valley   64/BBC .95 International Skyhawk Quicksilva VIC 20 .95 Fighter Plot Digital Soccer Commodore CBM64 .95 Crazy Kong Interceptorl VIC-20 .00 Integration Spectrum .95 The King Microdeal Dragon .95 All the above software is available on cassette unless Alchemist Imagine Spectrum .95 otherwise stated All Prices Include VAT BBC Vision Store KINGSTON 3 Eden Walk Precinct, Kingston, Surrey. Tel: 01-546 8974 Vision Store CROYDON 96-98 North End, Croydon, Surrey. Tel: 01-681 7539 8 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"BAG SOFTWARE SHOCKER UNFAIR ON THE UPSTART no more than one decathlon to the level that always Ideally the micro should be can be played without the devoured me. It began, the outdated and have virtually players being too tired to spaceships homed in on me no software available for it. play again. This includes and killed me. I looked over TRS-80S, MZ80S and Pets are Dear Sir, friends as well as myself. to the record player and the fine. The computer you buy I have a complaint to make. After only a few games of last song on the LP had just should also be a black and Recently I bought a) Atari Decathlon, I now need a finished! I flipped the record white one, have no sound 600XL after selling my Atari replacement for my joystick, over and started again. facilities and virtually no 400 and found not only that it a Suncom TAC II A few minutes later I was graphics the ZX81 is a fine Naturally the breakage of back onto the killer level, and choice. These precautions 410 Atari Recorder, but it also the joystick, which had a fortunately there were still a will ensure that whatever doesn't accept some of the good write-up in the March few songs to go. At first program you run on your micro Atari distributors' software. \"84 C&VG has left me very Annie Lennox helped me to cannot possibly excite you. Shop assistants don't tell annoyed, as I have never relax and I actually managed Once you have equipped you that most software for the previously broken a stick I to kill three aliens! WOW! yourself with a suitably 400/800 won't work on the still have the original Atari That guy really knows what redundant computer, your 600XL. What am I meant to joysticks — in the three years he is talking about. But choice of software is do with my software range I have had an Atari VCS suddenly, Annie started to important. Make sure that any three of which won't work on console. I feel therefore that sing my favourite song on the software you buy is in a plain my XL? Activision should be taken to LP and I just had to stop cover too many cassette Stuart Simpson task for not realising the playing the game and join in sleeves these days are Betford, havoc their game would the song. This ruined the little colourful and imaginativeNotts cause to joysticks. concentration that I had and not what we want. I hope that you will be once again I was obliterated. There are a number of old good enough to publish this I would be most grateful if software chestnuts that any letter or at least this warning. these unhelpful souls would self-respecting boredom Danger: Activision's Decathlon keep their stupid ideas to seeker cannot afford to do can damage your joystick! Dear Sir, themselves. After all, all they without. For example, Dr Jon Heels, I am writing to you about want is their names printed in computer Hangman. The best Heath, Richard Shephard's Urban C&VG and, if that was my versions of this well worn Cardiff. Upstart. Keith Campbell only purpose in writing this wonder for our purposes are Editor's reply: If it's any letter, I wouldn't go to all the described it as boring which those which give the consolation Jon, we broke trouble. Or would I? it is not in the least. computer a vocabulary of He said that the vocabulary one too a week after writing P Knee, about five words-dog, cat, the review. We contacted Ladybridge was thin but I have found that shoe, bee and door should be Activision for their it recognises all the useful Bolton boring enough comments and they told us words, and words like Versions allowing you to the game should not define your own naughty 'chippy' or 'shop' are not damage your sticks if you recognised as they are not words are not to be use short tugs back and useful to escape from recommended. If you cannot Scarthorpe. forth — and don't yank or find a version which pull too hard. I agree that the graphics Dear Sir, dispenses altogether with the Have you ever sat in front of are slow building up, but that graphic hanging of the man, doesn't bother me. As for the your micro, zapped a few then find one which uses the hundred aliens, saved a hospital, if you act wisely you graphics ability of your micro couple of planets, killed a to the minimum. won't end up there, but even dragon, looked up and Early software for a so I have got out many a time Dear Sir, exclaimed, \"My God, is that from the maze of the hospital. particular machine is usually the time!\" Yes? Then what My 'high' score on Jet Pac is Keith Campbell obviously did acceptable since these games very low. What can I do? In not play Urban Upstart for follows is for you. were rushed out at short Controversy surrounds long enough and the article is desperation I turn to the notice for quick profit. letters page of C&VG. Here I computer gaming. Many therefore an unfair criticism. If you find a version of Urban Upstart and am advised that listening to people — especially the Hangman fitting all the above music can aid concentration Invincible Island are in my older section of our there are plenty about community regard video opinion the best Richard while games playing. I drop you can happily turn minutes games as time wasters and Shephard games out. the magazine and quickly into millennia. A Myers, plug in my Vic, loading Jet relative life shorteners. They The future for life Pac, my favourite game. have a point. Hours do seem Church Vale, lengtheners, however, looks London N2 Five minutes later the like minutes when you're bleak. The computer games screen boasts that it is ready, climbing ladders and having industry seems to have finally (first time too!). I rush over to barrels rolled at you by a woken up and realised that it the music centre, put on my gruesome gorilla or clearing cannot survive on variations favourite record, which just the galaxy of cosmic firebirds. of old themes. But rest happens to be Touch, and the However, with careful use, assured that for years to Dear Sir, melodious tones of Annie ome boring people will be After reading the review of Lennox flood the room. lengthen your life to make selling boring games and Activision's Decathlon So to testing the theory. I minutes seem like decades. If using micros to the least of cartridge in C&VG (Feb 84), I started the game and soon you would like to seem to their potential. Until this bought a copy of the game cleared the first, easy, have lived forever, then follow breed finally gets chocked and found it excellent except screen. By now the record my tips on how to use micros off, Star Trek lives on... for two things. was part way through the to the least of their potential. Tim Boone, Playing the game is much second song on the LP. Firstly, make sure that you Lordshill, too exhausting to be fun, and Slowly I worked my way up buy a boring computer. Southampton BOREDOM RULES OK? BEATING THE RECORD! DECATHLON CRACK UP! COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 9 "


"DAILY LIT & VIDEO COMPUTER GAMES Kriegspiel Rox Pollint SOFTWARE NEW RETABASE FOR THE SPECTRUM ENEMY TANK Deed Ahmad Dragon 32 CHALLELORG SOWIE (Available on) Dama 48K SPECTRUM BY RJ SWIFT WEEK THIS LAST WEEK WEEKS IN CHART SPECTRUM VIC 20 CMMDRE 64 ELECTRON ATARI DRAGON ORIC BBC ATMOS WN WEEK 5 1 2 4 3 4 6 5 7 11 8 16 9 23 6 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 TITLE Publisher Computer JET-SET WILLY SOFTWARE PROJECTS (Spectrum) MANIC MINER BUG-BYTE/SOFTWARE PROJECTS (Spectrum) HUNCHBACK OCEAN (Commodore 64) FIGHTER PILOT DIGITAL (Spectrum) ATIC ATAC ULTIMATE (Spectrum) HUNCHBACK OCEAN (Spectrum) HUNGRY HORACE PSION/MELBOURNE HOUSE (Spectrum) THE HOBBIT MELBOURNE HOUSE (Commodore 64) SCUBA DIVE DURELL (Spectrum) MAMIC. MARCO COC DIGITAL INTEGRATION ..the name of the game 4BK SPECTRUM Joystick Compatible 106 VIENE "


"2 SCUBA DIVE VURELL 2 | MANIC MINER SOFTWARE PROJECTS 10 6 (Spectrum) (Commodore 64) REVENGE TERMINAL SOFTWA: OF THE MUTANT CAMELS PELER:::: 11 | 25 | 2 | THE HOBBIT MELBOURNE HOUSE (Spectrum) 12 | 172 MUTANT CAMELS LLAMASOFT (Commodore 64) 13 10 2 ANT ATTACK QUICKSILVA (Spectrum) 14 21 | 2 CRAZY KONG INTERCEPTOR (Commodore 64) 1 BLUE THUNDER R. WILCOX (Spectrum) 16 29 2 PILOT 64 ABBEX (Commodore 64) 17 8 2 JET PAC ULTIMATE (Spectrum) 18 9 2 ALCHEMIST IMAGINE (Spectrum) 1 NIGHT GUNNER DIGITAL INTEGRATION (Spectrum) 7 2 CHEQUERED FLAG PSION (Spectrum) 11 WIZARD AND THE PRINCESS MELBOURNE HOUSE (Vic 20) 1 ZORGONS REVENGE I.J.K. (Oric) 23 1 SPACE PILOT ANIROG (Commodore 64) 24 21 | 2 TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY BUG-BYTE (Commodore 64) 25 26 2 FRED QUICKSILVA (Spectrum) 26 | 302 SNOOKER VISIONS (BBC) 27 20 2 KONG OCEAN (Spectrum) 2812 2 LUNAR JETMAN ULTIMATE (Spectrum) 28= 15 2 POLE POSITION ATARI (Atari) 30 13 2 WHEELIE MICROSPHERE (Spectrum) TERMINAL The Official FROGGER for the 48K ZX Spectrum by Paul Curtis STARBLITZ The popular arcade game for the DRAGON 32 Commodore 64 Spectrum 48K and in trade Sea Emp DISTRIBUTED BY NURUT Look out for the brand new 'Top 10'in the Saturday edition of the DAILY MIRROR, every fortnight. Plus the complete 'Top 30'in Computer & Video Games at your newsagent on the 16th of every month. Information compiled by N.O.P. Market Research Ltd.  EMAP Business & Computer publications 1984 MICRODEAL MASTERS OF THE SOFTWARE PROJECTS CHART No. 2: 28th March-10th April International Deutsch Français Italiano "


"co UNORIUNI SOZLY DUPLICATOR That's right, even the pirates will be dropping their duplicators to play Moon Alert, to join in the swinging fun with Hunchback, to attack with Android Two, jump for their lives with Pogo, spin themselves dizzy with Chinese Juggler, they'll just crack-up with Eskimo Eddie's Arctic action and there will be no stopping the captain once he gets his hook on Mr. Wimpy that zany burger battle. Even the most cunning of pirates will find the exploits of Gilligan's Gold giving him fever and if they are still game for action then the excalibur's magical powers in Cavelon will improve even the sharpest of swashbucklers. They'll all be fighting to save the beautiful maiden in the chart"


"Even the pirates can't stop playing these priceless new gems from Ocean! GILLIGANS GOLD topping Kong, and Transversion will keep the best of fighter pirates on their toes. Don't you miss all the Ocean action, get down to your local dealer now and join in all the fun and games. Moon Alert Spectrum 5.90 Hunchback Spectrum, Comm.64. Oric 6-90 Android Two Commodore 64 6-90 Pogo Spectrum 5.90 Chinese Juggler Spectrum 5-90 Comm 64 6-90 Eskimo Eddie Spectrum 5.90 Mr. Wimpy Spectrum 5-90 BBC. Comm. 64. Oric 6-90 Gilligan's Gold Spectrum 5-90 Comm. 646-90 Cavelon Spectrum 5-90 Comm 64 6-90 Kong Spectrum 5-90 Transversion Spectrum 5-90 * Ocean Ocean Software Limited Ralli Building Stanley Street Manchester M3 5FD Telephone 061-832 9143 Ocean Software is available from selected branches of WOOLWORTHWH SMITH, John Menzies, LASKYS Rumbelows, Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Trade enquiries phone: 061 832 7049 "


"COMPETITION COMPETITION COMPETO CHESS MASTER \"Where are you going?\" shouted the Red Queen. \"I'm off to find the White Knight\", replied Alice, \"I must find out what these micro-computers are.\" And off she went, hand in hand with the White Knight. In our November '83 issue, we asked you to dream up a fantasy adventure game using the theme of a chess board, just as Lewis Carroll did in Alice's adventures Through the Looking Glass. Contemporary Chess Computers offered as first prize the new Ambassador chess computer, with chess software going to the five runners up. A lot of hard work went into this competition with some very imaginative entries, but one clear winner emerged Robert Hodge from Lancashire. Well done Robert an Ambassador is on its way. The five runners-up are: Gerald S Hughes, West Midlands; Simon Doyle, West Glamorgan; Chris Stangroom, Surrey, Mr R Stewart, Edinburgh and Mr A B Ellis from Chelmsford. 11 111 POOR PEDRO! FEELING ADVENTUROUS! In January you were asked to come Durnall of Walsall, set in Toffums up with an Adventure plot to fit a Private School for Executive Permap of 19 locations and a list of sonnel, inspired by Winkler Watobjects, printed in the Book of son's comic exploits. Also appealAdventure. ing was the entry from Robin HamThe map suggested the setting to mond of Letchworth, whose plot be a school for boys, near a village was centred around you (Watkins) in the heart of the English countrybeing seriously ill, and accused of side. And, of course, most of you doing away with the school cat. wrote an adventure plot with just The objective here was to drag such a theme. yourself from your sickbed to find The task of picking a winner from the cat and thus prove your innoso many widely differing plots and cence. Yet another outstanding enmethods of presentation seemed to try came from Robert Moss of cry out for a panel rather than just Basildon, with a tale of the bogus one judge, so I called in a team of teacher Harlequin, and an empty Adventurers well-qualified in mat school. ... ters educational: Ruth Campbell But unfortunately there can only schoolteacher, Veronica Campbell be one prize, and so to the above 3rd year schoolgirl, Neil Campreaders we are sending consolabell 5th year schoolboy, and tion prizes of a C&VG t-shirt. Keith Campbell very-ex-schoolThe winning plot concerns a raid boy and not-so-ex school governor. by the terrors of St. Trinians on that In judging the entries, we came last bastion of male chauvinism across a diversity of objectives, Greyfriars School. The school's from having a midnight feast to last hope, Watkins Minor has been finding your report card and burn captured by Matron, (really an old ing it; from rescuing a kidnapped girl Germaine Greer in dissheik's son to being expelled from guise). You, Billy Bunter, must resthe school; from unravelling the cue him, for he has information secrets of The Black Rectory and that is needed for a successful destroying an evil character named counter-attack. The rest of the gang Harlequin to finding the school cat. Watkins Male Supremacy VigiThe school cat featured heavily lantes, are waiting outside the in most of your entries, and was school tuck shop for you to do your often used to scare Matron off, job... who, many of you decided, had The Mattel Intellivision machine cat-phobia! The bunsen burner was and cartridges go to Carrick put to good use too sometimes Thomas of Paisley, Renfrewshire, to warm up invisible ink! who came up with what we thought Entries came from as far afield to be the most original plot, which as Reykjavik and Italy, and many contained all the conditions for were excellent, being well thought each of the problems, and was laid out and carefully presented. We out in detail, location by location. particularly liked one from K. P. FALSE ARREST WHO DUNNIT? The police quickly got to the root of || Finally it happened. Someone unlocked the cupboard, the Bug Hunter escaped the matter and this is how it happened: 'Ammer loaded the van and told one and hasn't been seen since! truth and one lie. The question was 'Who Dunnit? We Basher grabbed the goods and told two | printed a copy of the fingerprint found on the cupboard door and asked you to truths. Clogger drove the van and told two lies. come up with the name of the culprit. The villain was SMILEY and search Congratulations to the six winners of parties are out looking for him. In the Trevor Truran's brain teaser who will meantime, congratulations to the ten each receive an XL25, courtesy of Vulcan Electronics winners who have won a games tape for They are: Stuart Clarke, Notts; CJI their micros. They are: Lisle, BFPO 16; Mrs I M Keefe, Surrey; Neil Brannelly, Merseyside; Wido Sparling, Holland: Michael Mann, Essex; J. Mr T P Benton, London; A N Malster, Virdee, Berks; Mitchell Reynolds, SoliNottingham and Stuart Clydesdale from hull; Andrew Forrest, Lancs; Aiden Dumbarton. White, Surrey: Mr KJ Whitefield, Kent; Jorgan Kirksaether, Norway and Detlef Wacker from West Germany. Pedro's the name and Pedro's the game and there's over ,500 worth of tapes to be won this month. Imagine have given us 500 tapes of Pedro, 100 each for the Spectrum, BBC, Electron, Commodore 64 and Dragon and this month the competition is open to everyone regardless of area. Pedro once led a happy and peaceful existence pottering around his garden until one day he woke up to the fact that all his flowers were being eaten by scavenging animals. Enraged, he leapt to the defence of his flowers and now spends his time stamping out the undesirables and shooing away a persistent tramp who's out to steal his seeds. Can you help poor Pedro save his garden? If you think you've got green fingers and want to play Pedro, swap your spade for a pen, fill out the coupon and hot-foot it down to the post office. Remember the first 100 entries for each micro will receive a copy of the game. send in your coupon, marked Pedro and the type of micro you own to Computer and Video Games, 8 Herbal Hill, London, ECIR 5EJ. Name: Address: Micro your own: L ICOMPETITION COMPETITION COMPETI "


"1. COMPETITION COMPLETO ucOMPETITION COMPETITION COMPET V THE SUPERSLEUTHS THE ELECTRON SAGA Remember our Electron competition? Way back in July '83 we asked you to Despite the problems, the standard of come up with an idea for an original entry was extremely high. The winners computer game. selected by Bug Byte were those that Prize for the best idea was to be an \"combined imagination and originality Electron computer with runner up with a little constraint, always bearing in prizes of free Bug Byte software. mind that we don't write many games Sounds easy, right? Wrong the for mainframes.\" history of this competition reads like The winning game was called Libraone of Esther Rantzen's worst horror rian designed by John Reed of Newstories of bad service and dodgy deals. castle upon Tyne. The idea of the game Slight problems like Acorn failing to is to help Cedric, the librarian, put all deliver on the Electron, C&VGs editor the books back on the shelf and avoid leaving and Bug Byte getting caught up the bookworms who are out to get him. in a time warp all pushed the announceIt's an entertaining climbing game with ment of the winners back further and an original twist. further. The runners-up will each receive a Suffice it to say that the Electron game from the Bug Byte catalogue. competition was not our finest hour and Wight, PR Ambrose of Gillingham, John They are Ross Fulfor from the Isle of we apologise to all readers who entered this competition. That grovelly enough, Woods of London, Adam Ruddle of Ed? Peterborough and Stephen Dickinson of Leeds. REVEALED! So now we know who the super-sleuths really are! Obviously a lot of hard digging went on in dusty archives to solve the questions on Sherlock Holmes set by Keith Campbell. In fact, Keith says that all the answers are in the Encyclopaedia Britannica. The ten correct answers are: 1. Moriarty. 2. In the coal scuttle. 3. Baker Street. 4. Strand magazine. 5. Medicine. 6. A Study in Scarlet. 7. John H. Watson. 8. In Crowborough, Sussex. 9. A deerstalker. 10. Service in the Boer War (particularly in connection with a field hospital). The 20 lucky winners will each receive a copy of the Sherlock Holmes Adventure, courtesy of Melbourne House, which is now in the final stage of production. Melbourne House assure us that you'll each receive a copy in the near future. The 20 super-sleuths are: Andrew Mountford from Birmingham Myra Noble, Muswell Hill; Ian Wheatley, W. Sussex; Tony O'Donnell, Yorkshire; Mike Eastgate, Coventry: Dafydd John Llwyd Tudor, Clwyd; Neil Milne, Scotland; R. J. Nicholson, Whitby: Jenny Gybson, Belfast; Hugo Dobson, Gateshead; C. M. Samms Middlesex; M. Gorman, Leeds; M. J. Woodward, Chester; Brian McGovern, N. Ireland; Scott Brookmaw, Bristol: David Justesen, Surrey: R. J. Lynch, Herts; N. Warren, Gwent; John Whiten, Leics and G. J. Suggett from Sussex. AT HOME WITH THE HULK! How would you like to invite the incredible Hulk home? He may be a funny colour but he's really quite a nice chap. Just don't upset him and you will be perfectly safe... We've managed to get hold of 25 copies of the very latest Scott Adams Adventure based on the Marvel Comics character The Hulk and they are all signed by Mr Adventure himself just to make our prizes even more exclusive. So you want to be the first person on your block to have a Hulk in the house do you? Just answer the questions below, fill in the coupon and send it to Computer and Video Games, Hulk Competition, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, London, ECIR SEJ. And remember, we've got five copies each for Spectrum, BBC, Commodore 64, Apple and Atari owners — each signed by Scott Adams himself. So don't delay enter today! The first five correct answers out of the C&VG memory bin for each micro will win a prize. Closing date for entries is May 16th and normal C&VG competition rules apply. <<<<<1515151 <111 THE QUESTIONS 1. Spiderman's real name is: a) Clark Kent b) Peter Parker c) Matthew Murdock. 2. Bruce Banner was turned into the Incredible Hulk by: a) Alpha rays b) X-rays c) Gamma-rays. 3. Which of these Marvel heroes isn't a member of the X-Men? a) Colossus b) Black Panther c) Storm d) Wolverine. 4. The Thing's favourite catchphrase is: a) It's clobberin' time! b) Excelsior! c) Make mine Marvel! 5. Which Marvel hero was frozen in ice at the end of World War Two? a) Captain America b) Iron Man c) Iceman d) Cyclops. uo Vadis? Below is a clue which will go towards helping you solve the mystery of Quo Vadis? Turn to page 52 for more information! Questions compiled by Philip Morton. 1L FORMATTE LIST FILE: CURRENT NEFILL C&VG INCREDIBLE HULK COMPETITION FOR A HEAD ARCA TOS: NEXT PRINT ASIAT Faze PRINT LET B FOR TO 5: LEN CREATE 1 TO STEP 2 HIDS ASIA.C.2 e LET LED HER PRINT AS DATA S7706 27 Micro you own (tick box) Spectrum Apple BBC Commodore 64 Atari I COMPETITION COMPETITION TOMPEL "


"av G.A.M.E.S N.E.W.S HAVE A DOUBLE! K-TEL K-tel, one of the record industry's few successful record labels, is about to release its range of double-sided computer games written specially for the Commodore 64. Their most popular game for the Spectrum, 'It's only Rock 'n' Roll, is a game set in the tough music business. Can you take your band from back street pub obscurity to a gig at Madison Square Gardens? Will you even find an honest manager or a record company to back you? If you have a Commodore 64, you may be able to find out if you've got what it takes! Another release for the '64 is arcade game, Odyssey. You are the last surviving human in a radiated desert inhabited by lethal robo-crabs. Armed with a laser gun, you have to do the decent thing and blast the robots to smithereens. Odyssey and It's Only Rock 'n' Roll are available from K-tel for the Commodore 64 and cost .95 each POURING MONEY DOWN THE DRAIN! PUB QUEST you discover you've lost your wallet and the landlord isn't looking at all pleased! The menacing barman has given you less than three hours to find some money to pay the debt. Confused, and not a little drunk, you remember that you tripped on your way to the pub P-P-P-PICK UP A PENGUIN ESKIMO EDDIE Excess alcohol consumption a and Eddie will skate right into subject close to every journaltheir waiting mouths. ist's liver is the main ingreIn the second half of the game, dient in a new adventure game you take the role of Percy the that promises to have more than Penguin whom you must defend its fair share of headaches. Snow, ice and gale force winds from the attacks of the evil The game begins in your are forecast, following the launch Snowbugs. Your only line of delocal tavern, the Chequered of Eskimo Eddie, a chilling new fence is to crush them between Flag. After an evening of game set in the snowy wastes the ice blocks strewn across the fairly serious somewhere north of Watford iceberg. drinking, In the first part of the game, Eskimo Eddie runs on a 48k Eddie must try to rescue his Spectrum and is available from friend Percy the Penguin who Cheshire-based Ocean Software has become stranded in a snow for .90. storm and is slowly perishing from frostbite. His task is made all the more difficult by a pack of patrolling polar bears who guard the top of the ice berg one wrong step 16 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"5 G-A-MES NEWS po at TS HOW TO BE MASTER OF YOUR MICRO 223 R ES TVE JAUNO CRICKET TALES OF COMES TO CRICKLEWOOD SACRIFICE HUMAN CRICKLEWOOD AZTEC CHALLENGE and the money must have fallen Birmingham-based Centresoft led this gap quite well. The game through a drain into the and cost .95 on cassette or places you in the shoes of a sewer...! .95 for the disc version young hot shot programmer who Searching through the city's wants to start up his own softmaze of underground is difficult ware company. With only  to and nasty enough when you're start you off, your task is to build sober it's almost impossible a highly profitable games empire. when you're smashed out of your The game simulates all the mind. demands of being in Britain's If you feel thirsty during your biggest growth industry. You search, you can nip back to the must decide what quality your pub for a quick refill but that's MASTER CLASS games are going to be, how long another drink on an already exyou should spend programming pensive slate. The computer revolution is being and whether it is wiser to dePub Quest is available from given a helping hand by another velop new titles or to convert Dream Software, based in fast growing home technology your present titles. Basingstoke, for the Commodore the video recorder. You also have to arrange to 64 and sells in the shops for A series of 'how to video borrow money from the bank .95 tapes have been released to help and, if you're in financial difficulpeople get to grips with their ties, you can always pay Honest computer in a way that's not Harry a visit but watch outpossible to do, even with the best bec est because he will rip you off if he of instruction manuals. can! The first video for the Spec. The game also gives you trum deals with introductory ctory graphic representations of your graphic representations of your Basic programming, screen and sales, profit and turnover figures computer layout and construcand even draws a picture of the tion of simple games programs. house you own. The game starts The second tape delves deepyou off in a little terraced house Cricklewood not recently er into the workings of the 2x and, if your business becomes a known as the haunt of movie Aztec Challenge takes you back Spectrum. Array handling, success, you could even end up stars or TV personalities in time to the 16th century culstrings and animation are discus. buying yourself a stately home in seems to have become very upture of the Aztecs who, though sed in greater detail as well as the country. market again well according known for their highly developed many other advanced topics. to a new adventure game it has civilization, practised hu Millionaire is available from Both tapes come with three Reading-based Incentive SoftThe game, The Cricklewood sacrifices to please their numercomputer programs recorded ware for the 48k Spectrum and Incident, is set in the dark and Ous gods. onto the video tape. These in forgotten places of north London The game places you in the costs .50 clude -Neasden tube station and the position of a young Aztec warrior Minefield. Four other Master clude games like Hangman and Dog and Duck in Finchley who has been chosen to be sac-Class videos deal in the same where few people have ventured rificed to ensure a good harvest detail with the Acorn Electron The game features a cast of for the following year. The only of for the following year. The only and the BBC micros. thousands. Most of them include way to save your life is to prove The Master Class tapes are very unlikely inhabitants of Crickyour worthiness and survive a available from most branches of THE 64 lewood Gengis Khan, John trial by ordeal. W.H. Smiths or direct from the Travolta and Superman all make the first test of bravery is to  manufacturers, Holiday Brothers, COMMODORE their mark, even the Mr Nasty of run the gauntlet of the tribe's for an asking price of .95. Yorkshire cricket, Geoff Boycott, warriors who try to kill you with Spectrum owners have had it makes a guest appearance. Spears and daggers for the their way for far too long. Up to The game poses some really greater glory of the race of now, other micro owners could tough problems that even the course. You will also have to only look with envy at the huge most hardened adventurers will endure swimming across a range of games available for the find hard to crack — like what piranha-filled river, escape a ratSinclair time does the laundrette open, infested temple and run up the But now some of the best or more importantly, what effect side of a terraced mountain. known software houses are does washing powder have on Aztec Challenge and another MILIONAIRE broadening their horizons and continued world peace? new game, Forbidden Forest, are producing their best-selling titles These and many other burning the spearhead of a new range of Computer games have always for the other micros especially questions probably won't be games under the label of US Gold been good at producing simula. the Commodore 64 answered in the full blown, no which hopes to import the best of tions of flying a jet air craft or Legend creators of the reholds-barred version of The America's games for the Atari driving a rally car but, up to now, volutionary Valhalla are workCricklewood Incident, available and Commodore 64. there's been one missing how ing. day and night on a '64 verfor your Dragon 32 from SalaAztec Challenge and Forbidto get rich quick. sion. John Peel, the Managing mander Software. den Forest are available from Millionaire seems to have fil. Director of Legend, is claiming Minetield. Four other Master MORE AND WHO WANTS illustration: Dorian Cross COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 17 "


"G GA.M-ES NEWS CG33 the logs floating in the water. If you lose your footing and plunge into the river, the local zoo's escaped crocodiles or the pollution will finish you off. The longer the game continues, the more breathless you become. What's more, the traffic has started to get worse and don't forget the stopwatch is ticking away. Jogger runs on the unexpanded Vic 20 and is available from Paramount Software based in Stockton-on-Tees costing .50 Quarte that the new game is light years The Guild of Software Houses ahead of the Spectrum game in (GOSH) have protested strongly graphics and response times over the Ministry of Defence's The Pyramid has already been action placing a secrecy order converted for the Commodore on J.L.C. Data's newly developed and their newest Spectrum title, software protection system. Doomsday Castle, is just in the GOSH is bitterly disappointed last stages of production and by the action Software piracy should hit your local branch of is costing the industry at least W. H. Smith in April.  million a year. Nick AlexanFurthermore, Fantasy have der of Virgin Games is convinced committed themselves to a policy that it could have saved many of of making all their future softthe companies he thinks will ware available across both com go bust this year. \"Even big puters software houses are in danger of Splat! the top selling game going to the wall, warns from Reading-based Incentive Alexander. Software has also transferred to GOSH are demanding that the the Commodore stable and I'm government either release the assured that it hasn't lost any of anti-piracy system or compenits frustrating addictive quality sate the companies for the lost during the move. revenue. Ultimate are remaining tight. The reason for the Mod's aclipped about their plans for the tion is thought to be a fear of future but they have admitted losing out on information conthat several '64 games are in the tained in computers. If the syspipeline. tem is as good as it is claimed, C&VG's crystal ball is predict even the Ministry of Defence ing that Jet-Pac will make yet won't be able to break in another appearance! The nature of software piracy has changed from being merely a swopping of games between friends to being run by organized criminals who produce counterfeit copies that are almost impossible to distinguish from the originals. This could well be the PIRACY last straw for struggling companies. The controversy surrounding the software piracy debate has become even more heated following the confiscation of an antipiracy system by the government MINI-DOCTOR BIDS TO SAVE ROBOT! MICROROBOT GOSH GO FOR THE GOVERNMENT Remember the film where a team of doctors is miniaturized and injected into a patient in an attempt to save his life? It was called Fantastic Voyage. In this new game from Softec, the story line is the same except for one twist the patient isn't human, he's a robot. You play the part of a 4XTC robot surgeon trained to sort out any robots who have a few screws loose or overcharged chips Armed with a Supa Fix-a-Tive gun and stun balls, you are shrunk down to a few millimetres high and injected into the arm of a bugged robot. But the patient is far more damaged than you first thought. Huge areas of his brain Electronic exercise appeals to are damaged and you'll have to me a hell of a lot more than the act fast before his restraint cirtraining shoes and shorts variety. cuits breakdown or he could go Jogger, for the Vic 20, could berserk and kill hundreds of make sweat shirts a thing of the people. past. The most likely place of damJogger demonstrates how age is the pipes carrying lubrikeeping fit in a big city can be cating fluid and mezo-plasma. To very bad for your health. The mend them, you must be carrying game takes you on a training run the correct fixative in the gun across a busy motorway in and don't forget you only have a which, predictably, you have to limited supply. dodge the moving cars and even if you become really tangled, a few joggernauts perhaps? you can use the stun balls as a If you manage to cross the last resort to drive back the nasty road without being crippled for bugs. life, a large polluted river must be Microrobot is available for the crossed. The only way to reach 48k Spectrum from Softec Interthe opposite bank is to jump onto national and costs .50. ROUND THE JOGGERNAUTS JOGGER illustration: Dorian Cross 18 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"S G-A-MES N.E.WS m IT ITSE WHAT PRICE SOFTWARE SUCCESS? PRICE WAR Spectrum software, un doubtedly the cheapest for any home computer, may take another nose dive during the spring, following Imagine's announcement of startling price reductions on all their Spectrum software. Imagine have dropped the retail price of games like Alchemist and Ah Diddums from .50 to .95. They claim they have dropped prices in the interest of the consumer. Imagine's public relations representative, Tim Best, said the price cut was being absorbed by the retailers and distributors and that it wasn't a desperate attempt to get the company out of their present financial problems, but a move towards a healthier and profitable games industry. The price cut follows Imagine's loss of a ) million pens in Britain, our software contract with Marshall industry will be decimated. Cavendish to write programs that can hardly be in the for a partwork magazine consumer's interest, can it?\" which the company are preJanuary and February have paring to launch. The games been very bad for most softdidn't come up to Marshallware companies. Imagine's Cavendish's expectations and action is thought unlikely to Imgine will have to repay the precipitate a price cutting million in a series of war, but maybe a stabilising monthly instalments over the of prices. next 12 months. It has been calculated that The chairman of GOSH, Imagine will have to sell three Nick Alexander, forecast \"if a times the number of tapes to price cutting war like the one make the same profit they that took place in the video received with a .50 price game market in America haptag. DESIGNER OF THE MONTH Name: Sandy White Games: Ant Attack. Born: Edinburgh 1961. Sandy White's path into theme of his art college computer games is nothing days: \"My most recent is if not different. about a happy little robot Having obtained an art there is no particular mescollege degree, he exhibsage I was just feeling ited his sculptures at his quite happy at the time\". own show in Aberdeen and Sandy's happiness is then, two years later, prounderstandable, considergrammed Ant Attack the ing the royalties that must best selling 3D style game have been generated by that needs no introduction Ant Attack, though typical to most of you. Scottish caution is exerNone of this is that cised on this subject. strange when you bear in \"Quicksilva warned me that mind Sandy's interest in people would ask how Barrs Irn Bru. computers which stretches much I've earned, so his Favourite TV Programme: The official licensed back six years to when he lips were sealed. Star Trek. purchased a Sinclair Mark Though Sandy has Favourite Computer Pro-vers! agreed to do another game gramme: Time Gate. driving game, Pole \"I built my own computer for Quicksilva, he is conCountries Visited: All counPosition, is shortly to be to operate one of my workcerned that business tries in Europe. released by Atarisoft. ing sculptures — the ice pressures might, at some Pets: None. I used to own a The driving game listcream van which is a stage in the future, threaten rabbit and a newt. Jing published in last protest against nuclear his artistic integrity. Ambitions: To travel in the month's C&VG under the war\". Favourite Food: Kelloggs Space Shuttle. Sculpture is still imporCo-Co Pops, and MacViFavourite Pop Groups: Big heading Pole Position tant to Sandy though his tie's milk chocolate digesCountry, Thomas Dolby. is not the officially recent works have moved tive. Favourite Artists: Stephen licensed conversion for away from the protest Favourite Drinks: Tea and Spielberg, Walt Disney. the Spectrum. POLE POSITION 14. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 19 "


"THE FURTHER ADVENTURES OF es THE TAUGHING: ames in The DOWN IN THE JUNGLE SOMETHING STIRRED. SOMEONES IN A STEW. YES, IT'S THE LAUGHING SHARK WHO HAD COME IN SEARCH OF 6 NEW STEAMING HOT (VIRGIN GAMES mamy THERE'S RICK O'SHEA AND THOSE WILD ANIMALS DOING THE JUNGLE JIVE...... Men 'ELLO CHIEF. NEW CARPET? SAY NO MORE. JUNGLE BLUE WASN'T IT? NO? OOPS!! BETTER GET OUT BEFORE HE CAN CHECKOUT A BETTER GET OUTLET I Spy ACENT 003:5 ON ATLAS ASSIGNMENT. HIS MISSION TO SEEK AND FIND STOLEN NUCLEAR PLANS, 20 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"NEW RELEASES LOOKS A LIKELY SPOT FOR AN AMBUSH WITH FRANTIC, FAST & FURIOUS ARCADE FUN. SORCERY By Martyn Wheeler for the Spectrum 48K VGC 1016 By the author of the much acclaimed Dr Frankie. In this mystery tale you are a wizard who can fly, and fly you must, through 15 screens, avoiding false trails, evil ghosts and strange beings. You must collect various items and reach the door to the next scene before the attacking beings drain your power. The further you get, the harder it gets and the more compulsive Sorcery becomes. To reach the ultimate goal of your trapped sorceror friends you must be fleet of finger and brain. Excellent colour, graphics and sound. .95 R.R.P. AMBUSH ATLAS By Brian Williams for the ASSIGNMENT Commodore 64 By Martyn Davies for the VGA 6004 Spectrum 4BK Quite simply Ambush is VGC 1017 Just one more go! This is a text adventure type game. Get your with a difference-it hands on the controls incorporates three of your space ship and arcade-style games, nobody will be able to just to keep you on prise them off. Guide your toes. The player, a the space ship through secret agent has to seek storms of everand find stolen nuclear increasinates from plans. The fate of the strange alien forms. Hit world is in your hands. them with your laser Using cunning and skill and they split in two to find the plans you hit them again and they must decide what drop a proton bomb. objects you find on Fast furious action that your journey will be of is both compelling and use to you. Can you addictive. This is a enter the world of winner. espionage and survive? .95 R.R.P. .95 R.R.P. Joystick 2 THIS PLACE IS CRAWLING WITH BUGS BIG BUGS, CRAWLY BUGS, FLYING BUGS BETTER BUG OFF.. TO FIND THE WIZZARD. HE'S GOT A LOT OF SORCERY. HE'LL NEED EVERY SPELL IN THE BOOK. CHECKOUT By Mike Cooke for the   VGA 2011 A unique game that keeps your heart beating fast. Charlie the Checkout burglar dashes round the store collecting carpet titles, a robot guard with lasers tries to stop him. This grid walking game is a must for quickthinking, fast-fingered players. .95 R.R.P. BUGS By Dennis Ibbotson for the Electron VGA 8001 A rare arcade game for the new Electron. This fast-moving arcade game has the players garden being invaded by a whole host of nasties, scorpions, spiders and bugs of all kinds. Your job is to shoot them down before they get you. Your spray can is very fast and very manoeuvrable, but you can still get caught. .95 R.R.P. JUNGLE JIVE By Dennis Ibbotson for the BBC B and Electron VGA 2801 By the author of another new release, Bugs. Jungle Jive is fast action shoot'em up arcade game. Walk your hunter between the lines of snapping. snarling and slithering beasts. Shoot them all but not the baboons, and especially the snakes. Faster action as you progress. But beware the ricochetyou could shoot yourself! Stunning use of sound and colour. .95 R.R.P. MAIL ORDER All our programs are available at normal retail price including postage and packing direct from our \"MY LOCAL DEALER HAS GONE OUT OF BUSINESS BECAUSE HE NEVER STOCKED YOUR GAMES DEPT\" at 61-63 Portobello Road, London W113DD. YOURSEL COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 21 "


"GAME OFT isofbeRE-V-LE-W-S2 increases When you complete one screen, our entertainer jumps up and down in celebration. The game gets more difficult by giving you a colour sequence of plates which you must follow on later screens. If you pick up a plate which is the wrong colour, you can throw it up in the air to change it to the right colour. This is a simple little game with extremely cute graphics. It is fun and addictive and well worth the .90 asking price. O Getting started Graphics Value Playability 0 GARBAGE CAN MAKE A GOOD GAME TRASHMAN Seore After all those games ending in 'man', you'd think that you were in for another dose of ghosts and power pills. But you'd be quite wrong with this latest offering from New Generation software. You play the part of a dustman, and you have to empty the bins by collecting them from the gardens, tipping the contents into the van and then returning the empty bin to its rightful owner. All this is done against the CHINESE JUGGLER clock; a little timer ticks away slowly in the corner of the screen. Failing to empty the requisite number of bins in the time allotted will prompt a response from the boss to the effect that you're about to be fired unless your performance improves. However, there are ways of obtaining perks, in the shape of extra time, by staying in the homeowners' good books. You do this by not walking with your muddy boots all over their newly mown lawns. In return, a friendly TRASHMAN HUNCHBACK housewife will invite you in to show you her ZX81 and will reCUTE except for Jeff Minter had run cus. It's a pity because it's very ward you with (amongst other out of ideas, the Juggler amused entertaining to watch those things) some extra time points. LITTLE and entertained me. plates spin and wonder if they The main attraction of MalYou control a cute little orienwill fall and break. colm Evans' previous games was tal who performs a cabaret act Some of that excitement has always the stunning graphics; 3D by making plates spin on the top been captured in the game as Tunnel is still a talking point. And CHINESE JUGGLER of poles. you rush around the screen reit's those excellent graphics Older readers may remember spinning poles where the plate is which really make this game. The Ocean's Chinese Juggler is like a various artistes doing this act on about to fall and attempting to view of the street scrolls up the breath of fresh air that rare Sunday nights at the London Palget a plate on every pole. screen, and the player's angle is thing, a totally original game. ladium-though I have noticed The game is accompanied by that of a bird's eye view. Just when I was beginning to that the act seems to have disa piano ditty that gets faster as the perspective is perfect, think that all the games writers appeared from the Xmas TV cirthe number of plates spinning right down to the way the dust22 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES CABARET! "


"OF THE MONTH R-E-V-I.E.W.S Jman stoops to pick up the heavy bin. And there's a touch of Frogger in there as well, 'cos he has to collect bins from both sides of the road. To make life difficult, there are the cars which speed along in both directions. Animation is beautifully smooth and outclasses most of the pure Frogger games I've seen for this machine. The houses are superb, too. The only slight problem I found is that control is via the fourtiements without being knocked my opinion than Atari's version they drop will lose you one of cursor keys, which I don't like off. Armed guards try to spear for their own machine. your three lives. and find difficult to use. You can you and rocks and arrows fly out the graphics are pretty, colI first played this game at a use a joystick, though, if you of nowhere. Quasimodo will have ourful, and the animation of movtrade show in London last month. have one. to keep jumping just at the righting objects is extremely smooth. The first thing that caught my eye The fastest way to lose points time if he is to stand any chance The game has the full four (well, ear) was the sound effects. in this game is to commit the of rescuing the beautiful Esmerscreens as per the Nintendo As well as the catchy tune which deadly sin of walking on somearcade original and includes a plays all the way through the one's grass. Doing this will, in all Superior Software's Huntwo player option game, you also have the sound of probability, deter the owner from chback is a playable game. Just in case you've been in clanking wheels as they bob up offering you a much-needed tip. However, it lacks the profeshiding for the last two years, the and down under the car. If you In fact, you'll probably wake thesionalism that has become very basic idea is to get Mario up to ask me, it's about time for a dog whose territory you've just evident in Spectrum games the top of the scaffolding to res. 10,000 mile service. invaded. Yes, just like real life, sadly missing in most BBC soft-cue his girlfriend being held cap. And that tune really is catchy. there're dogs too. Accompanied tive by the Donkey Kong. I was still humming it on the way on screen by the phrase 'scat or The graphics are of a reason Atarisoft are asking .99 for home from the show, I'll bite your leg', the dog's able standard but the scrolling this cartridge a lot of money. As well as the decidedly unappearance necessitates a hasty screen flickers. The sound capabut then it's head and shoulders friendly boulders, there are also retreat for our intrepid binman. bilities of the machine have been above anything in Ti's own range holes in the moon's surface Generally, I enjoyed this game. totally ignored, apart from the for playability, quality of graphics which must be avoided. Luckily It's not fast by any means but, if odd beep or squeak. and lasting appeal. A definite your vehicle is like no other; it you'd rather have a challenge If you liked the arcade game, must for TI owners. can jump. Pushing the joystick up than spend all your time zapping then this version will probably will jump your car just like Miner Getting started things (no you can't shoot the appeal to you. If you weren't a Willy in Manic Miner. Only thing Graphics dog), then you'll love it. fan, then I'm afraid Superior SoftValue is, a miner jumping across a gap Trashman certainly lives up the ware's Hunchback won't convert Playability is one thing; a car doing the high standards set by New Gen you. The game is available now same is rather different. eration in the past. It runs on a and costs .95. I assume that the game gets a 48k Spectrum and costs .95. Getting started lot harder as you progress, as Getting started there's a note in the instructions Playability YOU PLAY Graphics consoling those about to give up. Graphics Every obstacle, it says, is Value Playability MORE EASIL passable.  Value TROOPA TRUCK As well as the ability to jump, you can also accelerate and BEEN slow down. To help in really Fans of Moon Patrol, as seen in the arcades, can now play the tricky bits, you can alter your GIVE YOU CONVERTED game on a Commodore 64 s peed while in the air. Troopa Truck is one of the Overall, I found this a very ATARISOFT latest releases from Rabbit Softplayable game. It's very addictive ware and your job, as is usual in but I don't know how long the HUNCHBACK Good news has been pretty thin these games, is to save the action continues before you are I've always thought Hunchback on the ground for TI owners Earth. As the driver of a Multi deemed to have succeeded in had a really weird theme a these days, what with the US Terrain Amphibious Armoured red your mission Cripple jumping along the top of a company ceasing production of patrol vehicle (their name, not Personally, I couldn't get very castle is weird, isn't it? But the the machine and compatible mine) you must cross the landfar, but had great fun trying. And game really caught on in software. scape that scrolls sideways at the tune's good, too. arcades, and it certainly seems Now we can bring you the you. A well produced game which to be a popular game on home good news that there may be life Intent on sabotaging your misshould prove fun for Commodore computers in the old micro yet, thanks to the sion, some extremely selfish 64 owners, Troopa Truck is from Hunchback, for the BBC, is a splendid new range from boulders deliberately position Harrow-based Rabbit Software fairly good copy of the original Atarisoft. Atari's most successful themselves in your path. Howevand costs .99. game but it is hardly 'state of the titles have been converted to run er, a swift finger on the fire art', and this Beeb version on the TI games with famous button will soon take care of Getting started doesn't compare with the Specnames like Pac Man, Donkey them. Graphics trum version available from Kong and Centipede.  Value Then there are the aliens Ocean Software. plugged in the ape game and which gather overhead. Shooting  Playability The aim of Hunchback is to was delighted to find an excelthem will get you extra points, run across the top of castle bat lent version of Kong better in while failing to avoid the arrows continued on page 28 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 23 TUNES HELP CO on on KONG'S THIS WILL THE HUMP! on CD "


"AWARD WINNING SOFTWARE FROM AUTOMATA VOTED WINNERS FOR THE BEST LEISURE SOFTWARE OF THE YEAR by the Computer Trade Association. AVAILABLE NOW FROM SELECTED SHOPS AND WHOLESALERS... OR BY MAIL ORDER AUTOMATA UK LTD . AUTOMATA * PIMANIA the cult adventure that's for real 16K ZX815 BBC 32K  Dragon 32 F10 Spectrum 48K E10 GROUCHO the Pimania sequel. Concord OE2 USA prize Free rock music on the flipside Spectrum 48K 10 PI-EYED the comedy cartoon arcade game, starring the P Man Free protest disco record Spectrum 48K [6 PI-BALLED Atriumph of the arcade programmer's art Starring the P Man Free offensive Reggae music Spectrum 48K 6 MORRIS MEETS THE BIKERS exciting arcade tun. as seen on TV Outrageous free doo wop record. Any Spectrum  YAKZEE Bruddy wonderfurt game otruck and Skin An oriental masterpiece for Dragon 32 plus Spectrum 48K 65 GO TO JAIL Play the game Find out what all the fuss is about cookie Spectrum 4K  THE PIMAN'S GREATEST HITS amazing stereo LP cassette 3 OLYMPIMANIA He's back! He's going for gold! He's sober! Free National Anthem on the flipside Spectrum 48K 6 I ENCLOSE THE RIGHT MONEY, OR DEBIT MY ACCESS/VISA CARD CARD NUMBER MY SIGNATURI E GREATES MY NAME MY ADDRESS MORRII POST CODE NO EXTRAS! ALL OUR PRICES INCLUDE DELIVERY AND VAT Send to AUTOMATA U.K. LTD. 27 Highland Road, Portsmouth, Hants. PO4 9DA 24-Hour Credit Card Hotline (0705) 735242 24 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"Software R-E-VTE.W.SI ya continued from page 23 ASSAULT AND BATTERY! BEAR BOVVER If you play around with your computer today, you're in for a big surprise. For all the bears that ever there were are out for a teddy bear's video game! Bear Bovver is a cute little game, based on that arcade favourite Burger Time. But instead of burgers and nasty tomatoes, you get batteries and Bovver Bears! Ted is out to find more batteries for his electric car which is rapidly running out of power. He comes across a Burger Time-style grid of ladders and platforms and must climb them to get the batteries and knock them down to power his battery car. All the while the Bovver Bears complete with braces and big boots are out to get him! Ted JET SET WILLY BEAR BOVVER is armed with some time bombs which will help him fight off the bad Bovver Bears, but they soon come back and race after our hero. The graphics on this game are simple but very effective the walking action of Ted and the Bovver Bears, is a real joy to watch. The author has come up with a nice line in typography too -the titles and instructions are really attractive. Game action is addictive and fast moving — you'll have to CENTIPEDE BEACH-HEAD have a quick keyboard finger to be centred. stay out in front of the mean old CENTIPE out video geriatrics like CenFor those of you who've never tipede and Pac-Man. What about Bower Bears. heard of the game, the action Xevious, Star Wars, Robotron, One gripe, however. The inlay ON ITS instructions included with the LAST LEG takes place in a mushroom field. and Pole Position? Using your rapid fire bug blastape are just not adequate. SimpCentipede is in the shops now ly giving the control keys isn't ter, you have to annihilate everyat .99 CENTIPEDE thing in the garden. I hope Percy good enough. When you reach Thrower isn't reading this. Getting started the end of a screen. Ted is supup. Whilst applauding Atari's deciThe real point earners are the Graphics posed to drive off in his battery sion to convert their top games jumping spiders, poisonous scorcar, but I just couldn't work out Value for other micros, I can't help how to stop him running into the Playability pions and frenzied fleas. Also feeling slightly bored by their worming its way down screen, is rest of the batteries dropped conservative choice of titles for a centipede which squirms in B A TTLE down from the ladder maze! No some machines and out of the mushrooms-you instructions about that any Do we really need Pac-Man have to shoot each and every FOR THE where! A nice feature of the game is and Galaxians for the Spectrum, segment to kill this one. even if they are the officially if you went bonkers over the D the baby bear mode which enA C licensed titles? The fact is there arcade game, then you will enjoy ables you to practice the game are already dozens of excellent playing the game at home on without getting bovvered! A great game for the younger for this machine. maze games and shoot-'em-ups your Vic. It's not quite as fast as Guns, tanks and battleships don't the Atari version and lacks the computer game fan, Bear Bovver sound like the ingredients for a Vic 20 owners are also victims prettiness of the original comes from Artic Computing and of highly original game but, unlikely of Atari going for the soft option will set you back around .50. though these are shortcomings as it may seem, they have comwith positively ancient offerings of the Vic not the cartridge. bined to produce the USA's best Getting started 7 such as Pac-Man and Centipede. What really gets me is that selling game of '83. Graphics I plugged in Centipede to take with so many great new games Beach-head won the award Value a look. First problem was that a to choose from and some of the for the best graphics and sound Playability quarter of the screen was out of best game-writing talent in the view and steadfastly refused to US, Atarisoft continue to churn conunued on page 20 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 25 ORATIVE SCORE zettee BEACH-HEAD "


"Taskset & commodore ommodore 64 We're only writing games, and we're only writing for the 64. Rely on us to bring you the greatest games, the greatest concepts and the greatest value. Bozo's NIGHT OUT O NEW NEW The complete deep space saga. A radical joystick action can bring inspired flexibility and a horrific kill-rate. The outstanding graphics include highly detailed craft and lots more than eight sprites at once. A full music and effects sound track accompanies the action. All these features combine with player options and a top 20 hiscore table to set new standards in hi-tech slaughter. NIGHT OUT A brand new character game. Poor old Bozo, all he has to do is to get home after a night out with the lads. That's easy until a wobble becomes a lurch and a stagger. Later into the night, all rules go out of the window as he disbelieves what's happening in front of his blood-shot eyes. An epic journey with ultrasmooth graphics and sprites which run rings round normal games. All available now on cassette or disk. PIPELINE COSMIC CONVOY SUPER PIPELINE Keep the pipeline open. Foreman Fred and Plumber Pete have their work cut out. The evil ladderman drops metal wedges to plug the pipeline and only Pete can fix 'em. Pete trusts Fred to defend him against the six-legged Venusian pipe spiders and the hard case lobster while he knocks out the plugs and restores the flow. Full accompanying music and effects, options and hi-score table. JAMMIN' Unlike anything else, a totally musical game yet highly colourful. Guide Rankin' Rodney through the top 20 mazes each with an interactive rock sound track Gather the instruments and make a band but watch out for bum-notes, dischord and that most deadly effect distortion. If you've never heard the full music capabilities of the 64, grab an instrument and join the band. COSMIC CONVOY Just surviving is not good enough in this giant convoy. Control three fighters at once, to defend the huge transporters as they ply between the planets. Only those transports reaching planetfall will gain galactic credits, and no one expects promotion for losing the TASKSET LTD The Specialists cassette Naturally, everything we've written for the 64 is available on either cassette or E7 1 LE E6% SPECIAL DIGITAL MIX entire fleet. Which freighters must be sacrificed to get most cargo to the next planet. Full sound options and hi-score table complete the arcade package. disk 00   each .90/ .99 each on Selected titles available from: WH Smith, Boots, Menzies and all good computer stores Major distributors include Microdealer UK, Websters, Centresoft and P.C.S. All games are the exclusive copyright of Taskset Limited. All rights are reserved. Be warned, infringement of those rights is an offence. MCMLXXXIV TASKSET LTD each 13 HIGH ST., BRIDLINGTON YO16 4PR TEL: 0262 73798 See you at the P. C. G. SHOW where else? stand 42 TASK SET! DIE THE BUG STOPS HERE! "


"e DARE YOU TRY AND BEAT THE SYSTEM? Ferranti&Craig DISTRIBUTION DIVISION PRESENTS SYSTEM From (AVS) System 15000, the very first real time investigation program is now available from all good software stores Runs on the BBC Micro B and Commodore 64. Spectrum version available soon. "


"son R-E-V.I.E.W.S LONAA pid explorer hasn't seen yet. So there you have it you control the top-hatted Willy on his quest through the weird rooms of his mansion searching for the glasses and bottles left lying around by his untidy mates. Jet Set Willy has well over 60 screens all different featuring Matthew's wonderful graphic oddities. Watch out for the ballet-dancing rabbit and the penguins in the cold room, Graphic masterpieces in their own right. There are also some refugees from Manic Miner among the 50000 odd creatures to be found but spotting them yourself is half the fun. The game is just too big for this reviewer to take in in the limited time available to look at the game -but I'm certain this game is going to be a winner. I found it much easier to get into than Manic Miner. The controls are extremely simple just POGO FORBIDDEN FOREST three keys for left right and jump. You can also move from screen to screen without having to comVOLCANIC ISLAND plete a task first-a bonus when you want to find out what's coming next! Software Projects have come up with an original anti-piracy device to protect their latest blockbuster. It's a card with a TK 91 coloured grid pattern. When you TR EN load the game, the computer comes up with a random location which corresponds to a square on the grid. You have to key in BLUE THUNDER KRAKATOA the colour code before you can continued from page 25 Gold being produced by the BirmMiner Willy is the star of this play the game. This routine has the star of this play the game. This routine has ingham company, Centresoft.game-but he's no longer lost in to be carried out each time you effects in a computer game in a It costs .95 on cassette or a mysterious mine. With all the play the game. Will it stop the poll published by the influential .95 for the disc version. money he made down the mine, pirates? We don't know -but it American music paper, Billboard Willy has purchased a vast manwill certainly make life more diffimagazine, as well as topping the Getting started sion in Surbiton. Why Surbiton? sales charts for several months. Graphics Don't ask me, ask Matthew! All this and a great competiThe object of the game is to Value Willy isn't mean with his newtion too! The first person to disguide your fleet of ships through Playability found wealth either he has cover just how many glasses the island's air and sea huge parties in his new home Willy has to collect before he is defences, negotiate a mined IS THIS THE with hundred of friends who allowed to get to bed will win a harbour and land a whole divi'really know how to enjoy themcase of champagne and a helision of tanks on the beach. TEXT selves. copter ride over his or her home The award for the best sound They often leave the place in town. effects was well deserved the N O ONE? quite a mess, however, and Jet Set Willy is bound to be up bombing and engine noises are Maria, Willy's fiery Italian house among the top ten in the C&VG so realistic you could quite easily JET SET WILLY keeper, gets really upset about Daily Mirror software charts bebelieve you're smack in the midthis. This new Willy epic begins fore very long and I confidentdle of the Battle of Britain. But Manic Miner strikes again! That after one of these big parties. ly predict that Matthew Smith the graphics, though impressive genius of the bizarre, Matthew Maria has finally put her foot and Software Projects have got during the first two phases, beSmith, the programmer behind down and won't let poor Willy another number one on their come progressively more the C&VG Golden Joystick winget to bed until he's cleared up hands strained and less sophisticated ner, Manic Miner, has come up the housel Maria stands at the Jet Set Willy is available now during the latter scenes with another original game. doorway of the master bedroom from Software Projects of LiverHaving said that, Beach-head Everyone has been waiting for and won't let Willy past the pool and is a bargain at .50. leaves 95 percent of British Comthe sequel to Matthew's top sellthreshold until he has picked up modore software standing and ing Spectrum game with bated every glass and bottle in the Getting started any shoot-'em-up fanatic will breath. Could it match up to the place. Graphics love the game. quality and playability of Manic Now, Willy's mansion is mas. Value Beach-head is the first of a Miner? Well, the answer is most sive and there are places and Playability new range of software called US definitely a resounding yes! rooms which even hean intreAO S VC 28 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"PIMAN GETS PAC-MAN TREATMENT POGO R-E-V.I.E.W.S SKREVIEWS Q*bert copies are beginning to proliferate on the Spectrum in the same way as rip-offs of PacMan did twelve months ago With no less than three versions to choose from, we thought it was time C&VG told you which one to spend money on. of the original idea. the giant spiders. They rush at to head. The original was an arcade Best buy. For my money Pogo you unexpectedly. This is the Both games feature choppers game by Gottlieb which introis the best Q*bert-type game point in the game where things performing a dual mission of deduced the cute but foul-mouthed available for the Spectrum — get quite messy, and where the fence and rescue over the briny. little character who had to hop and marks another success for programmers have gone a little The Blue Thunder chopper has from tile to tile on a triangular Ocean who are really beginning over the top on the animated the most realistic flight graphics shaped play area to change the to make their mark on the games blood which splatters all over the banking and dipping its nose colour of every square. Nasties business. screen. as it moves forward. like Coily, the snake, and a big red Pogo ,90 from Boots, MenFurther levels feature bumble The aim of the game is to blast bouncing ball tried to stop our zies, Woolworth, Pi-Balled from bees, frogs, dragons and an army your way into a nuclear reactor long-nosed friend from completAutomata of Portsmouth at  of skeletons. Each new type of which pops up out of the sea like ing his task. and Spellbound from most softaggressor needs different tactics an electronic sea serpent. Ocean's Pogo is the closest to ware shops at .95. to defeat them. The skeletons are Getting in is relatively easy, the arcade original with the particularly difficult to shoot and but blowing up the radioactive snake and bouncing ball — Pogo this level will easily prove the core takes much more skill. Once though in this version Coily is Getting started most taxing to would-be players. the possibility of a nuclear blast operating under the assumed Graphics The end of the game is has been eliminated, you can name of Hiss. Value reached when you come face to rescue your comrades held on The slow, looping hop of Playability face with the Demogorgon. The an adjacent island. Q*bert has been faithfully whole sky turns black and lightBlue Thunder is only average recreated in Pogo and this is also Pi-Balled ning flashes all around you entertainment. The chopper the only version which makes Getting started Overall, the game is fun and movement is either too slow or our friend jump off the side of the Graphics the graphics are reasonably too fast and some of the ground pyramid when you press the Value clear and well animated. But the installations showering you with wrong key. Playability game, for all its frills, is only a fire cannot be shot. Also hopping onto the bandplain shoot-'em-up and isn't in Far better value for money is wagon are Automata with their Spellbound the same league as most AmerAbbex's Krakatoa. This game has PiMan O'bert game Pi-Balled. Getting started ican software. All in all, Forbidso many clever little graphic frills PiMan and Q*bert could Graphics den Forest is a competent game, that it is difficult to mention them almost be brothers with those Value but it's definitely not game of the all. unmistakable long snouts — a Playability month material. The basic idea is to protect a similarity that has not escaped Forbidden Forest runs on the tanker being bombarded by Automata's attention as they inCommodore 64 and is available enemy ships in the bay. A radar clude a bar-room scene in the ANDN OW from Birmingham-based Centrescanner enables you see the game where the two share a soft for a price of .95. bandits and sneaking subdrink. 'COMPUTER marines. You'll really need to If you like fast games, then this NASTIES'! N start bashing your keyboard in an Getting started is the one for you. The PiMan can Graphics attempt to down those enemy be made to move very quickly Playability planes and subs. FORBIDDEN FOREST from square to square as he Value When the tanker sustains a performs his Q*bert impersonaVideo nasties have been hitting hit, the crew are thrown into the tion. the headlines quite often recentwater and it is your job to let Like Pogo, this game features ly and, judging by the amount of down a rope and winch them up the spinning escape plates at the blood spilled in Forbidden Forest, FALKLAND S to the safety of the chopper. side of the pyramid which you 'computer nasties' will soon be This is one of those games can jump onto when the going making the headlines in our daily FACTOR where you need about thirty six gets really tough. papers. fingers but, despite this, it's Spellbound from Beyond is the Forbidden Forest, an American hellishly addictive. The more I most orginal adaptation of the game for the Commodore 64, is played it, the more features Q'bert theme introducing witchset in a mysterious forest. You Shades of the Falklands indiscovered. es, spells and devils. play the part of an archer who famous bomb alley must have Krakatoa from Abbex really Despite the pretty graphics, has been sent on a quest to kill the been in the programmers' minds silences Wilcox's Blue Thunder this is the least playable version evil ruler of the FOREST. recently as a flurry of air-sea and is in the shops now at .95. of the game. The little yellow Armed only with a small bow battles are bombarding the softGetting Started devils are difficult to see and the and limited supply of arrows, you ware shelves. tiles only partially change colour must fight your way past the Hopping aboard HMS SpecGraphics when landed on — making the corrupt and evil creatures trum are Krakatoa from Abbex Value whole effect less colourful. Spellunder the Demogorgon's influand Richard Wilcox's Blue ThunPlayability bound also lacks the escape ence. der which we played against plates which are an integral part The first attack comes from each other in an explosive head continued on page 31 THE DO GOCO COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 29 "


"Open 8.30-6pm Mon to Fri & 9.00-1pm Sat Closed on Saturdays preceding Bank Holidays 6, London Bridge Walk London SE1 Tel: 403 1988 Software Specialist of London Bridge ZAP! POW! SOUND EFFECTS at SOUND PRICES COMMODORE 64 ZX-SPECTRUM MALAS BUGATE Hover Bovver.... . 16.50 P B Mutant Camels ... 6.50 3 Revenge Camels.  50 wwwwwwwwwwwwww Hungry Horace Hobbit 64 G/Master Chess... E15.95 Armageddon 64 5.90 .... 5.95 Rollerball .. 15.95 Chinese Juggler (5.95 Mr Wimpy Kick Off .95 Hunchback Widows Revenge... 15.95 Metroblitz S/King/Valley .50 Neoclyps... Dictator. .95 Krystals/Zong .......95 Aquaplane. .95 Purple Turtles..... . Quest/Herd .95 Ring of Power ......  6.95 Ultisynth Egbert .95 Bugaboo .00 Sting 64 Krary Kong . 600 Trans Tower . 6.00 Ship of Line MATRICK 16.50 Pilot 64 Aztec Tomb 16.95 Panic SPECTRUM 48K Brands Blagger 64. 600 Zoids Cosmic Commando. Tokens Of Ghall. Vortex Raiders  00  ner. 1600 Crazy Balloons .95 Moon Bugey 3D Time Trek  Just A Mot .00 Time Traveller 450 Word Power 48 95 3D Glooper$8.95 Stix Mothership Motor Mani Bonto 795 Matix Luerzone 56 60 Super Pipelines 6.50 Altair 64 VIC-20 BBC Model Dark Dungeon...495 Krazy Kong... 5.00 Star Defence...66 95 Larenzone... 500 www.poon Bonzo  95 Gridrunner .. .00 Cylon Attake. .90 Amok.  95 Matrix 15.00 450 Chuckie Erg. .90 Quest/Meravid.95 M galitic Llama 4 50 Bugblaster 1 6.95 Arcadia...  Tornado Twin kdom V. 495 EB.50 Bewitched ... 4.50 Skyhawk... 2695 5 Dictator 5.95 Catcha Snatcher E450 Space Joust Catrha Spatcher s Soarelust  1 747 Simulation. [6.95 Wacky Waiters 450 Jetpac 550 German MiB Falon Fighters. 5.00 Mower Mania  French Miss A... 18.95 French Miss B .95 Colossal Adv.... 18.90 Snowball 8.90 2000 WOOOOOOOOOOOO Lords Of Time.... .90 Harrier Att . 15.95 Q-Man... ... .90 Zorgons Rav 47.50 Man In The Hat... 4.90 Zenon 1 ... .50 Colossal Adv0 .95 3D Munchee .... 14.90 Apocalypse...... 18.95 Snowball . .95 Amade in Space...95 Hiest .... .95 2 Gun Turtle... 15.95 The Hobbit....... 12.95 Dogfight.......E8 95 Transistor Rev.... 16.95 Mr Wimpey 5 90 Saloon Sally..... 495 Gorf ... .95 Hunchback 45 90 VU-Calc .........95 Tiome Traviler.... .95 Isle of Death $5.90 VU Kle. Draculas Rev  5 95 ........ .95 Besieged Super Meteors 595 Music Procs... .95 Just A Mot....... .95 Achereons Rage .95 Beeb Art...... .95 Hunchback...... .90 Ice Giant. 15.95 ORICMADIMALS QUICKSHOT JOYSTICKS .95 ocean Quickshot ! Quickshot II Commodore/Atari.............. .95 .. .. .. ..95 Spectrum with Interface ......... .95 ....... .95 Oric with Interface. .95 ....... .95 IF YOU CAN'T SEE THE PROGRAM YOU WANT PLEASE PHONE, WE MAY HAVE IT IN STOCK FREE! There's MORE at historic, picturesque London Bridge Walk than Vic Odden's friendly service, wonderful prices, wide choice and staff so expert they possess disk drives for brains. NOW there's a FREE TAPE with every software cassette purchased before May 31st. Store your favourite programs courtesy of Vic Odden! (But remember, this offer is only valid on production of this advert). HOW TO FIND US # spectrum CHARGE CARD PANDORA THAMES INSTANT CREDIT UP TO STAN Vicodden's MAILORDER  MAIL ORDER SERVICE All mail order & phone enquiries to 6 London Bridge Walk 403 1988 BARCLAYCARD UGH HIGHST BOROVO Access Visa Trustcard & Credischarge orders can be accepted by post or by tele phone on 01-403 1988, during normal working hours. There is no surcharge on any credit card orders ALL MAIL ORDERS to 6 London Bridge Walk, London SE1 2SX Want to update your hardware? We'll give you up to ,000 Instant Credit. plus Part Exchange. Just call or write for details. the change this temple tider POST FREE! I Mail Order Prices correct at time of going to press E&OE All offers subject to availability 30 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"suffere R-E-V.T.E.W.S continued from page 29 GETTING INTO DEEP WATER! O'RILEY'S MINE 'Ee, there's trouble down t' pit, tha ken. And there's nowt Arthur Scargill can do this time. This is one of those scrolling games, which has you playing the part of O'Riley, the fearless miner. Unfortunately, there's a dynamite sticks. Pressing the dropping eggs which hatch into BATTLING leak in the shaft and water's er's joystick button will leave a lightnasty water nymphs unless the gushing everywhere. As fast as ed stick in your path, at which tadpole eats them first. If a CH E ESE. you can dig a tunnel, it fills up time a hasty retreat is advised. If nymph hatches out, it will chase with water. you've timed it right, the explo your poor tadpole and attempt to BUR G ERS! But, as every good physicists od physicist Sion will kill the approaching eat it. knows, water will travel to the meany. If you haven't, then As you master each phase of DRORE 2 highest level filling the lower yo er you've just wasted a stick of the game, more hazards are inones as it goes. So if you dig a a dynamite. Every unused stick at troduced until you reach the There I was, peacefully cruising side-to-side tunnel branching off the end of a level is worth $3,000 serious business of frog breedthrough space, when all of a from the main vertical shaft, then Generally, it's a very playable ing. Jelly-fish drop in for a bite sudden these flying saucers the oncoming water will fill your game, that's also quite fun. The and bob around near the surface. came screaming down at me new tunnel before rising in the early levels are quite easy and Then just to add a topical touch from out of the stars! Well, what main shaft and blocking your wouldn't imagine it taking too some nasty person dumps a could I do I just had to blast only hope of escape. long to complete the game, after drum of radioactive waste into them. The secret, I found, is there. which time any challenge has the pond and your tadpole has to Probe 3 is one of the new fore to dig horizontally along the watch out for poisonous patches releases from IJK Software for whole length of the bottom of the The graphics are good, and in the pond! the Oric-1 and the new Oric pit. This will allow you time to get the sound of the gushing water is the third stage of the game Atmos. Really it's a fairly basic back to the top without the shaft quite realistic. In fact, it gets introduces the first frog who sits space shoot-out but with filling with water. quite annoying after a time (think on a log and can attempt to eat some nice graphics and game The object of the game is to to about it). those nasty dragonflies as they features. dig in the mine and collect the O'Riley's Mine is available zoom overhead. If you've got this You control a space shipburied treasures. When you've from Centresoft and runs on a far but all your tadpole eggs have which looks a bit like a bunch of far but all your tadnole eons have which leave a found all of them, you move to Commodore 64. It costs .95 been destroyed, the program cheeseburgers stuck together the next level, of which there are calls up a computer mating not one of the best features of Getting started nine. I found the game rather agency and provides you with this game! The alien saucers are Graphics easy at first and, once I'd worked some more spawn and another great though. They come flashing 1. Value out the tactics, there was little chance to start a colony of out of the furthest reaches of Playability difficulty in getting to level four. froglets. your screen and zoom over your As well as collecting the Savage Pond is an original and cheeseburger sorry fast-moving game with colourful spacecraft! — dropping bombs and uranium, you are also purand intricate graphics. At first it's before they zap off into the stars sued by some river monsters. URU LU a bit difficult to master the swimagain. Your job is simply to shoot What they're doing in a mine TADDOLCI ming motion of the tadpole, but them down and avoid the bombs. shaft is anybody's business, but TAURULE: with a bit of practice you'll soon Each wave will retreat once they must be avoided on pain of be a nippy little amphibian! you've blasted 20 of their number being frazzled. Then there's the SAVAGE POND You'll also need to take some and another wave attacks in water, in which you will drown A tadpole's life is not an easy time reading the instruction greater numbers, with those misinstantly if it touches you. one. It's not all just swimming booklet which comes with the sile launchers in action on the My main criticism is that the about in an idyllic pool waiting to game a very comprehensive planet's surface. The more mine isn't very wide in fact, become a frog you know. The publication this. Other software saucers you let past, the more the true width is only about two poor little tadpole has to face companies take note! frequent the missile attacks from screens. This makes the game many hazards before he grows I really enjoyed playing Savthe ground. Those saucers land rather monotonous, and I don't up and starts his own little brood od age Pond it brought back and help the missile crews out think that I'd play this very often of froglets. memories of when tried to you see! You get a bonus score if I'd paid out real money for it. Your task is to breed as many breed tadpoles in a jam jar. This after each wave is destroyed. Reward comes not in points, frogs as you can in this pond way it doesn't take quite as long Overall it's a pretty good game but in money. Well, you don't without being killed off by the and you don't get baby frogs all for the underprivileged Oric and actually get the cash, it's just natural and unnatura over your living room. would make a good addition to that the score line has a dollar hazards in the pond. Savage Pond for the Comthe Oric owners game library. sign in front of it. Things don't look too bad in in modore 64 is available now from Probe 3 comes from IJK SoftDiamonds are the most valuthe first stage of the game. You Starcade of Merseyside and will ware of Blackpool and costs able and will net you $9,000 for help your little tadpole fill up with se .50 each one collected (unfotunately amoeba and worms avoiding Getting started Getting started the game's American, so all the the nasty stinging water plants at Graphics Graphics cores are in dollars). the bottom of the pond which will  Value Value Your only defence against the kill a careless tadpole. Playability Playability assailants is a limited supply of Dragonflies zip over the pond COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 31 buried oil, gold, diamonds, coal SAVE THE "


"Screenplay  COMPETITION SCREENPLAY offers anyone who buys the ANIMATOR for the DRAGON 32164 or the BBC Micro, the chance to recover the cost and a whole lot more. All you have to do is to write an original program using the SPRITES from the ANIMATOR. Programs may be written in basic or machine code. The winning program will be published by SCREENPLAY and the author will receive  cash plus royalty payments, subject to SCREENPLAY standard terms and conditions, a copy of which can be obtained by request. Even if you don't win the  cash prize, if your program is of high enough standard, you could be making MONEY before the closing date of the 1st September 1984, by having your program published by SCREENPLAY. Rules of the competition and entry forms are included in the package. All entries will be acknowledged. THE ANIMATOR is a sprite GENERATION package for the BBC MICRO and THE DRAGON 32164. The sprites produced have collision checking facilities built in and can be moved around the screen from your own basic or machine code programs. The programs are supplied in a box with a comprehensive manual and demo programs. Details of each product are given below. SPRITE FEATURES INCLUDE: BBC MICRO: Maximum size sprite 30 x 30 pixels: 16 colours in each sprite: 64 sprites at 8 x 8 pixels or 9 sprites at 30 x 30 pixels: Each sprite generates 2 other related clones. ONLY .95 DRAGON 32164: Sprite size up to 40 x 40 pixels: all available colours: all 5 HI-RES modes: 25 sprites at any one time: 40 page manual and demo game included. ONLY .95 DEALERS CONTACT 041-248 2481 for details of our range of software and dealer terms. Cut out this coupon and send it now to: SCREENPLAY, 134 St. Vincent Street, Glasgow. Please rush me THE ANIMATOR for the: DRAGON 32164[ ] .95 BBC MICRO [ ] .95 Tick as appropriate My name is .......... Address PROGRAMMERS: Excellent royalties paid for top quality original programs. Send off now to, the PROGRAMMING DEPARTMENT at SCREENPLAY. All cheques payable to SCREENPLAY. 32 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"One of America's most popular games THE ULTIMATE IN BATTLE ACTION... TM BEACH-HEAD\" C commodore A Incredible 3-D Graphics Unbelievable Sound Effects Unique Games Concept Multiple Screens High Resolution Scenario 100% Machine Language Voted by U.S. Billboard magazine as the best game for sound and graphics on the Commodore 64 It's a unique arcade experience in sound and vision and a stunning display of Commodore 64 capabilities Another quality product from ACCESS Software. Available on CASSETTE THE ULTIMATE IN AMERICAN SOFTWARE FOR YOU ON U.S. GOLD U.S. Gold is stocked by all leading computer stores including: BOOLA WHSMITH silable on .95 .95 ************ U.S.GOLD vers All American Software DEALERS! For information on how to become a U.S. Gold Stockist write to: Centresoft Ltd., Unit 24, Tipton Trading Estate, Bloomfield Road, Tipton, West Midlands DY4 9AH. Telephone: 021-520 7591. Overseas enquiries welcome. "


"NEWS OF THE NEWCOMERS PINBAL The roving reporters were at it again. Trudging tirelessly round London in their never-ending search for newer, better and more exciting games to entice the trigger-happy into the arcades. We hit gold when we went to the ATEl exhibition a few weeks ago where all the latest games were housed under one roof! at 185 mph. Needless to say, my driving expertise wasn't up to getting round the circuit in one piece! For those of you who are experts, TX-1 offers a far greater challenge than any of the other racing games currently on the market. You've got the choice of eight international circuits and, Pinball machines with odd feato get onto these, you have to tures on the backflash appear take either the left or right hand from time to time. In the past, the bends at junctions throughout player could have been con FIRE FOX the game. fronted with racehorses flashing Ultimately, you could find along the backflash while the Stealing the show on the Atari yourself whizzing round circuits score mounted, or simple spinstand was Firefox which is still in Japan, Paris, South Africa, ning target shapes whizzing receiving a lot of publicity. Based USA, Spain, Monaco, Belgium around to add an extra fascinaon the film of the same name, it's and Italy through magnificent tion to the game. a realistic, adrenalin-pumping scenery where your whole existZaccaria have come up with a aerial shoot-'em-up/down using ence depends on your skill in new pin called Devil Riders actual clips from the film. taking corners, avoiding oil which has a little stunt motorcycAtari brought over from the patches and safely negotiating list zapping around in a wall-ofStates a huge simulation model other cars. death-style loop within the backof the Firefox's cockpit with the flash. Devil Riders is, thankfully, video display on a screen situa far cry from that other awful ated some eight feet from the SPACE ACE Zaccaria game, Farfalla the cockpit's nose. With stereo one with that garish flower-powsound of explosions and enemy Space Ace, hot on the heels of er design. fighters screaming across your SPY HUNTER Dragon's Lair, also attracted a lot It has a two-level playfield and flight path, it gave a completely of attention. The successful Don several interesting features. On new dimension to playing video TX-1 Bluth partnership with Magicom, the top level, you have to keep games. Unfortunately, this model formerly Cinematronics, has the ball smashing into those fixed won't be available in the arcades \"Ello John Got a new come up trumps again in a game targets to get the man on the but you will find the next best motor?\" \"Yeah want a test whose animated cartoon bike spinning the more targets thing the new streamlined drive it's the new TX-1 from graphics are on a par with those you hit, the faster the cycle spins cockpit-style cabinet will be lurk Tazmi\" Gulping. I climbed into of its predecessor. Set in space, around in its wall-of-death loop. ing in your arcades in the next the huge cabinet, shifted into low s in the next the huge cabinet shifted into Inw the idea is to rescue Kimberley, Positioned around the loop there month or so. Watch out for it gear and prepared myself for a your ravishing auburn-haired are score-lights, so you can colit's impressive. hair-raising dash round the track partner from the evil clutches lect an extra bonus, as the cycle of the aliens. spins in wheel-of-fortune fashion Space Ace plays in exactly the around the backflash loop. same manner as Dragon's Lair in There are two access ramps that you don't have complete to the upper level, each guarded 11 control over the characters. They by three drop targets. Hit the only need guiding at certain targets and the ramps drop points and your moves have to allowing you to go up on the top be timed very carefully. Too early level and get the cycle spinning. or too late will inevitably end up I enjoyed playing this game. It with you being splattered across needs accuracy and quick reacthe universe, squashed by piletions to get the most out of it, drivers or frizzled by thousands though of volts of electricity! I haven't played the game The Pinball Owners Associathrough to the end yet, but a tip tion have revamped their magato beginners at the start jump zine called Pinball Player a towards the flashes of light, must for all pinball fans. when running from the alien It is now printed on better space ships, push your joystick quality paper and includes feato the left twice, then punch the tures, articles and reviews about energise button and ... the rest your favourite arcade pastime. If is up to you. If you hear a ping, you are interested in contacting you've made the right move and the Association, send an SAE to if your timing's right, you'll surArcadia, 465 Cranbrook Road, ROLLER ACES vive to move onto the next piece Ilford, Essex IG2 6EW. of action 34 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"ACTION 10 YARD FLIGHT tricks and will do everything been murdered in cold blood by a JACKRABBIT possible to stop you winning. gang of thugs. He sets out to 10 Yard Fight from Irem CorHowever, you've got no qualms avenge their deaths -an eye for \"Eee! What's up, doc?\" Yes, poration has just hit the arcades about playing dirty and will do an eye, a tooth for a tooth. you've guessed it, Bugs Bunny (or It's an excellent sports simula unto them what they do to you. There is a brief explanatory rather Jackrabbit) is now immortion of American Football where Obstacles abound and you'll film clip with voice-over at the talised on the video screen. It is you'll have to pit your team have to be nifty on your skates to start of each game describing a light-hearted game from Zacagainst the computer's and fight avoid pits, bollards and to pick up the whole horrific incident. The caria, in which the rabbit has to game begins you're walking hop round the screen collecting down a dusty street past a sacarrots from someone else's carloon bar when one of the thugs rot patch. seemingly appears from noThe screen is laid out in where. You find yourself looking squares, some of which will condown the twin barrels of a shottain a carrot and others a pit gun Booom! — unable to draw designed exclusively to catch fast enough, you're left lying in rabbits on the hop. You ve got to the dirt with half your body blown guide the dastardly carrot-eater away. Further scenes depict an safely round the garden, avoiding axe cleaving your head in two pits and bopping the baddies on and a scorpion which leaps on the nose when they come within and eats away at your face. boxing range. Further screens Like the other cartoon-aniprove more difficult with extra mated games, you can only conpits and split-level scenes. trol the character in Badlands at certain points throughout the game. The only form of control is SPY HUNTER a huge round fire button, closely Spy Hunter is described by resembling a track ball which has to be hit whenever you need Bally/Midway as a \"turboto make a move. Every time you charged espionage thriller'. I te would tend to agree. It's basicalare attacked by the bandits, punch the button and, if your our ly a sophisticated car chase with he you as the good guy escaping timing is right, the baddies will be blown to hell -too bad if you're from a bunch of thugs down a for every yard to get the ball up bags of gold which are lying on long and treacherous road. wrong though as another life is the pitch to score a touchdown. the track. Why bags of gold? You'll have to put your foot lost. As anyone who has ever watchThey earn extra points but don't points but dont Although the graphics in the down if you want to escape uned the game on TV knows, you have a lot of significance to the game are brilliant, it loses a lot in scathed. Get ready, foot on the will probably leave a trail of utter game. that the player has almost less accelerator and into low gear, chaos, tangled limbs and descontrol over the game than is shift into high gear and away you truction as you inch your way up SCRUM & TRI normally found in the majority of go. Hot on your heels are a the pitch! cartoon laser games. The other number of nasties including the It will be interesting to see Scrum & Try from Data East is games usually have a fire button bullet-blasting Road Lord, the names usually have a fire hutton bullet-blasting how this game takes off in the another sports simulation which or the equivalent as well. I also sinister Dr Torpedo and the Mad UK's arcades extremely well will soon be infiltrating the Bomber. Eliminating these nasshould imagine, if the huge arcades. This time rugby ties takes quite a bit of skill and amount of interest generated by should be cheering no longer points awarded are graded, with Channel 4's screening of Amerwill you have to pile out onto a the demise of the Mad Bomber ica's national sport is anything to muddy field in near freezing being awarded highest points. go by temperatures, no more cuts and Needless to say, it's harder to bruises from tackles and scrums get rid of him than any of the ROLLER ACES and definitely no more torn cartilothers. ages. In the warmth and comfort Your turbo-charged car is fitStreets Manufacturing have of a friendly arcade, you can now ted with some of the latest come up with an original in Roller play what must be the only form weapons but you have to earn Aces. No space ships, aliens or of armchair rugger, with nothing these. A weapons van appears at laser guns are involved in this disturbing the tranquility, other certain intervals throughout the game, rather the skill lies in not than the dedicated zapping of game and equips you with new falling off your skates! aliens from other fanactics weapons, ranging from machine Skating round the track at top around you. JACKRABBIT guns, smoke screens, missiles speed dressed in the fully padand oil slicks. ded suit of the pro, your aim is to BADLANDS found Badlands to be very There is a slight hitch in this first qualify for the race and then, macabre and in bad taste. Most game to enable the van to with two other roller aces conBadlands is Konami's latest games treat the death of the re-equip your weapons system, trolled by the computer, get offering to the rapidly swelling main character lightly and leave you've got to drive into it. Reready for the fastest, dirtiest race number of laservideo games the manner of the character's member, you're travelling at of your life. Alas, all is not plain using animated cartoon death to the player's imagination, about 100 mph and bullets are sailing — your opponents are graphics. Set in the wild, wild rather than portraying the grisly flying. Not a game for the faint masters in the trade of dirty West, the good guy's family have details on screen. hearted. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 35 "


"Mr. ADVENTURE SPIDERMANWULKI MEETS MAIN the TM DEO We have not had any new Adventures from Scott Adams since Golden Voyage surfaced a couple of years ago. Had he left us with an insoluble Adventure (Savage Island Part 2), I wondered, and made a quick escape from the Adventure scene, laughing? Well, the news is, Scott is alive and well and living in Florida with his wife, Alexis and their two daughters. By now, he could be a father for the third time. He flew over recently, for his first ever visit to the UK. Feeling rather like a small boy about to be introduced to the REAL Santa Claus, I went along to meet him. We typed OPEN DOOR and there was Scott, the man with one of the most devious minds in the world, instantly recognisable, more from a photo in '80 Microcomputing' some four years ago, than from the recent photograph in January's C&VG The place was festooned with pictures of Hulk and Spider-Man and bedecked with Marvel comics. Why all this Marvel Comic artwork? \"My new series,\" explained Scott. \"I had been looking around for a theme on which to base some new Adventures. I looked at movies and decided that, once off the screen and forgotten, a game based on one would soon lose its appeal.\" Frankly. I was disappointed. This didn't seem as if it would lead to the kind of puzzle and excitement that has become the hallmark of a Scott Adams adventure. OK, so I watched Hulk on the box occasionally, but could never figure out where he got his new shirt and pants. Would it stand up in an Adventure? Scott walked around to a poster of the Hulk as depicted in Adventure MI, as the first of the new series is known. He talked enthusiastically about his new subject. He explained how he had 36 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"PASSERE SEN approached this particular Adventure | For the past few months, the and how he aims, in general terms, to legendary Scott Adams has develop the Marvel series which will be been developing a liking of at least 12 games. Each will be self-contained, yet linkfor comic book ed in a way that will not be obvious to heroes like the the player. What that link is I cannot tell Incredible Hulk you, but it has a purpose. To tell you and Spiderman. might spoil your enjoyment as you play your way through the series as a whole. These characters Suffice to say that I was once again in are featured in awe of Scott's ability to create some what promises to thing exciting, original and downright be a tremendous mean and devious! series of I should have guessed! With Scott Adventures based writing it, of course it would work! An adventure game is incredible by any on Marvel Comics standards and with Incredible Hulk, heroes. More are and an Incredible Mind ..! promised for the One thing I can promise the Marfuture. Elsewhere vel games will be good and they will you'll find an not, as ever, be easy! The series is based on the world of exclusive review Marvel comics. Adventure International of the The Hulk, Scott's first superhero has a 10 year licence with the comic Adventure. Here Keith Campbell, company. Never before has Marvel en C&VG's Adventure Supremo, asks Scott tered into an agreement lasting longer a few probing questions about his life than a couple of years, and in this case, it was Marvel who made the first moves. and the art of writing Adventures. \"Adventure players are going to start reading comics again,\" claimed Scott. write a machine code game without \"It'll be more fun if you read the comics, re-inventing the wheel each time. but it will not be any easier to complete \"The interpreter is the printing press, the games.\" I write the book. It has served me well.\" Is there anything new about the for said Scott. mat of the series. Do they support multi However, whilst writing Mi, Scott word input? \"No,\" said Scott,\" I find that came up against a programming reeven in games with this facility, people quirement with which he began to think very rarely use it. It really is unneces the interpreter couldn't cope. \"I felt it sary. If more than two words are called was becoming too limiting\" he exfor, then if the player has typed TIE plained. \"So I went away and thought ROPE, for example, it is easy enough to about it, and then went right back and ask TO WHAT? just used the interpreter in a different Any randomness in MI? \"Yes, there is way. Everything I needed was there all one very big random element and two along the problem was the way in minor ones. But I'm not going to tell you which I had been looking at it.\" any more than that!\" So popular are the games that Mike The Marvel series appeals to Scott Woodroffe, who represents Adventure because it is an exciting concept, open International over here, has sent two ing up many new possibilities. In addi programmers to Florida for training on tion, the original series will continue, as Scott's interpreter. On their return, a it allows him to do just what he wants start will be made to convert it for yet with his imagination and to explore new more micros, and by mid-summer we ideas that come to himn. And one gets should begin to see Scott's games availthe impression that ideas are not slow in able for an extended range of coming to this man. machines, including the Dragon. Scott has not been idle since we last All of Scott's games are designed to had a new game from him. Much of his fit into 16k of memory on a TRS-80. \"So time has been spent running Adventure as you have a TRS-80, borrow my deInternational in Florida. After a number velopment disk to play Hulk,\" he said, of moves to different premises, AI now offering me his diskette. \"That way, employs about 40 people and occupies you'll get the best game. The TRS-80 has a Geodesic dome with 11,000 square the best version\" I was never more glad feet of floor area for its production that I had stuck to my trusty Tandy! facilities. Scott originally wrote Adventureland So like many of us, Scott writes his in Basic, hoping to sell perhaps fifty games at home, in the evenings. \"It's kind copies to friends and enthusiasts. With of difficult because, with two young hindsight, he now feels that Adventuredaughters, I don't get the chance to land could have been twice as big a make a start until around 7.30 -after game in the same size memory, given their bedtime,\" he added. the experience he gained in developing Although they are now played more the series. often on other micros, Scott still de Scott's evenings have obviously been velops his games on a TRS-80. His busy for, in addition to the first Marvel Adventure Interpreter allows him to Comics adventure, he has extended the original series. Adventure No. 13 is Sorceror of Claymorgue Castle, \"the most difficult\", and No. 14 a sequel to Pirate. \"I was never quite satisfied with Pirate, it wasn't all there. So I set about finishing it off,\" he explained. No mongoose this time, but the hill and the narrow crack are there. There could well be more sequels to come, and the earliest candidate looks like being a follow-up to Strange Odyssey. Scott claims he never achieved what he set out to do in Odyssey. \"OK, it works well, but I just don't like it.\" Some of Scott's games just happen. When he wrote Savage Island Part 1, he hadn't a clue what part two would be about. But when he came to it, everything fell neatly into place and it worked perfectly. Mystery Fun House took him just a week to write, with a little help from his wife Alexis. He confesses that they created the fun house, in which all sorts of exciting things could be done, and they liked it so much that they had to think up a plot to turn it into a game. So they added the parts outside the fun house and gave it an objective. It turned out to be one of his own favourites. For those of you who write asking if Secret Mission is the same as Mission Impossible, the answer is yes. \"We had to rename it because the television people objected,\" said Scott. We moved on to Voodoo Castle which was written almost completely by Alexis. I was intrigued that, of the few girls and ladies writing into Adventure Helpline, this was the game they most frequently mentioned. Also, it was the one my wife had stuck at until she had solved it single-handed. Scott confirmed that he also found that Voodoo, for some reason, seemed to have a particular appeal to women, yet it did not appear on the surface to be a major departure from the rest of the series. Why does Scott think his games are so universally popular? \"I think it is COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 37 "


"MR.ADVENTURE SPIDERMAN-HULK! because they are logical. All the information and clues necessary to solve the problem are there. The problems are all capable of solution and the player knows that. So he refuses to be beaten and will come back again and again to try.\" We turned to the subject of hint sheets. These have now been turned into a hint book and give first a clue, than a bigger clue and finally a solution to each problem covered. Isn't there always a danger that what the author doesn't see as a particularly difficult problem may completely baffle the player? \"Yes, that's true and we are constantly revising the hint sheets in the light of feedback. They are an ongoing thing.\" I had a look at the latest version of the hint book, just on its way to the printers and found it to be very comprehensive. I was interested in Scott's views on graphical Adventures. \"I understood you to prefer the purely text adventure and yet now we have SAGAs,\" I remarked. \"I still do prefer text,\" replied Scott. \"The player is left to exercise his imagination and provide his own images which is much more exciting. But if we can provide graphics, and people want graphics, then we should let them have graphics.\" So saying, he led me over to an Atari, currently at the start of The Count SAGA. \"Try that,\" he suggested, \"and see what you think.\" I panicked like a schoolboy faced with a spot test on a subject he had failed to revise. I sat down at the Atari and found myself in bed. There I was looking at the end of the bed, my feet sticking up through the end of the sheets. I took the sheet, got up, tied the sheet and opened the window. I was now facing an open window. I tied the sheet. \"Type INVENTORY\", suggested Scott. The picture showed me carrying the sheet which was clearly knotted to the bed. I climbed down the sheet, on to the ledge, and got in the window. I could now see the window, open, with the end of the sheet hanging down from above. \"So that's what it really looks like!\" I gasped. I looked around and moved the portrait which left a gaping hole in the wall. I was seeing the scene through my own eyes, as the \"puppet\", rather than through the eyes of a third party depicting the scene with me in it. The pictures are updated with the latest state of play and appeared perhaps more like an interactive illustration than most other graphical adventures I have seen, since they had been added to the text plot, rather than had the plot evolve around them. I was impressed and found my previously formed mental images from the text game aligned closely with the graphic display. But I think I would rather play the graphics game AFTER the text game and that way get a whole new dimension from the game after solving the puzzle. This, of course, can be achieved through the \"graphics off switch. One more note on SAGAS the flicker problem, caused by difference of mains frequence (60 Hz in the U.S.). has now been resolved. Alexis and their two daughters, aged five and two, obviously figure largely in Scott's life. Over dinner, I discovered that Alexis would dearly have loved to accompany Scott on his first visit to the UK but was unable, as she is shortly expecting their third child. \"She was wild about me going without her,\" grinned Scott, \"and so I am not allowed to do anything NEAT whilst I am over here without her.\" Luckily, the venue was Heathrow and Scott was relieved to find it didn't count as London. London is NEAT. And what of Scott himself? A tall, quietly spoken man who is fascinating to talk to. He has a liking for good food and wine. On tasting his Escargots, snails to you! which he ordered for starters, Scott jumped. They were obviously very hot. \"Boy, that really hit the spot!\" I muttered. \"Yes,\" he joked, **They do look like evil smelling mud.\" He particularly enjoys lychees which he is able to pick fresh from the trees in Orlando during one month each year. To say more would be mischievous, for under certain circumstances lychees can be NEAT! I am sure we will see Scott back again soon, together with Alexis and able to do NEAT things over here at last! Over the years, many new Adventure games will come in all shapes and sizes from numerous sources. Some will be played and soon forgotten. Others — fewer — will be more lasting, to be played and enjoyed for years. Scott's will be among those. They will be around for a very long time. 5 may come and go, but Scott's games will stay with us to be converted to computers not yet dreamed of and to be played by future generations. They are timeless and the stuff of which classics are made. Adventures can be played and enjoyed only by the young, says Scott. \"But,\" he adds, they are for the young of all ages. To play and enjoy Adventure, you have to be young in mind.\" 38 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"GOLD COLLECTION GOLD COLLECTION GOLD COLLECTION GOLD COLLECTION The Quill is a major new utility written in machine code which allows even : The Quilli the novice programmer to produce high-speed machine code adventures of superior quality to many available at the moment without any 48K Spectrum knowledge of machine code whatsoever. Using a menu selection system you may create well over 200 locations, describe them and connect routes between them. You may then fill them with objects and problems of your choice. Having tested your adventure you may alter and experiment with any section with the greatest of ease A part formed adventure may be saved to tape for later completion. When you have done so The Quill will allow you to produce a copy of your adventure which will run independently of the main Quill editor, so that .95 you may give copies away to your friends. The Quill is provided with a detailed tutorial manual which covers every aspect of its use in writing adventures. From The Golden Nib Of The Quill Comes a Gourmet Feast for Hungry Adventurers Volume 1 of the GOLD COLLECTION Magic Castle Rescue the Princess from the Magic Castle but beware of Vampires and Booby Traps. Devil's Island Escape from the infamous prison maybe impossible, but what alternative have you? GOLD COLLECTION GOLD COLLECTION GOLD COLLECTION GOLD COLLECTION GOLD COLLECTION GOLD COLLECTION GOLD COLLECTION GOLD COLLECTION GOLD COLLECTION GOLD COLLECTION GOLD COLLECTION GOLD COLLECTION Spyplane Can you survive and complete your mission high in the sky over enemy territory? Mindbender Only you alone can save the world from the terrible power of the Mindbender. Barsak The Dwarf Help Barsak recover the treasures of his ancestors from the underworld of o mythology A Superb collection of adventures for the 48K Spectrum written with the Quill.. From the fertile imaginations of many authors, we have selected this fine volume of adventures for you to collect. Each adventure is complete in itself and is presented in the distictive livery of the series to grace your software shelf as you build up the collection The adventures are priced at only .95 each, Diamond Trail Selected titles available from good computer Africa Gardens Where in this city of death and intrigue shops nationwide including:What is the secret of the deserted is the stolen Sinclive Diamond? W.H. Smiths, Boots, Menzies Hotel and where are all the guests?. Or direct from us by post or telephone Credit Card Order Line 30 Hawthorn Road Personally Manned for 24 hours SAE for full details of our range Barry &: 0222 41361 Ext 430 Soth Glamorgan CF6 8LE Dealer enquiries welcome 8: (0446) 732765 GILSOFT GOLD COLLECTION GOLD COLLECTION GOLD COLLECTION GOLD COLLECTION COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 39 Setia "


"VIDEOL HITCH A RIDE WITH OUR HERO HARRY! CON TITU Down in the jungle something stirs. The mad squawking of exotic birds disturbed splits the air as a fleeting figure dashes through the trees. No it's not Tarzan. Or Jane, for that matter. It's none other than Pitfall Harry on his way to the Lost Caverns to take part in his second adventure. Harry started out in the jungle two years ago when Activision launched the first Pitfall game. Since then our hero has become proficient in leaping over crocodiles, swinging through trees, running away from scorpions and countless other jungle pursuits. Now Harry will need all his skills for his second and much more treacherous adventure. C&VG's Joystick Jury has already pronounced judgement on Pitfall II elsewhere in this issue, but for those of you who can't stomach judicial procedures, let me tell you that the verdict was not far from fantastic. The game introduces lots of new challenges — like the balloons on which Harry has to hitch a ride and the horrible condors and bats. Now you can win a copy of Pitfall II plus an Atari VCS to play it on in our incredible Spot the Animals competition! Our friends at Activision are also throwing in two of their latest cartridges, Space Shuttle a challenging space fight simulation game and Frostbite which casts you as an eskimo racing against freezing conditions to build an igloo. We have six prizes of an Atari VCS up for grabs and three cartridges go with each one. Here's what you have to do. Study our artist's impression of a screen from the first Pitfall game and tell us how many jungle animals are hidden in the picture. Then, in no more than twenty words, tell us what Pitfall Harry, Tarzan and Doctor Livingstone all have in common. Entries can only be accepted on the coupon printed here and the usual C&VG competition rules apply. Send the coupon to Pitfall Competition, Computer and Video Games, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, London, ECIR SEJ. L -PITFALL COMPETITION jungle animals i (1) I think that there are hidden in the picture. | (2) The common link between Pitfall Harry, Tarzan and Doctor Livingstone is (max 20 words). .............. NAME : ADDRESS .. .................. 40 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"CAL HITTING POPEYE HITTING HE BOTTLE! \"I doesn't suggest ya tries it if yer eats ya spinach in a quiche!\" Hello shipmates! This time we take to the high seas with that jolly jack tar, Popeye the Sailor Man, thanks to Andrew May of Dumfrieshire, Scotland, who entered my video contest a couple of months ago We asked you to send in tips on your favourite game and Andrew was one of my winners. I thought his tips were good enough to pass on to you! Popeye can be played on the Atari VCS, ColecoVision Intellivision, and the Philips G7000. I reckon these tips will help you out whatever system you middle of next week while the bottom you can then jump on own. Now, over to Andrew! tune keeps playing! the trampoline and leap up to a \"You control Popeye who has Once all the hearts are out of higher level to catch another to save Olive Oyl from the the way, Popeye moves on to the note for more points. clutches of evil Brutus! In the next screen and here Olive is On this screen, the spinach first screen, Olive is throwing trapped at the top of a building. appears by the bottom right hand love hearts and Popeye must Olive is showering her true love trampoline. catch them before they sink into with musical notes. There are The Sea Hag appears again on the water. Each time Popeye two trampolines among the platthis screen, lobbing more bottles catches a heart, the nasty Sea forms in this screen and these at our hero so he has to punch Hag, another of Popeye's archcan be put to good them or dodge them to stay in the enemies, throws a bottle use if you have to game. at him. catch a note Screen three is the toughest of near the them all. It is set on a boat and AND NOW... Popeye has to catch Olive's kisses. There's a sliding platform on M Y THESIS! the top level of the screen which Phew! That Popeye chappie moves you around a lot faster, really tired me out so much so Beginners may find it but this can prove fatal if that I feel like retiring to my study hard to punch the bottles — Popeye's way you attempt to punch to have a quiet read of the Enof defending himself! Tout bottles at the cyclopaedia Videogameia. same time! But before I go, I'll tell you Andrew has cerabout some of the games to be tainly chosen a good featured in the Professor Video game on which to send column next month. To make it easier on yourself, us tips. Popeye has been one of After hours of play in my when you catch a heart, try to be the biggest favourites in the secret laboratory, I am pleased near the steps or on the ladder C&VG office, especially the Colto announce that I have deso you can dodge the bottles. eco version. Every one of our veloped a thesis entitled \"How to Brutus is also throwing bottles software reviewers has been Score Higher on your Favourite at poor old Popeye, so don't stay avidly studying Andrew's hints. Spectrum Games' on the same level for too long, as Judging by reports coming from I just know you are going to this evil character chucks three the famous C&VG computer, like it so don't forget to order an bottles at a time on occasions! whose tips have come up early copy of C&VG at your Try to keep to the top platform, IT trumps, all our reviewers are newsagents. as the higher Popeye is, the more well on their way to becoming I am also still looking for good points you get when he catches Popeye experts. strategy tips and have ten C&VG a heart. Surprisingly, all Andrew's tips T shirts to give away to the best Brutus can't chase Popeye work just as well on the Intellivi ones I receive every month. onto the top platform but he can sion and the Atari VCS as they do Tips can be for any home comjump up at him. on the Coleco. puter or video games systems If Popeye manages to grab his Thanks Andrew! Next issue or, if you have mastered an spinach, which appears ranwe'll be taking another look at a arcade game, you may like to domly around the screen, the top game and bringing you more send your tips to an ex-pupil of Popeye theme plays and our points winning tips. Excuse me, mine on the Arcade Action page hero can knock Brutus into the I'm off for a bowl of spinach! Miss Clare Edgeley. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 41 "


"Introducing U.S.GOLD U.S. Gold is a new concept in software marketing. We are dedicated to bringing to you the best in American software at a sensible price. You will find U.S. Gold in all leading computer stores, Look for the U.S. Gold emblem it's the mark of quality software. KONAMI'S OPOSETTE TS IGOLD. Al asoft POOYAN Commodore 64 $995  .95 CASSETTE U.S. GOLD FORTE corPUTER Wericans O'RILEY'S MINE Atari/Commodore 64 49.95 $12.95 85 soft Inc. Caverns of Rhalka ZAXXON Atari Systems CASSETTE ONLY AZTEC CHATLINGE SD CASSETTE como COSM M CASSETTE U.S. GOLD AL U.S. GOLD .95 FORBIDDEN FOREST Atari/Commodore 64 Software $0.95 CASSETTE CASSETTE CASSETTE U.S. U.S. EGOLD GOLD .95 w .95 CAVERNS OF KHAFKA 1 .95 SLINKY 1 2.95 Atari/Commodore 64 * *** *** *** ** CASSETTE AZTEC Atari/Commodore 64 Atari/Commodore 64 CHALLENGE $12.95 *** ** ** ** *** THE ULTIMATE IN AMERICAN SOFTWARE FOR YOU ON U.S. GOLD U.S. Gold is stocked by all leading computer stores including: Prolo WHSMITH US.GOLD All American Software DEALERS! For information on how to become a U.S. Gold Stockist write to: Centresoft Ltd., Unit 24, Tipton Trading Estate, Bloomfield Road, Tipton, West Midlands DY4 9AH. Telephone: 021-520 7591. Overseas enquiries welcome. "


"ATARI VCS OWNERS LOOK AT THESE PRICES! WE STOCK A RANGE OF OVER 200 VCS CARTRIDGES AND 90 OF THEM ARE UNDER  SEND FOR FREE CATALOGUE Silica Shop the leading mail order specialists in the Video Game and Home Computer world are pleased to offer you some really amazing bargains. We have a range of over 200 cartridges to fit your Atari VCS, over 90 of these are priced at under , so there's plenty to choose from if you're looking for a bargain. You may well be wondering how we are able to offer so many cartridges at such good prices. Well, Silica Shop have now been specialising in Atan game software for over 5 years and with a turnover of .5m and over 35 staff, we are able to make bulk purchases at lower prices than many of our competitors. We offer a 48 hour delivery service on, all software and Postage and Packing is totally free of charge. Should you wish to obtain further details on our extensive cartridge range, we have a 32 page illustrated catalogue available free of charge. We are currently running a buy one get one free offer on many of the Activision, C.B.S. and Parker cartridges. All offers are subject to availability and full details can be found in our catalogue, so send for your copy now. It is our aim to never be knowingly undersold, we will normally match a competitors price providing they actually have the goods in stock. Silica Shop runs an Independent Atari VCS owners club, with regular mailings to over 35,000 members. These mailings include detailed game reviews on the extensive range of Atari and third party cartridge releases. So complete the coupon below and send us your order, or your request for a FREE copy of our catalogue and we will add your name to our Atari VCS mailing list. E.T. .95 * MISSILE COMMAND .95 RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK .95 And that's not all look at the list below and see our other offers: .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 ET .95 Boxing Freeway b00ml Laser Blast Skiing Stampede Tennis Missile Command Pinball (Video) Soccer Yars Revenge .95 China Syndrome Gangster Alley Master Builder Planet Patrol Raiders Lost Ark Tape Worm Demolition Herby Jungle Hunt Kangaroo Ram It Shark Attack Space Invaders Stargunner Vanguard .95 Fast Food .95 Laser Gates Moonsweeper C.B.S. BUY ANY TITLE GET ONE\" FREE Carnival\" Donkey Kong** Donkey Kong Jnr. Gorf\" Mousetrap Mr Do Smurf\" Solar Fox Time Pilot Venture\" Wizard of Wor\" Zaxxon .95 .95 RECENT RELEASES BUY ONE GET ONE FREE OFFERS DO NOT APPLY TO THIS SECTION Centipede Crystal Castles Dig Dug Frostbite H.E.R.O. Mario Brothers Millipede Moon Patrol Pac-Man Pengo Pitfall li Pole Position Space Shuttle Escape Mindmstr Felix Return Fireball Fire Fighter Forrest Frogger c) Galactic Galaxian Goll Ground Zero Indy 500 Killer Sattelites Labyrinth Malia Magic Puzzle Miniature Golf Missile War Ms Pacman Olympics (Video) Othello Outlaw Overkill Pac Kong Party Mix Phoenix Rabbit Transit Sea Master Skin Diver Sky Diver Sky Scraper Space Eagle Space Raider Space Robot Space War Squirrel & Snail Star Raiders Suicide Mission Super Breakout Superman Survival Island Sword of Saros Time Machine Time Race Tom Boy Trick Shot .95 Combat Math Gran Prix Missile Control 1 Surfers Paradise .95 Atlantis Commando Attack Cosmic Ark Demon Attack Dragonfire Eggomania Fathom Gopher Internal Tower Lost Luggage No Escape Air Sea Battle Barnstorming Brain Games Bridge Challenge Nexar Chopper Commnd Demons to Diam Grand Prix Ice Hockey Maze Craze Night Driver Starmaster Warlords Octopus Picnic Racquetball Riddle of Sphinx Solar Storm .95 Alpha Beam Backgammon Big Birds Egg Ctch Cookie Monster Defender Football (Realspt) Snoopy/Red Baron Sorcerers Appren Tennis (Realspts) Volleyball (R/spt .00 Supercharger .95 Jawbreaker King Kong Marauder Miner 2049er Polaris Sky Jinks Springer Threshold .95 3D Tic Tac Toe Asteroids Astro Attack Basketball Battlezone Berzerk Black Hole Bowling Capture Casino Checkers (Video) Chess (Video) Circus Codebreaker Commun Mutants Dodge'Em Dragonstomper Dream Flight .95 .95 ACTIVISION BUY ONE GET ONE FREE Decathlon Enduro Keystone Kapers Megamania\" Oink Pitfall Plaque Attack River Raid Robot Tank Seaquest Spider Fighter PARKER BUY ANY TITLE GET ONE\"* FREE Action Force Amidar\" Empire Strks Back Frogger Jedi Arena\" Reactor\" Sky Skipper** Spiderman .95 PARKER BUY ONE AND GET ANY\" FREE CARTRIDGE FROM .95 SECTION ON LEFT Death Star Battle Popeye Super Cobra Tutankham O'Bert .95 camere Adventure Breakout Haunted House SILICA SHOP LIMITED, Dept CVG 0584, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Telephone: 01-309 1111 or 01-301 1111 To: SILICA SHOP LTD., Dept CVG 0584, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Tel: 01 309 1111 or 01 301 1111 Please send me the following goods: OTY TITLE LE ORDER FORM: Please send me a copy of your VCS catalogue I already own an Atari VCS console I am considering purchasing an Atari VCS console ADDRESS: Mr/Mrs/Miss Address: D I enclose a Cheque/P.0. payable to Silica Shop Ltd. CREDIT CARD Please debit my Access/Barclaycard/ Visa/American Express/Diners Club Card Card Number: Postcode: "


"VIDEOT THE ADAM? cassette games is unconfirmed. THE VERDICT A disappointing arcade conversion. Action Graphics type of nasty to deal with they Addiction looked remarkably like tortoises Theme to me. Then you get crab-like creatures called Sidesteppers, MARIO ZAPS and flying things called Fighterflies. THOSE PESKY All these creatures come at you as Mario clambers around a PESTS! series of floors, Donkey Kong That little carpenter Mario, the style. He can deal with the pests man who attempted to rescue his by bouncing up and down and SUPER Despite this extra capacity, girlfriend from the clutches of the bashing his head on the floors Buck Rogers does not measure great ape in Donkey Kong, and above him. If a pest is walking GAMES FOR up to some of the conventional then imprisoned the giant gorilla along at the same time, the cartridges available for the in Donkey Kong Junior, is back Shockwaves from Mario's headmachine. again. This time without a monbutt stuns them and Mario can Disappointment that was my I t is fed into the Coleco via the key in sight. nip up to the next level to knock main feeling when the longtape feed and loads extra screens Atari have raided the arcades them off scoring points as he awaited Adam expansion unit of action as the game is being again to bring you the story of does so. finally arrived complete with played — making a distracting the Mario brothers. No, it's not a in times of extreme trouble, Buck Rogers and the Planet rattling sound in the process. video-game version of The GodMario can head-butt the \"POW\" Zoom. The graphics are not a patch father, although you might want switch, located between the two Unfortunately for Buck Rogers on the arcade version none of to call in the Mafia to deal with bottom floors -this stuns all the fans, the same levels of excelthose long sweeping sorties some of the nasties you'll enpests on the screen. But you can lence have not been reached in across the planet's surface. counter in this version of Nintenonly use this switch three times this game. Buck Rogers and the Planet do's arcade game. after that it disappears and The game is the first title to Zoom are the hottest titles in the You have to help Mario and his you are on your own! come up before the Jury which range of co-called Super Games brother Luigi get rid of all the You can help Mario score works in conjunction with the for the Adam which does not pests infesting their new house. more points by collecting the expansion module a collection bode too well for the rest. There are several types of pest various coins and wafers which of boxes which can be conThe Adam expansion unit will and a nasty character called Sliappear rolling down the floors of nected to your Coleco to provide be in the shops around May at pice the Iceman. the Brothers' house. A bonus computer keyboard, tape drive between  and  SO S hellcreepers are the easiest wafer appears after each time a and printer start saving. The price of the pest is dealt with. Coins appear at random and you are given just 15 seconds to collect as many as LASE_855800 COURT 1881 you can before the pests return to haunt you. In later rounds, Slipice the Iceman appears and covers the floors with a dangerous layer of ice. You can stop Slipice by hitting him from below and knocking him off a floor when he starts to melt. Mario Brothers features eight levels of play — for one or two players. In two player games, BUCK ROGERS MARIO BROTHERS FROSTBITE SNOOPY AND THE RED BARON PITFALL II 44 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"ADICA INIC MORE Frostbite Bailey is not the most Playability of Pitfall ll has been with four kennels -armed with original game in the world, but if greatly increased by a unique a deadly machine gun! It takes you are looking for a Froggergame sector marker system eight direct hits to down the type game with some nice twists Every time you reach a certain Baron's plane. The Baron can then this is the game for you. point in the game, a cross shoot back-and Snoopy's kenGame action is fast and fairly appears which Harry has to nel gets riddled with bullet holes! Mario's brother Luigi appears addictive and graphics definitely touch-the VCS will register the Eight hits and he is in the dogand can be controlled by the fall into the 'cute' category. contact by emitting a bleep house too! second gamester. Frostbite will be available soon then, if you get killed later in the The Red Baron drops stolen It's not the most original game from Activision and will cost game, begin again at the last food from his plane as Snoopy around but it is very playable and .95 cross and not at the very beginharries him. To catch the supquite addictive. The graphics are ning. This takes the tedium out of plies, you must dive after them in the cute class a trend THE VERDICT having to play your way through and touch them with the kennel. which appears to be growing in Not terrifically original but that part of the game which you The Baron also drops a skull the world of dedicated video well executed and fun for all have already mastered to get to and crossbones don't catch game systems the family the bit which is still eluding you this otherwise Snoopy loses all Mario Brothers comes from Action The game is played to the the goodies he's managed to colAtari and runs on their trusty VCS Graphics accompaniment of a sophistilect. Also, if Snoopy is defeated system. It will set you back Addiction cated musical sound trap made by the Baron, all accumulated .99  Theme possible by a specially de food will be lost and the Peanuts THE VERDICT veloped sound chip exclusive to gang will go hungry. A cute game for running, this game. When you start the game, jumping and hopping fans The good news for Spectrum Snoopy has to shoot down the HEROICS with some nice twists but and Commodore 64 owners is Baron four times before moving not very original. that Activision are developing on to the next stage when the FROM HARRY Pitfall I and Il for these compudastardly air ace gets even trickAction Graphics In another first for Joystick Jury, ters to be launched later this ier to catch.  Addiction year. After the end of each stage we are able to bring you the first  Theme UK review of Pitfall II. or when the game ends you THE VERDICT see a scoreboard with the numRegular readers of VideogamI can't recommend this game FROSTBITE ber of planes shot down and the ing will need no introduction to highly enough. If you already that intrepid jungle adventurer, amount of food recaptured. A own Pitfall I rush out and Pitfall Harry really nice feature this. buy this sequel if you You get bonus points for each Quite simply, Pitfall is the best don't, rush out and buy them bit of food captured and earn N IN I E graphic adventure ever written both. There's no time to get cold feet for the VCS and now ace desiga Gold Baron after fifty red ones Action when you take on the frozen ner David Crane has prohave been shot down! Graphics wastes in the guise of Frostbite grammed the sequel. I really enjoyed playing this Addiction Bailey, Activision's latest hero The game kicks off in true game. It's fast, the graphics are Theme for the Atari VCS. Pitfall fashion with Harry dashing cute and it's very addictive. Frostbite is trapped on the through the thick jungle foliage. Snoopy looks just right sitting on polar ice-cap and the temperaA little further on, the horizon SNOOPY VS his flying kennel, complete with ture is rapidly falling. The only tal aspect of the game, which so goggles and scarf. way to survive is to build an igloo characterised Pitfall l, rapidly THE RED Snoopy fans will be pleased to quickly and rush inside. To do changes as our hero finds himknow that, when his kennel has this, he has to jump on ice floes self in the midst of a multi-level DARONE BARON! been riddled with bullets, he which are floating past in a subclimbing game. Here's the famous air ace predoesn't crash to the ground in zero sea! Each ice floe he jumps Harry and his travelling comparing for another dangerous flames. He simply floats gently on earns Frostbite a cube for his panions, Rhonda, his niece, and m are earthwards sustaining no terigloo but he must complete it Quickclaw, the cowardly cat. complete it Quickclaw, the cowardly cat. Red Baron! This time I'll get you minal damage! in time as he turns into a human have to encounter many nasties for sure! Stealing my dog-dish As with all Atari VCS games, / there are several game options perature drops as they explore the numerous was the last straw! below zero. levels and platforms. But if nas That famous beagle Snoopy, ranging from children's to expert. There are hazards, of course ties and a climbing scenario from the equally famous cartoon Snoopy and the Red Baron is like snow geese, clams and makes you think of rolling barrels strip Peanuts, takes to the air in a available from Atari for the Atari crabs who attempt to knock him and Italian carpenters, then video dramatisation of his battles VCS and is a bargain at .95 off the ice floes. And Frostbite is forget it when I say nasty, with the evil Red Baron. Could this be the first in a range not even safe on land. After a mean nasty. The worst of these This is a dogfight in the true of Atari-Peanuts video games? couple of opening screens, a villains is the condor who flies sense of the word! Snoopy flies Just wait and see! polar bear appears on the shore across several screens and his kennel in search of the Baron THE VERDICT to chase poor old Frostbite swoops down and kills our hero — who has stolen the Peanuts A great \"cute\" action game around simply by clipping him with its gang's food supplies. Hambur for all of you who like dogFrostbite can earn extra points wings. Also deadly are the poisgers, ice cream cones, popcorn fight games -and Snoopy by catching the fish which swim onous frogs that leap to and fro and other tasty treats have disfans of course! past, as he attempts to build the across the ladders. appeared into the Baron's crimAction igloo. He has to work day and The object of the game is to son triplane. Snoopy has to shoot Graphics night to keep out of the cold and collect as much treasure as you down the Baron and recapture Addiction must build four igloos in each can as you try to find your way to the goodies. Theme time period. the end of the Lost Caverns. Snoopy begins his mission COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 45 SKATING ON THIN ICE! "


"Spectrum Sensational The superb SAH ORIS OFFERS ATMOS from Spectrum *** JUUDU Normally Sale Save 10 Viscount S.Sided S.Density Disks in case .25 .50 .75 10 Viscount S.Sided D.Density Disks in case .25 .50 .75 10 Memorex S. Sided S.Density Disks .95 .95 .00 2 Pack Memorex S. Sided D.Density Disks .95 .95 .00 10 Memorex S.Sided S.Density Disks .95 .50 .45 2 Pack Memorex D. Sided D.Density Disks .95 .95 .00 10 Memorex D. Sided D.Density Disks .95 .50 .45 Empty Plastic Disk Cases takes 10 Disks .95 .50 45 Leda Disk Care Kits .95 .95 .00 C12 Data Cassettes (Single) 50 10 C12 Data Cassettes in carrying Case .95 .45 50 C15 Computape (Single) .75 20 C15 Data Cassettes (Single) 45 13 C15 Data Cassettes (5 wrapped) .95 1.75 20 Leda Cassette Care Kits .95 .95 .00 Viscount Cassette Recorder .95 .95 .00 2000 Sheets of 11\"x 9\" Listing paper .05 .50 .55 The Plug Power Filter .95 .95 .00 Decca 12\" Black & White T.V. (few only left) .50 .95 .55 Pheonix Amber Monitors (few only left) .50 .95 .55 HURRY! Limited stocks only first come first served. Must end May 5th. 95 58 Lots of exciting programs sculptured keys available Seperate keys for cursor Built-in centronics printer control interface (no RS232 needed just Built-in speaker plug in your printer) Special sound effects for Full-featured keyboard with game programmers The ATMOS has taken a remarkable step forward in home computer technology. But how? Most Micros 'waste' a large amount of memory on operating functions like graphics, colour and sound. Oric saw that by running these tasks from a ROM memory, a huge amount of the ATMOS's valuable 48K RAM capacity could be freed for more advanced operations. So the colour capability (8 graphics, 8 background), powerful sound synthesis and highresolution graphics of the ATMOS are achieved with fewer demands on computing power than its competitors. So what else makes the ATMOS so exciting? There's now a typewriter-style full response keyboard; it's directly compatible with most domestic cassette players, and there's a wide choice of software. The ATMOS is designed for convienience, too it uses extended Microsoft BASIC: your printer plugs in without an RS232, and it comes complete with leads and everything you need to get going. We've a 4-colour Oric printer (which accepts normal paper) at a terrific value-for-money price. Soon, a 3\" Microdisc Drive will be available, too, to complete the system. Take a look at the superb new ORIC ATMOS, in its highly distinctive black-and-red trim, at your Spectrum dealer NOWI Fantastic Value from Spectrum! SUPER SAVER CASSETTE RECORDER For COMMODORE 64 & VIC-20 ...... ONLY .95 LATEST NEWS UP TO ,000 Instant Credit With your Spectrum Chargecard SPECTRUM PRICE  For up-to-date news, information & offers from SPECTRUM see PRESTEL pare 600181 for full details COMPUTER DEALERS spectrum CHARGE CARD '169% (or prospective Computer dealers!) if you would like to know more about becoming a SPECTRUM APPOINTED DEALER on an exclusive area basis. please write to MIKE STERN or DUDLEY LANGMEAD Spectrum (UK) Ltd, Burrowfield, Welwyn Garden City. Herts. or Telephone (07073) 34761  There's up to ,000 worth of Instant Credit available on a Spectrum Chargecard. See your local SPECTRUM dealer for written details (UK mainland only) Typical APR-29.8% Spectrum Computer Centres have no connection whatsoever with the ZX Spectrum Computer manufactured by Sinclair Research Ltd. "


"Just Arriving! It's the new, superb COMMODORE SX64 PORTABLE BIG NEWS from Spectrumstocks are just arriving of the incredible new Commodore SX 64 Portable Colour Computer a dream come true for the travelling executive! This superb, compact Micro incorporates all of the top-selling Commodore 64's functions, and features a detachable, full function keyboard plus built-in colour monitor AND single disk drive. We're very excited you can see it at your local Spectrum dealer now! commodore SPECTRUM PRICE FREE! FREE! FREE!  FREE with each SX64 Portable three superb programs Easy Script, Future Finance and Easy Stock. 195 Now from Spectrum -a complete business computer system for under  COMMODORE VIC-20 OF GRAM SOFTWARE Super Value! STARTER PACK A complete Home Computer system including the VIC20 Computer, a Cassette Unit, int. roduction to BASIC part 1 a simple explanation of computer programs Blitz, Type-ATune, Race & Hoppit. A fantastic deall! and great value-for-money But HURRY! offer only while stocks last. SPECTRUM PRICE ANAGRAM SOFTWARE ORALS 4 St Also available TU .98 metas VIC-20 .95 Commodore VIC-20, SOFTWARE PACKS at HALF PRICE  Multipack 1: Omega race. Voodoo castle, Cosmic crunch Avenger  Multipack 2: Gort, Adventureland, Raid on Fort Knox, Mole Attack Multipack 3: Sargon Chess, The Count, Mission Impossible, Cosmic Cruncher. . Multipack 4: Sargon Chess, Pirate Cove, Rat Race, Super Lander . Multipack 5: Omega Race, The Count. Menagerie, Mole Attack Each WHILE Pack STOCKS Only LAST SPECIAL OFFER! on Commodore 64 ROM GAMES SAVE .99 when you buy any of the following Multipacks: MULTIPACK 1: Music Composer, Lazarian & Clowns MULTIPACK 2: Visible Solar System, Jupiter Lander & Le Mans MULTIPACK 3: Visible Solar System, Lazarian & Sea Wolf MULTIPACK 4: Jupiter Lander, Clowns & Lazarian MULTIPACK 5: Jupiter Lander, Omega Race & Clowns Spectrum Price COMMODORE 64 Including: 4 FREE ROM GAMES WORTH .96 BUSINESS PACKAGE Commodore 1520 PRINTER PLOTTER COMMODORE 1526 PRINTER Extremely simple to use.no computer experience required Complete & ready to run with Sales/Invoicing & purchase ledger programs. Complete end-ofmonth reports at the touch of a but ton.including Creditors/Debtors lists Sales & cash lists, statements, VAT balances etc. ACCESSORIES FOR COMMODORE Includes COMMODORE 64 IDISK DRIVE COLOUR MONITOR COMMODORE PRINTER PURCHASE LEDGER PROGRAM SALES LEDGER PROGRAM EASY SCRIPT PROGRAM Plus! FREE! GAMES DISK WITH SIX GAMES FROM ONLY Alphacom 42 Printer with Vic 20 Interface.... .90 Stack Light Pen.... .75 Plus 80 16K RAM.... .99 Viscount 64K RAM. .95 4 Slot Motherboard .95 Adman Chatterbox. .95 Stonechip 16K switchable The 1520 printer plotter draws in 4 colours, and prints characters and numbers Superb Dot Matrix (near letter quality printer) WITH MPS801 Printer .99 .00 RAM... Turn the page for more super offers from Spectrum ... Not all stores carry every advertised item, please phone before making a journey prices correct at time of going to press EXOE "


"Spectrum The Top 50 Superb value-for-money! MEMOTECH MTX SERIES SOFTWARE TITLES DLF Selected by Britain's leading Software Distributor MICRO DEALER UK Spectrum for the Gas RAN Sinclair BIENJAC MEMOTECH MTX 512 64K RAM 16 User definable Function Keys  12 Key Numeric Pad  Z80A at 4MHz 24K ROM containing MTX BASIC MTX NODDY FRONT PANEL DISPAY ASSEMBLER/ DISASSEMBLER Video Display Processor with 16K video-RAM  64K User RAM Twin RS232 Communica tions Board ROM Expansions Node Systems  MTX PASCAL  MTX FORTH Eight User Definable Virtual Screens  Up to 32 SPRITES SPECTRUM PRICE SUPPLIER Software Projects Digital Ocean Richard Wilcox Quicksilva Quicksilva Ocean Llamasoft Ultimate Ano Alligata Microsphere Port. FDX DISK DRIVE Up to eight Floppy Drives  Colour 80 Column Board (optional) Fast Access Silicon Discs . Powerful Floppy Disc Controller Board CP/M 22 Supplied . Teletext Compatible SPECTRUM PRICE .00 Memotech 32K RAM Expansion....... 550 Memotech 64K RAM Expansion..... .00 Memotech 128K RAM Expansion 160 00 Memotech RS232 Communication .00 SEPERATE EXPANSION ITEMS Silicon Disc (256K)...... .00 80 Column Colour Board... . 100.00 Floppy Disc Controller Board 230.00 7 Way Bus & Support Software for so.... 65000 MEMOTECH SOFTWARE Backgammon (Cassette) Chess (Cassette)...... Blobbo (Cassette). Kilopede (Cassette) Super Minefield (Cassette) MACHINE Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum  64 Also available MTX 500 32K RAM . . . . . . . . .  PROGRAM Jet Set Willy Fighter Pilot Hunchback 64 Blue Thunder 3-D Ant Attack Fred Chinese Juggler Revenge of Mutant Camels Atic Atac Space Pilot Barrer Wheele Hunchback Alchemist Eskimo Eddie Manic Miner Jet Pac Ouest of Merravid Pinball Wizard Scooba Dive 64 Pogo Chequered Flag Android TWO Horace and the Spiders Birds and the Bees Hover Bovver Fortress Stonkers Zylogon Metagalactic Llamas Plumb Crazy Mr Wimpey 64 DRAGON SHARP Imagine Ocean Software Projects Ultimate Durrell/Martech C.P. Software Durrell/Martek Ocean Psion/Melbourne House Vortex Psion/Melbourne House Bug-Byte Llamasoft Amcom Imagine Big G Software Llamasoft Terminal Ocean Quicksilva Protek Imagine Red Shift CBM 64  64 Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum CBM 64 Spectrum CBM 64 Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum CBM 64 BBC Spectrum CBM 64 VIC 20 CBM 64 CBM 64 CBM 64 Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum CBM 64 Spectrum CBM 64 Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum CBM 64 Spectrum Spectrum BBC BBC CBM 64 PRICE .95 .95 .90 .95 26.95 .95 .90 .50 E9.50 .95 .95 .95 25.90 5.50 .90 .95 .50 .95 25.95 26.95 ES.90 .95 .95 .95 .95 E7.50 .95 .50 26.95 16.00 .95 .90 .95 .95 .50 .95 .95 .95 25.00 15.95 DRAGON 32 Games Machine Hunter Killer Pedro Rebel Star Raiders Colossus Chess Skull Hellgate 64 Tribble Trubble Pool Trashman Lazerzone 64 Scuba Dive Code Name Mat Penguin Amaze-in-Space Dinky Doo Software Projects CDS New Generation Llamasoft Durrell Martech Micromega H Soft Opus Software Projects Check with your local SPECTRUM dealer for our LOW price SHARP MZ-711 (MZ-700 Series Computer) The super new colour computer from SHARP Now available in limited quantities SPECTRUM PRICE .95 with FREE Cassette Recorder and 10 FREE Games Total Value of Package over .00 SHARP PRINTER.......... ... .95 CASSETTE RECORDER.........95 .95 .50 LS.95 26.95 47.95 .95 .95 DRAGON 64 .00 Not all stores carry every advertised Item, please phone before making a journey. prices correct at time of going to press EXOE "


"Sensational PRINTER OFFERS from Spectrum ATARI 800XL Incredible Value! from Spectrum SPECTRUM PRICE  Powerful 64K RAM  Full-stroke keyboard. Full sound with 32 octave range. 11 Graphic Display modes. Full colour (256 Colours 128 colours can be displayed at one time) Ask to see this super new micro at your local SPECTRUM dealer NOW! ATARI 600XL......... TRACK BALL 1010 CASSETTE RECORDER........... 449.99 SOFTWARE 1050 DISK DRIVE .99 DIG DUG 1027 LETTER QUALITY PRINTER ..... .99 LONE RAIDER 1020 PRINTER PLOTTER .............99 And many more 36249 . . . . .99 ........ 39.99 .99 .99 MONITORS CUMANA CUMANA DISK DRIVES Commodore Model 1701 A superb Colour Monitor with sound NEW! SEIKOSHA Model GPIOOA Mkil ... .35 SPECTRUM LOW PRICE 95 SPECTRUM 22.30 PRICE PHOENIX Amber............50 FIDELITY CMI4 Colour ... .95 SANYO 14\" Colour TV (ideal as a monitor) . ....95 SANYO CDD 3125NB Colour Monitor .35 SANYO 12\" Green Monitor....299.95 Printing speed 50 C.P.S. Full Graphics capability Double width character output under software control Centronics type parallel interface Paper width is adjustable up to 10 inches FOR BBC CS100E... CS100.. .95 CS200E.. .15 CS200 .75 FOR DRAGON CDS250.. .95 CD5500 .80 CDS1000.. .95 CDD500 . ..........60 * Other Printer Bargains ALPHACOM 888 8 888 BBC Model B SPECTRUM PRICE 399 SEIKOSHA GPIOO VC .95 SEIKOSHA GPIOO AS..... .95 SEIKOSHA GP250 X .95 EPSON FX 80 .95 EPSON RX 80 ... .95 EPSON RX 80 F/T.. .85 ALPHACOM 42 for VIC-20, Commodore 64. Dragon, Atari, BBC with required interface.. .90 ALPHACOM 3C for ZX Spectrum. .95 Bit Print 24 for the BBC.............95 ALPHACOM 42 For DRAGON, BBC, COMMODORE, ATARI (Interfaces extra) . ..Spectrum price .95 ALPHACOM 32 For ZX SPECTRUM Spectrum Price .95 Paper Rolls for Alphacom printers Box of 5 Rolls .........................26.00 BIT PRINTER Sensational Offer OPUS DISK DRIVE for BBC Model 'B' An inexpensive quality printer for the BBC 'B' Just look at our fantastic low price on this super Dot Matrix printer! The ideal machine for the home user, the Bit Printer combines practicality with low cost now you can list programs for deburging without spending a three-figure sum The Bit Printer interfaces directly with the BBC 'B'. See it at your local Spectrum dealer STACK LIGHT RIFLE For Commodore 64, VIC-20 & ZX Spectrum A ble for the SPECTRUM VIC 20. and the COMMODORE 64 Are Now comes complete with 12 feet of cable and the exciting action software games including HICH NCON SHOOTOUT with full sound effects Spectrum Including 3 '.95 FREE Games Price SPECTRUM PRICE SPECTRUM LOW PRICE  for BBC Owners Including: MANUAL & UTILITIES DISC. ONLY .95 ACCESSORIES for BBC spectrum CHARGE CARD UP TO ,000 Instant Credit  There's up to ,000 worth of Instant Credit available on a Spectrum Chargecard. See your local SPECTRUM dealer for written details (UK mainland only) Typical APR-29.8% BBC Dual Disk Drive... .00 BBC BUGGY  189.00 RC DIGITAL TRACER for the BBC. .50 GRAF PAD Graphics Tablet ..... .75 .75 PROLINK Joystick Interface............95 BIT-PRINT ZX Printer ...............95 BBC Single Disc Drive.... .00 BBC Disk Interface Kit Cinc fitting). ,00 Acorn Software Cassette-Based from  9.95 Acorn Disk-Based software....... BBC Disk-Based Software from BBC Disk-Based software from... .95 BBC BUGGY Spectrum Price ....... 189.00 BBC Disk Manual & Utilities Disc ....50 QUICK-SHOT JOYSTICK Especially for the BBC Spectrum Price.................95 Turn the page for more super offers from Spectrum ... Spectrum Computer Centres have no connection whatsoever with the ZX-Spectrum Computer manufactured by Sinclair Research Ltd. "


"spectrum Everything you've ever wanted for your ZX SPECTRUM Superb ZX add-on's from your local Spectrum dealer ZX SPECTRUM DK'Tronics KEYBOARD 16K .95 For ZX SPECTRUM ZX SPECTRUM SPECTRUM PRICE 48K .95 1L Spectrum Computer Centres have no connection whatsoever with the 2x Spectrum Computer manufactured by Sinclair Research Ltd. VISCOUNT DISK DRIVE New & exclusive to Spectrum! INDESCOMP Superb quality add-on's for the ZX SPECTRUM SOUND 32K RAM JOYSTICK DOMESTIC AMPLIFIER PACK Interface Now from SPECTRUM a Disk Drive for the ZX SPECTRUM The VISCOUNT 5/4\" DISK DRIVE with interface system and complete with all leads. ONLY CONTROLLER  PRISM VTX 5000 MODEM .95 .95 .95 .95 ALPHACOM Thermal printer for ZX SPECTRUM NOW DOWN TO ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .95 DIGITAL TRACER PENVEX SOOO  32K RAM Pack .95 KEMPSTON Joystick Els Interface Coysticks opt extra) CURRAH Speech Synthesiser. .95 DKTRONICS Lightpen.........95 DKTRONICS DUALPORT Joystick Interface.....................95 STACKLIGHT Rifle with 3 FREE GAMES............. .95 Sinclair ZX INTERFACE 2 The new ROM Cartridge/Joystick interface Loads programs instantly! Takes two joysticks! Just plug in and play ONLY .95 Plus New ROM cartridge software. From RD Labs for the ZX Spectrum .50 NOW, YOUR ZX SPECTRUM IS YOUR KEY TO THE WORLD with the incredible PRISM VTX 5000 MODEM Versatile modem for ZX Spectrum (16K or 48K) versions Slim design fits easily, matches your micro Instant access to Prestel & Micronet 800 information services Instant communication with other ZX Spectrum users Use the Prism VTX 5000 with a Sinclair printer. and print Prestel frames SPECTRUM PRICE .95 BOOKS SPECIAL OFFER GRANADA PERSONAL COMPUTING SAVE  STONECHIP ACCESSORIES For the ZX SPECTRUM ECHO AMPLIFIER .95 PROGRAMMABLE JOYSTICK INTERFACE .95 Coming soon.... SPECTRUM KEYBOARD WITH SOUND NO NEED TO TAKE YOUR SPECTRUM APART Introducing the BBC Micro SUNSHINE The Working Spectrum Functional Forth for the BBC The Working Dragon 32 Dragon 32 Games Master The Working Commodore 64 Commodore 64 Machine Code II The ZX Spectrum and how to get the most from ... 5.95 The Spectrum Programmer ..... 5.95 The Spectrum Book of Games. <5.95 Introducing Spectrum Machine Code ....95 The Apple il Programmer's Handbook ...CI0.95 Programming with Graphics .95 The Dragon how to make the most of it. 65.95 Computing for the Hobbyist & small Business Simple Interfacing Projects The BBC Micro An expert uide... .95 Commodore 64 Computing The Oric 1 and how to get the most from The Working Dragon The Working Spectrum The Working CBM 64... Dragon 32 Games Master JOHN WILEY Atal Basic Using BBC Basic Winning games on the Commodore 6429. Hot programs to feed your Dracon..... 6.DS ZX Spectrum explored... Mastering th ZX Spectrum ............ 25.05 Mastering the Vic 20..... Small business computers for the first time users. If you bought your ZX Spectrum from a Spectrum dealer listed opposite .. bring in your sales receipt and we will sell you a PRISM VTX5000 Modem for only .95 But HURRY! Offer must end Sth May '84 or while stocks last. .95 The Dragon 12 book of games... .25.95 Computer Languages and their uses......95 Lynn Computing .95 21 Games for the BBC Micro...... .95 Choosing a Microcomputer...........44.95 Databases for fun & profit.......... 15.95 Spectrum Computer Centres have no connection whatsoever with the ZX-Spectrum Computer manufactured by Sinclair Research Ltd. "


"There's a Spectrum Centre near you.. AVON DORSET LANCASHIRE MIDDLESEX BATH Software Plus, 12 York St Tel: 0225) 61676 WESTON-S-MARE K & K Computers 32 Alfred St Tel. (0934)419324 BOURNEMOUTH Lansdowne Computer Ctr 1 Lansdowne Crescent Tel (0202) 20165 IPSWICH Brainwave, 24 Crown St. Tel: (0473) 50965 LOWESTOFT John Wells, 44 London Rd North Tel: (0502 3742 BEDFORDSHIRE DURHAM DARLINGTON McKenna & Brown 102 Bondgate Tel: (0325) 459744 ACCRINGTON PV Computers 38A Water St. Tel: (0254) 36521/32611 BLACKBURN Tempo Computers, 9 Railway Rd. Tel (0254) 691333 BURNLEY IMO Computer Centre. 39/43 Standish St 8811 1AP Tel: (0282) 54299 BURY (Lancs) Micro North 7 Broad St. Tel: (061) 797 5264 PRESTON Wilding , 49 Fishergate Tel: (0772) 556250 SURREY EDGWARE GK Photographic & Computers 106 High St Tel: (01) 951 1000 HARROW Camera Arts (Micro Computer Division 24 St Annes Rd. Tel: (01) 427 5469 STAINES Spelthorne Microsystems Lid 2 Kingston Rd Tel: (0784) 55659/55554 TEDDINGTON Andrews, Broad St Tel: (01) 977 4716 UXBRIDGE J K L Computers 7 Windsor St. Tel: (0895) 51815 DUNSTABLE Dormans 7-11 Broad Walk Tel 05821 65515 LEIGHTON BUZZARD The Computer Ctr at Milton Keynes Music, 17 Bridge St. Tel (0525/376622 LUTON Terry-More 49 George St. Tel (0582) 23391/2 ESSEX LEICESTERSHIRE NORFOLK BERKSHIRE BASILDON Godfrey's 28-32 East Walk, Tel (0268) 289379 BASILDON Godfrey's Computer Centre, 5 Laindon Main Centre Laindon Tel: (0268) 416747 CHELMSFORD Maxton Hayman Ltd., 5 Broomfield Rd. Tel: (0245) 354595 COLCHESTER Colchester Computer Ctr. 16 St. Botolphs SL Tel: (0206) 47242 GRAYS H Reynolds 79 Orsell Rd Tel: 10375) 5948 ILFORD Woolmans, 76 Ilford Lane Tel. (01) 478 1307 ROMFORD Computer Centre, 72 North St Tel: 0708 752862 LEICESTER Youngs. 40/42 Belvoir St Tel: 0533) 544774 MARKET HARBOROUGH Harborough Home Computers, 7 Church St Tel: (0858) 63056 BRACKNELL Computer Centre, 44 The Broadway Tel 0344) 427317 SLOUGH MU Games and Computers 245 High St Tel. (06285) 27194 FAKENHAM Fastview, 12 Norwich Rd Tel: (0328) 51319 NORWICH Sound Marketing, 52 St Benedicts St Tel (0603) 667725 THETFORD C B & Micros, 21 Guldhall St Tel (0842) 61645 CAMBERLEY Camera Arts (Micro Computer Division), 36 High St Tel: (0276) 65848 CHERTSEY Chertsey Computer Centre, 1 Windsor St. Tel: (09328) 64663 CROYDON Classic Cameras 16 St. Georges Walk Tel: (01) 686 2012 DORKING Dorking Computer Centre, 16 West Str Tel 103061 881557 EPSOM The Micro Workshop, 12 Station Approach Tel: (03727) 21533 HASLEMERE Haslemere Computers. 25 Junction PL (Adj. Rex Cinema) Tel: 0428) 54428 NEW MALDEN Surrey Micro Systems, 31 High St Tel: (01) 942 0478 RICHMOND Crest Computer Services 8 Hill St. Tel (01) 940 8635 WALLINGTON Surrey Micro Systems Ltd. 53 Woodcote Rd. Tel: (01) 647 5636 WOKING Harpers, 71-73 Commercial Way Tel: (04862) 61061 LINCOLNSHIRE BUCKINGHAMSHIRE NORTHAMPTONSHIRE BLETHCLEY Rams Computer Centre, 117 Queensway Tel: (0908) 647744 CHESHAM Reed Photography & Computers, 113 High St. Tel: (04941 783373 GRANTHAM Oakleat Computers Lid 121 Dudley Rd. Tel: (0476) 76994/60000 LINCOLN MKD Computers. 24 Newlands, Tel: (0522) 25907 NORTHAMPTON Dormans, 22 Princes Walk Grosvenor Centre Tel. (0604) 37031 HAMPSHIRE CAMBRIDGESHIRE LONDON NOTTINGHAMSHIRE SUSSEX CAMBRIDGE K P Computers Ltd19/20 Market St. Tel: (0223) 312240 Doen 6 Days) PETERBOROUGH Prrgh Communications 91 Midland Rd. (0733) 41007 NOTTINGHAM Jacobs Computers, 13 Middlegate Newark Tel: (0636) 72594 Just Opening WORKSOP Computergraphix. 132 Bridge SL Tel: 0909) 47224B ANDOVER Andover Audio 105 High St. Tel: (0264) 58251 BASINGSTOKE Fisher's 2-3 Market Place Tel. (0256) 22079 PORTSMOUTH Cygnus Computers Ltd 261 Commercial Ad. Tel (0705) 833938 PORTSMOUTH (Waterlooville) B Microland, 7 Queens Parade Tel 07014) 59911 SOUTHAMPTON RJ Parker & Son Lid 11 West End Rd Butterne Tel: 10703) 445926 WINCHESTER Winchester Camera & Computer Centre 75 Parchment St Tel. (09621 53982 BEXHILL-ON-SEA Computerware 22 St Leonards Rd Tel: (0424) 223340 CRAWLEY Gatwick Computer Services, 62 Boulevard. Tel: (0293) 37842 LITTLEHAMPTON Allan Chase Ltd. 39 High St. Tel 09064) 5674 CHANNEL ISLANDS NORTHERN IRELAND WALES GUERNSEY Gruts 3-5 The Pollett St Peter Port Tel 04811 24682 JERSEY Audio & Computer Centre 7 Peter St. St Helier Tel 0534) 74000 BELFAST Arthur Hobson Ltd. 37 Great Victonia St Tel: (0232) 246336 PORTSDOWN Pedlows, 16 Market St. Craigavon Co Armagh Tel: 07621 332265 LONDONDERRY Foyle Computer Systems, 3 shoo Si Tel: 0504) 268337 NEWRY Newry Computer Centre 34 Monaghan St. Tel (0693) 66545 CHESHIRE HEREFORD HEREFORD Melgray Hi-Tech Lid. 49 Broad St. Tel. (0432) 275737 OXFORDSHIRE ALTRINCHAM Mr Micro 28 High St. Tel: 051 941 6213 CHESTER Dakleal Computers Ltd 100 Boughton Tel: (0244) 310099 CREWE Microman Unit 2. 128 Nantwich Rd. Tel: (0270) 216014 ELLES MERE PORT AFR Computers 1 Pooltown Rd Whitby Tel: 051 356 4150 MACCLESFIELD Camera & Computer Centre 118 MAI S1 Tel (0625) 27468 STOCKPORT Wilding Lid 1 Little Underbank Tel (061) 480 3435 WARRINGTON Wildings. 111 Bridge St Tel: (09251 38290 WIDNES Computer City, 78 Victoria Road Tel: (051) 420 3333 WILMSLOW Swift of Wilmslow 4-6 St Annes Parade Tel (0625) 526213 ABERDARE Inkey Computer Services Ltd. 70 MI SI The Square Trecynon Tel: 0685) 881828 ABERYSTWYTH Aber Data at Galloways, 23 Per St Tel: (0970) 615522 CARDIFF Randall Cox, 18-22 High St Arcade. Tel: (0222) 31960 LLANDUDNO (Gwynedd) Computer Plus Discount. 15 Clomnel St Tel: 0492) 79943 NEWPORT (Gwent Randall Cox, 118 Commercial Si Tel 106331 67378 PEMBROKE Randall Cox, 19 Main St. Tel: (064) 682876 WREXHAM TE Roberts, 26 King St. Tel: (0978) 364404/364527 E6 Percivals, 85 High St North, East Ham Tel 01) 472 8941 E17 Erol Computers Ltd. 125 High Street Walthamstow Tel: (01) 520 7763 EC1 Sidney Levy, 17-19 Leather Lane, Tel: (01) 242 3456 ECI Pedro Computer Services Ltd, 47 Clerkenwell Road Tel (01) 251 8635 EC2 Devron Computer Centre, 155 Moorgate Tel 01) 638 3339/1830 N14 Logic Sales, 19 Broadway, The Bourne. Southgate. Tel: (01) BB2 4942 N20 Castlehurst Lid 1291 High Rd. Tel: (01) 446 2280 NW4 Da Vinci Computer Store 112 Brent St, Hendon Tel 01) 202 2272 SE1 Vic Odden's 6 London Bridge Walk Tel: (01) 403 1988 SE9 Square-Deal, 373-375 Footscray Rd. New Eltham. Tel: (01) 859 1516 SE15 Castlehurst Ltd. 152 Rye Lane Peckham Tel: (01) 639 2205 SE25 Ellis Marketing, 79 High St, South Norwood, Tel: (01) 653 4224 SW16 Butter Micro Shop. 310 Streatham High Rd Tel: (01) 769 2887 SW19 Emcom, 31 High St. Wimbledon. Tel (01) 947 7678 W1 Computers of Wigmore St. 87 Wigmore St. Tel 011 486 0373 W1 GK Photo & Computers, 92-94 Wardout St. Tel: (01) 437 0162 W1 Sonic Foto & Micro Centre, 256 Tottenham Court Rd. Tel: (01) 580 5826 W2 Devron 4 Edgware Rd Tel. (01) 724 2373 W3 Thames Computing 169 High St Acton Tel. 011 992 6888 W7 TK Electronics, 11/13 Boston Rd Hanwell Tel: (011 579 2842 HERTFORDSHIRE BOREHAMWOOD Master Micro 36 Shenley Rd Tel: 011 953 6368 HITCHIN Camera Arts Micro Computer Division 68A Hermitage Ad POTTERS BAR The Computer Shop 197 High St Tel(0707) 44417 ST ALBANS (Herts) Clarks Computer Centre 14-16 Hollywell Hill Tel: (07271 52991 STEVENAGE DJ Computers, 11 Town Square Tel. (0438) 65501 WATFORD SRS Microsystems Ltd. 94 The Parade, High St. Tel: (0923) 26602 WELWYN GARDEN CITY DJ Computers, 40 Fretherne Rd. Tel (07073) 28435/28444 ABINGDON Ivor Fields Computers, 21 Sturt St. Tel: (0235) 21207 BANBURY Computer Plus, 2 Church Lane Tel. (0295) 55890 OXFORD Ivor Fields, 7 St Ebbes St. Tel: (0865) 247082 SCOTLAND WARWICKSHIRE LEAMINGTON SPA IC Computers. 43 Russell St. Tel: (0926) 36244 NUNEATON Micro City 1A Queens Road Tel: 10203) 382049 RUGBY The Rugby Micro Centre, 9-11 Regent St Tel: (0788) 70522 CLEVELAND MIDDLESBOROUGH McKenna & Brown 206 Linthorpe Ad Tel. (0642) 222368 WEST MIDLANDS HUM BERSIDE ABERDEEN North East Computers, 1-3 Ellis S1, Peterhead. Tel (0779) 79900 AYR Vennals, 6A New Bridge St Tel: (0292) 264124 DUMFRIES Vennals, 71 English St Tel 103827 54547 EDINBURGH The Silicon Centre, 6-7 Antiqua St Tel: (031) 557 4546 GLASGOW Victor Morris Ltd., 340 Argyle St Tel 041) 221 8958 HAMILTON Tom Dickson Computers 8-12 Cadzow St. Tel: (0698) 283193 KILMARNOCK Vennals. 49 Foregate Tel: (0563) 32175 KIRCALDY Kirkady Photographic Services 254E High St., Fife. Tel (0592) 204734 CORNWALL ST AUSTELL A B & C Computers, Duchy House 6 Lowe Aylmer Sq Tel. (0726) 67337 BEVERLEY Computing World, 10 Swaby's Yard Dyer Lane Tel 0482 881831 GRIMSBY RC Johnson Ltd 22 Friargate, Riverhead Centre Tel 0472) 42031 HULL The Computer Centre, 26 Anlaty Rd. Tel: (0482) 26297 MANCHESTER GREATER BIRMINGHAM Sherwoods Gt Western Arcade Tel (021) 236 7211 COVENTRY Greens 22 Market Way Tel 02031 28342 DUDLEY Central Computers, 35 Church Hill Precinct. Tel: (0384) 238169 WEST BROMWICH Bell & Jones 39 Queens Square. Tel. (021) 553 0820 CUMBRIA ISLE OF MAN SHROPSHIRE WILTSHIRE BARROW-IN-FURNESS Barrow Computer Centre 96 Church St Tel: (0229) 38353 CARLISLE The Computer Shop. 56-58 Lowther S1 Tel (0228) 27710 PENRITH Penrith Communications 14 Castlegate. Tel (0768) 67146 WHITEHAVEN PO Hendren 15 King St. Tel: 0946) 2063 DOUGLAS TH Colebourn Ltd 57-61 Victoria SL Tel (0624) 3482 SALISBURY Whymark Computer Centre, 20 Milford St. Tel: (0722) 26688 BOLTON Wilding Lid. 23 Deansgate. Tel: (0204) 33512 MANCHESTER Lomax Ltd., 8 Exchange St. St. Anns Square Tel: (061) 832 6167 OLDHAM Home & Business Computers Ltd 54 Yorkshire S1 Tel (061) 6331608 ROCHDALE Home & Business Computers. 75 Yorkshire Si Tel. (0706) 344654 SWINTON Mr Micro Ltd 89 Partington Lane. Tel: (061) 728 2282 Late Night Friday WIGAN Wilding Ltd. 11 Mesnes St. Tel: (0942) 44382 SHREWSBURY Computerama, 13 Castlegate Tel (0743) 60528 TELFORD Computer Village, 4 Hazeldine House Telford Town Centre Tel: (0952) 506771 ISLE OF WIGHT COWES Beken & Son 15 Bath Rd Tel (0983) 297181 SOMERSET WORCESTER KIDDERMINSTER Central Computers, 2021 Blackwell St. Tel: (0562) 746941 WORCESTER David Waring Ltd., 1 Marmion House High St Tet (0905) 27551 KENT TAUNTON Grays. 1 St James St Tel: (0823) 72986 DERBYSHIRE ALFRETON Gordon Harwood 69-71 High St. Tel: (0773) 832078 CHESTERFIELD The Computer Centre 14 Stephenson Place Tel. (0246) 208802 DERBY C T Electronics, at Camera Thorpe The Spot Tel: (0332) 360456 MERSEYSIDE STAFFORDSHIRE YORKSHIRE BROADSTAIRS Video Vision 19/20 Willow Court St Peters Park Road Tel (0843) 63284 No Early Closing Day) DOVER Kent Photos & Computers. 4 King St Tel 0304) 202020 GRAVESEND Marshalls Computers & Cameras 3 Windmill St. Tel: (0474) 65930 ORPINGTON Ellis Marketing Lid 25 Station Sq., Petts Wood Tel: 0689) 39476 RAINHAM Microway Computers Ltd., 39 High St Medway Towns Tel: 10634) 376702 SEVENOAKS Ernest Fielder Computers Dorset St. Tel: (0732) 456800 SITTINGBOURNE Computers Plus, 65 High St Tel 10795) 25677 TUNBRIDGE WELLS Modata Cmptrs Ltd. 28-30 St Johns Rd. Tel: (0892) 41555 DEVON EXETER Seven Counties Computers) Ltd. 7 Paris Street Tel: (0392) 211212 EXMOUTH Open Channel 30 The Strand Tel. (0395) 264408 PLYMOUTH Syntax Ltd. 76 Cornwall S1. Tel 107521 28705 TIVERTON Actron Micro Computers 37 Bampton St. Tel: (0884) 252854 TORQUAY Devon Computers, 8 Torhill Rd. Castle Circus Tel: (0803) 526303 BIRKENHEAD Fails Cameras & Hi-Fi, Dacre Hill, Rock Ferry Tel. (051) 645 5000 MESWALL Thornguard Computer Systems 46 Pensby Rd. Tel (051) 342 7516 HUYTON lan Houghton 5 Huyton Hey Rd Tel: (051) 489 5785 LIVERPOOL Beaver Radio, 20-22 Whitechapel Tel. (051) 709 9898 LIVERPOOL (Aintree) Hargreaves, 31-37 Warbreck Moor. Tel: (051) 525 1782 SOUTHPORT Central Computers, 575 Lord: St Tel: (0704) 31881 ST HELENS Studio 55, 55 Ormskirk St Tel: (0744) 39496 STAFFORD Computerama, 59 Forgate St Tel: 10785) 41899 STOKE-ON-TRENT Computerama, 11 Mkt Square Arcade Hanley (0782) 268620 STOKE-ON-TRENT The Microchip. 37 Station Rd. Biddulph Tel: (0782) 511559 BRADFORD Erricks, Fotosonic House Rawson Square. Tel: (0274) 309266 DEWSBURY Home & Business Computers, 59 Daisy Hill Tel: (0924) 455300 DONCASTER The Soft Centre 8 Queens gate Waterdale Centre Tel: (0302) 20088 HUDDERSFIELD Richards (Formerly Launes) 12 Queen St. Tel. (0484) 25334 HULL Computer Centre 26 Anlaby Rt. Tel (0482) 26297 LEEDS Bass & Bligh 4 Lower Briggate Tel: (0532) 454451 YORK York Computer Centre 7 Stonegate Arcade Tel (0904) 641862 SUFFOLK BURY ST EDMUNDS Bury Computer Centre, 11 Guildhall St Tel: (0284) 705772 Not all stores carry every advertised Item, please phone before making a journey prices correct at time of going to press E&OE "


"CAST 2781376 78893266 387 833 2.73783265 327573767966 898 46 9326332 DARKTOWEF THE LITTLE BRICK OUT LO LINS RINGE KINGS w MURRAY MOND "


"Quo Vadis? ARE standing at the end of a long narrow road. There is a small brick house there and U enter by the front door. (U think: \"This seems familiar\", but dismiss the idea...). There is a key on the ground here. There is a brass lamp here. There is food and water here. U eat and drink. U pick up the key and lamp. There is very intricate engraving on the key which is hard to read but you see the letters: c..1, the centre two being very indistinct. U rub the lamp and now have a very clean lamp (!). U leave by the rear door... A thunderous voice roots U to the ground and U look up to see a figure calculated to strike terror into the bravest heart! \"Stop\"! \"Desist\"! \"Take not one step Beyond this program break. Consult the Key and See: How neatly put together Could curt description make Of crowned Viking impotence!\" What's all this then? You may well ask! If you are a seasoned Computer and Video Games reader then you'll know that we always come up with new and original ideas and this one is no exception! Quo Vadis? is a puzzle-cum-treasure hunt-cum-computer-moderated game that will baffle you for the next three issues of C&VG. But stick with it because we've got our hands on two Coleco Adam computer systems! The two people who manage to solve the mystery of Quo Vadis? will win one of these amazing prizes worth well over . And we'll have prizes for the top ten runners-up too. Who could ask for more? How do you get started? Just read the first part of the Quo Vadis? mystery which starts on this page. As you read, you'll come across some questions and puzzles which have to be solved before you can move on to the next stage which you'll find in the June issue of C&VG. The first three questions appear in this issue the rest follow with the final questions appearing in our July issue. Don't send your entries off yet! Wait until you've solved the entire quest. We'll tell you later how to send your entries in. You'll find clues to the mystery in our giant Quo Vadis? picture study it carefully and it will help you solve many problems. You might even find more clues if you read this issue really carefully So look out your magnifying glass, grab a pen and paper and enter the world of Quo Vadis? It's a journey you'll never forget. \"By happenstance bear I his name, And U, bold pilgrim now shall state First name, then Function! Else terminate Thy progress in this Quest By lack of diligence...!\" ( a)....................... (b)........................))))) U answer at once, being a C&VG reader and therefore a cut above the crowd as it were, but still U are incurring the displeasure of the frightening being before U... \"Oaf\"! \"Dolt\"! \"U are in the wrong Adventure\" shouts the apparition. \"But\", more kindly, \"U did answer smartly so I shall put U right\". So saying he announces proudly \"I am the Sinister Chief around these parts although my friends call me Chief. My REAL name is never used (You know it now so can see why!) as I resent legpulling\". The Chief now adopts a more fatherly tone of voice which implies that U are a feeble adventurer in need of guidance... \"I will take U to the start of this Quest\", adding darkly, \"Which is what I am...\" \"And then I'll introduce U to some of my mates along the way\"..\" Some minutes later U arrive at a sharp bend in the road. \"We're here\" says the Chief, \"This is me!\" \"Push off to the South until U reach a Base. The road bends around to the right gently at first but for goodness sake don't turn right into the big Red road on Ur right just before U get to the Base or else U will be in real trouble!\" \"My old mate AGAS will be looking out for U. Don't be frightened by his appearance he's really the Adventure Gamer's Arbitration Service and can get stuffy about his status in life.\" \"Don't be surprised if he's surrounded H TTTTTTTTT! THE PRIZES The first two people to solve the Quo Vadis? quest will win a complete Coleco Adam computer system worth over . This package has been causing quite a stir in the States and comes complete with a 75-key professional keyboard, an add-on called the Memory Module which plugs into the Coleco video game console, and a superb letter quality printer. Runners-up will each get a copy of the album performed by the band called Mainframe the people behind the mind boggling mystery that is Quo Vadis? We'll probably get some other goodies together too by the time the competition ends So watch this space for more news! Fill ELLO ELEE ED COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 53 "


"by uncertain adventurers pestering him for decisions about where to go next...\" \"Fact is, dear boy, or are U a girl? \"Never can tell the difference these days with the hair and all that\" sniffs the Chief, \"He will probably pass U on to the PC for the Base test. Goodbye!\" U set off South and become aware of a \"brown\" smell... This soon manifests itself as a cloud of vapour completely blocking the path ahead. It is muttering \"Diode Mining Ores\" and \"I Go Modern Inside\" and is blowing little smoke rings... U clear Ur throat and the AGAS (For it is he or it or she) looks at U with disdain. \"Yes?\" it says, sniffing its disapproval, \"What do U want?\" \"I'm looking for a Base\" U say, \"The Chief told me that you would help.\" \"God, but U're thick\" says the AGAS admiring its own fine translucency, \"I suppose U'd better follow me\" and puffs off at high speed. \"I should tell U,\" shouts the AGAS over its gaseous shoulder, \"This land is now mainly inhabited by VGs\" \"There are two bad types, 'Aerial' and 'Burrowing', AVGs and BVGs\" \"They leave the good guys, the CVGs, to clear up\". U reach a high stockade. AGAS exclaims \"Oh Lord, its the PC!\" and in a loud whisper: \"He's a real pain. Tries to control everything. His ancestors ruled the whole planet U know and he does get a bit above himself\" \"Just 'cos he's got some Perishing Missiles in there he thinks he's God and U'll get no further without the Password!\" \"Good luck cries AGAS, vanishing ...! Th PC is shouting at a group of AVGs and BVGs who are worrying a Trum but he has seen U approaching and now utters in a pompous tone: \"I need the Word, U weakly Nurd, To let U Pass Behind the glass And Poke around Inside the Pound For easy clues Which U may use To speed U on Ur wretched way And then can I go out to play...!\" Spotting the answer in a flash, U oblige the PC and, giving a cursory glance inside his Base, U press on South meeting the AGAS again. He seems to have taken to U and is happily burbling away about PC's exploits and how another character got in on the ACT in certain areas before PC's Big Brother stepped in to protect the little fellow from marauding Fruit. AGAS: \"U know, sometimes I think the PC is going a bit gaga.\" \"He keeps trying to tell me his real name is 'EMMMM' in a kind of farmyard English!\" \"But there again he is a bit slow, poor chap, and he does have that awful installed base to look after. Leaves him little enough time for Games!\"... AGAS kicks aside an emerging BVG who has been mining under the path, \"These Burrowing VGs are a real nuisance, picking on the Trums, poor little Specks!\" \"If it wasn't for the C&VGs chasing them out I don't know where we'd be\" \"Ah, there's the AURIC standing under that tree. He'll have Ur next problem for U I expect, that is, if we get to him before he vaporises!\" \"U have to chat to him for a few minutes so that he stays in his listening mode. He then waits ten seconds and changes into an AURICLE and spouts wisdom and so forth... U duly speak politely to the AURIC (For U are as yet only two tests down the road to success and cannot be too cocky about Ur progress) \"The Chief said you would help me Mr AURIC...\" The AURIC glows in the leafy shade and, precisely ten seconds after Ur last word, turns into an AURICLE. He mutters: \"Some Grind Iodine\" and then: \"Do not forget this pearl of wisdom for U will need it in the late summer when the greatest test of all is upn U\" So saying, the AURICLE buzzes and hums and extends arms in such a way that a shimmering mirage flows from the fingers barring Ur way. It quickly re solves into an array of numbers: 727987327765 788932667384 833273783265 327573767966 898469326332 AGAS looks at this for a moment and says: \"Look here, AURIC, that is an unfair question\" \"I am the Arbitrator here and I think this young Adventurer will need a little poetic help\". The AURIC returns grudgingly to his speaking mode and grumbles: \"A number will flow from this vision So grouping will aid Ur decision. Compute them in turn, It's a question U'll learn, It's all that U'll need for precision!\" (((((a). ............ (b)...............))))) \"Well done\" says AGAS, peering at the correct answers U have written down (For U will need them all at the end of this Quest!) \"I see U are keeping all the answers properly, for without them U will never leave this land to do battle with the Dragon of Herbal Hill\"... U are now travelling Southwest and U arrive at a sharp right angle bend in the road, noticing that yet another big Red road goes off to the right precisely at the apex of the corner... RULES: All answers MUST be sent on the form which will appear in our June issue. Decision of the Editor will be final in judging the winners and no correspondence will be entered into. All entrants MUST complete the entire Quo Vadis? quest. This is MAINFRAME, the unusual rock/pop band who created our Quo Vadis? quest. Mainframe is Murray Munro, 21 and John Molloy, 23. They are a two-piece synthesizer/guitar/computer band creating some very exciting music and also a considerable stir with their use of their very own Digital Sound Sampling device both in their live shows and in their records. They have already created one \"quest\" that which is part of their current album, Tenants of the Lattice-Work. Be warned, it is not easy. So far nobody has won the ,500 Golden \"M\" which is the band's prize but several groups are on the track! Murray, John and manager, Rod Munro, created the Quo Vadis? quest with Computer & Video Games readers very specifically in mind. Mainframe tell us that their album and the current single Talk to Me, which has soundto-light programs for Spectrum, ZX81, BBC and Apple on the \"B\"-side, should be available in the larger record shops and Smiths but if anyone has difficulty then they will supply directly from: MC2 Music, 24 Missden Drive Hemel Hempstead, Herts HP3 8QR. -PRESENTING MAINFRAME 54 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"! ZEAL SOUND BOOSTER NEW FOR THE CBM64 TINCENTIVE INCENTIVE THE SPLAT CHALLENGE FOR SPECTRUM SPLAT!  PLUG IN AND USE-NO INTERNAL CONNECTIONS  NO BATTERIES NEEDED . GOOD, CLEAR SOUND  OUTPUT CONTROL  LOAD/SAVE FACILITY BUILT-IN  FULLY GUARANTEED BRING THE SOUNDS OF YOUR GAMES TO EXCITING LIFE FOR JUST $14.99 NEW FOR THE CBM64 THE SPLAT CHALLENGE FOR THE COMMODORE 64 .50 CINCENTIVE VE INCENTIVE SOFTWARE, 54 LONDON ST. READING RG1 450 (0734) 591678 NEW FROM INCENTIVE NEWSFLASH <14\" MICROVITEC Colour Monitor SPECTRUM Compatible 2  (Incl. VAT & Carriage) A NEW EXPERIENCE IN GETTING RICHII 16K RAMPACK FOR ZX81 .50 (Incl. VAT & P&P) Please send me (enter quantity in box) SOUND BOOSTERS @ .99 COLOUR MONITORS (Spectrum compatible) @  RAMPACKS for ZX81 @ .50 ABOVE PRICES INCLUDE VAT/P&P/CARRIAGE NAME ADDRESS ........... I enclose Cheque/P..for .................................... 48K SPECTRUM .50 CINCENTIVE INCENTIVE SOFTWARE LTD, 54 London Street, Reading RG1 450 Tel: Reading 10734) 591678 ZEAL MARKETING LIMITED Vanguard Trading Estate, Storforth Lane, Chesterfield S40 2TZ. Tel. 0246-208555 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 55 "


"BUG HUNTER — WRITE TO ME AT: BOGO HUNTER COMPUTER VIDEO GAMESDORRANT HOUSE 8 HERBAL HILL LONDON ECARTE OR PHONE ME N:01-277 3881 SO NOW YOU KNOW Hello again. Thanks to everyone who sent me messages on Micronet 800 last month. As I said last time, Bug Hunter now has its own account on Micronet and, if you're a member, then save yourself the cost of a stamp and send electronic mail instead. My account number is 012 786 556, and I'll try to reply within a day or two. UNSTOPPABLE VIC Granville Danby writes from West Yorkshire with a way of disabling the run/stop and restore keys on a Vic. Try typing: POKE 46,26:POKE 45,240:POKE 788, 194: PRINT CHR$(8): POKE 37150,3:CLR and your listing should be well and truly unstoppable. MILLIMAN Milliman for the Spectrum, from February's Book of Games, was printed as a listing for a 48k machine. However, the title said that it would run on a 16k model. If your Spectrum has only 16k, then you'll need to change all references to 48k memory addresses by subtracting 32768. For example, in line 5, change 64999 to 32231. You'll also need to do this, for example, in lines 90 and 425. The game is bug-free, and should then run on any Spectrum. DRAGON POKES Now here's news for any Dragon owners having trouble loading and sav. ing on cassette. A letter comes from Scott McRae in Aberdeen, Scotland (that'll do nicely). He says that typing POKE 144,3 boosts the level of sound through the cassette interface and has improved his loading and saving no end. So if you've been having problems with your Dragon (no mother-in-law jokes, please) then try a quick poke. ANT ATTACK Remember the letter a couple of months ago about a bug in Chequered Flag for the Spectrum? And that the last lap time was always printed instead of the fastest one? I asked if anyone else had had that problem, and Christopher Truman of Kings Lynn has written to me to agree. It seems that there really is a bug in the program. Christopher also mentioned that typing 6031769 while playing Manic Miner will put you in 'cheat mode', and pressing certain combinations of keys will transport you directly to the level of your choice. Sorry to disappoint you, Chris, but you're not the first with this information. SIMPLE MINDED? Returning again to Manic Miner for the Spectrum, Robert Savage from Burtonon-Trent writes to point out that if, on the Kong Beast screen, you open the trap door and pull the other lever then you'll get a bonus of 2,500 points and the Kong Beast will fall to his death. Robert also states that he plays much better while listening to 'Sparkle in the Rain' by Simple Minds; especially side one. It takes all sorts. KONG-OCEAN Players of Ocean's Kong for the 48k Spectrum now have some help, courtesy of Peter Bines from Grantham, Lincs. When you are on the third level, he says, climb up the first ladder and then up the ladder on the right. If you then jump on to the moving girders, you can go straight through the top girder to complete the level. MORE MUSIC After the extremely weird Robert Savage and his high scores, achieved by listening to a Simple Minds LP, I thought we'd heard the last of such eccentrics. But the next day a letter arrived from Ian Potter in Thatto Heath, Merseyside in a similar vein. At the end of his letter lan says that his top score for Atari Donkey Kong is 265,600. That score was helped by listening to Windpower by Thomas Dolby. Where will it all end?, we ask. Donkey Kong, and The Monkees? What's your suggestion of music to play a video game to? Send it to me by the end of May and I'll publish the best ones and give a \"The Champ' tee-shirt to the winner. Entries to Bug Hunter at the usual address. A postcard would be useful; it saves extra work with the letter opener (Have you met her? She's called Jane and she's rather nice). TIMED TO A TEA Here's another tip for Atari owners, to make loading, saving and listing your programs a little easier. Typing CTRL-1 while a program is listing will stop the process, allowing you to inspect the portion on the screen. You can start it again by pressing CTRLla second time. When loading and saving programs, press CTRL-2 while the loading or saving is taking place. The computer will then bleep at you when the cassette operation has finished. So if you're making a cup of tea while waiting for Zaxxon to load, you'll know to take the tea bag out of the cup when you hear the bleep. LINK-UP FOR 64 Returning to Micronet for a moment, Richard Shepherd (no, not that one) from Nottinghamshire asks whether a Micronet link is available for the Commodore 64. The good news is that the Commodore database is currently being constructed, and the adaptor should be available towards the end of May. Details from Micronet on 01-278 3143. NINE LIVES Finally this month, yet another Spectrum snippet. Paul Shippen reckons he's found a bug in Jet Pac. It you get more than nine lives then a colon will be printed instead of a number ten. This, he deduces, is because a colon comes after 9 in the Spectrum's character set. You're probably right, Paul, but I've only managed to score 41,000 so far. I'm too busy reading all your letters to sit at home playing games all day. See you next time. Don't forget to write or phone if you have any problems with the programs from C&VG. Alternatively, drop me a mailbox on Micronet to 012 786 556. Has anyone out there managed to rescue all ten people in Quicksilva's Ant Attack? Have you found that the new game has the ten people in the same place as the first, and that finding them is, therefore, rather easy? If so, then you're not the first. This fact was brought to you by Paul Shippen and Darren Perrin of Hatfield, Herts. BY ROBERT SCHIFREEN 56 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"C&R COMPUTER SALES INCENTIVE PRESENTS... SPLAT! FOR THE COMMODORE 64 33 BURTON ROAD, LINCOLN LN1 3JY. Tel: 0422 26699 AND 48K SPECTRUM | What they say: ONE OF THE MOST ORIGINAL \"SPLAT\" is one of the most & COMPELLING ARCADE GAMES addictive games I have ever EVER PRODUCED !! played on the 48K SPECTRUM. It is certainly  WINNER James Tant from Wokingham NER! James Tant from Wokingham the most original who scored 112.930!ion visiting our offices to Computer & Video Games verify his high scoring ability he scored even more! \"Highly recommended SPECTRUM 48K .50 COMMODORE 64 46.50 Crash Review ATARI 600 XL 16k .99 VIC 20 STARTER PACK .49 ATARI 800 XL 64k .49 COMMODORE 64 .95 ATARI PROGRAM RECORDER PORTABLE COLOUR COMPUTER .99 (including .00 free software) ATARI 16k RAM PACK .49 .00 ATARI DISC DRIVE .993 RAM PACK FOR VIC 20 .50 EXPANSION MODULE (600 XL) 8k RAM PACK FOR VIC 20 .95 .49 16k RAM PACK FOR VIC 20 .45 ATARI JOYSTICKS .98 COMMODORE CASSETTE UNIT ORIC 48k .00 .49 ORIC PRINTER .95 SINGLE DISC DRIVE .95 ORIC SOFTWARE PACK .49 THE DOT MATRIX PRINTER (50 characters per second) .50 COLOUR MONITOR E 199.95 L PATC KET TEMPLE of VRAN THE KET TRILOGY MOUNTAINS OF KET \"A professional game in a competitive genre, especially if you want value for money, I can heartily recommend this adventure.\" HCW REVIEW *****HCW NEW RELEASE First get to the mountain... MOUNTAINS OF KET 48K SPECTRUM ,50 TEMPLE OF VRAN 48K SPECTRUM .50 TEMPLE OF VRAN NEW An even greater challenge just released HO All orders over  postage free (all orders under enclose .50 p&p) 1984 1984 ACCLAIMED GAME OF AGAME ON GOVERNMENT MANAGEMENT THE HIGHLY O ACCLAIMED GAME OF ECONOMIC SURVIVAL THE BRITISH ECONOMY WITH YOU AT THE CONTROLS! HOW MANY YEARS WILL YOU LAST? THE T.I. 99/4a SPECIALIST *5 STAR RATING HCW 31/1/84* BBC \"B\" .50 SPECTRUM 48K .50 EXAS INSTRUMENTS NEW FOR THE BBC MILLIONAIRE 1998 SOFTWARE WE HAVE VAST STOCKS ... INCLUDING SCOOP! FROM ATARI SOFT FOR T199/4A DONKEY KONG .... ONLY  PACMAN ONLY .50 DEFENDER ONLY .50 PICNIC PARANOIA..... ONLY .50 PROTECTOR II......... ONLY .50 PRICES INCLUDE POST & PACKING SEND SAE FOR FULL PRICE LIST PLEASE MAKE CHEQUES/POs PAYABLE TO From a small humble home to a magnificant estate? Take on one of lifes little challenges & become a millionaire! Start up a Software Co, Buy, sell, Advertise, Deal with Honest Harry, Full Screen Graphic Representation of your current residence, + many other features. A compulsive game that grips you. SPECTRUM 48K .50 OUR PROGRAMS ARE AVAILABLE FROM ALL LEADING DEALERS NATIONWIDE. In case of difficulty please use the coupon below. ORDER FORM 48K SPECTRUM COMMODORE (5.50 EACH 64 6.50 SPLAT O SPLATO Please send me the titles as MOUNTAINS OF KETO indicated by 1st class post. TEMPLE OF VRANO BBC BISERIES 1) enclose cheque/PO. for ... 1984 O 16.50 or debit my Access/Visa Account MILLIONAIRE O 1984 O TTTTTTT NoL PARCO Electrics here Name....... Address..... 4 Dorset Place New Street Honiton, Devon Tel: 44425 INCENTIVE INCENTIVE SOFTWARE LTD, 54 London Street, Reading RG1 450 Tel: Reading (0734) 591678 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 57 "


"- -  10 BORDER : PAPER 9: INK 7: C LS: LET F1=1 20 LET SP=: LET a=13: LET b=8 : LET in ESP: DIM 1 (INT PI): LET t (SGN PI) =9999: LET t (2) =t (SGN P I): LET t (3) =t (SGN PI: LET Ob=s : LET XP ESP: LET CF=SP: LET (p = 30 DIM P (3): FOR I = 1 TO 3: LET P(i) = 1: NEXT i: DIM (3) 40 DEF FN Piz) =INT (RND #Z) +1: LET CS=NOT PI: LET CI=CS: FOR I = 1 TO 3: LET CS=C5+FN R (6): LET O I=CI+FN R (6): NEXT I 50 INPUT \"Thy name in$ 60 GO TO 200 100 LET O ENOT PI: PLOT 0, 18: DR AU 155.0: DRAW 0.155 DRAU 155 0: DRAU 0 -155 PLOT 0.0: DRAW 2550 0.18 DRAW -255,0. DRAW 0,-16 120 PLOT 157,18: DRAU 98,0: DRA W 855. DRAU -98. DRAW 02-55 130 PLOT 157,75 DRAU 0.98: DRA 98.0: DRAW 0,-98: DRAW -93.0 4100 IF st<NOT PI THEN LET st=NO T PI 4110 IF it <NOT PI THEN LET it =NO 5000 REM Combat 5010 LET th=NOT PI LET dp=th: L P$=\"b\" OR ET ns = ip$=\"\") + (3 AND P$=\"\") + {999 AND PS=\"p\") 5022 IF P$=\"5\" AND 15 THEN LET n sans-SGN PI: GO TO 5000 5030 IF RND >.6 THEN GO TO 6000 5242 GO SUB 9100: PRINT AT 13,20 , \"Retreat?\" 5050 FOR 1 =SGN PI TO CODE \"d\": I F INKEY $=\"y\" THEN LET CFENOT PI: SUB 9100: PRINT AT 13, 20; \"co \":GO SUB 9110: RETURN IF INKEY ${\"\" THEN GO TO 50 060 NEXT i 70 GO SUB 9300: GOSUB 9100: P AT 13, 20; \"Strike now!\" 5075 FOR I ESGN PI TO 20: LET th= .5: LET dp =NOT PI 80 IF INKEY=\"\" THEN LET th=, 8: LET OP=5 GO TO 5120 5090 IF INKEY S=CHR$ 13 THEN LET th=,4 LET dp = 10: GO TO 5120 5100 IF INKEY=\"P\" THEN LET th=. 2: LET OP=20 GO TO 5120 $110 IF INKEYS=\"S\" THEN GO TO 55 5116 NEXT i 5120 LET thath + ics/20-.5): LET I 5130 LET IP = -1: IF (P<1 THEN L GO TO 850 ET F=\"Heart attack!\" ERND =XP+ 0. GO SUB 3000 220 LET tn=tn +SGN PI 230 GO SUB 3010 SUB 9300 TO 220  GO SUB 9110: PRINT AT 20.5G ; A wondrous jewe!!\": LET XP (FN r (6) + ) *CODE \"\": LET =50: GO SUB 9000: GOSUB 9110: R ETURN 2300 GO SUB 9110 PRINT AT 20,1; \"A Circle of power!!!\": LET d=59 : GO SUB 9000: GOSUB 911: LET p=1P+FN 140) +F1*FN (3): RETUR 2500 IF NOT P (VAL as) THEN RETUR 510 LET (VAL a $) = 1 +FN 16) +5: ET QIVAL as) =SGN PI 520 IF a $=\"1\" THEN LET CS=30 2530 IF a $=\"2\" THEN LET Ci =30: 2540 RETURN 3000 GO SUB 3000 3010 GO SUB 9110: PRINT AT 20,1; Uhich may nou?\" 3200 IF tnt (SGN PI) THEN LET PC SGN PI) ENOT PI: LET 9 (SGN PI) ENO TPI: LET CS=10 3210 IF tnt (2) THEN LET P 12) =NO TPI: LET (2) ENOT PI: LET Ci=13 IF tnt (INT PI) THEN LET PC PII =NOT PI: LET P (INT PIENO 3230 GO SUB 7000 3240 RETURN 4000 REM Monster Selection 4005 GO SUB 9300 4010 LET CF =1: LET mn=INT (AND #1 4020 RESTORE 9700+ (101): READ &, f1,82,P$,sb, ib 4030 IF Fl< 1 OR Fl>f2 THEN GOT 04010 4040 LET d$={\"paltry\" AND 5b 20) + (\"mighty\" AND Sb>19) +\" and \"+\" thick AND ib<10) + \"ciever\" AND ib)9) +\" \"+11 $ 4050 GO SUB 9110: PRINT N PI INK 7; PAPER 27 F PI: \"A monster appears!\": BEE 2.10: BEEP .02.20: BEEP.02 4060 IF 1 =11 THEN PRINT AT It's Nerith himself!\". GO TO 4 4070 PRINT AT 21 SGN PI; \"A\";d $ 4290 LET st=sb+ (INT (RND +10)-5) FL: LET itrib+ (INT (AND * 151 7) + THE TOWER \" 58 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"RINPIF 132. THENSESUB 91°CETP 6039 LET ns =ns-1: PRINT AT 15,20 ; \"A Fireball!\": LET 6040 PRINT AT 16, 20; INT da; \" dan h = t ICS AN age\": LET IP=P-01 6050 IF : GO TO 8500 P<0 THEN LET $=\"burns\" 6070 IF NOT (P$=\"1\" AND ns) THEN 599 TO 5070 GO TO 6100 6080 LET nsans-1: LET th=,4-1.3 AND 4 (INT PI): LET PERND d=50: GOSUB 6000 GO TO 500 5150 LET d=INT (RND#dp* CS/10 :GO SUB 9100: PRINT AT 13, 20; \"A hit...\": PAUSE 30: PRINT AT 14 20; INT d;\" damage. 5150 LET St=st-d: IF st 1 THEN GO TO 6900 5200 GO TO 6000 5500 LET POP-10: LET Ci=Ci-5: IF Ci<1 THEN LET $=\"Brainstorm! # GO TO 3500 5510 IF P$=\"\" THEN GO SUB 9100: PRINT AT 13:20; \"It is; AT 14,20 \"immune to\"; AT 15, 20; \"your feeb 16\"; AT 16, 20; \"blast, \": FOR i =1 T 075: NEXT iGO SUB 9100: GO TO 6000 5515 GO SUB 9100: PRINT AT 13,20 ; \"Psi-Shock!\": LET d=50: GO SUB 9000 GO SUB 9100: LET d=INT (R ND+20) + (C5/10) 5520 GO SUB 9000: GOSUB 9100: P RINT AT 13, 20; INT \" dan age.\" 5530 LET st=st-do: IF st 1 THEN GO TO 6900 6000 GO SUB 9300: GOSUB 9100: L ET d=50: GO SUB 9000: PRINT AT 1 3,20; $; AT 14, 20; \"attacks..\": GO SUB 9000 6020 IF NOT (P $=\"b\" AND ns) THEN GO TO 6070 RUNS ON A 48K SPECTRUM BY ADAM LOCKWOOD AND NEIL DUNBAR Let cala ack through time Some are willing to share their magie otplace where and more secrets with you, most are only too se it against you, so you must inilobirani s terious Towe ceep you wils about you. The Tower is a d eal adventure Plunged into a totally different game set in a warring forest Kingdom. world you armed only with simple Two kings and their trusted wizards are weapons and you wilt and cunning, so battling against one another to gain overcoming the dark forces will be a control of the land and the legendary dificul H not impossible Task to magic Tower. complete. Magical and ferocious beasts lurk in The Tower runs on a 48k Spectrum the forest's leaty depths. Orcs, elves only and uses the keyboard for and dragons are plentiful and though controlling the characters. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 59 "


"At last.: FLIGHT SIM A FLIGTOO ATARI commodore 64 Extensive flight manual including Basic Flying. Instrument Flying, Maps and Charts.  Cross-Country Navigation via Landmarks, VOR Stations and Dead Reckoning. Three geographical air navigation areas each with multiple airports and multiple runways. Dual Radio Navigation (VOR) and Instrument Landing System (ILS).  Emergency Procedure Practice.  Air Mail delivery game to test your flying skills. On screen flight path review between flights. Multiple Landing Approach Charts and Design-yourown approach feature. Landing ratings for smoothness and speed. For all ATARI computers, COMMODORE 64 Disk and Cassette. Take-offs and Landings under all weather conditions. .95 SOLO FLIGHT is an advanced simulation that uses realistic three dimensional terrain graphics, actual configuration instrument panel, multiple air navigation maps, and accurate aircraft performance characteristics to provide the challenge, thrill, excitement, and joy of the flight experience. SOLO FLIGHT is a quality product from MicroProse Software MERO 174 THE ULTIMATE IN AMERICAN SOFTWARE FOR YOU ON U.S. GOLD U.S. Gold is stocked by all leading computer stores including: BOOLE WHSMITH U.S.GOLD weil All American Software DEALERS! For information on how to become a U.S. Gold Stockist write to: Centresoft Ltd., Unit 24. Tipton Trading Estate, Bloomfield Road, Tipton, West Midlands DY4 9AH. Telephone: 021-520 7591. Overseas enquiries welcome. "


"8055 PRINT INK 6: AT 9, 2 NEXT y: NEXT Z 8065 FOR F=1 TO FN 3070 PRINT AT FNr (16) +1, FN (5) +1;\"\" 8030 NEXT F 3099 RETURN (15 -1 LED TO SEND INT 3100 36 30B 108: PRINT INK 5; AT 1,1; \" 3110 FOR_F=2 TO 17: PRINT INK 6; AT 1,1; \"1\";AT F, 18; 3120 PRINT INK 6 AT 18,1; 1\" NEXT 3130 PRINT AT 1, 14 INK 5; \"2\" 3140 RETURN 8510 CLS: PRINT AT 11:2; \"Thou a rt slain, heroin\"? mbat, Valiant co 8520 PRINT \"Thou didst die by\"; r$ \"PRESS ANY KEY TO PLAY AGAIN : PAUSE : RUN 8600 GO SUB 9110: PRINT AT 20,1; \"Stairway u/d?\": LET b=3: LET OD ENOT PI: LET SP = b =13: LET 8610 IF INREY $=\"U\" THEN LET flur +1-iFi =7): GO TO 3650 3620 IF INKEY=\"\" THEN LET fluf -1: GO TO 3650 640 GO TO 3612 8650 IF FI= THEN GO TO 9602 3660 LET d=52: GOSUB 2009: CLS : GOSUB 100: GO SUB 300: RETUR 9000 FOR I =SGN PI TO RETURN NEXT : 9103 FOR D=13 TO 18: PRINT AT 20;\" , \"': NEXT : RETURN PRINT AT 2017 AT 21.1 RETU EN 6090 IF Pith THEN LET CP=0 LET CSECS-12: GO TO 6145 5100 LET CP 20: IF P$=\"\" THEN LE T SP= /40 6110 IF (itst AND it >5 AND RND 1) OR RND<.05 THEN GO TO 6500 6120 LET st=st-1: LET th=,4-1.3 AND 4 (INT PI ) + (st/100-.2: LET AND 6130 IF st<1 THEN GO TO 5902 6140 IF >th THEN GO SUB 9100: P RINT AT 13, 20; \"Missed!\": LET d=5 : GOSUB 9000: GO TO 5070 6145 LET d=INT (RND+201 + ist/30+ 2) 6150 LET IP=LP-INT : GOSUB 91 00: PRINT AT 13, 20; \"A hit...\": G O SUB 9000: PRINTAT 14,20; INT #;\" da age!\": GO SUB 9003: GO SU B 9100 6155 IF RND CP THEN LET 1$=\"Ghou lysis!\"; GO TO 3500 IF IP < THEN LET $=\"your ! s\": GO SUB 3500 IF CS 0 THEN LET $=\"Energy n\": GO TO 3500 GO TO 5070 6500 GO SUB 9100: PRINT AT 13,20 ; \"Psi-bolt!!\": LET it-it-S 6510 IF it <1 THEN GO TO 6900 6520 LET I =INT (RND +20) tit-10+ -10 AND it<ci 6530 PRINT AT 15:20; \" damage! **: LET P=[p: IF IP 1 THEN LE Tr$ = ''Mindshock!\": GO TO 3500 6540 GO TO 5000 6900 LET CIE: GOSUB 9110 GO 5 UB 9100: PRINT AT 13,20; \"The \"; $; AT 14,20; \"dies With\"; AT 15, 22; * Screa\"; FOR i = 1 TO 75: NEXT i: GOSUB 9100 6910 LET XPEXP + (100+ 1 + 120-CS + (20-ci +3000* (n=11) RETURN 7000 PRINT AT a,b; : LET a 1 = LET bl=D 7005 FOR i = SGN PITO CODE\"\" 7210 LET a = a + (INKEY $ ='6\") (INKEY $=\"7): LET b=b+ LINKEY =\"3\") (IN KEY =\"5\") 7012 IF INKEY $=\"1\" OR INKEY $=\"2\" OR INKEY $=\"3\" THEN LET. a $=INKEY $: GO SUB 2500 7015 IF INKEY $<> \"THEN BEEP 01 10: GO TO 7020 7017 NEXT : BEEP ,01,0 GO SUB 4000: RETURN 7020 IF ATTR (a, b = 5 THEN BEEP 1,20 LET =a 1: LET b=b1 GO TO IF ATTR (a,b) =5 THEN GO SUB : RETURN 7040 IF SCREEN$ (a,b)=\"\" THEN G 7045 IF FN r (20) =SGN PI THEN GO 7050 IF FN (20) <+ / THEN G 4000 7060 PRINT AT a,b; ; AT 31, b1;* : RETURN 8000 GO SUB 3199 8002 FOR Z=1 TO 3 3005 LET X=2+FN 1115 801 LET X1 =2+FN r (15) 8015 LET Y=2+FN T (15) LET y1=2+FN r (15) FOR X=X TO X1 STEP X 1-XXXX 8031 IF FN ? (3) -2 THEN PRINT AT y, X; \" \" GO TO 3040 3035 PRINT INK 5; AT 4, X; \" 3040 NEXT X 8050 FOR YOU TO 41 STEP 91-4/6-Y 8051 IF FN (3) =2 THEN PRINT AT y ,x;\"\"; GO TO 3050 9300 FOR I =SGN PI TO VAL\"11\":P RINT AT 1,20;\" T: NEXT 931 PRINT AT SGN PI,2; $ 9322 PRINT AT INT PI 20; \"Strengt h \";CS 9330 PRINT AT 4,20 \"Power\";ci 2 PRINT AT 5,20 50 IF DISGN PI THEN PRINT AT Stamina:\"; IP 20;\"1Strength 360_IF P12) THEN PRINT AT 7,20; \"2 Intell\" 9370 IF PAINT PI) THEN PRINT AT 3,20;\"3Protect\" 9330 OVER 1: PRINT FLASH 7.(SGN P I; AT 6,231 9390 PRINT FLASH 412); AT 7,23; 9400 PRINT FLASH 4INT PI); AT 8, 23;\" \" OVER 9410 IF NOT CF THEN GO TO 9500 9420 PRINT AT 1,20; $ 9430 PRINT AT 11 20 st RETURN \";it: 9500 PRINT AT 10,20; \"Turn\";tniA T 11, 20; \"Skill\";XP; AT 9, 20; \"FIO or \"; fl: RETURN 9600 CLS: PRINT AT 11,2; \"The To wer is behind you\" Ses shall be sung\"? K hear ho YOU SLE or. If YOU did not 9710 DATA \"Orc\", 1 868 DATA Zombies 2,4111\" 15,0 9720 DATA \"Bugb 9730 DATA \"Zomb 9740 DATA \"Ghou 8 759 DATA \"Urai DATA 9770 DATA \"Drag 9780 DATA \"Balr 2790 DATA Troll 9300 DATA \"Gobli 9310 DATA \"Nerit 50,70 C Prei 3? :33 . ODOM . DOCUM VC CO: | ... WS vi 1 0 U 9000 : ucu :: : s : : : 5 Te \"warg \" 3 urah. : OO CU 00 0 : CC OU O "


"MICROPOVI RUNS ON A SPECTRUM IN 48k BY BARRY DE LOBEL $45-9000 || Hà TT OREGO SUB 1000 RAND TO 1500 $48 SUB 5000 IS CODE >7 THEN GO TO 10 LET ba$: PRINT AT 110 +13 IF CODE a $=48 THEN GO TO 15 108 IF IF INKEY $<** THEN GO TO 10 ! ET FOR I = TO 200 DI IF INKEY $< THEN LET 0 TO 112 $48 EEP 005, 25: IF CODE a $ > 57 THEN GO TO 114 \" THEN LET b$=$+ 4 PRINT AT 11,0 +13: INKEY THEN GO TO 11 i | Hà ) N ETO 112 | | MHO FO No U 10H Oulu 3000 lo SOOS 0-0 HOFU ZH LOL WILL LOLLOW LH ZOHOH JIH ZOHOJO 030 ON 99 | Monopoly is still one of the best selling board games around and it has proved to be a winner when converted to a computer game too. Micropoly is based on that well known board game and includes all the features you'd expect to find in the real thing. When you start the game, you must enter the number of players. The computer handles the banker s job and knows how much money each player holds, how much property each player owns, the moving of counters, rents, houses, hotels, jail routines, Chance and Community Chest etc. All this leaves each player free to worry about when to buy and sell or when to build the next hotel on Mayfair. Are you cunning enough to become a millionaire? The challenge awaits... Special notes: When entering an order, it is only necessary to type in what you require. There is no need to type in CR, ENTER etc. For example: Al=Angel Islington, 500=. KX=Kings Cross WW=Water Works, and so on. All properties are referred to by their initial letters When properties are auctioned, the computer will only accept bids greater than 50 percent of the original purchase price. When buying or selling property houses or hotels for properties, three options are available. Y/N puts house on a single property if confirmed as Y. A accepts house on single property with option of another. S puts houses on all properties in set. Players are distinguished by colour: 1 =blue, 2-red. 3=magenta, 4=green. The computer will not allow houses or hotels to be built on properties unless a complete set is owned by one player and none of the properties is mortgaged, just as in the board game. | | \" ! | I | | là \" 13 OR 2 TO 202 IF INKEY T HEN LET : GO TO 14.5 BEEP 025 25 IF CODE ODE 8 $57 THEN GO TO 15 $ = b THE THEN LET IF RINT PT 11 +13:55 LET XEVAL ET --1 LET b=1 Itt Ft |% | | | Illustration: Dorian Cross Dacest 62 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"| | | hi                      ETURN : 1. 28; \"L 490 PRINT AT 12-31) 495 INK3: LET 9=9+: FLASH 499 RETURN LET dx LET TEINT (6*RND +11 LET dy=0 + 15 LET San GO SUB PRPER 5: GO SUB 700 LET TEINT (6*RND+I): LET OX LET Y = +4 PAPER 4 GO SUB 700 GO SUB 580 LET ber : RETURN 590 PAPER 7: LET IF 1=1 ORD=3 OR 1=5 THEN P NT AT dx +1dy +1 510 IF TE > 1 THEN PRINT AT dxdy: P AT dx +2,dy + N PRINT AT DX+2.0 IF 13 THE oxd4 + EN PRINT AT AX+1. 1=6 THE \" T dX+1, dy +2:\" RETURN ATOX + PRINT AT Dxd4;\" y\" \"AT dx +20y\" RETURN \" AT 3.2 PRINT AT 3,1 \" \"; y!: RETURN INK 310 LET b=1 = 1 + THEN LET IF IF 50 THEN GO TO 8800 814 LET b=INT (M/201 NEXT POR K= TO P+1 STEP -1 LET 9=k: GOSUB 400 LET PY) = -1 GO SUB 380: NEXT : CO TO 3 LET = 1: LET bo-1 IF 4P THEN GO TO 350 LET = FOR K= 2 LET TO 40 EX: GOSUB 402 LET PY) = R + 1 GO SUB 380: NEXT K ET 9=1: LET PY) = 1 OR *= TOP-1 LET 9 =K: GOSUB 400 LET PY! =k+1 GO SUB 380: NEXT FOR j = 1 TO 2 IF >9 THEN INK : GOSUB 450 L ET 384 NEXT 390 LET 399 RETUEN =P (y): 20 SUB 450 400 INK BEEP.01 IF 4 12 THEN PRI 9-10 AT 21, 11 IF 9 22 THEN PRINT 0; TU\": GO TO 445 AT (22-4 <32 THEN PRINT AT O, 19RS: GO TO 445 AT (4-311+2+1,23; \"TU\" H1 INK (12 THEN PRIN M: GO TO 4 AT 21, (1 922 THEN PRINT M\": GO TO 495 AT (22-4 <32 THEN PRINT LM\": GO TO 495 019un non Senin 00 099 cu-num-on-OISIS OHHOHH+JIHOH H+  :: F     | 4 HO f  7 EEEEEE FFFFFFIES W 2 LOEWA RETAILWAY lalelelaDeal FAEDA EEEABEBIDEGA INZIGRE 1 ESO SUERE NNNNET SE OF Home Vau TUNISSAAR COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 63 "


"5 IF b=0 THEN LET bli 32 LET VERBS ( LET C = (y: LETD=ABS (b) 5 IF 722 THEN LET d=1 350 FOR I = 1 TO W STEPS 360 LET ! (9) + b 70 GO SUB 300 BEEP.0220: PA SE 5: NEXT i 380 LET y) =C+: GOSUB 800 890 RETURN : NEXT i R ETURN 950 GO SUB 5000 PRINT AT 9.0+ 1 LET B=A$: GOSUB 5000 PR AT 9.+14; A$ LET $ =B +A ESTORE 1900: LET +3; = 1 TO 2 T =0 OR 1=1 TO Z FS) < THEN LET = a + 1 NEXT I F = 1 TH EN GO TO 1800 F Siy) = 0 THEN GO TO 2210 LET t=3: INK @ LET P=py PRINT AT , PLAYER\" AT 1 INK AT 1,3 \"L\" GO SUB 8 B 900: CO SUB 1700: GO STORE 1900LET C=0 i=1 TO 28 > 14 THEN LET C=3 a $, WX =a (a, 11 500 THEN LET b=b-500 =INT 1001 F 100 THEN LET bb-100 TO G20 42 PRINT PAPER AT 9.0+ IF W4 THEN INK y THEN PRINT AT XCP OLY\"; AT 9.0 ER 5 BT 110+ FLASH 1; PA 7 i : RETURN B 900 1005 DIM (40.21: DIMb (187 IM : DIM D 14 : DIM 54: .: DIM d 1162 DIM 141 DIM X (10) = 1 TO 2 THEN LET = 07 01 I= 4 INK AT 8.0 AT 3.0 +5;\" WIN AT 12.0+3 PLAY FOR i = 1 TO 2 READ ajil NEXT : NEXT FOR j = 1 TO 18 FOR i = 1 TO 7 BD biji i NEXT 1. MH 100 i min 1 FILHOZ HORNO 15 01 20 min999 01 Suwu ( CHTXE H2H HZ 100. 0.0 HD O+COO 4 N2 TH-NOS-Sanong EL HOLD . + H0 : 0 th Son ST30009090909 -HSL HH ucu . OLIL ZILIZOSO QUOQ O N XIIXHOE IS os9 -9 SS OOS 101 1919 0-999 MS17 I out S9 I ran SD NO 1991 1199 US 90 minst V OOOOHT. SOUSCOON 999SU 099 09--9-9-m 91000 O O SUSISINA T 102 103 DOSSOSII in 00009 SUSH MD D 1990. I. Nurun 09H NOSO 1999 0 1990 Ganun 99 In N9SX 000SSSSSSS No sin NOU innu -19 OSUDINIS SOS 010 usu 900-N 999 999 990 .. SUHE 30 SILL. Sin ! ur 21 ON . 11 ISO MIM L lunnut oxos ODNO SO 30 DO ILHZHHH 19 OOO H sistem nnnnnnnnnNNNNNNNNNNNNNND DNNN Gin. THE ENX HOZAN tft In llo X ... -ZZUOLI: 1 XS X O EQDAINI SI DEO POOH zu Q: + 0.22 TO 0.00 in 1 XHEHEHOU in ZSZ 10mm .60.ninioN IN 9999999999999 ZOOTTONOSHOON 9000 9000 T HHHHHH+ZOLH200 1000. HUOLEHHHZOLJOON: DEHEHL HJH OOOLILILOW HOO OMONOMIOHD OOOOH Im0 0 : H UN : ton\" : non -1013 ONE 0 : 0 :39H009SIX X LO99 Y30 -3 A CLOZ srucul 99X91 IL PRINT INK 7; FLASH 1: PAPER 11 0+3;\" RINT FLASH 1 PAPER 5: INK 2,0 +3; PLAY AGAIN YN GO SUB 5000 13 IF YTHEN CO TO 1857 ORE 1902 UB 900 = 1 TO 28 $ a, X i 23 THEN LET E=2: su LET buaia, 1) IF >100 THEN LET beb-100 1880 IF DES THEN LET 1895 1) = 8: G 1890 LET ala, 1) = 128 Go su 2960 LET PEP (T: GOSUB 39 P DATA, \"KB 12.4.4. \"WR\",4,4,5, SHOH 190 223,1875 BRICHT PAPER 7: LET P= LET O= CO SUB 90 PINT ST 10 0+3:\"ENTER NUM 3 0 100009 00 Onu 0 XU 0 S: 0 Zno HI OSX 000 09 0 + 0 19 @ 20 uur 60. FINKEY=*** THEN GO TO 153 BEEP .005.25 LET Z = (CODE I Y -43 IF Z2 OR Z + THEN GO TO 15 1550 GO SUB 5500 INK 0 GO SUB 900: GO SUB 3 12 LET = 015 FOR 1 =1 TO 5: GOSUB 500 N IF 2=5 THEN LET t=t-1: LET LET S(y=0 IF WE THEN GO TO 4200 N 64 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"TANK MMANDER All action game with strong strategic element. Roll down the middle of the road in a beeline for the enemy fuel dumps and you won't make it past the first bridge This 100% machine code game features: Superb sound and graphics.  Smooth action scrolling screen. Separate map screen to plan strategy. Five pre-selectable skill levels. One or two player game. Requires 32K RAM expansion Cassette .95 ORC ATTACK Defend your castle against the rampaging hordes of attacking Orcs. with broadswords, rocks and boiling oil. This 100% machine code game benefits from superb sound and graphics spread over four screens of exciting action. One, two, three, or four player game. High score feature. Six pre-selectable levels of play. Requires 16K RAM expansion Instant plug-in cartridge action. .95 CARNIVAL MASSACRE Interesting fairground scenario where you must save the ferris wheel passengers from Butcher Bill's missiles, and the roller-coaster riders from Ruthless Rick's bombs. You will need to be quick to keep up with the action in this 100% machine code game which features first class sound and graphics over two screens. One or two player game. Instant plug-in cartridge action. .95 SUBMARINE COMMANDER Discover these newgames for ATARI.. Attack and destroy all enemy shipping. That is your brief in this exciting game of strategy. Can you stand the nerve tingling action spread over three screens provided by this amazing game. Already a big hit in the USA. Superb scrolling screen in periscope mode and realistic sound effects. Nine pre-selectable levels of play. High score feature. Requires 32K RAM. Cassette .95 COMPUTER Now all Atari owners can appreciate these great games from Creative Sparks, some of which were previously only available at . Experience the excellent animation, stunning sound effects and music in games which stretch your Atari to the limits. Priced from only .95, all Creative Sparks Atari games are available from your usual supplier, or direct from the address below. Based on the hit movie \"War Games Using both strategy and good shooting destroy the incoming missiles and avoid the holocaust. An amazing game with superb scrolling landscape when tracking missiles. High tension play when trying to crack the code. Keyboard or joystick control. One player game. Requires 32K RAM. Cassette .95 CREATIVE SPARKS Please complete the coupon and send it with your remittance to Creative Sparks, Patterson House, Chertsey, Surrey KT16 9AP. Please make your cheque or postal order payable to: TÉCS Name Address .95 Method of Payment Cheque Postal Order Access/Barclaycard Tank Commander TNDB101 Orc Attack TNDB60 Carnival Massacre TNDB50 Submarine Commander .95 TNDB71 Computer War .95 TNDB21 .95 Access CVG 584 .95 "


"* Europe's No 1 group of retail outlets * Check our multi-national network for your nearest dealer * Backed by an after-sales service second to none * Up to $1,000 Instant credit Write for details THE BIG _FOR. Computer Hardware Nand Software Nationwide ==== Low Prices Best Service at your local Big Dealer Micro-Management Head Office: 16 Princes Street, Ipswich, Suffolk Telephone: 0473 219461 "


"The Big International Dealer Network Altringham Pharmacy Computer Systems Copeland 37 Stamford New Road Altringham Cheshire WA4 1EB 061 928 0087 Beverley Beverley Computer Centre 1 Windmill Passage 55 Lairgate Beverley N. Humberside 0482 881911 Birmingham The Micro Centre 1756 Pershore Road Cotteridge Birmingham 021 458 4564 Bishops Storfford Computus (East Anglia) 3 Church Street Bishops Stortford Herts. 0279 506802 Bolton Selecta Video 5 Belmont Road Astley Bridge Bolton Lancs. 0204 52804 Bridgend Automation Services 42 Dunraven Place Bridgend Mid Glam CR31 ANS 0656 3550 Brighton Gamer 24 Gloucester Road Brighton Sussex 0273 698424 Bristol Brensal Computers Ltd 24 Park Road Bristol 0272 294188 Brixham Computer Systems (Torbay) Pump Street Brixham Devon 080456565 Bromley Data Store 6 Chatterton Road Bromley Kent BR2 9QN 01-460 8991 Bury Entertainment in Leisure 88 The Rock Bury 061 797 3463 Cambridge GCC Cambridge Ltd 66 High Street Sawston Cambridge 0223 835330 Canterbury Canterbury Software Centre 9 The Friars Canterbury 0227 53531 Cardiff Steves Computer Centre Castie Arcade Cardiff 0222 41905 Chelmsford Essex Computer Centre 216 Moulsham Street Chelmsford Essex 0245 358702 Chester-Le-Street Knowledge Computer Centre 15 Northburns Chester-Le-Street Co. Durham 0385 881014 Colchester Anglia Newsagents Braintree Computer Centre 193 Lexden Road Colchester 0376 24922 Colchester Capricorn Computers Ltd 32 North Hill Colchester 91 68471 County Antrim Everyman Computers 80 Charlotte Street Ballymoney Co. Antrim N. Ireland 02656 62116/62658 Dartford Anirog Computers 29 West Hill Dartford Kent 0322 92513 Derby First Byte Computers 10 Castlefields London Road Derby 0332 365280 Dover Dover International Computer Centre 18/19 The Charlton Arcade High Street Dover Kent 0304 212433 Dyfed Business Information System Computer Centre 18 Riverside Market Haverford West Dyfed 0437 2776/68228 Evesham Evesham Micro Centre Crown Courtyard 1 Bridges Street Evesham Worcs. 0386 49641 Hastings The Computer Centre 37 Die Robertson Street Hastings East Sussex 0424 439190 Harpenden Hobbyte 153 Grove Road Harpenden Herts 0587 3542 Heckmondwike Thoughts and Crosses 37 Market Street Heckmondwike West Yorkshire 0924 402 337 Hemel Hempstead Faxminster Ltd 25 Market Square Hemel Hempstead Herts. 0442 55044 High Wycombe Norwich Stroud South Bucks Computer Centre Abacus The Model Shop clo Hull Loosley & Pearce 12a Pottersgate 22 High Street 121123 Oxford Road Norwich Stroud High Wycombe Norfolk Glos Bucks. 0603 614441 04536 5920 0494 442311 Hornchurch Peterlee Surbiton Comptel Computer Systems General Northern Computing Computasolve Ltd 112a North Street 8 Whitworth Road 8 Central Parade Hornchurch South West Ind. Estate St. Marks HII Essex Peterlee Surbiton 04024 46741 Durham Surrey 0783 860314 01 390 5135 Horsham Micro Store Taunton 13b West Street Preston Sinewave Computer Services Horsham Format Computing Corporation Street W. Sussex 67 Friar Gate Taunton 0403 52297 Preston Devon Horsham Lancs. 0823 57526 Orchard Business Systems Ltd 0772 561952 Tewkesbury 34 East Street Sabre Consultants Ltd Horsham Rye W. Sussex RH12 1HL 103 High Street Tollgate Video Tewkesbury 0403 68461 Tollgate Garage Gloucester Ipswich New Winchelsea Road 0684298866 Brainwave Rye 24 Crown Street E. Sussex Truro Ipswich Rye 223106 Truro Micro Ltd Suffolk Unit 1 Bridge House Ipswich 50965 Scunthorpe New Bridge Street Ashby Computer Centre Truro Lancashire 186 Ashby High Street Cornwall Blackpool Computer Stores Scunthorpe 0872 40043 179 Church Street S. Humberside Blackpool 0724 871756 Uxbridge Lancashire FY1 3NX J.K.L. Computers 0253 27091 Southend 7 Windsor Street Lerwick Estuary Software Uxbridge Tomorrow's World 261 Victoria Avenue Middlesex UB8 1 AB 20 Commercial Road Southend 0895 51815 Lerwick Essex Shetland Isles 0702 43568 Welling 0595 2145 North Kent Computer Centre London Southall 52/54 Beligrove Road Welling Computers of Twillstar Computers Bedley Wigmore Street 17 Regina Road Kent DA16 3DY 87 Wigmore Street Southall 01-301 2677 London W1H SFP Middx. 01-486 0373 01-574 5271 Whitley Bay London Video & Home Computers CLM tia Matmos St. Anstell Centre 14:16 Childs Place Computavision 3 Roxburgh House Earls Court 4 Market Street Park Avenue London St. Anstell Whitley Bay 01-373 5000/6607 0726 5297 Tyne & Wear London 0632 534725 Cubegate Ltd Stirling Wolverhampton 301 Edgware Road Micro Store Wolverhampton Computer 38 The Arcade London Centre 01-836 9373 King Street 17/19 Lichfield Street Stirling Maldenhead Central Region Wolverhampton WV1 1EA Chiswick Organs 0786 64571 0902 29907 45 Nicholsons Walk Maidenhead Worthing 0628 31765 Stoke On Trent Worthing Computer Centre Town Computer Centre 32 Liverpool Road Marlow 30 Town Road Worthing Citybench Hanley W. Sussex 2/4 'Eton Place Stoke On Trent Marlow 0782 287540 Bucks For your nearest European 06284 75244 Stoneleigh Dealer telephone Belgium or Merseyside Diamond Duel Records Holland Source Computers 75 The Broadway Belgium 4 Cross Lane Stoneleigh Micro Management New-Le-Willows Surrey Belgium Merseyside 01-393 4944 Ballaerstraat 75 092 524394 2018 Antwerp Belgium Stourbridge Milton Keynes 03-238 9284 Landmark Computer Ltd Interac Systems Micro Land Marchill House Holland Lietherburn Court 151 Worcester Road Micro Management Brunel Centre W. Hagley Nederlands Bletchley Stourbridge Road Huisstraat 98 2406 Milton Keynes W. Midlands Ah Alphen-aan-den-rijn 0908 368018 0562 885456 01720 72580 CHECK WITH YOUR LOCAL DEALER FOR SPECIAL BARGAINS AND NEW PRODUCT RELEASES (All products normally in stock but to prevent a wasted journey phone your local dealer first before calling. All prices inclusive of VAD "


"TURBO CHARGE YOUR SPECTRUM NIVERRA Outperforms any Spectrum interface Or call our credit card hot line on 02514 25252. (Access and Visa welcome). Ram Electronics (Fleet) Ltd, 106 Fleet Road, Fleet, Hampshire GU13 8PA See us at the PCG Show, Solihull from April 20-22 The unique Turbo interface from Ram gives you all these features and more-in one unit: * A variety of interfaces including Rom cartridges, two 9-way D plugs for standard joysticks, PLUS full expansion bus at rear. ** Compatible with Kempston and Protek protocols, * Works with latest Quickshot Mk II auto rapid-fire joysticks! * Choice of Rom cartridge or tape cassette software. * Instant program loading with cartridge software. * Built-in power safety device unique to Ram Turbo. * Full one year guarantee. ** Immediate availability-orders will be despatched within 28 days of receipt of order. * Incredible value only .95. So don't wait around simply complete the coupon and send it to us today. Please send me: Spectrum Turbo Interface(s) at .95 + lp+ploverseas orders p+p) Quickshot | Joystick(s) at .95 (Only when purchased with Turbo normally .95 + p+p) I enclose cheque/postal order or charge my Access/Visa for  AEIIIIIIIIIIII Name Address Tel TURBO To: Ram Electronics (Fleet) Ltd, 106 Fleet Road, Fleet Hampshire GU13 8PA CVGS/84 Trade and export enquiries welcome. "


"BAHme & B&BAAE Tam 7177 ITIL .CZ Da ZIT 9 IF Sty! 0 THEN LET P=11: G LET OP: LET POPUT 2021 IF P12 THEN LET PED-40 LE =9 2025 GO SUB 300 LET SE: LET = P 11 IF > 500 THEN LET = a -500 HHHHH QXDEES egoer-HET = AS 2700 LET E = 0 LET V= W,1); LET 11 LET X = ( X 1 ) 100 THEN LET WEW-100 100 THEN LET wit-100: 100 THEN LET X=X-100: IF W2 OR W2 OR X2 THEN L BETURN 3000 ÉRINT AT 11,0 +4: \"DO YOU WAN PRINT AT 12.0+5\" BUY IT YA 022 GO SUB 5000 022 IF a < > HY\" THEN GO TO 3500 025 LET bra ( 2 LET =-bib, 11 LET = GO : LET SP1 =2+14+100 OR P=29 THEN LET 700 GO SUB 4000: G AT 10.0+4: RENT QUED PRINT AT 11,0 +4 PLAYER F_=3 THEN GO TO 3250 ET b=a (P.2: LET C IF S = 1 AND a=2 THEN LET CEC on O nonumuz HOMEM + dont un HA DONO 01 000 09090099 SHOOST + 2 0 0 LO OHILOILOLLILE IL HIHIGHHHH OH00 HOIDA. SOVU!!!!! 69 T ] DOUX OZ mucus -419 000 001 EFF II ! 90 H -nucu 20 l 9 0 ocucu ZO... ILU TOMONID 999 9 0 0 3 1 4 14 ti v th + 2000HT OF WO 5 10XH01 2 09:10MIDDDDDDDD Um ISSION HOOOOO-19 Sun HOHOHOHOHOHINO. I HQ Hz. 9 WHO NOM I too OOH in Concurrucucurucunun nutu TOWO IL ti 4 | 99 2 IF F=9 THEN GOSUB 900 PRI 10,0 +5: PASS GOAT 11 OLLECT  LET 200 B 900: LET I Fa > 100 THEN LET =i+1: LE GO TO 2035 a = 0 THEN LET bra (P.2) : P 10,0 +4;\" FOR SALE ';bib 3000 > AND 31 AND a 9 THE THEN GO TO 8000 HEN GO TO 8100 2 THEN PRINT AT 11,0 + (P2 LET SP GO TO 2100 GO TO 4200 15.0+10; AT 18,0 +10;\" CHANCE\" AT 17,0 + 4;\" CHEST , AT 6,0 +4; 2104 INK : LET 4 =D: GOSUB 450 2105 IF = 1 THEN GOSUB 900: PRI NT AT 10.0+4; DALBLE THROUWET 1.31 \"!OISES30 * FOR W = 1 TO 30 NEXT WGO TO 2000 2110 GO SUB 900: INK : PRIN 8.0 +4 IUNFOPERTY.ET BUY-BUS AT 10 G3 =SELL POL SES 12 C -1 L PROPERTE 2115 INK : PRINT AT 10,0 +4; 37 : GOSUB 5000 \" THEN GO SUB 5000 2\" THEN CO SUB 6500 2110 IF $9\" THEN CO SUB 7000 THEN GO SUB 5900 ET E =0: GO s cu WOULUL NINONONONEN WA orun -VOSOS : cucu IL. ODG GHH 9 . + S 0 ANOS 0.02 90 . HH 4. O UDUCUCUN XOU 9 Grubu Mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm O 09. HOO runninnnnnnnnnnn SO90098 ILH.200   HODEIX iz on NDOOMID OIL HUONO 224 PRINT AT 12.0 +4 .is 3230 LET -C: LET X31 = C: LET X (9) =1: GOSUB 310: LET TA (X (9 =M {X (9) +X (8): GO TO 2100 3250 LET b=4: IF S = 1 THEN LET = 3255 PRINT AT 12,0 +3:\" 2\";b 3256 LET (8) =bT: LET X9 = 3260 LET TH=-b*: GOSUB 812 X 19 ) = (x (9) ! +X (8): GO TO HOH * Jou FC IS Fog 128 HOOLD+ CD #4 MD 2150-500 Go 8 to 1980 12,14,15 3,0+4; FOE FLETED AT 9,0 +4; \"THE E 1900: LET 2=2 3530 FOR I = 1 TO 28 TO 28 THEN GO TO 3560 READ b, a, W.X CO SUB 7800 PRINT AT 10.0 +4: \"BID PLAYER GO SUB 5000 LET CECODE a $ C=C-18 IF C = THEN GO TO 2100 C<1 ORCZ ORSIC) = THE 0 3531 LET EEC RINT AT 10.0+4 PAPER CI 7 \"BID PLAYER \"C: 3538 PRINT AT 10,0 +15; CAT 11,0+ 4, \"AMOUNT 3590 GO SUB 100: PRINT AT 12.0 + 4 \"AGREED YAN\" 3600 GO SUB 5000 IF $ <> \"Y\" THE N GO TO 3500 E : 28,30,32 28:56.82736 w RESTORE 339 139 Ri= 1 TO 3 IF E=1 THEN CO TO 2640 READ V, X IF WE OR WE OR X = THEN L NEXT 1 2650 RETURN COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 69 "


"OSS UD immmmx30mm DDDDDDDDDD 4410 LET =-50 LET 810 =: GO SUB 4420 LET S(y) = 0: RETURN 5000 LET C=1: LET K= 1 5001 IF INKEY $<> \"\" THEN GO TO 50 5002 LET EN GO TO $=INKEY IF 010 $ <> \"\" TH 5003 LET K =k+1: IF K<>10 THEN GO TO 5202 = 1: LET C=C +1: IF : 2 C) 9 THEN LET 4 =D (C): SUB 460 B 390: GO TO 5002 005, 25: LET K =CODE as 96 THEN LET KEK 32 =CHR$ : LET K=: Il COR + ++ sinn inn u HUUH L.O *ZXO999999 SIGH  03  ELEE nnin n opi 1028 TO-037 LET b=a (P.2); LET b=bb, 1) IF X</2 THEN GO TO 3500 LET b iel-X 6 IF 0 THEN GO TO 3500 LET a (a , 1) =2+e+100 LET ME F2:13 OR =29 THEN LET al 8+e+100 IF E=y THEN GO SUB 810: GO 700 GO TO 3620 LET FE) = (e!-X GOSUB 4000 GO TO 2100 4000 FOR i =1 TO 40 10 IF Sli,1) > 500 THEN LET alia ( 1)-500: GO TO 4010 O NEXT i 4021 FOR i = 6 TO 36 STEP 10 22 LET =100+INT ( 11/100 23 IF = 0 THEN GO TO 4030 LET bra ii, 1) b=1 THEN LET (3, 1) = a +1: ET ali, 1) = + 2 4030 NEXT 4040 RESTORE 2500 4050 FOR i = 1 TO 9 4060 READ W, X 4070 LET SINT ( a 111001: LET b=INT (a (W, 11/120LET CEINT = x 112 4073 LET E= 1+100 4075 IF 8 W, 11 = OR (W, 1) = OR a ix, 11 = THEN GO TO 4090 4030 IF =D AND b= AND C O THE N LET av 1) =a ( 1) +500 LET all , 1) = a 1 +500: LET SEX 11 = 1x, 1 1 +503 4085 IF 3 X, 17 >1003 THEN LET aix 1) = a (x,1)-500 4090 NEXT i 4100 LET a=100+INT (6.1), 100 : LET U =a (6.1)-a: IF U=1 THEN LET Tb=100+ INT 1 6:11 1001 a (16,1)-5: IF V=1 THEN L Illu 4102 LET C = 100*INT (a (261) /100) : LET W = a (26, 1 -6: IF W = 1 THEN L ET SE 4103 LET d=100+INT (1361) /100 LET X= (38,11-: IF X = 1 THEN L ET =0 4105 IF 0 THEN GO TO 4115 4110 LET (6, 1) = 15,1) + (=b) + (as Cl+aud) 4115 IF =D THEN GO TO 4125 4120 LET (16,11 =a (1611 + b = 1 + b=! +(bad IF 0 THEN GO TO 4135 4130 LET a 126, 11 =a (26:11 + ICE + ( ad) 4135 IF = 0 THEN GO TO 4150 4140 LET 136,1 ) =a (361 ) + id=b) + { d=C) +Id=a) 4150 RETURN 4200 PRINT AT 110+4 GO TO UA 2 : LET 4 =P: LET P=11 4210 IF 911 THEN GO SUB 300: GO SSO LET 9=1: LET h=1 5501 FOR i = 1 TO 16 LET_5i)=i: LET dili NEXT i 1 FOR i=1 TO 16 520 LET b=INT (16 RND) +1 5530 LET SEINT (16+RND) + 1 5540 LET S=C (i: LET S LET Cibra =(b): 555 LET 3d (i)LET LET dic) za ) = (C): 5550 NEXT : RETURN 6000 PRINT AT 3,0+4; EU FEEPER \" AT 9,0 +4; \"WHICH 5020 GO SUB 950: GOSUB 7800 ?\" 5030 IF = ORDED OR Cry THEN G OTO 5200 6034 GO SUB 2500: IF E= TO 6940 THEN GO 035 GO SUB 2702 IF E=1 THEN GO 6040 LET EEC 5965 PRINT AT 10.0+4: \"FROM PLAYE R\";CAT 11,0 +4; \"AMOUNT E 6078 GOSUB 100 PRINT AT 12.0+4 \"AGREED Y/N\" 6089 GO SUB 5000 N GO TO 5200 IF a $<> \"Y\" THE 5105 IF a=6 OR a = 16 OR a =26 OR a =36 THEN GO TO 5120 6110 IF 2 AND 8 THEN GO TO 6 200 6120 LET (81) =b+y+100: LET X: LET fee: LET X 3) =X: LET X14) =: GOSUB 310: LET 4.) +X (3) X 4 ) = X 6130 GOSUB 1700 GO SUB 4000 6200 RETURN 6500 PRINT AT 8,0 +3; BUY HOUSE \"; AT 9.0+; \"FOR 5510 LET X17) = 2: GOSUB 950 ?\" 514 LET X(5) = 3: GOSUB 7800 5 IF a = OR <500 OR S HEN GO TO 6790 Y OR LET X16) =: LETE=b LET b=h (1) uh 21 th 13th (4) LET W=9 (1) +9 (2) +9131 +9 (4) IF E=S AND V=12 THEN GO TO IF E = THEN GO TO 658 IF b=32 THEN GO TO 67 LET b=INT (C-1) /101 + 1 IF X (7) > 0 THEN GO TO 5620 INT AT 10,0 +4: \"COST E PRINT AT 10,0 +13 PRINT AT 11,0 +4; ACCEPT Y/N +59 5 PRINT AT 12,0 +3; \"S=BUILD SE 6596 PRINT AT 13,0+3; \"A=ACCEPT & MORE 6500 GOSUB 5000 LET X(5) =1: GO TO 6620 IF $=\"A\" THEN 5695 IF a $=\"S\" THEN GO TO 6712 IF a >\"Y\" THEN GO TO 6700 20 LET aia, 1) =a (a. 1) + 1 + 4220 GOSUB 200 4225 LET S (y) =3 4230 LET TEO: LET t =3 GO TO 210 4300 GO SUB 900 4305 IF Sty! = 1 THEN GO TO 4400 4310 PRINT AT 9,0 +3; YOU ARE IN IL AT 10. 0+3;\" DO YOU WISH T O ; AT 11,0 +3; \"PAY  FINE YXN\" 4320 GO SUB 5000 IF $=\"Y\" THEN GO TO 1400 4330 LET Syl =S (y) 1 4340 RETURN 4400 GO SUB 900: PRINT AT 100 +5 AT IBAB+5.\" +   |  NDID DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD NOSO9n+ NOTICII 01   :   70 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"EMPIRES When a Galactic war breaks out, there is only one winner make sure it's you! Empires is a game of the type which has nofbeen seen before. It is a fully player interactive strategy game for up to six players and an umpire. The basic set contains three players. Expansion set one contains three more. Each player controls a unique race struggling to take over the galaxy. Mining companies, space fleets and sound strategy all contribute to the success of your race; but beware the other players will be trying to tear your empire apart. The skill required to organise your empire as it grows is enormous. To assist you galactic maps and data cards are provided. Soon further expansion sets will be available to give you an advantage over the other players. Move information is transferred via cassette to the umpire who analyses it with his program and returns the new data to the players. Messages can be sent to other players in the same way. THIS IS A NEW CONCEPT IN STRATEGY GAME PLAYING. 48K SPECTRUM CONTENTS: THREE PLAYER CASSETTES, ONE UMPIRE CASSETTE, 4 GALACTIC MAPS, 81 DATA CARDS, 1 FULL SET OF RULES, 3 PLAYER INSTRUCTIONS Price .95 Please send me .......... copy/copies of Empires Basic Set Send order to: IMPERIAL SOFTWARE IMPERIAL HOUSE 153 CHURCHILL ROAD PARKSTONE POOLE DORSET Total cheque/P.O. enclosed Cheques payable to Imperial Software. Name..... Address ...... ........ Age..... "


"PERSONAL COMPUTERS EXECUTIVE 64 Portable Computer including free software. Easyscript + Games + Easystock and Easyfinance. Special offer price . 48 Junction Road, Archway, London N19 5RD. NOW Tel: 01-263 9493 and 9495. ALSO 238 The Broadway, Muswell Hill, London N10 AT Tel: 01-883 3705 64 64 Professional System Commodore 64 computer 1541 disk drive Daisywheel printer Phillips 12in green screen monitor All connecting cables Easyscript; wordprocessing program Superbase — Database program (Easyscript and Superbase linked together) Box of paper and box of diskettes Our price     . .00 e BBC Model B computer....... e BBC Model B with disk interface ........ e BBC Model B with Econet interface ..... e BBC Model B with disk and Econet interface Disk interface (price includes fitting) Econet interface (price includes fitting). Speech interface (price includes fitting)....... a Microguide (Keyplate) .......... .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 . . .95 DISK DRIVES CUMANA DISK DRIVES e CS100 Single sided 40T/100K .35 TORCH 280 PACK e CS200 Single sided 80Tr200K .35 2 x 400K (formatted) floppy disk drives e CS400 Double sided 80tr400K .85 Z80 second processor e CD400S Dual single sided and the following FREE software 80Tr400K Perfect Writer Perfect Speller .35 Perfect Filer Perfect Calc e CD800S Dual double sided 80 Tr800K ................... .75 Only .50 +8.00 p&p CD drives can be switched to 40Tr mode. All Cumana drives are supplied in beige cabinet, have their own power supply, connecting cable, format disk and user's manual. e Commodore 64 computer ... .95 e 1541 disk drive (170K) ..... .95 e MPS 801 matrix printer ..... .95 .10 c C2N cassette unit ........ .50 a Quickshot joystick 2 .95 e 1520 printer/plotter ....... e 1526 dot matrix printer ..... .00 f1701 colour monitor ....... 2195.95 b Z80 CP/M cartridge ....... .50 b Speech synthesiser...... . .95 a Microguide ...... .00 c Petspeed ......... b Intro. to Basic Part 1 and 2 ... .50 b Simons Basic by Commodore .00 b Easyscript (wordprocessor) . . .00 b Easyspell (spelling checker) . . .00 b Vizawrite (wordprocessor) . . . .00 . .00 b Vizawrite/Spell ............ .00 b Sales ledger by Anagram.... b Purchase ledger by Anagram . .00 .85 b Stock control............ . .00 b Superbase 64 ......... b Wordcraft 40 (cartridge) ... .95 .00 c Calc Result 64/SX64..... .95 C Calc Result Easy 64/SX64... .95 b Bridge 64....... .95 b Mon 64 ..... .. c Programmers reference guide. . .95 .35 b Omnicalc.. .95 b Multiplan...... .75 b Zork I, II or Ill...... .95 b Deadline ...... .95 b Suspended ........ .95 b Flight Simulator II ........ b Robbers of the Lost Tomb .... .95 .95 b Hobbit 64 commodore 64 packs 64 STARTER PACK 64 BUSINESS PACK Commodore 64 Commodore 64 C2N cassette deck 1541 disk drive Intro to Basic (part 1) MPS-801 printer Quickshot joystick Free Easy Script Game of our choice Easy file, and introduction to Only .00 Basic (part 1) +  p&p Box of disks + box of paper Only .00 + p&p 64 BEGINNERS PACK '64 HOME BUSINESS Commodore 64 C2N cassette deck Commodore 64 1541 disk drive Only .00 box of 10 disks + p&p Only .00 + p&p PRINTERS fRX80 (Tractor only) Dot matrix .95 fFX100 (Friction & pin feed) Dot .95 matrix fRX8OFT (Friction & Tractor) Dot .85 matrix... .. .95 f Shinwa CP80 ......... 2000 (Daisy wheel) f Daisystep 2000 (Daisy wheel).. 2329.95 f FX80 (Friction & pin feed) Dot .95 matrix... ......... .95 Juki Daisy Wheel.... MONITORS Commodore 1701 Colour and Sound f Microvitec 14\" Colour ...... .95 fBMC 12\" Green screen ...... .85 .25 C Turntable stand for BMC . . . . . .55 f Philips Green screen ........ .00 f Fidelity RGB, RGBY, Composite and Sound ......... .85 1x8.813.00 p&p paper 3de code a) MEDIA SUPPLIES 132.75 Diskettes by Verbatim (supplied in boxes of 10) D.S.D.D. 80Tr DS.S.D.D. 40Tr .17.95 .24.75 b Plastic library case .35 S.S.D.D. BOT bC15 cassettes 50p each or 10 for .50 15.52 d 11x15 Computer paper supplied in boxes of 2000 sheets) d 11x8.13.800 11x91, .65 Sorry p&p paper .00 a box Printer Ribbons (postage code a) .26.21 b 1515/1525 b Juki ..........85 b Daisystep 2000 .52 b Epson ........00 Dust covers: postage code a) C2N E 1.95 54/VIC 202.95 03.95 BBC.... .95 1541.... .95 RX FX80 .95 Single disk .95 1525/GP100 .95 FX100 13.95 Dual disk .95 Dragon... 12.95 1526 PACK Phone or send for our latest details of our range of products which is far too large to put into this advert. Besides the complete range of Commodore and BBC we also stock all the latest software and books for the 64, VIC, BBC and Dragon. We guarantee all our products for 1 year (on 64 and VIC 2 years). Payment may be made by Access, Barclaycard, Bankers Draft, Building Society cheque or cash. Sorry, cheques need 4 day's clearance. Postage and packing: see codes. ALL PRICES ARE INCLUSIVE OF VAT. WE RESERVE THE RIGHT TO ALTER PRICES WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE Postage codes a-.65, b=21.00, c-.00 d=.00, e-.00 (Securicor), 1-.00 (Securicor) "


"7832 HBBBBBBBB 717 . IZZA HE S 5625 LET E = +1: GO SUB 6800: LET #4 =-b+50: LET = LET X 4 =E: G 0 SU8 812 6630 IF x 141 =7 THEN LET 9(y) = 14 +1: LET hy) =h (y)-4 GO TO 6650 6640 LET hy) =h (y + 1 6652 IF X (5) = 1 THEN LET WIX (6): GO TO 6514 6660 IF X (7) > 0 THEN GO TO 6710 6700 RETURN 6710 IF X (7) =3 THEN GO TO 6700 6715 LET $=\"SET 6720 GO SUB 2500 6725 IF W =X AND X (7) =2 THEN GOT 0 5700 6732 LET X (7) =X (7) + 1 6734 IF X (7) = 1 THEN LET a =v: LET W =X 161: GO TO 6514 6735 IF X (7) = 2 THEN LET a =w: LET W=X 16: GO TO 6514 6736 IF x 7) =3 THEN LET a =X: LET W =X (6): GO TO 6514 6750 GO SUB 900: PRINT AT 10,0+1 \" VE SESSEL 6760 FOR U=1 TO 100: NEXT W 6770 GO TO 6700 INK 4 IF E=2 THEN LET d=32: LET C 68s IF E=3 THEN LET d=153: LET 6310 IF =4 THEN LET d=154 LET 6320 IF =5 THEN LET d=153: LET IF E=6 THEN LET d=154: LET 5340 IF E=? THEN LET d=160: LET = 160: INK 2 5359 IF a <11 THEN PRINT AT 19,!1 1-a) +2+O; CHR$ C; CHR$ : GO TO 68 6860 IF <21 THEN PRINT AT (221*2-2,0-2, CHR$ C; CHR$ d: GO TO 6 890 6370 IF a <31 THEN PRINT AT 2, Ta21) +2+O; CHR$ C; CHR$ : GO TO 689 6330 PRINT AT (a-31) +2.30; CHR$ 0 : CHE r 6390 INK : RETURN 6900 PRINT AT 3.0 +3; SELL PROPER \"; AT 9,0 +4; \"WHICH ? 6910. GO SUB 950: GOSUB 7800 6920 IF = OR CS4 THEN GO TO 6 999 5930 90 SUB 2600 IF EI THEN G O TO 6940 6935 GO SUB 2700: IF  = 1 THEN GO TO 5999 6940 PRINT AT 10.0+4; \"TO PLAYER 6941 GO SUB 5000 LET C=CODE as: LET C=C-48 6942 IF S 1 OR C>Z ORS(C) =9 THE GO TO 6941 43 IF CEY THEN GO TO 6999 6945 LET EEC 8949 PRINT AT 10.0+14; C; AT 11,0+ ; \"AMOUNT 2\" 6652 Go Su 100: PRINT AT 12,0 +4 GREED YXN\" 6960 GO SUB 5000 IF a$<\"Y\" THE N GO TO 5999 6965 LET 19 = iel-X 966 IF < THEN GO TO 6999 980 LET ala,1)=b+E+100: LET MEX ET X13) =X: LET X (4) =E: GOSUB 810 LET ix (41) = (x (411-X (3) 6990 GO SUB 1700 GO SUB 4000 5999 RETURN 7000 PRINT AT 8,0 +3; 5ELL POLE EL\"; AT 9,0 +4; \"WHERE ?\" 7010 LET X77) =0 GO SUB 950 7020 LET X (5) =: GO SUB 7800 030 IF > OR <3 THEN GO TO 7 075 LET X (6= LET E=b 80 LET b=INT ( -1)/10)+1 90 IF (7) > 0 THEN GO TO 7160 110 PRINT AT 10,0 +4; \"PRICE * 7113, PRINT AT 10,0 +13; b*25 7120 PRINT AT 11,0 +4; \"ACCEPT Y/N 7122 PRINT AT 12.0+3; \"S=SELL SET 7125 PRINT AT 13,0 +3; \"A=ACCEPT | MORE\" 130 GOSUB 5000: IF S=\"A\" THEN LET X151 =1: GO TO 7160 135 IF a $=\"S\" THEN GO TO 7300 7140 IF as \"Y\" THEN GO TO 7200 7160 LET 1) = 13, 11-1 170 LET ese-1: GOSUB 6800: LET = +6+25: LET X 141 = GO SUB 810 7175 IF X (4) = 6 THEN LET 99=914 1-1. LET hiy) =h (9) +4 GO TO 7190 7182 LET hiy) =h (41-1 7190 IF X (5) = 1 THEN LET W =X 16): GO TO 7020 IF X17) > THEN GO TO 7300 7200 RETURN 7300 IF X (7) =3 THEN GO TO 7200 7310 LET 5$=\"SET\" 7315 GO SUB 2600 O IF W =X AND X (7) =2 THEN GOT 7340 LET X17) =X 71 +1 7350 IF X17) = 1 THEN LET v: LET EX 167: GO TO 7020 7355 IF X(7) =2 THEN LET a =w: LET W=X 16: GO TO 7020 7360 IF X(7) =3 THEN LET à =X: LET =X (6): GO TO 7020 7500 PRINT AT 8, 0+3; MORTEGE BAB FERTE; AT 9,0 +4; \"WHICH ? 7519 GO SUB 950: GOSUB 7800 7550 IF (b>2 AND <3 OR <<>Y TH EN GO TO 7700 7560 IF b=1 AND E=1 THEN GO TO 7 700 7570 IF b=1 THEN GO TO 7900 7580 LET bra (a, 2): LETE=b b, 1) 7610 PRINT AT 10.0++; \"AMOUNT \" COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 73 100 ANDRA 2358 LET into atest le by med 4 JAT. "


"R&R SOFTWARE means value FOR ANY (ZX SPECTRUM At R&R we believe that value comes first, and we make it our business to ensure that we provide good quality programs at realistic prices... for your enjoyment. ALL ARCADE GAMES NORMALLY HAVE CHOICE OF KEYBOARD OR JOYSTICK CONTROL Should you have difficulty in obtaining our products from your local Dealer please send cheque or Postal Order indicating titles required, for return of post service, CHOPPER X-1 GALAXY WARLORDS (For any ZX Spectrum) JUNIOR ARITHMETIC SPECTIPEDE For any ZX Spectrum) You command the Spectrum Chopper X-1 Gunship Your mission is to repelinvading forces and save the earth An action packed original game in full machine pode you defend your position as Galaxy Warlord against attacking enemy starships Both your patrol ship and rockets are steerable the enemy never seem to give up! Full colour action graphics and sound for For any ZX Spectrum) An excellent educational program for 6-9 year olds The fun way to learn and practice Addition Subtraction, Multiplication and Division Mistakes are corrected and explained, along with a running totalol correct answers Terric value at just For any ZX Spectrum) Enjoy the thrill of this full machine code arcade game Battle to keep the Spectipede at bay but watch out for a very unpredictable spider which is out to get you For 1 of 2 players with top score and on screen high score feature RRP .50 RRP .50 .95 RRP .50 GOLF GNASHER STAR TREK OTHER COMPUTERS? (For any ZX Spectrum) Enjoy a game of golf in the comfort of your own home! With the choice of a 9 or 18 hole course and the challenge of Fairway Rough Trees, Bunkers Water & Green Displays are in realistic colour graphics with full score cards No two games are alive! Send SAE for a full list of our growing range of software now available for x81 and ORIC 1 Computers (For any ZX Spectrum) The famous arcade maze game with tast machine code action excelent graphics colour and sound Eat up all the dots before the Chosts eat you or beat them to an energy pill which will allow you to eat them! Hours of addictive fun with on-screen scoring and high-score tape-save capability for just AOC (For 48% Spectrum only) One of the original computer space games, but this program has many updated features normally only found on larger computer versions Test yourself as Starship Commander as your mission takes you to the Outer reaches of the Galaxy to protect Federation Soace the Starship and yourself! Excellent value at .75 RRP .95 R&R RRP .95 DEALER ENQUIRIES WELCOME CALLING ALL PROGRAMMERS... R&R Software Ltd. WANTED New, Quality Software. 5 Russell Street, Gloucester GL 1 1NE. SOFTWARE Send us your latest Program Tel (0452) 502819 for evaluation NOW. AVAILABLE FROM LEADING DEALERS NATIONWIDE "


"TI 8500 DATA ADVANCE TO PM\",\"I U PASS GO\", \"COLLECT 2200\" 1,   E : OH: O OO 8510 DATA ADVANCE U PASS GO\", \"COLL \",\"ADUANC ** ADVANCE TO GO\" 8520 DATA \" EM 7620 PRINT AT 10,0 +13;e; AT 12,0 + 4; \"ACCEPT YAN\" 7630 GO SUB 5000: IF as<>\"Y\" THE GO TO 7700 650 LET aia, 1) = 1 +y +100 660 LET De: GO SUB 810 70 GO SUB 1700: GOSUB 400 RETURN LET d=a ia, 1 LET bed 7810 IF 500 THEN LET beb-500 7320 LET CEINT (b/100) 7330 IF 100 THEN LET bab-100: GO TO 7330 7843 INK 7: IF W4 THEN INK 7350 PRINT AT 9,0 +13: PAPER #; b$ 7860 INR : RETURN 7900 PRINT AT 3.0 +3; RENEEM MOET FO \"; AT 9,0 +4; \"PROPERTY 7930 LET buaia, 2); LET E = b (b, 1) 9 382 OZ E3 1 UNK'IN CHARGE 20 8530 DATA \"YOU HAVE WON A\",\" UORD\", \"COLLE MATURES TEDDU D DE DDOD DMD0 : DOS OF 252\", 3.so ISONERS FUND\" HOMHOI D OUTDM GCmEHOD ZOD mamaoui Iur zoz mm D -D: otom 00 EV D OUT om HDDO orom mm DIM PA Dom BAO DATA, JOSSTORE, ESBITALPAY H Woo 0.9 E 05 06100 ILI ::: H IGUD OWOWL 0:@ : O ha z HI ZH acu LO.. : ; 9W S a SW 20 znao. HOW in AUW 04 IW zonou 19 Har w :: w: DUO : : 004 : Z 409: 6.990 . 0: Do II HODOHOU WO: HZFO: : 9: OT: 00 : IZ Q 0:00 S:2003 wou: 90 FD 60 :: Zin TO: :  : 9 00 9 004+ : ILLISIS: HO HZ99  3. D DDD um 0910 anageuZ O EE EL HOC +0.000000 NNNNNDDU I una 0 mzr or 3590 8830 DATA \"ANNUITY MATURES\",\"COL LECT 2109\",\" 3.100, \"YOU INHERI 3,100, \"YOU HAVE CONTEST\", \"COLLEO RISONERS FUND\", \"RECI 2008 PRSONERS FUND\", \"RECI + om 7935 LET = +INT ( 10) 7940 PRINT AT 10,0 +4; \"AMOUNT 2\" 7950 PRINT AT 10,0 +13;e; AT 12,0 + 4; \"ACCEPT Y/N\" 7950 GO SUB 5000 IF a $< \"Y\" THE N GO TO 7999 7954 LETE-E: LET f = GO SUB 3 7955 IF = 13 OR =29_THEN LET al 8+y +100: GO TO 7980 7670 LET ata 1) =2+y +100 7980 GO SUB 1700: GOSUB 4000 7999 RETURN 3000 LET a = 9! 3005 PRINT AT 15,0 +10 FLASH_1\" \" AT 16,0 +10\" CHANCE\"; ST 17,0 +10;\" 3010 LET 3=9 +1: IF 9 = 17 THEN GO SUB 5500 3020 RESTORE 8500 3040 GO TO 3200 LET S = (h) PRINT AT 4,0 +4; FLASH 1\" \";AT 5.0+4\" CHEST HTAT 6 3110 LET h =h +1: IF h = 17 THEN GO 8120 RESTORE 3600 8140 GO TO 3200 8200 FOR i=1 TO a 8210 READ a $,$C$,bic 8220 NEXT i 3230 GO SUB 900 8240 PRINT AT 9,0 +4; a$; AT 10.0+4 ;b$; AT 11,0 +4; C$ 8250 IF b=1 THEN GO TO 3400 8250 IF b=2 THEN LET HE-C: GO su B 310: GO TO 2100 8270 IF b=3 THEN LET =C: GO SUB 319 GO TO 2100 8280 IF B=4 THEN LET M=50: GO 50 : GO TO 2100 3290 IF b=5 THEN GO TO 8700 IF b=6 THEN GO TO 4200 310 IF b=7 THEN LET OP: LET PE -3: GOSUB 200: GO TO 2030 IF b=3 THEN GO TO 3450 8350 PRINT AT 12,0 +4; PAY FINE Y 3360 GO SUB 5000 8370 IF as \"Y\" THEN LET -10: G O SUB 810 GO TO 2100 3330 GO TO 3000 8400 LET 4 =P: LET PEC 3402 IF C=2' THEN GO SUB 200: GO TO 2030 3420 GO TO 2025 3450 FOR K = 1 TO Z 8455 IF KEY OR STK) =9 THEN GO TO 3470 8460 LET = 10: GOSUB 810 LET (K) = (k -10 8470 NEXTK 8475 FORW=1 TO 100: NEXT W D) 3570 DATA \"YOUR BIRTHDAY\", \"C CT \", \"OFF EACH PLAYER\" 3 AY A  FINE\",\" OR TAKE A CHANCE\", 9,0 8700 IF 5=2 THEN LET M=thiy) +(9 (y) +100): GO TO 8720 8710 LET = (hy) *401+ gy) *115) 3720 PRINT AT 12,0 +4; \"TOTAL = 2 8725 FOR W=1 TO 50 NEXT W 730 LET :-: GOSUB 810 GO TO 2100 3800 LET X (1) En: LET X (2) a 8305 INK PRINT AT 8,+3; 13 FOR WE 1 TO 100: NEXT W 3808 GO SUB 900: PRINT AT 8 1) E REME 3310 INKO: PRINT BT 10,0 +4; 023 3: GO SUB 5000 3820 GO SUB 900 8330_ IF a $=\"3\" THEN GO SUB 7000: GO TO 3850 3840 IF as \"\" THEN CO SUB 5900 GO TO 3850 3850 IF a $=\"0\" THEN LET E=1: GO SUB_7500: LET EE: GO TO 8860 3355 IF a $=\"0\" THEN GO TO 3900     8360 LET MEX (1): LET a =x (2): GO TO 310 8990 IF F =D THEN GO TO 8920 8910 LET (F) = (f) + (y) 8920 RESTORE 1900 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 75 "


"BEBGBAAAH BH 27 Za ZD ZA 8935 FOR I = 1 TO 28 READ a $, a, W, X: LET b=ala1 Fb>500 THEN LET b=b-500 ET K=INT (b/100) > 100 THEN LET !=b-100 3936 IF i <23 AND KEY THEN LET E = 2: GOSUB 6800 3937 IF FEO AND 1=3 AND KEY THEN LET aia, 1) = 3: GO TO 3945 3933 IF FEO AND KEY THEN LET a ta 1) =0 GO TO 3945 3939 IF 6=8 AND KEY THEN LET aia * = 8+#10: GO TO 3945 8940 IF Kay THEN LET ala, 1) =2+ HU BORDER 7: PAPER 7: INK 0 : 0 FOR 1 = TO 10 PRINT AT 0, 2+; \"RS\" RINT AT i +2+1,0\"TU\" 2+1, 0+20:\"TU\" PRINT **2+0; \"TU\" NEXT i RINT AT 1,0 +16; \"CD\" RINT AT 20,0; \"RI\" AT 20,0+ RINT AT 6,0; \"EF\" AT 6,0+20 * AT 16,0; \"GH PRINT AT 1,0 +10: \"AB\", AT 20 AT 10,0; \"AB\": AT 10,0 +2 Ouru **         rumam un DONO    W     DODODI0000000000-000000000 DANS H ZOHOH +.CO.. aruLL + L OIL OG                  ing-I*sunnostuum on Our ODOS 0 EE ED OFFEE C Commmmmm da            \"O 9999999 on 0 0 8950 LET Sty) = 8955 GO SUB 8960 GO SUB 4000: 9 P <12 THEN PRINT AT 21, 11 \"TU\": GO TO 8995 p <22 THEN PRINT AT 0; \"TU\"GO TO 2995 FP32 THEN PRINT AT ipO ; RS\". GO TO RINT AT (P-31) +2+1;28; \"TU\" RETURN REM draw screen RESTORE 9020 FOR I = TO 167: READ a POKE USR \"a\"+i, : NEXT i 9020 DATA 0, 124, 31, 31, 127, 127, 12 9021 DATA 0,0,8,252 252, 252, 254, 9022 DATA 128, 145, 156, 159, 155, 14 4,128, 255 65,241,65,249.9,9,1.25 TA 255, 128, 135, 159, 191,19 255,1,225,249 253,253, 255, 123, 140, 158, 191, 12 8,123, 122 1,1, 1 253 121 165, 165, 165, 165, 16 6,48,112240, 240, 240 17,51, 119,255,255,255, 27 24 & 9032 DATA 252 254,2 0,0,0,0,0,0, 0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 0,0,60.60 9038 DATA 248, 168, 243, 158, 255, 17 9037 DATA 255, 128, 123, 128, 128, 12 +18 ! 2,0+10 \"FX\";AT 2.0 9587 PRINT AT 10,6; \"MX\"; AT 10.22 9568 PRINT 166; \"EC\" 19,+10: \"KX\" RINT AT 1, 0+4;\"??\";AT 20.0 AT 12,0+20 APER : INK RINT AT 1, 0+20; \"Gu\" GO\", AT 16,0+20 \"TX\" PAPER 2: INK 7 PRINT AT 1, 0+2; \"ST AT 1.0+ \"; AT 1.0+3; \"TS PAPER 6INK PRINT AT 1, 0+12; \"LS\";AT 1.0 4, \"CS\";AT 1, 0+18; \"Py  PAPER 5: INKO 9750 PRINT AT 20.0+2; \"PR\"; AT 29, ER\", AT 20,0 +3 \"AI\" 765 PAPER 4: BRIGHT 1: : INK_7 770 PRINT A T 20,0+14; \"UR\"; AT 29 : BRIGHT : INK 7 r 2,0;\"US\";AT 4,0; \"M w\" 9865 PAPER 3: INK 7 9885 PRINT AT 12,0 ; \"NA\", AT 14,0; WH\";AT 13.0; \"PM\" 9900 PAPER 4 INK 7 9902 PRINT AT 2,0+20; \"RS\";AT 4.0 +20; \"05\";AT 30 +20; \"B \" 9904 PAPER 1INK 9908 PRINT AT 14.0+20; \"PL\"; AT 18 9910 PAPER 7: INK 912 PLOT 0+3+31, 144 9914 DRAW 650 DRAU 0.-25: DRAU 5.0: DRAW 0,25 10 PLOT 0 +8+119,144 9912 DRAW 25.0 DRAW .-25: DRAU 20 PLOT 0+3+144,31 30 DRAW -65,0: DRAW , 25: DRAW 65.0: DRAW 2,-25 934 PLOT *8+56,31 9936 DRAW -25,: DRAW 0,25: DRAW 5; \"CHEST\" 945 PRINT AT 0 +11; \"CHANCE\" 9999 RETURN  DDU DO DWDDDDDDD DD DDODDOD DOD     DID DDODDDD DOD DODUDDDD un 449 1 o . DRAU 25, 188 21 128, 1 2 m) 1,1,1) DATA 128 128 128 128 1 PE 8,12 25. 0DRE AT 50 9040 DATA 1,1,1,1,1,1,1255 9500 LET 0=3 16 76 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"ORIC Software TANSOFT ultima W 100% machine code Seece trilogy-shoot the ons, avoid the Cincinnabattle. yon ay through the sate zone. Requires 48k Orc . inc. V.A.T. poste MORDON In co-operation with Melbourne House Ist selling e reisailable fo L his adverteres Pogues 48 Orig. Our software is available from all Oric dealers and most good software suppliers. In case of difficulty please contact us on Teversham (02205) 2261 or write to us at: TANSOFT Unit 1 & 2, Techno Park, Newmarket Road, Cambridge "


"DSYCLAPSE COMMODORE 64 LANDERSNATCH 48K SPECTRUM ..the name of the game 78 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"Harry the carpenter is very proud of his brand new house which he built with his very own hands but his dream home is under attack by a flood. Harry must battle his way to the roof of his house before he is swept away by the storm water. But the wet weather has brought out a damp monster who has been lurking in Harry's basement. The monster keeps dropping water bombs on poor old Harry whose only defence is to build a platform from old fea chests and try to knock the monster off the roof with a broomstick. Harry can also use one of the ladders to escape if he is in real danger, but be warned the routes are sometimes barred. If you let too many bombs go past Harry, the lower wall will break and the whole level will be flooded. BY ANDREW SMITH RUNS ON AN ATARI 400 WITH ONE JOYSTICK IN LEFT HAND JOYSTICK PORT PRC 71 POKE 752,1: DIF=1: POKE 632, 4: POKE 5327 7,0:MT=O: WY=85:LI=3: FLPO=35:LVFG=39:PI=7 7: EC=135 72 FLTP=INT (9*RND (0)+4) 80 GRAPHICS 1+16: SETCOLOR 4,0,0: POSITION 5,8:? #6; \"RISING DAMP\":POSITION 1,2:? # 6; \"dif=\"; DIF 81 POSITION 1,13:? #6;\"select your level &\": POSITION 5, 15:? #6; \"press start\" 83 IF PEEK (53279) =5 THEN SOUND 0, 180, 10, 7:DIFUDIF+1: POSITION 1,2:? #6; \"dif=\"; DIF : POSITION 6,2:? #6;\" \" 84 FOR I=1 TO 200: NEXT I: SOUND 0,0,0,0:1 F DIF >9 THEN DIF=1 85 IF PEEK (53279) =6 THEN SOUND , DIF*8, 1 9,8: FOR H=1 TO 50: NEXT H: SOUND 0, 0, 0, 0:G OTO 100 90 GOTO 83 100 GRAPHICS 7+16: POKE 712, 120: POKE 708, 222: POKE 709,63: POKE 710, 148: IEPEEK (106) +24: POKE 54279, 1:PMBAS=I*256 110 GOSUB 2050:FOR Q=PMBAS+384 TO PMBAS+ 1023: POKE Q,0: NEXT Q 135 POKE 704,0:POKE 705,78: POKE 706,58:P OKE 707, 184: X=160: Y=8: Y1=93: X1=182: POKE 559,46: POKE 53277, 3: WTF=10 136 POKE 53248, X: POKE 53249, X: POKE 53250 1, X: LVP3=2: FOR Q=0 TO 19: READ A: POKE PMBA 5+512+Y+Q, A: NEXT Q 150 DATA 60, 126,255, 60, 9, 102, 255, 102,0,0 ,,, 129, 255, 126, 0,129,255, 126, 160 FOR S=0 TO 19: READ A: POKE PMBAS+640+ Y+S, A: NEXT S 185 DATA 0,0,0,195,255, 153,0,153,255, 189 , 129,255, 126,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 190 FOR T0 TO 19: READ A:POKE PMBAS+768+ Y+T, A: NEXT T 210 DATA 0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,66, 126,0,0,0, 129,255, 126,0, 129,255 220 FOR D= TO' 8: READ A: POKE PMBAS+896+Y! 1+D, A: NEXT D 224 DATA 25,25,255,255, 188, 60, 102,66,195 illustration: Terry Rogers DAMP COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 79 "


"A RANGE OF QUALITY COMPUTERS AVAILABLE FOR THIS PROGRAM. OVER 175 DIFFERENT SCREENS Thousands of Commodore 64, Electron and BBC micro users have recently taken a trip into the heart of win Kingdom Valley, and none have returned disappointed! This incredible new program takes adventure games into new, uncharted territory, with a highly complex journey through over 175 different full colour, graphic locations, to test you and your computer to the limit. Are you brave enough to take the test? BUGBYTES SOFTWARE a 120 Versions available now for Commodore 64, Electron and BBC Model B. IN YOUR HIGH ST. NOW! PRICE .50 GOSH Bug-Byte Limited Mulberry House, Canning Place, Liverpool Dealers contact Matthew Thomas on 051-709 7071 Registered Dealers can order direct from CBS Distribution on 01-960 2155. "


"226 POKE 53251, X1: POKE 53259,1: POKE PMBA S+384, 1: POKE 53260, 255: GOSUB 2030: POKE 6 23,39: GOSUB 890: GOSUB 1954 249 POKE 53278, 250 A=STICK (O): SOUND ,,,@: IF GR=1 THE N 251: SOUND 2,0,0,0 251 IF ST=1 THEN 255 252 IF A-14 AND LVE=2 AND X1 >170 AND X1< 182 THEN GOSUB 2600 25S IF A-7 THEN X1=X1+6: POKE 53251, X1: IF X1 >=185 AND STRIG (0) =@ THEN GOSUB 298:X 1=185 256 IF X1 >=185 THEN X1=185 257 IF PEEK (53263)<> THEN GOTO 2550 258 IF A11 THEN X1=X1-6: POKE 53251, X1:1 FX1<=62 AND STRIG (O) = THEN GOSUB 304:X 1=62 259 IF X1<=62 THEN X1=62 260 IF X1<66 OR X1 >=184 THEN 265 261 IF GP=1 AND LVE=2 AND X1 >=174 THEN G OSUB 280 262 IF GP=1 THEN GOTO 265 264 IF PEEK (53255)=1 THEN GOSUB 270 265 IF GR=1 THEN RETURN 267 ON O GOSUB 350, 380: GOTO 250 270 IF LVE<>LVP3 OR X1 > (PI+5) OR X1< (PI5) THEN RETURN 273 POKE 707,15 274 COLOR : PLOT FLPO, LVFG: DRAWTO FLPO, ( LVEG-16): FLPO=FLP0+30:PIEPI+30:FOR I=1 T O 5: SOUND , I*50, 10, 8: NEXT 1 275 GOSUB 1140: GP=1 276 IF PI>167 THEN LVFGELVFG+23:PI=77:LV P3=LVP3-1: FLPO=35 277 SOUND ,,,: RETURN 280 COLOR 3: PLOT EC, 39: DRAWTO EC, 23: EC-E C+1: SCSC+10: SOUND , EC/2, 10, 8:FLC-FLC+1 : POKE 707, 184: GP=O: RETURN 298 LVELVE+1:IF LVE>2 THEN LVE-2: RETURN 299 FOR Q-1 TO 23+MT: SOUND 0,75-Q, 10, 8: B =USR (UP, PMBAS+895+Y1): Y1=Y1-1: NEXT Q: SOU ND 0, 0, 0, 0: RETURN 304 LVEELVE-1: IF LVE< THEN LVE : RETURN 1 E y i 1 1 ) 3) !!! ) is 71 1 kuun 305 FOR Q=1 TO 23+MT: SOUND ,40+0, 10, 8:B =USR (DOWN, PMBAS+895+Y1): Y1=Y1+1: NEXT Q:S OUND 0,0,0, 306 IF LVE AND QD=1 OR LVE=1 AND QD=2 THEN GOSUB 1950 307 RETURN 350 X=X+DIF: IF X>=TAR OR X >=200 THEN X=T AR: GOSUB 1010: GOSUB 890: RETURN 360 POKE 53248, X: POKE 53249, X: POKE 53250 , X: RETURN 380 X=X-DIF:IF X<=TAR OR X<=50 THEN X=TA R: GOSUB 1010: GOSUB 890: RETURN 390 POKE 53248, X:POKE 53249, X:POKE 53250 , X: RETURN 890 TAR=INT (150*RND (0) +50): IF TAR>X THEN O=1: GOTO 899 895 0=2 899 RETURN 1010 BDR=INT (2*RND (0)+1): IF BDR=2 THEN Y M=Y+21:GOTO 1100 1012 SOUND 2,,,: RETURN 1100 POKE 53278, : POKE PMBAS+384+YM, 9: YM =YM+DIF:SOUND 2, YM, 10, 7:POKE PMBAS+384+Y M-DIF, 1112 POKE 53252, X: POKE PMBAS+384+YM, 1:GR =1: GOSUB 250 1125 IF PEEK (53256)<>O THEN GOSUB 1140:P OKE 53278, : POKE PMBAS+384+YM, : GR=0: SOU ND 2,,,0: RETURN 1126 IF YMWY+13 THEN POKE PMBAS+384+YM , : GR=0: SOUND 2,,, 0: GOSUB 1151: RETURN 1130 GOTO 1100 WATER R FINAL DEMI COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 81 "


"At last, the first joystick that puts the firing button where it should have been in the first place. Extra responsive action Diamond Cut 'Arcade Style Grip Trigger Fire Button AMERICAN 5 THE TOP AMERICAN JOYSTICK IS NOW AVAILABLE IN THE U.K. ... IS HERE! To fit your SPECTRUM ONLY.99 + .50 P+P CIRIGA COMMAND Extra long 4 ft Cord  Including Interface to plug straight into the Spectrum.  The first Joystick to give you \"Arcade\" feel and control. . \"Jet Style\" heavy duty, diamond cut grip.  Fire Trigger placed under your index finger ... the finger with the fastest reflex action.  Self centreing, 360° action.  Compatible with most of the latest Software including: 3D Tunnel Rubber Suction Cups for One Hand Operation Slippery Sid SS Enterse Manic Miner Jetpack Cookie PSSST Timegate COSMOS Cyber Rats Galaxans Spookyrary Cosir Guerila Kong Armageddon Mission Impossible Anik Atak Braev D age Last Sunset Mazeman Galaxans Frenzy Astroblaster Kot 30 Joust Spectres Jerman Frogger Blind Alley Galactic Jailbreak Transam Robotics Armageddon Exterminator Detective Meteoroids Gula O VOX BOX NOTE: THIS IS ONLY A SMALL SELECTION OF THE MANY COMPATIBLE GAMES Also available for Commodore/Atari/BBC/ NEW NEW NEW NEW NEW NEW NEW NEW NEW SPEECH SYNTHESIZER WITH BUILT IN JOYSTICK INTERFACE FOR THE SPECTRUM ONLY .99 ON  Simply plug into an exciting new world of is computer speech synthesis.  Latest State of the Art Electronics. Uses the Allophone system.  Produces any word or phrase from an unlimited vocabulary.  Speaks directly through TV speaker.. Also Amplifies Spectrums own sound through TV speaker!  Built in Joystick Interface accepts any Atari type joystick for full games control. (Kempston compatible). Complete with Demo Cassette.  Full Instructions. LULUIJD2220N estsinthe Atari...... Triga Command Spectrum ............99 Triga Command BBC................ .99 Triga Command Atari.. ..........99 Vox Box, Spectrum ................. .99 . .99 Triga Command Commodore . . . . . . . . ..99 Vox Box and Triga Command ... ... ... .99 TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME Postage Please Add .50 FAI UNIT 8, FENTON INDUSTRIAL ESTATE, D E L DEWSBURY ROAD, FENTON, 24 HR CREDIT m wanae ELECTRONICS EIBT E STOKE-ON-TRENT TEL: 0782 273815 CARD LINE 82 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"1140 SOUND , 100, 10,8: SOUND 1,255, 10,8:S C=SC+5+DIF+ (LVE*5): SOUND , , , 1142 SOUND 1,,0,0: RETURN 1151 WTC=WTC+1: IF WTC=WTF THEN GOSUB 116 FEAT 1155 RETURN 1160 SOUND ,, ,8: SOUND 1,35,,8: COLOR 3:FOR XP=30.TO 159: PLOT XP, WY: DRAWTO XP1%, (WY-5): DRAWTO XP-30, (WY-10) 1161 NEXT XP: FOR IOWY TO WY-12 STEP -1:P LOT 0, I: DRAWTO 159, I: NEXT I: WY=WY-23 1162 WTC=O:FOR IOB TO STEP-1: FOR U=1 TO 50: SOUND 0, 0, 0, I: SOUND 1, 35,, I: NEXT U: NEXT I:QD=QD+1: IF QD=3 THEN 2000 1164 IF LVE OR LVE=1 AND QD >=2 THEN GO SUB 1950 1165 RETURN 1950 LIELI-1: IF LI= THEN 2000 1952 SOUND 2,0,0,0: FOR U=1 TO 200: SOUND 0, 100*U, 10, 8: SOUND 3, 155+U, 10, 7: NEXT U:S OUND 0,0,0,0: GOSUB 298 1953 SOUND 3,0,0,0: RESTORE 2530: FOR I=1 TO 150: NEXT I 1954 FOR I=1 TO 5: READ SO: SOUND 3,50, 10, 8:FOR U=1 TO 39: NEXT U: NEXT I: SOUND 3,0, , : RETURN 2000 POKE 623, 4:POKE 53277.0: GRAPHICS 1+ 16: POSITION 2, 7:? #6; \"you scored \";SC:FO R I = TO 3: SOUND 1,0,0,0: NEXT I 2001 GOTO 2001 2030 DIM UPCODE$ (21): UP-ADR (UPCODE$) 2031 FOR I=UP TO UP+20: READ B:POKE I, B:N EXT I 2034 DATA 104,104,133, 204,104,133,203 2035 DATA 160, 1, 177, 203, 136, 145, 203 2036 DATA 200, 200, 192, 11, 208, 245, 96 2037 DIM DOWNCODE$ (21) : DOWN=ADR (DOWNCODE JY HY 2038 FOR I-DOWN TO DOWN+20: READ B:POKE I ,B:NEXT I: RETURN 2041 DATA 104, 104, 133, 204, 104, 133, 203 2042 DATA 160, 10, 177, 203, 200, 145, 203 2043 DATA 136, 136, 192, 255, 208, 245, 96 2050 COLOR 3: FOR I= TO 5: PLOT I, 17: DRAW TO I, 90: NEXT I 2115 COLOR 1: FOR I=86 TO 90: PLOT , I: DRA WTO 159, I: NEXT I:FOR I=63 TO 66: PLOT 0,1 : DRAWTO 159, I: NEXT I 2116 FOR I=12 TO 17:PLOT , I: DRAWTO 159, I: NEXT I:FOR I =40 TO 43: PLOT , I: DRAWTO 159, I:NEXT I: COLOR 2 2119 PLOT 159, 90: DRAWTO 159, 23: PLOT 154, 90: DRAWTO 154, 23:FOR I=90 TO 30 STEP -5: PLOT 154, 1: DRAWTO 159, I: NEXT I 2120 FOR I=8 TO 22:PLOT 1,20: DRAWTO 1,81 : NEXT I 2122 COLOR 1: PLOT 5, 15: DRAWTO 5,90 2123 FOR I=35 TO 125 STEP 30: COLOR 1: PLO TI, 17: DRAWTO 1,90: NEXT I 2124 COLOR : FOR I=12 TO 17: PLOT 135. I:D RAWTO 147, I: NEXT I: RETURN 2530 DATA 91,96, 108, 114, 108 2550 FOR I=1 TO 50:FOR UTO 3: POKE 712 , PEEK (53770) : SOUND U, PEEK (53770), 10, 10:N EXT U: NEXT I: POKE 712, 120 2553 FOR I=0 TO 3: SOUND I,,, : NEXT I:P OKE PMBAS+384+YM, 2554 COLOR : FOR I=18 TO 39: PLOT 6, I: DRA WTO 159, I: NEXT I:FOR I44 TO 62: PLOT 6, I : DRAWTO 159, I: NEXT I 2555 FOR 1-67 TO 85: PLOT 6, I: DRAWTO 159, I:NEXT I: COLOR 2: GOSUB 2119 2556 IF X1=182 THEN 2564 2557 IF X1 182 THEN 2560 2558 X1=X1-1: X=X-1: POKE 53248, X: POKE 532 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 83 GO "


"SAVE MONEY INNE SOFTWARE SAVE ME SAVE TIME ONE-STOP SHOPPING BY MAIL AT GUARANTEED DISCOUNT PRICES SAVE EFFORT 83 NEVILLE ROAD, LUTON, BEDS LU3 2JG Tel: Luton (0582) 595222 (24-hour ACCESS service available) 6.95 8.95 8.95 8.95 6.95 7.95 8.50 8.95 8.95 Vortex Hunchback 747 Flight Simulation Twin Kingdom Valley Dog Fight Colossal Adventure Snowball Lords of Time Music Processor Beeb Art Transistor's Revenge Legion Hunchback 8.95 13.50 4.50 4.55 4.55 6.95 5.95 4.55 4.95 495 8888 8.95 8.95 5.95 7.95 8.95 6.95 6.95 TOP 30 Flight Simulator 6.95 I Maths 2 19-13) 1 Jet Set Willy, Spectrum 4.95 Oracle's Cave 6.95 Physics O-level 2 Manic Miner, Spectrum 4.95 Fighter Pilot 6.95 Punctuation Pete 3 Hunchback, Commodore 64 The Skull 6.95 Car Journey 4 Fighter Pilot Spectrum Super Chess 6.95 | French Mistress A 5 Atic Atac, Spectrum Snooker (Visions! 7.95 German Master A 6 Hunchback, Spectrum 5.95 Apocalypse 8.95 I Word Power 7 Hungry Horace, Spectrum 4.95 Snowball 8.95 Tense French 8 The Hobbit Commodore 64 12 99 Colossal Adventure 8.95 Time Traveller 9 Scuba Dive Spectrum 5.95 Voodoo Castle 8.95 | Special Agent 10 Manic Miner, Commodore 64 6.95 Secret Mission 8.95 | Grammar Tree 1 Nouns 11 The Hobbit, Spectrum 13.50 The Forest 8.95 I Grammar Tree 2 Verbs 12 Revenge of the Mutant Camels. 13.95 Commodore 64 Valhalla 13.95 CBM GAMES 13 Ant Attack, Spectrum 3D Seidab Attack 4.95 Grid Runner 14 Crazy Kong, Commodore 64 Glug Glug new 4.95 Arcadia 64 15 Blue Thunder, Spectrum Nebula new 5.95 Hungry Horace 64 H 16 Pilot A Commodore 4 Defenda 4.95 Cosmic Commando 17 Jet Pae, Spectrum Skull 5.95 3D Time Trek 18 Alchemist, Spectrum Pogo new 4.95 Indian Attack 19 Night Gunner, Spectrum 5.95 Pedro new 4.95 Dictator 64 20 Chequered flag, Spectrum 5.95 Frog Run 64 21 W ard and the Princess Vic 2045 Crazy Cave Man 22 Zorgon's Revenge, Oric Blue Moon 23 Space Pilot, Commodore 54 SPECTRUM UTILITIES Dark Dungeons 24 Twin Kingdom Valley Home Budget 4.75 Dungeons Commodore 64 8.50 Spectrum Monitor 6.50 Hustler 25 Fred, Spectrum 5.95 Editor Assembler 750 l Kick Off 26 Snooker, BBC Melbourne Draw 7.95 Sprite Man 27 Kong, Spectrum Vu-Calc 7.95 Star Trek 28 Lunar Jetman, Spectrum VuFile 7.95 | Mr Wimpy 64 28 Pole Position, Atari 26.99 Fifth 8.95 Rollerball 30 Wheelie, Spectrum M-Code 2 8.95 | Cyberman Super Code 8.95 Squashafrog Snail Logo 8.95 Kong (Anirogl SPECTRUM GAMES Omni-calc 8.95 Quintic Warrior The Pyramid 4.50 Learn Basic 11.50 Panic 64 Arcadia 3.50 Small Business Accounts diness Accounts 11.95 | Siren City Zip Zap 3.50 Tasword 2 12.90 Vortex Raider Zzoom 3.50 Devpac 3 Defender 64 Stonkers The Quilt 13.95 Tokens of Ghall Alchemist 3.50 Games Designer 13.95 China Mina Solat 4.50 Sales Ledger 13.95 | Pilot 64 Jet Pac Purchase Ledger 13.95 Atak Mutant Camels Pssst Stock Control 13.95 Hovver Bovver Cookie 4.50 Database 13.95 Cosmic Bounce Trans-Am 4.50 Hi-Soft Pascal 23.50 Nursery Nightmare Luna Jetman Skramble 64 Pool 4.95 Quest of Merravid Handicap Golf 4.95 Eggbert Corridors of Genon 4.95 SPECTRUM EDUCATIONAL Crystal of Zong 3-D Tunnel 4.95 French is Fun 4.95 I Metro-Blitz Mr Wimpy 4.95 0-level Geometry Aquaplane Rescue 4.95 Intermediate Maths 1 4.95 Snooker (Visions Eskimo Eddie 4.95 Intermediate Maths 2 4.95 Snowball Train Game 4 95 Intermediate English 1 4.95 | Colossal Adventure Omega Run 4.95 Intermediate English 2 4.95 Ring of Power Test Match 4.95 Music 4.95 Hobbit 64 Bridge Tutor (Adv) Young Learner 1 4.95 Space Pilot Bridge Tutor (Begl Young Learner 2 4.95 Booga Boo Doomsday Castle 5 50 Primary Arithmetic 4.95 Hellgate 64 Invasion Body Snatchers 4.95 Blagger 64 Rommel's Revenge 5.50 French Vocab Megahawk Birds and Bees 4.95 Star Reader A 5.95 Chinese Juggler Bear Bovver 5.95 Star Reader B 5.95 Football Manager 5.95 | Jungle Maths 5.95 Derby Day 64 Death Chase 5.95 Wordspell Star Clash Number Fun Roval Birkdale 5.95 Table Sums 6.95 5.95 Get Set 6.95 CBM 64 UTILITIES Hall of the Things 6.50 Count About 6.95 DFM Database Black Crystal 6.50 ABC Lift OH 6.95 Invostat Dungeon Master Robot Runner Transact The Island 6.50 Sum Scruncher 6.95 Database and Labels Hunter Killer 6.95 Wild Words 6.95 Practicalc Maths 1 7.95 Practifile 7.95 CBM 64 EDUCATIONAL 7.95 Open Sesame 9.95 Time Traveller 8.95 Beseiged 8.95 Word Power 8.95 Mot 8.95 8.95 VIC-20 8.95 Gridrunner 9.95 Bewitched 9.95 Arcadia Wacky Waiters Catcha Snacha 4.00 Frogrun 4.50 Dot Man 4.95 3D Time Trek 4.95 Pharoah's Tomb 4.95 Zok's Kingdom Crawler 4.95 Mini Kong 4.95 Dungeons 5.50 Dark Dungeons 5.50 Space Jeuet 5.95 Tornado 5.95 Matrix 5.95 Laser Zone Crazy Kong 5.95 Vic Gammon 5.95 Amok 5.95 Bonzo 5.95 Skyhawk 5.95 Star Defense 6.95 Fire Galaxy 6.95 Quest of Merravid 6.95 Chess 6.00 Maltitron 6.00 Gridtrap 6.00 Snooker (Visions) 6.00 Practical 6.00 6.00 6.50 ORIC 6.50 Mr Wimpy 6.50 Hunchback 6.50 Island of Death 6.50 Dracula's Revenge 6.95 Super Meteors 6.95 Acheron's Rage 6.95 Ice Giant 6.95 Two-Gun Turtle 6.95 | Harrier Attack 6.95 Invaders 7.95 | Defense Force 8.95 Rat Splat 8.95 Zorgon's Revenge 8.95 Xenon-One 12.99 Snowball new 6.95 Colossal Adventure new 6.95 Adventure Dbl Pk new 4.50 Hobbit new 6.95 5.95 5.95 BBC GAMES 6.95 0 Man 6.95 3D Munchine Saloon Sally Wizard Dictator The Generator 22.99 | Cylon Attack 28.99 | Chuckie Egg 28.99 | Adventure Land 32 50 Voodoo Castle 38.50 | Chess 38.50 Felix in the Factory 4.95 4.55 BBC UTILITIES 4.95 Vu calc 4.95 Vu Tin 4.95 4.95 BBC EDUCATIONAL 4.95 Physics 4.95 Constellation Wordspell 4.95 Number Fun 4.95 Table Sums 5.00 Number skills (0-20) 5.00 Number Skills (0-999) 5.00 Besieged 5.95 Time Traveller 5.95 6.95 DRAGON GAMES 6.95 Leggit 6.95 Hungry Horace Transylvanian Tower 695 Pub Crawl 6.95 Vultures Droids 7.95 Maurice Minor 28.50 Ugh Chess Up Periscope Chuckie Egg 5.96 Bonker 5.95 Flight Simulator 5.95 Drone Data Tank 5.95 Baccarat Dragrunner Care Figher 5.95 Trace Race 5.95 Ring of Darkness 5.95 Dragon Racer Wasp 6.50 Profile 6.50 6.50 DRAGON EDUCATIONAL 7.50 Jungle Maths 7.50 Astro Maths 8.95 Wizard Box 8.95 Star Reader Pack A 8.95 Star Reader Pack B 13.50 Geography 6.95 5.50 5.95 5.95 5.95 5.95 7.95 6.95 3.50 5.95 6.95 6.95 4.50 4 50 6.95 7.75 7.75 4.50 5.95 7.75 7.75 7.75 5.50 4.90 8.95 4.95 8.95 13.50 ATARI Pirates Adventure Mission Impossible Voodoo Casite 5.95 Sea Dragon Asteroids Super Cobra 6.90 6.90 QUICKSHOT JOYSTICKS 895 Mk 1 8.95 MK I pair 6.95 | Mk II 6.951 Mk Il pair 5.95 5.95 8.95 16.00 10.95 20.00 THIS MONTH'S SPECIAL OFFERS:The Fabulous Cassette 50 from Cascade for Spectrum, BBCA/B, ORIC-1, DRAGON, ZX81, ATARI, VIC 20, APPLE, Our Price .95 Send orders to SAVE-IT SOFTWARE, 83 Neville Road, Luton, Beds LU3 2JG, phone in orders to Luton (0582) 595222 MICRO COST Name Please supply me with Address payable to Save It Software or please debit my Price includes VAT Total and free delivery I enclose cheque PO for  Access card No SIGNED 84 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"I GAMES IN ALL G M /C >1009 QUALITY ARCADE ACTION GAMES FOR THE COMMODORE 64 at .95 eacho GALAXIONS B Y men Alley Cat Now Bogy Men The earth is being invaded by an alien Guide Thomas the cat force, the GALAXIONS have along the 13 walls of SOLAR arrived from a dying planet, determined street to his lady friend, to destroy civilization as we know it. who awaits him on the end They come in formation, swooping and Wir wall, but beware of diving towards the planet earth. You and V the flying boots, you alone can save mankind from the U bottles and mops, which are terrifying destruction the aliens threaten just a few of the hazards you will encounter. us with Munelman 4 A fantastic version of this popular Guide Boris up the ladders, to collect a coin arcade game. from the top of the screen, but beware! the bogy men are out to get you. He must return to the bottom of the screen, avoiding the Robin to the Rescue bogy men and insert the coin in the electric In days of old when * meter. The lights will knights were bold and S im come on enabling you the sheriff was in power, to see the pitch fork, and to play this game guide Robin Hood, after retrieving it, kill the to Marian locked up in the tower. bogy men UNEXPANDED VIC 20 Munch man .00 GUN FIGHT .00 SuperBreakout .00 GALAXIONS .00 ASTEROYDS .00 Scrambler .00 Cavern Raider .00 Occam 8 & 16K EXPANDED VIC 20 FIREBIKES 51 Meadowcroft, Radcliffe, Manchester M26 OJP England. All our games are available mail order P&P included from the above address. Orders sent by return post. Also available from all good computer shops. Distribution, P.C.S. Darwen, CENTRE SOFT West Midlands, ALPHA TAPES Merseyside, TIGER Cheshire, LIGHTNING London, LEISURESOFT Northampton, RA COMPUTER GAMES Barnsley, SOFTWARE DISTRIBUTION SERVICES South Devon, FIVE D SOFTWARE East Harling. "


"GET OFF MY GARDEN!! FROM INTERCEPTOR SOFTWARE WRITTEN BY IAN GRAY MUSIC BY CHRIS COX PRODUCED BY RICHARD JONES ONLY .00 ON CASSETTE .00 ON DISK TH 64 LEVELS! SUITABLE FOR commodore 6 INTERCEPTOR MICRO'S LINDON HOUSE, THE GREEN, TADLEY, HAMPSHIRE TEL 07356) 71145 RETAILERS ALL GOOD COMPUTER FROM AVTAITABE NOW "


"Wheelin' Wallie FROM INTERCEPTOR SOFTWARE WRITTEN BY ANDREW CHALLIS PRODUCED BY RICHARD PAUL JONES MUSIC BY GRAHAM HANSFORD GRAFIX BY CLAIRE TEL: ONLY .00 ON CASSETTE .00 ON DISK SUITABLE FOR THE commentarer o INTERCEPTOR VRINDON HOUSE, THE GREEN, TADLEY, HAMPSHIRE TEL (07356) 71145 AVAILABLE NOW FROM RETAILERS ALL GOOD COMPUTER "


"RAZ KONG RUNS ON A VIC 20 PLUS 8K EXPANSION BY KEITH PRIESTLY Poor old Mario, the fearless carpenter. @ PRINT\" POKE36879.8 POKE656.255;B=337 meets up with his deadliest foe, the 92 BB=9Q=3:00=244:53=36876 POKE36878.15 kong beast, in yet another duel to rescue OP=1 1 SC=:KY=3 SL=1 FB=1 his kidnapped girlfriend and topple the 2 Y=4141 FORT=1 T018 GOSUB63480 : FORU=1T02 hairy monster from his iron fortress. GOSUB4 : NEXTU: PZ=-21 GOSUB53405 : PZ=23:GO Mario must climb through the four levels SUB63480 of the Empire State before he can meet 3 FORU=1T02: GOSUB4 :NEXTU GOSUB63485: NEXT GOTO11 Kong face to face. The evil monkey will 4 POKE 646.SLSL=SL-1 IFSL=3 THENSL=i stop at nothing to delay the carpenter's 5 PRINT DO W progress. During the first level, the gorilla pelts flaming barrels at the 6 PRINTME VO helpless Mario whose only defence is to N leap over the barrels and climb the PRINT\" PRINT ladders as fast as he can. \" PRINT\" The conveyor belts are next and he'll SPRINT \" PRINT need all his sprinting strength to avoid N \" GOSUB63508 being swept off the side of the building. PRINT BY KEITH PRIESTLEY RETURN As Mario moves closer to the centre of 10 RETURN Kong's fortress, he comes across the 11 PRINTI L EVAL 1\" PRINT YOU M UST RUN ALONG THERAMPS AND UP THE \" disused lift system which has become 12 PRINT'LADDERS WILE JUMPING OVER BARR treacherously dangerous. Kong adds to ALS. LEVAL 2 the danger by throwing steel girders-3 FRINT\"N YOU MUST RUN ALONG THERAMPS AN down on the unsuspecting carpenter. D UP THE 14 PRINT\"LADDERS AND ON AND OFF THE CONVA his chance to get his own back on the 15 PRINT\" YOU MUST RUN ALONG THERAMPS AN gorilla. All he has to do is remove all the UP THE rivets holding the girders together to 16 PRINT\"LADDERS AND ON AND OFF THE LIFTS RELEVAL 4\" send the monkey crashing to his death 17 PRINT YOU MUST PUN ALONG THERAMPS AN and save the life of his girlfriend.D UP THE They keys: and = move Mario left and 18 PRINT\"LADDERS KNOCKING OUT THE ROOF SUPPORTS.\" PRINTS LEFT = RIGHT @ UP right and / and @ move him up and down. 19 PRINT\" DOWN JUMP PRINT'R PRESS 8 TO START O FORTE 1 T02088 GOSUB63588 VARIABLES NEXT RUN A = Mario's position AS = Keyboard input 28 SOSUB66889: POKE4258,32 50SUB68894:GOS Y = Kong's position SC = Score 360805 PRINT SO F ORT= 1 T015 PRINT E/H = The lift's movement OP = level \" NEXT "


"21 Y= 4433 : GOSUB62995 FORT=17014. GOSUB638 20 IFPEEK (F+118 = 244 THENPOKEF + 3 POKEF 244 22 FORV=1T0128 NEXT GOSUB63805 NEXT GOS UB63000 23 POKE 415-3, POKE 4150 65 FORT=170588 NEXT: GOSUB9280 2 B=9Q=30=244 28 CC=1 C=4211 D=421 G05.36222 GOSUB68 224 GOSUB6B285 3=32 99= 1 NNEL=32 LL= NM= E= 29 A=4537 P=31 GOSUB62312 POKE415+3 4 P OKE 4158,65 POKE 198 B 30 POKEO+B, 2 POKEC S POKEA 4 POKEA 65 E=EIFE6THENPOKED +3,2 POKED 31 35 GOSUB59988 37 FAC4211 THENGOSUB69212 FA4196 THENOP=2005 2920 SC=30+588:6 9888 GO T0588 C.SS=ATHENGOS D-LLEATHENGOS EK (A-22 =32 SU355560 INTC =! 14 0 EE 3EUE (+220244 AND PEEK C+132)=244TH ENPOKEO 32 SS=22 IFPEEK (+22244ANDPEER C+432= 32 THE NOREC +B, 1 S= 8 72 FPEEK (C+22=244 THENNMENN1 S=32 FNN=140RNN=2 THESSE-1 FNN=28THENSS=+ FREEK (D+22 0244ANDFEED +232 +244TH OKED 32 LL=22 IFPEEK (D-220244NOPSE: D-232 = 32 THE DHED B 1 L=8 IFPEEK (D +22 =244 -ENNNNM+1 =32 IFMN=210RNNE 34 THENLLEFMM=27THENLL= 5453 THENFONE 32=-24: N SS= MYYDEDIZIN 31 IFI = 4537 THENPOKED 32 D=4210 MM LL=1 200 POKEC S POKEO-E -83 IFE: 6 THENFO HEI POKED +BD=I285 GO T038 508 P=33 PRINT GOSU368828 GOSUB 2004: GOSUB68285 GOSUB6822 SS= --=-1 A=453 585 C=4427 :D=4429 E=4431 F=4336 =4334 H =4332 POKE 4150+B, 4 POKE 4152, 65 518 GOSUB6B889 51. POKEC +3,7 POKEC. 33 POKED +B.7: POKED.8 3 POKEE +3.7 POKEE 83 POKEF-B7 POKEF 83 512 POKEG+B, 7: POKEG 83 POKEH+B 7 POKEH 8 518 GOSUB59930: GOSUB59988 IFF=4317 THENPOKEF 32 F=4337 IF G=4317 THENPOKEG,32 G=4337 IFH=4317 THENPOKEH.32 H IFC= 4446 THENPOKEC 32 C=4425 E: 32 =4425 524 IFD=4446 THENPOKED 32 D=4426 525 IFE=4446 THENPOKEE 32 E=4425 538 GOSUB59998 592 IFPEEK (A+22=32 THENGOSUB5558 IFAC4196 THENOP=3 GOSUB988: SC=SC+08 GOSUB980B GOTO 1888 534 PRINT\" =\"KYPRINT M = 535 IFC+1=AORD +1=AORE 1=AORF-1=AORG-1=AO RH-1= ATHENGOSUB55556 58 IFAC4211 THENGOSUB68018 548 IFAX 4316ANDA4339 THENPOKEA 32 A=A+LL GOSUB59988 54+ IFA) 4426ANDA (4447THENPOKEA 32 A=4+55 GOSUB59988 593 POKEC. 32 POXED 32 POHEE 32 POKEF 32 POKEG 32 POKEH.32C=C+SS D=DESSE=ESSF =FELL 599 G=G+LL H=HELL 689 GOT0518 See Y=4120 GOSUB634852125 GOSUB62995 POKE 4158,32 992 READKP IFKP=-1THENPOKES3, RESTORE R E TURN 984 READPK POKESS KP FPX4702 THENGOSUB 63808 : 985 IFPK= 1708 THENGOSUB63885 986 FORT=1TOPK:NEXT GOSUB63085 GO TO982 983 DATA225,752 231 558 295 1582,231.550 235 550 236, 1788-1 999 END 1888 A=4537 P=31 PRINTS GOSUB4975 CC= 1 GOSUB68018 E=4563 H=4262 EE=-22 GG=22G OSUB60094 1881 GG=22 SD= CC= =4220 D=4218 QI= G = 1 1818 POKEA+B.4 POKEA 65 POKEO +3.2 POKEC 81 SD=SD +1 IFSD 6THENPOKED -3.2 POKED.81 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 89 illustration: Terry Rogers "


"HIRS SPECTRUM INC SOFTWARE CHOOSE FROM OUR VAST RANGE FREE 26 page CATALOGUE with full details of our range of over 280 different programs for the ZX SPECTRUM. All hired with the consent of the publishers. Whether you prefer to ZAP aliens, get lost in an ADVENTURE game, EDUCATE your children, CALCULATE the family finances or COMPILE machine code programs WE HAVE THE RIGHT TAPES FOR YOU TO HIRE. FAST SERVICE We stock up to 60 manufacturers' original copies of each tape (over 3000 tapes in stock), and can normally despatch yourtapes the day we receive your order, and we always use first class post. LOWEST PRICES We believe our prices are the lowest of any library, yet we offer the LARGEST range of titles. Hire up to 3 tapes at a time, for 2 weeks, for only .07 each inc. VAT & p&p). FREE TAPE HIRE For a limited period, we will send your first tape (your choice) FREE, SO join our library now. You can't afford NOT tol If you've tried another library and are wary of our claims send a stamp and we'll gladly send you a copy of our catalogue we're confident you'll join when you see it! PHOENIX SOFTWARE CENTRE MAIL ORDER SOFTWARE BBC SPECTRUM ETC. ANTONAL Cheam, Surrey SM2 6JT ATIONAL 200 Mulgrave Road, SPECTRUM VIC 20 Fighter Pilot .50 Cavern Raiders .30 Atic Atac .50 Snooker .25 Chequered Flag .25 Chess .95 BBC ORIC 1 Hunch Back .50 Harrier Attack .95 747 Flight .50 Light Cycle .95 Twin Kingdom Valley .45 Johny Reb .95 COM 64 ATARI Manic Miner .50 Up Up and Away .95 Mr. Wimpey .90 Air Strike .95 Revenge Mut. Cam. .50 Krazy Kopter .95 100's of other titles available. Please supply me with the following programa: Enclose S.A.E. for catalogue SOFTWARE LIBRARY I enclose cheque for .00 for LIFE MEMBERSHIP and I understand that my first tape hire will be FREE.If, within 28 days, I'm not delighted with your service youll refund my membership fee. Name Address State computer........ Please allow 21 days for delivery Name....................... Address... CVG4 Cheque for .............. enclosed Phoenix Software Centre 88 Huish. Yeovil, Somerset Tel: 0836 21724 Mesme omputer Fair NE.C. Birmingham 4-7 May 1964 ELECTRON USER... ELECTRONIKA See us on Stand E37 ...this is the add-on you have been waiting for. A switched joystick interface for the Electron user. Only .95 incl. VAT Visa Compatible with all \"Atari-style\" 9-pin joysticks Plug in cartridge design Tough plastic casing Does not interfere with keyboard operation Available from your dealer or direct by mail order 12 month guarantee Games coming soon from most software houses Extends the versatility of your Electron computer STOP PRESS Now available for use with our interface \"Cylon Attack\" by A&F Software First Byte, Dept. CVG. 10, Castlefield, Main Centre, Derby. DEI 2PE Tel: Derby EYTE 1633-23652 Beroy (0332) 365280 MAIL ORDER FORM Please send me a genuine First Byte S-JInterface I enclose a cheque made payable to FBC Systems Ltd Access Expiry date I wish to pay by Address A Genuine First Byte Add-on No. Name "


"GOSUB59978 GOSUB59988 5035 IFPEEK (A+22)=32 THENGOSUB55589 5937 IFA4221 THENGOSUB60218 5848 IFPEEK (A+23)=16BANDLK= 1 THENPOKEA+23 32 HR=HH+1 5841 IFPEEK (A+21)=16&ANDLK=2 THENPOKEA+21 B: HT=HH+1 IFHH=8 THENHH=2 3C=SC +1aee: GO TO 7008 PRINT\" =\"KY PRINT S IFC+LL=AORD +S S= ATHENGOSUB55558 FPEEK (C+23) = 32 THENL-=-* IFPEEK (C+21=32 THENL-=1 IFPEEK (D +22=32 THENSS=-1 IFPEEK (D+21= 32 THENSS= 5895 POKEC,32 POKED 32C=C+LL D=D+55 5900 GOT05813 53:5 Y=V-22 C=0-22 D=-22 E=E-22 F=F-22: RETURN 7808 PRINT\" GOSUB6B888 GOSUB62818 TY=2 60 =4143: GOSUB62089 PRINTSEL=\"KY PRIN C =\"50 Tee: PRINT S ERENISTANCTITETAS FORT=170 3 PRINT \" NEXT 202 PRINT SPOT FORT=17012 PRINT NEXT: FORT=110799 NEXT POKE 4 142+3.4 7834 POKE 4142,65 Y=4123: GOSUB63485 1985 PRINTS FORT=17013 PRINT I am a \"POKES3, TY:T TOOTED T 1211 POKEE+B, 1 POKEE 150 POHEE+1+B, 1 POK EE-1,160 POKEH-3,1 POE POKEH +1+B. 1 1,168 EK -22 = 1860RPE A+22) = 116 THENGOSU355588 =CORR-22=D THENGOTO CIM Ge YTIWDIO EEK (C+22= 325 HENDI=44 EEK (+22)=32 THENGN=44 IF PEEK (+44) =244ANDI=44 THENPOKEC.3 201=1 PEEK (+44)=244ANDGN=44 THENPOKED 3 BGN=1 E=4255 THENPOREE, 3 POKEE +1,32 E=4 IFH=4578 THENPORE 32 POKEH+1 32 H=4 IFA +22=EORA+22=5+1 THENPOKEA 32 A=A+ 1633 FA+22=HORA+22=-=1 THENPOKEA 32 A=A+ 227 FORVE1T052 NEXT PRINT DOO 200 m 2 am 000\" NEXT 7888 PRINTRE A m \"POKES3, POKE365 200 FORT=15T OBSTEP-1 7885 POKE86878T FORU= 1 TO 128 NEXTY: NEXT: OKE 36877 B POKE36878 15 210 IFKYCHANDFB= 1 THENK YEKY+ 1 FB=2 7611 FORT=1T01288 NEXT PRINT\" OP= G0S U3 9088 GO TO27 9888 PRINTED ADRESES LLEVAL\" = 4282: GOSUB63480 964 PRINT\" =\"KP PRINT S C = 90 3862 FORTE 1T02eee NEXT PRINT POKE 193 RETURN 55522 FORTE 1 T023 POLE 32 -22 GOSUB68 389 IFPEEK (A+22032 THENBOSU355550 5551 NEXT 55556 POKE AB, 4 POKE 12 POKES3 234: GO SUB55570 POKES 231 GOSU355578 POKE33 23 262 W35 g GOSUB55578 PORES3 22\" GOSUB5557@: 223 FORT=1T01508 NEXT POKESS,POK 1943 FC+01=AORD-GN=ATHENGO T055558 1845 IFAC4196 THENOP=4 GOLFSBB:SC=3C +988 GOSUB9082 GOTO5823 1947 PRINT =\"KW PRINT S C = 50 1650 GOSUB4975 GOSUB60884 1860 IFAC4211 THENGOSUB60518 1995 POKEE, 32 : POKEE + 32 POKEH.32 POKEH+ 132 E=E+EE HEHEGG BOHEC32 = + 1 1996 IFSD) THENPOHED 32 D= 3M 2000 GOTO1018 4975 PRINT\" ... ARI O NEANDE \" PRINT NIINILI 12\" 4976 FORT=1T04 PRINT NEXT 4977 PRINTERIORIDHI al \" FORT= 1 T04 PRINT BHG N HH E \" 4978 NEXT:PRINTAR HAR G RII\" FORT=1T04 4979 PRINT G 2 \" NEXT PRI NTO R I\" PRINT RIIS 4988 PRINT\" 0010 RETURN 5888 BB=1: CC=9 PRINT :0=700=160: GOSUB 68888. GOSUB6B895 GOSUB688.8 P=38 SS=-1:L L=1 OP=4 5085 A=4537 C=4336 D=442 POKE 4142-3,4:P OKE 4142 55 HH=3 5818 POKEA+B, 4 POKEA 65 POKEC +3,7 : POKEC 88 POKED +3,7 POKED.88 KYKY-1 IFKY=THENGO 7055568 GOSUB9000 IFOP= 1 THENGO TO27 1FOP=2 THENGO T0588 555 IFOP=3 THENGO 701288 FOP=4 THEN GOT05888 GOT027 568 PRINTO DAVVERO G AME OVER\": FORT=1504080: NEXT RUN 55578 FORT=170408 NEXT RETURN 53973 PRINT SED PRINT \" PRINTAMAN HOHOH\" HACTO Ltd. "


"63013 IFE C4110 THENE=E+22 63214 IFF (4110 THENF=F+22 63815 V=Y-22:C=C-22 D=D-22 E=E-22: F=F-22 63828 U=4110: IFY CUANDO CUANDD CUANDE CUANDF CUTHENPOKEY, 32 POKEY-1+B, 1 POKEY-1,8 POK EY+i+B, 1 : POKEY+1.8 63025 RETURN 63428 POKEY+B, 2 POKEY 168 POKEY +22+3,2 80401 POKEY +22,160 POKEY-21 + 2 POKEY+21 160 POKEY+23+ 2 POKEY +23, 160 POKEY +44 + B2 53422 POKEY +44, 168 POKEY -66 +3,2 53403 POKEY +56 168: POKEY -65 +32 POKEY +65 160 POKEY+67+3.2 POKEY+67, 168 POKEY+87+ F2 63454 POKEY+37150 BOKEY +39 +3.2 POKEY +39 168 RETURN 63425 POKEY. 32 POKE22,32 POKEY +21 32 P CHEV+23,32 POKEY +44 32 POKE-66 32 POKEY -65.32 63486 POKEY+6732 POKEY +37,32 POKE: +39 3 2 Y=Y+PZ RETURN 63500 GETARIFASTHENPRINT PZ=-22: GO TO20 50501 RETURN 59979 RETURN 59988 GETAIFA THEN53939 59981 IFA$=\"\" THENLK= 1 : GOSUB6B828 59982 1FA$=\"=\"THENLK=2: GOSUB68030 59984 IFA$=\"@\"THENGOSUB6B848 59985 IFA$=\"/ \"THENGOSUB68858 59986 IFA$=\"ATHENGOSUB65860 59388 RETURN 59993 PRINTO HOH\" PRINT\" ........ . PRINT 40........ \" 59999 PRINT \" RETURN 88888 PRINTTAB BORILI \" PRINT I ITINI HT 68801 FORT= 1 T04 PRINT NEXT PRINTAB L EHANI 11 60082 FORT=1T04 PRINTE .. . \" NE XT PRINTALIIIIIIIIIIII\" 60803 FORT= 1 T04 PRINT 012-\"NEXT PRINT Hill \" RETURN 580B4 PRINTS FORT= 1 T06 PRINT\". NEXT : RETURN 60085 POKE 4234 +BQ POKE 4234, QQ:POKE 4243 + BO POKE 4243,00 POKE4344-BQPOKE 4344,00 60006 POKE4353 +3,0 POKE 4353 00POKE 445 4+ BQPOKE 4454,00 POKE4463-B,0 POKE 4463,00 60397 POKE 4564 +,Q POKE 4564,00 POKE 4573 + BO POKE 4573,00 RETURN 50810 PRINTS TABOC) RETURN 60826 IFPEEKA+22)=BANDPEEK A-22) =3ORPEE KA-1)=2440RPEEKKA-22 =244 THENRETURN 62822 POKEA, 32A=A-1 GOSUB68889 RETURN 58835 IFPEEK (A+22=BANDPEEK (A-22)=30RPEE A = 2440RPEEK A-22 =244 THENRETURN 68932 POKEA. 32 A= A +1 GOSUB60889 : RETURN 68843 IFPEEK (A-22 SANDPEEK (A-1) 244TH ENRETURN 68341 POKEA+B, 1 POKE 3: A=4-22: GOSUB6088 9 RETURN 58858 IFPEEKKA+22) THENRETURN 6005: IFPEEK (A+21=244 THENPOKEA 32 A=A+2 2 RETURN 68052 POKEA SPOKEA +3,1 = A +22 GOSUB6088 S. RETURN 6086B IFPEEK(A-22)=BAND PEEK (4-22) =30RPEE KA+22)=BANDPEEK (A-1 = 2 440RPEEK (4-22) =24 4 THENRETURN 88062 IFLK= 1 THENBP=-23 B=21 GOSUB60070 52863 IFLK=2 THENBP=-21:3=23. GOSUB68878 50064 RETURN 68878 POKEA, 32A=ABP POKEA+B 4 POKEA. 65 GOSUB60879: IFPEEK (A+PB)=PTHENGOSU355550 68872 IF PEEK (A+22=244 THENRETURN 68373 POKEA, 32 A=A+PB GOSUB60039 RETURN 68279 FORT=1 TOZOB: NEXT RETURN 60889 POKEA+B, 4 POKER65 RETURN 62995 C=Y+22 D=C+22 END +22 FEE+22 RETURN 3603 POKEY+B.2 POKEY,160 POKEY-1 + 1 PO EY-13 POKEY +1+B POKEY +1 3. POKEC +3,2 63801 POKEC 160 POKEC-1 + 2 POKEC-1 166 POKEC + 1 + 2 POKEO +1,168: POKED + 2 63802 POKED 160 POKED-1+31 POKED-1.3: PO KED +1 +,1: POKED +1 O POKEE +3 2 63863 POKEE 160 POKEE -1+3 2 POKEE-1 160: POKEE+1+B 2: POKEE+1 165 POKE-1 +3,2 63604 POKEF .166 POKEF + 1 +3.2 POKEF +1.16 B RETURN 83805 POKEY 32 POKEC,32 POKEC-1+B, 1 POKE C-13 POKEC +1+B 1 POKEC+1 3 POKED.32 63986 POKEE, 32 POKEE 1 + 1 POKEE -1.8 POK EE+1+B 1: POKEE+1,8: POKEF-1 + 1 POKEF-1 63887 POKEF +1 +31 POKEF + 3 63018 IFY 411@THENY=+22 63011 IFCC4110 THENC= 0+22 63812 IFDC4110 THENDED)+22 ILO 92 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


" THULK FEATURING THE ADVENTURES by SCOTT ADAMS with art by MARK GRUENWALD  JOHN ROMITA! HULK IS THE TRADE MARK OF MARVEL COMICS AVAILABLE ON: COMMODORE 64 (with graphics) .95 SPECTRUM .95 (with graphics ATARI 24K cassette ATARI 48K .95 (with graphics, .95 APPLE 48K with graphics, .95 .95 BBC all prices inclusive of VAT The first of a new Series of Marvel Adverthures featuring Your fanourite Super-Heroes mich sensational graphics! R IAdventure Stores & good computer shops! Available from May Ist in all leading stores & good computer shops! INTERNATIONAL TW EXCLUSIVE U.K. DISTRIBUTORS OF SCOTT ADAMS PRODUCTS 119, JOHN BRIGHT STREET, BIRMINGHAM BI IBE. Telephone: 021-643 5102 "


"Challenging, sophisticated, advanced, extra special. A real adventure! COMING SOON FROM Melbourne House "


"JA_ b . So "


"LLLLC LIVE Even in the year 2245, travel in deep space is impossible, Inhabited planets are hundreds of thousands of light years away from the earth's solar system, The only way to reach distance galaxies is by using a dangerous time transporter to whisk you through the icy wastes between planets. Once you have entered the time vortex, you must guide your time machine past the space dust and asteroid fragments or your ship will be shattered into a thousand pieces. There are four different phases to overcome before you can reach your intended destination and deliver your precious cargo of gems. You move your 'Tardis' left, right and forward using a joystick in port Illustration: John Higgins "


". 524 POKE54276 2 POKE5427 POKE54278.0 525 PRINT\" POKE53238 E5465 ORE53231 B POK 518 PRINT TAB 10 PRINTTAB 12., RINTTAB 12: 3 & PRINTTAB 12 . 2 518 PRINTTAB (12 ) F 520 PRINTTAB (19);\"3PRINTTAB (18), \"THE 522 PRINTTAB (12) IR ! : 18 FORN=T062 READA POKE:6326+N, A. NEXT 26 V=53248 POKEV +32 3 POKEV+33.3 38 POKEV +21,1 POKEV -16,4 49 POKE2848 255 45 POKEV+39.1 POKEV+27.3 58 POKEV +1,280 POKE! 159 60 = 158: Y=208 188 POKE 555 123 18 PRINT *29 T=1 130 POKE 646,1 149 k=1065 45 POKE54296,3 POKE5427 99 POKE54278 243 POKE5427317 POKE5422 37 147 POKE54276 129 FORE=17025: NEXT PEN # MAIN PROGRAM * 152 POKE54296,3 152 POKEV+31, 155 AERND ( 143 POKEHA 3 OREKA-54272 524 PRINTTAB(13) ; 525 PRINTTAB (13) ; ! ! RIR LR\" 1997 528 PRINTTAB 13 538 PRINTTAB (13; ! 548 PRINT: PRINTTAB(5) . I REVIEW 542 PRINTTAB(5), \" IRIR! RIBIFIE 544 PRINTTAB(5) \"FURE IR REFIRIRI 546 PRINTTAB(5) . ! ! . 543 PRINTTAB(5); IRIK II III YE -3 55 K= +20 C=C-1 8 IFK1984 THENK PRINTS E -:-SCOR FEEK (5632 254 THENT=1-7 PEEK (5632 53 THENT=+5 IFPEEK (5632 251 THENX=X-4 IFPEEK (5532 47 THENX=X+4 IFPEEK (5632 THENX= +4 IFPEEK (5632 X-4 POKEV, XAND25 EV @ LETY=Y-T LETX=: IFCO 14 THENC= 1 IFM= 66 THENT=4 IFNE 30THENT=3 IF =65 THENY=280 ERNI 1*150: N=M+18 PINT IFY = 2B8THENY=208 29 IFX= 40 THENX=45 298 IFX.299 THENX=298 299 IFPEEK (V+31 = 1 THENPOXE54296 15 FORA= 8901888 NEXT GO T0560 399 GOT0158 500 FEN # START 56: IFMHTHENHEN 503 POKE53248+39. ILI IL LL LLLL DN-LIN00h IPIL OUTDOOR 549 POKE646,1 553 PRINT PRINTTAB 19); BY PRINTTAB 11 S.NYLER & A. BRYCE\" 555 PRINT PRINTTAB28; PRESS FIRE TO ST ART\": 560 IFPEEK (56321)=239 THENN=2 GOTO 28 578 GOT0568 9008 DATAB,60,93 126.0.9 247.6 .239. 8,118. B. 44, 3.118, 192,7,255,224 9018 DATA3, 126, 1922.68.8.8 36.0.0.182, .6 195, 96,6,195 96,15,195 243.6 195, 96 9826 DATA6, 255,96 8.68.a., 126,0,0.255.3 BY STUART MYI FR RUNS ON A COMMODORE 64 WITH ONE JOYSTICK "


"BEAR BOVVER SUL SOFEAWARE Jet Set Willy .95 Bear Bovver Bovver .95 Thousands of Spectrung Sinclair ZX Spectrum CHEQUERED FLAG ANT ATTACK SOFTSOLID 3D FROM QUICKSILVA SOTWARE BY PSION RUNS IN 40K ON THE SINCLAIR SPECTRUM BK RAM Chequered Flag Flacquered .95 Attack .95 98 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"for the 48K RAM Sinclair 2X Spectrum Spectrum ATICATAC «« aktronics Atic 5 50 Atac .50 Sed .95 mowners know we're in the right game Last year W. H. Smith sold thousands of Sinclair Spectrums, making us one of the leading stockists in the country and the ideal choice for Spectrum Software. With Arcade Games ranging from Jet Set Willy to Ant Attack we've got action and excitement just waiting for you. Of course, our range doesn't just stop at games. As leading stockists, we can also offer you an extensive choice of educational software. What's more, we're constantly updating the range, as new software is released so you can count on us having all the latest, most current programs. In fact, for the full spectrum, you can't do better than come to the people who know the game. WHSMITH WIFI Subject to availability Prices correct at time of going to press. At selected branches only Subject to availabil COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 99 "


"TABLE ÉÉÉÉÉ ALF Software A&F Software A&F Software A&F Software A&F Software oftware A&F Soft ... Beamus downto A&F Software! CHUCKIE EQG CYLON ATTACK IRAOHS TOMB CM64 BBC ELECTRON DRAGON SPECTRUM .90 .90 .90 .90 .90 CHUCKIE EGG AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD COMPUTER SHOPS John Menzies CYLON ATTACK .90 .90 JUNGLE FEVER .90 foot Selected Stores unte. Canalside Industrial Estate PHARAOHS TOMB A&F Software .90 .90 Unit 8. Canalside Industrial Estate, Woodbine Street East, Rochdale, Lancs. OL16 5LB. Tel: 0706 341111 100 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"o 9.00. 00 0.00 0.00 3.00..200000 0:02 Pa 0.80.8: 10ONERRORGOTO1590 20MODE 7 SOPRINTTAB(6, 3) : CHR$(136); CHR$(141) ******* DOTTY ********* 40PRINTTAB (6,4) CHR$ (136); CHR$(141); \"******* DOTTY ******* SOVDU23: 8202:05 0:0 6OPRINTTAB (3,5) You know the rules_eat the dots and avoid the ghosts .Eating a red power pill will enable you to chase the ghosts. Extra mana t 10,000pts.\" 7OPRINTTAB (14, 10) CHR$ (129);\"CONTROLS: \":PRINTTAB (14.12) CHR$(130);\"Z Lef PRINTTAB (14, 13) CHRS(130)\"X_Right\": PRINTTAB (14.14) CHRS(130) M Down\":P RINTTAB (14, 15) : CHR$ (130): \"K_Up\" BOPRINTTAB(5, 17) \"Hit any key to continue\":F$=GETS 9OMODE2 100VDU19,0, 4,0,0,0 110VDU23; 9202: 0; 0:0 120VDU23, 240, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255,255,255,255 130VDU23, 251.60, 60, 126, 66, 255, 255, 153, 153 1 40VDU23, 250,0,0,0, 24, 24,0,0,0 150VDU23, 241,0,0,60, 60, 60, 60,0,0 16ODIM Y (17.24) 170FORY=4 TO24: FORX=1 T017 130READY (X,Y): IF YOX,Y)=1 THENPRINTTAB (X,Y) ! : VDU240 190NEXTX: NEXTY 20ODATA 1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1 21ODATA 1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1 220DATA 1,0,1,1,0,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,0,1,1,0, 1 230DATA 1,0,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,0,1 240DATA 1,0,0,0,0,1,1,1,0,1,1,1,0,0,0,0,1 250DATA 1,0,1,1,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,1,1,0,1 26ODATA 0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 270DATA 1,0,1,0,1,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,1,0,1,0, 1 280DATA 1,0,1,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,1,0,1 290DATA 1,0,1,0,1,0,1,1,0,1,1,0,1,0,1,0,1 300DATA 1,0,1,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,1,0, 1 31ODATA 1,0,1,0,1,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,1,0,1,0,1 320DATA 1,0,1,0,1,1,0,1,1,1,0,1,1,0,1,0,1 330DATA 1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1 340DATA 0,0,1,1,1,0,1,1,1,1,1,0,1,1,1,0,0 350DATA 1,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,1 36ODATA 1,0,1,0,1,1,1,0,1,0,1,1,1,0,1,0,1 370DATA 1,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,1 38ODATA 1,0,1,1,0,1,1,0,1,0,1,1,0,1,1,0, 1 390DATA 1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1 400DATA 1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1 410T%-O: MOVEO,0 4205C%=O:LIFE%-3: EL=0: GA-1: GB=1 430S%=0:G% O 440PRINTTAB (6.27) 450PRINTTAB(0,27), \"SCORE \"SC%. 46OPRINTTAB (3,3); \"HI-SCORE \" T% 470PRINTTAB (13,27); \"LIVES \"LIFE% 480PRINTTAB(0, 29); \"LEVEL? (1 TO 10)\" : INPUTZ%: IFZX 10R2%>10THENPRINTTAB (0,3 0);\" \"GOT04B0EL SEK10+57% 490PRINTTAB(5,29);\" \"Z%;\" *: PRINTTABCO, 30): . U SA .. OO. 0.0 lo.o. 0.0. 0.0 0. 00 Oo oo 0 0.0. :0 10.0 O q°o° .0.  0 . O You've seen Pe-Man, Ms Pa@Man and Bahay Pac-Man. Now, C&VG ProGally present a Cevoly: min maze game playing z turbo charged Part Even the hardened c@vt review team Chave been exposed to the best games software who this side of the galaxy with admiration when Chris Broyden's game pops couldn'help gasping 500 FX12,1 510 FX11,1 520PROCFILL 528REM****Start of main loop**** 529REM 4530COLOUR 540IFVX>1 THENV%=V%-1:GOTOS70ELSE U%=1 550IFGB-1THENI%-10:J%14:P%-100%-14:GB=1 560IFGA--1 THENC%BD%-14:NX-8:0%=14:GA=1 570 FX15,0 SEOPRINTTAB (6,27): SC% 59OPROCPACMOVE GOOPROCTEST 610X%=L% 620IFV%=1COLOURIELSEIFVX<SCOLOURSEL SECOLOUR2 Y%=M%: EX-P%: 630IFGB-1THENGOT0690 %-Q% 640PROCGH (I%.J%) 000 $ o present for greater 0 t han tromirthe version thes .0 swept this country's carcades two years ago In. stead of passages full of dots and powerpills, the . whole screen is covered in dots which you must ento  bot once you have cleared one part of the maze, you egnnot go back gyer it. O Once you're in the driving o o Q you'll agree that Dotty is streets ahead of the at, we're sure competition. But Be warnedO couldwell d 730PRIN so difficult, e you found the bend 66OPRINTTAB (1%, J%);\"\" 670 IFP%-OTHENP%17ELSEIFP%=1BTHENP%1 6 BOPRINTTAB (P%,0%) 1 : VDU251 67i, P.: J 700IFGA=-1 THENGOTO530 e0:E=NU: H=0, 710PROCGH (C%, 0%) 720N%E%0%=H% 730PRINTTAB (C%D%)\" 740IFN%-OTHENN%=17ELSEIFNZ=10 THENN%=1 750IFV%=1 COLOURS 760PRINTTAB (N%,0%) :: VDU251 770PROCTEST (780C%-N%:D%E0% 7901F (S%+G%) MOD 1830=OTHENPROCENDSCREEN BOOIF EL-1 GOTO 530 1101F SC%>10000 AND EL-O THEN LIFE%-LIFE%+1: EL=1 B20GOTOS30  RUNS ON A BBC MODEL B IN 32K BY CHRIS BROYDEN n oa 'O.O O. OCOMPUTER 1.90 COMPUTER& VIDEO GAMES 101 : Gooo oo oo n O. "


"ULTIMAT oo_ o THE NOT SO SOFTWARE CAN YOU HANDLE THE ULTIMATE? THE MOST AMAZING PROGRAMMES, THE SMOOTHEST ACTION, THE HIGHEST RESOLUTION GRAPHICS ALL ULTIMATE GAMES ARE ARCADE STANDARD, ) FEATURE PACKED, 100% MACHINE CODE. AND PURE ADDICTION. SO WHICH WILL BLOW FIRST YOUR COMPUTER OR YOUR MIND? ONLY  FAC H Available from: WH Smith, Boots, John CI Menzies, Spectrum Centres, large department (All games joystick or stores and all good software retailers. Or send the coupon direct keyboard control) We'll pack and post your order to you absolutely free in the UK. ZRONS m ATIC ATAC NEW! Okay, I dare take my computer to the edge of meltdown. Send me the following: Cookie Lunar Jetman Pssst Tranz Am Jet Pac Jet Pac Expanded VIC 20 Atic Atac I enclose cheque/PO for  ____Name Address. Cookie 16/48K ZX Spectrum Tranz Am 16/48K ZX Spectrum Atic Atac 48K ZX Spectrum Code Send to: Ultimate Play The Game, The Green, Ashby de la Zouch, Pssst 16/48K Spectrum Lunar Jetman 48K ZX Spectrum Jet Pac 16/48K ZX Spectrum Leicestershire. or 8K Expanded VIC 20 Ultimate Play The Game is a trade name of Ashby Computers and Graphics Ltd., The Green, Ashby de la Zouch, Leicestershire, Tel (0530) 411485. Dealer enquiries welcome. VIC 20 "


". ..ooo. 0000000 o° °o o o o Soooo Qoo ooo 0 0 -6°.. ESKIFE NOCH ooo 0 0 o 0:00  oo  oo oo oooo  o 0.0 O vocean.000 Poooooo 0° 0° 0° 0 0 0 . 0.0 o 827REM B28REM****End of main loop**** 829REM 830DEFPROCGH (A%,B%) 840IFE%=N%THENR%-BELSER%-10 850IFU%-1 ANDRND (3) 1GOTO1080 860IFRND (K) CR%GOTO1 OBO B70F%=0 8801FABS (X%-A%) >ABS (B%-Y%) THENGOTO980 8901FU%-1 GOT0910 900IFY%>B%THENGOT0950EL SEGOT0920 910IFY%<B% GOTO950 920IFPOINT (A%*64, 1024-32*B%) = 7THENF%-F%+1 EL SEGOT0940 930IFF%2GOTO970EL SEGOTO990 940H%-%-1:GOTO1070 950 IFPOINT (A%*64,970-32*B%) = 7THENF%=F%+1EL SEGOT0970 960IFF%2G0T0940ELSEGOTO990 970H%EB%+1: GOTO1070 980IFU%-1GOTO1000 9901FX%>AXTHENGOT01040EL SEGOT01010 1000IFX%CA% GOT01040 1010IFPOINT (A%*64-64,992-32*B%) = 7 THENF%=F%+1 ELSEGOTO1030 1020IFF%2GOTO1060EL SEGOTO900 1030E%EA%-1:GOTO1070 10401FPOINT (A%*64+64,992-32*B%) = 7THENF%=F%+1 EL SEGOTO1060 1050IFF%2GOTD1030EL SEGOTO900 1060E%EA%+1 10701FPOINT (E%*64+32, 1010-32*H%)=7 OR POINT (E%*64+32,1010-32*H%) = 1 THENG%-G %+10 1080ENDPROC 1090DEFPROCPACMOVE 1100A$=INKEY$ (O): IFA$=\"Z\"ANDPOINT (X%+64-64,992-32*Y%) < >7 THEN LXX%-1: GOTOI 120 ELSE IF A$\"X\"AND POINT (X%*64+64.992-32*Y%) 1110B$INKEYS (O): IFB$=\"K\"ANDPOINT (X264, 1024-32*Y%)<> 7THEN M%Y%-1: GOTO112 O ELSE IF Bs=\"MAND POINT (X%*64,970-32*Y%) < 1120IFPOINT (L%*64+32,1010-32M%) = 7THENSOUND1.-10, 150, 3:5%-5%+10: SC%=SC%+10 7THEN L%=X%+1: GOTO1120 1130IFPOINT (L%*64+32, 1010-32M%) = 1 THENSOUND1,-10, 200,5: S%-5%+10: SC%5C%+10 0:V%30: U% THEN M%=Y%+1:GOTO1120 ELSE 1170 1140PRINTTAB (X%Y%);\" -1 1150IF L%=0 THEN L'17 ELSE IF L%=18 THEN L%=1 116OPRINTTAB(L%, M%);\"0\" 1170ENDPROC 1180DEFPROCTEST 1190IFU%-1GOTO1220 1200IF P%=L% AND Q%=M% AND GB=1 OR NX=LZAND 0%-M% AND GA=1 THEN ENVELOPE1, 128,-1,-1,-1,60, 60, 60, 120, 0, 0, -100, 120, 0: SOUND1, 1, 150, 30:LIFE%-LIFE%-1: COLO UR7: PRINTTAB (19,27) LIFE% ELSEGOTO1220 1210 IF LIFE%0 THEN GOTO 1530 ELSE S%0:G%0: PROCFILL 12201FGA1 THENIFN%=L% AND 0%-M% THEN GA=--1: SOUNDO, -15, 150, 30: SC%5C%+100 1230IFGB= 1 THENIF P 1240ENDPROC L% AND 0%=M%THENGB-1: SOUNDO, -15, 150, 30: SC%E5C%+100 1250DEF PROCFANFARE 1260SOUND 1,-15, 129,2 1270SOUND1,-15, 117,2 1280SOUND1,-15, 101,6 1290SOUND1, 0,101,1 1300SOUND1, -15, 101,2 1310SOUND 1,0, 101, 1 1320SOUND1,-15, 101,2 1330SOUND1,-15, 109,3 o OOOO 0.00 000 °o°. .. OOO O O O USODEFPROCTE 18001FUX ooo OO OOO OO OOO oo 2009 Ooo Variables X%Y%,L%,M% Pac-Man's coordinates C%.D%,N%,0% = Ghost A's coordinates 1%,J%,P%,0% = Ghost B'S COordinates 2% = Level of difficulty chosen R% = Speed of the ghosts T% = Hi-score SC% = Score at the end of the present game U% = Used to see if a power pillo has been eaten E% = Number of blocked routes OOO 000000 O O 1340SOUND1,-15, 117,2 1350SOUND 1,-15, 129,6 1360SOUND 1,0, 129.1 1370SOUND 1.-15.129.2 1380SOUND1,0,129,1 1390SOUND1,-15, 129,2 1400ENDPROC 141 ODEFPROCFILL 1420COLOUR:PRINTTAB (2,5);:VDU241:PRINTTAB(2, 23) : VDU241:PRINTTAB(16, 23) :: VDU241.PRINTTAB (16,5) :: VDU241: COLOUR 1430FORX1T017: FORY~4T024 1440 IFPOINT (X+64+32,1008-32*Y) =OTHENPRINTTAB (X,Y) :: VDU250 145ONEXTY: NEXTX 1460V% 1:S%=S%+10: G%=G%+20 1470x%-2: Y%-15:L%2:M%-15:C%-8:D%=14:N%=8:0%-14:1%=10:J%=14:P%=10:0%=14 14BOPRINTTAB OX%, Y%);\"0\" 1490COLOUR1.PRINTTAB(1%, J%) :: VDU251: COLOURS:PRINTTAB (C%,0%) :: VDU251 1500ENDPROC 1510DEFPROCENDSCREEN 1520PROCFANFARE: PROCFILLIK=K*1.4: ENDPROC 1530FORT=1 TO2000: COLOUR12: NEXT:PRINTTAB (2,1); \"ANOTHER GAME?\": COLOUR 1540 FX15,1 1550 FX12,0 1560IFSC%-10>T% THENT% SC% \":GOT0420 1570C$GET 1580 IFC$<> \"N\"PRINTTAB (2,1);\" 1590*FX15,1 1600*FX12,0 1610MODE? 1620END O Program structure 30-80 instructions 120-150 define characters 160-400 set up maze 420-490 set up titles 610-690 updates position 790-820 checks for edge of the screen 0 0 0 O screen boa O OOO oooo oooo OO 00.00.00 0 "


"944444444444444444444444CC LEVEL 9 ADVENTURES BBC 32K COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM 48K LYNX 48K NASCOM 32K ORIC 48K ATARI 32K al 976767667676767676767676766767676 DETAILS REVIEWS Level 9 Computing specialise in hugh, pure-text puzzle \"Adventures which have a fast adventures with detailed scenery response time, are spectacular in and a wealth of puzzles. All games the amount of detail and number have over 200 locations and a of locations, and are available to save game feature, and cost cassette owners. Simply .90 inclusive smashing!\" -Soft Sept 83 MIDDLE EARTH ADVENTURES \"Colossal Adventure is included in Practical Computing's top ten 1: COLOSSAL ADVENTURE. A games choice for 1983. \"Poetic complete, full size version of the and tough as hell\" -PC Dec 83 classic mainframe game \"Adventure with 70 bonus \"To sum up, Adventure Quest is a locations added wonderful program, fast, exciting and challenging. If you like 2: ADVENTURE QUEST adventures then this one is for Centuries have passed since the you\" NILUG issue 1.3 time of Colossal Adventure and evil armies roam The Land. With \"Dungeon Adventure is cunning, you must overcome the recommended. With more than many obstacles on the road to the 200 locations, 700 messages and 100 objects it will tease and Black Tower, source of their demonic power, and destroy it. delight! Educational Computing. Nov 83 3: DUNGEON ADVENTURE. The Snowball. As in all Level 9's trilogy is completed by this adventures, the real pleasure massive adventure, set in the rich comes not from scoring points but caves below the shattered Black in exploring the world in which the Tower A sense of humour is essential! game is set and learning about its denziens.. this program goes to THE FIRST SILICON DREAM prove that the mental pictures ADVENTURE conjured up by a good textual 4: SNOWBALL. The first of Pete adventure can be far more vivid Austin's second trilogy. The giant than the graphics available on colony starship, Snowball 9. has home computers been sabotaged and is heading Which Micro?, Feb 84 for the sun in this giant game with \"Lords of Time. This program, 7000 locations. writen by newcomer Sue Gazzard, THE LORDS OF TIME SAGA joins my favourite series and is an 7: LORDS OF TIME. Our extremely good addition to Level congratulations to Sue Gazzard Level 9 adventures are available at .90 from good computer S's consistently good catalogue.. for her super design of this new shops, or mail order from us at no extra charge. Send order, or SAE As we have come to expect from time travel adventure through the Level 9, the program is executed for catalogue, to the address below and please describe your ages of world history. Chill to the with wonderful style-none of micro. Ice-age, go romin' with Caesars LEVEL 9 COMPUTING those boring \"You can't do that legions, shed light on the Dark messages! Highly Ages, etc. etc Dept G 229 Hughenden Road, High Wycombe, Bucks HP13 5PG recommended.\" PCW, 1st Feb 84 LLLLLLLLLLQ9LLALALALALLLLLLLL NULLLLLLLLLLLLLLLL COMPUTER ACCESSORIES available for VIC-20. CBMKA BBC/B only Seaga SLR (Stack Light Rifle available for VIC-20 Stack Lightpen + available for VIC 20. CBM64, BBC/B, Alor Stack Analogue Joystick available for VIC-20, CBM64, BBC/B) CBM64, 48K Spectrum) comes complete with three free games 400/800 supplied with one free game on Cossette .75 VIC-20/CBM64 only .95 As Seen on TV! .95 Other games are available, titles include: Othello, Life, Go, Draughts, Lost in the Labyrinth, Crossword Twister, Shuffler, Stack Dustcovers Stock Storeboard memory expansion system) Seek & Destroy and Simon. Each gome costs 65.75 VIC 20/CBM64 Computer including Vickit2 Free $44.85 C2N/1530 Cassette Deck 8k Rampack for use with Stock Storeboord $20.70 Stock 4-slot Motherboard switched .35 1540/1530 Disk Drive & Rompack .35 Stack Utility Cartridges: 1525 Printer Stack 4-slot Motherboard switched) For cassette bosed systems. Arrow Toolkit/Fast Cassette) .35 1526 Printer Stock 3k Hi-Res' Memory Cartridge .50 Arrow Plus (os Arrow with Assembler) .85 BBC (A or B) VIC/PET Rom Emulator Package $57.50 For disk based systems Help Toolkit/Monitor/Disassembler) RX80 Printer Epson) Vickit2 (Programmers Aids/Hi-Res Commands) Cartridge .20 .75 FX80 Printer Epson Vickit 3 Comprehensive Hi-Res SystemCartridge .45 Super Help as Help with DOS/Assembler .25 Atari 400 or 800 specify Vickit 4 High Speed Cassette/M.C. Monitor Cartridge .45 These products available for CBM64 only Vickit 5 For use with Vickit 4 provides Assembler facilities on Vic) Cartridge .45 RS232 Interface Cartridge .35 Stack Cables IEEE-488 Interface Cartridge .10 BBC Epson Vickits available as Eproms only subtract .35 from above .40 Centronics Interface .70 Other cables available on request Stock Rom'n'Rom Carrier takes 2 Roms + 3k Ram .20 These products available for VIC-20 and CBM64 Multi-Rom Carrier 16.10 These products are available for the VIC 20 only. se products are available for the VIC-20 only. Graphis-Ed a unique graphics editor package for the BBC/B 20.55 Stock Data Cassettes C12/C15 Sinclair Prices include V.A.T. at appropriate rate. commodore BBC complete range of peripherals from just one source! 64 V 20 .30 ATARI Spectrum A Please send me a Free brochure, price list and the address of my nearest stockist. STACK Name Address The Computer People STACK(CUSTOMER INFORMATION CENTRE 290-298 DERBY ROAD, BOOTLE, LIVERPOOL L208LN DEALER ENQUIRES-051 933 5511, ASK FOR 'DEALER SALES E. & O.E. 104 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"LOTHLORIEN A LOTHLORIEN a SPACE VADERS MUMMY, MUMMY Woken from eternity by a mad archeologist and armed only with a spade you must bury the spirits in the masonry of the Pyramid if you are ever to read the cartouches and return to your golden sarcophagus. Spectrum 48K .95 USTER SPECTRUM GER ANY SPECTRUM MICRO MOUSE IS AN ACE DE-BUGGERI GRID PATROL Fast and furious. Eight different screens test your lightning reactions as you attempt to wipe out the aliens in a devastating crossfire from surrounding tanks. High score table. Fully redefinable keys. 100% machine code. Joystick option. Any Spectrum .95 LOTHLORIEN a SHELLING OUT FOR LOTHLORIEN GOES DE-BUGGING HALOTHLORIEN ARE CHAMPIONS O.K. SPECTRUM L LARIEN FACTION TURTLEN MICROMOUSE \"Graphically excellent with smooth moving sprites.\" POPULAR COMPUTING WEEKLY At last, educational arcade action! Fight off the software bugs and help Micromouse de-bug his programs. Datakill available. Fight through the levels to the highest score. TWO GUN some go for Any Spectrum .95 Commodore 64 .95 TURTLE strawberries, some \"Entertaining and original... go for you.. some an arcade game of the don't go for anything unless BEETLEMANIA highest quality.\" they're accidentally attacked. But this is winter \"Graphics are excellent. Increasing GAMES COMPUTING and you never know when In the middle of winter a difficulty is a welcome features it might snow. PERSONAL COMPUTER NEWS turtle is defending his Any Spectrum 50 strawberry patch against a Oric 48K UMOSble) .95 variety of marauding bugs Any Spectrum .95 You'll find the full range of Lothilonen ACTIONMASTER WARMASTER and ADVENTUREMASTER games at leading record'shops and good software shops including CO (selected WH Smith (selected on outlets) Mees outlets BEDLAM BLASTER Tiger trader Spectrum makro Top marks for redefinable keys. Sound and N a graphics superb. Good animation. Fun to play.\" s selected LIGHTNING N.S.S. outlets Dealers more action for your money PERSONAL COMPUTER NEWS For a complete list of Lothlorien games send for our FREE colour catalogue. Any Spectrum .95 MC Lothlorien, 56a Park Lane, Poynton, Stockport, Cheshire, SK12 TAE. Tel: Poynton (0625) 876642. WH Smin Southern 2 LOTHLORIEN "


"TERMINAL SOFTWARE from the producers of 3210 SUPER SKRAMBLE SUL CELCHE co STAR COMMANDO Star-badge by clearing the Galaxy of hostile ce dike Cosmic Kamikazes, Galactic Pirates altazards like Space Minefields and, Meteor SE Fantastic 3-D erspective on the Comune dore 6 for .95 RU GESE WIF602200 PLUMB CRAZY! Stop the tank exploding by piebing in a relief pipe using your skill and ingenuity. Avoid the rocks and beware the ghost! Fun-action game for Commodore 6.95 Diume NOP BAL TERMINAL Available from leading computer shops and distributors, including:TERMINAL SOFTWARE 28 CHURCH LANE, PRESTWICH, MANCHESTER M25 5AJ. Telephone: 061-797 3635 or 061-773 9313 INTERNATIONAL WICOSOFT-DUSSELDORF TIAL-ALMHULT AASHIMA-ROTTERDAM CARAT-KBENHAVN ZX AFRICA SOUTH AFRICA, OZISOFT-AUSTRALIA ALPINE NEW ZEALAND MICRODIGITAL-USA Dixons SOFTWARE PCS BLACKBURN. EXPRESS Selected Lewis's and Co-op Stores Soft Shop International Centre Soft WEST MIDLANDS FERRANTI AND DAVENPORT LTD "


"MICRODRIVE COMPATIBLE ABF PROGRAMMABLE JOYSTICK 2695 INTERFACE Spectrum or ZX81 ONLY 26.95 400pp for PACK CONTENTS SUPPLIED  Programmable Interface Module as illustrated, complete with clip-on programming leads. Self adhesive programming chart detailing how to define which key is simulated by UP, DOWN, LEFT, RIGHT, and FIRE. AGF One pack of ten Quick Reference Programming Cards for at-a-glance setting to your games requirements. Works with QUICKSHOT II & TRACK BALL Recognised as the only true Hardware Programmed joystick interface this product offers all the features associated with such a design. You can use any Atari-compatible joystick controller with any software for your Sinclair Spectrum or ZX81, not just those with a joystick option. Movement of the joystick is recognised by the computer exactly the same as pressing the appropriate control keys, and can therefore give the most immediate response to that movement. The hardware programmed design works with all possible key-reading methods, both BASIC and Machine Code. Eight directional movement, with or without the fire button being pressed, can be achieved by only programming the left, right, up, down and fire keys required by the game. Programming is achieved by a two-digit code, which is looked up on the Programming Chart supplied, for each direction and firing button. These two numbers are then selected on a pair of leads which are clipped onto appropriately numbered strips on the interface. Once configured this can be marked onto a Quick Reference Programming Card for storing with the game. As the programming is not power dependent the interface can be immediately used when next switched on. The keyboard remains fully functional and can be used simultaneously with the joystick. An integral rear expansion connector means there is no need to remove the interface to connect other peripherals. NB. A recent design improvement now means that the AGF Programmable Interface works with the new Quickshot II rapid \"Auto Fire\" feature. PARA 12 months guarantee and full written instructions. KEY FEATURES # Programmable design gives TOTAL software support. Accepts Atari, Competition Pro, Wico, Starfighter, Quick Shot, Le Stick etc. # Rear extension connector for all other add-ons. Free demo program and instructions. ONLY 11.95 + P&P Quickshot Ilo JOYSTICK NEW IMPROVED GRIP: BUILT-IN STABILIZING SUCTION CUPS TRIGGER FIRE BUTTON : RAPID AUTO FIRE SWITCH : TOP FIRE BUTTON AGF Hardware, Bognor Regis, West Sussex PO22 9BY. Telephone: (0243) 823337. FROM: MR/MRS/MISS Please allow up to 28 days for delivery. ADDRESS TOTAL SEND C.W.O. (NO STAMP NEEDED) TO: A.G.F. HARDWARE, DEPT CVG. FREEPOST, BOGNOR REGIS, WEST SUSSEX, PO22 9BR. QTY ITEM PROGRAMMABLE INTERFACE JOYSTICK(S) PACK(S) QUICK REFERENCE CARDS ZX810 ZX SPECTRUM O Please tick DEALER ENQUIRIES WELCOME EXPORT PRICES ON APPLICATION ITEM PRICE 27.95 12.95 1.00 FINAL TOTAL COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 107 "


"The No.1 Football Game ZX Spectrum 48 ZX81 16K, Spectrum 48K Football Manager ddictive FOOTBALL MANAGER Designed by Kevin Toms This outstanding game of skill and strategy is now widely available and you can join the many thousands of satisfied customers who have purchased the game. This is no five minute wonderyou will be playing this game for hours over many weeks (we know-our customers tell us!). Some of the features of the gameKevin Toms * Matches in 3D graphics * Transfer market * Promotion and relegation * F.A. Cup matches * Injury problems t Full league tables * Four Divisions * Pick your own team for each match * As many seasons as you like * Managerial rating * 7 skill levels * Save game facility Inolta *ZX 81 Chart Home Computing Weekly 16.8.83 Comments about the game from press and our customers \"FOOTBALL MANAGER is the best game! have yet seen on the spectrum and my personal favourite of all the games on any micro ... To the ordinary person it is an excellent view of what can be done in the field of computer games ... The crowning glory of this game is the short set pieces of match highlights which show little stick men running around a pitch, shooting, defending and scoring ... It is a compulsive game but people who cannot take game sessions of 9 hours or so, which happened on one happy Sunday, will be grateful to know that there is a 'save to tape' option. FOOTBALL MANAGER has everything it could... The originator, Addictive Games, certainly deserve the name.\" Rating:19/20 (Practical Computing August 1983). \"When I first received this game I spent the best part of the weekend playing it. Since then I have returned to it more often than any other. The truly addictive quality of this game is the remarkable way it mirrors the real football manager's problems... \"(Personal Computer Games Summer 1983) Programmers We want your software Send us a sample, if accepted, we will supply generous royalties plus cash advances plus free advice from Kevin himself! GOAL! Versions coming soon for BBC'B (End of march) Commodore 64 Oric 48K, Dragon etc. \"Tam writing to say what a great game it is. have spent over 45 hours on it.\" (Mr. D. Feam-Gloucestershire.) Action from the Spectrum version Available from computer software stockists nationwide, including B & John Menzies Prices: Spectrum 48K $6.95 ZX 81 16K .95 (N.B. 3D GRAPHICS ARE NOT INCLUDED IN THE ZX81 VERSION) Overseas orders odd $150 To order by mail (p&p free) send cheques or postal orders to: Addictive Games ZA RICHMOND HILL, BOURNEMOUTH BH2 6HE Dealers! For urgent stocks send your headed notepaper direct to our address. "


"O 24 16K, um 48K DISCOUNT SOFTWARE SUPPLIES 8 PORTLAND ROAD LONDON W114LA 01-221 1473 AMAZING SOFTWARE BARGAINS BY MAIL, 100's OF TITLES AVAILABLE! TELEPHONE ORDERS WELCOME. WRITE OR RING NOW FOR FULL DETAILS Supplier RRP Inc. VAT Our Price Inc. VAT Game Supplier RRP Inc. VAT Our Price Inc. VAT 5.99 6.95 7.95 6.95 5.95 5.00 7.95 6.95 6.00 6.96 d 8888 5.95 5.95 7.50 6.95 7.95 5.95 6.00 6.95 5.99 5.99 8.50 5.99 8.95 6.50 4.00 7.95 7.95 5.99 5.99 5.99 7.95 7.00 Game COMMODORE 64 Dark Dungeons Space Pilot Galaxy 64 Zylogon Dungeons Twin Kingdom Valley Flying Feathers Colussus Chess Revenge of the Mutant Camels Hellgate Jumping Jack Grid Trap China Mina Assembler 64 Siren City My Secret File Mr. Wimpy Bugaboo the Flea Sting 64 Snooker Transylvanian Tower Manic Miner Crazy Kong Dinky Doo Alley Cat 5.00 8.95 5.95 6.95 Anirog Anirog Anirog Big G Software Anirog Bug Byte Bubblebus CDS Llamasoft Llamasoft Livewire Livewire Interceptor Interceptor Interceptor Mosaic Ocean Quicksilva Quicksilva Visions R. Shepherd Software Pro Software Pro Software Pro. Solar 8.95 6.95 11.95 8.95 7.00 7.00 7.00 9.95 6.90 7.95 7.95 8.95 6.50 7.95 8.95 4.99 5.90 6.95 6.95 7.95 5.50 6.95 6.95 6.95 6.95 8888 SPECTRUM Krakatoa Football Manager Birds and the Bees Mrs. Mopp The Island Night Gunner Fighter Pilot Scuba The Skull 3D Seidab Attack Code Name Mat Lunar Crabs Abersoft Forth Melbourne Draw My Secret File Wheelie Train Game Escape Trash Man Flight Simulator Chequered Flag Scrabble Aquaplane The Snowman Fred Dragons Bane Eskimo Eddie Hunchback Mr. Wimpy Snooker 1994 Sheer Panic Tribble Trouble Manic Miner Jetset Willy Thrusta Push 011 Omertron Atic Atac Lunar Jet Man Tranz Am Jet Pac Blue Thunder 3D Ant Attack Bugaboo the Flea Abbex Addictive Bug Byte Computasolve Crystal Digital Digital Durell Games MCN Hewson Micromega Micromega Melbourne House Melbourne House Mosaic Microsphere Microsphere New Generation New Generation Psion Psion Psion Quicksilva Quicksilva Quicksilva Quicksilva Ocean Ocean Ocean Visions Visions Visions Software Pro. Software Pro Software Pro Software Pro Software Pro Software Pro Ultimate Ultimate Ultimate Ultimate R. Wilcox Quicksilva Quicksilva 14.95 8.95 9.95 5.95 5.95 5.95 5.95 7.95 6.95 15.99 6.95 6.95 6.95 6.95 5.90 6.90 6.95 88 6.95 4.95 4.95 5.95 5.95 as 6.95 7.95 VIC 20 Pimble Wizard Scramble Dark Dungeons Flight Zero One Five Vic Gammon Chess Falcon Figher Hellgate Space Joust 3D Time Trek Wizard and Princess Cosmonauts Jet Pac Crazy Kong Metagalactic Llamas... 6.95 888888888888888888888SSSSSSS Terminal Terminal Anirog AVS Bug Byte Bug Byte Interceptor Llamasoft Software Pro Anirog Melbourne House Melbourne House Ultimate Anirog Llamasoft 6.00 6.00 5.00 5.00 4.95 5.95 888888 8 Onununununununununununun o con 5.95 5.95 5.95 4.95 5.50 4.75 7.95 5.50 6.95 4.75 6.95 6.95 6.90 ORIC Scuba Star Fighter Mr. Wimpy Ice Giant Oric Munch Ultima Zone Lone Raider Rat Splat Hobbit Galaxy Five Durell Durell Ocean Softek Tansoft Tansoft Severn Software Tansoft Melbourne House Durell 6.95 7.95 8.50 5.95 5.95 5.90 5.95 6.95 7.50 6.50 6.95 12.95 5.95 7.50 7.95 7.95 BBC Dare Devil Denis A Maze in Space Fortress My Secret File Paras Visions Opus Pace Mosaic Lothlorien 7.95 14.95 6.95 8.95 7.95 9.95 7.95 8.95 7.00 Our Price 10.95 11.95 11.95 SPECIAL OFFERS FOR THE SPECTRUM RRP THE HOBBIT AND BOOK By Melbourne House 14.95 H.U.R.G. By Melbourne House 14.95 VALHALLA By Legend 14.95 SPECIAL PACKS SPECTRUM PACK A RRP Our Price COMMODORE 64 PACKB GCE Equations Open Sesame GCE Geometry .35 .00 Time Traviler O-Level Chemistry Besieged French Mistress B Word Power TO: DISCOUNT SOFTWARE SUPPLIES PLEASE ACCEPT MY ORDER FOR THE FOLLOWING PROGRAMS/SPECIAL OFFERS RRP Our Price .80 .00 S DISCOUNT SOFTWARE SUPPLIES 8PORTLAND ROAD LONDON WIT LA 01227073 SEND Name .......... Address. Make cheques payable to Discount Software Supplies Cheque No .... For .............. enclosed Please debit my Access Barclaycard No .................... Signed ................ SEND SAE FOR UP TO DATE LIST OF OUR AMAZING BARGAINS COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 109 "


"Imprisoned for a crime you did not commit, you are condemned to spend the rest of your life in a fortress from which no one has ever escaped ... alive! After years of imprisonment, the pressure has become too much you must escape or die in the attempt. Managing to get out of your cell will be difficult enough all the corridors and walkways are guarded by android guards. Laser beams scan the entire building, ready to scythe through the legs of any escaping prisoner. If you successfully dodge the guards, trip wires and lasers beams, you must blast a hole in the fortified entrance and escape through the prison ground and over the perimeter fence into the surrounding forest. The game has multiple levels. The longer you play, the tougher the iron bars get and the guards become much better shots! The game runs on any TI and doesn't require the extended Basic cartridge. :10 PRINT\" PRISON RUN\":!! :20 PRINT \"YOU ARE CHAIRMAN OF THE\": \"ESCAPE COMMITEE AT A MODERN\":\"P.O.W.CAMP\":: 130 PRINT \"GUIDE YOUR MEN OUT USING\":\"CURSOR KEYS\" :40 PRINT CO PRINT \"HEAD FOR THE DOOR IN THE\" : \"HOSPITAL BLOCK\": \"THERE HAS BEEN AN\": \"ESCAPE TUINNEL DUG THERE\" :: : 60 FRINT \"DODGE THE GUNS AND HEAD FOR\": \"THE TREES & SAFETY ONCE\": \"BEYOND THE WALLS\":::: :70 PRINT\" By Charles A Sharp.. 1983\" 180 FOR D1 TO 2000 :90 NEXT D 200 ESC=C 210 MO=O 220 ROW=18 ACO COL=24 240 CALL CLEAF 250 CALL SCREEN (16) 260 CALL CHAR(103.\"181818FFFF131018\" 270 CALL CHAR (104.\"187C7EFFFFFE7038\") 280 CALL CHAR(112.\"0000081C24101422\" 290 CALL CHAR (41.\"0000001818\") 300 CALL CHAR (40. \"FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF\") 2:0 CALL CHAR(120. \"FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF\") BY CHARLES SHARPE RUNS ON A TI-99/4A IN 32K PRISON RUN 110 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"19TX 460 FOR COM-10 TO 2: 470 CALL VCHAR (13.COM, 40.3) 480 NEXT COM 490 FOR D=25 TO 27 500 CALL VCHAR (6.0.40.5: S10 NEXT O 520 FOR OCH15 TO 2: SO CALL VCHAR 7.00.40.3) 540 NEXT OC 550 CALL HCHAR(10.21.40) 560 CALL HCHAR(10.19.40 970 FOR OP=12 .TO 15 S80 CALL VCHAR(2, OP.40.3) 590 CALL VCHAR (20.Op. 40,3) 600 NEXT OF 510 FOR PO-28 TO 30 620 CALL VCHAR (2,PO.40.3: 30 CALL VCHAR (20.PO, 40,3) 640 CALL HCHAR (8, 19.1031 650 CALL HCHAR(12.2. 32.4) b60 CALL VCHAR(14, 25, 32.3: 670 NEXT PO 680 REM SET TIME 690 TIME=100 700 Re -10 C-2 720 TIME=TIME-: 730 IF LEN(STR$(TIME) ) = 1 THEN 740 ELSE 750 740 CALL HCHAR (23.26.32) 750 FOR I TO LEN (STR$ (TIME) 760 CALL HCHAR (23. I+24. ASC (SEGO (STR$(TIME).1.1)) 170 NEXT 1 780 CALL. HCHAR(5. 12. 120 90 CALL HCHAR (17.15. 120) BOO CALL HCHAR (6.24. 120 310 CALL HCHAR(12.27.120) 520 CALL HCHAR(4.20.40.3: 330 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL.112) 840 CALL GCHAR(10.20.6) 350 IF G=112 THEN 1340 B60 CALL GCHAR(12.2.GT 370 IF GT=112 THEN 1880 ELSE 880 B80 GOSUB 1030 890 RANDOMIZE 900 X=INT (RND* 6) + 710 ON X GOSUB 1180.1340. 1500. 1680, 1180, 1180 920 CALL KEY (O.K.S: 730 IF K=69 THEN 940 ELSE 950 940 ROW-ROW 941 CALL GCHAR (ROW.COL.GET) 942 IF GET>32 THEN 943 ELSE 1010 943 ROWEROW+1 944 GOTO 1010 250 IF K=88 THEN 960 ELSE 970 960 ROWEROW 761 CALL GCHAR (ROW.COL. GET) 962 IF GET> 32 THEN 963 ELSE 1010 963 ROWEROW-1 964 GOTO 1010 70 IF K=68 THEN 980 ELSE 990 980 COL=COL+ 781 CALL GCHAR (ROW.COL.GET) 982 IF GET> 32 THEN 983 ELSE 1010 993 COL-COL-1 984 GOTO 1010 790 IF K=83 THEN 1000 ELSE 1010 1000 COL-COL-: :001 CALL GCHAR (ROW.COL. GET) 1889 EELSET 17 THEN 1003 ELSE 1010 1010 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL.32 1020 GOTO 930 1030 REM TIME COUNT 1040 TIME-TIME-1 : 050 IF LEN(STR$(TIME) ) = 1 THEN 1060 ELSE 1070 320 CALL COLOR (9.10.16 O CALL COLOR (10.13,1) 340 CALL COLOR (12.11.11) 90 CALL COLOR (11.6.1) 360 FOR C=1 TOS 270 CALL VCHAR(9..104.73 3BC NEXT C 90 CALL VCHAR (5. 14.40.15) 400 CALL VCHAR (9.28.40.15) 110 CALL HCHAR(5.15.40, 13) 420 CALL HCHAR (19.15.40.133 130 FOR CO-25 TO 27 440 CALL VCHAR(14.00.40.5 490 NEXT CO illustration: John Higgins COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 111 "


"ITU 1060 CALL.HCHAR (20.26.2 2070 FOR I=1 TO LEN (STR$ (TIME) 1080 CALL HCHAR (23.1 +24. ASC (SEG$ (STR$(TIME).1.1)) :090 NEXT I 1100 IF TIME THEN : 120 110 RETURN 1120 CALL CLEAR 1150 PRINT \"YOU LOST\":MO: \"MEN\": \"AND\": ESC: \"MEN ESCAPED. \":::: 1170 STOS 180 REM G1 1190 CALL SOUND (200,-1.1 : 200 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL. 112) 1210 CALL VCHAR (6.12.41.13) : 220 CALL GCHAR (ROW.COL. GC) 1230 IF GC-41 THEN 1240 ELSE 1310 : 240 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL. 120) 1250 CALL SOUND (200, 392.2.330.2% 1260 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL, 32) 1270 MOMO+1 1280 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL.32) 1290 ROWWIB 1300 COL24 1310 CALL VCHAR(6.12.32.13: :320 CALL HCHAR CROW.COL.32) 1330 RETURN 1340 REM G2 1390 CALL SOUND (200.-2.1) 1360 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL.112) 1370 CALL VCHAR (7.24.41.12) 1380 CALL GCHAR (ROW, COL.GC) 1390 IF GC-41 THEN 1400 ELSE 1470 1400 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL.120) 1410 CALL SOUND (200.392,2,330,2 : 420 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL.32) 1430 MOMO+: 1440 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL.32) 1450 ROW 1B 1460 COL24 1470 CALL VCHAR (7, 24, 32.12) + 480 CALL HCHAR CROW.COL.32) 1490 RETURN 1500 REM G3 1510 CALL SOUND (200.-3.1 :520 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL. 112) 1530 FOR RR.26 TO 15 STEP 1540 CALL HCHAR(12. RR. 41) 1550 CALL GCHAR CROW, COL, GC) 1560 IF GC-41 THEN 1570 ELSE 1640 1570 CALL HCHAR CROW.COL.120) 1980 CALL SOUND (200.392.2, 330.2) 1590 CALL. HCHAR CROW.COL.32) 1600 MO=MO+1 1610 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL.32: 1620 ROW=18 1630 COL.24 : 640 CALL HCHAR(12.RR. 32) 1650 NEXT RR 1660 CALL HCHAR CROW.COL.32) 1670 RETURN 1680 REM G4 1690 CALL SOUND (200,-9.11 1700 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL.112) 1710 CALL HCHAR (17.16.41.9) 1720 CALL GCHAR (ROW.COL, GC) 1730 IF GC=41 THEN 1740 ELSE 1810 1740 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL.120) 1750 CALL SOUND (200,392.2.330.2) 760 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL.32) 1770 MOMO+1 1780 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL.32) 1790 ROW=16 1800 COL=24 1810 CALL HCHAR(17, 16, 32.9 :820 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL.32) 1830 RETURN 1840 CALL HCHAR (ROW.COL, 32) 1850 ROWE 1860 COL=13 1870 GOTO 880 1880 CALL HCHAR(12.2.32) 1890 FOR S-30 TO O STEP 2 :900 CALL SOUND (100.262.S) 1910 NEXT S 1920 ROW=18 1930 COL=24 1940 ESC=ESC+1 1950 GOTO 830 19TX D )) 112 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"ACORNSAFT PRESENTS AVIATOR One man's flight to save his home town! TA Aviator This new and sensational production will leave you breathless as you master the art of flying a Spitfire. You'll have to think fast as you battle with the controls. And the suspense will be unnerving as you try out your new-found skills on increasingly difficult manoeuvres. Aviator is an exciting flight simulator which puts you in the pilot's seat. Earn your wings as you explore a 3-D graphical world and score points by successfully flying under a bridge and between skyscrapers. Then meet your ultimate challenge-you alone must save Acornsville from the advancing enemy. $14.95 cassette. .65 disc. | Plus full supporting programs. Starship Command Starship Command: JCB Digger: Are your reactions quick enough to fight off invadGet the Meanies before they get you! Dig holes for ing enemy spaceships? Will your performance report JCB Digger them to fall in, then fill them. Or scoop them up in to the Star Fleet Admirals be good enough for them to your shovel and dump them in the sea. warrant you another craft? The Meanies will become meaner and harder to As Captain of a battle starship, only you and your destroy as your skill develops, testing you even further skill can answer those questions. $9.95 cassette. $9.95 cassette. $11.50 disc. $11.50 disc. Disc versions are available in the new dual 40/80 track Free Fall: format. These and many more Acornsoft BBC Model B programs You've been attacked in outer space. All your crew are available from your local Acorn stockist. members are dead after the Alphoids injected the air Alternatively, you can order programs by sending a chequeor supply to the space station with cyanide. credit card details to Acornsoft at the address below. Credit card You managed to get your space suit on in time, now holders can also order by telephoning 0933-79300. Ring the defend the vital computer tapes from the Alphoids. same number for a free Acornsoft catalogue and Aviator poster. But, be quick, you've only a limited amount of air. Acornsoft, c/o Vector Marketing, Denington Estate, $9.95 cassette. .50 disc. Wellingborough, Northants NN8 2RL. Free Fall "


"FROM DER LIDDLE WABBITS... FOR THE KOMMANDANT 64 a talaga .99 inc. A VERY VACKYNUNVHAPPY DOGGY SCHULTZY VILL BITE ANYZING UND ANYVUN! ZIS IS YOU... VIVA OH, VOT A SCHWEIN YOU ARE! DIG, DIG, BRITISH FOOLS... FOR ZEM DER WAR IS OVER VUNCE YOU STOP ZEM! IT'LL END IN TEARS, TEDDY! RABBIT SOFTWARE AT THE BEST SOFTWARE STORES NOW! "


"COMMODORE 64  SPECTRUM BBC ORIC DRAGON  TANDY IF YOU THINK YOU'VE GOT THE BETTER OF YOUR COMPUTER, YOU'D BETTER THINK AGAIN.... We all enjoy a good action game on our home computers, but after a while doesn't chasing the alien across a screen wear a little thin? That's the time to take on the superior challenge of a Warmaster strategy gameplenty of action, plenty to think about, and plenty of titles to suit every taste. Take on Warmaster and really put your home computer through its paces. SIGGG TE LOTHLORIEN LOTILORIEN LOTHLORIENA PARAS LOTHLORIEN a Johnny ,Rel VARIMASTER TACTICAL AERIAL COMBAT GAME SPECTRUM 48K WARMASTER OSTAGES CONFRONTATION Bald-on game that offers a basic format for any modem, non-nuclear conflict. Contains a modern European scenario with facility to create others of your choice using air and land forces. Two-player game. Spectrum 48K .95 BBC-B .95 .95 LOTHLORIEN ATTLEZONE RED BARON PARAS JOHNNY REB Offers the excitement of arcade action Dramatic all-graphics campaign. There's still plenty of fight left in the but requires the tactical thought of war Your hand-picked force has dropped Confederate South as each side selects games. Pit your biplane against one or behind enemy lines to capture a strategic forces to manoeuvre on a full-graphics two of the Kaiser's aces in this serial river crossing. Two versions of the game battlefield. Play against the computer or combat game. with ten levels of play. challenge a friend Spectrum 48K .95 BBC-B .95 Spectrum 48K .50 Spectrum 48K .95 Oric 1 48K .95 Oric 1 48K (coming soon) BBC-B .95 DREADNOUGHTS Dragon 32/Tandy Colour 32K .95 Suspense-filled high seas drama as the Commodore 64 (coming soon) .96 pride of the German Grand Fleet is locked Available from John Menzies, Lightning Dealers and better in battle with the Royal Navy. Two-player game. software shops or clip the coupon for fast delivery. Spectrum 48K $5.95 Please send me (tick box) Johnny Rob Spectrum 48K .50 Oric 1 48K 6.95 Controntation Spectrum 48K 7.95 BBC-B .99 Dragon 32/Tandy BATTLEZONE 2000 Red Baron Spectrum BK 5 95 Colour 32K Futuristic wargame Paras BBC-B Commodore 64 (coming soon) Spectrum 4K 65.95 Dreadnoughts Spectrum 48K Your tanks, missile Oric 1 48K (coming soon) .95 Battlezone 2000 BBC-B launchers, infantry etc. have to destroy an all Free colour catalogue listing all Lothlorien games o powerful computer I enclose a cheque/P.O. for  made payable to MC Lothlorien. controlled battle machine. Please debit my Access No.__ I LL Signed Can you save Planet Earth? BBC-B .95 Name Address Send to MC Lothlorien, Dept., CVG 5/84, 56a Park Lane, Poynton, Cheshire SK12 1AE. the mind stretcher Tel: Poynton (0625) 876642. LOTHLORIEN a metamonien, Dogty, cV65lb, sea Park tone. Tu "


"THE HOTTEST GAMES IN TOWN FROM LLAMASOFT HELL GATE HELL GATE on the 64 is certainly no REVENGE OF HOVER BOVVER, being the VIC 20 code tweaked to run on this system. However we are offering it at a bargain price to those who like an unusual shoot om-up, fans of Gridrunner and Matr should enjoy themselves and the game is challenging to all Available for Commodore 64 65.00 and VIC,20 E6. MATRIX Jeff Minter has taken Gridrunner the game that topped bestseller charts in USA and UK and created an awesome sequel. Graphically supert, it features multiple screens, New aliens and attack waves, mystery bonuses, renegade humanoids, deflexor fields, diagonal tracking countdown/panic phase and much, much more... Packed into 20 mind-tapping zones and accompanied by incredible sonics  n und Available for Commmodore 64 .50 and VIC-20 . 1907 LASER ZONE Experience Laser Zone = an utterly NEW totally ORIGINAL masterpiece of Video games design Learn to control two spaceships at once Feel the EXHILARATION as after long hours of practice, you control the two ship so that they function as a smooth co-operative team! Feel the ruw POWER as you lunge for the electro button and BLAST your enemies into expanding clouds of SPACE JUNKI Feel the humiliation as carelessly aimed BLAST slams into the side of your last remaining ship BK expansion required. Available for Commodore 64 .50 and ViC 20 . METAGALACTIC LLAMAS BATTLE AT THE EDGE OF TIME A fast and original game for the unexpanded VIC Challenging and colourful, with good sonics and a unique game action and design, this promises to be the most exciting new 3.5K VIC Come since the introduction of GRIDRUNNER nearly a year ago .50 ATTACK of the MUTANT CAMELS Planet earth needs yout Hostile aliens have used genetic engineering to mutats comes from normally harmless tests into 90 foot high heutronun shielded, laserspitting death comes Can you fly your tiny mo v able lighter over the mountainous landscape to weaken and destroy the camels before they invade the humans stronghold You must withstand withering or fire and alien UFOs, Game action stretches over 10 screen lengths and features superb scro s coer 1/2 player actions and unbelievable antation Play this game and you'll never be able to visit a zoo again without getting an itchy trigger fingert Awesome me action Available for Commodore 64 ,50 HOVER BOWER GRIDRUNNER Finally true arcade quality on the unexpanded VICI Shoot down the segmented DROIDS invading the grid. Beware of the pods and oppors! The awesome speed, sound and graphics ges you the best blast available for unexpanded Vic. Available for VIC 20 .00 Comodore 64 .00 Atari 400/800 .50 A totally original arcade game for C64 featuring outstanding graphics and sound track created by a professional Piano Wizard Gordon Bonnet has borrowed his neighbour's Air Molowninower. Mow your way through 8 many of the 16 lawns as You can before the pursuing neighbour retrieves his mower Set your dog onto the neighbour to help you out of tight spots and don't annoy the gardener. Try not to plough through the neat flower beds or Overheel your mower 27.50 REVENGE OF THE MUTANT CAMELS At last the long awaited sequel to Attack of the Mutant Camels is available. You are controlling a ninety foot high, neutronium shielded lazer spitting death Gamel: leading a rebellion against your evil Zeytin overlords. The game features beautiful S ooth scrolling graphics and no less than 42 different attack waves, more than any game in video history. The challenge of play will last for months as you battle to see what's on the next wave. l@0950 Awesome Games Software 23 49 MOUNT PLEASANT, TADLEY, HANTS. RG26 6BN. TELEPHONE: TADLEY (07356) 4478 All orders add 50p postage and packing LLAMASOFT GAMES NOW IN 200 LASKYS AND MANY OTHER RETAILERS "


"BIG K IS THE NEW GAMES MAGAZINE THAT BREAKS ALL THE RULES No.2 33% RPM At last a games magazine that doesn't go by the book! BIG K is the name and BIG K is the game and from the very first pixel-poppin' page you'll know that no other sheet on the street looks like it or sounds like it. Whatever BIG K gets in its sights whether it's news, reviews, listings, or FREE hardware, it always plays it FLEXIDISC — a different way and says it a 3 great utility programs to different way. BIG K is technical, help you get even better BIG K is tactical but BIG K is games out of the BBC and Spectrum. never typical. BIG K isn't afraid to shoot from the hip7 and it's always hip when it shoots. THIS ISSUE: Falklands victor General Sir Jeremy If you want a magazine that's music to your Moore reviews the latest war games. micros then ours is more than just the 1984 giant test 3 forthcoming score. When we test rigs we don't take British versus 3 American micros. prisoners and we've a 'no holds barred' Adventure X a superb adventure approach to strategy and adventure. game for you to type into your Spectrum. After your first byte of BIGKAmazing games for Dragon, BBC, the game will never be the same. Vic 20, Spectrum, Atari. Spectrum graphics special how to program great graphics into your micro. SECOND ISSUE ON SALE 19th APRIL: 85p TURN OVER TO PLAY COMPUTER FLEXI-DISC COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 117 "


"INVADERS D 1 GOTO 10000 10 FOR F= 46592 TO 46599 20 READ A : POKE F,A 30 NEXT F 40 FOR F=46376 T046383 50 READ B:POKE FB 60 NEXT F 70 FOR F=46368 T046375 80 READ C:POKE F,C 90 NEXT F 100 FOR F=46360 T046367 110 READ D: POKE FD 120 NEXT F 130 DATA 12,30,63,51,51,51, 18, 18, 12,30,6 3,63, 38, 51,18,18,12,12,12,3 0, 30, 63, 63 140 DATA 63, 10, 34, 35, 50, 7, 13,41,41 380 REM **INITIALISATION** 390 S=0 400 Y=2 410 XL = 10 420 YM=D 430 T=0 450 PAPER O 500 A$=\"@ @ @ @ @ @ @ 510 B$=\" @ @ % % @ % @ 520 C$= A$ @ @ % % % % % % % % % %\" 530 D$=B$ BY NEIL FANTHAM RUNS ON AN ORIC 1 IN 16K 540 E$ 999 REM **SET UP DISPLAY** 1000 CLS:PRINT CHR$(2) 1020 PLOT 1, Y, A$ 1030 PLOT 1, Y+4, C$ 1050 PLOT 1, Y+2, B$ 1060 PLOT 1,Y+6,0$ 1070 GOTO 8000 1100 T=T + 1 1120 PLOT XL, 21, \"$\" 03 DES TORTOF 17 COMPUTER & VIDEO MES "


"1125 REM **THE GAME** 1130 L$=KEY$ 1140 IF L$=\"\" THEN RETURN 1150 PLOT XL, 21,\" 1160 IF ASCCL $ ) =8 AND XLX1 THEN XL = XL-1 1180 IF ASC (L$ )=9 AND XL (31 THEN XL=XL + C&VG always tries to bring you the classic arcade games first. Unfortunately, we haven't up to now published a version of the grand daddy of computer games for the Oric 1Space Invaders. We think we have more than justified the long delay by waiting for something special to come along and Neil Fantham's astounding version of the arcade game has been worth waiting for. We guarantee Super Invaders will turn owners of other computers green with envy. Space Invaders follows the theme of its forerunner religiously. Armies of multicoloured, laser-spitting aliens descend toward the earth whose only defence is a single laser cannon. You have been given the task of manning the gun against the overwhelming power of the warring aliens who attack in waves of over 30 at a time. The more invaders you shoot, the faster their comrades will move in an attempt to avenge their deaths. The left and right cursor keys are used to move the laser base and the up arrow key is used to fire the missiles. 1190 PLOT XL, 21, '$\" 1400 IF ASCCL$) >11 THEN RETURN 1415 ZAP 1420 FOR M=19 TO Y+6 STEP-1 1430 PLOT XL,M,\". 1440 PLOT XL,M+1, 1450 NEXT M 1460 PLOT XL,M+1,\" 1500 F=0 1510 Q$D$ : R=6 1520 GOSUB7000 1530 D$=Q$ 1540 IF F=1 THEN 1750 1550 PLOT XL, Y+5,\".\":PLOT XL, Y+5,\" + 1560 PLOT XL, Y+4,\".\":PLOT XL, Y+4,\" ! 1570 Q$=C$: R=4 1580 GOSUB 7000 1590 C$=$ 1600 IF F=1 THEN GOTO 1750 1610 PLOT XL, Y+3,\".\":PLOT XL, Y+3,\" \" 1620 PLOT XL, Y+2,\".\":PLOT XL, Y+2,\" \" 1630 Q$=B$ : R=2 1650 GOSUB 7000 1660 B$= Q $ 1670 IF F=1 THEN 1750 1680 PLOT XL, Y+1, \".\":PLOT XL, Y+1, 1690 PLOT XL, Y,'.\":PLOT XL, Y,\" \" 1700 Q$=A$ 1710 GOSUB 2000 1720 A$=$ 1750 IF A$=$ AND B$E$ AND C$EE$ AND D$ =E$ THEN 9000 1760 IF Q$= E$ THEN Y=Y+2: PLOT 1, Y-2, E$ 1770 GOTO 1100 7000 IF MID$ (Q$, XL, 1) =\" \" THEN RETURN 2010 Q$=LEFT$CQ$, XL-1)+\" \" +MID$C$, XL+1). 2020 F=1 7502 S=S+16-Y 7510 Q$=MID$ (Q$, 2) +LEFT$CQ$,1) 7560 PLOT XL, Y +R,\"#\" 7570 EXPLODE 7590 M$=STR$(S) 7595 IFASCCLEFT$CM$, 1)) <32 THEN M$=RIGHT $ CM$, LENCM$)-1) 7596 PLOTO,0 , CHR$(3)+\"Super Invaders\"+C HR$(4)+\" Score : +M$ 7600 T=T+1 : illustration: Dorian Cross : COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 119 "


"2610 RETURN 8200 PLOT 1,14,\"X\" 8010 IF T=100+INTCRND(1)*90) THEN Y=Y+2: T=0: PLOT 1,Y-2, E$ 8020 A$=MID(A$, 2) +LEFT$CA$,1) 8040 PLOT 2, Y, CHR$(1) +A$ 8050 GOSUB 1100 8060 B$= MID$(B$, 2) +LEFT$ (B$,1) 8070 PLOT 0,Y+2, CHR$(4) +B$ 8080 GOSUB 1100 *8090 C$=MID$ (C$, 2) +LEFT$(C$,1) 8100 PLOT 0, Y+4, CHR$(2) +C$ 8110 GOSUB1100 8120 D$=MID(D$, 2) +LEFT$ (D$,1) 8130 PLOT 0,Y+6, CHR$( 4 ) +D$ 8140 GOSUB 1100 8150 IF Y> 14 THEN GOTO 8500 8160 IF Y> 12 AND B$ <>E$ THEN 8500 E$ THEN 8500 8170 IF Y>10 AND C$ E$ THEN 8500 8180 IF Y> 8 AND D$ 8198 =[+1 8200 GOTO8000 8490 REM **EARTH DESTROYED** 8500 PRINT\" THE ALIENS HAVE LANDED AND TAL KEN OVER 8503 PLOT 11, 10, \"Game Over\" 8504 SOUND 1,400, 15:WAIT250 : SOUND 1,0,0 8510 GOTO 9010 8999 REM **THE EARTH IS SAVED !** 9000 PRINT\" YOU HAVE SAVED THE WORLD !!\" 9002 PLOT 0,10, CHR$(12)+\"Prepare for next army\" 9005 FOR F=1 TO 10:ZAP :NEXT 9006 WAIT 40:GOT0400 9010 INPUT\"Another game (Y/N) ??\";2$ 9020 PRINTCHR$(12) 9030 IF 2$=\"Y\" THEN GOTO 390 9040 INK O:PAPER 7:CLS:END 9999 REM**TITLES** 10000 CLS 10005 INK 7:PAPER 4 10008 PLOT5,5, CHR$(12)+CHR$(05)+\"BY NEIL FANTHAM 10010 PLOT 6,10,\"SUPER INVADE RS 10020 PLOT 6,11,\" 10021 PLOT 1,13,\"* Shoot down the aliens (Press ay key)\" before they *\" 10022 PLOT 1,14,\"* get past the 'X', the rwise there \" 10023 PLOT 1,15, \"* will be trouble for y ou ! ! * 10035 IF KEY$ <> \"\" THEN ZAP:WAIT 400: GOTO Variables Z$=Asks for another 1.game. S=Score M$=Displayed score Y=Vertical position of .. invaders XL=Position of laser base A,B,C,D=User defined characters A$,B$,C$,D$=Strings holding alien display L$=Position of missiles M=Position of moving bullet 10 10040 SHOOT WAIT50 10070 GOTO 10035 .. . "


"And now, to compliment the arrival of the fabulous New ORIC ATMOS, IJK Software bring you four exciting new games.. FOR THE GSK ORICand ORIC ATMOS BBM IJK YGHOST GOBIELER In this superly version the record breaking IJK Gtware Ltd present... FOR THE 4BK ORIC4 PROBE 3 and ORIC ATMOS In this tremen IJK RIC) dous machine code Arcade game, the aliens have you comered. To survive you must destroy the fighters and evade their approaching plasma bolts and missies Features superb graphics, smooth action, hall of fame, etc., etc. For the 48K ORIC-1 and ORIC ATMOS .50 inc. you must guide the muncher around themen, eating the dots to gain points. Eating the power pilis enables you to chase and eat the ghosts, coming bonus points. This all-action machine code Tavouriteatures ghosts, muncher power pills, ghostox, tunnel, fruits, hall of fame, smooth action, etc., For the 48K ORIC-1 agd ORIC ATMOS .50 inc. IJK Software Ltd present... FOR THE 48K ORIC-1 and ORIC ATMOS IJK Software Ltd present... FOR THE 48K ORIC-1 and ORIC ATMOS fren TOAD YORIC GREEN CROSS TOAD IJK Help the toad across the road avoiding the traffic, then. help him CYOSN the river on the legs and turtles to reach the safety of the lily pads. This machine code version of the popular arcade game features lanes of traffic, logs, diving turtles, jumping toad, snakes, mien, tunes, hall of fame, etc., etc. For the 18K ORIC-and ORIC ATMOS .50 inc. FRIGATE COMMANDER In this exciting simulation of modern warfarq, you are in. command of a frigate hunting the waters for enemy sub marines and warships. This excellent \"trek\" type game contains a highly colourful and realistic display, and features radar, sonar, weapons, damage report, map of area, etc., etc For the 40K ORIC-1 and ORIC ATMOS C6.50 inc. Our software has been officially approved by Oric Products International Ltd., and is available from branches of W.H. Smiths, Laskys, Comet, Zappo, John Monzies, The Spectrum Chain, many other leading department stores, hundreds of independent dealers nationwide, and in over 30 countries across the world. You can also order direct from us all advertised software is in stock now and will be despatched within 48 hrs. of receipt of order. SIJK IJK SOFTWARE IJK LIMITED ALL PRICES FULLY INCLUSIVE OF VAT and P&P NO MORE TO PAY! ALL OUR CURRENTLY Unit 3c, Moorfields, AVAILABLE SOFTWARE WILL OPERATE . Moor Park Avenue, Bispham, ON BOTH THE Blackpool, Lancs. FY2 OJY ORIC-1 AND THE ORIC ATMOS Telephone (0253) 55282 Telex: 67232 IJKSOF G WARNING All software sold subject to K Software standard conditions of sale and forms of trade, copies available on request "


"BEYOND CHALLENGING SOFTWARE PSSYTRON NEW Matter Disruptor complex report terminated: Estimate 75 personnel unaccounted for Repair and medi-crews alerted: Defence circuits detect responsible alien craft now locked onto new target: Saboteur sighted in central corridor Sector 7: Pursuit Droid activated: Switching to visual: Disruptor unstable! Detonation immin...... DANES Spectrum From the Necromancer's Cauldron... ...Were conjured the ghouls, ghosts and outraged spirits of centuries of sacrifices to the occult. Hurled forth from whoknew-whence to thwart your escape down the perilous fortress steps. An illtimed move will plunge you into his waiting spider's tangled web. 12 levels of haunting action. Spectrum The War of the Solstice will commence! me LORDS MIDNIGHT Gather those you can to your banner. The World's first Epic game. Not an adventure but a living fantasy novel. And you are the author of the action. Spectrum "


"SUP PERISCOPE: RAGON UFFISEZ OPEN BYRORE ROCK e che Gracisus COMMODORE ** Kriegspiel po DRAGON S.S. Achilles ATARI 400/800 VITH 48K SPECTRUM SAICE STATION Zebra I enclose a Postal Order/Cheque payable to Beyond, or charge my credit card. Card Number Access Visa (Delete as necessary) Total Price Name To... Beyond Competition House, Forndon Road, Market Harborough, Leicestershire LE19 9NR Please send me... KRIEGSPIEL .95 UP PERISCOPE .95 GOODNESS GRACIOUS .95 55 ACHILLES (DISC) .95 SPACE STATION ZEBRA .95 PSYTRON .95 SPELLBOUND .95 THE LORDS OF MIDNIGHT .95 BEYOND HOTLINE 0858 34567 Address Postcode Signature GRAND TOTAL Please rush me details of the Enter the Beyond Software Club all prices include p&p CVG6 BEYOND Competition House, Farndon Road, MARKET HARBOROUGH Leicestershire (E19 9NR "


"FWS thing special.\" Scott had left everything tidy! How did it compare? Short text messages and descriptions and not a large Adventure map, but I soon realised that this was easier on the eye than watching a mass of scrolling text. Anything new was immediately obvious. And the immediacy of the split screen display and machine code speed added a dimension of drama and suspense. The locations all have a use and, together with the short text replies, serve to concentrate the mind on the puzzle. Because of that, a solution is demanded in almost a challenging way. The Hulk Adventure comes with a special issue of a Marvel comic which leads up to the start point of the game, but is not necessary for its solution. Hulk is from Adventure International and will be released in the US and Europe in May in the following versions: Graphics: Spectrum tape, Commodore 64 tape, Atari disc. Text: Atari tape, BBC tape, TRS-80 tape. There is a possibility of 16k ZX81 text and Oric graphics versions later, and almost certainly a Dragon version by the autumn. Keith Campbell NO HULK I loaded Hulk from Scott Adams' TRS-80 development disk, and paused before I pressed ENTER. Would this relatively small (16k) text game seem pale and dated in comparison with some of the larger, all singing, all dancing recent Adventures? The screen cleared. \"I am Bruce Banner, tied hand and foot to a chair. Tell me what to do\". The old magic was back. What a rotten trick! I made various feeble attempts at escape, but it was soon obvious that I would never succeed I needed to be a super-hero. So I thought a bit, tried a few things, and then, dramatically \"Ouch! I scream! \"I am the Incredible Hulk (tm) now\". A pity that we had to have the trade mark in the text, but that was the least of my worries. I was free from my bonds and had a treasure to hand, plus a few unlikely objects, but I couldn't get very far. I was trapped inside two locations and, as I am currently the only player of Hulk in the UK, there was only one person who could possibly help — The Chief Examiner! So I rang him and he was sympathetic. \"The clues are all there. All you need to do is to read them,\" he assured me helpfully, and added for good measure \"You're heading in the right direction.\" Great! So I returned to re-read the text with open eyes. I applied some logic and hey Presto! I broke out! I found myself in a field, near a large dome. I soon came across a sign saying \"Leave gems here.\" I dropped mine and, obtaining my percentage score, reckoned I had a lot of hard work ahead of me. Now I seemed to be going around in circles and couldn't escape to anywhere useful. Sometimes I met a nasty end at the mandibles of alien ants, and sometimes I wondered why I didn't. Apart from a certain-death location, I could discover nothing new, despite digging around desperately for clues. Then sudden realisation hit me! I had a theory and excitedly put it to the test. Wow! I was right — twice over! I had fallen for a beautifully implemented ploy designed to deceive an Adventurer too jaded to use his eyes and brain! Gradually the shape of the game became clearer — and I had to admire the tactics Scott had used to lull the unwary into a state of complacency followed by total confusion! Right now I've got a couple more gems to find before I complete the game, and they don't seem to be giving themselves up easily. But I know the game can be solved, for Scott had left a saved game on the disc, with the player just about to drop the last treasure and win. I looked! Well, wouldn't you? Anyway, as the saying goes — \"I saw no124 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES BREAL CRITICAL MASS This is an adventure game which is based on the idea that a mad and evil genius has planted atomic bombs in five of the world's principal cities. He then sends out a message to tell everyone about it just to cause as much panic as possible. You are brought in to try and figure out how to stop him. To aid you in your task, the media agree to not let out any information about the plan. However, you are on your own. You are playing against the clock and this makes it harder, as the clock runs even if you don't move. So fly down to Miami and spend the nine days you have water-skiing and the world goes boom and you haven't got any further! T ERESA "


"produced by Sir-Tech of Ogdensburg, New York, the creators of the phenomenal Wizardry series. Unfortunately, this is not up to that standard, but it is a very good graphics adventure. John Molloy This graphic adventure has some interesting extra features. For example, the graphics screen is often animated and if things are happening around you then there is often a visual -the old adventure serial trap of the room with closing walls is also in there and this is accompanied with appropriately animated graphics. The game also hovers on the realm of video games with sections like the water-skiing in which you have to steer your way round a course in real time. Can you find the evil Count Stupotino? And, if you find him, can you stop him from blowing up the world? Luckily, if the world does start to glow at night and most of the rest of it vaporizes then you can always re-boot the disk drive and start again. Critical Mass is from Sirius Software and is for the Commodore 64, Atari 800 and 1200 and the Apple II. It costs .95. John Molloy well written and informative. Perhaps too much so in this case, as at the back there is a page headed DO NOT READ ANY FURTHER! THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION WILL REDUCE YOUR ENJOYMENT OF THE GAME. This is a bit like an adventure game in itself, as the whole thing is in a sort of code with all keywords numbered and scrambled and the sentences reading like #1 in the #7 with the #88. This is not one of them! It also helps the first time adventurer through the first three rooms giving them some idea what is going on and how to get on in adventures. The hi-res displays are good and give a perspective view of each room. However, to those who are used to certain sequences of rooms, the graphics can be turned off and this can help speed your way. So can turning off the sound, which consists of a tune when the adventurer completes each minor goal. Sometimes, this is accompanied by a FANTASIA DIAMOND REVIEWS Quest Adventure fans will be delighted to learn that Hewson have now launched Kim Topley's second gameFantasia Diamond Hewson told me that this game is as good as anything on the market so I thought I'd better take a look just to see whether it was true or not. The family heirloom from which the game takes it name has been stolen and taken to the fortress across the river. It's your job to get it back and also to rescue Boris the Masterspy imprisoned on a previous bid to regain the diamond. The game features a split screen graphics and text system. The pretty pictures are certainly but as good as the Hobbit? I'm sorry, Hewson, not by half. I liked Fantasia Diamond it struck just the right level of difficulty for me. It is tough but not so tough that I got the impression I would never solve it in a month of Sundays which was very encouraging. A well thought out and well executed adventure in the shops now at .95. Keith Campbell THE CRYPT OF MEDEA The clock had just struck midnight as I reluctantly booted the drive of my 48k Apple. Then my problems started... I awoke to find myself in a large mausoleum with marble floors and a dirt floor. The room was deathly silent. Before me lay an unlit candle. There was no way out. The object of the game is to use logic and cunning to work your way through the maze and find the way out. The program arrives in a book-sized box which contains a disc containing the program, a manual, various adverts, tip sheets and a warranty card. The manual, like all of Sir-Techs, was JERICHO ROAD Described as an educational adventure, Jericho Road was written by a church minister. It is set in biblical times, in the middle of the first century AD, in and around Bethlehem, Jerusalem and Jericho. The game has two levels of playjunior and full. I tried the junior version first, in which the aim is to get to Jericho. Wandering around in the hot sun nearly sent me to sleep, as there seemed nothing to do, the only light relief being when I got stripped, beaten and robbed. Along came a priest (trot trot trot), a lawyer (trip trip trip), and of course you've guessed it! Child's play, and I learnt little. But then, of course, this WAS the junior version, and I'm sure children will enjoy the sound effects as these various visitors arrive and depart. Not expecting much better, I tried the full game option — easy enough as it's all there in memory, and doesn't require a separate load. This version was in the same setting, but I was immediately impressed about how cleverly the full plot had been abridged in the version I had just finished. For the mission was quite different this time, and not nearly so easy. Thus I was forced to type HELP on a number of occasions and, when there was help on offer, it came in the form of referring me to a chapter and verse in the Bible. This, I found, added a completely new dimension to the game, and suddenly made Bible reading quite interesting. Reading the text gave information vital to the game, both in terms of knowing what actions to take, and getting the answers right when asked questions. The plot being inextricably tied up with the biblical narration relating to the scenario proved to be a winning formula as far as I was concerned. One thing to watch, though, is your typing, should you get frustrated. This game doesn't understand bad language! Jericho Road is from Shards Software for 48k Spectrum, priced .75. John Molloy SUU small cartoon on the text screen to build up the suspense. An impressive sounding, though untested, feature of the game (due to lack of hardware) is that it will generate speech responses if a Mockingboard is fitted. Luckily, this can also be switched off, for if my computer started to laugh at me because I had died for the nth time, I may be tempted to take a hammer to it. The game itself is a slightly more gruesome adventure as almost every room has something dead or undead in it. Such is the stuff of which nightmares are made it's not for the fainthearted. Remember, this is a graphics adventure. The Crypt Of Medea is a disk-based graphics, text and sound adventure for the Apple II, II+, IIE and III and is DEADLINE It's said that variety is the spice of life, and I'm inclined to agree. After adventuring in untold numbers of mazes to kill ferocious beasts, I found it refreshing to open the file on Infocom's Deadline, a game of detection. Inside the file was a large Inspector's casebook packed with information, from how to take fingerprints to making that all-important arrest, including a photograph of the position of the body, COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 125 "


"Starcade presents presents SAVAGE POND ATARI COMMODORE 64\" BBC A truly remarkable depiction of life cycles in a freshwater environment. A semi-educational programme with high resolution graphics, crammed with thrills, spills and excitement, featuring: Amoeba (Rhizopoda); Hydra (Chlorohydra Viridissima); Dragonfly (Erythromma Najus); Bloodworm (Phylum Platyheminthes); Jellyfish (Craspedacusta Sowerbeii); Beetle Larva (Macroplea Leachi); Spider (Argyronata Aquatica); Water Fleas (Scapholeberis Mucronata); BumbleBee (Bombas Lapidarius); and our special guest star THE COMMON FROG (Rana Temporaria) Awesome ... in its conception Brilliant... in its depiction Dynamic ... in its execution DISK OR CASSETTE \"Savage Pond is a real joy. A totally unique concept, well thought out and superbly programmed. Whilst a far cry from the usual arcade action it retains all of the excitement. It is an ideal family game and children and adults alike will marvel at the graphics and storyline... you will not find such an original and compelling game anywhere else. Buy it and sit back knowing that one of the most original games ever programmed was written here in Britain.\" PAGE 6 an Atari Users Magazine. DISTRIBUTED BY CENTRESOFT P.C.S. LIGHTNING CALLISTO TIGER (021-520 7591) (0254-691-211) (01-969 5255) (021-643 5102) (051-420 8888) STARCADE SOFTWARE, 2 Elworthy Avenue, L26 7AA. ASK YOUR Please rush me ........ copies of SAVAGE POND suitable LOCAL DEALER IF IN for Atari Commodore 64 BBC (DISC/CASSETTE). (Delete as necessary) Please debit by Access Card OR DIFFICULTY RING OUR POST THIS Number TTTTTTTTT SUPERFAST COUPON I enclose Cheque/P.O. for ......... CREDIT CARD SALES LINE: Name Address............. 051-487 0808 (24 hours) ---------------------Card Number Name ... ........... 126 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"C & VG SOFTWARE FORM Have you written a games program which you feel is just you send us, including the cassette itself. right for C&VG? If so we have come up with a form to ensure This form will merely help us to keep a check on your that we can test it out and give you our views on it, as game as it goes through our testing process and make sure quickly as possible. we have all the information we need to present it properly in We would prefer a tape and listing but can work from just the magazine. a tape and will return it to you if it doesn't find its way into If you don't want to cut up the magazine, we will accept the magazine. We will also need an additional sheet photocopies or close copies of this page. This form will be explaining the game and its theme. And any documentation appearing regularly in C&VG issues from now on. like lists of variables or how certain routines are working, Remember we pay  for each listing published and you would be of great help to beginners. Please make sure that could win our Programmer of the Year Contest where we will your name, address and the program name is on everything try to turn the winner into a best-selling games author. Program name: Machine make: ...... Model .......... Model Other models it should run on: Number of K needed to run it: ... Other equipment (joysticks, Extended Basic, add ons, etc.) needed to run it: .. Christian Author's name: Sur.name: Address: ............................... Tel: Tel: ......... ....................... .. Date: ..... Type of game: (If original please say so) ....... Loading instructions: Game instructions: in the listing) ne. (If not included -Office use only Date received: Evaluator's comments Good enough to publish Needs some tidying up Not worth publishing Acknowledgement sent: Name of evaluator: Date sent out: Date due back: Needs to be returned to author for alterations: Due to be published in ... issue of magazine. Date sent: ......... Same game already published on this micro . Wouldn't load COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 127 "


"All this sounds great, and it is. El Diablero is written in machine code and has all the usual features of adventure games. I recommend it to everyone-it is almost worth buying a Dragon just to be able to play it! El Diablero, from Dragon Data, for the Dragon 32, costs .95. Simon Marsh and statements made by the victim's family. All this gave the impression of a straightforward case of suicide but being an Adventurer I know that things are never that simple! The action takes place in a large country house and its grounds. The grounds are the pride of a gardener who becomes indifferent if you go rummaging around in his rose beds, until he decides to show you, that is! The body was found in the library, which appears to have only one entrance, and was locked from the inside. To solve the mystery, you have to deal with five people, not counting the lawyer, newsboy, or whoever else may happen to call in. Each character responds differently when questioned, so be careful. If someone feels you are getting a little too close for comfort you could be the next victim! End of game! Deadline, true to its name, gives you just twelve hours to crack the case. Timing is all important, as characters going about their daily business unintentionally uncover new evidence. It is vital you are on hand to receive their statements for, once given, they are not repeated. Like all good detective stories, once started, this game is very hard to put down. Until, that is, you have found the perfect solution. For Deadline, unlike other adventure games, has many different endings. It's only on finding the perfect solution that you are given a summary of the game. As with all Infocom adventures, the extent of the vocabulary is very impressive, and very rarely did my fullsentence commands get the response \"I don't understand that sentence\". Deadline, for the Atari with a minimum of 32k comes from Infocom on two discs, at .50. Expensive perhaps, but worth every penny! Paul Coppins SUSPENDED Having tormented myself with the tortuous paths of Zork, and the unlimited boundaries of Starcross, I thought I might try something a little less complex, So I turned to Infocom's Suspended. I should have known better, for this game was every bit as involved as the others from the Infocom stable. Suspended had one difference. The game has many skill levels, and if successful on one level, the player can move on to the next. If all the available skill levels have over manually the tasks of the computers. Failure to do so means the game comes to a low and painful end. To help achieve this mammoth task, you have control of six maintenance robots which are your eyes and ears. Each robot has its own personality and perception of its surroundings, so you may get six totally different descriptions of each area, and any objects you find. Most Suspended players will, I feel, adopt his or her favourite robot since they are endowed with characteristics that enable the player to associate with them. I found I favoured one called \"Poet\" since most of his communication was in verse. Early on in the game the player will soon discover the need to use the game board for, with all six robots in play at a time, it can prove almost impossible to remember who is where! So there you have it a game I greatly enjoyed, and one I would highly recommend. Suspended is from Infocom, and the Atari version which I played costs about . Paul Coppins REVIEWS EL DIABLERO The Dragon 32 now has a large selection of adventures available. Those from Dragon Data, I find, are among the best, and of these I put El Diablero at the top of the pile. You wake up in the desert dazed, after having been taught sorcery by an old man. Of those lessons you only have a vague memory, but you know you have to destroy the evil Diablero! The vocabularly of the game is fairly large and useful. It uses the common verb/noun system TAKE FISH, GO NORTH etc. On your journey around, you will find such things as mysterious yellow water and large slabs of rock. A magic word has you thinking for hours in search of a possible use for it! To top it all, the game has the best twist in the tail that I have ever experienced. I can tell you it left me breathless! QUEST OF MERRAVID Described on the cassette inlay as \"An Adventurer's Adventure\", The Quest of Merravid is for the Commodore 64, and is set in amongst mountains in a land called Thargon. Your task is to retrieve the magical firestone of the dwarfs, guarded by a Dragon. First of all, you must gather together the one set of armour that has been scattered about the land of Thargon. Not exactly a shatteringly original scenario, but I'll try anything once! So I typed RUN, and found myself in Lower Blackwoods. The cassette inlay told me that to move I could type GON for GO NORTH. Perfectly correct but that was all I could type to move north. N and GO NORTH went unrecognised. The problem is experienced Adventurers are not used to strictly applied non-standard abbreviations like this it can easily cause them to suffer a nervous breakdown! Moving on, I soon came across a bucket. Obviously I was going to find some water before long, so I typed GET BUCKET. I got it OK, but to my dismay, the screen cleared and said \"OK-your next course of action\". I had now completely lost the details of my location and exits. So I tried LOOK. \"I see nothing special\" appeared on a new screen. Unable to believe there was no way of redisplaying my location, I re-read the instructions, tried a few more words, and eventually decided the only way to find my whereabouts was to try moving until I got out, and then move back. As every adventurer knows, moving blind can prove very dangerous. I was lucky. Or was I? To see what I was carrying, I typed INVENTORY, TAKE INVENTORY, INbeen completed (wishful thinking?) then the player can go on and create his own level. This must be a first in computer adventuring, and I liked it, for it means that as one's knowledge of the game grows, its complexities can be increased. Suspended comes complete with a colourful gaming board and pieces, plus, of course, comprehensive instructions and a diskette. As the game starts, the player finds himself awoken from a 500 year cryogenic sleep, during which his mind was monitoring three master computers which maintained the planet's weather, food production and transportation systems. The computers have been damaged, and the objective of the game is to repair them, and meanwhile, to take 128 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"REVIEWS supply the empire's needs etc. Overall, I feel that Puffin did really well with this trilogy. Although it is true that the games are not the best in the world for the Spectrum, they are value for money. You may find the books worth a read too but do not expect Asimov! Simon Marsh VENT, and finally got it with INV. Like it said you will soon discover the commands. When I tried to climb a rope, I was told I could only climb up or down. And that was what I was told when I tried to climb up or down — except where I was meant to! A pity about these annoying features, as the game had quite a nice sense of humour. The player also needs one. And as for \"Adventurer's Adventure\" well, you'd certainly need some experience to guess many of the commands! The Quest of Merravid is for the Commodore 64 or Vic 20 from Martech, at .95 Keith Campbell DEATH CRUISE Yet another game from the growing Virgin catalogue. This attempt at Adventure is really rather tedious and does not show the potential I feel Virgin must have. The game is set on the luxury liner Pacific 1, and among the guests and passengers is H.R.H. King David. The problem is that the evil Mr. Sinister is out to kill him with a bomb! The way to save H.R.H. is, say the instructions, to find the bomb, the room containing the detonator, and to identify Mr. Sinister. Well, reading the cover of the game led me to believe that within its tape an Adventure was to be found lurking, ready to treat me to hours of enjoyment. All I found was a very poor attempt at an adventure game. My main criticism is that the vocabulary is the worst I have ever come across in my life! For the Dragon 32 from Virgin, Death Cruise costs .95. Simon Marsh TY \" BY CARE KORTH TRILOGY The Korth Trilogy is a set of three science fiction books from Puffin, each with a computer tape enclosed. On each tape three games are to be found, and each game relates to a part of the appropriate book. The games are not Adventures, repeat NOT, adventure games. This rather upset me, as the packaging that comes with each implies the opposite. Instead, they are arcade/strategy games but are being reviewed here because the pack aging suggests otherwise. I felt that the books are aimed at the eight to twelve year age group. Thus, if like me, you are out of that category, the stories seem rather boring. Each member of the trilogy is priced at .95 which is good value for money if you are in the appropriate age group and own either a 16k or 48k Spectrum. Of course, for the price, one cannot expect the games to give Ultimate any sleepless nights, but as a package they are superb. So here is a mini-review of each. The first, Escape from Arkron is about three members of Interplanetary Patrol who go to Sirius and find the evil Korth Empire at work. The best game on this tape is Prisoner, where you lead four men on a mission to free Louis and escape, avoiding the deadly robot guards. I found this quite like a Berserk game, but with more robots. Besieged has only one game really worth playing and that is called Alpha. The aim is to reach the control room of Alpha base and solve the problem of trinary maths to re-program the Korth computer. Alpha is in many ways a graphical adventure, but as there is no proper vocabulary, and only graphical monster-bashing, it is not worth much more than to say it is great fun. The last book is Into the Empire and the last game on the tape with it is, in my opinion, the best in the trilogy. The game is called Empire, and is one of the oldest games available for micros, being a simulation of the Empire's economy. You have to control the destiny of thirty planets, quell revolts and COMING NEXT MONTH Remember THAT ROOM in Deathmaze 5000? Keith Campbell has tracked down a reader who was seen crawling out of the Deathmaze and lived to tell the tale! Learn all about the mysterious calculator room AND find out about the safe in Xenos Adventure only in the June issue of Computer & Video Games! 2 * M FILE OSU . 131bPACIFIC T POOL SHOP BAIOCE   LOUNCE DECK COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 129 "


"lan Weatherburn John Gibson time I'd written the raw data I'd used up 21K so bang goes half your memory... so it's thinking cap time ... remember we got together on that one.\" John: \"Yes with ZZOOM one of the big problems was getting the graphic perspectives right, for example the line on the road gave a reference point but to achieve real 3D and animation and also ensure that all the objects increased in size realistically was a pain, for example the Extron missile spins toward you and increases in size at the same time, a big problem. Mind you the hardest part was working out some way of not running out of memory in about five minutes flat... that must have caused you some sleepless nights with Alchemist.\" lan: \"I'm not likely to forget ... but we cracked it in the end.\" lan: \"Yeh, with so many scenes I had to find some way of compressing everything, so I designed the scenes two screens wide then by experimenting with quite a few techniques managed to find a way of getting each line down to just a few bytes of memory; but you're right getting everything into what, in these days, is a relatively small amount of memory caused big problems. In the old 8K PET days the Spectrum's 48K was a lot, but now ... well... John: \"Right, but then I had the problem of making Stonkers not only a classical wargame but also a game that could be played and enjoyed by arcade and adventure fans as well. I had to get things John: \"You're right that was a big headache with Stonkers, by the "


"moving so fast that the player really had to sweat, you know leave them no time to think, with plenty of computer controlled enemy action going on without the player knowing about it, just like a real war in fact\". lan: \"Yeh, its amazing how you can get hooked on playing around with techniques, before I wrote Zip Zap used to experiment just for fun, but when it comes to producing a commercial product ... well ... it's hard work time; the amazing thing is you can sit down at ten in the morning and the next thing you know it's four o'clock the following morning and you suddenly realise why your body aches and your eyes feel as if someone has thrown a hand full of sand into them. The worst thing is entering all the data\". John: \"But it's worth it in the end, the best bit I find is when you've finished writing some code and it doesn't crash and you can see it doing what it's supposed to do on the screen, it's like writing a book and directing a film and seeing everything come out right... a great feeling.\" lan: \"I find some of the coding tricks I come up with really exciting, it's the creative bit I like, mind you the best thing about writing a game is driving around in the BMW afterwards ... the trouble is mine's been stuck in the garage ever since we got to grips with Bandersnatch.\" John: \"Yeh and it looks as if it's going to stay there for a few more weeks.\" lan: \"Thanks mate.\" Imagine Software Limited, Imagine House, 5 Sir Thomas Street, Liverpool, Merseyside L1 6BW the name of the game "


"Sir-Tech Software have recently released the third scenario in the Wizardry series The Legacy of Llylgamynwhich offers improvements over the original two scenarios. This seemed like a good time to take a look at what, if it filters down to other machines, could be the future of adventure games ... a high agility and high luck, cannot be of good alignment. Once all these things have been decided for a group of six characters, you are almost ready to start a game. The game begins in the castle. And the 'in' place to go in the castle is Gigamesh' Tavern. This is where you go to get your group together. Here you add the members of the party one by one. This is true of whichever scenario you are in. On your first visit and once the group is assembled, you will have to leave the tavern and visit Boltacs Trading Post, the only shop in the castle. Here the young adventurers get together the equipment needed for the battles ahead. What you need depends entirely on what class of character you are. A magic user can only wear robes to cast spells in, for example. Before the game begins, I will point out a few of the other places of interest where the fun begins. All this may sound like a lot of things to do before a game commences but the characters grow with the playing of the game. From the edge of town, you have access to the training grounds --which is where the characters are 'rolled' — or to the maze. The maze is the section relevant to the scenario and I shall give you a rough overview of three as any more would spoil the game for anyone who is likely to ever try it. The general idea of the game is to explore and map the dungeon, completing a given task on the way. This may take a long time indeed, but with the assistance of your spell casters there are two main types it should prove very interesting. It is the spell casting which is a great improvement over D&D. All the spells are named and are cast by typing in the correct name. An example from the two magic types are Dios in the priest spell book, which cures from one to eight points of damage on one of the party, and Katino which is a mage spell which causes one group of monsters to fall to sleep. The screen switches over from the text screen to the hi-res graphics screen and you are presented with information in various windows. In the top left corner of the screen is an image of what you can see directly in front of you. It is displayed as a 3D line drawing of the corridor. To the right there is a summary of available commands, and beneath that * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * Wizardry is loosely based on the game Dungeons and Dragons which swept into this country from America. This also influenced the laser disc arcade game Dragon's Lair. Wizardry is written in Pascal and runs on an Apple but there is also a version of the first scenario for the IBM. To play the game, a group of characters have to be 'rolled' this is a throwback to D&D which requires a small collection of multi-faceted dice. First a name is chosen for the character. He or she may also be human, elf, dwarf, gnome or hobbit. The computer then generates a number between three and 18 for each of the following categories: strength, I.Q., piety, vitality, agility and luck. These then allow the player to choose a class for the character. The main classes available are fighter, thief, priest and mage The more exotic types feature bishops, Samurai, lord or Ninja. For example, a player with a good strength could be a fighter. The player also has a choice over the character's alignment: good, evil or neutral this is the character's outlook on life. Some classes are not available to some alignments. For example, a thief who requires in the castle and what they are used for. The Adventurers Inn is where you go to rest. When you rest at the Inn, your hit points, which is how much damage you can take, are returned to full after the battles in the dungeons. You advance to new levels of the adventure by getting a certain number of experience points the higher your experience level, the better you are at doing things. Magic users and priests get more and stronger spells, fighters get better at fighting and kill the monsters with more ease and thieves get better at identifying and disarming the traps on the chests. The Temple of Cant is where to go to be 'put back on your feet if you have met with small setbacks such as death or maiming etc. The final option in the castle is to go to the edge of town. This is there is a list of what spells are 'up': light, protect etc. At the bottom of the screen there is an area which shows the condition of the various members of the party. By pressing the appropriate keys, the party moves off down the corridor. At this point, the player should be making maps as accurately as possible. A fair hint worth pointing out is that the only time I have had problems in the game is when I have thought that I knew what was going on and stormed triumphantly ahead only to lose my way totally, usually accompanied by death. When the party reach a door, they have to kick it down to get at what is beyond. These doors magically reform themselves as they have to kick their way out as well. Eventually the party will 132 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"FORWARD CAMP & SUICK RIGHT KICK WEB CLUSTER 3 3 ANAESNBAS 2 TAFECT SPELLS : BREECT MARTIN'S OPTIONS: SPELL NAHE ? >HAHAL ITO_ SARERS HERINGS? BU # CHARACTER NAME ATUS STATUS # ECHAME  ILLALO ILID N01010 DI CH V  0100000000 INOM 01000100 # CHARACTER NAME CLASS COLIN GRAHANE HURRAY 6 HART IN MARTIN QUA  WW 1) 3 ORCS (3) YOU STAND ON A BEACH. BEYOND IT LIES DARKLAKE, IN WHICH IS A SHALL ISLAND PRESS (RETURN JON'S OPTIONS RIGHT SPELL PARRY wake YOU SURPRISED THE MONSTERS! CLASS ITS STATUS # CHARACTER NAME GRAHAME 3 COLIN 4 MURRAY 6 MARTIN M LLLLL  Cano III! CNN WO00000000 WUUNOD 0.000000 #-Men # CHARACTER NAME COL IN 3 GRAHAME MURRAY DAVE 6 MART IN DAUEN mimo N-nic stumble across a group of monsters and | THE WIZARDRY this is where the hacking and slaying starts. TRILOGY The display of the room gives way to The Proving Grounds of the Mad Overa small picture of the monster you are up lord is the first disk in the series and the against. This gives you a clue as to how catch is that you must have this disk to to kill it as certain monsters can be dealt play the others in the series. This is the with in certain ways. only disk on which you can 'roll up' The party is given the options of what characters. to do. The first three can fight if they The quest involves an amulet stolen by want but, if not, they can also parry, use a nasty character called Werdna. The an item, cast a spell or run if the going party have to find Werdna, who is somelooks bad as can the rest of the where inside the ten level dungeon and, party. If the run option is after doing battle with him, return the chosen, the whole par amulet to the castle. ty attempts to flee The Knight of Diamonds is the second the scene, of the scenarios and is a sort of extennot just sion of the Proving Grounds. The artifact Sat has to be rescued in this case is the Staff of Gnilda. But along the way you have to find the armour belonging to the legendary Knight of Diamonds. It is a six level dungeon and is for characters from * 13th level upwards. the character who selected the option. If they survive the battle, then they | could camp to let the priest cure some of the damage to the party, swop gold or even examine or identify magic items. As experience is gained, the party can make its way further into the dungeon where the monsters get a lot more aggressive and can do a lot more damage -until they get to the point where they have to complete the quest on which they have been sent. The Legacy of Llylgamyn is a different story. For a start, the characters you have turned into superheroes during the time you have spent playing the first two scenarios die instantly upon entering this scenario. However, all is not lost because you become the descendants of the characters from the earlier scenarios. I'm afraid that this means your level 45 thieves are reduced to level one thieves again and you have to go back to Boltacs to buy new equipment but your ancestors have bequeathed talents to you, such as highish requisites and high hit points. The quest in this scenario is to remove a mystical orb from the great Dragon L'kbreth. But L'kbreth has drawn together mighty magic from both good and evil to protect it. I have not touched on Wizardry's addictive qualities. Because the characters grow as you play, you tend to want to try and 'break the next level. This leads to the infamous 'just one more short trip as xxx is only a few thousand points off a level. Having shown it to the crew with whom I used to play D&D, they were so impressed that I couldn't get rid of them until 4 or 5 am in the morning! This is the future of Adventure games where players can relate to characters and each character has its own history. If this was taken into the realm of time sharing and separate groups could play in the same dungeon simultaneously, then I for one would not leave my keyboard for months. As it is, Sir-Tech have got a lot to answer for in our house. K * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 133 "


"We've just won an award for blowina "


"ngaway the cobwebs. You know the story, the Micro you thought would give endless hours of fun soon becomes a five minute wonder. You get bored and dump it on the shelf to gather dust. With the introduction of Micronet 800 you now have access to a vast mouthwatering menu of facts, figures and fun. If we said it was a major breakthrough in microcomputer technology we wouldn't be going over the top. Just recently at the Which Computer Show we picked up the prestigious RITA award for Systems Innovation of the Year. RITA is the 'Oscar' of the computer industry. Judged and sponsored by the major forces in related institutes, associations and publications. Incredibly all it costs is just a pound a week to take up a subscription to the Micronet system. Plus, for most of you, a local telephone call whenever you want to connect up. Then you've got 30,000 pages at your fingertips, including Computer News Flashes, all that Prestel has to offer, and Micronet's SwapShop. Where you can buy anything from joysticks to second-hand computers. Interact with our daily news update. You can even take over the world; competing against hundreds of other subscribers on the system, in our 'Starnet' game. If we haven't won you over with that then try downloading our wide selection of free games and other tele-software. Naturally, you can run household accounts, manage businesses, talk to other subscribers nationwide using the system. The list is endless and so is the fun. The only addition you need to connect with Micronet 800 is a modem unit. Apart from that all you'll want is a pen to fill in the coupon for more information. Then we'll have you linked up in no time. Before the dust settles, in fact. Please send me the full facts about Micronet 800. Name Make/Model of Micro Address Telephone MICRONET 800, Scriptor Court, 155 Farringdon Road, London ECIR 3AD. Telephone 01-278 3143. micronet MICRONET 800. Scriptor Court, 155 Farringdon Road, London ECIR BAD. Telephone 01-278 3143. Prestel and the Prestelymbol are trademarks of British Telecommunications "


"MAL FUNCTION ST. HITCH SNAG JNR SCREAMING FOUL UA ITS UNCANNY! IT'S AS IF HE HAD A SPY IN THE MICRO! code HUH!_ THERE HAS TO BE A SIMPLE EXPLANATION FOR OUR PROGRAMMERS SUCCESS! 000 200 SIVE FORGOTTEN WHAT THE PROBLEM WAS DUX LOST MEMORY ZATER 7 OUR PROGRAMMER HAS INTRODUCED A SPY INTO THE MICRO-THE SHADOWY BUGSPY MALONE. THE AUG'S BUGGING QUOTA HAS TAKEN A DIVE SINCE BUGSPY ARRIVED! BY THE GREAT ROM. you IF THERE'S A SPY IN MAY BE RIGHT SNAG TNR. THE MICRO HELL HAVE WE MAY HAVE TO ACCEPT TO BE NOBBLED! THE POSSIBILITY THAT.... 7. HITCH WILL SEARCH SOB.). OUR PROGRAMMER IS THE PROGRAM FOR HIM BRIGHTER THAN WE THOUGHT EEK! I MEETING! SUCH LANGUAGE GO WASH YOUR MOUTH OUT!! LOUD TER! CHATTER AGENDA * Biron 1000 200 LOUD PLOT! LOUD SCHEME/ UNSERE OLD AN VOLGERE ZINES FORTHCOMING BUGGING PROGRAM SKID ENTER BUGSPY MALONE BUG SPY SNEAKS ALL TO OUR PROGRAMMER. INSIDE THE MICRO. MALONE'S MILLI SECONDS ARE NUMBERED. .. AND WELL BUG HIS NEXT PROGRAM ON LINE 400 .. AGREED cas AHAHA! NARNING Ooo .. YOUR PERCEPTION OOOO WILL AMAZE. UPSET ::8 AND GENERALLY oOo CONFUSE THE BUGS HAVE DONE MALFUNCTION, FAA SO!/ SUGGESTU 1 HEE HEE! HAVE YOU REWRITE LINE you PROGRAMMED 400 AS LINE 405 IN OUR LINE 4.00 AND SIMPLY DELETE YET HITCH ? LINE 4001 SCRIBBLE! THE COUNTERATTACK /S SUDDENLY. TYPED IN AGAIN BUGS! SNIGGER! ..SO T. HITCH CONVERTED LINE 400 TO THE BUG SPY'S FIRST PROGRAM LINE. HEE! HEE'SO DELETE 400 .. DELETE BUGSPY. GIGGLE! CHORTLE!! TAP TAP! YEEK. MY Spy's BEEN ZAPPED! "


"Coktel COMMODORE 64 IT'S ONLY Dreamer Or Superstar... Only you can prove it LA SUSUROM Do you have the talent and drive to be a Rock 'n' Roll idol... You've got a lot of energy, a bit of money and a great future. But can you stay the course, stand the heartbreaking disappointments, fraud, scandal, even arrest? Can you capture the hearts and wallets of the public and make it to the top? How would you start? Go busking for a month or hire a manager? OK... But do you really want to give a fat percentage to a manager? Will he look after your interests or his own? Why not try a tour... Not enough cash? You don't even have any popularity. Better be careful, at this rate you won't even make a 'has been'. Rock 'n' Roll is the new Commodore 64 version of the famous Spectrum game. But times change and now it's even harder to succeed in 'Showbiz'. NOW AVAILABLE FROM YOUR MAIN SOFTWARE RETAILER. COMMODORE 64 Ktel SOLICIN FREE FREE SPECIAL SUMMER OFFER FOR COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES READERS Have you got an old computer, cassette recorder, books, software or other old equipment gathering dust in the cupboard? Well, here's your chance to turn that old kit into hard cash, right when you need it most! Through the summer all private Microsell advertisements will be free!! So you can advertise to over 1 million games freaks without it costing more than a stamp. Turn to page 169 for further details and post your coupon TODAY! COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 137 "


"ONLY ACES SURVIVE IN ... 48K SPECTRUM BY R.J. SWIFT .95 THE sait tout JOYSTICK COMPATIBLE (Kempston, AGF, Sinclair, Protek and Others) AMAZING AIR BATTLE SCENARIO THAT STRETCHES YOU TO THE VERY LIMITGUNS BLAZING, ENEMY FIGHTERS ATTACK FROM ALL DIRECTIONS 3D GROUND ATTACK SORTIES AND THERE'S STILL THE OTHER AMAZING FEATURES FLIGHT BACK HOME. * 30 GROUND ATTACK MISSIONS REALISTIC 3D EFFECTS * EXPLOSIVE SOUND * 1 OR 2 PLAYERS EACH WITH 4 LEVELS OF DIFFICULTY HIGH SCORE TABLE WITH MEDALS * SELF DEMONSTRATING WITLE PAGE TAXI .50 Any Spectrum Selected products available from: Boots, Woolworths, H.MY Menzies, Greens, Lasky: Rumbelows, Selfridges Spectrum Dealers Video Palace, Zappo and all good Computer shops BEOOTBALL ANALYSIS LEAGUE Become a Taxi Driver ind fest your skills but beware the Reckless Drivers Fun for all the family FOOTBALL .95 48K Spectrum League Analysis Easy to use Pools Prediction With 9 methods of team performance analysis let your Spectrum guide you to your pools selection. DIGITAL FIGHTER 48K SPECTRUM FIGHTER PILOT .95 48K Spectrum Joystick compatible A spectacular flight simulation of the world's most exciting jet fighter with stunning 3-D cockpit view and the most realistic air to air combat ever seen on the spectrum! DIGITAL INTEGRATION Watonmoor Trade Centre, Watchmoor Road, Camberley, Surrey GU15 3AJ .95 Lifetime Guarantee Cheques payable to Digital Integration Please send me the Fighter Pilot 48K .95 Tenclose a cheque/P.O. for Total. following games for Football 48K .95 Name the Spectrum Taxi (Any Spectrum) ,50 Address VAT and p. & p. inclusive within UK (Overseas inc. 55p. per cassette) Or debit my Access Account No. Trade and Export enquiries welcome. Tele Sales Camberley (0276) 684959 Please send to Digital Integration, Dept C VG5 Watchmoor Trade Centre, Watchmoor Road, Camberley, Surrey GU15 3AJ COMPUTER GAMES SOFTWARE "


"oktel COMMODORE 64 CITY TTAK Action stations! MODORE 64/ The fate of millions is in your hands... You are the Defence Commander of a major city under attack by unknown hostile forces. Desperately you try to locate their position and destroy the enemy in the air and the squads of Urban Commandos trying to penetrate your ground defences. Suddenly another menace appears, a roving, swirling ball of neutrons defended by a guided fireball. The only way to save your Command Centre and the city is to score a direct hit from above on its vulnerable centre point. But watch the airborne attack. Every second they come closer to your Command Centre, every second brings the city closer to oblivion... CITYATTAK is an all new, fast action, machine code game. It features superb graphics, fourteen levels of play and seven screens. NOW AVAILABLE FROM YOUR MAIN SOFTWARE RETAILER. COMMODORE 64 (Oktel SHARP MZ-703 I.M.V.. isky's. idges, alers, appo, good hops THE LARGEST SELECTION OF PROGRAMS IN THE U.K. FROM THE MAJOR SHARP SOFTWARE HOUSES From GAMES to BUSINESS and EDUCATIONAL ... From LANGUAGES to UTILITIES OVER 180 TITLES plus Peripherals and Accessories. Accessories include: Matrix and Daisy Wheel Printers, Disc Drives, Joysticks, Interfaces, Cables, 80 column Mod, Paper, Colour Pens, Cassettes, Dust Covers and Books on the 700. For your copy of THE COMPLETE MZ-700 CATALOGUE Send P.O. for 50p (refundable on first order) to: G. M. Services (CVG), D. C. Brennan Eng.. 14 North Western Avenue, Watford, Herts. TO ADVERTISE IN COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES AND REACH OVER 100,000 PEOPLE TEL: 01-278 6552 POSTERN'S SPECTRUM 48K LATEST CHALLENGE. Combining the best of two alien worlds on one mind-blowing cassette. WITH KURRAH SPEECH Postern Ltd, PO Box 2, Andoversford, Cheltenham, Gloucestershire GL54 55W POSTERN COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 139 "


"BY TREVOR TRURAN NINE WAY CUT It was Uncle Eugene's birthday and all the C&VG mob clubbed together and got him a cake a really odd shaped cake. And that's where the arguments started. Everyone wanted a piece of cake with one star, one chocolate bar, one strawberry and two blobs of cream on it. No one would be satisfied with less. Uncle Eugene was getting really fed up with all the quarrels going on. Can you divide this unusual cake into nine equal sized pieces so that each portion has: 1 Star, 1 Bar, 1 Strawberry, 2 Blobs of cream? The cutting must be done along the dotted lines. PULLING THE WOOL Sluffy's gang, whose escapades were recorded in our March issue, have benefited little by being found out so easily and have again turned to big time crime. For their latest venture, they enlisted the help of their wives and headed for the South Downs for a spot of sheep stealing. Each member of the gang played just one vital part in the master plan: stealing the lorry; holding the torch; roping the sheep; loading the fleeces; lookout and shearer. One of the gang, posing as a camper, actually strolled up to a farm and asked if they could plug in the lead to their electric razor! When questioned later, they tried their usual ploy of mixing up truth with falsehood in the hope of confusing the police or the court. One of the men made two true statements, another told one lie and one truth and the third told two lies. Each wife acted in the same manner as her husband either told two truths, one of each, or two lies. 'AMMER: Basher loaded the lorry. Dora sheared the sheep. BASHER: Fiona stole the lorry. Clogger was the lookout. CLOGGER: Edna stole the lorry. 'Ammer was the lookout. DORA: Fiona loaded the lorry. Clogger roped the sheep. EDNA: Basher held the torch. FIONA: Edna did the shearing. 'Ammer stole the lorry. Can you sort out the truth about who did what and say who is married to whom? SEVENS UP The solution to each pretty cryptic clue is an anagram of five consecutive letters taken from within the clue itself. The one slight snag, which may hold up entering the answers into the grid for a moment or two, is that the clues are not in any particular order, so just where each goes has to be worked out. To help you, it happens that the seven first letters and the seven end letters, reading upwards from the bottom both form words. One clue across and down is already entered for you can you fill in the rest? ACROSS Short tales of animals that hop seawards. opsea = AESOP Palindromic clarity. Joints for unsoiled girders. Imbroglio opposed due to illness. find a nice spot for woodcutters. Dunn soundly invaded new territory. E AESOP DOWN Ambrosia? No. Butter toast to amuse. ertoa = ERATO A mishap relevant to a sufferer. Fight off a reverse. Upright situations for tosspots. Minor idealist of sculptural consideration. Monopoly played for light relief. From which we derive all kinds of being. By Timeshrinker TREBLE CHANCE It is at about this time of year when there is a sudden increase in moodiness. All over the country long faces can be seen pensively sucking a pencil and looking as if life has no further meaning. They all have a sense of loss but cannot quite place what is amiss. They can be seen aimlessly watching a black television screen on Saturday afternoons. The answer is simple the football 140 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"14 25 13 o 17 8 133023 on across the top edge at G8, 18 and K8, then your cluster would consist of 14, 28, 25, 14, 13, 11, 16 and 19. The TOTAL is 140 so the SCORE is 140 divided by 8 (8 numbers) which is, yes you can use your computer, 17.5. The aim, naturally, is to get the highest score. To enter, simply bung your personal details onto a card or letter and give the reference of the three squares you wish to fill. Tell us what you make the total and, nice and clear please, your SCORE. Decimals count, but not more than eight places! Send the whole thing in to Treble Chance, Computer and Video Games, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, Londond ECIR SEJ and you may be lucky! Five lucky winners will get one of Milton Bradley's wonderful boardgame adaptation of top arcade games. We've got our hands on five copies of MB's latest game based on arcade Centipede. So get puzzling and get lucky. w 1429 23 16 A B C D E F G J K L H I BRAND AND season has ground to a close and there are no more pools coupons to be filled in. We can discount that Australian summer rubbish such long distance gambling is like chucking a milk bottle into the Pacific in the hope of catching a bar of gold! It is at such times that there is an outbreak of unsightly graffiti on public walls--the urge to put a cross has to be worked out somehow. To that end, we have devised our own little Treble Chance it may save you appearing in court on a charge of misspelling Dyslexia Rules—KO? and you may win a prize so fabulous that it makes a pools fortune seem mere pocket money. All you have to do is put three (yes, three) X's in three squares of our coupon. Well, nearly all there is a bit more to it than that. The idea is to form a CLUSTER of numbers that is, a group of numbers joined together horizontally or vertically. There are various small clusters lying about already, such as 30, 23 and 15 left of centre. The idea is to use your crosses to link numbers together and form a bigger cluster. Your crosses must all be in the same cluster and there must be no dirty or devious work at the crossroads — each cross must help to make links between numbers and not just sit there doing nothing. The judge will be severe on artful dodgers. When you have made your choice, find the TOTAL of all the numbers in your one cluster. To get your SCORE, divide your total by how many numbers there are in the cluster. Thus, if you put your crosses straight 26 BOOK REVIEW Brainteasers For Basic Computers, by Gordon Lee Shiva Publishing Limited ISBN 0 906812 36 4 Price .95 The idea behind this slim volume (124pp) is to offer 50 puzzles which can be solved by writing a fairly short computer program. As the author points out in his introduction, most computer books either offer a manual or a listing of games to be typed in, and they are usually machine specific. In this book, the user is challenged to write a program which will carry out the number crunching task posed by the puzzle. None of the puzzles is claimed to be particularly new or original and puzzle fans will recognise some as being pretty old, such as Cannon Balls, Chuck-a-Luck and The Monkey and the Coconuts. What is new is that the middle, and largest, section of the book gives a program listing, in pretty basic Basic, which indicates one line of attack in achieving the desired result. Thus, by trying a puzzle or two and maybe not getting very far, a study of the listing will give the novice either to puzzling, or to programming an easy to "


"1 92 3 84 5 7 6 follow outline which will be of use in tackling other puzzles. There is a short solution section at the end, which is really there to confirm what your program should have found. The book is neatly laid out and there is a bonus for us all in that the listings are printed properly instead of looking like a distant copy of a listing which has been used to wrap the fish and chips. The puzzles are of just the right type to promote an interest in programming. They do not demand too much mathematics, though a spot of thinking about the range of possible answers may well lead you to write a better program which takes less time. Just before the listing section is a page or two intended to be helpful about using different machines. This is probably the weakest part of the book, though it is clear that the author did not want to be bogged down in a heap of alternatives and \"do this on the ZX, that on your Sharp and something else altogether on your Vic\". The section doesn't actually help make string handling clear and you will have to know what your machine demands. For instance, in the first listing we get: 130 FOR M=1 TO 5 140 FOR L=M+1 TO 6 140 IF C$(M)=C$(L) THEN GOTO 250. It does not mean that C$ is a DIMensioned array but the Mth member of the string is being compared to the Lth. For some machines at least, this would need to be in the form: 140 IF MID$ (C$,M,1)=MID$ (C$,L,1) THEN 250. This is not mentioned in the help section. So, provided you can understand enough about programming your machine to make these small adjustments, the 50 puzzles, though they may not seem a lot for the cash, will give you many hours at your machine which will require a lot more of you than hitting Z for left, X for right and SPACE to fire! To give you a taste of a book I would warmly recommend as the intelligent person's alternative to zapping invaders, here is one problem, with which that listing extract above is directly concerned.. The other Sunday, the hymn numbers on the board appeared as shown. It caught my eye because I saw that all the digits were different. I then noticed that the second hymn number was twice the first, and the third was equal to the first two added together. This made me wonder if there were any other 'sets' of numbers, all different, that could be formed into three, threedigit numbers with this property. 142 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES SOLUTIONS yn auo pue !| BUO POL 1266013 Moj ayi papeo euoi 00 eup3 pue lawwy, awn upea pall yoq  jois eupa daays agi paeys e00 Buol pue jayseg 'sawn 4109 yin ay daays ayi padou Jabboj 49101 ay   jdnoo auo  eoa pue p   i  . 100M BHI INI7IND NOLLNTOS INTVAYMANIN "


"GEM ZTFTWARE SOFTWARE LIBRARY SPECTRUM FOR SOFTWARE FOR THE BBC-B AND SPECTRUM OH MUMMY for the SPECTRUM & ZX81 ........................95 Your party of archeologists enter the pyramid in search of the mummies of the pharoah's household. There are five burial chambers containing treasure, secret scrolls, keys, royal mummies and some nasty surprises. To pass from one chamber to the next, you must find the key and the royal mummy, but beware, you may uncover a guardian, who will chase your group to avenge your desecration!! A machine code game for those with nerves of steel and great courage SUB CHASE for the SPECTRUM .95 A great machine code game in which you must depth charge the submarines Sounds easy, but you must position your destroyer, set detonation depth, fire and hope you can evade the subs' missiles. The problem is the higher the skill level, the more intelligent the subs become, and you only have a limited supply of depth charges!! UTIL-1 for the BBC-B... ...95 Two very useful utility programs for the BBC-B. Both tested on OS 1.0 and above. Character Define gives you a comprehensive and simple way to quickly create all manner of user defined characters. Envelope Editor will enable you to unravel the complexities of the Sound and Enveope commands, so that you can produce exactly the sounds you require. TANK ATTACK for the BBC-B .95 A machine code game for 1/2 players, defending supplies against computer controlled tanks. This game will stretch your reflexes to the limit as you battle with the enemy tanks. They won't be able to shoot back until they have supplies, but when they do, look out!! Joysticks required. Low cost weekly hire of the best arcade games, adventures, utilities, languages and business programs Membership only .00 for 12 months.  Program hiring from only 80p (plus p&p) Free fully descriptive catalogue for members New titles constantly being added. Purchase new programs at discount prices. Return of post service. All tapes despatched using first class post. . We have full permission and licences from the leading software publishers, to whom royalties are paid. Compare these features with our competitors and you will see why more Spectrum owners are joining the Kernow Software Library. Join today by clipping the coupon below or send a S.A.E. for further details. YES, please send me my free catalogue and selection sheet. I enclose my  cheque/Postal Order. NAME ADDRESS.. Selected titles available from larger branches of Lots more titles available, details on request All titles available mail order or Access All cassettes despatched by return of post. U.K. Postage included. GEM SOFTWARE UNIT D, THE MALTINGS, SAWBRIDGEWORTH, HERTS. Telephone: (0279) 723567 TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME PLEASE RING FOR DEALER PACK ..................................TEL.... Send to: KERNOW SOFTWARE LIBRARY (Dept. CVG) 55 ELIOT DRIVE, ST GERMANS SALTASH, CORNWALL PL12 5NL YOU CANT STOP PLAYING LIONEL Willie, Horace,Cuthbert. If you own a TI-99/4A and LADDERS you missed a lot of FUN Dont worry LIONEL will change that SHARP MZ700 A range of exciting software games and utilities from as little as .95, send s.ae. for full descriptive catalogue. Programs wanted for orginal software publication for MZ8OK. MZ80A and MZ700 series. Write for details on evaluation Descriptive catalogues now available for Spectrum, Commodore, Atari, Oric. Dragon, BBC and Electron Competitive prices on ALL HARDWARE Trade enquiries welcome. K-SOFT COMPUTERS, 56 Bolham Lane, Retford, Nottinghamshire, DN22 6SY Tel. (0777) 703889 FULLY ANIMATED SPRITE GRAPHICS MULTI SCREENS HALL OF FAME ESCAPE FROM Games to Z MBIE ISLAND .95 INTRIGUE SOFTWARE TI-994A EXTENDED BASIC ZOMBIE ISLAND For the Sharp M280 and M2700 Series INTRIGUE SOFTWARE SEND SAE FOR OUR SUPER GAMES LIST Wwwww When you're asleep in your bed tonight, the stars will be smiling down at you. Except one. * Death Star Three-dimensional terror from RABBIT SOFTWARE RRP  inc VAT For CBM-64 & ZX Spectrum 48K COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 143 "


"ATTENTION ATTENTION ATARI 400/600/800 OWNERS MIDLAND GAMES Ready for the BIG time? RARY If you're ready to take on the challenge of professional programming for the hobbyist micro market, then we want to help you. We are severn Software-creators and producers of high quality software for the Oric-1, CBM 64 and of course the Spectrum. Our software includes adventure and arcade games, educational programs and utilities. It is distributed through the leading high street outlets, like WH Smith and Laskys. So if you have the right product we have the market. Whether you've written a certain winner, need some help with a partly finished program or simply have a good idea, we would like to talk to you. We can turn your program into cash. This leaves you free to write more, and count the cash, while we handle the worries. Do you want to join a long established library? Are you looking for a fast efficient and friendly service? Would you like to select from nearly 700 programs: cassettes, cartridges, discs and utilities and educational? Would you appreciate approximately 35 new additions per month? Are you interested in interactive club schemes such as Adventure helps, newsletters, etc? Before writing to the rest, try the BEST. 2 games may be hired at any one time. We buy many of the popular games in multiples of 5 or 6 to give all our members a fair choice. Special introductory offer for new members; first two games lent free. Send large SAE for details. M.G.L. 48 Read Way, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham (0242-67) 4960 6pm-9pm All our games are originals with full documentation VERNS. Write to: ROGER BUFFREY, SEVERN SOFTWARE 15 HIGH STREET, LYDNEY, GLOS. GL15 SDP WWW HIRE & HIRE ZX81, SPECTRUM, DRAGON, BBC & VIC SOFTWARE LENDING LIBRARY UMN COLL GAMES LIBRARY www For COLEVISION VIC 20 INTELLIVISION 2600 ATARI 400/800 Do you want the best? Then read on Life membership for a limited period  Fast reliable service, !!!! \"Members eligible for generous dis\"Hire charges from 17p per day. counts (hardware & software). *Latest arcade type games from om \"Hire what and when you like. America * High score charts. New titles added regularly No cartridge is unobtainable JOIN NOW on money back approval, send S.A.E. or ring 0282 697305 to: MDM Home Computer Service, Dept. 4,20 Napier Street, Nelson, Lancashire BB9 OSN. We have for hire programmes for your computer. Hire charges start at 50p (ZX81),  life membership (less than the cost of a single game) brings you the SOFTWARE LENDING LIBRARY membership kit, inc. catalogue and newsletter. We now have over 200 hire titles, mostly for the Spectrum. Overseas members very welcome. Send cheque/PO for  to: Software Lending Library, P.O. Box 3, Castleford, West Yorks (Dept 1) stating name and address and computer type. All tapes used with manufacturers permission. SPECIAL Q.L. SECTION now open  life membership. You can't see it. You can't hear it. :: But up there it's waiting for you. Death Star : Three-dimensional terror from RABBIT SOFTWARE 144 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES RRP  inc VAT For CBM-64 & ZX Spectrum 48K "


"(oktel COMMODORE 64 ODYSSEY The journey of your life... or death! Like the explorers of old, your path lies through an uncharted world. A forbidden land, ridden with Plague Pests, guarded by lethal Robo Crabs and defended by a powerful Alien fleet. You stand alone against these evils, your only defence your trusty, fast firing laser gun and raw courage. This is your mission, there is no turning back. For you, survival lies in victory alone. Have you got what it takes to face this lone quest and complete your mission against all the odds? Odyssey is an all new, fast action, machine code game. It features superb graphics, twenty one levels of play and five different screens. NOW AVAILABLE FROM YOUR MAIN SOFTWARE RETAILER. COMMODORE 64 Oktel LOADE ENTERPRISES AMAZING SOFTWARE BARGAINS TI 99/4A LANTERN TI 99/4A SOFTWARE CMB 64 SOFTWARE PROJECTS Manic Miner SPECTRUM TEXAS LOTHLORIEN LANTERN 535 Red Baron 535 Battlestar Anak B) 595 Paras 48K 535 Hop IT Ex B) 6.95 Blasteroids (Ex B 595 7.15 DIGITAL INTERGRATION Hunchback Havoc (B) 595 7.15 Fighter Pilot Daddie's Hot Rod (B 595 ANIROG Hexpert Moon Buggy VISIONS Snooker 8.05 MICROMEGA Death Chase Star Clash ATARI SOFT Stargate Rom 625 Centipede Romi Defender (Rom) Pac Man (Rom) INTERCEPTOR Scramble 54 Siren City 6.25 GAMES MACHINE 6.25 Skull 19.99 19.99 625 ** QUICKSHOT 2 JOYSTICK .50 ++ All prices include postage and packing Send S.A. E. for full lists stating machine to LOADE ENTERPRISES, CO Ensemble (CVG), 35 Upper Bar, Newport. Shropshire TF10 7EH Tel. No. (0952) 813667 or 814292 DADDIE'S HOT ROD (BASIC) .95 Drive through sheep fields, woods, over HUNCHBACK HAVOCK | TS 91 rivers and avoid all obstacles, then pick Stretch your Basic to its limits thru 24 up hitch-hikers down perilously twisting different sheets of unrivalled arcade roads. HCW gave a five star rating action! TI-BASIC Send cheque or P.O. to Lantern Software 4 Haffenden Rd, TENTERDEN, Kent, TN30 6QD or send SAE for a full list. Look out for our products at your local T.I. retailer. Twinkle, twinkle little star. How wonderful I think you arrhhhhh + Death Starow Howard KNOWS NO MERCY Three-dimensional terror from RABBIT SOFTWARE RRP  inc VAT For CBM-64 & ZX Spectrum 48K COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 145 "


"IBBOE on Thasta 48K SPECTRUM SPECTRUM SOFTWARE PROSECTS SOFTWARE PROJECTS SOFTWARE PROJECTS FOR THE 48K FOR THE 48K SPECTRUM FOR THE 48K SPECTRUM SPECTRUM FOR THE 48K SPECTRUM METRON SOFTWARE PROJECTS SPECTRUM FOR THE 481 SPECTRU SOFTWARE FOR THE CBM 64 PROJETO SOFTWAPI PROJEC FOR THE 48K FOR THE 48K SPECTRUM CBM 6 SOFTWARE SOFTWARE PROJECTS FOR THE BBC SOFTW FOR THE FOR THE CBM 64 FOR THE VIC 20 B MICRO SOFTWARE PROJECTS MANIC MINER \"JET SET WILLY\" THE FIRST EVER TOTAL GRAPHIC ADVENTURE FOR THE 48K SPECTRUM 60 ROOMS TO EXPLORE AND MANY ITEMS TO COLLECT BEFORE YOU CAN GET INTO YOUR BEDROOM AND SLEEP. BUT BEWARE THE ATTIC. ARE PROUD TO ANNOUNCE A NEW ARRIVAL TO THE FAMILY AND A BROTHER TO THE ALREADY POPULAR "


"HA! SOFTWARE SPECTRUM  EMUANIC MINER JET SET WIELY ORION OMETRON PUSHROEF THRUSTA TRIBBEE TREBBLE SOFTWARE PROJECTS B95 VIG 20 SPACE JOUST SPACE SWARM 95 BBC MODEL B LECION Bear Brand Complex, Allerfon Road, Woolton, Liverpool, Merseyside L25 7SF 051-428 7990 SELECTED MILES AVAILABLE FROM JOHN MENZIES BOOTS, WOOLWORTHS, SPECTRUM SHOPS AND ALL GOOD SOFWARE DEALERS. TUSSYMAN COMMODORE 64 LZ FERAZY BALLOON NANIC MINER EDINKY DOO ALE SALES ENQUIRIES PLEASE CONTACT COLINESTOKES ON 051-428.9393 "


"Transform your Spectrum now Fullez The FDS Keyboard pouco Cum Transform your Speci w with the Serbaard, the best selling Spectrum keyboard in the UK. The Fuller FDS R oard with its sty rim-line appearance gives you the look and feel of a real microcomputer keyboard and helps you enter data with lightening fast accuracy. The keyboard contains all the graphic characters of your ZX Spectrum plus additionalfunction keys. It has 4 cursor control keys, an auto rub-out key, a separate key for full stop and comma, a full length space bar, shift keys either side and 2 function keys for direct entry into green and red E modes. The microdrive is easily adapted to go inside along with the power supply. Fixing is simplicity itself, no soldering or technical knowledge is required. For the user who is reluctant to install his Spectrum circuit board inside the FDS, a buffer is available (.75 +80p p&p) which simply plugs into the expansion port and connects directly to the FDS Keyboard, allowing the whole cased Spectrum to be installed inside. + .50 p&p 49.95 MICRO SYSTEMS Filler Customer enquiries Tel: 051-709 9280 At Fuller Micro Systems we strive to Please supply me with............ FDS Keyboard(s). I enclose a cheque/P0 payable to Fuller Micro Systems for ................or debit my credit card. Card No. D Barclaycard Access Card Signature Name Address ......... highest quality in both research and development, ensuring our products are the very best. We have now built a brand new mail order department to ensure our service is also the very best Our Stock includes a full range of components Fuller Micro Systems The ZX Centre, 71 Dale Street, Liverpool 2. Tel: 051-236 6109. Spectrum, all our products enjoy an excellent reputation for reliability and carry a world wide one year guarantee Fuller Micro Systems, The Zx Centre, 71 Dale Street, Liverpool 2. Tel: 051-236 6109 "


"PARSEC ARCADIA 1) D. lles, Bridgewater, Somerset 2,112,762 2) Andrew Milner, Hull, Humberside 1,747,681 3) Fraser Watson, Sheffield, South Yorks 952,149 4) D. Szewczyk, Sheffield, South Yorks 718,176 5) Robert Fairman, Thorplands, Northampton 600,119 1) Stephen Lawson, Bramely, Leeds 5,534,700 2) Grant Smith, St Albans, Hertfordshire 4,327,000 3) Raymond Walton, Carlisle, Cumbria 4,091,900 4) lan Cartwright, Stoke-onTrent 3,576,100 5) Brian King, Canterbury, Kent 2,483,200 PLANETOID ATIC ATAC 1) Robert Bazely, Earls Common, Droitwich — 163,680 2) Andrew Grimshaw, Lantern, Manchester 162,045 3) Ben Williams, Kidlington, Oxon 476,309 4) David Still, Pickard St, London 137,280 5) Jonathan Southern, Leek, Staffs 129,185 1) Simon Killoch, Weymouth, Dorset 1,114,100 2) Richard Tipper, Chesterfield, Derbyshire 721,700 3) Paul Dhonan, Reigate, Surrey 696,200 4) Matthew Constable, Andover, Kent — 682,800 5) Peter Harrison, Exeter, Devon -593,550 DIAMONDS OUR HALL OF FAME GAMES ARCADIA One of the best selling games around from Imagine. You can enter on the Spectrum or Vic versions but don't forget to tell us which? T  A great new graphic adventure-style game from Ultimate. DIAMONDS English Software have high hopes for this mining game and are even offering a diamond as a prize! For the Atari owner. JET-PAC The game that made Ultimate a top name in the world of games software overnight and which is rapidly becoming a cult game. For the Spectrum and Vic. KRAZY KONG The best version of Donkey Kong we've seen for the Vic. From Anirog. MANIC MINER Sheer addiction for the Spectrum from the Bug Byte people. MINED OUT Quicksilva's highly rated game for the Dragon 32 PLANETOID Acornsoft's brilliant version of Defender for the BBC. At Acornsoft, Neil Raine holds the top score of 408,000 beat that! SPLAT Help Zippy survive in this extremely playable game from new games company Incentive Software. THE PYRAMID The Pyramid has Fantasy's unique high score verification system built into the game. Help Ziggy beat the nasties. (On The Pyramid, please send your high scores direct to Fantasy at the address on the cassette inlay and NOT to C&VG. Fantasy have their own way to verify scores.) 3D DEFENDER Malcolm Evans' game for New Generation Software which set new standards for graphics on the ZX81. ZALAGA Space age action from Ardvark for the BBC. 1) A. Janota, Coventry, West Mids 5,701 2) Joe Singleton, Williow Drive, London 4,453 3) J. Marshall, Clifton Estate, Nottingham 3,854 4) David Gordon, Lamballe Road, London 3,149 5) Clive Gregory, Denbigh Road, Hounslow 3,197 THE PYRAMID 1) Giles Ahern, Surrey 137,499 2) Alastair Douglas, Northern Ireland -137,077 3) Joanne Thompson, Merseyside 136,731 4) Scott Hamilton, Lanarkshire — 136,616 5) Graham Phillip, Wiltshire 136,233 JET-PAC 1) Lee Milne, Lancaster, Lancs 12,892, 750 2) John Thake, Ely, Cambridge 12,857,815 3) Alan Ball, St Helens, Merseyside 8,930,385 4) Jonathon Jones, Solihull, West Mids — 7,306,857 5) Elliot Potts, Herne Bay, Kent 5,747,530 ZALAGA 1) Malcolm Cooke, Romsey, Essex 850,090 2) lan Stuart, Forteath, Scotland -735.620 3) Chris Waymark, Petts Wood, Kent 546,690 4) Sunjay Jain, Normanton, Derby 286,000 5) Piyush Patel, Hornchurch, Essex 250,140 Name .... MANIC MINER Address ....... 1) Daryl Unwin, Camberley, Surrey 5,000,083 2) Paul Rattray, Kinnoull, Perth 2,642,037 3) Julian Rignall, Dyfed, Wales 2,000,923 4) A. Procter, Leeds 1,970,815 5) Stephen Lynch, Wallasey, Merseyside 1,763,590 I scored....... Game It took me (approx.) Witness's name .. FAME COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 149 "


"N.E.X:T M-O-N-TH N -E-X-T CONFESSIONS OF A C&VG ANDROID . N-EX-TM-O-N-T-HD g M-O-N-TH \"Attention humans everywhere! This is Supreme Battroid Ser-20 talking at you. Hear this, you puny beings we have taken over the Computer and Video Games headquarters and won't be leaving until these people truth about robots. OK, Zac-5 Robots and androids! We're not just stupid slaves you know — or nasty, evil, overbearing monsters either. I quite like oil-painting when I'm not off rushing around the galaxy on missions like this. But while I'm here, I'm going to do a lovely little miniature of your wonderful tower blocks. It won't take me long, so you'd better get crack ing on this robot business!\" Phew! Has he gone? Good. Look, it seems as if we're going to have to tell you all about robots next issue whether we like it or not. I've got this list of things I've been told must go in and actually it looks quite sorry. VERY interesting. How about this. Build your own robot for a pocket money price! Yes, new computer comes complete with we've got our hands on some plans everything you need to get started in these gentlemen brought with them style including a printer and discfor a little computer-controlled robot drive. that will amaze all your friends! Then we take another look at our Watch out for the diary of a robot in new Games Software Top 30 brought the next issue of C&VG-better to you by C&VG, the Daily Mirror than Coronation Street any day. and NOP Market Research. What else is there then? Well, we This chart is the first and only truly might just be able to get hold of a independent top real live robot to give away in yet be able to discover just who is really another of our wonderful competinumber one in the world of computions. And we're bound to be giving ter games. Beware of all other imitalots of other fun prizes away too! Just tions! you wait and see. Don't forget, for the most up-toThere will be lots of robot-type date chart news, watch out for the games listings too, plus all your Daily Mirror's chart rundown every favourite regular features and pages fortnight. of news and the reviews you know Look, I'm going to have to push off you can trust! now. That irritable robot is on his We'll also be bringing you part way back, shouting about the office two of Quo Vadis?, our brand new Pet. play-by-mail treasure hunt puzzle. He seems to think we've been You can win yourself a wonderful ill-treating it by making it deal with Coleco Adam micro-systemthe Seventh Empire... brand new from the US of A! This EXCLUSIVE! JOIN THE JET SET M-O-N-T-H-N E:X:T M-O-N-T-H-N-E-X:ISo you've just got your copy of Jet Set Willy have you? Good isn't it? Well, did you know that Matthew Smith, the genius behind that top selling C&VG Golden Joystick Award winning game, Manic Miner, and the long awaited sequel, Jet Set Willy, has been working on a top secret project for Computer & Video Games magazine? You didn't, did you? Well, now all can be revealed. We've persuaded Matthew to write a special Miner Willy game just for C&VG readers! Matthew has delved into his imagination to bring you an exclusive, action-packed Miner Willy adventure. And all you have to do to get it is buy the June issue of C&VG. This is the first of several games written for us by the country's top games programmers. Watch out for an exclusive PiMan game in July with N-E-X-T To my newsagent: Please deliver/ reserve me a copy of Computer and Video Games every month. at Mine sagent: Pof Comput more great games to follow To my during the summer. So, discover what Miner and Willy does next in the June Price 85p issue of Computer & Video Name Games the magazine that Address brings you the best games action around! M-O-NTHNE-XT-M-O-NTH 150 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"COKtel 48K SPECTRUM DEPUSTUN Two great SPECTRUM SAMÉS ON One tape TWO GAMES ON ONE TAPE DEFUSION Time is running out... you are only seconds from an explosive experience. A live bomb ticks menacingly as you try to get near enough to defuse it. Unfortunately your path is littered with Booby Traps. To say nothing of a very determined Hit Man, who follows your every move as you race to stop havoc and devastation To further confuse you, you may only use each path once. So take care you don't get trapped. In the direst emergency it is possible to make a new path, but that will take the one thing you haven't got... time! WORMS What's slimy and nasty and ties itself and you in knots? You control the worm as it grows and grows, relentlessly filling the screen with its segments. Take care to keep clear of your own tail, as contact means certain doom. Only by exactly locating the Black Segments can you cross your own path. But watch out for the Bluebottles. You must eat one to avoid crushing yourself to death... DEFUSION Infuriating and addictive Home Computing Weekly (5 Star) DIUN Amost professional product MOCWS NOW AVAILABLE FROM YOUR MAIN SOFTWARE RETAILER DOUBLESIDER Oktel 48K SPECTRUM UNLEASHED The Panther A superb printer at a printable price Please rush me my Panther DX109 for which Tenclose acheque/Access/Barclaycard DINo for 329.70 Please send me further details of the Panther DX109 Dlwould like a demonstration. Please send me details of my local stockist. Please send me details on the range of DATAC printers Please tick box) The Panther has arrived. Afast, sleek, good looking printer from DATAC that's leaving other printers standing. Just look at the features that make The Panther the most exciting printer available today Friction feed and tractor feed for varying paper widths  A Viewdata character set as standard,  Bi-directional logic seeking carriage. Centronics interface as standard.  Compatible with the BBC Micro and most micros. All this plus more for only , +VAT +pp. Place your order today. Complete the coupon and send to DATAC at the address below. Name Address Telephone 24 Hour Express Delivery P&P charge DATAC D E I RA S DATAC LIMITED, Tudor Road. Altrincham Cheshire WA145TN Te D6 1 494 | 236 | Telex 60 PH22 CHAC CMMG CVG 584 DATAC LIMITED. Tudor Road Aloncho DATAC LIMITED, Tudor Road, Altrincham Cheshire WA14 STN Tel:061-941 2361 Telex: 667822 CHACOMG COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 151 "


"ANDROID RIDDLE + OL THE SPHINX NVADER THUNDER HAWK) LIBERACU PICTURE PUZZLES KENAR Blast the Albertron Birdcraft from the skies! SAVE YOUR PLANET! Spectrum 48K Joystick compatible Full colour You are pitched against the evil enemy who are set to destroy your race. Multiple levels of fast action bring you to the command centre of the Battle Fleet, can you finish the job? epic OF PREY FL LGolf LVUESSUFT LUENSUFI NUMBER L ILIT THUNDERHAWK (48K Spectrum) Golf (48K Spectrum) Voyager (VIC 20, 8 or 16K) all at Liberator (16K/48K Spectrum) Picture Puzzle (Dragon 32) each Riddle of the Sphinx (VIC 20, 8 or 16K) Android Invaders (Dragon 32) Bird of Prey (Basic VIC 20) Please debit my Access/Barclaycard (delete as necessary) CARD CARD D IT NUMBER Tenclose cheque/P.O. for  Name Address $5.95 LYVERSOFT, 66 LIME ST., LIVERPOOL L1 1JN Tel: 051-708 7100 "


"MR. CHIP SOFTWARE Dept. CVG, 9 Caroline Road, Llandudno, Gwynedd LL30 3BL. Tel: 0492 79026 COMMODORE 64 GRAPHICS MASTER NIC20 3 GREAT GAMES OF CHANCE OLETTE PONTOON BLOW  OFF any order for two or more programmes COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 Westminster DARTS Domo Daudood doo NIC20 EXPANDED DEALER ENQUIRIES WELCOME 14 COMM VIC20 VIC20 KWAZY KWAKS Wanted: High quality software of all types, for export and UK distribution Spectrum, Vic 20 and CBM-64. Other games and utilities available for VIC-20 & CBM-64. Send large Games for the All at just .50. S.a.e. for free colour brochure, including Rabbit Software at .50. VMnic SVE Available retail or mail order I enclose cheque/PO for .... Game(s) required ........ Name Address "


"GRAPHIC ADVENTURE SEVERN SOFTWARE ha Mystery of Munroe Manor You find yourself wandering the misty moors when you come across the gates to Munroe Manor, old man Bastow has disappeared but reports persist of his wealth hidden somewhere in the manor. The baying of hounds from within the grounds bring to mind tales of wandering ghosts and hidden traps. You, our intrepid friend, are about to attempt to solve this mystery.. and livel A full graphic adventure containing 70 different screens displaying each location or action during the game. CBM 64-68.50 MORA MYSTERY ulunroe Moria A challenging adventure game set in a game the mines of Moria. You'll have to try and survive encounters with the monsters of middle-earth while trying to locate Durins Ring The Wizard and Trader may help of hinder you on your joumey to find and or the hidden doors to freedom will really test your character and stay power Oric Author Adrian Sheppard Spectrum Author Mike Howard Oric-148K 96.95 Oric Atmos $6.95 Spectrum 16/48K 94.95 ARCADE ACTION menor FOR 16K/48K SPECTRUM SEVERN SOFTWARE CADE ACTIO LQUINCY Jogger Guide your joggers a 4-lane motorway and to infested ntver to reach the haven through the gapin lence. Each time a jogge sately home the next have to encounter mon lorries and cars on the motorway but tewer Crocodiles and logs the river. Pull oninstructions. Mo sound effects and action colour gtaphics Onc Author Adrian Shepp Spectrum ORIC 48K Dinky Kong Attempt to rescue your lovely girlfriend who is held captive by the angry gorilla As you climb the connecting ladders and move along the gangwarys, the gorilla will be throwing barrels and fireballs at you! The only way to reach her is to leap over these obstacles and progress to the top M code action with sound effects, full colour action graphics, skill levels, etc. Author Adrian Sheppard Oric-1 48K $6.95 OGGER -Mike How Ore 1481 Specta 1648 FOR 48K SPECTRUM SEVERN SOFTWARE FOR 16K/48K SPECTRUN counter Quincy A superb dice game for 2 to 6 players. 3 throws per go to try and score points by obtaining certain combinations 1e 3 of a kind, a run, pairs, etc. 13 go'sto complete a game. The highest score is the winner it's a game that is easy to leam but can be won by skilful and thoughtful play Pull colour graphics, on-screen instructions, bonus scores, etc. Author Tony Churcher Spectrum 48K 94.95 FOR ORIC 48K Encounter A complex and intriguing classicstyle text adventure. A Girl has been kidnapped by thugs your job is to locate and rescue her! Everything you need can be found in the game but sometimes you may have to manufacture items. Chemistry knowledge will help. Most commands are verb followed by noun although abbreviations can be used. I the alarm sounds you have twenty moves to stop it before you too are caught. It's worthwhile making a map noting what you find and where as the time limit is only 500 moves Oric-1 48K 97.50 $7.50 Onc Atmos $7.50 CBM 64 Spectrum 48K $5.95 RISE TO THE Grall You have been chosen to see recover the Holy Grail from the cost Perious. Throughout the course of task you will have to use yours intelligence and logic (along w uttle luck) as you encounter toes. You will have the opportu to gather weapons and ammo to tight with, but if you are wounded your strength wa drain away-many other features such as wap. jewels, etc Author Adrian Sheppe Oric-1 48% $6.95 One Atmos -.95 ARCADE ACTION LONE KATULK ORIC ABK Lone Raider As Captain of the spaceship \"Lone Raider' your mission is to save earth from the alien Zugs, who are aiming to destroy all forms of intelligent life in the Universe. The 'Lone Raider possesses formidable weaponry such as phaser cannons and neutron bombs. Armed with these you will need to battle through the planetry detences to seek the mother ship She is heavily guarded and your chances of Superb graphics, volume surviving long enough to even glimpse her are slim control, hi-score, 4 screen scenarios missiles fuel dumps, mines, sharks. octupl, mother ship. ete Can be played with keyboard or joystick using the Pase Lid interface. $8.50 Author Adrian Sheppard Onc-1 48K Onc Atmos E8.50 FOR ORIC 48K "


"get in Oric Atmos Extended Basic No Atmos programmer can afford to be without this program 23 extra commands yet taking up only 3K of RAM Commands include: Copy. Scroll Rotate Write. On & Otl clock Reset time. Extra sound commands. Facility to enter in upper and lower case and others. Demonstration program and full instructions included with programs to enter yourself Author Adnan Sheppard One Almos 58.95 Surins elp or and open game that d staying Utilities One-1 Extended Basic A must for the programmer Extended Basic offers the user 13 additional commands to the present Onc-1 46K commands and yet only takes up 2K of RAM Features: Commands include Venity. Write Recall Find. Scroll . Draw boxRotate and others. Takes up only 2K of RAM, SO Full instructions plenty of memory left for users to program Demonstration programs all detailed in the cassette inlay 7.50 Author Adrian Sheppard Oric 1 48K The Typing Wizard If you want to leam to type or improve your typing capabuities this program is a must. Continuous on screen displays and sound routines keep your eyes up and away from the keyboard to develop the proper technique. The teaching method is on a row to Tow basis starting at the home TOW with others being added. Each lesson has letter, groups of letters, word and finally sentence drill and at the end of each lesson the speed is given in words per minute and a count of the number of errors is given A beep signals any errors during the exercises You couldnt tind a more patient teacher CEM 64 gers across d crocodile their satte op in the Jogger is axt one will more on the cewer logs in on-screer Micode. ets and full our with your Oric-1, Oric Atmos, Spectrum or CBM 64. Address Fule Manager This is a new departure for software for the Oric-1 micro will allow you to keep ALL your important Tecords of NAMES & ADDRESSES Up to 256 can be kept in each file and fes can be SAVED & LOADED using an ordinary cassette recorder. This means an unlimited amount of information can be permanently stored in a convenient format Features. Menu-driven. Prompted Keyboard Prints on Screen of entry of data with check. Delete option for old data Search by sumame (handles multiple occurrences) Saves and loads NAMED files to cassette time and can be used by Printer. Up to 255 records can be kept in each fie The programa esives all information to the user inte anyone who can operate the anci 16.95 Author Mike Slowoud Ore 1 49% Oricade A combined assembler Disassemble and editor to the oric Handles full 6502 Mnemonics. Features Save and Reload MC. Assembles and disassembles at any address Al estal fool for any serious Programmer Adrian Sappara ENGES anc Atmos Sheppard um Autho e Howard S-1 48% 36.95 Sectrum 6/48K 54.95 Ghostman Control Ghost-Man around the naze eating dots and fruit and avoiding the ghosts, who are very clever at finding you. If you are cornered by the ghosts try to get to a Power-Pill (there's one in each comer) so you can become temporarily invincible to the ghosts You can even catch the ghosts for extra points! When you have eaten all the dots and fruit you proceed to the next level where the action is even faster Machine code action and sound, 9 levels of difficulty Ghosts, GhostMan, Dots, Power-Pills. Fruit and HI-Score Oric-1 48K 57.50 Oric Amos .50 dhostman ORIC18 ATMOS-48K MICROS seek and Castle se of you! y skill ng with a many portunity armour n will thes eppard SEVERMSOFTWARE Spectrum software is available O N MICRONET 800. Other tities available from selected retail outlots or direct from: Sever Software 15 High Street Lydney Gloucestershire GL15 5DP All Oric-1 and Odc Atmos titles available from Laskys. Dinky Kone also available from W Smjih. All One and One Atmos titles are recommended by ORIC PRODUCTS UNTERNATIONAL LTD TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME out for our growing ra software, S.a.. for tud list "


"Two things which make a micro cided that it was about time we the hobby than software. are hardware and software. Softlooked at some of the hardware So if there's anything that you ware is the part you can't see which might interest the gamesthink deserves a mention and the program, recorded on tape or playing micro-owner. perhaps a review on these disk. Hardware is that part that Since then, a lot more add-ons pages, then drop me a line with you can see the computer ithave been released, so we've desome details. self, disk drives, the cassette recided to make Extra Bits a reguIf you're already in with the corder, a printer. Anything which lar feature. communications revolution then you plug into your micro to add You'll find all the latest hard you may be a member of Miccertain facilities or functions is ware releases in these pages ronet. If so, write to me via Mailcalled a peripheral. every three months, just to prove box. My account number is 012 In February's C&VG we dethat we know there's more to 786 556. NOT THE ZX83 Launched in February amidst great anticipation, the QL is still pretty scarce. Speaking at its launch, Nigel Searle said he was confident that the machine would, like the Spectrum and ZX81 before it, sell a million. If the amount of unfulfilled orders is anything to go by then his hopes should be realised. A lot has happened for the games player since February. One of the most interesting and closely watched launches was Sinclair's new microthe QL. The initials stand for Quantum Leap which sounds like it should mean enormous but, in fact, means quite the reverse. A quantum leap is the smallest possible. Maybe Clive doesn't mean it's a giant leap forward at all. Perhaps he thinks it's only a small step down from, say, an IBM PC which costs many times more. Indeed the free software which comes on microdrive cartridge with the OL will soon be made available to IBM owners, at a cost of around . Although Nigel Searle, Sinclair's Managing Director, said at the QL's launch that the machine was aimed at small businesses and not at the games market, many software houses are realising how good a machine the QL will be for writing games on. It's very fast. It has 128k of RAM; enough to store a very large arcade game, and for adventure freaks, the 800k of space available on microdrives could bring some of the traditional adventures out from the massive mainframe computers and onto a home micro for the first time. OL 05 Megabyte RAM MONITOR YOUR SPECTRUM SPECTRUM INTO QL WILL GO Software house Joe the Lion is currently working on a Spectrum emulator for the OL. This, we're promised, will allow you to load and run Spectrum games on your new QL. The adaptor to handle the cassette input (the QL works only on microdrives) plus the software will cost around . ABITS! Spectrum owners unhappy with the quality of the display which the machine produces on a normal television can now use a professional monitor, but luxury comes at a price. There are two ways of linking a Spectrum to a monitor. Microvitec, well known maker of display monitors and given much publicity on the BBC's Computer Programme, now has a monitor especially for the Spectrum. And if you think you may ever outgrow your trusty little micro with rubber keyboard, then it'll also fit a QL. It's a standard monitor in a black case to match Sinclair's fairly uninteresting colour scheme. As well as having standard connections for a BBC and QL (which has normal RGB output to drive standard monitors), it is also the first to have the added circuitry inside to accept a con156 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"nection straight from the Spectrum's edge connector Although a video signal is available from this connector, it is not in the correct form to be used by a monitor and until now no-one has converted it. The Microvitec product in question is the 1431 and it costs , which is around  on top of the basic Beebonly model. This covers the extra chips and things to handle the Spectrum. is provided to keep the neighbours happy and the box takes all its power and signals from the edge connector. And so it should at a cost of just over . It's better value to buy the Microvitec monitor and put your ear closer to the machine. Unless of course you already have a monitor. And talking of TVs, the new Sinclair flat screen TV is now available, but still only through mail order. It costs  and is a true pocket television. You can run it from a mains adaptor or a special battery. There's no connection for linking it to a computer, although such a facility would be impractical anyway and rather difficult to read. IT'S A MIRACLE If  for a few chips sounds a little expensive to you, then you obviously haven't heard of the Miracle Systems MI3 interface. It's a fairly large black box which you plug into the back of the Spectrum. It then has a socket on the outside to allow a normal RGB monitor to connect to the machine in the same way as the BBC. In effect, this machine has the same circuit as the special Microvitec monitor but fits on the Spectrum directly instead. As an added extra, it also contains a sound amplifier. A volume knob on top expensive and is difficult to write on. Without opting for the expense of a professional dot matrix or daisywheel printer, there is still a happy medium to be found (Russell Grant take note) in thermal printers. These use special paper, but it's treated in a different way. It's a lot thinner, and you can write on it too. Rolls of this thermal paper cost around l each and, because it's thinner, you get a lot more on a roll. There are two thermal models, distributed by Dean Electronics. Called the Alphacom 42 and 32, they cost .95 and .95 respectively. The 32 will plug straight into a Spectrum or ZX81 and print the full graphics of the machine. As well as being easier to read than the output from Sinclair's device, it also prints faster. The model 42 comes complete with an interface to link the printer to an Atari, Vic, 64, Dragon or BBC and prints all the graphics. Further interfaces can be plugged in and they cost  each. So if you've got a Beeb and a Dragon, you can link them both to the printer for a total of under . The Commodore RISING THERMALS Until recently the only printer which would connect straight to a ZX8l or Spectrum without extra hardware was the official Sinclair electrostatic printer. Currently priced at , it's still pretty good as value goes. Problem is that it doesn't go very far where print quality is concerned. The paper's also quite The minor Miracles WS2000 modem costs  + VAT. Output is via an RS 232 Din socket at the back and a lead will connect it directly to a BBC B. Software is available for other micros too. You'll also need software to drive the modem. Micronet's own software will link you to their system, although to make full use of foreign and British bulletin boards you'll need some terminal software such as Termi, from Computer Concepts. POWER version works with both the Vic and the 64, and even prints cursor control characters properly. A couple more Commodore add-ons have arrived recently. Protek has brought out an interface which will allow you to use any tape recorder with your Vic or 64 — you won't have to fork out for the overpriced Commodore version. This box of tricks cost .95, and Protek is based in Edinburgh. TX DATA25RX-1200TX CARRER ON LINE ON LINE LOCAL MOO Mides MODEM WS 2000 Billed as the world's smallest TV, the new Sinclair device features a 12 inch screen. Power is from either a mains adaptor or special battery. Picture quality is excellent, although sound is rather distorted at louder levels. Available only through mail order the set costs .95. Power adaptor and batteries are extra. This new screen technology has still to be used as the display for a computer. Until the size of the screen can be increased, this will be impractical. TRUE MAGIC? Facing imminent launch from Commodore itself is Magic Voice, a speech synthesiser for the 64. It comes as a cartridge but has the expansion slot duplicated on the back, in true Sinclair style, so that you can also plug games in. Some speech systems work on allophone systems. This splits the words up into syllables so that you can produce any word. The Commodore unit only stores whole words, and can hold 235 of them. You can change this list of words if you can digitise your own voice. Commodore will be launching such a system in the summer, called Voicelab, which will COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 157 "


"face. let you do just this. No price has been interest you. A driving module is now storing whole words, it stores syllables announced for this, but Magic Voice available for the Spectrum, similar in which you can link together to produce itself costs .95. function to the add-on for the Coleco Vi absolutely any word in any No doubt other software companies sion. It's a steering wheel contraption language. will produce games with built-in which plugs into the Spectrum to add Although this is harder to program, it speech, but Commodore has started the reality to those road race games. is far more versatile and well worth the ball rolling with \"Wizard of Wor\". The device is produced by Spirit extra effort. You won't need any softsoftware which is based in London. I ware to run the package it's all on a MICRONET HITS 64 can't tell you anymore about the com ROM, so there're no tapes to load. Also due out soon for the 64 is a Micpany as they don't have a phone num It does come with a cassette demo, ber at the moment. But if we hear any though, complete with sample speech ronet modem to allow you to link up to the Micronet service. Launch date for more news about this product, then in foreign languages, including German you'll be the first to know. the system is mid May, and until then and French. And the Scottish one's pretthey'll all be hard at work preparing the Also recently announced is an exer ty funny too. Commodore 64 database of news, recise bike complete with computer inter Sweet Talker, from Cheetah, costs .75. views and software. DISK OR MICRODRIVE? Since the launch of the Byte Drive 500 from ITL, you can now buy a true 5.25in floppy disk drive from your local Spectrum dealer. Based around a Shugart drive, the package includes all the necessary interfaces to link to your Spectrum and costs . The interface alone, which allows you to use the drive of your choice, costs around . However there are a couple of problems with the device. A couple of people have told me that it's rather difficult to use and that the commands are rather complicated — especially in machine code. Slightly more serious is the almost total lack of software released on disk for the Spectrum. This makes the sysThe Phloopy tape drive is an alternative to a real disk drive for BBC owners. You don't need a DFS; the interface costs  and is supplied with the drive. The unit itself costs  + VAT and each tape holds a minimum of 100k. The system is compatible with the BBC operating system, and uses less RAM than a normal 5.25 MM MODEM WS 2000 inch disk drive. Interfaces for other micros should follow later this year. MORE MODEMS Latest news on the modem front is that tem an ideal buy for a pro The idea seems to be that you use it Minor Miracles has brought out its grammer, but not such a like a joystick. In your attempts to out world standard modem. bargain for the games play run a Pac-Man, the faster you pedal, the Although still awaiting approval from erunless software com faster you move on screen. British Telecom, the company told me panies will provide ways of Sounds quite clever, really, but rather this afternoon that, if the customer wants backing up cassette games tiring. After 20 screens of action, your one, they'll be more than happy to suppto disk which is very un legs'll probably feel a little worse for ly it. And at a starting price of around likely in view of recent wear , I'm not surprised. But rest assured events. If you'd like to try your own hand that the product is well worth the (leg?), then details are from Micro money. DRIVE WITH CLIVE Scope in Maidenhead. It's beautifully made in real plastic, and features all the different baud rate If exercise is the name of HEARING VOICES AGAIN settings. As well as allowing you to link the game, then these two up to Micronet, you can also dial up the new Spectrum add-ons will Latest in the line of speech synthesisers various 300 baud bulletin board serto land on my desk is an offering from v ices which are run in this country. Cheetah, which comes as a little black And, if your phone bill can stand the box (don't they all) and sits on the user pace you can try some of the foreign port at the back of a Spectrum ones too. The modem will handle all the Unlike the Commodore Magic Voice different rates, leaving you to worry cartridge, this one uses a system of how you're ever going to pay for all allophones. This means that instead of those international calls. 158 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES TX DATA CARRIER ABITS! "


"WHO ARE LORDS MIDNIGHT Notan Adventure THE WORLD's first EPIC game with 32,000 possible panoramic views accept the Challenge! BEYOND CHALLENGING SOFTWARE COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 159 "


"ARCADE ACTION & ADVENTURE WITH.. ...The Guardian You are at the Gateway to the Anti-Matter World of Migon . do you dare enter will you survive? 48K SPECTRUM $5.95 Krazy Kong All machin code,supe fast action 4 screens of fireballs barrels & conveyor belts. SPECTRUM 48K 5.95 PERSONAL SOFTWARE SERVICES RESCUE JANE. BUT BEWARE, KONG IS OUT TO GET YOU Krazy KONG PERSONAL SOFTWARE SERVICES Light Cycle Race your Light Cycle on the infamous grid. Fast action all the way SPECTRUM 16K 48K 5.95 FOR INSTANT CREDIT CARD SALES TEL (0203)667556, SEND CHEQUE OR PO. TO P.S.S. 452 STONEY STANTON RD.COVENTRY CV6 5DG. TRADE ENQUIRIES CONTACT JOHN FLETCHER, COVENTRY (0203) 81346 "


"NEW FROM THE GODS Pula Games from the Gods hine per on. alls SPEECH FOR ANY SPECTRUM Mega Fruit by Bob Hitching This is the ultimate fruit machine, with all the features of the real Arcade machines, such as Nudge, Hold, Gamble etc. FOR THE BBC 'B' Pyramid Painter by Chas Smith Can you help Bert the painter finish off the Pyramids before the balls or Thin Man finishes him? esperate FOR THE UNEXPANDED VIC 20 and the CBM 64 3D Silicon Fish by Chris Stamp Sillo has to collect Silicon and return to Earth before the Kollyon destroys him. Will he make it and collect his reward? Only you can tell. ALL PROGRAMS ONLY 2.95 SPEECH FOR ANY SPECTRUM Spiders Web by Peter Milne Micky is a greedy little spider. He traps lots of Flies and Wasps on his web and then stores them to eat later but it's tough for Micky, as the Flies bite back INCLUDING V.AT 1st CLASS POSTAGE & PACKING BY RETURN FOR THE BBC'B Desperate Dan by Reiner Bjerkeli Deep down in Dan's dungeon are the ghastly monsters, he keeps them at bay with liquid dartanium. This liquid is very sweet and is liked by several rodents. Dan is desperate for help to keep the creatures at bay. Can you help? AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD COMPUTER STOCKISTS Postcoupon now to Thor Computer Software Co, Led Esse Industrial Estate Liverpool Merseyside LSIA Tel 051-263 85212 3D Silicon Fish 3D Sticon Fish PCBM 64 Unexpanded VIC 20 Spiders Web Mega Fruit Any Spectrum Any Spectrum Pyramid Painter Desperate Dan     Please debit my ACCESS/BARCLAYCARD (delete as necessary WE WELCOME HIGH QUALITY PROGRAM SUBMISSIONS AND PAY TOP ROYALTY RATES SPECIAL OFFER Free Poster With Every Game A Cheque PO for Tendo Name Address DISTRIBUTORS / DEALERS ENQUIRIES WELCOME Credit Cards-Orders accepted by Phone-051-263 8521/2 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 161 5DG. "


"SCORPIO SOFTWARE ONCE YOU'VE BEEN BITTEN BY OUR GAMES, NOTHING ELSE MATTERS! RUBY RUNABOUT: 48k SPECTRUM. A fun-filled adventure with graphics that will keep you smiling from start to finish! 40 locations! Many contain crazy problems for you to solve. .95 LARGHEL STAR SEARCHER: 48k SPECTRUM. Alien and alone, the star searcher drifts down to a hostile planet. Can you help him tunnel underground to find fuel crystals before the Xeron Tank destroys his spaceship? Fast and tricky arcade action. .95 THE TOMB TOMB OF MYCLOPS: TEXAS T199/4A an ingenious and exciting adventure that will test you to the limit. There are few survivors-will you be one of them? (Extended Basic) .95 3 DECOR WRECKERS: SPECTRUM 48k This arcade new game will have you gasping terrifying with laughter... bet you get stuck on it! Watch out for the adventure for the Texas TI 99/4A flies! .95 ALSO AVAILABLE:  PRATFALL PEARLY Lunatic adventure for the Dragon 32 with every location in graphics .95 THE CODE BOOK CAPER 40 graphic locations for this Spectrum 48k adventure. Random feature means no two games the same! .95  MINEFIELD Multi-screen arcade action for the Texas TI99/4A .95 Available from your local Computer Shop or direct from:-Scorpio Software 147/155 Corn Exchange Buildings, Fennel Street, Manchester 4. Tel: 061-834 2292 DISTRIBUTOR & TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME WE WELCOME HIGH QUALITY PROGRAMS FOR ANY COMPUTER "


"ROMIK PRESENTS Two more great games for the 67 POTTIT TURTLE JUMP Romik Limited, 272 Argyll Avenue, Slough SL1 4EH Available from selected branches of: Dixons, John Menzies, W.H. Smith, Boots, and all good computer stores. Slough SLIGEH ROMIK "


"Reco CIDENTE 84 HELLO HELLO! MISSION OM TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY Eat your heart out Bilbo! So say the adverts for Twin Kingdom Valley, thus immediately inviting comparison with the Hobbit. Presumably the reference is to the lack of space for Hobbit graphics in the BBC micro. Be that as it may! Now there are graphic adventures and text adventures and each type has its fans. Personally, I find that the novelty of colour graphics, except where used as an integral part of an Adventure, soon wears off. Unfortunately, the graphic adventure usually forces the player to watch the picture when the program calls for it, unlike the illustrated book, in which pictures, if any, can be perused at leisure. One up for Dan Diamond! TKV offers the player four graphicscontrol options, one of which allows them to be switched off altogether. This may appeal to those who can't stand the sight of trees with red bark. Of course, the graphics are still there lurking in memory, where otherwise could be stored enhancements to the text and program. TKV is set in a valley ruled by two kings who hate each other, an unlikely situation, if you think about it. Your objective is to collect treasures. The locations are mountains and valleys, caves, a desert, a moor and so on. There is also an inn which sells what seems to be a very powerful beer! The plot and setting are, in combination, nothing special. The response is quick, and the game quite interesting to play, but death comes fairly frequently and in some cases, unavoidably. This is tiresome, as TKV suffers the same dire user-hostility as BBC Hobbit die and you face a reload! That is, unless you have a saved game on tape, when you can recover to your saved position and continue. Why do they write them like this, I ask? My advice for players of TKV is save a game as soon as you start, so as to always be able to get back in. Mind you — the data saving on this game is almost as long as the initial load time, so if you don't like tape waits avoid TKV 164 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES This month the Helpline team gains another member, Simon Marsh. Simon has been a regular contributor to Helpline for some time, and you may recogthese nise his name from pages. Let me tell you a bit about Paul and Simon. Paul Coppins is from Essex, and specialises in Atari adventures. Indeed, he seems to devour them at an alarming rate. With 3 Zorks and 12 Scott Adams behind him, to mention but a few, when I met Paul I was soon convinced that he was a master puzzle-solver. I look forward to timing him on Scott's new Adventures, due out later this year! Simon lives in Surrey, and is studying A level currently Computer Science. His circle of friends includes a number of keen adventurers owning a variety of micros. Simon himDragon self specialises in adventures, but will no doubt be craftily picking his friends' brains and taking over their micros when he gets one of your more difficult pleas for help! Both Simon and Paul, as well as helping me to answer your pleas, will be writing occasional reviews, for an 'Adventure review extra' feature which we will be presenting bi-monthly starting next issue. Watch out for it! Not a spy saga, as one might think from the title, but another of those Spell, Damage, Strength, Armour, Energytype Adventures. A formatted screen is used to display all the above characteristics on a points scale, with an adjacent box for inventory. Below these two boxes the location details are displayed, and then the screen is lined off, to show the conversation below. This display was crystal clear, and pleasing to the eye. I am not over keen on this type of game, but so far it held promise. After a short journey, a little spritycreature bounced down into view, and a warning siren sounded. I was about to be attacked by an Om-nivore. s where the energy, strength and spell points came into play. The Om-nivore's attributes were displayed in place of the inventory box, and the battle commenced. A lot of what ensued was fairly random. Suffice to say I clubbed the little devil to death, and the cave now had the faint smell of Om-nivore droppings presumably he had been somewhat scared of me all along. The game has many interesting ideas, not a particularly easy vocabulary, and one annoying feature. Don't they (nearly) all? The program takes ages to load, and then it is necessary to reverse the cassette, and read data in from the other side. So I eventually got going. But on being attacked by a strong Stone-thingummy, another unfairly random fight ensued, and this time I lost. And as a punishment, to play again, I had to load in the data side of the tape. Oh woe is me! Next time I played, I was feeling rather nasty and, needing one of those impossible-to-guess but well-known phrases, I typed and got the reply \"I could use some of that for the roses\". Sometimes you can forgive a game its faults, can't you?! But I was left wondering why he didn't use what the Omnivore left behind! Mission OM is for the Commodore 64 from Spectresoft, price .95. The game has a random element in the placement of objects but the randomness doesn't match up to that independence of character shown by Thorin, Gandalf and Co. There I've said it! Something good about Hobbit. Eat your heart out, Bug-Byte. Twin Kingdom Valley is from BugByte, for the BBC, Electron and Commodore 64, price .50. BY KEITH CAMPBELL "


"HELPLINE Cheating to unravel the secrets of an Adventure is becoming more and more sophisticated in fact, almost a science in itself. Peter Harrap from Doncaster has been digging deep into Hobbit, and come up with an Assembler program for the Spectrum which, he says, will save every possible position onto tape. The tape can then be loaded as though you had actually reached any position. There are a couple of snags though — there's not enough room to print it here, and the resultant recording will occupy 2 C-60 cassettes! A plea now, from Hywel Roberts, a regular C&VG reader from Llanfairpwll. How to reach the house without getting shot by the gamekeeper, and how to avoid getting stuck down a mineshaft without a wick in Feasibility Experiment. Thanks to Anthony Griffiths of Llandudno, who sent in some step-by-step hints on Golden Apple, with a very amusing commentary from one who has obviously played Adventure before! He enabled me to pass on some useful information to Max Berle over in Belgium. N. Machin of Sutterton, Lincs, keeps falling into a pit in every direction in Tombs of Xeiops. He asks is there ANY way out? An interesting discovery has been made by Andrew Dilley of Godalming. He has been PEEKing at Pirate Adventure, and spied the message \"POOF! THE GAME'S DESTROYED\". Try as he might, he can't get this message to appear when playing the game. Unfortunately, he doesn't mention which micro he was using at the time. Anyone else spotted this one? Darren Evans has sent in some useful TRAAM hints, and in return asks — how do you get the rod in Starcross's alien ship? Eliot Wong is trying to squeeze through a narrow crack in Hammersmith, hopeful to catch Pegasus in Perseus and Andromeda. Can anyone help him? The Castle from Bug-Byte is bugging Wesley Kerr of Glasgow. How is it possible to defeat the werewolf, what does the message in morse mean, and how does he get out of the maze he's lost in? The Ofnir, first quest to be completed in Valhalla, is giving many causes for concern. Not so for Joe Hon who wrote from Amsterdam. He, like Darren Waller of Kidbrooke, has found Ofnir, so his tips, printed upside down elsewhere on these pages, should be good ones! He and Darren are now languishing in the pits of Hell, trying to find Drapnir. Can anyone help them? Or can you help Philip Mawson of Barnsley to find darkness in Midgard? Meanwhile, Darren has found another Hobbit funny. He writes that if you attempt to use the magic door (when Thorin is dead) or (Thorin not with you AND not been captured) got it? you will get: Araw it! + ryecrackers, Dlake par Something drops from above and stings, You are dead! \"Nice, huh?\"asks Darren. \"Is an Araw a new kind of monster?\", hoping to be able to use it in a new adventure he is currently writing with the Quill! Brendan Pollitt from Stranraer writes in with help for Andrew Kennedy and Craig Lee, who were stuck at Velnor's Lair waterfall. He can't get past it either, but (shh!), he solved the game! Raaka Tu has reared its ugly head again! Paul Entwistle is highly frustrated! He can't get past the stone gargoyle EVEN THOUGH HE KNOWS HOW! How can he avoid falling down the pit so as to get the poisoned candle? Those readers who have tried Snowball from Level 9 are writing in proclaiming it to be one of the best Adventures they have ever played. I agree, and also that the claim that the average Adventurer should complete it in about two weeks is way out! As James Jennett of Widnes says: \"Oh well, 1.30 in the morning the night is still young!\" It's going to be a long haul, chaps ...! A new disease is springing up amongst Adventurers, possibly incubated by the recent sudden increase in new releases. This, according to Paul Badock of East Grinstead, is NAF, SHORT FOR Nutty Adventuring Frustration! And judging by my postbag, it's reaching epidemic proportions. So if you are suffering from it, write to Keith Campbell's Adventure Helpline, Computer & Video Games, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1R 5EJ, for a prescription. If, on the other hand, you can help to relieve another's suffering, please send your cure along to the same address. INSIDE THE LORDS OF TIME EGG \"  os    ssn uy mod uo un o    selv jarev ayl moi dray Keur ay pue wry of Boru aganap ajertepe yons uedo ou esquiadxe pue aoueuedxe ayi BABY PIOM OYM-pzey urut 1903 BYL  O2 II/MOL kq dn NM3S tre peau nok suonoop Jo aouenbes ay aneu pmoys no jaure styl znoqe spr q   I ANYTSI 19VNOIDS SOUTA I3 wo EN 10 N'MN OD OJ USIM no jaunay ay Team     s  M   burri jayje 'pue te Suey 10143 HTTPHTHA Not a Dr Who adventure, but connected very closely to the workings of a grandfather clock! It was designed by Sue Gazzard, mother of two boys and reluctant housewife! The design was implemented by and is the latest offering from Level 9. It has their usual format wordy descriptions, many locations, fast response, and occasional screwed-up text decompression. You are recommended to play this game in short bursts, and indeed, the structure of the plot lends itself admirably to short sessions. Without giving too much away, the many locations are arranged into nine separate levels, and each level can be explored independently. In fact, it is necessary to make reconnaissance trips to see what's around, before coming to any conclusions on how best to proceed to solve the game as a whole. If this sounds complicated, it isn't in practice, once you get the hang of moving round. Each level of the game, which can be freely selected, has a theme of its own. One minute you might find yourself on a Viking ship the next, playing a lute by a four-poster bed. Or trying to tame large woolly mammoths! The logic of the fairly extensive vocabulary, does suffer some mental lapses. Too many times I seemed to get \"Arfle barfle gloop?\", Level 9's standard reply to what the program decides is rubbish and, when aboard the Viking ship, EXAMINE SHIP elicited the response \"You can't see a moored Viking longship with a fierce dragon prow\". A box of matches, when checked, contained \"4tches\". But it would be churlish to carp too much about this, as the game is a lighthearted one which is fun to play, not too difficult to progress in, but will, I suspect, take rather a long time to complete. Who could ask for more? Lord of Time from Level 9, for a wide range of micros, costs .90. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 165 'N'n'N' Msuomenp burMOTO   ya pue 'z jrueil   isnur nok faoyjo s Jojpos ay i jab OL Od "


"GDVENTURE 989 ut % . DC SOMETHING COMPLETELY DIFFERENT It is unusual for an Adventure to offer different levels of play, but then Cricklewood Incident is an unusual Adventure! To start with, you must select a level in accordance with your ability Utter Wally, John Travolta, Gengis Khan, Superman or Geoff Boycott. The screen is formatted in an unusual way too. There is a section describing your location, another, your exits, and alongside this is your current state of health. Starting off as 'You feel great, this usually deteriorates fairly rapidly as the game progresses. To move around at will is fairly difficult, due to the intervention of the fuzz, an alien spaceship, and a band of Hell's Angels. If the fuzz strike, you usually end up in a cell, but don't worry you can walk out at will! The alien spaceship is a nuisance. After analysing you, you are usually discarded as uninteresting, but might end up anywhere. The Hell's Angels are killers. You go into a real-time fight, with various tactical key-stroke options. These range from retreating to the use of the knee. Travel is by bus and train IF you can find one and have the money. And then there's that push button with the 'forbidden' sign. An open invitation, isn't it? So I fell for it! The object of all this is to find the Holy Grail, and if I mention the words \"Yangtse', 'pointed stick, and yet another minute passed', those of you who have spotted the link will probably, like myself, spend more time searching for a Norwegian Blue (beautiful plumage!) than the Grail. The Cricklewood Incident, which I played on the Dragon, together with a BBC and Spectrum version, are from Salamander Software. The game is also known as The Streets of London on the Commodore 64, and marketed by Supersoft. I haven't played very far into it yet, but intend to go back as soon as my son lets me back on his Dragon! And if you like it -take heart there's more on the way! GET A LOAD OF THIS Most micro-owners start off with a The speed of reading is such that, cassette-based system, and those if you were not able to hear the drive who get hooked, very soon itch for a cut in, you would hardly be aware disc drive. that a disc access was being made. Their reason is usually frustration But were you to remove the disc from with tape loading times and errors. the drive whilst playing the game, all After all, who wants to hang around would be well until the program constantly trying to re-load a game called for data from the disc. With a that is proving difficult? tape file, data cannot be read I recently suffered an incredible outside a set sequence. 18 minute tape load on a I have a TRS-80 with a couple of Commodore 64 only to end with a drives, and Zork 1. Unfortunately, locked-up computer. have not been able to obtain Zorks 2 But a disc drive offers many more and 3. The latter games are, advantages than speed and however, easily available for Atari reliability of loading. Those of you and CBM micros. who have tried saving data to tape Suddenly, everything happens at will realise that it is necessary to once. wait until the bit of tape with the Paul Coppins, owner and solver particular record required passes of all 3 Zorks, joins the Helpline through the tape before it can be read (shows I pick 'em well!) and I by the computer. A disc drive is not a receive one of those rare tip letters sequential device like the cassette, worth a million Zorkmids! and can access records in any Mark Thompson from Deepcut sequence. This is known as near Camberley, has the benefit of Random Access'. Zorks on an IBM PC, and a Zork Games, particularly Adventures, User-group map of Zork 1 gained on can be constructed in such a way as a visit to the States. to make use of this characteristic of Mark sent me a copy of the map, discs. plus hints on Zorks 1 and 2, some of Thus, although it is true that any which are printed upside down tape game can be converted to run elsewhere on these pages. Mark from disc, the opposite is not the took the precaution of sealing the case. paper and envelopes containing the I mention this because many tips with disc write-protect tabs. readers write asking if there is Whoever heard of READ-protecting anything intrinsically different about with a WRITE-protect tab?! A risky Adventures such as Zork. There is thing to do, as I nearly destroyed the Zork is much bigger in size than valuable tips in my feverish desire to the memory of the micros it runs on. read the contents! It contains vast amounts of highly So here's some news for DEC interesting and amusing text, and Dungeon players Zorks 1 and 2 takes place in a relatively enormous TOGETHER make 'Dungeon' there land. is an exit from Zork 1 which leads to This is achieved through loading Zork 2. As far as I can tell, Zork 3 is an and reloading different data as the extra! game progresses. The program is finally can the jewel-enalways 'resident' in the computer, crusted egg be opened? Look for but different data is read in from disc my tips if you REALLY want to know! when called by the program. This And thanks a million, Mark, for your depends on your circumstances and helpful letter without folks like location in the game at any given you, Helpline would soon become \"Question Time'! time. 186 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"DJB Software TRIGSOFT UTILITIES, HARDWARE. ATARI 400-600-800 RENTAL CLUB * ATARI 400/600XL/800/800XL * CASSETTE BACK-UP UTILITY Tapeclone is a user-friendly copier that will make back-up copies of single or multi-boot, machine code or Basic cassettes. Features include:Audio and visual prompts, loads and saves all multiboot parts continuously, repeat copy. Only .95 for Tapecione autoboot cassette. Cheque/P.O. to C. Gibbons, 170 Bradwell Common Boulevard, Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire, MK13 8BG. Be one of the first to try out the very latest releases. For the most comprehensive selection of the best and most popular games available on cassette and cartridge Constantly updated. Send a large SAE for details to: D.J.B. SOFTWARE (Dept C.V.G.), 59 WOODLAND AVE, HOVE, SUSSEX TEL: (0273) 502143 Full menu of drives utility to make back-up copies of your programs, gives you choice to load or save to tape on discs. Show program length, displays disc director, etc. A must for disc owners . BACK-UP CONNECTOR FOR VIC & CBM 64. With this adaptor you can connect a second CBM tape unit to your computer. You can save a program on the second deck while it loads from the first. On the board pulse shaping 1.C gives clean output Send cheque/P.O. to TRIGSOFT, Marshfield House, No. 4 Burnett Place, Marsh Fields, Bradford BD6 94. .......95 ATARI 400/600/800/XL OWNERS Why risk losing those precious programs? With our range of utilities you can make a back-up of almost all your software KOPY T4 The only tape back-up system to take up to 4 stages can do more) in one pass. (16 + 48k versions on one cassette) .95 KOPY D2 — Single stage tape to disc (up to 10 tapes per discl .95 (for multi stage send S.a.e.). DISCDUPE 2-Copies full discs-remembers bad sectors and recreates them .95 AUTOMENU-Automatically lists every file on disc (Basic or binary) and will run them at press of a button .95 KART KOP-Transfers cartridges to tape or disc. Fully automatic .95 HOWSEN DOS-A new disc file management system 7 functions inc. tape to disc, disc to tape, disc to disc, tape to tape. All files placed on disc with menu (loads in 2 seconds) .95. AWG 145 Bankside, West Houghton, Bolton, Lancs. ATARI 400/800 OWNERS Vast range of cassette, disc and cartridge software for hire at .00 per week. Life membership is  (including 1st game hire). To join send  cheque/P.O. and list six games in order of preference. Or send S.A.E. for details. CASTLE GAMES LIBRARY, 44 AUGUSTA CLOSE, ROCHDALE, LANCS. Tel: (0706) 59602. Timeless Software Texas TI99/4A Software Extended BASIC T.3 The Crazy Fun House .......... .95 T. 4 Blackbeards Treasure .95 T. 9 Kong ... T.11 Diablo .95 T.12 Games Pak III* (contains Kong, Bouncer, Romeo) ....95 Books B. 1 The Smart Programming Guide for Sprites * = Joysticks required. All prices inc. p&p. Send SAE for detailed list. Cheques/POs to Timeless Software, 3 Bridgend, Fauldhouse, W. Lothian EH47 9HF. .95 PERSONAL SOFTWARE USERS' ASSOCIATION LIBRARY AND SWAP SHOP COMMODORE 64 AND VIC 20 PROGRAM COPIERS LANCASHIRE TICROS Sinclair, Commodore, Dragon, Lynx, Acorn/BBC, Oric, Memotech computers We have an extensive range of books and software over 200 Spectrum titles alone LANCASHIRE MICROS, 89, EUSTON ROAD, MORECAMBE, LANCS. TEL (0524) 411435. Send s.a.e. for free list. We now have a huge library of over 600 cassettes available for exchange or hire at best prices. .50 for a full 2 weeks rental period. Also discount purchasing and other features for members. Join us and take advantage of our huge range of programs for the ZX81, Spectrum, Vic20. Comm 64, Dragon, BBC, T199 14A, Oric, Atari. For details send S.a.e. to: P.S.U.A., 19 Lammerton Terrace, Dundee OD4 7BR, naming your micro. They copy most cassette based BASIC, machine code and multi-part programs of any size. Both copiers are written in machine code. Programs using a range of protection techniques can be copied easily. Audio and visual prompts are used for easy operation. Full instructions are contained in the programs. VIC IMITATOR IMITATOR 64 Please state which is required and make cheques POs payable to IAN WAITE Send orders to: IAN WAITE, DEPT CVG 11 HAZELBARROW ROAD, SHEFFIELD S8 SAU.  ATARI 400/800 SOFTWARE BLANK DISCS/CASSETTES single double den sity discs per 10 .95 inc. p&p. C15 cassettes high quality per 10 14.95 inc p&p. AWG, 145 Bankside, West Houghton, Bolton, Lancashire Why spend a fortune on software when you can hire all the very latest released games etc. at a most competitive rate? We have an allround selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges awaiting your Atari 400/800. Apply now and hire your first 2 games free. For full details send stamped addressed envelope or phone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends. (0783) 286351 Games & Software Club, 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney Close, Sunderland SR3 4PB. STYXFAX FOR THE ATARI T199/4A PROGRAMS from FORTEX SOFTWARE Texas Ranger, Star Gate Defender TI Basic. Martian Maze, Snake Pit, Gold Runner-will run in TI Basic or extended Basic. All at .95 each or .95 for 2 on one cassette. Or Send SAE for list to: Fortext Software, 71 St. Georges Lane North, Worcester WR1 1QX. ELECTRON PROGRAMS COMING SOON. Mini tutorials can help you get more out of Atari basic. Topics include: GRAPHICS SOUNDS SIMPLE GAMES, HANDY HINTS etc. Only .50 each. Send s.a.e, for details now. TAPE COPIER 5 STYX SOFTWARE, 58 Devon Drive, Chandlers Ford, Eastleigh, Hampshire SOS 3DH. Makes BACK-UP COPIES OF ALL SPECTRUM programs (incl header less me unstoppable that we are aware of with MANY unique features. FULL MONEY BACK GUARANTEE if you are not satisfied \"LOADS in all program parts CONTINUOUSLY. Verifies. Stops. Abort Program Name HEAD data \"FULL instructions, very user friendly. MDRIVE copies on to micro drive. Cost only .75 or 65.75 with M DRIVE Loverseas: E1 Europe. 2 others 5 STARS FROM THE HCW REVIEW, WITH 3 out 4 ratings of 100%! LERM, Dept CVG, COTTINGHAM, MKT HARBOROUGH, LEICS. ATARI 400/800 Cartridge Backup System Back IK cartonges to tape or disc. Ne hardware made rum with . Not suitable for the XL senes Delux version has gold edge blades a 0000 Cartage tape E150 deluxe 20.00 Carte de 2000 deluxe 25.00 Tape Duplicator Duplicate almost any single armulistage tape BASIC program runs on 10000 and XL 4K are recommended Tape Duplicator 6.00 Reduce a lading te tyrecording almost all of your single Fast Loader lapes at stage faster baud rate up to tasteri Ast e Neware medications required, sandard 410 1010 program recorder 400 800 ATARI 400/800 CARTRIDGE COPIER Easily create boot disc or tape from 8K or 16K cartridges. Ram Simulator, then runs program as normal cartridge. . Please state disc or tape. Send cheque/PO to: Magical Electronic Services, 14 Durham Close, Little Lever, Bolton BL3 1XA. ATARI 400 800/XL games, Drunkenstein's Vortex and Pinwizard. All 100% guaranteed. 48k cassette or disc only .95. Enquiries: Anthony Dolman, Software Cybernetics, 2 Hillcrest, Skellow, Doncaster. 723487 15.00 ATARI COMPUTER OWNERS Listing Service Your BASIC Asset PILOT Scarce regions or text files on ose or tape Isted to coun ter Price per 11985 in sheet Minun change Ml prices include pÀ Send large SAE for further details S. TERRELL 17 Cock Close Road Yaxley, Peterborough PESHJ Make the most of your Atari 400 600 800 by hiring from our Software Library. We offer a wide selection of the many games and adventures on the market for your computer For full details send a S.A.E. to: Star Hire, P.O. Box 48, Bracknell, Berks. RG12 4WD. CARTRIDGE CITY for Atari 400/600/800 and Commodore 64 cart. rentals. Yearly membership . Rates from 20p per day (equiv.). Large SAE appreciated. CARTRIDGE CITY, 25 Gaitside Drive, Aberdeen AB1 7BH. Tel. (0224) 37348. ONLY  membership then hire  per week ENGLISH E2 AMERICAN most updated software COMMODORE 64 games. Write \"Woody\" 1 Windle Royd Lane, Burnley Road, Halifax, Yorkshire COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 167 "


"BLANK CASSETTES ATARI 400/800 ART ATARI (16) Create graphic masterpieces with your Atari Up to 80 different colours can be displayed at once. Uses Hi-Res Graphics Mode 7.5. Finished pictures can be saved to tape for re-display .50 BLACKJACK (165) Features realistic Hi-Res card display. Can SOFTSAVE for the Vic-20 allows you to back-up the most commercially available software of any memory size. Tape to Tape back-up .95 Tape to Disc back-up .95 SOFTSAVE, 65 Stonewood, Bean, nr. Dartford, Kent DA2 8B2. PICTURE PUZZLE (32) Can you recreate the original picture, 2 Hi-Res pictures 20 difficulty levels. 14.50 ALL PRICES INC. P&P Cheques + PO's to P. F. SOFTWARE 14 Kirkstall Avenue, Littleborough, Lancashire OL 15 JA Rely on the professionals for guaranteed top quality computer die Cassettes at great value budget prices. Packed in boxes of 10 complete with labels, inlay cards and library case Prices include VAT post & packaging LENGTH BOX PRICE (10) QTY VALUE 5 mins le 51 54.55 10 mins ic. 10) 12 mins ic. 121 15 mins (c. 15) f4.50 30 mins (c. 301 14.20 60 mins Ic 601 5.30 90 mins (c 901 .00 Cheque Postal Order enclosed for TRADE ENDURRIES WELCOME GET BEST TERMS SERVICES PROOUCT BUY DIRECT FROM MANUFACTURERS OR PROFESSIONAL BRAND CASSETTES NAME ADDRESS PROFESSIONAL MAGNETICS LTD Cassette House, 329 Hunslet Road, Leeds LS10 3YY FREEPOST Tel: (0532) 706066 VIDEOACTIVE (RENTALS) SOFTWARE BY POST NATIONWIDE Do you own any of the following computers or TV games systems? * ATARI 400 600/800 VIC 20 Are you limited to the number of games you have due to the high cost of software? Then why not join our club. For a daily rental of 200 you will have the chance to enjoy any number of games from our ever expanding library Also ask about our computer hire service local only SAE for details to: VIDEOACTIVE (RENTALS) 9 Albemarle Gdns., Gants Hill, Essex IG1 DJ. Phone 01-518 6425 (evenings or wiends! We currently offer good rates for high quality BASIC and ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE programs suitable for use with the Atari range of home computers. ATARI OWNERS 400/600/800 MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY EXPRESS JOYSTICK REPAIRS Programs for the 600XL are of special interest. Joysticks repaired and returned within 24 hrs Eg. Atari, Vic, Quickshot etc. Send joystick and  + 50p postage. Send programs on cassette with detailed instructions to: ATARI SPARES Strong replacement joystick handle inserts at 250 pair Joystick handle-top fire button kit, includes insert and grip at .95 each 1) All Games Originals 2) Over 600 Titles 3) Cassette Disc Rom 4) 35-40 New Titles Per Month 5) Discounts Off New Software 6) Special Offer For New Members SEND LARGE S.A.E. FOR DETAILS M.C.L. 31 Evenlodge Close, Lodge Park, Redditch B98 7NA. Tel (0527) 2608 Lantern Software, 4 Haffenden Rd., Tenterden, Kent TN30 6QD. JOYSTICK OFFER Joysticks suitable for Atari CBM64 Vic etc .95 + 50p post. Dual fire button model .95 COMPUTER SUPPLIES, 146 CHURCH ROAD, BOSTON, LINCS PE21 OJX. NEW ATARI GAMES EAGLE EYE (Connect-4) COLOUR CODE Mastermind) All .95 COMPUTER BATTLESHIPS Also ADVENTURETIME (text adventure) .95 Introductory offer -all four on one tape or disc .95 A.W.G., 145 Bankside, West Houghton, Bolton, Lancs. cg SPECIAL OFFER for ATARI 400/600/800 OWNERS Hire your first 2 games free from our extensive range of software. Up to the Minute releases available. Apply now! Send s.a.e. to: Charnwood Games, 27 Warwick Ave., Quorn, Leics. Tel: 0509 412604 UICTAGRAPH PLOT WINDOW TOTAL FOR ATARIO 4/800, 6/800XL, PRICE AND 1020 PRINTER The easy way to plot X Y Co-ordinate based displays NEW INSTRUCTION MANUAL FOR PLOT.ORAUTO,XIO FILL, SET. COL. GR. 3 TO 11 DEMOS DESIGN PREP, USING DATA 1928 PRINTER PROGRAM + upu, VICTAGRAPHICS (VG) 6A BOW STREET, RUGELEY, STAFFS. U.K. Tel:(08894) 2426 usis 281 EUROPE SURFACE MAIL COMPUTER DUST COVERS Protection from that enemy of electronics Made in best quality heavy gauge, translucent and antistatic PVC with bound and sewn seams. Custom fit and handsome appearance VIC 20 Commodore 64 02.95. TI 99 4A .75. BBC .95 Also available-cassette head demagnetiser .95 T199/4A USA SOFTWARE The Computer Home Service 40 Barrhill Avenue, Patcham, Brighton BN1 BUF. Winging it Flight Simulation. Fly a plane in this excellent ly visualised simulator. Ground map and weather indicator chart your progress on a randomised earth simulacrum Once flying, three games test your skill T1 Basic ,50 inc 8p ATARI 400, 600, 800 OWNERS ATARI 400/800 OWNERS Cassette to Disc Utility. Put as many as 10 of your single load machine code tapes onto one disc Works with most tapes Requires 32K (Minimum) + disc .95 Copy Utility. An advanced copier that copies virtually all basic or machine code, single-load or double-load tapes with either long or short interrecord gaps. Written in machine language. Supplied on Autoboot cassette. .95 Cheques/P.O. to: W. ENTERPRISES, 49 Shrewley Crescent,Tile Cross, Birmingham B33 OHU. Bankroll manage your investments in this financial world simulation Prices respond realistically to changing world conditions News headlines help assess the future, 2.3 or 4 players. Extended Basic .50 inc. p&. Backgammon play this favourite game against the computer or an opponent. Computer plays quickly. Excellent graphics. Extended Basic  inc. p&p. MIND GAMES, 7 OAKWOOD DRIVE, PRESTBURY, CHESHIRE, SK10 4HG. REMEMBER Midland Games Library have nearly 700 original programs for hire wide range of programs, cassettes, discs, utilities and educational. Write to: M.G.L., 48 Read Way, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos. Tel (0242-67) 4960 6pm-9pm. ATARI GAMES CLUB Cassette/disc/cartridge hire To join send  membership and list of four titles in order of preference. First 2 hires free. Send to: Games Club, 11 Park Road, Stretford, Manchester. GAMES COMPENDIUM No. 1 ATARI 400/600/800/XL 48K AQUARIUS 16K FIVE great games including Q MAN. ONLY .95 including p&p. PLEASE STATE MACHINE Cheques to: M. Prince, 147 Fitzstephen Road, Dagenham, Essex RM8 ZYB. T199/4A STAINLESS SOFTWARE has a large catalogue of good quality programs for the T199/4A, with over 80 programs! For a copy, please send a large SAE to: Dept CVG, 10 Alstone Road, STOCKPORT, Cheshire, SK4 5AH. (Mail Order Only) 168 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"T199/4A SOFTWARE ATARI 400/800/600XL owners superior Tape Duplicator backs up all single/multistage M/C and Basic Tapes with long short I.R.G.'s . C. Matthews, 15 Millers Close, Chigwell, Essex T199/4A Progpack 1: 10 Arcade, Strategy and Adventure games. . T. Wilmott, 3 Somerset Place, Somerset Bridge, Bridgwater, Somerset. Atari 400/800 Games: Disc, tape, cartridge. All original from . 01-907 9546 evenings and weekends. Two great games on cassette for the unexpanded T199/4A. PILOT .95 A great new flight simulation game for one player. Options for take-off, landing or in flight. Graphics display of landing strip, terrain map, instrument panel, Full instructions included. Graphics and sound TI TREK .95 Defeat the Klingon invasion fleet. Includes 5 skill levels, graphics quadrant display, 8X8 galaxy, phasors, photon torpedoes, long range scans and much more. Full instructions included Graphics and sound, TEXAS PROGRAM BOOK .95 35 programs ready to type into the unexpanded T199/4A, including 3-D Maze, Lunar Lander, Horse Race, Invader, Caterpillar and many more. Send cheque or PO or telephone with Access Visa for immediate despatch Please add 50p p&p to orders under . Orders over  post free. Commodore 64 and Vic 20 + 8k/16k. Soccerclub Boss: manage your own football team. Features League Table, Commentary, Injuries, etc. + more! Only .99. D. Spencer, 230 Lowgrange Avenue, Billingham, Cleveland. Sharp M280 K3A fast M/C Space Invaders. Full sound, graphics. Send .50 P.O. Cheque to M. Travers, 23 Graham Gardens, Luton, Beds. Lots of Sharp software, MZ80-A/K, mostly games, reasonable prices. For details phone Craig Leeds 672534. APEX SOFTWARE Hastings Road, St. Leonards-on-Sea, E. Sussex TN38 8EA Tel. Hastings (0424) 53283 HARCLAYCANO VISA Need to borrow ATARI Eprom Burner very briefly. Will pay ;. Phone Hitchin 814503 Texas T199/4A. Ten games on one tape. Great value only .99. Tim Donavon, Rosetor, Rosehill Road, Rhyl, Clwyd. LL18 4TW. TACTICAL SOFTWARE T199/4A Hunt the Bismark 1-7 players Naval strategy. Pocket Battleship Bismark attacks convoys. Use 7 battleships to hunt and sink. Including Air Searches Gun control uls, engine failures, etc Race Time 1-6 players. Be a horse owner and place your bets Realistic races over the sticks stewards inquiries etc s.a.e. for price list. Orders under  P&P 50p. 108 Redland Road, Penarth South Glamorgan CF6 1WN WARNING!! IT IS ILLEGAL TO DUPLICATE AND SELL COPYRIGHTED SOFTWARE Sharp MZ-80K for information on a new range of games. Including Centipede. K. Balfour, 50 Freemans Close, Stoke Poges, Bucks. ZX81-16K computer still under guarantee. In original packing, complete with leads manual and 10 cartridges. Telephone Oxford 67146. Sharp MZ-80K imported software excellent new MC. Games enquiries to: John Parkes, Flat 7, 'Wellmead', Wellwood Road, Goodmayes, llford, Essex IG3 8TX TO ADVERTISE IN COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES TEL: 01-278 6552 Games and educational software for all home computers. 1000+ titles. Discount prices. For free lists phone Burnham (Bucks) 4537 any time. Apple ll Europlus with Apple Il Disc drive and Monochrome Monitor.  o.n.o. 10 months old. Tel: 041 942 6743. Atari 400 15k + programme recorder + Basic cartridge + manuals + games + books + deluxe joystick  o.n.o. Tel: 06977 3619 after 6pm. T199/4A's extended BASIC and Games . MINI MEMORY (new) and Editor Assembler manual . Tel: (0532) 572875 Vic 20 16K program recorder, manuals, many cassette games, worth over . Joystick, only  0.no. Tel: 01-697 1519. Molestreetch for Texas T199/4A in 11 Basic. . David Smith, 18 Birken Road, Tunbridge Wells. Tel: 29890. C&VG MICROSELL COUPON TERMS AND CONDITIONS 1. Trade advertisers will appear in the MicroAds section, private advertisers in the MicroSell Section. 2. All linage advertisements MUST BE PRE-PAID (cheques and postal orders made payable to Computer & Video Games). 3. The Publishers reserve the right to refuse an advertisement aEN To place a LINEAGE advertisement in EITHER the \"MicroAds\" or \"Micro Sell\" section of COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES, please fill out the order form, in BLOCK CAPITALS, ONE WORD PER BOX (telephone numbers count as one word and addresses must be included in the total). The FIRST TWO Words ONLY will appear in BOLD. Please underline any additional words you wish to appear in bold. AS A SPECIAL SUMMER SERVICE, MICROSELL (PRIVATE) WILL BE FREE! MICROSELL (TRADE) WILL STILL COST 40p PER WORD Minimum number of words is 15, maximum 40 (continue on a separate sheet where necessary). Please ring which month(s) you wish your advertisement to appear in JUNE JULY AUGUST TOTAL number of words for ALL insertions. (ie. 15 words per advertisement to appear in two months = 30 words in total) COST: MicroSell (Private) Micro Ads (Trade) FREE 40p per word 50p per additional bold word I enclose a cheque P.O. for made payable to Computer & Video Games Name Address POST TO: AD. DEPT, C&VG, 8 HERBAL HILL, LONDON EC1R 5EJ COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 169 "


"A great line up of 17 NEW titles... direct from CANADA CHILDRENS' & HOME EDUCATIONAL GAMES for the COMMODORE 64, ATARI 400/800 DISKS Only, at .95 each incl. PHABETI TCH UDFORD BIRDSAMEX KAN FOR ZX81, SPECTRUM, VIC 20, C64, ATARI! Just run your eyes over these new titles now available through \"SOFTCHOICE LTD\" the UK subsidiary of the well-known Canadian Software House INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHING & SOFTWARE INC.Purchase with confidence superb EDUCATIONAL UTILITY and GAMES SOFTWARE! TINY LOGO THE ALPHABET MATCH UP THE WORD BIRD TIME ZONE FACTORY These high interest Three different games TWO activity games Two arcade-style games make learning each designed to that develop the games that each to read fun! increase a child's needed language children the alphabet! 054 only reading vocabulary! Skills for successful C64 Atan Ages 3-8 years, 054 only reading! Ages 3-8 years Ages 6-12 years C64 only Ages 6-12 years GREAT UTILITY AND BUSINESS SOFTWARE for ZX81, SPECTRUM, VIC 20, COMMODORE 64, ATARI CALC-PRO 16K 21 16K BRIDGE For all the family Sharpen your skills with the computer's bidding! EXCITING NEW GAMES FOR FAMILY FUN AND LEARNING FOR ZX81 and SPECTRUM adding 1 + Cassette .50 VIC-20 16K 16K ZX81 GRAPH-IT ADDING MACHINE Additional facts for ages 5-9 yrs. For Spectrum Cassette .95 TAKE AWAY ZOO Subtraction facts for ages 5-9 yrs. For Spectrum Cassette C595 TINY LOGO The key to understanding and learning real computer programming For ZX81 Cassette 5.95 ZX81 FASTWORD FASTLOAD DIET CALC-PRO GRAPH-IT Fast. versatile and Gain control over A great tool for home An easy to use complete word processing programme up to 6 your eating or business! to produce package by Dr Pearson times faster than patterns. By Dr M complete financial graphical displays For ZXB1 normal! By Dr G. Minsky spreadsheet & runs For VIC 20. Cassette C7.50 Pearson For ZXB1 & Statistics programs Cassette .50 For 2X81 Spectrum VIC 20 Cassette .50 Cassette C750 Cassette 595 C64 Disk (14.95 HOW TO ORDER. BY TELEPHONE (01) 431 2494 BY POST. To purchase any of the items listed above If you are an Access holder, please telephone simply fill in the coupon below, write your Name, and give your Card No. Name Address and Address, enclose your chaque or PO, made item required for immediate despatch payable to: SOFTCHOICE LTD and post to us MAPHORE ZX81 16K SIGNALS & CODE See and hear the letters and numbers in order! On demand randomlyn messages, in score tests! For ZX1 ZX81 WRATH OF KONG Only real agility and cunning will outwit kong Camb quickly or Jane wil perish! For ZX31 & Spectrum Cassette C5 95 16K SPEED SNAKE Sither around mazes 10 different mazes to challenge your skill Deadly For ZX81 Cassette 0495 16K . 16K MR MUNCHEE Race through 3 mazes, avoid the Trolls! Exciting action with graphics For ZX81 Post to: SOFTCHOICE LTD. 52 PLATTS LANE, LONDON NW3 7NT Please send me the following items (Use scarlesheetit space allocated not outcent) prefer to pay by ACCESS Delta whichever is not applicable) Card No Signature Name Address SOFTCHOICE LTD. SOFTCHOICE 52 PLATTS LANE, LONDON NW3 7NT. TEL: (01) 431 2494. TELEX: 923753 lenclose my cheque PO for | CHG 58 ADVERTISEMENT INDEX R&R Romik ... 74 A & F Software ........ Acorn Addictive Games ....... Adventure International AGF Hardware Apex Audiogenic Automata 100 113 108 93 Kempston.... Kernow. . K-Soft K-Tel. .........6 .............. 143 143 .. 137/139/145/159 163 107 169 IBC ...... 145 104 162 24 Lantern ... Level 9 Llamasoft Loade Enterprises .... Lyversoft 116 144/154/155 145 152 Beyond Big K D. C. Brennan ... Bug Byte. 122/123/159 117 139 170 Salamander Save-It-Software Scorpio Software Screenplay Severnsoft Silica Shop Soft Choice Softek Software Lending Library Software Projects.. Solar ... Spectrum U.K. Stack... Starcade. OBC 144 146/147 C&R .... M.C. Lothlorien ....... 105/115 144 Melbourne House ........ 94/95 Micro ads.................... 167/168/169 Micro Management ... 66/67 Micronet 800 . 134/135 Midland Games Library .......... 144 Mr Chip Software .... Chromasonic Creative Sparks 46-51 104 . 126 159 ... 153 Datac Datel Digital Integration.. DSS Tansoft ...... National Software Library Terminal Thor su Ocean .... 161 Ferranti & Craig First Byte Fuller ....... 12/13 Ultimate U.S. Gold.. Gem Gilsoft 143 ...............57 90 139 .... 33/42/60 Parco..... Phoenix Software Centre Postern Program Factory ... PSS . 160 Vic Oddens........... Virgin Games .... Vision Store .. 121 ... 78/130/131 ... 20/21 .71 IJK Imagine Imperial Incentive ... Interceptor Intrigue Quicksilva ............ ............ IFC W. H. Smith 55/57 86/87 ... 143 Rabbit Ram Electronics .. 114/143 144 145 ..... 68 Zeal............ ............ 170 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"MACHINE CODE GAMES ACTION FOR Software 64 Software G4 Motor Mania Renaissan Software 64 16K ROAD TOAD Sur's $2x81 stoor MOTOR MANIA .95 THE CLASSIC CAR RACE GAME FOR THE 64! RENAISSANCE $8.95 ROAD TOAD $5.95 THE MIND-BENDING STRATEGY THE BEST FROGGY GAME FOR THE 64 BOARD GAME OF OTHELLO! BAR NONE! Software 64 GATACLYSM WORD FEUD .95 This brilliantly conceived program combines the best parts of arcade games with the best of educational games, making a real family game that anyone who can see the screen can participate in. You have to find the word that is hidden twice in the jumble of letters, then guide your sights over one of the occurrences of it. The first to find it wins! You can play by yourself or in teams against the computer, or against other players. Three difficulty levels are included to suit young and old alike! FOR cber pasvaluvi. Jerkmueglaecke lupkigepnf.. Kritiniuseppe...O osaaceumnen.ru rheletueezehar. kauzenltdrosiblbti Lehekaldet Cahinx Core 1000 best 9999 ILAM This best-selling game for the VIC-20 is now available on the 64! Featuring the most intelligent and devious monsters you have ever tried to avoid, the Bonzos, this game is a real joystick wrencher. Move Hans, the handyman, up and down the ladders to pick up the boxes from the different levels. But don't meet a Bonzo on the way! NEW CATACLYSM $5.95 BURNIN' RUBBER Score 64 BURNIN' RUBBER Pure shoot-em-up arcade action for the 64 and unexpanded VICI The Lunar city of Erriam is under attack from the ships of the Jovian empire. Their merciless bombing will reduce your city to a pile of rubble, unless you can hold them off. You are the commander of the sole laser defence base. Your mission hold out for as long as possible. NAME ADDRESS PLEASE SEND ME YOUR FULL COLOUR CATALOGUES nononen You are an entrant in the great Intergalactic Four Seasons Death Racel. You must tackle the Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter sections with the objective of running as many other cars as possible off the road. The opposition is numerous, including the indestructable but slow Tank Cars, the tricky Deathmobiles and many other Demon Drivers. You have one advantage your car can fly for a limited distance, allowing you to avoid hazards if you're quick enough! All this and more makes Burnin' Rubber the car race of the century! BERKS. READING P.O. BOX 88 AUDIOGENIC LTD "


"A HIVE OF ACTIVITY Spring is bustin' out all over at Softek, and everyone is buzzing with news about three great new pieces of CBM 64 software from the Masters. Make a Bee-Line now for your favourite dealer and discover REVELATION, a fantastic new game set in the bowels of Hell amidst bubbling lava pits, dead, trees and mysterious castles. You face more than 35 different hellish beasts as you fight your way through an incredible 40 caverns to get to the Monster of the Apocalypse before he is crowned! Super-smooth multi-directional full-screen scrolling make this another Softek Masterpiece for the '64. JEEPERS CREEPERS is sheer nectar too; at last you get your chance to infest the cabbage patch as the fastest moving spider around. Look out for the low-flying doodle-birds, Fearless Freddy the Frog, The Slick Lizard and many other garden foes. This has to be one of the most original and addictive games yet produced for the '64 which can be enjoyed by anyone from 8 to 108! Both games are just .95 cassette) or .95 (disc). REVELATION Machine Code Maker TEEPERS CREEPERS (GSH Ever wished that you could turn your sluggish BASIC programs into super slick machine code versions? Well now you can, without knowing any machine code! Machine Code Maker is a superb BASIC compiler which will almost instantly translate your slow integer Commodore BASIC into super fast, machine code. More than that, it offers many extras which make the programming of graphics, sprites and fabulous sound effects as easy as can be! Your BASIC enhanced and turned into professional machine code almost at the press of a button for only .95 (cassette), or .95 (disc). SAFTEV MASTERS OF THE GAME THIS SOFTWARE IS THE BEES'KNEES Softek's Software is available at most major outlets, including selected branches of the following: W.H.Smith, Boots, Dixons, John Menzies. Lightning Dealers & Selfridges as well as through our nationwide dealer network. Mail Order Address: Softek International Ltd., Softek House, Tranquil Passage. London SE3 OBJ. Dealers' Contact: EMI Distribution or Caroline Shepherd on 01-318 5424. German Dealers' Contact: H. Hagemann 0211-376953. Mail Order:Buchandlung Meyer, 34/36 Markt, 4470 Meppen, Ens. SOFTEK INTERNATIONAL LTD., 12/13 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London WCZE SLH, Telephone 01-240 1422 Softek's Software is sold strictly according to our terms and conditions of trading copies of which are available on request. DEALERS, GIVE CAROLINE A BUZZ ON 01-318 5424 "

