"Britain's best selling computer magazine SEPT88 ELIO S$4.60 Dm5.50 350pta HFL 5.90 COMPUTÉRN +video GAME STARGLIDER TIkbit games go into hyper drive Nick86 CIKELEN THERESE ES REALIFE V IONS AYMCARDIGAUN RETTIFACE HARRIER TENDACLUSIVE REVIEWS: PUNCH ELOR PROVA REVIENE DALEY THOMPSON'S OLYMPIC CHALLENGE, ULTIMA V, CKEY MOUSE OVERLANDER, SUPER HANG-ON, ROAD BLASTERS, TYPHOON "


"OVEONE THE ROAD GAME THAT BLASTS THE WAY SEO : 00001200 MONEY: 00002400 LEVEL 101 \"First Person' Perspective 'Fast Action Simulation' 'Armed Destruction 'Stomach Churning Hilly Road \"Player Controlled Vehicle Construction Reviews \"First Class Magazine Computer 'Available on Home Pole Position N/A HESTATE  x x x   SCORE: 0400 MONEY: 00001 CON LEVEL:01 Pit Stop Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix Outrun Road Blasters Chequered Flag WEC Le Mans OVERLANDER XX N/A X X X N/ A X GA  1988, Elite Systems International Ltd. "


"SCREENSHOTS ATARI ST OG SCORE: 0000000 CE 101 6147 AVAILABLE ON ATARI ST: .99 PRICE COMING SOON SYSTEM FORMAT Spectrum Cassette Spectrum Disc Commodore Cassette Commodore Disc Amstrad Cassette Amstrad Disc Amiga Disc .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 Surs Elite Systems Limited, Eastern Avenue, Lichfield, Staffs., WS13 6RX, England. Telex: 336130 ELITE G UK HOTLINE 0543 414885 "


"Contents TOTS DUE TA!! 0012028 a The Bitmap Brothers bounce back with Speed Bali, Daley Thompson works out for the Olympics, and Savage Aue arrives from Firebird nevieW S Nils this month for Super Hang-On 0.19) and Daley sh Thompson flexes his muscles (0.18), Ultima V arrives from America and we have the first review (0.38). Several Road Blasters lyne games all the office in the shape of Overlander 0.851the aptly named Fire and Forget (0.62) and the ellicial Version from U S Bold to.5 how did they shape un? Alarl launch several of their coin-op Dames for the ST. Bames like Battle Zone, and Asteroids. Julian Rignal puts them through their pace (0.70). Hawkeye leaps In from Thalamus tn.77), Mirror sell changes its name to imaye Works and launches two new games in the shape of Sky Chase 60.72), and Fernandez Must Dia (p.31). The Bard is wandering computer and again with number Tale il and H. Christmas blockbusters. Fax has the lax. P.8. Starglider II stunning rakles and sound otels Stunning graphies and sound effects Space Harrier mapped.P. In this space ople. We have the first review, and profile its author Jez San. Frame Up more readers computer ar your friend's judgment, you wtil a safer time. Hastily you retr ! Ach that lie at your feet, bet bei very darkness about you begins ree shapes begin to materialized adovlerds! 19, he dress his sword and moves hisses Sharine throu els discernible shapes. ture A riotous night out with Leisure Suit Larry. FantasyRole Playing Warned damer 90 reviews the best starter pack around Dragonroar. Julian Rignall's exclusive players guide to Gauntlet II. P.102. Comp Results are some other Playmasters Thundercats mapped, Bauntlet 1 96 98 Ultima Y-the King of role playing, latest Installment. P.38. JR's definitive guide, and stacks of hints and tips for all systems. POINTS Larger Than Life Man Hohy poes to the 110 blogesi cinema in the world and check out the latest son side simulation rides. Arcade Action Record Breakers and the tem 116 Zealand Story are the latest pay per blay Diggles. Mean Machine Exclusive reviews or new Mintendo games Punch Out. Pro Wrestling, and Prisoner of Zelda. Mailbag your leitars, viowe, groans, and jokes. OutToLunch John Winsen pots ponten. 130 I=Invento Starglider II C+Ya's highest rated 9 Nintendo Punch Out. P.122. Editor: Eugene Lacey, Deputy Editor: Paul Boughton. Sub Editor: Seamus St. John. Statt Writer: Matt Blolby. Art Editor: Craig Kennedy. Advertisement Manager: Garry Williams. Sales Executive: "


"600 18 03. 00000600 Don't miss... 21UY EURE Something has happened in the game business. Games are now being developed first for 16 bit machines and converted later to 8 bits. It used to be the other way around. The change has happened very quickly and almost without anyone noticing.C+VG's message to gamers who don't own an ST or Amiga Is don't panic. Almost all of the decent releases will still be coming out for your Speccy, 64, or Amstrad. C+YG Is not going to abandon Its eight bit owning friends. We have made a number of changes to deal with this changing situation. All reviews now carry an Update at the end of the review with the very latest Information about the version for your computer. All games are launched for a variety of systems and all our reviews are based on more than one version. Other 'Not To Be Missed' features this month are Jez San and the Argonauts and Playmasters Fernandez Must Dle. But must he? Asks John Minson? P.130. STECE. WCWCOS ayo . Win a trip to Disneyland with Mickey Mouse.P.32. The biggest cinema in the world. P.110. LONDON HOROUGH OF ISLINGTON SAN'S WALKE.C. Daley is looking good on the ST. First reviews. P.18, DRAGONROAR story, JEJett ison. Bled Some of the year. P.A2. Dragonroar the best beginners FRP package. P.30. Meet the Egron Commander. P.46. utive: Ilan Jones. Advertisement Production: Lora Clark. Publisher: Terry Pratt. Editorial and Advertisement Offices: Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECAR JAD. Tel:01-251 6222. "


" SOFT Explore the phantas lag forces of COCO VILL GE. a city where anything can happen and you can bet your life it will! The Mad Mix Game by Toposoft  1988. All rights reserved. ONLY 9700 SPECTRU 15 pulsating levels of good and evil... which are which??... only the daring will ever find out. "


"FEE FREELLE Il TILL tasagoric LLGE... ing THE PEPSI CHALLENGE From two giants comes a giant name... Pepsi and U.S. Gold launch the most original computer challenge series of the century. The Pepsi Challenge Mad Mix Game is an addictive, colourful extravaganza of ghouls and demons in the most spectacular traditions of computer entertainment... with a little 21st century trickery thrown in to torment you. Match your changeable persona to meet the metamorphosis of your mysterious adversaries and you'll find there's hardly a second to spare as you try to outwit, outgun and outrun their outrageous behaviour. And most importantly, The Pepsi Challenge Mad Mix Game has been specially selected to lead the Pepsi/U.S. Gold Computer Challenge Series... and if you want to know more about this opportunity, FANTA watch the press for details (better still buy one and gain entry to the most exciting challenge of the century). 199 TAPE DISK TAPE RUM 48/128K () CB 64/128K AMSTRAD ST .99 FANTASTIC PRIZES HUNDREDS OF WINNERS PEPSI Buy the Pepsi Challenge Mod Mix Game now for further details U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3, Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388. TE HI BOOST "


"Delayed Action After many delays, the Amated version af Virgin Action Foree toy to-In is nearing completion. The player taken the role of Wild Bill, who has helicopter over mooth-scrolling inndecape protecting huggles from the mareuding enemy forces. The Spectrum and Commodore versions of Action Force were released to a lukewarm reception at the end of last year, and the Amated version is looking very lilar to both. Sul, you're interested. It'u be available in early autumn, and will coat 0.05 on cassette ) SESS&5x56 ACTIONFORCE SC:004200 4 060 000 Fleetway Publications 1988 The B ap Brothers, creators of the fabulous vertically sering Xanense. Cova Junsere currently programming Speedball, a futurasport gama featuring metale graphics and fast and furious gameplay Two teams take to the Red and light for poeneeion of a large steel ball with the help of a large and violen array of weaponry. It certainly sound thrilling stuff, and will be available towards the end of the year on the Atari ST, Amipa and IBM PC priced 24.09. 24.99 and 29.9 pectively on Mirroreoft's new imageworks label Crisis Management Het on the heels of 2000AD getting extra colour pegas comes CRISIS, a new fortnightly colour come from Britain's Fleetway Publications. It features two 14 page stories from top 2000AD creators, including Carlos Strontium Dog Esquerra and witter Pat Mine, who was originally responsible for 2000AD 11 years ago. The two Initial tales are \"Third World War\", a very toploal and political strip about the impact of Western corporations on the third world and the New Statesman\", an adult superhere story cum political thriler along the lines of \"Watchmen\" With the first issue available on September 17, GRISIS promises to be the most noting development in British comics this decade. Kick yourself if you don't pick up the first issue: If nothing else, have you seen the price 2000AD No 1 goes for these days? Burning Rubber diense of two now on the hunters that 1.99 respect Mirrorsoft Publishing has introduced a new label, Imageworks, as a flagship banner for the majority of It's new games products. First releases Include Sky Chase and Fernandez Must Dle (See reviews this issue), as well as the Western Europe licence for Atari/Tengen's arcade hit, Blasteroids. Autumn sees the release of two new games. Foxx Strikes Back and Bamboozal. The first is the tale of a fox turning a machine gun on the hunters that torment him, and will be available on Commodore 64 and Spectrum for .99 and .99 respectively. Disk versions are also planned, and will cost .99 for both formats. The second title is an abstract puzzle game designed by a mega-programming team consisting of Jeff Mintor, Andrew Braybrook, John Ritman and David Bishop. Versions for all the popular home micros are planned, including Atari ST, Amiga, Spectrum and C64. iu 42 Mastertronic's moto-cross racing game, Motorbike Madness is released at the start of September on the MAD label for the Atari ST, Amiga and IBM PC, and on the Mastertronic label for all 8-bit machines. The idea is to ride an off-road motorbike around a hazardous course in the shortest possible time. Points are scored for a perfect run, but spills result in cash being spent to repair the bike. The 16-bit versions are looking very good Indeed keep your eyes peeled. / "


"CRL'S cereal AMSTRAD TOPTEN Football Manager 2Addictive When a press release arrived at the office with a mini box of Frosties attached, the entire office stopped to wonder ... Could the latest computer tle-In be a Tony the Tiger game? No, nothing so raunchy the cereal (which Incidently was eaten by C+ VG's greedy gobblin' Ads manager, Garry Williams) was to announce that CRL has just acquired the rights to the Kellogs Tour Bike race which ran between August the 9th and 14th. The release date of the game is due to coincide with the race, so it should be on the shelves by now. Yogi Bear Alternative ACI Cascade Alr Wolf Encore Rocky Horror Show Alternative USA O TIME FENCERE GBR 2 52 Frank Brune's Boxing Encore Target Renegade Imagine Beach Buggy Sim Firebird Fruit Machine Sim Code Master 10 We Are The Champions Ocean HERE Kellogg's FROST ES GEREKEN Tynesoft's Summer Olympiad enters the Olympic Games cash-in race with all versions ready for release in time for the events. Individual Olympic sports covered include fencing, diving, clay pigeon shooting, hurdles, triple jump and others, at .95/.95 C64, .95 STIAmiga, and .95 PC. New entries Rocky Horror Show and Torget Renegade are in fact the only two now entries in the overall Top fifty: bespite the fact that they sell tower individual games the ST value market share now exceeds that of the Amatred. THEY'RE GR-R-REAT Live and let Die Elite's Aquablast, a 3D speedboat shoot 'em up is now to become Live and Lot Dle, and will appear on the Domark label. Ellte is also taking over the marketing of Domark products. The only one with Tony Secret Formula SPECTRUM TOP TEN Football Manager 2 Addicitve European Five-o-side Firebird ACE Cascade Yogi Bear Alternative Rocky Horror Show Alternative Frank Brune's Boxing Encore Air Wolf Encore Ghostbusters Mastertrenie Target Renegade Imagine 10 Beach Buggy Sim Firebird Speccy sales continue to fall, dropping now to 41.35, lower than it's been all year. The Spectrum version of Footie Manager continues to be the best selling game on any format in the country. Loft drinks mega-company. Pepel, has climbed into bed with US Gold on large-scale crossmarket promotions and sponsorship prolaet for the UK US Gold hes plans to launch a compilation which will Include World Class Leaderboard and Bidearms under the Papal slogan, The Toate of America. It only be awalable to buyers of a Papel pack at a special price of 14,99 Meanwhile, US Gold's conversion of the Bagareadel Thunderblad has been named Papal Challenge Game of The Year and will be played by contenders on a giant video wall at the PG Show in September. Apparently, this is only the start of a number of co-operativa de la with Papel, which Papal say \"The mate weapon in the Cola wara\". We at CV are wondering whether Coca Cola will respond to the hallenge QOUTUS of Chops C64 TOP TEN Football Manager 2Addieltve ACE Cascade Yogi Beer Alternative European Five-o-side Firebird Frank Bruno's Boxing Encore A new compilation on the Star Games label Is Karate Ace, an assemblage of seven karate games. Highlights are Bruce Lee and Avenger; lowlights are Way of the Tiger and Samurai Trilogy. Others Included in the pack are Kung-Fu Master, the Way of the Exploding Fist and Uchi Mata which isn't really a karate game. Still, there's not going to be many fightin' 'n' fumpin' fans who'll complain about that. The compilation is available for the C64, Spectrum and Amstrad and costs .99. 6 Football Manager Additive Poor Rally Driver Alternative 87 Targer Renegade Imagine Steve Davis Sn. Blue Ribbon 10 Samantha Fox Stp. Poker React Football manager follows its new sequel back into the top ton, as the C64 share of the market rises to its highest market share level in months. "


"Always ahead of their TWRECKS WALT DISNEY Screenshot from Atari ST version Thic Computer game 343 RITS E at THE SEASHORE Screenshot from CBM 64/128 version CBM 64/128 .99 c-.99 d Amstrad .99 c-.99 d Spectrum .99 .99 d Amiga .99 d Atari ST .99 d CBM 64/128 .99 .99 d Spectrum .99 c-.99 d Don't miss these 4 great new releases from the creators of the most original and exciting games of all time. Help Mickey Mouse to save Merlin's magic wand from Disney's enchanted castle. Wreak havoc in Japan as TWrecks, a large and angry pre-historic monster searches for stolen eggs. Improve your footballing skills with the help of Gary Lineker or enjoy 2 different games in one with Skate crazy the \"Car Park Challenge\" and the \"Championship Course CBM 64/128 .99 c-.99 d Amstrad .99 c-,99 d Spectrum .99 c-.99 d Atari ST.99 d CBM 64/128 .99 c-.99 d Spectrum .99 C + 3 .99 d Amstrad .99 c-.99 d Gary Linekers TERDAM FIRE Shooting Dribbing creen shot from Amstrad version All mail order enquiries to: Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. "


"Forbidden fruit ATARI ST TOP TEN Football Manager 2 Addieitve Carrier Command Rainbird Forbidden Planet, Britain's biggest comic and science fiction storo chain, wel colorated Ite tenth anniversary opening a new flagship store in London's Now Oxford Street, C+ VG were up at the opening bash in a shop that looked for all the world like a Virgin Megastore without the records, in the company of Willie Rushton, Adam \"Batman\" West and a host of Rocky Horror and Night of the Living Dead rejects. The old Forbidden Planet site will now become Murder One, the UK's first specialist crime and Mystery bookshop Comic collectors who live in Cambridgeshire will also be interested to know that Forbidden Planet has just opened a specialist SFIFantasy comic shop in Cambridge. Dungeon Master Mirrorsoft P. Beardsley's F/8 Grand Slam Gauntlet 2US Gold Captain Blood Infogrames Out Run Sega/us Gold Freeway fever Bionic Commando Gol It'a 3D Wander Fire and Forget Titus 10 tkari Warriors Elite From role playing gamesbook pioneer and C+VG pal Joe Dever comes Highway Holocaust, the first of a new, more adult series of fantasy adventures Joe, creator of the very popular Lone Wolf series of sword and sorcery gamesbooks, now turns his skills to post-holocaust America In the next century, and a very Mad Max-inspired hero. Shotguns, biker gangs and Petrol explosions abound in this first Freeway Warrior\" adventure, and it's all great fun If you're into this sort of solitaire roleplaying. .50 from Beaver Books with more to follow, and look out for the Joe Daver/Lone Wolf computer game coming soon from Audiogenic. Wanderer, Elite's latest title is a 3D game which they describe as space poker. We don't yet give away 3D blue and red glasses with the mag that's why the screen shot looks a bit funny but glasses will be supplied with the game. Oh well, if you fancy a hand or two with a mysterious all-powerful alien, and want to look an idiot at the same time, look out for the game at the end of the month on ST and AMIGA at .99 and .99 respectively, and all 8-bit formats. Pete Beardsley and Fire and Forget are both new entries, and lkari re-enters the chart. Carrier Command is pushed off the number one spot by Footle Manager 2. ALL FORMATS COMBINED TOP TEN Football Manager 2 Addictvo ACE Cascade Yogi Bear Alternative Frank Bruno's Boxing Encore Air Wolf Encore Steve Davis Sn. Blue Ribbon European Five-o-side Firebird Rocky Horror Show Alternative Target Renegade Imagine JOE DEVER TOT Way of Exploding Fist Mitrenie Football Manager 2 continues to dominate the chart, the Spectrum verslon just outrolling the C64 which enters the chart at number two, if you were to think of each format as a separate game. CRL has been busy lately, putting together a couple of games for the debut of their Actual Screenshots 16-bit label. Slege of London is a currently trendy filled-in vector graphics affair, based around the notion of an allen Invasion of the capital. The screenshot shows no allen bird thing bouncing up and down next to Marble Arch, a sight you'll all be able to enjoy at the end of August on the Amiga at .95, with an ST version to follow. Their other 16-bit release will be / Ludicrous, a comie Roman game that'l appear in late Octoberlearly November on the Amiga. AMIGA TOP FIVE Interceptor Electronic Arts AAARGH Melbourne House Bugey Boy Elite Fire and Forget Titus P. Beardsley's F18 Grand Slam The Amiga shart pretty closely echoes the the other 16-bit format. TODO "


"STOOLD 00 BAN OF THE LANCE Dungeons COMPUTE ARCADE ACTION HEROES OF THE LANCE marks the first computer action game that re-creates the epic battle between good and evil on the world of Krynn. Controlling eight Companions, each with different specialised attributes and skills, guide these brave adventurers deep into the treacherous ruins of the temple XaK Tsaroth to retrieve the precious Disks of Mishakal. As you descend into the Abyss, the Companions must defeat the hordes of monstrous Draconians in handto-hand combat, deal with powerful magic and survive the onslaught of attacks from giant spiders, skeletal undead and countless other terrors. But your final obstacle makes these monstrosities innocuous by comparison. The platinum disks you seek are guarded by Khisanth, an ancient black dragon. And there is but one way to vanquish this mighty beast... ...find the key to destroy Khisanth or you are doomed to failure. CBM 64/128 .99 tape .99 disk SPECTRUM 48/128K .99 tape .99 +3 disk AMSTRAD .99 tape .99 disk IBM PC & COMPATIBLES .99 AMIGA .99 ATARI ST .99 COMPUTER PRODUCT Advanced Dungeons Dragons he OF THE LANIE  1988 TSR, Inc. All rights reserved. Advanced Dungeons and Dragons is a trademark owned "


"nced Dragons POOL OLDARDTARIOS PRODUCT FANTASY ROLE PLAYING Located on the northern shore of the Moonsea in the Forgotten Realms, the fabled city of Phlan had been overrun by monsters led by a mysterious leader. Your quest: discover the identity of this evil force. Pool of Radiance adheres faithfully to the legendary Advanced Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role playing systems. No detail is missed including 6 player characters; computer controlled non-player characters; the Adventurers' Journal packed with history, maps and clues and the Translation Wheel that converts Elvish and Dwarvish writing to English. The gameplay is exhilarating and the graphics state of the art-portrait displays, 3D perspective, tactical combat display and personalised weapons selections compile to form the ultimate breakthrough in fantasy role-playing computer games. CBM 64/128 .99 tape .99 disk AMIGA .99 IBM PC & COMPATIBLES .99 ATARI ST MI 26.7\" .99 OFFICIAL Dungeons Dragons Advanced COMPUTER PRODUCT POOL OF RADIANCE Fantasy Role-Playing Epic Vol. A FORGOTTEN REALNES STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS, INC. U.S. SER GOLD TSR, Inc. Lake Geneva, WI, U.S.A. and under license from SSI, Inc. Mountain View, CA, U.S.A. rd, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388. "


NA


"Triad Trio Industry giants Telecomsoft, Mirrorsoft a Psygnosis have signed a deal to co-operate in the development of the 16-bit market. Though they will still be competing for customers, they will be working together on joint-ventures to, erm, well, details are a bit vague at the moment, but you can be sure they'll be doing something. Why name it after the chinese mafia though? Very strange. Level 9 release the follow-up to Gnome Ranger in mid-October, hot on the heels of their illustrated adventure game Lancelot, based on the legand of King Arthur. Lancelot follows Time and Magik by being released with Mandarin, and promises to be a vast project closely following the definitive version of the tale as told by Sir Thomas Malory. Released at the start of September at .95 8-bit, .95 for 16-bit versions, it is said to be \"the best game to date from the specialist adventure house. Gnome I: Ingrid's Back, on the other hand, is slightly more based in the modern world, with horrible heroine Ingrid Bottomlow returning home, only to find unscrupulous yuppie property developers planning to steamroll the place. Can she defeat them? Find out in mid-October at .95 on 8-bit systems, .95 16-bit or rush along for a preview at the PCW show Ronin Rabbit Samurai Warrior \"It's brill! says Rignall the tale of a Ninja bunny, is out on Spectrum and Amstrad soon, following raves on the 64. THE BATTLE BLEMER Name of Company: Telecomsoft. Labels: Firebird, Rainbird, Silverbird. When Started: Firebird started 1984. Rainbird the first British 16-bit label set up a year or so later. Telecomsoft is an autonomous company, owned by British Telecom. Personnel: Paula Byrne Big Chief. Paul Hibbard Production and development publisher. Dobble Sillitoo Marketing manager. Contact: Customer services 01-379 5683. First game: Firebird's first releases were two ranges of budget, including Buggy Blast (by Paul Hibbard) and Demons of Topaz on Firebird Gold, and Booty and Headache of Firebird Silver. First Hit: Gyron, a maze strategy game with a huge ball In it, out in '85. Biggest ever hit: Probably Elite In 1985/6 \"t sold a squillion\", but Starglider may just have pipped it to the post. 10TIOUTOWN Forget the good movies, It's trash the kids want, and they don't come much trashier than the marvelously named Hell Comes to Frogtown, or the sword and sandal \"spectacular\" The Barbarians. Both feature old American pro-wrestling stars in the title roles, so you can guess how good the acting is. \"Rowdy\" Roddy Piper plays post-apocalyptic hero Sam Hell, a man who has to cope with both giant frog-like mutants and mad Nurse Spangle who locks him in a steel chastity belt, and uses him to impregnate the last surviving fertile human woman. Life doesn't sound too bad when you're the only potent male left in America! Meanwhile, the Barbarian Brothers tag-team play hardboiled orphan twins in whose hands rests, surprise, surprise, the fate of the universe. With both out on video now, bad movies have never had it so good! Ones to watch out for: Starglider 2, Corruption, Vermintor, Whirligig, and others. Crities Choice:By general consent in the office, their best games have been Bubble Bobble, Ellte, Starglider 2, and Carrier Command. Julian Rignallis torn between Twinkle goes hiking \"by some Hungarian bloke\" and The Comet Game, produced to cash in on the recent return of Haley's Comet and featuring, amongst other delights\" a sub game where you had to stop the spaceship coffee supply getting mixed up with the, erm, contents of the toilet bowl.\" Eugene thinks the stick-man kung fu games Ninja was bad enough to overshadow all these however "


"PETER BEARDSLEY'S INTERNATIONAL FOOTBALL MASBULOH ATARI SCREEN SHOTS GRANDSLAM AVAILABLE FROM JUNE ONWARDS .95 ATARI ST + AMIGA .95 SPECTRUM .95 MSX .95 CBM CASS .95 CBM DISK .95 AMS CASS .95 AMS DISK .95 GRANDSLAM ENTERTAINMENTS LIMITED 12-18 PAUL STREET LONDON EC2A 4JS Write now for your copy of PETER BEARDSLEY'S INTERNATIONAL FOOTBALL Post and Packaging FREE! to:Grandslam Entertainments, Units 1 & 2, Conlon Developments, Watery Lane, Darwen, Lancashire. BB3 2ET or Phone: 01-247 6434 our Credit Card Hotline. IN-PACK COMPETITION WIN 2 TICKETS TO WEMBLEY "


"BINSS Madness MaD-Man:MaD MASTERTRONIC a dded DIMENSION MASTERTRONIC 8-10 PAUL STREET LONDON EC2A 4JH TEL: 01-377 6880 FAX: 01-377 5569 Available on awale ATARI ST AMIGA IBM PC (.99 SPECTRUM/AMSTRAD FLIPPY C64 (.99) AUGUST 1988 "


"bevieNDALEY TI OLYMPIG GI  MACHINES: C64, SPECTRUM, AMDSTRAD, ST, AMIGA, IBM PC. hero, no more ludicrous you take part in the field and sweats. There is no SUPPLIER: OCEAN. bugs that meant with five events on the Commodore, need for these they are PRICE: 8-BIT $9.99 friends bashing away at the crowd in the totally un-necessary to the CASS/$14.95 DISK, ST $19.95, different buttons on your background does the game but they are a nice AMIGA $24.95.  VERSIONS TESTED: C64, computer you could get Mexican Wave. Not only touch. SPECTRUM. enough energy to run a that, but other contestants The system of play is this. REVIEWER: MATT BIELBY. three second 100 metres! In do press ups and train, To begin with we see Daley 1988 all the high scores for while a pack of runners in the weights room, Remember Ocean's the various events have jogs around the outside striving to achieve overall original Daley Thompson been worked out with the track. fitness. Though the game? I certainly don't: it aid of Daley's own log On the Speccy the Spectrum sprites are still was back in the days when book, meaning that with a training room scenes only monochrome in these we still printed listings and perfect performance in feature a little bod in the scenes they are of a fair a fresh-faced Julian every event it should still be background who wanders size, and at least bear a Rignall had just become impossible to beat the 9000 around in a comic routine reasonable resemblance C+VG arcade champion. points top Decathaletes trying to pick up various to our hero. The idea here is Pudding basin haircuts strive for. weights, on the 64 Daley to waggle your joystick had never had it so good. There are similarities, looks out the screen at us back and forth at such 0521 Bo SS E . Daley strains to fill the bottle on the Spectrum MK CIRCBIRGIRRE AGIRI A Amstrad training room: little guy does his comic routine. Yes, a lot of water's however. The basic passed under the bridge structure of the game is the since 1984, and Daley's same, as you work your pre-eminence as an way through 100 metres, athelete has grown in long jump, shot putt and almost direct propoortion the rest towards a gold with Jaz's barnet. Now medal position. The whole Olympic year has rolled button-bashing syndrome around again, and with that wrecked so many Daley still the great black Spectrums in the early '80s hope of British track and is back too, though this field Ocean has presented time the punishment is us with a new attempt to transferred to your joystick represent the ten gruelling Echoing the recent Decathlon events on your resurgence in the arcades home computer. of finger-strength over skill, So is it any good? Well, Olympic Challenge sees yes it is there is certainly no almost a return to the comparison with the old heady days of Hypersports game. No more and Track and Field. pink-skinned sprites with One of the really nice straight hair things about the game is masquerading as our the attention to detail. As 62% F-e69888 0 1 A We're left in no doubt as to what sort of hurdling shoes Daley wears. "


"IOMPSON HALLENGE The hurdles make an interesting variant to the running events, and then it is on to the high jump and pole vault. Possibly the trickiest of the lot, the skill.is in timing the jump to the last possible moment, especially hard in the vault since you must guess the length of the stick in front of speed as to fill up each of 1) is the hundred metres, training shoes from your you. three bottles of a well ten seconds or so of frantic menu for each event, or If you've done well you known fizzy glucose drink joystick action which only you'll really be making get to go on the winner's within a time limit, and so pales into significance unnecessary work for podium, something you be in the ideal state of yourself. There's no easy well deserve; after all that body for the two days the (oh my God) 1500 way to do this I'm afraid: on wrist action building up events. If you suceed you metres in the second load. the versions I played, power you'd be as fired as now have some reserves of Not a lot more to be said finding out which shoes to Daley himself. but the running events use is a case of trial and All in all, a very good the going gets rough. really. The motion is quite error. The packaging may looking game that This over with, it is straight nice, the backgrounds are make this clear. recreates both the man into the events, and there is nice and detailed and (on Adidas also get and his sport well. My only more than enough frantic the 64) moving, and your mentioned on the posters real reservation would be jiggling of the joystick here lower arms take a lot of that surround the stadium, that the manic joystick use to keep even the most punishment. One thing though there are fewer of could become somewhat hardened basher with a especially vital here is to those than there are on, painful after a while. smile on his face. make sure you chose the say. Peter Beardsley's Definitely one to pick up First up on the load (Day correct pair of Adidas Football. See what you can if you're into compilation LANGEN . POINTS POWER A Discus on the 04: note runners in the background. . Ocean AST screen: looking good. sports simulations though! get if you cough up the don't think it's special dosh, Lucozade? Next up is the Long Jump Joystick its illustrious enough to earn the Golden pretty tricky in that you predecessor did. We've have to jiggle the stick to just seen too much of this build up your power, sort of thing since then. release the fire button to get the jump, and then C64 SPEC control the angle of the GRAPHICS 8 7 jump with your joystick to get a good length to it. SOUND 7 6 The three throwing VALUE 8 6 events Shot Putt, Discus PLAYABILITY 7 6 and Javelin are quite OVERALL 8 close to each other, each one relying on the build up UPDATE... of power very difficult, on OPDAIE... my first attempt at waggling my stick that fast screens and the start of got roughly nowhere work on the Amstrad before the vital angle version, and it should play selection and the release. very similarly to the Spectrum. aaaa HEIGHT ANGLE POINTS POWER A A successful vault, but the pole's a bit bendy. "


"'HANG ON IN THERE ? 1 DECO FORRE ER DER U ATARI ST screen shots shown COLOUR MONITOR REQUIRED ursting on to your home screen with dazzling graphics and pulsepounding gameplay it's Super Hang-On, the greatest ever motorcycle racegame! The Best racing game you've ever played' and you'd better believe it! With 4 soundtracks, 4 skill levels and 18 thrilling stages, you can burn rubber at speeds in excess of 320 kph or can you? Find out but WATCH OUT at speeds like these, you've gotta stay cool to stay hot! TEAM PEPSI SUZUKI 1988 500cc WORLD MOTORCYCLE RACING CHAMPIONSHIP ST ACTION... \"The definitive racing game ever for the ST\" SEGA ELECTRIC DREAMS TM &  1987 SEGA ENTERPRISES INC (USA) Electric Dreams Software All rights reserved Authorised user Mail Order Mediagenic. Activision House, 23 Pond Street, Hampstead, London NW3 2PN, Consumer Enquiries: 01-431 1101. Technical Support 0703 229694 "


"SOFTWARE ELECTRIC DREAMS Atari ST: .99 Also available on C 64 cassette: .99 C64 disk: $14.99 Amstrad cassette: .99 Amstrad disk: $14.99 Spectrum: .99 "


"astro n the distant jungles of Central America, revolution is in the air. The government of the Democratic Republic of El Diablo has been brutally overthrown and the evil despot known only as Fernandez rules the land, Summoned by the exiled leaders of your homeland, you must free your people from the oppressive yoke of the Dictator by destroying the military bases that have protected Fernandez from the wrath of his people. Jeeps, tanks, motorcycles, trains and more Huge play area One or two player options (some formats only) Map of El Diablo Free 'Fernandez' badge 'Fernandez' poster and T-shirt offer Atari ST screen shots shown Spectrum disk: .99 Spectrum cassette: .99 Commodore disk: .99 Commodore cassette: .99 Amstrad disk: .99 Amstrad cassette: .99 ST: .99 Amiga: .99 Image Works. Headway House 66-73 Shoe Lane London ECAP 4AB. Telephone: 01-377 4645 "


"TGTHERWORLD Reviews SUPPLIER: HEWSON.  MACHINES: CBM 64/128, SPECTRUM 48/128, AMSTRAD CPC, ATARI ST, AMIGA. PRICES: SPECTRUM CASS .99, DISK $12.99, CBM 64 CASS $9.99, DISK $14.99 ATARI ST $19.99, AMIGA .99  VERSION TESTED: CBM 64. REVIEWER: GARY WHITTA. As if shoot 'em-up buffs didn't already have enough to be getting on with after the last release Marauder, Hewson has just s released Netherworld, a strange mixture of shoot 'em up and arcade adventure The game has you squeezers appear from time to time and can be used for changing rocks into diamonds by pushing them into the mouth of the diamond squeezer. In addition, metamorphosis walls will change a mine into four diamonds should one hit it. There are hosts of features such as teleports, brick smashers, surprise bonuses and extra 2-0 386 a 165 A Shades of Jeff Minter on the ST version LEVEL F ELIU 805 29 805 2 A Skulls on the Spectrum. weapons. You're in for a treat with Netherworld. It's just what you have come to expect from Hewson, with gorgeous animation on your ship and well-defined and animated nasties. All in all, Netherworld is a great game and one that you should definitely think about splashing out on this month. Amstrad: Chunkier graphics but just as playable. trapped in a strange alien world inhabited by all manner of dangerous 38 creatures. Obviously you want to get out of there ASAP, so you decide to try and collect enough of the planet's local currency to buy yourself out, a bit like how Prince Eddie got out of the Marines. Diamonds are the local currency and you must collect a set amount by steering your wheel-like structure around the bubbly landscapes that form Netherworld. The diamonds can be collected simply by running over them and picking them up. To hinder A Deadly Dragons on the 64. your progress, the poison at you. Alien creatures that make their generators look like weird home in Netherworld will beehives and blurt out do their best to get rid of different sub-nasties, while you as fast as they can. alien eggs are a pain in Demons, for example, lie the bot, because they on the bubble platforms block off passageways and spit their deadly and have to be blasted The diamonds can be g 0000100 000 a Coc 64 ST GRAPHICS 8 8 SOUND 8 8 o l 16991 VALUE PLAYABILITY 8 8 OVERALL 8 8 with your four-way laser to clear them. in contrast, there are a UPDATE... few features in the Netherworld that can help The ST version of you out, should you use Netherworld is exactly them correctly. For the same in the way of playability as the C64. "


"mavien SUPER HANG-ON MACHINES; SPECTRUM/AMSTRADI COMMODORE 64/ATARI ST. SUPPLIER: ELECTRIC DREAMS. TAPOS TERBRORE O PRICE: SPECIAMS/C64 $9.99 CASS, AMS/C64 $14.99 COURSE BARCA SPEED 269 DISK, ATARI ST $19.99. VERSION TESTED: ATARI ST. REVIEWER: JULIAN RIGNALL. After almost a year's delay, the Atari ST version of Sega's brilliant motorcycle racing racing coin-op has arrived. It's certainly been a long time coming, but I'm glad to say that the wait has definitely been worth At the start of a race the player chooses one of three tracks: beginner, novice or expert. Each course represents a A Activision add a little 'vroom' to 16-bit racers. T2B COURSE BLOC SPECE SUAGE COURSE BERECH ON passed, any remaining seconds are converted into bonus points to give an overall score. Super Hang-On is a superb conversion. Although the 3D update isn't super-smooth, it's very fast and doesn't detriment the gameplay or visual effect. The feeling of speed is tremendous, especially with the nitro injector or, and the bike handles extremely well even with mouse control The difficulty level is nicely balanced so the game is both challenging and addicitive. The three different courses gives that extra lasting appeal, and it'll take a lot or racing before the checkered flag is passed on the expert track Super Hang-On just has the edge over Buggy Boy, and makes Outrun look completely pathetic. The feeling of speed and exhilaration it generates is incredible; combine that with superb playability, colourful backdrops and TEE BROEG non 29 SPEED en CRUSH CRUSHA A Watch you knee caps on the road as you speed around the bends. A JR steals a glance at the poster beauty and ends up on his arse. different part of the world behind the bike as it zooms iniector which sends the e bike as if zooms injector, which sends the excellent sprites and and respectively increase down the course, around bike screaming down the you've got the best race in length and difficulty. tortuous bends and over course at an incredible game to date. Don't miss it. At the start of a game, the hills. Unlike Outrun, the hills rate which gives a player has the option to in Super Hang-On are tremendous feeling of !GRAPHICS choose the control thoroughly convincing. exhilaration! The nitro SOUND method, either mouse or Another point I was injection should only be joystick, and adjust the pleased to note is that the used on straight pieces of i VALUE sensitivity. After that, a track programmers haven't optedroad though switching it > PLAYABILITY is chosen, and the race for a stripy road which on just before you hit a OVERALL begins. usually looks awful corner is suicidal! Each course is split into instead there's just the The course is packed UPDATE several sections, and the central road lines you'd with other riders, collision objective is simply to race find on any street circuit, with which slow the bike An excellent Spectrum from one checkpoint to and they work very well right down. Crashing into a version another within the time indeed. roadside obstacle sees the towards the end of last limit, whereupon extra time The bike has a top speed rider thrown into the air, year. Other 8-bit versions is added for the next part of of 280kmh. However, when and precious seconds are are subject to delays, and the course. this speed is reached, it's lost as he remounts. there's no firm release The action is viewed from possible to kick in the nitroW hen the finishing post is date as we go to press. oo 0001 "


"BARCLAYPLUS IS GIVING OLD FASHIONED SAVING SCHEMES THE PUSH. BarclayPlus is a new way of saving for anyone over 14. Especially those of you who want to start taking money more seriously. Because your cash won't just be sitting around doing nothing. It'll be earn i 18 19. interest all be time. You can apply for your own BarclayPlus card so you'll also be able to draw out cash whenever you want from our cash dispensers. BarclayPlus +++ YOU'RE So put your piggy bank dedi BETTER OFF into retirement by opening a TALKING TO BarclayPlus account, at your nearest Barclays branch, now. BARCLAYS "


"BARB first screen is completely void of any nasties and traps and things, now is a good time to hone your fighting skills. To perfect rewind button on your kill you. One nasty trap is these, you have to get used video. This makes you run the old 'collapsing bridge to the icons at the bottom in the direction you're trick. Then you've got the of the screen. Look at any facing. Next to that, there's \"large door with spikes convenient screen shot a picture of a sword. This falling from the ceiling' MACHINES: C64, SPEC. that happens to be near means use the item you jape. As well as traps, there SUPPLIER: MELBOURNE this review, and I'll talk you have in your hand. Then are lots of different types of HOUSE. through the icons, left to PRICE: $7.95 CASS. right.  VERSION TESTED: SPEC. First, you've got a group REVIEWER: TONY DILLON. of four arrows pointing in I don't know how they've the four normal directions. done it, but they have. These are the commands Melbourne House has to make Hegor walk left or managed to faithfully right, and climb up and convert one of my all time down ladders or steps. favourite Amiga games to Next to that, you've got one of the most feeble what looks like a VC. This Oooooo Deepco computers around today means stop all actions, oh Barbarian is just so wicked. please, on for god s sake it makes Eugene Lacey stop, no don't go there look poor in comparison you'll die, etc. Next to that Barbarian is just the you've got a badly drawn slickest, bestest speccy umbrella, which makes you somersault useful for arcade adventure ever. and that even rules out my getting over collapsing getting over collapsing N u D ATA old favourite, Firelord. bridges. Then you have the You are Hegor, the icon that looks like the Jump that bridge! rootin', tootin', slashin' nasties, just waiting to eat bashin', dinosaur-slaying you, or put their head up Barbarian, who also claims your bum whichever is to be the toughest son of a more painful. chicken ever, and you've Just like the Yellow been sent to take care of Pages, not all the things in an evil wizard, who's done the game are nasty. There something bad I suppose are some good things, as and (yawn), I guess he's well, like blocked drains, hiding somewhere down a broken windows and extra dungeon with lots of levels weapons. You can find a and nasties. Oh, why bow and a very limited should I carry on, you've amount of arrows in place heard it all before on the map, and these are anyway used to kill baddies at long So, off you trot, and range, as there are some before long you find that you just can't get to. yourself in a nice little field Also a shield lies hidden near the entrance to the somewhere, and it's with dungeon, and this is where this that you kill the Wizard. the game begins As this A Watch out for that spiked trap but I'm not telling you how you've got another piccy The graphics have come of a sword, which means. down very nicely, and do curiously enough, do a bear quite a bit of backward somersault. resemblance to the Finally, you've got the two original, though some of arrows that are circling the animation is decided each other, this means dodgy drop everything and run Thankfully. MH away. This is not advisable hasn't tried to get because you drop the sound onto everything and lose your the humble weapon as well. black box Right, that's the confusing bit over with. The rest of the game is a regular hack and slash adventure through quite a large map. On various DD screens, traps will appear A Our hero, ready for anything out of the blue and try and near the entrance to the Dam DEA "


"DISK. PATTERSON are any option. much. of echoes Speccy owners, if there still recommending it to any hesitate in thoroughly possible and I wouldn't good a conversion as terrific, great, good and OK all rolled into one. It's ass Barbarian is fabbo, currently highlighted and fire selecting the the man on the screen, left/right manually moving cycling through the icons, up/down on the stick than on the original, with Controls are far better detract from the game too blop, but this doesn't matter of bleep, blip and doo-eee-doo). sound, however, is just a See what I mean? 48K (doop-e-doop-e-doop-ee. effects, making good use with some wonderful 128K Instead they've come up OVERALL PLAYABILITY VALUE I SOUND GRAPHICS ARIAN v Coming down the easy way. SUPPLIER: OCEAN. MACHINES: C64 AND REVIEWER: MARK  VERSION TESTED: C64. PRICE: 58.95 CASS, $12.95 rather overshadowed by the major licences. Typhoon the conversion, to spring on the little known arcade Typhoon is one of those conversions Ocean tends a blaze of publicity but unsuspecting public, not in never even heard of let alone the arcade machine. I like Afterburner and Flying Shark, and you start getting an early hot flushes over completely by surprise by Typhoon is a mixture of and wipe the sweat from both of them. Before the 64's joystick. The the thought of giving me a mere three version of before starting the second stage. seconds to gather my wits computer took me Tony Dillon five nil on Sega soccer, have a breather nevnoon the corcaderer Tony Dilloave a breatrom Frankly, before now, I had between the end of the first proved sufficiently long for the tape version that I was unplised whold a salvo escapes my inane reason, which worse, I can't say. though for better or 8 from the Speccy one, o playwise it's different Tin 16-bit formats, so 7 to the pointer control used 7 maybe unwisely, gone back in feel and graphics. MH has, close to the Amiga version, both C64 version, which is surprisingly UPDATE... The only other version around is the VALUE GRAPHICS SOUND really anything special. UPDATE OVERALL PLAYABILITY supply. Afterburner, it seems only first stage you move left fair to warn you that in the straight for a battleship and you're also driving and the plane banks right launching a flurry of air to your seemingly limitless battleship torpedoes from to the incredibly bad marksmanship of the A few direct hits put paid battleship's gunners. On using, the time involved torpedoes like they were hammered by the first going out of fashion. I did the decent thing, and was wave of jets to enter the level and the second level me to hammer my mate screen. I proceeded to and jam) my way up the blast and maim (well fluke unpleasant battleship level until a very large and realised what I was doing eight homing missiles. globules of whatever and launched a salvo of battleships glob, and a super-enlarged For some completely number of jet fighters. Thirty it finally sunk into me that seconds and five men later turret, missile and plane trying to pick off every gun intelligence, your super was pointless, but by then paddywacker had sleek, mega-death, F.14 had to use the very handy reserves of raw skill and helicopter, bypassed the battleship restart feature I used all my churning out hunter-killer submarines straight into a squadron of office running round fast with it. catchy, leaving half the The music is fantastically not into a humble green game humming it. Graphically though metamorphosed itself respectable Typhoon is a the first stage is the best, the attacking enemy fighters is good and the perspective used on Typhoon should be versions. available on the 64, However, Ocean any sixteen bit have no plans for the time you read this. Amstrad and Spectrum by Dosso "


"KICK OFF!! WITH THE HOTTEST FOOTBALL GAME AROUND GARY LINEKER'S Hot-Shot! YOULL ALWAYS SCORE WITH GARY'S GAMES The hottest football game ever produced for the home computer full eleven a side football, sliding tackles, throw-ins, corners, goal kicks, fouls, selection of strips and the dreaded referee with his red card. Play the computer or a friend on astroturf or grass be careful the surface affects the bounce on the ball. Top score with Gary Lineker's Hot Shot SPECTUM 48/128 CBM AMIGA .99 Tape, + 3 .99 Disk .99 Disk AMSTRAD/CBM 64/128 ATARI ST .99 Tape, .99 Disk .99 Disk "


"FIRE DREAM-UP 45.84.29.79 A N D FORGET THE FUTURE IS IN YOUR HANDS! FIRE AND FORGET! NEVER LOOK BACK YOU ARE OUR ONLY CHANCE.. AND AMSTRAD CPC COMING SOON FOR SPECTRUM 48/128, C 64/128 45220 Senest AMIGA VERSION PS, PC, XT, AT VERSION ATARI ST VERSION TM UNIT 4 STANNETS LAINDON NORTH TRADE CENTRE BASILDON ESSEX SS 156 DJ PHONE: (0268) 541126 C 1988 TITUS SOFTWARE CORP., TITUS AND THE TITUS LOGO ARE REGISTERED TRADEMARKS OF TITUS SOFTWARE CORP. COMMODORE 64/128, IBM, ATARI ST AND AMIGA ARE REGISTERED TRADEMARKS OF COMMODORE ELECTRONICS LTD, INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES, ATARI INC AND COMMODORE AMIGA RESPECTIVELY "


"WANTED IN THE GREAT Microdealer COVER UI FOR INVOLVEMENT Is THIS YOU? For years, unnoticed by the authorities, valuable goods were disappearing from shelves Now MICRODEALER INTERNATIONAL has revealed the extent of this massive scam' and discovered the stash. of unsuspecting stores thoughout the U.K.! No-one has come forward to claim the Loot. Your local Microdealer dealer has the 'lowdown' Be on the lookout for signs of the Cover Up and pick up your Cover Up card now. on the greatest games racket since Al Capone! Collect Cover Up tokens to complete your card entitling you to a piece of the action'. MEGA-games form major software houses, Joysticks, T-Shirts and an opportunity REWARDS to WIN a fantastic prize in the MICRODEALER COVER-UP competition! 1 Crodealer COVER UP with one of the range of EXCLUSIVE T-SHIRTS only available from your local Microdealer Dealer GO AND SEE HIM NOW! GREATM PROMOTED BY Microdealer SUPPORTED BY:FIREBIRD EPYX PALACE PALACE GOLDE SILVERBIRD "


"evlews FERNANDEZ MUST DIE Over. Graphics are great, with a very simple but effective colour system. Some very nice backdrops and extensive amounts of detail (such as the way when you grenade something, you make a nice hole in the floor, which stays there for MACHINES: C64, SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD CPC TIPURPLE HEART 464. WOUNDED IN BATTLE effect. SUPPLIER: MIRRORSOFT. FMD isn't a game that PRICE: AMIGA AND ST $24.99/C64 CASS $9.99 DISK you can just pick up a $12.99/SPECTRUM AND joystick and play but it's AMSTRAD CASS .99 DISK not an impossible task, $14.99 either. In the two days I had VERSIONS TESTED: C64/ST. it, I played it a lot, and REVIEWER: TONY DILLON. came very close to Fernandez Must Die is, completing it (6 bases to apart from being a very be exact), so I can't see it bad title for a game, a mix lasting very long, though of Ikari Warriors and Into there is the added The Eagles Nest. It's also challenge of rescuing all brilliant. It boots Ikari in the the POW's. A great game goolies and turns the Eagle and well worth spending into a budgie, so to speak, your money on. leaving you with a two-player trek through lots Looks like you didn't make it. of scrolling screens of action-packed all the while battleground, with a bit of The enemy plane either building exploration drops more soldiers, thrown in. medical supplies with The Fernandez in which you can boost your questions is in fact an evil flagging energy or bombs, dictator who has set up which churn up the eight bases, the purpose of ground, killing anything each to defend one of the 8 they touch, including you. strips of land he has taken Then you've got the tanks, over. He has captured all three times your sprite, of the allied soldiers and these hunter-killers mill the gold and hidden them about firing huge shells in inside the buildings that your direction. join the eight strips. Your Doing the same job as mission is to seek and the tank in Ikari, the jeep destroy these bases, whilst lets you get around at recovering the 202 caches around three times the of gold and the 182 POW's. normal speed. Sounds like quite a job. Unfortunately, only one Luckily you don't have to hit from a cannon, or two do it alone. mines is all that's needed The game is arranged as to turn your nimble little A The boats bombing you, the soldiers are shooting at you, get in that a huge map, broken up l and rover into a heap of jeep and get the hell outta there! into eight vertical strips, twisted metal. One nice the rest of the game) show GRAPHICS each several screens long point here is that, rather that the programmers and joined by rooms with SOUND (Tony Crowther and David than have two Jeeps closed doors that you have running around at once, Bishop, no less) have really VALUE to blast your way into. You both people can get in the taken there time over this. PLAYABILITY and a friend race same jeep, with the person especially like the little headlong up and down who entered first doing the ceremony at the end, OVERALL the vertically scrolling driving. What a cute idea. where you are shown your areas, searching for the When you enter one of CO placing medals on UPDATE... huge L-shaped buildings, the side rooms, by way of your coftir the bases, and avoiding blasting a hole in the door, different medals for ST and Amiga versions will everything the enemy can the game goes into mode different things like the be launched in throw at you, and believe Eagles Nest. Using a plan Purple Heart for wounds in September followed by me, that's quite a lot view of the area you are in, battle or the Distinguished the C64 version in early Firstly, you've got y you can see the POW's, Service Cross for October. Bad news for definative enemy soldiers. shacked up in little cages destroying vehicles. Speccy and Amstrad These run on from the top or embedded in the walls, Sound is simple but owners though-their the bottom of the screen and the caches of gold effective, with some great versions are not expected and to chase you in and laying around on the floor, tunes and a particularly to be ready until the end around the buildings, firing just waiting to be walked nice explosion sound of October. "


"Poviedo MICKEY hai MACHINES: SPECTRUM, 64, AMSTRAD, ST. SUPPLIER: GREMLIN. PRICES: SPECTRUM $7.99, +3 $12.99, AMSTRAD .99 $14.99 DISK, ST $19.99. REVIEWER: EUGENE LACEY describe the game. The towers of the castle. Mickey accurate in his aim if he is Magic Kingdom is in must defeat all of these to succeed. If the liquid mortal peril. One of those nasties to restore the wand connects with a target it evil so and so's that seem to and save Disneyland. will turn into a bonus. Many cause so much hassle in Each tower is made up of of these are little blue computer games has several circular platforms bottles of water to restore made off with Merlin's linked by wooden ladders. Mickey's water pistol level. Magic wand, broken it into There is only one direction Other bonuses to be four pieces, and hidden to travel upwards. But picked up are 'keys' which enable Mickey to get through the heavy wooden doors into the sub games where certain items are located that he will need in the quest. A birds head is another useful item to acquire as it will enable Mickey to survive, should he fall off one of the platforms. Glue sticks monsters to the spot, lightning bolts make Mickey move faster. A Repulsiveness' power-up makes Mickey so disgusting that not even the Ogre King's ghouls want to have anything to do with him, bombs blow up anything nasty on screen at the moment me pid of my Ti the jur A Mickey Mouse on the ST. Not one to boast or drop names or anything but I have actually been to Disneyland the original California based one and have spent considerable time in deep conversation with Mickey Mouse about his new computer game. So when I tell you that Disneyland is the most fun you can have on this planet I am talking from personal experience not spouting from a travel brochure. Because Disneyland is so mega-brill Mickey and I thought you would like the chance to mosey round for yourself. You can too, should you be one of two lucky winners to land the top prize in the Gremlin/ C+VG Disneyland Competition. Before I tell you about that though let me an almd you ying to murky live, yo ved MICKEY.C scure Mickey searches the maze in this ST version sub-game. them throughout the Mickey must defeat the when they are picked up Disney Castle. ghoulish guardians in and shields protect our Your enemy is the Evil each tower to proceed. heroes water supply. Ogre King who has posted Armed with a water pistol The water pistol will not his monsters and a wicked with a limited supply of dispatch all of the monsters witch in each of the four water our hero must be So Mickey sometimes has "


"MOUSE ---74 ST GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY 6 to press the space bar to stolen wand is to be found moving platform which he wield his mallet. must bash holes in so that i at the top of each tower OVERALL /_ 8 The graphics are superb and Mickey must have the he can puncture the giant in all versions of Mickeywand complete before he bubbles emanating from a UPDATE... full of detail and extremely faces the Ogre King. leaky pipe. Ghouls fly well animated. One of the At first glance Mickey looks across screen attempting Speccy, 64, Amstrad, and pecey:, Am like a game for children. to deplete our hero's st versions are all now on swings his mallet at an This impression is created energy as he struggles sale. An Amiga version of Ogre causing it to by the pretty graphics and against the giant bubbles. Mickey will be out of the mutate into two tiny Ogres the character of Mickey in towers three and four end of the month at who scurry around the himself who is seen as a he comes up against the $19.99. Gremlin have the tower and are difficult to Tower und ure unCUIT TO Kids hero. When you get Drippina Taps that have to rights to other Disney finish off. down to trying to solve the be switched off in the riaht characters. Already in the When Mickey gets to the game though, you soon order to proceed. In the works is a game called top of the fourth tower the realise that there is nothing Pump Room several little Disney Olympics Ogre king knows that he is sprog-like about the game monsters are causing involving several going to have to fight it out design. Believe me, it is no havoc by pulling the corks and con corks characters. with the super rodent in pushover. It requires good out of the leaking pipe. in person. arcade skills, persistance, Mickey must get past the To destroy the ugly, web and patience. force field and take his winged, huge-jawed nasty The sub games provide mallet to the giant monster Mickey must score welcome light relief from who is orchestrating the fifteen direct hits with his the main business of saving mischievous work of his water pistol. Only three the Magic Kingdom from little monster minions. attempts are allowed per the Ogre. Mickey reaches Disney are known for go and should he fail its these through the back being real sticklers right back to the foot of the doors of the tower. In the when it comes to the first tower. first two towers he comes representation of their Things are more difficult up against the Puddle characters in other media. than this for ST and Amiga Maze which he has to I can't think that there will owners as they have to explore picking up the be any complaints from Win a trip to Disneyland. If you are a Disney lan and have always fancled going to the Magic Kingdom can there be anyone alive who doesn't fancy four days in Disneyland? Here is how to win a trip of a lifetime. Gremlin and C+YG have got together to offer a truly mega prize. The top prize will include seven nighis hotel accommodation in the Holiday Inn, outward and return flights between Gatwick and Orlando and admission lo and unlimited use of all the lamous Disneyland attractions. The two lucky winners will be accompanied by a representative from C+VQ (our new Dep Ed. Julian Rignall. There will be two age categories lourleen and under and fifteen 200 and over. To enter the competition you must purchase a copy of the game. The official entry form is A Mickey heads for the water in this 64 screen. enclosed with the cassette. No photocopies or hand written defeat a wicked witch at magical items as he travels across the pond about this entries will be accepted and the the top of each individual and lobbing his trusty one. Gremlin have made a Editor's decision is final in all tower before going on to mallet at the monsters. meet the Ogre King. The Bubble Machine is Mickey into good looking matters relating to this Whichever version you my favourite sub game. It and fun to play computer competition. play one piece of the places Mickey on a game. .00 R "


"ENLIST FOR HI KONAMI BREAK JAIL BREAK GREEN BERET ocean een YIE AR KUNG FU ocean Puuse we ATRONCAFO.FR PING PONG YIE AR KUNG FU II JAIL Oren roun 1005 GREI moc insta YIE A EVERY GAME A SMASH HIT! WIZDALL A superlative piece of software. Slick in virtually every aspect, wholly original and immensely playable. (Zzap)ZZAP SIZZLER AMS ACTION MASTERGAME SINCLAIR USER-CLASSIC CRASH SMASH. SHORT CIRCUIT The two games are excellent and have delightful graphics. The variety is the real clincher, with something for everyone. (Amstrad Action). ARKANOID This is a magnificent conversion, faithfully capturing the feel, atmosphere, look and sound of the Toito original. (Zzop) PCW HALL OF FAME/YOUR SINCLAIR MEGA GAME SINCLAIR USER-CLASSIC. HEAD OVER HEELS Is one of the most addictive playable cuddly. cute and fun games ever. Miss it at your peril. (Crash) CRASH SMASH AMS ACTION MASTERGAME ZZAP SIZZLER THE GREAT ESCAPE \"THE DEST ARCADE ADVENTURE\" 1986 NEWSFIELD READERS AWARD Unquestionably the best arcade adventure so for this yeardon't miss it. (Zzap) YOUR SINCLAIR MEGA GAME CODRA Go out and buy it now no self-respecting games player should be without a copy. The grophics ore superb and the scrolling is very effective. (Crosh) CRASH SMASH FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD This is a highly innovative orcode/adventure that you must not be without (Crash) CRASH SMASH FREE YIE AR KUNG FU NEWSFIELD \"BEST GAME\" AWARD. Easily the best of the martial arts programs because of the variety of characters and excellent arcode style playability (Crosh) CRASH SMASH HYP left theo SPECTRUM AMSTRAD . COMMODORE EXTRAVAGANZA FREN Z CASSETTE DISK Ocean 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone: 061 831 "


"SCORE ACTION KONAMI NEMESIS RANLAGE SHAO-LIN'S ROAD PORTS RABBARIAN ima HYPERSPORTS he name ne same MINE JACKAL 10 SUPER ACTION ARCADE HITS BARRARI MIKIE Ploys a knockout frontic force in the classroom, locker room and the high schoscofeteria. Hip-zop, door Olack, throwballs and pies but can you nake him hand over his love letter to his girlfriend? JAIL DREAK is very prison wooden snighmore the inmates have broken out. These minore hardened criminals arned to the hill and orentofraid to gun you all down. Just move in knock'em down and Dund 'em up tosyl GREEN DERET RESCUE THE CAPTIVES! You are o highly trained coinbat machine. Your mission infiltrate all four enemy Strategic Defence installations alone against immeasurobie odds YIE AR KUNG FU II Eight more deadly opponents to combat as you advance to become obloch belt master Authentic fighting moves with different locations SHAO-LIN'S ROAD Our hero has finally mastered the secret martial art \"CHIN'S SHAO LIN\" but is trapped by triod gongs. With Kicks and other secret powers, escope from and travel SHAO-LIN Stood to freedom! NEMESIS The planet Nemesis is now under an all-out space ottock beings from the sub-spacestor cluster of Bacterion. You will need all YOU COUroge and concentration to win. Get ready to blast offl HYPER SPORTS Continuing the challenge where TRACK ond FIELD left off Archery Skeet Shooting and Weight Lifting are just some of the featured events to test your skill and stamina PING PONG YOU con almost feel the tension of the big march breaking through the screen the expectant crowd is almost on top of you! You return the service with a Top Spin Dockhand, then a Forehand Back-spin, the ball bounces high from your opponent's looping defensive lob SMASH!.. a great shol opens the score JACKAL Get into this and you'll never get out. The plan codename JACKAL is to drop a squad of 4 crack troops behind enemy lines Rescue a group of prisoners and whilst under attack, deliver them to helipods. Their final objective is to knockout enemy headquarters Simple eh? YIE AR KUNG FU Become a grand master bur to achieve this you must defeat a variety of deadly opponents ormed with different skills and weapons and must be overcome with a combination of different attock moves ALL THESE CHART TOPPING HITS IN A SINGLE GIANT PACK RENEGADE in the knife.edge world of the vigilante there is no place to rest no time to think-butlook sharp there is always time to die! You will encounter the disciples of evil whose mission is to exterminate the only mon on earth who dares to throw down the gauntlet in their poth-the Renegade PLAY RENEGADE... PLAY MEAN! IK They called International Korote the greatest Karate beat em up yer' (Commodore User). And who are we to argue? But ARCHER MACLEAN has come up with a stunner: A third fighter An amazing animated background. New moves (including double head-kick and a spectacular backflip) Re-mixed music by ROD HUDBARD SUPER SPRINT Licensed from Alari Gomes original money. spinning coin-op, one or two players compete head-to-head over eight gruelling tracks and four levels of game difficulty. Avoid the hozords and collect golden spanners to enhance custom cor features the key to Super Sprint. With detailed animation and sound effects. Super Sprint brings the best driving excitement ever to be experienced on home computers. RAMPAGE The game where the nice guys don't get a look in Grab your way through Chicago, punch up New York, and jump on San Francisco, Three indescribably nosty chorocters which bear a remarkable likeness to King Kong Godzilla and Wolfman, need you to send them on a rampage in an enduring 150 days of destruction, through 50 different cities DARBARIAN THE STORY SO FAR... The evil sorcerer Drax hos sworn to wreok an unspeakoble doom on the people of the Jewelled City unless Princess Mariana is delivered to him However, he has agreed that if o champion can be found who is able to defeat his demonic guardians, the Princess will be released. From the wastelands of the North, cores on unknown borborian, a mighty warrior wielding his broadsword with deadly skill: Con he vanquish the forces of Darkness and free the Princess ONLY YOU CAN SAY... number one SPECTRUM AMSTRAD  COMMODORE SPECTRUM AMSTRAD COMMODORE | BLOCKBUSTERS 1995  1795 BLOCKBUSTERS CASSETTE DISK CASSETTE DISK her age 6: the name aerome 332 6633 . Telex: 669977 OCEANS G. Fax: 061 834 0650 Ocean Say on "


"THE BIG APPLE Me BRASI wedd ACTUAL COMMODORE 64 SCREEN SHOTS. miesto SPECTRUM 48K .95 COMMODORE 64 .95 tape .95 disc Avaliable soon on ATARI ST .95 AMIGA .95. IBM PC .95 Each pack contains FREE APPLES' to be exchanged for a wide selection of gifts available from the BRONX CLUB THE BRONX THE SMARTEST GANG ON THE STREETS \"...OOPS!, a thoroughly addictive arcade style game.\" Your Commodore (August, 1988) \"...00PS: is an original and enjoyable challenge.\" Games Machine (July, 1988) \"...OOPS!, grabs you from the word go.\" Computer & Video Games (July, 1988) \"...00PS! a challenging arcade strategy game.\" ZZAP 64 (August, 1988) Company 10  ;   Art FLIGHTS RESERVED. UNAUTHORISED COPYING LENDING OR RESALE BY ANY MEANS IS STRICTLY PROHIBITED DESIGNER PACKAGING 1988 THE BIG APPLE ENTERTAINMENT CO LTD PAT PENDING suas Bang HOW TO JOIN simply send your 8\" x 10\" S.A.E.to Bronx Billy clo House 12 Brunswick Way Brunswick Industrial Park London N11 1HX for FREE membership and The Big Apple Entertainment Co. Ltd. Prestwich super gift catalogue "


"evlens Solin Solin 41610 MACHINES: SPECTRUM 48/128/CBM 64/128. LEVEL 1  SUPPLIER: DESTINY. PRICES: .99 SPECTRUM 48/128, .99 CBM 64/128 CASS, $12.99 DISK. VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM 48/128. REVIEWER: GARY WHITTA. Activision's first release on weapons systems in this its new sub-label, Destiny. mode, unlike Killar Mode, sees you in command of a you cannot use your strange robot-like being by inertia-field modules, the name of Supertronic, which is just a fancy word whose job it is to secure a for limited invincibility. By huge prison spaceship sealing all the exits on a which has recently prison ship, the ship is malfunctioned, thus letting 20% 100% 100% 100% 100% pronounced secure once all the prisoners escape. Noon so se sa shoots more and you pass onto The Supertronic is a weird the next level. shaped device, A Diamonds are forever but naff on the Speccy. Other Supertronic modes resembling a flying available allow you to metallic Melon. The transfer power from one Supertronic glides around Supertronic to another, the scrolling prison ship and use two Supertronics landscape with the intent together to help each of stealing all the the exit other out of tight corners hatches to stop as many and traps. prisoners as possible from Rovar Mode: No, you unsealed exits, from where Diamond sounds from escaping don't turn into a dog. the prisoners escape. To this review like a pretty In order to do this, the although you do work like seal it you simply stop over deep and absorbing Supertronic is equipped one. In this mode you glide it. Although you do have game, but it isn't. It doesn't with a nifty little device about the ship looking for access to use your really break any barriers which allows it to as far as Speccy games transmutate into any of four are concerned, and the different control modes: gameplay is too diluted to Hillbar Mode :In this offer any long term mode, the Supertronic challenge, which is a retracts all its outboard shame as the game's systems in order to protect graphics and sound aren't itself from attack and half bad, with some nifty collision. The problem with Hibar Mode is that as this Od scrolling routines and 000000000000 excellent use of colour. mode uses up zero power, There's also a free cassette you have no control over single featuring the Supertronic at all, so up-and-coming band The you are forced to drift Company She keeps but I around helplessly until you can't comment on this as choose another mode. haven't been able to listen Solar Mode : By hitting to it (Julian won't let me the S key you are PWR 3% 100% 100% 100% 100% borrow his Walkman). transformed into Solar So there we have it. Not Mode, allowing you to MODE HILLAR SOLAR SOLAR SOLAR SOLAR too bad as Spectrum replenish your ship's games go, quite involving energy supplies by sucking A Sparklers fail to shine. the first couple of goes, but in the energy from the solar not enough action to hold pannels that are scattered you for long, especially not around the ship. As Solar for the price. energy replenishment is a time consuming process, it's possible to get another SOUND one of your five Supertronics into action VALUE while the other one PLAYABILITY re-energises. OVERALL Killar Mode : As the name would sugest, this one is the UPDATE... most fun! Killar Mode activates the Supertronic's The Spectrum version is onboard weapons system, now on sale. The C64 thereby allowing you to version will hit the shops eliminate anything that towards the end of stands between you and MODE KILLAR SOLAR SOLAR SOLAR SOLAR August. No other versions mission completion. A Diamond \"not enough action\". of Diamond are planned. GRAPHICS 22 I 99% 20% 100% 100% "


"TeveNS R ULTIM usurperw ver British's Lord British is missing MACHINES: PC/64. SUPPLIER: ORIGIN. into a period of golden Trusting your frienus Juugen PRICE: C64 $24.99 prosperity, whilst in Ultima DISK ONLY. AMIGA & ST Ill the evil hoards had once questioNS Until a safer time. Hastily you 129.95. again reformed, and you let and Ankh that lie at your feet, but  VERSION TESTED: PC. had to go in search of the REVIEWER: WAYNE. Move, the very darkness about you begi elusive Exodus to quell The Ultima series of the them. Ultima IV saw you put change. Three shapes begin to Materiallia most successful sagas in the world to rights for British gloom. \"Shadowlords! hisses ShaMiNO + the history of computer once again. gaming. All five tales are teeth. Quickly, he drous his sword and to So when you feel the based around the tingling feeling of and the barely discernible shapes. mysterious \"Lord British\". teleportation happening who is the firm but you know that Lord British benevolent ruler of the needs you. And this time in mythical land called Ultima V, he needs you Brittania. more than ever!! British tries to keep his When you arrive in kingdom free, but behind Brittania, your long time every corner lurks an evil friend and adventurer lolo, usurper who is only too quickly informs you that willing to take over British's Lord British is m throne. However, before he can It all started with Ultimal, explain in further detail, when the evil Wizard three dark, malevolent evil Mondain tried to slowly beings turn up and shoot subvert the Lords of the lolo with a magical arrow, land against British. Ultima which all but kills him. Il challenged to conquer Releasing that you are in ZAINA evil and lead the nation mortal danger, you quickly The Shadowlords materialise from the mists. make your retreat into the night. Making haste you reach Shamino's house, another old adventurer friend of yours, where you manage to get lolo patched up. It is here that you learn that British has been lost, presumed dead, on an You expedition to explore the stare as the newly discovered light begins to diminish underworld. Lord Blackthorn, British's trusted and finally WINK out. and respected friend, has Something falls softly assumed control. onto the bed. Reaching Tyranny grips the land. The people of Brittania are out, you turn ON the oppressed and light at your bedside. downtrodden. You realise that you and your two There, lying before you, companions have to do is an amulet. You hesitantly reach for it. Gripping it tightsomething about it. But ly in your hand, your finger automatically traces over the what?? This is the major problem familiar etching ON its surface. Finally! Finally! A sign you are pitted with in from Britannia! It has to be! It could be nothing else. Ultima V, but there are many, many others. The game itself is well structured. Your group is The Amulet of Britannia. "


"100 your MONY retrieve the amut before you CON gins to swirl and lize in the murky through clenched loves between you damage. stick by which all computer There is a great deal of Fantasy Role Playing humour in the game. I met games are judged, would a magician who was slaughter this game in that looking for a talking horse, respect. However, in return, and would reward me if I Ultima V would leave found it, a demon who had Dungeonmaster standing renounced evil and was when it comes to interaction working for the forces of with characters, combat good, another magician tactics and strategy. The who had turned himself game is also nicely into a mouse via a magical packaged and it contains accident and a farmer, the usual Origin freebies. will rudely tell you to come plus several other people. This time you get the back when they are open. who were in the mysterious obligatory tea towel/map What makes the game \"resistance\", but would plus a large coin that is for me is the role playing only let me in if I knew the supposed to be the codex angle. You see, in Ultima V password. Oh, there was of Ultima wisdom. I only you can talk to near also the farmer who was wish it was!! enough every character bored with his lot and Ultima Vis a marathon of you meet, and this alone wanted to be a fantasy role a game. One of the best means over a couple of playing author!! He gave computer RPG's I have thousand people!! All have me all kinds of information played. something to say and their on Origin's next product. conversation can range . Turning to the negative  GRAPHICS from the release of Ultima's aspects of the game for a SOUND next product to where you moment, I wasn't too VALUE can find a holy shrine. impressed with the Some characters, like graphics. Both your party i PLAYABILITY yourself, can cast magic and the monsters look like OVERALL spells. A wise player only matchstick men who have casts well known spells in been on a four week Arnie UPDATE ... battle or dire Swartzenegger body consequences may occur. building course, and the IBM PC and Commodore Spells range from the colours of the countryside 64 versions of Ultima V will useful \"Negate Poison\", to were pretty lurid. be on sale at the end of the very useful \"Great Furthermore, the sound is August. An Apple version Flame\", in which a great nothing more than a series is already available and e smashes into the of bleeps and clicks. ST and Amiga versions will victim, doing immense Dungeonmaster, the yard be launched in October. od o The Summoning depicted in the game as an individual person, who wanders about from town to towwn. If you get into a combat situation you are quickly whipped off the Screen and replaced by a contains your party plus the opponents you are to fight. You then have three options, reatreat, fight or die. The combat system is somewhat put in the shade however by the realistic, living world that surrounds you. The game is all about exploring and putting little pieces of information together, so that you get the whole picture. As you travel the world you will come across towns, settlements and individual huts. Depending on the time of day, the people in the towns will react differently. If you approach shop keepers as dinner time or closing time, they WWW www From Nowhere, Smoky Hisps of clouds begin to form in the clear, Moonlit sky. In a few short moMents the sky is filled with dark, OMINOUS clouds that completely block the MOON'S pale light. Your bedroom is bathed in quiet darkness as you lie sleeping lightly. You don't need to have played the first four but it helps. "


"eview: HALLS OF I BEBEK *aaa i dal adau BODU       WEGO  | *** RO RECO * UKU DOO DON Co. *RROS non Nech is a problem of computer memory then SSG would do better to scrap them altogether, letting the player rely on the printed maps that they supply with the game. This would produce something like an adventure game, with the mil player in his \"command CREAT post\" receiving reports on the battle from outside. The Battlefront game mechanism used in Halls of Montezuma produces a one or two player game in 5 ART-Mxd. How. Blufts Fesh which each side's forces veteran SE O must be divided into up to three main units, but no A Montezuma makes historical gaffs. A let down by rudimentary graphics. more. This did not work well MACHINES: CBM 64, Marines from the assault on Halls of Montezuma, \"oh in Battles in Normandy and APPLE II. Mexico City in 1848 which no, not again!\" works even less well for SUPPLIER: ELECTRONIC gives the game its name Mainly because of the these scenarios. Mexico ARTS FOR STRATEGIC STUDIES (and the Marine Hymn its continued awfulness of the City itself, the teaching GROUP. PRICE: $18.95. first line) through the taking SSG Battlefront style scenario, is among those VERSION TESTED: CBM 64. of Belleau Wood in France graphics. In land considerably altered from REVIEWER: STEVE BADSEY. in World War One, plus wargames, maps are history to fit the game. (It one scenario for Iwo Jima absolutely crucial to was a surprise, The Australians of SSG have and two for Okinawa in u nderstanding what is commanding the North gone all out for the World War Two, the Inchon going on, where your own Koreans, to learn that the American market with this ket with this landings and defence of landings forces are and what the computer thought my \"battle history of the United Pusan in the Korean War, enemy is likely to do. The forces were \"The Axis\".) But States Marine Corps\" in and the recapture of Hue SSG hex-map does not the game is not all bad. eight scenarios. It judges citadel in Vietnam. In show the whole battlefield The method of selecting the Marines by their own addition, as is now normal properly and dissolves highlighted options and standards they are with SSG games, the disk rather than scrolls, interrogating your forces almost as good as they contains a design section, making it very difficult to down to two levels below think they are but unlike which with SSG's Warplan read and giving you an your command, by far the some American games and Warpaint routines almighty headache). Any best mechanism of the does not make them ready added allows you units shown on it move in a game, remains as good as completely bullet-proof. to edit every useful unit completely unrealistic way ever. Using the same and terrain icon in the and are often not What is worrying is that mechanisms as, and fully game and create any recognisable as either the earliest of the SSG compatible with, their scenario you desire, down friend or enemy. The map games, the strategy games earlier games Battlefront to the weather. actually gets in the way of such as Reach for the Stars and Battles in Normandy, Why then, did I find the game. and Carriers at War, this game follows the myself thinking as played If improving the graphics remain, for me, by far their best. Operational land opriol warfare requires a different games system, and far -HANDICAPbetter graphics than this. On the other hand, if you liked Battlefront, then Halls of Montezuma is for you. CONNOR 0510-6th March *** EO OO DO** OSIM BOXES II ODRE UULO** no FOMNander Ben. Kuribayashi human GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY OVERALL --- Ps-oKarine MAPh apply Formander Maj. Gen. Schmidt A Major Schmidt squares up to General KuribayashiMaps and icons syndrome prevails. "


"EPWORK SPECTRUM CASSETTE +3 DISC .99 .99 Netherworld, another time another place, created from the deep dark subconscious of the mind where the forces of good and evil are locked in eternal combat. Trapped in the fantasy world the only way back is through battle and bribery. COMMODORE CASSETTE DISC .99 .99 AMSTRAD CASSETTE DISC . .99  .99 ATARI ST DISC .99 COMMODORE AMIGA DISC .99 HEWSON For Mail Order send a cheque/P.O. to Hewson Consultants Ltd. Order by Credit card by sending your Access/Barclaycard number, and enclose a specimen signature. Don't forget to enclose your name and address. Hewson, Milton Park, Milton, Abingdon, Oxon. OX14 4RX Tel: (0235) 832939 Fax 0235 861039 As part of our continuing development of innovative Software we are always happy to evaluate software sent to us with a view to publication "


"0004 PeviewsSTA I= Inventory. JEJettison A Flying over the chequered plains of Apogee. I=Inventory, JaJett i so A pirate ship approaches 0007 MACHINES: AMIGA effects are very good, but ATARI ST. are eclipsed by the Amiga SUPPLIER: RAINBIRD. version, which sounds PRICE: $24.95. VERSION TESTED: ATARI STI absolutely incredible AMIGA/PC/64. There's also a brilliant REVIEWER: JULIAN Amiga soundtrack, which RIGNALL also works on Atari STs with a double-sided drive. The much heralded One thing that mustn't go Stargliger was launched in unmentioned is the fact late 1986 and was that the disk is specially arguably one of the first formatted to work on either truly 16-bit games. An an ST or Amiga you can excellent version did stick the same disk in both appear on the Spectrum machines! There are few (courtesy of the talented noticable differences Realtime programming between the two, apart team who recently from the Amiga's superior produced Carrier sound effects and the fact Command) but it was the that it moves just a little Atari ST and Amiga more smoothly. versions with their fast, The plot follows on from colourful vector graphics Starglider. The Egron forces and sampled sound effects that the player battled in that really shone. the AGAV two years ago Although Starglider II have become even more looks complicated, it's powerful. They've basically a shoot 'em up. conquered and occupied with the player completing the resource-enriched a series of objectives in a Solice System, and are strict order. Games never currently consolidating vary. The sequel, on the their position and building other hand, looks mighty war vehicles in complicated. And is. It's readiness to conquer the more like Paul Woake's galaxy classic Mercenary than They must be stopped at anything else. However, it all costs. has much more depth. As Jaysan, hero of Much, much more... Starglider, it's the player's The biggest change is task to pilot a small state-ofthe graphics. The vectors the-art Icarus craft behind have been replaced by enemy lines and single technicolor filled-3D handedly bring the entire graphics which move Egron military machine to smoothly and very quickly. its knees, thus saving the The 3D effect is truly galaxy. Now this might outstanding if you think sound a tall order, but Interceptor looks using cunning and stealth impressive, wait until you rather than gung-ho see these! The sheer variety suicide tactics, it is just of shapes, the Pac-Worm possible that the Egron and Pulsing Pyramids, are forces could be thwarted... amazing, the fluid The odds sound a little animation and movement, more favourable when the and the feeling of depth is Icarus is examined. absolutely incredible, and Originally designed as a sets new standards for Police patrolcraft, it's others to aspire to. equipped with a Plasma Not only are the visuals Drive power unit and impressive, sound has Stardrive (designed on the been used exceptionally planet Cosworth), a well. Each craft and piece 250-round gas-plasma of machinery makes its laser and has a Valium own distinctive noise, Dynamics energy which gets louder and absorption hull protected softer as the player by Hi-Lev sheild. Although approaches and moves the shield is the best of its away. The Atari ST sound type, It's diminished when I=Inventory, JrJettison. A That's a power line in the distance. 0012 I= Inventory, J=Jettison upper "


"00109 IRGLIDERT IeInventory, JeJettison, A An Egron control tower. I=Inventory, J=Jettison. A Boing! 90000 the Icarus sustains hits, and populated by weird collides with other craft or creatures. buildings or flies too near The grey planet of the sun. Fortunately it's Apogee is next. Here the possible to replenish shield Ergons have their base, so energy in a variety of ways. military and industrial A very useful feature is presence are very high. the five-channel Apogee has two moons, expansion bus, which Enos and Castron, both of allows up to five which are Ergonenhancement modules to dominated. be bolted onto the Icarus. Millway is a huge, red These include Time-Warp planet which cannot be Cuboids, Fire and Flee approached too closely Missiles, Bouncing Bombs due to the very high and a Neutron Bomb. atmosphere pressure. Finally, the Icarus has a However, there is a large cargo deck which high-altitude presence of holds three items, both Egron military forces including reserve and strange creatures, enhancement modules, including a robot duck! Items may be brought Millway has seven moons, aboard using the tractor Broadway, Apex. Esprit, beam, which envelopes a Questa, Westmere, selected object so that it Synapse and Wackfunk, all can be examined, and heavily industrialised. drawn into the cargo bay if Finally there's Aldos, necessary. another planet heavily The Solice System populated by the Egrons, consists of five planets, and apparently the some of which are orbited construction sight of a by moons, and a huge space station, which hazardous asteroid belt. will be the flagship of the Now, incredible though it Egron invasion fleet. Aldos may seem, the entire moon, Q.Beta, has itself a system, asteroids and all, small, yellow moon, has been programmed although radio telescopes into the game so that a can get no reading of its player may take off from presence. A mystery that one planet, cross the should no doubt be spaceways and land on investigated? another planet or moon. Travelling from planet to Each planet revolves, so planet is made possible that there are days and with the Stardrive, which nights you can actually kicks in at the press of a key see the sun rise and set. The and speeds up the Icarus shadows and colour of the by a factor of eight. sky changes as the sun Fortunately the planets are moves across the sky, until quite close together, so a night falls. On some journey never takes more planets there's even than a couple of minutes thunder and lightning! anyway, there are always Every planet has its own pirate space ships to distinctive environment. watch out for, as well as Dante, a small red planet asteroids. When the nearest the sun is inhabited destination is reached, the by a small Ergon task force drive is switched off and and a very strange the ship goes into collection of animals, planetfall, where it can grossly mutated into strage either be guided forms by the intense downwards through the radiation. It's an atmosphere to the surface, undesirable place to land, or flown back up into scattered with volcanoes space again. and gas eruptions. The mission actually Vista is a blue planet, starts on the surface of second nearest the sun, Apogee, right in the thick covered in marshlands Continued on page 44 I=Inventory, JoJett ison. A Sunrise on Apogee. C 00290 I=Inventory, JoJett ison.          "


"0005 I=Inventory, J=Jetti son. Entering the underground tunnel. A An external view of the Icarus. LUCE Continued from page 43. of things! Stompers walk method can be adjusted, about, ground and flying and the on-screen craft zoom around, and all presentation is superb. manner of strange, alien During a game, the buildings are scattered viewpoint can be altered across the chequered in a variety of ways so the plain. After a few minutes proceedings can be exploration, what looks like viewed from inside or a large red crater can be outside the Icarus. There found. Flying the ship are also options to look in slowly over the lip reveals a all directions, which is funnel, down which the useful just in case Icarus may be flown yes, something tries to sneak up some planets also have from behind. huge underground If you get bored with chambers to explore! playing, there's the The tunnel winds its way 'painting with Rolf' option down into the planet, with which allows the user to other passages branching look at all the objects in the off in different directions. game, cycle through their This subterranean system animations, rotate them in is quite extensive and is the any way at a variety of key to the game. When the speeds and even paint Ergons invaded, the with them! original peaceful Starglider II is an inhabitants of the Solice incredible program that System fled below ground. pushes computer gaming Finding them is of to new heights. I can quite paramount importance, honestly say that I've never since it's only with their been so entralled and help that the Ergon threat addicted by any other can be neutralised. Any game the urge to interaction with the explore is incredible. I've underground people is already spent many, many displayed via on-screen hours travelling the text messages. Prompts spaceways instead of and questions are sleeping and I'm sure that answered by typing yes or the weeks ahead will see no. much burning of the Once contact has been midnight oil! made, the mission really Buy it, and prepare to be begins. I'm not going to tell amazed! you what exactly you have to do (it would spoil half the fun, but completing the mission involves  GRAPHICS collecting, amongst other SOUND things, a crate of sweets, a flat diamond, an asteroid VALUE and a Professor who's PLAYABILITY currently leading a OVERALL research team on Broadway. It's certainly a tough task, and fortunately the programmers have UPDATE... included a load/save game option without it Starglider Il is available the mission would be now for the ST and Amiga. virtually impossible. We have also seen a PC One of the many version which looked appealing factors of unbelievably fast. Starglider Il is that it can be Commodore 64 versions played either as an are also planned and a adventure (as it should be Spectrum version is being played) or as a shoot 'em investigated. Julian up like its forerunner (in that Rignall has the full respect I found it far more 'behind the scenes' story varied and enjoyable than on Starglider II and all its Stargliderever was). versions in his exclusive The presentation is interview with Argonaut without flaw. Just about boss Jez San every aspect of the control overleaf. aaaaa I=Inventory, JrJett ison. A Swooping low over a silo. 0011 I=Inventory, J=Jettison. A Blast that walker! "


"The Legend Continues J.R.Tolkien's ASAR IN IDDLES ARTH 22 Repen MELBOURNE HOUSE Melbourne House 8-10 Paul Street * London EC24 4JH Telephone 01-3778411 "


"JEZ SAN and til can.\" Argonaut Software was set up by Jez San it'll look awful on it but I don't waste your time while he was programming Starglider. can't do anything about talking to airports and Since then it has grown steadily, and now that. We might use vector landing and things like employs eight full-time programmers. graphics if it detects a that. Julian Rignall talks to Jez about present very slow machine, but it \"It's based ten years will be solid where we into the future and and future projects. assumes that there are a Starglider Il is certainly an expect to find some very What about the other lot of Stealth Fighters amazing 16-bit product, soon indeed. machines? \"The around, so you're but how will the other the problem is that Spectrum version will actually attacking versions fare? Jez San has everyone in our suffer the most in terms of Stealth Fighters. We've a reassuring answer: company is a 16-bit graphical quality, but it'll programmed in all \"We've been searching programmer. No-one still retain much of the known Stealth Fighters hard for people good wanted to go back to gameplay. It doesn't plus we're going to invent enough to do the 8-bit 8-bit again, so we had to really matter what it looks a few of our own. There find new blood. Once like it'll most probably will be conventional were people with you've programmed planes as well, like F16, graphic systems already 16-bit you don't want to gameplay that really F18 and Phantoms. in existence like do 8-bit again. It stifles counts. On all versions \"We aren't going to go Realtime, but they're very your creativity. We're we'll be retaining as the Microprose route with busy and there was a bit doing the IBM PC version, much of the original a World War III scenario: of a problem finding out which we call 16-bit, but gameplay as possible.\" it's going to be more 'take which version they some people would Argonaut has two other it as it comes'. It'll be wanted to do and which argue it is 8-bit. projects under different every time and ones we wanted to do. In \"The PC version is being development at the we're going to town on the end we found some developed on an moment, the first of which the computer-controlled good Commodore 64 Amstrad, and is slightly is Hawk, which will be enemy they'll fly 100% programmers and slower than the Atari ST, appearing on the realisticaly. You'll be they're going to be but looks worse because Electronic Arts label in the able to follow them in working with us. We're CGA is graphically next few months. Jez turns and loops and going to supply our inferior. We hope to explains: \"It's a combat things like that.\" routines and lots of help. speed it up a bit, and also flight simulator based on Interceptor is the and they're going to be make sure it's compatible Stealth technology you current combat simulator programming the 6502. with all other graphics know, F19 and B2 and all yardstick, so how does it That'll probably include systems like BGA that kind of thing. compare with Hawk? Jez the Apple as well but we and Tandy. It requires a Graphically it's very replies with confidence: don't know yet. We're still lot of work to support all complex and the flight \"It's graphically much looking for Spectrum the different IBMs. An IBM dynamics are very like a superior at least twice programmers, but we PC is the very lowest one real simulator, but you the frame rate. SANS WALK IS SANS WALKER "


"The ARGONAUTS mont! dows entur omin dow nd ar ghton grin thin therir -bgot on yo e stuc to th reaki otto Simi! Allen of Dur drago passe \"Gamewise there's no at the moment has to current crop of coin-op division. All their comparison: ours has got remain nameless. Jez conversions; Outrun is programmers have real strategy and lots of reveals more of the pathetic. moved across to planes on the screen. In mystery game: 'We got \"Some coin-op games Electronic Arts. It's a Interceptor there can be excited by a particular can be reasonably well, shame, it's a really good a plane which is a dot on coin-op. It's not going to especially the Pacmans shoot 'em up very hard, the screen and you're still take us long to do it we and the Gauntlets where and far more immediate supposed to fly around already have a sprite not very much is than the computer and chase it you only engine that can enlarge happening but it's fun. version. I really liked get a brief glimpse of it up and decrease, flip in the But Outrun, where there's Marble Madness, it was a big. In Hawk you'll be X and Y direction and a lot going on and a lot of favourite for years. I also dogfighting all the time. draw millions of them a sprite action, needs to be liked / Robot There's a lot more in it too second, and that's all you well programmed and so Robot has a shape we've got fractal need for certain coin-op far hasn't been. I'm not painting option. Did the mountain terrains in some conversions coupled with saying that we are going 'Painting with Rolf' option parts of the game and in our 3D maths. to change all that, but we on Starglider Il come from to change all that, but we other parts there's flat \"We're due to finish it in are going to change all there? Jez acknowledges land with lots of buildings about two month's time that, but we are certainly that he did enjoy playing \"We've included a lot of ready for Christmas going to do it better'. with the drawing option, ground combat; there's launch on the Activision So how much does but explains: \"Paint with landing on different label. It's looking Argonaut watch other Rolf was a bug. We've runways and airports and reasonable considering programming teams? Jez always got a shape things like that. Mid-air we haven't been on it that admits: \"We're active in editor in our games, and refuelling of course. We long, and we ought to what everyone else is up one day it didn't clear the wanted to do the flight have something worth to, to steer clear of them screen and we thought, simulator to beat them seeing in about a month.\" so we can stay original. that's great! So when we all, and we put enough How does Jez view There's no point treading finished the game we put people in the company coin-op conversions in on other peoples' toes. I in some options, and the with different talents to general? play a lot of coin-ops, end result is great make an all round \"I think a coin-op that's where all the new everyone loves it. It's product it's a really full conversion done well is technology is. I've got a fascinating to doodle combat simulation; very very good, but I haven't Star Wars machine at with Walkers\". graphical and very fast. seen too many home, and I've also got a And indeed it is. With The second project is a conversions done well. Starglider arcade that, Jez had to rush off to coin-op conversion of a The best coin-op machine in my lounge. the duplicators to check Sega game that derives conversion so far is Buggy It's really good, but it that they were managing its name from a device in Boy, and even that could won't be released over to copy Starglider II an aircraft jet engine that have been better. I'm not here because Bally/Sente correctly. ignites extra fuel, which impressed with any of the have just closed their to do finall the tt band ones obse hou M clus ma inv SANS WALK SANS WALK to "


"vieNSPAGE HARRIER Deviews MACHINES: ATARI ST AMIGA. SUPPLIER: ELITE. PRICES: $19.99. VERSION TESTED: ATARI ST. REVIEWER: STEVE JARRATT. Sega's amazing coin-op with the hydraulically manipulated console first appeared as a conversion around a year and a half ago. Although a good seller, Space Harrier was generally regarded as something of a disappointment due mainly to the restrictions imposed by the smaller, eight-bit machines. Now and after quite a delay (I saw working and apparently finished levels of the ST version at last because oncoming missiles are completely hidden from view. Ultimately, Space Harrier year's PCW show) Space drawn, although still quite is disappointing. Without Harrier has finally arrived jerky at times. the novelty of being thrown on the 16-bitters. The main As with its predecessors, around in the hydraulic difference between these however, the game suffers seat, the game is reduced and earlier versions are the from one major flaw: since to a fairly average shoot colourful graphics plus the the action is viewed from em up which, at worst, can speed and quality of the behind the main character er be extremely frustrating. 3D update. The he successfully blocks any Having said that, this is the chequerboard floor moves fire heading directly for definitive Space Harrier, extremely smoothly, and him. This frequently leads and the one to go for if the sprites are nicely to the loss of a life simply you're a fan of the coin-op. The Amiga version should Space Harrier disappointing. be more or less identical. un som Om GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY OVERALL UPDATE... Only the Amiga versions of Space Harrier and Elite. Bombjack are now outstanding. All 8-bit versions have been available for well over a year. laava BOMBJACKE MACHINES: ATARI ST/ AMIGA. SUPPLIER: ELITE PRICES: $19.99. VERSION TESTED: ATARI ST. REVIEWER: STEVE JARRATT. Elite's eight-bit versions of the Tecmo coin-op appealing backdrops in to add variety appeared back in 1986 order to 'defuse bombs A mixture of airborne and now, with the advent which appear on each beings hinder Jack's of the 16-bitters, Elite has screen. mission, contact with taken the opportunity of Each bomb is made safe them signals the removal dusting off the old title and simply by flying into it, and of one of his three lives, shoving on a new price once the current screen There are also extra bonus tag has been totally cleared. icons which float around Bomb Jack is a small the next, more difficult one, the screen, including an caped crusader-type can be attempted. There extra life, a bonus character who travels the are six screens in all, multiplier to rapidly. world suitably cycling round with increase scores and a represented by a series of different platform layouts power pill which temporarily turns all on-screen meanies into shiny coins to be collected for additional points. The ST version reviewed is extremely close to the arcade game but for one or two artistic licenses and the music. It is fun to play, but at twenty quid represents a rather a dubious investment. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY OVERALL OOOOO PLAVERI 7:20 PLAVERI 3000 PLAYER2 PLAYER2 WWW ROUND ROUND HIGHERRE HIGHSCORE Elite. A Bombjack goes defusing. Action at the Acropolis. "


"A new generation of magazine for a new generation of computers JUNE 1988  ISSUE ZERO $1.50 ATARI ST) AMIGA PC IT GAMES CARRIER COMMAND Incredible Realtime action from Rainbird FORV 16-BIT GAMES SIAGE 1 US Gold's ST conversion of Sega's classic coin-op GAUNTLET II A corker of a conversion from US Gold VINA TRIP TO CALIFORNIA N CONCORDE PS D TO CALIFORNIA OBLITERATORI LPsygnosis' latest is a real killer Coming Soon.. Issue One Out September 14th. "


"AP TIIT are TUTO STOP STOP, STOR THEO THE THE THE History ij The first 3 years Computer Industry sources spoke of alarm and disquiet today as US Gold Europe's forerunners in home entertainment software announced plans for a September release that marks a milestone in the development of the home computer industry. Titled \"HISTORY IN THE MAKING\", it chronicles the early giant successes of this exciting industry and is regarded by many experts to be the finest single collection of computer games ever produced...... a real must for computer enthusiasts and a true collector's item to be treasured for years to come. . In just four short years constantly led from the commented to our home computer entertain front, outstripping competreporters: \"US Gold is the ment has grown into a itors in satisfying the entertainment software furious and exciting demands of an increasingly industry in the UK and now industry not only bringing discerning public. US Gold Europe. much pleasure and now stands firmly at the enio y ment to many head of a very stable and \"In short, the collection youngsters throughout vital industry leaving will appeal to everyone Great Britain and Europe, behind it many memorable it's not just a compilation but creating a whole and outstanding achieveof games but a true industry that has made ments. chronicle of the developenormous strides forward Now the company has in technology and the my nas ment of this fantastic announced plans to create industry of ours.\" standards of entertainanother shockwaveit's ment. taking those early No company has done masterpieces from its own It's hardly surprising our more to advance the cause outstanding success and competitors are unhappy than US Gold. Deriving its bringing them together in From the very early days name from the early one collection 15 true we were the innovators and activities of importing classics in all. A spokesman we therefore developed software from America for US Gold is not some real innovative and adapting it for the surprised at the market's games games that can be home market, US Gold has reaction when he called classics of their time. "


"GOLD) S. GOD U.S. GOLD NEWS 104 NEWS @ SOM NEWS @ E GOLD U.S. GOLD IS GOL E NEWS 11 the Making MONDAY, 19TH SEPTEMBER, 1988 and is prothem now...\", \"I've only heard of such games as Beach Head, now's my chance to see what I've missed...\" are common amongst the players that we've talked to. \"But the real winners are No one has achieved so SPYHUNTER... Bally around the world with 8 the 1st great arcade the buying public it's much and no one is able to Midway's armoured car incredible, and unusual conversion. ROAD fantastic value.\" command such outstanding classic became a home events by Epyx. EXPRESS RUNNER... the summer software. Now a mature computer cult. RAID... RAIDER... a rootin'. No. 1 of that year Perhaps one of the most pe's market is in residence, we Impressive yet tootin', arcade action the cartoon, coin-op capers informative comments was lease decided that the time was controversial, Raid hit the Easter hit of that vear from Atari Games. made by an industry DRY right to make a bold headlines in the national INFILTRATOR... arcade. IMPOSSIBLE insider: \"US Gold seem to statement about how press. GOONIES... strategy simulation all MISSION...the have done it again. Whilst significant and impressive Spielberg film translated ingredients that benchmark test for all we're all happily computer software is, we into the first simultaneous culminated into a subsequent platform ured constructing compilations therefore collected two player interactive European No. 1. BEACH games, still regarded by from any product we can together these classics arcade game. HEAD II... tough action many as one of the greatest find and offering them to collected from only our SUPERCYCLE... the sequel, another monster computer games of all Our the public as value-forfirst three years and are Epyx spectactular on two chartbuster by Access. time. KUNGFU is the money packs, US Gold to publish them in one wheels. Fast and furious GAUNTLET... the biggest MASTER... a Gallup No. have put together the finest historic pack. Many of an all-time racing classic. selling computer game 1 Data East often now collection of classic games today's enthusiasts may WORLD GAMES... 1986/87, over 300,000 sold imitated, never emulated. ever assembled and the have been too young to LEADERBOARD... \"This support material and givehave played the originals is the sports simulation of ection \"HISTORY IN THE MAKING aways will be just as it's obviously a real treat the year-if not the decade\", The First Three Years good and up to their usual for them and many of the Zzap 64. amazing standard. Quite ilation older players will treasure Besides its possession as simply, I think we're all true the value that such a a collection piece the stunned once again, but the evelopcollection offers. In short, tastic package is considered by real winners are the buying the collection will appeal to LA DERBOARD many to offer unheard of public it's fantastic everyone it's not just a EXPRESS RAIDER value for money and an value.\" compilation of games but a IMPOSSTKUB MISSION opportunity not to be Where will US Gold go true chronicle of the ing our SUPER CYCLB GAUNTLER missed. Many computer from here well no one development of this happy. BEACHHAAD INPTITRATOR enthusiasts await eagerly knows, all we can really say fantastic industry of ours.\" ly days RAIDCVER MOSCOW SPYHUNTER the mid-September release is that if they keep going ors and BEACH HEAD... the KUNG FU MASTER BRUCE LEE GOONTES and comments such as on making history like this eloped leader of the pack, US \"I've started saving then they can only keep vative Gold's 1st quarter of a WORLD GAMES ROAD RUNNER BEACHHEAD now...\", \"I wasn't into going on from success to can be million seller. BRUCE computers when the early success and all computer ir time. LEE... the first famous The games selected to honour this special collection releases came out, I'm owners will be pleased for face to join US Gold. are each of outstanding merit in their own right ... looking forward to playing that to continue. ware "


"1050A EMLUNIL GAL? bridge near the start of the difficult! way in one direction, with game. An 8-directional an almost mazelike series Oh, it's loaded. So, what filmation scroller, it's not have we got here. $&\"ing hard to see why it couldn't them. A river cuts across hell! This is berrilliant. This is fit on a 48K job. The playing the middle of the island. the game your 128 was area is massive, and all and ends in a glorious made for. This is fantastic.beautifully detailed. Huge waterfall. Check the Oh, I'm dead. This is mountain ranges bar your screenshot and you'll see what I mean. Walk across the tops of the thick growth MACHINES: SPECTRUM 128, within the water, avoiding PC, ST. SUPPLIER: OCEAN. the tentacled things that PRICE: SPEC CASS $7.95, lurk within, and you come DISK $14.95, OTHERS $19.95. to the natives. This is where VERSION TESTED: SPEC 128. the objects that are REVIEWER: TONY DILLON. scattered about come in. The objects are It's taken a long time, but manipulated using a little that game with the boobs window that you call up and the dinosaurs has with the space bar. In the finally landed on my desk. window are little portraits Better review it I suppose. of the four characters, their Dum de dum, look at the current status (alive or inlay. Yawn, yet another 3 dead) and things like a D filmation type of affair. quit and pause option. Load it up. Beee, dip. Bee Move your little arrow to a diddley dip. Usual good to loading screen. Nice long specific picture of a person, and another wait. Quite a bit of code window will appear telling this, well it is 128K only. you what they are carrying Your plane has crash A Don't look down snappy crocs below. and what items are nearby! landed somewhere in the What makes this game so midst of Tibet, on a small hard is the things like uncharted island. It's four natives, dinosaurs, occupants are unharmed stegasauruses, and but the plane is a write-off. pterodactils. Taking a look around they Everything else just trys to notice something strange. run you over, except the Something big and natives, who try to rape strange. Something big. you, at least that's what it strange and prehistoric. looks like. All you have to Something dinosaurlike. fight back with is a puny You are in control of the little gun. four characters in the The game is entirely game, but obviously only monochromatic but this one at a time, and can doesn't. In fact, if this chop and change game was in full Spectrumbetween them. O-Colour, I can visualise it Jarret is the smooth, being a bit of a mess. strong hunk of meat that Very easy to use and you see on the inlay very attractive to look at, artwork. Pilot of the WTSS is yet another notch crashed plane, he is A Natives are not necessarily friendly just like reviewers. on Ocean's belt of good almost the perfect person reputation. Congrats to to lead this band to safety. Denton Designs on an Gloria, who is the stunning sexpot, also on excellent game. the inlay, is a newlywed GRAPHICS who, despite being a girlie, is one of the strongest SOUND members of the group, will VALUE wise, and is one of the last to complain about petty PLAYABILITY little things like falling off OVERALL cliffs and being hit by boulders. Her husband Dirk UPDATE is, well, Dirk. You can't really say much about him, The ST version looks fab, apart from the fact that retaining the feel of the he's a bit of a weed and is Spectrum graphics, always ready for a good 10-001 though making use of the moan. Clive, Gloria's dad machine's colour and is a rich, obese lump, and I definition. How it plays, find great delight in trying though, has yet to be to get him to cross the rope seen. A Your crashed plane won't help you. ODWIN MONU acaco 3K "


"IF YOU'VE GOT IT IN YOU, OUR APPRENTICESHIP WILL BRING IT OUT. Business & Technician Education Council National Certificate The Army flies. REME keeps it flying. BTEC. A certificate they're crying out for in British Industry can be yours 2 years before any civilian. Today's Army has some of the most powerful and sophisticated equipment in the world. Telecommunications equipment like Ptarmigan provide the Army with its own telephone and data network. Rapier ground-to-air missiles rely on complex electronics technology. And tanks like Challenger are fitted with laser target acquisition systems. The responsibility for maintaining such equipment falls squarely on the shoulders of Army technicians. Which is why all these young men are trained at the Army's own Apprentice Colleges. There are over 15 types of Technical Apprenticeships on offer. To qualify for some you'll need to have, or expect to get 3 good GCSEs (or equivalent), one of which should be in a technical subject. But not all our apprenticeships are technical. We have courses for cooks, carpenters, joiners, plumbers, even accountants. But first you've got to show us you can take on a challenge. Because that's what being a Professional is all about. Electronic Technician. Keeping the Army's lines of communication clear, sharp and distortion free. The Army Catering Corps. 150,000 customers. Up to three times a day. The Royal Engineers. One of the world's oldest firms of map makers. Survey the world. Who else pays you to play your favourite sport? I am between 15 and 1712 years of age and would NAME LMRO MISS like to know more about Army Apprenticeships O Orl am between 15 and 25 years of age and would ADDRESS. like to know more about other Army Careers. O For further details send to: Army Careers Service, (Dept CVG 31/8/A), PO BOX 720, Chelmsford, CM1 3BR. DATE OF BIRTH PHONE 0800 555 555 (FREE) THE PROFESSIONALS SK (24 Hours) THE ARMED FORCES ARE EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYERS UNDER THE TERMS OF THE RACE RELATIONS ACT 1976. LAGE "


"pavien TO HELL AN knock you too egog rodent MACHINE: C64. SUPPLIER: CRL. them is definitely on the to be knocked down monsters can not only PRICE: $9.95 CASS, $14.95 porky side: he'd give through to immensely knock you into the soup DISK. Chubby Gristle a waddle annoying jumping rodent and so waste one of your VERSION TESTED: C64. for his money! things all too eager to eight lives, but also saps REVIEWER: MATT BIELBY. He does however come knock you off your perch your energy To Hell and Back is the best equipped with a litter the caverns, making Luckily bibles appear to CRL game we've seen in a handy.dandy boomerang movement a bit, we build up your energy, and while. Yes, I know that's not halo with which to zap your \"hellish'. Hitting any after bouncing through a saying much, but after the attackers and supposedly gobble of turkeys they 'transform them into angels have recently folsted upon and send them to heaven' an unsuspecting software though what the vicious market, this is like a little currs have quite done to glimpse of light at the end deserve such generous of the dark and dreary CLR of the dark and dreary CLR treatment I'm sure I don't tunnel. It's only a little know. glimpse, mind you: by any other standards this is still a The various levels scroll smoothly and are dotted very uninspired piece of with platforms and lava gamemaking. Apparently, things have pits a la Ghost and been getting pretty Goblins, though it must be decadent in programmer said that where you Andy Jervis's vision of actually can stand and heaven. Not only has Satan where it looks as if you been allowed to just should be able to stand wander in and filch the Ten aren't always that close. PIRE CONTINUE Commandments, but the Critters ranging from angel sent down to the your bog standard 'other place to retrieve ghosties that just queue up A The grey critter on the left is \"Satan's gopher\" (?) hobahat HOT SHOT  MACHINES: SPECTRUM/ each player enters his squat alien life form, but in COMMODORE 64/AMSTRADI name and is assigned a play there are very few ATARI ST/AMIGA/IBM. character by the noticeable differences SUPPLIER: PRISM. PRICE: $8.99/SPECTRUM computer. Personally I'd between them. CASS .99 C64/AMS CASS prefer to choose my own If there isn't a second $12.99 SPEC/C64/AMS. character, rather than be human player, the VERSIONS TESTED: given one randomly. computer supplies an COMMODORE 64. The characters vary in REVIEWER: JULIAN shape and size, from Level one looks very RIGNALL. roughly human shape to much like a Breakout I'm all for original and innovative ideas if the end result is an enjoyable and playable game. Hotshot is certainly original, but unfortunately Wochete it's far from playable. As Garry Williams, C+VG's lardy lump of an ad manager, says after lunch: \"Let me axpand further.\" The game is very simple: it's a one-on-one battle Addictive between either two human TEXEL players, or a human and computer player, set across five different levels. The objective is simple: beat the opponent. Before a game begins, Nice wall, shame about the spacesuit. game, as there's a large group of blocks at the top of the screen. The bottom of the screen is split into two halves, representing each character's playing area. A ball of antimatter is shot into the playing area, and the characters attempt to catch it and shoot it at the blocks, which earns points. This sounds pretty straightforward but there are two catches. Firstly, the players are only allowed to catch the ball using their 'gravitation guns' long sticks. If the ball touches any other part of the character's body, he dissolves and points are given to the opposing player. Secondly, each character exerts a strange gravity force, which causes the ball to follow parabolic curves, making it very difficult to actually catch the ball. The screen is played over a given period of time. When the clock runs down, PRISM card "


"D BACK occasionally looking very blocky and very old reasonably pretty and looking thing in the Moon suitably sombre. There is Lander mould. Imagine generally no problem with guiding your Olds the flat-ground moments in spaceship through some the game, where the tubby tunnels while squinting one's halo proves fairly your eyes and you've got it. devastating weapon, but still, whatever its the main difficulty in the shortcomings, which are level with angel-like ease. whatever that may be. game comes in the hardly surpising Bertram, for such is his which has also gone jumping moments, when considering its age, it's a name, gets to recover one missing. Though the sprites the rodent things nice idea to presenta of the Commandments are all quite blocky and mentioned earlier freebie like this and it Last of all you face the dull and hardly animated apparently meant to be certainly helps to make To devil himself, protected by at all, the general feel of gophers! knock you off Hell and Back look good. wolves, snakes and other the game isn't too bad with with monotonous nasties, to rescue your horn the backdrops regularity. There is a fairly boppy | GRAPHICS theme tune accompanying the SOUND proceedings, and quite a PLAYABILITY generous provision of lives VALUE VALUE allowing you to get futher into it than you would at  OVERALL first imagine, but despite the fact that it isn't UPDATE.. unplayable, it is hard to recommend such a CRL have no plans at generally lacklustre copy current to bring To Hell of an already much and Back to any other imitated game. formats, which is in line On the B-side, if you will, with much of their recent CRL has presented us with releases. If they did, they a game totally would certainly have to unmentioned on charge less than the full PAUSED FIRE CONTINUE Q. QUIT packaging cassette or price they are flogging press release: it is Moon the Commodore at to Crystals, Andy Jarvis' first make it anything like a A Chubby ad-manager ends up in Hell where he belongs/ game ever. A very simple, \"good buy'. aaaaa egeer 1 TS oth players go forward computer opponent is also two-player mode and Spectrum version. one at a time to tackle a very tough to beat, and frustration soon gives way to be perfectly honest, I pinball-style bonus screen. frustration sets in very to boredom. Even if you do don't think Hotshot would he character stands at the quickly. stick with it, there's only five make the grade even as a bottom of the screen and Now, all this would be levels of very similar budget game. Atten he ball ricochets around alright if the game was action. pounds it's vastly he screen. The objective is worth persevering with, but The graphics are very overpriced. Avoid it at all o score as many points as unfortunately it isn't. The poor indeed, and look as costs. possible by shooting the gameplay just isn't though they've been pins in the centre of the exciting even in copied directly from the GRAPHICS creen. When the time limit SOUND Expires, or the character gets hit by the ball, the VALUE bonus screen ends. PLAYABILITY If the player has scored more than 4,000 points, he OVERALL moves onto the next level. If not, the game ends. UPDATE... Subsequent levels play very similarly, but involve The Spectrum version is such things as drowning unsurprisingly identical to your opponent by hitting the Commodore, and enough bricks to raise the should be available water level in his area, and around now if you're doing a similar sort of thing interested. with a black hole. 16-bit versions have One of the game's big improved graphics, but faults is the control unfortunately the basic method. Catching the ball gameplay is the same as is incredibly difficult due to the 8-bit versions so the fiddly control method they're not really worth and weird gravity. The This'll never make the next Olympics. waiting for. W HOT SHOT -W. "


"Reviews WHIRLIGIG MACHINES: ATARI ST/AMIGA. SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD. PRICES: ST AND AMIGA .95. VERSION TESTED: ATARI ST. REVIEWER: GARY WHITTA. Whirligig the game is set far in the future, casting you in the role of a lone starfighter pilot whose mission is to fly around a CAREE strange surreal universe ASGEET (known as Whirligig) in order to collect five perfect solids that are drifting about in the void. Although Careful with those heat seeking missiles. there are only five solids to find, each one could be in your ship's supplies. What only transport you to one any of 4 BILLION (111) levels supplies? Oh, I almost other Eigenspace, and that (called 'Eigenspaces'), so forgot. Your ship, a Meson destination is indicated on obviously some serious Class Fighter, is equipped the region map on view at searching is going to have with some rather useful the beginning of every to be done. Relax though weapons, namely missiles, level. By travelling from you don't actually have and chaft. Missiles are sector to sector in this to go to all of them. That used to destroy the nasties manner, you will would take until eternity. that appear in the game, eventually stumble across You view your ship from (more on that later) and one of the five perfect' in outside as it flies about the since they are the game, each one Whirligig on its quest for heat-seekers, they lock on housing one of the solids solids (or should I say to their target with you're after. When you do 'pitches and rolls all over_frightening accuracy and find a solid, you can use its the place on it's quest for hardly ever miss. However, attractor field to put it in solids' as the mouse control should you be so trigger tow (after dealing with the is infuriatingly difficult to happy as to fire a missile nasty that accompanies use). with no enemies on screen, each one) and by As your ship makes its you're in for a fright as dragging it back through a way across the star they lock onto YOU! In stargate you can capture it. Capture all five and you've won the game. As far as I can see, Whirligig is very similar to Virus insofar as the pig of a control mode will have you tearing your hair out for a while, but once you've got the hang of it, you'll find an absorbing game there. With an alleged 4 billion levels and over 100 billion nasties you could be at it GREE for quite a while. The game ABEET posesses some lovely 3D filled in graphics, both well animated and defined, but not as impressive as its stablemates, Carrier A Weird game with great music. Command and Virus. systems, it will inexorably_ addition, chaff pods are encounter the many defensive drones used to objects, both friendly and destroy enemies, or any hostile, that feature in the missiles they may have game. Depots are Denots are fired at you. GRAPHICS some of the most useful, Anyway, the depots SOUND and are used to replenish mentioned earlier float around in space and can VALUE be used to re-chaff and PLAYABILITY re-arm, depending on OVERALL what kind of depot it is. Refueling depots are slightly more important, as UPDATE ... if you run out of fuel, you're ST and Amiga versions will dead! Travelling from one be on sale in early Eigenspace to another is September. Spectrum, achieved by travelling Commodore, Amstrad, through Stargates, strange and PC versions will follow later in the Autumn swirly rings that need some practice to get through but probably not before mid October at the safely. Each Stargate will earliest. Steady into the Star Gate. avau "


"T Three generations of pure magic... BARD'S I 17 Tales of the Unknown \"... If you are looking for a real challenge, a real fantasy quest and a brilliant game to boot, it does not get better than this.\" POPULAR COMPUTING WEEKLY. Bard's Tale U Out now on the C-64 Cassette, Spectrum and Amstrad and also available on the Amiga, Atari ST, C-64 Disk and IBM PC and compatibles. h ara's Tale UNKNOWN anderd. t: 6 ELECTRONIC ARTS Chercetar None   BARDS II CTRONIC RTS C64 cassette screenshot THE BARD'S TALE. II The Destiny Knight \"... An excellent game that will require hundred's of hours playing... Bard's Tale il is still one of the three best role playing systems currently available.\" YOUR COMMODORE. LA AMIGA \"NEW\" for the Amiga and also available on the C-64 Disk. THE DESTINY ELECTRONIC ARTS DES 2 BARDS III Amiga screen shot THE BARD'S TALE MI THIEFFATE BALLER Thief of Fate.  A starter dungeon for beginners.  Automap feature and enhanced Save Game without penalty. Over 100 spells and 500 monsters. 84 dungeon levels spread over 7 dimensions. 7 kinds of spellcasters, including Chronomancers and Geomancers. \"NEW\" for the C-64 Disk. Redbeard pelled the attack INTINDIHARI Character AC Hits Cond SPP ONTRINDIRIR Commodore screen shot ELECTRONIC ARTS Home Computer Software Electronic Arts produces Home Entertainment Software on most Computer formats. For a product brochure and the location of your nearest stockist, please contact: ELECTRONIC ARTS, 11-49 STATION ROAD, LANGLEY, BERKS SL3 SYN. TEL: SLOUGH (0753) 46465. DEALERS PLEASE CALL (0453) 40906. "


"viens ROAD BI The game was a smash Different types of joystick. This wastes the in the arcades a fact not weapons can be caught. enemy like nobody's missed by US Gold who There is a turbo charger business and does so to wielded their mighty that you use to accelerate a splendid, loud 'n quick, MACHINES: 64, SPECTRUM, cheque book to snap up at great speed enabling machine gun sound. AMIGA ST, AMSTRAD. the rights to the home you to reach the end of the Sound effects are SUPPLIER: US GOLD. versions. level more quickly. A bit of generally excellent in this PRICES: 64 .99 CASS a mixed blessing this Set sometime in the 64 rendition of Road $14.99 DISK, AMSTRAD $9.99, $14.99. SPECTRUM CASS future where the though as it makes steering Blasters especially the $8.99, AMIGA $24.99, ST motorways have become more tricky and increases explosions when you take $19.99. a death dealing the chances of collisions out one of the pill boxes. REVIEWER: EUGENE LACEY. nightmare. If you thought with other vehicles or They are hard to hit and the M25 was hairy then coming off the road. one of your most deadly Road Blasters blends forget it. With mines, lay My favourite weapon is hazards so the loud together the two most bye mounted machine the machine gun which resounding boom when popular features of video gun installations, mad can be operated by you take one out is gaming ever invented bikers, and other crazed pulling back on the particularly satisfying. driving fast and shooting roadsters, Road Blasters is things. a game where only the Just think of the dozens of tough will survive. shooting and driving The secret of Road games that have been Blasters is to make a launched over the years. Successful rendezvous with dt . They are far too numerous the passing let fighter that to list here. hovers above the road and What is strange is that it drops extra weapons to took until 1987 for some soup up your vehicle. bright spark at Atari Catching these weapons Games to put two and two is not easy you have to together and come up with line your car up with the the hybrid 'racer-shooterplane whilst keeping an that is Road Blasters. eye on the twisting road. MULTIPLIER 8: SCORE  FUEL LA SSCORE HILIJU MINE RESERVE MAIN TROR SPEED CATCH SPECIRL HERPE Sigb A Prince would love the purple sky in the Speccy version. If the other cars don't get you then running out of fuel most definitely will unless you are careful to pick up the green and red fuel balls that are scattered around the road at various points. The basic aim of Road Blasters is simply to drive and survive, and get as far as you can. There are fifty levels in total though you don't have to start at the first every time as there is an option to start further in the game if you so wish. The road leads through a series of countries with alternating checkpoints and rally points. The checkpoints are midway goals to aim for with the promise of extra fuel. Rally points are similar to the finish lines in ordinary races a chequered section of road denoting the end of a level. MULTIPLIER 0233CORE ELS RESERVE HAINTANK BANANE Uud leoo 1985 CAICHI PICTAVIAPON A Sun sets as the Road Blasters car prepares for battle. "


"STERS A control dash at the foot of the screen shows your fuel level, speed, warns of incoming mines and displays your multiplier status. The multiplier works by counting the number of yellow cars and bikers you blast. The aim is to hit as many as possible without missing this will give you a maximum multiplier of your score at the end of the level. Road Blasters is very much a high score game. One to boast about once you get your performance at the top of the pile. The 64 version reviewed here was coded by the same team that produced the Commodore version of Out Run father and son team Amazing Productions. So just how amazing is Road Blasters? The first thing you notice is the graphics and it has to MULTIPLIERI SCORE M DE CANON RANAN ACRELCARWERPUN Road Blasters car armed with missile launcher. little to be desired. On this excellent coin-op to a some of the early levels the better programming team. road actually moves for the truth is that both Out you. You simply stay in the Run and now Road Blasters centre of the road, don't have to be ranked as fairly touch your joystick at all, average conversions. and you end up at the end Both games deserved a of the level. All you have to lot better. do is blast the odd car that gets in your way. Of course there is no GRAPHICS point whatever in doing this as you won't amass any SOUND significant number of VALUE points. But that is not the PLAYABILITY point you shouldn't be able to get away with it. OVERALL The coin-op certainly won't let you Graphics and animation gripes aside the basic UPDATE... addictive element of Road Blasters is still here in this By the time you read this conversion. The strength of the Spectrum and the original Atari game Amstrad versions will be design shines through on sale. and I did find the game Amiga and ST versions very difficult to put down. are being coded by Probe However, you can't help in London. They are not wishing that US Gold had expected to hit the shops entrusted the conversion of until the end of August. A Hug the centre lane for a crash free ride. be said these are far from completely lacking in amazing shading which makes it The back drops range difficult to take seriously. from futuristic city scapes By far the major fault with to the unbiquitous desert. the game however is its All three resembled an lack of speed. The car just early attempt at doesn't create a sensation landscaping on the Atari of speed. Only when you VCS rather the pick up the turbo charger Commodore 64. does it move convincingly. The cars and planes are from a standing start you also pretty basic lacking have to reach about 60 in detail and moving very mph before you can blockily towards you as the discern that the car is road scrolls. moving at all. The colours are very stark Steering also leaves a Una "


"R.PEARSE FREBR. A-812387 touched down without a sound. Parachute hidden safely away, he surveyed quadrant'X' with the steely gaze of a professional killer. The task was hard, some would say impossible, but to a special operations agent the impossible was merely a way of life. The brief had been simple, recover the vital NATO documents and of course, those three familiar words on which A-812387 thrived... LEAVE NO SURVIVORS! Coming soon on Spectrum Cassette .95, Amstrad Cassette .95, Disc .95 and Commodore 64 Cassette .95, Disc .95. Telecomsoft, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford St, London WCIA 1PS. Firebird and Firebird Logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications PLC SEE US ON STAND 3447 AT THE P.C. SHOW, EARLS COURT, 14-18 SEPT. "


"Skw.........Tactics....... Strategy... Decisions.........Excitement......... Tension........Action FOOTBALL B CRICKET QUALITY STRATEGY GAMES from E J SOFTWARE Established 1984) EUROPEAN CHAMPIONS *NEW* THE INTERNATIONAL CHALLENGE OF THE EUROPEAN NATIONS CUP Genuine Nations Cup Format with full Random Draw of 32 Seeded Teams Fixture List, Results and League Tables of ALL 8 Groups Discipline Medical Reports Squad of 22 Players plus Other players available 17 Month Itinerary of Qualifying Group (Arrange Friendlies) and Finals Plus many more Superb Features and Options. EUROPEAN CHAMPIONS includes E & J's MATCH PLAY SYSTEM an imaginative and exciting new style of match presentation which captures the ACTION, DRAMA TENSION of International Football WORLD CHAMPIONS A COMPLETE WORLD CUP SIMULATION Select Friendlies 25 Players Qualifying Group 2 in-Match Subs Discipline Table Select Tour Opponents Extra Time Final Rounds Players Gain Experience 7 Skill Levels TEXT MATCH SIMULATION including Bookings Goal Times, Named & Recorded Goal Scorers, Injury Time, Corners. Free Kicks, Match Clock, Penalties PLUS many more Features PREMIER II CAN YOU HANDLE ALL OF THIS? Play all Teams Home Away Unique Transfer Market Team & Substitute Selection Named & Recorded Goal Scorers Injuries Transfer Demands Continuing Seasons Squad Listing ALL Teams Financial Problems 7 Skill levelsOffers to Manage other Teams Sackings Managers Salary Save Game Team Styles Bank Loans AND many more Features EUROPEAN II THE MOST COMPLETE SIMULATION OF EUROPEAN CLUB FOOTBALL YOU CAN BUY Home & Away legs. Full Penalty Shoot Out with SUDDEN DEATH)2 in-Match Subs Away Goals count Double til Drawnl Full Team & Sub Selection Extra Time 7 Skill Levels Enter your own PREMIER II Winning Team TEXT MATCH SIMULATION plus Sending off and Disallowed Goals Results Table PLUS MUCH MORE! CRICKET MASTER A SUPERB SIMULATION OF ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL/COUNTY CRICKET Weather, Wicket Outfield Conditions Batting & Bowling Tactics Team Selection Fast, Medium & Spin Bowlers 4 Types of Batsmen Select Field Layout 3 Skill Levels Wides Byes No Ball Run Out Misfield Dropped Catches Scoreboard Batting Bowling Analysis Run Rate Single Option 3 Game Speeds STAR FEATURE a complete MATCH OVERVIEW showing Ball by Ball Action and Commentary and MUCH MORE! TEST MASTER *NEW* A COMPREHENSIVE SIMULATION OF A 5 DAY TEST MATCH-Includes most of the Features of CRICKET MASTER and MATCH OVERVIEW plus Declarations Nightwatchmen Light Meter Rain Stops Play Varying Number of Overs per Day Follow On Save Game New Ball Bad Light interruptions TEST MASTER is a True representation of a Complete Test Match and offers the ULTIMATE CHALLENGE to All Cricket Enthusiasts CRICKET MASTER & TEST MASTER prices Include a FREE pad of SCORESHEETS Software Spectrum Commodore Amstrad availability Any 48 / 129 64/128K Tape Disc + 3 Tape 5 Disc Tape 3\" Disc EUROPEAN CHAMPIONS .95 11.95 WORLD CHAMPIONS E6.95 .95 .95 E10.45 .95 11.95 PREMIER IN E6.95 .95 .95 .45 .95 .95 EUROPEAN .95 .95 .95 .45 7.05 .95 CRICKET MASTER 17.95 E11.95 nia 8.95 .95 TEST MASTER 18.95 .95 FANTASTIC VALUE Special Discount of E2.00 for every EXTRA game purchased le.g. buy 2 Games deduct 12.00 from TOTAL buy 3 Games deduct .00 from TOTAL 4 Games  etc ALL GAMES are available by MAIL ORDER for IMMEDIATE despatch by 1st class post and include Full Instructions. (OUTSIDE UK please add [1.00 for postage and send payment in Pound Sterling only PLEASE STATE WHICH MACHINE AND TAPE OR DISC Cheques or Postal Orders payable to EG J Software Send to E & SOFTWARE, Room 5.37 Westmoor Road. ENFIELD, Middlesex EN3 7LE. SOFT CELL 194-196 Canterbury Street, Gillingham, Kent ME7 5XG Telephone 0634 56460, LAST NINJA 2 Spectrum/CBM 64/Amstrad Cass .99 CBM 64/Amstrad Disk .49 AMIGA A500 From $379.99 CBM64 only .99 Summer Sports Pack Send large SAE for free catalogue. Please state machines. Please make cheques payable to: Video Machine/Soft Cell Free P&P (Europe add f1.00) WANTED  SPACE ADVENTURERS OF THE 21st CENTURY  EDERATIO OF FREE PEE TRAD ADERS "


"\"eviens FIRE AND FORGET At the top of the screen is a numeric speed indicator, current score, level indicator and a large fuel gauge, which gradually ticks down as the battle car zooms along. The action is set over six MACHINES: SPECTRUM/C levels, which represent 64/AMSTRAD AMIGA/ different parts of the world. ATARI ST. The objective is to race are awarded, and a map the game makes it very SUPPLIER: TITUS. VERSIONS TESTED: ATARI along the road, blasting of the remaining locations difficult to react to ST/AMIGA. anything and everything. is shown, allowing the oncoming hazards, so you REVIEWER: JULIAN and pass the checkpoint at player to choose the next end up sitting in the middle RIGNALL. the end before the TM's fuel area of play. of the road pressing the fire runs out. Looking at the screen button like crazy and The evil and powerful Extra fuel can be picked shots, you might be led to attempting to run over the Inter-galactic liberation up en-route by running believe that Fire and occasional fuel cone. Organisation has invaded over blue and green cones Forget is graphically Since this tactic allows you the earth. They have razed that are scattered stunning. Sadly, this isn't to go all the way through to several cities to the ground thoughout the level. the case, since all impact the end, the game's and are holding many Every step of the way is is lost when the game is in appeal is very short-lived others hostage. It seems frought with danger, and motion. indeed. they intend to destroy the enemy helicopters The sprite update is fast, score score high speed Uor bonus score high 0 speed tor 20857 1386864 bonus 81 8188 372514 1386864 32 8180 fuel fuel I wnwaal A Don't let the graphics deceive you! A The animation in the game is jerky. Earth as we know it. Things approach at speed. but very jerky, and objects are looking very grim. Fortunately the seem to appear out of GRAPHICS But hark! Could that Thundermaster is armed nowhere. Other highly distant gunfire be the with the latest laser guns, annoying factors are the SOUND sound of an approaching and can destroy an enemy lines on the road they PLAYABILITY hero? Indeed it is, and just craft with one single hit. don't scroll down the in the nick of time. However, the enemy screen as might be VALUE Driving the Thunder reciprocate and a expected, but just change OVERALL Master, the newest and well-aimed blast from the colour. This would be most powerful land enemy craft sees the TM alright if there was a fighting machine, the hero explode in colourful variety of shades, but since UPDATE must take on the entire clouds of debris. The there are only two, the IGLO forces single player has an unlimited effect is pathetic and gives Spectrum, Amstrad and handedly and banish supply of TMs, but death no sense of motion Commodore versions banish them to whence results in a loss of fuel. whatsoever if it wasn't for won't be appearing for a they came. This is the cue There are also mines and the occasional roadside month or two, but will for some colouful and other hazards littered apparently play very noisy Roadblasters type around the roadways that think the TM was static! similarly to their 16-bit action. are either avoided, or All this would be forgiven counterparts. The action is viewed from blasted out of the way. if Fire and Forget was fun The IBM PC version behind the Thundermaster When the end of the level to play but unfortunately should be avialable by as it zooms down the road. is reached, bonus points it isn't. The sheer speed of the time you read this. "


"MAIL-SOFT 15.99 PO BOX No: 3 Ashton-under-Lyne MAIL ORDER Lancs OLG 6AH Mail Order Club for all Amiga/STICBM 64/Spectrum Owners A club for dedicated enthusiasts who appreciate a fantastic software selection with good prices and a superb service. We have been selling software since the home computer market began we have experience that true enthusiasts appreciate. Try us out you won't be sorry! We sell the best for less, i.e. RRP .95 our price .95 RRP .95 our price 97.50. Also joysticks, leads, covers, memory expansions (Amgia), external drives (ST and AMIGA), mouse mats, disk boxes etc. etc. etc. 6.99 02 Empires Send now for a price list of our massive selection and upon receipt of your first order you will be placed on our club mailing list and will receive regular updates. Please don't forget to tell us which computer you have PRICE BUSTIN' MAKES US FEEL GOOD Title\" Spec Spec C64 C64 AMS AMS Title Atari St Amiga IBM PC Cass Disk Cass Dsk Cass Dsk Elite 12.99 12.99 18.75 Night Raider............... 7,50 D17.50 02 750 02 Starglider il Overlander .............. 5.50 D1 5.9901 6.99 02 Bubble Bobble Carner Command 5.50 DI 630 02 630 02 15.99 18.25 Alien Syndrome ...... 6.30 D2 6.99 02 6.99 02 Time Stood Sull Foors Manager 2 15.99 18.75 090 02 03 02 699 02 Summer Olympiad 13.99 18.75 Psycho Pigs UXB 5.75 02 750 02 750 02 Space Harrier Street Warrior........... 6.75 02 7.50 02 750 02 Pandora Soldier of Light...........6.30 6.99 01 Bionic Commando ..... 6.75 D2 6.99 D2 6.99 D2 15.99 18.75 Street Fighter ...... 6.75 D1 6.99 D2 6.99 D Elite 750 10.49 Whirigia Head Alignment. 18.75 Empire Strikes Back 6.99 02 6.99 6.99 02 Legend of the Sword Hopping Mad 5.50 D1 6.99 Bubble Bobble 12.99 Barbarian 6.99 D2 6.99 Match Day 2 5.50 01 6.30 Three Stooges ... Hercules........... The Games ... 6.75 02 27 99 39.99 Flight Simulator 750 . ..... Captain Blood......... 15.99 18.75 Road Blasters ............ 6.75 D2 7.50 Linekers Superskil ...... 5.50 DI Night Raider Defender of Crown... Starglider .... 10.99 D2 Pour Beardsley Last Nina 2 ........8.99 Suurteet1 Ikari Warriors ...,6.30 Bobo Football Director ........ 6.99 Foundation Waste.. . 16.99 Hawk Eye Garrison 1 or 2. .. OCP Art Studio .......... 9.99 Verminator ...... Groen Beret il ...........5.50 international Soccer Gunship. ............ 12.99 7.50 Time. Magick ...........................13.99 Track Suit Manager .6.99 Corruption 15.99 18.75 N. Mansels G Pr ... 7.50 D2 Captain Blood ............ 6.99 imposs. Mission ll ..................... 14.99 14.99 18,75 Peter Beardsley ....... 6.30 Leather Necks ......................... 12.99 12.99 Dritor Black Lamp ........................ 12.99 12.99 Hopping Mad .50 Xenon ..................... 12.99 12.99 Dark Side ................. 6.99 Bards Tale ............ 18.75 18.75 18.75 The Games Bionic Commandos 1499 14.99 14.99 Dark Septre Red October 16.99 16.99 18.75 Oblitrator 16.99 15.99 Whiligig Test Drive 18.75 Battleheld Germany 18.75 18.75 9.99 Return To Genises ............ 15.99 15.99 Pandora Football Manager 2.............1299 12.99 13.99 Soccer Supremo 9.99 9.99 Time + Magick Gold Runner ll. 15 99 15.99 Salamander Alen Syndrome.. 12.99 12.99 Marauder Bermuda Triangle. Captain Blood Bugay boy 13.99 16.99 Samurai Warrior... Gaunter 14.99 Carrier Command... Thunder Cats 13.995.99 Overlander 13 99 16.99 Guild of Thieves Stary 15.99 Aaron 13.99 13.99 G. Hum. Mindfighter .. 16.99 16.99 20.99 Virus Intensity Quade Alien 13.99 13.99 18.75 Jinxter Interceptor............. 18.75 Pandora..... Stir Crazy ......... 13.99 13.99 Target Renegade 5.50 D1 6.30 01 6.30 DI Street fighter......... 14.99 18.75 Tracker Road Blastor... 14.99 18,75 Muitace-ST Also Available on disk format: D1=8.99, D2=.99, D3-.99, 04:14.99, D5=.99 Prices include P4P in UK, Europe add  per tape, elsewhere add .50. CHOP.O Payable to MAIL-SOFT, (C+VG) P.O. BOX 589, LONDON N156JJ. Please specity machine type in your order. Price matching: If you see a title cheaper by another company in this mag we will match the price. This does not apply to other companies special offers. If you don't see the title you require simply deduct 25% of the A.R.P and send your order to us. E ept, Budget. Sega Nintendo titles) We stock all software + joysticks for all machines.Access and Visa cards accepted 38 88 888888888888888888888888888888is is 888888888888888888888888888888868565 NONNO DONO DI 9.99889.88899998, 9. 88888888888888888888 2888.288888888888 ARE YOU THROWING YOUR MONEY OUT OF THE WINDOW? 8888888888888 Outro Re-Inking your own Amstrad DMP Ribbons by using out kit, comprising of one spare ribbon, one bottle of special ink and full instructions, each kit re-inks on average 40x's DMP 2000/2180/3000/3160...... ........10.00 DMP 4000........ ..............95 Send for catalogue of over three thousand titles for Amstrad CPC, PCW. PC, Commodore. Spectrum, Atari, Atari ST, BBC, MSX, Electron, Apple Series 2, Apple Macintosh Computer. All at discount prices. Scotland's Largest Computer Mail Order Firm COMSOFT MAIL ORDER DEPARTMENT 48 Duke Street, Coldstream, Scotlar ream, Scotland TD12 4LF Tel: 0890 2854 Fax: 0980 2927 SITUATIONS VACANT THE MISSION... As the universe unfolds and the population explosion engulfs mother planet, fearless space adventurers are required to break all known galactic boundaries to seek out new territories and locate vital wealth sources. THE REWARDS ... a more exciting trip than any halucinatory drug can Induce, more wealth than any human can ever hope to dispose of and an Immortal acknowledgement In the history of mankind. DEEP SPACE PILOTS INTERSTELLAR NAVIGATORS Leading a squadron of Astro Explorators and Experience of four-dimensional interstellar corps of elite Interstellar Infantry, your travel and super solar communications to responsibility is to fulfil your mission chart unknown territories and plot an failure will meet with court martial and untroubled path through deep space. execution. FUSION (FTI) DRIVE MECHANICS ASTRONAUTICAL ENGINEERS Detailed knowledge of kronite Astromechanical engineering skills propulsion and power generation and understanding of 5th generation systems and nuclear fusion back-up robotics required to maintain a fleet for the extended maintenance of under the most severe and untested hyperspace travel and life conditions. support systems. FEDERATION CREE TRADY FEDERATION OF FREE TRADERS Apply in confidence to Gremlin Graphics "


"Advance orders accepted VECTOR SOFTWARE London Wa APH 10 Barley Mow Passage, Chiswick London W4 4PH Tel: 01-994 6477 Call 01-994 6477 and ask for Vector Software (office hours) SPECIALISTS IN MAIL ORDER Hopping Mad 6.75 9.50 Bionic Commandos 6.75 10.50 13.50 6.75 1050 6.75 0.50 Bars Tale Beyond Zork Bionic Commandes Cane Command 050 16:50 19.95 13.50 16.50 AMIGA Title Alien Syndrome Anfica Dans Cass Disk Desolat Dream W Football Manager i 6.75 10.50 951 10.50 5 850 6.75 1090 Maraude Night Raider Nimitz il North Star Now Games Dutrun Pattony Rommel Pegasus Bridge P.H.M. Pegasus 350 15.50 16:50 Gary Linears Sals Gauntletil Great Giara Sisters Hopping Mad Van der Nigel Mansel GP Night Rider 6.75 10.50 6.75 10.50 13.50 13.50 10.50 6.75 0.50 6.75 10.50 6.75 0.50 1350 6.75 1050 675 1091 Bands Tale Bards Tale Bonic Commandos Carrier Command Comuption Empire Strikes Back Football Manager Goldrunner Great Gara Sisters 16.50 13.50 13.50 16.50 13.50 185 1350 Fury SPECTRUM Street Fighter 625 9.50 Case Disk Summer Olympiad Alen Syndrome 625 1050 Target Renegade Al Sans The Games Winter 613950 Arcade Force Time Magic 10.50 10.50 65 950 Vindicator 5.50 9.50 Barbarian Virus 5.50 9.50 Barbarian We are the Champions 6.75 Bands Tale 525 Where Time Stood Soil 5.50 10.50 Bionic Commandes 528 Whi 550950 Carrier Command 10.50 11.50 10 Great Games 6.75 10.50 Comuption 11.50 19 Boot Camp Dark Side 6.75 10.50 625 950 COMMODORE 64 Desano Case Disk Empire Stries Back Alien Syndrome 6.75 950 Football Manager 6.75 150 Al Stars 5.25 10.50 Arcade Force 4 6.25 10:50 Gary Linekar's Skills 550 950 Barbarian 6.75 9.50 Gauntlet Barbara Great Gano Sisters 8.25 9.50 Bards Tale 6.75 10.50 Gunsti 6.75 10.50 Bards Tale 1150 Bards Tale 11.50 Hooping Mad 550 9.50 Bionic Commandos 6.75 9.50 Hot Shot Chuck Yeager 6.75 1150 Souad Conuption 12.50 Marauder 5.50 950 Dark Side 8.75 950 Nigel Mansel GP 8.75 10.50 Descator 6.75 9.50 Night Raider 6.75 991 Dream Warrior Nimitz Empire Strikes Back Nina Football Manager 6.75 10.50 North Star 6.75 10.50 Now Games Gary Lineka's Skills 6.75 10.50 Outron Gauntlet 8.75 950 Pegasus Bridge 6.75 10.50 Great Gan Sisters 6.75 9.50 P.A.M. Pegasus 625 10.50 Gurship 10.50 13.50 525 950 He 8.75 9.50 6.75 10.50 6.75 10.50 950 1050 6.7505 675 950 635 10.50 625 10.50 6.75 10.50 1350 Sargon ll Dress Street Fight Summer Olympiad Target Renegade The Games Winter Time Magic Vindicator We are the Champions Where Time Stood Stil Whiligi World Tour Golf 10 Great Games! 19 Bocano 950 13.50 13.50 6.75 1050 10.50 10.50 6.25 10.50 6.75 6.25 10.50 Empire Sties Back Football Manager Gauntlet Goldrunari Great Gara Sisters Gary Linears Scis Gunsho Hot Shot Legend of the Sword Night Raider Outus Peter Beardsley Road Blasters Rochet Roger Starglideri Sta Goose Sargon lll Chess STAC Startet Street Fighter Summer Olympiad Tesforce Test Drive Time Magic 950 North Star Dumn Peer Beardsley P.H.M. Pegasus Road Basters Street Fighter Target Renegade The Games Winter Time Vagic Vindicator We are the Champions WhereTime Stood S Whiligig 10 Great Games 16.50 13.50 16.50 27.50 1350 5 6.75 10.50 6.75 1050 675 1050 6.75 0.51 10.50 10.50 6.25 10.50 6.75 625 1050 635 10.50 6.75 10.50 1351 Hot Shot Legend of the Sword Night Raider Per Beardsley Road Busters Rocket Roger Starglideri Star Goose Sargon ll Chess Starfleet 1 Street Fighter Sunneryd Temaforce Test Drive Time & Magic Vectoral Virus Where Time Stood S1 Whiligi World Tour Golf US 95 1350 13.50 16.50 6.75 Tide AMSTRAD Title Cass Disk Alien Syndrome 6.75 10.50 All Stars Arcade Force 6.75 13.50 6.25 10.50 Barbarian 6.75 9.50 Barbarian Bars Tale 825 1050 Vectorbal Vindicator 13.50 ATARIST Cass Disk Alen Syndrome Arcade Force 16.50 Arkanoid! 13.50 Aniforms 9.50 Barbarian 50 Where Time Stood Stil 13.50 15.50 Wigs 13.50 All prices include VAT and p+p in UK. Please add E2 to overseas orders for p +p. Please make cheques/P.O.'s payable to Vector Software. Orders normally dispatched within 24 hours. Send SAE for free price list specify machine. CLASSIFIED ADVERTISEMENTS THOUSANDS OF SOFTWARE TITLES *** FAST AND EFFICIENT SERVICE FREE DELIVERY ** DISCOUNT SOFTWARE Up to 21% off RRP for ATARI, COMMODORE, SPECTRUM AMSTRAD, BBC, MSX and IBM PC. Ring for Info Pack on any of the above machines: 24 hour HOTLINE: 0455 613377 B. BYTES COMPUTER SYSTEMS, 19 Southfield Road, Hinkley, Leicestershire LE 10 TUA. ATARI SPECIALISTS Sonda LARGE 2005 SHOW SOFTSCAN, CV, PO Box 4 red R 1040) 50 (Acce TU, West Midland Phone ATARI 400/600/800XL/ST AMIGA SOFTWARE We have all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE Apply now and hire your first four games free Around 1,500 different original titles. For full details send large stamped addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends LOW ATARI PRICES Atari 520 STEM .90 post free + 15 disks Antic and Analog magazines available Amiga A500 at only .90 p.. BEST QUALITY DISKS Memorex 5WS.S.DD Discs 10 for .95 p.t. Unlabelled 5WD.S.OD Discs 10 for .95 p. Top quality unlabelled 31 double sided disks 10 for .95 51 for .95 25 for .95 100 for .95 GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept. C+VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thomey Close, Sunderland SR3 4PD Tel: (091) 528 6351 EDUCATION SOFTWARE For the Atan ST. Highly effective and unique speling aid. Developed with a primary school head. Two age ranges Ring or write for full details Softstuff: 193 Sketchley Road, Burbage, Hinckley, Leicestershire LE 10 2DY. Tel:0455 617426. If you would like to advertise in the classified section please call Lora Clark for details. 01-251 6222 ext. 2478 CHIC COMPUTER CLUB: Now try the best! Unique w a ndbary scheme. Super fabulous range of amateur swand publications Galaxy Commander superb PBM Loads of bargain comotions so much more . SEE US AT THE PERSONAL COMPUTER SHOW. For your FREE copy of our latest page newsletter FREE asend SAETO CCC. Box 121, Gerard Cross, Bucks, SL99JF UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software Free membership. Huge program base for the Soectrum and Commodore 64 NOW ALSO FOR THE ATARI ST Send sae for tast response and details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG). 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield 55 9GB "


"evia OVERLAMPER Vews MACHINES: SPEC/C64/ The one thing I don't like convincing impression of AMSTRAD/ATARI STIAMIGA. is that you have lives I speed. The update is SUPPLIER: ELITE. prefer to rely on keeping smooth and the hills are PRICE: SPEC $7.99 CASS, C64/AMS $9.99 CASS, SPEC fuel levels up to keep me in very realistic. The car sprite $12.99 DISK, C64/AMS $14.99 ne game, rather than be is a little on the weak side, DISK, ATARI ST $19.99, AMIGA dumped out of it because but everything else is lot of practise just to finish $24.99. I've crashed six times. Still, nicely drawn and one mission, and VERSION TESTED: ATARI ST. it does make the game detailed. frustration levels are REVIEWER: JULIAN more challenging! Although the game is pushed to their limits as you RIGNALL. suppose. playable, I think the try time and time again to The graphics are difficulty level is set a little get to the checkpoint. A trio of Roadblasters colourful and slick, and the too high, which may be Despite the excessive games has arrived at the 3D effect gives a offputting to some.It takes a difficulty, Overlander is office this month: US Gold's disappointing officially SrOne: OOOOO.COM licensed, Titus' awful Fire MONEY: 00000600 LEVEL:01 and Forget and Overlander, the best of the three. At the start of a game, one of two missions is chosen one is more difficult than the other, and is therefore worth more money. Half the cash is given when the mission is completed. Extra money is earned by shooting other road users, which include cars, motorbikes and large 4x4 trucks. Overlander certainly has more depth than the other two Roadblasters games. I particularly like the way the game has been designed so that the better you play, the more equipment you can buy. The choice of two missions is also a good idea, effectively giving two different levels. A Road blasting in Overlander. challenging and addictive. The gameplay varies little from level to level, but I don't think that'll stop psychopathic racers thoroughly enjoying the action. Go for it if you think you can stand the pace... GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY VALUE OVERALL 2003 UPDATE... Amiga, Spectrum, Amstrad and Commodore 64 versions will all be available shortly, and are sounding very promising indeed. A The Overlander launches firebombs at a 4x4. "


"Dear Sir, I think this advertisement breaks some rules Advertisements are expected to conform to rules and standards laid O down by the Advertising Standards Authority. Most do. The few that don't we'd like you to write in about. And if you'd like a copy of these rules for press, poster and cinema advertisements, please send for our booklet. It's free. The Advertising Standards Authority. We're here to put it right. ASA Ltd., Dept. Y. Brook House, Torrington Place, London WCIE 7HN. This space is donated in the interests of high standards of advertising. FOX| Tights Back e's lean, he's mean, he's ready for action. This is one fox that won't take no for an answer. Too many times the hounds have tried to put him down, but he'll force the Hells Beagles back to the briars. Blast your way through the bullets and bombs as all the forces of nature are set against you. A great game from Denton Designs. KISS MINE Features include Great animation 100% leg-biting action Weapon pick-ups A massive play area Multi-level play Spectrum disk: .99 Spectrum cassette: .99 Commodore disk: .99 Commodore cassette: .99 Image Works, Headway House, 66-73 Shoe Lane, London EC4P 4AB. Telephone: 01-377 4645 "


"GET IT BEFORE IT GOES! of Dont let some weirdo buy your copy! Place a regular order with your newsagent NOW! Dear Mr Newsagent, reserve me a copy of Computer + Video Games. Name Address Simon 1957 SMN 1987 DOOS Commodore screen shots shown. "


"CB667 GAISTUI CHUBBY GRISTIE IS PROBABLY THE FATTEST AND MOST OBNOXIOUS CAR PARK ATTENDANT YOU'LL EVER COME ACROSS! A CLASSICAL PLATFORM GAME WITH DANGER AT EVERY TURN. AVAILABLE NOW ON ATARI ST + AMIGA .95 C64 DISK + AMS CPC DISK $14.95 C64 CASSETTE .95; AMS CPC CASSETTE, SPECTRUM + MSX .95 M.C.A JOBS Screenshots taken from Commodore POWER PYRAMIDS DELIVERY OF THE 4 PYRAMIDS IS EASY BUT ACTIVATING THEM BEFORE YOU HAND THEM OVER IS A DIFFERENT MATTER! IN THIS ARCADE ADVENTURE, GUIDE YOUR ROBOTIC SPHEROID AROUND 128 SCREENS OF MIND-BENDINGLY CONVOLUTED LANDSCAPE, AVOIDING THE MANY HIDDEN DANGEROUS OBSTACLES AND ACTIVATE ALL THE POWER POINTS IN THE PYRAMIDS. AVAILABLE IN SEPTEMBER ON: C64 DISK .95 C64 CASSETTE .95 DR SPECTRUM 48/128K AND + 2 .95 GRANDSLAM P a Screenshots taken from Spectrum Order your copy of Chubby Gristle and/or Power Pyramids now be sending a cheque or postal order to Grandslam Entertainments Ltd, Units 1/2, Conlon Developments, Watery Lane, Darwen, Lancs. BB3 2ET or phone 01-247 6434 our credit card hot line (Access or Visa) se retro 12-18 PAUL STREET LONDON EC2 4JS "


"C+VG HIT! MACHINES: ATARI STI AMIGA. do this, either by accident complete the screen, you SUPPLIER: ASL. or due to your lose a life and the screen resets, putting back all the PRICES: $14.95 ST, $14.95 sado-masochistic AMIGA. tendencies, the nasty splits nasties. Fortunately  VERSION TESTED: ATARI ST. into two smaller ones, thus power-up capsules REVIEWER: GARY WHITTA. enlarging your workload appear from time to time Keep on being careless offering extra lives and It ain't no fun being a pink and there'll soon be powers if you collect them, ball trapped in a strange alternative dimension inhabited by all manner of dangerous creatures, but that's exactly the around the screen predicament you'll find helplessly. After a while, yourself in should you buy picked up the control Helter Skelter, the new method and was soon release from ASL. gaining passwords to the Helter Skelter sure is one later screens. strange game, so much so Helter Skelter is a very that it's difficult to jolly game indeed. categorise it. It's not an There's certainly enough arcade adventure, and it's gameplay to keep gamers certainly not a shoot EXTRA HELTER SKELTER EXTRA EXTRA BONES GRAPHICS PLAYABILITY A You've only 20 seconds to squash these nasties. A Cute is the name of the game in Helter Skelter. 'em-up, so what in fact is it? at their joysticks/mice for a I'd better explain. You long time, but you'd better control a lively bouncing buy a hairnet 'cos by the ball whose job it is to time you get to the later bounce around various screens, you'll want to pull levels bumping off the most of it out! assorted nasties who roam the platforms and levels that each screen is composed of. But you can't SOUND just bounce on any nasty. No siree. You have to kill VALUE the right nasties in the correct order, and to help you do this, the specific OVERALL nasty that you have to squash is indicated by an UPDATE arrow that appears above his head. By landing on the A You have to kill the aliens in the correct order. Both ST and Amiga nasty's head, you cause thousands of little nasties but remember, as the time versions should be in your nim to explode, and the gallavanting about the limit is so short, the nasties local sortshop by the time next target is indicated, screen! always have priority. you read this, and a PC and so on until you clear As if that isn't enough, The control of the ball is version is to follow soon. the screen. each level carries a weird to say the least. \"Just Sadly no 8-bit versions are To make things just a bit painfully short time limit imagine you're slapping on the cards, but ASL more difficult, there's a (typically about 20 the ball with your hand\" haven't ruled it out penalty for popping the seconds each) and if this the man said, stifling a completely, so hang on in wrong nasty. Should you runs out before you giggle, as I bounced there. "


"ys ATARI BLASTI The Software division of Atari Corporation has been very quiet over the last few years, with very little in the way of new releases for either their 8 or 16-bit machines. However, this month sees a break in that silence, with no less than ten new titles for ST. Some may sound familiar; The $14.99 The sequel to Asteroids (not others not-so-familiar. Julian Rignall sorts out to be mixed up with the the wheat from the chaff. more recent Blasteroids). Asteroids Deluxe Battlezone OOO $14.99 This ancient first-person HIGH ENEMY. perspective vector IN RANGE PL 1 graphic tank game first PL 2 appeared in the arcades back in 1980. It's a very straightforward combat game in which the player guides a tank across an enemy battlefield. Other tanks appear one at a time, its whereabouts shown on the radar at the top of the screen, and proceeds to track down the player; it's kill or be killed. As the game progresses, fast super tanks appear, along with homing missiles which zig-zag across the playing area in an attempt to crash into the tank. Although Battlezone is a very faithful conversion of the original, its plodding, rather repetitive gameplay looks primitive by today's standards. I can't see it A Battlezone coin-op classic for the ST. Asteroids Deluxe, was 658 never a big arcade hit. 650 Nevertheless, Atari has decided to give it a new lease of life, eight years since it first appeared. The game involves entering an asteroid field and blasting rocks, which break down twice under fire before finally vapourising. On later levels, Alien Robot Drones A Joust! drift into the playing area. appealing to anyone but These split up into the most forgiving game individual ships when hit, players. which home in on the OVERALL player. Laser firing saucers also enter the fray, making life even more difficult. A Moon Patrol: a blast from the past. I found it difficult to get formula. Now that revival is absence of extra weapons enthusiastic about this complete with the and features is also an offering due to the sluggish re-release of Super annoying point, and it control method.It is fun for Breakout, the Grandaddy takes very little time, for the a while, but personally I'd $9.99 of them all. action to become wait for Mirrorsoft's Arkanoid, Addictaball and Unfortunately it lacks the repetitive and tiresome. conversion of Blasteroids Impact have all sophistication of the newer Either avoid it, or give which sould have a lot contributed towards the titles, and only has four one of the new breed a shot more depth than this. revival of the bat and ball different screens. The OVERALL 2 OVERALL Super Breakout "


"FROM THE PAST. Joust Gracked Logotron, causing hardly a The action gets pretty it's worth  entirely ripple on the 64 scene. frenetic on later levels, with depends on how much you Atari's conversion is very landmines, tanks and liked the arcade game. $14.99 similar and retains all the flying saucers making life OVERALL Designed by Eugene Jarvis good and bad points of the very difficult. back in 1982. Joust is a cult original. Although it's fun, Moon classic. One or two players It's a puzzle game with Patrol is dated and offers fly Ostriches (!) against the Boulderdash overtones little more than a few hours evil buzzard lords, where the player guides entertainment. $14.99 attempting to dismount two heroes through a maze OVERALL 6 This game's origins are a them with their lances, in the minimum amount mystery, but one thing's for whereupon they turn into of steps. The onus is on sure it's great fun to play eggs which can be puzzle solving, rather than It's the player's job to collected for extra points. on whizzing through the defend five nests from However, wait too long maze and avoiding the marauding birds by before collecting an egg enemy, so the gameplay shooting them down with a and it hatches into a faster does tend towards the crosshair. If a bird is moving enemy! pedestrian. Still, puzzle $14.99 carrying an egg when it is All the features of the fans should enjoy the The youngest of Atari's new shot, the egg falls and can original arcade game action and the fifteen big releases a mere four be caught using the have faithfully been mazes means that there is years old casts the crosshair and returned to reproduced in this plenty to keep you going player in the role of Bentley the nest. Later screens are conversion, and both the OVERALL Bear on his quest to collect set in a sewer and graphics and sound are jewels. These are scattered underwater, and there's spot-on. across a series of 3D forced also a bonus screen where Not everyone will enjoy perspective mazes of Joust many find the ladders, ramps and inertial control method elevators. difficult to master but if $14.99 Each screen is inhabited you enjoy a challange I was a great Moon Patrol by a variety of creatures and are into weird games, fan when the arcade which maraud around and this one's a must. appeared about six years are fatal to touch OVERALL ago, and therefore although there is a magic looked at this conversion hat which gives temporary with many a nostalgic invincibility thought. Although this conversion The player drives a moon is a little rough around the $19.99 we buggy across a right to left edges, it has all the Xor appeared on the BBC scrolling landscape, features and gameplay of A Bentley Bear gets the gems. last year, and was blasting everything that the original, and is eggs are thrown at a converted onto the moves and leaping rocks therefore highly rooster. Commodore 64 by and holes in the ground. enjoyable. Whether or not Crack'ed is by no means outstanding, but is nevertheless a simple, funfilled reaction game that'll appeal to a wide range of ST gamers young and old. OVERALL Moon Patrol or periode sofort Xor Moon base $19.99 0117 The supercomputer controlling earth's defences has gone haywire. The only way it can be fixed is by mining special raw materials from the Moon. The only way this can be done is for one person to fly a solo mission to the moon and bring it back to earth. Very much Gravitarinspired, Moon Base is a difficult but playable game with plenty of scope for long term play. It's a bit pricey, though. OVERALL 05 A Pedestrian puzzling in Xor. "


"SKYCHASE MACHINES: AMIGA ATARI ST. SUPPLIER: IMAGEWORKS. PRICE: AMIGA ATARI ST\" $19.99. VERSION TESTED: AMIGA. REVIEWER: JULIAN RIGNALL. plane, which has the best been deliberately simplistic, and plays specification of them all! simplified to allow players similarly to Ocean's failed When each player has to concentrate on combat. Top Gun Licence; it pales chosen a plane, the Both players start in the air, in comparison with amount of fuel, bullets and facing one another, and Cascade's Ace Il. There's missiles is set. The missile simply dogfight until one is little difference between lock threshold (when the destroyed by being shot the planes, and the targetting system actually down, flying out of the gameplay is very locks onto an enemy playing area, flying too repetitive. plane), bullet hit area, size high, or running out of fuel. A very major flaw is the Lizi SPEED SCORE 10490 BDTE SITE SPEED SEBE TEST JOE MISSILES FESSILES 03 09 PSSILES MISSILES 03 mere om o og lantalar o so The computer is seconds from death. A Twisting and turning in battle. The first title on the computer opponent it's Imageworks label pathetic. The easy level is a (formerly Mirrorsoft) is a pushover ... and so is Ace! Its tactics never vary, and it one-on-one split screen, soon becomes very vector graphic flight predictable. combat simulator. Programmed in the US by The potential for a brilliant 16-bit combat Maxis, it gives one or two simulator is there, but players the chance to take unfortunately Sky Chase on the World's hottest fighter planes and fly them hasn't realised it. in battle against a variety bad of enemy craft. IGRAPHICS At the start of a game, a wealth of options confront SOUND the player. One of the most sen en IVALUE important is the choice of players: two players may The planes fly close. PLAYABILITY fly head-to-head, and of the playing area (pilots Missiles or bullets are OVERALL there's also a choice of a have to keep within its launched using the fire computer opponent or confines) and G-force button, and thrust is demo mode. The tolerance may also be increased or decreased UPDATE... computer opponent has adjusted. using the keyboard. four levels of difficulty, from During play the screen is Points are scored An Atari ST version will be easy to ACE. split vertically into two whenever the enemy available shortly, and will Next, a jet is chosen. halves, representing each plane is destroyed, and the play very similarly to the There's a wide variety of players' viewpoint. objective is to simply Amiga version craft, including a MIG Beneath each players' outscore your opponent. unfortunately. Flogger, F-14, F-16 and F-18 screen is an information Although Sky Chase has No 8-bit versions are the programmers have panel showing all flight an impressive front end, planned, which won't also included a paper statistics. The controls have the game itself is very break many hearts. LES WNA "


"FARBARIANO THE DUNGEON OF DRAX Spectrum Version Amiga Version C64 Version BARBARIANT RARBARIANT BARBARIANIB S1CA 00172 90 Check your local stockist for availability. In case of difficulty, available by mail order from: Palace Software. The Old Forge. 7 Caledonian Road. London NI 9DX. Send cheque or postal order for .99 PALACE (C64. Spectrum. Amstrad cassette). .99 (C64 dsk). .99 (ST. Amstrad. Spectrum disk). .99 (Amiga) plus 80p P&P. Access and Visa holders telephone 01-278 0751. Subject to availability. "


"RAME Once again budding computer artists are flung into the limelight as C+ VG displays the best of this month's digital pictures. Featured this month are Dave Watterson from Oldham, Gary Marshall of Swanwick, purveyor of Amstrad pictures of Indiana Jones and Steel Madness, Paul Blakemore from Rainham, another Amstrad artist, Sigbjorn Vagenes of 4270 Akrehamn, Norway who drew Watchmen Forearm Thru Head and Gizmo on the Amiga (great, aren't they), Karl Munchheimer from Bergede in West Germany, lan Edwards of Bream, who drew Balls on the Atari ST, and finally the mysterious, yet prolific, JMA from London SE19 whose Uncle Sam, Jeckle and Hyde and U2 pictures were drawn are on the ST. Forearm Thru Head by Sigbjorn Vagenes. Who Watches the Watchment icture lade by: atrik Eonsuu A Two Dudes by Patrik Eo TEMPLE OF DOOM A Harrison Ford. A Balls by lan Edwards. "


"AU2 by JMA. AJMA'S Uncle Sam. Turbo by D. Watterson. Sigbjorn Vagenes. Jeckle and Hyde by JMA. Sigbjorn Vagenes' Gizmo. A Paul Blakemore. Steel Madness. A Freedom from lan Edwards. "


"MATCHO DAY I CRASH The graphics are clear and realistically animated. The wealth of moves and tactics available put this game in a league of its own.\" C+VG \"Match Day II has every option you could ever think of and loads more as well. The graphics are clear and well-animated. It's the best football game around.\" Crash A WORTHY SUCCESSOR TO THE EVER POPULAR MATCH DAY FOOTBALL SIMULATION A GAME WHICH HAS REMAINED IN THE READERS CHARTS FOR 3 YEARS! Written once again by Jon Ritman and Bernie Drummond this NEW Match Day is the result of all the customer feedback and advice on how to create the pinnacle in computer soccer. Pit yourself against the CPU or with 2 players-full league or cup competition with unique code save facility. Jump, head, volley and kick (using the kick meter) to move the ball from player to player with automatic deadball set ups and goalkeeper control. DIAMOND DEFLECTION SYSTEMMensures realistic ball ricochet and the action comes with full music and sound FX. If you want the very best in footSPECTRUM COMMODORE ball for your micro then there's only one choice... MATCH DAY II with multi-menu system makes the home computer come alive. ocean is the registered trademark of Ocean Software Limited Ocean AMSTRAD 8.95 795 8.95 "


"e/UCNS HAWKEYE MACHINE: 64, SPECTRUM. puzzles and challenges looking rhino at the end of Delta, Sanxion, and SUPPLIER: THALAMUS. PRICE: 64 $9.99 CASS, invented by the designers level one. But it's not the Quedex. $12.99 DISK, ST $19.99, are cleverly put together nasties that make it difficult am sure Stavros will be SPECTRUM $9.99. others are difficult to play it's negotiating the chuffed to learn he has a VERSIONS TESTED: 64. because things just don't platforms as you try to get computer hero named REVIEWER: EUGENE LACEY. work out the way they were to the next level. after him when he thaws intended. Hawkeye Should you succeed in out that is. He probably When you hear of a new belongs to the latter this, your energy is wouldn't be quite so game from Thalamus category replenished in an pleased though were he coded by a bunch of The method of jumping animated sequence whilst aware of the appalling Swedish hackers known illustrates this point in the next level loads. lack of originality that the collectively as the Boys Hawkeye. The character This is all very well. It game demonstrates. Without Brains you can't does not respond well to help but be interested. the joystick when he Unfortunately this soon attempts to leap chasms starts to wain when you and from platform to discover that the game in platform. This is extremely question is no more or less frustrating interrupting than a scrolling platform the game play not through number involving a great any lack of skill on the part deal of blasting and of the player but through picking things up. the inadequacy of the Called Hawkeye, the programming game takes its name from your hero is armed with 1 .31. LE 1111 FREEFEROX Ilmu PAUSED A Hawkeye as original as the Grumbleweeds. looks great and sounds Admitedly the graphics, good foo but the trouble is sound and presentation you have seen it all before. are excellent well up to It is as about as original as the high standards that we the Grumbleweeds. have come to expect from The muscle-bound hero this Crash and Zzapp of this little escapade owned software house. It's bears an uncanny just that in the playability resemblance to just about stakes it leaves me every other muscle-bound completely cold just like hero featured in countless Stavros. A Huge rhino must be wasted at end of level. scrolling, shooting Rumours emanating the two winking hawks at four different types of gun adventures over the last from Thalamus tell of a hot the right and left of the selected by depressing couple of years. I do like his new game from Martin information panel at the the fire button and moving name though Stavros or Walker author of Hunters top of the play screen. the joystick to the left. As far 'Stavvy' to his mates. I am Moon. Keep watching for When one of the hawks as I could tell it makes little reliably informed however news of this one. winks this tells you the difference which one you that this particular Stavros direction in which you must select as, apart from sound has no connection with a GRAPHICS DADUITS run to locate one of the four and graphics, they are all certain North London SOUND pieces of a puzzle that you pretty similar. restauranteur or an VALUE need to enable you to get As well as the four pieces alternative comedian onto the next level. of the puzzle there are also called Harry. No he is PLAYABILITY These glowing pieces of other glowing squares to more likely to take his OVERALL the puzzle are dotted be picked up offering extra name from a well known around the platforms and energy and fire power. Thalamus programmer UPDATE.. provide a modicum of The nasties are a widely called Stavros who was last interest above and mixed bunch. The first ones heard of freezing his The release schedule for beyond the otherwise you come across are a knackers off on the Hawkeye has just been tedious business of pair of wimpy looking Russian-Finnish border finalised. A Spectrum running, leaping and bouncing ducks. They do wearing a uniform of the version will be available shooting. improve though with Swedish army. shortly. ST and Amiga Some games are difficult groups of birds flying in Tam of course refering to versions will be launched to play because the formation and a mean Stavros Fasoulas author of later in the year. WWAOOOO "


"Fancy a holiday aborad? reputation for being truly Then you could follow Eddie disgusting but like the Murphy, who's Coming to New Yorkers, he also has a America (15). Eddie is tendency to stick around. prince Akeem, leading a life Beetlejuice is probably of luxury deep in the African the most original comedy of jungle. But custom dictates the year and the people that Akeem's Princess will primarily responsible are be chosen for him, which director Tim Burton and star isn't his idea of true love, so Michael Keaton. Burton, he takes off for the US of A who brought us the odd-ball in search of a real woman, Pee-Wee's Big Adventure accompanied by his best and is slated to direct the friend Semmi (Arsenio Hall). new Batman movie, has Akeem and Semmi's Summer sea, sand, sun! But there's no tan created a genuinely bizarre *undercover' arrival is for film fan Ward R Street as he checks out vision of the afterlife, while hardly successful not too the new releases. Keaton, who I've previously many inhabitants of New loathed, is both hysterically York wear gold chains and furs but the local down and outs help our two innocents abroad by relieving them of their luxury luggage. To fully escape the good life, the Africans take jobs as cleaners at a burger joint, which is where Akeem finds his true love ... but can he win her away from her sharp business man boyfriend? Murphy seemed to walk through his last two films the carbon-copy Beverly Hills Cop 2 and concert film Raw but Coming to America shows that Murphy really can act. He actually plays four characters and I guarantee there's one you won't get until the final credits! Arsenio Hall provides excellent support. The firm hand behind all this is director John Landis. Films such as The Blues Brothers and Trading Places demonstrated his talent and he turns this modern fairy story into a clever comedy with some superb gags. If you prefer a holiday in the countryside you might choose the sort of small town where Adam and Barbara live in a beautiful wooden-built house. It's an idyllic existence until Adam swerves their car to avoid a dog and crashes into the river! At first nothing seems to have changed for the sweet young couple. Then they try to leave their house and discover that the rolling green hills have become a Top the spooks sit down to dinner in Beetlejuice. A hostile desert inhabited by Above Chip and Annabeth show the audience how vicious sand-worms. Adam and Barbara are dead! immediately turn it into a The laws concerning the shrine to trendy afterlife mean that they tastelessness! Which is why couple of novice spooks funny and chillingly evil can't leave their old abode, they call it Beetlejuice (15), supposed to do when even spluttering away as the but as relatively the bio-exorcist! pulling out their eyes and disgusting spirit. Make sure inexperienced ghosts Their afterlife counsellor placing them in their mouths you haunt a cinema when they're not able to scare off does warn them against doesn't scare off the it's showing! the New York yuppies who relying on the ghost with invaders. Betelgeuse (to give For a supposedly more buy the place and the most' but what are a him his proper name) has a serious view of the other to shag "


"side you'll have to 'Stay out diminutive medium you that they have swapped The reason they call the the light' because those Tangina, rushing to Carol bodies. A delightfully fresh Kumite by such a sanguinary things that go bump in the Ann's rescue when she's script from Dick Clement name is that in this night want to make it kidnapped by Kane. and Ian La Frenais, the full-contact, free-style Poltergeist III (18), Carol But an exorcist should British writers of Auf contest held in semi-secrecy Ann nil! Actually they now have been called in earlier. Wiedersehen Pet, make this in Hong Kong every five go bump in a high rise luxury Compared with the wit and a magical gem. years, the claret regularly apartment block because the originality of the original, If you want a beach gets spilled. blonde child has taken a this is shoddy stuff. One holiday this year you really Our hero is clean cut holiday to live with aunt and character gets left on the ought to Shag (15)! No American Frank Dux uncle Patricia and Bruce. other side (preparation for a stop giggling you dirty (pronounced 'Dooks' Unluckily she brought the sequel?) and nobody seemsminded lot because the Shag nobody says 'Hello, ducks! ghostly preacher Kane with to care. By far the best thing is a dance which was all the to him) who has a face which her and he keeps appearing about the film is the effects rage in 1963. I suppose it's a is as emotive as an Action out of nowhere like he's work, in which reflections natural progression from Man doll and a kick of steel. been watching too many of suddenly gain a life of their Dirty Dancing! He's in training for Military the Elm Street movies! The own. These are truly But Shag is ten times Intelligence way to the other side is spectacular and almost make better than Filthy Foxtrot. but takes time off to enter through reflections bad up for the cliched story Instead of the bland the contest in memory of the news when the architect has but not quite. romance it's got a story like a Japanese martial arts filled the building with floor I mentioned Vice Versa female American Graffiti as teacher who taught him the to ceiling mirror! (PG) last month, but here's a four American girls take off tricks of the ninja Carol Ann demonstrates reminder to catch it if you for a weekend together at There are sub-plots about her psychic powers much to can. It contains more Myrtle Beach before the a couple of defence agents the dismay of doubting supernatural shenanigans as glamorous Carson marries who want Frank to return to vuppie father (he even has the exceedingly dull and the States and a female an electric revolving respectable Harley. reporter who wants to write tie-rack!) and son swap Shag stands out because it about the contest, but the places thanks to an ancient recreates the carefree feel of real interest is the fighting. I Eastern skull! Cue multiple a sixties summer with cars couldn't help thnking that confusions as young Charlie cruising up and down the seeing Dux use his has to handle his dad's board strip, a beauty contest, a spectacular techniques in a. meetings while Marshall visit by a third rate military mission may be learns that school days pretender to Elvis' crown. more interesting but I aren't necessarily the best of You've gotta believe that suppose they're saving that your life! girls just want to have fun as for a sequel. For the time The film stars Judge the quartet meet the local being the fighting of Reinhold, who was good in boys, hold the wildest party Jean-Claude Van Damme Beverly Hills Cop, and since Animal House, and and many other martial arts brilliant youngster, Fred enter the Shag contest. masters will provide hours Savage. They're both so The performances are of schlock-suey kung-fuey good they'll really convince brilliant, and if all this talk of for all you beat-'em-up fans! Boy and dad love and dancing sounds too There's a battle for life in swap roles in 'female' then you should be Hawks but neither Timothy Vice Versa. warned that Carson is (007) Dalton nor Anthony played by ultra-cute Phoebe Edwards has a chance of Cates (of Bright Lights Big winning. Their fight is City fame), while ambitious against cancer! Edwards is Melaina (Bridget Fonda) fills an American footballer out a stars and stripes bikini stranded in Britain with the very nicely, thank you! fatal disease which has Being greedy I fell in love robbed him of his strength. with all four girls. Shag is a But just as he's about to wonderfully fresh, funny, drown in self-pity, lively film and I make it my irreverent Dalton throws movie of the month. him a life belt. Both men will If you refuse to believe get a respite before they die, Ward and insist that and rather than hang around Shagging is too soppy, in hospital Dalton suggests More Murphy in there's choreography of they steal an ambulance and Coming to America. another kind in Bloodsport live it up in Amsterdam. (18), a return of the Death real death, venerable martial art of compared with the sanitised Ho-Kum! If we're going to 'Bang ugh!' of films is have a seventies revival, as an uncomfortable subject, everyone keeps telling me, and this portrait of two men the return of the kick flickrefusing to surrender to A Poltergeist III moves nobody. could be one of the better illness could have been aspects. gripping, blackly humorous and extremely moving. psychologist Dr Seaton, who Unluckily the script fails drawls his lines like he's tocreate real sympathy and tanked on valium while Tom the direction is so coarse Skerrit and Nancy Allen are that the result is the girl's long suffering depressingly like relations. Zelda Rubenstein Confessions of a Terminal reprises her role as the Patient. top om of two each rea. shot and of to I the oints. ere y, the red to meir ong are ange ow king ally dover down, "


"\"EVLONS BARDS variations and don't have to have any experience off your sophisticated use of aim as you explore the magic-user, can make all objects and magical city of Skara Brae. the difference in a battle; spells. It's set in Skara Brae, However, if you want to simply type in the a huge city featuring the actually complete the four-letter abbreviation for obligatory castles, game, the idea is to gain the appropriate spell dungeons and experieince points (from (given in the handbook) catacombs. surviving battles), quality and you can bring light You start off with an for a higher rank in the where there's darkness, adventuring party of six Adventurers' Guild, and blast your enemies characters. On the left of fight your way through the asunder, render your party the screen appears either castle until you defeat the invulnerable, reveal the view around you, or the tyrant Mangar. magic doors, and so on. characters you meet; on The battle routines are Singing characters the right is a text display pretty good. On each (bards) can do a bit of telling you what's round, you can choose the good by breaking into happening; and at the order in which your song at the right moment; some songs stimulate warriors to greater feats of battle, others frighten the enemy, some heal wounds. You can break out of most combats if your party begins to take too much damage, but if you win you will usually gain experience points and The Garo's tale treasure. Since you can face up to 99 opponents in each battle (usually small ones such as rats, you'll be relieved to hear), the greatest skill in the game 3 Spiders. consists of knowing when discretion is the better part of valour. Though something of the charm has been lost along Character None AC Hits Cond Spot cl with the excellent graphics BRIAN THE FIST and music of the sixteen-bit versions, The Bard's Tale remains the best attempt at computer FRPGs. det Your uart bonun? Spiders (Fight or (RUR \"IMT001 MARKUS 3873  SONAR A The Bard's Tale is a must for FRP fanatics. MACHINE: SPECIAMS/ AMIGA/ST/C64/PC. SUPPLIER: ELECTRONIC ARTS. The Gard's del PRICE: $8.95 CASS, $14.95 DISK. VERSIONS TESTED: SPECIAMS. REVIEWER: CHRIS JENKINS. You foce death There's not much doubt 4 Duarves. that the Bard's Tale is the most successful attempt Will your yet to re-create the stol Hart bond excitement of a fantasy Dwarves Flight or Crun? role-playing game. Character None AC Hits Cond SpPt CI Already a big success in RIAN THE FIST sixteen-bit formats, the game has now made it onto the Spectrum and Amstrad with practically all the playing characteristics intact, A Can you sing your way out of this fight? though with an inevitable bottom are the traditional characters will advance, bottom are the traditional C loss in the areas of counters showing your and if you opt for them to graphics and sound. character name, and such attack, defend, hide, use The Bard's Tale offers just attributes as strength, hit an object or, if about everything you points taken, experience appropriate, use magic or could want from an FRPG: points, gold carried and so sing a song. huge playing area, on. Magical spells, the complex character The great thing about availability of which definitions, endless The Bard's Tale is that you depends on the MMT doc.. i GRAPHICS REALISM VALUE PLAYABILITY OVERALL -FOOTNOTE... The Bard's Tale is now available for most major formats. The Spectrum and Amstrad versions include extra scenarios and character sets on a second cassette, and forthcoming is Bard's Tale 2, already available for the Amiga and ST, and on the way for the eight-bit computers. Once again, the adventure is sef in Skara Brae, but this time there are even more complex situations and deadly enemies to encounter. "


"i eviews BARDSELTRO  MACHINE: COMMODORE there is a detailed set of 64 DISK. SUPPLIER: ELECTRONIC tips and instructions in the ARTS. 32 page booklet PRICE: $16.95. accompanying the game. REVIEWER: KEITH The screen constantly CAMPBELL. displays the names of the characters, together with Skara Brae has been details of their armour destroyed, and must be class, hit points, condition, released from its bond of and spell points. Above ruin, by tracking down and this, there is a small picture eliminating the Evil One, of what the party can see in who caused its destruction, the direction in which they Starting off from a refugee are facing; to the right of camp set in the heart of the this is the narative. ruins, you set about The map is based on a grid exploring the land of squares, and the current together with a band of position relative to the adventurers. refugee camp is obtained But before you can by keying '?', for example: begin this epic, it is \"You're in the Wilderness, necessary to make backup and six paces north and copies of the two double round but is it really this A The wandering bard finds his way to the title screen. sided disks on which the small? game is recorded. The task THE BARDS TALE I When monsters attack it's is simplified through the THIETAN up to the player to assign a use of a built-in formatter mode to each member of and copier. his party, bearing in mind You can choose to be his or her weapons and accompanied by a band attributes. They may of characters already attack, defend, hide, cast created on disk for you, or a spell, or merely strum a to build up your own set, tune. As the fight assigning each a race, progresses, a smoothly sex, and character scrolling commentary attributes of strength, appears in the narative dexterity, intelligence, window. Should a bold constitution, and luck. adventurer get killed, Building a character there's always the chance requires some thought, for of a miracle down at the those of poor calibre will local shrine, where a be a handicap to the party reincarnation may be when it sets out. For purchased if you have example, a strong but dim enough readies. mage will be pretty useless There are many other if your mage is features and subleties of intelligent, don't worry too play. much about his strength. To Bard's Tale Illis a big and help select the right complex game. It should balance of attributes, A Two disks \"it's big\" says KC. not fail to enthrall two paces south of the role-playing enthusiasts. refugee camp of Skara Brae. GRAPHICS It pays to map the grid, SOUND for there is little chance of VALUE A Black Hobb.tk using the pictures to recognise where the party PLAYABILITY is. However, at the OVERALL danage! extremities of the A Black Hobbit kick Wasteland area, there is a UPDATE... roll-over to the opposite side of the map, making Bards Tale III is available mapping extremely arters on disk only for the 64 at confusing, unless'?' is used the moment and is pants quite frequently. After likely to be some time moving about 15 paces (probably next year west, for example, further according to EA) until PC westerly movement will and 16-bit versions follow. result in the party findingNo decision has been itself four paces east of the made on Speccy and A Panel displays your companions what a crew. camp. So the world is Amstrad versions. "


"WWWWWW Leisure Suit Larr Adventure Reviews A Blondes have more fun in KC's column. SUPPLIER: ACTIVISION game is less subte than a you'll never make it! That Larry. SIERRA ON-LINE. church full of Goddesses. guy with the joystick is But you aren't just out on  MACHINES: ATARI ST, There is a stringent age trying his best to get you the booze, are you? No, AMIGA, IBM PC. test, by the way of five there! you're after something PRICE: $19.99. questions difficult even REVIEWER: KEITH No, Larry, don't tread on other than that, and I just CAMPBELL. for adults if their not that drunk, your pointy guessed what! Perhaps American. Two wrong shoes will do him a you'll get it behind the Tired of slogging away answers will take you right mischief Just head for the padded door? over a hot computer, back to the desktop. Did cubicle, and answer the So, being quick with a playing adventures that you know what or with calls of nature. Jeez, Larry. cab to avoid a dog that weary the brain? Here's whom former congressman that was quickl Did prefers his leg to a lampost, something a bit different. Wilbur Mills went for a dip something just die in there? Larry is soon walking but if your under 18, then in the tidal basin? No, I can't bear it, let's get through the automatic turn the page! thought not nor did ! back to the bar. sliding glass doors of the QUIRO MART CRO A Larry visits several locations in his quest. In the same format as And repeated attempts to Soundson sierra's 'Quest' seiries, this get the answers right are is an animated graphical not easy, for the questions adventure that requires come randomly from what the use of a mouse, joystick seems to be a very large or cursor keyes, to move repertoire! Larry around, plus text Once through the test, commands to play the though, the game is sheer adventure. But unlike entertainment if you like Space Quest and the that sort of thing! There's others, this is one for catchy theme music on adults only. So if your over and off throughout the 18 (and can prove it!) why game, and plenty of sound not have a night out on the effects. town, and join Larry Laffer Let's start off with a drink, in search of fun and frolics? Larry. Beer? And another? Getting into the game is And another? Jeez, Larry, A Playing for funds in the casino. not easy, and probably just your breath smells like the \"Hey, dork! There's toilet imposing casino, his as well, for whilst no four insides of a motorman's paper stuck to your shoe!\" breath smelling like the letter words appear on the gloves! Where's the gents? Who said that? Surely not floor sweepings from a screen (unless you happen Follow me, and do try to the lady sitting at the bar? rendering plant. Now he's to type them in yourself) the walk straight, Larry, or Go on, scrape it off, then, going to have a real WWW "


"M y and the Lounge Lizards gamble on the Blackjack American ones? Hmm... Just for a precaution or can't solve all the tables. preferred the ones I heard three, perhaps you should problems (yes there's Read the house rules first, in Lefty's bar. I'd heard 'em visit the drug store next? Oh quite a few, there really is!) Larry! Minimum bet is $2, all before, mind! Dancing Larry. I can't take you you probably won't mind maximum $20, and the girls? OK, I'll wait, Larry, but anywhere, can I? I told you at all, for it's such fun. house limits total winnings they'd beter be better than to look over your shoulder Leisure Suit Larry is to $250. It's not easy to this stand up comic. OK to check there was no-one presented with superbly reach that limit, but to be bet you're itching to spend around, before you asked animated graphics by sure you have enough your hard won cash, now the assistant. Striped for the best yet from Sierra cash for all the temptations No! Don't go upstairs and ribbed, rough, and To watch Larry dancing in that might lie ahead, let's disturb all those people spearmint flavoured? How the disco, to see a close-up go for it! Wow $150 trying to get a good night's embarrassing! Now for of his partner's face, or already! Wait for it, Larry, sleep in their hotel goodness sake be careful even merely to go for a ride the guy with the joystick is bedrooms! What's that a what you say on that in a cab, is like watching a e Reviews Soundson \"Hey, dork! You've got toilet paper stuck to your shoe!\" A The most embarrassing things happen when you've had one too many. phone... fully animated cartoon SURGEON Oi! Where are you taking film! There is even one me now, Larry? The Disco? lengthy automated Disco dancing is sequence, where you may energenic, Larry! Sure discover what happens you'll be up to it, when you when a dead adventurer get the chance to get types RESTORE! down to it? OK then, but coupled with catchy leave Fawn alone, she music and plenty of sound looks like a nice girl! Just effects, Leisure Suit Larry is have a dance with her and an adventure that really ... Hey! Mind that ceiling will transport you into a for heaven's sakel And world of fan world of fantasy. Wink, Jeez Larry, anyone ever tell winkl Nudge, nudge! you your breath smells? Here we leave Larry. I proud and upstanding, to VOCABULARY A Bring on the dancing girls. sheep? Don't even think get on with his own thing. I going to save it for you, in He certainly provides a lot ATMOSPHERE case your luck turns! about it, Larry! And your of laughs in what is a PERSONAL Say, what's on at the breath is beginning to Cabaret? You like blue thoroughly entertaining smell like an athlete's VALUE Jokes, even crude running shoes... adventure. Even if you OOOOOO WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW "


"tyd.DAJ JJINSV4811Wayed MMY-MIX.MPPMATOPPAAMBI-18.PNAF.NINN.PD-4F1 S hMh.MMM.MPPMath.MPAKABI418-PAMFpNINTFA D. Long ago, High King Valwyn drove back the e barbarian hordes invading Albareth, endinga tragic war. Drained of spirit the High King departed to the homelands of the Elden folk to renew his strength. Legends promised his return after twenty years. But twenty years have come and gone, and Valwyn has not returned. Now the mystic powers of old are fading and chaos rules the land. Desperate brigands roam the once-peaceful roads, while the fearful citizens of Albareth live in a world without law. Dauntless adventurers are being recruited to carry out unlikely missions in strange, distant places. Welcome to the Kingdom of Albareth! Experience a game with relentless action and unprecedented levels of graphic detail. Stroll along the seashore, lulled by the rolling tide or explore long.forgotten desert ruins, challenging death with sword in hand, for these are the Times of Lore! Times of Lore combines real-time gameplay with an epic story of adventure and intrigue, bringing unique challenges never before encountered in a fantasy role-playing game! Available for Commodore 64/128. Cassette .95, Disk .95. HORIGIN SYSTEMS INC. Please send -Copies of Time of Lore C64 Cassette _Disk Name (block capitals)Address Address — Post Code lenclose & including 55pP+P. Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd. or debit my Access/Visa card. Expiry date No. IIIIIII MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place. Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. UK. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tix: 43422 MPS/UKG. PAMBHIR PAAP.NIN:14M 1 ) X "


"WWW The Fiend be boys. This one really around to discover what raises the ethical question may be hidden, and of profits over morality. without the key, you will not But how about find. With one exception. non-naughty games? You Beware you rude-bit know, the ones with the programmers, that the hidden bits. Ship of Doom word SCREAM, which is Oh, how The Fiend suffers in Naughty games have had its android, and The innocent enough in itself, the name of been with us since day Pawn its princess. Arduous has on several occasions Adventuredom. Oh the one. I seem to remember though it may be, the Fiend been misinterpreted by the sacrifices that I have had classified ads for games sat and replayed these bits parser, and an to make on YOUR behalf, that arrived in plain brown recently. Purely out of inappropriate response my faithful followers. I only paper, and contained scientific curiosity, you angrily received! hope that you appreciate adventures' of dubious understand. Speaking of keys, I can my anguish, having to sit intent, set in Soho. Not that there can be no doubt, verify that Maid Marion's here night after night, the Fiend lowered himself because I am about to say chastity belt is NOT forcing myself to complete to play any. How could you so, that these bits ARE removable. This should be Leather Goddesses of even think of it? But with acceptable, if done in the fairly obvious, as otherwise Phobos, and try to seduce Leather the genre best possible taste, and she would be 'Woman all manner of women, in suddenly became with humour. For those Marion', wouldn't she? And the guise of Leisure Suit respectable and above untainted souls playing rumours of strange goings Larry, however distasteful board. After all, it is the games will not even on in the Hobbit, featuring the task. professionally produced know what they missed, goblins and elves, are All of which set the Fiend and packaged, and does and those less innocent ill-founded. thinking about naughty contain three levels of (most of you lot) would not Ah, woe is me. Back to bits in general. Having naughtiness, so you don't be shocked or corrupted Phobos I must go, as done that I thought about have to be offended or by the response. In this despite completing the naughty bits in adventure corrupted, do vou? Yet the manner, adventure games game, somewhere, games in particular. Are prompts in the game keep differ from books and films, somehow, I lost a few they really necessary? Do steering you to the where what is written is points. I obviously left some they improve a game, or naughtier levels, unless openly displayed for all to stone unturned, or degrade it? Are they you possess a will of iron, see. In adventure games something undone, ethical? like the Fiend. And boys will you have to go digging perhaps. Hmm, now where did I leave that yak? News Desk lny Dep Act Self Dis  Where have all the We've had Legend of the the mind of the player! adventures gone? After a Sword and Corruption from A friend suddenly reflurry of hot titles in the Rainbird, Shadowgate minded me, when he early part of the summer, it and the ST release of announced he had a now seems everyone has Uninvited from Mindscape. pirate copy for his IBM. gone to sleep until the The ST Adventure Creator \"There's pirate copies all autumn! from Incentive, MicroMud over the place the lads from Virgin, Wolfman from at my son's office have all CRL, and Mindfighter from got one, and they've wrapped up the game, Activision. US too!\" He announced. So I There should be another rang Mediagenic, and Infocom title or two begged for the review SEUL trickling through soon. copy that hadn't been Level 9's Lancelot seems forthcoming earlier in the likely to be the next year. As an adult \"biggy\" likely to come adventure, it's a winner! along, but when is still not clear. And around the MORE GNOMES same time, or perhaps a bit  After Lancelot, Level 9's later, we should be seeing next release through Fish, the next adventure Mandarin Software, will L'erwers du mystere! from Magnetic Scrolls. be Gnome Ranger Il. Thank heavens for Larry. Level 9 is determined to that lovable randy little have a new game at this Desk Inv Dep Act Son Dis fellow from Sierra On-Line. year's PC Show, and Pete Larry's been around a few Austin suspects that months in fact, the first Mandarin will hold heard of him was from Lancelot until that time. Christian Martensen, However, if Lancelot adventure columnist and appears earlier, deputy editor of the Danish everybody's favourite magazine COMputer, gnome will be making her back in the new year. But second appearance in mysteriously, Activision, September. has been keeping a very And guess what comes low profile over it. Could next? Why. Gnome Ranger be that they're worried III, of course, but not until about a Whitehouse next year! Perhaps the ca donne sur un couloir backlash. But the evil is in Austins will be producing a few Rocky's next... A Mortville Manor French game of the year. Reviewed next month. song Jour m0 000000000001 "


"Dyina m i te SPECIALISTS IN COMPUTER GAMES AND PERIPHERALS SPECIALISTS IN COMPUTER GAMES AND PERIPHERALS Dynamite Software, Unit 27, 16 Tresham Road, Orton Southgate, Peterborough PE2 OSG Tel: (0733) 230119 (07331 234248 COMPILATIONS 3.99 each 3.99 COMMODORE 64 Gauntlet Donkey Kong Gauntlet II Kung Fu Master Star Fox Jet Set Willy Shamus Saboteur 11 Task III Target Renegade Indiana Jones Chronos Cricket Crazy Helidrop Sword Slayer Shanghai Centurions Armageddon Man Zork III (Disk) Zenith Lords of Midnight Strike Force Harrier Ghostbusters Wizard's Lair Life Force Cass 2.99 2.99 2.99 2.99 2.99 1.99 1.99 3.99 3.99 5.50 5.50 2.99 2.99 2.99 2.99 2.99 2.99 2.99 1.99 1.99 2.99 2.99 1.99 2.99 2.99 SPECTRUM Cass Samurai Trilogy Winter Olympiad 6.00 Soldier of Light 6.50 World Games 3.99 Winter Games 3.99 Tetris 3.99 Ace 2 5.99 Trantor 3.99 Rolling Thunder 3.99 Impossible Mission 2.99 Kung Fu Master 2.99 Snooker-Simulator 2.99 Bruce Lee 2.99 Ace 2.99 Freedom Fighter 2.99 Xecutor 2.99 Time Flies 2.99 The Incredible Shrinking Man 2.99 Spell Seeker 1.99 BMX Simulator 2.99 FA Cup Football 2.99 Outrun 5.99 Knuckle Busters 3.99 Target Renegade 5.50 Solomon's Key 2.99 Karnov 5.50 Final Matrix 5.50 Fast & Furious Thunder Ceptor 3.99 Combat School 5.50 Bedlam 5.50 Brave Star 6.50 Bomb-Jack II 2.99 Phantom Club 2.99 COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM Now Games 5 They Sold a Million II Int-Karate, Hacker II. Street Hassle, Rebel Bruce Lee, Knight Lore, Match Day, Match Prohibition, Kat Trap Point Four Great Games Vol 2 Star Games II 48K 128K Jet Set Willy, Lawn tennis, World Cup Raffles Highway Encounter, Cyberun, Trailblazer, Four Great Games Vol 3 Avenger, Ballblazer, The Eidolon Equinox, Darksyde, The Big K.O., Mousetrap Big 4 Vol 11 Computer Classics Saboteur II, Thanatos, Deep Strike, Sigma 7 Aliens, Cauldron II, Into the Eagles Nest, Lucas Games Zynaps, Dynamite Dan The Eidolon, Rescue on Fractalus, Ball Blazer, Hit Pak C64/128 Six Pack Koronis Rift Scooby Doo, Fighting Warrior, 1942. The Utilities Sacred Armour of Anitrad, Jet Set Willy , Spectrum Power Packs 7.00 and 1.50 P P Split Personalities, Duet Floppy Disc 51\" .90. E1 EACH BUY 2 GET ONE FREE! Commodore Cass Prodigy Little Computer People XARQ Eidolon Explorer Dandy Eidolon Prodigy Riddlers Den Cele  Go to Hell Bail Blazer  Rescue of Fractulus Toy Bizarre Mermaid Madness Rescue of Fractulus Hacker Mind Shadow Master of the Lamp Amstrad Hacker Mermaid Madness Explorer Spectrum Cass Dandy Toy Bizarre Rescue of Fractulus Eye of the Mask Hijack Zeny Prodigy Xcel Ball Blazer Tempest Eidolon Space Shuttle  XARO coccacco AMIGA Road Wars Hacker 11 Levitation Fire Blaster Mach 3 Sidewinder Amegas Cass 12.95 11.00 11.00 11.00 12.00 8.50 12.00    GoodGGGG Postage and Packing Freel Please note cheques will have to be cleared before goods are sent. Cash or postal order items 48 hours despatch. Please state your name, address, make and model computer and your order in block capitals to avoid confusion. Please add .00 per game overseas Please send a stanped addressed ebvelope for catalogue on education software. 400/806 NOW A SWORD WORTH LOOK 1000.VE YOURS CAN BE CAN BE XLUXE ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to:CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 WITH DRAGON SLAYER AND (LinEL COMPUTER SOFTWARE 8/16 bit at Discounted Prices Up to 30% off New Releases and Back Catalogue Titles Example: RRP of .99 becomes .99 Payment by cheques/PO/Visa/Access, Post and Packing free  and over, Under  add 50p. Outside UK add . Orders despatched within 24 hours. New Releases despatched on day of release. Send today for your free price list to: PJK COMPUTING,PO Box 20, Daventry, Northants NN11 4RU or Telephone our MAIL ORDER HOTLINE NUMBER (0327) 300150 SEE YOU AT THE PC-SHOW DEALERS PLEASE CONTACT THE EXCLUSIVE SALESREPRESENTITIVE THE SALESCURVE Lid, 50 Lombard Rd, London SW11, Tel. 01-585 33 08 LINEL PRODUCTS, MERIMPEX Ltd, Box 447. FL-9490 Voduz, Tel. 0104175 28 368 "


"1 Helpline Stuck in an adventure? KC and having spectacular Miami? his crew can help. success. Nor is Stephan Mike Thomas, that Adventure Englhart, from West prolific letter writer from Helpline, C+VG, Germany. He has Wales, has a few words for Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, completed the game, but Gavrok, who launched London EC1R 3AV never did manage to get forth on his inability to find hold of the jewel. 'Strange an adventure game to This month the talk is of a golden oldy how do you that you can complete a buy. Mike works in the Shadowgate, an recruit Mr. Video, and how game without having to computer department of adventure that is rapidly do you make Soapy solve one of the major John Menzies in Cardiff becoming a hit Helpline. stagger out of the pub? problems,' he comments. (pop in and say 'hello' to Shadowgate and his Sounds like a couple of Whilst on Infocom him, all you local friend are playing it in dodgy questions there, games, Andrew has run adventure fans!) and he Brighton, and have come from Dodgy Geezer out of puzzles to solve in reports that the only to a grinding halt. Here's a Andrew Baranowski, of Lurking Horror! 'Adventure adventure they stock is few things that are Bradford. should have puzzles \"the appalling Football bothering them. Are the Who remembers an coming out of the Frenzy.\" When he Hobgoblins red herrings? adventure called woodwork,' says Andrew. questioned his superior Can you open the globe in Smugglers Cave? Back in 'You shouldn't have to go who orders the games, he the study? How do you get the dim and distant past it on an expedition to was told that adventures up to the archway without appeared in spectoral actually find them!' are 'a dying breed. \"That's breaking the ledge? Not a form, and later, Who knows how to pass rich, coming from a QL lot to ask, is it? apparently, on an the gatekeeper in Part 2 of owner!\" he says. It seems Similar pleas come from Amstrad. This is where Karyssia, to help out that stores don't stock Allen and Mark Errington, Damon Hawkins of Matthew Conway, of adventures because they of Durham. Can the Mooroobool in Lambourn? don't sell. \"But how can dragon be killed or Queensland caught up David Hesketh went into they sell, when they don't passed? Is there anything with it. But it finally caught the palace, couldn't do stock them?\" Mike asks. to do in the armoury? And up with him when it placed anything there, went back Chicken and egg, by the finally, where is the key for a pirate in front of him outside, and couldn't go sound of it. the third door from the beard quivering with rage, anywhere without ending Now here's a leading banqueting hall not the and refusing to Damon back where he started question! How do you get ones that lead to the pass. And that elevator by the tree. It's Venom down the stairs with the observatory or the hell also has Damon baffled again advice urgently princess, and how hound? how on earth do you needed, please! get past Kronos? Meanwhile, general operate it? Now here's a problem Most of the pleas printed clues for Uninvited, stable Shed a tear for Andrew that's close to my heart! in these pages do not fall mate of Shadowgate, are Bethell, who is continally Has anyone had a bit more upon deaf ears! If you have invited, for a number of being gulped by the luck than Andrew Baxter a problem, or can help readers. Crocodile Idol in Beyond of Manchester, in doing someone out, drop me a And back to earth with Zork. Trying to pilfer the ANYTHING worthwhile on line. I'll do my best to get what is rapidly becoming spectacular jewel, he is the ship, in Murder Off back to you. Help this month came from: Colin Barrow, Irvine; Mandy Flower, Bath; Marco Andreoli, Turin; Jarle Skirbekk, Kolsas, Norway; Allen and Mark Errington, Durham; Stephan Wiestner, Therwil, Switzerland; Andrew Bethnell, Wallsall; Martyn Amos, Newcastle Upon Tyne; Dick Light, Hitchin; Mandy Flower, Bath; Paul Hardy, Sheffield; and Mike Thomas, Caerphilly. elqwoz dwn! Jepioj aut o uo leo aut alpiado pup of SOLA !! ueym Joj pepeeu si BOJOJ JO !! V LIANINN puq kipuoluet yold NOLLdnadoo lejsuow yoojeyi puryeq Isano SONI nok op UOAD |s | o aim sabulaq | no ob pup 'dn qu0||g sau epods ou! PIN Dp OulApoqunouo sepeqyod eyi dosp ueyteyung pup 'ispe eyloj Woojeyi ol qni 'dwoms ey! SsOJO O Aup oboj pejl oop en nok og pup's ueul 'upu pro jedod eui uing pup llun syl op oj enujuo eyi ojelom pup poojens exspq eyi doip 'leyspa sej pup'dn quiloxoid VWIHOINX Som eyi uvedod ind eylem Om eyi ujejoy \"Syubu lejupids eyl elbjedo o Dino enoq yiy pewoh #noseyi Bujujwaxe 31-V Z isano 30VdS Aedojd jou spy ! | sasnq aut aoxj   uy pu jd jdjs Dr! Buj) 'spojdx ejeyi puy noh eleum e noi ssejun 'yesinok !! Jeho unb unis et wo uuou enOW 'quaqpi t! Yuup 1,uod 'useum Igel ofiny ul olup you eo edpose olet 111 pup' up sepeq ind og 'yinos ob pup 1 ADO7 NIBISNXNV: \"jeup eyl uedo 'wooidot You quoq eyi expi pup ey, bude eJojeg 1q-up \"jps , u s ! JSEM BYL U SOXVIG ApS WONGA ind 'om hodu pis ol isdom TeADO Speg '3S'S'M ob pub 'qwijo uyi \"HIDM pud euogo Bop ey! eyt woll'n 'a'a's 'M's Jepun 'jesino 11 AUDOJO A16 UpIOIOJ Ausspd on \"N'S'S:sswoopeinojo jo \"Il lelep Olesie euoewos SONJAJU S.13018 ezbw ay yonojyt einoi eul Joj Abd elppos ay XNIHDS podsud ou SADM JD JOY Buimoly pJDy emos 'BADAI MIM AIXNIC op Buryl je eyl Jepun DW \"XDID JOJ po uyl weut d iyo eyi tisodeppupupow'71pO of Wool o qq  ! | DAON\"lopinoqavi !!s of Vayov eq, u| Augud ag} s 'spionb aytssod Ol anoj OUSVINV: Isano sono SONJAJU S.13018 'n pup'ss's 'eyi wool punojoy! Woy 06 '!! yopes ol 'ezowejlspo ey ujueppiy eADO spyt u edoi | o buils s| |up|6  SHEMOI NI7805 "


"MICROSELL Selling? Buying? Here's the Market Place!! It only costs C64, 1541C disk drive, C2N cassette deck. joystick manuals, all in excellent condition. Over 200 games, only . telephone 0272 839899 after 7 pm for more details Dear Sio 'l dout suppose youve Seen this obnox QUS Advertisement to advertise in this BBC'B' (boxed) data recorder (boxed). speech rom, joystick, manuals, books, section! over  of software. Total value E740+  Ads must be for the sell for , telephone (0522) 21407 or (0909) 500204 after 7 pm. private sale of hardware only. Amiga 500 + modulator, manuals +  No more than 25 software,  ono, telephone Alastair all day on (0748) 3797. words long BBC B.joystick, games (on disk), 40/80 Trak disk drive. Speech chip+phrom. Amstrad 1512/DD colour monitor with Transfrom (Tape to Disc). Will sell for  printer. Little used. Many games plus ono. Worth , telephone 746 8064 After D-Base Ill plus, Lotus 1.2.3, and more. 5 pm. . Telephone: 0279-870914 Anytime). C128-D, monitor, MPS-803, cassette, Commodore 64, Excellerator + Plus disk drive, joystick, books, data recorder, over graphics, tablet, voice master, and software and hardware worth over ,000. 60 disk +  of software, mouse, cheese and art studio, freeze machine, music Open to offers. Ring 051-3361711 for list, maker. All perfect. Sell for $400 ono. Tel: evenings only. 472 3251 10-2 pm. 476 6739 after 5 pm. Nintendo entertainment system. Super CBM 500 Amiga + A1084 monitor with 11 Mario Brothers, Kung Fu, Tennis, Ice months quarantee, also interceptor, Climber Cartridges. Two Wico Joysticks. leatherneck. Sell for  ono. SAE ken, Cost  new. Accept  ono. Rotherham 589601. After 6.30pm. 268 Barking Road, Plaistow, London, E13 SHR Amstrad CPC 6128, disk drive, monitor 150 Commodore 64. 1541 Disk Drive, tape original recent games, modulator. deck, sound amp + speakers, disk + box. external tape deck. 30 magazines, 3 games utilities, books, mags, joystick joysticks, books, everything for . acton replay MK1V. Worth over  sell telephone 0245 469755. for . tel: (0244) 821484 ask for Justin leves). CBM 128 disk drive.  worth of software, magazines and joystick, boxed BBC'B' computer. Single and twin 2 cartridges, all for . Phone Marcus 0582 83 3501. After 4.30 pm. joysticks, data recorder, over  of software, instruction book. Hardly used. Telephone 0272 843748 eves. Commodore 64C, datarecorder, mouse all boxed immaculate condition. 16 months Atari 800XL, XC12 tape deck, dust covers, guarantee, OS II \"T\" joystick,  tape rack, 2 cheetah 125 joysticks, f250 of original software latest titles.  ono. software, 2.5 years Atari user + binders. Telephone: 0695 73147 After 5pm. Telephone 0786 63663 ask for Scott E250 ono. For sale C64 data recorder plus 2 joysticks. Over ,000 worth of original software. Ex cond, will sell for : tel 0631 63693 (Oban) ask for Martin. Atari BOOXL, datarecorder, disk drive, 2 joysticks, manuals, touch tablet, over 100 games \"auto duel (disk), Gauntlet, etc. \"only f250 ono. Phone Leicester 0533 402330 Sega Master system still under guarantee + 2 joysticks and 3170 worth of games including afterburner, wonderboy, etc. For only . Telephone Sheffield (0742) 435388. After 5pm. Intellivision, master component wanted must be in good condition. Please phone with offers 01-994 5616 after 7 pm. CBM 64; data recorder, 3 joysticks f40 of mags.  of games including some new ones.  for everything. Phone 01-892 2875. Ask for Brendan Commodore 64, disk drive, freeze machine, joystick, tape back up board, datacassette, mouse and cheese, Lots of games and disks.  ono. Telephone Lyndon Cardiff 568341. Amstrad CPC 464 including colur monitor. Excellent condition. Only one year old. Plenty of software. Worth . Selling for  ono, telephone 01-376 5136 ve welcome complaints from the V public about advertisements in the press, on posters and in the cinema. It helps us keep advertising standards high. But we also monitor a considerable amount of advertising, and take the necessary action ourselves. If you'd like to know more about our work, and receive a copy of the rules, please write. For sale. Year old Amstrad CPC 464, colour monitor, software worth  joystick. Immaculate condition. Worth over  will sell for . Ring 051-924 5639 After 4.30 pm. CBM 64, 1541, MPS803, 22\" TV colour.freeze machine, loadsabooks, about  of software (many newl. Best offer around.  accepted, telephone Gary 0223 832992 after 6 pm. Spectrum 128 + with interface, two jysticks, leads. powerpack, books, magazines and over  worth of software. E120, telephone 0295 4039. Colour CPC 6128, DMP 2000, AMX, Stop press E200 + software, including Amdrum, AA Studio includes, screen vision worth  + Sell for  ono. Or swap Atari 520ST. Telephone 04575 4936 eves Simon. Send your ad together with a cheque/PO for  to: Microsell Dept. C+VG, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. The Advertising Standards Authority. We're here to put it right. ASA Ltd. Dept. X. Brook House. Torrington Place, London WCIE 7HN, This space is donates in the interests of high standards of advertising "


"Can You Stop The Russian Bear? Storm products at larger branches of WH Smith Free MicroProse timepiece with selected Micro Prose between 16 August and 10 October 1988. Based on the NO.1 best-selling book Red Stor Rising by Tom Clancy: Larry Bond co-author. Copyright 1986 by Jack Ry Enterprises Ltd and Larry Bond. All rights reserved. Look out for the specially labelled product at your WH Smith computer department to an astonishing variety of undersea environments plunging you into challenging and exciting situations, Prepare for action in this heart-pounding Simulation Available for Commodore 64/128 Cassette E14.95, Disk .95. The storm has broken. MicroProse's latest title is here. This high technology simulation of strategy and tactics is based on one of the most dramatic and detailed stories of modern Warfare Red Storm Rising, the international best-seller by Tom Clancy and his technical collaborator Larry Bond. Working with the authors, MicroProse have brought the book's intense action and excitement to your computer screen. You are put in command of an American nuclear attack submarine at a time when the two super powers collide. Standing between the Russian bear and global domin ation, you play a crucial role in the conflict. Missions take you MICROPROSE SIMULATION SOFTWARE RED STORM RISING by Tom Clancy 1986 by lack Hyan Enterprises Ltd and Larry Bond Please send Copies of Red Storm Rising C64 Cassette Disk Name (block capitals) Address Post Code Tendose including 55pP+P. Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd, or debit my Access/Visa card, Expiry date. MicroProse Ltd. 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL88DA. UK. Tel: (0666)54326. Tix: 43422 MPS/UKG "


"The fantasy section starts here!! Lots has been happening on the FRP scene lately, with Games Workshop issuing a mountain of accessories and Standard Games releasing the definitive guide to roleplaying for the total beginner. Add to this the chance to play a superhero of your choice and you have what's covered in this month's FRP section. FANAS Dragonroar SS DRAGONROAR DRAGONROAR Party Adventure Tho th Dive cm  SUPPLIER: STANDARD who takes this position plays effects. Basically, you play the package for the absolute GAMES. the part of a referee. They must part of a pre-determined COMPLEXITY: novice, it introduces you to BEGINNERS. set the scene for the adventure, character called Tolmar, who and includes, six different PRICE: .95. be familiar with the rules and has a magical family heirloom shaped dice, ranging from a try to think of the possible stolen from him by a man four sided die to a twelve sider Getting into Fantasy Role Playing is no easy thing. There eventualities that may arise in called Zanto. It is your quest to and explains how to use them. the game. They make it retrieve it and it is no easy task. Also included is a full colour are a large number of games possible for the other players to You have to decend into into dungeon floor plan, mapping and accessories available to the P his deadly domain, where you play the game. first time buyer plus a whole paper, tokens to represent both The Arbiter is someone meet horrible hobgoblins, the monsters and characters, new language of gaming terms elected by the players as a ravinous rats and terrible quick reference play sheets plus to be learned. Add to this complex rules, as well as a a couple of pre-planned policy maker. They must take traps, each of which has their into account what the party own individual sound effect adventures. definite lack of explanatory supportive material, and it is easy to see why some people never get involved in the hobby in the first place! With the release of Dragonroar, Standard Games has gone a long way to solving many of the novice's problems. They have come up with a product which is simple to play, easy to learn and very enjoyable. The first thing to do is to listen to side A of the enclosed cassette. This explains what role playing is all about, how you play the game and generally answers all those nagging questions that you have been dying to know the answers to. Now turn to the rule book to see how the gaming system works. The cassette talks you through character creation, movement and combat refering you back to the rulebook at various times to explain examples. Once you have a basic grasp of the rules, A Dragonroar contains dice, cassette, dungeon floor plan, paper a complete starter pack. you are then advised to read the rulebook two or three times intends to do and informs the At certain times the narrator of the cassette is very well to make certain that you know Fatemaster of the group's the story tells you to flip over recorded and includes them. You can draw a actions. The party should the floor plans and you find everything from interesting comparison between the decide things on the rulebook and a telephone yourself in another room, with sound effects to a nifty piece of democratic basis of one player a unique encounter for you to music, which bid directory: you don't have to one vote. The arbiter then attempt to conquoer. whilst you get everything know It Oil by heart, but you takes everythine the group savs Most encounters involve together. do have to know where to look into account and makes the fighting of one description or So, if you are contemplating Once this is done you have decision, if necessary another, and it was nice to find entering the fantastic world of two options. You can play the As a single plaver vau have a combat system that is quite Fantasy Role Playing. game with a group of other an entertaining threat in front detailed, yet simple to an entertaining threat in front Dragonroar is definitely the players or play on your own. If of you. On side B of the opperate. game for you. you choose to play with others cassette is a solo adventure! All The same goes for the magic you have to elect two other you have to do is lay out the system. At certain times, with VALUE people, one being the enclosed floor plans in order certain weapons, combat can \"Fatemaster\", the other being and once again the cassette will be quite lethal, but it only PLAYABILITY 9 the \"Arbiter'. PRESENTATION 9 talk you through. However, serves to add to the realism of The Fatemaster is the key to this time it is done as an the game. COMPLEXITY 3 the whole affair. The person adventure with special sound All in all, this is the complete OVERALL 53013: "


"Role PLAYIN Champions Letters You get 100 to start off with, But these are not nearly enough. There is a reason for this however and a very good one it is to ! You can obtain more Power Points, if you agree to have the same My friends I have been reading to work out what kind SUPPLIER: GAMES OF your FRP column with ammount of points in of superhero you would like to Character Disadvantages. interest, and have decided to LIVERPOOL. PUBLISHERS: HERO be and once you have the basicIf you are a comic buff, you take the plunge and get GAMES. idea you then flesh it out with will no doubt know that all ! involved. However, we are not REVIEWER: WAYNE. COMPLEXITY: FAIRLY skills and powers. heroes have weaknesses as well sure what to buy! There are Skills are the abilities that EXPERIENCED. as strengths; both are necessary loads of games available, but PRICE: .95. characters have learned in their to an interesting, well rounded we want one which is sword character. They also give the and scorcery based and simple GM interesting ideas for to play. What do you adventures, giving them a wide scope for that all important Gary Horesham, \"Cringe Factor'. Blackpool. Disadvantages range from anything from Beserk, which Dragonroar which is revealed means that your character this month, is well worth a can't distinguish between look. TSR's 'Dungeons And friends and foe in combat, to Dragons'. (basic set) is the Unusual looks, which can game which people usually range from startling, to start with, but you can always downright hideous. try GW's 'Runequest III'. Once your character has which is slightly more complex. been created, it is time to read All games should be available in your local hobby store. where the game totters slightly as it is quite involved and time I like to play Role Playing on consuming. On the positive side it is quite realistic and my Atari ST and I am having a covers all possible outcomes. great time playing When you have read all this Dungeonmaster at the you are ready to play the game moment. However, I am very Of course you'll need a Game close to finishing it and will be Master (GM), to run and at a loss as to what to play referee the game, as well as a next!! Can you advise me on few other players. The GM is any other FRP games which well catered for in the rulebook, are/will be available for my with a whole section dedicated type of computer? to running a campaign. A. Tomlinson, A Champions brings your super heroes to role-playing life. Also included are five Poole. adventures, one of which is very small and can be played Shadowgate is the only new Champions is the past experience and may range solo. To balance this up there is FRP-ish game on the market at superpowered world where the from acrobatics to stealth. a large, involved adventure the moment. It is a bit full colour fantasies of comic Powers separate the involving the clearance of a Adventure-ish, but is quite books become real. superheroes from ordinary sinister organisations interesting in places and very Here superheroes and super people. Powers are the ability headquarters. addictive. There is also the villians do battle for the destiny to fly or fire energy bolts. To quote the designers of the Ultima series issued by Origin, of the human race. There are many powers to which have a large FRP bias. game: \"The main object of the Here, armed with just the choose from and you can get game is for the players and GM However, the computer FRP rulebook, a few dice, a couple yourself in a right state market is waiting with baited to have fun.I totally agree, breath for the release of of pencils and the odd metal considering the permatations and so those more serious computerized AD+D, which is figure, anyone can become a and combinations for your minded roleplayers should give a combined release by TSR/US superhero. hero. To help you decide, the this game a wide birth. Gold and SSI. It has really To start off you have to powers have been grouped into VALUE great potential and if it lives up create you own character. four catagories, namely: PLAYABILITY 7 to its pre-release material, it This is fairly easy and the rules Offensive; Defensive; PRESENTATION 5 should be bigger than guide you through this process, Movement and Others. Dungeonmaster. Keep reading refering you to many examples You pay for both skills and COMPLEXITY 7 C+ VG for further exclusive on the way. Basically, you have powers with Power Points. OVERALL 8 details. "


"23 WAYS TO ACHIEVE SPORTING IMMORTALITY eo K omme FIGURE SKATING TOOM DASH SPEED SKATING HOT DOG FREESTYLE RELAY (SWIMMING) ROWING JAVELIN SUMMER GAMES I & II Brand New on Spectrum and Amstrad SHOW JUMPING HIGH JUMP Screenshots taken from COM 64/128, Spectrum and Amstrad formats FENCING CYCLING EDYX EDYA EVENTS CBM 64/128 .99c, .99d SPECTRUM .99c, +3 .99d AMSTRAD .99c, .99d U.S. Gold Ltd Units 2/3 Hollord Way Holford, Birmingham B6 TAX. Tel: 021 356 3388  POLE VAULT CANOEING FUNICUTATE 0:0 GYMNASTICS BIATHLON 0000 0 FREE SKATING 100M FREESTYLE (SWIMMING) SKEET SHOOTING 4 x 400M RELAY DIVING "


"FANAS, ROLE-PLAYIN news decorated in an imitation wood armoured fighting vehicle and finish. is a very nasty piece of work, It sells for around .00, bristling with offensive which is a bit steep, but there is armoury. Games Workshop has been no other fortress on the For around  you get three very busy recently issuing a market. Furthermore, GW are rhinos, which are all moulded veritable mountain of gaming selling them as fast as they are in top quality plastic. The accessories. making them, so if anyone is models are highly detailed and It's biggest, and I mean this interested in buying one it come complete with literally, recent release must be could be a wise move to contact multi-option body sections, The Ballad of SkiirLa A Standard Games has also had its nose to the grindstone. The company recently released two accessories to accompany their Dragonroar range (see this month's review). Zhevezh Gauntler will test the skills of even the toughest players. Based around the town of Tutub, the adventurers have many options for excitement and action. Included in the package is a booklet fully detailing the various non-player characters, more dungeon floor plans and new counters. There is also a new adventure cassette, which is for solo play. The Ballad Or Skiirn La'ana is another Dragonroar adventure, which leans more towards stretching the old grey matter than actual hack and slay. However, adventurers will need to keep their swords handy as there are some formidable new monsters, namely the Khlamin, which is a rock monster that flies!! Also the viscious War hedgehogs are on the loose ... Skiirn La'Ana for experienced players only optional hatches, smoke launchers, spiked ram attachments, hand rails and A Fully painted Giant Fortress. the Mighty Fortress. Standing them direct. at over six inches high and over GW has also issued a couple two feet square the fortress is a of products to accompany its formidable structure. It has Warhammer 40,000 space role been made specifically to cater playing game. The new space for your miniature figures marines come in blister packs (25mm) and you can use it for and sell at .50. You get three whatever historical period you metal marines to a pack plus desire. various accessories such as It is made of reinforced, high standards, weapons and other density polystyrene and offensive devices. designed in such a manner so There are six new variations that you can assemble it in of model and their poses differ what ever fashion you desire from model to model. Most of without the aid of glue. This them are in action stances, with ans that you can rebuild it such weapons as bolt throwers, over and over again, to suit chain swords and other hand your specific gaming needs. held weapons. A must for any The fortress comes in a serious Warhammer 40,000 realistic textured stone grey player. colour, but you can enhance it Talking of \"musts\" the if you wish with the aid of Rhino is a deadly fighting water-based paints. It contains machine from the battlefields four square towers, four wall of Warhammer 40,000, which sections, and two wall sections any dedicated player will miss with gateways. at their peril. In addition you get a large The Rhino is the mode of selection of plastic doors, transport used by space ladders, trapdoors, gates and marines. It is a frightening flagpoles, which are all version of a modern day t a Rhino battle cars flush out the enemy. lighting equipment. You have many different options as to how you construct them. Some modelling skill is essential as the Rhino's must be constructed using modelling glue. However, full assembly instructions are included along with painting instructions and sheet of full colour transfers. A Space Marines 4 for .50. "


"PlayByMail There have been big happenings in the PBM world this month. Mitre Games has gone bust, a couple The PBM news of the month, if of other PBM companies have taken over its doesn't cost and arm and a leg, not the year, must be that Mitre Games, one of Europe's so is well worth a try, even if products and Sloth Enterprises is you just learn from experience. largest PBM's companies, has giving away free rulebooks One thing you should bear in gone into volentary and re-introducing the mind though is that our liquidation. concept of discounts colonial cousins go in for So where does that leave the for bulk turns computer-moderated games in players who have a substantial purchased. a big, big way. Over there time ammount of money invested in is money and you will not find the company, in the form of a company that deals in turn credits? Well, it all hand-moderated games. depends which Mitre PBM you experience. So be prepared to played. fill in turn sheets with quite a Midgard Players: The receiver, who will be dividing Spellbinder Games also have few numbers, to achieve the European rights to Midgard up and allocating the money the rights to run the same desired results. have been sold off to a company that is avalable. you can play game. This means Two games run from the called Mid-Games, which is Turning now to happier the game with the company USA that I can recommend are based in the USA. It is run bynews. The BPMA's Great you prefer. Sloth, however, the following: Warp Forces Bill Fawcett and Eric Ziemer, Northern PBM convention is have come across with a novel Empire is a sci-fi game of and they have agreed to honour well under way. idea on how to market the combat and exploration. all credit that UK players have It is taking place at game. You start off with a accumulated. Apart from the Sheffield Polytechnic on Basically, the rule book, planet under your control just inconvienience of playing the Saterday 15/10/88 between 10 start up and first two turns are as your population is venturing game across the Atlantic, Mid into space exploration. Where Games say that, economics you go from here is up to you. aside, they will continue to run The owner of the game in the same vein as Enterprise Games Systems, Mitre, without any radical Steve Gray, is a very pleasant, changes. If you wish to contact reliable chap, who is only too them their address is; Mid willing to answer your initial Games, PO Box 268050, enquiries. Chicago, III, 60626. However, before you bother Global Supremacy Jade Games him see if you like the game has snapped up the rights to first. Simply write to me with a this game and it should be up SSAE and I will arrange for a and running at this moment. leaflet to be sent to you. Like Mid Games, they will Duelmasters is a game of honour all credit that players gladiatorial combat fought in have in their accounts. Unlike an arena between two Mid Games, they believe that characters, where you play the they can make a considerable Warp forces Empire U.S. PBM Invasion. owner of a team of warriors improvement to the game and and 6pm. All the major PBM free, so all you C + VG readers that number up to five. You they are striving to introduce a companies have been invited, who are interested in playing then write down how your more realistic element into it. along with certain Fantasy the game, drop me a SSAE at warriors are armed, what Anyone interested in playing Role Playing organisations. C + VG and I will arrange for armour they wear, and how Supremacy should note that Live role playing the start up package to be sent. they will fight, what style they new startup positions cost (demonstrations and Sloth is looking for GM's, so will use, what tactics they will .00, with turn fees starting at participation), computer if you fancy living in adopt and what other warrior .40 and rising depending on games and quizzes, Southampton and have good you want to challenge. You the number of actions you handwriting, some computer then get back a computer buy' auction have all been skills, a couple of O Levels (or print out of the flight that is any readers interested in arranged. equivalent), plus an active first divided into minutes and contemporary wargaming. Tickets usually cost .00, imagination, then pass the then sub-divided into a blow by Please note that whilst these but any C+ VG reader who details to me and I will notify blow account of the descriptive two companies will honour writes to ; The BPMA, 2, Sloth. action. Dependent on how well your credit in the form of David Court, 200 Lansdown Finally, this month I would you do, you rise or fall in the turns, they are not able to give Rd, London, N17 9XW, can like to report on a few games gladitorial table. The aim is to cash refunds on monies owed. get them for .50. that are worth playing from become the Duelmaster which Tribes of Crane: It would Sloth Enterprises has America. Playing PBM in the is the top person in the game s shown obtained the rights to run the States is easy and enjoyable. and means you play for free. very much interest in this Australian Created PBM, The post takes about eight days Anyone interested should game, and as I write, its rights Spiral Arm II. The game is one door-to-door, and most of the forward an international reply are still unsold. The only of space empire creation and games have long fixed coupon or cheque to C+ VG recourse I can advise to players involves the usual ammount of deadlines. Money is paid in for $2.50 payable to \"Reality who have credit held here is to space combat, interplanetary ordinary UK cheques that are Simulations Inc and I will get in touch with Mitre's colonisation and trading. written in Dollars and Cents: It pass it on. "


"BYRITE SOFTWARE 100 NEW GAMESRETIMA STAR LEAGUE BASEBALL DEATHSCAPE COMMODORE EDUCATIONAL RANCH NUMBER TUMBLERS, SONG MAKER FANTACY. ALE LOGIC LEVELS, ALPHABET 200, FRACTION, FEVER, AGEAN VOYAGE, STORY MACHINE SEA SPELLER, ALL E1.99 EACH. IMASTER WORLD BALLONING, CAR JOURNEY AGE 6 10 ALL FOR 2.99 COMMODORE .99 DISC ANKH, HYPABALL, AZTEC MR HOBOT, BEST OF BEOND CAPTURED, THE VIKINGS, RED ARROWS MURDER BY THE DOZEN KINETIK EMPIRE SUPER MAN FIGHTING WARRIO INFODROID LIGHTFORCE, ESCAPE FROM PARADISE, STARION, NEXUS, TRACER ZORK H, ZORK III, STARCROSS. DEADLINE. SUSPEND, DECATHLON SPIN DIZZY, TRANSFORMER, BORD OF THE RINGS PLEASE CHOOSE ALTERNATIVE GAMES TO AVOID DISAPPOINTMENTI COMMODORE MISCELLANEOUS you COMMODORE NEW be terid OL 2. FIRELORD HOPPING MANAGER 2 INO COMM .99 EACH BUY TWO GET ONE FREE CHAMELEON, MONTY ON THE RUN, LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE WILLOW PATTERN. NOSFURATU, RESCUE ON FRACTAUS, MONTEZUMA'S REVENGE TEMPLE OF TERROR, KRAK OUT, EXPLORER DOUBLE TAKE, BULLDOG, KRYSTALS OF ZONG, HYPER BIKER, QUAKEMINUS ONE. MISSION AD, STRIKEFORCE COBRA, ARC OF YESOD, THROUGH THE TRAP DOOR, CHAIN REACTION, ICE BUSTERS, KORONIS RIFT NEOCLYPS, DEADRINGER KILLER RING YARBA DABBA DOO, 10TH FRAME, MAJIC MADDNESS. DECEPTOR, SHADOW HEADROOM SUPER BASIC ENIGMA FORCE DEVSEX MACHINA, XENO, WIBSTARS, THE FIFTH QUADRANT FUTURE KNIGHT, WEST BANK, CYBOURG, THE COLOUR OF MAGIC ELEVATOR ACTION POLAR PIERRE, PILE UP. THE COMET GAME, CHALANGE OF THE GOBOTS, SUPER STAR PING PONG AVENGER, DANDY, RANARAMA STRIKE FORCE COBRA THE DETECTIVE, 1 CUPS HYPA BALL, MISSION OMEGA, INFORDROID HYLANDER KINETIK, PLAY YOUR CARDS RIGHT, JET SET WILLY SKY RUNNER, MOON CRESTA MUGSY REVENGE. ON COURT TENNIS, MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE, DECATHLON, EMPIRE, MOON CRISIS 1999, MOUNTE MICK'S DEATHRIDE BRIDE OF FRANKENSTEIN ITS A KNOCKOUT JUMPING JIMMY HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER DOGFIGHT 217, WRENDER, OUT ON A LIMB BOBBY BEARINGS, DEACTIVATORS BACK SHERLOCK SURF CHAMP, HYBRID ESCAPE FROM PARADICE, AGENT ORANGE THANATOS, APSHAI TRILOGY COMMODORE .99 EACH TRANFORMERS, BLOOD AND GUTS RAMPARTS, REBOUNDER, INTO THE EAGLES NEST. JAILBREAK ROADRUNNER, DRUID IGREYFELL, SAMURI TRILOGY, PSHICO SOLDIER TAI BOXING, CONVOY RAIDER, SUPERSPRINT RATTALION COMMANDER STRIKE FORCE HARRIER, SOLOMONS KEY, FIREFLY TRANTOR DARK EMPIRE, TOMAHAWK QUARTET, IMPLOSION FIRETRAP SHO LINS ROAD, NEATHER EARTH, INHERITANCE2 QUARTET, IMPLOSION, FIRETRAP INHERITANCE 2, FIRE TRACK, RAMPAGE GUADACANAL BASKETBALL, HACKER BOBSLEIGH BATTLE FOR NORDAMER COMBAT LEADER INTERNATIONAL SOCCER CASS), JACK THE RIPPER GAME, KRANOUT. WAR DEADRINGER SIMONS BASIC + SIMON BASIC EXTN GEOS DESIGNER PENCIL PASCAL DISC INTRO TO BASIC PT1+2 CASS FREEZE MACHINE RESCUE ON FRACTALUS, BALLBLAZER. 10.00 KORONIS RIFT BLACK CAULDRON SPECTRUM RIMZON 10.00 COMMODORE AMIGA KING QUEST COMPILATIONS SOFTWARE 10.00 INFIDEL 10.00 UNBELIEVABLE ULTIMATE ZOAK FAHRENHEIT 451 SUSPECT JEWELS OF DARKNESS 10.00 BEST OF BEYOND LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE SILICON DREAMS 10.00 ARGUS PRESS 30 GAMES, SCOTT ADAMS 2.98 WITNESS COIN OP CONNEXIEN INC ICRYSTAL SPECTRUM .99 EACH CASTLES, BREAK THUR, EXPRESS RAIDER MOONMIST METRO CROSS) SUSPENDED OR BUY TWO GET FUN PACK 3 INC THE HUCK LEVITATION DEADLINE WISHBRINGER ONE FREE POTAAL LUCAS GAMES COLLECTION INC. THE MIND FOREVER VOYAGING 10.00 ACTION REFLEX, SAI COMBAT BACK TO THE EIDOLON RESCUE ON FRACTALLIS ENCHANTER BALLBLAZER, KORONIS RIFT, (2.98 CUTTHROATS 10.00 FIGHTING WARRIOR BRAINSTORM 10.00 STARQUAKE, XCEL, GALASIAN, HACKER SPECTRUM NEW TITLES DR FRUIT 11.95 SKY FOX, MOONCRESTA, BALLBLAZER, JET 7.95 PAC, MS PACMAN, DOUBLE TAKE THE FOOTBALL DIRECTOMI THIS IS ONLY A SAMPLE, ALL NEW TITLES ATEIDOLON, XARO, KORONIS RIFT, COP OUT ACTION FORCE 30% OFF RRP FRANK N STEIN, FUTURE KNIGHT KINETIK MAGNIFICENT SEVEN PSI S TRADING CO PRODIGY, LIFE OF HARRY PULSATORY, HYBIRD, 10TH TARGET RENEGADE FRAME COSMIC SHOCK ABSORBER TITLES KONAMI ARCADE COLLECTION GALVAN, WIBSTARS, TRAP, MAILSTROM SALAMANDER THE 5TH QUADRANT WHERE TIME STOOD STILL FOOTBALL MANAGER DEATSCAPE, THE TUBE, THEY STOLEA MILLION, DOG FIGHT 21187. FIRETRAP FOOTBALL MANAGER PETER BEARDSLEY'SINT SOCCER 26.95 HLACK, BUBBLER, ICE TEMPLE, COMET PETER BEARDSLEY'S INT SOCCER ALIEN SYNDROME ARCADE COLLECTION KONAMI ARCADE COLLECTION TAPPER GREYFELL. OMEGA MISSION KILLER RING, AGENT ORANGE THIS IS ONLY A SAMPLE ALL NEW TITLES AT SALAMANDER 6 29 PYRACURSE, MONSTRIKE, MOONLIGHT 30% OF RAP BEYOND THE ICE PALACE MADNESS, ROUGE TROOPER THANTOS PERIPHERALS 6PAR VOL 3 THE EDGE ALLSTARS 06.95 OF THE COBOTS. IMPOSSIBLE. MINDSTONE UTILITIES DARK SIDE [9.96 SIGMA 7, METRO CROSS, HEARTLAND ROTRONICS WAFADRIVE 1 FREE SAK TUJAD, GUNRUNNER LES FLICS, TRIAXOS WAFA 1799 INC PEP ATARI ST SOFTWARE MOUNTIE MICKS DEATHRIDE, GERRY THE ACAPERS, EVIL CROWN GRYON, EACH 64K EXTRA WAFADRIVE CARTRIDGES 166 2.00 350 EACH CRAZY CARS VALHALLA, BIZZICOM TEMPLE OF TERROR 10.00 SPECTRAL WRITER WORD PROCESSOR ON PUB GAMES, ARTIC ANTICS, SIR FREAD. WAFA 3 96 EACH BOULDER DASH CON KIT COLLISON COURSE, SKY RUNNER, BATTLE ALPHACOM PAPER (BLACK) ROLLS 10.95 ADDICTABALL EXTENSOR TASSWORD SPECTRUM +3 DR LIVINGSTONE 10.00 CAPER, SAILING, TOY BIZARRE, HOWARD TAS SPELL 3 THE DUCK TEMPEST, TWISTER. TAS-PRINT 3 SUPER CYCLE 10.00 (PLEASE CHOOSE ALTERNATIVE GAMES TO TASCALC3 CLASSIQUES AVOID DISAPPOINTMENTI TASWIDE 3 WISHBRINGER SPECTRUM .99 EACH TASCAL SPECTRUM 2 10.00 2 FIGHTER PILOT, DARK EMPIRE, SHDA LINES AD TASWORD PLANET FALL 10.00 AVIVOR SUPERSPRINT ALIENTAS PRINT SPECTRUM T ASCOPY SPECTRUM STATION FALL EVOLUTION, SAMUN TRILOGY SPEC 35. BASKET MASTER, SOLOMANS KEY BENTAS DIARY KEY, HED P&P 1-3 TITLES 25,4 OR MORE 61 SCORPION NEMESIS JAILBREAK OVERSEAS ORDERS ADD 31 PER CASS SEA STALKER 10.00 TRANTOR, PSYCHO SOLDIER, CUTTHROATS REFLY, PROHIBITION, SLAINE, QUARTET BORROWED TIME CHOLO, DRUID IL IMPOSSIBLE, MISSION II 10.00 HEADCOACH, RAMPARTS, DEATH OR DEPT C + VG ZORK GLORY, NINJA HAMSTER, PSI PO BOX 589 PLANTFALL 10 CHESS, ELEVATOR ACTION, SPY V SPY LONDON 10.00 KNIGHTMARE, GUADACANAL DIG TROUBLE BALLYHOO IN LITTLE CHINA. N14 6SJ RANARAMA EXPRESS HAID CHALLENGE NEOS MOC OF THE PLANETS WEESOD ISLAND FUTURE FINANCE INTERNATIONAL SOCCER ICART 04:56 COMM COMPILATIONS .99 EACH CASSETTE ALLIGATA ACTION PACK PLATFORM PERFECTION. UNBELIEVABLE ULTIMATE SCOTT ADAM'S SCOOPS, BEST OF BEYOND . COIN OP CONNECTION INC ICRYSTAL CASTALESI, BREAKTHROUGH EXPRESS RAIDER METRO CROSS, SOMMER GOLD INC 110TH FRAME DAMBUSTERS, BRUCE LEE, BEACHEADH LUCAS FILM COLLECTION (THE EDOLON RESCUE ON FRACTULUS, BALLBLAZER KORONIS RIFT COMMODORE .99 EACH DISC STAR RAIDERS II FIRE TRACK ALIENS SUPERSPRINT, RAMPAGE, BASKETBALL LUCASFILM GAMES, INC. THE IDOLON. 88888888 SPELL BREYER VOYAGING BYRITE SOFTWARE ULTIMA 1 Bridge Street Galashiels TD1 15W WORLDWIDE .SOFTWARE 49 Stoney Street Nottingham NG1 1LX. Megasave AMS DISCCOUM DISC TITLE Timescanner SPEC. 645 12.95 645 9.95 SPEC Alien Syndrome AMS DISCCOMM DISC 902 FAST DELIVERY ON ALL STOCK ITEMS BY 1a CLASS MAILIN UK SPECIAL OVERSEAS SERVICE BY AIR MAIL WORLDWIDE 6.45 995 8.45 7.95 8888888 Beardsley Football 800 De 8888 VISA 735 1095 6.45 01 CREDIT CARD ORDER TELEPHONE LINES 0896 57004 (24hours) 0602 48077 (24hours) Pac Vol 23 Amiga & Atari ST 8:45 D2 8.45 9.95 Beardsley's Euro 16.45 COMMODORE AMIGA SOFTWARE Barbarian Il................ .................13.25 Bards Tale Il..........................................18.55 Better Dead Than Alien.... ..........13.25 Bionic Commando...... . . Bubble Bobble Buggy Boy........ ............................16.45 Corruption... ................... ..... 16.45 Flight Simulator Great Gianni Sisters kari Warriors... ..16.45 King of Chicago.... 21.95 Overlander 16.45 ATARI ST SOFTWARE Alien Syndrome.... Empire Strikes Back Fire and Forget... Football Manager Legend of the Sword Bionic Commando Gauntlet ll.. Night Raider. Outrun.. Road Blasters. Pandora Quadalien. Cam Command ***8888888888 Fer Formula Football Manager 4.9501 19.95 21.95 Thundercats. Road Blasters Rocket Ranger...... Thundercats... Virus. Whiligig ***** Sentinel 88 GLI Super Great Gara Sisters .13.25 Where Time Stood Still Whirligig.......... 495 01 645 9.95 13 25 ' Imposso Mission Legend of the Sword 8888888 85D3 50p off every title SUMMER SPECIAL OFFER 50p off every title Just tell us in which magazine you saw our advert then deduct 50 pence from our advertised price on each title that you order (not joysticks or peripherals) Cass disk 7.25 11.20 7.25 9.45 cass disk 7.25 10.85 725 10.15 CM/128 SOFTWARE... 19 Boot Camo... Barbarani Micro Mud Night Raider Carriers at War President is Missing Overlander. Great Gianni Sisters Last Ninjal. Ultimal or lilor IV Battlecruiser.... Red Storm Rising 5.25\"blank disk per ten... SPECTRUM SOFTWARE Airbourne Ranger Empire Strikes Back Football Manager il Night Raider When Time Stood Stal Bards Tale... 35 10 15 7.99 11.99 2495 7.25 9.75 7.25 9.00 7.99 11.99 9.75 11.20 7.99 9.75 5.95 10.5 .7.55 11.99 22.95 Road Blaste 12.95 13.96 ..11.20 14.95 4.99 JOYSTICKS Comp Pro 5000 Comp Pro 5000 Clear Comp Pro 5000 Extra......... Cheetah 125 plus. 3.5\" blank disk pertenl.. Time and Magic Tubo Please make cheques and postal orders payable to WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE, Prices include postage and packing in UK. Overseas orders please add .50 per E cass/disk for AIR MAIL delivery Credit Card Telephone Numbers: 0896 57004, 0602 480779 Time and Magic 10.95 D3 10.96 1395 10.5 13.95 1495 14.56 496 6.25 The Games (Win ) 6.26 D1 6.45 Three Stooges Werewe stood 5.DI 6.45 29 64 Xenon 1195 1195 DISC DI 08.75 02 05 03 10 6 4 125 MAIL ORDER ONLY, POSTAGE INCLUDED GREAT BRITAIN EEC 75P PER ITEM, OVERSEAS ESO PER ITEM FAST SAMORDER DRENGLESE SERMOA SANT BOITE DE RELENTE A CTONA LONDON SWAK MAIL COMMODORE, SPECTRUM AND DISC, STATE WHICHEST PLEASE NOTE NEW PROGRAMS WILL BE SENT THE FUTURE LEAGUE LIMITED "


"COMPETITION RESULTS! and Kevin Hutchinson from DAY OUT IN A Sheffield. FERRARI And last but not least in this batch of winners comes the Jane Frewer from Broadstone Roadblasters/US Gold coin in Dorset was the \"lucky\" op winner. winner who gets to be driven He is John Wood of around by Eugene Lacey for a Wednesbury in the west day. The consolation prize is Rafael Ssabater from Earl's Hearn and Marko Svominen Midlands who will soon be that it's in a Ferrari, so the day Court, London, Alistair Mayfron Finland, heroes all. annoying family and shouldn't be that bad. from Moray in Scotland, neighbours alike with his new She impressed the judges by Adam White from Leeds, TALLY HO coin op. The winning rhyme? the fact that she'd just done a Joseph Old from Padstow, COMPETITION \"The engine revs 9,000 word project on the Cornwall, Ranjadh Grewal On new locations, famous sportscars, and that from Northampton and S.P. June's Tally Hol Gee Bee Air to rid the road she was a girlie, and we don't Howells from Birmingham. Rally competition got a whole Of vile creations get many of them entering our Playing cool competitions. And driving faster, Burn the streets ROCKET Like a real Roadblaster!\" RANGERI GRAFFITI B MOVIE COMPETITION W. Craigens from Middlesborough stormed into At last the winner of the first place with his suggestion Graffiti competition run with for a B movie title Maynard International last \"Frankenstein Ate My Virgin year sometime can be Granny on Wheels.\" If you revealed. He is Chris Green think that's bad, you should from Bexleyheath in Kent, see the rest of them! He gets a who pips Nick Adams and free day at Alton towers. Steve Bain to the post with his epic wall painting, and gets to MR D.J ROBOT go to New York for his troubles. RADIO Winner of the Mr DJ robot PRISONER radio was Gareth Dew from A By Karl Hornell. Bridgwater in Somerset, who And no, I'm not going to COMPETITION was the first out of the hat to explain to you the last answer Back in February we asked correctly tell us that the name \"What is a bit-map?\". We the name of the Prisoner of the robot in the film had all sorts of answers, but if (Number six) and the previous Forbidden Planet was you want to know you'll have series starred in by Patrick \"Robby\". He should have to look it up! McGoohan (Danger Man). received his prize, ooh, ages The winner of a set of videos ago. BLACK LAMP of this classic series was BITMAP COMPETITION Patrick McTeggart from BROTHERS April also ran a Black Lamp County Fermanagh in competition to win five metal Northern Ireland. Darren Bilham from King's model dragons. This was an Lynn won the Bitmap remote art compo with a very healthy A By Morgan Eves. EYE control model aeroplane number of entries, but the five heap of silly and often COMPETITION which was first prize, with winners were: Karl Hornell downright unintelligible these correct answers. The from Sweden, Morgan Eves suggestions for the photo The Eye competition was an Wright brothers were the from Norwich, Jokell Freyr caption. These ranged from artwork one for which we got a famous flight pioneers, the Svanarsson (I hope I got that \"Okay, which clever bastard load of really good entries, but assassinated US politicians right!) from Iceland, Nicholas nailed my scarf to the unfortunately only one were the Kennedys and the Young from Saddleworth in propellor?\" (J. Round from winner. That winner, as suit billionaires were Moss Lancs and Allan Batchelor Nottinghamshire) to, ''Twist chosen by the C+ VG art Bros. Runners up who win from Tottenham, North the other end and black department was Richard Xenon games are Cameron London. pepper comes out here,\" Jepson, age 10, from Hogg of Stoke on Trent, John Runners up who get Black from P. Young of Rotherham in South Parchment of Clapham, Lamp games are Alan Wan, Huddersfield. Other flying Yorkshire. He gets an eye London, Daniel Cregin from Lee Bullock, Luke Liller, Jacket winners are Matti board game, a computer Newcastle, Jon Christian Richard Knights, D. Smith, Kennedy from Cornwall game and various goodies. Hartley from Blackburn, \"GYS\", E. Wardlaw, Thomas Steve Cooper from Somerset Well done! "


"NAI MIRROR Soft KIKOS RAINBIRD TRIAD A NEW FORCE IN THE 16 BIT MARKET PLACE "


"Fly all over the screen. Dodge this lot. Keep moving all the time. When all the mushrooms are in the air, only take a few out, then swoop across the ground and back up into the air. PARTIT Reviember to dodge all the Best to stay low most of the time. When rocks are on the floor higher and blast them. Space Harrier is now available on the ST. Here's a map of the first three levels to get you going, plus some hints and tips direct from Elite. Stage 4: Very fast level; and it is very solid; It has loads of posts very close together, this needs very good, fast reactions, and it is very useful to go from left to right all the time, using the auto-fire. Stage 5: This is a \"Bonus Stage\"; all you do is wait until a Hamster comes along and wait until you are on his back. Then control him over the screen, smashing into everything you see. 59 "


"VT TE lay Masters Fly in a circle around the Dragon with auto-fire on. Even if you don't kill the big aliens at the end of a stage, you must shoot them a lot of times before passing onto the next devel. 1 tree posts. en the rocks are on the loor fly her and blast them. LUSTRATION PAUL HEATH age 6: Just keep out of the way of the Steel poles and dodge the ulls which the Hockey Players \"whak\" at you. age 7: Very tough level at the start. When objects in the air Ey on the ground but fire when there aren't too many. Stay out of way of the Faces, they come too fast. Keep crossing the screen last a while longer. 061 Stage 8: Have auto-fire on and move all over the screen, blowing up everything in sight. Stage 9: Very, very fast level; it is very full of obstacles and is very hard. Stage 10: Not reached. "


"ACADEMY RIVALRY Oo oo ooo Konami's arcade hit now for your home micro and already a No. 1 hit. Seven JUMU gruelling events featuring the Assault Course, Firing Range, Arm Wrestling and Combat with the instructor himself! Combat school throws down the challenge to the toughest of thoroughbred gamesters but if you don't make the grade you're out!  1987 Konami Special boxed pack containing FREE film poster, g and audio cassette of Smokey Robinson's \"Tracks Capturing the intimidating mood of conflict withi Platoon has been hailed as \"Best Film Tie-In to da program has received brilliant reviews on all form Lead your Platoon deep into enemy territory, you feel the humidity, sense the threatening dangers enounter the enemy and his many booby traps. He at your peril! Enemy soldiers lunge at you from the can find vital information. If you come out of this  1986 Hemdale Film Corporation All Rights Rese GAMES OF COMBAT, 16.7 COMBAT SCHOOL SPECTRUM AMSTRAD 7.95 8.95 SPECTRUM COMMODORE ALSO AVAILABLE ON AMIGA & PC + COMPATS PLATOON SPECTRUM 9:95 COMMODORE ASTRAD Ocean Software Limited. 6 Central Street Mancheste "


"COMES YEAR AT COMPUTER PERSONAL STAND N13101 SANS COURT, LONDON FARE me picture of my Tears the jungle e\" the ts. an almost you ving found the underground maze of tunnels, enter murky waters within, but this is the only way you live, you'll be just one of the few! A superb conversion for your home micro of Konami's arcade blockbuster. Featuring all the game-play of the arcade original, Gryzor takes you into a thrilling alien world of force fields, fanatical guerillas and strange enemy defence systems but you have the fire-power and maybe, with a little skill, grit and split second timing, you can infiltrate the aliens' headquarters. Play Gryzor once and you'll be hooked!  1987 Konami ved IT ONLY FOR HEROES ea GRYZOR SPECTRUM AMSTRAD 7.95 8.95 SPECTRUM COMMODORE ALSO AVAILABLE ON AMIGA & PC+ COMPATS PLATOON IS ALSO AVAILABLE ON ATARI ST, AMIGA & PC+ COMPATIBLES  M2 5NS Telephone: 061 832 6633. Telex: 669977 "


"asters Play There are two ways of playing Gauntlet: the smash n'grab method where you plle Into the fray without any regard for your health, or the stealth mission where tlme, patience and skill are used to amass the highest score possible. If you prefer the former method of play. Turn the page. If the latter is more your style. d n. POSITION A Positioning the character correctly behind this wall means that the generator and monsters can be destroyed without them being able to touch you. Although there are four characters to choose from, solo players are besl advised to pick elther Merlin the Wizard or Thyra lhe Valkyrie. Merlin is naturally gined with magic powers, and his magic shots and prowess with pollons malte lilm an excellent fighter. However, POSITION B .A super shot amulet collect this after you've cleared the maze. LEGEND FOOD TREASURE MAGIC POTIONS KEYS AMULETS PERIAN INVISIBILITY TNVULNERABILITY POSITION Shoot through these two gaps to destroy the generators behind the wall REFLEET YENESS REFLECTIVE SHOTS POSITION D  Reflective Shots amulet. Don't collect this if a shots hurt other players' message has appeared at the start of the screen you could end up blasting yourself! he has little armour, and therefore can only be recommended to skilled players who are adept at avoiding the less than-amorous attentions of the dungeon hordas. Thyra is ideal for less experienced players, as she is endowed with body armour and lias reasonable magic powers. POSITION E Blast Death with a potion otherwise pick up the invisibility amulet (F) and rush past MONSTERS POSITION F Invisibility potion watch it, its effects tend to run out at the most inopportune moments! LEVEL 8 type GHOST GRUNT DEMON LOBBER SORCERER DEATH ACID PUDDLE SUPER SORCERER DRAGON type fight shoot Magic GHOST VALKYRIE POSITION G Potions are vital Collect it don't shoot it. 10 HEALTH SCORE HEALTH SELECT HERO SCORE HEALTH SELECT HERO DEMON LOBBER SORCERER DEATH ACID PUDDLE SUPER SORC STUN DRAGON YES STUN The key to the game is keeping your health level up. Running around blundering Inlo everything isn't the best way of conserving BROPOV carefully does II. The priority targols are the monster gonerators. Take one of these but as soon as IOSSIDIO, otherwise the screen wil uickly tell with marauding monsters. A useful lactic 18 to think aliend. When you're wandering through a maze, destroy everything you can on the other side of the wall by shooting through the gaps. This means that when you reach the other side there won't be anything nasly lying in wall. Monsters always advance towards you in a straight line, soll you can pula wall or obslacle balween you and them, they won't be able to approach. With clever nositioning, you can actually shoal past a wall with monsters behind Il.destroying them wilhoul laar of them touching you. Always watch out for food: sa citer bolle be careful you don't shool llll's better to batlle a couple of monsters hand-1-land to reach some lood, rather than is lasting ll. The Same goes for DOTTONS. Ghosts, grunts, lobbers and sorcerer's are easily dealt with blast 'em lo blis. Bemons are dispatched in a similar way, bul care SAOUId bo takon lo avoid their health supong gobs of Ir. The IT monster Is no trouble lo a solo player touslers chase after you anyway but acl Dons and Deall are. Acid pools can't be shot, and dave to be avoided (toplug into one knocks Ol 30 dealth points). 102 "


"GAUNTLET II Deaths are deadly and can only be destroyed by Dollons, so don'! wasio them. Dragons are the most dangerous of the dungeon Inhallanls. They appear rarely, bul nearly always bar the way to the all. The only way oldestroying a dragon is to I PODOBIOy on the head Timing is critical, 85 Ways from sido lo sido making it incall la got a shot on largol. All the while ISOWS UP, 30 Spoon is also of the essence over approach too near a dragon-la do 50 18 suicidal. It does take practice to destroy dragons, but don't be disheartened. HIS DOSSIDO. YOU GONTSUCCEDU Barroponteu aliompis, you could always wimp out and summon another character to do the dirty work Amules are all very useful apart from transportabilly, which makes playing the game very dificult Indeed. Thara's a sacral room hidden in the game, and it's acked lot of pollona, amulels and other goodles. Il ean be accessed in a variety ol ways, but the best thing to do is savo super shols. 0001 collect Super shots walll you've completely cleared a Hongoon, then relrace your steps. pick up all the super shol amulets you missed and go to the all without Dressing tha llra bullon. Keep collecting super shols in Urls fashion and you'll eventually enter the secret peam. Entrances to the secrel room are also hidden in the walls of soma mazesbut they're very difficult to find. Il you discovor any other ways of getting into the socPel room, write in to Playmasters. "


"COME AND SEE US PERSONAL STAND NP3101 THIS YEAR AT COMPUTER EARL'S COURT, LONDON SHOW THE SALAMANDER SPECTRUM COMMODORE 8.95 SPECTRUM Beyond infinity lies the evil galaxy dominated by the forces of the despotic SALAMANDER: A hero must persuade his compatriots to join him on a journey into hell and beyond Organic AMSTRAD Monsters of destruction, Nuclear Spiders, Infernos burning like raging seas in torment: Caverns of Despair, Demons beyond the dimensions of our minds... NOW IS THE TIME...YOU ARE THE HERO the name of the game * TCT Konam IMAGINE SOFTWARE 6 CENTRAL STREET MANCHESTER M2 5NS TEL. 061-832 6633 TELEX: 667799 OCEANS G. FAX: 061 834 0650 "


"asters Welcome to Playmasters. Julian Rignall here with all the latest hints, tips and POKEs for your machines. Over the next few months I'll be reshaping and developing the Playmasters section to turn it into THE definitive tips section, with the hottest maps, listings and POKES that are guaranteed to work, and the best cheats and hints. The best news this month is that I've got software to give away to the senders of the best tips of the month. So send in your maps, hints, POKEs or anything you think could help fellow games players to: Julian Rignall, Playmasters, C + VG, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AD. You never know, you could well win yourself a bundle of software for your computer. By the way, when you write, don't forget to say which machine your tips are for. Coming up this month is a solution to the final level of Dungeon Master, a Space Harrier map and some superb tips for Gauntlet II get playing! complete. island, get as close as you If you're in need of fuel, can without grounding and make repeated contact with turn the carrier around by fuel rods in any store area to 180°, so you can hit island replenish supplies. If it's installations using surface-toshield energy you require, surface missiles. make contact with the Don't try to and destroy the Pentagon-shaped power Marauders one by one, as points. there can be up to 40 To enter the ovehead stationed in a silo (known as a walkway, simply shoot the rod Batcave) at once. When a above the door repeatedly. It Marauder is launched, it's should spin, so keep on fully refuelled and armed with blasting until the door slides three seek-and-destroy open. Blasting radar beacons missiles. Take out the prevents you from being Batcave, and then hunt down thrown into jail. and destroy the remaining If you touch a telepod Marauders or just wait for crystal, it is positioned in the them to run out of fuel. centre console within the Remember that the telepod. If you then enter the Command centre on the telepod, shoot the crystal and island immediately starts to then leave the telepod, you'll repair anything you've blown find yourself in a new area. up. Apparently you can buy Marauders don't ever leave your way out of confinement the vicinity of the island, so if by lasering the slots in the you want to destroy a pillars. Energy is expended, Batcave, fly around the island but you'll soon be free. avoiding the Marauders until you're close enough to the CARRIER Batcave, and take it out. COMMAND Volcanic islands are always good sources of fuel SO No signs of the 8-bit versions always turn them into yet, but apparently they're on resource islands. the way. Still, 16-bit players Do you know that you can should find the following tips Poland a Manta on an enemy very useful they were airfield to refuel? Just make compiled by Realtime, the sure you destroy all missile programmers of the game, so la launchers before they do! they must be good! When you reach an enemy Brad Zoom in NEMESIS 1 Electra, 2 Syzygy, 3 This is an old tip, but might be Drambuie, 4 Plug, 5 Soprano, useful for those who've just 6 Mayonnaise, 7 Faucet, 8 bought Ocean's Konami Potato, 9 Woomera, 10 Collection. Load Nemesis, on Nacissus, 11 Debutante, 12 the title screen press down Firkin, 13 Acoustic, 14 the SHIFT LOCK key and Triptych, 15 Jabberwocky, 16 press SPACE four times to Whimsical, 17 Cornucopia, 18 cycle through all the player Punjabi, 19 Tiddly Pom, 20 options and bring you back to Kewpie Doll, 21 Sepulchre, 22 player one. Start the game Euphemism, 23 Grammarian, and you'll be invincible, 24 Crossword, 25 Quarantine. allowing you to knock up a totally ridiculous highscore. DARK SIDE BETTER DEAD Here are some tips for THAN ALIEN budding explorers, sent in by Incentive themselves nice If you've been playing this people indeed! glorified Space Invaders The first thing to do is game and haven't got very disable three or four ECD's far, take heed of the advice which slows down the timer sent in by Craig Allcock of otherwise you'll find yourself Salford, Lancs. he's sent in running out of time long the access codes to all levels. before the mission is A Make sure you have the codes. "


"asters lay Find and press it and you'll carefully check the left hand activate a Storm Ring which side. There's another button you'll be able to fit more shoots lightning. At the end of there; press it and go back to supplies in the carrier's the dungeon there's a Ra. the first button, and nearby Don't leave without it. you'll discover a door. Open it stores. In dungeon ten there's a and enter. On one of the walls Make use of the head-up corridor which goes round in a there's an altar with ash on it, radar on Mantas and Always have Virus bombs Walruses to spot incoming circle. To get past it walk beneath which is a key. and ACCBs on high priority, missiles early. around throwing objects at There's also a button located as they're quite demanding On reaching an enemy the wall. When an object in the room; press it to get a on resources when being island, immediately launch a e disappears, turn around and disa Ra key and scrolls which tell manucfactured. Always have full complement of defence walk back the way you came you about the staff. Four the Automatic Repair drones. Systems on high priority in the Before you reach an enemy Damage Control Screen. island, send out a Manta as a Factory islands and the reconnaissance scout to see Base island produce limited what and where things are on resources. the island. Regularly move the Stockpile island so that it's in DUNGEON MASTER range of the group of islands Calling all Dungeon Master you're currently running a freaks. If you're having campaign against. Place trouble battling through the defence islands at key last level, Richard Corns of positions in the island Kingswinford, Swindon has network, so that it's more just what you're looking for difficult for the enemy carriera complete solution. Read to break down the network through it first to familiarise Always repair Mantas and yourself with what you've got Walruses as soon as they to do before entering the ill NI A Look for the concealed button. and you find yourself in a doors can be opened with the 175 different location. Keep doing ashkey, and behind each one this to find your way out. is a magical item. BORIS KIZARD OF BALDOR When you've found a way out. Use the Ra key found in the back around carefully and altar room to open the door you'll find a door. Open it to with the star-shaped keyhole. find a sword called The Fury Explore behind the door and which can shoot fireballs. you'll find the Firestaff. (it's Near to the steps which behind the black door which is lead down from this dungeon opened with the Master key.) there's a door it's vital that Go back to the level with the you enter. On the wall there's Wizard and you'll find a large an eye. Take an object and room. Fall down any hole ENCARNATE click it on the eye to open a there and you'll find yourself HEALTH secret passageway. Enter in the dragon room. Under a 35/35 STAPENA 65/65 CANCEL and you're transported to the pile of ash is a key. Pick it up, MANA 28/ 28 LORD 3.0/ 38 KG Ruby key. This must be used but be careful because if the in the Tomb of the Firestaff. dragon breathes fire, the In dungeon eleven there's a entire party will be instantly A You must kill the wizard to win. Ra Key and the Master keyfrazzled. return to the carrier. dungeon the last thing you which is used to open the Behind the door in the Only refuel Mantas and what to do is have to refer Firestaff door. Be careful dragon room is a power gem. Walruses with just enough back to this during a battle! here, as the dungeon is full of To free it from the spell use fuel for the sortie. If they're In dungeon eight (the one knights in chain mail which ZO + KATH + RA + destroyed, fuel won't be with the rats) there's a are very difficult to destroy. XXXXXXXXXXXX. This wasted. message which says 'When is When you've got both keys, produces a crystal with which To move quickly between rock not 'rock'. To the left of go down stairs. There's a you can touch the gem. islands, dock all drones and this message you can walk Wizard here, but don't pursue Go up the stairs to the room don't leave a Manta on the through the wall to get to a him as he's far too powerful to with the Wizard. Be extremely flight deck, as this slows down passage which has an beat at the moment. Don't cautious here, as the room is the carrier. When you send invisible teleporter. Locate open the skeleton hole here packed with demons, and the carier to another island, the concealed entrance by if you opened one on level there's fire everywhere. don't forget to recall all walking down the wall seven, you'll be transported Destroy all the demons and Walruses and Mantas to the throwing objects. When an all the way back there. then face the Wizard himself. carrier. While moving from item disappears, you've Go to the Firestaff you Surround him with fluxcages one island to another, use the found the entrance. Walk should be able to open all the and when you're sure that time to redesignate the sideways and turn about. A doors with the Ruby Key he's COMPLETELY settings on the Ste Priorities giant rat appears but it can be and open the door that says surrounded, invoke a fuse, screen. dispatched using full-power \"Enter with Caution'. Search stand right next to him and Always keep you Mantas fireballs. around and you should be use the fuse. If you've and Walruses fully armed, Later on in the dungeon able to find a button. Go down surrounded him correctly, he even when in the hangar, as there's a concealed button the passage that apears and dies, and the quest is over. "


"Against a silver moon an awesome shape emerges, rumbling towards its destiny. A classic encounter between two of the most destructive forces of their kind ever conceived by man. THE GRUMMAN AVENGER ...a masterpiece of aeronautical engineering, designed specifically to combat the growing menace of warmongers and protect western fleets from attack by air and sea. NIGHT RAIDER is the compulsive culmination of all aspects of this encounter and captures both the action and simulation of one of man's most memorable conflicts. THE BISMARK... the most fearsome battle machine to ever haunt the seas. STRATEGY ACTION SIMULATION DESTRUCTION \" O CBM 64/128/AMSTRAD ATARI ST $9.99 tape $14.99 disk $19.99 disk IBM SPECTRUM 48/128 $19.99 disk $9.99 tape +3 $12.99 disk AMIGA APPLE .99 disk &19.99 disk CAROLINE GREMLIN GRAPHICS Alpha House, SOFTWARE LA SOFTWARE UTILI 10. Carver Street, Tel: 0742 753423 LIMITED Sheffield S1 4FS IS RIVUJ Soys was 10. Carver Street, "


"Are You Good Enough to TACKLE There is so much in Hot Shot-you need to be a crackshot, a pinball wizard and an ace controller. Have you got what it takes to beat Hot Shot? GOLD LABEL AWARD R 012889 BER R 10001077)  N . as the greations, oua Labelawa Univeat has exceeded for And Hot Shot the back 0 001710 00000 Screen shots from Atari ST version Universally acclaimed as the greatest game this century. Hot Shot has exceeded all expectations, out of hundreds of games only two have qualified for Addictives Gold Label award. These are Football Manager 2 and Hot Shot. Games Machine Hot Shot is so action-packed, before you buy, read the back of the Sinclair User. Hot Shot box. Available at all quality stores. MA fast, addictive challenge. Original and humorous.\" \"It looks frabjuous ... and well brill it looks too.\" Street Date:Endof August. CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk Spectrum-.99 cassette, +3.99 disk Amstrad 29.99 cassette .99 disk Amiga .99 Atari ST .99 IBM PC .99 Go For Gold. It's Totally Addictive PRISM LEISURE CORPORATION, Unit 1. Baird Road, Enfield, Middlesex EN1 153 "


"UPUTER ext video 1988 will go down in history as the year of the role playing game. RPGs are now big business and games giant US Gold is about to launch the biggest game of them all Advanced Dungeons and Dragons for all computers. There are two games a conventional PRG from S.S.l. and an original, more acadey game using AD&D characters. C + VG has exclusive reviews, a meg compo, and all your favourite regulars in our bumper PC Show issue. It's big and fat and the best value in gamesdom at .10. ON SALE SEPTEMBER 16 "


"LARGER You remember that famous bit at the revolutionary giant-sized the beginning of Star Wars? The Canadian system or, heaven one where the giant Imperial Star help us, it's even more Destroyer roars into view from spectacular domed screen cousin the top of the screen, and seems OMNIMAX there wouldn't like it's going to keep coming on have been a few gasps in every forever. It was a magical piece of audience, there would have been film-making, if perhaps heart attacks. Yes, it really is that cheapened by a thousand small good. screen showings. That's a fate As it is, everyone walking out that will never befall an IMAX of the auditorium is walking on film, not so much the cinema of air. Hardly surprising as they've the future as a cinema of the just come out from under a ideal. If George Lucas had used screen at least ten times bigger IMAX A Bradford's IMAX projector. V Super X packs them in A \"The Dream is Alive\" shot by shut than anything they're used to seeing a literal wall of image that engulfs their range of vision. The IMAX film frame is three times the size of the normal 70mm movie frame you might see projected onto screens at Leicester Square or big cinemas around the country. Even when projected onto something seven stories tall, the sheer size of the film itself allows for an extraordinary sharpness of image that few could compete with Coupled with the severely pitched seating that puts everyone in the auditorium far closer to the screen than they would ever normally be, the "


"than life! It's the nearest thing to being there. Matt Bielby reports on IMAX and Super X, simulations that really stimulate. minutes in length and pack them experience. Experiences like in at the museums, planetariums using the earth suspended blue and cultural centres that house and massive above you, forcing most of the fifty odd screens, in the eye to roam across the the main telling you far less about screen trying to take it all in any particular subject than your cannot fail to move you. If average Horizon programme, someone hasn't already called but letting you feel much more. IMAX the seventh wonder of the Brighter, crisper, larger than modern world, well, they should anything you have seen before, a have. film like the space shuttle film Super X is a very different The Dream is Alive affects the system. Unlike IMAX, it doesn't audience like a cross between a use a massive, awe inspiring roller coaster and a religious Continued on page 112 A Twist your head to take the world in. The Dream is Alive. astronauts themselves. system leaves everyone with the impression of being actually inside the action. If it seems like I'm raving, it's because I am. The system is the brain child of three Canadian film-making friends who built their first rolling loop projector in time to be the sensation of the 1970 Japan Exposition in Osaka with their first film. Tiger Child. Since then 55 or so films have been made, each one vying to be more spectacular than those before. Most have been pseudo-documentaries devoted to subjects like flight, space exploration, natural history the Grand Canyon. All are around 40 "


"screen for it's effect indeed, the films it uses are shot on normal video tape and played on a screen not too much larger than one you could buy for your home but adds the sensation of movement to the experience. Dubbed the Prokon, Super X's capsule is like a very simplified version of an aircraft flight simulator. Fourteen passengers sit in the dark watching the screen at the front like IMAX the films are interchangable and are normally of the exciting ride variety and cling on as their environment swoops and judders in time with image. The visual images on video tape are linked to the hydraulic motion system the capsule stands upon, each pitching, rolling or falling movement seeming far more spectacular in conjunction with the film than they would on their own. There are aircraft, rally car, helicopter and white water rafting sims available now it only takes a few moments to reprogram it for another ride A typical domed OMNIMAX projector with many more being x 63'8\" screen has showings on information phone the museum produced all the time. the hour throughout the on 0274 727488 for programme Where to see them afternoon every day except details. IMAX screens aren't exactly Monday, with evening showings Super X simulators are located thick on the ground. The only Thursday and Friday at 7.30 pm at the Needles Pleasure Park. one in the United Kingdom is a You can go and see the giant Alum Bay on the Isle of Wight, The National Museum of helicopter round the back, and the Fleet Air Arm Museum ac Photography, Film and Television visit the rest of the museum's Yeovil in Somerset and other which, due to the current policy excellent exhibits while you're at temporary locations around the of locating such things around the it. Apparantly most people go country. One will appear in the nation, is located in Bradford back again and again after they British pavilion at Expo '88 in West Yorkshire. The 52'4\" have seen a film. For more Brisbane, and another will be on SOFFET An operator slaves over his hot controls. A The National museum of Photography, Film and Television in Bradford, the Microprose stand at the PC show this year, hopefully not making their 16-bit sims look a bit sick. If the manufacturer Super X has its way, of course, you soon won't be able to move for them, and they promise that it's success will pave the way for much more spectacular and involved rides along the same lines. A An IMAX projector similar to the one in Bradford. 112 "


"Move over BROTHERS!!! Make way for ... Great Tiana Sisters Where one famous double act stopped short, another begins, Headbutts and demons, platforms and pits all delivered with a glamour and style that neatly disguises the cunning tricks and tantilising terrors of a couple of wild cats. wThis is one of the most addictive arcade adventures I have ever played, the gameplay is fabulous.\" Zzap Gold Medal. \"Having been totally addicted to the original Super Mario Bros., it is no mean feat to say that I found the Giana Sisters as compulsive.\" C + VG. Screenshots from Amiga version A TERRIBLE TWOSOME WHO'LL STOP AT NOTHING TO SEND YOU OUT OF YOUR MIND CBM 64/128 .99t, .990 Amstrad .99t, $14.99 Spectrum-.99t, +3 $11.99 Atari ST .99 GOI Media Holdings Ltd., a division of U.S. Gold Ltd. Amiga .99 Units 2/3 Holford Way, Wolford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 Rainbow + Arts "


"WITH YOUR SECRET WEAPONS ro CBM 64/128 Spectrum 48K .99 Amstrad Atari ST .99 .99 .99d Spectrum +3.99 .99t-.99d Amiga .99 "


"YOU CAN RE-WRITE HISTORY 943 1943 It was over 40 years ago, at the height of World, War II, that the Japanese main squadron tasted defeat off the west coast of the Midway Islands. Some say that this battle greatly changed the outcome of the war, some say under different direction we may now all be living our lives under the shadow of the Rising Sun. This is your opportunity at the controls of your magnificent P38, armed with six secret weapons, to relive the titanic struggle for supremacy against the battleship Yamato and, its legions of defences. \"Supreme arcade conflict at its thrilling best\", Screen shots from Atari ST version. 1 PLAYER 11220 2PLAYER 4PLAYES 2PLAYER CAPCOM GIANTS OF THE VIDEO GAMES INDUSTRY C 1987 CAPCOM CO. LTD. Manufactured under licence from CAPCOM Co. Ltd., Japan. 1943 and CAPCOM are trademarks of Capcom Co. Ltd., by GO! Media Holdings Ltd., a division of U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 "


"ARCADE The Olympics are here again and the arcade manufacturers haven't been slow to get their new sports games into the arcades. Clare Edgeley takes a look at Record Breakers as well as reviewing the cutest game we've seen in ages The New Zealand Story. RECORD BREAKERS A miserable summer never stops up speed. Whoever designed the the athletics, especially with the joysticks needs his head seeing to Olympics looming on the horizon. They are thin and spindly and And what better way to get into about two inches long. training than a quick trip down to With no advance warning of your local arcade to play one of the humiliation to come l entered the several new sports the weightlifting contest. Two simulations. hefty body builders stand on the Taito's Recordbreakers is the screen waiting for the start signal. latest sports sim in the arcades Punch the button and attack the AA perfect landing and features ten finger numbing events ranging from running 9.331 hurdles. Unfortunately it's not through to polevaulting and that easy. Crouched over that gymnastics. wretched joystick I skinned my Recordbreakes is a one/two knuckles trying to build up speed player game with a vertically and concentrated so hard that split screen. As you race against couldn't time the jumps. My your partner in the 100 metres, character just ploughed through you can see him tearing ahead of the lot. you on your side of the screen, Freestyle swimming sounds while down the middle is a birds simple, and it is if you remember eye view of the track for a spot to let your player breath! check on position and how much Alternatively you can try to further you've got to go. There drown him. There's an oxygen are two qualifying rounds for meter in this event and you must each event and you must get keep an eye on this to tell you through one of them. This at least when to hit the beath button. And gives both competitors a sporting all the time you're accumulating chance to enter the big race. joystick blisters. The first event 100 metres A It's difficult to get to the finish in the time limit, The shot putt is mostly a matter is a doddle. As soon as the start of timing the build up of strength joystick again. beginning of the contest the table pistol goes, thump the start button and knowing when to release the There was no way I could build of weights I was trying to lift and start wiggling the joystick putt. It's less of a strain than some up enough strength to qualify in What a pillock. Start off at 230kg of the other events, and at least backwards and forwards to build this event until I noticed, at the and work your way up to 270kg the angle meter is some help. It's a lot easier. Another tip is to The same goes for the long watch the weightlifter's face. If it horse all pretty straight goes blue with the strain, stop the forward. But wait for it the joystick and then try another hop, skip and jump should keep burst of strength to around the 80 you on your toes. Use the start mark and then hit the stop button button for the run up, beat the hell Next are the horizontal bars. out of the joystick for speed and This one's a lot easier, though then use the button again for hop. timing is important. Hit the start skip and while you're jumping button, waggle the joystick as attack the joystick even harder to your competitor swings round keep your character in the air. and round and round on the bar, The last flogging event is the then hit the stop button. With luck 400m relay and takes real he should fly off at top speed, hit stamina. It's fairly simple, just the mat and stand up. With rotten punch the button at the right Juck he'll head for the ground at moment to pass the baton and breakneck speed head first. keep that joystick moving to Right. On with this gruelling qualify in 40 seconds ordeal. The Hurdles. Now this Recordbreakers could have should be easy. Just hit the start been an enjoyable contest, and button, waggle the joystick and should be. Unfortunately, it was 270 kg looks too much for challenger 1. remember to hit the button to spoilt by the miniscule and jump your player over the unwieldly joystick SPEED CHALLENGE "


"ACTION THE NEW ZEALAND STORY \"A daring kidnap. Young kiwis snatched by aging Walrus,\" scream the tabloids. National outrage. People wring their hands and then do nothing. Unless that is you are a kiwi. A bird of brain, but a helpless, flightless youngster who's ready to brave the baddies to free his mates. And so the cute and addictive New Zealand Story starts at the entrance to the zoo Armed with a bow and unlimited supply of arrows you flutter into action, zapping a number of hungry foxes who have just picked up your scent. Immediately obstacles become apparent as you look at the map and find you're at the furthest point from your goal. Arrows point upwards and to the really starts. Portals appear in the brick wall, spilling out hedgehogs hanging onto balloons, armoured turtles and penguins riding rubber ducks. It seems the whole zoo is out to stop you. Shoot these and avoid the balls and other missiles they lob at you. If you have the misfortune to be knocked off your perch, you'll fall to the bottom of the screen. In which case guide your character to land on the nearest block 50 that you can start the journey back up on foot. As soon as a Flying nasty appears, shoot it and capture its balloon, duck, color whatever it happens to be riding and continue upwards. Bonus weapons con be picked up on route old fashioned fuse bombs, laser guns, fire balls and Don't fall into the trap of even a stop watch which freezes thinking this is a straight up and the enemy for a short time. down platforms game. There's a Collect these and dropped fruit bit more to it. Handling the whenever you can different weights of transport is As you climb higher the going one problem. Cradles, rubber gets tougher. Bats appear from d ucks, potatoes and the like all nowhere to drop cone shaped drift at different rates, so check missiles on your head difficult how quickly you can manoeuvre to dodge, especially if you are them before engaging battle trapped in a narrow tunnel with flying foxes and killer between building blocks. Other hedgehogs. hazards come in the shape of Another living hazard is a spikes attached to the ceilings of small devil complete with each level. Hit one of these and obligatory horns and tail. This your balloon will burst. Just as nasty little character comes deadly are the ground spikes haring over for a quick positioned between blocks when conversion job and takes a lot of jumping from tower to tower. killing. One arrow is not enough. Eventually you'll find your So beware, make sure you've kiwi friend and will be able to got a quick balloon and a hefty release him by touching his cage. weapon. Lasers are ideal in this An exit opens up taking you to case as they can be fired from a the next level and another safe distance. trapped kiwis One helpful hint is to shoot the *FOO GOOOOOOOO The arrows point you to the exit. right. Building blocks tower in your path and these you must hop over using the jump button. Zap a few more foxes, pick up the fruit they leave behind in their wake and move on. You soon reach the edge of the screen and realise that the only way out is upwards. Suddenly you're under an airbourne attack. Baddies drift down from above, each riding what looks to be half a potato. Jump up and without hitting the potato, knock the baddie off his perch with a well placed arrow and take flight in his makeshift chariot. Now you can travel upwards far faster than if you had to rely on jumping from block to block. And it's here that the action A It's a long climb to the top. D009. 000000 00000000 0000000000 00000000001 Deadly teddies chase you everywhere baddies so that their transport falls to the nearest block. Then nudge the balloon or cradle to an accessible position so that it you get shot down, you've got a back-up in reserve. Later levels take you away from the brick wall scenario of the zoo to different backgrounds including a brilliant underwater scene where your intrepid kiwi dons goggles and snorkel. You'll have to come up for air every so often and to kill the baddies, take off your snorkel and spit jets of water at them. Great fun. There's bags more to this fabulously playable little game, the further you get into it, the more you'll like it. It can be frustrating but it's never boring So save the kiwis and bag a nasty today "


"THE DOMI Fall for one of our games Once you have experienced the superior graphics,superb you'll be falling over yourself E HNIEK IMANDO ROAD BLASTERS SHACKLED Your friends are prisoners within the mysterious castle. Release the fetters that bind them and chain them to yourself, only then can you make your escape. Release as many as you can for their predicament is dire, though the more you have on your chain the slower your progress will be. Defend yourself with a choice of 8 different weapons Battle your way through 112 stages of gripping continuous action. Defeat your foes, rescue your friends, escape from every stage; only then is freedom yours! BIONIC COMMANDO\" The only hope we have of regaining our home world lies in the hands of our elite force of Bionic Commandos. With their telescopic limbs, sophisticated weaponry and bionic power they must infiltrate the enemy bases, destroy the deadly foe and neutralise their doomsday weapons. CBM 64/128 Cassette .99 Disk .99 Spectrum Cassette .99 Disk .99 Amstrad Cassette .99 Disk .99 Atari ST $19.99 Amiga .99 IBM PC .99 Super charged destruction .. the ultimate race against death, Road Blasters delivers all the gripping action and high speed thrills of this arcode spectacular. CBM 64/128 Cassette .99 Disk .99 Amstrad Cassette .99, Disk .99 Spectrum Cassette .99 Disk .99 Amiga .99 Atari ST .99 CBM 64/128 & Amstrad Crissette .99 Disk .99 Spectrum 48K/128K+2 Cassette .99 Disk .99 Atari ST .99 U.S. 6 GOLD U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3|Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 "


"NO EFFECT... the rest will be irresistible sound and unmatched playability of our games in an effort to get the rest... what it takes to be a. MENON CONTINUES..... LLING DTIET On D CAT URDER 21 The Coin-op Sensation GAUNTLET IT The mind blowing sequel to the No. 1 smash hit. Addictive, frantic and packed with so many new features it's a totally new game. Over 100 levels of pulsating action as you take on the powers of your favourite character even if they're already in play, Gauntlet Il is not just a further episode in this enthralling crusade-it's a whole new experience in action packed adventure. DREAM WARRIOR OUT RUN You're cool, the engine's hot, the girl's gorgeous, a tank full of gas and an open road ...the rest is up to you! The ultimate experience in motor sports simulation, the absolute challenge to nerves and reflexes. Experience the exhilaration and excitement of driving a high performance sports car in this teasing time trial where your co-ordination and nerve will be tested to unbelievable limits. 720 BAD CAT Experience all the thrills and spills of real Its 1984 and Los skateboarding in this Angeles prepares for unique challenge to the Olympic summer become champion of games. The dignitaries the skating world. and celebrities prepare Starting out from their speeches, ready 'Skate City test your for the huge crowds, abilities amongst the who are expected to numerous skateparks, attend. But there are improving your still the straying techniques both in citydweller cats freestyle and despised by all, the competitive action as infamous cats are well you attempt to known for they are complete the ultimate planning their own manoeuvre-the 720 competitive games. degree twist whilst ill Bad Cat live up to soaring through the his name? air. W A Kaleidoscope of Psychological Warfare The life forms of three prestigious government officials have been captured by the dreaded Dream Demon. He now has the vital information to formulate his evil plans. Overcome the two headed monster, the Demi Demons and the final confrontation with the Dream Demon himself and then only you, the DREAM WARRIOR can save the world. CBM 64/128 Cassette .99 Disk .99 Spectrum Cassette .99 Disk .99 Amstrad Cassette .99 Disk .99 IBM PC .99 DESOLATOR\" Smashing its way towards you out of the arcode into the computer, a fury of havoc and destruction straight from the Halls of Kairos. Fight your way through to the castle owned by KAIROS the Great Satan--and free the captive infants held behind mysterious mitors. Smash the mirrors to break Kairos' evil spell and upon completing your quest, transform into the invincible Machoman and desolate all in your path. CBM 64/128 Cassette .99 Disk .99 Spectrum Cassette .99 Disk .99 Amstrad Cassette .99 Disk .99 Atari ST .99 ROLLING THUNDER Rolling Thunder introduces intrigue and heroism in an intense action game. A secret society is plotting to conquer the world. The 'Rolling Thunder undercover police organisation is assigned to signed to expose this conspiracy. Top agent, code name \"Albatross' is sent to the enemy headquarters to complete the mission and free the allies held hostage. Have you got what it takes to be a ROLLING THUNDER undercover cop? CBM 64/128 Cassette .99 Disk .99 Spectrum 48/128K Cassette .99 Disk .99 Amstrad Cassette .99 Disk .99 Atari ST .99 Amiga .99 CBM 64/128 Cassette .99 Disk .99 Spectrum 48/128K Cassette .99 Disk .99 Amstrad Cassette .99 Disk .99 Atari ST .99 CBM 64/128 Cassette .99 Disk .99 Spectrum 48/128K Cassette .99 Disk .99 Amstrad Cassette .99 Disk .99 Atari ST .99 CBM 64/128 Cassette .99 Disk .99 Amstrad Cassetie .99 Disk .99 Atari ST .99 Amiga .99 CBM 64/128 Cassette .99 Disk .99 Spectrum 48/128K Cassette .99 Amstrad Cassette .99 Disk .99 Advanced Dungeons Dragons COMPUTER PRODUCT Coming Soon "


"THE MAJOR CLASSICS OF GOLF SIMULATION IN ONE INTERNATIONAL TOUR CHALLENGE LEADERBOARD Collection An easy to follow, easy to use, colour guide helps you tackle these fantastic courses. LEEDER@EBC Full colour reference chart assists with quick club selection and wind calculations. CLUB & POWER SNAP INDICATOR LEETBEFEUR LEADERBOARD COURSE #1 YARDS 300 200 100 Us! 000 Record those memorable rounds forever in this pocket scorebook. IO LEDOER B Cocodom PAR Journament ON3709 MERDE ONION-NOONG ELE ACLASSIC CELEBRATION OF THE GREATEST SERIES OF GOLF SIMULATIONS EVER PRODUCED, INCLUDING GAMES, 16 COURSES, UNTOUE FREE STANDING HOLEGUIDE, CUIB LENGTH CHART SCORE CARDS AND WALLET ZGEDEEE The greatest series of golf simulations ever produced, now available in one memorable collection, every bit as compulsive as the major tour classics that have the real pro's battling it out year after year. LEADERE PRO | ACCESS LEADER BERRD LERDER DE CONCERT PAR 4 CBM 64/128 U.S. GOLD PAR 3 LEADERBOARD, TOURNAMENT LEADERBOARD WORLD CLASS LEADERBOARD BIRDIE LEADERBOARD, TOURNAMENT LEADERBOARD LEADERBOARD, TOURNAMENT LEADERBOARD LEADERBOARDEXECUTIVE EDITION WORLD CLASSIEADERBOARD SPECTRUM&AMSTRAD .99 tape .99 disk ATARI ST .99disk ACCESS AMIGA&PC .99 disk Software incorporated .99 tape .99 disk "


"PERSONAL STANDESA, LONDON FF COMPUTER EARLS COURT, LONDON FAR AWAY IN A LAND WHERE TIME STOOD STILL ... YOUR AVAILABLE NOW FOR ATARI ST & AMSTRAD PC ARGHH!! ... A SUDDEN ROCK-FALL THREATENS TO KILL OUR HERO TOODSME 0 OPEN 0 SPECTRUM 128 CASS .95 DISK .95 IBM AMSTRAD PC + COMPATIBLES $19.95 ATARIST $19.95 FOOD LORD! OH NO!! CANNIBALS DANGER LOOMS EVERYWHEREII Ocean ned! Holt Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street Manchester-M2 5NS Telephone 061 832 6633. Telex 669977 OCEANS G "


"Lean lachines ews elda At last Japan's best selling Nintendo game is available in the UK. The Legend of Zelda is a massive arcade adventure packed full of dragons, imprisioned princesses, traps and pitfalls. Princess Zelda has been kidnapped and is being held captive by an evil Gannon. Guess what? It's down to you as the dashing hero to rescue Tony Takoushi has never seen anything like, neither the fair lady by finding the will you Chan and Chan is the weirdest and eight lost pieces of the whackiest game and the naughtiest game Wisdom Triforce' hidden by lady Zelda before she was you are likely to see on a games console. captured candle, Tony also taken a look at new shoot'em There is an enormous wand, up. Aleste, and a shooting game country to examine, with nine whistle, called Rescue Mission as well as secret labyrinths to be located rings, letters, and examined, not to mention ladders, shields, delivering his usual the Overworld where you keys and bombs collection of tips and high start your travels. to name just a few scores. There are dozens of things of them. to collect like a sword, You play by running boomerang, bow and arrow, around by slashing and avoiding the nasties, as you X4 reach the side of the screen it The PC Engine has scrolls, there is a map to help dropped in price in Japan. It you keep track of where you now sells for  and has are and if you press the B R-Type bundled with it. Still button an inventory screen no news of a UK launch scrolls down allowing you to though. choose your weapons. You Sega has set up a UK Club can amass coins to buy as from August. If you want to weapons and collect bombs register for the newsletter and and other items left when details of the Sega Hotline certain nasties are killed. then pop along to the There are powerups and Mastertronic stand the Sega bonuses hidden in the walls as bit!) at the PC Show to get the well as a fair smattering of lowdown on what's puzzles to be solved before happening on the Sega you can gain entry to parts console and arcade front in of the game. the build up to Christmas! A Zelda has a unique position save feature. Graphics and sound are excellent and again playability is supreme. It needs to be, as the price tag is a bit hefty at . GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY Super Racing OVERALL 9 . I love a good driving thrash as much as the next man, so with baited breath I await the arrival of Super Racing which has a touch of the F1/ Road Fighter about N000 ULUS it. A Japan's best selling games now available. "


"unch-out Nintendo are pretty chuffed password can be entered if comments, 'like when can I go with their boxing game. Not your game finishes allowing to sleep', or 'I will conquer suprising really as it carries a you entry to the circuit you you'. Graphics and sound Mike Tyson endorsement. It is bowed out on. are good. Your boxer is in the shops now for your To win a bout you need a simple to control (good Ninendo so yours truly KO or a technical KO which is animation) while the other decided to invite it into my when you knock your boxers detailed and smoothly console for a sparring match. opponent over three times or animated. They are amusing There are ten opponents to by a points decision if the to watch with their little A Wrestling is a Nintendo no no. roSYSTENDA restlin FR8RVGAPAN MINOR CIRCUIT TITLE BOUT FROM BRONX Pro Wrestling is the AGE: 1 weakest of this month's new WEIGHT: 107 Nintendo games. Not for content. It features a one or 20 2KO A Mario is the referee. VS. two player facility and a overcome before you can 261 18KO choice of opponents (Fighter Hayabusa, star man, Kin indulge in your dream bout of \"PROFILE\" trying to give Mike Tyson a Corn Karn, Giant Panther, good thumping (I must admit PUSH The Amazon, King Slender the idea does appeal to me and Great Puma). START! 1). It is very well presented RANKED: 1 In one player mode a game AGE: 28 with good linking screens of WEIGHT: 174 consists of a five minute single LITTLE MAC characters and messages. match against the computer, The ten opponents are your ranking is five and this Glass Joe, Von Kaiser, King Can you reach the final bout against Tyson. HHHHHHHHHHHHHH dances and expressions. ! 12:18 actually sat in front of the POINITSE3670L Run monitor and roared with DxB 629 laughter at their antics. You WEMASESORISORSER can punch to either side of the BATERIEROVLBX head, or give body blows as FOO FIGHTER FORTE well as ducking and weaving to give some pretty complex combinations. Again this Nintendo game is very A Yawn time not brawn time. playable. You have to goes up with every opponent analyse your opponent's beaten. movements whilst using some When you reach first nifty footwork. position you wrestle with The Punchout will not Champ. Beat him and you disappoint you, it is a truly have to defend your crown. enjoyable piece of There are over 20 throws software... and techniques to learn, each involving the joypad and A A KO for Takoushi but where is Tyson? combinations of firebuttons Hoppo, Bald Bull, Piston match goes the full three and position to the other Honda, Don Flamenco, Great rounds. wrestler. Tiger, Mr Sandman,, Soda The playing screen has a The graphics are plain, Popinski and Super Maco stamina meter, a stars count sound OK'ish and play is Man. There are three circuits (number of uppercut punches pretty mediocre. This is not a to be completed Minor, Major available), heart which shows bad game it just fails to grab and World, each circuit your ability to throw punches, your attention or enthusiasm. having a number of if you are too tired you turn Now that Wrestling is to be opponents which have to be purple and can only avoid the taken off TV it could be the beaten before promotion opponents punches, points kind of game to play on a comes your way. scored elapsed time and rainy afternoon. One nice feature is the use round. At the end of each GRAPHICS 8 GRAPHICS of password codes so that if round your trainer gives you SOUND 7 SOUND you complete any of the advice on how to beat your PLAYABILITY 8 circuits you are promoted and opponent while the opponent PLAYABILITY given a password. This babbles very stupid but funny  OVERALL 8 OVERALL EPLIENTE aucun "


"STREET SPORTS » SOCCEP Screen shot from CBM 64/128 version ... ANOTHER GREAT SPORTS SIMULATION FROM EPYX... BASKETBALL Choose the best 3 players from a cast of 9 neighbourhood characters and participate in this unique action packed soccer game. Execute all of the hottest soccer moves like passing on the run, heading the ball and shooting at the goal with a variety of shots. That is not all, avoid obstacles such as oilslicks, manhole covers and pot holes. Real life, fast action fun from the masters of Street Sports ... EPYX. Select from 16 of the neighbourhood's hot hitters and hacks. Each with his own level of skill in hitting, fielding and throwing. With the right combination your team could be the champions. With the wrong combination, the chumps ... Screen shot from CBM 64/128 version. STREET SPORTS BASKETBALL CBM 64/128 & AMSTRAD .99 tape .99 disk SPECTRUM 48/128K .99 tape STREET SPORTS SOCCER CBM 64/128 .99 tape .99 disk . U.S GOLD) Langhom Pts Tough on the Streets! U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 TAX. Tel: 021 356 3388 country "


"EXPANDING THE WORLD OF PLAY ELECTROCOIN PRESENTS THE VIDEO SYSTEM WITH SO MANY FIRSTS IT'S SECOND TO NONE. M AND SEE THE L SYSTEM WITH ALL THE NEW AND FUTURE RELEASES, ON STAND 3442 AT THE PC SHOW. (14th 18th SEPT) W The link between you and all the firsts. Foago The Control Deck brings you graphics that almost jump off the screen. Nintendo The Zapper, the one and only light sensing video gun. No one has come out with more innovations at one time in one place, than the Nintendo Entertainment System. First of all, there's R.O.B., your Robotic Operating Buddy.R.O.B. becomes your off the screen partner, putting the action between you, him and the screen. And first of all, Nintendo introduces the Zapper. It's the one and only light sensing video gun that's going to trigger a whole new kind of fun. And first but not last, Nintendo offers superior graphics on all 17 game paks. Fifty-two colour/dot capability allows for brilliant tone refinements, realstic 3D images, convincing depth of field and actual shadows. Discover the Nintendo Entertainment System. With all these firsts, you'll love it in a second. PLEASE SEND ME GAME PAK DETAILS AND: DESCRIPTION QUANTITY PRICE ORDERS & ENQUIRIES TO: DE GALE MARKETING LIMITED 81 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD, LONDON W1A 1EY TEL: 01-637 5735 PRICE LIST CONTROL DECK.. ... .00 ACCESSORIES ROBOT ....... .95 ZAPPER GUN.. ... .95 GAME PAKS FROM...... ..95 DELUX SET ONLY... .00 (Features Robot, Zapper, Deck + Free Software) (All prices include p&p) DG3 TOTAL Signature.... Mr/Mrs/Miss.... Address........ I enclose cheque/PO for ............ made payable to: De Gale Marketing Please deduct ... ... from my Access Account No.IIIIII (Signed)........... ...............Post Code..... Nintendo ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM "


"THE PRESIDENT IS MISSING Interactive Mystery/dventure Simulation Tribune EXTRA Wagisington E PRESIDENT Hostages Sinister Plot Several other Heads of Staty Abducted NEWS MEDIA PASS PASSE INI United States of America WHO IS BEHIND THE WORLD'S WORST HOSTAGE CRISIS? pia Please send ......... copy/ies of the President is Missing. Format .............. Price .. (C64/128 $12.95 IBM PC/compatible .95.) Name(block capitals)........ Address...... The President of the U.S. and other members of a top-secret summit have been taken hostage. As the world watches and waits, your job is to secure the safety of the captives and resolve the crisis. This exciting simulation is a challenging test of your skills. A cassette containing the terrorists demands and loaded with vital clues is your starting point. Utilizing the main computer of the CIA's Counter Terrorist branch you must correctly identify suspects, working under mounting pressure and tension. Make the right decisions and the trail of espionage, secrecy and deception eventually takes you to the Middle East. Here, you discover that an even more sinister-but undeniably intriguing-plot lies behind the kidnapping Have you got ability to successfully investigate international terrorism? The President Is Missing available for C64/128 computers, plus IBM PC's & compatibles Post code Tenclose ............ including $1.00 P&P UK only. (Overseas .00) Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd. Or debit my Access/Visa card. Expiry date............ No. U L ILI T For more information on the Cosmi range please tick box U IWSOJ Tomorrows Reality. Today Cosmi, MicroProse Ltd. 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Glos GL8 8DA, UK. Tel: (0666) 54326 Tlx: 43422 MPS/UKG "


"71 mailbag Perhaps we've been a touch mean in the past. As from now, the best letter to Mailbag each month wins a brand spanking new C + Vg T-shirt! So new, we're not even quite sure what they look like yet! So now you've no excuse, get writing to: Mailbag, Computer and Videa Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1R 3AU. Jasn ing LETTER OF differences between the male Adventure Helpline, which poking his staff at the boat?'. THE MONTH and female of the species and if was the best column in any mag Does this earn me a game? he cares to read them, I'm sure anywhere and generally made ol often wonder about the he will be able to work out why me feel good about having a John Fowler mentality of people who feel the two genders are different computer. Alas, today's C + Vg Broxbourne, Herts obliged to be abusive about (Something a little more basic is only a shadow of the people they have probably than the length of their hair, magazine it once was. Editor's reply: If you thought never met. What do they get David!) Recently you introduced more that was good, you should have out of it? The cachet of having As for intelligence, I hardly general interest items into the seen the Dungeon slagged off a famous name in need to go into this do I? magazine like the film and Master/ Winner Stays On mix the national press? The dubious W Wayne writes for a national video review, the comic strip up! And no, you can't have a pleasure of pointing out their magazine about a hobby that and review page, PBM etc. I game. abusive letters to friends and he enjoys and plays well. David applauded these at first, but I sniggering over their words in writes a childish and abusive think now you should admit newsagents? letter about people he has these 'experimental' articles I think you've got a great mag Take David Giffog's letter never met in order to gain haven't worked and get rid of going, but I've decided to about Wayne in the July issue attention. Which is the most them. The adventure Helpline warn you. Of what, I hear you of C+VG. This man has come intelligent? has now all but disappeared, cry? Well, let me get straight to to the conclusion that Wayne is Most of the people who have and there are less actual words the point. I have a fanzine that a pervert purely on the met Wayne have found him per page of C + Vg than any if put on the market would impression he has of him from a friend friendly and easy-going, quite other mag. reduce your sales to pulp. It's picture in a magazine. And why called the Digitised Directory y willing to put himself out for At least this month things not? Surely everyone knows others, whether it is by talking seem to be improving. The new and it's been a great hit with my that people who have long to new PBMers on the phone charts, Winner stays on, better or mates. As it won't be available bleached hair are always and explaining why they are pokes and the letters page is in most newsagents for a perverts? Thank God the police couple of years (I'm only having problems with a certain getting more serious, but are not so biased or there twelve!) you'd better start to game, or putting people up for there's still virtually no would be a lot of innocent work around the clock to the night at his place when they Helpline. However, there is people in our prisons. I imagine improve you're mag. Let me come down to London and still a long way to go, and that is that David has short brown hair give you a few tips that will go then miss the last train home, why I now read the excellent and wears smart, neat clothes down well with the dregs of but these are things you only ACE instead of C + Vg. (rather like Dr Cripin did.) society: learn about someone from I accept that looks are a knowing them. You cannot Gareth Williams 1) Although you're ratings matter of personal taste and are quite inventive, you should deduce what a person is like by Swansea David may not find Wayne looking at a picture of him in a Editor's reply: Keep watching c use percentages as for some attractive (perhaps he also magazine. + Vg, Gareth. The only thing reason they are more popular. prefers men with short brown 2) Expand you're Mean you can be sure of is that like it Linda Little hair!) but most people who \" Machines section, because Redhill or loath it, it never stays the reach a reasonable level of nowadays the serious gamers same for long. maturity are willing to accept Editor's reply: Actually Linda, don't find two meagre pages that not all people's tastes are we at C + Vg tend to suspect enough to make them that nice bloke though he is, Whilst looking through your interested. David doesn't seem to have Wayne is a bit of a pervert July issue I came across the 3) Bring in a new section reached this level yet which And congratulations for reiview of Last Ninja 2. every few months or so to keep leads me to suspect that he is being our first T-shirt winner, Observing the cool pictures people buying. either very young, or at least for having the funniest which I think are the best I've I hope these points help you 'young at heart'. letter on the page. seen on the 64 and Speccy, I bring a little spice to the Most people have no came across the captions. The magazine. difficulties telling men from I've been a Computer and picture of the Ninja poking his women, but if David is Video Games reader for some staff at the boat said 'mad bikers Alexander Debenham-Burton confused by people who have time. Way back in October are out to get you'. Then Essex long hair, then perhaps he is 1982 when I first bought it, it thinking how odd that was | Editor's reply: We thought we looking at the wrong signs. had detailed, trustworthy saw a scond caption with the did bring in new sections every Thre are a number of very good reviews, interesting articles and picture of a biker after the Ninja few months! What about Fax, books for children on the the shining glory was the which said 'Why is that Ninja Playmasters, Out To Lunch... TRU CBI "


"Testite 1-1 SAVIENOR13 EARLS COURT LONDTI YOUR SEARCH FOR THE ULTIMATE IN ENTERTAINMENT.......ENDS HERE TIT THE PERSONAL COMPUTER SHOW EARLS COURT LONDON HESLBT PERSONAL LOMUTIR bead of sweat gently strokes your brow. There's simply no better way of getting your Fingers tortured with anticipation. Eyes hands on the very latest technology. Feel free to riveted to the screen. Nothing can stop you try the games yourself or to see how the experts now. The record score is one carefully aimed F16 perform live on the gigantic Pepsi video wall at the missile away. Ready. Aim. Fire! National Computer Games Championship. Oh no! ...... missed. There will also be daily Personal Computer Conferences covering topics from small business If you live and breathe Personal Computers there's to music, to help you get more from your computer. one event that shouldn't be missed. To obtain more information about the conferences Personal Computer World has always been the please call 01-948 5166. target for people wanting to see the very best in So if you think you've given the current batch of leisure computing. But this year we've set our sights games your best shots, come to the Personal on making it even bigger and even better. Computer Show and discover a new world of To reflect this new direction, we've also retitled the excitement event The Personal Computer Show' and moved it to To attend on the public days (either 16th, 17th or Earls Court, London's premier exhibition centre. 18th September) just complete and return the Inside the specially allocated Leisure Hall will be coupon with a cheque/postal order for .00. assembled all the leading companies from the U.K. To make a credit card booking, telephone the Keith and overseas. Showcasing the most dynamic and Prowse Personal Computer Show ticket office on exciting games software on the market. 01-741 9999. The Personal Computer Show is presented by Personal Computer World a VNU. publication Organisers: Montbuild Ltd. 11 Manchester Square, London WIM SAB. Post To: The Keith Prowse Personal Computer Show, Ticket Office, PO Box 2, London W6 OLQ. Tel: 01-741 9999 Please send me my ticket(s) to the Personal Computer Show No of Tickets Name I ENCLOSE A CHEQUE/POSTAL ORDER FOR  (.00 per ticket) Under 18's will not be admitted on the 14th and 15th September as these days are exclusively for Trade and Business visitors. Under 18's will not be allowed in the business hall. CVG The Keith Prowse Personal Computer Show Ticket Office PO Box 2 London W6 OLQ 05-11 9999 "


"NEW LOW PRICE ST! ST PRICE INCREASE Due to a worldwide shortage of memory chips, prices of many computers have gone up. From April 1988, the Atari ST range is also likely to be affected. For details of any price increase, please return the coupon below for our latest literature. AARI ATARI ONLY FROM SILICA +VA = 2299 UCH FOR SO LITTLE! Nisk drive or interlacour 512K RAM by Atari's There is nothing that can compare with the incredible value for money offered by Atari's 520ST-FM. For only  (+VAT -), you can purchase a powerful 512K RAM computer, with a 95 key keyboard (including numeric keypad). MIDI interface, GEM, a palette of 512 colours, mouse controller, and a 512K built-in disk drive. The 520ST-FM has a TV modulator built-in, and comes with a lead to allow you to plug it straight into any domestic colour television set. The mains transformer is also built-in to the keyboard, so there are no messy external boxes. You couldn't wish for a more compact, powerful and stylish unit. Atari ST computers are now firmly established in the UK, there are nearly 500 software titles already available for a wide variety of applications and the list is growing all the time. And that's not all. When you buy your new 520ST-FM (or any Atari ST computer) from Silica Shop, you will get a lot more, including a FREE Silica ST Starter Kit worth over . Read the ONLY FROM SILICA section on the left to see why you should buy your new high power, low price 520ST FM from Silica Shop, the UK's No1 Atari Specialists. For further details of the range of Atari ST computers and the FREE Silica ST Starter Kit, complete and return the reply coupon below. ATARI 520ST-FM NOW ONLY  (+VAT=) 520ST-FM with 512K RAM & mono monitor 39 Cinc VAT U pgrade from 512K RAM to 1024K RAM 6100 (inc VAT the one problem that other computers have created Amordaby s a shop are pleased to present the ST range of personal business computers from Atari The ST w designed u sing the most recent breakthroughs in semiconductor technology, producing a personal computer that performa tasks with fewer parts. Which means it costs les to make. And less to buy. The latest ST computers now include built in power supplies and built in disk drives. The TOS operating mystem and OEM window anvironment are now On ROM chips which are already installed in the ST keyboard. This enables automatic instant booting when you switch on Silica Shop are pleased to offer the complete Atan ST range. Our mail order department is situated in Sidcup and we have retail outlets at sidup, Lion House (Tottenham Court Rd) and Selfridges (Oxford Street. We have eight years experience of Atant products, longer than any other UK company, and are well established as the UK's No.1 Alari specialist with a group turnover of over  million and in excess of 80 staff, we offer you unbeatable service and support. We provide several facilities which you will find invaluable during your Atari computing and most of these tacities are available ONLY FROM SILICA. We suggest that you read through what we have to offer, before you decide where to purchase your Atari ST. FREE STARTER KIT Only From Silica When you purchase any Atari ST keyboard, you will not only receive the best value for money computer on the market, but you will also receive the following from Atari Corporation as part of the package BASIC Language Disk \"BASIC Manual ST Owner Marku \"TOS GEM ON ROM If you buy your ST from Silica Shop, you will also receive * NEOctvome Sampier-colour graphics program for Word Word Process In addition, we at Silice would like to see you get off to a flying start with your new computer, so we have put together a special ST STARTER KIT worth over 100 which we are giving away FREE OF CHARGE with every ST computer purchased at our normal retail prices. This kit is available ONLY FROM SILICA and is aimed at providing users with a valuable introduction to the world of computing We are continually upgrading the ST Starter Kit, which contains public domain and other licensed software, as well as books, magazines and accessories all relevant to ST computing. Return the coupon below for full det DEDICATED SERVICING Only From Silica At Sica Shop, we have dedicated service department of Meme Alar trained technical statt This team is to dedicated to servicing Atari computer products. Their accumulated knowledge, skill and experience makes them second to none in the eld. You can be sure that any work carried out by hems of the highest standard. A standard of servicing which wer e you will find ONLY FROM SILICA In addition to providing fun waving facts for Atar ST computers both in and out of warranty, our team is to offer memory and modulator upgrade to ST computer 1 Mb RAM UPGRADE Our upgrade on the standard Atan SOSTO ST-FM keyboard Increase the memory from 512K tom 1 024K has a M1 year warranty and able from S aat an additional price of only M. VAT 100) TV MODULATOR UPGRADE Silica can upgrade the 100ST-F to include TV modulators that you can then use it with your TV w. This is an inte upgrade and does not in any untidy external boxes. A cable to connect your ST to any domestic TV included in the price of the upgrade which is only 4 in VAT). The upgrade is also available for early 5205T computers at the same price THE FULL STOCK RANGE Only From Silica We aim to keep stocks of all Atari related products and our warehouse carries a stock of over en million We import many software tites direct from the USA and you will find that we have new releases in advance of many of our competitors. Unlike dealers who may only wock selected tites, we have the range. In addition, we carry a complete line of all books which have been written about the Atari ST. A range as wide as ours is something you w ind is available ONLY FROM SILICA. AFTER SALES SUPPORT Only From Silica Rest assured that when you buy your ST from Silica Shop, you will be fully supported. Our free mailings give news of releases and developments. This will help to keep you up to date with new software releases as well as what's happening in the Atari market. And in addition, our sales staff are at the end of telephone line to service all of your Atar requirements. If you purchase an ST from Silica and would like any technical advice, we have a full time inchnical support team to help you get the best from your computer. Because we have both the staff and the systems specifically dedicated to providing after sales service on Atari ST computers, we are confident that our users anjoy an exceptionally high level of support. This can be received ONLY FROM SILICA FREE CATALOGUES Only From Silica Al Silica Shop, we recognise that serious users require an in-depth information service which is why we mail free newsletters and price tato our ST owners. These are up to 48 pages long and are crammed with technical details as well as special offers and product descriptions. If you have already purchased an ST and would like to have your name added to our mung list, please complete the coupon & return it to This information service is available ONLY FROM SILICA FREE OVERNIGHT DELIVERY From Silica Most orders are processed through our computer within 24 hours of receiving them. Most orders are sent by the overnight GROUP 4 co r vice FREE OF CHARGE TO Gustomers within the UK. This method helps to ensure minimum delay and protection PRICE MATCH Only From Silica We hope that the combination of our low prices FREE UK very nice FREE Starter Kit and FREE her sales support will be enough to you buy your Atan ment from aca Shop however, then please contact our department providing our competitor's name, address and telephone number our competitor has the goods in stock we will normal mach the orname product same price basis and provide you with our normal free delivery Were that we are not the only company who will match a competitor's price. However, you come to us for a price match you will also be entitled to our her sales service, including free new s and technical support. This makes our price match promise rather special something you will receive ONLY FROM SILICA We don't want you to go anywhere else for your Alari products. So shop at the UK's Not Alan Specialist ATARI 1040ST-F NEW PRICE We are pleased to announce new reduced price point on the 1040ST-F which is now available for only 409 in VAT). The 1040 is a powerful computer with 1Mb of RAM and also includes built-in 1Mb double sided 34\" disk drive. The 1040 has been designed for use on business and professional applications most of which require a high resolution monochrome or colour monitor. It does not therefore have an RF modulator for us with a domestic TV set. Modulators can be fitted for 149 (ing VAT) OOST-F Keyboard wamour Montor.... CAT) ASTF Keyboard i s SIS Mone Monitor D ie WATU If you would insturmeren of the 10405T-return the coupon below ATARI MEGA STS NOW IN STOCK For the user who requires even more RAM than the 520 or 1040 ST's offer the new MEGA ST computers are now available There are two MEGA STs, one with 2Mb of RAM and the other with a massive 4Mb. Both new computers are fully compatible with existing ST. and tun currently available ST software. The MEGA ST's are styled as an expandable Central Processing Unit with open architecture and a detachable keyboard. They are supplied with GEM, a free mouse controller and all extra as with the 520 or 1040. Prices are as follows MEDA STE Karyboard CPU One W MEGA ST O PUS Mono Mont e in WAT MEGA STO CAU MEGA ST GD Gore CPU S oe Mono w ne WAT you would be the MEGAST coupon below To: Silica Shop Ltd, CVG 1088, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent DA14 4DX PLEASE SEND ME FREE LITERATURE ON THE ATARI ST Mr/Mrs/Ms: ............ Initials: ............ Sumame: Address: ito aledi SIDCUP (& Mail Order) 01-309 1111 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX LONDON 01-580 4839 Lion House (Ist floor), 227 Tottenham Court Rd, London, WIP OHX LONDON 01-629 1234 ext 3914 Selfridges (1st floor). Oxford Street, London, WIA TAB Postcode: Do you already own a computer If so, which one do you own? "


"John Minson is out to lunch in Right! This is the big onol I have the posh Savoy Hotel... Where disagree with their philosophy of personally discovered a Join the Army to Meet People.. subversive, communist plot based he unearths a communist plot Then kill them. What I am within the software industry. Its suggesting is that they contain a sole aim is to poison young and and poses the question ARE view of life and that counts as impressionable minds (my own is YOUR GAMES BRAINWASHING propagando in my book. safe, being old and poisonous YOU? Now this may seem fairly trivial already). These reds call but I suspect that one way we themselves Imageworks, but learn about the world is through that's just a shallow disguise for all the hidden signals that we that well known, international receive from television, subversive organisation magazines computer programs Mirrorsoft, WHICH USES evan. If you play games which tell OFFICES NOT MILLION you that the way to win is by MILES AWAY FROM THOSE OF killing your enemies will you THAT LEFT-WING PAPER, THE challenge the same sort of DAILY MIRRORU (Hey, this Sun thinking when Maggie sends a speak is fun or should that be task force to the Falklands or FUN !!!) Ronnie bombs Gadaffi, or the Anyhow, linfiltrated their EVIL Russians invade Afghanistan. gathering for a three course You get the point? luxury lunch at that well known IF I was a politician, of haunt of Trots and Anarchists, whatever party, I would get London's Savoy Hotel (after all, somebody to produce a computer even revolutionaries need to eai). game which embodied my On the surface evarything beliefs. How about Poll Tax The seemed innocent enough until Gomo, in which you have to Tom Watson, A MAN WHO round up people who don't pay SHARES RED DEREK the community charge to score the HATTON'S LOVE OF points, course you don't get so EXPENSIVE SUITS, stood up to many for turning in the down and tell us about their new thinly outs who live in cardboard disguised propaganda in the boxes, but it's a way to start form of so-called games because they don't put up as First there Foxx Fight Back much of a fight. A Foxx Fights Back in which Mr Foxx picks up a It's also nice to see a program machine gun and blasts away at like Codemaster's Race Against chickens, squirrels and get this) statement that people gat upset by the mission to kill terrorists, Time. Apart from the fact that it's huntsmenlll Damn those commie and stort shouting about really saying That it might be a raising money for a worthy cause hunt saboteurs, this hits at the propaganda. But virtually better world if we all talked and that is message is for a very fabric of British life-lo the everything has some political together at the UNE And what unified world battle against riaht to go 'How How aloland Significance about Platoon with it's kill the starvation, it features a black Now as we re concerned with kill small, furry animals. gooks gameplay! That's hardly runner on its cover. A small point, But there's warte What would world of computers lol's look the humanist metsage of the film. maybe, but it could serve as a you make of Fonanda Min n ow mor boldly sweeping but then again, there's not much reminder that in South Africa An incitement to larrorism or statement applies to your micro money in pacificism. blocks are treated as inferior whatel? Just because the Latin There's nothing political about all I'm not suggesting for one citizens. It'all very well to talk American country of El Diablo Those games you play is there moment that alames like these will about keeping politics out of has been given a taste of tough Well what about the military Aintea Full Metal Jacketspor, out of music, out of medicine by one General scenarios? What is the pumping marine corps psycho. I'm not computer games, but in certain Fernandez, you re supposed to iron of Combat School, followed even suggesting that you should countries it impossible to avoid sympathise with the shirking Fernandez Must Die. politics because they make a work-shy peasants who complain large number of people suffer! about being shipped off to death Okay, now you can post those camps and... letters complaining that I'm Enough of the irony. What obviously in the pay of the KGB really want to talk about is (isn'it oad that nobody ever Politics and Computing or rather writes to complain that somebody politics and computing, because is too Conservative in their views) this is not primarily a Party affair and that this is a load of paranoid (I'm more anarchist that party piffle. A fer all, there's nothing animal). But can guarantee that political about developing your already some of you are reaching reflexes shooting down missiles. for the Basildo, Bond to scream Complain a you like, but I'm to Uncle Eugene: 'KEEP reminded of a cartoon in The POLITICS OUT OF THE Guardian in which Ronnie MAGAZINES Well, sorry, but Reagan discovers that the person I've got bad news for you. You in charge of the USA's nuclear can't. defences is a teenager, chosen Politics is part of our everyday because he was a computer life, whether you like it or not. The games whizz. Silly, huh? There's problem is that most of the time it no way you're training to fire lurks silently below the surface, 50 missiles, drop bombs, initiate that we never even notice it. It's Armageddon. only when somebody makes the Is there...? effort to produce a political "


"THE GAME IS FANTASTIC THE CONVERSION OR time play i rime recipe for = excellently addictive play.» yuk Sicran CRASH PSYCHO plesi \"THE GREATEST Pia RELATED GAME This DECADE FIELD & FARMING MONTHLY Seroom shot from Spectrum v on HH MTV || L T 14B VIP M DS THE 66 BOUND Screen Shot from Austad Screenshot from trad v CBM 64/128 .99 CASSETTE .99 DISK SPECTRUM 48/128K .99/CASSETTE SECTIM +31 $12.99 DISK AMSTRAD $9.99 CASSETTE $14.99 DISK . U.S. E GOLD U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way. Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 "


"DALEY THOMPSON25 OLYMPIC CHALLENGE Enter the 1988 Olympic Challenge with Daley Thompson as you work out in the gym with Bicep Curls Leg Extensions and Sit Ups, where your efforts will directly attest your performance in on the competition itself another first from Ocean judgement to select the most effective equipment for each event is now vitala decision which can win or lose you a place on the podium But this isn't just another Sports simulation, this is a Daley Thompson 'event where all his talent and humour burst through to make thrilling and entertaining game play for all the fainily Go for the Olympic Challengel CHALLENG by adirlar events include Long Jump Shotput, High lump. 100m Sprint 400m, 110m Hurdles Discus, Pole Valut Javelm and 1500m You will need all your skills to build on what you hope was an impressive work-out, and as is necessary for all top flight athletes your AMSTRAD COMMODORE SPECTRUM .95 DISK AMSTRAD COMMODORE SPECTRUM cize Ocean CASSETTE Ocean Software Limited-6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS-Telephone 061 832 6633. Telex 669977 OCEANS G "

