"S$7.20 Dm6. D 350pte COMPUTER +02 DUNGEONS LADGONS ARMALYTE — C64 PEREGON PLAYMASTERS: MICKEY MOUSE MAPPED, BARD'S TALE PLAYERS GUIDE REVIEWS: ROCKET.RANGER EXCLUSIVE STAR RAY, INTENSITY, VINDICATOR. WIN: A LOAD OF BALLS "


"\"HANG ON IN THERE.... TES (123 BLOG (Y ) EGREE SPEED 216RF COURSE DI SPEED 200K COURSE SURCES ATARI ST screen shots shown. NA 29 COLOUR MONITOR REQUIRED D ursting on to your home screen with dazzling graphics and pulsepounding gameplay it's Super Hang-On, the greatest ever motorcycle racegame! 'The Best racing game you've ever played' and you'd better believe it! With 4 soundtracks, 4 skill levels and 18 thrilling stages, you can burn rubber at speeds in excess of 320 kph or can you? Find out but WATCH OUT at speeds like these, you've gotta stay cool to stay hot! TEAM PEPSI SUZUKI 1988 500cc WORLD MOTORCYCLE RACING CHAMPIONSHIP ST ACTION ... «The definitive racing game ever for the ST» ELECTRIC DREAMS TM &  1987 SEGA ENTERPRISES INC. (USA) Electric Dreams Software All rights reserved Authorised user. VISA AMERKAN DALES Mail Order: Mediagenic, Activision House, 23 Pond Street, Hampstead, London NW3 2PN, Consumer Enquiries: 01-431 1101. Technical Support: 0703 229694. "


"ELECTRIC DREAMS SOFTWARE Atari ST: .99 Also available on C 64 cassette: .99 C64 disk: $14.99 Amstrad cassette: .99 Amstrad disk: f14.99 Spectrum: .99 "


"Contents Gianna Sisters Il arrives from Deutschland, the Bruce Willis game from America, and latest Nintendo news from Japan. Review's We've gotta stonking Olympic Games full of C&VG Hits for you. AD&D and Heroes of the Lance (P.26). Armalyte is the hottest shoot 'em up Julian Rignall has ever reviewed on the C64 (P.29) Rocket Ranger is here exclusive to C&VG (P.34) Slar Ray is the nearest thing to Defender 16 bitters have seen yel, and introducing the totally Bruce Willis is in Fax. Why? P.8. weird and wacky Bobby Yazz Armalyte is white hot. P.29. AN N Anen on computer will change the course of SHINOB games playing as we know it. You'd better read the first reviews and not miss the chance to win a pile of AD&D gear. Computer art these may be worth rraneup mega bucks in years to come. Big Screen ward R Street has seen Running 1987 Man, Rambo III, and Good Morning, Vietnam. Shinobl the first review on Sega. P.118. Ballsy prize. P.110. FantasyRole Playing Dracula sinks Dracula sinks his fangs Into FRP this month. Puzzlers are in for a fishy time of it as KC Scoops Magnetic Scrolls latest. 82 93 The best map there is. Bards Tale The best map there is. Plavmasters julian Righall's hint 'n' tips. ArcadeActior cabalDynamite Dux, and Julian Rignall's hint 'n' tips. I 114 Cabal, Dynamite Dux, and Legend of Makaji come under Clare Edgeley's unrelenting Joystick finger. Win a Load of Balls from Realtime. OutToLunch is the PC show worth the dosh? Is the PC show worth the dosh? 130 1 Minson provides a helpful A to Z for those who think it is. Bard's Tale the players guide. P.9 Mickey Mouse cheat modes. P.108. Editor: Eugene Lacey, Deputy Editor: Paul Boughton. Sub Editor: Seamus St. John. Staff Writer: Matt Bielby. Art Editor: Craig Kennedy. Advertisement Manager: Garry Williams. Sales Executive "


"Don't miss... w MINUT LLLLLLLLL Ireneants It's a stonking good PC Show of an issue ... Whatta we got? We got lots. Start off by checking out the role playing game launch of all time Advanced Dungeons and Dragons. C + VG has exclusive first reviews of these mega launches plus a chance to win a stonking great pile of AD&D goodies. Playmasters has a complete guide to Bards Tale, you might win a load of balls, and Fax is packed with games, gadgets and fun. C + VG The only mag with stonking appeal. MOK ** T Meel Finn Auvanced Dungeons and Dragons. P.18. 09196509 DAMOCLES Damocles first glimpse. P.123 Entering the Bunbase you discover more evidence of technology : tar in duonge o know Sience 1 a lower level you discover the entrance to a vast wine ,,, siave woman sorape at the Junartu ir pieeding singers, their seran punt by the cracking ENEMY TURRETH CREDIT BB Cabal coin-op. P.114. dust -there is no true to waste. Dracula su Druculu Naked ladles on the moon in Rocket Ranger. P.34. GEBENE ADELANO ETTER VITAL WHOLE Summer Olympiad. P.43. Dracula FRP. P.74. Jones. Advertisement Production: Lora Clark. Publisher: Terry Pratt. Editorial and Advertisement Offices: Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AD. Tel: 01-251 6222. "


"DALEY THOM. CON ama WAKELIN Ocean Software Limited. 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS. Tel "


"eson's ALEY BACK! the competi will directly affect vane gym, where Enter the 1988 Olympic Challenge with Daley Thompson as you 'work out' in the gym, where your efforts will directly affect your performance in the competition itself — another first from Ocean. Ten Olympic events include Long Jump, Shotput, High Jump, 100m Sprint, 400m, 110m Hurdles, Discus, Pole Vault, Javelin and 1500m. You will need all your skills to build on what you hope was, an impressive work-out, and, as is necessary for all top flight athletes, your judgement to select the most effective equipment for each event is now vital — a decision which can win or lose you a place on the podium. This isn't just another sports simulation, this is a Daley Thompson 'event' where all his talent and humour burst through to make a thrilling and entertaining game play for all the family. Go for the Olympic Challenge! BL Eala AMSTRAD COMMODORE SPECTRUM SPECTRUM AMSTRAD COMMODORE SPECTRUM SPECTRUM TATARI STI 14.95 19.95 CASSETTE DISK Also available for your Amiga mone: 061 832 6633 . Telex: 669977 OCEANS G. Fax: 061 834 0650 "


"veterans Day ax Yet another new label enters the 16 bit fray, with their launch at the PC show in September (ie, about now). Software Horizons launch with three new ST/Amiga blasts: Veteran, which features commando action not a million miles away from Operation Wolf; Luxor, a planet bound shoot 'em up which bears a slight resemblance to a side view of Space Harrier, and Mafdet, action Egyptian style. All look rather nice if not over-burdened with originality, but there's no complaining about the pricing at .95 they're a snip!! K SCORE: 006622 The Packman Cometh Pac is back in Grand Slam's newest license featuring possibly the most famous and easiest to draw!) sprite of them alll Pacmania follows the arcade game closely on all major 8 and 16 bit formats taking the little smiling chappie through a number of three dimensional mazes Pacmania differs from the original game in that you only see a small section of the maze at any one time, making picking up those last elusive pills more of a problem. The usual selection of ghosts of varying degrees of stupidity loiter around, though you can use speed pills and a new found jumping ability to avoid their deadly touch You can battle through Sandbox land, the jungly steps and the rest in mid-October for lucky ST Amiga and Speccy owners (.95/.95 respectivelyl, with C64 and Amstrad in November (.95 cass, E14.95 disch Their conversion of the new board game sensation Espionage should be available at around the same time OOOOSSSO PACMANIA 80866955 CREDITS 20 OOOO 00308035 CREDITS 2 000110 TARGET TARGET namco 1960.87 namco 01960,87 Just Hang On A Minute... The strategic war game simulation Balance of Power gets updated this year with new nations added. Dubbed the 1990 edition it features new trouble zones of strategic importance: Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan and Nicaragua, though with the way things are developing in at least some of those states, this version will soon be as outdated as the last one. Your task is to survive eight years in office without initiating war in your position as either US President or General Secretary of the Soviet Union. It will be available in November for IBM PC and Amiga. 9004490 don't turn that page! To celebrate the launch of Electric Dreams Super Hang On. the best race game to date, we 've got a lovely little competition to run where you get a once in a lifetime chance to win a Kawasaki ZXS 1500 racing bikel Actually, that's a total lie, but Activision has been good enough to provide us with the next best thing, a rather whizzo Mountain bike worth a cool , to ride home in style. All you have :o do is answer these three simplefish) questions and the \"Blizzard\" could be yours Question one: Which four continents are featured in the game Super Hang On? Question two: Your Super Hang On bike is assisted by Nitrous Oxide Injection. By what more common name in this gas known? Question three: Where is this year's British Motorcyle Grand Prix held? First correct slip out of the sack wins the bike, the next 25 get exclusive posters of the game. Write to: Super Hang On Compo, C+VG, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. XII Smuwdu te dalla de EEEEEE terlebihan Name.............. Address....... Age .......... Question One.... | Question Two...... Martech's 8 bit shoot 'em up Rex (originally to have been dubbed Zenith) is to be available in September for Amstrad, Spectrum (shown) and C64. Looks like a relatively standard addition to the shoot 'em up genre. Question Three...... "


"SPECTRUM TOP TEN European Five-a-Side Firebird Football Manager 2 Addictive Beach Buggy Sim Firebird Gollen Demon Awards Where Time Stood Still Ocean 5 Stunt Bike Simulator Firebird Air Wolf Encore Ghostbusters Mastertronic Rocky Horror Show Alternative Battleships Encore The Golden Demon Awards are a unique event in the role player's calendar Mark Smiddy went along to find out more The Golden Demon Awards are held annually in Nottingham by Games Workshop, where model painters of all ages show off their talents and compete gainst each other for the coveted two-handed Golden Demon Slayer sword Included in this year's events were medieval combat displays, a fancy dress and speed painting contest as well many of the experts displaying their creative talents Of the main event, one of the judges remarked that all of the entries had been of a very high standard, some even surpassing the work of the pros themselves Overall winner of the contest was Ivan Bartleet with his vigenette of a battle mammoth The beautifully crafted figure was built from scratch and the result of over 400 hours work Ivan comes from Birmingham and is now a freelance figure painter after studying design at university Bryan Ansell the man described as the Richard Branson of the games world sees the future of role playing games in computers He told C + VG \"We already have plans to create the ultimate system on the new generation of 16 bit computers like the Amiga, ST and Macintosh \" And, although he was understandably cagey about details he would concede that the system could involve hundreds of human players all linked by a single super computer \"This system will be the closest thing to real life as yet,\" he added But are board games dead yet? Jervis Johnson designer of the sporting spoof. Blood Bowl told C. VG that it was expected to sell over five million units in its lifespan Similar figure are expected for other recent titles with the new Warhammer 40.000 currently outselling everything Frank Bruno's Boxing Encore European Five a Side returns to the top spot alongside two other high rising Firebird cheapies, and Ocean's Where Time Stood at last enters the top ten at number four. Temis Accolade AMSTRAD TOP TEN Football Manager 2 Addictive 00000 2 Air Wolf Encore ACE Cascade DIKESAVE Stunt Bike Simulator Firebird E.A.'s Accolade label release a series of new sports sims for the Christmas market. Serve and Volley is a tennis game with different levels of difficulty, a selection of serves and hits (slice, lob etc) and a two player option. Each match can be saved for later, and the computer can make predictions on results based on past performance. It all sounds dead whizzo. Other new sims are T.K.o., a boxing game with big sprites and realistic broken lips (ugh!), Rack 'em (a snooker sim) and Fast Break (a basketball sim where you can select pre-set offensive and defensive plays or develop your own). They all sound like very comprehensive and thorough representations, though perhaps you'll have to be an expert in each particular sport before you can play them! All are .95/14.95 on C64 and are staged through September (Serve and Volley) to December (T.K.O.) at monthly intervals. PC versions (.95) will be available for the tennis and snooker games. Rocky Horror Show Alternative Super Stuntman Codemasters Beach Buggy Sim Firebird Battleships Encore European Five-a-Side Firebird FERIE Frank Bruno's Boxing Encore Sega Activision in 89 Football Manager 2 retains its grip on the top of the charts, as Stunt Bike Sim and Battleships re-enter. The number one spot is the only one held down by a tull price game C64 TOP TEN 11 115600 231600 99500 Football Manager Addictive European Five-a-Side Firebird Activision has signed for five of the top new Sega arcade games conversion rights. These include space shoot 'em up Galaxy Force, currently the number one arcade game in the US and Japan; chase/beat 'em up Altered Beast; Sonic Boom, fighter plane game Hot Rod racing game and Ace Attacker, volleyball sports sim. The titles will appear some on the Activision label, some packaged as Electric Dreams, C + VG arcade aces Clare Edgeley and Seamus St John have to admit they Galaxy force for one in the arcades, were non too impressed with but we all know that has nothing to do with it making a good home computer home ... don't we? Bruce Lee Americana pilotale Battleships Encore Ninja Scooter Sim Firebird ACE Cascade Yogi Bear Alternative TIME TUNNELS Rally Driver Alternative A childhood of stern, honest discipline taught you well the ways of a Knight, and to never stray Far From the needs of the commion Folk... And thus to aduenture begins... Stunt Bike Simulator Firebird Times of Lore, on Microprose's Origin label, comes out in early September on the 64, with Amstrad, Amiga, ST, IBM and Speccy following later in the month. The shots are from a slightly unfinished version, so it should be looking pretty hot by release time. Sam Fox Strip Poker React European Five-a-Side goes up 12 to 12 while Footie Manager 2 is once more the only full pricer in the top ten. "


" 6 THE NAVAL COMBA THEPERSIAN GULF DEFENCE Order Cosmi's new, up-to-the-minute naval combat Please send.......... copy/ies of Navcom 6: 1 simulation. Navcom 6 puts you in the hot seat in Form ............ Price . command of a U.S. warship stationed in the Persian (C64 disk $12.95 Cassette .95 Gulf. Experience the tension and drama of carrying out IBM PC/compatible, Atari ST and Commodore patrol, surveillance and escort duty in these Amiga, $24.95.) troubled waters. Name(block capitals).. Your Aegis Missile Cruiser is equipped with one of the most sophisticated detection and weapon Address .. systems. You'll find yourself receiving authentic ......... Post code .... telemetry from airborne AWACS and navigational satellites, detecting and destroying explosive'l enclose .............. including .00 P&P UK only. mines in the shipping lanes, and defending (Overseas .00) against boat raids and attacks by missile-laden jet. Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd. aircraft. Or debit my Access/Visa card. But not every contact is hostile and the cost of making an error is high. Will you make the right Expiry date .......... combat decisions and judgements? Dive into the explosive situation in the Gulf. I NO Navcom 6 is available for IBM PC's + compatibles For more information on the Cosmi range please C64/128, Atari ST and Commodore Amiga tick box computers. INSOOR... ....... Tomorrows Reality... Today Cosmi, MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Glos GL8 8DA, UK. Tel: (0666) 54326 Tlx: 43422 MPS/UKG "


"Dowerola ALL FORMATS COMBINED TO TOP TEN Football Manager 2 Addictive European Five a Side Firebird ax Air Wolf Encore ACE Cascade Stunt Bike Simulator Firebird Latest in the 16 bit 3D graphics stuff is Powerdrome from Electronic Arts. It's a futuristic racing sim from UK programmer Michael Powell, featuring humps, turns and sliding gates as obstacles in a low level jet race. There are six races set on different planets with different backdrops and weather conditions to be aware of, chances to tune your racer to optimum performance and a duel player option that apparently requires you to link two machines. There is even the now familiar rear view display showing the following racers. ST is out in late September at .95, with the Amiga following in November. Steve Davis S'ker Blue Ribbon Frank Bruno's Boxing Encore Beach Buggy Simulator Firebird Battleships Elite Way of the E'dng Fist M'tronic Skelter Glimosed Firebird continues to outsell Alternative overall by a tiny margin, but both must keep a watch out for Encoro who once again increase their market share considerably. Though Virus continues to do well, it is the footie games that dominate this time round. ATARI ST TOP TEN Soit and polish Virus Firebird Paul Woakes is a very busy man indeed. Not only is he currently working on Damocles (see feature on page 12) he's also developing a new space shoot 'em up called Skelter. It features filled-vector graphics, is played from some very unusual perspectives and looks like a sort of 3D Asteroids. More news when we have it; as for now you'll have to make do with this screenshot. Football Manager 2 Addictive Outrun Soga/US Gold Gauntlet 2 US Gold \"It really is completely brilliant!\", says Domark modestly, and indeed, it is quite a licence to get their mits on. For lo! they have acquired the rights to TV satire show Spitting Image, and promise us a suitably irrerevant computer game. You get to oppose six world leaders (Maggie. \"Mad dog' Reagan, Gorby, P.W. Botha, or his holiness the Pope) in a battle for world power. Can you rumble their devious ruses, or will they retain credibility and get control? At least there's no problem of power corrupting: they're all corrupt already! We're promised hilarious fights, toilet humour and the odd naughty word. But will it be funny? That's what counts. Available on all major 8 and 16 bit formats well in time for Christmas ul a Empire Strikes Back Domark Space Harrier Elite Alien Syndrome ACE Dungeon Master Mirrorsoft 000 Carrier Command Rainbird Bruce Willis Invaders Sidewinder Mastertronic Virus sticks in the top slot, while Sidewinder re-enters at the bottom and Elite and Ace score new entries with Space Harrier and Alien Syndrome. AMIGA TOP FIVE Mediagenic has signed up Moonlighting \"superstar\" Bruce Willis for their latest project. Or, rather, they've got his image on sprite for Die Hard, a cop thriller with a Christmas feel. Bruce will be playing a wise-cracking but hard bolled detective laying solgo to 12 holed up terrorists. The film is apparently doing exceptional business in the States even as we speak, but you'll have to hold off until next year for the game Meanwhile, blg Arnle Schwarzenegger will soon be the undisputed king of the sprites as his little figure appears on yet more programs. Gram Slam now has the rights to the Running Man sci-fi thriller (see Big Screen) while Ocean are planning to convert his as yet unreleased Red Russian cop flim. Ellte also have their computer sports quiz a Question of Sport based on the well known TV show for October, but since it's not half as glam as the rest, we won't mention it. Interceptor Electronic Arts Interstellar Dursuit Football Manager 2 Addictive 3 Corruption Rainbird Black Lamp Firebird Ikari Warriors Elite Black Lamp and Footie Two re-enter, and Rainbird's Corruption leaps in a number 3, while the excellent Interceptor retains the Top spot. Available shortly is Genus 11 Trivial Pursuit, Domark's second attempt to convert the famous board game to the small screen. The game sends you from a doomed earth in search of the paradise world Genus ll, on a trip on which you can only make progress by proving your mettle at triv with the various allen brings you meet. New questions and and an extensive framing sequence help make it quite a step onlaway from (take your pick) the original concept of the game. "


"CHAIN TTIPTELES CAD HEDE TE !!. LE38 "


"AVAILABLE FROM THE END OF SEPTEMBER ON C64, SPECTRUM & AMSTRAD Back with a Vengeance! Commodore screens shown. USING USING -Using Commodore 64/128 Cassette .99 and Disk .99 HOLDINO HOLDING WILHA HOLDING HOLDING 29 082100 OU 302012 016800 DO 220:31 03390 00:30:32 29 30 OS1300 OORS305 DS 99 sz Amstrad CPC Cassette .99 and Disk .99 ZX Spectrum 48K/128KL + Cassette .99 POHER POWER OWER US2500 2635 IIIIIIIIIIIIIIII Born in a time of peace, lived in the time of war; the shadow warrior returns. Leaping the abyss of time he comes to fulfil his destiny! DATELINE: 1988 Manhattan THE TIME: Now THE QUEST: to destroy the eternal evil... KUNITOKI! MAIL ORDER — Please make all cheques and postal orders payable to: System 3 Arcade Software Ltd. at 23 Pond Street, London NW3 2PN Tel: 01 435 8448  1988 System 3 Software "


"nightmare ax Remember the first series of Knightmare, the award winning D & D style adventure game that brightened up Children's ITV last winter? Five million of you do. Enough to earn it a second series, because as eagle eyed Monday afternoon viewers will have spotted, it's back! Back! Back! Brilliant special effects aimed to \"take exciting steps in what was previously the unknown\", coupled with gameplay that will be more than familiar to the Wayne's of this world make it a real treat for all fantasy fans. To find out what they're raving about, why not tune in at 4.45pm next Monday, and watch out for a new sci-fi TV game to follow in it's footsteps. English Arts E.A.'s first British developed release, the arcade/strategy game Fusion, is released in October. The player must collect the scattered components of some mega-bomb in order to destroy an alien planet. So much for interseller glasnost. Lots of the de rigueur rotating plasmo spheres nitro mice (?) and so on to blast, and weapons to scoop up. Sounds just like a shoot 'em up to us. Price will be .95 TEM ** ** Stick 14 LOY883 R ESURSS Nintendo remain confident of supplying the UK with game packs and Entertainment Systems for the Christmas market despite a world wide shortage of chips. Recent game packs reviewed in C+ VG including Punch Out, Zelda Legend of Link, and Rad Racer will all be available from major branches of Boots by the end of September. The Punch Out game carries an endorsement by world champ Mike Tyson who you will see on the TV quite soon in a series on Nintendo advertisements. The latest info on Nintendo is in our Mean Machines column every month. You might well already own a Konix joystick their Speed King has sold oodles and can be found hooked up to everything from IBMs to Nintendo consoles. Now they're going for a virtual stranglehold on the market with two new products the Predator 9 (about ) and the subtly named Megablaster (ish). The larger Predator operates by micro-switches rather than more traditional methods, but both can be used with all the major systems covered by this magazine. "


"CORE 003800 TIMR 40 LIVRS 4 BOMBS 003 SCORX 000100 TIMB 32 LIVBS 6 BOMBS 01 Jedi Completes Star Wars Trilogy into the Hot on the heels of Empire Strikes Back comes Domark's last conversion of a Star Wars license, this time junking the quick vector graphics that have served well in the past in favour of solid sprites. Based in the main on the Ewok jungles portions of the movie, the first level has you play Princess Leia in the speederbikes chase, bumping off Stormtroopers and springing traps to help the cuddly little teddy bears. For part two the action switches between Chewbacca dodging rolling logs in a stolen Walker, and Lando flying the Falcon towards the Death star. With the shields blow, you can then go onto part three, and the destruction of the enemy space ship. Out in October on ST Amiga, C64, Spectrum and Amstrad The question everyone's asking is. \"Where's Luke Skywalker...? WRÉSZ Hewson's Rack-It budget label strikes back with two newies for the coming weeks. Battle Valley is a desert based shoot 'em up where your task is to capture a terrorist base (ho hum). In Scorpion you pilot a super-tank taking out squidgy aliens. Still, at least they're cheap. 189 GERMAN BYTES AN EXTRA SPECIAL SNEAKY PREVIEW OF SOME HOT NEW GAMES FROM THOSE \"CRAZY\" GERMAN BOYS. IMPLICITY OBONUS12970 STAGE 3 E LLER SCOBE 881056 SCORE 465888 Some of the best looking 16 bit games are coming out of the fatherland these days, and over the next few months a whole passel of top notch product is going to be hitting the Bavarian streets. Fax has the low down on what's hot and what's not courtesy of new German correspondent Carsen Borgmeler (crazy name, crazy guy). Best news of all for the C+VG Great Glana freakes (ie. all the office) is that the sisters second adventure is almost ready. Rainbow Arts will publish \"Glana Sisters in the Future World\" for Amiga, ST and C64 probably at the end of September, with better graphics, extra weapons and more hidden surprises. Carsten assures us that it scrolls vertically, though we're not too sure about our ourselves. Magik Bytes hasn't been slouching elther. Their Tom and Jerry game for C64, ST, Amiga and Amstrad CPC should be out in Germany at the start of '89, featuring a two player option where Tom must chose the mouse, and Jerry can defend himself with all manner of household objects as in the cartoon. This is joined by North Sea Inferno in May, where your job is to make your way through g maze of piping to defuse an oll platform threatened by a terrorist bomb. SPECIAL BZEGNSER CGEONSESS W HINOOL WIZAROS s ortel US Nane Facing Hest Malickiestier Prisrarhem GIRNA 000880 BONUS TIME Window Wizard, the tale of a big city window cleaner hampered by dropped flower pots, opening panes and the like, is but one release from Hanover based Reline software. They also have a Strip poker game lyown!). Oll Imperium which is a business strategy game, and Dyter 07 where you must capture tropical enemy islands with the use of robots and a helicopter. March sees the release of the impressive looking role playing adventure \"Legend of Foerghall\" which CB reckons may show Bard's Tale the way home. No British release dates for any of these yet, but if you're that desperate you could always nip over the Channel for them. Certainly easier than getting your greasy Iittle hands on a PC Engine... 932 Hittitud SHU 6 666 | LIVES 03 STAGE 03 "


"Who else pays you to play your favourite sport? The Army flies. REME keeps it flying. What is the most important subject a soldier must learn? A. Battle tactics. B. Fieldcraft. C. Weaponry. Think you're fit? We'll spend 18 weeks getting you fitter. Nobody kicks sand in your face. aseyJO IIV :18MSUY Last year there were members of the British Army serving in 35 different countries around the world. REC N.A.T.O. 39 years of peace. There are desk jobs in the Army. But they're nothing like this. In the Army, mates are more than a bunch of blokes in Enfield SA 80 rifle UK 5.56mm SUSAT L9 A1 rifle sight *4 magnification Colt M16 A2US 5.58mm The cut and thrust of a career in the Army Catering Corps. Interested? FRANKENSTEIN 5.56mm cartridges in 30-round box magazine Heckler & Koch G41 W.German 5.58mm Overall length: 785mm Barrel length: 518mm Rate of fire: 650-800 rounds per minute The SA80 is the new Army rifle. It offers pinpoint Kalashnikov AK47. Soviet 7.62mm (Chinese Type 56) accuracy. It's your personal responsibility. COLIN CLIVE MAE CLARKE JOHN BOLES BORIS KARLOFF MARY WOLLSTONE CROFT SHELLEY BRIGIDA POR JAMES WHALE Challenger. The Army's main battle tank. All information classified. Looking for adventure, excitement and action? Don't just sit there watching it, be a part of it. "


"AND NOW FOR SOMETHING COMPLETELY DIFFERENT Your Drill Sergeant. Someone who'll always listen to any kind of problem you've got. Work harder. Play harder. In today's Army, you need all the energy you can get. Our specialist subject. Modern weaponry? Languages? Jungle Warfare? There are over 150 trades you can become expert in. The 155mm Howitzer Artillery gun. That shell will be landing 16 miles away. Precisely. Wouldn't it be nice to find a job that credits you with intelligence? A job that's going somewhere, rather than nowhere? A job where you are being stretched rather more than just having to turn up on time? A job that gets the best out of you, because you enjoy putting your best into it? A job where you'll be paid to do something different every day? A job that gives you pride in what you do and actually builds up your confidence? A job that means you'll have a career? Cut out the coupon, drop in to your local Army Careers Information Office, or phone 0800 555 555 free for more information. Then we'll show you even more. IF YOU'VE GOT IT IN YOU, WE'LL BRING IT OUT. For a Corporal, starting pay before tax is a handsome .00 per week. the pub. Mates are the people you trust with your life. Go on. Prove yourself and we'll pat you on the back with something for your arm. Orchestrating manoeuvres in the dark. The Army's Light Intensifier helps you find, fix and destroy. I am between 15 and 25 years of age and would like to know more about the Army. NAME MRO MISS D ADDRESS Could you do this five times from 200 metres away? You will DATE OF BIRTH AGE AGE For further details send to: Army Careers Service, (Dept CVG1/10S1), FREEPOST 4335 Bristol BS1 3XY. or phone 0800 555 555 free 24 Hours) Army Careers THE PROFESSIONALS It takes all sorts of characters to make an Army. If you've got it in you we'll bring it out. The Army Careers Information Office. More information. No obligation. THE ARMED FORCES ARE EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYERS UNDER THE TERMS OF THE RACE RELATIONS ACT 1976. "


"POOL your attention. Upon character, as it represents game, where players roll opening it, you are their vocation in life. There a varying amount of six confronted by an is a fifth option however for sided dice to determine awesome sight, which will non-human characters their characters abilities, chill the bones of even the They can elect to become and select the best three most hardened role Multi character class, results. Each character has player. The first thing to hit which allows them to a \"Prime Requisite\" ability you is the FOUR disks. OK, I become a mixture score, which means in know a couple of other of the aforementioned layperson's terms, \"the one  MACHINES: C64, AMIGA, games contain four disks, classes available. special ability.\" PC, ST.  UPPLIER: US GOLD. but how many of them are However, in true tabletop Next up is alignment, a PRICE: C64 DOUBLE SIDED!! Yes that is fashion, the advantages source of controversy in the $14.99 (DISK)/AMIGA, PC, ST eight sides (count 'em) of are balanced with certain table top ranks for many $24.99. information packed disks, disadvantages. Their years! Alignment is the VERSION TESTED: C64. all waiting to be played. progression within the philosophy a character REVIEWER: WAYNE. Next up is the well game system is slow, so lives by. You control the written and interesting 28 they tend to die more actions of your characters Pool of Radiance is about page introductory booklet. to change the face of This goes on to unravel computer role playing as some of the secrets relating we know it. to the game and generally We've all seen The Bard's explains the concepts C+VG Tale and many other so behind it. It tells you how to called role playing create your party of six HIT! games, but AD+D is in a bold adventurers, which in different league reality is no easy task. Each altogether. team member is created For a start AD+D is the only computer game in existence at the moment that can claim to have MATT BIELBY been specifically designed as a tabletop role playing game. That was over ten years ago by the man who started roleplaying off, GOLD 80 Gary Gygax. Since its arrival on the market, tabletop AD+D has been expanded, refined and generally improved in many different areas. The computer adaptation of the game was only held back by the limitation of computer 280 10 technology. The advent of the 16 bit computers has THEco 21 IMAGE 102 made AD+D possible. TSR created the storyline LOK to the adventure, whilst the SSI team, lead by Chuck CHANGE : HEAD BODY KEEP Kroegal, developed the computer game. The real Matt Bielby is at last revealed! Kroegel has flirted with computer role playing individually and a degree regularly. and the character's before helping develop of forethought is essentialIt then explains that each alignment can effect the Shards Of Spring, at all times as it is a character has six abilities; way other people in the Phantasie and several somewhat long and Strength, Intelligence, game view it. other fantasy games. arduous process. Wisdom, Dexterity, The final stage is the Considering its For the novice, the Constitution and design of your character. background, it's surprising character creation Charisma. The computer This impressed me no end, that the game so adheres process could become randomly generates the as there are so many strictly to the AD+D quite complex. However ability scores that every options. You can start off by tabletop rules and the booklet guides you adventurer has. Each choosing which pose you mechanics. From the first through and holds you in through and holds you in ability score has an effect al would like your character glance of this product you good stead. It explains that on the play of the to have. This also gives you know you are in for the four character classes character. The ability a limited selection of something special as the available; Fighter, Cleric, scores are based on a weapons and shields. Next packaging is superb. The Thief and Magic User. You range from 3 (the lowest) to you allocate colours to box has excellent artwork have to allocate one of 18 (the highest). This goes your character's clothes, and immediately grabs these classes to your back to the table top for various parts of the body. STR toe first step WONNO WE FEJTS EXP "


"It then goes on to explain the concept of death, which will come swiftly if first aid and/or magical healing isn't applied to combat worn characters. If you are unlucky enough to lose a character, it may well be possible to resurrect them depending on two factors; their Constitution and manner of death. If the deceased has a low constitution, then you have a small chance of being brought back to the land of AND ST TEMPUS HOUSES TURN AROUND HON, die You HILL FRESS RETURNS OR BUTTON TO CONTINUE A Exploring the numerous temples. RADIANGE AC HP NAME AC HP NO1 MATT BIELBY RENNY ROGERS 191. HETASKELETS 0:39 0,11 so  1:44 14,1 THE PRIESTS OF MPUS BID YOU HELCOME. DO YOU SEER HEALING? 790V BOARD & BOAT. CRETURNS OR BUTTON TO CONTINUE A Kenny Rogers, Matt Bielby how horrible. A Kenny 'n' Matt indulge in a little boating. Lovely. the living and if they died Through combat and the abilities. So party created and via a Dragon's flame or a accumulation of treasure ! You then move onto the background read, it is off to disintegrate spell, they you build up your Adventurer's Journal, which adventure in the land of have no chance at all. experience points. When provides the background Moonsea, where the game Combat allows for a you have reached a to \"Pools\". It is a 38 page is based. And what an wide range of both tactics certain level of booklet that includes fliers, adventure it is!! You start off and strategy to be applied experience, and have the maps, and information that in the city of Phlan. Your as each character is specified amount of your adventurers would mission, to bring Phlan moved on an individual money, you can go to know before beginning back to its former glory. But basis. It can be as slow or training school and their quest. A thorough how? Well, you could (and as fast as you like, because enhance your abilities. This read of this is a must, as it should) start by getting of the quick option that allows you to progress in provides some very paly with the town council. allows the computer to levels, which makes your important and essential The council will post take over the combat and characters more hardy information, that will be messages on the wall of the run it rapidly. and proficent in their ignored at a player's peril. city which represent "


"ULTIMATE SIMULATOR Cle 2012 O NS ZopSarg Sper STROKES Gm UTITS NOTE Screen shots from Atari ST version. The ultimate golf simulation for your computer. See how different shots affect the way the ball is hit. Let the computer determine your skill level. Perfect your technique by following the example of the computer golf player. A must for all enthusiasts who've tried their hand at computer golf but never met a challenge as testing and enthralling as ULTIMATE GOLF: CBM 64/128 .99 DISK .99 ATARI ST .99 IBM PC .99 AMIGA .99 GREINIL THE DEFINITIVE GOLF GAME All mail order enquiries to: Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS "


"es missions that the council would like you to do on their behalf. They can be anything from clearing an SKELETON area of town of monsters, vermin etc, to finding magical tomes, many miles away. Of course the council will amply reward you ... If you succeed. SKELETON Another thing you can do is listen to gossip in taverns. LASTELES This is a lucrative form of adventuring at best, and many an adventurer has been killed by investigating false tavern tales. However, it is also very profitable, if found to be true. On the course of your adventure you can talk to almost everyone. You meet A Shades of Gauntlet in this brilliant RPG. literally thousands of people and how they react depends on how you speak to them. If you agree to parlay with them, you have five choices of appreciated. Overall Pools is a game which no role player or adventurer should be without and people new to role playing should seriously consider buying as an introductory guide. POOL RABIANGE WT 703NT$ 5 ONES PPOINTED BY COUNCi TRODUCE NENCOHERS. 0 THE FAIR CITY A Kenny 'n' Matt in ... (just watch it, captions writer! Matt). PULSN. YOU HULL ACCOMPANY ME, conversational tone, pitched battle! HILL START THE TOUR being: Haughty, Sly, Meek, The game is very easy to Nice and Abusive. Some of get on with once the Non Player Characters adventuring, and you soon (NPCs; people controlled get on with the A Here's Rolf, your grinning chum. by the computer), will even menus that confront you. offer to join you in your must say however that! game. This came as a T SOUND quest. You can allow up to found them all a bit too welcome surprise and two NPCs to join you and it joystick responsive. I found once more shows Krogel's  PLAYABILITY may seem like a good myself wizzing through the versatility.  VALUE thing at the time to swell various options at The roleplaying element your ranks by two. i ROLEPLAYING is just what can be frightening speeds and However, choose wisely. sometimes I would input expected from TSR Every person in this game is the wrong order, much to excellent. There is also an individual. Certain people my party's cost. overall friendly attitude. UPDATE... who wish you ill will try to The graphics are very There are a lot of nice So far only available on join you. They can be good for an 8 bit machine. little touches as well. The Commodore disk but a traitors who will spy on you, Kroegel has certaintly tried Translation Wheel is tape version is planned. reporting secret to go for maximum effect beneficial and not a PC, Amiga, and ST information to your here, although at times hinderance, the NPC's versions will follow in that enemies and they may they could be considered deliver some very nice order over the next few even turn on you in battle. lurid. The game also plays lines of conversation, and months. No Speccy Furthermore treat NPCs quickly and there is a cameo performances, and version planned as yet badly and they may desert minimal amount of disk the quick start option plus though USG/TSR plan you, even in the midst of a changing for such a large starting off hints were further releases. INDOO GRAPHICS "


"Cow The computer games hobby can claim to have thrown up a fair tew talented artists in its brief history Illustrations for boxes, advertisements and the graphics for games themselves have gasps of admiration from games players. But all of the best computer games art is as nothing when you stand it beside some of the very best work generated by the artists working in the world of fantasy books. magazines and board games. Names like Tim White, Larry Elmore, delt Easley, Keith Parkinson and Chris Achilleos have become stars in their own right and the faithful will pay huge sums to own one of their originals. C+VG is launching a search to find the new stars of fantasy art and we are offering ten super prizes to aid the quest. We want you to draw us any scene you can dream up from any fantasy book, board game, or even your own idea. As long as it can loosely be labelled fantasy art it qualifies. The ten best illustrations will receive an AD & D Super Prize. This will contain an AC & D board game, computer game, I shirt, two books and poster. The very best fantasy illustration will be published as a poster for G# VG and you will be paid by C+ VG for the use of your illustration just like the pros who work for us regularly. To give you some ideas have a look at the work of some of the top names above. Think you can do better? Don't forget to cut out and fill in the coupon below and send it off with your entry. The competition closes on October 31st and the winners will be announced in our January issue. | Name Address.. Age ..... computer...... "


"Remember Raffaele Ceccos' action packed Cybernoid The Fighting Machine? Spectrum Cassette .99 + 3 Disc .99  Commodore Cassette .99 Commodore Disc f14.99 Amstrad Cassette .99 Amstrad Disc .99 How could you forget! Atari St and Commodore Amiga Available Soon. Awards include, Crash Smash, Zzap Sizzler, Amtix Accolade, Amstrad Action Master Game and many more. Now Premier Software House Hewson, bring you The Sequel I... CYBERNOID II The Revenge : New Weapons Systems : New Static Features : New Alien Features HEWSON For Mail Order send a cheque/P.O to Hewson Consultants Ltd. Order by credit card by sending your Access Barclaycard number, and enclose a specimen signature. Don't forget to enclose your name and address. Hewson, Milton Park, Milton, Abingdon, Oxon. OX14 4RX Tel: (0235) 832939 Fax: 0235 861039 As part of our continuing development of innovative Software we are always happy to evaluate software sent to us with a view to publication "


"FIVE FIST-FULLS OF ROY OF THE ROVERS NEWSFLASH! Four of the Melchester Rovers fiveaside football team have been kidnapped... hours before a crucial fund-raising game to save their ground from grasping property developers. Time is running out and player-manager Roy Race MUST rescue his team-mates, dodging danger, escaping ambushes and boobytraps in order to play the most important game of his career! CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 diski SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk GARY LINEKER'S HOT SHOT The most realistic football game ever produced for your computer. Play in a full-scale eleven-a-side football game complete with sliding tackles, throw ins, corners, goal kicks, fouls and even the dreaded referee with his red card. With all these features to watch out for will you have what it takes to match the shooting skills of England's top striker in Gary Lineker's Hot Shot. CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk AMIGA .99 disk IBM PC .99 disk SUPERSPORTS As varied and as bizarre a collection of unique sporting events as you are ever likely to find. Have you got a good enough eye to be a 'crack shot'; the nerve to attempt the 'devil dive'; the strength to 'smash slates'; the accuracy to shoot the 'cross bow'; and finally (and unbelievably!) triumph over an underwate assault course'. Up to four players can compete in this outrageous challenge! FLEETWAY PUBLICATIONS II 1 1 1 1 Gary Lineker's SUPERSI of the Hoi-Shot! Roy 3 Rover COMPIR BAME OF THEIR TIME PROMOTERS SOME GRE Screertshots from various formats. Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, "


"SPORTING POWER CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD $9.99 cassette ,99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk GARY LINEKER'S SUPERSKILLS Hot on the heels of the hugely successful Superstar Soccer comes Superskills, again endorsed by England's star striker. To command a permanent place in the national team means dedication dedication towards hard work and training. The national coach has designed an extensive training programme which will improve your fitness, ball control, sharpness and accuracy. Can you prove yourself to be both physically and mentally agile and alert? CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk ATARI ST $19.99 disk ULTIMATE GOLF The ultimate golf simulation for your computer. See how different shots affect the way the ball is hit. Let the computer determine your skill level. Perfect your technique by following the example of the computer golf player. A must for all enthusiasts who've tried their hand at computer golf but never met a challenge as testing and enthralling as Ultimate Golf. CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk IBM PC .99 disk AMIGA .99 disk BILS U (S   SUPERSKILLS Ulamang Was per TAN FLUTEE 7772123 YLE OL EYE 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4Fs. Tel: 0742 753423. "


"HEROES views here. The official AD&D computer product. Heroes of the Lance follows the antics of a band of adventurers in search of the Discs of Mishakal,  MACHINES: C64, ST, which are guarded by AMIGA, IBM PC, SPECTRUM, Khisanth, a huge black AMSTRAD. dragon, deep in the ruins  SUPPLIER: US GOLD (SSI). of the town of Xak Tsaroth. PRICE: C64/SPECIAMS The reason this band of $9.99 CASS, C64/SPECIAMS $14.99 DISK, ST/AMIGA/IBM seven plucky lads and one $24.99 busty, blonde, bouncy  VERSION TESTED: ST. bimbette (I should write for REVIEWER: TONY DILLON. The Sun) have to get these circles of sanctuary is to If you are a well cool FRPer stop the advancement of who is more than worth his the Queen of Darkness into salt, skip this paragraph. If the land of Krynn (the last you are a computer gamer 'n' is silent, by the way), the who is wise on what's going mystical land first brought down at the moment, also to light in the Dragonlance skip this. chronicles. For those of you Once upon a time, not so who don't know, the long ago (around 10 years, Dragonlance chronicles GOLDMOON: a human cleric, daughter of the Que-Shues Chieftain, she is betrothed to Riveiha. Goldhooh carries the Blue Crystal stafi, it's fupowers as yet unknown but only available to her. Press any key She's sexy but well'ara Wack 'em on the head... nick the shield  Nog ie user spels elencal staff spells Vise Take Give actually) a couple of guys are the diary of a band of headed by Gary Gygax FRPers who decided to let put their heads together to the world know what they try and create the ultimate got up to behind closed game. What they came up doors. Expect 'Scrabble: with was the first (and to my The Novel' next month. mind, still the best) Fantasy Unlike the other AD&D Role Playing game, the release this month, HOTL classic Dungeons and gives you your characters Dragons. beforehand, and quite an So successful was this experienced lot they are venture that they too. You've got (in order of expanded the single basic size) Tanis the Elf. A born set of rules and the few fighter due to his high meagre 'ready-made' Strength and Dexterity, a adventure modules to a character well worth huge 5-set game. And it's having 'up front'. Caramon still growing. On top of that, Majere. A seasoned they created Advanced fighter, he lives for battle, Dungeons and Dragons, and usually wins due to his for those who want a little almost freakish strength. more detail in their Spends his time looking make-believe worlds. after his twin brother There have been many Raistlin. Raistlin. Weak, imitations, but it's finally though incredibly clever, Saye dake Bestore gore Seone Exit Wehu A If you wanna role play you have to make a choice. CHVG "


"F THE LANGE RI VERUN ND: in outcast of the Que-Shu tribe, he had the temerity to fall in love with Riverwind. With the skills of a human rander he tights with bow and londsword. With his betrothed, he is seek ind the secrets of the Blue Crystal Staff. Press any key . Ee's a tough nut too. the obvious profession for full RPG, and very good it is this puny excuse of a boy too. was Magic. Probably the Viewed akin to Dun most inexpendable of the Darach, your party is group. Sturm Brightblade. represented by a large, Bearing an almost wonderfully animated (if a unbelievable little slow) piccy of whoever resemblance to Derek is first in your marching Smalls from Spinal Tap, he order. This is the character was graced with you have full control over. Knighthood at a young The others are assumed to age. Riverwind. Raised as just be tagging along. a Navajo, he was almost The graphics are stoned for lying to his fantastic. All the sprites are elders. He told them a gorgeously detailed and magic staff he found was amazingly animated, magic. When asked to though the scrolling does prove it, he couldn't tend to be a little jerky. The Luckily everyone saw the secret screens are funny side. Tasslehoff amazing, too. \"What secret Burrfoot. Flint Fireforge. A screens,\" you may as well dwarf with a good axe cry. When you enter throwing arm. Extremely various rooms around the deadly, despite his ruins, you are presented diminutive size. The girlie of with a large, animated the party, and the only one picture of exactly what you with a healing capability, can see. I could only find so don't let her get killed one, which contained a Rather than have this as beautiful underground a true, straight RPG, USG river. With a bit of luck has used the there'll be a screenshot system not unlike the somewhere else on this Windowmation system page. used in the Magic Knight You get all this, plus a games, Spellbound, Knight very big playing area, Tyme and Stormbringer. some very attractive Pressing space brings up a backdrops, a wide variety menu with which you can of spells, plus the 'feel' of manipulate all the objects the original game. How and people in the game. have they done it. With one For example, you can snag. There are three disks, change the marching so expect alot of disk order by swapping the swapping, though the disc order of the photographs access is fast enough not to at the bottom of the screen. be frustrating. HOTL is the Why bother with that? Just best ST game I've ever like the Bard's Tale series, played, even beating my only the first four people old favourite, Captain can be involved in any Blood. Any game that can combat of any description. keep me up to 4 o'clock in The other four just sit on the morning has to be their bottoms waiting to be worth checking out. called to the foray. Also Wouldn't you agree? from this menu, you can call up selection screens  GRAPHICS for magic spells, to call up SOUND visual representations on a characters stats and much PLAYABLITY more.  VALUE One thing I haven't told you yet, even though  OVERALL you've probably worked it out from the screenshots on this page, is that this game is an arcade adventure, The ST version is the first not an RPG. \"Hold on a version to hit the shops minute,\" \"isn't AD&D an though versions for all RPG? \"Yes,\" I reply with a systems will be launched mischevious Irish twinkle in my eyes,\" but as US Gold throughout the Autumn. have made probably the Given that the ST version best decision I've seen has three disks expect them make yet.\" They've some kind of multi load released TWO AD&D system for Spectrum and games. The other one is a Amstrad. . now you're cookin. 00 00 00 00 The enchanted waterfall. CFVG "


"Before November 5th. smart guys save  on their Young Persons Railcard. Offer available September 11th to November 5th. A Young Persons Railcard now costs  instead of  and gives 16-23 year olds 1/3 off most rail travel for a whole year. Pick up a leaflet for details. Young Persons Railcard. "


"VINDIRTOR! 12 evlews 103 60-650-ODE VINDICATOR for arcade fans; a fast-moving vertically-scrolling 17 JE shoot-'em-up similar in style to Flying Shark. It consists of two phases; in the first, you have a plane armed with missiles and bombs, with which you must clear away as many as possible of the enemy tanks, planes, helicopters and gun emplacements. If you survive this phase, you get to drive through the remaining defences in a jeep armed with grenades. A Vindicator is three whole games in one. At the end of this section is the giant lobster featured on the cover artwork, and he's a devil to knock off. Phase three is very much in the style of Trantor or Impossible Mission; you move along corridors looking for lifts which will  MACHINES: AMSTRAD take you deeper and CPC/SPECTRUM/CBM 64. deeper into the complex.  SUPPLIER: IMAGINE. Hopping, flying and PRICES: AMSTRAD $8.95/514.95 DISK/SPECTRUM slithering aliens assault .95/$10.95 DISK/CBM 64 you from all sides, but at .95/$11.95 DISK. least you don't have to VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD worry about ammunition CPC. it's unlimited in this section. REVIEWER: CHRIS JENKINS. Finding operating switches 12 DE He's tough. He's mean. He's to activate lifts allows you got a tiny little head and to move nearer and nearer arms as thick as your torso. to your final encounter with He's the Vindicator, and the horrific Gog. he's the hero of the latest The Vindicator is really Imagine romp, in which, three games in one, and 10DDDDD guess what, you're the only unlike many efforts of this man alive who can save kind each game is of the Earth from the invading excellent quality and has alien hordes, blah blah A You'll need a map to find your way round this game. plenty of original quirks. blah... piles of crates and also have to keep your eye You might end up cursing it This is a very tenuous equipment, and the on your oxygen level. The for taking up so much of follow-up to Green Beret inevitable slimy aliens. As aliens breathe some sort of your time, but you'll never in fact the words Green you make your way poisonous muck, so unless regret buying it. Beret 2 don't even appear through the maze, you keep finding supplies  GRAPHICS on the box artwork, and the investigating each room in of oxy-gum you'll be really ! chap is kitted out in cool turn, you must shoot it out choked literally. The SOUND shades and a big gun with them, ducking under best idea is to make a note ! PLAYABILITY rather than a floppy green their fire and melting them of the locations where you VALUE hat. into slimy puddles with find gum, and return to It's a three-part game your energy gun. The pick it up when your OVERALL consisting of a 3-D maze aliens carry ammunition, oxymeter runs low. followed by a lift passes and computer The aliens are very nicely UPDATE .. vertically-scrolling code-cards, all of which designed, but don't shoot-em-up and finally a you will need to complete present much of the The Commodore 64 platforms-and-shooting the maze. When you find a challenge. The main version is due out very gig. Like all maze games, computer room, you must brain-strain of the first shortly, with a Spectrum the first half gets pretty \"log on\" using the section involves making version in a few weeks. tedious unless you're appropriate card. There's your way through the maze Despite the mention on prepared to get out the an inventory display on the and finding the passwords the current advert, there Crayolas and make a top right, which you flip which will allow you into are no plans for an Atari map. It looks nice, though; through to select the the elevators to the other ST version, or for that comouflage-drab correct card, and different levels. matter an Amiga corridors, sliding doors, types of ammunition. You Level two is much better conversion. Pity.   "


"ARMI of before the next level is tackled. There are seven levels in all; each one is loaded separately and boasts a full 32K of graphics data. What makes Armalyte so very but more powerful laser (up to six double shots), special is its technical bursts. When a and the second and third excellence and finesse; it superweapon is fired, the give rearward and vertical takes Commodore gaming weapons charge is firepower respectively, to heights previously depleted and it slowly Fourth is tri-lasers (a pretty  MACHINE: C64. undreamed of... regenerates, represented devastating addition to six  SUPPLIER: THALAMUS. At the start of a game, by a bar at the bottom of double-shots) and fifth is PRICE: $9.99. the screen. one or two players are VERSION TESTED: C64. conserve and converge REVIEWER: JULIAN selected. In the one-player As the player progressesprotects against this RIGNALL. mode the ship is equipped through the landscape, reversal process. Sixth and with a remote drone which pods drift onto the screen seventh are generators Thalamus has already hit floats in front of the craft and are shot repeatedly to and batteries, which are the headlines with two giving extra firepower. In cycle through their collected to speed up horizontally scrolling shoot two-player both players contents. The first item recharge time. A complete 'em ups, Sanxion and battle simultaneously in gives an extra double-shot set of four batteries and Delta, and are set to repeat Salamander fashion, that success with their third, although unlike the Armalyte. And how! arcade game, both The game has been players have the same programmed in Exeter by firepower. With that newcomers Cyberdyne selected, the game Systems, who've taken it begins. upon themselves to prove Each ship starts out with that it's possible to two double-shot firepower produce an and a complement of arcade-quality game on three superweapons, the C64. And they have. If chosen from keyboard and feelings of scepticism are activated with a long press creeping in, bear with me of the fire button. The first and I'll explain. gives a massive aerial Armalyte is a traditional burst, which practically fills horizontal scroller in the the screen with laser fire. respect that you have to Second is laser fire which travel from left to right passes through scenery to across a series of alien destroy craft or landscapes, blasting all installations that are and sundry. At the end of otherwise impossible to hit, each level is a giant and the third is similar to guardian who is disposed the first, but releases fewer, Annanna odle 103 "


"LATEG C+VG HIT! generators gives a very quick recharge time, so you can use the superweapon almost repeatedly to much devastation (and satisfaction). If a pod is collected without being shot, the ship becomes invincible for five seconds. The first level is set in a mechanical city, where metallic constructions, electric forcefields and batteries of laser emplacements await to destroy the player. Swarms of aliens infest the cityscape, and collecting extra weapons is essential to ensure survival. Halfway through the first level a mini-mothership attacks, and is disposed of to proceed through the rest of the city to where a giant guardian awaits. This is unlike anything I've ever seen on the Commodore; it's half a screen high and spins around the screen at yourself glued in front of an awesome velocity. the monitor as you Next comes the ruins, repeatedly play just to see consisting of broken pillars whether you can get to the and monuments, next level; addiction isn't complete with the word for it Armalyte bomb-spitting gargoyles almost requires a and even more aliens. The government health third level is my favourite warning! and comprises of I seem to have backgrounds inspired by exhausted all the Hans Rudi-Geiger's superlatives in this review, Necromomicon. The but believe me; Armalyte graphics are absolutely will knock your socks off! It's stunning, and I'd even be simply the absolute so bold to say that it knocks pinnacle of Commodore spots off the second level of gaming at present, and the Vulcan Venture sets news standards that arcade game! many will find nigh on Later levels include a impossible to match. space section, complete Buy it, and experience with a myriad of swirling perfection in motion. aliens, and a fabulous mountain level. I GRAPHICS Armalyte's beauty isn't just skin deep it's SOUND also the most playable VALUE shoot 'em up I've encountered. The PLAYABILITY gameplay is incredibly OVERALL hectic, with an almost unfeasible amount of aliens swirling and whirling around the screen. Once again new ground is Thalamus has said that broken with up to 20 of your work is already underway bullets and 20 different on Atari ST and alien ships on-screen at the Amiga versions, which same time — and no will retain all the glitches whatsoever! playability of the 64 The difficulty level is version but sport new extremely well balanced features and better and allows you to get a graphics. Sounds like little further into the game, they're games to look out and consequently you find for! a ada a 00195500 Lewis 300 03 AM DRADE 31 "


"The price of coming at the Olympics COMMODORE 149.99 "


"firs If you weren't selected for the Seoul Olympics, no need to feel out of the running. Because everything you need to compete in all the events is right here with the Commodore 64 Olympic Challenge pack. And at only .99, your gold medal's practically in the bag. Here's the C64 Olympic line-up... * C64 Computer, the latest version of the world's best-selling computer. * Cassette unit, for simple loading of programs. * Joystick to put you in complete control of screen action. * Plus all the excitement of 10 great sporting games. On day one, you can use all your skills and reflexes to race against the clock in the track and field events. Or take up the challenge of world series baseball, weightlifting, football, tennis and the championship title fights. And when the Olympics are over, you can then go out and grab the best beat 'em ups, one-on-one, adventure and simulation games that really come alive on the C64. There's only a few days to go before the opening ceremony, so make a dash for your local dealer and ask about the C64 Olympic Challenge pack. Or telephone 0800 800 477 for more details. C«COMMODORE 64C Commodore "


"Peviens ROGKET time-transferred weapons option from a small menu found only on the moon) materialise in front of your The real plot begins then fly to each supply eyes, you are Rocket when top scientist Professor dump and fight for what Ranger! The short novella Barnstorff and his gorgeous you need. Once you've enclosed expains the pouting daughter Jane are found these, you must  MACHINES: ATARI ST, capabilities of your kidnapped by a Nazi figure out how to assemble AMIGA. weapons, but there's an airship. The main strategy the ship in the Rocket Lab,  SUPPLIER: MIRRORSOFT. element of trial and error in section of the game is and how to use the Fuel PRICES: .99. working out how to use controlled of five spies in Depot to charge your VERSION TESTED: AMIGA. REVIEWER: CHRIS JENKINS. them. twenty-five countries, in space ship and rocket You won't be old enough to remember the cinema B-movie serials like King of the Rocket Men and Radar Men from th Moon which inspired Rocket Ranger. Fortunately, great serials like these, Flash Gordon and Buck Rogers, are being revived on Saturday morning TV, so now you can see what you missed in the 30s! Rocket Ranger is the latest, and easily the best, Cinemaware game from Mirrorsoft. Like all the Cinemaware range, it features state-of-the-art graphics, sophisticated music and sound effects, and snazzy packaging. This time they've remembered to put a game in too! The big problem with early Cinemaware titles like Defender of the Crown was that while the graphics A Anyone remember the classic film \"Destination Moon\"? were stunning, there was very little gameplay, so One of the most you could see everything entertaining aspects of in an hour and never want Rocket Ranger is the way in to play it again. Rocket which the 30s serial has Ranger doesn't have that been lovingly recreated problem at all; it's a without a hint of parody. complex blend of arcade The pseudo-futuristic and strategy sequences designs of the costumes, guaranteed to keep you rocket ships and other playing for ages. pieces of technology; the Using clever digitised helpless heroine photo-montages of maps, constantly getting into historical photos, and even dangerous scrapes; the a little animated Hitler, the potty professor, the evil prologue sequence sadistic baddies and the explains the background cliff-hanging perils are all to the game. As there. It may not be as government scientist up-to-date as your Star A Adolf struts his funky \"thang'. Cody, you are chosen by Wars or your Terminators, your attempt to thwart the resistance fighters from a but it has a charm all of its Nazis. By using the menu future world dominated by own. system to issue orders, the super-science of the Each new episode is change priorities and victorious Nazis, to receive introduced by monitor messages, you the technological gifts cinema-style captions and must discover five hidden which can help you to stirring martial music, and sections of a space ship, change history. From the most game choices are and its fuel supply of moment when the made by selecting an lunarium (an element Fanan Roce that "


"RANGER late in rescuing Jane from the Nazis. On this note, it's worth pointing out that like Defender of the Crown, the graphics of Rocket Ranger packet. The key to success are fine, even better are crumpled heap if you get make liberal use of in the game is in the animated arcade you timing wrong. The glitnting thighs and discovering and stealing sequences, beginning with more fuel you carry, the plunging cleavages; supplies of lunarium, then you trying to take off harder it is to take off. A there's also the odd bit of handling them properly to wearing your rocket pack. successful launch brings fetishism and bondage, so reach the climax of the To calculate the amount of up the destination screen, on the whole it's pretty game on the Moon. fuel needed to fly from one where you click on the unsuitable for adults. While the maps and country to another you country you need to visit, Oddly enough, there's graphics of the must use the card Decoder and hope that you can get no game save feature; the introductory sequences Wheel supplied (a neat there without running out of manual claims that a complete game normally takes only an hour, which sounds to me like an underestimate. If there is a problem with Rocket Ranger it is that there is a certain inevtiable amount or repetition involved in playing the game. Unlike, say, a straighforward shoot 'em-up, where you progress from one level to the next blasting successfully more challenging waves of targets, Rocket Ranger shares some of the features of an adventure game. If you fail to complete one section, you won't necessarily lose the game; you'll just find yourself back in an earlier situation, forced to play through the scenario again. Basically this is only likely to become a problem if you aren't any A Rocket Ranger confronts Garry Williams. good at playing the game! fuel and plunging into the GRAPHICS sea! There are eight excellent SOUND arcade sequences, such VALUE as the episode in which PLAYABILITY you have to intercepta fleeing Zeppelin using OVERALL your Radium Pistol.Later UPDATE.. episodes see you fighting off Messershmidt fighters, There's a Commodore 64 joining in hand-to-hand version of Rocket Ranger combat with a brutal planned for October. Cost guard and shooting it out will be $14.99. Early in the with zombie sex slaves New Year there'll be IBM (yeah, you heard me and Atari ST versions. right!). The next Cinemaware To aid you in your mission interactive video game A \"Thar she blows, Jim lad!\" you also have a will be Lords of the Rising anti-piracy technique, by wrist-computer. In and Sun, an oriental strategy the way). In the Take-off location except Fort Dix game, initially on the sequence you run along you can access the Amiga. the Fort Dix parade computer to pick a new Also in the pipeline are ground, hitting the joystick destination, or call for help three sports simulations; fire button in rhythm until if you have run out of fuel. TV Sports American you reach take-off speed, The monitor will also show Football first, followed by and push forward to you some pretty gruesome basketball and boxing launch or land in a torture scene if you are too games later in the year. O O OOOO estiute, co atpeed Rocket Ranger: a water pistol, a space ship and a bald patch. 26 "


"IF THE GIRLS DON'T SEEM TO NOTICE... FREBRP Telecomsoft, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford St, London WC1A 1PS. Firebird and Firebird Logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications PLC. SEE US ON STAND 3447 AT THE P.C. SHOW, EARLS COURT, 14-18 SEPT. A LEGEND IN GAMES SOFTWARE "


"One two three. One free too. Pineata THE PEPSI CHALLENGE MAD MIX GAMES Gary Linekers Hoi-Shord THE VINDICATOR 72 Goia With Boots computer games you just can't lose. Buy any three from September 5th to November 19th and you get another one free. Just ask a sales assistant for the special Collect Card* and we'll stamp it every time you buy a game from our large selection of titles. With three stamps on your card, all you have to do is return to a Boots store. And then we'll give the game away. A better buy at BOOL *COLLECT CARD ONLY AVAILABLE UNTIL 22nd OCTOBER 1988. ALL TITLES MUST COST .95 OR MORE AND BE FOR THE SAME COMPUTER THE FREE OFFER DOES NOT APPLY TO COMPILATIONS. SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY IN LARGER STORES ONLY. "


"INTENSI depressed. Make sure that the skimmer gets out of the way of the drone, though, as they can collide in MACHINES: mid-air, destroying both. SPECTRUM/C64. Landscape features vary SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD. from screen to screen, but PRICE: $7.95 SPEC CASS, each one has at least two .95 C64 CASS, .95 C64 DISK. airlocks, from which the VERSION TESTED: C64. colonists emerge, and a REVIEWER: JULIAN landing pad. Colonists RIGNALL attempt to walk towards Andrew Braybrook has the drone, but since they been very quiet since the only walk in straight lines much-delayed Morpheus often get stuck behind an was released at the obstacle. This is where the beginning of this year. He point of the drone actually finished movement comes in; and programming the game the drone is guided to a last September, and since suitable place where the then has been busily colonist may board. When working away on Intensity, enough people have been his latest game. picked up, the landing Unlike nearly all of pad flashes, and the drone Braybrook's previous is guided onto it to finish games, there's no shooting the screen. or scrolling, although Every time a colonist is Intensity does bear many rescued, an Rappears of his hallmarks, including and floats around the bas-relief graphics, screen. If it's collected by excellent presentation and the Skimmer, a resource Paradroid-style sound unit is added to the bank. effects. These can be used to buy So, if there's no scrolling faster and more powerful or shooting, what do you skimmers and drones have to do? Well, the although they often take action is set in the far time to build, so order reaches of the galaxy on a early. distant space station. Alien There are five type of forces have invaded, and alien craft: Spores, Stalkers, it's up to the player to Podules, Trackers and rescue the colonists from Nuclons. Stalkers are the the occupied sections of simpliest life form, and are the station using a skimmer destroyed when hit by the and remote control drone. skimmer or drone, or when Each screen is viewed they collide with a from above and represents landscape feature or one a part of the space station. another. If one lands it turns The player has the skimmer into a Stalker, which is under his direct control, again destroyed when hit and there's also a remote by the skimmer or drone. If control drone parked on it runs into a colonist it turns the ground. It's moved by into a Nuclon, which heads pressing the fire button, towards the drone, whereupon it lifts off and downgrading or moves to the point where destroying it on contact. A the fire button was similar reaction occurs if it The current level indicator. IN 7 A Braybrook's latest unsurprisingly sports bas-relief graphics. A Intensity: a mixture of old ideas and new, but uninspiring gameplay "


"hits the skimmer. Podules are formed when a Spore is mutating to a Stalker, and is vulnerable to attack from the drone or Skimmer, and Trackers are dangerous creatures which home in on the skimmer and drone, destroying or downgrading it on contact. As the game continues, aliens become faster and faster. The mission ends when all skimmers or drones are destroyed, or the final screen is reached, whereupon an escape shuttle is launched from the station. Although Intensity has a nicely thought out scenario and some neat touches, the gameplay is dull. The game merely consists of moving the drone from one location to another and running the skimmer into aliens, and for me that just isn't exciting. The lack of variety in the gameplay soon gives rise to apathetic feelings, and found my attention wandering after a couple of sessions: there just isn't enough in the action to keep you playing for a long period of time. The bas-relief graphics and very standard fare, and many of the backdrops are comprised of what looks like cast-off sections from Uridium, and the sprites are similar to the ones used in Alleykat. Even the sound effects are similar to the ones used in Paradroid and Uridium! If you're a Braybrook fan, try before you buy you might find yourself disappointed I certainly was. GRAPHICS SOUND > VALUE PLAYABILITY OVERALL ANDREW BRAYBROOK ora Andrew Braybrook first hit the limelight with Gribbly's Day Out, his first original game which was released by Hewson back in mid-1985. It's an excellent little game and features ones of the cutest characters ever to come out of a Commodore 64. Eager to repeat that success, Andrew worked busily on his next project for six months, and the final result was Paradroid, which was received to critical acclaim and was widely regarded as a classic Uridium followed, and again was acclaimed as a classic. It's a two-way horizontally scrolling shoot 'em up sporting some excellent bas-relief graphics, which were swiftly becoming a Braybrook hallmark By now Braybrook had a strong following, who awaited impatiently for his next release. It finally arrived in the guise of Alleykat, a vertically scrolling race game. Although it's a good game, it did have one major flaw which allowed a player to complete screens very easily. Still, the graphics were up to Braybrook's usual high standards. In early 1987, Andrew started work on his most ambitious project yet: Morpheus. When the game was finished, much controversy was caused when he and the rest of the Graftgold team signed to Firebird. A court case followed, but Hewson couldn't stop Firebird publishing Morpheus. And now, after a string of great games, Braybrook has produced Intensity, arguably his most disappointing release yet. Has Braybrook gone off the boil? Write in to C+VG and let us know too. UPDATE... The other Graftgold founder, Steve Turner, is currently putting the finishing touches to the Spectrum version, which will be out at the end of September. Obviously the graphics will be different, but gameplay will be identical. "


"BYRITE SOFTWARE NENDER. FOOI AVENGEBASH MEANCE 2. BOULDEOR, ROADAANDER.FIE 8888 SPECTRUM SPECTRUM .99 EACH EDUCATIONAL OR BUY TWO GET PACK. AGED 8-12 ONE FREE KING ARTHURS QUEST, AZTEC, CAR JOURNEY, BALLOONING ALL FOR 2.99 DEEPSTRIKE, ORBIX, PUB GAMES, SKY RUNNER, ONIK, BATTLE OF THE PLANETS. SPECTRUM NEW EQUINOX, COLOUR OF MAGIC, CHAIN REACTION, REVOLUTION, KINETIC, KILLER TITLES RING, HOWARD THE DUCK, PYRACURSE, KNIGHTMERE, MOONSTRIKE, THANATOS FOOTBALL MANAGER II RANARAMA, BUBBLER, TEMPEST. ALIEN STREET FIGHTER EVOLUTION, MERMAID MADNESS, TWISTER, ROAD BLASTERS SAI COMBAT, ACTION REFLEX, SAILING, TOY WORLD CLASS LEADERBOARD BIZARE, FIGHTER PILOT, POLE POSITION GAUNTLET 11 BRAINSTORM, FIGHTING WARRIOR, XCEL, HACKER, SKYFOX, BALLBLAZER, JETPACK MOONCRESTA, COP-OUT, FUTER KNIGHT SPECTRUM DOUBLE TAKE, KORONIS RIFT, EXPLORER THE EIDOLON, PRODIGY, XRAQ, LIFE OF HARRY, PULSATOR, COSMIC SHOCK HYBIRD, GLAVIN, WIBSTARS, TRAP, FIFTH EACH QUADRANT, MINDESTONE, SIGMA 7, COMET GAME, DEATHSCAPE, DEADRINGER, NIHUST, HACKER II, TUJAD, BIG TROUBLE IN LITTLE, CHINA, MOUNTIE MICKS SPACE RAIDERS, PLANETOIDS, CHESS, JET DEATHRIDE, LES FUCS, IT'S A KNOCKOUT, PAC, HUNGRY HORACE, HORACE AND THE KOS BRIDE OF FRANKENSTEIN HIGH SPIDERS, TRANZAM. FRONTIER, TEMPLE OF TERROR DEACTIVATORS, CHOLO, COSTA CAPERS, SORDONS SHADOW, SPACE SHUTTLE, DRUID II, GRYON, BIGGLES, EXPRESS RAIDER, POLE POSITION. SPECTRUM (PLEASE CHOOSE ALTERNATIVE GAMES TO AVOID DISAPPOINTMENT). MISCELLANEOUS GAMES ON .99 THE COMET GAME, DEV'S EX MACHINA COMMODORE CASS .95 ROUGE TROOPER, 10TH FRAME, TEMPLE OF FASSAM, ASSEMBLER DISASSEMBLER TERROR, 10TH FRAME, DRUID II, KRACKOUT .99 EACH CASS .95 DEATHSCAPE, ENIGMA FORCE, MAX WHITE LIGHTNING .95 HEADROOMN, EVIL CROWN, WEST BANK, DONKEY KONS (CART) STAR RAIDERS II, INTERNATIONAL SOCCER .95 PILE UP, COLOUR OF MAGIC, DAVY, CASS, GAMESTAR BASKETBALL ELEVATOR ACTION, ON THE TILES, SUPERSPRINT, JAILBREAK, JACK THE COMMODORE TRANSFORMERS, DOG FIGHT 2187. RIPPER, CONVOY RAIDER, BASKET MASTER, STRATTON, AGENT ORANGE, ESCAPE FROM THAI BOXING, PSYCHO SOLDIER, FIREFLY AMIGA SOFTWARE PARADISE, PRODIGY, EAGLES, BOBBY RAMPAGE, FIRETRACK, COMBAT LEADER, BEARING, THANATOS, NEMESIS THE BATTLE IN NORMANDY, TOMMAHAWK WARLOCK, WRENER, OUT ON A LIMB, QUARTET, SIDEWISE, FIRETRAP. STARCROSS SHADOW SKIMMER, KRYSTALS OF ZONG .00 IMPLOSION, ACTIVISION'S DECATHON, PORTAL BULLDOG, DOUBLE TAKE, YABBA DABBA .00 MAGNETRON, BOBSLEIGH, SHAO-UNS-RD, ZORK II DOO, HYPER BIKER, NEOCLYPS, MAGIC .00 RE-BOUNDER, FOOTBALL MANAGER MADNESS, EXPLORER, TEMPLE OF APSHAI, LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE .00 ALIENS, HACKET II, AVENGER, ZORKI WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST, STARION, .00 BOULDERDASHI, BOULDERDASHII, SEASTALKER .00 KORONIS RIFT, ALLIGATA ACTION PACK, TRANATOR, ROADRUNNER, INHERITANCE 2, DR FRUIT DESIGNER PENCIL, LORDS OF MIDNIGHT. .50 BATTALION COMMANDER, FIELD OF FIRE, VADERS .50 (PLEASE CHOOSE ALTERNATIVE GAMES TO RAMPARTS, CHOLO, GUADALCANAL, BACK AVOID DISAPPOINTMENT). FINAL TRAP .50 TO THE FUTURE, THUNDER CATS. COMMODORE COMMODORE COMMODORE .99 EACH DISC 64 NEW TITLES COMPILATIONS SPIRIT OF THE STONES, BEAM RIDER, .99 EACH CASS SPINDIZZY, TRANSFORMERS, BATTLE OF FOOTBALL MANAGER MIDWAY, PITFALL, SUPERMAN, VIKINGS BIONIC COMMANDO PLATFORM PERFECTION, UNBELIEVABLE CAPTURED, HYPABALL DRUID, EMPIRE, ROAD BLASTERS ULTIMATE, BIG NAME BONANZA, COIN-OP DECATHLON, POLAR PIERRE, ANKH TRACKER COLLECTION INC (CRYSTAL CASTLES. GALACTIC CONTROLLER, MURDER BY THE GREAT GIANA SISTERS BREAKTHROUGH, EXPRESS RAIDER, METRO DOZEN, THING ON A SPRING, STALLION, ELITE 6 PAK VOL II .99 CROSS, SUMMER GOLD INC (10TH FRAME, REDHAWK, MR ROBOT, WILLIAM WOBBLER IMPOSSIBLE MISSION, REBEL PLANET TRACER SANCTION, INFRODROID, KINETIC DAMBUSTERS, BRUCE LEE, BEACHEAD II, ESCAPE FROM PARADISE, LIGHT FORCE ATARI ST LUCAS FILM COLLECTION INC (THE EDOLON, PAST FINDER, RED ARROWS, SUPERSTAR RESCUE ON FRACTULUS, BALL BLAZER PING PONG, SUSPENDED, STARCROSS. SOFTWARE KORONIS RIFT, DURELL BIG 4, VOL II INC DEADLINE, ZORK III, ZORK II, BORED OF THE DEEP STRIKE, SIGMA 7. SABATEUR II + RINGS THANATOS TRINITY COMMODORE HOLLYWOOD HIJINX COMMODORE BALLYHOO .99 EACH DISC MIND FOREVER VOYAGING .99 EACH .50 HITS 5, MARBLE MADNESS, SUPER SPRINT CUT THROATS SUSPECT .00 OR BUY TWO GAMESTAR BASKETBALL, STAR RAIDERS II, MOON MIST .00 BEST OF BEYOND, RAMBO, RAMPAGE, PLANET FALL DRUID II, FIRETRACK, LUCAS FILM GAMES .50 GET ONE FREE ZORK 1 .00 COLLECTION ZORK 11 .00 STAR LEASE BASEBALL, MONTEZUMAS ZORK 111 .50 REVENGE, DISCOVERY, RESCUE ON COMMODORE LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE .50 FRACTALUS, ICE BUSTERS, COMIC BAKERY BASKETBALL EDUCATIONAL THROUGH THE TRAP DOOR, CHAIN SPELL BREAKER REACTION, WILLY PATTERN, MONTY ON THE RANCH, NUMBER TUMBLERS, SONG MAKER GOLDEN PATH RUN, CENTURIONS, GREYFELL, ARC OF ALPHA BUILD, MAKE A FACE, DANCE KING QUESTII YESOD, LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE, FANTASY, ALF, LOGIC LEVELS, ALPHABET WORLD GAMES HIGHLANDER, DARK EMPIRE, MURDER OFF ZOO, FRACTION FEVER, AGEAN VOYAGE, HACKER II MIAMI, MISSION OMEGA, HYPA BALL, 1 STORY MACHINE, SEA SPELLER, ALL FOR SUPER CYCLE .00 CUPS, THE DETECTIVE, NEITHER EARTH. .99 EACH. MASTER WORD, BALLOONING, FAHRENHEIGHT 451 .50 DEADRINGER, DRAGON SKULL, MOON CAR JOURNEY AGE 6-10 ALL FOR .99. AMAZON .50 CRISIS 1999, JUMPIN JIMMY, FUTURER NINE PRINCES OF AMBER .50 KNIGHT, BRIDE OF FRANKENSTEIN, IT'S A COMMODORE KINGS QUEST .00 KNOCKOUT, EMPIRE MOUNTIE MICK'S ULTMA II .00 DEATHRIDE, MYSTERY ON THE NILE, MISCELLANEOUS THE BLACK CAULDRON .50 MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE, ON-COURT JEWELS OF DARKNESS .50 TENNIS, SKATEROCK, SCARY MONSTERS, SIMONS BASIC + SIMONS BASIC EXTN E14.95 SILICON DREAMS .50 SKY RUNNER, STARQUAKE URIDIUM, GEOS .95 CRAZY CARS .00 MOONCRESTA, PLAY YOUR CARDS RIGHT PASCAL DISC .95 CLASSIQUES .00 FALCOM PATROL II, INFODROID, KINETIC INTR. TO BASIC PT 1 + 2 CASS .99 DR LIVINGSTONE .00 RANARMA, DANDY, SUPERSTAR PING INTERNATIONAL SOCCER (CART) .95 BOULDERDASH .00 PONG, CHALLENGE OF THE GOBOTS, LOGO DISC .99 ADDICTABALL .00 WIBSTARS, CYBORG, XENO, FIFTH DESIGNERS PENCIL .99 TURBO ST .00 QUADRANT, THE TUBE, OLAKE MINUS ONE, CLUEDOO, MONOPOLY, SCRABBLE, EXTENSOR .95 88888 BB3 888 SPECTRUM .99 EACH E7.50 RBLE MATBALL. SRAMPAGEMES DEATH OR GLORY, SPY V SPY 2. ONIK, HEADCOACH, SPY V SPY 3, RAMPARTS, WINTER GAMES, SURVIVOR, FIRETRAP. SUPERSPRINT, DARK EMPIRE, SUPER CHESS 3.5, RED SCORPION, NEMESIS, JAILBREAK SOLOMAN'S KEY, SAMURI TRILOGY, GREY FELL, RAMPAGE, TRANATOR. MAGNERTRON, PROHIBITION, QUARTET SLAINE, IMPOSSIBLE MISSION, FOOTBALL MANAGER ROTRONICS WAFADRIVE + 1 FREE 64K WAFA .49 INCP+P EXTRA WAFADRIVE CARTRIDGES 16K 62.00 EACH 64K .50 EACH SPECTRAL WRITER (WORD PROCESSOR ON WAFA) .95 EACH BROTHER HR 10 DAISYWHEEL PRINTER INC TRACTOR FEED UNIT .95 INC P+P ALPHACOM PAPER (BLACK) 5 ROLLS .95 INCP+P GUNSHOT JOYSTICK .00 SPECTRUM + 3 COMPUTER INC JOYSTICK + SIX GAMES .95 + .00 P+P SPECTRUM 128 COMPUTER .95 + .00P+P TROJAN LIGHT PEN+ GRAPHICS SOFTWARE (+2 ONLY) .95 P+1-3 TITLES. 75p, 4 OR MORE .00 OVERSEAS ORDERS ADD .00 PER CASS 88888 SPECTRUM COMPILATIONS UNBELIEVABLE ULTIMATE .99 BEST OF BEYOND .99 COIN-OP COLLECTION INC (CRYSTAL CASTALES, BREAKTHUR, EXPRESS RAIDER, METRO CROSS) LUCAS GAME COLLECTION INC (THE EIDOLON, RESCUE ON FRACTALUS, BALL BLAZER, KORONIS RIFT) .99 FUN PACK 3 INC (THE HULK, LEVITATION, TREMOR) .99 6PAK VOL II INC INTO THE EAGLES NEXT, BATTY, ACE, INT KARATE LIGHTFORCE, SHOCKWAY RIDER .99 ODRCIARS RIGHT PASCAL DISC BYRITE SOFTWARE DEPT C + VG PO BOX 589 LONDON N14 6SJ FLIGHTFORCE: 63.99 . MAILSOFT SPEC SPEC C64 C64 AMS AMS  Software Title CASS DISK CASS DISK CASS DISK ATARI AMIGA ST IBM Software Title 12.99 12.99 15.99 15.99 da da Jja) TAO2 199112 viud19006) aer-per DXC SOM Jnell, modprillid OOPSC PEDO 9nodagleT | IJA ? 6.99 12.99 6.99 8. da d. ee.p12 6DIMA bns T2 8.8.800 2M029MOHT YS JAG 05 ... MY AH 8888 6.99 6.99 : ... Double Dragon 6.99 . 6.99 D2 6.99 D2 Elite 18.75 Barbarian-mel 6.99 6.99 D2 Starglider 11 15.99 Bubble Bobble 5.50 D1 6.30 D2 6.30 D2 Carrier Command 15.99 Alien Syndrome 6.30 D2 6.99 D2 6.99 D2 Fish 15.99 15.99 18.75 Foot'll manager 2 6.99 D2 6.99 D2 6.99 D2 Time Stood Still 13.99 18.75 Psycho Pigs Uxb 6.75 7.50 D2 7.50 D2  Double Dragon 13.99 13.99 13.99 Street Warrior 6.75 7.50 D2 7.50 D2 Space Harrier 13.99 16.99 Soldier of Light 6.30 Pandora 12.99 Bionic Commando 6.75 6.99 D2 Great Giana Sister 14.99 18.75 Street Fighter 6.75 6.99 6.99 D2 U.M.S 15.99 15.99 18.75 Elite 7.50 10.49 D3 7.99 D2 Gunship 16.99 24.99 Head Alignment 6.99 6.99 6.99 Whirligig 12.99 12.99 Terrapods-Mel 6.99 D2 Jinxter 12.99 15.99 18.75 Night Raider 7.50 D2 7.50 D2 Legend of the Sword 15.99 15.99 Brabarian 11 6.99 6.99 D2 6.99 D2 Bubble Bobble 12.99 12.99 Match Day 2 5.50 01 6.30 D1 6.30 D2 Hotshot 12.99 12.99 12.99 Hercules 5.99 7.50 7.50 D2 Three Stooges 15.99 19.99 The Games 6.75 7.50 D2 7.50 D2 Flight Simulator 11 27.99 27.99 39.99 Super Hang On 6.99 6.99 D2 6.99 D2 Captain Blood 15.99 15.99 18.75 Linekers Superskill 5.50 D1 7.50 D2 7.50 D2 Night Raider 14.99 14.99 14.99 Starglider 10.99 D2 4.99 10.99 04 Defender of Crown 19.99 19.99 18.75 Last Ninja 2 8.99 8.99 8.99 Oops 12.99 12.99 12.99 Ikari Warriors 6.30 6.99 02 6.99 D2 Starfleet 1 18.99 18.99 Football Director 6.99 6.99 Power Drome 18.75 18.75 R-Type 6.99 6.99 D2 Foundation Waste 16.99 16.99 OCP Art Studio 9.99 9.99 D3 Garrison 1 or 2 16.99 Green Beret 11 5.50 6.30 D2 Verminator 15.99 15.99 Gunship 7.50 10.9904 04 International Soccer 12.99 12.99 Track Suit Manager 6.99 6.99 Time + Magik 13.99 13.99 13.99 N.Mansells G.Prix 7.50 D2 7.50 D2 Corruption 15.99 15.99 18.75 Captain Blood 6.99 6.99 D2 Hotball 15.99 15.99 Peter Beardsley 6.30 6.99 D2 1943 14.99 18.75 Xenon Leather Necks 12.99 12.99 War in Middle Earth 6.99 6.99 Black Lamp 12.99 12.99 Hotshot 6.99 D2 Xenon 12.99 12.99 The Games Bards Tale 1 18.75 18.75 18.75 Oops Bionic Commandos 14.99 14.99 14.99 Virus Red October 16.99 18.75 Whirligig Netherworld 12.99 12.99 Battlefield Germany 9. D3 Test Drive 18.75 18.75 18.75 \"1943\" D2 Return to Genises 15.99 15.99 Daley Toms Olymp D2 Football Manager 2 12.99 12.99 13.99 Time + Magik D2 Leaderboard Coll'n 14.99 18.99 18.99 Salamander D2 Gold Runner 11 15.99 Netherworld Alien Syndrome 12.99 12.99 Captain Blood Bermuda Triangle 16.99 16.99 Samurai Warrior 5.50 Heroes of the Lance 18.99 18.99 18.99 Carrior Commond 9.99 Gauntlet 11 14.99 Leaderboard Coll'n 11.50 Thundercats 13.99 16.99 Gold/Silver/Bronze 11.50 Overlander 16.99 Out Run Staray 15.99 G.I. Hero Platoon 13.99 16.99 Virus Mind Fighter 16.99 16.99 20.99 Intensity Quadr Alien 13.99 13.99 18.75 Jinxter Interceptor 18.75 Pandora 6.99 D1 Stir Crazy 13.99 13.99 Target Renagade 6.30 01 D1 Street Fighter 14.99 18.75 Tracker 4.99 D1 ST 5 Star Hits 16.99 Kryslis Multiface 43.99 43.99 Also available on disk format D1 = .99, D2 = .99, D3 = .99, D4 = .99, DS = .99 Prices include P+P in UK, Europe add l per tape elsewhere add .50. ChQ/P.O payable to: VISA MAIL-SOFT (C+ VG) P.O. BOX 589, LONDON NIS 6JJ Please specify machine type in your order. Price Matching:If you see a title advertised cheaper by another company in this mag, we will match the price. This does not apply to other companies special offers. If you don't see the title you require simply deduct 25% off R.R.P. And send your order to us (except budget. Sega, Nintendo titles.) We stock all Software + Joysticks for all home micros 6.50 .OOOOOOOOOOOO 6.75 .. COUNT OOO.O. 98 ee.az 9119225) boitemAlmud9921Pa Mab ep.cz neid boutemA\\muito992\\pa ma? .013 6pimA .[32 OW  2W HOT) 88888888888 15.95 D2 888888888888888 8888888 8.888.8 O 8.888. ...... 13.99 OSO 8888 19219mo2 1936W9pbia Zprinnel .AM 6EMA n97 moniprillid blony9.91M spiMA .nobro,wotamon116W 19116H.A.M M muit9q2 .x922) VudliT 1263 191107.2 M #ab .O .. 5.50 926919.oupoloto 9917 101 SA2 90161 bnga 29uper gyom 926919.29nidbom 91612 1197 fo2\\enid=6M OSDIV :of eldoy69 (00.17 bbs 99013) 999 9917, AZN "


"Mad.madma MASTERTRONIC a dded DIMENSION meunesse available on MASTERTRONIC 8-10 PAUL STREET LONDON EC2A 4JH TEL: 01-377 6880 FAX: 01-377 5569 awada ATARI ST: AMIGA IBM PC (.99) SPECTRUM/AMSTRAD FLIPPY  C64 (.99) AUGUST 1988 "


"TAKE 'EM ALL ON... IT'S THE ONLY WAY TO LIVE! Target Renegade is hugely entertaining and ample justification for a sequel Screen ...it develops the theme and develops the game play no end on the original...Each man is four sprites ...all beautifully drawn with great comic touches. The dog is quite wonderful. Commodore User Sercem as *Star* PCW GAME OF THE Target Renegade has the added essence of variety, which is not to be found on other games of this kind. Fear not, this is well worth the readies. PCW Game of the week 1P:001800 2P: 000000 m. PRUSED SPORT TO (18) WAKEIN Eventre Every move you make, every step you take, they're watching you. Fight your way through the precinct — the back alleys, the car parks, fight your way through the villainous community, the skinheads, the Beastie Boys, the bouncers. On a hot, steamy night in New York this is just the tip of the iceberg on your chilling quest to confront «MR. BIG\". A spectacular arcade style brawl with many hoodlams and hellhounds to encounter this is target Renegade if it moves, it hurts! $18FF 1... 100= FLORE TAGGSE SPECTRUM CASSETTE AMSTRAD .95 (EACH SPECTRUM EACH COMMODORE S Mae ame ex-Gaile O FRE CENTRAL STREET MANCHESTER 1.25NS 00 TELET 00. OCEANS G FAX 061 934 0650 "


"SUPPLIER: TYNESOFT. MACHINES: SPECTRUM/C64/PCI AMIGA/BBC/ELECTRON. PRICE: IBM $24.95, ST/ AMIGA $19.95, C64 DISK/BBC DISK $14.95, C64 TAPE/BBC TAPE $9.95, SPEC CASS $7.95. VERSION TESTED: C64. REVIEWER: TONY DILLON. cle before, the graphics are great. I particularly liked the crowd in the background and the two TV camera's that track your every move. Next is the triple jump. Viewed from behind, above and to the right of the-runner, you have to try and get his speed up to maximum and at the appropriate moment, hold Tynesoft's latest release is Summer Olympiad, one of the most beautifully polished and presented Olympic simulations since Summer Games II. The only problem is that it's too small, with only five events to challenge the player. Still, what you get is very good. First off is the skeet shooting. There are seven stations positioned in a semi circle around a field, and at either end of the ring are the skeet launchers. Using a crosshair, you have to aim your gun in the general direction of the skeet and try and hit it before it drops to the ground. Your figure is positioned in the centre of the screen, and what a big A Skeet Shooting. 1. Eugene SUMMER OLYMPIAD Youve Been Knocked Out In Round 1 Score 102 hurdles, and after all the others, it's a bit of a let down. Waggle your joystick to get the man to run faster, and then fire to make him jump. At least the 3D update is smooth. Summer Olympiad is a great game, but lacks the lasting appeal that makes it worth the asking price. GBR 2 TIME 2) USA 346  GRAPHICS  SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY  VALUE FENCER || VREME A The Fencing event. fellow he is too; fully down the fire button to animated as well. As you achieve the perfect jump. swing the crosshair around No onto the diving. This is the screen, he swings his done in much the same gun, which is smooth and way as the cliff diving in very realistic. World Games, except that Then you've got the you now have a lot more fencing. Two large and control. Using different well-drawn opponents line joystick directions, you up with each other, salute, have to make your and try and see who can on-screen counterpart stab each other first. The twist, flip and tumble, as computer opponent seems well as making him to have the edge over you straighten out just before in the respect that he he hits the water. As usual knows the exact distance nice big graphics and to stand to give you the smooth animation. sharp end of his foil. As The last event is the UPDATE. The ST version has some wicked graphics, though slightly smaller than the 64's and boasts different control methods. It plays just as well, in some cases a lot better, and is one of the better sports releases on the ST at the moment. The Amiga version should be graphically impressive, and will feature the same gameplay as the ST. "


"SAVAGE IT'S AMAZING WHAT A REAL COMPUTER GAME CAN DO.  HURL A VOLLEY OF AXES  FIRE BOLTS OF LIGHTNING  WRESTLE FEROCIOUS BEASTS  LEAP OVER BLAZING CHASMS REBIRd Telecomsoft, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford St, London WCIA 1PS. Firebird and Firebird Logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications PLC. SEE US ON STAND 3447 AT THE P.C. SHOW, EARLS COURT, 14-18 SEPT. TWARE "


"Special Reserve There's no way to save money and have been selected by HALF PRICE GAMES FOR know you're only getting the best. our team of experts. So your gameCONNOISSEURS Right? playing satisfaction is assured. Wrong. With SPECIAL RESERVE These benefits are exclusive to year together with a free binder for your normal price is half price. The SPECIAL RESERVE members. the Guides. And each time you order, game you want is .95 in the Membership costs .00, and you IS .95 in the Membership costs .00, and you we'll send you our up-to-the-minute shops? Try us. We probably sell it for can order at the same time as you Stop Press update. .47 (plus post and packing). join. . We aim for 24-hour turnaround of Some of our special offers will blow Members receive a privilege your orders. And you can order NEW your socks off. ordering number, a membership releases in advance of publication; And if it's a turkey, we won't sell it at card, and our detailed, expert we'll despatch them on the very day all. All SPECIAL RESERVE games Buyer's Guide, revised three times a they ship. OFFICIAL SECRETS EXCLUSIVE MAGNETIC SCROLLS MINI-ADVENTURE For the select band of expert gamers for whom even SPECIAL RESERVE is not enough, we offer OFFICIAL SECRETS . all the benefits of SPECIAL RESERVE plus confidential information on games, the gaming world... and more. Your special privileges as a member of OFFICIAL SECRETS begin with a subscription to Confidential, a brand new magazine that gives in-depth, authoritative coverage to areas that existing magazines ignore. Costing .00 an issue to nonmembers, it's produced bi-monthly by experts with experts in mind; Confidential takes you on the inside track of the gaming world, with yaring woria, with access to leading figures, gossip, fact and news on upcoming releases. With Confidential, you'll know what's happening... Confidential, you'll know what's happe before it happens. The privileges of membership continue: free with Issue 2 of Confidential is a private, specially-commissioned mini-adventure disk from The Guild of Thieves, The Pawn and Jinxter authors, Magnetic Scrolls* reserved for members, and never to be publicly released. And there's more. A copy of Gnome Ranger from the award-winning Level 9 team. \"Go out and buy it, pronto!\" said Atari ST User and if you already have, tick the box and well and if you already have, tick the box and we'll give you a secret, surprise alternative. A competition to win -worth of hardware of your choice. Free help and hints on any game you buy from us. And exclusive, and very special offers. All this, for just .95, including your membership of SPECIAL RESERVE. Who is behind OFFICIAL SECRETS and SPECIAL RESERVE? Tony Rainbird (ex Firebird and Rainbird), Graeme Kidd (ex CRASH and The Games Machine) and Nick Walkland (ex Orcsbane \"Fanzine of the Year\"). Year\"). \"Available on the ST. Amiga, PC, Mac, PCW, C64 and Spectrum +3; if you use a different machine, we've a different treat in store for you wait and see! CENSORED! MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION & ORDER FORM Complete this coupon or write the details clearly on a sheet of paper, or phone our New Members Department on 0279 600204 NAME We intended to fill this space with examples from our catalogue of over 400 products. But our prices are so low that they annoy other software sellers, and we have been asked to withold them. ADDRESS _ POST CODE You may already know somebody who belongs to one of our clubs. If so, please ask them about our prices. COMPUTER delete where not applicable DISK: 5.25\"/3.5\"/3\"/TAPE I want one year's subscription to: SPECIAL RESERVE UK .00 or EEC .00 Special Reserve and Official Secrets are trading names of Inter-Mediates Ltd.  Send off .00 now to join Special Reserve. People who join Special Reserve get one month to upgrade to Official Secrets at a special price of $15.95. or Send us a stamped addressed envelope (International response coupon if you live outside the UK) and we'll send you a price list, including all the latest titles we recommend. Please mark the corner of your envelope with the type of computer you own and send it to the address shown in the coupon. or OFFICIAL SECRETS UK .95 or EEC .95 WITH Gnome Ranger Surprise Alternative I'd like to buy a game as well (optional) TITLE PRICE  Post & Packing per game .50 UK or .00 EEC (.50 for telephoned orders) TOTAL delete where not applicable Payment by Cheque/Postal Order/Visa/Access/American Express (Payments from outside the UK must be made by credit card) My credit card number is: IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII Please remember that you cannot buy a game from us unless you join one of the clubs, and we add post and packing charges as shown in the coupon opposite. Members are not allowed to buy more than one copy of each game, as we do not supply for resale Name and address must be as above SIGNATURE EXPIRY DATE Cheques or Postal Orders payable to: OFFICIAL SECRETS or SPECIAL RESERVE Dept. C&VG, BOX 847, HARLOW CM21 9PH Registered in England Number 2054713. "


"LA. GR MACHINE: CBM 64.  SUPPLIER: EPYXIUS GOLD. PRICE: $14.99 DISK. REVIEWER: CHRIS JENKINS. San Diego S.Schools 1984.. B.8., 1988 Ever fancied being an undercover agent? Not the sort who just runs along blasting everything that moves, a la Rolling Thunder, but one who has to use his eyes, his brain and his wits to solve a really challenging case? Good. You've got the job. LA Crackdown is the best thing to come out of Epyx Rookie #13 Samuel Smith for some time. The clever rthdates part is that you don't play the undercover cop Hoe fei High School, 1984 yourself; you play the mission controller, Height: 5 Height: 163 Lbs. communicating with a Hair : Black rookie using a hidden Background: Graduated 8th out of 63. transceiver. The rookie will Scored well in all qualifying tests at normally obey your orders, but if you mishandle the the academy, but not physically strong. Strong knowledge of the law and police case he's likely to quit on you if he doesn't get regulations intelligent and adaptable. killed first. Could go far Could go far in the Department. Your mission is to Press h aaseRELO or -> to chooseRL investigate an operation importing electronic A Rookie Sam Smith will do a good job if you don't ask him to do the impossible. equipment from the Far East. Is it a cover for drugs unmarked surveillance smuggling? Let's hope so, van. If any suspects arrive or there won't be much of a or depart, you can select game. You can visit FOLLOW from the GO TO different locations, search menu to trail them. for clues, plant bugs, take At the bottom left you see photos, question suspects, maps of Los Angeles, or of trail them, and, when you the insides of the buildings. have enough evidence, Each room is numbered, r talking. Should I go start to make arrests. and you just have to select The game's menu driven, a room number to enter it. and combines text and At the bottom centre TORAGE graphics very smoothly. appears the main text After naming your menu from which you 4 RESTROOM character and choosing a select your next command LOADING DOCK RECEPTION rookie from a selection of with joystick or keyboard;  four upstanding officers, and bottom left, displays the main screen display showing the time and date, AFEHOUSE divides into five sections. At and the status of your four the top left is a graphic available bugs. Planting A Confronting the hoods in the warehouse. display showing the phone bugs in strategic interiors of buildings, such places is the key to of schedules from the things in my time but a as the operation's obtaining vital warehouse, these form Scottish Sushi bar. OK Los warehouse and a information. Once a bug your first leads, and direct Angeles is as everyone suspicious sushi bar (the indicator lights up, you you towards the strange knows the decadence bar's suspicious, not the know it has recorded a Scottish sushi bar, the boss capital of the world but sushi). At the right are conversation which you villain's beach house and this strange mixture of shown the exteriors of the can replay in your van. Eso on. cultures anyway on with buildings as seen from your Combined with snapshots I thought I'd seen a few the tale.... AMELE 7 STORAGE MONDAY MTING PARCEL "


"ACKDOWN 552232 COMMUNICATE SEARCH SNAP PICTURE TIHE COMPRESS ARREST REVIEW IDENTIFY QU AFEHOUSE A Use the command menu to issue instructions to your rookie. about the game is that it's completely realistic; no jet-packs, wrist-communicators or stun guns. You can't even shoot your way out of trouble, and there aren't many games where that's true. Whatever about the specific verdict on LA Crackdown you have to give Epyx full marks for persevering with this unique game play system. It really is one possible future way in which adventure games can HONDA develop which may turn out to be a life saver for the computerised lateral thinking puzzle. It would be a great loss to the computer game hobby if puzzle and whodunnit games were totally eclipsed by the role play fantasy type of game. Sure, these games are excellent in their own right but they TIME COMPRESS option you don't have the sheer can speed through weight of puzzlability that a uneventful days or long good whodunnit style stakeouts. adventure can create. LA The graphics are simple Crackdown and games and nicely-drawn, with like it are a lifeline for clever touches such as adventure enthusiasts. moving vans and  GRAPHICS animated characters. Typical commands which  SOUND you can issue include VALUE COMMUNICATE, which PLAYABILITY initiates a dialogue between your rookie and OVERALL other characters; SEARCH, UPDATE ... FOLLOW, and IDENTIFY, which brings up rap sheets There are no versions of of the various plug-uglies LA Crackdown planned and the sleazoids you'll for other machines. encounter. The portraits Several new Epyx titles will be launched at the PC are nice, but comments Show, but they're all such as \"normally wears a sports simulations, moustache\" aren't much including 4x4 help in your police work. Roadracing, Winter Great fun, though not Edition Games, Street terribly complicated; for Sports Soccer and Final instance, there are only Assault, a four different buildings to mountain-climbing investigate. The good thing simulation. 1 STORAGE 1 NMIGO RECENT POROCK CANCEL WAREHOUSE A Watching the warehouse from your unmarked van. You really have to think night, because if you try to about what you're doing to insist on making a search, play this game; for or arresting someone instance, you can't plant without enough evidence, bugs or search the your rookie will quit. Also warehouse during the day, remember to select the because the thugs will REST option every hours, or throw you out. Return at he'll collapse! Using the "


"MACHINES: SPEC, C64, AMS.  SUPPLIER: DESTINY. PRICE: $8.95.  VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM REVIEWER: TONY DILLON. Everybody loves a game show, right? I mean, with such lovable hosts as Jim Show, and Destiny has out. As usual, there are all or lasting. cleverly licensed it before the regular nasties and It's not a bad little game, its creator is born. That way things to hinder you. but I think it's the little' that they can sue for Get through all that and stops it from being a great infringement on copyright you get to the bonus stage, game. A novel idea, and when the show does come which just entails you one I can see being around. Clever, eh? grabbing all you can in the copied quite a lot. Bobby's show involves unfairly short space of time i the contestants controlling you're allotted. Get  GRAPHICS a little remote ball kind of through all that, and you 1 SOUND affair through four get to to onto next week's gruelling tasks, being show. Yeeaaah!  PLAYABILITY careful not to hit any mines Between some of the VALUE or other balls. Remember levels, and these do come gang, if the ball goes, you as welcome breathers, are L O VERALL --go, as Bobby says. The first task is relatively COULDDDDDDDDD aa THE BOBBY HOLOTNG HOTHING ** ** MORE 402**(u0033900* A Bobby says \"Opportunity Knocks!\" ok** $7503 22 AEZ 22 EEE ZZ SHOW E HOLDING NOTHING ** **SCORÉ* ** SCORÉ ***** :* *60000100** *SCORE :H: A Bobby Yazz: it's a \"gruelling task\" and no mistake. \"get your hands off my simple. A simple grid is bully' Bowen, Ted \"I can displayed, and the only go up to 123 becausel contestants have a very haven't got a brain\" short time to turn all the Rogers and Nicholas \"I'm squares from blue to red, alive and well, where am simply by rolling the ball 1?\" Parsons, it's difficult not over them. Opposition to. Even more so with the comes in the form of some prizes at stake nowadays. nasties that, just like you, Remember the good old can change the square's days, when you'd be colour, except they 1* **\"0021132* * happy with a hand crafted change all the red ones Caribbean wooden mixing back to blue. Frustration spoon. Nowadays it's all city. A In the fine tradition of games show hosts, Bobby lack a brain. hi-fis with built in vacuum The second, the commercials. Short UPDATE cleaners and combination affectionately termed animated films, almost plant pots/coat hangers. In blind level, has the blipverts, they advertise The Bobby Yazz show is the future, though, things contestants floating eerily such greats as \"Soapo III the Bobby Yazz show is the Bobby Yo will be a lot different. It above some distant planet better than our last rubbish the Bobby Yazz show. won't just be the prizes on an invisible maze. They it nearly works\" and Since there's no messing you'll lose if you don't get have a short time limit to \"Rocky XI, the musical.\" 301 or more with 27 darts, find their way to the exit. with success, all three Unfortunately, there aren't it'll be your life. It's all in the normally on the other side enough of them to make versions are very similar name of good clean family of the screen. them interesting for any bar graphical entertainment, though, so Then it's on to the key great length of time. I differences. No plans for a no-one's complaining. level. On here, the found that to be the main 16-bit version though. The most popular contestants have to collect problem with this game. It's Expect a more gameshow of the future, all the keys and get to the just too short and repetitive colourful, blocky C64 as however, is the Bobby Yazz exit before the time runs to be in any way addictive per usual. "


"The games they said couldn't be written QUADRALIEN STARGOOSE! STARRAY CREDITS WADRALIES BONO SCORE 00000 SHIELD 8550 ST Screen Shot You are entering Jupiterspace. Your destination, Astra , the vast cybernetic nuclear-fission complex they orbited mid-21st century. Something strange has happened there. Astra has sealed itself off from the outside world, the control mechanisms won't respond, the temperatures rising. Meltdown is nigh. But it's worse than that, for in the very heart of the reactor itself, the sinister QUADRALIEN forces have established their foothold in our solar-system. You have just six droids to sort it out. QUADRALIEN is ACTIONSTRATEGY-TENSION-JEST Amiga Screen Shot What happens when a team that's notched up two 16-BIT number ones decides to tackle the classic theme of the vertical scroll-and-blast? The result is StarGoose!, the latest from Steve Cain and GP (Kenny) Everett, and boy is it wierd! Until you've tackled the mindboggling variety of defence forces in the 3-D world of Nom , you're still in Straight City. StarGoose! ingredients include: The beefiest scrollFULL screen width and Variable speed, Unique relief landscapes, Unique supply tunnels and The Eyes! ST, Amiga .95 PC .95 Amiga Screen Shot We won't mention the supersmooth parallax scrolling...the stunning backdrops...the amazing hi-res graphics...the never-heard-before sounds...the gameplay that turns humans into jelly...the aliens that just get wierder...the unique Last Game Option... We'll just say: \"Quite possibly the best arcade action yet written for any micro\" Amiga (2 disks + Audio Cassette) .95 ST .95 C64 (Disk + Audio Cassette) .95 PC .95 ST, Amiga .95 PC .95 MASTER WORKS FOR THE MILLENIUM Please send me: NAME & ADDRESS STARRAY |STARGOOSE! Postcode QUADRALIEN ACCESS/VISA CARD NUMBER IIIIIIIIMII I enclose a cheque for  made payable to Logotron Lt WHY NOT PHONE OUR CREDIT CARD HOTLINE FOR PROMPT DELIVERY : (0933) 79300 LOGOTRON RECREATION LOGOTRON LTD, DALES BREWERY, GWYDIR STREET, CAMBRIDGE, CB1 2LJ "


"EXPLORATION OF THE COSMOS Only the chosen few are trained to operate the Lockhead C-104 Tomahawk the 21st century's most awesome combat and exploration vehicle. Only the chosen few experience the excitement and thrill of three dimensional graphics, the delicate manoeuvring of spacecraft and remote pilot vehicles and the cut and thrust of intergalactic combat. Orly the chosen few have the opportunity to undertake a journey with the most advanced space flight simulator known to man. Only the chosen few are selected for ...... CBM 64/128 TAPE .99 DISK .99 SPECTRUM TAPE .99 +3 DISK .99 AMSTRAD TAPE .99 DISK .99 PC .99 AMIGA $24.99 A ACCESS Software Incorporated "


"Can you live with the reality of ..... SCREEN SHOTS FROM CBM VERSION. ECHEL JEOOPTAC012213 C HOOSE 200 OD 5 L05 MRIN SCRE TEODO ODID3115CHOOL BH 50D 3DD HRIN SCPO ILLUSTRATION: PETER ANDREW JONES. COPYRIGHT: SOLAR WIND LTD.\"  1987 Access Software Inc. U.S. El GOLD U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 TAX. Tel: 021 356 3388 "


"Cobby -GASTLE CHUBBY GRISTIE IS PROBABLY THE FATTEST AND MOST OBNOXIOUS CAR PARK ATTENDANT YOU'LL EVER COME ACROSS! A CLASSICAL PLATFORM GAME WITH DANGER AT EVERY TURN. AVAILABLE NOW ON ATARI ST + AMIGA .95 C64 DISK + AMS CPC DISK .95 C64 CASSETTE .95; AMS CPC CASSETTE, SPECTRUM + MSX .95 MC.P. CAR PARKS JOBS WOR SERRED HV ain pain 128 RE: 403 WTTTTTTT Geishes cases see e t par here BRONE: 1182 Screenshots taken from Commodore TOWER LYRAMIDS DELIVERY OF THE 4 PYRAMIDS IS EASY BUT ACTIVATING THEM BEFORE YOU HAND THEM OVER IS A DIFFERENT MATTER! IN THIS ARCADE ADVENTURE, GUIDE YOUR ROBOTIC SPHEROID AROUND 128 SCREENS OF MIND-BENDINGLY CONVOLUTED LANDSCAPE, AVOIDING THE MANY HIDDEN DANGEROUS OBSTACLES AND ACTIVATE ALL THE POWER POINTS IN THE PYRAMIDS. AVAILABLE IN SEPTEMBER ON: 00032 2 3 Ep  C64 DISK .95 C64 CASSETTE .95 SPECTRUM 48/128K AND + 2 .95 on 00001 9670 GRANDSLAM Order your copy of Chubby Gristle and/or Power Pyramids now be sending a cheque or postal order to Grandslam Entertainments Ltd, Units 1/2, Conlon Developments, Watery Lane, Darwen, Lancs. BB3 2ET or phone 01-247 6434 our credit card hot line (Access or Visa) 01010 19670 1948 Screenshots taken from Spectrum km Home 12-18 PAUL STREET, LONDON EC2 4JS "


"Scenario aside, 1943 is a vertically scrolling shoot 'em-up with some novel twists, the most notable of these being the simultaneous two-player option that allows you to team up with a mate and cause twice as much damage. Planes fly down the  MACHINES: SPECTRUM screen and are 48/128/+3, AMSTRAD CPC, easily disposed of by C64/128 ATARI ST, AMIGA.  SUPPLIER: US letting rip with a quick GOLD/CAPCOM. volley of machine gun fire. PRICES: SPECTRUM 48/128 Slightly more difficult to hit $8.99 CASS +3 $12.99 DISK, are the formation planes C64/128 .99 CASS $14.99, that spiral around the DISK AMSTRAD CPC $9.99 screen. Shooting an entire CASS $14.99 DISK, ATARI ST wave of these leaves $19.99, AMIGA $24.99. VERSION TESTED: behind a POW symbol SPECTRUM 48/428. which can be collected to REVIEWER: GARY WHITTA. upgrade the plane's weapons. Fortunately, Anybody who's been a unlike it's predecessor, computer gamer for any 1943 works on a system reasonable length of time whereby crashing into an will remember that 1942, enemy plane or getting hit Capcom's original (and by a bullet won't kill you. ageing) coin-op was Instead you're given just licenced and converted one life that is represented by Elite quite a while back. as an energy bar which is 1943 was released by depleted every time you Capcom fairly recently take a hit; when the energy and was snapped up by US hits zero, the game is over. Gold as part of their At the end of each level mass-licencing deal with you must attack a fleet of Capcom. heavily-armed warships by 1943 is basically very blowing away the symbols much in the same mould on the decks of each. of its predecessor Managing to do this so much so that it's completes the level, boosts almost exactly the your score and energy and same game, albeit with sends you onto the next several improvements and level. Later levels see the gameplay tweaks. The unwelcome arrival of huge game is set in World War II megabomber planes that and recreates the famous take up almost the entire Battle of Midway. Taking screen, spewing out bullets control of a fighter with gay abandon and bomber, the player's requires continous mission is to fly deep into machine gun fire to shoot it enemy territory and wreak down in flames (a very havoc. satisfying experience). 1943 is a very good game indeed, but doesn't offer enough improvements over the original. Graphically everything is fine, although things can get a bit confusing at times. Sound is adequate and there's certainly enough gameplay to keep you going, although it is a mite easy due to the new 'energy bar' system. The two-player option is well executed, but even so the game overall is a bit dated. One for the younger gamers perhaps?  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY  OVERALL UPDATE Amstrad and Commodore versions should play very similarly, but boast improved graphics and sound. The 16-bit versions are looking very promising. 000000 RRRR 8988098 1943 0021000 8000000 0000000 RRRR RRRR 0800068 0000000 53 "


"| TRYBRIDGE SOFTWARE DISTRIBUTION 6.50 9.95 Spectrum Cass Disk Amstrad Cass Disk Atari ST 6.50 IBM PC o  g d) 6.50 6.50 6.95 6.40 i 398 6.95 6.50 9.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 13.95 Amiga 16.95 16.95 9.95 8 CBM 64 Cass Disk 14.25 14.25 6.50 9.95 6.50 9.95 15.00 19.00 6.95 10.45 6.95 10.45 10.45 13.95 3.50 9.95 6.50 6.50 9.95 9.95 6. U 13.95 10.45 16.95 9.95 I U 16.95 21.95 Rampage Rastan Saga Rolling Thunder Ring Wars Red October Revs Salamander Summer Olympiad Soldier of Light Skatecrazy Salamander Super Hang On Star Wars Streetfighter Sinbad Throne Superstar Ice Hockey Strip Poker 2 Street Basket Ball Solid Gold Star Glider Sentinel Silent Service Silicon Dreams 16.95 13.95 13.95 13.95 13.95 16.95 13.95 13.95 10.00 13.95 88888888888 88888 88888888888888 ciocco 889 8888  g d 88888 9.95 9.95 8888 88 9.95 0    10.95 6.95 6.95 6.50 9.95 . CO 001  8.95 GA 9.95 6   ooooooo 8 8888888888888888888 16.95 16.95 9.00 10.45 16.95 18.95 13.95 9.00 16.95 9.95 11.95 3.95 9.95 9.95 8.95 13 9.95 295 6.50 9.50 6.95 9.95 9.95 16.95 19.95 13.95 10.00 16.95 16.95 10.45 720  8888888 0 0 988 8888 0 0 8.95 dil 88 doo NUR 220 88988 991 999 999 W UMNO 8888888 88888888888 ON 9.95 10.95 13.95 13.95 7.45 14.95 9.00 10.95 19.95 oi 888 24.95 6.95 15.95 13.95 oi o 95                   88888888888888888888888 88888888888888888888          0 9          6.00 8.96 6.959.95 6.95 6.95 10.45 6.95 10.45 6.50 9.95 6.50 9.95 9.95 13.95 8.95 9.95 16.95 16.95 9.95 9.95 6.95 6.95 6.95 10.45 6.95 6.00 9.95 6.95 10.45 6.959.95 6.959.95 9.95 13.95 13.95 13.95 9.95 American Civil War Vol 1 American Civil War Vol 2 Alien Syndrome Advanced Tactical Fighter Advanced Art Studio Arctic Fox Apollo 18 Airborne Ranger Army Moves Arkanoid Arkanoid 2 Revenge Barbarian Psygnosis Battletron Battle in Normandy Black Tiger Beyond Ice Palace Blood Brothers Bionic Commando Best of Elite Vol 1 Barbarian 1 or 2 Bards Tale 1 or 2 Bards tale 3 Bangkok Knights Bubble Bobble B'Dash Con Kit Batman Carrier Command Carriers at War Crosswize Combat School California Games Cybernoid Chuch Yeager Chessmaster 2000 Daley Thompson 88 Dark Side Driller Dark Sceptre Dragonslair 1 or 2 Druid Eddie Edwards Ski Empire Strikes Back Europe Ablaze Euro 5-a-Side Enlightenment Elite 6 Pack 1 or 2 or 3 Enduro Racer Elite Earth Orbit Station Fernandez Must Die 4x4 off Road Racing Flying Shark Fox Fights Back Football Director F15 Strike Eagle Football Manager Football Manager 2 Flintstones Fivestar 1, 2 or 3 Get Dexter 2 G.I. Hero Gold Silver Bronze GT Giana Sisters G. Linekar Skills Gauntlet Il Gryzor Game Set & Match Guild of Thieves Gunship Halls of Montezuma Hawkeye Hercules Headcoach Heroes of Lance Hotshot Infiltrator 2 18.95 16.95 3.00 9.95 9.95 8 88 88888 88 ONW 888 88888 ON 16.95 9.95  888 9.95 14 25 OLD DDD 888888888 4.95 9.95 9.95 CON UN 88 888888888888888 88 O 9.95 0 0 0 8888888 0 8.95 10.45 12.95 9.95 16.95 16.95 13.95 17.45 13.95 17.45 10.45 19.50 13.95 13.95 17.45 13.95 13.95 13.95 13.95 13.95 10.45 13.95 13.95 17.45 10.45 11.95 12.95 6.95 9.95 6.95 9.95 5.00 9.95 6.95 9.95 6.00 9.95 2.95 6.95 6.959.95 6.50 9.95 6.95 888888888888888888 6.00 6.95 9.95 6.95 6.959.95 8.95 6.95 9.95 9.95 10.45 9.95 10.45 9.95 6.50 9.95 8.00 9.95 0 389 Na 13.95 0 000      0 0 95 9.95 6.50 6.95 9.95 9.95 6.95 6.95 9.95 6.00 9.95 10.45 16.95 6.959.95 6.95 9.95 6.959.95 6.00 12.95 17.45 12.95 10.45 6.25 3.50 6.50 12.95 5.50 8.95 Atari ST 16.95 12.95 6.95 8.95 Amiga 16.95 13.95 6.00 9.95 IBM PC  16.95 CON UN 16.95  * 6.95 8.95 10.45 12.95 6.95 8.25 6.95 8.95 6.959.95 8.95 11.95 13.95 13.95 14.25 9.95 9.95 Title Ferrari Formula One Foundations Waste Flying Shark Galdregons Domain Garfield Giganoid Gryzor Gunship GT Giana Sisters G Linekar Skills Golden Path Gold Runner 2 Guild of Thieves 16.95 Garrison 2 Hacker Helter Skelter Heroes of Lance Hitchiker Hotshot Hollywood Hijinx Hunt For Red October Interceptor Impact Ikari Warriors Impossible Mission 2 International Soccer Jet Joe Blade Jinxter Jewels of Darkness Knightorc Kristal Land of Legends L'Board Birdie Lounge Lizards Living Daylights Leather Goddess Legend of the Sword Leathernecks Marble Madness Mars Cops Mercenary Comp Mickey Mouse Mindfighter Motorbike Madness Music Con Set 1943 Nebulus Netherworld Nigel Mansell Nightraider Oids Ooops Outrun Overlander Pepsi Mad Mix Peter Beardsley Soccer Phantasm Powerdrome Power Struggle Photon Paint Planetarium Pool of Radiance Pro Copy Platoon Predator Psion Chess Police Quest Pandora Pawn Quadralien Quantum Paint Rocket Ranger Road Blasters Rolling Thunder Rockford Return to Genesis Return to Atlantis Roadwars Sargon Ill Ches Skychase Star Ray Stealth Fighter STOS Super Hangon Space Harrier Streetfighter Strip Poker 2 Summer Olympiad Sherlock Riddle Shadowgate ST Adv Creator Sentinel Scrabble Deluxe Silent Service Starfleet Starglider Starglider 2 Star trek SDI Star Wars Space Quest 11 Time Stood Still Tracers Thundercats Taipan Tetris Three Stooges Trivial Pursuit Trinity Testdrive Time and Magik TT Racer 2 Univ Military Sim Uridium Uninvited Virus Vixen Vroom Verminator Warlocks Quest Where Time Stood Still Wrath of Nikademus Whirligig Winter Olympiad Wizball Xenon Zork 1 Zork 2 Zork 3 Zynaps 88 16.95 29.95 13.95 13.95 16.95 14.95 000 88888 13.95 13.95 14.95 32.50 13.95 13.95 16.95 16.95 20.95 15.95 11.95 16.95 15.95 11.95 13.95 13.95 15.95 17.45 5.50 9.95 & 2.95 17.45 OOONO 14.00 6.00 S &&&&88 Shoot 'em up Con Kit Stealth Fighter Skate or Die Stalingrad Street Soccer Super Soccer Spy v Spy Artic Spy v Spy Trilogy 3 Stooges 10 great Games 1 or 2 20 Chartbusters Terrapods Test Drive Timescanner Time Stood Still Train Escape To Hell & Back The Games Winter Trigger Happy Time and Magik Tracksuit Manager Trantor Target Renegade Thundercats TWrecks Typhoon Ultimate Collection Unitrax Vampires Empire Vindicator Virus Vixen Venom Wasteland World Class L'Board Wonderboy World Tour Golf Wizball We Are The Champions Whirligig Title Ady Art Studio Alt Reality Alt World Games Alien Syndrome Aaargh! Art Director Arctic Fox Adv Cons Set Army Moves Arkanoid Revenge Arkanoid Bombjack Buggy Boy Bubble Bobble Bionic Commando Bermuda Project Beyond Ice Palace Backlash BMX Simulator Black Lamp Barbarian Pal Barbarian 2 Pal Battleships Ballyhoo Borrowed Time Bards Tale 1 or 2 Corruption California Games Captain Blood Carrier Command Chubby Gristle Combat School Chuck Yeagers Aft Chasemaster 2000 Daley Thompson 99 Debit Deck Special Dark Castle Degae Elite Defender of Crown Deja Vu Deluxe Video Deluxe print Deluxe Production Deluxe Paint 2 Dizzy Droids Dungeon Master Deluxe Music Con Set Eagles Nest Echoes Elite Empire (Intersteel Empire Strikes Back Enlightenment Echelon EPT Earl Weaver Basketball Epyx Collection 5 Star ST Pantacvision Flight Sim 2 Scenery Disc 7 or 11 Scenery Disc Europe Scenery Disc Japan Faery Tale Adv Football Manager 2 F15 Strike Eagle Fleet Street Pub/Editor 14.95 13.95 13.95 17.45 13.95 13.95 13.95 13.95     12.50 8888888889 SW 13.95 8888 8888888 888888 88 9.95 14.95 w 8888888888  /  2.95 6.95 6.50 9.00 6.50 6.50 DEN 13.95 8.95 12.95 13.95 10.45 13.95 13.95 13.95 16.95 6.50 13.95 9.95 9.95 13.95 9.00 9.00 16.95 16.95 13.95 14.95 13.95 17.45 13.95 19.95 13.95 13.95 13.95 10.45 13.95 16.95 16.95 9.959.95 10.45 16.95 OONO O O O 8 88888888888888 O O O O O O e 9.95 10.45 13.95 16.95 16.95 16.95 16.95 10.95 16.95 16.95 16.95 16.95 16.95 15.95 6.50 9 6.50 9 8.50 6.95 6.959.95 6.50 12.95 9.95 11.95 88888 00 8888 WW SSSSSS 8 13.95 13.95 16.95 16.95 15.95 15.95 8888888888888   uu 88888 6.00 9.95 60 6.95      0888888888888888888 \" ! 9.95 19.95 13.95 14.95 International Soccer Impact International Karate Imperial Mission 11 Ikari Warriors Jewels of Darkness Konami Collection Knightmare Karnov Knightorc LA Crackdown L'Board Par 3 L'Board Par 4 Live Ammo Last Ninja Last Ninja 2 Lazer Score Mickey Mouse Magnificent Morpheus Match day Mega Apocalypse Mini Putt 1943 19 Bootcamp Netherworld Nigel Mansell Nebulus Now 5 Nightraider Ooops Operation Wolf Overlander Outrun Pepsi Mad Mix Peter Beardsley Pool of Radiance Power Pyramids Patton VS Rommel Pacland Platoon Predator President Missing Psycho Pigs Pink Panther PHM Plus Pawn Pirates Power at Sea Paper Boy Road Blasters Rimrunner Reach for the Stars Rommel 20.50 6.50 9.95 6.95 10.45 6.959.95 6.95 9.95 6.95 9.95 6.95 10.45 6.50 9.95 6.50 6.95 9.95 6.95 9.95 9.95 6.959.95 6.95 10.45 6.95 9.95 39.95 15.95 88888888888888888888888 16.95 16.95 13.95 19.50 8888 o 10 ) 888 8888888 88889888 88888 99988      S88 17.45 17.45 9 g gà s  ssha La 888 9.95 16.50 888899888888888888 14.95 15.95 6.00 6.00 6.95 9.50 9.95 10.95 10.95 9.95 10.45 9.95 9.95 10.95 13.95 13.95 6.50 6.95 6.95 6.50 6.95 9.95 9.95 10.45 14.00 14.00 26.35 10.50 10.45 29.95 26.35 15.35 15.35 15.35 29.35 13.95 17.45 13.95 13.95 13.95 16.95 6.00 9.95 8888888 9.95 9.95 6.50 c $ 8.95 14.25 14.25 12.50 16.95 85.00 $ Please send cheque, PO/Access Visa No. and expiry date to: TRYBRIDGE LTD, 72 NORTH STREET, ROMFORD, ESSEX RM1 1DA. Please state make and model of computer when ordering. P&P inc UK on orders over .00. Less than .00 and Europe andd  per item. Elsewhere please add .00 per item for airmail. TEL. ORDERS: 0708 765271 Special Offer On orders received prior to 10th October 1988.  off orders over .  off orders over .  off orders over . "


" MACHINES: COMMODORE jumping obstacles, driving you find yourself 64/SPECTRUM. and fighting give your plummeting off the bars as  SUPPLIER: CASCADE. PRICES: SPECTRUM co-ordination rating, your soon as you build up a $9.99/$14.99 DISK, CBM 64 stamina is calculated from decent speed. $9.99/514.99 DISK, AMIGA how long you compete in Part two, the shooting $19.99. each routine, and your range is impressive VERSIONS TESTED: CBM morale from your overall technically, but a little dull 64/SPECTRUM. REVIEWER: CHRIS JENKINS. performance. After each to play. An enlarged event you earn a rating section of the background It's been a long time from 1 (Abysmal) to 10 is shown through your a time limit, using offensive coming, but 19 is finally (Exceptional), and your infra-red sniper scope as moves including kicks, here. By the time it's in the overall score can be saved you pan around the view. butts, jabs and hooks. If you shops, it will have been a and used in the Using your limited knock him down you get a year in the making from forthcoming sequel 19 Part ammunition supply, you bonus: if his energy level is one PCW Show to the next two Combat Zone. must knock off the pop-up higher than yours at the and while this four-event DAMAGE military training simulation SPEED 45 MI has several good things going for it, given that much time it should have been not just acceptable, but astounding. Inspired by the Paul Hardcastle song of the same name. 19 is the story of a draftee drawn into the Vietnam war. He looks pretty miserable about it SCORE PRIVATE EUGEXE on the title screen, but so 001042 would you if you'd had all 7850782 www A Racing along in a rusty old jeep. soldiers, while avoiding end of a bout, you're out. taking out women or As you often find, the children, which will Spectrum version of the decrease your score by game has a nicer feel to it, 1,000 points (unlike in the despite the colour and real war, where they gave sound limitations. The real you medals). problem, though, is that 19 Next up is the jeep Part One is basically a driving section. We've seen compilation of four plenty of these unremarkable games scrolling-roadway efforts in rather than one good one. the past, and this is Maybe the proposed 19 basically just more of the Part Two The Combat same thing: accelerate Zone will prove better A N-n-not a bad game. along the road, pick up value for money. your hair shorn off. First, the assault course. helmets, boots, ammo ---CASPEC You don't get any of the On this left-to-right scrolling boxes, dog tags, jerry cans GRAPHICS battlezone atmosphere event there are eight and stars for bonus points, here, though — in part one courses, each to be avoid the sides of the > SOUND what you get is several completed against a roads, haybales, cones, VALUE training exercises, similar decreasing time limit. The tyres and fences which  PLAYABILITY 7 in style and content to trick is to gauge your slow you down, and the  OVERALL Ocean's coin-opconversion position and time your rocks, logs, tree-stumps Combat School. After an presses on the fire button and fences which UPDATE.. astonishing Rob Hubbard correctly so that, as you run bring you to a standstill. Spectrum and rendition of the music, up to each obstacle, your Each bit of damage slows Commodore versions are complete with synthesised power meter rises to the your jeep down, and if you available now with helicopters, gunfire and correct amount to get you sustain total damage 16-bit versions screams, you can select through. Among the you're out of action. coming up before and name up to four challenges is a brick wall, Lastly, unarmed combat. Christmas, the Amiga competitors. In each of the vaulting horses, stepping Though this is a decent conversion first. 19 Part four training exercises to posts, ditches and monkey one-to-one beat-'em-up Two The Combat Zone come, you will be assessed bars. Animation in this routine, there's nothing will be previewed at the in three areas. Your section is fairly good, but new to it: light eight bouts PC Show and is due for accuracy in shooting, control is a little tricky . with the instructor against release next year. 96 6 6 } "


"The world's leading brand for the real games competitor ELITE PROFESSIONAL Sr: 4 Joy JOYSTAR IBM JOYSTICK -X JOYBOARD Have you got your hands on one yet? FUROMAX .. . .. .. . .. . .. . BESSINGBY INDUSTRIAL ESTATE, BRIDLINGTON NORTH HUMBERSIDE YO16 4SJ, ENGLAND TELEPHONE: 0262 601006/602541 FAX NO. 0262 400068 . Please send me full details.... HDD ON IG Name Address ..... "


"OFFICIAL Advanced Dungeons Dragons COMPUTER PRODUCT In the mystical world of Krynn an epic battle rages between the forces of good and evil. Eight brave companions enter the treacherous ruins of the temple of Xak Tsaroth seeking the precious Disks of Mishakal the only end to this infernal struggle. Draconian monsters, skeletal undead, powerful magic and countless other terrors face the adventurers but the way is barred by the ancient black dragon, Khisanth. Find the key to destroy Khisanth or you are doomed to failure. COMPUTER PRODUCT inced Dungeons Dragons UEDO ES OF THE LANCE ARCADE ACTION / Dungeons Dragons Advanced OFFICIAL COMPUTER PRODUCT POOL OF RADIAYCE CBM 64/128 9.99c, 14.994 SPECTRUM 48/128 .99c, +3 .99d AMSTRAD .99c, .99d IBM PC & COMPATIBLES .99d AMIGA .99d . ATARI ST .99d PREROES OFTRE L AMORE A FORGOTTEN REALMS sy Role Playing Epic. VOLI The fabled city of Phlan has been overrun by monsters your a quest: discover the identity of this evil force. No detail is missed, 6 player characters; non player characters; the Adventurers' Journal packed with history, maps and clues, and the Translation Wheel. The gameplay is exhilarating and the graphics state-of-the-art portrait displays, 3D-perspective, tactical combat display and personalised weapons: the ultimate breakthrough in fantasy role playing computer games. CBM 64/128 .99c .99d AMIGA .99d  ATARI ST .99d IBM PC & COMPATIBLES .99d OFRADIANCE IL C SIMULATIONS, INC. FANTASY ROLE PLAYING U.S.:  1988 TSR, Inc. All rights reserved. Advanced Dungeons and Dragons is a trademark owned by TSR, Inc. Lake Geneva, WI, U.S.A. and under license from SSI, Inc. Mountain View, CA, U.S.A. GOLD U.S.Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388. STRATEGIE SMULATON NE "


"C+VG HIT! Pavier STAR igh-ponderful solities... SUPPLIER: LOGOTRON.  MACHINE: AMIGAIATARI ST/COMMODORE 64/IBM PC. PRICE: $25.95 AMIGA, $24.95 PC, $19.95 ST/C64.  VERSION TESTED: AMIGA. REVIEWER: JULIAN RIGNALL. the classic two-way horizontally scrolling gameplay is properly exploited, it gives far more blast-for-blast, thrills and each of which is played showing all alien activity, spills than any other shoot four times before the next so that the player can spot 'em up format can ever one is tackled. Although impending troublespots or hope to produce. And in the levels look different, the identify approaching these days of of gameplay on all is hazards and swiftly take high-powered machines fundamentally the same. the appropriate action. with wonderful sound and The player takes control of Each screen consists of graphics capabilities, the StarRay ship and several attack waves of there's potential to create defends ground aliens, which appear one a Defender style shoot 'em installations from after the other. Should all up to end all shoot 'em ups. marauding aliens by flying enemy craft be destroyed, Star Ray goes some way over the two-way a points bonus is given in to reaching this ideal, and horizontally scrolling relation to the amount of is a game that'll appease wrap-around planet and installations remaining. the most demanding of destroying all hostile As the player progresses blasting fanatics. intruders. through the levels, many The action is set over At the bottom of the different types of alien craft seven different levels, screen is a radar display are encountered. Landers defends ons troms by flying Apart from Dropzone on the C64 and Atari 8-bit, there have been very few good Defender type games. Personally I think this is a great shame if THERM SHIELD PORIZERS) | SCORE Battling over the jungle world. VAPORIZERS SCORE Star Ray takes out a perverted emplacement STREET FIGHTER  SUPPLIER: CAPCOM/GO! twist to the rather At the start, the player other's health meters by MACHINES: hackneyed one-on-one chooses a location for his punching and kicking. SPECTRUM/COMMODORE beat 'em up formula. 64/AMSTRAD/ATARI first fight, and is whisked When a fighter's bar is ST/AMIGA. The scenario is pretty away to commence battle. completely drained, his PRICE: $8.95 SPEC CASS, ordinary: the player takes The two opponents face opponent wins. Each fight $9.99 AMS/C64 CASS, $12.99 the role of a street fighter one another and have to is the best of three bouts, SPEC DISK, $14.99 AMS/C64 who travels around the knock points off each and if the player wins he DISK. 319.99 ST, $24.99 world to battle other AMIGA. VERSIONS TESTED: ST/ fighters. This basically DO PLAYERS AMIGA. means fighting ten REVIEWER: JULIAN different opponents over RIGNALL. five suitably-drawn Capcom's coin-op, Street backdrops, representing Fighter didn't exactly take Japan, USA, England, the arcades by storm, but China and Thailand. The its pneumatic buttons first four can be played in the harder you hit them, any order, with Thailand the more effective your (having the two top on-screen punch fighters) being the last port certainly added a new of call. IVE Street Fighting's never been so easy. "


"RAY C+VG HIT! pure blaster yet produced on 16-bit. It's slick and UPDATE... beautifully presented. Steve Bak, author of Vivid parallax-scrolling Return to Genesis, appear on every screen takes too lond to complete backdrops and crisp Leathernecks and and attack ground a screen), Living Crystals, sprites give a staggering Goldrunner is currently installations by hovering Siliucon Worms and Radar visual effect, the sampled working on the Atari ST over the target and Interference Satellites sound effects are stunning conversion, so hopes are draining all its energy. If (shoot one and the radar and the gameplay is fast pretty high-the scrolling the Lander isn't shot before screen is blacked out for and furious and really gets should be pretty good if its deed is done, the some seconds — at great the adrenalin flowing! the year-old Return to installation is either inconvenience), amongst Genesis is anything to go destroyed, or is 'perverted' many others. by. and becomes hostile. If all Highscore fiends will be Both the C64 and IBM eight installations are pleased to know that top PC versions will obviously destroyed, the game ends. scores are automatically GRAPHICS 8 lose out on the graphics Other aliens include saved to disk, and there's stakes compared with the Bombers, Krellian also a 'last game option' SOUND ST and Amiga, but Motherships (pods that split which allows a current VALUE Logotron hopes to retain open and release tiny game to be saved and all the thrills and green ships), Blue Hunters > PLAYABILITY continued at another time. playability of the 16-bit (which appear if the player StarRay is by far the best OVERALL versions. 0000000 SHIELD SHIELD 2920 SCORE VAPORIZERS Blue Moon APORIZERS 1 SCORE Destroy that Airbus for a bonus. goes on to tackle the next strength as possible. fighter. Lose and it's game When I saw screenshots over. of the 16-bit versions, I was When a country's two expecting great things fighters have been the sprites and backdrops defeated, a bonus round is looked almost identical to played where the fighter the coin-op. However, all smashes a pile of concrete expectations were dashed blocks. At the top of the as soon as they started screen is a rapidlymoving. Although the fluctuating energy bar. The sprites are nicely drawn, player has to stop it at its the animation on both the peak by a carefully-timed Amiga and ST is apallingly press of the fire button to bad, with huge gaps give the fighter as much between frames resulting UU9999 go PLAYER EHEHY TINE 95. in a spasmodic and totally likely be sick of the sight of unrealistic effect. The the machine before you'd fighters mince about in a used up all your credits very un-macho fashion so why spend that much of and the backdrops jerk an unchallenging and rather than scroll. incompetent computer That could be forgiven if version which has no the game was fun but no. lasting appeal Either GO! has grossly whatsoever? underestimated the ability of the average games player, or didn't bother to playtest the game. Street I GRAPHICS Fighter is unbelievably SOUND easy especially when you discover that the VALUE crouching punch PLAYABILITY (accessed by pressing fire OVERALL and moving the joystick diagonally downwards) defeats nine of the ten fighters without them UPDATE .. actually being able to touch you! Street Fighter has already If you went and put  been released on all 8-bit (or  if you're an Amiga formats to a generally owner) into a Street Fighter warm reception. All are coin-op, you'd more than multiloads. NNSA 1UE The infamous crouch kick in operation. "


"00000000000 OURHOURS WANTED IN THE GREAT Microdealer COVER UP! FOR INVOLVEMENT or IS THIS YOU? For years, unnoticed by the authorities, valuable goods were disappearing from shelves Now MICRODEALER INTERNATIONAL has revealed the extent of this massive 'scam' and discovered the stash. of unsuspecting stores thoughout the U.K.! No-one has come forward to claim the Loot. Your local Microdealer dealer has the 'lowdown' Be on the lookout for signs of the Cover Up and pick up your Cover Up card now. on the greatest games racket since Al Capone! Collect Cover Up tokens to complete your card entitling you to a piece of the action'. MEGA games form major software houses, Joysticks, T-Shirts and an opportunity REWARDS to WIN a fantastic prize in the MICRODEALER COVER-UP competition! T Microdealer COVER UP with one of the range of EXCLUSIVE T-SHIRTS only available from your local Microdealer Dealer GO AND SEE HIM NOW! 25 PROMOTED BY Microdealer MICRO PROSE GRANDSLAM ENTERTAINMENTS LIMITED SIMULATION SUPPORTED BY:AREHIRD PALACE T .S. EPYX GOLD SILVERBIRD "


"FREE GAMES FOR C+VG WORTH UP TO 68.95 SUBSCRIBERS MAGNETRON Warning! To read any further is to invite the future to erupt through your letterbox, pulverise your senses, unveil untold pleasures and torment your emotions. All that and a FREE game! So if you want tomorow today and delivered right to your home each and every month, you dare not miss the Computer + Video Games Subscriptions offer. And if you take out a year's subscription right now you'll get a sensational free Firebird game, just make your choice from the selection below. 10. (Commodore 64). This is a mega wham bam boom shoot 'em up with really tasty graphics. Crosswize (Spectrum). It's mash the monster time as the aliens come at you thick and fast. Magnetron (Commodore 64 and Spectrum). Steve Turner's new game. You control an engineering droid called KLP2 on a mission to deactivate reactors powering a deadly weapon. Lot's of hack and attack. Samurai Warrior (Commodore 64). Meet the funny bunny with deadly martial arts skills. Hareraising fun! Just fill in the coupon below to get your subscription to the world's best computer games mag and your sensational FREE game. COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES SUMARAI WARRIOR CROSSWIZE My choice of FREE Firebird game is: (one game only per subscription) SC/10 10 (Commodore 64). SC/11 Crosswize (Spectrum). SC/12 Magnetron (C64/Spectrum). Please specify which machine. SC/13 Sumarai Warrior (Commodore 64). Your free game will be sent under separate cover please allow 28 days. Please start my subscription from the .........issue. Tick appropriate box: One year U.K. & Eire .99. One year Europe .99. Rest of World Surface Mail) .00. O One year Rest of World .00. , (Air Mail). I enclose my cheque/postal order payable to: COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES for ........... Please debit my Access/Visa Account. Amount ....... Expiry Date....... Card Number............................ Name ........ Address ..................... Return to COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES SUB OFFER, Subscriptions Department, PO Box 500, Leicester LE99 OAA. Or ring our special 24-hr Orderline Service and quote your credit card number. Tel: 0858 410888. ENQUIRIES: 0733 555161. .............. Signed. "


"333312 13 PE SCORE:90900 HALL 20 HI-SCORE:012258BUBELE:4 option which allows you to practice any of the game's screens. It's great to have a little originality every now and then, and Bubble Ghost is like a breath of fresh air. It's an exceedingly cute game, and the ghost sprite is really appealing. The animation is superb, especially when he's annoyed or is out of breath. The background graphics are a little unimaginative and plain, although you don't have much time to hang around and gawp at the scenery! The sound effects are sparse, but effective. The blowing and coughing noises are brilliant, and there's an amazing title tune, which has some incredible voices. The most imprtant thing is playability — and Bubble Ghost has plenty. Blowing the bubble around trying to avoid the myriad of obstacles is an engrossing and thoroughly enjoyable; I found myself constantly sneaking back to the Amiga for 'just one more BONNIK A Keep blowing that bubble. BUBBLEU The only disappointing aspect is that it only has 40 CORE:88509@uer screens. Although it does crne:912250 get very tough later on, requiring skill and, A Oh, dear... you've burst another bubble. planning to unsuccessfully blow the bubble to the exit. annoyance of the ghost, The practice mode is a who turns to face out of the good idea, and allows the screen and berates the player to attempt screens player! that he may never see. Blowing too much Bubble Ghost is a neat causes the ghost to cough little game; the appeal and he really does may wane after a while, cough while the bubble bur until then you'll be  SUPPLIER: ERE trapped. Since he's a floats on uncontrollably. forever blowing bubbles! INFORMATIQUE. ghost, he can't physically There's a time limit to GRAPHICS  MACHINES: ATARI ST, touch the bubble, and each screen, and if the SOUND AMIGA, AMSTRAD, IBM PC, instead has to blow it to the bubble is blown out of the C64, APPLE II. PRICES: ST $19.95, C64, exit of each screen. The exit before the unit expires, VALUE APPROX 8.95. ghost can move anywhere the time remaining is  PLAYABILITY  VERSION TESTED: AMIGA. on-screen even through converted into bonus OVERALL --REVIEWER: JULIAN RIGNALL. objects and rotates points. Take too long and Bubble Ghost is a when the left or right mouse no points are awarded. delightfully cute and buttons are pressed. As the ghost progresses Bubble Ghost is available highly original little game Space bar makes the ghost through the maze, screens across most computer from the French computer blow, and the bubble get harder and harder to formats, although as company Ere bobbles slowly across the negotiate, with spikes, many shops seem only to Informatique. screen in the direction it's pulsating objects and tiny be stocking ST and a Poor old Bubble Ghost blown. If the bubble gaps providing plenty of couple of other popular nas nis soul trapped within bobbles slowly across the hassle. The game finishes formats you may have to a bubble, and the only screen in the direction it's when the bubble has been or been order it. We've seen the way to free it is to guide the blown. If the bubble hits an blown through all 40 Amstrad and it plays almost identically the floating sphere to the exit object or the wall of the screens or all lives are lost. of the maze of screens only differences being screen it pops, losing one Just in case you never get graphical. This should be where he is currently of five lives, much to the that far, there's a useful the case with all formats. ONN too long and UPDATE: is available "


"BEST BYTE 2 QUARRY GARDENS, TONBRIDGE, KENT TNS 2SG ACCESS CARD HOTLINE 0732 770508 ALL ORDERS SENT BY FIRST CLASS POST WITHIN 24 HOURS (Subject to availability). 6.40 19 .8.25 12:50 Histoes of the PROBABLY THE CHEAPEST SOFTWARE PRICES IN THE UK. SPECIAL OFFERS TO C+VG READERS UP TO 40% OFF RRP ATARIST WRRP OUR AMIGA RRP. OUR SPECTRUM CASS DISKCBM 64 CASS DISKAMSTRAD CASS DISK 24.95 14.90 Alternate Reality-City 5 Star Compilation 19.95 11.90 19 7.40 6.40 9.50 20 Chart Busters Action Service 19.95 11.90 Army Moves 24.95 14.90 20 Chart Busters 7.40 20 Chart Busters 7.40 . Arcade Collection 6.90 11.50 Arkanoid Revenge Doh 19.95 11.90 Barbarian 11 19.99 11.90 Action Force 2 5.90 9.50 Arcade Collection 6.90 11.50 Barbarian II 6.40 9.50 19.95 11.90 Beyond Ice Palace Army Moves 24.99 14.90 Arcade Collection 6.90 11.50 Barbarian (Psyg.) 6.40 Beyond Ice Palace 6.40 9.50 Barbarian II 14.99 9.50 Black Jack Academy 24.99 14.90 Barbarian (Psyg.) 6.40 Barbarian II 6.40 8.50 Blood Brothers 8.25 12.25 Beyond Ice Palace 19.99 11.90 Black Lamp 19.95 11.90 Barbarian II 6.40 9.50 Beyond Ice Palace 6.40 7.90 Captain Blood 6.40 9.50 19.99 15.35 Bubble Ghost Bionic Commandos 24.95 14.90 Beyond Ice Palace 5.30 8.50 Bionic Commandos 8.25 12.25 Carrier Command 9.50 12.80 24.95 14.90 Buggy Boy Captain Blood 24.99 14.90 Bionic Commandos 7.45 Blood Brothers 8.25 12.25 Corruption 12.80 Carrier Command 24.95 14.90 Captain Blood 24.95 14.90 Blood Brothers 6.75 10.65 Carrier Command 9.50 12.80 Cybernoid 2 8.25 12.25 24.95 14.90 Carrier Command Corruption 24.95 14.90 Carrier Command 9.50 10.90 Corruption 10.90 DT Olympic Challenge 5.90 9.50 Cybernoid 19.99 15.35 Corruption 24.95 14.90 Corruption 10.90 Cybernoid 2 8.25 12.25 Darkside 6.40 9.50 DT Olympic Challenge 19.95 11.90 Cybernoid 19.99 15.35 Cybernoid 2 6.75 10.65 DT Olympic Challenge 5.90 9.50 E. Edwards Super Ski 6.40 9.50 24.95 14.90 DT Olympic Challenge Dungeon Master 24.95 14.90 DT Olympic Challenge 5.30 9.50 Darkside 6.40 7.40 8.50 Elite 8.90 E. Edwards Super Ski 19.99 11.90 E. Edwards Super Ski 19.99 11.90 Darkside 6.40 9.50 E. Edwards Super Ski 6.40 9.50 Empire Strikes Back 6.40 9.50 Elite 24.95 14.90 Empire Strikes Back 19.95 11.90 E. Edwards Super Ski 5.90 8.50 Empire Strikes Back 6.40 8.50 F15 Strike Eagle 6.40 9.50 19.95 11.90 Federation Free Traders Empire Strikes Back 19.99 15.35 Earthlight 5.30 Fernandez Must Die 5.90 8.50 Fernandez Must Die 5.90 8.50 Federation Free Traders 19.99 15.35 Flinstones 19.95 11.90 Empire Strikes Back 6.40 9.50 Firefly 5.90 Flintstones 5.90 8.50 24.99 14.90 Football Manager 2 Fernandez Must Die 19.99 11.90 Fernandez Must Die 5.30 8.50 Flintstones 6.40 5.90 9.50 9.50 Flying Shark Flintstones 19.95 11.90 Games Winter Edition 24.99 19.15 Firefly 5.30 9.50 Football Manager 2 6.40 9.50 Football Manager 2 6.40 9.50 19.99 11.90 Giganoid Football Manager 2 14.95 9.50 Flintstones 5.90 Foxx Fights Back 5.90 8.50 GI Hero 5.90 9.50 G'nius 19.95 11.90 Green Beret 24.95 14.90 Football Manager 2 6.40 9.50 GI Hero 6.40 9.50 G. Lineker Super Skills 8.25 12.25 Games Winter Edition 19.99 15.35 Gryzor 24.95 14.90 Foxx Fights Back 5.90 8.50 G. Lineker Super Skills 8.25 12.25 Game Set & Match 8.90 11.50 Gauntlet 2 19.99 15.35 Helter Skelter 14.95 9.50 GI Hero 5.30 G. Linekar Hotshot 8.25 12.25 Games Winter Edition 8.25 12.25 Helter Skelter 14.95 9.50 Heroes of The Lance 24.99 19.15 G. Lineker's Hotshot 6.75 10.65 Game Set & Match 8.90 11.50 Gold Silver Bronze 12.95 19.65 Heroes of the Lance 24.99 19.15 Hostages 24.95 14.90 G. Lineker Super Skills 6.75 10.65 Games Winter Edition 8.25 12.25 Gorilla Wars 5.90 9.50 Hostages 24.95 14.90 Ikari Warriors 24.99 14.90 Game Set & Match 8.90 11.50 Gold Silver Bronze 12.95 16.75 Guild of Thieves 12.80 14.99 9.50 International Soccer Ikari Warriors 19.95 11.90 Games Winter Edition 8.25 10.65 Gorilla Wars 5.90 9.50 Gunship 9.50 12.80 International Soccer 19.95 11.90 Jinxter 24.95 14.90 Gold Silver Bronze 12.95 16.75 Gutz 5.90 Heroes of the Lance 8.25 12.25 24.95 14.90 Leaderboard Birdie Jinxter 24.99 19.15 Gorilla Wars 5.30 9.50 Heroes of the Lance 8.25 12.25 Ikari Warriors 6.40 9.50 Kennedy Approach 24.95 14.90 Leatherneck 19.95 11.90 Gutz 5.30 9.50 History in Making 8.25 12.25 9.25 13.25 Impossible Mission 11 19.99 15.35 Legend of Sword Leaderboard Birdie 24.95 14.90 Heroes of the Lance 8.25 12.25 Impossible Mission II 8.25 12.25 12.80 Jinxter Leatherneck 19.95 11.90 Mars Cops 19.95 11.90 History in Making 9.25 Intensity 6.40 9.50 Karate Ace 10.95 12.75 Legend of Sword 24.95 14.90 Mortville Manor 24.95 14.90 Impossible Mission II 7.45 10.65 Karate Ace 10.95 12.75 Last Ninja 2 8.50 9.50 Lords of Conquest 19.95 11.90 Motorbike Madness 14.99 9.50 Intensity 5.30 LA Crackdown 12.25 Leaderboard Par 3 12.25 15.35 Mars Cops 19.95 11.90 Netherworld 19.99 15.35 Jinxter 10.90 Last Ninja 2 8.50 9.50 Magnificent 7 6.90 11.50 24.95 14.90 Night Raider 19.99 15.35 Karate Ace Maupiti 10.95 8.25 12.25 12.25 14.75 Marauder Leaderboard Par 4 19.99 15.35 Obliterator Mickey Mouse 24.95 14.90 Last Ninja 2 8.50 Live Ammo 6.90 9.90 Matchday 11 5.90 9.50 24.95 14.90 Oops! Mortville Manor 19.95 11.90 Leaderboard Par 3 12.25 15.35 Magnificent 7 6.90 11.50 Mickey Mouse 8.25 2.25 Motorbike Madness 14.99 9.50 Operation Wolf 24.95 14.90 Live Ammo 6.90 9.90 Marauder 8.25 12.25 Mini Office II 9.50 14.40 Neiher World 19.99 15.35 Outrun 24.99 19.15 Magnificent 7. 6.90 11.50 Matchday 11 5.90 9.50 Netherworld 8.25 12.25 Night Raider 19.99 15.35 Overlander 24.99 14.90 Marauder 6.75 10.65 Mickey Mouse 8.25 12.25 Night Raider 8.25 12.25 24.95 14.90 Photon Paint Obliterator 69.99 44.90 Matchday 11 5.30 9.50 Netherworld 8.25 12.25 Operation Wolf 5.90 9.50 Oids 19.95 11.90 Photon Paint Expansion 19.95 11.90 Mickey Mouse 6.75 10.65 Night Raider 8.25 12.25 Overlander 6.40 9.50 Oops! 19.95 11.90 Platoon 24.95 14.90 Netherworld 6.75 10.65 Oops! 6.40 9.50 Pepsi Chall. Mad Mix 6.75 10.25 Operation Wolf 19.95 11.90 Pool of Radiance 24.99 19.15 Night Raider 8.25 12.25 Operation Wolf 5.90 9.50 Pro Soccer Sim 4.20 Outrun 19.95 15.35 Power Pyramids 19.95 11.90 Oops! 5.30 9.50 Overlander 6.40 7.90 Platoon 6.40 9.50 Overlander 19.99 11.90 Quadralien 19.95 11.90 Operation Wolf 5.30 9.50 P. Beardsley F'Ball 6.40 9.50 Rastan 5.90 9.50 Pepsi Chall. Mad Mix 14.99 12.25 Rally Run 19.95 11.90 Overlander 5.30 8.50 Pepsi Chall. Mad Mix 6.75 10.25 Robocop 5.90 9.50 19.95 11.90 Roadblasters Platoon 24.99 19.15 Pepsi Chall. Mad Mix 6.75 10.25 Platoon 6.40 9.50 Salamander 5.90 9.50 Pool of Radiance 8.25 24.99 19.15 Rocket Ranger 29.99 17.90 Pink Panther 6.75 10.65 Pool of Radiance 12.25 Samurai Warrior 5.90 9.50 Quadralien 6.40 9.50 Skate Crazy 19.95 11.90 Scabble Delux 19.95 11.90 Platoon 6.40 9.50 Power Pyramids 8.25 12.25 Quantum Paint 24.95 14.90 Sentinel 19.95 11.90 Power Pyramids 5.90 President is Missing 8.50 Summertime Special 8.75 15.85 19.99 15.35 Space Harrier 24.99 14.90 Pro BMX Sim Road Blasters Rastan 4.20 5.90 8.50 T-Wrecks 8.25 12.25 STAC 39.95 25.90 Spider Tronix 19.95 11.90 Pro Soccer Sim 4.20 Red Storm Rising 9.50 12.80 Target Renegade 5.90 9.50 Space Harrier 19.99 11.90 Star Goose 19.95 11.90 Rastan 5.30 9.50 Robocop 5.90 9.50 Ten Great Games III 8.75 Star Goose 19.95 11.90 Star Ray 24.95 14.90 Robocop 5.30 9.50 Roy of Rovers 8.25 12.25 Time and Magik 9.50 9.50 19.95 11.90 Starglider 2 Star Ray 24.95 14.90 Salamander 5.90 5.30 9.50 Salamander 9.50 Typhoon 5.90 9.50 24.95 14.90 Street Fighter Starglider 2 24.99 19.15 Samurai Warrior 5.30 8.25 12.25 Victory Road 8.50 Skate Crazy 5.90 9.50 19.99 15.35 Sub Battle Simulator 24.95 14.90 Skate Crazy Street Fighter 6.75 10.65 Soldier of Fortune 6.40 8.50 Vindicator 5.90 9.50 19.95 11.90 Summer Olyrnpiad Summer Olympiad 19.95 11.90 Soldier of Fortune 5.30 8.25 12.25 We Are the Champions Street Sport Soccer 6.90 11.50 Super Hang On 19.99 11.90 Tanglewood 19.95 11.90 Summer Olympiad 5.30 Summer Olympiad 6.40 9.50 Where Time Stood Still 5.90 9.50 19.95 11.90 The Kristal Tetris 29.99 17.90 Summertime Special 8.75 15.85 Summertime Special 8.75 15.85 1943 8.25 12.25 29.99 17.90 Three Stooges The Kristal 29.99 17.90 Super Sports 6.75 10.65 T-Wrecks 8.25 12.25 24.99 14.90 Thundercats Three Stooges 24.99 14.90 T-Wrecks 6.75 10.65 Ten Great Games III 8.75 19.99 11.90 Time and Magik Thundercats 19.95 11.90 Ten Great Games III 8.75 9.50 Three Stooges 19.95 11.90 Tracker Time and Magik 24.95 14.90 Time and Magik 9.50 9.50 Time and Magik 9.50 9.50 24.99 14.90 Ultima IV Uninvited 24.95 14.90 Tracksuit Manager 6.40 6.40 Tracksuit Manager 14.99 9.50 Uninvited Vectorball 29.99 17.90 Typhoon 5.90 5.30 9.50 Typhoon 9.50 19.95 11.90 Vectorball Virus 14.99 9.50 Ultimate Coll. Works 10.95 12.75 Ultima V (4 disks) 15.5 UNBRANDED 19.95 11.90 Virus Vroom 19.95 11.90 Victory Road 5.90 9.50 5.30 9.50 Victory Road 19.99 11.90 Vroom Wanderer 5.30 19.95 11.90 Vindicator 135TPI 95p EACH 5.90 9.50 Vindicator 9.50 Where Time Stood Still 19.95 11.90 Wanderer 24.99 14.90 Virus 5.30 8.50 We are the Champs 6.90 11.50 MIN 10 19.95 11.90 Whirligig 5.90 Whirligig 19.95 11.90 We Are The Champions 8.50 6.90 11.50 Where Time Stood Still 19.99 15.35 Zynaps Zynaps 19.99 15.35 Where Time Stood Still 6.40 5.30 8.50 Xork 19.99 15.35 1943 1943 24.99 19.95 1943 8.2 12.95 7.45 10.65 1943 FREE microdealer cover up token with every  (RRP) worth of software (while offer lasts) collect tokens for FREE games, T-Shirts etc. PLEASE SEND ME THE FOLLOWING ITEMS BEST BYTE ORDER FORM C+ VG OCT MICRO ITEM AMOUNT Name......... Address..... 3.5\" DSDD DISKS Access Method of Payment: (Please tick) PO Cheque TOTAL Signature..... Access Card No.............. All items include first class postage and VAT, and are dispatched within 24 hours subject to availability. To order send this form with payment payable to 'Best Byte' or phone our 24 hour Access card hotline 0732 770508. Overseas orders add .50 per item, outside Europe add .00 per item for Air Mail. Mail order only. BEST BYTE (DEPT CVG10), 2 QUARRY GARDENS, TONBRIDGE, KENT TNI 2SG "


"over and pick him up. advantage over The last little reservation I Should the hacker force the other man, though, found the more annoying: you, as a Tracer or and if used sparingly a few the fact that the joystick protector of the computer seconds use to get in front control seems ever so system to similarly crash, of him then cut him off can slightly inprecise. I tried it you get a psychic be all it takes to win. with three different sticks, feedback that could fry The further you get into and couldn't rival the your brain. the game, the more streets responses of the One of the nice things is and buildings appear to computer's own player. the number of options complicate your path, Maybe I've just got the available to you. Not only givng the opportunity to reactions of a donkey. do you get the choice block him down a side Still, Tracers is an between various alley, but equally making atmospheric, nicely scenarios, out between things a good deal more produced and packaged different tunes to dangerous for yourself, you game: one that pushes accompany them. The can trap yourself with your foreward no boundaries simplest option is a simple own wall too, though there especially graphically one on one chase is a wandering gate on but which offers playability between you and a data your otherwise solid path, in spades. I'll come back to thief. Your starting location which can give you an exit it once in a while, I think, is indicated by a gold if you hit it right. Extra points and there are plenty  MACHINES: AMIGA.  SUPPLIER: MICROILLUSIONS. PRICE: $24.99.  VERSION TESTED: AMIGA. REVIEWER: MATT BIELBY. Tracers is TRON, the light-bike race centerpiece of the early '80s computer generated \"sensation\", put back where it always really belonged. You'll remember the scene: Jeff Bridges in a glowing blue jumpsuit bending onto all fours and moulding into his bike, forced to race at breakneck speed through the tightest obstacles, the TRACERS 00000 BORI e goed A Tracers: things begin to get complicated. A Each screenshot looks just like the last ... sharpest turns, always square on the grid; your are gained by successfully around I can't say that aware of the dangers of opponent's by a crossing your own tail in about. It might even inspire the solid wall left in his smaller green one. this way, by picking up a trip down the video shop, opponent's wake. It was a Suddenly, you're away, circular tokens just to see if they've got great chase and a each racing along, trying (unfortunately often TRON lurking on a back beautifully simple idea for to block the other into a placed near walls) and shelf somewhere. a game. small space or force him collecting fuel nodes. The first point in Tracers' into the wall. Alternatively, you can favour is the manual. The Since your speeds are play a game where your  GRAPHICS nine-page introductory equal, it is strategy that mate plays another racer, makes the grade, the most usually against a few more SOUND story is actually quite readable, if important thing being to villains so the screen soon VALUE understandably vague realise that it is becomes a tangled maze  PLAYABILITY about a future world where lengthening your survival of trails: a set up as likely to I drafted police recruits time that counts. The have you crashing into  OVERALL actually serve a useful chances are that he'll each other as trap the bad function chasing make a mistake some of buys. UPDATE... computerised thugs over a these data thieves seem Problems with the game grid system. The enemy hits less smart than others and are limited, but you may Microillusions have never a side wall, a \"restricted have a habit of driving find them important. been very big on ST or 8 access node\" or, more straight into a wall so be Despite the cleaness bit, and with nothing on likely, your solid \"tail\" and sure to always leave of the graphics you may Mediagenic (Activision) his program crashes, yourself a way out. There find them a bit limited and release schedules, we'd momenterally revealing are no brakes! You have an boring: Amiga owners be very surprised to see his physical whereabouts accelerator that gives you aren't too used to coping Tracers on any other so ground crews can rush a momentary speed with this repetition. format. import the grade in that ave "


"THE BRONX THE SMARTEST GANG ON THE STREETS   BICARPUS BIG APPIE he in our gar T. THE BIG APPLE HOLDINGS Company "


"11 BA UUTII IIIIIII Have Nice C BUYING BIG APPLE GETS YOU LOTS OF GOODIES "


"empeletama TILL Sivecomes TIL LILLE vance Prodiicts SIMPLE MINDS DORA ENA ACES cance compact characher amous Deluxe Sound pocket radio High perla HAEL JACKSONS Cassettes, video films, peripherals, hardware, record and cassette storage cases, & lots more. Top Chart mer sports Walkman E-180 QUALITY STEREO E.180 STEREO HIGH CURITY E-180 STEREORCH QUALITY lower Herea cassette players Tripte-pack video tapes Super Star' beach to Join Bronx Billy in his club and gain access to an ever changing range of superb leisure products. Simply cut off the Apple Tokens, found on all Big Apple products, and swap them for anything you desire. "


"Street Rules THE BRONX CLUB To join, simply send an 8\" X 10\" stamped addressed envelope to: Bronx Billy, clo The Bronx Club, P.O. Box 910, London Ni1 177. We'l Rush to You... ... your very own membership pack, including your personal membership card and number. Always remember to quote your membership number along with your full name and address, when corresponding with the Bronx Club. Take Your Pick... ... you can choose absolutely anything you desire from the Bronx Club catalogue, so remember to save the Apple Tokens, found on all Big Apple products, and put them away safely in the envelope provided. When you've chosen your product and collected enough tokens, send us your order and we'll mail you your goods. Freebies... ... upon enrolment you will also receive a FREE Big Apple Game Badge. Try and win more Bronx Billy merchandise by entering all our Club Newsletter Competitions exclusive to members. Special Privileges... ... yes! you get specialist treatment too! We are releasing some fantastic games that are exclusive to the Bronx Club, so only you, will be able to play them! No Obligation... ... You're welcome to use the Bronx Club as often as you like. There is no obligation to purchase or redeem tokens for products in order to retain club membership. So don't delay, sign up today! Signed pes. BRONX BILLY Have a nice Play BRONX BILLY Copynght 1988 "


"ALDERWOOD CENTRE SEDGLEY, DUDLEY W. MIDLANDS, DY3 3QY MAIL ORDER DIVISION OF ESTABLISHED RETAILER (TEL: 0902-313600/880971) HOLMESOFT SAME DAY DESPATCH So why didn't we order it from Wight Computing. TITLE Spec Spec C64 C64 AMS AMS Cass Disk Cass Disk Cass Disk 16-BIT ST AMIG IBM 6.90 10.90 6.959.99 6.95 NDON 888888 owo 8888 13.95 6.90 11.90 10.90 10.90 10.50 o 8 O OOONOROGO ON OUR 8888888888888888 O-90010 19 (Boot Camp) 1943 20 Chartbusters 720 Degrees ATE Aaargh! Airborne Ranger Alien Syndrome Alt Olympics Am. Civil War 2 for 1) Arcade Force Four Barbarian (Psycho) Barbarian -2 (Pal) Bards Tales Bards Tale 2 (or 3) Best of Elite 1-2 Beyond Ice Palace Bionic Commandos Black Tiger Buggy Boy Bushido California Games Captain Blood Carrier Command Championship Sprint Combat School Corruption Crazy Cars Cybernoid Daley Thompson '88 Dan bare-2 Dark Side Double. The Dragon's Lair 1.2 E Edwards Super Ski Echelon Empire Strikes Back Famous Courses Famous Courses 2 Fernandez Must Die Fire & Forget Football Director Football Director-2 Football Manager-2 Foxx Fights Back Frightmare Fury G.1. Hero G Lineker Hot Shot G. Lineker Soccer G Lineker Sup Skills Game, Set & Match Games, Winter Ed Garfield Gnome-ll (Ingrid) Gold Silver & Bronze Gothik Great Giana Sisters Gryzor Guadal Canal Gunship (Apache) Gutz Hawkeye Hero Of The Lance Hewson 4 S/Hits History-In-Making Hopping Mad Ikari Warriors Imposs. Mission-2 Int. Soccer Intensity 8888888888 8888 14.90 18.95 16.90 19.95 16.90 12.90 12.95 12.90 12.95 12.90 12.90 15.95 140 19 95 9.99 12.95 18.90 18.95 19.99 12.90 15.95 1990 1995 1999 14.90 1895 18.99 12.90 12.95 12.90 15.95 14.90 18.95 15.90 15.95 16.99 15.90 15.95 16.99 10.40 10.45 18.00 18.95 19.99 12.90 15.95 13.99 15.90 15.95 15.90 15.95 16.99 11.90 16.95 14.99 14.90 19.45 13.90 13.95 13.90 13.95 15.90 15.95 1290 12.95 16.99 16.90 16.95 12.90 15.95 14.90 19.45 16.90 16.95 17.90 18.95 14.90 18.95 15.90 15,95 16.99 26.90 26.95 39.99 12.90 12.95 13.99 15.90 15.95 14.90 13.90 14.90 14.90 12.90 12.95 13.99 14.90 18.95 12 90 15.95 12.90 15 95 16 90 16.95 10.40 10.45 1790 18.95 6.90 III 8888 18.99 3.95 6.20 9.50 6.459.90 6.40 14.90 6.90 10.95 9.50 6.90 11.90 6.49 A 9.90 8888 & 5 95 5.95 5.95 9.90 6.95 5.90 10.50 10.50 10 50 13.40 10 90 && 10.50 13.94 9 50 995 10 94 4.95 6.95 395 394 6 90 4.90 INSON 88 8888 8888 NaNonton 888888 &&& && 7.44 744 10.44 9.90 10.90 11.94 11.94 13.94 9.90 &   to && 8.8888 &!!  14.95 15 16 10 18 19 14 18.95 18.95 15.95 12.95 1295 11.90 12.90 13.90 14,90 15 90 16.90 10.40 14 90 14.90 14.90 14,90 14 90 12.90 12.90 12.90 11.90 12.90 12.90 17.90 12.90 13.90 15.90 12.90 14.90 14.90 9.90 4.70 3.95 4.94 3.94 7.45 10 44 8.90 11.94 6.94 6.90 4 90 6.90 !!!!!! But still he sits there with that blank look on his face. 0983 68978 From Tapes to Networks Phone for the most up to date prices or write to: 13.90 10.50 6.95 10.95 1943 7.45 11.95 7.49 11.99 3 Stooges 6.96 6.99 5 ST-Stars 5 95 11.95 5.99 11.99 Aaargh! 6.95 10.95 6.99 1099 Alien Syndrome 6.95 10.95 Arkanoid-2 10.50 Army Moves 6.95 10.95 6.99 1099 Astaroth 7.45 11.95 7.49 11.99 Barbanan-2 (Pal) Bards Tale-2 (or 1) 7.49 11.95 7.50 11.99 Beyond Ice Palace 6.99 10.99 Beyond Zork 6.49 9.50 6.50 9.99 Bionic Commandos 7.45 11.957.49 11.99 Black Lamp 12 95 Buggy Boy 10.95 12.50 1099 11 50 Bushido 6.959 .95 6.99 10.99 Captain Blood 7.45 9.95 7.49 11.99 Carrier Command 7.45 11.95 7.49 11.99 Champ. Cricket 6.95 10.95 6.99 10.99 Chessmaster 2000 7.45 11.95 7.49 11.99 Combat School 7.45 11.95 749 11.99 Conqueror 6.95 1095 6.99 10.99 Corruption 9.99 13 95 10.50 13.99 Crazy Cars 3.95 9.95 3.999.99 Cybernoid 4.95 9.95 4.99 10.99 Double Dragon 12.95 Dreadnought 6.95 10.95 6.99 1099 Dungeon Master 7.45 11.95 749 11 99 E. Edwards Superski 6.50 9.95 5.90 8.95 5.499.99 Empire Strikes Back 6.45 9.50 6.49 999 Exolon 8.99 Fernandez Must Die 3.95 3 99 Ferrari Formula 1 6.45 6/49 9.99 Final Countdown 745 11.95 7.49 11.99 Fire & Forget 6.45 9.95 6.499.99 Flight Sim. 2 3.95 5.95 3.99 6.99 Football Manager-2 3.99 5.99 Foundations Waste 6.95 9.45 6.99 9.49 G. Lineker Sup Skills 6.959.95 6.99 699 Galdragons Domain 6.45 Games Winter Ed Gauntlet-2 6.95 10.50 6.99 10.99 Gnome-2 (Ingrid) 6.959.49 Great Giana Sisters 4.95 995 6.499.99 Green Beret 7.45 10 95 7.49 11.99 Gryzor 6.95 9.50 6.29 10.49 Gunship (Apache) 745 11.95 7.49 11 99 Helter Skelter 7.45 11.95 6.99 11.99 Hero Of The Lance 11.95 11.99 Hollywood Poker 9.95 13.45 9.99 13.49 Hotball 7.45 11 95 7.49 1199 kari Warriors 6.35 9.95 6.40 9.99 Imposs Mission-2 10.45 10.55 10.49 10.59 int Soccer 10 95 13 95 10 9918 99 interceptor 5.95 9.45 5.999 .99 Jel 745 9.99 7.49 11.99 Kennedy Approach 3.96 10 50 3.99 10.99 Lancelot 3.95 3.99 Leaderboard/Birdie 10.95 10 99 13.99 Leatherneck 5.50 9.95 Legend Of Sword 6.959.95 Leisure Suit Larry 7.45 11.95 7.49 11.99 Mars Cops 7.45 11.95 7.49 11.99 Mickey Mouse 10.45 13.95 10.49 Mindfighter 6.95 950 6.99 10.99 Mortville Manor 6.45 9.95 6.49 Motorbike Madness 7.45 10.95 7.49 10.99 N Mansell GP 6.95 1095 Ne 6.95 9.95 Netherworld 5.959.95 Night Raider 13.95 9.95 11.959.99 11.99 4.75 8.95 4.799.99 P Beardsley F'ball 3.96 3 99 Pandora 4.95 4.99 Pepsi Challenge 3.95 8.95 3.99 8.99 Phantasm 7.50 13.95 749 1399 Platoon 10.45 10.55 1049 1059 Pool Of Radiance 8.95 10.95 8 99 1099 Powerplay 11.95 14.95 11.99 14.99 Rally Run 6.95 9.95 6.99 1099 Red October 6.95 6.95 10.95 6.99 Return To Genesis 5.50 9.95 Roadblasters 6.95 13.95 6.99 13 99 Roadster XR. 745 11.95 7.49 11 99 Rocket Ranger 6.45 10.50 6 49 10.99 Rockford (Arcade) 10.95 7.49 10.99 9.95 13.45 9.99 13.49 ST Adv Creator 7.45 10.95 7.49 11.99 Scrabble Delu Scrabble DeLuxe 11.95 7.49 11.99 Sentinel Sentin 7.45 11.95 7.49 1199 Shadowgate 7.45 11.95 Sherlock & C Jewels 6.50 6.49 10.50 10.99 Side-Arms 7.45 8.95 7.49 11.99 Sidewinder 9.50 6.99 10.99 Soccer Supremo 9.95 5.999.99 Space Harrier 9.95 13.95 9 99 1399 Star Ray 7.45 11.95 5.95 9.45 5.99 7.45 11.95 7.49 11 99 Starglider-2 (pr 1) 6.95 10.95 6.99 10.99 Street Fighter Street Gang 7.45 11.95 Strike Force Harrier 5.959.95 5.999.99 Subbattle Simulator 9.95 Summer Olympiad 7.45 7.40 11.95 6.45 9.95 6.49 10.99 Super Hang-On 2.96 2 999.99 Tanglewood 9.95 13 959 99 13.99 Test Drive 10.50 13.95 Thundercats 7.45 11.95 7.49 11.99 Time & Magic 4.959.95 4.999.99 U. Military Sim 7.45 11.95 7.49 11 99 UMS Scenario 4.95 9.95 4 999.99 Ultima-5 6.45 10.50 10.99 Ultimate Soccer 6.25 9.50 6.29 10.49 Uninvited 6.25 6.29 10.49 Vectorball 9.45 11.95 12.99 Verminator 10.95 14.95 Virus 4.959.95 4.99 6.45 9.95 9.99 Wanderer 7.45 11.95 7.49 11 99 Where Time S Still 7.45 11.95 7.49 1199 Whirligig 6.25 9.49 Xenon 5.999.99 Zynaps 3.95 7.4511 957.49 11.99 SEGA 7.45 11.95 11.99 Sega cons . game 94 95 95 10.95 10.99 Koni joystick 24.95 20 Pro Hunt 23 95 45 11.95 749 1199 39 Zamron 22.95 6.95 10.45 Atterburner.. 23 95 10.45 10.49 Acton Fighter... 18.95 395 8.95 3.99 8.99 Alex Kidd 1695 7.45 11 95 749 11.99 Alex Kidd 2 23 95 3.95 12.95 8.99 12.99 Alen Syndrome 23 95 6.45 10.50 6.49 10.99 Astro Warrior 1895 3.95 3.99 Black Bell 7.50 Bank Panc 13 95 Choplifter 18 95 7.49 750 Cure Zone 1895 6.99 10.99 13 95 F 16 Fighter 7.45 1195 7.49 11.90 Fantasy Zone 18.95 7.45 11.95 7.49 11.99 Fantasy Zone 2 21 95 6.45 9.95 6.25 9.99 Global Defence 18 95 7.45 11.95 7.49 11.99 19.95 10.49 10.95 10.50 10.99 Gangster Town 1895 6.95 10.45 6.99 10.49 Kunatu kid 1 995 650 M ssile Defence 23.95 6.25 9.95 6.49 10.99 Nina 1895 7.45 11.95 7.49 1199 Outrun 23 95 1995 7.45 11.95 7.49 Quanet 11 99 23 95 6.95 10.50 6.99 Rody 10.99 Rescue Mission 18 95 6.95 18 95 6.99 13.45 Secret Command 13 49 Space Hamer 23 95 6.99 11.99 Soy vs Soy 1995 6 25 9.95 6.29 10.99 Super Wonderbov 23 95 6.959 .95 6.99 10.99 Wunderboy 1895 World Grand Pr 18.95 World Soccer 1295 Zillon 2 1995 ! 13.95 10.94 10.90 9.90 10.90 10.50 10.90 10.90 11.90 12.95 15.95 18.95 12.95 13.95 15.95 12.95 18.95 19.95 19.95 12.95 !! 595 5.45 7.45 09. 16.95 12 95 15.95 15.95 !! 12.90 6.90 27.90 13 90 10.90 15.90 15.90 14 90 6.90 9.90 12 90 16.90 13.90 1795 6.95 6.95 UO U 888888888888888 6.45 !III. WIGHT COMPUTING 15.95 16 05 13.95 888 888888888 11.99 Star Wars 9.49 Starlight && 15.90 14.90 10.40 15.90 19.95 13 & 11.99 Sundog 2.95 Jinter Karate Ace Karnov Kidsplay Knight Orc Knightmare Konami Arcade Coll Lancelot Last Ninja-2 Leaderboard Coll Live & Let Die Ammo Magnetyan Magnificent 7 Marauder Matchday 2 Mickey Mouse Mindfighter N. Mansell GP Netherworld Night Raider Nimitz Operation Wolf Outrun Overlander P. Beardsley F'Ball P Stealth Fighter PHIM Pegasus Pepsi Challenge Pink Panther Platoon Pool Of Radiance Power At Sea Predator President Is Missing Psycho Pigs UXB Rambo-3 Rampage Red October Red Storm Rising Roadblasters Rolling Thunder Roy Of The Rovers Rygar Salamander Samurari Warrior Savage Scrabble Deluxe Shoot'em' Const Side-Arms Six Pack-3 Skate Crazy Skate Or Die Soldier Of Fortune Soldier Of Light Space Harrier Spy Trilogy si Sport Soccer Star Wars Stealth Mission Street Fighter Summer Olympiad Summertime Special Super Sprint T-Wrecks Taito Coin Op Coll Target Renegade Ten Git Games Ten Grt Games-2 Ten Grt Games-3 Terrorpods Test Drive The Train Thundercats Tiger Road Time & Magik Top Ten Collection Track-Suit Mgr Typhoon Ultimate Soccer Ultimate Soccer Vindicator Virus We Are The Champions Where Time S. Still Whirligi Xenon & 9.90 6.90 4.90 5.95 4.90 4.90 5.45 5.50 7.94 13.90 10.50 9.90 10.50 9.90 9.45 9.50 11.94 12.95 18 95 15.95 1395 16.95 10.95 2095 17.99 10.899 21 99 10.90 12.90 12 90 17.90 12.90 13.90 16.90 10.90 20.90 14.90 16.90 9.90 15.90 12 90 14.90 12 90 12.90 12 90 11.90 14 90 122 High Street, Ryde, Isle of Wight PO33 2SU Good advice Given Freely VISA 19.95 995 9.95 SI!! 4.90 9.99 Vixen 14 95 15.95  6.40 5.95 6.90 5.50 4.95 12.95 12.95 19.95 9.95 5.99 7.44 6.90 6.94 NO 888 o 6.90 6.94 10.44 3.90 5.95 8.94 5.95 4.50 1050 12.94 10.90 7.45 6.95 7.40 6.95 10.95 11.90 11.94 9.90 10.50 0.90 9.90 JOYSTICKS ADD-ONS 0.525° D. 599 10 3 5 Disks 12 99 103 Doks ICC Cass 399 Cruiser Joystick a 99 Delta Joystick Cheetah 125. 6 99 Cheetah 125 Spec'l 12.49 Cheetah Mach 1 12 99 Como Pro 5000 13 99 Euromax Elte9 49 Euromax Pro 15 95 Euroma, Prol.AF) 1799 Euromar Mhandler 22 99 Euromar Joyball 1199 Euromar M Ace 1099 Fantastic Stck 6 49 Gunshot (AF) 749 Arcade Turbo 9.99 Koni Sg. Game 919 KOn Sking. AF199 Amsolt JY2 Quickshot Il CuckSholl Turbo 12.99 mar IBM Jstick19.49 hemoston Interface 799 Dua port interface 1249 +2.3 J'sick Adap 399 .3 Recorder Lead 3 99 Amst Recoder Lead 2 99 4 Player Adap (16 bit5 99 Achon Rosay MK4 29 99 SPECTRUM TAPE TOTAPE-TAPE UTILITYBA Yes Tub will back up most of your TAPE based software, including most of the recent jerky loaders and those programs with a counter converts for reliable loading. Can measure speed of faster loaders, manages 100% accurately many blocks over 51k, etc etc. Unrivalled. On tape at .50* SPECTRUM TAPE TO DRIVE-TP5 te software package includes Tub to transfer hundreds of programs to your drive manages some that hardware devices cannot reach! Jerky and counter loaders managed easily, but program not for the novice, Only \" (+ on m drive cart). INFORMATION BOOK covering over 400 transfers, including many top 20 hits .50 extra with TP5. Versions for 48K, 128K, Plus. +2, and +3. M/DRIVE OWNERS-MICROMATE The only complete package for morive owners, and it pays for itself. These are just some of its features: Format (up to approx 104k). Clone, sector editor, reconditions cartridges, repairs and gives condition of files. \"boot\" program, multiple ERASE rename, true CAT. Copies tape to drive (unsecured), drive fo drive, drive to tape. It has so many features and is unique. YOU MUST HAVE THIS PROGRAM IF YOU HAVE A M DRIVE! .99 on m drive cartridge. CODE COMPRESSOR, Z80 TOOLKIT Code compressor compresses machine code many uses, but ideal with hardware devices that don't compress code. Only .50. Z80 Toolkit New Version. A superb assembler (full screen editor), fast disassembler, single step to see how m/c works, loader, hex/dec toggle, tutorial ideal for ALL particularly beginners only .99 State TYPE OF SPECTRUM + drive system when ordering e.g. PLUS 3 or 128k with Opus disc drive Brand new m drive cartridges .75 each (min 4) ALL PROGRAMS CARRY OUR MONEY BACK GUARANTEE (not updates phone for prices of these). All prices inclusive except add  Europe,  others. SAE for full details LERM, DEPT CVG, 11 Beaconsfield Close. Whiteley Bay, Tyne and Wear NE25 9 (091) 2533615 6.90 10.45 6.90 6.45 5.50 5.95 5.95 5 95 5.50 6.90 5.95 5 50 6.40 799 9.90 10 50 10.50 10 90 9.99 13.40 10.95 9.90 10.90 Multiface 3 Multiface 2 AMS) 44 99 Cheque/PO/draft/cash UNLISTED ITEMS Stock items usually by return payable to: Holmesoft Note UK P&P incl (Rec deliv: 50p) Please phone/write for Forthcoming releases will be sent Europe add 50p per item any item, new or old, on day of release Elsewhere  (Airmail) not listed above. SAE for software/hardware lists. 69 "


"ecruits are Suffering DJs have won medals but if anyone ever deserved Adrian Cronaur. military Catering, but a version of Steve Wright, and nothing raises morale than his cry of Good Morning, Mississippi where, before the end of the Second movie with a difference Instead of machine signs up for another tour of duty reviewing autobiographical Screenplay but it is a wonderful, often hilariously comic pict men in love, but mainly this is a | The Running Man. instead of just censored bulletins normally While Good Morning, below the surface of 'Nam, it has directed another tune in and Sly Stallone doesn't take Commies to laughin Ramb0 Colonel Tautman, who also captured by those evil. rtisem Reaganite politics. problem Similarities with other as RoboCO an evil empire and from their ignoble war s Richards, w enforcement helicon 4 Sly proves, yet again, that he can't act his way paper bag. and only one thing can help that's why they rushed barely time for monthly under totalitarian rule. by Richards and two allies as The Satire on a show want us to Say naSty things about his latest won't stop me, Rambo arena and The Price is Right and gets lif 2019, made from cardboard and the gung-ho anti-SOViet make anyon Is T Somehow the action never The really delivers. Still, there worse ways to spend 10 criminals can win their minutes and as a Computer how game is on the way you'll want to catch it "


"none is more vivid than that his talents are not I confess I had the country by holding up a Toomey. properly recognised by the reservations about such an mail train and making off As the soft spoken world. To stop things obscure sounding movie but with the biggest haul in Sergeant with the metal becoming boring he's even it's the most amazing action British criminal history. The plate in his head, seduced by his mother's best story. 16 year old Aigin takes crime is still known as The Christopher Walken creates friend! The bedroom on the black-clad, nomadic Great Train robbery and the just the right sense of sequence between River raiders, the Tchude, when names of the perpetrators unhinged menace. Matthew Phoenix, so sweet and they slaughter his family. remain famous, including Broderick is excellent as the innocent in Stand By Me, With bow and arrow bear Ronnie Biggs and Buster narrator, Eugene, and Corey and Ann Magnuson, from hunts, flights on skis, (15). Parker is wonderful as the underrated Making Mr treachrous mountain Buster was Buster intellectual geek Epstein. If Right, is a real eye-opener. passes and a mystical white Edwards, who managed to you've ever thought of But this tale of teenage reindeer, every adventurer elude the police and escape enlisting, see this movie hustling is not another should seek out this path to Mexico, only to find that and even if you haven't, Lemon Popsicle. into another world. life in paradise wasn't all it Writer/director William Back to civilization with was cracked up to be, so he Pathfinder is a unique and Richert's attention to detail Harrison Ford, not that his returned home to give and obvious fondness for his working holiday in Paris is himself up. Sensibly the film unusual foreign language film. characters mean that peaceful. In fact it's quite doesn't just recreate the Jimmy Reardon captures Frantic (15), because no robbery but follows Buster the spirit of sixties teen sooner has he recovered and his wife as they dreams with the crystal from his jet-lag than his wife suddenly become fabulously clarity in a night to has gone missing, kidnapped rich and internationally remember. for no real reason. notorious. Teenagers in 1945, Ford soon discovers that Phil Collins' performance teenagers in 1962 his wife picked up the wrong is a nice blend of comedy and whatever next? What about suitcases at the airport and sadness, as he discovers that a teenager 1,000 years ago, a keyring and box of he can't adjust to the living in the icy wastes of the matches may be a clue to her jet-setting life. He's frozen north. That's the abduction. But as les flics 'brilliantly balanced by Julie unique unusual setting for and the American Embassy Walters as June, his missus, Pathfinder (15), the first seem unwilling to do longing for her home in the film in the Lapp language ... anything constructive, he Smoke. There's also a nice but don't worry, there are sets out on the trail himself, portrait of the subtitles and plenty of moving from seedy establishment, rocked by action if you can't be nightclubs to the famous the Profumo sex scandal bothered to read them. rooftops of Paris. (also being turned into a Along the way he picks up film) and out for Buster's Jimmy Reardon. Polanski's latest discovery, a blood by way of revenge. Charlie Sheen as bad rich kid young lady by the name of But though the picture is Ted Varrick in No Man's Land. Emmanuelle Seigner, and enjoyable, it does neglect for a moment I wondered one fact the train's driver why he didn't forget his was coshed unconscious and wife, who looks rather like spent the rest of his Nancy Reagan, and settle for shortened life with severe this Gallic delight instead? brain damage. Remember But Frantic is far too fast that before you turn Buster paced for such heretical into a hero, please. doubts to linger long. Trains aren't the only form For home grown thrills, of transport susceptible to based on fact, travel back crime. No Man's Land (15) is twenty five years to when a about Benjy, a rookie cop gang of criminals shocked who goes undercover to uncover a gang of yuppie car Frantic a kidnap yarn. thieves specialising in those high powered, roller skate < Phil Collins cashes in on Buster. look-alikes, Porsches. He soon discovers that the watch it to discover how the gang is led by a bored rich army turns individuals into kid, Ted Varrick, who obedient soldiers. possesses a high octane Quite what the military charisma. Pretty soon police would make of Jimmy practices are blurred as Reardon (15) is hard to Benjy starts to take pleasure in heisting Porsches from imagine. He's a dreamer, a bit of a rebel, a potential underground garages. Then Cassanova, a poet ... most another gang takes offence definitely an individual and at Ted's techniques. the events of this movie take If all this suggests car place in probably the most chases, you're not wrong, important 36 hours of his 17 but there's also an year-old life! interesting relationship The year is 1962 and between the two young Jimmy has most of the men. This lifts it above the problems that make life so mundane but not quite high lively money, parents, enough in a month of good girlfriends, and a feeling films. Not a Porsche but better than an Escort. Screen "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES ESTAB: SINCE 1978 ACCESS ORDER BY CREDIT CARD LINE 01-348-2907 VISA 7.50 D2 ON 7.50 7.50 6.75 7.50 ONNI D4 12.99 10.99 III 5.50 99 8888 5.50 ONN .2008 6.30 D2 D1 6.75 8 0888ASNOSONSONNING 88888888888888888 5.50 NNNNNNNNNONONONOONONOOONNNNNNN . NONOON NOONNNINN INN INNOINNNNOINNININ Sono D2  , ,   , ,    .       Spec Spec C64 C64 AMS AMS Spec Spec C64 C64 AMS AMS Atari Software Title Cass Disk Cass Disk Cass Disk Software Title Cass Disk Cass Disk Cass Disk Software Title ST Amiga Night Raider 7.50 D17.50 D2 7.50 D2 * Double Dragon 7.50 7.50 D2 7.50 D2 Elite 13.99 13.99 Overlander 5.50 D17.50 D1 7.50 D2 Salamander 5.50 6.30 D2 6.30 D2 Starglider 11 15.99 15.99 Bubble Bobble 5.50 D1 6.30 D2 6.30 D2 Test Drive 7.99 D2 Carrier Command 15.99 15.99 Alien Syndrome 6.30 D2 7.50 D2 7.50 D2 \" 19\" 7.50 D2 7.50 D2 Double Dragon .13.99 13.99 Footll Manager 2 7.50 D2 7.50 D2 Barbarian Mel 7.50 7.50 Virus 13.99 13.99 Alt World Games 7.50 D2 7.50 D2 Advance Art Studio 16.99 16.99 D5 Inernal Soccer 13.99 13.99 Netherworld 7.50 7.50 D2 Terrapods Mel D2 Hotshot 13.99 13.99 Dream Warrior 7.50 D2 Marauder 5.99 01 7,50 D2 7.50 D2 Corruption 15.99 15.99 Imposs'le Mission 2 7.50 D2 R-Type 6.99 D2 6.99 D2 Leathernecks 13.99 13.99 Street Fighter 6.75 7.50 D2 7.50 D2 Carrier Common 10.99 D2 10.99 D4 Hotball 15.99 15.99 Elite 7.99 10.99 7.99 D2 Mini Office 11 14.99 D4 Power Drome 18.75 18.75 Head Alignment 7.50 7.50 7.50 Xenon 7.50 7.50 D2 * 1943 15.99 19.99 Soldier of Light 5.50 7.50 D1 7.50 D2 War in Middle Earth 7.50 D2 7.50 D2 Xenon 13.99 13.99 Sorcerers Lord 9.99 9.99 D3 9.99 03 Knight Orc 10.99 D2 10.99 D4 Bards Tale 1 19.99 19.99 Black Lamp 5.50 6.30 D2 6.30 D2 Stealth Fighter D4 Bionic commndos 15.99 15.99 Match Day 2 5.50 6.30 D1 6.30 D2 G.I. Hero 6.30 Netherworld 13.99 13.99 Leaderboard Coll'n 12.99 12.99 D4 12.99 04 Kryslis 5.50 7.50 D1 Obliterator 16.99 16.99 California Games 6.75 D2 7.50 D2 Airbourne Ranger Test Drive 19.99 19.99 Rastan 5.50 D2 6.30 D2 Intensity Return to Genises 15.99 15.99 Linekers Superskill 5.50 D2 7.50 D2 Samurai Warrior 5.50 6.30 D2 Football Manager2 13.99 13.99 Starglider D3 10.99 D3 Hotshot 6.30 D1 7.50 D2 Soccer Supremo 10.99 10.99 Last Ninja 2 Target Renagade 5.50 D2 Gold Runner II 15.99 Ikari Warriors 7.50 D2 Whirligig 5.50 D1 Alien Syndrome 13.99 13.99 Football Director 6.99 6.99 Oops 5.50 7.50 D2 Leaderboard Coll'n 16.99 19.99 Adv Tac'l Fighter D2 Pink Panther 6.75 7.50 D2 Buggy Boy 13.99 16.99 Ocp Art Studio 10.99 D4 Peter Beardsley 6.30 7.50 D2 Guantlet Il 15.99 Green Beret 11 6.30 D2 Bards Tale 1 7.99 7.99 Heroes of Lance 18.75 18.75 Gunship  7.50 9.99 D4 Psycho Pigs UXB 7.50 D2 Pool of Radiance 18.75 18.75 Track Suit Manager 7.50 7.50 Karnov 7.50 7.50 D2 Platoon 13.99 15.99 N.Mansells G.Prix 7.99 D2 1943 6.75 01 D2 7.99 D2 Mind fighter 15.99 18.99 Empire Strikes Back 7.50 7.50 D2 D. Toms Olympic 6.99 D1 6..99 D1 6.99 Quadr Alien 13.99 13.99 Peagus Bridge 9.99 9.99 D3 Red Storm Rising 12.99 D4 Interceptor 19.99 Driller 10.99 D3 10.99 Barbarian II 7.50 D17.50 7.50 D2 D. Toms Olympic 13.99 15.99 Gold/Silver/Bronze 12.99 D5 Arcade Force Four 6.99 D3 6.99 D3 6.99 D3 Street fighter 15.99 18.99 Gauntlet II D2 7.50 D2 We are the Champ's 7.99 D3 7.99 D3 D3 Barbarrian II (Pla) 10.99 13.99 The Games 6.75 D2 7.50 D2 Heroes of Lance 6.75 D2 7.99 Fire + Forget 16.99 16.99 Dark Septre 6.30 D2 Time Stood Still 5.50 D2 6.30 D2 6.30 D2 Peter Beardley 13.99 13.99 Solid Gold 7.50 04 Vixen 7.50 D2 D2 Defender of Crown 19.99 19.99 Buggy Boy D2 7.50 D2 Overlord D2 7.50 Night Raider 15.99 15.99 Battlefield Germany 9.99 9.99 D3 Road Blaster 6.75 Flight Simulator II 29.99 29.99 Super Hang On 7.50 D2 Summer Olympaid 5.50 Captain Blood 16.99 16.99 Platoon 7.50 D2 Bionic Commando Starray 16.99 Time + Magick 10.99 10.99 D2 Street S.Soccer 6.75 Three Stooges 16.99 16.99 Garfield 7.99 D2 Artist Il + 3 disk Bobble Bobble 13.99 13.99 Predator 7.50 D2 Artist Il 48K 12.99 Legend of teh Sword 15.99 15.99 Captain Blood ARtist II. 128K Whirligig 13.99 13.99 Konami Collection Elite Hitpack 3 Gunship 19.99 Vampire Empires 7.50 D2 Animator 1 Super Hang on 13.99 Arkanoid Il 5.50 6.30 D2 Desert Rats U.M.S 15.99 15.99 Guild of Thieves D4 Chuck Yeagers 7.99 Great Giana Sister 15.99 18.99 Out Run D2 Theatre Europe 4.99 4.99 D1 Space Harrier 13.99 16.99 P.H.M.Peagus Magnificent 7 7.99 D3 7.99 D3 D3 Pandora 13.99 13.99 Virus Live Ammo 7.99 02 7.99 D2 7.99 D2 Multiface 44.95 44.95 Badcats 7.50 D2 Dark Side 7.50 D2 7.50 D2 7.50 D2 Summer Olympiad 13.99 13.99 Jinxter D4 The Pawn (SP128K) 10.99 D3 D4 04 Fish 15.99 15.99 Pandora 7.50 D2 Soldier of fortunes 5.50 6.30 D1 Time Stood Still 15.99 Also Available on Disk Format D1-.99. D2-.99, D3-.99. D4-.99, D5-.99 Mail Order Customers Personal Callers For Mail order please make Chq/P.P. payable to S.C.S. (C+VG) 655 Personal callers can pick up software at our branches at Shekhana, 221. Tottenham Court Green Lanes London N.8 0.Q.Y P+P included in the U.K. europe add Road London WIR 9AF Near Goodge St Station. Tel: 01-631-4627. Or S.C.S 655, Green Lanes London N.8.O.Q.Y (nearest tube stn turnpike lane.) Tel: 01-340-8565. On product of  per item, elsewhere add . Add  for all machnes for P+P (UK your copy of this advert we will give you a discout of 10% Off the R.R.P., on software. If you only) Send S.A.E for free list. Please specify machine type in order. + are making payment in cash and the title appears on this advert. items only available from 655 Green Lanes. N.8. (Except Sega, Nintendo:Above is effective from (12/8/88.) Discount prices are for mail order only 7.50 Accessories / Utilites + C64C Olympic Pack 149.99 + C64C Computer 129.99 + C2N Data Recorder 29.99 \"Load It\" Cassette Player 39.99 + Accelerator + D. Drive 129.99 + Acc'tor + Geos + F.M + 2 ND Drive ST or Amiga Disk Disector ST + Final Cartridge 3 + Action Replay MK.4 + Action Replay Proff + Enhancement Disk Expert Cartridge Freeze Machine F.M Utility disk Reset Switch Plus 2 or C64C Cover 10 X 3\" Disks 10 x 3.5 Disks (Sony) 10x 5.25 Disks Multiface 128K Multiface 3 Multiface 3 + T.Port Kempston Interface 4 Way Adaptor ST or Amiga Plus 2 J/Stick Lead Plus 3 Recorder Lead JST Ext Lead (ST) Auto Fire Adaptor + Mouse Mat Amiga or ST Dust Cover Slimline Keyboard Joysticks IBM Joystick IBM Joystick + Card 39.99 Fantastick Joystick 6.99 Quick Shot II 8.99 Quick shot Il Turbo 12.99 Konixs Joystick 10.99 Konixs + Autofire 11.99 Euromax Proffesional 17.99 Euromax non Auto-Fire 15.99 Cheetah Mach 1 Plus 13.99 Cheetah 125 Special 11.99 Cheetah 125 + 7.99 Comp Pro 5000-Black 12.99 Comp Pro 5000-Clear 13.99 Comp Pro 5000-Extra 15.99 Comp Pro 5000 BBC 17.99 Tac 2 10.99  3 12.99 Tac 5 13.99 Starfighter 9.99 Slick Stick 6.99 Economy J/Stick Cruiser Joystick 9.99 Sega Sega Master System Plus Hang on 79.95 3-D Glasses 38.99 Sega Joytick 13.99 Konixs Joystick 11.99 Light Phasor 42.99 Quick Shot J/Stick 13.99 Transbot 13.99 Super Tennis 13.99 Chiplifter 18.99 Black Belt 18.99 Action Fighter 18.99 Pro Wrestling 18.99 Shooting Gallery 18.99 Space Harrier 23.99 Rocky 23.99 F-16 Fighter 13.99 Astro Warr+Pit Pot 18.99 Out Run 23.99 Teddy Boy 13.99 The Ninja 18.99 World Grand Prix 18.99 Enduro Racer 18.99 Alex Kidd 18.99 Secret Command 18.99 Fantasy Zone 18.99 Bank Panic 13.99 Missile Defence 3D 23.99 World Soccer 18.99 Zillion 18.99 Gangster Town 18.99 Kung Fu Kid 18.99 Maze Hunt 3-D 23.99 Great Golf 18.99 Fantasy Zone 11 23.99 After Burner 23.99 Global Defence 18.99 Zaxxon 3-D 23.99 Alien Syndrome 23.99 Cube Zone 18.99 Rescue Mission 18.99 Zillion 11 18.99 Alex Kidd 11 23.99 Super Wonder Boy 23.99 Spy V Spy 13.99 ** Nintendo **** Control Deck 99.99 Gunshoe 29.99 Deluxe Set 160.00 Wild Gunman 29.99 Soccer 19.99 Urban Champion 19.99 Kung Fu 19.99 Mach Rider 29.99 Tennis 19.99 10 Yard Fight 19.99 D2 D2 7.99 D1 19.99 6.75 7.99 D2 D2 88888 7.50 DOS 6.25 !! D2 7.99 098, INNNNIININ 888888888 D2 D3 ! R !!! NON 889 989 : OVO! 6.99 Credit Card Holders Access and Visa card Holders ring: 01-348-2907, 01-340-8565, 01-631-4627. Credit card orders despatched same day subject to availability. Please note we also now sell telephones, cordless, cellular, Pabx.. Accessories Answer Fax, Copiers. Shredders. Calculators, Machines Ring: Tel + Fax 01-436-9590 SAS TORT STORT SOFT VISA TORT MAIL ORDER SPECIALISTS INCREDIBLE LOW PRICES ALL DISKS HAVE A NO QUIBBLE REPLACEMENT GUARANTEE ARE CERTIFIED 100% ERROR FREEY COME WITH LABELS 5\" ALSO HAVE SLEEVES & WRITE PROTECIS. SOUND N VOO OON COMPUTER CABLES (ribbon cable) .95 Male Male centronics 1.0m .95 2.Om Male Male RS232 1.0m .95 2.Om Female Female cent. 1.Om .95 2.Om Female Female RS232 1.0m .95 2.Om Male Female cent. 1.Om .95 2.Om Male Female RS232 1.Om .95 2.Om Standard ST centronics printer cable (25 D way plug to cent. plug, screened). 1.5m .95 3.0m .95 5.0m .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 II Centronics plug to plug (screened) 1.0 .95 2.0m .95 3.0m .95 AMIGA A500.... ...............00 ATARI 520 STEM SUMMER PACK ..00 ATARI 520 STFM. ..00 1084 COLOUR MONITOR............95 1081 COLOUR MONITOR....... ..95 ST AND AMIGA 1 MEG DRIVES....95 CITIZEN 120D PRINTER...............00 STAR LC10. .....00 ALL ST AND AMIGA GAMES 25% OFF RRP PRICE. RS232 25 way D plug to 25 way D socket (screened) 1.5m .95 2.0m .95 3.0m .95 Gender changer (RS232 25w plug to 25W socket) .50 ST 13 pin din plug to Phillips RGB monitor scart 2.Om.. .50 ST 13 pin din plug to Sony KX14 RGB monitor scart 2.Om. ...95 ST 13 pin din plug to monitor/TV scart 2.0m. ..50 ST 13 pin din plug to open end 2.0m. .95 ST 13 pin din plug to 9 way D socket for Phillips 8873 monitor switches between mono & colour res. 2.0m.. ...95 ST 13 pin din plug to two phono plugs (composite video, ST needs internal modulator) 2.0m .95 ST 13 pin din plug to 9 way D socket for NEC multisync monitor switches between mono, medium & low res. 2.Om..... .95 Scart plug .95 13pin din plug .75 14 pin din plug.......................... .95 ST switching unit for Mono & Colour monitors... ******* .............95 .95 ST 14 pin din plug to 14 pin din plug 1.0m .50 2.Om........... ..95 ST 14 pin din plug to Shugart 34 way IDC connector................. ............ ..95 ST 14 pin din to open end 2.0m .50 BLANK DISCS 50 .00 .95 Trade enquiries welcome. 10 .95 20 100 .00 COMPUTER ANCILLIARIES 3.5 Cleaning Kit .95 Mouse Mat .50 Copy Holder (Thingi left or right monitor mounting) .50 Atari ST Twin Joystick/Mouse extension lead 10 inches .75 RING FOR DETAILS OF OUR WIDE SOFTWARE SELECTION TORT Cheques etc pavable to STORT SOFT. International Orders add 10% and remitin pounds Sterling by bank draft or international money order. ACCESS MASTERCARD EUROCARD VISA arcepted CREDIT CARD ORDERLINE 0279-8yboy 0279 8950924 HOURS ADAY 7 DAYS A WEEK VAT&PP INC NO 0279 89509 HIDDEN EXTRAS WHAT YOU SEE IS WHAT YOU PAY 18 CROWN CLOSE, SHEERING, BISHOP'S STORTFORD, HERTS CM22 7NX Cheques & p/os to: SOUND N VISION MAIL ORDER Mail Order Dept. 11A Silk Street, Leigh Lancs WN7 1AW. 0942 261344. 11 Silk Street, Leigh, Lancs WN7 1AW. 0942 673689 "


"0 UO Ulu UgolosIOupdL03 anic Monsters of destru Uclear Spiders, Infernos bu Despair LANDSCAPE AGAINST INCREDIBLE ODDS HE MUST TOO LATE! "


"Thanks for all the FRP mail, it's great to see so many people getting into the hobby. If you've got a comment about FRP to make, don't be shy, let me know! This month's column contains the latest solo role playing book written by Joe dever, a review of Games Workshop's RPG Dracula, plus all the latest news and gossip. Read on ... FANTAS The fury of Dracula side you are on, that makes the game. It is full of close shaves, red herrings, tactics, strategy and forward planning. The whole game was designed by Steven Hand and SUPPLIER: GAMES form of rumours. So when an initiative. Once this is decided, brilliantly illustrated by Colin WORKSHOP Adventurer enters the town, he you can then check the relevant Dixon (the board) and Dave PRODUCED BY: GAMES will undoubtly find out table and cross reference the WORKSHOP Andrews (the counters). You and know that he is hot on weapons/abilities for a result. PRICE: $14.95. get an phenomenal amount for COMPLEXITY: BEGINNER Dracula's tail. This can be anything from your money including the two UPWARDS. Hovever, rumours are not killing Dracula outright to aforementioned full colour REVIEWER: WAYNE B. the only thing Dracula leaves seriously wounding humans. boards depicting Europe, a GAMER. behind. Sometimes he leaves My sole criticism of the game strategy and movement chart I can honestly put my hand on nasty encounters which can lies here. If you win the plus screen, a combat action my heart when I say that this is range from a plague of hungry initiative against Dracula in the board, a large sheet of full the best board Games rats to one of Dracula's undead day time and use a stake, colour counters, a deck of 60 Workshop has ever released. It vampire servants. Dracula automatically dies as event cards, three hunter is really tremendous and the The game does take a bit of he has no defence!! This is OK playsheets. Two six sided dice, company will have to go some setting up initially, but once if you want to stick to the a detailed 20 page rulebook, way to beat this little you have done this a few times legend, but in a game it has bad with pull out reference section masterpiece with their future it becomes easy enough. effects. I was killed as Dracula and four metal figures (in releases. It has been out for a Basically, dracula runs the quite a few times within a few certain editions). short while and has not game from behind his screen, minutes play because of this. The boxes with the metal honestly received the acclaim it with his small map in front of Furthermore, if Dracula figures are well worth looking deserves. him and his encounter chits on catches an adventurer out for as they are well The game lets you become either side. The players sit at unawares at nightime, he does detailed, nicely cast and add Dracula for a few hours, whilst the other end of the table in not kill them, he merely character to the game. your friends become his reach of the large map. They wounds them. This is an I would unhesitatingly adversaries, Lord Godalming, have their playsheets' ready additional burden to the recommend this game to Dr Stewart and the notorious to hand. already overworked Dracula beginners and experienced vampire hunter, Van Helsing. Combat involving Dracula is player. players alike. It will provide There are two ways to win. a bit sticky at first, but once T his criticism aside, the hours of fun, suspense and For Van Helsing and his again becomes routine after game moves along at a terror for all who play. associates winning means practice. First of all you have moderately fast pace, but the killing Dracula, or trapping to determine if the combat suspense is there all the time. It PLAYABILITY him in his castle for a certain takes place in day opr night. is the thrill of being on COMPLEXITY period of time, whilst victory Then you secretly pick your Dracula's tail, or the tense for Dracula means creating a weapon or ability that you wish excitement of eluding your DESIGN certain amount of vampires or to use, then you roll for pursuers, depending on what VALUE killing key members of Van Helsing's party. However, before the party can kill Dracula, they must find him. There are two boards, one large and one small, both represent the whole of Europe circa 1890. Van Hesling's party must openly show their moves on the large board, while Dracula moves on the small board, which is concealed behind a special screen. This is meant to represent the powers of Dracula's information network, plus his special powers. However, whatever city Dracula enters, he leaves behind him speculation in the oona nila Defur Dracula Dracula GT Prek Dece Seard 74 The Fury of Dracula is a very well produced game. "


"Role PLAYING CREATED BY: JOE DEVER. are sipping their celebratory PRODUCED BY: BEAVER champayne, HAVOC enact BOOKS.  SUPPLIED BY: GAMES OF their ultimate revenge. A LIVERPOOL. transmitter hidden on their PRICE: .50. island, which is fitted with a  COMPLEXITY: BEGINNER time delay mechanism, clicks UPWARDS. on, sending a high frequency REVIEWER: WAYNE B. GAMER. radio signal to a communications satellite Highway Holocaust is the first orbiting the earth. The satellite solo role playing book in the amplifies the signal, shoots it new Freeway Warrior series, back to earth and detonates all by Joe Dever. the hidden nuclear warheads. Dever will be a familiar At the time the bombs name to those of you out there detonated, you were lucky (!) who like book role playing. enough to be visiting your Over the years he has one many uncle's oil refinery in Texas. various awards for his books, He and your aunt take you on a the most famous of which was trip down his mine and whilst for his Lone Wolf adventures. there, the bombs exploded HIGHWAY : HOLOCAUST FREEWAY WARRIOR ahaan Holocaust TRIFUTERNES JOE DEVER In this new release, you play trapping you there for the the part of Cal Phoenix, a aforementioned eight years. young man who has spent eightFinally, in the year 2020AD, years living in an underground you manage to dig yourself out complex with his aunt and to discover the nightmare that uncle. The reason for this is the bombs left behind. that HAVOC The Hijack, It is easy to believe that the Assasination and Violent three of you are the last Opposition Consortium an survivors on earth, but after From the author of the best-selling series LONE WOLF organisation consisting of messing about with a radio set, A Joe Dever's Highway Holocaust. political terrorists who are you manage to ascertain that funded by organised crime, has there are other groups of managed to cause total nuclear survivors scattered around the You are elected scout, because my adventure as Cal Phoenix, I devastation. countryside. You manage to of all the skills you have was totally hooked. I met HAVOC achieved this by team up with the people in a learned and your task is set savage bikers, violent punks hijacking a train containing small settlement called «DCI» can you help lead your and radiation victims. My seventeen 100-Kiloton and all seems safe for a while. settlement to a new, safer land? journey was full of danger, and warheads and then holding the You learn how to shoot, repair It is inevitable on your death lurked around every world to ransom for a motor vehicles and drive. It is journeys that you will get into corner. staggering $2 trillion in gold your prowess with a gun and combat, be it with weapons or if you liked the films Mad bullion. Of course, the world your skill behind a wheel that on a hand to hand basis. The Max, Escape From New York, leaders won't give in to earns you the name Freeway system for determining the Bladerunner, and The terrorism\" (haven't I read that Warrior. combat results is simple to say Terminator, then this somewhere before?) and they After a few years, DCI gets the least. All it consists of is the adventure book is definitely immediately give orders to increasingly frequent reports selection of a few random for you!! destroy HAVOC's HQ, which that the large gangs of bikers, numbers and then comparing is based on a unmapped island PLAYABILITY hooligans and pschopaths, that them with a combat ration in the Pacific Ocean. are known to be roaming the chart in the back of the book. COMPLEXITY However, whilst the leaders countryside are geting, It is fast, fluid and fun! DESIGN of all the world's major nations un-nervingly closer every day. From the moment I started VALUE "


"TRAS TRADE WAS TRONI SSNK Shin Nhon Kelaku Corp 1965 SAX ELECTRONICS CORP SPECTRUM .95 COMMODORE .95 AMSTRAD .95 COMMODORE DISK .95 AMSTRAD DISK .95 he name Imagine Software (1984), 6 Central Street Leetme Manchester M2 SNS Tel 061-834 3939. Telex, 669977 "


"FANAS, ROLE-PLAYIN News Standard Games has released a booklet of additional scenarios A Paranoia (adventures for their best only the tough survive. selling game «Cry Havoc\") the mission, rather than which is a snip at .95. The assassinate each other at the booklet contains six original drop of a hat.\" The reason for scenarios, as well as additional this is because the computer rules for peasants plus hints has promoted you to Security and tips on using miniature level Blue and re-assigned you lead figures with all their to the elite Internal security products. I found the latter of force of HIL Sector. special interest and using If you believe for one minute figures certainly brings more that working as an Internal clarity and detail into the Security team you will become game. friends, then you deserve what The scenarios have a great you get! As any experienced medieval flavour to them and Paranoia player will tell you, it my favourite is \"The Knight is hard enough to survive a Errant», where a company of Paranoia adventure, let alone a mercenary soldiers has been campaign. terrorising a village, Survival aside, this pack will threatening the inhabitants if assist a GM no end. It has a they do not pay them in money quick nine stage guide to create or in kind!! A wandering the famed «Blue Troopers», Knight, Sir Richard has loads of colour cardboard cut encouraged the village to stand out counters (cor!), to up to the extortioners and represent the troopers, various conflict is not short in the concerned citizens, a blue offing. Can the mass of the trooper auto car and a couple peasants beat the expertise of of nasty looking dinosaurs!! the mercenaries? Only you can Of course these are totally decide. superfulous and don't have to  The Paranoia Campaign be used at all. I would advise Pack, (see Paranoia review this letting the players use their issue) has been out for a little imagination, as it would worry while. However, it has been them more!! spotted in several games Overall the adventure is well Workshop stores at a much written in the inimitable reduced price. Originally Paranoia style. Designer Ken selling at .95, I managed to Rolston has pulled out all the obtain a copy for only .99! stops to create as much As any Paranoia player will tell madness and mayhem as you this is an essential possible. He has taken manu of purchase, and will put a lot of the situations and phrases from life (and death!) in any a well-known American TV adventure. police series, and based some Cheekily Sub titled \"Hill of the characters around the Sector Blues» the intro states actors. It is well written, with that this campaign book loads of gags and cartoons to \"departs from the normal keep you interested and the Paranoia adventure. Here artwork by Jim Holloway is characters are encouraged to just great. Miss this campaign keep each other alive to achieve pack at your peril! Thanks for all the mail that has been pouring in it is really appreciated! However, please don't stop as I need to know your views on the FRP scene along with what you like and dislike. To entice you into writing, I will give away a prize to everyone who has a letter printed!! So get to it! . Wayne, I know that D+D Your wish is my command means Dungeons and Dragons Geoff. Standard are located at: and AD+D means Advanced Arlon House, Station Road, Dungeon and Dragons, but I Kings Langley, Herts, don't know the differences between them! Can you please explain as I would like to buy Andy Lawson from Liverpool one of them?' asks; Peter Powditch London . Wayne, What are your favourite computer FRP Phew, a tall order for a column games and what would you with as limited space as this!! recommend for a beginner? Basically, D + D is a simple Andy Lawson sword and sorcery FRP game, Liverpool. which ignores a lot of real life facts. It is based on fun and is At the moment Andy, I don't easy to play, with few believe that there has been a lot complications to hinder it. It is of pure FRP games issued to also aimed at a younger date. A load of them have been market. expanded adventure games AD+D is a different game with combat options thrown altogether from D+D in. However, things are although it is set in the same beginning to change now and background. It is quite without a doubt my favourite complicated, fairly intricate FRP computer game is and involves a lot of reading. Dungeonmaster by Mirrorsoft Let me give you an example of on the ST. It has the the differences. In D+D if you combination of everything you wanted to hit the monster with could ask for, and I for one am your sword all you would do is totally addicted to it. It has roll a dice to see if you hit it. In combat, traps to negotiate and AD+D you would have to see the best magic system I have if you have the space to wield ever seen. I have spent so many your weapon, work out how hours on it I have lost count!! many attacks you may need Also, I have seen a preview of before you start swinging. My the AD+D Computer game advice is try D+D first to see if that is soon to be released by you like it. US Gold/SSI. It looks very good and well worth . I have seen you review some purchasing when it is games which are issued by comercially available. To get Standard Games, but I can't into the swing of things try seem to buy them anywhere. «Legacy of the Ancients' on Could you please give me their the trusty old C64 or address so I can order things by \"Shadowgate\" on the Atari post? ST. The latter is a cross Geoff Penn between an adventure and a London FRP game. "


"PlayByMail I have been flooded by your sorrows in the all-day bar. \"Busy, busy is the only way to describe the PBM requests for an update on the Tickets for the convention cost KJC special version of \"It's A scene at the moment, what with the Great a miserly .00, but C + VG Crime\" for C + VG readers. So Northern PBM Convention shortly taking readers can get them even here it is. place and people bombarding cheaper for .50 if they write On the gang front, the head to; The BPMA, 14 Courtney me with mail about playtest honchos as I write are the Road, Holloway, London N7. positions, PBM information, Axemen (737) who have a All cheques and POs to be massive 1913 notoriety points. hints, tips and news. made payable to the BPMA. They are being closely followed by The Fighting Falcons (547), Spellbinding who are on 1859; just behind C+VG Offer them are the \"Riotous Spellbinder games have come Assembly\" (429), who have a up trumps once again for notoriety of 1769. Meanwhile, for insertion in a ring binder. CW is a world where the one-time leaders \"Lumps C + VG readers. They are There is also a publication adventure is only a sword Of Green Putty\" (313) have breath away. If you don't look called the \"Crasimoff's World arranging for a C+VG readers only game with a difference. dropped to fourth with 1650 for danger, danger will come to Companion» which is The difference being prizes. and the aptly named you. There are thousands of produced on a fairly regular \"Hammers\" (383) have unique animals, monsters, basis. It contains histories and The way the game is structured means they can offer various dropped to fifth place. magical herbs, mystical forna articles relating to various CW prizes at various levels. The . However, this is not a bad prizes start off with things like achievement for them as they book and record tokens, but have just split their gang. will slowly and surely move up No Mob Boss has yet to prizes like Role Playing become Godfather, but things Games, and finally holidays are getting tight. \"The for two abroad!! The terms are Patonucci Family\" (291) have just being finally agreed, but I the most mob businesses, but can reveal that the game will be they are closely followed by called Kingdom and the «The Freakato Family\" (446) turns for start off at 50p each! who are in second spot. On the For those of you who don't other hand The Hedgio Family know what Kingdom is all (350) have the most loyal about, it is a totally gangs, whilst The Lugenmann computerised PBM that is (216) have the most enforcers. based on power struggles, The mysterious \"Family\" diplomacy, tactics and (433) have suddenly entered the strategy. As in the time old most enforcers lists like a bolt Spellbinder tradition your start from the blue, and it is clear up, rule book and first couple that this game is not over by a of turns will be TOTALLY long stretch. More reports to FREE. follow next month. A Rule book artwork from Crasimoff. Talking about KJC, you all of which have their subjects and comes in the same Fanzine Fervour may remember that a couple of individual token! The same format as the rulebook. There Here are the details of a few format as the rulebook. There Here are months ago I mentioned the goes for the cities, towns and is also a bi-monthly newsletter, more fanzine fact that they had sold off their other non-player characters which contains cartoons, Magazine is long established longest running game to longthat you may meet. The land is player alliances, rumours and and dedicated soley to PBM. It time GM Andy Smith. I am of a living, breathing, world stories. comes out quarterly in a large course talking about. where legends are created. Great Northern format covering a Crasimoff's World. Andy has now re-vamped combination of professional CW was the first PBM I ever CW, so that all the turns are PBM Convention and amateur PBMs with a tried. I have now been playing processed using the latest word This is the last call for the unique style. it for over eight years and processor technology, which Great Northern PBM Issue 26 is still available, at during that time it has seen means clearly printed A4 Convention, which takes place the rather expensive price of many other PBMs come and sheets. The tokens are now in Sheffield Poly (Pond Street) .65. go. Sure, it has been through computer printed and opposite the BR station, on «Vollmond' is a brand new its bad patches, but it has amended when something 15/10/88 between 10am and fanzine, which is not totally always seen them through and happens to them. For example, 6pm. This is your chance to see dedicated to PBM, as it also has now developed into a high if your party made a carving on some of the big and some of the covers a wide range of FRP presentation, quality game. a tomb wall, for which there not-so-big PBM companies, games. It has a PBM column CW is a hand moderated was a token, the next party to have a go at some free FRP by yours truly and covers all sword and sorcery game. set in enter the tomb would receive a games, get involved with some aspects of the gaming world, a mythical fantasy world. You new token, with full details of FREE live role playing. vote in including a great news section. play the part of brave your actions detailed on it. the alternative PBM awards it is well worth the 70p asking Chieftain, who leads his part of the long awaited third and generally get to know the price. Send and SSAE to me nine trusted companions in edition rulebook is now ready. players and the GMs. If you get and I will tell you how to get search of whatever you deisre. It is now A4 size and is suitable bored you can always drown them. ISA KFUM? "


"om TELE-GAMES Europe's Largest Stock Of Video Games & Cartridges For tot Vntasy ICBS ATARI INTELLIVISION 2600 PU IN STOCK NOW 1. Dark Future .99 Warhammer Fantasy RPG .95 Advanced Dungeons and Dragons from .95 Basic, Dungeons and Dragons from 7.95 PAINT SETS Citadel Colour Paint Set .95 Creature Paint Set .95 Monster Paint Set .95 Expert Paint Set .99 Nintendo BOARD GAMES Blood Bowl Curse of the Mummy's Tomb Fury of Dracula Dungeon Quest Heroes for Dungeon Quest Dungeon Quest Catacombs Chaos Marauders Chainsaw Warrior Kings and Things Warlock of Firetop Mountain Warrior Knights Blood Royale Railway Rivals Superpower Judge Dread Roleplaying Game Talisman 2nd Edition Judge Dread Boardgame Rogue Trooper Boardgame Block Mania Renegade Legion + Many More Listen .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .95 .99 .95 .95 .95 .95 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .95 WICO JOYSTICKS FOR NINTENDO IN STOCK NOW The leading Video game specialists. Send for lists (state make of game) TELEGAMES, WIGSTON, LEICESTER, LES 1TE (0533-880445) FIGURES Bugman's Dwarf Rangers Nightmare Legion (Skeletons) Harboths ORC Archers Skarloc's Wood Elf Archers Ruglud's Armoured ORCs Ulthar's Dragon Company Goblin War Chariots Dwarf Onager Skeleton War Machines Imperial Space Marine Space ORK Raiders Devastators Rhino (Vehicle Kit) Elf War Chariot .95 .95 .95 .95 .99 .99 .95 ATARI ST OWNERS 1932 8888888 Why not complement the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with the MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY. The greatest, biggest and best Atari Club on the market. cu illuminazione axiskaun APPROX 1400 ST TITLES NOW IN STOCK ROLEPLAYING GAMES Runequest Advanced Runequest Runequest Monsters Land of Ninja Griffin Island Rogue Trader Battle Rules Warhammer Battle III Siege Armies Stormbringer RPG Paranoia Il Hardback .95 .95 .95 .99 .99 E14.95 14.99 .99 .99 .95 .95 WARGAMES Air Superiority Air Strike Team Yankee Tank Leader Soldiers + Many More .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 PLEASE ADD .00 P+P TO ALL ORDERS OF .00 OR LESS Games, Business, Education and utilities. MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over 5 years ago first conceived the idea of a software library. FOR SALE: HUGE STOCK CLEARANCE OF ATARI XL/XE CASSETTES. Hundreds to clear, all originals, please write in for list and prices. 200 XL cassettes for sale (originals)  the lot! Often purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Many very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany, Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast efficient and friendly service operating a computerised custom built system to keep track of all your records. requests are attended to immediately, virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service, regular newsletters and program updates. plus other inter-club activities. SEND LARGE S.A.E. TO: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 READWAY, BISHOPS CLEEVE, CHELTENHAM, GLOS. Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programs are originals with full documentation TOTAL FANTASY Bucktons Yard, Darlington, Co.Durham DL3 70L Telephone: 0325 381686 hine The S issues Lilecasve Skill......... Tactics......... Strategy......... Decisions............. Excitement......... Tension......... Action FOOTBALL B CRICKET QUALITY STRATEGY GAMES from E & J SOFTWARE (Established 1984) 6.95 02     10.95 D3 6.75 D:    193888888 on och 88888888888 oro   8888888  DUNGUN     9       880.88 ut         OS 6.151 | 95 UNCA 1 6.95 03  TITLE SPEC+ 3 AMS DISCCOMM DISC Amiga & Atari ST Amiga Atari ST Action Force 11 5.95 D2 Arcade Force Four 15 95 Bionic Commandos 5.95 6.45 9.95 6.45 7.95 Arkaniods 11 12.95 Beardsley Football 6.25 6.25 9.95 6.45 9.95 Alien Syndrome 12.95 12.95 Buggy Boy 4.99 D2 6.45 9.95 6.45 9.95 Army Moves Boot Camp 19 6.75 6.459.95 17.95 1795 Bards Tale 1 or 2 6.95 D3 Bard's Tale 725) 10.95 7.25 10.95 Bionic Commandos 15.95 12.95 Bard's Tale 2 or 3 Buggy Boy 15.95 12.95 Black Tiger 5.15 9.95 6.45 795 Bomb Jack 15.95 12.95 Barbarian Il 6.75 D2 45 8.95 Barbarian Il 15.96 9.96 Combat School Birdie 15.95 12 95 Champions 95 9.95 12.95 Boot Camp 19 Collected Works 8.95 D3 Corruption 15.95 15.95 Carrier Command Carrier Command 15.95 15.95 Dark Side Captain Blood 15.95 15 95 Daley Thompsons 88 Chrono Quest 19.95 19.95 Empire Strike Back Champion Cricket Eliminator California Games Footb Manager II Dungeon Master Footb Director Dark Tiger Footb. Dir. Il 126 Daley Thompson Flintstones Empire Strikes Back Fernandez Die Eliminator Foxx Fights Back Football Manager Il G Lineker S. Skills Fire Power G Lineker Hot Shot 5.95 Garfield 95 Fed of Free Trade 6.959.95 Fernandez Must Die 5.96 5.15 GI Hero 95 6.75 Gary Lineker Super 9.75 Skills Gold S Bronze 10.95 D4 95 10.50 15.95 G. Linkeker Hot Hawkeye 6.75 9.95 Shots Heroes of Lance 6.959.96 6.959 .95 Gauntlet il Hot Shot 6 25 D: 6.75 8.95 6.75 8.96 Garfield Ikari Warriors 5.95 D17.50 7.95 6.45 9.95 Heroes of Lance Konamis 10 Hits Karate Ace 8.95 95 Helter Skelter 9.95 895 9.95 Last Ninja 11 95 8.75 Hot Shot 8.75 9.95 Laser Squad Ikari Warriors 6.25 6.25 Magnificent 7 Interceptor 95 695 13 95 6.95 D4 4.95 Matchday il Leather Neck 595 8.75 495 02 Mickey Mouse 6.45 9.95 5.45 Legend of the Sword 9.95 5.95 D1 Marauder 6.45 9.95 6.45 Mickey Mouse 9.95 Night Raider 6.75 D1 6.75 9.95 Mindfighter 6.75 9.95 Netherworld Mars Cops 5.20 D1 6.75 9.95 6.75 9.95 12.95 Outrun 45 6.95 D2 Menace 9.95 6.45 9.95 Night Raider Operation Wolf 12.95 5.15 Overlander 95 6.75 Navcom 6 16.95 795 5.15 Oops 6.75 Netherworld 9.95 12 96 6.75 D2 Platoon 95 6.75 Outrun 9.95 12.95 6.75 Obliterator 9.95 Psycho Pig UXB 15.95 15.95 95 Road Blaster 6.75 9.95 15.95 Overlander 12.95 Oops 12 95 12.95 Par 3 95 13 Par 4 12.95 Platoon 9.95 1295 16.95 15.95 Pool of Radiance R.Type Rambo 3 5.25 6.75 9.95 6.75 8.95 Road Blasters 15 95 12.95 Sidewinder 10 95 13 95 6.95 Red Storm Rising 6.95 4.95 D1 6.45 Stake Crazy 9.95 6.45 Starglider II 8.75 15.95 15.95 Street Fighter 6.45 5.94 D1 9.95 6.45 Street Fighter 9.95 15.95 12.95 Summer Olympiad 6.45 15 95 12.95 6.45 9.95 Space Harrier 12.95 5.15 Salamander 6.25 6.25 Summer Olympiad 9.95 12.95 The Double 795 Stir Crazy 12.95 12.95 Target Renegade 5.15 D2 Star Gooze 12 95 12.95 Track Suit Manager 6.45 6.45 Speed Ball The Games (Winter) 9.95 6.45 Super Hang-On Time Stood Still 129 5.15 D3 Sky Chase ST 5 Star Timescanner 5.95 5.95 Typhoon 6.46 8.95 Star Ray T-Wrecks 5.15 D2 6.75 9.95 Slot Game Creator The Mad Mix 5.20 D1 5.25 Test Drive Thundercats Vinicator 5.95 4.95 Virus The Games (Winter) 6.25 Venom Strike Back 495 01 6.45 9.95 The Mad Mix Whirligig 5 15 02 9.95 Verminartor 10 Great Games II 6.96 D1 6.959.95 6.959.95 Virus 4 Hits (Hewson) 5.95 D2 645 9.95 6.45995 Vectorball 720 5.95 6.45 9.95 6.45 795 6 Pac Vol 3 595 01 6.45 9.95 6.45 Where Time Stood 1943 6.45 D1 6.75 8.95 6.75 8.95 4 Of Road 6.45 6.75 9.95 12.95 12.95 6.75 Xenon 995 Zynaps 12.95 12.95 3 Disc 01 .75 02&.95 03 15.95 12.95 110.95 04 .95 (4OH Road 15.95 Mail Order only, postage included Great Britain, EEC add 75 per item, overseas add .50 per item, fast Service, send Cheque P0 o Megasave Dept, CVG) 49H Sutherland Si, Victor, London SWIV 4K.. Mail Order only. Please send for free list of new releases on Amstrad, C16, MSX, Atari ST, Amiga, Commodore, Spectrum and +3 Disc State which list. Please note new programs will be sent the day they are released Future League Limited          ON N EUROPEAN CHAMPIONS *NEW* THE INTERNATIONAL CHALLENGE OF THE EUROPEAN NATIONS CUP Genuine Nations Cup Format with full Random Draw of 32 Seeded Teams Fixture List, Results and League Tables of ALL 8 Groups Discipline & Medical Reports Squad of 22 Players plus Other Players available 17 Month Itinerary of Qualifying Group (Arrange Friendlies) and Finals Plus many more Superb Features and Options. EUROPEAN CHAMPIONS includes E & J's MATCH PLAY SYSTEM an imaginative and exciting new style of match presentation which captures the ACTION, DRAMA & TENSION of International Football WORLD CHAMPIONS A COMPLETE WORLD CUP SIMULATION Select Friendlies 25 Players Qualifying Group 2 In-Match Subs Discipline Table Select Tour Opponents Extra Time Final Rounds Players Gain Experience 7 Skill Levels TEXT MATCH SIMULATION including:Bookings, Goal Times, Named & Recorded Goal Scorers, Injury Time, Corners, Free Kicks, Match Clock, Penalties PLUS many more Features PREMIER II CAN YOU HANDLE ALL OF THIS? Play all Teams Home & Away Unique Transfer Market Team & Substitute Selection Named & Recorded Goal Scorers Injuries Transfer Demands Continuing Seasons Sauad Listing ALL Teams Financial Problems 7 Skill Levels Offers to Manage other Teams Sackings Managers' Salary Save Game Team Styles Bank Loans AND many more Features. EUROPEAN II THE MOST COMPLETE SIMULATION OF EUROPEAN CLUB FOOTBALL YOU CAN BUY Home & Away legs Full Penalty Shoot Out (with SUDDEN DEATH) 2 In-Match Subs Away Goals count Double (if Drawn) Full Team & Sub Selection Extra Time 7 Skill Levels Enter your own PREMIER II Winning Team TEXT MATCH SIMULATION plus Sending Off and Disallowed Goals Results Table PLUS MUCH MORE! CRICKET MASTER A SUPERB SIMULATION OF ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL/COUNTY CRICKET Weather, Wicket & Outfield Conditions Batting & Bowling Tactics Team Selection Fast, Medium & Spin Bowlers 4 Types of Batsmen. Select Field Layout 3 Skill Levels. Wides : Byes No Ball Run Out Misfield Dropped Catches Scoreboard Batting & Bowling Analysis Run Rate Single Option 3 Game Speeds. STAR FEATURE a complete MATCH OVERVIEW showing Ball by Ball Action and Commentary and MUCH MORE! TEST MASTER *NEW* ACOMPREHENSIVE SIMULATION OF A 5 DAY TEST MATCH -Includes most of the Features of CRICKET MASTER and MATC Nightwatchmen Light Meter. Rain Stops Play Varying Number of Overs per Day Follow On Save Game New Ball Bad Light Interruptions TEST MASTER is a True representation of a Complete Test Match and offers the ULTIMATE CHALLENGE to All Cricket Enthusiasts. CRICKET MASTER & TEST MASTER prices Include a FREE pad of SCORESHEETS Software Spectrum Commodore Amstrad availability Any 48/128K 64/128K CPC Tape Disc + 3 Tape 5%\" Disc Tape 3\" Disc EUROPEAN CHAMPIONS .95 .95 n/a n/a n/a n/a WORLD CHAMPIONS .95 .95 .95 .45 .95 .95 PREMIER II .95 .95 .95 .45 .95 .95 EUROPEAN II .95 .95 .95 .45 .85 .95 CRICKET MASTER .95 .95 .95 .45 .95 .95 TEST MASTER .95 .95 n/a n/a n/a n/a FANTASTIC VALUE: Special Discount of .00 for every EXTRA game purchased (e.g. buy 2 Games deduct .00 from TOTAL buy 3 Games deduct .00 from TOTAL 4 Games .00 etc). ALL GAMES are available by MAIL ORDER for IMMEDIATE despatch by 1st class post and include Full Instructions. (OUTSIDE UK please add .00 for postage and send payment in Pounds Sterling only). PLEASE STATE WHICH MACHINE AND TAPE OR DISC. Cheques or Postal Orders payable to E & J Software. Send to: E & J SOFTWARE, Room 5.37 Westmoor Road, ENFIELD, Middlesex EN3 7LE. NON 5 20 D1  6.25 D1 O   7.95  15.95 6.25 D1  9998899 525 795 0 5.15     8888888 MONUONNON  888888888888888 0 0 "


"«THE MAIN EVENT» DEPT (C+VG) 61 STAFFORD STREET, HANLEY, STOKE-ON-TRENT, STAFFORDSHIRE ST1 1LW 24 HOUR ANSWER SERVICE. TEL: 0782 281544 COMMODORE 64 6.30 6 30 5.39 5.59 59 6.99 90 6.30 6.99 6.30 6.30 6.30 6.30 6.30 6.30 6.30 5.59 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 30 oooooo 99 6.99 6.99 ROAD BLASTERS RASTAN ARKANOID RODOH TARGET RENEGADE D.T. OLYMPIC CHALLENGE SHACKLED BIONIC COMMANDO DREAM WARRIOR DESOLATOR ROLLING THUNDER GAUNTLET 11 OUTRUN 720 NETHERWORLD ALIEN SYNDROME LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE PLATOON HOTSHOT S.S BASKETBALL NIGHT RAIDER SUPER HANGON VINDICATOR MICKEY MOUSE T-WRECKS SKATE CRAZY G.L. SUPERSKILLS HEROES OF THE LANCE TYPHOON HOTSHOT DIAMOND ROAD BLASTERS OVERLANDER CHUBBY GRISTLE BARDS TALE COMBAT SCHOOL GRIZOR SALAMANDER GREAT GIANA SISTERS 1943 TRACKSUIT MANAGER EMPIRE STRIKES BACK BUGGY BOY BARBARIAN CYBERNIOD BEYOND THE ICE PALACE 6.99 6.30 6.30 6.99 6.99 5.59 5.59 5.59 5.59 5.59 6.99 6.30 6.30 5.59 6.30 SPECTRUM ROAD BLASTERS RASTAN ARKANOID RO DOH TARGET RENEGADE D.T. OLYMPIC CHALLENGE SHACKLED BIONIC COMMANDO DREAM WARRIOR DESOLATOR ROLLING THUNDER GAUNTLET II OUTRUN BAD CAT 720\" NETHERWORLD ALIEN SYNDROME PLATOON HOTSHOT S.S. BASKETBALL NIGHT RAIDER SUPER HANG-ON VINDICATOR MICKEY MOUSE T.WRECKS SKATE CRAZY GL. SUPERSKILLS HEROES OF THE LANCE TYPHOON HOTSHOT DIAMOND ROAD BLASTERS OVERLANDER CHUBBY GRISTLE BAROS TALE COMBAT SCHOOL GRYZOR SALAMANDER GREAT GIANA SISTERS 1943 HAWKEYE POWER PYRAMIDS HELL AND BACK POOL OF RADIANCE SS SOCCER TRACK SUIT MANAGER FOOTBALL MANAGER 2 HAWKEYE IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 2 6.99 6.30 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.30 6.99 6.30 6.99 6.99 AMSTRAD CPC ARKONOID R.O. DAY TARGET RENEGADE B.T. OLYMPIC CHALLENGE SHACKLED BIONIC COMMANDO DREAM WARRIOR DESOLATOR ROLLING THUNDER GAUNTLET #1 OUTRUN BAD CAT 720\" NETHERWORLD ALIEN SYNDROME PLATOON HOTSHOT S.S. BASKETBALL NIGHT RAIDER SUPER HANG ON VINDICATOR MICKEY MOUSE T-WRECKS SKATE CRAZY G.L. SUPERSKILLS HEROES OF THE LANCE TYPHOON HOTSHOT DIAMOND ROAD BLASTERS OVERLANDER CHUBBY GRISTLE BARDS TALE COMBAT SCHOOL GRYZOR SALAMANDER GREAT GIANA SISTERS 1943 HIGHLANDER LEVIATHIAN IT'S A KNOCKOUT GENIS STARION HOWARD THE DUCK DRAGONS LAIR GAUNTLET WONDER BOY 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 AMIGA FIRE AND FORGET 17.50 SENTINEL 13.99 BUGGY BOY 17.50 BETTER DEAD THAN ALIEN 13.99 GREAT GIANNA SISTERS 17.50 BEYOND THE ICE PALACE 17.50 BIONIC COMMANDO 17.50 BEYOND ZORK 17.50 BUREAUCRACY 24.49 EBONSTAR 17.50 FIREPOWER 17.50 GALACTIC INVASION 17.50 G.LT FOOTBALL 17.50 HACKER 2 17.50 HOLLYWOOD HIJINX .21.00 KINGS QUEST 3 21.00 MINDFIGHTER 17.50 SHANGMAI 17.50 SHERLOCK 17.50 SPACE QUEST 21.00 TASS TIMES 17.50 PINBALL WIZARD 13.99 FLINTSTONES 13.99 TERRAMEX 13.99 ARKANOID 18.99 KARATE 13.99 BUBBLE BOBBLE 13.99 BOBO 13.99 MIND SHADOW 12.50 MUSIC STUDIES 24.49 WISH BRINGER KARATE KID 2 LEATHERNECK 13.99 SILENT SERVICE 17.50 LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE 13.99 PORTALL 13.99 MIND SHADOW 13.99 CUT THROATS 13.99 ZORK 2 13.99 ZORK 3 13.99 ENCHANTER 13.99 SORCERER 13.99 INFIDEL 13.99 STARCROSS 13.99 HACKER 13.99 (MERCENARY) FRENCH 17.50 JET 28.00 ECHO 17.50 ATARI ST OVERLANDER 13 99 HELTER SKELTER 10.99 CHUBBY GRISTLE 13.99 SKYCHASE 13.99 HAWKEYE 13.99 GREAT GIANA SISTERS 13.99 1943 13.99 ARKONOID II 13.99 D.T. OLYMPIC C MAL 13.99 SHACKLED 13.99 BIONIC COMMANDO 13.99 DESOLATOR 13.99 GAUNTLETII 13.99 BAD CAT 13.99 KINGS QUEST 3 17.50 MIND FIGHTER 17.50 MUSIC STUDIO 24.50 PLUNDERED HEARTS 17.50 PREDATOR 13.99 STRIP POKER II 10.99 SKY FOX 17.50 HUNT RED OCTOBER 17.50 TERRAMEY BRIDGE PLAYER 2000 13.99 BMX SIMULATOR 10.99 TRIVIAL PURSUIT 13.99 STAR WARS 13.99 ALIEN SYNDROME 13.99 PROTECTOR 17.50 FIRE BLASTER 13.99 BETTER DEAD THAN ALIEN 13.99 BATTLE SHIPS 10.50 BEYOND ICE PALACE 13.99 BUGGY BOY 13.99 IKARI WARRIORS 1099 10.99 THUNDER CATS 13.99 FOUNDATIONS WASTE 17.50 JEWELS OF DARKNESS 13.99 GOLDEN PATH 13.99 LEGEND OF THE SWORD 1750 NORTH STAR 13.99 RETURN TO GENESIS 13.99 SENTINEL 13.99 STAR GLIDER 17.50 STAR TREK 13.99 PETER BEARDSLEY 13.99 INTERNATIONAL SOCCER ATARI ST OUTRUN FOOTBALL MANAGER II WIRLIGIG ARMY MOVES HOT SHOT NIGHT RAIDER SUPER HANG-ON ZYNAPS MICKEY MOUSE OIDS SPACE HARRIER VIRUS DEFLECTOR MASTERS OF UNIVERSE PINK PANTHER VAMPIRE EMPIRE HITCHIKER LEATHER GODDESS MIND SHADOW ZORK III BEYOND ZORK CAPTAIN BLOOD CRASH GARRET GET DEXTER II PROHIBITION WARLOCKS QUEST JOE BLADE HOLLYWOOD POKER ROCKFORD SIDE WINDER ALTERNATIVE GOLD RUNNER GOLD RUNNER II INTERNATIONAL SOCCER LEATHER NECK TANGLEWOOD TRIVIA CHALLENGE F15 STRIKE EAGLE GUNSHIP SILENT SERVICE DEJA VU SUNDOG TETRIS PLATOON BOMBJACK LAND TIME FORGOT FOOTBALL MANAGER TEE UP SHANGAI 13.50 13.75 13.99 13.99 13.99 13.99 13.99 13.99 13.99 13.99 13.99 13.99 13.99 13.99 13.99 13.99 21.00 21.00 17.50 21.00 17.50 17.50 13.99 13.99 13.99 13.99 6.99 6.99 13.99 6.99 21.00 17.50 13.99 13.99 13.99 13.99 13.99 15.99 17.50 17.50 17.50 10.99 13.99 13.99 13.99 13.99 21.00 1750 6.99 6.30 99 99 6.30 5.59 5.59 6.30 6.30 6.30 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.30 6.99 6.30 6.30 6.30 6.70 6.99 6.30 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6 99 6.99 6.99 6.99 4.99 4.50 4.25 4.50 4.50 125 All Budget priced WE GIVE AT LEAST 30% DISCOUNT We also sell (.99) games stocked. ON ANY NEW TITLE. IF YOUR NOT console games at low Atari 400/800 and 2600 Any 3 for .50. SURE OF A PRICE, PLEASE PHONE. prices. Please send SAE for free list. AMIGA COMPILATIONS 21.00 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 Neeeeeee 88888888888 SPECTRUM INT. KARATE CHALLENGE THE GOBOTS SKY RUNNER AVENGER FUTURE KNIGHT PILE UP SNAP DRAGON DEUS EX MACHINA HYPA BALL ELEVATOR ACTION TRAIL BLAZER DANDY DEACTIVATORS PUB GAMES RANA RAMA EXPLORER FIFTH QUADRANT BALL BLAZER SPIN DIZZY INDOOR SPORTS THING BOUNCES BACK EXPRESS RAIDER JAIL BREAK KNIGHT GAMES II QUARTET BACK TO FUTURE MARBLE MADNESS SCOOBY DOO LEADER BOARD BOMBJACK II 2 ON 2 BASKETBALL BASEBALL SHORT CIRCUIT TAG TEAM WRESTLING 2.75 S.D.I. TETRIS 13.99 BARBARIANS 13.99 FOOTBALL MANAGER 2 13.99 HOLLYWOOD POKER 13.99 ARCADE CLASSICS 13.99 BAD CAT 1750 LEADERBOARD 17.00 LEADERBOARD TOURN 8.95 MOUSE TRAP 10.99 WORLD DARTS 10.99 JOE BLADE 6.99 CHALLENGE 6.99 WORLD GAMES 17.50 WINTER GAMES 17 50 THREE STOOGES 21 00 KICKSTART 11 6.99 BLASTER BALL 6.99 ARGHH 13.99 SPACE STATION 9.99 WAR ZONE 9.99 FIRE BLASTER 9.99 PROTECTOR 9.99 THE ENFORCER 9.99 PLAYHOUSE STRIP POKER 9.99 ONE ON ONE 15.99 ARCHON 15 99 7 CITIES OF GOLD 15.99 STATION FALL 13.99 MOON MIST 13.99 SUSPECT 13.99 BALLY HOO 13.99 A MIND FOREVER VOYAGE 13.99 DEADLINE 13.99 COMMODORE 64 INT KARATE OF THE MASK SKY RUNNER AVENGER FUTURE KNIGHT KRAKOUT IMPOSSIBALL KAT TRAP ACTION REPLAY HARD GUY TRAIL BLAZER GREYFELL DEACTIVATORS GUN RUNNER RANA RAMA INHERITANCE FIFTH QUADRANT BALL BLAZER SPIN DIZZY THEY STOLE MILLION THING BOUNCES BACK EXPRESS RAIDER CONVOY CRYSTAL CASTLES QUARTET ALIENS CHOLO BIGGLES SAI COMBAT STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 2 ON 2 BASKETBALL BASEBALL SAILING LAST MISSION 9.99 9.99 9.99 9.99 9.99 9.99 9.99 9.99 9.99 9.99 9.99 9.99 9.99 9.99 9.99 19.99 19.99 11.50 14.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 2.75 2.75 AMSTRAD CPC INT KARATE NEMESIS CHALLENGE THE GOBOTS AVENGER FUTURE KNIGHT KRACKOUT IMPOSSIBALL KAT TRAP QUARTET BLADE RUNNER SPITFIRE 40 KNIGHT GAMES II ACE PUB GAMES RANA RAMA EXPLORER FIFTH QUADRANT BALL BLAZER SPIN DIZZY WERNER TRAIL BLAZER KETTLE BOUNDER WINTER OLYMPICS EXPRESS RAIDER SAILING ELEVATOR ACTION SHOCKWAY RIDER NOSFERATO TARZAN 2 ON 2 BASKETBALL BASE BALL SPACE HARRIER MARIO BROS ATARI ST MUD PIES LANDS OF HAVOC FLIP SIDE TURBO ST CHECKMATE ST KARATE ST SPACE STATION WAR ZONE FIRE BLASTER PROTECTOR ADDICT BALL THE ENFORCER ST COLOUR WRITER ST KEY MAKRO MANAGER THUNDER DEGAS EYE BLACK CAULDRON KINGS QUESTII ULTIMA 11 HOLLYWOOD HIJINX TRINITY MOON MIST BALLYHOO WITNESS SUSPECT CUT THROATS PLANET BALL A MIND FOREVER VOYAGING STARCROSS ENCHANTER SPELL BREAKER SEA STALKER DAMES) COMMODORE 64 6 HIT PAK VOL. II ACTION PACK II BEST OF BEYOND COMPUTER HITS 5 NOW GAMES III BEST OF BEYOND PCW GAMES COLLECTION GOLDEN OLDIES FIVE STAR GAMES II ACTION PACK II 6 SPORTS PACK V.I. 6 SPORTS PACK V.2. 6 THRILLER PACK V. 1 6 THRILLER PACK V.2 WAR GAMES PACK SPECTRUM WAR ON WANT (14 GAMES) TRIO PACK 1.99 NOW GAMES III 3.99 ACTION PACK II MICRO VALUE I, II, OR III 3.99 6 SPORTS PACK V.1. 3.99 6 SPORTS PACK V 2 6 THRILLER PACK V.1. 6 THRILLER PACK V.2 WAR GAMES PACK AMSTRAD ACTION PACKI ACTION PACK III 10 GREAT GAMES (GREMLIN) 4.50 MICROVALUE III 3.99 6 SPORTS PACK VOL 1 OR 2 3.99 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 1.99 2.75 3.99 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 2.75 S.  Sand 75 2.75 2.75 14.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 2.75 2.75 Please cross PO/Cheques and make payable to: THE MAIN EVENT. To help maintain our low prices we would be obliged if you could include a first class stamp with your order, although this is NOT compulsory. Free Post & Packaging. Overseas please add 75p per tape. We apologise for any alterations or omissions since going to press. The Main Event is a division of Software City. "


"tyd.DAJ.JJIN8140WAYd TANESPLORE 44MM.FIM.MPPMKTU.MPAMBI+18.PNMF NICIPAL AFT DESSEMIASSES 44M4.146.MPPMATUMPAMPABI418.PNMDF foNitr.ffpofft R ESTADORES DE SENESTER Long ago, High King Valwyn drove back the barbarian hordes invading Albareth, endinga tragic war. Drained of spirit the High King departed to the homelands of the Elden folk to renew his strength. Legends promised his return after twenty years. But twenty years have come and gone, and Valwyn has not returned. Now the mystic powers of old are fading and chaos rules the land. Desperate brigands roam the once-peaceful roads, while the fearful citizens of Albareth live in a world without law. Dauntless adventurers are being recruited to carry out unlikely missions in strange, distant places. Welcome to the Kingdom of Albareth! Experience a game with relentless action and unprecedented levels of graphic detail. Stroll along the seashore, lulled by the rolling tide or explore long-forgotten desert ruins, challenging death with sword in hand, for these are the Times of Lore! Times of Lore combines real-time gameplay with an epic story of adventure and intrigue, bringing unique challenges never before encountered in a fantasy role-playing game! Available for Commodore 64/128. Cassette .95, Disk .95. ORIGIN DE SYSTEMS INC. / TPlease send Copies of Time of Lore C64 Cassette --Disk Name (block capitals) — Address Post Code I enclose  — including 55pP+P. Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd. or debit my Access/Visa card. Expiry date No. MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place. Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. UK. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tlx: 43422 MPS/UKG. LAS PAMBM-18.PAAA.Nirr.papa F1 "


"WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW re Reviews Fish sive Review you more a stump i take his aptitude test, and this stump, though. Instead, return three keys to him. you'll find a little man who Facing you are three is completely off his portals, each leading to a rocker, jealously guarding mini adventure. One takes a golden disc that you into a recording commemorates the studio, famous for its millionth copy of a Seven recordings of the group Deadly Fins number. This known as the Seven Deadly lunatic has his own Fins, another takes you to philosophy for life, for where a group of hippies which he thinks he is are signing round a famous: Get a home, get a makeshift fire in a ruined bird, and settle down. He abbey, whilst the third sets has lived by it, too. His best you down by a stump in a friend is and his exploding forest clearing. homing pigeon that hasn't No pouch full of colours in a clue where to head for, SUPPLIER: There you are, one RAINBIRD/MAGNETIC ordinary Wednesday SCROLLS. MACHINES: ATARI morning, happily ST/AMIGA/C64 TURBO-LOAD swimming round your VERSION TO FOLLOW. bowl, when suddenly a PRICE: $24.50. plastic castle breaks the REVIEWER: KEITH tranquility of the water in CAMPBELL. your bowl, knocks the It sounds corny, and it's pondweed to one side, easy to say, but I have to: and lands on the gravel Fish is like no other beneath you. When you've adventure I've played quite got your breath before. And then again ... back, you decide to Fish is something like bits of explore the interior of this Leather Goddesses, alien structure that is now Stationfall, Lurking Horror, occupying the major part Border Zone, and The of your environment. Pawn, all rolled into one, Snatching a quick ant-egg with a bit of Monty Python snack from the the surface, thrown in for good you enter the dark interior measure. Just what sort of with more than just a little game am I talking about? apprehension. I'm talking of the fifth Dagon, the god-like game to come from inhabitant of the castle, Magnetic Scrolls, and the mistakenly believes you to inning northeast or northwest third one this year! Plotted have arrived in answer to Sono disco dancers are here. this time by John Molloy an advertisement. Before (well known to regular he is prepared to offer you eaning the dancers and then dance with then C+VG readers for his the job, he insists that you A Two adventure folk shag away to the music. contributions a few years back), Pete Kemp, and Phil South, it takes the art of adveturing into a completely new dimension underwater! And before you say \"Underwater it's been done before!\", read on... I don't know what it is about fish that makes people go completely pun crazy. I mean think about. Why fish. If someone mentioned cats to you, or dogs, or snakes, you are not going to start making the most awful puns imaginable are you? Fish though, and it becomes pun city. D e to sila sifted its not Magnetic Scrolls new ust. game doesn't miss the Des is a line and a stoi se fut 1924, s st sstestile opportunity to become the most pun packed adventure ever. ad. 18 ct pos A Nothing fishy about this boozer. Sfiles Text o s arises, visit the toilet below the ag in dance b "


"Spooky location but where are the fish. and is currently sulking in its cage not far away, following a dreadful row between the two. This is an utterly mad adventure, and one that definitely breaks the mould, as I found to my cost just when thought I was winning! And so, with the three keys safely retrieved, Damon gives you the big one\" the task for which he wanted to hire you. It seems that the city of Hydropolis is in danger. Water is evaporating away Adventure Reviews le we e t w at brachiis Soodis to the rest you can take a track into the gloon. i leaflet has been dropped by sone unthinking lout. Maybe you shouli pick it get leaflet and exanine it. faster than it is being there's your colleagues on city, not to mention the supplied, and the entire the project: Eric Chubb, crowds of ordinary fish-world is in danger. A Simon Tench, and Bertie pilchards and sardines, as special project has been Bream. Having been given you head towards the set up to teleport large the day off, you'll find them famous seat of learning. A quantities of water back down at the Hook, Line & little investigation will but it seems it has been Sinker, having a few reveal that a number of key sabotaged. You find snifters. components for the 15. Rajolersin yourself transported into Leaving your apartment 'device' on which the the body of fish-scientist Dr (not forgetting your project depends are out of . Printer Roach, the man in charge all-important Fishofax) you stock and a further look E, or return of the project, and you set off via the round will uncover some Credits must discover which fish underground, for an likely replacements. Goodies are reposnsible for the dirty appointment with the Here is an adventure full deed, stop them, and principal of the university. of fishy puzzles and puns, repair the damage. It's rush hour on the tube, (try playing The Prawn, or There are plenty of and you are jostled by Gilled of Thieves on the suspects. To start with, guppies on the way to the university mainframe...) that is guaranteed to produce shoals of laughter as you scratch your scales trying to fathom its depths. Scrolls really seem to be cleaning up on the adventure scene this year. Mind you, it has to be said they haven't had much competition. With their old enemy Level Nine not producing anything new of iate they have had the field to themselves. Then there is Infocom. What's happened to them no new game since Christmas. Files Text . . Graphics.\" Goodies you used to suffer, has long since gone. However, it is still very dangerous VOCABULARY 8 up here as there are no hand holds and no safety line, Watch your feet. ATMOSPHERE 9 A gargoyle stares at you, in a vacant manner. PERSONAL anime gargoyle and then go down I VALUE A Meet strange creatures in the land of Fish. "


"///// STARGLIDER E 19. LED*** FREBRD THE ULTIMATE TEST ELITE \"The game of a lifetime\" (Zzap 64) SENTINEL \"There's nothing to compare with it» (Amtix) TETRIS \"Tetris will have you hooked from the moment you pick up your joystick» (Your Sinclair) ACE \"This is the perfect flight simulation\" (Crash), STARGLIDER \"One of the best shoot-em-up's you can buy\" (Ace) SPECTRUM 48K/128  SPECTRUM PLUS 3 AMSTRAD 464/6128. AMSTRAD DISC COMMODORE 64/128. COMMODORE DISC .95 cass. / .95 Disc THE ULTIMATE PACK THE NAME BEHIND THE GREAT GAMES BEAU-JOLLY "


"wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww You are ALONE UDI The other side of the mystery Proper Charlie's place? Mortville Manor dventure Reviews 6 A The approach to Mortville Manor. A If Pat, Guy etc are all there, why can't we see them? comprehensible, although the French accent superimposed on the speech synthesiser does occasionally give rise to a comic effect. The graphics of the locations are not up to the SUPPLIER: LANKHOR. immediately head for. On there are multiple exits same standard as the title  MACHINES: ATARI ST, your arrival, you find she shown in the picture, picture, which is itself a AMIGA, IBM PC VERSION TO has already died. What allows the selection of FOLLOW. location, and it is PRICE: ATARI ST, AMIGA follows is typical detective 'Choice On Screen'. somewhat disappointing $24.95. stuff, in which you gather Following which you click to find that the characters REVIEWER: KEITH evidence, and interview on the appropriate door. listed as present in a CAMPBELL. members of the family, to If you choose to DISCUSS, location are not actually In their approach to piece together the course then only the characters visible. adventures, the French of events. present in the current room Overall, this is a well have always seemed to me the entire game is are highlighted on the presented intriguing to be utterly illogical and played through mouse drop-down menu. mystery. out of touch with the rest of and function keys, with no Selecting one produces a the world. For example, the text entry from the close up mug-shot of the incredibly doltish and keyboard. The key to this is character, and offers the apparently random the menu bar, which offers choice of subjects for Passengers On The Wind, options and presents a discussion. Again, clicking |  VOCABULARY 7 wouldn't have bothered to drop-down menu giving a on one these causes the play for more than five number of further choices, character shown on | ATMOSPHERE 8 minutes if I hadn't had to depending on the main screen to issue forth a review it. Why this is the PERSONAL option. MOVE, for example, suitable reply in case, and why letters from lists the actual places to synthesised speech, with French readers lag way  VALUE which you can go directly, an animated face. Most of behind the numbers sent in and in some cases, where the replies are quite by their European counterparts, I have no myself as basically a idea. two-word adventurer, However, perhaps with having been playing Fish Mortville Manor, a new era extensively, I found it rather has begun, for here is a limiting. I wanted to put the mystery game that has fwooble back in its cage,  SUPPLIER: D&H GAMES. some very nice original MACHINE: SPECTRUM 48K. while, began to seriously to put the carrot inside the features about it, and plays PRICE: $9.95. wonder whether he would kettle. I began to feel a in a logical, if very French  REVIEWER: KEITH bother to come back. mite frustrated, not the manner. It opens with a title CAMPBELL. Carefully guarding the least due to a not screen not far short of If you wandered into a book, I thought I would over-endowed Magnetic Scrolls lonely cottage and found take a stroll outside for a vocabulary, until I stopped standards and a catchy a wizard, what would you breath of fresh air, and see to think: \"If I can't enter a little loop of digitised do if he asked you stay if I could find him. Ooops! command because it is too music, with superimposed behind and guard his spell The book was definitely complex, then the game voice singing 'Mortville book whilst he went in magic, for I was picked up does not require it!\" Manor'. Digitised sound search of a missing page, and whisked back inside An interesting little contains all the harmonics recently stolen by a the cottage again! adventure that puts the in one single channel, to goblin? The Realm is set in a player in quite an original faithfully represent an Would you hang around, strange wood, and has dilemma at the start, and overall 'sound picture'. trusting him to return within monochrome graphics is pleasant to play. You have received a a reasonable time, or. that are mostly passable, desperate telegram from would you desert your in some cases quite Julia Defranck, saying she post? I hung around a bit, detailed. They may be ! VOCABULARY 6 is very ill and in danger of examined his mouldy turned on and off with a PIX ATMOSPHERE death, and is very worried carrot, and let his pet command. for the rest of the family. It is Wooble out of its cage, The parser accepts only PERSONAL addressed from Mortville tried reading the book with two words, and whilst I VALUE Manor, which is where you little succ Ilittle success, and after a have always thought of dan "


"WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE 1 BRIDGE STREET GALASHIELS TD1 1 SW WORLDWIDE .SOFTWARE: WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE 49 STONEY STREET NOTTINGHAM NG1 1LX MasterCard VISA COMMODORE AMIGA SOFTWARE ATARI ST SOFTWARE G. Linekar Super Soccer Galdregons Domain... Gauntlet II Gunship..... 17.95 17.95 17.95 16.45 16.45 13.25 18.95 13.25 17.95 13 25 16.45 13.25 14.35 17.95 13.25 13.25 11.20 13.25 14.35 13.25 12 25 ATARI ST SOFTWARE 1943 Battle of Midway.. Ad Dungeons & Dragons... Alien Syndrome... Army Moves Barbarian Better Dead Than Alien.... Bionic Commando......... Bomb Jack Buggy Boy... Captain Blood Carrier Command.... Corruption Daley Thompson Olympic Chall Dungeon Master........... Empire Strikes Back...... F15 Strike Eagle Fernandez Must Die... Fire and Forget.... Football Manager Gary Linekar Hot Shot................ 13.25 14.99 16.45 28.95 .16.45 14.35 13.25 16.45 16.45 13.25 16.45 18.95 14.35 13.25 14.35 ATARI ST SOFTWARE Rally Run...... Return to Genesis... Revenge Il... Road Blasters Silent Service Skychase Space Harrier....... ST Five Star STAC Starglideril... Star Ray Stir Crazy... Street Fighter Summer Olympiad.... Super Hang On........ Time and Magik.......... Verminator Virus Where Time Stood Still...... Whirligig....... .. 13.25 13.25 6.55 14.35 16.45 13.25 13.25 16.45 26.55 Kennedy Approach............ Leaderboard Collection Birdie Leatherneck Legend of the Sword Live & Let Die.... Mars Cops Mortville Manor. Nigel Mansell Grand Prix Night Raider Operation Wolf Outrun.. . Overlander... Pandora... Peter Beardsley Football... Platoon.. COMMODORE AMIGA SOFTWARE Overlander... Peter Beardsley Football................ Plantoon Powerdrome... Quadralien Rally Run... Return to Genesis Road Blasters... Rocket Ranger Rockford Sentinel Shadowgate. Skychase. Space Harrier Starglider 16.45 16.45  16 45 1325 16.45 16 45 16.45 13.25 ..14.35 16.45 16.45 16.45 16 45 16.45 16.45 16.45 .13.26 13.25 21.95 13.25 . 16.45 31.95 13.25  13.26 13.25 13.25 13.25 13.25 13.25 1943 Battle of Midway. 4x4 OH Road Racing Adv Dungeons & Dragons leach)... Alien Syndrome... Army Moves... Barbarian Il Bard's Tale il Better Dead Then Alien Bionic Commando Black Lamp Bomb Jack Bubble Bobble....... Buggy Boy.... Captain Blood Carrier Command... Chubby Gristle.... Combat School Corruption. Daley Thompson Olympic Chall... Driller Empire Strikes Back...... Enlightenment... Faery Tale Adventure... Fernandez Must Die Fire and Forget.... Flight Simulator Il... Football Manager ll. Foundations Waste... Future Tank...... Garrison II. Gnome Il... Great Glana Sisters.... Green Beret... Gryzof Hawkeye.. Hotball Ikari Warriors Interceptor International Soccer.... Jet... Leaderboard Collection Birdie Legend of the Sword.......... Leisuresuit Larry (Adults only Live Let Die..... Mars Cops Mortville Manor....... Motor Bike Madness.. Night Raider Ooops! Pandora 1325 Stir Crazy Summer Olympiad Thender Thundercats Time and Magik...... Ultima V.. Universal Military Simulator Verminator Virus... Wanderer Whiligig Wizaball World Tour Golf..... Zynaps... 21.95 16.45 16.45 13 25 16.45 13.25 16.45 18.95 14.35 Fast delivery on all Stock Items by 1st Class Mail in UK Special Overseas Service by airmail Worldwide Credit Card orders accepted by phone or mail Credit Card Order Telephone Lines North, Scotland, N. Ireland and Overseas 0896 57004 (24 hrs) South Midlands, Wales 0602 480779 (24 hrs) C64/128..... 11.99 12.95 6.95 12.95 12.95 16.45 16.45 16 45 16.45 16.45 18.95 13 26 28.95 17.95 13.25 JOYSTICKS Cheetah 125plus... Cheetah Mach 1 plus... Comp Pro 5000........ Comp Pro 5000 Clear... Comp Pro 5000 Extra..... Speedking. Speedking with Autofire..... Ram Delta.......... Cruiser............... 14.95 10.99 11.99 7.99 7.99 13.25 C64/128 ...cass disk Adv Dung Dragons (each).. . 7.99 11.99 Alien Syndrome.............................6.55 9.00 Bamboozal 7.25 9.75 Barbarian Il ...7 25 9.75 Bards Tale Ill............ .. .. .....14.95 Daley Thompson Olymp Chall.... ... 7.25 9.75 Fernandez Must Die ...7 25 9.75 Flight Simulator il.. . 2995 31.95 Football Manager II.....................7.25 11.20 Fox Strikes Back............................7.25 9.75 GI Hero... ...7 25 9.75 G Linekar Super Skills... 7.99 11.99 Gary Linekars Hot Shot... ..7.99 11.99 Gold Silver Bronze...... .11.99 14.50 Hawkeye .7.25 9.45 Intensity 7.25 9.75 28.95 Kennedy Approach............... 7.25 11.20 Konami Arcade Collection.... 1.25 13.50 cass disk 9.75 11.20 ...11.99 14.50 7.25 11.20 7.25 13.50 6.55 11.20 7.99 11.99 7.99 11.99 7.25 11.20 ...7.99 9.75 7.25 9.00 7.25 11.20 .7.25 9.75 11.20 14.95 7.25 12.45 11.20 14.95 .11.20 14.95 ..6.55 9.75 ..7.25 11.20 Last Ninjall Leaderboard Coll Par 4.... Live Ammo...... Magnificent Seven... Matchday ........ Mickey Mouse... Night Raider Ooops! Outrun Overlander P. Beardsley Football Pandora Pirates Powerplay. Project Stealth Fighter. Red Storm Rising.... Samurai Warriors..... Super Hang On...... Wasteland.......... C64/128 19 Boot Camp... 1943 Battle of Midway. Psycho Pigs UXB... Salamander Silont Service...... Street Fighter Street Sport Soccer Strike Fleet.. . Summer Olympiad Super Hang On....... Target Renegade The President is Missing..... Times of Lore.... Track Suit Manager Typhoon..................... Ultima lor lll or IV ... Ultima V... Vindicator....... We Are The Champions........ ..cass disk 7.25 11.20 7.93 11.99 ..7.99 11.99 2.25 9.75 ..7.25 11.20 7.99 11.99 ..7.99 11.99 .7.99 11.99 7.25 11.20 7.25 11.20 ...6.55 9.75 .......9.75 ...7.25 9.75 ... 7.25 ..7.25 11.20 ....... 14.95 8.99 9.95 ARA PERIPHERALS Azimuth C64 tape head align kits.... 5.25\" disk box (holds 100 diskl.... C64 dust cover......... C64 disk drive cover Renel Switch... . . C2N Datasette unit 6.99 28 95 6.55 11.20 7.25 13.50 BLANK DISKS 3.5\" DS/DD Disk (perten).. 5.25\" DS Disk (per ten)..... Please make cheques or postal orders payable to WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE. All prices include postage & packing in UK. Overseas please add .50 per cass/disk for AIR MAIL delivery. Credit card orders accepted by phone or mail. Galashiels: (0896) 57004 (24 hours) Nottingham: (0602) 480779 (24 hours) All UK Deliveires by 1st Class Mail ECTOR SOFTWARE Dept 1 VECTOR SOFTWARE 10 Barleymow Passage Chiswick London W4 4PH Advance orders accepted Call 01-994 6477 and ask for VECTOR SOFTWARE (office hours) ENQUIRIES ALWAYS WELCOME SPECIALISTS IN MAIL ORDER Vindicator Virus 6.25 We are the Champions Where Time Stood Still Whirligig 5.50 9.50 550 950 6.75 5.50 10.50 5.50 9.50 16.50 13.50 6.75 13.50 16.50 16.50 13.50 16.50 16.50 16.50 16.50 10.50 16.50 16.50 13.50 13.50 Peter Beardsley PHM Pegasus Pool of Radiance (D&D) Red Storm Rising Roadblasters Salamander Sargon 3 Chess Shoot em up Construct Street Fighter Target Renegade The President is Missing The Games (Winter Tracksuit Manager Typhoon Ultima 5 Vindicator We are the Champions Where Time Stood Still Whirligig World Tour Golf 6.75 10.50 6.75 10.50 6.75 10.50 10.50 13.50 6.75 10.50 6.75 9.50 13.50 10.50 13.50 6.75 105 6.25 9.50 9.50 6.75 10.50 6.75 6.25 9.50 13.50 6.25 10.50 6.75 6.25 10.50 6.75 10.50 6.75 Leaderboard Collection Netherworld Nigel Mansell GP Night Raider Outrun Overlander Pegasus Bridge Peter Beardsley PHIM Pegasus Roadblasters Salamander Street Fighter Target Renegade The Games Winter Time & Magic Typhoon Vindicator We are the Champions Where Time Stood Still Whirligig 6.75 10.50 6.75 10.50 6.75 10.50 6.75 10.50 6.75 10.50 6.75 10.50 6.75 10.50 6.75 10.50 6.25 10.50 6.75 10.50 6.25 6.75 10.50 6.25 10.50 6.75 10.50 10.50 10.50 6.25 10.50 6.25 10.50 6.75 12.50 6.25 10.50 6.75 10.50 S8888 Title  88888 ATF SPECTRUM Title Cass Disk 1943 10 Great Games 2 6.75 19 Boot Camp 6.75 Alien Syndrome 6.25 10.50 ATF Barbarian Barbarian Il 6.75 Bards Tale Bionic Commandos Carrier Command 10.50 11.50 Corruption 12.50 Daley Thomson 88 6.75 9.50 Dark Side 6.75 10.50 Empire Strikes Back 6.75 Football Manager 2 6.75 10.50 Fox Fights Back 6.25 9.50 Gary Linekars Skills 5.50 9.50 GI Hero 5.50 Great Giana Sisters 6.25 9.50 Gunship 6.75 10.50 Hawkeye 6.75 Hercules 5.50 9.50 Heroes of the Lance (D&D) 6.75 10.50 Hot Shot 5.50 Lancelot 10.50 Laser Squad 6.75 Last Ninja 2 9.50 Leaderboard Collection 6.75 10.50 Netherworld 5.50 9.50 Nigel Mansell GP 6.75 10.50 Night Raider 6.75 9.50 Outrun 6.25 9.50 Overlander 5.50 9.50 Overlord 6.75 Pegasus Bridge 6.75 Peter Beardsley 6.25 PHM Pegasus 6.25 10.50 Roadblasters 6.25 9.50 Salamander 5.50 Street Fighter 6.25 9.50 Target Renegade 5.50 The Games (Winter 5.50 Tracksuit Manager 6.75 Typhoon 5.50 16.50 10.50 16.50 13.50 16.50 6.75 13.50 16.50 Heroes of the Lance D&D Hot Shot Joe Blade Lancelot Leaderboard Collection Legend of the Sword Motorbike Madness Netherworld Night Raider Oids Outrun Overlander Peter Beardsley Pool of Radiance D&D Revenge 2 Roadblasters Rocket Ranger Sargon 3 Chess Shoot Em Up Construction Sky Chase Space Harrier Starglider 2 Street Fighter Summer Olympiad STAC Test Drive Terraforce The Games (Winter) UMS Ultima 5 Virus Vindicator Vectorball Where Time Stood Still Whirligig Zynaps COMMODORE 64 Cass Disk 10 Great Games 2 6.75 10.50 19 Boot Camp 6.75 10.50 Alien Syndrome 6.75 9.50 6.25 9.50 Barbarian 6.75 9.50 Barbarian 2 6.75 Bards Tale 6.75 10.50 Bards Tale 2 11.50 Bards Tale 3 11.50 Bionic Commandos 6.25 10.50 Chuck Yeager 6.75 10.50 Corruption 12.50 Daley Thompson 88 6.75 9.50 Dark Side 6.75 9.50 Empire Strikes Back 6.75 Football Manager 2 6.75 10.50 Fox Fights Back 6.75 9.50 Gary Linekars Skills 6.75 10.50 GI Hero 6.75 9.50 Great Giana Sisters 6.75 9.50 Gunship 10.50 13.50 Hawkeye 6.75 9.50 Heroes of the Lance (DGD) 6.75 10.50 Hot Shot 6.75 9.50 International Soccer 6.75 10.50 Lancelot 10.50 Last Ninja 2 9.50 10.50 Leaderboard Collection 6.75 10.50 Netherworld 6.75 10.50 Night Raider 6.75 10.50 Outrun 6.75 9.50 Overlander 6.75 9.50 Patton v Rommel 10.50 Pegasus Bridge 6.75 10.50 13.50 16.50 13.50 16.50 Barbarian 2 Bards Tale Bards Tale 2 Bionic Commandos Carrier Command Championship Cricket Corruption Daley Thompsons 88 Fernandez Must Die Ferrari Formula One Fire and Forget Football Manager 2 Goldrunner 2 Great Giana Sisters Helter Skelter Heroes of the Lance (D&D) Hot Shot Interceptor Joe Blade Lancelot Leaderboard Collection Motorbike Madness Netherworld Night Raider Overlander Peter Beardsley Pool of Radiance Red Storm Rising Roadblasters Rocket Roger Sargon 3 Chess Sentinel Shoot Em Up Construction Sky Chase Starglider 2 Star Goose Street Fighter Summer Olympiad Terraforce The Games (Winter Virus Vectorball Where Time Stood Still Whirligig World Tour Golf Zynaps 16.50 16.50 13.50 13.50 16.50 13.50 13.50 27.50 16.50 9.50 13.50 16.50 16.50 13.50 13.50 6.75 13.50 13.50 13.50 AMSTRAD Title Cass Disk 10 Great Games 2 6.75 1943 6.75 10.50 Alien Syndrome 6.75 10.50 All Stars 6.25 ATF 6.25 10.50 Barbarian 6.75 9.50 Barbarian 2 6.75 Bards Tale 6.25 10.50 Bionic Commandos Corruption 13.50 Daley Thompsons 88 6.75 9.50 Dark Side 6.75 10.50 Empire Strikes Back 6.75 Football Manager 2 6.75 10.50 Gary Linekars Skills 6.75 10.50 Great Giana Sisters 6.75 10.50 Gunship 10.50 13.50 Heroes of the Lance (D&DI 6.75 10.50 Hot Shot 6.75 9.50 Ikari Warriors 6.75 10.50 Lancelot 10.50 Last Ninja 2 9.50 10.50 16.50 9.50 16.50 ATARI ST Title Cass Disk 1943 13.50 Alien Syndrome 13.50 Artificial Dreams 9.50 Barbarian (Palace 10.50 Barbarian 2 10.50 Bards Tale 16.50 Bionic Commandos 13.50 Carrier Command 16.50 Championship Cricket 10.50 Corruption 16.50 Dungeon Master 16.50 Empire Strikes Back 13.50 Fernandez Must Die 16.50 Fire and Forget 13.50 Football Manager 2 13.50 Gary Linekars Skils 13.50 Goldrunner 2 13.50 Great Giana Sisters 13.50 Gunship 16.50 Helter Skelter 10.50 16.50 13.50 16.50 AMIGA Title Cass Disk 1943 16.50 Alien Syndrome 13.50 Artificial Dreams 9.50 Barbarian (Palace 13.50 13.50 16.50 13.50 All prices include VAT and p+p in UK. Please add  to overseas orders for p + p. Add 50p to your order if you require recorded delivery (UK only). Please make Cheques/Postal Orders payable to Vector Software. Orders normally dispatched within 24 hours. Send SAE for free price list please specify machine. Any titles which are not yet released when ordered will be sent on day of release. No visitors please we are a specialist mail order company. "


"WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW Holn enture Stuck in an the combination of the thing is certain, they are adventure? KC and case, in Lapis the tool of the games his crew can help. Adventure Philosophorum, should cheat! If you feel like Helpline, C+VG, write in without delay! cheating the C64 version of Priory Court, 30-32 Starting the mole digger Quest For The Holy Grail, Farringdon Lane, and finding the map, is here is how Robert Owen London EC1R 3AV exhausting the gets a complete program imagination of Stuart Day listing: The perils facing a sweet solutions he is willing to of Peterborough. Has young girl who asks a s end you, for the price of a anyone enough Reset the computer, and: friendly stranger back stamped, addressed imagination to help? POKE 2050,8 home, have been brought envelope. Well, so ends yet another SYS 42291 home to Christopher Waite, Simon Percival of year of C+VG and the POKE 45,PEEK(174) of Chelmsford. \"How do Wivenhoe, has got all the Adventure column next POKE 46.PEEK(175) you stop him changing into jewels, and rescued all the month will mark our POKE 47,PEEK(174) a werewolf?\" he asks, heroes in Heroes Of Karn, seventh birthday! POKE 48, PEEK(175) realising too late, that the but can't end the game. Is Meanwhile, get writing! Let POKE 49,PEEK(174) average man in the street it a simple matter of typing me know of any adventure POKE 50,PEEK(175) may not turn out to be quite SCORE, or has he missed problems you can't solve, what he seems. someting important along and I'll try to help. Can you SMASHED: Meanwhile, in the same the line? yourself help someone to get the key, take the cat game, Gareth Edwards Miss Thompson cannot who is stuck this month? Or and enter the chopper. cannot beat the monster tell the difference between perhaps you've an Switch on the chopper, pull that is covering the a rat and red herring! It's a interesting comment to the joystick, and then land. passage leading upwards, rat she is trying to get rid of, make on the world of near the coffin, past the but has that nagging Adventure? Whatever your TRINITY: skeleton, he says. The feeling she may be letter is about, don't forget Drop the paper bird in the name of the game, of wasting her time! The that each month there is a playground, for transport! course, is Wolfman. answer to this, and the year's free subscription to Back to Christopher, who whereabouts of a candle, the Adventurer's Club Ltd, JINXTER: also wants to know how to would be of immense help worth , for the sender of Doofer crystal chimney. disrupt the guards' card to her in playing Cloak of the letter I judge to be most Drop the ash and hide, game in Rigel's Revenge, Death on her Atari. worthy of the prize! Have the bracelet ready and how to escape the Everyone who has And while you're all busy When the finger shows, crocodiles in Tass Timesa. played Scott Adams' writing, I'm off for an inside! But there aren't any classic Pirate Adsventure, adventure of my own, to crocodiles in Tass Times. will have a bit of know how Moscow and Leningrad. RIGEL'S REVENGE: Christopher so which is it in the field of boat See you next month if Pull the bar and pull it to be, allidiles or building. But there are they let me out! hard. Medicate and bend crocogators? boats and boats, and here it up. Having trouble with we have a potential wreck CHEAT'S CORNER Knight Orc? Richard being built, by one Robert It's not often you get pokes FISH: Archer of 129 Johnson Milton. Anyone who can for an adventure game, why make coffee yourself Road, Cannock, Staffs keep Robert afloat, and they are usually the when there's an expert WS11 2BB has maps and who also happens to know province of arcades. One available? o whereaboutimmense help Smashed SUPPLIER: ALTERNATIVE helps a lot if you are a fan Helpline testify. However, SOFTWARE. of the popular TV series invariably the purveyors of  MACHINE: SPECTRUM 48K. MASH. You play the part of such clues and their letters PRICE: .99. Pigseye Peers, an army with an even greater REVIEWER: KEITH surgeon. Before playing number of problems with CAMPBELL. very far into the adventure, which they require help! Smashed is not exactly a Clingon goes missing, It's only a budget game, new adventure, but has presumably trapped in a probably GACked, and been the subject of many minefield, and you are written by the recently pleas in the Helpline, over asked to report to the prolific C. A. Sharp (have! the past few months. entrance to help out. put you off yet?) but no-one Unfortunately, I was sent Now I'm not sure whether has actually claimed to neither a review copy nor a it was my lack of the have solved it yet! There's press release. Indeed, I intimate details of MASH, no prizes on offer foronly knew of its existence whether it was just sheer anyone who does, but if from the maill was stupidity, or whether it is the you can afford the .99, receiving. way the adventure is and don't mind risking Eventually I contacted written, but after some boredom whilst struggling the publisher, Alternative three or four hours playing, with it, it may be worth a try Software, who were kind I had managed to solve And if you solve it, let me landblem and enough to send me a copy only one problem, and know! know! post haste. So what is all even that didn't merit any the fuss about? points! However, it VOCABULARY Smashed stands for obviously is possible to do ATMOSPHERE Strangest Mobile Army better than this, as a Surgical Hospital East of number of clues just PERSONAL Detroit. Needless to say, it starting to roll in to the VALUE "


"D. G. Marketing for all your COMSOFT Nintendo ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM Hardware, Latest games and Peripheral Requirements SCOTLAND'S LARGEST MAIL ORDER FIRM ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT & CARRIAGE. NO HIDDEN EXTRAS. AMIGA GAMES ATARI ST GAMES OUR OUR DETAILS OF GOODS R.R.P. PRICE DETAILS OF GOODS R.R.P. PRICE 17.49 13.08 21.83 1749 26 21 21.87 26 21 17.49 17.49 8.74 13.12 See the System on Stand 3442 at the PC Show Earls Court 14-18 September For further information: 01-637 5735 or write to: De Gale Marketing Limited 81 Tottenham Court Rd, London W1A 1EY 19.99 14.95 2495 19.99 29.95 24.99 29.95 19.99 19.99 9.99 14.99 19.95 19.99 24.99 14.95 29.99 19.95 9.99 19.99 29.95 29.95 24.99 9.95 19.95 9.95 9.99 19.99 19.99 9.95 19.95 19.95 24.95 24.95 19.99 14.95 19.95 34.99 9.95 24.95 24.99 24.95 14.95 24.95 19.95 19.95 9.95 24.95 9.99 29.99 24.95 9.99 29.99 19.95 9.90 9.95 24.95 AARGH OMEGAS ANNALS OF ROME ARCADE CLASSICS ARENA/BRATACASS ART OF CHESS BALANCE OF POWER BARBARIAN (PALACE). BATTLESHIPS BLASTER BALL BMX SIMULATOR BUBBLE BOBBLE CASINO ROULETTE CHAMPIONSHIP FOOTBALL CITY DEFENCE COMPUTER HITS CRACK CRUNCHER FACTORY CRYSTAL HAMMER DEFENDER OF THE CROWN DEJA VU DESTROYER DR FRUIT EMERALD MINE EXTENSOR FEUD FINAL MISSION FIRE POWER FLIGHT PATH 737 FLINTSTONES FORMULA 1 GRAND PRIX GALACTIC INVASION GARRISON GEE BEE AIR RALLY GNOME RANGER GOLDEN PATH GULF GAMESTAR GRID START GUILD OF THIEVES HARDBALL HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER IMPACT INSANITY FIGHT INTO THE EAGLES NEST JEWELS OF DARKNESS JIGSAW MANIA JINXTER JOE BLADE KAMPPAGRUPPE KARATE KID 2 KIKSTART 2 KING OF CHICAGO KNIGHT ORC QUASIMODO LAS VEGAS LEADERBOARD LEATHER GOODESS LEATHER NECK LEVIATHAN LITTLE COMP PEOPLE MACHII MEAN 18 GOLF MIND FIGHTER MISSION ELEVATOR MUSIC STUDIO NINJA MISSION PAWN PHANTISE || PINBALL WIZARD PLUNDERED HEARTS PLUTOS POOL PORTAL POWER STRUGGLE Q BALL ROADWAR EUROPA ROCKFORD ROLLING THUNDER SCENERY DISK 7 SCREAMING WINGS SECONDS OUT SHANGHAI SIDEWINDER SILICON DREAMS SKY BLASTER SLAYGON SPACE BATTLE STAR WARS STARWAYS STRIKE FORCE HARRIER SUPER HUEY TERRAPODS THREE STOOGES TIME & MAGIC ULTIMA 3 VAMPIRE EMPIRE WESTERN GAMES WIZBALL XENON 17.49 21.87 13 OB 26.24 17.46 8.74 17:49 26.21 26.21 21.87 8.71 17.46 871 8.74 17.49 17.49 8.71 17.46 17.46 21.83 21.83 17.49 13.08 17.46 30.62 6.71 21.83 21.87 21.83 13.08 21.83 1746 17.44 871 21.83 8.74 26.24 21.83 8.74 26 24 17.46 8.71 8.71 21.83 26.24 17.46 24.99 24.95 14.95 19.95 29 99 29.99 24.95 19.95 29.95 24.95 14.99 19.99 19.95 19.99 19.99 14.99 19.95 19.99 24.95 24.95 24 99 24.95 9.99 29.99 19.95 19.95 24.99 19.99 29.95 19.99 24.99 19.95 19.95 24.95 39.95 19.95 19.95 21.95 14.95 29.95 19.99 19.95 24.95 19.95 5.95 19.95 24.95 24.95 9.99 24.95 14.99 14.95 19.99 19.95 9.99 14.95 BULLOCKS 221B BAKER STREET ADVANCED ART STUDIO AIRBALL CONSTRUCTION AMAZON ARENA ARENA/BRATACASS AUTO DUEL BACKLASH BALANCE OF POWER BARBARIAN BATTLESHIPS BEYOND THE ICE PALACE BLACK LAMP BLUE WAR BOB WINNER BRIAN CLOUGH FOOTBALL BUBBLE BOBBLE BUGGY BOY CAPTAIN BLOOD CARRIER COMMAND CHAMPIONSHIP FOOTBALL CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING CHOPPER X COLONIAL CONQUEST CRASH GARRAT CRAZY CARS DARK CASTLE DE LUXE SCRABBLE DEFENDER OF THE CROWN DEFLEKTOR DUNGEON MASTER ECO EXTENSOR F15 STRIKE EAGLE FLIGHT SIMULATOR 2 FLINTSTONES FORMULA 1 GRAND PRIX FOUNDATIONS GAMBLER GATO GAUNTLET 2 GET DEXTER 2 GOLD RUNNER GOLD RUNNER GOLD RUNNER I SCENERY DISK II GOLDEN PATH GUILD OF THIEVES GUNSHIP HOLLYWOOD POKER HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER IKARI WARRIORS IMPACT INDIANA JONES JEWELS OF DARKNESS JOE BLADE JUMP SET KARTING GRAND PRIX KINGS QUEST TR1 PACK LAS VEGAS LEADERBOARD LEVIATHAN LITTLE COMP PEOPLE MICRO LEAGUE WRESTLING MOUSE TRAP NINJA NOT A PENNY MORE OIDS OUTCAST PERFECT MATCH PHANTASIE 2 PIRATES OF THE BARBARY COAST PLUTOS POWERPLAY PREDATOR RINGS OF ZILFIN ROAD RUNNER ROADWAR EUROPA ROCKFORD SCENERY XI SCRABBLE DELUXE SCRUPLES SECOND OUT SILICON DREAMS SKY FIGHTER SLAYGON SOLOMONS KEY ST REPLAY STAR GLIDER STAR WARS STRIKE FORCE HARRIER SUB BATTLE SIMULATION SUPER SPRINT TERRAMEX TERRAPODS TRIVIAL GENUS EDIT TURBO ST ULTIMA 4 WINTER OLYMPIAD 88 WIZBALL XENNON BULLOCKS HOME ENTERTAINMENT CENTRE 884 WASHWOOD HEATH ROAD WARD END BIRMINGHAM B8 2NB TEL: 021 783 2809 ST CITY 21.87 21.83 13.08 17.46 26.24 26.24 21.83 17 46 26.21 21.83 13.12 17.49 17.46 17.49 17.49 13.12 17 46 17.49 21.83 21.83 21.87 21.83 8.74 26.24 17.46 17.46 21.07 1749 26 21 17.49 21.87 17.46 17.46 21.83 34.96 17.46 17.46 21.83 13.08 26.21 17.49 17.46 21.83 17.46 5.21 17.46 21.83 21.83 8.74 21.83 13.12 13.08 17149 17.46 8.74 13.08 8.71 21.87 8.71 21.83 13.08 30 62 17.46 13.08 8.74 17.46 17.49 8.74 8.71 21.87 11.33 13.08 17.46 17.49 21.87 21.87 21.87 17.49 21.83 17.46 17.46 99 MSX 9.95 24.95 14.95 34.99 19.95 14.95 9.99 19.95 19.99 STILL UK'S LEADING MSX ST SUMMER PACK .00 RETAILER INCLUDING...22 GREAT GAMES (OVER ), JOYSTICK, FREE ALL KONAMI GAMES NOW IN DELIVERY STOCK INC. MSX 2 ST SOFTWARE SALE NOW ON COMING SOON NEW KONAMI SOFTWARE POUNDS OFF ST SOFTWARE INCLUDING MSX CLUB STILL GOING STRONG SEND SAE FOR DETAILS ZORK 1 .95 NOW .95 ZORK 2 .95 NOW .95 ORDERS RING 021 783 2809 ZORK 3 .95 NOW .95 ASK FOR TRACEY ALL MAJOR WORLD GAMES NOW .95 CREDIT CARDS EXCEPTED LEISURE SUIT LARRY NOW .95 GUNSHIP NOW .99 WORLD GAMES NOW IN, ALL WINTER OLYMPIAD NOW .95 MAJOR COMPANYS NOW TEE UP NOW .95 IN STOCK ECO NOW .95 SEGA AND THERE'S MUCH MUCH MORE ALIEN SYNDROMEIZILLION II RING NOW FOR LIST ON WONDERBOY IN MONSTERLAND 021 783 2809 AFTERBURNER II OUT SOON OR SEND LIST ON SAE TO WE STOCK ALL THE GAMES FOR BULLOCKS ST CITY, 884 THE SEGA WHICH RANGE FROM WASHWOOD HEATH ROAD, WARD .95 TO .95 END, BIRMINGHAM B8 2NB WHY NOT GIVE US A RING IF YOU WE ACCEPT ALL MAJOR CREDIT WOULD LIKE TO ORDER ANYTHING CA AND ASK FOR TRACEY OR MATTHEW 021 783 2809 19.95 19.99 34.99 19.99 29.99 24.99 19.99 34.99 9.99 24.95 24.99 19.95 24.99 14.95 9.99 34.99 14.99 19.99 24.99 19.99 24.99 24.95 14.99 19.95 24.99 9.99 19.95 19.99 19.95 9.99 19.95 19.95 24.99 19.99 24.95 29.99 19.95 24.95 19.99 19.99 24.99 19.99 30.62 17.49 26 24 21.87 17.49 30.62 8.74 21 83 21.87 17.46 21.87 13.08 8.74 30.62 13.12 17.49 21.87 17.49 21 87 21.83 13.12 17.46 21.87 8.74 1746 17.49 17.46 8.74 17.46 17.46 21.87 17.49 21 83 26 24 17.46 21.83 17 49 17 49 21.87 1749 9.95 24.99 1295 14.95 19.95 19.99 24.99 24.99 24.99 19.99 24.95 19.95 19 95 19.95 19.95 14.95 19.95 19.99 79.95 24 95 19.95 24.95 24.99 14 99 19.95 24 95 19.95 9.95 24.95 19.95 19.95 1999 17.46 13.08 17.46 17.49 69.96 21.83 17 46 21.83 21.87 13.12 17.46 21 83 17:46 871 21 83 1746 1746 17 49 SEND FOR OUR CATALOGUE OF OVER THREE THOUSAND TITLES FOR AMSTRAD CPC PCW-PC, COMMODORE. SPECTRUM, ATARI/ATARI ST, BBC MSX VISA ELECTRON, APPLE SERIES 2 APPLE MACINTOSH COMPUTERS ALL AT DISCOUNT PRICES. ALL PRICES INCLUDE V.A.T. POST & PACKING UK ONLY. PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE. COMSOFT MAIL ORDER DEPARTMENT, 48 DUKE STREET, COLDSTREAM, SCOTLAND TD12 4LF. Shop open Mon/Sat 9.30-12.00 1.00-6.30. Tel: 0890 2979. 24 hour order service on 0890 2854. SPECTRUM NOW AVAILABLE PC2 SS, DD, HD MEGA ST 4, HARD DRIVES, LASER PRINTERS MOST OF THE NEW RELEASES BUDGET AND NON BUDGET ARE NOW IN STOCK "


"THE PRESIDENT IS MISSING Interactive Mysterydventure Simulation Tribune EMIRA Masiyine Washington Scene, May Hold Kevs tollostages Lacation Kidnapped From Audio Cassette found at Secret Summit Sinister Plot Veared Several Other Heads of Stat Abducted NEWS MEDIA BLOOM DAL P249000 Hon <<>> 1-556-4729 39452 EF H PASSPA E T United States of America WHO IS BEHIND THE WORLD'S WORST HOSTAGE CRISIS? .......... The President of the U.S. and other members of a Please send .......... copy/ies of The President is top-secret summit have been taken hostage. As the world watches and waits, your job is to secure the Missing. Format ....... Price .. safety of the captives and resolve the crisis. (C64/128 .95 IBM PC/compatible .95.) This exciting simulation is a challenging test of your skills. A cassette containing the terrorists demands Name(block capitals) and loaded with vital clues is your starting point. Address ....................... Utilizing the main computer of the CIA's Counter Post code Terrorist branch you must correctly identify suspects, working under mounting pressure and tension. Tenclose .............. including .00 P&P UK only. Make the right decisions and the trail of espionage, (Overseas $2.00) secrecy and deception eventually takes you to the Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd. Middle East. Here, you discover that an even more Or debit my Access/Visa card. sinister but undeniably intriguing-plot lies behind the kidnapping. Expiry date .. . Have you got ability to successfully investigate No. I II international terrorism? The President Is Missing For more information on the Cosmi range available for C64/128 computers, plus IBM PC's & please tick box U . compatibles COSMI . . . . . . . Tomorrow's Redlity. Today Cosmi, MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Glos GL8 8DA, UK. Tel: (0666) 54326 Tlx: 43422 MPS/UKG "


"RAME Where have all the 8-bil artists gono? This month Frame Up is completely dominated by 16-bit pictures. So come on C64, Spectrum and Amstrad owners, get out your pixel brushes and show those 16-bit owners that 8-bit artists are allve and kicking! This month's delectable selection of colourful creations come from Simon Fincher of Evesham, Worcs, who drew Clagary '88 and the Skler on his ST, Lars Sandess from Brolvlka, Norway, who created Salamander on the Amiga, and Mick Tale from Tidworth, Hants whose Three Astronauts was also an Amiga product. Other Amiga artists are Matthew Key from Bury St. Edmunds (Vindicator), Darren Barwise of Doncaster (Clint Eastwood, Woody Allen and Oxygene) and busy Barry Pringle of Wembley, Middx (Afterburner, Robocop. Ghostbusters, Primal Urgos and Rick 'n' Roll). SCORES 10-10 il 5.055 PTD ND An Afterburner screen by Barry Pringle. Simon Fincher's ST skier. Clint by Barry P. CALGARROS Calgary '88 by Simon. SCT 1988 Salamander, drawn by Lars Sandness. RAN "


"Atari ST car. First men on the moon by Mick Tate. Part Man, Part Machine, B92 Rad caveman by Baz. Hey Rock 'n' Roll. Part man, part machine: all Barry Pringle. MERCIVATED Woody by Barry Pringle. Who you gonna call? "


"15+M+:JJIN-JWVd-81HIWAYA HEHORIGIN LAHSYSTEMS INC. THE START OF SOMETHING NEW U MA I: CBM 64/128 .95; IBM, APPLE $24.95. ULTIMA Ill: CBM 64/128, AIARI XE/XL ,95; MAC IBM, APPLE AIARI SI AMICA Z24.95. ULTIMA IV: CBM (04/128, AI RI XE/XL ,95; IBM, APPLE, ATARIST, AMIGA .95. ULTIMA V CBM 6+2128 219.95; APPLE L24.95. miting Ultima I MOEBIUS Warriors of Destiny Quest of the Avatar 44MY.MM.MPPMATUMPAMABI418.PNAFTNINT:F4M0411 X4M4.MW.MPPMATH.MPFAB14-18.PRAEL.NINS:FM:4F1 OGRE IS AVAILABLE FOR: COMMODORE 64/128. ATARI XE/XL DISK .95. IBM, APPLE, ATARI ST, AMIGA AND MAC DISK .95. AUTODUEL IS AVAILABLE FOR COMMODORE 64/128 ATARI XE/XL DISK .95. APPLE, ATARI ST DISK .95 MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. UK. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tix: 43422 MPS/UKG. tatMA:JJINAJMUA:8140WAY.d "


"lay Masters The Bard's Tale Sind in the 4 MESTO INN IN SEOG ! zdccce ? 2016 Adventurers. The best tip for beginners that Create chor. (R)enove chor. I could find is don't delete Lpod party Brian the Fist or El Cid. Brian ( Save party is an excellent swordsman, <uit gone and perfect for starting with. CERit Guild. El Cid, however, has one of the best items of equipment The Guild that I could find in both Tales of the Unknown AND The Character Nane Hits Cond Spot Destiny Knight (Bard's Tale 2, BRIAN THE FIST more later): the Firehorn. EL CID Simply by blowing this, he can cause enough damage to wipe out entire attacking SHERLIN groups. Keep him, or you'll GJONAR regret it when confronted by two squillion rampant Ad Managers (a frightening thought in itself!). A major problem that I, and Greetings all ye who read this passage, for if ye really needeth help on a lot of other people, found the trilogy of fiendishly tricky RPGs from yankee-based software when they begin a quest as house Interplay then fret no more, for what ye have in your hands is large as the one in the BT series, is the simple, almost probably the most helpful batch of tips to get ye started on any of the overwhelming question ... series, and there's even some more advanced tips thrown in too. So Where do I start? Just for on we go, with Tony Dillon's. those of you who have bought the game, taken it home, loaded it up, and been hit by the sheer hopelessness of it all, here are a few starter key locations to get you going. The all important Review Board (That's where your characters get promoted, dummy) is on Trumpet Street. From the north end of the street and going south, it's the second building on the left. The starter dungeon mentioned in the instructions is in the southern end of Rakhir Street, and goes by throne in Harkyn's Castle for personal touch, and what 6PCs). That way, each the quaint name 'The Scarlet a great reward. A secret exit bigger expert on the Bard's character gains more Bard'. Underneath the inn is a to Mangar's domain is Tale series, than the director experience, making them go large wine cellar, and to get to situated by ascending the himself, Brian Fargo. Take it up levels faster. You want it, one of your characters has stairs on the third level of the away, Bri. more? Um, at night the to ask for a drink. Which one? sewers, and using a certain \"You want a couple of monsters are a lot harder to Well, you don't get Ale in a Onyx item. More I cannot say helpful hints? OK, well one of kill, so if you don't fancy wine cellar, do you? Well I can't give the entire the most important things fighting any, run into the That should be enough to game away, can I? you're going to need is a 3rd Adventurer's Guild, and run get you going, and before Not only do Playmasters Level Sorcerer, to cast a out again, and voila, it's long, you'll be well on your bring you the hottest tips healing spell, and the daytime again. Is that OK?\" way to destroying Mangar. around, we also call in the quickest way, I find, is to send More from Bri later, but first There are still a lot of puzzles experts for that more out a small party (less than turn the page for ... and stuff set there to stop you getting anywhere, and so Playmasters now brings you the most concise, yet informative hints guide ever. To enter the Temple of the Mad God, utter the name Tarjan. In the second level of the Mad God's Temple, avoid the Soutwest area like you would a Great White's kiss. The area contains a spell which locks everyone in time, and is inescapable. Sit on the BARD'S TALE HINTS HINTS "


"ay Masters Stilingi Starting Bard's Tale 2 is, in of the map, and you reappear effect, a lot simpler than BT1. at the south end. In answer to Finding your way around the the riddle, the master of the city of Tangramayne is a mind is Mangar. When faced cinch, thanks to the with the message \"things eversohelpful map enclosed change unnoticed, and not in the instruction. One always for the better» on the problem you will most first level of the tombs, you'll definitely discover is finding find that you've been the other towns. Some key teleported down a level. In locations are quite small, so Dargoth's Tower, it's better to you may find yourself running burn. (You'll know what I around, all to no avail. Still, mean when you get to it.) The weep no more, for if you care battlecry is \"havok\". to glance around, you will find Phew, try saying that lot in no less than a map of the one breath. As usual, if that Wilderness, with all key ain't enough, here's Brian. locations and cities marked, \"The Destiny Knight? Um, courtesy of Electronic Arts. well, ask the sage about Still, enough about starting, everything you can think of. on with the tips. He can reveal some pretty The third level of the Dark amazing things. Another Domain (the starter dungeon) one? On the later dungeons, is a wraparound map. In other the monsters are so good that words, walk off the north end they can't be hit in hand to hand...\" THE WILDERNESS Tin VOL2THE DESTINY KNIGHT THE WILDERNE mo 5 UIT Lihil TA LITE LIS TOLSTITUTT TOOL OLUL v TE ti 7 Aloooooo *1=150%ol-Iww.lolo-|.|0|0|-|-||*|*||*|*|*| BB E with in Linh 111213141516171819|10|11|12/13/14/15/16/17/18/19/20/211 ) 01112131415161718|0|0|1|12/13/14/15/16/17/18/19/20/21 THE DESTINY STONE, LEVEL ONE ...THE DESTINY STONE, LEVEL TWO Dahmini 94 "


"CLASSIFIED ADVERTISEMENTS ZX SPECTRUM 48/128. CASSETTE ONLY ADULT GAMES STOP PRESS * LATEST ABC = 108,800 (JAN-JUNE '88) * ANNUAL RATE INCREASE * CLASSIFIEDS NOW COST  ( + VAT) PER SINGLE COLUMN CENTIMETRE * RING 01-251 6222 FOR DETAILS * SOCCERSOFT (Specialists in Football Software) We have every football game under the sun plus thousands of other titles! As you can see we do not spend a fortune on advertising so our quality software is EXTREMELY CHEAP!! For a catalogue send an SAE (State Machine Name) to: SOCCERSOFT (C+VG), 2 Tennyson Avenue, Doncaster DNS BEN Your catalogue will be sent out within 24 hours FANTASY UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64. NOW ALSO FOR THE ATARI ST Send s.a.e. for fast response and details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG), 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB Looven your coller. get out Your JOYSTICK and get stuck In. By the time you finish you'll be exhausted. COVER UP! Participation game for 2-4 players where anything goes. You never know what you'll be doing or wearing. WHAT THE BUTLER SAW Two programmes. A naughty but amusing look at the roaring 206, and a prop show with some very attractive women. (These are NOT games) ONLY AVAILABLE UYMAL ORDER FREE NAUGHTY GIFT W ING YOU when you buy 2 or 3 of the sbove games. R'n' H MICROTEC .50 Each  32 Hazell Way .00 . FREE GIFT for any 21 Stoke Poges .00. FREE GIFT for all 3 BUCKS SL2 4DD *FREE GIFT may very ATARI 400/600/800XL/ST AMIGA SOFTWARE * EURO ST EDUCATION SOFTWARE We have all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges. FOR HIRE. Apply now and hire your first four games free. Around 1,500 different original titles. For full details send large stamped addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends LOW ATARI PRICES Atari 520 STEM .90 post free + 15 disks Antic and Analog magazines available Amiga A500 at only .90 p.f. BEST QUALITY DISKS Memorex 5V4\" S.S./DD Discs 10 for .95 p.f. Unlabelled 5V4\" D.S./DD Discs 10 for .95 p.f. Top quality unlabelled 34\" double sided disks 10 for .95 51 for .95 25 for .95 100 for .95 GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept. C+VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney Close, Sunderland SR3 4PD Tel: (091) 528 6351 FREE GAME/FREE HIRE OFFER Our receipt of your .00 membership fee to biggest Atari Hire Library you will receive. Full Hire List NEWSLETTER A FREE game on Disk Your first Hire FREE British and Irish Cheques/Postal Orders to EURO ST, Kinsella House, Johnstown, Sea Road, Arklow, Wicklow, Ireland. C64 Disk Library available. Membership .00 (includes game/demo disk). Send to above address. For the Atari ST. Highly effective and unique spelling aid. Developed with a primary school head. Two age ranges. Ring or write for full details. Softstuff: 193 Sketchley Road, Burbage, Hinckley, Leicestershire LE 10 2DY. Tel: 0455 617426. BRITISH MEMBERS NOW ACCEPTED! FREE MEMBERSHIP!! Hire CBM64, Spectrum, Amstrad and VIC 20 Software (Top Titles) Send 2 x 18p stamps for your hire kit Computersoft (CV), PO Box 28 North PDO, Nottingham NG5 2EE (Please state which machine) THOUSANDS OF SOFTWARE TITLES DISCOUNT SOFTWARE Up to 21% off RRP for ATARI, COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD, BBC, MSX and IBM PC. Ring for Info Pack on any of the above machines: 24 hour HOTLINE: 0455 613377. B. BYTES COMPUTER SYSTEMS, 19 Southfield Road, Hinkley, Leicestershire LE10 10A. ATARI SPECIALISTS ***Fast and efficient service free delivery*** If you own a-C64/C16/Plus 4/Amiga/Spectrum/AmstradeMAtari XEJSTINCS2600/BBC/Electron/MSX/Apple/Sega have we got a treat for you! Send 50p for the latest SOFTSCAN catalogue featuring software, hardware, disks, stix, and much much more!!! IMMEDIATE DESPATCH! SOFTSCAN, (C+VG), PO Box 84, Hereford HR4 9YU, West Midlands. 400/806 NOW LOOK. ST COMPUTER SOFTWARE 8/16 bit at Discounted Prices Up to 30% off New Releases and Back Catalogue Titles Example: RRP of .99 becomes .99 Payment by cheques/PO/Visa/Access, Post and Packing free  and over, Under  add 50p. Outside UK add . Orders despatched within 24 hours. New Releases despatched on day of release. Send today for your free price list to: PJK COMPUTING, PO Box 20, Daventry, Northants NN11 4RU or Telephone our MAIL ORDER HOTLINE NUMBER (0327) 300150 XL/XE ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 "


"lay Masters 2.2.LUTA 181 D.C.HDR . . ITTA'un \"2.D -IN \"lalalal-|-|016 | | | 3 | 4 | 5 6 =  FU 9 9 A The wandering bard performs on the title screen. I... : at eifbar. and his For 3 points of dandge! : A Black Hobb.f kick 2: 'A'J2J'DA ODDELD oli 1213141516171819|10|1|12|13|14|15|16|17|18|19|20|21| :] THE DESTINY STONE, LEVEL THREE Spit Ironpants eifbar Thobrogue paladin HOA 00000 A It is not always advisable to stand and fight in Bard's Tale. VOL 3~ THE THIEF OF FATE This is the biggest and the showing you all the quests hardest out of all three. The that must be carried out, as Review Board is four well as where to go to teleport paces north and 14 paces to them. east of the city gates in Scara A couple of final general Brae. Advancing levels is hints. Recruit Hawkslayer giving everything away. Let pretty easy at first, because of when you meet him. the magic characters use the the large amounts of Always try to have Elik's Harmonic Gems, they experience gained in small Instant Slayer in your party. replenish spell points. Also, battles. Ideally, you should Remember, in some fights, there are certain places aim for at least 14th level it's easier, quicker, and a lot where your bard can learn characters before attempting safer to run. new songs.\" All that remains the starter dungeon in the Here he is again, for the to be said is, in the immortal Mad God's temple. When you final time, back by popular parting words of Brian Fargo are ready, though, go to the demand, Brian Fargo! \"Happy adventuring, and Temple (it's in the city square) \"What I can say without keep good maps.\" and tell the priest CHAOS. Yes, I know you are told to tell him TARJAN, but that's a complete waste of time. Try it, THIEF-FAT and you'll see what I mean. When you do reach Brilhasti Ap Tarj, kill him instantly with a spell, whilst using the FAFO spell to keep the dark guards away. Beware of them, they are mean. Once you've done all that, and have got a chronometer, then it's off to the dimensions you must go. Somewhere on this layout is a nice little table, LI THE BARDS TALE QUESTS AND TELEPORTATION LOCATIONS In the land of arboria your quest is to find Valerian's Bow and the Arrows of Life. The location is the twilight copse. At the Cold Peak in Gelidia find the Wand of power and the Sphere of Lanatir. In Lucencia at the crystal Spring find the Crown of Truth and Belt of Alliria. In the Old Dwarven Mines at Kinestia find the Hammer of wrath and Ferofist's Helm. At the Shadow Rock in Tenebrosia, seek the Cloak of Sceadu. And there you have it. A Bords Tale more machine versions to follow. "


"OFF SHORE WARRIOR VIOLENCE ON THE HIGH SEAS, THE ULTIMATE TEST OF MANHOOD SCORE S255 PES AMIGA VERSION PS, PC, XT, AT VERSION ATARI ST VERSION THE YEAR IS 2050. VIOLENCE AND TERROR HAVE TAKEN OVER THE WORLD, CIVILIZATION HAS DISAPPEARED, VIOLENT STREET SPORTS ARE NOT ENOUGH TO SATISFY THE BLOOD LUST OF A NATION. A NEW SPORT HAS EVOLVED. YOU ARE AN OFF SHORE WARRIOR, ANYTHING GOES. THE BATTLE CAN BRING YOU FAME OR DEATH... THE ONLY RULE IS TO WIN WHATEVER THE COST. CAN YOU MEET THE CHALLENGE AND BECOME THE SUPREME OFF SHORE WARRIOR A WORLD AWAITS, PREPARE FOR THE ULTIMATE TEST... TII  1988 TITUS SOFTWARE CORP., OFF SHORE WARRIOR, TITUS AND THE TITUS LOGO ARE REGISTERED TRADE MARKS OF TITUS SOFTWARE CORP. IBM, ATARI ST AND AMIGA ARE REGISTERED TRADE MARKS OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES, ATARI INC AND COMMODORE AMIGA RESPECTIVELY IM UNIT 4 STANNETS LAINDON NORTH TRADE CENTRE BASILDON ESSEX SS 156 DJ PHONE: (0268) 541126 "


"The Ad GAMO "


"Jenture Goes On EOVGR II Video-Game EW TASK STANDS BEFORE YOU... APPROACHING | PHANTIS You must rescue ARKOS, the hero of the rebellion against GREMLA, who has been imprisioned. You combat the kamikaze hordes, dodging missiles and avolding balls of incandescent magma. Once you enter the caverns of the planet PHANTIS you fight your way through. AMSTRAD STRUGGLING ON COMMODORE 2009 After abandoning the ship you capture an ADREC in order to continue advancing on the planet. A dagger is the sole weapon you rely on to fend off the inhabitants. You fight against the enemy troops. You have to steal a weapon. And advance forward, straight ahead. Nothing can detain you. PROPOS waves GADGOOSSSSSSSSSSSSS THE PRISON SONYMER ATARI ST You cross swamps, mountains and forests... there are enemies all over. The way to the prison becomes more hazardous the further you advance. You take command of a helicopter, descend into the entrails of the planet, and arrive at the prison. It is heavily guarded. Will you be capable of freeing ARKOS?. I NEVER SPECTRUM * SPECTRUM AMSTRAD CPC * COMMODORE 64 * MSX VEINTINUEVE-UNO, S.A. 8.95cassCHE DISK 1295 *PC COMPATIBLESATARI ST* 1995 DiskDISK DISTRIBUTED BY ELCTRONIC ARTS For a full broadsheet describing the complete range or information on your nearest stockist write to: Electronic Arts. 11-49 Station Road, Langley, Berkshire SL3 SYN, England. Or call our Customer Services Dept. on 0753 46465 "


"asters 010 027830 Hello! Come on in. Why not savour some a la carte tips? And what a varied and tasty pot-pourrie there is this month, with Bards Tale hints and tips, a Mickey Mouse map and tips, as well as a plethora of POKES and cheats. If you have some tips, a map, some POKES or whatever you think could help other compu er games players send in your stuff to: Julian Rignall, Playmasters, C + VG, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Don't forget that there's bundles of software on offer to the sender of the best tips and that could be you! ... 100 R T 00S Rolling Thunder:PTO to Cheat! As always, when you send in Seeders are pure cannon your tips, don't forget to state fodder: just track them down which machine your tips are and blast them to bits just for. And if you send in POKEs, be careful not to fly through give a detailed description of their red virus spray. how they should be entered. Bombers are a priority 00075001 This month congratulations target they rapidly deploy [ ] SCOFIL are in order to Kenneth Brady cannisters of concentrated of Dublin and Robert Hayden virus. Fly at high altitude and of Lings for their excellent swoop down, blasting as you A Marauder see the Commodore Cheat. tips: bundles of software are dive. It takes a lot of practice at this very moment being to be able to complete this. screens is a cryptic clue ONE amulet last thing and sent off... which should be solved to don't fire before you exit the VIRUS (Atari ST) GAUNTLET II (US Gold) enter the secret room. screen. One of the most difficult Following on from last GO ON A DIET: You'll have USE things about this game is month's Gauntlet II tips: to experiment with this one, TRANSPORTABILITY: Use a getting to grips with the here's how to enter secret but either eat two or three transporter either 3 or 15 control method. However, rooms. Thanks to Kevin foods only. times (you'll have to if you're a proficient Bulmer of Gremlin SAVE SUPER SHOTS: You experiment again). hoverplane pilot, you Graphics for the help! have to leave the room with BE PUSHY: Experiment should find these tips from At the beginning of some ten super shots — so collect time again push either two Robert Hayden useful. or three moveable walls onto Drones are the tricky craft an exit or transporter and to deal with. When you spot destroy them. one, track it down at low DON'T GET HIT: Easy altitude, then climb rapidly enough avoid being hit by and shoot towards it. It might OMES monster's missiles. respond to your attack, but By there way, there are two could easily get bored and different secret rooms, and trundle off in search of a tree you can't enter one until so it can mutate. you've passed screen 12. Mutated drones are dealt MARAUDER (Hewson) with in similar fashion, but Okay Commodore owners! twist as you climb to spray Boot up the game and on the bullets across its flightpath. If title screen press the you miss, drop to low altitude Commodore key, Q, 2 and the and repeat the move. space bar and the words Fighters are tougher, but Cheat On will appear at the can also be dealt with in the bottom of the screen. Start same manner or you could the game and you'll find a always use a missile if you're rather easy game. Thanks to feeling particularly lazy. Kenneth Brady for that little A Asexy Cybernoid Cheat. gem. 100 "


"player two, and type in the Edward O'Donnell of West 037200 required keys, making sure Lothian for that. 030700 they're exactly the same as TARGET RENEGADE player one's. Press escape (Ocean) twice and start the game. Once again it's Multiface time Press your chosen key for again. Load and stop the right and both ships will move game, and tupe POKE 63760, right. Keep pressing right until 255 for loads of time. Thanks both ships merge and you'll once again to Edward find yourself with twice the O'Donnell firepower and twice the lives. STREET FIGHTER (GO!) DRUID II (Firebird) This is one of the simplest ST Right, Spectrum owners. games I've ever encountered Get your fingers into gear all but the last opponents and enter the following can be defeated by using the listing for unlimited energy crouching kick. The last one, and lives. Sagat, is also defeated by the 10 FOR F=65 024 TO 65 031 crouching kick but you 20 READ A: POKE F,A actually have to jump when he 30 NEXT F hurls a fireball at you. Wow! 40 LOAD \"\"CODE C'est la challenge formidable 1:37 000 50 POKE 6405 8,25 4 ... or something like that. 60 RANDOMIZE USR 64000 GRYZOR (Ocean) A An easy to use C64 Cheat. 70 DATA 62, 58, 50, 60, 117 Brendon McDonogh from 80 DATA 195, 0, 111 Chez No Fixed Abode has Load the very first part of put together these very the game, switch off the useful Gryzor tips, which computer, stop the tape, type should be relevant for all in the listing, RUN it and press formats of the game and play on tape to load the rest of even the arcade version! the game. LEVEL ONE ROLLING THUNDER (US When you start off, hold the Gold) fire button down and run Rolling Thunder is quite an apt across the top path. When the description of Garry Williams, mounted gun just before the C+ VG's suet-featured Ads bridge scrolls off the screen, Manager his great folds of shoot the scatter and collect flesh thunder as he rolls into it. Pull down on the joystick the office. I digress. This little and press space to jump tiplet, supplied by Kenneth d own into the water. Walk Brady of Dublin, lets you under the mounted gun without stopping until you're 018000 choose what level you want to PAUSED start on. Just press F1, F5 and out of range, but watch out for the soldiers shooting from A Watch out from above. F7 together and then press F7 above. to pick the level you desire to CYBERNOID (Hewson) Leamington Spa has a Jump twice to get to the top play. That's a C64 tip by the A bit of an oldie tip, but just in convoluted, but effective way way. path. Blast the top case you don't know, define to get extra lives on this rather GUTZ (Special FX) emplacement when you the keys as Y, X, E, S (in that naff ST game. Select Another Spectrum Multiface reach the end screen, then order) and a host of ships are two-player mode and input POKE. Load the game and jump down and destroy the yours for the playing and options from the menu. Move stop it so you can enter POKE middle one. Be careful of destroying. Cheers to player one's input choice onto 38915, 62. Restart the game Soldiers during this time. Kenneth Brady of Dublin for the keyboard and press fire. and you'll have zillions of Shoot out the remaining that C64 tip. Type in the required keys. lives. Well, an infinite number emplacement and you'll finish GARFIELD (The Edge) Now do exactly the same for actually. Many thanks to the level. Easy! No things get More C64 stuff this time a a little tougher ... reset POKE. Load the game, LEVEL TWO reset the machine and type If you still have the scatter POKE 25 389, 173: POKE 25 gun, this level is pretty easy. If 370, 173 (RETURN) and you haven't, prepare to battle. Garfield will be endowed with The first sensor is at gun unlimited awakeness and sight, so simply stand and food. By the way, if you don't blast only avoid enemy know how to reset your C64 gunfire if you have to. The go and buy a reset switch next one is behind a wall, so (look in the classifieds) or buy blast and blast again. The a cartridge (Evesham Micros, third sensor is between two Datel and Trilogic all have walls, so lie down and shoot them). If you're a C128 owner, repeatedly, only dodging if an just use the reset button next enemy soldier throws a stick to the ON/OFF switch but grenade. The final sensor is don't forget to keep the high up so you have to jump Commodore key pressed as and fire at the same time. you push the button. BETTER DEAD THAN ALIEN Matthew J. Howkins of Try out the C64 Garfield Cheat. 101 "


"ESPIONAGE THE COMPUTER GAME YOUR MISSION You are now entering the world of International Espionage, where you control a highly motivated team of 12 agents. Your agents must set out from their secret base and proceed across the board which represents the world's capitals, airports, deserts, etc. The world's fate is now in your hands in a game of deadly conflict to reach the 4 micro-films, each containing details for the ultimate weapon. Should you have the cunning and sheer nerve to carry on this most formidable of tasks and return to base with the micro-films, you would be pronounced Master Spy. Good Hunting. AVAILABLE FOR: AMSTRAD PC (32\" DISK) .95 ATARI ST, AMIGA, AMSTRAD PC (5/4\" DISK) .95 C64, AMSTRAD CPC, SPECTRUM + 3 DISKS .95 C64 CASSETTE .95 SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD CPC, MSX CASSETTES .95 Order your copy of ESPIONAGE now by sending a cheque or postal order to Grandslam Entertainments Ltd. Units 1/2 Conlon Developments Watery Lane, Darwen, Lancs. BB32ET or phone 01-247 6434 our Credit Card Hotline (Access or Visa). GRANDSLAM "


"Can You Stop The Russian Bear? Red Storm products at larger branches of WH Smith Free MicroProse timepiece with selected MicroProse between 16 August and 10 October 1988. Look out for the specially Based on the NO.1 best-selling book Red Storm Rising by Tom Clancy; Larry Bond co-author. Copyright 1986 by Jack Rya Enterprises Ltd and Larry Bond. All rights reserved. labelled product at your WH Smith computer department. to an astonishing variety of undersea environments, plunging you into challenging and exciting situations. Prepare for action in this heart-pounding simulation. Available for Commodore 64/128 Cassette .95, Disk .95. The storm has broken. MicroProse's latest title is here. This high technology simulation of strategy and tactics is based on one of the most dramatic and detailed stories of modern Warfare Red Storm Rising, the international best-seller by Tom Clancy and his technical collaborator Larry Bond. Working with the authors, MicroProse have brought the book's intense action and excitement to your computer screen. You are put in command of an American nuclear attack submarine at a time when the two super powers collide. Standing between the Russian bear and global domination, you play a crucial role in the conflict. Missions take you MICROPROSE SIMULATION SOFTWARE RED STORM RISING by Tom Clancy  1986 by Jack Ryan Enterprises Ltd and Larry Bond, Please send. Copies of Red Storm Rising C64 Cassette Disk Name (block capitals). Address Post Code lenclose f including 55p P+P. Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd, or debit my Access/Visa card. Expiry date, No. IIIIIIIIII MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL88DA. UK. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tlx: 43422 MPS/UKG. "


"FIVE FIST-FULLS OF MOTOR MASSACRE The holocaust has come, laying waste cities, continents and civilisation. Out of the devastation emerges a breed of survivors merciless in their greed for simple possessions, barbaric in their thirst for power and dominance. To live even a day is hell, to achieve fame and wealth is deadly. You must fight your way to the Demon Dome and then compete in the most horrifying carnival of motor destruction ever conceived, forcing your opponents into the endless chasms of darkness, before you emerge Supreme Gladiator... supreme that is until the next round of motor massacre. CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99_cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk AMIGA .99 disky TECHNo c Step into the future... technology has overtaken society the rich are richer, the poor are poorer chaos, unrest, destruction... lawlessness reigns, terror rules. But this is your territory, your assignment with death. These are your streets and you have volunteered to clean out the scum, destroy the streetgangs and eliminate the deviants that pollute your city. Yes you have your beloved sleek racer, but armed with only stun gun and keep net what skills do you possess to neutralize the many hundreds who lie in wait for you? Being a cop is always dangerous, being a cop of the future is a step into the unknown. CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk AMIGA .99 disk IBM PC .99 disk CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD $9.99 cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk GREMLIN ODA 24:2 GUN NET 30000 Screen shots from various formats. Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, "


"FEROCIOUS ACTION Only the elite pass the three phase test DARK FUSION of the Corps of Guardian Warriors Co-ordinated fury in destruction of the mutant hordes of the underworld; supreme command skills in frantic defence against the invading alien pace fleets and merciless nerve in bloody battle against the monster of the Pit of Despair. Then the final chilling decision enter the letamorphosis Chamber to fuse feforms with your vanquished e or face your next challenge with only the powers your nortal form bestows on you. BUTCHER HILL Tension mounts as you navigate the murky waters in your motorised dinghy, seeking out vital supplies and ammunition careful to avoid enemy mines and aerial bombardment. Landfall... deep in the heart of the Vietnamese jungle, heavy with the odour of death, concealing deadly mantraps and enemy gunposts. Panic... an unknown village. Friend of foe? Whichever the final obstacle between you and your ultimate goalthe assault on Butcher Hill. CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk AMIGA .99 disk ARTURA Stand proud Arturo son of Pendragon and set forth on your quest to unite the warring kingdoms of Albion in this age of bloody war and mysterious magickes. Your task is to rescue Nimue from the clutches of your evil half-sister, Morgause for which only your fearless nerve and superior fighting skills and the mystical wheel of Cerriddwen will overcome the ghouls, spiders, soldiers and giant rats you encounter. CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk GRENOLITY LOLE 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: 0742 753423. "


"ACTION SERVICE Somewhere in Europe, at a confidential location, lies one of the world's toughest school : a top secret training centre. Behind impenetrable barbed-wire and patrolled by wardens armed to the teeth, stretches the course, a gruelling track of obstacles, traps and dangers, stretching every commando's ability to the limit. PURPOSE: preparing soldiers to join the \"Cobra Command\" a crack team of commandos who have chosen war as their profession. QUALIFICATIONS: strength, courage, nerves of steel... ACTION SERVICE is a brilliantly executed Commando School Simulation, with all the features that add up to one of the most challenging and exciting action programs ever produced : unique simulated video recording and playback system, allowing action replay of your performances (to help you to improve it). lifelike action graphics with superb sound and speech effects. easy to use, difficult to master ! up to 12 players competing on 5 different modes : physical, risk, close-combat, combination and the unique Commando Construction Course ! 02483) din POTED EENTH Jylounier Somewhere in Europe, in a top secret training cen The video control panel Including the superb \"Cobra Command\" Construction Set: construct, edit and save commando courses, making them as easy or difficult as you wish. challenge your friends on the course of your own design ! a Dhusic Scape View 113 PAGE 03 726 X0Y 00 itens prontiter traps disk REST nan I and scare hs 00 cese end 2rise The Construction Set control panel AN INFOGRAMES INTERNATIONAL PRODUCT distributed by INFOGRAMES LIMITED MITRE HOUSE, ABBEY ROAD ENFIELD, MIDDSX. EN1 2RQ TEL:01-364 01 23 3 combat 1000 conbi ATARI AMIGA PC  19.95 CBM  9.95 cassette  14.95 disk Amstrad  9.95 cassette  14.95 disk Spectrum  8.95 cassette SOS Screen shots from Atari ST version ACTION SERVICE ONE DAY THIS MAY BE MORE THAN JUST A GAME... "


"Masters lay switch off for a second every reset the game (using a reset so often, so stay alert and switch, for nothing else will move whenever you can. At do). Enter POKE bullets. Practice is of the the end of this an 16101,5:POKE 16106,6 essence, but once the timing invulnerability add-on flies by, (RETURN) and restart the is sussed, this so shoot and collect it and run game with SYS 6412 formidable-looking task is through the remaining (RETURN). A secret unused LEVEL THREE easy. barriers. At the end is a head sound effect is activated, Scatter gun owners shouldn't Well, easy-ish. on a pipe, which should be which sounds alarmingly find the going to tough here. LEVEL SIX shot repeatedly and quickly similar to the noise used The wall in front of Gryzor Set on an icy wasteland, before the invulnerability during the shower scene of a opens up to reveal two mean soldiers are dropped from a wears off to finish the game. famous Alfred Hitchcock film. scatter cannons and four mothership and proceed to HUNTER'S MOON Most Hunter's Moon players sensors. The cannons fire attack it's very difficult to (Thalamus) should already know that every ten seconds, and you get through, and usually a life Arriving just in time for this pressing the 2, 3 or 4 keys on have to be ready when they is lost in trying to do so. Take month's tips section are a few the title screen in conjunction do; stand under the left hand the high road, and when you POKEs for this fabulous shoot with the fire button starts the edge of the left sensor, and see a sniper, duck and blast 'em up from the author, game on that level. We-e-ll, if the bullets whizz close by him. Just off the track and Martin Walker. Load and you reset the machine and but won't harm Gryzor. In POKE 65 99, number from between this, blast like crazy 0-15 will let you start on any of and try and take out the rest of the first 16 levels (depending the machine. When the on which number you used) scatter guns are left, go to the by pressing key 2 at the start. safe place and blast upwards. POKE 6618, 0-15 selects Repeat by going to the right levels 17-32 on key 3, and edge of the right gun. Now a POKE 6632, 0-15 selects silver thing appears at the top levels 33-48 from key 4. of the screen and oscillates Restart with SYS 6412, and from side to side, launching start from your selected level firebombs. Avoid these and by pressing the relevant key shoot it it takes practice, as you start the game. And but try and adopt a point, get ready to rock the joint ... shoot and run technique. The next part of the section is similar, but men run from either side of the screen. Stand under the opening doors and get two shots in as A Ifyou've got the gutz, use the Spectrum Poke. they open, run and take out the two men that run on. Go blast the sniper who's on the back under the doors again slightly higher level (use and repeat the move. When angled shots). Jump up, take both doors are blown, his place and shoot at the repeatedly shoot the top or man who follows. Fall down to the construction and it'll the bottom path and walk right eventually explode. up to the sniper, shoot him LEVEL FOUR diagonally, being careful of This is very similar to level the soldier behind you. Jump two, except the sensors are in up and shoot the laser add-on different places. Use the that flies past. Walk up slowly same techniques, but make until you see the truck, run to sure you don't dally around the far left and let it have it. time is short. After it's destroyed, walk on LEVEL FIVE and until the giant soldier Similar to level three, only appears, then lie down WITH harder. There are three THE SPACE BAR HELD sensors at the top of the DOWN and shoot. If it fires a screen, which fire at where middle shot, it'll pass you're standing so keep on overhead, a low shot should the move and don't return to be avoided by standing up the place you just left if the when it's very close, and scatter guns have just fired. Gryzor jumps over it. When There's no real tips to give he's been dealt with, walk on here it's just a case of and fall through the gap. The dodging and blasting. When yellow blobs expand every fire the sensors are destroyed, seconds, so jump when the four silver things appear at opportunity arises. Walk on the top of the screen and until you see another giant, move back and forth, firing. and follow the same You can only score a hit when procedure as before. Next they join together in pairs, so comes a deadly passage with watch to get your timing right, electricity zapping from the nip in, blast and dodge their roof to the floor. The charges A kick ass with a Speccy Poke. "


"lay Masters MICKEY C Suure MICKEY MOUSE MAP Right, all you Mickey fans we have the official tips for all formats of this game, so nobody's going to miss out. Il you're an Atari ST owner, there's a really neat cheat for you. Load the game and on the title screen press the INSERT key, followed by 6.1.3. 1.5. 6. 8. 8 and finally press the INSERT key again. Start the game and everything will appear as normal. However, if you press F2. you'll be given a bonus secret key. F3 automatically completes the level, and Mickey faces the witch and F4 fills the waterpistol up. Pressing. On the keypad successfully completes a side room, and ENTER on the keypad causes failure which is a rather strange option. Spectrum owners are catered for by way of a POKE. Switch on your machine and type POKE 52428, 1 and then follow the normal LOAD\" procedure. When the game loads you'll discover that Mickey has an unlimited water supply and can complete a level simply by entering a side door. Why can't all cheats be that simple to enter? Next on the agenda is Amstrad owners. Switch on the machine, type POKE 11792.1 (RETURN) and follow normal loading procedure to activate the cheat mode, which is identical to the Spectrum. Last, but not least, is the Commodore 64 mode. Try pressing C on the credits screen and press CONTROL and 2 to activate different effects MICKEY C "


"ROBBEARY Bertie, an agile and clever bear has targeted a famous 24 floors store for his last and most daring ROBBERY. With no alarms or visible guards and fabulous treasures, yet it has been avoided like the plague by the criminal fraternity. Bertie soon discovers why? AMIGA .95 HIGHWAY HAWKS Grand Prix driving skills is essential to negotiate the crowded highway at speed. Obliterate the assassins cars and the ones that get in your way but keep the tiger in your tank fed, the engine cool and the tyres and steering intact. Acquisition of faster cars and lethal weaponary depends on your driving and trading skills. AMIGA .95 (2 DISCS) ILITIE TILLO TITUTIILIT TITULI 001 EMERALD MINE A giant arcade adventure which has received rave reviews. Each level has its own unique solution and requires ingenuity and dexterity to complete. One player or two players TEAM action for added enjoyment. AMIGA .95 CBM64-PLUS 4 .95 (D) .95 MANIAX Maniax relentlessly pursued by the creature undertakes to clear the thick fog engulfing the world capitals. An addictive game requiring quick thinking and action. AMIGA-ST-IBM .95 CBM64-PLUS 4 .95 (D) .95 zu DEUTERS QUANTOX Progress through 24 levels of this fast and furious action. Lightning responses are secondary to the strategic choices between better weaponry or better defence. AMIGA .95 FACE OFF Experience the sheer pace and exhilaration of ICE HOCKEY. Be prepared for the body checks, fouls and rough play. League competition, 1 or 2 player option. AMIGA-ST-IBM .95 FACE OFF STRIP POKER II PLUS A sizzling evening with Sam & Donna AMIGA-ST-IBM-ARCH. .95 SP-AMS-MSX-BBC-ELECTRON CBM64-PLUS 4 .95 STRIP POKER II PLUS DATA DISCS Requires Strip Poker II Plus disc to load Disc 1 Beverly & Dawn Disc 2 Lee & Roy Disc 3 Suzanne & Bianca Disc 4 Rachel & Kim AMIGA-ST .95 MICRO TEXT MICRO BASE Ideal for home and business use. Menu driven to enable a novice to use powerful capabilities with minimal reference to the tutorial manual. Micro base a powerful data base with fast SEARCH and SORT facilities includes a very flexible label printer. Sorted files can be used by the Micro Text word Processor to send personalised letters. A boon to any Club Secretary. AMIGA .95 EACH DAWN BEVERLEY ANCOME ANCO SOFTWARE LTD. UNIT 9-10 BURNHAM TRADING ESTATE OFF LAWSON ROAD DARTFORD, KENT DA1 5BH TEL: 0322 92513 MAIL ORDER HOTLINE: 0322522631 FAX NO: 0322 93422 PAYMENT BY CHEQUE, P.O., VISA OR ACCESS "


"NYLON WOUWE HAND 32 WIN A LOAD Brave NYINYOUNIS MOS HAND SEWN GGZS. Horrel * OLD BALLS Let's get the old ball rolling shall we? Take a butchers at the photo. We've got all these to give away: a football, a basketball, an American football. a baby American football, a cricket ball, a softball, a hockey ball, a squash ball, golf balls, ping pong balls, squidhgy balls, firm balls ... You get the picture. Even some shuttlecocks for some odd reason. An excellent sort of prize, we're sure you'll agree. All these come courtesy of top budget house Alternative, to celebrate the launch of their American football game Endzone, the latest edition to a wide range of sports sims. You're bound to have seen a least some of them: Football Frenzy. Indoor Soccer, Cricket Crazy, Howzati, and mega-hit Soccer Boss. Endzone follows a similar management-type format to that best seller, and looks to be one of the big 8 bit sellers of the coming months. The winner will get all the balls, a handy dandy bike pump adaptor to blow them up with, and a selection of alternative sports games. Twenty runners up will just get the games. Ready for the questions? 1) How many footballs can you see on the entire inlay sheet for Soccer Boss? 2) Who won the last Superbowl? There will be no tie break first one out of the hat gets the prize. Send your entries to: C+YG Ball Compellion. Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Write with a ball point pen, don't balls it up, and send your entries now. The ball's in your court. And don't, whatever you do, forget to specify which format you want your games C64. Speccy or Amstrad. Name Address Computer Answer 1. Answer 2. Hogal "


"NEW LOW PRICE ST. From only .51 per week. Return coupon for details. ATARI 5205 ATARI NUVVY ONLY FROM SILICA M SILICA FOCO Finally, problem that o business coechinology, proand less to buy, system and crables autom the range of persosemiconductores less to make the TOS operatikeyboard. Th VA = 299 SO MUCH FOR SO LITTLE han you purchaseou will also rece BASIC Maro receive on the markASIC Langueslica Shop you our graphics pros If you buy You Ochrome Samlike to see you never . Whic This kit is avane 1st Word ur new compre OF CHARG purchased at ou worth over , Wing start with you There is nothing that can compare with the incredible value for money offered by Atari's 520ST-FM. For only  (+VAT=), you can purchase a powerful 512K RAM computer, with a 95 key keyboard (including numeric keypad), MIDI interface, GEM, a palette of 512 colours, mouse controller, and a 512K built-in disk drive. The 520ST-FM has a TV modulator built-in, and comes with a lead to allow you to plug it straight into any domestic colour television set. The mains transformer is also built-in to the keyboard, so there are no messy external boxes. You couldn't wish for a more compact, powerful and stylish unit. Atari ST computers are now firmly established in the UK, there are nearly 500 software titles already available for a wide variety of applications and the list is growing all the time. And that's not all. When you buy your new 520ST-FM (or any Atari ST computer) from Silica Shop, you will get a lot more, including a FREE Silica ST Starter Kit worth over . Read the ONLY FROM SILICA section on the left, to see why you should buy your new high power, low price 520STFM from Silica Shop, the UK's No1 Atari Specialists. For further details of the range of Atari ST computers and the FREE Silica ST Starter Kit, complete and return the reply coupon below. ATARI 520ST-FM NOW ONLY  (+VAT=) 520ST-FM with 512K RAM & mono monitor  (inc VAT) Upgrade from 512K RAM to 1024K RAM  (inc VAT) Finally, there's a personal computer that not only solves problems like other computers, but also solves the one problem that other computers have created. Affordability. Silica Shop are pleased to present the ST range of personal/business computers from Atari. The ST was designed utilizing the most recent breakthroughs in semiconductor technology, producing a personal computer that performs tasks with fewer parts. Which means it costs less to make. And less to buy. The latest ST computers now include built in power supplies and built in disk drives. The TOS operating system and GEM window environment are now on ROM chips which are already installed in the ST keyboard. This enables automatic instant booting when you switch on Silica Shop are pleased to offer the complete Atari ST range. Our mail order department is situated in Sidcup and we have 3 retail outlets at Sidcup, Lion House (Tottenham Court Rd) and Selfridges (Oxford Street). We have eight years experience of Atari products, longer than any other UK company, and are well established as the UK's No. 1 Atari specialist. With a group turnover of over  million and in excess of 80 staff, we offer you unbeatable service and support. We provide several facilities which you will find invaluable during your Atari computing life and most of these facilities are available ONLY FROM SILICA. We suggest that you read through what we have to offer, before you decide where to purchase your Atari ST. FREE STARTER KIT-Only From Silica When you purchase any Atari ST keyboard, you will not only receive the best value for money computer on the market, but you will also receive the following from Atari Corporation as part of the package: * BASIC Language Disk \"BASIC Manual ST Owners Manual TOS/GEM ON ROM If you buy your ST from Silica Shop. you will also receive: \"NEOchrome Sampler colour graphics program 1st Word Word Processor In addition, we at Silica would like to see you get off to a flying start with your new computer, so we have put together a special ST STARTER KIT worth over , which we are giving away FREE OF CHARGE with every ST computer purchased at our normal retail prices. This kit is available ONLY FROM SILICA and is aimed at providing users with a valuable introduction to the world of computing. We are continually upgrading the ST Starter Kit, which contains public domain and other licensed software, as well as books, magazines and accessories all relevant to ST computing. Return the coupon below for full details. DEDICATED SERVICING Only From Silica At Silica Shop, we have a dedicated service department of seven full time Atari trained technical staff. This team is totally dedicated to servicing Atari computer products. Their accumulated knowledge, skill and experience makes them second to none in their field. You can be sure that any work carried out by them is of the highest standard. A standard of servicing which we believe you will find ONLY FROM SILICA. In addition to providing full servicing facilities for Atari ST computers (both in and out of warranty), our team is also able to offer memory and modulator upgrades to ST computers. 1 Mb RAM UPGRADE: Our upgrade on the standard \"Atari 520ST-M or 520ST-FM keyboard will increase the memory from 512K to a massive 1024K. It has a full 1 year warranty and is available from Silica at an additional retail price of only .96 (+VAT = ). TY MODULATOR UPGRADE: Silica can upgrade the 1040ST-F to include a TV modulator so that you can then use it with your TV set. This is an internal upgrade and does not involve any untidy external boxes. A cable to connect your ST to any domestic TV is included in the price of the upgrade which is only  (inc VAT). The upgrade is also available for early 520ST computers at the same price. THE FULL STOCK RANGE Only From Silica We aim to keep stocks of all Atari related products and our warehouse carries a stock of over % million. We import many software titles direct from the USA and you will find that we have new releases in advance of many of our competitors. Unlike dealers who may only stock selected titles, we have the full range. In addition, we carry a complete line of all books which have been written about the Atari STA range as wide as ours is something you will find is available ONLY FROM SILICA. AFTER SALES SUPPORT Only From Silica Rest assured that when you buy your ST from Silica Shop, you will be fully supported. Our free mailings give news of releases and developments. This will help to keep you up to date with new software releases as well as what's happening in the Atari market. And in addition, our sales staff are at the end of a telephone line to service all of your Atari requirements. If you purchase an ST from Silica and would like any technical advice, we have a full time technical support team to help you get the best from your computer. Because we have both the staff and the systems specifically dedicated to providing after sales service on Atari ST computers, we are confident that our users enjoy an exceptionally high level of support. This can be received ONLY FROM SILICA. FREE CATALOGUES Only From Silica At Silica Shop, we recognise that serious users require an in-depth information service, which is why we mail free newsletters and price lists to our ST owners. These are up to 48 pages long and are crammed with technical details as well as special offers and product descriptions. If you have already purchased an ST and would like to have your name added to our mailing list, please complete the coupon & return it to us. This information service is available ONLY FROM SILICA FREE OVERNIGHT DELIVERY From Silica Most orders are processed through our computer within 24 hours of receiving them. Most hardware orders are sent by the overnight GROUP 4 courier service FREE OF CHARGE to customers within the UK. This method helps to ensure minimum delay and maximum protection. PRICE MATCH Only From Silica We hope that the combination of our low prices, FREE UK delivery service, FREE Starter Kit and FREE after sales support, will be enough to make you buy your Atari equipment from Silica Shop. If however, there is something you wish to purchase, and you find one of our competitors offering it at a lower price, then please contact our sales department, providing us with our competitor's name, address and telephone number. If our competitor has the goods in stock, we will normally match the offer (on a 'same product same price' basis) and still provide you with our normal free delivery. We realise that we are not the only company who will match a competitor's price. However, if you come to us for a price match, you will also be entitled to our after sales service, including free newsletters and technical support. This makes our price match promise rather special, something you will receive ONLY FROM SILICA. We don't want you to go anywhere else for your Atari products. So shop at Silica, the UK's No1 Atari Specialist. ATARI ATARI 1040ST-F NEW PRICE We are pleased to announce a new reduced price point on the 1040ST-F which is now available for only  (inc VAT). The 1040 is a powerful computer with 1Mb of RAM and also includes a built-in 1Mb double sided 375\" disk drive. The 1040 has been designed for use on business and professional applications most of which require a high resolution monochrome or colour monitor. It does not therefore have an RF modulator for use with a domestic TV set. Modulators can be fitted for  (inc VAT) 1040ST-F Keyboard Without Monitor ............. (inc VAT) 1040ST-F Keyboard + High Res SM 125 Mono Monitor .............. (inc VAT) If you would like further details of the 1040ST-F, return the coupon below. MEGA ST's NOW IN STOCK For the user who requires even more RAM than the 520 or 1040 ST's offer, the new MEGA ST computers are now available. There are two MEGA ST's, one with 2Mb of RAM and the other with a massive 4Mb. Both new computers are fully compatible with existing ST's and run currently available ST software. The MEGA ST's are styled as an expandable Central Processing Unit with open architecture and a detachable keyboard. They are supplied with GEM, a free mouse controller and all extras as with the 520 or 1040. Prices are as follows: MEGA ST 2Mb Keyboard + CPU  (inc VAT) MEGA ST 2Mb Keyboard + CPU SM125 Mono Monitor ...........  (inc VAT) MEGA ST 4Mb Keyboard + CPU  linc VAT) MEGA ST 4Mb Keyboard + CPU-SM125 Mono Monitor ...........  (inc VAT) If you would like further details of the MEGA ST's, return the coupon below. FROM SILIS list, please com you have already To: Silica Shop Ltd, CVG 1088, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent DA14 4DX PLEASE SEND ME FREE LITERATURE ON THE ATARI ST Mr/Mrs/Ms: ............ Initials: Surname: Address: SIDCUP (& Mail Order) 01-309 1111 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX LONDON 01-580 4839 Lion House (1st floor), 227 Tottenham Court Rd, London, WIP OHX LONDON 01-629 1234 ext 3914 Selfridges (1st floor), Oxford Street, London, W1A 1AB Postcode: Do you already own a computer If so, which one do you own? "


"CELITELE P101011 47 E, UBRUSERS SOFT Explore the phantas forces of COCO VILLA a city where anything can happen and you can bet your life it will! The Mad Mix Game by Toposoft  1988. All rights reserved. ONLY . SPECTRE 15 pulsating levels of good and evil... which are which??... only the daring will ever find out. SELEN 9444 "


"38 THE goric O PEPSI  CHALLENGE From two giants comes a giant name... Pepsi and U.S. Gold launch the most original computer challenge series of the century. The Pepsi Challenge Mad Mix Game is an addictive, colourful extravaganza of ghouls and demons in the most spectacular traditions of computer entertainment... with a little 21st century trickery thrown in to torment you. Match your changeable persona to meet the metamorphosis of your mysterious adversaries and you'll find there's hardly a second to spare as you try to outwit, outgun and outrun their outrageous behaviour. And most importantly, The Pepsi Challenge Mad Mix Game has been specially selected to lead the Pepsi/U.S. Gold Computer Challenge Series... and if you want to know more about this opportunity, watch the press for details (better still, buy one and gain entry to the most exciting challenge of the century). Series. TAPE | DISK (.991 48/128K 34/128K ISTRAD ST .99 FANTASTIC PRIZES HUNDREDS OF WINNERS U.S. E GOLD PEPSI Buy the Pepsi Challenge Mad Mix Game now for further details. U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3, Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388. Dixon 21_21 BB TOIT 2 "


"ARCADE 12200 A tale of two cities this month, with two new cute titles, Dynamite Dux from Sega and Jaleco's Legend of Makai being offset by the latest in arcade violence, Cabal. Clare Edgeley brings you this report. LEGEND OF MAKAJ UTIC 713228 PURE 40 Legend of Makal might have have the dosh, some information pretty dreary graphics, but don't from a manuscript and so on. It all let that put you off the game costs though. At times, the wraith which is a reasonably fast-paced behind the counter might arcade adventure in the Ghosts volunteer information and this 'n' Goblins style. and any other messages will be The story line is pretty naff displayed at the bottom of the screen. In this way you learn to though as usual you've got to look on the top of trees for keys, rescue someone or other. one of which lurks in the boughs of However, to get to them, you're the first tree. going to have to travel a tortuous Once you've made your exit route, bashing baddies with your you'll be thrown immediately double axe-head boomerang, A Grab that treasure chest. buying new weapons, collecting keys and finding the letters of the spell which will defeat the evil KEY= wizard. The surpirse of the game is that you seen to be in control of a heroine, and if she's not a girl, he's a pretty effeminate male long legs tucked into short boots, long hair and a short tunic. So it could be that you're off to rescue the 'poor, defenseless boyfriend who's been kidnapped by the evil wizard'! A nice change. The game starts in a wood, trees towering above your head with interlocking branches forming an uneven and slightly dodgey ladder upwards. Immediately you'll be set upon by a variety of monsters. The money A She's the one you've got to rescue. collected is displayed clearly at the bottom of the screen and is back into the fray. Knock off a vital if you're to buy information, few more gribblies and you'll potions and more sophisticated soon come across a door which is weapons. obviously not a shop. Enter this Jump up into the branches of if you can you have to have the the tree and while you're about it, right object and you'll run knock out the spitting orchids, smack into a miniature unicorn huge plants which throw fireballs who'll give you the first letter of in your general direction. One the counter spell. direct hit from you and they'll The end of level monster in topple off their perches leaving this case it's a more fragile the branch tree. One irritating looking druid — casts a silvery net thing is that they reappear if you in your direction followed by a should visit that branch again. So stream of crystalline bubbles. killing them isn't permanent. Should you run into either of these Your first shop is in the you're dead. She takes several truck of the second or third tree shots to kill and when she does go and there you can use your it's in a magical puff of small joystick and firebutton to select a explosions which reveal her true higher grade of weapon if you form a small green goblin which Alt's certainly an uphill struggle. A Not yer average grocer 338 39! KEYE 000 KEY= 114 "


"ACTION DYNAMITE DUX 300 scuttles off into the undergrowth! the like lie temptingly on the And then it's on for more of the SEGA988: ground for you to pick up for same on the second stage, only energy. Rocks lie abandoned on this time there are more nasties, the sidewalk and these can be more shops, more weapons. In used as temporary missiles, fact buying extra weapons and Patrolling these horror filled information becomes almost streets is a task only for those with ludicrous. The shopkeeper tells a one-way deathwish. you to go to the next shop for an It might look easy, but in the even better piece of equipment like the silver shield, and on end you're a sitting duck as the sheer strength of this mutated getting there you are likely to be army is likely to leave you given directions to yet another shop to buy the Wiam Slayer and quacking in desperation. so on. The hassle is almost as bad Your quest starts off initially in 'as going shopping down Oxford the midst of some town. Clean Street in the West End on the day Uy started and fuktened streets, no garbage and plenty of before Christmas. monsters. Soon signs appear Anyway, once you're kitted up QR taken away to the acka leading you down into the to the eyeballs, you can easily subway where you can battle it deal with the baddies. Staying out on the tracks with an even alive is then merely a matter of more dirty fighters than the ones skill and agility. Finding your A If you think there story's wierd ... above ground. Stairs eventually way down into dank caverns, appear and you leap making your way up cliff paths desperately for them only to be cut in the hillside and so on. And greeted by a fox manning a in this level, you'll meet up a little bazooka. old crone who'll give you the next That did it for me. I got shot Rubber necked reindeer, uncontrolled skateboards zoom straight in the guts and fell in a bodyless sausage dogs, in for the kill and horned reindeer ridiculous bundle of feathers to skateboarding cats and cuddly head bound towards you on KEY the ground. Luckily there is alligators hosted by a manic duck elongated rubbery necks. have to make up the most Sandwiches, cream cakes and continued on page 116 amusing game I've seen in a long while. Dynamite Dux, from Sega, is 490 240 the name and dynamite is the game if you can afford to let your friends see you playing something so daft and whacky. Cartoon antics on the screen lead your duck, which goes by the unlikely name of Pin, to battle his way through a series of hilarious situations to rescue his mistress. She has gone the way of most females and has stupidly allowed OME AGAIN? herself to be captured by some evil, nasty minded, thick headed letter of the elusive spell. numbskull. The third level starts off half Pin, and Bin if you're playing in way up a waterfall with you two player mode, are dressed in Down to the tube station at midnight. balanced precariously on a red and blue, strut around the wooden platform. Jump up by Cook, cook, cook, cookability. screen armed only with their leaping onto moving logs to get fists!? Clad in boxing gloves, to terra firma and the safety of the these two feathered heroes can trees. One word of warning this knock the living daylights out of waterfall is an awfully long one, any monstrosity silly enough to so a badly timed jump will spill sneak up too close. And sneak up you into the drink they will. The graphics are not so bad, The variety of baddies is an more dull and dreary. Lots of endless source of inspiration to shades of brown seem to feature anyone wanting to get into heavily. It's shame really, cartoon graphics. Rabbits on because Legend of Makaj pogo sticks bounce into the features large easy moving attack, their ears flapping wildly sprites and it offers quite a with every hop. Dog heads snarl challenge. Though the game has at you from ground level, been done before in various yapping round your heels, cats guises there are touches of wearing protective helmets and originality buried in the depths. whizzing around on wildly LLLLLLLL 115 "


"ARCADE ACTION always another life and with a You're in the open now and the determined quack, Pin, or was it only thing left for you to do is Bin, leapt to his feet to attack. shoot better and quicker than Success. Armed with a bazooka, them so that you can move onto the rest of the mutants fell into the next level and have a quick disarray. That is until the end of breather. level monster, a towering column The controls are very clever. of flame, appeared. When the roller ball is spun to the Shaped like the British Gas left and right your character runs symbol and equipped with two across the screen accordingly. huge eyes, the flame advanced. The sights are always further Like lightning I dived for a nearby ahead of your commando and water pistol and let him have it these can be moved up and down where it hurt most. Psssssst! He by rolling the ball the same way. started to shrivel and then with a So playing the game you need to burst of energy overwhelmed me keep an eye on both the position by spitting out lots of mini replicas of your character you don't of himself. want him to stop a bullet while ENEMY The battle of the fire monsters at the same time positioning the CREDIT OO continues for a long time. Problem sights on your next target. Neat. is you keep getting overwhelmed A Kill! Destroy! Maim! by the flames, drop your trusty stealth and silence. water pistol and have to start The next level takes you to the again. As you can imagine, a gates of the enemy compound, bazooka is no help at all in this and boy is that heavily guarded. rather heated situation. They wheel out the heavies to Eventually you'll fight clear. The meet you, truckfulls of soldiers, flame will fizzle out and you can tanks and snipers. You're kept storm onto the next level to pretty busy and even busier when continue your daft quests. you reach the HQ itself. The graphics in Dynamite Dux Buildings must be smashed, are delightful and the game's got enemy jets must be grounded, to be the cutest thing around. fuel tanks exploded, and Real cartoon figures acting out a hovering choppers knocked out of mad and fantastic scenario. Sega the skies. As the screen and must be congratulated. The game objects advance towards you, makes a fun break from the you will occasionally be able to serious business of piloting space hide behind objects though these craft, blasting aliens and never remain intact for long. single-handed, armed only with Grenades are the most suitable knife, wiping out whole form of defence in a hot spot as batallions of enemy invaders. they have a small smart bomb If you want something whacky A Just you, and a few million rounds of ammunition. effect on impact. and you're not too fussed with I thoroughly enjoyed Cabal blazing the trail of heroism then and even though I'm a play Dynamite Dux. It might not notoriously bad shot I found it a be macho, but it's a laugh. real challenge. The game with its four levels is extremely addictive CABAL and sets the adrenalin running. It might not be an original, but what A game which uses the roller ball better commando theme to cabinet of Combat School and is resemble than Operation Wolf. played on the lines of Operation If you spin the roller ball very Wolf has got to be interesting. quickly your character will take a Cabal, a roaring battle against dive and roll head over heels the might of the enemy, fits the bill across the ground in a very nicely. convincing fashion. Don't stand In fact this is one or two player gawping in awe at this gymnastic game with simultaneous play for feat though as you've got to the second commando. Stuck at rescue your sights which will have the bottom of the screen and only shot off to one side of the screen! able to move left and right you SEREMY On catching a bullet your have to knock out advancing GO CREDIT character will fall sprawling enemy troops by roller balling A Take out that plane. your sights onto target and then across the path and at this point the graphics suffer from a small hitting the trigger of your machine On dying, some soldiers leave with two players, Cabalis a must flicker. It's not too bad and the gun. behind grenades which you can for commando freaks. The battle rest of the game is very clear and You're at a distinct run over to pick up. These are Samsoon hots up. Leaving the drawn with a good sense of disadvantage if you can't shoot great for destroying buildings outskirts of the jungle on the first perspective and detail. The sound straight in this crazy fight against and any tanks which come close level you belt off into the distance isn't too bad either a good the odds. The enemy come enough. waving your gun in the air and sense of perspective and detail. charging down the screen at you Fast and addictive, especially kicking up your heels. So much for the sound isn't too bad either. "


"ASISI MIRROR Soft KIKO: RAINBIRD TRIAD A NEW FORCE IN THE 16 BIT MARKET PLACE "


"Mean Aztec vonture Machines For those of you hankering after more Fantasy Zone, Aztec Adventure is very much in the same mould and has a similar feel and look to it. It is a one megabit cart (128K) and is a one player What a month! There's a quartet of new Sega game. The scenario has you games reviewed; one is the long-awaited in a fierce labyrinth (?) searching for the long lost conversion of the new martial arts arcade Aztec paradise. There are ten machine, Shinobi. There's also a sneak preview rounds and eleven stages to of some hot new PC Engine titles, including conquer. R-Type II and Galaga '88 and they really ARE You take the role of Nino hot as well as Britain's only Games Console and you can pick up some defensive help along the way Highscore table! What are you by buying the aid of sword, waiting for? carrying ducks and discretely Get reading!! dressed rabbits (kinda cute). . These characters follow you around and they are a good block if a nasty heads your way. and the more enemies killed The nasties come in all the more you can fill them up, shapes and sizes; bug eyed the weapons left are random. frogs, leaping toadies, Gameplay seems a bit slow demonic cats, rotating blobs at first, and to progress you with antlers, pod-spitting have to go for it and hammer plants and nasty bugs ease most things within reach. The out of the earth to swallow screen scrolls when you hit the you up! You can use your sides of the screen and you sword to kill them (they can have to be prepared for just leave various weapons when about anything to hit you killed) or simply run around when the next scene scrolls them. down. The graphics are nice To help you there are five and detailed and it really has types of weapons: money, an Aztec feel to it, the tunes bombs, homing missiles, four are straight out of F Zone and way fire and mystery. These enhance an already well all start out at zero, weird game. Laze Hunter 3d DEPO 2 SOAS 06 CB A Shenobi. Yet another good reason to go and get some 3D specs! This rates alongside Harrier 3D for the strength of the 3D perspective, it works very well without any reservations. You have to battle your way through a labyrinth which is made up of five areas (Metal, Rugged, Jungle, Ice and blaze) with each area having four levels A Maze Hunter 3D. "


"renguin VOO and three sub-levels. To get down (very useful). from one area to the next you Cuteygames rarely hit the have to collect a key. spot in the UK, although they The areas are inhabited by AN are popular in Japan. the likes of rolling dice (well It is a thinkers' that's what they LOOK LIKE), Boulderdash is a test your molar strength (a game with cute graphics, twirling cherries, hefty thugs, classic arcade type smack in the mouth) and they tunes and almost fiendishly rotating blue boulders and puzzle and Penguin Land is a will crush your egg given half subtle puzzles to solve. numerous other brutes. cute interpretation of the a chance so do not give Contact is fatal and you lose original. You have to rescue them one. If you get into one of your three lives. To your eggs. trouble and lose track of  GRAPHICS help you there are random The game comes on a where you are there is a SOUND power ups strewn around, one megabit cart and is due pause facility where you can PLAYABILITY these can give you high jumps for release in September. view the play area by to leap over enemies around On game start there is the scrolling the screen up and OVERALL you, and metal bars to option to play any of the first clobber the opposition. thirty levels (there are fifty The graphics are pin sharp over all). If you reach level and crisply coloured and thirty the back twenty levels these factors enhance the 3D can then be chosen. There is effect considerably. The also an editor facility where screen scrolls around you you can design AND SAVE and the gameplay is quite up to fifteen levels of your sedate. The real problem with own choice (fun, fun, fun). Hunter 3D is that the play is To get your egg to safety quite repetitive, so although it you have to go down a is lucious to the eye it does not vertically scrolling screen get the heart beating wildly. using your nose to break up the horizontal platforms, thus  GRAPHICS 8 allowing the egg to fall to the SOUND next level down, if the fall is PLAYABILITY too high it will crack and you have to start over. OVERALL On the way down there are polar bears which just love to A Aztec Adventure. ups are bonus rounds, here you can wack up some score by throwing darts at Ninja which are running across two henobi platforms in the distance (very If you hankered after the Disks of Tron), when the Shenobi coin-op then hanker round is over a Ninja jumps at no more... you filling up most of the Sega has converted it to its screen (lovely effect!!). console format. It comes on a At the end of each stage is a two mega-bit (256K) biggie to kill, this brute is a cartridge and it is a onehard beast, he throws player game. blobs of what look like sick at Ninja Kids have been you have dodge them and try captured by Ninja Outlaws to take him out before he does and they are being held you. If you succeed you hostage in various parts of a advance to the next round. city. You have to rescue them A Penguin Land. Graphics are well defined using your Ninja skills, there into the game. throw darts at them or to drop and colourful, sound is good are five missions with three to You can walk left/right down into a crouch or leap and the gameplay is four stages to each mission. against the scrolling high and release a dart to excellent, it just rolls off your You can punch, kick, throw backdrop and the action can take hidden Ninja out. There fingers into the joystick, the Shurken blades or use a take place over two levels. are enemy Ninja hidden moves become instinctive sword. You can switch between levels behind barrels, sitting high up after a short while and this The game starts with an by pressing both buttons on walls and some have leads to some very satisfying amazing piccy of a Ninja with down and pushing up or defensive shields to deflect play. . his eyes flitting from side to down to scroll to the your darts.  GRAPHICS side, very realistic. On upper/lower level. If you are hit by the enemy SOUND pressing fire you are The kids are situated you lose energy, if your presented with a map of the throughout the level and are energy guage hits zero you  VALUE city and a little box over the protected by various types of lose a life. PLAYABILITY area you are in. Then you do Ninja, your best weapon is to Hidden amongst the power OVERALL 00 00 00 00 "


"Mean Lachines 11igh scores Monopoly of Life. Up to four the map there are some big people can play using the sprites flying overhead, a special joystick interface biplane, flying saucer and a called the Multi-Tap, this plugs witch on a broomstick all very into the regular joystick port detailed and large! and allows four other pads to If you get to the end, there be plugged into its interface. is a special sequence with a The game is played on a bunny girl showering scrolling map and the dice is champers over you and you simulated by a rolling clock get to sit watching the birds with the numbers one to ten fly into the horizon on a being chosen at random. sandy beach with a jazzy The idea is to get to the goal tune to keep you company. picking up as much cash an The other two games are experience of life as possible. Baseball and Shanghai from Your car moves a number of Activision. Shanghai is the steps depending on your'dice' same as the 16-bit board throw. The stops include game released a while back, comparison to the coin-op it is wedding, having a baby, it is very simple to play and faultless. It plays beautifully buying a house, bank, casino, quite addictive. It makes a but you must learn the attack concerts, school, airplane trips pleasant change to use the patterns FAST and hone those and various dangers. old noodle every so often. reflexes!! A nice feature of the As your car moves around Baseballis remarkably good. game is that if you completed The latest news on the PC the R-Type 1 you were given Engine is the launch of a CD a mission code, this code can ROM unit. The potential for be entered on R-Type 2 game with this add-on is carrying over your score and staggering, imagine almost weapons on to the first level instant access to gigabytes of (that would be level five in the of (that would be level five in the WRECKING CREW 98,100 J. Ashworth memory.  arcades). MACH RIDER 54,100 J. Ashworth The five latest cards to fall The other arcade goody in DUCK HUNT 728,100 The Breaker into my palms are Galaga 88, the five is Galaga '88, an PINBALL 333,130 Mr Garmant R-Type 2, Power League updated version of the KUNG FU 685,300 Tony Wright Baseball, Yu Yu Jinsei and Namco original. I expected it to be a little DONKEY KONG JR Shanghai. 231,500 Tony Wright After R-Type 1 I could old hat, what I got was a DONKEY KONG 3 384,200 Lee Davidson bearly wait for R-Type 2! The thumb-bendingly addictive CLU CLU LAND 52,250 Victoria Garmant good news is that the graphics blaster (I am up to level 28). GUMSHOE 231,000 Alex Bell are as classy as the original You start by zapping the POPEYE 87,130 Sherif Salama as is the sound, but the aliens which filter in strings BALLOON FLIGHT 524,400 James Garmant gameplay is tortuously hard. from the sides of the screen, MARIOS BROS 447,370 David Walker As if to emphasis this you start you can release blue warp AFTERBURNER 10,588,400 Andy Barkworth with five credits/restarts in pods hidden away in SPACE HARRIER 42,509,860 Neil Parsons R-Type 1 there were only boulders on the screen if you OUTRUN 54,455,720 Jamie Dilasser three credits. collect two you can warp to a CHOPLIFTER 2,240,000 Keith Lynch R-Type 2 is actually the last higher level in the galaxy for HANG ON 4,101,780 Gary Waddington four levels of the original better point scoring. BLACK BELT 2,568,200 Mark Warrior R-Type coin-op, in Yu Yu Jinsei is a type of SECRET COMMAND 1,875,200 D. Gibson 6\" OG TRANSBOT 1,340,760 Mark Shaw QUARTET 1,158,400 Keith Lynch ASTRO WARRIOR 803,500 Mark Lazenby FANTASY ZONE 9,702,000 Andrew Barclay FANTASY ZONE 2 4,723,300 Brett Colman NINJA 1,116,250 Phil Marley WONDERBOY 1,099,970 Keith Lynch ALEX KIDD 2,115,800 Nigel Ogley MISSILE DEFENCE 3D 246,000 Ben Everett MY HERO 10,420,240 Rob Bailey SHOOTING GALLERY 44,300 Simon Fields GHOST HOUSE 575,010 Paul Bradley KUNG FU KID 1,273,200 lan Green BANK PANIC *526,650 Paul Bradley GLOBAL DEFENCE 125,930 Nigel Ogley GANGSTER TOWN 138,540 Gareth Edwards 120 "


"DOUBLE DRAGON MELBOURNE HOUSE Settin New Standards IN COMPUTER SOFTWARE 2-1 Vernon Yard: 119 Portobello Road, London U X Delephone 01-727 8070 Pelax 01 7 SMEDEDEYE MASTERTRO ORE "


"23 WAYS TO ACHIEVE SPORTING IMMORTALITY DELA 30.0 SURIGORUSDICATOR STYGG UTRILITETENTEME CONTESTANT TS FIGURE SKATING 100M DASH SPEED SKATING HOT DOG FREESTYLE RELAY (SWIMMING) COMPUTER PACER 0:00 6 e ur KULO 04. ad CONTESTANT ANOTHER JUMP? VES PRACTICE 0:00,320 CONTESTANT TRY AGAINT VES SKI JUMP BOBSLED TRIPLE JUMP ROWING JAVELIN ADDR SUMMER GAMES I & II Brand New on Spectrum and Amstrad CONTESTANT CONTESTANT FAULTS 26 TIME 4 20 CONTESTANT S ET BAR HEIGHT 1.25% SHOW JUMPING HIGH JUMP Screenshots taken from CBM 64/128, Spectrum and Amstrad formats. FENCING CYCLING EDM EVENTS CBM 64/128 .99c, .99d SPECTRUM .99c, +3 .99d AMSTRAD .99c, .99d ANTS U.S. Gold Ltd Units 2/3 Holford Way Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388   GOLD : SCORES 4,4 CANOEING POLE VAULT BIATHLON GYMNASTICS CONTESTANT LAP 2:0 1.8 MATOETS PREPARE TO RACE FREE SKATING 100M FREESTYLE (SWIMMING) SKEET SHOOTING 4 x 400M RELAY DIVING "


"2 KONAMI SUPER ACTION ARCADE HITS SPECIAL ARCADE PACK AT YOUR RETAILER NOW! SEAU Konami TETESIS BERET | BREAK ses Plays a knockout frantic farce in the classroom, locker room and the high school cafeteria. Hip-zap. door attack, throw balls and ples... but can you make him hand his love letter to his girl-friend? It's every prison warden's nightmare the inmates have broken out. These men are hardened criminals, armed to the hilt and aren't afraid to gun you all down. Just move in, knock 'em down and round 'em up. Easy! RESCUE THE CAPTIVES! You are a highly trained combat machine. Your mission; Infiltrate all four enemy Strategic Defence Installations alone, against Immeasurable odds. Eight more deadly opponents to combat as you advance to become a black-belt master. Authentic fighting moves with 4 different locations. Our hero has finally mastered the secret martial art \"CHIN'S SHAO-LIN\" but is trapped by triad gangs. With kicks and other secret powers, escape from and travel SHAO-LIN'S road to freedom! The planet Nemesis, is now under an all-out space attack beings from the subspace star cluster of Bacterion. You will need all your courage and concentration to win. Get ready to blast off! ArKUKOFU SPORT SY PINGPONC You can almost feel the tension of the big match breaking through the screen... the expectant crowd is almost on top of you! You return the service with a top-spin Backhand, then a forehand Back-spin, the ball bounces high from your opponent's looping, defensive lob ... SMASH! ...a great shot opens the score... Get into this and you'll never get out ... The plan codename JACKAL is to drop a squad of 4 crack troops behind enemy lines. Rescue a group of prisoners and whilst under attack, deliver them to helipads. Their final objective is to knockout enemy headquarters. Simple eh? JACKAL is replaced by IRON HOS on the Comm Continuing the challenge where 'TRACK and FIELD' left off. Archery, Skeet Shooting and Weight Lifting are just some of the featured events to test your skill and stamina. Become a grand-master but to achieve this you must defeat a variety of deadly opponents, armed with different skills and weapons and must be overcome with a combination of 6 different attack moves. SPECTRUM. AMSTRAD ALSO AVAILABLE COMMODORE line ngime ON DISK of the game istered trademark CASSETTE IMAGINE SOFTWARE 6 CENTRAL STREET: MANCHESTER M2 5NS. EL: 061-832 6633  TELE 667799 OCEANS G FAX: 061 834 0650 .95 Imnogine "


"THIS OUT NOW THE OCTOBER 1988 ISSUE ONE Tasty trading and blasting action from Gremlin ATARI ST AMIGA PC FOR V 16-BIT GAMES FREE! 1K+ Playable Previews for Atari ST and Amiga Slick shoot'em up action with Electronic Arts' FUSION DREAM GOYUZLE 22 t: 995 Tower toppling fun with Hewson's NEBULUS DALEY THOMPSONS OLYMPIC CHALLENGE Ocean's superlative sports simulation HOSTAGES Infogrames ELIMINATOR Hewson MITH FREE DISK WITH ISSUE ONE Play Hewson's Nebulus + E.A.'s Fusion Dream "


"THE ARCADE COMPILATION OF THE YEAR LEGEND OF COIN-OP EVDE of the game Che name 1P 188 1P H I 1649 OPTIES SLAP FILATI C TAITO CORP. 1987 RASTAN The Warrior King Lands that produce men of legend, dragon slayers, lie in his shadow guardians of evil fear his fire Spewing sword, the axe he wields as swift as lightning State of the art programming makes a true simulation of the Arcade for your home micro, enjoy superb graphics and realistic action as RASTAN takes on a world of dangers magical wizards, fire breathing lions, bats, snakes, skeletons and finally the living dead. Is it more than you can handle?  TATTO CORP. 1987 SLAP FIGHT You are the pilot of the Slapfighter and must destroy the evil alien swarms which confront you, wave after deadly wave on the ever hostile planet of Orac To aid you in your challenge collect icons and substantially increase your fire power and speed Superb graphics and split second timing give this game an addictive edge. C TAITO CORP. 1988 RENEGADE REBEL WITHOUT A CAUSE? In the knife edge world of the vigilante there is no place to rest no time to think but look sharp there is always time to die! from the city subways to the gangland ghettos you will always encounter the disciples of evil who's mission it is to exterminate the only man on earth who dares to throw down the gauntlet on their path-the Renegade PLAY RENEGADE...PLAY MEAN! C TAITO CORP. 1987 ARKANOID The era and time of this story is unkown. After the mothership \"Arkanoid was destroyed, a spacecraft \"Vaus scrambled away only to be trapped in the void... You control the Vaus and have to penetrate 32 levels and then confront the \"Dimension Changer whom you must destroy in order to reverse time and ressurect the \"Arkanoid.\" Frantic action and split second timing combine to produce the most addictive and compulsive game DITO JUMP PLAYER PLAYER WARNA 658 ORE 09 C TAITO CORP. 1987 FLYING SHARK HOT FROM THE ARCADES. Flying Shark is the definitive conversion of this shoot-em-up. chart topping classic hit from Taito. Develop your strategy as you face swarms of enemy planes, tanks, gun emplacements and a host of sea. borne craft as you bomb. blast and battle your way into arcade history.  TAITO CORP. 1986, ARKANOID REVENGE OF DOH. Eons have passed..yet despite apparent annihilation in the original ARKANOID game. Dimension-controlling force \"DOM\" has come back to life, and occupying the huge space-craft ZARG, has entered our Universe, ARKANOID type space-fighter MIXTEC runs through long forgotten computer data until it finds the answer to his threat. \"VAUS 2 is launched and speeds towards the threatening alien presence, before it can extract its revenge \"The Revenge of Doh  TATTO CORP BUBBLE BOBBLE TAITO'S NO 1 ARCADE HIT IS HERE! Meet Bub and Bob. two of the busiest beasties you ever saw, as they battle their way across 100 levels of controlled Chaos in search of their girlfriends (ahhh!). Jump around picking up goodies and secret weapons as you seek to outsmart your enemies, but beware_hang around too long and you'll face Baron von Blubba from whom there's no escape! SCENE DEKORCE  TATTO CORP LEGEND OF KAGE Legend has it that long ago in Japan the beautiful Princess Kiri was kidnapped by the evil Dragon King. and Kage, a young ninja who was walking with her in the forest at the time, was given the formidable task of rescuing her. You must help Kage in his quest through the forest to the Dragon King's palace, gain entrance, find Mini and take her to safety. while avoiding the Dragon King's ninja guards CASSETTE AVAILABLE ON SPECTRUM AMSTRAD COMMODORE $12.95 alhe name the game ALSO AVAILABLE ON DISK Imagine Software: 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Tel: 061 834 3939 Telex 669977 "


"Mailbag Perhaps we've been a touch mean in the past. As from now, the best letter to Mailbag each month wins a brand spanking new C + Vg T-shirt! So new, we're not even quite sure what they look like yet! So now you've no excuse, get writing to: Mailbag, Computer and Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1R 3AU. . Can you tell me how it's July issue Computer and screen-shots from water pistols. Come to think of possible that I almost think of Videogames: Street-Fighter). it we don't give a pig's left ear you as an old friend? Perhaps 1) Let us all look at page 8) But the 'Play Masters' was a about comics. What on earth is it's because this is already the number......, DAMN THE PAGE real puzzle for me. Right a motorbike ad doing in a third or fourth letter I'm writing NUMBERS ARE GONE, WHAT beneath the first picture of computer mag? Can you play to you... HAPPENED TO THE Dungeoh Master) I read 'Justin Space Harrier on it? Why lie OK, I know you get PAGE-NUMBERS, MY gets his prize, but seems more about being the best selling loadsaletters, and you can't KINGDOM FOR SOME interested in the computer mag? You won't print print them all, but I would PAGENUMBERS... (ok ! champaghe'??!?$$%$$?!?'?$?this letter because you can't appreciate it if you would print regained control over myself). *(Ahd handle the criticism. one of those letters. 2) Somewhere around page 15. Under the second picture 'The Tyrant and Fash After reading the July issue of Comics, the one thing you BIG ED cringes as Justin whips your otherwise utterly splendid absolutely can't afford to miss if him oh Sidewinder'. Only after Editor's reply: C+ VG has magazine, I just felt ah your buying a reading your (by the way nice always had little bits and pieces enormous urge to write. COMPUTER-mag.......... one this one!) 'Winners stay on' on things other than computer In your review about 3) The review of Football competition I realised that games, the fact that we carry Aaargghhh (how about that for Manager Il on page....ehum just those comments were meant to ads from other than software a funny title), you said you forget it. You know I had to load be beneath the pictures on that houses shows how seriously would give the first person who my copy of this good game, just page. big name companies take both would write to you telling you to convince my neighbour 9) Your review about the magazine and the computer the spelling error in this game (who by the way has an Shadowgate (a truly nice games industry, and we say would receive a free game. Amiga(ha)) that the screen shots adventure'). Now I know that we're the best seller because Now I'm not going to tell you were hot from the ST version the Gem used by Atari looks we are, and now by an even this error (because I don't know (he nearly got a very much like the one used by greater margin. it), perhaps when this game will laughing-heart-attack as he saw the FAT-Mac. You printed a l have been reading your be released for the the screen-shots) although your screen-shot from the Mac!! magazine and have had little to Simply)-T(eriffic) computer reviewer stated that the Ok that's it for today, when complain about, and though I (yep, I'm one of the how nearly machine tested was the ST?. I'll find more 'funny mistakes have read others yours is by one million ST users around on 4) How are you so far?, still in issues to come, I'll let you far the cheapest and coolest on this tiny blue planet), and wnen game for a laugh?. know (the next issue will be on the market. this error is still around I could 5) Well, talking about screen sale on August the 16th, but But, in the March issue there tell you. shots: 'How oh earth did you won't be available until were two Codemasters games But that's not what I wanted get those screen-shots from September the 8th ...) reviews, ATO Simulator and Jet to say. First of all I fully Patton vs Rommel, Gianni Kind regards and Still your Bike Simulator, both of which understand that you'll have to sisters and Vixen, did you use a Devoted One were put down, and although check Software for errors, but I colour-printer or something, this is perhaps fair comment it really think that this is going to cause they looked very awful! Rob Nehgermah puts down the Codemasters far (or perhaps it was meant to 6) Talking about Vixen: oh the Holland label as a whole. be funny?, well if this is the ST the game scored the PS I am not an Arcadia, BMX, Pro Snooker and Jet Bike case, then prepare for a lot of following points: 8,6,7,7,7 and Mastertronic or Melbourne Simulators all by Codemasters laughs... on the Spectrum: 9,8,7,7,8. House employee, nor am ! are great value at .99 but you I really think that the ratings related in any way to one of didn't review any of these. I am Mark D. Garland have been swapped (specially their employees. sure many will agree with these P.S. How about fixing me a when the reviewer said and I PPS. Just replace the 'h' with points, so why don't you date Lora Clark. Poutlicious quote 'The animation of the the letter 'n' page 41 in the July donate a page to Codemasters indeed. main figure is really very issue 'But then again they never games to show they are a better good... The ST animation is noticed in the first place.' A label than portrayed. Editor's reply: Hopefully you'll especially good... watch out for really nice joke!!! Kevin Harris like the fact that ace tipster the way her hair bounces'). Sandy Beds Julian Rignall is handling much Am I right? . Me and my mate think you're Editor's reply: Are you sure of Playmasters now, so it 7) Are those screen-snots from magazine is **** !!! We are your name isn't really Richard should go from strength to Beyond the Ice Palace really Fash and Tyrant, and we really Darling? We don't slag strength. And sorry, Mark, Lora from the Amstrad? If they are don't give a damn how much off labels, just individual says she's spoken for (though I'll have to reconsider my fizzy drinks are, nor are we products if they aren't really up yours wasn't the only enquiry!) opinion oh this computer (e.g. great fans of trendy new delux to scratch. 126 "


"HOT GAME .... HOT REVIEWS \"FAB STAR AWARD\" % D01071 Dome 49 (Amstrad Version) COMPUTER GAMES WEEKLY AMSTRAD GOS FOR ALLOYD Addictive CPC GO FOR GOLD IT'S TOTALLY.. \"WELL DESIGNED. PROVIDES CONSIDERABLES > ORIGINALITY... ADDICTIVE... & 3 CHALLENGING. CHALLENGING.» 2% (C64 Version) \"THE LONGER I PLAYED... THE MORE DIFFICULT IT WAS TO STOP... EXCELLENT GAMEPLAY\" (Amstrad Version) COMPUTING WITH AMSTRAD CPC 86% SILVER AWARD AMSTRAD CPC 76 CAMES MACHINE \"A THOROUGHLY ADDICTIVE GAME... WILL KEEP YOU GLUED TO YOUR MONITOR FOR WEEKS\" % CRASH (Spectrum Version) 1926) \"BRILLIANTLY CLEVER AND ENDLESSLY ENTERTAINING FUTURE SPORTS SIMULATION\" 91% WOBBLY (Spectrum Version) SINCLAIR USER THE HOTTEST GAME ON THE STREETS GO FOR GOLD IT'S TOTALLY Addictive Available on: CBM 64/128 cassette & disk, SPECTRUM cassette & disk... AMSTRAD cassette & disk, AMIGA, ATARI ST, IBM PC Addictive Games is a division of PRISM LEISURE CORPORATION PLC, Unit 1, Baird Road, Enfield, Middlesex ENI 153 "


"AD INDEX SPEEDYSOFT The Fastest Mail Order Service Available 8 ............ .IFC,3 Activision .. Anco... Army Ad..... ... 109 ...16, 17 ...84 ...... 95 ...56 Amstrad C.P.C. Agent x2 Riddlers Den .00 Micro Rythm Merlin Core Mission Genocide Xen Dont Panic Crazy Comets Doombase Chimera HyperBlob Dawnsley Allen Highway Radius Grid Trap VooDoo Rage Fruit Machine Simulator Dark Star Redhawk Rainbow Metaldrone Defend or Die .50 Brain Ache Technician Ted Sunstar Hall of the Things Dark Star 1.C.U.P.S. Labyrinthion Zorro America's Cup Captain Kelly Hi Rise Gobots Hocus Focus Park Patrol Life Force Bounces Zolyx Death or Glory Core Killer Cobra The Vikings .50 5th Quadrant Nu Wave Triaxos Dun Durach Stormbringer Alien Evolution .50 Thrust 2 Future Knight Trashman Ciphiod 9 Revolution Trailblazer R.I.S.K Eastenders Ball Breaker Inside Outing Rigels Revenge Zapp Shadow Skimmer Saracen .00 Discovery Cosmic Shock Absorber Knightmare World Games .00 10th Frame Knight Mare Jack the Nipper Survivor Big Trouble Little China Convoy Raider 10th Frame Star Raiders 2 Deathscape Mertianoids Shangai Nihillst Shao Lins Road Labyrinth Star Raiders 2 Jack the Nipper King Fu Master Howard the Duck Jack the Nipper 2 Shogun Phantom Club Classic Collection 2 Deactivators The War Game Blockbusters Pulsator The Trading Game Tau cell 2 G. Deeper Dungeons Last Mission Gauntlet deeper Dungeons .00 Mikia Hybrid Solomons Key Gauntlet Shadow Skimmer Big Names Bonanza Gauntlet Deeper Dungeons Triaxos Star Games 1 Lazer Wheel Warlock Athens 2 Pie R Squared Mystery of the Nile 10 Comp.Hits 3 Metrocross Phantom Club Quartet Masters/Univers Rampage Que-Dex Hacker 2 Firetrack .00 Killed until Dead Rampage Guadal Canal Sold a Million 3 Basketball Living Daylights a Pan. Basket Master Leviathan Greytell the Legend of Norman Game Over Rampage Mercenary Roadwars Hades Nebula Druid 2 Meg Max Athena 2 14.00 Gauntlet Mutants Hacker 2 California Games Hacker Il Gryzor Collossus Chess 4 Magnetron Freddy Hardest Renegade .00 Athens Wizball 2 Tia Pan Wizball 2 Bubble Bobble Super Sprint Screen Heroes (7 Games) DISCS Cholo High Frontier .00 .50 Guadal Canal Marsport Wizball 2 F15 Strike Eagle Hive Last Mission Silent Service Shockaway Rider Tobruk Plus 3 discs avallable at low Nemesis the Warlock prices. Send S.A.E. for list. Howard the Duck Firefly Hydrefoot Music Master Slapfight ATARI ST. Footballer of the Year .00 .00 Maestro Amplifier Normally Flying Shark Roadwars .95. Now only .95 Rolling Thunder Gunship Large range of discs from as Commodore 64/128 little as .50. Send SAE for full B. Clough Football .00 Sky Rider Ilst. World Games Bounces Spectrum 48/128 Crazy Cars Nexus .00 Pool Starlon Ballbreaker Strip Poker Master of the Lamps Zenji Arkanoid P.C. Fuzz Supersleuth Tracker Frostbyte Fire of London U.M.S. Aliens Chaos AMIGA Starforce Fighter Rollaround .00 Go for Gold Ricochet Blastaball River Rescue Star Pilot Space Ranger Space Tunnel Super Stuntman Zenji Tank Busters .00 Ork Attack Sports Hero E.C.O. Swamp Fever Lazer Wheel Roulette Code Hunter Spote Jigsaw Mania Slurpy 30 Starfighter Diablo K.G.P. Agent Transmuter Crazy Cars Rock 'N' Wrestle Super Robin Hood Star Glider Pirate Base Wizards lait Roadwars On Court Tennis Zolyx Jewels of Darkness A.T.V. Simulator Alpine Games Bubble Bobble \"Credit card orders welcome by phone on 0564 775975 Mon-Friday 9.30-6.00/Sat 9.30-12.30. We accept Visa, Access, Mastercard & Eurocard. wuiken ... 23 106 .00 Beau Jolly. Best Byte. Big Apple.... ................65, 66, 67, 68 Boots. British Rail... Bullocks.......... Byrite. Charnwood.... Classifieds ..... Commodore..... Comsoft.... DG Marketing. ......... Euromax.. ........... E&J. ..79 Grandslam..... ............52, 102 Gremlin...........................20, 24, 25, 104, 105 Hewson. Holmesoft Infogrammes..... Lerm ......69 Logotron.. Mailsoft... Main Event. Mastertronic. .41, 121 Microdealer ........ Microdigitalsoft.. ..................98, 99 Microprose. ....................10, 81, 89, 92, 103 M.G.L. ..... Ocean................IBC, 6, 7, 42, 73, 76, 125, 129 PJK. Shekhana. Silica Shop Softcell. Sound & Vision Speedysoft. Stortsoft.. ......72 System 3. 12, 13 Telecomsoft.........................................36, 44 Telecomsoft.. Titus. ......97 Triad. .... 116 Trybridge.... ......54 US Gold..............OBC, 50, 51,57, 112, 113, 122 Vector ........ ................. Worldwide... .................. W.C.H.M. 49 ......80 ..........60 ... 79 .95 ......... * Established five years, we offer unrivaled prices and Service. * All computers catered for. * TO ORDER: Send cheque or postal order made payable to: SPEEDYSOFT 15 LADY BYRON LANE KNOWLE, SOLIHULL W. MIDS B93 9AT 36. 44 * Credit card orders welcome by phone on 0564 775975 Mon-Friday 9.30-6.00: We accept Visa, Access, Mastercard & Eurocard Name... ..Comp. Address...... Visa/Access/Mastercard/Eurocard Card No. 1 Title 1. olwil Post & Packing .00 Europe P&P 2.00 Grand Total "


"+video Month Prepare to be amazed! Strapped onto the cover of next month's C+ VG is a FREE cassette of one of the year's arcade sensations R-Type. Converted by Activision, the tape will feature a playable demo of the entire first level of the Spectrum and Commodore versions. 16-bit owners needn't feel left out because we have an extremely generous money-off voucher allowing you to save pounds on the game. There'll also be pages and pages of exclusive reviews, red-hot tips and all the latest news and previews. And all for only .10. It's in the shops on October 15 order early! "


"John Minson provides the complete It's here again — the 'it' being just dying to try/ NEW the PCW Show or PC Show guide to the PC Show in unique A-Z PRODUCT is also fresh but as it is now known, the W style. The rich fabric of the biggest served with a thick sauce of having got lost during its beano in computerdom is all here hype to disguise the fact that move from the Olympian from the under dressed girls to the over it's scrag end rather than heights to the baronial rump steak. 'New Product' is splendour of Earl's Court. rated games. Is it worth the entrance the same one that you saw The change in venue makes fee? last year only now it's crystal-ball gazing tricky, nearing completion honest! even for experienced Crowds: Obviously a exhibitions like myself, but at MING popular show like PC attracts least I can pass on some the masses but nothing can homespun wisdom which will prepare you for the solid help you get the most from the sauna of sweating bodies that show. you'll encounter. It's hotter Arrivals: Earl's Court tube than a Commodore power station has two exits, so the supply. My advice? Stay readers of other magazines away so that I can get around will lose vital seconds circling MMOORE more easily. the platform, looking for the No not really. PC right one. But canny wouldn't be half the fun C&VG-ies will head straight without the Battle Zone for the one marked Exhibition element. You can try brute (clever huh) where, tube strength, derived from ticket at the ready, with Show American Football, shouting ticket (you did buy in 22 34 18! Hut, hut, hut!' advance, didn't you?) But I prefer the sneaky clutched firmly in the other approach: \"Phew. It's so hot hand, you'll rush the barriers on the palace stand Maria and beat everyone else to the Beware of the show bimbos warns Minson. Whittaker has just taken off stands. Then when they role market stall once the binge is On not to try is with the her chain mail bikini.\" It can up, sweating in their anoraks, over, to the hardened hack blonde beauties who adorn empty an aisle within you can say very loudly, the show is one big blag. some of the stands. Ever since seconds. \"Pity they won't be But what to do if you're not Syste System 3 offered us Charlotte One stunt that I've never deomnstrating that CD ROM tried but you may care to is and her dancing Harlots a a journalist? There's no easy again. The 3D interactive solution. Editing a fanzine, couple of years ago and got smuggling in your adventure with digitally skateboard, getting up on the particularly if the circulation is their plugs pulled by s their plugs pulled by the sampled dragon roars was one hand written issue, Whitehouse brigade, things balcony, selecting a stand quite something! specially prepared for your have been more restrained on and dropping in on the  First Impressions: These can masses from a great height be overwhelming. Some showtime lig, will result in two the page three front. fingers, not freebies. Your However, should you see one with a truly rad Ollie to people rush wildly around, best bet is to remind the PR of these fair females, stick to Hurtcity kamikaze drop! Yo trying to see everything in the person that today's spotty Peeking unless you want a dude! first five minutes. With this in mind you should little oik is tomorrow's spotty Poke in the eye. Me, I stay cool saunter bug hack and hope they'll let Il et Note: These bimbos are be able to get the most from over to the nearest bar, you have a badge or two to known as 'Personality Girls', the PC, but before you leave where there's always a large tide you over until I grow too which seems a little odd as Earl's Court don't miss contingent of gssiping old/senile/inebriated to churn standing in a swimsuit with a The Great Out to software people, and earwigout this trash silly grin on your face doesn't Lunch — Spot The Minson on what the action is. You can Hands On Experience: Lots seem to indicate much of the Contest. Actually I won't be pick up amazing bits of  of this. You'll be able to play Saforementioned quality, but it that hard to locate. I've given information but there is one all the latest releases (see next ay does lead neatly into our next you enough clues as to where problem the cost of drinks category which is ... section) — providing you can appears to be governed by to look already. And when Technical Terms: There is you finally do find which bar the size of the show. get close enough to the one extremely imprtant micros. This is not to be I'm lurking in, approach me Press Privileges: These are technical term for all visitors confused with Legs Off (carrying this issue of C&VG, manifold. From the free to PC and that is New natch) and say, \"'You are booze urged upon you by PR Experience, in which a disk. micro, monitor, Microprose's product. Actually this is John Minson and I think people (thanks in advance, several terms, depending on flight simulator, etc grows you're a genius.\" Then you you all) to the T-Shirts which how ot's written. New legs so you can try it at home. Product is the hundred can buy me a Bloody Mary not only ensure that you won't and be seen drinking with me freeze on the way home but Don't even think it, punk! percent fresh program or as your prize. See I said it also allow you to open up a Another aspect of Hands piece of hardware that you're was liggers paradise! "


"COIN-OP ACTION scar through wave after wave of deadly airbourne invaders. Accumulate a vast array of weapons as you pilot vqui armour-laden helicopter and the awesome SE 14 fighter plane Typhoon is a combat for the skies Ache Konashiconop hit nowy for. your home misto. Frenzied dogadicinine in a 3D scrolling acdon, SK levels of puise pounding Excitrinent. Each culminating in a devastating adversary Pa typhoon and reach for the skies * **** CASSETTE COMMODORE AMSTRAD DIS AMSTRAD .95 .95 .95 .95 COMMODORE SPECTRUM Une name terme IMAGINE SOFTWARE O CENTRAL STREET MANCHESTER M2 5NS TEL: 061-832 6633 TELEX: 667799 OCEANS G FAX: 061 834 0650 "


"DONT MISS THE MAD SCRAMBLE FOR OFF-ROAD RACIN Put yourself and your driving skills against the clock and computer controlled opponents to challenge for the Victor's Cup. Off-Road, Racing is a test of speed and survival. Customise your vehicle and prepare to race over the world's toughest terrain. road game yet. It makes the Grand Prix look like child's play. desert all combine to make Off-Road Racing the most hazardous the Death Valley Trek or the Baja challenge. Snow, ice, mud and challenge: the Georgia mud flat, the Michigan Winter Wreck-Off, Four of the toughest, roughest courses gives you the ultimate driving + Your chance to win a fabulous Kawasaki KDX200 in our 'Mad Scramble' Competition See the bike at the PCW Show. For details of the competition see the inlay card. HORNT ELVIN ATOMBEN IMPOSSIBLE MISIONI Also available Impossible Mission II the return of Elvin Atombender CBM64/128 & AMSTRAD .99 tape .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 tape ATARI ST .99 disk IBM PC $24.99 disk CBM64/128 & AMSTRAD SPECTRUM AMIGA IBM PC .99 tape .99 disk . .99 tape .99 disk .99 disk U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 ZAX. Tel: 021 356 3388. U.S. GOLD "

