"Britain's best selling computer magazine AUG88 .10 S$4.60 Dm5.50 350pta HFL 5.90 COMPUTER BARBARIAN 11 The karrior is back +video Great Money On Offer GAMES I WILL RIDES THE PARK ROUND-UP THE KRISTAL REVEAM PRED: OBNTERIOR WIN: SIGNED COPIES OF RED STORMIRISING! REVIEWED. VIRUS NIGHT DER, CHUBBY GRISTLE, TRACK SUIT MANAGER SAAMANDER, STAR WARS, HOPPIN MAD, SKATE CRAZY AND THE PRESIDENT IS MISSING "


"ATARI ST AND AMIGA If your computer could choose... LELE The Computer's Choice! "


"DUNHINI BOM, TACK  SPACE ARRIERA CHURER ALS Atari ST .99 *Ikari Warriors Atari ST .99 Amiga .99 EYOND Elite Systems Limited, Eastern Avenue, Lichfield, Staffs WS13 6RX, England. Telex: 336130 ELITE G "


"Contents Score VIRUS Carrier Command and Operation Wolf show on the 6 bit machines, Elite is profiled and Bat Man finds time to drop in. S The Empire Strike Back with a vengeance at this coin op game gets the thumbs up (p. 18). The President Has Gone Caped Crusader has time for Missing is a whodunnit the first for ages (p.20). Track Suit Manager looks even better than Footy Manager as a strategy game (p.22) Virus C+VG Hit p.30. Barbarian First reviews and competition First reviews and competition. WOLLUT Mindfighter looks beautiful in the box but how does it play. The Fiend is back too. Rocket Rauger Cartoon Frame Up Mega Mega Frame Up competition. 11 Ward let rip with the Hairspray. Big Screen is devine this month 0 67 The Kristal sparkles on ST and Amigo p96 RedStormRising Comp Fantasy Role Playing comic heroes ron the dice, PBM fanzines, and lots of goodies to be won. Playmasters Obliterator, Thundercats, and Netherworld mapped. Thekristal The best st/Amiga game yer? Best new rides in the UK. ArcadeACION Cybertank and Chequerer Flag are reviewed as well as a round-up of what's new Mailbag The bit you write. OutToLunch will role playing gamesClean up? 114 Best rides in the land p. 100. Night Raider strategy, shoot 'erp. Editor: Eugene Lacey, Deputy Editor: Paul Boughton. Sub Editor: Seamus St. John. Staff Writer: Matt Bielby. Art Editor: Craig Kennedy. Advertisement Manager: Garry Williams. Sales Executive an "


"Don't miss... I want you all to give a huge welcome to new writers of exceptional talent Julian Rignall ex-Editor of Zzapp and Steve Jarret ex-Editor of Crash. This month they give you their views on Virus, Barbarian Il the Dungeons of Drax and Chubby Gristle. There is a not to be missed chance to save money on Barby ll should you fancy a bit of hackin 'n slashin, a pull-out-and-stick-on-you-wall Rocket Ranger cartoon strip, a guide to the best ride available in the UK's burgeoning theme parks, an Amiga to win, a hundred free novels to read by the pool at whichever exotic resort your jet off to and, most importantly of all, The Fiend has returned. 90 on page 82 Super heroes go to the boards p.76 Red Storm Rising first pics p.22 LEVEL 2 11980 WAI SHIELDS The big green slime lunges at the Barbarian p.61 E ONLY GOT MTOW CAB ES ! * HING LOCK U OL LAND GESE TAIL BHEEL UTD UCD CAMERA ARRESTED ON OFF IDLE of 'emp, and sim, all in one p.34. Chequered Flag races into Arcade Action p. 104. Win an Amiga with the Star Wars II p.18. ecutive: In Jones. Advertisement Production: Lora Clark. Publisher: Terry Pratt. Editorial and Advertisement Offices: Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AD. Tel: 01-251 6222. "


"L M a 67 A D V A N C E M E N I. Denied his throne, RASTAN hacks his way through the horrors unleashed upon his world-FIRE BREATHING LIONS. GIANT BATS. SNAKES. LIVING SKELETONS and the LEGIONS OF THE DAMNED. Finally he must slay the EVIL NECROMANCER KARG, as he assumes the awesome appearance of a MULTI-HEADED DRAGON, to regain what is rightfully his. Is it more than you can handle?... RASTAN THE WARRIOR KING \"SLICK AND COMPELLING\" Crash \"RASTAN SAGA IS GOOD ENTERTAINING STUFF AND IT'LL KEEP HARDENED ARCADE FIENDS GOING FOR A LONG TIME Commodore User QOFEZ-39700 TIES 0 1 0 Licensed from Taito Corp. 1986 .95 SPECTRUM 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS dhe ne the eco "


"ET ICS HR OU G H IMAGIN FIGHT your way through the precinct-the back alleys, the car parks. Fight your way through VILLAINOUS community, the SKINHEADS, the BEASTIE BOYS, the BOUNCERS. On a hot steamy night in New York this is just the tip of the iceberg on your CHILLING QUEST to confront \"MR. BIG.\" \"THE GRAPHICS ARE OUTSTANDING AND WOULDN'T LOOK OUT OF PLACE NACARTOON FILM\" Zzap 64 \"IT'S PACKED WITH FIVE LEVELS OF PURE ADDICTIVENESS: YOU CAN'T GO WRONG Crash ARKANOID type Space Fighter MIXTEC runs through long forgotten computer data until it finds the answer to this threat... \"VAUS 2\" is launched and speeds towards the threatening alien presence, before it can extract it's revenge... \"THE REVENGE OF DOH.\" \"A GREAT GAME, FUN AND FRUSTRATINGLY ADDICTIVE\" Sinclair User \"COMBINE GORGEOUS VISUAL PRESENTATION WITH POWERFUL WEAPON ENHANCEMENTS AND ADDICTIVE GAMEPLAY AND YOU HAVE REVENGE OF DOH\" Zzap 64 \"GO AND BUY IT IMMEDIATELY Your Sinclair AROEN Kennel EDIGE Also available on the IBM/Amstrad PC & Compatibles & Atari ST Licensed from Taito Corp., 1986 COMMODORE .95 AMSTRAD name Tel: 061 834 3939 Telex: 66997 "


"ting Circuit Vroom crazy title, crazy game is a new racing car sim from the French Lankhor people, distributed in this country by Active. Out in September on the St and Amiga (.95), it is a Formula One game along the lines of Electronic Arts' Ferrari game, and similarly you can see the following cars in your rear-view mirrors SDORE Daley Thompson Olympic Challenge, out in August to coincide surprise, surprise! with the Seoul games, runs through all ten decathalon sports, and is expected to do big things by publishers Ocean. Pole vault discus, 100 metres any of them could be ruined by failing to complete training sessions, or by wearing the wrong type of running shoes! Not for nothing do Adidas sponsor both Daley and the game! Prices are .95/14 95 Spectrum. .95/14.95 Amstrad EB 95/12.95 C64. STIPC. Amiga 124.95 co Daley Express Oceans biggest and best for Christmas will be Operation Wolt, based on the successful Talto coin op. For the few that don't know, it's all to do with rescuing hostages from some hostile nation, the gimmick being that you seen things from the point of view of the mercenary you play, facing enemy troops, armoured cars and 'copters as they rush towards you. Joined by Rambo 3 it will be out well before its time to fill those stockings, at normal Ocean full prices. INJURY S OPORODOS INJURY This is the Spectrum version of Carrier Command from Rainbird, out on September19th with Amstrad to follow about a month after and C64 a while after that. This is a pre-production tranny, but as you can see the graphics are going to transfer to 8-bit pretty well (.95 Speccy/.95 + 3). Following on from the waterpistols we played with last week comes Gotcha!, an even wickeder form of home warfare. Remember Combat Zone, where you all run about the woods shooting each other with paint pellet guns? Well Gotcha! is the version you can play among yer granny's rose bushes, with a wide range of guns to choose from that fire bright, non-toxic, washable paint. Fast, furious, messy and you don't even need batteries! SCORE "


"Advanced Dungeons and Dragons US Gold has a whole string of Advanced Dungeons and Dragons titles planned, bringing an entire line of role playing games to your computer. The first two are out in autumn, developed in the States by top FRP outfit S.S.I. Pools of Radiance adds displays of monsters, dungeons and swinging weapons to the standard AD& D gameplay, and allows you to personalise the weapons and armour of your characters. This is followed by an arcade-style interpretation of Heroes of the Lance across all major systems in September, followed by other D&D products. AMST TOP TEN Yogi Bear Alternative Super Stuntman Code Masters NINOTAUR Steve Davis Snooker Blue Ribbon ACE Cascade 5 Fruit Machine Simulator Code Masters DanaAttack: Shanghai Karate Players Special Attack: Frank Bruno's Boxing Encore Six Pak 3 HH Pak Ninja Scooter Simulator Firebird IO We are the Champions Ocean Except for Six Pak 3, a collection of old games every t here a budget re-release, and can be picked up for under the quid This is The Vindicator a sort of Rolling Thunder style shoot 'em up where the aim of the game is to blast all the nasty aliens who've taken over the earth Shock horror! On all popular 8 bit systems at normal full price out at the end of July from Ocean's comes home   ACE Cascade Steve Davis Snooker Blue Ribbon Ghostbusters Mastertronic Allen Syndrome ACE Batha-03-mm 1800Trap Door Alternative E.T. The Extra Terrestrial gets a world wide release on video this October. While some of you may have seen it on pirate vid already you naughty people! this is the first time Steven Spielberg's mega weepie has been officially available Released way back in '82. it will cost .95, or a couple of quid from the corner shop for the night. There are no plans to make the world's biggest grossing film available to TV for a good while yet. Pacland Quicksilva Ikarai Warriors Elite Target Renegade Imagine Draconus Zeppelin 0 17500 VIND DATORI 10260 hou lol Yogi Bear Alternative ACE leaps en places to number one, pushing Target Renegade back down to eight. The chart she's pretty even split between new full prices and releases budget games. SPECTRUM TOP TEN Target Renegade Imagine ACE Cascade ce Core COTCHA ... or so they claim basing one of their new range of lollies for Summer '88 on the wishes of a 12 year old Jim'll Fix It\" girl. The result: the Tongue Twister, now joined by the Strawberry, Pineapple and Lime Tangle Twister (C+ VG rating: looks weird, tastes a bit wet), the 15 penny Crazy Joe Cola (+VG rating: cola lolly with white ice cream centre, good value) and the swirly, messy toffee-fudge Pzazz (C+VG rating: looks like sludge tastes... a bit sickly). Our favourites are the Orange Calippo water ice, and the \"adult\" Snofruit, with great lumps of strawberry and cream frozen on a stick. Yogi Bear Alternative Ghostbusters Mastertrenie TOYAL Fruit Machine Simulator Code Masters 6 Frank Bruno's Boxing Encore Steve Davis Snooker Blue Ribbon 8 Soccer Boss Alternative 9 Out Run Out Run Sega/Us Gold  TO Super Stuntman Codemasters Though andy Target Renegade and out m tulpice gumes in the e only format to Speecy remain the out the growing 1"


"Move over BROTHERS!!! Make way for ... Great Giana ... Sisters Where one famous double act stopped short, another begins, Headbutts and demons, platforms and pits all delivered with a glamour and style that neatly disguises the cunning tricks and tantilising terrors of a couple of wild cats. JI \"This is one of the most addictive arcade adventures I have ever played, the gameplay is fabulous.\" Zzap Gold Medal. Having been totally addicted to the original Super Mario Bros., it is no mean feat to say that I found the Giana Sisters as compulsive.\" C + VG. Screenshots from Amiga version A TERRIBLE TWOSOME WHO'LL STOP AT NOTHING TO SEND YOU OUT OF YOUR MIND CBM 64/128 .99t, .99d Amstrad .99t, .99 Spectrum -.99t, +3 .99 Atari ST .99d Amiga .99d Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 Rainbow ** Arts GOI Media Holdings Ltd., a division of U.S. Gold Ltd. "


"ALL SYSTEMS TOP TEN Byledividual Machina Format Target Renegade Spectrum ACE Spectrum Yogi Bear Spectrum Ghostbusters Spectrum 5 ACE-C84 ACE C64 No screen shots here, because the most interesting thing about Destiny's shoot 'em up Diamond is that it comes with a free cassette single by new (ish) band, The Company She Keeps. Out in June on Spectrum (.99) and C64 (.99/12.99), it isn't the only game to feature this gimmick: 19 Part 1 Boot Camp from Harrogate's Cascade comes with a 12\" mix of Paul Hardcastle's hit \"N-nnnnnnninteen\". Frult Machine Simulator Spectrum Frank Bruno's Boxing Spectrum Steve Davis Snooker Spectrum Soccer Boss Spectrum Out Run Spectrum Yogi Bear Amstrad Super Stuntman Spectrum Super Stuntman Amstrad Shanghal Karate Spectrum Stick it to them with these two new variations on the Cruiser theme, black and clear versions of their popular Joystick. Black and blue come with the adjustable stiffener feature on the knob, allowing you to taylor things to your style of play, and dual lead for the +2 (.99), while the cool clear one also enjoys auto-fire (available late August at .99). RE Interceptor Amige Sam Fox Strip Poker Spectrum Steve Davis Snooker C64 18 Steve Davis Snooker Amstrad 19 Carrier Command ST CRUISER 20 Popeye Spectrum This chart gives a good indication of just how many budget Speccy games will compared to other formats Software houses Mastertrende and Alternative are neck and neck in the same takes, leaving nearest Hvala Fabird and Codemasters in their petram. ATARIST TOP TEN SCORT PRIVATI GRANT 301163 Carrier Command Rainbird Out Run Sega/US Gold Debut Fortune Hunter Dungeon Master Mirrorsoft Bugsy Boy Elle Captain Blood Infogrames Firebird's Soldier of Fortune, out in September on C64 and Spectrum, is not the modern day mercenary epic it sounds Ilke, but a more FRP stylo scrolling adventure, where picking up coins helps you to buy better weapons from the weapons shop. Ghosts, bats and owls are among the villains, and your character shares pretty close relations with the elements, with earth, fire, wind and water affecting his performance\". Spacey .95, Commodore cassette .95/disk .95. Elemental, my dear Watson. Gauntlet 2US Gold OO Nola Foundation's Waste Exocet Ikarl Warriors Elle Debut, a new Atari ST game from Interceptor's Pandora label, may look pretty dull, but if the idea of stabilizing a planet poisoned by human generated pollution sounds like your cup of tea, then it's certainly not. Wars and so on have further damaged the eco-system, and it is your job to manipulate the weather, regulate the population and regulate the food chain in this ecologically sound adventure. After all, we don't want everyone to die out, now do we? At only .95, it has to be one of the cheaper ways to play God. Obliterator Paygnosis IO Pandora Firebird Combined it and Amige ses now account for over 25 of the market with the top four des appearing in the overall Top 50. AGA TOP FIVE interceptor Electronic Arts ASSES Obliterator Peygnosis Ferrari Formula One Electronic Arts DEBUT Satellite Scanning System JOSTICK   SET SCARING FARRETERS Aaargh Melbourne House 5 Star Wars Domark O rator, Part stries, with interceptor 1 and tar Wars game te held a Top 50 poulton konec thely Amon Alarg trommemberane "


"To make sure the Atari 520 STEM only plays games that are worthy of it, MATARI SC1224 ATARI HEELER Offer excludes monitor. Only the Atari Summer Pack gives you the world's best home computer plus the world's best games. Twenty-two software titles that most people would give their right arms for, are yours absolutely free. "


"WINTER OLYMPIAD \"88 .95 MOUSETRAP .95 SLAPFIGHT .95 DEFENDER OF THE CROWN .95 INTERNATIONAL KARATE .95 TRAILBLAZER .95 we're giving you  worth free. ENDURO RACER .95 ARKANOID .95 WARLOCK .95 MARBLE MADNESS $24.95 RAMPAGE .95 EAGLE'S NEST 19.95 PLUTOS $14.95 LEVIATHAN -95 SUPERSPRINT $14.95 RANARAMA .95 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 24.95 TETRIS .95 Q-BALL .95 ROADWARS .95 3D GALAX $19.95 CHOPPER X .99  VODE es. There's no catch. You really do get a 520 STFM and  worth of great games for just .99! But only until September 1st. What are you waiting for? SUMMER PACK KATARI ee. "


"18 HITS BOTTITILD in INTENDO VILL mm LUI Flesh Eaters Anything with dinosaurs in sine by us, and when you ve got a large and more than slightly muffed dino terronsing Japan Well T-Wrecks could well be a winner Your task is to defeat lots of rival monsters and eat bundies of little Japanese people What more could you want from Gremlin on Spectrum, C64 and Amstrad from near the end of July boks back Andrew Braybrook's new game for Faebird is Intensity, a Speccy and C64 non-shooting shoot 'em up for the end of September You fly a small summer craft across a benes of flipping screens. guiding a trading drone shop into picking up captive men from the surface Stalker bad guys try to stop you, and transform any men they touch into hostile versions of themselves No guns, no scrolling just a lot of strategy and co-ordination needed to build your way through the harder screens towards top left of the grid Commodore retails at  95/12 95. with Spectrum at 795 Storm Warning This here Is Typhoon from Ocean, an arcade conversion shoot'em up out in September for lucky Speccy, Amstrad and C64 owners. www Braybrooks ARA Martian Constables Does the world need another shoot 'em up? If you decide that it does, and you have an ST or Amiga, then Arcana's new space police blaster Mars Cops could be for you. A simple saving of the day from alien invasion thing, it storms through 25 levels in part one, and loads more later on. You get to fly your Hawk ship against the bad guys, coping with the old \"equal and opposite ractions\" rule flight-sim style, in late August Or at least it does when you've got one of these dynamic Batman clocks. And things go with a bang when you watch a dynamite bomb clock. The caped crusader isn't the only cartoon character you can nail to your wall, and you don't have to be a supervillain to do so. Superman, Top Cat and The Flintstones are also available at just under  from Glitz and Schmultz in Croydon among others. But for those of you who'd like time on your hands for gratis simply sending us a postcard with the name of Bruce Wayne/Batman's butler on it, and you could walk off with one of these chronological masterpieces "


"Dizzy Droia's These are preproduction trannies of Firebird's Whirligig, a space shoot 'em up for ST and Amiga (.95). \"Whirligig's\" are apparently a sort of stargate that you have to fly through in order to tell the people of the past not to embark on the course that eventually was to put you and your kind into slavery (or something). Those crazy French boys have been at it again, with a wierd looking cartoon-style arcade game called G'NIUS, out in September. Wacky robots push each other about and knock down walls in that inimitable gallic style, available in September from Lankhor/Active (ST .95). We're promised a nice 3D light effect, and 8 bit versions to follow. 30 ZARELE VAFEL! Fax Box Name of Company Elite Systems Limited Address: Eastern Avenue, Litchfield Stafts WS13 GRX When started: September 1984 Personnel Founded by father and son team of Brian and Steve Wilcox, later joined by Barnard Dugdale (ex C+VG): Contact Phone the consumer hotline on 0543 414885 if any problems etc First game kokotoni Wilt released September 84 and set among dinosaurs. Now they admit it was not First Hit Airwolf, which spent three months at number two beneath the all conquering Ghostbusters in December English BECAUSE YOU DEMANDED IT EGALIBER Biggest hit Either Paper Boy in the second half of '86, or the Christmas '85 number one Commando. Ones to watch for This year A Question of Sport based on the well known quiz show, and the speed boat shoot 'em up Aquablast are Elite's great white hopes vue TRAGON'S Despite all the talk of a British Renaissance in comics, you KNOW it must be true when it hits mainstream Marvel. Excalibur, a brand new X-men comic brings the surviving members of America's favourite superstream to the UK, and teams with our own Captain Britain in a series of rollicking adventures that are more fun than yer average comic has been for years. Meanwhile, Marvel UK are for the first time marketing their own colour comic in the States, a sub-2000 AD thing called Dragon's Teeth which takes it's influences from Rollerball and Harlem Heroes. British creators have been hot news for years it's nice to see comics set here for a change. 9WCLAWS WERE TERRA TRAVES IN THE WORLD. A Nintendo's version of smash hit Commando. Paper Boy, the other big success. "


"NANE "


"2o ESO Back with a Vengeance! IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII Commodore screens shown. Commodore 64/128 Cassette .99 and Disk .99 Amstrad CPC Cassette .99 and Disk .99 29 ZX Spectrum 48K/128K) IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII + Cassette .99 MAIL ORDER Please make Born in a time of peace, lived in the time of war; all cheques and postal the shadow warrior returns. Leaping the abyss of orders payable to: System 3 Arcade Software Ltd. at time he comes to fulfil his destiny! 23 Pond Street, London NW3 2PN DATELIE: 1988 Manhattan THE TIME: Now Tel: 01 435 8448 THE QUEST: to destroy the eternal evil... KUNITOKI!  1988 System 3 Software YSTEM "


"EMPIRE STI Leview After their successful game. So, in similar Once a level is selected, assault on the fashion to Star Wars, the game begins proper giant Death Star Lucasfilm's Games Group with the player at the battlestation, the Rebel joined forces with Atari to controls of a Snowspeeder Alliance has gone into produce a vector graphic  MACHINES: SPECTRUM/ skimming low over the CBM 64/AMSTRAD/BBCIATARI hiding on the ice planet arcade game-of-the-film. planet Hoth in search of the ST/AMIGA. Hoth. However, they're It appeared in late 1983 Empire's Probots. These  SUPPLIER: DOMARK. forced to scatter when the in the guise of a conversion Scout droids have landed PRICE: $9.95 SPECIAMS evil Empire discovers their kit for Star Wars arcade on the planet in search of C64/BBCI CASS $12.95 C64/BBC DISK $14.95 SPEC location and sends forth a coin-ops. Because of this it the Rebel base, and are +3/AMS DISK, $19.95 ATARI large attack fleet. never appeared in any destroyed with one blast STIAMIGA. great numbers unless an from the Snowspeeder's VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM. adventures, the characters arcade had an on-sight laser. REVIEWER: JULIAN RIGNALL. reassemble on the cloud electronics engineer Care has to be taken not Empire Strikes Back world of Bespin, where handy, the operator had to to run into their defensive George Lucas' brilliant disaster strikes! To tell you send the machine back to laser bursts, which deplete sequel to Star Wars, was more would ruin the the manufacturers for one of the 'speeder's five released to a delighted ending if there's anyone upgrading but that shields on contact. public in 1980; its out there who hasn't seen hasn't stopped Domark The second Oscar-winning special the film. from buying the rights and effects helping it to The film features some converting become one of the incredible action top-grossing films in sequences ideally suited cinema history. to a video The story continues directly from where Star Wars left off. PROTS BASIHE VABERSHE 2 SIELDS III i deg D SHIELDS A Vader heads towards A A Probot approaches. The Snowspeeder skims low. BE LEFT 4 TORO N YOU'VE level puts the player against the Empire's surface invasion force. it to home Giant four-legged AT-AT S computer formats. and smaller bipedal It's a brilliant arcade AT-ST s are heading game, with four action towards the Rebel base sequences and what and must be stopped at all seems like half the film's costs. Both types of dialogue digitised into machine can be memory. The Spectrum destroyed by shooting their version lacks the speech, tiny cockpit windows, and but it is an otherwise faithful AT-AT s can also be copy of the original, and brought down by firing one boasts nearly all the of the Snowspeeder's gameplay features. limited supply of tow At first the player chooses cables at their legs. either an easy, medium orDaring players can also hard game, which starts go for a special trick flying the action on the first, third bonus by flying through the or fifth wave respectively. If legs of an AT-AT, although either of the latter two are the move is a tricky one selected, a special and runs the risk of losing a advanced player bonus is shield through collision awarded when the first four with the metal behemoth. attack waves are When the invasion fleet is completed. repelled, the Snowspeeder Attempting some trick flying. "


"lands at the rebel base and the scene shifts to outer space, where the player flies the Millenium Falcon against rebel TIE-fighters. This level is very similar to the first in Star Wars, only this time the Executer, Darth Vader's huge starcruiser.looms menacingly in the background instead of the Death Star battlestation. TIE-fighters zoom in from all angles, When that level is completed, a bonus is awarded and the player returns to the first level again, only this time the enemy forces are far stronger. Presentation is excellent throughout, and there's an on-screen Rebel Instruction UPDATE... Good news for Amstrad and the Las Vegas arcade owners the conversion in London and have been Tor your machine is looking forward to the looking very good indeed, conversion since Domark and Domark reckon that announced it more than a it'll match the Spectrum year ago. The Spectrum version for speed and version isn't at all gameplay. disappointing, and looks WALLERS os L TOW CABLES LE of 2012 W YOU FRE LEERHIBEON Father and son... o 233. DE A Under the legs of an AT-AT. SHIELDS rds Hot A Blast those laser bolts. twisting and turning and firing rounds of shieldreducing laser bursts. The pilot defends himself against the attack with the Millenium's laser cannon, but because it's rather weak, TIEs have to be hit directly on their engines The Commodore 64 isn't before they explode a tops when it comes to difficult task under and plays very similarly to vector graphic games, pressure! the arcade original. The and sadly it looks like Finally, the player guides second level is absolutely Empire will be rather jerky the Falcon through an manual which can be superb, and depth is and sluggish so take a asteroid field to safety. The accessed before play to incredible. The only thing good look before parting craft has no means of display all enemy craft. that lets it down is its with your dosh, OK? defendng itself from the Programmers have also occassionally slow screen The 16-bit versions are myriad of spinning rocks, included the JEDI bonus update, but other than that looking and sounding so it's up to the pilot to on each we have a bonus the game is excellent and extremely promising; not skilfully fly the spacecraft and a letter either J, E, D well worth looking up. only do the Atari ST and through the or is awarded for Amiga conversions boast densely-packed field shooting down a given super-smooth vectors that GRAPHICS without hitting an asteroid. number of targets. are identical to the This is definitely the hardest I must confess to being a SOUND 4 arcade machine, they of all the levels and great fan of the arcade VALUE 6 also include large requires some very nifty game (the only two lever chuncks of speech PLAYABILITY joystick wielding to avoid found were in Blackpool 8 digitised directly from the OVERALL 81 coin-op original. A An asteroid smashes into the Millenium Falcon. "


"VIENS THE PRE  MACHINE: COMMODORE C64 DISK. SUPPLIER: COSMI. PRICE: $12.95. REVIEWER: KEITH CAMPBELL. In a daring helicopter raid on a summit meeting in Lichtenstein, the IS MIS TODAY THE VICE PRESIDENT ANNOUNCED THE COMMISSION OF A SPECIAL TRDEPENDENTI INVESTICATION INTO THE RBDUCTION OF THE PRESIDENT AND THE OTHER HEADS TRTE. CASEZEFRON DAY O DOBOS STATE DEPTO ACENT REPORTED BULLET SUBJECT PHOTOCRAPHIC DOCURENT RECORDS CASE PENDING RUDIO REPORTS CONFIDENTIAL ELECT FILE TYPE BY NUMBER A Guarded by terrorists, the President delivers a message. A The President is missing... but where do you begin? President of the USA, along politicians. with most of the Presidents This is where you come and Prime Ministers of the in. You have been EEC, are abducted. appointed Special Before long, a recorded Investigator to the message from the Commission on Abduction President is received. and Terrorism. To carry out Having refused to record a your duties, you have been prepared statement, he given access to all security has been allowed to send files and databases, in his own message. It order to expedite the becomes clear that all the recovery of the President hostages are separated, and his fellow victims, and and none of them have to bring those responsible had any contact with the to justice. others, nor knows of their The action takes place Not enough troops are engaged. whereabouts. on a simulated computer A number of impossible system. demands are received Information is accessed from the kidnappers. by entering the command Destruction of the state of FILES, which displays a Oh dear... Israel, re-establishment of menu of 8 file-types CONFIDENTIAL offers two accompanying text. A Palestine, nationalisation available. files, each requiring an facility is provided to of Islamic oil, an end to SUBJECTS gives a access code, so unless you magnify these into an Russian occupation of selection list of all the discover any on your way almost meaningless set of Arab territories, characters in the game, through, you may have to pixels, where, by using the sovereignty of the Persian each of which may be hack them without joystick, the area of the Gulf, and unification of all called up, to display a authorisation! picture can be scanned Arab lands are among the photo and biographical PHOTOGRAPHIC files for any useful detail list of 9 conditions for the data. DOCUMENTS holds consist of full-screen hidden in the basic release of the top the text of official papers. photos, with picture. 20 "


"ESIDENT SING three other main producers must know what commands. AGENT opens is meant by that term, these a channel for you to give days?) is let down only by a up to eight agents under few minor points of user your control an unfriendliness. For assignment. CODES example, there are three accesses a computerised boxes permanently on decoding facility, offering screen, marked STATE Morse, Enigma, and DEPARTMENT, AGENT Transpositions, and REPORT, and BULLETIN COMMS allows you to When the Agent Report box direct the authorities to starts flashing, you can go detain a suspect or secure into the REPORTS premises. sub-option of FILES and get The two double-sided the feedback from the disks are accompanied in agents to whom you have the package by an given assignments. But you instruction manual and an are asked for a file number, 127 88: 86 ORD BIBES CINE . HO # Armored Strength KINONDO-WWUOC JOUWZW=OCKco-moc-OMNMDMZZMZ: NIZDXZ-ZZO 9BUL TEENBERSER 6 FOWZ occ -C700. WNIONA W WW OG OXGHOOM KWOOL. ZOC MEMRE-WO-W CUM MIC19 XZZHWMOOCROZM 7WL .. we OZ FERY Zz HWX20W .CW. Wc WWW --JOUZE D wwco. OZWZW WZO CECOW -10054 306 het TANKS 10654 308 Score -829 HEREN KONANSE AZ Dmoborc ERR A The assault on the terrorist stronghold begins. The computer database stores details on all the game's characters. audio cassette. The and there seems to be cassette is very realistically no way of knowing it. produced, and consists of When the BULLETIN light archived tapes relating to started flashing, I just did the case. These include a not know what to do, and tape sent from the could find no mention of President whilst detained. the feature in the An option under FILES instructions, either. classifies the recordings, Despite these few and enables individual difficulties, this is an tracks to be found more extremely large and easily. As you sift through impressive program, well the mass of information at thought out and your disposal and start thoroughly researched, getting reports back from offering many hours of your agents, you may well intrigue and investigation. need to go back to some of the recordings, to refresh GRAPHICS your memory, or perhaps SOUND to listen more carefully. VALUE When negotiation fails, call in the infantry! All the time you are FILES also gives the protected, care must be playing events are on the PLAYABILITY 7 player the option of taken to ensure that it move worldwide, and the OVERALL entering his own case files really is the spare disk in pressure is on you to reports of his progress. To the drive, before using the succeed before the world UPDATE... do this requires a spare CASE option. Since the moves into political chaos. Co versions are  C64 versions are disk, and thoughtfully a CASE files are entered in The game, described as available on disk only. PC FORMAT option is offered at free format English, as far an Interactive Graphics and 16-bit versions will this stage. as I could see they act only Adventure Simulation' However, since the follow but no Spectrum or (ADVENTURE is misleading, Amstrad versions are on as a scratch pad. program disk 1 is not write As well as FILES, there are and surely software the cards. } he "


"Competition BETTER READ THAN DEAD Red Storm Rising is the latest blockbuster from Meler of Silent Service and Solo Flight fame. Microprose-taking as its inspiration the best selling in typical gungho Microprose fashion Sid Meler novel of the same name. describes the similarity with Silent Service as being In this amazing C&VG deal we are offering one \"like the difference between the P-51 Mustang in World hundred lucky readers a chance to win a signed copy of War II and today's F-15.\" Only a Microprose simulation the chilling novel. expert could come up with a quote like that but he does In Red Storm Rising you are in charge of the tactical have a point about the sophisticated gadgetry at your operations of an American nuclear attack submarine in fingertips as you 'drive' the 688. World War III. Most important of these gadgets is the sonar that is so The Warsaw Pact countries are mounting a huge sensitive it can pick up the sound of submarine offensive against Western Europe. The USSR is disrupting propellers at great distances, there are also the shipping bringing men and supplies across computerised databases that list the speed and the Atlantic Ocean from America. As the Commanding weaponry of enemy subs, and intelligent' torpedoes that Officer of a crack Class 688 nuclear submarine you must can turn and home in on their targets. seek out and destroy the Soviet submarines as they leave their base near the Arctic Circle. The game was coded by Microprose's top man Sid TUTTI PFALYISTS RGWA OIARTIR TIUI LG RBE E LA ETN HBALSE PATS D CTO AT ANALEH AER BOEINTRITE BRNBU MSAHA PL WQ ETITE YOLLL ABC MICRO PROS TUNGIT VOLLEY SOLO FLIGHTBU M FARO UT CRANGE WHY ASTEALY RUN <ULO MI porn og AT8Sanguillemrettedestenica! Reading Tom Clancy's novel will not make you an ace I at the game but it is a good read in its own right and If you do buy the game the Insights it gives you will be most helpful. Red Storm Rising will be launched on the Commodore 64 cassette at .95 and .95 disk on August 11th, Amiga. St, and PC versions will follow shortly at .95. For your chance to win a signed copy of Tom Clancy's Hunt For Red October all you have to do is spot the names of Microprose games hidden in the word square. The name of the company and of their larger than life, ex-fighter pilot boss, are also hidden in the puzzle. Cut out the box, complete the name and address panel, and send to Red Storm Compo, C&VG, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Name Address... "


"FARBARIANT THE DUNGEON OF DRAX Spectrum Version Amiga Version C64 Version   BARBARIANTI SA BARBARIANI 01220 Check your local stockist for availability. In case of difficulty, available by mail order from: Palace Software. The old Forge. 7 Caledonian Road, London N1 9DX. Send cheque or postal order for .99 PALACE (C64. Spectrum, Amstrad cassette). .99 (C64 disk). E14.99 (ST. Amstrad. Spectrum disk). .99 (Amiga) plus 80p P&P. Access and Visa holders telephone 01-278 0751. Subject to availability. "


"STAR Brought to you by the team who produced the top-selling STAR WARS game, THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK TM is the next stage of the unfolding drama. This game follows the non-stop action of the movie and is a direct conversion of the famous coin-op. The player takes the role of Luke Skywalker, piloting a snow-speeder against the huge Imperial Walkers. Darth Vader controls his forces with deadly cunning, using his Probots to search and attack the Rebel Base. The action continues as the player becomes Han Solo in the Millennium Falcon, looking for safety in the galaxy whilst being attacked by Tie-Fighters and dodging asteroid storms. WARIS May the Force be with you Always! COM 64 Atari ST Published by Programmed by VENTOR TM &  1988 1984 LUCASFILM LTD & TENGEN. All Rights Reserved DOMARK UD. Registered User DOMARK 22 HARTFIELD RON LONDON SW193 01-047 5624 "


"STAR MPIRE WARS ed by RR LD ROAD W19 3TA 5624 "


"Reviews DREAMT conversions, US MACHINES: CBM 64 necroromancing, a team Every time you kill a nasty boost your energy level, SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD, IBM of scientists called he leaves behind a little while grey globules allow PC. collectively ASMEN found a coloured globule that can you to access the lift and SUPPLIER: US GOLD. way to combat the evil be picked up, the item you move between the two PRICES: CBM 64 $9.99 CASS Dream Demon. $11.99 DISK. SPECTRUM .99 Unfortunately, FOCUS gain when doing so being available floors. By picking CASS. AMSTRAD .99 CASS dependent on what colour up a green globule it's $14.99 DISK. sussed out their plans and the globule is. Red possible to journey to other VERSION TESTED: CBM 64 planted Demons in their globules, for example, dreams (there are three in DISK. dreams to kill them, and The big moster thingy is green, for those of you with black and white se REVIEWER: GARY WHITTA. the only way to save them is for you, the Dream Here's a surprise! After a Warrior, to enter the heads seemingly endless stream of the scientists and flush of arcade conversions, US out the Demons. Gold have come up with a The game is basically a game with absolutely no sort of quasi-sideways coin-op connections at all. shoot-em-up with strategy Dream Warrior has a really elements built in. The strange and complicated scientist head interiors are scenario, so turn on your depicted as a long brain and read on. horizontally scrolling The time is the future playing area that takes up (Gosh!) and in an attempt about 25 screens. You, as to put an end to messy the Dream Warrior (clad physical wars with lots of stylishly in green motorbike blood and intestines all leathers) run around the over the place, the FOCUS dream blowing away Federation (Boo Hiss) have dream demons with your developed a system laser rifle. The nasties come whereby they can plant in various colours and Demons into people's shapes and fly past you at dreams to kill them while speed hoping to collide they sleep with you and knock your To prevent this Nocturnal energy level down a bit. GIGA Giganoid: sounds like Arkanoid, loole MACHINE: AMIGA. which need to be hit twice,  SUPPLIER: MICRODEAL. and those which drop PRICE: $14.95. REVIEWER: CHRIS JENKINS. spinning canisters when hit. Along the bottom of the Who-ho-ho! This looks pretty screen moves your bat, familiar! Like many a piece under mouse, keyboard or of European software, joystick control. Just keep Giganoid is immaculately the ball bouncing off the programmed and very bricks, and pick up the polished, but relies on canisters for bonus ripping off established features, such as an ideas rather than coming extended bat, sticky bat, up with anything original. multiple balls, lasers, extra first half-a-dozen levels you In this case, the subject is life and instant exit. come to the Demons. Arkanoid, the The brick patterns, Selecting the number of brick-bashing Breakout including floppy disks, rounds, 1-4 you're faced variant. computers and with four sinister heads, Giganoid features fifty geometrical shapes, aren't one of which spits out a screens of pretty particularly challenging ball without warning. You background patterns and though there's the odd get to slip as many levels complex constructions of tricky one where you have as you can parry balls. bricks. As usual, there are to flip the ball along the Further on you'll several different types of top of the formation to get encounter the bricks; normal ones, around the indestructible Gatekeepers and the indestructible ones, ones bricks. However, after the Grandmaster, demons "


"WARRIOR all) via the dream hoppers, you can progress to the and blue globules are used to slowly put together battle with the ultra-nasty a picture of the scientist megademon. Ocular. whose head you occupy. There's also a strange 'interlude' section where managing to complete all you hop on board a three scientist's portraits, strange flying Suzuki known te sets. 7 Nifty biker suit, but where's the gamesplay? Sound is good too, albeit sparse, with a pleasant soundtrack on the title screen and reasonable in game effects. Unfortunately, all excellent aesthetics aside, there isn't much gameplay there, and after the initial novelty of running around as a Sloop (don't worry! blasting aliens and don't understand it either!) collecting globules has and have a punch-up with worn off, there's little more huge green monster to keep you coming back, mateys called Wryms. which is a shame. Some US Gold must be excellent graphics and congratulated with sound have been wasted producing a game that's on a mediocre game. original in both scenario and concept, something of GRAPHICS a first for them, as well as SOUND some extremely nice graphics and sound,  VALUE which deserve a mention PLAYABILITY 4 all on their own. The Dream Warrior sprite has been OVERALL very well defined and animated and is UPDATE. surprisingly large for a game of this type, The C64 version of Dream although he doesn't Warrior should have been actually seem to be there, released by the time you instead he looks like he's read this, along with the floating about. The Spectrum and IBM PC and backdrops are very pretty, Amstrad versions, none of even if they aren't original which we've seen as yet. (yet more bas-relief) and ST and Amiga owners, scroll smoothly enough. however, will have to miss The Wryms have been out on this slice of tedium, drawn well, but as US Gold have no plans unfortunately they're a bit for 16-bit versions. Oh, too big for the poor old 64 well. You can always to handle and the end dream... result is a little jerky. TaAAa QO1115 RENEUTII INOID pid, look Arkanoid which shoot fireballs as you Addictaball, and your life try to hit them. isn't the same since you While Giganoid doesn't finished them, Giganoid is feature all the aliens and well worth a bash. gimmicks of Arkanoid or Addictaball, it does have GRAPHICS GRAPHICS some marvellous sound SOUND samples; a horrid growling! PLAYABILITY intro sound, a shout of \"Everyone out there VALUE ready!?\" before each OVERALL round, a didgeridoo on the Lhigh-score table, and clanging metallic UPDATE... percussion each time the ball hits a brick, the side, or Giganoid is the first your bat. With several balls product from Swiss in play, the noise starts to Computer Arts to be sound like a Def Leppardhandled by Microdeal. drum solo. There are currently no Entirely unoriginal, then, plans for other versions. basically an Arkanoid clone, but great fun and smoothly programmed. If you liked Arkanoid or TOP SCORE 200000 I UP \"Everyone out there ready TOP 102520 Round os 2 UP 001 Round on OVER "


"SUPERCHARGED DESTRUCTION ROAD PAASIUS \"VROOM! BOOM! & 3 DOOM!\" C. & V.G. Screen shots from CBM version The thunderous world of destruction .... the ultimate race against death, Roadblasters delivers all the gripping action and high speed thrills of the arcade spectacular. U.S. SIGNES CORPORATION KIL RIGHTS RESERVED ICENSE TOU.S.COLD COLD CBM 64/128 999 914 99d SPECTRUM 48/128K .991 SPECTRUM +3 .99d AMSTRAD .99t-.99d ATARI ST AMIGA .99d $24.99d 1986 Atan Games Corp. GOLDS Licensed to US. Gold Itd. All rights reserved U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way. Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388. "


"CORFUPION Atari ST screen shots. Can you cope with Corruption? The City of London. Deals and chicanery, Thieves. It's a fast-paced thriller, like nothing Porsches and profit, wild animals in handmade else you've ever played. Your only weapons are suits. And you. communication and information. There's Are you a winner? Or a dead man? nobody you can trust. And it isn't easy. Reboot your mindset, check the FT index, and But then, neither is life. take an option on Corruption, the latest Just remember: in the real world, the good guys mindbender from Rainbird. It's new. rarely win. It's different. It's on everyone's mind. For mail order please send your order and remittance Because these people are rich. Vicious. And they (cheques payable to British Telecom plc or direct debit run the country from Access/Visa card by stating card number and Corruption is written by Magnetic Scrolls, home expiry date) to:The Marketing Department, of classics like The Pawn and The Guild of Telecomsoft, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford Street, London WCIA IPS. Atari ST .95, Amiga .95, IBM PC .95. Telecomsoft, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford St, London WCIA IPS. Rainbird and Rainbird Logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications PLC. 1988 RAINBIRD Rainbird and the Rainbird logo are registered trademarks of British Telecommunications PLC "


"pride VIRU els CHG A An Attractor drains the Hover Planne MACHINES: ARCHMIDES ATARI ST, AMIGA, SPECTRUM.  SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD. PRICE: ST $19.95, SPEC $7.95.  VERSION TESTED: ATARI ST. JULIAN RIGNALL Virus was first exposed to the public at the last PCW show; then it was called Zarch and was only available for the mighty Acorn Archimedes. Since then, author David Braben has been busy converting it to the Atari ST and Amiga and the end result is nothing short of spectacular. It's a unique game, and is as much an innovation as Ultimate's 3-D forced perspective filmation format was four years ago. The plot doesn't break any A Virus \"is simply incredible... I've never played a game so real\". new grounds the player cast by the hoverplane, perseverence pays off, takes command of a which changes as the craft and once you're used to hoverplane and patrols a zooms over the gently the way the craft pitches map of Islands, mountains rolling landscape. A really and yaws, flying becomes and sea, defending it from nice touch is seen when second nature. The invading alien spaceships flying low over the sea; hoverplane is also who are trying to infect the water drops complete equipped with a laser land with a deadly red with shadows spray cannon and three homing virus it's the approach everywhere as the plane's missiles for use against the and presentation that ion that jet blasts the surface. jet blasts the surface. marauding enemy. makes Virus very special The hoverplane is mouse A game begins with the indeed. or keyboard controlled hoverplane parked on the The action is played over and tilts and thrusts in any landing platform. Within a a solid, true 3-D direction. It must be said few seconds the invasion perspective world, with the that the control method is player having a remote very tricky indeed the enemy activity is displayed view of the hoverplane. The hoverplane responds to as coloured dots on a visual effect is incredible; the slightest twitch of the miniature scanner/map at the landscape is made up mouse but the top left of the screen. of an undulating subtly-coloured checkerboard of greens and browns and scrolls smoothly as the hoverplane files around. Dotted across the land are different types of trees, bushes, radar towers and houses, all of which move in smooth 3-D. Fly upwards and the ground scrolls off the bottom of the screen; fly higher and the craft runs into glowing 'space debris', a sort of high altitude snowstorm which moves in a highly convincing parallax fashion. Giving the game an even more solid look is the ultra-realistic shadow A Scroll too for skywards and you confront the space debris. A Deadly red alien dust falls on the land Star VIRUS A The beautiful crystal like object is adplie "


"RUS Plane onergy There are eight types of boasting similar armament to enhance the feeling of alien craft. Seeders roam and manoeuvrability to being there'. around polluting the the hoverplane engage in When an entire attack landscape with virus spray dogfights whenever they fleet is destroyed a bonus is while Bombers fly at high can. Finally, there's a awarded for the amount of speed dropping mystery spacecraft which uninfected landscape parachute bombs that appears later in the game remaining, and the player contain cannisters of and 'may have' a lethal goes on to tackle the next, concentrated virus. weapons system fitted. more aggressive invasion Neither are aggressive. Whenever a craft is force. Every fifth wave the Attractors, on the other destroyed, bits fly landscape is disinfected, hand, fire lightning bolts at everywhere, and larger and the gravity is the landscape and use chunks of debris float increased on waves three, five and seven. An extra life is awarded every 5,000 points. Virus is simply incredible. I've never played a game that has felt so real; the hoverplane's inertia, the gravity, the way the sound works and the amazing 3-D effect generated by the graphics all conspire together to make a game of classic dimensions: a landmark in 16-bit entertainment. Time and patience are required before enjoyment is gleaned, but to be honesti A The Hoverplane casts a shadow on the undulating terrain as it flies. can't think of a game more deserving of such their tractor beam to drain slowly earthwards, perseverence. the hoverplane of its smoking as they fall. energy, shown as a Indeed, destroying diminishing bar at the top anything results in a plumel GRAPHICS of the screen. When energy of smoke, and trees and is low the plane can return the like continue to burn for 1 SOUND to the landing platform to long periods of time, PLAYABILITY refuel. adding to the game's The other five craft are realism. VALUE entirely aggressive. Drones The sound effects are a OVERALL trail the hoverplane and little harsh and tinny, but L attempt to destroy it. If one they have been shoots a tree, or bush intelligently used. Each infected by the virus, it craft makes its own UPDATE... becomes a Mutant, a distinctive noise, which similar, but bigger and increases and decreases Virus is available now on more powerful craft. Pests in volume as it the ST and Spectrum. home in kamikaze-style, approaches and retreats Commodore 64 and PC and deadly Fighters yet another clever ploy versions will also be available later in the year but no firm dates are IVES BOMBS DAVE BES 00000 00300301 090 available on these as we go to press. ST owning David Braben fans can look forward to a version of his first and most famous game Elite, which is just being polished up in readiness for a late Summer launch. Amiga owners are also going to be on the Elite new version list we are Informed. If you are a Virus owner and pretty nitty at it we want to hear from you. We are offering a reward for the best strategy guide to Virus so write in now. 1 000 ooo Se land. on alien ground installation NEUE Et is a de lien ship A Rationlised graphics on the Speccy but game play is as good. "


"IS REAL EXCITEMEN Project Stealth Fighter Concealment is your greatest weapon in Project Stealth Fighter, a simulation of America's latest and top-secret strike fighter. Pilot the F-19 on sensitive missions around the world, GUNSHIP Gunship The award-winning and highly acclaimed simulation of an AH-64 attack helicopter Master its incredible array of weaponry as you fly on over 100 missions throughout the warzones of the world. RANGERS Airborne Ranger Your chance to join America's most elite soldiers. Airborne Ranger is a brilliant combination of arcade action and strategy simulation. You'll be sent on 12 daring missions, deep behind enemy lines. NOW AVAILABLE SPECTRUM PROJECT STEALTH FIGHTER, C64/128 CASSETTE .95. DISK .95 GUNSHIP, C64/128 GUNSHIP, C64/128 CASSETTE .95, DISK .95, SPECTRUM 48/128 CASSETTE .95, IBM PC .95, COMMODORE AMIGA .95 AIRBORNE RANGER C64/128 CASSETTE .95 DISK .95, SPECTRUM 48/128 CASSETTE .95 Don't miss out on the chance to live through new a ving incredible depth and playability, each and intensely exciting experiences. What could I simulation provides compulsive entertainbe more challenging than piloting the American Air ment. So, inject some genuine excitement into your Force's unacknowledged super-tech jet fighter, leisure time. The world's leading combat simulatForce's unacknowledged super-tech jet fighter le flying an advanced Gunship helicopter, or fighting ions include many all-time classics like Gunship critical battles as captain of a World War II and Silent Service, plus several great new titles. submarine. M icroProse simulations are stunningly realistic IV and take you to the most dangerous and thrilling environments. In the thick of the action split-second decision making and brilliant strategic SIMULATION. SOFTWARE thinking are essential "


"JT PASSING YOU BY? Pirates! SIRATES! TO Chase fame and fortune on the high seas. Pirates! is a unique blend of simulation, adventure and role-playing. The non-stop action takes place during the 17th century as you endeavour to increase your wealth and status. CICAT CODICE 1 LES Silent Service As a World War II submarine captain you are stationed in the South Pacific. Experience the thrill and tension of hunting down and attacking enemy shipping. Red Storm Rising Look out for the specially labelled product at your simulations at selected branches of WH Smith between 16 August and 10 October 1988. Free MicroProse timepiece with any of 12 MicroProse Red Storm Rising You're captain of an American nuclear attack submarine. And your ship is all that stands between the Russian bear and global domination. Experience the pulse-pounding tension of Red Storm Risisng COMING SOON department. WH Smith computer Software Title Cassette Computer Quantity Amount ach ainTour latPIRATES, C64/128 CASSETTE .95, DISK .95, IBM PC .95 ship Name (Block Caps). TOTAL INC .00 P&P (UK only) Address Daytime Tel: Expiry Date Postcode Access/Visa Card No. IIIIII I Cheques made payable to MicroProse Software Ltd. MicroProse Software Ltd., 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Glos GL8 8DA. Tel: 0666 54326 SILENT SERVICE, C64/128, ATARI, AMSTRAD CASSETTE .95, DISK .95, SPECTRUM CASSETTE .95, ATARI ST, IBM PC, APPLE, APPLE 2 GS, COMMODORE AMIGA DISK .95 Overseas .00 P&P "


"eviens torpedo The game has a multi-screen design enabling you to flick from front view to tail view, cockpit controls, scrolling map of the battle theatre, and also the menu and game play options by MACHINES: ATARI ST, pressing the number keys SPECTRUM 48K AND PLUS 3, on your computer. COMMODORE 64, AMIGA, PC. Your plane is based on PRICE: SPEC $7.99, +3 $12.99, C64 $9.99, ST $19.99, the Grumman Avenger AMIGA $24.99. an American designed  VERSIONS TESTED: ST+3. torpedo bomber which REVIEWER: EUGENE LACEY. delivered the killing death blows to the Bismarck. The Night Raider strikes a nice game is at its best in the balance between mission mode when the simulation and arcade Avenger comes under play whilst at the same time teaching you something useful about one of the most exciting sea battles in the history of REPORT #5 naval warfare. The Bismark was the You got the short straw, pride of the German fleet Blackhawk Ark Royal is in World War II and the Surrounded by U-boats, scourge of the Royal Navy. E-boats and Dorniers are She claimed amongst closing in. Bismarck is in many ships the Battle range cruiser Hood before May God be with you. being sunk by a prolonged aerial attack from planes ACCEPT DECLINE launched from the Ark Royal Night Raider lets you take the joystick of one of these planes as it weathers the flak and dive bombs the Bismarck to drop its Choosing a mission don't expect any scenic supply runs. A Churchill makes a stirring digitised attack from German fighters. It is a case of blasting away with your forward and aft guns flicking through the screens whilst also keeping an eye on your course. The Avenger has several controls on board which you can operate with the aid of an icon pointer which you move around the controls with your joystick. These are airspeed, altitude, artificial horizon of particular use when flying at night, vertical speed, Inverted T-bar to show the position of the rudder, brake, throttle, ignition, and torpedo. Armements are just the torpedo and forward and tail guns. You can only load one torpedo into the Avenger so you must hit the A Ace pilot Ed gets a Dornier in his cross hair gun sights. "


"DER A Tail gunner lets fly at two Dornier's in this Speccy Plus 3 version. all systems. Best of all are QUR NATION the German fighters if HOURS THE you bag one of these they plunge most dramatically sea-words with trails of TRAGEDY OF flames pouring from their tails. HOOD AND Gamers old enough to remember the Dam Busters (recently out on budget) THEY HITS will see some unmistakable resemblances in game design FORGOTTES. This is the best launch from Gremlin for some BE AVEREED time. I found it a thoroughly enjoyable game to play. Just right for people who want something a little more challenging but Scrolling map screen shows the Avenger closing on the Bismarck. don't want to plow through a thirty page manual The scrolling map is full correct direction. It is not and get involved in save of enemy hazards. There easy but it is challenging itised spebut only for 16-bit owners. are closing German game options as for and rewarding when you example in something like target when you get in fighters, U-boats, successfully correct your Carrier Command. Night range. destroyers, floating mines course and get your guns Raider finds the middle The various controls of and many other hazards. operational quickly Sometimes you have two the Avenger sound similar enough to take out some ground most effectively. to those you would expect tasks to carry out at the incoming fighters. in any flight simulation. In same time like The graphics are worthy GRAPHICS practice they are much destroying the Bismarck of mention both on the Plus SOUND easier to use than a pure and defending the Hood. 3 and Atari ST the two PLAYABILITY simulation. The tolerance Essential skills apart from versions tested. They are levels have been set low the obvious ones of solid filled on the ST but VALUE so that you have a fair mastering the flight resort to 3D line drawings OVERALL amount of time to put controls and perfecting on the Plus 3. things right should you take aim with the torpedo you Nice frills are included like a picture of Adolf Hitler UPDATE too much flak, or over heat must also learn to set the the engine. course, navigate, and with digitised speech as The ST and Spectrum Night Raider makes a manoeuvre the Avenger. the Fuhrer celebrates the versions of Night Raider justifiable claim to having There is a real knack to first victim of the Bismarck. are now on sale. a challenging strategy this particularly when Soon after Winston Expect to see the element. I particularly in combat. The crosshairs Churchill is up on screen Commodore 64 version in liked the mission lock the plane into a making his famous speech the shops shortly. An challenges. A certain course. You must about lifting the curse of Amiga version will follow Commander offers a fist full therefore take the cross Hitler \"from the brow of in the Autumn. of straws. Yep you hairs off the screen risking Men\". Most of the game play is guessed it, they are pretty attack from enemy fighters. Of course these frills are identical in all versions. tough challenges, and you Then quickly flick to the reserved for 16 bit owners The Speccy employs a always draw a short straw map screen and get your but the main game play combination of vector of some description. Avenger pointing in the graphics are also sound on line drawings and solid graphics. "


"RevieHOPPINES MACHINES: SPECTRUM, CBM 64, AMSTRAD. SUPPLIER: ELITE. PRICES: CBM 64 $9.99 CASS $11.99 DISK. SPECTRUM .99 CASS $12.99 DISC. AMSTRAD $9.99 CASS $14.99 DISK. VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD. REVIEWER: GARY WHITTA. Those of you with a good memory will have taken one look at the screen-shots LOYEDWI-SOBRE Hill back to the beginning of the level. The controls are simple enough; left and right (to accelerate and slow down) and the fire button to jump. I wasn't disappointed by Hoppin Mad at all, mainly because I wasn't expecting much in the first place, having seen Cataball. If Elite had wanted to release a sequel, they should have done something to spruce up the gameplay and graphics rather than just add on more levels, as all they have succeeded in doing is turning a boring game into a long boring game. TZLI 13 TAHTO YUXUwa nza A Cataball returns in the guise of Hoppin Mad. A Bounce those balls and burst that balloon accompanying this review LETER XI-SOORE TINE Hoppin Mad is one of and thought \"Hey, that looks remarkably similar to H | Elite's few titles not to be a . II |III linked to some famous Cataball, one of the coin-op or personality games on Elite's ancient which just goes to show 3-game compilation Trio\". that Elite should stick to And of course you'd be what they do best: arcade absolutely right, 'cos Elite conversions or, if they're were obviously quite going to carry on chuffed with the original producing original titles, concept for that game and make sure they're have released a follow-up playable ones in the form of Hoppin Mad. GRAPHICS Taking control of four shiny bouncing balls (no SOUND smutty jokes please), your VALUE objective is to guide them, in a long caterpillar-like PLAYABILITY string, across a series of A Shades of Dali as a quartet of shiny balls bounce through a desert. OVERALL surreal landscapes, including a strange plant a few others that I haven't collecting floating that looks like a cross seen yet (because the UPDATE... balloons as you go, between a Venus Flytrap game's so difficult). Collect 10 balloons and and a Triffid, nasty mutant And the gameplay. All of the 8-bit versions of you can progress to the seagulls, fish, and oooh, Rather than each ball on Hoppin Mad (Spectrum, next level. It sounds simple, just loads of other things. screen representing one but as you would expect. The levels have been life as I thought it would been released and are there are lots of nasties who reasonably well designed, each life is represented by available now, but it are just aching to puncture There's a Wonderboy the entire string of four, SO you're an ST or Amiga your balls (stop laughing at style forest section, Roman you can lose one ball and owner, don't hold your the back!) ruins, a desert, a seaside the rest will keep bouncing breath, as Elite have no Nasties come in various and an aquatic on undaunted, until you plans for 16-bit shapes and sizes, underwater level as well as lose all four and are sent conversions. SZESZERZSE "


"The Amiga version speaks; the Spectrum merely beeps. the completion of certain allowing Chubby to fall screens. For instance, the through the edge of a flowing stream can only be platform and get bumped negotiated once a pair of off by the nasties, even Wellington boots have when they aren't touching. been retrieved... Also, death sends Released across all Chubby back to the exit of formats, Chubby Gristle the last screen rather than has the added advantage placing him near to where of some excellent digitized his demise occured. Once, speech on the larger it even went further. machines. The Spectrum sending him back to the version is not afforded this screen before that. I was luxury, and has to rely on not impressed. gameplay to provide its With a price tag of nearly entertainment value an nine quid, I'd expect a little unfortunate occurence more for my money than since it doesn't really have the archaic and unoriginal that much to offer. platform action on offer In fact, Chubby Gristle has some very annoying faults: both the character  GRAPHICS and sprite collision detection is a bit lacking, SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY Trespassers will be sat on! here. AW GRISTLES CHUBBY UPDATE... It came as quite a surprise to discover that Chubby is MACHINES: AMIGA/ATARI practically identical ST/CBM 64/SPECTRUM. across all formats. SUPPLIER: GRANDSLAM. Although Amiga owners PRICES: VERSION TESTED: can laugh at the manic SPECTRUM. speech, at the end of the REVIEWER: STEVE JARRATT. day what you've got is a crumby-looking platform When the Amiga version of game of three-year-old Chubby Gristle arrived, the Spectrum ilk. whole office stopped in The Commodore amazement. Not at the version is particularly game mind you, but at the poor, being an almost increasingly realistic direct port-over from the speech: \"Ye can't park Spectrum, and Atari ST ere\", it says in a distinctly owners won't be northern voice,\" \"ave a impressed when they word wi' commissioner\". can't park here! discover that the version However, without the for their machine looks speech the game is really HISCORE: alarmingly similar to the dull, especially the C64! Spectrum version... A Chubby lumbers around in search of food. The aim is simple: selection of beings along blubberman Chubby the route, most of which are makes his way across 13 to be avoided since their levels of platforms, touch is fatal to each of ladders, lava pits and Chubby's four lives. streams in order to get Similarly, falling large home to Mrs G. and make distances results in a little Gristlets. thinner Gristle and the Each screen has removal of a life. Monty-esque decor, There are various objects comprised of the usual scattered throughout the pot-pourri of brickwork, landscape which are platforms, pillars and collected for various posts, interspersed with effects: flashing food patterned areas for a bit of boosts Chubby's weight variety. However, they're and score; objects such as neatly drawn and a lot less money bags, coins and illing up station garish than many games of tools are collected for this type. extra points; and a number HZSCORE: 365 Chubby meets a of items are necessary for Surely this guy's one of the fattest ever computer characters. "


"CLASSIFIEDS UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64 NOW ALSO FOR THE ATARIST Send sa e for fast response and details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG). 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield SS 9GB EDUCATION SOFTWARE For the Atari ST. Highly effective and unique spelling aid. Developed with a primary school head. Two age ranges Ring or write for full details Softstutt: 193 Sketchley Road, Burbage, Hinckley. Leicestershire LE 10 2DY.Tel: 0455 617426 ATARI 400/600/800XL/ST AMIGA SOFTWARE We have all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE. Apply now and hire your first four games free Around 1,500 different original titles. For full details send large stamped addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends LOW ATARI PRICES Atari 520 STEM E299.90 post free + 15 disks Antic and Analog magazines available Amiga A500 at only 1469.90 p. BEST QUALITY DISKS Memorex 5WS.S.DO Discs 10 for $11.95 p.. Unlabelled 5W D.S.DD Discs 10 for .95 p.1. Top quality unlabelled 31 double sided disks 10 for $12.95 51 for $54.95 25 for .95 100 for .95 GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept. C+VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney Close, Sunderland SR3 4PD Tel: (091) 528 6351 CHIC COMPUTER CLUB: Now try the best!  Unique s/w sales and library scheme. Eam Toase money from your old sw. Super  blousrange of am w and publications including some GREAT fonines  Ragu BARGAIN pached compute. Many 100% satisfied members ForFREE trial send SAE 1o CCC Box 121 Gerrard Cross, Bucks. 5199 Orw you have which we could add tourage Excellent It only costs  (+VAT) per single column centimetre to advertise in the classified section call Lora Clark on 01-251 6222 ex 2478 for details CONSOLE SWAP CLUB n y and swap your old console games you have Save a NINTENDO ATARI 2000 Send SAE for details today CONSOLE SWAP CLUB IC VG 2 Cornwall Drive, South Woodham, Farners. Een CMOSYE WALL SIZED VIDEO GAMES! FOR LESS THAN $20!! Project your games to a giant sx picture Life A your friends TV programmes & videos look great \"Money hack if not delighted This incredible TV projector works with any television and is easily constructed within an hour. Send (18.95 for your guaranteed lens DISCOUNT SOFTWARE Up to 21% off RRP for ATARI, COMMODORE, SPECTRUM AMSTRAD, BBC, MSX and IBM PC. Ring for Info Pack on any of the above machines: 24 hour HOTLINE 0456 613377 B. BYTES COMPUTER SYSTEMS, 19 Southfield Road, Hinkley, Leicestershire LE10 1UA. ATARI SPECIALISTS THOUSANDS OF SOFTWARE TITLES * Save yours e attractive courts & tree delivery on orders *** Vice our customers why they keep coming back to you CACIUPlus Ami s tad XESTNCS 2000/BBC E ISIAD/ Sever for you send a LARGE and MEDIATE DESPATCH BIG TIME ENTERPRISES, STOCKWELL LANE, BRANDESBURTON, DRIFFIFIDE YORKS YOS SRD ACT NOW WHILE STOCKS LAST! Strategy... Decisions Excitement ........ Tension....... Action FOOTBALL A CAICKET COMSOFT SUPER SAVERS 20% DISCOUNT ATARI ST AMIGA SPEC DISC UN BIS loc It En las warna NI CITANE ME TE MBAN MUTIARA RE C IMIMISTIK.SI ARTIE, APPU BREI-PECTACTER LA BOCINETICS code. Policial Marissa COMSOFT MAIL ORDER DEPARTMENT La Botia 1012 QUALITY STRATEGY GAMES from E&J SOFTWARE Established 1964) EUROPEAN CHAMPIONS NEW THE INTERNATIONAL CHALLENGE OF THE EUROPEAN NATIONS CUP Genuine Nations Cup Format with full Random Draw of 32 Seeded Teams Fixture List, Results and League Tables of ALL B Groups Discipline & Medical Reports Squad of 22 Players plus Other players available 17 Month Itinerary of Qualifying Group (Arrange Friendlies and Finals Plus many more Superb Features and Options EUROPEAN CHAMPIONS includes E&J's MATCH PLAY SYSTEM an imaginative and exciting new style of match presentation which captures the ACTION, DRAMA & TENSION of International Football WORLD CHAMPIONS A COMPLETE WORLD CUP SIMULATION Select Friendlies 25 Players Qualifying Group 2 In Match Subs Discipline Table Select Tour Opponents Extra Time Final Rounds Players Gain Experience 7 Ski Levels TEXT MATCH SIMULATION including Bookings Goal Times Named & Recorded Goal Scorers, Injury Time, Corners, Free Kicks, Match Clock Penalties PLUS many more Features PREMIER 11 CAN YOU HANDLE ALL OF THIS? Play all Teams Home & Away Unique Transfer Market Team & Substitute Selection Named Recorded Goal Scorers Injuries . Transfer Demands Continuing Seasons Squad Listing ALL Teams Financial Problems. 7 Skill Levels Offers to Manage other Teams Sackings Managers Salary Save Game Team Styles Bank Loans . AND many more Features EUROPEAN IS THE MOST COMPLETE SIMULATION OF EUROPEAN CLUB FOOTBALL YOU CAN BUY-Home Away legs Full Penalty Shoot Out with SUDDEN DEATH) 2 in Match Subs Away Goals count Double Gif Drawn Full Team & Sub Selection Extra Time 7 Skill Levels Enter your own PREMIER II Winning Team TEXT MATCH SIMULATION plus Sending Off and Disallowed Goals Results Table PLUS MUCH MORE! CRICKET MASTER A SUPERB SIMULATION OF ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL COUNTY CRICKET Weather Wicket Outfield Conditions Batting Bowling Tactics Team Selection Fast, Medium Spin Bowlers-4 Types of Batsmen Select Field Layout 3 Ska Levels Wides Byes No Bail Run Out Misfield Dropped Catches Scoreboard Batting & Bowling Analysis Run Rate Single Option 3 Game Speeds STAR FEATURE a complete MATCH OVERVIEW showing Ball by Ball Action and Commentary and MUCH MORE! TEST MASTER NEW A COMPREHENSIVE SIMULATION OF A 5 DAY TEST MATCH-includes most of the Features of CRICKET MASTER and MATCH OVERVIEW plus Declarations Nightwatchmen Light Meter Rain Stops Play Varying Number of Overs per Day Follow On Save Game New Ball Bad Light Interruptions TEST MASTER is a True representation of a Complete Test Match and offers the ULTIMATE CHALLENGE to All Cricket Enthusiasts CRICKET MASTER TEST MASTER prices include a FREE pad of SCORESHEETS Software Spectrum Commodore Amstrad availability Any 48/128K 64/128K Tape Disc + 3 Tape 544 Disc Tape 3 Disc EUROPEAN CHAMPIONS 2795 .95 n/a n/a WORLD CHAMPIONS .95 C10.45 .95 $11.95 PREMIER .95 2.95 11.95 EUROPEAN 26.96 C10.45 CRICKET MASTER 11.95 n/a TEST MASTER 18.95 .95 n/a FANTASTIC VALUE: Special Discount of .00 for every EXTRA game purchased buy 2 Games deduct 12.00 from TOTAL buy 3 Games deduct C4.00 from TOTAL 4 Games (5.00 etc) ALL GAMES are available by MAIL ORDER for MEDIATE despatch by 1st class post and include Full Instructions. OUTSIDE UK please add 1.00 for postage and send payment in Pounds Sterling only PLEASE STATE WHICH MACHINE AND TAPE OR DISC Cheques or Postal Orders payable to E & J Software Send to: E GJ SOFTWARE, Room 5.37 Westmoor Road, ENFIELD, Middlesex EN3 7LE. CHURRROGA "


"eyes skater's legs. Again collecting litter is of importance, giving you the wherewithall to purchase pads, clothes, skates etc, which improve your performance. Jumping is achieved by pushing the firebutton, while pushing the joystick up throws some of your collected litter. The result is MACHINES: SPECTRUM, nice is the way the AMSTRAD, C64. impression of skating is SUPPLIER: GREMLIN. conveyed. When you pass PRICES: SPECTRUM $9.99/12.99, AMSTRAD AND over sand you crunch to a C64 $9.99/14.99. stop, oil sends you spinning  VERSION TESTED: C64. out of control, and you can REVIEWER: MATT BIELBY. easily slip back down a hill if you don't have the Skate Crazy is perhaps the momentum to make the world's first roller skating crest. game. You play yer Of the four city scapes, average street cred skate the multi-directionally kid, zooming through what scrolling skate park is the amounts to two games in section most similar to that one: a multidirectional earlier skateboarding SCORE U00140 LIFE OZ scrolling thing where game, 720! You as the PONER V OREDO OOO impressing the judges with skater have to negotiate a your rad jumping is the TIMERES QUCHO series of flashing gates OUCH TEREO order of the day, and a within a time limit, while at The Obstacle Race impossible time limits. also have to contend with that you often find yourself the initial difficulty of the chucking everything controls. Jumping is you've collected by achieved by releasing mistake, though if it should and pressing down the fire hit one of those birds or button, and managing to other creatures that spell land the right way round doom for your sketer, it isn't after a mid air pirouette a total waste. can be tricky to say the An enjoyable, varied least. game that still looks One nice thing about this perfectly good alongside section of the game is that such other fine skating if you fail to qualify for the games as Skate or Die. next round you are given SCORE DODON00 LIFE 03 another chance in a large PONER car park where you simply GRAPHICS OUCH have to collect a number SOUND REBR ESY CERCELLI of pieces of litter within a 1 time limit. PLAYABILITY Even better, though, is A Collecting litter gives you a greater buying power. VALUE the horizontally scrolling horizontally scrolling the same time adding section which utilises yet OVERALL obstacle race. There are points by kicking over another control method four levels of each, so you cans, picking up litter and again. Here you race can either play one all the doing free style jumps along ducking some UPDATE... way through, or you can which are marked by a obstacles, jumping others skip about playing rounds panel of judges rather like against an almost Spectrum and Amstrad alternately if you can in ice skating. Impossibly tight time limit. versions are both out now, stand the multiloading! It's not as easy as all that The skating action is rather and though we haven't Sound and graphics are though, because not only cleverly reproduced by seen them we are told very good throughout, with do you have to contend the fact that you have to that they will be very large well defined sprites with bouncing balls, lethal move the joystick back similar in all but graphics. and colourful backdrops frisbees and a whole and forth to move, each However, there are no backed up by a suitable bundle of obstacles from movement represented on plans for 16 bit versions of jaunty tune. Especially oil slicks to tyres, but you screen by a push of the the game. CREO "


"ECTOR SOFTWARE London Wa 4PH 10 Barley Mow Passage, Chiswick London W4 4PH Tel: 01-994 6477 Access/Visa orders accepted Call 01-994 6477 and ask for Vector Software (office hours) SPECIALISTS IN MAIL ORDER SPECTRUM Skate Car 8.75 10.50 Guns 90 Action Foreil 25 1090 6.26 625 10.50 Ques 6.75 9.50 Beyond Zork Bone Commandes By Boy Camer Command 9.50 9.50 0.50 9.50 The Games Winter Time Mage Venem Bach Karl Wern 6.75 100 6.75 10.50 6.75 10.50 Dungeon Master Enduro Racer Free for Arcade Force Arlandi ATE Pandora 5.50 10.50 5.50 Foto Me F Enduro Raw org Gast 1650 10.50 11.50 Fitnes Football Manager a Wamions 883 9.50 6.75 10.50 10.50 I onal Soccer Gunship Crosswine Cyberknight Dark Side 5.50 10.50 COM Case Disk Action Forcell Roling Thunder Rin Runner Sanay Street Fighter Target Renegade The Games Winter TineMagie Venem Stres Back 6.75 10.50 6.75 10.50 8.25 9.50 Now Games On Overlord Pando Power Beardsley Intercepter International Soccer 6.75 10.50 10.50 10.50 6.75 10.50 Dream Wario Flintstones Football Manager Legend of the Sword Acade Ford Arkanoidi We are the lampions Joe Blade Lagend of the Sword 853 Barbara Pal Bione Commandes Blood G ames Ob 5.50 10.50 Rungthunder 675 150 625 9.50 AMSTRAD Ceghe Case Di Revenge Runner Roads Rolling Thunder S 8.75 9.50 6.75 10.50 6.75 10.50 6.25 10.50 Action Force Acade for A nol II 6.25 6.75 F Target Renegade The Games Winter Time Mage Venom Strikes Back Pe Bewey Retum to Genese Revenge Rim Runner Road Busters Rolling Thunder Lords of Conquest Magnetron 13.50 6.75 Dream Warrior Firestones Football Manager Gauntlet .35...39.39 89893 898 10.50 8.25 Star Wars Street Figh Sherlock Holmes Time Magic 10.50 5 75 1090 North Star 10.50 13.50 Barbarian Pascal Bionic Commando Blood Brothers Cam Command 6.75 10.50 Wewe the Champions Wizard War 10 Great Games 19 Boot Camp ATARIST 875 100 Waris Ouest Time Magic Overlord Wannon Cam D Be Dead Than Alien AMIGA Dan Wan C Dish Dead Than Alien Lords of Cong Magret March Day 6.268.50 Barban 10 6.25 3.50 hall Mart Arcade Ford Rolling Thing Rim Runner 6.75 9.50 10.50 10.50 16.50 Gaur Bone Commandes Bugoy Boy Barbarian Palace All prices include VAT and p+p in UK. Please add  to overseas orders for p+p. Please make cheques/P.O.'s payable to Vector Software. Orders normally dispatched within 24 hours. Send SAE for free price list specify machine. CALLING ALL BURNERS . SUPE FLAME Ano Is SEGA Copyright 1987 SEGA Enterprises, Inc. (USA) "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES ESTAB: SINCE 1978 ACCESS ORDER BY CREDIT CARD LINE 01-348-2907 VISA *** FREE POSTER WITH ORDERS OVER .00 *** 7.50 Illala1151111116081611118 888888888 16.99 16.99 Air RaleySPEC SPECC84C64 AMS AMS SPEC SPEC 064 064 AMS AMS  SOFTWARE TITLE CASS DISK CASS DISK CASS DISKI SOFTWARE TITLE. CASS DISK CASS DISK CASS DISKI SOFTWARE TITLE. ST AMIGA SEGA *** ACCESSORIES UTILITIES: ....7.30 7.99 02 799 02 Starglideri 19.99 19.99 Sega Master System -C64C Connoisseur Pack 189.99 na 799 02 799D2 Salamander .. . .6.50 7.50 D2 7.50 D2 King of Chicago 24.99 free game.. 99.95 -C64C Computer .......... 129.99 Bubble Bobble Test Drive Carrier Command 19.99 19.99 3-D Glasses 39 99 C2N Data Recorder ....... 29.99 Alien Syndrome 6.50 02 7.99 02 7.99 D2 Dungeon Master Sega Joystick 14.99 Neos Mouse Cheese ..29.99 Football Manager 2 7 .99 7.99 02 799 02 Power Al See Badcats 16.99 19.99 Konix Joystick 12.99 +Accelerator + D. Drive .. 129.99 At World Games....... 6.50 7,99 02 79902 Advance Art Studio ....... 21.00 Internal Soccer Light Phasor 44.96 -Acc'lor. Geos. FM 149.99 Gary Linekers............... 6.50 D2 7.99 D2 799D2 Skate Crazy Time & Magick 16.99 16.99 Quick Shot J/stick 14.99 +1 Mega D Drive Amiga 114.99 The Train Ramparts............. 7.50 7.99 D2 7.99 D2 Sinbad Transbot.... 14.95 +3.5 Disk Drive (ST)-... 114.99 Beyond Ice Palace...............6 Impossible Mission 2 Leathernecks 16.99 16 99 Super Tennis 14.95 .Final Cartridge 3 Top Fuel .... 7.99 19.99 D2 19.99 Choplifter Pacs Land 19.95 Action Replay MK.4 Mini Office il........... . Impossible Mission 2 16.99 Black Belt 19.95 Action Replay Proff D3 9.95 D2 Blood Brother .......... ...6.50 Action Fighter 19.95 Enhancement Disk Head Alignment .............. 7.50 Charlie Chaplin ............... 7.50 16.99 16.99 Pro Wresting 19.95 Expert Cartridge . ESM ... 29.99 Soldier of Light 6.50 Knight Orc .......... ..... 12.99 Bands Tale 1 Shooting Gallery ... .-19.95 Freeze Machine Sorcerers Lord 10.99 Stealth Fighter ................... 16.99 21.00 Space Harrier ...... 24.95 FM. Utility Disk Buck Lamp D2750 Up Periscope ....... ...........Red October 19.99 19.99 24.95 Reset Switch Match Day 2 Thunder Chopper ............Obliterator 19.99 19.99 F.16 Fighter 14.95 Plus 2 or C64C cover Hercules..... Airbourne Ranger ..........Astro Warr R.Pa Pol....19.9510x3 Disks C omia Games .............7 Intensity Return to Genises Out Run.. 24.9510 x 3.5\" Disks Rasta ... Samurai Warrior ... Football Manager 2..... 16.99 16.99 Teddy Boy 14.9510 x 5.25 Disks Teladon ...... Soccer Supremo ......... 12.99 12.99 The Ninja 19.95 Multifan 120K Starglider ...... Target Renegade . ...... 6.50 Gold Runner il World Grand Prix 19.95 Multiface 3 Last Ninja ll ...................10 kari Warriors Enduro Racer ... 19.95 Multiface 3+ T. Port Desolator. Soko-Ban Beyond Ice Palace Alex Kidd 19.95 Kempsion Interface Football Dwector ............... 7.50 Pink Panther Secret Command ............ 19.95 Duel Port Interface Arty. Tacl Fighter ............ 7.99 Gauntlet il Fantasy Zone ...............19.95 Plus 2 J Stick Lead OCP Art Studio ............ 12.99 Thunder Cats .... 16.99 Bank Panic ......... 14.95 Plus 3 Recorder Lead ..... 4.99 Groen Berelil Pink Panther ............ 16.99 16.99 Missile Defence 3D 2 4.95 St Ext Lead ST) ....... 7.99 Gunship 7.99 D2  ... World Soccer . ...... 19.95 Auto Fire Adapter Track Sut Manager.......7.99 7.50 Ice Hockey 19.99 19.99 Zillion 19.95 + Mouse Mal .. . N. Mansels G. Pri.......8.99 Aaargh Indoor Sports ...........19.99 19,99 Gangster Town ............ 19.95 Atari ST Dust Cover Super Hang On....... 7.99 2 Interceptor Kung Fu kod ........... 19.95 Slimline Keyboard ..... 19.99 Peagus Bridge The Corporation ..... ....7.99 7299 02 3D Helicopter Sim' 19.99 19.99 Maze Hunt 3-D 24.95 JOYSTICKS Arcade Force Four .......8.99 D2 Strike Force Harrier 19.99 19.99 Great Golf 19.95 IBM Joystick Blood Valley We are the Champ's .... 8.99 D2 Barbarian (Palace) 12.99 16.99 Fantasy Zone Il ... .......24.95 IBM Joystick + Card 39.99 Gauntletil .. . Barbarian (Psy) 19.99 19.99 After Burner 24.95 Fantasid Joystick .... Acel.. Time Stood Stil................ 6.50 02 Global Defence .... 19.95 Quick Shot it ....... De Sceptre ................ Veen Defender of Crown... 24.99 24.99 Zaxon-3-D ... 24.95 Quick Shot ll Turbo Sold Gold ... 7.98 Overlord.......... .. 7.99 Soonary Disk Elaven. 19.99 19.99 Alien Syndrome 24.95 Konix Joystick .......... Buggy Boy ......................... 6.50 Road Blaster ...................... 7.99 D2 Flight Simulator II .34.99 34.99 Cube Zone ....... 19.95 Konik + Autofire... Battlefield Germany ....... 10.99 Frightmare ......................... 7.99 Captain Blood ........... 19.99 Rescue Mission ...........19.95 Euromax Professional.... 19.99 Rolling Thunder............... 7.50 D2 Bionic Commando ........... 7.50 Road Wars............. 16.99 16.99 ........... 19.95 Euromax Non Auto Fire 16.99 Platoon B reig. 7.99 Three Stooges .......... 19.99 24.99 Alex Kidd ll ... ............ 24.95 Cheetah Mach 1 Plus 1499 Tome + Magick .............. 12.99 Animatot Bobble Bobble....... 16.99 16.99 Super Wonder Boy ............ 24.95 Cheetah 125 Special 12.99 Garfield .. . ..... Artist il48K 12.99 Legend of the Sword .. 16.99 16.99 Spy v Spy........ .... 14.95 Cheetah 125. Predator 7.99 Artist 128K 14,99 ......... 19.99 19.99 Comp Pro 5000-Black ... 14.99 10 Mt Games (Hepak) ....8.99 Este Hifpak 3..................8.99 02 89902 89902 Gunship Control Deck .... ....... 99.99 Comp Pro 5000-Clear Konami Collection ......... 8.99 Napoleon At War.......799 Deluxe Set 7.99 160.00 Vampire Empires............. 6.50 Desert Rats.............. 16.99 Comp Pro 5000-Extra GumshoeArkanoid .................. 6.50 Chuck Yeagers 02 29.99 Comp Pro 5000-BBC Desolator Guld of Thieves... Theatre Europe.............4.99 4.999.99 Wild Guman 4.99 9.99 Soitfire 40 . 19.99 10.99 Out Run Magnificent 7...... 799 799 D3 8.9903 8.9903 Pandora ...................... 16.99 | 19 993 12.99 Soccer .... ................ 16.99 16.99 P.H.M Peagus...... ..... 8.50 Live Ammo ....................7.99D28.99 D2 8.99 02 Maraunderil .. Urban Champion....... 19.99 TAC 5 Get Dexter Dark Side 7.99 02 799 02 7.99D2 Disector ST................ 24.99 Kung Fu ........ 19.99 Starfighter Badcats DI 7.99 D2 The Pawn (SP128K) ...... 12.99 D3 D4 D4 Vixen ....................... 17.99 17.99 Mach Rider 29.99 Sik Stick inter Ring Wars... .....7.99 02 7.99 02 7.99D 2 Flintstones ............... 16.99 16.99 Tennis ......... .............. 19.99 Economy Stick Pandora . . 10 Yard Fight... .. 19.99 Cruiser Joystick Also available on disk format D1 .99, D2 = .99, D3 = .99, D4 = .99, D5 = 21.00 MAIL ORDER CUSTOMERS PERSONAL CALLERS CREDIT CARD HOLDERS For mail order please make ch Po payable to SCS CYG 655 Green Lanes, London NB OQY P.P Included in the UK Europe add  per Personal callers can pick up discount software as above on production Access and Visa card holders ring 01:3-4H-2007, 01-340-8565. 01-633-4627 Credit card orders despatched same day subject to item, elsewhere add 12. Add [5 for all machines for P.PUK only) Send of this advert at either S.C.S. 221 Tottenham Court Road. London W1 availability. Please note we also now sele telephones, cordless, cellular SAE for free list. Please specify machine type in order .items only near Goodoo St Station or S.C.S. 655. Green Lanes. Pabx, accessories answer, tax, copiers, Shredders, calculators available from655 Green Lanes. N. London N80.Q.Y. (Nearest tube sin Turnpike Lane machines. Ring: 01.436-9590 7.9902 NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN F INN NNNNNNNNN 18888888888888888888888888811118 $ $ $88888888888888888888888888888 22.99 16888888888888888888888888888888 ONNNNNNNNNIIN ONNNNNNNNNNNNNNN 888888888888888888888888888888888888 1118818788811118818118888888888811111811188 3188 1881 .. 6.50 . 7.99 ** NINTENDO 799 2012 7.50 ....... 750 02 LAN Is on course for the Atari ST ELECTRIC DREAMS SOFTWARE Commodore 64/128 Cassette ($9.99) and Disk ($14.99) ZX Spectrum 48k/128k/+ ($9.99) Amstrad CPC Cassette ($9.99) and Disk (.99) Atari ST ($19.99) Mail Order: MEDIAGENIC, Activision House 23 Pond Street, Hampstead, London NW32PN Customer Enquiries: 01-431 1101 Technical Support: 0703 229694 Copyright 1987 Sega Enterprises Inc. (USA), All rights reserved. Electric Dreams Software. Authorised User A Division of MEDIAGENIC "


"FEATURING SPECTRUM 48K/128 GHOSTBUSTERS L.A. SWAT NINJA MASTER TERWS WAY OF THE WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST Bluster F.A. CUP FOOTBALL DAN DARE AMSTRAD FOR ONLY FORMULAI SIMULATOR BRIAN JACK'S SUPERSTAR CHALLENGE COMMODORE 64/128 + AN AMAZ AMAZING IS TAU-CETI PARK PATROL AND MANY MORE! T OFFER! BEAU-JOLLY THE NAME BEHIND THE GREAT GAMES SEE PACK FOR DETAILS "


"eyller ESOLATOR RYROS MACHINES: AMSTRAD/ATARI ST/SPECTRUMICBM 64.  SUPPLIER: US GOLD. PRICES: SPECTRUM $8.99 CASS $12.99 DISK/CBM64 $9.99 CASS $14.99 DISK/AMSTRAD .99 CASS $14.99 DISK/ATARI ST $14.99. VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM. REVIEWER: STEVE JARRATT. 00001500 G collect a limited supply of bombs and perform acrobatic forward 'flips' in practice, a totally useless activity. The action offered by Desolator isn't the most original or interesting I've ever seen. Progress is slow and the gameplay is marred by niggling faults, such as the fact that Mac can't move and punch at the same time. The incessant hordes of enemies which constantly assail our poor hero also help to make this game a rather short affair. Overall, Desolator is an average game that offers a reasonable amount of entertainment take it or leave it. DR GRAPHICS on wasn't working on I SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY US Gold's Desolator is 00999999 based on the little-known Sega coin-op, Halls of 1500 Kairos (perhaps unknown Sega coin-op' might be a better phrase, for no-one! know has even seen the machine!). Involving the exploits of the imaginatively titled Mac the hero battles through the hero, Mac, the player is Halls of Kairos. According to the sent on a rescue mission up to ten different instructions, punching inside the forbidding walls adversaries, ranging from barrels turns them into 5 of the castle owned by the moronic henchman who weapons which Mac can great Satan, Kairos. simply wander around then use. I tried this sapping Mac's energy on The castle interior Scrolls contact, to the dreaded repeatedly but simply got vertically down the screen Kairos himself. Mac's rolled over: either this as Mac wends his weary punching abilities are not way through corridors and limited to inanimate the review copy or it's chambers of the stone incredibly difficult to objects, however, and he fortress. The aim is to affect. repels his aggressors with a release the many tiny Mac's mission is aided single deft blow. infants or 'Peters' (1) by activating a large who have been captured Further opposition is arrary of devices which and are held captive provided in the shape of have differing, but within mirrors adorning the land mines and barrels laser-spitting ornaments, generally destructive castle walls. A press of the which roll around the floor. characters. He can also effects on visible fire button sees Mac shatter each mirror with a mighty punch, allowing the children to escape and ULUS OF scurry about. Mac then DYDAC attempts to collect the rampaging kiddies before they disappear off-screen. On collecting six Peters, a temporary Power-up is granted, turning Mac into the invincible machoman 10001900 and enabling him to cut a 848 SEAN swathe of destruction 10999999 through the castle without gaining so much as a Orar\" scratch. 2350 Castle Kairos is a veritable menagerie, containing a variety of wierd and wonderful opponents to beat. Depending upon the version played there are Crossing a bridge in Desolator. GE TROS UPDATE The Commodore 64 version is colourful and loud, but is let down by its gameplay. It's just far too easy. Another big niggle is the very awkward and clumsy multiload, which disrupts play very badly. The same can be said for the Amstrad version. The Atari ST version has extra features not seen in the 8-bit versions, including extra weapons and a wider range of enemies. The graphics are also far better than the 8-bit versions. Still, there's no getting away from the fact that there are only four levels to battle through, and at  many experienced ST gamers mightn't think that enough to spend their cash on. "


"GET IT BEFORE IT GOES! Dont let some weirdo our copy! Place a regular order with your newsagent NOW! gp our Dear Mr Newsagent, reserve me a copy of Computer + Video Games. Name Address Simon 1987 Simon 1987 MAIL-SOFT Title SOFT CELL 194-196 Canterbury Street Gillingham, Kent M 5XG Telephone 0634 56460 \"FREE OPERATION WOLF\" 1199 1499 *SIMPLY THE CHEAPEST MAIL ORDER COMPANY *** Spec 3 C64 C64 AMS AMS Cass Dsk Cass Dsk Cass Dsk Atari St Amiga IBM PC kan Warrior 6.25 02 6.44 D2 6.44 02 Carner Command 14.99 14.99 14.99 Skate Crazy 4.94 1 6.99 02 6.99 02 Flintstones Starglider 14.99 14.99 14.99 02 6.99 02 King of Chicago Road Blaster 6.99 02 6.99 02 6.99 02 UMS 14.99 Stealth Fighter 14.99 14.99 14.99 14.99 14.99 Airbourne Ranger Intensity Legend of the Sword 11.99 11,99 11.99 Samurai Warrior Bobble Bubble 11.99 11.99 Target Renegade 5.99 D2 Captain Blood Shackled Roadwars 11.99 11.99 Bubble Bobble Defender of Crown 14.99 F. Manager 2 14.99 16.99 Time Magick 11.99 11.99 12.99 Alt World Games 11.99 Bionic Commandos 14.99 IMP Mission 2 12.99 Soccer Supremo Pacs Land Jewels of Darkness Elite Strike Force Harrier Earthlight Flintstones 11.99 11.99 Black Camp Superstar Ice Hockey 14.99 Alien Syndrome 14.99 14.99 5.99 D1 6.44 1699 Soldier Of Light 494 01 5.99 14.99 14.99 12.99 Starglider 9.99 02 9.99 Return to Genesis Druid il 2.99 2.99 Indoors Sports 14.99 14.99 14.9 Football Director 6.99 6.99 Pink Panther 5.09 01 6.44 Three Stooges 14.99 18.99 18.99 Last Ninja 2 8.99 8.99 Desolatot 4.94 5.99 01 5.99 D Track Suit Manager 6.44 6.44 Rolling Thunder Jewels of Darkness 8.99 B.99 D2 8.992 Ikari Warriors 4.94 D 5.99 Gold Rnner il Tiine Magch 9.99 02 999 02 9.99 D2 Vampire Empire A.T. Fighier 11.99 11.99 6.44 02 6.44 Football Manager 2 Gunship 04 9.99 04 11.99 11.99 12 Rocket Ranger 14.99 18.99 6.99 02 6.99 02 6.99 02 Test Drive Bionic Commandos 16.99 16.99 599 6.44 01 6.44 D2 Obliterator Pandora 14.99 14.99 Out Run Dark Sepire 11.99 494 01 Buy Boy Alien Syndrome 11.99 11.99 02 6.99 02 Rolling Thunder Silicon Dreams 999999 D1 6.99 D2 Xenon 11.99 11.99 Black Lamp 11.99 Garfield Hotel 14.99 14.99 Magnetron Leathernecks Crosswize 11.99 1199 Buogy Boy 11.99 Time Stood Sull International Al Soccer 1199 13.99 Het Pack 3 6.99 Red October Overload 14.99 14.99 16.99 Gee Bees Air Rally Flight Sim 2 26.99 16 99 39 99 Vampire Empires Beyond Ice Palace Sentials 11.99 11.99 Thundercats Mickey Mouse D2 6 44 02 The Double Barbarian Palace Knight Orc Aaargh 11.99 11.99 D2 9.99 D2 Outrun Amagadon Man 14.99 14.99 14.99 5.99 Pandora Desolator 6.99 11.99 11.99 22 6 99 02 Shackled Sicon Dreams 8.99 8.99D2 8,99 02 Verminator Available on disk format: D1=8.99, D2-.99, D3 .99, D4-12.99 Prices include P+P in UK, Europe add  per tape, elsewhere .50. CHOPO Payable to MAIL-SOFT, (C+VG) P.O. BOX 589, LONDON N15 6JJ. Please specily machine type in your order Price matching: If you see a title cheaper by another company in this mag we will maich the price if you don't see the bite you require, simply deduct 30 off the RRP and send to us Except. Budget. Sega, Electronic Arts Nintendo titles) VISA We stock software + joysticks for all machines. Access and Visa cards accepted 28888.818.99888.8888888 888 88 99.9982889 Run 8 $88 898 822999 88888 Order Operation Wolf by 20th August and be entered in FREE DRAW. 5 winners will each receive Sports Bag, T-Shirt, Mug and Full Refund for game. Presentation on OCEAN stand at PC Show, Saturday 17th September (travel paid by Soft Cell) Winners also listed in October issue of C+VG Platoon bo8 Sede So aaaooo Spectrum .99, + 3 .99 CBM64/Amstrad Cass .49, Disk .99  ST .49 Amiga .49 25p off if advert included with order 5.99 7.75 88886 9.99 Send large SAE for free catalogue. Please make cheques payable to: Video Machine/Soft Cell Free P&P (Europe add .00) "


"134. :JJINO JUV4-8140WAYA HEMORIGIN PA SYSTEMS INC. THE START OF SOMETHING NEW ULTIMAT:( BM 128 ,9%; IBM, APPLE24.95 ULTIMA III; CBM (4126, AIARI XE XI  95: MC IBM, APPLATARI SI AMIGA 24,9%, ULTIMA IV: CBM 64/128, AIRL XXL L19,995; IBM, APPLE AIAR SL AMICA .95. ULTIMA V CBM 64/128 .95; APPLE .95. Tilting Hmy Ultima AMOEBIUS Sf.MAI:JJIN.JAWVA8IHINAYodalohYWddw.mhdhwah Warriors al Destiny LYM4.MM.MPPMATUMPAFAB14-18.PNARWNICT:+W461) Quest of the Avatar OGRE IS AVAILABLE FOR: COMMODORE 64/128. ATARI XE/XL DISK .95. IBM, APPLE, ATARI ST, AMIGA AND MAC DISK .95. AUTODUEL IS AVAILABLE FOR COMMODORE 64/128 ATARI XE/XL DISK .95, APPLE, ATARI SI DISK .95 MicroProse Ltd. 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. UK. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tix: 43422 MPS/UKG 144:JJIN JAVA:8140WdYd "


"1 : sequence and an similarities to its prequel; it Princess Mariana from the obnoxious little green features the same clutches of Drax the evil hunchback who boots characters, and has the scorcerer, who has fled to about the severed heads same graphic style and his dark castle and 15 of the defeated. Needless sick humour of the original, currently plotting his to say it caused an outrage but the gameplay is revenge on the Jewelled MACHINES: when it appeared and sufficiently different. Kingdom. He must be SPECTRUMICOMMODORE because of that, sold in Basically it's an arcade stopped, and the only 64/AMSTRAD/ATARI ST/AMIGA. vast quantities. people capable of doing adventure; there's still SUPPLIER: PALACE. Later on 16-bit versions plenty of bloody fighting so are the Barbarian and PRICE: $9.99 SPEC/C64 AMS were released, sporting action, but the essence is Princess Mariana. CASS $12.99 C64 DISK $14.99 similar gameplay, but on locating and picking At the start of a game the SPECIAMS DISK $19.99 ATARI Incredible sampled up the right objects to player chooses either ST/AMIGA. groans and screams complete the mission. Princess Mariana or the VERSION TESTED: C64. and of course Improved The plot is very Barbarian. She is armed REVIEWER: JULIAN graphics. straightforward: the witha death-dealin' sword, RIGNALL. Barbarian Il bears some Barbarian has freed while he brandishes a Palace's classic slicin' 'n' dicin' game caused quite There is nothing jolly about this green giant. Recognise this little head-kicking gremlir a stir when it was released this time last year, and the ADDIC sequel looks set to follow in Its footsteps. There can't be many who don't remember the extensive advertising campaign that heralded the product Palace cleverly used pictures of a very scantily-clad Maria Whittaker to promote their game, which whipped up considerable public debate. The game itself is brilliant; a very gory one-on-one sword fighting game featuring such LEVEL 2 delights as blood spurts, a fabulous decapitation 12003 DADDARIANT Superb detail and definition in the 57 version as Barby fackles the dragon dinosaur  0.0.0.0.0 A puff of green smoke as Barby waste BA LEVEL 1 0011333 "


"IRIANT stonking great axe ideal The player starts the cave entrance is present. for hacking apart any quest with five lives, each As the player progresses undesirables. Both have with a set amount of through a level, the similar fighting abilities energy, represented by a direction he walks and can perform a variety bar at the top of the screen. constantly changes: of attacking moves, As hits are sustained the fortunately there's a including a front kick, bar shrinks, and if it compass at the bottom of head chop and the deadly diminishes entirely, a life is the screen to avoid lost. A life is lost outright if confusion and make often has spectacular the player falls down a pit. mapping easier. The results. The hero and The action is set over objective on each level is heroine can also run and three flick-screen levels, to locate and pick up two jump, which is useful for each of which has 28 different objects. When crossing the pools of green screens. The player can both items have been slime and bottomless pits move left or right onto the collected the level is that are frequently next screen, or into the completed, and the next encountered. screen when a door or one loads from cassette. gremlin from Barbarian 1. V A hulk of ad-manager-like proportions confronts our hero. The Wasteland outside Castle Drax is the first port of call; an inhospitable landscape inhabited by a very nasty range of creatures. Pink, bald mutant chickens attack an Intruder by pecking at knee height, but can be swiftly killed by a few swipes of a sword or axe. Worse are Stabbers, green bipeds which have a sharp knife protruding from their stomachs. Saurian Beasts, apes and Floaters also make an appearance, but by far the most deadly are the Neanderthal men who stomp about the landscape armed with skull-caving clubs. Next comes the Dungeon; a dark, dank and dangerous place. Here, carnivores roam, ready to wrestle a hapless adventure to the ground and rip at the throat with its sharp fangs. Green, skinny Orc guards maraud about with their swords at the ready, and cave trolls prove hardy foes in combat. There are also scuttling crabs, slithering things and scorpion-like stingers to keep the player on his foes. Finally there's the Dungeon, a maze of doors, pits and highly dangerous creatures. Giant grubs, floating eyes and aptly named gobblers provide the least of worries; DATATIT SDADDASIANTI LEVEL 3 4950 Limited colours on the speccy version but excellent detail. LEVEL 3 23509 14RRARIAN wastes o nasly with his axe. Tower LEVEL 3 20007 001720 LEVEL3 "


"BARBARIAN IL els the pit monsters on the and punches as soon as the player down, and the other hand are very the player draws near. dangerous. These purple Dungeon Master's heart When the two dungeon horrors lurk in pits and dropping out when he's on oblects are collected, the reach up and grab the receiving end of a player enters the Sanctum anyone who tries to leap flying neck chop gore of Drax, a three-screenover, dragging them down long room where a Living fans will certaintly enjoy to their doom. Players of the action! The sound Idol and giant fireBarbarian I should effects are very good too, breathing Demon lle in recognise the Orclets particularly the Dungeon wait. On the final screen they're little green Master's laugh! Drax himself appears... hunchbacks with wicked and it's kill or be killed. The game itself is both night. grins and a peculiar Barbarian ll is an enjoyable and If you're fed up with affinity for kicking about incredible-looking game. challenging, with plenty of blasting aliens and want severed heads only this The graphics are mapping and hacking some REAL action, look no time they're armed with absolutely superb, with required to defeat Drax. further than Barbarian Il. axes and it's your head amazing sprite animation That, coupled with the they want! brilliant visual and visual effects. There The great, fat, Dungeon are so many neat touches, characters results in a presentation and choice of Master also makes an GRAPHICS like the skull being spat out game that'll keep you appearance, and kicks when a pit monster drags hacking long into the SOUND VALUE The giant cat will savage Barby unless he swings his axe before it plunges. PLAYABILITY OVERALL OOONOOI HADATAIT UPDATE... Barbarian Il's gameplay is identical on all formats, with the same map, objectives and control method as the 64 version. The 16-bit versions, however, will feature improved graphics and fabulous digitised sound, including speech, thuds, splats and crashes-look out for them! LEVEL 2 8390 C+VG HIT! Woops Barby almost loses his balance after leaping the well. DADDARIAN Win our Review Copy Here is your chance to win a signed copy of Barbarian ilthe Dungeons of Drax. Signed not only by the lovely Maria Whittaker but also by top games reviewer Julian Rignal We have a doubly signed copy of the Spectrum, ST, and Commodore versions to give away. In ancient times female warriors looked very different to the sexy, page 3 image of Maria Whittaker. They were rough and lough and could hack it with the man To win your signed copy of the game all you have to do is tell us the name of the famous female Anglo Saxon warrior who had her armies into battle from her chariot Warrior's Name tl III Your Name.. LEVEL 3 BARBARIAN 11 COUPON NUMBER 2 "


"BYRITE SOFTWARE   COMMODORE NEW COMM E1.99 EACH BUY TWO GET ONE FREE CHAMELEON, MONTY ON THE RUN, LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE WILLOW PATTERN NOSFURATU, COMIC BAKERY, RESCUE ON TEMPLE OF TERROR KRAK OUT EXPLORER DOUBLE TAKE, BULLDOG, KRYSTALS OF ZONG HYPER BIKER QUAKEMINUS ONE MISSION AD, STRIKE FORCE COBRA ARCO YESOO, THROUGH THE TRAP DOOR, CHAIN REACTION, ICE BUSTERS, KORONIS RIFT STAR LEAGUE BASEBALL DEATHSCAPE NEOCLYPS, DEADRINGER KILLER RING YABBA DABBA 000, 10TH FRAME, MALLIC MADDNESS, DECEPTOR, SHADOW SCIMMER, NEMIS THE WARLOCK, MAX HEADROOM SUPER BASIC ENIGMA FORCE DEVSEX MACHINA XENO, WISSTARS THE FIFTH QUADRANT, FUTURE KNIGHT, WEST BANK, CYBOURG, THE COLOUR OF MAGIC ROUGH TROOPER DAVY, THE TUBE. ELEVATOR ACTION, POLAR PIERRE, PILE UP THE COMET GAME, CHALANGE OF THE GOBOTS, SUPER STAR PING PONG AVENGER, DANDY, RANARAMA STRIKE FORCE COBRA, THE DETECTIVE, 1 CUPS HYPA BALL, MISSION OMEGA, INFORDROID. HYLANDER, KINETIK PLAY YOUR CARDS RIGHT, JET SET WILLY , SKY RUNNER STAR QUAKE, FALCON PATROL 2 FIRELORD MOON CRESTA MUGSY REVENGE ON COURT TENNIS, MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE DECATHLON EMPIRE, MOON CRISIS 1900 MOUNTE MICK'S DEATHRIDE BRIDE OF FRANKENSTEIN, ITS A KNOCKOUT JUMPING JIMMY. HICWAY ENCOUNTER DOGFIGHT 2187 WRENDER, OUT ON A LIMB  BAHINGS, DEACTIVATOas, BACK TO THE FUTURE LORDS OF MIDNIGHT SHERLOCK, SURF CHAMP HYBRID, ESCAPE FROM PARADICE, AGENT ORANGE THANATOS, APSHAI TRILOGY. COMMODORE .99 EACH DARKSIDE DAREWARDSTERS NETHER EARTH DEATSCAPE THE 200. FRACTION, FEVER, ACEAN VOYAGE DEADLINE STORY MACHINE, SLA SPELLER, ALL E1 90 WISHBRINGER BLACK CAULDRON 10.00 SPECTRUM IMASTER WORLD BALLONING, CAR RIMZON MIND FOREVER VOYAGING JOURNEY AGE 6 10 ALL FOR 2.99 10.00 ENCHANTER COMPILATIONS GOLDEN PATH CUTTHROATS 10.00 COMMODORE .99 CRAZY CARS DR FRUIT 10.00 UNBELIEVABLE ULTIMATE DISC VADERS 23 FAHRENHEIT 451 NEW GAMES 7.95 JEWELS OF DARKNESS 17.50 SENTINEL SILICON DREAMS ARGUS PRESS 30 GAMES, SCOTT ADAMS ANKH, HYPABALL AZTEC MR ROBOT, BEST SCOOPS OF BEOND, CAPTURED, THE VIKINGS, RED TURBO WAR ON WHEELS SPECTRUM .99 EACH COIN-OP CONNEXIEN INC CRYSTAL ARROWS, MURDER BY THE DOZEN, KINETIK STARGLIDER 2 CASTLES, BREAKTHUR, EXPRESS RAIDER CORRUPTION METRO CROSSI OR BUY TWO GET BUSSY BOY FUN PACK 3 INC (THE HUCK LEVITATION, PARADISE STARION NEXUS, TRACER THEMORI THIS IS ONLY A SAMPLE, ALL NEW TITLES AT SANCTION, PASTFINDER, CHAMELION ONE FREE 20AK II ZORK III, STARCROSS, DEADLINE 30% OFF RRP SPECTRUM NEW TITLES SUSPEND DECATHLON ACTION E x, SAI COMBAT, BACK TO THE COMMODORE FOOTBALL MANAGER 2 FUTURE, REVOLUTION, POLE POSITION SKAT CRAZY TITLES FIGHTING WARRIOR BRAINSTORM BEYOND THE ICE PALACE MISCELLANEOUS STAROUAKE, XCEL, GALASIAN HACKER BESTA. BALLBLAZER. JET ACTION FORCE PAC, MS PACMAN, DOUBLE TAKE THE SIMONS BASIL SMION BASIL EXTN GREAT GANA SISTERS EI OOLONXARQ, KORONIS RIFT, COP OUT DREAM WARRIOR DISK FRANK-N-STEIN, FUTURE KNIGHT KINETIK STREET FIGHTER GEOS BONIC COMMANDOS DANDY, PSIS TRADING CO, PRODIGY, LIFE DREAM WARRIOR DESIGNER PENCIL OF HARRY PULSATORY, HYBIRD 10TH INFILTRATOR 3 BUGSY BOY FRAME, COSMIC SHOCK ABSORBER SOLDIER OF LIGHT INTRO TO BASIC PT 12 CASS THE GAMES (2.98 GALVAN, WIBSTARS, TRAP, MAR STROM ECHELON ROAD BLASTERS FREEZE MACHINE ALIEN SYNDRONE FOOTBALL MANAGER 2 NEOS MOUSE CASS: E14.96 VENOM STRIKE BACK MILLION DOG FIGHT 2187, FIRETRAP, 03.98 ROAD BLASTERS LOGO THE GAMES E2.90 HIJACK BUBBLER, ICE TEMPLE COMET FUTURE FINANCE ALIEN BLASTERS GAME KRAKOUT WAR, DEADRINGER, 13.99 FLINTSTONES THIS IS ONLY A SAMPLE, ALL NEW TITLES AT INTERNATIONAL SOCCER ARGET RENEGAD KILLER RING FAIRLIGHT II AGENT ORANGE 30%OF RRD PANDORA PERIPHERALS PYRACURSE, MOONSTRIKE MOONLIGHT COMM COMPILATIONS IMP MISSION 2 MADNESS, ROUGE TROOPER, THANTOS ICE PALACE UTILITIES .99 EACH CASSETTE RANARAMA, EXPRESS RAIDER, CHALLENGE OF THE COROTS ROTRONICS WAFADRIVE + 1 FREE 64K ATARIST SOFTWARE SIGMA 7 METRO CROSS, HEARTLAND, 17.99 INCPP ALLIGATA ACTION PACK, PLATFORM TUJAD GUNRUNNER LES FLICS, TRIAXOS EXTRA WAFADRIVE CARTRIDGES 10K 2.00 EACH 6 PERFECTION, UNBELIEVABLE ULTIMATE MOUNTHEMICKS DEATHRIDE, GERRY THE 3.50 EACH CRAZY CARS SCOTT ADAM'S SCOOPS, BEST OF BEYOND TURBO ST GEM, COSTA CAPERS, EVIL CROWN, GRYON SPECTRAL WRITER WORD PROCESSOR ON BIG NAME BONANZA, COIN OP CONNECTION BOULOER DASH CON KIT VAMAA,  TEMPLE OF TERROR, INC CRYSTAL CASTALES PUB GAMES, ARTIC ANTICS SIR FREAD, ALPHACOM PAPER (BLACKS ROLLS 10.96 BREAKTHROUGH, EXPRESS RAIDER, METRO EXTENSOR COLLISON COURSE, SKY RUNNER BATTLE TASSWORD SPECTRUM + 3 CROSS, SOMMER GOLD INCLOTH FRAME OF THE PLANETS, WEST BANK, OR BUX, OR LIVINGSTONE IMPOSSIBLE MISSION REBEL PLANET WORLD GAMES DEEPSTRIKE, ARC OF YESOO, ISLAND TAS PRINT DAMBUSTERSBRUCE LEE, BEACHEA  TASCALC +3 LUCAS FILM COLLECTION THE EDOLON CLASSIQUES TASWIDE +3 RESCUE ON FRACTULUS, BALLBLAZER WISHBRINGER KORONIS RIFT TASCAL SPECTRUM SPECTRUM .99 EACH PASWORD 2 MIND FOREVER VOYAGING 2 SPELL BREAKER TAS PRINT SPECTRUM COMMODORE AMIGA PLANET FALL FIGHTER PILOT, DARK EMPIRE, INDIANA TASCOPY SPECTRUM STATION FALL JONES, SHOA LINES AD SNOOKER TAS DIARY 13.30 SOFTWARE TRINITY SURVIVOR, SUPERSPRINT, ALIEN P&P 1-3 TITLES 750 4 OR MORE E1. MOONMIST EVOLUTION, SAMUI TRILOGY, SUPERCHESS OVERSEAS ORDERS ADD 31 PER CASS 3.5 BASKET MASTER, SOLOMANS KEY, RED 10.00 CUTTHROATS BYRITE SOFTWARE SCORPION NEMESIS, JAILBREAK ZORK II SUSPECT TRANTOR, GRYZOR, PSYCHO SOLDIER HACKER PO BOX 589 LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE FIREFLY, PROHIBITION, SLAINE, QUARTET 50.00 CHOLO, DRUID I, IMPOSSIBLE, MISSION PLANTFALL LONDON N14 6SJ HEA COACH RAM PARTS EATOR SEASTALKER MOONMIST ULTIMA I GLORY NINJA HAMSTER, COMDAT SCH, PSI SUSPENDED CHESS, ELEVATOR ACTION, SPY V SPY II 10.00 BALLYHOO SPY V SPY RRRRRRR WINDSTONE TRILOGY, PSCO SOLDEVELL SAMURT TRANFORMERS, BLOOD AND GUTS RAMPARTS, RE BOUNDER, GRYSOR, INTO THE EAGLES NEST, JAILBREAK ROADRUNNER, ORO GAETFELL. SAMU CONVOY RAIDER SUPERSPRINTING BATTALION COMMANDER STRIKE FORCE HARRIER SOLOMONS KEY FIREFLY, TRANTOR, DARK EMPIRE, TOMAHAWK INDIANA JOPNES QUARTET, IMPLOSION FIRETRAP SHO LINS ROAD, NEATHER EARTH, INHERITANCE 2. COMMODORE BORROWED TIME EDUCATIONAL RANCH NUMBER TUMBLERS, SONG MAKER ALPHA BUILD, MAKE AFACE, DANCE FANTACY ALF, LOGIC LEVELS, ALPHABET 01-882 6833 J. R. H. SOFTWARE PRICES SLASHED!      400/806 NOW W INCHES ACTION FORCE 050 8'88' AKANOID 2 LOOK GAUNIETI 182299 2.98.999.. COMMANDOS 8888 '88' 888 88 DEF, CROWN ni b th ng NHTEACH 888 *SPECIAL OFFERS FOR CBM 64 OWNERS: *GARY LINEKERS SUPERSTAR SOCCER 5.95 -VICTORY ROAD: .45 \"HITCHIKERS (Infocom Disk): 17.95 XLUXE ST ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to:CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 6.85 03 WARRIOR 98.8 9999 MARAUDER 2008 293 SPRENSA OPERATION STRAPOKER 24 PresAA  23 PACLAND 9888 88889 S 292 33333! 3 888 STOOD SALAMANDER SAMURA QUICKSHOTH JOYSTICKS ( 16-BIT SOFTWARE CARRIER COMMAND FOOTBALL MANAGER GREAT GANA SISTERS IMPOSSIBLE MISSIONI oro PLAYHOUSE STRIP POKER SO TUO THUNDER SIDEWINDER TIME BANDIT ONIC COMMANDOS Di Price Code: 108.25 2 1 0 25 412.45 D5-13.45 DO 1845 PLEASE MAKE CHEQUES/PO'S PAYABLE TO JRH SOFTWARE AND SEND THEM TO 15 BRIDGE ROAD, WESTBROOK, MARGATE, KENT CTO SJN. ENQUIRIES NUMBER 108431 33882 EVERY SINGLE ORDER SENT BY FIRST CLASS POST AND DATAPOST WHENEVER POSSIBLE "


"ieviens SALAMANDER SALAMANDER. MACHINE: COMMODORE 64. SUPPLIER: OCEAN. PRICE: $9.95 TAPE/$12.95 DISK. REVIEWER: CHRIS JENKINS. Salamander is, of course, the sequel to the coin-op Nemesis, and all the same elements are there; sections. One or two rings, flapping chance to recapture any players can compete, space.birds, giant weapons pods which you flying through the six levels flamingoes, and the most dropped (if you're fast which take you over the hideous guardians at the enough). surface of the planet Latis, end of each level. The So what you get for your through an asteroid storm, demon-headed snake at money is an absorbing over a volcanic the end of level three is a and challenging blast, but landscape, through a particular horror, requiring nothing in the way of mechanoid base, through dozens of head-shots to originality. To be honest, sub-space, and finally to polish it off. this doesn't look as good or the final fortress level But the landscape is just play as well as lo, but the control of the ship, which as dangerous: huge claws programming is a little is smaller than the one in reach for you, jets of flame slicker. If this is your kind of shoot from the surface, and thing you'll enjoy it, but networks of tendrils Salamander won't convert actually reform as you any confirmed attempt to shoot your way shoot-'em-up haters. through them. In some places it's important to GRAPHICS develop the correct SOUND pattern of movement and shooting if you hope to PLAYABILITY blast your way through. VALUE If you're terminally OVERALL UPDATE This conversion of Konami's hit coin-op has been a little slow coming, and to some extent has been pre-empted by other similar games. Arcade Dated looking shoot em up. fans will enjoy making the A Arrow head ship shoots its way through the maze. 020530 special weapons, attacking aliens, huge mutations, hostile environments. But then, you could say that about lo, SlapFight, R-Type, and dozens of others... Still, Salamander is a classy conversion of the coin-op. The most impressive bit (apart from Action furns verical. the non-stop funky music Nemesis, is pretty smooth. and sound effects) is the As you'd expect, if you can way in which the sprite destroy a whole flight of routines have been fiddled aliens, they leave behind a to give squillions of objects weapon pod which you fly dashing around the screen over to pick up. Features at the same time. include speed-ups, Admittedly, most of them whirling laser pods, are missiles, but to keep two-way and three-way everything going without lasers, and spinning loss of speed at even the energy bolts. Once you A Impressive yellow flame effect has been widely copied. hairiest moments is a great have picked up a damaged, your ship just most of it, though, and achievement (and one selection of these, the flashes, disappears, and might even save which lo can't boast). screen becomes filled with reappears at the left hand themselves some money. Most of Salamander is a missiles every time you hit side of the screen, giving The only other versions horizontally-scrolling the fire button. your a few seconds of in the pipeline are for format, though on some The poor aliens invulnerability before the Spectrum and Amstrad levels there are subjected to this barrage mayhem starts again. You CPC, both due at the end vertically-scrolling include simple dancing do, though, get the of July "


"OLD In the beginning there was a void, a blank memory without fom or purpose. And ARGONAUT Software looked upon the void and said ... \"LET THERE BE FLIGHT ...and there was STARGLIDER. And as time progressed, the art of three dimensional solid graphics became known unto the ARGONAUTS, and they rejoiced. And they said ... \"LET US CREATE THE ULTIMATE PROGRAM, TO HAVE DOMINION OVER ALL OTHER PROGRAMS IN THE UNIVERSE ... and there was a blinding light and the Earth spat fire and trembled. And as the fire diminished and the vapours cleared, the fruits of their labours emerged from out of the chaos. THE ULTIMATE CREATION! STARGLIDER 2. A VOYAGE INTO THE THIRD DIMENSION BY ARGONAUT SOFTWARE, Atari ST/Amiga .95 RAINDERD Telecomsoft, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford St, London WCIA IPS, Rad and Raab. Logo are trademarks of British Telecomunications PLC Rainbird and the Rainbird logo are registered trademarks of British Telecommunications PLC "


"MWWW Mina Adventure Reviews MACHINES: CASSETTES Matthew, and manages to PRICE $14.99, C64/128; SPECTRUM 48K/128K/PLUS; bring himself up on his own AMSTRAD CPC. DISKS remarkably well for a lad of PRICE $19.99, C64/128; his age, as well as coping AMSTRAD CPC. DISKS with the final year of his PRICE $24.99, ATARI ST; degree course. He has AMIGA; AMSTRAD PCW; MS some remarkable powers DOS. (as might be expected for SUPPLIER: ACTIVISION/ ABSTRACT CONCEPTS. an 11 year old degree REVIEWER: KEITH student) and as the story CAMPBELL opens, he has just Mindfighter is based on a successfully gone into a trance and managed to novel of the same name, reduce the rate of by Anna Popkess. This radioactive decay of a full-length (150 page) lump of uranium. paperback, has been Alison is nineteen, and a published especially for bag of nerves. In her inclusion with the game. It childhood, her father was originally written for treated her mother publication as a brutally, and she stand-alone book, with no committed suicide after he thought of an adventure raped her. However, after game in mind. a long absence, he traces The story centres on a Alison, and re-appears to group of youngsters try to rape her, his own studying parapsychology daughter, as well. This is at Southampton University. prevented by another Robin, the youngest, is an student, Harry, who is a orphan, and only eleven tower of strength and years old. He rooms with support to Alison. Robin arrives in post-nuke Southampton. upwards to the north and Sloped down to the south, while another rough road wound from east to west. Robin also noticed nece of des A Life doesn't seem to be particularly kind to Robin, does it The students are occupied to get down to currently planning their any serious work. latest jolly wheeze an Before long they have attempt to mastered it, although metamorphasise disappointed that they themselves into the bodies can only hold animal form of animals. They read up for about fifteen minutes at about the subject of a time. Meanwhile, Robin werewolves to get a few becomes withdrawn, and hints and tips on how to set eventually goes into a about the task. Well, I'd trance, speaking to them need a clue or two on that as if from another world. It myself, wouldn't you? Their soon becomes apparent professor, not in the know, that he thinks he is in conveniently gives them a Southampton of the near month off from their studies, future, after a nuclear war. as they seem to be too pre. The group, together with varred, rubble wasteland SCRIOTS around Robin. top, ampuna o pattered concrete slabs, he gazed dscape. Be e Behind and to the east of hi the distant blackened could just make out the fallen of sone high-rise fiats. Away Le Speci Uninvited 1 SUPPLIER: MIRRORSOFT/ICOM SIMULATIONS MACHINES: ATARI ST; AMIGA; C-64 VERSION EXPECTED. PRICE: $24.99. REVIEWER: KEITH. just manage to force the door comfortably furnished lounge, open and stagger out before it you jump, as the door slams blows up. Your kid brother got closed behind you-trapping out, too but where is he? you inside. There is no sign of him. All is still and deserted You find yourself outside a dark and foreboding within, yet you feel you're mansion, starkly illuminated being watched. A nightmare by the vivid flashes of search for your missing brother lightning. Probably your is about to begin in this brother sought shelter inside, haunted house. and so, pushing the creaking You are soon startled by the door open you step inside. As sudden appearance of a you look around the ghost in the hall. Do you have the power to exorcise it for if enverope It's a stormy night, and your car is out of control. You struggle with the wheel to no avall, and after the impact, If that's an 'Inteligent' picture, I' d e wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww "


"WWWWWWWWWWWWWWW Afighter dismal but effective. But if he found nothing, surely then the whole mood of the he could examine it! At one game is dismal. time, Robin wanted to Multiple complex cover his face with some commands are possible, rag. such as GET THE NEWSPAPER COVER was not AND READ IT. PUT THE successful, so he tried to NEWSPAPER INTO THE BOX. PUT RAG OVER FACE, and There is an OOPS managed to drop it. When command (retracts your he decided he had been last move) available on the harrassed enough by a bigger memory machines. tall guard, he tried to HIT Disk and ram save, text GUARD WITH WRENCH. only, verbose/brief, sound Nope he couldn't do onloff, and a printer option, that. But he did manage to are available from a set of hit him with the command icons, depending which KILL GUARD WITH WRENCH. computer you are using. Strange, that you must set Previous command editing out with the intention to kill, is also supported on all rather than to disable, to versions. Although sentances get someone off your back. entered may be complex, But that does seem to be many simple ones are not consistent with the general supported, and give a brutal approach poor message in response. throughout the game. Whilst it is possible to get VOCABULARLY information by EXAMINING some objects, quite often EXAMINE (object) replies PERSONAL that\"... Robin could not examine that.\" What? Even VALUE Didn't anyone ever tell you it's rude to stare? C: 13 SCORE Adventure Reviews 7 ooo Surprised Ruddy shocked, more like! their professor, get depressing events with a together with him, to help level of detail which the him to find the key to author seemed to relish. prevent the war, thus The adventure game saving mankind from the was written by Fergus dreadful future Robin McNeill, using an entirely describes. In following his new system developed for exploration, his friends are Abstract Concepts, by Tim aided by Robin's Gilberts (of Quill fame) and somewhat unusual ability his team. All versions have to project images of what graphics, and the pictures he sees in the other world, change through a series of through his eyes. \"vertical shutters', giving a I found the book lacking very smooth effect. The in the slightest degree of graphics themselves vary credibility, written in a between versions. I played superficial style, the Atari ST version, and describing morbid and found most of the pictures not, it will surely be the death A detailed 'intelligent' picture each room picture is read in of voul A search of the dining of the current room sits in the from disk (actually, two rooms room, kitchen, servants' middle of the screen (unless seem to be resident in memory quarters, study, and games you move it), and operation is much of the time) slows down room, all fail. Upstairs, the almost solely by mouse-driven progress. A useful bedrooms, bathrooms, and icons. I describe the picture as enhancement to this already closet, are equally deserted intelligent, because each advanced system would be to But to what evil purpose is the object depicted, however he object depicted, however provide a form of GOTO attic put? A false move here, minute, is an icon, sensitive to command perhaps through and you could be one of its commands when the arrow is opening up a window with a victims! positioned on it and the schematic map. Three strange buildings mouse button clicked. Overall, though, this is an stand in the grounds, but to As well as occasional excellent haunted house enter them, your search of the special graphics effects and thriller with plenty of puzzles house will probably have to animation, the sound effects and surprises, a user-friendly be more thorough. When its are plentiful and add a lot to are plentiful and add a lot to mode of operation and some secrets start unfolding, you'll the atmosphere of the game. very detailed graphics find bottles of potions, vials of In between the incessant strange coloured liquids. rolling of thunder, try secret cabinets, hidden keys, operating the old wind-up VOCABULARY N/A sliding panels, and more gramophone in the games ghosts, that go to pack this room for a spot of digitised ATMOSPHERE adventure with spine-chilling music! Groovy literally! PERSONAL surprises. My only criticism of VALUE Uninvited is from the same Uninvited is that moving team that produced Deja Vu around between distant and Shadowgate, and the locations becomes a little game takes the same format. tedious the delay whilst now open I'd hate to see a stupid one. wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww "


"wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww Helpline because EMAP does its ho hasn't got a level best to prevent their problem with magazines from reaching Football Frenzy? your country. Until your Peter Nuttall can't find the attitudes change, you car, can't get the players don't have the moral right to start a match, can't to the products of any clean the kit, and doesn't civilised country. know how to deal with the \"Could you please, ticket tout. Paul Hardy, a please, spare a few lines, veteran FF problem poser, to produce the answer (to is still coming back for my problems) in your more. \"What should one section? (You don't have to do (or give) to the Record say where I come from.)\" Engineer? Can the police But I'm sure other readers sergeant be of any help? will want to know, and that And Paul, too, is worried last sentence is precisely about that ticket tout. why I am breaking my As if Football Frenzy normal rule. It shows that wasn't bad enough, you are so ashamed of summer is now here and being South African, you we've been blessed with would prefer the fact not to Cricket Crazy! Still game, A Looks like a hold-up in Police Quest. be mentioned. As it seems despite his football Here it is: there is some hope for you, problems, Peter Nuttall \"I just had a visit from my you'll find the Rebel Planet can't get rid of the friend John. It went clue you need in the clues hijacker. \"And is the pen something like this: John section. no use, as the game (clutching his head): crashes every time I \"What's good for a examine it?\" he asks. headache, Mark?\" Me: Sounds like a dodgy game \"Seabase Delta.\" John: Help this month comes if ever there was one \"?!!\" Me: \"Well, that's how ! from: Tarke Fahmy, Giza, perhaps it was no accident got mine!\" John: \"No, how that I failed to receive a Egypt; Peter Nuttall, A In the dock Can Helpline do I get rid of one?\" Me: Belfast; and Andrew review copy! Has anyone help you out? \"What, Seabase Delta?\" else had this problem, and John (going funny colour in in more people trapped in Bethell, Walsall. if so, on what machine? face): \"No!! A bloody there than you can get loois eu, upjoy JD Who can stop Mark  n    students into a phone box! headache, you moron!!!\" Wilkins getting his head Me: \"Oh, that's easy. Ask Will the first person out, let weyi bujidwej aq 'Bulldub smashed in? He is playing Keith at C+VG.\" John me know how they did itut puryeq Suolley do Police Quest, and after PLEASE? makes an awful scene, pup'eouy dium eyi yopib booking the amazing jumping up and down, OOHA71V8 Helen, was sent to Carol's screaming about nd finally, a rare \"H! en of wip Cafe. But he can't get the computer freaks + 1001 mention for one of our oor sed Yong BION bikers to move their bikes suitable tortures for unwanted South epid was eyi olyoq can you? adventure addicts. Me: African readers. \"As you no podsub IIM PJOM By! \"Well, that's how I got rid of can probably see by the ups \"uo ueui wo 'PIOM mine!\" Door: \"SLAM!!\" address and stamps, I live ljeds eyi poe pup and ark Barnes writes Advice wanted by in South Africa. Please JDS DOI !! XD!! en ol from Queensland, to would-be murderers! don't have any negative egue||elu yiy D speeu say I deserve a raise! Assassin: Andrew Bethell. attitude towards this letter, ljeds poojeyi esn ol Hear hear! (Haven't been Victim: Wizard. Scene of because of that,\" writes  aNOA38 telling you that for months, Crime: Kings Quest III. John Heynes, of PO Box HYIM Eugene?) \"Whatever Assassin: Leslie Brady. 197, Minzenberg 7950, PIDM Byl 14 pud 'PJOM they're paying you can't Victim: The Wolves. Scene South Africa. But I have, bpw eyi yum hos ey! be enough for the quality of Crime: Frankenstein John. It is my normal  'pi  d of of work you turn out for the Part 2 practice to screw up letters VINX mag,\" he continues. from South Africa, and hex popew yi puy or Now you're making me chuck them in the bin, YoSDpo dwpo eyi exo blush, Mark but not f you're playing Jack where the reviled policies 03HSVWS enough to stop me The Ripper, the of their undemocratically showing the Ed. your letter! chances are you'll elected government also IN XOM JO MOq eu And for the following story meet up with a lot of C+VG belong. jopueruee 6 NO about a headache, Mark readers when you get to John continues: \"I have NOISNVW VINVW wins this month's award of the room with the rolltop been purchasing your \"YOLDMSUM a year's free subscription desk, and pictures with magazine since January unoh wol yoon eu to Adventurer's Club Ltd. eyes behind them. There's 1987.\" That is not in your Ofuoo 'diys eyt ende Ol favour, either, John LanVid 1393 w "


"wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwWWWWWW The Fiend The Farringdon Fiend has returned. No one knows where he has been or what he has seen but one thing is for sure, he's back. Loud asnd proud and sounding off about role playing/adventure demarkation lines. But its not all rant. Our opinioned mystery man also has a dozen copies of Dungeonmaster up for grapbs. Those of you not too thinking. When is an overcome by raging adventure not an apathy, may have noticed adventure? Is a role a most significant event playing game, strategy or FIEND recently. Yes, The Fiend has adventure? returned! But where have to answer the last beenm and what have question first, the answer been doing? The whole depends upon the game. awful truth may never be in the case of DM it is known, but part of the time undoubtedly an has been spent adventure, full of puzzles completing Dungeon and problems. All right, Master. there is no text input, but Funnily enough, The there have been icon Fiend felt quite at home in driven adventures before. I the depths, and the quote Dj Vu as a good deeper I got, the more example. And yes, I admit pleasant became the that there is monster surroundings, and the bashing (and jolly good more attractive the fun it is too!) but so has citizens. All of which begs Beyond Zork. and role playing games discovered one or two the issue, for it is And what of the role the boundary is fuzzy and arcade games over the controversy time! Oh joy! playing aspect? Well, obscure. The one thing that years that fall into this For it was decided by a aren't ALL adventures role aren't ALL adventures role separates the superior category! magazine editor not one playing? Isn't the mark of a adventure player from the Besides, any game that million miles removed from good adventure that the mindless alien-basher is his has an imprisoned princess C+VG, that Dungeon player gets into the role of ability and willingness to with a removable chastity Master was NOT an the hero, into the mind of use his brain, to exercise belt has to be something of adventure, but a role the programmer? And who his intellect. And THAT is an adventure. Where she playing game. Therefore, set the boundaries how The Fiend classified is, and how, and with what, the review copy went to the anyway? There is no clear games. Adventures to me, I will not tell! leather freak instead of KC cut demarkation line are any that make me All of this set The Fiend to between good adventure think, and I have Fiendish Compo. ! (1) AD&D stands for (a) A Demon and Dinosaur, (b) Advanced Dungeons and Dragons, (c) Alternative Demons and Dragons. (1) The excellent Dungeonmaster game is In the history of gaming 1988 may well go down as the produced by FTL. What do year role playing games come of age. these letters stand for. Everyone is talking about them. You have read about them in Fax, John Minson devotes all of this month's Out (3) What is an RPG? To Lunch to discuss them, US Gold are going to spend a fortune persuading you to buy them, and even the Farringdon Fiend is wants to get in on the action. If you have never played a role playing game then Answers perhaps it is time you started to consider it. Name..... C+VG and the Fiend are offering you a unique chance Address. to get into this absorbing type of game play. We have ten copies of Dungeonmaster perhaps the best role playing game launched yet to give away. Five for the ST and five for the Commodore 64. The 64 version is not quite ready but as soon as it is five copies are ear marked for C+VG readers. All we want you to do is answer some simple questions about role playing, cut out the coupon below, and send off before August 16, to C+VG, Fiend Compo, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, ECIR 3AU. A Dungeon Master. The game that put role playing on the map and launched a debate when is on adventure RPG and vice versa. | wwwwwwwwww "


"mon your familia present at last night's do for labyrinth of caves under now at a low ebb, and you  VOCABULARY you're going to need if you gg and eaten for Smart Egg enlisted for this, irreverent and comic Written by Harvey Lodder eggcup even if you are certainly on the Spectrum and Nigel Brooks, Quest for omnipotent. Mind you, not version whichl played garden, is a bright white RAMSAVE option. suspended from it. You hop versions (48k and 128k) on the bottom rung, and come on the same tape it all up? After a strange . series of specialist rooms, Square, and Snow Hall. But budget adventure, that is g id the house (well, adventurers always deep, not too difficult, and VOCABULARY Weather is all controlled from Cloud 99, "


"MUNDIALNA BREEHHHON HA ALIEN FORCES WREAK HAVOC ON OUR PLANET. THE EARTH TORN AND BLASTED IN WHAT SEEMED THE FINAL WAR, BUT ENOUGH SURVIVED TO UPHOLD THE LAWS OF JUSTICE AND REVENGE. NOW ONE MAN MUST FACE THE FINAL ENEMY. HE IS THE VINDICATOR ACROSS A TORTURED LANDSCAPE AGAINST INCREDIBLE ODDS HE MUST BATTLE THROUGH TO THE ENEMY STRONGHOLD, DOWN INTO MAZE LIKE CORRIDORS FILLED WITH MUTATED GUARDIANS UNTIL WE REACHES THE INNER SANCTUM OF THE DARK OVERLORD TO STRIKE THE FINAL BLOW OF RETRIBUTION BECOME THE VINDICATOR IN THIS MULTI-SECTIONED GAME OF SURVIVAL AS STATE-OF-THE-ART GRAPHICS TAKE YOU ON ..lhe name ALSO AVAILABLE ON DISK E T HE ADVENTURE OF A LIFETIME. SPECTRUM AMSTRAD of lhe game STRIKE BACK, BEFORE IT'S TOO LATES .95 .95 IMAGINE SOFTWARE 6 CENTRAL STREET MANCHESTER M2 55 TEL: 061-632 6633 TELEX 667799 OCEANS G FAX: 061 834 0650 COMMODORE "


"CINEMAWARE MIRROR AND PRESENT THE ORIGIN OF OTU 1940-HITLER'S NAZI HORDES SWEEP ACROSS EUROPE. CAN NOBODY STOP THEM? 3000 MILES AWAY, YOUNG INVENTOR TOM CODY DESPAIRS. CUDDENLEO IT STILL WONT WORK! WHY WONT THEY SEE? WE MUST CRUSH HITLER! ... UNLESS YOU USE THESE GIFTS WISELY. WHA??? A GHOSTLY VOICE FILLS THE ROOM. TOM CODY-ONLY YOU CAN CHANGE HISTORY! THE NAZIS WILL WIN THIS WAR... "


"OUTSIDE THIS HAD BETTER WORK! (IT DOES! CODY EAGERLY READS... CALL ME... PRESS BUTTON WITH EACH STEP... BUT AT THE HOME OF PROFESSOR BARNSTORFF ACCOMPANY US TOWN OR YOUR OUR ZEPPELIN..., DAUGHTER DIES CAN ROCKET RANGER RESCUE THE PROF? WHAT IS THE TEMPLE IN THE JUNGLE? AND WHO ARE THE ZOMBIE WOMENON THE MOON? ONLY YOU CAN FIND OUT WITH ROCKET RANGER! FROM... Doa RANGERES FIRST WITH THE REVIEWS "


"KINNIS COMMANDOS ZZAP 54 CRASH Bionic Commando is a thoroughly enjoyable game, miss it and you're MAD: COMMODORE USER CLASSIC YOUR SINCLAIR SINCLAIR USER CBM 64/128 9.99c11.990 SPECTRUM 8.99 AMSTRAD 9.99c14.990 ATARIST 19.99d AMIGA 24.99d IBMPC 19.99d GIANTS OF THE VIDEO GAMES INDUSTRY en years have passed since the devastating war when the enemies secret Zargon missiles destroyed our civilization, The only hope we have of regaining our home world and re-building our lives lies in the hands of our elite force of Bionic Commandos. with their telescopic limbs, sophisticated weaponry and bionic power they must infiltrate the enemy bases, destroy the deadly foe and neutralize their doomsday weapons. Your skill and their bionic powers are our only hope CAPCOM U.SA., Inc. 1987 GO: Media Holdings Ltd A Division of U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Wolford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 "


"eyes SENTINEL MACHINES: BBC B, CBM 64, SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD, ATARI ST, AMIGA. SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD. PRICE: $19.95.  VERSION TESTED: AMIGA. REVIEWER: CHRIS JENKINS. Love it or hate it, you can't ignore The Sentinel. Now that the Amiga version has been released, practically everyone has the opportunity to try one of the weirdest games ever written. The Amiga version is a bit of a disappointment, in that it doesn't make any significant use of the micro's superior graphics and sound abilities. Turn the sound off and you could well be playing the BBC version. That's not to say that the graphics are poor; indeed, they're quite unlike anything you'll have seen in any other game. Created using fractal techniques, the endless 3-D landscapes of The Sentinel consist of slopes, planes, and strange objects. Using the keyboard or mouse, you can change your viewpoint freely. scrolling the landscape to reveal ever new vistas of strange complexity. Your aim is to defeat the hooded Sentinel of each level by converting objects into pure energy, and using it to transfer yourself to higher levels. To do this you must create new bodies for your Synthoid robot, and move into them. You are first shown an overview of the landscape, showing the Sentinel, its Sentry henchmen, and the details of the topography, You can access an aerial view of the landscape at any time by aiming your viewpoint into the sky and pressing HELP. Around the landscape are dotted crystalline trees. These are your raw energy building blocks. Using the cursor, centre on a tree and press A to absorb it. You'll see it enemies including disintegrate and your Meanies, which project energy readout at the top you at random through of the screen will increase. hyperspace unless you As you absorb energy, the absorb them first. Losing Sentinel will become your vantage point is bad aware of you, turn to face enough, but unless you you and start to absorb have enough energy, a your energy. This means jump will kill you. that you have to keep You might find the moving to survive. strategy and fast thinking As you progress you will involved in The Sentinel come across other fascinating, or you might E88 ANY KEU One of the weirdest games ever written. find it stunningly boring, but the fact is that you will probably never finish it. There are 10,000 levels to complete, each with an 8-digit access code which is revealed when you complete the previous level. Make sure you see The Sentinel, but before you buy, ask whether the thrill is likely to last for 10,000 levels.  GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY  OVERALL 7 UPDATE... This conversion of The Sentinel has been slow coming. It was released on 8-bit machines quite some time ago and was just as weird then. A Endless 3-D landscapes created using fractal techniques. "


"Cele NS WA WWW FURY continually drive directly petrol like there's no in front of you to stop you correctly, and can wipe tomorrow. Railguns are the out a whole group of from getting up to a standard form of weaponry opponent's cars with one halfway decent speed. and come already fitted to shot. There are three types of your car, but ammunition race in all: Speed Trial (go needs to be bought in as fast as you can), Killing order for them to function. Race (go as fast as you can GRAPHICS Although this all may and shoot a few cars while sound jolly exciting in SOUND you're at it) and Tag Race, theory, it is in fact very dull where one car is randomly VALUE in practice. I was very selected as 'IT', and has to unimpressed with the PLAYABILITY touch another car in order graphics of the cars. They to rid itself of the tag. OVERALL are small and poorly The killing race is by far the most dangerous of the defined, and the three, as although you can amateurish scrolling fails UPDATE... to give any real impression Spectrum and Amstrad buy rockets and flame throwers to destroy the of speed. versions on sale now, with Last, but certainly not other cars with your least are the Semi-guided C64 cassette and disk opponents are constantly missiles, which although trying to blow YOU away. versions on sale in July. they cost positively To make matters worse, No 16-bit conversions are from time to time the planned. loadsamoney, are pretty screen will turn red and a devastating if used targetting cross-hair will Go as fast as you can yawn. appear on the screen, and if you're not quick enough to avoid it, it'll lock onto you and BOOM! It's all over for you, matey. The weapons available to you come in all shapes and sizes, and generally the deadlier they are, the more cash you have to fork out for them. The flame throwers come in two sizes, one with a range of 8 metres and another with a range of 20, and although they're ideal for torching the other cars out of the race, they eat up your car's Cars look graphically anaemic. IT  MACHINE: SPECTRUM/COMMODORE/ AMSTRAD. SUPPLIER: MARTECH. PRICE: SPEC 18.99/C64, AMS .99. VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM. REVIEWER: MATT BIELBY. \"Fasten your Saver Being Harness for the Space Age Demolition Derby,\" says the blurb for Martech's latest release, The Fury. In an attempt to thwart your right-to-left progress over the track, enemy cars appear and try to bump Iyou off the road or limit "


"BIONIC COMMANDOS 5 0 MACHINES: deadly electronic version is its amazing SPEC 064 SPECTRUM/CBM forcefields and heavy soundtracks. Each level GRAPHICS 64/AMSTRADIATARI boxes thrown down by has its own fabulous piece ISOUND ST/AMIGA/IBM PC. SUPPLIER: US GOLDIGO! soldiers in the battlements of music, varying from a PRICE: $8.99 SPEC .99 On level three the heroic whacky 70s-style cop PLAYABILITY C64/AMS $19.99 ATARI ST/PC commando enters the theme tune to a VALUE 7 8 $24.99 AMIGA. fortress and negotiates the psychedelic mood piece.  VERSIONS TESTED: hazard-filled sewage I thoroughly enjoyed OVERALL_. COMMODORE/SPECTRUM. system inhabited by giant Bionic Commando; is a UPDATE REVIEWER: JULIAN robots and soldiers in large tough, yet highly RIGNALL. mechanical fighting enjoyable arcade Both the Atari ST and Bionic Commando made machines. conversion and is well Amiga versions are Although Bionic a brief appearance in the virtually worth buying. arcades towards the end Every tune is outstanding, indistinguishable from the Commando is essentially a of last year before sinking a platform game, it has and surely must rank arcade version. The without trace a shame enough neat touches to amongst the best tunes yet Amstrad version is also make it worthwhile. The really; it's a neat little written fot the Commodore. looking promising. extending arm is a brilliant game. Turn up the volume for the brilliant sountrack. Still, that hasn't stopped idea which has been US Gold from converting it beautifully implemented; it to just about every home really FEELS good, and micro available. swinging across gaps in Chances are that you the landscape is great fun. haven't seen the arcade The action is frenetic throughout, with all game it appeared in very few provincial manner of hazards to keep you on your toes. The arcades So here's a graphics aren't quick precis of the scenario. The player takes Spectrum and outstanding; on both the control of said Bionic Commodore the sprites Commando and attempts are a little on the small size, a solo infiltration of a CORE TOP but colour is used well, five-level enemy fortress. 05:50 120000 Each multi-directionally giving both games a generally pleasing look. TII 1:2 scrolling level consists of One thing that mustn't go platforms and obstacles STIBBEL unmentioned about the 64 which the commando Platform game, but with some nice touches. negotiates. The objective is to reach the top right of the landscape, whereupon a points bonus is awarded, and the next level loaded from tape. The mission starts in a forest, and the commando climbs through the foliage using his bionic arm, an extendable metal limb which is shot at objects above the commando and then retracted to lift him upwards. Shooting the arm diagonally and then retracting it slightly causes the commando to swing Tarzan-style ideal for crossing chasms or moving from one tree to another. CORIE TOP As the mission progresses, things get decidedly harder. Level two has the commando TIME 0:5:2 climbing up the walls of the fortress, ducking out of the 5 TBGIELA way of cannonballs, \" BIONIC COMMANDO ! : BONDS 2013  "


"RAME Frame Up is being a little devious this month but there is a good reason. One of the computer graphics masterpieces on this spread is not a reader's effort. It is a professionally produced image for the Commodore Amiga. If you can spot it you win a free game of your choice. Anyone can enter this competition whether you are a micro artist or not. Just goes to show doesn't it how good our readers' art is becoming. Keep sending them in there is a super prize every month. FUN -TIMES Excellent animated cartoon strip from Norway A Thanks to Stole Loseth of Elnesvaggen Norway he The soldier who fights on. Pyramids and balls. HEAD The ghastly Evil Dead C+VG monster. RAM "


"TH HOPLO HAR TO THE RVERAGE AGE OF THE 2GH WE THRH HE HAS HAFLESTE FERRARI TESTAROSSA A Derek Jolly's Spectrum produced this Testarossa N-N-N-N-NNineteen comes to Frame Up. MSR A Ballet dancer pirouettes. rway fhese Walkers. RSSY LLOYDS BANK The Predator stalks Frame Up. A Flight of fantasy by Stole Loseth. John Player The best team in the land. A More Star Wars from Stole Loseth. Matt Bielby in Pixels "


"TERRORPODS MELBOURNE HOUSE Now Available for the Spectrum and Commodore 64. Distributed by Melbourne House 8-10 Paul Street London EC2A 4JH Telephone: 01-377 8411 "


"movies on their toes but Where were you in '62? In everyone else will want to Baltimore they were sit this one out. addicted to dances like The Meanwhile the Transylvanian Bug, The Corney Collins ballroom team of Dracula, Show and enough Frankenstein, the Wolfman, Hairspray (PG) to punch a Gill-Man and the Mummy hole through the ozone have all turned up in layer! small-town USA. Who ya Appearing on Corny's TV gonna call? The Monster music show is every teen's Squad (15) that's who! ambition and when Tracy These teenage fear fans Turnblad wins her place in discover a book by one A the audience it enrages Van Helsing a dead bitchy beauty, Amber Von giveaway that the undead Tussle. Meanwhile Tracy's If music be the food of love... movie man are about to turn up on their best friend Penny Pingleton Ward R. Street will need a diet after this doorsteps. Suddenly their is dating Seaweed, a black favourite film frighteners kid, and runs into the harsh month's melodicious feast! are flesh and blood or in realities of racism when he's the case of the Mummy, banned from the show! bandages and dust. The The era of beehive hairdos problem is, nobody will and beatniks has been believe them. lovingly recreated by John So Sean, Patrick, Rudy Waters -the cult and 'Fat Kid' this really is film-maker responsible for the month for overweight outrages such as Polyester, heroes set out to do the with its scratch and sniff monsters before they do for card which let the audience the town. It's one hilarious share delights like dirty thrill after another as they sneakers and worse. discover new ways to Now he's turned down the dispose of an ancient tastlessness to produce the Egyptian and why funniest, sunniest film of the werewolves wear trousers! summer. But it's still got its They even persuade one err eccentricities. classic creature to join them. Hairspray-ing heroine Ricki This isn't the first time the Lake makes most teenage teenagers and monsters plot stars look positively has been used but it's one of anorexic while her mother is the best a delightfully played by the equally daffy roller coaster ride overweight female which packs more invention impersonator Divine! into its 83 minutes than most But it all serves to keep movies manage in two Hairspray spaced out in its hours. It looks great, is well own daffy dimension. It's a acted and keeps you on the musical filled with fantastic sixties tunes! It's a message A Divine stars in his last movie edge of your seat. You'd be Hairspray mad not to like it. movie with two messages While we're talking about black and big are both dancing! beautiful! It's weird and Rico's friend Ken is dating madness strap on your strait jacket for The Couch wonderful with a host of his sister Rita, leading to muchos teen anguish and Trip (15), in which a convict special guests, including escapes from the mental even more Latin American Debbie Harry and Pia Zadora institution where he's enthe happiest, wackiest music. There are enough joying a relaxed regime, and movie this year. Start cliches to keep fans of bad poses as a psychiatrist who spraying that hair! A The Monster Squad. hosts a popular radio show. If only the dance contest As the cast includes Dan in Salsa The Motion Aykroyd and Walter Picture (PG) was so much Matthau you might expect fun. But this Dirty Dancing great things of this farce. imitator takes its tale of But obviously something feuding youngsters and went wacko somewhere dance hall histrionics all too along the line. Aykroyd is seriously and trips over its fun as the con, gathering his shoelaces before it hits the radio audience on buses and floor! taking them down to a Set in a Spanish quarter of baseball game for some Los Angeles, working-class group therapy, and Charles life centres on La Luna a Grodin provides sterling salsa dance club. Rico is support as the real doctor, determined to win the recovering from a nervous annual contest but tension The ever elegant Walter Matthav lives it up in Couch Trip. breakdown in London. But rises when the former there's too little sanity in \"Queen of Salsa' Luna, tries this tale of madmen. It really to replace his girlfriend and is one trip you might want to partner, Vicki, and teach forego. him some lessons not all of There's a similar lack of which have to do with continued . "


"neen sense about Deadly Pursuit (15), a thriller which goes way over the top 7,500 feet over the Canadian border, to be exact as it tells of an FBI man and his mountain guide in pursuit of a psychotic killer. The catch is that the murderer is holding the guide's girlfriend hostage! It's a promising idea and begins well as the unseen psycho escapes from a house where he's holding the occuptants hostage even though he's surrounded by police. But by the time scowling Tom Berenger has dragged Sidney Poitier, back in action after many years at the Fed, up the mountain, it's climbed the giddy melodramatic heights of True Life Macho Adventures. Nobody would call Woody Allen 'macho' but every so often he feels the need to flex his dramatic muscles. Unluckily September (PG) A Woody Allen's September. finds him in serious mood budget movie. It's messy once more and despite a and at two hours it's twenty packed cast, including minutes too long. But it's Denholm Elliott and Mia also bright and breezy and Farrow, it's as enjoyable as a heartfelt. rainy autumn day. At Mission the students A family gathers in their divide into two groups. The rural house to bitch, fight, hard core blacks are burst into tears about politically aware while the men-friends and the like, against a background of memories as they prepare to sell the place. When Allen gets serious he seems to lose his self-critical facilities. With its mannered dialogue Skool Daze. it may all work better on stage. In such a crowded month we can't mention everything, but a special Michael J. Fox tries once more word for Vice Versa (PG), to escape his squeaky clean image. the tale of a father and boy who magically swop identities. It doesn't open till 29th July, so I'll reviews it at greater length next month. Just room to tell you that it's an hilarious comedy thriller so go see it. Back to the dancing with Skool Daze (PG), though it's not actually a musical. Then again, it's not quite anything. There's some Animal House comedy, there's romance and there's a message about intolerance and integrity. But what makes these university hi-jinks really different is that Mission College is for blacks. Spike The Pet Shop Boys acting it couldn't happen here. Lee, who brought us the highly acclaimed, bargain basement She's Gotta Have It, has thrown in a bit of everything for his first big Gamma Phi Gamma fraternity seem more interested in imitating the ways of white students. It focuses on the hilarious rituals of the Gammas, and the rivalry of radical Dap and cool dude Julian and their girlfriends rivalry which is likely to turn into a dance number at the drop of a challenge! Don't be put off by its heavy-sounding theme or its lack of discipline though. For the most part Skool Daze bubbles along like they really are the best days of your life and it's a true original. The report reads: *Bags of enthusiasm. Will do even better in future.\" Better school than The Pet Shop Boys in their first film, It Couldn't Happen Here (15). It Shouldn't Happen Here is a fairer title for this mish-mash of supposedlymeaningful and heartfelt images rather like their songs you may say. What? You don't say! Then you're probably a Pet Shop Boys fan so ignore all my grumbles about this trip through a Britain stacked with second-hand surrealism in the hope of convincing us that Chris and Neil are really deep and sensitive. For the rest of us, this is what we always feared a ninety minute promo film! At least Prince concentrates on doing what he does best which is performing on stage. Prince Sign o' the Times (15) is a brilliantly well made documentary of his show. Now I'm no fan of the Purple Poser, but the sight of Sheila E pounding the drum kit is one even I won't forget in a hurry. Salome's Last Dance (18) isn't another Dirty Dancing imitator but a version of Oscar Wilde's scandalous play, set in a brothel, with the tarts taking the parts and Wilde and male friend in attendance. Only one director could be responsible the equally scandalous Ken Russell. It tells the story of the princess Salome, who demanded the head of John the Baptist on a plate, presumably because she's tired of Big Macs. Russell's idea of outrageous decadence is to have everyone's nipples painted gold or silver, which is neither wild nor Wilde! He should take a few lessons from John Waters. "


"DREAM-UP 45.84.29.79 VIR A N D FORGET THE FUTURE IS IN YOUR HANDS! FIRE AND FORGET! NEVER LOOK BACK YOU ARE OUR ONLY CHANCE... AND AMSTRAD CPC COMING SOON FOR SPECTRUM 48/128, C64/128 AMIGA VERSION PS, PC, XT, AT VERSION ATARI ST VERSION TM UNIT 4 STANNETS LAINDON NORTH TRADE CENTRE BASILDON ESSEX SS 156 DJ PHONE: (0268) 541126 C 1988 TITUS SOFTWARE CORP., TITUS AND THE TITUS LOGO ARE REGISTERED TRADE MARKS OF TITUS SOFTWARE CORP. COMMODORE 64/128, IBM, ATARI ST AND AMIGA ARE REGISTERED TRADEMARKS OF COMMODORE ELECTRONICS LTD, INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES, ATARI INC AND COMMODORE AMIGA RESPECTIVELY "


"2 MACHINES: SPECTRUM, CBM 64, ATARI ST. SUPPLIER: US GOLD. PRICE: SPEC/64, $9.99 ST, $19.99. VERSION TESTED: ATARI ST. REVIEWER: CHRIS JENKINS. The eagerness with which each new Gauntlet clone is greeted never ceases to amaze me. After all, the original is still the best, and If you endlessly blasting hundreds of boring sprites on countless similar levels, you might as well stick with the devil you know. Mind you, Shackled has a lot going for it. Apart from the Commodore 64 enough variation between levels, though I admiti haven't completed all 112 Fast moving and imaginative, then, but not perhaps original enough to sustain your interest in the long term. The Amstrad CPC version is almost (but not quite) as poor as the Commodore 64; the characters are 8 89 B : 00050000 23P 2000 PILSE: 10 A Gauntlet done with a little more variation. SHACKLED version, where both the speed-ups, because want to survive. Move fast, bland, the sound effects graphics and sound lovely-wovely though your hit hard, don't get trapped unimaginative and the effects are fruly dreadful, if friends are, they don't half in corners, and watch backgrounds similarly looks good; and there's a slow you down as you try to yourself as you traverse afflicted by big blank little more variation to the make for the exits. If you narrow corridors. Because blocks. All the versions gameplay than you'd find reach the final door on the scenery scrolls in four have a misleading error on in Gauntlet itself. each level, you get directions, it's easy to run the packaging: the ST The plot's pretty through to the next and into a squadron of archers screenshot is labelled straightforward. Your earn bonus points hidden, say, off the top of \"arcade version\" and vice comrades-in-arms have according to the number the screen. versa been captured by the of people you've saved While the characters forces of evil, and chained and the number of and effects (such as jets of GRAPHICS up in cells situated in a enemies snuffed. flame) on the ST version are SOUND labyrinthine castle. Your Although there's no very artistically designed, task is to save them, strategy as such involved the background is a bit of a I VALUE fighting off the enemy in Shackled, there's a disappointment, featuring I PLAYABILITY monsters as you go. certain style of play which large lumps of unvaried The scenery is seen from you have to adopt if you colour. There also isn't OVERALL a top-down perspective, Shackled loses out on graphics and sound effects, pretty similar to that of Gauntlet, but rather than a UPDATE lot of open space there are large areas full of narrow Although Shackled is a corridors. As you find cell conversion of a Data East doors, you open them with coin-op, the machine magic keys (conveniently doesn't seem to have left lying around as usual) been widely distributed in and enter the cell to rescue this country. Basically the your chum. 16-bit versions seem to Each friend carries a have come out quite well, special weapon which while the 8-bit games are can be used against the disappointing with the baddies, which include surprising exception of knife-throwing ninjas, giant the Spectrum. ogres, energy-draining You can expect to see blobs and archers. versions for Spectrum Plus COCOOOOOOOOO811 Your extra weapons Three disk and MSX in the include knives, arrows, next couple of months. balls of fire, shields and A more sophisticated speed-ups. FOOC Amiga version is also in You'll need the the works O OREO LQ "


"LUST THINK FRANKIE SPECTRUM 48. 128 O O COMMODORE 64.128 COBRA Ocean Ocean What if you could buy all these hit games in a special pack for the price of one... Wouldn't that be fantastic? And what if there was an extra FREE game included say the best selling martial-arts simulation \"Yie Ar Kung Fu\". Wouldn't that be sensational? WELL NOW YOU CANI It's called... FRANKIE SPECTRUM 48128 COMMODORE 64-128 VE WIZRALLEL nnuve A CEO UNSTOPPABLE! 33 WEEKS IN THE CHARTS! VERSE DEVEN Oceancom SPECTRUM AMSTRAD, COMMODORE CASSETTE And of course it's courtesy of You can buy it on December 1st O.K.? Box 17705 DISK Ocean House: 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS: Telenhone: 0610226622 Tolou "


"evieNS TRACKS MACHINES: CBM 64/SPECTRUM. SUPPLIER: GOLIATH GAMES. PRICE: $9.95. VERSION TESTED: CBM 64. REVIEWER: GENE SIMMONS. DEREITA Goliath is a name you may not have heard a lot about, but it's a name that will be talked about quite a lot, considering the strength of this, the company's first entry into the software SPAIN 1 0 ENGLAND market. It is, and this is no exaggeration, the best ever football managerial game, ever, in the history of the world, no messing. straight up, honest. A claim you'd normally only hear BY HITS 1ST TIME SHOT... from a PR company, but for MYYNNEM me to write it, it must be GOAL something good. *************** You are given the task of managing the England KICK OFF squad, or any of 54 other countries, and gently nursemaiding them through first the European Cup (Nations Cup) and TIME then the World Cup. As far as I can remember, and 11:00 that's quite far despite my tender years, there has never been a true managerial game. There's always been a bit of administration and PAUSE SUBSTITUTE accountancy thrown in which I have always found A The action is described in Brian More speak. NEWSPAPER REPORTS to put a dampener on the Goliath have gone for a far fun. more involving and In Tracksuit Manager, sophisticated approach to DAILY SLAG you are only the manager. the match. With the use of a You know how they're couple of menus, you can going to play, and above piece together a very SPAIN WELCOME NEW MANAGER all, win. complicated strategy very Glancing back over the quickly. four managerial duties. Using the Team Tactics some of you might stop m enu, you can set SPORTING KNIFE and think to yourselves that formation, playing style one and two have been (attacking, defensive) done before, but what's length of passes, tackling. this thing about how style, general defence they're going to play'. As system (sweeper, offside well as tackling an almost trap) plus a general guide untapped field of the to how you want the team genre, namely to play the full match (slow A The press approve of a mega transfer deal. international football, build up, fast build up, fast55MERASCEY GREETEO HITH 72 "


"The incredible thing less than five statistics at with many more can boost about the matches is the Brilliant level. or drop your ego. commentary. Whilst All of the usual stuff is also the whole game is playing, you are given a contained, such as group joystick controlled and all running update on all tables, fixture lists and the options are selected from action on the pitch. Stuff most impressive scout a little bar at the base of like \"Lacey gets the ball. reports I've ever seen. The the screen. The Lacey runs upfield. one thing that really adds presentation is very clean Williams brings down pleasure to the game and and professional, with the Lacey\" and so on for the can decide whether you can decide whether you screen divided and length of the match, which feel good or not about your redivided into various incidentally, is variable. 1-0 win over Albania are windows and any and all Anything from sixteen the newspaper reports. useful information is seconds to 90 minutes, by After every match you always on-screen. using the joystick to give play, you are given two As I've already stated, all the details about the newspaper headlines from Tracksuit Manager is the match, such as the number the Daily Slag and the best ever managerial of goal attempts, fouls, Sporting Knife. 'Cute little game and a very bookings, sending offs and impressive start for Goliath. more besides. The same goofs up\" and \"Gene If you like football get it. If thing happens after any leads us to victory\" along you like strategy. get it. If you want one of the best TEAM TACTICS 8-bit games around at the moment, get it. NA  GRAPHICS: SOUND: VALUE: PLAYABILITY: OVERALL FORMATION 1 3 3 BUNYIMBI SYSTENT ATTACXICO GATE ATTACKTHO STYLE|NORMAL. BUILD UPS MARKICO SYSTEM IZONAL MARKING PASSICO STYLE | LONG PASSICO GAME TACKLIKO STYLE STANDARD TACKLICB DEFENCE SYSTEM SHEEPER SYSTEM EXIT Update... The Spectrum version is identical to the 64 version in playability and layout, with some screens slightly altered with different character sizes and different sized windows. Even as we speak, plans are being drawn up for 16-bit versions later in the year. E. LACEY ATTACKER 5088IM.. ORE Individual strengths and weaknesses are listed. counter attacks). All this other matches, which generalisation not amazingly only take less involving enough for you? than a second to play. Fine, just switch to the The main aim of the player tactics menu. With game alongside providing this you can tell a player hours of fun, I am told, is exactly how to play, who to accuracy. Over a mark, where to play, thousand real players are whether to take free kicks, contained within the penalties, thrown-ins or program, and statistics are corners and lots more. held on all of them; such as The matches themselves passing accuracy, are a piece of masterful confidence, skill, heading programming. A small accuracy and tons more, diagram of the pitch and a along with their home highlighted band provide clubs, caps and goals all the graphical bits with scored. Needless to say the purpose only to show Maradonna is the best where the ball is. player I could find, with no THE REH: 16 GBp : CAPS GOALS CLUB +VG ROVERS EXIT A Just look at these stunning skills. "


"PlayByMail START-UP PBM'ers MEET IN turns are .00 each. Anyone SHEFFIELD interested in this thinking It's me, Wayne. Lots to write about this person's PBM should make all Yes, they have confirmed to me month, like board games featuring cheques payable to Mitre and that this year there is going to your favourite superheroes, and a forward them via C+ VG. be a SECOND PBM Standard Games still has a convention! Going under the couple of Fanzines. No time to few places left in their C+ VG name of \"The Great Northern waste. game of Dark Blades. You PBM Convention\", it will take could win a gold plated place on 15th October at dragon, which measures over Sheffield Polytechnic, 12 inches in length and Sheffield, between 10 am and breadth, and is valued at over 6 pm. ,000, as well as many other As I write they are in the Games, who used to run up in the game or old players prizes!! Full reports of the process of inviting 20 of the Pangea. I have received a letter who get wiped out and wish to C+VG game will be featured biggest P.B.M. companies in from them stating that due to recommence will be placed on a in my next column. 11 you are the UK to the convention, as personal reasons they have had waiting list for the moment interested in taking part in well as a handful of smaller to close down their company until a new place is available. what i consider the best ones. Further details of the and cease running the game. To speed up turns. Andy is presented PBM game to date, actual companies attending The GMs have assured me that employing the use of a modern drop me a line with a will be released in my next all plavers who have credit in word processor which will also cheque/Potor 2.00, made column. However, at present the game will receive their allow him to update the tokens payable to standard Games can confirm that they are money back in the long run. on a daily basis. and I will ensure that you get in organising Live Role Playing the correct game. sessions (Participation and Demonstration), an Open AD+D Competition, FANZINES Wargames displays and . PBM SCROLL No 2 participation, a bring and buy . (70p) By Philip Rankin sale, loads of Fantasy Role Contains hints and tips on the Playing Games to get involved Boss level of It's A Crime, plus with, the \"Alternative\" PBM (+ 2 free turns!) reviews of Gameplay, awards (worst Company etc), Alkimora and League Soccer, quizzes and competitions, a Issue: 0-free sample. as well as part one of a PBM fanzine stall, PBM lectures and directory, giving the full details seminars, plus Computer game of certain PBM companies. competitions. Also, thanks to Although the printing quality the forthcoming changes in the varies from issue to issue, it is licencing laws, the humorously written. professionally run bar and cafe .PBM SCROLL No 5 will be open all day!! . (No price given, but worth Sheffield Polytechnic is about 85p in my estimation) by directly opposite Sheffield BR John Woods station. The event is taking Very well put together issue, place in the Main Hall, plus with It's A Crime and League surrounding lecture theatres, A Brace of fanzines essential tips for PBM'ers. Soccer covered once again, plus on the Pond site. a few other sports games, The entrance fee is .00, including European football but once again I have managed CRASIWORLD MIDGARD NEW and Aussie rules!! Other games to secure a discount for C+VG LAUNCHED covered include Spiral Arm RULE BOOK OUT readers. Anyone who writes and Crisis, as well as a couple Another big chance in the PBM of amateur games that I have in to me at C+VG with a Talking of new rulebooks, cheque P/O for .50 made world is that KJC have recently Mitregames has just issued never heard of. payable to the BPMA plus a leased off the rights for their version 5.1 of the Midgard ssae will not only make a first ever game, Crasimoff's rulebook. This takes into GOING DUTCH saving of 25 per cent but will be world to a new company called account the fact that Mitre has to close this month's column guaranteed to receive a ticket. Crasiworld\", run by Andy just amalgamated both the US a large PBM company, which The Sheffield venue has a Smith. Andy, who was one of and the UK version of the game is based overseas, has asked me smaller capacity and there is a KJC's long serving GMs, has and it aims to iron out any to remind foreign players that realistic possibility of a sell out. asked me to mention that all inconsistencies that existed not all PBMs are written in Consider yourself warned!! correspondence should be sent between both versions of the English. Fantasia Arena, a to him c/o; Crasiworld, 4 PANGEA game, on different sides of the Dutch company co-run by Paul Crescent Avenue, Cleveleys, Atlantic. fit looks much H artman, runs a wide range of SHELVED Blackpool, FYS3JE and that better written and the rules are PBMs that are written in their at the moment he is limiting the explained with a welcome I know for a fact that one PBM native language. If you can membership of the game to clarity. I especially like the company that won't be turning keep the turn around time at a read Dutch and are interested naval rules revisions in respect up to the Sheffield PBM minimum. This means that please contact: Fantasia convention will be Anvil of ships and combat. The rule Arena, Van Bassen Straat 118, new players who wish to start book costs .00 and further 3067 ND, Rottedam, Holland. "


"GET INTO CRIME! In the late 1990's the streets of New York are a jungle. You are the ice cool leader of a gang of drug crazed terrorists. Your main goal is to become the richest, toughest and most notorious gang in the city. DARE YOU PLAY..... FREE OFFER NY SAME IS SORTABLE CHILDREN FREEL SEND YOUR NAME AND ADDRESS TODAY FOR YOUR FREE TRIAL OF IT'S A CRIME THE WORLDS MOST POPULAR PLAY-BY-MAIL GAME Write to:KJC GAMES, PO BOX 11, CLEVELEYS, BLACKPOOL, LANCS FY5 2UL. "


"The interest in FRP is growing on a daily basis out there if the size of my massive mailbag is anything to go by. This month we take a look at the game based on Marvel Comics' super heroes, the latest Dark Blades Expansion , plus a round up of all the latest FRP news around the country. By the way, don't forget to keep that mail flooding in!! FANAS Mar rel Super Heroes PUBLISHED BY: Wolverine, or any number of special environments. A nice MARVEL/TSR. the Fantastic Four. factors, which mean touch is that the relevant SUPPLIED BY: GAMES OF All heroe's have seven major recalculating the results of Marvel character introduces LIVERPOOL. PRICE: .95. abilities, which ranges from certain actions by moving up and takes you through the Strength to Psyche and four and down the table. However, subject that they specialise in. As an avid comic collector and minor ones. Playing the game even this is not that complex For example Dr Strange takes AD+D officianado, imagine is simply based around The my delight when I discovered Universal Table\". This allows that Marvel comics and the you to calculate every result creators of the world's most you will ever need, quickly and popular role playing game, efficiently. The table is divided TSR, had got together to create up like bar graph, with a game whereby you could play numbers from 1-100 down one your favourite comic side, and all the characters superheroe's! A million and abilities down the other. All one possibilities swept my you have to do is role two ten mind, as I ripped open the box sided dice (which are enclosed), and began to read the enclosed giving you the random number \"Battlebook\". you need and then cross The 18 page Battlebook is reference the result between the aply named as its main two on the table. The result function is to inform you how you get is a colour, which tells to resolve the many combat you whether you have failed, situations you will inevitably succeeded, done something find yourself in. It also special, or done something explains how to play the game. spectacular, which is not Basically you can choose to always to your advantage. play one of eight preIf you find this too simple, All this Marvell role playing gear for less than nine quid. determined famous heroes: then there are some advanced Captain America, Captain rules that take the game a step and takes only a short while to Marvel, Spiderman or further and introduce other master. The 48 page \"Campaign Book\" makes very interesting THE THING reading indeed. It explains that the game is run by \"The Judge', who controls all the supervillians, thugs and other 'Non' Player Characters like, Auntie May, Spiderman's relative. The judge's job is not easy but, by the same token, it is the most enjoyable. You have to have a bit of a knack for telling stories and entertain the players. Furthermore, you have to tailor the game to suit your players' needs, find out what your players prefer and adjust your adventures accordingly. The book covers many This set includes the X-Men of a few years ago, not the present team. topics such as magic, vehicles, Pack contains eight coloan heavy artillery, building special "


"Role-PL MiNg k Blales SUPPLIER: STANDARD GAMES. PUBLISHER: STANDARD GAMES. items, alien technology and I then flipped through the magic, whilst Mr Fantastic official game adventure, \"The take you through the building Day Of The Octopus\", by special items sections. It helps Bruce Nesmith. Without giving you flush out your whole game too much away, you have to and provides you with a thwart Dr Octopus and his constant source of invaluable aid. It can also help you create intent on stealing a suit of team of super villains who are the role playing version of your power armour. The Mighty favourite superheroes, such as Thor is by your side to help you Dare Devil and Iron Man who in this tough challenge. are not covered in this game. Overall, I liked the game. It The aim of the game is to is easy to play, fast, exciting achieve more Karma. The and full of action. It is well more Karma that you can written in a humorous, accrue, the more you can non-condescending manner increase and improve your natural or unnatural abilities. and excellently packaged. The drawings are superb (they However, be warned, Karma is more easily lost than it is should be as they have a fleet of gained, as not only do you the world's best artists at their effect your karma by being a fingertips) and the enclosed super hero, but you also effect large double sided map is a nice it when you are in your secret touch. identity. For example, if you My only real criticism is stop a maior crime, then you leveled at the dice and the will gain a certain amount of character counters. The dice Karma, but if when you were are so awful, that they give you stopping the aforementioned a crayon to colour them in with crime you were supposed to be so you can see the results better taking your loved one on a and there are simply not date, then you will lose the Karma that you have gained!! enough character counters to Karma can also be sacrificed to complement the game. I liked the game overall, temporarily effect your powers in certain ways. How you do especially the way that you this is up to you. could unintentionally lose Karma and eventually end up being hated by the public. To Quote the booklet \"No-one said being a superhero was SPIDER-MAN This booklet contains twenty and you can see that Standard have scenarios for you to play in come up yet again with another association with Standards board association with Standards board winner of a package. For example, game, Dark Blades. However, as take the case of Quill the Wizard you probably know by now that all who has been challenged to a Standard's games are based on one magicians duel by a rival Shaman. system throughout and therefore The aim is to see which one of them these games can also be played in is the best wizard. Quill has been conjunction with the likes of Cry forbidden to attend by his leader Havoc, Siege and Outremer. because he is too valuable to be Some of the scenarios require killed in a petty squabble, but EXPANSION SET DIANEC easy!! Dark Blades expansion set contains forty magic tokens. +  PLAYABILITY COMPLEXITY BASIC GAME ADVANCED GAME ENTERTAINMENT VALUE VALUE FOR MONEY additional maps and these can be whilst he was otherwise engaged, cheaply purchased from Standard Quill slips out of the camp with a via mail order. This is not a must few of his most trusted however, as with as little companions to settle this matter of imagination, some hex paper and a honour. Meanwhile, the rival modicum of artistic skill you could Shaman is waiting with his design your own maps to suit the \"Companions\", that consist of relevant scenarios. The decision is two war dogs and a slow thinking really up to you. Beserker!! An interesting conflict The scenarios cover all different would arise naturally, however, kinds of encounters and they range Standard have brought in some from rescuing a dragon to herb n ew rules that make it even more gathering! They have one thing in entertaining. common though, and that is that The Expansion kit also includes they are interesting. Add this to the 40 (count 'em!) new magic tokens fact that they are original to boot which change the game Cont p. 79 It carotard super heroes. "


"DARK BLADES A Living PLAY:BY: MAILAdvenbro DARK BLADES Over 25,000 mapable positions; Unique line of sight vision; Over 20 different types of armour and weapons to choose from and dozens of different items to trade with; Play a mon-oger or human; 1000's of individual npc characters to hire, trade with, fight, speak to or learn from. There are thousands of creatures within the land of Dark Blades, all are different and even the lowliest has OVER 70 elements built into its make-up to make it a true individual, with its own reactions and, dare we say. LIFE? Using the unique Gamma Operating system to control the game has created a living world inside a computer, where the game' could go on even without players. You complete 10 tasks before being given your final quest' and the first player to complete their quest wins their game and receives free game play in another game, as well as a chance to become the Champion PLAY:BY: MAIL of Champions! Don't delay the exciting experience of playing a LIVING ADVENTURE  send for your start-up package now!! The start-up package costs .00 and for this you get a rule book, full colour A2 poster-size map and two free turns, all enclosed in a full colour box to help you keep your turn sheets tidy. Further turns are .25 each and we mean .25, there are no \"HIDDEN\" extras. 1 st Prize HACKER er enero de Dark Blades Play by Mail prise for the Champion of Champions. Hacker is 22ct Gold Plated and valued at OVER ,000! the Golden Dragon and measures 13in length Size: Approximate wing span of 12\" Send your .00 (cheque/cash/postal order, no coins please) to: STANDARD GAMES PBM, Arlon House, Station Road, Kings Langley, Herts WD4 8LF., or if you're STILL not convinced send a stamped addressed envelope for more details. A Living Adventure ..  1 Bridge Street Galashiels TD1 1SW WORLDWIDE .SOFTWARE 49 Stoney Street Nottingham NG1 1LX -CREEPHOUSE AMIGA THE PLAY BY MAIL GAME RRRRRBERNERVENAR Become a creep, slime or wulf and try to be the first to escape the most darkest, meanest haunted house in America. You will be competing against 40 other players and 60 computer controlled monsters. Creephouse is a new play by mal game and uses 3D Adventure-Vision' which allows you to push and stack all the Creephouse furniture, fight other players and 9 different types of monster, and move north, south, east, west, up and down, featuring Trapdoors, blood barrels, garlic, stakes, gobble plants, vampire women, skeleton keys, locked doors, and much much more. Turns are 8Op each. The RULEBOOK, FOUR 3D FLOOR PLANS OF THE HAUNTED HOUSE, ENTRY CARD AND TWO FREE TURNS are free. Just send your name and address to Project Basilisk (C+VG), PO Box 24, Sheerness, Kent. We will return a tree Creephouse starter pack within 8 days. FREE OFFER 50p extra off all titles \"SUMMERTIME SPECIAL OFFERS SOp extra off all titles. Tell us where you saw our advert then deduct 50 pence from our advertised price on each title that you order. COMMODORE 64/128 COMMODORE 64/128 sex  RRRRRRRRRRRRRRR88888 HUMORUMS WHERES SUPER THIEF? FFF  Kennedy Approach Leaderboard Fam. Courses Marauder.. Mini Office 6 Pack Vol2 or 3 Please make cheques and postal orders payable to WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE, Prices include postage and packing in UK. Overseas orders please add .00 per E cass/disk for AIR MAIL delivery 10 Credit Card Telephone Numbers: 0896 57004, 0602 480779 "


"FANASy Role-PLAYING Continued from p.77 spells are very spell casters more express within the game Ogre Forest Mega games, who brought designed to give starting you the all new Mega Role adventures for inexperienced playing system, (reviewed in players, characters and GMs. June's C + VG) has now 1 These ready top play released their first scenario. adventures are very useful Titled Ogre Forest it is when a GM plays the Mega dramatically. Some of the new provided, and by recording spells are very powerful and they accurately your characters serve to make the spell casters more experiences, it is possible to relevant and important to the progress within the game frame game. One spell, \"Alter Terrain\" work. You should bear in mind has lead to Standard including a that this system is reversable and new sheet of terrain pieces with this you can regress in levels as well as package to cover the effects of the progress. A general rule of thumb spell. Also, not being people to is that if your characters adhere to waste space, Standard has included their aims and are successful, they various cut out valuables and will gain skills, however, if they pieces of a 2D wizards tower. drift from their principles and fail The other spells include **(k) in battle, they will find themselves nightly pain\", which causes certain on the slippery slope down the skill knights to suffer a pain so immense tables. that they have to bang their heads A good value for money package against the floor to get rid of it, that will provide hours of which of course causes them entertainment. This is because the damage, to \"Flame Finger\", scenarios fit in with so many of which causes everybody in a Standard's games. certain area to suffer wounds from a fireball. There are a great deal more spells but lack of space stops me going into greater detail. PLAYABILITY If all this is not enough, COMPLEXITY Standard has added two more items which enhance the game DESIGN greatly. The first is the additional VALUE FOR MONEY 8 optional missile rules, which give realism and depth to all the missile weapons, and this includes everything from throwing daggers to Longbows. The second is the Character Advancement rules, which enable you to improve the fighting skills of your favourite characters. By using the tables OOO OOO Ogre Forest  set contains all colour maps. System for the first time. The module contains two separate adventures called: The Return Of Twain Alderyn and Ogre Forest. They may be linked together if necessary or can be run individually. All the maps, outdoor and indoor are shown on the cover in colour as well as on a separate sheet. The outdoor maps are designed in such a way that they will fit easily into an existing world or campaign. An experienced GM should be able to make even more out of the adventures than is just supplied, as special missions, interesting encounters and so on will give the players more to deal with. Many additions could be made as a direct consequence of the players, actions in each scenario. Both scenarios are interesting, The Return is a short encounter based around a house that is rumoured to be Cont. P.80. Scene from the huge separating screen in Ogre Forest. "


"FANAS, Role-PLAYING Cardboard Characters Continued from p. 79. haunted. It is ripe for thieves Mannish Races\" vol II, a lot of and the like to use as a hide out, you have asked me to give you however, whatever way you more details about the actual play it, you should find a twist game. Well, at the moment the in the tale. Ogre Forest is the game is available in two forms, longer scenario, which mixes a boxed set and the solitary up Ogres, Kidnappers and a rulebook. trip through the forest together The boxed edition sells for with an interesting story line. .95 and is beautifully Success depends a lot on packaged and the artwork is roleplay and hack and slayers just out of this world. For your . OK, so you've bought a piles, vegetation, and paving fantasy role playing game, stones, to larger items like played if for a while and are rafts, boats, ships and roofs. just getting to grips with it. They are all very well You want to improve upon illustrated and sturdy, so they your game's settings and make will last for a long time. My it more visual, but you cannot favourites were the doorways afford the lead figures or and windows, which are accessories, so what do you uniquely designed. One nasty do? Easy! You go out and buy double doorway is like going the latest Dungeon Accessory through the mouth of some Pack from Standard Games, hideous demon and the which is No 2 in the series. For windows above it are designed .95 you receive 12 A4 hard to make them look like eyes!! cardboard sheets that can be A good test of any brave cut up into many individual adventurer's metal. Also if you objects. have a steady hand you could The sheets range from small cut out the picture on the cover things like swords, treasure of the box and use that as well. Role playing adventure in Ogre Forest LI could be in for a bit of a hard money you receive the MERP time. rulebook, a 32 page My booklet came introductory adventure accompanied with a big, booklet, a 16 page layout colourful Dungeon Masters booklet, a set of full colour screen which, for the stand up characters and the uninitiated, is plonked in relevant dice. between the Dungeonmaster The rulebook alone sells for and the players to stop them .95 and the game can be peeking at classified info. played straight from the Once again my main gripe is booklet. The rules cover with the artwork. It is terrible! combat, races, magics, The colour maps are professions and everything else acceptable, but the black and that you can think of. Also white artwork just makes me included is a complete starting cringe. However, as the price is adventure in the Trollshaws around .50 I can forgive region. The whole package is them this time because the rest written in a player-friendly way of the product is well put and if you like Tolkien, this together and it is easily game is definitely for you. convertible into other games Personally, I believe that it is systems. worth laying out the .00 for After reviewing the Middle the extra background that is Earth Role Playing System covered in the boxed set alone. (MERPS) scenario, The Box full of accessories for just .95. "


"You are competing against the world's greatest in the greatest and toughest series of winter sports yet devised. Seven events to test your skill and nerve to the utmost; each one with its own individual demands. Practice, patience and more M practice are required to stand any chance of a medal. You can do it; you will do it! And what's more you'll have a great time trying! UDE SKI Jumping Daredevil bravery neries of steel and total control are compulsory in this event where both distance and style count towards your score Figure Skating Precision and poise are essential in this most artistic of sports Cross Country Skiing One of the stiffest tests of pure physical prowess ever devised. Battle with time, terrain and winter itself in this ultimate test of endurance. Slalom Speed control and split second timing are pre requisites in this most difficult of skiing events Luge Daring a touch of winter madness! Lying prone, feet first on a sled you'll use every muscle in your body to make the most of each straight and curve. Downhill Skling Afree fall in white, you'll achieve speeds of 70mph as you hurtle towards bold! Speed Skating The fastest self propelled sport on earth. A test of strength and rhythm where speeds of 30mph are reached in the quest for gold. EPYX Manufactured and distributed under licence from Epyx Inc, by U.S. Gold Limited 2/3 Holford Way. Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. All screens from the Commodore 64 version of the same Available for Amstrad CPC Cassette & Disk Atari ST Disk CBM64/128 Cassette & Disk MSX 64 Cassette Spectrum 18/128K, + 2 Cassette Spectrum + 3 Disk 1988 Epyx Inc. All rights reserved. Epyx is a Registered trademark No. 1195270 "


"Here's an exclusive preview and map for ace shoot 'em up Netherworld, hitting a shop near you soon on every format you can think of. That means all the Spectrums, Amstrads, C64, Atari ST and Amiga. NE Play Masters CG 07:30 Eh : bois ZZZZZZ CS 65 66 3 m Z 0658 ZZI i GOSS ZDZOZIEDZI Z DZ DZ02 6033886 x38 : Netherworld, covered in Fax last month, is a brand new programmed by Jukka Tapanimaki, a Finn who they insist on calling \"Charlie T\". There are twenty four levels of a mysterious limbo state where a set amount of diamonds have to be collected in order to buy your way out of a level using a teleport. In your way are a horde of monsters from dragons to fireballs created by the monster generators. Dead aliens leave behind glowing icons which you can pick up in your revolving ship. These include extra points, extra speed (these look like arrows, but slow you down if you collect more than three of them), a skull and 335 EE Blok 100 G 1469 to Level 6. You can see your ship's multi-directional firing. A Level 8. Things are getting "


"ETHERWORLD SS 755360302831552 GO183 294 O PZPZP 6.083 SS. 890) 3GB a 45 RZE      z ZZZZZZZZZE E 109631823 EORUBS 2685  Hisi E DS ccccc ZEPPE ZIZZE ZDZEZE ZEZ0292072e222 DADA Z27022ZEBEDEE ZIZZIERE es 3 OG DS4 crossbones shaped thing that destroys everything you touch and surprise bonuses which can give extra lives, invulnerability, or can send you out of control. The game includes movable rocks which you can use to block off the alien bad guys, or can squeeze until it becomes a diamond, teleports and time bonuses. Here we take you through level five, a fairly typical level, and normally about the place in any game where it all starts to get a bit hard, and help becomes pretty damn useful lor EESEENESSES BETYGS 49 etting omplicated. A Level 12. Still only half way there! "


"Against a silver moon ... an awesome shape emerges ... rumbling towards its destiny. Screen shots from Atas TAIL CELU STRATEGY SIMULATION CBM 64/128 Atari ST &9.99 cassette $14.99 disk $19.99 disk Amstrad IBM .99 cassette S 14.99 disk $19.99 disk Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, "


"50,000 tons of awesome power knifes its way through an ink black sea! anal D 602 rom a n ST Version, HE ACTION DESTRUCTION Spectrum .99cassette .99+3 disk Amiga Apple .99 disk &19.99 disk 10 Carver Street, Sheffield Si 4FS. Tel: 0742 753423 "


"lay_asters \"inner Stays On. JOE BLADE MAP 8) One possible order for completing the game is: 6) Never pass a shield a) Collect the rifle generator without saving b) Collect the bazooka the game. c) Collect the shield 7) It is best not to save the component OBLITERATOR game when you collect d) Collect the weapon any of the component's component MAP since if you can't make it e) Collect the blaster back to a shield generator ) Collect the datapack In addition to the map, (because you got g) Collect the shuttle worked out by Brian hammered on the way to component You saw the champ last Webber and drawn by the component) you may Nick Grant, we have for month. Looked pretty h) Collect the drive have ruined your save component hot, didn't you think? Or you these playing hints game and have to start all ) Collect the shuttle from Mark Errington. maybe you didn't. over again. component Thanks guys. Neither did Eugene, and look where that 1) Leave Component 1 got him: trashed good (Drive) until last since once and proper at you have all five Sidewinder. components your score Joe Blade was one of the big hits of '87, and What I'm getting at is starts to drop in 40 per cent re-entered the charts in quite a big way this starts to drop in 40 per cent recent chunks and when it this: it's Winner Stays On reaches zero the ship year with its release on 16 bit. As Joe Blade, Il time. This is where our blows up. Before picking rock star and SAS-type, you have to champ gets to prove up Component 1 make infiltrate the enemy's base and rescue himself against the ve at least 0,000 kidnapped world leaders. On this map, H toughest opposition we points or else you won't can rustle up, and you make it to the shuttle. I had shows the initial positions of the hostages, 5,500 and ended up with a all six of which have to be found, and B maybe, just maybe, final score of nine (Big eh?) shows where the bombs to be primed are. get to whip his chances which was cutting it a little Exit when you've done all that. for an ST away from fine. right under his eyes. In 2) When there are aliens fact, we're beginning above or below, but on the EXIT WHEN ALL 6 BOMBS 6 HOSTAGES HAVE BEEN FOUND to size up the list of same screen, shoot them through the floor. possible challengers 3) If you know there is an START START even as I write this, but alien on the next screen no worries: even if (when you're moving you're too late for part sideways) shoot while your two, still send in your character is stuck on the most impressive high impressive hiah end of the screen i.e. Just before the screen scrolls scores because it across. doesn't stop here. We'll 41 W 4) When your path is be running challenges apparently blocked by a throughout the year. pillar, use the bazooka to What are you waiting destroy it again on the way for? The chance for back. fame and glory and 5) Using defend while running causes the 16-bit-ship starts here. character to roll. This is very Don't delay, post useful to get past tricky today! aliens and hidden guns. Name...... ... Address... Outside Railings Phone... Age....... Game System Score B = Bomb H = Hostage "


"HAMPIONS GSE CHART TOPPIMI OPPING HITS ALL THESECI  The Ultimate Warrior RAMPAGE The game where the nice guys don't get a RENEGADE In the edge world of the vigante there is no place to rest, no time to think butlook Sharp there is will encounter the disciples of evil who's mission is to exterminate the only man on earth who dares to down the quantlet the path the R ace HAYRENEGADE...LAY MEAN romate Coro, 1986 Grab your way through Chicago punch up New York Thret indescribably characters which bears remarkable beness to go Godzilla and Woman, need you to enduring 150 days of destruction through different de TM 1981 Al They called international Karate the greatest beat Commodore User And who we low ARCHER MACLEAN with a stunner Ath fighter An imated ba moves including double hack and spectacle bacio Rembed usic by ROB HURRARD. And ball 1997 Arena Software BARBARIAN THE STORY SOLAR The owner D om w unspeakable doom on the people of weed City unless Princess Marlen is delivered to him However, he has agreed that a champion can be found who is able to defeat Ne demen guardar the Princess will be released from the wastelands of the North comes an unknown barbarian t y wwiec wieldig broad word with deadly Canhe guish the forces of Darkness and free the Prince ONLY YOU CAN SAY Piece Sollte SUPER SPRINT Licensed from Atanae angina monerspanning coin-op one or player compete head to head over aggrueling tradis and four levels of same l ty. Avoid the cards and collect golden spannen to enhance custom cal features the key to perform with dead wimation and sound effects, fuper forint being the best driving excitement ce to be experienced an hort combler TMCA Corporation 1965 A Reserved Ciectnc rem Satware UNA SINGLE GIANT PAS O926 Ocean OUT NO ONLY 1ANT PACK EACH OUT NOW! Ocean Software Lim "


"Play Masters 00 SAVE GAME BLASTER WEAPONS INI ENGINES DATAPACK HA \" Blog leading to A ALIENS In Obliterator you play Drak, a lone human forced to infiltrate a vast alien space craft, collect five vital shuttle components (Data pack, Engines, Shield, etc.) and escape. There are various guns and ammo to collect around the place, the most useful being the blaster which can take out all hostile aliens, though it Is not blessed with a wealth of ammo. The trick is to use the right gun at the right time, collecting the "


"From:  SHUTLE RAZ AMMO BAZOOKA FL SAVE GAME . HEL SHIELD Ep4  bazooka near the beginning for use on the toughie you face at the end. You will need to get a high score to make it back to the shuttle. And remember that if you run out of ammo, then you can roll everywhere which prevents the nasties from getting you. This is a very handy way of avoiding monsters you don't have the firepower to wipe out. "


"PSYCHO PIGS \"I know which one la rather play with.\" Yes, but have you seen the reviews for Psycho Pigs UXB? : "


"PIG, SUXB "


"de a HEELS ers lay Masters SALAM "


"TON KERHET ALORS RUS KE EEEE KIERA WIF Irr ILLUSTRATION: PAUL HEATH. With Elite's Thundercats having caused a stir and earlier versions. You play Thundercat Extra lives and firepower lurk on pillars or on 16-bit just recently, it seemed high time leader Lion-o slashing and hacking his way old trees, pits must be leapt and bad guys for a map of the game, though in fact there through hordes of evil minions to recover smited. All in day's work really. isn't a great deal of difference between this the stolen Eye of Thundera. "


"Dynamite SPECIALISTS IN COMPUTER GAMES AND PERIPHERALS SOFTWARE Dynamite Software, Unit 27, 16 Tresham Road, Orton Southgate, Peterborough PE2 OSG Tel: (0733) 230119 COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM COMPILATIONS 2.99 Gauntlet 3.99 each Samurai Trilogy 3.99 Donkey Kong 2.99 Winter Olympiad 6.00 COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM Gauntlet II 6.50 2.99 Soldier of Light Kung Fu Master 2.99 World Games 3.99 Star Fox 2.99 Winter Games 3.99 Now Games 5 They Sold a Million II Jet Set Willy 1.99 Tetris 3.99 Int-Karate, Hacker II, Street Bruce Lee, Knight Lore, Match Shamus 1.99 Ace 2 5.99 Saboteur 11 Day, Match Point 3.99 Hassle, Rebel, Prohibition, Kat 3.99 Trantor Task III 3.99 Rolling Thunder 3.99 Trap Target Renegade 5.50 Impossible Mission 2.99 Star Games II 48K 128K Indiana Jones 5.50 Kung Fu Master 2.99 Four Great Games Vol 2 Highway Encounter, Cyberun, Chronos 2.99 Snooker-Simulator 2.99 Cricket Crazy 2.99 Jet Set Willy, Lawn tennis, 2.99 Trailblazer, Avenger, Bruce Lee Helidrop 2.99 Ace 2.99 World Cup Raffles Ballblazer, The Eidolon Sword Slayer 2.99 Freedom Fighter 2.99 Shanghai 2.99 Xecutor 2.99 Four Great Games Vol 3 Big 4 Vol 11 Centurions 2.99 Time Flies 2.99 Armageddon Man 2.99 The Incredible Shrinking Man 2.99 Equinox, Darksyde, The Big Saboteur II, Thanatos, Deep Zork III (Disk) 1.99 Spell Seeker 1.99 K.O., Mousetrap Strike, Sigma 7 Zenith 1.99 BMX Simulator 2.99 Lords of Midnight 2.99 FA Cup Football 2.99 Computer Classics Lucas Games Strike Force Harrier 2.99 Outrun 5.99 Ghostbusters 1.99 3.99 Aliens, Cauldron II, Into the The Eidolon, Rescue on Knuckle Busters Wizard's Lair 2.99 Target Renegade 5.50 Eagles Nest, Zynaps, Fractalus, Ball Blazer, Koronis Life Force 2.99 Solomon's Key 2.99 Dynamite Dan Rift Karnov 5.50 AMIGA Final Matrix 5.50 Road Wars 12.95 Fast & Furious Thunder Hit Pak C64/128 Six Pack Utilities Hacker 11 11.00 Ceptor 3.99 Scooby Doo, Fighting Warrior, Spectrum Power Packs 7.00 Levitation 11.00 Combat School 5.50 1942, The Sacred Armour of and 1.50 P+P Fire Blaster 11.00 Bedlam Anitrad, Jet Set Willy II, Split Floppy Disc 51\" .90. Mach 3 12.00 Brave Star 6.50 Sidewinder 8.50 Bomb-Jack II 2.99 Personalities, Duet Amegas 12.00 Phantom Club 2.99 Postage and Packing Free! Please note cheques will have to be cleared before goods are sent. Cash or postal order items 48 hours despatch. Please state your name, address, make and model computer and your order in block capitals to avoid confusion. Please add .00 per game overseas. AD INDEX Atari Activision s 12,13 Mailsoft 40,41 Mastertronic Megasave 42 Microdealer 49 Microprose 107 Beau Jolly Byrite Software 32,33,45 Classified advertising costs .50 ( + VAT) per single column centimetre. For further details call Lora Clark on: 01-251 6222 38 Ocean 6,7,57,71,87 Classified Section Comsoft Charnwood 38 23,38,44,49,94 Domark Dynamite DG Marketing 49 Palace Project Basalisk 24-25 94 Shekhana 111 Silica Shop Softcell 38 Sound 'n Vision IFC,3 Standard Games 69 System 3 Baa \"HAMMMMM E&J Elite Entertainment Int. WHERE IS SUPER THIEF? 16,17 Gremlin 84,85 Telecomsoft 29,51 Holmesoft 107 US Gold OBC,10,28,60,90,91,81 JRH Software 49 Vector KJC Games 75 Worldwide a "


"ext COMPUTER +video onth STARGLIDER IL Star Glider can justifiably claim to be the first 16-bit arcade game, though most people will remember it as the Get Mucky game before Xenon ousted it this Summer. The big news now is that Telecomsoft's star programmer Jez San has just crafted the sequel. We have the review, a profile of the man, a compo, and best news of all there will be 8-bit versions as well. The full story is in C+VG next month. On sale August 16. Still only .10 and now Britain's best selling computer magazine by an even greater margin. "


"Could Cinemaware have a UK rival in This is a preview of the game to be launched in late October, it will come on Atari ST and Amiga formats and because of its It is time to fasten your MINDBLOWING size it seat belt and take a firm will come on three grip of your seat! disks. I feel very priviliged The Kristal does not to have seen and now to fit into any one category be the first to tell you of description, the best I about THE BIGGEST, can offer you is that it is MOST PRESTIGIOUS a computer film. The 16-BIT GAMES nearest comparison is to PROJECT EVER TO BE the software produced UNDERTAKEN IN THE by Cinemaware but WORLD. even this pales into It is called THE insignificance by KRISTAL, and it comes contrast. The Kristal is from Addictive Games, in a class of its own! a subsidiary of Prism Brainchild of Mike Leisure. A true feeling of depth is created in the landscag The Kristal is the biggest, most amazing 16-bit project ever according to C+VG sleuth reporter Tony Takoushi. For those of you who think TT has cried wolf once too often just remember he was also the first to rave about the PC Engine, Dungeonmaster and a host of others. Shiny metal effects in the graphics. "


"dscape al in the graphics league? A Green screen shows the Kristal universe. Sutin and Rodney the game. same question sixty four planet. Those of you Wyatt, Mike Sutin was It is basically the different ways. with 1 Meg machines stage manager on Hair story of a good natured Michael Hough is the can look forward to and Jesus Christ pirate called Dancis art director, with Dave extra sonics as the Superstar back in the Frake from the Kreema Hardy (a famous software is designed to 60's and Rodney Wyatt System who has to go illustrator whose credits make use of machines was also involved in around various galaxies include Asimov books) with the extra RAM. theatre production meeting and extracting and a team of six Mike Sutin describes work. Sutin set up information from some graphic artists. The Kristal as an Fissionship Software to very interesting Alex Mills is the Odyssey, it is an produce the game. characters! The Programming director unfolding story where Like its authors, The ultimate aim is to find heading up a team of you are the main Kristal has a theatrical The Kristal. If this all four coders and a participant and the background. Written sounds pretty vague IT variety of sound people. story can develop back in 1976 as a stage IS MEANT TO BE Half The graphics I have anyway you choose, it is play, a sound track was of the joy of playing is seen far surpass designed to take around recorded (Elaine Page discovering the huge anything that has gone three months to recorded some of the number of characters, before, the backdrops complete. There will be songs and Patrick locations and where the and planet scenery are a choice of playing Moore did some action is! very lifelike and the styles with an easy commentaries) and Before some of you characters are superbly mode which allows you some of the music has switch off thinking this animated in true to zip around the planets been digitised for use in is an adventure, DO NOT! perspective in and out of getting to know people This game has it all, the scenes. There are and places before you arcade, strategy, over 1,500 frames of take on the quest interaction in real time animation and huge proper. and real charisma. That detailed multi-colonred The game will cost is a rareity today, very scrolling scenes. .99 and comes on few games have soul, I The sound is three disks, with a have met most of the magnificent, there are Novella detailing people involved in the sections of sharp, events before your game, they are totally, atmospheric speeches entry to the game and a totally committed to the sensitively digitised scroll which tells the concept and absolute story of the Kristal in perfection in its example of this is the heirogliphics translation to the 16-bit start of the game. Here It really is an epic format. you are shown a void of game with a style and You get information space with Patrick content not yet matched by indulging in question Moore telling you about in breadth of vision and and answer sessions the history of the star development in the with the characters system you are seeing software industry to around you. The As he speaks you are date. This if the first interaction has been filtered down through game to fully use the very carefully designed galaxies and solar facilities of the 16 bit so that you do not get systems (really machines and I cannot stuck in tortrous gorgeous, gorgeous wait to get my hands on circles of asking the graphics) to the starting a copy of my own "


"Competition EMPIRE STRI "


"IKES BALI Domark bought the rights to the three Star Wars arcade machines last year, and the second in the trilogy Empire Strikes Back has just been finished. It's a brilliant vector graphic shoot 'em up which gathered a very strong cult following when it first appeared in the arcades during 1983. The computer versions we've seen have all managed to retain the original flavour and atmosphere of the coin-op original for more details read the Hit review on page 18. To celebrate the release of this epic game, Domark has joined forces with Commodore UK to organise this fabulous competition. On offer to a very lucky reader is a Commodore Amiga 500, currently regarded as the Ferrari Testarossa of home computers, and tipped by experts to become THE games machine of the 1990s. With its fabulous graphic and sound capabilities who's arguing? Also on offer to ten runners-up are copies of the Star Wars role-playing game, in which players can take the role of their favourite characters and travel the galaxy in search of adventure. So, what do you have to do to win these amazing goodies? Well, we've managed to get hold of five stills from the Empire Strikes Back film pictured here. What we want to know is: what order do the scenes depicted appear in the film? When you've decided the order, fill out the coupon below, stick it in an envelope and send it to: COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES EMPIRE COMP, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. To arrive no later than 16th August. I FORM: The order of the pictures is: 1....... 2....... 3.......4 Name.... Address... commodore 11 POSTCODE. DOSTAKK "


"WILD It's no joke trying to keep your candy floss down when your stomach's in your mouth and your knuckles are ice white, but Matt Bielby has been doing his best as he takes in some of the wildest rides around. CAMELOT It might be better to travel, but it's best to travel FAST! THEME PARK And travel scared! There will Charnock Richard, be more world class roller Chorley, Preston PR75LP coasters and other wild rides Tel: 0257 453044 across the country this Open: daily 26 May-end summer than at any time September, beginning of October if weather good. before, as new theme parks Easter, Bank Holidays and open up and old favourites weekends during rest of invest the proverbial year; 10am-5pm loadsamoney to pack in the Admission: .95; family summer punters. ticket (two adults, two A new leisure and pleasure children) .95 Aimed specifically at three to park called Waterworld is fourteen year olds, Camelot is being built for .2 million just twice as big as last year, with a outside Edinburgh, but that's Beast roller coaster and Falcon's chickenfeed compared to the Flight balloon journey added to  million sunk into the attractions. A log flume, water Derbyshire's American slides, a dragon monorail and a whole feast of live entertainment Adventure for the new from jesters to jousting season, or the whopping  tournaments add to the fun. Many million spent this spring on of the big rides have a smaller three new 'coasters and a 3D Riding the rapids at Alton Towers. cinema at Europe's premier park, Alton Towers. ALTON TOWERS Alton ST 10 4BD, North Staffordshire Tel: 0538 702200 Open: Daily 26 March-6 November; 9am-7pm Admission: .99 adult, .99 under 16, senior citizens .99. A American Adventure: Amazingly now the 5th biggest The gates to the West. park in the world, and far and the park. away Europe's number one, Set on a 500 acre estate in North Alton Towers features over 120 Staffordshire, the former home of attractions including four big the Earl of Shrewsbury now holds newies for '88. The famous Black Festival Park, Aqualand, Fantasy Hole has been modified for this world and other themed areas, year, and is joined by the German served by restaurants, shops and built Beast 'coaster (carries 1.600 so on. In addition, there is also the passengers per hour), a smaller \"Around the World in 80 days\" roller coaster called the Alton fantasy ride, live entertainment mouse, and a new 3D cinema. Old from dance to a massive model favourites like the Corkscrew, railway, and car and toy A Victorian mainstreet at Granada Studios. Log Flume and Grand Canyon museums. Rapids continue, along with the C + VG rating: Short of going resident circus, spectacular to Disneyland, the best day out from a relatively tame roller gardens and birthday parades for around. Try and go outside of coaster to a good water ride and school holidays or at least during the standard pirate ships and the week though, because at the magic carpet rides. height of the season it can be a Amongst the best rides we nightmare. found were the pirate ship and magic carpet, both of which are CHESSINGTON super-scary, yet don't seem to WORLD OF generate the same queues as the roller coasters or Dragon River ADVENTURES log flume. You can get four or five goes on them in the same time as Leatherhead Road, you'd be standing in line for the Chessington KT9 2NE others, Tel: 03727 27227 C + VG rating: Nicely laid Open: Daily 26 March-30 out, and just the right size for a October; 10am-5pm day out. Highlight of our trip was Admission: .25, under 14 the feeding of the polar bears, and Senior citizens .25 seen through an underwater glass Once a zoo, Chessington still has wall, though if you object to lions, giraffes and the rest animals in captivity you may not alongside the rides, which range be too impressed. "


"RIDES! Ch's version alongside, so even the really young can join in. C + VG rating: Despite the rather strained Arthurian theme you can buy sweets at \"Guinevere's goodies\" and T shirts at \"Galahad's Garments\": an excellent park with great live entertainment, and great for youngsters. PLEASUREWOOD HILLS AMERICAN THEME PARK Corton Road, Lowestoft NR32 5DZ Open: 30 April-21 May weekends only. 21 May-11 September plus 17, 18, 24, 25 Sept; 10am-4pm Admission: .00, senior citizens .90. Two new rides are the Zierer Waveswinger (see picture) and a new Haunted Magic Castle feature to join roller coaster, pirate ship and Sealion show among others. A new Have a bevvy at the Rover's Return. Alton's Corkscrew: wildest of all? Popular Pirate Ship ride at American Adventure. A Woody welcomes winners to Pleasurewood Hills! Fancy a great day out this summer? C+ VG hasten sets of family tickets to Pleasurewood Hills American Theme park up for grabs. Each set gets you and your folks or a bunch of three mates if you can't stand the family into the park and onto the Waveswinger ride, the Haunted Magic Castle and other great attractions. The tickets can be used any day this season, which ends on September 18th, and should make for a truly memorable day out. All we want you to do is send your ideas for a great new ride at Pleasurewood Hills to the address below let your imagination run riot and we'll pick the best ten entries that arrive before August 7th. Remember, it's your ideas that count, not your drawing skill! daily, 10am-dusk. Admission: .95 The Great Niagra Rapids white water ride, hopefully open by the end of the summer, will be the biggest of its kind in the UK. Other Wild West style rides include the Cherokee Falls Log Flume, the Tennessee Tentacles The Waveswinger at Pleasurewood Hills. Octopus ride, and a couple of western coasters. Lots of staged computerised system should horse stunts and shoot outs too, make parking and ticket buying and a new section of the park easier this year. based on a Canadian Rockies fort. C+VG rating: Few really American Adventure was the massive spectacular rides, but a first UK park to be totally based lot of good fairground-style stuff around a single theme, a practice and a very good atmosphere make followed by sister park Camelot, Pleasurewood Hills a winner. but precious few others. The Balloon race ride is one big newie for '88, and the log flume boasts Europe's highest double drop. AMERICAN There are also 40,000 sq. ft. of indoors area tor rainy days, and ADVENTURE quieter rides for the old folks. Ilkeston, C + VG rating: Some great rides, live entertainment and a Derbyshire DE7 5FX strong Western theme make this Tel: 0773 769931 Open: 29 May-25 September country. one of the best theme parks in the PLEASUREWOOD HILLS COMPETITION Name Age As always, the judges decision is final, and all entries become the property of the theme park. "


"BLACKPOOL PLEASURE BEACH 525 Promenade, Blackpool Tel: 0253 41033 Open: 31 March-6 November daily; 11am-dusk. Admission; Free (Pay per ride) The .5 million Avalanche bobsleigh run is the first of its kind in the UK, and joins the Big Dipper, Log Flume, Tokaydo Express and many other spectacular rides. C + VG rating: Some of the best rides in the country all in a very small area, but could work out expensive if you want to go on them all GRANADA STUDIOS TOUR Opening in July inside the walls of Granada Television in the middle of Manchester is the Granada Studios Tour, the nearest thing to the famous American Universal Studios Tour we've got. Three and a half acres of land have been set aside to provide a behind the scenes glimpse of the world of TV, including reconstructions of the House of Commons, downtown New York, Downing Street, Sherlock Holmes' Edwardian Baker Street, Check Point Charlie, an untamed Jungle and, of course, Coronation Street. There will be a room featuring a giant piano and fireplace you can walk into, as well as a TV trivia interactive video competition, where the year's best score earns Most parks have a cablecar or monorail to see the sights. A Alton Towers pirate ship. THORPE PARK Staines Road, Chertsey KT16 8PN Tel: 0932 562633 Open: March-September (opening hours vary phone for details) Admission: .50, senior citizens .50, disabled .50. The wilder attractions such as the Thunder River rapids ride and the Space Station Zero roller coaster are offset by more gentle things like the Magicmill ride. C + VG rating: Not too many really thrilling rides and a high entrance price mark this as not the best value of parks, but it's by far the most convenient for central London. A Mock House of Commons at Granada. a trip to LA(man!). You will be able to watch highlights from 30 years of shows, and learn how they were made, as well as drink inside the Rover's Return. Planned to open on July 20th, it will be open all year round at .50 adults, .50 for under twelves. Phone (061) 833-0880 for further information. OTHERS: The above are just a tiny selection. There is also Frontierland at Morecambe, Flamingoland in North Yorkshire, Lightwater Valley near Ripon and many others. Nearly all welcome disabled visitors, will be open all Summer and are fun places to be. Go to your local tourist Info place and they'll give you a list of them all, and more details of any in your area. A Merlin, your host at Camelot. 102 "


"QUADRALIZ LOGOTRON LTD GREYHOUND HOUSE 16 GREYHOUND ROAD LONDON W6 8NX QUADRALIEN IS ACTION STRATEGY  TENSION JEST .95. ST/AMIGA .95 (TC) TANDY COMPATIBLE. LOGOTRON "


"3000 This month's been a big one, lots of new games have been launched into the arcades. Forgotten Worlds and Cyber Tanks are the two biggest games around at the moment, but Clare Edgeley also casts her eyes over the best of the rest in our Arcade Round-Up. 3000 1200 _3001 200 FORGOTTEN WORLDS e o Forgotten Worlds is a hybrid of varying sizes of Zeny Coins, many games, with extra weapons which must be picked up to help to collect, money to find and buy you additional weapons. hoord and shops to visit to add to li's at this point that you must your immense store of weaponry have full control of your Nemesis is one game which character, moving him up and springs to mind when you look at down the screen with the joystick, this little gem. You're not in and turning him to fire or the CTE charge of a spaceship, neither nasties creeping in from behind. Don forget to pop in the shop to get the best blast for your money are you scooting through death-laden tunnels, but in other which can be bought at the shop 23500D aspects, the games have their * 194988 repair tubes to repair armour similarities. For instance when an elixir to prolong your life and you are airborne the hoards of an energy recovery box are three attacking aliens are just as indispensible items. Alongside vicious, and you do have to these lie flame throwers, bound increase your weapon strength it shots which make bullets bounce you're to get anywhere in the off walls; a balkan cannon the game. Controls are by eight-way most destructive weapon; wide joystick and a revolving knob angle lasers and so on. Some of which spins your character to face these automatically replace your all directions while also operating original weapons, others hang as the trigger to his guns. around at feet level, adding a So on with the game. Stalking tremendous boost to any new the streets at around ten feet off weapon you've just picked up the ground, laser at the ready, Once you've bought the best the first wave of aliens start the you're pretty well indestructible, attack, shooting onto the screen as your bullets stream out from all from the right at both air and sides covering every angle of ground levels. They're huge attack. This is when the game green slimy creatures blasting The multi-directional movement is vital starts getting really interesting A Fvery good game has to have its to help you deal with game's biggest fireballs at you though they're enormous monster Forgotten obstades. And now that you've got the not too hard to dislodge. Left in Worlds is no exception The pace is ultra fast and your life most powerful weapons Zeny their wake are blue discs of isn't worth a dime if your coins can buy, you're ready (or attention wanders. The sound should be) to face the dragon 235000 103700 adds nicely to the excitement of This lies just past the docks a this very fast, though not highly highly dangerous area as you fly original game. over the stinking waters The The streets soon give way to aliens step up their harrossment larger buildings and finally and you're totally unprepared warehouses as your route takes for the monstrosities which rise you towards the dock. A shop out of the seemingly still waters. soon appears, its sign large, and Great, thick, tube-like growths it shouldn't be missed. You're shoot out with jaws gaping to going to need heavier fire power pluck you out of the air and draw Swoop down to the entrance and you back to their lairs. You'll find yourself confronting a As you get closer to the girl behind the counter. Using a ragon, the growihs leap at you your joystick and selector knob, in synchronised time, one after run through the lists of weapons the other as in some macabre and buy what you think is going at you think is going dance sequence. Getting past to be most suitable. Of course, the them unscathed needs quick really powerful stuff is very reflexes and careful timing expensive and you probably The tail of the dragon won't be able to afford an awful eventually appears, skeletal and lot at this stage. very long. And then the body, Weapons aren't the only things lying on its back, its stomach LENINY "


"building marking its route. This quickly changes, the machine gunner will soon be blasting paras dropping out of the skies, while the tank controller steers round mines and guns down anything dead ahead and to one side of the tank. Massive bunkers now loom ahead so that the tank has to zig zag past them. It's a good idea to slow down at this point or you'll plough straight into one of them. As there's no reverse on the tank, the machine will continue to headbull the bunker until it blows pulsating like something out of the CYBER TANKS v s movie Alien. The only way post this grotesque monster is to shoot it in the stomach. Amove which Running the gauntlet of the enemy Running the gauntlet of the the dragon doesn't take too well, whilst being attacked by a mass Hovering just above this bar of conventional weapons is quivering mess, you send a exhilerating stuff, especially stream of fire downwards, when you're in control of the dodging out of the gouts of flame Cyber Tank it throws at you. Dodging also Cyber Tank, from Coreland, is long steel rods which thrust mounted in a huge upright upwards to impale you and cabinet with double screens side finally dancing out of the way of by side in the manner of Darius its claws as it reaches out to swipe and Ninja Warriors. Mounted on out. All hairy stuff the front of this two-player game Finally the dragon puffs is a two-handed control for the upwards and is gone. You're now tank and its gunner, next to it are onto a futuristic space level the massive controls for the inhabited by lots more machine gun for the second graphically revolting creatures player. This is one game which The artists must have had a whole spews out non-stop action of a time designing Forgotten Both players have two entirely different jobs as the tank charges through the enemy to the safety of its own forces. One player controls the lank as it churns through the landscape down'a clearly marked route. The other takes on the machine gun to clear the immediate area ahead of attacking choppers, paras, missiles and the like. The action transmits itself physically to the players 100, There's an awful fong way to the end of your mission SEPTE 204 KM The dangerous road to the next lencampment awaits you sco 254 1248388 REMRIN  A Time to get back to some blasting Worlds. Shops must be visited, killer leaches blown off steel pipes, ground cannons to be blasted, cactii with jaws filled with sharp serrated teeth pull you into their gaping maws and lots more in the same vein. Al the end is a huge monster, around three screens high which must be blasted in the eyes Unfortunately, to get anywhere CREDITS near its face you're going to be in the tank rolls into the screen as which adds a certain realism to arrive in quick succession. To reach of its fists huge ham-like in Pole Position, with the attacks the game. If your hands are on bunches of fives mode of steel make matters worse, the road coming from dead ahead and the controls when the tank goes becomes clogged with collapsed An Egyptian scenario comes from both sides. The machine up in a jarring explosion, the buildings and is pitted with mines next with pharaohs running gunner must have his wits about joystick shakes and judders with red lights glinting in the cround firing at you, skulls float him and take careful aim through sending vibrations running falling light. As soon as you see towards you in a death array and his sights to hit all the moving through the player's arms. The the lights of the mines, blast them creatures with the faces of dogs targets. same goes for the machine gunner before the tank rolls over them. whirl towards you protected by a The aim of the game is to run as the weapon shudders rapidly Miss one and you're a gonner. spinning circle of blue flame through each section of hostile with each outpouring of bullets. Cyber Tank is an unusual game Forgotten Worlds isn't quite territory to reach the safety of a When the action really hots up with shades of Operation Wolf finished and the game I played is controlled zone. Bullet stocks are you feel as if you're on the end of A tremendous shoot 'em up which very much an unfinished version. replenished before the next runa jack-hammer. requires more skill than just However, if this is anything to go starts. The game is fairly slow to Homing missiles soon scream in raking the ground ahead with by the completed game is a must start with, just an empty road from the sides of the screen and bullets. It should be going into the for anyone who likes a fast unwinding into the distance with are very difficult to dodge, arcades around now, and is well shoot-'em-up. only the odd lamp post and especially when two or three worth having a blast. "


"ARCADE ACTION ROUND-UP!  Cardaus Ne YOSHERVOANDD Basically it's a case of blasting brochure says. Whoopee. The ARCADE everything that moves or swivels graphics are large and very KONAMI At certain stages in the game, you clumsily drawn. So's the game. leave your aircraft to take control The Main Event is a wrestling In June we were invited to of a car and this is when the jump game between several pairs of preview all the new games for the button comes in handy to leap muscular thugs. Wrestle your surner, and though there were a assorted barricades and objects, opponent to the ground and hold number of new releases around, Lost Duol didn't impress me him there in a half nelson or there were very few surprises enormously on first sight, though whatever for the count to win Here's a brief run down of it apparently gets more exciting each match. The graphics are well some of the latest coin-ops to be in later levels. drawn and the speech synthesis hitting your local arcades in the Kickle Cubele: What an awful excellent, though to be honest next few weeks. name for what looks like an awful wrestling isn't my game. I find it P47 is a fost horizontal shoot game. This is a cutie little game, as boring to play as I do watching 'em up with you and your partner very much in the Japanese-style. it on the box controlling two bombers. Your Weird with cutsie graphics and Hot Rod from Sega is a racing mission is to knock out ground not an awful lor else from what game played from an aerial cannons and missiles while at the could gather. viewpoint. The game itself has same time trying to blast enemy Vindicators is a one or two pitstops, practice laps to earn choppers and fighters out of the player game which you'll either yourself a decent grip position skies. Needs quick reflexes, the toke to immediately or hate and the normal bumping race araphics are clear and is well quite liked it. It's a vertical shoot against a number of other racers worth playing. 'em up played in short sections, Fair play doesn't run true on this Sky Soldiers is very much in the where you have to control a small circuit and if you can nudge them Flying Shark veina vertical vehicle, bomb all the baddies, off the track and into the barrier scrolling blast 'em to bits while The rather bland Altered Beast. whizzing over enemy territory. 115600 231600 The usual bombs, planes and missiles are hurled at you, and the only way to keep alive is to collec all the pick-ups and so increase your weapon power. Welcome to The Main Event. In Last Duel another horizontal scrolling shoot em up him off his stroke. The current the game starts off pretty keeps dragging you into shallow slowly with you controlling some waters to jam you against a bank sort of aircraft while running the and you have to paddle furiously gauntlet through enemy lines. to turn yourself round and back into the main stream. Two buttons Last Duel rather bland vertically scrolling action. must be punched rapidly and these control your left and right hands. Punch only one button and you'll turn in a circle. A weird game but fun for a little light relief. The games playing public may be bored to death with racing games but the arcade manufacturers obviously aren't pick up keys and other objects so much the better. What is as the launch of Chequered Flag and make it to the exit before the interesting is that the game comes proves. time limit expires and the whole in an upright cabinet and also a The game does have some kaboosh goes up in flames. Extra multi-player version with the original points in its favour but it's weapons can be bought en route, screen set into a huge table top nothing that will make you dash and once you've got the hang of cabinet so that four players can out to the arcades in a rush to the rather clumsy controls, it's stand round it. spend your pennies. quite good fun. Toobin'is the whackiest game The game reminds of a Clumsy is the name when you I've seen in months. Apparently combination of APB and Super first set eyes on Altered Beasts. the theme of paddling round\" Sprint. The game is very much It's not terribly original either. swimming pools and down rivers like most racing games with an Rescue the girl who is held while sitting in a tyre is now a aerial perspective but it does hostage in each of the five levels popular sport in the States. I'm have comic elements. Like and beat the monster at the end of not sure that I believe that one, bashing into almost everything on each scenario. I've heard that though I have it on good the course without blowing up. story line several million times authority that it's true, hence this Having said that your car does before and the game itself is just mad simulation. The game is a sustain damage during the race as jaded. Collect spirit balls as race down a river with gates to and you will have enter the pit you storm though each screen paddle through for extra points, to repair the car. and accumulate enough to turn spiked logs to avoid which'll So Chequered Flag is nothing yourself into a 'superior being'. puncture your tyre, crocs to remarkably new if you want a You now have 'devastating dodge and beer cans to pick up real driving experience try power and mobility' so the and Hing at your opponent to put Continental Circus or Out Run. "


"SOUND 'N' VISION HOLMESOFT E (Dept. CV) Alderwood Centro Sedgley, Dudley W.Midlands DY3 3QY Tel: 0902-3136001 880971) Phone! Write EN Mail Order Division of Established Retailer 16-Bit Title ST Amina IBM Spec Cass Spec C64 Disk Cass C64 AMST AMST Disk Cass Disk Alen Syndrome COMMODORE HARDWARE Amiga A500, Workbench 1.2 Very First Steps Tutorial Amiga A500 Business Pack Amiga A500 + 1084 Colour Monitor Amiga A500 + 1081 Colour Monitor Amiga A500 + Mono Monitor Amiga 2000 Amiga 2000 Internal Drive Amiga A500 Internal Upgrade Cumana 1 meg Drive Commodore CBM64C pack 1084 Colour Monitor 1081 Colour Monitor (stereo) Gemlock Digi View 19 Campi o .95 .95 .00 .95 .95 Phone for price .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 Barbara Psyg Action Force Airbame Ranger All Stars (The Edge At Olympic Beyond 20k Bon Commandes Arcade Alley Archon Collection Bad Car Bangkok Knights 88888888.803..... 90 Bugay Boy 888888888888888888888888888 6 99 00 Chessmaster 2000 Combat School 10.99 1150 888888888888888888888888 Bionic Commandos Hack Lamp Dreadnought .888.888.8888888888888888888888 88888 Empire Sv. Back 888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888 8 Cha v F. Football Manager 2 .95 BLANK DISCS 20 50 .00 .95 Trade enquiries welcome 100 .00 Owley Thompson 8888888 imposs, Mission 2 RING FOR DETAILS OF OUR WIDE SOFTWARE SECTION 8.8.8888888 88888888888888888888888888888888888888888888 88::88:888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888ASP.NOSSAS Cheques & p/os to:SOUND N VISION MAIL ORDER Mail Order Dept. 11A Silk Street, Leigh Lancs WN7 1AW. 0942 261344. 11 Silk Street, Leigh Lancs WN7 1AW. 0942 673689 Game Send Maich Garfield's Deal ...........888888888 Great Gan Sisters Police Ques 888888888888888888888888888 8888888888888888 888 nuoma GBUS 88.880088888 649 NO 99 Aberford (Acade Ading Thunder 31. Adv. Creator Maaasa Space Quest 2 for! SPEC. JAMS DISCCOMM DISC TITLE State Crazy SPEC+3 AMS DISCCOMM DISC Alien Syndrome Arcade Force Four Matchday 2 Minatge .:133333333333:22:38 Stalingrad i lasketball Sir Fhe S Nebus 3............888. &..... Bone Commandes Time and Magic TO Operacion Wor P Beardsleyball U Minim ..asa ANDARAN PHIM enamun Tree Stooges Time Stood Sot Pasta & 688 58.3858 p artner Pion Predator Crazy Cars Where Time Stood Sie Venom Sirkes Back 10 Great Games Carrier Command Desolat Rm Runne Ruing Wars 8.45 01 8.45 E PAC V203 Arcade Force Four Arkanoids 9.95 65 9.96 AMIGA AT. ST Daley Thompson Fool Manager 88 saagi. to Football Beardsleys   Bermuda Pro SEGA Shoot'em up Consi Side Arms Stare Crazy Stare Or Die 988 488 Son  gotowe RSS Ey,,,, Haba888888888858 8a!'aala88:8858688 88888'' 9989889*88888888888888888888999289889993 donde Cam Command Jisticks,Add-ons Etc. Games 94 95 D#5 Disks 12.50 Ox30 sks 315 Dabas 33.95 OC 20 C 21 Oelta Joystick SOTHO   Ferran Formula One Flintstones Street Fighter Cheetah Mach 18.98 Euromax 23.95 Ema Prodi AP 888888888 Ten Gn Games-2 The Games Wine Ed 1799 bend 1885 Gunsholt. AF 88888888888888SRR. Top Ten Collection ubre Coll Works Vindicato GB21 588888888 4888 8888888888888888 Pr Pan 999 Oulun TAS EM M ick 19.45 6.99 1099 Super WonderBoy 23.96 Mutface 128 1895 Mutiace 2 Ams] 350 22 Street Fighter Sar Crary Three Stooges Thundercats War on Wheel 1195 1195 1095 +Dae D1 875 029 03C105 D 1395 Mail Order only wage included Great Britain, EEC d p per tem, overseas ad Spar com os service send e 50 per tem, tas service and Please send to an Please send for wel Butherland St. Vei of new releases on Amstrad ot, cv 14 16, SK Alan ST. Amiga Commodore Spectrum and +30m, ale which is Please note new programs will be sent the day they are released Future League mig Cheque/PO/Cash/ Draft payable to Holmesoft UK p&p incl (rec. Delivery: 50p) Europe add 50p per item elsewhere  (airmail) UNLISTED PRODUCT Phone/Write for latest prices! (Huge Stocks) Stock Items Usually By Return Future Releases On Rel/ Day SAE for Software/Hardware List 107 "


"Chan and Mean han lachines Chan and Chan runs on the PC Engine and is more than a little like Super Mario Bros from Nintendo in style and play. It has the dubious honour of being the naughtiest arcade game I have ever played with bottoms being shown and a little man peeing against lamposts (more of this later)!! Tony Takoushi has never seen anything like, neither The basic aim is to travel dozens of screens to find some will you Chan and Chan is the weirdest and hidden treasure with your whackiest game and the naughtiest game partner. Each part of the game is you are likely to see on a games console. split into sections with four parts Tony also taken a look at new shoot 'em to a section (sounds familiare). On pressing start you are given up. Aleste, and a shooting game the choice of either Chan as your boss, called Rescue Mission as well as character (the Chan not chosen this brute appears in later stages of the delivering his usual leaps into game) and you are then faced collection of tips and high the air and with a living room scene (VERY throws boulders scores. detailed and colourful) with a at you. To kill him you have to get close and 33950X D PAUBE COIN bright red kick him in the teeth, his eyes roll and he is crouched down near the and legs waggle and he drops to floor!) you can kick him while he is his death. doing this and he flies into the air This is a really playable game, doing a moony!! great tunes, superb graphics, and You are not without a secret many many stages to work weapon. You can press the through. It really has that joypad down and tap the addictive urge to it and to firebutton to fart at your enemies. progress you have to get very Honestly, a big brown cloud skilful as there are mean combos to overcome. escapes from your bottom and kills the enemy (I know a few people who can do that). Weird IGRAPHICS but fun. SOUND At the end of each sub-section you get bonus points for energy  VALUE left with an extra life at 70,000 PLAYABILITY 8 points. At the end of every four OVERALL KAS sections you have to fight the big 331200 x 2 PAUSE COINS phone ringing. The Chans walk drop lumps of turd, big fat ugly in, answer the phone, there are flies, dangling spiders, collapsing speech bubbles in JAPANESE!!) ledges, bugs, flying fish, and then the game starts. boulders, dogs, beavers and the You move against a left to right very lethal fire places which are scrolling backdrop and can instant death to the touch. There is collect gold coins by kicking also a beautiful purple dragon objects along the way (amposts, which, when killed, flies into the air railings, water hydrants, and There are many hidden extras mystery points not marked as in a like jumping on top of a water hydrant and pressing the fire used on later stages where you button when you are carried into gamble on a slot machine to gain the top third of the screen and energy, lives and more coins. hidden doors in mid-air. You start with three lives and a Your partner Chan can life is lost when your energy hits be found along the zero. way peeing down Energy goes down slowly but lamposts, going you lose large amounts if you to the toilet collide with the resident nasties. in bushes The hazards include birds which (his face is in be hydrant and "


"lleste escue of mindle cover the stupid number have very few games na Phaser Special Force soldiers appear. These highly dangerous commandoes are very fast moving and are capable of Owners of Sega s Lignt Phaser destoying the cart with a single I have been wringing my hands have very few games to use with on board. This is where you come blast in despair over the stupid number their peripheral. With only in. Using the light phaser, you Adding even more hassle are of mindless scrolling shoot 'em have to blast all enemy troops Gangster Town and Shooting before they have the chance to grenades thrown by soldiers, ups across most formats and boomerangs, bazooka bombs, when I discovered Aleste on the Gallery supplementing the free accomplish their evil deed. The Marksman Shooting/Trap balloon bombs which float in from Sega was a scroller, I almost gun fires as quickly as you can Shooting cartridge given away the side of the screen and guided threw it out of the window! pull the trigger, and the onus is on missiles possibly the hardest to with the gun. fast, accurate shooting. hit of them all. But Aleste is like a breath of However, things have taken a When the cart reaches the end When a soldier is resued, he fresh air. It alvas scrolling shoot turn for the better with the release of the track a bonus is awarded leaves behind a special package 'ems a whole new meaning. OK, of Rescue Mission, a fun-packed for the number of medics left and which is automatically picked up so it scrolls, and there are aliens arcade game that requires very the amount of soldiers. when shot; either a protector, first to shoot but the attack patterns fost reactions and accurate There are five different aid kit or smart bomb. Protectors are different, the backgrounds shooting. landscapes: jungle, swamp, make the medic immune from a are very detailed and tastefully The scenario is easy enough to village, bridge and ammo depot, Special Force attack, a first aid kit coloured. There are six sectors to understand: allied troops have which offer the player an removes one point of damage cross, and you can start over at been badly injured and are increasingly difficult challenge and a smart bomb destrove the beginning of the sector you currently trapped behind enemy On the first landscape only everything on-screen. died on (hooray). lines. They must be rescued, and infantry attack, but on the second When the cart reaches the end you've been assigned the task ... level they're joined by deadly air of level five, a mega-bonus is You start with three lives and The only mode of transport earn extra ones at 20,000 and troopers jet-packed soldiers available to the casualty area is award for the amount of medics then every 100,000 points. You who fly around the screen at by a handcart, which trundles its remaining up to a huge can arm your ship by shooting a great speed. Occasionally, way along an old disused 450,000 points if all three lives number from one to eight which are still intact. railroad. On board are three appears in the scrolling medical experts who can dress backdrop, it will then float slowly the soldier's wounds to enable up the screen and you have to them to make their way back to dash up and touch it. the safety of headquarters. Your normal weapons are The cart trundles along the bullets and a little fat lazer which track, which wends its very can fire in all eight directions. convoluted way across the Number one makes the laser fat, multi-directional scrolling rrrr two is a big vertical missile, three landscape. At regular intervals rrrrrrrrrr is a long vertical laser, four is an along the track are the wounded orb circling you providing troops, who wave white flags. protection, five has three orbs When the cart reaches them, it circling you and they can be fired stops while medical treatment is six is wide bullets, seven is double given, and then continues on its bullets and wide circular front way while the soldier runs off the shield and eight is a long screen to safety sweeping laser which winds up While this is happening, enemy the screen rolling from left to rights + soldiers run on screen and (now that's what I call a weapon). attempt to kill the medics on board by blasting them with their The backdrops are active on machine guns. One shot slows the the higher levels and you may find shooting up the screen crawl while a third is fatal to all dislodges sections of backdrop which can fall down on you, the I must say that I enjoyed tunes are good and there is very playing Rescue Mission very little flicker despite there being so much it's a fast and furious many aliens on screen. game which requires a very high level of sustained concentration to blast the myriad of enemy troops. I felt exhausted after one session! The appeal might wear arer off after a while the game does get a bit repetitive but it's by far the best Light Phaser game around.. ------1 GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE | PLAYABILITY  OVERALL ---------ALESTE PAL nk * E "


"Mean ews lachines Tengen Gauntlet/ Pacman/ Tiato Operation Wolf/ Bubble Bobblel Konami Jackall Track and Field 2/LJM Nightmare on I have got me mits on the US/ Elm Street/ Friday 13th/ Japan release schedules for DataeastRobocop/ Rampage Nintendo and Sega carts for the Sega Poissedon Wars (3D)/ next few months and boy are they Shanghail Alf/ Kansi Dan/ hotstuff! Guillivous/Thunderbladel Nintendo Milton Bradley Double Dragon/ R-Typel are doing California Games California Games World Games/ Marbles There will will also be a new Madness/ Mindscape 720 lightgun in the shape of a machine degrees/ Paper Boy! gun with a much faster firing rate. Roadrunner/ Indiana Jones and I have also seen the latest Sega the Temple of Doom/ Acclaimcarts due for release later in the Rambo 3/ Empire City/ Airwolf year, Shenobi, Penguin Land and Capcom Street Fighter/ 1943 Aztec Adventure they are VERY Bionic Commandoes/Black Tigerl tasty... IDS round three and we bottle on the When you dle at the forni handside 5 times and the scroll Fantasy Zone 2 is proving will appear. popular (and so it should !), here Scroll 3 located in screen 6. Scroll are some tips from Steve Mellor in is Samurai house. It is located in cores Nottingham. the corner next to the tree by the 1. There is a red bottle on wall, round two it is on the warp with Scroll 4 Located in screen 8. WRECKING CREW 98,100 J. ASHWORTH the big spikes on the floor, keep Go through the entry way to the MACH RIDER 54,100 J. ASHWORTH shooting the bottom of the spike openfield. Shoot at the last bush ICE CLIMBER 69.910 CHRIS NOON which is below the warphole at towards the back wall and the DUCK HUNT 728,100 THE BREAKER the top of the screen. scroll will appear. PINBALL 333,100 MR GARMANT 2. There is a hidden shop on Scroll 5 Located in screen 9. KUNG FU 685,000 TONY WRIGHT round three and it is on the floor. Crawl up the wall (disappearing WILD GUNMAN 1,216,000 3. There is a blue bottle on the helps) stay on the right side. DONKEY KONG JR 231,500 DONKEY KONG 3 floor on the first warp of round six When you reach the falling roc 384,200 LEE DAVIDSON NEMESIS 4. There is a hidden shop on shoot the hole at the far right 767,900 HENRY FONG round six on the warp with the side. When you reach the falling GHOST AND GOBLINS 101,600 FRANCOIS COUTURE 1942 small clouds on, and the shop is in rocks shoot shoot the hole at the 218,350 far right side 46 times this will the middle of the screen. HOGANS ALLEY (C) 243,900 Alex Kidd Here are a couple of stop the rocks. Go up past the CLU CLU LAND 52,250 VICTORIA GARMANT GUMSHOE juicy tips from Keith Linch in rockholes and start fighting the 231,000 ALEX BELL Ireland. When you kill Jenken the main boss. At 87,130 SHERIF SALAMA hen you kill Jenken the main boss. After a few seconds of POPEYE fighting go to the far richt side of BALOON FIGHT Great go up the ladder to the fighting go to the far right side of 524,000 JAMES GARMANT room above but do not get off the the screen on the same walkway AFTERBURNER 8,940,670 GARETH EDWARDS ladder. Jenken will be alive again as the boss was on and the scroll SPACE HARRIER 42,509,860 ANDY BARKWORTH and you can keep doing this will appear. OUTRUN 52,204,240 DAVID HILLHOUSE getting 10,000 points each time. After scroll 5, screen 9 will CHOPLIFTER 2,240,000 JAMIE DILASSER appear with a message from HANG ON 4,101,780 KEITH LYNCH inside the secret scroll. Obay the BLACK BELT 2,568,200 GARY WADDINGTON message for the 10th screen. SECRET COMMAND 1,875,200 MARK WARRIOR On the tenth screen go to the TRANSBOT 1,340,760 D. GIBSON third lamp that is closest to the QUARTET 642,450 MARK FRAZER castle. Get as close as possible, PRO-WRESTLING 901,300 KEITH LYNCH push the control pad to the left ASTRO WARRIOR 803,500 MARK WARRIOR and push button 1 three times so FANTASY ZONE 9,702,000 MARK LAZENBY you are shooting 3 times to the FANTASY ZONE2 4.734.300 ANDREW BARCLA On the water sheet with the left. Reposition your man so he NINJA 1,116,250 BRETT COLMAN 'octopuses, when you kill the first faces in another direction and WONDERBOY 1,099,970 PHIL MARLEY one, sit on his bowl and pull the disappear three times. A stair ALEX KIDD 2,115,800 KEITH LYNCH joystick down, keep repeating SAFARI HUNT 1,510,800 NIGEL OGLEY this and you will go down his TRAPSHOOTING 254,200 CHRIS SHAW bowl into a bonus sheet where MISSILE DEFENSE 3D 246,000 CHRIS SHAW you can obtain lots of money and MY HERO 10,420,240 BEN EVERETT a free man. ACTION FIGHTER 243,490 JOHN COWLIN Ninja fans can sleep easy with SHOOTING GALLERY 44,300 NICHOLAS BROWN these little jems from Android X. PIT POT 168,500 SIMON FIELDS Scroll 1 located on screen 1, kill GHOST HOUSE 575,010 ALAN CLARE transforming Ninja and scroll will KUNG FU KID 1,273,200 PAUL BRADLEY appear. way will then open up and the BANK PANIC 526,650 TAN GREEN Scroll 2. Located in screen 4. screen will change. Below is a TEDDY BOY 412,700 PAUL BRADLEY Shoot at the dog maze, to get through the statue on maze go to left, Come on I want to see highscores for the following ZAXXON 3D/ far left right, left and ALIEN SYNDROME/RESCUE MISSION.The same goes for all you keep running. Nintendo owners, what about MARIOS BROS? 110 "


"EXPANDING THE WORLD OF PLAY ELECTROCOIN PRESENTS THE VIDEO SYSTEM WITH SO MANY FIRSTS IT'S SECOND TO NONE. The link between you and all the firsts. oooo The Control Deck brings you graphics that almost jump off the screen. Nintendo The Zapper, the one and only light sensing video gun. R.O.B, your first off screen partner. No one has come out with more innovations at one time in one place, than the Nintendo Entertainment System.\" First of all, there's R.O.B., your Robotic Operating Buddy.R.O.B. becomes your off the screen partner, putting the action between you, him and the screen. And first of all, Nintendo introduces the Zapper. It's the one and only light sensing video gun that's going to trigger a whole new kind of fun. And first but not last, Nintendo offers superior graphics on all 17 game paks. Fifty-two colour/dot capability allows for brilliant tone refinements, realstic 3D images, convincing depth of field and actual shadows. Discover the Nintendo Entertainment System. With all these firsts, you'll love it in a second. PLEASE SEND ME GAME PAK DETAILS AND: DESCRIPTION QUANTITY PRICE ORDERS & ENQUIRIES TO: DE GALE MARKETING LIMITED 81 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD, LONDON W1A 1EY TEL: 01-637 5735 PRICE LIST CONTROL DECK. ... .00 ACCESSORIES ROBOT..... ..95 ZAPPER GUN... ......... .95 GAME PAKS FROM ..95 DELUX SET ONLY... TOTAL (Features Robot, Zapper, Deck + Free Software) (All prices include p&p) Signature..... Mr/Mrs/Miss..... Address........ .......... (DG2) (DG2) TOTAL TOTAL I enclose cheque/PO for ........ made payable to: De Gale Marketing Nintendo ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM ..........................Post Code "


"ailbage If you've got something to say about the world of computer games, don't keep it to yourself. Write to Mailbag, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. I have just received the the decision I have come the stock in trade of EDITOR'S REPLY: I'm afraid June issue of C&VG, and to, but feel it is necessary everything from Milton to you've not seen the last of tomorrow will be with the trend you are the better fairy tales. We old Tone. There are a hole cancelling my order with taking, with film reviews find it hard to know what bundle of exciting things the newsagent. The tending to be of the horror games you've been happening on the Mean magazine has been or blood & guts type of film playing all this time that Machines front not getting worse for some time and extolling their virtues, don't feature some least the PC Engine and it has now hit an 18 certificate films in a quasi-biblical references which he will continue to all-time low. The cartoon magazine directed at o r zapping something or cover for us in his strip, Shuk+ Doode, which I those under that age; the other! inimitable style, as well as have been becoming cartoon strip for the reason writing special items on concerned about since it I have stated above; and After reading C+VG in the best 16-bit games, like was first included has articles extolling violence March '88, I was most this month's \"The openly included and gore such as your angry when I read Richard Krystal\". blasphemy for the first time, Gore Zone article in the Hewison's review of Mini not to mention the June issue about the film Putt. implications up until now special effects. He said: \"How many . I wish to heartily of demoniacal I must once again say people do you know who congratulate Tony T. on his associations. This is not that I feel it is not commonly head for the wonderful \"Mean feel, an appropriate style appropriate for a golf course on Saturday Machines\" section. I have otevactly the just finished your June issue for a magazine aimed at magazine targeted at the morning. It's not exactly the the younger and more kind of activity you anu was delighted to read impressionable age include such tasteless associate with your about three new games for group. Your articles have articles; and I will be taking average computer games the Sega. Brilliant! I am now been getting worse and my complaints to the player.\" I consider myself saving up for a pair of 3-D seem to cater for the worst relevant bodies, which is \"an average computer glasses for the acclaimed in today's society, rather the only thing stopping the games player\" and every Space Harrier 3-D. than, as would be Unfortunately there is a current issue ending up in Saturday morning. expected in your position the dustbin. Wednesday and Tuesday problem, the whole thing is of one of the top selling Mark Harvey, afternoon I play a round of just not big enough. One magazines to the younger month it's full of Sega Cornwall. golf. generation, trying to show After reading this review games, the next it's full of wholesome articles to try EDITOR'S REPLY: Well, am seriously considering Nintendo games. You and improve the society Mark, as a long-time not ordering your could have two pages for we live in. reader you must be aware magazine anymore. the Sega, and two pages Thave for some time but that a degree of \"blood Barry Wheeler for the ... erm, other one, up with the fact that you and guts\" has always and please don't shove in reviewed very little BBC been a part of the EDITOR'S REPLY: Get needless ranting about the software for the adventure computer games scene, annoyed pretty easily, PC Engine, the section is section which I have found just as they have been of don't you? small enough already very good (however, even most entertainment without a third party that has been going almed at young men. O.K. So what have you joining in. downhill; and to keep up Convincing arguments done with him? How did to date with the games exist both for and against you finally manage to shut David Wyatt world. However, your this sort of fantasy Mr T's gob? I'm pretty sure Yeovil, Somerset. presentation is atrocious, it violence the sort you couldn't have found a is confusing and unclear; featured in our technical piece of material big EDITOR'S REPLY: Sorry, in my opinion, you would Gore Zone Item but we enough to gag him, or did David, but if we gave do well to look at the BBC certainly don't see C+VG you amputate his writing extra pages to each magazines on the market as in any way arm? Whatever happened, section every time a PBM, which have excellent, \"condoning\" real life I'm glad to see (and or an Adventure or a clear presentation. violence. hopefully hear) the last of Mean Machines fan wrote I have been a reader of Similarly \"blasphemy\" him in your pages. In, the mag would be 300 the magazine since issue 3 and \"demonic pages long, cost $2.50 and regret having to make associations\" have been Andrew Hoyle and nobody would buy it. de seg "


"NEW LOW PRICE ST! ST PRICE INCREASE Due to a worldwide shortage of memory chips, prices of many computers have gone up. From April 1988, the Atari ST range is also likely to be affected. For details of any price increase, please return the coupon below for our latest literature. ATARI SZOS AATARIS TUVIVY ONLY FROM SILICA LICA 260 Finally, there's a personal computer that not only solve problem the other computer, but also the one problem that other computers have created. Amor ty Sea Shop are pleased to present the +VAT=2299 SO MUCH FOR SO LITTLE MIDI interfertur 512K RAM by Atari's There is nothing that can compare with the incredible value for money offered by Atari's 520ST-FM. For only  (+VAT ), you can purchase a powerful 512K RAM computer, with a 95 key keyboard (including numeric keypad), MIDI interface, GEM, a palette of 512 colours, mouse controller, and a 512K built-in disk drive. The 520ST-FM has a TV modulator built-in, and comes with a lead to allow you to plug it straight into any domestic colour television set. The mains transformer is also built-in to the keyboard, so there are no messy external boxes. You couldn't wish for a more compact, powerful and stylish unit. Atari ST computers are now firmly established in the UK, there are nearly 500 software titles already available for a wide variety of applications and the list is growing all the time. And that's not all. When you buy your new 520ST-FM (or any Atari ST computer) from Silica Shop, you will get a lot more, including a FREE Silica ST Starter Kit worth over . Read the ONLY FROM SILICA section on the left to see why you should buy your new high power, low price 520ST FM from Silica Shop, the UK's No1 Atari Specialists. For further details of the range of Atari EM from Silica Shon the UK's Not Atari Specialists For furth ST computers and the FREE Silica ST Starter Kit complete and return the reply coupon below. ATARI 520ST-FM NOW ONLY  (+VAT=) 520ST-FM with 512K RAM & mono monitor  (inc VAT) Upgrade from 512K RAM to 1024K RAM  (Inc VAT onica ST Starter Kit, compFor further details of the price 520STATARI 1040ST-F NEW PRICE that perform take with fewer parts. Which means contesto m e. And less to buy. The ST Computer now include but in power supplies and in disk drives. The TOS operating system and GEM Window environment are now on ROM chipe which are ready installed in the ST keyboard. This enables automatie Instant booting when you switch on Silica Shop are pleased to offer the complete Atari ST range. Our mail order department is situated in Sideup and we have retail outlet Sidcup. Lion House Totenham Court Rd) and Sestridges (Oxford Street). We have eight years experience of Atan products, longer than any other UK company and are well established as the UK's No. 1 Atari specialist with a group furnover of over million and in GR of 80 statt, we offer you unbeatable service and support. We provide several facilities which you will find invaluable during your Atari computing life and most of these facilities are available ONLY FROM SILICA. We suggest that you read through what we have to offer, before you decide where to purchase your Atari ST. FREE STARTER KIT Only From Silica When you purchase any Atari ST keyboard, you will not only receive the best value for money computer on the market, but you will also receive the following from Alan Corporation as part of the package: BASIC Language Du BASIC Manuar *ST Owners Manual TOS/GEM O ROM If you buy your ST from Silica Shop, you will also receive NEOchrome Sampler low price program \"tar Word Word Processor In addition, we at Silica would like to see you get on to a Dying start with your new computer, so we have put together special ST STARTER KIT worth over 100, which we are giving away FREE OF CHARGE with every ST computer purchased at our normal retail prices. The t a ble ONLY FROM SILICA and is med at providing with a ble introduction to the word of computing We are continue upgrading the ST Starter K i ch contain public domain and other licensed softwar e a book magines and relevant to ST computing Return the coupon below for DEDICATED SERVICING Only From Silica At Sea Shop, we have a dedicated service department of wave M ime Atar trained technical wat This team is totally dedicated to servicing Atan computer products. Their accumulated knowledge, skill and experience makes them second to none in the field. You can be sure that any work carried out by them is of the highest standard. A standard of servicing which we believe you will find ONLY FROM SILICA. In addition to providing full servicing facilities for Atari ST Computers (both in and out of warrantyl. our team is also able to offer memory and modulator upgrade to ST computers 1 Mb RAM UPGRADE: Our upgrade on the standard Atari S2OST-M or 5205T-FM keyboard will Increase the memory from $12K 10 massive 1024K. It has a full 1 year warranty and is available from Silica at an additional retail price of only 6.00 (VAT 6100). TY MODULATOR UPGRADE: Silica can upgrade the 1040ST-F to include a TV modulator so that you can then use it with your TV set. This is an internal upgrade and does not involve any untidy external boxes. A cable to connect your ST to any domestic TV is included in the price of the upgrade which is only 19 (ine VAT). The upgrades se aviable for early 520ST computers at the same price THE FULL STOCK RANGE Only From Silica We aim to keep stocks of all Atan related products and our warehouse carries a stock of over million We import many software tites direct from the USA and you will find that we have new release in advance of many of our competitors. Unlike dealers who may only stock selected sites, we have the range. In addition, we carry a complete line of all books which have been written about the Atan ST. A range as wideas on something you will find i be ONLY FRONTSILICA AFTER SALES SUPPORT Only From Silica give news of releases and development. The help to keep you up to date with new software as well as what's happening in the Atan market and in addition, our are the end of a telephone line to service all of your Atar requirements you purchase an ST from Scand would the any technical advice, we have a full time technical support team to help you get the best from your computer. Because we have both the staff and the systems specifically dedicated to providing her sales Service on Atari ST computers, we are confident that our u n enjoy an exceptional high level of support. This can be received ONLY FROM SILICA FREE CATALOGUES Only From Silica Al Silica Shop, we recognise that serious u n require an in-depth information service which is why we mail free newsletters and price list to our ST owers. These are up to 48 pages long and are crammed with technical details as well as special offers and product descriptions. If you have already purchased an ST and would like to have your name added to our mailing list, please complete the coupon & return it to us. This information service is available ONLY FROM SILICA FREE OVERNIGHT DELIVERY From Silica Most orders are processed through our computer within 24 hours of receiving them. Most hardware ent the overnight GROUP 4 courier service FREE OF CHARGE to customers within the UK. This method help to ensure minimum delay and maximum protection PRICE MATCH Only From Silica We hope that the combination of our low prices FREE UK Delivery service, FREE Starter Ko and FREE after sales support will be enough to make you buy your Atar equipment from Seca Shop. If however, there is something you wish to purchase, and you find one of our competitionering a lower price, then please contact our department providing with our competitors and address and product same price a n d provide you thout normal free delivery. We that we are not the only company who w atch a competitors price. However, you come to us for a price ranch you makes our price match promise rather special something you will receive ONLY FROM SILICA We don't want you to go anywhere else for your Aanproducts. So shop at Silice, the UK's Not Alan Specialist We are pleased to announce a new reduced price point on the 1040ST-F which is now available for only 400 (inc VAT). The 1040 is a powerful computer with 1Mb of RAM and also includes a built-in 1Mb double sided 3\" disk drive. The 1040 has been designed for use on business and professional applications most of which require a high resolution monochrome or colour monitor. It does not therefore have an RF modulator for use with a domestic TV Modulations can be fitted for 149 in VAT) ATARI OSTF oad High S ne Man MEGA STS NOW IN STOCK For the user who requires even more RAM than the 520 or 1040 ST's ofter, the new MEGA ST computers are now available There are two MEGA ST one with 2Mb of RAM and the other with a massive 4Mb. Both new computers are fully compatible with existing ST's and run currently available ST software. The MEGA ST's are styled as an expandable Central Processing Unit with open architecture and detachable keyboard. They are supplied with GEM, a free mouse controller and all extras ss with the 520 or 1040. Prices are as follows: MEGA ST 200 Keyboard + CPU Ine WATU En g ar SMS Monte Mar i ne VAT) MEGA STUD Keyboard + CPU More Menor... WATI you would like further details of the MEGA ST, coupon below To: Silica Shop Ltd, CVG 0888, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent DA14 4DX PLEASE SEND ME FREE LITERATURE ON THE ATARI ST Mr/Mrs/Ms .......... Initials: ............ Surname: Address: SIDCUP (& Mail Order) 01-309 1111 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX LONDON 01-580 4839 Lion House (Ist floor), 227 Tottenham Court Rd, London, WIP OHX LONDON 01-629 1234 ext 3914 Selfridges (1st floor), Oxford Street, London, W1A TAB .... Postcode: Do you already own a computer If so, which one do you own? ........... "


"ck, he dressus sur NS es betres 2. DROP Return to Gane The next time I meet Claire the Daring John Minson confronts the choicem, which may go against Enchantress I will slice her devious Clare, explores caves, finds the grain of open-ended gaming, but let's face it, if you're faced by two-faced head from her treasure and muses on the future of role double-dealing body! Claire, a dozen orcs, what are you going you see, is a real joker Claire playing games can your computer ever to do if you don't Fight of Flee? waited until I was stuck in a giant really give you a true role playing game? Stop to powder your nose? My spider's web, then teleported me major complaint about Bard's to her and hacked me to death. Tale is that you control a party of Thanks to Claire I lost all my players, which makes character identification more difficult. experience points. And that is why Claire is dead All three systems have their virtues as well as their meat ... or dead bytes, to be more accurate, for Claire is no shortcomings. That's hardly surprising considering the scale of more than a computer created character, a figment of my today's home micros. But what micro's RAM. She is one of the about the future? EA's Mark hundred other players' in Lewis recently told me that the Virgin's Micro MUD, a simulation company already has a small A Ultima V vostly upgraded. Advanced Dungeons will clean up. adventure which uses compact of the original on-line adventure Two games gunning to clean up in the role video disk images up and running which does away with modems playing stakes this year are Ultima V from in the States. Now that really by generating your opponents Origin and Advanced Dungeons and Dragons itself. does sound exciting! But the quest for treasure isn't from US Gold. The next generation of the real topic of this month's rant. Urima carries a huge cult following a technology, much of it centred on I'm interested in a much more who will swear that nothing else comes close laser disk memory, will allow us elusive quarry the perfect to the creations of the mysterious Lord British to store much more information, gamel A couple of months ago 1 whilst US Gold feel that the better known including unbelievably high lamented the crap the industryAD+D game will open computer RPG open to resolution graphics. has dumped on us over the years, a whole new audience. Other contenders are Developments in artificial Now let's look to the future. Not FTL soon to launch Dungeonmaster Il and intelligence will also use that CD that MUD's perfect, but it's one of ROM to produce computer Electronic Arts with Bards Tail III. the few pieces of recent coding controlled characters who can that isn't a total waste of hold realistic conversations. everyone's time, from the playing campaign. The only hope addition of other, intelligent 16 and 32 bit programmer's to the punter's seems to be giving two fingers to characters adds a whole new multi-tasking will allow the CPU and it represents a positive path geography and logging on for dimension. We've moved a long to handle your input at the same forward. some telephonic fantasy way since the days of The Hobbit time as setting up a dwarven Yes, I'm talking about But can a home computer cope when Torin used to sit down and trap. role-playing games. Games with the sophistication of role where you have to think about playing? After all, we're talking The fact that I'm still burning day you'll come home and drop a what you're doing. Games which about situations which are as about Claire's little trick shows silver disc into the player which call for swift reactions, even if open-ended as life itself. In a how convincing it all is, when you doubles for audio and video CDs they don't use a joystick (you try traditional micro adventure game get into it. and suddenly your TV screen facing an army of orcs in you might have to LIFT STONE Text games have the will become a gateway to real-time). And most importantly, then GET KEY, but a role-player advantage of lavish descriptions, another world. Perhaps you'll be games which let you relate to could tell his game master, and MUD is superb. But linked to a central computer by a your character, develop their \"Okay I'll get the fungus Micrprose/Origin's Ultima modem, playing with and against skills and attributes, live the part. that's growing on the wall and adventures have taken another people from all over the country Long, long ago I remember the mix it with the black powder from route, close to wargaming. As perhaps the world. Or are they joy of a Monday night was to my pistol then ignite it and wait you roam around the countryside mere figments of the computer's gather round a blazing log fire for the explosion. Even if the you move a squidgy little figure imagination? You just won't be or rather a table in a college GM hadn't allowed for this across a map. For cities the map's able to tell seminar room with Sue and ingenious use of the giant scale changes, and only in This may be a few years off, but Steve, Cuddles and Monster, and puffball, he'd have to consider it dungeons do you get a player's I'm convinced that it will come. Michael the Biking Viking. And or at least fake a few dice rolls eye view. This imitates the And when it does, computer there Venetia the Vixen, the to suggest that he was. TRY miniatures and floor plans found games will truly be interactive cruellest, kinkiest one-legged SOMETHING ELSE' does not cut in many RPG's. Ultima offers entertainment movies in which woman ever to wander a the ice. limited interaction, which lacks you can take part, adventures dungeon, joined the band of I've been looking at computer the fluidity of human conversation which you can live. adventurers to take on whatever RPG's recently and we're not but at least avoids incessant So you'd better start playing foultraps our DM had devised for there yet. Not even near. But requests to 'Please try another now. Whether you choose Micro US. what we do have is still pretty word'. MUD, Ultima or The Bard's Tale Great days indeed, and ones damn clever at least as clever Electronic Arts Bard's Tale or even all three systems -which only ended with revision as a pretty dopey, novice GM! series comes somewhere you'll be starting off on a great and examinations and somehow Take Micro MUD, for example quest. And you'll need the ..somehow when you've all gone its roots are still firmly based in Instead of a map you get a small practice because the thought of your separate ways and are traditional adventure gaming, window into the world, with coming face to face with a earning a crust in the real world which means you're going to scrolling text to one side. The high-res CD DC (Devious Claire) you never get together with wear out your N, S, E and W pay-off for this sophistication is unprepared is just too horrible to friends long enough to run a role keys as you move around, but the that all commands are multiple consider! 114 "


"UP WANTED IN THE GREAT Microdealer COVER UP! FOR INVOLVEMENT Is THIS YOU? Now Micsappearing iconnoticed by a For years, unnoticed by the authorities, valuable goods were disappearing from shelves of unsuspecting stores thoughout the U.K.! Now MICRODEALER INTERNATIONAL has revealed the extent of this massive 'scam' and discovered the stash. No-one has come forward to claim the Loot. Your local Microdealer dealer has the 'lowdown' on the greatest games racket since Al Capone! Be on the lookout for signs of the Cover Up and pick up your Cover Up card now. Collect Cover Up tokens to complete your card entitling you to a piece of the action'. REWARDS MEGA-games form major software houses, Joysticks, T-Shirts and an opportunity to WIN a fantastic prize in the MICRODEALER COVER-UP competition! Microdealer PERLATMA COVER UP with one of the range of EXCLUSIVE T-SHIRTS only available from your local Microdealer Dealer "


" NOTHING STANDS IN YOUR WAY mm BRUSSE TENISIER BUSTER an ACHTEN Screenshot from CBM 64/128 version Screenshot from Spectrum version. PLYRI ENEMY ga CHUHE EXPLOSIVE COIN-OP ACTION! Battle your way across the globe taking on the mighty fighting power of 10 awesome exponents of hand to hand combat. \"A SINCLAIR CLASSIC\" \"Thoroughly impressive combat game which knocks Renegade for 6. Go damage someone.\" Sinclair User \"It's fast, good looking and well hard\" Your Sinclair CBM 64/128 .99 -.99 Spectrum 48K .99 Spectrum +3 .99 Amstrad .99 .99 Atari st.99d Amiga .99 Screenshot from Amstrad version Screen shot from Atari ST version ENEHY MONEY EXCHANGER ET LE \" GIANTS OF THE VIDEO GAMES INDUSTRY ColMedia Holdings Ltd. A Division of U.S. Gold Ltd. Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B67AX. Tel: 021 356 3388. "

