"THE MAG REAL GAMERS READ... FREE STICKERS INSIDE! COMPUTER VIDEO GAMES NEWS SUPER STREET FIGHTER II SCOOP! 10 PAGE AUTUMN GAMES PREVIEW INCLUDING: REVIEWED ON SNES AND MEGA DRIVE LANDS OF LORE 2 ON PC DONKEY KONG COUNTRY ON SNES IT'S AWESOME! DEMOLITION MAN AND LOADS MORE ON JAGUAR WAY OF THE WARRIOR ONSDO JAGUAR CD. NEW ED-I PLUS! OVER 80 NEW GAMES AUGUST 1994 ISSUE NO 153 MORTAL KOMBAT  MORE GORE THAN EVER BEFORE! < 80 EVERY NEW GAME REVIEWED AND RATED THE BATTLE BEGINS!= 9\"7702611369062\" 60.00 ASCH DM 12.50 13.50 $5.95 7000 L AWESOMELY COMPREHENSIVE! PLATFORM GAMES. ADVENFIRST COLOUR TURE GAMES SPORTS GAMES RACE GAMES. FLIGHT GAMES. GAME BOY SHOOT-EM-UPS . ROLE PLAYING GAMES  ARCADE COIN-OPS . PUZZLE AND STRATEGY GAMES. MULTI-PLAYER GAMES SIMS REVIEW! BEAT-EM-UPS BEST FOR NEW MACHINE COVERAGE SEE PAGE 70 "


"\"wew? GET YOUR FINGER ON THE PULSE THEF ST MOVIES sas: "


"D Book your place now for LIVE '94, the most exciting consumer electronics event in the UK. See the latest hi-fi. TV. Video. Computers. Games. Camcorders. In-car. Musical instruments. Cameras. Telecoms. Satellite. Home automation. Experience Capital Radio Live at LIVE 95.8 Capital FM Stage. 1548 AM Capital Gold concerts. Dolby Home Cinema Promenade. Real Hi-Fi Village. TV Times Live Television Studio. Young Newspaper Feature. BPIA Future of Photography. Yamaha/TES National Youth Rock & Pop Awards. Games Arena. Focus on Multimedia. Get your hands on a ticket. Phone the LIVE hotline or return the coupon now. Remember — if you're under 16, you must have an adult with you at LIVE '94. THE CONSUMER ELECTRONICS SHOW EARLS COURT  LONDON 2025 SEPTEMBER 1994 LIVE HOTLINE: 0 891 50 O 103 Calls cost 39p per minute cheap rate and 49p per minute at all other times. Please tell me more about LIVE '94 and how I can get a ticket to the UK's most electrifying event. Name:.... Address:.......... 10x Handycam lin of ob on N # co o wiele ............ Postcode:.. El 2 2 Please return this coupon to: LIVE '94, News International Exhibitions Ltd. Europe House, World Trade Centre, St Katharine-by-the-Tower, London El 9AT. --------------*The top journos from Mean Machines, Sega Magazine, Nintendo Magazine System, Computer and Video Games, PC Review, CU Amiga, The One Amiga and PC Games will all be there. "


"CVG CONTENTS 16 PAGE AUTUMN PREVIEW REGULARS COVER STORY THE BATTLE BEGINS: Two of coin-op land's biggest ever games have come to consoles! See Mortal Kombat II on page 40, then race to page 58 for reviews of Super Street Fighter II on SNES and Mega Drive! 27 Ed's Comment 28 News 32 Coming Soon 106 Yob's Mailbag 110 Group Test 118 Help! 126 The CVG Charts 130 Next Month See Donkey Kong Country and much more in our fantastic 16-page CES guide! FEATURES AUGUST 1994 ISSUE 153 6 NEWS SCOOP! AWESOME AUTUMN PREVIEW! Chicago is the setting for this summer's Consumer Electronics Show, where software houses across the world air their wares for the months up to Christmas. We bring you the very first shots of: .The incredible Donkey Kong Country! Virtua Star Wars and much more on Mega 32! Mortal Kombat Il on SNES and handhelds! A host of red hot new Jaguar carts! The new sub-$300 CD-i!  Jaguar CD! And well over 100 new videogames! VIDEO GAMES 36 LIGHTS! CAMERA! Film licences worth the effort? Page 36 ACTION! THE MOVIE LICENCE EXPLORED Games based on films have been around for almost a decade. CVG takes the wraps off this megabucks genre. 102-4 ARCADE ACTION Gunfighters: Lethal Enforcers II is given the exclusive CVG once-over. We also take a look at a couple of big-name pin tables hot from the States. Check 'em out! EDITOR: PAUL RAND DEPUTY EDITOR: GARY LORD ART EDITOR: JULIE HEAP STAFF WRITERS: DENIZ AHMET RIK SKEWS DESIGNER: PETREA DOYLE MANAGING EDITOR: STEVE JAMES CONTRIBUTING WRITER: MURMURING' MARK PATTERSON ILLUSTRATIONS: STUART HARRISON COVER ILLUSTRATION: SEBASTIAN QUIGLEY DIRECTOR: Marcus Rich MARKETING MANAGER: Karen Williams PRODUCT MANAGER: Sarah Ewing PUBLISHING DIRECTOR: David Kelly MANAGING DIRECTOR: Terry Pratt SUBSCRIPTION ENQUIRIES: CVG Subscriptions, Tower Publishing, Tower House, Sovereign Place, Lathkill Street, Market Harborough, Leicestershire LE16 SES TEL: 0858 468811 RATES: 12 ISSUES UK: .00, AIRMAIL EUROPE: .00, AIRMAIL REST OF WORLD ZONE 1: .00, AIRMAIL REST OF WORLD ZONE 2: .00, REST OF WORLD SURFACE: .00, BFPO: .00, EIRE: .00 PRINTED IN THE UK BY: St Ives, Peterborough COLOUR BY: PrePress & APT, London EC1 DISTRIBUTED BY: Frontline (c) COPYRIGHT: Computer and Video Games 1994 ISBN NO: 0261-3597 CVG DISCLAIMER: Although we take great care to ensure as far as reasonably possible the accuracy of the information contained in this magazine. CVG and the publishers cannot be held responsible for omissions, errors, misprints or mistakes which may occur. THANKS TO: Paul Newman for letting Our Nige come back. NO THANKS TO: The Pride. Four pence extra indeed. It's a bloody disgrace. It really is... WIN! AQUAREA Editorial and advertising enquiries: 071-972 6700 Subscription and Back Issues enquiries (9.30-5.30 Mon-Fri): 0858 468888 EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISING GREENHOUSE: CVG, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU TEL: 071972 6700 FAX: 071-972 6701 ADVERTISING MANAGER: Simon Hamer ADVERTISING EXECUTIVE: Holly Eadie PRODUCTION ASST: Vicki Jacobs MARKETING 48 WIN A JAGUAR! AND GET A HALF. PRICE JOYPAD! We ve teamed up with Rumbelows to not only give away a brand-spanking new Atari Jaguar to one lucky reader, but we're also giving everybody the chance to pick up a half-price Jag joypad in an EXCLUSIVE CVG reader offer!  25 MILLION READERS SINCE 1982... "


"CONTENTS CVG CONTENTS EVERY NEW GAME REVIEWED AND RATED REVIEWS 96 Pinball Dreams 2 PC Can 21st Century repeat the success of its earlier silverball sims? SUPER SHORTS 66 Graham Gooch's World Class Cricket PC 82 Dr Hauzer 3DO Alone In The Dark-style roleplaying comes to 3DO. 84 Stunt Race FX SNES Race wacky buggies in Nintendo's Super FX smash! 54 Theme Park PC Bullfrog's long-awaited funpark simulator! 56 Drop Zone Game Gear The blast from the past makes it to the Gear. 58 Super Street Fighter II SNES/Mega Drive The definitive reviews of the SNES and Mega Drive versions of Capcom's latest! Goochie and co appear in Audiogenic's Test sim. 68 Litil Divil CD-ROM Mutt the devil goes pizzahunting on compact disc. 69 Ranma 3 SNES The manga-influenced beat-'em-up is back. 70 Donkey Kong '94 Super Game Boy The first ever colour Game Boy game is taken apart. 34\" 87 Mega Man 3 Game Boy The man we know as \"Mega' makes a Game Boy return. 90 Gunship 2000 CD32 The PC stunner makes its debut on Amiga CD. Reviewed and Rated: on pages 71, 93, 101 Benefactor: Amiga Bump 'n' Burn: Amiga Cliffhanger: Amiga Naughty Ones: CD32 Sierra Soccer: Amiga Super Putty: CD32 Switch Quiz: Amiga The Settlers: PC Robinson's Requiem: PC Detroit: PC Eye Of The Storm: PC Corridor 7: PC World Cup Challenge: PC The Horde: CD-ROM Jack Nicklaus: CD-ROM Kick Off 3: Amiga Eye Of The Beholder: SNES SOS: SNES Jungle Book: NES Boxing Legends: SNES Ultima False Prophet: SNES The Hulk: Mega Drive Ultimate Soccer: Master System Knights Of The Round: SNES 97 Outrunners Mega Drive The smash-hit driving coinop of 1988 earns itself a sequel but it's a bit of a stinker! 100 Metal Marines SNES Mindscape offers up a successful blend of action and strategy on SNES it's a bit of a blinder, actually. 73 International Tennis Open CD-ROM Can Infogrames kick up a racket on PC CD-ROM? 74 Smash Tennis SNES More tennis action, on Nintendo's 16-bit hit. 75 Wembley International Soccer A1200/CD32 The first licence based around a football stadium! 76 Body Blows AGA A1200 Team 17 soups-up its acclaimed beat-'em-up. 78 Banshee A1200 Core takes us back to the days of 1942. 92 Striker CD32 Check out the latest soccer sim on CD32. 95 Zool 2 PC A second outing on the PC for Gremlin's platformer... WORK IN PROGRESS 62 Empire Soccer-PC Soccer games keep on coming. 63 Mario Andretti Racing Mega Drive Take to the track in hot race machines. 65 Battlecorps Mega-CD Core's 3D CD blast! VA 80 Muscle Bomber SNES WWF has nothing on this top grapple-fest. 40 Mortal Kombat II 43 Creature Shock 44 Shaq Fu 46 The Lawnmower Man 47 Outpost 49 NHL '95 52 Top Gear 53 EA Sports Tennis AND STILL THE MAGAZINE REAL GAMERS READ "


"CVG CES NEWS THE GREATEST SHOW ON EARTH HYE SA Practically everyone who's anyone exhibits at the summer Consumer Electronic Show in Chicago. It's the time and the place where all of the games publishers reveal early versions or news of their Christmas biggies and hardware manufacturers woo the games makers with hush hush previews of their new machines. This year's show was a roaring success and we'll be telling you what to watch out for in our massive 16 page spesh. or two reasons the show was a little smaller than usual this year. Firstly, pretty well all of the software houses claim that they'll be releasing fewer but better games over the next 18 months. Secondly, none of the public were admitted because the money men and women were busy tying up deals to publish software on the new machines. Sega seemed to feel that with this Christmas' release of Mega Drive 32-X it's got everything in the bag. Its stand was smaller than even some of the lesser software houses. But Nintendo, which has been a bit left out of the hardware war, went for maximium overkill with show-stopping demos of its new Ultra 64 machine (formerly tagged as Project Reality) and the truly wonderful and hitherto-unheard-of SNES game, Donkey Kong Country. 3D0 games were in abundance on Panasonic, Goldstar and Sanyo machines, with the quality of 3D0 software coming on in leaps and bounds. Also on the machine side, two new, more affordable CD-i units were announced in time for a Christmas release, and Atari's CD add-on for the Jaguar was unveiled, along with a brace of brand new Jag games. However, this time round there were fewer new big name coin op and film licences doing the rounds, with notable exceptions such as Mortal Kombat II, True Lies, Lion King, Flintstones and Shadow. God knows how many film licences Ocean has done. More than anyone, certainly. But even the Manchester lads will be doing far fewer of them in future. The standards set by the up-and-coming machines will mean that games will be bigger and more expensive to produce and will take so long to make that there's less chance than ever of anyone tying together the release dates of films and games. Overall this was a show of few shocks and spills which nonetheless had more than enough good, interesting games on offer. There was plenty of news about SNES releases, but a further drop in the number of new Mega Drive titles. PC CD-ROM seems to be the big winner now... ATELIT 6 "


"THE GREATEST SHOW ON EARTH CES NEWS CVG Nintendo 8-9, 11 & 12 First updates on Project Reality, VR32, plus BIG, BIG news on a BIG, BIG SNES game Mega Drive 32-X 14-15 Drool, as you see for the very first time screens from these soon-to-bereleased games for the 32-bit upgrade for the Mega Drive Sega 16-17 The cream of the crop of forthcoming games on Mega Drive, Mega-CD and Game Gear Acclaim 18 One of the most interesting and pubilicity-hungry software houses of the last two years releases a host of new games and development kit that will change the face of entertainment forever. Virgin 19 In terms of qulaity and innovation you'd be hard pushed to find a more dynamic publisher than Virgin Interactive Entertainment. What did it come up with at the show? 3DO 21 This time last year it was the talk of the town, this year the games for it are vastly superior... Jaguar 22 The new CD drive, an innovative modem-cum-telephone headset, plus a ton of new games for Atari's super console PC 24 Who wants to see the first shots of Doom Il? You do, of course, along with Cyberia, Colonization and Lands of Lore II The new machines 25 At last, a cut-price CD-i, a new 3DO machine and the latest on the fabulous but oh-so-secret Sony PlayStation "


"CVG CES NEWS NO MORE MONKEY BUSINESS USA WHEN Last year it was 3DO. This time round, the event that had everyone talking was Nintendo's 64-bit venture. Formerly known as Project Reality, Nintendo unveiled the ultra 64 to the press... intendo played the waiting game as journalists wondered whether they'd be allowed to see the machine in action. But the number of invitations rose steadily through the show and we were bussed off to a hotel suite where Nintendo staff had been polishing up their best PR spin. After waiting in a courtesy room we were led into a curtained-off area about six yards long and four wide. A Nintendo rep spoke to us. He needn't have used the microphone that made him sound like Ronald Reagan it was comny, but his easy charm and hard sales techniques built up expectations even more. He shouldn't have bothered. When the curtains were pulled back and we were let loose on the machines the sheer power of the Ultra 64 games was enough to bowl us over. There were just two games on show: the Nintendo Williams beat-'em-up Killer Instinct, and Cruisin' USA, a race game from the same team. They both play well in these early versions and look fabulous, Killer in particular. This is a blood-splattered Mortal Kombat-style fighting game which features fully raytraced space that are a dream to control. Ultra 64 will appear in the arcades before moving into the home. Both of the games we saw were inside coin-op cabinets, but Nintendo insists that the home versions will be exactly the same. That point is key. Killer Instinct and Cruisin' USA are two notches above anything in the arcades but if they make it into the home intact they may well knock the spots off anything Nintendo's rivals put on offer. Meanwhile Acclaim announced that it is the first third party developer to sign up for the system. Its currently working on a game based around characters from the Voyager comic books the publishers of which Acclaim bought up earlier in the year during another massive spending spree. YR32 A top and we mean top source has revealed details of Nintendo's VR32 machine that finally puts paid to speculation. WILD N. KONG he new VR32 system from Nintendo, exclusively revealed in issue 151, will NOT be an upgrade for the SNES, but will be a portable machine with a built-in VR headset, according to a source close to the head of Nintendo Of America. We're told that at the moment it can only display in black-and-white, although that shouldn't detract from the genuinely new experience it offers, claims our source. Apparently Nintendo's research & development boys are doing further research before the company makes a final decision on whether or not to release the machine. \"It's so different from anything else that the public will either love it or drop it like a stone,\" claimed the source. COUNTRY 8 "


"S NO MORE MONKEY BUSINESS CES NEWS CVG 13A Kong needs to employ the help of other jungle dwellers to help him in his quest. Nintendo practically stole the CES show with its imminent launch of a Donkey Kong game but it's like nothing you've ever seen before on SNES! Clockins in at 32 leg this is also the biggest SNES latformer of all me. Cor! ou'd have thought that Nintendo would have plenty to shout about at CES, with its new machine, Ultra 64, wowing everyone who saw it. The Big N did have a product worthy of the size of the stand but it's not their new games machine. It was a real cracker under wraps to all but a select few. The product in question was a new SNES game, Donkey Kong Country and CVG is the first magazine any. where to bring you screenshots of this show-stopper! No prizes for guessing it's a platform game (alright then, maybe a bag of sweets) but what's got those in the know enthusing about Donkey Kong Country is the graphic style, the programmers have abandoned conventional sprites, in favour of rendered computer images to give the characters an ultra-realistic look. Using a technique called Advanced Computer Modelling (ACM). programmers Rare Ltd formally Ultimate, of Knight Lore fame and later a big performer on the NES stage have come up with certainly one of the best-looking SNES games for a long, long time, rivalling even some of the things we've seen on more advanced systems! Donkey Kong joins forces with a new sidekick, Diddy Kong, in a journey across a variety of magical worlds chock-full of goodies and baddies. There's no firm release date for Donkey Kong Country in the UK as yet, although with a US launch in November it's a fair bet that the game will appear before Christmas on this side of The Pond. Nintendo reckons that this one will put Mario to sleep for the next five years. A number one Yuletide chart position for Nintendo, perchance? tendo Nintendo has excelled this game it's say the best looking SNES game ever. "


"IF WE GAVE YOU ANY MORE, WE'D BE GAMESHOW HOSTS. SAVE 14 scam2 HU  Off Lloyds Bank leadway Bank Cascint Card 1921 845 6769 OLOL FREE GAME VOUCHER Isport ER THOMAS N GREY 30-18-25 173 omare THIS ONE FREERISSIONS THIS VOUCHER ENTITLES THE HOLDER TO ONE FREE GAME OF BOWLING SS TO INCLUDE ADMISSION AND SHOE HIRE a PLUS ONE FREE LASER GAME PLUS ADMISSION (where available FREEPHONE: 0800 710 723. Or fill out the coupon below, and send it in an envelope to our freepost address now. You will receive details of our Youth Deal within 7 days. PLEASE PRINT CLEARLY. THE YOUTH DEAL First Name (in fulls.......... ...Title: Mr/Miss/Ms Surnames. ....Date of Birth:............ A Cashpoint* card. A  Mercury phonecard. A pack stuffed with discount vouchers, special offers and the chance to win a mountain bike. The list of perks you receive when you open a Lloyds Bank Headway Account goes on and on. So we won't. If you're aged between 11-17 and want to find out more freephone 0800 710 723, fill in the Lloyds coupon or pop into your local branch. Bank Address: ..Post Codei... Please tell us which of these will apply to you in September Still at School. Going to Collage/University. Starting/have just started my first job or None of these apply to me. vocational training. Please send to: Lloyds Bank Plc, The Youth Deal, Freepost CV2870, Stratfordupon-Avon, Warwickshire, CV37 98R. OVIH SPONISTIKOS LYDSBANKE SATRACOMODAL OLUNCE D ANDAS MORTO YOUPISSARRISPONGONHA S ONABLET COLOFO TELI BACI USARO SELONCON EYE DE LLOBREGAMOYOND AND THE SONG OSMON S-D "


"NEW SNES GAMES HEADING YOUR WAY CES NEWS CVG SNES attack THE FLINTSTOI VA With Mortal Kombat II and Super Street Fighter about to burst on to the scene, it seems a strange time to launch a pretty standard beat-'em-up. For everybody the consoles market is supSon posed to be in decline; but that hasn't stopped a glut of new releases for the Super Nintendo. Big names rubbed shoulders with the lesser-known titles, but only you can decide what will do well and what won't... THE FLINTSTONES Out: Autumn '94 Licensed from the recordbreaking new Spielberg movie starring John Goodman and Rick Moranis, The Flintstones features really big sprites, and the characters look like their on-screen counterparts. Unoriginality reigns supreme, though. IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 2025 Out: Autumn '94 Doing the rounds on the Amiga at present, the SNES conversion of the upgraded C64 mega-hit should do well when it's released, especially considering it's got the original game included on the cart as well as this new remix! but this time the blocks come in a multitude of shapes and sizes! The Game Boy version's great, receiving 84% in issue 152: the SNES game should be just as much fun. JELLY BOY Out: Autumn '94 Designed and programmed by Mortal Kombat boys Probe, you control Jelly Boy, a young feller who's able to morph into all manner of objects, such as hammers and even a helicopter, with hilarious results. WCW SUPERBRAWL WRESTLING Out: Autumn 94 It may be the poor relation to WWF, but this game based on WCW looks mighty impressive. It remains to be seen how it'll stand up against its betterknown counterpart in the gameplay stakes, though. UNIRACERS Out: Autumn '94 Take the speed of Sonic The Hedgehog, slap it onto a SNES cart and swap the central character for a unicycle and you've got the basic gist of Uniracers. Frantic one or two player action across over 100 different tracks! DONKEY KONG COUNTRY Out: Winter '94 The biggest SNES game yet 32Megs, the cart needs s much memory as it can Set to hold all those incrediSie rendered graphics. S7million is being spent in he US on promoting this platform romp, so you can be sure it'll sell by the barTel-load come November. THE SHADOW Out: Winter '94 Ocean has crossed Street Fighting with puzzle sections in its conversion of the comic book and radio show. It looks good, but does the SNES really need another beat-'em-up? VORTEX Out: Winter '94 Super FX games are taking off in a big way, and this one from Electro Brain has a distinctly Battletech look about it. PAC-MAN 2: THE NEW ADVENTURES Out: Winter '94 Pac returns in a sequel to the brilliant, if slightly dated. Pac Land coin-op! There are more monsters, bigger levels and, hey, a warm nostalgic feeling too. STARFLEET ACADEMY Out: Autumn '94 Want to learn how to fly like Captain Kirk? You'll be able to soon, when Interplay releases its starship simulator on to the Super Nintendo TINSTAR Out: Autumn '94 Don't worry. Super Scope owners: Nintendo hasn't forgotten about you as is proved by the forthcoming release of TinStar, a seven-level blaster set in a futuristic Wild West where the cowboys are robots! WARIO'S WOODS Out: Autumn '94 Up until now the staple diet of the Game Boy owner, SNES fans can now join in Se Tetris-style puzzling fun th this game based Sound Mario's arch enemy. Lirik together like-shaped gojects to score points and dear the screen Simple but highly addictive. LORD OF THE RINGS Out: Winter '94 The Super NES plays host to some surprisingly good RPGS, and Interplay's conversion of the classic Tolkien adventure epic should hold its own nicely in such venerable company as Zelda. INDIANA JONES' GREATEST ADVENTURES Out: Autumn '94 The man in the hat is back! It looks quite similar to the Star Wars games on SNES, which shouldn't surprise you since it's been created by JVC, who released both Super Star Wars and Empire Strikes Back, and are soon to show off Super Return Of The Jedi! REX RONIN: EXPERIMENTAL SURGEON Out: Autumn '94 From the people who brought you the truly desperate diabetes blaster, Captain Novolin, comes Rex Ronin: Experimental Surgeon. The title on its own is probably enough to steer you away from a likely purchasing error. POPEYE Out: Autumn '94 The spinach-munching sailor makes an appearance on SNES in a fairly run-of-the-mill platform game. CLAY FIGHTER II Out: Winter '94 More characters! More combos! More clay! Yes, the Clay Fighters are back, in yet more gripping Street Fighter-ish antics. SUPER PUNCH-OUT Out Autumn 94 An upgraded version of the popular boxing coin-op of a Se years back. Those with long memories will remember Frank Bruno's Boxing on Spectrum, which was very much based on this same. More characters and new moves feature this time around. ASP: AIR STRIKE PATROL Out: Winter '94 Have a guess what the programmers have been hooked on while creating this forced perspective action wargame? The reek of Desert Strike is almost nauseous! MIGHTY MORPHIN POWER RANGERS Out: Winter '94 The surprise kids' TV hit becomes a videogame, during which you're bound to run into all manner of enemies in a platform-based setting. Hope it's better than the telly show. BLACKTHORNE Out: Winter 94 Nothing to do with cider, Blackthorne is a platformbased, rotoscoped slash-emup, a bit like Flashback but in bygone days. Great graphics and sounds abound. WOLVERINE: AN X-MEN TALE Out: Winter '94 Going solo for a while after a long stint with the X-Men. Wolverine stars in his own platform game! Look out for this one, probably on the Acclaim label. TETRIS 2 Out Autumn '94 The sequel to the most popular puzzler ever comes to SNES! More of the same, THE DEATH AND RETURN OF SUPERMAN Out: Autumn '94 There's never been a Superman game on SNES yet, and this one from the ULTIMATE FIGHTER Out: Winter '94 "


"CVG CES NEWS TOP TITLES FOR ALL NINTENDO CONSOLES SNES attack NES SA The 8-bit NES continues to hang on in there, despite Nintendo's best efforts to get you to upgrade. Again, there are some big titles on the way, although it's likely that this is the last time we'll see the NES at CES. STREET RACER Out: Autumn '94 This two-player racer from UBI Soft actually doesn't look that bad at all. The Mode-7 graphics work well, and there seems to be quite a challenge there. The split-screen option doesn't suffer from noticeable slowdown, either. Konami looks to have created a pretty accurate conversion of the 16-bit battler; let's hope that it plays more like the SNES game than its Sega forebear. Sun Corporation could be a good 'un, with big sprites and frantic gameplay. It looks a bit Final Fight-y, though. BEST OF THE BEST CHAMPIONSHIP KARATE Out: Autumn '94 It went down a storm on Amiga, SNES and PC Engine, and it's about to repeat the success on 8-bit Nintendo. Those sprites are awesomely animated, and the gameplay's pretty sharp, too. RESCUE RANGERS 2 Out: Winter '94 Capcom takes time off from its Street Fighting ways to produce the sequel to Rescue Rangers. That cute duo. Chip and Dale, make a welcome return in a platform which looks a lot like Super Mario Bros III. Hope it plays as good. CHAMPIONSHIP POOL Out: Autumn '94 It may not be Jimmy White's in all its 3D glory. but this top-down pool sim won high praise on SNES, and this is an almost spoton convert. WERSA SHIEN'S REVENGE Out: Winter '94 It's been a while since we've seen an Operation Wolf game on SNES. Apart from Lethal Enforcers. Mind you, this one does have some big, chunky sprites. Hurrah. THE BLUE MARLIN Out: Winter '94 Jack Charlton's Match Fishing take a hike! The NES brings you sea-fishing at its most exciting! Sit for ages! Wait for a fish! Catch it! The fun never ends... REN AND STIMPY: BUCKAROO$ Out: Autumn '94 Cat and dog duos don't come much stranger than these two, and they're about to strut their stuff on 8-bit. MICKEY'S ADVENTURE IN NUMBERLAND Out: Winter '94 It's a platform game! Guide Mickey through the many levels of Numberland, picking up, erm, numbers as you travel. Sounds a hoot and a half. THE JETSONS: INVASION OF THE PLANET PIRATES Out: Autumn '94 Join George Jetson and the rest of his future family in a 90s videogame representation of the popular, Hana Barbera 70s cartoon TURTLES TOURNAMENT FIGHTERS Out: Winter '94 WWF KING OF THE RING Out: Autumn 94 Owen Hart is the new King of the Ring see how you fare in Acclaim's NES adaptation of the 16-bit hit. SAMURAI SHODOWN Out: Winter '94 Why buy an expensive Neo Geo when you can soon get the best beat-'em-up for that machine on your SNES? DOUBLE DRAGON V: THE SHADOW Game Boy Nintendo concentrated more on the launch of the new Super Game Boy add on for SNES than announcing new titles for the handheld, but that didn't stop a clutch of third party softcos from airing their wares. insects could well be inter ested in this an interest ing title which has you messing around with cockroaches! Out: Winter '94 If you're not fed up to the back teeth of Double Dragon games by now, then here's one that should keep you happy for at least a few minutes. Look out for its release at around the same time as the Double Dragon movie. STAR TREK: THE NEXT GENERATION Out: Autumn '94 Let's hope that this is a different version to the one currently doing the rounds on SNES. Because that game. quite frankly, isn't very good. SEAQUEST DSV Out: Autumn '94 Steven Spielberg's low-quality TV show becomes you guessed it a horizontally scrolling underwater shoot-'em-up. In a submanne, naturally. RIDDICK BOWE BOXING Out: Autumn 94 All the talk at 1985 the moment is of Lennox Lewis and Riddick Bowe climbing back into the ring together, so this boxing sim couldn't be timed better. SUPER GODZILLA Out: Autumn '94 What makes this beat-'emup stand out from the crowd is the huge sprites. They're a bit wiffy in the animation department though, and the action's hardly up to Street Fighter Il quality. FLINK Out: Autumn '94 Receiving a fair amount of attention on Mega Drive, Psygnosis latest platformer looks the part, but can it compete with the likes of Donkey Kong Country? MEGA MAN 5 Out: Autumn '94 Mega Man makes a wel come retum to the little Nintendo and if you get yourself a Super Game Boy you can enjoy his platform antics in colour! BLACK BASS LURE FISHING Out: Winter '94 We're not sure why these fishing sims are so popular in the States, but they obviously are because at least four appear every year! DAFFY DUCK Out: Autumn '94 Daffy becomes Duck Dodgers in the 23rd (and a half) Century on Game Boy! And owners of Super Game Boy can play in living colour, too! TIP OFF Out: Autumn '94 Originally appearing on Amiga, Ubi Soft has converted this not-bad basketball sim to the Game Boy MICKEY MANIA Out: Winter '94 Where would the SNES be without its Mickey Mouse games? It's been a while since MM's been seen on console. and this one could be the best of the bunch. BONK'S REVENGE Out: Winter '94 Better known as PC Kid II. the little, bald prehistoric one returns to Game Boy in a conversion of the top PC Engine game. YOGI BEAR Out: Autumn '94 Pickernick baskets and avoiding count less parkbased ene mies are what's on Yogi's mind in this jolly-looking platformer. CASINO! Out: Autumn '94 Everybody likes a bet, especially when they don't lose. And you can't lose with Interplay's compilation of casino games there's nowhere to stick the coins! STOP THAT ROACH! Out: Autumn '94 Lovers of puzzle games and horrid 12 "


"BEMIDLAND BANK plc 1994 GREED, Steve wasted all his cut-price cinema tickets in blundering attempts to impress his sister's friends. Sue 14 got one of our free Megadrive systems then charged her kid brother a whopping  an hour to use it. Carl took full advantage of our halfprice Sega games offer. Now leaves his room only for meals. Joe 15 ordered his \"Pizza for a penny\" pizza and then deceitfully asked his girlfriend to pay half the normal price. MIDLAND LIVECASH DEAL You handle 11? Opening a Livecash account will bring you many things. Free gifts, competitions. Big money off Sega, Nintendo and Amiga. But o bring out the worst in you. You have been warned. Find out more by sending the coupon to Midland Bank plc, FREEPOST her formation Silver Street Head, Sheffield SI TAY, or by asking at your nearest Midland branch, or by calling us on 0345 180 180. Lines are Bon& pm, Monday to Friday. All calls charged at local rates. Livecash is available to 11 18 year olds. 1345 180 180 .. MIDLAND The Listening Bank member HSBC group POSTCODE COMPVG/B "


"CVG CES NEWS TURBOCHARGED GAMING LOA SEGA strikes back With Nintendo currently stuck on the grid in the 32-Bit technology race, Sega claims that next year it will put its opposition on the shelf for good, and here's why... 327 ames, it's had a few. Mars, MD-32 and now Mega Drive 32X. The latest addition to the Sega range promises to revitalise the flagging Mega Drive market. With the Saturn conspicuously absent from Sega's stand it was left up to the firm's new wonder peripheral to draw the crowds. Everything about the 32-X had an air of being rushed. There wasn't a completed version of the machine on show, no finished games either. The packaging for it and the games are still at the mock-up stage and look more like Kodak film boxes than traditional Sega branded material. Even so, for something which was just a rumour a few months ago. Sega seems to have moved mountains to get it and the games up and running for a Christmas release. And there's one overriding fact it's going to be good. As you probably know, it plugs into the cartridge slot of the Mega Drive, but once it's in that's it, there's no need to take it out again. All existing Mega Drive games should run through it. Also, despite rumours to the contrary, the 32-X also works with the Mega-CD, with four CD releases planned in the first batch of games. The demo of Virtua Racing Deluxe on 32-X was running opposite Virtua Racing on Mega Drive. The 32-X version runs with twice as many polygons, tons more colours, a faster frame rate and added tracks and cars. With a provisional retail price of just  you can't argue with the power-to-price ratio. But should you wait for the Saturn? We'll have to see when the machine hits these shores in November Golf's Great 36 Holes CONTINUE? VES INO Shadow Of Atlantis Star Wars Arcade Sega Well, you can hardly go wrong with a golf game, so it looks as though Sega is on to a safe bet here. Realistic graphics are what's on offer, but even with 32-Bit power behind it, topping PGA Golf won't be easy. Sega With the coin-op's future in the balance, one thing's for sure in Virtua Star Wars' life that'll be converted to 32-X. Anything with Star Wars attached to it is a big seller these days, and from what we've seen this won't be an exception Sega Of all the initial 32-Bit games, this looks like being the most original. It's an aquatic adventure which makes full use of the machine's extended colour palette to produce some excellent rendered images. Fahrenheit 023 SFAHRENHEIT Sega Bringing the Mega-CD into play comes the 32-X's first Tru Video game. Basically it's an FMV adventure, but unlike previous games of that ilk on Mega-CD, the graphics will be almost video quality I atro Asco w orsport Jure hyperpoce S sodby to recete srders THE SATURN WILL FOLLOW EARLY NEXT YEAR WITH AN ESTIMATED RETAIL 14 THE MEGA DRIVE 32-X IS SCHEDULED FOR RELEASE THIS YEAR PRICE OF  "


"TURBOCHARGED GAMING CES NEWS CVG USA Ecco The Dolphin Virtua Racing Deluxe Sega Although Sega hasn't announced this as a 32Bit release, it would be surprising if Ecco didn't surface in the near future. Especially as Sega had a il colour Cinepak demo featuring the game's logo on show, RHAWI THE DOLPHIN Sega As far as we could tell all the Deluxe refers to in the title is that the game, will be almost arcade perfect, with a similar number of polygons on screen and the same ultra-fast speed. A few extra tracks wouldn't go amiss, though. Cyber Brawl Virtua Fighters Sega Although Sega's official 32-X press packs don't mention Virtua Fighters, it's hard to see them not converting it from this coin-op version especially with Virtua Racing on the way. Sega As if the likes of Mortal II and Virtua Fighters wasn't enough. Cyber Brawl gives you one-onone 3D combat action. This should be coming out in the first batch of 32-Bit games. Sega have yet to publish shots, though, which suggests that this game might not see the light of day until some time next year. We'll just have to wait and see what happens. Mortal Kombat Il NBA Tempo Deluxe Acclaim This will be a conversion of the latest version of the world's most successful coin-op. Again, it's hard to envisage it being any. thing less than arcade perfect. Acclaim This is one game which holds so much potential on 32-Bit. While the standard Mega Drive version promises to be good, you might as well be playing the coin-op when you play this. Sega Where would Sega be without cutesy games? Nowhere's the answer. So continuing in the tradition is Tempo, which introduces a completely new character to Sega's already vast range of marketable stars. Fingers crossed we'll also be seeing the likes of Toejam & Earl appearing on the 32-X Alien Trilogy Super Motocross Acclaim Although Acclaim is keeping pretty quiet on this, it looks as though this will be one of the first third party 32-X games to make use of the Mega-CD. We've seen it running on a development machine and can honestly say this is going to be a landmark title. We've never seen anything quite like it before. Sega Putting the 32-X's scaling hardware to use will be this dirt track bike race game. There aren't many details yet, but it will be one of the first releases. Chances are Sega will push the boat out with this, especially when you look at how well titles such as Super Hang-on have worked for them in the past. 199 100 2009 32-bit Doom CPU: 2 Hitachi 32-Bit Sega Alt. so you're probably sick of hearing us harp on about how great this game is. but IT IS. The 32-X version will be identical to its PC cousin, including the gore and chainsaws, thankfully, processors running at 23Mhz Co-processor: Motorola Metal Head 68000 and enhanced Video Digital Processor Graphics: 32,768 colours, Sega This futuristic Battletechstyle robot combat game is still in its early stages. Even so it still looks good with fluid polygon graphics and that's before any shading has been added. 50,000 polygons per second, texture mapping, hardware rotation and scaling. MORTAL KOMBAT 2 SHOT TAKEN FROM COIN-OP NBA SHOT TAKEN FROM LATEST VERSION OF COIN-OP VIRTUA FIGHTERS SHOT TAKEN FROM COIN-OP WHICH UTILISES SIMILAR 32-BIT TECHNOLOGY TO MEGA DRIVE 32-X AND SATURN. ALL OTHER SHOTS ARE MEGA DRIVE 32-X VERSIONS 15 "


"CVG CES NEWS TURBOCHARGED GAMING LA RESEGA Mega Drive While Sega beaver away on 32-X games, the rest of their developers are, working on a crop of potentially excellent software, part from the Mega Drive 32-X, Sega itself had almost no software on show other than Virtua Racing and Super Street Fighter II. The company didn't really have room for it on its minuscule stand. However, it was a different story for its third-party publishers, with plenty of new titles as well as a few new names entering the Sega market. The release dates are for America only, so the games listed should be on import around that time with the official versions following shortly after. SULLARI Wiek 0 Burnin' Ca a great game. We're definitely looking forward to this. Out: Winter potential. Fair enough, it's another beat-'em-up, although this one features some excellent cartoon-style graphics So no complaints about the violence, please. Out: Autumn Dragon's Lair music up to scratch. If it manages it the company will have a real winner on its hands. Out: Winter characters and moves remain intact. Out: Winter Animaniacs Mary Shelley's Frankenstein Pacman 2 The New Adventures Boogerman Interplay Boogerman, the star of this forthcoming platformer, is quite unlike any hero ever to star in a computer game. To start with he's made entirely out of snot, which lets him alter his shape to avoid nas. ties. This should be, umm. interesting Out: Early '95 Konami Wacko, Yakko and Dot, stars of the topper Spielberg cartoon series are set to make their console debut this Autumn. Like the Tiny Toon games, Konami has done a first rate job in doing the cartoon's animation justice. It's going to be a biggie. Out: Autumn Taito Don't confuse this with the near-unplayable coin-op original. Instead it's a plat form game which should be a hell of a lot more interactive. Whether it's going to be good or not we'll have to wait and see Out: Autumn Namco Don't worry, this isn't another conversion of traditional Pacman, instead it's a scrolly arcade effort, with a be-limbed Pacman flying and fighting his way through the levels. Out: Summer Rainbow Islands Mega Drive Sony With a hot licence like Frankenstein due out the same time as the new movie, you could be forgiven for expecting something new and outstanding. Unfortunately it looks like being a platformer. Still, it worked for the likes of The Addams Family, so let's hope that Sony puts some thought into it. Out: Autumn Rock 'n' Roll Racing Viewpoint Kartoon Kombat Clay Fighter Interplay This conversion of Interplay's hit SNES race game looks like being spot on graphically, but the real trick will be keeping the Interplay Also on show from Interplay was the Mega Drive version of Clay Fighter. Graphically it doesn't look quite as the SNES version, but all the American Sammy Corporation Yes! Finally someone has managed to have the sense to convert this ace arcade blaster. If it's even half as good as the original it'll still be Taito It's been a very long time in coming, but soon Mega Drive owners will be able to get their paws on one of the most addictive platform games every programmed, that started out all those years ago on Amiga, Out: Autumn American Technos Here's a game with plenty of 16 "


"TURBOCHARGED GAMING CES NEWS CVG VYA Mega-CD mere All things considered, there was a surprising amount on show for the Mega-CD. Not all of it was brilliant, but here are some of the better discs coming your way soon. a range of console software. Flying Nightmares, out next year, is a flight simulation featuring some of the world's most fearsome attack aircraft. Out: Early '95 Gunfighters Space Ace Return To Zork Activision Starring Sam Jones (aka Flash Gordon out of, er, Flash Gordon) this FMV adventure received mixed reviews on PC, but is now set to become the first of the dozen or so Zork games to appear on Mega-CD. It's highly unlikely that we'll see any more, but you can try this one for yourself when it's released next summer. Out: Early '95 Readysoft Not content with unleashing Dragon's Lair on the unsuspecting Mega-CD public, Readysoft is now gearing itself up for the launch of Space Ace it's equally uninteractive follow-up. Don't hold your breath now will you? Out: Summer Konami The follow-up to Lethal Enforcers is due to hit the shelves just before Christmas '94. If you've already got the light guns they should work with this, otherwise you'll have to shell out for a set. Check out the coin-op review on page 102 Out: Autumn Flying Nightmares scored a hefty 90% CVG Hit when we reviewed the PC version back in issue 151. It manages to combine stunning graphics with some of the most taxing gameplay ever encountered in an adventure game. Out: Early '95 Domark Myst Despite losing the publishing rights for Tengen games, Domark is still gearing up with Sunsoft This excellent adventure Game Gear Masterlink There's not much happening on the Game Gear at the moment that we haven't told you about. Keep an eye out instead for some hot official releases heading your way in the coming months. Innovation Sick of having to buy the same game twice just to go head-to-head with a mate on a Game Gear? Well Innovation has come up with a joypad adaptor which lets you connect a Mega Drive pad up to the Game Gear so two people can play on one machine. All we need now are some games to go with it. TeeV Bubble Bobble Golf Popeye's Beach Volleyball American Technos Making the most from its Popeye licence, American Technos has shoved the Spinach devouring muscle man out onto the volleyball court in this Game Gear title. It looks interesting enough and the graphics are nice and clear. Let's just hope it plays well too. Out: Autumn Taito Yes! Yes! Yes! Finally all you Game Gear owners are going to be able to get your mitts on a version of this classic coinop. This version sticks pretty much to the original version, although it features a massive 226 levels as opposed to the 100 of the coin-op. Out: Autumn Barbie Super Model Hi Tech Entertainment Oh yes this looks truly wonderful. Just what we've been waiting for. Another Barbie game. Whoop-ee-doo. In a bid to get more birds, girls, women, females to enjoy the delights of the Game Gear we have to put up with this sort of licence. It's educational though. Woo bleedin' wee. Out: Autumn Sports Sciences CES always throws up some interesting gadgets, but this has to be one of the strangest. Basically it's a specially adapted club with a built in transmitter which determines what kind of stroke you play in your favourite golf game. It should be available over here in a matter of months priced at around . 17 "


"CVG CES NEWS ACCLAIM HITS THE WINDY CITY 13A ACCL AIM BIG GAMES. BIG CLAIMS mortal kombat II Money bags Acclaim has the year's biggest names tied up... due SNES, Game Boy, Game Gear You can check out the Mega Drive version in Our Work In Progress on page 40 here, however, you can delight at the first shots of the SNES Game Boy and Game Gear ver sions of the game that's sure to be number one for ages when it appears. As we said earler, the battle begins. ever the sort of company to miss out on the really BIG licences, Acclaim was more than happy to show off what could well be the biggest box-office hit of the year True Lies. Starring Amold Schwarzenegger, True Lies involves Amie taking on nuclear terrorists around the world, getting into all manner of shooting people-related scrapes while his family and friends believe he's got an ordinary, 9-to-5 job! Sounds a bit of a cracker, and the game is due for release in October across all formats. But what's even more exciting, certainly for those of you looking to upgrade to one of the new range of CD machines appearing between now and Christmas, is a new graphics programming system devised by Acclaim's US-based research and development arm, which allows the creation of FMV-quality sprites that are, in actual fact, entirely computer generated! What this means for the gamer is that, whereas full-motion video graphics are impossible to take control of with a joystick, this new system allows 100% interaction. Characters are created by first building a wire-frame model of a character, then texture-mapping computer scanned features over the top of this digital skeleton to give a totally realistic-looking character which you can control instead of just watch. The first example we've seen of this new technology in action is a demo called Duel, which shows a human character and a massive alien battling it out across a rendered 3D landscape. You can judge the quality of the graphics for yourself by taking a look at the screenshots on this page, but stills really do not convey the quality of the animation: we are talking MOVIE QUALITY, 24 frames-per-second movement, with a full range of moves for both characters the alien character even mutates into an even bigger beast! The scope for this system is huge; Duel, for example, paves the way for a brand new breed of beat-'em-up. And because features such as skin, hair and facial structure are texture mapped on to the skeleton, there's no need to draw a massive amount of different bodies, which cuts down on memory usage. Indeed, as you can see from the shots, alien battlers can be tumed into ice hockey players with ease. We ve had a sneak preview of this system in use in a game that's actually being released on Sega Saturn and Sony PlayStation in May, it's a huge movie licence and, if everything goes according to plan, it'll be the best game ever seen! Details are hush-hush at present, but rest assured, CVG will bring you the full SP on this fantastic new breakthrough and the first games to use it very soon indeed. Stay tuned this is going to change the face of videogaming as we know it! Not an actual game, but a demonstration of the capa bilities of Acclaim's new graphics programming system, devised by the firm's US-based R&D department. ATG (Advanced Technologies Group). Using digital actors, the game creator can now produce FMV-quality char acters which are fully interactive. Look out for news on a couple of new movie licences which exploit this incredible system soon. stargate SNES, Mega Drive Stargate is being tipped as one of the big movies to see over the next few months. The plot revolves around time travel and aliens having cre ated the pyramids and such like, and the game is predominantly left-to-night scrolling with 3D flying sections built in for good measure. true lies SNES, Mega Drive Here's the first ever shot of True Lies. The VideoGame! The game fol lows the movie plot closely, so expect such occurrences as car chases chopper res cues (as shown) and blasting of baddies ahoy! WWWt rawSNES, Mega Drive MQTDA USHRA nigel mansell's monster truckwar snes Indycar racin SNES, Mega Drive WWF Raw is based on the popular Monday Night Raw programme on Sky, and fea tures all your favourite wrestlers from Lex Luger to Doink The Clown. Don't expect a vast difference between this and the others though apart from new characters. Senda USHRA stands for United States Hot Rod Association and what you get is Mode 7-biased monster truck thrills and spills on your SNES! Still in the early stages. USHRA nonetheless looks promising SNES. Mega Drive Acclaim seems to have got its timing all wrong with Nigel Mansell's IndyCar Racing it's looking increasingly likely that Our Nige will be back with the Williams F1 team soon. Still, the game looks good on SNES and Mega Drive, with 2-player split-screen action being an obvious pull. LO 9/9 BOS2 "


"VIRGIN GO CHICAGO CES NEWS CVG VIE-ING FOR USA THE TOP WITH DISNEY AND LUCAS the lion.ino menilimander ca With LucasArts now finally under its belt, Virgin announces a fab new Star Wars game but it hasn't turned its back on its console roots, grabbing the rights to the brand new Walt Disney movie!] cannon fodder Sensible Software scored a hit with its action war game on Amiga, and Virgin are hopeful of the same success from the PC version, which also features a stack of rendered cut scenes and the like. SNES, Mega Drive Become Sinbar the Lion, as well as a host of other characters, in VIE's gameof-the-soon-to-beblockbuster Disney movie. Over 2000 frames of animation are used to make the sprites move as elegantly as they do in the movie version. PC There seems to be a bit of interest in Battletech games lately Activision plan to release one soon and VIE's thrown its hat into the arena with an impressive-looking robot wartare game. Texture-mapped Mechs patrol the landscape in all their massive metal glory: should go down well with fans. thedis star wars: links dark forces PC Mega-CD Originally on PC, the acclaimed golf game has been Mega-CD'd to go up against EA's Mega Drive smash PGA Tour senes. It looks good, cer tainly, but it'll have to go some gameplay-wise to win against PGA serious soccer If you can't beat em, join 'em! Star Wars gets the Doom treatment, but who's com plaining? Take on the wrath of the Empire, battling with Storm-troopers, rescuing cap tured Rebel pris aners and generalBy blowing things up. Expect this one to sell by the Conllian cruiser-load, PC Steven Spielberg's first attempt at game design is looking, erm, a bit weird really. You play the role of a space explorer on a mission to knock a massive asteroid out of its collision course with Earth, only to be confounded by alien trickery. You may be interested to learn that this is the first videogame to incorporate effects created by none other than Industrial Light & Magic, of Jurassic Park computer dinosaurs fame. Amiga and Mega Drive Owners know this game it's a conversion of Dino Dini's Goal! All the original features are here, including the Sensi small screen view and the horizontal and vertical playing options. usiest third-party software house at CES had to be Virgin Interactive Entertainment (VIE). whose forthcoming series of releases could keep you happy for a good few months on their own! The biggest news from the VIE booth has to be the company's taking over of UK distribution rights of LucasArts formerly Lucasfilm Games from US Gold. What this means to you is that, not only will TIE Fighter, the follow-up to XWing (and reviewed next issue) now be released by Virgin, but so will all forthcoming LucasArts product, including the absolutely brilliant Dark Forces! Looking similar to Doom Dark Forces is a first-person 3D blasting extravaganza in which you play a Rebel Special Forces operative, gunning after the Empire as you battle through Star Destroyers and enemy planets. There's sound from the movie, Gouraud shading galore and the only bad thing is it isn't out until around November time! And then there's VIE's success in securing the rights to produce the game of Disney's next big movie, The Lion King. On this page and you'll see the first shot from this impressive-looking title, in which you control four characters a young and an old Simba, Timon and Pumbaa. Mostly platform based, but sporting the increasingly obligatory first-person special levels, it's claimed Disney's animators worked closely with the programmers to get the characters just right apparently 2,000 frames of animation are used. It was mainly PC product on show from VIE, which shows the dramatic move the company has moved away from consoles over the past few months. VIE does have console software on the horizon-titles such as Jimmy White's Snooker and Super Bomberman II, for instance but it was more interested in demo-ing its more groundbreaking product. full throttle kyrandia II: malcom's revenge NASCAR racing kalase PC Continuing on from the excellent Legend of Kyrandia comes this roleplaying tale of Wiz ards and war nors. Number three sur passes the previous pair in the graphics department this one features 3D Studio-rendered pics galore. PC From the creators of the stupendous IndyCar Racing comes another graphic-heavy 3D racing sim, this time for all you folks who watched Days Of Thunder on the telly lately and want to become the next Cole Trickle. A must for stock-car buffs and lovers of quality car-based software. Another LucasArts product, full of plot and packed with action and high-quality graphics A vaguely Mad Max-esque storyline sets up the player for third and first person 3D biking and battling in a futuristic scenario. The pun dits are talking this one up big-time look out for more info as it comes in. 19 "


"VREES OF BAGE It's an all out turf-war featuring MORE weapons, MORE moves and More outRAGEous action than ever before. Mr X has hatched the ulti'mate evil plot but what he didn't count on was a bone-crunching counter-attack from Blaze, Axel and Skate, together with an all-new character, Dr. Zan... and a surprise helper! It's 24-megabits full of jump kicks, power-slams and spin punches set to thrashing digital hardcore! it Go Electric! Mr.X minions meet their match in Dr. Zan's electrifying Robotic Reach! MEGA DRIVE SEGA Lift-off! Use Skate's shreddin' airborne rollerblade spin-attack to Battle the 'Bots! \"The best scrolling combat game in existence\" SEGA MAGAZINE 90% \"The best horizontally scrolling beat 'em up that I have ever played and that is saying something\" MEGATECH 90% \"It looks great, it plays remarkably well and it sounds even better. What a winner!\" SEGA ZONE 86% Axel and Blaze are back and getting their kicks with all new Martial Arts Moves! SEGA TEGA DRIVE TAKE BACK THE STREETS... "


"THE 3DO ASSAULT BEGINS? CES NEWS CVG BETT GAME carita The increase in the number of good games on 3DO should be great news for those who intend to buy the new machine but let's hope that publishers here will now take 3DO as seriously as the Japanese have been taking it... alone in the escape from aragon Tore monster manor dark Interplay This top PC and CD-ROM adventure is getting the 3DO treatment. Electronic Arts A Doom-ish game with an added touch of mysticism, and role playing, alongside Demolition Man this was one of the more graphically interesting uities on the 3D0 stand. Software Toolworks Software Toolworks is well pleased with this RPG, and, judging by this early demo, quite rightly so. All of the usual medieval shenanigans plus toprate presentation. VR Stalker super megarace street fighter III turbo nsurprisingly, the 3D0 stand was to be found in the East Hall of Chicago's McCormick Exhibition Hall, alongside some high-definition TVs and surroundsound systems, but well away from the North Hall where all of the games publishers were to be found. The 3D0 system has never been (or has yet to be) big in mainstream games publishing in America, unlike Japan, where the Multiplayer has been selling in high quantities. Europe will have its chance this autumn, though, when it finally goes on sale here So. despite the fact that support for 3D0 among UK developers is at best patchy, it was something of a relief to see such a high number of good quality games to be found for the system. A lot of people now seem to have overcome the problem of slow-speed disc access that was common to early 3D0 releases. Panasonic The seat news for 3D0 fans is that theirs will be the Gry machine to feature a genuinely accurate version of is arcade smash. It will feature all 16 characters, spe, oal Super Combo' moves, and Gouki, the most power Eney in the Street Fighter II, will be making his debut in the home. Morpheus Interactive Flight Sims rarely promise to be so packed with soundtrack effects and 3D animations as this flight-sim-cum-tale-ofespionage. You're a spy in the sky off to recapture a piece of hot property stolen from the Yanks. Looks promising Software Toolworks Software Toolworks is well pleased with this RPG, and, judging by this early demo, quite nghtly so. All of the usual medieval Shenanigans plus top rate presentation. samurai way of shodown the warrior ingdom ENE Universal Interactive Studios Although Mortal Kombat is planned for conversion to 3DO, Universal has snuck in first with a Kombat clone that looks nice, but which at this stage seems to lack enough aggro. Interplay Dragon's Lairish antics abound in this soon-to-be released game from Interplay: a company that is gearing up for a number of releases on 3DO, including Out of This World, which is Interplay's attempt at Another World Cristal Dynamics The first of two beat 'em-ups shown at CES. the promise is that this, like conversion of Super Streetfighter Il Turbo, will feature all of the characters, levels and moves from the acade original. 21 "


"CVG NEWS NEW JAG GAMES UNVEILED UBA KUTENWS wolfenstein 3D Atari revealed a number of new plans for the Jaguar. As well as demoing its CD-ROM drive it also unveiled an awesome 32-player simultaneous network game system and a range of new titles. If Atari can get more hardware and its better games into the shops in time, the Jaguar could win new fans this Christmas... Data Voice Modem Whereas most consoles can offer up to five players at once cramped around one machine, Atari's new Data Voice Modem for the Jag lets up to 32 players go head-tohead with each other. It works pretty much like a conventional modem, but with an added communications headset which lets you talk to the other players while playing the games. ID Software Atari has finally managed to release shots of this 3D blaster and it looks great The graphics are streets ahead of the PC version most notably the character graphics don't Lego-ise when you get close. cd-rom update pinball fantasies The much-vaunted Jaguar CD drive had a limited showing although, disap pointingy, its showreel video didn't feature any games. The drive will be compatible with Cinepak, which is the FMV system employed by Mega-CD games, although in this case the graphics will be in 24-bit colour and high resolution. It also has a built-in on-screen light show, written by Tempest 2000 programmer Jeff Minter, which plays alongside audio CDs. Finally. Atan is working on an M-PEG compatible carthage so the Jaguar will be able to play CD movies 21st Century This game has proved popular on floppy for mats, so it seems logical that it should be heading towards a console. Il shouldn't be a hard game to convert, all we want is a few extra features adding to the tables for this version HB syndicate Ocean Bullfrog's ace futuristic strategy game should go down a storm when it hits the Jag. This version will have an even darker, meaner look to it than the others altra vortex double club dragon V drive Atar As if Chequered Flag wasn't enough, Atari have a second driving game up its corporate sleeves. Club Drive is a more sedate game. combining polygon graphics with sprite based scenery. It looks dead smart Tayman Beyond Games Beat-'em-ups are an inescapable fact of consoles and here's the Jags answer to Mortal Kombat. Ultra Vortex features digitised character and backdrops and wads of special moves. It's still at quite an early stage but it's already looking good Williams Entertainment Another beat-'em-up, but this one's coming out on more than just the Jaguar. It could be the first real chance to compare the Jag to its rivals However, it turns out that this is the kind of DIB name game that Jag needs to put it up there with the major league consoles. UBI Soft The number of cutesy platform games slated for release on the Jaguar are so far few and far between, but this one from UBI soft sure looks pretty, although it needs a few tweaks before it's finished. 22 "


"HUNT DOWN JAGUAR RUMBELOWS DO *OI off KATARI JAGUAR 1/2 PRICE TEMPEST 2000 93052 6 4. BIT INTERACTIVE MULTIMEDIA SYSTEM  64 EXPLODING BITS OF RAW POWER UNBELIEVABLE 16.7 MILLION SCREEN COLOURS  STUNNING PHOTOREALISTIC 3D GRAPHICS  AMAZING CD QUALITY STEREO SOUND**  17 BUTTON MULTI-FUNCTION JOYPAD INCLUDES THE OUTSTANDING 30 SIM CYBERMORPH 99975 TAGUIAR)  99 WHEN YOU BUY THE JAGUAR\" EMPEST DINO RAIDEN RAIDEN JAGUAR DUDES CRESCENT GALAXY GALAXIA S CONTROLLER PRE-HISTORY MEETS THE FUTURE IN THIS NEANDERTHAL PUZZLE ADVENTURE ALL-TIME COIN-OP CLASSIC CONVERTED FOR THE JAGUAR 64-BIT POWERHOUSE $4 99 FOR THE JAGUAR FANTASTIC 3D INTERGALACTIC TALE STARRING TREVOR McFUR LANTATE ALACTIC ESSENTIAL TO PLAY LIES $1999 $4499 99 ESSENTIAL TO PLAY 2 PLAYER JAGUAR GAMES LIKE TEMPEST 2000  FA499 RUMBELOWS COME IN-STORE AND TRY JAGUAR JE FOR YOURSELF FREE ** SUBSTITUTE GAME WILL BE OFFERED IF STOCKS RUN OUT, ASK INSTORE FOR DETAILS. **WITH OPTIONAL LEAD, EXCLUSIVE OFFER TO THORN U.E. RETAIL OUTLETS. RUMBELOWS LTD, BAIRD HOUSE ARLINGTON BUSINESS PARK, THEALE. BERKS. RG745A "


"CVG CES NEWS ATIEEE! DOOM 2! 19A AHESACTION the psychotron PC games are getting bigger and novastorm better that's official! Well, it must be seeing as everyone seems to be producing PC floppy and CD-ROM at the moment... PC-CD Known as Scavenger 4 on the FM Towns Marty, Novastorm is the enorCE mously improved sequel to Psygnosis's Microcosm. This CD-ROM-only game serves up head-on shoot \"em-up action sprinkled with pixie dust from the Silicon Graphics machine and will be appearing on Sega CD as well as on PC. PC-CD Merit software is offering one of the first Reelmagic releases for yonks. Also available for standard CD-ROM, this Windows adventure game is a yarn of weird events and extra sensory perception. ith the growth in CD-ROM sales it wasn't too sur prising to see the move towards publishing CDROM games, as was evident at this year's show Psygnosis in particularly has targeted the CDROM market with all its new titles destined for the Silver disc. Elsewhere, there were the inevitable Doom rip-offs in one form or another and, if those didn't pull the crowds, there was certainly a trend towards smart rendered graphics to attract those eying the new machines from Sega and Nintendo. Watch out for the spectacular Ecstatica from Psygnosis. Action games appeared to be the in, coming as a welcome change from the usual adventure romps Psygnosis' Scavenger 4 easily proving that CD-ROM games can be fully action orientated. The PC featured one of the most diverse range of games on any of the formats on show and with rumours of SEGA converting some top titles across to CD-ROM in the near future, PC owners couldn't be happier. bios fear buried in time PC-CD Published by Sanctuary Woods, this is a Mac conversion which certainly looks smart and has much in common with EA's Myst game. Superb graphics help it stand out from the crowd. PC From ASG another of those graphically impressive futuristic adventure games. This one's steeped inmoody graphics. Conversions are planned for 3DO, Jaguar and Mega Drive 32X CD. armoured fist colonization PC Nova Logic, the publisher of Comanche, was showing off Armoured Fist, its new tank simulation. With all guns ablazing on the action angle. it could be a lot of fun with some highly detailed imagery. Doom IR Hell on Earth PC Microprose's sequel to Civilisation was up and running. Although the standard of graphics remains pretty much the same, the strategic gameplay has greater depth and explorative elements. One of the few games at the show capable of running on a 286!. dungeon master 1 cyberia PC This sequel to the 1987 classic promises greater interaction, automapping, varied terrains with smooth, real-time scrolling. May possibly include some complex animations, too. PC-CD Interplay's lush and lavish press do for the lush and lavish press was an opportunity for the company to demo this sexy-looking, Rebel Assault-ish number. Wow. PC Lucky old US Gold has snapped up the rights to publish the Cacodemon-ridden sequel to a game that proves that gore is great. Id software popped into the show to explain about Doom Il's new nasties, the new weapons and the massive 30 new levels. We can't wait! Lands of Lore // a nde wa PC-CD Appearing on the Virgin Interactive stand as as a work in progress, this gobsmacking dungeon number looks very very special. There's no doubt that with software such as this on the horizon, late '94 and early '95 are going to be great for PC fans. 24 "


"BORN AGAIN CONSOLES CES NEWS CVG R MACHNEYE Plenty of new machines were unveiled at the CES, but, sadly, there were no surprises. Console yourself with six new consoles instead... REVEALED! Four new CD-i's! hilips really pushed the CD-i boat out at CES, unveiling no less than three new versions of the machine. From Magnavox comes the CD1450 and 550 consoles. These forsake the video look of the existing machines for something which resembles a PC Engine Duo. The 450 will sell in America for $299 (), while the 550, which has a built-in Digital Video Cartridge costs $499 (). Philips plans to launch its own versions of the machines in the UK before Chrismas, although import taxes may affect the prices. Meanwhile Goldstar, which is more used to producing low-cost videos and TVs, has also unveiled two machines. The cheaper machine is aimed at Joe Public as a games and general entertainment system, while the second, more expensive, CD-i will be a portable system possibly aimed at businesses. Not to be out done, Philips announced the launch of two more systems. One is the long expected hi-fi midi system with built-in CD-i, with the other being a TV and CD-i all-in-one unit. More 3DO! Sony keep schtumm e might still be waiting for the first official 3DOs to arrive in this country (Panasonic reckons it could have its version out as early as September), Goldstar has jumped on the bandwagon with yet another variation on the console Its version will come with built-in FMV capabilities to run video CDs something which the other machines lack. However, this will make it the most expensive one of the lot, so whether it will be a hit or not remains to be seen. Playstation V. GoldStar GS ccording to Jeffrey Fox, Director of Communications for Sony USA, the number of people who've seen the new 32-bit Sony PlayStation running games and who haven't been impressed can be written on a matchbox, Opinions on any new machine become more divided as time goes by but that hasn't stopped certain soit ware bosses from claiming that they'd seen stuff on the PlayStation to make you weep with joy. Sony isn't showing anything to the public yet. They claim that if too much interest is generated too soon software publishers will be pressurised into releasing early dud games. For the latest gossip on the PlayStation turn to page 28 of news. Goldstar is set to launch its own 3DO. Will it be (like the screenshot) Out of This World? The PlayStation is waiting in the wings. 25 "


"NO.1 FOR WORLD CUP COVERAGE No.T FOR TOP NAME POSTERS Wu.T FOR MEGA STAR INTERVIEWS No. 1 IN FOOTBALL WIN GIGGSY'S REEBOK BOOTS & SIGNED PICS! MATCH TOTALLY SORTED, SUPER FAST AND MEGA PI/ DUNDEE UTD. 9770955494056 SATURDAY, MAY 28, 1994 53.90 M 3400 bap us 127 51.00 SCH MAN UNITED UNITED WIN THE SCOTTISH CUP MAN, UNITED RYANI BRYAN ROBSON'S FAREWELL TO OLD TRAFFORD NEWCASTLE TRTT MACH WORLD CUP GUIDE GROUP BOLIVIA GERMANY SOUTH KOREA Part 3 LA PRESS SPAIN >> LEE CLARK'S ULTIMATE TEST 16-PAGE WORLD CUP BOOKLET CAUSDIADORA DON'T MISS YOUR COPY, ON SALE OREST EVERY TUESDAY! MAN. CITY O LEICESTER O DERBY O CHELSEA FOREST "


"ED'S COMMENT CVG FUTURE'S S BRIGHT... The battle begins, Mortal gets into Kombat mode in our comprehensive preview on pages 40-42 he Summer Consumer Electronics Show has finished in Chicago (as you may have gathered from the 16-page CES special preceeding this page), and if there were any thoughts of this industry sinking under a pile of unoriginality, then they can be cautiously dispelled. For, despite a sprinkling of platformers and beat-'em-ups, there was a goodly amount of new and exciting software and machines on show at CES. It seems software producers are getting the message that the public will not get what it's given; mind you, looking at some of the sales figures of the past six months can also lead me to believe that they've had matchsticks wedged under their eyelids and been forced to look. Sure, unoriginality continues, but you have to give the games biz its due: having been gifted with the greatest leap in technology yet seen, it's trying to come up with something new. Most impressive is a new development system that puts players in a supposed FMV environment that's computer generated, allowing for almost movie-like graphic realism, as well as freedom of movement and interactivity anywhere in the game The beat-'em-up every world. I've seen the first game to use this new system, it's a Mega Drive and SNES huge movie licence and it's gone a long, long way to restoring owner is waiting for. Worth my confidence in this genre. the cash? Pages 58-59. The thing is, you're going to have to spend more on the new technology than the  you're used to spending on consoles. The LEEB point is, which type of person are you going to be one who goes 'too expensive' or the other, who reaches for the future of gaming, knowing tomorrow's games are going to deliver? I know which side of the fence I'm sitting on especially when I know that this 'future' is closer than most people think. Happy gaming. RAND OUR REVIEWS POLICY Here at CVG we're independent of any hardware manufacturer, so we'll let you know whether a game is available on other formats, whether there are better examples of the game on that system, and most importantly whether it's any good. Unlike other magazines which base their scores on the views of one person, our ratings are arrived at after lengthy discussion bet-ween the CVG team about each title's good or bad points, with the overall score being a separate mark based on the quality of the game NOT an average of the other marks. For the sake of those who want to refer to back issues, if we recommend an alternative game we'll keep its original score, but obviously times change and what may have been a great game a couple of years ago, now may be a bit passe. However in the past five years alone we've reviewed around 1,000 games, so you can be sure that our recommendations come with an accumulated wealth of gameplaying experience. WHERE'S ME SATURN SOCCER PIC? If a game scores more than 90% we'll award it a sought-after CVG HIT! Cock up? What cock up? OK, we'll put our hands up and admit that, due to, erm, technical difficulties, our top free World Cup wallchart and games guide went out last ish minus the pic of Saturn Soccer. Doh. But fear not! For, to complement this month's World Cup stickers, we've decided to give you all a free cut-out-and-stick-on Saturn Soccer pic! It's so easy to use. Simply grab a Pritt Stick (or similar adhesive substance), cut out the Saturn Soccer pic around the dotted line and attach it to your chart! If you don't want to cut big lumps out of your mag then you can always use a photocopy. WORLDBEATER SNES Streetfighter II Turbo Nintendo/.99 Still the best one-on-one combat game for the SNES. If you've already got a copy try Ranma 1/2 from Ocean or Capcom's Art of Fighting Issue 134: 81% Whenever you see one of these we'll be referring to the best game of its type, irrespective of which games machine it's on. You won't be seeing many of these only games scoring 95% or over will be granted this accolade. P "


"CVG NEWS FIRST PLAYSTATION TITLES ANNOUNCED NEWS NEO-GEO CD IT'S PLAYTIME! \"EXPOSED Recently revealed at the Tokyo Fair was the the new Neo-Geo CD system from SNK. Now fully CD-based the latest system isn't compatible with existing carts, but has an enhanced spec thanks to a new RISC chip which allegedly positions it on par with the likes of Sega's Saturn. Apparently the launch went down so well that Sega held an emergency meeting afterwards to discuss this new threat. Sporting a newly designed arcade joystick, the Neo-Geo CD should make it to our shores soon, with a price tag of -350. As for existing Neo-Geo owners, there's no need to worry as SNK has no plans to discontinue its cartridge-based platform which may even receive a further price cut. ore and more news is emerging on Sony's new 32-bit PlayStation. After CVG exclusively revealed first pictures of the machine last month, we can now confirm that there are over 80 titles currently in progress from worldwide signings of over 160 third-party developers. Big name games which will be making an appearance include arcade smashes such as Super Street Fighter II from Capcom, Ridge Racer and Cybersled from Namco, Raiden 1 and 2 and the coin-op version of Parodius from Konami. As far as non coin-op games are concerned ORA-194, which is a horizontally scrolling shoot-'em-up, and Zero Device, which is a robotic beat-'em-up, seem to be the titles causing the greatest excitement in Japan. Rumours are now starting to circulate as to what games will be bundled with the machine. Sony isn't dropping any clues as yet, but a couple of developers working on the machine have told us that there's likely to be three to four games bundled with the system, of which Raiden 2 is highly likely to be one of them. There's also a nice little story doing the rounds about Psygnos wanting to put Lemmings on the PlayStation, but Sony has apparently said 'no'Judging by the developers' list there certainly seems to be a bias towards shoot-'em-ups on the Sony console, but don't let that put you off. Although we were disappointed to find out that the PlayStation only uses a double-speed CD drive (like 3DO and CD32) its 32-bit RISC chip and custom graphics chips are believed to offer a staggering combined speed of 500mips (millions of instructions a second), which leaves everything around at the moment standing. There's also a facility to link up two machines for modem-type multi-play. So there you have it. Here is a machine which seems to offer programmers the power to do what they like. So isn't it about time we saw some revolutionary games rather than just evolutionary ones? Sonic 3 solved THE Titan Books has released the official Sonic 3 players' guide, featuring over 4,000 screen shots, solutions and tips from the cre. OFFICIAL ators of Sonic. Every zone in the game is GUIDE mapped and all bonus stages and secret rooms are revealed. At .99 it's perhaps a bit steep, but it's well put together with 97 tip-packed pages. SCGA If you're wondering why the joystick plug is so thick, it's because the slot above the joystick fits a RAM card for saving games etc. A Featuring a 32-bit-RISC chip, the Sony PlayStation measures 25 by 20cm and will include S-VHS and RGB output sockets. 4,000 28 ONE OF THE FIRST THIRD-PARTY RELEASES TO APPEAR FOR THE SONY PLAYSTATION WILL BE ALIEN TRILOGY FROM ACCLAIM, WHICH IS ALSO BEING PRODUCED FOR THE NEW SEGA MACHINES "


"11000 IN DOUBLE DRAGON DRAMA NEWS CVG SATURN AIMS TO BLOW PLANET EARTH DOUBLE DRAGON MOVIE FOR XMAS Take a look at the first on-set shots from the Double Dragon movie due out on November 4. An $8million marketing spend for the movie will no doubt focus heavily on the Double Dragon V game scheduled for an August release on SNES, MD and Jaguar. Predictably the movie is about rival gangs and the battle of the Double Dragon Duo as they try to prevent a magical medallion from falling into the wrong hands. Could it be worse than the Super Mario Bros movie? Surely not. Watch this space punters. he most anticipated item on show at this year's Tokyo Fair has to have been the Sega Saturn. However, punters still didn't get a chance to actually play any games on the system and had to make do with another of those Sega video walls. A more complete version of Virtua Fighters was on display, featuring sprites with most of their facial features and body texture added, but they still lacked the res olution of the coin-op worrying. Word has it that Fighters on the Saturn will also incorporate extra moves not found on the coin-op to make it more playable, since the coin-op hasn't been as popular as it was hoped it would be, apparently Elsewhere on the Sega stand was a first look at a Saturn joystick, looking surprisingly large. We could not actually find out if this will be the bundled Saturn stick, but our guess is that it'll be sold as a luxury extra. A Unknown actors and actresses abound in Double Dragon, although there is a big name in there Robert Patrick, who played the T1000 in Terminator 2. One of the Lee brothers, from the new movie Double Dragon, opening in November. Dragon's moving on up The release date for VIE's Dragon has now been put back to October, following the decision to add an amazing 15 extra moves to the game and include blood in the American version. We gave Dragon on SNES 84% in issue 152, and these extra enhancements could well tip the beat'em-up into 90% territory. Well done, VIE, for responding positively to criticism. Super! FX from NEC NEC, creator of the popular Japanese 8-bit console the PC Engine, has also entered the 32-bit race with a new system provisionally titled 'FX'. The machine contains most of the circuitry from the PC Engine Duo, but enhanced to run fullscreen animation at 30 frames per second. The FX also uses JPEG rather than MPEG for video compression, which should mean sharper pictures too. NEC predicts a November launch, but no details on price have been announced as yet. 29 "


"CVG NEWS BYE BYE BLACK AND WHITE NEWS GAME BOY GOES COLOUR! Super GAME BOY Not to be confused with the animated movie which is out now, the proper Super Street Fighter film is being directed by Steven de Souza, whose past credits include smash-hits such as Die Hard 2, Commando and Beverly Hills Cop 3. The budget for the movie is now $34.4 million, which will go some way to paying for the big name cast. The Muscles from Brussels, Jean Claude Van Damme, will play Guile, Raul Julia (Gomez in The Addams Family) is to be cast as Bison, Roshan Seth (of Ghandi fame) will play the part of Dhalsim, Eric key layouts to your SNES Schweig (from Last of the Mohicans) will be T. joypad. Nintendo is hop Hawk and apparently Kylie Minogue is cast as ing to get the Super Cammy! Sadly it doesn't appear that there will be Game Boy into the shops any major special effects in the film, certainly no by early September with fireballs and teleporting. a price tag of .99. The plot centres around Guile leading a The American and Jap United Nations strike against Bison, versions are out who will be an evil overlord, tryalready but ing to take over a land called the British TEE TIME Shadowloo. T. Hawk and one will Innova Products has launched Tee Cammy will be Guile's miliWork V Golf for the Mega Drive. Using tary side kicks. Chun Li is through the supplied 26-inch club you pera journalist and Honda a conform swings realistically over a her cameraman. Sagat verter. special receiver pad with the is a gangster and Vega action being transmitted to your fights his battles for Other golf game it's compatible with him. The movie is being Super PGA Tour 1 and 2 from EA. The kit shot in the Far East, Game Boy costs .99. around Australia and games to Thailand and should feature VG pops up with be a very smart little look forward to backdrops from the coin-op, another first this gadget, not only offering soon include the like Guile's airport and Vega's month we've colours but sampled promising Bomberman Spanish cafe. Expect a PG-13 rating and actually got our hands on speech too. By pressing (reviewed next issue) some elements of the movie to find their way into Nintendo's Super Game the L and R buttons you and Aladdin from Virgin. the forthcoming Street Fighter III coin-op. Boy adaptor for the bring up a menu from Also keep a look out for SNES! And a couple of where you can select the colourised version of games too (one of which your colours and even Mighty Morphin Power is reviewed on page 70). design a background. It's Rangers from Bandai. It's actually turned out to also possible to assign GAME BOY LATEST ON STREET FIGHTER THE MOVIE CD32 KEYED UP MicroBotics is to release the SX-1 expansion module for CD32 which allows connection of a disc drive and A4000 keyboard to CD32, turning it into an A1200. No price as yet, but think about the back catalogue you'll have access to. CONTACT INNOVA PRODUCTS (081-207 2222) FOR MORE INFORMATION ON TEE V GOLF 30 "


"THEMES ALEMA MEGA-CD LOWEST EVER PRICES LOWEST EVER PRICES LOWEST EVER PRICES SOFTWARE CLEARANCE HURRY! GUARANTEED LOWEST PRICES ITEGA DRIVE MEGA-CD Master System STREET FIGHTER 2 BATMAN RETURNS JURASSIC PARK WAS .99 WAS .99 WAS .99 .99 OK 220 99  . 001 SPOT WAS $44.99 SAVE  .99 SONIC CD WAS E44.99, .99 SAVE  .99 JUNGLE BOOK RASSIC PARK was .99, 137.99 SAVE  .99 JAGUAR XJ220 WAS .99, .99 SAVE  .'' SONIC CHAOS WAS .99 SAVE  .99 AVIS CUP TENNIS WAS 64.99 SAVE  .99 SHERLOCK HOLMES was .99, .99 SAVE  .9 TAZMANIA WAS .99, .99 SAVE  .99 | me SUPER NINTENDO GAME BOY SONIC CHAOS STREET FIGHTER 2 TURBO MORTAL KOMBAT WAS .99, .99 WAS .99 WAS .99 559 SAVE SAVE C1999 JURASSIC PARK WAS E32.99  .99 K CHAOS a MORTAL KOMBAT LOWEST EVER PRICES LOWEST EVER PRICES LOWEST EVER PRICES SAW  SAVE tome * .99 449 27 .99 TE GEER NGLE BOOK WAS .99 SAVE  WAS .99, .99 REETS OF RAGE 1 was .99,.99 SAVE  MORTAL KOMBAT Aklaim PINBALL DREAMS WAS .99 THE FIDGETS WAS E24.99 WARIOLAND WAS .99 .99 SAVE  .99 SAVE  .99 SAVE  .99 .99 AMIGA CD2 IND PLAY GAMES FOR LOME IN-STORE DECRETO .99 MORTAL KOMBAT WAS .99, .99 SAVE  .99 JURASSIC PARK WAS .99, 844.99 SAVE  .99 COOL SPOT WAS .99, .99 SAVE  .99 AMIGA CD32 TOTAL CARNAGE WAS .99 I EHTNATGE SAVF LOWEST EVER PRICES  .99 CASTLES 2 WAS .99 SAVE  .99 MEAN ARENA WAS .99 SAVE  .99 NIGEL MANSELL WAS .99 SAVE  .99 LOWEST EVER PRICES TAGUAR IS COMING TO SOON MANY MORE PRICES RUMBELOWS BLASHED IN-STORE DONNE HURRY WHILE STOCKS LAST. OFFERS VALID UNTIL 31.7.94. RUMBELOWS LTD, BAIRD HOUSE ARUNGTON BUSINESS PARE. THEALE BERKS. RG745A "


"COMING SUUN CVG COMING SOON COMING SOON Keep track of the best of the upand-coming titles and find out what's been delayed and why. It can only be the information organ that is Coming Soon... JULY SYNDICATE MEGA DRIVE ELECTRONIC ARTS Following a major revamp of its graphics and a few gameplay changes, the Mega Drive version of Bullfrog's utterly excellent Syndicate will be hitting the shops in November. It's widely regarded as one of the most violent games on home computer, largely down the massive civilian body count your posse of killer cyborgs rack up. If it sticks closely to the other versions, this could easily prove to be the best strategy game ever for the Mega Drive. Meanwhile, the PC CD-ROM version has just hit the shelves, which combines the original game with the American Assault data disk. A Mega Drive Syndicate is Mega Drive Syndicate is coming along nicely, and should sell by the binful come its release at around November time. ALIEN BREED TOWER ASSAULT AMIGA TEAM 17 The third instalment in Team 17's Alien Breed saga is another update rather than a true sequel. As before, it has you and a buddy blasting aliens in a series of top-down viewed A Alien Breed Tower mazes. It's not an original Assault more of the same but at a new price of just concept and the aliens .99! Who could ask for look more than a might anything more? familiar, but in this version you get a whopping 50 new stages, improved graphics, better sound and new creatures to fight. Best of all, it's coming out at the budget price of .99. Time will tell whether this will be enough to set it apart from its predecessors. AUGUST ALIEN BREED CD CD32 TEAM 17 Hot on the heels of Tower Assault on the Amiga comes Alien Breed's CD32 debut. It will feature an enhanced version of the latest Alien Breed game with plenty of CD speech bolstering Team 17 comes up the sound effects. Essentrumps for CD32 owners. tially, though, the basic format will be the same sticking to the tried and tested Alien Breed top-down gameplay formula. As a bonus the disc will also feature the original version of Alien Breed 2, so you get two games for the price of one. Unlike the disk version of Tower Assault, this will be coming out at full price. Still, if it turns out to be good, who's going to complain? ON THE BALL AMIGA DAZE While we're currently flooded with footy action games, Daze is lining up a managerial sim which it reckons will be the best looking yet. Up to four players can adopt a league team, then get to grips with tactics, finances, sponsorship deals and slapping down stroppy French players. Unlike other managerial games which tend to consist of plenty of text screens and almost no graphics, On The Ball packs a weighty 45 minutes of visual action, including free kicks, penalties, goals galore and faked injuries. It comes out in time for the start of the new season with up-todate statistics, players and teams. A Daze's On The Ball is a graphical extravaganza, unusual for football management games. Let's hope the gameplay hasn't been forgotten about. First person to send us the gag about George Best in the hotel room with a suitcase full of cash wins a game! 32 "


"ENCOMING SOON CVG ENG SOON TOON SPORTS SNES KONAMI Making the most of its Tiny Toons licence, Konami has shoved the minuscule heroes out on to the sports track for some fitness related japes. It features 10 events from the sprint to hammer throwing, all the toons from the cartoon series and liberal doses of humour. If what we've seen is anything to go on, this could be a real cracker. One thing's for certain, this is going to be the best looking Tiny Toons game yet with massive graphics and superb animation. last one is on course for an autumn release in their first solo outing. Naturally it's going to feature the same amount of gratuitous cat-and-mouse antics that have made them a regular feature in The Simpsons. Acclaim is relying on a platform A Itchy And Scratchy is one of format to convey the the funniest things on TV. WII action but are including the humour translate successmassive graphics and fully to videogame? special stages to break the action up. So far their only computer game appearance was in one of the better levels in Acclaim's last Simpson's game, Bart's Nightmare. It'll be interesting to see how this one turns out. It's track and field time with the Tiny Toons! Konami reckons the Toons deserve more than just endless platform games. TINY TOONS ALL-STARS MEGA DRIVE KONAMI While the SNES gets a dose of track and field toon action, Mega Drive owners will be able to take to the footy field with Toon All-Stars. It sounds like a bizarre TIME 1:55 Mega Drive fans who want a bit of a laugh from their footy games could do worse than keep an eye out for Tiny Toons All-Stars. YP X-KALIBER 2097 ISNES ACTIVISION How about this for a bizarre concept. Set in the year 2097 (surprisingly), this scrolling FINEONIKI dice 'n' slicer has SONIK PSYKO SDK PS you controlling a future warrior PSYKD SONIK PS SON armed with top CD SOT Arthurian sword Excalibur on a mission to free the world from the clutches of aliens. Apart from just being able to carve people up, Could Activision surprise Excalibur can now unleash everyone with X-Kaliber deadly energy waves. Not 2097? We shall just have to all weird plots work well in walt and see. games, but by sticking to a familiar format and incorporating plenty of large bosses to kill it looks as though this could be a surprise hit. We'll just have to wait and see if Activision can deliver the goods. combination, and the result will hardly be the kind of hard-core football fest, you get with FIFA or Sensi. Instead Konami is going for the out-and-out arcadestyle gameplay of titles such as SNK's Soccer Brawl, where you don't even have to like football to enjoy the game. Each team is made up from a selection of toons, and it also features a two-player mode, which is an essential feature in any sports game. for the With FIFA the kind tles ITCHY AND SCRATCHY MEGA DRIVE ACCLAIM The greatest cartoon cat-and-mouse duo since the acand-mouse duo sinc 33 "


"COMING SOON CVG COMING SOON COMING SOON SEPTEMBER I SUPER STARDUST CD32 TEAM 17 SPIDERMAN/VENOM: MAXIMUM CARNAGE SNES/MEGA DRIVE ACCLAIM This is shaping up to be one of the biggest games this autumn, as Spiderman teams up with mortal enemy Venom in what could the best scrolling beat-'em-up on console. It's based on the hugely successful Spiderman: Max Carnage comic and will feature all the key characters from the story, including Captain America and Shriek. The game's at quite an advanced stage now, and the large graphics seem to have captured the feel of the comic, right down to the 'pows' and other assorted comic book sound effects which appear when a villain is slapped around. Best of all you can play the part of Venom as well as Spidey, which is great as his outfit is much better than web-head's. A Get back to real gameplaying with Super Stardust a really hot title. Finally, after much faffing around, Super Stardust has a firm release date. This September CD32 owners will be able to get their hands on a game which could be the hottest thing to hit Commodore's console yet. We've seen the game up and running and it really is something else. The graphics are amongst some of the best we've ever seen on the Amiga, with hi-res 256 colour sprites, parallax scrolling and amazing backgrounds. It still sticks to the original gameplay though, with Asteroids-style levels punctuated with awesomely fast tunnel stages. That worked seriously well first time, and with the improved graphics we just can't see this failing to make a big impact. Your friendly neighbourhood Spiderman swinging on to a television screen near you soon. If you've got a SNES attached to it, that is. A The movement of this tunnel has to be seen to be believed! The simplistic gameplay of Super Stardust disguises a thoroughly enjoyable, highly addictive game which CD32 owners can indulge in come September. INFERNO PC CD-ROM OCEAN Following the success of the excellent flight-sim TFX, Digital Image Design (DID) is currently putting the finishing touches to its next big release, Inferno. The game uses an enhanced version of the TFX 3D engine to create some amazing visual effects. The game's basically a futuristic flight sim, but instead of merely whizzing past objects and blasting them, you get to fly inside them negotiating cramped tunnels while fending off other craft. The action is backed up by a host of animated cut scenes which serve to update the storyline. Providing nothing goes drastically wrong, this could well be the number one CD-ROM game at Christmas. A Don't look worried feller; DID will have you ready by Christmas. 34 "


"SPACE LEGENDS PREMIER 2 MANAGER MANAGER JOIN now from just .00 ARCADE POOL UNDER CAMIZ empire ARCADE POOL SPACE LEGENDS AMIGA 6.99 CD32/CDROM 9.99 AMIGA A1200 VERSION DISKS LEMMINGS 2 Special : Reserve The Discount Club 19.49 READ Special Reserve Magazine 48 Page colour club magazine sent bi-monthly to members CHOOSE from our Huge Selection From leads to PC's and thousands of games for all formats BUY at Best Possible Prices Just one purchase will normally save you the cost of joining SAVE with our Special Deals Always hundreds of Special Reserve Offers on TOP products SAVE MORE with our XS Coupons Money-off coupons worth over  a year off classic games AND ENTER our FREE competitions Six reasons why over 200,000 people have joined Special Reserve, the biggest games club in the World! We only supply members but you can order as you join Just send in the form below or phone. There's no obligation to buy SYNDICATE VI 12.49 0279 600204 OPEN to 8pm DAILY or by Fax on: 0279 726842 FREE 16-PAGE COLOUR CATALOGUE JUST ASK * .9.99 ..19.99 CHUISE FOR A CORPO 19.99 OPEN 10am TIL 8pm SEVEN DAYS A WEEK! CHELMSFORD 43 Broomfield Rd just around the corner from the bus station SAWBRIDGEWORTH The Maltings 200 yards from the train station MEMBERSHIP FEES 6 MONTHS ONE YEAR TWO YEARS. MEMBERSHIP MEMBERSHIP FREE HARD BINDER 6.00 7.00 OVERSEAS EC MEMBERS 6.00 9.00 18.00 OVERSEAS WORLD MEMBERS 7.00 11.00 22.00 WE ONLY SUPPLY MEMBERS BUT YOU CAN ORDER AS YOU JOIN All prices include VAT and carriage to UK mainland. See base of order form for overseas surcharges. We supply hardware orders to UK mainland addresses only (PLEASE PRINT IN BLOCK CAPITALS) LARD SOLIT MEG) CAV GAMES ! Name Grat UNDER OMARE empire SPORTS MASTERS PREMIER MANAGER 2 CHAMP. MANAGER '93/4 SENSIBLE INT AMIGA 9.99 AMIGA 13.99 AMIGA 7.99 AMIGA 9.99 AMIGA 15.49 PC 9.99 PC 9.99 PC 7.99 PC 12.99 PC 15.49 13.99 MICROCOSM 32.99 SECRET OF MONKEY ISLAND V/2560/286 12.49 MAN UTD PREMIER LEAGUE NAUGHTY ONES 1999 SENSIBLE SOCCER V/2560/296 1 4.99 BODY BLOWS GALACTIC 18.99 CHAMPIONS (1 MEG) ..18.99 NICK FALDO'S GOLF 22.90 SENSIBLE SOCCER INTERNATIONAL V/386 15.49 SAUTAL FOOTBALL DELUXE ............15.49 MICRO MACHINES 18.99 NIGEL MANSELL'S WORLD CHAMPSHIP 1499 SETTLERS EN 1286 STIVE 2UBERATION 20.99 MONOPOLY 18.49 PINBALL FANTASIES 19.99 SIM CITY 2000 SV/386/4MB..... ..25.99 DOS ENGINE 18.49 NICK FALDO'S GOLF 14.99 PIRATES GOLD 19.99 SIM CITY 2000 SCENARIOS VOL 1 ... 11.99 SATION AGA 18.99 OVERLOAD I MEG) 23.49 PLANET FOOTBALL SPACE LEGENDS ...23.49 PINBALL FANTASIES.... 14,99 RYDER CUP 19.99 (WING COMMANDER, MEGATRAVELLER ENDALL 2 BANE OF ASGARD 21.49 PREMIER MANAGER 2 (1 MEG) 7.99 SABRE TEAM 23.49 REACH FOR THE SKIES ELITE PLUS) HID EN/286 14.99 SECOND SAMURAI POSSIBLE MISSION 9.99 SHAR 2LEGIONS OF CHAOS 18,99 REALMS (1 MEG). 10.49 SENSIBLE SOCCER ....16.99 SPEAR OF DESTINY V/2560/386 .11.49 ESPOND 3 OPERATION STARFISH 1999 ROBINSONS REQUIEM (1 MEG)... 20.49 SENSIBLE SOCCER INTERNATIONAL 17.99 SPORTS MASTERS (PGA GOLF, INDY 500, COX OFF 3. ...19.99 SUB (1 MEG) . 20.99 SOCCER KID 18.99 ADVANTAGE TENNIS, EUROPEAN PUANET FOOTBALL 22.49 SECOND SAMURAI (1 MEG) (NO12).11.99 STRIKER...... 18.99 SER CUP 1249 SECRET OF MONKEY ISLAND (1 MEG) 11.99 SUPERFROG. CHAMPIONSHIP'S 1992) E/V/386.... ... 9.99 SABRE TEAM ......... ..............18.99 SENSIBLE SOCCER (92/93 SEASON)13.99 TFX (DUE SEPT 94). 27 99 SSN SEAWOLF V/386/4MB 28.99 STAR TREK 25TH ANNIVERSARY SENSIBLE SOCCER INTERNATIONAL TRIVIAL PURSUIT... ...19.99 STARDUST V/386 .. ARO DRIVE ONLY) ...15.49 ULTIMATE BODY BLOWS (BODY BLOWS & SYNDICATE V/2560/386/4MB 27.90 23.49 SETTLERS EVE PARK. TACTICAL MANAGERS GEAR 2. 1729 SILENT SERVICE 2 (1 MEG) BODY BLOWS GALACTIC).... ......19.99 ENGLISH LEAGUE EN/386SLEY. INTERNATIONAL SOCCER. 17.49 SIM CITY DELUXE WEMBLEY INTERNATIONAL SOCCER...19.99 ITALIAN LEAGUE EV/386..... WORDWORTH DEALS --...-1499 SCOTTISH LEAGUE E/V/385 (SIM CITY, FUTURE CITIES & OROWORTH V2 AGA WORD PUBLISHER ZOOL 2 28.49 TERRAIN EDITOR) TFX V/380/2 MB THEME PARK V/396/4MB EN LOW PRICE (1 MB, EXTERNAL DISK PC GAMES DISKS SKID MARKS (1 MEG UFO ENEMY UNKNOWN V/3864MB HARD DRIVE REQUIRED). 28.99 ..39.99 SOCCER KID C-CGA E-EGA, V VGA, SV SVGA ULTIMA PAGAN V36/4MB OROWORTH V3a AGA WORD PUBLISHER SPACE HULK NEW ITEM, MB MIN PAM NEEDED ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 2 V/2560/386/2MB 14.99 EXTERNAL DISK OR WEMBLEY RUGBY LEAGUE V/286. RO DRIVE REQUIRED).... SPACE LEGENDS AIRLINES EN/386 23.49 ...74.99 (WING COMMANDER WING ARMADA V/386/2MB ARCADE POOL V/386 15 09 12.99 WOLFSTEIN 30 V/386 MEGATRAVELLER, ELITE) (1 MEG) AMIGA GAMES DISKS 9.99 AWARD WINNERS GOLD WORLD CUP USA 94 V/388 21 09 NOP = A500 ONLY (NOT PLUS) SPEEDBALL 2 (SENSIBLE SOCCER ELITE JIMMY WORLD CUP YEAR 94 (GOAL NO12 = NOT A1200.. = NEW ITEM SPORTS MASTERS WHITES SNOOKER, ZOOL) 1386 ......23.49 CHAMPIONSHIP MANAGER 94. 1 MEG = NEEDS 1MB RAM (PGA GOLF, INDY 500, ADVANTAGE DATA DISK, STRIKER, BATTLE ISLE 2 V/386 SENSIBLE SOCCER V/38623.49 SAN MEG 12 09 TENNIS, EUROPEAN BIG SEA V/386 ...19.49 X-WING HD V 2560 386 11.99 CHAMPIONSHIP'S 1992) (1 MEG) .........13.99 BIOFORGE V/3864MB ..... 30 90 2OOL V/286 10.99 EN BREED TOWER ASSAULT...1290 STRIKER (1 MEG)............... BLOOONET V B . . 8.99 25.99 ZOOL 2 V/386 21.49 CADE POOL (1 MEG).......................6.99 SUPREMACY (1 MEG) ...............10.49 10 BOC GARDENERS WORLD 3D 2249 GARDEN DESIGNER SYNDICATE 1 MEG). .................15.99 PC CD ROM CD's RD WINNERS GOLD CANNON FODDER V/386. TACTICAL MANAGERS SENSIBLE SOCCER, ELITE, JIMMY 23.49 200g CHAMPIONSHIP MANAGER 93/94 V/386 12.99 11TH HOUR (SEQUEL TO ZTH GUEST -ES SNOOKER, ZOOL) (1 MEG). 20 99 ENGLISH LEAGUE (1 MEG). (RATED 18) V/2560/46/4MB..........39.99 CHAMPIONSHIP MANAGER 93/94 (END ITALIAN LEAGUE 1 MEG). D EATH A STEEL SKY (1 MEG).........22.49 SCOTTISH LEAGUE (1 MEG). 13.49 ARCADE POOL V1386 OF SEASON DATA DISK) V/386... 20.99 TAL FOOTBALL . ... .. ... 13.99 CLUB FOOTBALL. THE MANAGER W386. 23.49 BATTLE ISLE 2 V/386/4MB ..................32.90 AGN(1 MEG) . ... CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE V/2560/386/2MB -27.09 ..... .. 12.49 12.49 THE GREATEST COMBAT CLASSICS 2 NON FODDERIE HOMEO).. .. 20.49 JIMMY WHITES, LURE OF THE CIVILISATION & RAILROAD SILENT SERVICE 2. F19 STEALTH SAMPIONSHIP MANAGER 93/94 (1 MEG) 9.99 TEMPTAESS, DUNE) (1 MEG)..... .... 13.99 FIGHTER, PACIFIC ISLAND) V/386 TYCOON EN/285.......... S PONSHIP MANAGER 93/94 (END TURBO TRAX (1 MEG).. 2 3.49 CRUISE FOR A CORPSE V/286 18.99 .11.99 SEASON DATA DISK) (1 MEG) 13.49 UFO ENEMY UNKNOWN (1 ME COOL SPOT V/386 20,99 ELITE 2 EN/386/2MB/NDS 26.99 13. UFO ENEMY UNKNOWN (1 MEGI 23 99 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER CEN286 11.99 WEMBLEY RUGBY LEAGUE 1 MEG) . 17.49 D-DAY (IMPRESSIONS: V/388. UPDATE DISK (1 MEG) ..19.99 WORLD CUP USA 941 MEG). ...19.49 DESERT STRIKE V/386 PIONSHIP MANAGER DOOM (GAME OF THE YEAR) V/386/4MB 24.99 F15 STRIKE EAGLE 2 C/EV/286 941 MEG.. WORLD CUP YEAR 94 (GOAL ...... 17.45 DUNE 2BATTLE FOR ARRAKIS HD V.298 15 49 F19 STEALTH FIGHTER CEN286 11.99 12.99 CHAMPIONSHIP MANAGER OU ELITE 2 FRONTIER) HD EV3882MB/NDS 24.49 FABLES AND FIENOS 2 V/388/2MB. 31.99 THE MANAGERIER 2018 DATA DISK, STRIKER EMPIRE SOCCER V/386 20.99 FORMULA 1 GRAND PRIX & DAVID SENSIBLE SOCCER) (1 MEG) 20.99 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER 2 V/2560/286 12.49 LEADBETTERS GOLF V/286/1MB...... 19.99 SOBAT CLASSICS 2 9.99 F14 FLEET DEFENDER V/385/4MB .27.99 GUNSHIP 2000. ISLANDS & ICE ENT SERVICE 2. F19 STEALTH ZOOL 2 (1 MEG).... ..1099 GRAHAM GOOCH WORLD DATA DISK V/286. .. 19.99 TER PACIFIC ISLAND) (1 MEG. 20.99 CLASS CRICKET HD V/286.................22.49 ISHAR 2LEGIONS OF CHAOS V/2560/286. 12.99 AMIGA CD32 CD's SHOUMMIES (1 MEG). 18.99 HANNIBAL V/386 19.49 LATE NIGHT SEXY TV SHOW DO MPRESSIONS) (1 MEG) . 21.99 FOR OUR FULL SELECTION PLEASE HEIMDALL 2-BANE OF ASGARD V/388/2MB 24.49 (RATED 18) V/2560/386 ... JUNE 2BATTLE FOR ARRAKIS (1 MEG) 15.49 SEE OUR COLOUR CATALOGUE INDY CAR RACING HD V/385/2MB...19.99 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 1 V/2560/386 11.99 NA 1 MEG) ........ ... 18.99 ARCADE POOL 9.99 INTERNATIONAL MANAGER THE LEMMINGS 1 & 2 EN/285 1999 . E E 2 FRONTIER) (1 MEG).............. 18.99 ASSASSIN SPECIAL AND OVERDRIVE. 16 99 WORLD CUP EDITION V/385 SPRE SOCCER 1 MEG) 18.49 BANSHEE. 20.99 ISHAR 2LEGIONS OF CHAOS V/2560/286 11.49 M1 TANK PLATOON C/EN/285...... DE OF THE BEHOLDER 2 (1 MEG) .12.49 BRUTAL FOOTBALL 19.49 SHAR 3 VIBE. 21.99 MEGA RACE V/256C/486..... ENTERNATIONAL SOCCER (1 MEG)20.99 BUBBA 'N' STIX ... 18.99 JUNOLE STRIKE V/300 23 99 MYST (WINDOWS V/486/4MB S CANNON FODDER...... 19.99 19.99 KICK OFF 3 V/380. AM GOOCH WORLD 32.99 OUT POST V/2560/486 ....... ..... LASS CRICKET (1 MEG) .... 18.49 CAPTIVE 2-LIBERATION ... 14.99 KINGS QUEST 3 EV . 10.49 PIRATES CE/286 ...18.99 CHAOS ENGINE 17.99 KINGS QUEST 4 E 85 12.49 PRIVATEER V/250CA AMB 29 99 ENDAL 2-BANE OF ASGARD (1 MEGI 21.49 CHUCK ROCK 2: 18.99 LANDS OF LORE V/2560/388/2MB 18.99 REBEL ASSAULT V/2560/286/4MB 32.99 RED GUNS (1 MEG)........... ... 10.99 DISPOSABLE HERO 13.99 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 3 E/V/386 11.49 SABRE TEAM V B 1999 TERNATIONAL MANAGER THE DIZZY COLLECTION MONOPOLY E/V/286 22.49 SAM & MAX HIT THE ROAD V/2560/385/4MB 29.99 ORLD CUP EDITION 1 MEG). .. 18,99 10 DIZZY GAMES) 16.99 OPERATION STEALTH DIS 11.49 SPACE QUEST 1 V/2560/386. 11.99 SHAR 2LEGIONS OF CHAOS (1 MEG)11.49 ELITE 2 . .. 18.99 OVERLORD V480. 25.99 SPACESHIP WARLOCK V 2560/386/4MB. 31.99 S R 3 (1 MEG). .. 20.99 GUNSHIP 2000 ........... 19.99 PACIFIC AIR WAR 1942 V/386/2MB 29.99 STAR TREK 25TH ANNIVERSARY ASS C PARK (1 MEG)... 12.49 HEIMDALL 2. 20 99 PINBALL FANTASIES HD V386 23.49 E/V/2560/386/2MB ..... ... ...... 31.99 AUTOPIA 2) (1 MEG)....................18.49 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 19 99 PREMIER DIVISION MANAGER ENV/386. 11.49 TELSTAR DOUBLE PACK ....16.99 JAMES POND 3 OPERATION STARFISH 19.49 PREMIER MANAGER 2 V/386 7.99 7TH GUEST AND DUNE V/2560/48635.99 ES OUEST 3. 10.49 KID VICOUS 1999 RAILROAD TYCOON EN/286 .6.99 TFX V1256C/388/4MB. ... .34.99 ES OUEST 4 (1 MEG) . 31.99 17.99 RAVENLOFT V/38/2MB. . 12.49 LEMMINGS. 29.09 THEME PARK V386/4MB TS OF THE SKY (1 MEG) 12.49 LOST VIKINGS. 1999 REALMS V/386. 10.49 UFO ENEMY UNKNOWN V386/4MD. 29.99 DOS OF VALOUR (1 MEG) (N012) 13.49 LOTUS TRILOGY (LOTUS 1.2.3 18.99 SUBV305/21 23.49 WORLD CUP USA 94 W/386 ...........21.99 RE SUIT LARRY 3 (1 MEO)... 12.49 MAN UTD PREMIER LEAGUE CHAMPS.18.99 SAM & MAX HIT THE ROAD V/386/2MB 27.49 ZOOL 2 V/286 . .......21.99 SPORTS ALIEN VS PREDATOR 54.99 ATARI JAGUAR ... 229.99 BRUTAL SPORTS FOOTBALL.... 50.99 64-BIT CONSOLE WITH JOYPAD AND CLUB DRIVE CYBERMORPH GAME STATE OF THE EVOLUTION DINO DUDES CRESCENT GALAXY TREVOR MCFUR41 99 ART CONSOLE WITH 16.7 MILLION KASUMI NINJA 50.99 COLOUR CAPABILITY AND 41.99 PROCESSOR CLAIMED TO BE 55 TIMES REDLINE RACING FASTER THAN THE MEGADRIVE OR STAR RAIDERS 2000. 50.99 SOCCER SNES. GENUINE UK VERSION TEMPEST 2000 50.99 WOLFENSTEIN 3D. 50.99 PER EURO TOUR ROAD RASH 2 VIRTUA RACING FIFA SOCCER SNES GAMES 32.99 19.99 57.99 36.49 MD. 35.99 SNES FROM 17.99 BEST DEALS ON AMIGA A1200 SONY MEGADRIVE GAMES SUPER NES GAMES INCLUDING 1 YEAR IN HOME WARRANTY KVM1400 ...39.99 ALIEN VS PREDATOR -... 38.99 A1200 2/0 COMBAT INNOVATIONS PACK 14\" FST BUSSY BOBCAT... WITH ZOOL 2. BRIAN THE LION TOTAL 17.99 BARKLEY SHUT UP AND JAM. 32.99 COLOUR .....................35.99 CARNAGE, WORDWORTH 2 AGA BATTLETOADS IN BATTLEMANIACS 29.99 S O S ENGINE. .... CHAOS ENGINE PERSONAL PAINT 4 & DAY BY DAY 310.00 ................38.99 .43.99 SCART TV ...17.99 CLAYFIGHTERS OR AS ABOVE WITH PLUS FOUR PACK EA SPORTS SOCCER (FIFA SOCCER)...36.49 MONITOR CYBERNATOR... .... 34.99 (ELITE 2, BATMAN, LEMMINGS 2 E NTERCEPTOR.............. 18.99 DESERT STRIKE 39.99 & CIVILISATION AGA) JUST ADD 29.99 SCART INPUT 17 99 DRAGON 10.99 AMIGA A1200 2/0 LEMMINGS PACK GIVES PIXEL DAN MODEN 93. 16.99 FIFA SOCCER 36.99 OHN MADDEN AND EA ICE HOCKEY 1999 FLINTSTONES WITH LEMMINGS AND PERFECT PICTURE ENFORCERS WITH LIGHT GUN) 54 99 INCREDIBLE HULK DELUXE PAINT 3............... 270.00 WITH REMOTE CONTROL 60 CHANNEL 42 99 GTUS TURBO CHALLENGE JIMMY CONNORS PRO TENNIS TOUR 34,99 TUNING, REAR SCART, HEADPHONE 17 99 OR AS ABOVE WITH PLUS FOUR PACK EGA GAMES 1 (WORLD CUP ITALIA 90 JOHN MADDEN 93.. SOCKET TWO POSITION TILT BLACK (ELITE 2. BATMAN, LEMMINGS 2 19.99 COLUMNS SUPER HANG ON) JUNGLE BOOK & CIVILISATION AGA) JUST ADD TRINITRON SCREEN, LOOP AERIAL 29.99 19.99 JURASSIC PARK 39.99 SONY 14\" TV (GREY) 194.99 SONY 14\" TV ( WHITE) OKEY AND DONALD ILLUSION 19.99 KRUSTY'S FUN HOUSE 19.99 244.90 CRO MACHINES SONY 14\" TV FASTEXT LETHAL ENFORCERS (WITH LIGHT GUN) 64.99 ORTAL KOMBAT............. AMIGA HARD DRIVES FROM MEGA MANX 32 99 FREE SCART LEAD 42.99 MORTAL KOMBAT.... 32 99 STATE AMIGA ST. MEGADRIVE, SNES CD321 SOCKEY S4 EA 4 PLAYER GANE) 36.49 NBA ALL STAR CHALLENGE GOLDSTAR CI14A80 14\" TV/MONITOR NBA JAM ...50.99 PETE SAMPRAS TENNIS (not shown) GREY WITH REMOTE 34.99 NHLPA 93 ICE HOCKEY PHONE 0279 600204 FOR 24.99 CONTROL REAR SCART INPUT ON EUROPEAN TOUR PACATTACK 32 99 GA GOLF 2 PGA TOUR GOLF .... 19.99 OUR FREE 16-PAGE SCREEN DISPLAY, SLEEP TIMER 159.99 14.99 PRINCE OF PERSIA 34.99 COLOUR CATALOGUE FREE SCART LEAD OAD RASH 2 ...19.99 ROCK AND ROLL RACING 37.99 ROBOCOD (JAMES POND 2)...... 14.99 SENSIBLE SOCCER 39.99 AN GIGGS CHAMPIONS SOCCER 34 99 SENSIBLE SOCCER INTERNATIONAL. 34.99 AMIGA CD32 SENA SUPER MONACO................ 17.99 SIM CITY 19.99 SPECTACULAR VOYAGE PACK WITH SELE SOCCER 40 09 ENSIBLE SOCCER INTERNATIONAL. 37.99 SPECTRE. MICROCOSM AND CHAOS ENGINE.. .. . .. . ......... 13.99 STARWING..... ...19.99 PLUS TWO PACK FOR CD-32 (ONLY WHEN 19.99 STREETFIGHTER TURBO 32.99 YOU BUY A CD-32) CONTAINS ELITE 2 AND SUNSET RIDERS TRIVIAL PURSUIT CD's ..........JUST ADD 15.99 SUPER BOMBERMAN (4 PLAYER) 35.99 29.99 STREETFIGHTER 2 CHAMPIONSHIP 39.99 SUPER EMPIRE STRIKES BACK COMMODORE CONTROL PAD FOR ETS OF RAGE 2 SUPER MARIO KART...... 33.99 AMIGA CD-32 STREETS OF RAGE 3. ..39.99 SUPER METROID. 41 99 DYNAMICS CONTROL PAD FOR AMIGA DER MONACO GP 13.99 SUPER NBA BASKETBALL 37 99 CD-32 (NEW) SUPER SMASH TV PORN STRIKE. 34.99 SUPER WWF WRESTLEMANIA 24.99 COMMODORE FULL MOTION VIDEO-CD MODULE FOR AMIGA CD-32 VERTUA RACING 57.99 TINY TOON ADVENTURES GIVES CD-32 HIGH QUALITY FULL MOTION VIDEO CAPABILITY FOR MOVIES 18.99 WORLD LEAGUE BASKETBALL ...... 17.99 MUSIC VIDEOS AND GAMES THAT FEATURE FULL MOTION VIDEO 32.99 ZELDA 3. LINK TO THE PAST .33 99 GAMEPLAY. SIMPLY SLOTS INTO BACK OF CD-32 199.99 Address Postcode Phone Machine Enter membership number (if applicable) or NEW MEMBERSHIP FEE (ANNUAL UK 7.00) item item Sitem ALL PRICES INCLUDE UK POSTAGE & VAT Cheque/P O/Access/Mastercard/Switch/Visa (Switch Issue No RADEN Card expiry date Signature Cheques payable to: SPECIAL RESERVE P.O. BOX 847, HARLOW, CM21 9PH Overseas Orders Surcharge (EC or World) Software orders please add .00 per item. Non-software items please add 25%. Hardware items supplied to UK mainland only Overseas orders must be paid by credit card. Order Confirmation Recept sont for every order We only supply official UK products. Official suppliers of all leading brands We sell games and peripherals all at amazing prices for Megadrive, Mega c, Master System, Game Gear, Super NES, Gameboy, NES, Lynx, Amiga, Atari ST, PC, CD ROM, CDI, CD32 and Apple Mac. Inevitably some games listed may not yet be available Please phone sales on 0279 600204 to check availability before ordering We reserve the right to change prices and offers without prior notification PRICES CORREOT AT TIME OF GOING TO PRESS 22 6194 ESO E Inter-Mediates Lid 2 South Block, The Maltings. Sawbridgeworth, Herts CM21 9PG 135.99 i . FREE FOR ALL Anybody can enter. Anybody can WIN! || | I WIN A PANASONIC 3DO I Just answer the following questions Can a 3DO play audio CD's? What is your name? IWhat is your telephone no? V.GAMES_LARD 57.99 SEGA MULTIMEGA PORTABLE MEGADRIVE VEGA CD WITH ROAD AVENGER 325.99 SNES WITH STREETFIGHTER TURBO1 PAD ...95.99 EGADRIVE 1 WITH FIFA SOCCER 2 PADS 114.99 EGA CD 1 WITH ROAD AVENGER .........199.99 MEGADRIVE 2 WITH SONIC 3.2 PADS .........124.99 MEGA CD 2 WITH 7 GAMES . 224.99 GAME GEAR WITH SONIC 1.4GAMES............ 74.99 GAME GEAR WITH SONIC 2.4 GAMES ...79.99 MAINS ADAPTOR FOR GAME GEAR..... 8.99 GAMEBOY WITH BATTERIES GAMEBOY WITH TETRIS & SUPER MARIO LAND ATARILYNX 2 WITH BATMAN RETURNS MAINS ADAPTOR AND CARRY CASE ... MAINS ADAPTOR FOR ATARI LYNX OR LYNX 2 Then cut out this coupon and send it with or without an order to SPECIAL RESERVE, P.O. BOX 847, HARLOW, CM21 9PH Closing Date: September 1st 1994 First correct answer selected at random will receive a state-of-the-art Panasonic 300 system plus software worth around , Competition winners will be listed in the club magazine or available on request. BATMAN RETURNS 9499 0.99 "


"CVG FEATURE FROM BIG-SCREEN BLOCKBUSTER.. The film licensing game took off in a big way with Activision's release of Ghostbusters way back in those 8-bit days of 1984. It caused a sensation, despite carrying one of the heftiest price tags around at that time an enormous .99! Games based on films have been raking it in for softcos for a decade, but are these licences really up to scratch? Paul Rand delves into the cash-crazy world of the film tie-in... atman. Rambo. The Terminator. What have they got in common? They've all made the jump from the big screen to the small games screen. The movie game business is one of the biggest money-spinners in the market but is it reaching the end of its life? WE NEED A HERO The gamesplaying public were hooked, though for the first time you could become a movie hero and fight the bad guys, just like the real actors did on-screen. That was the idea, anyway. What you actually got on your monitor, though, was a pretty unappealing time, riding around a map screen to a variety of similar-looking locations and trapping ghosts using a laser-style weapon. The graphics were shoddy, the music offensive and the gameplay limited, to say the least. But the game went down a storm, creating in its wake a new market for software companies eager to cash in on the computer boom. Ten years on from then and little seems to have changed in the film licensing market. The technology has improved beyond all recognition you can actually understand what people are saying these days but the basic nature of movie-licensed product remains annoyingly consistent. THE MOVIE 26 "


"..TO SMALL-SCREEN MONEYSPINNER FEATURE CVG D1:0132:15 MOVIES COME TO LIFE With the arrival of new videogame systems, software developers are now able to incorporate a variety of new techniques into the production of film licences. Some companies, such as Virgin with its forthcoming Demolition Man game, are digitising real actors in this case, Sylvester Stallone and Wesley Snipes on green-screen chromakey backgrounds. The developer then simply swaps the green-screen background for a conventionally-drawn back. drop and hey presto Sly 'n' Wes come to life on your machine. On the other hand, take a look at SCI's Lawnmower Man. The firm took advantage of the movie's virtual reality storyline and stuck the whole game in a computer-generated VR environment, allowing the use of some incredible graphics thanks to the storage capacity of compact disc, as well as the ultra-powerful processors of today's sophisticated games systems. ter make sure that the film they're staking their wedge in is going to be a sure-fire success. And if the movie does turn out to be a flop, you're in it deep; imagine, for instance, the faces down at Sony HQ when they a) read the reviews of Arnie flop Last Action Hero then b) saw the finished version of the game. Considering that the budget for an original game isn't subject to the demands of the huge cost of film licences. paid up-front in order to fund cartridge production, companies had bet. ROBO, BRUCE AND ARNIE There have been some very good examples of film-based games -anyone who's owned an Amiga for a couple of years will remember just how good Ocean's conversion of the (just released) Robocop 3 movie was. One of 3D specialist DID's first products, Robocop 3 had you immersed in a polygon-based three-dimensional extravaganza. In most instances, however, you get a basic platform engine with a couple of barely recognis. able sprites running around, which the software company purports to be either Arnie, Willis or others of their ilk. But no matter how rough and ready these titles are, many of them sell by the bucketload. Why is this? Alison Fennah of Acclaim, publisher of True Lies (the licence of Arnie's latest film) is adamant that it's an aid to shifting quality product. «If a game is good to start with, the awareness it has indeed ever, the case. because it has been But hey, if there's money released as a movie to be made... brings it to the forefront, garners a higher profile, LAME LICENCES allows it to benefit from With blockbuster film additional marketing and rights running to upwards contributes to its suc of ,000,000, it's little cess.\" wonder that only the big Simon Alty, Marketing boys can Manager of afford to Ocean, a firm with \"Original proddabble in strong links to the uct does not what can be movie licensing get the intense a very lucra world, is under no time con tive area of illusions as to the straints put the market. success of this upon it that a Sure, the type of product. movie licence smaller \"The whole stratedoes\" softcos can gy behind securSimon Alty play in a ing a movie Marketing Manager smaller way licence is to purby buying chase predeterup the mined consumer rights to TV perception. Or, in proother words, if you've grammes, where the seen a major movie, say costs are considerably Jurassic Park, you will lower. But it's the subconsciously attach a Hollywood smash-hits set of positive emotions that make the most to the name.\" Which, in money, since they can layman's terms, means be converted to almost that film tie-ins work every format imaginable because people think and still be recognised in that the game is going to Europe, Japan and the be as good as the film. USA as well as the UK. And as we already know, But with the sort of that's very rarely, if money that has to be LICENCE EXPLORED VIDEO GAMES THAT HAVE BEEN. OR ARE IN THE PROCESS OF BEING, MADE INTO BIG-NAME MOVIES INCLUDE SUPER MARIO BROS STREETFIGHTER II AND DOUBLE DRAGON 22 "


"CVG FEATURE FROM BIG-SCREEN BLOCKBUSTER. the jurassic parks... JURASSIC PARK SNES/Amiga/PC By Ocean A solid, enjoyable title, with an impressive first-person 3D shooting sequence. One of the biggest sellers of last year. (On other formats it was a different game altogether). AKlaim ALIEN 3 Mega Drive/SNES Game Gear/Amiga By Acclaim An action-packed blast with you taking control of Ripley in an all-out battle against the aliens. The movie link is questionable, but the game's ace. PREDATOR C64 By Activision One of the first Arnie licences, with the Predator following you all the way through the game using his triangular sight, adding that elusive movie atmosphere. then you can assume firms shouldn't be that a hell of a lot of attempting to fob the cash, which could other punter off with platformwise go towards effec ers and beat-'em-ups tive game design and with the name of a film programming, is being being the only thing to spent on link the two little more \"Advanced technoltypes of media than a film ogy will provide together. But name unsurpassed real as we're now the ism, so players will moving rapidly movie's feel as if they're into the age of plot is selcontrolling the 32-bit CD, with dom actual film\" all the promise adhered that these new Alison Fennah, to, and Marketing Manager systems posimages of sess, is there actors any chance from the that we'll see movies are a movie-based almost never used game that gives you the because it costs extra, same levels of awe, as does the right to use excitement and plot that a film's soundtrack. So you expect from the really, the consumer isn' t flicks, as well as the levgetting a videogame ver els of playability expectsion of the film at all, is ed from the top games? he? Says Fennah, Alison Fennah cannot \"Sometimes a movie's be more optimistic; storyline must be altered \"Instead of feeling as if so that it will unfold into you're controlling an a great playing game.\" adaptation of a movie, And, as Simon Alty advanced technology will points out, \"Original provide unsurpassed product does not get the realism, so players feel intense time constraints as if they're controlling put upon it that a movie the actual film. Acclaim licence does when we is developing an awardare striving to coincide winning motion-capture game and film release to technology that will allow maximise exposure in designers to scan actors' the media.\" images while on movie sets, and create digital THE MOVIE GAME actors with realistic Arguments have been movements from those put across in the past scans. It is a groundthat film tie-ins are a breaking technology that disappointment because Acclaim sees as impactthe machines of yestering on interactive enteryear and indeed today tainment as well as a simply haven't got the variety of entertainment industries.\" power to handle them. Of course, there's And as for the genre itself; are we witnessing always the counter-argument that if the the end of the movie machines can't carry a licence, or the start of a decent film game, then new era for this expenTERMINATIONS 13 ROBOCOP 3 Amiga By Ocean DID's 3D spectacular, consisting of a variety of different types of game. The game also beat the movie to the screens by nearly three years. 38 OUS GOLD BOUGHT THE RIGHTS TO PRODUCE A GAME BASED ON THE WORKS OF CHARLIE CHAPLIN BACK IN 1987, BUT THE PROJECT HIT VARIOUS SNAGS AND HAD TO BE ABANDONED "


"...TO SMALL-SCREEN MONEYSPINNER FEATURE CVG ...and the last action heroes T&SK THE LAST ACTION HERO SNES By Sony The film was bad enough; the game, an incredibly ropey Final Fight rip-off with appalling graphics and gameplay, is even worse. Nice one, Sony. sive corner of the games market? Simon Alty is adamant; \"From Ocean's point of view movie licences will grow less and less in the medium term. Games on the new formats demand a development cycle much longer than before, and this lessens any impact of simultaneous game and film release unless we get involved in a movie project at script.\" Alty adds though, Movie licences have helped bring Ocean tremendous success over the years. They provide maximum press coverage and cross over into all media. They have accounted, however, for only 10-15% of our product releases and I would make an educated guess that this carries across to all game releases over the past 10 years. So original product reigns supreme it just doesn't get the front page of the specialist press as often!\" Fennah, on the other hand, is more bullish; \"Movies will continue to provide exciting themes for videogames. Acclaim's agreement with James Cameron's Lightstorm Entertainment, for example, provides us with rights to his movie properties for interactive entertainment and we look forward to working with him.\" It looks like the cameras will keep rolling for some time to come. UNIVERSAL SOLDIER Game Boy By Accolade Nothing more than Turrican with this Van Damme/Lungren licence tagged on. An all right enough game, but nothing whatsoever to do with the film. 9 1 0001000 401 ossz oo 003 WAYNE NAVY SEALS Amiga By Ocean A very shoddy platform shoot-'em-up, full of bugs and based on a low quality, star-free movie that did little at the box office anyway. VLUSU Boorpresa WAYNE'S WORLD SNES By T-HQ How do you turn a smash film into a hit game? T-HQ Obviously hadn't a clue when it produced this tedious, tenuous platformer. APPARENTLY, A COMPUTER GENERATED IMAGE OF BRANDON LEE WAS USED TO COMPLETE THE MOVIE THE CROW AFTER THE STAR'S UNTIMELY DEATH. 39 "


"CVG WORK IN PROGRESS GUTS GALOREAND A WHOLE LOT MORE! WORK PROGRESS MEGA DRIVE BEAT-'EM-UP LUNCONFIRMED OUT SEPT NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE SNES. PC GAME BOY GAME GEAR, AMIGA, MEGA 32, SONY PLAYSTATION VERSIONS PLANNED MORTAL KOMBAT TI What's going to win in the battle of the beat-'emup sequels Super Street Fighter or the follow-up to Acclaim's biggest-ever hit? f we asked for the name of the game that became one of the biggest-selling videogames of alltime, you'd have a hard time guessing what we're after. If we said it was the goriest beat-'em-up ever seen, then you'd have no problems workA Baraka goes crazy-ape bonkers with his sai much to ing out that we're referSub-Zero's displeasure. ring to Mortal Kombat. And if you take a look at record-breaking prequel, thought the furore over Drive version, and the headline on this very Mortal Kombat Il boasts the original was bad a very impressive page, you'd be in nosome big improvements enough, wait until the eight featuring in the doubt that we're bringing more characters, more newspapers and MPs get hand-held games, Mortal you a good, hard look at death moves, certainly death moves, certainly a look at a look at this! With all 12 Kombat Ilis streets the 16-bit Sega convermore blood and a host of coin-op fighters ahead of its predecessor sion of the even bloodier secret surprises. If you squeezed into the Mega in the quantity stakes, sequel, Mortal Kombat II! and when you bear in Developed on mind that Probe has Mega Drive, Game Boy managed to shoe-horn in and Game Gear by interall the babalities, friendnationally renowned ships and death moves development house into a 24 Meg MD cart, Probe, the firm which you can appreciate the also produced the sort of work that's gone into making Mortal II one of the most accurate coin-op converts ever Sub-Zero gets his own seen. There's going to be back on Baraka with a wellplaced blast of his special another big-name battler ice weapon. That'll teach to rival MKII, in the him, the big-toothed git. shape of (as if you need telling) Capcom's Super Street Fighter II (and if you turn to page 58 you can see the reviews of Mega Drive and SNES versions) and it'll be interesting to see which of the two comes out tops with the punters. In the meantime, take a butchers at these extremely impressive Mega Drive shots and go wild with delight! GAME BY PROBE CONTACT ACCLAIM (071-344 5000) FOR INFO O 24 MEG CARTRIDGE ONE OR TWO PLAYERS 40 "


"GUTS GALOREAND A WHOLE LOT MORE! WORK IN PROGRESS CVG Why slaughter your opponent when you can be his friend, like Liu Kang's attempting here? Shang Tsung prepares to hurl the unfortunate Raiden over his shoulder. If you get bored with Shang, a quick special move allows you to turn into the other MKII characters, complete with their special moves! GORE BLIMEY! SNES IN MKII BLOOD SHOCK! A Kitana's forceball is useful for wearing down an opponent's energy from afar. Mega Drive AND SNES versions of MKII are both looking likely to receive 17 ratings in the controversial new videogame classification system because we're informed that, unlike the prequel, SNES Mortal Il includes ALL the blood and death moves of the coin-op! Not only that, you won't have to mess around with joypad combinations to activate the gore like you did in the Mega Drive version of the first game they'll be there the second you switch on. Rivers of blood, warping kids' minds, society down the pan etc... A This particular attack really wipes out enemies. but it is a bit tricky to pull off so practice is essential. IS IT JUST ANOTHER MORTAL MONDAY You move further up the mountain the more enemies you take apart. Johnny Cage is just starting out on the road to Mortal immortality here. Al'd duck out of the way of that dangerous-looking fireball if I were you! To prove that all the death moves are in there, here's Liu Kang in Dragon mode. And yes, he does bite his oppo in two one for the MPs to whinge about there. A Jax isn't having his leg pulled by Shang Tsung he's having his arms nearly ripped out of their sockets! AT 24MEG. MORTAL KOMBAT IL IS GOING TO BE MORE EXPENSIVE THAN YOUR NORMAL MEGA DRIVE CARTRIDGE. BUT ACCLAIM ASSURES US THAT ITU BE NO MORE THAN . THATS BIG OF THEM. 4 "


"CVG WORK IN PROGRESS GUTS GALORE-AND A WHOLE LOT MORE! KITANA VINS RED HP A A new special move is Sub-Zero's ability to drop a pool of ice on the floor. causing his enemy to slide around and giving Sub an open shot. A See, she's not all bad, is she. The friendship moves are a welcome inclusion in the Mega Drive game. A Kung Lao's hat is one of the most dangerous implements in the entire game. And his death move is easily the goriest of the lot he slices his enemy right down the middle using his titfter. PLAYSTATION TOO! MEGA-CD BOO-HOO A Don't get involved with Kitana she really has got a kiss of death! A We're not completely sure that Raiden should be bringing his off-spring into the arena, especially when he's taking on someone like Scorpion! Mind you, the bairn seems to be enjoying the show... So you're thinking of buying one of the new breed of games machines, but you're a bit worried that all you'll be able to buy for it is terribly high-brow RPGs and stupid encyclopaedias. Well worry no more! For Probe has informed us that it is definitely looking to convert Mortal Kombat II to the likes of the Sega Mega 32 and Sony's PlayStation, and if they go well then more converts could follow. What won't be available, though, is MKII for Mega-CD. Not from Probe, anyway, who have no plans to convert it to Sega's flawed CD format. S. CHOOSE YLOR FIGHTER SNES, GAME BOY GAME GEAR A Look! All 12 characters! All complete with every move you enjoyed in the arcades! ENGAGE YOLL FIGHTER Handheld owners are in for a pleasant surprise we've seen the Game Boy and Game Gear versions of MKII and they're looking excellent! Probe has managed to squeeze EIGHT of the original 12 characters into the little Sega and Nintendo games, complete with death moves. Obviously, some features have had to be dispensed with you won't find friendships or babalities, for instance but you'll find that they're both very nippy, extremely responsive and geared up for two players using the respective link-ups. And what about the SNES game? American development house Sculptured Software, a Yank version of Probe, is handling that conversion. The Probe boys have informed us that it's almost exactly the same as the Mega Drive version same graphics, same sound, same gameplay. If that's the case, then everybody will be happy come the game's all-cartridge-formats launch on September 9. A Although he plays similarly to his former self, Liu Kang's now got the excellent Dragon death move, which is a real stunner. A What's the difference between Luther Vandross and Raiden? Raiden's got no soul. 42 THE MAIN REASON PROBE SAY THEY WONT CONVERT MKII TO MEGA-CD IS BECAUSE THE COMPACT DISC ACCESS TIME ON THE SYSTEM IS SO SLOW THAT IT WOULD TAKE FOREVER TO LOAD IN EACH CHARACTER. RUINING THE FLOW OF THE GAME. FAIR ENOUGH, WE SUPPOSE. "


"CREATURE FEATURE WORK IN PROGRESS WORK CIN PROGRESS CREATURE SHOCK ICD-ROM SHOOT 'EM-UP TBA OUT NOV NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE CD-I VERSION PLANNED The company that created the Super FX chip turns its attention back to games programming and it looks like a welcome return for the 3D specialists... 4 A Argonaut is famed for producing high-quality titles with superb graphics. Creature Shock doesn't look like being the exception to the rule either, with excellent rendered monsters milling around. hy is it people excuse to send in a team believe that of UN-sponsored after the year hard lads to wipe 2000, the world is immeout the inevitable diately going to become alien threat. a cesspit of corporate The name of the degradation? We've seen game comes from it in Blade Runner, we've the programmers' seen it in Aliens, we've inspired use of seen it in untold video Earth-based creagames such as Syndtures such as ants icate now it's the turn and exotic fish as of Creature Shock. the basis for the 2023 is the year in aliens in this CDquestion, and things based shoot-'em-up. have become so bad on Melding two distinct Earth that a colonisation types of style on-foot ship has been built to blasting and in-flight, take people to new erm, blasting, producer worlds. Which is all well Argonaut is promising and good, but while more from Creature passing Saturn all conShock than your normal, tact with the craft is lost. run-of-the-mill CD game. Which is, let's face it, a And coming from the perfectly reasonable company that brought us One of the less pleasant creatures you come across during your travels. They don't get much better. the revolutionary Super FX chip for SNES, we're expecting something special when the game appears in time for Christmas. A Part of the excellent intro sequence, which details the plot and also gives you the opportunity to show off to your mates just what your machine can do. You should see it moving, that's all we can say. OTHER VERSIONS The animation of the characters is particularly impressive, as is the lightsourcing which works very well when you see it eminat ing from this bloke's helmet. Creature Shock is the first game to be released on CD-I, following Philips' three-game agreement with Virgin Interactive Entertainment. It should be a spot-on convert of the PC version, and could be just the thing to help CDin its quest for big sales. Another shot taken from the introduction. Virgin hopes to have Creature Shock released on both CD-ROM and CD-i by Christmas what a treat, eh? All the enemies in the game are based on real life creatures such as tropical fish and, like here, various types of insect. CD-1 NOT YET REVIEWABLE GAME BY ARGONAUT CONTACT VIRGIN INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT (081-960 2255) FOR INFORMATION DISC SIZE 550MB 43 "


"CVG WORK IN PROGRESS SHAQATTACK WORK IN PROGRESS SHAQ FUS MEGA DRIVE IBEAT-'EM-UP IUNCONFIRMED OUT NOVEMBER 1994 INO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED The Beast moves in for the kill as his hooded opponent fends him off with his defence move. When a game stars Shaquille O'Neal you'd think it would be a basketball game, wouldn't you? Wrong, get set for a fast-paced beat-'em-up... eveloped by with their own special Paris-based moves (at least 60). Delphine, the Shaq's specials include a original plan was to make fireball and a circular saw Shaq Fu a basketball which whirls around his game, but since Shaq is head and can be hurled also a martial arts freak, at the enemy or used a fighting game seemed defensively; then there's a better idea. Anyway, on Wolfman whose bite is with the storyline... worse than his bark and While touring with his The Mummy who ties victeam, Shaq is spirited off tims in his deadly banto a new dimension. Once dages and then moves in there, he has to stop the for the kill. In Tournament ruler an evil mummy or Dual Mode, play Shaq from grabbing himself a or any of the other fightnew body and taking over ers in a duel to the death. the real world. You, as Interesting stuff watch Shaq take on, one by this space for fur. one, 11 fighters each ther updates. Life in a new dimension ain't fun when a Voodoo woman starts sticking pins in an effigy of you. 0756 Kung Fu experts and Hollywood stuntmen and women were all filmed against a blue background before being transferred, image by image, from the video sequences on to the advanced Silicon Graphics computer. Catwoman gets ready to pounce as she taunts her foe, bringing his Fury level up to boiling point. Voodoo woman transforms her shape to take on the hooded fiend from hell. ALTERNATIVE SNES Clayfighters Ocean/.99 Not a spectacular beat-'emup, but has some excellent comedy characters: from the plasticine-like Blob to the quiff-boffing Elvis lookie-likey. ISSUE 149: 79% GAME DESIGNED BY DELPHINE CONTACT ELECTRONIC ARTS (0753 549442) FOR INFORMATION 44 "


"ZAP COMPUTER GAMES TECHNO HOUSE.LOW LANE.HORSFORTH LS18 4DF MAIL ORDER SIZZLINGLY HOT LINE 0532 5.90*077 LOW LOW PRICES ALL THE LATEST GAMES & MACHINES SUPER QUICK DELIVERY NO SILLY MEMBERSHIP FEES REQUIRED TO BUY. OUR MOST FRIENDLY STAFF ARE WAITING FOR YOUR CALL ZAP HOURS: 9am-7pm Mon-Fri 9am-5pm Sat. and Sun. FAX NO: 0532 586523 OPEN FOR SERVICE AND PRICE DAYS A WEEK SUPER NES USA FAMICOM JAPAN 3-D-O USA BOMBERMAN CALL UPER STREET IGHTER SUPER METROID (NINTENDO).......... SUPER STREET FIGHTER .........................CALL 3-D-O SYSTEM... .00 SLAM MASTERS (CAPCOM).. . .....254.99 SUPER BOMBERMAN IT.... 259.99 TOTAL ECLIPSE. $49.99 STUNT RACE FX (NINTENDO) ..................99 RANMA 3 (BEAT EM UP) ... .CALL JOHN MADDEN... $49.99 STAR TREK (SPECTRUM HOLY BYTE) .......99 MYSTICAL NINJA II ............ .CALL JURASSIC PARK $49.99 SUPER STREET FIGHTER (CAPCOM)..........CALL KING OF THE MONSTERS IT. E39.99 ANOTHER WORLD ... .99 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER (CAPCOM .........254.99 SAMURAI SHOWDOWN. CALL SEWAR SHARK. .99 KNIGHT OF THE ROUND TABLE (CAPCOM) .99 WORLD HEROES IT ... .CALL ROAD RASH... .CALL FATAL FURY II (TAKARA)... 54.99 DRAGON BALL 2 II....... .99 PGA GOLF CALL LORD OF THE RINGS (INTERPLAY) ...........99 SUPER SOCCER II.... 120.00 FTFA SOCCER.... SOS (VIC TOKET)....... MUSCLE BOMBER..... ..CALL THE HARDE ....... .99 FIFA SOCCER (OCEAN/EA).... .99 PERBLE BEACH GOLF...... .249.99 KICK OFF II (IMAGINEER) ................. ......99 ULTRAMAN (JAP)............... .CALL WORLD CUP STRIKER (ELITE) ..................99 WACKY RACES (JAP).... .CALL RYAN GIGGS SOCCER (ACCLAIM)..... ... ....99 SEAL OF PHAROAH (JAP).... WORLD CUP SOCCER US 94 (US GOLD) .....99 SOCCER SHOOTOUT (CAPCOM ..................99 KING OF THE DRAGONS (CAPCOM .........254.99 PINBALL DREAMS (GAMETER)...............249.99 HARDWARE NINJA WARRIORS (TAITO)........................254.99 MEGAMAN SOCCER (CAPCOM)...... .99 MEGAMAN X (CAPCOM).... SNES US CONSOLE..............+.50 POP ...39.99 NEO GEO CONSOLE........... +7.50 P&P LEGEND (SEIRA) ....... 119.99 TIME TRAX (THQ)................ .99 NEO GEO USED CONSOLE ........+.50 P&P 3-D-O CONSOLE .99 GS (REMCO) ..... CRASH BURN..+.50 P&P HARDBALL I CACCOLADE) ....... ATARI JAGUAR UK CONSOLE........... ..CALL ..99 ATARI JAGUAR US CONSOLE ....+.50 P&P MIGHT & MAGIC II (FCI) ........ ULTIMA RUNES OF VIRTUE I.. SNES MULTITAP ..................224.99+.50 P&P 154.99 SNES PAUL BOOSTER................99+.50 P&P KING OF THE MONSTERS II............... .99 ATARI JAGUAR SPELLCRAFT (ASC ..... TRISTAR (NES TO SNES *** ....... ...$49.99 SPEEDY GONZALES (SUNSOFT) .............. ..99 CONVERTER). ...39.99 +.00 P&P UK MACHINE..... .CALL SUPER MAN (SUNSOFT)................. ..99 SNES MOUSE... ...99+.50 P&P US MACHINE ......... .....2275.00 ASCH FIGHTER STICK (SNVES).99+.00 P&P SPIDERMAN & VENOM (ACCLADO..........99 RAIDEN .99 VIRTUAL BART CACCLAIM ....... .99 TOP FIGHTER JOYSTICK (SNES)..99+.00 P&P CRESCENT GALAXY ... .229.99 OPERATION EUROPE (KOET)....... .59.99 NTSC GAME CONVERTER (SNES)...00+.50 P&P DINO DINO DUDES ..... ...CALL CLAYMATES (INTERPLAY) ..... ...99 NEO GEO JOYSTICK ..............00+.00 PGP TEMPEST 2000 154.99 SECRET OF MANA (SQUARE) .......... .99 NEO GEO MEMORY CARD.......00+.50 P&P ALIEN vs PREDATOR.... .CALL FINAL FANTASY IT (SQUARE)......... .99 3-D-O PAD.... ....99+.50 P&P WOLFENSTEIN 3D..... WIZARDRY S (CAPCOM)................. .99 JAGUAR PAD.. $24.99+.50 PB-P DOOM....... .CALL JOE & MAC II (DATA EAST) ..... ..99 NEO GEO STYLE JOYSTICK (SNES) .99+.00 P&P KASUMI NINJA.... BUGS BUNNY (SUNSOFT)...... .99 LETHAL ENFORCERS + GUN .99 BATTLE CARS (NAMCO) ..... 234.99 MARIOS TIME MACHINE.. ..99 NBA JAM (ACCLAIM... .99 FLASHBACK (US GOLD) ....... .99 AERO THE ACROBAT (SUNSOFT)............. ....24.99 ACTRAISER II (ENZX)..... ..99 SIDE KICK SOCCER II. ...CALL TOP HUNTER COOL SPOT (VIRGIN).. ...CALL .99 GOOF TROOP (CAPCOM)...... ....24.99 WIND JAMMERS...... 165.00 NHL 94 (EA) ...... SPIN MASTERS..... . .00 ...99 J MADDEN 94 (EA)...... ART OF FIGHTING IT......... .00 STANLEY CUP HOCKEY (NINTENDO)........99 SUMURAI SHOWDOWN .......... ...165.00 SENSIBLE SOCCER....... ..29.89 OVER 100 USED CARTRIDGES FROM  CALL SPORTS BASEBALL/FOOTBALL (MALIBU) .99 KEN GRIFFEY BASEBALL NINTENDO)...144.99 OPERATION LOGIC BOMB.................... ...99 MECAROBOT GOLF........ .00 TECMO SUPER BOWL (TECMO) .............. .:24.99 ORDER FORM NAME EVO (ENIX).. .99 Send to this address: RED LINE FI RACER... .99 ZAP PEACE KEEPERS (JALECO).... ADDRESS ADDRESS 249.99 TECHNO HOUSE T-2 THE ARCADE GAME (ACCLAM)...........99 OLYMPIC GAMES (US GOLD).............. .99 LOW LANE, HORSFORTH POSTCODE ROMANCE OF THE MI KINGDOM MI........ LEEDS LS18 4DF NOBUNAGA'S AMBITION ....... 39.99 KENDO RAGE...... ........024.99  Please rush me the following TELEPHONE NO. BUSBY.... 24.99 DARIUS TII............ Credit card number ITEM .99 PRICE POST/P TOTAL IMPOSSIBLE MISSION (MICROPROSE) .......CALL PIRATES OF THE DARK WATER (SUNSOFT) 249.99 ANDRE AGASSI TENNIS TECMAGIK)....249.99 Expiry Date SPECTRE (GAMETER) . .. 19.99 SENSIBLE SOCCER (SONY)..... BATTLE CARS (TECMO) ........ ..229.99 Cheque Credit Card Postal Our premises are bulging with games, Order so if you don't see what you want do not despair Just call! All Postal orders and credit VISA card purchases will be whisked to you the Please make cheques/PO's GRAND TOTAL same day. All prices subject to change and payable to ZAP availability. Post and packaging Games Switchcards welcome. .50 Handhelds 25 Consoles .50 Please quote issue no. for Switch. NEO-GEO MD WHEN BUYING A UK SNES CONVERTOR FOR .50 AND A USUAP NINTENDO GAME YOU CAN KNOCK A WHOLE e 10 OFF 1'34'os 000 THE PRICE OF THE GAME, NOW THAT'S WHAT I CALL AN OFFER EXAMPLE IF YOU BUY THE CONVERTER & GOOF TROOP THE TOTAL COST WOULD BE A MERE .49 + (P&P) OUCH!! SAID OUR BANK MANAGER! ITUNT RACE FX CALL CUT HERE Post and packaging Games 1.50 Handhelds 5 Consoles .50 SUPER METROID .99 "


"CVG WORK IN PROGRESS THE MOWER THE MERRIER WORK THE LAWNMOWER MAN SPROGRESS MEGA DRIVE PLATFORM/SIM 1.99 TOUT SEPTEMBER IPC CD-ROM AND SNES ALSO AVAILABLE MEGA-CD VERSION PLANNED Killer bees and a virtual reality super-villain, it can only be the return of the Lawnmower Man. awnmower Man, ble for the SNES and PC the movie, is versions. In fact, it's the generally con SNES game that Mega sidered a bit 'cultish'. Drive version is being but that hasn't stopped based on. There are it raking in a massive some changes, though. $145,000,000 in the two The programmers have years since it was obviously listened to the released. Roughly trans criticisms that were loblated, that means licenbied at the SNES original ce fodder, and now that and cut down the numTime Warner has it, it's ber of platform stages, not going to let go. and have also increased Despite Warner releathe excellent VR secsing the game, it's still tions. Not only this but being programmed by the animation has also SCI the team responsi been vamped up some what, so we could be looking at a much improved game. VSI A To reach the VR sections you need to collect discs during the platform stages. These are hidden in such obscure places as dustbins and behind bushes. Thankfully the rather dull platform sections have been cut down for the Mega Drive version of the game. This tunnel flight level rotates through 360 degrees at an even faster rate than in the SNES version! Here you can control the rotation to line enemies up in front of you. A The giant VR 'bees' are just one of the many bosses you will come across on your journey. Mode-7 ahoy! This excellent flight section has super fast Mode 7. style graphics, a first on the Mega Drive. They said it couldn't be done! OTHER VERSIONS The SNES version is similar to the Mega Drive one. The PC game, however, is a different kettle of kippers, with stunning graphics and gameplay. In-between the platform stages you are taken to a modern day Space Invaders-type shoot-'em-up. PC CD-ROM ISSUE 148 88% SNES ISSUE 145 @ 88% GAME BOY ISSUE 145 @ 87% This is another one of those Mode 7-type levels which this time tilts from side to side. Fasten your seatbelts! GAME BY SCIO CONTACT TIME WARNER (0604 790785) FOR INFORMATION 46 "


"GET OUT AND GET TO YOUR POST WORK IN PROGRESS CVG WORK SPROGRESS OUTPOST IPC CD-ROM I STRATEGY/SIMULATION .99 OUT NOW INO OTHER VERSION AVAILABLE PC AND CD MISSION DISC PLANNED The latest instalment in strategy games from Sierra On-Line this time for the PC CD-ROM. t is 50 years from now. Planet Earth has been destroyed. Your mission is to discover new worlds and rebuild human civilisations using the very lat est nuclear fusion space exploration technology. Coo. You must locate suitable planets and establish colonies on them, and once this is complete with food sources, and is able to sustain life forms, you might think your job is over. Wrong pal. You have to keep your colony alive and kicking, which entails you dealing with hostile rebel colonies who try to nick your food, water and even the air that you breathe! This strategy contender is looking good, but sonically we can't comment as there isn't even any sound yet! However we have been promised that the digitised stereo soundtrack and effects are something very special. Let's hope the gameplay is. Could this be one of the mutants who you will come face-toface with on your quest? Could be, but who would want to meet a creature like this down a dark alley? Build Mankind's frein Sicida The planetary systems, robotics and spacecraft design are based on NASA findings. Here you fuel up (Super Unleaded of course) from Jupiter's atmosphere. The 3D rendered graphics in this game have to be seen to be believed, they look like something out of Babylon 5! They are so good we nearly wet ourselves! The screenshots don't do them justice. This robot miner digs for resources in potential mining spots. There is a large variety of robots in Outpost, from explorer to bulldozer robots. ALTERNATIVE MEGA DRIVE Populous 2 Virgin/.99 Strategy sims aren't rampant on Mega Drive, but this cart shows the genre can work. Nurture your population and manage the calls (or should that be forces?) of nature. ISSUE 142: 86% This is where you will start your journey on the mothership. The revamped Populousesque interface is what you will be using to take control of your planet. GAME BY SIERRA CONTACT SIERRA (0734 303322) FOR MORE INFORMATION 42 "


"CVG COMPETITION FAB FOR JAG! GO 64-BIT WITH RUMBELOWS| AND CVG! HALF PRICE JAGUAR TOYPAD FROM CAMIES ARENA TO BE RETAINED BY THE CUSTOMER Take this voucher into The Games Arena at your local Rumbelows and hand it to a member of staff. The voucher entitles you to buy an Atari Jaguar controller for half price (.99 instead of the normal .99). This offer is only valid using this voucher. Only one half price Jaguar joypad can be redeemed per voucher. This offer is only valid while stocks last (photcopies not accepted). -------------------------------TO BE RETAINED BY THE STORE NAME: ADDRESS: o you've just bought an Atari Jaguar, one of the most powerful games machines on the market today, but you're slightly peeved 'cos you want to play two-player Raiden or Tempest 2000 but there's only one joypad in the box. Well don't fret CVG has teamed up with top High-Street store Rumbelows, and its videogames arm The Games Arena, to bring Jaguar owners a totally EXCLUSIVE offer! Simply snip out the coupon on this page, take it into your nearest branch of Rumbelows and you can buy a second Jag pad for HALF THE RECOMMENDED RETAIL PRICE! That's right you only need to fork out a piddling .99 instead of the usual .99! So just clip out the coupon and hand it over with your tenner and if you're popping into The Games Arena to buy a Jaguar, why not hand over an extra  to the nice lady behind the counter for a copy of Tempest 2000 because Rumbelows is also knocking this superb cart out for half price with every Jag sold! CVG verdict? Two offers you really can't afford to miss. POSTCODE: PHONE NO: EXCLUSIVE CVG READER OFFER AGE: DATE: BRANCH INSTRUCTIONS: DISCOUNT THE JOYPAD BY  USING DISC 9/684 PLUS! WIN A JAGUAR! n an inexplicable fit of generosity, Rumbelows and The Games Arena has decided, along with with its fab half price joypad offer, to literally GIVE AWAY an Atari Jaguar Cybermorph Pack to one lucky CVG reader! Unbelievable but true! The pack, containing the Jaguar console, one joypad, the usual gubbins to link it to your telly and, of course, the 3D shooting extravaganza Cybermorph, normally costs .99, but one of you jammy so-and-sos can walk away with one without putting your hand in your pocket! To put yourself in with a chance of winning, simply answer the following question: WHAT'S THE NAME OF THE FORTHCOMING JAGUAR GAME BASED ON TWO FUTURISTIC MOVIE MONSTERS? Bit easy, really. Write the answer down on a postcard or the back of a sealeddown envelope, add your name and address and post it off to: THESE RUMBELOWS LADS ARE A BIT GOOD, AREN'T THEY?, CVG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. Please make sure your entry reaches us by August 14th 1994, otherwise your chance of grabbing the Jag will have scarpered, into the jungle undergrowth, never to be seen again. RUMBELOWS COMES ARENA Employees of EMAP and Rumbelows, and the families and friends thereof, are ineligible to enter. The editor's decision is final. No correspondence will be entered into. The prize is as stated, and no cash alterna tive is offered. 48 "


"JOLLY HOCKEY STICKS WORK IN PROGRESS CVG WORK NHL '95 PROGRESS MEGA DRIVE I SPORTS SIMULATION | .99 TOUT SEPTEMBER INO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED Another year, another hockey game from EA. Same old game different wrapping? Let's see... henever the top games software people come to see us with their hot new products there's always a big fight to see who will take the first look. When Electronic Arts came in a couple of weeks back, though, with the latest in a hockey series that stretches back nearly five years, there wasn't exactly a rush to see it. Why? Primarily because the last two versions changed very little from the definitive NHL '92. This time round, though, the news is much better. EA has listened to the criticism and has radically overhauled the game engine. The most noticeable difference is in the graphics which now have a lower viewpoint and larger player sprites. Add to this the ability to play a full season, a player trading option, a create-player option and new player moves and EA could well have pro. grammed a hockey game to rival the brilliance of the original. Look out for the review in a couple of issues' time. In NHL Hockey scoring has never been the easiest of things until you're a pro and with improved artificial intelligence expect it to require even more talent. The new lower viewpoint and larger player sprites make for more realistic player movements, but thankfully the great gameplay will be untouched. Players can get injured, but not from fighting. The fight option from the original EA Hockey is still missing. A two-on-two practice mode will let you try out all the new moves without the stress of a real game. One of the new player moves will entail the defenders div. ing down to stop an opposition team's slapshot going any. where near the goal. ALTERNATIVE TRADE PLAYER GAME BOY Speedball 11 CHICAGO POSITION RATING POSITION BOT Nintendo/24.99 The nearest to hockey that you can get on the Game Boy. Speedball is a futuresDETROIT port game, ie it's very violent, and this is an excellent conversion of what was originally a big hit on the 16-bits. ISSUE 135: 86% RATI It has to be said that the graphics were starting to look a little dated, after remaining much the same in the previous four games, so finally they've been given a Nineties gloss. Players can now be bought and sold on the transfer market. Teams can also be created from scratch so you could, for instance, have a team made up of CVG staff. (Saddo.) Wou GAME BY ELECTRONIC ARTS CONTACT ELECTRONIC ARTS (0753 549 442) FOR MORE INFORMATION 49 "


"CVG WORK IN PROGRESS OT! YOU LOOKING FOR A FIGHT? WORK LEGEND PROGRESS ISNES BEAT-'EM-UP IUNCONFIRMED TOUT SEPT INO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE INO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED Arcade Zone hopes to create a legend with its first game: a horizontally scrolling beat-'em-up with an unfea. sibly large sword... Another brilliant effect is seen in this section. The translucent glass is breathtaking to behold as you walk through it. mo erhaps the most you're not familiar with obvious reason the genre the idea is to for Golden Axe walk across numerous never making it on to the horizontally scrolling SNES was that it was levels mashing to a pulp created by Nintendo's anything which gets in arch enemy, Sega. It the way. Although Leg. seems strange though, end doesn't really offer that something similar anything new, it's great has yet to make an fun to play, as anyone appearance. who's familiar with the Newcomer Arcade Streets of Rage series Zone is set to change will testify. that, and from what See for yourself when we've seen so far it we spill its pint and give looks like being some it a good seeing to thing of a blinder. If around September time. A It might be a computer game but the preliminary ideas are still sketched out on paper. For instance, here's a look at your typical baddy, ie someone who's going to do to you what a shredder does to paper. A There's some great technical touches in this game, like these smart effects you can see in the foreground scenery. The flame effects later in the game are especially good. Here's an example of one of the typical bosses you can expect to come across during your journey. It's best to save your magic for these guys because they're tough cookies. It'll be worth keeping an eye out for keys because the chests which they open will be chock-a-block full of bonus items. ALTERNATIVE MEGA DRIVE Streets of Rage 3 Sega/.99 Continuing series of this horizontally scrolling beat-'emup. Similar to SOR 2 but with more polished graphics and new characters to play. ISSUE 152: 82% Arcade Zone is clearly into lots of detail. Here you start off in daylight, but once inside the building the light gently fades to dark. A It's not frustrating but the difficulty level is quite high so keep an eye out for food to top up your health level. GAME BY ARCADE ZONE CONTACT ARCADE ZONE (071-721 7805) FOR INFORMATION 50 "


"FACT: NINTENDO MAGAZINE SYSTEM HAS REVIEWED MORE UK SNES RELEASES THAN ANY OTHER MAGAZINE* MROWORLD SUPER NINTENDO ...SO WHY READ ANYTHING ELSE? Nintendo Magazine System: everything you need to know about SNES, NES, Gameboy and more. OUT 19th EVERY MONTH. * Figures based on October '93 March '94 issues. "


"CVG WORK IN PROGRESS ELBOW ON THE WINDOW TIME WORK IN PROGRESS A1200 I RACING GAME I.99 OUT JULY ISNES VERSION ALSO AVAILABLE CD32 VERSION PLANNED Get into gear with the latest driving game from those Sheffield-based boy racers at Gremlin! TOP GEAR 2 erhaps the most perfect conversion matenovel aspect of rial for the Amiga. Top Gear 1 and 2 And cor blimey here it on the SNES was that is! Prepare for all the the programmers didn't usual racing game fea starting to show their resort to using Mode tures, like full screen age it seems only fitting 7 graphics, something one-player option or split that it should be Gremlin that's almost unheard of screen two-player mode, who releases an even in SNES racing games. nitros and a prize money smarter title. With any Add the fact that Top option so that you can luck Top Gear 2 should Gear 2 is a fine game buy better equipment.be hitting motorway CVG and it sounds like the With the Lotus games in the next issue. GUVO LL 29 19 E MORE www o og KT GUTO 11 Look out for some great ways of mashing up your car which include jumps, spins and spectacular flips when you crash. wako 15 GULO 20 tmp Ova 0-26\"20 LOGICE A Backgrounds and trackside scenery are looking very detailed and are a considerable improvement over Gremlin's earlier Lotus games. KNH UTO 1096 AUTO BE60 LA 101 20TH LAR1 Use prize money to improve tyres, gearbox, engine and armour which limits the damage from crashes. You'll need plenty of upgrades if you hope to stay in the leading pack over all 64 courses. GUVO CR las UST Thankfully there's no noticeable slowdown in the split screen two-player version, unlike Virtua Racing on Mega Drive. OTHER VERSION There's a lot more racing games available on the SNES but this version of Top Gear 2 is one of the main contenders, especially if you're sick of that Mode 7 look. A Like Titus' Lamborghini game, prize money is on offer for when you do well in a race. Use this to customise your car and hopefully make things even easier for yourself. A All the usual weather conditions are thrown at you: rain, fog and snow, as well as a little sunshine. SNES ISSUE 1440 87% GAME BY GREMLIN CONTACT GREMLIN (0742 753423) FOR MORE INFORMATION 52 "


"EA SPORTS MAKES ANOTHER RACQUET WORK IN PROGRESS CVG WORK EA SPORTS PROGRESS TENNIS MEGA DRIVE L SPORTS .99 LOUT JUNE LNO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE LOTHER VERSIONS PLANNED King of the sports game, EA Sports turns its attention to tennis at last... AEA is spending a lot of time in making sure the court dynamics are recreated faithfully. For instance the ball will bounce a treat on the hard court, while not bouncing much on a clay one. Ithough EA the rotoscoped players Sports has a who have a similar look superb record it and feel certainly are. shouldn't get complacent And to that you can since this is Wimbledon add realistically simulatseason, and there's plened court surfaces, a ty of competition out coaching mode and plenthere in videogame land, ty of attention to detail most notably the ballsy_including chalk puffs, Pete Sampras Tennis squeaking trainers, argufrom CodeMasters (CVG ing with the umpire and 151 84%). of course compatibility To challenge the com with the 4-Way-Play petition, EA Sports adaptor. See for yourself Tennis will feature 16 whether it plays like a venues and singles and British nobody or a doubles play. OK, so Wimbledon champ in a that's nothing new but couple of issues time. Apart from the grass court there will also be clay. indoor and hard courts too. Like many golf games, EA Sports Tennis will have a serve meter to allow for variation in the power of shots. The 4-Way Play adaptor seems like it was designed for a game of doubles and EA Sports Tennis will probably see its best implementation yet. TOURNAMENT Tournament Name Key Biscayne Open V It wouldn't be an EA Sports game without a decent crowd and you can be assured of a wildly animated bunch in the final version. The practice option is brilliant and takes you from the basics, right up to being able to pull off really difficult edge-of-court shots that are nigh-on impossible for your opponent to return. EXHIBITION ORR HOGAN OO The sprites in EA Tennis will be rotoscoped, which should lead to much more realistically animated characters than if standard sprites had been used. This chirpy little presentation number pops up before the start of every match to let you know where you're playing, and on what type of court. GAME BY EA SPORTS CONTACT EA SPORTS (0753 549442) FOR MORE INFORMATION 53 "


"CVG WORLD CUP CRAZY! MEET THE CREW So the World Cup is all but done and dusted, and even though England weren't there it's been a good 'un. What were the team's high points of the four-yearly soccer marathon this time round? PC BUSINESS SIM .99 HOUT AUGUST NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE 3DO, JAGUAR, CD-ROM, MAC, AMIGA, SNES, MEGA DRIVE VERSIONS PLANNED TO PAUL Being the only true footy fan on the team (Patterson is, after all, an Arsenal supporter), Rand's obviously the one who can comment on the general quality of the proceedings. It's been a cracker', remarks the ardent Liverpool (or whoever's doing well at the time Mark) fan, 'featuring everything that's best in the game. The thrills, the spills, Klinsmann's dives perfection. And England didn't do too badly either, although why they changed their name to Ireland I'll never know.' GARY Gaz isn't what you'd call mad on our national game, preferring to watch a couple of overpaid characterless types knock a ball over a net for an hour-and-a-half. But there must have been something in the month-long festival of footer that caught the eye of the Lord? The electric carts were a good laugh', comments Gary. It just goes to show how lazy these so-called 'professional footballers are, if they can't be bothered to walk off the pitch. What a miserable sod, eh readers? Roll up! Roll up! It's all the fun of the fair in Bullfrog's most eagerlyawaited game yet! t's summer again, and no doubt many of you are looking forward to a well-deserved break from school/college/work/the dole queue and a couple of weeks away on your hols. If that's the case, then it's a fair guess that many of you will be visiting one of the many theme parks around the world, such as Disney Land, Disney World and, erm, EuroDisney. Of course, if you can't be had with all those blokes dressing up as Mickey and Pluto, there's a host of others to choose from. And, if you're family is too tight to take you away with them, then you could always while away the time with Theme Park, the latest from Syndicate and Populous creator Pete Molyneux and his Bullfrog team. The aim of the game is to build your own funfair, including in it everything you'd expect to find in a real one. And while this may sound a very difficult task, actually building the thing is a cinch. It's making it and keeping it profitable that's the swine. DENIZ Deniz's favourite bit of the World Cup is the same every time it's on. I always have a good laugh when the winners actually receive the Cup.' Pray, tell us why. 'It's just the obviously pretend took of joy they have on their faces when they receive it. I mean, it looks nice and everything, but it's a bit small and the players don't get a big, fat cheque like other sportsmen do. And anyway, you'd think Germany would be sick of walking up those steps by now, wouldn't you. AIK You'd think that, with all the drama, controversy and goals displayed during World Cup USA '94. footy fanatic Rik would have been on his seat for the entire month, able to spout forth his feelings on the game we all know and love. But Rik isn't a happy man, the reason being he's a Tottenham supporter, and quite apart from the fact that he can never understand the manager when he's announcing the team, his lot have been deducted a massive twelve points for financial irregularities. Ha. 23 JUL MAAK Mark's a big fan of triumph over adversity. He is an Arsenal supporter, after all. So the dramatic first-round game between Italy and Norway really caught the miniature Gooner's attention. I didn't particularly want Italy to win, but those Norwegians were appalling, even when they had a three-man advantage.' It's just a pity that the Norway goal was disallowed the way it trickled through the goalie's hands would have reminded Mark of 70s North Bank hero Bob Wilson. On a good day, The most impressive attraction of the lot is the roller-coaster. It costs a fortune to put up and run, but if it's a good 'un the punters will flock like sheep in pasture. JULIE Typical woman, Julie. 'When it's finished' was her response when we asked her what she likes best about the World Cup. Frankly. that's not good enough, if only because we have to write the same amount of copy for hers as everyone elses to make it balance out. I mean, what about the things that all girls like about football, such as the big hunky guys showing their muscly legs off in those skimpy shorts? Wait a minute... this bit fits properly now. There, finished. ROKAS A FAIR DAY'S WORK Could you be up there with the big fairgrounds of this world? Follow these simple rules and you should be coining it in within months! PETAEA 'Yeah, the footy's been marvellous, hasn't it!' enthused 'Trea. 'It's quite difficult to get to see the games, but when I do they're a treat. I mean, did you see that one the other day when the forward dribbled the ball nearly forty yards around at least five defenders, then picked the ball up and chucked it to his team-mate, who lobbed it into the net to win 2/13 to 1/9? Ripper!' When we told her we wanted to hear her thoughts on the World Cup and not stupid, crap Aussie Rules Football, she shut up. STEVE Mr James is the spawniest get out of the lot of us, as he's just been to Chicago during the World Cup! Not for him the Mexican Wave, painting flags on faces and keeling over in 100 degree-plus heat, though Steve visited the Summer Consumer Electronics Show, bring ing back a whole heap of exclusives which you can check out in our 16 page special starting on page 6! And anyway, he knows as much about football as Deniz knows about not wearing woolly hats. First, build some walkways and drop a few rides in, then open the doors and let 'em test them out. You only start with a few rides and buildings, so plough some money into research to create new and better attractions. 54  GAME BY BULLFROG CONTACT ELECTRONIC ARTS (0753 549442) FOR INFORMATION ONE PLAYER "


"'ERE! YOU CAN'T PARK THERE! REVIEW CVG THEME PARK CO BIG TIME BURGER -2.8% If you want to make a bit of extra money at your patrons' expense, then why not make the burgers with a bit less beef and a touch more fat? A Negotiations are all-important, since they determine how much you'll end up forking out for wage rises and the like. You negotiate by pulling the arm (seen in the bottom-left) across the screen to meet the opponent's. If the two don't touch by the time the pile of biscuits in the middle of the screen runs out, you fail to reach an agreement and the staff go on strike. CIFE OF 5 31 CUSTOMERS OF STOCK PRICE SOLE CE BOUNT OF TO VERDICT VERSETTI CHE SEICES UTICKEHILL EAY QUITE ALOT MORE. Putting food bars next to white knuckle rides isn't a good idea, as the punters will eat first, go on the ride then come off and be sick on your nice, clean paths. Not exactly a crowd-puller, is it? EASINGTON WORLD PC When Pete Molyneux wrote his first business sim in 1982, he couldn't have predicted it would evolve into a game as intricate, feature-packed and as fun as Theme Park. The amount of options is incredible, and everything you do has an effect on another part of the park or its running. The graphics are cute and work well, as does the sound. But it's the game itself that's the star; like everything else Molyneux's done, Theme Park is out on its own in the enjoyment stakes. PAUL RAND ALTERNATIVE PC/MAC/AMIGA Sim City 2000 Maxis/Various Why build a theme park when you can construct an entire city? More complex than Theme Park, but it's as enjoyable in the long term. ISSUE 148: 94% A A fairground can't run without staff, although in this game you can't hire dishevelled travelling types who annoy the female visitors. A fairground isn't a fairground if it's got no rides, so make sure your park has plenty to keep the customers amused. BIG TIME FRIES GRAPHICS 77 SOUND 74 PLAYABILITY 92 VALUE 90 OVERALL Ah-ha! A chip shop. Now the trick here is to pile loads of salt on to the chips. so that the consumers will get thirsty and... ...rush to quench their raging thirsts. Another tip here is to put extra ice in the cartons to save on the amount of coke you use. Your park is running nice and smoothly now, with most people happy enough to spend a fortune. So what you do now is... ...flog the fair to the highest bidder at the first available auction! Now you can go and build an even bigger park with loads more rides! 92 THE BIGGEST ROLLER-COASTER IN EUROPE HAS RECENTLY OPENED IN BLACKPOOL, AND PEOPLE WHO WEAR WIGS HAVE TO TAKE THEM OFF FIRST AS THEY BLOW OFF IN THE 85MPH PLUS WINDS! 55 "


"CVG REVIEW SPACED-OUT DUDES GAME GEAR SHOOT.'EM-UP EUNCONFIRMED OUT JULY INES AND MASTER SYSTEM ALSO AVAILABLE INO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED DROP ZONE Another blast from the past, this time a convert of the brilliant C64 Defender clone... his game was out 10 years ago on the Commodore 64. Back in the days when graphics really didn't matter too much because the 'gameplay' was what was so phenomenal about the product. Most of you have no doubt played the classic Defender in one form or another, and Drop Zone is an addition to that list. It's a lightning-fast left-and-right scrolling blaster in which your task is to save men from invading aliens and drop them off at the nearest moonbase. A radar at the bottom of the screen plays a tactical part in planning rescue attempts and apart from air-bound aliens there are ground dangers like erupting volcanoes to keep clear of. The appeal of Drop Zone is the way in which the action can switch suddenly from you being in control to everything being out of control: you know something is going to happen, but you never seem to be ready for it. Clever stuff. You can complete a level by rescuing the pods and blasting all the baddies on screen. You get shown the bonuses that you've accrued at the end of game. You should do better than this, since only 100 bonus points is a bit poor! VERDICT ATTACK HAVE COMPLETES BONUS x 211 GAME GEAR Drop Zone has managed to retain the playability which made it such a popular blaster on the Commodore 64. Sure, it's good fun to play, but the problem with playing high-speed games on a small screen is that you have very little time to react to floating bullets, especially when they're just a pixel big! As a result Drop Zone is a difficult game. By design it is also very repetitive, yet it's the sort of low-tech blast-fest that will probably do well on Gear. DENIZ AHMET 1770 OUTO Like Micro Machines, Drop Zone has the facility for two players to play on the same machine. The problem with this game is that the bullets are only a pixel big and they are very difficult to spot on the Game Gear's small screen. The object of the game is to collect the blue pods and drop them off at the space station. Use the radar to locate them with ease. GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY 80 I VALUE 69 OVERALL ALTERNATIVE SNES Choplifter 3 Ocean/.99 Another old C64 game, this. Similar 'rescue gameplay to Drop Zone but the ability to power-up your weapons makes it far more inviting. ISSUE 147: 87% There are also dangers that you have to avoid on the ground; these erupting volcanoes can be lethal, so steer clear. If you don't collect the pods then the enemy will do its best to steal them and fly away GAME BY CODEMASTERS.  CONTACT CODEMASTERS (0926 814132) FOR INFORMATION TWO PLAYER GAME 56 "


"PCE-mes «I say, old boy — did you spill my port?» On-sale NOW, price .95  Ho Ho Ho MOTHERS Yes! The second finger-blisteringly good issue of PC GAMES is here and 'they' said it couldn't be done... PC GAMES looks good, tastes good and by gum! it does you good. It's quite literally jam-packed with top stuff, such as the completely EXCLUSIVE first review of THE CHAOS ENGINE, as well as in-depth analysis of THEME PARK, PACIFIC AIR WAR, THE SETTLERS and dozens more games besides. And, as if all that wasn't enough, there are amazing previews of SCAVENGER 4, CREATURE SHOCK and PROJECT-X, Ha do any CORP SEE and PER comprehensive playing guides to PAGAN: ULTIMA VIII, MYST and BENEATH A STEEL SKY, a simple-tofollow guide to buying and installing a soundcard and ooh! — loads more. And let's not forget as if we could — the two high-density disks affixed so firmly to the cover, bearing totally exclusive and fully-playable demos of ZOOL 2 and COOL SPOT. 0 S PC GAMES The only PC games mag you'll ever need. 6 PCG UPOZOMES poc "


"CVG REVIEW THE NEW CHALLENGERS ISNES AND MEGA DRIVE BEAT-'EM-UP .99 OUT ON IMPORT NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE PC AND 3DO VERSIONS PLANNED SUPER It has arrived. The biggest release of the year. But just how many times does Capcom expect you to pay for the same great game? t took two years for Capcom to develop the Super Street Fighter II coin-op. Recently the comSNES pany churned out the newer Turbo version and naturally TEOSTETO everyone was expecting that to end up on the new cart. Unfortunately, it hasn't; so what's new on these carts is little more than the four new characters. Of course, Street Fighter gurus will find the new combos and strategies that accompany the new challengers ample reason to buy this version. But weary of criticism, Capcom has added two new modes of play to Super, and these are Time Challenge, which gives you the chance to see how quickly you can slaughter an opponent, and Tournament Battle which is a sort of musical chairs with up to eight characters winners fighting winners and losers pitched against losers. Super Street Fighter II shouldn't be considered as a new game because it's really just an upgrade. It's just that it happens to be an upgrade to an awesome game. A Cammy's Cannon Drill is a great way to catch opponents by surprise. Best used as a follow up move in a combo. MEGA DRIVE ISNES Out of the new characters Cammy is probably the strongest thanks to her great special moves like this back breaking throw. Cammy's thrust Kick is very power ful and can be done from close or long range.  GAME BY CAPCOM MEGA DRIVE CONTACT COMPUTER EXCHANGE (071-636 2666) FOR INFORMATION CART SIZE: 32MEGS SNES / 40MEGS 58 "


"THE NEW CHALLENGERS REVIEW CVG ISNES Cammy's Spinning Knuckle is a great move to use in the corner and delivers a double hit. It can also shield you from fireballs etc. Erba MEGA DRIVE Despite weighing in at an astronomical 40 megs, the graphics in the Mega Drive game are not quite as good as those in the SNES one. All we can say is why? SUPER BIG CARTS HIT THE STREET THINGS ARE NOT AS THEY SEEM Dee Jay's projectile is very similar to Guile's Sonic Boom. Good for keeping opponents back. Ok, so you've already got Street Fighter II Turbo and you want to know what differences there are in SUPER. Here's what we've spotted in the two versions, apart from the new characters and their backdrops: SNES MEGA DRIVE THawks Bilarika * All new instruments making up the same music, * The sample \"fight' is missing at the start of a round. * New colour schemes on many of the backdrops. * Difficulty settings: easy is easier and harder is harder. * Honda's laugh has changed to something much more sinister. * On Ken's boat stage the cheering crowd is joined by cheering birds. Strange. * You can now hear the elephants during a match on Dhalsim's stage. * Different endings. * New Dizzies. * Change the colour of your character from an eight-strong selection. * Play in Tournament Mode. * New Time Challenge Mode. * New win pose for Guile. * New bonuses for combo attacks. * Dhalsim has a quicker teleport. * Ryu can now do a fireball. * Ken can do a flaming Dragon Punch. * New look 'Vs' screen. With a joypad T Hawk's Storm Hammer throw is even more difficult to pull off than it was in the arcades. THE FIRST STREETFIGHTER COIN-OP CAME OUT IN 1986 AND WAS FOLLOWED IN 1989 BY THE FIRST HOME VERSION ON THE TURBOGRAFX 59 "


"CVG REVIEW THE NEW CHALLENGERS MEGA DRIVE FKD Zany is AWAWISAN VW SNES VERDICT Although Super Street Fighter II is excellent, we reckon it's only worth buying if you haven't got the original since it's far too expensive, and you tend to only play the original characters anyway. MEGA DRIVE ISNES A Dee Jay's Double Dredd kick produces devastating double hits knocking opponents to the ground. SNES Annoyed that Capcom hasn't converted the TURBO version of SSFII? Me too.  or more for four new characters isn't worth it. I mean do you ever see people playing as the new characters in the arcades? Rarely, because everyone knows Ken is still the best. Still, SSFI is an exceptional conversion and let's not forget that part of the high cost is because this is the biggest SNES game ever at 32 megs. Still, have to admit it's still the best game on the SNES. DENIZ AHMET A Bar a few movements in the background characters the graphics are arcade perfect. A Dee Jay's Hyper Fist works well in combinations. ALTERNATIVES AMIGA Body Blows AGA Team 17/.99 It's the best beat-'em-up on any Amiga and combines all the key elements of moves, skill, graphics and longevity. High on fun. ISSUE 153: 88% MEGA DRIVE I SNES VERDICT PC IGRAPHICS 96 SOUND 80 PLAYABILITY 97 VALUE 30 A Hawk's Power Dive is a great long distance attack move. PC Mortal Kombat Virgin/.99 A fantastic conversion with spot-on graphics and more intelligent opponents. It has all the gore too, and is proof positive that beat-'em-ups work on the PC. Very good value. ISSUE 149: 86% OVERALL A With the Mega Drive's crap sound chip you'd expect the sound to be poor, and with ruff samples and muffled sound it certainly is. I SNES MEGA DRIVE The Special Champion Edition on Mega Drive sold poorly compared to the SNES. This means there's probably plenty of MD owners who haven't got a copy. If that's you then this is essential as the graphics and playability are almost identical to the arcade. Despite SSF Il's excellence it's hard to recommend, primarily for its price but also because I've a feeling that we'll see a Turbo version sooner or later. Brilliant stuff, but a Turbo version would have been even better. RIK SKEWS I SNES Can FIT COMBO A Fei Long's Rekka Ken is a smart triple combo which forces opponents into the corner as it hits them. T'LL HAVE TO SAVE UP 60 MEGA DRIVE GRAPHICS 95 SOUND PLAYABILITY 95 VALUE 80 OVERALL At present Super Street Fighter II is only available on import in Japanese format which is why it costs so much. The Mega Drive version should be out officially around the end of July for . As yet, Nintendo has no plans for a UK release. Both versions should also be out soon on American carts which'll be cheaper. A Fei Long's Rising Dragon Kick is a leg version of Ken's Dragon Punch but does more damage. It can be instantly performed, getting you out of danger. 88 Like the arcade the characters have a choice of eight different colours to choose from including a garish pink. 60 JUST IN CASE YOU'RE WONDERING, THE USUAL UP, DOWN, LEFT, RIGHT, ETC. CHEAT DOESN'T WORK ON SUPER. SEE IF YOU CAN FIND THE NEW CHEAT FOR EXTRA SPEED "


"GAMESTER GAMESTER md-6 md-3 MDG ---6 Button Joypad Independent Auto and Turbo Fire MD3 3 Button Joypad Independent Auto and Turbo Fire Multiplayer AdaptorUp to 5 player action on multi player games for SNES SUS, SN8 m GA MESTER JOYPAD FOR SUPER NES SNS JOYPAD FOR MD6 MEGADRIVES JOYPAD FOR MEGADRIVE ruseo urope SN6 6 Button Joypad Two Extra Buttons for Arcade Style Play sn-6 GAMESTER GAMESTE snSELECT START SLOW MOTION SELECT START SN8 6 Button Joypad Independent Auto and Turbo Fire LMP More Great Products Now available from: The Range of Video Game Accessories (GAMESTER VIDEO GAME ACCESSORIES For full details of prices and distributors contact: Leda Media Products Ltd., Stonemason's House, 75 Railway Street, Hertford, Herts. SG14 1RD Tel: 0992 503133 Fax: 0992 503061 "


"CVG REVIEW THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK PC EMPIRE SOCCER '94 FOOTBALL GAME .99 OUT NOW AMIGA VERSION ALSO AVAILABLE ISNES VERSION PLANNED As PC owners wait expectantly for a FIFA release, Empire manages to slide in with a substitute... here have been more soccer games this year than ever before, and unless you've been hanging out with a load of Outer Hebridians (or you're an American) you'll be able to guess why. Yes, the World Cup, tallied with the fact there are more formats than ever means there's a plethora of footy games. Even PC owners are suddenly spoilt for choice, and in the case of Empire Soccer it's actually appeared on the PC before any other planned formats. The problem though, is that every game seems to be emulating a previous release in terms of features offered, and softcos are making brasher claims on the box to the effect of 'more of this' and 'more of that'. So, when you actually get to play these games as often as us you can pick out the problems immediately usually. Empire Soccer was a strange one though, first we hated it, then we liked it, but the more we played it the less we liked it. So just what did we think of it? Read that final verdict... When you start flashing it means you've activated the special move shot as set in the options screen. It's a bit difficult to see what you're doing when this is happening. I VERDICT England England Sweden PLAY Time 1:87 Computer Power Orive Scoring goals is actually quite easy because the goalies are basically crap. route corpore Computer Power Drive RIESE Pro PC These are the biggest sprites in any footy game; which would be OK if the play perspective wasn't a bird's eye view. The problem is you don't see much of the pitch at any one time, which limits play to close-range tactics. The animation is also quite 'frameless' and the players don't look real when moving. Apart from these niggles, Empire Soccer is a comprehensive sim of the sport Covering all the options you're likely to find in any other soccer game. DENIZ AHMET Here is the option screen where you select player formation. Notice the 'special move' option which gives a choice of six skills, like improved tackling and banana shots. 72 Here the opposition prepares to block a free kick at the goal. Isn't it annoying that you can't actually see the goal itself. One of the novel features of this game are pop-up animations which show player and spectator reactions to goals and so forth. GRAPHICS 75 SOUND PLAYABILITY 80 VALUE 87 OVERALL ALTERNATIVE SNES FIFA International Soccer Ocean/.99 The most visually realistic game around with a damn good range of moves too. Captures the essence of the sport like no other. ISSUE 151: 90% A We've printed this picture so that you can see just how big the sprites are! There's hardly anything else on screen. This is one of the few footy games where the ref is actually on pitch with you. There's no getting away if you commit a foul move in this game. 28 GAME BY EMPIRE CONTACT EMPIRE (081-343 7337) FOR INFORMATION ONE DISK GAME 386 PC OR ABOVE REQUIRED 62 "


"MARIO ON THE MEGA DRIVE? REVI CVG MEGA DRIVE RACING GAME .4.99 OUT NOW MARIO ANDRETTI RACING ENO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE ENO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED Racing legend Mario Andretti runs out of petrol as he crawls into the Mega Drive garage... BAYSHORE INTERNATIONAL RACEWRY earing in mind that Mario Andretti's Racing is from EA, have you noticed something familiar about the graphic engine? In case not let me tell you that it looks mighty similar to the Road Rash one that's since turned up in Road Rash 2 and more recently Skitchin'. They say first impressions count and I have to say I was disappointed to see this game engine crop up yet again, but maybe this game has some redeeming features? Well, quite neatly there's more than one game on offer here with Indy car, Stock and Sprint (slow buggies on a muddy track) racing all catered for. There's a training feature seen in games like Nigel Mansell where Andretti himself guides you round the track, plenty of different views, including a two-player split screen option and the ability to use slipstreams and more realistic breaking than we've seen in any other race game. Amazingly enough Mario  Andretti racing is a 16 meg racing game. Plenty of memory must have been used up on these grainy pitstop sequences because the in-game graphics are very weak. LAP TIME LAPOT OO\" 88 BEST 0054-12 TOTAL 0155OS BHEAD 002659 BEHIND 0000-00 LAPO2 POSLO GEAR DRPM 000 mph BAYSHORE INTERNATIONAL RACEWAY VERDICT TLANE EARD RPM 073 mph LAP 01 POST START ON THE LEFT FOR THIS IST CHICAL GEAR 6 RPME 145 mph LAP01 POST LEAR DRPI 0 73 mph LAPOT POSI MEGA DRIVE Mario Andretti's is full of neat ideas like the slipstream and realistic braking effects, but sadly the game is a bit cack. The graphics are some of the worst I've ever seen on Mega Drive and I reckon they'd even feel embarassed on Master System. Sound couldn't be much worse either. And gameplay sucks, with no feeling of speed, control or the sensation of driving a real car. Looks like another case of all the money being spent on the licence instead of the gameplay. RIK SKEWS Like the Nigel Mansell game, Mario Andretti's Racing features a tutorial from the man himself. And the tips are just as useless as they are in the Gremlin game, CIRCUT PAIN There's a two-player option which improves the gameplay somewhat, but it's still not a patch on that in Virtua Racing OCR <Mario's has three racing games in one (so at least you get value for money: the) and they line up as follows: Indy (like Formula One but not as good), Stock (racing about in an old man's car) and Sprint (crappy slow cars on dirt tracks). TRANS MOTOR SPEEDWAY RINT GRAPHICS 48 SOUND 31 PLAYABILITY 51 VALUE 54 MAFE OVERALL ALTERNATIVE SNES Stunt Race FX Nintendo/TBA Reviewed on page 63, Stunt Race is a brilliant racing game that would be as good as Mario Kart if the two-player mode was up to scratch. ISSUE 153: 91% A Plenty of different views are available to you. The best is the one with the map which allows you to see how near the other drivers are both in front and behind you. < I can't believe that Electronic Arts has used the Road Rash graphic engine yet again. It's really starting to show its age. The sound isn't much cop either. 50 GAME BY ELECTRONIC ARTS CONTACT ELECTRONIC ARTS (0753 549 442) FOR MORE INFORMATION. 63 "


"Roadshow Venues 23-24th July Thorpe Park Surrey 26-28th July New Forest Show Brockenhurst Turn up and 30-31st July Fairford International Air Tattoo Gloucester turn on. 2-7th August 'Swanage Regatta & Carnival Dorset 9-10th August Lakeside Thurrock Essex The power is HERE for you 12-14th August Northampton Balloon Festival 17-21st August Airborne '94 Eastbourne Get your hands on the 24-27th August Dartmouth Royal Regatta 29-30th August Aintree Show Panasonic R-E-AL 3DO Interactive Multiplayer System 1st Sept Bucks Show Aylesbury TBC 3-4th Sept Sheffield Show at the most exciting experience of the year. 7-13th Sept Chessington World of Adventures The Panasonic Juggernaut Roadshow 21-25th Sept LIVE '94. Earls Court London 28th Sept. -4th Oct Lakeside Thurrock Essex will juggle your senses. 9th Oct East of England Autumn Exhibition Peterborough It is 11-15th Oct Medowhall Centre Sheffield 17-22nd Oct Merryhill Centre Brierly Hill West Midlands TBC 24-29th Oct Fairfield Halls Croydon 2nd Nov City of Portsmouth Firework Display the future 4th Nov 26th Big Night Out Suffolk 7-12th Nov Clifton Moor Centre York 14-18th Nov Panasonic R.E.A.L : Metrocentre Gateshead These details correct at time of going to press. For further info call: 0800 444 220 3DO 3DO INTERACTIVE MULTIPLAYER "


"CORP BLIMEY REVIEW CVG MEGA-CD ISHOOT-'EM-UP .99 OUT NOW INO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE INO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED BATTLECORPS Following the success of Thunderhawk Core comes down to earth with another CD corker... ETECTED hen you sit down to play this you can't help but think that if only Sega had got its act together and produced games of this quality early on in the Mega-CD's life, things would be very different now. Instead they've had to rely on thirdparty developers such as Core to deliver the goods aeons too late. Battlecorps is based on an improved version of the one that powered Core's other Mega-CD hit, Thunderhawk. This time, though, you're at the controls of flippin' massive Battletech-style robot death machines tramping through various post holocausttype landscapes. No puzzles, no brainwork. Just you, 200 tons of extreme hardness and plenty of things to kill. Bliss. Even better news about this game is that rumour has it Core is producing a version for the Mega-32, which will really be something special. VERDICT SHIELD You play one of three 'Gun-jocks'. Yes, it sounds crap, but you don't play games like this for the story, you play them to kill things. MEGA -CD Core has once more proved itself as the top Mega-CD developer. I know it sounds like I'm crawling but I don't care because this is great. Technically and from a gameplay point of view. Different tactics can be applied, or you can just wade in and stamp on everything. The control system is over complicated, which severely messes you up if you panic. But aside from that I don't see a better Mega-CD release on the horizon. MARK PATTERSON A Battlecorps lacks one essential ingredient, people to squash. It's not fair, really, you've got this massive robot and nothing too squishey to stamp on. BIDNECH SC UN SHOE Until you get used to the controls Battlecorps is not an easy game to play. Once you get used to them, however, there's no end to the destruction you can wreak. GRAPHICS 93 SOUND 90 PLAYABILITY 93 VALUE 89 9 OVERALL ALTERNATIVE SNES Spectre Gametek/.99 Converted from the Macintosh classic, this headto-head first-person perspective blast is rock hard and it plays extremely well. ISSUE 152: 84% A The battle robots are kitted out with machine-guns, missiles, mortars and flamethrowers. More than enough to complete the task at hand. This is Lieutenant Calgary. He's hard. You know this because he shouts a lot and has a better haircut than you. GAME BY CORE CONTACT CORE (0332 297797) FOR INFORMATION 65 "


"WHOOP THE WINDIES ON YOUR PC REVIEW CVG IPC SPORTS SIM .99 OUT NOW INO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE AMIGA AND ATARI ST VERSIONS PLANNED GRAHAM GOOCH'S WORLD CLASS CRICKET Will it be game, set and match for Graham Gooch, or have I just chosen the wrong sporting cliché? Surprise surprise, the speed of the ball is determined by a frantic buttonhammering session. o it seems we're not rubbish at cricket after all. Mind you, that's easy to say when we're playing sad sides like New Zealand. But even so, you can't knock Graham Gooch's terrific doublecentury in the First Test, only the second time he's achieved such a feat. And you can't knock Audiogenic either, for dusting down its Goochie licence, giving it a coat of paint and shoving it out on PC. You can choose to play any of the world's recognised Test cricket teams, from the West Indies to poor old Sri Lanka, with each one made up of the real sides' current players. And as for the aim of the game? Stripping away the gobbledigook like Silly MidOff (what does that mean?), you've got to score loads of runs with your bat, then try to bowl the other side out before they amass a better score than you. There, simple. So why can't our players do it more often? Always keep the wicket cov. ered to stump the runners out. VERDICT BOWL SPEED Gooch Fraser PC Graham Gooch's is a game for those with patience, as well as those who enjoy the real thing. The mechanics of the game are basic, but you can control some of the more technical areas such as organising your own field placings. The fun mainly comes from racking up points or getting the opposition out, but to do that you have to spend time learning the requisite skills. Only worthwhile if cricket's your bag, but Graham Gooch's is the best sim you can get. PAUL RAND SUD OK Copy Thorpe Cancel Fielding Setup For R.A.Smith The fielders must be positioned in such a way that they can reach a ball quickly. England : Squad Selection Le MR.Atherton Sbewant 66.GOOch Go.Hic! R ith GP, hope Swing Mod ASS You're out! And let's face it, with a score like that you could well earn a place in the current England squad. Les Mod GRAPHICS 78 SOUND 66 PLAYABILITY 80 I VALUE 80 C.White 36 Mod CC Lewis SIRhodes Or 99 MouR BAU biti im No Players Seleeted Clear Best 11 OVERALL Graham Gooch's is more enjoyable when played against a friend, especially when you're just starting out because the computer teams will doubtless hammer you into the ground. ALTERNATIVE SNES FIFA International Soccer Ocean/.99 You can't get a criket game on console, but there's a range of sports games, one of the best being FIFA Soccer on SNES. ISSUE 151: 90% The teams are made up of the current members of the real sides, although you can edit them to whatever you want them to be called. 22 GAME BY AUDIOGENIC CONTACT AUDIOGENIC (081-424 2244) FOR INFORMATION 66 "


"NO MEGA-CD SAVIOUR HERE... REVIEWS CVG MEGA-CD ARCADE ADVENTURE .99 OUT NOW AMIGA AND MEGA DRIVE ALSO AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED, THANKFULLY MEGA-CD SPORTS SIM .99 OUT NOW ISNES, MEGA DRIVE, GAME BOY, GAME GEAR, AMIGA AND PC ALSO AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED SENSIBLE SOCCER SHADOW OF THE BEAST 2 Another disk-to-disc conversion which, shock horror, isn't all it's cracked up to be... A You start the game with no items and a rather modest mace as your weapon. From here you have to rely on your skill and cunning, well, your jumping ability to survive. Not satisfied with being on virtually every machine, Sensi gets too greedy... he appearence of this game begs one important question if you've got the cartridge version, is this worth buying? Like many CD conversions this is nothing more than a repackaged version of the original with a few new sound effects. Being fair to the programmers, there wasn't much they could add to such an excellent game. This raises another question. Why bother producing this when So, should Sensi novices pick up a cart, or come up to date with CD? Scoot to the verdict to find out. lippin' hell, this is the computer game equivalent of digging out an old pair of DM's and finding three year-old dog dump festering in the soles. It's as equally unexpected and unwelcome. The original Mega Drive cartridge version of the game wasn't a total disaster, although it came pretty close. Somehow, though, they've made the CD version even worse. Included now is a full load of CD speech, which is badly acted and, horror, you can't interrupt it. This means before you kill a key character you're forced to listen to their monologue first. On top of that, the text still comes up on screen, so you can read it before the Mega-CD's even had a chance to access the relevant sound file. You're left with no option other than to switch it off. Doh! The graphics may be puny, but the gameplay is headand-shoulders over almost every other footy game. A Almost no one in the game is pleased to see you. They demonstrate this by hitting you with whatever objects come to hand. GOAL! VERDICT VERDICT The Mega-CD version retains the Mega Drive's playability except when the game pauses to access the CD. MEGA-CD The key issue here is not what's made the game so bad, but that this was a tragic game in the first place. If it was a car it'd have three wheels and fluffy dice. There are some well worked puzzles, but that doesn't justify this game's existence; the combination of adventure and action isn't balanced and the result is tedious. MARK PATTERSON MEGA-CD Apart from new sound effects, Sensi CD offers nothing new. In fact, it's worse than the cart the game freezes momentarily when you score a goal as it loads in the appropriate sample, and saving out custom teams takes up precious space on the Mega-CD's battery. Sensible's a great game, but you're better off with the cartridge version. MARK PATTERSON Customisation of teams is limited by the amount of free space on the MegaCD's battery RAM chip. This is the first puzzle you encounter. Some bloke's being spirited away and you, being an all-round hero-type, have to rescue him. GRAPHICS 64 SOUND PLAYABILITY 40 VALUE 27 OTHER VERSIONS Sensi's appeared on loads of formats, here are some of the best versions. GRAPHICS 80 SOUND 79 PLAYABILITY 89 VALUE 90 OVERALL OVERALL Once you switch the speech off, Beast 2 is painfully similar to the rather poor cartridge original. S4 AMIGA ISSUE 129 95% SNES ISSUE 146.95% MEGA DRIVE ISSUE 145 94% ARCHEMEDES ISSUE 150 94% 84 GAME BY PSYGNOSIS CONTACT SONY (071 734 5151) GAME BY SENSIBLE SOFTWARE CONTACT SONY (071-734 5151) 67 "


"CVG REVIEW FOOD FOR THOUGHT IPC-CD ROM ARCADE PUZZLE GAME .99 OUT NOW CD-I, ST AND PC FLOPPY VERSIONS AVAILABLE CD32 VERSION PLANNED LITIL DIVIL Pizza has been the biggest food sensation in the world, and apparently it's big in the Underworld too.. at as much as you like for .50' says the sign. It can only mean one thing PIZZA! Yep, Litil Divil is your pizza delivery boy, and although he doesn't ride a crumbly old moped, he'd be better off if he did because by the time he reaches this pizza it'll probably be cold. In the pits of hell, Mutt the Divil is sent to collect pizza, a task so perilous that he's likely to visit the toilet a couple of times before he gets to eat. A Labyrinth of traps and secret rooms looms before him, dropping Mutt into the sort of 'reaction' puzzles made famous by the Dragon's Lair games. But that's only part of this game; for the large part it's about collecting goodies and discovering their uses elsewhere. Systematic adventure is what you get here (A + B = C sort of stuff) and to help it along there is loads of devilish humour. A There are lots of stages which involve finding the correct movement path across risky platforms; unfortunately it's the same paths each time you play. VERDICT A One of the more frustrating bits in the game. Having collected the key you have to guess where platforms will appear and jump across to the door. PC-CD ROM On the one hand Litil Divil is a large, challenging game, blending a few styles of gameplay with funny graphics; but on the other it never seems to evolve into anything that you haven't seen in the first half-hour of play. The tunnel sections don't give you enough reaction time and rely on you having a good memory. As for the puzzles, they hold no lasting challenge once you've sussed the correct combinations. Few addictive qualities in gameplay, but it will make you laugh. DENIZ AHMET A This dragon will need to be taught not to make so much noise when he sleeps. Always approach baddies slowly to see if Mutt will automatically use a collected item. A Battle with the guardian to enter the game at the start. This gets you used to the moves available to Mutt. 82 GRAPHICS 87 SOUND PLAYABILITY 71 VALUE 70 OVERALL Here the mermaid has been captured by nasty piranha fish. Mutt will need to destroy them before he can set her free. Women, eh? ALTERNATIVE SNES Space Ace Empire/.99 Very similar in feel, but is more action packed. Loads of variety in game styles and very smart graphically. Just a bit too hard. ISSUE 147: 90% A Here you need to guide Mutt across sinking stepping stones. Unfortunately there are numerous slimy monsters who spring out to knock you off. 69 GAME BY GREMLIN CONTACT GREMLIN (0742 753423) FOR INFORMATION 68 "


"CUTE BUT NOT SO CUDDLY REVIEW CVG ISNES IBEAT-'EM-UP .99 OUT NOW NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED RANMA HARD BATTLE The most bizarre excuse for a beat-'em up makes a third attempt at the genre... ou don't have to be a dedicated manga fan to realise that this is one of those weird and disturbing beat-'em-ups that only the Japanese seem to be capable of getting away with. This is actually the third Ranma game taken from the nutty cartoon series and features the most diverse and unlikely cast of superheroes yet assembled in a fisticuff type of game. In case you know zilch about the cartoon, Ranma is the main character who turns into a girl whenever he gets wet, and whose dad is actually a fat Panda bear. Ranma tends to battle with cheerleader-type girls with silly names like Shampoo, and when there is a bloke to bash they tend to suddenly turn into a pig or some other animal. We'd say problems like that are good enough reasons to start a fight and that's all this game is about really. Each character has at least two special moves, which are actually too effective when used in the corner. Victory is almost guaranteed on easier levels. VERDICT O gobe.. SNES The biggest thing this game has going for it is the graphics the animation and detail is amazing. and there are plenty of special moves, as well as a load of opponents. Is it any good though? Well it's not bad, but the special moves tend to be far too effective, tempting you not to bother with anything else, and there's no combination moves either. I completed the game on my first go, using Ranma's special moves to trap opponents in the corner the oldest trick in the book! DENIZ AHMET A Holding the 'L' button starts a bizarre animation on your character. If you can avoid getting hit while this is happening your sprite will temporarily become much stronger when the energy bar flashes. Opponents do this too. A This is the boss-type character which appears after the other Ranma characters have been defeated. He's not very hard at all. A A lot of Ranma characters have a habit of turning into animals when you don't really want them to. This chap turns into a pig as a special move. GRAPHICS 93 SOUND 72 PLAYABILITY 77 VALUE 65 COMING SOON MEGA DRIVE Super Streetfighter Sega You just know that this is going to be the best basher ever on the MD. It's a 40Meg cart crammed with an accurate conversion of the coin-op. Sadly, it isn't the turbo version. OUT NOW OVERALL The quality of the backdrops is probably the best we've seen in a beat-'em-up recently. There are some nice parallax effects too. 24 In Tag mode you play a two-player game in a wrestling ring. GAME BY RUMIC SOFT CONTACT COMPUTER EXCHANGE (071-388 2613) FOR IMPORT COPIES. CART SIZE 20MEGS 69 "


"CVG REVIEW .DRINK IT IN THE KONGO DONKEY SUPER GAME BOY PLATFORM UNCONFIRMED INO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED Nothing like a splash of colour to brighten up an old Game (Boy). Take a trip down Memory Platform... DANKST LONG intendo's Super Game Boy adaptor for the SNES certainly scores novelty points wise: slot it in your SNES and you can plug in any Game Boy game to play on your TV. But it doesn't end there; by some miracle you can actually add colour to your GB games. Big deal eh? Well, actually it is because there are now specific colour GB titles appearing which work normally on a standard Game Boy but when played through the adaptor appear in glorious colour with sampled speech too. Donkey Kong '94 is the first of these games and features Mario out to save his girl from the giant gorilla. Each rescue attempt presents numerous levels of Mario-style platform action and the boss stages take inspiration from the Donkey Kong coinop. And if simplicity breeds addiction then this game dribbles with the stuff. By pushing down and jumping Mario does a handstand. Jump again and he does a super high jump. Also, as shown here, the handstand move enables Mario to avoid bullets. On later stages there's a lot of complex work to be done; you have to pull levers back and forth to change the direction of lifts which in turn activates new platforms. ACA VERDICT SCUDUD-200 x DO A In the jungle there's a lot of climbing to be done on the vines and on the tails of strolling apes. The quickest way to climb is by hanging between two vines. On the platforms you have to find the key and take it to the door. Problem is you can't climb while holding the key, so you have to throw it, climb down and pick it back up before it disappears. SUPER GAME BOY When I heard about the Super Game Boy adaptor It seemed a stupid idea, but if Donkey Kong is indicative of the games we can expect then I'm impressed. This game merges Mario's platform games with the nostalgia of Donkey Kong, resulting in awesome playability. The platform puzzles you face are well thought out and are clever and challenging. There's plenty of variation in gameplay, with stacks of levels too, Donkey Kong '94 is the best Game Boy game ever. DENIZ AHMET DENKSTING 32 SODDISOD X BE GRAPHICS 94 SOUND 84 PLAYABILITY 95 VALUE 87 OVERALL ALTERNATIVE SNES Mario All Stars Nintendo/.99 A classic collection of Mario platform games on one cart. Tons of lastability here and essential for anyone interested by platform games. Good value for money, too. ISSUE 142: 94% Akong appears twice in each world. You kill him the same way each time by picking up objects he throws at you and chucking them back at him three times. A The more difficult puzzles involve moving these blocks around to create temporary ledges to move across. On later stages you have to make ledges to lure baddies away from platforms. 92 GAME BY NINTENDO CONTACT NINTENDO (0703 618382) FOR INFORMATION GAME SAVE OPTION INCLUDED APPROX 100 LEVELS 20 "


"REVIEWS CVG So crammed pack full of games, features, reviews and the like is CVG that there just isn't the space to tell you about every new game this month in full; so here's some super short reviews of games coming to your system this month... GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY OVERALL BENEFACTOR AMIGA :Not exactly the height of sophistication. The main sprite is awful and the backgrouds look rather dated. Average is being a little bit kind when applied to the blandness inherent in the sonics here. Takes a little while to get into, but once you do you'll have great fun. A nice mix of arcade and strategy. Frustrating, but if you like a bit of joystick frippery to go with your puzzling this should suit you. U RULLE RATING:81% BUMP 'N' BURN AMIGA Detailed sprites and smooth scrolling. The backdrops could be better. Different sounds for every character in the game add pleny of variety to the accompanying aural assault. Instinctive and responsive controls plus plenty of depth as well as the various power-ups and original courses. Much like Super Mario Kart, which is no bad thing. One for the less serious racing fans. RATING:85% CLIFFHANGER AMIGA Completely crap. Tiny iffy sprites a C64 would be ashamed of and terrible animation. Cover your ears! Verrily the sound of this game doth scrape the lugs like one of them cheese graters. Blimey, not only is the control method utterly useless, but the game design is stupendously flawed. If you released this as a PD title you would immediately lose any credibility whatsoever. RATING:16% SUPER SHORTS NAUGHTY ONES CD32 A pleasant looking game. In fact, it looks more like a SNES game than anything. Naughty Ones has what ranks as the absolutely worst soundtrack you wil ever suffer. Believe us. Smooth moving, with an impressive number of levels. The controls spoil the fluidity of the gameplay. Good fun if you can get used to the joypad controls but you'll find that hard going. RATING:72% SIERRA SOCCER AMIGA The players move fluidly, and some nice cut screens add to the atmosphere. A bit on the average side. This is, after all, a footie game, a genre not generally famed for ace sound. Fast paced and rather Sensi-like in its entirety. Very easy to get into indeed... Playable and most enjoyable. It is, however, rather on the easy side for single players. RATING:58% Fonians 1:0 Ron Ireland U 15 KUUD U Detailed, colourful, well-animated and exactly the same as the regular Amiga version. Jolly, bouncy tunes, plenty of good effects and sounds identical to the regular Amiga version, once again. A wide range of puzzles and a lot of good new ideas. However, the control system is rather finnicky. Worth a look if you want a challenging puzzle platformer, but has frustrating controls. RATING:83% CD32 SWITCHQUIZ SUPER PUTTY AMIGA SWITCHQUIZ Very very basic indeed. Just a number of boxes containg a little text. Rather short on colour, too. If you thought football games were bad for sound, you've obviously never played a trivia game in your life. Good enough selection of questions, although some of them are rather on the impossible side. Great for passing some time with a couple of mates, but not a majorly exciting product. RATING:68% SETTLERS Probably the best going among the God-games. A high level of detail abounds all over the shop. Not bad, not bad. Not particularly incredible either, by any means, but not all that bad. PC There's absolutely loads to do, it takes a while to get into the swing of things, but once you do you'll be engrossed. If you haven't already got a god game (or you're a big fan), you should buy this RATING:86% 21 "


"SUPER STREETFIGHTER REVIEWED EXCLUSIVE 16PAGE SUPPLEMENT Once again, SEGA MAGAZINE is first for top smart ace games. Issue 8 out now features the first megadrive Super Streetfighter review, plus Mortal Kombat 2, an exclusive review of the incredible Shining Force 2, Virtua Star Wars, Rocket Knight 2, Battlecorps, Konami's long-awaited Probotector and yet more amazing (and very exclusive) mega-32 coverage. And it's funnier than usual as well. SEGA MAGZINE ISSUE 8 OUT NOW PRICED .25 IT WILL QUITE LITERALLY MELT YOUR SPINE WITH BRILLIANCE SEGA m A G A Zin E BRITAIN'S ONLY OFFICIAL SEGA MAGAZINE "


"COURT IN THE ACTION REVIEW CVG PC-CD ROM SPORTS GAME .99 OUT NOW CD-I VERSION ALSO AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED INTERNATIONAL TENNIS OPEN Dennis the Menace can't play tennis, but CVG's Den can trip (and trim) the lawn fantastic with Philips' latest sports sim... ennis players know how to get their whites really white; get a big multinational to plonk its logo on their shirt, socks or shorts, then when it's dirty you just throw it in the bin and get McDonald's or Philips to buy you a new one. And talking of Philips, the peeps behind the CD-i have just released a new PC tennis sim. Now we won't insult you by telling you what you have to do here this is just tennis after all but we can't resist quoting a line from the game's manual which reads: 'The object of the game is to get the ball over the net..' Really? Anyway, this is actually a serious attempt at simulating the sport, providing you with digitised graphics, international courts, training options and all the standard playing surfaces of grass, clay and cement. While it supports two players it doesn't offer doubles, but the whole point of it being on CD is that you get genuine commentary from over 1,000 phrases giving you tips while you play. So is it any good? Let's see... A There are two options for training available. You can challenge the ball machine shown here, or practice serving. VERDICT INFOGRAM NESSERAMES PC-CD ROM This is a decent tennis game for the PC; you've got all the moves available for strategic play, but the combination of joystick and keyboard to use them is too awkward to be comfortable. In one player mode it's very sensible in that it always gives you control of the nearest player when you change sides, but in two player matches the opponent has a hard time returning shots. All in all it's a very believable tennis game, but a somewhat poor use of CD-ROM. DENIZ AHMET TENNIS OPEN Unlike other games you can't dive for the ball if you think you're about to miss it. So it's not all that realistic after all. You only get four players to select from in this tennis game. Clicking on the faces plays an FMV sequence of them in action with commentary. 88 GRAPHICS 83 SOUND PLAYABILITY 74 VALUE 69 You can select to play on clay, grass or cement surfaces. But we haven't really noticed much change to the ball's handling on each one. OVERALLE ALTERNATIVE SNES Super Tennis Tonkin House/ Best game of tennis you're likely to find anywhere. Excellent response and simplicity make this shockingly addictive. It's fast too. ISSUE 120: 96% A While the courts don't scroll, the perspective works well and you're always the nearest player. The most exciting way to play is up against the net so as you can slam the ball. Risky though. 29 ORIGINAL GAME BY INFOGRAMES CONTACT PHILIPS (071-331 1605) FOR INFORMATIONSMEGS HD SPACE REQUIRED 73 "


"CVG REVIEW BALLS TO YOU ISNES SPORTS .99 CVGSMASH TENNIS OUT NOW NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE INO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED Skip the strawberries and cream and head for the beach for a smasher of a game of tennis... mash Tennis has been available for a while on import under the name of Super Family Tennis. As its import name suggests, this game is best appreciated with more than one player and multitap support makes sure of that. The first thing you'll notice about the game is the diversity of the playing courts. They range from beachside to clifftop, and they're full of intricate graphical touches which complement the cheerfulness of the cutesie graphics; for instance as the sun comes out, nearby trees gradually cast shadows over the court. Additionally, on some courts you can scroll the screen far enough to see people playing on adjacent patches, or even hit passing animals with the ball. As for the gameplay, well it does the job, delivering an accurate representation of the sport, even with a limited range of moves. Normally you select which court to play on and stick to it. If you select the Whistle stop option however, you get to do a tour of all the courts. VERDICT Each court has funny animated scenes around the edges. The Shrine court shown here has the best touches; the ball can drop into little pools, you can scare sleeping crows who flap across the screen, and if you blast the ball into the temple small creatures scurry out in fear. SNES Smash Tennis is a fine game. The cute approach sets it apart, as does the illusion of a large play area; though there aren't enough different shots to cover the whole court, unless you're playing it as a multitap game which is the better option. What's so good, though, is the way opponents respond to your improving skills, giving the game heaps of lastability. The control system is responsive enough to ensure that if you miss a shot it's your fault. DENIZ AHMET This is the only indoor court in the game. We thought we'd print it because the sound effects are very good with lots of echo and reverb. If you think you're about to miss a shot it's worth tapping the hit button a couple of times, which makes you dive for the ball. Serving takes a bit of getting used to, like all tennis games. Unlike other tennis games however, it's very difficult to score on the serve. Computer opponents are very good at returning. 76 GRAPHICS 89 SOUND PLAYABILITY 88 VALUE 84 OVERALL Playing one-on-one is actually very tricky because the CPU has a habit of hitting the ball very precisely into the corners of the court and you can't really run fast enough to reach it in time. ALTERNATIVE MEGA DRIVE Pete Sampras Tennis Codemasters/.99 One of the few fine tennis games available on MD. Great moves, great response and smooth animation. Comes on a four-player J-Cart. ISSUE 151: 84% 90 GAME BY VIRGIN CONTACT VIRGIN (081-960 2255) FOR INFORMATION 8 MEG CART 24 "


"DO WE NOT LIKE THIS? REVIEW CVG CD32/AMIGA 1200 SPORTS .99/24.99 OUT NOW NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED WEMBLEY INTERNATIONAL SOCCER The greatest game on earth, the biggest football stadium in the country and a CD and floppy disk to which football is just a fantasy... Tott'nam are a load of...! Considering Audiogenic had to shell out for the licence, the Wembley connection is really sparse. You'd at least expect a '66 World Cup option. o, really, it's true, this is a licence of a stadium. I don't have much truck with Wembley stadium itself, especially having missed the start of the England Denmark game earlier in the year after spending 20 minutes on the stairs, thanks to the crap stewards herding everyone towards the same seats. Apart from the logo, the only thing this game has in common with Wembley is football. In this case, though, it's without the drama. When you cast your mind back to Charlie Nicholas smashing two goals past Liverpool for Arsenal in a cup final, or Andy Linighan and his broken nose giving us a winner against Wednesday, then play this, something, somewhere, has gone very wrong. 1-0 To The Arsenal! As is the norm with most modern footy games, the defending team for a wall for free kicks, which you invariably kick the ball over. RPEE COLA SCI WEMBLEYI VERDICT ECD32/AMIGA 1200 I love football me. I can't even begin to calculate the amount of money I've shelled out to watch Arsenal FC. So when I get a game like this which costs almost as much as two tickets for the North Bank, I can't help but think that the people who programmed it haven't been to that many games. It's unrealistic lacks speed, effective controls, polish and fun. Take your money, buy a ball and go for a knockabout in the park with your mates instead. MARK PATTERSON 3 WARRIBE And we hate Tott'nam! A clever picture-in-picture system shows you close-ups of the action, although you don't always have time to pay it any attention. Goonaaahs! The action can be viewed top down or from the side. Either way, the gameplay is almost identical, so they don't make much of a difference. ALTERNATIVES GRAPHICS 67 SOUND 44 PLAYABILITY 60 VALUE 53 FIFA Soccer EA/Ocean/Various The slickest of the lot. Graphics are faultless, but Sensi and Kick Off 3 are still our faves. OVERALL A We are the Tott'nam haters! One nice feature of the game is the one-touch mode, which lets you string a series of neat first-time passes together. A Head-sup! The players have a variety of different moves including overhead kicks and headers. A Man on! In the top-down mode the player graphics are rough to say the least. completely out-matched by their side-on brothers. 92% MEGA DRIVE ISSUE 145 SNES ISSUE 151 56 90% GAME BY AUDIOGENIC CONTACT AUDIOGENIC (081-424 4244) FOR INFO FINAL QUOTE: \"YOU'LL NEVER TAKE THE NORTH BANK.\" 25 "


"CVG REVIEW RIGHT IN THE GUTS! BODY BLOWS AGA A1200 BEAT-'EM-UP .99 OUT NOW AMIGA VERSION ALSO AVAILABLE INO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED The champion of Amiga beat-'em-ups gets a facelift from those programmers extraordinaire, Team 17... ntil Body Blows came along there were few decent beat-'em-ups on Amiga. And on CD32 it was a similar situation until Ultimate Body Blows arrived. Meanwhile, the A1200 had Body Blows Galactic, a fine game although it was criticised for being too slow. So what exactly can AGA Body Blows offer that's not been seen in one of the previous Team 17 products? For a start the price. AGA Body Blows is only .99 and just .99 if you send your original disks back to Team 17. As a game it slots in somewhere between the original Body Blows and Ultimate Body Blows. All the original characters are present apart from Max and the turbo and tournament options from Ultimate have been included. VERDICT Like Ultimate Body Blows on CD32 there's now a tag and tournament option to play.  SELECT  PLASERS A1200 AGA Body Blows is what a beat-'em-up should look, sound and play like. Although the graphics are not as good as Elfmania's, at everything else it excels. It plays like a beat-'em-up with loads of moves which are easy to pull off. And bone crunching sound FX only add to the realism. It's also tremendous fun, especially when you play with bizarre characters like Loray. Previously said Ultimate Body Blows was the best Amiga beat'em-up. Now this one is. RIK SKEWS ETTU NIH A There's plenty of special moves on offer with Loray having more than his fair share of the good ones. 23 Mmm, smell those graphics, or something. They're good, but not in the same league as Elfmania's. A mercy option has been included and this lets you choose whether you hit people or not when they've been knocked down. GRAPHICS 90 SOUND 87 PLAYABILITY 88 VALUE 94 OVERALL ALTERNATIVE MEGA DRIVE Streetfighter II Special Capcom/.99 Yawn! What more can we say? Probably the best beat'em-up ever thanks to brilliant control, moves and that classic gameplay. ISSUE 144: 94% Speed rush! If you already thought Body Blows Galactic crawled, you won't believe how slow it seems after playing AGA Body Blows on the fastest turbo option. Yitu is one of the best characters to pick if you're a beginner, he's just so fast. Just pray you don't come up against him until you've had some practice! A As always in Team 17 games the music is good, but it's not a patch on the soundtracks and FX in Ultimate Body Blows. 88 GAME BY TEAM 17 CONTACT TEAM 17 (0924 201846) FOR MORE INFORMATION 26 "


" MUTR COMPUTER CANES ARE DEAD VIDEO VIDEO FAMEC BHMES RISE OF THE ROBOTS SUBSCRIBE TO CVG HLOQUY HELL HARVESTER'S IN TOWN! FREE WITH TOTAL ORAC WAc. WHO SATS ORIGINA CASES ARE DEAD NOW RISE OF THE ROBOTS HARVESTER'S IN TOWN! REE WITH TOTAL WALL CHAMA GAMES ARE DEAD LAME AND RECEIVE 12 ISSUES FOR THE PRICE OF 11 THAT'S 1 ISSUE FREE! IDEO VIDEO RMES RISE OF THE ROBOTS HARVESTER'S IN TOWN! FREE WITH WALL CHART Com GOMPUTER THEME PARN WHO ITS ORIGINA GAMES ARE DEAD Computer & Video Games is Britain's GAMES RISE OF THE ROBOTS ULTIMATE longest established LOODY HELL HARVESTER'S IN TOWN! FREE WITH TOTAL Orac WALL COMPUTER VIDEO THEME PARK GASES ARE DEAD VIDEO GAMES RISE OF THE ROBOTS video games magazine. Twelve years old and going as strong as ever, CVG is the brightest, brashest games mag around, covering all the popular formats and we mean all and reviewing every single new game released. Why spend a fortune on single format mags when you get the whole world of games in CVG ULTIMATE HARVESTER'S IN TOWN! FREE WITH I would like to subscribe to CVG for 12 issues! Send to : CVG Subs Offer, Tower House, Sovereign Park, Lathkill Street, Market Harborough, Leics. LE 16 9EF Name: Address: .... To subscribe just fill in the form below or call our order hot line on 0858 468 888. SUBSCRIPTION RATES 12 issues ........ United Kingdom (BFPO) .00 12 issues ... ----Air Eire/Europe. . .00 12 issues ......revere Air Mail-Rest Of World Zone 1...... .00 12 issues ......Air MuilRest Of World Zone 2 ........569.00 569.00 12 issues...............Surface-Rost of World .... ..$37.00 Post Code:.... Signed: Signed:............................................... (Parent or Guardian's signature if under 18 years) I enclose a cheque/postal order made payable to EMAP Images Ltd for  .... Subs will be processed as quickly as possible, but you should allow 28 days for the order to be processed and expect the first available issue after that. Fulfilment: Tower Publishing, Tower House, Sovereign Park, Lathkill Street, Market Harborough, Leics LE 16 9EF THEME PARA COMPUTER VIDEO ROMECA VIDEO  "


"CVG REVIEW A BLAST FROM THE PAST IA1200 SHOOT-'EM-UP .99 OUT NOW NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE CD32 VERSION PLANNED BANSHEE It's time to don your goggles and Biggles leather jacket, because Core's latest game has landed! round the mid Eighties you couldn't move in your local arcade for vertically scrolling shoot-'em-ups based on creaky World War II fighter planes: 1942, 1943, Tiger Shark to name but three. The format was done to death, both in the arcades and on home machines and eventually the general public decided it was all a bit passe. As you may have noticed there's something of a retro games revival at the moment with people snapping up Tiger Shark PCB's for example. What better time, then for Core to fly into the market with its own interpretation of the genre, complete with four huge main levels and two equally large sub-levels? And as this is AGA-only expect fast and simultaneous two-player action, 256 colour graphics and realistic sound FX as well as classic gameplay. Level three starts with you flying above arctic waste. Shoot the igloos to make them explode! VERDICT SHIELD A Some of the 'dodgy' scenes may not make it into the boxed game. These include being able to shoot prams, polar bears and graves as shown here. CDON LOOP 3 A1200 Core has taken a classic arcade shoot-'em-up and given it a Nineties sheen. If I was a cynical old hack I'd say Banshee offers nothing new, but I'm not and the game plays so well I just don't care. There might only be four levels, but they're huge and the two player option is a gas, Solastability shouldn't be a problem. The only criticism is it's on four disks, but as it stands Banshee is the best shoot-'em-up on Amiga since Project X. RIK SKEWS The first boss you will encounter in this game is not one, but two huge planes. Don't get cocky. though, this is just the mid-level boss. Wait till you see the endof-level mutha. A Check out those lovely 256 colour backgrounds. That's the benefit of being able to develop on A1200 and CD32 first. Be sure to pick up the power-ups so that you can get rid of those end-oflevel gits You get a limited amount of rolls. Use these to get out of a dangerous situation. You might end up killing yourself though, since the rolls are activated by the spacebar and it's a bit difficult trying to press it and play the game! ASHIELD 85 GRAPHICS 86 SOUND PLAYABILITY 87 VALUE ALTERNATIVE 84 000000 OVERALL LIUES Two-player option ahoy! Just like the arcade classic, Banshee can be flown by two players simultaneously. There's no fighting over power-ups though, you each get given your own. SNES R-Type 3 Irem/.99 One of the classic shoot'em-ups of all time, this third incarnation on SNES IS arguably the best yet. ISSUE 148: 88% 85 28 GAME BY CORE CONTACT CORE (0332 297797) FOR MORE INFORMATION "


"HIT AND MISS ON CART AND DISC REVIEWS CVG Don't get caught out by flash intros and no gameplay; here are the most playable CDs... OUT NOW ON CD OUT NOW ON CARTRIDGE You've been umming and ahh-ing over that new cart; now's the time to spend your cash, and here's the ones to choose... ANOTHER WORLD / 3DO / INTERPLAY PRICE: .99 We reckon this is the best 3D0 game we've seen so far. Interplay has stuck to the original structure of the other versions, but added new backdrops. If you've played this on any other format, you'll be disappointed, but otherwise this is a disc you should have. Issue 152: 90% SUPER METROID / SNES / NINTENDO PRICE: .99 Out officially on the 22 July, complete with a free 72-page players' guide which you don't get with the import game. It's  cheaper, too. Issue 152: 91% FIRST OF MY EASY BUIKER SHOT. JUST HIT THE BALL OUT OF THE SAND NICK FALDO'S CHAMPIONSHIP GOLF / CD32 / GRANDSLAM PRICE: .99 Taking the crown for the best CD32 golf game because it's the only one, it's just as well that this is actually quite good. As you'd expect from being on CD, the game features loads of digitised graphics and sound effects, which add massively to the gameplay. Great stuff. Issue 151: 80% STREETS OF RAGE 3 / MEGA DRIVE / SEGA PRICE: .99 SOR 3 has taken the series to exploding point. Another would be the ultimate in overkill. As it is though, this is the best. Issue 152: 82% ZOOL 2 / CD32 / GREMLIN PRICE: $29.99 Even CD is no refuge from Gremlin's ninja ant, Zool. His latest appearance brings his unique brand of platform gaming to CD32. This version features a recorded soundtrack as well as the obligatory FMV intro. It's an essential purchase for platform game fans. Issue 152: 85% SAM & MAX HIT THE ROAD / PC CD-ROM / LUCASARTS PRICE: .99 The floppy disk version of this game is one of the finest adventures to surface in recent months, and now we've got the CD version which is even better. The game itself is exactly the same, but it now features recorded speech which adds so much to the game it makes it the essential CD adventure purchase. Issue 152: 84% DRAGON / SNES / VIRGIN PRICE: .99 A good battler, based on the movie a fact that's rammed home with plenty of cut scenes. Still, it's fast, playable and if you have a multi-tap, you can play three players at once. Issue 152: 84% SEIRD CREEPY BUBBLE AND SQUEAK / CD32 / AUDIOGENIC PRICE: .99 Here's a nice change; a game that's not a port, but actually developed solely for CD32. Admittedly it is a platform game, and not a mould-breaking one at that, but it still represents excellent action in 256-colours. And it's cheaper that your average CD32 game. Issue 151: 84% PETE SAMPRAS TENNIS / MEGA DRIVE / CODEMASTERS PRICE: .99 The cart comes with two joypad sockets built in, so up to four people can compete at once in what is a rather decent spot of oncourt action. Issue 151: 84% AVOID And here's the one that should stay on the shelves... Keep away! Keep away! Keep away! ULTRAMAN / 3DO / BANDAI PRICE: .00 This game has almost all the right ingredients for success flashy sound and visuals, quality presentation and loads of FMV. What it doesn't feature is a great amount of playability, which scuppers it completely. Impressive to look at, but not worth the money. Issue 152: 42% PACMAN / NES / NINTENDO PRICE: .99 A perfect conversion of an amazingly old game. Which is a shame since it's only playable for about five minutes. Your money would be better spent on something more 1990s than 1890s. Issue 152: 46% 99 "


"CVG REVIEW MUSCLE IN ON THE ACTION SNES WRESTLING GAME .00 + OUT ON IMPORT FM MARTY AND COIN.OP VERSIONS ALSO AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED MUSCLE BOMBER 24-Meg heavyweight action comes to the SNES courtesy of Capcom's fourplayer coin-op... he best move in wrestling has to be the \"whoopie cushion' where you leap and sit on someone's head Pooo! We couldn't find that move in this game but there are stacks of others to get to grips with, and a veritable number of grips, slams, grapples and falls come from a formidable 10 characters who you are required to defeat. You yourself can be one of eight of these 'actors' for one-onone action, or just slot in multitap for a four-up tag. team razzmatazz. While Muscle Bomber only makes use of three of the SNES buttons, a combination of repeated tapping, and simultaneous pressing of two but tons, launches characters into an aggressive special move. But, as your opponents get more aggressive the better you start to play; there's none of that onemove cheesy stuff which lets you always win on some lesser games. Tapping the punch button repeatedly usually starts off a dramatic combination move. Just what is that camera man filming looks a bit rude to us. After bouncing your opponent of the ringside why not stick your arm out and take them down! There are many ways to bring an opponent down. You determine the moves performed as you grab the victim. The big chaps tend to be better at close-range attack. This bear hug looks particularly painful. No, he's not trying on a new hat, just smashing this bloke's head in There's some fancy leg work going on here. This chap does his best to disorientate the baddie. Your opponent is likely to escape from this fall because he has a lot of energy left. SLAM BAM, THANK YOU MAAM GAME BY CAPCOM CONTACT PLANET CONSOLES (0272 413030) FOR INFORMATION CART SIZE 24 MEGS 80 "


"MUSCLE IN ON THE ACTION REVIEW CVG SECOND OPINION The best thing about this game is the variety of moves available, and the way in which you can string together some very good combination attacks. The opponents have a very good level of intelligence coded into them too which means that you have to learn genuine skills to defeat them. The best way to enjoy this however, is in 4-up mode where there's no slowdown and you can work as a team. just like the real (or should that be unreal') sport. It's a toughie that's for sure. GARY LORD You always fight in the same ring unfortunately, but you can leap out and hit opponents with chairs and stuff if you want. VERDICT A You don't get any extra points for knocking him out. Unfortunately. SNES Unlike the WWF games this game acts as more of a wrestling sim, with the characters each having distinctive characteristics, a separate mastery of moves (like Streetfighter) and a control system which isn't just about tapping keys and hoping for the best. You can actually do combos here, finishing off opponents with a special move. Naturally. this game excels with four players and without slowdown too it is dangerously addictive. DENIZ AHMET GIVE-UP 2 A If all else fails then there's only one thing you can do in this position: fart! GRAPHICS 89 SOUND 78 PLAYABILITY 88 VALUE 80 OVERALL ALTERNATIVE MEGA DRIVE WWF Superwrestle Mania Acclaim/.99 One of the better wrestling games for the MD. offering decent graphics and has a good control system with plenty of moves. ISSUE 134: 84% This is one of the most dramatic special moves. It involves swinging 360 degrees round the opponent's neck. 89 THE COLT CHARACTER IN MUSCLE BOMBER IS ACTUALLY THE BROTHER OF STREETFIGHTER'S GUILE DUDE "


"CVG REVIEW HAUZEL  HEN 13DO ADVENTURE -70 OUT ON IMPORT NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED Who's in the Hauz? Well it's Dr Hauzer, the 3DO's latest hero trapped in a computerised Amityville... DR HAUZER here was much scratching of chins when we first saw the ad for this game, which is pretty understandable when you think that this is the most blatant bit of plagiarism we've seen in a long time. Basically, all programmers seem to have done is parked themselves in front of a PC, played Alone In The Dark for a couple of hours, and decided it would make a rather decent 3D0 game. They were almost right. Alone In The Dark would make an extremely good 3D0 game done properly, that is. What the programmers have actually created, however, is a rather miserable copy of that game. It uses the same style of polygon graphics, with the addition of a few bits of texture mapping, the same camera angles and the same kind of puzzles. They've also added a new element slowness. Hauzer is incredibly sluggish. Avoiding the axes is tricky when you're controlling a character who only seems to respond to the joypad when he feels like it. VERDICT In true Indiana Jonesstyle Hauzer sprints away from a rolling, erm, thing. Really, you'd have thought that the programmers could at least draw circles. 3DO Been there, seen it, played it, beat it, and not playing it tomorrow. This is Alone In The Dark all over again without the speed or gameplay. Hauzer is ridiculously slow, which slaughters the gameplay. The firstperson perspective mode is unusable and even when there's nothing moving the game isn't that good to look at. There aren't enough problems to make it an adventure and there's not enough action to make it an arcade game. MARK PATTERSON A If Indiana Jones was born in this country he'd be born in this country, this is the kind of sad hero he'd be. Hmm, a fiendish trap. The room rapidly fills with water threatening to drown Hauzer oh no! Well, it would be quite fiendish if you couldn't just open the door and walk out. GRAPHICS 70 SOUND PLAYABILITY 32 VALUE 30 A Look at Hauzer leap, look at Hauzer run. Look at Hauzer, well, that's about all he can do really. OVERALL ALTERNATIVE PC Alone In The Dark 2 Infogrames/.99 Hauzer is suspiciously similar to this game, although it's not even fit enough to do its laundry. Alone In the Dark 2 is simply superb. ISSUE 147: 94% A The top-down view is useful for checking out what's in the room with you, but you can't play the game using it. 32  GAME BY PANASONIC AVAILABLE FROM COMPUTER EXCHANGE (071-636 2666) B2 "


"ADVERTISING PROMOTION WH SMITH HOT GAME OF THE MONTH THEME PARK themePARK \"When Pete Molyneux wrote his first business sim in 1982, he couldn't have predicted it would have evolved into a game as intricate, feature-packed and as fun as Theme Park. The number of options is incredible, and everything you do has an effect on another part of the park or its running. The graphics are cute and work well, as does the sound. But it's the game itself that's the star; like everything else Molyneux's done, Theme Park is out on its own in the enjoyment stakes.\" Paul Rand COMPUTE YOUVE READ THE REVIEWS. YOU'VE SEEN THE SCORE NOW TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THIS GREAT OFFER BROUGHT TO YOU BY WH Smith CVG! TITLE IS | SIO Theme Park This voucher entitles the bearer to save .00 when they purchase the Theme Park comput er game. (PC & Amiga A1200 versions only) Voucher valid until 1st October 1994. This voucher may not be redeemed for cash or any other merchandise. WH SMITH Staff initials: Till No. 0901 VIDEO 1 % GAMES OEC Reciept No. Cash value 0.001p Offer exclusive to WH Smith "


"CVG REVIEW PLEASE FASTEN YOUR SEAT BELTS ISNES RACING ETBA OUT AUTUMN NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED After looking both ways before crossing, CVG steps out to find Nintendo's new Super FX game anything but middle-of-the-road... magine yourself sitting in a radio-controlled car with a small child at the controls. The child makes the car crash, spin, leap and roll-over because it's fun. Now picture yourself sitting down to play Stunt Race FX: you select the Speed Trax option and pull off on the first of 15 courses. Suddenly, a car hits you from behind forcing you to go faster, you see another car but you don't drive safely by, instead opting to bash into it, spin off on the adjacent corner, roll-over and carry on. Why? Well because it's fun and you can, just like the child with his toy. So, you hopefully get an image of the freedom, excitement, curiosity and risk elements which form the appeal of this game. Sure it's about reflexes and winning, but it's more to do with having the most wacky race possible. With its obligatory split-screen mode plus an additional five courses of Monster Truck-type stunts you may, like us, have suddenly realised that Stunt Race FX may be the illegitimate sequel that was never promised to Mario Kart junkies. STUNT RACE EX The 4WD truck has no problem getting through water, but with the smaller cars you'll need to use you the booster. You have a limited supply of turbo (booster) so ensure you pick up these blue gems to top up your power. 13: 12 WACKY RACES Join me for a ride, maximum overdrive.' There are a total of five vehicles to master in this game, across 24 different tracks. Here's our guide to their pros and cons. 4WD is ideal for beginners and essential on the Stunt courses. He doesn't skid around a lot and offers good grip on different surfaces. He's fast at acceleration but rather slow at turning. Coupe is a good allrounder, and his benefits are tight steering and high speed. His boost supply also lasts longer than the other vehicles. Select this if high-speed and stability is your thing. F-Type is for those who've mastered the controls. His acceleration is slow but his top speed is the greatest. This car has a weak body, so you'll need to balance him out during jumps and avoid frequent crashes.  2WD is only available on Free Trax until you clear the Master Class tracks. He's fast and is tricky to control. If you lose control it's hard to recover without wasting valuable time. Good for setting speed records. The Trailer is only available in the bonus game. The viewing perspective is different in the bonus game so controlling him can get very confusing. Go slowly. GAME BY NINTENDO CONTACT NINTENDO (0703 618382) FOR INFORMATION 84 "


"PLEASE FASTEN YOUR SEAT BELTS REVIEW CVG O'03\"53 There's plenty of little touches like horses running across the road and Nintendo lorries crossing which have to be avoided. SPEED DAMAGE RANT 1 I REST 106 MB 1 2 TAKE A CRASH COUR WITH ADDED FX! Niniendo DAMAGE 057 The split screen mode isn't as playable as the main game mainly because of the tiny play areas. It's also quite slow. You can both use different perspectives, though, like in Virtua Racing TINJE BOOST OP5630 DAMAGE VERDICT 098 MPH TINE RANK OP56°32 SECOND OPINION When SNES games are good they tend to be very good and Stunt Race FX is in that category. Using the Super FX chip there's no need for Mode 7 graphics for speed. Everything here is smooth, fluidly animated and there's no slowdown. The graphics are cartoonish and they also don't build up in blocks on the horizon. There's stacks of variety in gameplay and it shifts like a proper race game with challenging opponents. Stunt Race FX is the most creative racing game to date. DENZATVET SNES games have generally been poor this year with only NBA JAM standing out. And now Stunt Race FX. Graphically and sonically this trounces Virtua Racing and in one player mode it matches it for speed. It's also a damn sight more fun to play. Sadly the two-player mode is a little disappointing since it's quite slow and has a small game window. If you want the best one-player racing game on the SNES get Stunt Race FX, but if you've got any friends you'll still be better off with Mario Kart. RIK SKEWS  SPEED DAMAGE BANE 020 REST x 2 All the vehicles in this perform spectacular crashes. They fall in to pieces and rebound together like an elastic band. If you crash and your vehicle explodes, you then have to wait some time while it rebuilds itself. GRAPHICS 94 SOUND 80 PLAYABILITY 93 VALUE 87 O'58\"83 ALTERNATIVE MEGA DRIVE Virtua Racing Sega .99 It's the best racer on Mega Drive and a top coin-op conversion. Sadly, it's rather boring because of a lack of opponents and tracks. ISSUE 150: 79% OVERALL SPEED DAMAGE BOOST Blowing your horn not only makes other cars move (sometimes) but it raises your vehicle so that you can pass over others safely. 21 MEMAGE she THERE ARE NOW FOUR DIFFERENT GAME ENHANCING CUSTOM CHIPS FOR THE SNES: DSP (MARIO KART), SCII (EXHAUST HEAT 2), SUPER FX (STAR WING) AND THE UPDATED SUPER FX (STUNT RACE) NOW COURSE CHIPS FOR THE smes: DSP mario 85 "


"CVG REVIEW BARGAIN BASEMENT CHEAPOS PDGAMES Bargain hunters will be pleased to hear that you don't have to spend wads of cash for some decent games... DEMOPLAY 108 2069 712 ARCHER MACLEAN'S POOL PC/AMIGA / HIT SQUAD PRICE: .99 The only criticism anyone had of Jimmy White's Snooker was that snooker is, well, not exactly a fast game. Paying attention to this, programmer Archer Maclean adapted it and produced Archer's Pool, which is as close as you can get to the real thing without getting skinned for all your money. 91% Cheap doesn't have to mean nasty, just check out the latest PD releases... HOCUS POCUS / PC From Apogee, the creators of Halloween Harry, comes another arcade-type PD disk. Hocus Pocus uses the same 256-colour engine, although it's not quite up to Halloween's standards thanks to a couple of annoying gameplay faults. Still, this is a solid platformer which makes a decent change from more heavyweight full price releases. 73% TEST DRIVE III PC / HIT SQUAD PRICE: .99 Accolade finally came up trumps with the third game in the Test Drive series at a price. While the gameplay's better, this version features fewer cars and tracks than the previous two. Still, it's fast and very realistic, so give it a, erm, test drive. 81% ROB'S GAMES / AMIGA 17-Bit / Disk 3039 Who is Rob? Do we care? Not really when we get a disk this good. It features five games, the best being Thrust, Dynamite an excellent Bomberman clone and Scorched Tanks, a battle tanks rip-off. Altogether this is one of the best games packs we've seen this year. 93% KINGS QUEST 3 AMIGA / KIXX XL PRICE: .99 OK, so this game's old and it looks it, but that doesn't mean it's bad. Honest. It looks crap but this is actually a decent adventure, packed with puzzles, well structured and punctuated with bouts of groan-worthy jokes. Hey, if you like it there's another three after it (but not out on budget yet). 77% ASTROFIRE / PC While Amiga owners rant on about Stardust, PC owners can now get their hands on a shareware game which is more than a tad similar. Basically Astrofire uses the same Asteroids-style format combined with 256-colour graphics. It lacks Stardust's 3D section, but it's very playable all the same. 83% ROAD RASH AMIGA / HIT SQUAD PRICE: .99 EA's Amiga conversion of its Mega Drive hit remained faithful to the original, although it never really had the same level of gameplay. Still, if you don't have access to a Mega Drive, this is a decent enough substitute. 78% EPIC PINBALL / PC If you've come across our review of Pinball Fantasies you'll no doubt realise it has more than a couple of faults. This game, however, is actually slightly better, and it's only a couple of quid. 89% BIK 400 24 OK. So it may be going cheap, but even if this was the last piece of software on Earth (or any other planet) we'd still say 'Don't bother'. Even for sweet FA, some games just aren't worth bothering with... LEISURE SUIT LARRY 3 KIXX XL PRICE: .99 This game appeared around the same time as Kings Quest 3, but it doesn't even begin to approach being as good as it. Like KQ3 it's a graphic adventure, although 'adventure' is used in the loosest sense of the word. It lacks the depth to keep you playing. 49% TEMPORAL MISPLACEMENT / AMIGA 17-Bit / Disk 3110 Basically this is like one of those trashy early-Eighties text adventures with the 'bonus' of black-and-white pics. The parser's crap, too, which makes it almost unplayable. 8% You say... \"Oh, Kalalau, baby\" you shout \"Your lover boy Larry 13 home! PD CONTACTS: AMIGA 17-BIT (0924 366982) PC TRANSEND (0274 622228) PD SOFT (0702 466933) 86 "


"IT'S QUITE GOOD, MAN! REVIEW CVG GAME BOY MEGAMAN HPLATFORM .99 OUT NOW NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE ANO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED Long before the days of Streetfighter, Mega Man was Capcom's flagship character; is it time for retirement or what? ega Man's big in the videogame world, but a lot of gamers haven't heard of him because he's spent an awful lot of his life leaping and blasting around on the 8bit machines. Now he's back in his third Game Boy game, battling against the evil Doctor Wily. To give Dr Wily a good slapping Mega Man will have to battle his way past eight of his previous enemies, like Skull Man and Gemini Man. Once this lot have been dispensed with it's time for the ultimate confrontation with old Wily himself. Of course there's all the usual power-ups to help you on your journey, but be warned, the levels are gargantuan and there's a distinct lack of extra lives to pick up Don't be deceived. Although the levels start off very easy, it's not long before they become mindnumbingly difficult. VERDICT Get under narrow sections by having a good old slide. Watch out for carpet burns though! You can always rely on Mega Man games to have decent backgrounds and guess what? Mega Man doesn't disappoint. GAME BOY Mega Man 3 is characteristically unoriginal and tough. In some cases being a dab hand with the joypad doesn't matter since there's a host of traps that are impossible to avoid. Also, there are no restart points on each level, which is one of my pet hates. Still, graphics and sound are good and if you're sick of easy platformers this is one for you. Just keep an ambient album nearby to reduce those stress levels! | RIK SKEWS PRESS A BUTTON GRAPHICS 80 SOUND 86 PLAYABILITY 78 I VALUE 76 OVERALL ALTERNATIVE SNES Megaman X Capcom/ Megaman X plays along similar lines to Megaman 3 but it's a better game thanks to it being easy and having restart points. ISSUE 149: 85% Collect power-ups for some wonderfully uninspired armour and weapon boosts. A It's amazingly frustrating when you battle all the way to a boss, get completely trashed and have to go right back to the start of a level. 29 GAME BY CAPCOM CONTACT NINTENDO (0703 651010) FOR MORE INFORMATION 82 "


"A FULL MONTH DOESN'T NEED TO PASS BEFORE YOU CAN GET YOUR HANDS ON A BRILLIANT SEGA MAGAZINE! MACHINES IF YOU CAN'T STAND THE AGONISING WAIT OF A MONTH FOR THE NEXT EDITION OF SEGA MAGAZINE HERE'S THE PERFECT SOLUTION! LOOK OUT FOR MEAN MACHINES SEGA, BRITAIN'S BEST SELLING SEGA MAGAZINE. AVAILABLE MONTHLY, TWO WEEKS AFTER SEGA MAGAZINE MEAN MACHINES FEATURES THE LATEST IN NEWS, PREVIEWS AND REVIEWS. MEAN MACHINES FROM THE MAKERS OF THE SEGA MAGAZINE. "


"BACK GAMES ISSUES VIDEO THEME PAR THEME PAR AVC 148 PAGE XMAS SPECIAL GAMES ARE DEA COMPUTER VIDEO GAMES  VIDEO BEETLEN HAOCE VERSUS TULATE PREDATOR TOPEDIA SDO! MEGA DRIVE JURASSIC PA DEMOLITION MAN BLASTS ONTO ED AND SIGA EXCLUSIVE! SPACE FREE HANDHELD RAG SE MERAER ER GE (  ROBOCOP VS TERMINATOR ALL THE Issue 139 June 1993 SOLD OUT Issue 140 July 1993 Final Fight 2. Jurassic Park. American Gladiators. World Class Rugby. Taz Mania. Wonder Dog. Free Mega CD Guide. Issue 141 August 1993 SOLD OUT Issue 142 September 1993 SF II Turbo. Sensible Soccer. SF 2 Championship Edition. Nigel Mansell F1. Super Turrican. Gunstar Heroes Issue 143 October 1993 SOLD OUT Issue 144 November 1993 Robocop Vs Terminator. Lethal Enforcers. Free SF Turbo Tips poster. SF Il Stickers Issue 145 December 1993 Lawnmower Man. Free rocket Knight bodge. Free poster. Free Barcode Batller card. Free Super Bomberman cards Issue 146 January 1994 SOLD OUT Issue 147 February 1994 SOLD OUT Issue 148 March 1994 SOLD OIT Issue 149 April 1994 Kick Off 3. Ryan Giggs. Fifa. 32 Bit Madden. Ridge Racer, Free Ocean Games mag. Free Home Entertainment mag. Issue 150 May 1994 Daytona. Virtua Racing Star Trek. Hyperdunk. Pac Attack. Fleet Defender. Yoshi's Cookie. Kick Off 3. Liberation, raiden. Sensible Soccer. Disposable Heroes. Free Games Encyclopedia Part 1. Issue 151 June 1994 Super Wing Commander, mega Turrican, tempest 2,000. Nick Faldo's Championship Golf. Joe & Mac 2. Ninja Warriors. Heimdall 2. 7th Guest. Fifa Soccer. Dragon's Lair. Free Games Encyclopedia Part 2 Y OSICIAL MORTAL M KOMBAT 2 REE! FR HRESHOOTER TURBO  NOT CD SILARNIE ENTO CO ANO SECTION CONSOLE Men FREE! WIN FREE HAND-HELD MAQ VIRTUALLY EXCLUSIVE LE COMPUTER HIB Jamore ZO COLE HANDHELD POSTER! COMPUTER VIDEO GAMES GAMES Open 24 Hour Please send me the following back issue(s) of CVG: | EREST FREE FREE RISE OF THE ROBOTS GK HARD BLOODY HELL HARVESTER'S IN TOWN! WORLD | FREE WITH DIPS BART 2 (write the issue number(s) here) Send to : CVG Back Issues, Tower House, Sovereign Park, Lathkill Street, Market Harborough, Leics. LE16 9EF Name:........ Address: ....... sayev WALL CHARTS Bombtastie GAMES GUIDE Christmas If you're missing any previous issues of Computer & Video Games, you can order them from the CVG Back Issues Department, Tower House, Sovereign Park, Lathkill Street, Market Harborough, Leics. LE 16 9EF. Post Code:... Signed:.. (Parent or Guardian's signature if under 18 years) I enclose a cheque/postal order made payable to EMAP Images Ltd for . UK Rates : .95 per magazine. Overseas : .95 per magazine. Back issues will cost you .95 each or .95 each if you live overseas. Please make your payment by cheque or postal order don't send cash through the post. Fulfilment: Tower Publishing, Tower House, Sovereign Park, Lathkill Street, Market Harborough, Leics LE 16 9EF "


"CVG REVIEW CHARLIE DON'T SURF CD32 SIMULATION I.99 OUT NOW AMIGA AND PC VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED GUNSHIP 2000 The Americans have got it wrong concentrating on stealth technology what they need are some loud scary 'copters like these. It's a macho thing... Getting the helicopter off the ground is a hell of a lot easier than, say, getting a VW Beetle started on a cold day. Simply push up on the joypad and hit the yellow button to power-up. From then on your only worry is crashing into a mountain or taking a missile up the jacksy. ebels, insurgents, 'freedom fighters'. Scum more like. Planting their bombs, kidnapping honest journos, growing beards and living in forests who needs them? Not MicroProse at any rate; the latest incarnation of their classic flight sim Gunship puts you right in the middle of them from the safe position of behind the controls of a large, well-armed assault helicopter. As you wipe out opposing forces you rise in rank, which lets you pilot even larger 'copters on even more dangerous missions. The objectives don't change, though. It's still applying the American method for dealing with people you don't like which mainly involves bombarding them with missiles. But who cares when it's as fun as this. Like most modern flight sims, the action can be viewed from almost every position. The different views look good, but serve no purpose. Quelle surprise! The game has an FMV intro! We've never seen one of those before. SURPRISE! YOU'RE DEAD! Sitting behind you in the cockpit is your invisible co-pilot who controls the counter measures and never seems to be around when it's time to get the beers in. So what does it take to be an ace helicopter pilot? Not much, really. Take a look at a typical mission. 1. When you've been given your mission you can back out like a coward or take it like a man without blubbing. 2. Now you know what you're up against you can select the right 'copter for the job, along with a battery of missiles, of course. 3. Once you're airborne check the map to find out where your primary target is. This time it's an armoured platoon you're after. If the game isn't fast enough, there are options to reduce the detail level of the graphics, which speeds things up considerably. THE O PTRER ET RIE 90 GAME BY MICROPROSE (0666 504326).  ORIGINAL GUNSHIP PROGRAMMED BY SID MEIER, WHO ALSO WROTE THE STUPENDOUS RAILROAD TYCOON AND THE GROUNDBREAKING CIVILISATION "


"CHARLIE DON'T SURF REVIEW CVG SECOND OPINION With titles like Gunship 2000 the CD32 is really starting to show its prowess. Everything about this game reeks of quality. From the beautiful packaging to the gorgeous rendered intro, from the 256-colour graphics, fantastic CD sound and music, to the faster and smoother update. Even the many keyboard controls have been expertly implemented on to the CD32 joypad. With a wealth of missions and top notch control, Gunship 2000 is up there with TFX as the best flight sim around. RIK SKEWS Gunship's most incredible feature is the neat way its programmers have crammed all the controls on to the joypad and a few menus. It's actually easier to play now than it was in its original floppy form. I VERDICT A When all else fails you can fall back on your trusty cannon. It's only effective at short range, but it comes with a hefty 1,200 rounds of ammunition so you can afford a few misses. CD32 Sorry, but I've got to get nostalgic here. Gunship was one of my fave C64 games, so I'm biased. Gunship 2000 has loads to see and kill, different 'copters to fly, excellent weapons and plenty of missions. The programmers have done an admirable job of cramming a keyboard's worth of commands on to a joypad without making it too complicated. My only criticism is the graphics are too simple. Still, this is one of the best CD32 discs available. MARK PATTERSON 4. Now's the time for you to do some real damage. You've caught the enemy napping, so punish them by unloading a salvo of Hellfire missiles. 5. That showed them. It's time to go home and collect the medal and world peace is restored until the next time you take to the skies. GRAPHICS 78 SOUND 84 PLAYABILITY 93 I VALUE 92 It's compulsory to attend mission briefings, although you never hear anything new. The missions invariably involve shooting things, so there's not much point in paying attention. OVERALL KILLING MACHINE 91 THE HELICOPTER WAS INVENTED BY IGOR SIKORSKY AND MADE ITS MAIDEN FLIGHT IN 1939. THE GERMANS NEVER DEVELOPED A HELICOPTER DURING WWII, SO THAT BIT WITH ONE IN WHERE EAGLES DARE IS TOTALLY WRONG 91 "


"CVG REVIEW DEJA VU ON CD32! CD32 SPORTS SIMULATION .99 OUT NOW ISNES AND AMIGA VERSIONS AVAILABLE CD-I VERSION COMING SOON STRIKER The latest, but unfortunately not the greatest, footy game limps on to CD32... icking! Just as World Cup fever's about to strike, along comes Striker on CD32. It's the second football game to come out on this format, but can it match or surpass Sensible Soccer's CD32 dominance? Well, that would be hard, but let's see what Striker has to offer. For a start there's 64 international teams to choose from, each with their own strengths and weaknesses. They can be selected to play either a one or two-player game or enter a cup competition. Other options include different formations, game length, pitch surface, strength of wind and so on. One other point to note is that the playfield is vertically scrolling, not the best of ideas perhaps, but it's not as unplayable as the similar Super Soccer on SNES. VERDICT Choose your team! There are 64 to pick, ranging from Germany to the tragic Qatar. Oh, and England obviously not the World Cup then. 1 ALBANIR RLGERIR 13] RNGDER RRGENTINA 5 RUETAIE E BELGIUM 2 BOLIVIA FRIENDLY 1 7 RECHS 33 HERE 18 DET EL LIBERA 19 ECUADOR ES LUHERE OF 20 EGYPT 21 EL SALVRODR 3 7 HELT 2 ENDLA 2B NEHILE 23 ELRAD 35 HOROGO 34 TELANCE 60 HIGERIR ES GERAIS MIRELAND 26 EREECE 2 HEURER E TUATEMALA 28 HOLLA LL PARTS 25 HURGHAS 165 PERU ED ICELAND LE PILHAD 31 ITALY JAPAK LE GATHE 49 OF IRELAND 50 RONARIA 52 SAUDI ARABI: 52 500TLAND S2 STORER Sk 562 95 SHEER 56 SHITZERL 910 57 TRIWIDT DEACO SE TURE SSURE 50 S.R. 52 URUGUAY 52 VENEZUELA 52 HALES 5 YUGOSLAVIA BULUFFON A Goooooaaal! One nil to the Qatar! Bet the defence won't want to remember that one! 10 CHIERODA 31 CERDR CATTLE 34 COLUMBIA 15 COSTA RICA 16 CYPRUS A PLATUGAL CD32 CD32 Striker has no improvements over the Amiga original, there's not even any CD music! Striker was great when released originally, but football games have come a long way since then. Features like sampled speech, FMV intro, more play options could and should have been added. The in-game sound effects are poor, and there isn't much ingame music. It's fun, fast and furious but doesn't offer the depth other footy games can. RIK SKEWS FLASER 1 ALBHAIR PLAY OPTIONS QUIT FLASER 2EL SALURODA NEEL GEORGIE P RET GANESA NIKAN 571 A Action replays are shown after every goal is scored, but there is an option to switch them off. Use your joypad as a video-type controller for rewinding and fast-forwarding through the goal build-up. sel A The easiest way to score is to dribble down a wing and shoot between the keeper and the near post. GRAPHICS 75 SOUND PLAYABILITY 80 VALUE 77 PLAYER OVERALL ALTERNATIVE SNES FIFA International Soccer Ocean/.99 OUT NOW One of the best footie games on SNES. Superb graphics and sound and excellent fiveplayer simultaneous action. ISSUE 151: 90% A That was a meaty challenge! Harder fouls result in yellow cards, so don't say we didn't warn you! A This is really the only time the radar is of any use, as you can line up where you want the ball to go. The scoreboard displays the time remaining, current players, injury meters, and of course the score. 25 GAME BY GREMLIN CONTACT GREMLIN (0742 753423) FOR MORE INFORMATION 92 "


"REVIEWS CVG We're here to make sure you don't buy some crap old game just 'cos the box and screenshots look cool. Oh no, if game's a turkey we'll tell you; likewise if it's a real high flyer we'll say so... GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY OVERALL Droolmongous! Stunning first-person perspective graphics they look lovely. Scroling's a bit jerky though. Not going to break any records for brilliance, but the sound does the trick perfectly well. More depth than you would possibly ever believe, but the crap controls take the edge off it. Must have taken years to develop, but dodgy programming spoils some of the splendidness. RATING:82% REQUIEM PC EYE OF THE DETROIT PC ROBINSON'S STORM PC Wow! Lots of pictures of cars! And factories! And spreadsheets! Phewee! Well, not bad for a strategy game, but then strategy games are hardly famous for world-beating sounds. Engrossing and original, this is a strategy game with plenty of new ideas to keep things interesting Very playable indeed, and it takes plenty of brainpower to get to the top. RATING:84% Not bad if you've got a decent sound card (as usual, in fact). Plenty of ray-tracing if you like that sort of thing, and some spectacular useage of polygons. Well, it's an Elite-esque spcae combat/trading simulation you probably get the idea. A completely redundant piece of sotware which has been done better a million times before. VE RATING:43% SUPER SHORTS If you've played Wolfenstein you will know what to expect since they use the same game engine. A sparse use of sound is obviously meant to convey an eerie atmosphere. Or perhaps they just couldn't be bothered. Probably the latter. It's... it's... it's just like Wolfenstein! And Blake Stone! And that other one they did with the same engine! Perhaps it's time our friends at Gametek ought to think of some new ideas. RATING:51% PC WORLD CUP CORRIDOR 7 CHALLENGE Completely useless, as you might expect from a football management sim. Well, there's acouple of interest blips here, but nothing for anyone to get excited about. Limited number of options, and generally limited all round. No in-game interaction either. Premier Challenge would be a better bet if you're after a tactical footy management game. RATING:43% HORDE PC CD-ROM Cor blimey! There's a load of that there FMV here! And some rather nice intermissons, too. If it's sampled speech you're after and you've got a card that'll support it it's sampled speech you'll get. Nothing you won't have played before really, but extremely well done and with plenty of fresh challenges. Impressive visuals and a good, solid challenge, but no marks for originality. RATING:84% Solid graphics make it easy to judge distances and shots. Loads of digitised effects enhance the atmosphere no end. | JACK NICK LAUS: SIGNATURE EDI. TION PC-CD Loads of courses, a course designer and a big challenge. Maybe not detailed enough for the real enthusiast, though For the incredible bargain price of 20 Sovs, this is most worth a look. RATING:85% KICK OFF 3 AMIGA Sprites look pretty rough compared to some of the other footy sims doing the rounds. Surprise surprise! Not much to speak of, and what's there is pretty crap, anyway. Far too complicated to control, even with two fire buttons. And the ball goes right through the players at times. It was a star on SNES the Amiga version, on the other hand, is what you'd call 'poor'. RATING:58% 93 "


"CVG REVIEW THE BEAUTIES AND THE BEASTS OUTNOW ÉS Forget the beach, babes and turning a nasty shade of pink in the sun; stay in with the best of the latest releases... O UTNOW ON FLOPPIES ON HANDHELDS Tee The Game Gear's short of releases at the mo, but Game Boy owners have nothing to worry about... JAMES POND 3: OPERATION STARFISH / A1200 / MILLENNIUM PRICE: .99 After the disaster that was the Aquatic Games, James Pond returns to familiar platform territory. Although it's a very different game from the second Pond plat. former, it's not a remarkable piece of software engineering, but it is large, playable and much cheaper than the Mega Drive version. Issue 152: 83% WARIOLAND / GAME BOY / NINTENDO PRICE: .99 The third Marioland game on PD 728 Game Boy doesn't star Mario. That doesn't hinder it, though, as the evil Wario is more than a worthy replacement. The best GB platform game for some time. Issue 152: 87% COOL SPOT / PC / VIRGIN PRICE: .99 With platform games so few and far between on PC, it's great to see a big company such as Virgin Interactive produce a game of this quality. It's almost identical to the console versions and goes a long way to prove that the PC shouldn't be overlooked when it comes to this kind of game. Issue 152: 85% MICRO MACHINES / GAME GEAR / CODEMASTERS PRICE: .99 It's cheap, it's fun and it's two-player on one Game Gear. What more could you ask for in this excellent conversion of the 16-bit and NES smash? Issue 148: 89% K240 / AMIGA / GREMLIN PRICE: .99 Survive the manual that comes with this game and you'll find yourself playing one of the best strategy games so far this year. It's a heavy duty futuristic empire building game, with more depth than the Atlantic. Not something you can just pick up and play, but it's well worth persevering with. Issue 151: 86% WORLD CUP STRIKER / GAME BOY / ELITE PRICE: .99 This is a top-notch Game Boy footy game where you can actually see the ball and the action isn't destroyed by the screen blurring. Issue 151: 87% ARCADE POOL / AMIGA / TEAM 17 PRICE: .99 Archer Maclean may have created the definitive pool game, but this still deserves recognition. For  you get the best top-down view pool game ever created. There are several variations on the traditional game including US eight ball and speed pool. Excellent stuff. Issue 152: 83% F1 / PC / DOMARK PRICE: .99 With the likes of IndyCar around, you'd probably think there isn't enough room for another PC race game. F1 proves that wrong. Visually it doesn't look like much, with simple vectors and almost no graphical detail. However, this is faster than anything else out there, which makes it well worth picking up. Issue 151: 85% COOL SPOT / GAME BOY / VIRGIN PRICE: .99 Virgin has come up trumps with another fine conversion of its hit platformer. It's exactly the same as its fullcolour brothers, right down to the layout of the levels. A spot-tacular release Issue 152: 88% AVOID Duff, dreadful, dire, dirgesome, despicable. Steer well clear... AVO And here's the little black cloud... LIITTO SPIRITUAL WARFARE / ALIVE SOFTWARE PRICE: .99 This is a God game with a difference. Instead of being God, you're actually worshipping him in a Christian platform game where you're out to put the world to rights. That's not a bad thing, but the game is. One of the worst games we've encountered in some time. Issue 152: 10% MS PACMAN / GAME BOY / NINTENDO PRICE: .99 All right, so Pacman's a classic. It doesn't mean we want to play it now we're in the 90s, though. The nostalgia value is enough to hold you for a day or so, but Ms Pacman offers precious little by today's standards. Issue 152: 32% 94 "


"NICE LEGS SHAME ABOUT THE FACE Zooz REVIEW CVG PC ZOOL 2 PLATFORM .99 OUT NOW AMIGA, CD32 AND A1200 ALSO AVAILABLE PC CD-ROM VERSION PLANNED The last of the Zool 2 conversions has arrived. Who ever said Zool was a man's game must have forgotten about Zooz his girlie. Sticking to the wall is one main way of getting around. Just watch out for dangers in your path. I DON PLAYER ONE CHOOSE ool is a bit like the Rowntree's Fruit Pastel Challenge (the one where you have to put one in your mouth and not chew it), only on this occasion you'd have to look surprised if this wasn't a review for yet another format of this infectious platformer. Zool 2 is still managing to cover what has been done before very well. If rushing around collecting tokens is your idea of an uplifting pastime then Zool 2 is doing a good job. It's a purist platform game, one in which reflexes are given priority, and by that we mean it's fast. An intense overload of colour and parallax in fact, but yet oddly uneventful in what it requires from you. Perhaps that's the reasoning behind the appearance of Zooz to give variety, and perhaps the new look chubby Zool is an indication of the result of eating those Chuppa Chups sweets which Zool games promote so heavily. You'll just have to play the six huge levels and see. Secret rooms aplenty in Zool 2. You usually find them at dead-ends. VERDICT PC 006195 HI 10000 The main difference between Zool 1 and Zool 2 is that you can select to play as either a bloke (ie Zool) or a gal (Zooz Zool's girlfriend). Zool has new moves in this version and the girl's got a whip and can burst up through blocks. HI, 10000 Zool 2 goes to show you just how well the PC can handle arcade platformers; utilising the machine's speed, smoothness and hard disk loading of stages. But I just think the whole Zool concept has had its day. The addition of Zooz doesn't really add anything new to the game; and if you're going to convert a game to different formats you should try and take advantage of that system's potential. Zool 2 is still the same Amiga game. DENIZ AHMET These jumping beams are your continue points. You need to collect 99% of tokens on a zone to complete it. SC VUDUZO C 004200 HI 100 You can't get away from Chuppa Chups in this game. You could try those blocks on the left, but they'll probably disappear beneath you. A Collect the rings and eventually you'll get into the bonus stage. There's one in each of the three zones which make up a level. GRAPHICS 85 SOUND 78 PLAYABILITY 78 VALUE 75 OVERALL 2972928 79 You can't skid into opponents with Zool in this version of Zool. That's why it's better to play with Zooz. 29 This is one of your power-ups, collect it and you get a mirror friend to help you out for a while. GAME BY GREMLIN GRAPHICS. CONTACT GREMLIN GRAPHICS (0742 753423) FOR INFORMATION. ONE DISK GAME 95 "


"JUST CALL ME FLIPPER REVIEW CVG IPC PINBALL .99 OUT NOW INO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE CD32 AND AMIGA VERSIONS PLANNED PINBALL DREAMS 2 If Tommy was deaf, dumb and blind, yet darned good at pinball, what is it that makes Rand so crap? Who knows, but here's a chance to see how good you are... hen I were a lad I remember schmoozing, down to my local arcade and encountering Pinbot. I was young, it had flashing lights and a half-naked gal on the front and appealed to my young, inquisitive mind. Ten pence later and for the first time I'd seen the attraction in pinball games. Computer pinball games, however, are a completely different matter. What Pinball Dreams 2 offers you in the way of table-top action is two flippers, four scenes and few extras. While the simplicity formula has worked for some real-life machines, when you've shelled out a wad for a computer version, you've got a right to expect a bit more for your cash. Even if you don't have a sound card, you still get the benefit of excellent digitised music and effects through the PC's internal speaker VERDICT EDE The four tables all look radically different, but sadly they all play the same, so there's a lack of variety. boonnr 2000 ARCEPC1000 EDOR The control system, as you'd expect, is very basic. The left and right shift keys control the flippers while space tilts the table. It's not good for the keyboard since you're tempted to smack the keys really hard for more power which just leaves them knackered. SCORE PC In the history of computer games there have been two decent pinball sims Devil Crash and Pinball Fantasy. That number isn't going to change with the arrival of Pinball Dreams 2. Technically there isn't anything to fault: the scrolling's smooth and the ball movement's convincing. What lets it down is the lack of features; the tables aren't big enough and you only get one set of flippers and the only extras are ramps. MARK PATTERSON PULL 1000 ng 10.000.000 BE USZ UN DILDLIFE BALL Neprne GRAPHICS 82 SOUND 79 PLAYABILITY 62 VALUE 55 Once the scrolling and ball movement have been sussed you'd think it would be hard to make a hash of a pinball game. Unfortunately that's what's happened here owing to an acute lack of imagination. OVERALL satami No matter how good it is, computer pinball just can't match the feeling of the real thing. Especially when it comes to hitting the flippers at different strengths. 60 BACK ON SAFARI GAME BY 21ST CENTURY CONTACT 21ST CENTURY (0235 851533) FOR INFORMATION "


"THE ROAD TO NOWHERE REVIEW CVG MEGA DRIVE OUTRUNNERS RACING GAME .99 OUT ON IMPORT NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED The sequel to that classic arcade game Outrun rears its not-so-pretty head on the Mega Drive at last... LOCALIFORNIRE MD VARI ega has virtually defined the way arcade racing games should be with a string of brilliant machines like Outrun, Powerdrift, Rad Racer, Virtua Racing and most recently, and most excellently, Daytona USA. Somewhere in the middle of that lot though came Outrunners, a mediocre sequel of sorts to Outrun. The game itself was much the same as its forerunner. Essentially you've got to race through a number of stages making the checkpoint at each one. Every so often the road splits, allowing you to decide which way to go with one route tending to be easier than the other. Despite the choice though, the routes tend to be similar. And that's about all there is to say about it, except there's a two-player option and the game's crap! VERDICT POS BAROVI One of Out Runner's main faults is the distinct lack of opponent cars which makes crashing a reality for only the completely hopeless. PLAYER 1 GEAR 2SHEED BORD ONS TEA TINE 10 ENTRY POS 1st 069% Everyone's favourite theme 'Magical Sound Shower' is here, along with all the other original tunes plus plenty of new ones. MEGA DRIVE Outrun's one of my favourite arcade games, but Outr Runners was rubbish, so I guess this is an accurate conversion! It harks back to when all racing games made you do was move left and right and avoid a corner occasionally. Graphically it stinks with cardboard-looking sprites and backgrounds repeated every couple of seconds. Sound is the usual whining nonsense too. This is the worst Mega Drive game I've played in ages. Avoid. RIK SKEWS QUBER REACTOR 10 ENTRY:12 COMPUTER GEAR 4 SPEED POS 49 ENTRY: 12 OP 2200 A A choice of eight different cars await you although personally I couldn't feel much difference in the way they handled or notice much difference in their top speeds. Still, if you should be crap enough to crash you're treated to this tasty sequence where your car spins violently. Hope they've got seatbelts on. The roadside scenery is very sparse too, something else which lets you glide through the levels without the fear of crashing. WANUAL You can choose between automatic or manual gears with automatic ones offering a quicker recovery from crashes while manual ones give a higher top speed. Sicu. U ENTRY: 12 AUTC 59 GRAPHICS 52 SOUND PLAYABILITY 47 VALUE 40 POS 30 ) PLAYER 1 TI NE GEAK RUIU 91 LAPBB 27\" 30 31 Ist 295K SPEED49 ENTRY: 12\" OVERALL That familiar Outrun map makes a reappearance and shows you how far you've got once the game has ended. 48 POS BIBDDDDD COMPUTER GEAR AUTO TINE COMPUTER TI NE GEAR AUTO LOPBD 27 20 31 2ND 320K 2018-ce 49 GAME BY SEGA CONTACT COMPUTER EXCHANGE (071-636 2666) FOR IMPORT COPIES 97 "


"N LOCAL BUYERS GUIDE NOTTINGHAMSHIRE WEST MIDLANDS ACT GAMES 0602 458870 SEGA NINTENDO AMIGA CD32 PC + CD ROM LATEST GAMES LOW PRICES FIFA CD THEME PARK CALL Z MICRO MACHINES 2. W FREE P&P NOW FOR 3 URBAN STRIKE PHONE ON ALL FREE LIST FOR PRICES FOR SOFTWARE DATES RELEASE wwwme THE GAME SHACK 105 Locarno Road (Rear of Laser Keys), Tipton. 3DOJAGUAR SEGA CD CD32 MEGADRIVE SUPER FAMICON SUPER NINTENDO USA EXCHANGE SERVICE AVAILABLE ALSO MAIL ORDER. FORMAT TO FORMAT SYSTEM TO SYSTEM. MEGADRIVES + SUPER NES CONSOLES FROM . MEGADRIVE + SNES + CD32 + MEGA CD GAMES FROM .50!! CHEAPEST AND BEST IN MIDLANDS ALL LATEST RELEASES + IMPORTS FOR NEWS + ORDERS PLEASE CALL IN OUR SHOWROOM OR TELEPHONE THE HOTLINE 021 557 0633 mm UNIT 4 SMITHURST ROAD, GILTBROOK, NOTTS NG16 2UD CHEQUES PAYABLE TO REACT LEISURE GROUP ALLOW 7 DAYS FOR CLEARANCE/STOCK ETC LONDON SE14 KENT Arca de Connection PC, JAGUAR, GAMEBOY, GAME GER, NES MEGADRIVE & SNES THE BEST CONNECTION YOU'LL EVER MAKE Super Gun Pro  Play Arcade PCB'S At Home With any one of these options FREE! SF11 Interface Variable Power Phono Connectors Headphone Socket A Large Selection of Arcade PCB'S Also In Stock Street Fighter II CE , Crime Fighters  & Many More 081 473 3707 (Open Mon-Sat 10am-8pm) LARGE SELECTION OF SECONDHAND CONSOLE GAMES & CONSOLES ALL OUR NEW GAMES ARE AT DISCOUNT PRICES INCLUDING ALL THE LATEST TITLES Opening hours: 11 am 7.30pm MON/TUES/THUR (9pm FRI) 9 am 5.30pm SAT GAME ZONE SNOWDON PARADE, VINTERS PARK MAIDSTONE, KENT ME14 5NS TEL/FAX 0622 766220 Fast & efficient Mail Order service available Send SAE for list of new & used prices (please state which console) READING MIDDLESEX DO YOU OWN AN ATARI, LYNX OR JAGUAR? If you do you should read Atari Entertainment the first dedicated Lynx + Jaguar magazine in the world. Issue 2 has forty pages of news, reviews including the worldwide preview of Ultra Vortex for the Jaguar. We also have reviews of Tempest 2000, Crescent Galaxy + Raiden. For our Lynx users we have reviews of Super Off Road + Ninja Gaiden III Issue 2 is available now. To subscribe to six issues please send your name and address together with  (cheques made payable to Atari Entertainment) to: Atari Entertainment PO Box 7 Riseley Reading For subscription enquiries phone (0734) 885176. GAME BUSTERS WE ARE MAIN IMPORTERS FOR SEGA AND NINTENDO PRODUCTS, EVERYTHING IS AVAILABLE IF YOU JUST ASK FOR THEM, PLEASE CALL FOR LATEST PRICES, SUPER STREET FIGHTER II VERSION BRAND NEW @  SUPER STREET FIGHTER UPGRADE ONLY  GAMEBOY AND GAMEGEAR CARTS AVAILABLE GAMEBOY ADAPTOR FOR SNES .50 CALL NOW ON 081 958 1455 OR 0585 276685 WE CAN ALSO GIVE YOU ADVISE + ARRANGE ALL YOUR FREIGHT FROM HONG KONG, TAIWAN ETC. DEAL DIRECT IN THE UK WITH US AND AVOID THE RISKS WITH TRANSFERRING MONEY ABROAD TRADE PRICES AVAILABLE HK$ 2130 NINTENDO SUPER STREET FIGHTER II HK $ 2300 SEGA + NINTENDO SUPER STREET FIGHTER II I HAVE BEEN DEALING WITH FREIGHT FOR 5 YEARS, DON'T PAY UPS OR FEDEX PRICES. CALL ME NOW ON 0956 363104 "


"LOCAL BUYERS GUIDE CORNWALL WEST MIDLANDS JAGUAR GAME 3DO JAGUAR CD32 SNES. MEGADRIVE  SEGA CD * IMPORT + OFFICIAL* OVER UK VERSION .99 USA SCART VERSION .99 Consoles include: Cybermorth Cartridge, Control Pad, RF Cable, 12 months guarantee Dinodudes .99 Raiden .99 Crescent Galaxy .99 Tempest 2000 .99 Alien vs Predator Call Wolfenstein 249.99 SEGA MEGADRIVE MD SPECIALS SNES (UK) + FIFA SNES SPECIALS (UK) STREET FIGHTStreet Fighter 2 .99 SOCCER RRP K KEAGANS PLAYER MAGASCAR ER S.C EDITION ARP Fatal Fury .99 E24.99 3950 .99 Lotus 2 .99 1139-29 .99 WWF ROYALRMBLE 29.99 T2 ARCADE .99 SEND S.A.E FOR OUR FULL PRICE LIST WE ALSO 0736 331131 ACCEPT CONSOLE CONNECTIONS, OLD BAKE HOUSE LANE, SWITCH CHAPEL STREET, PENZANCE, CORNWALL TR18 4AE NATIONWIDE DELIVERY -9 Corporation Street Caldmore Walsall West Midlands WS1 4HW Tel: 0922 616833 Fax: 0922 723444 SPECIALIST IN IMPORT GAMES GAMES BOUGHT SOLD + PART EXCHANGE ON ALL FORMATS HUNDREDS OF GAMES NEW AND USED e.g TOMCAT ALLEY  STAR TREK  VIRTUA RACING  FIFA SOCCER  (SNES) BRISTOL MILTON KEYNES WILD CONSOLES Arcade Mania SPECIALISTS *Consoles* IN: Mega You will not *Video Games* Drive, Super believe the (imports and < LOW PRICES Nintendo, officials) Jaguar, 3DO, Super Gun Don't mess around CALL NOW! Next day guaranteed delivery Telephone ANYTIME: (0831) 267711 or write to Arcade Mania, 15 Stoke Hill, Stoke Bishop. Bristol BS9 1JN for a PRICE LIST Specialists in S.N.E.S & Megadrive backup devices. Panasonic 3DO  Super Wildcard Call Double Pro Fighter Call 32 Meg Upgrade Call Movies Sport Adult Sattelite Smartcards CALL FOR DETAILS Tel/Fax: 0908 379049 Mobile: 0850 994372 31/5\" HD Disks, Grade A 100% 40p each Trade enquiry welcome NEXT DAY DELIVERY GUARANTEED ADVERTISING TO ADVERTISE IN THE LOCAL BUYERS GUIDE CONTACT HOLLY EADIE ON 071 972 6700 EXTENSION 2757 "


"CVG REVIEW METAL IN THE AREA SNES STRATEGY .99 OUT NOW INO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED METAL MARINES The SNES may be over-endowed with killer robot games, but this one offers something a little bit different to the rest... uzzah! A strategy game on the SNES! And it's a good one. Metal Marines draws elements from such diverse titles as Rampart, Dune and Battleships to create a game which is completely unique on this system. It's set in the future, with you in charge of a hi-tech army of battle robots (Battletech, perchance?), out to nuke the asses off evil overlords. The Rampart bit has you furiously building up your defences before the enemy strikes. For the Dune element you're trying to make enough money to increase the size of your army. As for Battleships, you've got no idea where your enemy is, so the only way to pin them down is by scoring hits with random shots. Together this makes for a game which demands plenty of tactics, occasional bouts of patience, and in return gives you a highly addictive cart with one of the easiest-touse interfaces of any strategy game. VERDICT If the enemy land, there are only two forms of defence open to you your marines or automatic gun turrets. You'll be stuffed if you've neither of these. SNES Apart from Sim City, the SNES is v. short of decent strategy games. Metal Marines goes some way to redressing the balance, though. It's easy to play, full of action and presents a real challenge. However good this game is, though, it lacks one vital element a two-player mode. It's great for a while, but the endless succession of computer opponents just isn't the same as having another human to grind into the dirt. Even as a oneplayer game though, this is still a top bit of action. MARK PATTERSON A A few missiles in the right place will disrupt your enemy's defences, allowing you to unload a platoon of marines in the area. The hardest part about waging a war is paying for it. Every unit you build costs money, which slowly accumulates as the game progresses. Defence is as important as offence, so it's essential to create a wall of anti-aircraft missiles and radar to take out any enemy attacks. GRAPHICS 81 SOUND 88 PLAYABILITY 90 VALUE 80 OVERALL ALTERNATIVE MEGA DRIVE PowerMonger Electronic Arts/.99 Bullfrog's classic medieval, Populous-style wargame is still a corker two years after its release. It's harder than Metal Marines, though. ISSUE 135: 90% 86 A When you launch an attack you get a short animated sequence of your missile or plane flying into enemy territory. It's nice for the first few times but after that it's really dull. GAME BY NAMCO CONTACT MINDSCAPE (0444 246333) FOR MORE INFORMATION CART SIZE 12M-BIT 100 "


"REVIEWS CVG What? You mean you haven't had enough game reviews to last you until CVG hits the shelves next month? Just as well we've slipped this extra little page in just for you then (oh and all you other readers, too). GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY OVERALL EYE OF THE BEHOLDER SNES The main graphics window is a little small, but the sprites and 3D effects are good. Atmospheric background music, but the effects are pretty limp. Could do better. Almost arcade-esque in the speed and action content of the game, but with plenty of puzzles thrown in. An excellent, fast-paced RPG which knocks the spots off any other firstperson effort RATING:90% SOS SNES Original and impressive use of Mode 7 techniques, but the sprite animation is appalling. The tunes and effects add a lot of atmosphere to the disaster movie events. Very challenging, and very different from the competition but there are no enemies at all. Packs a decent difficulty level, and is most original, but regrettably not exciting at all. RATING:70% 5622 An incredible amount of time has been spent on this animation and there's a wealth of colours. Spot-on conversion of the movie tunes, with extra added ace animal noises Well designed levels and plenty to do, but can be a little floaty at times. No prizes in the originality stakes, but a top award for its excellent implementation. RATING:85% SIHOHS H3 dns BOXING LEGJUNGLE BOOK ENDS OF THE NINTENDO RING NINTENDO 2:08 Vexas Hilton Impresive sprites when still, awkward when in motion. A nice enough bit of music and some pleasant crowd effects, but nothing to get you all juiced up. Could have been a contender for certain, but spoilt by over-ambition. It's good fun, but the giant sprites make it a little difficult to tell what's going on half the time. RATING:72% Modest and bijou would be a way of describing the visuals. A bit of a curate's egg, some good bits and some rather crap ones. ULTIMA THE FALSE PROPHET SNES If you're into RPGs, this is quite engrossing once you manage to get into it. Won't turn anyone on to the genre, but this is decent enough for fans of RPGs. RATING:81% HULK MD The Hulk sprite is great, but all the enemies and backgrounds lack detail and imagination. Fuzzy and hissy throughout, this is sound from about three years ago. Probably wouldn't be so bad, but the combat is utterly tedious, which ruins everything. If the Hulk could kill opponents without too much trouble, this could have been good. RATING:52% ULTIMATE SOCCER MASTER SYSTEM Absolutely pitiful. It's hard to focus on them for long because the scrolling is so bad. You really would not believe just how incredibly bad the sound is on this game. No, you wouldn't, honest. Put it this way this is the sort of game where the ball sometimes scrolls off the screen, and you can still kick it Oh please, turn it off! Take it away! This game is scary! Do not ever go near it! RATING:12% KNIGHTS OF THE ROUND SNES Loads of clour, but the actual graphics are nothing you won't have seen before. Muffled is certainly the word you'd use to describe the sound for this game. It's pretty entertaining for a while, but completely lacking in any original ideas whatsoever. Not a terrible game, but there's nothing to set this apart from the millions of similar games. RATING:70% "


"CVG REVIEW YOU'RE NOT FROM THESE RCADE UF-OZ ARCADE SHOOT-'EM-UP VARIES OUT NOW NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE MEGA DRIVE AND MEGA-CD VERSIONS PLANNED Yee haw! Lethal Enforcers goes back to the American Wild West for a rootin' tootin' sequel... ethal Enforcers wasn't one for the politically correct. The idea was simply to er... shoot everyone. But as they were criminals it was probably all right. Apart from the violence, the most memorable feature were the guns stuck to the front of the machine, especially the pink one! And luckily for Lethal Enforcers 2 the guns are back, only now they've been stretched to six-shooters since this time the blasting action takes place in 1879, right in the thick of cowboy and Indian territory. Five different levels have to be blasted through, which range from a train robbery to an abandoned mine. Don't worry about the odds though, there's plenty of power-ups to collect on the journey, including Gattling guns and even a cannon! So will you make it to US Marshall or simply remain a member of the posse? GUN FIGHTERSLETHAL ENFORCERS 2 ---STAGE SELECT PRESS START You can choose to play any stage at the start of the game, but bear in mind that the game gets progressively more difficult, so if you're new to the game then you'd be better off picking the first stage. THE BANK ROBBERY THE STAGE THE SALODE LOS LECHOWDOWE As Beavis and Butthead would say: 'Heh heh, heh, heh heh!' Shooting innocent people may be fun but you lose energy, so it's not a good idea unless you like wasting money. THE TRAIE ROBBE THE IIDE-OUT GAME BY KONAMI CONTACT KONAMI (0895 853000) FOR MORE INFORMATION 102 "


"PARTS ARE YOU, STRANGER? REVIEW CVG ist INDIAN WARPATH! This guy is the last baddy in the game and he's a right git! A Those stray bullets don't go to waste. Instead they pep. per the background and generally mess the place up! RELOAD! PRESS Shooting at some people or background objects can result in one of six different different power-ups such as the shotgun shown here. Some are limited while others last until you die. They're collected by simply being shot. First of all he appears and charges himself up. Bolts of energy fly at you and turn into energy destroying skeletons if you don't destroy them quickly... Not for the squeamish; Gun Fighters features blood and gore galore. Characters can also be wounded as well as killed outright. PRI VERDICT ...Skeletons also rise from the ground. This guy means business! MACHINE Gun Fighters is a more complete game, with superior guardians to those in Lethal Enforcers. More precise shooting is needed to kill, otherwise you just wound your opponents. There are some amazing digitised backgrounds and the difficulty curve is well set. The guns are too large though, and it's easy to knock the cabinet when reloading. There's not much variety either, but seeing as it's an arcade game, that's not really a major problem. RIK SKEWS BOSS DRUMMING! There's a whole heap of nasty bosses to contend with before you face the final showdown. Here's a look at some of them... Should you manage to kill him he turns back into a spirit. Until next time, perhaps... A Those guns are back, but they are of course sixshooters since this is a Western-based game. Shame they couldn't have changed the colour of the pink one though! GRAPHICS 85 SOUND 88 PLAYABILITY 82 VALUE 80 OVERALL This boss fires his cannon at you, so you've got to find time to shoot his shells as well as him. A major irritant is this old guy. He leaps about all over the train and is very difficult to pin down. A Watch out for the rolling barrels from this boss. On the whole he's quite easy to beat though. Don't worry, this is the two-player mode! Even so you've each got to out. draw three of these suited nasties. 82 MANY OF THE CHARACTERS IN THE GAME ARE DIGITISED REPRESENTATIONS OF SOME OF THE KONAMI AMERICA STAFF. THAT GOES FOR THE SAMPLED VOICES TOO I03 "


"CVG ARCADES THE LATEST MACHINES RCADE S: OLITIONSMINE SAPDV With a foot in the door and a notepad in his hand, Rik Skews checks out what's hot in coin-op city... CUF-OZ 2-036 w ww.ms STARRING: JAMAL_MASHBURIN The graphics are still as brilliantly digitised as ever. Couple this with great sampled sound and killer gameplay and you've got an arcade superstar. NBA JAM GETS A NEW COAT OF PAINT Boomshakalaka! By the time you read this a new version of last year's best arcade game should be in your good old arcade emporium. That's right, NBA JAM is back in a new Tournament Edition. The original game is still here in all its glory, but there are some excellent new enhancements available to the player including the ability to select from five characters instead of the original two. This allows you to substitute at half-time and sort out the wheat from the chaff in each of the NBA East and West teams. There's also more power-ups, secret moves and many new statistics. All this makes NBA JAM more playable than ever. SULISTITUTIONS With five players in PRESS TURBO TO SWAP each team, half-time is a good opportunity PRESS SHOOT TO SELECT to make substitutions and get rid of a player who's having a bad match or who's been injured. VISIT: WILLIAMS DEMOLISH THE PINBALL OPPOSITION Also on its way from Williams is a pinball version of Demolition Man, based on the highly explosive and enjoyable movie of the same name starring old rubber muscles him. There's plenty of self, Sly Stallone. We reckon novel features in the game like these twin that even non-pinball fans will gun grips used to conget a lot out of this game trol both the cyro-claw since it's sporting some and flippers. excellent new features not seen in pinball games before. For a start there are two side mounted triggers to control the flippers and the cryo-claw (you'll recognise it from the film). And there's a miniature car crash built in! No, we don't know exactly how this is going to work in something like pinball, but hey, we're open minded. Look out for a full San Angeles burns in one review in a forthcoming of Demolition Man's excelissue. Let's hope we lent Dot-Mation scenes. don't have to go all the way to San Angeles to test it out though! MOLEWAT 42:5= If you've seen the film, you will probably recognise this as the cryoclaw where Stallone is cryogenically frozen. In the game it's controlled by the gun handle grips. Another industry first is the miniature car crash feature that's been built into the game. He's on fire! Like the original NBA JAM, the Tournament Edition features this move where your player becomes almost unbeatable if he scores three consecutive dunks. 104 THERE WERE ONLY 15 SECRETS IN THE ORIGINAL NBA JAM. THE TOURNAMENT EDITION IS RUMOURED TO HAVE OVER 70 INCLUDING AN OPTION TO SELECT A SUPERSTAR TEAM "


"THE TIME HAS COME FOR SOMEONE TO TAKE THE LEAD IN SELLING COMPUTER GAMES. SOMEONE WHO CARES ABOUT THEIR CUSTOMERS & PRICES. SOMEONE WITH GUARANTEES THAT NO ONE CAN MATCH. ITS TIME TO SHOP AT: KNIGHTRAVEN COMPUTERS SHOP OPENS 21 JULY IN HARLOW SNES MEGADRIVE MEGA CD AMIGA CD32 3DO MEGA CD JAGUAR PC ENGINE LASER DISC MEGADRIVE Virtua Racing Art of Fighting .......... Greatest Heavyweights ....... Streets of Rage II .. Dragons Revenge Bubba and Stix. Sonic 3.......... F117 Nightstorm..... General Chaos... Hardball 94.............. Young Indy ................. Eternal Champions...... Pebble Beach Golf SUPER NINTENDO Lethal Enforcers... The Legend of Mystical Ninja. Pop and Twinbee Major Title Golf. NHL Hockey 94......... Dr Frankenstein.. Rock n Roll Racing..... .99 .99 .248.99 ..99 .99 ..99 .99 ..99 .99 .99 ..99 .99 ..99 \"HE GAMES PALACE .99 ..99 ..99 ..99 ..99 ...99 ..99 SNES A-Train 13.99 MEGADRIVE Aladdin 43.50 Award Winners Gold22.99 Aladdin 41.50 Bugs Bunny CALL Battle Isle '93 18.50 Art of Fighting 41.50 Clayfighter 43.50 Cannon Fodder 20.50 Bubba n Stix CALL Choplifter 3 CALL Club Football 21.99 Dune 2 CALL Dragonball Z 2(0) 40.50 D-Day 22.99 Davis Cup Tennis Dragon CALL Dune 2 16.99 Dragon CALL FIFA Soccer 40.50 Elite 2 19.99 FIFA Soccer 38.50 FX Stunt Riders (US) CALL Empire Soccer 19.99 Hardball 94 CALL Incredible Hulk 40.50 Mr Nuts Incredible Hulk 37.50 Jungle Book CALL Sens Soccer Inter Ed16.99 Jungle Book CALL Muscle Bomber (1) CALL Sim City Deluxe 20.99 NBA Jam 40.50 Ninja Warriers (0) CALL Sports Masters CALL R-Type 3 49.50 Striker 8.99 Pete Sampras 33.50 Rock n Roll Racing 40.50 Taction Manager (Eng/Sco) PGA Eurp Tour 38.50 Super Metriod (0) CALL 21.99 Sensible Soccer 34.50 Star Trek (US) 57.50 The Blue & The Gray22.99 Sonic 3 44.50 SUPER STREETAGHTER 2 (US) CALL Turbo Trax CALL SUPER SF2 CALL S. Bomberman 2 (0) CALL UFO Enemy Unknown CALL Speed Racer World Cup Striker CALL Wembley-Rugby LeagueCALL Streets of Rage 3 38.50 World Cup USA '94 CALL World Cup Year 94 21.99 Virtual Racing 54.50 AMIGA NOW IN STOOGWILD TRAXE NOW IN: ELFMANIA CALL KICK OFF 3 CALL 3D0 20th Century Almanac .99 All new games sold. Another World .99 Accessories for all systems John Madden 3DO NFL Football.99 Imports from USA and Japan Whacky Races CALL No Membership or Hidden Extra .99 Lemmings Most Computers Catered For Super Wing Commander .99 Best Service Ultrman Games Exchange Service Available Jurassic Park (US) CALL Please Call before Ordering 3DO + Crash n Bum + Demo CD 1439.99 CALL FOR YOUR FREE PRICE CATALOGUE JAGAR Alien VS Predator BRA DO Mont Closed Tues-Sat 10am 8pm Club Drive E50.99 Sun:12 4pm Jaguar Console (UK) .99 ask about our customer Service Charter KNIGHTRAVEN PROMISE: NEVER TO CASH YOUR CHEQUE/PO UNTIL YOUR ORDER HAS BEEN DISPATCHED. WE GUARANTEE TO GIVE THE BEST SERVICE AVAILABLE AT THE BEST POSSIBLE PRICES SECOND HAND GAMES AVAILABLE TELEPHONE:031 443 1892 COMPETITION Competition phone line 0336 424137 All costs 39p per min cheap rate 49p per min all other times TGC PO Box 545, Luton, LU1 1L5 1st prize = 2 games of your choice Runner up = 1 game KRAZY CONSOLES est. 1990. 0422 342901 PO Box 200. Halifax, West Yorkshire HX1 3LY Tel: 0422 342901 Office Hours Mon Sat 9-5.30pm Closed Thursday am (Stock Taking!) Tel: 0422 367730 Evenings 5.30-10pm & All Day Sunday UNIVERSAL ADAPTOR ATARI 64 BIT JAGUAR SCART 60HZ-FULL * The Universal Adaptor will SCREEN CYBERMORPH: . allow you to play imported cartridges on a UK SNES. PRO UNIVERSAL Plays Country Coded Games!! The Universal Adaptor is a Only .00 Top Quality product, cased &IIS. FIGHTER 2 FIGURES SET OF 12. boxed with full instructions ISNES STEREO A/V LEADS... Only .50 SNES AUTOFIRE-SLO MO PADS.....................  SUPER FAMICOM JAPANESE SOFTWARE Super Streetfighter II (Capcom/32M)... .99 Fatal Fury Special (Takara/32M). .99 Super Bomberman 2 74.99 Powerful Pro Baseball (Konami)............. 79.99 wid Trax (Nintendo/FX 2 CHIP) 79.99 Muscle Bomber(Capcom/24M) .99 Jleague Excite Srage 94 (Epoch/16M). .99 World Heroes 2 Takana) .99 Tiny Toon Wacky Sports Challenge. E74.99 .99 .99 $64.99 .99 .99 .99 164.99 .99 .99 .99 .99 159.99 .99 IF AN VADVERT IS IN PRINT, IS IT PROPER?  E25 SNES USA SOFTWARE Ninja Warriors Again.. Stunt Racer EX.. Slam Masters (Capcom/24M) Super Meteriod (Nintendo/24M) World Cup US 94........... The Jungle Book (Virgin/16M). Soccer Shootout (Capcom) Super Street Fighter II (capcom/32M) Barclay Shut Up N& Jam Super Bomberman 2 (Hudio of:/8M).... King of the Monsters 2 (Talana). Super Kick Off 3... Super Pinball (utc).. . USA. SUPER SPECIAIS! Actruiser 2. Barts Knightmare Featuring the Simpsons.... Calafornia Games II...... Clayfighter (IGM).... 2020 Super Baseball Goof Troop (Capcom)... Street Fighter Il ........ Fatal Fury On The Ball Lost Vikings Super Smash TV Super Star Wars Moral Kombat . Pal Version   JAP SUPER SPECIALS! Aliens vs Predator Axelay... .. Combar Tribes (12 Mbit) F1 Echaust Heat.... Golden Fighter (12Mbit)..... J. League Prime Goal... Joe & Mac 2/ Congo's Caper..... Nigel Mansel F1 GP... Phananx (shoot em up). Paradius... Rushing Beat Run/Rival Turf 2 (12Mb) Sky Mission/Wings 2 Acres High Sonic Blastman... Soul Blades Satrfox/Starwing (FX-Chip 3D) ving (FX-Chip 3D)..... ... Street Fighter 11 (16Mbit... Super Ghouls N Ghosts Super Pang/Super Buster Bros Super Smash TV Tiny Toon Adventures-Buster Busts Loose... WWF Super Wrestlemania.... ... .. .   EN  12 Only 32  E14 Most advertisements are perfectly proper. A few are not. The Advertising Standards Authority not only monitors over 850 advertisements every month, it ensures compliance with the rules in the strict Code of Advertising Practice. So when you question an advertiser, they have to answer to us. To find out more about the role of the ASA. please write to the address below. Advertising Standards Authority, Department X. Brook House, Torrington Place, London WCIE 7HN. Jap Import Titles .99 3D Controllers $39.99 American Later Gun .99 ...19 The 3DO Interactive Multiplayer Please call for latest prices availability and compatibility with your set up.  for a 3DO with John Madden Football Sample Disk/7 Button Pad/Crash N Burn CD. 11 DO GAMES Out of This World.... Toon Time Super Models Go Wild Pebble Beach Golf..... Real Pinball.... 144.99 144.99 144.99 44.99 1654.99 Monster Manor E54.99 John Madden Football ... $54.99 Twisted $49.99 Road Rash... .99 Shockwave... E54.99 Jurassic Park. .99 Total Edipe.... ...99 The Hoarde 149.99 Star Control 2. .99 Lemmings 49.99 Microm.... .99 Super Wing Commander $39.99 Thats News to Me... 549.99 Step Acrobics  99 Cowboy Casino... Who Shot Jonny Rock Mad Dog 2. Night Trap... Sewer Shark San Diego Zoo Animals 20th Century Video Alminac Mega Race Dragons Lair All goods are new. Prices include VAT at 17.5% and are correct at time of going to press. Please add .50 per game for Ist dass recorded delivery. Please call for availability before ordering 149.99 ..99 E49.99 .99 This space is donated in the Interests of high standards in advertisements. "


"CVG YOB'S MAILBAG NINFORMATIVE, NINSULTING BUT YOB'S IMAI UUNNNGHHH! UUUURRGGHHH! Hang on, I feel something moving. One last push and it might drop. Hold on. No, it's too much. The strain is too great. No! I can't give up! Come on now, one last push. YES! And with an almighty plop, another log of letters arrives for YOB'S MAILBAG. If you can match my wit and wisdom, or just want to know about games, then loosen off your best efforts in the direction of: CAUTION: THIS LET. TER'S A BIT CACK, YOB'S MAILBAG, COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. Remember, there's a jobtastic ONE HUNDRED POUNDS for the best letter of the Tot, and sweet fartall for the rest of you. 0:00 CORNED BEEF he SHAST A CULTURAL DESERT Dear YOB, The legendary man returns (Omar Elhaj Omar). First: could you arrange this games from the best Mortal Kombat 2, Super Streetfighter II, World Heroes 2, Fatal Fury Special 2. When this games come out on Super NES: (Tiny Toon 2, Rocket Knight)? Second: I think Street Of Rage 2 better than 3 (Music in 2 best and string and graphics excellent but 3...)!!!? I want your opinion! Is Deniz and Pik drinking something when they gives 85 overall for Tournament Fighter? After you print this letter and offend me I will tell you 'even Homer sometimes node. Think about this.' Yob, you will understand when the sun sets from the North. OMAR ELHAJ OMAR Sultanate Of Oman GoT & SERVE FOOT 75930 YOB: Mortal Kombat 2 best of lot, you find? It am miles ahead Super Streetfighter 2, this a bit boring now being. Still, better than World Heroes 2, which still good, and Fatal Fury Special much better. Clear this is to you now? 2. Both will be fulfilled before the setting of the full moon from the East. I think you're am right on Streets Of Rage 2, much puzzlement that you actually make some sense, though. Deniz law unto himself. Me not know what him think of, but I say Tournament should get 90 per cent. And Rik has an 'R' in it, but the 'P' is silent. Consider wise words of one who knows: him who live in desert must wear trousers, not skirt, or much sand up the bum be getting quickly. VANS 106 "


"CERTAINLY NO NINNY YOB'S MAILBAG CVG wwwmma { HOLD T, Gauk Roger! mum HELP ME DO A BANK JOBBIE Dear YOB, Please could you print a picture of me trying to rob a bank and making a balls up? Thanks. ANTHONY GAUKROGER Halifax knows anything about consoles is fully aware that the Neo is the console to have for this type of game. However, this expensive machine is in serious danger of being completely written off by the next generation of consoles and all the planned bolt-ons under the sun won't save it. You've rambled on about the SNES (you're wrong, by the way Dragon Ball Z 2 is crap) and PC, but not to mention the threat hanging over the heads of all your machines: the 32 and 64-bit machines. Right now Sony's PS-X is looming large on the horizon, and the Jaguar is starting to pick m up some sort of installed base. Granted, the 3D0 has yet to make its mark, but with Mars and Saturn waiting in the wings from Sega and Nintendo's two machines (VR32 and Project Reality) in the offing, the future's looking bleak for every machine you describe. Instead of banging off smug letters about all the kit you've got, why not make some sort of intelligent statement about the future of hardware. What do the rest of you think? Write in and I might even dole out some cash to the best letter of the lot. YOB: Let this be a lesson to you kids. You might have a sawn-off shotgun, balaclava mask, striped T-shirt and a bag marked SWAG, but if you are unfortunate enough to come from Halifax and are blessed with a surname which sounds like the mating call of an ostrich on heat, you can forget a life of crime. Fo rening it? I can can compete with well, I just can't finco Geo I KNOW sons: fighting and shooting is being developed featur. EVERYTHING, ME games. And don't you dare ing a 32-bit RISC procesDear YOB, tell me Streetfighter Turbosor. CD-ROM drive, VR First of all, I know you don't is better than Samurai headset, the works! like people who show off Showdown or Fatal Fury Don't get me wrong. so I'm going to do just that. Special although it will be I'm not saying every other I own a 486 PC, a SNES, a when they're converted to system is crap -I'm only Game Boy and a Neo Geo the SNES! Agreed, Turbo is suggesting you should not and they're the best in the the best game on the just ignore certain systems market (each in their own SNES (well, it has been for because they're too expencategory, of course). The a long time, but now sive. If you do, then why PC wipes the floor with the there's Dragon Ball Z are you still reviewing PC Amiga (Ahem YOB), the Action Game 2), but how games? I admit you can do SNES is tons better than many other SNES fighting more with the PC than play the Mega-CD (Ahem, ahem games can compete with games, but that is an endYOB.), and the Neo Geo it? I can't think of one (not less discussion. All want is well, I just can't find words even Mortal Kombat or info on Neo Geo games. to describe this wonderful Turtles V come close) CHRISTOF ROEYAERT piece of equipment And what about shoot Moen, Belgium (Cough, splutter, phlegm, ing games? All right, there gob, splatYOB.). are a lot of good shooting YOB: I decided to print In Issue 142 your games on the SNES like this because it contains answer to Stephen Pierro's UN Squadron, Axelay and a lot of questions you lot letter made it clear the Geo recently R-Type 3, but what have been asking about isn't your favourite console, are they compared to view the PC debate, the next and I presume the rest of Point on the Neo Geo? So, generation of consoles the CVG team aren't that you can say that SNK's litand so on. First of all, thrilled about it since there tle marvel is too limited this contestant makes a hasn't been a review of a when it comes to game number of mistakes: we Neo Geo game in your mag variety, but in terms of think the Neo is a fine for ages. Why? If you really beatem and shoot-'em machine and we cover don't think the Geo is worth ups no other system beats every game released for the bother, you should it. What's more, the Geo is the machine. Trouble is, have your head checked! going to get even bigger there aren't too many of Now before you start SNK is working on new them and a fair few of insulting me and telling me high-memory cartridges the games are wildly how limited the Geo is in which will allow for games overpriced cack. terms of game styles, let up to 330 megs. But that's The beat-'em-ups are me tell you that people not all: a completely new the exception to this only buy one for two rea-l console called the Neo Star rule, and anyone who TYS 78 = 25 % no OBSOLETE 107 "


"CVG | YOB'S MAILBAG NINFORMATIVE, NINSULTING DAZED AND CONFUSED Dear YOB, The first thing I am going to say is that I have seen you going into a pub with John Major. An hour later you came out and he walked off and you got into your W-reg Lada and drove off. You must like your car because it had leather seats, alloy wheels and a : new paint job. Your car must be your pride and joy. By the way, is John Major your best friend? One more thing: do you own an Atari 2600? R DEAN Manchester 0 PS Do you support Swindon Town? I'LL TAKE THIS BLEEDER Dear YOB, In Issue 150 on the Coming Soon bit of the mag there's a bit on Tie-Fighter. On one of the pictures there's a man who is blue this man is Grand Admiral Thrawn who is only in the new Star Wars books. Does this mean that TieFighter is set in the new books, five years after Return of The Jedi? Please answer PETER HUTCHINSON Runcorn, Cheshire YOB: I'm sorry, but I've got better things to do. My backside has started to itch and must be scratched quickly. Try not to still be here when I return. YOB: Hmm. Your therapy doesn't seem to be working, so let's play a new game. You go back and hide in the cage and I'll tell you when to come out. RICHARD SAUNDERS EXPOSED! Dear YOB, My ex-friend says that he has got Sonic The Hedgehog on his Super Nintendo and that he bought it from Japan. Please could you tell him he's a lying little tortoise poo. Please could you also print this message: Richard Saunders (who wrote to you in issue 149) you are a hippo's fart with about as much brains as Paul Rand (The editor Yob.) and if I ever see you I will shove my sister's curling tongs right up your backside. DAVID RICHARDSON Nottingham JUST A LITTLE CD Dear YOB, You are an insignificant pile of llama cack, so answer my questions if you can manage to remember where your hands are. DANIEL HODGKINS Haworth, W Yorks 1. Is it true that Mortal Kombat 2 is coming out on CD-I. YOB: Now where did you hear a thing like that? 2. Is Super Don Quixote coming out on CD-I? YOB: You don't actually own a CD-I, do you? Oh dear. Welcome to The Interactive World Of Nothing Much At All. 3. How do the people at CVG put up with you drooling all the time? YOB: Simple. They hide me in the corner and wheel me out every time the bloke from Philips comes round. 4. What is your favourite banned? (Probably Take That). YOB: I've got lots of favourites. Racing on the motorway and constructing thermonuclear bombs in the back garden are two which spring to mind. 5. How many brain cells do you currently own? YOB: Is it just me, or now that they've closed all the coal pits is Yorkshire actually worth keeping any more? I mean, what's left apart from cloth caps and Last Of The Bloody Summer Wine? YOB: Remember to pull them out of your own first. These pathetic attempts to turbocharge your brain are bound to end in failure. \"\"\" \"\" \"\" s FRANKLY, I'M A BIT STUPID Dear YOB, You git! Anyway, enough of the pleasantries. Let's get down to business. My friend Andrew talks cack all the time, so could you sort out his lies from the facts. He said that Sega and Nintendo are the same company. Hmmm. Another one was that he said Undertaker in Wrestlemania could do a tombstone piledriver. If you don't print this letter will send Andrew round to tell you some of his lies. ALAN RUSBY Kedington, Suffolk Fruit Salad SCLAGNUT Crinper YOB: Your friend Andrew may be a compulsive liar, but he does have one thing going for him: at least he knows how to wind-up a brain-dead cretin like you. 108 "


"BUT CERTAINLY NO NINNY YOB'S MAILBAG CVG >I HEAR TILY AGREE FIGHTING TALK Dear YOB. First let me congratulate you on the fine job you all do. Thanks for the Mortal Kombat 2 moves in Issue 149. Now can you please answer the following for me to your fullest ability? TIM NECKLEN Leicester 1. Do you prefer MK2 or SSF2? YOB: 1. MK2. 2. Do you think SSF2 is even worth switching on? YOB: I'd rather play it than sit here answering drivel like this. 3. Do you prefer MK2 or Virtua Fighters? YOB: MK2. Virtua Fighters may look good, but there's not much depth and the excitement soon turns to boredom after a few plays. 4. Has a release date and price been set for MK2 on the Mega Drive yet? YOB: September 9. 5. Will MK2 come out on Mega Drive or Mega-CD'first? YOB: Mega Drive. 6. Would you recommend getting a Mega CD or waiting for Saturn? YOB: Wait for Saturn. DO NOT BUY A MEGA-CD UNLESS THE MAN IN THE SHOP THREATENS TO SHOOT YOU. EVEN THEN, TRY BEFORE YOU BUY... 7. Do you agree that G****M***** is a sad mag? YOB: Seeing as it hero worships some fat old astronomer with a metal toothbrush sticking out of his ear, I'd say so. MULTIMEDIA MORONERY Dear YOB, LMA MORTAL WOMBAT I am writing to you concerning the multimedia 'super machines' which you comprehensively covered in the supplement What Home Entertainment? which came Dear YOB, with Issue 149 of CVG. While the technical specifications of these new consoles I am a Mortal Kombat 2 fan and I want you to are amazing, I fear that they may fall flat on their faces. answer my questions about MK2. Take the Sega Mega-CD as a prime example. It was touted as the next genera1. Where can you buy a MK2 arcade machine? tion of computer gaming. However, it has largely faded into obscurity in the short YOB: You have to go to the coin-op distributors, space of one year because the software produced did not live up to the machine's If memory serves, MK2 is distributed by Deith high standard. However, with the companies behind these machines taking them Leisure, London and they are in the phone book. seriously and pumping millions into the development I hope my fears will be 2. How much will it cost? proved wrong. A machine, though, is only as good as its software, and therefore YOB: Between ,000 and ,000. just as much time should be dedicated to providing an interesting and varied 3. Will MK2 be released on Jaguar or on 3DO? software base. YOB: Not that I know, though there's an MK My view is that this type of machine will eventually take over from computers clone being prepared for the Jag. and consoles, but only by trial and error. What do you think? 4. Is MK2 better than Streetfighter 2? THOMAS-ALAN MURPHY Redgate, Limerick YOB: Seeing as the Streetfighter genre is now as much fun as a poo in a pillar box, I'd say so. 5. What rating would you give MK2? YOB: So you're saying that these Japanese companies are pumping billions YOB: About 92 %. 93 if I was feeling generous. of yen into machines they know are crapper than your sad name. No, it 6. It is said that each character has Fatalities and a makes perfect sense, it's much the same way your parents have invested a Babality (the person turns into a baby) and also a fortune bringing you up. Do you really think that companies are wasting Friendship Fatality. Is this true? their time deliberately developing crap because they think it's a laff? YOB: If you don't know this by now, you might as CD's already proved itself as viable on PC just look at games like well live in Cobham. Of course there are Rebel Assault and Sam & Max Hit The Road. We've seen some top-secret Friendships, which involve the victorious fighter PlayStation games which will make your puny brain explode when you see giving gifts to his or her vanquished foe. The them. Film-quality graphics and fully interactive gameplay all running off programmers thought it would be a laugh to put CD. Then you've got the Saturn which will bring with it near-perfect arcade it in, and they were right conversions. Fair enough, CD has had its teething troubles, but what do you PS Answer my questions or I'll bribe my friends not expect from a new format? You obviously haven't played any games which to buy your magazine. can only work on CD, have you? So I suggest you get yourself down your CARL BONDE Cobham, Surrey local computer shop and check out some of the CD games on offer, then YOB: PS I'm sure those two or three people will come back and tell me how wrong you were. make all the difference. 109 "


"CVG GROUP TEST HEAD-TO-HEAD SPORTS GAMES GROUP TEST DIGITAL FITNESS EA's Michael Jordan licence: v. flashy 3D graphics. MARIO Whatever your sporting penchant, LEMIEUX HOCKEY there's a game for you here as we MEGA DRIVE pick out the best, and some of the SEGA also-rans, in the competition for the Trying to out-do EA's best sports game ever... superb NHL series proved too great a task, as Sega part from our less strenuous. So if found out when it released once-a-week while watching the World this. In its own right this is kick around in Cup, Wimbledon, or the a decent ice hockey game, Regents Park, USA PGA Open you feel with plenty of features and we here at CVG inspired to take part in fast-paced action, but put are what you might call some sporting action it up against the EA games athletically challenged then fine; but knowing and it loses out in almost preferring the arduous this country's inclement every area. The playability's task of competition pork weather you'll probaweak in comparison and pie eating to try and get bly have to settle for a the control system isn't as fit. This is why we like bit of indoors computerfluid. A decent attempt that sports games so much. and videogame sporting doesn't make the grade. You see, they let you say instead. And you don't .99 in all honesty 'oh yeah, want to be playing any was on the tennis court old crap, hence why for three hours yester we've compiled six pages MICHAEL day'. But to make it of the most notable, and JORDAN IN sound convincing you the best, sports games FLIGHT need a decent game, available. So what are PC which is almost like playyou waiting for sports LEA ing the real thing, but far fans... read on. Bringing all of its technical wizardry into play, EA created a visually stunning 3D basketball game with its Michael Jordan licence. Rather than take the arcade-orientated approach of console basketball sims, EA created something a bit more up-market. The player animations are digitised from the great man himself, and the action's 3D, with panning camera-style views. For all the flashy graphics, the gameplay is not quite what it should be and fails to match up to many of the console offerings .99 DAVIS CUP TENNIS MEGA DRIVE TENGEN Hit the courts and take on the top players in the Davis Cup Tennis a very playable tennis sim for the Mega Drive. It has an excellent selection of shots and is superb in twoplayer mode. LOS DOSE TEAM 2 EN   un 1. DAVIS CUP AVIS CUP Mario Lemieux Hockey an excellent ice hockey game in its own right, but doesn't quite match up to EA's NHL series. Shame. 19:00 "


"HEAD-TO-HEAD SPORTS GAMES GROUP TEST CVG WAY PLAY tennis tour circuit. Although it doesn't look like much, it's incredibly playable. The control system is easy to get to grips with, letting you produce all manner of shots with minimal effort. As with most sports games the two-player mode really stands out, especially since this doesn't suffer from small player sprites at the far end of the court which afflicts many tennis sims. Not the best Mega gives you. As well as taking Drive tennis game, but very on Ali (before his flabby close to it. Seventies phase) you're .99 involved in the best boxing game on the Mega Drive. It's feature packed with MUHAMMED one of the best control sysALI'S BOXING tems in any boxing game. MEGA DRIVE Best of all is the 3D ring, VIRGIN which rotates as the playPunch up fans, don't settle ers brawl their way around for anything less than a it. There's no need to try scrap with the best which anything else, this is the is exactly what this game best boxing game money can buy. .99 A EA's FIFA Soccer obviously bowing to the Yanks and not calling it footy. falls short when compared to Imagineer's Kick Off 3. One of the main complaints is that you don't always feel as though you're in control of your players. Still, that's no reason to overlook one of the best football games ever, especially since Kick Off 3 now won't be coming out until September. .99 this, although what we want to see is a texture mapped version for the 32bit systems. .99 NICK FALDO'S GOLF CD32 GRANDSLAM Taking the title of best CD32 golf game by default (like, because there are no others, right), this is actually more than a half-decent game. Being on CD, it features plenty of real sound and digitised graphics, although that doesn't go far enough to make up for the faults in the gameplay. It's nowhere near the standard set by PGA on other formats, but for the moment this is the only golf game on this system, so you'll just have to make do. .99 NO SECOND PRIZE AMIGA THALION This vastly underrated bit of motorbike course racing is one of the fastest sports sims ever. The graphics are relatively simple, but action is unmatched in any other bike game. As such the Amiga's mouse proves a better controller than a standard joystick. If it's speed you're after there isn't much that can top HEAVYWEIGHT CHAMP GAME GEAR ISEGA Bizarre as it seems, this is, as you've probably managed to suss from the title, a boxing game for the Game Gear. It's certainly an impressive 'attempt' at bringing this sport to a handheld, but unfortunately all it is really is an 'attempt', since it falls short of being playable and lingers around the 'nice try but...' category. If you're after a fighting more than a sports game, you'd be better off with Mortal Kombat. .99 Ali takes the title of best boxing game by a knockout in the first round. Nick Faldo's Golf is the only golf game on the CD32, for the moment that is. Heavyweight Champ: more of a beat-'em-up than a proper sports game. AGAIN. FIFA SOCCER MEGA DRIVE/SNES EA With this game EA has redefined the standards for graphics and presentation in computer football games. EA has really hit the mark with the gameplay too, although it just 1 No Second Prize: works well on Amiga because of the mouse control system. STRICE DE "


"CVG GROUP TEST HEAD-TO-HEAD SPORTS 100 100 100 100 RI Speedball: violent, fast, Americanised Bitmap Bros futuresports game. Very playable and very good. THE EVIL FT Winter Challenge, plus you get the Summer one too. 1100 RI STB 0000 54 SPEED SKATING Time: 0.05.25 SLAP SHOT IMASTER SYSTEM SEGA Not to be outdone by the Mega Drive with its multitude of EA NHL games, the Master System boasts a Slapshot is the best ice hockey game to be found on nifty ice hockey game of its the 8-bit Master System. own. It doesn't have the options of its 16-bit rivals, there are no rules, so it's but that doesn't stop it dead easy to pick up and being an excellent actionplay. Between matches the orientated slap shot fest players can be bolstered and the best ice hockey with better armour and game on 8-bit. Because of aggression-enhancing its relative simplicity and the devices (although lager opposing computer teams, isn't one of them). A genwhich aren't the brightest wine classic that should be things ever to grace a sports in everyone's collection. game, this game is best in .99/ .99/ two-player mode. .99/.99/.99 .95 INBA JAM SPEEDBALL2 MEGA AMIGA/MEGA DRIVE/SNES/ DRIVE/PC/GAME GAME GEAR BOY/MASTER ACCLAIM SYSTEM Basketball games don't VIRGIN come any bigger than this. Cross rugby with football, Converted from the most chuck in massive geezers successful coin-op ever, tooled up with body armour NBA JAM is simply the best and you get Speedball bit of basketballing money the ultimate future sport can buy. Dozens of moves, and one of the all-round fluid action and sharp best sports games ever. graphics all contribute to Unlike many sports games this piece of sporting excellence. Even the Game Gear version manages to hold its own against the rather stunning 16-bit versions. A near-perfect conversion of the world's best basketball game. .99 /.99/ .99 so the graphic style and basic control systems don't vary much, but between them they boast over 20 events, ranging from equestrian to giant slalom. Scores and event times can be saved to hard drive, so once you've got the hang of the events you can go back again to beat your best performances. Good games, great VFM. .99 IWINTER CHALLENGE & SUMMER CHALLENGE PC CD-ROM ACCOLADE Two games for the price of one both of which are top-notch. They're based around the same engines, U-LEAGUE PRO STRIKER IMEGA DRIVE ISEGA This vastly underrated and very excellent footy game throws you into the Japanese league for fourson Above and left NBA JAM on Game Gear and Mega Drive. This game was B.I.G. in the arcades and on console it doesn't disappoint in any way, and luckily for non-Americans you don't have to know about basketball to start playing. J-League Pro the I' standing for Japanese, and yes, you do get a picture of Mr Lineker. PHOENIX NEW YORK stes 112 "


"HEAD-TO-HEAD SPORTS GAMES GROUP TEST CVG NB-TG 6 .5 Hole #8 Par4 Stroke 1 + Distance:384 yds. Club: Driver Jrue DOUBLE A PGA Golf: the classic golf game, converts well to the Mega Drive. A 2020 is a very glamourous baseball game, with flashy graphics and starling sound and comedy touches thrown in to give it that special touch, but at the end of the day it's just not worth the huge price tag. player multitap action. It's not up to the level of Sensi or FIFA, but it's still a jolly good kick around which is worth considering if you're tired of the rest. It even features a picture of Gary Lineker on the JOHN MADDEN'S FOOTBALL 3DO EA The 3DO's first, and currently only, sports game is a decent enough conversion of the original Mega Drive Madden's sensation. Naturally, being on CD and 32-bit, EA couldn't get away with a port, so all the graphics are digitised and the action's interspersed with generous amounts of FMV. However, the control system is the same as the Mega Drive's, which is a good thing since that's what made the game so accessible. It doesn't play as well as the 16-bit versions, but with a shortage of decent 3DO software this is a welcome launch. .99 Domark's Rugby: definitely one for the rugby enthusisast only. SUPER TENNIS ISNES TONKIN HOUSE Despite this game's age (it was one of the first SNES releases) it's still the best tennis cart for this system and ranks up there as one of its best all-round for real or not, you'll find this game easy enough to play and horribly addictive. From a full set of clubs to A Super Tennis excellent SNES sim. (See also Smash world famous courses, this Tennis on page 74.) game's got the lot. There's sports games. The twoanother version of the player mode is superb, game available which feathanks to the intuitive contures all the European trols and speed of gamecourses, but it's almost play. Don't be put off by identical to this version, so this game's age, it doesn't there's really no point in show at all. An essential trying to separate them. part of any collection. .99 .99 RUGBY 12020 SUPER AMIGA BASEBALL DOMARK NEO GEO Very much in the Kick Off ISNK mould, Domark's Rugby Big graphics, flashy sound, proved what could be done neat presentation and with a sport most people landmines on the pitch considered impossible to can't prevent the fact that convert to computers. It this isn't that good a game. sticks faithfully to Union It's easy to be drawn in by rules, although with the the visuals and the 'come. omission of rucks. Domark dy' touches, which work also proved that rugby isn't well and look excellent. But everyone's ideal game, once you've actually played which is why this received a few games the shine very mixed reviews. You wears off and you find really need to appreciate yourself playing what is a the sport to appreciate the very average baseball game, and if that's the game. With this kind of case you'll enjoy this. .99 price tag you've got to think carefully about your purchases, and this is one you SENSIBLE can live without SOCCER .99 SNES/MEGA DRIVE/AMIGA PGA TOUR GOLF 2 SONY/ MEGA DRIVE RENEGADE EA This is regarded by most as When it comes to golf the greatest computer footgames there's nothing ball game ever, which around that can touch this. might come as a surprise Whether you've played golf to people who haven't The Soccer game that is anything other than sensi. ble, is phenomenal on SNES. Grampus Eight team screen. In fact it's hard to fault this game in any area, especially when it's played with four people. .99 The best game to arrive on the 3DO. John Madden's Football, seems to be a winner on every machine. 113 "


"CVG GROUP TEST HEAD-TO-HEAD SPORTS TOA 2 Mutant Hockey is a zany twist on the hockey format, but sadly it doesn't quite work. be Indycar: it's almost like being there a slight exaggeration but this is a bloody good game nonetheless. 54 played it when they see the John Madden's '93 is tiny sprites. What makes it cheaper and almost identical so good is the unsurpassed to the subsequent release. action. It's not very realistic UOHN but it's more playable than MADDEN'S any other footy game on FOOTBALL '93 FOOTRA '93 the shelves. One of the MEGA DRIVE best football games ever EA devised, even if it is nothOut of the three Mega Drive ing to look at. .99/.99/.99 John Madden's games, this is the best. Mainly because IPGA TOUR GOLF '94 is almost identical to it and you'll probably find this IMACINTOSH one cheaper. American EA football isn't everybody's PGA Tour ideal sport, but the execuGolf tion in this game is so faultless it's accessible to every one. Again, like many of the games here, it's the twoplayer mode that makes it stand out, especially when A PGA Tour distracts us you hammer your opponent constantly since we work on so hard they have to bring Apple Macs. the ambulance on. .99 Despite the fact this game's knocking on a bit, the hi-res 256-colour LAMAZING graphics are excellent and TENNIS it has all the features of MEGA every other version of PGA. DRIVE/SNES There's a variety of courses ABSOLUTE to play on, different weath ENTERTAINMENT er conditions, handicaps Why watch English tennis and professional and ama'stars' flounder in major teur tees. It's cheaper than competition when you can a set of clubs and you beat the best on your condon't have to have any sole. It's programmed by golfing ability to play it. David Crane, creator of .99 Little Computer People, and instead of producing an arcade-type game, he opted to make this as realistic as possible. As such it features massive player graphics and excellent animation. It doesn't always look as though you're hitting the ball though, which is an annoying bug. Not quite 'Amazing', but it's still one of the better tennis games available. .99 gave the theme a twist, bunged in some monsters and a rink full of holes. The result is a moderately playable game, but not as violent or funny as it should have been. After a few hours of play it becomes dull, and you realise that there really isn't that much to do. Stick to EA Hockey. .99 KICK OFF 2 AMIGA ANCO The follow-up to the father of footy games epitomises JINDYCAR RACING PC IVIRGIN Recent winner of our driving game Group Test, this is the best motor sport sim money can buy. You need a fairly powerful PC to run it, since it's loaded with detail and the graphics are mindblowing. All this exacts a high price in processing power, but the result is one of the most realistic driving games ever. .99 Jimmy Connors has better graphics and presentation than Super Tennis. Kick Off 2: a truly legendary footy game if ever there was one. Which there is by the way. MUTANT LEAGUE KEY IMEGA DRIVE EA Amazing Tennis was programmed by the man who brought you the 'amazing' Little Computer People. This effort, though realistic, does not quite live up to its name. Deciding that conventional ice hockey isn't enough, EA "


"HEAD-TO-HEAD SPORTS GAMES GROUP TEST LCVG COMPARISON CHART RATINGS WORLD BEATER the word 'classic'. It introduced after touch' and proved a computer football game doesn't have to be realistic to be good. It still offers enough to hold its own against any newer release, although Kick Off 3 might have something to say on that matter. .99 REALISM GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY OVERALL SNES IUBI SOFT Almost matching the excellent Super Tennis for playability is Jimmy Connors. The graphics and presentation are better, and while the gameplay is superb, it falls short of Tonkin House's offering thanks to slower action and a trickier shot selection system. Still, if it's a slightly more serious tennis game you're after, this is the one to choose. .99 JIMMY CONNORS' PRO TENNIS TOUR SENSIBLE SOCCER VIRGIN MEGA DRIVE/SNES/ AMIGA OK, so it's a footy game. But there can be very few people who've played this that can criticise us for choosing it. Sensible Soccer is the ultimate chunk of computer sports action. It combines speed with incredibly inventive gameplay that requires skill over joystick thrashing power. Your team can be customised to suit you, from the formation they play in to the player's names. The computer teams pack a decent challenge and it's almost unrivalled in twoplayer mode. It accommodates passing tactics, sad long ball merchants and jammy gits who like to dribble the ball from their penalty area then walk it into the opposing goal. It might look like crap but that doesn't detract from this being head-and-shoulders over all current sports. There are plenty of challengers this summer, but at the moment this reigns supreme. MEGA DRIVE MARIO LEMIEUX 80 81 78 73 75 HOCKEY 84 76 89 88 89 DAVIS CUP TENNIS 8789 84 86 88 ALI'S BOXING 91 92 90 91 92 | FIFA SOCCER 82 84 78 9091 SPEEDBALL 2 85 8381 8888 J-LEAGUE STRIKER 94 89 90 91 90 JOHN MADDEN'S FOOTBALL '93 93 90 82 93 93 PGA TOUR GOLF 2 61 78 77 72 73 MUTANT HOCKEY 70 81 79 95 94 SENSIBLE SOCCER 59 91 90 92 90 NBA JAM 75 90 77 80 79 AMAZING TENNIS AMIGA 93 90 73 92 91 NO SECOND PRIZE 82 85 81 92 91 SPEEDBALL 2 78 74 70 80 78 RUGBY 83 84 749291) KICK OFF 2 PC MICHAEL JORDAN 93 91 88 67 68 IN FLIGHT 95 94 90 93 93 INDYCAR RACING 86 8778 88 89 SUMMER/WINTER CHALLENGE CD 32 90 86 8790 88 NICK FALDO'S GOLF GAME GEAR 65 71 56 6260 HEAVY WEIGHT CHAMP 59 88 8785 871 NBA JAM SNES 59 92 91 92 91 NBA JAM 69 81 84 90 88 SUPER TENNIS 70 81 79 95 94 SENSIBLE SOCCER 91 93 94 92 92 FIFA SOCCER 90 80 778685 JIMMY CONNOR'S TENNIS 3 DO 91 89 90 8486 MADDEN'S FOOTBALL MACINTOSH (94190 16190191 PGA TOUR GOLF NEO GEO 40 93 94 76 78 2020 BASEBALL MASTER SYSTEM 177 66 54 8279 SLAP SHOT EA turned up trumps with its NHL Hockey series. NHL HOCKEY '93 IMEGA DRIVE EA We know this isn't the latest version, but it's the one we regard as the best. It has all the features of the original, including the fight sequences and blood which were cut out of the '94 version. It's slightly faster than the first game, and has excellent features like 'super shots': these shatter the glass that's supposed to protect the crowd. Basically it's the perfect ice hockey sim, unrivalled on any format. .99 These ratings are comparative in relation to other sports sims, not other genres. So the marks here will differ from the ones in the original reviews. 115 "


"SLOW 2 SLOW 1 AUTO TURBO NORMAL LMP GAMESTER CORE GENERATED LMP GAMESTER START START md-6 md-3 MIDO... Buton sovpad Hradependent Auto and Turbo Fire MD3 3 Button Joypad Independent Auto and Turbo Fire Multiplayer AdaptorUp to 5 player action on multi player games for SNES sol trato SNS 133WV GAMESTER JOYPAD FOR SUPER NES JOYPAD FOR MEGADRIVE PRODA GBUTTON-INDEPENDENT TURBO AND AUTO PRE andSN6 -6 Button Joypad Two Extra Buttons for Arcade Style Play sn-6 CMP GAMESTER GAMESTER 8-US SELECT START SLOW MOTION SELECT START SN8 6 Button Joypad Independent Auto and Turbo Fire LMP More Great Products Now available from: The Range of Video Game Accessories GAMESTER VIDEO GAME ACCESSORIES For full details of prices and distributors contact: Leda Media Products Ltd., Stonemason's House, 75 Railway Street, Hertford, Herts. SG14 1RD Tel: 0992 503133 Fax: 0992 503061 "


"THEY TELL IT LIKE IT IS OPINIONS CVG BIG EDS SUMMER IS NOT USUALLY HOT IN THE GAMES MARKET, BUT THE EDITORS OF SOME OF BRITAIN'S BEST GAMES MAGS TELL YOU WHAT'S BEEN MAKING THEIR TEMPERATURES SOAR... STEVE MERRETT, EDITOR MEAN MACHINES SEGA CHRISTINA ERSKINE, EDITOR PC REVIEW With both Mortal II and Super SF debuting on Mega Drive this month, I reckon I could have anyone right now. Both are stunning conversions, but I have to say that MKII stuffs Capcom's World Warriors this time round. The problem with MK was it wasn't instinctive to play, but such problems are long gone and the 12 characters are now very controllable, and the moves a doddle to pull off. A vintage Mega Drive month, topped up by a quick blast against the evil Empire in a game of Rebel Assault. If there's a bandwagon going around, you can guarantee that computer games will leap on it. So this month we've had the World Cup, and so we've got new footy games, updated footy games and we've got old footy games that frankly should have been left in peace. Out of the 50-odd footy games on all formats coming out this summer, nine of them are World Cup-specific PC titles. IT makes you want to weep for the good old days when the PC used to stand aloof from all this sort of thing. TIM BOONE. EDITOR NINTENDO MAGAZINE SYSTEM PAUL RAND, EDITOR OF CVG It's been a long time coming but the wait has been worth it. No I'm not referring to Super Street Fighter II, I'm talking about Stunt Race FX Nintendo's amazing new Super FX title (see page 84). It's powerful, extremely playable and honestly the most exciting game to surface this year. CES proved Nintendo is still the most powerful video-game company in existence, with Donkey Kong Country for the Super NES displaying impossible visuals and sounds. Also Ultra 64 previously Project Reality is fully operational and looking totally scary. Arcades as we know them look set to die when this machine is released late next year. I hate to sound biased, but, for the moment at least, Nintendo definitely rules! You'd think that I'd be going cock-a-hoop over Super Street Fighter II this month but nay. It's the awesome Stunt Race FX that has got me glued to the videogame screen this month, with its top graphics and speedy gameplay. It's actually quite refreshing to see a SNES game that isn't a platformer or a beat-'em-up, and even better when it's taking advantage of new technology. Speaking of which, I can't wait to see Mega Drive 32 in all its glory with games such as Virtua Star Wars and Acclaim's batch of fab graphic extravaganzas on the way, the future of gaming really does look very rosy indeed. SIMON'THE HERO' BYRON, EDITOR OF THE ONE The arrival of Summer usually heralds a dry season for games — but not so on the Amiga thankfully! Renegade's Ruff 'n' Tumble is the hottest of the lot, combining old-fashioned playability with excellent graphics and sound. It may not be the most original game ever, but it does what it does brilliantly. And most importantly, it's fun. And much the same could be said for Ocean's Kid Vicious. OK, so it's a platformer, but it's doing things with a 1 Mb Amiga 500 you would not believe and it's a right laugh to boot. And we thought platform games were passé, well think again. THE ONE FOR AMIGA GAMES, PC REVIEW, NINTENDO MAGAZINE SYSTEM AND MEAN MACHINES SEGA ARE ALL BROUGHT TO YOU BY THE SAME COMPANY THAT BRINGS YOU COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES, AND THAT'S EMAP IMAGES 112 "


"CVG Q&A HELP! HELP! You can 'get by with a little help from your friends', but what helps you get by and get on with your favourite games, or sort out that important hardware dilemma you were poring over, is the CVG Help! team. Let them take you through it... IS IT REALLY MAGIC The wide screen mode facility on the Sony PlayStation will enable those who have said TVs to make the most of their big screens. You will not need a wide screen TV to use the console though. This new Philips model (28W632A) is the cheapest at ,000! IMPORTS ON SNES Reel Magic I'm very interested in movies on CD and currently own a 486 PC. I'm looking to buy a ReelMagic card so that I can watch movies by using my PC. A friend, though, has suggested going for a Philips CD-i instead, which costs about the same amount of cash. Save my sanity please, which one should I go for?. Tom Green, Manchester I've a SNES and I've noticed most of my games are in letterbox format. I also hear the new consoles, like the Sony PlayStation, will have a wide-screen mode. Is this the same thing, and will I need a wide-screen TV? Kien Cook, Wales Seeing as you already have a PC it may be a good idea to upgrade your current sytem rather than buying a totally new one, ie the CD-I. But what are the advantages of a Sigma Design ReelMagic card over a CD-i? Well, if you already have a sound card you can pick up A ReelMagic Lite card for around  (plus VAT), whereas a CD-i with FMV is going to set you back about . Deniz reckons you get better quality with a CD-i, but our pals on PC Review have no complaints about the ReelMagic's FMV. The main drawback with Sigma's card seems to be that it will only run Philips CD-i movies if you have a certain kind of CD-ROM drive, so check the small print. Philips is a big company though, and it is putting a lot of money behind getting plenty of game and film titles on to the market, whereas Sigma hasn't quite got the same muscle, but there are over 20 new releases planned over the next three months, with GameTek planning a further 30. If your SNES games are showing in letterbox format that's because you're have NTSC import games. It is possible to convert to PAL if you have the correct adaptor, then you end up slowing down the game. As for the PlayStation, yes it will have a wide-screen mode, and so might Sega's Saturn. You will not need a wide-screen TV, but if you do have a wide-screen it'll mean you get a full screen without having to distort the original image. GAME TIPS ARCADE D, D-T, T, D-T, D, D-B, B+A ART OF FIGHTING 2 beat-'em-up that deserves a few of your silvers next time you're passing an arcade. To get extra VFM and to make you look completely smart in front of your mates you might want to try out these finishing moves. Remember you'll need a complete rage gauge before you can pull them off. FULL RAGE GAUGE DEATH MOVES Ryo Sakazaki Super Haoh Sho KoohKen T, B, D-B, D, D-T, T+A, Is this better than Streetfighter 2? Who cares? What we all know is that this is one fierce Temjin Super Mongolian Fire Tackle B, T, B, D-B, D, DT+A Yuri Sakazaki Super Haoh-Sho Kooh-Ken T. B, D-B, D, D-T, T+A Robert Garcia Super Haoh-Sho Kooh-Ken T, B, D-B, DD, D-T, TUA Takuma Sakazaki Super Haoh-Sho Kooh-Ken T, B, D-B, D, D-T, T+A Jack Turner Super Bounce B, T, D-T, D, D-B, B+B Eiji Kisaragi Super Kasumi-Kirl Lee Pai Long Fan Blade CREDITS IIB "


"Q&A CVG PC OR NOT PC? THE BLOKE AT DIXONS SAID If you've a Mega Drive II then you'll have to use the headphone socket on your television. THE WRITE LINE I've just bought a new design Mega Drives, but I can't find the headphone socket. How on earth am ! supposed to connect up to my hi-fi? Dixons told me it's not possible. Kenny Peters, Lancs. I have owned an Amiga 500 for the past six years now, and I suddenly feel that I have had my head stuck in the sand and that far better games systems have passed me by. Now I want to get a PC, but I don't know exactly where to start. I like ultra-fast simulations, though, I don't want to waste money on a top end PC which I'm only going to use to play games on. Also, what are the advantages of getting a CD-ROM drive as well? I've got around ,500 and I am desperate for advice. Mr P O'Brian, Basingstoke. If you're a flight sim fan (and there's none better than TFX on PC CD-ROM, pictured here) then you'll be wanting to get yourself a decent PC You've certainly made the right deciwith a CD-ROM drive. sion going for a PC if you're a simu lation fan. The problem is that if you want speed you have to pay for it. With ,500 you should be looking towards an Intel 486DX2 50 or 66Mhz (don't get fooled into buying a slower 486SX). This should have Local Bus sockets (VESA) and be fitted with a Local Bus graphics board (not IDE). Next, make sure you get a multi-sync monitor (so that you can use high resolution modes). Ensure you get a hard disk with no less than 180Mb and try for 8 rather than 4 Megs of RAM. Ask b and try for 8 rather than 4 Megs of RAM. Ask about the controller board inside, make sure it has at least a 256k cache and supports multiple hard disks. If you're going for a sound board too, get a 16-bit one instead of an 8-bit (although most support both). As for CD-ROM drives, the main advantage is storage space. A CD can hold around 650Mb of data which means bigger more lavish games. TFX (flight simulation) from OCEAN also happens to be one of the best CD games around. If you do go for CD-ROM make sure it is double-speed (300k plus transfer rate) and that it has an access time under 250ms. Prices range from  . Good luck! The chap at Dixons obviously doesn't know what he's talking about. All you need to do is connect your Mega Drive to your TV then use your TV headphone socket or other output. But the best way is to get a special lead which splits the SCART signal into video and audio. They cost around .99. Contact Machine Shack on 081677 8062 We live in the caring, sharing Nineties, so hey! If you've mapped out a level, found a secret part to a game or you've just got a common-or-garden hint or tip (and that doesn't mean we want advice on planting sprouts, OK?) send it in. And if it's any cop we'll print it and share it with the masses. Address your correspondence to: CVG Help!, Priory Court, 3032 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1R 3AU. T. B, D-B, D, D-T, T+A Mickey Rodgers Super Comet Gale T, B, D-B, D, D-T, T+A John Crawley Super Mega Smasher T, B, D-B, D, D-T, T+A Top blasting action is guaranteed in this ace blaster from Virgin. Trouble is the action is so intense that it can be a little difficult to find time to check out those hidden rooms. Worry no more though, 'cos thanks to someone who even went to the trouble of drawing us diagrams We would name him/her but they forgot to tell us who the hell they are! on mission two on the second bar, once Robocop falls off the bar press left and once he cannot go any further do a diagonal jump left. When you have done then go in the door. Kill everything in this room too, then walk to the far left and then behind the wall. Now press up and you will enter a door and be in the secret street level with three bonus random power-ups and one extra life. King Double Strike T, B, T, D-T, D+B Mr Big Blaster Wave B, D-B, D, D-T, T+A this press up. you should now have entered the secret office level where you can get two lives and a random bonus power-up at the end-of-the-level. sion five there is a bar directly above Robocop. Move slightly to the right. jump on to the chairs and then on to the bar. Now press left and you will go through the wall at the start! You should now be in the secret office. Kill everything around you and Secret remote base On mission seven, after you have gone down the fourth ladder walk left until you hit the wall. Now do a diagonal jump left through the wall. You should now have gone through the wall. MEGA DRIVE ROBOCOP VS TERMINATOR Secret street and office levels. As soon as you start mis 119 "


"CVG Q&A HELP! PROBLEM PAD MD32 RUMOURS ABOUND I've heard that the Mega Drive 32 will be compatible with the Mega-CD, is this true or what, and when can I get hold of one? Richard Chantler, Kent I've got a 3D0 and I'm fed up with it's crap control pad which forces me to press really hard if I want to move diagonally. Is there any thing I can Not the most popular new joypad is the one supplied with the Panasonic Mutiplayer. Read do to it, or below for a handy tip on how to improve it. are there any alternative pads I could buy? Jason Web, London Any add-on device has to be compatible with other add-ons when you're a console manufacturer, so the answer is yes. With the custom chips of the MD32 (which looks like a mushroom actually) the Mega-CD could turn out to be a very powerful system. Sega isn't telling yet if there are any new Mega-CD titles in development for the MD32, but there's bound to be some Impressive stuff. The MD32 should be out before Christmas for under  Virtua Fighter is certain to be one of the releases on Sega's MD32... Our Art Editor, Julie, knows exactly how you feel after she snapped a nail on on one of the blighters. While there are no alternative controllers available over here, we found that if we used a small screwdriver to turn the screws on the bottom by half a rotation, then the pad is far easier to use. ... and here's a pic of what the brute is going to look like. GAME TIPS Continue left and then up the ladder and into the door. You should now be in the base! SKITCHIN' \"Dear CVG reads the letterJulian White's letter, \"I have some really good tips for Skitchin' on the Mega Drive'. Please continue Julian. \"On the right-hand, PRINCE OF PERSIA Thanks to Mark Priddey from Birmingham for coming up with a complete set of passwords for this classic platformer. Glad you agree with us Mark and do keep reading! Level 13 APPDBF Invaders Level 14 HUULQJ Cabbage for Lletterbasher Level 15 LZZNWV Cherry twice for Bounce Level 16 ZUKCOF Orange and Lemon for Level 17 RZZVPU Wheelspin Mushroom and Cabbage WIZ AND LIZ for Wabbitoids (dear oh This is a long one so no dear) time for waffle, apart from Strawberry and Orange for to say thanks again to Splat those Dudes (hmm. Daniel Boutros. Here's a looks familiar) list of all the sub-games: Banana for Lemmings Orange and Mushroom for Select: Tube Skiing Potato and Orange for Potato and pear for Gold Snakes Alive Rush Strawberry and Pear for Onion and Banana for What's that Pony (tee hee) Catch Pear twice for Finder Pear and Carrot for Wabbit Phew. Level 2 MTUEZO level 3 TYZMOV Level 4 PTUJTP Level 5 WYZRIU Level 6 OOPKIJ Level 7 STUPXM Level 8 DEFBSX Level 9 KUKUHC Level 10 CZZCHR Level 11 UOPVGG Level 12 EUUGWK 120 "


"Q&A CVG MY GAMES ARE CRAP ENGINE NEEDS TINKERING WITH Recently I was given a PC Engine, but I can never seem to get a good, clear image on screen. The colours in the games all seem to be rather washed out. Have you any ideas why this is the case? Leon Braddock, Birmingham I've got a Neo Geo which I reckon is still the best machine for arcade quality games at home. Unfortunately, the games are very expensive and I was silly enough to buy a game without trying it first. I returned it within three days after deciding didn't like it, but the chap said it was policy not to give refunds and offered an exchange. I wouldn't mind but there's nothing worth exchanging it for. Can | demand a refund? Neville Smith, Northampton A Colour Booster will enhance your PC Engine. The PC Engine was not designed for an RGB system. No one we've spoken to has been able to convert the machine internally so that it works with an RGB system; so the solution is to get hold of a Colour Booster. This is simply a SCART lead THE HELP! LINE which includes a special picture-improving circuit If you've a tip or query available from most about a game why not phone it in to the CVG importers. Don't pay more Help! Line. It's open on than about  for Friday afternoons from one though. 2pm until 6pm. Simply phone 071-972 6729 and leave your message. That's all there is to it, so get cracking and remember there's a software prize on offer for any stupendously excellent or unique tips. Unfortuantely you can't ask for a refund in this situation because you should have tried out the game first. You are only entitled to a refund if the goods have been sold to you under false claims. CVG will be reviewing all new Neo Geo games in the future so this should help you make the right CHICAGO: L3CI FOAD GIHI New York. Finish in 5th place or above in this race, and you'll be granted with the title 'World Champion Solo Skitcher'. In case you cannot be bothered to do all this, we have some accompanying passwords: NEW YORK: TUNK PPHT XCMP SAN DIEGO: FT1. FOTA, GBRI side at 3.6 miles in to race 2 of the Denver track, jump into the Burger and Drink billboard to be warped to San Diego. Here, you must qualify to reach Seattle. The billboard 'Buy Things' takes you back to Vancouver (which is the first race). At 3.5 miles in Seattle, jump into the billboard which has a lady's face on it and you will be warped to LA. Here, jumping into the billboard 1.8 miles into the race on the rightDENVER: OAN4 NGFO Y001 SAN FRANCISCO: NO2U EAQC SSJF WASHINGTON: DKSK EBQP XQVG hand side which has 'Buy things' plastered on to its facade will result in the swift transportation of you to Toronto. Qualify here and its on to Detroit, quali fy there and Chicago is your destination. In Chicago, hit the billSEATTLE: 35E1 4B3K R1FA board 'Don't Drink and Skitch' at 6.8 miles an the LOS ANGELES: NABU QA55 left-hand side, and you'll 5H301 be whisked away to Miami. Qualification of this race TORONTO: 7504 GYXCI will take you on to the lastYONVI race, in the Big Apple DETROIT: OA34 NGFG YBDI MIAMI: EHIZ YYTG SIZN Phew again! 121 "


"CVG Q&A HELP! SHORT TIPS SNES Blade B 2 SECONDS, T, L ACTRAISER 2 Would you like to reach the final level of this fine game with 38 lives? Thought you might. Thank that man Boutros then! On the hard Skill level enter the code FIFA SOCCAR Here's some FIFA Soccer secret codes from the most excellent Leon Ashley in Manchester. Cheers Leon! Rolling Head Butt D, DT, TL Tiny: Right Hook D, DB, B Secret codes: Taffy: FLOOR SCORE ITEM HEALTH  957. 22 Slide B, B, TL All the codes must be entered in Option Mode. If a code does not work, exit the option menu, reenter and try again. Running Head Banger B 2 SECONDS, T, L Ice Breath B. DB, D, DT. T.L Invisible Walls: Press YYYXAAAB Flat Slide B. DB, D, DT, T, R Crazy Ball: Press XABYYBAX Bonker: MEMJTVSYFVPX and you'll find yourself like, right there in the thick of it. Curve Ball: Press: BARBYL for the rather disorientated Wolfenstein players out there. Try entering A. UP and B for a mighty useful map. Water Sprayer -B, DB, D, DT, TL Super Kicks: Press: BABBBBBBBB Walk On Air-B, DB, D, DT, T, R Flying Tornado T, DT, D. DB, B, B. L Elbow B, A, R Super Goalie: Press: AAAAAYYYYY CLAYFIGHTERS If you haven't yet mastered, the special moves for that plasticine powered beat em-up Clayfighter on the SNES from Nicky Ward of Basildon. Dizzy Spell D, DB, B, L WOLFENSTEIN 3D A few tippets now for that great game Wolfenstein 3D from DB yet again. For a unlimited ammo and weapons, press Ron control pad 2, then START then PAUSE, then R, UP, B and A. Not only that but i you press B, UP, B, A, then invincibility is all yours. If you want to exit the current level you're on then press UP, B, R. B. Got that? Good. Finally, here's one Super Jump UP. R Kiss My Feet UP. LI Dream Team: Press: AABBYYXX JAGUAR Helga: Super Offence: Press: RRRRRLR Belly Flop D, DT, T, R. Super Defence: Press: LLLLLRL Scream hold down button B for 2 seconds, DB, D. DT, T, L Ickybod Clay: CRESCENT GALAXY There are hardly any games for the Atari Jaguar let alone cheats for the ones that we do have. But we do possess one for Crescent Galaxy. If you are one of the smug few to own this game (Daniel Boutros doesn't, but he's a friend who has!), the machine and two control pads, then key in 1. 9, and 3 at the title screen on control pad one. You can now speed up or slow down the backTeleport-D + L + R Head Butt B 2 SECONDS, TL Bad Mister Frosty: Nose Peck T, DT, D, L The Blob: Spit D, DT, T, L 122 "


"CVG XTRAS ground graphics by press ing A or B respectively while the game is playing on pad 2. C, will fire a spe cial weapon (woooo!), 4, makes you utterly invincible, and the Option key will skip a level. BEB75C25 Dilophosaur: BEA7542D Visitor Centre: CE5FBOC5 Maintenance Shed: FE6FA8DD Tunnels: EE7FAOD5 JURASSIC Underground Tunnels: PARK/A500/A600 9E074035 We've managed to acquire, some level codes for HIRED GUNS Jurassic Park on the Typing in AMIGA while A500/A600. Here goes! playing Hired Guns on guess what, the Amiga, Triceratops: will result in you receiving 8EB75C3D Velociraptor: DE5FB8C5 Stegosaur: EEE7740D Dilopesaur: AEA7542D Brachiosaur: Some column inches devoted to some gaming titbits... EASY PC VIDEO JUKEBOX GAMES One of the most crazy The Game Wizard Pro is ideas for a peripheral lately probably the hottest has been this rack which piece of cheating soft holds Six Sega SNES and ware around on PC that Jaguar carts, allowing you doesn't require addition to play them without having al hardware. It works as a pop-up menu from within any game and scans the memory for cheats of all sorts. The best thing we've discovered, though, is a little option which actually speeds up games by allowing them to use to plug them directly into a the maths coprocessor Mega Drive. Surely no-one in your machine (DX could be that lazy! The sys type PCs). This makes tem is only available in the Doom so fast on a 486 USA at present for $50, SO 33mhz that it is almost lets hope it stays that way unplayable! It works particularly well with RAM INTO vector games like X MEGA-CD Wing. You can get a Sega will shortly be releasshareware version of ing a much needed RAM Game Wizard on BBS (0101 416 497 8337 or 0101 416 492 0157). RAM AMIGA BRIAN THE LION Chris Gutsell from Gillingham down there in Kent has sent us in some tips for Brian The Lion on the Amiga 500 and 1200. Many thanks matey! Simply press CAPS LOCK when playing the game and click on the right mouse button. While Caps Lock is on press L to get 9 lives (like a cat), H to get 9 hit points (not like a cat) and K to get 999 crystals. Pressing P incidentally will allow you to play all the levels. PROR ONE SOUND OFF NuReality is a CD-sized little gizzmo which takes the sound input from your Sega or Nintendo, processes it and churns it out using the award winning SRS 3D sound System for surround sound type effects from two of your speakers. We've been quite impressed with it. Contact your nearest cart for the Mega-CD. Apart from the obvious benefits of being able to save more games, this should now enable bigger RPG-type games to be produced for the machine. Check with your import dealer for release dates. infinite energy and infinite ammo too. Rather handy that. ZOOL 2 If you've got an Amiga then it more or less goes hand in hand that you've got a copy of Zool. And if you've got Zool then undoubtedly you probably have in your possession SEGA LOCK-ON Sega's newest piece of hardware takes a more virtual form of gameplay. Sega Lock-On comprises a gun and a headset which triggers when shot at. Obviously the idea comes from those lazer-tag games you can go along to now, with the idea being to try importer to see if they stock it. 123 "


"ADVERTISERS INDEX Midland Bank.... ...........13 Arcade Mania ..... Silica Shop.. .............IBC Game Over ............. LMP .................. .................61 React Games ......................... Ocean ............... ...............OBC Arcade Connections ................... Special Reserve ...... ......................57 Gamebusters .............. ............... Rumbelows ..............................45,31 Atari Entertainment .................... Sega............. ...35 Knightraven Computers ........105,124 Panasonic.. ..................64 The Games Exchange...................124 Lloyds ........ ....10 The Games Palace .....................105 The Games Shack . .98 Krazy Konsoles ................. Wild Consoles........................... ..99 Hearts Leisure .......................... Console Connections ................99 Zap Computer Games............... 51 Game Zone ...... ........... K .......... HEARTS LEISURE (LONDON) 125 BOWES ROAD, PALMERS GREEN, LONDON, N13 4SB TEL: 081 889 0811/081 360 5562 FAX: 081 881 9558 Suppliers, Operators, Distributors & Importers of Arcade Machines and Jamma Boards Hearts SuperGun \"The Powermaster\" Now you can play arcade games on your own TV Original Arcade Joystick (THE BEST) with 6 button panel \"The Voyager\" compatible with most systems Complete package for only .99 items also individually sold. 100's of Jamma Boards in stock Stock Changing Daily Double Dragon .99 Shinobi .99 Ice Hockey............. .99 Final Fight.... .99 World Cup 90....... .99 Football Champion.... .99 Super Contra.. . .99 Golfing Greats... .99 WWF Superstars..... ....99 Super Street Fighter ...........................99 + Many, Many, Many, Many More TO ORDER OR FOR AN INFORMATION PACK AND PRICE LIST PHONE NOW Please allow 21-28 days for delivery. Manufactured by Hearts Leisure ARE YOU BLIND? YOU'VE JUST MISSED THE BEST SERVICE AT THE BEST PRICES. TURN TO PAGE 105 NOW! Knightraven Computers We guarantee to give the best service and the best prices. 0279 422113. THE Games Exchange 1st Anniversary!!! 1000s upon 1000s of \"fair exchanges!! 1000s upon 1000s of members (regular ones!!). Cheap (.00 TOTAL for 1 exchange,  for 2,  for 3), quick and efficient (normally 2-3 day turnaround, same day handling, first class post etc) and the more you use us the more generous and flexible we become!! See conditions. «You wanted a decent 'swap Mega Drive Super NES Forget all the bad history on 'swap clubs' of old. Over 1000 games always in stock (we DON'T club' and now you've been Mega CD NES sell games) and growing all the time (we DO buy games). All for the benefit of our members!! Master System Gameboy given one, USE IT!!!\" Visitors welcome by appointment. We do not produce lists as we have or receive all titles, new Game Gear Amiga CD32 and old. \"Even those tricky to obtain ones\". TELEPHONE: (0452) 382038. Tell us (A) your membership number (if you have been given one). (B) the console in question, (C) what game/s you have to exchange, (D) what games you are looking for (we usually need 4 choices for each game you want to exchange). POST: The Games Exchange, 17 Brunswick Square, Gloucester GL1 TUG. Write down your membership number in all cases (if you have one), your name and address, the game/s you are sending, at least 4 choices of game wanted (for each game sent in), the amount enclosed and have it signed by a guardian if you are under 18. Package the game sensibly enclosing the relevant details above and a cheque/P.O. for the required amount made payable to The Games Exchange. WHAT'S A 'FAIR' EXCHANGE? We consider many factors like the age (release C onditions: The Games Exchange must reserve the right to refuse certain exchanges, when in our opinion the date), value (second hand value), magazine opinion, popularity, lastability and a exchange is 'unfair'. We also reserve the right to cancel membership. All fees paid are administration, service good few other factors like what the game is really like. The situation constantly and P+P charges. Some exchanges are not straightforward and require variable amounts of time. Problems will changes as games are received and new games released, so no set groups or be notified by post. Please allow 3 weeks from date of posting before making telephone enquiries about games bands are maintained. A sensible judgement will usually suffice already sent in. Please enclose S.A.E. when making written general enquiries "


"Q & A CVG XTRAS HELP! and blast your opponent before they do the same to you. There's only one SHORT TIPS involves players bashing levers and switches to punch and kick their opponents (which are interchangeable). Unfortunately, you can't do any special moves and there's no gore, unless you pick up the game and throw it at your opponent's head. It's made PC codes in when you are looking at the table, rather than when you're actually playing. You may be pleasantly surprised, and then again you may not. Zool 2. If you do then type the fol lowing in on the title screen when Zool is showing and when 'press fire for opt ions' is flashing GAME BOY CASTLEVANIA 2 PINBALL FANTASIES We're a I ways telling you what the tips we provide you with do. So we're going to make a change for once by not telling you what these Pinball Fantasies cheats do. Typing in TECH, GREETS, TSP and GABRIEL, will result in... ooh, nearly let the cat out of the bag then. Type the To reach the last level and face Dracula himself on the Gameboy version of Castlevania 2. select Ball, Heart, Candle, Heart, and you'll be transported there instantly courtesy of CVG. Ad 4. 5. gun per pack so you'll have to buy two to appreciate it, but that'll set you back  so it's probably not worth it. Contact Sega on 071373 3000 by Tiger Electronics in the PC PADDING States Infa-red joypads have never been much cop on FUMBLING CD the PC but now there's a FUN new one on the scene Anyone owning, or being which we're quite recently blessed with, a impressed with. Not only CD-1 will probably agree on does it give you two six the difficulty faced in playbutton pads for ing action games with the  but supplied pad it really does your thumb in. Just So you know though there is an alterna it claims to tive pad work up to 40 feet avail away and is programa ble mable to accommodate from all games. The receiver Philips end simply plugs into which does your joystick port, and it the job SO all runs economically off much better and is far 2 AAA batteries Ringmore durable. The Bluepoint on 0908 277 Touchpad costs .99 007 for information. from all CD-i outlets. DYNABLASTER Shall we tell you a little Dynablaster tip for the Game Boy, that will allow you to power up Linford Christie style? OK then, if you insist. As any upgrades collected are kept after continuing, keep on losing Dynablaster's lives until he is fully armed up then all you have to do is move him aong to the next stage. CREMOLA for 10 lives (hmm) VISION for 20 lives (mmm!) TOUGH GUY will make you invincible OLDENEMY gives you an infinite amount of time ALCENTO will give you 99 items if you choose to type it in KICKASS for unlimited smart bombs very handy BUMBLEBEE is to skip stages (by pressing the return key) Rockin IEEE 9 GAME GEAR TERMINATOR As soon as the Sega logo appears in Terminator for the Game Gear, hold down 2 and START, while rotating the direction pad clockwise until two numbers appear. For your efforts, you will be granted with a rather nifty level select. This one is courtesy of Robert Campbell from Merseyside. PHILIPS MORTAL KOMBAT JUNK How's this for duff American merchandise? This desktop Mortal Kombat beat-'em-up 125 "


"CVG CHARTS ALL THE CHARTS CHART ATTACK WITH KEY: = Non Mover * = New Entry = Move up = Move down 3RD 728 KNOW HMVKNOW GAME Football games dominate the charts this month, with US Gold's official world cup licence taking them straight into the all-formats top-spot. Otherwise it's a pretty mixed bag this month with no software house claiming overall control of the top 20. WARIOLAND GAME BOY Nintendo Mario may be out of the frame, but Wario's still top-10 fodder. His debut game is one of the biggest selling handhelds carts of the year. ALL FORMATS TOP 20 6 SENSIBLE SOCCER INTERNATIONAL AMIGA/PC Mindscape With its full complement of international squads, the Sensi bug has bitten again with the arrival of the World Cup WORLD CUP USA '94 MEGA DRIVEI SNES/ GAME GEAR US Gold It's World Cup time and football game's are selling by the truck load, and it's the official licence that takes the top spot. 2 WORLD CUP STRIKER SNES Elite And they say there are too many beat-'em-ups. World Cup Striker gives up the top slot and dives down the Top 10. FIFA SOCCER MEGA DRIVE/SNES EA/Ocean Holding up well in the face of renewed competition, Fifa seen all off all but one challenger in its dash for the number one slot. 8 SIM CITY 2000 PC/MAC Maxis Despite struggling to keep in the Top 10, Sim City 2000 will soon be bolstered in the all-formats chart by an A1200 version. KICK OFF 3 PC/AMIGA Anco It may have stormed the charts at number three, but Kick Off 3 isn't the best of the trio. Don't rush to part with your money. VIRTUA RACING MEGA DRIVE Sega Virtua's hefty price tag hasn't prevented MD race freaks from picking it up, as it clocks in as the highest format-specific game. ARCADE POOL AMIGA Team-17 This budget game lets you take to the tables in true Fast Eddie style, and you don't get George C Scott breaking your thumbs either. PIT START SPEED 126 "


"ON ALL THE FORMATS CHARTS CVG 10 DOOM PC ID 16 PAC ATTACK SNES Nintendo We didn't like this, but someone out there obviously does. Pac Attack just isn't worth the money al12021, 1951 It's one of our all time favourites and it's still holding up the Top 10 which goes to show how hard (as in tough) it is. HEALTHAT CANNON FODDER AMIGA/PC Virgin As Sensi International scores a direct hit on the charts, the Sensible boys warfare sim takes a drop. 17 MAN UTD PREMIER CHAMPS AMIGA Krisalis OK, so it's more than a little like Sensi, but who cares when you've got a game this good? 12 18 NBA JAM SNES/MEGA DRIVE/GAME GEAR Acclaim It's had quite a phenomenal run, but it finally looks like Acclaim's mega basketball sim has its days numbered. ELFMANIA AMIGA Renegade Those beat-'em-up starved Amiga owners are obviously flipping over Renegade's stylish combat game. 13 SONIC 3 MEGA DRIVE Sega You can't keep a good hedgehog down. Unless you splat it with your XR3i. 14 STAR TREK: JUDGEMENT RITES PC/PC CD-ROM Interplay They're mouldy, they're old, but there's no stopping the original cast in their PC CD-ROM voice over spectacular. SKIDMARKS AMIGA Acid If you can stop laughing at the 'humorous' title, you'll find out that this is a rather topper race game. 20 15 ROCK 'N' ROLL RACING SNES Ocean Even its arsenal of 70s heavy metal tracks isn't enough to prevent Rock 'n' Roll Racing going into reverse this month. MS PACMAN GAME BOY Nintendo There's no fooling us you know, we're well aware this is just Pacman with a bow in his head, and this game isn't really worth the asking price. Money for old rope and no mistake. 127 "


"CVG CHARTS ALL THE CHARTS ON ALL THE FORMATS CHART ATTACK WITH HOW KNOW HMY. KNOW GAME 3. MEGA-CD TOP 5 NES TOP 5 VIRTUA RACING Sega PGA EUROPEAN TOUR CD-i TOP 5 3. y 1. * MORTAL KOMBAT Acclaim TETRIS 2 Nintendo PAC ATTACK Nintendo ROCK 'N' ROLL RACING Ocean WORLD CUP STRIKER Elite 1. * 7TH GUEST Philips EA ERO WIM FIFA INTERNATIONAL SOCCER EA PETE SAMPRAS TENNIS Codemasters GAME BOY TOP 5 WARIOLAND Nintendo MACINTOSH TOP 5 1. * PRINCE OF PERSIA 2 Broderbund KIRBY'S DREAMLAND Nintendo MICRO MACHINES Codemasters YOSHI'S COOKIE Nintendo DAYS OF THUNDER Nintendo GROUND ZERO TEXAS Sony 3. V NHL HOCKEY '94 EA LETHAL ENFORCERS Konami 5. WWF RAGE IN THE CAGE Acclaim 2. * PLAYBOY COMPLETE MASSAGE Philips STAR TREK IV Philips/ Paramount GHOST (Widescreen) Philips Paramount 5. * TOP GUN Philips Paramount 2. GAME GEAR TOP 5 2. MS PACMAN Nintendo ZELDA: LINK'S AWAKENING Nintendo KIRBY'S PINBALL Nintendo SUPER MARIO LAND 2 Nintendo PC TOP 5 3. DOOM ID MASTER SYSTEM TOP 5 SIM CITY 2000 Maxis PETER GABRIEL XPLORA Real World MYST EA PGA TOUR GOLF 2 EA 1 * WORLD CUP USA '94 US Gold 2A ALADDIN Virgin 3 A SENSIBLE SOCCER Sony NBA JAM Acclaim MICRO MACHINES Codemasters MORTAL KOMBAT Acclaim AMIGA TOP 5 SUPER NINTENDO TOP 5 1. * KICK OFF 3 Anco MEGA DRIVE TOP 5 WORLD CUP USA '94 US Gold 2. * SIM CITY Interplay KICK OFF 3 Anco SIM CITY 2000 Maxis PACIFIC AIR WAR MicroProse 2. A BATMAN RETURNS Sega 3. DESERT STRIKE EA 2. * SENSIBLE SOCCER INTERNATIONAL Mindscape ARCADE POOL Team-17 BENEATHA STEEL SKY Virgin 5. * BODY BLOWS Team-17 FIFA INTERNATIONAL SOCCER Ocean WORLD CUP USA '94 US Gold SONIC CHAOS Sega SENSIBLE SOCCER Sony KEY: = Non Mover * = New Entry A = Move up = Move down 128 "


"Roadshow Venues 23-24th July Thorpe Park Surrey 26-28th July New Forest Show Brockenhurst Turn up and turn on. 30-31st July Fairford International Air Tattoo Gloucester 2-7th August Swanage Regatta & Carnival Dorset 9-10th August Lakeside Thurrock Essex The power is HERE for you 12-14th August Northampton Balloon Festival 17-21st August Airborne '94 Eastbourne Get your hands on the Panasonic R-E-A-L 24-27th August Dartmouth Royal Regatta 29-30th August Aintree Show 3DO Interactive Multiplayer System 1st Sept Bucks Show Aylesbury TBC 3-4th Sept Sheffield Show at the most exciting experience of the year. 7-13th Sept Chessington World of Adventures The Panasonic Juggernaut Roadshow 21-25th Sept LIVE '94, Earls Court London will juggle your senses. 28th Sept. -4th Oct Lakeside Thurrock Essex 9th Oct East of England Autumn Exhibition Peterborough It is 11-15th Oct Medowhall Centre Sheffield 17-22nd Oct Merryhill Centre Brierly Hill West Midlands TBC 24-29th Oct Fairfield Halls Croydon 2nd Nov City of Portsmouth Firework Display the future 4th Nov 26th Big Night Out Suffolk 7-12th Nov Clifton Moor Centre York Panasonic R.E.A.L : 14-18th Nov Metrocentre Gateshead These details correct at time of going to press. For further info call: 0800 444 220 3 DO 3DO INTERACTIVE MULTIPLAYER "


"CVG COMING YOUR WAY SOON NEXT MONTH THE BIG ONE COMPUTE E What's going to be the number one game this Christmas? CVG looks at the hot contenders for the cov. eted Yuletide top spot and quizzes the software houses on their chances of success. GAMES LOST MINES PLATFORM KINGS Platform games come under the spotlight next issue, as we Group Test the most overpopulated genre of them all. Sonic, Mario, Zool — they're all there, but which one will walk off with the spoils? SUMMERTIME Some mags reckon summer's a quiet time of the year for games. But that doesn't stop CVG bringing you more reviews than any other magazine around Don't miss out. CVG OUT 15 AUGUST THE MAG REAL GAMERS READ 130 "


"AND IT'S HOT JAGUAR OFFICIAL IT'S HERE! THE WORLD'S FIRST 64-BIT CONSOLE AWESOME LUKI The 64-bit Jaguar is here to make other games consoles look prehistoric! RODUCT Look out! There are some stray cats coming into the country! Some USA Jaguars have been imported into the UK unofficially This imported product has been manufactured for America and is not compatible with UK Jaguar equipment. Look out for the UK sticker above on the Jaguar products you buy. This will ensure it is official product and will work properly in the UK. sol deliver which we check it your can't SOFTWARE Atari, the inventors of video games, have developed another world exclusive the FIRST EVER 64-bit games console. Why settle for less, when the Jaguar can deliver arcade quality sound and graphics in games which would be impossible to play on other consoles. Check out Jaguar's impressive specifications, then visit your nearest Silica store for a demonstration. Or, if you can't wait to get your hands on one, call our mail order hotline now. Stock permitting, we can make sure your Jaquar is delivered to you the day after we receive your order (UK mainland). And, delivery (Mon-Fn) is FREE! CD-ROM add-on To provide access to even bigger and better games, plus films and standard music CDs, Atari expects to deliver a CD add-on for Jaguar before Christmas '94.  5 Processors 64-BIT DATA BUS  2Mb 32-BIT RAM  Spectacular 32-BIT Graphics including 3D Animation 16.7 Million Colours CD Quality Stereo Sound 17 Button Controller Plugs Straight into a TV Free Cybermorph Game On Cartridge Worth  INC VAT 227189  , A ATARE FREE! CYBERMORPH JAGUAR LUK WORTH LINE EEEEEEEEE JAGUAR There are almost 100 companies in partnership with Atan for Jaguar software, with over 50 cartridge des in progress. The following are the current tes with Ataris release dates. Return the coupon for a list Crescent Geeny NOW Evolution Dino Dudes NOW E30 Paden NOW Tempest 2000 NOW Wotenstein 30 JUNE 94 Alen v Predator JULY 94 Club Drive JULY 94 Kasumi Ninja AUG 94 Redline Racing AUG 94  Brutal Sports Football AUG 94  Doom AUG 94 TBC Rise of the Robots AUG 94  Thy Toons Adventures AUG 94  ACCESSORIES Jaguar Controller .99 Composte Monitor Cable .99 Switch Box inc Cable .99 38238333 ooo @ JAGUAR CONSOLE + CONTROLLER PLUS CYBERMORPH GAME  INCLUDING VAT JAG 1064 THE SILICA SERVICE -----------------TO Silica, CVG-0894-217, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup. Kent, DA14 4DX PLEASE SEND A BROCHURE ON THE ATARI JAGUAR MAIL ORDER 081-309 1111 PART OF A COM A YEAR COMPANY: 300 stat We are solid reliable and profitable SNESS EDUCATION GOVERNMENT: counts are available Tel: 081-308 0888 PLUS TECHNICAL AND HEAD OFFICE Mr/Mrs/Miss/Ms .... Initials: Surname:.................... Company it applicable. ........ EF S on acties at all our stores STOCK RANGE: surements are available from one Address:.... scareduced price offers, as 1-4 THE MEWS, HATHERLEY ROAD, SIOCUP, KENT, DA14 4DX PLUS BRANCHES AT: BRISTOL Debenhams (3rd Pool St James Barton 0272 291021 CHELMSFORD Debenhams 2nd Floor, 27 High Street 0245 355511 CROYDON Debenhams 2nd Floor, 11-31 North End 081-688 4455 GLASGOW Debenhams (Sth Floor, 97 Argyle Street 041-221 0088 GUILDFORD Debenhams 3rd Floorl Millbrook 0483 301300 HULL Debenhams 2nd Floor Prospect Street 0482 25151 IPSWICH Debenhams 2nd Floor, Westgate Street 0473 221313 LONDON 52 Tottenham Court Road 071-580 4000 LONDON Debenhams 3d Poon 334 Oxford St 071-493 3735 LONDON Selfridges. Basement Arl, 369 Odord St 071-629 1234 LUTON Debenhams dit hoor. Arndale Centre 0582 21201 MANCHESTER Debenhams 3d Poor Market Street 061-832 8666 PLYMOUTH Debenhams 3d Poor Royal Parade 0752 266666 SHEFFIELD Debenhams (3rd Floor, The Moor 0742 768611 SIDCUP 1-4 The Mews Hatherley Road 081-302 8811 SOUTHAMPTON Debenhams testo. Queensway 0703 223888 Keddies and Pol, High Street 0702 468039 .......... Postcode Tel (Home): Tel (Work): ... Which computer(s), if any, do you own? 217B 1 ESCE Advertised prices and specifications may change Please retum the coupon for the latest information "


"WOTA-BOY! IF IT'S RAINING... NO PROBLEM... HE CAN DODGE TROUBLE, GIVE IT THE HAMME. OR MOVE LIKE A ROC ET! IT'S NOT ALL HOT AIR, JUST LOOK AGAIN. IS IT A BIRD? O IS IT A BR CK? NO IT'S... POOD SECCO BOY GAME BOYIC SUPER NINTENDO  1994 Electronic Arts. ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM All rights reserved. OCEAN SOFTWARE LTD 2 CASTLE STREET CASTLEFIELD MANCHESTER. M3 4LZ.. TEL: 061 832 6633  FAX: 061 834 0650 "

