" SEPTEMBER 1987 S$4.60 Dm5.50 285pta HFL 5.50.   20MPUTER BEACH WITH +VIDEO BATTLESHIPS FREE: ARTION OF OUR GIANT JIGSAW POSTER! A COMPLETE SEGA STER SYSTEM! PHOTON WARRIOR SER GUN KITS! EXTRA — NINTENDO/SEGA/ATARI GAMES ISTEMS TRIED & TESTED LAST NINJA HOW TO WIN/BARBARIANS FIRST ST GAME MAP STAR TREKKIN'— WIN A STAR FLEET SURVIVAL KIT! "


"Thrill to the action as the 225 you adv imp rise ! We're giving away 5000 games one of them could be yours! Yes! To commemorate the sale of US Golds 5 millionth game in April this year, we are including a fantastic opportunity to win a game of your choice with every copy of Indiana Jones which itself and the Temple of Doom is set to become a software milestone Here's all you have to do: Simply make your choice of game on the voucher to be found in each copy of Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom Should yours be one of the first 5000 vouchers to be drawnt you will receive the game of your choice absolutely free! The draw will take place on November 30th Al vouchers to be included in the draw should be returned by October 30th SCREENS FROM ARCADE VERSION "


"che legend comes to life! ONES and the other TEMPLE OF DOOM\" ersinn af The Hol the Atari C *TM Pick up your trilby and trusty bullwhip and don the mantle of the legendary Indiana Jones! Prepare yourself for your most dangerous adventure yet-to storm the evil Temple of Doom and rescue the Imprisoned children and the magical stones of Raa! Beware the foes and hazards that block your way. The Thuggee guards will fight to the finish and poisonous cobra snakes will rise up in front of you. You will traverse perilous ledges, ride under-ground railways, and cross the bottomless fiery pit in pursuit of your quest! You will call on all your reserves of courage strength and skill. Push yourself to the limit, ride your luck and the magical stones may just be yours!  1985 Lucasfilm Ltd and Atari Games Corporation. All rights reserved. Trademarks of Lucasfilm Ltd., used under licence Licensed to US. Gold Ltd, 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 TAX. Telephone: 021-356 3388 U.S: (GOLD) American COMMODORE 64 Cassete .99 nisk .99 AMSTRAD CASSETTE .99 msk .99 SPECTRUM 48k cassette .99 ATARI STS 19.99 GAMES "


"O-features | 48 FANTASY | 54 POLICE QUEST 67 THE GAMES MACHINES 100 PHOTON COMPETITION | 110 ST NEWS | 118 FRAME UP! 1118 BARBARIANS COMPETITION RESULTS 124 FANTASY ISLAND News e Reviews FANTASY ISLAND/P128 Contents 18 NEWS 116 REVIEWS: GAME OF THE MONTH: ROAD RUNNER. C+VG HITS: Battleship and Star Paws. Other games reviewed are Game Over, Centurion, Traxxion, Catch 23, Pirates of the Barbary Coast and Scary Monsters. 51 THE BIG SCREEN i 63 IDEAS CENTRAL 85 ADVENTURE NEWS | 88 RIGEL'S REVENGE 91 ADVENTURE HELPLINE 92 ADVENTURE ROUND-UP 94 ADVENTURE REVIEWS 97 THE FIEND | 103 ROCK ON! 112 NEXT MONTH 117 BATTLESHIPS COMPETITION | 121 PLAY BY MAIL | 128 FANTASY ISLAND 130 ARCADE ACTION 136 PREVIEWS | 140 MAILBAG | 146 TONY TAKOUSHI SWAMP THING/P48 SCHVG team EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John ART EDITOR Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Steve Donoghue Matthew Woodley AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeley SOFTWARE CONSULTANTS Tony Takoushi PUBLICITY Clive Pembridge ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Garry Williams ADVERTISEMENT | EXECUTIVE Katherine Lee AD PRODUCTION Debbie Pearson PUBLISHER Terry Pratt COVER Gary Ward EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1R 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222. July-December 106,571 AH!! IT'S KNIGHT ORC/P94 "


"-Contents Oh officer, did you want me PIRATES/P21 POLICE QUEST/P54 BERTES puchstat. Tu H ilver lost. 2. th. Pestands at the age of the til alle Federal del KNIGHT ORC/P94 BATTLESHIPS/P36 Inside Story The Mean Machines are back! And inside we turn the spotlight on the Atari, Nintendo and Sega video games systems. The games, the hardware, everything you need to know about the exciting new entertainment sensations. And YOU can WIN your very own Sega Master System if you enter our amazingly easy competition. Talking of winning, you can also pick up a starship full of Star Trek goodies, PLUS an incredible Photon Warrior Laser Combat Kit! Don't say we never give you anything! There's Part One of our collectable jigsaw postera double-sided full-colour extravaganza which builds up month-by-month into a giant megaposter which you can wallpaper your bedroom with. Barbarian and Golden Path are among our ST and Amiga reviews. We'll be bringing you a well wicked 24-page supplement packed full of the hottest news and reviews from the 16-bit scene. STARTREK COMP/P82 AMAZING FREE POSTER FILMS/P51 SEGA COMPETITION/P74 ANCIENT MARINER/P110 -Contents "


"JAPAN has a word for the CLU CLU LAND The evil Sea Urchin has hidden the gold in an underground mystery maze. 0281282 2 BASEBALL It's the most realistic baseball game outside of a ballpark! HOGAN'S ALLEY Use your Zapper light gun to shoot the gangsters. Game pales now available 1P-000.100 E 3 TIME CLUB IN DUCK HUNT There's a duck in the air! You've only got three shots to bag this duck. And if you miss even your dog laughs at you in this fast-action Zapper Gun game. GYROMITE You've got to keep R.O.B.'s gyroscope spinning to help a mad scientist de-activate the dynamite in his laboratory in order to play this action-packed game! GOLF Choose your clubs. Control your swings Select the angle of every shot. It's Nintendo GOLF and there's not a video golf game on par with it anywhere! Because when you own a Nintendo entertainment system you also get a buddy to play with, a Robotic Operating Buddy to be exact for R.O.B. to his friends). He's your partner. Seat him next to you, send him signals from your tv screen and together you can tackle the enemy. For the first time in the UK direct from Japan comes Nintendo, the home entertainment system with genuine arcade-quality graphics. Nintendo make 2 out of 3 of all the world's coin-op arcade machines, so they know what they're doing. And already, in Japan 91/2 million homes have a Nintendo home entertainment system. Now you can enjoy the amazing 52 colour 3-D graphics of Nintendo (On most home computers, you've been lucky to get 16 colours until now!) Nintendo's superb graphics give the games a convincing true 3-D feel with actual shadows which add depth to the characters. Already there are 27 Nintendo Game Paks available in the UK and more are being added to the software library all the time. But there's even more to Nintendo than the best games you've ever seen... Nintendo Entertainment System For the first time home entertainment enters a new dimension. The Zapper Gun Never before has there been a video gun of this calibre. The astonishing light sensitive Zapper Gun lets you shoot moving targets with pinpoint accuracy from up to 16 feet. If you think you're a sharp shooter the Zapper Gun will test your skill to the full. Nintendo or Super Nintendo, the choice is yours. Which set do you want? NINTENDO's superb high-quality action costs .00* for control deck, mains transformer, two hand controls, and one free Super Mario Bros Game Pak. DELUX NINTENDO costs .99\" for the amazing Zapper Gun, R.O.B., and two free games, Gyromite and Duck Hunt. "


"ultimate video game... Nintendo\" Nintendo TERTET SOM MATTEL Boa poi DO po Where you can buy Nintendo Nintendo is available from the stockists featured. If you have any questions or have difficulty obtaining the product, write to HiTech Electronic Services Ltd., Unit 2B,200 Rickmansworth Road, Watford WD1 7JS. Or 'phone: 09232 41811. Hamleys Jenners Toys 'R' US Grattans Littlewoods Mail Order Freemans Mail Order Kay's Mail Order Empire Stores Mail Order Arding & Hobbs Gloucester Toy Shop John Farnon Allders Department Stores Willis Ludlow Toy & Hobby Selfridges Argos Superstores Telebank Telegames Harrods Computer Magic See Nintendo demonstrated at Harrods, or at Selfridges computer department, Oxford Street, August 3rd 8th, and Hamleys of Regent Street, London, August 10th 15th. *Recommended retail price "


"* News Rambo and twice as tough. Cap'n will be coming your way from English Software, after he's dabbled in a bit of hair-raising jungle combat, perilous river rides, sniper attacks and a helicopter rescue bid. Available from September for the C64 on tape and disc at .95/.95. This is Freescape, a should be out in time for the revolutionary new 3D Personal Computer World Environment Simulator Show. Using Freescape you can system created by Incentive move to any point in threeSoftware. These pics are simply dimensional space and then look in a demo of the amazing capabilities any direction including up or the system has and which will be down. More on Freescape as and used to the full in Incentive's new when. game called Driller, which There's no excuse for not saving up for a well wicked Atari ST now that the American company has dropped the price of the 520STFM to .99. It has a built in 360k 31/2\" disc drive and you can plug it in directly to any standard TVjust like your trusty Spectrum or C64 — except that the quality is SO much better. Atari are also relaunching their 130XE which they call \"the ultimate teaching computer\". It has an interactive voice prompt and a complete getting started in computing package. FREESCAPE Oh No! It's Captain Courageous-prettier than INCENTIVE COPUsht 1987 Ever fancied careering down the frightening Cresta bobsleigh run at zillions of miles per hour? No, neither have I. Still Digital Integration think you might enjoy a computer simulation of the event which is a whole lot less dangerous! Digital has been working with the UK's top bob driver Nick Phipps to bring you a sledge-sim featuring the world's hairiest runs like St Moritz and the Olympic track at Calgary, Canada. Bobsleigh is planned to hit the streets in the Autumn. Meanwhile here's a pic of the GB team christening their new bob with a spot of bubbly and not a reindeer in sight. FREESCAPE It was only a matter of time before the martial arts invaded role-playing adventures. And that time is now! Moebius from Origin Systems features roleplaying and swordplay and martial arts all in one action packed package. Moebius, the fabled deity of the island kingdom of Kantun, has chosen you, his disciple, to recover the stole Orb from the renegade Warlord and prevent the destruction of the universe. THCENTEUE Copyright 1987 NAME: Fiicei-.ff.. LEZ SORTE SHOES 90001 IND Steve Turner, Hewson's wizard programmer, is putting together the final pieces of Magnetron, his follow up to Quazatron. The arcade adventure, for the Spectrum and Commodore, looks like, and to some extent plays like, Quoztron but it takes place on one of the moons around the original Planet Quartech and is more involves more strategy than droid destruction. The central character, KLP-2 is the same and he can still grapple, destroy and take the energy or devices of other droids. But his main task is to overload or by three square. It's rather like the deactivate the reactors which jackpot slot machines where power the power lasers around the you've got to get matching shapes around the planet, then his buddies on one line. Each line does can invade. something for your droid. It may, Each reactor has plus and minus boost your energy, help you with charged rods. To distrupt them take weaponry or mess around with one type of charge from a rod, say enemy robots. plus, and transfer it to a rod with Steve's also included a host of the reverse charge, minus. If you new weaponry systems which do it often enough and in correct KLP2 can collect. There's a mortar sequence you'll overload the and a bouncing bomb which'll go system. up as well as down steps, The game also includes strategy boomerang that returns and a elements, such as the transfer frizzbee which'll take the top off game which takes place in a three any alien You will journey through the ascending planes of Earth, Water, Air and Fire. At each level your challenges increase in difficulty, demanding greater courage and cunning. All of your martial arts skills will be required to survive the ninja-like assassins who seek to foil "


"EIE 1260 ***5 ****** * Meet Trantor the last Zybor, the forces of the Worlds stormtrooper. This Mr T is on a do reached out cautiously into the or die mission and needs your help. black unknown of the Periphery, This new game from Probe is Zybor had endured power for tens shaping up to be really of thousands of years. It had spectacular. We've seen bits of the included all the planets and moons Amstrad and Speccy versions and of the Galaxy in a centralised rule, they look pretty neat. The story? sometimes tyrannical but always Here it is! Many light years into the orderly. However, its people knew distant future, in a world where the that its reign had fallen, that Zybor predominance, and even survival, no longer ruled, that greatness had of a solar system, still rested upon departed and peace had the superiority of its technology, a disappeared. bitter war of struggle was Zybor was embittered by the beginning to erupt. eternal danger of the new worlds, From the radiating point of expecially Nebulithon, who had a mature atomic ecomony and had recently advanced in the development of the devastating Quark MK3 bomb. Trantor had been chosen to lead a squad of mercenaries to destroy the bomb. Once the squad had reached their destination they had to locate a communication console, every 90 seconds, or risk their implanted bombs draining the life from their bodies. Buggy Boy is on the way from Elite. We've had a brief encounter with a half finished 64 version and it has to be said that the game is looking well wicked. No release date as yet -but you should have enough time to save up for two new TV's so you can experience the three screen thrills seen in the original arcade version! 5% 2 25 km essentially a two player game, each controls Brain or Brawn, two droid-like thingies. your quest. Sword-wielding rebelhave to merge the three droids guards will test your blade every together at stages crucial stages in step of the way. And watch out for the game. wild beasts that stalk the forests! Local villagers can help, but bewere the wrong approach will frighten them away, leaving you in a world where starvation looms ever-present. Wise use of magical charms, prayers and fireballs is essential in reaching the final confrontation with the treacherous Warlord where victory brings recovery of the longsought Orb of Celestial Harmony. Moebius will be first available on C64 disk priced at .95 and The International Arcade comes with a manual and oriental Player of the Year contest headband. Other vesions planned blasts to a climax at the PCW for later in the year will be Apple Show, Olympia, in September. IBM, Amiga, and Atari ST. Four winners, from UK heats Origin Systems Inc. are the staged by Arcadia Mastertroproducers of such titles as the nic's coin-op arm, will meet the all Ultima series and also their last star US Video Champs in what is release Autoduel now available likely to be a bitterly contested on disk for the C64 and Atari battle. Our team will be composed XL/XE and ST. All details for Origin of high scoring members of the products can be obtained from media while the US team is comMicroprose, 2 Market Place, posed of guys who hold eight Tetbury. Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. arcade endurance and high score records. The coin-op used in the final will not have been seen by Yanks or Brit's but we have a feeling our guy had better keep Latest from Starlight is Hybrid featuring three battle practising. droids, The Brain, The Xylon and The Robot is out next month for the Spectrum, Amstrad and 64. The Use your brains and a bit of three droids have to be brown in a newie on the way from manipulated to destroy-you've Probe. Called Brain and Brawn guessed it -menacing aliens the game is set inside yet another within a 200, room complex. The giant computer. Your job? To neat bit about the game is that you deactivate it -that's what. B+B is Reaktor, Ariolasoft's .99 post budget range, sports three new titles. Deathride, for Spectrum, Commodore and Amstrad, takes place on the Trans-Canadian Here are two more tokens for you to use in our great Gang, is after a large gold Mastersound tape offer. shipment. Mick The Mountie chases Remember you can get 50p off them down the train in an attempt summer sounds on cassette from to stop their getaway. Mastersound, including Heat of Deadringer is set in space Soul and Heat of Reggie. Check where you run around a ring out our June issue for all the details. arena, shoot out the opposition and set a new lap time. All titles are available on Amstrad CPC, Commodore and Specrum, immediately. WA SHER Sauna A MASTERTRONIC COMPANY Sound A MASTERTRONIC COMPANY g "


"MEGA-APOCALYPSE FIND STRANGE AND EXCITING NEW WORLDS ... then blast them to pieces! Featuring: One player, Two players, Dual allies or Dual enemies. Five channel sound which utilises two separate speech channels with sampled dialogue and effects. Super fast 360° fire power. Collectable pods to enhance your spacecraft's shield, fire power, manoeuvrability and speed. Hi-Score, Ultra Score and Galactic Hali of Fame Credits: Program and sound effects by Simon Nicol. Graphics by Bob Stevenson. Music by Rob Hubbard. Commodore 64/128. .95 cassette, .95 disc more Martech is the registered trade mark of Martech Games Limited, Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay East Sussex BN24 6EE TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME PHONE (0323) 768456 TELEX: 878373 Martec "


"BAILE SHIPS THE CLASSIC BOARD GAME NOW ON COMPUTER 62 PHASE 1 ENEMY IN SIGHT Using skill and judgement you must plot your feet's gunfire onto an elusive enemy. You will need to know the measure of your opponent... and autuess him! Spectrum Cassette .95 Commodore 64 Cassette .95 Commodore 64 Disc E14.95 Amstrad Cassette E8.95 Amstrad Disc .95 Atari ST coming soon PHASE 2ATTACK Fire! On your command, your guns and bombers roar into action Stunning battle scene graphics give you, the Commander, an up to the minute picture of the b e as it unfold RELEASE DATE Sept 14th Elite 1987 Spectrum PHASE 4THE VICTOR To the vietor, the spoils. Enjoy the antare of the victory il past in glorious graphic PHASE 3 UNDER FIRE Now your feet undergoes the nightmare of attack. Besieged by bombers and under fire from enemy guntoutmanoeuvre your opponent's feet and prepare to counterattack ELITE SYSTEMS LTD. Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands Spectrum Telephone: (0372) 59165 Telex: 336130 ELITE G Mail order, just send a cheque or postal order payable to ELITE SYSTEMS LTD. or quote your credit card No. VISA CBM 64 "


"nemos friends with other fans and get Sensible Software, your fave novels autographed. responsible for Ocean's Wizball There's also a continuous video and Parallax. The construction kit program, a raffle in which you enables a person with no could win film posters and props, programming knowledge to write and The British Fantasy Awards professional style arcade games. Banquet. More info from Di Sounds interesting, though it's been Wathen, Fantasy Con XII, 15 Stantried before by Melbourne House ley Road, Morden, Surrey, SM4 and Quicksilva before. 5DE. But hurry, it takes place between 4-6th of September. Help the Battle Against Boulderdash is back! And at Ocean's recent problems with Cruelty to Kids by getting your a knock-down, unbeatable price of the release of some of its big hands on a copy of .99 from Prism Leisure Brave C+VG gamers Paul summer titles appear to be over BACKPACK, a new compilation Corp. If you haven't already got Makelyne (left) and Paul with the imminent release of of 1 top games put together to this classic in your collection there's George (Right) took on the might Taipan at last. The problem's raise cash for the NSPCCI absolutely no excuse for not of Martech's Mega Apocaly concerned the compression of the RSPCC. The money raised by getting it now. Rockford and the pse in an inter-magazine play-off 128K Spectrum version into 48K this new collection will help set up assorted boulders and insects held at London's City University. and the ST version onto disc. At Child Protection Teams-experts which make up his world provided the gamesters had three minutes least this quantity problem bodes who know just how to deal with C+VG reviewers with months of on an infinite lives version of the well for the quality of the finished cases of child abuse. We can't think fun when the game first appeared Simon Nichol's game. PG did well game. of a more worthy cause and at a few years back. Boulderdash is with 18,793 but PM pipped him under -that's just l per available on the Spectrum, C64 with 22,061. The winner, however, game-the compilations are Atari 400/800 and Amstrad. was Julian Rignall of ZZap 64. More exposure for best selling amazing value for money. The Boulderdash Il is out again for the author Jeffrey Archer. Spectrum tape consists of Xeno, Spectrum, C64 and Atari, again at Domark has licensed Not a Deactivators, Night Gunner, .99 tape, .99 disc. Penny More, Not a Penny Bounty Bob Strikes Back Less, the first novel he wrote to and Lunar Jet Man. The Amstrad get him out of bankruptcy back in tape has Xeno, Deactivators, Night the 60's. The plot concerns four Gunner, Tempest, Marsport, Monty Star Gazer Chris Clegg rebusinessmen and their attempts to on the Run, Starion, Nomad, cently received a prize of a take back one million dollars from Starstrike and Knightmare. The C64 Netwonian telescope and tripod swindler Harvey Metcalfe. In four collection features Xeno, Barry for his success in solving problems cleverly conceived plans they aim McGuigan's Boxing, Deactivators, posed by Martech's The Planets to take no less and no more than Bounces, Spindizzy, Monty on the earlier this year. It took Chris the money he took from them in a Run, Starion, Bounty Bob Strikes almost one year of late nights and share dealing fraud. Sounds like a Back, Skyfox and Electra Glide. trips to the reference library to The guys from Palace Soft strategy game to us, but all will be solve the clues in the program. But ware are about to become revealed by Archer and Domark at after the presentation by AstroOutlaws when they launch a new next month's PCW show. nomer and TV personality Heather software lable later this year. Starglider fans will soon be Couper, bleary-eyed Chris agreed Outlaw Productions will able to play their fave game down that the time had been well spent. bring together some of the coun Those Hard Guys at Advance at their local arcade. Ace arcade try's most talented independent are betting on a 16-bit led games company Bally/Sente has designer/programming teams. The scene next year. Advance is presigned up Starglider for their new first release is the Shoot'em Up pared to back its bet with an ST Amiga based arcade machines. So Construction Kit for the version of Butch Hard Guy. It's you should be hearing the sultry CBM64. It's been developed by only .95. tones of C+VG's arcade queen Clare Edgeley echoing around your neighbourhood arcade palace very soon. If you didn't already know, Rainbird used Clare for the digitised speech sequences featured in the game. Big Sister is speaking to you! Mattel Toys has launched a new video disc system in the States. The system, aimed at children, incorporates interactive video similar to the system used in coin-ops such Want a copy of Elite? Then as Dragon's Lair, digital sound you're in luck. We've got a and computer program data, all selection of the latest versions stored on interchangable standard of this classic space trading game sized compact discs. Mattel intends to give away to the first four to produce interactive games, enpeople who write in and ask us for tertainment software, children's ena copy! What could be easier. If tertainment packages and even you've got an Electron, a BBC music videos on the system. Ill be Micro and Master we've got some launched in the US in September goodies for you. We've got an but is unlikely to be seen on this \"Holy \"ll\". The Ed screamed soon be on sale in this country. But Electron version, a BBC Micro tape side of the Atlantic until next year. as he opened the mysterious pack true to form we've got our hands version, a BBC Micro/Master 51/4\" age from Denmark Someone is on some of these nitty new gadgets disc version, and a BBC 31/2\" trying to wipe us out!\" But the first and we want to give them compact disc version to GIVE authentic looking grenade turned away-20 in fact. All you have to away to the first Beeb owning A dark feast of fantasy and out to be the latest in designer do is tell us the name of the actor C+VG readers to write in-on horror authors, illustrators and film joysticks called the Termina who starred in the movie Terminapostcards only please. And don't directors will be gathering at The tor. This cute little stick is shaped tor. Send your entries, on postcards forget to include your address and Midland Hotel, Birmingham, for like a real live grenade, complete ONLY please, to Computer + the version you want on your card Fantasycon XII. It's a cosy with firing pin. Terminator has Video Games Terminator otherwise you'll be feeling affair where you can talk to British been created by a Danish com Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 pretty silly, won't you? and American professionals, make pany called Super Soft and will Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AV. "


"SIX OF THE BEST FROM.. STILL AVAILABLE 6-PAK VOLT PAIK VOL .95 .95 Spectrum Cassette .95 Commodore 64 Cassette .95 Commodore 64 Disc .95 Amstrad Cassette Amstrad Disc Eagles Mail order, just send a cheque or postal order payable to ELITE SYSTEMS LTD. or quote your credit card No. GARENY ACE BATTY INTERNATIONA INTO THE EAGLE'S NEST ANCHOR HOUSE, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands WS9 8PW Telephone: (0922) 59165 Telex: 336130 ELITE G FASTER EN LIGHT FORCE INTERNATIONAL KARATE FASTER PIANO SHOCKWAY RIDER RELEASE DATE: SEPTEMBER 14th SHUT-PAKKE "


"RINER A lost Ship A lost Soul A lost Love Beyond the Edge of Darkness... For further details or to reserve an advance copy now, please send a SAE to Systems Architects 6/9 Market Place, Kingston, KTI 4BR, But please do not send any payment yet. Price to be announced SYSTEMS ARCHITECTS "


"21st CENTURY WARRIOR: Apache GUNSHIP See your software dealer today and become a part of the GUNSHIP, adventure! Challenge the enemy the sky, and YOURSELF with this extraordinary simulation. GUNSHIP for Commodore 64/128. Cassette .95, Disk .95. The Apache... Fierce and elusive, like its warrior namesake ... Capable of defeating enemy tanks. infantry, and hostile aircraft on the modern, electronic battlefield. Gunship's revolutionary 3-D graphics enable you, the pilot, to fly into the world's hottest trouble spots... You'll use an unbelievable array of high, tech information and weapon systems, including lasers, video cameras, night viewers, radar warnings, jammers, computers, missiles, rockets, flares and a 30mm cannon! Successful missions will be rewarded with medals and rank promotions. Experience the danger and excitement of attack helicopter action. your latest adventure in the ever-growing line of MicroProse Simulation Software MICROPROSE SIMULATION SOFTWARE MICROPROSE SOFTWARE LIMITED. 2 MARKET PLACE. TETBURY, GLOUCESTERSHIRE GL8 8DA. TEL: (0666) 54326. TEX: 43422 MPS/UKG Also available on Spectrum and Amstrad CPC "


"REVIEWS GAME OF THE MONTH Bigger, better and bolder than the rest. Try it, buy it. Don't miss out.  MACHINES: AMSTRAD/ATARI ST/CMB 64/128/SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: US GOLD PRICE: .99 (CBM, SPECTRUM AMSTRAD TAPE), E14.99 (CBM, AMSTRAD DISC), .99 (ATARI ST DISC)  VERSION TESTED: ATARI ST REVIEWER: JOHN C+VG HIT! Beep, Beep! It's nail biting. It's C + beak against snout. Road Runner has swopped the cartoon canyon for the computer trail in an effort to out-fox that peril of the roadWile E. Coyote. All you've got to do is pick up the seeds and lemonade bottles C+VG HIT on the desert road but, as always, that long eared enemy Miss the hits at your peril. They are of yours is close by with knife, the business! fork and a host of impromptu gadgets to bring him even closer to fricaseed bird and french fries The seeds maintain Road Runner's hectic pace, and if he misses five of them he'll not only fail to gain important points but also faint from malnutrition and lose a life. Lemonade is also invigorating but if you stop to drink it you'll spend several valuable chase seconds drinking it. Road Runner runs at twice the THE REVIEWERS speed of Wile E. but the Coyote TIM METCALFE: has a skateboard, rocket, jet pac The Ed man wields the fastest A ATARI ST and pogo stick stashed on levels two onward to dwindle joystick of all. When his word is heard you better listen. the distance. He'll also lob sticks of dynamite at you when he PAUL BOUGHTON: finds them scattered on the Shoots from the lip. Likes zip in his road, zap. If you make the mistake of LEE BRATHWAITE: being hit by dynamite, or Radio Lancashire's ace games man, winded by one of Wile E's always ready to air his views. contraptions, you lose another CHRIS CAIN: of your five lives and get blown back to the start of the current The Amiga man. But Cain is able to level. be persuaded that 64 isn't near Wile E. doesn't have it all his retirement age. own way, though many of the DAVID BISHOP: natural dangers along the road As an Amstrad fan, The Bishop can trip you up as well as the preaches what he practices. He is Coyote. At the start of the game, also full of praise for the Atari ST. when the road is wide enough STEVE BADSEY: for traffic, you can try and lure him in front of a passing truck The Doctor reports from the frontline or boulder and force him over about war and strategy games. the side of a crevasse. You can NICKY TREVETT: also dip your body in invisible Reclusive Nicky has the knack with paint and disappear for a few ATARI ST the BBC seconds while you complete the landscape, whiskers wilting in JOHN GILBERT: current level. the noonday sun while Road Beep! Beep! He's back from the The most hilarious part of the Runner, hopefully, makes his Dead Zone! game -apart from watching escape. But, be wary, 'cos Wile E. ride a rocket is when JERRY MUIR: Roady can suffer the same fate the Coyote gets frazzled by a and, if Wile E does succumb Games expert Muir has the Alari mine. It's the exact picture of to a blast, don't stand too near Bit between his teeth. Something in the cartoon series. Wile E. him-he'll recover in a fleeting XLs at. stands blackly against the second and continue the never EN ending chase. Despite the last warning, Roady can score points by running close to Wile E. and sticking his tongue out before running away. You run the risk of writing your dinner ticket but, if lucks on your side, you could Scoop up 100 cheap points. Road Runner scores all the "


"coad Runner Cave  MACHINES: 64, SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD, ATARI ST  SUPPLIER: US GOLD PRICE: .95 CASS / .95 DISK, ATARI ST .95 DISK  VERSION TESTED: COMMODORE DISK REVIEWER: LEE impressed by both the simplicity, and the addictiveness of the game, and couldn't wait for someone to release it. I couldn't believe my luck when a copy arrived the next day. To my supprise, it was almost an exact copy, in both graphics and gameplay, and to be quite honest, is one of the best arcade conversions I've ever played. You play the role of Road The first meeting with this game, was at a motorway service station, on the way back from watching a preview of the new Bond film, which was arranged by Domark. It was about half past midnight, and I'd stopped off for a cup of coffee and a butty, when I spotted the face of Road Runner on an arcade machine. Anyway. .40, and half an hour later, 1 felt I should carry on back to Accrington. I was incredibly LIVES: 2490 the last one. You must eat the bird seed, except the ones which Wile E. has laced with iron filings which will slow you down. Also on the road, are glasses of lemonade which you can either drink to gain a bonus, or make Wile E. drink to slow him down. When you complete a level and lose your last life, you can go straight up to it via a short cut on level 1. As I've said, the gameplay is as close to the original arcade game as is possible and it's just as addictive. Shaun \"Trailblazer and Kik Start\" Southern must be congratulated on the Commodore version, expecially in the graphic department. You Runner, (Speedious Birdious), really feel like you're involved in being persued by that ever a cartoon, as they capture the hungry Wile E. Coyote, characters to a tee. I loved the (Starvingous Carnivorous), way Wile E. looks round in who's sole meaning in life is to amazement when you run past do the Road Runner what him! Both backdrops and sound Colonel Sanders did to are excellent and there's even chickens. Now the only the cartoon's jungle when you weapons our feathered friend lose you last life. has are his legs, whereas good My only criticism is that ol Wile E. has bombs, jet because each level is a powered skateboards, jet packs, multiload, it could become a and pogo sticks. pain for cassette users, but on All Road Runner has to do, is disk it plays like a charm. Buy to get to the end of each level, this and you'll have fun for without being blown up, ages, and a guarantee that at squashed, eaten, or generally some point you'll laugh out being destroyed in numerous loud. I know I did! ways. This may sound easy but the hazzards don't just come  GRAPHICS from our favourite meat eater SOUND but lay on the roads in the form  VALUE PLAYABILITY of mines, trucks, boulders, crevasses, invisible paint and bird seed, all of which must be jumped, dodged, ducked and generally avoided, all except COMMODORE LIVES:6 12330 enne TM COMMODORE which you may know from the way as a game although the orginal cartoon titles, show the Atari ST price is a little steep. ST's potential.. The graphics are of superb So, what else can I say? cartoon quality, although Roady That's all folks! and Coyote are a little stickish, and each level has its own GRAPHICS cartoon time soundtrack. Added SOUND to that, the tasters at the VALUE beginning and end of the game, PLAYABILITY "


"FLUNKY 130W FULL TIME 1 FLUNKY REQUIRED Menial manservant required for special duties at Buck House. The successful applicant will need experience of bomb disposal, fighting rats and avoiding homicidal guards, as well as a good conversational manner with Royal Personages. Excellent rewards for a candidate with quick reactions and strong nerves. Apply for more information to: Helen Holland, Piranha, 4 Little Essex Street, London WC2R 3LF Tel: 01-836 6633 Bianha Available soon on Spectrum, Commodore and Amstrad cassettes all at .95. Commodore and Amstrad discs both .95. "


"STARLIGHT HYERIJ HAVE YOU GOT WHAT IT TAKES! A complex and deeply developed strategy game brought together to generate the battleground of the future. HYBRID is a combination of superb graphics and original techniques to emulate those fevered imaginations hitherto found only in nightmares. HYBRID challenges your ability to master this superior space adventure. The superb detail and engrossing strategy is a feast for the imagination. FECTIE SPECIAL FEATURES + OVER 200 ROOMS + MULTIPLE ROBOT MERGE FACILITY WEAPON SILOS, POWER PODS TELEPORT CONSULES + MULTIPLE FIREPOWER & ARMOUR CHACHETS C64/128 cass .99 C64/128 disk .99 AMSTRAD cass .99 AMSTRAD disk .99 SPECTRUM .99 "


"BY TONY CROWTHER & ROSS GOODLEY NOW FROM THE T.V. SERIES eeee... 0158 * POWER-X-TREME!!! 88710898 * EXOFRAME ON AND READY! Boge... 9379 ZAP MILLIONS OF BADDIES! Choose from an awesome array of weapons and prepare for the battle of a lifetime! Ace McCloud, Jake Rockwell and Max Ray are THE CENTURIONS! Stop the evil Doc Terror in his desperate bid to destroy the world! Guide the Centurions through Space, Sea and Air, and find all six parts of the master key before it's too late! SPECIAL FEATURES MAIL ORDER: If your dealer is miles away you can order from ussend your crossed cheque P.O. made out to Ariolasoft U.K. Ltd., including your own name and address, to Ariolasoft, P.O. Box 461, London NW1 2ND Multi-directional scrolling 3 massive levels Amazing 'Exoframe feature 1 or 2 players co-operational game FAKTOR C64 128 cass .99 C64/128 disk .99 AMSTRAD cass .99 AMSTRAD disk .99 SPECTRUM .99 LORO "


"C+VG Pirates of the Barbary Coast HADEIRA TOTT CANARY    Cannonball & powder 45 Destimation AFRICA ATLANTIC Cargo Manifest Bancrowder Hold Space Tea to sell for ** Th\"!!18, to sell for 1 DGTT Tobacco Rum ake Ray MACHINES: CBM/ATARI ST/ ATARI 800  SUPPLIER: CASCADE PRICES: C64/ATARI 800 .95, ATARI ST .95  VERSIONS TESTED: CBM/ST REVIEWER: JOHN DNS! error to uide bugh and 87 The infamous Bloodthroat the Pirate has kidnapped your daughter and is demanding 50,000 pieces of gold ransom for her. You'll have to decide whether to pay or blast him out of the sea when you get to his island at the end of the game, but first you've got to raise the ransom by trade or more risky ventures. First stop, the Barbary Coast map which shows you're docked at Casablanca. You're immediately shown a manifest of the gold you have, your food and firepower calculated in numbers of cannonballs. The game's controlled by a series of multiple choice menus, some of which have only one choice (?) which you have to press to move to the next part of the game, and an arrow cursor. You sail from port out how that was done. The gold, literally a fortune in it. to port by pointing at the instructions are unhelpful to say when you pay a visit to the destination. You're then given the least! local port store you can bribe the time it will take to get there When you're loaded, select the keeper and he may give you and asked if you want to the cannon's elevation and the a treasure map, marked with an continue or re-select. fire panel. The cannon goes off X. Once you've got that you can Once out of port you may be and, with luck and no help at all make your way to treasure attacked by other pirate vessels. from Cascade, you sink the island but, because the same You have the choice of fleeing ship. You have 15 cannons but, old select menu control system old select menu cont or standing your ground, but if if you're unlucky, they'll be is used throughout, even this you select the latter you'd better knocked out one by one, and if section of the game-digging be prepared for some heavy you're mega-unlucky, you're for treasure isn't particularly confusion. The cassette inlay ship will sink exciting describes how to stoke up and Back at port you've got the Cascade has hit on a fire your cannon, but the opportunity to trade, buy mediocre game formula. instructions are for the supplies and repair your ship. Commodore strategists may Commodore version. It refers to The idea is to do what no enjoy it for a few hours but the a blue cannon selection panel, British Prime Minister has done ST version, which performs in which is yellow on the ST, but since the war and make your low-resolution graphics mode, doesn't show you its position balance of payments show a makes a mockery of the 16-bit on the screen. So, if you've got profit. It's a slow business power. the ST version of the game, and a tedious one because all The company should either you'll have to work out which you have to do is select from have added to the plot and panel controls each cannon multiple choice menus but produced hi-res graphics for the action. there's no margin for error. ST, or left the game on the Before you fire the cannon Once you've sold stock of a Commodore. you have to load it by pointing certain product you don't get at the powder in the keg to the the chance to buy more at the GRAPHICS right of the gun and ramming same port. SOUND one of the cannon balls in. It Trading's a slow business, VALUE took me half an hour to work but there is a chance to go for PLAYABILITY lure C64 tv "


"THE MAN WHO WON LOST THE MAN WHO LOST/WON Gen. MacArthur Adm. Yamamoto NOW YOU CAN CHANGE THE COURSE OF HISTORY The battle for Guadalcanal has been called the most decisive single action of the war in the Pacific More significant, even, than Pearl Harbor. The battle lasted six months. It took the combat skills, the courage and eventually the lives of thousands of dedicated fighting men, both American and Japanese, to bring it to a conclusion The battle for Guadalcanal is unquestionably the finest war strategy game to date. It is perhaps the first game to give you a true indication of the awesome responsibility of the battle commander Now you can re-fight the battle for Guadalcanal. You can re-think the tactics. You can re-deploy the resources, You can re-live the battle. In effect, you can change the course of history, "


"Mimary 3 The game display is best described as two halves. All general information about the game is in the top half while control of units and info on them are in the lower half. To the top right you will see a clock face. This runs at a speed of 1 minute for every 10 seconds of real time. The clock NEVER stops. DATA CANAL ACTIVISION ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE Commodore 64/128 Cassette & Disc ZX Spectrum 46k/128/+ Amstrad CPC Cassette & Disc (All cassettes .99 and discs .99) Mail Order: Activision (UK) Ltd, Units 3 & 4 Finedone Road Industrial Estate, Wellingborough, Northampton NNS 4SR Computer software program Guadalcanal-designed by lan Bird, developed in collaboration with Alan Steel "


"19948 BOMUS 9940 MACHINES: SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD/C64/ATARI ST SUPPLIER: US GOLD PRICES: .99 (Spec), .99/ .99 (C64/Ams), .99 (ST)  VERSION REVIEWED: AMSTRAD REVIEWER: TIM It's fun being the boss. That way you get to pick and choose which games you review. If you can't there's not much point in being the Ed, is there? Solomon's Key is one of my favourite arcade games and this is a very good conversion right down to the tinkling little tune. OK, so the graphics can't hope to match up to the arcade original, but the boys from Probe have managed to capture the feel and the addictiveness of the original. The idea is pretty simple. You play the part of an explorer searching a lost temple for the key to Solomon's treasure. You The aim on each screen is to around hidden objects by explore a network of rooms collect a key which opens the destroying and replacing screens to you -jam packed door to the next level while at blocks. with puzzles and goodies to the same time sccoping up Watch out for the messages collect. goodies for bonus points and which appear on some screens Each room is a network of extra lives. solve the puzzles they pose stone blocks which can be The game is really pure and you'll gain entrance to the destroyed and recreated by arcade strategy. Find the best bonus mystery screens -just your explorer at will. Some route to the key and the door like the arcade version. blocks hide goodies which can within the time limit. Solve the riddles -like \"Cast be collected. Some blocks are Watch out for useful objects a spell on the key at lll lll\" What indestructible. like fireballs which add to this means is that you must Most screens are inhabited by you limited defensive wave your want at the key in nasties who are out to get you level II-Ill to get to the bonus at every turn. If you don't have them you level. More complex and have to dodge the nasties and You may think fairies are dangerous hazards and create barriers. weedy little creatures but combinations of blocks appear Talking of blocks-which when they appear in this game as you progress through the we'll do a lot in this review you better grab them quickgame. you can sometimes swap they grant you an extra life. Solomon's Key Don't sneer at the Speccy version's weak graphics, look behind them and play the game. It's just as playable as the other versions. Loads of screens, tons of fun and hours of totally absorbing gameplay make Solomon's Key a must for you summer holiday entertainment. It's an ideal mixture of Bombjack and that all time C+VG fave Pengo. C+VG  GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY GO ooo 13128 2HBAR BOEHS BONUS 43HR "


"Re-bounder OO TODO 1 0161413) D2R GEBE FIS MACHINE: C64 SUPPLIER: GREMLIN allow you to pump bounder up. And you'll want to keep coming PRICE: .95 (tape) More pressure in the ball back for more because the REVIEWER: TIM makes for higher jumps. But game is just as addictive as its don't pump him up too muchpredecessor. Take our advice Thing has bounced back and otherwise you'll be clearing up and catch a copy today! now Gremlin has given that all a nasty mess on the inside of IDEAS Central and The Ed time fave, Bounder, a retread and sent him out to face more deadly dangers. Unlike many sequels, which often attempt to spin out a successful theme and tempt you to part with your hard won cash for more of the same, Rebounder is a very playable stand alone game. Bounder fans will curl up their toes with joy when they get their hands on a copy. Bounder finds himself in the Overlord's fortress, which is heavily defended by all sorts of aliens, bubbling lava pits, slimejelly, and other horrible hazards. Your job is to steer Bounder over, around and along the familiar suspended platforms and hazards to reach the Overlord in time for the final showdown. At the end of each level you'll come across a Sentinel, one of the Overlord's more powerful minions. Defeat it and you move on to further more dangerous levels. The first level is simply to get you used to handling old Bounder again. After all, it could've been some time since you've played the classie original your TV screen! await you hints tips and cheat It may have just been me but! Complete the first training modes with anticipation. But do felt that this new Bounder level, defeat the Sentinel and an old man a real favour will wasn't quite as responsive as you get a choice of directions you? Don't keep us waiting too the first but after a couple of You can continue bounding left long! C+VG sessions the extra added to right or switch to scrolling HIT! attractions thrown in by the up OR down. All of which  GRAPHICS programmers more than make should give even the most SOUND up for it.  VALUE demanding Bounder freak value  PLAYABILITY Bounder can defend himself for money. against the Overlord's alien There are no less than nine minions by firing various different sorts of aliens to projectiles at them. Collect the contend with each with 'F' symbols and you get different capabilities. But different sorts of weapons, there's one thing they have in indicated by a number at the common if you don't blast side of the symbol. A few them they'll get you as sure as games and you'll know what eggs is eggs! you're picking up. Beware the Crackle. This is a Watch out for the 'A' symbols sort of mobile and very too these give Bounder a suit deadly-electric barrier. Shoot of designer armour, protecting out the terminals and you path him against the attentions of will be clear. Fail and you'll be even the most persistant alien fried. You can try to jump, but attacker. you'll fail nine times out of ten. As in the original there are Graphics and sound are slabs that make Bounder excellent in fact the whole bounce further, slabs that package is extremely well SO IDIDO S901 DSC provide extra points, slabs that presented, including the intro give mystery bonuses-good messages which feature some or bad plus new things like amusing bits of coders trivia. the smart bombs needed to Rebounder is bound to have defeat the Overlord and the many hidden secrets only to be unlocked by prolonged play o coon on "


"Juncom Joysticks. Here compatible with the foughest kids B3 D Suncom joysticks are tough capable of taking the roughavith the smokith Combining duratility and quality We re among the most reliable Joysticks available. Which is wh/Suncom offerychaing other manufacturer y esto offer=a. 2 Year Guarantee on our Staftighter and Tac range. ww compatible with yost poplatkogie computers, this Y angis available from all good computer stores. 1, Remarkably, perides starliamjst .99 Suncom jodids. Made to last Suncom icroprosused 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tlx: 43422 MPS/UKG "


"ALL NOW!  OFF TRADE NOW! TRADE PRICES NOW YOUR MICRO DESERVES THE BEST.. TRADE .95 .95 24 ting themes When your home or business micro costs several hundreds of pounds, it deserves the finest repair facilities in Europe (well, probably!). And the finest prices  off trade rates for a limited period only. * How? At Verran we use our own range of advanced automatic test equipment (now sold worldwide), backed by stringent 2-8 hours soak-rack testing. That means speed, ultra-low prices and, most important, guaranteed reliability. For the first three months we'll repair any fault free. For the next three, at half these quoted prices. It's the finest service available. * Currently we handle over 3500 products on average every day. Providing services for such leading companies as Amstrad plc, Commodore Business Machines, Sinclair Research, Rank Xerox, Dixons, Currys, Boots, WH Smiths, John Menzies and many more. * Join them and take up our special offer now. * SPECTRUM *COMMODORE 64 * BBC B STD BRD 25 *AMSTRAD 464 * ELECTRON AMSTRAD Recommended and Approved by ATARI ACORN SINCLAIR COMMODORE EUROPE'S LEADING COMPUTER REPAIR CENTRE ..AND UNBEATABLE DISCOUNTS ON ALL COMPONENTS!!! * With over ,000 worth of spares in stock, we can meet many of your specialised requirements. We've listed a few examples and for anything not displayed just call us and we'll quote immediately inclusive of first class post Keyboard Membrane Spectrum Spectrum Plus Metal Templates SPECTRUM SPARES Z80 CPU ULA 6C001 Power Supply ROM 4116 RAMS ZTX 690 COMMODORE SPARES 6510 Processor 6525 CIA 6581 Sid Chip 901225 Graphic ROM 90.226 Basic ROM 901227 Kernal ROM 906114 House Keeper 6569-VIC 4164 RAMS Memory 12.00 12.00 15.00 10.00 10.00 15.00 10.00 18.00 1.00 Power Supplies C64 19.50 C16 15.00 All the above prices include VAT but please enclose a further .50 post and packing on all component orders. HOW TO CONTACT US *For quotes on computers not listed or on any component, telephone 0276 66266. (Quoting VID/097) *To send us your micro for repair, mail it securely packed, accompanied by cheque, postal order (made out to Verran Micro Maintenance Limited) or quote your Access or Barclaycard number. And to obtain your special discount quote VID/097. ZTX 213 Verran Verran Micro-Maintenance Limited. Unit 2H & 2J. Albany Park. Frimley Road, Camberley, Surrey GU15 2PL. Telephone 0276 66266. "


"GANG Superior Collection Superior fans have been average, but still well eagerly awaiting a collection of presented, while Wallaby and  MACHINES: BBC/MASTER SUPPLIER: SUPERIOR Superior hits, and here it is Smash & Grab are basic PRICE: $11.95 (DISK) the Superior Collection, climbing round the screen VERSION TESTED: BBC volumes 1 and 2. On each disk games and nothing to get REVIEWER: NICKY you get seven old favourites excited about. and one new release. On Synchron is a good quality It's become fashionable for the volume 1, there's Repton, game in which you fly around games people to produce Karate Combat, Star Striker, collecting power orbs, compilation tapes and disks of Airlift, BMX on the Moon, destroying as many flying and their games and it must have Wallaby and Smash & Grab, ground targets as you can. set a lot of teeth gnashing. For plus new boy Synchron. On Volune Two, you get what you could have paid for Repton, Karate Combat and Repton Two, Deathstar, Space just one game in the past, you Star Striker are among the Pilot, Missile Strike, Battle Tank, can now have a whole library of cream of Superior's games, all Crazy Painter and Overdrive, games. Frequently first rate excellent quality. Airlift and plus new release Kix. ones. BMX on the Moon are more The seven old faithfuls are well up to Superior standards. Kix is not unlike Crazy Painter, where you have to try and fill in as much of a huge square as you can-but there is a 'thing hanging around which blows you up if it touches you or the trail behind you. Good nervewracking stuff. At .95 each, you're not likely to find better value for money in the BBC games world. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY 00 00 00 Saneahalisere magic ||  MACHINES: BBC/ELECTRON touches-the way the cat gives SUPPLIER: BUG-BYTE the mouse a thumping and the PRICE: .99 stars which swim around the VERSION TESTED: BBC REVIEWER: NICKY victim's head, for instance. And these cats have brains if they see you, they go for you. Bug.Byte's latest is not for the The sound is impressive. The squeamish. You are a mouse tunes are actually worth engaged in a life or death listening to and don't simply get struggle with three patrolling in the way, and the sound moggies. The idea is to collect effects during the game add to keys which release a giant cat the fun. trap. On the debit side, the action is While you are collecting the held up for too long when you keys in a race against time, the lose a life, and when you've lost cats are at liberty to bash you. one life, you've often lost the lot But once the cat trap is when the game restarts, you released, it's moggy watch out. opponent is still right by you The visual and sound effects and it's extremely difficult to get when a cat gets itself caught in away. I spent several boring the trap are pretty grisly. minutes watching my lives slip There are two modes in this away, without being able to game, 'sheer panic' and 'sweaty continue playing, or interrupt panic' and 'sweaty palms'. For and restart. sheer panic read 'reasonable It's maybe worth the .99 pace', for'sweaty palms' read price tag. But Tom and Jerry it dead slow'. Goodness knows ain't. why they put the slow mode in. The graphics are Bug-Byte's favourite mode two type, blocky GRAPHICS SOUND and uninteresting, although VALUE there are one or two nice PLAYABILITY MACHINES: BBC/B+/MASTER Leptons, which seem to be sub SUPPLIER: MICRO POWER atomic particles running amok. PRICE: .95 (disk) VERSION TESTED: BBC You do this be painting in the REVIEWER: NICKY box, hoping the Lepton doesn't touch the trail you leave behind you. Here's another collection of Cybertron Mission is an old games to join the growing favourite, where you explore a library of compilation tapes and maze of rooms shooting things disks. Makes you sick, doesn't and picking up things. it, when you think of the bad old There is also an excellent days when you paid .95 Chess game, with very OK probably more for just one graphics, but as for the rest paltry game! oh dear! Stocking fillers. Micro Power has crammed a There is a very average whopping ten games on to this climbing ladders game, Felix in disk, but they are not all gems, the Factory, a very basic version I'm sorry to say. of space invaders, albeit with First you get Mr EE, a good slick speed, Positron, a twocopy of the arcade game Mr Do. layer shoot-down-yourIt's another Pac Man clone, opponent flying game, Bandits wherein you nip around the at 3 o'clock, and a test-yourscreen eating fruit and avoiding knowledge-of-the-world quiz monsters. called World Geography, Helldriver is good for an hour Still, at .95, there are or two. You drive around a enough solid offerings to make maze running over flags to get this disk excellent value. points, while attempting to dodge other cars and obstacles. Rather basic graphics. GRAPHICS SOUND Frenzy is a near relation of VALUE Crazy Painter. You have to trap PLAYABILITY O 000 00 Saneakaliser' Magic!! "


" nd Langs 03  ACE 2 PILOT TUO AIRCRAFT POR SELECTION GOOOOOO P ORE FOR THE OF High speed one or two pilot action. Computer opponent has advanced artiticial intelligence at 20 skill levels. Comprehensic options. Tona 2000CCO PILOT TUO SS 03 GOSCOGS Commodore 64 Disk..... $14.95 Commodore 64 Cass. . . . . . .95 Spectrum 48 Cass......... .95 Spectrum 128 Cass........ .95 Commodore Plus/4 (64k). . ..95 Air-air and air ground combat. Real time, real space leon Equipped with two aircrall lypes and variety of modern missiles. Atari ST... (IBM and Atari for Christmas) ......95 CASCADE C ont. Harmate. HG 5BC, England fol. 04231232 hr le phone ordering 02350668 Tele268 MONRET GOuoting MAGTR20 THE ULTIMATE HEAD TO HEAD CONFLICT was the CE "


"REVIEWS Centurion  MACHINES: AMSTRAD CPC RANGE, COMMODORE, SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: ARIOLASOFT/ REAKTOR PRICE: .99 (CBM, AMS), .99 (SPEC) VERSION TESTED: COMMODORE 64/128 DISC REVIEWER: JOHN Doc Terror's out to destroy the earth, and The Centurionsfresh from a successful cartoon season on BBC TV form the codenamed Earth. Se season on Reccessful cartoon CLASSR992. only force that can stop him. Beneath their powerful exoframe body armour, studded with special assault weapon systems, these highly skilled super troops are all too human. Ariolasoft estimates that the exoframes give The Centurions the power of 1,000 men with machine-like dedication. The three-man team dedication. The three-man team codenamed Earth, Sea and Air will need all their extra abilities to defeat Doc's robotic minions Doc's plan is to steal a lethal nerve gas. It's hidden at the centre of the high security complex, protected by a myriad of locked doors. Your team's job is to find the correct keys. gain entry to the complex, find the chemical and keep it safe. You'll have to use the whole team as certain areas, in which keys are kept, are off limits to all but one member. Keys are placed on plinths within air black, sea blue and land yellow areas. Only the corresponding member of the team Air on Air, Land on Land can enter those areas. Once you've picked up a key you race around the entrances to the security complex looking for a door with a lock hole the same shape as your key. If you strike lucky the door disappears and you can enter the complex ready for a showdown with the Doc. You can switch between characters in each of the three sections of the game by skimming your player over the air, land, and sea icons. The player doesn't change shape when you change character but the name of the new character is put up on the status display on the lower third of the screen. That confusing? Well it isn't because you'll know if you hit a no-no area. Your character's score takes a dive. The scoring system is a little odd but, once you get used to it, you will see that Centurions can be played in one of two ways. The main score starts at 1000 and decreases when you're hit by a laser bolt or brushed by a monster. When the life energy level reaches zero, the game's over for the current character but you can protect him for a while, at least, with armour which you'll find are carried by some of the creatures lurking around the play area. When you shoot one of these creatures a flashing armour symbol appears in its place and, if you glide over it, your character is clothed with a new weapons system. Each set of armour includes a different type of fire power. Srake Paws MACHINE: COMMODORE 64  SUPPLIER: SOFTWARE PROJECTS PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: LEE Occasionally, a game arrives in the office, that blows the socks off everyone who sees it. Star Paws is just such a game. Software Projects has now decided to lower the price of all their games to six pounds, which makes this an even better buy than it was full price, which to be honest, is saying something Now to be quite honest, I felt that the storyline to Wizball was going slightly beyond the realms of sillyness, but Star GOGGE NNNNN "


" MACHINE: SPECTRUM  SUPPLIER:CRL PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: TIM As C+VG You'll be able to shoot walls of laser power, scattered bursts, and lines of zap as well the normal rapid laser bursts. Each laser weapon is powerful in its own right but just make sure you don't let them off in confined space or you'll end up shooting yourself and that'll lose you some important life energy. Centurions transcends the normal arcade shoot-'em-up type of game while retaining instanteous action and hoards of aliens who'll put up a quick fight if that's all you want. It's not the main aim of the game but Ariolasoft has included an alien kills score just in case you're not so hot at solving the key finding and mapping problems. That said you'll need to play Centurions as an arcade adventure, which requires mapping, if you're to get the most out of it. If you want high scores it'll give them to you, if you're up to the Doc's alien barrages, but you'll need a steady, logical, strategy if you're to beat this superb game, and not just the monsters that inhabit it.  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE  PLAYABILITY So you thought you'd seen every possible angle on martial arts? Well, you couldn't have been more wrong. Meet the Ninja Hamstera fiendishly furry blur of flailing fists and feet. This game started out life as a joke an irritated company PR person making up a title just to get a journalist off his back. But then the idea of a Ninja Hamster seemed to stick and so a legend was born! Well, not quite a legend more a bit of fighting fun. And by your response to our Ninja Hamster Competition you think it's a laugh too. More on that next issue-but meanwhile back to the review. The story goes like this. Old Hammy has been in training in a mountainside rodent monastry for absolutely ages a fortnight at least. Spinning round in a little wheel, eating sunflower seed sandwiches, that sort of thing. Now he's heard that his village is under attack by a gang of joyseeking villains lead by the Lizard of Death, the Sinister Rat and the Loony Lobster to name but a few. It's Hammy's job to battle this motley crew in hand to hand Ninja combat. Load the game up and you'll be confronted by the regular karate combat screen layout except that the fighters are big, cartoony style comic characters. And it's this that makes the game different from the run of the mill combat challenge. Each character is dressed up in a neat way, The Sinister Rat looks a bit like a Wallaby with boxing gloves, The Lizard is a mean monster with a spiky club, Mad Dog is dressed as an American Football star, and so Uinia Hamster ABCDEFGHI KEV TAKE nanin 12 7 00000000 DROID KEY minimal and gameplay gets a bit repetitive. Ninja Hamster doesn't add much to the martail arts theme except to generate a bit of humour. But sadly the joke isn't enough to last long enough for Paws beats that hands down. This may sound easy, but You take on the role of even though the birds are Captain Rover Pawstrong, who friendly, they won't let anyone has been sent to defeat a colony catch them, let alone kill them. of, get ready for this, Tasty To help you slightly, a space Space Griffins, who, although ship drops supplies on the are loyal and friendly animals, surface of the planet, which find themselves at the centre of contain extra means of an inter-galactic plot to propulsion, extra weapons to overthrow the order of peace kill the birds, mining lamps, and and stability in space. Now you bonus puzzles, which are may ask how are they going to basically a simplified version of do this. Well quite simply, this is Split Personality from Domark. an illegal flock of oven-ready At certain points, you can go griffins, which have been bred under the surface into a mine, by a group of mercenaries, who which may contain some plan to sell this rare bird at griffins, or may not. If you ridiculous prices, thus activate a matter transporter, destabilising the monetary you play a game, similar to the system, and allowing them to first stage in Beach Head, in take over the entire universe. which you angle a gun, and try Sounds awful, doesn't it? and blow the birds up. This is where you come in. There is a great title screen, You've been sent to the planet brilliant super smooth Paralax where the birds are being scrolling, and a great Rob reared, and have been ordered Hubbard tune, that is one of the to either destroy, or capture best. every single bird, and every Overall, it is excellent value, married one of it comes to that! and at the price, if you miss it. This is where you come in. you must be off your rocker! You've been sent to the planet where the birds are being reared, and have been ordered GRAPHICS to either destroy, or capture SOUND every single bird, and every VALUE married one if it comes to that! PLAYABILITY There are eight villainous vermin to defeat in order to save the village-two on each load. Yup, I'm afraid you'll have to keep going back to the tape player in order to complete the whole game. A bit of a bind this. There's a two player option as well-which as with all combat games makes the thing a whole lot more interesting to me to want to shell out for a full play. I found that after the price game-at budget price novelty of the funny graphics, things might be different. little comic style speech balloons had worn off the  GRAPHICS whole thing got a bit too easy. SOUND I defeated The Rat using the VALUE tried and trusted low sweeping PLAYABILITY kick time after time the computer controlled opponents seem to be too easy to overcome. You have to defeat each of the opposing animals about four times before you get to move on to the next one. The number of falls your enemy or you have taken is indicated by apples at the top of the screen which have bites taken out of them with every fall. Graphics aren't bad, sound is Coo "


"KAKTOR 68113 SISUNDISHT 323 68763 SS13 HODONT SVORISTI I S X-*.XV.IS THE FOX IS BACK! "


"C+VG Star Fox Luca REVIEWS MACHINE: AMSTPAD CPC DISC SUPPLIER: REAKTOR/ ARIOLASOFT PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: JOHN laser at the start of the game your laser power. One visit only which, according to the is allowed per level so you'll instruction manual, if fairly have to rely on support ships, useless. Eventually you get the who're out there with you, to opportunity to find and visit one keep your fuel supply up and of the eight friendly, federated laser power flowing. planets. Each is hidden by a As if the aliens weren't worm hole in space, so the enough, you'll also have to fly location is difficult to find, but through electron and ice crystal once you're there you can storms. If you're used to repair your ship and upgrade dodging asteroids you'll have GOX509502502 Take the combat module out of Firebird's Elite and you've got Star Fox, with one very important different. The wireframed attack ships are colour filled and the resulting combat sequences aren't noticably slower. You play Hawkins, a Star Fox flyer in the Hytuian System. Peace has reigned since the System was enclosed on a Rubicon cube protection system, but now the cube has been breached and a new planet has drifted into the galaxy. The inhabitants are hostile and attack everything that enters the planet's path. Suddenly, your mission is to chase and destroy these aliens through eight levels of gameplay. Not only that but each level contains a task, revealed at the beginning which you must complete before you go onto the next. Your Star Fox fighter is equipped with a simple MK1 no trouble with these smaller objects but if you're at turbo speed you're in for some bad damage. When you've finished one level you have to get of the Cube and into the next. Select the orientation display, which shows your ship in the middle of a huge cube and rotate it to the point where the nose of your Star Fox is facing the exit point. Then head for it and time warp to the next stage of the adventure. Star Fox is a repeat of so many games, Starion and Elite being the favourites but it contains enough style of its own to make players who pant after this type of game sit down and take note. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY 0000 Mega Apocalypse  MACHINE: CBM64 SUPPLIER: MARTECH PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: NIGEL Missiles are your most useful weapons. Launch one and watch it lock onto the fastest planet and shoot right up its tail! Ka-boom!!! You need all the fire power you can get, too, with the likes of Mad Xothopian around, a planet the size of well, err... a planet. Don't worry about memorising endless waves of aliens or asteroids. All you need for Mega is skill, and plenty of it. because it's a very, very hard C+VG HIT! Just how much can you say about a game that was in the arcades three years ago, on your 64 two years ago and now surfaces with a corny title like Mega-Apocalypse? Quite a lot, as it happens. It's a one or two (simultaneous) player game. Set against the backdrop of one of the slickest, smoothest star routines I've ever seen, wave after wave of planets, asteroids and comets move into view. The rules are simple: everything moves at 100mphexcept when it's going faster. There are one or two fiddly bits (pods) which you have to collide with for bonuses (extra speed/lives/missiles/rotate control), everything else you blast. The faster it moves, the faster--hopefully-you blast. game. Learning how to avoid comets and catch pods while blasting planets doesn't take a diploma, just lightning fast wrist-action. The best technique is always to blast the seven planets on each screen before they reach full size. Do this and you get massive bonuses of 2,000, 4,000 and then 8,000 points, if you manage it three times in a row. the seven and a half minute The game features speech, music track) is sampled to give but everything in Mega (except brilliant Star Wars-style sound effects. Five channel sound and, for the first time on a 64, 005663 nothing slows down for the speech. If you cringe every time all those superlatives are rolled out for each successive 'genuine arcade action, blast-'em-up. sensation' buy Mega and throw away your dictionary. GUSI001 SOUND  GRAPHICS  VALUE  PLAYABILITY 9000 HOR "


"| Ca REVIEWS Barbarian After most sound effects, be they '00', 'AGH' or 'BOING', instead of blissful silence, you get a loud click as the sample ends. Should you make it to the dark parts of the Underworld, you will discover a bow which, MACHINES: AMIGA, ATARI ST SUPPLIER: PSYGNOSIS PRICE: 24.95 VERSION TESTED: AMIGA REVIEWER: CHRIS At last, they've done it! Psygnosis has finally written a game, a decent game, which you don't need A-level Physics and a CSE in Maths to play! Explain myself? OK. Brattacus, the company's first game, was not as I had expected it to be. It was far too complex, and really slow, but amazingly managed to sell quite well. Arena, the first 16-bit Track & Field had great graphics, although very slow, but suffered from the same some of which are hidden in the nasties decides to have lunch, most amazing ways. you can bet he has got a tasty When loading up the game, barbarian arm in mine, so how you are entertained by a do you stop him? Well, as with number of beautifully drawn all mighty warriors, you have a screens, which set the mood for magic sword which likes the game. The main screen is of nothing better than to play with Hegor standing with his sword, a demon's intestines, so all you raised above his head over a metal chain. You appear in the dangerous marsh lands bordering Hegor's home village, and from there you start towards the Underworld. Control of your mighty warrior is by mouse, keyboard or joystick, although the latter is not recommended at all. I found the mouse easiest, and quickly got to grips with the controls. You move Hegor about with various wonderfully drawn icons, which decorate the lower quarter of the screen. Using these you can make your barbarian stroll, run, jump. somersault, attack, pick up objects, climb ladders and even own have to do is let it do the talking. like everything else, is guarded. Sometimes this is not the The guard in question is a huge best way to handle the metallic being, who carries a situation, and so a knowledge large unfriendly looking mace. of somersaults comes in handy. It is, in fact, impossible to kill Don't worry, all barbarians this guy, although I will tell you come witha lifetime's that you must have a bow to somersaulting ability destroy Necron's dragon. guaranteed. This is a difficult task, and one When you do something, be it which I fail at time and time attack, defend or jump, the again. You see, I shoot the graphical action is dragon, and he shoots me back, accompanied by various so we both die. I can't figure out barbarian type groans. These how the hell you can get past range from '00' and 'HA' to the him, but it is possible. more complex sentences such So at last we've got a as 'OO ER HUR Psygnosis hit, great graphics, AAAAAAAAGHHHHHHHH... brilliant sound and for once, All other creatures make excellent gameplay. noises as well, dogs bark, werewolves growl and bows go GRAPHICS 'Boing' as they launch arrows at SOUND you. This brings me to an VALUE important part of the game... PLAYABILITY problem. run for his life. When Barbarian landed on As you venture through my doormat, I hoped and Necron's lair, the screen does prayed that this game would be not scroll in the true sense, the turning point. Phew!, what a which is a shame, nor does it relief I got when I loaded it. flick between screens like Sabre Barbarian is an arcade Wulf. Instead it 'flick scrolls', adventure of the classic, cult which is one of the only faults following type. The game is the this gme has. story of a young barbarian Passing by the amazing named Hegor, and is all about graphic backdrops, you his quest to destroy the evil encounter some of the most evil Necron, an evil being who killed creatures you could possible his father. imagine. You get werewolves, Accompanying the disk is a ghouls, lizards, and, of course, a novella, a seemingly popular nasty fire breathing dragon. device employed by software With all this going on, you houses, which tells the tale of just have to sit back and stare at Hegor and his father, and the the true arcade quality graphics, story ends where the game and gasp at the amount of work begins. which has gone into each Many valuable clues are to screen. obtained from the novella, Anyway, when one of these "


"Brusels From Taito, the masters of arcade entertainment 'BUBBLE BOBBLE' Blow and bounce and bob your way into oblivion in this incredible conversion of the greatest arcade game of the year... Bubble Bobble will blast your brains and bruise your senses... Baffle yourself...buy Bubble Bobble Spectrum .95 Commodore & Amstrad cassette .95 Commodore disk .95 Amstrad disc .95, and for the Atari ST .95 TAITO TAITO TAITRONICS TAITRONICS FIREBIRD Firebird Software, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford St., London WC1A 1PS. Firebird is a Registered Trademark of British Telecommunications plc. "


"controls and decide if you want evenly over the grid. Your attack over and it's the to play against the computer, a Once you've used up your turn of your opposite number to friend or indulge in a bit of ammo the screen display attack you in exactly the same multi-player action. switches to the attack screen fashion. If one of your ships is Two players compete at any which shows an animated viewsunk you lose firepower. And one time then take on all of your shells hitting or missing it's quited distressing to see comers in a knock-out the enemy ships. them slip beneath the waves. tournament. This is the only The ships you're attacking are Don't despair if your big ships way you can get your name on displayed in detail down the take a beating. It has been the hi-score chart. side of the screen in the 64 known for a tiny missile shipPlaying the game goes like version, while the Spectrum just two squares in size-to this. First you position your and Amstrad games show you stick around long enough to ships on the battle-sea. The sea the fleet bobbing about on a beat the enemy fleet. is represented as a grid system pixellated sea. Spectrum and Amstrad and your ships as different If you hit a ship, a square on versions are graphically similar shaped groups of squares. the grid is filled in red, a missis with the same attack/battle The computer/player two indicated by a blue square. If screen showing boats on the goes through the same you've remembered the shapes sea. The 64 version is different. procedure then it's on to the of the different ships you'll be It shows a bow mounted ships good bit-the blasting. able to direct your fire more gun blasting away at the You begin with 24 shots accurately. But horizon while planes fly over  MACHINES: C64/AMSTRAD/ which you position in the remember they head dropping bombs. SPECTRUM/ATARI ST squares of the grid using a can be rotated As boats are hit they settle in SUPPLIER: ELITE cursor. diagonally on the sea-several hits are  PRICES: E7.95 (SPECTRUM) .95 Starting out you simply the grid. needed to finish them off finally (AMSTRAD) .95 (C64) ,95 (ALL have to guess where and it has been know for a DISCS)  VERSIONS REVIEWED: to position your totally crippled ship to sail past SPECTRUM/AMSTRAD/C64 firepower in the victory parade! it's a REVIEWER: TIM good idea to Gameplay is much the same simply on all versions after all Bing, bing, biiing! The sonar is spread you can't really change ticking away nicely but I still your much in such a simple haven't managed to pick up that shots concept. In fact sneaky sub, and it's bound to be ist's so simple lying in wait, ready to pick off it's brilliant my flagship aircraft carrier. Where Is the little **@? The tension mounts as another classic sea battle reaches its climax. Which fleet will emerge victorious? Who will survive to sail back to home base? Who'd of thought it could be done? That old school boy classic Battleships on computer. If anyone had told me that it was being done! would have had to smother a snigger or two. But the trouble truth is that Battleships TOOO XIT END NXI A SPECTRUM MOVE YOUR SHIPS C+VG HIT! gads V AMSTRAD Ams PLAYER C64 EFDUOD Battleships a 50 year old game! is simply horribly addictive. Play the computer, play a friend, play loads of friends in this updated strategy style offering based on the game you used to play with a couple of scraps of paper and pencils. Load up the game and you are presented with an options menu. This allows you to select GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY chances "


"Cassette .95 Don't buy another game until you v sted. Ekolon the scorching new space-play nit, from Hewson To rid the planet of deadly aliens. Vou are armed with a rocketNauncher disguised as a back pack -but the odds are loaded boainst you. With exploding birth pods, landmines, shattering grenades and rampacing icket guns you'll need all your skill to outwit the enemy but you do have the advantage of being able to change your level of protection giving you more power and speed at a touch Can you meet the challenge of Exolon? Cassette .95 Disc .95 Cassette .95 Disc .95 SPECTRUM  AMSTRAD  COMMODORE specimen signature. Don't forget to enclose your your Access Barclaycard number, and enclose a Consultants Ltd Order by Credit Card by sending For Mail Order send a cheque P.0 to Hewson name and address HEWSON Hewson, 56b Milton Trading Estate, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RX Hewson Consultants Ltd. As part of our continuing development of innovative software we are always happy to evaluate software sent to us with a view to publication "


"ATARIR COMMODORE SPECTRUM SPECTRUM WOOLWORTHS TOP 30 BARBARIAN  AMSTRAD MACHINE PRICE NINJA 9.99 9.99 9.99 COMMODORE DUET Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum | CBM Amstrad | CBM CBM CBM Spectrum Spectrum | Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum COMMODORE SPEERBOY AUGUST 1987 POSITION TITLE SOFTWARE HOUSE 1. Last Ninja System 3 Barbarian Palace 3. Enduro Racer Activision 4. Wonderboy Activision 5. 6 Pack Barbarian Palace Paperboy 6 Pock Elite Wonderboy Activision World Class Leaderboard U.S. Gold 11. Army Moves Ocean Word Games U.S. Gold Road Runner U.S. Gold F15 Strike Eagle Microprose Gauntlet U.S. Gold 16. Big 4 Durrell 17. Game Over Ocean Metro Cross U.S. Gold Road Runner U.S. Gold Leaderboard U.S. Gold Game Over Ocean 22. Living Daylights Domark 23. Trio Konami Coin Op Imagine Living Daylights Domark Trio Elite Paperboy Elite 28. Konami's Coin Op's Imagine 29. Quartet Activision 30. 6 Pack 9.95 9.99 8.95 9.95 9.99 9.99 7.95 8.99 8.99 9.95 NDER BEE 88888888888888888888888|| AMSTRAD Spectrum Spectrum | CBM Spectrum CBM Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum CBM ATARI ATARI 9.99 9.95 8.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 7.95 9.95 9.99 9.95 Spectrum | CBM |  Amstrad Elite ATARI WOOLWORTHS A Great Deal in Entertain SPECTRUM SPECTRUM Alseleded larger stores. Mastertronic games at 1.99 and .99 \"Items subject to avoilabilly COMMODORE SPECTRUM S AMSTRADE "


"Carch 2375 REVIEWS MACHINES: SPECTRUM/C64/ areas which have been mined. AMSTRAD You have been equipped with a SUPPLIER: MAR TECH mine detector which, if the PRICE: .95 (CASS) .95/ unfortunately your map shows batteries are not flat, will relay a (64/AMSTRAD DISCS)  VERSION REVIEWED: only a few of the principal signal to you head-up display. SPECTRUM shuttle routes. Any mines in your field of vision > REVIEWER: TIM There are a large variety of will be clearly visible to you. building types. Most of the The parachute drop has been There's only one catch in Catch buildings have been sealed by scheduled to coincide with a 23 and that's the fact that you the military, but not all. It is still moonless night. You have been need plenty of spare time to possible to enter and explore equipped with an advanced a large number of technicians play it. Catchis BIG! those which have been image enhancer which shows and scientists to help with the Martech have come up with a overlooked. Buildings which an accurate 3-D representation development of the CK 23. Very complex strategy/action game you can enter will have clearly of your world as you move few of these people were that will appeal to wargamers visible doors. within it. The SIE also has a recruited willingly, most having and fans of vector graphic Once inside a building it will sophisticated head-up display been blackmailed, threatened adventures like Elite and Cholo. be possible for you to identify which provides you with a or even kidnapped whilst Intelligence reports and its contents. You may also find constant update on your status attending a bogus conference. satellite pictures have batteries for the mine detector, and situation. Unkown to the enemy, confirmed the worst the explosives for making bombs You can also carry a seventeen of these scientists enemy's CK 23 orbital and spare ammunition clips. It maximum of three bombs. You organised themselves into a interceptor is operational. Able is worth making a record of have an unlimited supply of highly effective resistance to take off and land like any buildings which can be visited detonators and timers, but to movement, determined to conventional aircraft, the sabotage the enemy's plans. revolutionary CK 23 is also able coreo164 Unfortunately they were to escape the earth's discovered and were all gravitational pull and then evacutated. Their whereabouts achieve geo-stationary. are not known. There it can lie in wait, for However, intelligence weeks at a time, ready to blast sources have discovered that back into the atmosphere at each of the seventeen found a frightening speed to intercept deserted building and turned it and destroy enemy missiles or into their base. To enable them aircraft with its sophisticated to communicate with each missile and laser weaponry. other in secret they installed a The CK 23 test development computer terminal and site is the most secret military transmitter in each location. complex on earth. Hidden You have been provided with somewhere on a mountainous a brief descripttion of sixteen of and now deserted island, it is the seventeen scientists. The surrounded by deadly identity of the seventeenth minefields, high voltage electric scientist remains a mystery. fences and surveilance This information will help you cameras. The island itself is recognise which hideout you bristling with military activity, have located should you come from armed foot patrols to across a computer terminal/ roaming lethal armoured to obtain fresh supplies of these make replacement bombs you transmitter. Being able to vehicles. vital items. There are other must find buildings which correctly identify whose hideIt is your mission to explore things for you to discover about contain explosives. out you have discovered may the island and find the heart of some of these buildings. Your Compass Direction be a matter of life and death. the development complex. Once inside a building it will Indicators display the direction Computer TerminalOnce there you must steal the be possible for you to identify you are facing. They can also be Transmitters can be found in design of the CK 23 and then set its contents You may also find used to lock onto the location the hide-outs of each of the a time delay bomb in the batteries for the mine detector, from which radio transmissions scientists. To LOGON to the nuclear reactor. The explosion explosives for making bombs are being made. The direction system network you must enter which follows will devastate the and spare ammunition clips. It to the transmitter you have the correct password. entire island. is worth making a record of detected will be displayed in Once you are into the system, At the start of the game, you buildings which can be visited red. there are useful clues to be have just been dropped by to obtain fresh supplies of these Your Dangerometer displays discovered, if you can crack parachute. Where you actually vital items. a measure of the danger them. land will depend on the Armoured Vehicle Patrols assiociated with you current You can save the game to prevailing wind. The time is have set patrol routes. They will location. If it is high, the tape or disc, but only from a 2200 hours. Sunrise is at 0600 not deviate from these routes likelihood of your encountering safe House. If you find the word hours. This give you just eight unless they spot an intruder. a foot patrol is also high. For SAFE written on a wall, enter hours to complete your Your image enhancer allows example, if you set off a bomb investigate mode and identify mission. you to see armoured vehicles in a particular area, soldiers are the lettering. Whilst the enemy were from a distance from which likely to rush to investigate My only complaint is that it building the military complex, they are unable to see you. what happened. could just be too big. It takes a the villages were occupied by Foot Patrols are armed and, However, if you are elusive, lot of time to explore the game the civilian workforce. To assist like you they have been and keep a low profile, soldiers and discover its secrets. in rapid transport, a shuttle equipped with capable image are less likely to patrol your Catch 23 is a good looking, network was built which still enhancers. If you run into a foot immediate area. well produced and thoughtful criss-corsses the island. patrol and they see you it is too Keeping a close eye on your game. The shuttles run late to think of running away. Dangerometer and trying to automatically from one location Being accurate and quick on the discover what affects it, is of  GRAPHICS to another. By switching trigger is the only way you will immense importance. SOUND shuttles, it is possible to cover survive the inevitable shoot out. As well as the civilian VALUE lareg distances quickly, but The island has a number of workforce, the enemy recruited PLAYABILITY       O 00 "


"Game Over man  MACHINES: AMSTRAD/CBM/ you can pick up grenades on the crowded with elevators which SPECTRUM ground and a nifty time you'll take you from one floor to the SUPPLIER: IMAGINE have to avoid the mines if other. Once you're in one you PRICES: .95 SPECTRUM, .95 you're ever to get to the second mustn't move or you could die. AMSTRAD CPC/CBM, .95 There are also mines scattered world. AMSTRAD CPC/CBM DISK  VERSION REVIEWED: AMSTRAD The Planet Sckunn scrolls on the floor, and four more CPC vertically and horizontally, so types of aliens with which you'll REVIEWER: JOHN the game play's more difficult. have to deal. That said, your weapon, puny The aliens on this level shoot though it is on the first level, is fireballs and you need to hit A principal female character at upgraded so that it produces a them four or five times before last, but one, I suspect, never-ending stream of laser they're destroyednot a launched as a cassette wrapper power and will destroy difficult task with your super to appeal to the male eye. But laser. The Giant Guardian at the what's this? This woman, everything in its path. There are two stages to get end of the game, however, is named Gremla, is a cruel and through: The Forest and The another matter. Hitit 30 times powerful galactic ruler, a megaPalaces. In The Forest there are and its wings disappear, 15 villain to out-shine Darth Vader. lakes in which you'll drown as times and its body disappears, The hero, yes you've guessed it, is a man called Arkos. He was well a less-than-abundance of another 30 and its head aliens. Admittedly you do get a vanishes. It's a devil to destroy Gremla's faithful Lieutenant but creature called a Kaitas which and makes up for all the puny a sudden twinge of conscience takes two energy points from aliens in the other parts of the has turned him into a superyou when it hits you, but it can game. goodie, determined to defeat be downed with just one laser the megalomanic obsession of shot and doesn't represent his ex-boss. The final battle is AMSTRAD SPECTRUM much of a threat. played out on two levels and  GRAPHICS 5 The Palace screen is an ladders worlds, the first called SOUND improvement over The Forest, Planet Hypsis, the second  VALUE Schkunn. You must dash across but only marginally. It's PLAYABILITY 7 each, destroying Gremla's guardians on the way, and, on VCOMMODORE 64 the final screen, defeat the Giant Guardian. Hypsis is a horizontally scrolling world of 20 screens, peopled with five types of alien robots and another five types of objects. On the first screen you meet the small, floating laser shooters, robots that'll shoot straight for your head and drain your ever decreasing power unless you put four laser bolts into them. To offset their deadly effects, shoot at the Energy Heart cylinder, grab the heart SCOBE which floats away from its GATE remains and take on the energy OVER PLANET it contains. You'll need all that energy if you're to beat the second level which, when you first see it, you V SPECTRUM will think is unplayable. There are two level pads which move up and down in the middle of the screen. Jump to the first and then the second, but you must not hit the ground or you're turned into a mass of glittering vapour that floats away and that's a life lost. If you pass this screen you'll have seen and solved the play format for the rest of the game. The levels change colour blue to white-later in the game, and take on ladders in the middle of the map, but the method of moving from one end of the screen to the other is always the same. Only the guardian robots change. You soon encounter a massive guardian robot, a Dalek without an eyestick, which lobs huge AMSTRAD energy bolts at you. Don't bother to stay around and destroy it. Just run across the screen in the vain hope that you'll retain all of your energy. Next up are the green monsters which you find on the metal platform and stone bridge screens. They represent no threat that I could see, and don't even look pretty. To combat all these forces P LO  eitetett  1#una "


"IDÉWI/E S COGO Sidewize the ultimate shoot-em-up. Incredible weapon pick-up systems. awe-inspiring arcade action...\"Sidewize is the slickest, no messing shootout in a long, long time\" wrote Sinclair User..don't mess with the others, try messing with Sidewize. INCLAIR USED CLASSICA L FIREBIRD SPECTRUM CASSETTE $7.95 COMMODORE CASSETTE $8.95 COMMODORE DISK $12.95 SINCLAIR USER Firebird is o Registered trademark $ of British Telecommunications plc. Firebird Software First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford St. London WCIA IPS "


"C#VG  MACHINE: ATARI ST SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: JOHN Blitzkrieg REVIEWS Je ne The vine of life stretches long and far before you, oh withered one, but before you reach the Final Enlightenment on The Golden Path it will have been slashed by monsters and the grapes soured by the complex puzzles that face you. You are the newly initiated monk Y' in Hsi, whose father, the Emperor Tang Yin, was murdered by an evil warlord. Before he died he gave you a ring, containing his magical life force, and a scroll called The Book of Knowledge. Combined with your monkish command of the martial arts and help from a friendly hedgehog called Norman you're all set for the long road. Despite Firebird's claim of complex puzzles, the action set against highly detailed but gaudy backgrounds-takes the form of bashing brainless animals and defending yourself against sudden goblin attacks. The goblins-monkey-faced midgets in baggy trousers have an aversion to hedgehogs so, if you can catch him, Norm comes in handy on the first screens. You have to hold him in your hands though, because the pocket in your robe, which holds one object, won't take the prickly bundle and that's trouble when you want to pick up one of the other objects on the trail in a hurry. The puzzles are easily solved W na  MACHINE: CBM64 SUPPLIER: 39 STEPS ARIOLASOFT PRICE: .95 (cass) .95 (disc) REVIEWER: STEVEN Novelist Len Deighton wrote his factual history Blitzkrieg: from the Rise of Hitler to the Fall of Dunkirk in 1979, and this new game has only a passing connection with the book. Division 11 Pan Messages For one player only, taking -800270 Score the Germans against the lland has falle computer, it falls into two parts. In the first part the player may accept the computer's default setting for the strength and deployment of his forces, or create his own, expanding the historical number of panzer (armoured) divisions from eleven to a maximum of fifteen and changing their strength in tank and air support. STRONG DATK JW 7 COORD This scenario must then be saved to tape for later use. For AIR the second part these panzer GROWO 2 111 y: 09 divisions only are deployed on a map of Europe. At this point the game parts company sharply with history. The map shows sourthern England, northern France, the Low Countries, Denmark and Norway as unconquered on 1st May 1940. In reality the Scandanavian countries had been over-run the previous month. The object is to score at least 100,000 \"victory STATIS points\" which can be done without conquering France if Division. 3 Por is Britain falls to your invasion (a o coordinate 31. 12 Its current prders pretty absurd idea), but a country does not surrender Growd Strept) : 4 until all its cities have been occupied. Lorder : Guderi In the real war the Germans by-passed cities and played on political bluff as well as military skill to win victory. can be ordered to move is six The player can access the The player is given only the squares (there are 35 squares view from any divisional German panzer division as if the from the Rhine to Normandy) commander's tank to see what rest of the army didn't matter. most of the divisions spend a the problem is. The single A5 sheet of lot of time doing nothing, while there is even a happy instructions gives, for all it takes up to ten game days to marching tune to listen to while practical purposes, no tell a single division to do the driving over France. indication of how to play the obvious, like cross the river it But in providing all these frills game and the player must has come to. the game designer has lost discover for himself which key Nor is it clear from the map sight of the need for a clear, to press to get the part of the which division is where and simple, well-explained playing orders menu he wants. what direction it is travelling. mechanism, with a readable The most irritating feature is Care and attention have been map, and some attention to that although the game runs lavished on the non-map what really happened. very quickly from 1st May to graphics of this game, with 30th September in about 40 orders coming in mock German minutes GRAPHICS it does not pause scripts and a filing cabinet REALISM while orders are being issued. opening to provide the menu of VALUE Since the most any division orders and reports. PLAYABILITY ere eg ditacprders Stoupasengih Guderian MACHINES: ATARI/C64/ST/ AMIGA SUPPLIER: MICROPROSE FOR ORIGIN SYSTEMS PRICE: .95 (disk)  VERSION REVIEWED: C64 REVIEWER: STEVEN It is the year 2030 and law has broken down throughout the United States. Armed gangs patrol the main highways and any traditional means of communication between cities is impossible. Pickups and deliveries are made by couriers driving highly specialised and heavily armed and armoured cars, all under the strict regulations of the American Autoduel Association. You have arrived on the bus in New York with $2000 in your "


"C+VG REVIEWS 2 . QO0CM Golden path to do, apart from searching around screens for the randomly placed objects every time you load the game. The Golden Path is a superb package game with graphics and oriental soundtrack worthy of the ST combined with a 34-page mystic novella and two discs one for the monk's attributes and the other for the backgrounds. The gameplay, however, is disappointingly similar to the fighting fist mould of games and the puzzles are not strong enough to bless the but made artificially more old man and his hill may be that shrivels you've had it. The game with full-fledged difficult when the scenes are replaced by a next-to-naked hill only way to increase vine power adventure status. If Firebird had switched around on the game man who's after your blood, is to solve some puzzles and paid as much attention to plot map. The rosy apple may be on you'll have to store that apple in that means finding the use for as it has to graphics and sound, one screen and the hills with the your pocket in the hope that the fire tongs in the temple, the game might have been a hungry old man on the one to you'll stumble upon the old finding a way to ford a sacred success. the right. It's easy enough to man fairly soon. river and find the stick of yellow  GRAPHICS drop the apple at the old man's Combat encounters take you incense. Once you know which SOUND feet and wait for your reward. further along to Path but drain object and character goes VALUE When you reload the game, the the energy from your life vine. If together there's not much more PLAYABILITY Ho-Duel 2 CITI Power Plant 08 Driver 06 Paused. ASSEMBLY I SALVA NITRUCK STOP CANCE pocket, enough to buy a suit of body armour but not a car. You volunteer for amateur night in the Autoduel Arena, and of the five contestants only you come out alive. After a few more nights of this you have enough for a car and you start taking courier missions. You may even get rich enough to afford a clone to take over for the day when another courier or a bandit finally gets you. It's a short life, but it's a living. If you think this isn't a wargame, just try playing it! It has its origins in the Car Wars by boardgame Steve Jackson and its roots in the Mad Max films. A considerable amount of luck is required to survive at first, but a character can be saved to disk for a continued life and exploits. The real problem comes in selecting your particular carwill you be a killer rabbit or a Kali turtle?and the courier missions you will undertake. A real coward can just catch the bus to Atlantic City and try to get rich playing poker but if you ask me the game is fixed! Auto-Duel has created a varied, ingenious and entirely believable world in which it is possible to lose yourself for hours. If anyone wants me, I'll be in Joe's Bar in Pittsburgh and open to any reasonable offer. GRAPHICS REALISM C+VG  VALUE HIT! PLAYABILITY CROSS 000 43 "


"GET INTO CRIME! In the late 1990's the streets of New York are a jungle. You are the ice cool leader of a gang of drug crazed terrorists. Your main goal is to become the richest, toughest and most notorious gang in the city. DARE YOU FREE OFFER PLAY..... D2 FREE! SEND YOUR NAME AND ADDRESS TODAY FOR YOUR FREE TRIAL OF IT'S A CRIME THE WORLDS MOST POPULAR PLAY-BY-MAIL GAME Write to: KJC GAMES, PO BOX 11, CLEVELEYS, BLACKPOOL, LANCS FY5 2UL. "


" MACHINE: C64  SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: JOHN Hot C+VG Harry Johns, ex-football star, adventurer and walking advert for dental floss has been stranded on an island with only the diabolical Dr Graves and his mutant carnival for company. The island is a prison for the mad doctor's latest creations but is also haunted by the dead ancestors of his victims, who people the houses and castles REVIEWS 88888888 30 18\" Scaryo Monsters Frankies and Dracs, doesn't seem so appealing. There is no menace as great as looming boredom!  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY on the island. You start the story on an overhead view of the island. Move your pin-man representation of Harry Johns around until you come to a building which you enter by going in the front door. One of them will contain your lost love Conny, who's been kidnapped by Graves, but first you'll have to pass the hoardes of witches, Frankenstein monsters and ghosts. The building interiors consist of stairways, bannisters and landings. You can leave at any time you want but, if you want easy enough if you keep your are easy to get through or to finish the game, you'll plod finger on fire. Leave by the left escape. The only aspect of the on. side of the screen and wander game which makes it a long The one interior design in the the map again. Your lady friend player is the massive size of the game is shared by all the could be held in any one of the map. It's a pity that there's no houses and castles, but there castles, houses and manors on save game option available are three levels to it which you the island and a good many of because you'll probably give up can reach by jumping onto them are protected by mazes, long before you've found stairs, bannisters and even bridges and one way entrances. Conny. Suddenly her rescue, some statues that depict Again, the mazes and other and the thought of bravely Frankie, Drac and the Mummie. more natural protection devices battling all those witches, Monsters drift across all these levels but you can hit any of them with plasma energy that fires continually, and will point in any of the eight compass directions.\" Alternatively you can press fire and pull the joystick down to neutralise all the supernatural forces on a screen. Harry faces front and his hands flash out as he casts a double, clammy, wammy spell. You've only got six of those, and three lives, so you'd better watch what your doing. If you get too close to a monster it'll bounce you around with some of that ectoplasmic force, at the same time draining your energy and, if you're caught by several other ghouls on the rebound, you'll be well and truly done. Just duck to avoid them, and don't jump around the levels too much. Unfortunately, it's that easy. Once you've played out one house don't hang around to bump up your high score Elitetind "


"C+VG REVIEWS 414H444  MACHINES: C64/SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD  SUPPLIER: CRL PRICE: .95 TAPE .95 (DISC)  VERSION REVIEWED: C64 REVIEWER: TIM SCORE HELTRON I always wanted a train set. But never got one. But I guess the next thing could be Traxxiona sort of computerised train set with added blasting. You find yourself rumbling around in a tank on tracks, within a giant nuclear reactor Traxxion ERILO SCORE HELTDOWN which is about to go terminally cars in the vicinity, on impact have no more left for that car. other hazards apart from the critical with any object. Your car has Watch your BRK and JET points some sections move You must find your way to the been equipped with a shield to counters, as although they randomly leaving you nowhere exit before the faulty reactor reflect the destructive energy of reiuvenate with time, these may to go if you've used up all your melts down the resulting the Electrostatic Disintegrators. run out on you just when you EMIs. Some routes lead to explosion will destroy. The teleports once entered by need them. dead-ends-others get you To escape you must negotiate your car, will automatically W hen possible, always shoot stuck in seemingly endless crossroads, sliding platforms, teleport you to another part of the Electrostatic Disintegrators loops. points, and many other hazards. the map. and Fuel Caps, to destroy all Traxxion is a HUGE game and To change the points you must Your screen display goes like other cars in the vicinty and to reasonably addictive tooshoot the flashing controller this. On the bottom panel you gain extra time respectively. although after a while playing it next to the points. will see your score, and the time But above all, aim for the you might just start thinking You can also reverse the to meltdown clearly depicted, in teleports, this means you're \"What's the point?\". But then direction in which you are large LED numbers. heading in the right direction. life's like that, isn't it?! travelling by hitting F7, this The TP number is the number The key to Traxxion is All the same, it should keep uses up one of your limited of the next teleport which you working out the quickest route you occupied for some time. supply of Electro Magnetic must head for. to the teleports and being able Inverters (EMI). The small cars are the cars to hit the points with a well  GRAPHICS Running off the points or you have remaining, the Electro aimed shot just when you want SOUND crossroads, hitting obstacles Magnetic Inverters remaining, to change direction.  VALUE PLAYABILITY (road blocks and other cars, the JET temperature, and the The track presents many both of which can be shot), or brake (BRK) temperature. hitting a dead end is fatal, The last two, on reaching the costing you one of your three maximum, stop your car from craft. Other points of interest to accelerating and braking note are the Fuel Caps, the respectively, until their Electrostatic Disintegrators, and temperatures are out of the the teleports. white areas. The Fuel Caps are the tops of When starting out, always the fuel rods that fuel the travel slowly, to get the hang of reactor. These are exposed for the game, and to get acquainted easy refuelling. If these are with the map. shot, the time to meltdown will When approaching points, suddenly be increased, as there crossroads, and sliding is now less fuel to melt down. sections, always reduce speed; The Electrostatic these are tricky to get used to! D DJ.. Disintegrators are a security Be very sparing with your system installed to destroy all EMiswhen these run out you El 4 TP16 DJET 11 SCORE en LE BRR HELTDOWN "


"TATNI olhe perilsploding op die The banlogg ersvillac Abu-sah Wonder as the recrless expoits carry them cross sin boked deserts and througpalm strewny Towns in search of adventure and Abu Bahl's dayroll Alaihis heroism and son will be availabsor Your Spectrum, Commodoro and Amido (costite , disc l 295), dl dlliceod computer steigs soon FIREBIRD "


"FAN THE WORDT GREATEST COMIE AAGAZINE Welcome to a new column that will tell you what's hot in the wonderful world of comics. Phillip Morton begins with something that if there's any justice at all will be extremely hot. Fantastic Four SAGA OF THE SWAMP THING.. Once upon a time there was a scientist named Alex Holland. An experiment of his was sabotaged and in the resulting explosion the mixture of chemicals and swamp slime turned Holland (the man, not the country) into a walking, thinking muck-heap called, appropriately, the Swamp Thing. Though he looked like a monster, his behaviour was civilised enough. But, this being the early '70s, a time when horror/mystery comics underwent something of a revival, he inevitably came into conflict with a number of weird (and not always wonderful) creatures. The 18-issue run of Swamp Thing's original comic was distinguished mainly by the exquisite artwork of Berni Wrightson and Nestor Redondo. End of story--for ten years or so, anyway. With the movie rights to Swampy sold (the film proved to be less than a blockbuster), DC revived Swamp Thing's comic fans. But Moore is probably the first writer-superstar. And it's largely on his Swamp Thing scripts that his reputation has been built. He has a unique knack of spinning an intriguing, thoughtful tale without losing touch with those readers who are looking for action and horror. He probes more deeply into the nature of fear than almost any other writer, in comics or anywhere else. Moore's first masterstroke on Swamp Thing was to literally take the character apart, revealing him to be more plant than human. Since then, for over 40 monthly issues, he has explored the sometimes horrifying ramifications of this, usually aided by the atmospheric artwork of Steve Bissette and John Totleben. Which brings us to Swamp Thing books one and two the beginning of a series from Titan Books, reprinting the expensive, hard-tocomic, with pleasingly intricate artwork, mostly by graduates of the Joe Kubert school of cartooning. Unfortunately, this new beginning was marred by scripts which were strictly Tedium City. Until the arrival of one Alan Moore, that is There have been superstar artists and superstar writer/ artists in American comics for as long as there have been 1 9 find early Moore issues of \"the Swamp Thing monthly comic. There's not much to say about the transition to book form, except that the stories are more satisfying without a one-month gap between chapters, and that the woodcut-style artwork looks better in crisp black and white than in muddy bog-paper colour. In short, highly recommended. Volumes one and two are now available from bookshops and comic shops, priced .95. MARVEL MAGIC REVISITED Looking for a taste of what made Marvel Comics great in the mid-60s? Look no further than current issues of Fantastic Four, on distribution here at 40p. Steve Englehart's scripts perfectly capture the flavour of the comic's Lee/Kirby heyday -which means the stories concern relationships within the group as much as Dr Doom's plans for world domination. This is a different Fantastic Four, though-gone (temporarily) are Mr and Mrs Fantastic, replaced by ... well, buy it and see. You won't be disappointed. "


"TASY SUP There's so much to choose from nowadays: British weeklies, American monthlies, Continental albums and various hybrids that cut across such categories. One that's right at the cutting edge is Escape, a beautifully designed and always interesting mixture of new avant-garde strips and worldwide comics news. It comes out every two months and costs .95 (cheap!) from comic shops. If you're looking for more frequent news updates ... well, there's always this column! But for an even wider range of interesting stuff about US and UK comics, try Speakeasy. It's .00 for 12 issues, from Acme Press Ltd, 5-9 Beadon Road, London W6 OAE. ESCAPE Jim first made robots in the late 70s and has since supplied automata for Herbie Hancock's video Rocket and a bunch of television adverts. He's always endeavoured to depict some human parody. One of his early works called The Pyramid Men showed City gents in suits and bowlers climbing the \"social pyramid\". Every time one neared the top, it fell off. Men Flying adorned the top of the National Theatre at the South Bank Arts complex. This \"sculpture\" showed a series of blue men flying around on the ends of pendulums. Another work comprised of a series of mobile men's suits that followed each other about like some loony City gents obsessed with chasing each other all day long. The simplicity of Whiting's work is what makes them so appealing. Most are hilarious they're cartoon caricatures which leave us in little doubt as to their human origins. Other robots at his \"unnatural bodies\" plant in Hackney are leaming more subtle skills, With help from small video cameras, infra-red sensors and opto-electronic devics, these robots are learning to react to humans. One will smile at you if you smile; another will pull a face if you don't Jim sees his robots as great potential entertainers of the future. His latest work, exhibited during June at an art gallery in Hamburg, is a whole environment a house, with several rooms and several robots. Last year Whiting took his mechanical zoo to the Limelight Club in New York. Of his experiences he said: \"The public loved it but the management tried to rip me off. I ended up losing money on it.\" Next time, perhaps, he'll have a mechanical bodyguard ready to deal with unscrupulous managers. Ilpm. \"It's a party!\" Charlie yanks us out to Hackney in the Cortina for a look at the zoo. Hidden in a warehouse near Clapton Pond we found the most amazing menageire of computer-controlled creatures. Really dark in here. Sudden groan of an engine, sharp hissing and beams spray from flashlights connected to rubber hoses, all twisting in rhythm with the enormous compressed air lung parked out back. LOOK OUT! A suspended pair of banker's trousers activate, nearly kicking our heads! Around the corner mannequin legs climb a steel staircase, just behind us a rubber-headed, three piece family motor in a customised mini Mini while another threesome, with vice-gripped claws, methodically clamber within a cage. Hmmmmm. The constructions are very nearly life-like but all seem in some way dangerously distorted, comedic performance artists. Mechanical maestro this evening, off to a dark corner, is the exceedingly tired-looking Jim Whiting. READ ABOUT THE WORLD OF COMICS IN ONLY 50p BRITAIN'S NO.1 COMICS NEWSPAPER SHOOTER EXCLUSIVE 4 WINDS WASTELAND BYRNE'S THE STARBRAND 2000 AD'S ZENITH "


"PUT STARS IN YOUR EYES WITH STAR GAMES A ENCOUNTER SPECTRUM ballblazer LUCASFILM GAMES On Spt in      CYBER UNS UN DEBIDOLONS TESFILM GAME TRAILBLAZER A dazzling collection of famous hits bursting with action and excitement. Forget that bored glaze from playing inferior games over and over again. Here's six times the fun for the price of one! 6 GREATGAMES FOR -99 Available on CBM 64/128, Amstrad and Spectrum 48/128K* (CBM 64/128 Disk -99) Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd. Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS, tel: (0742) 753423 "


"1: The Bio Screen My name's Street ... Ward R Street, and I'm or worry about army licensed to spill the beans on the films that regulations. There are racial tensions but basically they leave you shaken and stirred! know you're in for a sleeek, could be any place, any time. OND is back, twenty KGB agent who posed as a suspenseful, stylish time. But they're not just five years and fifteen concert cellist to try to kill Detective Roger Murtaugh anywhere. They're in the films older, now in his him may be a concert cellist (Danny Glover), celebrating heat of a country where fourth incarnation as after all... But where does his fiftieth birthday, would death can come at any time, wrinkles overtake mortal that leave the American rather not share this scene, and ahead of them lies a actors. But the big question arms dealer? Carry on like especially when he's saddled heavily defended hill. To is whether the cracks are this and we'll be in the with Martin Riggs (Gibson) take it they will face showing in The Living realms of Le Carre, not as his assistant. The Lethal constant bombardment, mud Daylights (PG) Fleming. Weapon of the title isn't a which makes climbing A lot was made of old There's no need to worry gun... it's this possibly impossible, even being shot Moore's inability to act with though. At one point the psychotic, probably suicidal, at by their own helicopters. action stops so that 007 can Vietnam veteran who True to his documentary explain it all to us, then it's nobody wants to work with training, director John Irvin back to the shooting and There's nothing in Riggs' gets into the action, to record bombing and crashing a behaviour to suggest that it in all its unbelievably gory plane into a cliff. The only he'll even see his next horror as if it was happening thing that's missing is the birthday, and it looks like for real. Heads are blown kitchen sink, presumably he's deterimined to take apart before your eyes and because Q was fitting it with Murtaugh which him, but bits of bodies are pulled a laser to nix anybody who eventually an uneasy peace down from the trees. skives off washing up! develops between the two But while Hamburger And that's the movie's men as they discover that Hill celebrates the courage main failing. While it rolls the girl's death wasn't an of these young soldiers, it along at a rattling pace to accident but is linked to a chooses not to take a moral start with, switching from mammoth drug dealing or political view of conflict in Gibralter to Vienna, for a operation run with military chilling chase through the precision by a gang of snow, then soaring off to ruthless commandos. Morocco, by the time Bond At times extremely funny, and the cellist, played by the at others brutally tough, incredibly beautiful Maryam Lethal Weapon piles on the d'Abo, encounter an Oxfordpressure and keeps you so educated Afghan rebel involved that you never leader you may well feel that really question its highly the movie has lost its way. unlikely plot... and the last There are sequences which twenty minutes are so tense are classic 007, but a more you'll hardly dare breathe. LIVING DAYLIGHTS. ruthless approach when it Despite its fierce and fast anything other than his came to cutting the script action and references to eyebrow, but he also used his could have made for a more Vietnam, Lethal Weapon is a tongue, which he kept firmly effective whole. Timothy fairy-tale compared with the in his cheek. He was licensed Dalton is extremely athletic true horrors of death in to quip as well as kill, and it's not his fault the South East Asia. Platoon Timothy Dalton's new look script is rather flabby. So pricked America's Bond is more serious about welcome back, James... but conscience; now there's a his double-o responsbilities. keep an eye on those writers. The film's not without its We expect even better things who experienced 'Nam while humorous moments, such as of you next time. shooting a documentary. a deadly milkman whose However dire the Hill 937, another number pintas would make your Rice situation, you can be sure on a military map, doesn't Crispies go with a real bang, that James Bond will tell you much about the ten but Dalton treats the survive. The same can't be day battle to capture it, but A HAMBURGER HILL. superhero spy as a real said of Mel Gibson in Lethal the men who were chewed up which America should never person. This is the Bond of Weapon (18), a police like so much meat is have been involved. It isn't Goldfinger rather than thriller that packs a punch commemorated in its enough to say that war is Moonraker. like a .44 Magnum. nickname, Hamburger Hill hell. We need to know how With the new 007 comes From the opening (18). this waste of life happened, new complexity, as double sequence, when a camera The film follows the so that we can make sure it and treble crosses abound. soars around Los Angeles, fortunes of Company B, 3/ never happens again. There's the Russian defector, finally alighting on a girl in 187th, who suffered 70% From insanity off one kind who reveals a plot by a rogue a penthouse flat, just in time casualties in the assault, to insanity of another, Russian general to kill to witness her take a dive introducing them as a namely Pee-Wee's Big Western spies, only he may and put one almighty dent in regular bunch of guys who Adventure, a film so not be a defector and the the roof of a parked car, you dream about cars and women innocent that it carries a U 00000000 "


"The Big Screen 0000000000000000000000000000000 Frankly I found little to laugh at in this undoubtedly wacky adventure, but it could be that Ward is just an old grouch. I know lots of people who love Mr Herman. All I can suggest is that if you find the likes of Jerry A BLIND DATE. Lewis a laugh-riot, give him resembles. spectacular. a try... But don't say I Even less subtle is Mr The Magic Toyshop (15) didn't warn you if you just Jolly Lives Next Door, half of is another television film, cringe. a double bill from the Comic but like Company of Wolves, At least I prefer the totally Strip (15). The difference is which was also based on an surreal antics of Pee-Wee to that at one point I almost Angela Carter story, it's the tired old routines of washed out my contact been made for initial cinema Blind Date (15). For a man lenses with tears of laughter release. who scored such a success The scene in question is There's plenty of magic in with the Pink Panther series, set in the Dorchester where this toyshop but it's not the A HAMBURGER HILL. Blake Edwards Ade Edmonson tries to sort of place you'd take a certificate. Its star, a Mr demonstrates a total lack of amuse Nicholas Parsons by child. Angela Carter's Pee-Wee Herman, has 'cult' talen for comic timing. trying to light his own speciality is finding all that's written all over his highly sinister in fairy tales, then made-up face. In the States spinning miraculous yarns he's already the biggest full of cruelty and dark thing since the last big psychology with it. thing This one concerns Pee-Wee lives in a house Melanie, who destroys her designed by an architect who mother's wedding dress and was into late toy-town, and causes the death of her filled with such parents. She's taken, along connoisseur's tat as a with her brother and sister, breakfast making machine to live with their mysterious and a hand painted dog. But A BLIND DATE. Uncle Philip, a tyrant who makes life-sized puppets how shall I put it?natural which perform in plays gas. It stars Edmonson and before an audience Rik Mayall as two chronic consisting of his bullied alcoholics who make The family. Young Ones look couth. Its partner in crime is Didn't You Kill My Brother, Alexei Sayle's satirical look at what happens when a notorious gangster, one of the dreaded Moss Brothers, tries to go straight. Jolly is childishly hilarious, Brother is more thoughtful, but the most interesting thing about the two is that the last a little over fifty minutes each. Whether audiences will rush A PEE-WEE'S BIG ADVENTURE. to see two episodes from a A MAGIC TOYSHOP. forthcoming TV series I'm The film is about his most treasured Bruce Willis of not sure. But I'd rather have Melanie's battle against the possession is his bike, an Moonlighting is the two hours of concentrated wicked uncle and it's a clever unfortunate executive who's humour that leave you journey into the darker side fantasy, and when it's stolen fixed up with Kim Basinger. yearning for more than some of childhood, by turns he cannot rest until it's Like some variation on the draggy Hollywood chilling and funny. found famous Gremlins warning, A MAGIC TOYSHOP. Somehow this grown man, he's instructed not to let her who acts like your worst drink. He does and, like nightmare bratty kid and some yuppie gremlin, she dresses in a suit that's so causes chaos wherever she tight it could explain his goes. high-pitched nasal whine, is Perhaps Edwards realised a star. The Americans adore that he'd been landed with a him, reinforcing some things dog when he accepted a date I've always feared about our with this script, which looks trans-Atlantic cousins. But middle-aged and tame when will Pee-Wee seduce the compared with Something Brits? Wild, which it vaguely 53 IIIIIIIIIII "


"STRATEGY MIRROR ADVENTURE SIMULATION FANTASY BALANCE OF POWER ARRIE of the Town IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII0000000 ire BERMUDA PROTECT MIRRORSOS oss Submarine Simulation WWII GATO 1. ORBITER COMING SOON The most accurate space shuttle simulation available, taking you from launch to landing.. and every possible hazard in between 8. SPITFIRE 40 COMING SOON Fly the most famous warplane of all and save your flight log. Rise through the ranks of the RAF towards the coveted title of Group Captain, DSO, DFC, VC. .95 2. BALANCE OF POWER \"Balance of Power is simply the best strategy game out on the ST. Popular Computing Weekly. .95 5. DEFENDER OF THE CROWN COMING SOON Defender of the Crown brings back all the romance, action, thrills and adventures of the days of chivalry. .95 The publishers reserve the right to alter prices and specifications without notice. Please check prices and availability before ordering. 3. STRIKE FORCE HARRIER The most realistic simulation yet of flight and combat in one of Britain's most exciting fighter planes. $24.95 6. BERMUDA PROJECT COMING SOON Danger and adventure in the mysterious Bermuda Triangle. MIRROR Soft 4. GATO Take command of a GATO class World War Il submarine in this award-winning simulation. .95 7. SDI the screen burns with forbidden passion and global war! .95 Mirrorsoft Limited Athene House, 66-73 Shoe Lane, London EC4P 4AB Telephone: 01 377 4645. Fax: 01-353 0565 | Telex: 9312100112 "


"How many adventure writers have actually encountered a fire-breathing dragon or a horribly beweaponed Orc? About none, we reckon. But the creator of Police Quest, Jim Walls, is a veteran of the California Highway Patrol, so he's seen many of the events featured in his new adventure at first hand. Marshal M. Rosenthal gives you the briefing. POLIC s Police Quest just another programmer's idea of what a cop is like? No way! The story comes direct from the pen of Jim Walls, a 15year veteran of the California Highway patrol. \"People think that a cop's life is like the afterwards about right and wrong, but making decisions on the spot is part and parcel of the job. Consider the routine. You have to take care of so many things, from checking your equipment and patrol car, to dealing with ordinary citizens and their everyday shows they see on the the car, aiming a .357 TV,\" says Walls. \"Either it's magnum at me and car chases and shoot POW! my windshield outs, or endless days of disintegrates. Glass is writing traffic tickets. flying everywhere but, \"The truth is amazingly, I'm not hurt. somewhere in \"Even more amazing between is that the guy's car now \"Often it's just simple starts to roll and it gets routine -the stuff of his attention. He forgets everyday life. What about me, runs after the makes being a cop so car and jumps into it Please, I beg you officer. If you would just give me a warning May hy we could get to know each other better. difficult is the and drives off. I'm still on the force. It's uncertainty, the fact sitting there, all is calm, realistic. that things can change and the whole event \"Things happen to from one moment to hasn't taken more than you, you develop the next 30 SECONDS! emotional reactions to \"For instance, I saw \"That kind of the work and the this car run a red light. I uncertainty changes various charcters you hit the siren and you, it can't be meet on the street. This motioned the car over. described,\" notes Walls. influences what you do The guy refused to stop, \"Police Quest is my first and how you go about sped up, and now I was story, almost a doing it. in pursuit. compilation of my time \"It's easy to talk \"After a few minutes of giving chase (first calling it in on the radio for a backup), he comes to a dead stop right in the middle of traffic. I slam on the brakes and skid to a stop some six feet behind him. \"Before I know what's happening, he's out of tensions and problems \"It's no bed of roses, believe me, because it's the real world. People can get shot and die. A world that can be all sweetness and light, and then turn vicious and cruel. \"You're police officer Sonny Bonds, serving the small but affluent "


"CE QUEST town of Lytton, California. A slower pace than a big city, but not a bad life. Hardly any real trouble to speak of. Peaceful. \"But now a drug dealer, nicknamed the Death Angel, is moving in and spreading his filthy wares. Crime is going up — things are HOW OUR PICTURE STORY WAS MADE Too Many Dames owes its high-tech look to a number of interesting. technical procedures. A story board kept all of the action in sync, and the colour slides of the models are now digitised using Digi-View Software. these image files are turned into Deluxe Paint 2 A 3-D priority effect brushes, sized and allows characters to positioned onscreen. A big advantage with move both in front of using the Amiga and behind objects, as computer is that 32 well as other people, shades of grey can be Do you have what it reproduced in the takes to keep the Interlace mode, allowing streets safe? a very detailed and realistic black and white Author's bio: Marshal M. image. Rosenthal is a New Now, how do we get the York-based dialogue onscreen? Since Quest series. That means animated characters you interact with besides controlling onesound effects, puzzles to solve, and keyboard / joystick control the keyboard comes in handy when it's time to do something, or speak to someone. photographer, and reasonably lawabiding citizen. He also writes on computers, video and high-tech fo a number of domestic and overseas publications. Production Information: Police Quest: Sierra Online, Coarsegold, California. POLICE QUES IN PURSEHE DEAT (C) 1987 \" Shine. starting to explode. Colonial There's a lot of bad stuff going down.\" Interactive adventures require you to participate, not lean back and be given the answers. Police Quest continues Sierra Online's tradition pioneered by the King's the standard Amiga fonts are too big, this problem is quickly solved by using The Calligrapher, a programme that creates and edits fonts as small as 1x1 pixel! The finished eight screens are bundled into four pages (two screens per page stacked vertically), and sent to the ImageSet Corporation. "


"HANDS UP! SORRY, NIEVER GIVE OUT THE NAMES OF THE YOUNG LADIES STAYING AT MY HO TEL. + GREY BAY NEW YORK OH YEH? OUT! AFTER I'VE HAD A QUICK LOOK-SEE SISTER. ANG! BA THERE WHITE STUFF ALL OVER HIS FINGERNAILS. POLICE? MADAME LAF ANGE THERE-S BEEN A MURDER. SEND YOUR BEST MAN. GIVE ME SOME SLACK, OKAY LADY HMM, SMUDGE ON THE GUN BARREL THERE GOES MY QUIET NIGHT "


"Will H  IHOOMI HOM S SILLY MURDER MAKING ME LATE THE THEATRE. -  GETTING ALL SMEAREDT ACHOO! EASE ON THAT TALCUM POWDER, WILL YOU? OH, NO SIR. I'VE BEEN HERE ALL DAY WATERING THE PLANTS. THEY'RE MY FRIENDS. SORRY SASEEN OUT HAVEN'T BEENA LIPS OF BED ALL DAY. sooo COFFEE HASA THIS FOLDER JUST ARRIVED FOR YOU FROM HEADQUARTERS YEH, THIS INFO CONFIRMS   THOUGHT. LAFANGE, GET EVERYBODY IN HERE E TIL "


"LISTEN UP. THE DEAD GUY WAS A DOPE DEALER NAMED HE USED SLICK  E THE DELIVERIES, BUT ONE RIPPED HIM OFF LAST WEEK OF 108 GRAND AND SCRAMMED. BETTER BE MORE CAREFUL  LET IN NEXT TIME, LAF ANGE LITTL FLOWER-CHILD HASN'T THE SMARTS  HV DONE THE JOB. ALL I UNCOVERED ABOUT LADY GODIVA HERE IS THAT SHE HASN'T STIRRED FROM HER ROOM FOR THE LAST TWO WEEKS. THAT LETS HER OFF THE HOOK MOVVOC SPEAKING VERING "


"ter HAV CHEETZ COULD FOOLED IF HIS HAD DISGUISED HERSELF HE NEVER HOUGHT F MAKEUP AND OTHER TRICKS. : POWDER ON CHEETZ-SN AND THE GUN WERE THE SAME : TALC! YOU WERE PRETTY CLEVER. BUT YOUR BIGGEST MISTAKE. WAS GETTING TALC ON YOUR REAL HAIR! SHE WOULD GO AND FAINT. I SAW THE WHITE STRANDS ON THE COMB. s OH WELL, JUST 5 MORE YEARS TILL RETIRE. WRITTEN PRODUCED AND PHOTOGRAPHED BY: MARSHAL M. ROSENTHAL he End LAYOUT-L.VOLPE ART -M.WAXMAN FEATURING: B.FEAMANI. GONZALEZ D.RATTIGAN F.ROSENTHAL J.SALMOND/C. ZACHARIA tech aid-S.Storozum "


"BANGKOK «PROBABLY THE BEST CARTOON GAME OF THE YEAR 1ACTUAL CBM 64 SCREENS Commodore 64/128 cassette (.99), disk (.99), Spectrum 48K/128K (.99) and Atari ST (124.99), System 3, 23, Pond Street, Hampstead, London NW3 2PN. 01 438 8448 Mail Order: Activision (UK) Ltd. Units & 4 Lloyds Close Finedon Rd, Industrial Estate, Wellingborough NN 4FR Distributed by Activision (UK) Ltd. "


"KNIGHTS no .99). "


"TWO NEW SPORTS SIMULATIONS FROM  IT'S TOUGH ON THE STREETS STREET SPORTS BASEBALL The Pitcher winds, throws, cracklits a long fly ball to... bang... right into the catcher's mitt. To make a home run you'll have to cope with makeshit diamond bases, made from sparetyres and trashcans, bushes, rocks even their own personalities and skills in pitching, hitting and Squealing cars. Not to mention 16 neighbourhood players each with fielding. With the right combination you could be the champs. With the wrong combination the chumps. CBM64/128 You'll pick the place, the team, the positions, the strategy and then you'll be in the middle of it all. It won't be easy but it's right up your street! .99 cassette .99 disk between la 12 8 CETTES INITE 5 orahom NEIGHBOURHOOD BACK LOTS. HERE'S YOUR CHANCE TO JOIN IN AND MAKE YOUR TEAM THE CHAMPIONS! SOME OF THE MOST THRILLING AND ACTION PACKED BASKETBALL AND BASEBALL GAMES TAKE PLACE ON AMERICA'S STREET CORNERS AND STREET SPORT BASKETBALL You'll shoot hoops in dingy alleys, playgrounds, parking lots, occasionally even the suburbs have fun dribbling on the lawn). You'll pick your thret-strong team from the 10 toughest players in the neighbourhood. There's hot shooters and slow dribblers. Team players and show offs. There's guys who can shoot the eye out of a needle at 20 feet and guys who couldn't sink one if they were sitting on the backboard. Pass on the run, popem in from the corners, take a hookshot, a tip in. But don't dribble through the oil slick and for heavens sake watch out for the windows CBM64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk Coming Soon U.S. Epyx GOLD A U.S. Gold Led Units 2/3 Holford Way. Holford, Birmingham 6 TAXTel: (021) 356 3330 CS "


"Well, at last it's here! No, I don't mean the new games consols from Sega and Nintendo. Nor do I mean those Photon Laser Guns that the guys in the office keep having battles with. I mean summer. Hasn't it been great. Blue skies, brilliant sunshine, lunch in the park. No wonder it took me all week to get round to writing these pages this month. But, with big, bad St. John breathing down my neck, had no choice. So, here it is. Enjoy it. THE LAST NINJA HINTS AND TIPS The first person to write in with and pick up the staff. When left, down left, put weapons right, take rose to the white tips for System 3's Last Ninja you come to the stone away, use rope and climb vase, up right, use the bottle is lan Walker of Leicester. dragons, if you still have the ladder. on the lion. You use it like you Follow his advice and you Ninja magic, you will cross Section five-go up, keep used the stars. Up right. A shouldn't have too many over into the third section, if following path until there is a good tip here is if you are low problems. not you will fry!! split. Pick up the apple use the on energy and you see an On the first screen, collect Section three go up and apple, collect the apple, go off stars, smoke bombs, a sword, then down. Collect stars, keep Down right, down right, now the screen and get beaten up nunchuckas and an apple and going till you come to the walk up to the statue. Go (!!) come to the apple and a bag. Don't bother jumping water. Line yourself up with round him-keep close, but, collect again on section six. the water, as you can walk the first stone and jump right beware. Up right, take the Here there is a sort of canon. If round it. When you get to the and up and jump out of the flower to the big grey pot, you touch it you fly out the dragon use a smoke bomb on screen. Jump right and right down left, down right, up right. screen. Also try walking up to him. again, then forward. If you Section six -Now it get's the telescope. And this is as Screen two-collect the keep going you will come to a hard! Up left, up right, collect far as lan has got any one claw from the lion in the same buddha wearing a pendant. bottle, down left, up left, up got the rest of the solution? screen, keep going until you Take the pendant and go come to a wall. Put all back, now go up keep going weapons away and use the that way and you will claw to climb the wall. Use eventually come to the flower. stars on the mountain part-it Pick up the flower wearing the From a bunch of guys who call receive an extra man. Here is saves time. Collect the apple glove. Carry on until you come themselves the K.I.D. hackers a list of your destinations from from the cave. When you to a little lake. You will notice a we have some hints and tips the airports. come to a wall going down put bit sticking out on each side of for Auf Wiedersen Monty. Take the football from Spain Airport Spain Paris, Paris and walk backwards. Keep and jump, pushing upwards. to Juventus in Italy. To use the Antwerp, Belgium going right until you come to When you come to the buddha the ski lift get the tools from Bonn. Antwerp, Luxembourg Take the bottle of wine from Amsterdam, Airport Spain the water. On the stones, jump give him the pendant. France to Dortmund. Take the Bonn, W Germany W onto the third one. When you Section four-walk forward steering from Sweden to Berlin, W Berlin Berlin, E are on the stone jump right and drop through the floor. Monaco. Take the cork to the Berlin Airport Yugoslavia, and up again. The Ninja magic The next bit is like a maze, so man in Amsterdam. He will Airport Yugoslavia Rome, is behind a rock, don't touch it follow these instructions give you some flowers, takeItaly, Rome Olympus, till you have picked up the carefully-down right, up them to the lady on the Tower Greece, Olympus Bern, glove this is very important. right, collect rope, down right, of Piza. Take the Mona Lisa to Switzerland, Bern-White When you have done this up right, up right, down left, up the mafia fence. To get extra Airport in Yugoslavia be go back across the stones. right, collect apple, up right, lives collect all the rabbits, warned never use this airport Cross over the mud and keep down left, down left, down cherries and ice cream. as you will lose all your air going until you see a bunch of right, down left, down right, Collect ,000 and part of the tickets, Moldaviabamboo sticks. Walk into them down left, down right, down island will appear and you will Copenhagen, Denmark. "


"ENDON SLIDER UN SABOTEUR <<XXN Mapped by William Rowe om IHCO3zOOO mm ADRIL VELIN D 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 KEY: 9=GUARD PPUMA TE LIFT COMPUTERS W = WATER FILLED CAVE = Box's OF EQUIPMENT I = TELLY SCREEN WE TREE (CLIMBABLE) SABOTEUR II Have you noticed the amazing type will fell them. Five As the levels get harder you Saboteur Il map which William screens is the furthest you can will find the guards and pumas Rowe of Nairn has sent in! fall, only if you have full energy hit harder. Try to avoid them Wonder how long it took him though. The bike is in screen as you will find time is the to draw. Here are some A8. The electric fence switch greatest enemy-especially general gameplay notes for is in screen S28. The Ninja on level seven. you as well. can swim, sink to the bottom And finally some codes: The best place to leave the then push up and the direction Mission one: No code needed glider is as you enter the you want to travel in. Mission two: Jonin fourth screen. Keep running Mission three: Kime on the tight ropes. The best LOCATION OF COMPUTER LOCATION OF COMPUTER Mission four: Kuji Kiri fighting position is to pull the CODES A bug in Delta has been joystick down and press fire in the box's in the following detected by Robert Larkin of the direction off the enemy rooms contain pieces of the Co. Dublin. Line yourself up to This would seem to be the computer tape Z9/T16/R5/ destroy the aliens. Destroy manoeuvre you can do U23/U28/L13 them all and very quickly quickest and most frequently. 16 contains two codes 118/ destroy yourself. Remember Some guards have a weak G31 to destroy yourself before the point, a single blow of one D14/a25/B23/&2 next wave comes. "


"GOBOTS ELECTRON Ronnie Farrington of Merseyside has a quick cheat for the new game from Ariolasoft Gobots. Load the game in, press fire on the score screen, the credit screen then appears, press F3 and a menu appears. You can now change the following using the right CRSR key. Gravity Yes/No I and death yes/No Y Thrust O to 9 X Thrust O to 9 Speed O to 3 Autofire Yes/No After choosing what you want, press return to start the game. Here's someone who reads your opponent out at the same intros. Robert Anderson of time as yourself for lots of Liverpool has sent these tips bonus points. for the Electron. Exploding Fist-don't use Thrust this game can a roundhouse kick after the seem immensely difficult, but 2nd Dan, it doesn't do much can be mastered with a little good. A good move up until perseverance. It is best to the 4th or 5th dan is the make simple maps of each forward sweep which works level showing the positions of very well. On the later levels all the objects. Try and destroy somersault over your the limpet pods first they opponent and back again, only need one shot. If there when he turns around kick him are pods near you, you can — this usually works. hear them when they fire. It Keyboard control is easiest takes anything up to 12 direct once you get used to it. hits to destroy the reactor. Robert would like some tips Death Star here is a very on Karate Combat as it is small cheat which makes the driving him crazy. When he game a little easier while hits the opponent his energy you are playing hit Caps, Q drains-what is he doing and 1 at the same time and wrong? the game will revert to the start So come on all you Martial of the level you are on. This is Arts experts, tell Robert how very useful for when you are to beat his opponent in Karate collecting starbombs and Combat and remember it enables you to buy time as the must be the Electron version. death star is formed. Write to him c/o Melissa Yie Ar Kung Fu-knock Ravenflame, I.C. BARBAR Here it is guys. The first Atari The map is for that well ST map to be published in any wicked game Barbarian by magazine -well, what do you Pygnosis. Brian Webber is the expect we are the best after man responsible for C+VG all. being first-again!! con BARBARIAN PSYGNOSIS O STARTER SELE:I.::..ZÉS A Arrow EF Evil Frog G Grissly RL Rock Lobber P Phantom AX Axe Man SW Sword Man JC Jumping Cat MM Mechnical Mauler B Bow JR Jumping Ray BD Bulldog R Rhino D Dragon SH Shield CM Cave Man PR Priest M Magician N FROM PSYGNOSIS Mapped by B. Webber Traps 1 Death will always occur here 2 Watch out for falling slabs 3 The bridge is not very safe 4 This one may eat you 5 This slab has a point to it 6 Watch out for ankle height arrows 7 See 2 8 Do not hang around too long 9 This one is a bit choppy 10 See 4 11 See 2 12 This is the worst so far 13 See 6 14 Do not stand too close to the mounting US TONTTU IIIHIILELI 50% TITIOIHIMET Throw crystal here and turn back mom "


"GANT OVGRI TO DINAMIC 1987 Game Design Dinamic LREYD When you decide to embark on this adventure you will face KAIKAS (mutating kangaroos), ORCOS (fierce monsters of the planet DEDRON), LEISER-FREISERS (autonomous search androids, equipped with telescopic cameras and turbo-laser cannon), GARKLAS CLONICOS (specialists in following trails through the swamp jungle)... a world full of dangers. A challenge for the brave. Ce m e A challenge only for heroes, GAME OVER of the game SPECTRUM 7.95 COMMODORE, AMSTRADIVX 8.95 IMAGINE SOFTWARE LIMITED 6 CENTRAL STREET. MANCHESTER M2 5NS. TEL: 061 834 3939. TELEX: 669977 "


"GAMES MACHINES EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO KNOW ABOUT THE NEW GAMES MACHINES +VIDEO GAMES WIN A SEGA MASTER SYSTEM! NINTENDO/SEGA/ATARI MACHINES REVIEWED SUPER MARIO BROTHERS — THE COMPLETE PLAYERS GUIDE! CLASSIC GAMES ON CARTRIDGE — PREVIEWED AND REVIEWED "


"GAMES MACHINES Sega Master Systen bad luck to be an F.B.I. agent. Better practice with your light phaser 'cause you're gonna need a good shooting eye. he Sega Master System is developed. regular games, but it really a worthwhile contender to the Set-up is quick and simple, shines when used with the new home video-game market with a choice of television or carts designed to take Sega supplies one fully direct video/audio output. advantage of its features. integrated package, containing Care must be exercised in Also due shortly is the three the master console, control inserting/removing the carts, dimension system. These pads, light phaser gun, plus all and remember to kill that special liquid-crystal glasses the cables and wires needed power switch! The controllers enable the player to experience for easy set up and use. Two are similar to Nintendo's, but the thrill of depth in a video free games on one cartridge are the movement pad is of one game. It attaches via the card also included Hang On and piece. This can make for easier slot on the Master Console, Safari Hunt. manipulation especially on needs no separate power Hang On places you in as the diagonal. There is also the supply, and looks a bit like motorcycle race, while Safari option of using the included super-cool dark glasses. Hunt lets you zap jungle mini-joystick that screws into the new games appearing animals with the light phaser the centre of pad. soon are: Sega's console is reminiscent Another nice touch is the Astro Warrior (cartridge): of a 1950s conception of a pause button on the console. It Go head to head with superGhostbusters (cartridge): Who are YOU gonna call? Those slime balls are here, and you have to stop them. Great Soccer (cartridge): Dribble, pass, and head for that net-all aided by the sports pad controller. There are even penalty kicks. OUTRUN SEO SE CHAPTER 20: TOP3 This powered spaceships. Shoot first, wipe them out before they turn you into sub-atomic particles. Then take on the insidious master ship. futuristic toaster Cartridges are may be a bit more trouble to inserted into a slot on top, but get to, but it works on there is also another slot which everything you play. takes \"credit card\" sized games Accessories are also being of 256K memory. The carts explored, and the first to show contain a standard of one is the sport pad. This is a megabyte of memory, and 1/2serious two-button/trackball meg games are created by combination which takes the making combo-carts. New place of the regular controller. Two-Meg Carts are due shortly. A special setting allows for which ought to really make the continuous action when fur fly. A wide assortment of pressing one of the buttons, original games, plus arcade and there is also a switch so conversions, are being that it can be used with the A BLACK BELT Alex Kidd in Miracle World (cartridge): Your name is Alex Kidd, and your job is to save the city from the puzzling danger that confronts it. Will your wits decipher the clues in time to do so? Enduro Racer (cartridge): Compete against opponents, and the clock, as you race your motorcycle over varied terrain. Kung Fu Kid (cartridge): The monstrous MANDA is an evil master of the ancient art. Use your training and wits to end his reign of terror. Gangster Town (cartridge): It's the 1920s, and you've the "


"GAMES MACHINES (cartridge): Guess what you get Monopoly (cartridge): The to do? Fight, shoot, kill. Use classic board game comes to flame throwers, arrow bombs, the screen. Play against a friend and machine guns. When all and machine guns, When all or the computer. else fails — use your savage strength. After all, the odds are The Ninja (cartridge): The only 1,000 to one. arch-tyrant has his mitts on the Princess. Time for a dart up his Rocky (cartridge): Got big nose. Of course, you'll have to enough fists? You do now, so enough fists? You do now. so take on his whole army first. go ahead and use them to knock out all contenders to Out Run (cartridge): Test your title as Heavy-weight your driving skills as the wind Champion of the World. whips up and over your Another Two-Mega cart. SPACE HARRIER Black Belt (cartridge): You'll Zillion (cartridge): You and have to sharpen up your Karate two buddies are captured by Kicks if you're going to beat Planet X. Switch control this game. between the three as you smash the enemy's base. Transbot (card): A scrolling For the 3rd Dimension System. shoot-em-up that allows you to change your weapons during Missile Defense 3-D: Use the game the light phaser to knock those nuclear missiles out of the sky. Marksman Shooting Watch out one's coming cartridge). There are three right at you! different scenes to shoot at in this one. Choose between clay Zaxxon 3-D: Flying a superpigeon, moving cut-out villains and a chance to hunt big game RAMBO in Safari Hunt 2189 ME HARY 9880 RD 1 1008 He Za A QUARTET convertible. Switch lanes, screech around curves. Some fun huh? Another Two-Mega cart. Pro Wrestling (cartridge): Work two beefy boys, as you go for Champs of the Ring. When all else fails, pull your opponent out of the ring and hit him with a chair! A CHOPLIFTER duper spacecraft/fighter has O ther games available for Space Harrier (cartridge): never been more fun. Ora Fight off those aliens as you 7 the Sega Master System are: tougher challenge. weave and duck. Run or flyOn Cartridge: Choplifter, but don't stop shooting until Fantasy Zone, Great Baseball World Grand Prix 2 you've whipped them all. Great Basketball, Great (cartridge): The cartridge not Football Another Two-Mega. Football, Great Soccer, Great only lets you pit your racing talent agaist the world's best Volleyball and Marksman Shooting Trap Shooting. Wonder Boy (cartridge): The drivers, it also lets you design evil Great King has your girl. your own racing tracks On Sega Card; F-16 Fighting ld is full of snakes, bats, make them easy or difficult as Falcon, Ghost House, My and other icky things. But you you like. Hero, Super Tennis, Teddy must meet the challenge. Boy, and Woody Pop. Rambo: First Blood Part II "


"GAMES MACHINES Nintendo Entertais In 1986 the day of the games Operating Buddy plugs into the which allows a player to machine seemed to be dead control deck, and plays along continue the game from one and gone. But Nintedo took a with games in the Robot series. sitting to the next. chance and released their He'll move coloured blocks, Entertainment System. With juggle gyros, and just plain Kid Icarus: Greek mythology great sound, great graphics, amuse you. updated into the video age. video robot and a light gun that The Zapper light gun brings Part of the Password Pak series. Part of the Password Pak series. sees' what is on the television a shooting gallery into your screen — PLUS lots and lots of house, and you don't ever The Legend of Zelda: In this 3-D Racer: Fast paced action is combined with speed and sound effects. All enhanced by realistic 3D viewing when used with Nintendo's 3D system. Other games from Nintendo: Other games from ACTION SERIES: Balloon GRADIUS 3 P 00179000 2498 500 con COOL games. Now the Entertainment System comes in two flavours. Buying the Deluxe set gets you the works, the control deck, light gun and R.O.B. the robot: The basic system gives you the control deck plus controllers and you also get Super Mario Brothers 11 The control deck is a small box with video/audio outputs as well as a RF (radiofrequency) port for the television or monitor 1 Two controllers are plugged into the front of the deck. Each has dual firing buttons, 'select\" and \"start\" switch. and a four direction rocker pad have to worry about running prequel to Adventure of Link, a out of ammunition. young Link must use both The N.E.S. Advantage sword and sorcery in order to Joystick is a new add-on, withsave the land. The cartridge all the features of the regular contains a lithium battery controllers enlarged for easier which stores a player's handling accomplishments and position The newest addition is 3-D! between sessions. Specially designed glasses attach to the control deck, and Metroid: As a super bounty work in conjuction with 3-D hunter, it is your job to roam games to produce spectacular the galaxy; seeking out and results. It's never too soon to destroying the dangerous start looking like Flash Gordon! Metroid life-forms. Also part of New games from Nintendo the Password Pak series. ARUSH 'N' ATTACK Fight, Clu Clu Land, Kung Fu, Ice Climber, Pinball, Urban Champion ARCADE CLASSICS SERIES: Donkey Kong, Donkey Kong Jr., Donkey Kong III, Mario Brothers, Popeye. EDUCATION SERIES: Donkey Kong Jr. Math. LIGHT GUN SERIES: Duck Hunt, Gumshoe, Hogan's Alley, Wild Gunman. PROGRAMMABLE SERIES: Excitebike, Mach Racer, Wrecking Crew. ROBOT SERIES: Gyromite Stack-up. SPORTS SERIES: Baseball, SPORTS SEN Golf, Soccer, Tennis, 10-Yard Fight. The Adventures of Link: In this action/adventure, Link travels the countryside seeking allies to help him defeat the villainous Gannon. The game features a special password Punch-Out: A conversion of the coin-op in which the player fights for the World Boxing Title against a variety of top contenders. The mechanical Robotic "


"GAMES MACHINES Enment System Star Voyager: Free your civilisation the only way you know how by blowing up the aliens and their spacecraft throughout the galaxies. cclaim Entertainment is the first third party company to produce a 3D game The 3D Battles of Worldrunner. Not only can you play it just like any regular game, but flip the select switch and it turns into red/green 3D, or true 3D when TROJAN ILMES :83 and evil demons. Watch out for the many traps! Capcom takes off with conversions of all their top Family Fun Fitness games are special. You run, leap and 1942: Super Ace plans to move around on a special mat visit Tokyo, but he won't be that has sensors built into it. treated as an invited guest. This is relayed into the control You'll have to help him fight off COMMANDO Bandai presents: Chubby Cherbu: Poor guy, PLAYER HY 0295600 soog 340 SURANI KERANA 8600 N PAUSEN A WORLD RUNNER A LEGEND OF ZILDA used with Nintendo's new 3D all he wants is something to deck, and corresponds on the the many enemy air attacks system. Acclaim's games are: eat. But along the way, you'll screen as you play the have to help him do good following games: Commando: Shoot, kill. The 3D Battles of Worlddeeds, and avoid firecrackers runner: Play normal, or wear Destroy the evil army. Don't let and pesky dogs. Athletic World: Jump those up until you've freed those ir the included red/green glasses hurdles, dodge wild boars, hop hostages. for a 3D effect. Or opt for the M.U.S.C.L.E.: That's what from log to log. Tired of that? liquid crystal way and really get you better have if you're to win Then go for a raft cruise down a off on the action. Keep your the Tag-Team wrestling title. river or sprint through a deep Ghosts 'n Goblins: It's tough Space Cowboy from falling into Clever moves will whomp your and treacherous tunnel taking on the demons of the pits, or the mouths of alien foes, but beware of the night. Just make sure your beasties. electrified ropes or floor of ice knight doesn't get so scared he options could be a good Stadium Events: Participate jumps right out of his armour time to jump out and let your in four events, with up to six Winter Games: Split screen team-mate take over! players competing against each Trojan: The brutal King has action and multinational other or the onscreen many followers. But a master of anthems highlight the events. \"buddy\". There's 100 Metre the martial arts, with shield and Go sledding, or try to avoid Ninja Kid: Find the scroll and Dash, a 110 Metre Hurdle s word in hand can vanguish landing on your head in the ski restore tranquility to the land. event, a Long Jump, or a Triple all event. Oh yes, along the way you'll Jump. have to fight enormous fires Continued on page 72 "


"GAMES MACHINES Nintendo Entertainment System continued from page 71 head when the ref turns his Daniel-San through a series of for this game of quick reflexes Data East offers the following back don't hurt either! challenges, obstacles and as you battle down the brickBreakthru: Can you retrieve hazards. Get in there and fight! like defences in an alien space the stolen secret fighter plane? Irem Corp. presents: labyrinth. It's you and your sophisticated Kung Full: The martial arts assault vehicle against hordes master ceturns for new SNK brings you: of hostile renegades challenges. Alpha Mission: Pilot your Elevator Action: work your way down the enemy building. Burgertime: It's/Yum-Yum Sqoon: The aliens have sunk spacecraft through screen after screen of dangerous aliens. All But be prepared to shoot it out time as Chef Peter Petter most of the cities, and a large with evil agents every step of percentage of the population intent on your destruction. attempts to fend off food foes the way. while making his perfect has become shark food. Do burgers. This could turn you you dare rescue survivors from the underwater city? Ikari Warriors: They're Elevator Action: Work your into a vegetarian tough, they're beefy. They've one tough Samurai dude. He From Konami comes: got guns and grenades. Don't can leap a mile and toss spiked Karate Champ: Sharpen Gradius: The evil Bacterions get in their way, no matter how stars like popcorn. Whirling his your skills, perfect your aim are up to no good. Pilot the good you think the odds are. swords like a lawn mower, he Then let loose against your \" Warp Battler\" through hordes The Ikari boys are going to must rescue the Princess from opponent with moves of speed of mighty opposition, and blast wipe those enemy soldiers right fire-breathing Monks, and and'skill Ai-yaa! 'em to bits! off the face of the earth. other baddies. BANDAI'S FAMILY FITNESS DELUXE JOYSTICK 3D GLASSES into a vegetarian 1ST SISSSSSSSSSSSSS A STAR VOYAGER Sun Corporation shows: Renegade: Don't let those Sky Kid: You and your hoods take over the subway, occasional friend, Blue Max, the docks or any part of the rev up those biplanes and take City. off on an exciting mission. AATHLETIC WORLD A SLALOM Karnov: Thatjolly fire Rush'n Attack: Those breathing Russian, Kamnov, American POWs are getting seeks the Lost Treasure of mightly bored. It's time to tear Babylon. Help the old hot that armoured car apart, head as he runs, swimse despite the many hazards climbs, flies, and incinerates waiting for you. his many bizarre foes Track & Field: Take on all Kid Niki: One pint-sized comers in eight events of skill fadical punk. One razor-sharp, and willpower. Toss that sword. The Stone Wizard had Javelin, sink arrow after arrow better beware. The results are in the bulls-eye, and then brutal astound them all with your running speed. Tag Team Wrestling: Teamwork is the key, but a LJN Toys presents punch to your opponent's The Karate Kid: Guide Spy Hunter: You know what this baby does. Weapons van, enemy autos, and one tough car to drive along a highway fraught with death and destruction. Techmo offers the following: Rygar: This legendary warrior restores peace to the land by night-stalking and whomping an army of dangerous beasts. Taito presents more arcade action: Arkanoid: A special twobutton controller is included Solomon's Key: You and Dana the Wizard must unlock the scroll of secrets to restore peace and order. "


"\" THE ULTIMATE HOME VIDEO ARCADE MACHINE Mastersus INSESS This is SEGA the powerful new video games system designed specially for the home and the whole family. It's compact and easy to assemble, and the high technology gives you sharp video images, vibrant colour and realistic sound! games console 256k cards! And Sega has (to run a card or cartridge), 1 megabyte and huge 2 megabyte a FREE copy of the hit arcade game cartridges to take the 40 new titles \"Hang On\", 2 control pads, a TV coming your way later this year aerial fixture to let you watch TV including smash hits Out Run, even when the console's still Space Harrier and many more. connected as well as a fitted SEGA GIVES YOU ALL 3-pin plug and a special mystery THIS FOR JUS game built-in and ready for you to find! GAMES! GAMES! GAMES! Sports action, exciting thrillers and great arcade LIGHT PHASER hits there's a feast of fun covering Take aim and fire at your targets with ease and stunning realism! 3-D VISOR GLASSES Get more out of your game More force, more action and more amazing 3-D realism! COMING SOON! LOOK HOW MUCH SEGA GIVES YOU With Sega, you get a complete, ready-to-use system. All you need is a TV! The package includes | Choplifter World Grand Prix Super Tennis Space Harrier F16 Falcon Out Run Distributed in the UK by Mastertronic Ltd. 8-10 Paul Street, London EC2A 4JH. Tel: 01-3776880 "


"GAMES MACHINES Hey YOU! Want to be the first person on your street with a brand new Sega Master System? Want to be the first person on your street to have a copy of Out Run-the number one race game -to play on your Master System? Of course you do. And only one magazine can give you the chance Computer and Video Games! Thanks to Mastertronic, the people who are bringing the sensational Sega system into this country, we can offer one lucky C+VG reader this truly awesome prize. The first prize winner will get a complete Sega Master System PLUS a copy of Out Run, PLUS a mystery gamel 10 second prize winners will get a Mastersound video. 40 third prize winners will get a Mastersound music tape. 20 fourth prize winners will get a special coffee mug. 50 runners-up will get a giant Mastertronic poster. To get your hand on the mega-prize all you have to do is! identify the six segments of Sega games pictured on this page. answer the simple tie-breaker question and then rush your entry coupon off to Computer and Video Games. Sega System Competition, 14 Holckham Road, Orton, Southgate. Peterborough PE2 OUE. Normal C+VG rules apply, closing date is September 16th and the Editor's decision if final. Now, get into gear, fill in the coupon and race down to your nearest post box before the rest of your street gets the same idea! PICTURE CLUES Pic 1 is: A) Space Harrier B) Choplifter C) Rygar? Pie 2 is: A) Jet Set Willy B) Quartet C) Boulderdash? Pic 3 is: A) Fight Night B) Frank Bruno's Boxing C) Pro Wrestling? Pic 4 is: A) Commando B) Ikari Warriors C) Ghostbusters? Pic 5 is: A) Wonder Boy B) Miracle World C) Mario Bros? Pic 6 is: A) Slap Fight B) Astro Warrior C) Hades Nebula? Fantasy Zone The Nero SEGA COMPETITCm TTHE 25 SCORE ORI LAP W STAGE: "


"GAMES MACHINES BH The Sega Master Syste Choplifter ASV COMPETITION THE 21SCORE 03 LRD C+VG/MASTERTRONIC SEGA SYSTEM COMPETITION Name Address Age C64 The Sega games are: Computer owned (tick box) Atari Atari ST O Spectrum o 2 The car featured in Sega's Out Run is: A) Porsche B) Ferrari C) Lotus (ring your guess! Video: VHS BETA (tick box) "


"GAMES MACHINES Cat6 GueStn tari doesn't like to be lefti Asexpected, these carts are territory. Don't let anybody, or this one. out. With that in mind they not compatible with any other anything, get to them. introduced the xe Game s ystem, nor vice versa. But Moon Patrol (Atari): Avoid System, Alate entry into the enough of that, let's see what D esert Falcon (Atari): Pilot the many traps and aliens, as game market (even though y else Atari's got: against great odds in the land you drive through the bleak they started it all with the 2600), of the Sphinx. landscape. Atari bas learned from the Archon (Electronic Arts): competition just what gamers Chess for arcade fans. Fight for Dig Dug (Atari): Help DD Ms Pac-Man (Atari): She's want. And delivered! position with swords, magic burrow for buried treasure. But cute as a button, but hungry for The XE Game System is a and mayhem. be careful of the fire-parrots, those power dots. Watch out B. renovated XE Computer, . and other dangers. for Ghosts! subdivided into two parts. The Ballblazer (Lucas Film main console accepts game Games): 3-D effects, turn this Fight Night (Accolade): A One-on-One Basketball cartridges which contain overfuturistic soccer game into a low blow may get you tossed (Electronic Arts): Just you and 256K of graphics and sound. real free-for-all. Don't let the out of the ring, but who cares? your opponent, no one to These games are both originals robot drones get in your way! The important thing to do is blame or yell at. Show him as well as conversions from the beat your foe to a pulp. who's the best hundreds out there on the XE Battle Zone (Atari): The computers, with more on the landscape is barren, with only Food Fight (Atari): Take care Pole Position (Atari): Are you way. A keyboard unit can be an active volcano to light the of those pesky people once good enough to reach top attached to the gaming console way. Can you manoeuvre your and for all. Give them an eye position? Get behind the FIGHT NIGHT POLE POSITION FOOD FIGHT JOE BLOE 111 38000 SCORE 184 0073 0:510038 PREPARE TO RACE CE S MAUE MISSILE COMMAND AMS PAC-MAN A ROBOTRON when special commands are stank to safety, while wiping out full of dessert. driver's seat and find out. needed (like for Flight the opposition's tanks and Simulator it). A light gun also guided missiles? Galaxian (Taito): Forget Rescue from Fractalus comes with the system, as well strategy just blow up all (Lucas Film Games): Can you as the \"beloved standard Caverns of Mars (Atari): A those alien spaceships before rescue your comrades from the Atari joystick swift descent against terrible they take you out! surface without being blasted Those who want even more odds. Destroy the Martian to smithereens? Be careful of can add an XE disk drive thus headquarters and escape. Hardball (Accolade): alien traps! opening access to all the 8-bit Baseball the way you like it. disk software on the market Centipede (Atari): Bugs, Lots of graphics, sound and Robotron (Atari): Blast those And speaking of software, it's bugs, bugs. Can you keep the split screens. invaders to teeny-weeny bits! the games that makes Atari's garden free of them? new system shine. Three are Midnight Magic Star Raiders II (Atari): The included with the system: Crossbow (Exidy/Light Gun): (Broderbund): Try your hand at aliens think they can take over Flight Simulator H, Missile Protect your friends as they a wild pinball ride. You're your galaxy. They've got Command, and Blast 'Em. pass through dangerous going to need quick reflexes for another thing coming. "


"GAMES MACHINES Reviews WORLD GRAND PRIX and crashes I had before I was able to compete at any satisfactory standard. Across the top of the screen is displayed speed, gear selection and the track. Your position shown on it as a po moving blob. It pays to keep an eye on it because you'll need to think well ahead. Corners have a nasty habit of coming at you before you're ready. Besides the existing tracks you can design your own, making them as simple or complex as you like. You are provided with a series of track pieces, straight, curves and bends. By positioning an arrow over them and hitting the fire button you can select the track piece by piece. I prefered fairly simple designs, long straights with as few curves as possible. These are the best for high speeds. World Grand Prix is ace race action. Great graphics and sound. The crashes are 1101111 TIME WORLD GRAND PRIX  MACHINE: SEGA MASTER SYSTEM  SUPPLIER: SEGA PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: PAUL Sitting on the grid I can almost smell the high octane fuel. It's as hot as hell and getting hotter. Tension mounts. The warning lights begin their countdown. Ready, steady ... GO! Islam my mean machine into gear and hit the throttle. The wheels spin making a racket. Squeals on wheels, in fact. At last the rubber grips the tarmac and I'm off like a bat out of hell, following the exhaust trails of the other cars. Hot pursuit, I just love it. The controls are really simple. Hitting the button puts up the revs, moving the joystick back and forth switches the gears between high and low. Moving the stick left and right steers the car. Easy? In theory, yes, but I lost count of the number of spins FEETS 03 innya 00:49 SOUND  GRAPHICS VALUE PLAYABILITY NO 538 2032 EDO HANG ON HANG ON 'added to the next stage. The five stages of a course  MACHINE: SEGA MASTER SYSTEM are circuitseaside, monument SUPPLIER: SEGA valley, city night, circuit and PRICE: FREE (CARD) finish line. If you manage to REVIEWER: PAUL complete the eight courses in Hang On is head to head, high level three you start all over speed action between your again. But this time the time motorcycle, the Fearless 4, and limits are cut the equally powerful Sizzler 2. Each course is four And it comes free when you kilometres long. The distance buty the Sega System. remaining is displayed at the The Hang On technique top right-hand corner of the enables you to hang on screen through really tricky curves at the points scoring is based high speeds. on three elements overall The bikes race over three S peed, the higher it is the more levels each consisting of eight points passing the Sizzler gets courses. Each course has fivel 300 and for every second stages. under time limit earns 1,000 The Fearless 4 has three points gears low, second and high t hooghi Hang On would Moving the joystick up and just be the bike version of down selects the gear. It's also World Grand Prix but I was used to control the hike. The wrong: 1 . control pad's two buttons are Speed merchants who fancy used a brake and accelerator a head to head challenge Each stage must be against the clock go for Hang completed within a 60 second On time limit. If you managed to SOUND clear the stage with time to GRAPHICS VALUE spare the extra seconds are PLAYABILITY SS235 83: B ORSE "


"GAMES MACHINES Nintendo si Cle perjalised two strokes on om W ild Gunman MACHINE: NINTENDO GAMES CONSOLE SUPPLIER: MATTEL PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: JOHN At last, ia calm, relaxing strategy game on a console better known for arcade raction. The display is fairly complex, but once you've! worked out how.tolswing any club and drive the ball up the course you'll find play easy The top left corner of the screen gives you information it about your score, how well you're doing against the par of a particular hole, the wind strength and the length of shot you'll need to hole the ball. perjalised two strokes ---SO don't hit it into the woods and if you land in the ocean, ponds, rivers or any other  MACHINE: NINTENDO Guy, and have the tall, thin water hazards you're penalised GAMES CONSOLE one drop his pants. one point. There's also a  SUPPLIER: MATTEL Game B is more of the same, PRICE: .50 formula to help you get out of but you have to contend with REVIEWER: JOHN bunkers and lists of information two gunmen who draw at the about holes, showing the Some lose their hats, some lose same time. They do take a few distances from the fairway and their pants, some lose their seconds out between yelling bunker you'd have to make for cool. You're on the other end \"FIRE' and drawing their guns each shot using a particular of the light gun in this game but you have to be pretty club. The shot instruction book you can get revenge on all steady with the gunsight if you too short in my view for the those awful spaghetti western want to hit both between the complexity of this type of game actors. Just imagine them in eyes. also give a full bird's eye your sights and press the Finally, Game C, changes view of the course and its 18 trigger. scene to the front doorstep of a holes. Wild Gunman is yet another saloon. You have a limited The game does not conform oldie from Nintendo but, number of bullets but, unlike to all the rules of the real game despite its repetitious nature, the other two games, you can for instance your choice of it's one of my favourites. use more than one shot on clubs is limited to five woods, Nintendo's version of the game whoever steps out of the wing eight irons and a putter. If you must be played with the light doors and draws ... TROKE PLAY INR SHOT SCORE 1.17 10 9. E TIME. YOU, 0. GUNKAN 1. 0 A 6 CLUB PT RE28 88888 : SEB the window beneath the were in a real game you'd gun, and there are three types The most competitive of the score information shows your probably need to be Gary of action three games is B-T regarded player as he squares up to putt Player to win with that little Game A takes place in the A as a practice range-but, or drive a ball. You can run selection but, after all, this is an desert where a number of because the game is so through the limited range of arcade game and we shouldn't rogues are after your blood. repetitive, it's great to be able woods, itans and putters you expect miracles of the real They come onto the screen to switch to C, and a different have available by using the fairways and greens of a course one by one-they turn, their location. It would have been contral pad, then press the such as St Andrews. eyes flash and they shout better if the game action was control three times to make a If you're just after a good 'FIRE'. The timer starts and more varied gunmen on shot once to set the amount time, Golf will probably be you've got to have them horses for instance-but you ofclub back swing, the second enough, but if you want a no already lined up in your sightscan't have everything when to start the dowry swing and the holes barred simulation you'll to stand any chance of hitting you're trying for coin-op third to set the impact position have to look to the them between the eyes. Your realism, even if it is antiquated The window on the right of : Commodore or Spectrum opponent will blow you away action. the screen gives a bird's eye 22 computers. Wind variance and if your hand shakes or your But, with luck, Nintendo view of the hole. An arrow weather problems just aren't in finger twitches for just that will soon be rid of its back points away from the hole and this Nintendo game. second too long catalogue stuff and we'll see you can change its position in Five characters are involved some real action. line with the direction in which in the plot to gun you down. If you want the ball to go. GRAPHICS SOUND you're lucky, though, you'll SOUND  GRAPHICS The rules are fairly strict. ff VALUE knock off the Mexican and VALUE you go out of bounds you're PLAYABILITY 8 man in black, floor the Butch PLAYABILITY "


"GAMES MACHINES System Reviews Pinball Pinball Excitebike Excitebike screen A, at the top of the table, you can knock over penguins and balancing seals.  MACHINE: NINTENDO Scene C holds the bonus GAMES CONSOLE features, which you can only SUPPLIER: MATTEL reach if the ball has the good PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: JOHN fortune to pop into a hole at the bottom right of the A screen. Faster than a speeding bullet Instead of flippers you've got the ball is hammered from its Mario, of Mario Brothers fame, launch position and into the in control. He holds a platform three-screened pinball which'll catch the falling balls machine. and bounce them back up the The ball, shot into space by screen if you manage to walk the control pad's A or B button Mario under them in time. and its velocity is determined The bonus screen also by the length of time you hold includes a three by four matrix the control down of coloured, numeric lamps The main area of the which change colour as the machine is divided into two ball bounces between Mario sections, both of which have a and the two 100 point pair of flippers at the bottom of bumpers on left and right. If the screen. Left is flipped with you manage to turn the lamps MACHINE: NINTENDO When you ve scored GAMES CONSOLE  SUPPLIER: MATTEL sumber one on both built-in PRICE: .50 tracks the design of you own.is REVIEWER: JOHN simple. The cartridge stores 20 pre Bike racing games, especially set lengths of track which you where the two-wheelers rush can put together in hundreds of lo horizontally across the screen, combinations. The display! lost their cred points when shows your bike at the start of Enduro Racer appeared but the empty road. You move it Excitebike has enough track along to the spot where you features to provide an Want an obstacle, move the entertaining, if dated game. choose feature cursor to the It's a one or two player letter, A to $, which game, played on one of two corresponds to the obstacle courses. You can also design and dump hot, hole or Slimey your own and save your track patch onto the main display 12 in RAM for use when you get! You can then choose to tuna back to play mode. The solo rade, or pityourself167 second, more difficult track just against other motorcross 4 TOP 00320 4 LUP BALL) Nintendo 1124100 ALMBT OT1Sica the control pad while the right on in the same colour, a lady at comprises of a more tortuous riders, and away you go is moved with either the A or B the top of the screen will drop route. The obstacles are the): My first impressions of button. The latter part of the set into peril, which means extra same no matter which track Excitebike were not too good. up can cause confusion at the points for you. Eventually that option you take. There are alve seen scores of similar start of the game when those gap becomes too big to jump seven hill gradients, a jump. products before and the 3D two buttons have different and she'll fall, at which point barrier, oil spots, multi gradient perspective games have largely meanings and a short mental you move Mario under her and hills and a ramp which looks taken over from them. But this control leap has to be made when he catches her you get a like an oil platform. race game has the advantage of before you get into the game. bonus 10,000 points. You've got two speed a course designer and a large Although you only have two If you're a pinball fan you control one ordinary, the range of objects. There's not sets of paddles there are no won't see the new features other turbo and the use of much skill involved in clocking single paddles in this game which are appearing on the one or the other at the right up a good timing on the two the lack of control or latest coin-op games but, if you time will determine whether Mattel tracks, but there's involvement is made up for by can't afford one of those in you you do a wheelie or crash. always the addiction of the crowded point-scoring hall, Nintendo's ball blazer Over use of turbo also makes contantly trying to be number features. There are two sets of provides an excellent the engine overheat so it's best one numbered targets, cards that'll alternative. used on flat parts of the track flip over if you hit them, and where there are no mud oroit: four 100 point bumpers. On slicks to slow you down, or screen Bat the bottom of the  GRAPHICS GRAPHICS over several hills if the engine SOUND table, small chicks are hatched SOUND VALUE heat monitor is less than half VALUE from eggs when the ball hits. In PLAYABILITY 8 way red. PLAYABILITY "


"SUPER MARI It's the game that's kept the entire Just jump up and down to break a C+VG office in chaos for weeks. Yup! hole and jump through, It's the solution to the incredible Super remembering to shoot any approaching monsters. A little Mario Brothers well almost! further on you'll come to a small The C+VG team has been working chasm, with a small ledge above day and night to beat the game, and you. Jump onto the ledge, you we've almost done it. You'll just have to should now see another ledge on finish the last world all by yourself... if the right-hand side of the screen, covered in gold coins. Jump over you can! the gap, collect the coins and bash Super Mario Brothers is a very previous level. The first thing you two or three holes in the ceiling long game, and if you're going to must do is get some fire power above you. Go to the far right hand ever get to the end of it, you'll have and quick! side of the ledge and jump up to to make use of the cheats and Grab the fire flower hidden in the brick above you, run back short cuts the programmers have the very first flashing question along the ledge and then jump put into the game. mark and you will be able to blast through the hole you created Well, let's begin at the those nasties out of the way. earlier. There will be a small beginning, World 1-1 should Jump across the brick pillars mushroom moving fast across the present no problem. First of all and you'll come across a monster screen which you must catch. That collect the mushroom hidden in the ne trapped between two walls. Squash accomplished, you will have gained second flashing question mark on the monster by dropping on it and yourself an extra life. the first screen and then, instead of then jump underneath the single Run along the top of the screen having to waste time covering the whole world, duck down the tube which is just beyond the first pair of monsters. You'll now find yourself in a secret underground room full of flashing gold coins. Collect all the coins -once you've got one hundred you'll be given a free life and walk out of the exit in the corner. You are now at the end of the first level. Run up the stairs and jump from the top onto the brick above you. You should get until you come to the two flag pole for maximum points. ten or 12 coins from it. There are elevators. Jump on to the lifts but The reason why you sometimes very many of these bricks around make sure that on the second one get fireworks at the end of a level the game, and many of them are you jump back up to the top of the is still a mystery. The instruction invisible. So make sure you give screen where the score is manual is frustratingly vague everything a good head-butting displayed. Keep running along and about everything. even if it looks as if there is nothing you'll come across the game's next The next level, World 2-1, is the there. short cut — the Warp Zone. first underground scene and is Now we've come up against the There are three tubes here and quite a bit more difficult than the first obstruction a solid wall. you should go down the one marked 4. You have now been warped to the fourth world. Congratulations! Things now start to hot up. New hazards include a smiling cloud which drops spiny monsters from the sky -they can prove very painful for poor Mario. The best policy on this level is keep moving as fast as possible. The only thing that is worth stopping for is another free life mushroom. Halfway through the level you'll come to a ledge consisting of four flashing question marks in a row which you have to hit with Mario's head. Once all four have been knocked, jump onto the ledge and position Mario over the third brick and jump into the air. A brick will appear as if by magic, and an extra-life mushroom will emerge from it. Once you get the mushroom, it's a non-stop ho sprint to the end of the level. Level 4-2 is another underground scene with a very vine. First of all you will have to negotiate several chasms it should be no problem by now and once over those obstacles you will enter an enclosed tunnel. Run AMT players guide "


"D BROTHERS down the tunnel polishing off the monsters as you go. The screen will now open up again and you'll find yourself in a room full of the flashing question marks. Jump to the ledge on the right-hand side of the screen and jump onto the lift and drop off it on the other side. Above you you will see a line of bricks. Jump up in the air below them, you won't be able to reach them but several bricks will appear and you will be able to use them to reach the highest row. Go underneath, hit them with Mario's head and a vine will appear. Climb up the vine and you will enter a bonus screen filled with more coins At the end of this screen you will come to another Warp Zone. Down tube number 8 and you've warped to the last world! Not surprisingly things have the middle. The best way to deal bouncing monsters, and collect the than it first appears. Jump over with this is just to run very fast at mushroom as it drops down. the bullets and cannons but it and jump right at the edge. The rest of the level becomes an remember to keep your timing Don't push the B button down obstacle course of bullets, beetles absolutely perfect. The next because it will make you over-shoot and bouncing monsters. The one problem are a pair of hammer and send you plunging downards. particularly difficult feature of this throwing monsters perched on two The beginning of level 8-2 level is a chasm which looks far too platforms. The best way to deal requires good timing. Jump over with these two is to stay close to the first bouncing turtle without First of all drop down onto the nearby tube, where the hammers touching it. Wait until another nearest of the two pillars before can't reach you, and wait until turtle comes bouncing down the the gap and then press the B both of them have left the ground started getting tough. Flying turtles, huge bullet firing cannons, piranha plants and black beetles come at you all at the same time. You're going to need a lot of dexterity to get past this level. Practice is the answer. The one particularly difficult feature of this level is a huge chasm with only a small column in stairs, it will fall down a hole and you should then run up the stairs avoiding the spiny creatures as you go. Jump off the top and you'll come to a trampline. Jump onto it and jump straight up into the air. And extra-life mushroom will now appear and start moving along the highest platform. You should run along your platform, avoiding the usual button to make you move quickly — don't worry about the small gap between pillars as you'll just walk over it and when you reach the very edge of the second pillar you should jump! Once across this problem the end of the level shouldn't be too difficult to reach. World 8-3 is much more tricky and then run underneath the platform you can kill them by banging the brick they are standing on. There is also a mushroom hidden inside the highest platform. A little further on there another two hammer throwers and the same technique will work here. Later on in this level you find three lone hammer throwers and you have to avoid the hammers and jump on top of them. And this is as far as we can go! The last level is a maze of tubes you must climb down-they must be in the correct order or you'll wander around forever and you'll encounter a swimming level. And that's as far as we've reached. Can you beat it? titut  players guide "


"SPACE-ENERGY/MATTER SINK [ACQUISITION) MAGNATOMIC FLUX CONSTRUCTION-ARST STADCOMMEN POWER-STAR FLUX CHILLE WARP ENGINE NACELLE PRIMARY DOCKING PORT THE FORWARD PHASER BANKS V.I.P. LOUNGE WINDOWS IMPULSE ENGINE COMPENDIUN MAIN GANGWAY HATCH DOCKING PORT EXHAUST EMERGENC EMERGENCY FLUSH IN CONNECTING DORSAL PRIMARY FORCE-FIELD DERLECTOR HO LANG PHOTON TORPEDO TUBES REACTION-CONTROL THRUSTERS SPACE-ENERGY FELDA ATTRACTION SENSORS by ALLAN SHERITAN DOCKING PORT --ENGINEERING LANDING LATERAL DEFLECTOR GRID (ENGINEERING) R TREKKIN' TO AATION AATION OF P HEADQUA HEADO FEDER Bored with waiting for Firebird to release Star Trek? We are! Still, to keep all you Trekkies happy we've arranged a special Star Trek competition with the help of our mates at Titan Books. If you can't play the game at least you can read about the classic sci-fi adventures of Captain James T. Kirk and his crew. Boldly go where no C+VG reader has gone before and enter this cosmic competition! Just answer the simple Star Trek quiz and a starship full of goodies could be yours! FEDER OF PL RTERS STARFLEE LO*0 STARFLEET ARTERS LANETS UNITE UNITET PLANET ETS FIRST prize winner will get the new Star Trek Compendium, packed full of fascinating facts about the TV show and films, together with a complete show by show guide and tons of pictures, PLUS Mr Scott's Guide to the Enterprise, an incredibly detailed \"user manual for the Starship Enterprise, PLUS a full set of the Star Trek novels. That lot should keep you busy for a few light years! Three SECOND prize winners will get a copy of Mr Scott's Guide to the Enterprise. Five runners-up will get a copy of the latest Star Trek novel. Now on with the questions! Answer them and mail your answer via the nearest Star Fleet transporter beam to Computer and Video Games, Star Trek Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Closing date is September 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and Mr Spock's decision is final. 1. Name the pop band who recently had a hit with the terminally dreadful Star Trekkin' song. 2. Name the Communications Officer on the Starship Enterprise. 3. Name Mr Spock's Vulcan father. 4. Name the giant creatures featured in Star Trek IV. 5. What does the T stand for in James T. Kirk? C+VG/TITAN BOOKS STAR TREK COMPETIPTION Name Address My answers are: o "


"MOEBIUS dventure through a complex and colourful Oriental world of magic, mysticism and intrigue. Moebius-fabled deity of the island Kingdom of Khantun-has chosen you. his disciple, to reclaim the stolen Orb of Celestial Harmony from the renegade warlord. Featuring superbly animated martial arts and sword-fighting combat, Moebius is far better than other Far Eastern adventures. Strategically and tactically more challenging this odyssey takes you through the realms of Earth, Water, Air and Fire. The dynamic playfield changes constantly as you travel across 26 terrain types. encountering earthquakes, rockslides, heavy rains and heat waves. Graphics are top-notch and you can communicate with all the townspeople, There are 2 distinct magic systems, mixed combat modes and a fearsome array of enemies. Strategy, planning and quick thinking are essential to reach the final confrontation in this engaging and unique fantasy Moebius fills both sides of two disks and is available for the CBM 64. Amiga, Atari ST and Apple. Prices from .99. PLANETS Abe Black Bell anal Atis Canes FAHHORIGIN SYSTEMS INC. SYSTEMS INC. HOIRUSE MicroProse Software Ltd, 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GLB 8DA. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tix: 43422 MPS/UKG "


"FROM THE ARCADES-A TIGRESS! ATHEDA Shin Nihon Kikeky Gore  1985 SNK ELECTRONICS CORP. the name   SPECTRUM COMMODORE $7.95 &8.95 SPECTRUM AMSTRAD Imagine Software Limited 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS Tel: 061 834 3939. Telex: 669977 "


"ADVENTURE news Among three future reweeks. Programmed by Ox-able, the extra review The Sarien Encounter, leases announced by ford Digital Enterprises, ver-playing comes as a pleasure comes from the progInfocom, more of the sions for the Spectrum, Am-it's the reduced time availrammers of Kings Quest famous Zork, which sold over strad CPC, Commodore 64, able for writing the review and The Black Cauldron one million copies, is promand BBC micros will be reitself, and completing the and is a humorous tale of ised. Beyond Zork, written by leased by Mosaic Publishing column that becomes a action and adventure set in Brian Moriarty, features Induring October, to be folnightmare! deep space. focom's new interface syslowed a month or so later by It introduces Roger Wilco, tem, in what would appear to a Amstrad CPC/PCW disk ver There was a reappearsanitation engineer turned be a combination of rolesion. ance of the Helpline on space age swash buckler. As playing and traditional Combining graphic and Clive Bull's LBC progluck would have it, Wilco Deadventure game. text, including icon driven feramme on a recent Sunday comes the sole survivor With window displays to atures in a scrolling office, afternoon. For the first time, aboard the research ship show what weapons and there will be elements of Paul Coppins and I decided Arcada and the last hope for tools the player is carrying strategy and decision makto throw caution to the wind, his planet, Xenon. and special function keys ing in the game, which covers and leave our files of soluHis mission is to search out programmed for fighting bata five day period in the life of tions behind, just working and destroy the super-sector tles, the player will start off Jim Hacker. Each day will from the database printout star generator which has setting up his own character, require a separate load and memory. And guess been violently stolen from his in terms of strength and enA series of completely new what? British Rail decided to vessel, then carry out Arcadurance, etc before setting scenarios has been devised carry out maintenance on da's first objective initiate out in search of the fabled for the game, and scriptwriter Paul's line. Paul arrived too a new star for his dying Coconut of Quendor. Tony Jay has been keeping late, and there was I with only planet. According to C+VG's an editorial eye on the one half of the memory reKings Quest lll and Space source, Beyond Zork will be game's development. A new quirements! And it's funny, Quest will be available in July available for a restricted TV series of Yes, Prime Minisisn't it, how the questions that for a wide variety of compurange of machines, which fer! is also scheduled for late one can't answer always ters including Apple Il series, does not include the C-64. in the year, and the BBC has come in runs, leaving an GS and Macintosh, Amiga, Nord and Bert Couldn't liaised with Mosaic so that its embarrassing sequence of Atari ST, IBM PC series and Make Head Or Tail Of It is the timing ties in with the release grunts and 'er's!! Still, it was MS-DOS compatibles. The unlikely title of a new game of the game. nice to speak to so many who suggested retail price is from Jeff O'Neil, author of the launch promises to be phoned in. $24.99 for Atari ST and $29.99 Ballyhoo. Described as a an interesting and amusing for all other systems. game of word trickery and event, with a number of real This issue brings the first double meanings, MPs on hand to play the of the Fiend's 'alterna Activision are releasing N&BCMHOTOI will consist of game, and see how they tive' looks at adventures two Sierra On Line titles. eight short stories. would make out as PM! in the shape of an ad-7 Sierra has built on enNew Infocom storyteller C+VG will be there! judication over Matthew's viable reputation in the states Amy Briggs will be making her Savage Island review. To for fantasy role playing debut with Plundered Hearts, keep him out of harm's way games, with chart hits such as a 17th century adventure set Very big high-quality over the next few weeks, Kings Quest and The Black on a schooner on the high adventures are always have sent him an unusual Cauldron. The first two titles seas. The reading of rowelcome and tend to budget adventure on which being released in the UK by mance novels, and details of be released every couple of to comment Inspector Activision are Space Quest 17th century costumes and months or so. However this Flukeit. It has a somewhat and Kings Quest III. ships, has been part of the month has seen the appear\"Sherlock feel to it, with indeKings Quest lll as the name research undertaken to proance of Level 9's Knight Orc pendent (?) characters who suggests, is the third in the vide the background for this coinciding with The Lurking deserve the sharp analysis Kings Quest adventure series adventure, in which, it seems, Horror from Infocom, and all available only by the Flend's that has proved immensely the player will be unable to close on the heels of Station huge intellect. popular Stateside. control her passion. fall, Bureaucracy, and Guild Also next month, Matthew Featuring the 3D animated Beyond Zork is due for reof Thieves. The trouble is that and I will be bringing you a graphics included in Kings lease in the USA in October, these games demand far complete rundown of what to Quest takes place in the the other titles, in September. more playing than the averlook out for in Adventure, at kingdom of Daventury. The UK release is expected to age adventure, for a suitable this year's PCW Show. C+VG player must help Gwydion, follow some six to eight review. will be out a week or so slave to an evil wizard overweeks later. After all, if you're paying before the show so make come his servitude and per120 or more a throw, you sure you are not without your form brave deeds, sail the The BBC comedy hit, Yes, want to know a bit more copy before coming along to seven seas with a band of Prime Ministerl is due to about them before you demeet us, and all the other merry sailors, and come face hit your computer cide whether to shell out. people in the adventure to face with Medusa and the screens in the next few Fortunately, they are so playworld! Abominable Snowman. 85 "


"4. Disc ATARI ST/800XLIXE OWNERS DEPT CV1 228 ORME ROAD NEWCASTLE STAFFS STS 2P8 SPECTRUM TEL: 0782 711269 MICRONAUT ONE WC LFADERBOARD ROAD RUNNER EXCLON MASK DE TRANSTEN HADES NELLA Subsidiary of Nova YOU HAVE TRIED THE REST NOW TRY THE BEST! Como CHAMPIONSHIP GOLF ARP Our LEATHER GODESSES 23 95 TRAMOS Price STAR GLIDER 18 NEMESS WARLOCK 995695 ULTIMAI 1895 THING BOUNCES BACK 8.95 6.50 SUNSHIP 18.95 PROHIBITION 8.995.55 CBM 54 GUNSHIP RAPOUR F15 STRIKE EAGLE 9.95 695 9.95 $95 SILENT SERVICE 6.55 TOUGH ON STREETS AMSTRAD SALE 9.996.9 RUN CLOUGHS FOOTBALL WAR GAME CON SET 19.99 14.95 MARBLE MADNESS CON KIT 3.99 7.95 550 REBOUNDER 5.50 EXOLON 8.93650 BACK TO THE FUTURE 9.9 99 THING ON A SPRING BRIDE FRANKENSTEIN 99 9 9 PLEASE ADD TO COVER PSP ON MAG MAX UNITED QUANTITY FIRST COME FIRST SERVED. PLEASE STATE SECOND Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with the MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY. The greatest, biggest and best Atari Club on the market. APPROX 550 ST TITLES NOW IN STOCK MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY: The company who nearly 5 years ago first conceived the idea of a software library Now approximately 2 000 titles on disc cassette and Rom (games business cation and UtilitiesOhen purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or Sex to give all our members a air chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Several thousand very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany, Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast efficient and friendly service operating a computerised custom built system to keep track of all your records Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities SEND LARGE S.A.E. TO: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos, Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programs are originals with full documentation QUARTET LIVING DAYLIGHTS BARBARIAN ENDURO RACER LAST NA HT PAK INTO EAGLES NEST SENTINA GUNSHIPTHE PAWN ATARIST 24.95 1795 9.95 6.95 ARBARIAN ATHENA SLAP FIGHT 12.95 1050 9.95 695 ARMY MOVES 8.95 50 XEVIOUS BATFIELD GERMANY ZULU WAR JUPITER PROBE FIS STRIKE FACE NEMES 400/806 NOW LOOK KENAPPROACH UVING DAYUGHTS SPECTRUM 128.2 ONLY TEMPLE OF APSHA DEFENCE OF CROWN ADV ART STUDIO 2 495 1895 BARBARIAN 9.95 6.95 STARS ON 128 Como 995 6.95 THEY STOLE MILLION 995 14.95 10.95 TWIN TORNADO GULD OF THIEVES TAU CETI 9.95 8.95 ARKANOO DATA GENIE 1 . 995 895 MONSTER W Gms 99 99 MERCENARY COMP CONGRAPHY AIR BALL KINGDOM OF KRELL 9.95 5.95 SILENT SERVICE GAUNTLET LITTLE COMP PEOPLE SOLO PUGHT LEADERBOARD TOUR CONFLIN VETM DEC THE DES BARBARIAN  Kip II AMSTRAD WORLD GAMES THE PAWN 17.95 TRID 9.95 8.95 ROAD RUNNER HOLLYWOOO HUIX 23.95 WC LEADERBOARD 17.95 ROADRUNNER SILICON DREAMS COLONIAL CONQUEST 29 96 23 95 ANALYSE SPREADSHEET 8395 8.95 8.50 SHANGHAI SILENT SERVICE 33.56 QUARTER FLEET ST PUSTOMER 115005 BALANCE OF POWER 3395UVINO DAYLIGHTS DEFENDER OF THE CROWN OUTCAST 895850 ALL ST SOFTWARE WITH PREIS CHAMPIONSHIP FOOTBALL ENDURO RACER 9.996.90 PORTAL NEW OR DUE SHORTLY AND WILL BE 995 895 DISPATCHED ON DAY OF RELEASE IF LITTLE COMP PEOPLE WE ALSO STOCK MSX BBC ELECTRONIAM COMPATIBLE SOFTWARE PLEASE SEND 50 FOR CURRENT LISTS REFUNDABLE ON FIRST ORDER GAMES NOT YET RELEASED WILL BE DISPATCHED ON DAY OF RELEASE ANY TITLE YOU REQUIRE WHICH IS NOT SHOWN ON THE LIST ABOVE THEN PHONE OUR HOTLINE NOW! POST & PACKING FREE EXCEPT OVERSEAS PLEASE ADD E1 CHEQUES ETC PAYABLE TO NOVASOFT XLUXE ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 CUT PRICE SOFTWARE SPECTRUM RRP OUR COMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK 9 .95 6.95 SPECTRUM OUR PRICE The Pawn 128 Only) 14.95 11.95 Aut Monty 7.95 5.75 Enduro Racer 995725 Road Runner ..... 8.995 .50 Sold Million 3 9 .95 6.95 Shockway Rider ...... 7.95 5.50 Cart 725 35.95 11.95 WOT'S Freeze Frame3 Epyx Epics... Hades Nebul Ta Pan Stars On 128 Starglider Mag Max Tank Traxos Paperboy Convoy Raiders Konami Condo wital NEW? 7.95 8.99 95 9.95 5.50 6.50 5.50 7.25 7 Expert Cart NA 28.95 The Wit ..795 799 5.50 575 NA 11.96 WHATNOW? ? Saboteur 2 Hallen Thu || 6 | COMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK Mini Office 2 ..... 11.95 14.95 Road Runner 7.25 11.95 The Pawn N A 16.95 Ourell's BG4 6 .95 11.96 Leaderboard EE 695 11.95 725 11.05 14.95 11.95 | Pu thang Hydrofool Het Pak 6 AMSTRAD TOP 10 Hit Pak Trin Pursuit. Mini Mice 2 Starglider Paperboy CASS 7.25 11 95 11.95 11.95 5.50 11.00 DISK 11.95 16.95 14.95 16.95 10.95 1795 NA 11.95 Defender of Crown Ta Pursuit 6.50 10.95 Commando 86 Trip Hit Pak 9 .95 7.25 Head O Heels Prospeil.... Protest NA 21.95 6.95 6.95 725 Space Harrier Bomb Jack 2 Barbarian Nemesis Deaths 11.95 11.95 11.95 Stap Fight 7 .95 kari Warrior............ 7.95 Gunn 7.95 ATARI ST TOP 10 5.50 5.50 5.50 725 11.95 itor Probe 11.95 1495 Duarte Metro Cross. 9.95 725 19.95 ... 24.95 Quartet 7.25 11.95 Gautie Scent Service Balance of Power SD Cinemaware Road Runner Guild of Thieves Star Tres Gobots Zynas Thing Bounces Back 725 Graphic Ad Creator 17.00 11.95 22.00 8.95 6.50 AVAILABLE FROM 19th AUGUST at your LOCAL INDEPENDENT COMPUTER SHOP 19.95 Sold Milion 3 AMSTRAD PCW 2548512 Barbara HP 6 725 11.95 ShrFor Hamer Bomb Jack 2 7 .95 5.50 11.95 1595 Living Daylight 9.95 725 Rana Ram 5 .95 11 95 Triv Pursuit Bismark.......... 9.95 7.25 Bomb Jack 2 .6.95 11.95 Steve Davis Snooker 15.95 Army Moves.. .7.95 5.50 Enduro Racer 7.25 11.95 ....... .9.95 6.95 Arkanoid ..... 6.95 11.96 Brian Clough Head O Heels 725 5.50 Death or Glory 6.50 11.95 Batman Post & Packing Inc. Overseas Orders please add 75p per tape Cheques/post orders (Sterling only please). Made payable to: Cut Price Software Unit 6, Stort House, Riverway, Harlow, Essex CM20 2DW 24 HOUR ANSWER PHONE (0279) 24433 OR (0279) 31956 Blank disks 3 x 10 .99 512 X 10 .99 3% x 10 from 12.95 H&D Services 1338, Ashton Old Road, Higher Openshaw, Manchester M11 1JG Tel. 061-370-5666 "


"UNLOCK THE THRILLS & MYSTERIES OF... SOLOMONS \"An arcade strategy game with enough addictive qualities to turn even the toughest coin-op cldc Into an arcade junky\".C&VG Return to an age of mystery and Intrigue, a place in which the fabled treasure of King Solomon shone brightly with its glorious wealth. Where amongst the network of mysterious rooms lies the next key that will bring you nearer to these fabulous riches. Where amongst the stone pillars and hidden dangers le mythical creatures that can perpetuate your life long enough to reach your ultimate goal. CBM 64/128 Cass.  9.99 Disk 14.99 ATARIST .99 USA GOLD AMSTRAD Cass.  9.99 Disk. .99 SPECTRUM 48/128K 8.99SCREEN SHOTS FROM AMSTRAD VERSION Senioren US. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 TECMO "


"ADVENTURE view we preview RIGEL'S hat is it like struggling to make the grade in the competitive world of adventure software? How does one go about setting up a full-time business, and what are the pitfalls? Over the past year, Keith Campbell has been following the progress of two accepted two-word input, visit the two firms, to adventure enthusiasts who have created and they decided to test the ascertain mettle of their system by projected Smart Egg software, and reviews their first recreating Colossal Cave sales big game Rigel's Revenge, a budget with a few variations-on a figures adventure from Mastertronic. Spectrum. Their next step would be to upgrade the Nigel Brooks is not only looked into the Enterprise parser from two to three an adventure Allowances Scheme, and words, but possibly no enthusiast he is a discovered it was possible further, since they feared businessman. A couple of to get a weekly payment of that the cost of supporting years ago, he decided, dra words to maintain together with his friend Said counselling. But first he had consistency might limit the Hassan, to write adventuresto demonstrate that he had games themselves. for commercial sale. a sound business idea, and Although it was not thier As boys, Nigel and Said that he could lay his hands original intention to publish were friends at a Prep on  to support the 'Adventure' (their version of school in Purley, when both business, if and when it Colossal) they were so their families moved home. became necessary. pleased with the end result, It was quite by chance that Nigel being strong on that they offered it on mail theymet up again at the age knowledge of adventures, order themselves, at the of 11, at Brighton College. had little difficulty in same time approaching a Said went on to obtain an persuading the powers that number of publishers, and A-level in Computer be that he knew his subject sent out review copies. Science, and then spent a well enough to make a go of Typical of the replies year at Hatfield Poly before it. He and Said have definite received was one from dropping out and deciding views about adventurers, Audiogenic, which, perhaps further study was not for him and how they will go about predictably, concluded that He got a contract in a writing them. Preferring text the Crowther and Woods telesoftware project at only, they believe that game had been done to Brighton Poly, developing graphics detract from a death. Nevertheless, it software for transmission to game unless they are of expressed an interest in any local schools. At the same really high quality, future adventures the pair time, he was writing The Pawn's graphics, they might come up with. educational software or a think, ae well justified, and More encouraging, freelance basis, for Letts although they see the however, was the reaaction Dairies. But O-level revision development of Level 9's of Mastertronic. Again, none subjects on the Beeb and system as having gone so too interested in Spectrum are not great far in terms of technical 'Adventure', Mastertronic money spinners, Said expertise, that the system was so impressed with the discovered, and so more now rules the game. So, way it performed, they sent and more he spent his spare accepting the need Nigel and Said a storyboard and time doing what he enjoyed commercially, for graphics, to evaluate, with a view to likely most-playing adventures. Smart Egg's would be producing the adventure for returns, Meanwhile, Nigel, too, different'. them. had a Spectrum, and a copy But knowledge of the Good news was soon to negotiate the of the Quill. He tried out a primary subject alone is not follow. Interceptor Software contracts. few ideas using it, and enough to run a business, accepted 'Adventure' for When I visited showed the results to Said. and so when Nigel's publication on their Players Smart Egg for a Sald liked what he saw, but proposed company was budget label, and progress report, Ross they both agreed that the accepted under the Mastertronic gave the go demonstrated his graphics Quill had too regimented an scheme, he took a number ahead for them to produce in a preview of Rigel's approach. So Said, by now of short courses to help with Rigel's Revenge the Revenge. they were truly an accomplished machinethe business side-such as storyboard they had been impressive in concept. But code programmer, went finance and marketing. evaluating. Plans for writing for Nigel and Said, there was ahead and developed his Consistency in an their own adventure, something of a crisis in the own Adventrue system. adventure is one of the already storyboarded and air. Nigel, unemployed, priorities of Smart Egg, and ready to roll, would have to The Mastertronic contract decided to set up in that means objects clearly wait, for here was an deadline for the Spectrum business as an adventure visible must be supported in opportunity too good to version was two days software company. He the program. Their parser miss. Nigel set off to hence. It was ever so nearly and 88 "


"REVENGE phone call elicited a of the device, first, of course, multiplicity of reasons, getting anything he can lay execuses, and his hands on, that might procrastination. Nigel was help him in the task ahead, getting bitter about it The graphics are not begin to see now how merely representations of people in the computer the locations they games business become actually contribute to the millionaires by not game. For example, paying any royalties!\" examine a door that has It took a lot of chasing, you worried, and you will and Nigel really had to get a couple of pictures a make a nuisance of himself, distance shot, and a close before he got a cheque up of the handle revealing a for a mere $183. \"I know trap. All instantly displayed, they've sold more copies and removed from the than that, but they now say screen for the resumption of their policy is not to pay until text play. they have been paid by the The problems are there, distributor.\" Nigel has and although some take a to complete the game! become very bit of thinking about the first Just to unsettle Nigel a knowledgeable about the one had me worrying for at little further, he sent form different companies' least five minutes!) none of him a postcard contracts can take, and them are too difficult, and towards the what to look for in them, as a the vocab and alternative end of this result of his experiences. commands allowed do not holiday \"Can you see the day frustrate the solving process. saving: when you will be able to liveSome of the replies have a on the business?\" I asked, footnote reference to them knowing that anytime now, (shades of Infocom!). Type the Enterprise scheme in FOOTNOTE 2, and you will allowances would be get advice to write to an running out. Nigel was Adventure Helpline, If you philosophical, No business can't solve the problem in can really expect to make a hand! The way this is profit in its first year,\" he handled is yet another said, \"It takes time.\" example of what sets the Patience and a modest game apart financial investment Despite its somewhat grim certainly seems to have theme, a sense of humour paid off for Smart Egg. After soon becomes apparent, a year or so establishing when, for example, Harper themselves in the Adventure gets lost in the desert. There world, things do at last seem is obviously a clue in the to be gathering momentum sand that will help get him for them. back to town-but EXAMINE SAND does not REVIEW give it. The game has a RAMSAVE SUPPLIER: MASTERTRONIC/ and RMLOAD facility, as SMART EGG well as tape. Despite being MACHINES: SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64, AMSTRAD non-Quilled, there is so AND ATARI much held in memory, that PRICE CASSETTE $1.99 the adventure comes in two REVIEWER: KEITH parts, and data must be The Rigellian war tape saved to move from raged. Harper dropped one to the other. Once into down from the part 2, however, a restart is scoutship. An nearby possible with that part, explosion ripped off his without having to reload the night-sight goggles, saved data. plunging him into darkness. The character set is very Nearby, a moan emanated clearly legible, displayed as from Elliott, lying mortally white on black, adding to Injured. the very professional The Rigellians have a performance of what must doomsday device. They be one of the highest quality plan to use it to devastate budget titles ever! The only \"Decid the planet if they lose the thing lacking is its price at ed to stay war.\" He urges Harper to $1.99 it's a snip. If on for another find and destroy the device. Mas Mastertronic continue to fortnight.\" He He is halfway through telling release adventures of this was joking, of him how, when he dies.. quality of this price, they course! Harper finds the town in could well revolutionise the It was now mid-May ruins, in the grip of war. cassette-based adventure and with \"Adventure\" on Shattered flexiglass from the market. Go out and buy it! the market for a good few dome which once enclosed months, the quarterly the town lies everywhere. VOCABULARY royalty payment from Rubble, barricades, and ATMOSPHERE Interceptor was well broken windows are all PERSONAL overdue. Phone call after around. He sets off in search VALUE ready, but Said was booked on an evening flight from Gatwick the following day, for a fortnight's holiday in Yugoslavia. Said worked all through that night-a 25hour stint in all and failed "


"Ultimy T Quest of the Avatar Quest ut ita Avatar D A D A AT ser MICRO PROSE Hote ll JOURNEY THROUGH THE LEGENDARY LAND OF (UDC WOC o bark on the test epicadvere l dimet the latest sequel the award Ultima saga is not here. Mondain, Minax and the hellspe Exodus have finally been vanquished from the lands of Britannia. Peace prevails, but a perfect mortal an Avatar-is sought to conquer evil and lead the nation into a golden age of prosperity. With a party of adventurers track evil to the furthest reaches. Explore towns and dungeons, converse with hundreds of characters to glean vital information, and unravel the my system. But, treadef o n dragons and long dead wadham same y tranquil places. Strategic use ofterrain and weapons is essential survive dangerous combat as youjoury to the final frontier. Only those who have pursued virtue to become an Avatan can brave the terrors of the Abyss. In this true fantasy classic the ultimate Solution lies within. Ultima IV. Available on disk for the CBM 64 and Atari. .95. Ultima TV Quest of the Avatar Please send _copy/ies of ULTIMATE Format Name Address Postcode Which magazine have you cut this coupon from? Please debit my Access/Visa Card No.IIIIIIIIIIIITT Expiry Date Cheques payable to MICROPROSE SOFTWARE LIMITED. I enclose .00 postage & packing. #HORIGIN SYSTEMS INC. Each ULTIMA sequel is a complete adventure in itself. For more information write to MicroProse Software Limited, 2 Market Place, TETBURY, Glos. GL8 8DA. "


"ADVENTURE helpline ADVENTURE Aberdeen, Matthew Conway. Clues Here it is. The one and only Adventure Helpline. THE place to get ALL the hints, tips and last, you have 000. Strike and solutions you could the middle, gives you 010\". But possibly need. Need a David Irwin suggests the helping hand? Then check opposite. He reckons its out KC's all purpose problem means 101, the binary number page! 5. Well? Every month the Helpline Ragnar Tornquist was mail brings a diversity of desperately trying to find problems usually Gramps, and this month Uwe centred on a 'moving Recknagel comes to his window of currently popular rescue, with a clue for Tass games. But every now and Times. But Uwe can't get to kill again, it seems, perhaps Franklin Snarl can anyone telepathically, a whole host help him give this archof adventurers gather around baddy his come-uppance? one problem, and stare at it Darren Sellwood of in amazement. This month's Blackpool, is playing Return most baffling problem is: How to Ithaca, and is trying to do you get past the she-bear avoid being captured by the in Colour of Magic? native with the wax figurine. This adventure is proving Sounds like a problem that difficult all around. Geoff will soon melt away, once Hale from Barcome in Sussex, C+VG adventurers put the doesn't know what to do next, heat on it! having rescued Twoflower The Sydney Affair is causing and bought a horse. lan Tustin of Northampton And then, of course, there's some heartache.lan is always the odd plea for usually quite content something really off the plodding through beaten track. Like that of M. adventures, but he just had to W. Nesbit of Redhill, who can't put pen to paper about this open the chest, nor use one. Every time he seems to magic in Firebird's be getting somewhere, it Runestone. Who can? comes up with the irritating Most adventures these message: 'Hey Boss, Wake up days are available for a \"Can you explain this?\" asks range of machines. lan. He has only one suspect, Occasionally, they vary an R. Renard, and is slightly from one machine to disappointed that Infograme another, although if so, the doesn't supply an address solution is roughly the same. However, it is not possible for customers. us to play every version of Where is Mr Video after the every game to check out the meeting in the arcade? What clues sent in by you, and is Cracker's gelignite for those that we glean other than suicide? And how ourselves. can you get rid of Italians Thus we came unstuck before they get rid of you? All recently, in giving advice on these questions are puzzling how to deal with the tramp in Jakob Sloth of Denmark, Spytrek Adventure. It seems playing a very dodgy game that a bug in the C-64 version, of Dodgy Geezers. makes this problem more Who can help Eddy James difficult than it should be, if to stop the professor shooting not impossible. Leslie at the end of Phil Wight was puzzled Redhawk? about the holy door message Mike Thomas of Caerphilly in Rebel Planet, Pauline is playing Frankenstein Garrett of Andover comes to Everything about the game is his rescue with this great, he thinks, bar the explanation: \"The message response time, and the fact refers to the five balls on an that he doesn't know what do arch above a temple you do in the blocked off doorway. If you ignore the first ice-crevice, with the vague Thanks for the help with month to: Wiliam Hern, Aberdeen; Matthew Conway, Lambour; Pauline Garrett, Andover, Uwe Rechnagel, euooz D M PUDIS! Bochum, W. Germany: Jakob | PHI DO THOI ev u s Sdubble Sloth, Ringkobing, Denmark; NMOLENOI NI WII SSVI Eddy James, Sunderland; jd  isuj opjd exp Mike Thomas, Caerphilly and suosse uoypisubi eund Marco Andreoli, Turin. \"P! Disko eut uedo  '  Is Pes HOLD uup pup' weils et D silinopodeu Yuup'upu ueb eyssod i spojlepinoq o doup pup 310LLLSNI DHI qojs Duo pupis psnu oqo7 ex et soewy ISSOINVI HO SHOU BOLOH ONIAN HI DMD wejqoid sjebbpjs Adoos hun 'qnjo busseid D sisseup e y luspunoj Bujang deex 17V: NOUVIS 14|| Dexus 'uyor 'loocano  sypios    upp ppel —   u upd SU3Z330 AGOS *Anagns peyd eyl  u  s 'j o uo sdiy ey dp u ' NIELSNINV: Outu UDWOM Out of dow 'sesseippo eejuu yleAB 's op eylssod oj SMOU Ajuo udubiqli eu jebbjudapD OF HIS \"Ojding Oy oth eseupdos Meu unoh eoyboid BAD-esnoyEDM U S OSD e ut-ploop buunojo XMVHANN a heq yoniq bewoseg \"NXV NOUVNIOVI epoo dyzvesn-jepoljeut upjunoja ulos aut ind Jo suini eyl u sujoo eyl NOXUV do Sinos ewip hex Do nol sexi dozd jet eylesneyi pup'ida PIOS  - q pq ujd  'sjud oyi uedo of * 3sanVONI shadow behind the wall? repeat it! Finally, help needed of a Before I go, here's different king! Come in Dave advance warning that the Ovens! You kindly offered Adventure Helpline will once maps for Bard's Tale. We not again be waiting to meet you only failed to print your and help with your problems, address, to make matters at the PCW at Olympia. The worse, we have now lost it! show runs from 23rd to 27th Write and let us know where September (first two days you live, Dave, and if your trade and Press only). More offer is still open, we will details in the next issue! "


"ADVENTURE round-up The Three Inferno Musketeers SUPPER: VANADIS response whatsoever. And there is a bug in part twodo not press COPY. With a few humorous moments, on the whole Inferno is one of those SERIOUS adventures. Treasure Island REVIEWER: JOHN LOONT Dusk over Elfinton  SUPPLIER: MASTERTRONIC MACHINES: COMMODORE 64/128, CASSETTE PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: KEITH QUICK-GUIDE RATING: 2  SUPPLIER: VANADIS SOFTWARE  MACHINES: BBC DISK SUPPLIER: COMPUTER PRICE: $14.95 inc P&P: MAIL NOVELS ORDER FROM: 37 JEUNE MACHINES: COMMODORE STREET, OXFORD 64/128, CASSETTE REVIEWER: JOHN 'LOONY PRICE: $9.95 YEATES REVIEWER: KEITH QUICK-GUIDE RATING: 8 QUICK-GUIDE RATING: 4 Go to hell, say Vanadis Not so much an Software! You've been adventure as a multipledumped in Dante's choice novel, the storyInferno, and must get out. concerns your mission to Dante's map of Hell is deliver a letter to England provided, but the scientist that will prevent the Queen who dumped you there says from being discredited by it's out of date. (I didn't know Cardinal Richelieu for giving Hell had been redesigned!) the Duke of Buckingham Two flippable 40-track disks some diamonds. sounds like a lot of Text narrative alternates adventure, until you discover between choices and action that it's been written with These are in most cases GAC, and it's split into four displayed sequentially, and parts. That means you get selected by pressing RETURN. pictures (yaay!) but also that In some cases, the range is the games are smaller. THE THRF MUSKETEERS I suppose this could be SUPPLIER: VIDEO GAMES called an adventure, MACHINE: SPECTRUM 48K, since it involves text CASSETTE PRICE: $2.95; MAIL ORDER Input, but is very strange, and FROM 1 GLANWORFYDD not very playable. To start HOUSE, RHOSAWWAN, with, play is in real time. AWWANFORD, SA18 1DP REVIEWER: MATTHEW Movement is by walking in a QUICK-GUIDE RATING: 6 set direction. Vocabulary is fairly Walking down a quiet minimal, as are the text alleyway, your eye replies, and often, entering a catches the reflection of direction such as NORTH, the moon on a broken mirror which I reckoned would turn On closer inspection, a me the right way before ghostly apparition is seen, WALKING, met with a \"Which which beckons you into way's that?\" another world. A TELESCOPE command It all starts off in a library puts a cross-hair on the and from here you venture screen, which can be aimed into numerous Quilled at anything in view for a locations. A two-part game, graphic magnification. Well, the first involves the retrieval anything that is in the same of an orb, whilst in the second horizontal plane as the cross you continue adventuring hairs, for they can only be around Elfinton. moved left and right. The problems entwined in Pictures can be turned off the game are often quite in which case it seems you hard, but not too difficult. The are almost playing in the vocabulary is fairly standard dark, for WALK brings no and there is no real trouble in response at all. trying to find the correct The inlay expands, and has phrase required comprehenvisve instructions, Not exactly my cup of tea, but sadly that telescope is but a good problem solving needed to read them! exercise. Treasure Island The The Musketeers The graphics are most jolly, limited to a choice of two i never knew Hell was so actions, and those presented colourfull Unfortunately, there are rather contrived. For doesn't sem to be a way of example, when charged with killing them, despite the fact your mission, do you rush off that GAC supports this by jumping out of the window, feature. or hurry through the door? Inferno has quite long Very little gameplay is atmospheric descriptions somewhat offset by some (maximum 255 characters). effective graphics, in most vocabulary is adequate, and cases digitised from photos. a list is even provided. It is a There is a terrible dirge that pity, though, that you can't accompanies the whole SAY (answer) but have to game, but this can easily be ANSWER (answer). The text at turned off, and probably will the start of part one suffers be. badly from typos; another It is not an orthodox bad point is that some adventure commands simply have no "


"New Works Scum a lake Over DEATH WISH 3 The big screen classic, in which modern day vigilante Paul Kersey wreaks his own form of revenge on the scum and filth that terrorise the streets of modern day New York. For too long the gangs have run wild, unchallenged in their peverted attacks and violations of innocent citizens. Muggings and robberies have become a daily feature of city life. So when the chief of police turns a blind eye you decide to take over where the law left off. OPINTS 193888 = 8 Strap on your famous 475 WILDEY MAGNUM, turn yourself into a one man fighting force armed with pump action shotgun, machine gun and rocket launcher. Now turn the tables on the punks and creeps who certainly know how to dish out the violence but may not be so good at being on the receiving end. \"Die SPECTRUM 48/128K Cassette .99 MSX Cassette .99 CBM 64/128 & AMSTRAD Cassette .99 Disk .99 Yon lo Stop He Down Them... Gremlin Graphics Software Limited. Alpha House. 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 455. Tel: 0742 753423 REINILIM 1986 Cannon Productions NV "


"re reviews SUPPLIER: RAINBIRD/LEVEL 9 MACHINES: COMMODORE 64, ATARI 800, AMSTRAD CPC, AMSTRAD PCW/CPC, ATARI ST and AMIGA PRICE: $14.95 (cass + disc) ST AND AMIGA/$19.99 REVIEWER: KEITH A band of orcs, comered in the cellar of the Orcs Head Tavern, has challenged Sir Cecil to a Fight of Champions. Under the rules of the contest, provided their own Champion remains behind to fight, the rest may leave. And flee they do, leaving you, Grindleguts, the most drunken of the bunch, to the tender mercies of the joust. Just to make sure you enter the spirit of the thing, and don't escape or fall off your steed, they have tied you to and those familiar with the series of directional habits of the Uruk-hai, commands to get to a pronounce the word by particular destination. If you gathering a mass of phlegm type GO TO CASTLE then all and gobbing it as far as the replies you would have possible! received in typing in each But back to the plot. The move separately, are joust over, and given up for displayed, until either you dead, you crawl out of a reach the castle, or can go comfortable pile of garbage, no further due to some to go in search of anything obstruction. Alternatively, you that will join together to make can RUN TO CASTLE, and an extended rope. Like the merely arrive there, or even halyard on the flagpost, the ask someone else to go and hawser in the well-even the carry out whatever chore you very robe the hermit is have in mind, whilst you get wearing and a bit of cord on with something else. Mind supporting the lid of a chest. you, that's not to say they will Co-operate, for some of them have a decidedly stubbom streak! In fact, Denzyl is the only controllable character in the first part. Not all versions have graphics but the bigger machines do. In Part 2, things become very strange, for two parallel worlds exist — the ancient and the modern — both extremely similar yet intriguingly different. with the game comes a 36-page manual containing full instructions, and a novella. I can usually take on KNIGHT ORC Meanwhile, with the Orcs Head Tavern Ladies' Bowling The countryside is Team in hot pursuit, the band scattered with an amazing of orcs demolish the bridge amount of gold treasures spanning the chasm leading not the objects of your to Orcs Head Tower. Your job attention in this game, in Part One is to make a rope except insofar as they may long enough to get across help to distract the local the chasmand that's a lot population who are thirsting of rope, believe me! for a drop of orc's blood. Knight Orc is a single game There are plenty of them, too, in three parts, and the first part like Boadicea, Odin, is really provided to help the Muscleman, The Liquidiser, player explore the way the Kris and Denzyl. ice in the distance shouts, how do 7 get a drink out of the new adventure system works. Movement is through What now? run to castle Parts Two and Three are the normal direction commands, You are outside...ali.castle in a houbertang. Exits lead in all real guts of the adventure, in directions and inside Tou can sha r e is closed but, unless you prefer to, there which you learn to use male voice in the distance shouts, Stop attacking her is no need to painstakingly We won't bother with what o magical spells, recruit fron now on, > knock on the drawbridge make a map, or to issue a followers, and escape. To be successful, you must leave a novella. So often they act like an orc. So what are consist of so much contrived orcs really like? According to drivel to lend a degree of the manual, they are credibility to the game plot. pungent people of elvish But The Sign of the Orc is stature, with the charisma of really amusing, and is a good blow flies and the appetite of read in its own right. It really IS gannets. They are particularly useful, too, for the game starts cowardly, too. In the game it where the story ends, and so usually pays to run like hell. you feel you know many of The orc philosophy, in a the characters when you start nutshell, 'disgusting is playing beautiful, runs throughout the You are on an east-vest road. To the west is a huge bridge. Exits lead north Here is an adventure that is northeast, east, south, southeast, southwest and west. You can see the troll game, and provides much of and a lump of driftwood. like nothing you've ever the humour. EXAMINE URUK, played before. You go south and are on a bank at the eastern side of a north-South river, for example, produces Exits lead north, northeast, east, south, southeast, southwest, west and VOCABULARY ATMOSPHERE C+VG information that he is a trollish northwest. > jump in river  PERSONAL creature of great pungency,  VALUE ooo "


"LURKING HORROR SUPPLIER: ACTIVISION/ INFOCOM  MACHINES: COMMODORE 64/128,AVARI X E, AMSTRAD PCW + CPC, ATARI ST and AMIGA. PRICE: CBM, ATARI, determined not to let you hell-bent on putting a stop to put The Lurking Horror on AMSTRAD/.99; ST, AMIGA/$29.99 pass. But is he really a what seems to be a fakeover the same level as Stationfall, REVIEWER: KEITH maintenance man? Come to of the college by an evil although, preferring sciencethat, is he really a man? A life-force. fiction to horror, purely as a On a cold winter's night, cold shiver runs down your Very much in the style of a matter of personal taste, with a blizzard raging spine as he disintegrates, modern horror movie, this is found this slightly less outside, you find yourself and turns into dozens of an Infocom shocker from enthralling. If you are into trapped in the computer squealing little creatures who Dave Lebling, whose graphic horror, and into adventures, building of the George disappear at great speed text makes graphics get into The Lurking Horror! Underwood Edwards Institute down the corridor redundant. It will leave you, of Technology. Never mind, Before long you have more than once, feeling VOCABULARY ATMOSPHERE you have an assignment to forgotten about your slightly queasy and decidPERSONAL get finished by tomorrow, assignment, and become edly uneasy VALUE there is only one other student using the computer terminals, so now is the time to get on with it You log into the system, edit the paper on which you are working, but instead, some very strange text fills the screen. Mesmerised by its nightmarish quality, you faint. When you come round, you find yourself clutching a cool, smooth stone with some weird markings on it. Your colleague, a hacker if ever there was one, comes over to see if you are all right. He diagnoses that your life server has been corrupted and somehow entangled with that of the Alchemy department So you head for Alchemy but, with most of the college buildings locked up for the night, your route takes you down into the basements and tunnels that link the various buildings of the campus. Students have been warned not to venture into these parts, for they are old and decrepit, being part of the original buildings that once stood on the site, and held to be dangerous. It soon becomes apparent that something very nasty is going on down there... The first hint that anything is amiss comes when you reach the Aero building, and start to traverse the so-called infinite corridor' to Alchemy. A maintenance man is riding a floor waxer, and is "


"TRANTOR THE LAST STORM TROOPER The order of the solar system as kept for thousands of years by the people of Zyber was coming apart. Growing dissatisfaction in outlying planet bodies increased as their technological achievements reached greater heights. Zybor reacted in the only way len to it whilst the technological advantage remained in its handa. And so Trantor was brough from out of the ranks of the warriors forces where a brutal streak and rebellious nature made sure he talenta never realised their full potential. His credentials were perfect his mission was simple, to lead aband of out mercenaries and math the growing power of the New World NEBULITHONEbel its atomic threat tumed into an awesome cataclysm of conflict. But the Nebithons were not unprepared and when on return from a reconnaisance scouting. Tranter found the remains of hin undercover force scattered amongst the alien Landscape along with the last fragments of his battle cruiser, hefelt the hate and rage surge through his body and within the ice cold compartment of his mind, he recognised the burden that now lay with him, that all now depended on he Trantor, the Last Stormtrooper. SPECTRUM +3 .99 SPECTRUM 48/128K .99 AMSTRAD TAPE .99 Disk .99 CBM 64/128 TAP: .99 Disk .99 Coming soon on Atari ST .99 0.0 0.2 TDOO 28 Senshot from Amstrad version Screenshots from Spectrum Version TOMORROW'S SOFTWARE TODAY Units 23. Holford Way. Holford. Birmingham B6 7AX Tel: 021 356 3388 probe "


"ADVENTURE The Tiend.... brought his glead Ebefore \"Did you read the I would like to say this, but I mailbag pages (July) can't, as it isn't, and I didn't! and Frank Gilbert's But us Fiends are nothing if wonderful little letter?\" asks not stubbom, and turning the Mike Thomas. \"Deary me, he full force of my megabrain in must be rather short sighted if its direction, I eventually he can't see that yours is THE overcame, finally completing adventure column! A curse the game with bandanna on him for his nasty waving proudly in the breeze, scribblings!\" This breeze was the residue of Yes, Mike, I noticed alright. Hurricane Alexis, so beloved But I didn't worry too much. of Matt. The editor digs out letters like So, faithful Fiend fans, who this every now and again as a was right, complainer or pre-emptive move when he complainee? The case for gets an instinctive feeling the prosecution has some that I am about to ask for a FIEND merit, as the logical raise! sequence of the problem is The Adventure pages in well thought out, and if Matt C+VG are a forum for really hadn't fixed the beer/ adventurers' views, and over hurricane problem, then he the years a number of the wasn't overly far into the more longwinded readers game. have become household However, The Fiend has names to regular readers of noticed that most of you the column. One such, humans are not blessed with renowned for his loony letters, the tenacity of a Fiend, nor is John Yeates, a native of the brainpower for that Jersey, and an avid follower matter, and I suspect that of Pimania in its time. many a poor mortal would be John still writes, in fact he reduced to a gibbering wrote a review a couple of frantic heap by this game! months back. \"But where did In my humble opinion (not it go?\" many readers have that I am ever humble) Matt asked. Having seen it got it right! This may have mentioned in the Helpline, no been a biffo game in 1981, but one could find the actual it pales in comparison with ... review, and were keen to see ah, but that would be telling, what John would come up wouldn't it? with when put to the test. User friendly game this is Unfortunately, it didn't make it not! Time after time I found into the available space. myself inputting verbs with Because the game the first letter missing concerned was of a more because the program minor appeal than the others THE FIEND IS REVEALED!! decreed, for reasons best that month, it was consignedgave an excellent game a So someone has written known to itself, that I should to that great pile labelled bad rating. So I passed Ray's \"a letter of complaint. Ha! press ENTER before 'overmatter. But don't worry comments, along with a copy The Flend LIKES letters of continuing. And as for the GET -John will be back! of the game, to the Fiend, complaint. I should, as I write ALL command, by all that is Another who has graced and waited for the vitriol to enough of them myself. So it fiendish why does the stupid these pages is the ultra pour out. was with professional interest thing insist on trying to pick anonymous Faringdon Fiend. One thing can be that I read what Ray had to up narrow crevasses and No We REALLY don't know gathered from the Fiend's say about Matt's review of dark openings, particularly who he is! But his cutting analysis. The game has lost a Savage Island Part I. when each fry moves the comments are now being lot in conversion from the Hmmmm. It appeared that he hurricane nearer? cunningly and constructively TRS-80 to the Spectrum didn't quite agree with Matt's Had parts one and two diverted away from yours It also seems to have appraisal. been packaged together at truly gained something-bugs! So loading up old faithful. $7.95, then despite all that I Ray Fearnley of Heydon, Bugs of the sort that seem to The Fiend set out to discover have said, I would have no recently wrote taking young have been created by what all the fuss was about reservations in Matthew to task over his someone converting the And I would like to say right at recommending it as real review of Savage Island Part I, original work, without a the start that I found the value for money. But as it Ray felt that Matthew, finding sufficiently intimate game so simple that it stands, this is one for Scott it too difficult to get very far, knowledge of the subtleties completed it within the first Adams freaks and software gave up too soon and thus of the plot. hour! historians. "


"P.O. BOX 14, BUTTS GREEN RD. HORNCHURCH, ESSEX, RM11 1HT. MUSIC BY MAIL DE PAR VIKARIAT OPENING OFFER AMSTRAD PRICE 8888888888888 1.65 Vodenicienciacicieli i  275 SPECTRUM COMM 64 ELECTRON TITLE PRICE TITLE PRICE TITLE TITLE PRICE WORLD CUP FOOTBALL 1.65 GOLF 1.65 ON THE OCHE (DARTS) GOLF 1.65 TITANIC ON THE OCHE (DARTS) 1.65 STARSHIP COMMAND DEATH KICK SNOOKER AH CONDOR 1.65 1.65 PENGI CODE NAME MATT GOLF WORLD CUP FOOTBALL 1.65 1.65 3D MAZE SHADOW FIRE SPEC CHESS JOHNNY REB II 1.65 1.65 1.65 JOHNNY REB 11 PEGLEG VIDEO POOL 1.65 TORNADO LOW LEVEL 1.65 ROLAND GOES DANCING CASINO ROYALE SUPER HANDMAN RIVER RESCUE 1.65 1.65 1.65 STARSHIP ENTERPRISE RIG ATTACK LORDS OF MIDNIGHT ALIEN BREAK-IN 1.65 1.65 ALPHA TRN ATOM SMASHER ARCADE ACTION PYSTRON 1.65 1.65 UK PM CASEY JONES 1.65 SABRE WOLF JEMS OF STRADUS 1.65 WET ZONE SPACE HAWKS TITANIC SPY'S DEMISE 1.65 1.65 BOUNCING BOMBS BLUE MAX 1.65 TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY CRAZY GOLF 1.65 FIVE-A-SIDE SOCCER SNOOKER 1.65 PSI. WARRIOR LASER WARP 1.65 GUNSMOKE ASTRO ATTACK TIR NA NOG A VIEW TO A KILL 1.65 1.65 2.75 BLAGGER SUPER POOL UNDERWURLD 165 CODE NAME MATTI 2.75 STRATO BOMBER LUCKY FRUITS 1.65 1.65 ENIGMA FORCE TURBO 64 PILOT 64 WARLORD HYPER DRIVE 1.65 A VIEW TO A KILL SUPERMAN SULTAN'S MAZE CATERPILLA 1.65 CODE NAME MATTI SPECIAL OPERATIONS INVADERS 1.65 SUPERMAN 2.75 JET SET WILLIE HUNTER KILLER NEXUS 3D BOMB ALLEY 1.65 SABRE WOLF BROAD STREET MASTER CHESS BLITZKRIEG INTERNATIONAL KARATE 1.65 2.75 ELECTRO FREDDY ON COURT BASEBALL 2.75 TALES OF ARABIAN NIGHTS EUREKA JET BOOT JACK CYCLON INVASION 2.75 FRANKIE GOES 10 HOLLYWOOD2.75 BROAD STREET 2.75 PUNCHY TREK II WAR ON WANT ENIGMA FORCE 2.75 2.75 2.75 SPACE CAVERS HAUNTED HEDGES 2.75 BEACH HEAD PYSTRON 2.75 3.75 BOZO THE BRAVE CODE NAME MATT II ON COURT FOOTBALL Ms. PACMAN 2.75 3.75 2.75 A VIEW TO A KILL WORLD SERIES BASEBALL THEATRE QUIZ (2 TAPES) ENDURO 2.75 3.75 2.75 COMBAT LYNX GEOFF CAPES STRONG MAN CRIME & DETECTN (2 TAPES) 3.75 2.75 MIND SHADOW MUSIC QUIZ (2 TAPES) 3.75 GHOSTBUSTERS SUPERMAN 3.75 2.75 SPACE SHUTTLE HISTORY QUIZ (2 TAPES) 3.75 LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE SPLIT PERSONALITIES 3.75 2.75 FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD3.75 SCIENCE QUIZ 12 TAPES) BRUCE LEE GLADIATORS 3.75 2.75 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT ROYAL QUIZ (2 TAPES) 3.75 TOUR DE FRANCE SOFTWARE STAR 3.75 2.75 PACMAN I DO (2 TAPES) 3.75 HERBERT'S DUMMY RUN DALEY THOMPSON DECATHLON 4.25 2.75 PITFALL 2 DATING GAME (2 TAPES) 3.75 BALLBLAZER CHOPPER SQUAD 4.25 2.75 THE YOUNG ONES BIOLOGY (2 TAPES) 3.75 DEUX EX MACHINA STAR COMMANDO 4.25 2.75 SKY FOX ENGLISH (2 TAPES) 3.75 MERMAID MADNESS 4.25 HUNCHBACK 2.75 ROBOTTON HOME RUNNER BLUE MAX HACKER 2.75 4.95 4.25 HEATHROW MANIC MINER GHOSTBUSTERS TRAIL BLAZER 2.75 4.25 4.95 ALIEN MINESHAFT BALLBLAZER 2.75 LIGHT FORCE 4.25 4.95 ZANY KONG JNR. BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK SKY RUNNER GO TO HELL 2.75 4.25 4.95 FU KUNG IN LAS VEGAS HEATHROW ATC DEACTIVATORS 2.75 PITFALL 10 4.25 4.95 FRIDAY THE 13TH TEMPEST 2.75 WINTER SPORTS PITFALL 4.25 MASTER OF THE LAMPS DONKEY KONG OVERDRIVE 2.75 MATCH POINT 4.95 DIG DUG FIGHTING WARRIOR 2.75 SMASH'N'GRAB LIGHT FORCE 4.95 MONOPOLY/SCRABBLE/CLUEDO KAISER 2.75 TRAIL BLAZER 4.95 ARKANOID AMERICAN FOOTBALL 3.75 ORBIX 4.95 PRESIDENT MUTANT MONTY 3.75 COMBAT LYNX 5.75 HEADCOACH WINTER SPORTS FIGHTER PILOT 3.75 PAPER BOY 5.95 GOLF COMBAT LYNX MARBLE MADNESS 3.75 GOLF (KONAMI) THEY SOLD A MILLION IN MERMAID MADNESS DANGER RANGER BOMB JACK 2 DEACTIVATORS MR DIG LEADER BOARD (GOL) ARKANOID PENGON ACE LIGHT FORCE ITS A KNOCKOUT 4.95 TUTTI FRUTTI INFILTRATOR PRESIDENT BOBBY BEARING AVENGER BUG OFF 4.95 HEADCOACH SKYFOX KONAMI COIN OP HITS CANNIBALS 5.75 TARZAN BACK TO THE FUTURE SUPERMAN CAT TRAP PAPER BOY INTERNATIONAL KARATE PITFALL II GAUNTLET GAUNTLET SPACE SHUTTLE PRESIDENT TARZAN FIST 2 10TH FRAME THEY SOLD A MILLION II BOMB JACK 2 INRLTRATOR SPACE HARRIER FOOTBALL THEY SOLD A MILLION WORLD GAMES KONAMI COIN OP HITS MANAGER THEY SOLD A MILLION II 7.95 FIST 2 ACE THEY SOLD A MILLION IN 7.95 CHAMP'SHIP WRESTLING GAUNTLET 9.95 SPECTRUM C64 KONAMI COIN OP HITS 2.50 7.95 10TH FRAME BOMB JACK 2 LEADER BOARD C.16 BBC. ATARI 7.95 PRESIDENT (DISC) LEADER BOARD 12.95 SPACE HARRIER 7.95 HEADCOACH (DISC) 12.95 SPACE HARRIER 9.95 AMSTRAD ELECTRON VIC 20 NEW ARRIVALS NEW ARRIVALS AMSTRAD AMSTRAD C64 SPECTRUM ARNHEN 3.75 SPINDIZZY DISC 5.75 FA CUP FOOTBALL 5.75 INT. RUGBY 1.65 THING ON A SPRING 3.75 STEVE DAVIS SNOOKER DISC 5.75 KUNG FU MASTER 5.75 ZOIDS 2.75 MONTY ON THE RUN 3.75 NIGHT GUNNER DISC 5.75 FIGHTER PILOR (Disc) 5.75 SKYRUNNER 2.75 GHOSTBUSTERS DISC 5.75 LORD OF THE RINGS 6.95 KORINIS RIFT 5.75 SAM FOX STRIP POKER 3.75 FAIRLIGHT DISC 5.75 TIME TUNNELL 5.75 BACK TO THE FUTURE 3.75 KUNG FU MASTER DISC 5.75 C64 FIGHT NIGHT 5.75 FRIDAY THE 13TH 3.75 BATMAN DISC 5.75 DAMBUSTERS 5.75 MAX HEADROOM 3.75 LAW OF THE WEST DISC 5.75 3.75 ZAP SIZZLERS 6.95 SUPERSLEUTH J REB II DISC 5.75 BIGGLES 3.75 LORD OF THE RINGS 6.95 FIGHTING WARRIOR 3.75 SHOGUN DISC 5.75 HARDBALL 3.75 GRAHAM GOOCH CRICKET (DISC)6.95 ARNHEM 3.75 DISC 5.75 SHOGUN RED ARROW 4.95 WORLD CUP CARNIVAL 3.75 DAMBUSTERS 4.95 ZORRO 3.75 MERMAID MADNESS 3.75 VIRGIN ATLANTIC CHALLENGE 3.75 LORD OF THE RINGS 6.95 ATARI 4/800XL NORTY && LOONNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN 88 88 eine 88888888888 8888888888888888 8888 9.95 NEW ARRIVALS STEVE GUNNERINGS 3.75 ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT & DELIVERY PLEASE MAKE CHEQUES OR POSTAL ORDERS PAYABLE TO MUSIC Y MAIL "


"The Ultimate-Golf Challenge World Class LEADER BJARD Full scoreboard printout. Course Editor allows you to arrange any of the holes from all four courses to form your own personal 18 hole golf course. (Disk) More trees (upto 192 per hole), traps and rough. Practice putting green and driving range. Improved graphics and playability increase difficulty and add realism. TH Aerial view gives you a bird's eye view of the course and your position One to four players can compete in MEDAL, MATCHPLAY and BETTER BALL competitions. Realistic choice of club, distance, type of shot (hook, slice or putting). Unlimited backups of World Class Leaderboard can be made for your archives. (Disk) U.S. Gold proudly present the final challenge in the Leaderboard series World Class Leaderboard the citimate test of your skill and ludgement, the unparalleled successor to Leaderboard and Leaderboard Executive. Now you have the opportunity to play the same courses that have challenged golf's greatest legends, three famous and classic 18 hole golf courses in which each hole is authentically reproduced for distance, traps, trees and water hazards. St Andrews Doral Country Club Cypress Creek And the fourth, the \"Gauntlet Country Club\" has been specifically designed for the \"World Class Leaderboard\" challenge-only those who can master the testing conditions of the best golf courses in the world will come near to mastering \"The Gauntlet\". Whether at novice, amateur or professional levels, \"World Class Leaderboard\" will challenge you with the same demanding strategy, skill and decision making options set by its real life counterpart. The Gauntlet-designed to create the greatest test of a golfer's true skills and abilities. Few courses combine such a searching trial of accuracy and courage, harrowing and perilous in the extreme. EUROPEAN COMPUTER GOLF CHAMPION 1987 In honour of the outstanding excellence of this, the ultimate golf game, U.S. Gold have organised a competition to find the European Computer Golf Champion of 1987. In every World Class Leaderboard game there is a scoreboard. Practice your skills, test your courage and then play your best possible round on the ltimate course The Gauntlet-Record your best score, have it verified by an independent witness and send it to U.S. Gold. Novice, Amateur and Professional there's a prize for each:Professional: a full set of Ping golf clubs \"the ultimate club in the world.\" Amateur: a full set of Gallagher golf clubs-a superb asset in improving your game. Novice: 10 free golf lessons with the teaching professional\" of your local golf club. When all entries have been received closing date 31st September 1987 the top four players at each level will be called to a central venue to play-off for the title European Computer Golf Champion 1987 and receive their trophies and prizes. VILDE TIL HEIL screenshots from CBM64128 version ACCESS CBM 64/128 .99 TAPE .99 Disk AMSTRAD .99 TAPE .99 DISK SPECTRUM 48/128K .99 TAPE SPECTRUM +3 .99 DISK U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way. Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388. U.S. GOLD "


"COMPUTER +VIDEO CAMES O MASTEI PHOTON 0 THE ULTIMATE GAME ON PLANET EARTH alling all space cadets! Here's YOUR chance to become C+ VG's Master Blaster thanks to LJN Toys and Nexus. We've got a crateload of the amazing Photon laser games up for grabs just like the well wicked gear worn by the spaced out C+VG reader on this page! Laser gun games are all the rage this summer so if you want to be the most talked about person in your street you won't want to miss out on this chance to win some of the best phasergear around. The Photon system has features not found in other laser gun outfits. The guns are interactive which means you aren't limited to firing at a simple target if you've got a friend with another Photon gun. That also means that you don't have to buy all the helmets and add-ons to play especially as we're GIVING away complete sets of gear! All that and the guns actually turn themselves off saving battery power if you leave them lying around for a while, just the thing for absent minded zappers. First prize winner will get the incredible Photon \"double warrior\" set which includes two special Photon helmets, two Photon guns plus a whole bunch of accessories essential for the complete enjoyment of a Photon session. Two runners up will get the Photon \"solo warrior\" set each comes with a red or green helmet plus the Photon gun and accessories. What do you have to do to win one of these truly awesome prizes? Simple. Just look at the completely naked Photon helmet on this page and imagine just how YOU'D like it to be decorated. How about a bit of street-cred graffiti? Or why not try the ALIEN battered and bruised look? Whatever you fancy. Once you've worked out your design, transfer it to the special blank C+VG Photon helmet and send it together with the coupon, to Computer, and Video Games, Master Blaster Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is September 16th. "


"RBLASTER! THE ULTIMATE GAME ON PLANET EARTH C+VG/LJN TOYS/NEXUS PHOTON COMPETITION | NOJOHD Name Name Address Age "


"MORE FUN THAN A BARREL FULL OF MONKEYSE THE NIPPER... Help! Stop! The country has had enough, no more can It take of the devilish pranks and obnoxdous behaviour of darfing ittle Jack. Off to aland where many of your kind were banished long before. Off to Australia Jack you must goll! ius Britanss per is deported to the Australia Its no fue being cooped sp. Maybe there's somethlag dom there that fancies being me ... bitten ... sparat or pinched. As ever poor Mom and Dad dutifully follow their saseating little offspring \"I don't like your stinking climate anyway you coughlsplatter...lgs. There's plenty of places just waiting for me. Hallbluffed Jack deflantly On the ground, is the air, you can't keep mischief maker out of trouble and with all those pretty air hostesses around... well what do you expect WE LA ENTILI Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S145 Tel: (0742) 753423 Screenshots from Spectrum version Capture the full excitement of Jack and his Jungle capers with this super full colour wall poster. Only 99p post and packing included. Order form in the game CBM 64/128 Cassette .99 Disk .99 rozana SPECTRUM 48/128K Cassette .99 endingar AMSTRAD Cassette .99 Disk .99 "


"Rock On down : To begin with this month Kerrang! Yeah it's Wayne Bootleg, the This is Death's debut album would like to thank all the thrash wizard, bringing you the latest and and in my mind it is an instant readers out there who wrote in classic. There are many Thrash and supported the page. It just greatest metal releases. This issue we look greatest men bands around at the moment goes to show that a lot of at a great new indie band Fields of Nephilm but there are only a few REALLY people out there have other and an essential new Thrash release. Play it GOOD Thrash bands. Death fall interests apart from playing in the latter catagory. This computer games 24 hours a loud! album is vicious and nasty. It day. In fact one person who trade and put them on this to get started with. Tracks like packs a meaner punch than wrote in has managed to album. The album has a 'The Shape Of Things To Come' Mike Tyson! The album is combine both music and freshness, with a clean sound which kicks off the album and classy, classic thrash with computer games to great effect. which purposely becomes \"She's Got the look\" sets out shrieking shots of short, The person in question likes ragged at the edges. At times the band's stall. However, my bursting guitar plus savage to listen to Drokken at full the sound reminded me of early favourites are the closing two vocals. Producer Randy Burns volume whilst blowing aliens Dio but then the music would tracks, which incidentally are has obtained the perfect Thrash away in games like Elite and quickly change into a pseudo both recorded live, \"Too Late\" sound and atmoshpere. The Slap Fight. He reckons that the Sabbath type blast. They have a and a tremendous version of tracks seem to mould into one music increases his combination of sounds which the Michael Shenker Group's another and it seems like that performance and puts him they use to good effect. This is 'Armed And Ready' there are no breaks at all. Listen more in the mood by keeping one of the rare bands which can to Denial of Life, Sacrificial and him on edge. If you decide to try carry off a ballad as well as a the brilliant Mutilation and see out the combination of sound real rocker. DEATH/ what I mean and shoot'em up, write in and when I read that lead guitarist SCREAM BLOODY GORE I don't know how they are let me know the results. I'll send Martin Bushell had left the UNDER ONE FLAG going to beat this with their a couple of albums to the ranks, I wondered where they This band has been around the next recording as they have set people who have the funniest would find someone of his thrash metal scene for quite a a very high standard with this results. quality to fill the obvious void while... but in many various first album. Even the cover is Right, we'll move onto the that he left. However, when I forms. In fact they have had excellent, probably the best I've music quiz in the July issue. It found out that Brian \"Robbo\" more band changes than I have seen this year. came as no great surprise to me Robertson, ex Thin Lizzy, had hot dinners, so I won't go An essential Thrash buy! that 99.9% of the people who Motorhead and Wild Horses, into the different versions of the wrote in and answered the had taken his place I was very many line ups they have had in FIELDS OF NEPHILM/ question got it right. In fact pleased. If anyone can fill the past! However it will suffice DAWNRAZOR/ there was only one wrong Bushell's shoes Robbo can. It is to say that lead guitarist and SITUATION TWO answer and boy was it wrong!! easy enough to see why he vocalist, Chuck Schuldiner, was I make no apologises for The question I set was \"Who is joined as Barden's vocals will one of the original founder reviewing an 'Indie' band which the bassist in Motorhead?\" and complement robbo's guitar members of the band, has now Owes much more to Punk than the answer is of course Lemmy playing style and musically this put together a great trio, which rock. In fact I have received a lot Kilminster. Being a kind hearted band is ideally suited for him. consists of himself plus John of mail asking me to review soul I would have taken Lemmy Statetrooper is the band's Hand on rhythm guitar and more \"alternative and indie as well. However, one poor soul debut album and it is a nice one Chris Riefert on stix. material. This is yet another wrote in and said the answer debut album and like the others was Wurzle. If Lemmy finds out band reviewed on this page, the I don't think he'd be too band has played out of their pleased!!!! skin. Anyway the lucky winners of It is inevitable that critics will the albums are: Catherine compare this band to the now Hughes of Gwent, R. Proctor of defunct Sisters Of Mercy. Whilst Brighton, Diane Fisher of it is true that they have the Harwich, Harry Black of London and P. Osborne of Bradford. same general sound and lead singers vocal sound slightly like Well with that out of my the Sisters' old vocalist Andrew system I'd better get on with Eldritch, the band do have a reviewing this months selection more western flavour. This of albums, which all have at together with the use of pieces least one thing in common: of tape from \"Nightmare On they are all debut albums. Elm Street\" as overdubs gives the band a much more sinister STATETROOPER/ and horrific aspect. Also UNDER ONE FLAG Nephilm have a distinct organ When Gary Barden resigned his sound in their line up which position as vocalist in the greatly enhances their musical Michael Shenker Group, he capacity. The band will be moved around a bit from band probably be branded as to band and then finally decided \"Goths\" for their use of dry ice to form a band of his own. and black clothes. In fact, I think Statetrooper is the result. they owe more to the style of In Statetrooper he has Mad Max than the Goths!! gathered together a group of I really do like the sound that accomplished musicians who they have come up with. It is produce a very capable form of given full airing in Preacher Heavy Metal M.D.R. rock. They have taken the all tricks of the von 1 45 1 "


"immediately formed Holy This album is a real pleasure to who is the lead singer of Terror as he wanted to progress listen to. Anthrax. If that's too hard, there in a new direction. He enlisted is an album to the person who various unknowns into the band WIN AN EAR BASHING! gives me the wrong answer, but as well Mike Avalord, ex Black Yes, as in previous columns, sends it on the postcard which Widow as support lead you can win a copy of one of the is in the \"Worst possible taste\", guitarist. albums above by answering a See ya in two months and With this album he has ridiculously easy question. All don't forget to keep progressed from the norm. He you have to do is let me know headbanging!! has taken the classic elements Man and in the scary, haunting of Heavy Metal and superbly Reanimator where you can blended them with the finer imagine a body screaming the points of Thrash Metal. The lyrics \"Reanimate me, result is a unique sound which REANIMATE ME NOW!!\". has all the aggression and Really effective stuff. speed ot Thrash, but the style When the Sisters split up! and technique of Metal. The was looking for a band to fill the music is very, very good and void they left behind. Wayne the production is superb. The Hussey and Craig Adams guitar solos actually sound like formed the pop based Mission, they are lifted off, up and away which are far too commercial from the background music and for my tastes, whilst Andrew they are as clear as a bell. Eldritch formed the unorthodox Keith Deen's lead vocals are but excellent Sisterhood, that clear and for once you can TELOR seem to release a record once a understand all the words. This decade. Now The Fields of brings me to the one weak point Nephilim are here and the void of the L.P. The lyrics are in the SUBNE ssion has now been filled. same vein as Bathory (reviewed last issue) and are all about GEISHA/ devil worship and the dammed. PHANTASMAGORIA/ They don't vary one iota and I HEAVY METAL for one would like to see a bit WORLDWIDE more variation, to see if they can produce lyrics in a different Geisha are a quarter of Danish vain. glam rockers/shockers that try Overall though this is a to tread the same as tremendous debut album, the Wrathchiled. They rely a lot on their looks, their \"Megamusical quality of the band mayhemic phantasmal\" speaks louder than the words. stageshow. They also lean rather heavily on their reputation for being obsessed with tribal warefare and warrior like symbolism. They would like to be seen as urban terrorists dressed in Gary Glitter's clothes!! After listening to their album, it is easy to see why they play a lot upon the aforementioned points. You see the music is little more than mundane pomp rock. Although they try, and try very hard at that, they soon fall into the old rock and roll rut. One point I did like though was the length of the tracks. Gangland Sector 21 is a full seven minutes long and it is very rare nowadays that you hear a track as long as that. In fact all the tracks on side one are quite lengthy as it contains only three numbers in all. The band's lead singer, Yenz Cheyenne, stands ouit above al, with a natural voice that would be more suited to Heavy Metal than this Glam Rock. However, what is a miss is the band's lack of style and the over produced sound. I think they would need a complete change of musical direction to produce a good album. Statetrooper HOLY TERROR TERROR AND SUBMISSION/ UNDER ONE FLAG 10 Once again, an album with a terrific cover, but it also has a great inner sleeve. The band are a five piece American Outift, hailing from Los Angeles, California. When Agent Steel's guitarist, Kurt Kilfelt, left the band he "


"CARTOON'S MOST ELUSIVE CHARACTER HAS FINALLY BEEN TRAPPED. THE ARCADE SMASH HIT THAT RECREATES THE SPEED AND EXCITEMENT OF THESE CLASSIC ENCOUNTERS. Young or old, whatever your age everyone enjoys the antics of the cunning Road Runne as he baffles and bemuses poor wie E Coyote. Or does he?... This is your chance to really find out as you take on the role of Road Runner in this comic all action extravaganza that recreates these nail biting chases and the fast moving excitement to perfection. Speed through canyons and along the highways following the trail of birdseed left for you to feed on (is this the first trick???) Dodge your way round the onrushing trucks keeping an eye out for the perilous mines and feather rufning, leg busting oil slicks. What dastardly plans has the sleazy Wlle E Coyote got in store for you as he lurks in hiding cowardly awaiting his moment to enjoy a succulent roast of \"Road Runner and French Fries We're sure you'll overcome all the dirty tricks he can throw at you with ease, agility and grace and a haughty \"Beep Beep\". Overcome them that is if you've got nerves of steel, the reflexes of a wildcat and the speed of the fastest bird on two legs, otherwise its sorry goodnight and \"Burp Burp\"!! CBM 64/128 TAPE .99 Disk .99 ATARI ST DISK .99 SPECTRUM 48K TAPE .99 AMSTRAD TAPE .99 Disk $14.99 GOLD ATARI Trademark of Warner Bros used by Atari Games Corporation under license.  1985 Warner Bros. and Atari Games Corporation All rights reserved. U.S. Gold Ltd. Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX Tel: 021 356 3388.   For Ance Musion BEEP BEEP!! "


"A POWERFUL FORCE IS GATHERING ITS MOMENTUM "


"MAN OS IH7490SFTHOSE INHA TUMIIHIHOHdd SIIN DINI NOTHUTHX TONENDILENONNI 1001HOMO243000 ON WHITHI INIWNHAIN FUMIJOS Golltd. Units 23 Holland Way, Holford, Birmingham Bo 7AX. Tel: 023563388 "


"SUPA SOFT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE Present the Following Special Offers to C&VG Readers SPECTRUM Starglider Space harrier Barbarian Head over Heels Enduro Racer Elle Paperboy Hades Nebula Kon Coin-op Great Escape Nemesis Arkanoid Leaderboard Hits Pack Try Pursuit Ghost & Goblins Trio (Elbe) Bomb Jack 2 Double Take Road Runner Catch 23 Indoor Sports Tenk Impassaball Ikan Warrior Stars on 128 Fairlight 2 Mario Brothers Short Circuit Boogit RRP OUR SPECTRUM RRP OUR CMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK COMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK ATARIST RRP OUR AMSTRAD PC1512 RRP OUR 14.95 10.95 F-15 Eagle 9.95 7,00 Starglider 10.95 14.95 Deathscape 6.75 10.95 Starglider 24.95 19,99 Winter Games 19.95 16.95 7.95 5.25 Trap Door 7.95 5.25 Leaderboard 6.50 10.95 Sentina 6.50 10.95 Guild Thieves 24.96 19.95 Summer G (2) 9.95 6.75 Hyrdofool 7.95 5.25 Aliens 6.50 10.95 Big 4 6.50 10.95 Leaderboard 24.95 19.99 Pitstop (2) 19.95 16.95 7.96 5.40 Krakout 7.99 5.25 Xevious 6.50 10.95 Gobots 6.75 10.95 Hades Nebula 19.95 15 95 D. Desert 24.95 22.95 9.95 6.75 Sold a million 3 9.95 6.75 Triv Pursuit 10.95 14.95 Sigma 7 6.50 NA The Pawn 24.95 19.99 Silent Sery 19.95 16.95 9.95 7.00 Top Gun 7.25 5.25 Paperboy 6.50 10.95 Living Daylights 6.75 10.95 Silent Ser 24,95 19.99 Subbattle Sim 24,95 19.95 7.95 5.25 Hardball 8.95 5.99 Star Fox 7,00 11.00 Auf Monty 6.75 10.96 Gold Runner 24,95 1995 Destroyer 24.95 19.95 7.95 5.25 Fist 2 8.95 6.00 World Leaderboard 6.50 10.95 Great escape 6.00 10.00 Subbastie 24.99 19.99 Leaderboard 24.95 19.95 9.95 6.50 Durell's Big 4 9.95 6.75 Black Magic 6.75 10.95 Samurai Trilogy 6.75 10.95 Deep Space 29.95 24.95 Guild Thieves 24.9519.95 7.95 5.25 Xevious 7.95 5.25 Detta 6.75 10.95 World games 6.50 10.95 Star Trex 24.95 19.95 Passengers on Wind 24,95 1995 7.95 5.25 Silent Service 9.95 6.75 Spy v Spy 3 6.50 10.95 Tank 6.25 10.00 Arkanoid 14.95 11.95 Balance Power 24.95 19.95 7.95 5.25 Aliens 9.99 6.50 Leviathan 6.50 10.95 Epyx Epics 6.75 10.95 Star Raider 2 24.95 19.95 Orbiter 29.952495 9.95 6.60 Footballer Year 7.95 5.25 Elite 10.95 14.95 Five star 6.50 10.95 Gauntlet 24.95 19,99 F16 Falcon 29.95 24.95 9.95 6.50 Starfox 8.99 5.50 Re-Bounder 6.75 10.95 Ghost & gobling 6.50 10.95 Champ Wres 24.95 19.99 Gato 29.95 24.95 14.95 10.95 Gun Runner 7.95 5.25 Bolderdash Cons 6.50 10.95 Wizball 6.25 10.00 Silicon Dream 24 99 19.99 Psion Chess 24.95 19.95 7.95 5.25 Silent Service 9.95 6.75 Coin-op 6.50 10.95 Subbattle 6.75 11.95 Jewels Dark 24.95 19.99 9.95 6.75 Auf Monty 7.995 .25 Fist 2 6.50 10.95 WC Leaderboard 6.75 11.95 (FULL INFOCOM RANGE IN STOCK PLEASE RING FOR DETAILS) 7.95 5.40 Army Moves 7.95 5.25 Barbarian 6.75 10 95 Silent Service 6.75 10.95 (WE TAKE ACCESS OR VISA FOR ATARI ST. & AMSTRAD 1512 7.95 5.25 Rana Rama 795 5.25 Trio 6.75 10.95 Acro Jet 6.50 10.96 PRODUCT ONLY RING FOR DETAILSK1512 BUSINESS PRODUCT) 8.99 6.25 Leviathan 7.99 5.25 Gauntlet 6.50 10.95 Head Over Heels 6.25 10.00 ALSO IN STOCK RING FOR FULL LIST & PRICE) 7.95 5.25 S Lip & Co 9.99 6.75 Sold a million 3 6.50 10.95 Mario Brothers 6.25 10.00 AMSTRAD 5128/464 CASS DISK SPECIAL OFFERS 8.95 6.50 Super Soccer 7.95 5.25 Road Runner 6.75 10.95 Tai Pan 6.25 10.00 Mini Office 2 1 2.00 14.95 DOUBLE PACKS SPECTRUM 7.95 5.25 Eagle Nest 9.95 6.75 Space Harrier 6.50 10.95 Game Over 6.25 10.00 Trivial Pursuit 11.95 16.95 Butch Hard Guy + 8.95 6.25 Falcon 9.95 6.75 Catch 23 6.25 10.95 Sold A Million 3 6.95 10.95 Sold a Million 3 5.95 10.95 Hardball [11.00 7.95 5.25 Winter Games 9.95 6.50 Bomback 2 6.50 10.95 Shockway Rider 6.00 10.00 Hit Pak 6.96 10.95 Footbaler of year 9.95 6.50 Mask 7.995.25 Ace 6.50 10.95 Dracular 6.50 NA Konami Coinco 6.95 10.95 Super Soccer .00 9.95 8.50 Super Cycle 7.95 5.25 Quartet 6.75 10.95 Ninja 6.50 10.95 Acro Jet 6,95 10.95 Space Harrier 7.95 5.25 Living Daylight 9.95 6.75 Pirates 1195 595 và buak. 6.50 10.95 Silent Service 6.95 10.95 Head Over Heels C10.00 795 5.25 Zynaps 7.95 5.25 Freeze Frame 3 (Cart) 33.95 Gunship 10.95 14.95 Starpider 11.95 16.95 Mag Max 7.95 5.25 Shockway Rider 7.95 5.25 Expert Cartride NA 25.95 Destroyer NA 1095 Trivial Pursuit (PCW) 16.96 Army Moves 110.00 9.95 700 Gauntlet 8.99 6.25 Death or Glory 6.25 10.95 Trap Door 5.50 NA Head Over Heels 6.50 10.00 (SPECIAL OFFERS) 7.95 5.45 Shadow Mordor 7.95 5.25 Star Raiders 2 6.75 10.95 Short Circuit 6.00 5.50 10.00 Army Moves 10.00 DOUBLE PACKS COMMODORE 7 95 5.25 Slap Fighting 7.95 5.25 Slap Fight 6.25 10.95 Nemises 6.25 10.95 Aut Monty 6.95 10.96 999 6.75 Game Over 7.95 5.25 The Pawn NA 14.95 Elne H Pak 6.50 10.95 Starglider (PCW) Last Ninja .00 7.995 .25 Bubble 8.99 6.25 E 6 Pak 6.75 10.95 Rouge tropper 6.50 NA Gauntlet 7.95 5.25 Last Ninja 9.95 6.50 Arkanoid 6.00 10.00 Zap 2 6.50 NA Shadows Mordor 6.50 10.95 .00 9.95 6.75 Wiz 7.95 5.25 Wiz 6.75 10.95 Graphic Ad Cre 1 7.95 22.95 Plan It (PCW) 9.96 5.50 Deathscape 8.99 6.25 Defender Crown NA 11.95 UrduParadroid 6.00 NA Sabatuer 2 $12.00 9.99 6.50 Sigma 7 7.95 5.25 Army Moves 6.25 10.00 Shao Lins Road 6.50 10.95 Ankanoid 9.95 6.75 Survivor 8.995.25 Zynaps 6.25 10.00 Silicon Dreams 1 0.95 14.95 Livingstone 6.50 11.95 (All of the above on999 6.75 Gobots 8.99 8.25 Shadow Mordor 6.25 10.95 Jewels Darkness 10.95 14,95 Big Four 6.96 10.95 Cassette only) Post & Packing Inc. Overseas Orders Please Add 75p per tape, Mail Order only. Cheques/postal orders (Sterling only please) Made Payable to: DISCOUNT SOFTWARE, Dept 3, 210 Nicholls Tower, Harlow, Essex, CM18 6EF NA 199s Sky Runner + 7.25 11.96 H Pak 6+ Sabatour 2 Tai Pan Quartet Final Matrix Wizball Dracula Sky Runner High Frontier Eit 6 Pak Samurai Trio NA 20 95 Army Moves 6.25 10.00 Gauntlet 6.50 1105 Bombjack 2 TELEPHONE (0279 29076) WEEKDAYS ONLY PLEASE CITADELA -SOFTWARE ATTENTION ALL PROGRAMMERS THE POWER HOUSE NEEDS YOU! Bios8888 12 95 1050 DON'T THINK ABOUT IT DO IT! XXX R X99XRR81&&&&&&& 88888888888888888888888888888888888888888888 HOUSE 60 HIGH STREET HANHAM BRISTOL BS15 3DR TEL: (0272) 604130 24 HOUR ANSWER PHONE FOR ALL QUERIES ATARI ST RETAIL OUR RETAIL OUR PRICE PRICE PRICE PRICE TIME BANDIT 29,95 24.50 AIRRALI 24.95 19.00 TRAILBLAZER 24.95 19.00 ARKANDID 14.95 12 50 TYPHOON BARBARIAN (Psygnosis) 24.95 20.00 ULTIMA 1 BORROWED TIME 24.99 19.00 VAGUS GAMBLER BOULDERDASH CON SET 24.99 19.00 WINTER GAMES BRIAN CLOUGHS FOOTBALL 24.95 19.00 WORLD GAMES BRIDGE PLAYER 2000 XEVIOUS CHAMPION WRESTLING 24.96 19.00 221B BAKER ST CRAFTON 19.95 17.50 DIGI DRUM 24.95 19.00 AMIGA EDEN BULES 24.95 19,00 ADV CONSTRUCTION SET EXTRAVAGANZA ARCHON II FLEET ST PUBLISHER 115.00 90.00 ARCTIC FOX FLIGHT SIM II BALANCE OF POWER FLIGHT SIM II SCENERY DISK 7 29.99 26.50 G.FL. CHAMP FOOTBALL BORROWED TIME GATO 24.95 19.00 DEFENDER OF CROWN GAUNTLET 24.95 19.00 GOLDEN PATH DEMOTION GOLDRUNNER FAIRY TALE GUILD OF THIEVES RIGHT SIM HADES NEBULA 19.95 15.50 GUILD OF THIEVES HARDBALL 24.95 19.00 HACKER HARDBALL 24.99 19.00 HITCHHIKERS GUIDE HOLLYWOOD HINX 29.99 24.50 HOLLYWODO HIJINX JUPITER PROBE 14.95 12.50 JEWELS OF DARKNESS KARATE KID 11 KARATE KID II KINGS QUESTI 29.95 24,00 LEADERBOARD LEADERBOARD 24.95 19.00 LEADERBOARD TOURNAMENT LEADERBOARD TOURNAMENT 9.95 8.25 LEATHER GODDESS LIBERATOR 1905 in MARBLE MADNESS 2400 19 MEAN 18 MACADAM BUMPER 24.95 19.00 MINDSHADOW MEAN 18 2495 19.00 PHALANX MERCENARY COMPENDIUM 24.95 19.00 PORTAL METROCROSS 24.95 19.00 SDL METROPOLIS 14.95 12.50 SILENT SERVICE NINJA 9.95 8.25 SINBAD PASSENGER'S IN WINO PHANTASIE IN 24.95 19.00 STARGLIDER PIRATES OF THE BARBARY COAST 12 95 10.5 STATION FALL PLUTOS 14.95 12.00 THE PAWN PRO SOUND DESIGNER 57.445 ULTIMA I PROHIBITION 19.95 15.50 UNINVITED ROAD RUNNER 24.95 19,00 WINTER GAMES 24.96 19.00 WORLD GAMES SILICON DREAMS 19.95 15.50 SPACE BATTLE 24 99 19.00 79 95 62.50 ATARI ST NEW RELEASES STARGLIDER 24.95 19.00 TRACKER STATIONFALI 29 99 25.00 AUTO DUEL STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 24.95 19.00 OUTCAST SUB BATTLE SIM 24.95 19.00 LURKING HORROR 25 50 SUPER CYCLE 24.95 1900 TAIPAN TENTH FRAME 24,95 19.00 All dates correct af time of print s are delayed THE PAWN 24.96 19.00 they will be sent af time of release All prices are inclusive of VAT and delivery inside the UK Pa make cheques, PVO payable to 'Lightspeed Software al orders despatched with 24 hours, please allow 7 days 8 8888888888888888888888888888888 IS YOUR SOFTWARE GOOD ENOUGH FOR US? FOR THE BEST DEAL SEND YOUR GAMES TO: THE POWER HOUSE 204 WORPLE ROAD LONDON SW20 PROGRAMMER PROFILES ON EVERY GAME "


"MI CROS E IL MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! LO 637709 Data Recea softwe Warning: It is illegal to sell CBM 64 disk drive + cassette duplicated or pirated softrecorder + 2 joysticks + 10 blank ware on tape or disc. You discs + 20 original games. Buyer collects. . Phone 01-530 2385 will now be liable for proafter 6.30pm. secution. All suspect CBM 64 OWNER wishes to swap advertisements will be formany new games e.g. Delta, Aufwarded to the Federation Monty. Wants anything reasonable, against Software Theft for contact: Daniel Lecount, 28 further inspection. Sycamore Grove, Braintree, Essex CM7 7LT. Telephone 0376-21499 FOR SALE. CBM 64, C2N cassette ALL GAC ONWERS Ultimate GAC unit, manuals, leads and reference guide. Reveals powerful guide plus 100+ of latest original undocumented GAC features. SAE software worth over  for  for details. .75 from The Essential and/or 48K ZX Spectrum with Myth, 54 Church St, Tewkesbury, joystick and interface over 100 GL20 5RZ. games, all for  ono. Ring 01-940 0338 between 5 and 9pm and ask for CACPAC-extensive utilities Flo. package for Spectrum GAC owners. BBC B. Acorn DFS, Teletext Adaptor, Compacter, optimizer, etc 'Ultimate Cumana look disc drive, tape GAC Guide'. .95 from The recorder. Lots of games, magazines. Essential Myth, 54 Church St, Book will sell for . Ring 01-854 Tewkesbury GL20 5RZ. 6283. Jimmy after 5pm. ENGLISH CMB64 hacker has and CBM 64, C2N Tape Deck, Quickshot would like to swap very latest Turbo + Boss Joysticks, 87 Games software on disk, preferably in or inc. World Games, Leaderboard, around Europe. Send list to: Michael Gauntlet, 26 ZZAP+C+VG Mags, Fisher, Schemeringlaan 8, 1900 worth ,000. Sell  ono, (01) 892 Overijse, Belgium. 0455 ATARI 800XL 1050 disc drive, 1010 CBM 64. Games to swap, old and recorder + joysticks, books, new titles. Disk and Tape. All letters magazines and a large amount of answered. Peter, 10 Pine Close, software. All in excellent condition, Canvey Island, Essex SS8 9JL.  onon. Tel Horwich 692710. CBM 64K. For Sale, with the 1701 COMPUTER GAMES INDEX is an Colour Monitor and over 3 original index of over 1000 games reviewed games including: Championship in C+VG. Details issue + page. Send Wrestling, Gauntlet, Dragon's Lair II .95 to S. coombs, 53 Rake Hill, and many more great titles. This Burntwood, WS7 9DF. also includes the tape deck (new). SPECTRUM POKES. To get those Worth about  will sell for  ono for quick sale. high scores, get our best-selling booklet of infinite lives pokes. 70 BARGAIN! Spectrum Plus with chart-topping games covered, Joystick, cassette player, great including Gauntlet, Feud, and Head games plus! Trojan Lightpen. All Over Heels, for an unbeatable .50! boxed-nearly perfect condition. Post now, cheques/wrapped coins to  ono. Tel: Leicester (0533) 841795 after 5pm. Robert Burgess (SP), 1 Middlefield Road, Rotherham, S60 3JH. Written FOR SALE! CBM 64, data recorder, enquiries welcome. every accessorie needed. Included 2 top quality joysticks. Over 100 ENCOUNTER, Fighter Pilot, Zaxxon, games inc. very latest releases. Also Worm in Paradise, Airstrike 2 copying devices. Bargain! . Tel: Spellbound, Ninja, Kikstart, L.A. 483887 offer is only temporary. Swat, Thrust. One man & his droid, NEW GAMES C-64 send list with Submarine Commander, BMX your latest games to: Martin Simulator, Cloak of Death.  the Limkilde, Hyrups Alle 1 2900 lot. Write to: A. Hughes, 67 St. Johns Hellerup, Denmark Hi: Triad New Walk, St. Ives, Cornwall TR26 2JJ. Bencor FP Alliance TTI. BBC GAMES For Sale: Contraption, ATARI cassettes, swap or sell, Firetrack, W.A.R., Commando, Leaper, Gunlaw, Kikstart, Action Gyroscope, Citadel, Yie-Ar, Kung-Fu Biker, laste V8, Spiky Harold, .00 2. Nightshade, Strykers, Run, Knight each. Mr Robot, Polap-Piere, Blue Lore, Castle Quest, ... Phone Ruislip Max, Airwolf .00. Roger (0684) (0895) 637709 Now! 295180 evenings. SPECTRUM + Data Recorder + FOR SALE CBM 64 computer Interface + Joystick +53 Software cassette deck, programmers guide, titles including Cass50 including 2 joysticks, over 200 games worth Back to Skool + Skooldaze all worth ,400, sell for . Tel:  sell  ono, or swap for Chelmsford 323221. CBM64 and Data Recorder. Tel BBC+B MODE Cub type for sale. (Liverpool) 722 5457.  plus cassette data. Recorder + NEW CBM 64C for sale, joystick, games + joysticks. 15 games. games. If interested send S.A.E. only Blaggorette, Repton 3 . Tel: to Mr S. Mutty, 29 Perth Road, 422168 Plaistow, London E13 9DS, ATARI 130XE and 1010 data AMSTRAD CDC464 Green screen recorder  post free. Happy monitor. Two joysticks tv backup board for Atari 1050 drive modulation  or software all with rev7 software  ono. Phone originals. Immaculate condition, sell 0703 474777 for  ono. Tel: (0243) 527374 ATARI DISK. original adventures. FREE FALL LANDER multi-level Sands of Egypt, Dark Crystal, Wizard and Princess, Ulysses, Blade of space game of skill, quick-reacting Blackpoole  each. Phone Nick, nerves. Op Steel CBM64 cassette Southampton (0703) 474777. .75, to J. Gilbert, 14 Pingley CBM64 ORIGINALS. Alternate Meadow, Brigg, S. Humberside. reality, Phantasie .50 each. CBM 64. Software to swap, with Mindshadow, Ultima III, Dallas anyone in the world. Send your list Quest,  each. Cassettes. Kayleth to A. Kerrigan, Killen, Castlederg, , Mordons Quest, Rats, Hobbit Co. Tyrone, N. Ireland, BT81 7SH.All .50 each. Southampton 474777. letters replied to just send now!! ATARI OWNERS. You can't afford to (disc or tape). miss these bargains!!! Atari 11029 MPS 803 printer for CBM64 printer + dust cover + Atariwriter & WANTED must be in good working Utilities software + paper. . Atari order. Apply Dorchester (0305) 850 interface + dust cover + Comms 62449. software. . Disks: shooting CBM + 1541 + Dolphin DOS, Arcade, Clowns & Balloons, Deluxe c2N+HB801, Fin. Cart, Exp Cart. + Invaders, Softporn adventure  ESM V210 software disk/tape. each. Computer Chess ROM . Prism mod'm 2000 + Mustang, Buyer collects or pays postage. artist 64 + mouse, all manuals. Telephone Crewe (0270) 766462 and Worth  bargain ! Kev ask for Gary or write to G. Tinsley, 11 (0283) 48977 (Burton) buyer collect. Cookesmere Lane, Sandbach, COMPLETE COLLECTION of C+VG Cheshire CW11 9BQ. magazines from issue 1. Offers. CBM 64 User would like to swap Atari disk and cassette games, programs on disk new and old all Arkanoid, Strikenstein, many more, around the world. Over 1700 titles offers. Atari 800, 1010 recorder + send your list for mine all letters  ono. Ring Paul 0942675255 after answered. Steve Davis, 28 Chipping  ono. Ring Paul 0942675255 after 6pm. Dr. Alexandra Hills 4161, MSX GAMES for sale, Way of the Queensland, Australia, Tiger, Decathlon, Hunchback, Feud, COMMODORE 64, as new (boxed), Ninja, Jet Set Willy, Space Walk, cassette player & 1541 disc drive, 2 Superbowl, Dogfighter, Jack the joysticks, Starter and Graphics Packs Nipper, Flightdeck, all very good (boxed), 22 top games (9 on disc), condition. Wanted: Gauntlet and over 35 magazines, value . Football Manager, Please ask for Telphone: Buckingham (0280) Darren or Raymond. 076 881 602 812994 BRIGHTSOFT COMPUTERS CAME OVER 3,000 SOFTWARE TITLES IN STOCK MANY C64/PLUS 4 & AMSTRAD DISC BARGAINS PLUS OTHER PERIPHERIALS, JOYSTICKS, CABLES, & DUST COVERS ROTRONICS 64K WAFERS .99 NEW STOCK WAFADRIVE REPAIR & SERVICE .00 INC WAFADRIVE INFORMATION SHEETS tttttttttt SOFTWARE AVAILABLE FOR ALMOST ANY MACHINE EVER MADE INCLUDING AMIGA AMSTRAD, ATARI, BBC CBM 64/128, C16/+4 DRAGON ELECTRON LYNX MSX PC COMPATIBLES PCW, SPECTRUM VIC 20, ZXB1, PLUS GAMES CONSULS-ATARI 2500, PHILLIPS PRINZTRONIC SPECTRAVIDEO & NEW SEGA\" ********* BACK CATALOGUE BARGAIN SPECIALIST FULL LIST AVAILABLE SEND LARGESA E PLEASE STATE MACHINE TYPE & DETAILS OF ANY SPECIAL TITLE OR ITEM REQUIRED. QUOTE CGVI. YOU WILL BE SURPRISED AT OUR RANGE & PRICES. TRY US & SEE. tttttttttt CAPRI MARKETING LTD 24A, WHITE PIT LANE, FLACKWELL HEATE, HIGH WYCOMBE, BUCKS. HP109HR CHEQUE, P.O. or ACCESS TEL:06285-31244 + (24HR ANSWERING SERVICE) FELTON PARK, FELTON, MORPETH, NORTHUMBERLAND, NEESHN. TEL: 057087) 319 Hotline SPECTRUM RRP OUR COMMODORE 64 TAPE DISK AMSTRAD ARMAGFODON MAN 12.959.95 ARMY MOVES 550 NA ARKANOID AUF MONTY 736 5.50 ALF WIDER MONTY BARBARIAN 999 7.20 AUTO DUEL CATCH 20 7.96 5.50 LARRARAN WARRIOR 7201116 BARBARIAN CHAL GOBOTS 899650 BRIDE FRANCINSTEN 72033 CH OF GOBOTS ENDURO RACER FIS STRIKE EAGLE DEFENDER OF CROWN GF FOOTBALL GAME OVER GAME OVER CFL FOOTBALL 550 GUNSHIP 11.95 16.95 GAUNTLET 850 LAUREL & HARDY 150 1185UVING DAYLIGHTS UVING DAYUGHTS 999 720 UNG DAYUGHTS 550 MAC MAX MICRONAUT ONE 720 MASK NEMESS WARLOCK MAXTORQUE OIARTET ROAD RUNNER 72 REBOUNDER 6.50 RENEGADE SAMURAI TRILOGY 5.50 ROAD RUNNER 720 1105 SUPRIGHT 5.50 SAMURAI TRILOGY 8.50 SHADOW SKOMMER SURVIVOR 850 NA TANK TAIPAN 7.209.95 THE FINAL MATRIX 7% 5.50 STIFFLIP & CO 7.2011 THING SOUNCES BACX THE FINAL MATRIX 0 0 riot PACK 720 119 WC LEADFRBOARD  9 72 WC LEADERBOARD BERSERSRSRRRRRRRRRRRRRRR SSSR88 SRSRSRSRSRS If you don't see any program here possing our hotline between pm Cheques Pomade payable to Brighton Computer for regular upeite and sal stating which computer PLEASE NOTE ANY GAME NOT RELEASED WHEN OROERED WILL BE SENT ON RELEASE DATE "


"TRUTH NEWS ST special Academy CRL's smash space game, had made the transformation to the Atari ST, price .95 In it you play a trainee skimmer pilot enrolled in the top training school of the Galcorp Academy for Skimmer Pilots. You will learn to design your own space ship and participate in many classes all so secret that they can only be revealed to qualified skimmer pilots. On graduation from the Academy you will take the space ship you have designed on 20 missions, encountering aliens and practising the top secret theory learnt at the Academy DAN RUNS FROM THE TREENS wWwwW re DAN DAP PILOT OF PILOT OF THE FUTURE A This is the first look at what could be the most grand and impressive games to be released on the Atari ST so far. It's called Ancient Mariner and it's from a relatively new name on the games scene, Systems Architect. Systems Architect are probably best known for producing the Three Little Pigs tdemo using Mirrorsoft's Film Director. Mariner will be a trilogy. The first part will probably be released towards the end of the year. You play the part of an impoverished 16th century seadog whose lands have been lost through gambling and bad business deals. To regain his former status in life he must trade both legally and illegally all over the world. The game will combine fast arcade-action with iconcontrolled elements. The screen shots include shows an excerpt from the life or death sequence depicting an Elizabethan harpoonist attacking the Kraken one of a host of giant sea-creatures that imperil your voyage. Other arcade sequences include battles in the Spanish main, skirmishes against cannibals, raiding and boarding parties, hand to hand combat (you v computer). Ancient Mariner is being programmed by ex-Ultimate ace Manuel Caballero, who claims AM is the first Atari game to be written in machine code, and the graphics are in the hands of artists Mike Jary and Emma Hughes. Ancient Mariner, which will also be out on the Amiga, will probably be released by Mirrorsoft. Meanwhile, Systems Architect also has another Atari game in the offing, Dimension 45, set on a light-less, diseaseridden earth where a mercenary must explore London to find something known as the \"Eden device will can be used to return the planet to civilisation. It should be released early next year. DAN DARE PADRE PILOT OF THE FUTURE A Chins in, chests out, chaps. Stiffen your upper lips and get set to play Dan Dare: Pilot of the Future from Virgin Watch out for Mekons landing near you soon. "


"PIRATES BARBARY COAST Action, adventure and derring-de or the high seas Back in time we pake you. Back to the days of swashbuckling action on the high sens where you become the Captain ota 15 gun trading frigate. Whilst docked in Casablanen, your shipis attacked and plundered by *Bloodthroat the Pirate a blood-thirsty rogue who terrorizes the seven seas. Ile has taken your daughter Katherine and demands WAW 50.000 gold pieces for her safe return. In Pirates Of The Barbary Coast experience the thrill of battle under sail, the atmosphere of exotic locations. Use all of your cunning bravery and guile to fight and trade for the release of your daughter. Combining skill, strategy and action, CASCADE Pirates Of The Barbapy Coast is the Pirate simulation game. Commodore 64/128 Disk .95 Atari 800 Disk .95 Pirates Of The Barbary Coast Atari ST Disk .95 Another great entertainment package from GAMES. LTD Cascade Games Ltd. 1-3 Haywra Crescent, Harrogate, North Yorkshire HG1 SBG, England. Tel. 0423) 525325 "


"PLEASED HIM... 4ME out on the 15th September Get wraped with the spikey-topped barbarian Slaine in the totally berserk October issue of C+VG! We've got an exclusive review of the latest game to feature a cult 2000AD comic character. Coming from the same team who don't you brought you Nemesis, Slaine is a totally original and exciting game. We'll have a pulse pounding competition plus a full colour map of Slaine's world. The October issue will simply slay you dare miss it! Next Month Meet the A-team in our 24 page full colour, totally FREE special 16-bit supplement featuring all the hottest new games for the awesome Atari ST and Amiga. Packed with news, reviews and previews this is going to be the essential guide to games for the Amiga and ST. And it's FREE with C+VG, THE magazine for 16-bit games players. Games guides galore come you way next issue in the shape of our special Centurions map and tips from the man himself, Tony Crowther. PLUS a players guide to the sure fire hit Druid Il. If it's tips you want then you know where to find them first! It's show time again. And we'll be bringing you a rundown on what's going to be on show at the Personal Computer World Show-a game by game guide which will help make the most of your visit to the UK's top software show. "


"PIRATES! UCHASE FAME & FORTUNE ON THE HIGH SEAS The Action Adventure Simulation Pirates! The world's first swashbuckling simulation. Nort stop action and Raid treasure laden bistorical drama take place negotiateibe greatest profits galleons and plunder rich on the Spanish Main during Success will determine ports. Learn to navigate to the ribcentury and you play your status in later life. Ho fence and to avoid muutim: The leading role-Privateer will you and your days? A Uniquel; Pirates! Captain, et pirare in all but prosperous noble or common combines the excitement of name. scoundrel? an adventure story with the Pirates will be landing in Leap into this era of challenge of simulation turbulence and change a all good software stores soon. decision-making. You must time when daring choose the most fucrative adventurers can gain power expeditions, forge the most and wealth fruitful alliances and Commodore 64/128. Disk .95. Cassette . MicroProse Software Ltd. 2 Market Place, Tetbury. Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tix: 434222 MPS/UKG "


"NOW TAKEN Castle Computers 47 BRIDGE STREET NEWCASTLE STAFFS ST5 2RY Tel: 0782 619159 Ext 25 Amstrad Special Offer: Atari ST RAPOUS Asphalt Living Day Lights Porto Rede Runner 2.95 1895 2495 1896 Prohibition World Class Laderboard Barbaran Arkanoid Auto Amiga Barbarians Space Base 9.95 6.95 RRP OUR 24.95 1896 Barbara TT. postal Now Games 3 Virgin Callenger Gava 495 Front Breakrough ************ * ORDER NOW! * RENEGADE * Spec C54 Amstrad * 5.25 6.25 6.25 OUT SOON! 0915 C64 Spectrum Special Offers: Spectrum Special Offers Spectrum Special Offers: OUR PRICE ** RRP OUR Zynas 7 95550 Living Darts Tiger Mission 9.95 695 Gunships 9.856.95 Quartet 595 Strike Force SAS * tridis Alpha World Class L Board 6 50 Linstone Mission Ad City Slicker 715 299 Mt Packi 65 l Para Pracun 695 Engeset Mission Bar 29 Fat Worm Blow A Sony 9.992 Vulcan People (1281 9.95 695 Super Cycle Sgma 7 999 299 Rode Runner 8.95 6.50 Now Games 9.95 6.95 Drep Strike 9.99 2.99 Last ja 895 650 Games 3.95 New Games 3 995 395 Barbara Scare 895 3.5 955 through FA Cup Footbal 7.95 299 Silent Service 9.50 6.50 Word Games Howard The Duck Virgin Olenger 7.95299 S Wand 7.95 5.50 Para Undium 295 + Strangeloop 9.95 6.95 395 Falcon Patrol C64 Special Offers: lolce Works We are moving to larger RRP OUR * Leganed Of Rage Krackout + Super Hory 1 premises shortly and must Word Cass Leaderboard 996 BCR Carte Sonder's Shadow 395 * Dunger Mouse in Trouble clear the following stock thens El brown quickly, hence the silly illy Barbanan 9.95 6.93 Tap Team Wresting Quartet 9.95 695 The Wings 29 prices! Please state an Gurih 14.95 10 Thing ones Back 3.9 * SkyRunner 2.99 alternative if not phoning Army Moves 8.96 650 Rana Rama Obermata Ung Daylights first! 1 Prod Convoy Rade 9.95 695 Lots of sight 9.95 29 7.95 3.95 Movie Monster Wand Games 995 695 Doomdaris Revenge Cyberun 9.95 1 Ye Ar Kung Fu Winterboy 985618 cups Rode Runner Gaude 9.95 415 Bubble Hit Pack il 955 85 Enigma Force Bu Rogers Ht Pack The Ndesor Yes 9.95 299 do 995695W Series Babel 7.95 299 ingossaal 3.95 Topics 9.95 6.95 Ger der The Bogot 7.95299 Sacred Amour of Law Of The West Five Star Games 9.95 53 Aliens C64 Discs: RRP OUR PSTexting a The Young Ones 9 6 29 Highlander Cabra 7.95 299 Masters of Universe World Class Leaderboard 1499 1050 Now Games Tral 9.95 395 Fang Transformers Corona Conquest 7.95 5.50 Hot Runestone 7 290 Winds Crown 14.95 10.50 Bored Of The Rings * 995 3.95 Auto us Short Circuit 3.95 Onship 19.95 146 24.95 96 Robin Of The Wood (1289.95 THE ABOVE MUST BE SOLD OFF GPL Food Hermand Waris South Pacific 2496 1995 BEFORE WE MOVE TO BIGGER 19.95 14.95 Convoy Raider 7.95 5.50 Mami Vice Se of Thieves BE QUICK FOR THESE W O W Highlander edion Kevious Dragons La 10 Frame Computers mess wrock Thing Bounces Back Shain Road WE WON'T BE BEATEN ON PRICE! 8.95 Shocky Rider Ary game not released will be sent day of release 4.95 Free P&Pow ers are shorts 495 pese soy Overseas parame. Calle w aar Games Phone Hotline To Clear 8.95 The Planets Academy fotbal Manager Gyroscope Please note ow us order Obe moving to offers above our ow shop in Sh w e .ToCare 199 Our shop af Nrw de wie opet week Nomad World Class Leaderboard Farlight memnon Tempest Thanks to allow Customer for meg STOWW US YOULL AF GLAD YOU DVD. Cateva PHONE OUR HOTLINE NOW 0782 619159 MAIL-SOFT * **AMSTRAD** MASK-D2. ELITE 04 6.50 NATIONAL COMPUTER LIBRARY Hire Software Before You Buy It * SPECTRUM ** BARBARIAN W.C. LEADERBOARD MYSTERY OF NLE BUTE 6 PACKI-02 BATTLESHIPS-02....... THE LAST NINJA ATHENA MYSTERY OF NILE-02 ELITE HIT PACKI-02 ELITE TRIO PACK-02 WC LEADERBOARD-025 TANK-02 BATTLE SEPS-02 ROAD RUNNER-02 HIGH FRONTIER SLAP FLIGHT THE PAWN-120K VICA ALT1 WONDER BOY ARMEGEDON MAN QUARTET. NR. NOW UNDER new managernent OVER 8,000 different tities available for hire for the COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, ELECTRON, BBC, AMSTRAD all models, ATARI, and MSX computers and now ATARI ST. ARCADE, ADVENTURE, EDUCATIONAL and BUSINESS software too. HIRE PRICES from only .00 INC. P&P. 20% DISCOUNT off all purchase software. LIFE MEMBERSHIP .00. Hire your first title FOC. FREE CATALOGUE FAST RETURN OF POST SERVICE (if reserves are given). ALL GAMES manufactured ORIGINALS with full documentation. EUROPEAN members welcome. UP TO 65% OFF software, regular sales lists sent to all members. Full computerised system keeps track of your order. We pride ourselves in being the most professional Hire Library in the United Kingdom, with experienced staff who know what the word service means. Backed by our own software company and programmers. + COMMODORE 64 BARBARIAN-02... NEMISES 02 W.C. LEADERBOARD-D2 .....6.99 ELITE-03 ZYNAPS-02 EPYX EPICS-02 R.I.S.K. -02 EDGE CLASSICS-01... TRIVIAL PURSUIT-04 ATHENA-02 GUILD OF THIEVES-04 FLITE 6 PACK 02 JAILBREAK-02 REVS PLUS-02 LAST MISSION-02 ROAD RUNNER 2 RE-BOUNDER-D2 WONDER BOY-02 WATER POLO-02 5.99 ENDURO RACER-02 EAGLES-02 TANK-D2 ARMAGEDDON MAN-D2 ELITE SIX PACX-02 KILLED UNTIL DEAD-02. REBEL-02 ELITE TRIO PACK D2.... TAI-PAN-02.................6.70 CALIFORNIA GANES-D2......7.25 LAST NINA 02 ARKANOID-02 SURVIVOR-D2 GUNSHIP-04........ CAVE OVER-02 METROCROSS-02 MYSTERY OF NILE-02 5 50 DEF ER OF CROWN-DISK... 11.95 FREEZE MACHINE .............25.99 FREEZE FRAME LAZER ......... 37.95 FREEZE FRAME MK.IV ........ 26.95 BERTES ACTION REPLAY MK3........ 27.36 FINAL CARTRIOGE..............36.96 LEADERBOARD DONVAY PA DER BATTLEFIELD GERMANY ELITE TRIO PACK.... THING BOUNCES BACK SILENT SERVICE CONFECUS 11 ELITE 6 PACK ZYNAPS ....... THE PAWN STARGLIDER WORLD GAMES WINTER GAMES DEFENDER OF CROWN BALANCE OF POWER *** BLANK DISKS +++ 10 x 3 DISKS 10 x 5.25\" SS48TP1 25 x 5.25\" SS48TP1 10 x 5.25\" 0S48TP1 25 x 5.25 DS48TP1 10 x 3.5 * ATARI ST ** GAUNTLET ROADRUNNER FUGHT SIMULATOR 11 GUILD OF THIEVES FLEET ST PUBLISHER STAR TREK ART DIRECTOR 1520K) FILM DIRECTOR SUB BATTLE SIMULATOR...... 18.75 BARBARIAN 99 7.25 METROCROSS F15 STRIKE EAGLE TAI-PAN YANKEE SILICON DREAMS ENDURO RACER TRIVIAL PURSUIT Send large S.A.E. now for free catalogue. NATIONAL COMPUTER LIBRARY 1 Walkers Road, North Moons Moat, Redditch 1398 9HE 0527 591450 CVG NAME ADDRESS CONFLICT 1... 9.99 GUN RUNNER KEMPSTON INTERFACE RAM TURBO INTERFACE ....... 12.95 MULTIFACE 128.................. 44.95 KONEX JOYSTICK CHEETH MACH1. CHEETAH 125 QUICKSHOT I COMP PRO 9000 QUIOX SHOT TURBO FUROMAX PROFESSIONAL COMP PRO 5000.... 17.95 13.95 . Disk version available: D1 19.95, D2 .95, D3 .95. D4 114.95. Post & Packing included in UK Europe add Ct per tape. E5 0 12 | | | CC010 VISA Mail-Soft PO Box 589. London N15 6JJ. Access and Visorders welcomed If you do not see the game you want, simply deduct 30 of the RAP and we will send to you. (Except Budget Titles) * Dentes new releases w be sent to you as soon as the game is eased from the software house Please specycomputer type in your order COMPUTER MODEL "


"COLNE VALLEY COMPUTERS 19.99 C64/128 Cass Disk AMIGA ATARI ST Ady Art studio 1995 19.95 Barbarian....... 18.95 Airball 18.95 AR Reality 14.95 Bureaucracy 26 96 At Realty Dungeon...18.95 Arkham Manor 8.55 Chmosh Baseball 1895 Barbarian Armageddon Man 9.75 11.20 Defender of the Crwn 18.95 B Clough Football 18.95 5.55 Fairy Tale 37 95 Flight Sim 3795 Autodel 14.95 Guld of Theives 18.95 Gauntlet ... 18.95 Battle Cruiser 14.95 Hitchikers Guide 22.05 Gauntlet Deeper Dungn 9.95 Bismark 7.25 11.20 Holywood Hinx... 22.95 Guild of Thieves 18.95 Big 6.55 9.75 Karate Kid il 18.95 Gunship Bride Finstein 7.25 9.75 Leaderboard Gold 19.95 Leather Goddess 22.95 Leaderbord God Bureaucracy (126) 25.95 Prohibition... 14.95 22 95 Road Runner.... Carrier Force...... 24.95 Silent Service................... 18.95 Roadwar 2000..... ... 18.95 Carriers at War.... _ 1495 Sinbad... 22.95 Silent Service............. Catch23 6.55 9.75 Starglider 1895 Startrek 14.95 Colonial Cowest 1995 Stational 22.95 Subbat Simulator Convoy Raider 725 11.20 Uninvited 22.95 Tai Pan 14.95 Destroyer ... 11.20 Winter Games ................... 18.95 Top Gun.......................14.05 Dinder of Crown ... 11.20 World Games ................ 18.95 Xevious......... ........18.95 Mail Order Europe, Middle East Software service WORLDWIDE USA, Africa SOFTWARE Australia and many Britain other countries C64/128 Cass Disk C64/128 Cass Disk C64/128 Cass Disk 11.20 14.95 LaureHardy 725 11.20 Shadows Mordor 6.55 11.20 Epyx Epics 7 25 11.20 Leather Goddess 19.95 Silent Service 725 11.20 6.55 Living Daylight Slapfight 6.55 9.75 Falcon Mask 7.25 11.20 Stationfal. Final Matrix 7 25 11.20 Mega Apocalypse..... 6.55 9.75 Sufflip & co... ....725 9.75 Fligh Simli... 33.95 Mini Omcell... 12.75 14.95 Surt Baseball 7.25 F15 Strk Eagle 7.25 11.20 Mrde on Aonte 11.20 14.95 Sut Basketball 7.25 11.20 Game Over 5.55 Panzer Grenade 1995 Subba Sim 725 11 20 14.95 Ta Pan Gld of Thieves 14.95 Pirates 11 20 14.95 6.55 Gunship........ 11 20 14.95 Plasmatron..... The Pawn. 14,95 HHikers Guide ...........19.95 Portal 19,95 Triaxos.. 7.25 9.75 High Fronter .725 11.20 Prohibitionems of 725 11.20 Ultima VIVIV Hlywood H in 1995 Darkness 14.95 Up Periscope 28.95 6.55 11.20 Rab Chiokamas 1995 USAAF Indiana Jones .725 11.20 Rebounder 7.25 11.20 War in S Pacific Wargame 19.95 Inheritance 725 11.20 Renegade _..... 8.55 Cat Set 7.25 11.20 Kid until Dead... 7 25 11.20 Rev ... ...... 7.25 9.75 Wargame Greats ...... 11.20 14.95 Last Mission..........725 11.20 Road Runner........... 7.25 11.20 World Ciss Labd.........7.25 11.20 Last Ninja...............725 11 20 Sector ................. 6.55 10514 Blank Disk........... 7.99 7.25 Atari 520 STM 2239.95 Atari 1040 STF System E659.95 Atari 520 STEM .95 Amiga 500 E499.95 Atari 520 STM System .95 PRICE CUT DUE Atari 520 STFM System .95 ON ATARI ST SEPT. 1st. Atari 1040 STF .95 RING FOR DETAILS ST Software Barbarian 19.99 Lord of the Rings 14.95 Accountant E129.95 Road Runner Hacker 2 14.99 Accountant Plus 174.95 Airball Hobbit 24.95 Superbase Personal .95 Guild of Thieves 19.99 Star Glider 14.95 D Basell .95 10th Frame K Data .95 IBM Software Amiga Software Personal Money Accountant .99 Silent Service Manager $24.95 Accountant Plus .99 .99 Fleet St. Ed. .99 Wordstar 1512 $59.95 Shang Hai .99 Fleet St. Pub .99 dBase IBM .99 Adventure Con. Set .99 Film Director .99 Fleet Street Editor .99 Artic Fox $24.99 Winter Games .99 Cut Throats Sky Fox .99 Strike Force Harrier $24.99 Enchanters .99 Pawn .99 Star Glider .99 Ghostbusters .99 Leather G. of Phobos $24.99 Silent Service $19.99 Mindshadow E24.99 Ballyhoo .99 Shang Hai $20.99 Portal .99 Cut Throats $24.99 Rogue .99 Shang Hai Mindshadow Pawn .99 Sorcerer $24.99 Moonmist $24.99 Moonmist .99 Spellbreaker .99 Music Studio .99 Mindshadow .99 Wishbringer .99 Sorcerer $24.99 Mercenary Comp E19.99 Bridgemaster .99 Spellbreaker $24.99 Little Comp. People .99 Chessmaster 2000 .99 World Games .99 Leaderboard Pitstop il Temple of Asphai .99 3-D Chess .99 Winter Games .99 Leaderboard .99 Hacker 2 .99 Summer Games 2 .99 Starglider .99 Sky Fox .99 Trivial Pursuit .99 Silicon Dreams .99 Trailblazer .99 Ballyhoo Arena .99 Ballyhoo 24.99 Leather G. of Phobos E24.99 Defender of Crown E24.99 Cut Throats Passengers on Wind .99 Hacker 2 19.99 Leather G. of Phobos $24.99 World Games .99 Marble Madness 24.99 Spellbreaker 124.99 Sub Battle .99 Pawn Passengers on Wind 119.99 Destroyer .99 Silent Service 19.99 Black Cauldron $34.99 Infiltrator .99 Ultima 3 World Games .99 Roadwar 2000 .99 Sinbad 34.95 Xevious .99 Silent Service .99 Barbarian 19.99 Arena $24.99 Conflict in Vietnam .99 Guild of Thieves 19.99 Gauntlet E19.99 F-15 STrike Eagle .99 Winter Games All prices include VAT and postage in UK Please make cheques payable to: Colne Valley Computers 4 Rose Green, Colchester Road, Chappel, Colchester, Essex C06 2AB. Tel: 0206 240485/560638 ACCESS/VISA WELCOME All price include postage and packing in UK. Overseas orders please add 11.00 per cass/disk for AIR MAIL delivery, Send SAE for catalogue and new releases (please state machine type i.e. Spectrum, MSX, BBC etc.) Access orders welcome by phone or letter. Cheques and postal orders payable to WORLWIDE SOFTWARE 1 Bridge Street Galashlels TD1 15W Tel: 0896 57004 RUDEB ANAGEMENT TELE-GAMES Europe's Largest Stock Of Video Games & Cartridges For 3 Classic Football Management Strategy Games. Each of these Quality games is packed with GENUINE FEATURES to make them the most REALISTIC available PREMIER L A COMPREHENSIVE LEAGUE GAME Play all teams home and away. Full squad details all teams, Injuries Team styles, in-match substitutes Named & recorded goalscorers, Compre hensive transfermarket 5 Skillevels, Financial problems, Job Offers, Morale, Save game and MORE! Pnge 48 128K Spectrum 2695 Also available on the 64/125K Commodore PREMIER LEAGUE Includes many of the features of Premier il-Price  50 WORLD CHAMPIONS A COMPLETE WORLD CUP SIMULATION From the first trendies qualifying stages, tour matches and onto the FINALS Select from squad of 25 players. 2 in-Match Substitutes allowed. Discipline table, 7 SM levels and MUCH MUCH MORE Includes textmatch simulation with injuries, Bookings. Sending of Comers, Free kicks, Match mer, Injury time, Extra time Gomes and MORE! Price 48/128K Spectrum 06.95. 64/128K Commodore 6795 EUROPEAN HI-CAPTURES THE FULL ATMOSPHERE OF EUROPEAN COMPETITION Home way logs, Away goals count double cildrawn) Full penalty shoot out with SUDDEN DEATHS levels 2 subs allowed. Pre match team news, Discolne table, Full team & substitute selection, Disal lowed Goals and MUCH MUCH MOREIPUS FULL TEXT MATCH SIMULATION. Price 48 126 Spectrum 0595 64/128K Commodore 67.95 ICBS CASER ATARI INTELLIVISION 2600 IN STOCK NOW Nintendo SEG FANTASTIC VALUE Buy any 2 games Deduct C2.00 from total Buy all 3 games Deduct .00 from total All games are available for IMMEDIATE DESPATCH by 1st Class Post and include FULL Instructions (add .00 outside UK) From: E & J Software Room S, 37 Westmoor Road, ENFIELD, Middlesex EN3 TLE WICO JOYSTICKS FOR NINTENDO IN STOCK NOW The leading Video game specialists. Send for lists (state make of game) TELEGAMES, WIGSTON, LEICESTER, LES 1TE (0533-880445) ROLLING UP SOON... CLEVE THE QUEST FOR ULTIMATE DEXTERITY A MUSE BY STAVROS FASOULAS CBM 64/128 "


"G-TEN LIMITED THE Mail-Order Software House THE BEST IN ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE SARA EpYX ELECTRONIC ARTS INFOCOM STRATEGIC INFOCOM PLUS SOFTWARE EXTORT SOFTWARE AMSTRAD Tage Disc SENTINEL 7 25 11.25 SLINT SERVICE DPRESS RAIDER 7.25 11.25 XEVIOUS 75 11 25 STRIKE FORCE HARDIER ENDURO RACER 75 11.25 MOVIE MONSTER GAME 5.75 1125 PRO SPRITE DESIGNER 850 11.25 DESTROYER ELEVATOR ACTION 6.75 12 25 MGT METROCROSS 7 23 11.25 ARKANOID 6.5 1525 HITS PACK 750 12.25 ARKANOOS PROHIBITION 50 NAVICUS WORLD GAMES 72 NA NENESIS BARN 7.25 NA FIRETRACK 750 1225 STAR RAIDERS 5.50 10.75 ROMULUS GREENBERFT 850 1155 STAR GAMES 5.50 NA TEMPLE OF ASHA STALLONE COBRA 5.50 NA SEX PAK HITS PO NOW GAMIS N THI T 675 11 DEATH OR GLORY WINTER GAMES MARBLE MADNESS 675 1925 ROAD RUNNER BUREAUCRACY GAUNTLET 675 11 LAST NINA 825 135 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 725 NA SPY V SPY 325 13 25 MOON MIST 22.25 THEY SOLD A MILLION) 725 1125 CONFLICTS II 8 25 13 25 ARCHON BOMB JACK 2 725 12.75 BLITZKRIEG 8.25 13 25 NEMESIS THEY STOLE A MILLION 825 1125 SC MICRO 26.50 26.50 SUPER CYCLE 7.50 12.25 PAPERBOY 7 25 1125 750 NA TEMPLE OF TERROR 650 10.75 EVINCITIES OF GOLD 17.75 7.50 12.25 675 1125 COMMANDO HEAD ONA HERS 6.50 1225 AIRWOLF 675 1125 45.75 SHAOLINS ROAD REPTON 3 725 9.75 PAPERBOY 650 115 KONAMI COIN-OP HIT 725 1125 SILENT SERVICE FIVE STAR GAMES 2 STRYKERS RUN WORLD GAMES SARACEN 9.50 STRIP POWER ANY NOVES CRYSTAL CASTLES LIVING DAYLIGHTS STAR GUDER 8 25 NAYE AR KUNG FUS 15 STRE EAGLE 875 13 FOOTBALL FORTUNES 825 135 FIRETRAX TENSON 325 325 YOR TERRA NOVA COMMODORE 64/12 GRAND PRE DON SET PAPERBOY METRO CROSS 725 115 TARZAN 7 25 10 50 KONAMI GON-OP ROUSUE TROOPER 725 115 STAROUAKE MAC VAX 650 10 PHANTOM 8.50 10 ELECTRON 6.50 10. THE HUNT 8.25 10 50 PAPERBOY 725 7 25 1125 ROUNDHEADS NA 10 50 THRUST GHOSTS N'GOBLINS 675 1125 STALLONE COBRA 650 NA ATARIST Our Price PERIPHERALS GAUNTLET 19 25 iPAP s item LEADERBOARD 675 10.75 BALANCE OF POWER 24 25 QUICKSHOT TERRA CRESTA 650 NA BUREAUCRACY 2925 QUIXOT PLUS ROCKY HORROR SHOW 675 NA THE PAWN 2325 PHASER ONE 10.25 IN FT. 675 11.25 HACKER 23 25 QUICKSHOT TURBO STARGLIDER 11.75 15 50 STAR GLIDER 2325 AMX MOUSE/Stop P OP STAR RAIER II 5 75 117 SUPER HUEY 17 75 054) THEY SOLD A MILLION) 875 11.75 STRIP POKER 17 75 AMX MOUSE SuperP GUNSHIP 11 75 1450 THUNDER 37 25 BBC 75 25 TEL. ENQUIRIES TEL: 01-377 2630 (24hr Answerphone) Please specify machine. Please allow 14-28 days delivery. Please add 75 P&P per item (UK or BFPO only). Overseas add .50 P&P per item. Please make Cheques Postal Orders (sterling only made payable to G-Ten Limited, UK or BFPO orders, please send to: G-TEN LTO, DEPT. C+VG9, FREEPOST (no stamp required) London, E1 6BR Overseas orders send to: G-Ten Ltd, Dept C+V69, 1st Floor, 146/150 Commercial Street, London E1 GNU 133868 ORIGIN MINDSCAPE SYSTEMS INC SEL subLOGIC SIR-TECH MICROPROSE Overseas Enquiries Welcome Send  for our NEW Catalogue Redeemable with your first Order ALL PROGRAMMES ARE ON DISC ONLY STRATEGIC PLUS SOFTWARE APPLE II P.O. Box 8 Hampton Middx TW12 3XA ATARI C64/128 AMIGA Tel: 01-979 2987 RING FOR THE LATEST PRICE ON STIAMIGA WANTED PROGRAMMERS to write high quality entertainment software for the ATARI ST and COMMODORE 64 computers. Accomplished artists also welcome. Why not try us. Send some examples of your work on disk or tape NOW!!! Genuine top prices paid for good work. Why not write for yourself when you can work in a team and have your work professionaly marketed. com sa SOFTWARE HIRE Atari St CBM 64 COMPUTER ANGLE The leading 16 bit Software/Hardware dealer NOW IN STOCK AMIGA A500 With free Software including free modulator, mouse mat, Starterkit and deluxe paint, all for the amazing price of .00 inc VAT ALSO IN STOCK ATARI STFM 520 with free software for .00 inc VAT Amiga Software Atari Software Our Price Our Price Marble Madness 24.00 Goldrunner 21.95 Karate Kid II 20.95 Karate Kid II 20.95 Amiga Karate 18.00 Star Trek 14.95 7 Cities of Gold 24.00 Leaderboard 20.95 Barbarian 20.90 Barbarian 20.95 Alien Fires 24.00 ST Karate Uninvited 24.00 Alternate Reality Deja-vu 24.00 International Karate Guild of Thieves 19.95 Guild of Thieves The Pawn 19.95 The Pawn Gauntlet 18.95 Gauntlet Road Runner 19.95 Road Runner Archon 24.00 Gato Archon 11 24.00 Enduro Racer 19.95 Tai Pan 11.50 Tai Pan 11.50 Artic Fox 24.00 Silent Service 19.95 Deep Space 27.00 Deep Space 27.00 Swooper 16.00 Karate Master 12.95 Flight Sim II 42.00 Flight Sim II 42.00 Fairy Tale 45.00 MGT 19.95 Cinema Ware Software SDI 26.00 Sinbad throne of Falcon 26.00 Defender of the Crown 26.00 King of Chicago 26.00 alltities available on Amiga. SDI available on Atari Infocom adventures in stock. American Software available. Full range of business products backup Utilities. Commodore 64s and software in stock. For price lists and information ring Harlow (0279) 639567 Cheques postal orders made payable to: Computer Angle Unit A, 31 Amherst Lodge, Bramble Rise, Hodings Road Harlow, Essex CM20 1EE Dog 88888888 HIRE software before you buy cheaply. * 3,000+ titles for the CBM64/ * 200+ titles for the ATARI ST * Much more than anyone else has to offer. * Membership  LIFE + first 3 games FREE! * ALL latest releases .00, tape or disk * Send now for automatice membership/details or a S.A.E. for more information For either of the above write to: ORION SOFTWARE 29 St. Martins Close, Clacton on Sea, Essex C015 3NJ. PHONE: 0255 431067 116 "


"BATTLESHIPS COMPETITION boldest battleship ever to sail the seven seas! Couldn't be simpler, could it? Once you've spotted the differences, ring them and mail your entry, together with the coupon, to Computer and Video Games, Battleships Competiton, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Normal C+VG rules apply and the closing date is September 16th. Ahoy there shipmates! This is Captain C+VG calling. our two pictures of HMS +VG--the biggest and And I expect all C+VG readers to do their duty and enter this special sea-faring competition. You could win an awesome radio-controlled speedboat thanks to Elite, who want to celebrate the release of their latest hit, Battleships! First prize-winner will get a Niko Challenger 5 radio-controlled speed-boat which comes complete with hand-held transmitter. Challenger 5 is super-sleek and super fast and will blow away anything else at your local pond! PLUS a copy of the Battleships game. Three second prize-winners will get an Airfix model of one of the most infamous battleships of all time-the Bismark. PLUS copies of Battleships. 25 runners-up will get a copy of Battleships currently available for the C64/Spectrum and Amstrad and soon to be released on the ST. To win all you have to do is spot the five differences in C64 0 C+VG/ELITE BATTLESHIPS COMPETITON Name Address STO Computer owned (tick box) Spectrum D strad O "


"Thunderbirds are Go on the ST thanks to Atari artist Shaun Davies of Barnsley! He created these neat pics from his favourite TV show using Mirrorsoft's Art Director. Meanwhile, a Compunet freak, Boz has set us a couple of his pics The Wizard and good old Clint. Mr Eastwood also featured on an Amstrad tape from Wayne Grover who drew his fave movie star in a scene from Heartbreak Ridge. Hugh Binns from Wolverhampton flies high with is Airwolf art. Karl Hornell, programmer of the budget blast Furgus, sent us this cute picture of the lovely Melissa Ravenflame and says a big hello to CFVG readers in his home country of Sweden. Remember-keep those screen gems coming. Send your discs-complete with comprehensive loading instructions and a totally indestructible sticker or something with your name, age and address on it-to Computer and Video Games, Frame-Up, Priory Court, 3032 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR3AU. 19 meum FOR A FEW DOLLER VOTE "


"1.D.E.A.S Hi there! COMIENIA ** WEIRD Press Press Pr int Eastwood in his new film! "


"OMPUTR GAMES I BUY C+VG EVERY MONTH. IT COVERS ALL COMPUTERS. THERE'S MORE GAMES REVIEWS, BETTER COMPETITIONS, FREE POSTERS. GREAT HINTS & TIPS AND THE BEST ADVENTURE COLUMN IN THE WORLD...OH AND IT'S GOT MY PICTURE IN IT! OMPUT COMPUTER ES GAMES COMMANDO WIN A GENUINE ARCADE MACHINE! BIG RED CANT BE WRONG. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES. THE BIGGEST SELLING GAMES MAG IN THE WORLD. ON SALE 15th OF EVERY MONTH. Big Red has either stamped on my local newsagent or Mellissa has run off with him. Either way I'm having trouble getting hold of my monthly copy of C+VG. Please help. Please start me a subscription to Tick Box Computer & Video Games. U.K. $150 Europe  (Surface Mail) Rest of World  (Airmail) Rest of World  Tenclose a cheque/P.O. for  Please debit my Access/Visa A/C: Amount Number Signed Expiry Date Signed Name Address Editor's Reply, I'm afraid Big Red can get a bit out of hand, and as for Mellissa well there's no accounting for taste. To ensure you don't miss a single copy of C+VG, why not take out a subscription. We guarantee that you'll receive 12 months'issues, posted direct to your door on the 15th of every month. Postcode Please make cheques payable to Computer & Video Games. Return to: Carl Dunne, C+VG, Magazine Services, EMAP, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Telephone: 01-251 6222. COMPL. RETROVE! FREE INSIDE: BOOK OF ADVENTURE WIN A METEOR PIN WIN EA. THUNDER FREE IN +VIDEO BUCLUSIVE BANDARE pilot of the future COMPUTER E GAMES GAMES "


"Wayne Play by Mail of K.J.C.'s games, you will below are the details of the ten learn a lot about P.B.M. in winners: Mark Walton of general if you turn up. Also, Sidcup, Kevin Pack of Higham you do not have to live in Ferrers, Simon Cotterill of London to attend. There will Stock-on-Trent, Stephen be people from the length and Dulson of Kinver, Wai breadth of the country. Cheong Kwok of Braintree, This is a chance for the David Haffner of Redditch, readers playing in the special Kenneth Banks of Glasgow. C+VG version of It's A Crime Robert Gotobed of Harlow, to come along and pick up a Martin Owen of Caernarvon few game winning hints. A few and Nicholas Caie of Oxford. people from C+VG, including They should be receiving their myself, will be attending, so prizes shortly. please come over and have a By the way, the people at chat. See you there!! Sloth wish to apologise Moving on now to the long through the pages of this awaited Sloth Enterprises, magazine to their players for *Gameplan\" competition the dramatic increase in the results, it is apparent that the length of the turn round time question I set in June edition with regards to their other confused a few people as it was games. They have informed slightly ambiguous. I asked me that the increase is due to \"Who won the 1984 the fact that they have just lost Superbowl\" and the answer to two GMs, moved into new this could have been either the office accommodation and had L.A. Raiders, the team who a lot of their staff take their actually won the Superbowl in summer holidays. However, the year 1984 or the San they assure me that they have Francisco 49ers who won broken the back of the backlog Superbowl XIX at the climax and hope to resume their usual of the 1984 season. To regular service as soon as The first thing I would like to will be attending and he will be to accept either answer and compensate for this I decided possible. do this month is thank all the bringing with him a couple of people who wrote in applying his GMs to answer all your for the reviewing positions queries/problems. that I offered in the July For those of you who have edition. There were hundreds never been to a K.J. C. pub of letters which ranged from meet, I'll give you a brief idea the sublime to the ridiculous. of what you've been missing. Someone even tried to bribe It is the chance for you to me!! I can assure you that I actually meet the other players read every letter and the in your game and discuss people who were selected will tactics whilst you have a drink. be notified shortly. You get to meet loads of new I just regret that there are people, pick up hints about the not enough games for game, make alliances, sort out everyone to playtest at the your problems and generally moment, but new games are have a great time. being created daily so This time the meet has been eventually everyone will get to arranged so that we will not test one. It just takes time. have to move (or in some Talking of time, the time, people's case, stagger) out of date and place of the next K. the pub. The publican has very J. C. London pub meet has kindly agreed to apply for an been announced. It will start extension and he will open at 11am on 3rd October at throughout the afternoon. Hot **The Horn Of Plenty\" public and cold meals will be house, which is 25 yards on the available all day right of Mile End tube station All C+VG readers of the (Central Line) age of 16 and above are Once again a couple of welcome. If you have never hundred P.B.Mers will spend played a P.B.M. before, the day chatting about K.J. please feel free to attend as C's four games, It's A Crime, this is a golden opportunity for Earthwood, Crasimoff's World you to get involved with a and Capital. Kevin Cropper, great hobby. Even if you do K.J. C's managing director, play P.B.M. but don't play any "


"Wayne's Mail Plan in respect of a long established the rapidly expanding P.B.M. is someone up there flying!!\" P.B.M. game, all for the price called Pangea. They are The world of Hero Press is of an S.A.E.? This is the offer looking for a new GM now very, very unusual and that Spellbinder Games has kindly because they realise that in a makes it extremely interesting. made all C+VG readers. Yes, couple of months' time their It is not like any comic book if you write into me enclosing game will be so big that they world that I have read about a S.A.E. I will pass it on to will not be able cope on and I have read over 10,000 Spellbinder and they will send their own. They have asked comics. The trick to playing you all the above for their me to announced that if this P.B.M. is to play yourself. game Spiral Arm. I intend anyone out there has a wide The game is based around reviewing this game shortly, experience of fantasy role YOU being the supeperson. but to give you some idea of playing, a wild imagination. what it is all about I can tell good handwriting (that's me CREATING YOUR you that it is a computer out!) and a good sense of CHARACTER moderated, fixed deadline humour, then there is a job The first thing you must do is game based around sci-fi and going for you. You should be create the NEW you. You space travel. It is a game of 18 or over, have a couple of O should take an honest look at economics, diplomacy, Levels (including English) and yourself and grade yourself strategy and warfare, where be prepared for a move to between 0 and 100, in the Sloth enterprises has you try to become ultimate Surrey. The wages are not a following characteristics: informed me that they are ruler of the Galaxy!! The game king's ransom, but the job is Health: This determines is limited to 50 players per having another 1,000 copies of how much damage you can fun and at the same time the Gameplan rules regame and features a map with take, how fit you are and what interesting. A liking for printed. They have extended a d o ver 640 stars, seven spaceship Rockabilly music (veuch!) will kind of trials you can survive i.e. how long you can hold classes, eight racial types, four also be an advantage. If unique, one-off limited period offer to all C+VG readers as modes of space movement, anybody out there thinks that your breath etc. space and planetry combat follows: If you write into me, they suit the bill, drop me a Agility: This shows how well enclosing the logo at the top of + plus colonization and co-ordinated you are, how line and I will pass it on. well you hit and dodge in technological development. the page asking for a copy of Interested? Then send me a REVIEW combat. the \"Gameplan\" rulebook, HEROPRESS S.A.E. now. Might: This is a measure of you will be sent on I have made it my policy not to your actual strength showing ABSOLUTELY FREE!!! GIZZA A JOB immediately review games how much you can lift and how Last month, Mitre Games that get sent to me from much damage you do in unSPELLBINDER OFFER were looking for new GMs, companies that I or my armed combat. How do you fancy getting a set however this month it is the colleagues in the P.B.M. Popularity: This measures up, a rule book and three turns turn of Anvil Games, who run world have never heard of just the amount of respect and in case they fold, leaving the recognition you get as a C+VG readers, who have superhero from the members paid good money, high and of the public. It can range dry. from the public thinking However once in a while a you're a nice person to trust to P.B.M. rulebook turns up that them believing you are a thug gives off good vibes about the in a silly suit. game and the company that Movement: The measure of runs it. HeroPress is one of your ability to get from A to B these games. in the shortest possible time. For a start, it is very Of course the above system unusual. It is the only game of is open to abuse as you could it's kind that I know which is put 100 in every statistic, but based around comic strip you would be cheating no one superheros. You play the part but yourself. This game has no of a superperson that you winners and is only played for create and you have to live fun. Also I know that the your life either defending the G.M. has a very good and weak human population from effective way of dealing with the superbaddies or trying to superpeople who are perfect in make the population your everyway, so don't bother slaves. trying to fiddle. You can also forget about all the comics you may have WAYNE'S VERDICT read, to some extent, because On the whole this looks a very, in this world if a member of very good game. There is the public say you flying masses of background info, overhead, they are not going the world has been created in to say \"Look there is a super depth to give a real life feel to person flying up there; Aren't it and the presentation of the we safe\" they are more likely game as a FUN based P.B.M. Bila to shout, \"Hell's teeth!! There appealed to me. "


"R PLOSLOD -Without doubt, the FASTEST multi-SCREEN SCROlling GAME EVER IMPLOSION will defy completion by EVEN THE MOST ARDENT GAME PLAYER. WHEN YOUR WORld is UNDER ATTACK... 8 levels of 360° scrolling ACTION. ARCADE STYLE Mutri-colour Graphics. Dual play field. ARCADE style multi-channel sound EFFECTS CONCEIVED AND CREATED IN ASSOCIATION with Mindscape Inc. HOT CASCADE COMMODORE 64 DISK.... .95 COMMODORE 64 CASSETTE.....95 SPECTRUM 48/128 CASSETTE.....95 1-3 HAWRA CRESCENT, HARROGATE, HCI SBG, England Tel: (0423) 525325 Telex: 265871 MONREF C Quoring 72: MAG31320 Screen shots are taken from the Conversion "


"By the beard of Cram! You went wild over Barbarian competition C+VG's offices was almost overwhelmed by muscle-bound Warriors swinging their mighty broadswords all over the place! Here are the winners and runners-up for the rest of you to enjoy. Steve Brown, who designed Palace's mega-game, waded in to help us judge the competition and picked Out Steve Lyttle from Belfast as the overall winner, Richard Thomas from Manchester picked up second prize. Once again we were amazed at the quality and the number of entries -sorry more of you can't win something! STEVE LYTTLE RICHARD THOMAS tip of studi,  HEND UNS RY INS OR DOES IT?  WAYNE ALLEN "


"KELVIN NASH bolarion TE DHE CASPAR HANSON RICHARD MAINTYRE WILLIAM LEE WAH KAN ELEOT SUDBURY "


"UUDIO SYSTEMS ARCHITECTS W BUDGET SPECTRUM 48K .25 each or 5 for .50 Gunstar Willow Pattern BMX Simulator  88888888888888888888 Brainache Megabucks O & Usa Ninja Master Thrust Phantomas Vampire Super Shuffle Terra Cognita Hyperbowl Kobyashi Naru Necris Dome Harvey Headbanger Armageddon Caveman Roadrunner Rider Sheer Panic Taffy Turner Kings Keep Pitman 7 Shuttle Shock Freex Jasper Zipgurat Robon Raider Bomber Bob Ten Years After Turbo Chess Glug Glug Dogsbody Laserwarp Joust Professional Snooker Imagination SOS SDI  sach or any 3 for  Return of Space Warrior Leaderboard Tourn. Archon 2 25.00 TWOTEF The Equalizer Terror of the Deep Adventure Cons Set 25.00 Blockbusters Pneumatic Hammers Avenger Artic Fox 25.00 Xevious Marble Madness 25.00 Gallipoli COMMODORE 64 TITLES TWOTEF One to One 25.00 Wibstars  each or any 3 for  Shanghai Skyfox 25.00 Dandy Skate Rock Horward the Duck The Pawn 20.00 Ace of Aces Paradroid & Uridium Bazooka Bill Guild of Thieves 20.00 Donkey Kong Chameleon Acro Jet Faery Tale Adv 34.00 Super Cycle Pitstop 2 Jailbreak Borrowed Time 20.00 Breakthrough Dandy Footballer of the Year Ballyhoo 24.00 Sky Runner Pole Position Hit Pak Cut Throats 24.00 Kat Trap Droids World Games Deadline 24.00 Hardball Big Names Bonanza Arkanoid Enchanter 24.00 Butch Hard Guy DEFCOM Star Games 1 THHGTG 24.00 Space Harrier Judge Dredd Lightforce Infidel 24.00 Scooby Doo Legend of Kage They Sold a Million 3 Leather Goddess 24.00 Samun Kayleth Field of Fire Mindshadow 20.00 Ghost & Goblins Labyrinth Shockway Rider AMFV 27.00 Fairlight 11 Star Soldier Indoor Sports Moon Mist 24.00 Shadow Skimmer Murder of Miami Nether Earth Music Studio 29.00 Top Gun Infiltrator Nemesis Planetfall 24.00 Impossaball Cobra Star Raiders 2 Seastalker 24.00 Crystal Casties Nosferatu Five Star 2 Sorcerer 24.00 Hive Bulldog Big Trouble Spellbreaker 24.00 Silent Service Donkey Kong Starcross 24.00 Leaderboard Nuclear Embargo  COMMODORE DISKS Suspect 24 DO City Slicker Mutants The Pawn Suspended 24.00 Sailing 10th Frame Silicon Dreams Trinity 27.00 Eidolon Gauntlet Nuclear Embargo Witness 24.00 Aliens The Vikings The Sentinel Wishbringer 24.00 Explorer Agent Orange Terra Cresta Zork! 24.00 Future Knight Leaderboard Judge Dredd Zork II 24.00 Nightmare Rally Dodgy Geezers World Games Zork III 24.00 Gauntlet Pilot 64 Hit Pak 1 Silent Service 20.00 Bazzoka Bill Sailing Shao Lins Road Ultima lll 20.00 Jailbreak Raid 2000 Fields of Fire Balance of Power 30.00 Eastenders Police Cadet Indoor Sports Defender + Crown The Goonies Crystal Castles Druid Deja Vu 24.00 Hit Pack 1 Computer Hits 3 Ace of Aces Sinbad 30.00 Green Beret Vietnam PSI-5 Co. 24.00 Unbelievable Knuckledusters Soldier One Uninvited 24.00 Footballer of the Year Space Harrier Dandy Arena Brattacus 25.00 Cobra TWOTEF Bobby Bearing Deep Space 24.00 TWOTEF II The Sydney Affair Gunship Internationalf Karate Scott Adams Scoops Delta ATARI ST TITLES 10th Frame Elevator Star Games 1 Altar 15.00 Kayleith The Sentinel Star Raiders 2 Crafton & Xunk 15.00 Infiltrator Sky Runner Little China Eden Blues 20.00 Dodgy Geezers Macadam Bumper 17.00 Leaderboard Exec Krakout Art Director 42.00 Psi-5 Trading Co. Panarama Americas Cup Film Director 52.00 Legend of Kage Delta Phantasie il Fleet ST Publisher 100.00 We also have hundreds of FA Cup Football 87 Cobra Borrowed Time 20.00 other Spectrum titles at prices Elite 6 Pack Colleen Music Basketball 20.00 we daren't print. Please Romulus Knucklebusters Bureaucracy 20.00 telephone or write for full Tag Team Wrestling Monopoly GLF Football 20.00 details Blockbusters The Sydney Affair Hacker 20.00 Explorer Double Take Hacker 2 20.00 COMMODORE 64 TITLES Krakout Sailing Little Comp. People 20.00 .25 each or 5 for .50 Future Knight Paradroid & Unidium Shanghai 20.00 Willow Pattern Dragons Lair il Jailbreak Tass Times 20.00 Tera Cognita Countdown to Meltdown Coin Op Hits Strip Poker 15.00 Micro Rhythm Aliens Shanghai Tee-Up 15 00 Thrust Breakthrough Future Knight Skylox 20.00 Kobyashi Naru Armour of Antirad Scrabble Bridge Player 2000 15.00 Creations Coin Op Hits Leaderboard Exec ST Karate 15.00 Warhawk X-29 Fighter Ranarama Protector/Station Imagination Ace of Aces Wizards Crown Pro Sprite 32.00 Formula Simulator Sigma 7 Tag Team Wrestling Pro Sound 45.00 Aftermath Terra Cresta Shockway Rider War Zone/Fireblaster 20.00 Terminator Silent Service Jewels of Darkness 12.00 Hyperbowl Yie Ar Kung Full AMIGA TITLES Star Glider 20.00 Ninja Master Street Machine Bureaucracy 29.00 Trailblazer 20.00 BMX Simulator Paperboy Golf 29.00 Typhoon Olli & Lisa Superhuey 11 GLF Football 20.00 Passengers 17.00 Necris Dome Championship Wrestling Hacker 20.00 Phoenix 17.00 Park Patrol Double Take Portal 24.00 Colourspace 16.00 Armourdillo 1942 Shanghai 20.00 Cards 16.00 Red Max Apache Gold Tass Times 20.00 Electronic Pool 16.00 Labyrinth Magic Madness Witness 25.00 Flipside 16.00 SOS Short Circuit 7 Cities of Gold 25.00 Goldrunner 20.00 See Amiga Listing for Prices of ST Infocom Adventures Please make cheques payable to Systems Architects Lid. We also accept Access and Visa. Prices subject to availability Karate Kid Il Lands of Havoc Major Motion Mud Pies Pinball Factory Super Conductor Time Bandits Trivia Challenge Silent Service Crusade in Europe F15 Strike Eagle Ultima II Balance of Power Black Cauldron Kings Quest 2 S.D.I. Strike Force Silicon Dreams Starglider Hollywood Poker 15.00 Swooper 15.00 Leaderboard 20.00 Leaderboard Tourn 20.00 Mean 18 24.00 Super Huey 15.00 Apshal Trilogy 20.00 World Games 20.00 Hades Nebula 16.00 Mercenary 20.00 Arkanoid 12.00 Chess 20.00 Arena 25.00 Brattacus 30.00 Arena Brattacus 30.00 Deep Space 30.00 Jewels of Darkness 20.00 Guild of Thieves 20.00 The Pawn 20.00 Silicon Dreams 20.00 Games Compendium 20.00 Check Mate 12.00 Wanderer 20.00 Terrestial Encounter 12.00 Liberator 10.00 Mousetrap 12.00 Plutos 12.00 Timeblast Apshai Trilogy 20.00 Aternate Reality Dungeon Reality Championship Wrest Phantasie II Leaderboard Metrocross 0-Ball Questprobe Roadwar 2000 Rogue Super Huey Super Cycle Super Tennis Winter Games World Games Xevious ATARI ST HARDWARE 520 STEM 355.00 520 STEM+ Mono 485.00 520 STFM + Colour 685.00 1040 STF 585.00 1040 STF + Mono 685.00 Hard Disk (SH204) 685.00 Mono Monitor 135.00 COMM. AMIGA HARDWARE Amiga 500 499.00 Colour Monitor 399.00 External Drive 249.00 Amiga 2000 POA PRINTERS Atari SMM804 185.00 Quendata DM 190.00 Mad Nurse Cyrox One Hundred & Eighty Tomb of Syrinx Acro Jet &&&& 888888888888888888 && &&& Pool Flip Flap Ludoids Adventure Bily Bluebottle Ostron Bouncing Berty & Eskimo Capers Castle Colditz & Battle Toothpaste Alchemist Caveman Derby Day Quacker Freds Fan Factory Monsters in Hell Toolkit Mad Martha Moonlighter Loony Lander Gridrunner Biorhythms Hyperaction Handicap Golf The Chess Player Dominoes Subterranean Stryker Robot Messiah Magic Roundabout Sheepwalk 4D Timegate Robber Access VISA 01-549 3028 6/9 MARKET PLACE, KINGSTON UPON THAMES, SURREY KT1 4BR "


"BARBARIAN COMPETITION Eve . GAVIN JEFFERIES Walpapano la GRAHAM CORKER BARBARIAN  M. BAGSHAW w DAVID GRIFFITHS  JONATHON BLACK MATT LYON "


"Fantasy CSAK    3  8     ) g_  8  8 It's horrible, it's disgusting and it's dangerous. the boat, and we were told that the and shield clashing and the Yes, it's C+VG's very own PBM Wizard Wayne reason we were here was because screams of battle filled the air. In alias Tol-Harquin the Barbarian. our \"loving\" Emperor had written the end our skill and strength of Wayne grabbed his trusty broad-sword and to us saying that a fallen angel of numbers finished them off. But at headed off to the Isle of Dread to find fame, evil was on the island doing all a price! Many of our party had fortune and mostly green monsters to play with. kinds of nasty business and, most serious wounds and if we didn't get importantly, not paying his rent. help soon, this would be a short About a year ago Peter Garner, basic rules to the others who had We were to sort him out or we adventure! who runs the Labryinth, invited a never played before, I, as a would be sorted out by the town We searched the island and ran select group of C+ VG people to veteran, was deciding what executioner. So our party of seven into a few more encounters, which explore the wonderful world of his character class to play. Out of the brave adventurers set out to sort we managed to somehow win, Labryinth Live Role Playing four choices of Warrior, the demon out. before we found a man tied to a Society below the earth in his Elementalist, Priest and Scout. Our first problem was to get pole in the sea, being slowly specially excavated caves. A good there was only one real choice-a into the fortress which was drowned. We killed off his captors time was had by all. Since that WARRIOR!! magically sealed by a spiritual key. and rescued him, but one of our date, the Labyrinthe has expanded So it was here on the pier that After a short discussion we decided party was killed. He seemed very and become the largest and most Tol-Harquin the Barbarian was successful live roleplaying society born. A broad sword and small to date. shield were thrust in my hands and Always trying to keep one step I stripped off to the waist, ready ahead, Peter decided that he would for action. I leapt on the boat and rent an island and run live away we went. On the boat, the roleplaying on it in a series of 24 others were eagerly getting stuck hour adventure. It was to this place into the face and body paint. I that I was invited to try my luck, a initially declined, but when I gave mysterious island in the middle of it some thought, my favourite the Medway, near Gillingham. barbarian, Slaine from 2000 AD, I arrived to find Pete unloading always wore paints. I got stuck in. his van a second hand One black strips across the eyes ambulance of all the fighting and one across the mouth did my equipment and cosulme we would face, then it was onto the body. I need for the day. Swords, covered decided that I was a member of the in the infamous Gaffa tape, shields black nipple tribe, so I immediately and armour were in abundance. As sprayed them black. Pete went through explaining the After a short ride we jumped off The big, bad monsters attack yet again leaving Tol-Harquin no Tol-Harquin the Barbarian indulges in a little pre-adventure option but to mash 'em with his sword. sparring. to search the island. We had been confused, but he did manage searching for no longer than ten through magical means to cure minutes when a skull faced midget most of our wounds with special weilding a sword in each hand, herbs. popped up through the long grass We also bumped into a palladin and started screaming abuse at us. who was unfortunately being We discovered he was evil by attacked by some nasty green orcs. casting a magic spell that forced We didn't manage to save him, but him tell us his alignment good relieved him of a nice silver sword or evil. We shot through the grass that he could no longer use. at him, behind the covering fire of However, we still couldn't get our welsh archer. However, when through the spiritual door! we got to within six feet of him five Suddenly, one of our priests told us other monstrous creatures with he had found a scroll hidden in a silver faces and fangs jumped upon small shrine with which he could us and attacked. We had fallen into do an exorcism. He was reading it a well laid trap. Quickly we over the man he rescued, when we regrouped and fought our were attacked once more. This opponents. The sound of swords time it was Trolls, who we could "


"-Teland! 1 8  8  K_  E 7 not kill, so we burnt them!! pitch black, muddy, wet, smelly paralysed us, blinded us and made wherever it rose. We would return. By this time the man we corridor, which was only big us run away in fear. Eventually, I rescued had recovered his memory. enough for single file. We slowly realised that my silver sword hurt We found out that the spiritual key wandered down it and entered a him real bad, so after I lent it to a If If you'd like to try your was in this man's body. So he small, smoke filled room. friend, who was stronger than me hand at an adventure on approached the door and cast a It was full of candles and looked and got stuck in myself, we chased the Isle of Dread you spell and the door magically like an altar room. There were him outside the fortress into the should write to Pete creaked open. some silver plates on the floor and open and slew him by the power of Garner, The Labyrinthe We waded through the ankle the greedy ones amongst us dived the sword. Our priests exorcised Club, 77 Hinton Road, deep mud and water only to be for them. Too late!! They were his body and we gathered up our Herne Hill, London, SE24. confronted by a circular trapped and loud explosions treasure. Then it was back to the The 24 hour adventure passageway off of which led rocketed through air. Then four boat and off to the mainland. We costs , the 12 hours numerous dark tunnels. It was men appeared as well as a demon all vowed to avenge our lost costs  and nine hour about this time the explosions went which had red flashing eyes, horns comrades and agreed to fight evil adventure . off and the smoke began to fill the and a manical laugh. It told us to What adventure would be complete without a pair of mad monks. air. This time we were fighting leave or die. That was it!! The weapons came out and there was absolute chaos. Once again our priest came to our aid. He read a scroll which disintigrated the monsters and turned the demon's zombie servant on himself, and killed him. We then moved out of the passage way into the bright light, only to be confronted by a group of Zombies. These caught us off our guard and battle weary and battle weary another one of our party bit the dust, never to rise again. Then we bumped into him! The main man. The fallen angel. He was confident, he was arrogant, he was hard!! We first had to over come his Zombie servants and he cast all kinds of spells at us that After a hard day's fighting even the monsters look like they could do with a pint/ Sir Hugh the Archer. about six humans and there was also a man dressed in a magician's garb. We battled bravely on, being chased and chasing around and around the circular passage way. It came as no surprise when the guy in the magician's garb started casting spells at us shattering our weapons and shields. This battle lasted about 30 minutes and we were really badly wounded. We then were lucky enough to find some potions and scrolls which went some way to healing our wounds We then found another magical door and to this day I do not know how we managed to open it. However, we got through to the   3  8    "


"** AREA 2680 TIC APTAIS Clare Edgeley reports on Sega's version of Ronnie Raygun's newest toy SDI. atmosphere, they start to burn red Can you defend freedom and democracy? She also takes a trip back in time to do are four or five bunched together, you may find it impossible to battle with Dragon Split. destroy them all before they reach target. As a great number of missiles will be travelling at any SDI managed to destroy. one time, all af varying distances And then it's onto the defensive from the planet's surface, the trick is Strategic Defence Initiative is the half which, to my mind, is much to leave the ones that are only just latest biggie from Sego, housed in simpler. This time a large section of starting their flight and concentrate a huge upright cabinet complete the Earth fills the screen and you've on the ones closer in. with rows of flashing lights along got to blast the enemy missiles as the defensive stage can be quite the top they zoom towards their hectic, but isn't nearly as exciting as The game is divided into two destination. Head-on they look like the offensive half. Once again, a halves Offensive Half and deadly arrow heads, and if you shuttle zooms in to pick you up and Defensive Half. The offensive half can get them before they enter the this time the score board includes a comes first and is played out high atmosphere your job's made that percentage mark on how well above the Earth in space. Settled in much easier. On entering the you've done on defence. your space capsule complete with su TOT roving gun sights, you've got to 32170 stop the opposing super-power goining military supremacy in space. That means blasting away at all enemy missiles, satellites, rockets, floating space stations and a host of other space junk, while dodging the laser bolts which come your way. This isn't as easy as it sounds. Your space craft is controlled by an eight-directional joystick with a fire button set on top, but your sights are controlled by a trackball. So while guiding the sights onto target, you must keep an eye on your craft in order to move it out of danger. As you get better and move onto further levels, the numbers of enemy units increase until the screen is almost filled to overflowing. At these times it's difficult to destroy everything as The sound is minimal and though the units each move at different AUTO ** 2017 tur rockets disintegrate with a speeds and eventually disappear satisfying Boom!, other bits and out of the screen. Enemy fire is also pieces fizzle out in c increased and there's more likely disappointingly silent fashion. SDI to be a collision is addictive in a quiet way and Power capsules can be picked great fun to play, especially when up, and these ease life greatly by using the two-player option, increasing the number of your however, it isn't one of those sights, enlarging the area of an games that get the adrenalin explosion or simply by increasing pumping and your heart heaving. your ship's speed. When going for Having said that, though I did pour pounds into the machine. a power capsule which is attached to the bottom of a satellite, make sure you're close enough to pick it up as it drops. Otherwise it'll drift off the edge of the screen before you can catch it. After a time, a shuttle flies onto the screen, scoops up the craft and your score is drawn up on a grid to show how well you've coped. The areas you are judged on include the numbers of enemy missiles, satellites, fighters and bases you've CAPTAIN SILVER Captain Silver is the latest release from Data East in which you have to search for treasure through a number of scenonos, fighting your way past a host of hostile guardians and weird objects, and picking up various goodies which help on your quest or give extra points. Your first task is to go through a town and make your way to the wharf. However, to get through the castle gates you've got to impale a couple of the castle's guardians looking suspiciously like bulls trotting upnght on their hind-legs One of these will drop, amongst other things, a key. While you're there, pick up the letters as well, they will spell out the name CAPTAIN SILVER at the bottom of the screen at which point you'll be awarded a spell. Captain Silver's no walk-over. Just getting to the town is a chore, what with massive cats leaping off walls to claw you to death, more bulls to stab and objects which hurtle towards you at knee-level. Outcomes the trusty sword not an interesting piratical cutlass but an ordinary, boring old sword which can be used to slash at anything coming within swiping range. You'll have to be quick on your feet though, bulls charge from both sides with alarming frequency and the cats tend to drop down on you just when you're busy with something else. And of course, the nearer you get to the wharf, the *28190 "


"IN ACTION IR SILVER top of the wall in the early stages of the game. Should you succeed in the first level, which I admit I didn't manage, then you'll be moved onto the next scenario on board a pirate ship. Kill the one-eyed pirates, duck their flying knives and scramble up the rigging to get the cowards hiding at the top. But your aim is to find the Captain who's sulking in the bridge. The third stage may reveal the treasure at the end of the rainbow. sorry, I mean island, as it's on this deserted hump of sand, inhabited only by spear wielding natives and manic coconut trees, that the smell of gold gets stronger By this time you'll know to duck flying arrows, stab at falling coconuts and put an end to the giant killer crabs. These tend to sidle up on you from both directions, and before you know it a coconut will land on your bonce, stunning you while the crabs get to work on your toes. Occasionally a fairy appears, and if you manage to jump on it you seem to get extra weapons. Believe me, shooting something from a distance is a whole lot easier than a close tussle. Also line your pockets en route with gold dubloons, and make sure any key lying around is picked up because you're bound to need it at a later stage in the game. The sound is reasonable, the sprites and general backgrounds sprites and are excellent and though Cap'n Silver's not exactly fast on his pins, at least the game doesn't dwaddle. One horrible noise, though, erupts from the good Captain's mouth every time he makes a stab at something All in all not a game I'd make a song and dance about, but it's mildly addictive, quite tricky and the scenario's been well thought out. DRAGON SPLIT Namco's Dragon Split is basically a shoot'em up of the Galaxian type with a dragon taking the place of the more usual space craft. Dodging is called for here and also a good bit of nifty shooting if you're to clear the ancient swamps of prehistoric relics and the skies of flaming birds The birds, all coloured yellow, are the first to attack, swirling and swooping down in formation, and your winged dragon is going to have to flit swiftly round the skies to get them all. You've got three lives and three brushes with death before you lose a life. Being louched or hil by the enemy counts as a brush with death. So even if you accidentally clip wings with a bird your dragon lets out a mighty squawk to warn you of his impending room. The landscape is pretty bare at first and takes you along a narrow river which widens to an estuary And as it's filled with hostile prehistoric creatures doing their level best to kill you you've got to cope with attacks from both the ground and the air. The music is superb and your fool will soon be tapping away Loud and full or rhythm, this is one of those rare instances when the sound adds to the action As you travel the course of the river, the attacking creatures change and increase in numbers and ferocity. Still come the air attacks, but the ground based beasts also add their might throwing up a deadly collection of bombs which, at times, become difficult to avoid But added firepower is near at hand if you can shoot and catch it in time. Lying around in infrequent gops you'll notice gargantuam eggs both red and blue. Hit one of these with a bomb and out flies a small ball of the same colour. Catch the ball and if it's blue you'll gain an extra head breathing out a steady stream of flames, if it's red you'll be given extra fire powerboth bombs and flames Dragon Spint may not be original in theme, but it's quite a lot going for it. And though it joins the already swollen ranks of shootem-ups in the Galaxions genre, ils tricky and addictive enough to encourage you to spend just another 20 pence. 1 CELOSINTA harder the going becomes Jumping into the air and ducking are absolutely vital if you're lo avoid some of the hazards, and remember, you've got to collect as many objects as possible. Some are placed quite out of reach like the useful looking phial of liquid on SECAPTAIN SILVER "


"* AKTAKLIAI BEAT THE BEST The search is hotting up for the C+VG SEARCH FOR BRITAIN'S best coin-op player around. BEST ARCADE High scores are flooding in to the C+VG offices and arcade NAME addicts are doing their nuts in an effort to beat the best. So ADDRESS send in your high scores NOW! And that's not all, thanks to Euromax, who is sending out the High Scores Chart to many My choice for best arcade is: arcades round the country, you will be participating in a huge NAME: nationwide contest to find the ultimate champions. ADDRESS: If you would like your favourite arcade to get in on the action, get the owner to write to: C+VG's Hall of Fame, Euromax, Bessingby Industrial Estate, Bridlington, North Humberside Y16 35). UK COIN-OP HIGH SCORES Space Harrier Hogan's Alley Terra Cresta Section Z Tokyo Express Raiders Tube Panic Pacland Iron Horse Shao Lin's Road Mikie My Hero Trojans Ghosts 'n' Goblins Kung Fu Master Wonder Boy Tiger Heli 1999 Salamander Nemesis TX-1 Road Runner Gauntlet 1942 Marble Madness Return of the Jedi Do Run Run Star Force Buggy Boy Super Mario Bros Hang On Commando Choplifter Bomb Jack 10 Yard Fight Track & Field Tazzmania Robotion Pole Position Pac-Man Mr Do Mr Do's Castle Elevator Action Dragon's Lair Defender Flying Shark Flicky Arian Mission Haley's Comet Legendary Soldiers Sky Kid Pinball Action Soldier of Light Psycho Soldier Psychic 5 Turbo Side Pocket 31,900,730 Matthew Preece, Kent 325,000 Neil Coggins, Liverpool 10,000,000 Cao Nicholas, London W2 3,200,500 L Murphy, Essex 3,485,500 Stuart Dixon, Oxon 950,220 Matthew Preece, Kent 428,368 Stuart Dixon, Oxon 4,150,400 Mark Mendes, London, W10 1,756,200 Jason Dowling, Dublin 8,270,000 Fiz, Coventry 310,800 Nigel Parker, W Yorks 9,857,212 Gavan Davies, Swansea 280,650 Fiz, Coventry 7,554,700 Simon Lennox, N Ireland 564,800 Romano Lindhout, Holland 2,020,170 Daz, Farnworth, Bolton 1,350,640 Larry Barr, Shropshire 1,009,200 Geoffrey Clarke, Sunderland 1,700,000 Keith Bradley, Blackburn, Lancs 1.195,500 Paul Ashworth, Plymouth, Devon 289,000 GWhitthingham, Birmingham 2,000,000 U.S., Bristol 5,867,911 Jeremy Walt, Cornwall 12,164,340 Neil Wilde, Farnworth, Bolton 208,340 Martin Deem, Hants 2,250,310 Martin Deem, Hants 1,605,100 Adam Mastromarino, Bristol 3,315,000 R Jones, Star Games, Dyfed 103,200 Peter Huesken, Holland 2,702,800 Martin Deem, Hants 49,658,320 Martin Deem, Hants 1,600,320 Bev, Farnworth, Bolton 2,238,400 Michael Kane, Scotland 16,424,000 Matti Javelin, Finland 480,050 Brett Caines, Bristol 7,899,500 Nick Roberts, London 2,300,000 Gary Spencer, I.O.W. 368,950,000 P Coles, Cardiff 110,545 Matthew Bryden, Kent 3,500,000 Christopher Burns, Lancs 10,000,000 Peter Huesken Holland 679,720 Lee Taylor, Lancs 149,000 Peter Huesken, Holland 993,920 Lee Taylor, Lancs 2,000,000 Gary Spencer, l.O.W. 558,340 Neil Wilde, Farnworth, Bolton 9,990,990 Neil & Steve, Farnworth, Bolton 2,231,790 Phil, Farnworth, Bolton 574,450 Phil, Farnworth, Bolton 324,030 Phil, Farnworth, Bolton 496,000 Bev, Farnworth, Bolton 2,400,180 Andy, Farnworth, Bolton 1,715,920 Leith Bradley, Blackburn 182,200 M Hylands, Starburst, Bridlington 2,7 6,100 N Watson, Starburst 9,907 C Firth, Starburst 48,500 P Bolton, Starburst HALL OF FAME Rygar Green Beret Street Fighter Ikari Warriors Gun Smoke Bubble Bobble Gauntlet II Quartet Yie Ar Kung Fu Out Run Slap Fight Indiana Jones King Of Boxer Hyper Olympics Spellbunker Block Jackal Victory Road Rampage Battle Lane Enduro Racer XX Mission Valtric Great Gurianos Mag Max A.S.O. 720 Arkanoid Rolling Thunder Legendary Wings Side Arms Gryzor Fighting Wings Metro Cross Arm Wrestling Jail Break Paperboy (Cheat Mode) 4,735,250 Keith Bradley, Blackburn, Lancs 6,166,500 Michael Robertson, Newcastle 1,975,600 Graham Smith, Manchester 2,192,200 Charles Taylor, Lincs 1,876,250 Gavin Davies, Swansea 4,793,200 Keith Bradley, Blackburn, Lancs 6,758,572 CM Bradley, Sussex 8,576,750 James Washburn 9,999,999 Geoffrey Clarke, Sunderland 350,070,030 Steven Martin, Leicestershire 6,680,550 Phil, Farnworth, Bolton 1,180,060 U.S., Bristol 1,800,000 Gary Spencer, I.O.W. 2,100,000 Gary Spencer, I.O.W. 3,500,000 Gary Spencer, L.O.W. 228,980 Jason Dowling, Dublin 674,810 Paul Stokes, Sussex 130,200 Martin Deem, Hants 68,400 Manish Ragvarni, London E8 1,343,700 Elout de Kok, Holland 22,020,000 Elout de Kok, Holland 1,565,300 D Pruet, Staffs 116,400 D Pruett, Staffs 2,970,800 Paul Stokes, Sussex 192,000 AJ Rolfe, Cafe Chertsey, Surrey 780,000 Fiz, Coventry 264,950 Martin Deem, Hants 995,410 Tony, Farnworth, Bolton 491,100 Martin Deem, Hants 361,400 Matthew Preece, Kent 17,663,300 Jonathan Cook, Co Dublin 1,439,900 Simon Mills, Southport 101,400 Bredon Bird, Glasgow 793,940 Gavin Davies, Swansea 345,000 Peter Huesken, Holland 265,450 Martin Deem, Hants 1. 1942 CAPCOM 2. WONDERBOY SEGA 3. BUBBLE BOBBLE TAITO 4. PACLAND NAMCO 5. BIONIC COMMAND CAPCOM 6. RYGAR TECHMO 7. ARKANOID TAITO 8. TERRA CRESTA NICHIBUTSU 9. EXPRESS RAIDERS DATA EAST 10. GHOSTS 'N' GOBLINS CAPCOM The Top Ten chart is compiled by Euromax and shows the most popular games nationwide. 1,782,214,387 Matthew Hill, Sussex "


"MOND GAMES \"IMUST COLLECT MY THOUGHTS» How many times have you said this?! Now's your chance to do it!!! with this addictive arcade game literally a. MIND GAME 000020 MIND GAMES Victory House Leicester Place London We2H ZNB ODDSSO Available for Spectrum 48/128 .95 Commodore 64/128-.95, Commodore Disk .95 teinar "


"IMAGINE SEMNAT NIKAKVE S UOSI THE BLOCKBUSTER! SCREEN AFTER SCREEN OF ONE OF THE MOST ADDICTIVE ARCADE GAMES EVER! IT'S TRUE TO THE ORIGINAL WITH SHARP GRAPHICS AND PLAY FEATURES SUCH AS LAZERS, CATCH AND HOLD, ELONGATOR AND MUCH MUCH MORE. THIS IS ARKANOID THE REAL THINGI AMSTRAD 8.95 COMMODORE .95 SPECTRUM .95 TAITO COIN-OP ATKANGID Licensed from toto op: 1986 MACMAXI HOT FROM THE ARCADES. GET SHARP OR YOURE DEADI BULD UP THIS MEAN MACHINE TO ITS AWESOME FIRE POWER TO STAND ANY CHANCE OF COMPLETING YOUR TASK STUNNING GRAPHICS AND UGHINING GAME PLAY TEST YOUR REFLEXES AND SHARP SHOOTING TO THE LIMITS. TAKE ON MAGMAX IT'S A KILLERI AMSTRAD 1895 COMMODORE $8.95 SPECTRUM $7.95 MAGMAX Game Design Nitchibutsu. IMAGINE SOFTWARE LIMITED CENTRAL STREET MANCHS "


"Y ES AT ION  COIN-OP SLAR FROM TAITO CORPORATION COMES SLAP FIGHT AND THE LAST WORD IN PLANET COMBAT, MULTI-SCREEN, REALISTIC GRAPHICS AND ALL THE CON-OP FEATURES \"ADDICTIVE AND COMPELLING YOU JUST CANT PUT YOUR JOYSTICK DOWN\" AMSTRAD $8.95 COMMODORE $8.95 SPECTRUM $7.95 SLAP FIGHT Licensed from toto corp, 1986 ARMY MOVES YOU ARE ONE OF THE ELITE A HANDPICKED, CRACK TROOPER IN BATTLE AGAINST A FORMIDABLE ENEMY. YOU'LL NEED ALL YOUR SKILL TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF EVERY SITUATION, STAMINA TO KEEP ON GONG WHERE OTHERS WOULD FAIL AND COURAGE TO FACE THE CEASELESS BOMBARDVENT BY ENEMY TROOPS, HELICOPTERS AND ARTILLERY AND F YOU SURVIVE ARMY MOVES YOU'LL HAVE SOME GREAT TALES TO TELLI AMSTRAD $8.95 COMMODORE $8.95 SPECTRUM $7.95 MINE DINAMIC ename La game SEB aren VSTOLS COTT lormats ARMY MOVES  1987 Game Design Dinamic. CHSTER M2 5 NS . TELEPHONE 0 6 18 34 39 39 . TELEX 66.9977 "


"Sweet Scene..... 92950 99360 39360 DONA m = x MORBIDRIRE Bub and Bob, two under-weight Brontosaurs, are about to float onto computer screens everywhere after their highly Successful run in the Taito coin-op Bubble Bobble. The Bronto brothers are spoiling for a fight, and they get it from the seven types of inhabitants of the game's 100 levels. Meanies include Blubba, Benzo and Bonnie-Bo, but all pale into comparison when the evil Baron Von Blubba hits the scene he's the one it's hardest to destroy. Bub and Bob a gentle twosome. Not for them the finality of the laser blast, or the explosive blob bombs. Their only weapons are bubbles, blown from their gaping mouths, which encircle the bullies, float them up towards the top of the screen and bring them down on their heads with a burst. There're masses of diamonds to collect and bananas to eat ... but the secret of the game's surprise, so we won't give too much away. The brill conversion work, done for Firebird by Software Creations, bears close comparison to the original coin-op but the sound track has yet to be added before its release in September.  27 an Na 00B0B004 SEPT BRUIS FAUSES FOOD SSSSS 999 Imagine the peace and serenity of the jungle. The burnished red of the setting sun, zebras, tigers, and lions grazing together near a pool, and the sudden titanic yell of Jack the Nipper as he glides to earth on his nappy parachute in his new game Coconut Caper. He was the one who got his family deported from Britain to the Aussie outback, but he didn't like the idea of all those dingos so he took a chance and jumped somewhere over Africa. Now he's got to avoid his father, who wants to give him a spanking and the natives who aren't always friendly. But not to worry. There're plenty of naughty tasks for him to perform, as usual. He can act like a regular teeny Tarzan, swing on vine ropes, and throw coconuts or spears at the pygmees. The game will be on the Spectrum for .99 while Amstrad and Commodore cassettes will sell at .95 Alternatively you could try the Amstrad or Commodore disc versions at .99. Crom! The Druid is back and he's twice as magical! Yup, Druid the First may have been a big hit but prepare your self to be spellbound by the sequel, entitled Enlightenment (Druid 'II). Created by Dene Carter, Andrew Bailey with music by David Hanlon, speech by Simon Pick and a killer loading screen by Paul Docherty, the game has heavy D&D influences and is coming your way on the Firebird label next month, initially on the 64. Hasrinaxx has a mission -to destroy the Dark Mage before he destroys the land of Belorn. Fight off the living dead, wild trees and deadly mushrooms in the action packed arcade adventure. Druid Il is going to be big. Watch out for our players guide next issue. The game comes with a comprehensive manual which explains in true D&D fashion — how you can mix and match the spells you need to colle The Golem is back from the original Druid, but our hero can also call on other elementals to help him wipe out the big bad Dark Mage. "


"| 0 0 0 0 0 0 Megacity, that 2000AD masochists' health farm, is a popular place. First Piranha licenses a rather unsuccessful Rogue Trooper, then Melbourne Mouse takes on Judge Dredd another limited success and now Pirhana is back at it with Judge Death. This latest arcade thriller pits the beautiful but deadly, Judge Andserson against the dreaded Dark Judges. They've come from another dimension to wreak perverted justice and death on all living beings. Judge Death is their leader, a mummie of a monster with a claw that rips out human entrails. Only Anderson's blasing laser and psychic powers will save the Universe and the game buying public. The game, due out in September on Amstrad, Commodore and Spectrum games machines, will cost .99. Hey! We're the Jet Boys and we're going to blow you away! This is a sneak preview of a new game set to appear on the CRL label from a brand new programming team called Solid Air. It's a two player game each player confrols a heavily armed Jet Boy through a horizontally scrolling alien landscape blasting aliens. At the end of each level you have to wipe out a BIG alien like the one in screen shot. Jet Boys should be out on all formats at .95 on cassette. MARIT HIGH 386361 SCORE 63934 to MITCH SH U TCH HITCH e DE C E 5678 out USB ETRIKE HIGH D If you boldly go out to your software Glory a space shoot-'em-up comshop sometime soon you'll discover bined with 12 different sub-games creDiscovery, a huge space style game ated by Software Invasion, the team from CRL. It's Oink meets Death or who brought you Plasmatron. . MORE! Prof Humphrey Bogus, inventor of the Digital Teabag and leader of the Lunar Renovation Project, hos parked his latest weapon, The Tachyon Vortex, on the near side of the Moon and intends to wipe out the Earth. Your mission, should you choose to take part in such madness, is to destroy the infernal device during Moon Strike, a vertical scrolling flash through futuristic, digitised landscapes only in this game your ship can fly over a giant picture of the Mona Lisa. The aliens are oddball too. Just wait until the hail of animated coins, bombs and pizzas hit you. Moon Strike has been programmed by a new team, Binary Innovations from New Zealand, and will be launched on the Spectrum, .95, during September Death Wish III will be out on the streets soon and it's looking mean. Gremlin give you the chance to become vigillante Paul Kersey, as played by rough tough Charlie Bronson in the film. Play out the wild justice of your dreams, take out muggers, rapists and robbers on the streets New York. Your range of weapons is guaranteed to put you on the winning side. There's your famous 475 Wildey Magnum hand gun and a pump action shot gun. You're well protected with a bullet proof vest and can have a bloody good gore bath without worrying too much about the ordinary citizen on the street. Hitting them may make your score suffer but Gremlin has provided a team of nurses to mop up the blood and stitch back the limbs TBD Street Scene..... "


"LOGIC SUMMER SALE  99 LES 11.99 EACH COMMODORE 64 DISCS SPINAKER BOXING, CHUCKIE EGG II, GALAXION, POLE POSITION STAFF OF KARNATH, CRYSTAL CASTLES, BIGGLES, EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE STAINLESS STEEL, PROJECT FUTURE. SUPERCHESS 3.5 STARSTRIKE I THINKII, POTTY PIOGEON, PANZADROME DRAGONSKULLE, WILLIAM WOBBLER, KETTLE REDHAWK, SUPERMAN .99 GEOFF CAPES STRONGMAN. OFF THE HOOK BOUNDER. MACADAM BUMBER, FLAK, BULLDOG, ZOIDS, THING ON A SPRING COMMODORE C1.95  99 QUESTPROBE ADVENTURE, CRITICAL MASS, BOMBO LAW COMPILATION. THE PLANETS, QUAZATRON, MOON ALF. AGEAN VOYAGE SONGMAKERRANCH SEA OF THE WEST, FIGHT NIGHT. TIGERS IN THE SNOW. POTTY SPINDLUZY CRESTA CYBERUN, FALKLANDS 82, COP-OUT, EQUINOX, 21.99 SPELER. NI MRER TUMBLERS, FRACTION FEVER. MAKE SIR LANCELOT, REALM OF IMPOSSIBILITY, DEEP STRIKE, PIDGEON, OUTLAWS, IMHOTEP, DRELLS, CHIMERA BEAMRIDER 11.99 AFACE, STONY MANCHINE, ALPHA BUILD, DANCE FAT WORM THANATOS. CONTACT SAM CRUISE THUNDERBIRDS, TIME TUNNEL, THING ON A STRING WEB DIMENSION $1.99 FACTORY, LOGIC LEVELS, ALPHABET Z00. CHOSTBUSTERS. MINDSHADOW. BAL BLAZER WHO DARES WINS II, GYROSCOPE, BOUNCES, MUGSYS REVENGE. TAPPER, ZAXOCON, CRAZY COMETS, DEVS EX WILLIAM WOBBLER SUPERSLUETH, SHERLOCK, H.U.R.G. GAMES DESIGNER .99 SPECTRUM 1.95 MACHINA LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE, HAMPSTEAD PASTFINDER .99 KIDS ON KEYS. FRACTION FEVER. ALPHABET ZOO, AGEAN 5299 FACH FOREST OF DOOMEDOIE KIDOS JUMP CHALLENGE, Q GALACTIC CONTROLLER .99 VOYAGE, UP AND ADODEM NUMBER TUMBLERS. LOGIC BERT CARTRIDGE, ADRIAN MOLE PITMAN TYPING SIRIUN KEYBOARD SKILLS, GRANDMASTER CHESS/OTHELLO, LEVELS, DANCE FACTORY, RANCH, MAKE A FACE, KINDER TRAILBLAZER. FOOTBALL MANAGER, WAR. PRODIGY, SURF CHAMP, SPIDERMAN HULK, FASSEM MACHINE PARK PATROL COMP TARZAN, HIGHLANDER, MASTERS OF UNIVERSE, ROBIN LANG ASS., JET SET WILLY II, FIGHTING WARRIOR, CHIMERAWILLOW PATTERN 1.99 OF SHERWOOD, VIRGIN ATLANTIC CHALLENGER CHUCKIE EGG II, DAVIDS MIDNIGHT MAGIC YAABA DABBA ORAGONS LAIR SUPERBOWL, W.O.W. GAMES UTILITIES & NEXUS .99 DOO SPELLUNKER, TWIN KINGOOM VALLEY, PARADROIO COMPILATION, SOLD A MILLION. HEAVY ON THE MAJICK THE RATS, COMRAT LYNX, BEACH HEAD, WORLD SERIES MASTER OF LAMPS PERIPHERALS FUTURE KNIGHT, AVENGER, CRASH SMASHES II BASEBALL HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER STARQUAKE, GHOST PITFALL 1 COMPILATION, HOT SHOTS COMPILATION, TERRA CHASER ARK PANDORA, MERMAID MADNESS FIGHTING WARRIOR CRESTA ARCADE HALL FAME COMPILATION, NEVER EASY FILE DISK 14.95 .99 ENTOMBED, MOON CRESTA, MONTY MOLE. MOEBIUS ENDING STORY. EVIL CROWN, MINI OFFICE. VECTRON 3D LONGO BONGO, BEAMRIDER ONE ON ONE RED REDHAWK PHONEMARK 8500 QUICK DATA DRIVE TEST LORD OF THE RINGS, PAC-MAN, THE KET TRILOGY, COSTA ARROWS, ROCK N WRESTLE FRAK, GROGS REVENGE MONEY MANAGER .98 PROGRAMMERS UTILITIES 5396 CAPERS, GERRY THE GERM. RUNESTONE, RASPUTIN, ZORRO, NEXUS, MATCH FISHING, WILLOW PATTERN, RESCUE ON FRACTALUS .99 BREDENS BASIC DISK & CASS .95 FIRELORD, CITY SLICKER, PYRACURSE, IMPOSSABALL, . ELECKTRA GLIDE, SPLIT PERSONALITIES AAN RIVER RAID FIGHTER PILOT. JET PAC C64 MUSICMAKER KEYBOARDS .99 HERBERTS DUMMY RUN, TOUCH TYPE BY COMMODORE, PSYTRON, BALLBLAZER, SHERLOCK PED ARROWS .99 LOGO .00 .50 EACH MURDER BY THE DOZEN .99 FUTURE FINANCE .95 .99 EACH GHOSTBUSTERS SIMONS BASIC EXTENSION DISK OR CASS 1465 SCOTT ADAMS, MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE ADVENTURE SYSTEM 1500 ENDED, LORD OF THE RINGS, SIGMA 7, THE TRACER SANCTION  KAYLETH, UNBELIEVARIFIN TIMATE CODE AUVENTURE SCRABBLE CLUEDO, MONOPOLY CASS. ALL 3 FOR .95 KAYLETH, UNBELIEVABLE ULTIMATE COMPILATION REBEL PLANET, JET-PAC STAR GAMES 1 (Compilation) ADVENTURE QUEST, LORDS OF TIME. THE FORCE SPACE SHUTTLE .99 NEOS MOUSE CASS 120.00 KNIGHTS OF DESERT JACK THE NIPPER. PILGRIV 23.00 DECATHALON SINCLAIR UTILITIES FOOTBALL MANAGER, AVENGER, TRAILBLAZER ADVENTURELAND/SECRET MSSION, PIRATE BALLBLAZER .99 ADVENTURE/V00000 CASTLE, BOULDERDASH AND PERIPHERALS CRITICAL MASS COMBAT LYNC SPECTRUM SOFTWARE .99 CONSTRUCTION KIT. DRAGONS LAIR, ZAPP SIZZLERS II ZORKI 61.99 11.00 EACH CURRAN MICRO SLOT 12.95 COMPILATION. TOUCHDOWN FOOTBALL, XEVIOUS TUBULAR BETIS, JOHNNY REB, EVIL CROWN ZORK II .99 ROTRONICS WAFADRIVES BALLBLAZER SUPERBOWL, UCHIMATA, HOWARD THE ZORK II CHESS. BIORYTHMS D' LEVEL CHEMISTRY. TALOS For 4BK + 128 Spectrums DUCK, SPORT 4 COMPILATION WEST BANK, KAYLETH, SUSPENDED THUNDERBIRDS, SPACE RAIDER ICART, BIZZICOM .99 + .50 PP AMERICAS CUP CHALLENGE. THAI BOXING, ROBOTRON SMALL TRADER, CHIMERA, KOMPLEX, VALHALLA, TEACH includes 1 64K Wata free 2084 ICARTI, DONKEY KONG (CART), HACKER II, MAX BASIC ON ZX, THE CONENANT, MUGSY, HELLFIRE, HEADROM, FIRELORD, ALLEY KAT, BEACHEAD II, FIGHTER BARGAINS CHICKEN CHASE, TWISTER. SPECTRUM POWER PACKS $8.95 +  p&p PILOT FROM 1st PUBLISHING ALPHACOM PAPER (5 rolls) $9.95 + .00 p&p .50 EACH $1.99 EACH 8 BOOKS FOR JUST 19.95 + 2.50 p&p MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE ARCADE, MASTER OF THE Normalt RRP over 50.00 SIR FRED. BRIAN JACKS SUPERSTARS, BATTLE OF THE p&p 1-3 titles 75p UNIVERSE ADVENTURE. APSHAI TRILOGY UNBELIEVABLE YOUR 64 CASSETTE BOOK, GRAPHICS BOOK FOR THE PLANETS. NOMAD. MANTRONIX. BOUNDER. SAM STOAT ULTIMATE COMPILATION, BEYOND THE FORBIDDEN 3 or more .00 SAFEBREAKER WITAM WOBALER. RIDDLFRS DEN COMMODORE 64. PEEKS & POKES C64 TRICKS & TIPS FOREST, REBEL PLANET, HOT WHEELS STAR GAMES I Overseas C1. 20 per tape METABOLIS, ZORRO. RIVER RAID. REVOLUTION. RED FOR YOUR COMMODORE 64, ADVANCED MACHINE Compilation), SCOTT ADAM (Compilation), PLATFORM LANGUAGE BOOK FOR THE C64. IDEA BOOK C64. MACHINE ARROWS CRYSTAL CASTLES. ENDURO, WHO DARES CHEQUES PAYABLE TO PERFECTION (Compilation LANGUAGE BOOK FOR THE C64 WINS II, WINTER SPORTS, ADRIAN MOLE SPIDERMAN HULK, PITFALLI INTERNATIONAL KARATE LOGIC SALES LTD COMPILATION DISKS 1st PUBLISHING PROGRAMS ON DISC ADVENTURELAND/SECRET MISSION, VALKYRIE 17. ALL JUST E10.95 EACH RESCUE ON FRACTALUS. FROSTBYTE 3 WEEKS IN DISK 1: TURBO 64, DERBY DAY, PILOT 64, HANDICAP FIRST WORD (WORD PROC) PARADISE. 1 OF THE MASK. ROBIN OF SHERLOCK. NIGHT Department 4 GOLF, WORLD CUP TEST MATA 34.95 FIRSTBASE (DATABASE) GUNNER, ZOIDS, COMBAT LYNX GYROSCOPE, THE 17 Leotric Square, Eastern Industry DISK 2 VIEW TO KILL. FRIDAY 13TH. CODE NAME MATH BASIC 64 ENDOON. FIGHTING WARRIOR. SKOOLDAZE. BC'S QUEST Peterborough, Cambs. THE PYRAMID, TEST MATCH, BEAKY AND EGG \" PASCAL (LANGUAGE) FOR TIRES, SURF CHAMP, YABBA DABBA DOO, MERLOCK SNATCHERS .95 ADA TRAINING COURSE THE MEDE, JET SET WILLY I, SKYFOX, FRANK BRUNO'S Tel: 0733 313870 HANG IN THERE ALL YOU SUPER Just 4 weeks to go before your fave coin-op driving game comes to your own screen! The official licenced tie-in "


"OPPORTUNITIES In-House and Free-Lance Technical Staff Having established the key elements of a well organised and equipped 'in-house software development team, the company has the following opportunities to offer in Entertainment Software Development. Senior Programmers O.T.E. K Having been responsible for at least one technically excellent (though not necessarily commercially successful entertainment software product you will be experienced in 280, 6502 and/or 68000 assembler. You will be looking for an opportunity to join an in-house' environment committed to the development of original products and conversions of the very highest quality and will expect to call on graphics, music and other support functions of the highest calibre. Programmers-O.T.E. K Though not necessarily able to show direct involvement in any commercially available entertainment software products, you will be able to demonstrate through specific routines and demo programs, a high degree of technical ability in 280, 6502 or 68000 assembler. You will be looking for an opportunity to realise your ambition to be responsible for the development of technically excellent entertainment software products and will expect to call on graphics, music and other support functions of the highest calibre. Graphic Artists/Musicians/Game Designer-0.T.E.  K with or without formal qualifications you will already be working in a free-lance or inhouse capacity supporting programmers in your specialist discipline in the development of commercially available/to be published entertainment software products. You will be able to demonstrate a number of different examples of your work and will be looking to put your experience to use whilst developing it further in the production of commercially available products. All appointees to the above positions will be offered an attractive working environment, substantial basic salary and an opportunity to develop their ambitions with the full support of the company's management and financial strength In addition to the above opportunities the company has a regular flow of program conversion contracts available at attractive rates to free-lancers and is particularly keen to support proven programmers and development houses wishing to write and have published by a major brand name original games for all popular machines. If you would like to arrange an interview to discuss any of the above opportunities please write, giving full details of your relevant experience to Steve Wilcox Director Elite Systems Ltd, Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall WS9 BPW ATARI GAMES SPRINTERS! has all the features that have kept Super-Sprint top of the Arcades. Available on cassette and disc next month. UPER TM &  1987 Atari Games Corporation. All rights reserved. ELECTRIC DREAMS "


"Mailbag Computer + Video Games 30-32 Farringdon lane London ecir3au over the contents page, hold it up in front of a street lamp and you'll discover the proper page numbers. Haven't you ever heard of security? Can't have just anyone reading C+VG, can we? I'm a long-time reader of Also, if the game did sell convinced that Mindscape are C+VG and I've seen many well, they would in time get not really satisfied with this reviews about all different some of the money they lost, review. aspects of gaming, through back on other leading games. Matthew Bryden your review-packed pages. Russell Mills Kent One game which stands out Oxon Editor's reply: Ha! Given on its own and that is Soft Aid's Editor's reply: You'll be yourself away Matthew. It's compilation tape for charity pleased to hear about obvious that your Dad, or with proceeds from the game BACKPAGE -the compilation some member of your family, going to the starving of the third being released to raise cash for works for Mindscape. Chris world. the NSPCC. Buy it today. will be visiting your home very Many people bought this Details on our news page. soon to sort you out. Have the tape and so in turn saved many Oddun's ready. lives. In my area, pirates I have come to the stage in operate with any game for any Aaaaarrrrgggghhhh!!!! This life where I feel I need to machine, but I was glad to see makes me so mad! What I'm upgrade my old Atari 800 to that these pirates did not copy referring to is the organisation either an Atari ST or Amiga. I this charity tape who said of last month's issue. When I have seen the graphics on the they didn't care? hastily brought it home and ST and they are very This tape sparked off other turned to the contents. Aah! impressive. compilations for other charities Page 87 Sentinel Players compilations for other charities. Now to the point of this but didn't get far. Nowadays all letter. I would like your honest Guide. So I flicked to 87, but, gasp. software companies are opinion on which of these two NO Sentinel guide. So I looked concerned with \"are we at the machines is the best. The ST top of the software charts yet?\" chines is the best. The for it for it and there it was on page seems to be doing very well at 82! What's going on? Then or \"how much is our new the moment and was launched went to page 108 Arcade game earning?\". at the perfect time and has got Action. But, where was it. We game-buyers pay a lot of publicity including TV enough as it is just to see the again, it was not there. It was ads. The Amiga has had none on page 122. Then I turned to software companies getting of this. What do you reckon fatter on our hard-earned the Bug Hunters page 124. C+VG? money. Why can't they help Yep, you've guessed it -they those less fortunate than Jason Dowling weren't there. Instead they themselves? Dublin could be found on 126. To top Most software companies Editor's reply: Get an ST. They it all you made mistakes on produce two games every eight are cheap. There's tons of Tony T's Hot Gossip section weeks or so. Why don't they software and I like them. OK? you put captions under the give half or more of their wrong piccy. This is going too income to different charities I am speaking on behalf of far. Please stop this foolishness every three-four months? the millions of Amiga freaks out and do not make future If they did this then more there in the big, wide world. As mistakes, otherwise you will people would buy the top if it wasn't enough for have a mad axeman on your selling game but in turn help reviewer\" Chris Cain to say ir others too. Or does it take his review of Sinbad, that he On last thing, I loved the another earthquake, bad crop, finished the game in five or six brilliant articles on Metal or chemical leak to make them goes but to actually tell us the Heroes Fantasy Figures! realise that they can't just do conclusion of the game it Wenchin Ng this for a couple of months' till has totally spoilt the game for London things look better. Charities all all of us. He completely ruined Editor's reply: I could give you over the world need money the game for a whole audience a long and very boring reply ALL year round because of Amiga freaks. Wenchin, but this isn't Crash disasters happen all the time in I am totally sure that a or Zzap-so just try adding Africa and third world minority of them are going to the page numbers up, divide the page numbers up, divide countries. buy this game and I am equally by five, sprinkle some Perrier I am writing to get my views heard! I think that the music section in C+VG is a VERY good idea. It makes for a more varied mag. All those who complain should try really listening to Rock and Heavy Metal which is real music, not just pressing a few buttons on the synthesisers like much of today's pop music is. Give it a go, you'll love it! There's nothing better than a bit of AC/DC while alien zapping C+VG is easily the best computer mag on the market, especially now it has many especially now the other regular features like PBM, the Big Screen and Rock On. It all makes for a much more varied, entertaining and value for money mag. The posters are brilliant too! But I hope all these features will not in any way cut the space for what the mag is produced for -computer and video games. Chris Brooks Cornwall Editor's reply: See, I told you games players liked Metal. Pass me the air-guitar, I feel a solo coming on. Never fear we'll never lose sight of our main purpose in life to bring you the best in computer entertainment. OK. First things first. Covers. These used to be extremely good-take for instance the year book Dallas and more recently The Pawn. Now look at the more recent 140 "


"good. pictures Barbarians. Good been pleased that it has anything serious I'm far too different formats in the same grief, what rubbish. The gradually improved in spite of busy enjoying myself. reviews. Barbarian looks as if he is in the some of your juvenile letterBill Fox One thing I'd like to know, is process of removing his full set writers. Derbyshire it possible to buy C+VG teeof false teeth. I always imagined that your Editor's reply: Thirty-three eh? shirts/sweat shirts? And if not, The Guild of Thieves cover targetted market was the 10 to Almost as old as Paul. why not? Another thing, I am, was incredibly bad. I've seen 20 age group, but enjoy the Shocking still having fun at at the moment considering better artwork on the back of a contents even at 33. that age. Should be a law three possible futures for my cornflakes packet. The Your recent foray into music against it. OK we get the interest in computing. Gunship wasn't too bad but suprised me a touch of LMI point about the music. Watch They are keep my C64 Indiana Jones was not very think. As music is a far more this space-again! Jerry's and build it up into a complete personal subject than cartoon is taking a break system. Sell my 64 and buy an Poster now. Most of which computer games, I think it but Melissa is still wearing the Amiga A500 or buy the Amiga are rubbish. For example did better left for the specialists jumpsuits in Esso adverts. and keep my C64 and tape you import a three-year-old such as Melody Maker, We've already got a strategy deck without investing in disk from Japan to draw the Sounds, Record Mirror, etc. section-WAKE UP! drives, etc. embarrassingly bad Gobots Your current reviews have After reading your brilliant I know that the C64 is picture? Now to probably the been too narrow in choice of comics article, I have decided popular with loads of software worst poster ever designed by subject, apart from that, the to write to you about your and that the Amiga doesn't C+VG. Yes! You guessed it, majority of teenagers I know do not like Thrash or Heavy Metal. magazine's change to not just a have anywhere near this Miss Melissa Ravenflame. specialised computer and amount, but it is a great What a naff picture. My nineThey seem to prefer the likes of video games mag but to a more computer. year-old sister could do better. Madonna or Whitney varied one. I can only afford to go for Bughunters is totally average Houston. Some changes, in my view, one option, so could you offer and the storyline is awful! Still, If you must review music, at are for the better. These me some advice. By the way, C+VG does have its good bits least let it be from volume include the comics and the does the A500 need a monitor like ... er ... um... the selling artistes and not esoteric or will it run off my TV? role-playing games. Arcade section. cult groups. As an alternative to Some, however, are for the Richard Monks kicha The Barbarians posters was no music reviews, you could worse, these include the metal South Humberside trashy. Who wants a picture try delving into different types miniatures and the rock music Editor's reply: If you want an like that? each month including an article/section. Comics and Amiga you're going to have to Ben Rainbow occasional foray into the toprole-playing games have buy the peripherals there's ilminster selling albums rather than new something to do with a big wordanyway. 64 stuff releases. Editor's reply: I'll have you computers, but how rock isn't compatible. And yes, I would sooner read a review know that I modelled for the music and the miniatures can you'll need a monitor. of a group's new album than Barbarian cover and there's be of any interest to computer barbarian cover Commodore in their wisdom and there's an album by a new group. My nothing wrong with having users. Please keep irrelevant haven't made the A500 with a own tastes vary from cult types false teeth. Looking forward to features like these two OUT of built-in modulator. Daft, if you such as Pere Ubu, Christian seeing your nine-year-old C+VG ask me. Death and Beki Bondage to sister's artwork. Makes me I have been collecting to mega-types such as Kate The last time you did the wonder why you spend a quid comics for about five years Bush, Kim Wilde and Starship. on this magazine every month. now and have enjoyed myself video section, all you reviewed At least you require a serious greatly but with continued were kiddies' films. We want to re-think regarding style and I wish to pick your brains. criticism from family and see some good sickos! Love content. Around Christmas time! friends, but it was hard and the mag. Pat on the back time for your bought two games for the after a year's absence from the G Ross PBM section. The first and the Spectrum Plus — it was a comics scene, I returned with a London best. Also thanks for the free special double pack. In it was vengeance to find sheer poster of Maria Whittaker and Editor's reply: Sickos!? You brilliance. Uridium and Firelord. After Barbarian and for the Imagine mean like Craig's home movie two weeks of non-stop playing How about printing some Game Over artwork how of Garry Williams in the bath. I got a brill score and to my posters of comic-book about a poster of that? Talk about Moby Dick... utter dismay, after I entered characters? If you put LT Laww Also, whatever happened to JAY in the Hall of Fame, I found in comic book form he would As C+VG is available in the the delightful Melissa's sexist sell like hot cakes. remote town of Khamis that some letters (DFL or cartoon? It started very something) had mysteriously Syed Absar Mushayt, Saudi Arabia, since interestingly until she started last April, I have been a regular taken place in my score. Has London covering up the Aneka The anyone else had this problem? Editor's reply: Don't quite reader of your beautiful, Skull Rice's jumpsuits. I can Jason E Mellor follow you, Syed. Role-players tell they are from Aneka' cos Cheshire they are baggy on the bum. USE the miniatures for games One thing, though, why Editor's reply: Better than Finally, how about a strategy and programmers do their picking your nose, I guess. Are and simulations section? heads in with loud music while don't you omit the comic pages and devote those pages you sure your Iceyboard is on would like to see a roundun of coding code for games you zap for info. On Atari ST and the right way round? Are your games currently available and rrently available and away at. Glad you like the fingers on in the right order? Amigas as readers know very which are worth buying. As an other changes, though. little about these machines. Did you eat your vegetables? If ex-Amtix reader it was one of I've been a reader of your I want to produce this is the only problem you've their best sections. magazine for about a year now commercial titles for small got then you're laughing. Playing games on a and I've NEVER read anything stores and establishments, so computer does not mean you better. Your reviews are great decided to buy a computer I have enjoyed reading are a thicko I'm in MENSA and I particularly like the with bigger memory. I am C+VG for several years and and I don't program or do system of putting rating for Continued of page 143 "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES Order by Credit line 01-348 2907 (24 hrs) VISA 1395 ***SPECTRUN** PRIO ***SPECTRUM+*+ PRICE ***COMMODORE ... ***COMMODORE 54+++ PRICE ***AMSTRAD.. PRICE ******BBC***** FLITE  ARTIST 10.95 RARAHIAN-02 7.50 MYSTER OF NILE-01 595 BARBARIAN-02 7.50 CHOLO DISK BARBARIAN CONFICTI 9.95 W12BALL 6.50 WONDER BOY-02 NEMISES -D2 ARKANOID 7.50 GUN RUNNER 5.50 EUTE 6 PACK-02 7.50 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-04 MYSTERY OF NILE-D2 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-04 ZYNAPS SILENT SERVICE 6.95 QUARTET 02 6 99 WORLD CLASS L BOARD -02 750 COOENAME DROID-01 WORLD CLASS LEADERBOARD 6.95 RATTLESHIPS-02 SURVIVOR 02 6.99 BUITE 6 PACK 1102 PAPERBOY (BBC/ELEC) 2 795 FISTII 6.50 REVS PLUS-01 850 ZYNAPS-02 ARKANOID-02 695 11.95 REVS 4 TRACK 03 ROAD RUNNER 7.50 FAJALIGHT OR DECEPTOR DO ELITE-03 9.95 * *ATARI 2000 SYSTEM 5.95 ELITE PACK 6.99 RENAGADE 02 606 ROAD RUNNER-D2 WIZBALL-02 6.75 6.99 VCS GAMES CONSOLE 5.95 750 ELITE TRIO PACK MILLIPEDE GUNSHIP-04 BATTLESHIPS-02 11.95 NEM SIS THE WARLOCK-02 650 GUNSHIP 7.50 GAUNTLET 6.99 EDGE CLASSICS-02 7.50 STARGATE BUBBLE BOBBLE-02 5.98 ELITE TRIO PACK-02 7.25 F15 STRIKE EAGLE TAL-PAN 12 95 $95 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-04 POLE POSITION ATHENA-D2 6.95 AUTO DUEL (DISK ONLY) SKY RUNNER HIGH FRONTIERS 02 WONDER BOY 6.99 750 SPACE INVADERS NINJA HAMPSTER-D2 750 BLACK LAMP 01 LEADERBOARD EXOLON 02 6.95 BATTLEZONE 6.99 QUARTET 699 MEGA APOCALYPSE02 750 EDGE CLASSICS-02 7.50 PROHIBITION 02 ENDURO RACER 750 MARIO BROS MYSTERY OF THE NILE TAIPAN 02 BATTLE CRUISER IDISK ONLY) 1750 CHOLO-04 12.96 CRYSTLE CASTLE BASKET MASTER TOMAHAWK 750 EPYX EPICS-D2 79 WAR GAMES CONS-DISK 14.96 TAIPAN-02 MS. PACMAN ELITE 9.95 INDIANA JONES 750 WORLD CLASS LBOARD-D2 699 STREET SPORT BASEBALL-D26.99 GUILD OF THIEVES-04 ATARI 8 BIT HIGH FRONTIER 7.50 GAME OVER ADVANCE ART STUDIO-DISK 19.95 DESTROYER DISK ONLY 12.95 ELTE 6 PACK 02 7.50 GAUNTLET 02 ARKANOJO 5.50 NAPOLIAN AT WAR 6.99 GUILD OF THIEVES-DISK ONLY 14.95 L'BOARD TORM-(DISK 08.90) 4.99 ELITE TRIO PACK-D2 7.2 JEWELS OF DARKNESS-02 11.95 9.95 U CAN 7.50 QUEDEX-02 7.50 EUTE 6 PACK-02 6.99 ADVANCE ART STUDIO-DISK VANCE ART STunin_DISK 19.95 19.95 SILENT SERVICE-02 GALLIPOLI 7.50 SOLD A MILLION 3 7.50 RE-BOUNDER-02 6.99 RAMBO DISK MINI OFFICE II 04 12.95 AUTODUEL DISK 14 99 NEMESIS THE WARLOCK 6.50 RENAGADE LAST MISSION-02 7.50 DEFENDER OF CROWN DISK 12.95 MASK-D2 SILICON DREAMS-02 11.95 EXOLON SCALEXTRIC 5.99 RISK 6.50 PIRATES 04 12.98 SURVIVOR-D2 7.50 ATARI ST CONFLICTS 11 5.50 WIZBALL 5.50 FRANKENSTEN 6.95 ***C54/DESKS UTILITIES *t HTE 6 PACK II — DO 7.50 STAR TREK BESMARK 699 CHOLO 9.95 WATER POLO-02 7.50 ULTIMATISK 14.95 BLACK LAMP 12 7.50 BARBARIAN PALACE 18.95 JUDGE DEATH 7.50 METROCROSS KILLED UNTIL DEAD-D2 6.99 EXPERT CARTRIDGE + ESM 27.96 ROAD RUNNER-02 7.50 PAWN EDGE CLASSICS NICK FALDOS GOLF 2.99 LEADERBOARD EXECUTIME2 6.99 FREEZE FRAME LAZER BATTLESHIPS-02 GULD OF THIEVES ARMAGEDON MAN MULTIFACE 128 4495 LEADERBOARD 02 6.99 FREEZE FRAME MK 4 27 85 CHOLD04 PASSENGERS OF THE WINO BLACK LAMP ADV ART STUDIO 129K 19,95 ARMAGEDDON MAN-02 6.95 FREEZE MACHINE 27.95 TANK-02 GAUNTLET BUBBLE BOBBLE THE PAWN 128K CONFLICTED 10.95 FINAL CARTRIDGE 36.95 VULCAN 7.95 GOLDEN PATH 15.75 ARTIST -120K 14.95 HIGH FRONTIER-02 02 7.50 + ACTION REPLAY MK III ENDURO RACER 28.95 7.50 ROAD RUNNER ARMY MOVES ***SEGA SYSTEM** 6.95 REBEL-D2 COLONIAL CONQUEST 7.50 ZYNAPS-02 \"PHANTOM SURVIVOR 7.50 MASTER SYSTEM POWER BASE GAME OVER-02 99.95 6.95 18.75 STARSLIDER THE LAST NINJA-02 SLIMUNE 14 KEYBOARD YANKEE 7.50VY HEAD GAUNTLET-02 7.50 PHANTASIE 2 AUF WEIDERSHEN-D2 CARRIER FORCE DISK 24.95 WORLD GAMES QUARTET-02 7.50 GHOST HOUSE SILICON DREAMS 18.75 14.95 REV PLUS-02 695 SLAP FIGHT-02 TRIVIAL PURSUITS HARORALL 19.99 10.95 SUPER TENNIS 14.95 CALIFORNIA GAMES-02 750 BARBARIAN 19.95 GUILD OF THIEVES SILICON DREAMS-04 9.95 9.95 19.99 SUB BATTLE SIMULATION SPY V SPY 14.95 IMAGE SYSTEM-04 HITCHIKERS GUIDE INTO THE EAGLES NEST MULTIFACE II *****JOYSTICKS***** WORLD SOCCER 14.95 + MINI OFFICE 11-04 SILICON DREAMS 19.95 6.99 TRANSBOT QUICK SHOT 7.96 14.95 8.99 BISMARK-D2 LEADERBOARD 19.99 10x5.25\" SSAB TPI ZULU WAR 7.50 NCTION FIGHTER QUICK SHOT I TURBO 1995 7.95 13.56 GAME OVER-02 5.50 PAWN 1999 252525\" SSAB TPS 1395 KONDYS JOYSTICK 11.99 CONVOY RAIDER 5.99 PRO WRESTLING 1995 SABOTEUR 1 SILENT SERVICE 19.99 100 10x525 DS48 TPI 8.95 COMP PAO 5000 NINJA HAMPSTER BLACK BELT 1995 MASK-02 7:50 MEAN 18 GOLF 25x5.25 DS48 TPI EUROMAX PROFESSIONAL PLUS URIDIUM CHOPLIFTER 1995 SPY V SPY -02 6.99 STARGLIDER 19.99 10x3 54 55 14 95 FUROMAX NON-AUTO FIRE 1595 SHOOTING GALLERY 1995 ENDURO RACER-02 KARATE KIDH 19.95 25x3 SSS 39 95 CHEETAH MACH 1 13.95 ANNALS OF ROME SPACE HARRIER 24.95 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT 6.99 GUILD OF THIEVES 19.99 10x5,25 SSAB TPI-COLOURED 1095 CHEETAH 125 + BATTLEFIELD GERMANY ROCKY 24.95 ELITE-03 995 STATION 4 19.95 10x5 25 0548 TPI-COLOURED 24.95 COMP PRO 5000 BBC SILICON DREAMS-04 996 DEFENDER OF THE CROWN 24.95 10x3\" DISKS 2595 FANTASTIC STICK ALSO AVAILABLE ON DISK FORMAT D1=.95, D2=.95, D3-.95, D4=.95, D5=.50 FOR MAIL OADER CUSTOMERS CALLERS PLEASE SEND CHEO P.O. TO: SCS (DEPT CVG9, 655 GREEN LANES. LONDON N8 ODY. P&P INCLUDED IN PERSONAL CALLERS PLEASE PRODUCE THIS ADVERT AT EITHER SHOP ACCESS AND VISA CARD ORDERS FOR GROVE DISCOUNTS TO: SHEKHANA AT COMPUCENTRE UNIT 5. UK EUROPE ADD 1 PER ITEM ELSEWHERE ADO 12 PER ITEM. ADD CS FOF221 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD, LONDON WIR SAF 201-348-2907 801-340-8565 801-631-4627 MACHINES FOR PSP UK ONLYI SEND A SAE FOR FREE LIST CREDIT CARD ORDERS DESPATCHED SAME DAY C64 SPEC AMSTRAD BBC ATARI STAMIGA IBM PCW NEAREST TUBE STN GOODGE SLOPEN 6 DAYS A WEEK SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY 10.00AM 18.00PM. OR 655 GREEN LANES, LONDON NB ODY Please specify computer type. Phone us for the latest news on *ALL NEW RELEASES ARE SUBJECT TO RELEASE DATES IN TURNPIKE LANE STN) FROM SOFTWARE HOUSES the Ninetendo and Sega Systems Above discount valid until 16 09 87 only. DENOTES ITEMS ONLY AVAILABLE FROM 655 GREEN LANES. NS OGY PLEASE RING TO CONFIRM AVAILABILITY 2496 16.95 V.F.M. DISCS ATARI 400/600/800XLIST SOFTWARE klebek USED HARDWARE Spectrum 48K.. ... .50 Spectrum Plus $50.00 Spectrum 128K. .00 Spectrum +2... .00 Commodore 64(+Rec).. .00 Commodore 16 (+Rec). ...00 Commodore Plus/4.. .00 ZX81 16K. .00 Electron.... .00 VIC-20 16K (+Rec)........... .00 Amstrad CPC464 (Green)... ...00 Amstrad CPC464 (Colour)... ....00 Amstrad 6128 (Green)......... $220.00 Amstrad 6128 (Colour)...... .00 Atari VCS......... .00 Joysticks from $2.00. Interfaces from  00 Printers from .00 Al the above computers are guaranteed for 3 months, in good condition boxed and complete with loads, manuals etc Send cheque/PO to: Software City, 173 Mansfield Road, Nottingham, NG1 3FR. Telephone (0602) 410493 Overseas orders: Add .00 BRANDED DISCS DSDD 48TPI ..E13 99 Per 10 DSIDD 48TPI E14 99 Per 10 5.25\" DATA PRO D S/DD 48TPI. ES SO Per 10 SS.DO 135TPI DS/DD 136TPI 127 99 Per 10 625 9 Per 10 UNBRANDED DISCS 5.25 BOWED O S DO 48TPI.... ES 99 Per 10 CASED 699 per 25 5.29 BULK BUY DS DO 48TPI ... 12 96 Per 25 3.5\" BOXED BOXED DYDD 135TP SIT 1 25P 10 CASED (13.95 per 10 . 14 55 Per 16 CASED 115 95 per 10 ACCESSORIES QUICKSHOT II JOYSTICK QUICKSHOT IL TURBO JOYSTICK PLASTIC OESC CASE 3.5' OR 5.25 PAINTER RIBBONSIDUST COVERS AVAILABLE. We anly supply top quality products and other a full replacement quarantee All dies 100% error free. Make cheque POS payable to VEM DISCS. UNIT 121. LONGFIELD, HARLOW ESSEX CM 18 GLB Tel 8279 411145 VISA 124 hour order line) and 0279 443219 We have all all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE Apply now and hire your first four games free Around 1.000 different original titles For full details send large stamp addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 Disc Drive E119.95 post free Atari 5205STM (345.90 post free 10 free disks Casio C2230S 6279.90 post tree Antic and Analog magazines available. BEST QUALITY DISCS Memorex 54 S.SJDD Discs 10 for .95 p.t. Unlabelled W SS/DD Discs 10 for 19.95 p.. Unlabelled 5 S SIDD Discs 25 for $22.95 of Unlabelled S S/DD Disc 50 for 142.95 Unlabelled SAS S/DD Discs. 100 for $79.950 1 Memorex 312 Dises. Boxes of 10 S.S./00 .95 p.t. Unlabelled 32 S.S./00 Discs 10 for .95 p.. Atari 520 STM with 12 Megabyte Drive 1449.00 + 23 discs Happy enhancement for the 1060 Drive with revision 7. .95 post free GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB DEPT. C+VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thornex Close, Sunderland SR3 4PD. Tel: (091) 5286351. CLASSIFIEDS THE COMPUTER SOFTWARE EXCHANGE UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Fre membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64 Send s.a.e. for fast response and details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG). 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield $5 9GB SPECTRUM SOFTWARE LIBRARY OVER 1000 TITLES Hire fees from 50; for 2 weeks including postage For Details send an s.a.e. to Dept CVG, PO Box 63, Banstead, Surrey, SM73QT. Want to swap the software you no longer use. If you own a CBM64, SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD, BBC, ATARI XL or ST. For free membership and club magazine send large s.a.e. to: C.S.E.(V) 8 Poplar Croft, Bramley, Leeds, LS13 4SX Tel (0532; 790750 MATRIX HIRE The cheapest way to play them all. Top games titles for Spectrum, Commodore and Amstrad. Please state system. Details from: Matrix Leisure Club 271 Stanstead Road, Bishop's Stortiord, Herts CM23 2BT FREE MEMBERSHIP!!! Hire CBM64, Spectrum, Vic-20 software! amstrad, atari, C16 BBC, electron Write now for free exciting details! COMPUTERSOFT (cv) PO Box 28, North PDO, Nottingham NGS 2EE (Please state machine. Stamp appreciated) "


"Mailbag Computer + Video Games 30-32 Farringdon lane London ecir 394 Continued from page 141 telling them how to do it and Magnetic Fields Part II; Loco Alien Sex Fiend, Sisters of considering a C128, Amiga or get on and enjoy the rest of the Equinox parts five and six; Yie Mercy, The Dead Kennedys, ST. Can you help me? What is game. Do any other readers Ar Kung Fu Magnetic Fields etc. I think you should review the difference between the think this is a valid argument. part IV and finally Rob records of unknown, new Atari 520 ST and 520 STEM Cameron Watts Hubbard's Thalamus-loading bands bringing different music are they compatible? Dumbarton music which was one of the so that more people know that Khalid Sohail Editor's reply: You're not demo's free from Zzap. it exists and buy it. Got it, Saudi Arabia talking about System 3's Last I do hope they get Wayne? Editor's reply: Now here's the Ninja, are you? Sounds like permission first before putting I was a bit disappointed with sort of reader I lika to get you need a good seeing to by them into games 'cos I'll grass three of your issues earlier on letters from! Polite, and to the Melissa Ravenflame and Ideas 'em up ... I will yer know. It this year-namely, March, point. The Atari STFM can be Central. And it costs you less somehow seems to be such a April and May. They were so plugged directly into a TV. The than a phone call! Seriously, mock-up of his music. I am weak. But, I am glad to report ST needs a monitor. Buy an STC+VG prints solutions to only protecting the rights of my that you have got it together or an Amiga both will serve many different games each idol. I wonder how many more again. you well. But it really depends issue So BUY IT MORE pieces of his music are in I loved the advert for Game on how much cash you want OFTEN! And help keep me in computer games do you Over could you do that into to spend. Check out our next the style I've become know? a gigantic poster? I would also issue for the special Atari/ accustomed to. The cardboard Dalian love a poster of Hewson's Amiga supplement. box is quite comfortable, Dorchester Zynapes. thank you... Editor's reply: Don't know, Wim de Gent I am hopping madDalien, but I guess JMJ is just Belgium fuming, in fact. Software In reply to M Wilson's letter one of many composers to be companies do all these lovely there is one Enterprise User treated in this way. Me, I'm Never mind with the Dear adverts for their up-andGroup. He can contact them at looking forward to his C+VG crap listen up! coming games and get all your this address: ICU, PO BOX Spectacular in Londo You need a swift kick in the readers really keyed-up waiting 13, Crowborough, E Sussex Docklands later this year. See pants to get your brain for the release date. TN6 1QX. Make sure you you there? working. There're a few things We all rush out and buy their enclose a SAE when you write. about your mag that I don't games and that's that as far as There is also an IEUG hotline Wayne's outdated. OK, if Wavne's outdata like. the companies are concerned. available from 7pm to 10pm. you want a \"music\" section in 1. Your competitions seem Thev don't want to know us The number is 08926 3890. your mag please remember this to be set for Artists, what about until the next game release. If anyone wants to help with is the 80s and not the 70s. I u s other readers who can't But, what about us — we buy their enterprise or wants a pen think it is ridiculous to review draw! the game and find it nigh on pal then wirte to me, clo only hard rock, heavy metal, 2. Your letter pages are full impossible to finish certain C+VG. speed metal and other metals! of it! Yes, full of people levels or to find magic potions. John Foster I completely agree with moaning about pointed So, of course, what do we Sheffield Stuart Gorland. If you want to anatomy and God knows what do we phone the company Editor's reply: So now you can review hard music, how about else. Send these people one concerned and what do we get all boldly go where no punk. Don't say that there is no crate of Terry Wogan -sorry, we can't help you, we computer owners have gone more punk, 'cos if punk is underwear this should quickly don't have hint sheets, or even before... dead, then hard rock lies 13 dispatch them. better, we don't give away billion years away. Just look at 3. Just how many people out hints. So there we are, left I am a loyal fan of the The Conflict, The Exploited, there don't know how to write tearing our hair out trying every magnificant composer, Jean GBH and many others or complex programes (me conceivable way possible to Michel Jarre. I have all his won't you dare to review it included)? Everyone can write complete the level. existing records and consider because there's lots of *@*@game scenarios. Isn't it about Don't they realise that after myself quite an expert on his and !S* in it? time you showed us how sales is just as important as all wonderful music. If you want something new arcade games are made? the lead-up to the release. But isn't it amazing how come over to Belgium, it's the 4. Don't you ever read what I'm not asking them to give many of his pieces occur in world's centre for New Wave. you print? And there are too away the complete formula to computer games? I own a C64 If you're too lazy to come over many black and white the game, but surely if and with my large selection of just open your eyes up Spectrum 0.1k photographs. someone can't even get out of games I have sussed out four there's loads of good, Anon level one there is no harm examples: Bomb Jack unknown groups in England, ie Birmingham "


"Pen Pal Page Hunting are welcome. Criminals or Exterminators, and before you ask, yes, I am a member. I'll reply to everyone. IC Genius Essex like to know their hobbies and interests. Gregory Winfield 67 May Street Altona North, 3025 Victoria Australia I am looking for new friends to write to, to talk about my C64. I also have a 1541 disk drive, printer and modem. I have had my computer for two years and I just love it! So, please write to me. Gerry Charron PO Box 9084 Main Terminal Ottawa Ontario K16 3TB Canada If anyone is interested, am a 14-year-old boy stationed in Malaysia where a very good range of software for all computers is available for very good prices. I own a C64 and would like anyone interested in the above or maybe just to chat to drop me a line. Nathon Gunn Desa Ukay Heights Condo-apts B-no 2 Jalan Teberau Kuala Lumpur 68000 Malaysia I am an American C64 owner who is stuck with only a datacassette and printer. I would love to here from anybody, from any country, wanting an American pen pal. Paul Smith 526 Township St Sedro-Woolley WA 98284 USA Fancy a pen pal who is: crazily keen on home computers, a CPC6128 Amstrad owner with a cassette player, interested to get in touch with other Amstrad owners, 17 years old and a really nice lad? If you do, then don't waste any time! Send a letter to: Harry Tsangarides 2 Phedras St Acropolis Nicosia Cyprus I am a 17-year-old Spanish C64 owner, who would like to swap pokes, hints, etc, with owners anywhere in the world. Jordi Verges Molins de Rei no03 Sob 1a 08750 Barcelona Spain I am the owner of a BBC Master compact and would like to get in touch with any male or female from Britain. I am 15 years old and a student at the English School in Nicosia. Dinos Strovolides 8 Phedias Street Strovolos Nicosia 154 Cyprus This is the voice of someone who has just bought an Amiga 500. Yes, it is a fantastic machine! But, I need a pen pal. I really like good graphic adventures like the Pawn. De Vos Christophe Oeverstraat 11 1900 Lokeren Belgium Hiya, my name is Kin On \"Ghetto' Li. I am a Chinese walkin' talkin' readin' listenin' adventurin' wacko person. Anyone want an innocent 10-year-old penpal like me to write to? Are there any Amstrad CPC 464 cool dudes out there to swap news, etc?, then write to me c/o C+VG. Kin On 'Ghetto' Li Cheshire My name is Mark. I am 13 and own a C64 and 1530 datassette unit. would like pen pals all over the world. I would like to swap hints, tips and pokes. Mark Murphy 9 Woodvale Foynes Co. Limerick Eire I have been studying English and German at the Institute of Foreign Language in Prague. My name is Jiri Suchy and I would like to have a pen-pal from England, Scotland or Ireland. I am 37-years-old and work as a translator. My hobbies are tourism and hiking. Jiri Suchy Praha 10 Pripotocni 21 101 001 Czechoslovakia I am a 14-year-old Atari 520STFM/Speccy owner who desperately wants a British — preferably in the South East male/female pen pal of roughly the same age. I am a devoted computer freak. Paul Meech Essex I am a 15-year-old Finnish boy and I have MSX-micro and cassette unit. I would like to swap ideas, hints, etc. I am looking for male/female pen pals from abroad. All letters will be answered. Taisto Repo Lehtola 74640 Sulkavanirv Finland Hello there! I am a very lonely, male C64 owner and would like a male or female pen pal (preferably the latter). You don't have to own a computer, just write whether you want to swap hints or tips or just to chat. I don't mind. Any members of The I am looking for a penfriend between the ages of 13 and 15 and who will be able to inform me of upcoming games that are being converted from the arcades to the computer. I am not bothered where they come from but I would I am a 16-year-old Amiga user who would like to get in touch with male or female Amiga users. I am interested in swaping ideas, tips, information and, of course, letters. I run Amiga Users Group, Norway, so I can get lots of tips and info. Oyvind Grimstad N 6674 Kvisvik Norway "


"THE COIN-OP CLASSIC NASIIMSON A TEST OF VALOUR TO CALLAGE THE MOST OUTSTANDICADE SPACE FIGHTER U.S. GOLD Driven from your home galaxy your only pallback to ending your exile and reclaiming your honour lies in defeating the invading force torment your people. Armed with the most sophisticated weapons systems, quarded by a protective forcefield, you set out on a mission to conquer the enemy starbase, a crusade against the most starting of death defying odds. The ultimate in firepower is at your fingertips, the pinnacle of spacecraft control and command is within your grasp. The strategy and excitement only ever associated with arcade settings is recreated for your very own personal mission. A coin-op classic of immense proportions, DATA EAST CBM64/128 .99 Tape .99 Disk Spectrum 48/128 .99 U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford May. Holford. Birmingham B6 TAX Tel: 021 356 3388 "


"C+VG's Hot Gossiper Tony Takoushi has the biggest eyes, nose and mighty mouth in computer games. He sees all, hears all and he then shouts about it each month exclusively in your favourite computer mag. Solread on for the man who shoots from the lip at the good, the bad and the ugly in the software world. ne of the most presented with a choice details of each points if they touch you. painful aspects of five characters, character's score, You can destroy the of owning an Merlin the Wizard, Agor health, keys/treasurel ghosts by zapping them Amiga right now is the the Warrior, Golwyn the potions collected. but give yourself room extreme shortage of Elf, Valeria the Valkyrie At the bottom of the as they do tend to crowd quality arcade games. and Thorin the Dwarf. screen is a timer not around you! OK, so there are a few You choose your operational in my copy Other features of the games from Anco and character and go into -I would assume speed game include chunky Eidersoft but nothing to the game. is the order of the day. set the world on fire. The play area takes As is the form there swinish-looking hams But do not despair! up two-thirds of the are zillions of ghosts to keep your health There is help on the screen, with the other trying to nobble you, level up, drinking way. Really classy third to give you the and you lose health potions and amulets for arcade games are being special powers and written in Germany for teleports to get you into the Amiga. A hot (precorners of each level. production) little item The play is smooth that has arrived on my and the action does not desk is Garrison. slow down regardless Garrison is truly of how many nasties awesome there's a are on screen! word I haven't used for I really am looking a while it is a Gauntlet forward to this little gem derivative and has being finished as the everything you could author promises a Want from an Amiga hundred levels, lots game. more enemies, sounds When the game has galore and even better loaded you are graphics. t's really strange that computers. coupon below, and get massed ranks of C+VG just a few days after That set me thinking. a friend to sign it as readers then you'll writing my last What we should do, well. know that they don't comment on TV mused, is start a proper Then we'll pass on care about the kids! producers and campaign for a PROPER your demand to the Remember if you marketing people, I had TV computer GAMES BBC, ITV and Channel 4. don't, you won't get the a call from Channel Four to show-not just another If they ignore the TV you want. do a spot on their BLUE PETER and Chips! Network 7 show. What better way to To be honest it did start than to ask all the C+VG READERS SAY WE WANT A PROPER little to change my view C+VG readers who'd COMPUTER GAMES SHOW ON TV! that people in TV know like to see a proper Dear Mr Producer, nothing about computers. show on TV, dealing with Please help us get a good computer games show To a great extent they their favourite subject, on television 100,000 C+VG readers can't be still seem to take the to join in a campaign to wrong! view that computers are persuade the controllers of the a fad, and are not here Signed to stay. airwaves to let Address What was refreshing computer games have a Age was that they were regular slot. Signed honest about their What we at C+VG Address ignorance and were would like is for you to keen to do more on fill in the petition Return this form to TV Campaign Computer and Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR ZAU. Age "


"JOVIALAUSK JEGADE GEAM Art SPECTRUM 7.95% COMMODORE 8.951 AMSTRAD COMMODORE MAA 42.95 | TAITO COIN-OP DISK AMSTRAD 14.951 Taito Corp 1986 Licensed from Programmed for Amstrad, Spectrum Commodore by Imagine Software ATARI ST In the knife-edge world of the vigilante there is no place to rest, no time to think-butlook sharp-thereis always time to del From the city subways to the gangland ghettos you will always encounter the disciples of evil Who's mission it is to exterminate the only man on earth who dares to throw down the gauntlet in their path-the Renegade A breathtaking conversion of the arcade hit by Taito now for your home computers He with all the original play features-when you play Renegade you would not have believed you could play so mean! eGiGTMAGY NE SOFTWARE DISENTRAS "


"GREATS AIRWULF camis, han GURIANO A OFFICIALLY LICENSED COIN-OP FROM OFFICIALLY LICENSED SEQUEL TO THE UNIVERSAL PICTURES TELEVISION SERIES TAITO GAMES FOR THE PRICE OF 1 SPECTRUM from Great Gorianos Airwolf 2 30C RELEASE DATES Europe 13th July UK 20th July AMSTRAD Great Gurianos Airwolf 2 DC CES B CBM-54 disc ETCS Great Gurianes Airwolf 2 Cataball Mail order, just send a cheque or postal order payable to ELITE SYSTEMS LTD. or quote your credit card No. 0 GREAT GURIANOS Classic Coin-Op Action! Great Gurianos, supreme warrior ** battles against all the odds. Licensed from Taite Carp Expert outside Europe and Australia prohibited.\" AIRWOLF 2 Once again you pilot the ultimate combat helicopter, where no one else dares to go. \"Go for it Stringfellow Hawke.\" 1984 Universal City Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. A Trademark of and licensed by Universal City Studios, Inc. WHITPAK SI 3DC Beware the perils of the Deep! Quick thinking, fast action, and more than a CATABALL bit of cunning will be needed to Introducing a new rebuild your crippled submarine, concept delicate control is required to stoor all 4 balls successfully through a hostile world your only chance of escape. and at the same time achieve your goal! : SCORE10077502 NEMA NY Screenshots are taken from various computer formats. Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands WS9 8PW Telephone: (0922) 59165 Telex: 336130 ELITE G "

