"DECEMBER 1984 95p Dm 6 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES SPECIAL OFFER MELBOURNE HONE CHRISTMAS GAME OF R. Prepare to meet THE LAST STARFIGHTER ,000 MEGARULE COMPETITION! AN ADVENTURE HOLIDAY WITH MACBETH! INSPIDER-MAN ADVENTURES JOIN THE WARRIORS OF THE FREE IN THE LAND OF MIDNIGHT "


"ABK SPECTRUM .95 COMMODORE 64 .95 The Fallety h ires Colt when he's not before the cameras Colt Seavers is a top Hollywood stuntman who uses the extraordinary skills he displays before the camera when moonlighting as a modern Bounty Hunter, who apprehends and brings in Bail Bond jumpers. Colt is ably assisted by his would be manager Howie, his beautiful stuntgirl protege, Jody, and terri the lady from the Ball Bond Company, who The cast of characters is Colt Seavers... LEE MAJORS Jody Banks ........ HEATHER THOMAS Howie Munson DOUG BARR Terri Micheals T... MARKIE POST WARNER BROS The Dukes ceHazzard QLAND Its the 4th of July and as usual the Duke family want to have their annual party. The essential ingredient to make the party a success is moonshine, so its up to Bo and Luke Duke to take the General Lee and fetch the moonshine Uncle Jessie Duke has left scattered throughout the county. The problem is that Boss Hogg knows about the Duke Boys plans and has sent Roscoe and company out to stop the Boys collecting the moonshine Kolotoni Wit Coming to your Micro early 1985 AS Kokotoni Wilf you must recover all of the Dinosaurs to hostile alien. Robots but the pieces of the legendary Dragon Amulet reward for recovering all of the pieces (which has been scattered through time for warrants the risk, 60 plus screen settings in your master the great magician Ulrich genuine high resolution make Kokotoni Wilf Throughout the quest Wilf comes up a ainst an arcade adventure worthy of comparison many dangers from huge Prehistoric with Jet Set Willy SPECTRUM .95 COMMODORE 64 .95 PRESENT LEE MAJORS CENTURY Every single ELITE product carries the unique 'ELITE Holographic Sticker. Make sure your copy does, its your guarantee of quality FALL GUV 48K SPECTRUM .95 COMMODORE 64 .95 48K Spectrum and Commodore 64 AVAILABLE IN NOVEMBER AVAILABLE NOW Mail Order: Just send a cheque or P.O. payable to 'ELITE'or quote your credit card no. tems Ltd 55 Bradford Street Walsall, England WS130D. Telephone (0922) 611215. Telex 335622 SPETEL G AttentionsElite "


"86 de A still from the movie, The Last Starfighter. Turn to page 100 for our preview of this latest space adventure. Cover: Universal Lorimar Productions. 314 AV FEATURES MAILBAG. Piracy, pretty pictures and praise feature in our Christmas letters page COMPETITIONS Four pages packed with prizes start here. . Is this a competition I see before me? You bet it is! SPIDER-MAN. 54 Old Web-Head gets the Scott Adams Adventure treatment and Keith Campbell gets caught up in the threads. GAME OF THE FILM Films and TV shows are getting the video-game treatment. THE YEAR'S NEW MICROS 93 93 The Bug Hunter takes a look at the new games machines lining up for the Christmas market. THE LAST STARFIGHTER.. 100 The ultimate adventure starts here! C&VG's preview of the latest space movie. TOP 30 CHARTS 106 DOOMDARK'S REVENGE 110 Part one of our exclusive Fighting Fantasy style adventure competition join the Warriors of the Free! CHRISTMAS GAME OFFER. ..146 A very special offer exclusively for C&VG readers a great Christmas adventure from The Hobbit people. ADVENTURE HELPLINE Two pages of hints and tips from the files of the Adventurer.in. Chief and his apprentices. ADVENTURE .166 KC digs deep into his software pile and comes up with some new Adventures! AVALON 173 Professor Video takes a look into the weird and wonderful world of Avalon and brings you an exclusive map with tips. BUG HUNTER .191 FIFTH COLUMN 197 Mike Singleton brings you the latest news from the battlefield! HALL OF FAME. 200 Hot-shots start here. Are you good enough to get into our elite? NEXT ISSUE ON SALE 16th DECEMBER 165 LISTINGS Editor Tim Metcalfe Deputy Editor Eugene Lacey Editorial Assistant Clare Edgeley Staff Writers/Reader Services Robert Schifreen Seamus St. John Art Editor Linda Freeman Designers Lynda Skerry, lan Noble Production Editor Mary Morton Advertisement Manager Louise Matthews Advertising Executives Bernard Dugdale, Sean Brennan Phil Godsell Production Assistant Melanie Paulo Publisher Rita Lewis Editorial and Advertisement Offices: Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES POSTAL SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE. By using the special Postal Subscription Service, copies of COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES can be mailed direct from our offices each month to any address throughout the world. All subscription applications should be sent for processing to COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES (Subscription DepartmentCompetition House. Fanndon Road, Market Harborough, Leicestershire. All orders should include the appropriate remittance, made payable to COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES. Annual subscription rates (12 issues): UK and Eire E14 Additional service information, including individual overseas airmail rates available upon request. Circulation Department: EMAP National Publications. Published and distributed by EMAP National Publications GANGSTER/SPECTRUM. Big Dino has set you up good and proper! WEATHERBEATER/SPECTRUM ...126 Would you buy a used space craft from this man? BOXER/CBM 64. This program's a knock-out! FRANTIC FARMER/BBC 181 It looks like a bleak winter ahead for Giles the Farmer. DOODOS -35 NEWS AND REVIEWS 20 GAMES NEWS Hot stories from the city desk concern Ultimate's new releases and the demise of Parker Brothers. Plus lots more scoops! REVIEWS Exclusive reviews on U.S. Gold's Raid Over Moscow and Tapper, Countdown to Meltdown from Creative Sparks plus Black Night from the new Interdisc outfit and Jet Set Willy for the 64. ARCADE ACTION Arcade Spy discovers the latest Star Wars game Revenge of the Jedi and it's a real blaster. Plus news from the Pinball Owners Association Convention. Game of the Month NEXT MONTH. 207 Boulderdash 64 Printed by Severn Valley Press. Typeset by In-Step Ltd. "


"10   ORIC/ATMOS ORIC/ATMOS OTHER TITLES FOR CBM64/V20 SPECTRUM ZX81 AVAILABLE ON REQUEST NS 3 9 Nasa No 933-373 3 land CATEG/ORIC BAB 3 Bed 3 OPTIMUM ORICI/ATMOS 0503 CATEG-ORIC (action game). Take command of a cruiser engaged in battle against fighter planes and submarines. Use the radar and sonar systems to detect hanem before and destroy the enemy before you are sunk.& 7.95 0540 STYX (arcade). Des troy the castles of the Dark One which guard the river Styx. Struggle against vultu. res, the eyes of the devil and his minions to vanquish evil. 0494 DBUG (utility). A monitor/debugger to debug your programmes in machine code: position of internal registers, set breakpoints, step through programmes. & 11.95 0496 OPTIMUM (home). Manage up to 4 different accounts, keep track of expenditure and compare with your monthly or yearly budget. Just what you need to keep the household accounts in or der. & 9.95 0495 FIRE FLASH (arcade). Prevent the aliens from sabotaging the fuel depot and avoid enemy fire by passing into hyper space. An attractive and challenging arcade game in 100% machine code, & 8.50 8.50 N and No se No 315 NS 310 Na man's land PANIC AND THE TORTOSE THE HARE HARD.Commentication CHATMOS MULTI FILER 0526 TYRANN (adventure). Can you find your way through the labyrinth and liberate Queen Tyrann from her torment? A first-class adven-_ ture game with text and graphics. & 8.95 0514 THE DIABOLICAL TO WER (adventure). The Diabo lical Tower has 60 floors, each one fraught with danger. Your mission is to seek out the treasure. & 8.50 ORIC-TAYMOS 0463 PANIC (action). Catch the marauding apples by setting traps. 6 levels. & 6.95 48K ORIC 1/ATMOS 0510 MULTIFILER (business). A powerful programme for creating files. Choose your own criteria adapted to your requirements. Rapid sort and search features in machine code and possibility of memorising over 30000 characters. Extremely simple to use. & 14.95 48K ORIC 1ATMOS 0515 THE HARE AND THE TORTOISE (education). Agame for 3-8 year olds to teach the notions of right, left, up, down and counting. The hare and the tortoise decide to race. Who will win? The level of difficulty is adjustable to the child's ability. & 8.50 OTHER ORIC/ATMOS TITLES RETAILERS CONTACT: MAIL ORDER: POST COUPON TO HIGH TECH UNITS 1 & 2 CONLON DEVELOPMENTS WATERY LANE DARWEN LANCASHIRE PRICES INCLUDE POSTAGE AND PACKING FOR UK ONLY OVERSEAS ADD 4.2. Centre Soft S REF TITLE TOTAL PRICE 0497 ADDRESS BOOK & 9.95 0498 BANK ACCOUNT & 12.50 0499 BASIC PLUS & 9.95 0502 COMPUTER ASSISTED DESIGN & 8.50 0504 CHARACTER GENERATOR & 8.50 0465 CONCOURS HIPPIQUE 45.95 0464 CW MORSE & 14.95 0506 FINANCIAL CALCULATOR & 9.95 0507 INVOICING & 14.95 0508 LEARNING FORTH & 16.95 0509 LIBRARY CATALOG & 9.95 0511 SCREEN KIT & 9.95 0513 SUPERCOPY & 9.95 OR ASK YOUR DISTRIBUTOR TO CONTACT US DISTRIBUTORS AND OVERSEAS ENQUIRIES CONTACT: PO/CHEQUE ENCLOSED OR DEBIT ACCESS/VISA IF CARD EXPIRY DATE: IMPORTANT: All cheques or cards payable to NO MAN'S LAND and sent to High Tech. NAME ADRESS POSTCODE JANET PELTON, INNELEC-NO MAN'S LAND 110 BIS RUE DU GAL LECLERC 93506 PANTIN CEDEX FRANCE TEL.: 33-1-840.24.31. CVG "


"GETTING THE BEST FROM DECATHLON HARD.communication PA before, Derek, we rely on | little dots on a screen, or about that \"French the honesty of our readers manoeuvering a small Mistress\"... when they enter our Hall character called Willy (?) I must admit, I did like of Fame. If you cheat, you around scenes which Manic Miner, until I found Dear Sir, only fool yourselves. Lots seem to be the result of a the Skylab stage of people out there know particularly bad batch of impossible. I haven't The two programs below about the scoring system glue ... are merge routines, the played it for months. So for games as Derek's first for the Vic 20 and the From present sales you can appreciate the letter illustrates. second for the CBM 64. figures, I would be elation that I felt when 1. Vic 20. tempted to define such a confronted with the POKE43,PEEK(45)-2 prospect of continuing the A LOONY WRITES person as a Consumer, or POKE44,PEEK(46) to use a modern, hip word saga in Jet Set Willy (can LOAD AND WRITES. ! punter. you?). However, the joy POKE43,1 I hope that you was short lived ... Bugs? POKE44,16 Dear Sir, wholeheartedly disagree That game is more 2. CBM 64 I've just got time for a few with this, if only to create a infested than a tramp's POKE43,PEEK(45)-2 quick words before I little controversy into an hammock! If you have POKE44,PEEK(46) return to the fray. otherwise bland letter. played it for more than NEW I'm one of those few I have in my possession five minutes (how long DO LOAD million odd people who a few games which, I am you reviewers take?), then POKE43,1 have, perhaps quite by afraid to say, come into the you will know of the bugs POKE44,8 accident, come into the \"I wish I hadn't bought that I speak, and how, Both programs should be possession of a \"Home once manifested, the only ...\"category. For typed in immediate mode. micro-wave oven\"... or at example Schizoids, way to remove them is to least I think that's what the Transylvanian Tower, and Press return after each re-load the whole thing line. It is important to note man in the shop called it. a few lesser items which from scratch. Anyway, this micro thing could easily feature in a Ha Ha Ha, what is this that the second program should have higher line seems to be taking over computerised version of padlock software security? numbers than the first. my home. \"The worst of Hollywood\". It's almost laughable what PS. A good tip for I can't watch TV in the Next time I read \"... and some people will do to Activision's Decathlon is to mornings because my all the features you have deter us budding pirates! use a Zeta joystick. sister is catching up with And what if I do lose the PPS Can anybody beat her language course with think to myself: \"Ah yes, card with the codes on it? 11,306? something called \"The Poor scenes, flickering But then, if I was making Graham Rice French Mistress\" ... that sort of money, I graphics, boring, slow, Eynsham which I at first assumed to fondue, cuddly toy ...' suppose I really would be Oxford be one of those new Didn't he do rotten! worried about a few video-game-nasties. When Of course, I am biased. I copies being made. I come home at night, I forked out  on a WHAT REALLY How infuriating to find find my father has invited Clinclair Clectum and the Best of Bucks Fizz IS THE SCORE? a dozen business every other game I see for sporadically interrupted associates round to work it is \"arcade standard\" by \"Beep ... crackle .. Dear Sir, out the many ways to advertised and plays like a zzzz\", as some jerk has I am writing to complain swindle the company on nun in a brothel ... is this copied the latest copy of about the high scores on the \"Busi-calc-formy fault? ... Any Atari the latest arcade Jet Pac. Scores like 25 complete-novices-and owner will say \"Yes, you simulation of a book of the million would take far too chartered accountants\". are an idiot... Ah so.\" film of... there's more ... long to achieve. I noticed So where does that leave But I digress. The truth So what can I do? Type that the highest score me? I have to wait until the of the matter is that I enjoy in one of those extremely shown in the September stroke of midnight before I the good Spec-games, few good games that get '84 issue was 13 million in can plug in my trusty though they are, and I also printed up in all the best 36 minutes. What utter Kempston and sally forth pay attention to the mags? (Sorry). nonsense! I also noticed into the dim and distant reviews that illustrious Here's a new one that that the score of 13 million worlds of \"Ulti-magi publications, such as you might not have seen ended in a 2. This, tronics\", and other less yours, give them. before: however, is impossible in well known but equally I'll have a bash at 10 PRINT \"Input Jet Pac because a score dubious sounding zones of anything Adventures, Direction\" either ends in 0 or 5. twilight ... which brings wargames, shoot-'em-into 20 INPUT a$ Derek Wright me, at last, to what I really bits, even the highly 30 PRINT \"You are Orpington intended to write about. Is overrated \"Graphic lost\":GOTO 10 Kent there yet a definition for a Arcade Simulations\" but Followed by a mad dash person who spends hours I'm afraid I have yet to find for the user's manual. as a Editor's reply: As we've at a time seeking the one that makes me wake million new Spec-owners said so many times | fictitious destruction of up in a cold sweat... pity try to find which key Please drop us a line at: Computer & Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. ERY 42. Tech. CVG "


"SURELY NOT? TOP US GAMES combination produces otherwise excellent LADVENTI IDC MISTAVC will disable the Break key ADVENTURE MISTAKE will disable the Break key PRINT ... I hear the latest magazine. and the machine will excuse is that typing in a Kevin Hatter crash if someone tries to game out of a mag actually Trowbridge look at your program. But helps one's programming Wilts Dear Sir, if you supply the game on ability ... answer on a As avid readers of your tape, it's still possible to postcard to ... etc. Editor's reply: Thanks for most enjoyable Adventure MERGE the game before Sorry to sound so your letter Kevin, and I column, we thought we it has a chance to run and cynical, but the primary have to agree with you should write and notify set up the POKE. school across the road is that the Videogaming you of one of your rare The reason that teaching the kids exactly section has been a little mistakes. machine code games are the same thing that I am bit thin over the last few In his review of Ring of easier to protect is that a trying to understand on a issues. The reason for this power for the CBM 64, Basic program B/T Compt. Science is that there aren't the Geoffrey Carew states that automatically keeps course ... and we get number of new releases the only graphics are checking whether you're called the future brains of for the video games some \"murky sprites at the pressing BREAK. In Britain. I fear more for this systems that there were a edge of the screen\". If machine code, you have country's future than I did year ago. Without new you type PICTURE you to do this yourself in your when Uncle Albert split games to review, there will get the full colour program. his atoms. simply isn't anything for graphics, although they If you don't then there's Remember skateboards? Joystick Jury to pass are rather repetitive and no way of breaking in In ten years, if you are judgement on. boring. without turning off the lucky, you might TEXT will take you back machine. So programmers remember home to the test mode. There is of games like Manic computers. no mention of this, Miner will remove the I am going back to fight COD TUC TCVA however, in the BREAK part of the the mothership on level 4 instructions. program before it goes on now, but be warned, I Dear Sir, Apart from that, we sale. shall be in touch ... I am writing to tell you agree with the reviewer. If you print any/all of how pleased I was to hear Simon & Edwin Sheaf C&VG IS JUST this rubbish, I shall be that Parco Electrics has Hove your servant for life and I bought up the stock of East Sussex IRRESTIBLE! might even buy the next American Texas issue. If you don't, then Instruments cartridges. Dear Sir, the next one will be even Maybe now Texas owners I was not a regular reader more intellectual ... and will be able to obtain what BASIC PROGRAMS of your magazine until possibly spelled rite. Until we have always wanted June. I saw on the cover next time, good versions of top Dear Sir, that you had the missing John Tapper, American games. I would like to know if it is screen from Jet Set Willy. I Herefordshire Software has always possible to safeguard a bought it instantly and been hard to get and I feel program in Basic) from rushed home to program it BRING BACK OUR that now, at last, things being broken into. in. I was delighted with may be getting better. Programs like Jet Set the game. I am also writing to ask if Willy and Sabre Wulf A month later I saw your C&VG could get hold of cannot be broken into July issue on the shelf. I Dear Sir, some and review them — during the game. I know saw your 52-page Book of I think it's about time I now that these cartridges these games are in Games so I bought it. This wrote to you expressing have become available. machine code but I issue was just as pleasing my disappointment in the This would make choosing wondered if it was as the last recent Video Gaming the good buys a lot easier. possible with Basic I am now planning to get sections in your magazine. Andrew Meiklejohn listings. C&VG every month. It also I am not criticising the Gullane If it is possible, could has lots of competitions way in which you judge East Lothian you please tell me or give and reviews which is what the games, but rather the me a few hints. I own a I like. I have only one lack of games over the Editor's reply: We have Spectrum 48k. criticism and that is that past few months. As video reviewed a couple of A B Walker there are too many game owners are these games already, Broughton in Furness adverts. expected to pay the same Andrew. These were Cumbria Keep up the good work as micro owners for the Buck Rogers and and my friends and I will mag, I feel we should get Burgertime. If you check Editor's reply: There's a continue to buy your more than three or four out your back issues you number of ways of magazine. reviews per month (only should be able to find protecting a Basic Matthew Clayton one in August). This is my them. We will continue to program. On the Otley only criticism of an support the Texas. Spectrum, POKE 23659,0 N Yorks PROTECTION FOR VIDEOGAMING! "


"BIOTHEORIENCE 56A PARK LANE POYNTON, CHESHIRE SK12 IRE Tel: (Poynton) 0625 876642 ACTION COMPUTER STATIONS! micro Spectrum. . . .95 Commodore 64... .96 adventure Enter our spectacular competition and win a SUNSHINE HOLIDAY for two at the luxurious Bel Azur Hotel in Tunisia in March. Second prize is a colour television set. This fabulous competition is run in two sections, for Spectrum and Commodore 64 Owners.. Buy 'SPECIAL OPERATIONS' and complete the game for Objective 4 get a sample of an experimental chemically based rocket fuel. State the time it took to complete the adventure as given on the screen and give the name of your Computer, Keep a cape of the 'saved' game as proof of achievement. The top five competitors for each machine will be invited to a competition play-off during February 1985. There will be a panel of judges, and their decision will be final. Closing date January 31 1985.Complete the entry form below and return to us with a corner cut from the cassette sleeve of Special Operations. DO NOT send your tape with the entry form 34121 WHERE READING ADVENTURE AND COMPUTER FUN COLLIDE Four fantastic new adventure stories, full of danger, action and suspense. The only. person who can save the day is youusing the challenging computer programs included in each Micro Adventure. Launch them today! NAME. ADDRESS. micro adventure micro adventure Completion Time.. Tel. No. Computer .  SPACE ATTACK AZ/FHB4 JUNGLE QUEST Master of Serebal. Redcoats.. Johnny Reb Panzer Attack Lifeline, Billy Bong Spectrum f6.95 Electron/BBC .95 Spectrum 48K .95 Amstrad 6.95 Spectrum 48K .95 Spectrum 48K .99 Spectrum 48K E2.99 Micro micro adventure adventure MILLION DOLLAR TIME TRAP GAMBLE Please Send me: lenclose a cheque/PO for Eas made payable to MC Lothlorien. Please debit my Access A/C No...... Signed, Name... Out now in Dragon Paperback Only .50 each! GRANADA A division of the Collins Publishing Group Address. More action for TOTHLORIENyour money Post te:Melothler he Parth LaPoy Stockport Chuahiro 12 1 AZFIBA | "


"tir nang ** GARGOYLE GAMES .95 48K ZX SPECTRUM Tir Na Nog the land of youth, the other world. Tir Na Nog the kingdom of the sidhe, the home of dagda's cauldron. Tir Na Ng a vast and complex adventure, in a magical celtic landscape. Tir Na Nog -a most stunning visual experience, with state-of-the-art film animation. Tir Na Ng-a true computer movie. ALSO FROM GARGOYLE: THE STUNNING SPACE GAME, AD ASTRA .95 GARGOYLE GAMES, 74 KING STREET, DUDLEY, WEST MIDLANDS. TEL: DUDLEY 238777 "


"GUZZLER INTERCEPTOR SOFTWARE ONLY .00 ON CASSETTE .00 ON DISK WRITTEN BY JASON BENHA PRODUCED BY RICHARDWAR E SUITABLE FOR THE commodore 6 LINDON HOUSE THE GREEN, TADLEY, HAMPSHIRE TELEPHONE: (07356) 71145, 3711. FROM AVAILABLE NOW RETAILERS ALL GOOD COMPUTER "


"Aerid arcade action from Synoot BOMBS AWAY rescue manding, maddens, constant-scroll you can't rea Play this multi-level extravaganza three different ways. You and your chopper must bomb and firelon vile enemies, navigate hazards like deadly laser rooms and hyper-energy-chambers, rescue 18 trapped friends and make your way through the most demanding, maddening set of caves ever devised. Super graphics, unnerving sounds, constant scrolling, plus randomly placed dangers so the game is always new. You can't really Team Fort Apocalypse. Just hold on to your joystick, practice and hope! LEERLE 583028.643 You're at the controls for this World War dogfight game. Shoot down enerny planes, bomb targets, strafe tanks and gun emplacements there's constant action on the incredible 3-D diagonally scrolling screen. At the same time, you have to keep track of altitude, speed, fuel and damage. Medals don't come easy. You must mastej a series of flying skills and perform them with pinpoint accuracy. One slip and you've lost it ail even your life. Happy landings, ace! SELECTED TITLES AVAILABLE SOON FOR SPECTRUM 5458 DRELBS I SENTINEL. ALL GAMES CASSETTE .95 DISK 4.5. Gold Lid., Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre. Heneage Street Birmingham B7 4LY. Tel: 021.399 3020. ****DISK .95 U.S. GOLD SWISDIL A lively, imaginative One of the most Exciting 3-D action! alternative to rockets challenging arcade The most realistic point and bombs. Your Drelb games available! of-view game you've builds squares, his Incredible B.D graphics. ever played. Navigate enemies knock them diagonally scrolling through asteroid belts. down. Quick reflexes, screen, super sound destroy enemy ships, intelligence and strategy all in great detail. and more! are a must. Commodore 64 & Atari. Commodore 64. I Commodore 64. "


"sien Dave WIN IMGX MSX BEAMRIDER MSY Our friends at Activision have come up with  worth of MSX software for you if you can answer the three simple questions You all read last month's below. Computer & Video Games, amazing MSX-extra where Fifteen people will get Activision MSX we explained the vices their hands on sets of two Competition, Priory Court, and virtues of the new Activision MSX games 30-32 Farringdon Lane, breed of micros from conversions of their megaLondon ECIR 3AU. Japan. Well, if our hits Beamrider and the Closing date for the features persuaded you to classic River Raid. competition is December buy one, you'll need some Just the thing if you've 16th and normal C&VG games to play on them got yourself a new MSX! rules apply. The editor's won't you? And we've got Now answer the decision is final and no the games if you've got questions, fill in the correspondence will be the answer. coupon and mail it to entered into. THE QUESTIONS COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES/ACTIVISION MSX COMPETITION My answers are... What do the initials MSX stand for? If you got last month's issue, this question will be no problem! 2 ...... What is the name of Britain's Olympic Decathlon champion featured on C&VGs July cover. Name ...... Address ....... Name the famous Activision programmer who created Pitfall? "


"..... STOP PRESS ..... THIS FABULOUS NEW GAME IS NOW FEATURED IN THIS MONTHS.....COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES ..... HALL OF FAME.... THE OFFICIAL If you've ever wondered how it feels to be Eddie Kidd ... defying danger and gravity, soaring on a motor-bike over a long line of cars ... here's your chance to find out! This fabulous new gameJump Challenge -has been produced for you by Martech, with a lot of help from Eddie himself. At the age of 12, Eddie Kidd was jumping over oil barrels on a bicycle. At 18, he shattered the world record with his astounding leap of 190 feet-clearing 14 double-decker buses. Can you match his skill, courage, control and ice-cool nerve? Jump Challenge will show how you compare with the King of Motor-Cycle Stunts! Just like Eddie, you'll start by trying to clear barrels on a bicycle ... gradually working up to attempting Eddie's daring leaps which have thrilled millions around the world! 100% machine code separate control of bike and rider for incredible realism dangerous headwinds for added difficulty scoring system for successful jumps joystick or keyboard option PLUSH! You can enter the Official International Jump Challenge Competition! Details on cassette insert Available from leading software retailers OR order today by mail, price .95 (48K Spectrum) or .95 (Commodore 64, BBC 'B', & Electron) including VAT and P&P. Please make cheque or postal order payable to Software Communications Ltd. Allow 7 days for delivery. CERITA MAAAAAAA SPECTRUM Martech is the registered trade mark of Software Communications Limited Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME. PHONE: (0323) 768456 TELEX: 87465 EXIM Brighton 48K SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64.BBC 'B': ELECTRON "


" SPOT THE DIFFERENCE AND WIN A MEGARULE! The Megarule is a ruler with a Look at the illustration and then To make sure you get a Megarule or difference it magnifies over 100% turn to page 85 and find as many to order more for Xmas presents, and is ideal for computer listings. The differences between the two pictures just fill in the coupon and save 50p pale blue tint takes your eye directly as you can. off the normal price of .99. This to the area and the central marking Circle them and send a completed offer is exclusive to readers of makes sure you focus on the actual entry form to: Megarule Christmas Computer & Video Games. line you need. Each Megarule in this Competition, Computer & Video Just send your remittance of .49 special limited edition carries the Games, Priory Court, 30-32 per Megarule to Mega Marketing Computer & Video Games logo. Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Ltd., 20 Orange Street, London WC2H ZED or phone 01-930 1612 with your Access number. MEGARULE CHRISTMAS COMPETITION To: Mega Marketing, 20 Orange Street, London WC2H 7ED. I have found........... differences Please rush me ...... SPECIAL READER OFFER Name ......... | Megarules at .49 each. I enclose Address........ i a cheque/postal order to the value of i ........ Or debit my Access card number...... | Name......... Address...... The competition is only open to readers of Computer & Video Games. No staff (or their relations) of Computer & Video Games, Mega Marketing or associate companies may enter. The editor's decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into. A list of winners will be provided if requested. Closing date is December 16th. What will ha swim Signature w EBS T IT SYSTEM 15000 MODEM COMPETITION COMPETITION SYSTEM 15000 MODEM COMPETITION My answers are: So, you won a System 15000 in last issue's competition did you? Well THE QUESTIONS now you've qualified for the next part of our great System 15000 competition. All you have to do is play the game 1. What is a modem? by doing that, you'll be able to answer 2. What type of game is System the questions below. Get the answers right and you could 15000? soon be the proud owner of an 3. What is the telephone number for Answerphone Modem! We've got Seastar Travel? five to give away, thanks to our friends at Craig Communications, the people 4. Who owns Realco? behind System 15000. Want one? Then 5. What is the account access code get cracking! at Midminster Bank? on Name. Address 13 "


"PLAY HAVOC WITH YOUR COMPUTER A \"Possibly the ultimate challenge for arcade fans, and a brilliant piece of programming\" Commodore Horizons Nov. 1984 HERE'S A VERY SPECIAL OFFER TO HELP YOU! FREE COUCHER FREE COLOUR FREE HAVOC FREE SOFTWARE FULL EE GIFT 25 VOUCHER WITH EVERY GAME FL COLOUR A3 POSTER HAVOC MOBILE SOFTWARE OF AT LEAST .95 R.P. To take advantage of this special offer, send cheque or P.O. to Dynavision, P.O. Box 96, Luton LU3 2JP. Credit card orders to 0582-595222 (24 hrs.) HAVOC for the CBM 64 — .95 HAVOC for the SPECTRUM.95 Please send me a copy of HAVOC CBM 64 Spectrum Name Available from all leading computer stores and retailers, including W.H. Smith, Boots, John Menzies, Spectrum Group, etc. Address RIOT RACS ITSATOUCHIEN DICE WITH DEATH GET IT NOW! THRILLS AVAILABLE FROMspectrum BEL GRANADA WOOLWORTH HMV Co-op Stores AND ALL GOOD SOFTWARE STORES! TSPILLS YENESS FRENZY micro-antics Littlehome, Hawthorne Lane, Codsall, Wolverhampton, W. Midlands. Tel:09074.5147 181 14 "


"FREE OFFER PE TER PAN met hoe om te to get it oft to fit to your SPOT THE DIFFERENCE! What can 13p get you these days? The first 10 pages of C&VG, a quarter of a can of coke or half a Mars bar. Not great value for money. But here at C&VG we've come up with a great idea to help you spend those few pennies and what you get is worth at least three times as much! It's a copy of our amazing Thompson Twins flexi-disc Adventure game. If you missed out on our October issue, you will also have missed out on your free copy of the flexi. So, due to great public demand, we've decided to offer copies of the disc just for the price of a second class stamp. All you have to do is fill in the coupon below, stick a 13p stamp on it and post it to the address on the coupon NOT C&VG please. Don't lick all the stamp otherwise we'll never be able to get it off to fix to your flexi-disc package. I'm afraid you won't be eligible for the competition at this late date but Peter Pan was flying around long Video Games, Peter Pan Competithe first 25 people to send in their before people started playing comtion, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon coupons will receive a free Computer puter games. But we reckon, if he's Lane, London ECIR 3AU. & Video Games tee-shirt. still out there in Neverland, he'll be Closing date for the competition is THE COUPON playing all the top games along with December 16th and normal C&VG the rest of you. rules apply. Being a conceited chap, he'd cerRemember to mark the outside of | Computer & Video Games tainly want to see how his own adventhe envelope with the make of micro Flexi-Disc Offer tures had been transformed into a you own. computer game! Please send stick Hodder and Stoughton, publishers C&VG/PETER PAN I me my free stamp! of the book, have just released a new I flexi-disc: COMPETITION here!! game based on Peter Pan, the classic children's fairytale by J.M. Barrie. The game comes complete with a copy of Name | Name the paperback so if you haven't yet read it, now's your chance. Address i Address.. We've got six copies of the Adventure game which runs on the Spectrum and the BBC to give away to the readers who can spot the differences in the Peter Pan illustrations on this page. Send to: Computer & Video Games | Once you think you've found all the Computer you own: Flexi-Disc Offer, Ward Lester Ltd, differences, ring them with a ball 14 Hertford Road, London NI. point pen and send the pictures and Spectrum BBC the coupon below to Computer & L-------"


"Clues Down 1. Game that sounds related to the crocodile 2. CEEFAX, for example (8) 3. Speed (4) 4. What you need to be to enter the Hall of Fame (6) CROSSWORD We proudly present another of our amazing C&VG crosswordswith the clues in the right order! The first three correct answers to this crossword out of the C&VGmemory bin will get an amazing \"The Champ\" tee-shirt. Just send your completed crossword to Computer & Video Games, Crossword, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Clues Across 2. Amphibian drive by 5 LOGO (6) 5. Sabre Wulf's software house (8) 7. Finger, toe or number (5) 8. Stop holding down a key (7) 10. Check that data is reasonable (8) 12. He's at the end of the Q* in the game (4) 14. It may be magnetic or paper (4) 16. A file of information 18 for applications (4,4) 18. VDU (7) 20. Fighter flier (5) 21. Computer game for a full back? (8) 884 22. Phantoms in Atic Atac (6) 6. Beaten at Chess (5) 9. A big one rolls barrels in Donkey Kong (3) 11. Artificial humans (8) 13. Returned to original value or condition (8) 14. Co-ordination (6) 15. Point in a din plug(3) 17. Macintosh micro (5) 19. Fluids for jet printers (5) AFRICAN SAFARI tot T.'.FORR \"Txone CURRENT One night, a couple of months ago, Snag Junior crept into the C&VG office to create his usual havoc. You probably noticed that he'd been at work when you attempted the crossword in October's issue. The headlines to the Across and Down clues were switched! I'm happy to report that everyone managed to unravel Snag's night's work and also to complete the crossword correctly. There are three winners, all of whom will receive a C&VG tee-shirt. Well done to Mr J Eagle, London; Mark Woolrich, Doncaster and Mr M R Eves from Surrey. The correct answers are below. ZA REZISTUE African Safari is the first Adventure game to feature fully animated scrolling graphics. And you need a joystick to play it, too! We've got 25 copies of this revolutionary new game for the Commodore 64 up for grabs, thanks to our friends at the new and innovative software company, Interdisc. You can read all about the game in our Games News pages this issue. And on this page are some screen shots so you can see what the game is all about. Want one? Then all you have to do is answer the three simple questions below, fill in the coupon and mail it to Computer & Video Games, African Safari, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date for the competition is December 16th and normal C&VG rules apply. Now for those questions: 1. What was the name of the young boy befriended by animals in the classic children's story The Jungle Book by Rudyard Kipling? 2. In the Tarzan movies the ape-man's best friend was a chimpanzee. What name did Tarzan give the chimp? 3. What animal won't you find on an African Safari? a) Elephant b) Flamingo c) Tiger. HC&VG/AFRICAN SAFARI COMPETITION My answers are: 5 P SOLUTION B KZINGON_MINOR 0 C 5 'T SB LETT FINISH B LU EARS DE HOTL 22  DESFAX GENUE REVERSO RCS 5 D Name...... JA Address SUO um 30D SZEXO .. Turn to page 207 for competition results. . , Due to the fact that this issue features so many great you've entered a competition in the last few issues and the competitions and prizes, we've decided to feature these results haven't been printed they'll definitely be in the and have put the competition results on page 207. If January issue. 16 "


"TheAdventure to blowyour min BeCQUseyOU write the adventure on yOur Computer...in English! AdventureWriter does not allow "


"Last month each Software Club Member took a share of .000 worth of discounts on the very latest top quality programs and accessories... ARE YOU STILL BUYING YOUR SOFTWARE THE HARD WAY? COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM 48KBBCB VIC 20-ORICZX31-DRAGON 32 ELECTRON-AMSTRAD WHO ELSE GIVES YOU ALL THIS? CHOOSE ANY THREE FOR HALF PRICE Rec. You Choose Retallat Hall Item Software * A huge continually updated choice of the finest and latest games available, plus Price Price Code House educational and business programs in many cases before they reach the shops! Ad Astra 00360 Gargoyle Can you survive in deep space against the deadly phasers of Pirate * The backing of our Price Promise so you can buy with absolute confidence knowing Battlecruisers and Robot Scout Ships, scatter bombs, and the almost Impenetrable Curtain of lethal mines. that you're getting the most from every penny you spend and the best with every pound Blade Alley 5.95 2.97 04340 PSS you save. Six different screens of incredible arcade action foafuring Saucers * The Club's free colour magazine showing our vast choice of programs and exclusive Asteroids, The Fighters, Space Hoppers, Banking Spaceship and moving 3D Scenery oners on accessories all at huge cash savings like a superb computer Work Station 8.00 3.00 07750 Automata for just .95 ( less than everyone else is currently paying), like top quality home Shipwrecked and stranded on a remote island with nothing but an empty stomach a bottle of grannys patenter and the clothes he stands up computer maintenance kits at half price! The list goes on in a magazine that comes not your job is to return Crusoe home again. once in a while, not every couple of months but every month, so you're always right at Micro Olympics 5.95 2.97 07070 Micro-User Game description as for Commodore 64 the centre of the action. Moon Alert 5.90 2.95 05840 Ocean * Programs for nine types of home computer not just two or three all guaranteed Emergency Battle across the rugged lunar ferrain from the wreckage of direct to you from the original manufacturers. your Space Fighter back to the lunar base. Scroling landscape cover * Free Software Club Vouchers every month if you're quick on your feet! Moon Sweeper 7.95 3.97 10420 Cheetah * A telephone order hotline for ultra fast despatch and a Customer Service hotline to You command the Moonsweeper Raider on a deadly seek and find mission for stranded lunar pioneer. There are four moons to search serve you better. guarded by hostile Base Carriers. Short Range Interceptors and Dean * The knowledge that you'll be with the Club that started it all. There's only one Olympimania 6.00 3.00 04080 Automata Software Club, it's the most popular in the U.K. because it's the best always in touch, Starring the Piman in five different Olympic events with a differencelively and fun, that's The Software Club. The best value you can get-bar none. who let those alligators into the swimming pool? Features Lurch the Office Parrot Mutant Trees and many more surprises Special Operations All that we ask from you in return is that you buy just al programa In 5.95 09790 2.97 Lothlorien The Club's free monthly magazine-packed with bargains addition to your three half price selections in your first year of member Superb graphics adventure war game-features 18 different maps, plur hla You'll be spoil for choice and if you're anything like our current maps for resolving skirmishes with enemy patrols, and seven diferent member you want a lot more than the anyway and our affordable prices Get your computer back on top form in just 60 seconde levels of play sach with a different objective make a posible. You can buy your chosen programs spread over the Trashman 5.95 2.97 04290 New Gen. Year or all at onceita antirely up to you and remember, all backed Empty at the bins from each road into the dustcart in a race against you by our price promise slowly reducing scoro, get more points doing jobs for householders but In no with Club policy, postage and packing costs are kept to an step on the grass and you'll get bitten by their dogs and end up with a limp absolut minimum and are free on many orden. Once your membership Watch out too for cysts and cars accepted, pÀp on order for two or more tapes is absolutely free and War of the Worlds 7.95 3.97 virtually all accessories are also sent pÀp free pap is only charged on Based on Jeff Wayne's Musical Version of the H.G. Wells classic. You live order for single programs at a rate of 41p. In a world under Martian domination you must survive against the terror of their Fighting Machines and weapons of death OUR PRICE PROMISE THE SOFT WERE CLUB 06950 JK Start off by choosing any three of these 49 oftes for half price. All you then Quite simply the best version of the game available for your Oric w have to take another six programs at prices well below retail in your first variable si care sub and speed levels... stuck? the computer year of membership. If you find you could have bought the nine to you suggest a move just one of the many features of this superb program choose where for loss, at the same time as you bought them from the 6.95 3.47 08540 Lothlorier Club, we will gladly refund the difference. You can lose with The Software Club Fast and challenging-deposit sacks of gold in your bank while attem ing to kill all the monsters on tbe screen before time runs out REMEMBER SEND NO MONEY NOW Ghostman 7.50 3. 75 0 7480 Savem Control your Ghostman around the Maze eating the dors and fruit bu avoid the Ghosts who are out to got you. Find the PowerPills in the Although we dont Nat Amstrad titles in our hail price offer, programs for comers of the maze and you'll become fanporarily invincible Nine level the Amstrad are available of big discounts through the Club Bach one faster than the previous mare Lone Raider For con Earth's Battle Fleet has held back the allen Zugs. As Captain the Lone Raider you must breach their defences wreaking havoc on your way to their Mother Ship Trick Shot 7.50 3.75 06970 JK You have to por the balls in the pockets by lining up the cue and hitting the cue ball with just the right strength --Ar's highly realistic and each ball and pocket combination scores diferenity DRAGON Recall Hall Item Software Rec You Choose Chuckle Egg 7.90 3.95 02300 AGF Price Price Mom Software Game description as for Electron Blagger Price Price Game description as for Commodore 64 07700 Cascade A great double bil... Towers of Death and The Ice Kingdom are two Chuck Egg 02540 ASF The te says because this program has 50 great games on one clases that should feature in every collection. But miss a vital clue and Game description as for Electron Cassette. We dont have space to them but they're all herom ar You could be playing for months in your quest for the treasure 07170 Ocean arcade, mis tactical and logic Photo-Finlah The zanist, craziest burger battle to sizzle your screens! Fight Waldo Football Manager 5.95 2.97 01470 Addictive Superb real-time graphics, authentic race-cards showing previous for and the rebel ingredients to make your dolcious Wimpy Burgers Captures the real le drama and excitement of the game. transfers, odds based on actual form, races from 5 furlongs to 2 miles, timed results the boat in town league tables, injuries, promotion and relegation FA Cup, Seven till and a photo-finish foaturel For 1-4 players. 05990 Allgata lovels and much more. Take off rol loop-the-loop and landing must be performed with Krary Kong 3.95 1.97 01590 PSS A top secret missile command centre has been discovered in an extinct complete accuracy or your ght will end in disaster this will have Camb the pyramid Knocking out the support for the giant gorillas you volcano on the Yugoslavian border to the heart of a network covering the you glued to the screen for hours go, meanwhile dodging the barrels and rocks he drops on you whole of the Soviet Block your ob is to neutralise Uncle Claude 7.95197 a workers against bosses because the Union suspects that Take the control for a night fight navigate by beacons using the You be brieled on your mission and then, equipped with hercopte Uncle Claude the electronics magnate) is about to lay of the instrumentation, take off climb, bank left and right descend and land-gunships, wire guided missiles and grenades, it's up to you. There's workers. They elect you, Micro Micky to foil this dastardly plan you learn to master them all night action feature and nine minefields just to even things up. THE SOFTWARE CLUB "


"ONE And start by choosing any three games for half price (plus p&p) LOCO ANROG SONCEN Flight Path 737 CHUCKIE EGG OMCATMOS <ddictive FOOTBAI. MANAGER GNADIE Visions woman and GUARDIAN GUARDIAN DAREDEVILSENS COMMODORO! 003 ANDRON CASSETTE DICO 2 Ghostman M MP S.A.S WAAGIC MOONSWEEPER TOTHORIEN a U S end present CD PILOT noving INOON Orold PROJECT VCICANO empty sup in PSS Blade Alley User ACORN age of Covers dah ad find arch, Death ARCADE ACTION Visions SNOOKER RAURER Oce Kaw  plus BONGO MINI KONC AD ASTRA VIC 20 UMEX THEN GO ON TO MAKE UGE SAVINGS ON AROUND live OTHER TOP TITLES EACH MONTH Item Software COGLIERE Price Price Code House Android 2 You are the Android-stop the advance of the M ods, survive the Maze of Death rationalise the Paradox Zone and cross the Flatlands but beware the lethal hoveroids, bouncers and landmines emplWe aim to the aware the only you want to be with All of our progra m the on cture and are proud oright standard e r if any prove to be active pa r ts with a short te wining the machon i place for the new by return of post ut but in the levels Follow the exploits of Rodger the Dodger, master burglar, though banks shops and houses but watch out for alarms and very spooky night witchmen Sain of In your ing the Retalt at Hall Hem Software Code House Bongo Hilarious game for the whole family Bongo the Super Mouse sets out to And the stolen diamonds so he can win the hand of the King's daughter in marriage 07630 Novasoft Your Space Ship is low on Novale tue crystals forcing you to land on a planet whose inhabitants worship them. Brave the many dangers in the multi-level tomb before your ship is destroyed Mini Kong 5.95 2. 97 0 1780 Animog Kong has abducted a young maidan and trapped her in his you have to climb the ladders to rescue her as the angry Kong rains down a stream of barrels to crush you 05690 Animog As the pilot of this high performance jer ner you must take off from an airfield surrounded by high mountains and having climbed safely over them prepare yourself for a landing in the valleys below Snooker 8.95 4.47 02170 Visions Game description as for Commodore 64 HEGEROM Blagger 7.95 3.97 05170 Algata Gare description as for Commodore 64 Chuckle Ego 7.90 3.95 02190 Who'd think a farmyard could be so stressful? You must collect the eggs before the nasies get out and eat all your corn. And the crazy duck gets out of the cage, you're in real trouble 737 Flight Simulator 7.95 3.97 06420 Dr. Soft \"Start approach wallout starting down from 3000ft af 10nm range, dont forger Map and gear, al for a 3 degree slope down to the runway, follow up with power to control speed u st one of the manoeuvres in this superb Might simulation a real test of skill Guardian Stop the Landers trying to capture Humanoids from your planet surface while tackling flying pods. swammers, aion bombers, deadly basters and a camivorous overblown Mollysh Snooker 8.05 47 02280 Visions Game description as for Commodore 64 You ve polished your skills on Blagger, now put them to the test with his son Sippery Sid's not after money. espionage is his game. Cavedon 6.903.45 05800 Ocean Enter the caste stronghold af your peni! To rescue Guinevere you must ascend six awesome levels dodging and barting the deadly Knights Ww the magic of the sword Excalbur make good prevail? Dare Devil Dennis 7.95 3.97 06700 Visions So you think you could be a stuntman the money is good but will you Ive to enjoy it-test your skills on land, sea and snow. Hunchback 6.90 3.48 03750 Ocean Rescue Esmeralda from her caste stronghold. Featuring the Ramparts. Knights, Arrows, Fireballs, The Pit and of course those Bells LOCO 7.95 3.97 0 8180 Allgata Through terrifying hazards and under constant aerial bombardment, this in the nightmare train journey of all time-can you make it before you run out of tol and become a surting duck Micro Olympics 5.95 2.97 07080 Micro-User Five track event plus long jump, high jump, pole vault, javoin, diacus and hammer you can take part in them all at the fabulous Micro Olympics Potty Pigeon 7.95 297 09210 Gremin Parcy the Potty Pigeon makes suicidal attempts to build his nest by plucking wigs from the path of onrushing tra h e has one weapon though his revolting explosive eggs Snooker 03900 Visions Accurate table layout variable shot strength, spin on the ball in any direction, foul feature. It's to having your own size table but guard or you'never get a chance to play yourself INTRODUCTORY DISCOUNT COUPON To: THE SOFTWARE CLUB, PO BOX 180, ST. ALBANS, HERTS AL3 5BD Please accept my application, enrol me as a member of The Software Club and send me the introductory tapes whose numbers I have written in the boxes below, for which you shall charge me in due course, should I decide to keep the software (plus a total of .25 for postage and packing). If I am not completely satisfied, however, I may return the tapes intact within ten days, my membership will be cancelled and I will owe nothing. As a member, I need not take a tape every month, if I want no tape at all, I can say so on the card provided. I will, however, choose at least six tapes in the first year. I am over 18 years of age. (This application must be from your parent or guardian if you are under 18 years of age) My 3 selections are (item code) ve two e and results Memory size Machine Mr/Mrs/Miss/ Address ing the Postcode re's a Signature "


"Just Arrived! TWO OF YOUR ALL-TIME CINEMA & T.V. FAVOURITES THE LEGENDARY Danger, Intrigue, Suspense! You'll need all your wits and skill when you take on the ruthATARI less J.R. and face the many hidden enemies in the search for oil that is... Th BRUCE 64 CEEA NOW ON 48K SPECTRUM  ALLAS Quest Your chance to relive the deadly skills and awesome power of the legendary Bruce Lee.  Twenty secret chambers. Dazzling graphics and Disk and animation. Cassette Cassette  Unique multiple Inique multiple player options.   A unique graphic adventure.  Choose your level of difficulty.  Scores of colourful scenes. Disk only & only  products from Datasoft Two more quality products from P Datasoft Software. ** ** * ** ** ** * ** ** * * * ** ** THE ULTIMATE IN AMERICAN SOFTWARE FOR YOU ON U.S. GOLD U.S. Gold is stocked by all leading computer stores. DEALERS! For information on how to become a U.S. Gold Stockist write to: Centre Soft Ltd., Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. Telex: 337268. Overseas enquiries welcome. U.S.GOLD All American Software "


"G.A.M.ES NEWS ON SAFARI VALKYRIE 17 THERE IS \"BEBASALI\" 2686! 870 A team of undercover Who said you don't need a investigators have been joystick to play an Adventyre? working around the clock to Interdisc has just released what uncover a secret organisation must be the first animated known only as Valkyrie 17. scrolling graphic Adventure for C&VG has been in on the action the Commodore 64, called and in coming months we will African Safari. You have to help reveal the truth behind this evil Dr Livingstone find the long lost organisation. And believe us, Kenyan Diamonds in an the members of Valkyrie 17 are enthralling and original game. even more unscrupulous than a Not only do you have to bunch of software pirates. So if control the action arcade style Dr. Livingstone I presume? someone says to you \"The Red with the joystick, you must also Kipper Flies at Midnight\" don't help Dr Livingstone solve various problems by inputting the regular Adventure instructions. laugh at them they could be The screen display is split into two. The top half of the screen shows Dr Livingstone and his attempting to tell you something surroundings which he explores as you move him around using the stick. Below is the test it shows to your advantage. Watch out for men in trenchcoats and in which direction Livingstone can move and, if you see anything interesting on screen, you can tell watch this space for more Livingstone to LOOK and a description of the article flashes up on screen. undercover information about Interdisc is also releasing a double pack of space shoot-out games for the 64 --Gammaron which is Valkyrie 17. an adaptation of arcade Xevious, with more great graphics, plus Starforce, an updated version of that more great graphics, plus Starforce, an updated version of that It all has something to do with old Atari VCS classic, Star Raiders. this blueprint we discovered If they keep up this high standard of release, Interdisc is a company which games players should poked under the C&VG office watch in the coming months. All releases should cost .95. door the other night... FLYING RED KIPPERS? HERE COMES THE JUDGE? PARKER BROTHERS BOW OUT STRONTIUM DOG At last! Someone has got around to converting those great comic characters from the best British comic around, 2000 AD. Quicksilva, the people who brought you our amazing Thompson Twins Adventure game in October, have signed up Johnny Alpha, better known as Strontium Dog, to star in a series of computer games. The first Strontium Dog game, for the Commodore 64, is out now. You can find a review of the game, Strontium Dog and the Death Gauntlet, on our reviews pages this issue. Strontium Dog: The Killing, will be the next release. This concerns a planet ruled by a dictactor who stages a tournament for all the most evil and vicious killers in the universe. They battle against each other to discover who is the nastiest. Strontium Dog, who is a Search and Destroy Agent, attends the tournament to wipe out a few of these criminals. Can't wait to see it! Parker Brothers — the company who launched the Star Wars video games with a massive TV advertising campaign have withdrawn from the games business \"until the market settles down\". Parker are owned by Palitoy which is one of the largest toy manufacturers in the world. The withdrawal of Parker Brothers surprised many in the computer games business who believed that they would use the muscle of the parent company to become one of the leaders, Parker's decision means that all planned products will now be put on ice including the range of Star Wars games planned for the Spectrum and 64. A company spokesman said \"fifty per cent of Parker's business is in video game cartridges for the VCS. . . . . . the recent Atari price cuts have destroyed any possible margins on our products, many of which are based on licences acquired at great cost from popular films and well known characters\". Parker would not say when they expected to re-enter the market for computer games but it is thought that a toy company of Parker's size cannot afford to stay out of this market for ever. For those of you who have never read 2000 AD, Johnny Alpha is one of a race of mutants created by a nuclear war known as Strontium Dogs. They are social outcasts shunned by the rest of society and the only job they can get is bounty hunting tracking down deadly criminals and enemies of the state. A sort of futuristic Dirty Harry. Unfortunately, 2000 AD's best known character, Judge Dredd, has already been snapped up by an American movie company. Quicksilva's Mark Eyles told C&VG that they were attempting to see if they could get hold of the rights for the Judge. But, in the meantime, he's looking at other heroes from the comic with a view to turning them into sprites. 21 "


"P. G.A.M.ES N.E.W.S in C .333 BERING UIT GHOSTBUSTERS I RANGE: 3 HOVE:12 +PREK :PRESTANY KEY D-DAY FOR THE QL Games Workshop's first venture into computer games will make a little bit of history. One of their forthcoming new releases called D-Day will be coming out for the QL the first game for this new machine. D-Day is a graphic war game for two players based on the Normandy landings of 1944. Players take the Allied or German sides, deploying their armed forces. We've already mentioned Battlecars, a Mad Max-type race game with some original touches which will be released for the Spectrum at the same time. Ghostbusters is a smash hit movie from a VW Beetle to a high-powered in the States right now and the sports car. theme tune from the film has beenThen you move onto a maze-like riding high in our music charts for screen which shows the city streets. several weeks. Now Activision has Haunted buildings start flashing red got hold of the rights to make the and you have to guide your ghost game of the film! mobile along the quickest route to the David Crane, Activision's top affected skyscraper. programmer, who brought you Pitfall and Decathlon has been given the task of turning the movie into a game which Activision says will be on sale in time for Christmas. Ghostbusters, the movie, tells the tale of three New Yorkers who set up in business fighting ghosts and ridding the city of paranormal beings. It's a light-hearted comedy and has been beating Indiana Jones at the U.S. box offices. David says the game will contain Ja mixture of Adventure, strategy and arcade action based on events The Ghostbusters team see the latest on the film — which should be in issue of C&VG! cinemas here very shortly. Watch out for it! Once at the building, the screen display switches to the exterior of the building with a little ghost floating 171P.. T u around outside. You must guide your ghostbusting team of two into position and then fire your laser-like, ghostbusting beams to force the ghost into your trap. You earn money for each ghost you trap. You must also prevent ghosts reaching the Temple of Zuul which in the film is known as Spook Central. It's a IMA N E M door to the spirit world which you have to shut at the end of each game. CHY'S, PK ENERSYS S L609 Ghostbusters is a terrific game extremely addictive and great fun to The townscape screen from Ghostbusters! play. Watch for a full review in our next issue. Computer & Video Games got a sneak And if you haven't yet rushed out to preview of the brand new Ghostbuy Ray Parker's hit theme tune to the busters game at Activision's London film don't bother. Activision's game offices. plays the soundtrack almost note for David Crane's latest game closely note. And the final version will have follows the plot of the film. First you speech too. Press the space bar and it have to set up in the ghostbusting will shout \"Ghostbusters!\" at you. business by getting some cash Which comes in really useful as you together, buying your own ghostsing along with the lyrics displayed as mobile and equipping it with ghostthe game loads complete with little catching equipment. bouncing ball! This Commodore 64 The screen display shows the autoversion of the theme could get into the mobiles you can choose -ranging Top Ten too.. THE PRINCE IS A WINNER John Sherry of Keele, Staffordshire is the winner of the 1984 Cambridge Award, co-sponsored by CCS Cases Computer Simulations and Sinclair User. John will receive a ,000 cheque and the Cambridge Award trophy. John Sherry's winning program, The Prince, for Spectrum 48k, is a highly original, tactical and interactive Adventure game for four players which could spark off a new generation of complex Adventure programs. It is being published by CCS and will be priced at .95. 22 "


"PROGRAMS WANTED SEND NOW bloby computer games PROGRAMS WANTED SEND NOW 1.99 1.99 1.99 ANNOUNCE THEIR VERY OWN POCKET MONEY RANGE MORE FUN AT LESS PRICE 1 BARMY BURGERS SPECTRUM 48K GOTCHA SPECTRUM 49 GUIDO SPECTRUM ABK ANDROID ATTACK  SLABY COMPUTER GAM Casey Jones is available from All games are obtainable direct W.H.Smith, Menzies from this company at .99 +50p, p+p and other major stores or from computor+video shops or where you see the Slush Puppy sign. at .50 S.A.E for full list. Dealer enquiries welcome DEPT CVG BLABY COMPUTER GAMES CROSSWAY HOUSE LUTTERWORTH ROAD BLABY LEICESTER TEL: 0533 773641 TELEX 342629 JRHHG V) 1984 and MILLIONAIRE 1984 1984 A GAME OF GOVERNMENT MANAGEMENT MILLIONAIRE WATCH YOUR PREMISES GROW WITH SUCCESS! 2003: ANW EXPERIENCE IN GETTING RICH A GAME OF GOVERNMENT MANAGEMENT 'Compulsive Software Today 'An absorbing program CTW \"Clear, Concise, and Well Presented' Big K 'Pick of the Week' PCW 'Very addictive...' HCW 'A very special game PCW MODELS CENTMO ELECTRON + BBC B I r Indicator BBC MODEL B & SPECTRUM ELECTRON BBC B & SPECTRUM SELECTED ITEMS AVAILABLE FROM LARGER BRANCHES OF John Menzies ORDER FORM 1984 Spectrum .50 BBC B .50 MILLIONAIRE Spectrum .50 Electron & BBC B .50 Please rush me the titles as indicated above by 1st Class post. I enclose cheque for . . . . . . . . . .. or debit my credit card No. I I I Access Visa Name Address RETAILERS 1984 and Millionaire are available now from: Microdealer, Tiger, Centresoft, Express, R&R, Terry Blood, Websters, Twang. Microdeal and Leisuresoft. REGISTERED OFFICE 54 London Street, Reading RG1 4SQ. CREDIT CARD ORDERS Tel. Reading 107341591678 INCENTIVE SOFTWARE LTD, 54 London Street, Reading RG1 4SQ, England. "


"G.A.M.E.S NEWS TRAVELS IN THE UNDERWURLDE SABRE WULF DESIGNER OF THE MONTH NAME: Peter Liepa. BORN: Toronto, Canada, 1953 Ultimate has remained tight-lipped about the new games they are producing except that Underwurlde will feature over 100 screens of action, battling against the inhabitants of the mythical country. The company claim that the Sabre Wulf, the last game to be game has \"an unequalled player released from the respected appeal\". Spectrum software company In Knight Lore you are trapped in Ultimate, is to be followed by two a full realistic 3D world, playing the sequels featuring the Sabreman. part of an adventurer-cum-explorer Underwurde and Knight Lore making his way through a world adventure game\", or so says the chronicle the further Adventures of filled with huge monsters and alien advertising blurb. the Sabreman in the land of the warriors. \"Knight Lore becomes Sabre Wulf, up to now, has not underwurlde. more of an adventure film than an been selling as well as previous Ultimate titles, having sold less than 30,000 copies — Beach-Head for the Commodore has sold nearer 60,000. One reason may be the similarity between their last two games. Why buy Sabre Wulf when you can get Atic Atac for a fiver? GAMES: Boulder Dash. FOLLOW THE LOST BOYS Peter Liepa's first game Boulderdash looks set to become a hit in the UK Everyone loves the boy who refused to repeating the success it has already grow up. Stephen Spielberg wants to received in the States. make a movie about him. Michael But Peter is not letting this success go to Jackson wants to play the part. And his head. \"The American games business this Christmas there will be several is going through a tough time. I enjoy versions of the stage show about this writing computer games and would like fairytale character playing in theatres to think I would be doing it in two years all around the country. Who is he? Peter Pan -that's who. time but nothing is that certain at the decided to buy an Atari 800. \"I'd always liked video games and some of my If you've never read the book about moment.\" the exploits of Peter Pan, Wendy and Despite the pessimism, Peter has friends were spending a lot of money on the Lost Boys in Neverland then why started work on his next game Boulderthem ... it just seemed like a natural not try out the computer adventure dash II. Don't expect this to go on sale for progression that my next project should game based on J.M. Barrie's famous several months though, as Boulderdash I be a video game\". When Peter is not programming he children's book? took no less than a year to programme. \"I Following in the footsteps of The spend all my energy on a project likes watching films and practises the Hobbit, Erik the Viking and Sherlock actually only about two hours a day on the martial art Tai Kwondo although he Holmes, Peter Pan is the latest adaptakeyboard but I am thinking about the says he doesn't have hobbies. \"I don't tion of a book to hit the screen of your program all the time. I even dream about draw a line between what I do for a living Spectrum and soon for the BBC and it.\" and my interests\". Electron. Peter has spent all of his working life in Favourite drink: Coke. a You also get the chance to enter a the computer business. \"I've done just Favourite TV programmes: \"I'm competition being staged in conabout everything. Worked on business forager. I watch almost anything. Last junction with the game. Discover a software, research projects, the lot ... year I was a Hill Street Blues fan. I tend to secret password and you could win a even when I was a student I managed to get bored very easily with TV\". special deluxe edition of the advenget vacation work on computer Favourite computer programs: tures being put together at this very Suspended by Infocom, Crossfire, Miner moment by Hodder and Stoughton. projects.\" \"My first contact with a computer was 2049'er, Choplifter. The game itself is really for the via a terminal to a mainframe at university Worst Game I've Ever Played: Castle younger Adventurer but older gamesters will enjoy it too. It has ... I didn't major in computer science... Wolfenstein some nice animated graphic screens my programming knowledge is selfThe thing about computing that most makes me want to throw up: The on the Spectrum version and taught\". features all the characters from the By 1982, the personal computer boom multiplicity of systems and lack of book, including the evil Captain Hook, was taking America by storm and Peter standards. Expensive software. Peter's arch-enemy. 24 "


"mm mm marana Lew Det THE BUG STOPS HERE! 00 BU ASPEC) corrnnoctore + E9-25 "


"SUMMER GAMES QUICKSILVA PRESENTS THE TOP U.S.AND UK. OLYMPIC GAMES PROGRAM You're an Olympic athlete competing in eight key events at the SUMMER GAMES. How well can you score in track, swimming, diving, shooting, gymnastics and more? So realistic, there's even an opening ceremony and awards presentation after each event. Unlike other \"Olympic-like\" games, SUMMER GAMES has incredible realism, superb state-ofthe-art graphics and sound effects, including national anthems from eighteen countries and true actionstrategy game play. In each event you must plan and execute your game strategy in order to maximise your score. It's not just a matter of how fast you can move the joystick. So change into your running shoes, grab your joystick and GO FOR THE GOLD! .95 Commodore 64 Turbo load .95 Commodore 64 Disk SUMMER GAMES From EDYX QUICKSILVA COMPUTER SOFTWARE PRESENTS MMODORE 64 DISH QUICKSILVA PRESENTS Marketed Exclusively in the UK under licence from CBS/EPYX BY QUICKSILVA LTD. The ultimate in graphics! Commodore 64 Disk .95 UICKSILVA PRESENTS Commodore 64 Turbo load .95 DOODLE! Strontium 001 OMMODOI 24 JUR SKE\" QUI to DOP QUICKSILVA PRESENTS MAGIC MICRO MISSION A REAL TIME ACTION INTERACTIVE FILM NORMAN THE WARRIOR IN CASTLE OF JASOOM 36 SERENISSEN VEROOM .COMMODORE 64 JOYSTICK Commodore 64 Disk .95 A REAL TIME ACTION INTERACTIVE FILM NORMAN THE WARRIOR IN Two adventures with real time action, unbelievable excitement! DUNGEONS OE BA PARTS 1 + 2 TURBO LOAD JE 'COMMODORE 64 5 COMMOBTIERE Commodore 64 Disk .95 TURBO ..COMMODORE 64 JOYSTICK 4 QUICKSILA Two games for the price of one! Commodore 64 Turbo load Based on Central Independent Television Series. .95 All titles available from Quicksilva Mail Order, PO Box 6, Wimborne Dorset BA 217PY. Tel (0202) 891744. "


"They came from out of the desert to . the lost city of Antescherand discovered the HORROR of the ANTS: ANT ATTACK The Walled City of Anteschor has rested for a thousand, thousand years in the midst of the Great Desert inhabited by only the deadly Ants who have made it their home. Then one day He and She arrive to play their games through the wind-swept streets, ousting the Ants from their exclusive occupation. But the City seems to have a presence, a huge brooding entity which hangs over the buildings and in some mysterious way controls the destiny of those below.. RAUD COMMODORE 64 ANT AHTACK3D Turbo load Commodore 64 QUICKSILVA available from Quicksilva Mail Order, P.O. Box 6, Wimborne, Dorset BA21-7PY. Tel. (0202) 891744 Selected titles available at WHSMITH WOOLWORTH Wohn Mennes and leading multiplir retailers and specialist computer stores "


"Tune-in to Jet-Boot Jack. The massive hizo from English Software. NOW AVAILABLE FOR COMMODORE REF 1 000375 OHICHHER DODTSO BIGHSCORE D00225  LOODETS O HIGH-SCORE DDON DOOSAS O HIGH-SCORE COOOOO 7777  LETRTJAS COMMODORE Cassette to expect from English OT (Speedload) Software. ATARI 32K C Jet-Boot Jack and our other Cassette or Disk programs are available Jet-Boot Jack is fast heading for No 1 from branches of Laskys, Greens and spot in the Atari games charts. all good software dealers. Because he's absolutely unique. Telephone Sales Hot Line Jet-Boot Jack is the space-age jet(Access and Visa) 061-835 1356 powered jogger who takes you on a chase through the vaults of the Record Pressing plant, collecting his favourite music as he goes. Copyright 1983 English Software Program written by Jon Williams and Mark Taylor. Evil creatures try to thwart his every move, but Jack's special bouncing powers send them hurtling to their deaths! Sliders and elevators provide access ENGLISH to new levels but sometimes they turn nasty! With 10 different screens and 6 skill levels Jet-Boot Jack will stretch your abilities to the limit. THE POWER OF EXCITEMENT The English Software Company, Box 43, Which, after all, is what you've come Manchester M60 3AD Trade Enquiries Tel: 061-835 1358 (all English Software programs are sold according to the English Software Terms of Trading, copies of which are available on request). ENCUCM. SOFTWARE "


"BEYOND CHALLENGING SOFTWARE THE FIRST EVER TWO PLAYER ADVENTURE All the action all the time as two people play simultaneously. No waiting for turns as you lay your next trap to try and outwit your 2) opponent. The Black and White spies made famous by MADC Magazine search a variety of foreign embassies for the top secret briefcase, engaging in hand-to-hand combat, and chasing one-another through Hop different rooms. It's mad-cap Felop action against a friend or the CHop computer in a different embassy layout everytime. LA Please send me SPY vs SPY for my Commodore 64 (.95) CASSETTE QTY Commodore 64 (.95) I enclose Postal Order/Cheque payable to Beyond, or charge my credit card ORDER HOTLINE Card Number 0858 34567 Access Viso (delete as necessary) ENQUIRIES Name 01-8372899 Address Address Postcode Please send me details Signed of the Beyond Club Based on the SPY vs SPY characters created by Antonio Prohias and the property of E.C. Publications Inc and used by permission. Licensed from First Star Software Inc. BEYOND Competition House, Farndon Road, Market Harborough, Leicestershire LE 19 9NR. "


"KERAN SOFTWARE GRAB A PIECE OF THE ACITON 4 CZ MOTORCYCLE CRAZY! Spectrum 48K Meltdown Motorcycle Crazy! is a graphic adventure where you, as the central character, must find the AWARD and return it safely to Ariel Castle. Unfortunately for you there are several pitfalls awaiting! .95 .95 Meltdown is a new classic in arcade style games for the 48K Spectrum! This totally original game sets you in the not-too-distant future, where your task as service engineer for ACME Nuclear Reactors, is to prevent overheating of the reactor on the planet Haras.  THE Working THE CRYSTAL FROG TOP SECRET THE CODE  The Crystal Frog is a traditional adventure program for the 48K Sinclair Spectrum. You play the role of the main character, with the computer acting as your eyes and ears. The object of the game is to find the fabulously valuable Crystal Frog and return with it intact. It will not be easy! Kerian U.K. Ltd PETMCTPATOP 1.  . Your mission should you decide to accept it, is to go to a place deep within the KGB's stronghold from where no-one has returned alive. We have only one message from your 25 predecessors, cut short by a blood curdling scream. It said \"Nothing is what it appears to be and.....   |  NEP DISTRIBUTORS Terry Blood Dist. Express Marketing LVL Wayferer Vanguard Dealer enquires welcome KERIAN (UK) LIMITED I enclose a cheque/P.O. for ..........made payable to Name Address 29 GISBURN ROAD HESSLE NORTH HUMBERSIDE HU13 9HZ Telephone (0482) 643786 Telex 527619 (Kerian) "


"Macbeth) You may well start leaping for the emergency exits when someone mentions Shakespeare. A lot of us have been bored to tears by the Bard at school which is a great pity because his plays just aren't as tedious as they often become when you have to study them. Often they are action packed Adventures. Which is where David Pringle and his team come in. They have dragged Shakespeare into the computer age by creating an Adventure game based on one of his best known, and bloodiest, plays Macbeth. Read on to discover why they did it... M acbeth is one of ShakesIV peare's best known plays. It has lots of action most of it bloodstained and, when you come to think about it, is ideal Adventure game material. \"It seemed that more and more people were turning to literature for material for Adventures,\" said David Pringle, the leader of the seven strong team who put the Macbeth game together. \"Macbeth has lots of action and it's a story that everyone knows well.\" It took around 21 months for the project to be completed from original concept to storyboards and final coding. It comes in four parts and at present is only available for the Commodore 64 although a Spectrum version could be in the offing. As seems to be the norm with Adventure games these days, there are graphic screens in each of the four parts. Some of them are animated. These were designed by graphic artist Geoff Quilley. My favourite is the animated scene where Macbeth meets the three witches. The witches transform themselves into nasty things like bats and then disappear. This took the graphic artist two days and around 10k to complete. David reckons that the game features some of the best graphics yet seen on the 64. All seven members of the development team have an academic background. So is Macbeth really an educational package, I asked? \"We tried hard to get a good balance between the educational element and the game,\" said David. \"I don't think it's the kind of thing that teachers will use in schools. But I think people will appreciate Shakespeare a lot more after playing the game. We certainly did!\" N. Screen shots from the Macbeth Adventure featuring graphics designed by Geoff Quilley. \"I think people will be able to play the game as an Adventure and not feel that they are being forced to learn. However, the game could be of value to people who are studying the play at school.\" As I've already mentioned Macbeth is divided into four parts. The plot of Macbeth is so involved that the programmers needed all the space they could get! Each part can be played as an individual game. At the end of each section of the COMPETITION sut ng Adventure, you'll find another game which can only be described as a sort of psycho-analysis program. Macbeth sits down on the psychiatrist's couch and looks at his actions. This probably says more about the Adventurer's state of mind than Macbeth's but it's an interesting concept in any event. Who knows what it might reveal about YOUR character? Come to think of it, Mr Campbell has been very quiet since we sent him a review copy. These can be played separately from the main game. Macbeth is released by Creative Sparks this month and will cost .95. It comes with a special version of the play in paperback form. The book was edited by the group in order to make it easier to read, removing a lot of those odd quirks of ye olde English that make Shakespeare hard to follow. So the message is clear. Don't be frightened off just because the game is based on a Shakespeare play which bored the pants off you at school. It's still a good Adventure game. C&VG's Chief Examiner, Keith Campbell, tells you what he thinks about the game this issue. Macbeth is the first Adventure of its kind. David Pringle and the rest of his team are awaiting your reactions with interest. The complete works of Shakespeare as Adventure games? Stranger things have happened! 5 If you get your hands on a copy of Macbeth you could win a very special prize. Together with Creative Sparks we've come up with a new and original competition idea — but you have to have a copy of the Macbeth adventure to enter. Complete the adventure and you could win a holiday weekend at the Treasure Trap Castle! Here you can play a real life adventure game. More about this from Keith Campbell soon. He'll be visiting the mysterious castle to bring you the low-down from the dungeons. Two winners of the C&VG/Creative Sparks Macbeth Competition will go to the Treasure Trap castle, and 25 runners-up will receive copies of a brand new and as yet un-named Creative Sparks adventure series. But first you must solve Macbeth .. ting come DE 3786 31 "


"HERE TO STAY LIST FILE PREC SPACE TREK TEXAS INSTRUMENTS TI-99/4A SOFTWARE IS HERE PARCO ELECTRICS have more software for the TI-99/4A than anyone else in Europe. Watch out for new titles from the USA, as well as our own range of quality cassettes. Pro Electric SUPERHOD IS HERE! THE BARGAINS ARE HERE! 5.95 SUPER HOD * A-Maze-Ing * Attack # Car Wars #Chisholm Trail # Connect 4 # Tombestone City # Video Games 1 * Zero Zap ONLY 9.95 EACH!!! SOLID STATE SOFTWARE CASSETTE SOFTWARE TEXAS INSTRUMENTS PARCO Software Extended Basic ... ..69.25 Hop On.... Minimemory.. 69.25 *Listfile (database).... 9.75 Personal Record keeping........... 22.50 \"Parco Golf... 7.95 Home Budget Management 17.50 Space Trek... 5.95 Adventure Pirate. 22.00 \"Superhod... 7.95 Buck Rogers ......... 27.50 (* Extended basic.) Burgertime 27.50 VIRGIN Games Hopper ....... 21.75 Robopods 4.95 Jawbreaker II 17.50 Fun-Pac...... 4.95 M.A.S.H.. 17.50 Fun-Pac2... 4.95 Moon Mine 21.75 Fun-Pac 3..... 4.95 'Munchmobile. 15.50 *** SPECIAL OFFER * * * Parsec... 17.50 ALL FOUR ABOVE IN Return to Pirate Isle 27.50 LIBRARY CASE... .00 Sneggit...... COLLINS Educational Star Trek..... 21.75 Cassette AND Manual in each. ATARISOFT for TI-99/4A Starter Pack 1 ............. 5.95 Donkey Kong.. 20.00 Starter Pack 2 5.95 Jungle Hunt 18.00 Games Writer Pack 1 5.95 Moon Patrol .. 20.00 Games Writer Pack 2. Ms. Pacman. 18.00 *** SPECIAL OFFER *** Picnic Paranoia.. 12.50 ALL FOUR ABOVE Pole Position.. 24.50 + FREE BASIC TUTOR Protector Il. ..18.00 CASSETTE... .00 + many more modules in stock. + many more tapes in stock. PARCO Electrics Cassette.... 7.95 (Extended Basic) 2 THE HARDWARE IS HERE PARCO ELECTRICS con still offer you not only a remarkable computer, but also an exciting range of add-ons. TI-99/4A COMPUTER. 89.00 RS232 Stand Alone 120.00 Disc Control Card .. 156.50 32K Expansion Card .... 105.00 Speech Synthesizer.. 40.00 TI Joysticks (pair) ........ 19.75 Cassette Cable.......... 9.95 MODEMS: Interlekt Auto answer (Portman)........... 199.95 Jaguar Communications (Minimo 300) 99.00 + much more-write or 'phone for all your hardware enquiries. 3 THE SUPPORT IS HERE as well as offering a wide range of useful publications including our own magazine), PARCO ELECTRICS are enjoying a good reputation for customer service and informa tion. If we can't solve your problem, you may be sure we know who can! BOOKS: Getting started..................... .. 5.95 Dynamic Games .................................... 4.95 Intro to Assembly ...16.95 System Technical Data........................... 8.45 MAGAZINES: 99/4A (Parco Magazine) 2.00 HOME COMPUTER Magazine...... .3.75 + many more publications THE FUTURE IS HERE The T1-99/4A is a well established and proven machine. Even so, it has long enjoyed features that other micros are still struggling to emulate, yet there is also room for new growth. WRITE OR'PHONE TODAY FOR NEWS OF A COMPLETE PACKAGE (MODEM + TERMINAL EMULATOR + RS232) THAT WILL ENABLE YOU TO ENTER A NEW WORLD WITH YOUR TI-99/4A! The future is in our hands and yours. PARCO Electrics For a free price list and further information send a s.a.e. to: 4 DORSET PLACE, NEW STREET, HONITON DEVON EX14 8QS. TELEPHONE (0404) 44425 Access orders taken by telephone. All prices are inclusive VAT and p&p. "


"FILE AT LAST THE ARCADE ADVENTURE FROM MICROMEGA For The 48K Spectrum Available through good computer stores everywhere. MAGIC STON DEREK BREWSTER amoa C&C "


"BIGGER, BOULDERM BEAUTIFUL AMERICAN NOI. 75.05 00 136 000005 Evin 86 LEVELS BOULJer dash commodore commodore 67 JOYSTICK 1110 00 0 000000 12.25 DO 147 OOOOOO SAMARRETES SACS . TRUE BOULDER DASH STAR CASSETTE 8.95 DISK 10.95 I hope tych Access Account the amount State Soft Ltd Business & Technology Centre, Bessemer Drive, Stevenage, Hertfordshire SG1 2DY. Phone (0438) 316561. Statesoft Really Something Else "


"Isotherme R-E-V.T.E.W.S Game of the Month  Sound them firing at him for a few seconds at a time. He also has his trusty laser pistol to blast back at them. There are Time Grids dotted around the planet which send him short distances back in time if he bumps into them. The screen shows a main display of the planet's surface with Johnny and his opponents in glorious Commodore colour. At the bottom of the STRONTIUM DOG screen is a small landscape map which shows Johnny's 00000 MACHINE: CBM 64 position on the planet. He has SUPPLIER: Quicksilva to cross Mountains, desert PRICE: .95 and a cityscape before he Regular readers of 2000 reaches Wulf the Gronk. There are AD comic will know all levels of play each progresfive different about Johnny Alpha, the sively more difficult. Strontium Dog. Johnny is Don't expect too much a Search and Destroy from the game just because it Agent, a future style features your favourite comic bounty hunter, who travels the hero but having said that, universe tracking down evilStrontium Dog is a solid shoot doers and criminals. out with a few nice twists that Strontium Dog and the will keep you interested on a Death Gauntlet is Quicksilva's rainy afternoon. But I'm not first outing with a character too sure how long the appeal from the comic. More 2000 will last. AD characters are to appear in future games (see Games News).  Graphics It's a basic shoot-up game  Value  Playability BOULDERDASH jewels such as butterflies and amoebas. MACHINE: CBM 64/ In between certain screens BRAXX BLUFF joystick are little bonus games or SUPPLIER: Statesoft \"playable intermissions''. MACHINE: Spectrum SUPPLIER: Micromega These take the form of short PRICE: .95 interactive puzzles. Solve one PRICE: .95 Who needs mega-games and Rockford gets a bonus when you've got Boulder score. Braxx Bluff is the latest Dash! It's a really simple 3D game from MicroThere are so many nice game — but this reviewer touches in this game that it's mega — the people who brought you Code Name found it hard to put the hard to pick one that stands with some pretty graphics and Matt and Full Throttle. joystick down. Boulder Dash out. a nice line in sound effects. The action takes place will have you glued to your The graphics are great fun. You control Johnny Alpha on the planet prolon where screens. Rockford is a graphic gem who, along with his partner you are given the job of As I've said, the basic he stands and blinks at you if Wulf Sternhammer, has been objective is very simple. You you let him stand still for long. tracking down two renegade have to help a little character it's well worth doing that lust Strontium Dogs — called Rockford search to watch him! the collective name for Mutants. Yes, through 16 caves picking up suppose the closest thing Johnny is a Mutant too! These jewels along the way and to Boulder Dash would be Dia renegades are known as The avoiding getting squashed by Dug the arcade game but Stix Brothers. the boulders or killed off by Boulder Dash is better, by the other hazards he finds Wulf and Gronk, a faint miles! hearted alien, are waiting for You can select various Strangely enough. Boulder Johnny on the Planet of Renecaves at the start of each Dash is one of the first comgades. As Johnny neared the game from the comprehenputer games to be transferred planet, his craft was attacked sive menu. Each cave has five to the arcades Exidy have by the Brothers and forced to rescuing a team of explorers difficulty levels the time brought out an arcade crash land. Johnny has to from you get to complete each machine of the same name the Vicious Prolon cross the dangerous planet to nasties who are feeding on screen gets shorter as you if you've got a 64 meet his friends on foot. And their ship's energy supply. increase the difficulty. To get from one cave to the Santa now! Boulder Dash is a must. Tell that's where you come in. To do this, you have to land You have to help him reach on Prolon, find the explorers' next, Rockford needs to his mates, fighting off des crawler craft which is collect the right number of perate criminals, renegade marooned at Braxx Bluff and  Graphics gems. This opens the exit door robots and deadly vegetation. get it back to your mother ship — allowing Rockford to move  Sound on. In later screens, Rockford  Value Johnny is carrying electrobefore the crew die. can transform  Playability flares which he can use to Sounds easy? Don't you things into dazzle the nasties and stop believe it. Just landing on 10 35 "


"R.E.V.TE.W.S rema proting Prolon took me a couple of screen of a Commodore. the title screen while the rest hours to crack and as for Black Knight comes from of the game loads. BEAR GEORGE locating the dreaded Braxx the Australian company. After a brilliant few bars of MACHINE: Spectrum Bluff — well that was an allSimulated Graphicsand synthesised music, the game evening job. SUPPLIER: Cheetahsoft features the best animated starts. Game controls are kept graphics yet for the 64. It's just the same as the PRICE: .95 simple — just up, down, left. You play the part of Black Spectrum version. The idea is If you go down to the right, and fire --and you can Knight, on a quest for gold and that you are chief test pilot of woods today, you'd better choose the keys you want to glory. There are several an interstellar space transport gobble up a lot of apples. use for these functions. This stages to his quest. First, he company and you are deliver That's my advice if you makes BB one of those nice has to mount up and galloping spaceship kits around the decide to purchase games that you can play across the countryside Cheetahsoft's latest straight away — no need to avoiding chasms and potholes game — the Perils of Bear read the cassette inlay about as he goes. There are lightGeorge. 15 times before you know ning bolts and fireballs The idea of the game is to which keys do what. dodge, too. stock up on food and then get One thing I didn't like about Then he has to leave his George safely back to his the game was the graphic at four-legged friend to jump cave where he can hibernate. the beginning of level one over crumbling chasms, fight Getting to the cave is no which you have to watch a giant serpent, armed only easy task as George has to every time you play I would with his trusty blade, and dodge the poisonous apples, preferred to be able to battle with a nasty dwarf loony skiers and bear-eating short-circuit it somehow and before getting the gold. spiders. get straight into the game. Still Black Knight is extremely it is pretty, I must admit. playable but difficult. You BB has five levels altocertainly won't master it in five gether — the Lander Phase minutes, but if you stick with it described above, the Walker you'll find your time was well Phase in which you have to spent. locate the crawler with the aid Programmer Kyle Hodgetts of audible signals, the Land has set a new standard for 64 Crawler Phase in which you animation with this original negotiate Prolon in the sixgame. It looks and sounds speed Crawler, the Sea simple but, believe me, it's Crawler Phase takes you into a real challenge to beat! the uncertain waters of Prolon Watch out for the Black galaxy. As you land on each and If you get to George's cave, finally for the really Knight when he rides into your planet. You must collect he will fall into a deep sleep super-skilled, you find the computer store. enough fuel pods to take off and the months will start to besieged ship, enter it and see again. Any other treasures pass, represented by pages the commander's smiling face  Graphics 10 which happen to float past are peeling off a calendar congratulating you.  Sound yours for the taking. month after month. Braxx Bluff should provide  Value he graphics are better on If you caught enough falling several hours challenging  Playability this version than on the apples on screen one, George game-play on your Spectrum Spectrum. The aliens and will survive the winter and The only reservation I have is your character are multiwake up again in spring back about the lasting appeal. What JET PAC incentive is there once the coloured which makes the in the woods where the cycle crew have been rescued? MACHINE: BBC B game play look better. begins again. Movement is faster in this I have to say that it is not SUPPLIER: Ultimate version and it's not as easy to that difficult to get George  Graphics PRICE: .95 control your man. Maybe through the winter. After a bit  Sound Surprise, surprise. that's because I'm used to the of practice at apple catching,  Value Ultimate has come up Spectrum, though. you should be able to catch  Playability with another winner. Sound effects are good and enough food to see our hero Ultimate's first release, loud, but you can turn them off through until the spring each Jet Pac for the Spectrum, when the neighbours start to and every time. BLACK KNIGHT was top of all the charts bang on the wall. Don't turn Perils of Bear George is for months. Now the game the sound off until you've one of the cutest games MACHINE: CBM 64/ joystick has been converted for the heard the opening tune. have played for a long time. SUPPLIER: Interdisc Beeb and it's just as good. All in all, a good shoot up The animation is excellent and Software houses are begingame for the BBC. each screen has a nice jingle PRICE: .95 ning to discover ways of to accompany the action. Buckle on your swash making movement on the  Graphics The children's song Teddy and leap into the saddle screen while a tape is loading, Sound Bears Picnic accompanies with Black Night, the and Ultimate is no exception.  Value V screen one plus on screen most dashing computer There are some large snow Playability three the music of In the Hall game hero to grace the like blobs which rain down on of the Mountain King. 00 00 00 36 "


"REVIEW.SOT 33 le CO CO CTO Perils of Bear George is a explosion for the 64 of the houses and climb down when it comes to playability great game to buy for your redraw the scene from a the chimneys, avoiding fire— but none the worse for ttle sister or brother but its different viewpoint which balls and falling snow that. Graphics are pretty and four screens are not really because the game is in 3D. Once at the bottom of the sound adequate. challenging enough for the will often give you a clearer chimney, Santa must get to Special Delivery will make a seasoned Spectrum gamer. view. The graphics for the the tree and put his presents novel stocking filler for your ants aren't as good as the underneath it, avoiding sleepfavourite computer gamer  Graphics Spectrum version, though. walking children. Then he who still believes in Santa!  Sound Sound effects are limited, must find the key to the back  Value  Graphics probably owing to lack of door and creep quietly away.  Playability Special Delivery is a game  Sound memory. Ant Attack is an above you'll get out and play each  Value average game for the 64. It Christmas. It's fairly basic  Play ability ANT ATTACK offers fair competition to the disc-based games currently MACHINE: CBM 64 ficult enough for you then you on their way over here from SUPPLIER: Quicksilva TAPPER will be pleased to learn that the good old U.S. of A. PRICE: .95 you do not have just one bar MACHINE: CBM 64 and Sequels to hit games to tend but four.  Graphics sling Spectrum If you successfully aren't usually as good as  Sound SUPPLIER: US Gold four beers at your first four the original, and this is  Value customers, forcing them out PRICE: .95 CBM disc, not exception.  Playability With the software .95 cassette, .95 through the swing doors, then Spectrum cassette. you can progress to screen Regular readers of C&VG two. This time you have two will need no introduction cowboys at each bar, then to the game Tapper three and so on. During their drinking seswhich we reviewed exclusion, some of the cowboys get sively in our June edition. For those of you who don't peckish and tuck into a meal, get the UK's biggest and best making more work for you as computer games magazine you have to clear away the E 'S A magam each and every month, let me dirty dishes. if you manage to clear fill you in on the Tapper story away the food plates, two so far. The game started out in life dancing girls appear on stage now in full swing, this game as a Sega arcade game, was and do a can-can for you as a isn't as stunning as it was SPECIAL DELIVERY then converted for the 64 and reward. when first launched for the Points are earned every MACHINE: Spectrum/ is now available in the UK, Spectrum keyboard or joystick courtesy of US Gold for the 64 time you successfully repel a Ant Attack is set in an cowboy by slinging a glass of SUPPLIER: Creative Sparks and Spectrum ancient city called Antescher. Tapper is one of those fast beer along the bar at him. The only inhabitants are some PRICE: .95 But be warned — if you and furious games that will Here's a game which you very large ants that thrive on have you on the edge of the should drop a glass, the game human flesh. can play while listening to will end and you will have to seat. At the start of the game, all those great Christmas You play the part of a hardstart all over again. you can choose whether you song LPs you've got The sort of panic induced pressed barman in a Wild want to be a girl or boy. You stashed away. You know West saloon bar. Those cowby Tapper when a cowboy is then have to rescue 10 the ones I mean — The Sex boys are pretty darned thirsty almost at the end of one of the members of the opposite sex Pistols sing Bing Crosby's and if your pint pulling can't bars and you are three bars who have been captured and Greatest Hits or Phil Spector's away is a little bit similar to the match the speed of their drink are hidden somewhere in the Christmas Album, Volume 851 ing, they are likely to pull you nail-biting excitement procity It's a very simple game over the bar and send you flyduced by Chinese Juggler Control is by joystick only Santa has overslept and has from Ocean. ing and, as you guide your only five hours of Christmas This similarity aside, Tapper If that doesn't sound difcharacter through the ruined Eve left to collect presents really is quite unlike anything city. you realise the true 3D and deliver them. His Helpers that has ever been tried effects of the program a re dropping the gifts from the before. The walls are beautifully sky to help him get around I played the Commodore 64 drawn in three shades of grey that much quicker So Santa version and found it fast, with to give the appearance of has to steer his sleigh under excellent cartoon-style distance and texture. the falling presents and pick graphics and nice jingles. The ants move well and are them up. Once he's got very intelligent. You'll need to enough, he can start deliver Graphics keep a finger on the ammo ing and you move on to stage  Sound key to stay alive. Pressing one two of the game.  Value of the four function keys will You must land on the roofs  Play ability no 37 "


"Salone R-E.V.I.E.W.S od Graphics: Are they really as mind-blowing as the adverts say they are? Does the screen scroll effectively? Do those aliens really leap out of the screen at you? This is how this category is judged? dotted about the factory. let him get to bed until he has 10 STRANGELOOP all that sharp stuff fly11 JET SET WILLY cleared up all the empty ing about your suit is bound to bottles and glasses from MACHINE: Spectrum MACHINE: CBM 64 get punctured you do have around the house. SUPPLIER: Virgin SUPPLIER: Software some patches to plug the This is where Jet Set Willy PRICE: .95 leaks but these soon run out Projects begins and it is your job to Virgin are taking a whole and you'll need to pick up PRICE: .95 guide Willy around the house new look at their range of spare patches as you go After the usual false collecting all the empties. games and coming up around the factory. You can starts, broken promises If you enjoyed Manic Miner with some interesting top up on oxygen too as and delays, the review on the 64, you will enjoy this new titles for Christmas. bottles are to be found in copy of Jet Set Willy for too. I rate the game higher One of these is Strangevarious rooms. the Commodore 64 finally than Manic Miner and it is cerloop — a Jet Set Willy-ish As in an Adventure, there arrived at the C&VG offices. tainly in the Top Five best ever ramble through a maze of are various objects to collect Someone said \"It's here\" games for the 64. rooms filled with deadly and use along the way — and a brawl immediately One extra nice touch in this hazards. And it's great fun! essential in your quest to stop broke out on the review office game worthy of mention IS Here's what you have to do the aliens. floor. After a struggle, I that a scrolling message Your mission, little space. The screen layout shows managed to wrestle the appears on screen at the person, is to regain control of the room you are currently in. cassette away from the Editor beginning of the game pointa robot factory situated on the At the bottom of the screen is who was attempting to pulling out that it is illegal to copy edge of a far distant solar a readout showing the status rank and write the review himgames and that if you do so system. of your suit — how many self. Bit keen on Jet Set Willy you are stealing from the The factory has been leaks and patches, plus your -the C&VG review team. people who spend months invaded by a powerful alien programming them. Well said, force which is re-program10 Software Projects. ming the robots as they come off the production line.  Graphics Instead of being nice quiet  Sound metal-beings who only want to Value help the human race, the  Playability robots are being turned into fierce killers, out to destroy anything that looks vaguely STAGECOACH humanoid. No maps of the factory MACHINE: Spectrum/ exist -not even in the latest laser status, and what you've I didn't have to play the keyboard or joystick copy of C&VG! So you have to got in your pockets for game for very long to realise SUPPLIER: Creative Sparks warp into the unknown. The instance things you've picked that it was worth the fight. PRICE: .95 environment of the factory is up along the way, plus a It's all here — the Night Howdy partners! My extremely hostile unless compass showing the way to mare Room, Banyan Tree, name is Kidd Rivers, the you are an indestructible the control room and a map of Chapel, Kitchen, Nomen Luni, toughest cowboy in robot that is the rooms around you. Bathroom even Maria, Micro County. I enjoy There's no oxygen, zero Game control is by keytapping her foot and pointing rescuring runaway stagegravity, soaring temperatures board only -but this doesn't her finger in Willy's bedroom coaches which is just as and nasty sharp bits of indusdetract from the playability. As far as I could see, the well as it seems to happen a trial waste zapping around. Graphics are certainly not game is virtually identical to lot around these parts. Me There are 240 rooms between state of the art but pretty good the original Spectrum game. and my trusty steed. you and the control room for all that. The animation of If that means nothing to Spectrum, are just about to which you must reach if your the spaceman and his jet bike you, let me give you a brief leave town looking for mission is to be successful and the nasties is great and Miner Willy history. It all began another stagecoach right All you have between you flicker free. in Surbiton where Willy now. Want to tag along? and disaster is a very old I found Strangeloop stumbled down a mine shaft If you decide to join Kidd on space suitgovernment amusing to play. It certainly full of several items. Twenty his rescue mission, your're in cuts you see, no new ones has that all important lasting screens, and several colfor a rough ride. First he has available — and a laser gun. appeal and, with a game SAVE lected items later, Willy to find the stagecoach, During your journey facility, you don't have to sit became a very rich miner. galloping at full tilt over rough through the factory, you'll up all night to beat it! The profits from his Surrey country. He has to avoid spiky come across an old abanstrike were invested in a huge cactus and rocks among doned jet cycle that is great  Graphics mansion where our hero took other obstacles. If Kidd falls for whizzing around but it to throwing lavish parties for off his trusty steed the  Sound does use up a lot of fuel. You  Value his nouveau riche friends. program provides an amusing have to keep topping up at the  Playability After one such party, Willy's scene. various fuel dumps you'll find bossy housekeeper refuses to Kidd's horse dashes off to 000 12 38 "


"Weve got the é and our games prove it! Galati Amazing graphics, fast and furious action, challenging strategy, compelling adventure this first wave of games from TALENT has got the lot! Written by professional computer scientists using powerful new programming techniques (which leave machine code standing), these games have pushed home micros to the very limit. DO000 D00000 KALAH One of the oldest games in the world Originally played by Bedouins using pebbles and holes scooped in the desert sand, this strategy game has absorbed the mind of man for thousands of years. Superb graphics and music, with a choice of levels and depth of search. Easy to learn fiendishly difficult to beat! Commodore 64 Cassette .95 Disk .95 COMMODORE CASSETTES ARE MAST LOAD LASER REFLEX A new angle in alien tapping Against a brilliant backdrop of stars, you must defend your asteroid hase from wave afterwave of swooping mutating starships. Your defences powerful laser deflected against a giant mirror, How long 1 can you hold out before your defences crumble BBC Models Cassette 17.95 Electron Cassete .95 COMMODORE SOFTWARE WILL SHORTLY ME AMAILABLE ON COMPUNET ARCHIPELAGO Dare you venture into the ancientundersea labyrinths which link the islands of the Archipelagor Fabulous jewels await you there-but the guardians of the treasure mark your every move, waiting to deal with and terrible vengeance. How long can you survive? A fast-moving action-paced game with brilliant graphics. animation and music. Commodore 64 Cassette 27.9 Disk E9.95 eywick needed) A compulsive adventure game set in a ghost town in the Wild West. Your task-to flush out a gang of bank robbers and retrieve their loot with only your trusty steed and your she shooter to aid you! Test the speed of your draw, your skill cards, your powers of survival The first of a stunning series of adventure games from Allan Black, played in real time. Commodore the .9 D 0.95 BBC Model (text only casette .95 Blectron (tent only) Cassette 17.95 PANORAMA (H) An outstanding graphics package for the Commodore 64. Features include free-hand sketches, circles, ellipses, black move, copy and reverse, magnification choice of cursor oystick or key control, PLUS texture definition and texture and colourfill PANORAMA (H) uses the full colour facilities of the Commdore 64 Commodore 64 cassette 12.95 Disk 19.95 The programme lamenw-driven and comes with comprehensive illustrated instruction booklet. TO: TALENT COMPUTER SYSTEMS FREEPOST (no stamp required) GLASGOW CAOK Please send me the following items COLODORE 64 Gatity AC MODEL 12.951 LASER REFLEX Cari 1951 WEST Netany Cassette 1 910 ARCHIPACO ARCHIPELAGO LASER REFLEX WEST E 9951 Total includes postage and packing Cassette 1991 2951 Please debity ACCESS BARCLAY/TRUSTCARD TendeaPOJ Chaqueta the weat SOFTWARE FROM SCOTLAND FROM SCOTLAND Curran Building, 101 St James Road Talent games should shortly be available from your local software retailer-or post off the coupon now. Glasgow G4 ONS Tel 041552 2128 INSTANT CREDITCARD 24 HOUR ORDERING SERVICE TEL 0415522128 Enquiry Date are cast Ads Signature Please up to 28 days for my We all of your relaterte are a branded "


"WIN  AND SAVE THE WORLD EKO! 250 K OF PURE MYSTERY BY IAN LIVINGSTONE Spectrum 48K or Commodore 64 (Turboload) 5 complete Adventures, each with its own Arcade,\" in one multi-load mega-program: Eureka! is the ultimate computer Epic. Epic in scale: \"Eureka!\" spans five eras of history! You battle against the dinosaurs, outwit Nero ond his gladiators, join the Knights of the Round Table, escope from Colditz, and finally into 1984 defeat the evil master of the Caribbean who is holding the world to ransom. Epic in sheer size-there's more than 250K for you to get yourself killed in Full-colour booklet, packed with cryptic clues to help you unravel the mystery and win the ,000 reward Music and sound effects built in 5. PROGRAMS IN ONE All 5 Adventures are linked but you can choose to play them separately. And they all have REAL TIME built in. So if you don't think fast, you wind up as a plerodactyl's lunch, die of over-exertion in a Roman orgy, or just lose your mind... Eureka!\" is not just an Epic not just an Adventure. At the start of each historical era, you face an Arcade Action Test, to decide your strength level for the Adventure to come. The better your score, the stronger and faster you'll be. And it'll keep you on your foes, with constantly changing, static and moving graphics. Brilliant music and sound effects add to the excitement. As part of the \"Eureka!\" pack, you receive a full-colour illustrated booklet, containing cryptic riddles and mysterious illustrations. Using booklet and screen together, you steadily unravel the clues and build High quality, up a secret phone number piece by piece. full-colour, static and If you're first to ring it, you save the world and collect the $25,000! moving graphics Just clip the coupon. Or, for even faster action, order by Credit Card on the \"Eureka!\" Telephone Hotline 01-460 6000. Eureka! Send your order now to \"Eureka!\".FREEPOST, Dept 400. Mount Farm, Milton Keynes, MK1 THO NO STAMP NEEDED / To: \"Eureka!\", FREEPOST Dept 400. Mount Form, Milton Keynes, MKIIHO Please send me \"Eurokol packs.complete with cosselle, full-colour booklet instructions and rules, at $14.95 each PLUS 55p post a packing. DOMARE THEN THE RACE IS ON!!! DEVISED BY IAN LIVINGSTONE The storylines for \"Eureka!\" are by lan Livingstone, whose \"Fighting Fantasy books have sold over 2,000,000 copies. He's dreamed up some rather nasty tricks and twists for you in this Epic, because he has also devised the cryptic clues and conundrums in the booklet that goes with the program. He's the one who knows the answers \"Eureka!\" was programmed by Andromeda teams led by Hungarians Dont Kiss and Andrs Available from Csszr. It took the equivalent of 5 all good software retailers, YEARS to create, and the skills of or if any difficulty use the coupon 4 graphic artists, 2 musicians and a professor of logic too. or Hotline telephone number We told them to stretch the 01-460 6000 hardware's capabilities, and make NOW. sure you were kept awake for hours!! They've done it... MY COMPUTERS Bed total of 15.50 24 HOUR PHONE COMMODORE 54 HOTLINE NUMBER SPECTRUM 48K 01-460 6000 TOTAL For Credit Card Orders enclose payment by cheque/PO. payable to DOMARK UD. OR Picose charge my Credit Card VA A Access AMEX Card Number Expiry Date Dale Nome Signature Street Town Post Code Domark Lid. 228 Munster Road, London SW6 Reg. No:1804186(England) The race for the ,000 starts on 31 Oct 1984 and closes on 31 Dec 1985. "


"Salone R-E-V.I.E.W.S Sound: Does the game sound like a Duran Duran LP played at half speed — or does the noise from your micro knock you half-way across the room. The C&VG review team don't judge games with their ears plugged up, we can tell you! the side of the screen. Kidd your Colt 45. the room more odd limps after it, catches it and Indians will attempt to 13 ANCIPITAL creations from Minter's fertile remounts before continuing climb onto the stage and MACHINE: CBM 64/ imagination. We won't spoil the chase. capture the passengers — if Meanwhile the stage is still you lose them the fun by letting you know joystick all to the what they are. It'll take some rumbling around the range rampaging redskins, then the SUPPLIER: Llamasoft time for you to work out the without a driver and game ends with you losing PRICE: .50 best ways to open the exits shedding passengers at every your scalp. Nasty! What could be better which is half the fun of the turn. If all six passengers fall If you fight off the Indians, than playing Revenge of game. out before Kidd reaches the you'll live to see the stage the Mutant Camels while to get into some rooms, stage and jumps on, the game come safely home to San listening to very loud blasting is absolutely no good. is all over before it's really got Pedro music in a darkened You have to help your furry going Stagecoach is an entertainroom? Playing Ancipital while Ancipital find the camel keys Finding the stage and in order to reach these rooms. manouevring Kidd behind it is There are also magic goats fairly easy -but then comes 12 13 scattered about which, if colthe jump, which is a bit ose 1987 lected, give your Ancipital risky. extra added power. Collect Once on the stage safely. five and he can jump up and Kidd dashes for the reins and down on walls to damage brings the runaway horses 888888888888 them. under control. He then has to The game also features a pick up six more passengers development of Jeff's who are waiting for a lift into ingenious gravity system first town. seen in ''Sheep\". Mastering Once he's done this — a the four-way gravity found few would be passengers will inside the Zzyaxian base is get trampled in the process, ing and original game. listening to very loud music in quite difficult but follow the I'm afraid, it's off into the However the graphics are a a darkened room that's comprehensive instructions mountains where more bit crude the Spectrum is what. found inside the cassette and hazards await our intrepid capable of better but this I've just emerged blinking you should soon have the hero. doesn't really detract from into the sunlight after a proAncipital leaping about like a Kidd has to drive the coach the game's playability which longed session with Ancipital mo through dangerous mountain is considerable. It will take — the latest game from comYou'll have to master the passes which are prone to some time to master and puter gaming's answer to Neil jump-turn a Torville and landslides that send rocks there are several skill levels from the Young Ones, Jeff Dean type manoeuvre — in hurtling down at the coach. to beat. Minter. order to bounce around inside Little arrows appear to show As I've already mentioned, Jeff has come up with a the rooms without fear of you which trails are clear, the falling off the horse real winner this time. Anyone damaging your furry friend. There is a time limit on this routine is nicely done, as are who was a bit disappointed the graphics are great part of the game and a countthe rampaging Indians. with Sheep in Space will be well up to Jeff's usual high but down timer appears on However, I felt the limitations glad to hear that Jeff is back quirky standard. The sound is screen. of the graphics showed up on form with Ancipital. terrific. Jeff has included what If you keep getting hit by most in the mountain Well, what is an Ancipital? he calls a \"Phil Collins rocks or running into the sequence. Hit a rockfall and It's a half man, half-goat module\" so that every room mountains, your stage half the stage graphics get creature which you may have has its own drum rhythm. sustains damage. wiped away. chequerboard seen scuttling about the Firing sounds in each room Use up all your damage fashion. screen in \"Sheep\". The Anciare different, too. point and the game ends right Overall, Stagecoach is well pitals have joined forces with Overall Ancipital is a game there and then. On your way put together with a compreus humans to help fight the any self respecting Commothrough the mountains, you'll hensive menu at the start of Zzyaxians — an evil bunch dore owner should see gold and ammunition the game which, among other responsible for everything immediately go out and grab boxes appearing on the road. things, allows the player to nasty that happens in Minter's off the shelves it will keep Steer your stage over them redefine the keyboard cosmology. you intrigued for months. It is and you pick them up. controls. You have to help the Anciwell documented you If you get lost, you can call At the end of each game pital warriors break into a couldn't really ask for more up a map of the mountains. you also see a comprehenZzyaxian weapons base from a set of instructions — The game is frozen until you sive scorechart which tells armed only with an extremely and extremely well presented. go back to the action. you how well you've done in sketchy map and destroy all Ancipital sees the Shaggy Survive the mountains and various parts of the game. the deadly things you find One back on form. you're faced with a nasty inside. bunch of Red Indian raiders  Graphics Once in the base, you'll find  Graphics out for your scalp. You have  Sound that you must open up exits in  Sound to fight off the Indian attack  Value the walls surrounding each  Value by climing onto the roof of the  Playability room. You do this by blasting  Playability stage and blasting away with the things you'll find inhabiting Ono "


"GET THE MOLE BEFORE HE GETS YOU. Available for B.B.C. Model \"B\". Electron, Spectrum and Commodore 64. Espionage is available from all leading High Street Stores and quality Computer Games Specialists Espionage price .95 Retailers contact Mr. Len Fisher on our telephone hot-line (0642)227223. MODULAR RESOURCES LIMITED A GAME OF INTRIGUE & SKILL IN THE OIL BUSINESS. "


"of these R-E.V.I.E.W.S VU wwy EXCLUSIVES MOSCOW MACHINE: CBM 64 SUPPLIER: US Gold PRICE: .95 Beach-head, one of the best selling games of the year, eclipsed only by Software Project's Jet Set Willy, now has a sequel to thrill war game fanatics. Raid Over Moscow is the follow up to Bruce Carver's excellent Beach-head, which won the award for the best planes, patrolling tanks and graphics and sound on a stationary guns all take a pot computer game in a poll of shot at your plane readers by the American Buildings, huge columns magazine, Billboard and walls must be negotiated Raid Over Moscow, unlike during the mission. Staying as Beach-head, places you in close to the ground as the cockpit of the world's possible is absolutely fastest fighter bomber. As the necessary as enemy fighter squadron leader, you must planes come rushing up lead your men on a bombing behind, giving you only raid over the main industrial seconds to react. Flying low centres of the Soviet Union, in also makes you a much better an attempt to knock out the target for the roaming tanks. computer installations which Each successive Screen are at this moment guiding takes you closer to your missiles over the north ultimate target, the centre of SANOVAUNCH DETECTED Atlantic to targets in North Moscow and the Kremlin. IMPACT: SHTREOL America. The first part of the game SCORE: 00000 takes place in a space station The Russian nuclear attack orbiting earth. Russia has flies across the Atlantic. launched a series of nuclear strikes. You and your men are all that stands between the destruction of every major city in Canada and the USA You must guide your ship out of the landing bay and fly it through space towards the Soviet capital. The view then switches to one of the ground. You must fly your air craft very low to ELOCITY avoid being detected by the ALTITUDE COORDINATES 13 M Russian radar network. Jet HE IMPACT: 05 399 38.8 ALTITUDE Tanks, enemy planes and stationery SCORE eee SCORE: 30000 guns block your way to the target. -mmmmmEDITOR'S COMMENT There's no doubt that Raid Over Moscow is an extremely slick games program. It's very playable, the graphics and sound are of the highest quality and the packaging rivals anything on the market. However, no amount of slick production can disguise the fact that the basic philosophy behind the game is to say the least questionable. Maybe we're being hypocritical by criticising this aspect of the game when many games we review feature alien blasting and other forms of destruction. But nuclear war is not a subject for fantasy. Perhaps we're being too sensitive take a look at the game and the packaging and let us know what YOU think. Write to Computer and Video Games, Raid Over Moscow, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1. The space station, the first phase of the game, tests all your skills of co-ordination. Raid Over Moscow scores highly on graphics and playability. The game is much more difficult and challenging to play than Beach-head, and will certainly take a lot longer to master. The game at the beginning is certainly difficult, and in my , STATUS SEA difficult, and in my You have reached the centre of too difficult for Moscow and the Kremlin. you to really enjoy the game without a hell of a lot of practise. a big hit this Christmas? Once you have finally you have finally I don't think, there's any mastered the game there are doubt about that. another four levels for you to beat. On the highest level,  Graphics couldn't even get out the Sound space station with five lives.  Value Will Raid Over Moscow be  Playability 000 000 "


"THE ALLIGATA WILL ALWAYS JET YOU At only .95 (Disk .95) you should bite our arm off Another set of amazing specials from the software house with the reputation for fast machine code action, high resolution graphics and unbeatable quality. Games to keep you enthralled. Games to get hooked on, but never bored, because once you've started you'll keep coming back for more. HELP! Commodore 64 WAIT 5 BEST SELLERS 749.95 T.95 .95 CHARTBUSTER Chartbuster Fhe outstanding games in one package Begger, Eagle Empire. Panic Planet Kiler Watt and Bugblaster Hits you may have seen or heard about, but could never wordnow available in a 1984 bonanza onlar ting 3D Water-Ski Hope you're not so sick or trad of the water. Feel your nos bend as you roll the come your stomach churn as you jump the name and the terror of slicks and minefalds. The toy controlable the speeds and superb 3D effects guarantee many absorbing hours on the ocean wave LULU Atea Rocket Roger Walk, run, jump and even jet thrust your way round this single, continuously scrolling screen drama as rocket propelled Roger mines crystal fuel for his stranded mother ship, fighting off hordes of marauding nasties on the way, watching out for sizzling security laser beams, sliding doors and invisible force fields. Aztec Tomb Revisited (Part II) Sequel to the first nerve tingling mystery of the South American junglesSomeone's ready been you to the golden bounty pirate looler five hundred years Barier: All that remain is one quarter of their treasure map. The only cluelet to an exciting drama in pursuit of Chartbuster. Loco Waterski 3D Rocket Roger Aztec Tomb Revisited (Part II). Please indicate programs required and whether tape T or disk D Loco your dream SEND SAE FOR COLOUR BROCHURE Skifully maneuver the six track rawy dodging bera bombardment from planes and airship, avoiding tatad collision with the oncoming handcarta, aided only by your lethal smoke and steam and a unique split screen feature giving immediate action viewing with a master plan image of the danger to come. I enclose a cheque/PO* fort Charge my Access Card No. Alligata Software Ltd 1 Orange Street, Sheffield S1 4DW Tel: (0742) 755796 Name Signature Address Alligata *Payable to Alligata Software tAllow 75p for post and packaging Despatch is normally made on receipt of order and should reach you within 7 days Software Limited "


"CSVG TOP TEN GAMES OF THE YEAR 1 JET SET WILLY and Daley's is no exception — are copies of the Konami arcade game in which the player has to shake Top selling game of 1984 is the joystick furiously to the cutest climbing game of them all Jet Set Willy. make his little man run and jump. The game is the sequel to one of 1983's top games — Manic Miner. It was always 8 TRASHMAN going to be a big hit but the game completely dominated the C&VG/Daily Mirror Top Trashman is a total original in Thirty for most of this year. computer games — the only Only two games have dustbin simulation available ousted Willy from his number With 1984 drawing to a close without too much for the Spectrum and 64. one spot throughout the year and now, with the game also You have to collect the evidence of Big Brother forcing us to use our bins, empty their contents computers for boring serious applications, it's available on the Commodore 64, there seems to be no stoptime to take stock of some of the best games of into the dustcart that is scrollping the Liverpudlian miner. the year. ing slowly up screen and For those of you who've The real games of the year will be the ones that bring the bins back again. But if you think that sound not seen the game, it's well you, and all the other C&VG readers vote for, in easy, you haven't reckoned worth putting on your the Golden Joystick Awards the gamers' on mad dogs, lunatic drivers, Christmas list. awards which will be presented in London in kamikaze cyclists, pubs, January cafes, and tricky grass 2 BEACH HEAD In order to start your thinking about your verges. choices, we asked NOP the compilers of the For sheer fun, you C&VG top twenty to tell us what were the best can't beat Trashman. Beach-head is the most sellers of '84. successful of the invasion of From the list they gave us, the C&VG review American software that has team picked out the games that they liked best 9 HUNCHBACK flooded into the UK this year. which were launched this year. The game drew gasps of Here are our choices. Now tell us your admiration from games profavourites. Fill in the Golden Joystick Awards Hunchback for the Sinclair grammers and businessmen when it was first shown to the form below and send off to C&VG, Gold Joystick Spectrum was Ocean's first big hit — the first of many top trade at the Leisure ElecAwards, Prioty Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, selling games that the tronics Show last January. London EC1R 3AU. Manchester software house Then, when US Gold put were to launch in 1984. the game out on cassette at Supported by a TV advertis.95, the games players purMay and saw it zoom up the chased Beach-head into the charts to the number one 6 ing campaign, the Spectrum LORDS OF MIDNIGHT and 64 versions of this Top Ten games chart. spot. popular arcade game stayed The game features four Sabre Wulf is the latest in a in the Daily Mirror chart for different scenes. By far the series of Spectrum hits from Who are the Lords of several months. best of these is the sea Ultimate who are Britain's Midnight? That was the You are the tragic Quasiscene. undisputed number one in the question on every gamer's modo who seeks to rescue market for arcade-style lips in the weeks leading up to his beloved Esmerelda. The 3 FIGHTER PILOT games. the launch of Beyond's first guards in Notre Dame have Critics said that Sabre Wulf \"epic\" game. different plans for our hero was no more than a copy of Beyond describe Midnight and it's down to you to Ultimate's previous game — as an \"epic\" as it does not fit Digital Integration stormed Atic Atac — and that the prointo either the Adventure or see that he escapes their way into the big league grammers had merely strategy category but lies their arrows. of software houses with two changed the backaground. Somewhere between the two. hit games in Spring '84 0 swapping a haunted house for swapping a haunted house for SHERLOCK Night Gunner and Fighter There is also a strong Pilot. a jungle. element of war gaming in Of the two games, Fighter Midnight as you seek to unite Pilot was marginally more the forces of the Free Another of this year's instant SOCCER successful. It's a flight simuagainst the evil Doomsuccess stories is Sherlock lation with a strong flavour of dark. from Melbourne House. World War II. Like Jet Set Willy the game As well as keeping an eye Soccer is the best sports Commodore's International 7 couldn't fail. Programmed by 7 OLYMPIC GAMES on all normal flight controls, simulation ever written for Philip Mitchell of Hobbit, the player also has to deal Penetrator and Mugsy fame, with bandits screaming in any home computer. Sherlock was billed as from above and below. Soccer finally found its way The Olympic Games shook up Melbourne's biggest thing Digital Integration are conth into the shops and well worth the games business this since Hobbit. verting their Spectrum the wait it was, too a cartsummer with no less than a Sherlock is one of the new games for the Comridge game at just .95 with dozen athletics games seekbreed of interactive Advenmodore 64. stunning graphics and exceling to capitalise on the ture games not just a set of lent game play. Olympics. fixed puzzles with one The running animation of Most successful of the solution. Sherlock has semi4 SABRE WULF the footballers, movement of Games games was Daley intelligent characters who the ball and accurate Thompson's Decathlon which react to your moves, it has shadows make the game a produced a number one several possible conclusions Ultimate launched their sole delight to watch as well as smash hit for Ocean. and can be different every Spectrum game of 1984 in play. Almost all of these games time you play. 45 ited "


"sphere R-EVIEW.S Value: Is the game really worth all those pennies? How long will its attraction last? Is it worth going without Computer & Video Games for a month because your parents won't give you any extra pocket money or could you write a better listing? case. After all, there have seemed to be useful for the is to find and return them, for TRASHMAN been very few games information observed is easily if the talisman is not reconstiMACHINE: Spectrum launched this year that are in recorded. In fact, I could see tuted, the moon is destined to SUPPLIER: New the same league as little reason why this puzzle explode, taking Earth with it! Trashman for graphics and should be published as softDisregarding the prize, how Generation Software gameplay. If you liked ware. do the games play? PRICE: .95 Trashman, you won't be To be honest, I wouldn't First, the music and sound After cleaning up the disappointed with the sequel. buy it unless e disappointed with the sequel. buy it unless | fancied my effects are spectacular! The fal streets of London in the chances for the ,000 (sod Commodore uses the TV's first Trashman game, our Graphics the Golden Hare I'll take loudspeaker and the bursts of hero now sets out on a  Sound the cash!) But hang about! music can only be described much more ambitious  Value That's a huge pile of readies as triumphal! project to clean up the entire  Playability to be giving away. Where will Second, there are graphics world in the sequel to New it all come from? Suppose  and they are created in a Generation's hit of the year per game is put into the kitty most innovative way. There Travels With Trashman. that's one helluva lot of are \"wide screen\" pictures at At the beginning of the HARERAISER copies to hope to sell for a some locations and smaller game, you are given a certain MACHINE: 48k Spectrum puzzle that isn't even a game! \"cameos\" at others. amount of fare money. A map Could it be that we have to SUPPLIER: Haresoft Ltd. of the world shows all the Each Adventure has its wait for sales to reach a preown plot which when solved cities that Trashman can PRICE: .95 determined level before we will lead you to a piece of the travel to, providing he has Hareraiser is not so see any sign of The Finale? talisman. A single review enough cash to do so. much a game as a could not do justice to this The Paris job involves puzzle. It comes in two catching all the frogs that vast game and I can't attempt  Graphics parts: Prelude is avail Sound 10 here to describe the other have been let loose by a able now and Finale is 12 made chef at a café in the  Value (if you win) module I have tried; Celtic yet to be released. Champs Elysées. No easy job Britain, except to say that it (if you don't) The player\" has the four  Playability follows the same style. this as our hero must also cursor keys at his disposal, With or without the prize, avoid bumping into the waitallowing him to move around this package has got to be resses and losing points. the countryside in search of terrific value. Other possible starting clues to discover the Hare's EUREKA! points are Germany where whereabouts. These are disTrashman is offered the job of played as short lines of text  Graphics MACHINE: CBM 64  Sound collecting the empties at the on a graphics background of Spectrum 48k  Value Munich Beer Festival. a field. Sometimes the hare SUPPLIER: Domark Ltd.  Playability Trashman does not have to comes loping in to the PRICE: .95 on cassette accept the first job offer he accompaniment of music .45 on CBM disc. gets. He can fly onto another before divulging his clue. Five epic Adventure MELTDOWN destination providing of sometimes he doesn't. Is that games, each preluded by MACHINE: CBM 64 course he has enough of the a clue? an arcade game, offered folding stuff to pay for his The object of all this is to SUPPLIER: Creative Sparks in the Eureka! package, airline ticket. be the first person to solve together with a booklet. The PRICE: .95 The most dangerous of his the puzzle. If that happens to Adventures can be played If you don't want to start early jobs, and one of the best be you, then you write in to independently, but are linked glowing in the dark, then screens in the game, is the Haresoft with the Hare's and clues lead you from you'd better act quickly if Spanish job where Trashman location, plus an explanation Adventure, to book, and back, you get your hands on a has to collect up all the roses of how you arrived at the in search of a mystery phone copy of Countdown to thrown into a bullring during a answer, together with the two number. The first person to Meltdown. bullfight the bull would tapes and a letter quoting discover that will save the An explosion has devasprefer them to stay there your personal numbers. You world from destruction and tated a nuclear power plant There are ten desintations could win the Golden Hare win ,000 in cash as a and radiation is leaking out in in the game altogether and it itself, or choose to take bonus! vast quantities. The core is will take a good deal of ,000 in cash instead. The Adventures are set rapidly heating up and there practice to visit them all. To be eligible to enter, you throughout the ages. Starting could be a gigantic nuclear Comparisons with must first have registered the off in Prehistoric Age, you explosion unless you can Trashman / are inevitable if a purchase of each part, by progress through Ancient prevent it. little pointless as the game is returning a card on which is Rome, Celtic Britain and War. You control a team of eight really quite different. printed your unique personal time Germany to the Modern android commandos who However, Travels With Trashnumber. Caribbean. A talisman was are the only beings tough man is slightly more difficult That's the task — how will discovered on the Moon, and enough to make it to the core. to get into than the first game, you shape up to it? All you under analysis, split. Five You have to guide your Personally I prefer need is pencil, paper, your fragments disappeared, but team down through the many Trashman, but it is no poor eyes, patience and an inquirhave been traced to the levels of the installation, find reflection on Travels With ing mind, says the inlay. places and times in which the the core and prevent the Trashman that this is the Pencil and paper certainly Adventures are set. Your job explosion. o ou 46 "


"MSX? SETTING THE STANDARD What MSX? SUPERTEST: Full reviews on the first computers from Canon, NC, Mitsubishi Sanyo, Sony, Spectravideos and Toshiba WE 20 On sale now: the essential buyers' guide to this exciting new standard for home computers. Facts, specifications, prices, software and peripheral listings. All you need to know about every MSX computer available. Plus free first issue of MSX Computing. A LOOK INTO THE FUTURE tomorrow's software and machines BASICALLY BETTER? an introduction to MSX BASIC BUYERS GUIDE: MICROS. PROGRAMS AND ADD-ONS PLUS GAMES REVIEWS "


"Mirage ein Street 9 Rossini Street Seaforth Liverpool L21 4NS Tel: 051-920 9713 SOFTWARE & DISTRIBUTION PROGRAMMERS WE ARE LOOKING FOR TOP QUALITY PROGRAMMES TO MARKET IN THE UK AND ABROAD. THE PROGRAMMES MUST BE OF TOP QUALITY AND IN MACHINE CODE WITH GOOD GRAPHICS AND SOUNDS AND ORIGINAL CONCEPT. WE ARE LOOKING FOR PROGRAMMERS TO CARRY OUT WORK ON NEW MACHINES SUCH AS THE C.B.M/16 AMSTRAD AND M.S.X. WE CAN SUPPLY THESE MACHINES TO CARRY OUT WORK FOR MIRAGE. WE ARE ALSO OFFERING  PRIZE FOR THE BEST PROGRAMME RECEIVED BY THE END OF FEBRUARY 1985 WHICH WE WILL DECIDE TO MARKET. WE OFFER AN OUT RIGHT PAYMENT OR 10% PLUS PAYMENT OR 20% ROYALTIES. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT THE SOFTWARE MANAGER HE WILL BE GLAD TO LISTEN TO ANY QUESTIONS YOU MAY HAVE. SOFTWARE HOUSES WE ARE LOOKING FOR TOP SELLING PROGRAMMES TO DISTRIBUTE TO OUR WIDE RANGE OF OUTLETS THROUGHOUT THE UK AND GIVE YOU A VERY FAST SERVICE TO HELP WITH YOUR SALES AND TO MAKE THE MOST OF YOUR PRODUCTS. SEND A SAMPLE COPY OF YOUR PRODUCTS WITH RATES AND TERMS FOR A FAST ASSESMENT. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT THE SALES MANAGER HE WILL BE GLAD TO HELP AND ASSIST YOU. DEALERS AND DISTRIBUTERS DEALERS WE HAVE THE BEST SELLERS FROM THE BEST PRODUCERS: WE ALSO OFFER VERY GOOD RATES AND TERMS TO HELP YOU AND US TO ACHIEVE THE BEST SALES AND SERVICE. FOR MORE INFORMATION, CONTACT THE SALES MANAGER. DISTRIBUTERS HAVE YOU GOT THE MIRAGE RANGE ON YOUR SHELVES, IF NOT THEN CONTACT THE SALES OFFICE FOR SAMPLES AND RATES. SALES MANAGER T.C. SAPHIER SOFTWARE MANAGER C.A. SAPHIER "


"Sophone R-E.V.I.E.W.S Wo1 Playability: Will the game keep you up until the early hours of the morning, as you attempt to complete just one more screen in a desperate attempt to beat it? Or does it send you to sleep the moment the introscreen appears? Could you spend hours locked away in your bedroom with it? Countdown follows the The game comes with There's a magic carpet these \"plays'' by using simple current trend towards graphic necessarily detailed instrucfloating around, too and, as two key instructions and Adventure/strategy games. tions which you'll need to read Sinbad, you have to hop on to the computer works out the You have to solve a lot of before getting into the game. it and climb up its rope ladder outcome. problems, gather your comYou won't learn to get the to touch an alien. As you The attacking team aims to mando force and equip them best out of Countdown in ten touch one, it changes colour. Score a touchdown by utilising and then go after the core minutes but it's well worth But touch an already changed the various plays and You monitor the androids the effort. one and you get knocked off strategies available, while the progress through \"video the carpet. defending team aims to stop cameras\" your computer . Graphics Once you've managed to them. screen. You can switch  Sound 7 change all the aliens' colours. The computer acts as the between \"north\" and \"south  Value 8 you move to screen two. referee and throws in penalcameras to give different per  Playability Here, you have to pilot Sinbad ties from time to time in a spectives of the rooms you on his carpet through space, somewhat arbitary manner. are exploring. avoiding the asteroids and This is one of the annoying You can also switch 15 SINBAD other original things like that. features of an otherwise well androids throughout the This second stage is timed to executed program. Just like game. Each one of the eight MACHINE: BBC last as long as it took you to the real live players, you get has different characteristics SUPPLIER: Virgin clear screen one. really annoyed when a penalty which are established at the PRICE: .95 One of the dullest games decision comes up! beginning of each game. And I thought Virgin's I've seen for the Beeb. At half time and at the end Some are technical wizards, latest batch of games of the game you get a statiswhile others are pure fighters were supposed to be  Graphics tics readout — how many with little scientific knowledge. better than the last lot.  Sound yards your quarterback ran in Virgin are currently  Value the game, how many interhaving a clear out to get  Playability ceptions were made and so rid of their old games at on. The program allows you to .99. This latest release AMERICAN FOOTBALL get a print-out of the result should be included in the and the stat-sheet. Another price cutting, if you ask me. MACHINE: Spectrum nice touch. As usual, Virgin includes a SUPPLIER: Argus Press few words about the author of Software 16 the game on the cassette PRICE: .99 inlay. Dennis Ibbotson, who wrote Sinbad, is 35 and only 24! 32! 48! Hut! Hut Hut! started computing last year Incredible isn't it when his mother bought him a people actually talk like The screen display shows computer! that! your android and the room he Dennis dislikes arcades If you are a fan of that OTHER COMANDS is in. Below you'll see a and hates all computer bonecrunching spectacle 19 TAHUT HE HELP complex series of read-outs magazines. Well, Dennis, we Americans call football which relating to the status of your don't think much of you draws massive audiences to android and the condition of either. Perhaps if you read Channel 4 at teatime on LTE Tristallations core. the installation's core. Some magazines and played Sundays, you're going to love the game comes with an You must select the a few the a few more games you'd this computerised version. informative booklet well android most suited to the know what people look for in a Argus Software has come worth the money on its own as specific task and get him to good game. up with the first really worth it actually helps you underthe right location. while version of the game that stand what you see on telly You must reach the core 15 has become increasingly too! Ken Thomas, editor of and cool it down before it popular in the UK over the Touchdown magazine, the exceeds 10,000 degrees past three years. official NFL publication in this centigrade. If you don't, then You can either take on the country, has written an intereven an android can melt! computer or play a human esting, easy-to-understand Countdown is a complex opponent in this game of guide to the game and a list of and challenging game — strategy and muscle. Strategy all the jargon used. Great stuff definitely not for those of you right word here as you and even a five-foot who simply want to blast have to mastermind your weakling can play it without things. team's march to victory by fear of terminal damage! A The graphics are impresutilising various tactics preCommodore 64 version sive particularly the neat sented to you by the program should be available soon. sliding doors between rooms When you start the game. The instructions on which the androids have to there are a few space invader screen and in the comprehen Graphics activate. There are 2,000 type monsters moving round sive instruction manual -list  Sound rooms spread over eight the screen, accompanied by a series of plays you ca  Value levels -each with a different the slowest piece of music use when on the offence or  Playability challenge you'll ever hear. when defending. You key 16 COLD "


"Don't fool with fireworks.. wheny SPECTRUM 4k 36.905 SQUAM OLDN ACK Ocean Software Ocean House 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Ocean Software is available from all good lift "


"you canplay with...   Roland's Rat roce 903 190 COMMODORE Roti GLODOS REVENGE QUASI MOD STRIKES BI ocean Telephone: 061.832 6633 Telex: 669977 Oceans G "


"GHOSTBUSTERS« THE COMPUTER GAME, BY DAVID CRANE Available from these Lightning Dealers:Berkshire William Smith, 35-39 London Street, Reading Nibbles Bits Bites, 99 High Street, Maidenhead Buckinghamshire Softly, 5/7 Deer Walk, Shopping Building Central, Milton Keynes Softshop Ltd, 55 St Peter's Court Chalfont St Peter Cheshire Pyramid Micro, 25 Cairo Street, Warrington Cleveland Multi Colour Micro Shop,8 Duhdas St, Redcar Cumbria Maryport Home Computer 65 Sewhouse St. Maryport Derbyshire Gordon Harwood, 69-71 High St.Alfreton Devon Computerbase, 21 Market Avenue, Plymouth Dorset Solent Micro, 25 Bargates, Christchurch Essex WA Baker, 113-117 Old Road, Clacton Estuary Software, 261 Victoria Ave, Southend on Sea Colchester Computers, 58 East Street, Colchester Greater Manchester Court Grand Comp, U44 Arndale Centre, Stretford, Manchester Micro North, 7 Broad Street, Bury Computer World, 208 Chorley Old Road, Bolton Albert Brown Ltd, 11 Silk Street Leigh Microtrix, 24 Gt Moor Street, Bolton Hampshire GB Microland, 7 Queens Parade, London Rd, Waterlooville Hertfordshire St Albans Electronic, 130 London Road, St Albans Humberside Tomorrow's World, 15 Paragon Street, Hull Kent Socodi Music, 9 The Friars, Canterbury Computer Plus, 65 High Street, Sittingbourne DGH Software, 10 North Street, Ashford Lancashire Grahams Micro, 24 Bridge Street, Darwen Leicestershire Dimension, 27-29 High St, Leicester London Hamleys, Regent Street, W1 Video Palace, 100 Oxford Street, W1 Firuji Hi-Fi video, 325 Kentish Town Road, NW5 Jordans Video, 159 Ballards Lane, Finchley, N3 Logic Sales, 19 The Broadway, N14 Micro X Ltd, 765-7 Harrow Road, NW10 Tomorrow's World Today, 27 Oxford Street, W1 KK Stationers, Simgold Ltd, 187 Edgeware Road, W2 Middlesex Lightning, 108 High Street, Ruislip Jennings Stores, 244 Hertford Road, Enfield JKL Computers, 7 Windsor Street, Uxbridge Norfolk Thetford CB Micros, 21 Guildhall St. Thetford Northumberland Alnwick Computerware, 9A Narrowgate, Alnwick Nottinghamshire Micro Vision, 32 Station Street, Kirby in Ashfield Long Eaton Software Centre, 91 College St. Long Eaton Oxfordshire Giles Sports Toys, 1 Auelscot Rd, Carterton Somerset The Forum Computer Shop, Silver St, Chard H&S Buckthom Ltd, Frome Computers, 21 Frome Field, Frome Suffolk Brainwave, 24 Crown Street, Ipswich Surrey Bentals, Wood Street, Kingston on Thames Landau Electronics, 215 High Street, Sutton Sussex Worthing Comp. 32 Liverpool Road, Worthing Micro Store, 13B West Street, Horsham Tyne & Wear Video & Home Comp. Centre, 3 Roxborgh House, Park Avenue, Whitley Bay West Midlands Home Entertainments, Commodore Centre, 212-3 Broad Street, Birmingham Owen & Owen, Mander Centre, Wolverhampton Yorkshire Flexiwords, 18 Otley Road, Leeds Harrogate Video, 18 Cheltenham Parade, Harrogate Just Micro, 22 Carver Street, Sheffield SCOTLAND: Fife Micro Pot, Unit 15, Knightsbridge, Kirkcaldy Lothian Patersons Stockbridge, 13 Deanbrook Lane, Edinburgh Strathclyde Softwarehouse, 12 Ettwick Square, Town Centre, Cubernauld Tayside Vics Independent Comp. 31-33 South St, Perth 1984 COLUMBIA PICTURES Yes. Ghostbusters is a computer game, too. The game play follows the film with incredible accuracy. Even down to the chart-topping music score. Your task is to rid the world and in particular New York City-of a cataclysmic plague of ectoplasmic nasties. Designed by USA's David \"Pitfall ll and Decathlon\" Crane and running on Commodore 64 cassette and disk and Spectrum. Coming soon on other systems. ACTIVISION Your computer was made for us. "


"AMSTRAD CPC 464 SOFTWARE SUTO MICROSWITCH JOYSTICKS THE ROYAL QUEST .95 Can you discover the object of your quest and then complete it? A classic text only adventure, with dozens of problems to keep you perplexed for weeks. Features include save game facility and very large vocabulary WITH ARCADE ACTION For: COMMODORE ATARI AMSTRAD MEMOTECH BBC (to order) THE ARCADE PRICE ine VAT .95 ROLLABALL .95 A challenging game of skill, relying on quick wits and steady nerves. Can you keep the ROLLABALL in motion? All you have to do is slide a piece of track in its path to divertit, trouble is the tracks always disappear when the ROLLABALL moves over them. A very addictive one player game. THE MOORS CHALLENGE .95 An ancient game of strategy and cunning. 'Capture' all your opponents counters to win. Play against your Amstrad CPC 464 at any of five skill levels, from simple to advanced or play against a friend, you can even make the computer play against itself. *** SPECIAL OFFER* * * For a limited period only * Timeslip Software will be giving away one free title with every two titles purchased, so hurry send cheque/P.O.'s payable to ... TIMESLIP SOFTWARE STONEYBURN WORKSHOPS THE OLD PRIMARY SCHOOL STONEYBURN, WEST LOTHIAN EH47 BAP * Offer ends 31st November 1984 COMPETITION-PRO ne VAT .95 ARCADE PROFESSIONAL PRICE CHRISTMAS SALE -50p off -any TWO Games SPECTRUM Our Price COMMODORE Our Price DEUS EX MACHINA (Automata) 13.00 DALEY THOMPSON DECATHLON 7.00 BEACHHEAD (US Gold) 7.00 DECATHLON Activision) 9.00 SHERLOCK IMelbourne House) 12.75 ZAXXON ( US Goldi 9.00 DALEY THOMPSON DECATHLON 500 QUO VADIS Edge) 9.00 RIVER RAID (Activision) 7.00 FALCON PATROL 2 (Virgin KOKOTONI WILF (Elite) 5.00 STUNT BIKE (Ocean 6.00 ENDURO Activision 7.00 PITFALL Activision) 9.00 DELTA WING (Creative Sparks) 600 KOKOTONI WILF Elitel FULL THROTTLE (Micromegal 5.00 TOY BIZARRE Activision HERO Activision 7.00 HERO Activision) TERRAHAWKS ICRLI 7.00 MONTY MOLE (Gremlin) TORNADO LOW LEVEL (Vortex) 525 ZENJI (Activision) ZEN Activision) RIVER RAID Activision) FOREST AT THE WORLD'S END Inter 5.00 STRIP POKER IU S Gold) 9.00 FRANK N STEIN (PSS) 5.00 INCREDIBLE HULK (Ad.Int.) LORDS OF MIDNIGHT (Beyond 9.00 INTERNATIONAL SOCCER (Commodore) 9.50 SABRE WULF (Ultimate) 9.00 TRASHMAN (Quicksilva) THE INCREDIBLE HULK (Ad.Intl 8.50 FOOTBALL MANAGER (Addictivel MATCH POINT (Psion! 6.00 WALLY GOES TO RHYMELAND (Inter 6.00 FREE POST PLEASE STATE WHICH MICRO FAST SERVICE SEND CHOU POTO SOFTWARE 249 High Street, Stratford, London E15 2LS ine VAT .95 G by QUALITY EUROMAX ELECTRONICS LTD. Pinfold Lane Industrial Estate, Bridlington, N. Humberside Tel: 0262-602541 Telex: 527381 EMAX G With Interfaces: SPECTRUM T199/4A COLECO BBC ELECTRON ACCESS ACCEPTED MAL ORDER ADD 1.95 PAP ATTENTION ATTENTION ATARI 400/600/800 OWNERS MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY Do you want to join a long established library? Are you looking for a fast efficient and friendly service? Would you like to select from nearly 750 programs, cassettes cartridges, discs and utilities and educational? Would you appreciate 40 new additions per month? Are you interested in interactive club schemes? Two games may be hired at any one time. We buy many of the popular games in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair choice. Now entering our third year of service to Atari owners. Hundreds of satisfied members, many even as far away as Iceland, Denmark, Eire and West Germany. Send large SAE for details. M.G.L. 48 Road Way, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham (0242-67) 4960 6pm-9pm All our games are originals with full documentation JOYSTICKS CONTACT US OR NEAREST COMPUTER STORE "


"DERMAN One morning at the Personal Computer World show, before the crowds arrived, Keith's trusty apprentices, Paul Coppins and Simon Marsh, wandered along to the Adventure International stand to see the new Scott Adams game, based on Spiderman, the Marvel comic hero. Here, Simon relates how the Chief Examiner put C&VG's Adventure team to the test... \"Please Scott, please, please, please! Just one small clue just one!\" | grovelled! \"Now come on, Simon, you know I never give out clues!\" said the man who put Adventure into adventure games. You have no doubt gathered by now that the PCW Show was attended not only by C&VG's Adventure Helpline team, but also a certain Mr S Adams, of Longwood, Florida, USA. This certain Mr Adams just happened to have with him a copy of Questprobe 2 Spiderman. As the game was still in its testing stage and as there were possibly a few bugs still lurking around, Scott asked Paul and myself if we would test it for him. Silly question! Throughout the time we played, Scott stood behind us and was busy scribbling notes about our efforts. On many occasions, he laughed aloud at our feeble attempts to crack the early parts of the game, but as time went on, seemed very pleased with our progress. But it was hard not to ask for help with the great man himself watching over us. \"Scott, if I put Doc Connors over there, will he wake up?\" I asked. \"Well, just play the game. After all, that's what it's there for!\" Scott replied, with a smile on his face that made me feel even mre desperate for the answer. While I was quizzing the Chief Examiner, Paul was getting down to the serious business of solving the game, and very well he was doing, too! Suddenly Scott's face lit up as Paul got the first gem apparently he had done it in less time than anyone else before, including Mike Woodroffe of Adventure International UK! Later, a certain chemical equation cropped up, and Scott seemed very happy when I was able to solve its meaning, for he now knew for certain that this part of the game was possible for people with no specialist knowledge of the subject. Adventurers everywhere will be pleased to know that the C&VG team, may just be responsible for making Scott's latest game just that bit harder! Meanwhile C&VG's own superhero, Keith Campbell had slipped into his alter-ego Adventureman costume to join Spiderman on a quest to beat Scott Adams at his own game... so Adventure International is moving on to the IBM. But I couldn't hog the IBM all day, so Scott winked and slipped a TRS-80 disc into my hand. I took it back to the Adventure Helpline stand and, using one of the Model 4's, quickly made a backup copy. When I returned the original, Scott warned: \"You only have the twoword output version there!\" As if I cared! I had the game, didn't I?! Walking around in a skyscraper office block may sound like a rather mundane scenario for an Adventure game, but for a spider, the perspective can be completely different! So later on, back home, it was up the hallway for me, and into other rooms. A voice screamed \"Ouch!\" and I found myself confronted by Sandman. Treading carefully, I wandered around and met up with Doc Connors in drag, and a host of other Marvel characters. Most concealed a gem, and, when spoken to, were rather challenging about my ability to divest them of it! All except Ringmaster, that is, for he reckoned himself to be a piece of cake to overcome. He, of course, turned out to be one of the more difficult problems! In the middle of all this was the central challenge one Bio-gem. It will come as no surprise to Hulk players to hear that it was in the company of a Matter Energy Egg. Yes you know what that means, don't you? BANG no gem! Spiderman is a very different game to its Questprobe predecessor, Hulk. It has a less surrealistic setting, which better conveys the atmosphere of the Marvel comic stories. Mind you, this particular skyscraper has some very peculiar features, and is not exactly straightforward to get around! In Spiderman, as I've already mentioned, you can type in whole sentences as commands. Thus feature has been lacking in Scott's MY SPIDER SENSES TINGLE! An IBM PC confronted me and wondering how I could persuade my Editor to buy me one, I started in on Questprobe 2. Yes, it was a Scott Adams game, all right I could tell that from the fact I was getting nowhere fast. But it had a very different feel to it. There I was attempting to overcome a very nasty looking creature indeed, and trying to use many words when my instinct said two. The creature in question was Hydroman, who was graphically depicted in some lurid detail, an aquarium containing a gem. Getting hold of the gem turned out to be a very solid problem. To my horror, the Chief Examiner offered me a choice of Atari or IBM PC versions. Well, I wanted to play this game quietly at home a home devoid of those computers! \"How about a TRS-80 version?\" I asked nervously, \"After all, that's what you develop the games on, don't you?\" I added, determined not to let Atari-owner Paul be the only one to get a copy! \"Yes, but this will probably be the last. We're switching to the IBM for development you really ought to get one, they're very good machines!\" Because Spiderman has a fullsentence interpreter, it will just not fit into the standard 16k TRS-80, and 54 "


"previous games, a fact seized upon by some critics besotted by a \"state-of-the-art\" mentality. Well, \"state of the art\" they now have! When I played Spiderman I was at a severe disadvantage. The Chief Examiner had lent us his only copy of the proofs of the Questprobe 2 comic to browse for a couple of hours, but getting it away from Paul was more difficult than coming to grips with Mysterio! According to Paul, solving Spiderman could be much easier if you had read the storyline in the comic that is supplied with the game. Now, imagine YOU are stuck in an air-conditioning system, and feeling suicidal about it. Sounds unlikely. but you know the feeling don't you? You know there is an answer, and you slowly go mad, trying to deduce it. You eventually take the last resort the C&VG Adventure Helpline. But was there to be an answer for me? Here I was with a game not yet fully tested, let alone on the market! This could be lobotomy time coming up, so I rang Paul. He'd done it, of course! His solution had meshed with the problem no more RPMS for HIS fan! The mesh was only hitting my fan metaphorically or at least it would be if I didn't turn in my review by the deadline! Paul's method didn't work on my computer. Had I an incomplete version? Had Scott purposely flown early from London, chuckling throatily into a strange mist visible from the side of the aircraft? I dug out the British Telecom tariff, an atlas, and a Tandy diary showing time-zones. I was about to play my trump card. It had been kept safely in my briefcase since February. On one side was the legend 'Scott Adams Inc.' and on Even the experts need help sometimes. Adventurers from three continents met up at the C&VG Helpline which was operating live at the Personal Computer Adventure Series), Paul Coppins (Help World Show in September. Left to right, line helper), Philip Mitchell (author of Keith Campbell (C&VG's Adventure The Hobbit, Sherlock, Mugsy and scribe, author of the Pen and the Dark Penetrator), and Simon Marsh, Keith's and the C&VG Book of Adventure), Scott other helpline helper. Adams (gourmet, wine snob, author of Scott was at the recent PCW Show to Spiderman and the Scott Adams launch the new Spiderman game. the other was scrawled two telephone numbers labelled 'home' and 'work'. \"Home,\" I thought, and at 10.30 pm I started dialling ... 0101 ... but you don't think I'm going to tell you the rest of the number, do you?! Alexis answered, and called Scott to the phone. It was about 5.30 on a Sunday evening, so my calculations had been correct. I mentioned my unresolved problem did I have an unfinished copy? Scott was right on the ball. \"The problem is on Paul's copy, not yours. His is not the correct answer it's far too easy!\" explained Scott. \"Your copy is the perfect one!\" Wonderful! I was just about to put the phone down, when I realised that the threat of a lobotomy had not receded! \"Just a small, teeny weeny little ...?\" I pleaded, grovelling. \"Well, what you need is what no spider should be without!\" Scott laughed, fiendishly. You know, I'm really quite partial to that sort of clue! Spiderman certainly has a surprise ending, for although I am not quite there yet, Scott had left his usual saved endgame on the diskette, and I had been up to my usual cheating! So will Spiderman be classified as an \"adventure nasty\"? That, you will have to discover for yourself! Personally, I found it to be a great game, with plenty of variety and puzzles. Although different from Hulk, it continues with the same theme. By the way, anyone want a Bio-gem? I'll let you have mine for a price!! Fancy yourself as Spiderman? 1. Which way is the moat monster Course you do! Well here's your facing? NAME: chance to win a copy of Questprobe 2. Where will you find a Mexican hat? No.2 for one of the following 3. Where must you look to see a ADDRESS.... computers: Spectrum 48k, Commoferret? dore 64 and BBC B. 4. What dish once reminded Scott of Scott Adams, Mike Woodroffe and evil smelling mud? Keith Campbell put their heads 5. Where does Pirate No.2 start off? together over dinner at a smart The first three questions are based ANSWERS Covent Garden restaurant, when the on Claymorgue Castle, the answers wine was flowing well. They came up to 4 and 5 will be found in the pages with the following questions to of the C&VG over the past 12 months! ensure that free copies of Spiderman Send your answers on the form (2) only fall into the right hands! To provided to Spiderman Competition, I qualify, you will need to have played Computer & Video Games. Priory (3) The Sorceror of Claymorgue Castle, Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, I in a graphics version on either the London ECIR 3AU. Normal C&VG (4)........................................ Commodore or Spectrum, AND be a competition rules apply and the first regular reader of C&VG. 30 correct solutions opened on 17th (5).... Scott, Mike and Keith want to know December will receive a free copy of the answers to the following Spiderman for the micro of their MICRO YOU OWN BBC O i questions: choice. SPECTRUM O CBM 64 55 "


"To date, Atari's most astonishing game is Pole Position ... If you are only going to buy one game, then this is the one you should get. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES. ... Pole Position gives a very strong sense of speed as you hurtle round the track. The super-realism of the three-dimensional effect adds a lot to the game.It is a PRACTICAL COMPUTING. great graphics demo. Brilliant! WHICH MICRO? AND SOFTWARE REVIEW, ... a terrific version of the arcade motor racing game...graphics are superb...sound, too is very good as brakes screech and engines rev-up. PERSONAL COMPUTER GAMES. Exciting, exhilarating, excellent, Pole Position takes the lead as the best Atari race game around. PERSONAL COMPUTER NEWS. "


"What can we say? SPEED:55 SCORE :7582 We're overwhelmed. Though we should just add that with Atarisoft, you can now play Pole Position on the Commodore 64, BBC and Spectrum computers, as well as on all Atari POLE POSITION systems. And you'll also find available other games such as Galaxian, from ATARISOFT Robotron Moon Patrolt and Ms Pacman. LOOK OUT FOR OTHER LEADING COMPUTER GAMES FROM ATARISOFT PRICES START FROM .99 *TRADEMARK OF NAMCO.TM ARE TRADEMARKS OF ATARI CORP TRADEMARK OF WILLIAMS "


"DEATHSTAR INTERCEPTOR NOW Earn is threatened by d Empire Deathstar, can you penetrate its delences and destroy it be pre il destroys you? 52K of pure machine code tole you 12 screens of 3D graphics, super smooth 3D animation, unbelievable sound effects, music, 4 skill levels and hiscore table this is the ultimate challenge! This game has to be player to be believed! You have not seen what the Commodore 64 is capable of until you have played Deathstar Intercepky Commodore Available now at .99! NOVA LOAD SUPERFAST LOADING SYSTEM Graphically Amazing! BERTHSTAR INTERESPOR DO YOU WRITE YOUR OWN PROGRAMMES? If you have a marketable programme send it to us for evaluation. Excellent Payment Terms and Marketing plans Send to Product Development Manager at the address below DEALER INQUIRIES (01) 5870873 EXPORT INQUIRIES WELCOME Ses Software Graphic Aming! SPECTRUM VERSION AVAILABLE SOON! P available at Boots, W. H. Smiths. elows. Curry's and all good CORE 1 ALL WEIN SCORE 1000000 14 HELDE 2 MS 1000000 CHE LOODS ALONE 3 NS LOGO HOW TO ORDER To purchase Deathstar interceptor, simplu in your name and address on a piece of paper, enclosing your cheque wade payableto: SYSTEM 3 SOFTWARETO poslo the addresse Please allow 7 to 14 days are very Overseas orders Please adde oper game ordered. Sustem 3 Softusere ECORE 1000000 112 SHIELOS 3 NS 1000000 South Bank House, Black Prince Road, London SEID Tel: (01) 5870873 "


"  COMPUTER ATARI XL GOCAL  THE NEW ATARI BOD UK COMPUTER ATARI 100 EVERYTHING YOU WANT FROM A HOME COMPUTER 1. ATARI 64K 800XL : The Atari 800XL has many facilities and includes such advanced specifications that you will be amazed by its performance. At the now retail price of only  for a full specification 64K computer with a proper full stroke keyboard, we believe that the 800XL cannot be beaten. Just look at the following specifications COLOUR CAPABILITIES: 16 colours and 18 intensities giving 256 different colours all of the 256 colours can be displayed at the same time OPERATING SYSTEM: 24K ROM including Atari Basic programming language and a self diagnostic test program KEYBOARD: Full stroke design with 2 keys including help key and 4 special function keys, international character set and 29 graphics keys SOUND 4 independent sound synthesisers each capable of producing music across a 3 octave range or a wide variety of special sound effects. Additional programming can achieve an octave range of up to nine octave) DISPLAY: 11 graphic modes and 5 text modes. Up to 320-192 resolution Maximum text display 24 lines by 4 columns SPECIAL ATARI INTEGRATED CIRCUITS: GTIA for graphics display Pokey for sound and controller ports Antic for screencontrol and (Input/Output) CPU: 6502C microprocessor -0.50 microsecond cycle and a clock speed of 1.79 MHE. EXTENDED GRAPHICS FUNCTIONS: High resolution graphics Mulb-coloured character set Software screen switching. Multiple redifined character sets Player missile (sprite graphics Fine screen scrolling. Changeable colour registers Smooth character movement, Simple colour animation facilities PROGRAMMING FEATURES: Built in Atari Basic programming language Supporting peek, poke and USR plus at least 8 other languages available. The help Key will provide additional information and menu screens with certain software. Full on-screen editing is available as well as syntax checking on antry INPUT/OUTPUT: External processor bus for expansion with memory and peripherals. Composite video monitor output. Peripheral port for direct connection to Atari standard peripherals. Software cartridge slot is included as well as 2 joystick controller ports SOFTWARE: Over 1.500 items of software are available including sof teaching programs with unique voice over the range of programs includes Education, Home Management & Programming aids. There is also APX Atari Program Exchange) and of course Atari's famous entertainment software now at only 59 96. In addition there is a host of support and help available from special Atari magazines like Antic and Analog and from over 75 Atan books/manuals 2. ATARI 800 48K COMPUTER : We have a limited number of the Mit model 800 computer with 48K. The price is  (as a games machine) or 299 with the Basic Programmer Kit (Basic cartridge & 2 manuals). Both come with a full 12 months guarantee. 3. ATARI 1010 PROGRAM RECORDER 34: For low cost storage and retrieval capability. Data transmission 600 baud. Storage capability TOOK bytes on a sixty minute cassette. Track configuration four track, two channels (digital and audio) Auto record/playback/pause control/unique soundthrough facility. Also included is built in accidental erasure prevention and automatic shutoff after each programas well as a 3 digit tape counter. 4. ATARI 1050 DUAL DENSITY DISK DRIVE : 5\" disks holding 127K randomly accessible bytes provide both expansion and flexibility for your 400/800 or XL system with new 'helpful DOS 3. All customers who purchase a Disk Drive from Silica Shop will be automatically given a FREE set of 100 programs on 3 Disks recorded on both sides 5. ATARI 1020 COLOUR PRINTER : Printer and Plotter with four colour graphic print capability, 40 column width printing at 10 characters per second. Can print 5, 10 and 20 characters per inch 64 character sizes Prints text in 4 directions Choice of line types. 6. ATARI 1027 LETTER QUALITY PRINTER 249: For word processing letters in professional type. Print speed of 20 chars per second 7. ATARI TOUCH TABLET 149: Enables you to draw and paint pictures on your T.V. screen with the touch of a stylus. 8. ATARI TRAK BALL CONTROLLER .95: Enables cursor movement in any direction and adds arcade realism to your games 9. ATARI SUPER CONTROLLER .95: The ultimate joystick with double fire button to give you a greater competitive edge in your games. 1050 127K DISK DRIVE 1020 4 COLOUR PRINTER SLIGA SHOP SILICA SHOP ARE THE No1 ATARI SPECIALIST Silica Shop are now firmly established as the No 1 Atari retail/mail order and wholesale specialist in the UK. We already offer our service to over 120.000 customers, 10.000 of whom have purchased Atari Home Computers. Because we specialise (and with a turnover of .5 million), we are able to keep prices low by bulk purchases. Ring one of our 45 staff and we will be glad to be of service to you. Complete the coupon below and we will send you our Atari pack with price list and colour catalogue EXTENDED TWO YEAR GUARANTEE: We are an Atan Service Centre able to service and repair Atari equipment and have added a 12 month guarantee to the year offered by Atari, giving you a full 2 year guarantee on your computer if you buy it from us SPECIALIST SUPPORT: Our technical staff are always available on the telephone to help and advise you. We endeavour to hold stocks of every Atari compatible item available in the UK, and we stock over 75 Atari books and manuals AFTER SALES SERVICE: Your name will automatically be added to our mailing list and you will receive price lists, newsletters and details of new releases and developments as well as special offers which are exclusive to Silica Atari Computer Owners LOW PRICES: Our prices are extremely competitive and we will normally match any lower price offered by our competitors FREE COMPUTER OWNERS CLUB: This is open to all Atari computer owners irrespective of where you purchased your equipment Membership is FREE and entitles you to receive bulletins giving details of new releases and developments Send now for your FREE information pack price list & colour catalogue PAYMENT: We accept cash, cheques, postal orders and all Credit Cards. We also offer credit facilities over 1, 2 or 3 years. please write for a written quotation NEXT DAY DELIVERY FREE: All goods despatched from Silica Shop are normally sent by first class post or parcel post FREE OF CHARGE As a special introductory offer for a limited period only we will be sending all Computers and Disk Drives by a next day delivery service at our expense So fill in the coupon below with a literature enquiry or order and begin to experience a specialist Atari service that is second to none. LETTER QUALITY PRINTER SILICA SHOP LTD, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Tel: 01-309 1111 ORDER NOW-OR SEND FOR A FREE COLOUR BROCHURE To: SILICA SHOP LTD, Dept CVG 1284, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Telephone: 01-309 1111 LITERATURE REQUEST: O Please send me your FREE colour brochures and 16 page price list on Atari Computers. I own a .... ..... Videogame I own a ..... Computer Mr/Mrs/Ms: ............... Initials: ........ Surname Address: ... Postcode: .... .. . ORDER REQUEST: Please send me: BOOXL 54K Computer ........ O 800 48K Computer 1010 Program Recorder ... 1050 127K Disk Drive (169  O 1020 4 Colour Printer Letter Quality Printer ..... Touch Tablet Cartridge .. Trak Ball Super Controller .. . E199 O O lenciose Cheque/P.O. payable to Silica Shop Limited for the following amount ..... CREDIT CARD Please debit my Access/Barclaycard/Visa/American Express/Diners Club Card Number ... SUPER CONTROLLER "


"SCOT THE SUPERHEROES QUESTPROBE HULK QUESTPROSE HULK Scott Adams, is the most acclaimed adventure games writer in the world with an impressive string of internationally best-selling software titles behind him. Now, in association with Marvel Comics he invites you to share the adventures of two of the world's best known super heroes. Adventure International Software challenge you to pit your mind against that of Scott Adams with THE HULK and SPIDERMAN. Both games are for most popular home computers and incorporate text with spectacular high resolution graphics, allowing you to immerse yourself in both a visually as well as mentally exciting adventure, Now's the time to walk into a shop, and walk out with an adventure. You can both play and read the adventure! "


"TADAMS NET DES SUPERHEROI Grauniad WAKELIN 34 nost orate F MAAdventure INTERNATIONAL and EXCLUSIVE U.K. DISTRIBUTORS OF SCOTT ADAMS PRODUCTS 85, New Summer Street, Birmingham, B19 3TE Telephone:021-359 0801 Marvel Comics Group 1984 A Division of Cadence Industries Corporation All Rights Reserved "


"Education's a scream down at Spooky Manor. Acornsoft have a range of education programs that encourage children to think logically and creatively. And at the same time, they make learning bags of fun. SPOOKY MANOR: An adventure game for up to four players. Where exploring the creepy old house and solving mysteries involves co-operation and planning. It is suitable for children aged seven and upwards but many adults will enjoy the challenge it provides. WORKSHOP: An easy to use and completely captivating program. Full of unusual machinery. By experiment children discover what each of the machines can do with simple geometric shapes. For ages three or over, Workshop encourages highly creative thinking and experimentation. ABC: A writing tool designed for young writers aged seven and upwards. It is easily operated and quickly understood and before they realise it children will be creating and reshaping their words and ideas. TALKBACK: Both entertaining and demanding. It allows children to create their own computer 'characters' capable of holding simple conversations on the screen and provides valuable lessons in both English and computer literacy. For ages ten and over. All four programs are available for the BBC Micro computer on either cassette (.95) or disc ($11.50). Talkback and Workshop are also available for the Electron on cassette ($9.20). For your local Acornsoft stockist or to order by credit card simply ring 0933 79300 during office hours. Alternatively you can order the programs by writing to Acornsoft, c/o Vector Marketing, London Road, Wellingborough, Northants. NN8 2RL, enclosing a cheque or postal order. Please allow 21 days for delivery. Spooky Manor Workshop ABC Talkback ACORNS-FT "


"MOCRO POWERMOCRODOWE RM3 electron B.B.C. MICRO SUPERFAST LOADING TIME commodore JET-POWER   MOOROPOWER MOCRO POWERMOC OOOO Imprisoned by the evil warlord Nogrob the Terrible, Jack the intergalactic hitchhiker must collect fuel pods from the other side of the garage to refill the waiting starships. With a fast diminishing oxygen supply, an erratic Turbopak, and a band of nasty Space Googjies to contend with, Jack certainly has problems! COMMODORE and ELECTRON CASSETTE PRICE 20.95 BBC cassette price .95 BBC and Commodore disk price .95 ero Fon . HTTTTT Al lol .. COMMODORE 64 VERSION PHONE NOW FOR OUR FREE COLOUR CATALOGUE 1.1.1.. AR . HE. MOCRO POWER EMOCROPOWERMOCROP OWEN MICRO POWER LTD., NORTHWOOD HOUSE NORTH STREET, LEEDS LS7 ZAA MAIL ORDER TEL 0532) 434006 SELECTIVE BRANCHES OF BOOTS, CO-OP IMENZIES WH SMITH, WOOLWORTHS AND ALL GOOD DEALERS AUTHORS! WE PAY 20% ROYALTIES! "


"bandits and slots. Lots of Return of the Jedi from Atari. At one moment you will be trophies and shields were You may recognise the guiding Chewbacca in his awarded. The best pintable events and also know what stolen Scout Walker amidst award went to a 1952 Gott happens next but this time rolling logs and catapaulted lieb Happy Days and a the destinies of the famous rocks now helped by the lovely Williams table, four, Luke Skywalker. Ewoks and the next Happy Days 1960, won the Princess Leia, Hans Solo and second you could be exhibitors' choice. TechnoChewbacca are in your switched into space to help logy struck back, however, hands. Will they destroy the Lando Calrissian and the when the visitors' choice Death Star once and for all? Millennium Falcon attack the was a 1980 Stern Seawitch. The ultimate aim of the Death Star. The highlight of the day game as in Star Wars is in scenes three and four, was the Pinball Wizard comto destroy the Death Star but you remain with Lando as September 15th saw the petition. Every member was Return of the Jedi has been you fly a hazardous path most important event of the a starter and, after some presented in an entirely towards the Death Star's year for the Pinball Owners furious flipping, this was different way. Star Wars reactor, shooting and killing Association, the Annual drastically reduced to a featured linear graphics of the deadly Tie Fighters en Convention. mere 12. This was the semis, mostly reds, blues and route. Around 100 members and lots of nail-biting took oranges and much was left Once you've blown up the converged on Harold place, until they were finally to the imagination in filling in reactor's core, you've got Wood, Essex, for what whittled down to only four. the scenery. precious few seconds to turn turned out to be a very Gottlieb's latest machine The graphics in Return of the Millennium Falcon round enjoyable day out. These The Games was pulled into the Jedi have been done in a and hot foot it out through people are not weirdos, the centre of the hall and the different way with beautithe same narrow tunnel to they do not wear bunches of final began. From then on it fully drawn replicas of the the outside before it blows. keys around their necks, was pure skill, but at the they haven't got a secret end of the day, the POA's handshake and their middle illustrious chairman Gary fingers don't stick out. They Flower had a resounding are in fact a cross section of victory. Modesty doesn't society, tied together by an prevent me from telling you obsession for pins, one arm that this reporter took third bandits, jukeboxes and place. other slot machines. ManyDue to this report, the of them own their own article on Back to Basics will machines, but this is not a appear next month. requirement of member. Keep Flipping! ship. The event had attracted much publicity. Members had been seen on BBC's Breakfast Time and Pebble Mill television programmes. Several members brought machines and the final line up consisted of 13 pins, a Flying through the Forest of jukebox and masses of Endor toward the Ewok village, I glanced to my right two storm troopers were drawing level with my hover It's full of pillars, so beware bike. characters I particularly and drive carefully! I sent my bike careering liked C3-PO and R2-D2. Unfortunately, I wasn't into the side of the first There's also a lot more quick enough but the storm trooper where he hit a talking from the characters in explosion is quite spectree with a satisfying thud. this game, overlaid with the tacular and leaves you in no Throttling back, the second Star Wars theme tune doubt that you and everyone trooper sped past straight helping to make it seem more else inside the Death Star are into my gunsights. BANG! He real. well and truly dead! exploded into a column of With four different action Atari state that \"dramatic flame. scenes over eight levels of stereo sound effects, original Traced ahead and, increasing difficulty, it's a music and actual character unaware of their presence, real challenge to get through voices (including the Ewoks) flew straight into an Ewok the game and one you'll have from the movie enhance the trap. My bike and parted to work at. pace and realism\". I tend to company to the sound of Scenes two and three of agree the Ewoks and cheers from those little furry the game feature a unique Darth Vadar seem almost bears. split screen where you take real the game's portrayed The sequel to Star Wars part in two events which are beautifully and faithfully has finally arrived in the happening at the same time. follows the film. THE JEDI AKE THEIR Chewbacca and the Scout Walkers/Lando in the Millennium Falcon "


"ACTION FOREVER... PART TWO madly. After a couple of seconds it will say NAMCO original programmed by DE STROY REACTORA EVEZOO. The hidden targets of Xevious. These appear as huge spires that rise out of the ground. Most of the time they appear in groups of up to eight. Unfortunately, most appear very late in the game, but two appear before the first mother-ship. The first appears in the second Millennium Falcon and the Tie-Fighters The Falcon at the Reactor's Core roadway section, just after a horizontal road. The second 46 = Allows following game 46 = Generates a random appears just before a short to start at green level coloured level with the diagonal row of bases. 50 = Player moves by wrong enemies for that level These targets are worth himself (eg, a dark blue level with 2000 points for revealing 51 = Player moves by fueball tankers!) them and 2000 for wiping himself 48= 255 extra men!!! them out. 60 = Objects drift down Apparently, Atari made a Also in Xevious are hidden Arcade Spy's sidekick, 66 = Objects drift right modification kit for Tempest Flags!! known only as The Boffin, 67 = Objects jump to stop these bugs, it is also the first two flags appear proudly presents part two of 69 = Objects drift up very uncommon, and is not by horizontal rivers, usually How to Play Forever the 70 = Objects drift up evident on any Tempests on the banks. The third flag is definitive guide to making All the tricks will work if that I have played. on a horizontal line which the most of your last 10p. you LOR. you use the one to play the passes through the river inlet when playing your favourite urite attract mode (05). If you XEVIOUS in the middle of the shield arcade machine. pause at any of the desired How to get the initials of the storm and just before the This issue the Bof looks at points, it will take place programmer. desert. The fourth is at the Tempest and Xevious. instantly. Also two additional To get these, at the start of base of the eagle in the ones work from this. They a game, fly right and bomb desert. TEMPEST are: This is the key to high scores on Tempest ... First, you must complete To Tinere takes you right back to the enemy aircraft Computer controlled game and said most games on the red level that gives you days when planes were stuck together are bombing the ship. A distressing clear instructions on how to play and it 188,000 bonus points. Then with string and sealing wax for in this way to lose the game just when you normally takes one game to see how get your score to one of the to play it properly. Two Tigers is a bit to one of the new game by Ball Midway, you think you're winning 100 two digit combinations listed control an ancient Tiger Moth battling the game is played over three confusing at first but it's really good below (by shooting spikes, for supremacy in the skies with scenes and the player's roles are when you get into it. There's a lot of worth one point per hit). another equally ancient bi plane! changed each time, alternating rivalry between players. We come After you have the combiYou can now engage in a mock between defender and attacker it's down to the arcade quite a lot but nation you require, kill yourbattle between two ageing bi planes a real advantage to win the initial dog we're not really addicts you know!\" self by walking into enemies The joysticks stimulate aeroplane with a friend of your choice and for fight. Three ships have to be sunk and wait for your desired only 30p! not just holed-to gain an extra man. joysticks, giving a nice realistic Touch effect to happen. They are: Set in the days of World War I and We spoke to Terry and Martin who to the game. An enjoyable way of 00 = Freezes screen for two players. Two Tigers is all work near the_Crystal Rooms in spending your 30p and one that id 01 = Gives access to about protecting a battleship from the London. They were very keen on the recommend bookkeeping totals enemy. 05 = Allows play during The game offers you a fighting chance of defending attract mode or attacking the ship. This is decided by a one-to-one 06 = 40 free credits dogfight which takes place between you and your 11 = 40 free credits opponent the loser being given the une viable task 12 = 40 free credits of making sure the ship doesn't go down with all 14=Credit sound without hands. actual credits Once the roles have been decided, the game starts 15 = Credit sound without with a vengeance. Weaving in and out of a barrage of actual credits fire and enemy planes, the two Tigers jockey for the 16 = 40 free credits prime attacking position. As soon as you've outwitted 17 = 40 free credits your opponent, you can then shoot his tailplane off at 18 = 40 free credits leisure! 41 = Last two digits of score Whilst you're happily flinging your plane about the switch skies, it can easily escape your notice that other 42=Score increases quickly TIGER, TIGER BURNING BRIGHT! 65 "


"statix PSION statix WE DARE YOU ESPOR Statix for the BBC Microcomputer, models A and B (32K) .95 including VAT from leading software stockists = 202 : : Y Cb = DC = ? "


"match point MON AVAILABLE ON THE COMMODORE 64 WE CHALLENGE YOU = 5 y PSION match point Match point for the Commodore 64 and Sinclair Spectrum (48K) c = CE PSION : .95 including VAT from leading software stockists 28= 2 y co = = = ? "


"A prophecy is about to be fulfilled. The Dead will rise again to eat the flesh of the living... poukake From the authors of ANT ATTACK, Sandy White and Angela. Softsolid 3D* from SPACEMAN *Patent pending 48KSpectrum  QUICKSILVA All titles available from Quicksilva Mail Order, P.O. Box 6, Wimborne, Dorset BA21 7PY. Telephone (0202) 891744. WARNING: These programs are sold according to QUICKSILVA Ltd's terms of trade and conditions of sale.copies of which are available on request WHSMITH OZ WOOLWORTH sohr Menzies and leading multiple retailers and specialist computer stores "


"GUICKSILVA PRESENT BATTLEZONE Then Snowman based on the book by RAYMOND BRIGGS Runs on the 48K Spectrum An enchanting Christmas game based on RAYMOND BRIGGS' best selling book and film. GATECRASHER SPECTRUM GAMES FROM QUICKSILVA 1 I The Official Atarianproved 48K Spectrum version of the popular ATARI arcade game. she has to get the removed 26.95 .95 UNS ON THBK COTE A Game of strategy that will test your mind to its limits. Strontium the use Killing A fantastic fight to the death within your own bloodstream! Blood&Guts A battle to the end with the deadliest killers in the Galaxy! available from QUICKSILA Quicksilva Mail Order, P.O. Box 6, Wimborne, Dorset BA21 7PY. Tel. (0202) 891744 48KSpectrum :95 each "


"A NEW TYPE OF ADVENTURE GAME Hampstead is an adventure game for would-be social climbers. Speed of reaction isn't so important. What matters is your ability to solve complex problems, which get harder the further you proceed in the game. Hampstead is a quest, but not for gold. The aim of it is to reach the pinnacle of social status, and acquiring wealth is only one part of the problem. If you wish to go up in the world you also have to gain the admiration an respect of your fellow men, and there's more to that than a fat bank balance. In Hampstead it helps to know something about artor rather, to give the impression you do. You must wes the right clothes, be seen in the right places, live in the right house with the right partner and use the corred mode of transport At the start of the game you are a nobody whose aim is to become a somebody. So lie, cheat, steal and defraud You know it makes sense. Orders to: Melbourne House Publishers 39 Milton Trading Estate Abingdon, Oxon 0X14 4TD Correspondence to: Church Yard Tring Hertfordshire HP23 5LU All Melbourne House cassette software is unconditionally guaranteed against malfunction Trade enquiries welcome. Questions People Ask About Hampstead: Q: Is there life after Hampstead? A: No, Only before and during. Q: Why do dustbins have no lids in Hampstead? A: In order that passers-by may see the week's completed Guardian crosswords stacked neatly within. Hampstead a new type of adventure game! Please send me your free catalogue. Please send me: COMMODORE 64 SOFTWARE Commodore 64 Hampstead Castle of Terror Commodore 64 Sherlock Commodore 64 The Hobbit Zim Sala Bim Commodore 64 Classic Adventure .... Commodore 64 Hungry Horace Commodore 64 Horace Goes Skiing Commodore 64 FORTH .......... A.C.O.S+ Commodore 64 Penetrator .95 .95 .95 E14.95 .95 .95 ..95 .95 E14.95 .95 ..95 HAMPSTEAD SPECTRUM SOFTWARE Spectrum Hampstead 48K Spectrum Sherlock 48K Spectrum Sports Hero 48K Spectrum Mugsy 48K ..... Spectrum Penetrator 48K Spectrum The Hobbit 48K H.U.R.G. 48K Spectrum Classic Adventure 48K.... Melbourne Draw 48K Abersoft FORTH 48K Sir Lancelot 16K & 48K .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 E14.95 .95 .95 .95 E14.95 .95 BBC SOFTWARE BBC The Hobbit, Model B E14.95 BBC/Electron Classic Adventure .95 All versions of The Hobbit' are identical with regard to the adventure program. Due to memory limitations. BBC cassette version does not include graphics Please add 80p for post & pack TOTAL enclose my cheque money order for Please debit my Access card No Expiry Date Signature Name Address : Postcode Access orders can be telephoned through on our 24-hour ansatone (0235) 83 5001, CVG 12a (GSH) Melbourne House "


"on and twear orrect Fraud. So you're hardly stumped for choice. You simply choose your colours and characters, then 'build up your picture. Just like any other artist. With 'Art Master' you again get a choice of 121 colour shades. But this time you can draw whatever shapes you like, creating your very own high resolution masterpiece from a blank screen. It is even possible to draw circles, and store and then recall a back-up picture which is more than you can do with other graphics programs. Everyone, from the six D.H.1984. PICTURE YOURSELF ON TV We're not the only people the best computer graphics year old right up to the 66 year who think 'Art Master' and you have ever seen. old, will enjoy 'Art Master' and 'Picture Builder' are two quite Anywhere. 'Picture Builder exceptional computer graphics The pictures are drawn Like all of our software, software programs. using either the keyboard or they have been specifically Tony and Rolf do, too. a joystick, and can be stored designed to get the best out Otherwise comm odore on either tape of Commodore hardware. they'd never COMPUTER SOFTWARE or on disk. That's why you can't have agreed to put their name With 'Picture Builder' you choose better. to them. are presented with a palette Commodore software: it With both 'Art Master' of 121 colour shades (more costs no more, even though and 'Picture Builder' you can than enough for any budding there's more to it. create full colour pictures on Michaelangelo). your own T.V. screen. And a collection of ROLF HARRIS TONY HART PICTURE ART MI AETEE And believe us when we character sets totalling BUILDER say those pictures will match over 250 shapes. PICTURE BUILDER ON CASSETTE. ART MASTER ON CASSETTE OR DISK. EACH .99. "


"COMMODORE 64 TERSE frequestThe first ever 7-part arcade adventure serial, each part is an adventure in its own right. An incredible unexpected event in the final screen leads to a mystery prize for the winner of the Firequest Challenge. (GSH) Commodore 64 .95 on Turbo Cassette; .95 on Disc Available from good computer stores everywhere. In case of dilliculty in obtaining any of our games please contact us on the numbers below. Authorised dealers can order directly from EMI Distribution, The Edge, 31 Maiden Lane, Covent Garden, London WC2 Tel: 01.240 1422/7877 Telex: 892379 "


"Or play safe and choose somewhere in between. At each level you're able to play either a friend or the computer. (But be warned, it plays a pretty mean game does the Commodore 64). You can also choose your team's colours, and those of the opposing team. Which is great. It means you can play for Chelsea one day, and QPR the next. Or Celtic, then Rangers. Imagine that. Or you can play in your own team's colours against Liverpool...and thrash them. With International Football you get all the atmosphere of THEIR | YOUR HANDS. O.K., so you like to think the ball into the net, the crowd you can play football like Pele. cheers madly. Well, now's your chance How often you score to prove it. depends on how good you are. With the best football It also depends on the level at game that's ever been seen which you choose to play. outside of Commodore Altogether Wembley COMPUTER SOFTWARE there are seven Not only is International levels. From good amateur to... Football startlingly life-like, but well, good professional. it gives you near perfect control You can choose the over the players. easiest level of play, so long as The ball's at their feet, and you don't expect a walk-over, their feet are in your hands. Or, if you fancy seeing You can kick the ball and what it's like to play in you can dribble it. You can pass a Cup Final, then you can it or even head it. always choose the most And every time you belt difficult level. a Cup Final spectacular in your own front room. The game is a real test of skill, dexterity and speed, and guaranteed to very quickly drive you football crazy. Like all of our software, International Football has been designed to make the very most of our hardware. Commodore software. It costs no more, even though there's more to it. INTERNATIONAL SOCCER INTERNATIONAL FOOTBALL CARTRIDGE E14.99 "


"Commodore classic now available for all ATARI machines | Attack of the Mutant Camels Lamasoft ATARI PRICE .50 AWESOME GAMES SOFTWARE PLUS THE USUAL AWESOME COMMODORE RANGE ZLAMASOFT SOFTWARE, 49 MOUNT PLEASANT, TADLEY, HANTS, ENGLAND. "


"BEYOND CHALLENGING SOFTWARE The Psi may be weaving their invisible tentacles around you even now. They have manipulated man for tens of thousands of years. Only now have we discovered it... Only now are we perceived as a threat.. Only now are we in danger ... Men And our only defence is ... RRRRRR 000000000 WARRIOR A character you can really control, reacting realistically to every twist of the joystick, as he jinks and leaps in and out of his 3D background. Quantity Please send me Psi Warrior (Commodore 64 .95) From the authors of Psytron (Commodore 64 .95) | Order Hotline 0858 34567. Total Enquiries 01-8372899. Price lendose a Postal Order/Cheque payable to Beyond, or charge my credit card Card Number Access/Visa (Delete as necessary) Name Address Post Code Please rush me details of Signed the Beyond Club! Beyond Competition House, Fardon Road, Market Harborough, Leicestershire LE19 9NR "


"YOU MARVELLED AT BEACH-HEAD... NOW ACCESS PRESENT THEIR LATEST MASTERPIECE: RAID OVER MOSCOW -00000= (commodore 64 The most breathtaking 3-D graphics yet seen on the Commodore 64! Gripping arcade action Multiple scrolling screens STATUS: READY SCORE: 00008 BEACH-HEAD The Soviets launch a nuclear strike against major cities in the United States and Canada. With our own nuclear arsenal JELOCITY X 90TK/H COORDINATES % 298 Y 00 KH dismantled, in ALTITUDE OF TO IMPACT: 05:39:6 accordance with the CORSAAR Salt IV Arms Agreement, the Soviets believe their treachery will lead to total world domination. Our only hope is our space station equipped with stealth bombers, which can fly undetected in Soviet airspace. As squadron leader, you must lead your commandos on a virtual suicide mission, knock out the Soviet launch sites, and then proceed into the city of Moscow. Armed with only the weapons you can carry, you must seek and destroy the Soviet defence centre to stop the attack! Top multiscreen action! THI SPECTRUM FORSK THE FIRST 64GAME TO REACH No.1 IN THE CHARTS Available on CASSETTE f . Available on CASSETTE # U.S. IGOLD America U.S. Gold is stocked by all leading computer stores including: BOOTS WH SMITH JOHN MENZIES WILDINGS WOOLWORTH em Al cansole Oftware Dealers! For information on how to become a U.S. Gold Stockist write to: Centre Soft, Unit 10. The Parkway Industrial Centre. Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. Telex: 337268, "


"**************** U.S.GOLD CHRISTMAS SOFTWARE AT LOW LOW PRICES. All American Software 5,50 7.80 4.85 & > p FROM WHITEHOUSE RETAIL ALL PRICES INCLUDE V.A.T. & P. & P. SPEC COM64 ATARI ELECT BBC KOSMIC KANGA-MICROMANIA AMERICAN FOOTBALL-ARGUS 7.80 GILLIGANS GOLD-OCEAN 5.45 TRASHMAN-NEW GENERATION 6.90 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT-BEYOND 7.15 ZAXXON-U.S. GOLD 8.25 12.35 MUGSYMELBOURNE HOUSE DALEY THOMPSON'S DECATHLONOCEAN BEACH HEAD-U.S. GOLD SABRE WULF-ULTIMATE JET SET WILLY-SOFTWARE PROJECTS TORNADO LOW LEVEL-VORTEX STRIP POKER-U.S. GOLD 8.25 PSYTRON-BEYOND 6.50 VALHALLA LEGEND 11.15 11.15 HIGH NOON-OCEAN 5.80 6.15 WAR OF THE WORLDS-C.R.L. 6.50 MICRO OLYMPICS-DATABASE 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 FULLTHROTTLE-MICROMEGA 6.20 SOLO FLIGHT-U.S. GOLD_ 8.25 11.80 11.80 JACK & THE BEANSTALK-THOR 5.10 Jz  U PR & L6000 The premier publishers of American Computer Software offer \"Fantastic Opportunities for Assembly Language Z-80 Programmers Translation coding from Commodore 64 to ZX Spectrum. First class work will be highly rewarded with guaranteed payments. Programming includes Arcade Games, Simulations Adventure, Strategy and War Games. Write or phone now to Software Development Department, U.S.G, 6 Central Street, Manchester M2. or phone 061 832-6633 But hurry! Limited contracts left for this year. Completed programs for Spectrum also considered. * ** * * * * * * * * * * * * 4.95 WHITEHOUSE RETAIL PO BOX 15, BRAMHALL, CHESHIRE SKZ IPT NAME ADDRESS GAMES CHEQUE/P.O. PAY WHITEHOUSE RETAIL  CATALOGUE ONLY SEND S.A.E. MACHINE JET SET WALLY? Well perhaps not, but the titles on offer from some games hire schemes do leave a lot to be desired. Joining the wrong library can mean parting with your cash only to find that the top games are not available. That can't happen with the Matrix Club. We give you the opportunity to see our selection lists and compare our terms before you decide to join. We believe you'll find that Matrix has the finest games selection, and offers the best deal in games hire. Post the coupon below with no obligation, and check out the Matrix deal! MATRIX Number One for games hire. L.E.T. Top Fifty always stocked. W W Simple system, no deposits, hidden costs or extras. Spectrum Commodore Z ww V .C.S. Spectrum Please send me details of the Matrix Club Commodore 64 Atari VCS (tick system). Excellent hire rates: Spectrum and Commodore 64 2 tapes for .50 a week. Atari VCS I Cartridge for .00 a week. NameAddressINNUDNII WII MATRIX SOFTWARE CLUB Post coupon to: Melrica Agencies 271 Stanstead Road Bishops Stortford Herts CM23 2BT "


"10 RESTORE : FOR PEO TO 187: R EAD a: POKE USR 20 DATA a + , 16 , 15, 16, 146, 84,561 NEXT F 30 DATA 24, 24 [N 53,3 INNON O  FEESID HOE 44   H OMON -0000-00 Poco DOMO |   *  Tu + DUO-SAN + 0 in INU) U 10 t ( UN -|| t uo 1] DI DUDU in TO = Ngun (1 SU 09 o po ngdom 1 OU 1 1 0 ON 10 out OU 0 + NA 0 OU. 0 DI   24 255, 231, a DATA 0.0.0.255,4 100.65, a, 12 254, . DATA 28, 124 152 125,25,24,3 80 LET isso GO SUB 9700 LET is = 1 RANDOMIZE : LET ret =@: LET b=: LET barrel = Th=: LET Id=-1 bx=21: LET by=31 ti=ies SCO: LET 3 x=21: LET_Y HI CX 1 =7: LET CX 2 = 13. Cy1 =30: LET C=44: LET b LET d=30: DIM RESTORE 190 (12) 160 FOR F=1 TO 6 179 READ 9 LET a(f) =4: LET al 000 DDPO-DHDDD 10 DOD 1 DO DDADDDDD 1:-hitudin  6 N u DAHUL 0 O DPD D D S UZ TO HEHEHEHEHEPPER TOHO :VOIDD UHTUQOOZ Drrrrrrrrrr DOXOTQ900001 0.00099 Onunooo000AD00 00 H 0 MUHOG uma HODMD DXID D 7 1201 EDDIDO DOPO P -Z* 1910 2020 FOR 1587 TO 47 STEP 1: PLO TO, F: DRAW 79,40: NEXT 2030 PLOT 0,67: DRAW PAPER 7; IN K ; INVERSE 1; BRIGHT 1; 30, 40: PLOT 81, 108: DRAW INK 7; BRIGHT 1; PAPER : 174,0 OVE 2040 FOR F=81 TO 255 STEP 20: PL OT BRIGHT 1; INK 7; PAPER R1; 1,108: NEXT F 2045 FOR FEO TO 1: PRINT AT ,0; PAPER 6; 1. NEXT F 2050' INK 2: PAPER 5: PLOT 0, 165: 161: DRAW 25 DRAW 255.0: PLOT PAPER 3 5,0: INK 2060 LET n=13: FOR F=31 TO 14 ST +(21-n: PRIN EP -1: FOR JEN TO NEXT ji L T AT PPER 5;\" \" ET n = +.5: NEXT F 5 PRINT PAPER 5 AT 21, 14; \" \" AT 20, 16;\"\";AT 19, 18; 2070 PRINT AT 20.30;\" FAT 21,2 STORE 2090: FOR F=1 TO 5: INK 2; w: PRINT AT 9, SIC: NEXT F O DATA 19, 31, 19, 28,18,27,19,2 PRINT INK 4 A FOR F=2 TO 3 10: \"AA\" AT 115 \"AAA\"; AT 12 \"; AT F, 27; \"AAA\": NEXT INT AT 5, 10; INK 4.; \"AA\", 3 \"AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA\" Rf=3 TO 4: PRINT INK 4 13; \"A\";AT 7,19 \"A\";AT 1.25 A\" NEXT F 2130 FOR =2 TO 10: PRINT AT P. INK 4; \"A\", NEXT F TO 10: ; 2140 LET n=9.5: FOR F = RINT AT nifi INK 4: \"\"; LET nas 5 NEXT F :: NEXT f DODERS: 50 PRINT AT 5,2; PAPER 5;\" AT 6.2: PRINT #0; TAB 13: PAPER 4; BRIGHT 1; FLASH 1; \"GANGST | ti || U C42= | HUU I WILL ADA EEEEEEEEEE + ON+ WOWO + 4DZ 00: CD OHHHHHI ZALEZWZ ZUZEU HI+I EHLEWEEEE OG : COLO 190 DATA 0:-40.-24,-32, -24,0,3 250 GO SUB 2000 :40: -40,80.0 260 PRINT AT X.; INK 7; \"B\" BE PER EEP 1,9 R : INR PAPER IGHT 1 IN | | : UCHUL u 0 uz H    M BRONT -u Z DUX H Z 00 T . '  mom mm -0.00 HATI OUG AE995 . O PER OVER EERDER TENT=0 2007 FOR F=1 TO 100: PRINT AT EN *10+11 INT (RND+32) | INK 4; \"A\": 2010 FOR 1=5 TO 10: PRINT AT F. 1 ; PAPER wo 80 WENN "


"GANGSTER U z 2999 BEE 003 Alles THE TO D D :1 0 do 410 T HU RUNS ON DA SPECTRUM IN 48K TURN Listen schmuck, da Boss is not too happy wiff the way you've been EP.003 X+Y: LET tisti 1 double dealing him recently. You made a big mistake when ya tried cevTHEN Gal to muscle in on his operation. You gotta learn that no one treads 350 7300 IF bomb=1 THEN LET btirbti on big Dino Raviolli's toes. bti = THEN GO SUB 6800 So da boys is organizing a little party for ya down at da railway 3010 GO SUB 4000 yard. We've picked up ya girl but unfortunately she didn't like da 3020 GO SUB 4500 3025 PRINT AT X, idea of a party so we has to tie her to the track to keep her still 7; (\"B\" AND NOT barrel) + (\"cit AN PAPER 8 IN Da Detroit Express is due fairly soon, so I'd get your ass down to barrel da railway track, unless of course, you want ya girl to look like one 3030 GO SUB 6000 of my Mamma's pizzas. 3040 IF barrel=1 THEN GO SUB 700 My boys have picked up a few fings from da local building site and is mixing your present, ready for when ya arrive. THEN GO SUB 6500 TUEN SX 1 =XOR INT CX2+.5) = 1 Don't no nofing clever like phoning da cops, cos even 3060 IF bomb=1 THEN PRINT AT 2.5 they is scared of Big Dino. ; INK 2: BRIGHT 1; \"MO\": AT 3,5; 'N BY RICHARD EVANS 3070 IF dam = 1 AND bomb = 1 THEN GO SUB 7500 3100 GO TO 3000 4000 REM Move Man 4010 PRINT AT X,Y; PAPER 8 (2 AND barrel INK 4020 LET X 1 =X : LET Y1 =y 4030 LET X=X + (INKEY $=\"6\") (INKEY $=\"7\" : LET y=y+ LINKEY $=\"3\")-LINE KEY $=\"5\") 4035 LET X=X + X <1 + (NOT bomb! x > 211: LET Y = + (y 4040 LET ty31 SATTR 4050 RETURN (x,y 4500 REM Check POS 4519 IF a=90 OR =6 OR = 24 OR a = =4 THEN LET barrel=: LET OR a XEINT (X +.5); RETURN 4520 IF a=42 AND barrel = ET barrel=1: LET bx =X-.5: LET by THEN L =y: RETURN 4525 IF = 42 AND barrel = 1 AND X >X1 THEN PRINT AT bxby; PAPER 5 INK 2; \"C\" BEEP.2 20 LET bx = X-.5: LET by =y: PRINT AT bx, by PAPER 5;\"\"RETURN 14530 IF =42 AND barrel = 1 THEN G O SUB 7000 RETURN 4550 IF a=28 THEN PRINT AT XY INK 4; \"A\": BEEP.1, -20 LET ti =INT (tilleview +1: LET LET X = 1 y ay 1: RETURN 4560 IF = 40 THEN LET ad=1: GOT o 9000 4570 IF à = 70 OR a=68 THEN LET ad 1=2 GO TO 9000 4580 IF a=71 THEN LET X=X-1: RET URN 4590 IF a=120 THEN LET X=X-1: RE TURN Marcin 2635 LETTO om Q ITIVA litet hun ble from delicadow in same m thanghestar and "


"HENBEER 1,50: LES STOBETURNHEN LERETURNARIN + C 4591 IF a=49 AND Y=3 AND bomb THEN LET dam = 1: PRINT AT 1,3; I NK 2: PAPER 6; \"L\"; LET X =X+1: RE a = 89 THEN PRINT AT 2.5 BRIGHT 1; \"MO\"; AT 3,5 \"Ne bomb=1 RETURN 3 IF a =50 THEN BEEP RETURN 1,50 : LE F a =94 AND dan = 1 THEN GOT a =94 AND dam =THEN PRIN 30; BRIGHT 1; INK 5 \"R\" 1: LET yay 1: RETURN a = 49 THEN LET X=X 1: BEEP RETURN REM Move Cars PRINT AT CX1,0917 PAPER 8; INK 8;\" \"; AT CX2. c42 5020 LET Cy1 =Cy1-1 LET CH2=Cy2 5030 IF CY1<8 THEN LET CX 1 =CX1+. 6040 IF Cy2 <11 THEN LET CX2=CX2IF cy1 = 0 THEN LET Cy1 =30: L ET CX 1 = 7 6070 IF SY 2 =30 THEN LET CY2 =: L CX2 = 13.5 6075 PRINT AT CX1, CY1; BRIGHT 1; R INK 4: DE INK 5; \"FG AT CX2, Cy2; 6080 RETURN 6500 LET à SATTR (X.): LET 4 =y-C y1: LET 41=y-CY2 6510 INK? THEN GO TO 5600 IF ABS 9X8 AND CX 1 = x 6520 IF ABS 91<3 AND INT (CX2+.5 EX THEN GO TO 6700 6530 IF AND >.9 AND CX 1 =X THEN GO TO 6600 6540 IF RND >.9 AND INT (CX2+.5) = X THEN GO TO 6700 6550 RETURN 6600 LET dis = 6610 FOR f = f: BEEP.1, +30: PLOT CY1+5 TO 1: INVERSE F OU 1-CX1) +8+4 DRAW diso INK 620 IF ATTR (x,y) <> : NEXT F : GO TO 9000 THEN LET a RETURN LET dis=1*8 FOR FE TO 1: OVER 1-f: BEE f*30: PLOT (INT 21-INT (CX2+.5))+8+4: DRAW d (Cy2+.5 ) +8 715 INK 5720 IF ATTR (x,y)<>à THEN LET a NEXT F =3: GO TO 9000 6730 RETURN 7509 IF RND +*%9: END +61 TO 1 7030 IF bx=21 THEN LET ad=5: GO TO 9000 7040 RETURN 7500 REM House Fire 7505 IF RND.4 THEN RETURN 7510 PRINT AT Xy; PAPER 8: INK 7; \"B\": LET PO SINT (RND +6) + 1 0 INK 3: OVER 1: FORF = TO 1 TCb: DRAW (PO),a (PO+6): INT AT X,: \"B\": IF SCREEN$ (X, 1\" AND FED THEN LET ad = 6: GO 7530 BEEP.005,60: NEXT : OVER INK : RETURN 7800 LET dd utd: PRINT AT id-1; INK 2 PAPER 6; a $; AT 1,0-1, \"LJK 01 IF d=29 AND ret = 1 THEN LET = 7: GO TO 9000 IF ret= 1 THEN RETURN IF d=2 THEN LET to=1: LET a IF d=3 AND dan = 0 THEN LET a GO TO 9000 O RETURN 9000 REM Deaded 9010 INVERSE : GO TO 9000+ad50 9050 GO SUB 9600 9060 PRINT \"Fine with me but I Wouldn't try to swim with\"; \"a b Ob under my shirt.\" AND bomb =) + (\"a girl in my hands.\" AND d a = 1) + (CHR$ 8+\"Out arm bands.\" A ND bomb=1 AND dam =) 9070 GO TO 9580 9100 GO SUB 9600 9110 PRINT \"Oh, dear the car did n't stop 9120 GO TO 9580 Fotz-FOFO 23 I OH HUDUDDDD fem, Ti Ti ) | I ono HOJ LH : : 9 FOHI .0 .. NN :00 0 . z | B INT AT 2,5; INK NP\"BEEP.01*7+: NEXT F: NEX \"MO\" AT 3,5;\" In: PRINT AT 2,5; INK 3,5;\" : LET bomb = 2 ; \" \";AT > 2 AND YKS AND X<5 THEN =4 GO TO 9000 ET id=SGN AND to=-1) + (\" ST\" AND to = (4-0: LET a $= (\" 830 GO SUB 7800 BEEP 03, 10 IF d=4 THEN GO TO 6860 TO 6830 Id=1: LET a $=\" ST\": 10: PRINT AT 2.5 PRINT AT 2.5 BEEP 10: NEXT INU 0 PRINT AT 1.4 1,4; LA BRIGHT RETURN 7000 REM Move barrels 7010 BEEP INT AT bx, by; PAPER 5;\"\"; LET b 02,40 BEEP 01.0: PR x=bx+.5: LET by=by 1 7015 LET X=bx: LET y Eby 7020 PRINT AT DX, by PAPER 5: IN K 2; \"CH INT AT O IL101 E X "


"GERRY ANDERSON & CHRISTOPHER BURRS ECOME A YOU BECOM AWK SPACE ACE PILOT CAN Y TERRAHAL 101 18 CRL The Dream MOUS For THE 48K SPECTRUM AT .95 Droduced by CBL Groun PLC CRI House a Kinos Yard Carpenters Road London 152HD "


"Seeing is See the pack-see the screen-see the game. See the difference the moment you pick up one of the games from Firebird's new Silver Range. The difference is that our packs show the high quality you'll see on the screen when you play, so you know exactly what you're buying. Here's a sneak look at three of the NEW games: 05317 059170130 von Bruna Le ab MR.FREEZE DUCK! Mr Freeze is faced with a real challenge. Armed with a flame thrower he has to determine a route through the fridge and de-ice each of its six compartments. This involves jumping over ice cubes and gaps between the shelves, and avoiding flying food, lasers and guardian robots. You'll need all your cunning, timing and skill to prevent Mr Freeze from being turned into ice. B-R-R-R!!! VIKING RAIDERS THRILL to the Vikings' exploits in this highly original war game. SAIL the Fjord in search of treasure and adventure. LEAD your armies in raids on enemy castles. CURSE at the uncontrollable antics of drunken Norsemen. MAY ODIN PROTECT YOU! For 1, 2, 3 or 4 players (any combination of human and/or computer controlled Viking armies). Farmer Tubby is out to bag a few ducks, and maybe a swan for his dinner. His trusty blunderbuss is small comfort against some of the zany hazards and surprises he encounters. Can you help him? This is the daftest, funniest duck-shoot of them all. A sense of humour is essential! Look out for these games in the FIREBIRD silver range at selected high street stores. SPECTRUM: THE WILD BUNCH. BOOTY. MR. FREEZE TERRA FORCE VIKING RAIDERS. MENACEEXODUS. RUN BABY RUN CRAZY CAVERNS, COMMODORE 64: BOOTY. MR.FREEZE EXODUS HEADACHE ZULU VIC 20: SNAKE BITE. MICKEY THE BRICKY. BBC MICRO B: BIRD STRIKE GOLD DIGGER. ACID DROPS DUCK! "


"believing The same high standard applies to all twenty games in the range and all are available at the remarkably low price of .50 FIREBIRD SOFTWARE The new range from British Telecom. You'd better believe it!!! FIREBIRD SOFTWARE, WELLINGTON HOUSE, UPPER ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON WC2H 9DL. TEL: 01-379 6755/5626 Firebird and the Firebird logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications plc. "


"THE AGE OF THE R.AT CONVENTIONAL JOYSTICKS ARE DEAD! Patent Pending The Cheetah Remote Action Transmitter is the most sophisticated computer controller available. It has these features: Infra Red transmission so there are no leads trailing across the living room. Just sit back in your chair up to 30 feet from your machine. Touch control-no moving parts, extremely fast, long life. No extra software required. Can be used with all Cheetah RAT/Kempston compatible software. Fits comfortably in your hand for long play periods. Comes complete with receiver/interface unit which simply plugs into the rear of your Spectrum. Compatible with all Sinclair/Cheetah peripherals via the rear edge connector. Simply incredible at .95 including VAT and p&p. Dealer enquiries welcome. Export orders at no extra cost. Send cheque/p.o now to: Cheetah Marketing Ltd. (Dept. cvG), 24 Ray Street, London EC1R 3DJ. phone 01-833 4909 Cheetah products are also available from branches of John Menzies For WHSMITH Rumbelows and all good computer shops. heetah Marketing "


"9150 GO SUB 9600 9160 PRINT \"BANG. The man in the car shot YOU\" 9170 GO TO 9580 9200 GO SUB 9600 9210 PRINT \"The explosion from t he house has stunned you.\" 9220 GO TO 9580 9250 GO SUB 9600: PRINT \"Themba rrels just so happen to fall do wn waterfalls when they are at the top.\" 9260 GO TO 9580 9300 GO SUB 9600: PRINT \"POP. Tha t man in the house just shot yo 9710 PRINT can also have its problems. Two ca Crossing the road rs go back t you if you get in range. Don't and forth fireing a worry too ble Shot.\" much their a terrib 9711 PRINT\" On the other side o f the road is a little drivewa y that you have to 90 UP. Turn eft towards the house.\" 9712 PRINT \"Go into the house a nd Plant the bomb that you had se cretly Ur shirt way Under rain and and there u se blom 9713 PRINT \"NOW that your hands are empty you can get your gir 9714 PRINT \" Try to get away qui ckly as the man in the house sta ts Shootingat you and the house could blow its top at any time ith that 5 GO SUB 9900 bomb in it.\" 716 PRINT \"GANGSTER ns (cont... 9717 PRINT Instructio S the man \"When the house blow rain and and tries to get to the there catches the i far right of the screen to the S tate boundry.\" 9718 PRINT thim there.\" YOU Ust try to be a 9719 PRINT \" When you are there go to the he Police telephone and ringt 9720 PRINT \" They will arrive an d apprehend the filan.\" 9721 PRINT.227 The End. 9723 PRINT \"GANGSTER GOSUB 9900 9724 PRINT Controls.. 9722 POD : 0 U Down:......5\"/2...,5.. Rian'.....7 :.UP.... ..6 STOP 9310 GO TO 9580 9350 GO SUB 9600: PRINT \"The tra in has crossed the state line an d they have got away.\": GO TO 95 9400 GO SUB 9600: PRINT \"All is lost your beautiful girlhas bee n squashed.\" GO TO 9580 9500 FOR = 1 TO 3 FOR F= 1 TO 2: FOR n = 1 TO 10: BEEP.003,40: BE EP.003, 44: NEXT : PAUSE 10: NE XT : PAUSE 20 ANS. 9520 FOR F=31 TO 0 +2 STEP 1 STEP 1 EP.3,20 PRINT INK 1; PAPER 6; A T 1, \"U\" BEEP.3, 15PRINT INK 21 PPER 6AT 1 \"L\" NEXT 9530 PRINT INK 1 PAPER 6; AT 1, f +1; \"U\" INK 1; FLASH 1: PAPER 6; AT 1,d+1; \"B\" 9540 FOR =1 TO 20: NEXT F: PAPE R : INK 7: BORDER : CLS 9550 PRINT \"Well done the Poli the man in hand-cuffs.\" 9560 RESTORE 9570: FOR F=1 TO READ a, b: BEEP 3/5, b: NEXT F 9570 DATA 0,1,2,1, 4, 2,5,2,7 12,1.9.2.1 9580 PRINT Another go? es 9590 IF INKEY =\"y\" OR INKEY $=\"Y\" THEN GO TO 90 9595 IF INKEY $ =\"\" OR INKEY $=\"N\" THEN PRINT \"OK. bud. See y'ro und town.\":P 9597 GO TO 959 9600 PRINT AT Xy; BRIGHT 1; FLA SH 1; INK 8; PAPER 8; \"B\" FOR 1 TO 2: FOR 1 =60 TO 20 STEP-1: BEEP.003, f: NEXT : NEXT n: PAR ER O: INK 7: BORDER : CLS : RET URN 9700 BRIGHT 0: INK : PAPER 7: B ORDER 2: CLS: IF is = 1 THEN GOT 09726 9701 PRINT \"GANGSTER: Instructio 9702 PRINT \" This is gangster a game where you take the role o f hero who is desperate to save h is girl from the 11 O'Clock expr ess. 9703 PRINT\" Your arch enemy has tied her to the railway track an d he has stranded you on a li ttle island.\" 9704 PRINT \"Your only hope ist o jump onto the barrels and floa t down the river to another and then onto the bank.\" 9705 PRINT\" But beware if YOU iss a barre you will be carried down the river and over the ater fall, 9706 PRINT \"After that you have to find your way through som e prickely bushes to the road.\" 9707 PRINT \"Don't bump into the bushes Or you will have to was te title Picking out the thor 9726 PRINT \"GANGSTER: Level...\" 727 PRINT evei TAB 9; \"Enter a TAB INPUT PAPER 2; INK 13 (1-9) LINE as 9729 IF LEN a $< > 1 OR as \"1\" OR a ; TAB 15 $\"9\" THEN GO TO 9728 9730 FOR n=1 TO 5: FOR PEO TO 4: IF a $=STR$ in uf] THEN LET leven . +1: LET bti =20+f+5: GO TO 9750 9740 NEXT F: NEXT 9745 STOP 9760 RETURN 9900 PRINT #1; TAB 8; FLASH 1; \"Pr ess any key: 9910 I INKEY $=\"\" THEN GO TO 991 9920 CLS : RETURN m 50 ns. 9708 GO SUB 9900 9709 PRINTGANGSTER: Instructio ns (cont... While Middle "


"OFTHER Terry and Arthur from Minder. OF THE Pretty soon you won't be able to tell the difference between watching your favourite TV series and playing computer games. Just about every software company in the country seems to be working on games based on TV programmes. One of the disturbing things about this rash of tellygames is that they all seem to be based on American TV shows. There's Dallas, Automan, The Fall Guy, M.A.S.H., Dukes of Hazard, and countless others. Now don't get me wrong, I'm just as big a Dallas bore as the next man and I've got no intention of putting down American TV just because they were nasty to Zola Budd. But what I do want to know is what's wrong with our own programmes. After all, everyone agrees we have the best TV in the world so why not give some of them the computer game treatment? British TV companies are only slowly waking up to the possibilities offered by turning some of their most popular programmes into computer games. I'm sure Hilda Ogden would look marvellous in pixels, Russell Grant could star (sorry!) in his own astrology game and just think what you could do with Crossroads. Suggestions on a postcard please to C&VG, Crossroads Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1. There's a \"The Champ\" tee-shirt for the best printable suggestion. Whilst pondering how happy you would be if you won a C&VG teeshirt, you might find it useful to know what the other games are going to be about. It's not just telly games that are being converted either. It's books and films, too. The battle for licences is on! Eugene Lacey has been checking them out. Elite Software have two TV games in the pipeline The Dukes of Hazard involves Luke and Beau in a run-in with the sheriff over some illicit moonshine needless to say there is plenty of racing around in the General Lee. The Fall Guy will be out before the abilities of his screen counterpart. Dukes of Hazard and is expected to Quicksilva has also opted for a include some exciting stunts, just like computer theme with their game the TV show which stars Six-Million based on Central TV's Magic Micro Dollar Man, Lee Majors. Mission. \"The game is in two parts Bug Byte are particularly bullish based on the opening sequence from about their new telly game the programme,\" chief Game Lord Automan. \"Unlike some of the other Mark Eyles told C&VG. games, ours is based on a computer Mark believes that more and more theme which will be of obvious games are going to be launched appeal to our customers,\" said a based on known characters and spokesman. Quicksilva will be announcing more The computerised man loves video of their own in the next month. games, and has a computerised car Dallas has now been on sale for as well. several weeks and gives you the Details of the game are still being chance to outsmart JR on your worked out but the computer game Commodore 64 or Atari. Automan will have many of the In order to beat JR in this Adventure game, you have to team up with Sue Ellen and go prospecting for oil in the jungles of South America. Soap operas are ideal for Adventure games as situations and characters can be accurately drawn with the combination of text and OF THE The Benny Hill Television Show. 86 "


"JD games.\" a game based on Minder, the \"If the right deal came along we Sweeney, and Benny Hill. would be interested.\" The question is who will buy a When I phoned Channel 4 to find computer game from Arthur Daley? out about the possibility of a Plenty of people, say DK's Roger Brookside game, I was told: \"If you Barnard \"We have the rights to all wanted to make some money, you Thames programmes and will be could suggest it to the programme's studying them closely to decide producer.\" which will work best as computer So telly games are what the So telly games are what the games.\" software bosses have decided you Thames has also licensed out their want and telly games are what you graphics for added realism. famous rodent Dangermouse — are going to get over the next few Soap operas are also ideal from the who is now starring with his arch months. manufacturer's point of view as the enemy — Silas Greenback — in an The thinking seems to be that there programmes are so well known and action packed episode featuring are too many games being launched. have such wide appeal. some particularly nasty killer Dangerit is difficult to make a game that will So what about that Coronation mouse clones. appear to the customer to be Street game? We spoke to Granada Dangermouse's rodent rival different and stand out from the Television who were quite adamant Roland the Rat Superstar is crowd. Answer base the game on that NO Coronation Street game determined not to be left out of the something which is already would be forthcoming. \"We have limelight and will appear in his own established in the customer's mind had dozens of requests from people computer game to be launched by like a popular TV programme. wanting to do games, and all sorts of Ocean later this year. Of course, telly games are not the other commercial spin-offs based on Roland's game will appear in time only licensed games to go on sale the Street but at the moment we have for Christmas and is described as an there are book games like the to say no the position may change arcade style Adventure game. It will Hobbit, Pen In the Dark and Erik the in two years time when we open the be the first of a series of games Viking and the Marvel comics games Street up to the public\". starring the famous rodent. based on the Hulk, and Spider-Man. But if Granada say no, there are Suitable TV programmes are being But licensed games are no plenty of yesses beginning to come snapped up fairly swiftly — though guarantee of success as a number of forward from several other British TV there are a surprising number of titles companies have already found out to stations. Biggest scoop of all may well still looking for homes. Anglia TV, their cost. When Atari bought the be DK'Tronics' deal with Thames who are famous for quiz shows like rights to E.T. and Raiders of the Lost Television to enable them to produce Sale of the Century and Gambit, say: Ark from Stephen Spielberg for an estimated $30 million, the games, E.T. in particular, fell way below expected sales levels. This failure has not discouraged Atari from producing film-games. They plan to launch Gremlins — another Spielberg movie about some not so cute creatures. Thorn EMI also drew a blank with their Computer War Game based on the successful film War Games. Not all the film games have flopped, though. Parker Brothers' Star Wars series for the Atari VCS and soon to be on the Spectrum is thought to have sold well, as has Mattel's Tron game. The trade in licences is now so brisk that a number of agencies have sprung up offering deals on certain characters. One such organisation is Yaffe Character Licensing, who handle a number of the famous newspaper comic strip characters like Hagar the Horrible and The Perishers. \"Our characters are seen by literally millions of people all over the world and would convert nicely to computer games\" said a spokesperson. So whether it is books, TV, or cartoon strips you are into, all three will be possible on your computer in A scene from War Games. the next few months. HE BOOK, HE TV SERIES.. "


"SPECTRUM OUR RRP PRICE 14.95 10.50 SOOD COMMODORE 64 15.00 10.75 9.95 6.65 9.95 6.95 7.95 5.95 9.95 6.95 14.95 10.95 6.90 5.25 7.95 5.99 14.95 10.50 4.959.99 5.50 9.95 6.99 7.95 5.99 4.99 5.95 4.50 5.95 5.95 4.60 5.95 7.95 5.99 6.95 5.25 6.95 5.99 6-95 5.50 OUR BRP PRICE 7.95 6.50 10.95 8.50 9.95 7.50 7.90 5.75 9.95 6.99 9.95 7.25 7.95 5.50 7.95 5.50 B.95 7.25 8.95 7.25 8.95 7.25 14.959.99 7.00 5.50 7.95 6.50 9.95 7.75 SPECIAL OFFER OUR PRICE SPECTRUM 48K..... SOFTWARE PACKAGE WORTH...... 56.00 KEMPSTON TYPE INTERFACE........ 14.95 QUICKSHOT II JOYSTICK 11.95 TOTAL VALUE 212 85 OUR PRICE .00 (This offer is not included in the 10% discount for orders over ) 6.95 BBC GAMES OUR RRP PRICE GAME SHERLOCK HOLMES.... KOKOTONIWILF DUES EX MACHINA UNDERWORLDE. KNIGHT LORE..... DARKSTAR.. SABRE WULF THE GREAT SPACE RACE DALEY THOMPSON DECATHLON BEACHEAD....... WHITE LIGHTNING HOBBIT MUGSY LORDS OF MIDNIGHT PSYTRON CODENAME MAT JET SET WILLY FRANKN. STEIN. TORNADO LOWLEVE TRASHMAN FIGHTER PILOT NIGHT GUNNER WORLD CUP CLASSIC ADVENTURE VALHALLA... FOOTBALL MANAGER HURG... MONTY MOLE.... FULLTHROTTLE.. MATCHPOINT.... DANGER MOUSE FOREST AT WORLDS END TILER AVALON HERO ZENJI. RIVERRAID ENDURO... HAMPSTEAD... PSYTRAXX... STAR BIKE GIANTS REVENGE EDDIE KIDD JUMP CHALLENGE COMBATLYNX... TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY TRAVEL WITH TRASHMAN PSYWARRIOR... DOOM DARKS REVENGE HAVOCE POLTERGEIST BACKPACKER GUIDE TO THE UNIVERSE QUASIMODOS REVENGEHUNCHBACK II) STRIP POKER..... SOLO FLIGHT F-15 STRIKE EAGLE GAME SUICIDE EXPRESS GHOSTBUSTERS....... ACTIVISION ALL OTHER TITLES JET SET WILLY. ZIM SALA BIM STRIP POKER... BLACK HAWK PSYTRON 64 ASTEC ANKH. MR ROBOT... HOBBIT TALES OF ARABIAN NIGHTS... DALEY THOMPSON DECATHLON BEACH HEAD DECATHLON PIT FALLI. MONTY MOLE. SOLO FLIGHT TRASHMAN 64.... VALHALLA DEATH STAR INTERCEPTOR .... PITFALL II. RIVER RAID HERO.. DALLAS QUEST(DISC ONLY) BRUCE LEE... NATO COMMANDER SPITFIRE ACE...... F15 STRIKE EAGLE.... EDDIE KIDD JUMP CHALLENGE COMBAT LYNX... STUNT BIKE MY CHESS 11... BATTLE FOR MIDWAY HAVOC.. ANCIPITAL QUASIMODOS REVENGE TORNADO LOW LEVEL JONY AND THE JIMPYS KOKO KONI WILF ZAXXON... BLUE MAX. FORT APOCALYPSE. SENTINEL ..... SUMMER GAMES 7.95 14.95 7.95 14.95 9.95 9.95 6.50 11.00 6.50 10.99 8.50 7.50 GAME OLD FATHER TIME.... CITY DEFENCE MUSIC SYNTHESISER TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY HULK AVIATOR BLAGGER JCB DIGGER HOBBIT.. VOODOO CASTLE CHARTBUSTER ELITE 7.50 5.95 9.50 7.50 9.50 7.50 7.95 6.50 14-95 11.00 7.95 6.95 9.95 8.50 14.959.99 9.95 8.50 9.95 7.50 14.96 10-50 5.25 14.959.99 6.95 5.50 6.95 5.75 7.95 5.99 6.95 4.99 5.50 3.99 5.50 3.99 5.50 7.95 5.50 7.95 5.50 7.95 5.50 7.95 5.50 9.95 6.95 7.95 5.50 6.95 4.99 6.95 4.99 15.95 11.99 9.95 14-95 9.95 7.50 1200 7.50 SCRABBLE MP CHALLENG 7.95 7.95 5.95 9.95 9.95 7.95 5.50 5.50 4.75 6.99 6.99 5.95 4.50 5.25 4.90 5.99 7.25 7.25 9.95 14.95 7.95 8.95 6.90 8.95 9.95 9.95 7.50 7.90 7.90 6.90 6.90 9.95 9.95 9.95 7.95 11.00 5.50 7.25 4.99 7.25 7.50 7.95 5.50 5.90 5.90 5.25 5.25 7.25 7.25 7.25 ELECTRON GAMES OUR GAME RRP PRICE MICRO OLYMPICS... 5.95 4.75 TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY............ 9.50 7.50 7.95 6.50 ALL ACORNSOFT 9-20 7.50 CHUCKIE EGG 7.90 6.50 BLAGGER ... 7.95 6.50 ALL PRICES INCLUDE P&P QUICKSHOT II ONLY .99 PLEASE NOTE IF YOUR ORDER EXCEEDS  YOU GET 10% FURTHER DISCOUNT SEND CHEQUES/P.O. TO GOODBYTE 94 LEATHER LANE, LONDON EC1 PLEASE STATE WHICH MICRO 7.50 6.90 7.95 9.95 9.95 14.95 10.50 We apologise for any delay in the release of software SOFTWARE PROJECTS LIMITED MILES BETTER SOFTWARE NEEDS YOU 221 CANNOCK ROAD, CHADSMOOR, CANNOCK, STAFFS, WS11 2DD. TEL: (05435) 3577 Would you like to see your games on the shelves next to programs like 'Manic Miner' and Jet Set Willy'? US GOLD If you have written software for any of the popular micros and can meet the quality of our other products, we pay the highest outright payment or royalties for your efforts. You choose. The address to send your programs to is: STRIP POKER 8.95 11.00 BEACH HEAD  8.95 11.00 RAID OVER MOSCOW 8.95 11.00 FORBIDDEN FOREST 11.00 AZTEC CHALLENGE  7.95 11.00 SLINKY 7.95 11.00 CAVERNS OF KHAFTA  7.95 11.00  8.95 11.00 O RILEYS MINE  8.95 11.00 BRUCE LEE  12.95 12.95 THE DALLAS QUEST 12.95 SNOKIE  8.95 11.00 FLAK  9.00 12.95 MYSTIC MANSION 8.00 11.00 SOLO FLIGHT  12.95 12.95 SPITFIRE ACE  8.95 11.00 F15 STRIKE EAGLE  12.95 12.95 NATO COMMANDER 8.95 11.00 FORT APOLCALYPSE 8.95 12.95 DRELBS 8.95 12.95 SENTINEL 8.95 8.95 BLUE MAX 8.95 TAPPER SPY HUNTER STELLAR 7 9.00 Available for the Atari (phone for size of K) Please phone for extensive software lists and software availability ALL SOFTWARE POST FREE All Software is subject to availability. Phone for Access/Visa sales Please add  for overseas orders. NNNN 9888 9.00 Christine SOFTWARE PROJECTS Bear Brand Complex, Allerton Road, Woolton, Liverpool L25 7SF. or Tel: 051-428 9393 88 "


"commodore IN VIDEOLAND NOW ON CASSETTE! PURE MAGIC! Join Alice in her journey through Videoland an enchanted place populated by strange creatures such as bread-andbutterflies and pipe smoking caterpillars, where little girls change size and flamingos turn into croquet mallets! Alice in Videoland is a revolutionary new conceptin entertainment for the Commodore 64, incorporating some of the finest graphics ever seen on any home computer, accompanied by a charming musical score. There are four different game scenes involved, and your performance in earlier ones will affect your ability to get through later ones and determine your eventual total score. Scene One Stunning title page graphics give way to the first game scene as Alice falls into the rabbit's warren. Score points for collecting the objects to be found there including keys to open doors, bottles to make her smaller, cakes to make her bigger! Scene Two Out in the garden the Cheshire cat looks on as Alice meets the pipe-smoking caterpillar. Help her to catch the bread-and-butterflies and the rocking-horse flies that change into the balls used in the croquet game in the last scene! Scene Three Alice is a pawn in the chess game where her opponents are the Jabberwocky and Tweedledum and Tweedledee. Help her across the board by protecting her with your White Knights! Scene Four The most bizarre croquet game everl Help Alice hit the balls through the playing-card-soldier hoops before the Queen of Hearts stomps on them! Alice in Videoland is available for the Commodore 64 on disk .95, and now on cassette .95. Alice in Videoland features graphics created with the Koala Pad. -Audiogenic P.O. BOX 88, READING, BERKS. SEND FOR FREE COLOUR CATALOGUEI "


"TURBO CHARGE YOUR SPECTRUM Outperforms any Spectrum interface 24 Hour despatch for credit cards and The unique Turbo interface from Ram gives you all these features -and more in one unit * Avariety of interfaces including Rom cartridge, two 9-way D plugs for standard joysticks, PLUS full expansion at rear. * Compatible with Kempston, Protek and Interface 2 protocols. * Works with latest Quickshot Il rapid-fire joysticks and trackballs. * Choice of Rom cartridge, tape cassette or Microdrive software. * Works with virtually all joystick-compatible software. * Instant program loading with cartridge software, * Built-in power safety device-unique to Ram Turbo * Full one year guarantee * Immediate availability-orders will be despatched within 24 hours upon receipt of postal orders or credit card details (cheques seven days). So don't wait around. It's available from Boots, Menzies, Greens, Spectrum Group home computer centres and all good computer shops everywhere. Or simply complete the coupon below and send it to us today. Ram Electronics (Fleet) Ltd, Dept.CVG, 106 Fleet Road, Fleet, Hampshire GU13 8PA. Or call our credit card hot line on 02514 25252 ! Please send me Spectrum Turbo Interface(s) at .95 postal orde +.00p+p overseas orders .00 p+p). Quickshot II Joystick(s) at .95 (only when purchased with Turbo normally .95 + p+p) I enclose cheque/postal order or charge my Access/Visa forê Expiry Date_ I AEIIIIIIIIII i Name Address Postcode Telephone To: Dept. CVG, Ram Electronic (Feet) Ltd. 106 Feet Road. Fleet, Hampshire GU13 8PA B Telepi TURBO Trade and export enquiries welcome. "


"solar SOFTWARE SO SOLAT SOFTWARE QUEST ACTUAL SCREEN SHOTS TAKEN FROM CBM 64, Young Jim he was a fearless lad he roamed the jungle free. He went in search of Jane one day but she'd gone out for tea. The natives were preparing her with water bubbling hot, If you don't rescue Jane in time she'll end up in the pot. .95 SOLATE NEYMO PRISES MONEY MACIE DELWARE ACTUAL SCREEN SHOTS TAKEN FROM CBM 64 Born in an egg on a mountain top Ask for MONKEY MAGIC at your local shop He knew all the magic tricks under the sun To play this game, guide monkey round and have some fun. .95 100% Machine Code, JIFFY fast load, Joystick and keyboard, Multi-screen, Hi-res scrolling Graphics, Available now at your local computer shop Mail order price includes vat and p&p. Trade enquiries to Brenda Shay .95 DO .95 5.95 MUNCH MAN 64 Other titles available .95 ALLEY CAT GALAXIONS 5.95 BIZZY BEEZzzz ROBIN TO THE RESCUE .95 BOGY MEN SOLAR SOFTWARE LTD. 77 WEST DRIVE, BURY LANCS BL9 5DW ENGLAND TEL 061 761 1770 ne "


"the only choice GA U STRADUS STAR STAR_ AVENGER CALAXIA AMSTRADE Holdfast Gems of Stradus Star Avengers Galaxia Music Composer Kuma Anilku ur404 Kuma Kuma ILME ELLLLL AVSTNAD UF4404 HIJ INAU GP1404 DATA BASE EASI VAT ASSEMBLER trts Logo Database ZEN Assembler EASIVAT Home Budget An outstanding selection from Kuma's rapidly expanding range of Entertainment and Application Software for the Amstrad CPC464 Micro-computer. Book: Kuma Computers Ltd., 12 Horseshoe Park, The Amstrad CPC 464 Explored Horseshoe Road, Pangbourne, Berks RG8 7JW. This superb book is designed to let every CPC464 user, at Please send full catalogue on Amstrad CPC464 whatever level, get the most from his computer. After an products. introductory section on the special Basic features, the book looks in depth at the excellent sound and graphic . facilities including: Animation Windows 000 Character sets Multitasking 3 Voice Times . ....... ....... Phone..... MC routines for Basic Use of Zen Use of O/S Sample programs Trade Enquiries Phone 07357-4335 Available from your nearest Amstrad CPC464 Stockist. Name ..... Address .. "


"NEW MICRO GUIDE PART 1 Thinking of buying a micro for Christmas? Or have you been promised one? So many new computers have been launched this year that we decided to ask Bug Hunter to delve into them and find the best one. What makes a good micro? Is it the machine itself or the software which comes with it? What do those strange technical words mean that you find in some brochures? In a break from presenting his normal wallchart, Bug Hunter presents the first half of an in-depth look at 1984's new micro launches. The wallchart will be back in February which is the same as a BBC in mode 7. The other similarity to the Beeb is the sound generator. There are three voices to choose from so you can play chords. There's also a fourth standard, although the Enterprise 128 voice for percussion and noise has twice that amount. effects. The actual machine with its A cassette interface is fitted, but a keyboard looks more like an ink stain disc interface will cost extra. than a micro. It's not round but it's not Joysticks are standard Atari types. square, either. At the front of this odd Other extras are a circuit card to shape is a small joystick, although produce an 80 column display. An there are two connectors on the back RS232 interface will also be made, as will disc and printer interfaces. There are two special chips which The first MSX micro to hit Britain is have been designed just for the the Spectravideo, but the rest are Enterprise. Instead of calling them by from Japan. The first batch will long, technical names they are include Sony, Canon, Hitachi, JVC, known as Nick and Dave! Nick takes Mitsubishi, Sanyo, Teleton and care of the video side which leaves Toshiba. Dave free to manage the sound. The Toshiba's entry in the MSX race is brochure says that the Enterprise is known as the HX-10. This has a full the first micro to have stereo sound, 64k of RAM and will sell for .95. which may have been true last year yte RAM OL s MSX The best thing about the micro industry is that every company is always trying to bring out what they believe is the best computer. Some will write clever versions of Basic, some include built-in printers or cassette recorders. Some offer superb resolution graphics and vast amounts of memory. The problem with all this is that if you change your micro you'll have to learn a new version of Basic. And all that software which you've bought over the years won't load into your new machine. The way round this is to design a standard for a computer and let all the manufacturers make their own micros which all conform to this The Sinclair QL personal computer standard. This is MSX. MSX stands for Microsoft Extended ENTERPRISE but, with the launch of the Amstrad, Basic which is the language used by There's been a lot of new micros isn't any more. at any launched since last Christmas, when The Enterprise will connect hardware or software written for an we gave you the definitive guide to straight to a normal TV or a colour MSX machine will run on any other. the best micros for gaming. monitor. Maximum text display is 50 So any cassettes or cartridges will be One of the most interesting facts is lines across 84 characters but this interchangeable. that the Elan, announced just before resolution will be unreadable on a Manufacturers will be free to add our last guide was printed, is still not normal television. their own special features if they yet widely available Graphics resolution goes up to 672 wish, to make people buy their back in the days when it was called X 512 pixels which really is high. machine as opposed to any other. But the Elan, the claims were impressive. Let's hope that software will be the minimum standard is this. But the model on show at the 1983 produced which can exploit these The CPU is a 280 with 322k of ROM PCW show was only a case and a characteristics. holding the MSX system and the keyboard the amazing graphics If you like writing your own special Basic language. Each displays were being done by a much programs, the Enterprise has a good machine must have a minimum of 8k larger computer connected to the TV Basic with lots of useful structured RAM though most in this country will which everyone thought was linked programming commands. have 32k. to the Elan. But if you'd rather use it for more There's a ROM cartridge for Renamed the Enterprise, the serious purposes, there's also a builtsoftware. Alternatively, you can get machine isn't as unique as when it in word processor. programs on cassette or disc. was first announced. You can choose from a set of 256 Graphics resolution is 256 x 192, The machine is based round a 280 colours and you can even have every which is the same as the Spectrum. chip the same as the Spectrum and colour on screen at the same time! Text is 40 characters and 24 lines the Amstrad. It has 64k memory as A computer without software is as 93 "


"useful as a piano without any sheet music. You either have to write your own or do without. There's very little software around for the Enterprise at present, but this may change as the software companies start to write for it. PPT The only software mentioned in the Enterprise's advertising at the moment is a Tarzan-like game called Jungle Jim and a shoot-up called Space Convoy TTTTTIIIIII The machine is very expandable. TTTTTTTTTT There's parallel, serial and network TTTTTTTT interfaces built in, which means that you can link up to disc drives, printers and modems as they are announced. The machine includes a MSX ROM cartridge connector. AMSTRAD If you buy a micro, then you'll usually need a spare TV and cassette recorder to use with it. It's not easy trying to interrupt the family's weekly Toshiba's MSX home computer dose of Juliet Bravo by pleading that you need the TV to play Electrotext, then you can have up to 16 The QL is the only home micro Freddy! colours on screen at once, but only which doesn't have a cassette interOne way of keeping the peace is to 20 characters per line. face fitted which means that you can't buy the Amstrad micro. For  you Graphics resolution ranges from store programs on cassette. Instead, get a green screen monitor and built200 x 160 in mode 0 to 200 x 640 in the machine makes full use of in cassette recorder as well as the mode two. In between, mode one Sinclair's new microdrives. The QL micro itself. gives 200 x 320. has two drives built in. For another , you can get the The Amstrad has the same sound The high resolution graphics discolour model which features the chip as the BBC micro and is capable play means that 32k is used just to same micro but with a colour of some good sound effects. There's store the contents of the screen, monitor. a volume control on the side of the leaving 96k available for programmIf you have just the green screen machine which is useful. A connector ing. A microdrive cartridge will store and want to take advantage of the on the back allows you to play the around 100k so, if you have a long colour display which the micro can sound, in stereo, through a hi fi program and lots of data, you'll only produce, a separate modulator is Disc drives and printers are now be able to fit one copy of it on a available for around  which lets available. A 3\" disc drive complete cartridge. you plug your Amstrad into a normal with CP/M software to control it will The QL uses yet another new colour TV. The reason why this part is add only  to the cost of the micro. Sinclair version of Basic, this time so expensive is that the power supply The DMP-1 is a dot matrix printer. named SuperBasic. for the computer comes from the Also available is the custom Amstrad There are lots of commands and monitor. So, if you're not going to use joystick. The machine only has one programming is quite easy even if the an Amstrad monitor you'll need a joystick connector. If you want to use machine doesn't run as fast as it power supply combined with the two, then the second one plugs into should. modulator which is what you get. the first. To manage this clever feat. You can program the OL in The Amstrad CPC464 is 280 based you'll need an official Amstrad machine code and there are a few and has 64k of RAM. It features a joystick with a built in connector. But books to show you how. But be good quality keyboard and the Basic for a single controller, like most warned that machine code in general has a choice of 27 colours. games use, any standard is not easy and 68008 machine code is There are three different screen Atari/Commodore stick will do. probably not the best place to start. modes. When you turn on the Software is already being There aren't many games around machine it's set to mode one which produced for the Amstrad and some yet for this machine, mainly because gives the same text display as the of it really is good. Sinclair kept redesigning the ROM Commodore machines — that's 25 Most large software houses are and the software houses dared not lines of 40 characters. Mode 0 gives rewriting versions of their top games release any software in case it just 20 characters on each line while for the micro and some new classics wouldn't work with newer QLS! mode two gives 80, as used for word will certainly be launched for the All that I've seen so far is a 3D chess processors. If you're using the TV Christmas market. program with some marvellous modulator, though, you probably graphics, and a couple of Adventures won't be able to read an 80 column THE SINCLAIR OL from Talent Computer Systems. I'm display very well. sure that much more will follow, From the choice of 27 colours, the When it's finished, the Sinclair QL though. number you can have on screen at a will be one of the best micros around. time depends on which screen mode Its heart is the new 68008 CPU and it's you're using. Having more characters the first machine to use it. on the screen means that more of the For  you get the micro itself micro's memory is used up and you which has a whopping 128k of RAM won't be able to have as many and 48k of ROM, most of which sticks computerspeak. colours. If you'd rather use that area out the back if you have an early of memory to hold colours instead of version of the machine. Turn the page to crack the code of 94 "


"ZOOMSOFT COMPUTER SOFTWARE SPECIALISTS ATARI 400/800/XL SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 8.95... 8.95 8.95 COMMODORE 64 Boulder Cash Bristles.... Asto Chase Flip Flop The Hulk Fort Apocalypse Artec Challenge Kong Strikes Back disk 10.95 .. 10.95 .. 10.95 10 95 9.95 14.95 12.95 8.95 9.95 8.95 8.95 12.95 1995 Zork 1 11.95 Juice 9.95 11.95 11.95 ... 11.95 11.95 37.95 41.95 .. 12.95 12.95 9.95 9.95 1395 -8.95 Zork II Zork III Stalcross Deadine Encounter Flight Simulator SAM Forbidden Forest Jetboot Jack... Nato Commander.... The Sorcerer of Claymorgue Castle.... Trolle Wallie ............ Daley Thompson's Decathlon Football Manager... Super Base 14 Juice Adventure Creater Ot's Well Beyond Castle Wolfenstein Castle Wolfenstein Master Type Master Type Spride Maker.... Stranded Letter Wizard Mask of the Sun... 795 7.95 16.95 56 95 ATARI disk SPECTRUM cass disk The Hulk 17.95 Lode Runner 9.95 25.95 Ant Attack... Arcade Machine Kong Strikes Back Sorcerer of Claymorque Castle 9.95 17.95 Sabre Wall Warlock... 1495 14.95 Beachhead.... Forbidden Forest.. 8.95........ Zaxxon SAM 41.95 Sorcerer of Claymorgue Castle 9.95 PM Animator ...25.95 The Hulk ..... Basic Debugger 27.95 Daley Thompsons Decathlon Shadow World 10.95 1495 Bugaboo (The Flea) 21.55. 21.55 Games Designer Jetboot Jack 9.95 Fred Diamonds..... 9.95 The Snowman... Dan Strikes Back 9.95...... Dragons Bane.. Star Bowl Football 23.00 23.00 Games 84.. Star League Baseball 23.00 23.00 Battlezone Seastalker 28.75 Gatecrasher Grid Runner 7.50 Poltergeist 5.95... Zombies.... 25.15.. .25.15 Olympics 84.. 14.95 Buck Rogers.... ROM... 28.75 Pointbox 8.25.... Graphics Magician.. 4475 Hunchback 690 Disk Collector... 18.95 Harrier Attack... 5.95 Mac 65 (OSA) 57.95 World Cup Football.. Action.. ROM Colossal Adventure..... Basic XL Snowball ............ Rails West 29.95 Lords of Time 9.95... Adventure Creator ROM 28 75 Frankenstein... 5.95 Raster Blaster 21.55 Micropainter 24.95 Software now available for Apple, Teletari, 28.95 Amstrad, BBC, MSX. Flight Simulator ..3795 Dancing Feats 21.95 Or's Well... 21.55 Castle Wolfenstein 21.95 Basic Commander 25.95 Data Perfect 7395 ...24.95 Encounter 9.95 14.95 Claim Jumper... 10.95 14.95 Original games and utility programs The Arcade Maker wanted for the Atari and Commodore Sorcerer 35.95 Protector. 10.95 ...... . 14.95 64 home computers. Top royalties paid. Caves of Rigel.. 9.95 We can distribute your software world Slime... 10.95..... 14.95 wide. For further information please The Protect write to both sides of disk) 13.95 write or telephone. Plus 100's more titles available. Send S.A.E. for free catalogue or telephone 01-723 0562 between 10am and 7pm. All cheques, P/O made payable to Zoomsoft. 86.25 2595 9.95 2995 ROM ROM 26.95 21.95 2795 32.75 1.999999999 9.95 7.95 ATARI AND COMMODORE PROGRAMMERS Dial 34.95 28.75 25.75 34.95 9.95 8.95 10.95 ...NA 795.......... 9.95 4495 Spel Wizard... BC's Ouest for Tyres Swag Soldier of Fortune. Zapa Mission Ant Attack Esporage .. Mr Robot 895 8.95............NA 8.95.... ... 11.95 ZOOMSOFT 46 HUNTSWORTH MEWS, LONDON NW1 6DB KERNOW SOFTWARE SERVICES LTD NOW NATIONWI BRITAIN'S LEADING SOFTWARE LIBRARY WITH THE NATIONWIDE SERVICE THROUGHOUT THE U.K. IS OFFERING YOU THE CHANCE OF LIFE MEMBERSHIP FOR ONLY . office. AS SEEN ON Library.  Low cost weekly hire of Arcade Games, Adventures, Utilities, Languages, Compilers & Business Programs.  Program hiring from only 80p (plus p&p).  Postage & packing costs include postage both ways, simply affix the pre-paid label provided on the package and pop it into your nearest post box — no need to visit your post office.  New titles constantly being added monthly  Purchase new programs at discount prices.    Return of post service using first class post. JOIN today by clipping the coupon below or send .50 for a copy of our hire lists (refundable upon joining TRON/VIC 20 owners are joining The Kernow Software — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Yes, please enrol me as a member of The Kernow Software Library and rush me by return of post, my TOWNA OSPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 hire list & selection sheet. I enclose my Life Membership Fee of .00. ELECTRON VIC 20 Please send me your Hire Lists. I enclose my .50 Send to: (inc p&p) which I understand will be refunded to me upon joining KERNOW SOFTWARE LIBRARY Name (DEPT CVG) Address.... SOMERSET PLACE, STOKE PLYMOUTH, DEVON PL3 4BB ...................... Post Code ....................... PERSONAL CALLERS WELCOME 95 "


"COMING NEXT MONTH, If you're looking for a micro, then you probably have a whole heap of brochures which you've picked up at various shows and computer stores. In among all those bold advertising claims and clever headlines, you'll usually find a panel of technical specifications. The brochure may say that it's only worth reading if you're an experienced user and you know all the right terms. Don't you believe them. Those few paragraphs will tell you more about the machine than the rest of the glossy brochure, so don't be put off by all those clever sounding words. This, in plain English, is what they Everything you wanted to know about Commodore's two new micros, the 16 and the Plus 4. All this and how to find your ideal micro. mean.. Sound Text Resolution Graphics Resolution Memory * JUGGLING WITH THE JARGON Sound effects during games can only be as good as the machine is capable of producing. Some micros have more than one voice which means that they can make more than one sound at the same time. This is just like the difference between a trumpet and a piano. The number of different notes which can be made is often measured in octaves. One octave is eight notes. Resolution means splitting something into its separate parts. Text resolution is how many letters of numbers you can get on one line on the screen. Some micros have different screen modes which means that you can have a choice of 20, 40, 64 or 80 characters per line. The higher the resolution, the more characters and the smaller they are which makes them harder to read unless you have a good monitor or an exceptional TV. But word processing programs will need at least 80 characters to give a realistic display. You hear a lot about hi-res at the moment. This is short for high resolution graphics and refers to the number of dots over which you can have individual control. On some micros the graphics resolution is 672 x 512 which means that there is a total of 344064 dots on the screen which go to make up the display. The higher the resolution, the better the graphics you can produce. But the machine needs somewhere to store all those dots so that it knows which are set to black and which are set to white. This will take up various amounts of the micro's memory. Your computer needs somewhere to store your program as you type it in. You've probably noticed that, if you turn off the computer, the program you were typing in will have disappeared when you turn the machine back on. This is because your program is held in RAM. This stands for Random Access Memory and it's where all the program and its variables are stored. Each time you add a new line to the program, you are changing the contents of the RAM so it needs to be able to cope with this constant changing. When you turn on a micro, you get a message on the screen and you are now ready to program in Basic. But surely that message can't be held in RAM otherwise it would be lost each time you turn off the machine? And how does the computer know how to run the Basic language for you to write your programs? There's obviously another type of memory which stays the same even if you turn off your computer. This is called ROM and stands for Read Only Memory. This means that you can read it (see what's inside) but you can't write to it (alter it). Its contents are fixed into a chip when the computer is built and they cannot be altered. Expanding your micro means adding disc drives, printers, modems, extra memory and the like. Some computers will have sockets which you can plug a disc drive or printer straight into. Some will need expensive interfaces to convert the computer so that it can cope with the new device. This is the language in which most home micros are programmed. You'll get a manual with your machine which explains a little about the features of that particular version of Basic. You can also program in machine code which, although harder to write, will produce programs with a more professional appearance. Expansion Basic "


"SK Spectra pram of the PROGRAM OF THE YEAR AWARD Gold-pieme hinated he c SCOPE COMPILES TRUE MACHINE CODE TO RUN TOTALLY INDEPENDENTLY! Unlock Your Imagination SCOPE * The GAMES DESIGNER: for COMMODORE 64 and 48K SPECTRUM CodeWriter Limited NW 5 .953 tape  OFM THIS REMARKABLE PRODUCT will revolutionise programming on the Commodore 64 and 48K Spectrum. By using the simple plain English commands you can now write and publish your own games to compete with the professionals. Powerful yet easy to use SCOPE will benefit beginner and competent programmer. You will handle all aspects of Graphics, Sprites, Colour, Sound, Music & Animation. All in original super-fast machine code. Demand Scope from your dealer today. Tell him it's available through Terry Blood, P.C.S., CentreSoft or Tiger. Or fill in the coupon and post it to: CodeWriter Ltd., CodeWriter House, PO Box 33, Basingstoke RG24 OUG *Music not available with Spectrum INCLUDES * Comprehensive Instruction Manual * Tape Demo Routines * Free Membership of CodeWriter Author's Club *Programmer's Hot-Line Phone. Available from selected branches of Boots, WH Smith and John Menzies. SCCVG Postcode Please allow 28 days for delivery (.95) BLOCK CAPITALS PLEASE CLIP THE COUPON NOW AND UNLOCK YOUR IMAGINATION Post to: CodeWriter Ltd, CodeWriter House, PO Box 33. Basingstoke RG24 OUG Tel: 0256 27844. Please rush me Scope for CBM 64 Disk CBM 64 Tape (E17.95) 48K Spectrum tape (E17.95) Overseas orders add El. I enclose a cheque/PO/IMO for E made payable to CodeWriter Ltd. Name Address "


"FEATURES 4 \"SOUND\" VOICES MAX 256 COLOURS ON SCREEN AT ONE TIME DIAGNOSTIC \"SELF TEST\" CASSETTE \"SOUND TRACK\" CAPABILITIES 64K RAM PROGRAMMABLE JOY STICK PORTS SPRITES CARTRIDGE SLOT MONITOR SOCKET BUILT-IN \"BASIC'' COMMUNICATIONS CAPABILITIES REAL KEYBOARD SINCLAIR SPECTRUM PLUS ACORN ELECTRON COMMODORE 64 ATARI 800XL "


"AT , LOOK HOW THE ATARI 800XL COCKS A SNOOK AT THE COMPETITION. AT LAST, SERIOUS HOME COMPUTERS ARE UP AGAINST SERIOUS COMPETITION. THE ATARI 800XL OFFERS EVERYTHING COMPETITORS IN OUR PRICE RANGE OFFER. AND, AS YOU CAN SEE ON THE LEFT, A GREAT DEAL MORE. PLUS SOFTWARE PRICES THAT START AT LESS THAN $10. KATARI 800XL FOR FURTHER DETAILS CONTACT YOUR NEAREST ATARI DEALER: ARGOS, BOOTS, CARREFOUR, CO-OP, CURRYS, DIXONS, GRANADA, LASKYS, LEWIS'S LITTLEWOODS, MAKRO, RUMBELOWS, SILICA SHOP. SPECTRUM, VALLANCES, WIGFALLS, WOOLWORTHS AND ALL OTHER COMPUTER SHOPS "


"THE LAST STARFIGHTER Greetings earthlings! I have travelled far across the universe to bring you the story of The Last Starfighter the only member of your race to join the elite squadron of space aces from the planet Rylos. We of the planet Rylos thought you should know of his triumph. That is why I have braved the dangers of space to bring you this report and videogram which tells the tale of The Last Starfighter FUIFLI Scenes from the movie, The Last Starfighter, showing Alex as a member of the elite Starfighter squadron and his co-pilot Grig. THE GRAPHICS Earthlings everywhere will be stunned by the incredible com puter generated graphics featured in The Last Starfighter. For the first time the magic of space has been recreated by computer graphics simulation and not with lots of Airfix models! Around 21 minutes of the film features graphics produced by Digital Productions of Los Angeles the people who also brought you the animated sequences in Walt Disney's Tron. The Last Starlighter called on Digital Productions to produce 230 individual scenes including the stunning Gun Star sequences and the amazing massed starships of the Ko-Dan armada. Another computer generated scene, Centauri's sky-car blasting away from earth featured on our front cover this month was also created by Digital's super computer using a process called Digital Scene Simulation. Americans have a way with words don't they! You can see more examples of the special effects on this page and watch this space for a feature on Digital Productions. 100 "


"Wouldn't you be nervous sitting next to that? Imagine. One minute you are scored on the machine. All the playing your favourite video game residents of the park gather round the next you find yourself kitted to watch him beat the machine and out in space gear flying off to do cheer him on. Just like C&VG's battle with a bunch of evil smelling arcade championships really! aliens! Alex cheers up a bit after this — Neat eh? It must be every vidiots only to hear Maggie say that she ultimate fantasy. To actually find doesn't think she'll be able to leave yourself in control of a hi-tech space the park with him if and when he fighter in the thick of an alien battle goes. Oh, well, that's life, I guess. fleet. The lone survivor fighting for Later that night Alex is prowling the future of the universe against around the park when a very enormous odds and still getting strange car pulls up at the entrance home in time for tea. to the park. The driver introduces That dream has been brought to himself as Centauri, the inventor of life in the latest science-fantasy the Starfighter machine and he's movie to hit the silver screen. It's looking for the person who broke called The Last Starfighter. the record on his machine. Surprise, As well as being great entertain surprise! ment Starfighter features some of Disobeying all those warnings the most stunning \"state of the art\" about getting into futuristic looking computer animation sequences yet cars with strange men, Alex climbs seen on film. But more of that later first on with the plot. Alex Rogan, the hero of the film. Alex Rogan is a young American with big ideas. He wants to escape his home and family, who live in a small trailer-park somewhere in the middle-of-nowhere, USA, and DO something with his life! At the start of the film escape is the main thing on Alex's mind that and his attractive girlfriend Maggie. Things get tough for Alex when first his mother demands that he stay and help her around the trailer park instead of going off on a picnic with Maggie and a bunch of friends. Alex suffers another disappointment when the local bank says he can't have the loan which would have taken him away to college. So, after he's finished his chores, Alex seeks a bit of enjoyment by playing the park's Starfighter video machine. And, as in all good fairytales, he breaks all previous records into the car and soon finds himself zapping along the highway at 300 mph! Alex is more than a little concerned when the car suddenly transforms itself into a flying machine and blasts off through the atmosphere — leaving the trailer park and Earth far behind. Well, he wanted to escape didn't he? Soon Alex finds himself on the planet Rylos, where he finds out that his talent on the arcade machine has qualified him for a place among the elite Starfighter squadron who at that very moment are about to set off on a do or die mission against the evil Zandozans who have a huge battle fleet poised to strike at Rylos. Now this is where Alex starts to have second thoughts. And somewhat ungratefully decides he wants to go home. Centauri isn't pleased. But as Earth isn't yet part of the Star League, the video-inventor is persuaded to take Alex back. Meanwhile ... back at the trailer park. Centauri has arranged for a nice Beta unit — better known to earthlings as an android to replace Alex. He looks the same but isn't quite sure how to behave as an earth-being, and has a lot of trouble with Maggie when she starts becoming affectionate one night under the stars. Stupid robot! Meanwhile ... back on Rylos. The evil Zandozans, led by Xur, a refugee from the Dr Who special effects department, have mounted an attack on the Starfighter base wiping out all the top space aces in one blow! Alex is the only one left. And the Zandozans want his blood. An evil smelling \"hit-beast\" is sent to earth to get Alex who has just returned to find that he has been replaced by a Beta unit. The \"hit-beast\" attacks and Centauri is wounded. All this persuades earthAlex that he should get back up there and blast a few of these horrible creatures, leaving androidAlex to look after Maggie. Centauri just makes it back to Rylos before moving on to another dimension, and Alex is left in the care of a lizard-like alien called Grig. Together they take one of the last Gun Stars, a sophisticated spacefighter, and set off to stop the Zandozan invasion. \"I've always wanted to fight a battle against incredible odds,\" says Grig enthusiastically as they streak toward the Ko-Dan armada. He gets his wish and we get a great movie! The Last Starfighter is an entertaining and highly amusing film, packed with great special effects. It opens in London on December 12th and goes on general release around the country shortly afterwards. Don't miss it! 101 "


NA


"Herbie Briggs has just destroyed the myth that all floppy discs are created equal. floppy stiffer. Stronger. And your data safer. To resist bulging, warping, puckering, or opening up. MEMOREX SOLID-SEAM BONDING: Every inch of every seam is sealed shut. Tight as a drum. They seem equal. Until you look at the seams. That's where equality ends. Most companies seal their discs with a spot here, a spot there. Leaving most of each seam not sealed at all. Sooner or later, the seams might do what comes naturally: they bulge. Warp. Pucker. Open up. Pens, pencils, fingernails-even a fouryear-old's, like Herbie-can catch and snag in those wide open spaces. That's sloppy. And dangerous. Because if you put a sloppy floppy into your disc drive, it can jam your drive. Ruin your drive head. Lose your data. So much for their seams. Ours are different THE SLOPPY FLOPPY: Sealed with a spot here, a spot there. Leaving unsealed scams everywhere. To resist all the things that can jam your drive, ruin your drive head, or lose your data. Which proves that a Memorex floppy disc isn't equal to all the others. It's better. Solid-Seam Bonding is just one example of the extra care that goes into every Memorex floppy disc. Be it 8 524\" or the new 31/2\" Extra care that lets us guarantee every Memorex disc to be 100% error-free. The next time you're buying a floppy disc-or a few hundred of them-just remember this: It's always better to be safe than sloppy. For more information on the full line of Memorex quality computer media products, including computer MEMOREX tape, call Memorex U.K. Ltd., 96-104 Church Street, Staines, Middlesex. Tel: 0784 51488 Memorex uses a process we developed, called Solid-Seam Bonding. Solid-Seam Bonding seals shut every inch of every seam of every Memorex floppy disc. Tight as a drum. That makes the Memorex MEMOREX Your Data. When it matters, make it Memorex\" MEMOREX Memorex is a registered trademark of Memorex Corporation * 1984 Memorex Corporation A Burroughs Company "


"MATTEL ELECTRONICS Intellivision Intelligent Television SPECIAL OFFER .95 STILL THE BEST VIDEO GAME Mail Order: Cheque with order (INCLUSIVE) Personal Callers Welcome Weekdays 9.30 to 4.00 HiTech ELECTRONICS SERVICES LTD Mattel House, North End Road, Wembley Park, Middlesex HA9 OAB. Tel: 01-900 0311. PENTATHLON Ext. Basic TI-99/4A Ext. Basic Race the intrigue athlete in the running events Full of special features: Choose your own Colours, one or two players. Very animated and incredibly challenging. Trade enquiries welcome 1500 metres 100 metres High Jump Long Jump Discus Only $.95 Post Free by return Tel: 058064726 Now For full details of our comprehensive range SAF Op for 12 page catalogue with screen pictures INTRIGUE SOFTWARE Cranbrook Rd, Tenterden, Kent TN 30 6UJ MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS SPECTRUM SPECTRUM COMMODORE UNDERWURDE 8.50 FIGHTER PILOT 6.40 AMERICAN FOOTBALL.... 8.50 KNIGHT LORE 8.50 RAPSCALLION 5.85 SUMMER GAMES 12.95 DOOMDARK'S REVENGE 8.50 AUTOMANIA 5.75 HEEBIE JEEBIES PSI WARRIOR 8.50 TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY 6.85 DARK STAA COMBAT LYNX 7.85 PSYRAXX. 8.50 JINN GENIE AMERICAN FOOTBALL 850 KOSMIC KANGA 4.95 STRONTIUM DOG TRAVEL TRASHMAN........495 FOOTBALL MANAGER 5.85 SEE SAW BACKPACKER'S GUIDE 675 VALHALLA 11.00 TRAFFIC 6.RS EUREKA 1295 WAR OF THE WORLDS 6.75 GHOSTBUSTERS THE GREAT SPACE RACE 12.95 MUGSY 595 JINN GENIE KUNG FU 55 MICRO OLYMPICS 4.75 NATO COMMANDER ZOMBIE ZOMBIE 595 CAVELON 495 MONTY MOLE JASPER 585 TRASHMAN 495 SUICIDE EXPRESS LODE RUNNER 8.50 FOREST AT WORLDS END 450 HUNCHBACK SUB HUNTER 585 ENDURO 685 SHERLOCK HOLMES PYJAMARAVA 585 RIVER RAID 685 FIGHTER PILOT ASTRONUT 6.85 DANGEROUSE EDDIE KIDD JUMP 5.85 KOKOTONI WILF 496 LAZY JONES BATTLE CARS 585 TERRAHAWKS 595 BOULDERDASH TURVOIL 585 DELTA WING 595 RIVER RAID BATTLE ZONE 585 BLACK HAWK 595 ANCIPITAL DECATHLON (DALEYSI 530 DEUS EX MACHINA 12.95 STRIP POKER DANGERMOUSE 5.95 WHITE LIGHTNING 1250 HIGH NOON TIR NA NOG 850 DEV PAC 3 10.50 DECATHLON (DALEYS FULL GUY 5.95 TASWORD II 11.75 HERO SHERLOCK HOLMES 1295 HAMPSTED 8.50 TRASHMAN LEGEND OF AVALON ... 6.85 CODE NAME MAT 4.75 TORNADO LOW LEVEL BRAXX BLUFF 5.95 ROCKET ROGER KENTILLA COMMODORE B.C'S QUEST STUNT BIKE 495 HALL OF THINGS 745 QUA VADIS STAR BIKE 5.95 SPY VS SPY 8.50 HAVOC STEVE DAVIS SNOOKER.... 6.85 JET SET WILLY 696 PIT FALLIL... STRANGE LOOP 495 ZAXXON 8.75 JOHNNY AND THE IMPYS 5.75 DARK STAR 650 SPITFIRE ACE 875 STUNT BIKE FULL THROTTLE 5.95 FORT APOCALYPSE 8.50 AZTEC BEYOND JET SET WILLY 485 RAID OVER MOSCOW 8.50 PSYTRON SABRE WULF 8 25 F-15 STRIKE EAGLE... 12.95 STEVE DAVIS SNOOKER BEACH HEAD, ....6.96 BRUCE LEE..... 8.50 CLIFF HANGER.........685 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT 850 TROLLIE WALLIE 595 FOOTBALL MANAGER.... TORNADO LOW LEVEL......475 STORM WARRIOR 685 BLACK HAWK 6.95 MONTY MOLE 595 COMBAT LYNX 785 FIREQUEST WORLD CUP 595 RETURN TO EDEN 350 BEACH HEAD 8.50 PSYTRON 6.50 EUREKA 12.95 KOKOTONI WILF FRANK N. STEIN 4 95 FLAK 8.50 CURRAH SPEECH 239888888888888888888 IF YOU WANT TO ADVERTISE IN COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES RING 01-251 6222 FAST SERVICE PLEASE STATE WHICH MICRO P&P INCLUDED SEND CHEQUE P.. to MEGASAVE Dept. CVG, 76 Westbourne Terrace, London W2 104 "


"The Unsurpassable Experience. The Official 5asolt SEGA AVAILABLE SOON FOR 48k SPECTRUM .95 320 Now you can play one of the most challenging arcade games on your Commodore 64 home computer. ZAXXON's incredible 3.D graphics, diagonally scrolling screen and supersound are reproduced in great detail. Everything you love about the arcade game is here and much more. ZAXXON is now more difficult than ever before! So hang onto your joystick and keep firing. Then practice. You may eventually encounter the deadly ZAXXON himself. GOLD) (« commodore 64 swisoft THE ULTIMATE IN AMERICAN SOFTWARE FOR YOU ON U.S. GOLD U.S. Gold is stocked by all leading computer stores including: Bon John Menzies WHSMITH WILDINGS WOOLWORTH CASSETTE Ceritrech lid, Unit 10. The Parkway Industrial Centre, Menenge Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-3593020. Telex: 337268 .95 .95 DISK "


"DAILY & VIDEO COMPUTER GAMES LOTHLORIEN a DEATHSTAR INTERCEPTOR SPECIAL OPERATIONS SOFTWARE JOVENTUREMASTER System Software Graphical Amazing! RE (Also Available on) Syrisat QUESTFREE THE HULK LAST WEEK WEEKS IN CHART SPECTRUM VIC 20 CMMDRE 64 ELECTRON ATARI DRAGON ORIC THIS BBC OTHER 2 2 5 4 7 6 5 2 4 16 2 TITLE Publisher DALEY THOMPSON'S DECATHLON OCEAN ELITE ACORNSOFT DALEY THOMPSON'S DECATHLON OCEAN BEACH-HEAD ACCESS U.S. GOLD MONTY MOLE GREMLIN GRAPHICS JET SET WILLY SOFTWARE PROJECTS SHERLOCK HOLMES MELBOURNE HOUSE JET SET WILLY SOFTWARE PROJECTS Computer SPECTRUM BBC COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM SPECTRUM SPECTRUM SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 Adventure to be FRANK N STFIN PSS SPECTRUM "


"14.95 1 8 colo Another Mainom Ocean DALEY THOMPSONS --===== = JET SET WILLY SOFTWARE PROJECTS FULL THROTTLE MICROMEGA FRANK. N. STEIN P.S.S. CHILLER MASTERTRONIC KOKOTONI WILF ELITE BEACH-HEAD ACCESS/U.S. GOLD DARK STAR DESIGN DESIGN LORDS OF MIDNIGHT BEYOND 2 2 10 1 10 COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM SPECTRUM DECATHLON CHALLENGING SOFTWARE utorake derflow T ow the Section 12 PSYTRON | 13 10 1 9 21 113 CO FOR Cob: 6.90 ocea 790 HOT 23 SABRE WULF ULTIMATE HUNTERKILLER PROTEK TORNADO LOW LEVEL VORTEX ZAXXON ACCESS U.S. GOLD DEATH STAR INTERCEPTOR SYSTEM 3 QUO VADIS THE EDGE CHESS PSION DANGER MOUSE CREATIVE SPARKS CHEQUERED FLAG PSION ALCATRAZ HARRY MASTERTRONIC FALCON PATROL II VIRGIN HECTIC MASTERTRONIC MONTY MOLE GREMLIN GRAPHICS INTERNATIONAL SOCCER COMMODORE ARABIAN NIGHTS INTERCEPTOR MICROS SPECTRUM SPECTRUM SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM SPECTRUM SPECTRUM SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 VIC 20 COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 1 2 1 2 1 1 1 16 1184 COLUMBIA PICTURES =**** CAESAR THECA *NEW TERMINAL A SOFTWARE BAG PACKERS GUIDE TO THE UNIVERSE PART 1 And you thought it was just a movie! Coming soon to save the computer world! ACTIVISION Commodore 64 Spectrum 48K BBC Look out for the brand new 'Top 10'in the Saturday edition of the DAILY MIRROR, every fortnight. Plus the complete 'Top 30' in Computer & Video Games at your newsagent on the 16th of every month. Information compiled by N.O.P. Market Research Ltd.  EMAP Business & Computer publications 1984 Your computer was made for us. For 48K Spectrum Software by Jantary "


"SPECTRA IMPORTS STOP PRESS The cold weather must have affected our sanity. Our bank managers and accountants have turned their back on us, at selling these items at such ridicuously low prices. We have been warned that these prices will make us bankrupt. But we are willing to take the gamble and have this once in a lifetime sale in November and December. As all items listed below must be sold before January 1st 1985. COMPARE THESE UNBEATABLE PRICES: COMMODORE VIC 20 SPECTRUM 48K .95 CASH .95 CASH COMMODORE 64 BBC MODEL B .95 CASH .00 CASH BRAND NEW COLOUR MONITOR 14\" RECONDITIONED COLOUR TV/MONITOR 17\" BRAND NEW MONOCROME MONITORS .00 CASH .95 CASH .95 CASH COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES SPECTRUM OUR PRICE JACK & BEANSTALK... 2.99 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT.... ...6.99 MISSION 7..... ....... MANIAC MINER 2.99 MICRO OLYMPICS 2.99 MOON BUGGY 2.99 MATCH POINT OUR PRICE) ..10.25 ..4.50 .. -..4.50 4.50 4.99 3.50 4.99 4.99 .5.99 SPECTRUM OUR PRICE) 747 .5.95 AIRLINER  ... ARCADIA 2.99 ANTICS 4.99 ALCHEMIST 2.99 AUTOMANIA.. 5.99 BLACK CRYSTAL.. 4.99 BIRDS A BEES ......... ... 2.99 BEAKY & EGG SNATCHERS.... 3.99 CODE NAME MAT..... FIGHTER PILOT 3.99 FOOTBALL MANAGER FOREST 4.99 FULL THROTTLE.... FACTORY BREAKOUT 3.99 HARRIER ATTACK 2.99 HEATHROW A.T.C. 3.99 HOBBIT R99 HUNCHBACK.... 6.99 JET PACK 2.99 JET SET WILLIE JOHNNY REB 2.99 COMMODORE OUR PRICE ARCADIA 2.99 AZTEC CHALLENGE .. .. .6.99 ARABIA NIGHTS....... .5.99 BEACH HEAD 6.99 BEAM RIDER 7.99 BLACK HAWK 7.99 CHINA MINER 3.99 EGBERT 3.99 FALCON PATROL .................. 3.99 FOOTBALL MANAGER......... FLIGHT PATH 737 ..... 4.99 HOBBIT 8.99 HUNCHBACK 2.99 HUSTLER ........ 3.99 INTERNATIONAL SOCCER.........5.99 KICK OFF 399 MANIAC MINER PYRAMID PITFALL PILOT 64... 5.99 SPACE PILOT 4.99 SOLO FLIGHT 8.99 SNOW BALL 6.99 TALES OF ARABIA 3.99 MR WIMPY NIGHT FLIGHT NIGHT GUNNER PSYTRON POOL PYRAMID PEDRO STAR TRADER SABRE WOLF SCUBA DIVE SPLAT TITANIC TIMEGATE..... TRASHMAN... VALHALA.......... WAR OF THE WORLDS 2.99 3.99 2.99 5.99 2.99 2.50 2.99 3.99 1.6.99 2.99 ..4.99 BBC AVIATOR ***** BRAINSTORM ... BLAGGER............ BUG COLDITZ ADVENTURE CRAZY PAINTER ........ CHESS DANGER UXB 3 DEEP SPACE ... FLAK FORTRESS FLIGHT SIMULATOR ... FELIX GARGOYLE..... GENERATORS...... HUNCHBACK... LOST IN SPACE............ MUSIC PROCESSOR ... OWZAT PEDRO............ PSYCO.. TIME TREK VOODOO CASTLE WIZZARD 4.99 9.50 -7.99 4.99 3.99 3.99 8.99 2.99 4.99 4.50 FINANCE FACILITIES Orders to: SPECTRA IMPORTS (UK) ARCADE CENTRE 1st FLOOR OFFICES SCOTLAND RD, NELSON LANCS. TEL: 0282 698666 BBC MODEL B DEPOSIT  10 MONTHLY PAYMENTS @ .50p COMMODORE 64  @  6.50p COMMODORE VIC 20  @ 4.00p SPECTRUM 48K  @  4.00p NEW COL. MONITOR  @  6.50p RECON. COL. MONITOR .95 NO FINANCE AVAILABLE NEW MONO MONITOR .95 NO FINANCE AVAILABLE PLEASE SEND ME.. AT ................ CASH OR E................ DEPOSIT I ENCLOSE MY CHEQUE/PO/CASH FOR E NAME ADDRESS PLEASE ALLOW 28 DAYS DELIVERY POSTAGE & PACKING: CASSETTE 250 PIP OTHER ITEMS 15.00 N.B, ALL FINANCE ARRANGED BY OUR OWN COMPANY 108 "


"SOFTWARE WORLD 12 ETHEL STREET, BIRMINGHAM B2 Tel: 021 643 7559 THE LATEST AND ONLY SPECIALIST SOFTWARE AND COMPUTER SHOP IN THE CITY CENTRE FOR ALL YOUR HOME COMPUTER REQUIREMENTS CHECK OUR DISCOUNT PRICES FIRST. SOFTWARE ATARI BBC/ELECTRON Stockist of U.S. Gold, Atarisoft and Stateside. Plus all popular Over 200 educational tapes in stock plus full range of software. popular software. STOCK DISPOSAL OF 5,000 TAPES, DISKS AND ROMS FOR ATARI 400/800. Prices from C. 3.95 to 4.95 R. 4.95 to 5.95 D 4.50 to 5.50 MAIL ORDER All software, books and small peripherals are available. Free postage & packaging U.K. Send cheques payable to Software World. Any item dispatched is tested as working. For stock disposal lists and new price lists. Please send S.A.E, to above address stating which machines interest you. COMMODORE Vic 20 tapes from Vic Roms from C64, U.S. Gold and Atarisoft in stock. Full range of software titles from 1.85 3.95 SPECTRUM Over 3,000 tapes in stock. From 1.99. 1.99 PLUS SOFTWARE FOR DRAGON, TEXAS, SHARP, MSX, AMSTRAD, ORIC BOOKS PERIPHERALS Main stockist of all computer' books for Commodore 64, Vic Quickshot II Joysticks 8.95 20, Atari and Texas. Over 1,000 books in stock for all home BBC Twin Voltmace 19.50 computers and business applications. Triga Command 9.00 BBC Crackshot 16.95 Plus all other popular joysticks, over 20 types stocked. INTERFACES Main stockists for Datel, DK Tronics, Currah, Bud, Concom e.g. Spectrum U/F from 8.95, Electron 19.50. Full range of Joystick l/F, Speech Boosters and Synths, Light Pens, Centronics I/F and the new C64 Sound Digitizer. Cassette Players, Leads, Disks, Cassettes, Dust Covers and Learning Aids. SUPPLIERS TO USER GROUPS AND EDUCATION PLEASE DEDUCT 15% OFF ANY PURCHASE OF SOFTWARE, BOOKS OR PERIPHERALS IF ACCOMPANIED BY THIS ADVERTISEMENT. CLOSING DATE DECEMBER 20TH. ANY ITEM NOT STOCKED IS NORMALLY OBTAINABLE WITHIN 24 HOURS HARDWARE All makes of home computers in stock at discount prices. Disk Drives, Printers, Monitors available e.g. Commodore 64 C64, Q/S Joystick, Recorder BBC, Disk I/F, Disk Drive Electron, 5 software cassettes Electron, Expansion Box, 3 Roms Spectrum 48K, Software 189.00 225.00 589.00 195.00 290.00 125.00 FIRST FLOOR BUSINESS SALES ACT & APPLE SYSTEMS DEMONSTRATED EX DEMO SOFTWARE & HARDWARE AT REDUCED PRICES When you come to Birmingham pop in and see us. We are one minute from New Street Station, situated just at the rear of Woolworths, New Street, round the corner from Pizzaland. 109 "


"Doomdark's Revenge Part 1 PART 1: TO THE FROZEN GATES CHARACTERS: Luxor the Moonprince a brave and mighty Lord of the Free, worth 50 men in any battle. His Moon ring gives off a warmth which stirs the heart of true warriors but creates confusion among those of evil intent. Fighting Fantasy is the name given to a new kind of book which allows you to take over the role of hero or heroine. Big in the best-seller charts, these books give you the situation and some possible solutions and then ask you to choose what the hero does next. Then you turn to the appropriate number and find out the consequences of your action. For this issue and the next two months, C&VG will be presenting a Fighting Fantasy style trilogy. It is based on Beyond Software's chart-topping Lords of Midnight trilogy. Part one of the Fighting Fantasy is called To the Frozen Gates. It takes up the story from the killing of Doomdark the Witchking at the Citadel of Ushgarak and unfolds the circumstances which lead to the second title in the trilogy, Doomdark's Revenge. The story has been written by Beyond's Clive Bailey who has written the adventure story novel Terrors Out of Time, published by Methuen and former C&VG editor Terry Pratt. At the end of part three we will ask you three questions relating to the novel's games. The first question is at the end of this story. Note your answer down to enter in the third issue. Tarithel the Dreamer the daughter of the Lord of Dreams. A member of the elfish Fey race and able to blend in with most natural landscapes, particularly at home among woods and forests Rorthron the Wise a member of the ancient ruling race of knowledgeable and magical men whose towers dot the landscape of the Land of Midnight. THE RULES In this adventure you take command of Luxor, the Moonprince and his command of 1000 cavalry brave warriors of the Free. You must think like Luxor and take his part in the battles to come. To play \"To The Ice Gates\" you will need one six-sided die, a pencil and an eraser. You should also familiarise yourself with these simple rules:DAMAGE If an attack is successful, the attacker inflicts damage upon the opponent's STAMINA. In general one point of Stamina or 10 men will be lost. However, certain characters, like Luxor, are armed with fearsome weapons which destroy more than one point of STAMINA on a success. ful attack. When a character's STAMINA points fall to zero, he dies. When a group of soldiers lose their last 10 men, all are slain. 1,000 Riders of the Free brave warriors who have already followed Luxor into battle against the dread Doomguard of Doomdark, former Witchking of Midnight. BATTLES The route across Midnight is perilous. If you are obliged to fight a single combat with Luxor or a mass action with his cavalry command, roll the dice against the SKILL factor. If the number rolled is equal to or less than the SKILL factor, the attack is successful. If the number rolled is greater than the SKILL factor, the attack fails. EXAMPLE Luxor the Moonprince battles with Halberg the Foul: On Luxor's turn the die is rolled and a score of 3 is seen. As this is below Luxor's SKILL of 4 the attack is successful. Moonsliver, Luxor's sword, slices 2 points from Halberg's STAMINA. Luxor's Cavalry command battles with a group of Doomguards: On the Doomguards' turn the dice is rolled and a score of 2 is seen. As this number is below the Foul's SKILL of 3 the attack is successful. The attack wipes out one box from the STAMINA of Luxor's Command. THE QUEST: Luxor's son Morkin has been spirited away to the lands above Midnight. This land is known as Icemark and can only be reached by the Frozen Gates which have been closed for millenia. The ultimate quest is to push through to Icemark and rescue Morkin from the clutches of Shareth the Heartstealer. In Part 1 you must attempt to bring Luxor and his 1,000 riders and Tarithel the Dreamer together and then to follow Rorthron's path to the Frozen Gates. Morkin THE LAND OF MIDNIGHT: The quest takes place in the Land of Midnight after the defeat of Doom dark the Witchking at the battle of Ushgarak. Although Doomdark is defeated it is still a treacherous land, with ravaging packs of wolves, the evil little Skulkrin warriors, dragons and ice trolls. Its mountain ranges are i forbidding, its lakes deep and forests tangled. And the land is full of ancient and mysterious monoliths, henges, caverns and ruins. 110 "


"PLAYER CHART PROVISIONS During the adventure Luxor may be presented with food by grateful subjects. Record these gifts by ticking one or more of the PROVISION boxes on the PLAYER CHART LUXOR THE MOONPRINCE SKILL: 4 STAMINA: 12 GETTING STARTED To begin \"To The Ice Gates\" turn to entry one and follow the instructions. MOONSLIVER THE SWORD CAUSES 2 POINTS OF DAMAGE TO AN OPPONENT'S STAMINA PROVISIONS ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) After several hours the crash of thunder subsides and the rain lessens. You urge your captains outside to get the men remounted and back on the quest. But, at a roll-call outside, it quickly becomes obvious that several have entered caves and not reappeared. You have lost 20 men from Luxor's cavalry command.  Do you now follow the path on towards the village? Go to 15 . Or head back the way you came? Go to 37 POSSESSIONS YES THE MOONRING NO O 3) He slits your throat. The quest is over : 4) The lake spreads out before you.  Do you cross at a gallop, all at once? Go to 43  Do you dismount and lead the horses? Go to 9 : : 5) You ride on next morning towards the great frosted mountains. Crossing your path, through some hillocks, you see a huge man with a great helm and a frosted beard. He rides a mighty sledge through the covering of ersh and this is drawn by two huge white bears.  Do you hail him to talk? Go to 31  Do you ignore him and ride on? Go to 24 SCORING To score the game give yourself 10 points for every surviving point of stamina Luxor has. Take two points off for every group of 10 warriors which were lost en route and add 15 points for every treasure you have with you when you meet Rorthron (including the Moonring). Obviously in these games it is all too easy to sneak a look elsewhere and take advantage of inside knowledge. We hope you'll do the decent thing and play through and see what kind of score you get. Should you come up against the dreaded, \"The quest is over\" message we'll let you start again. As a scoring chart we offer the following: 140+ amazing. 120-140 excellent. 100-120 good. 80-100 average. 60-80 could be better. Under 60 don't call us! Finally, on the third part of the fighting fantasy we'll ask you to choose between three questions on each part of the quest. This issue Rorthron asks you the question. 1) You, Moonprince of misused Midnight, are beset by anxieties. Only a few moons have passed since you rid Midnight of its foul ruler, the Witchking Doomdark, who had turned the land to perpetual winter. Just yestereve you were reunited, amid joyous celebration, with your brave son Morkin, who had announced his intention to marry Tarithel, enchanting daughter of the Lords of Dreams. The Forest of Dreams had rung with the clamour of jubilation. The many Lords and warriors, homeward bound after the triumph over Doomdark in Ushgarak, had made merry and the people of Midnight had realised their newfound freedom from tyranny, possibly for the first time. That was yesterday. Then, last night, a great and fell storm had come upon the forest, rending the trees with its flashing lightning, lashing the Citadel of Dreams with its deluge and turning pleasant smalltalk into uneasy rumour. You awoke from a slumber filled with dark dreams in which your old friend Rorthron the Wise had appeared and bid you hurry north for some new danger threatened Midnight. While you pondered on how real and urgent the visitation had seemed, word was brought to you that Morkin had disappeared in the night and that his 6) You pass by beneath the rocks unharmed, except that a drip of some foul-smelling blood falls upon you from above.  Go to 33 LUXOR'S CAVALRY COMMAND SKILL: 4 CAUSES 1 BOX OF DAMAGE PER TURN STAMINA 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 7) A foul stench fills the tent as the casket creeps open. Inside is a pulp. recognisable as your old adversary only by the helm he wore when you felled him and that black cloak. Beside the corpse lies a crystal ball.  Do you take it? Go to 13 Or leave it and burn the casket? Go to 35 bride-to-be. Tarithel, was spotted mounting her horse and riding off into the aftermath of the storm first thing that morning. Gathering 1,000 of your most brave and gallant warriors you decide to ride out in search of Morkin, believing that his disappearance holds the key to this new malaise which seems suddenly to have come upon Midnight.  Go to 36 8) Arriving at the White Fang, you are hailed by Rorthron who waits at the base of the mountain. \"I have grave tidings. Morkin has been spirited away into the Land of Icemark to the north. He is the prisoner of Shareth, Doomdark's daughter, and I fear for him. To rescue him we must go through the legendary Frozen Gates but first I need to find a spell to open them. Something will come to me, I'm sure.\" \"I have something for you,\" grins Rorthron. \"A friend of mine told me you had lost it.\" He drops the Moonring into your hands.  Go to 50 2) With obvious ill-humour the me.. dismount, still listening to the rantings of your reluctant host above. 111 "


"9) The ice holds and you are safely across. You are cheered loudly by the troops who vow they will follow you anywhere. But you have paid a price-during the crossing you lost the Moonring from your finger. . Go to 38 the gorge to crash against the other. The boulder itself plummets to the bottom of the gorge where fell creatures rush out from concealment to investigate its noisy appearance.  You congratulate yourself and go on. Go to 26 10) The company passes by unharmed and then a voice grates from above. \"Moonprince.\" \"Who hails me?' you reply. \"Never ask questions in a mountain pass, Moonprince. Time is not on your side and neither are the mountains. Indeed I am more foe than friend and I am your only friend here.\" Still there is no sign of a body behind the voice. Shouting your thanks you move on. Suddenly something falls down from above, tinkling against the rocks on the way. One of your men brings up the Moonring. \"This fell from above the corpse's nostrils. It freezes your hand where it touches it, but still you grab the crystal and haul it away. The corpse is suddenly animated and attacks you with a poison-tipped sword. The creature has a high skill of 5 but it is barely flesh and bone and has a low stamina of 3. The poisoned sword causes 2 points of damage. The corpse of Doomdark strikes first and will fight until it is slain. If you are killed the quest ends here. If you win you have the crystal ball and burn the tent, corpse, coffin and all. (Note the crystal ball on your player chart).  Go to 46 18) Clenching the sword tightly, you approach the back of the cave. It is dark here and the rustling noise comes again. Looking down into the gloom around your feet, you see a huge rat staring up at you from the body of a man. The man was obviously the Ice Troll's last meal and is two weeks beyond saving. Then behind him you notice a strangely carved head. It glows slightly in the gloom and, as you raise it up, the cares of the quest fall from your shoulders and you feel ready to take on Doomdark once again were he still alive. Rejuvenated and pocketing the peculiar power-head, you emerge into the sunlight and the cheers of your men. (Note that you have the power-head on your player chart). . Go to 26 Sir.\" 14) Waiting until nightfall, you order your men to dismount and approach the village. Your scouts have already indicated that the Doomguard are not numerous and most seem to be the worse for drink pillaged from the village. They are also careless and have not mounted any kind of guard. Your men rush in taking the Doomguard warriors by surprise. Many are even without their weapons and resistance is scant.  Turn to 21 . Go to 33 11) The ledge leads you on towards a distant rope bridge hanging over the gorge. When you get there you note that the bridge seems in surprisingly good repair which is as well for the gorge yawns deep and wide. On the far side another path can be seen disappearing off to the north east. On this side of the gorge the ledge widens to accommodate a few scant holly bushes before continuing on.  Do you avoid the bridge and continue on this side of the gorge? Go to 26  Do you decide to cross the bridge as promptly as possible? Go to 39 19) Following on to the north and dipping into a valley, a camp is laid before you. The tents are black and sport the cold eye and red hand of Doomdark's emblem.  Will you skirt the camp? Go to 35  Or will you order the charge down into the Foul remnants? Go to GARY BATCHFORD 54 20) Do you have the Moonring? If so go to 49.  If not go to 8. 12) Seeing Ushgarak caught in the sunlight reminds you of how you last left it. After the battle outside the Citadel. When the Lords Mitharg, Shimeril and Xajorkith with 3,000 riders and 2,500 warriors attacked alongside you from the south. With Farflame the Dragonlord, Rorthron and the Lords of Gard and Gloom racing in from the west with 4,000 men. And brave Corleth and his Fey compatriots, Thrall, Dregim and the Whispers coming from the East, with the bright Lord of Dreams in his silver armour following in their rear. Ushgarak had been breached and the Free rampaged through its dank passages. And as Doomdark himself had hurled a cold mist around the ramparts and struck new fear into their hearts and raised the spirits of his own troops, then suddenly he had clutched at his heart in full view of all, as in far-off Mirron, Morkin had cast the Ice-Crown into the depths of the Lake destroying it forever beneath enchanted waters. Now here was deserted Ushgarak, bathed in rare sunlight and the memories come flooding back.  Go to 19 Rorthron the Wise 15) You ride on and see a small and quiet village set on the edge of the forest. The rain is pelting down on the village square and the houses and village hall look inviting.  Do you enter the village and proclaim yourself to the elders, requesting shelter? Go to 22  Will you ride around the village and brave the storm? Go to 42 21) Back in their village, the elder takes you down into a hidden passage beneath their main hall. Here are stored most of the village's provisions, undiscovered by the raiders. Your warriors are well fed for their trouble and bedded down for the night. Tick 3 provisions on your player chart. You interrogate the marauders' leader who claims that they pursued a boy on a horse through the wood the previous night. But strangely he says the storm seemed to protect the lad from their harm and lightning finally brought their pursuit to a halt when a great tree crashed between his men and the boy. The boy was heading north. Leaving this Foul captain to the tender mercies of the villagers, you ride on the next morning.  Turn to 16 16) The next day brings you to a frozen lake, stretching out on either side of you for as far as the eye can see.  Do you go around the lake because the ice looks unreliable? Go to 44  Do you decide to go straight across? Go to 4 22) You ride into the strangely deserted village. As your troops congregate in the centre, arrows pour in from all sides. You had already dismounted but the rest of your warriors depart the scene quickly. Throw against their skill. If you succeed only 10 men are killed by arrows strike them from Luxor's Command. If you fail, 30 men 17) The boulder rolls out across the bridge which promptly collapses, leaving its moorings on this side of 13) A cloud of fine mist billows from 112 "


"New Software Mind Bending, : Finger Twitching, Brain Teasing. OTSE O Commodore 64 for MSX and ECLIPSE SOFTWARE \"Eclipse Software you have to fight. RIPPER LEGION NAIRE INDROMEDA CONQUEST A TELENGARD 8. Oh Mummy! Hot Shoe London Blitz Ripper! Legionnaire Brings to life the ancient Afast moving, 3D challenge. Re-live the events of World The year is 1900 and the Set in the days of Caesar. magic of the Pharaohs of Help Atomiser Man save the War II. Are you brave notorious Jack the Ripper is Command your Roman Egypt. Hoards of riches to galaxy from the perilous enough to find and defuse at large. Scotland Yard has legions against the be found if you dare disturb asteroids. But beware of the deadly UXB's? Sharp assigned you to the case. Barbarian hordes in this the guardians of the thirsty mutant atoms and thinking, delicate treatment Using your deductive skills non-stop adventure. .95 Pyramids. .95 the mischievious Ron the and split-second timing is unravel the horrifying COMMODORE 64 MSX Robot .95 essential if you want to incidents of this well-known MSX Andromeda Conquest survive. .95 mystery. .95 COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 (Disc only) Strive to conquer the Andromedean Galaxy in this all-action galactic challenge. .95 Get your free catalogue of our exciting range of software and computer books. Phone our HOTLINE today (0279) 34622 COMMODORE 64 or post the coupon now to Longman Software, Telengard Dept 656, Longman House, Burnt Mill, Harlow, Essex CM20 2JE. Dare you enter the forbidden maze of the great labyrinth, ECLIPSE risking life and soul in search of gold, treasure and Post Code 011 magical powers? .95 COMMODORE 64 Telens enter labyrintech Adress SOFTWARE "


"y voticton. FAHREVLET ODDS: ITEM: ITEM: ITEM: MILLION TO ONE AGAINST WHAT COULDN'T HAPPEN HAS THE 'DRAGON' REACTOR CORE TEMPERATURE CRITICAL MELTDOWN IMMINENT ITEM: FAHRENHEIT 2990 SHUTDOWN REACTOR ITEM: FAHRENHEIT 2995 MELTDOWN IMMINENT SHUTDOWN REACTOR ITEM: FAHRENHEIT 2998 SHUTDOWN REACTOR MELTDOWN IMMINENT . ITEM: FAHRENHEIT 3000. FAHRENHEIT 3000 FAHRENHEIT 3000 for dealer enquiries phone now Please send me a copy of: FAHRENHEIT 3000 AMERICAN FOOTBALL THE MAGICIAN'S BALL I ENCLOSE CHEQUE/PO FOR (Please add 1:00 for overseas orders) NAME ADDRESS :95 48K SPECTRUM :95 48K SPECTRUM :95 CBM 64 POST CODE SOFTSTONE LTD. 39a PADDINGTON STREET, LONDON WIM 3RN TEL: 01-486 5266 "


"THE unes OF DORCAS PRESENT SOFTWARE  High Resolution Graphics  Full Animation . Sentence Input  12 Separate adventures Sound Effects The tiny principality of DORCASIA was a pleasant fertile land until the wizard ZENDOS used his evil powers to cast the country into perpetual darkness until all citizens pledge obedience to him. It is known that through the SPELL OF DARKNESS Zendos has trapped the spirit of each month into one of 12 GOLDEN TEMPUS RUNES or RUNIC HOUR GLASSES hidden deep within his mysterious and magical castle. As the land dies in the grip of the black desolation a hero must be found to locate and destroy the 12 hour glasses thus releasing the months and returning Dorcasia to the natural forces of the seasons. Each glass has a RUNIC inscription around its base which you must read and understand. Only saying these words will lift that part of the spell. To protect the hour glasses Zendos has placed them in 12 separate rooms in his castle, each room linked to a different exterior gateway by a devious route. Depending on which entrance you select Zendos casts spells which change the locations of rooms within his castle to confuse you. The menacing creatures and challenging problems which confront you at every turn mean that only the brave and the clever will succeed. SPECTRUM 48K COMPATIBLE WITH Sinclair Microdrive ZX hlade THE ORACLE'S CAVE Our best seller available for the 48K SPECTRUM and COMMODORE 64. Oracle's Cave is a unique adventure game featuring continuously displayed high resolution graphics and text, a new cave layout and event sequence for every game and a time limit on every adventure. Available on cassette from selected branches of WHSMITH BULL or direct from: DORCAS SOFTWARE 3 The Oasis, Glenfield, Leicester LE3 8QS at .95 (inc. VAT) Postage and Packing FREE DORCAS "


"GO NORSE, SOUTH, EAST OR CENTURIES... W MOSAIC THE SAGA OF ERIK THE VIKING THE SAGA OF ERIK THE VIKING Adventure game program by LEVEL 9, based on the book by TERRY JONES Enter the world of Monty Python star Terry Jones's Erik the Viking. Over 200 locations. ... a remarkable adventure game ... with graphics of a standard I have not yet seen in an adventure.' COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES Spectrum 48K/Commodore 64 (turbo load cassette/BBC Micro B .95 pack (cassette, instructions and extracts from the book) Based on cokty THE STAINLESS STEEL RAT SAVES Adventure game program LEVELS Based on the book by TERRY JONES BOO LHE THE WORLD BOOKCAPE OF THE INCLUDES A COPY BOOK THE NOMAD OF TIME TH THE ADVENTURES DEWALD BASTABLE THE STAINLESS STEEL RAT SAVES THE WORLD Adventure game program by SHARDS, based on the book by HARRY HARRISON You are Slippery Jim di Griz, the Stainless Steel Rat. Your mission to travel through time to save the world. A challenging, illustrated text adventure. Commodore 64 (turbo load cassette) .95 pack icassette, instructions and a copy of the book) OF TIME THE NOMAD OF TIME Adventure game program by SHARDS, based on the book by MICHAEL MOORCOCK A text adventure with stunning graphics. As Oswald Bastable, member of the League of Temporal Adventurers, you have a chance to change the course of history in alternative time-streams. Commodore 64 (turbo load cassette) .95 pack (cassette, instructions and an extract from the book) CHARDS Adventure Based on the book by MICHAEL MOORSOEK BLOLARE Published by Mosaic Publishing Ltd Marketed by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Baffins Lane Chichester, West Sussex (Reg. No. 641132 England) Available from all good bookshops and computer dealers or simply by using the coupon To: Lesley Valentine, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, FREEPOST, O Please debit my credit card account .......... Baffins Lane, CHICHESTER, West Sussex PO19 1YP Card No.. Expiry date..... Please send me Access/American Express/Barclaycard/Visa/Diners Club (delete) ERIK THE VIKING Telephone credit card orders ask for FREEFONE 3477 0 0946855 08 0 Spectrum 48K .95 0 0946855 09 9 BBC Micro B .95 NAME/ADDRESS.. 0 0 946855 11 0 Commodore 64 .95 THE STAINLESS STEEL RAT SAVES THE WORLD 0946855 161 Commodore 64 THE NOMAD OF TIME SIGNATURE ......... 0946855 18 8 Commodore 64 .95 Postage and packing free . please allow 14 days for delivery 3 MOSAIC I enclose cheque/P.O. for .. ........... payable to John Wiley & Sons Ltd. .95 ........ "


". If you slay Halberg turn to 48. 25) The arrows rain down on the rock and you hear your scout shout. \"Got him sire. I heard his moan and it should be safe to pass now.\"  Go to 6. are slain and must be struck from Luxor's command. Once, they have reached the cover of the forest, the survivors regroup and hail the Doomguard who have just rushed out to capture you. You recognise the voice of your second-in-command Valethor: \"Harken ye servants of the slain. We are warriors of the Free, veterans of the slaying at \"Ushgarak\". A massive Doomguard in black chainmail strides forward to grab you: \"Think you not that we Doomguard are so befuddled as not to know a prize when we see one,\" He shouts. \"Lord Luxor is known to us and methinks we have the power to bargain here.\"  Do you spit in his black eye and tell him to do his worst? Go to 3.  Do you suggest that you and he settle the matter in a fair fight? If you win they will surrender the village and leave peacefully. If he wins you will surrender your men's provisions and return to the Castle of Dreams. Go to 30. 26) The path leads on past a rock shaped like a hawk and then up high into cold mist, finally emerging into brilliant sunlight, perhaps the first to fall on the Mountains of Death for 100 years. Looking south you can make out the sacked citadel of Ushgarak where Doomdark's body still lies where you slew it all those moons ago. . Go to 12. 31) The giant turns at your hail and his face spreads into a broad grin. \"Ah a Moonprince by your trappings. I had been warned to expect this meeting.\" I was sought out by Rorthron, Wisest of the Tower-Dwellers in yon mountains. He gave me this message to deliver. \"He says he will wait for you below the White Fang at the far side of this great range. But two days can he wait and no more. Follow my tracks back and it will lead you to a pass. It is to be found after that.\" He gives you some provisions for the journey. Tick one box on your chart.  Go to 24. 27) Within one of the tents you find a coffin which also has the eye and hand symbols. The men with you shy away and you too can feel the evil eminating from the casket. . Will you burn it? Go to 35. . Or will you open it? Go to 7. 32) A scout is found and despatched beneath the rocks. He shouts from the far side: \"There is movement up there lord. I think it may be a Skulkrin trap.\"  Do you carry on regardless? Go to 10.  Send a cluster of arrows skywards? Go to 25. 33) If you are currently holding the moonring go to 45. If you do not have it in your possession go to 11. 23) A group of 20 men is despatched at your bidding to make entry into Grark and find if aught hath moved into occupancy since the Lords of the Free broke its defenders on the way to Ushgarak. They do not return for several hours and as you are about to command a second unit behind its dank walls, one of the men runs screaming from the broken gateway. \"Where are the others?\" you demand. \"Killed, Lord Moonprince,\" he splutters at last, \"Every man dead at the hands of some foul witchery that lingers there still. Stunned, you refuse to order any more men within the castle walls but return to the camp. Strike 20 men from Luxor's command chart. . Go to S. 28) Suddenly you find yourself separated from the rest of your command by dancing lightning and you see a vision of a beautiful yet somehow cold woman. A mocking laugh chills the very souls of your troops who believe their Moonprince magicked away by some trick of the storm and that enchanted laughter. Roll against their skill. A roll under the current total means that they await developments. Above the current total and a group of seven take fright and ride off into the forest. Strike one box from your command chart. Within the circle of lightning the woman beckons to you and you observe that she seems to be urging you to the north. Then the lightning subsides and you reappear amidst your warriors. . Will you now seek shelter? Go to 47.  Or will you carry on following the path? Go to 37. 34) You drop into the mouth of the cave and surprise a huge ice troll armed with a club and a knife. With barely time to notice that the supports of the bridge have been cut away, you are dodging the first blow. The Ice Troll has a stamina of 6 and a skill of 5.  If the ice troll triumphs the quest ends here.  If you triumph go to 40. 35) Beyond the Doomguard's camp you begin to see the end to the Mountains of Death. Beyond them stretch the cold frosted plains which will lead eventually to the Frozen Wastes which mark the barrier to Midnight. Up ahead you can see a tall white needle like point which you decide must be the White Fang. You head there at a gallop. . Go to 20. 29) Your pursuers are turned upon twice before finally dispersing the attackers. You lose another 10 men in the process and they return still tired by morning. . Go to 16. 24) After a long ride you come to the mountains and a pass leads through a steep gorge. The path leads you along a narrow twisting route before opening out onto a still narrower ledge. On one side the mountain rises up sheer above you. On the other, the gorge falls clear away to a series of frozen stretches of water far below. Some way along this ledge a cluster of boulders tumble down and it is a miracle that no horse is pushed over the edge with them. Second-in-command, Valethor, points to a jutting thrust of rock up ahead over which hangs a collection of loose boulders, some 50 metres up. \"A ledge seems to run parallel to this one my Lord,\" he says. \"If a trap is to be sprung, what better place than there?\" He points to the jutting rock. \"And in truth Sire none of us can climb to the higher path, for the rock is sheer.\"  You send a scout ahead to see if he spies aught from the far side. Go to 32 30) The Doomguard laughs: \"Bring your men forward to witness this bargain then.\" The Free send a deputation from the forest who hear the bargain and agree, at your command, to bear witness to the contest. Halberg is a good fighter with a Skill of (4), however he is weak from days of wandering and has a Stamina of (5). You must fight him in single combat until either he or you are slain. Before this combat commences roll a dice for yourself and for Halberg. The character with the highest number makes the first blow.  If you are slain the quest ends here. 36) Last night's storm is threatening to return behind you as heavy clouds now scud overhead. The rumble of thunder draws ever closer from the south. Your captains advise caution and suggest shelter until it has passed by. . Do you search for shelter on a well beaten track lying to the northeast? Go to 47.  Do you carry on northwards? Go 37) Now the rain has ceased as suddenly as it began. Approaching a clearing you notice a group of people huddled beside the trail. Their leader hails you. \"Brave lord, halt I beseech you. We are badly in 117 "


"Yout my rapit. Ishock AVAILABLE NOW CLIFF HANGER AUTHOR JAMES DAY ORIGINAL MUSIC BRIAN DOE Thrill to the cartoon style action of Cliff Hanger, a really original, Wild West game. As Cliff the hero, you've got to stop the bandito shooting up the canyon. But with its own brand of wacky cartoon action fun, things simply aren't as they seem in Cliff Hanger. For a start, the boulder you throw at the ol' bandito may just come bouncing back at you. Cliff Hanger incorporates all the elements that have made New Generation games best sellers for the Spectrum, such as original ideas, superb graphics and hilarious happenings but now it's available first for the Commodore 64. Featuring 50 separate screens, three levels of difficulty, one or two players scoring, Hall of fame and joystick compatibility or user defined keys, Cliff Hanger is set to be THE Commodore games playing sensation. Available from any good software store for just .95. Selected titles of New Generation Software are available from your local computer store and larger branches of John Menzies WHSMITH 300 WOOLWORTH Spectrum "


"from November 23rah In the shops shoota Dids, then ota you! Shoot the Rapids AUTHOR PAUL BUNN Ever wondered what it would be like to face the fierce white water in a top class canoeist slalom run? Well wonder no more because you can enjoy the fast action thrill of competitive canoeing from the comfort of your own armchair with Shoot the Rapids. It's a game that involves real skill because you must move your joystick to simulate paddling action. You must get through the gates of the slalom course in the fastest time possible, while avoiding the river bank and rocks. There are also extra hazards like rogue speed boats and interfering beavers to worry about. This multi level game features increasingly difficult river courses with superb graphics and smooth scrolling along the river. Qualifying times have to be reached to move onto the next course. With Hall of Fame, one or two player scoring and joystick compatibility, Shoot the Rapids is probably the best sports action M y simulation game devised to date. Available from any good software store for just .95. New Generation NEW GENERATION SOFTWARE FREEPOST Bath BA24TD GSH New Generation products are sold according to Software Tet 022510824 their terms of trade and conditions of sale "


"need of your services. Our village has been taken from us by the remnants of the Witchking's evil Doomguard.  Do you order your men to attack the village? Go to 14.  Or do you decide your mission is too important to be waylaid and skirt the village to the west? Go to 42. Witchking. How fitting. You killed my father, I have your son. Yes Morkin is mine. Already he has passed through the Frozen Gates into my realm, beautiful frozen Icemark where you cannot follow. Or can you I wonder?\" \"Well, follow if you can, Moonprince. I will try to entertain your son between times.  Go to 35. 38) You camp for the night beside the empty Citadel of Grark. Its black walls stare down on your camp fires. Before you lie the Mountains of Death. It is hard to know which the men find more forbidding.  Do you send a small group of men into Grark to see what was left there after its sacking all those moons ago? Go to 23.  Do you ride on next morning? Go to 5. Shareth the Heartstealer This battle continues until just 20 marauders remain then they will flee into the night.  Do you send a force off in pursuit? Go to 29.  Or redouble the guard and try to get what rest you can before morning? Go to 16. 47) The track leads to a clearing before a sheer and pitted hillside. Caves dot the cliff and one of your men discerns a movement in one of them high above you as a rope ladder is hurriedly pulled up. Your hail brings an old hermit to the mouth of the cave. At your request for shelter he warns that the lower caves are unsafe in heavy rain and that he believes them haunted. There is a village further north-east and he advises that your band heads in that direction.  Do you take his advice and head northeast? Go to 15.  Do you ignore him and order your men to dismount and find shelter in the caves as best they can? Go to 2. 39) The bridge collapses with 30 men on it. (Strike them from your command). Then amid whoops of joy, fell creatures can be seen rushing out to gather the bodies from concealed places. As he fell, the leading captain shouted a warning and pointed to a spot in the hillside below the bridge. Horrified you decide to investigate further and soon discover some steps behind the bushes cut in the rock leading downwards to a cave-like opening.  Do you decide to go down alone and investigate? Go to 34.  Do you continue the quest on this side of the gorge? Go to 26. 43) You charge across at a gallop. Throw a dice and abide by the score as follows: 1-4: The ice breaks under a section of the cavalry and 30 men and horses plunge to their death. Strike 3 boxes from Luxor's Command. 5-6: The ice breaks and Luxor goes down with 30 men. He alone is saved. Strike 3 boxes from Luxor's Command and 2 points from Luxor's stamina. On the far side you realise the Moonring has slipped from your finger. You decide there is no chance to find it again.  Go to 38. 40) The ice troll lies in its own black blood when you hear a noise from the far end of the cave. You suspect that the creature's mate lies in wait for you there.  Do you decide that your casualties have been avenged and rush out of the cave? Go to 26.  Or will you investigate further? Go to 18. 44) The way around the lake is long and tiring. Both your men and your self feel the effects of the three day trek. If you had provisions before cross them out now. You have suffered the loss of one point stamina from the exertion. And in addition you have lost the Moonring during the journey. . Go to 38. 48) With your blade sticking in his side, Halberg collapses. \"Remember your promise to my men m'Lord. They will be faithful to mine or I'll come back and haunt every last dog. Within my pouch is an emblem. It belonged to one of the Free Lords. He hailed from the forest of whispers and met death by my hand in the Mountains of Ithiril. The Fey I know hold great store by it. Return it to them — it has magical properties.\" With a last curse at life, he dies. His men pick up the body and nervously make to leave the village. Fingering the emblem in the shape of a falcon, you motion for your men to let them leave. (Note the Falcon emblem on your player chart).  Now turn to 16. 41) Your cavalry charge through the tents, scattering the rabble who are little match for them. However among the rabble are some Doomguard stalwarts. They number 60 men and have a skill of 3. (10) (10) (10) (10) (10) (10). Luxor's Cavalry strike first. These Doomguards will fight to the death. When the battle is over will you:  Search the camp? Go to 27.  Or burn it? Go to 35. 45) The ledge leads onto a distant rope bridge as the voice had said it would. It hangs over the gorge in surprisingly good repair and you consider it would easily take the weight of many men. On the far side of the gorge a path winds off into another valley. While on this side the ledge continues past the bridge.  Will you avoid the bridge and continue on this side of the gorge? Go to 26.  Do you decide to cross as promptly as possible? Go to 39. 49) Arriving at the White Fang, you are hailed by Rorthron who waits at the base of the mountain. \"I have grave tidings. Morkin has been spirited away into the Land of Icemark to the North. He is the prisoner of Shareth, Doomdark's daughter, and I fear for him. To rescue him we must go through the legendary Frozen Gates but first I need to find a spell to open them. Something will come to me.\" . Go to 50. 50) Rorthron turns to you: \"Tell me, my prince, what was the most important treasure you could have found on your adventures?\". 42) You ride around the village and that night camp beyond it. But while you sleep the guard you posted around your fires suddenly come under attack. The ambushers are mounted and ride into the camp firing arrows and loosening some of the horses. Their skill is equal to your cavalry. They number but 60 men: (10) (10) (10) (10) (10) (10). Fight these marauders with Luxor's Cavalry. They attack first then Luxor's Cavalry can retaliate. 46) Resting to the north of the Doomguard camp, curiosity demands that you pull out the Crystal Ball and stare into it. Within it, the mountain scenery distorts and glistens. The lights twinkle more brightly seeming to hold your gaze ever more intently. Suddenly they resolve themselves into a beautiful woman with a cruel gaze who smiles at you. Words form in your mind: \"Ah my brave Moonprince. Slayer of my father the A: The Power Head B: The Emblem of the Falcon C: The Crystal Ball Keep your answer until the third 120 "


"TH 7 7 7 | | Hareraiser M challenges Scot | | GOLDENY 30,000 > PRIZE I | | n H 2 KH M \" Ho a h 49 iPad và k c you! IT'S NOT AN ARCADE GAME IT'S NOT A BORING ADVENTURE TREK IT'S A GENUINE PUZZLE THAT COULD BE SOLVED BY YOU! HARERAISER THE UNIQUE COMPUTER TREASURE HUNT, A COMPUTER PUZZLE OF GRAPHICS AND TEXT IN 2 PARTS. EACH PART CONTAINS VITAL CLUES TO PLACES OR LOCATIONS WHICH WILL ENABLE YOU TO DISCOVER THE WHEREABOUTS OF THIS GOLDEN TREASURE. IT HAS NOT BEEN BURIED YOU JUST HAVE TO PINPOINT ITS LOCATION TO CLAIM THIS AMAZING PRIZE ... THIS PUZLE HAS BEEN SPECIFICALLY DESIGNED TO BREAK AWAY FROM INDIVIDUAL ARCADE AND ADVENTURE TYPE GAMES AND PROVIDE FAMILY INVOLVEMENT. A COMPETITION FOR ALL THE FAMILY. ONCE YOU'VE COLLECTED ALL THE CLUES YOU CAN WORK ON IT ANYWHERE, INDIVIDUALLY OR IN GROUPS. YOU COULD SOLVE THIS... PART 1 (PRELUDE) AVAILABLE NOW! @ .95 each PART 2 (FINALE) READY FOR CHRISTMAS. se AVAILABLE FOR ALL THESE MICROS ELECTRON BBC B ORIC ATMOS SPECTRUM CBM 64 VIC 20 EX. AMSTRAD MSX TANDY EXT COL 32K ATARI 800 XL Available from: W. H. SMITH, HARRODS, BOOTS, TANDY, CURRY'S, GRANADA, TV RENTALS, RMBELOWS, LEWIS LTD, DEBENHAMS, LASKYS and good computer outlets or from Haresoft. 48 HR DESPATCH HARESOFT LTD, P.0. Box 365 LONDON NW1 7JD TEL 01 388 3910 "


"MUTANT To: Artic Computing Ltd, Main Street Brandesburton, Driffield YO25 BRL Please supply 2401 43553 GMC. CHROMAS 1401 43553 38-995 215 *Cheque for total amount enclosed  Name Address Troutine * Access/Barclaycard No. * Please delete or complete as applicable "


"HOZ FROM SEGA THE ARCADE WINNERS Bally/MIDWAY U.S. Gold is stocked by Sub John Menzies WILDINGS WOOLWORTH, WHSMITH, Rumbelows and Spectrum Shops NEW! released *NOW* TAPPER SIDE-SPLITTING, SODA-SLINGING LAUGHS AND SPILLS! THE OFFICIAL HOME VERSION OF BALLY MIDWAY'S ARCADE HIT Belly-busting Soda Fountain Fun, including:  Mad-capped, soda-starved, clammering cowboys, sports fans, punks and space creatures . Plus a head-spinning Soda Bandit Bonus Round Awesome color-packed action graphics Just try to keep your cool as hotheaded, crazy customers blitz your bar for another cold one. OFFICIAL RCADE GAME Upnoun MIDWAY NEW OFFICIAL ARCADE BUCKROGERS OFFICIAL ARCADE GAME OFFICIAL GRADE Wally/MIDWAY SPU NEW HUNTER OFFICIAL ARCADE 6 COMMODORE CASSETTE 9.95 DISK 12.95 U.S. SPECTRUM CASSETTE 795 Exclusive manufacturers for RR and Rady MIDWAY. For release schedule and trade details contact: Centre Soft, Unit 10. The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. Telex: 337268. "


"LE In space no one can hear you scream. 2000000 DOCE THE CREW Personnel files followyours to commandwell almost. NAVIGATOR Shy. Skilful and telligent --Panics Easily EXECUTIVE OFFICER Direct, Imaginative Cautious, Loyal SCIENCE OFFICER Secretive, Unlikeable, Brillant Occasionally Illogical CAPTAIN Solid, Dependable, Courageous Excellent Leader ENGINEERING OFFICER Physically Strong, Low LO. Potentially Rebellious 3RD OFFICER Wii Abitious Authoritive, Resourceful. ENGINEERING OFFICER Cynical, Rebellious Untrustworthy, Unflappable MIND GAMES SPECTRUM 48K. CBM64 Featuring the unique Personality Control System Argus Press Software Group .99 No. 1 Golden Square, London W1R 3AB, Telephone 01-437 0626 "


"N Discount Registered No. 1795113 Telephone: (0256) 51444 Computer 16 Coates Close, Brighton Hill, Software Basingstoke RG22 4EE AMAZING SOFTWARE BARGAINS BY MAIL, 100's OF TITLES AVAILABLE! TELEPHONE ORDERS WELCOME. WRITE OR RING NOW FOR FULL DETAILS Supplier RRP Inc. VAT Our Price Inc. VAT Supplier RRP Inc. VAT 7.95 Our Price Inc. VAT 6.75 ADDICTIVE A&F 6.95 5.90 5.90 BUG BYTE 5.90 7.96 8.25 6.75 6.75 AUTOMATA 9.00 5.00 4.95 DURREL ANIROG no no 6.95 4 95 INTERCEPTOR 7.00 7.00 7.00 5.95 5.95 5.95 ARTIC 7.00 4.95 4.95 4.15 8.50 5.95 5.95 PEAKSOFT TASKSET 5.85 8888 5.85 5.95 SOFTWARE PROJECTS 6.75 o BEYOND CDS C.R.L 6.75 4.95 4.95 8.95 8.90 4.95 8.90 No no no no n 4.95 4.95 4.95 4.95 4.95 4.95 4.95 NOVAGEN US GOLD US GOLD US GOLD QUICKSILVER STATESOFT STATESOFT ACTIVISION ACTIVISION PALACE LEGEND ADDICTIVE GREMLIN Good 8.10 8.90 8.90 5.90 4.95 13.90 6.90 6.90 DIGITAL 6.95 5.95 DURREL UN UNG 6.90 Game SPECTRUM FOOTBALL MANAGER CHUCKIE EGG JUNGLE FEVER PIMANIA P1-BALLED KONO MOON BUGGY SLAP DAB GALACTIC ABDUCTOR GALAXIANS CHESS BEAR BOVVER MONKEY BIZNESS BIRDS & BEES PSYTRON POOL TEST MATCH STAR GAZER SECRETS DERBY DAY HANDICAP GOLF OMEGA RUN THE GREAT DETECTIVE THE INCREDIBLE ADVENTURE THE WARLOCKS TREASURE OLYMPICS GRAND NATIONAL GLUG GLUG FIGHTER PILOT NIGHT GUNNER SEA HARRIER ATTACK JUNGLE TROUBLE SCUBA DIVE NIGHTFLIGHT 3D SPACE WARS HEATHAOW LUNATTACK SPLAT VALHALLA PARAS MUGSY TUTANKHAMUN PENGY CODENAME MAT HAUNTED HEDGES LASERWARP TRASHMAN MR WIMPY HUNCHBACK ESKIMO EDDIE SCRABBLE FLIGHT SIMULATION 3D ANT ATTACK BUGABOO THE FLEA THE SNOWMAN BLUE THUNDER MANIC MINER JETSET WILLY ATIC ATTACK SNOOKER PHEENIX JACK & THE BEANSTALK GIANTS REVENGE BLACK TOWER HOW'S THAT MONTY MOLE 5.95 5.95 5.85 HEWSON 6.90 5.95 7.95 795 Game ZODIAC ICE HUNTER TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY OMEGA RUN DERBY DAY HARRIER ATTACK SCUBA DIVE BURGER TIME GET OFF MY GARDEN CHINA MINER ARABIAN NIGHTS THE BOSS SUPER PIPELINE BOZO'S NIGHT OUT MANIC MINER MISSIONI ENCOUNTER STRIP POKER BEACH HEAD MYSTIC MANSION FRED FLIP & FLOP ASTRO CHASE PITFALL BEAMRIDER THE EVIL DEAD VALHALLA FOOTBALL MANAGER MONTY MOLE PEACY THE POTTY PIGEON DALY THOMPSON DEC HUNCHBACK ANDROID 2 DARE DEVIL DENNIS SHOOKER REV OF MUTANT CAMELS HELLGATE SHEEP IN SPACE TRASHMAN SKYHAWK VIC 20 BONGO SKRAMBLE KRAZY KONG BATTLEFIELD SLAP DAB DARK DUNGEONS DRACULA FLIGHT PATH 737 FLIGHT PATH ZERO ONE FIVE FALCON FIGHTER HELLGATE GOLD RUSH BENGO HUMPHREY AMIGO PUNCHY ORIC SEA HARRIER ATTACK SCUBA XENON ZORGONS REVENGE PROBE 3 THE HOBBIT & BOOK DINKY KONG DRACULA'S REVENGE ULTIMATE ZONE RAT SPLAT SPACE JOUST JET PAC SNOOKER 6.90 7.50 GREMLIN OCEAN OCEAN OCEAN VISIONS VISIONS LLAMASOFT LLAMASOFT LLAMASOFT QUICKSILVER QUICKSILVER 7.95 5.50 14.95 5.95 6.95 6.25 4.95 4.95 5.75 4.95 6.75 6.75 4.60 11.95 4.95 5.75 4.95 4.95 5.75 5.75 INCENTIVE LEGEND LOTHLORIAN MELBOURNE HSE MICROMANIA 4.10 7.95 6.90 6.90 5.95 795 MICROMEGA 5.95 6.95 ANIROG 6.95 6.95 6.95 5.95 V W MICRO GEN NEW GENERATION OCEAN 6.75 4.95 U 4.95 4.90 5.70 4.95  4.95 4.95 6.75 PSION 13.00 6.75 4.95 QUICKSILVA 5.95 5.95 6.95 OOO OOO Non AVS INTERCEPTOR LLAMASOFT MR MICRO 5.95 && 6.95 5.95 R. WILCOX SOFTWARE PROJECTS 4.60 5.85 4 95 &&& 5.95 5.50 5.85 5.85 8.95 5.50 5.95 ULTIMATE VISIONS MEGADODO THOR THOR DOLLERSOFT WYVERN GREMLIN 4.95 4.60 7.70 500 5 00 6.00 6.00 5.00 6.50 DURELL DURELL 6.95 6.50 5.95 5.95 6.50 5.50 5.50 12.95 5.50 6.95 6.95 6.95 8.50 7.50 7.50 14.95 6.95 6.95 8.50 ANIROG COMMODORE 64 KONG 64 SKRAMBLE 64 3D TIME TREK FLIGHT PATH 737 SPACE PILOT CYBOTRON 7.95 7.95 5.95 7.95 7.95 7.95 UK LJK MELBOURNE HOUSE SEVERN SOFT SOFTEK TANSOFT TANSOFT SOFTWARE PROJECTS ULTIMATE VISIONS 6.90 8.90 4.95 6.75 6.75 5.95 6.50 5.95 4.95 5.95 5.50 8.95 6.75 TO: DISCOUNT COMPUTER SOFTWARE, PLEASE ACCEPT MY ORDER FOR THE FOLLOWING PROGRAMS/SPECIAL OFFERS (STATE MACHINE 16 Coates Close, Brighton Hill, Basingstoke RG22 4EE SEND CREW onnel Followsto nandmost... Name ............... Address ............... Make cheques payable to Discount Computer Software Cheque No ............ For ........... enclosed Please debit my Access No ........ ..................... Signed ............... CVG SEND SAE FOR UP TO DATE LIST OF OUR AMAZING BARGAINS à .99 125 "


"+ + +00 DAO ILI . 10 E O PEEK (tempos) = THEN GO SUB 6000 ey=LEV 1 LET babci Fink=5 THEN LET IT = 4 IF lev = 10 THEN LET Lev 10 THEN LET = 1 = -1 + WOO . TOHHHOOH + 1 SHUDHEPPIHEEE DHEERHOF HOOOTO+ngOMPHE DOU ATER + + + REM + + + WEATH July J RICHARD PA GOTO 9000 5 LET HSC=0 BORDER 5 10 RESTORE : PAPER 5 CLSINK_0 20 LET E = 5: LET Lives=4 LET Lev=1 LET F 30 LET SCE-6 uel =: LET b=10 40 LET ink=8 DIM 2 (50): DI 50 RANDOM DIM V50 950: DIM 150 70 LET NAP 100 LET OPEEK + (+12) 1 READ TO 200 FOR 0.4,149 16.52, 125 255 255 255 DATA 95.240 240,240.248.252 31.31. 153, 255 255 223, 14 PODNISODIUNTOS HH000 on DO 01 01 E LET P= FOR 9=10 TO 20 FC TO 7: BORDERC BEEP 0.005 NEXT S NEXT 9 FOR_Y = TO 21: PRINT ATY. LET PER+1: IF P=8 THEN LE NEXT Y INK PAPER YOUR ENER FAILED YOU NOW NEVER M THE ATMOSPH IN VERY LITTL = = =  I NOU NEVER TAKE IT OUT OF   50.13   20 Q. HI UHHO 03000 H0H0. III.10 X  BEER BEER D  BEEPS BEEP U  1650 DATA 254, 254,252 2-3: 192, 19 42 5 QO000 ONU 9 009 CUOCA000000 OXIIIII ISI HEEEEEEEE Song NUN 010 000-OOO D OLHO il WS JOO 2 EEEHOORHOURUE PMP 19 999 9900 IIPOST  23:19 DATA 0.0.24 50 255 24:00 48.56 28 56 112 224 11 A 24, 12, 43,96, 192,95.16 14 15:32 DATA 1.7.30 254 30 128 224 56 255,55 240 A 24:24,50.125 255 255 1 097 GOSUB 7000 REM 3T SRT SCREEN IF LIVES= THEN GO TO 120 CLSLET SCESC + level: 50: 2 PRINT AT 10 \"LIVES\", li THEN LET ink= T BEEP 1 -12 SCORE ACHIEV IF 50H50 THEN TAT 17:0;\" LET HSC =50: NEW HIGH S BEEP 1.6 BEEP 11 G-12 NEXT FOR G=20 TO 30 1227 PRINT AT 19,9; \"HIGH SCORE 1230 PRINT #1; \"PRESS ANY KEY TO PLAY AGAIN...: PAUSE : GO TO 1 1580 REM PEST CLOUDS 0 FORD = 1 TO E BEEP 0.01,INT (RND+30): PRI Tyin.X ; INK ink; \"ABC\";A +1;X ; DEF 5 NEXT 1720 RETURN O RE HE 2001 FOR j = 1 TO E BE (RND +241 +4: LET YIj = INT LET XIj = INT PEEK the POS-{{31-X (RND 1): LET V : NEXT j )*2))-61) + EX (j: LET Wijay 2005 LET S = 2007 GO SUB 1690 LET OD LET Obsb 010 FOR 1 = 1 TO E 011 LET Xin) =x in) + (INT (RND+3) : LET Yin) =y ) + INT IRND+31-i T oro Hlustration: Gary Wing OOH MLIM OOO OOO Out OOOO COOOO 0000 OOOO OOO Soo OOODOO, OOO OSO GOCQGGG DOOOOOO   OOOOOOGG OOOOOOOOOO DOGODO OOCOOOO DOOID. 000 OOO ODDD dogo OOO DOO 0060 HARRY "


"GO HHHHH2HI IL. IL LILLL LL WIL LET SC=S C +1 NEXT : GO TO REM SEUCER ROUTINE IF IN 64510 255 THEN LET be 3020 IF IN 63486 255 AND b. THE 3025 IF IN 61438 <255 AND FUEL THEN LET a = a +1: LET Fuel=fuei-5 PRINT AT 0.26 Fuel LET = a +1 PRINT AT Obioa; \" 304 LET = -41) IF POINT ((a+81 +4 (175-18 THEN GO TO 3045 2 IF PEEK memPOS-123 OR PEEK ime ) AND (PEEK -1 THEN LET FU PRINT AT ba-1;\" AT 0.26 fuel FOR j = 1 STEP 5 BEEP 0.01 NEX LEPRINT xin) <1 THEN LET xin) = 1 in =1 F xin) > 28 THEN LET Xin) = 28 y in <1 THEN LET )= yin >18 THEN LET Yin) = 18 +3, X (y IF SCREEN$ )-1) = N LET yin) =uin-1 + 3 y SCREEN$ IN LET yin ay ini CREEN$ tyin +3Xin +1) = (n)-1 \"\" THEN LET Yiny THEN GO TO 2036 ) =X 2020 IF ink> THEN LET X 22 IF Xina THEN LET Yin) ay in 24 IF yn) 026 IF Yin) b THEN LET Yin) ay in ;\" \";AT 2036 PRINT AT win, W LET win) ay in win) +1,Vin; 2038 LET WEni Ex Anxin; 2040 PRINT INK ink AT \"ABC\";AT Yin +1 Xin ; DEF! ink = THEN GOSUB 5000 GO SUB 3000 ZEZ II os OTO MO E T -LETS c IT0+ IUO DIZ . ... 2050 RUNS ON A SPECTRUM BY J. RICHARD PALMER O CL DH You can't trust anyone these days can you! There I was crusising around the used space ship lot when Chis chan in a battered and extremely old-fashioned trilby hat came up to me and said, PSSI: Want buy a space ship. Good runner, low on the light years, only one owner a little old E.T. from the  Milky Way?\" Well, to cut a long story short, about 20 parsecs later, I was the proud owner of a tasty used spacecraft. A couple of light years out on my first trip I discovered a hole in my fuel tank.. Can you help this stricken space pilot? Full instructions are included in the listing. To enter the game, type in the listing and save it on tape. Capital letters in PRINT statements which aren't proper words are probably graphics characters, so enter these in graphics mode by typing CAPS SHIFT-9. Before you can play the game, though, you have to create your own landscape. Type GOTO 9000 or RUN 9000 to do this. Once you have, you can save this on tape for future games. You only get four lives, so use them carefully. E NEARLY NEW 1 BOLT AL . OOOOO ONE (CAREFUL OWNER LATTI "


"11SI 0 . **. + 1 7110 DATA 2,0.1, 1 0 3044 IF PEEK (men POS11 = 2 AND b= (PEEK 12+132 -1 THEN GO TO 5200 POS-12 15 IF POINT (23)+7) 5+4)=1 THEN GO TO 523a 347 IF a> 29 THEN GO TO 1100 050 PRINT AT PRINT AT SEC \" BEM CRASH 0 20 TO NEXT 9 STEP DEEP IF FEE THEN od9999 0900 lu 7115 DATA 220_1 RETURN 7138 DATA 2011-:1: 7125 DATA 2,0.1) 4020 00 me POS 92 THEN 7130 DATA 2,021 7135 DATA 2.0.1 7140 DATA 7,5, 1, 7145 DATA 7.5.1 7150 DATA_7,521, ABC N 7835 DATA 254, 1.1.1 0_4006 BEEP 7160 DATA_7.521 . 7165 DATA 7,521 I 7170 DATA 7,5, 1, LET Lives=lives-1 5000 REM LISTING GO TO\"11 5010 IF INT (RND #3) = 1 OR a Ex in THEN GO TO 5020 5015 RETURN 5020 PRINT AT yn) +2, xin) +1; INK 6; \"H\"; AT Yin 5030 FOR j=50 TO 46 STER -2 +3. Xin +1: 524 PRINT AT yin) +2,xini + 1;* BEE AT yn) +3, xin) +1: 5050 IF ax in)-1 AND axin) + 1 AN ; Dbyin +5 RND b TO Soba in + 1 THEN GO 5055 RETURN 5070 FOR INK 9: \"G\": BEEP 0.05.9: NEXT 9: = TO 7: PRINT AT ba 5202 LET addr: LET bad = REM BELEEF HET 5205 IF a 5 THEN LET add=30 5206 IF a> 27 THEN LET addr-30 5208 IF 55 THEN LET bod=-30 5210 FOR j=1 TO 10 NT (RND #40 BEEP 0.005 I OT INK INT (RND +8): PL (a +81 +4, (175 (+3 NT (RND +601-30+ add, (INT (RND+30) +4 + bdd: NEXT DRAW I 5220 LET lives=lives-1: IF PEEK : INK (memPOS)<b+2 THEN LET MPOSI-3 5230 GO TO 1100 PEEK ne    LANDSCAPE 20 LET YEPEEK (MEMPOS): LET O= K imempos + 1) PRINT AT 4X\" O=1 THEN PRINT AT 9-1, X-1 : =2 THEN PRINT AT y-1,X; -ET me POS me POS +2 -ET X=X+1: IF X=32 THEN RET 050 GO TO 5020 7000 REM BESCREEN 7005 BORDER : INK 7 7010 FOR G=1 TO 20: BEEP 0.01, IN PAPER O T (RND+40) : LET X=INT (RND+28) : INK INT (RND +61 +1: LET Y=INT (RN D#20: PRINT ATY.X \"ABC\", AT Y+1 N 7175 DATA 0,1,0, 7180 DATA 0.2.0.\". 7185 DATA 0,3.0,\" -190 DATA 2.4.0. 7195 DATA 0,50.\" 7200 DATA 0,6,0,\" -onk WKNIK M cull W OOOOX Z .HMZO 2000 999 EDDIDDOD DOONNNEHA NNNNNINN ZHG HD90000 Z*XO 9000W You + 0000 Azwaag... Joua IL 4. KESTORE 7180: FOR 3=0 TO 20 | 7845_PRIREMATE 2138 INR I; PAPER FAA REE NEXT BICHARD PALGha ALMHT DIEGO R3582 INK I PAPER EXT G RICHARD PAL . Chen UVU "


"HIRE SPECTRUM SOFTWARE Only by conquering Stonehenge can you free the world of the evil curses and eternal darkness Join us on this marvellous arcade adventure and challenge your wits against the evil forces of the Necromancer with his spectacular trickery and deception. CBM 64 VGA 6007 JOYSTICK CONTROL SAVE .00!! For a limited period, we are offering HALF-PRICE membership to readers of this magazine. Join now, LIFE membership is only .00 (normally .00). BORSEBS OVER 280 different tapes for hire including ARCADE, ADVENTURE, BUSINESS, EDUCATIONAL, etc.-even an m/c Compiler. FREE 26 page catalogue. FREE newsletter, with hints, tips and our top tape chart. OVER 3000 tapes in stock, with up to 60 copies of each title for fast service. All tapes sent by 1st class post. LOWEST PRICES hire up to 3 tapes at a time, from 63p each for two weeks hire. (Plus p&p and VAT). European members welcome Tapes for sale at DISCOUNT prices. Telephone 01-661 9240 (9am 5pm) or write for further details, or complete the coupon and JOIN TODAY you've nothing to lose! SWOP SHOP A new service from N.S.L SWOP your unwanted tapes with tapes from other members for a small handling charge of only 60p (plus p&p and VAT) NATIONAL SOFTWARE LIBRARY 200 Mulgrave Road, Cheam, Surrey SM2 6JT. Tenclose cheque/postal order for .00 for LIFE membership. Please rush my membership kit to me. If, within 28 days, I'm not delighted with your service you'll refund my membership fee.. .95 Name Address Marvellously detailed graphics and animation Many objects to collect and exchange, Joystick control. 17 screens to master.  Atmospherie musie and sound effects. 'Flashload' rapid load system. PicaRAMMED BY MAN OF FIVE  AN ORIGINAL IDEA BY MARTIN WHEELER FLASHLOAD ADVANCED TACTICAL RECONNAISSANCE AND ATTACK MISSION ZuO022 _ROYAL_NAVAL TASK FORCE ENCOUNTERS _U.S. MARINE CORPS UNIT SIMULATED _NATO _ EXERCISE_-_TIME_TOMORROW ---2-4_PLAYERS _EQUIPMENT -AND TERRITORIES EQUAL ELIMINATE -STRATEGIC_TARGETSThe first in a series of unique COMPUTER AIDED BOARD GAMES ECTRUM 48k AVAILABLE FROM SELECTED RETAIL OUTLETS FROM THE 1st NOVEMBER 1984, TRADE ENQUIRIES CONTACT: SALES DEPL WEBSTERS SOFTWARE. TEL: 0483 62222 129 "


"| OLUAN THE ACTION GAME Volcano — not just another computer game! The object is to escape the fury of an erupting Volcano. With only five lives the odds are against you. Red-hot lava streams destroy all before them. Your escape route can be through the medieval city, the business or commercial section or via shopping precincts. Falling rocks block you way. Rioters may destroy you. You may fall into the underground passages to be lost forever. You might disappear in the marsh or get eaten in the jungle. When you finally reach a boat to escape to a safe island there may be no rigging! You have to return to one of the many shops to try to collect these ... With forty screens above ground; two-hundred-and-ninety 3D screens below; onehundred shops and factories in which to find aids to your escape Volcano is not just another computer game! COMPUTER MAGIC 39 Bridge Street Walton-on-Thames Tel: Walton-on-Thames 231011 Note: Volcano can only be played with the map supplied. Volcano is designed for use on a Spectrum 48k. Design Illustration by Angel Art Tel: Walton-on-Thames 222110, FREE MAP "


"MAY WICO BE WITH YOU W h en you're up against all the evil in the universe, you need the finest joystick. Weak, sticky, slow controls can only lead you to your doom. You need a Wico. The controls in more than 500 modern arcade games are actually made by Wico. They set the industry standard for durability and performance. And the same arcade quality goes into the Wico you take home. Wico\" joysticks work directly with the Commodore 64,Vic 20,\"all Atari Home Computers and Atari Video Games. Add an interface, and you can connect into a Sinclair Spectrum or Apple lle and lle. If you have a new MSX computer there's the just released MSX Grip Handle for you. What do you get? Aman-sized handle on a virtually unbreakable shaft. Tough, ultra-sensitive Wico switchgear. A heavy weight base. A year's guarantee. And more sheer dodging, chasing and blasting power than ever before. The Wico range includes the famous Red Ball, straight out of the arcades. The Three Way Deluxe with interchangeable handles. The light but rugged Boss. And check out the state-ofthe-art Trackball: many owners use it for serious programming, where it gives them effortless cursor control. Ask your dealer to let you handle a Wico. Quality (you'll find) costs money. But if you want to have less trouble fighting your controls, and more power for fighting the forces of darkness ... only Wico is worthy of your hand WICO THE FINEST HAND CONTROLS IN THE KNOWN UNIVERSE CGL HOUSE, GOLDINGS HILL, LOUGHTON, ESSEX IGIO 2RR.01-508 5600. LOOK FOR THE WICO NAME IN ALL GOOD SHOPS AND CATALOGUES. "


"atch out for themthese four new games could be dangerous to your health. And, as they're from A'n'F, they're second to none, calling for a level of skill that's bound to set the adrenalin racing. NOT FOR PEOPLE WITH HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE! F GUMSHOE SNARL-UP ALPHA-BETH NEW CYLON ATTACK SPECTRUM 48k CYLON ATTACK-Now with better than ever isometric perspective graphics (3D). .75 BBC 32k SNARL-UP-Sheer bumper to bumper frustration and only five chances to hit the fast lane. .90 COMMODORE 64 GUMSHOE -One bleepin' obstacle after another stops you reaching a girl who needs youdesperately. .90 SPECTRUM 48k ALPHA-BETH -The brain teaser that makes it doubly difficult for you to give the right answer. .75 SOFTWA NULLI SECUNDUS MIES A&F Software, Unit 8, Canal Side Industrial Estate, Woodbine Street East, Rochdale, Lancs OL16 5LB. Telephone: 0706 341111 "


"AT THENS O 0 1 1 ON D 0 0 I 0 \" G TO TO ONN IN HOOM ( USE QHQ -010 OC 09 I + 3 DATA .33,0): .2.2..33.9. ATA 33,0, 33.9 .33, 12 PAPER 5: INK 00 PRINT #1; FLASH OR ANY FOR INSTRUCTIONS FLASH OTHER KEY TO PLAY ... 0 FOR H=1 TO 22 7310 RESTORE READ LP LP IF INKEY THEN BORDER 5: GO TO 7350 7320 NEXT H: PAUSE 10 GO TO 731 7350 IF INKEY $=\"I\" OR INKEY=\"\" THEN GO TO 7400 7360 RETURN 7400 REM instructions 7410 INK 1 PAPER 7: BORDER 5:0 L5 7412 CLS PRINT! The story So 7450 PRINT LINKS AME TIME YOU MLET UGH FUEL JK TO COLLECT ENO F THE ATMOSPHERE AT THE END OF CLIMB OUT O PE.\" E BOMBS L. WATCH OUT FOR TH 1-5 . UP AT END : *1-5 , #1; PAPER 5 \"PRESS AN BEEP 005, INT AND+20)+10 IF INKEY $=\"\" THEN GO TO 7495 IOC HOHHOH HUO EUZJZZZ: ut IO + + Yos +0.01 YOU BEER Sasha a. CMD 11. 9. 0 cuma OF CCL 0.0 000 Ann 000.11. OU ate crash with a meteo. You di Scovered hole in the fuel ta built Sauce.\" nk of your earth 7413 PRINT YOU landed on 1 he nearest Planet I called \"T he Moon\"\" to try to refuel and discovered you needed nearly a full tank to get out of the atmosphere and back to the neare Planet...\" st major 7414 PRINT ?\" You have four 1 ives if you are hit or crash y our shields weaken and you LOO se life. Loose four andi: . SPLATTI!\" 7416 PRINT # Press any key...\" 7417 BEEP 0.01 INT (RND +300: IF INKEY=\" THEN GO TO 74.17 IN 5 TB 7420 CL 5: PRINT UCTIONS PILOT YO 7430 PRINT PAPER 7; THROUGH THE UR SAUCER G SLOULY CAREFULLY A DENSE ATMOSPHERE ATHERING 5 VOIDING THE DE WITH THEIR TORMCLOUDS LIGHTNING DE 7440 PRINT INK 5* 8000 REM LE 8005 PAPER T ON INK 7 CLS : LET e =30: LET ink=? 8006 PRINT AT 10.5\"PREPARE LIFT-OFF\" FOR 9 PRINT AT 10 TO 1 STEP -1 9: NEXT 9: CL 9:\" BEEP.5, 3008 FOR 9 = 1 RND*8): NEXT 9 INT 8010 FOR PES TO 3015 LET ese-4 =a LET b=20: PAPER P: BORDE 3017 PRINT AT 0,0; INK 7; 50:\"; SC; AT 10: LIVES 20 \"FUEL; fuel Lives AT 8020 FOR = 1 TO 15 *3+5: PLOT INTERND +321 +8 INT INK INT AND RND211 +8 DRAU 1 RAW -10: NEXT 9 DRAW 2.1 D 8021 FOR j = 1 TO D+291: LET Y = INTERND + 15 +1 PRI : LET X=INT ! NT ATY.X; INK ink: \"ABC\"; AT 4+1 X; \"DEF NEXT 8025 LET 1=1 F IN 54510255 T HEN LET = 2 8030 IF IN 63485255 AND EN LET ara 1 > 1 TH 3040 IF IN 61438255 AND 2 <307 HEN LET =a + 1 3045 LET SC=S C+5 PRINT AT 2.45 8050 PRINT AT 5+1,08\" \" LET 0 D IH unk YARDA 133 "


"8060 IF POINT (a +8+4, 1175 (b+8) + 4)) = 1 THEN GO TO 8500 8065 BEEP. 0.005,60 8070 PRINT AT ba; INK 5; \"G 8080 LET b=b-1: LET fuel=fuel-1: IF b=1 THEN NEXT P: GO TO 8700 8082 PRINT AT 0,26; INK 7: fuel\" 8085 IF Fuel 1 THEN PRINT AT 10 10; INK 7; FLASH 1: \"OUT OF FUEL\" ; FLASH 3090 GO TO 8030 GO TO 1215 3500 REM 8505 FOR 9=20 TO 40: BEEP 0.005, 9: NEXT SLET lives=lives INT AT 0,7; INK 7; lives: IF Live SE THEN GO TO 1200 8705 RESTORE 8710 FOR 9=1 TO 16 Z DODOD MOM EF-10NEXT 9 2.318, DOO i bê+4372, 127:3:8..3:10. OOOO DOHOTO 900 tu. 9505 ERERATOR Ste landscape n 9130 IF SCIEEL AND X = 0 THEN GO TO 9500 9140 POKEMPOS 9150 LET en rien +1 LET mempos Em em POS +2 9160 PRINT AT 00:\"length : \"; le Screens n; AT 15; \"Screens : TOld EPEEK imen POS-4)  IF olday THEN PRINT ATY.X; 73 IF oldy THEN PRINT AT 4+1, xH; AT 4X; 9176 IF old<y THEN PRINT AT 4-1, \".\";AT YX;'\". 200 LET X = X + 1: IF X=32 THEN LET x =: CLS: LET screens Escreens + 250 GO TO 9100 9500 REM PRINT \" LANDSCAPE \"Press 9510 PRINT 21 TO 53 rate landscape 3) TO Load landscape landscape 9515 IF INKEY $=\"1\" THEN GO TO 96 9520 IF INKEY $=\"2\" THEN SAVE \"US DeCODE 50000 S I INREYS454THEN LOAD \"\" 525 IF INKEY $=\"4\" THEN RUN 9530 GO TO 9515 9600 REM Landscapes 9605 CLS: PRINT are 20 screens long and are for front of th med by moving the down as it e landscape Up or moves forward.\" 9610 PRINT \" Fuel should be pla ced on fiat areas of ground, a bout 2 to 6 FUE Pods per scre en Suitably Protected by bombs RINT SIT 6 down  :T   11 5.9. 20.419,2,20 1.3, 17 .2.1 OINTS: 1000\"; FLASH FLASH 1, \"BON C +1000: FOR 9=1 TO 400 LET 8750 LET ink=7: INK NEXT BORDER 5: CLS : LET E = 5: LET Lev =1: LET b=15LET memPOS =50000: : PAPER 5: GO TO 1100 9000 REM LENSERE 9001 GO TO 9500 9005 PAPER 7: INKO GENERATOR 9010 CLS T lenzu: LET screens = LET y=20: LET X=0: LE sàEO LET THE P05 =5aaaa 9100 IF IN 61438=239 AND Y <20 TH EN LET Y=y+1 '9110 IF IN 51438=247 AND Y> 1 THE N LET Y = -1° 9115 POKE en POS +1,0 9120 IF IN ( ( (x-1) *8) 2<255 AND POINT D PEEK (m 75-ty8)) + 4) =0 AN em POS +1, 1: 1) <1 THEN POKE : GO TO 9130 T AT 4-1 , X-1; \"UK\" 9125 IF IN 2 (X+3) +4.01 16255 AND POINT OKE e POS +8 ) + 4) =D PRINT AT 4-1 %;\" THEN P O M. 961 ala SNO MH IZ in UNT ! center..bomb\": 9620 PRINT AT 21: \"Press any ke : GO TO 9 y to start...\": PAUSE Lie OK YARDA 134 "


"FROM THE SOURCE OF NEW IDEAS ROGRAM HERE English Software presents 5 original games. CUR PJETBOOTJACKAL HENRYBUSE c QUI Commodore 64, BBC Model B Acorn Electron, Amstrad CPC464: each Cassette L 7.95 Atari 400/800 and XL Models 32K: (Cassette and Disc) Electron starring little HENRY Commodore 64: Cassette: version is 0 .95 0 jovstick interface compatible 0 w LC CDWICH I Witch Switch Soldier of Fortune Fortune . -UE vi p q v Commodore 64: Cassette .95 Commodore 64: Cassette TI .. ALL COMMODORE 64 CASSETTES ARE SUPPLIED ON PAVLODA ULTRA-FAST LOAD JET-BOOT JACK Legend of the Knucker-Hole THE KTADOTTACK REVIEWERS CHOICE! Commodore 64: Cassette (Release Date December) .95 PROGRAMMERS WANTED We're always on the lookout for new programmers. If you can work to the English Software standard of quality, we'll reward you by marketing your programs across Europe and USA! Contact us today. graphics\" same with beautiful \"Excellent throughout -a likely chart topper\" 100% Rating (5 stars) \"Excellent game with beautifully coloured and defined PERSONAL COMPUTER NEWS graphics\" \"This game is excellent Jack looked almost human!\" WHICH MICRO? \"Arcade standard should please most addicts\" (5 Star Rating) GAMES COMPUTING \"In short, a first rate game\" HOME COMPUTING WEEKLY \"Jet-Boot Jack is a gem!\" \"This has to be one of the best, most playable and carefully TV GAMER COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES thought out games for the Atari that I've seen for a while What more can WE say!?!?!? PERSONAL COMPUTER NEWS ENGLISH.. SOFTWARE THE POWER OF EXCITEMENT The English Software Company, Box 43, Manchester M60 3AD Trade Enquiries Tel: 061 835 1358. . "


"JOYLESS incoming aliens VICTORY ranking system that starts IN ONE! track the position of the game well worth converting. incoming aliens. The game works in The game also has a run conjunction with the Coleco ranking system that starts Roller Controller not you off as a cadet and exactly a cinch at . Games like Victory really challenges you to work your Omega Race spun into the You pilot the Omega make me wonder if the Cole way up through the ranks to arcades two years ago and fighter as it battles against covision has any future. squadron leader. then spun out again without the droid forces. The ship Two years ago I was Trouble with this is that making any major impact. can rotate through 360 writing with nothing but it's just too easy to gain It made a brief reappear. degrees, thrust forward at enthusiasm for this bright those promotions. ance on the Vic 20 last year great speed and bounce off new video games System Other features include and now thankfully there is a the walls to gain anl which promised great things smart bombs, shields, a version for the ColecoVision. advantage. with its range of exciting refuelling mechanism and a It's a pity this game has Is You are armed with a laser You are armed with a laser arcade-to-home conversions. shield strength indicators. been ignored by most of the gun as defence against the There was Donkey Kong, The graphics in Victory are arcade game cloning droids but be warned Zaxxon and Venture. Lots of very crude and chunky and software houses as it's a they have the same fire good games the only movement seems very jerky, very original and entertaining power as you do and they problem was finding the also have the advantage of money. numbers. But recently the supply of The first few sheets of good games has started to droids conveniently stand dry up. We've had Miner still so that you can pick 2049'er, Rocky and Omega them off with ease. Pretty Race that have been worth soon they start to speed up, buying the rest can only tracking you around the be described as average. central island at great speed, Victory too falls into this so manual dexterity with the category. It's a scrolling Roller Controller becomes shoot-'em-up with a planet important. surface scene and space This is where the strategy scene. Again the game element comes into Omega works with the pricey Roller Race planning your Ball controller your ship direction, and your angles of can move in any direction fire and bouncing off the and your gun rotates through walls to arrive at a vantage 360 degrees. It's the sort of point. game that has been done so There are three variations well on other systems on the basic game: Tunnels Spectrum and 64 to name and Astro Gates which but two so that when you with Christmas just around the corner, our feature two escape tunnels come across a third rate Joystick Jury resumed its session to take a that can also be used for version on what is supposed surprise attacks and Fast to be the best games system look at some of the new releases for the Bounce which makes you around, you cannot help but ColecoVision system. And although rebound off the sides of be disappointed. dedicated video games machines seem to those walls like a silver ball in The game does have some be taking a nose-dive lately, CBS are a pin table. saving graces, like the radar Omega Race available now scanner that enables you to releasing some attractive new games. at .95 5058 603.58 The Verdict Not good enough a game to justify the .95 asking price. The Verdict If you are lucky enough to own a Roller Ball controller for your Coleco, this is one of the best available for it so far. You'll find it difficult to put it down.  Action......................4 Addiction .....  Graphics .................. 2 Theme...  Action............... ...2  Graphics ............... Addiction............. Theme............ 136 "


"You'll never dream a program could be this good!!! 38 PYJAMARAMA Join Wally in his nightmare MIKRO-GEN Sensational Software from Spectrum 48K — .95 44 The Broadway, Bracknell. Tel: (0344) 427317 Available for Commodore 64 and Spectrum 48K Commodore 64 .95 "


"The Red Kipper Flies at Midnight OU GET HOME ONE EVENING to discover a message on your answering machine. Something you'd thought hidden for good has reared its ugly head once again. Valkyrie 17 is active. Over the next five nights a series of frantic phone calls convince you that the matter deserves further investigation. You receive a dossier on the activities of Valkyrie 17. Pieced together from fragmentary reports culled from the last forty years you slowly begin to put the whole thing together. Drakenfeur, Heinrich and Reichsmuller. The badge pressed into your hand on the station at_ And that last desperate call for help from the Glitz Hotel overlooking Lake Bruntz. Your cover is good. Very good in fact. You spend a few days sniffing around and then head up towards Lake Bruntz. You check in to the Glitz Hotel. It's the last lead you have. You seem to be getting nowhere. Then on your way to the bar you sense a movement in the shadows. You feel a blow on your temple. And everything goes black... Valkyrie 17 is an Adventure featuring both graphic and text locations. You will meet several different characters some of whom may help you while others see your demise as their sole purpose in life. Included in the pack is a comprehensive dossier on Valkyrie 17. On the reverse of the cassette tape are the answerphone messages. And then of course there's the game itself. LOADING TIME 542 minutes. MICRODRIVE X/FER FUNCTION LOCATIONS 100+ FUN FACTOR 8 LEVEL SOUND Beep Beep HINTS Watch your back, try not to get killed and mind your language. The RamJam Corporation cannot accept responsibility for injury either mental or physical caused during the playing of Valkyrie 17. Furthermore the existence of these words affects your statutory rights. RamJam Corporation 1984. (Although why we bother heaven only knows). VALKYRIE Valkyrie 17 is distributed by Palace Virgin Gold, 69 Flempton Road, London E10 7NL. Telephone: 01-539 5566. Available from all leading wholesalers. "


"PROJECT FUEURE NEW 48 SPECTRUM PROJECT FUTURE, YOUR MISSION TO DESTROY THE DREADED S.S.FUTURE. AMAZING HIGH RESOLUTION GRAPHICS OVER 250 'SCREENS OF THE MOST . EVER SEEN ON THE SPECTRUM. SUPER SMOOTH ANIMATION, INCREDIBLE SOUND, EFFECTS, 100% MC, ARCADE STANDARD. THE TOTALLY ADDICTIVE CONCEPT $7.00 THE ULTIMATE ARCADE ADVENTURE, MICROMANIA Available now! From all good software outlets or direct from: Micromania, 14 Lower Hill Road, Epsom, Surrey. P + P free.Dealers phone: (03727) 20152. "


"SED QR NENE LEUE I55 LEERRRRRRR MENRD LEVELRT You are a highly trained Galactic Commando deep in enemy territory. Power hungry leaders of the repressive Bungeling Empire have stolen a fortune in gold from the peace loving people, and you have just discovered their secret underground treasury. Your goal? To recover every last ingot of Bungeling booty. You'll be running, jumping and climbing heroically, solving perplexing puzzles and drilling passageways through stone floors and barriers using your laser drill pistol. You'll need more than fleet feet and good looks to get through this mission alive. You'll need quick wits and brains! CREATE YOUR OWN GAMES! Lode Runner is more than a fast action game. It's a game generator that lets you design your own puzzles and scenes. You can move, add and take away countless ladders, floors, trap doors, crossbars, gold chests and Bungeling enemies. It's easy and there's no end to the variations, challenge and fun. Available on the 48K Spectrum  Broderbund  1984. Licensed to Software Projects. Produced by Software Projects, SOFTWARE PROJECTS Software Projects Limited, Bearbrand Complex, Allerton Road, Woolton, Liverpool L25 75F Telex: 627520 Telephone: 051-428 9393 (4 lines). "


"SZERETE BISORE REST GRAPHICS BASE USE TH1887get FERZERA \"TEL *Psgo 982 198319gre Can Thor save Cute Chick from the hungry dinosaur? Only you can help. At first he only has to jump rocks and holes. Then he must jump and duck, almost simultaneously, to avoid the logs and low hanging tree limbs in the Petrified Forest. The only way Thor can get across the river is to hop on the turtles' backs. These turtles sometimes get tired and submerge at the wrong moment, much to Thor's dismayl To add to Thor's difficulties, his arch-enemy Fat Broad is waiting on the other side to ambush him. If Thor's timing is good, the Dooky Bird is overhead, the prehistoric bird will pick him up and carry him ACTOSS! Thor must build up plenty of speed during his downhill run before the cliff. Timing is crucial, too. If Thor's balance is off or he is too slow he will crash into the ravine or the face of the cliff. Once over the cliff, Thor faces his most difficult challenge: the volcanic eruption. In addition to the obstacles on the ground, he is showered with boulders from the sky. Once again Thor must cross the river on the turtles' backs. Then, at last, he must face the dinosaur! If Thor can get past the dinosaur and into the cave, he has only a short way to go to rescue Cute Chick. On his way, Thor must duck under stalagtites and jump over stalagmites to avoid crashing. If Thor does crash, don't worry: he has five wheels. But True Love is calling him, so use all your agility and cunning to help him rescue Cute Chickr Available on the Commodore 64  Sydney 1984. Licensed from Sierra-on-line Licensed to Software Projects. Produced by Software Projects. Send a large stamped addressed envelope for more detailed information on our new releases, plus a free large poster. All sales enquiries to: Colin Stokes (Sales and Marketing) Please send me a copy of BC'S QUEST FOR TIRES .95 Please tick LODERUNNER .95 where applicable | I enclose cheque/PO for ......... (Please add .00 for orders outside UK) Access Card No..... Name .... Address.... For Mail Order only: Software Projects, P.O. Box 12, L25 7AF Selected titles available from John Menzies, HMV, Boots, Woolworth, Spectrum and other large department stores and all good major software retailers. \"SF For Mail Order only: Software Projects, P.O. Box 12, L25 7AF "


"99 Oh what a night, drinking, dancing and singing 'til dawn. Now it's time for all the revellers to make their way home. Being a little worse for drink, you decide to walk home in the cool night air, rather than taking a taxi. Singing merrily along the way, you walk through the park and skip lightly over the ducks and catch the notes of music that seem to hang in the air. But be careful when approaching the railway, trains still run at this time of day and wild dogs are in search of food! When you have collected all the notes on the level you are on you will proceed to the next, collecting a time bonus on the way. Miner Willy's first outing on the Commodore VIC 20. Available on the VIC 20+ 16K expanded se Its army to enormous dimensions, soon its attack on mankind will commence. Exploring the outer regions of a weird landscape, your secondhand 'ground Skimmer has only a single laser in its armoury. Discovering the Dodo's secret means you must destroy as many beings as possible, as the Dodo will try anything in its power to prevent the secret getting out. The game has 9 attack waves with progressive difficulty and speed. There's a bonus life every 10,000 points and bonus points after every wave, dependant on which level you are on (Bonus =Wave Number x 1000). After the wave bonus the Dodo must be hit 12 times, by bringing the number on the right of the score from 88 to 100. The number of Mults'. \"Wallys' and 'Buildas' is also dependant on the wave number. WARNING: 'Mults are not affected by laser fire, but in fact, feed on it. The 'ground-skimmer can be destroyed on collision with any enemy or enemies weapons, or by letting the 'BBs' (purple coloured enemy) getting to the far right of the screen. Available on the unexpanded VIC 20 so PRORE CTS Software Projects Limited, Bearbrand Complex, Allerton Road, Woolton, Liverpool L25 7SF. Telex: 627520 Telephone: 051-428 9393 (4 lines). "


"1998 RWORWUR Deep in the kitchen of one of the towns first class restaurants amongst the hustle and bustle, Little Thwitchy Thwilly has just been selected from the aquarium as a customers main course... panic... sitting in the oven his first thought is survival and how to escape. As the oven is ignited and the flames start to rise he realises his only hope is to collect the dripping condensation from the pipe at the top of the oven and try to extinguish the flames. It's going to be tough, he must survive through ten different ovens and face added hazards such as the rotating spit, spinning food debris, oven foam and the restaurants pet dog, Fatty Schizo llenry, who by the way often enjoys a snack from the restaurants aquarium Can you help him? Available on the unexpanded VIC 20 Once you were the head gardener in charge of a group of ten power flowers. These have been stolen and hidden in a set of caves, from which you must retrieve them. The flowers are protected by forcefields, gates, begonias and patrolling snap-dragons. Be careful as the flowers are poisonous and you must find a pot to put each flower in before you try to pick it up. The beans in the cave are harmless and extra points will be achieved by picking them up along the way, but don't touch their stalks. If anything is touched other than a pot, beans, fuel dumps for re-fueling. Sprays which can be used to stun the snapdragons, or a plant if you have a spare pot the result will be that you are teleported to the start of the game. It is possible for you to leave your transported back to your teleport. You begin the game with four teleport charges and an extra charge is gained for every flower collected. Available on the Commodore 64 You play the roll of a spider in this extremely compelling game and you are faced with escaping from some very perilous situations. You are trapped in a hole from which you must escape, but there are other insects in the hole which make your task more difficult, as contact with any of them will lead to instant death. However you are not totally defenceless you are capable of leaving a web trail which only snails can cross. By collecting the twigs that are littered around and storing them against the left hand side of the hole between the two stones a bridge will form and you will be able to climb out. But be careful there are 15 hazardous situations to contend with each one more difficult than the last. Available on the Commodore 64 Send a large stamped addressed envelope for more detailed information on our new releases, plus a free large poster. All sales enquiries to: Colin Stokes (Sales and Marketing) For Mail Order only: Software Projects, P.O. Box 12, L25 7AF Please tick were applicable Please send me a copy of HEEBIE JEEBIES .95 PERILS OF WILLY .95 | GALACTIC GARDENER .95 DODO LAIR .95 FATTY HENRY .95 Tenclose cheque/PO for ........ 1 (Please add .00 for orders outside UK) Access Card No... Name ... Address................. Selected titles available from:John Menzies, HMV, Boots, Woolworth, Spectrum and other large department stores and all good major software retailers. For Mail Order only: Software Projects, P.O. Box 12, L25 7AF Software projects. F.o. Box 12, 125 zar ----"


"PETUDE SOFTWARE VARE TO TWARE TIPS ISOFTWARE SUIDERS SUPER VERS ZIGGURAT FLIP FLAP FRED'S FAN FACTORY HALL Lured by the promise of untold riches, our intrepid hero enters the temple of Ziggurat, a place of III legend. All he has to do is grab the money and run, but he can't quite remember which way he came in, and what is that shuffling sound coming from the crypt. Available on the 48K Spectrum. A pin ball game with a novel twist. There are twenty tables to be negotiated, each by reaching a target level. Each table has a different theme with original bonus features. Will you dare to use the gamble feature? You could gain an extra ball-or lose 5,000 points! Available on 48K Spectrum It's Fred's first day at his new job; guiding balloon men through the factory si passages using fans to blow them to freedom. Easy? It looks that way until the balloon men come under selge from B spinning knives, fireballs, spikes and explosives, Fred is starting to panic, can sa you help him. Available on the 48K Spectrum. VASOWANE ELAL ETWA SUPER SAVERS DERI RS CALIFORNIA GOLD RUSH FACES OF HAARNE FREEX In the heart of hostile Indian Country, prospector Jake has discovered a fabulous fortune in gold, spread out in 24 rich fields. To claim these riches he has to fence off each mine. The Indians, alas, have other ideas, tearing down his fences and attacking him with arrows and tomahawks. Can Jake block the Indians with carefully placed sticks of dynamite and stake his claim to the fortune. Available on the Commodore 64. Night falls over the city and at the local museum Herbert the curator is doing his rounds. As he approaches the Green Room containing the mysterious and fabulously valuable \"Faces of Haare\", strange noises can be heard from within. Armed with his steel-rimmed \"Odd-Job\" hat, Herbert enters the room. You won't believe what he encounters! Available on the Commodore 64. All has been quiet at the Trans-Cosmos outpost for the past 50 Intergalactic Standard Time Units. Suddenly, out of nowhere, appear hoardes of allen marauders 100 waves of them. This is It; the moment you've been waiting for, the chance to gain your stripes. Available on the 48K Spectrum. 23EEST "


"R SOTTWARE SUPER SAVERS | MOONLIGHTER iilih Software Supersavers is a new name to watch out for. We'll be bringing you quality software at a supersaver price. They're not re-hashes of old games but totally original ideas combining to give you an exciting range of new games. So whatever your software tastes are, Software Supersavers has the game just right for you. tory You are the Commander of a Space Shuttle ferrying cargo to Arcturus and all planets north. Whilst checking the Inventory, which includes Mega-Tennis Balls, Clockwork Oranges and IntoxoBeverages, you hear some very peculiar sounds coming from the hold. Dare you investigate? Available on 48K Spectrum. om can All games SOFTWARE TIDER ISAVERS .99 each HERE SHUTTLE SHOCK Dealer Enquiries 051-428 6367 and ask for Lesley Please send me a copy of I enclose a cheque/PO for.. (Please add $1.00 for orders outside the UK) os Access Card No ............. Name........... Address..... or, Algernon the astronaut has crash-landed on the planet Epsilon XI and the power packs that propel his rocket have been dispersed around the planet. Algies efforts to re-assemble his power packs are hindered by some rather eccentric life forms; stinkers, mutant lawn mowers, grandfather clocks?? What kind of planet is this? Available on the 48K Spectrum. Software Supersavers Ltd., P.O.Box 13, Liverpool L25 7AG Software Supersavers Ltd., P.O. Box 13, Liverpool L25 7AG "


"atmas Chme from Melbourne House CUT-OUT YOUR CASSETTE INLAY Meny MERRY CHRISTMAS FROM MELBOURNE HOUSE Mustmas from Melbourne House 146 "


"SANIH his red coat with fur-lined hood and big black boots. But something is missing. Better call reindeer. Do this, and watch the reindeer scampering down the hill ready to pull Santa's sleigh. If you succeed, a visual treat is in store as Santa flies away to distribute his toys. Guaranteed to generate sighs and aahs from members of your family this Christmas. To get your Christmas adventure game, fill in the form below With Christmas and new year on toy cars and pretty clothes on and send it off with a cheque or holidays looming, many a dolls. Outside, the snow is falling postal order for 95p. Forms gamer's thoughts are turning to and you can hear the blizzards should reach us no later than \"what can I play on my computer blowing across the snowy wastes. November 31st. Please allow 28 to relieve the tedium of Billy Call Santa, and Father Christdays for delivery. Do not send Smart's Circus, soppy films and mas emerges from his hut clad in cash through the post. the Paul Daniels Christmas Show?\" To: C&VG/Melbourne House Christmas Offer, Priory Court, 30-32 If that sounds like dullsville to Farringdon Lane, LONDON ECIR 3AU. you then relax C&VG and Melbourne House have come up with a game that will keep you Please send me. ... ... ...tape(s) of Merry Christmas From occupied and entertained Melbourne House. throughout the twelve days of Christmas. Merry Christmas runs on the Commodore 64 and is a gift at Name ...... 95p. The animation is amongst the best that you will see on any Address....... game, with delightful moving pictures to illustrate some of the locations. It's one of the new breed of adventures from the company who brought you The Hobbit, Sherlock and Zim Sala Bim. The game begins outside Santa's home in the North Pole. To the east is the toy factory where the elves are busily putting springs on jumping jacks, wheels I enclose a cheque/postal order to the value of ... payable to C&VG. Please allow 28 days for delivery. 147 "


"BOMB sau WARP 1 strategical space adventure, OLTRO Space the tarontier o Your tasto see outs Starship Cajuns plore new goles are boldly go where neangas one erat. ..23 ELECTRON... 5 WONGO.. bounce along the Sected of conaco di fuse enemiesto blast before reach of these the mothes sp. $7.95 ELECTRON $7.95 $7.95 ELECTRONS AVAILABLE FOR 48K SPECTRUM BBC & ELECTRON Per MERRY XMAS SANTA Hi-res tull colour arcade action as Santa delivers presents on Xmas Eve...avoid hostile snow men tlying snowballs, slippery roots, icicles etc. whilst devouring as much calce, pudding, and shery as possible on the way but be careful Santa doesn't get tipsy who knows what might happen SPECTRUM $5.95 ELECTRON $7.95 BBC....95 Mail Order: Send cheque or P.O. payable to 'ICON' or quote your credit card no. ICON Selected titles avallable from: John Menzies, Co-op, Harrods, Wildings, Granada and most good computer shops. Dealers contact: Centresoft, Express, Tiger, Drakes, R&R. SOFTWARE 65 HIGH STREET, GOSFORTH, TYNE & WEAR, NE3 4AA. TEL: (091) 2846966 "


"Interview Opportunity Knocks. This is your big chance the top programmer's job. All you have to do is be at the right place at the right time. But don't be deceived, the competition is tough out there! Due to the complexity of its outstanding graphics and challenging game play, Interview is a multiload game using the Novaload fast load system on tape. Don't wait for the rush, Interview is available now from your favourite software retailer or direct from us. Tape .95 Disk .95 inc. VAT. Commodore 64 To: Front Runner, K-soft distribution, 620 Western Avenue, London W3 OTU Rush me Tape(s) Disk(s) of interview Name Address Post code Postcode (post free) Telephone I enclose a cheque/PO made payable to K-soft distribution for E or debit my Access/Visa* Delete as applicable I would like to hear news of more Front Runner releases Yes Please allow 21 days for delivery. Meet the challenge 4AA. "


"ENOUGH TO BLOW ANYONE'S FUSE. FOR ! 38 TO STEP-I LET GAA 1192 PRINT AT SCC(10+NDA SPACE XY 3Y=116%*SLOW' 1747/ FOR IBU PRINT AT 21 LET COX1 THEN COTO 97* Every month, SINCLAIR PROGRAMS features extensive listings for the Sinclair Spectrum and ZX81, as well as graphics instructions, letters, game of the month', and even a special section for beginners. See you in a month's time! CETTE If it's games you want, youll find plenty in Sinclair Programs Cincaran Available from your newsagents, only 95p A PERFECT COUPLE COMMODOREN New Just like ham and eggs and peaches and cream, Commodore User is the perfect companion for your 64 or Vic 20. Every month Commodore User is packed full of the latest new games reviews, special projects and business computing, plus the latest software charts, Tommy's Tips for your tricky computer problems, and much much more. Commodore User, the perfect magazine for Commodore owners, at your newsagent on the first of every month. All for only 85p. THE SX BUTTERFIE DISK GAMESF COMMODORE TOMMY User 150 "


"Explosive Action! Feel your temperature rise as you battle to control the overheating, boilers. Your challenge is to fight and defeat the machinery, but the pressure can become intolerable! Boilerhouse is an all machine code game with keyboard or joystick options. Now .95 inc.VAT 48K Spectrum TO: Front Runner, K-soft distribution, 620 Western Avenue, London W3 OTU Rush me _Tape(s) of Boilerhouse Name Address Post code Telephone (post free) Meet the challenge I enclose a cheque/PO made payable to K-soft distribution for E or debit my Access/Visa\" Delete as applicable I would like to hear news of more Front Runner releases Yes Please allow 21 days for delivery. "


"SWAG FOR THE NEW! COMMODORE 64        E92 33 The SWAG man's on the job to burgle the millionaire's mansion. It's full of beautiful, valuable SWAG ready for nicking! Unfortunately, he's gatecrashed a fancy dress party and the guests are in pursuit. Help him through the seemingly never ending maze of rooms to collect the SWAG and find the WAY OUT! .95 CASSETTE .95 Arcade standard, 100% machine code. amazingly shooth high resolution graphics, incedible sound effects, the totally addictive concept the ULTIMATE arcade adventure MICROMANIA SWAG is available now! On high speed loading Cassette or Disc from all good software utlets or direct from: MICROMANIA, 14 LOWER HILL ROAD, EPSOM, SURREY. P & P FREE. DEALERS PHONE: 03727 20152 "


"MICRO POWER MOCROPOWER M 3 electron B.B.C. MICRO SUPERFAST LOADING TIME commodore FRENZY COMMODORE 64 VERSION MOGRODOWEMOGRO POWER MOORODO MOGRODOWERMOGRODOWEMOCRODOWEBM 'Deadly sub-atomic particles have escaped from the high security research lab. Trap the darting Leptons as they zip around the room. 'Speed is essential as the heat-seeking Chasers are forever on your trail. MMODORE and ELECTRON $6.95 CASSETTE PRICE L0.95 BBC cassette price .95 BBC and Commodore disk price .95 PHONE NOW FOR OUR FREE COLOUR CATALOGUE MOCRO POWER MICRO POWER MICRODOWE MICRO POWER LTD., NORTHWOOD HOUSE NORTH STREET, LEEDS LS7 ZAA MAIL ORDER: TEL. (0532) 434006. SELECTIVE BRANCHES OF BOOTS CO-OP MENZIES. W. H SMITH WOOLWORTHS AND ALL GOOD DEALERS AUTHORS! WE PAY 20% ROYALTIES! "


"The ultimate development from ag: PRC 9.9* * * NEW MOLU LOFU> NON MUOX & FCC HJKLE 6289 OTOCOL KEY CODES 01234143210 DROMICO THE LATEST PROGRAMMABLE JOYSTICK INTERFACE ONLY .95 Designed exclusively for the ZX Spectrum, Protocol 4 brings you game control customising in a way that no other interface does. It can accept all commercially standard joysticks, including the Quickshot Il with rapid fire or Trackball controllers, and is compatible with ALL Spectrum software. OPERATES LIKE FIXED OPTION INTERFACES OR CAN BE FULLY HARDWARE PROGRAMMED The flexibility of Protocol 4 control is achieved by a specially designed 'CustomCard' system. CustomCards are easily programmed to suit all types of games. Simply clip in a programmed card for immediate customised control. With preset cards supplied Protocol 4 can emulate the following control standards: AGF/Protek, Kempston and ZX Interface 2-both players. You can change or reprogram blank cards (1 supplied) to get the responses you want even on games without joystick options. time you load another game. The keyboard remains fully operative at all times. It is also perfectly possible to connect up to five Protocol 4's on one Spectrum, each programmed separately, for multiple player control only possible with the hardware programmed design. Incorporated into the design is a computer Reset button for clearing the computer memory between games without pulling the power plug out. Fully guaranteed for 18 months, Protocol 4 comes supplied with five CustomCards, ten Quick Reference Programming Cards and complete instructions. Utilising Hardware Programmed technology you have the benefit of automatic eight direction control, no power-down programming loss, guaranteed conflict-free operation with other peripherals, including microdrives, and no extra software to load or awkward joystick movements and key presses to make each "


"agt PROGRAMMABLE INTERFACE *********INTERFACE ROMSLOT QUICKSHOT QUICKSHOT PROGRAMMABLE INTERFACE As the first fully hardware programmed joystick interface, this product has become well established over the past year and will accept ALL standard joysticks or trackballs, including Quickshot II with 'rapid fire, for use with ALL Spectrum or ZX81 software not just those with a joystick option * No Software programming required. Programming is not lost when power is disconnected between games. * Eight way movement with or without the fire button pressed-only requires setting of the four normal directions. Compatibility is guaranteed with ALL key reading techniques machine code or BASIC. * Several interfaces can be separately programmed and fitted to one computer for multiple player games. Keyboard operation is totally unaffected by this interface, as with all AGF add-ons, and will never conflict with any other device fitted at the same time. Twelve months guarantee, key programming information and a pack of Quick Reference Cards, to speed up setting of the clips, are supplied with full instructions. INTERFACE II The AGF Interface Il represents the best low cost introduction to joystick control. The AGF control standard is now offered by over 100 games or utility programs for use with any joystick or trackball. Any game which is controlled by the cursor movement keys (5,6,7,8) or has a Protek option is also compatible with Interface II. Arear connector allows other peripherals to be connected at the same time. This product is available for either the Spectrum or ZX81, is supplied with full instructions, a 12 month guarantee, and a 12% discount voucher against further AGF mail-order purchases. ROMSLOT The new AGF RomSlot is designed for anyone who already owns a programmable joystick interface, or prefers to use the keyboard to control games, and would like to add the facility of ROM cartridge software to their system. RomSlot will accept the Sinclair range of instant loading games and will also be compatible with the new releases from Parker Softwareexciting new games only to be available in ROM format. This system allows instant play. Your computer memory size is not important and you will be able to play games that could ordinarily require more RAM. RomSlot incorporates an extra feature called 'Restart'. This allows you to instantly restart the ROM game. RomSlot is guaranteed for 12 months and has a full width expansion connector to accept joystick interfaces, speech units and printers etc. QUICKSHOT The Quickshot joystick is an excellent value game controller incorporating suction cups for sure-footed precision with a comfortably contoured handle offering a convenient top firing button as well as one on the base. QUICKSHOT 11 Quickshot li nas improved styling with a trigger type tring outton as wun as the top firing action, with a broader base for greater suction stability It also has a unique Auto-Fire facility which at the flick of a switch provides a constant rapid firing action simulating a fast trigger finger. ----E DE ume. PRICE AGF Protocol 4..... ..........95+.00 p&p AGF Programmable Interface...... ...95+.00 p&p AGF RomSlot ................... ..... 9.95+.50 p&p . AGF Interface ll .. .. 9.95+.50 p&p Quickshot II Joystick... .....50+.50 p&p Quickshot Joystick .... ... 7.95+.50 p&p Extra 'CustomCards'.. .... . 3.95 inc. p&p (5 per pack Extra Quick Reference................. 0.65 inc. p&p Programming Cards (10 per pack) Specify Computer .... .......ZX81 .........Spectrum (0000 I enclose cheque/Postal Order for .. Please debit my Access/Visa/Diners Club Card Account No .......... Signature ............ My Name ............ Address ............. on TICK BOX OPPOSITE REQUIRED ITEM ayer ign. ing Send to: AGF Hardware, Dept CVG, Freepost, Bognor Regis, West Sussex, PO22 9BY. Trade Enquiries ring (0243) 823337 with ! There's nowhere else to go "


"| Warning:these gai > > MUISHO wapbury "


"mes show no mercy. Acornsoft have now unleashed eight more merciless games onto unsuspecting BBC micro owners. Ranging from Gateway to Karos, where putting a foot wrong could mean instant death. To the relentless antics of Drogna which could have you dying with laughter. Gateway to Karos. An adventure game in which you'll need all your patience and ingenuity just to stay alive. Your objective is to find the Talisman of Khoronz but, whichever path you choose, you'll be beset by treachery. Serpents lie in wait and magical phenomenona are in abundance. Should you find the Talisman, you've still to find your way back. Kingdom of Hamil. As the rightful heir to the Kingdom of Hamil, you are in the unusual position of having to prove your claim to the throne. Evil people are trying to prevent you accomplishing your task by any means. An adventure game fraught with many dangers, puzzles and problems. Tetrapod. You're in an arena littered with dormant lizards, killer bees and other hostile creatures with whom you'll have to do battle to survive. But beware of your own laser bullets, as they bounce off the arena walls. Drogna. A game for two people-preferably with devious minds. There are two vaults containing diamonds and your job is to collect and transfer them to your home base. While your opponent is out collecting you could sneak in and steal his loot... but keep an eye out for him doing the same to you. Crazy Tracer. An arcade style game where you're in charge of apaint roller. Guide your roller around a maze of rectangles while evading monsters who are committed to destroying it. Gain extra rollers and bonus points by painting different objects. But you'll have to avoid running out of paint. Volcano. Mount Crona has erupted after 150 years of silence. And your mission as an Emergency Rescue Helicopter Pilot is to save sightseers stranded on the slopes. Time is of the essence as the lava approaches the sightseers. But you'll have to take time to evadeorshoot the boulders being hurled from the volcano. Carousel. A re-creation of the fairground shooting gallery with a difference. Shoot down all the ducks, owls and rabbits before you run out of ammunition. Watch out for the low-flying ducks. If you fail to shoot these, they'll steal your bullets and reduce your chances of success. Meteor Mission. On an alien planet are six stranded astronauts. Launch your capsule from the Mothership and by avoiding or shooting meteors and alien craft, pick up the astronauts one at a time and return them to the Mothership All games with the exception of Gateway to Karos which is currently only available on cassette can be bought direct in either cassette or disc form. You will find all these programs at your local Acorn stockist. To find out where they are simply call 01-2000200.Credit card holders, phone 01-2000200, anytime. Or 0933 79300, during office hours. Alternatively, you can order the games by sending off the coupon below to:Acornsoft,c/o Vector Marketing, Denington Estate, Wellingborough, Northants NN82RL. Please allow 28 days for delivery. — — — To: Acornsoft, c/o Vector Marketing, Denington Estate, Wellingborough, Northants NN8 2RL. Please send me the following software games: PROGRAM QUANTITY DISC/CASSETTE Gateway to Karos Kingdom of Hamil Tetrapod Drogna Crazy Tracer Volcano Carousel Meteor Mission TOTAL Price Cassette: .95: Disc: .50 I enclose PO/Cheque payable to Acornsoft Ltd. Orcharge my credit charge. Card Number: Barclaycard/Access (Delete) Name Address Postcode Signature Registered No. 1524763 VT S, 215 8123 85 ACORNSOFT "


"5 POKE36879 10 38 POKE36869,255 35 PRINTCHR$(147) FORI=7468 T07679: POKEI PEEK (I +25680) : NEXT 48 FORT=7432 T07495FEADV POKET, V: NEXT 58 LI=3 D=118: SC=@ SOKE36873.15 53 H=7942: R=7883 N= 54 PRINT\"C\" A=3099: G1=3117 02=7998 G3=78 l=i-1 G2=G2+1 27 G3=G3278 HEH-1 279 R=R-1 256 F0168099 THENPORE8299 32 PORE8898.32 s18117 298 IFG2) 8888 THENPOKE8809 32: POKE8689, 32 G2=7998 300 IF637379 THENPOKE7379, 32. POKE7878.32 G3=7897 384 IF PEEK(A) = THEN900 365 IFH<7925 THENPOKE792532 POKE7947, 168 H=7942 310 IFR 7798 THENPOKE7798 :: POKE7797,32 R=7803 330 IFA=3187ORA=7999ORA=79980RA=7997ORA= 7887ORA=77750R-=77820RA=781 THENGOT 2080 342 IFA=777@THENSC=SC+1028 GOTO2056 420 FORT=1 TODEXT: GO T0288 788 POKEA. 34:+1 POKEA-1.32 POKEA 34 e Gi=G1-1 G2= 32+1 Go=G5 POKEG2-1, 32 : POKEGS-1 32 POKEG1 1 32 745 FORT=7T010POKE36875 208 : NEXT: POKE36 720 A=A+22 POKEA-22 168 FOKEA 34 POKE368 725 POKEG1,36 POKEG2,36: POKEG3,36 POKE36 55 PRINT . . !!! . !!!!!! # #2 6@ PRINT\" ! 7 PRINT\" !!!!!!! !! 88 PRINT\"2000 !!!!!!! 9@ L1=3030 FORX= 1 TO4 103 POKEL 1,8 L1=L1 +22 NEXTX 110 L2=7901 FORX= 1 T04 128 POKEL2,8L2=L2 +22 NEXTX 138 L3=7318 FORX= 1 T04 142 POKEL3,8L3=L3 +22 NEXT 288 POKEG1+1,32 POKEG2-1 32 POKE GS-1 32 32 POKER -1 32 POKEH+1 32 : POKEH +22+ 205 POKEL 18 POKEL2.5 POKEL 3.8 POE POKE769.4 POKET47 39 2.3 POKEA 34 : POKEG: 35 PUNGE 36 F.208 56 POKEH, 37 : POKEH +22 38 POKER 35 2.5 IFPEEK(A) =36THENGOTO2000 228 GEPEEK (197) IFG=370RG=290RG=26ORG=34 T-ENPOKEA, 168 376,230 238 IFG=29 THENA=A-1 POKE36 6230 240 IF G=37THENA=A+1 POKE3637 250 IFG=26THENA=A-22 POKEA+22: POKEA, 8 4 A=A-1 POKEA+1.32 GOSUB752 = EA, 3 258 IF G= 34 THENAEA-22 POKEA +22 4 ADA+ POKEA-1.32 GOSUB? 255 1FPEEK(A) = 36THENGOTO2828 26POKE 36376. . 875 6 76.200 275.0 Illustration: Ivan Allen. 727 IFPEEK(A) =36THENGO TO2000 738 POKEG1,32 : POKEG2.32 POKEG3.32 RETURN 750 POKEA. 34 A=A-1POKEA +1.32 POKEA. 34: 1 FASH+44 THENGO TO 780 760 G1=G1-1 : G2=G2+1 G3=G3-1 POKEG1+1 32 POKEG2-1, 32::POKE G3+1.32 765 FORZ=1T010 POKE36975,288 NEXT: POKE36 The A=A+22POKEA-22.32 POKEA. 34 IFAER-22 HEN950 175 POKEG1,36 : POKEG2,36 : POKEG3,96 776 IFPEEK(A) =36THENGO TO2280 875.6 "


"BOXER RUNS ON A COMMODORE 64 Fancy yourself as Frank Bruno? Reckon you could go a few rounds with Bonecrusher Smith? Well, get stuck into this program and you could soon be slugging it out with the best of them. Work your way up through the contenders to become the world champ! Jason has included all the instructions you need in the program. There are 10 opponents to beat each a bit tougher than the first and Jason has come up with some really neat graphics you are bound to enjoy. Are you slick enough to score a K.O.? Find out! BY JASON ROBINSON 159 "


"778 POKEG1,32 : POKEG2,32 POKEG3,32 RETURN 788 FORX=1T05: A=A-1 HEH-1 POKEA+1 168 PO KEA, 34 : POKE36876,210 785 POKEH, 37 : POKEH +22 38 798 POKEH, 32 : POKEH +22 32 POKEH-1,32 POKE H+23,32 POKE 36876,8NEXTX 95 A=A+22 POKEA-22 160: GOTO208 902 FORX=1T05 295 POKEA, 34 : POKE36874,290 918 A=A-22 POKEA +228 POKE36374. NEXTX 926 SC=SC +102 938 GOTO200 958 FORX= 1T06 960 R=R-1 ANA-1 POKEA+1,32 POKER-1.32 PO HER-1 32 : POKE36875 238 78 POKEA 34 : POKER, 35 POKE36875 @ NEVE' GOTO288 1998 DATA223,223,223 0.253,255,253, 60 89.24, 126, 189,24 36 231 -818 DATAB,255,255,85.85 85 255 255 24,6 2 98 98, 126, 126 255 178 1928 DATA15,6,2 2 2 2 2.2.7.5.138.71,182 126,62.28 1838 DATAB,0,0,0,0,0.50.66 129,90,126.22 229 235,98,60 2880 FORT=1T08 POKE 36874 178: POKE36679,4 2018 POKE36874 @ POKE36879 18 828 NEXTT 2830 LIELI-1 2835 IFLIE THEN3D0B 2648 GO TO53 2858 FORT=1T08 POKE 36879 124: POKE38875,2 1M=M +1 2868 POKE36879 18:POKE36375 8. A=4+: 2878 NEXTT 2830 D=D-20 2985 IFD COTHEND=3 2898 GO T053 3888 PRINT\" PRINT TOMTESTATO GHO OTO 3818 PRINT0 3828 PRINT CORE SC 3830 GET A$: IFAS=\" .FLY AGAIN W ORN 5240 IFA$=\"N\" THENPOKE36869 248 PRINT\" THENGOT050 END 3858 POKE36878, GOT03838 : 160 "


"SPACE AGE 2101 PILDT \"I travelled space till starcate 2209 and 93 days, collected my TRACTOR BEAM, LAZER BOOSTER, EXTRA SHIELDS. FUEL UNITS, PASSENGERS, 99 DAY VIROCONSOLVEAR FOOD SUPPLY... AND finally left for Zegrah with the Zadron bomb. I had earned and spent a total of $67,000.00 before leaving for the outer limits of the Mhiyken Solar System\". Journey to the other worlds, in this combination arcade strategy game, which could take months to complete. Using the save game and load game feature you can store your game and all your purchases until you return to continue. Available on cassette and Cass .95 disk for the Commodore 64 at all good computer stores. Disk .95 OZI Soft seating e OZI SOFT: London House, Baughurst, Hampshire, England, Telephone: (07356) 71163. Telex: 847423 -Taza THE MAT OZ2093 "


"The Activision Eight. GH STBUSTERS HERO PITFALLT ACIMSON Pitfall Harry has to recover the priceless Raj Diamond from the lost caverns. But there is a small matter of poisonous frogs. Albino Scorpions. Vampire Bats. Electric Eels. Need we go on? Running on Commodore 64, MSX and Spectrum Miners are trapped deep underground. Threatened by molten lava, poisonous bats, snakes, spiders. You alone in the person of Roderick Hero Helicopter Emergency Rescue Operation can help. Running on Commodore 64, Spectrum, MSX And you thought it was just a movie. But Ghostbusters is a computer game, too. Following the film with incredible accuracy. Even down to the chart topping music score. Running on Commodore 64 and Spectrum. Soon on other systems. SPACE SHUTTLE A JOURNEY INTO SPACE BT PAR STEVE KITCHEN RIVER RAID THE DESIGNERS PENCIL , With the Designers Pencil, you can draw the world-and everything that's in it. Write your own melodies. Learn to write and develope your own programs. Its scope is as broad as your own mind. Running on Commodore 64 and Spectrum ACT Man's ultimate journey. You can make it, in faithful detail, from lift-off, through an outerspace rendezvous, to landing. A genuine test of your inner strength. Available soon for Commodore 64 and Spectrum Stay cool. Stay low. Stay alive. Your mission is to fly down the world's most heavily defended river, destroying everything the enemy hurls at you. But beware... your fuel tanks are nearly dry. Running on Commodore 64, Spectrum, MSX DECATHLON Eight very different titles with one thing in common. The Activision touch of gold. BIZARPE For more details contact Activision (UK) Inc, 15, Harley House, Marylebone Road, London NW1. Number one in the charts. And set to stay there. Decathlon asks for total commitment Speed. Strength. Stamina. The will to win. Running on Commodore 64 Merton the maintenance man is set for yet another routine night in charge of the toy factory But something has gone terribly, terribly wrong. Running on Commodore 64. Soon on Spectrum ACTIVISION Your computer was made for us. "


"SPECTRIMASK \"... Dare you.actept this mission?\"... THESE PRICES VGC 1019 0.057.60 7.801 SPECTRUM COMA LATA RRP OURS RRP OURS OURS SPECTRUM COMM 64 ATARI HIGH NOON 6965.75 796-65 ZAXXON DALEYS DECATHLON 600 5.39 700 6.39 MUNCHBACK II 60 5.75 7. 6-65 SENTINE: SON OF BLAGGER 705 6.65 BLUE MAX 7.95 6.65 4.03 7.00 7.95 LOCO FOR 1 APOCALYPSE 7.93 0.65 0.09 7.00 7.00 ROCKET ROGER F1S STRIKE EAGLE 7.95 665 95 1149 11:49 SPACE PILOT NATO COMMANDER 3 7.90 7.00 FLIGHT PATH 737 709 6 29 SPITFIRE ACE JET SET WILLY 5.05 455 95 5.99 SNOOKIE 0.9% 7.00 7.00 MANIC MINER 5.5 465 595 STRIE FOKEE 7.95 6.05. 2.79 7.701 FULL THROTTLE 69 575 MYSTIC MANSION 7:45 PSYTRON DALLAS QUE51 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT BRUCE LEE 95 7.25 7.95 6.659 POOYAN MUCSY ORILEYS MINE 445 7.00 7.00 SHERLOCK HOLMES 49 1195 TEXT PRO SABRE WULF 9.9 7.85 DATA PRO ATIC ATAC 550429 SLNKY BEACH NEAD 7.5 6.75 CAVERNS OF KHARA CAVELON 5.4573 7.797.79 AZTEC CHALENGE GILLIGANS GOLD FORBIDDEN FOREST HUNCHBACK HOUSE OF USHER ZARGA MISSION CS GUEST FOR TYRES 3D TIME TREK KONG 64 CODE NAME MAT 609 4.99 SKRAMERE DEATH CHASE 6.95 5.45 SPELLBOUND CLASIC ADVENTURE 95 545 JET PAC ABERSOFT FORTH 1495 19 PSSSY COOKIE TRANZ AM CHARI BUSTERINC JINN GENIE 3. AGGER 4 OTHER LODE RUNNER 4.00 GAMES HRACKA OLYMPICS 5.90 450 2050-46 YONG STAKES BACK HEERE SEEBIES 3.70 UNDERWUNDE 898 839 ZAGA MISSION  A massive arcade adventure with a wealth of incredible graphics  Game Save facility. Flashload rapid loading system, 240 uniquely detailed locations many of which contain hidden surprises and ingredients necessary to complete the game. Key control selection. Interactive robots Pick up/use objeet facility 6-90 5.65 CONTACT DISEASES GUARDIAN VISITED 2 OOOOO Not only all this, but it's cheap too Popular Computing Weekly 5.9.84 \"Strangeloop is unique, graphically impressive, vast, and devious; In short, brill.... STRANGELOOP 10.40 560 RAID OVER MOSCOW STATUS Prices include P&P and VAT immediate despatch Wany many more games available on request at lon. low prices, inst ask for details with order PLEASE STATE WHICH MICRO Send your Name Address and Cheque or P. O. toProgrammed by Charles Goodwin. .95 BANANA SOFTWARE COMPANY STARNEAD WOKMCHAM, ...not days, not weeks but MONTHS of enjoyment.. BEURS. RG 11 2NX MICROBASE FOR PRICES THAT ARE HARD TO BEAT SPECTRUM SHERLOCK HOLMES 12.70 HAMPSTEAD KOKOTON WILF..... 495 BLACK HEAD. COMBAT LYNX DANGER MOUSE DOUBLE TROUBLE CBM 54 ZAXXON....................8.45 FLAK HAVOC KOKOTONI MILE PERCY THE POTTY PIGEON.6.75 MONTY MOLE CBM 54 ASTROCHASE. FUP & FLOP HIGH NDON FALCON PATROL QUO VADIS MYSTIC MANSION BLOCKBUSTER STRANGELOOP FRANK N. STEN FOREST AT THE WORLD'S END.4. 45 AMERICAN FOOTBALL...........8.45 IF YOU WANT TO ADVERTISE IN COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES RING 01-2516222 LAZY JONES... SHEEP IN SPACE CRAZY KONG CAVELON FORBIDDEN FOREST 7.45 MOUSE OF USHER..................5.75 SPACE PILOT. BOOGA 800. BOZO'S NIGHT OUT SOURA ONE SOLO FLIGHT BONGO BEACH HEAD.. HUNCHBACK   17. SON OF BLAGGER................6.25 ARABIAN NIGHT .........5.95 DECATHLON Prices include postage and Commodore packaging Write or phone for price list Please state Spectrum of Please send Cheque/PO to: MICROBASE, (CVG11), P.O. Box 28, Newcastle. NE3 1NH. Tel:091 285 9855. LOROS OF MIDNIGHT HGHTER PILOT BLUE THUNDER WAR OF THE WORLDS.......... ATIC ATAC NIGHT GUNNER BUGA 800. THE SANDMAN COMETH THE PROGRAM THAT ST-R -ET-C -H -E-S YOUR IMAGINATION This is no ordinary adventure. It can change your whole way of looking at the world. Starring the Sandman, the Cheddar Cat and a cast of thousands (well, OK, about a dozen really). The Sandman Cometh comes in two 48k parts on one cassette. And the first player to answer the hidden question correctly wins a weekend for two in Paris! \"Richly entertaining with attractive original graphics that display very quickly' Computer and Video Games. The Sandman Cometh is available from most good retailers or direct from: STAR DREAMS, 17 BARN CLOSE, SEAFORD E. SUSSEX BN25 3EW (p&p free). A DREAM OF AN EZ SPECTRUMARK .95 163 "


"From the producers of the highly successful MYSTERY OF MUNROE MANOR, two GREAT NEW GRAPHIC ADVENTURES for the CBM64.. SEVERA CTWARA VAC Nuclear War-Games .50 MASTA, the NORAD Defence Computer, is playing his games. ... you can save the World from total destruction by overcoming all the obstacles in your way and finally inserting the corrct code into MASTA to stop the countdown. Competition  cheque for the 1st correct answer in the post. See cassettes inlay for details. Search For King Solomons Mines .95 From the banks of the Zambesi, through the Jungle into the Tallawasi Mountains you search for King Solomons Mines in this superb epic graphic adventure. Two loads, 34K of memory and 3 levels of difficulty for beginners and Jungle Jim types! Competition —  cheque for the 1st correct answer in the post. See cassette inlay for details. Available at all good computer shops or direct from us. No extra charge for postage/package in UK. Overseas customer's please add 75p for each tape. SEVERN SOFTWARE 15 HIGH ST, LYDNEY, GLOS GL15 5DP Tel: 0594/43352 "


"DONT LET THE GREMLINS GET THE BETTER OF YOU, WRITE TO... LOONY TIME! LIVE FROM smiled, nodding in agreement. \"Golast a lifetime! Mike popped in to on Paul, move the Dragon!\" he offer me a preview of Return to Eden, OLYMPIA insisted, \"I'm not leaving until you on the Level 9 Stand. Pete took me move it!\" through part of the games and, What a fantastic time the Helpline Slowly, a light dawned, and Paul's although it was a brief introduction, I team had at the PCW show in mouth fell open, \"You wouldn't do a got the impression that here was a September! Simon Marsh, Paul sneaky think like that, surely?\" he game that played uncannily like a Coppins and myself arrived at Stand complained. \"I certainly would!\" real book. Review later! 1203 just before the show opened, chuckled Scott, \"and what's more, I would like to pay tribute to Paul and were on hand until it closed five it's one of my favourites!\" and Simon, without whose days later. Brian Howarth was another caller magnificent support and constant Goodness knows how many tips and I suggested we retired to the bar friendly good humour, I doubt if I and clues we dispensed between us for a chat (any excuse for a pint!). He would have survived the five days. during that time! Some came straight discussed the sad demise of Digital off the top of our heads, some from Fantasia, then very recent news. hint sheets and some from our HelpBrian was philosophical about it. line Database, which we had running \"That's life, I suppose,\" he said. The John Yeates, the unstoppable simultaneously on two TRS-80 Model much awaited Midwinter, although Adventurer with the bent brain, dis4 computers. One of these was playable, was still not quite finished, appointed me during the summer! connected to a printer, so we were because of Brian's recent problems. | Holidaying in Guernsey, my family able to dispense hard copies direct \"It will appear soon,\" he promised. decided to take me on a day trip to from the database to those adven Channel 8 will be distributing it in all Jersey. They forced me, screaming, turers who needed more hints than versions, as they will those versions aboard the hydrofoil. \"No not any they could carry home in their heads. of his other games that were originnearer to HIM!\" I cried, \"St Peter Port Our sincere apologies to those few ally published by DF. So, happily, we | is dangerously close as it is!\" people we were unable to help we will not be seeing the end of the These hydrofoils certainly move hope to fill the gaps in our knowfamous Mysterious Adventure series and far too soon I was just a few miles ledge very soon! Brian, who has been responsible away from where I ran the danger of Many visitors to the stand were for the Spectrum and BBC converbeing converted into a raving lunatic. fascinated to see our database in sions of the Scott Adams series, is Like a zombie, I headed for a phone action and some actually got \"hands now working with Adventure Inter and rang him. Imagine my relief, on\" experience of it themselves! national on further conversions. He when his grandmother answered and Among those who dropped in on and Scott could often be seen on the informed me he was out for the whole us was Jon Briggs of Radio 4's Chip AI stand, deeply engrossed in the day! But being an Adventurer, I was Shop who made a live broadcast, results of Brian's Spectrum version of only too aware that I might unknowdirect from the Adventure Helpline, Claymorgue Castle. After Voodoo ingly bump into him in St Helier, and I during Saturday afternoon's show. To Castle, Mike Woodroffe of AI (UK) didn't stop trembling until the jagged help us explain why the Helpline predicts the February release of a rocks along the Jersey coast faded existed and how the database \"real humdinger\" the two Savage from view. worked, we were joined by Seth Islands in one package, with two Once safely back in my hotel in St Kleinman of Bayswater, a C&VG more new Marvel games (The Peter Port, I felt brave enough to ring reader who walked on to the stand Fantastic Four) shortly after. him again to say how DISbefore the program started. Seth had Just over the way from Stand 1203 APPOINTED I was to have missed a Hobbit problem, (yes — THAT was Melbourne House, the temposeeing him. He seemed fairly unconHobbit problem!) and after getting rary resident of Philip Mitchell, the cerned, being more pre-occupied his tip, he explained to Jon Briggs man mainly responsible for the with his current project the how infuriating an Adventure could Hobbit and Sherlock. After a well creation of a new world-shattering be when the player was really stuck. deserved break in Europe, he will be Adventure trilogy ZARKI, ZARK 2 Another famous visitor to the stand heading back down under and and ZARK 3. was Scott Adams, who caught Paul suspects his next project could well \"You're not really as mad as you and Simon challenging the wiles of be Lord of the Rings. More about make out, are you?\" I asked. Claymorgue Castle on one of the Philip in the next issue. \"Oh yes! At least as mad as that!\" he Model 4's, during a rare quiet spell. A persistent but very welcome to replied modestly and added They were trying to shift the dragon, our stand was Margaret Austin. Was \"Anyway, don't worry, I hope to be but with little success, much to she after tips on Snowball, we visiting the mainland next summer!\" she after tips on Snowball, we visiting Scott's amusement. I suggested to wondered? No but we think that If I can find out when, it will Paul that there was a definite clue in the whole of Level 9 now have definitely be the Channel Isles again my review of the game and Scott enough C&VG Champs tee-shirts to for me next year the same week! KEITH CAMPBELL COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES PRIORY CT. 30-32 FARRINGDON LAN LONDON ECIR BAU 165 "


"127 ADVENTURE THE FINAL KET MYSTERIOUS long before it is claimed, unlike a However the unprecedented joy of certain sundial I could mention. finishing the game was somewhat NEWS! The problems in Final Mission are subdued by the message: not mind-boggling, but the game is ULK$ + 5(VAX %DBIHO:7E8 / The Vic versions of the Mysterious enjoyable to play. Once the prize has MP4JITQEF%GW6C? Y, Z = Adventure series by Brian Howarth, gone, the trilogy will have to stand on &R*-N2)9. which I recently reported to be availits own merit for further sales, and I I would be grateful if you could offer able, have not yet surfaced, due to think it will succeed. advice. Yours triumphantly,\" writes Brian's problems with Digital What bothers me, though, is the Vincent Fisher of Watford. You Fantasia. However, Brian promises promised award of Britain's Best haven't been feeding SI2 with saved that he hasn't dropped the idea and Adventurer to the winner. The title Hobbit data, have you Vincent? soon hopes to be working on the offered suggests something official \"Do you think we could possibly conversions. which it isn't. Whilst I like the trilogy, have less about The Hobbit?\" asks In the meantime, his fans will be I don't think that completing it would Nick Clark from Southend. \"Whilst it pleased to hear that he has written a prove too much about one's Advenis a good Adventure, so much has brand new adventure for Adventure turing ability. A game like Zork is been written about it and, considerInternational, due for release this needed for that. ing the number of bugs in my BBC side of Christmas. Through the The Final Mission is from Incentive version, I have frankly had enough. Enchanted Mirror is a game in which Software for 48k Spectrum, priced some of the bugs are so bad that they the player can explore parallel .50. will crash the program without the worlds full of mysterious undertones user doing anything wrong.\" of the supernatural A hint about Ultima 2 comes from Also promised by AI before Jonathan Day of Stockport. The book Christmas are two multi-player D&D CHAT The Sky at Night may have the type games, with animated monsters which are different each time played. \"I've done it. After a mere three answer to the problem on Ultima 2. months, 3,000 cups of tea, 17 TV sets \"Try looking at page 91 for two other The computer acts as the dungeon and 76 visits to my psycho-analyst, planets,\" he suggests. \"Also, surely master and a manual will provide the Savage Island Part 2 bit the dust! you know the earth's moon is so large game details. Brian Howarth has had it is a planet in its own right?\" a hand in these, along with \"fighting Guy Wilkinson of Stansted has fantasy\" Steve Jackson. some harsh words to say about the Quill. The Quill, he claims, must take all the fun out of Adventure writing (eg banging your head against a wall The Mountains of Ket trilogy is after failing for the nth time to implecompleted with the arrival of The ment a brilliant puzzle in the game!). Final Mission. The game has a nice \"Will this mean still more poor feel to it, like its predecessors. The screen is tidily arranged with the location details outlined in a box and shows the current percentage score. Watching this gradually increase is an incentive to continue, for points ue, for points The object of Hampstead is to climb sick a cracked washbasin containThe object of ing the remains of last nights are awarded with a fair degree of aur degree of to the top of the social ladder. One to the top of the social generosity. must attain Hampstead, not merely_ Vindaloo and Chips. and an old go there. for in this Adventure, banana and cod sandwich which, venture starts out with the player trapped one side of a door, Hampstead is a state, representing when eaten, caused the computer to reply \"UGH! No ketchup!\" where he must use his wits and a us wits and a the epitome of success. Hampstead, says the chair to get him into the main part of To reach this pinnacle, of course, it the game. I was somewhat amused to is necessary to lie, cheat and accompanying booklet, was find I could not stand on the chair defraud, as in real life. But beware, developed using the Quill. That while I was carrying it, but neverthemoney isn't the only thing one implies it is not an actual Quill less could carry it whilst I was standmust be seen to be doing the right program. Nevertheless, it has all the ing on it! However, this little quirk in things. It is no good, for example, hallmarks of one. The booklet is quite hilarious in its no way spoils the game. being a Sun reader, if you hope to own right and I particularly liked the A video recorder is the prize for the become a Hampstead Man! first person to successfully complete I had a horrible feeling that here narrative under a photo of some the trilogy a modest prize to be was an Adventure in which I would mews cottages describing them as sure, in times when large piles of totally fail, never having been known \"violently twee\". The credits say that ready cash are being offered for for my diplomacy and tact, not to put the authors run a private college, teaching deportment, conversation some games. But this is reassuring, too fine a point on it! I mean would for the scale of the prize, coupled I be writing for C&VGif I had attained and art appreciation. Don't believe a with my own impressions of the Hampstead? Of course not. I word of it! But the thick wad of  games, suggests that it will not be too wouldn't even be reading it, let alone notes mentioned just might come, true for them! wearing the T-shirt! Hampstead is for the 48K Spectrum, 166 There's plenty of humour in Hampstead and it's my type, ie rather from Melbourne House, priced .95. WA GETTING TO THE TOP "


"10 ADVENTURE 1984 Throughout the past year, I, factor. With all our reviews together with the able \"named\", you will soon get to assistance of Paul Coppins and know how our personal likes Simon Marsh, have brought and dislikes tally with yours. you reviews of many Adventure games. Some have given us publishers, whether we have And to authors and indescribable pleasure and praised or slated your games, excitement, others we have thank you for trying, at least, to found average and a few we bring enjoyment to us and to couldn't stand! Reviewing an Adventure sending the review copies! our fellow adventurers! Keep game is rather like reviewing a book. Sometimes an excellent all concerned with Adventure, My Christmas greetings to publication just does not suit everywhere. Whether you are the taste of the reviewer! In the player, reader, author, or New Year, by popular request, publisher, may you have a very we will be introducing a rating Merry Christmas and a Dragonsystem, including a \"personal slaying New Year! ADVENTURE! games? Anyone now, it seems, can type in a few locations, add a dragon, an axe and a lamp and sell copies for about  a time, laughing all the way to the bank!\" Who's going round and round in circles, from field to fuzzy area and back, getting nowhere, then? Great Hulks of letters have been arriving on the subject of fields, a certain underground room and ANTS! Hulk has certainly produced more than his fair share of letters and all sorts of people are getting stuck! Wax, ants and astral projections are baffling many a player not to mention scratch marks! Quite a Nightmare! Now there's a thought..! Steven Dix writes to warn people of Microdeal's Mansion House which, he says, is awful and not worth the trouble playing. You can open a safe twice, says Steven, and have the On the other hand, it may not be same objects fall out onto the floor quite your cup of tea. It wasn't mine. twice — even though you have Macbeth is for the Commodore 64 picked them up! He refuses to look at from Creative Sparks and costs .95. the listing in case it damages his programming style! A CHRISTMAS James Bibby who writes once again, as he puts it, to our \"illustrious organ\" (is out August Journal turning A title that can do nothing but act as a into an oversized piano?), reckons his magnet for parents with fairly young correspondence is becoming so and thus it was, when I came upon children at this time of vear js Peter regular that his pet dog is becoming the immovable Macdonwald, in Pan. jealous! However, James has at last order to pass him, I had to UNSEAM Peter Pan is one of the ever found two adventures to keep him MACDONWALD FROM NAVE TO growing list of Adventure games happy Castle of Piddles and The CHOP. This, of course, I did with based on popular fiction and the Pen and The Bark. You're not taking relish. book is included with the software. In the castle out of my game, James, I Macbeth comes in four parts. You fact, the J.M. Barrie royalty from the hope?! James signs off with this play the part of Lady Macbeth in one sales is bequeathed to the Great thought: if you came across a very and Macbeth himself in others. Two Ormond Street hospital for sick small German guard whilst playing parts have graphics and are not only children a fact that in itself might Colditz, would he be described as a very artistically drawn, but reflect the commend the package to a Stalagmite? current state of play. Thus, a trapdoor prospective purchaser. will be shown as closed or open and NOW PLAY THE The player has to follow the story should you \"fix Macdonwald's head fairly closely. Events commence in upon the battlements\", there you will the Darling children's bedroom after see it dripping with blood! Never the goodnight story. You, Peter, fly in Shakespeare has finally caught up eaten Mekilwort Pie? Now's your with Tinker Bell. To fly away to with the micro, in the form of chance to find out what it does for Neverland, you must have Fairy Dust Macbeth. you and see the size of slice you and be complete with shadow To play Macbeth, you will need to took which goes missing in the attached. Of course, this is one of the be familiar with the play, or to have picture! Adventure problems. the pocket edition supplied with the If you happen to get killed, then My verdict is if you are parents game with you, and preferably both. you may be given a second chance with children in the 5 to 8 age range, The game requires an understanding by answering some fairly probing read them the book and then play the of the play and the use of Shakesquestions about the play. So here is a game to them. Let them join in, even. perian words as commands in the novel way of really getting to know You will get a break for beer and Adventure. your Macbeth. If it should happen to ciggies every now and again, whilst Do not despair I am no great be your set paper for an exam, then you are in flight, for example! classics student, but still performed by the time you've worked your way Serious dragon-bashers though passably in the Adventure! If you through this game, your knowledge steer clear! This is NOT for you! type HELP, the chances are you will should be very thorough and Peter Pan is for the 48K Spectrum, be referred to a passage in the play gained in a unique way! from Hodder and Stoughton. PLAY! 167 "


"DON'T LET THE GREMLINS GET THE BETTER OF YOU, WRITE TO... x-se THEY STILL KEEP COMING KEITH TELL HULK *** EGG BUT your \"Am I really rather clever\" WHEN HULK GET THERE, GAS letter! Everyone is claiming an TURN HULK TO BRUCE AND THEN excessive and a tee-shirt! You'd EGG BANG! KEITH SAY ANTS HELP think we ran an Oxfam shop for David Radisic wrote from Basildon to HULK BY KILLING HULK LIKE Flatheads! help Jonathan Day in his search for ALWAYS DO? KEITH SAY HULK LIFT So from next month, the Editor has Zork on a PDP-11. Softsel, he says, are RING! KEITH THINK HULK STUPID?. kindly granted me two tee-shirts to Infocom's English distributors, on HULK TRY MANY TIMES, BUT GAS give away! But I'm a bit meaner than 01-844 2040. If they can't help, then it | COMES! him you're going to have to earn is possible to order direct from the Jonathan Brough writes from Seaton one! Each month I will be sending a US. But David adds a warning that he to express his disappointment at my C&VG Champ tee-shirt to the person wrote eight times to Infocom in the having mentioned the \"other\" Ghost who sends in the best tips and the US, following an unfulfilled order, Town from Virgin games, which he person who writes the most interestand it was only with help from Rita thinks is an \"intriguing graphical ing overall letter about Adventure! If Rivard of 80-Micro magazine that he adventure\", only twice. As much as | you write and don't get one, don't be managed to get a response. So he that, Jonathan? I make it only once disappointed I can tell you that the suggests sending any such mail to and then it was to say how awful it standard of some of the letters, tips other countries registered and was. It just goes to show how easy it and maps are absolutely superb! keeping a photocopy of everything is to confuse people and sell copies if I called in on Softsel's stand at the you pinch the name of a well-known PCW Show and discovered that they quality game, ie Scott's Ghost Town. H A VAYHINTS supply the trade only, but will Sorry to disagree with you, Jonathan, happily advise callers on the nearest but I put it in the worst 10 Adventures Credits this month go to: Stephen stockist of any particular item of I have ever played! Rooney of Dublin, Stefan Fafinski of Infocom Software and, if necessary, Do you realise that the plot of Reading, Colin Wilson of Glenrothes, order it. Circus is similar to Ray Bradbury's Adrian Brown of Nottingham, Nic \"I would like to warn anyone Something Wicked This Way Comes, Aplin, Jonathan Day of Stockport and, thinking of buying the Fabulous asks Steve Dix of Rugeley. \"Perhaps I of course, Beverley Randle. Wanda not to,\" says Dave Coverley should write to Ray and ask him how a well experienced Adventurer to open the maintenance wagon!\" Hueydaje a 10 janeya Od row Sue SWM wew whose pleas reached me before jokes Steve. Well, Steve, I mentioned 15300 S.H3HDOSO TIH even the HelpLine officially started! your observations to Brian Howarth \" Soup U o supio sajpur insa au pur jaqeydje aujo \"The arcade action is pathetic,\" he and discovered that any similarity is O Bu puodsi u sebe sale sau abuewy poo auto pagnual  01 5.. 385 Run Supanb aul pieud2mg buAE adds in disgust. purely coincidence, since Brian has IWVH :O WOLONIX Hugo Hackenbush writes from not read the book. \"MOJO Killyleagh to complain about The Ross Campbell of Wokingham Code. On receiving the game after | points out that a review of a game on -NOIVA N30709 difficulty in getting his order fulfilled, one micro does not necessarily hold Buru BUODLOs pue liye Joy Budejsku-opeis cod he has never been so disappointed in true for the same game in a version 18V1Sdn Nvaun his life! The locations lack exits, some on a different micro. In particular, Buy Sooj ayley 41 Jeau poi uopOOM vous au NEM 'n Bujano e pugeu 16 OJ exits don't connect so a map is point! says Ross, Twin Kingdom Valley less and he is reduced to taking, seems a lot better on the Commo- No0oNIX NIMI dropping and defusing, he says. So it dore 64 than the BBC. True, Ross, and eo aul wes o oyu Osu pur shayal Janosip oj xogando aus uedo wasn't just me thank goodness for we try to remember to mention on -NI  that! which computer we've played for the je qoydophy wou sans kew ouim ol Geoffrey Davis of Bridgewater in review. But I must add, Ross, that NUVY SO S3OU3H Somerset writes \"In your reply to my when TKV was reviewed, it was only *** peacons 1 uop nok e m al jououou problem, you suggested I take Dr available for the BBC. ng     rg   Adooe Asus Strange's advice. This, I am sure, is Bev has come up trumps again in -S370019 :0 31SVI very useful, but I have yet to find Dr reply to my plea for Russell Martin. I     of wise ou S UM 2146 je dwe yo au SIKU-YUL 1 Strange!\" This illustrates the difficulty can't understand a word she says, INNOO of helping people without giving too Russell, but no doubt you and many Buous jedns swoeg J aoupe sjoppo novel much of the game away. It is just as others will look for the upside XINH easy to give too little of the game down Kingdom of Hamil clue! And    away! For example, I replied help thanks once again, Bev! BUOS pa suos ang ada dwe peau no ajounod ay umOP 06 OL fully to Jim Jennett's Hulk problem, Which reminds me you certainly 3SunO VONI only to receive the following started something, Beverley! They're  i panod  n  u   20 15 i ppy message written in green ink: GRRR! | all on the earhole for a tee-shirt since T ZyvSind WOU: 3dV3S3 KEITH CAMPBELL COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES PRIORY CT. 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON ECIR SAU 168 You warr Alie! of th task, fears "


"-937SAMURAI SOFTWARE Castle of the Skull Lord Packaged in a Special Presentation Box which includes a \"Free Dust Cover\" for your computer. In a battle lost in the mists of time, the necromantic Skull Lord attacked and defeated a race of noble Dwarves. The Dwarves lost many treasures, the most valuable of these being the \"Crown of Dwarves Kings\". For many ages did they attempt to regain this artifact, and for many ages did they fail. Now in desperation they call upon you, noble warrior, to attempt that which is beyond their power. Your quest:To regain the fabled crown and defeat the all powerful skull lord. SKILL CASTLE OF The adventure is of the classic format. Simple verbnoun combinations are ex. pected, and will usually be understood. Please tick the correct boxes in the mail order coupon. MS MAZEY PECTRUM Y.95 AMSTRAD .95 Runs in 41.6k N SHARP MZ7110 .95 CBM 640 .95 DRAGON Special modified .95 version SPECTRUM 48k .95 BBC .95 VIC 20 16k Special modified Special modified version version .95 ELECTRON .95 T199/4A Special modified Special modified version version INVADER SAMURI MS. MAZEY ROOSTER RUN INVADERS .95 .95 .95 Amstrad only Amstrad only Amstrad O Samurai Invaders Ms. Mazey Rooster Run only Can you guide the intrepid Ms. Mazey Why DID the chicken cross the SEND CHEQUES / POSTAL ORDERS TO around her garden maze and collect road? You don't know? Neither Samuri Software to the evil skull riders?' (in a garden?) 16 Clapgate Lane, Goose Green, warrior whose aim is to prevent the game you may Can you make it to the magical \"flow just find out! Wigan. WN3 ORN Alen invaders from gaining controler pills\" Will you get the \"flower Your aim is or Ring: Tele-Sales (0942) 495753 with of the earth. To help you in this power\" to zap the skulls? Will Ms. rooster across the road, then, get in ACCESS / VISA NO for tak, you are armed with shuriken, Mazey ever get to see the flower of the boat and avoid the aquamarine IMMEDIATE DESPATCH. Barsome oriental throwing stars. her heart, Percy Chucka? hazards. What could be simpler?! do "


"STARCADE SAVAGE POND Argus Press Software Group  some in its conception Brilliant in its depiction Dynamic in its execution The world you are about to enter bears no resemblance to any arena you ever encountered before. Weapons are of no avail in this small habitat. The only sources of protection at your disposal are quick wits and fast reflexes. The only reward is to survive against monsters of unbelievable ferocity and cunning, and to avoid hazards more perilous and deadly than any you might find on a trip through the outer universe. This is the real world, populated by the creatures of our own inner universe, where nature is red in tooth and claw. Brace yourself now, and come with Starcade into the still water and deceptive calm of the SAVAGE POND. COMMODORE, ATARI, BBC/ELECTRON (.95 each) On disc for COMMODORE, ATARI, BBC/ELECTRON (.95 each) Now available for SPECTRUM (.95) From Boots and all leading retailers STARSADE UPUPANDAWAY STARCADE REWE UP UP AND AWAY Argus Press Up Up and Away Software Grup COMMODORE, ATARI, BBC (.95 each) On disc for COMMODORE, ATARI, BBC (.95 each) produced by ARGUS PRESS SOFTWARE No 1 Golden Square, London WIR 3AB Telephone: 01 437 0626 "


"NAG JONES A new games concept for the CBM 64 Play LAZY JONES and become the laziest and most skilled shirker in the Hotel business. Your hotel has 18 rooms most of which have their own computer game. You must play LAZY JONES, playing each game, but avoid being caught by the irate manager. Each game in the Hotel is displayed on a split screen and is the first TERMINAL SOFTWARE game to incorporate its en fast loader-Term load. RRP .95 24 THÉP OURO SCORE_000000 LIUESS HI 000000 ANOTHER WINNER FROM ROM RAM TERMINAL SCORE_010 TIME=8766 300 Akra STARDUST SCORE 000 SCOOT SCORE 000 TIE9867 SCORE 000 THE 77233 WILD WAFERS 99 RED BALLOONS Terminal Software Games. are available from Micro Dealer International Retail Tial Sweden John Menzies Ozisoft Australia Dixons Software Express Alpine New Zealand Makro S.P.I.D.-France Selected Lewis's & Co-op Stores TERMINAL Micro Dealer PCS Distributors Prism Bulldog R & R Computer Games Centresoft SDL ESD Electronics Solomon & Peres Gordon Howson Tiger Distribution Lightning Twang LVL AB Terminal Software, Derby House, Derby Street, Bury BLI ONW, England. Tel. 061-761-4321 "


"A New Leader Emerges protek JOYSTICK INTERFACE LLLLLLLLLLLL Protek Switchable Joystick Interface It is so easy to use-there's no software patch tapes or programming required. Simply plug in and flick the switch for compatability with all games requiring a joystick. Available for immediate delivery, AVAILABLE FROM LEADING COMPUTER STORES retailing at delivery, $19.95 Protek= Protek Computing Ltd, 1A Young Square, Brucefield Industrial Park, Livingston, West Lothian. 0506 415353. "


"Glass G ALON AVALON Com Wreuth THE GATEHOUSE The year is 408 AD. Maroc the The crowd mutters and Mage is a Lore Seeker. He begins to disperse. The Causeway travels, gathering knowledge Maroc, much embarrassed of the old ways and is learned and disturbed by the event, The Isle di Avalon in the subtle arts of herbs and prepares to leave. But the old Candid Chanshealing. woman takes him aside and Rasim Aladit One night, while orating one gives him an old oak staff with Harga of his collected rhymes, \"The an iron head and an old Warloete Legend of Avalon\", to some map. \"There is Avalon,\" she interested villagers, an old chuckles menacingly, pointing woman in the crowd begins to a mysterious hill rising in foretelling a new age of chaos. the blue distance. LEVEL The air chills as she speaks of Maroc's curiosity over. whereabouts of this room is the dread Lord of Chaos once whelms his fears and he one secret Professor Video again leading his wild hunt allows the villagers to guide has yet to uncover. Perhaps across the night sky, stealing him to the Island across a YOU can help him? Let us corpses from graveyards and causeway half hidden under a know how far you can get battlefields. dark sea. The villagers sudinto the mysteries of Avalon. Her bony finger points at denly depart, leaving him But before the Prof. goes Maroc. \"Go to the Isle of alone on the island to consider back to his history books, Glass\" she demands fiercely. his next move ... here's one more clue for you. He found it written on a stone The Legend of Avalon Thus runs the Legend of happens... tablet at the entrance to Avalon, which Professor The Way Room Avalon. Beyond the shadow of the Video discovered on a \"Gold can buy a star to fit sun, crumpled ancient parchment To get to the deeper levels of and a servant comes when Where countless alien while on an archaelogical dig Avalon, you must help Maroc you ring, but what colour is realms are hung, somewhere in deepest find The Way Room but the the fish?\" The Lord of earth reached Wessex. He also uncovered out in dread some interesting facts about Maroc the Mage needs a few spells to help him on his To claim his tribute from Avalon thanks to fellow quest to destroy the Lord of Chaos. Professor Video has the dead. historians Hewson Conunravelled the secrets of mystic runes found in the first His horn sounds out his sultants room of the mysterious mound and can now tell you just warning cry, Hewson's historians have how to get two vital spells. But first you'll need to know The wild hunt thunders delved into the secrets of the what he means by his instructions! across the sky. Isle of Avalon and now C&VG Instruction Meaning can exclusively reveal the EXIT LEFT: Leave the room by the door on the Mage and Lorelord map they have made of the viewer's left. combine their might entrance to the mysterious EXIT UPPER LEFT: Leave by the rearmost of the two To crush the chaos of the mound known only as The doors on the viewer's left. night. Gatehouse Level. EXIT REAR: Leave by the door at the back of the With cunning craft they Prof Video has deciphered room. forge for war the riddles of the map and EXIT CENTRE REAR: Leave by the centre door of three at The sword of power, with the help of the Hewson the back of the room. Caliburn, historians can now reveal Leave the room by the only door. The Amulet for some extremely useful hints CROSS: Leave the room (which has two doors evermore, and tips only) by the door through which you The Wraithbane rod of The Wizard did not enter. lore. You will have noticed that Collecting \"Energise'' and ''Freeze' spells. Upon a bier of burning from time to time another gold, wizard materialises near you Select \"MOVE\" by pressing 'FIRE'. They set the cup of power floating above the action. EXIT to red room, note star. untold. This wizard has something EXIT RIGHT to blue room. you really need. To get it, you EXIT REAR to yellow room, collect spell by passing Maroc Before the radiant host must pay him some gold you over the spell scroll in the middle of the room. they fly pick up from a chest someDeselect \"MOVE\" by pressing 'FIRE'. To chasms deep below the where on the Gatehouse Note \"ENERGISE\" is now on scroll at bottom of screen. sky. Level. The Servant sprite will Use joystick to move \"ENERGISE' next to arrow. Within the crystal Isle of help you get the gold but Press 'FIRE' several times to boost dragon flame of energy Glass then you've got to find the Select \"MOVE\" and fire. The destiny of men must Servant too, haven't you! EXIT RIGHT note your first encounter with goblin pass. Look closely at the map and warriors (three of them) avoid them or they will The earth is rent as read the cryptic clue below drain your energy. powers collide, you might just be able to work EXIT RIGHT collect FREEZE spell scroll. Victors and vanquished it out! EXIT LEFT scaled inside. Once you've got the gold, CROSS Warriors, lorelords are go back to the starting room CROSS AGAIN to blue room. gone and wait for the wizard to EXIT LEFT to red room, note the star. Lost, entombed in Avalon, appear. Then see what EXIT LEFT to starting position. 173 "


"AVA Guardians of Chads O LP Chest Containing Scroll Locked Chest Containing Money Wraith Locked Chest Containing Key Pentangle Servant Ring y colin Goblin Spell Scroll Blocked Door "


"zah ) Dolina NOTsa "


"48K SINCLAIR IX SPECTRUM KISISISISI Nana RAREN TISSKISSSS STOTIS \"UNDERPURLDE\" recommended retail pice $9.95 inc VAT Available from W.H.SITES, BOOTS, J.TENZIES, WOOLWORIES and all good software retail outlets. Also available from ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME, The Green, Ashbyde-la-touch, Leicestershire LE6 3JU ' (P&P included) Tel: 0530 41485 "


"48K SINCLAIR ZX SPECTRUM \"KNIGHT LORE\" recommended retail price .95 inc VAT Available from W.H.SMITHS, BOOTS, J.MENZIES, WOOLWORTHS, and all good software retail outlets. Also available from ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME, The Green, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire LE6 5JU (P&P included) Tel: 0530 411485 "


"BBC MODEL B 1.2 OS Tales EANNA \"SABRE WULF\" recommended retail price .95 inc VAT Available from W.H.SMITHS, BOOTS, J.MENZIES, WOOLWORTHS, and all good software retail outlets. Also available from ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME, The Green, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire LE6 5JU, (P&P included) Tel: 0530 411485 "


"COMMODORE 64 (Joystick Compatible) KORNETT \"THE STAFF OF KARNATH\" recommended retail price .95 inc VAT Available from W.H.SMITHS, BOOTS, J.MENZIES, WOOLWORTHS, and all good software retail outlets. Also available from ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME, The Green, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire LE6 5JU, (P&P included) Tel: 0530 411485 "


"IT'S HERE! FOR THE Commodore 64 Commodore For TOOTBANI MANAGER \"Absorbing and realistic Highly recommended\" Sunday Times, February 1984 \"Completely fantastic I want one!\" Charlie Nicholas, Arsenal striker in Big K, April 1984 \"Having chosen your players the match highlights are then displayed in very good animated 3-D Graphics. ... There are many other excellent features in this game in fact the attention to detail is outstanding (5 out of 5).» Popular Computing Weekly16 August 1984 YEAR Action from the Game STRATEGY GAME OF THE Nominated GOLDEN JOYSTICK AWARD KEVIN TOMS Designer $7.95 Some outstanding features of the game  Matches in 3D graphics  Transfer market  Promotion and relegation  F.A. Cup matches  Injury problems  Full league tables  Four Divisions  Pick your own team for each match  As many seasons as you like  Managerial rating  7 skill levels. Save game facility. Financial manipulations. 4 divisions and customising feature. You can even be sacked! Available from computer software stockists nationwide, including B & WHISMITHE Prices: BBC Model B -95 To order by mall (p&p free) send cheques or ALSO FOR Spectrum 48K 96-95 BBC 32K ZX81 16K $5.95 (N.B. 3D GRAPHICS ARE NOT INCLUDED IN SPECTRUM 48K THE ZX VERSION 7A Richmond HII, BOURNEMOUTH, BH2 6HE & ZX81 16K John Menzies postal orders to: Addictive Games Overseas orders add $1.50 "


"FRANTIC FARMER RUNS ON A BBC MODEL B Giles the Farmer hasn't been working too hard during the summer. And now that the cold fingers of the north wind are beginning to creep under the doors of his farmhouse, he is starting to regret not earning enough money to pay the fuel bills. You have to help Giles search his barren field for some firewood to burn on his stove. Trees have grown all over the field and you have to make sure that Giles doesn't run into any of them in his panic. As well as collecting the dead branches off the ground, Giles can pick up any corn seeds he finds and store them away for next spring. Full instructions are included in the listing. BY JONATHAN TEMPLE . .... FRANTI: 10 REM.... FARMER Jonathan 20 REM .......... Temple 30 *TV255 40 MODE 1 50 PROC instruct 60 PROCchars 70 PROCsetup 80 PROCinit 90 PROCscreen 100 PROCtitle 119 PRINTTAB 10, 13)CC) Jonath an Temple\" 120 PROCget 130 REPERT 140 PROCinit 150 REPEAT 160 PROCscreen 179 REPEAT 180 PROCman 129 IF SH>1 PROCzombie 20 PROCtune 120: NEXT TO (5-SN 219. FOR N= 220 UNTIL KF% OR WCX-9 230 IF WC%=8 PROCcount ELSE LV KELVZ-1 240 UNTIL LV%=0 259 IF SC%HS% HS% SC% Illustration: Dave McTaggart SEEDS "


"269 PROCtitle 270 PRINTTRBC 12,13 )\"HIGH SCORE \"HSX 280 PROCget 290 UNTIL FALSE 309 : 310 DEFPROCran 320 IF INKEY-99 REPEAT UNTIL 1 NKEY-74 330 TD%=INKEY-73)-(INKEY-98) *2-(INKEY-105*3INKEY-674 340 TXXEMXX:TYZMYX: IF TDX MD TDX 350 MY MY +(MDX=1)MDZ#3 360 7X%=MXK+CMD%=2)-(MD%=4 370 VDU 31, TXX, TY%, 32 390 IF 00232 VDU 17.2,8,231 :P ROCseeds(-1) 390 IF OC%=31 VDU 17,1, 8, 132 400 IF OC%=133 VDU 17,3,8,133 410 OCY=FNRC MX, MY2):IF 0013 0 PROCtest 420 VDU 17,3,31,MX%, MY%, MCX 430 IF SN7>2 IF RNDC 1 >>.98 IF EX EO PROCdiamond 440 IF RX IF TIME>500 VDU 17, 1,31,RXX, RYK, 130 : RX 1,33,5 3: SOUND 19 450 ENDPROC 460 : 470 DEFPROCzombie 480 TXX=ZXX: TY=ZY%: VDU 31, 2X 292,32 499 ZY%=ZYK+(ZD%-1)-(ZD=3) 599 ZX%=ZX%+(ZD%2)-(ZD%+4) 510 2C%-FNR ZX%, ZY%):IF 2012 8 OR 20%=129 KF%=1 ELSE IF 2C%1 31 ZD%=ZD%+1:ZXTX%: ZY ZD%=5 ZD%=1 TY: IF 520 VDU 31,ZX, ZYK, 230 S30 ENDPROC 549 : 550 DEFPROCdiamond 560 PROCrandom: SOUND 19,1, 129, 579 VDU 31, RX, RY, 233: TIME=0 580 ENDPROC 599 660 DEFPROCtest 610 ON OC-130 GOSUB 640.658,61 60,640, 680,690, 700 620 ENDPROC 630 : 640 KF1: RETURN 659 IF MCX-225 OCA21 : RETURN E LSE MC-225: SOUND 19,1,125,29 RE TURN 660 MY-29: MD00CX=32: IF MC -225 MC-224 WC WC+1 : PROCsere (10): SOUND 19,1, 106,20 670 RETURN 680 PROCseeds(-10): RETURN 690 PROCseeds(25): SOUND 19.2.11 99,3 RETURN 700 PROCscore(50): SOUND 19,2.7 5,6: RETURN 719 720 DEFPROCscore(AD%) 730 SC-SC +ADZ: COLOUR 3 PRINT TAR7,05C%; TAB 33,9C% 740 ENDPROC 759 : 760 DEFPROCseeds AD) 770 SD%-90%+AD 1:SD IF SD A KFT 780 COLOUR 3:PRINTTARA, OD 790 ENDPROC 800 : 010 DEFPROClives 820 COLOUR 3:PRINTTABC 38,0\" TABC 39, STRINGSCLV-1,CHR$224) 830 ENDPROC 840 : 850 DEFPROCcount 860 N=81 : RESTORE 1869:#FX15.0 870 FOR N= TO 380: NEXT SEEDS "


"19, 27 =12 1 880 FOR T=1 TO 10: READ A.D:N-N + 890 SOUND 1.1,N,D: SOUND 2, -7,N +48,0 900 NEXT 919 FOR YK-2 TO 27: FOR X=2 TO 37 920 IF FNRCX,Y)=135 SC% SC%+ 930 NEXT, : PROCscoreco 940 SN%SN%-(SN%<5: ENDPROC 95 : 960 DEFPROCandom 970 REPEAT RX RNDK 36 )+1: RYR ND( 24 )+3 980 UNTIL FNRCRX, RY1-130: END PROC 990 : 1900 DEFPROCchars 1019 FOR C=224 TO 233 : VDU 23,0 1020 FOR N=1 TO 8:READ V:VDU V: NEXT 1939 fields=CHR 17+CHR$1+CHR$22 1640 trees CHR$17+CHR$2+CHR$227 1050 ENDPROC 1060 1070 DEFPROCsetup 1080 HS%=200:@\":19 SEFA -SEEDSN "


"1990 VDU 19,2,2,0; 23;10,32,0; 9; 0: 1100 !870=&F4299749: !874869808 6FF 1110 ENVELOPE 1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,1 26,-1,0, -5,126,0 1120 ENVELOPE 2.133,8,4,9,3,1,1 , 126, 0, 0, -19, 126,0 1130 ENDPROO 1140 1150 DEFPROCimit 1160 LV-3: SD%=150: SC%=0: SN%=1 1170 ENDPROC 1189 1190 DEFPROCScreen 1200 VDU 12,17,7 1210 PRINTTAB(0,0,\"SCORE: \"TAB 1 4.0\"SEEDS: \"TAB 27,0)\"WOOD: \" 1220 SD3200 :WC%=0:MP :RESTOR E 1940 1230 PROCscore(a) PROCseedsco): PRIClives 1240 PRINTTAB 2,2>STRING$< 40, tr ees 1250 FOR Y TO 20 1260 PRINTTABCO, Y tree's\" \"STRI NG$636, field)\" \"tree 1279 NEXT 1290 PRINT TABC0,38 STRING(40, rees 1290 VDU 31,0,3,227,31,39,3,227 , 31,0,29,227,31,39,29,227,31,2,2 7,227,19,227,17,3,5,9,229, 17,2 1300 FOR trees=1 TO SN5+10 1310 PROCrandom: VDU 31, RX, RY 227 : NEXT 3 1320 FOR seeds=1 TO (6-SN% 1330 PROCrandom: VDU 31, RX, RY, 232: NEXT 1340 FOR Wood-1 TO 10 1350 PROCrandom : VDU 17, 1.31.RXX RY, 228 1360 NEXT KF0:00 32 1370 MX-1: MY%29: MD=4:10%-224 1380 VDU 17,3;31,1,29,MOX 1290 2X*39: 2 3 :2D%*2 R 19 1400 IF SN\":1 VDU 21,38,3,200 1416 ENDPROC 1420 : 1430 DEFPROCtitle 1448 VDU 28.4.21,35,7.12.26.17, KWMUWUOOUUWW 1456 PRINTTAR 12, 11)\"FRANTIC ARMER\" 1460 ENOPROC 1-79: 14:09 DEFPROCget: 1490 PRINTTAD , 15\"PREOS SPACE DAR TO PLA,\" 1500 F15,0 1510 REPEAT UINTIL CET 32 1529 ENDPROC 1530 : 1540 DEFPROCtune 1550 READ A: IF A=-1 SOUND 2,0,0 , 1 ELSE SOUND 2, -19-(MP%=40*5.A ,1 1569 MP MP%+1 MOD41: IF MP3 RESTORE 1842 1572 ENDPROC 1589 1590 DEFFNR(X%, y VDU 31, x2, YK: CALL 8.76: =78.80 1609 : 1610 DEFPROCinstruct 1620 COLOUR 2 1630 PRINTTABC 12,0\"FRANTIC FAR MER\": 1640 COLOUR 1 1650 PRINT'''Guide the farmer a round the screen usingthe 2,X, and keys, bringing pieces offi rewood back to your small house one ata time whilst leaving at ail of Seeds.\" 1660 COLOUR 2 1670 PRINT')\"Try not to cross t his trail as doing so will lose a you some seeds, and you lose life each time you run out. If y ou aregetting short, get the sma Il piles of Seeds but watch ou. t for trees!\" SEEDS AVISAYA CODS "


"MO@OPOWERMICRODOW@RM3 A FANTASTIC NEW PROGRAM FROM BRITAIN'S LEADING SOFTWARE HOUSE SUPER-FAST LOADING TIME commodore 61 , electron ..c, MICRO Ew@@Mo@odowa@MOCO@BOWOOMOOo Skid round hairpin bends, cutting up the competition and rebounding off the barriers. A one or two playe racing game featuring 6 different circuits, oil patches, selectable number of laps and variable skid. ,95 (BBC version .95) BBC and Commodore Disk price .95    COMMODORE 64 VERSION WATCH OUT FOR OUR NEW PACKAGING AND CATALOGUE MOCRO POWER VOPOWERMOCROPOWER MICRO POWER LTD. NORTHWOOD HOUSE, NORTH STREET LEEDS LS7 ZAA TEL: (0532) 458800 SELECTIVE BRANCHES OF BOOTS, CO-OP. NMENZIES. W. H. SMITH, WOOLWORTHS AND ALL GOOD DEALERS AUTHORS! WE PAY 20% ROYALTIES! "


"Will you bethe first Earthling towina plce Acornsoft are issuing a nationwide challenge embark upon an experience unlike any that you to all Acorn Electron and BBC Micro users. have known before. It's the challenge to join a new and exclusive You will be a space trader who roams the group of computer games players: The Elite. universe, making your living from buying and v With 3-dimensional graphics. Elite is a game selling the cargo in your Cobra space craft. which is light years ahead of any other. On your travels, you will encounter aggressors 2 It strictly defines the rank of each and everywho are eager to put an end to your dealings. player. Only the fittest will survive. As your prowess improves, you move into As you establish yourself as a survivor, you higher ranks. will win the right to a higher rank. But make no mistake, to reach the top rank, In all, there are nine, from \"Harmless» to f your performance must become exceptional. \"Elite\" And your computer will continually tells Then, and only then, will you qualify to call you where you stand. yourself a member of The Elite. Trade with 2.000 planets in eight galaxies. t From harmless, you must become lethal. Besides survival, your success also depends In Elite, all players start as equals. on the rewards you reap from the cargo that With the initial rank of \"Harmless, you will you carry. "


"load your game onto cassette or disc each time you take a break from play. When you reach the rank of \"Competent\" or higher, you should send us the secret code number revealed to you by your computer. We will send you in return a special document which certifies your achievement. And you stand to win a valuable prize. Are you ready to accept the challenge? Elite is available on both disc and cassette for the BBC Micro and on cassette for the Acorn Electron. With either, you will get \"Elite: The Dark Wheel' a compelling novel which sets the whole mood of your adventure. You'll also get a flight training manual which will get you fit to roar into the unknown in your Cobra spacecraft. Your Acornsoft dealer now has the entire package at $14.95 on cassette, or .65 on disc (for the BBC Micro) and $12.95 for the Electron. For the address of your local stockist or to order by credit card simply ring 0933 79300 during office hours. Alternatively, you can order by post from: Acornsoft, c/o Vector Marketing, London Road, Wellingborough, Northants NN8 2RL. You can also get a free Elite poster by ringing 0933 79300. Slace among the Elite? ACORNSOFT ou ind sors fou That cargo can be anything from foodstuffs to contraband. If you decide to trade in contraband, the rewards will certainly be higher. But so will the risks you take. To ply your trade, you can dock at any of 2.000 planets in eight galaxies. However, before you dock, you must use your wits to assess the planet's political climate and the perils which may be waiting for you. Also, in any of the eight galaxies, you may find yourself being asked to perform acts of considerable heroism and selfless courage. Although these will bring you into danger, they can bring considerable rewards too. We're waiting to recognize your skills. Achieving higher status in Elite will tax your skills to the limit. Which is why you must downtell for the BBC Microcomputer nds ACORNSOFT "


"FOW.COMMODORO QUALITY CONTROL FROM CREATIVE SPARKS ON C64 For those who demand excellence JAVA SOUARESMEDEROUBLE JAVA JIM Guide Jaye Jim around the screen digging negr square holes as he searches for ancient relics. You will have to avoid the lumps of sizzling lava being continually showered down on Jim from the still achive volcano in this highly original fun game. 4 full graphic all action screens. 20 levels of play. High score feature. Fast loading cassette. FOR COMMODORE 64 COUNTDOWN TO MELTDOWN COUNTDOWN TO MELTDOWN An amazing graphic action adventure game which puts you in charge of a team of androids trying to reach the core of a nuclear reactor before it explodes. This game has over 2000 rooms to be negotiated and every single one of them is in 3D!! Probably the most exciting game yet developed for the C-64. Fast loading cassette. FOR COMMODORE 64 BIRD MOTHER LIFE'S A STRUGGLE BIRD MOTHER This is a delightfully original game which uses nature as the setting for a highly compelling and challenging game. Guide the Bird Mother as she builds her nest and raises her young, finally protecting them from a predator hawk. Fast loading cassette. The stunning graphics and music in Bird Mother are not to be missed. FIVE SPARKS FORCOMMODORE 6 WING COMMANDER SORRYANT ONE UND WING COMMANDER This is a highly sophisticated flight combat simulator which puts you in the pilots seat. Highly advanced machine code programming has ensured you feel every stomach lurching dive and roll. With 17 separate controls to be monitored and several ground targets to be defended from the attacking enemy bombers. This game will stretch your skills to their limits. Fast loading cassette. LEH CREATIVE SPARKS Method of payment By cheque or PO (no cash) made payable to TECS By Access Enter card no. Barclaycard Available from All good computer software stockists. Send me (tick as required) JAVA JIM TNCE163 (C64) .95 COUNTDOWN TO MELTDOWN TNCE273 (C64) .95 BIRD MOTHER TNCE263 (C64) .95 WING COMMANDER TNCE203 (C64) .95 My local stockist's address Your full list of games Game/s at .95 each  : P + single P&P sum Total to send Creative Sparks Department MO, 296 Farnborough Road, Farnborough, Hampshire, GU147NF. Telephone: (0252)518364. Name Address LLLLLLLLLLLLLLL Sign below: CVG1284 CVG1284 Credit card sales: UK buyers only. Response within 21 days. "


"ma 1680 COLOUR 1 1690 PRINT' \"After each screen you are given a bonus depending on how many seeds you have naged to Sow. On later Ecreenst are diamonds and a zombie. from the 2 here Diamonds will give you extra poi ws, but keep away ombie !\" 1700 COLOUR 2 1710 PRINT' TAEX 10\"Press SPAC E to start\":FX15,0 1720 REPEAT UNTIL GET=32 ENDPRO 1730 1740 DATA 28, 7, 8, 127,28,29,.54 1750 DATA 29, 220, 200,-1,220, 212 20,54 1760 DATA 0,153, 102,0,0, 153,192 1770 DATA 56,94,86.90,44.24.. 1789 DATA 9,6, 14, 20,56,112,96,0 1730 DATA 24,60, 126,-1,126,90, 1890 DATA 28,9, 127,92,95,20,,5 1810 DATA 0,0,0.9.20, 8.0.0 1820 DATA 0.9,0,0. 16, 40,84,9 1880 DATA 0,24,60,126,4,68,24,0 1849 DATA 3,69,91,73,69,51,52, -1,41, 33, -1 3 ,-1.9.32, --1,69, -1 ,53, 33, -1 1850 DATA 53,69,91, 9, 61, 53, -1,41,32,-1,32, 1,19,33, 1.61,52 1860 DATA 0,4,6,4.9.4.4.4.8.9,12, 3, .0,12,8,8,8, -16,9 SEEDS SOUVE 1897 189 SEEDS "


"AUTOMATA thanks everyone who has taken DEUS EX MACHINA to their hearts ... reviewers, whole salers, retailers, the media, and mos important of all, our public... THANK YOU! (Barry Norman, Radio 4) \"Perfection, the aim of all of us!\" (Popular Computing Weekly) \"a completely new computer experience, rare and truly great!\" (Dave Freeman, Radio 1) \"You've got to play it to believe it! This will get to Number One!\" (Computer & Video Games) \"The most original concept since the Spectrum was a gleam in Clive Sinclair's eye. The computer equivalent of Pink Floyd's The Wall... (Thorn EMI) \"The first computer program to inspire a cult following. To be without it is to lose social standing! AUTOMATA C.K. PRESENTS YOURSELF IAN DURY JON PERTWEE MEL CROUCHER DONNA BAILEY and FRANKIE HOWERD in (Crash Magazine) \"There are few things in life that can be called global certainties ... this is one of them! Hypnotic, emotive, noble, humorous, absolute excellent....\" DEVS EX MACHINA (Home Computing Weekly) \"To call this a game is an insult. It's a stunning and profound audio-visual experience. Instructions 100% Playability 100% Graphics 100% Value for money 100%\" WRITTEN AND DIRECTED BY MEL CROUCHER DEUS EX MACHINA Amstrad and Commodore 64 versions available soon! CRUSOE ........ 48K Spec  DEUS EX MACHINA .......... 48K Spec  PIMANIA .......... ..48K Spec  PI-EYED ........ 48K Spec  GO TO JAIL................. 48K Spec  OLYMPIMANIA..... 48K Spec  PIROMANIA .... 48K Spec  MORRIS MEETS THE BIKERS.. Amstrad  PI-BALLED........ 48K Spec L PI-IN'ERE....... 48K Spec  PI-IN'ERE MORRIS MEETS THE BIKERS.. Any Spec L DARTZ ........... 48K Spec  YAKZEE.. Dragon/48K Spec  PIMANIAC T-SHIRTS (state size) ..... Price L NEW WHEELS JOHN? 48K Spec  'BACKCHAT' Speech Synth. CBM64 with Software & Programming Book........  Piman's Stereo L.P. Cassette ....  PIMANIACS CLUB for 20% off all products, etc. Annual Subscription UK Overseas  Piman's Greatest Hits Vol. 2....  I enclose the right money, or debit my ACCESS/VISA Card. My Card number is ...... Expiry Date.. Card holder's signature .... Card holder's name ............ Tel. Number... Card holder's address.... Post Code NO EXTRAS! All our prices include VAT and Postage & Package. 24 hr.-CREDIT CARD HOT LINE (0705) 135242. Send your order and payment to: AUTOMATA U.K. LTD. 27 HIGHLAND ROAD, PORTSMOUTH, HANTS. PO4 9DA, ENGLAND "


"who to nost BUG HUNTER WRITE TO HEAT COMPUTER& VIDEOGAMES PRORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON EC/R 3AU. OR PHONE ME ON:VI-2516222. it! ng!» utely AYE AYE CAP'N crashes. This way, you'll be able to wonder why someone so good and play the game but, unfortunately, you so true could get so upset, down Some companies go to great lengths won't be able to use joysticks. and blue. I know I'm hard at times to protect their games from pirates. These lines are .. when perhaps you need me most, Aardvark seems to have a novel *FX 163,128,0 to disable the but we all have our destiny and approach. If you try loading a pirate interrupts. that's no idle boast. Wherever I am, copy of Frak into your Beeb, you'll Then, 7&212=&D6 whatever I do, always remember I hear a beautiful rendition of the and ?&213=&1F. love you.\" theme from Captain Pugwash. You You can re-enable the interface by Wordsworth eat your heart out! know, that cartoon series about putting a 1 at the end of the *FX pirates! command instead of a zero. FULL THROTTLE If you want to hear it for yourself, And remember, don't remove your don't try copying the game. Just Plus-1. Chris Pullen reckons he's found the LOAD \"FRAK\" and wait for the only bug in Micromega's latest game. loader program. Then type GOTO BLAGGER If you allow yourself to be lapped, 140. the screen will show I've had so many letters about \"POSITION:LAPPED\" but this seems TOKEN GESTURES cheating in Alligata's Blagger that I to make no difference to your think it's about time to print one. finishing position. If you get lapped If you have a Commodore machine, First out of the hat is one by Saul and then end up in first place, the try entering a REM line followed by a Masson and David Parker. Sorry computer will announce you as the few capital letters. Now list the line guys, you'll have to share the . winner, even though you have been and see what's happened. The letters Before you start a game, says the lapped! have changed into various Basic letter, press the space bar. You keywords. should find your lives increasing WRITE TO ME Matthew Nicola sent me a list of from zero to five. Now hold down the them and asked why this happens. control key and press any letter. Technology seems to be taking over Well, Matthew, your machine Each letter corresponds to a different as far as readers of Bug Hunter go. stores Basic words as single screen. The others can be reached I'm getting more and more letters characters called tokens. For with \":\" \",\" and \"\". sent through Micronet each week, example, the word PRINT takes up which saves you buying a stamp and five characters but, if you store it as a A DEFINITE RE FLAG saves me having to open all those single character, it takes just one. envelopes. Normally, your machine will know News has reached me of a couple of Don't forget that, if you have a the difference between them but not classic bugs in Daley Thompson's Micronet account, you can write when it comes to REM lines. If you Decathlon. If you want to qualify in straight to C&VG through Mailbox. want to use capital letters in REMs, the high jump, just set the bar nice Just go to page 84 and fill in the Bug just put the line in speech marks and high and then go under it instead Hunter number, which is 012 786 556. \"like this\". of jumping over it! The computer Letters and phone calls are still recognises that you have passed the welcome, of course. The phone ELECTRON TIPS bar but seems to miss the fact that it's number is 01-251 6222. Call any time still underneath you! during the day and, when Cindy I've just come across a scrap of paper answers, ask her for extension 2470. which I picked up from the Micro ODE TO PSYTRON Power stand at the BBC User show. I'd forgotten all about it till now, but if you've bought Beyond Software's That's all we have time for this here's some news from Micro Power Lords of Midnight game for your month. Remember that if you about the Plus-l interface for the Spectrum, you've probably seen have any problems with C&VG, drop me a Electron. listings in the demo of their Psytron game on Some games won't work on your side two of the tape. Andrew line at Priory Court. Or call computer if you have a Plus-1 Biswell, known as the Chessington during the day on 01-251 6222. attached. However, it's not a good Loony, tried to make the demo If you uncover a bug during one idea to disconnect it, as the contacts version into a full playing program. of those all-night programming will gradually wear out. During his devious deeds, he unsessions, don't save it till What you should do is to enter the covered this poem buried in the morning. Just call 01-251 5633 following lines before loading the actual machine code of Psytron. and a friendly voice will say game. Then, it will run with the Plus-1 Dear Fiona, «this is a recording, please attached. You are too precious for mere leave your message after the The problem is that some large words but maybe \"I Love You\" will bleep.\" Well, you don't expect games use the same area of memory do. Sometimes, late at night, I hear me to work all night, do you? as the interface, so the routine you cry, while I lie awake and BY ROBERT SCHIFREEN 191 Di "


"«Brilliant...\" Elementary my dear Watson. Sherlock must be the most complex adventure ever created. The creation of atmosphere is superb (more like that of a novel than a computer game) in fact playing the adventure feels more like acting than playing a computer adventure. The characters in Sherlock behave just as they would in real life and have a very human feel to them, not only in the way they react to situations, but also in their displaying of human emotions.' MR STERN, HERTS \"Sherlock is an incredibly sophisticated program. The most impressive feature is the convincing way in which the leading characters go about their interrogations and how these can be followed up with meaningful discussion between the protagonists.' CRASH 'Your game is atmospheric. I have to admit it is actually real. I am referring to of course, the characters who work so independently that I am amazed at their individual characteristics every time I play the game.' MR DEMPSTER, SCOTLAND 'Sherlock Holmes has been well worth waiting for with an 800 word vocabulary, real Victorian transport system cabs and trains and all, and a cast of characters peopling graphics screens designed by Mugsy man Russell Comte. YOUR COMPUTER 'I have been totally enthralled with this new brilliant adventure. I thought the Hobbit was good, but the added vocabulary and the even more intelligent characters, makes Sherlock number one in my software collection.' MR ROGERS, BATH 'In Sherlock you can not only talk to other characters, of whom there are at least thirteen, and ask them to do things for you, but you can also interrogate them and even discuss the case. SINCLAIR USER 'Rich mental imagery.' CRASH All Melbourne House cassette software is unconditionally guaranteed against malfunction. Please send me your free catalogue. Please send me Commodore Sherlock . . . . $14.95 Spectrum Sherlock 48K ................95 I enclose my cheque/money order for  Please debit my Access Card No. Signature Name Address Expiry Date  +p/p 80 Orders to: Melbourne House Publishers. 39 Milton Trading Estate Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4TD Correspondence to Church Yard Tring. Hertfordshire HP23 5LU Access orders can be telephoned through on our 24-hour ansafone (0235) 83 5001 All prices include VAT where applicable. Please add 80p for post and pack. Trade enquiries welcome. Total Postcode Melbourne House CVG 12b "


"IN 2 Sjo COMMODORE 64 WAVAILABLE "


"THE CONNOISSEURS CHOICE 2000 ZX Spectrum 3D LUNATTACK Steve Turner Fly your Hover Fighter over the 3D Lunar landscape battling the SEIDDAR Joystick compatible, 40k only .95 3D SEIDDAB ATTACK Steve Turner Using your radar, missiles and sixth sense clear the city area of SEIDOAB Joystick compatibi, 16K or 48K 3D SPACE WARS-Steve Turner Hunt the Seiddab through four levels of 3D hyperspace and destroy them Joystick compatible 16K or 48K ES.95 DI-LITHIUM LIFT Simon Cobb Can you lift the D-Lithium crystals from the vaults? Joystick compatible 16K or 48K .95 NIGHTFLITE II Mike Male Flight Simulation with full instrument display and perspective irway Mew Joystick compatible 16K or 48K .95 HEATHROW AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL Mike Male Written by a professional air traffic controller 16K or 4K .95 QUEST ADVENTURE -Kim Topley Find a map hidden in an inhospitable world inhabited by gruesome creatures .95 FANTASIA DIAMOND -Kim Topley Retrieve the magnificent Fantasia Diamond and rescue Bonis the master spy 40K only .95 KNIGHT DRIVER Clive Brooker BBC Model B/Electron Steer your car round a tortuous circuit of roads, braking and HEATHROW AIR TRAFFIC accelerating as you go Joystick compatible, 40k only .95 CONTROL Mike Male COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD Written by a professional air traffic controller 7.95 An educational package that will give an appreciation of COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD world geography An educational package that will give an appreciation of TOK and 48K .95 world geography .95 PILOT FOR THE ZX81 Mike Male DRAGON Fly your computer from take-off to landing navigating between mountains using radio beacons .95 3D LUNATTACK -Andrew Braybrook COMMODORE 64. Ply your Hover Fighter over the 3D Lunar landscape battling the SEIDDAR HEATHROW AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL Joystick compatible 32 of 64K .95 Mike Male 3D SEIDDAB ATTACK Written by a professional air traffic controller Seven levels of Andrew Braybrook play including demonstration mode Using your radar, laser bolts and sixth sense you will need to Books clear the urban area of SEIDDAB oystick compatible .95 20 Best Programs for the ZX Spectrum ES.95 2K OF 64K 40 Best Machine Code Routines for the 3D SPACE WARS Andrew Braybrook ZX Spectrum .95 Locate the Seidlab on your galaxy scanner through four levels of 3D hyperspace and destroy them. Joystick compatible 32K or 64K .95 DRAGONFLY II-Eric Ratcliffe Navigate from one airport to another using your instruments and a radio beacon Joystick compute .95 (GSH Hewson Consultants 56B Milton Trading Estate, Miton Abingdon Oxon Ox14 4RX As part of our continuing development of innovative software we are always happy to evaluate software sent to us with a view to publication. Selected items available from Centresoft Dealers and all leading computer software retailers TESCO WOOLWORTH John Menzies spectrum LASKYS BUDE HMV "


"Multiple Combat Scenarios Full Aerobatics 3-D Graphics GOLD. Amen . Alle can Softwa para escola scenarios F5 STRIKE EACAE MicroProse Software 64 ATARI ATARI F-15 Strike Eagle features superb 3-D graphics, F-15 manoeuvreability, computer assisted targetting including modern fighter Heads Up Display, airborne radar, air to air missiles, surface to air missile defence, ground target bombing, full aerobatics, and multiple combat scenarios. DISK/CASSETTE Tags POWER 14.95 FLIGHT SOLO FLIGHT: Take off with this user friendly flight simulator which includes 3-D graphics, full cockpit instrumentation, dual VORS, ILS, 21 different airports, and real life challenges from weather and mechanical emergencies. DISK/CASSETTE .95 SPITFIRE ACE: Save London during the Blitz in your RAF Spitfire! Outstanding out-of-the-cockpit 3-D graphics; 14 different combat senarios. DISK .95, CASSETTE .95 NATO COMMANDER: Defend Europe in an accelerated real-time war situation! Full scrolling battle map, includes infantry, armour helicopters, airforces and tactical nuclear weapons. DISK .95, CASSETTE .95 U.S. Gold is stocked by all leading BOOT John Menzies WHSMITH WILDINGS WOOLWORTH computer stores including: us Gold Limited, Unit 10. The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. Telex: 337268. "


"MacGibbon Games with a little bit more Hill MacGibbon King Arthur's Quest VE FORWARD way past my feeding time and I ungry. Would you mind bringing my T? I think it's to the north. MacGibbon HIN Games with a little bit more 5555 Aztec Hur for the sun god Carrrrrrrrrrrr rrrrrrrrrr Well mat, young ou have done w to bring the sun this far. Now gitt it to me and we s fres the Sun together.\" 48K SPECTRUM .95 COMMODORE 64 .95 After Midnight two adventure games that herald a new dawn A new concept all graphics, 3D, and 360° scrolling HIII Macebbon MacGibbon _Gamea to stretch the mind Games to athetch the mind Rally Dealer enquiries welcome Sports simulations that leave the rest Yacht Race Driver standing Cassette & map/chart .95 48k SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 00:00:49 0.20.NO. 0.0.100 Black Streak has rounded buoy 1 13:40 11:08 OB 0258 Running for Gold World Cup Football COMING SOON Hill MacGibbon Ltd, 92 Fleet Street, London EC4Y 1DH All programs created by Five Ways Software Ltd. Telephone 01-353-6482 "


"MIKE SINGLETON'S PLAYER'S GUIDE TO STRATEGY AND WARGAMES... going to surprise them even more! If you make Britannia has Two U.S.N. carrier task forces are contact with the long been supposed under your command as well as Bismark with these, they to rule the waves at least by land-based fighters and bombers may well be blown out of the water her subjects but what of her from Midway itself. Before you can before you can bring up the heavy nautical software? Would Nelson attack the enemy you must locate his stuff. The big battleships you really have given it a second glance fleets by directing search aircraft to command are relatively slow and if or would he have preferred to likely areas of ocean. . these find the Bismark, she is almost peruse it with his blind eye? Midway needs thought and care bound to outrun them. Temptation's Admiral Graf Spee ful planning to win but it also needs The solution, as in the real event, is for the Commodore 64 is a less than quick thinking. The pressures a to sacrifice some of your ships and tempting offering. This ugly commander is under during battle aircraft in an attempt to cripple the duckling of a game doesn't quite are recreated by a continuous real German battleship and slow her know what it's supposed to be and time change of the strategic down, then bring in your heavy ends up as a rather unhappy mixture situation. battleships for the kill. Okay as a of real-time action and pause-forPonder an attack for too long and magazine listing, but not really the thought control. You get a very nice your search planes may have lost sort of game I'd pay good money for. map of the South Atlantic and an contact with the Japanese Fleet, but This month's moral, I suppose, is inventory of the fuel and ammunition act too hastily, forget about that that approach and presentation in a your pocket battleship carries. Yes, Squadron vou lannched three hours computer game are crucial to its computer game are you play the part of the dastardly ago and it will run out of fuel and success. All three games I've disHun in this one and even get a partial ditch ignominiously in the sea. cussed take war at sea as their theme rendering of Deutschland Uber Allest Above all, you must try to find the and concentrate on the problems of One of your options, Mein Kapitan enemy carriers before they hit you. Tocating and engaging the enemy, is to rendezvous with your supply Can you out-think the inscrutable? yet only one has really succeeded in ship, the Altmark, but this wastes An engaging game, which uses the putting the player there, on the spot. valuable sinking time so you are element of the unknown to great In any strategy game, the player warned to be careful with your effect.. will be giving a lot of commands to munitions. Somewhere in the middle ground the units under his control but the Presumably the programmer who between the disastrous and the real meat of the game is making the wrote this game was afflicted by a successful comes Bismark from the decisions. The physical effort of heavy Geman accent: sinking time Argus Press Software Group enacting them should be kept to a there's plenty of but thinking time Though the game I tried was for a minimum so that the player can get precious little! Little specks repre 48k Spectrum, versions apparently on with the real business of being a senting enemy shipping flicker exist for most popular home commander. This is the key to briefly on your Atlantic chart. computers. Perhaps this explains success, Well done P.S.S.! Strategic movement consists of why the game turned out to be fairly --------------trying to catch one of these fireflies rudimentary in fact pretty Basic In the next sth Column, I shall be tellbefore it disappears. You are then when I came to list it. The scenario ing you all about Seldon's Game, a deemed to be in visual range and a has you hunting the German battle strategy game that grows. Its theme pseudo-arcade sequence begins ship Bismark in the North Atlantic is galactic but the player has no \"pseudo\" because the enemy ship Bismark plays rather like an ships or planets under his control. flits about the horizon at near arcade updated version of the schoolboy All he has is knowledge and the speed but the response time of the game of battleships even the mapability to slightly tip the balance of controls at your disposal would is just the old, familiar 10 x 10 grid events one way or another as the make a sloth seem hyperactive. stretched a little bit. Ordering your history of the galaxy grinds inexorAt the other end of the spectrum ships about gets rather tedious and ably on. The player's objective is (although it's for the Commodore 64) memory-sapping because you have to bring peace to the galaxy by is P.S.S.'s Battle for Midway which to input strings of compass subtly changing history. recreates the Japanese carrier attack directions for all of them (in How does it grow? Well, editor on the World War II U.S. base in the 1 sequence!) before any movement on permitting, I'll be providing listings porates your chart becomes visible. Needin Basic of the bare bones of the real-time arcade action but uses it less to say, this makes for frequent game with \"history\" subroutines for more as occasional atmospheric mistakes especially since the map a few different types of world. scenery than as something that I gives no clue as to the identity of the In subsequent 8th Columns, subactually influences the outcome of different squadrons of ships. Only routines for new types of world to your strategic planning. the one you are currently giving add to your galaxy will be listed but This time, the chart on your screen orders to is picked out by a flashing these, I hope, will come from you, is the South Pacific Ocean. Some cursor. the readers. As time goes on you will where out there you know, thanks to However, if you manage to cope be able to build up a whole library of your code-breakers who have been with the problems of command and Seldon's Game worlds to use in your feeding you the radio transmissions control, the game itself does offer a galaxy as you choose and you'll also of the Japanese Imperial Fleet, that real, if simple, strategic challenge, be able to include your own an invasion fleet and two carrier You have to locate the Bismark conconctions. Every reader should groups are approaching Midway before you can destroy it but some of be able to build up his own, unique Island. They are hoping to surprise your battle groups are much weaker game. Till next time, I'll leave you I you but you can be sure that you're than the enemy in firepower. with that tempting thought. Please senda SAE for our superb 16 page catalogue 197 "


"Amazing how played out some thingh GALLARDOODUSELE SALATLARDA ROELS T ALA EUROOPA L MALALA DUDA RESTAURATION UGUSEIDUOUS S TO "


"gs become. Will you think the same of your micro in 6 months'time? Remember the days when every record player was gifted with a needle instead of a stylus. 45's were \"in\" 78's were \"out\" Before the days of hi-fi and laser discs. When a graphic equaliser was a breakthrough on the football pitch instead of in music technology Look at a record player now and it's a museum piece. It's like that with micros too. The machine you thought would give endless hours of fun and interest often becomes a five minute wonder. Played out within months. Or so you thought But imagine communicating with other micro users on a nationwide mainframe system. Updating yourself daily with the very latest computer news and reviews. Paging a special Bulletin Board. Feasting from Prestel's vast menu. Even downloading a choice of software absolutely free. In fact, imagine 30,000 pages at your fingertips and you've imagined what it's like to be on line with the Micronet 800 system. For Just  a quarter (and, for most of you, a local telephone call whenever you want to connect up) you could subscribe to the Micronet system. The only extra you need to connect up is a modem unit. Which is a small enough outlay for what it buys. Micronet's features are almost limitless and constantly updating so why not see it in action at John Lewis stores, selected W. H. Smith shops and Spectrum UK dealers. Or fill in the coupon for our brochure. You'll find you won't want to play on anything else. Dansette micronet 800 Please send me the full facts about Micronet 800.1 Name Make/Model of Micro Address A DIDE DOOR Telephone Telephone MICRONET 800, Durrant House, Herbal Hill London ECIR SEJ. Telephone 01-278 3143 CVG12 MICRONET HOO,Durrans Hus, Herbal Hill. Landon ECIR 5F). Telephone 01:27N 314 Prestel and the Prestel wmbol are trademarks of British Telecommunications Making the most of your micro. "


"* NICHOLAS HART ATIC ATAC DONKEY KONG 1) Graham Peters, Billericay, Essex OUR HALL OF 1) Darren Prince, Salford, Manchester 5,629,796 FAME GAMES 569.900 2) Gary Watts, Bishopstone, Hereford 2) Matthew Brady, Maldon, Essex 432,000 1,724,605 Since we relaunched our Hall of 3) Deborah Healey, Oldham, Lancs3) Carl Thomas, New Ferry, Wirral 400,083 995,003 Fame with some new games, your hiscores have been flooding in. Keep it 4) DJ Murray, Denstone, Uttoxeter — 4) Andrew Lord, Hebden Bridge, West Yorks 362,200 985,833 up! If you look below, you'll see we've added a few more new games for you 18 5) Philip Wakeman, Rugby, Warwickshire SABRE WULF to try your skill at. There's Starbikethe space game with a difference MANIC MINER from The Edge-Acornsoft's Elite, a 1) John Capel, Preston, Lancs 3,000,045 2) Thomas O'Dowd, Wexford, Ireland very sophisticated trading game and 1) Paul Rattray, Kinnoull, Perth 1,350,335 Micro-Gen's Pyjamarama a sort of 13,753,289 3) David Walker, Darlington, Co. DurhamJet Set Wally! 2) Graham Farthing, Patching, Brighton 1,306,565 4) Dominik Szewczyk, Bents Green, DIAMONDS 9,133,137 3) Matthew Hawkins, Halesowen, West Mids Sheffield — 998,490 Michael O'Mahony won a  diamond 8,719,937 5) Neil Williams, Rugeley, Staffs 973,875 for his 5,997 high score on Diamonds. 4) Paul Knowles, Bishop Stortford English Software's other big game Jet 7,106,234 PLANETOID Boot Jack for the Atari computers and 64 5) Philip Sherlock, Crewe, Cheshire will now replace Diamonds in Hall of Fame. 4,973,012 1) Alexander Marco, Jesmond, Newcastle JET PAC PARSEC 2,565,260 Fly Jet Man around the screen collecting 2) Neal Wylde, the three sections of his space ship. 1) Richard Dresner, Welwyn, Herts Crowborough, E. Sussex 1,618,500 DONKEY KONG 8,550,700 3) Daniel Poon, The king of climbing games. The ape, the 2) Nicholas Hart, Hull carpenter, and the blonde are now North Humberside — Newark 783,475 2,528,600 available on Atari, Vic 20, 64, and T1-99/4a +4) Paul O'Malley. Romsey, Hants from Atarisoft. 3) Ian Wilson, 684,550 MANIC MINER Gwynedd, 5) Richard Thorpe, North Wales The zany 20-screen climbing game that Denham, Bucks 99.690 593,000 introduced Miner Willy. 4) Jonathan Pierce, Newport, Shropshire JET PAC * JET SET WILLY 333,300 1) Denis Vuuc, What Miner Willy did next. This time 5) Keith Jayasekara, Chelmsford, Essex -Isleworth, Middlesex there are 60 screens. 281,500 38,848,420 THE PYRAMID 2) Gordon Garrow, PSYTRON Glasgow, Scotland The Pyramid has Fantasy's unique high 28,957,210 score verification system. 1) Clive Richards, Monkton, Pembrokeshire 3) Richard Edwards, 254% ZALAGA Crewe, Cheshire 2) Stuart McIntosh, Bishopsbriggs, Glasgow 20,578,796 Splendid arcade clone for the BBC. -248% 4) Fraser Watson, GORDON GARROW 3) Clive Richards, Monkton, Pembrokeshire Sheffield, West SABRE WULF 206% Midlands 16,742,160 Similar to Atic Atac but twice as tough 5) Simon McElroy, Wolverhampton, West and thrice as pretty. STAR BIKE Midlands 14,863,889 PSYTRON Beyond's first big hit for the Spectrum. 1) Paul Davenport, Hull — 19,046 The Psytron is a computerised defence 2) Steve Brookes, Bath 17,429 HALL OF FAME system for the planet Betula 5. 3) Peteer Reaves, London — 12,934 4) John Cooper, Manchester 9,260 Name. ELITE 5) Michael Mason, Nottingham 5,120 Address... Acornsoft's sophisticated space trading game. Great graphics and action. ZALAGA STARBIKE 1) Jonathan Reade, Telford, Shropshire The Edge promise a gold BMX bike to the 8,622,450 T-shirt size sm med Ige I highest scorer on their new game. 2) Chris Waymark, Petts Wood, Kent 5,717,890 JUMP CHALLENGE I scored. ............... 3) Sunjay Jain, Sinfin, Derby 2,384,210 Eddie Kidd's brand new computer game 4) David Lucas, Hallisham, East Sussex Time taken which features buses, barrels and bikes. 2,222,870 Even Eddie found it difficult! Game.. .................. 5) David Irving Ponteland, Northumberland PYJAMARAMA 1,684,220 Computer Witness's signature.. Wally steps into a nightmare and into TI owners please note that Donkey Kong by C&VG's Hall of Fame. Atarisoft is now in Hall of Fame. Let's have some high scores, ape crunchers! RICHARD THORPE * * * * POR FAME "


"The New Force in Software 2,000 THE GAME OF DEADLY DRIVING orks BATTLECARS FOR 48K SPECTRUM FOR 48K SPECTRUM Mids lower of Despair 486 SIERO WORKSHOP GAMES WORKSHOP is the UK's largest fantasy and adventure games com pany with ten years experience behind it. Now we're using our expertise to create the best in computer games, and the first three are BATTLECARS, D-DAY, and TOWER OF DESPAIR each with over 90K of programming! BATTLECARS is the deadly sport of the future...arm your battlecar with your chosen weapons, and select your battleground; a gruelling speed circuit or a town centre labyrinth. BATTLECARS is a one or two player game of skill, nerve and cunning B. 33 D-DAY is a superb graphic wargame based on the Normandy landings of 1944. Two players take the Allied and German sides, battling through four seperate scenarios, D-DAY offers an enduring tactical challenge to players tired of simple arcade action In TOWER OF DESPAIR, Games Workshop has used its ten years of experi ence in role-playing games to create an outstanding adventure. It includes two entire 48K programs, and a guide containing a history, map, and illus trated clues. FOR 48K SPECTRUM AND SHORTLY FOR THE COMMODORE 64 .95 EACH FROM ALL GOOD SHOPS OR DIRECT FROM: MAIL ORDER DEPARTMENT GAMES WORKSHOP LTD., 27-29 SUNBEAM ROAD,LONDON NW10. by ave "


"FOR SALE TRS 80 model one 16K C.P.U. V.D.U. and cassette will accept offers or swap for Spectrum 48K or any other machine. Phone Jan 061 881 6145. SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership. Discount offers. Spectrum/Dragon. Huge prgram base. SAE please. UKSEC (CGG), 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE for sale. Dozens of different titles including Jet Set, Sabre Wulf, Withas, Pstron, Lords of Midnight. All originals from only .50. Phone 01-348 7378 ask for Rik. SPECTRUM CURRAH speech as new . Ram Turbo joystick interface and Atari joystick . William Stuart Synthesiser and software value . Accept . Phone Birmingham 772 8996 after 6pm. ATARI 400 2 joysticks book basic cartridge, Air Strike, Poker, Centipede . Tel: likeston 327064 SPECTRUM sell or swap Penetrator, Arcadia, Zzoom, Microbot. Many more .50 each. Tel: Falmouth 318580 CBS COLECO vision for sale plus Turbo Driving Expansion  or will swap for good condition 48K ZX Spectrum. Ring Bedford 0234 64615 for quick sale. DRAGON 32 SANYO cassette  including Chess cartridge, books, PERFECT! joysticks  ono. Watersmeet 832 (Herts) evenings. FOR SALE 48K SPECTRUM + reliable tape recorder + programable joystick interface + Quickshot joystick +  games worth  YOURS FOR . Phone West Linton (0968) 60549 after 6pm. BBC B adventures for sale includes Sphinx adventure, Franklins Tomb, Circus, Pirate adventure plus lots more. Phone Chelmsford 380898 after 6pm and ask for Darren all  each. 48K SPECTRUM currah microspeech Kempston joystick and interface cassette player.  worth of software including many new titles all in perfect condition  ono. Tel: Durham 62930. T199/4A computer, extended basic, games modules Parsec, Soccer Invaders, joysticks, cassette lead, 30 games on tape, books and magazines worth , Sell for . Tel: Burton (0283) 43038. COLECOVISION cartridges for swap or sale. Looping Mousetrap Carnival  each also electronic games Firefox , Puckmonster . Phone 01-570 4391 SPECTRUM software over 100 titles for sale Jet Set Willy. Full Throttle, Sabre Wulf and more for list send sae to Nick Blow, 47 Oakwood Road, Bricket Wood, St Albans, Herts. SHARP MZBOK 48K integral monitor and cassette deck plus nine issues, user notes plus three techniques books plus new manual, nine games, speed basic, forth, home finance, music, composer, value  accept  ono. Phone: Ware (0920) 82 1003 after 6pm. ATARI MACRO assembler V.G.C  also Chess and Missile Command roms  each. Tel: Redhill 61612 evenings. Ask for Chris. SPECTRUM software for sale. Tities include Pole Position, War of the Worlds, Factory Breakout, Incredible Hulk, Moon Alert, Sabre Wulf, Disco Dan, Chuckie Egg and Gis a kiss many more. Tel: 0703 767519 and ask for Richard. VIC 20 Games Unex 16K and cartridge Mission Impossible, Great Adventure Pack, Bomber Mission, Frantic, Arcadia and Four Gates to Freedom. All for . D. Booth, 18 George St. Riddings, Derby DE55 4AU. SPECTRUM software for sale. Includes Cavelon, Psytron, Moon Alert, Scuba Dive, Pogo, Birds and Bees, Doomsday Castle, Android II, Bear Bovver, Orion and more. All  each. Tel: Bradford 565976. SPECTRUM software for sale originals only. Sabre Wulf, Golden Baton, Lords of Time, Full Throttle, Jet Set Willy, Codename Mat, Manic Miner, Oracles Cave,  to  each. Tel: (0742) 692829 anytime. HALF PRICE SPECTRUM software, Arcade, Strategy and Adventure. From . Send for list, enclosing stamp to: Paul Bentley, 18 Lynton Avenue, Claregate, Wolverhampton, West Midlands WV6 9NG. VIC 20 (1 month old) + C2N cassette recorder +  of software for sale  ono. May split and sell software for .50 each. Also 20 CBM 64 games  or .50 each. May swap. Write to P. Simpson, 11 Egremont Street, Millom, Cumbria LA18 4EA. COMMODORE 64 games to swap or sell. Programs include British and American titles. Write or send your lists to Hlege Stava, 427Y Stol, Norway VIC 20 for sale, including 16K Rampac, software, joystick, magazines.  or offers. Tel: (0469) 72854. T199/4A home computer. Excellent condition. Instruction manuals, tutor, cassette + cassette cable. Connect four module + book, all in original packing. Price? . Tel: Slough 0753 36570 after 5pm. COMMODORE 64 games to swap or sell, American and English titles including Potty Pigeon, Pole Position, Voodoo Castle, and many more. Tel: (025485) 2779. VIC 20 FOR SALE. With cassette recorder, 32K switchable expansion, joystick, 7 games cartridges, over 30 games tapes, manuals and books. Worth , sell for . Tel: (021) 378 1943 48K SPECTRUM, tape recorder, books, and over forty popular software tities including Sabre Wulf, Mugsy Moon Patrol, Atarisoft Pacman. Total value  seven months old will sell complete . ELECTRON SOFTWARE to swap. ZX81 with 16K . Spectrum software for sale. Chuckie Egg, Atic Attack etc.  also over  worth of magazines PCN, etc. Tel: (0424) 421932 or write to 51 Morecambe Road, Morecambe, Lancashire LA3 3AA. 48K ZX SPECTRUM, ZX printer, Data recorder, Kempston interface, joystick, lighpen, carrying cases, paper, over  software.  ono. To lan Beswick, 875 Oldham Road, Thornham, Rochdale, Lancs OL 16 4RY. Tel: 0706 42656. ZX81 with 16K ram cassettes magazines manual fully boxed  ono. Phone 021 353 6781 for a real bargain. TEXAS T199/4A, cassette, joysticks, extended basic, plus 2 games, cartridges, seven cassettes of programs, two prgram books, two games cassettes. All manuals and literature giveaway price . Contact Lloyd, 73 White Thorn Street, Bow, London E3 4DA. SHARP MZ-BOK personal computer. Integral display unit and cassette players. Software includes two basics, Q Bert, Scramble, Chess, Invaders, Valley, Pinball, Minopoly, Disassembler, Star Trek, Hangman, Pacman, Epidemic, Head on. Also manual.  ono. Apply: Accrington 35719. VIC 20 BK starter pack boxed, O'Level Maths cassette. Presentation cassette choice of old or new cassette tape model, extra manual Around , Phone Slough 25672 after 6.30pm. SWAP OR SELL BBC B with extra's for Commodore 64 plus money or  no offers. Tel: 051 263 3334 ask for Stuart. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE for sale or swap. Hobbit, book, Black Crystal. Both unused 19 each ono Jetset, Sentinel, S.Panic, S.Raiders, and Airline each .50. Tel: Nic on Bitton 2366 anytime. ORIC 48K, with 22 excellent arcade quality games, including Zorgons Revenge, Donkey Kong, Centipede, Hopper, Xenon 1. Multigames, Drive, Harrier Attack, Trek, Flight and many more for . Tel: Gaston 662305. ATARI 400/800/600 Hire Club. No membership fee. Over 100 games available. Also Jawbreaker, Apolcalypse, Shamus II, Seadragon  each. Ring Dean Hedges, West Wickham (777) 1842 anytime. WHO WANTS to exchange CBM 64 software with me? Disk only. Many American titles. Send lists to me! Nick Tjandra, Esdreef 26, 3110 Rotselaar, Belgium, 48K SPECTRUM KEMPSTON interface and joystick, data recorder plus many games J.S.W. Wheelie, Pogo, Krakatoa, Manic Miner, Atic Atac, Fighter Pilot, etc, all originals . Tel: Wantage 4187 after 6pm. 48K SPECTRUM printer and paper  worth of magazines, tape recorder, games including Jet Set Willy, Atic Atac, Valhalla, Hobbit. Worth  sell for . Phone 0782 621018. ATARI 800 48K plus disk drive with chip 2 guaranteed to back up any program. Plus 80 disks of software, centronics interface, joysticks, paddles, manuals etc.  ono. Tel: Worthing 0903 45200. T199/4A progpack 1, 10 great programs for only .00 HCW gave a 5 star review and said \"excellent games at a giveaway price\". T. Wilmott, 3 Somerset Place, Somerset Bridge, Bridgwater, Somerset. COMMODORE 64 American games for sale or swap e.g. Pole Position, Pooyan also swap games for blank disks. Telephone 0462 59460 for more details, we still have more games. SHARP MZ-BOK 48K ram with VDU and cassette recorder. Built-in. Voer 50 programs, joysticks and power supply all in perfect condition,  ono. Tel: Paul, Sheffield 384642. For all the details. MAKE MONEY selling your programs with this comprehensive quide on how to produce top quality software. Send  to A. Shaw, 8 Yeadon Drive, Soutowram, Halifax, West Yorkshire. 2 TOP QUALITY machine code games for your Dragon. Nutron Blaster and Cruise Attack + Full Moon, a 30K text/Graphic adventure. .00 (inc. p&p). M. Doyle, 34 Wilton Avenue, Walker, Newcastle-on-Tyne NE6 2TS. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE Library Club news etc. Almost every new release in stock. Life membership .50. Mosside Road, Blackburn, West Lothian EH47 7DN. SPECTRUM 48K games, for sale. Ten games including Mugsy, Mad Martha I and II, Quill Super Spy  ono. Tel: Doncaster (0302) 26629 evenings only. DRAGON 32, with  of software including Ugh!, Donkey King etc; two joysticks, recorder, magazines, books, dust cover, including leads, worth , Only  ono Telephone St Albans 52909. 16K ATARI 400, programme recorder, basic books, joysticks, twelve games including PacMan, Defender, Preppie, Star Raiders. Excellent for first time buyer  ono. Tel 01 946 3883 anytime. SELLING Atari 800 48K. Also basic and game cartridge plus joystick, books and magazine (still under guarantee) for only . Tel 272 0701 between 6 and 7pm. WANTED Atari 810 disc drive. Will pay fair price. Phone lain on Peterborough (0733) 231863 anytime. WANTED for Spectrum, Utilities (Assemblers, Speedyloads etc.), Wargames (Lothlorians's Redshift, ASP, etc.). Back issues of Your Computer, ZX User etc. I have top games to swap or money to buy them. Tel 0977 43367 FOR SALE TRS80 Model One 16K C.P.U.V.D.U. and cassette will accept offers or swap for Spectrum 48K or any other machine. Phone Jan 061 881 6145. Rufus Ho, 54 Haven Lane, Ealing W5. ATARI 600XL with 1010 tape recorder and Defender, Centepede, Lone Raider, Airstrike, Gridrunner, Zaxxon with books worth  sell for  ono. Swap for CBM 64. Tel: 997 9361 (01). T199/4A, Ex-Basic, Alpiner, Wumpus, Joystick & Interface, 2 books, cassettes, . Good for beginners. Tel 01 421 0827 after 4.30pm. G. Macaulay, 21 Wessex Drive, Hatch End, Pinner Middx. SOFTWARE EXCHANGE. Swap your used software. Free membership. Discount offers. Spectrum/Dragon. Huge program base. SAE please. UK SEC (CVG) 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB ATARI 400 Pacman + Basic cartridges, basic manual + all leads worth  sell at  ono. Phone Runcorn 718556. BBC USER in New Zealand wants penfriend in U.K. to exchange information and possibly software. Write: Nigel Keenan, 22nd Peel Forest, Geraldine, South Canterbury, New Zealand. 48K SPECTRUM for sake, plus over  worth of games, including Sabre Wulf, Jet Set Willy and Psytron etc. and also assorted magazines.  for the lot Phone Darlington 56580. ATARI 400, programme recorder, joysticks, basic, books, Defender, Pacman, Preppie, Shamus, Diamonds and 6 more games. Worth over  selling for . Tel 01 946 3883. FOR SALE -T199/4A, seven games + back up adaptor, two books, and cassette cable  ono. Tel (061) 487 1822. Ask for Paul. CBM 64 original games for sale, most at less than half price. Ultysinth, Hobbit, Hovver Bovver, Mr Wimpy, Chinese Juggler, Booga Boo, Colossus Chess, Ceasar The Cat, Cuddly Cuburt, Orange Squash, Galaxy, Skramble, Kong. Might consider swapping, ring Dave 0452 830 675. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE Sentinel, Space Intruders, Meteor Storm, Astro Blaster, Frenzy. Hungry Horace, Hunchback, Alchemist, Blue Thunder, Kong, Android II, Zoom, Mr Wimpy. Orion, Airbase Invader, Ad Astra,  each: Ring 503 734 (Andy) (Brighton). COLECOVISION complete with turbo module and the following cartridges, Donkey Kong. Donkey Kong Junior, Zaxxon, Mousetrap, Cosmic Avenger, Arcade Action for  ono. Please ring Sunderland 659661. gwater. Somerset Place Saway price.ro 202 "


"AN APPOINTMENT NOT TO BE MISSED EVERY MONTHI sinclair September 1984 An independent magazine published by EMAP Publ 1984 Tuesday 16 User 3860 SPECTRUM USER THE TRASHM COME top at talks Sinclair User magazine hits the street on the 16th of every month packed with enough material to keep both you and your Sinclair machine fully occupied until the same time next month. Sinclair User magazine, is devoted entirely to the Sinclair ZX8l and Spectrum. Everything you need to know about the latest peripherals and software releases, as well as letters, book reviews, program listings and competitions. Plus special sections for beginners business and education. We even have a special telephone'hotline' for those problems that just can't wait No wonder Sinclair User is the UK's top selling Sinclair magazine. Available from your newsagents now, only 85p COMPUTING IN YOU WON'T FIND OR VAR. BUT YOU WILL DISCOVER HOW TO PREVENT CONTROL YOUR OR TALK TO THE WITH YOUR Plen me Electronics and Computing Monthly achithrib 12 In luncle chin thakal til at plantsupp Addre COMPUTING ELECTRONICS & Date Cheques should be made porablet Electronics and Computing Monthly VAN ININ Please send Electronics and Computing Monthly. Subription Department Competition House, Farndun Road, Market Harburgh, Leices 203 "


"Software 013600 Excellface BBC SOFTWARE for sale, graphics rom . Frak , Hobbit .50, or  the lot. Phone 041 942 8616 after 4pm. (will post in UK). 48K SPECTRUM and Currah speech both under guarantee, Quickshot joystick and interface, sound amplifier, tape controller, 7 books, loads of games, many classics. Over 60 programs.  ono. Phone Duncan Macrae on Morpeth 0670 57050. SHARP MZ-700 for sale. Complete with software and built in data recorder. Good condition, selling for . Martin Wilson, 47 Kincross Crescent, Great Barr, Birmingham. Call after 6pm. Tel: 360 8812. VIC 20 for sale, cassette recorder + Intro Basic Pt 1, lots of software ie, Arcadia, Gridrunner, Minikong, etc  worth of magazines + manuals. Worth  sell for  ono. Tel (0506) 854301, Scotland. 48K SPECTRUM with Amstrad cassette recorder all original software. Plus books on programming and games listings worth  want  ono. Telepone Chandlers Ford 65394 A REAL snip ZX81 (needs attention) plus ZX81 add on keyboard 16K add on ram and 64K add on ram pack tapes and leads. Giving away for . Phone now 01 560 4612. BARGAIN of the week 8K Vic 20 computer plus cassette players  of games and all the manuals and leads. Phone now 01 560 4612. All for  will consider splitting software titles! ATARI 400/800 software nine roms, Pole Position, Konkey Kong, Pac Man etc  each. Ring Bacup 875941. ZX SPECTRUM 48K:  worth of software, Quickshot joystick and interface + cassette recorder. Still boxed. Excellent condition. All for ! Tel: 01 360 2308. COMMODORE 64 software to swap. More than 500 arcade action jump and 3D games in maschine code to exchange against your newest programs. Tape versions preferred. Write or send lists to Thomas Holzner, Linkstrasse 13, 800 Munchen 45, West Germany. I will answer each letter!!! VIC 20 16K C2N cassette deck joystick Intro One Books Mags Cartridge. Plus lots of games and many extras worth over  sell for  ono. Tel Hungerford (0488) 83582 SPECTRUM SOFTWARE to swap Avenger, Halls of the Things, Fighter Pilot, Zaxxan, Atic Atac, Bugaboo, Terror Daktil 4D, Zzoom, Zip Zap. Games DesignerHunter Killer, Confrontation. Tel York 51130 after 5pm. SHARP Mz700 for sale with software + manual as well as Data Recorder hardly used still in box sell for  ono. Enquiries to Ringstead Grange Cottages, Ringstead, Kettering, Northants NN14 4DT. T19914A and cassette leads + manual, three cartridges: Donkey Kong, Parsec, Invaders + Quickshot Multi joystick with adaptor, TI Treck cassette game fully boxed worth  sell for . Tel 863 1380 (Harrow) and ask for Hardeep after 5.30pm. .99 GAMES for unexpanded T199/4A and Spectrum games includes Starzone Fighter, Lazer Cycle and the fantastic gunman. Send SAE to Waspsoft, 17 Cobham Rd, Walthamstow E17, London ED. ATARI SOFTWARE, selling personal collection. + worth of cartridges including PacMan, Defender, Donkey Kong,  + worth of disks including Choplifter, Suspended, MicroSoft Basic.  worth of cassettes. Any reasonable offers considered. Don Bacon 19 Writtle Rd, Chelmsford, Essex CM1 3BS. SPECTRUM 48K, Interface 1, Microdrive (3), ZX Printer and paper, cassette recorder,  of software, joystick interface. Excellent condition 240 ono. Phone 0294 63236 evenings. COMMODORE 64. Who wants to swap their Commodore for two computers still under guarantee. A Dragon 32 and an Oric Atmos plus tape recorder, joystick and software. Tel Andrew on 750952. Crynant, N-Neath, W. Glamorgan. T199/4A COMPUTER, joysticks, instruction book and tape, 4 games on cassette, cassette cable, 2 program books, . Also Texas computer cassette recorder with double cassette cable. . Emsworth 6462 pm only. Customer collects. CBM 64 plus C2N cassette deck, TAC 2 joystick, dust cover, magazines ie. C&VG, Commodore User and 3 games, Hunchback Revenge, Moonbuggy. All worth  selling for  ono. Phone 061 434 1520. BACK ISSUES: Most 1983/4 enter draw for every one bought!! Also modem (BBC)  with software, lead, mags. Tel 01 981 1934 (Mnet 919991762. COMMODORE 64, 1541 single disk drive, MPS 801 printer, colour monitor and software 6 months old.  O.no. Tel: Rye 225 266 (evenings) or Hamstreet 2707 (daytime). COMMODORE 64, one month old disk drive, C2N tape deck, joysticks, 14 inch ITT portable colour television, cartridges and over 30 disks full of software. Sell for . Tel: (05827) 69152 VIC 20 full starter pack, switchable 16K ram, 5 year guarantee,  worth of software, joystick, books worth . Will accept . Ring South Shields 557081. VIC 20 starter pack switchable 16K, joystick, 40 by 24 screen, book of 60 programs, magazines and 12 good games worth . Sell for . Tel: Derby (0332) 677863 after 4.00pm. SHARP MZ700 with tons of software and data recorder built in. Still boxed. Will swap for Electron on its own. If interested write to Robert Bruton, Rockwell College, Cashel, C. Tipperary, Ireland. 48K SPECTRUM and tape recorder, Kempston interface,  worth of games including JSW, Jetman, Suba Dive, Hobbit and magazines, will sell for . Tel: Stevenage 62441 after 5pm. ATARI 400 16K for sale, cassette recorder and basic cartridge included. Over 30 programs plus four cartridges. Will accept  ono. Tel: 01-980 5014. ATARI 400 48K joystick manuals, leads  worth software including Pacman, Soccer Missile Command, Preppie,  also Atari VCs, five cartridges, joysticks, paddles . Tel: 01-642 2517 (Surrey). 48K SPECTRUM + cassette recorder + Cambridge interface + Quickshot MK1 joystick + lots of software. All for  in cash. Telephone Steve 061 789 2007 after 4pm for details SECONDHAND ORIC 1 with two tapes for . 0787 227269. The Walnuts, Bures, Suffolk COB 5FT. CBM VIC 20 16K switchable, cassette deck, joystick, manuals, magazines, many cassette games including Chariot Race, Matrix, 3 cartridges including Gorf Star Battle. Bargain as new.  ono. Tel: Brighouse (0484) 71241. BBC SOFTWARE from .99 over 100 titles. Newbury 32666 also some Commodore and Spectrum. SPECTRUM 48K 12 months guarantee, computer recorder,  worth software. Latest titles including Decathlon, Sabre Wulf, Matchpoint,  ono. Tel: 363 2121. SPECTRUM Currah Speech  also swap software over 150 games, send your list for mine. To Gordon Shennan, 106 Oakwood Avenue, Ayr, Ayrshire, Scotland KAS ONX. ATARI Software for sale. Originals at lowest prices. S.A.E. for list. Hepburn, 4 Cardinal Avenue, Kingston, Surrey KT2 6SB. STUCK ON THESE ADVENTURES? No. 2 Pirate adventure, No. 3 Mission Impossible, No. 4 The Count, No. M1 Hulk. Then why not send for our comprehensive Hint N Tips sheets. Send  and SAE to Skarab Hints, 6 Edgewood Road, Meals, Wirral, Merseyside L47 GAL. SWAP OR FOR SALE; Atari 400 16K, program recorder, books, basic cartridge, 9 games. Atari VCS, 8 games, joysticks,  ono. Will separate or swap for 48K Spectrum, tape recorder and games. Tel: Shoeburyness 7251 after 6pm. 48K ZX SPECTRUM, computer compatible tape recorder, joystick interface, over  software including Fighter Pilot, Manic Minder, Hobbit, Flight Simulation, also two books, manuals, . Tel: 061 483 0871. BBC MODEL B D.F.S. single disc drive, four colour plotter. Speech synthesiser, and software collection.  ono, enquiries to D. James, 1 Grampian Way, Sundon Park, Luton, Beds LU3 3HB ATARI sell or swap \"Hellcat Ace\" 32K Microprose \"Cells and Serpents\" 16K ASP. \"Roman Empire\" 48K Lothlorien. Tel: 03744 2784 after 6pm or weekends. ATARI 400, Program recorder, joystick, Zaxxon, Diamonds, Airstrike, leads, manuals. All boxed. . Ring Naresh on 01-472 9286 for immediate sale. Basic kit included. COLECO ADMA OWNERS. Join the independent Coleco Adam Users Club. Write to PO Box 9, Towcester, Northants NN127QG. SHARP MZ700 plus  of software, joystick, data recorder, manual. Perfect condition. Worth , sell for . Tel: Ongar 362631. COLEVISION and six cartridges including Zaxxon and Time Pilot  ono and Intellvision + 6 cartridges  ono. Interested in part exchange with Commodore 64 with either both of above. Contact Chris (0525) 60254. SPECTRUM GAMESTAPE 16/48K 5 addictive games. Ideal Christmas present. Cheque/PO for .40 to J. Villis, 31 Sandys Road, Worcester WR1 3HE. ATARI 800 two years old. As new, also software, Atari data recorder. All manuals plus other materials in V.G.C. cost  sell for  ono. Tel: Craigie (Scotland) 0563 86233 or contact Scott Rennie, 32 Main Street, Cragie, Kilmarnock KA1 5LY. CURRAH MICROSPEECH wanted. Will pay reasonable price plus footware. Titles include Wheelie, Fighter Pilot, Trashman, Match Point, Mugsy, Beaky, Doomsday Castle. Tel: Gary now on Forby 70492. CBM 64 with cassette, books, manuals and over  software including five adventures, Hobbit, Twin Kingdom Valley also two joysticks, only . Tel: 0535 275157 (W. Yorks) evenings. WANTED. 3K Super Expander or 3K expansion. Tel: Cardiff 566805 or write to: Martin Sulman, 10 Llandow Road, Ely, Cardiff CF5 5ET. ATARI 400 16K, cassette recorder, manuals, special books, American magazines, over  original software, including Star Raiders, Pacman, Submarine Commander, Assembler, joysticks, 'Le Stick'. Tel: 01-643 4416,  ono. Also AP-100A printer for BBC 900 sheets paper. Perfect condition.  ono. ORIC 1 48K plus cassette recorder, manuals and magazines. Also 19 games . Tel: Bradford (0274) 687378. SHARP MZ-700 for sale complete with data recorder plus 15 game cassettes. Excellent condition. Still under guarantee  or reasonable offer. Tel: Bangor 354121 evenings. DRAGON 32, joysticks, books and software including The King, Frogger, Skramble, Donger Ranger and more plus cartridge. Sell for  ono. Also cassette recorder if required add  to total. Tel: Lanark 61498. FOR SALE VTX 5000 modem (Spectrum) v.g.c . Amstrad computer + colour monitor + Punchy, Spanner Man, Alien Break-in . Tel: Ilkeston (0602) 301526. T199/4A BASIC computer less than one year old. In perfect condition, hardly been used,  ono. Tel: Kettering 517217. SPECTRUM 48K home computer system includes 48K Spectrum (four months old) VTX 5000 modem (hardly used), tape recorder, ZX printer and paper, joystick interface and Kempston comp-pro joystick. Also over  of software and loads of books and mags. . (0777) 709476 after 4pm. CBM 64 games to swap, many American and British including Starwars, Zaxxon, Buck Rogers, Pogoshoe etc. Disk or cassette. Send list to David Miley, Holmelea, Red Hall Drive, Cochrane Park, Newcastle upon Tyne. CBM 64, four months old, Introduction to Basic, Part 1.  worth of software, C2N cassette recorder . Tel: LV 763846 after 4pm. 48K SPECTRUM +  of software + TV + Tape and M.C. Book. All for . Tel: 021 422 8965. GENUINE BARGAIN! Vic 20, 16K ram pack, C2N tape unit,  of software, joystick (optional), worth around . Make own reasonable offer! All boxed! Tel: lan on 061 231 4344 ATARI software cartridges, Pole Position , Donkey Kong , Qix, Missile Command. Only  each: Tel: Rich on 01-393 8859. VIC 20 C2N cassette recorder, 16K switchable ram pack, leads, books, manuals, plus lots of top quality software. Excellent condition . will separate if required. Tel: (051) 924 7775 after 4pm. WANTED ZX MICRODRIVE, ZX printer and Kempston joystick interface. Will pay good price. Also for sale, Trans Tower, Flight Simulation, Ah Diddums, all originals! .50 each ono. Tel: West Chilterns 3714. k speedly usystick Also Ova mags. for Eldette game oystick Parsecual, three 204 "


"CARTRIDGE CITY Simply the best cartridge rental service for Atari Computers. ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE We have an all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE. Apply now and hire your first 4 games free. Well over 800 different original titles. For full details send stamped addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends. LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 DISC DRIVES [194.95 800XL COMPUTER 164.95 Purchases of either of the above offers receive free membership Flight Simulator il disc 36.95 BEST QUALITY DISCS, BOXES OF 10 Single density discs (16.50 Double density discs 18.00 Antic & Analog magazines available 16K Ram boards only suitable for 800 upgrades) 16.00 GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney Close. Sunderland SR3 4PB. Tel: 0783 286351 WA THE SOFTWARE LENDING AND EXCHANGE LIBRARY SPECTRUM, COMMODORE 64, DRAGON VIC 20, BBC & ZX81 YES! ICO! We live programs for your computer We live programs from 500 (ZX81). Two weeks .00 LIFE MEMBERSHIP (less than the cost of a single game) brings you our membership kit, including hire listings software exchange catalogue and introductory letter. We now have OVER 300 HIRE TITLES, and 500 EXCHANGE TITLES, with large Spectrum and Commodore sections. All mail dealt with on a daily basis and OVERSEAS MEMBERS VERY WELCOME New software discounted to our members at impressive rates Send cheque/PO for .00 to The Software Landing Library PO Box 3, Castielord West Yorkshire WF10 1UX Stating name, address and computer type. FORGET THE REST AND JOIN THE BESTI C610 Full information pack from CARTRIDGE CITY 25 Gaitside Drive, Aberdeen, AB1 7BH. Tel. (0224) 37348 ATARI ALL MODELS — PROGRAMMERS WANTED Original games and educational software required for most makes of home computer. Outright purchase or royalties considered Strict professional ethics adhered to Send your programme on cassette to: KnightSoft, Unit E17, Glenfield Park, Glenfield Road, Nelson, Lancashire BB9 BAR. EXPRESS JOYSTICK REPAIRS Joysticks repaired and returned within 24 hours, e.g. Atari, Vic, Quickshot, Triga Command etc. Send joystick and .95 + 50p postage. Reconditioned joysticks for sale .95 each. ATARI/COMMODORE SPARES Strong replacement joystick handle inserts at .50 pair Atari 12.15 pair Commodore. Joystick handle top fire button kit, includes insert and grip at 2.95 each Atari or Commodore, OL Macra. Assembler/Disassembler .95 inc. postage. JOYSTICK FOR OL Plugs straight into control port 1 or 2. No interface required. .99 each or two for . Add 50pp&p. COMPUTER SUPPLIES 146 CHURCH ROAD BOSTON, LINCS PE21 OJX THE HELPER Stuck on an adventure? The Helper will list prog to screen allowing you to Search for clues (Tape Only) THE CRACKER Will crack any Atari type MC prog to screen, you edit download to tape your personalized version, with or without MIC knowledge (Tape Only) THE CREATOR P.M.G. Editor, will do a months work in a day. Create image you wish and download into your own Basic program (Tape or Disk) T.D.K. Tapes  each Memorex Disks  All Post Free Mail Order Only SUPERSOFT 15 WOODBROOKE ROAD BIRMINGHAM B30 1UE So G SPECIAL OFFER FOR ATARI 400/600/800 OWNERS Hire your first 2 games FREE from our extensive range of software. Up to the minute releases available. Apply Now! We now have Atari hardware for sale at discount prices. Modems suitable for Atari Computers now for sale. For further details send s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD GAMES 27. WARWICK AVENUE QUORN, LOUGHBOROUGH LEICESTERSHIRE TEL: 0509 412604 CG219 MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY We now have EVERY cassette, disc, ROM worthy of inclusion released in the United Kingdom for the ATARI 400/600/800 range. OVER 750 original programs for hire. Write for details with sae to: MGL 48 Read Way, Bishops Cleeve Cheltenham, Glos. Tel: (0242-67) 4960 6pm-9pm CG313 BLANK CASSETTES Guaranteed top quality computer audio cassettes at great budget prices. Packed In boxes of 10 with labels, Inlay cards and Mbrary case. Prices include VAT post and packing (C5) DC30) DC10) E3.40 1060 $5,30 GC12 E3 45 DiC9057.00 (C15) .75 BASF FLOPPY DISCS Prices of boxes of 10 54 Single side Double density .95 5% Dotole side Double density 921.85 D5% Double side/ Quod density .75 MICRO FLEXI DISCS Price per unit 34 Single side f4.00 each 3' Double side 4.75 each Indicate quantity of each product required in boxes. Free delivery UK only Cheque/P.O.Enclosed for NAME ADDRESS FAWCETT Software T199] SANTA RUN ideal Christmas gift only 2.45 QT-bounce around a pyramid of cubes 12.95 ART ATTIC wander the haunted house 12.95 GHOSTERS bust those ghosts (EB) 13.95 sge for full list all prices include Dep FAWCETT SOFTWARE, 61 Howdale Road, HULL T199/4A STAINLESS SOFTWARE has a large catalogue of good quality programs for the T199/4A, with over 80 programs! For a copy, please send a large SAE to: Dept CVG, 10 Alstone Road, STOCKPORT, Cheshire, SK4 5AH. (Mail Order Only) PROFESSIONAL MAGNETICS LTD w Cassette House, 329Hirslet Rood. Leecks 151037 FREEPOST Tel. (0532) 706066 COMMODORE 64 GAMES PLAYERS MANIC MINER, ARABIAN NIGHTS, AUTOMANIA and many other top 64 games can now be conquered with the RED BUTTON reset switch. This device simply plugs into the back of your computer and lets you break into games. With easy to follow instructions you can have many lives and start on any screen. The instructions also include a program which recovers your basic programs after crashes a valuable tool for debuggers Note: Our latest hi score on Revenge of the Mutant Camels is 3,560,400.Beat that! Send cheque/p.o. for only .50 now to: S. MAINWARING, 19. HEOL SAFFRWN, MORRISTON. SWANSEA SA6 6EH. so BLANK DISKS SPECIAL OFFERS SOFTWARE FOR THE COMMODORE 64 .95 5% disks supplied in boxes of 10 with a FREE black plastic Ibrary Case SCOTCH 3M Single Sided Double Density Double Sided Double Density .95 CONTROL DATA Single Sided/Double Density .95 Double Sided/Double Density [18.95 SPECIAL LIMITED OFFER 50 High Quality, quaranteed. SSHDD disks supplied with a FREE perspex storage box ONLY We have many other brands formats of 5 \" disks, as well 33 Microdisks Details on request Bulk order discounts available Astrochase Flip & Flop Zaxxon Summer Games Monty Mole Arabian Knights Lazy Jones Caverns of Khafta .05 .05 .95 .45 .15 .25 .15 .05 Dealer welcome \"All prices *FREE FAST DELIVERY Please send cheques POS to: SJB DISK SUPPLIES 11 OUNDLE DRIVE, NOTTINGHAM NGB 1BN TEL. NO, 106021 782310 For full lists please send S.A.E. to: LOADE ENTERPRISES, c/o Ensemble, 35 Upper Bar, Newport, Shropshire TF10 7EH. Tel (0952) 813667. VIC 20/CBM 64 SOFTWARE HIRE Free membership, top titles from 50p per week. Two first class stamps for your hirekit to VSH(CV), 242 Ransom Road, Mapperley, Nottingham. Please state which machine. 205 "


"48K SPECTRUM still under guarantee, plus Kempston joystick and Kempston interface also many top selling games such as Manic Miner, Snowman, and Football Manager + 12 mags. . Tel Burnham 67413 SHARP Mz-800 personal computer. Excellent condition. Integral screen, keyboard cassette recorder. All original manuals. Dust cover, over  software. All worth over  only . Tel: Walton on Thames 244758. A NICE shaped File contains over 50 programs listings for Atari (collected from books and magazines). To order, send Personal cheque of  to Y Behbehani, PO Box 5845, Salat, Kuwait Details call 2465987 (24 hours). 10 ATARI games on one cassette .50 inc P&P. Mr S Richards, 14 Beach Grove, Acomb, York, Yorkshire YO2 SLB TEXAS T199/4A. Will exchange complete Logo II as new, or alternatively three games modules. Munchman, Car Wars and The Attack. For mini memory. Phone Runcorn 715942. Evenings between 6 and 9 or weekends and ask for George. VIC 20 originals Startrek, Orb Abductor  each. Also Scott Adams Solutions plus free map  each plus s.a.e. Write A Bellamy 201 model Village, Creswell, Worksop, Notts. 48K SPECTRUM, interface one, Microdrive, nine cartridges. Alphacom 32 printer, nine rolls paper, Kempston joystick interface, Sound Amplifier, tape recorder, lots of software.  ono. Tel Mr Kwong (0823) 75615. 48K SPECTRUM Quickshot two joystick, Kempston interface  worth of software including Jet Set Willy, Match Point, Sabre Wulf, Lords of Midnight. Few books, mags for . Tel 67 38247 (after 6pm). SPECTRUM 48K including cassette deck, Kempston interface and  or original software swap for Commodore 64 and C2N deck cash either way. Spectrum only 3 months old. Tel: John Lea Hall, Birmingham. 021 784 0138 32K RAM expansion for 16K Spectrum 4 months old also will swap or sell games. Tel Falkirk (0324) 25133 DOWNSWAY PROGRAMMABLE interface for sale hardly used lus free Bug Byte game all for . Phone Colchester (O) 323444 after 5.00pm ZX81 16K including Quicksilva sound character and mother boards, Maplin full keyboard. Input output board, software worth + including 3D Monster Defender, Pimania. Worth  bargain at  offers A. Graham, 19 Queen Street, Ryhope, Sunderland, Tyne & Wear please include S.A.E. ATARI 400 together with program recorder, joysticks, games. All for only .20. Please reing Southend 347288. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE. Swap your used software. .00 per exchange. Over 50 titles. First swap only 75p, which will include list. Also software for sale at reasonable prices. .50 membership required. COMMODORE 64 software wanted, buy, sell, or swap. Please send your list in return for mine. Write to N. Birds, Shawcraft, Biggin, Hartington, Buxton, Derbyshire SK17 ODH. ORIGINAL GRAPHIC adventure in machine code for the 48K Spectrum only .50 per tape O'Neill, 10 Ashton Place, Kintbury, Berkshire. FOR SALE T199/4A computer Complete with extended basic joysticks cassette leads and manuals.  ono. Telephone Buckley (0244) 548052 T199/4A PLUS extended basic, joystick interface with new Quickshot joystick, dual cassette leads with cassette deck. Many games including Invaders, TNT Home Finance, Household, Budget only  ono. Swindon 827392 16/48K SPECTRUM adventure White House Assault, you must steal U.S. Defence Systems code. 100% M/C Cheque P/O for .00 (STG) or .00 (IR) to David Ryan, 13 Leopardstown Park, Stillorgan, Dublin, Ireland. Easy script for CBM. New and boxed complete with manual and 6 games disk. . Tel: 0705 594755 after 6pm. URGENT ALMOST new Vic 20 with tape recorder, 21K switchable ram, 4 slot motherboard and dust covers for sale. Worth over . Price negotiable. Ring Swanley (0322) 62996 for details. MEMOTECH MTX512, 64K 16 colour, front panel moniter, 280 assember, Hi-Res graphics 12 months old still boxed . (02273) 3403. 33 Coventry Gardens, Herne Bay, Kent CT6 6SD ORIC 1 48K,  software, books, Vic 20 16K, software games, radio controlled car and electronic board game worth  + sell for  ono. Call (0924) 462344 Dewsbury after 5pm weekdays. VIC 20 starter pack, over  worth of software, Introduction to Basic two, Quickshot 2 joystick, altogether worth over . Yours for only  ono. Telephone Coventry (0203) 360 950. DALLAS QUEST solved. The complete solution to this brilliant, complex adventure .00. Send a large s.a.e. to: David Fearn, 38 Byfords Road, Huntley, Glos GL 19 3EL. T19914A EXTENDED basic, Speech Synthesizer, Parsec, Alpiner, Munchman, Soccer, Joysticks, Dual cassette lead. Texas program books, cassettes, mags, 99er. All original packaging and manuals. Only . Ring 0709 862322. ZX SPECTRUM 48K with interface, data recorder, plus over 50 games programs, and a few mags. I will sell these  ono. Tel Slough 70288 after 4pm (under 1 year old). SHARP OWNERS Atari 400/800/XL Account and Display programs made to suit. Ideal for Video Clubs, Shops etc. Send large s.a.e. for details to Kusanta GroupWhitestown Industrial Estate, Tallaght, Co. Dublin or phone (07) 987209. ATARI SOFTWARE. All originals. On disk and tape  each. Also secondhand single density disks  for 10. Tel: 01-907 9546. New Double Sided Density Disk. Very good quality  inc. P&P. SOFTWARE EXCHANGE. Swap your used software. Free membership. Discount offers. Spectrum/Dragon. Huge program base. SAE please to UK Software Exchange Club, 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB. SORD-CGL M5 Enhance your programmes, run large ones with Editor Assembler Cartridge .95. Basic-G Games: Planet Hoppers, Boxman, Colditz, Interstellar, intrigue, Mancala, GQ, Asteroids. Take 5 .95 each Special S/W tools. Micro Xzec, Walton House. Richmond Hill, Bournemouth, Dorset. (0202) 21220. C&VG, ONLY MICROSELL COUPON TO ADVERTISE IN C&VG MICROADS TEL: 01-251 6222 BN TERMS AND CONDITIONS 1. Trade advertisers will appear in the MicroAds section, private advertisers in the Microsell Section. PLEASE PRINT IN BLOCK CAPITALS ONLY ONE INSERTION PER COUPON Minimum number of words is 15, maximum 40 (continue on a separate sheet were necessary) 2. All free MicroSell ads are subject to space availability TOTAL number of words for ALL insertions (ie. 15 words per advertisement to appear in two months = 30 words in total) COST: MicroSell (Private) MicroAds (Trade) .00 40p per word 50p per additional bold word I enclose a cheque/P..for ............ made payable to Computer & Video Games Name ....... 3. The Publishers reserve the right to refuse an advertisement. Address POST TO: AD. DEPT, C&VG, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU 206 "


":X-T M-O-N-T-H  SS PROFESSOR BECOMES TORNADO PILOT. Take off with the Prof in the next issue of C&VG when he straps himself into his Tornado jet and blasts off for a training flight. Yes, we've persuaded Professor Video to take to the skies in order to bring you hints and tips on that top selling game, Tornado Low Level. Plus a great map with extra added flight equipment. Interested in earning your wings? Then fly down to your local newsagent on December 16th and grab a copy of C&VG! N DOOMDARK -I-X. CONTINUED. .... The battle against the evil Heartstealer and her Iceguard legions continues in part two of our Doomdark's Revenge competition. If you were intrigued by part one then you won't want to miss your chance to fight alongside the Warriors of the Free. Join up by getting your mailed fist around January's Computer & Video Games. KNUCKERHOLE? What is the Knuckerhole? Where is the Knuckerhole? And what has it got to do with computer games? Find out ONLY in Computer & Video Games next issue, when we exclusively reveal the mysterious Legend of the Knuckerhole, Jet Boot Jack's latest and greatest adventure. Delve into the depths with Computer & Video Games and you may well come up with some interesting prizes! 4. N-E-X-T. ADVENTURE WIZARD Keith Campbell, C&VGs Adventure wizard, has been looking at all the latest Adventure games with the help of his two apprentices, Simon Marsh and Paul Coppins. You'll discover what he thinks about the hot new games in C&VGs Adventure Extra next issue. Keith has also been delving in to the mysterious world of Zork a classic Adventure series. Read all about the Underground Empire in a special feature next month. JANUARY ISSUE ON SALE FROM DEC 16th L M-O-N.T.H.N.E.X.T-M-ON HCOMPETITION RESULTS PINBALL JUMP CHALLENGE Once upon a time a young motorcyclist stunt rider saw a film featuring Evel Knievel which inspired him to greater things. His name was Eddie Kidd and he eventually set his own world record at Radlett Airfield, Herts. He then went on to star in a film called Riding High. The film is based on the life of Eddie Kidd and had the answers to the questions in the Jump Challenge competition held two months ago. Thanks to Martech Games, we had 40 copies of the Eddie Kidd Jump Challenge game to give away to the first 40 correct entries picked out of the C&VG memory bin. Ten prizes each for the CBM 64, Spectrum, BBC and Electron. Congrats to the winners and the prizes are on the way. In October's issue we had an exclusive on Travel with Trashman and also ran a competition with 50 copies of this brand new game up for grabs thanks to New Generation Software. We asked you to answer three trashy questions and to tell us what you would most like to find in your dustbin if you were a dustman. I got the overwhelming impression that most people would like to find large sums of money or blank cheques this must mean something! The answers to the questions: \"Daisy Roots' means boots, London's homes produce five million tons of rubbish per year and Malcolm and Rod Evans are twins. We know that twins also means brothers but twins was the answer we wanted! The first 50 correct entries to be picked from the C&VG memory bin have won the prizes. Due to lack of space we aren't able to print the names of the winners but prizes are being sent out. There are a lot of pinball wizards out there, judging by the entries which fooded in for our CGL Pinball Game and Watch Competition. We had five of the latest CGL hand held games to give away and all you had to do was answer three simple questions. Which rock band created a rock opera all about pinball? The Who, that's who! What was the name of the star of that opera? Tommy! And what do you call the devices on a pin table used to bash the ball about? Flippers! Easy wasn't it? Now for the five lucky winners, who were: Jake Francis, of Powys, Wales; A. Ferris of Clapham, London: Raphael Lyne, from Oxford; Keith Mason of Upton, Wirral; Mrs J.H. Berry of Wigan, Lancs. Well done! DUSTY BIN 207 "


"TEXAS T199/4a Software ATARI 400-600-800 RENTAL CLUB WHY DO SPECTRUM USERS FROM LONDON DEVON. ESSEX & CAMBRIDGE SEND THEIR MICROS TO US FOR REPAIR? Average price  Only Co. in all UK offering while you wait Oor 24 hour turnaround every micro insured for return journey Ophone or send for free estimate enc. .60 UK, LOM, Eire CL ONO hidden handling charges. Ospecial rates for schools MANCOMP LTD Printworks Lane, Levenshume, Manchester M19 3JP Tel: 061 224 1888 Fantastic new pames for your T1994 Two games on every cassette ful graphics and sound. Al games are in T1 Basic Cassette 1. Boony Bill Dooit Go pub Crawing with Boozy Bill or make your fortune Goldmining Cassette 2. Galati Alen Madness aliens in a game with a difference Cassette 3. ol Panic Jet Plane ......................Price 4.50 Connect a pipeline before the boller bursts or steal a Jet Plane bomb the enemy and try to land Al prices include P&P with fast delivery Make cheques, POs payable to MRJ, B4 Reva Rd, Broadgroen, Liverpool L14 GUB Be one of the first to try out the very latest releases For the most comprehensive selection of the best and most popular games available on cassette and cartridge: Constantly updated. Send a large SAE for details to: D.J.B. SOFTWARE (Dept C.V.G.I. 59 WOODLAND AVE, HOVE, SUSSEX TEL: 0273) 502103 CG36 WARNING! HELP!! EJo ZOOMSOFT FOR THE VERY BEST SPECTRUM, COMMODORE 64 AND ATARI GAMES (including U.S. SOFTWARE) See page 95 IT IS ILLEGAL TO DUPLICATE & SELL COPYRIGHTED SOFTWARE. Programmers of all types of home computers. We urgently need games and adventures of any orginal concept, unfinished games also accepted for review Are you a competent programmer, but stuck for ideas? Can you help us complete unfinished games, or convert existing games to run on your compter? Royalties or weekly payments paid. For further details: Tel (0282) 844242 ask for ALAN. Or write to:HAWKSOFT Sough Bridge Mill, Colne Road, Kelbrook, nr. Colne, Lancs. \"HAME FOR A GAME COMPETITION We need a \"Name\" or a \"CONCEPT\" for series of 10 oferent adventure games The winners will each receive a set of the 10 adventure games Entries to HAWKSOFT, et above address FREE SOFTWARE BUT HOW? You've got friends with computers. Show them our huge discount games lists. They like to save money, and you earn some too. That's all and it doesn't cost you a thing. Interested Yes More details please TECHNIPLAY SOFTWARE Dornoch Drive, Hull HUB 8JL Tel: 0482 712958 COMMODORE 64/AMSTRAD OWNERS MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY The First and the largest Commodore 64 Library in the World OFTEN COPIED BY NEVER EQUALLED 11 All the latest titles on Cassette, disc and cartridge 21 Hire your first two games absolutely free. Up to 2 in value 3) Life membership (6 4) Hire charge from only t inc p&p for full 7 days 5) Not to the amount of games you can hire B) Al games originals with documentation 71 Games, Business wd Education software 8) Return of post service quaranteed 91 Lowest now hard and software prices in the UK 10) Join now on 14 day money back guarantee 11) Over 10,000 games in stock including many US imports Send cheque or postal order for 8 with your two selections or large se for further details to: MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY 172 Studley Road, Redditch, Worcs. Telephone 0527 23584 T199/4A USA SOFTWARE AT DISCOUNT PRICES Winging It Flight Simulation. Fly a plane in this excellently visualised simulator Ground map and weather indicator. Chart your progress on a randomised earth simulacrum. Once flying three games test your skill TI Basic .95 inc P&P. Treasure Trap graphic adventure game. Break into the builders planetoid and explore myraid rooms in your quest for hitech treasure. A different adventure each time you play. TI Basic .95 inc P&P Agent 000 Text adventureExplore Atlantis and a black hole with Agent 000 Enemies are everywhere. What is the secret mission? Extended Basic .95 inc P&P SAE, for catalogue MIND GAMES, 7 OAKWOOD DRIVE PRESTBURY, CHESHIRE SKI10 4HG ATARI COMPUTER OWNERS Make the most of your Atari 400/600/800 by hiring from our Software Library. We offer a wide selection of the many games and adventures on the market for your computer For full details send a S.A.Eto: Star Hire, P.O. Box 48, Bracknell, Berks. RG12 4WD. CG69 THE WORLDS LARGEST COMPUTER LIBRARY ARE NOW STOCKING TITLES FOR THE AMSTRAD, BBC AND MSX ANOTHER FIRST FOR MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY ATARI SOFTWARE ZOOMSOFT ATARI AND CBM 64 PROGRAMS Original games and utility programs wanted for the Atari and CBM 64 home computers. Top royalties paid. We can distribute your product worldwide. Send programs to: Zoomsoft, 46 Huntsworth Mews, London NW1 6DS, or phone 01-723 0562 between 10am and 7pm. CASS 12.80. BRUCE LEE DALLAS QUEST DISK 12 BO 12 80 12.80 CBM 64-ATARI-VIC AMERICAN SOFTWARE MAGAZINES We find the best games. adventures and utilities from the top American Computer magazines and type them onto disc or cassette for you. Guaranteed a minimum of 12 top class programmes every month. JUST LOOK AT THIS PRICE Disc-.95 Cassette-C6.95 including postage) For your sample copy send cheque/P.O. to: COMPUTER TYPE LITTLE PAGEHURST COTTAGE THORN ROAD STAPLEHURST KENT and we will rush you your program by return. Please specify computer type. 12.80 12.80 12.80 SOLO FLIGHT BLUE THUNDER DESMONDS DUNGEONS es 3.80 é ATTACK OF THE MUTANT CAMELS HOVER BOVVER 32K6.50NIA NATO COMMANDER 11.70 SPITFIRE ACE JETBOOT AC. ... 9.10 DAN STRIKES BACK STRANDED SNOOKIE DENNIS DRINKING GLASS 4BK CAVERNS OF KAFKA........... 16 . 800 COLONY 7 BRO ENCOUNTER 11.75 SNOWBALL ADV..... 32K. BEACH HEAD DUNGEON ADV.............32K PENGON MA DIG LORDS OF TIME ADV HULK TANK COMMANDER CASCADE 50 GAMES 16/32K MIDNIGHT MAGIC COMPUTING Cheque & PO's to: J SOSTA 141 PLIMSOLL RD, HIGHBURY, LONDON N4 2ED. 01-359 7217 ssess SOFTWARE AT DISCOUNT PRICES ATARI 600-800-2600'-BBCCOLECOVISION-COMMODORE VIC 20 +64-ORIC-ELECTRON-SPECTRUM Sale OR rent from 20p/day Send s.a.e. 9x 4 for free list Please state micro MODELMAKERS 4 Market Parade Hazlemere, High Wycombe Bucks HP15 7LQ Tel: High Wycombe 711711 SHARP SERIES New hardware, Games, Adventures, Utility and Educational Programs available for Sharp Computers MZ-BOK, MZ-80A and MZ-700 Series. Send for our FREE full descriptive catalogue and add your name to our mailing lists. K-SOFT COMPUTERS 56, ROLHAM LANE, RETFORO NOTTINGHAMSHIRE, ON22 6SY 208 "


"REWRITE HISTORY -the world's Nolwar game company THE BATTLE OF THE BULGE: ATARI Spectrum versions available soon! Allaction strategy games from SSIAt last here is your chance to see how you shape up as a General in a real battle! The pages of history record the triumphs and failures as Eisenhower, Montgomery, Rommel and von Rundstedt battled in Europe and North Airica. But with a clear thinking strategist like yourself in command perhaps the historians would have had a different story to write! TS. Gold is proud to present four of the best strategy games by Strategic Simulations Incorporated: LIGHTS OF THE DESERT pitches the Mettich Forces of Montgomery against the might of Rommel and his Panzer Divisions in the classic North African campaign [ 1941. BATTLE FOR NORMANDY commences on D-Day' June 6th 1944 and relives the Allied Forces attempt to smash Hitler's Atlantic Wall. TIGERS IN THE SNOW reconstructs the legendary Battle of the Bulge as in December 1944 the Panzer Divisions of Tom Rundstedt try one last gamble in a desperate attempt to halt Eisenhower's advancing Allied lines. Who will be the victor and who the vanquished? Only you have the answers! And if you're looking for strategy with arcade action then COMBAT LEADER will test all your wits, depth of thought and reflexes in this toughest of battle challenges! COMBAT LEADER 2 >= = = SEL STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS INC = = c. $14.95 U.S. GOLD disk& cassette THE ULTIMATE IN AMERICAN SOFTWARE FOR YOU ON U.S. GOLD U.S. Gold is stocked by all leading computer stores including: BOOTS WHSMITH JOHN MENZIES WILDINGS WOOLWORTH DEALERS! Tu information on how to become a U.S. Cold Stockist write to: Centre Soft Ltd., Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Hentage Street, Birmingham B7 ALY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. werin Su STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS INC. "


"Nothing will affect you (and your school or college) more than... I TRIONIC Your Local Home Computer Centre cornpoistove Best Shop in Town for Software, Books, Mags, Peripherals and Accessories. We sell and support: Amstrad, Atari, BBC, Commodore C16, CBM 64, CBM Plus 4, Electron Spectrum 48K, Sony Hit-Bit (MSX). We are one of the Largest Stockists of Games, Business and Educational Software and Utilities for all Popular Home Computers. Amstrad CPC464 Green Monitor ............ . Amstrad CPC464 Colour Monitor ............... Commodore C16 Starter Pack................ . Commodore 64 ...................... ....................... . Commodore 64 Trionic Pack.......... . Commodore 64 Business Pack..  BBC Model B Micro .................................. **.................. . Spectrum 48K............. . Sony Hit Bit MSX Computer.........  We also stock a large range of Printers, Monitors and Disk Drives to suit all applications. Acorn Electro We'll send you a sample copy of EDUCATIONAL COMPUTING for just .00 write to Valerie Day EDUCATIONAL COMPUTING Durrant House 8 Herbal Hill London ECI SEJ EDUCATIONAL OPEN 10am-8pm Mon-Sat. Tel: 01-861 0036 TRIONIC LIMITED 144 Station Road, Harrow, Middlesex ADVERTISEMENT INDEX ............ 201 .62 National Software Library ..........129 New Generation Software... 118/119 Games Workshop Gargoyle. Goodbyte... Granada.. Ocean Ozisoft. .180 161 *** Parco... ... 17/97 A & F ... 132 Acorn ... Acornsoft ........... 156/157, 186/187 Activision ... ....52, 162 Addictive Games.. Adverture International...........60/61 Adventure Writer ......... AGF 154/155 Alligata .... Anirog IBC Argus Press Software....... 124/170 Atari. ..56/57 Atarisoft..... 98/99 Audiogenic... Automata Haresoft... Hewson High Tech Electronics Hill MacGibbon. ONE 44 Icon. 8 Incentive..... Innelec.. Intrigue... ...89 ...190 John Wiley Banana Beyond Blaby Kerian..... Kernow... Kuma DNF Cheetah Marketing Commodore. Commodore User. Computer Games. Computer Magic... Creative Sparks.. CRL 131 30 188 .81 Protek Psion ... Quicksilva ................26, 27, 68, 69 Ram Electronics Ramjam..... Samuarai.... Severn.. Silica Shop .... Sinclair Programs Softek Softstone.. Software Club Software Projects...... 140-145 Solar Software.. Spectra Imports Star Dreams .... Statesoft.. System 3... Talent...... Taskset Terminal.. Timeslip Trionic ... 210 Ultimate .. 176-179 US Gold.. 10, 20, 76, 77, 105, 123, 195, 209 Virgin ................... 129, 163 Websters..... Whitehouse Retail Zoomsoft ............... . 40 14 Martech, Match Weekly .... MC Lothlorien... Megasave....... ... 104 Melbourne House ......... 70, 192/193 Melrica...... ..77 Memorex... ..102/103 Micro-Ads... 205, 208 Microantics. Microbase. ..163 Micromania 139, 152 Micromega. Micronet 800 .......... ..198/199 Micropower..... ...63, 153, 185 Microsell.. 202, 204, 206 Midland Games Library Mikrogen... 137 Miles Better Software 88 Mirage ... Modular Resources .... MSX... Discount Computer Software .....125 Domark.. Dorcas....... Dynavision 13 .53 Eclipse ... E.D. 40... Elite English.. Euromax ..IFC .53 .28, 135 ...53 Firebird Software............... ....82/83 Front Runner .................... 149, 151 210 "


"ANIROGA TURBO COMMODORE ANIROG ANIROG ANIROG This COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64  8 PopCPE , ANIROG COMMODORE 64 COMMODOPE 56 Also available on Disk ANIKOG Space Pilof ANIKOG USE OF Llagoste HUNTER2 Tob COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 MODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 VIC 20 COMMODORE 67 & VIC 20 16K ANIROG ANIROG Minipedes, TE DEFENDER CA64 VICBOOK C.B.1.64&VIC2016 MICRO VIC 20 18% EER NIKOG AMIKOG ANIROG MINIKON Flight Path 727 DO BONGO LSKRAMBLE   CA. VIC2016 CARLOVICHSK cus VIC 20 UNEX. VIC 20 UNEX. VIC 20 UNEX MSX UTILITIES SPECGRAF Flight Path 727 Flight Path 727 ASTRAD SPECTRUM TRADE ENOURRIES ANIROG SOFTWARE LTD 29 WEST HILL DARTFORD KENT 0322) 92513/8 MAN. ORDUR HIGH STREET HORLEY SURREY 24 HOUR CREDIT CARD SALES HORLEY (02934) 6083 PAYMENT BY CHEQUE PO ACCESS/VISA 50p POSTAGE & PACKAGING "


"albed Yeh, only the good will survive in this the Superstar's.(that's me), first supa-game. .. \"Roland's Rat Race\". Yeh, I'll really need your help. Rat Fans, to wind my way through the underground Rodent World of ladders, lifts, bats and all kinds of creepy crawlies, where I must find the keys to free my furry friends. I can't wait to use my glue gun... \"Stick 'em down.\"... on those monster meanies. See you on your screen, from your cuddly, adorable me. ... Roland Rat, Superstar. STRIKES BACK! BALL The fun of the fair and the fury of Kong! Now you can know what it feels like to be a dodgem, only this time you're running up and down the Roller Coaster dodging the cars, giant buns and jumping springs. But the fun has only just begun....wait until the fury starts! The wacky Waltzer and the zany Swinging Gym are enough to unhinge the sanest fun fair fanatic. Kong Strikes Back is all good fun but it's bound to bring out the bad in you! LQUASIMODOS REVENGE Ugh! The Hunch is back! Your favourite bell ringer, the all-conquering Quasimodo, swings into action on another breathtaking, action-packed extravaganza. Set the bells sounding and Esmerelda's heart pounding with Quasi's astounding derring dos and athletic antics. The bats in the belfry may send you bonkers but be as bold as brass, give yourself a pat on the hump and, WATCH THAT FIREBALL!... phew!... Our hero's revenge is a winner all the way, yes, it's definitely for you..hoo! ohre Three great games of real character from SPECTRUM 48k COMMODORE 64 6.90 Ocea 7.90 Ocean House 6 Central Street. Manchester. M2 5NS. Telephone 061 832 6633. Telex 669977 Ocean Software is available from selected branches of: WOOLWORTH, WHSMITH, BO John Menzies LASKYS, Rumbelows and Spectrum Shops Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Trade enquiries welcome. "

