"Britain's best selling computer magazine DEC 88 .20 S$ 7.20 Dm6.50 350pta HFL 6.50 COMPUTER +video 1 GAMES KE OPERATIONS NA Versions Reviewed 180 PAGAL COUNCI ON OB. WIN 50 LRICIELS PORSGREEN MAPPED: NINJA I LEVELS 45 AND 6, ARMALYTE OBVENIDA TURBO CUR S ER SQUAD, SAVAGE DOUBLE DRAGON, AFTERBURNER, HELLFIRE ATTACK; RETURN OF THE JEDI. "


"\"WORLD'S N) ARCADE GAME Six levels of thrilling coin-op action are brought to life on your home micro. Without fast and accurate shooting skills you will never complete your mission which With all the original takes you through arcade play features steaming jungles magazine reloads, and enemy strong energy bottles, hidd'holds as you attempt en supplies, rocket to liberate the pris grenades and much, oners and secure a IME much more. safe getaway. L os FEST BUTTON HOS DESCUE THE HOSTIGES ! RESCUE THE HOSTAGES! RESCUE THE HOSTAGES! SPECTRUM AMSTRAD OC TAITO) .95 .93 SPECTRUM COMMODORE Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NSTE COIN-OP "


"OPERATE THE NUMBER 1 COMPUTER GAME ATARI ST AMIGA .95 .95 TAITO ephone: 061 832 6633 Telex: 669977 OCEANS G Fax: 061 834 0650 ATARI ST AMIGA COIN-OP "


"Contents Sexy games from France, win a ghetto blaster and a packet of Chewiis every year plus all thals hot in computer games. LTRES OperationWolf Game of the year? We review all versions including a World exclusive first full evaluation of the ST copy. K Win the coin-op. Your very own lype master blaster for your bedroom. Yuk for Arclura .37) and hurrah for Keviews Muncher P.38) as two Gremlin games lastes the bitter and sweet flavour of C+V6 reviews Afterburner scoras a HIP.52). as does Savage (0.66) and Lazer Squad P.89) which Tony Dillon thinks is one of the most brillant and underated games of the year so there. plus ik+ is meaner than mean on the ST 8.74). and Turbo Cup from Loriclels shows thal the French know whals what when it comes to racing games P.78) -all that and Emlyn Hughes pops In to pick up a C+Y& Mit for his C64 fooly game. What ever computer you've gol-C+V8 knows besl. R-Type win the coin-op. P.28. Big Screen MEMENT Ward R Street gets involved in serious gang fighting as ho chooses his Colours (who's got the licence? Ed.) Afterburner C+Vg scoope review. P.5 Funny OldGame, Innit Cecil! 98 Me \"Robson Out, Robson Oul, Robson Out\". The fans want to know about good computer football. Tony Dillon has the answers. Brand new, sparkling C+Y8 column providing all the news, reviews. and gossip about Role Playing computer games and board games, adventure games, PBM and anything else thal is Iruly challenging. um 118 Laser Squad sheer genius. P.89. Playmasters Ninja Il maps Part Two, Armalyle Maps Part I, Julian Rignall's home mada, hand written, players lips and Starglider Il tipped and hinted. 11. Moan, moan, moan. Creed, croep. creen. 131 IDAS Don't blame me. You guys write this stuff. Frame Up is bock. P.15, Arcade Action Robocop. Power Drift, binls and lips, and a guide to London's arcades are on the menu this month. Yum, yum. No Sabrina shots yet Frame Up but loads and loads of cars. Mean Machines Double Dragon gous head lo head on Sega and Nintendo Zelda Is mapped, and Rambo Ill (Saga) looks a lot like Operation woll. OutToLunch 178 Minson Jaws with Berry Anderson (Thunderbirds man) about his new film, computer games, and Lou Tennant. Subscriptions All enquiries to EMAP Frontline, 1 Lincoln Court, Lincoln Road, Peterborough, PE1 2RP. Armalyte the maps. P. 128. Speccy Op Wolf? Wrong Sega Ran bo P.163 ditor: Eugene Lacey, Deputy Editor: Jullan Rignall. Sub Editor: Seamus St. John, Stall Writer: Matt Blatby. Art Editor: Andrea Walker. Advertisement Manager: Garry Willams. Sales Executive: Joanne Cook. Advertiseme "


"Don't miss... DBKFUTURE Big changes are sweeping C+VG. Tony Takoushi gets the boot as Julian Rignall takes over our re-vamped Mean Machines column bringing you all that's hot, and some of what's not, on the Nintendo, Sega, and PC Engine. AGM is our brand new column for role playing enthusiasts and adventurers. Playmasters is bigger and better than ever, plus you could win an R-Type coin-op and a host of other goodies If you play your cards right. It's all inside for you (including our booklet we are 114 pages of top notch editorial) for just $1.20, which quite simply kicks everyone else into touch. Enjoy. F5 La Operation Wolf Atari ST exclusive review. P.20. Rambo III. Naughty Larry is back in AGM. P. 106. Woment Production: Lora Clark. German Correspondenti Carsten Borgmeler, Publisher: Terry Pratt. Editorial and Advertisement Offices: Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR JAD. Tel: 01-251 6222. "


"CM 64 SPRINGBOARD DIVING-Cool nerves, total concentration, split second timing, and not a small measure of artistic flair will determine your scores as you strive for as near perfect execution as is humanly possible. COM 54 UNEVEN PARALLEL BARS Balance strength and artistic flair are the vital ingredients which make this event, perhaps the most demanding, expressive and thrilling of all the gymnastic disciplines IBM PC HAMMER THROWA spectacular test of sheer human power. Feel your every muscle tighten as you rotate the hammer. Then as the centrifugal pull takes over you must gauge your moment of release to perfection to achieve that medal winning throw! 1988 Epyx Inc. All rights reserved. Epyk is a registered trademark No. 119.770. All screen shots are from the CBM64 version of the game. HURDLES -Speed, strength, rhythm Three essentials in an event that is perhaps the toughest on the track Be quick and judge your stride to perfection. The slightest mistake and you're not only out of the medals, you're out of the race! Manufactured and distributed under licence from Epyx Inc by US Gold Limited 2/3 Holford Way, Holford Birmingham B6 7AX nitions of athletes fooruing elite have gone undisputed mastenute ohe World's spontaan. Now w eight diseady accum and detery The Ambitions of athletes from all corners of the Earth culminate in these championships. For it is here that the cream of the World's sporting elite have gathered in a once in a lifetime opportunity to compete for the most coveted titles known to man. Now Epvx, the undisputed masters of games simulation software, offer you the chance to compete with the World's best in eight disciplines that will test your courage and prowess to the absolute limit! You must be grateful and quick. You'll require deadly accuracy and nerves of steel. You'll need strength, stamina, artistic and physical skills. And above all else you'll need the will and determination to be a winner! Eight thrilling events. Opening and Closing Ceremonies Multiple player option, each player competing for a different country. Or compete against the computer Unique \"First person\" perspective allowing you to assess your performance. Epyx "


"CBM 54 ARCHERY-A strong and steady arm, and an accurate eye will be essential for success in an event that combines skills that are in essence centuries old with twentieth century technology RINGS A controlled gymnastic per formance which features the most testing piece of gymnastic apparatus yet devised. Flexibility, fluidity. staticstrength, and strength in movement make the rings the most unique and demanding of the men's gymnastic exercises POLE VAULT An event that is as skilful as it is daring! Accelerate down the track: position the pole and dimb to its top. Strength and technique are everything as you stretch your body in a dramatic attempt to clear that near impossible horizontal bar IBM PC VELODROME SPRINT CYCLING A tough physical and psychological battle in which the ability to outwit your opponent and the strength to beat him to the finish line are required in almost equal measure. Available now for: Available soon for CBM64/128 IBM PC & Compatibles Amiga  Amstrad CPC  Atari ST Spectrum 48K, +2, +3 "


"As far as crazy arcade game ideas are concerned, there's no one to touch the Japanese. As if any more proof were needed, we saw this whacky remote control cars set-up on a recent trip to Tokyo A bank of converted Outrun sitdown machines contain the pilots of the six facing cars, each of whom sees the course vio a video camera mounted in the snoot of his car. The course is pretty complicated and the effect is apparently brilliant though don't hold your breath for them to appear down the local sea front Tvisting Circuits The barrage of car racing games continues apace, with two newies from Mandarin and Accolade taking their places firmly in the realistic simulations camp, as opposed to the Roadblasters school of fantasy Grand Prix Circuit is a Formula One sim for the PC (shown, .95) and the C64 (.95/14.95) from Accolade Racing around such famous courses as Detroit and Monaco, you compete against nine other drivers in a choice of McLaren, Williams or Ferrari cars. There are five levels of difficulty. pit stops to slow you down and the de rigueur opponents seen edging up in the wing mirrors. Mandarin software have taken a slightly more unusual route and created a rally game based around the Lombard RAC rally. Here you sit behind the wheel of a Ford Sierra RS Cosworth as you plough through lour different stages, including through a wood and night driving. With help from Ford and the RAC the game is promised to be a faithful rendition of the hairpin bends and dangerous surfaces of rally driving Released initially on ST and Amiga () budding drivers on other systems should be able to join the fun in the new year leeg, 10112 Psygnosis have one of their strongest ever 16 bit releases available for ST and Amiga (.95) around the time you read this. BAAL is a multi-level scrolling platform shoot 'em up with some stunning screens. You guide \"Time Warriors\" though a series of tunnels and platforms in an attempt to destroy the many scattered components of an allen death machine. One to watch out for Christmas, and while it looks as visually excellent as their very similar \"Obliterator\", we hope that it plays a bit more smoothly. Elite have Space Harrier 2 on ST (.95) and Amiga (.95) available in November amongst other major new releases. Mike Reid's Pop Quiz should also be out at about the same time to join the other trivia quizes competing for the Christmas sales. Quiz Roya ER Mail Elite Bits 5 The 8 bit Rastan look-a-like Storm Warrior is also due this year, at standard prices for Amstrad, Spec and 64, but the latest competitor in the racing wars, Supertrux, will wait until January. At .99 for 8 bit, hurling those four tonne monsters round a track might be fun. "


"Pun of the month must this time go to Elektra Software for the title of their new If unfinished adventure, \"Let Sleeping Gods Lie\". This is an unfinished early screenshot, but the whole thing looks most bizarre. 12 : Pun of the monih ago Madness Gremlin's Motor Massacre is an all-systems post-apocalyptic racing game to join all the other post-apocalyptic racing games. Lots of thrills, spills and destruction are promised, as well as an unusual top view of the action (available November). Motorway idio como One of the things many of you may be finding your stockings this Christmas It's not so far away, you know! is a new joystick. The Mister Joystick range from Powerplay have a number available, from the Blue. Black (.99) and clear (.99 with autofire) Cruiser range, to the new, more upmarket Crystal model. These are all truly clear as opposed to being merely opaque like most clear sticks with red handle and particularly snazzy innards The standard model comes at .99 with the last auto-fire equipped Turbo model coming in at .99. To celebrate, we have a Christmas present even better than a joystick to give away: the Sony Sound Bag This is a portable, high quality radio cassette encased in a soll, squldgy bag for style and user-friendliness. To win it, we'd ask you to come up with a new name for a whizzo top of the range joystick that you reckon everyone would rush out to buy Give some technical details of it too if you want: even draw a picture. We'll chose the one we like the look of best, and should we manage to resist taking the prize home ourselves, someone will get an extra Xmas pressie Name Address There can be few characters in popular culture who haven't been computer gamerised at some point or other. And there could scarcely be such a popular hero, nay icon, as the bubbling and effervescent Postman Pal. Therefore: Pat should become a computer game. Now the unthinkable has come true. Top budget label Alternative have bought their first ever license for a character, and intend to have an 8 bit hit in the shops for Christmas. Quite how you can make a game out of the thrilling adventures of a postie Paperboy notwithstanding we await with interest, but we look forward to the appearance of the black and white Name of new joystick.... Specifications Send to: Mr Joystick Compo, C+VG, Priory Count. 30-32 Farringdon Road, London EC1R 3AU. "


"MICROPROSEREVEALSMORE THANA GLIMPSE OF THE FUTURE      STEALTH FIGHTER Go on solo strike missions to Libya, the Persian Gulf, North Cape and Central Europe. The revolutionary feature of your F-19 is its ability to remain virtually radar-invisible, so your success (and future promotion prospects) rests on mastering the jet's electro magnetic profile. At your fingertips lies an incredible array of weapon options, yet the machine is nothing without the pilot -combat skills and intelligence are essential to survive this advanced and innovative simulation. Project: Stealth Fighter. The ultimate flight simulator for superior pilots. Available for C64/128 Disk .95. Cassette .95. Coming soon for Spectrum, Spectrum +3 & Amstrad. The latest spectacular flight simulation by MicroProse gives you the chance to actually experience the future, putting you in control of America's newest, and top secret fighter plane. Shrouded in mystery, the F-19 is the product of leading-edge technology and engineering. Using the skill and ingenuity for which they are renowned, the aviation experts at MicroProse have accurately reproduced its operational systems to create an incredibly realistic simulation. A simulation with such exceptional playability and depth that it has become an instant award-winner. MICROPROSE SIMULATION. SOFTWARE MicroProse, 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Glos. GL8 8DA. Telephone: 0666 54326) "


"tranehal on the amous s and Rochi e d The Ma n comic charcoananundan ng win skind Bob Mame On ome Ove Microfo n was bebid a while the des France, the described t h e Superski thin but with bik i ng An almost in mem shared the stand wil l ing unusual in that m away and towards o Trackers island h ow in game was Ladie Edwards ax p ry ay Patrol also O Rider. This was you control lies ntrol plane. Loriciels shared this stand, though in a very low key way and with no product to push Coktel Vision had a number of new German games which they handle the distribution for on show, but their main effort was with an adventure game called Freedom based on the escape of slaves from a Carribean plantation, This had some nice graphics and a Barbarian style fight scene, but perhaps overshadowed by another adventure based on Jules Verne's 2000 Leagues Under the Sea. As told by the captured sailor Ned, it tells of the escape from Nemo's Nautilus, fights with sharks etc. In the section of the show taken over completely by Atari there was a fairly large education section which before you stop reading completely had some nice looking 16 bit programmes for five year olds. The graphics of bunnies and so on were as good as you get in most \"proper\" games. In fact, there were a 3rd Festival de la Micro: The trials and tribulations of a Yorkshireman in Paris. Show report by Matt à Paris 2. FESTIVAL DE LA MICRO For the seasoned British PC Show goer, the first impression of the Paris Festival would be of something small and sober. The largest stands were little bigger than your average living room, there was only one free play coin-op around Operation Wolf) and the show bimbos were conspicuous by their absence. Only Titus bothered having a big set piece on their stand (a Ferrari) and worst of all, there was no bar. The Titus stand had Crazy Cars 2, which looked about 150% better than its predecessor. You drive an ultra-rare, ultra-expensive and ultra-ultra quick Ferrari F40 across four American states, steering clear of police and other road users with user of your radar detector. It should be available for Amiga/ST/PC/Amstrad in November and Spec/64 next year. number of produc e rnyetoktel's short but sweet Peter Paro v er here soon enough. \"Yipee t h Peter named tones, as he competes in a resolvery simple Pacman stylemes and so on. One of these bo DROWOTE Theyin, really! Outside the theme the parently some confusion going on one s ide Who come underground, marked on which to homing more than a full m o fusion as to weath e r been the ar m ertion exit had to the Y o uth Till have been the ro o m "


"Charts Take a Butchers at This SPECTRUM TOP TEN Bomb Jack Encore Joe Blade 2 Players D. T'sens Olym ChallOcean Track Suit Manager Goliath Gauntlet Kixx Typhoon Ocean 1943 US Gold Jungle warfare: it's just the ticket these days, isn't it? Looking not too dissimilar to the game that has just graced almost ever magazine cover under the sun though to be fair it is no clone is Gremlin's Butcher Hill. Through three sections a rubber dingy ride down a river, on foot through a jungle and a village you make your way through Vietnam to \"Butcher Hill\". It's a shoot 'em up for Spec, Amstrad, 64, ST and Amiga in January Football Manager 2 Addictive Axxiom Station Bartleships Encore 10 Eur. Five-a-side Firebird Typhoon, anawantry, does well and con be expected to do better in the coming months. More full price games in the chart than there have been for months as the budget houses all and the market braces soft for Christma AMIGA TOP FIVE Star Glider Rainbird German Software house Axxiom are starting to be distributed in the UK, and intend to be one of the bigger names in the 16 bit arena by the end of next year, or so. Their first three releases are all to be available before Christmas on the Amiga, though later ST versions will be available. Way of the Little Dragon, which they see as being potentially the first hit, is a karate game to be played against either the D. T'son's Olym ChallOcean Interceptor Electronic arts Carrier Command Rainbird 5 Garfield the Edge OST Doley und Garfield are now antriet, while the rest of the chart stays EXACTLY the same as long time. le. Star Glider 2 anys right at the top Way of the Little Dragon ALL FORMATS COMBINED TOP TEN D.T'son's Olym Chell Ocean machine or another player. Graphics are rather nice, though gameplay is less than original; an accusation that could be quite easily levelled against the other games as well. Crystal Hammer is a Breakout Arkanoid clone, while Powerstyx bears a remarkable similarity to old fave Qix: you must build up a picture by sectioning off portions of the screen with your cursor, while avoiding the hostile skulls and so on whose touch means death. Later releases include Gunshoot, a cowboy game: a 3D helicopter sim called Skyblaster: and Spaceport, where you pilot a helicopter through underground caverns. All games will be .95 which makes for very good value. Watch C+VG for the first reviews Joe Blade 2 Players Bomb Jack Encore Ghostbusters Mastertronic Kik Start 2 Mostertronic Spaceport. 6 Track Suit Manager Goliath Football Manager 2 Addictive Yogi Bear Alternative 9 1943 US Gold 10 Soccer Boss Alternative n Daley Thompson may not have managed at the Olympies, but he finally makes number one in the software charts, while atry 1943 puta in sterling service for US Gold Best selling individual version, however is the C64 version of Barbarian 2. ACCOUNT: 00080001 Gunshoot IRRATNS: 62 Crystal Hammer "


"ARCADE ACTION SNK From the SNK MERETT stable, the coin-op smash hit now for your home micro. This multi-level, vertically scrolling arcade thriller throws you deep into the jungles and ruined cities of a nation held in the grip of a cruel oppressor. Freedom is your aim ... Guerrilla War is the means! IIII HUILAH GUERRILLA AMSTRAD COMMODORE E SNK SPECTRUM the name of the came IMAGINE SOFTWARE 6 CENTRAL STREET MANCHESTER M2 5NS TEL: 061-832 6633 TELEX: 667799 OCEANS G. FAX: 061 834 0650 "


"This is the opening of a shop called Software Circus deep in the heart of London. It is unique in that it's claimed it is Britain's first store selling computer software only. The Oxford Street shop has both business and games programs on sale, and aims to be the first ol a national chain of about 50 Already there are plans for a second in London with more lo come It might be an idea to pop into the Plaza centre and check it out if you're ever in the area boss man Steven Markham seems pretty confident they'll soon be the Forbidden Planerol computer games German correspondent H Carsten Borgmeler is at it again, with all the new product CL coming out of Magic Bytes, Rainbow Arts and more... Softgold, who handle the international marketing or products from many German software houses, including Rainbow Arts and Reline, is currently touting a whole range of new stuff on the German market Games we can expect to see in the near(ish) future include Graffiti Man in which you must prove yourself by spraying walls in eight different locations in the face of opposition from police, grannies and other such upstanding citizens Anti-social or what?! Down at the Trolls comes under the less controversial category of fantasy adventure, allowing up to eight players to fight through a labyrinth of tunnels Oxxonian is a four way scrolling The Paranoid complex thingle where you must run around beaming hostile creatures back to their home planet, while Danger Freak features three long levels of stuntman sim, including motorcycle stunts, POSE GUH hanging from helicopters and other such foolhardy stuff 29 LAUNCHER FOR Also available now in Germany are WATOENSPARROW an adventure game centered on the story of Joan of Arc, and Starball which looks like a cross between a Breakout clone and those tennis games which were among the first ever video games CAGIRES: Towards the end of February these 2-5HAFT GRS TURBINE will be joined by Grand Monster Slam ELECTRIC LARSON M 15 20 a dueling game in which trolls, goblins and dwarfs compete by hurling \"living USS John Young. Danger Freak. Gol's deal with arcade mega-company Capcom bears first fruit with the (almost) simultaneous release of new game L.E.D. Storm on both home computer and arcade. The game, which only recently arrived in European arcades, will be launched in December on all major formats It is yet another tale of road racing over empty. post-nuclear wasteland in the tradition of Road Blasters and Overlander, though graphically it looks possibly better than either. Nine levels of varied terrain, dotted with ramps, broken bridges and other hazards beckon for Spectrum (.99/12.99). Amstrad and C64 (.99114.99). ST (.99) and Amiga (E24.99). bunuem U11045 PULAR CUTS balls at each other. Circus Circus based around various big top acts.is out at the same time too. Most of these games are on 64. ST and Amiga, with some also on Amstrad and IBM Meanwhile, in the Magic Bytes camp, the end of the year will see a bizarre thing called The Paranoia Complex which works like the computerised city equivalent of Gauntler You and your faithful robot must serve the giant computer by killing those citizens powerful enough to be a danger toit and so rise the social ladder yourself be careful though once you start to do your job well, the computer may decide you are efficient enough to be a danger! Mini Golfis self explanatory. while Wall Street an attempt at a stock market sim. promises not be es REZEGGE "


"Bytes (1) Video Star B@@ 2006 plupar t game mentioned in the October is now to be called you guessed it Persian Gulf Inferno! Biggest news of change though comes direct from the mouth of one Marc Alexander Ullrich, M.D of Rainbow Arts. After some trouble with Nintendo and Mediagenic because of the Mario Brothers clone Giana Sisters Il and the R-Type clone Katakis Rainbow Arts first hesitated to bring it (sic) on the market. But now they decided to change some sprites and bring it out under new names Katakis will be called Denaris will be out very soon on Amiga and C64 in France and the UK Giana Sisters gets another name which is not sure yet. This brilliant clone will be out the beginning of next year.\" You see here the best Christmas present for '88 that will not be The Sony Video Walkman will be available some time in the new year, at a price about the same as a good non-portable VCR (a few hundred pounds) Using an 8mm video cassette the GV-8 has a three inch LCD screen with 92.160 resolution and offers up to three hours play at a shot. Using dry cell batteries it can be watched on the bus or tube or wherever though we wouldn't recommend the car battery power source option for true portability, It can record both from TV and through a portable video camera, though what quality will be like we don't know. All in all, it makes you almost look forward to '89, and could soon be seen on every bus, train and park bench in the land At least he admits they're straight clones, but Denaris still looks, at the very least, uncomfortably close to its inspiration, and whether name changes are enough to stop new action being taken remains to be seen. And that's the news from Germany. just between us! SPGHEORD ILLUMINATOR FIRE CONTROL TEN 579TRACK-UILE SCAR RADAR TO FIRE CONTROL SYSTER Sin/ DUAL ILAH ASROC LAUNCHER (2) Chewits Eat unti-youre -Il comoo Down of the Trolls. Oxxonian. BALL101 To tie in ever so neatly with Gremlin's release of the Chewit's \"Muncher\" game (see JR's thumbs up review this issue) we have an extra neato munching compo. Ten C+VG readers can get a year's supply of our fave fruity sweets i.e. 365 packets) simply by writing in to Tell us what flavour that they don't already make you'd like to see cluttering up the local newsagent's shelves, and a big box of the things could be yours. Now why not check out the review on page thirty eight? 0000000 0000000 00100001 Name..... baffling as the real thing Best of the bunch looks to be USS John Young, a solid vector graphics game for C64 and 16 bit machines, based not on flight of any sort but on modern naval warfare. You must play the captain of a US destroyer in the Persian Gulf of the near future, battling Iranians, Soviets and all sorts In fact the Persian Gulf seems to be a Address... New Chewits flavour and why...... "


"AFTER SHAKE.R BURNER AERIAL L ARCAD ACTIVISION SEGA AFTERBURNER THE ARCADE S Afterburner Sega are trademarks of Sega Enterprises Ltd. Game has been manufactured under license from Sega Enterprises Ltd., Japan. Marketed and distributed by Activision. Mail Order: Activision, Blake House, Manor Farm Estate, Manor Farm Rd., Reading, Berkshire. Consumer Enquiries: 0734 311666 Technical Support: 0703 229694 Available on C64 cassette (.99) and disk (.99). Spectrum (.99). Amiga (.99) "


"RATTLE. ROLL IT.. Amiga screen shots shown ST screen shots shown PE SENSATION OF THE YEAR AFTERBURNER You've played the arcade smash now experience the white-knuckled realism of a supersonic dogfight at home! Using your heat-seeking missiles and laser anti-aircraft fire, can you be top gun against a seething supersonic swarm? Experience brain-numbing G-forces; bones rattling with the body-jarring pitch and yaw... scan with your radar, lock on your target and FIRE! Amstrad cassette (.99) and disk (.99), Atari ST (.99), and MSX (.99). "


"Sticky Decision AMSTRAD TOP TIN Daley Tson Olym ChallOcean Adv. Pinball Sim Code Masters Kik Start 2 Mastertronic This here is a Spectrum look at Dark Fusion, a new 8 bit shoot 'em up from Gremlin. Fight nasty aliens and all that stuff, but you'll also find you have to fuse your own lifeform with that of your failed foes (ick!) to survive. Big monsters at the end of levels and all that jazz no doubt, out early December Joe Blade 2 players Bomb Jack Encore Air Wolf Encore UJI Ace of Aces Kixx Glider Rider Bug Byte Ghostbusters Mastertronic Game Over 2 Dinamic Forget Robo-cop. Forget The Running Man and Die Hard: this is the film license they'll all be talking about. Not on show in Paris, but due from Cocktel Vision before Christmas, is Emmanuelle a computer game based on the famous soft-core porn flick! Apart from the fact that it is an adventure based closely on the plot of the original filmwhatever that was details are vague at the moment. More news as and when Advanced Pinball Glider Rider and Game Over 2 are all new entries. Sales are low, but expected to rise aharply as the strong Christmas product got a hold C64 TOP TEN Barbarian 2 Palace Daley Thomp Oly Chall Ocean 1943 US Gold Roy's a 04 104 Track Suit Manager Goliath Football Manager 2 Addictive Bomb Jack Encore Gold, Silver and Bronze US Gold Footie games continue to come out of the woodwork at a quite alarming rate just check out Supreme Challenge Beau Jelly 9 Pro Ski Simulator Code Masters DO Melchester DETI AU Stars 03 10 Joe Blade 2 Players Compilations like Supreme Challenge and Gold, Silver..do well while the top two remain the same. Only the budget games in the ten Bomb Jock, Pro Ski and Joe USD Sed ATARIST TOP FIVE Keen not to get lost in the Christmas rush \"hellbent you might say Is this new 16 bit release from Novagen. A scrolling shoot'em up for ST and Amiga, Hellbent is the company's third 16 bit release and the first done by someone other than company boss Poul Woakes In this case a young chapple with the unlikely name of \"Donovan Prince\" HH Star Glider 2 Roin bird STOS Game Creator Mandarin Virus Firebird 4 Where Time Stood Still Ocean Chubby Dillon's round up on page 98 and not least of these is Gremlin's Roy of the Rovers. This is a Spectrum look at a game that will have been released just before this mag goes on sale check out the full review soon. Roy's fictious team Melchester wear red and yellow vests, we believe, which doesn't seeem to have some over too well on the Speccy! Dungeon Master Mirrorsoft Night Rulder and Lancelot are both new entries et 7 and 8 while Strip Poker and Dungeon master reonter and Star Glider 2 begins to slide, while retaining the top 4419 "


"AND OUT CROM THE ROWE You've bought Outstanding the mag, read Features A the reviews, * High Durability now get blasting Advanced design and precision those nasties with engineering. the C+VG Joystick! * Rapid response Exclusive to our Guaranteed by readers it's a uniquely constructed customised version of But hurry, stocks are limited bearing and gate ? and the Ed is getting zippy!! the Euromax Elite assembly. *Ultra Sensitive model. Suitable for Atari, Commodore, Fitted with short With its advanced Amstrad and MSX. Also with travel micro design, accurate fire, interfaces:Sinclair, BBC and switches. unique colour and Electron. * Absolute accuracy giveaway price, it was In terms of the consistent In multi quality of the game across directional just too much for the a variety of machines it movement. Ed. Recently he was definitely is the best ever. *Reduced fatigue seen sneaking down What I particularly like Advanced ergonomic the fire escape with a about the orginal game design reduces design is the way it crateful earmarked for effort suitable for simulates the strategic his chums! as well as the blood and left or right hand guts of the battle. The six play. So to stand out from levels are: The * 1.5m cord allow the crowd, all you have communications set-up for best playing to do is fill in the the jungle, the village, the position. powder magazine, the coupon and rush down concentration camp, and *Guaranteed Full to your nearest post the airport 6 months guarantee Each level sets you a box. 3 against any specific task which helps a defective parts. little towards your goal of freeing the hostages. "


"jela OPERA MACHINES: ATARI ST, Chances are it is also the AMIGA, game with a cluster of C64, SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD. gamers huddled around it.  SUPPLIER: OCEAN When you have your first  PRICES: .90 SPECTRUM go you can easily get the .95 C64, AND PLUS 3 DISKS impression that all the $14.95, ST .95, AMIGA $24.95. game amounts to is a case REVIEWER: EUGENE LACEY. of swivelling that Uzi on its base and spraying the Operation Wolf or enemy with machine gun 'Op-Wolf' as most addicts fire attacking anything call it is definitely the that moves. coin-op of the year. OK, Nothing could be further know. you are pig sick of from the truth. Although SUORE 000500 ENEMIES 43 04 05 HOSTAGE A Gunboats blast you in the jungle level. A Armoured cars patrol the concentration camp. that phrase \"coin-op of the you are armed to the teeth year\". I know all the ads with stacks of bullets and claim that their coin-op grenades you nave to conversion is the one that make every bullet count if all the punters are you are to succeed in vain pumping their dosh into. Well, there is nothing I can do about all this hype all I can tell you is that the official arcade industry charts prove that Op-Wolf is sthan the real number one. And if Lame Chubby Dillon's round up on that isn't conclusive page 98 and not least of these is Gremlin's Roy of the Rovers. enough for you, the game This is a Spectrum look at a game is also the one that the that will have been released just C+VG team have put before this mag goes on sale more '10ps' into than check out the full review soon. anything else this year. Roy's fictious team Melchester There is no missing the wear red and yellow vests, we game in your local believe, which doesn't seeem to arcade. It's the one with have some over too well on the the Uzi machine gun Speccy! mounted on the front of its vast, bulky cabinet th his pistol. ! RESCUE HOSTAGES! "


"TION cemerolling fire or nemy Level 1 is set in the Communications compound where your aim is to cut the enemy off and stop them from calling up more reinforcements. The enemy constantly fire at you, lobbing issue an Uzi sub-machine grenades, throwing knives, that had been achieved gun with every copy\". and should you let them previously in military Ocean's programmers hover straffing you from shoot-ems up like Green came up with a far helicopter gunships. Beret and Combat School. cheaper solution. They Each hit weakens you The use of the Uzi led simply replaced the gun and makes your Damage many people to believe with a floating on-screen Barometer fick that its absence in the cross hair. Controlled by downwards. If it reaches home versions would make joystick or mouse, you zero it's curtains, and a the game unconvertible. simply move the cross-hair grim sounding voice will Mike Pattenden, for to the target and press fire. inform that \"Sorry you are example, writing in the OK so its not quite as finished here\" (only on ST December '87 edition of good as handling, and and Amiga versions). CU said \"Why do they feeling the weight of the Uzi The aim of the game is to bother? Are they going to pressing against your avoid sustain hits by SCORT 000600 05 42 04 05 420405 ENEUES 42 04 0 HOSTREES X9 HOSTAGE X9 A Into the action by paratroop, parachute. 772 Skinhead mercenary lets fly with his bozooka. shoulder blade but from shooting the grenades out just about every other before they hit you and angle this game has to be eliminating the soldiers ranked as one of the best before they take aim. conversions ever Get through this and you In terms of the consistent find yourself in the jungle of quality of the game across Level 2 where your mission a variety of machines it is to extract information definitely is the best ever from the enemy about the What particularly like concentration camp. about the orginal game Level 3 is not for design is the way it pacifists. You are ordered simulates the strategic to go into the village and as well as the blood and kill all the enemies whilst at guts of the battle. The six the same time to \"take a levels are: The rest\" I should point out the communications set-up amidst all this glorification the jungle, the village, the of war Op Wolf does have powder magazine, the some semblance of concentration camp, and conscience there are the airport hostages civilians fleeing Each level sets you a from the mayhem and specific task which helps a nurses trotting across the little towards your goal of battlefield carrying the freeing the hostages. wounded on their Blasts that torpedo before it blasts you "


"FIVE FIST-FULLS OF GARY LINEKER'S HOT SHOT The most realistic football game ever produced for your computer. Play in a full-scale eleven-a-side football game complete with sliding tackles, throw ins, corners, goal kicks, fouls and even the dreaded referee with his red card. With all these features to watch out for will you have what it takes to match the shooting skills of England's top striker in Gary Lineker's Hot Shot. CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 diski AMSTRAD .99 cassette  14.99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk AMIGA .99 disk IBM PC .99 disk ROY OF THE ROVERS NEWSFLASH! Four of the Melchester Rovers fivea-side football team have been kidnapped... hours before a crucial fund-raising game to save their ground from grasping property developers. Time is running out and player-manager Roy Race MUST rescue his team-mates, dodging danger, escaping ambushes and boobytraps in order to play the most important game of his career! CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk AN SUPERSPORTS As varied and as bizarre a CB collection of unique sporting events as you are ever likely to find. Have you got a good enough eye to be a 'crack  shot; the nerve to attempt the 'devil dive'; the strength  to 'smash slates'; the accuracy to shoot the 'cross bow'; and  finally (and unbelievably!) triumph over an'underwater sp assault course'. Up to four players can compete in this outrageous challenge! CFLEETWAY PUBLICATIONS Gary Lineker's Hol-Show! SUPERSDI ROY Rover __A E from various formats Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, "


"F SPORTING POWER ULTIM Golf simula affect th your skilexample, MATE otion for yoway the balel. Englo in the nations hard work as an extensive rack CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 disk GARY LINEKER'S SUPERSKILLS Hot on the heels of the hugely successful Superstar Soccer comes Superskills, again endorsed by England's star striker. To command a permanent place in the national team means dedication dedication towards hard work and training, The national coach has designed an extensive training programme which will improve your fitness, ball control, sharpness and accuracy, Can you prove yourself to be both physically and mentally agile and alert? CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99_cassette .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk and ULTIMATE GOLF The ultimate golf simulation for your computer, See how different shots affect the way the ball is hit. Let the computer determine your skill level. Perfect your technique by following the example, of the computer golf player. A must for all enthusiasts who've tried their hand at computer golf but never met a challenge as testing and enthralling as Ultimate Golf. CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk IBM PC .99 disk AMIGA .99 disk ater SPECTRUM this .99 cassette .99 disk SP RTS V Car Linekers SUPERSKILLS ULUSMATE 2 use, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: 0742 753423. "


"5 ground, and dozens of troopers that dash across the screen in twos and stretchers. Should your threes in the far distance. bullets accidentally hit Depending on what any of these you are level you are on the tanks, punished by losing energy. lorries, motorcyclists, Level 4 is set in the choppers, or gun boats (in enemy's ammunition the jungle level) usually dumps your taks is to\" arrive in the foreground. take the ammunition by The game is at its best force\". when you take out the If you survive this far you enemy vehicles. You can get your first chance to knock them out with rescue some of the persistent Uzi fire but the hostages. Level 5 has most effective method is to five hostages incarcerated use the grenade launcher. in the concentration You can even take out two camp. Your orders are to vehicles with one massive \"help them\". boom. You have to a pretty The lorries rip apart when good Op Wolf player to get the grenade hits them and to the Level 6. Set in the go up in a ball of flame airport this is where the and grey smoke. Trouble is remainder of the hostages are being held. Your to waste your grenades as orders are to rescue the you only have five of them hostages in the airplane at the beginning of each and get away. level. (Which is why a The gameplay of the certain, nameless C+VG various levels is essentialy reviewer's policy of the same. The battle field blasting the nurses with scrolls slowly from left to arenades as soon as they right your cross hair gun appeared is not site panning across with it. particularly The enemy rush on from recommended). both sides in three set Special mention has to planes. There are soldiers be made of the quality of in the foreground that the graphics on the ST and practically fill the screen Amiga versions the when they dash on middle armoured cars, choppers, sized ones in the mid and gun boats are 002644 ---ENERIES 39 06 05 HOSTAGE X9 A St chopper ... coin-op... chopper ... now thats a corsi SCORE ENEMIES Ba 08 08 w HOSTAGES RESQUE HOSTAGES! I MAGE TACES :O :60 46:08 2:3 INJUR A Monochromatic but excellent Speccy version. A C64 version smooth 'n' pretty. "


"UPDATE ... these matters. We just review the games. So what is our advice should you C+VG only be buying one HIT! coin-op conversion this Christmas? Buy Op Wolf it's a brilliant conversion and you will get a lot of fun out of it. identical to their after you have played counterparts in the Op-Wolf a good few coin-op. times, like shooting the Op Wolf will be out on all I suppose a certain birds, and the pig that formats by the end of degree of near-coin-op scampers on to pick up November. The PC version graphics is now taken for more ammo. It is this kind of is being coded in the US granted in ST and Amiga attention to detail that and won't be ready until conversions but what makes for a good coin-op next year. Expect big pleased me particularly conversion irrespective of things from the Amiga on the ST version is the little the graphical capabilities details of game play that of the computer you are smooth scrolling, speed have not been forgotten. playing the game on. and improved digitised The tricks that you discover The software tycoons are speech. Sega Rambo Ill is SUURE having right battle royal an Op Wolf clone, and an this Christmas. Bets are officially licensed being placed, claims are Nintendo version will be being made as to who will on sale next year. be number one. It reminds me of the famous Bill Shankly quote about football being much more important than, life, or death, or something like that. To you Op Wolf, Afterburner, and Thunderblade may just be VILLAGE AIRPORT games. To the tycoons they are company profits, reputations, image and a whole host of other things. ENEMIES C+VG doesn't take sides in S 4 O ST SPECTRUM C64 | GRAPHICS HOSTAGES I SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY 91% 91% 92% 32250 31:4 50 04 05 HSR D A OVERALL p convon. -SHURE 012650 ENEMIES 31 05 05 off HOSTRE B TAGES: 6:40 2:04 : 3 INJUR Kaboom the C64 shudders with explosions. A Watch out for the dagger. "


"«There we were, okay yah, in our GTi, okay, playing this frightfully good game, okay.... ... THE  WORLD! Destroy the credibility of six world leaders (although Ronnie's got À ... ...new job) and SAVE THE WORLD.\".  PREVENT ARMAGEDDON FROM THE COMFORT OF YOUR OWN. PARKBENCH... \"I'm absolutely delighted to be on this advert... \"MORE EXCITING THAN NINJA GERBIL\", \"MORE ABSORBING THAN MASTERS OF THE POP UP TOASTER» What they said about the Spitting Image game: \"COMPLETELY BRILLIANT\", all at Domark «STUNNING\" The Spitting Image Accountants. \"DEFINITELY THE BEST COMPUTER GAME I HAVE EVER PLAYED IN MY WHOLE LIFE!\" The girl on the Spitting Image switchboard. WARNING: DAMAGE A good way to really damage your cassette or disk is to smear marmalade all over it or leave it overnight in a bucket of creosote. A ABLE FOR ALL COMPOTERS... CEXCEPT THOSE THAT IT'S NOT AVAILABLE FOR DO MARK PUBLICATION  Spitting Image Productions Ltd. 1988 Writer: Geoff Atkinson Music: Phil Pope Illustrator: Paul Cemmick . Puppets created by Fluck and Law Ferry House, Lacy Road, Putney, London, SW15 1PR. Telephone 01-780 2224 "


"The completely brilliant Se COMPUTER GAME FREE BARRY MANILOW SEE PACKAGING FOR DETAILS "


"A strip of scrolling action from R-Type fly through the flak, centre your R-9 assault craft in the centre of the worm and blast it, kill worm number two by shooting out its orange lights, and pump everything you've got into the seething mass of kidneys at the end of level two. Phew what a game. IP QOGLOD HI SCORE 250000 BERMC BEAM R-TYPE COMPO "


"COUPON NO 2 R-TYPE worcu EV BERMC ORD. BEAM BEAMC 70300 R-Type is the master blaster conversion of Fill in this form and send off without delay the year. Spectrum, ST, and C64 versions to: C+VG, Master Blaster Compo, Priory received the thumbs up in last month's issue. Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, Lucky C64 and Speccy owners also got EC1R 3AU. the chance to play the first level. If all of The R-Type coin-op would go well in my that fails to impress get set to win the real bedroom because (please complete this thing a stonking great R-Type coin-op sentence in not more than 100 words). machine for your bedroom. Remember you must include R-Type coin All you have to do to win is cut out the op Coupon No 1 from last month's C+VG to R-Type coupon No 2 from the top right hand qualify for entry. That'll teach you not to corner of this page. miss out on C+VG every month. Name Address "


"A MAMMOTH COMPILATION OF WORLD BEATERS... When the golden team take their golden games and add a little bit of golden magic, then there's only one outcome .... a GIANT success. Five giant games squeezed into one giant compilation OUTRUN... To be blunt this game is going to outsell anything ......a flippin good game-test drive one today!!\" Your Sinclair 720 Virtually flawless arcade game. Addictive, smooth and slick, easily U.S. Gold's finest hour. Don't miss this one.\" Sinclair User GAUNTLETIL... It's one of the finest conversions I've ever seen\". C & VG ROLLING THUNDERTM An excellent game, full of atmosphere, suspense and outstanding playability. Do not miss it!\" CCI CALIFORNIA GAMES IM Quite simply the apex of computer sports gaming\" Zzap 64 THE PHENOMENON CONTINUES Have you got what it takes to be a... Plung California   NOW FOR COMPUTER Out One UURDER STAR undercover cop? BEATERS SPECTRUM 48/128K E12.99%, +3 .990 CBM 64/128 .99t, .99d AMSTRAD .99%, E14.990 U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford W Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 353388 The Coin-op Sensation "


"DREA M. ZONE DEEPER IN IS THE ONLY WAY OUT. It's the wierdest dream you ever dreamed. And you're trapped. Unless you can find your way out -through misleading clues, over wild landscapes and past characters stranger than you ever imagined. No wonder the top U. S. magazines hailed Dream Zone a \"masterpiece,\" \"filled with biting satire,\" and \"outstanding graphics.\" Ask for it at your favorite software store. Available on Atari ST Amiga, IBM, and Apple IIGS at .99 Distributed in U.K. by L Leisuresoft Ltd. BAVDVILLER) High Performance Software All manufacturers' trademarks are acknowledged. "


"FIVE FIST FULLS OF BU TEN MEGA GAMES The future. The past. A mega mix of combat, adventure and fantasy from 10 very individual challenges. Featuring: Northstar, Cybernoid, Deflektor, Triaxos, Blood Brothers, Mask II, Tour de Force, Hercules, Masters of the Universe, Blood Valley. CBM 64/128, Amstrad and Spectrum .99 cassette, .99 disk outstand role games Featurlandinle planes con of Me Bruce ing: The examng adveining KARATE ACE The definitive compilation of Martial arts classic combat games combining arcade action and role playing adventure in these 6 outstanding examples of their genre. Featuring: The Way of the Exploding Fist, Bruce Lee, Kung Fu Master, Avenger, Samurai Trilogy, Uchi Mata and Way of the Tiger. CBM 64/128, Amstrad and Spectrum .99 cassette, .99 disk RAILBLAZER S SEVEN GAME COMPILATION 1945 TIMBERLAZE THE WORLD'S GREATEST FIGHTING GAME SINO-INTOA SAMURAI UCHI MATA. THE TIGE AVENGER. SAMERA NORTHSTAR MASTER DAMESODOR 21 Z EISTA DEFLEKTOR bare "


"BURNING XCITEMENT ACTION ST 5 bit action to match 16 bit technology colourful, fast, immense ... a startling collection for a startling machine featuring Deflektor, Northstar, Trailblazer, 3D Galax and Masters of the Universe. Atari ST .99 FLIGHT ACE After controlling the airways of the busiest airport in the world and harnessing the power of the most fearsome aircraft of the century, no player will ever again be satisfied with life on the ground. Featuring Air Traffic Control, Ace, Spitfire 40, Strikeforce Harrier, Tomahawk and Advanced Technical Fighter. CBM 64/128, Amstrad and Spectrum .99 cassette, .99 disk SPACE ACE The time ... the choice is yours. The place ... not yet in existence! Except that is for within this mind boggling collection of epic microcosms of the future. Featuring Xevious, Venom Strikes Back, Cybernoid, Northstar, Zynaps, Trantor and Exolon. CBM 64/128, Amstrad and Spectrum .99 cassette, .99 disk Advancorce Harrier ce, Spitfire ceaturing on the overall craft of the Magilbaz Nouring hiling SIX GAME COMPILATION MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE THE WORLD'S GREATEST FLIGHT SIMULATORS TOMAHAWK  TACTICAL FIGHTEI STRIKEFORCE HARRIER ALHOTII SEVEN GAME COMPILATION OF THE WORLD'S GREATEST SPACE GAMES  XEVIOUS CYBERNOID. NORTESTARZYNAPS. TRANTOR. EXOLON PITFIRE SPACE ACE  SPITE  WONZA TRIKES GREMLIN Ail mais order enquiries to: Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield ST 4FS. Tel: 0742 753423 "


"FIVE FIST-FULLS OF MOTOR MASSACRE The holocaust has come laying waste cities, continents and civilisation. Out of the devastation emerges a breed of survivors merciless in their greed for simple possessions, barbaric in their thirst for power and dominance. To live even a day is hell, to achieve fame and wealth is deadly. You must fight your way to the Demon Dome and then compete in the most horrifying carnival of motor destruction ever conceived, forcing your opponents into the endless chosms of darkness, before you emerge Supreme Gladiator... supreme that is until the next round of motor massacre. CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cossene .99 dink SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk AMIGA .99 din TECHNO COP Step into the future... technology has overtaken society the rich are richer, the poor are poorer-chaos, unrest, destruction... lowlessness reigns, terror rules. But this is your territory, your assignment with death. These are your streets and you have volunteered to clean out the scum, destroy the streetgangs and eliminate the deviants thot pollute your city. Yes you have your beloved sleek racer, but armed with only stun gun and keep net what skills do you possess to neutralize the many hundreds who lie in wait for you? Being a cop is always dangerous, being a cop of the future is a step into the unknown. CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk ATARIST .99 disk IBM PC .99 disk AMIGA .99 disk CBM 64/128 .99 comes .99 disk AMSTRAD $9.99 cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM 27.99 .99 disk ne Çop GREMLIN GUN @ : OUP 8@ 2030 Screenshots from various formats Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, "


"FEROCIOUS ACTION Only the elite pass the three phase test DARK FUSION of the Corps of Guardian Warriors Co-ordinated fury in destruction of the mutant hordes of the underworld; supreme command skills in frantic defence against the invading alien space fleets and merciless nerve in bloody battle against the monster of the Pit of Despair. Then the final chilling decision enter the Metamorphosis Chamber to fuse lifeforms with your vanquished De or face your next challenge with only the powers your mortal form bestows on you. BUTCHER HILL Tension mounts as you navigate the murky waters in Your motorised dinghy, seeking out vital supplies and ammunition cereful to avoid enemy mines and serial bombardment. Landfall... deep in the heart of the Vietnamese jungle, heavy with the odour of death, concealing deadly mantraps and enemy gunposts. Panic... an unknown village. Friend of toe? Whichever the final obstacle between you and your ultimate goal the assault on Butcher Hill. CBM 64/128 .99 cosete .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk AMIGA .99 del ARTURA Stand proud Artura-son of Pendragonand set forth on your quest to unite the warring kingdoms of Albion in this age of bloody war and mysterious magickes. Your task is to rescue Nimue from the clutches of your evil half-sister, Morgouse for which only your fearless nerve and superior fighting skills and the mystical wheel of Cerriddwen will overcome the ghouls, spiders, soldiers and giant rots you encounter. CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk GREMLIN 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: 0742 753423. "


"ULTSMOTE WHERE SIMULA ON The ultimate gokksimulation for your computer. See how different shots affect the way the ball is hit. Let the computer determine your skill level. Perfect your fechnique by following the example of the computer golf player. A must for all enthusiasts who've tried their hand at computer golf but never met a challenge as testing and enthralling as Ultimate Golf. ULTIMATE DO GIVEART THE DEFINITIVE GOLF GAME All mail order enquiries to: Bergen Caphics Sanare 4G/ CBM 64/128 .99 DISK .99 ATARI ST .99 IBM PC .99 AMIGA .99 Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS "


"20 02 Devies 2011 ARTURA description and guess what happens when this bar runs out? A Artura fails to impress. Attack is always the best form of defence, and in Artura's case a never-ending supply of axes is used to deal with the opposition. Rats and the like can be seen off with a single swipe, but it takes a Castlemaine (that's tour axes to you mate) to get rid of the rest of the opposition. When a Rune is completed, play can then be switched into 'Rune mode'. This involves placing a pointer finger icon on the completed Rune and then stepping back in amazement as the 'Wheel of Cerriddwen' transports you to another A Can this really be an ST game. of one sentence: find the plane phew! lost Rune stones and Try as I might, I couldn't backgrounds like Captain rescue the girl. find anything about Artura Pugwash characters. The blurb also describes to recommend. The These 'classics' usually Artura as an 'arcade graphics are awful, the involved searching for the adventure', but I'm loath to to gameplay is seriously lost sword of use this term as neither dated, the levels are too someone-or-other and word is really applicable. similar, the landscape is fighting to the death Basically the idea is to too confusing and no spark against hordes of beasts explore a multi-roomed of interest is generated at from the dark side... get castle, consisting of left to any point. the picture? What this bijou right scrolling walls with This next little piece may history lesson is leading to doors in both the sound like it should be is that Gremlin has for some background and shouted out from speaker's reason decided to foreground allowing corner on a Sunday ressurect the genre access both onto 'into' and afternoon, but I really probably so that 16-bit 'out of the screen. believe the software games players can be Along the way there are publishers shouldn't introduced to the joys' that opponents to be mangled. release games like this. these games bring. giant rats and falcons to be Computer hardware has Artura starts with the disposed of food to be developed in leaps and MACHINES: ATARI usual sub-Arthurian legend eaten and sections of Rune bounds over the last two ST/C64/SPECTRUM/AMSTRAD. gibberish. You are Artura, years and as a sort of SUPPLIER: GREMLIN. stones to be collected PRICE: ST $19.99, SPECTRUM half-brother to the vil son of Pendragon and (\"these stones will be the knock-on effect 8-bit $7.99, C64 .99. rune of me form the games have improved VERSION TESTED: ATARI ST. ST Morgause. This witch has Kenneth Williams school of beyond recognition in the REVIEWER: CIARAN kidnapped Nimue, awful puns). An enery bar same time. To my mind BRENNAN apprentice to the wizard below the play area there's no excuse Merdyn...etc, etc. This diminishes every time whatsoever for taking what \"Look back through the bunk could easily have Artura comes into contact is already a sub-standard dark mirror of the seasons been avoided by then use with a nasty of any 8-bit game and converting to the time when the Eagles Not one of Gremlin's best. it upwards. deserted this land of Albion I'm going to have one to the ravaging of the last try at thinking of Saxons. Look back to an BOSSES something nice to say age of bloody war and SOS about Artura... erm, the mysterious magickes.\" ASUS cover artwork's nice. And while you're at it, why RSS not take a look back to about three years ago to a SOUND time when Boots was filled with Spectrum games that PLAYABILITY involved semi-mythical VALUE characters floating around dungeonesque OVERALL 17% GRAPHICS 3. "


"Reviews MUNCHER MACHINES: SPECTRUMIC64. the monster, knocking a play with. The third level, SUPPLIER: GREMLIN chunk off his energy bar the army base, has even GRAPHICS with every hit. However, more soldiers and PRICE: SPEC CASS $7.99, these weak and puny vehicles. However, at the C64 CASS .99, SPEC DISK humans are no match for end is a big brown monster .99, C64 DISK $14.99. the monster, who can leap who fights with fireballs,  VERSION TESTED: C64. on them, splattering them feet and claws. REVIEWER: JULIAN RIGNALL. into horrible smears on the As you might have road. If he's feeling already gathered, peckish, he can bend Muncher is a game with a Have you seen the Chewits down, pick them up and sense of humour. 1 ad? You know, the one with eat them. Yum! And this thoroughly enjoyed an angry green monster frolicsome exercise adds a playing it, and many a who's running amok in a bit of energy to the bar! smile was in evidence as cardboard version of Innocent bystanders in the bashed, smashed and London? Just when he's form of briefcase-carrying chomped my way through about to sink his fangs into city nerds and the enemy forces. If you are a famous landmark, he pram-pushing women also a highscore fiend, the suddenly spies a Chewit, run around in terror, and game throws down quite a pops it into his cavernous are similarly blatted or challenge, and should cake-hole and finds his noshed. keep large-scale vandals ravenous appetitite Soon reinforcements happy for some time. suddenly satieted. Well, Beam Software, in conjunction with Gremlin Graphics, has decided to base a game around this whacky ad, and have managed to persuade Chewits to endorse it. Rather than tackle the subject head-on and cast the player as a Chewit, those devious Beam people have decided on an alternative approach and have put the player firmly into the size 237 boots of the Godzilla-like monster! The mission of mayhem begins at the sea shore. Soldiers immediately start walking from both sides of the screen, and shoot at Chasing some lunch. A Stomp! UPDATE arrive, with tanks, jeeps The graphics and sound and helicopters firing are both fine, and even missiles and ruining the though the novelty will monster's fun but he eventually wear off, there's leaps and snaps at the plenty of fun in store. --choppers with this great choppers, and jumps on GRAPHICS the vehicles in a display of wanton destruction. The SOUND monster can also spit fire. VALUE Buildings are PLAYABILITY encountered frequently, and can be bashed with OVERALL 77% the monster's tail, or climbed and thumped, Rampagestyle. If he's feeling particularly tough The Spectrum version he can climb to the looks even better than the rooftops of a particularly Commodore, with slightly high building and roar faster gameplay and derision at the piffling more impressive sprites. humans below Gremlin say that there When the end of the first may be an ST version next level is reached, the action year, although couldn't switches to Nintendo confirm that as definite. village (ahem, you're Let's hope so-improved going to change that graphics and sampled aren't you Gremlin?). sounds mixed with the which offers more of the 8-bit gameplay could same gratutious violence, produce an incredibly only with more things to good game! Leap and chomp a chopper. "


"STARGLIDER Z  CCUELL A little more desirable than \"FOUR CALLING BIRDS\" don't you think? MOK . CORRUPTION Moon Game of the year Please send me further informacion on these Rainbird products. POSTCODE Telecomsoft, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford St, London WC1A1PS. Rainbird and Rainbird Logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications PLC NAME ADDRESS Telecomsoft First Floor 4.76 Newtond Shoot London Line "


"ELCTRONIC ARTS Software Centre AVON Ace Computers Ltd 47 Cannon Street Bedminster Bristal Tel 0272 637981 Ace Computers Ltd 3 North Su Computerware 22 Si Lenards fload Bestell0424 223340 Gamer Computers 71 East Stres KENT Computer Lature Contre 117 High Stre Orpington Tel. 0689 21101 Mode Computer ad 30 St Johns Head Tunbrido Wells Tel. 0892 511555 Salware Plus 35 High Street Gesand TM 0474 333162 Satwe Plus Unit 2. 4-8 Orange Street Canterbury Tel: 0227 458112 Terri's Canguters Video SO High Street Tn Computer Salwared 161-169 Ubridge Road Esling London W13 Tel 01 840 5135 Virgin Games Cantre 100 Oder Stre London Tel: 01 637 7911 Vun Cams Canne 527-531 Duford Street Tel 0212 666341 The Mode Shop 8 Fairfax Street Tel: 0272 273744 Viris Games Carre 18 Merchant Street Bristol Tel 0272 294779 BEDFORDSHIRE Hobe Computing IG The Andale Centre Tel: 01 491 8582 Virgin Megason 14-18 Daford Street London WI Tel. 01 6311234 MERSEYSIDE Bts Bytes Computers Lid 18 Central Station Ranelagh Street SOUTH YORKSHIRE Last Micro Lid 22 Carver Sures Shield Tel 0742752732 The Computer Store 21A Printing Office Suret Doncaster Tel. 0392 25260 STAFFORDSHIRE Castle Computers 6 ge rest Hanley Tel. 0782 267952 Castle Computers Il Newcastle Stree Bursiem Stoke on Trem Te 0782 575043 Miles Beste Software 219/221 Cannock Road Chaumoor, Cannock Tel: 0543 466677/8/9 Sony 53 Free Street Stafford Tel: 078541899 SUFFOLK Softsellers 5A Dogs Head Street Ipswich Tel: 0473 57153 Sarware Plus 22 Si Matthew Street 0273 728681 Virgin Games Centre 157-159 West Rand Brighton Tel 0273 725313 ESSEX Computer BB/00 London Road Southend-on-Ses Tel: 0702 335443 La Computer Systems Lid 1063 High Road Chadwell Heath Ramdand Tel: 01 597 8851 Pamford Computer Centre 12 North Street Randond Tel: 0708 765271 Satsers 351 Osame Street Colchester Tel: 0206 560638 Software Phes 336 Chartwell Sun Southend Tel: 0702 610784 Sobne Plus Liberty Shopping Hall Basildon Tal 0268 27922 Software Plus 15 Kingsway Colchester Tel: 020 760927 Software Plus Unit 1.28/31 Moulsham Street Chelmsford Tel: 0245 491746 Schwere Plus Unit 1 Queensgate Cante Brett Road WEST SUSSEX Computers 62 The Boulevard Crawley Tel: 0293 37842 Worthing Camputer Centre 7 Warwick Street Worthing Tel. 0903 210861 WEST YORKSHIRE Microbytu Home Entertainment Centre 33 Kogate Wakield Tel. 0924376656 Microbyte Home Entertainment Centre 29 Queen Victoria Street Leeds Tel 0532 450529 Microbyle Home Entertainment Centre Kirkgate Mall The Kirke Corte Bradford The Congue Store 13 Westmanland Street Wakefield Tel: 0324 290159 The Computer Store 34/36 legate Bradford Tel: 0274 732094 The Computer Store 40 Trinity Arcade Leeds Tel. 0532 429284 The Complet Store 10 Square, The Woolshops Halle Tel. 0422 89077 The Computer Store Mark Place Tel. 061 709 4036 MIDEX Adams World of Software Lid 190C S on Head Edware Tel 01 952 0451 Adams World of Saltware 265 Station Road Harrow Tel: 01 863 7262 Dk Amina Specialists Unit F Wilowes Farm Spout me North Staanll Moor LALALALALA Tel. 0753 682988 Electronic Computer Service 1000 Land Road Hayes 1801 573 2100 NORFOLK Jarreld Department Store London Street Tel: 0484 514405 Virgin Games Centre 9496 The Brigg T 0603 880561 Se Band TIA Castle Meadow Tel: 0582457195 Software Plus Unit Il The Boolean Harpu Centre Bedford To 0234 68598 BERKSHIRE Ace Computers Lud 495 490 Ostond float Reading Tel 0734 393615 BUCKINGHAMSHIRE SLY 5 Deer Walk Shopping building Cartial Milion Keyes Tel 0908 670620 CAMBRIDGESHIRE Sawwe Plus 43 Burleigh Street Cambridge Tel 0273 353643 CLEVELAND Chios Computer Shop 151-153 Linthorpe Road Middlesbrough Tel: 0642 210139 Chios Computer Shop Silver Court Shopping Centre Silver Street Stockton-on-Teas No telephone number Multi Coloured Micro Shop Dundas Arcade Dundas Street Middlesbrough Tel: 0642 230323 Multi Coloured Micro Shop Dundas Street Redeer Tel 0542 486643 The Computer Shop 14 West Row Stockton-on-Tres Tel: 0542 606160 Topsh Computer Software 3 Ha n ian Yard Stockton-on-Tees Tel. 0542 670503 CO DURHAM Chips Computer Shop Dars Your Darlington 25381048 Tapah Comune Software 5 Wellington Court News Gange Road Darlington Tel: 0325 486689 DERBY Comuta Centa 17 Campbell Street Baler Derby 10773 826830 DEVON Software Express Ltd 9 tarer STT The Viaduct Plymouth Tel: 0752 285272 The Model Shop 11 Old town Sue Plymouth Tel. 0752 221851 EAST SUSSEX Anghton Computer Exchange 2 Ann Street Brighton Tel: 0273 570740 Tel: 01 300 0990 Tenis Computers & Video 292 High Street Drington Tel: 0689 21515 The Video Machine 194-196 Canterbury Street Gingham Tel: 0834 56460 LANCASHIRE Alan Heywood Video and Computer Centre 174 Church Street Hlackpool Tel: 0253 21557 Castle Computers of Lancaster Lid 9 Gage See Lancaster Tel: 0524 81133 Home Business Technology Centre 46-48 Yorkshire Street Oldham Tel: 051 633 1608 PV Computers Lid 104 Aby Suret Accrington Tel: 0254 35345 LEICESTERSHIRE Cavendish Commodore Cat BB London Road Les Tel 0533 550993 LINCOLNSHIRE Oaktre Computers (lunesah that The Old Malthouse Springfield Road Grantham Tel: 047678994 LONDON Ace Computers Lid 786 G Lang Winchmate Hill London N21 Tel: 01 360 3671 Adam Ward of Saltware Lid 779 High Head North Fachley Landon NIZ Tel: 01 48 2241 Erol Computers Lid 125 High Street Walthamstow London E17 Tel 01520 7753 G6 Computer Electronics Ind 220 Tottenham Court Road London W Tel: 01 255 1502/1 GSB Congule Electronics Lid 13 Tottenham Court Road Tel. 0532 443681/2 WARWICKSHIRE Soa Computer Centre 68 Claradon Street Leam goo spi Tel: 0926 37648 WILTSHIRE Ace Computers Lid 31 Farrington Red Swinden Tel: 0793 512074 Ats 8 Regent Cartes Tel: 0375 391164 GLOUCESTERSHIRE The Model Shop 79 Northgate Stre Clouca Tel. 0452 410693 The Model Shop 22 High Street Stroud Tel. 0453 85920 GREATER MANCHESTER Microbyle Home Entertainment Centre Una 17 Halle Mall The Aendale Centre Manchester Tel. 061-832-1438 The Computer Shop Knighde Mall The Aredale Centre Manchester Tel 081 832 0878 HAMPSHIRE Tel 0473 54774 SURREY Barman Computer Services 1st Floor, Carfinals of Kingston /9 Marin Place Kingston Tel01 546 5941 The Games Room Unit 15. n-Shops Esson Indoor Marte High Street Easom Tel: 03727 44465 The Model Shop B9E Woodbridge Head fuldford Tel 048339115 Ultima Retailid 1st Floor, What an Walk Guildford Tel. 0483 508939 TYNE & WEAR Mette Home Entertainment Centre 56 Garden Wak The Metro Gateshea Tel: 091-460-6054 Sunderland Computer Cet 29 Crowree Road Sunderland TH 091 565 5711 The Computer Shop 7 High Friends Eldon S TH0603 683796 Viking Computers Ardney Hise Cato Grove Road Norwich TH. 0603 401982 NORTHAMPTONSHIRE A-Z County Supplies 23A Lo Mall Wiesto Fiel Centre Northampton Tel 0804 414528 Northens Congrer cette 13 Ahington Square Northampton Tel 080422539 Sot Spot Computers 42 High Street North Tel 0327 79020 NORTH HUMBERSIDE Tomorrows World 27 Paragon Street Tel. 091 261 260 Unt 8 The Boulevard Wellington Centre Tel: 0793 611253 EIRE Virgin Games Camere 14-18 Aston Duny Dublin 2 Tel Dublin 777361 SCOTLAND Mugabyte Computer Centre 12 Erick Square The Centre Cumbele Tel. 0236 238398 Virgin Games Centre 24-32 Union Street Glasgow Tel 041 221 0103 Virgin Games Centre 131 Princes Street Edinburgh Tel: 031 225 4583 WALES Ace Computers Ltd 87 City Road Cardiff TH. 0222 483059 Bud Morgan 22/24 Castle Arcade 025229882 Uma Real Las 118 East Street Souhangton Tel. 0700 639419 HEREFORDS WORCESTER 9 Maine Terrace Sunderland Tel: 091 510 8142 WEST MIDLANDS Ewesha Microlid 1782 Pershore Head Dotteridge Hemingham Tel 021 458 4564 Tel. 0482 24887 NORTH YORKSHIRE The Computer Store 14 St Sampsons Square Tel: 0904 545934 Yorcom The York Computer Centre 9 wygate Centre Dawigate 16 St Swithin Street Worcester TH OSOS 22335 Evesham Micros in 63 Bridge Street Evesham Tel: 01 580 3702 Micro Arvika Lid 220A Torrenham Court Read London WI Tu 01 836 2547 Pile Software Lid 32 Rathbone Place London W1 Tel: 01 636 2666 Shekhana Computer Services 271 Tortenham Court Road Londos WI Tel: 01 831 4827 Sahara Circus The Person Odord Street 120 Oxford Street London WI Tel: 01 438 2801 Software Plus Inshops, 37-43 South Wal Edmonton Green Shopping Centre London Ng Tel: 01 803 8581 Tel: 0904 841862 NOTTINGHAMSHIRE Byteback 5 Mumby Close Newark Tel. 0838 79097 The Computer Shop Tel. 0386 765500 HERTFORDSHIRE Hobbyte Computing 10 Market Place St Albans Tel 0127 41396 Software Plus Town Souane Slevage Tel 0438 742374 Schware Plus Unit 94 inshops The Maiting St Albans Tel: 0727 54347 Victore Centre Nottingham Tel. 0802 410533 Virgin Games Centre 5-8 Wheelergate Nottingham 11-12 Three Shires Osk Arad Bearwood, Wharley Tel: 021 429 4998 Satware City 3 Lichid Passe Wolyngton Tel: 0902 25304 Salwary 1 Goodall Street Whisali Tel: 0922 24821 Sotaples Lid 212-213 Broad Stree Birmingham Tel 021 543 9100 Watchdog Home Emertainment Centre 40 Duset Street Wolverhamnen Tel 0902 313000 Virgin Games Centre 98 Corporation Street Birmingham Tel: 021 235 2523 Tel: 0222 228065 EC Computer Esbition Centre ple 2nd Flow Glamorgan House David Street Cardiff Tel: 0222 390286 She Cant 28/30 The Parade Cwmbran Town Centre Cwman Tel 0533368131 OXFORDSHIRE Soh Spot Computer 5 George Street Banbury TW 028568921 A "


"Now you can test your skills on Land, Sea & Air or challenge new frontiers. R i S DESIGNED TO EXPLOIT THE POWER OF THE AMIGAS errari FORMULA ONE ELECTRONIC ARTS FERRARI FORMULA ONE. \"Ferrari Formula 1... a departure from the standard...a game of incredible complexity and truly remarkable RETURN TO EU AMIGA TLANTIS realism.\" THE GAMES MACHINE. PRESS Hile Wallace ELECTRONIC ARTS RETURN TO ATLANTIS \"... Return to Atlantis is a thoroughly enjoyable game... As such, it represents excellent value for money.\" YOUR AMIGA CTRONIC ELECTRONIC ARTS F/A 18 INTERCEPTOR.\" \"If you want seat-of-thepants air combat action, miraculous graphics and NO six month training period, look no further!\" ACE. ELECTRONIC ARTS SKYFOX II. \"Skyfox Il is great... it's good fun. So strap yourself into the seat and go kick some alien backside.\" THE GAMES MACHINE. XCITING! ORIGINAL! AUTHENTIC! Electronic Arts produces Home Entertainment Software on most Computer formats. For a product brochure and the location of your nearest stockist, please contact: ELECTRONIC ARTS, 11-49 STATION ROAD, LANGLEY, BERKS SL3 SYN. TEL: SLOUGH (0753) 46465. DEALERS PLEASE CALL (0753) 40906. ELECTRONIC ARTS Home Computer Software "


", loriciels SPACE 2 UUUUZ LE Price System Spectrum Spectrum Commodore 64 Commodore 64 Amstrad CPC Amstrad CPC Atari ST Amiga IBM PC + Compatibles Format Cassette Disc Cassette Disc Cassette Disc Disc Disc Disc .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 "


"evlews D2 environment. To make matters worse An aerial view of the action. you don't even have any privacy in this odd little SUPSTYLES world. A couple of other characters knock around on later levels and if you think that they're there to help you out then think again. 'Bubble' treats all bombs as mines (and you can imagine the trouble which that causes), while 'Squeak' is capable of doing anything that you can and does his level best to get in the way. As if all this wasn't difficult enough, the exasperatingly precise joystick/mouse control adds to the difficulty and A Bomb blasting bombuzal. the supposedly helpful 3D wobbly monster around a bomb-moving Slot, the option only causes more series of tiled sections, indestructible Rivetted tile problems than it solves. So exploding bombs by and the map-resetting who can you blame all of stepping on them and Switch can be used to your this infuriation on? Well, the staying in one piece in the advantage, but don't programming was done process but bombs depend on them showing by The Bitmap Brothers, but setting each other off in up too often. they were aided and chain reactions and tiles The bombs also come in abetted by a number of disappearing under your many shapes and sizes famous screen designers feet make this a sight more each type has a different including Andrew difficult than it first effect which almost always Braybrook, Jeff Minter, Ubik appears. has to be taken into and Jon Ritman, so you Each screen is made of account if a screen is take your pick from that lot. up a number of different going to be completed. This is more of a types of tile, and you can Small bombs only destroy mindbender than a bet your life that you'll be the square that they thumb-twister because in deep trouble if you don't occupy, while medium once you've solved a level watch where you're and large bombs destroy once it shouldn't prove to  MACHINES: stepping. Normal tiles are four and 12 surrounding be a problem anymore. If SPECTRUM/C64/ATARI squares respectively. Then you were the type who safe enough, but the ST/AMIGA. SUPPLIER: IMAGE WORKS. Dissolver does just that then are three varieties of enjoyed showing how you PRICE: SPEC CASS $8.95, after you've stepped over it aerial bomb, which could solve Rubik's cube in C64 and the Ice Tile is a little too explode when any other a fraction of a second then CASS $9.95, ST/AMIGA $24.95. slippery and should be aerial bomb is detonated this is just the brain teaser VERSION TESTED: ATARI ST. avoided. Other hazards and cause exactly the you've been waiting for REVIEWER: CIARN include the Teleport tile same amount of damage if not, prepare to lose a lot BRENNAN. which whisks you to a as their 'normal' of sleep and a lot of hair. Ever since the first random square and the counterparts. Swell bombs --computer programmer Spinner type which knocks change size randomly and GRAPHICS made light move around a you in any direction. A few mines detonate on contact tiles, such as the Temple screen, there's been a ... Phew! There's not a lot of S SOUND SOUND race to find a new concept (which absorbs time to stop and admire PLAYABILITY 7 that's more difficult and explosions), the the scenery in this VALUE absorbing than chess'. The 3D game. Image Works, Bombuzal  OVERALL 74% doesn't aspire to this lofty VEL AWUNNE TOITETTORES ideal but it does come UPDATE.. across as being a combination of Chess, All versions will play Play-Doh and one of those identically. Spectrum is Chinese number puzzles. monochrome, the C64 Like most difficult puzzle and Amstrad are more games it's based on a very colourful. The Amiga simple idea. The only version is identical to the objective is to move a ST bar slightly improved sound. BOMBUZAL EDEA "


"Peviews jer BY FAIR MEANS OR FOUL IM almost unrecognisable. Especially so when the Ref gets bored. His head deflates and collapses on his shoulder. Sound is as sound does on an Amstrad. i.e. it No knockout game this. sounds like it's coming from the other side of a very tight as fast as it goes up, it drops wire mesh whilst you are twice as fast. These boys 000300 JO! JOY 000000 wearing a greased heal quickly! cucumber in your right ear SOUND You are very limited in and a copy of the the moves that you have to Financial Times, rolled up choose from. Basically a and smeared with punch to the face, a punch Sainsbury's own brand to the paunch, a head buti Lemonade in your left. (dirty move) and a kick (Tony, what have you been below the belt another up to? Ed). In other words, dirty move). Needless to lots of crackly scratching say, the dirty moves do the sounds coming from the most damage. 'crowd and an occasional It's with this in mind that! bonk from a punch or ping don't like this game very from a bell. much. I found I was far too By Fair Means or Fouljust 081 restricted for a boxing isn't my cup of tea. game. Graphics are simplistic GRAPHICS and blocky, with sparse MACHINES: 64, AMS, SPEC. SOUND SUPPLIER: SUPERIOR 00000 SOFTWARE. VALUE PRICE: TO FOLLOW. PLAYABILITY VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD. REVIEWER: TONY DILLON.  OVERALL 36% Talk about hitting the bandwagon fast. First Linel FOUL 3 UPDATE... Switzerland announce its The 64 and Spectrum boxing game, The Champ, versions should all be then Nintendo leaps in with Mike Tyson's Punch Out available as you read this, but let's be honest, and now Superior Software who cares? The only release its soon-to-be-forgotten By difference between the Spectrum and Amstrad Fair Means Or Foul. The reason for the slightly versions is the colour and strange title is that this isn't the only difference between the 64 and a normal boxing game, where every man is a British Amstrad versions, is the A Fight dirty when the ref isn't looking. resolution. fighter and everyone is he's watching, but as soon use of colour. At some clean and angelic. In this One not to look for, me game, you play dirty if you di as he turns away, play points, the graphics are thinks. you dirty. want to get anywhere. He doesn't look away for JaS 000000 The game is viewed very long, though, so side-on, so's that your ROUND timing is all important. Go boxers on screen are for a dirty move, and he square on with each other, only able to move forward calls foul, losing you one of and back, as in games like your five lives. The only other way you can lose a THE CHAMPIO Barry McGuigan's Boxing life is if you are knocked thingee and Fight Night. A out, but that only seems to referee wanders about be possible after about 30 aimlessly, and to win continuous hits with no properly, you've got to interruptions. keep your eye on him as As you hit your opponent, well as your opponent. and indeed as he hits you, Like most people, the a damage-meter at the referee has a tendency to bottom of the screen slowly get bored very quickly. This fills. The idea is is to hit him is the key to winning. Fight hard enough to knock it up like a gentleman when before he can recover. For Dillon sits this.one out. "


"THE MICROPROSE REDSTORMIS RISING Red Storm Rising Standing between the Russian bear and global domination, you play a crucial role in the conflict. Missions take you to an astonishing variety of undersea environments, plunging you into challenging and exciting situations. Prepare for action in this heart-pounding simulation, Available for Commodore 64/128 for Cassette .95, Disk .95 The storm has broken. MicroProse's latest title is here. This high technology simulation of strategy and tactics is based on one of the most dramatic and detailed stories of modern warfare Red Storm Rising, the international best seller by Tom Clancy and his technical collaborator Larry Bond. Working with the authors, MicroProse have brought the book's intense action and excitement to your computer screen. You are put in command of an American nuclear attack submarine at a time when the two super powers collide MICROPROSE SIMULATION SOFTWARE MicroProse, 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Glos, GL88DA. Tel: 0666 54326 RED STORM RISING by Tom Clancy  1986 by Jack Ryan Enterprises Ltd and Larry Bond. "


"views STAR GOO You may say, and quite Alternate and Caps Lock heavy blue gates that rightly, that the idea of a keys on the ST itself, and as appear periodically on vertically scrolling shoot such are all but useless the landscape: here you doesn't sound very should you like me be see your ship from a Interesting anyway, but in the habit of sitting back different angle almost Star Goose does give the with your feet up to play the directly rear as you idea quite a nice little twist. game. scoot down a tunnel that MACHINES: ST, AMIGA, IBM Despite it's looks, the goose Extra ammunition can be looks like nothing so much PC, AND POSSIBLY C64. is not a space ship at all, gained by entering tunnels as a spider web, picking SUPPLIER: LOGOTRON. but a land-wagon of some of varying length through up tokens shaped like PRICE: ST/AMIGA $19.95, PC sort, and as such travels up $24.95. Nice spiders web. VERSION TESTED: ATARI ST. and down over the REVIEWER: MATT BIELBY. bas-relief terrain. This means that your guns are The first thing you have to only of any use in taking say about Star Goose is out the hostile ground that it does look gorgeous installations and enemy You may not think the sprite craft you encounter when design is very imaginative, they are directly in the line you may find the game of sight of your pitching play gets repetitive as you craft. encounter your fifth near Your weaponry consists identical level, and you of normal foreward facing may think some of the guns which are not the controls verge on the most powerful thing ever ludicrous, but you have to and need to be trained on admit that it looks very most enemies for quite nice. Star Goose is a nice some time before taking idea for a vertically effect and a limited scrolling shoot'em up. Well supply of guided rockets. executed, but marred by a Unfortunately, these are lack of visual variety and a not controlled by the few silly mistakes. joystick trigger, but by the TOTAL An ancient curse, an imminent eclipse, giant pyramids, secret panels, a hidden shrine, poison darts, pressure pads, treasure chests, trip wires and mysterious mummies, all in glorious FREESCAPE Solid 3D. Set under the burning Sun. TOTAL ECLIPSE is the BIGGEST and GREATEST FREESCAPE experience yet! BY MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS "


"To progress onto the next almost as much of a to reach over to the Caps level you have to collect six mystery. The mountain Lock key, risking taking my eyes off the screen for a from the landscape, which deadly \"lakes\" may be couple of seconds, only to could seem to be quite a different, and there may see my precious rocket problem since your ship be a few more baddies to roar uselessly off the top of will slow down but never take on, but the overall the screen, it's target stop, and by the time one look is identical. I have to having moved ... it will be Sit up and look graphics. appears on the screen it admit a fondness for the too soon. File under metallic valleys and hills of \"honourable attempt, the landscape, and in d oesn't quite cutit\". particular the way the whole mood can change as they face randomly from one colourway to another. Though there are more GRAPHICS sprites in the later levels at any one time, and each is SOUND perfectly clean drawn, if VALUE rather small, there is not a single one I could describe i PLAYABILITY with any degree of  OVERALL 72% accuracy 24 hours after having played the game. The same could be said of the rather uninspired music and sound effects. We have, then, a game The Amiga version, with the potential to have released exactly the gross eyeballs. Swing your could be too late to swing jointed the list of really same time as the ST, looks ship from side to side and right across and collect it. good 16 bit shoot 'em ups and plays nigh you can increase speed to It's okay though, because your Sidewinders and identically. There is also a a point where it is possible each level wraps around your Xenons but which PC versionm scheduled to circle right up one side on itself, and so before botches the job through for November though we of the tunnel and down the long you'll be back in a repetition and possibly the haven't seen that, and other. position to pick it up again. most annoying piece of ill quite serious talk of a C64 There are other tunnels to Quite why anyone would though out game design variant appearing before help with shield and fuel ever bother going onto the have encountered this the New Year, though that supplies. second level, however, is month. If I ever again have is also not definitive. TEEEEEEEEEE UPDATE... ELIPSE FREESCAPE\" SOLID 3D SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 AMSTRAD CPG 55E95 E9-95 +3 DISC .95 C64 DISC .95 CPC DISC .95 Incentive ZEPHYR ONE, CALLEVA PARK, ALDERMASTO SOFTWARE LTD BERKSHIRE RG74QW. TELEPHONE: (07356) "


"EXPLODING AT A m SHOP NEAR YOU!!! AN IT'S DYNAMITED WHACKING GREAT   HAVE A NICE DAY TOLLS WEE FOTO E LEGO DE Amiga .99 Atari ST .99,3 Pit your wits against some of the finest programmers in the U.K., with contributions from Jeff Minter, Jon Ritman, Mule and from your favourite magazines too! Hundreds of levels of sheer addiction .... Incredible Cartoon Graphics .... Isometric 3D or Plan View Play Option ... by Tony Crowther. Coming from Image Works on all major formats. Amstrad CPC .99 (Cass). Amstrad CPC .99 (Dise). Commodore 64 .99 (Cass). Commodore 64 .99 (Disc). 3 Spectrum .99 (Cass). Spectrum .99 (Disc). Headway House, bt-73, Shoe Lane, London, ECAP HAB. Tel: 01-277 4645 Fax: 01-5833494 Telex: 265451 MONREFGM "


"LevlONS DOUBLE DRAGON punkesses who emerge from all manner of places (nearby rooftops, doorways, from hidden niches in shrubbery etc) and have the basic mission MACHINES: SPECTRUM, This is the third version of DD includes this one, are all of causing as much C64, ST, AMIGA, PC. that I've seen today, and far too easy. Still, on with physical damage to you as SUPPLIER: MELBOURNE can't deny that I am the review. possible. HOUSE. becoming just a little Double Dragon To do this, each fights in PRICE: C64, SPEC .99, ST, AMIGA .99, PC $24.99. S, bored with it. The problem unofficial sequel to the well their own specific way. VERSION TESTED: ST. is that all the versions I've crucial beat-'em-up. Some merely try and wade REVIEWER: TONY DILLON. seen so far, and that Renegade, has you, and a in with punches, some friend if you so wish, ina attack from a distance and dazzlingly violent rescue flying kick you to the scenario, all for the love of ground. You get some your sweetheart, really unfair fighters that kidnapped by the gang up and attack from infamous Mr Big. The biti all directions at once. If can't understand, is why you're really unlucky, a can't the two chums group of about six or seven involved realise that the will just stand around you girlie is two-timing them and keep punching you to with each other. the ground every time you The game itself is get up until you lose a life. basically a right to left You can fight back with a scroller much in the mould variety of moves ranging of Renegade, Vigilante from the simple punches etc, with a bit of up and and stomach kicks, to down scrolling, just to give some really dirty back you a bit of elbow room. elbows to anyone standing Enemies come in the behind you, and I do mean form of your average anyone. You can beat up everyday street punks and your partner, which unfortunately you find 1P 7420 A10832 yourself doing quite a lot as you launch yourself into a crowd of enemies. That isn't all of the combat. There is one more thing to tell you about. Weapons. Some enemies emerge into the game with baseball bats, whips, packing crates, barrels, rocks, ... You name it, they've got it. Of course, it goes without saying that most of these items do a lot more damage than your regular punch or kick. Thankfully, you too can use these items. If you're a real cleverdick, you can position yourself just as they come onto screen, and knock the weapon out of their hands before they can use it. Where these weapons come in handiest is against the really big enemies. Twice the size of the ordinary enemy, these huge giants break through 3 CREDIT 5 3 .. PUSH TIME 68 TITI "


"iEN DOUBLE DRAGON the walls that line some streets, growl menacingly, and then smash you to the ground. Sounds a little difficult to me. Unfortunately it isn't. In fact it's amazingly easy. You can earn an extra life in almost no time whatsoever, and it's thanks to the fact that I completed the game on my first go and technically lost no lives. Speaking of the sound, which we weren't, it's hilarious. All the regular thumps and bops are there, as well as two really unusual death noises. When the women die, they make a short 'eek' sound. When the men cop it, they make a sound not unlike the sound made by someone throwing up violently. Har har. Graphics aren't too good. They're not terrible, but there's something about them that says \"look at me. I'm not very well designed or animated Aren't comical.\" At least they're fast. I would like to TIME 60 awaoni recommend Double Dragon, because when it comes down to it, it is quite fun. But I can't because it's just far too easy to be worth it, and for a coin-op conversion opportunity of this 'cult' appeal it is not quite there. GRAPHICS SOUND: VALUE: PLAYABILITY: 6 OVERALL: 54% UPDATE... All other formats are being released at the same time and all feature the same style of gameplay. Multi load could may well be a problem on the smaller machines, especially with tape loading times. There are no 8-bit disk versions definitely planned, but they are being looked at, as is an Amstrad CPC version. "


"MICRO EW BLASTER REPLAY PROUDLY PRESENTS... The New Microblaster Joystick, professional arcade quality, fully microswitched for the ultimate in game control. ORDER TODAY AND TAKE CONTROL! FEATURES INCLUDE ONLY 3612-95 1. Ergonomically designed handle and base for smooth, accurate and comfortable playing action. 2. Steel shaft for extra strength & durability. 3. 8-way arcade quality microswitches giving greater sensitivity and precision controlled movement. POST FREE Limon ARCADE QUALITY 4. Non-slip rubber feet on base for secure table mounted operation. 5. Large, dual-fire microswitched fire buttons for left or right hand operation. 6. Extra long 1.4 metre cable allows more choice of player position. 7. Switchable normal/rapid fire options for extra player control and higher scores. Suitable for use with a wide range of computers and video game machines. Compumart Ltd., Jubilee Drive, Loughborough, Leics. LE11 OXS. Tel: (0509) 610444 Compumart are the Officially Appointed Sole UK Dealer for REPLAY Replay loysticks Replay Joysticks. GUARANTEE This quality Replay joystick is fully guaranteed against material defector faulty workmanship for a period of 12 months from the date of purchase. ORDER TODAY AND TAKE CONTROL! PLEASE RUSH ME JOYSTICK(S) @.95 each. O (0509) 610444 Total enclosed  24 HR HOTLINE to order using Type of computer owned ACCESS/VISA Despatched same day. Allow maximum 7 days delivery. or complete the Please deliver to: coupon and send with a cheque/ P.O. to: Name Date COMPUMART LTD DEPT.CVG Address FREEPOST Postcode LOUGHBOROUGH Price inc. VAT,free postage & packaging U.K. only subject to availability. E. &0.E. LE11 OBR "


"Die AFTER vies  MACHINES: is viewed in 3D from behind of bringing down planes SPECTRUM/AMSTRAD/C641 the plane, rather like a that fly in front of the F-14 ATARI ST/AMIGA/MSX/PC. traditional race game. but otherwise they're pretty  SUPPLIER: ACTIVISION. Formations of enemy craft useless in combat. PRICE: SPEC/C64/AMS/MSX fly over the horizon and The first few formations of $9.99 CASS C64/AMS $12.99 attack before peeling ack before peeling planes are merely cannon DISK, ST $19.99, AMIGA away. Sometimes planes fodder, but the jets that $24.99. emerge from the sides of follow launch missiles at VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM. the screen, swooping the F-14; one hit is fatal and REVIEWER: JULIAN RIGNALL. across the F-14's flightpath, the plane plunges to the and attack from behind, ground and ploughs a Arguably the hottest requiring some nifty great furrow as it comes to arcade game of the year, manoeuvring to shake off a standstill. As the player Sega's Afterburner has the pursuer. progresses the missiles finally arrived on home The solo mission of death become faster, more computer format courtesy and destruction starts on numerous and very of Activision. an aircraft carrier. The F-14 accurate, and swift The unenviable task of takes off automatically reflexes and good converting this monster and heads for the sky, and hand-to-eye co-ordination machine was given to from then on you're on your is needed to fly the plane Keith Berkhill, whose own. safely through the previous masterpieces The plane is armed with seemingly unceasing include Ghosts 'n' an unlimited supply of assault. Goblins, Space Harrierand bullets, which fire Occasionally a plane or nando. Has he been constantly throughout the homing missile able to work magic and mission, and a limited approaches from behind reproduce Afterburneron amount of air-to-air with the sole intent of the Spectrum? Well, the missiles. When an enemy destroying the plane. This answer is a resounding yes plane comes into firing frantic situation prompts believe it or not. range, a box appears only one course of action; For the arcade virgins around it and a missile can a spin. This particular among us. Afterburner is be launched by pressing manoeuvre is tricky to an aerial combat game in the fire button to send it master, but essential if the which the player flies an haring across the sky to player is to complete the F-14 against an entire home in on the target. mission. A short tug of the enemy airforce. The action Bullets are a good means Joystick in one direction, Near perfect title screen on the 64 followed by a quick switch A Banking steeply on the Speccy. ESCORE ESCORE11917180. CHE A Speccy has tbe right opening sequence sends the plane and the horizon into a complete rotation, shaking off the aggressor in the process. At regular intervals a big tanker plane flies in and the F-14 automatically docks in mid-air for refuelling and rearming. There are 23 levels in all like the arcade game the majority of which involve aerial combat. There are two canyon runs, where the plane is guided down the middle of a steep-sided valley to straffe -ground targets that litter the plain. The sides of the 223 "


"BURNER C+VG RESENTS =USION PUERI RRNER ESCORE TI910750 STAGE SEITE D1 2 3 Fuence. A Swoop down to take out ground targets. it takes off it's good to see playable. The plane machine! that sort of attention to handles beautifully, and And now that Activision detail. targetting and firing has proved the seemingly The original arcade missiles is easy. My one impossible, the ball is now game had lavish and very single gripe is that it's in US Gold's court. Will fast graphics sometimes difficult to see Thunderblade shoot down Unfortunately the colour is incoming missiles due to Afterburner? Or will lost on the Spectrum the the colour restrictions Afterburner leave playing screen is always a but it doesn't ruin the Thunderblade in its jet combination of two colours game. Play is exciting, and wash? one thing's for sure: to avoid attribute problems the frenetic action keeps Thunderblade will have to -but the speed has been you on your toes constantly be exceptional to beat this retained, and the game is the only time you can GRAPHICS as fast as its coin-op big ever afford to relax is when canyon have to be brother the plane is on the runway! SOUND avoided, so it's useful to The main sprite is clearly The difficulty level is set VALUE slow the plane down as drawn and the 3D update quite high, and even much as possible that on the enemy planes is though the game is started ! PLAYABILITY way there's more time to smooth. There are few with a generous number of OVERALL pick the juclest targets and ground features, the lives, it doesn't take long to notch up as many points as majority of them seem to blow up all the planes. UPDATE... possible be bushes, but you tend Nevertheless, this small The 16-bit versions are There are also two not to notice when you're fact didn't stop me playing being programmed by friendly airfields to land on, flying there are far more if incessantly! Argonaut Software, where the plane is quickly important things Afterburner, is an producers of Starglider ! serviced before resuming happening on-screen to excellent conversion, and and II. Hopefully their combat; it provides a very spend time gawping at while Keith Berkhill goes for usual high standards will welcome breather from that scenery. The canyon a stroll on water, Spectrum be in evidence in their first the frenetic action. The section is well executed. owners at least can revel arcade conversion. programmer has included and again the update is in one of the fastest and Afterburneron the C64 the little Hang-On bike and convincing. most impressive arcade & Amstrad should be as Outrun car which follow More importantly, the games to appear in the fast as the Spectrum, and the plane up the runway as game is extremely six-year history of the have more colours. "


"GET IT'S AMAZING WHAT A REAL COMPUTER GAME CAN DO. Amstrad screen shots Spectrum cassette .99 Commodore 64 cassette .99, disc f12.99 Amstrad cassette .99, disc 14.99 FREBRO For mail order please send your order and remittance (cheques payable to British Telecom pic or direct debit from Access/Visa card by stating card number and expiry date) to: The Marketing Department, Telecomsoft, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford Street, London WCIA 1PS. Telecomsoft, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford St, London WCIA 1PS. Firebird and Firebird Logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications PLC. A LEGEND IN GAMES SOFTWARE "


"Keviews  MACHINES: C64, PC. SUPPLIER: EPYX. PRICE: C64 CASS .99, DISK $14.95, PC $24.95.  VERSION TESTED: C64. REVIEWER: TONY DILLON. TGSE, or rather, Summer Games III falls well into the reputation of the seemingly endless Games series that started all that time ago with Summer Archery. My fave. Games. By that I mean Waggle the joystick to great graphics, terrific build up the stress on the sound, stacks of playability bow, then line up the sight and horrendous on the target, making sure multiloading. to compensate for the wind The whole point behind shown by the windsock. the Games series is that As usual, the game is they give all the same old A Looks great but the ease of play spoils the game. multiload, and as this isn't twaddle, but dress it up so about one second in every but you still seem to do it much of a problem as far you think you're getting twenty that's the exact pretty well. as disk owners are something new. And to be moment to let go of the Probably the most concerned, cassette honest, they've done a fine hammer, you usually find graphically interesting owners are in for a job at dressing this one up. yourself completely event is the Pole vault. nightmare. Most events What you get are right mistiming it. Whilst your runner is racing take around three and a events, all portrayed in a Parallel bars bars. Move toward the box, the half minutes to load. That's a long time considering that most of the events don't take that long. I quite like TGSE, but there is, as always, a fault or two. With this, the fun is THE GAMES SUMMER EDITION new and interesting way. the joystick in random camera' is positioned at incredibly short lived, due They are: movements left and right to the end of the pole, so you to the quickness and Diving. More than a little get your athlete to do some can look down and see his relative easiness of the similar to the original pretty amazing things and furrowed brow as he events. That, plus the Summer Games event, rack up some pretty high wonders whenever the loading times, aren't except that now it boasts scores. Yet another nice pole will snap as it did to enough to keep anyone much fancier graphics and easy event. our own Daley Thompson playing past their bedtime. and is a lot easier. The idea Rings. Waggle the Once in range of the jump is to make your man jump joystick in either of the two the view goes back to the off the springy bit off directions to send your old side on bit. Another !GRAPHICS wood/fibreglass and land man up and down on the remarkably easy event. SOUND in a large puddle in the old chest muscle rippers. Hurdles. The normal bit. nicest possible way. Yet another one of those Waggle the joystick left VALUE Velodrome cycling. This events where you don't and right to run faster and PLAYABILITY is the event in which the know what you're doing, fire to jump. two cyclists get chained to A Good presentation, nice graphics, but you've seen it all before. OVERALL 70 razor thin cycles and have to race headlong around UPDATE... the inside of a bowl. The graphics are done as first The PC version is pretty person 3D view, from similar to the 64 version, slightly behind the cyclist. FRONT SUPPORT QUTHARD with only a couple of The 3D update is relatively ON HIGH BAR slight colour and sound smooth and very fast, differences. Also, instead giving a good overall of running the 110m impression of movement. hurdles, you run the 400m Unfortunately, as before, hurdles. Strange. the event is far too easy. Spectrum and Amstrad Hammer throwing. A versions are being good joystick waggler, this worked on and will be one, with some pretty released soon. amazing graphics. Amiga and ST versions Waggle your stick to get will definitely happen the ball swinging, press and will be even more fire, and then keep on fabbo than Californian waggling to get the man Games, but don't hold swinging and then press your breath. They won't fire to let go. As there is only happen until well into '89. The 11mstead urdles, "


"HELLFIRE eviens  MACHINES: SPECTRUM, C64, AMSTRAD, AMIGA, ATARI ST. SUPPLIER: MARTECH. PRICE: SPEC .99/$14.99, C64, $9.99/$14.99, AMS .99/$14.99, STAMIGA $19.99. VERSION TESTED: ATARI ST. REVIEWER: MATT BIELBY. Martech's Hellfire Attack is a scrolling shoot'em up not... ah, 100% unlike certain other high profile shoot'em ups you will be seeing and reading about Hilda Ogden's place goes up in smoke. in the run up to Christmas. of game requires onto eyes off the screen and You play the pilot of a even a 16 bit machine, and one hand off the stick. Supercobra attack so have let the \"concept\" And whatever its other helicopter flying against of the thing go to pot. faults, there is no way you wave after wave of enemy \"Heads Up!\" reads the could fairly accuse this fighters jets, choppers and legend as your 'copter game of being slow. Waves missiles. The scrolling isn't rises into the air at the start of'copters rush towards perfect, with many of these of Level One, the rotors you, and while in the early jumping towards you in a making a harsh whir and levels it isn't too hard to steady series of jerks rather the gun sight hovering a avoid them by skirting than getting progressively few inches above you. The around the edges of the larger, but since even such guns fire automatically the screen, you can't count on games as Victory Run on moment you are airborne, this technique for long. the PC Engine suffer from and with rearmament With a homing missile the same fault, it is stops between the level nearly always right on your forgivable. there is no danger of tail, it is impossible to use Whoever played running out of ammo. Your the centre of the screen for designer on this game joystick buttons allow you fear of it it connecting. This must have visited some to fire extra rockets, and can force you into a corner pretty strange places, the space bar on the and... Whammo! It would however, as the first two computer gives you turbo take some hot shot flying to levels consist of a bizarre boost with a decidedly stay in one piece against combination of woods, unhandy flick of the heel. the whole barrage of castles and Honestly, this would have attackers. Manchester-style terraced been far better Hellfire Attack isn't too suburbia, with level three incorporated into the bad a game I enjoyed joystick with a double click some of the backgrounds interpretation of what we or something no one and the frenetic action was would normally think of aswants to have to take their sort of fun. oil rigs. In other words, Missiles & choppers zoom to the attack. none of the backdrops resemble anything that could be confused with reality, and thus far from being an \"arcade simulation of an attack chopper it occupies the strange limbo between the world as we know it and pure fantasy. No attempt is made to suggest why we should spend ten minutes shooting up Coronation Street before being whisked immediately into a frozen polar seascape, and so the obvious inferance is that they have had trouble trying to interpret the complex sprite movements this sort 7  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY OVERALL aaaa 56% UPDATE... Hellfire Attack should be released on all formats at once, and though at the time of writing we haven't seen finished 8 bit versions we heartily recommend you look before you buy in other words, they may not be too hot). "


"A TORRENT OF DESTRUCTION RISES LICENSED O N CORPORATION You never know what's furlong beneath the surface, laying in walt, ready to attack ... Any second now the underwater onslaught will begin taking you completely unawares. You'll need split second ming as you drop your depth charges your only weapons as you fight back destroying the enemy submarines armed with heat seeking torpedoes, floating mines and cruise missiles. DIOD CBM 64/128 .99 casele .99 Specim .99 cherete .99 Amstad 69.99 cassette .99 di Amiga .99 AM ST & IBM PC .99 de UNDER THE TRANQUIL SURFACE OF A SUN BLEACHED SEA A SUBTERRANEAN MENACE MASSES ITS FORCES! U.S. Gold, Unite 2/3 moord Way. Holford, Birmingham B6 ZAX : 021 358 3388 "


". c allowing the target to slip by before the lasers impact. Therefore, for AMARILIIT aster moving targets it's often wise to shoot just in A Defence mode is engaged as the nu fly front of them to ensure Occasionally a friendly their destruction. satellite appears which The satellite can also be drops a power pod when moved, either by trundling blasted. When this is the mouse while the left picked up, an extra feature hand button is depressed, is added to your craft; a satellite is or using a joystick in the yellow pod gives extra dropped off other part in conjunction firepower, a red one gives by a friendly with the mouse giving a multiple cursors (up to space shuttle, and similar feel to the arcade three) and blue pods give the action begins. game, with its joystick and extra speed when moving The aim is to shoot trackball. Although this the satellite. down all hostile missiles sounds a little tricky, the Each level lasts for a and satellites by blasting latter control method is specific period of time them with your laser, which excellent more that can and if every enemy missile is aimed with a be said for mouse only. and satellite is blasted, a MACHINES: mouse-controlled cursor in which is very sluggish in 20,000 point 'perfect' SPECTRUM/C64/ST. similar fashion to Atari's practice and tends to bonus is awarded, and the SUPPLIER: ACTIVISION. ancient Missile Command. cause frustration when the player goes on to tackle PRICE: C64/SPEC $9.99 CASS, * For some reasons which satellite won't move the next level. If some C64 DISK .99, ST $19.99 will remain nameless quickly enough. The missiles get through the VERSION TESTED: ST. let's call it game designer's reason for satellite defence, indicated by a REVIEWER: JULIAN RIGNALL. licence the lasers don't movement is that if an damage meter at the strike their target instantly. enemy space vehicle hits bottom of the playing Some great fool has but take a split second to it, a life is lost and the level area, the player has to pressed THE button and get there, sometimes is restarted from scratch. endure a defensive' level. started World War III. Who Don't let those nukes slip past you. The world turned upole started it? Nobody knows. BORG but hallaluhah, the missiles are flying and the only thing standing between them and the obliteration of the entire Western hemisphere is you and your SDI satellite. Yes, that whacky little Star Wars defence system that cost a mere 59 zillion dollars and was fully endorsed by everyone's favourite cowboy President, grinning Ronnie Raygun is about to have it's first test run and its curtains if you fail to do your duty in this latest Sega coin-op conversion The first scene is set in space, with mother Earth forming a part of the horizontally scrolling DACIACE backdrop. The player's "


"STAGE 3 JIUJIUNUL DANGER JUUUUUUUUUUUUUU DANGERE ne nukesfly, A rare game that is better to play with a mouse. At the bottom of the increasing level of damage as possible, yet appeal lies you can screen is the Earth, difficulty stay out of harm's reach. load it any time, put your oblivious to the clusters of A neat feature is the The graphics are brain in neutral and blast missiles winging their way playable highscore table, colourful and detailed, away until your heart's over the horizon. These are which apparently leads to and the horizontal content. Take the initiative shot with lasers before they a cheat level if you can scrolling is surprisingly and try it out fall to earth and wreak complete it. Scores are smooth. A parallax immeasurable damage. automatically saved for starfield is also used to get | GRAPHICS Any missiles that sneak posterity a presentation good effect through ad even more to point I applaud. SOUND The backgrounds are the damage meter, which At grass roots, SD is a nicely detailed, and in the VALUE results in a loss of life if it is Missile Command variant, midst of the action, the totally filled. When the PLAYABILITY although enough has colourful explosions look assault is over, the been added to make it a as though a firework OVERALL 8 percentage of targets shot thoroughly addictive display is taking place! down is displayed, and game. Reactions are There's a different tune UPDATE converted to points before tested to their limits as on each level some are the second level begins. swarms of enemy craft and rather mellow and Both the Spectrum and This is played over a salvoes of missiles fly melodious, quite a feat for Commodore versions will different backdrop, and around the screen. I the usually tinny ST sound be available shortly. although fundumentally particularly like the chip. The sampled loading They're both looking similar to the previous joystick/mouse control music is also good, good, although how the level, has faster and more option, which keeps the although it's a little games will play without aggressive enemy forces. gameplay at a frantic level scratchy in places. the mouse/joystick option There are twelve levels in as you co-ordinate both SDI is a very simplistic is another matter entirely. all, each offering an hands to inflict as much game, but that's where its Our advice is to test them d upside down... A nuke is taken out by gunner Rignall. out first. 00 0000 1 AA54950 LUIT I STARF DANCER STACF 2 DE JIJIN DANGER "


"CARSI ST ADABLEE 88 SCORE BONUS AMIGA ATARI ST SCORE BONUS AMSTRAD CPC SPECTRUM C64/128 SCREENSHOTS FROM AMIGA VERSION UNIT 4 STANNETS LAINDON NORTH TRADE CENTRE BASILDON ESSEX S$ 156DJ PHONE: (0268) 541126 "


"VIENS RETURN JEDI ( LIVES attempts to avoid or destroy oncoming logs and boulders. During waves two and three a 'split wave' effect comes into operation, with the action switching at crucial points from the forest to the Death Star where Lando Calrissian is taking the Millenium Falcon on a do or die mission to destroy the central reactor. Lando also has to battle along a diagonally scrolling landscape, with Imperial fighters in hot pursuit and dangerous protrusions jutting from every wall. The action gets a touch hectic at this point, as you have to keep a close eye both in front of MACHINES: ST, AMIGA, C64, SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD. SUPPLIER: DOMARK. PRICE: SPECIAMS/C64 CASS $9.95, C64 DISK $12.95, SPECIAMS DISK $14.95, ST/AMIGA $19.95. VERSION TESTED: ATARI ST. REVIEWER: CIARAN BRENNAN. LEVEL BONUS -B38000 SCORE 309388 A long time ago in a galaxy far away, a Scrolling through the grids on the ST. RETURN OF THE JEDI powerful regime known as Into luxuriant forests on the ST. the Atari Corporation the Falcon for obstacles produced a series of and behind for the enemy. massive coin-op games It's difficult to decide Star Wars, The Empire whether Jedi is a good Strikes Back and Return of finish to the Star Wars series The Jedi. Meanwhile, in far or some kind of space off Wimbledon, a small, turkey. revolutionary outfit, The presentation is up to Domark, managed to Domark's usual high infiltrate the Atari HQ and standards, with a choice of escape with the home three difficulty levels, computer licences for demo mode, high score these games. Over the past table etc. year Domark has BONUS 60 Return of the Jedi is successfully converted the probably not as good a first two but now can it game as either of its pull off its third and most predecessors, but it is a difficult mission, making a good conversion and an good job of Return Of The adequate game in its own Jedi, and thus makes the The AT-AT tacklessnowy Speccy terrain. right. universe a safer place? let down by a couple of At this point your body The first section takes little faults. First of all the changes dramatically. place in the forest of Endor, joystick control is sloppy. You grow by about three ST SPEC where you (as the Princess making controlling the feet and develop a nasty GRAPHICS Leia no sexism here speederbike into a little too bodily hair problem 7 8 buddies) race along a fine an art for my liking, that's right you're SOUND 7 8 diagonally scrolling and second the action Chewbacca the Wookie! PLAYABILITY 7 8 pathway on a high-tech scrolls by at a fixed speed things aren't going too speederbike avoiding the -pushing forward rushes well lor old Chewie. as he's VALUE copious forestry and the player towards the top at the controls of an OVERALL 67% 72% keeping your eyes peeled of the screen, but once Imperial Scout Walker and for the Imperial there the action returns to attempting to take it to a Stormtroopers who wait its normal pace. But for all bunker to relieve a pretty behind the trees like evil that this is a compulsive desperate Han Solo. UPDATE... speed cops. enough task, finishing only Once again the The scrolling is super when Princess Leia background scrolls All versions with play smooth and the sprites and reaches the Ewoks' base diagonally (although this similarly to each other. backdrop are good camp to be greeted by an time it's from bottom right Amiga will have speech enough, but this section is ecstatic R2D2 and C3PO. to top left) as Chewie and better graphics. FENURNEJEDI 66 "


"RSGAME OVE side. Add this to the free poster featuring some of the most attractive but least relevant box artwork we've seen for a while and you've got quite an  MACHINES: SPECTRUM, attractive little package AMSTRAD, C64, ST, PC. for your Amstrad or 64. SUPPLIER: DINAMIC (E.A.). The game comes in two PRICES: SPEC/C64/AM CASS loads, the first of which you $8.99, DISK $12.99; ST/PC $19.95. have to complete before VERSIONS TESTED: you gain the access code AMSTRAD/ST. for the second (and no, I'm REVIEWER: MATT BIELBY. not going to tell you what they are). Let's go through First things first: there is no the levels in order, shall 11111111 way you can argue that we? Game Over II isn't good After the nice title screen, value. There is a lot of we're straight into the game here for the money, action with a bang as we from outer space shoot'em approach the enemy ups through R-type style prison planet. Two sorts of DINAMIC 1988 tunnels to Rastan-like aliens approach those beating and blasting that fire back at you and almost as much as one of those that swirl around the A Game Over ll we wish it was. those budget screen as well as a vulnerable to incomings a little less jerky and the compilations. With winter number of asteroids. from the left and shouts collision detection setting in, you need Unfortunately, your ship of \"That came nowhere less ropey, it would be a something to fill the will insist on drifting back to near me!\" could be heard very playable little evenings. the left of the screen at to echo around the office. If Amstrad game. The 8 bit versions come every opportunity your ship was more It's down the tunnels and with the first one on the flip leaving your very manoeuvrable, everything into the planet next, for a GAMEOVER FINAL So, you've got to your first bit of vertical rock What now? You can climb it by hammering in the old iron spikes and hauling MACHINES: C64, ST, \"What shall we put in our AMIGA, PC. SUPPLIER: EPYX. rucksacks\" time. The most PRICE: $19.95, 64 $14.95, important things you 16 BITS. should bring, apart from VERSION TESTED: AMIGA. the obvious stuff like REVIEWER: TONY DILLON. crampons, soft shoes, rope I can quite happily say that and a copy of C+VG, are Final Assault is, without a things to warm you up, like shadow of a doubt, the clothing or drink (Rum, greatest, graphically best, wine, hot chip fat etc). most exciting and most Once you've got yourself testing the ground by realistic mountain kitted up, it's onto the icy pressing down and climbing game ever. slopes you go. jumping over cracks by Probably because it is, as Before you get there, pushing up. This is how the far as I can remember, the you've got to walk along whole game is played only one ever. the gentle slopes. This is Rather than move the Before you can begin done by, and don't laugh, climber as a whole, you your ascent to the top, you moving left/right on the have to move individual have to make some vital joystick, occasionally parts of his body. decisions including the Fyx Presents route you wish to climb. The route you choose greatly reflects what kind of a chance you're going to have to get to the top. If you choose an easy course, you are allowed to lose your footing three times before you die. Choose a hard one, and you only get one chance. Still, on with the decisions. The next thing you have to bend your brain over is whether to take champagne or not, or a bobble hat, or climbing spikes, or anything. Yes, it's uthin Ves Copyright INFOGRAMES. 1999 A Nice title screen shame about the game. FINAL ASSAULT A Surely someone can do a better mb "


"Woe betide you if you dare Throughout Load Two where you get to free your venture anywhere near the you play a jet pack friend from prison. top of the screen! equipped little chappy, The whole thing is The last section of this armed with a variety of laughably bad on the STload has you step out of weapons as the phases go no wonder they haven't your space ship and mount on. There are six stages, the bothered with an Amiga a space-ostrich thingy. first of which involves using version but the 8 bit thankfully short three Armed with a \"photonic\" your jet pack to keep package is generous, and minutes of the worst R-Type blade which looks like a above the action as much while it won't set the world clone ever seen. This giant yo-yo on the as poss, while you roll a alight, could be a wise hardly bears writing about, Amstrad, you slash your tame ball shaped creature purchase. Though C64 except to say that on the way through a swampful of into hostile members of the owners are still spoiled Amstrad the snakes die giant frogs and same species. As you enter for choice, there is too little very easily, and you should pterodactyll riders. Come the alien base there are a around on the Amstrad for be able to get through out the other side and it's variety of bad guys to cope this to be ignored. without losing a life, while the end of load time, just in with, including men on None of the shoot'em up the ST features the world's time for a cup of tea and a living, biting Space styles that make up the worst collision detection, sticky bun. Hoppers and floating various levels are good Doge those Ginger Snaps. monstrosities which enough to stand up on materialise in front of you. their own, buttogether they By now you should have make for a quite picked up a gun as you appealing package. make tour way through the AMSTRAD maze of tunnels, eventually coming into a wooded i GRAPHICS area where the key to a SOUND 5 2 blue door lurks. There are plenty of extra lives hidden! VALUE around here, so you can PLAYABILITY 6 4 afford to die a few times OVERALL 74% 21% and still continue the game. Through the door UPDATE... lurks a monster filled lake, a section where you must All the versions use a helicopter to avoid mentioned at the top of talling rock and leaping the page are released lava (decent of the aliens simultaneously, but no to leave a Jet ranger lying Amiga is going to be around) and the final level available. Some surprise. el de WNN! 8 . ASSAULT perfect position. Final Assault isn't rubbish. In fact it's quite fun. It's nice to know that there is still some originality left in the market. The only problem is, it's far too easy. On my first go I played at intermediate level and finished it without any yourself up. This is done by move the climber and get time, and you have to problems. With that pushing up to hammer the him to put in the next spike. move the joystick up or problem in mind I have to spikes in, pulling down to It's wild, it's wacky, it's down to cycle through the give Final Assault the move the climber's legs boring various ways he can thumbs down. and then pushing up to Finally you reach the position it. Once happy ------74-AMIGA real challenge, the that he's got it in place, vertical slope. press fire to move the next GRAPHICS One of your climber's bit until you've got both SOUND appendages flashes at a arms and legs in the PLAYABILITY VALUE OVERALL 57% ACCEPT UPDATE.. The ST version of Final Assault has identical REFUSE graphics to the Amiga, though, as is the case with nearly all ST games, doesn't have nearly as good sound. The P version, funnily enough, HEIGHT: 01 KG 658 also boasts the same NUMBER: 081 well-detailed visuals, with some attractive sound to 12670M NAME : ANORAK boot. per climbing game than this. A Selecting your gear where's the C+VG. on on ona "


"BULLOCKS HOME ENTERTAINMENT CENTRE 884 WASHWOOD HEATH ROAD WARD END BIRMINGHAM B8 2NB TEL: 021 783 2809 ST CITY AMIGA A500 inc Modulator & 10 blank discs  zone MSX ATARI 520ST super pack inc. software, etc  COMMODORE 64, data cassette, joystick, games, etc  STILL UK'S LEADING MSX ST SUMMER PACK .00 RETAILER INCLUDING...22 GREAT GAMES (OVER ). JOYSTICK, FREE ALL KONAMI GAMES NOW IN DELIVERY STOCK INC. MSX 2 ST SOFTWARE SALE NOW ON COMING SOON NEW KONAMI SOFTWARE POUNDS OFF ST SOFTWARE INCLUDING MSX CLUB STILL GOING STRONG SEND SAE FOR DETAILS ZORK 1 .95 NOW .95 ZORK 2 .95 NOW .95 ORDERS RING 021 783 2809 ZORK 3 .95 NOW .95 ASK FOR TRACEY ALL MAJOR WORLD GAMES NOW .95 CREDIT CARDS EXCEPTED LEISURE SUIT LARRY NOW .95 GUNSHIP NOW E14.99 WORLD GAMES NOW IN, ALL WINTER OLYMPIAD NOW .95 MAJOR COMPANYS NOW TEE UP NOW .95 IN STOCK ECO NOW .95 SEGA AND THERE'S MUCH MUCH MORE ALIEN SYNDROME/ZILLION II RING NOW FOR LIST ON WONDERBOY IN MONSTERLAND 021 783 2809 AFTERBURNER I OUT SOON OR SEND LIST ON SAE TO WE STOCK ALL THE GAMES FOR BULLOCKS ST CITY, 884 THE SEGA WHICH RANGE FROM WASHWOOD HEATH ROAD, WARD .95 TO .95 END, BIRMINGHAM B8 2NB WHY NOT GIVE US A RING IF YOU WE ACCEPT ALL MAJOR CREDIT WOULD LIKE TO ORDER ANYTHING CARDS AND ASK FOR TRACEY OR MATTHEW 021 783 2809 AVAILABLE SPECTRUM NOW AVAILABLE PC2 SS, DD, HD MEGA ST 4, HARD DRIVES, LASER MOST OF THE NEW RELEASES PRINTERS BUDGET AND NON BUDGET ARE NOW IN STOCK SPECTRUMS 48, 128. Price on request. Amstrad home & business computers, printer ribbons, blank discs. NINTENDO NOW PRICES TO LOW TO SHOW. PHONE FOR ITEMS NOT LISTED. 2 day courier service for orders over 100 0983 68978 TELE-GAMES Europe's Largest Stock Of Video Games & Cartridges for -From Tapes to Networks Lum NEW Z CBS Cases ATARI 2600 SGAMES NOW IN STOCKS Phone for the most up to date prices or write to: mun IN STOCK NOW Nintendo WICO JOYSTICKS FOR NINTENDO IN STOCK NOW The leading Video game specialists. Send for lists (state make of game) TELEGAMES, WIGSTON, LEICESTER, LEB 1TE (0533-880445) WIGHT COMPIJTING 400/806 NOW LOOK. 122 High Street, Ryde, Isle of Wight PO33 2SU Good advice Given Freely XLUXE ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages, Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 CHD Tel: 0509 412604 VISA "


"DOUBLE DRAGON THE ARCADE GAME OF THE YEAR D MELBOURNE HOUSE Settias New Standards AVAILABLE ON: C64  SPECTRUM AMSTRAD  ATARI ST AMIGA  IBM PC IN COMPUTER SOFTWARE 2-4 Verynard. Portobello Road, ATRADEWEST & MELBOURNE HOUSE PRODUCTION LICENSED FROM TECHNOS JAPAN Telefax 01-7278 "


"O000 whose girlfriend has been kidnapped. His job is to rescue her, through fire and ice, come hell or high water. Savage's woman has been woman-napped by some vicious fiend (probably) and so, as MACHINES: SPECTRUM, lovers do, he's set off to C64, rescue her through three AMSTRAD/AMIGA/ST. levels of glorious SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD. technicolour, PRICE: SPEC $8.99 CASS, non-clashing, brilliant, AMS/C64 $9.99 CASS, 100% pure arcade action. ST/AMIGA 19.99. VERSION TESTED: The first features our hero, SPECTRUM. 64. Trantor-like, in all his REVIEWER: TONY DILLON. If I was to walk up to you in the street and tell you that a Spectrum was capable of an almost arcade quality game with huge, colourful graphics and immense playability, what are the odds you'd have me locked away. That's why I'm not going to tell you in the street, I'm going to write it here. The Spectrum is capable of an arcade quality game. You still don't believe me? Then feast your eyes on Savage. Savage is, if you didn't already know, the hottest game from Telecomsoft yet, who seem to be having a bit of a ball at the moment, what with Carrier Command and StarGlider A Better do as the man says. II, and these still macho glory, and what a screenshots can't even stud he is. He even walks begin to convey the muscly. He make Eugene wonderfulness of this Lacey looks like Arnold game. It's the only game Swarcheneef, er, that makes a colour swodgernagger, um, monitor worthwhile for the Sylvester Stallone. He has Spectrum. It's amazing! to run from left to right, Savage is a 6'4\" blond hurling magic axes from haired, macho Danish his infinite magic axe programmer-type person, supply at the attacking get going Hula that hoop. 0220 0290 Savage, standing proud! flies, spiders, and Ad normally does. He bounces Managers. Yes, even in a around hurling abuse. The game as wonderful as this, graphics are huge, well our own Garry Williams animated, colourful, makes an entrance as a non-clashing and simply huge, pot-bellied, lager amazing. Definitely a must swilling ad-selling demon, see. who bounces around Pass that lot and it's onto hurling lightning bolts, the second level, which is a which is only slightly 3D jaunt, Space different to what he Harrier-like, through a A Things are a bit too quiet... "


"AGE can get squashed under a falling pole, he can get 1988. The 16 bit version impaled on spikes, he can promise some surprises as merely get his head bitten well from what I've heard off and fall to the floor all liked the digitised roar of portrayed in similarly gory our hero who shouts ways. \"Savage\"every so often on Savage is definitely one the Amiga version. of the best arcade games Next it's onto the third yet seen on the Spectrum. If and final level. The girl is you don't buy it, it's not hidden somewhere in a worth your while having a maze far too difficult for Spectrum. Savage to negotiate, so he Savage could be the sends his pet bird in. For game that puts most people, a pet bird is a development house Probe budgie or a canary. For well and truly on the map. Savage, it's an eagle. What Congratulations are due all round. 64 SPEC GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY VALUE 8 OVERALL 78% 87% TEEEET 000 UPDATE... The Amstrad version looks and feels pretty similar to the Spectrum version, the SCORE only main difference being that there's 0252 considerably more blood when you die on the third level, the C64 version, funnily enough, is also The Gene Simmons of the statue world. looking pretty similar to you have to do on this level the Spectrum version. is fly the eagle around the How it plays remains to be maze until it finds the girl. seen. ST and Amiga Simple! The only difficulty is versions will be available that the enemy normally soon, boasting even 1240 have some sort of say in it, better graphics, and an and it's this level that amazing soundtrack on features the best of the the latter. Gameplay will graphics, the eagle's be the same but is three death. Yes, there is more levels enough to justify than one way to die. He the price tag? 0100 A / wonder if it's friendly. nightmare world of cleverly managed to get rotating head-shaped brown as one of the colours monoliths and totem poles on the scrolling floor. Quite that stick their tongues our clever considering the rudely when they get Spectrum doesn't have close. As usual fast, brown as a base colour. colourful graphics That is the beauty of abound, and the 3D Savage it pushes the movement works really Spectrum even further than well. Funnily enough, the anyone believed it could be pushed right at the end of A A nice view from the castle battlements. "


"Armed with new BOUNCE power, PAC-MAN faces new challenges as he enters the worlds of Block Town, Pac-Man's Park, Sandbox Land and Jungly Steps. PAC-MAN IS BACK & BOUNCING IN 3D! AVAILABLE ON: ATARI ST & AMIGA .95 C64 & AMSTRAD CPC DISK .95 C64 Cassette .95; SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD & MSX Cassettes .95 Amiga screenshot stein GRANDSLAM  NAMCO LTD. All rights reserved Licensed from Tengen  Grandslam Entertainments Ltd. 12-18 Paul Street, LONDON EC2A4JS. W TEL: 01-247 6434 EMT Screenshots taken from ATARI ST. Screenshots taken from SPECTRUM "


"SHEKHANA MAIL ORDER SERVICES ESTAB: SINCE 1978 ACCESS ORDER BY CREDIT CARD LINE 01-348-2907 / 01-340-8565 VISA N as '8' 8888888888888 19.99 18.75 NNNNNNNNNNN 88278 8888 88888899988 88 DONNNN *8888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888 Spec Spec C64 64 AMS AMS Spec Spec C64 C64 AMS AMS Sega Software Title Cass Disk Cass Disk Cass Disk Software Title Cass Disk Cass Desk Cass Disk \"Software Title ST Amiga * Software ST Amiga Master System 79.95 7.25 D2 7.99 D4 7.99 04 Mansells Racing ...7.99 DU 1943 ... 14.99 19.99 Night Raider 15.9919.09 Master System Plus...99.95 4 x 4 Racing Motor Massacre 6.50 3D Wander 13.99 16.99 Operation Wor Master Super Syst 29,95 Action Service Monopoly 750 5 Star Hits ST Overlander 13.99 1599 Lightphaser. Cart 44 96 Ady Art Studio 15.99 Night Raider 799 Action Service Overlord 30 Gates Ar Bumer Ocean Comption 1399 16.99 Pacland 13.99 13.99 Control Suck Alan Syndrome Oop Art Studio Atura Pac Mana Aboum Ranger Operation Wall Barbarian 13.99 13.90 Paperboy Quickshot 15 JSK Batman Peter Beardsley Alter Burner ....... Artist 3 Disk Battle Chess Pool of Radiance.. 16.99 19.99 Alex Kidd 1 or il Pacland. Black Tiger Power Drome 1999 18.75 Alien Syndrome... Barbarian Pacmaria Blazing Barrels 1 290 12 99 Puffys Saga Arte Adventure Bards Tale Peter Beardsley Butcher Hil.... 15.99 15.99 Oundr Alien ..13.99 13.99 Blade Eagle 30 Batman............ Psycho Pigs UXB  ... 20.99 20.99 Ouesson of Sports 13.99 15 99 Captain Silver Battleid Germany Pulls Saga Captain Blood 16.99 16.99 Rambo 13.99 15.99 Black Tiger . Question Sport Carrier command 15.99 15.99 Robocop 13.99 15.99 Double Dragon Butcher Corruption 1599 15 99 Rocket Rangel 15.99 1999 Fantasy Zone Carner Command De Luxe Scrabble 1399 13 99 R-Type 15.99 159 Cyberoids Road Blaster Double Dragon 1399 16.99 Great Baseball Dandy Dragon Ninja 1 399 1699 Roy of Rovers Deiller 16.99 16.99 Great Footbal Da Side Double Dragon Dungeon Master ....... 1699 16.99 D. Toms Olympics ...13 9916.99 Stargoose Dragon Ninja........ Samaurai Warrior 5.25 Echolen 19.99 Starray ...... D.Toms Olympics... 7.25 Eliminator 13.99 13.99 STOS Echelon Silicon Dreams...... Elte 15.99 1599 Techno Cop 15.99 15.99 Este 7.50 D1 Skate Ball 7.25 Fernandez Must Die 16.99 16.99 The Pawn . 15 99 15.99 Miracle Warrior Espionage 6.75 01 6.99 6.75 03 Soldier of Fortune 5.99 Final Command 15.99 1999 Missile Defence 30 Exploding Fist 4 Supreme Challenge. 8.99 15 99 15.99 Thunderade 15.99 1999 F . Throttle 899 D3 Sorcerer Lord Flight Sim 2 26 90 25.99 Tv Port New Flintstones 16.99 16.99 Stew Fighter Foh-Gremlin Ultimate Gall 15.99 1599 Outrun 3D Footbal Director 5.99 Stargider 15.99 1599 Penguin Land F. Brunos Bos 8.99 Summer Olympiad 5.30 Foot Manager 2 13.99 Uninvited ... 15.99 1999 13.99 Phantasy Star F. Director 2 1399 DE 13.99 Super Sports Verminator ... 15.99 1599 F. Manager 6.99 03 6.99 7.25 1999 1998 Victory Road ............. 13.99 16.99 Rescue Mission Game Over 2. 7.25 D47.25 7.25 D2 Tailo Con Ops . 8.99 Ghost Gobbins 13.99 16.95 War Midde Earth... 16.99 16.99 Shanghai Gauntlet il 6.00 D2 7.99 Target Ronagade 5.99 Wec Le Mans .............. 1399 16.99 Guerilla War... DO 7.25 D3 Techno Cop ... 6 50 Shooting Gallery Guild of Thieves 3 Guild of Thieves 8.99 The Double 7.75 Space Harrier Gunship DS 9.99 Hitcher Guide 16.99 16.99 Mac 4495495 Space Hamer 3D I ne: The Pawn 128K HS Mission 14.99 14.99 Head Cleaner 35 Set. Match 2 8.99 19.99 10x3.5\" Unbranded 999 Thunderblade 9.99 Thunder Blade 10x3.5\" Sony JVCI3M14.99 Wonderboy 1 or il Intensity 5.99 Thunder Cats Iron Lord .............. Maxell Dysam 14.99 Word Grand Prix kari Warriors 6.75 01 7.25 DS Tiger Road 10 x 525 5.99 Jewels of Darkness.... 8.99 03 99 05 Time Stood Still Jinxter Sony JVC 3M Jinxter 3 Disk.. Time + Magick.. Kennedy Approach. 16.99 Dust Cover Zaxxon 3D ......... 24.95 Knight Orc 8.99 D38.99 DS Times Of Lore ...... 20.00 20.99 Cheetah Mach 1 King of Chicago 12.99 Zillion 1 or li Konami Collection .. 22.95 750 05 7.50 05 Total Eclipse ... ........ 7.25 Lancerit 13 9 13 99 Cheetah Challenger -... 13.99 NINTENDO SYSTEM Track Suit Manager 725 Leaderboard Coil 1599 1999 Quickshot Stick 7.50 Control Deck Last Ninja 2 8.99 03 8.99 DS Typhoon. Quickshot Turbo 11.99 Urban Champion 24.99 Untouchables Linekers Hot Shot 1599 Comp Prp . 12.99 Live Lot Die 13.99 1399 Comp Pro Car 13.99 Super Mario Bros Uneke Hotshot 24.99 Vindicator Mike Reads OU 13.99 16.99 Comp Pro Extra 14.99 H PG A 9à Unekers Ski Virus Motor Masacre 15.99 15.99 Navigator Suck 13.99 Gumshoe We are Champs-...-7.50 05 7.50 05 Nevcom ............. 16.99 16.99 Predator Sock . Mike Tysons Boxing 29.99 Magnificent 7 7.50 05 750 DS 750 D5 Wec Le Mans 03 725 03 Netherworld. 13.99 13.99 Konins JrSlick Legend of Zelda........39.99 Also Available on Disk Forma DI-69.99, D2-.50, D3-10.99, 04.11.99. 05-C12.50, D6-.99 Mall Order Customers Please make Cho P O payable to SC S.C. VOL. 655 Green Lanes Personal Callers Credit Card Holders London N BOQY P.Pncluded in the UK EEC add C per item, Callers can pick up software at our branches at 221. To enham Court Road London WIR Access and Visa Holders ring elsewhere add2 for Airmail Add cs for all machines for P.PUK SAF Near Goodge St Station Tel: 01-631-4627 OSC S 655. Green Lanos London 01 348 2007.01-340-8565. 01.31-4527. Credit card orders only. Please specify machine type in your order. Also ove temave N8OOY near Turnpike Lane Suton) Tel: 01 340 8565 On production of th e we choice in caserom is not release yet or out of stock. Al new releases will give you a discount of 10% OH the RRP of software these appears on this advert stock telephones, cordless. Answer Fax Calculators Machines will be sent out on day of release. Access and Visa orders welcome (Except on Sega. Nintendo Software) Tel:-01-436-9590 NS 888 88888888888 8888888888888888888888888888888888888888 8888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888 &'88888888888888888888888888888 8888588 NNNNARR 88888888888888888888 $$ $ 8888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888 Monopoly 8.99 6.30 &&& & &&&& World Socce 288888888888888 ONION S8888 8888888888 &&& & & Megasave SPEC +2 Au u  602 \"N.C.L. REPAIRS» 22a Bartleet Road, Washford, Redditch, Worcs B98 ODG 0527-510409 Big Barrels Bonby You Show Cam Command 3688688 Den oyne 999 For Moans or Fou Fet of Free Trading G. Leer Horno 999 R98989888888888RRRRRRR9889 RSRSRSR888888ASSRORREBR 8586888888888888888888888888888588688 16868888888888888:15 A R REPAIRS TO ALL HOME MICROS!! * Quote given before proceeding with repair if wished. * Free membership of our computer Hire Library with every repair. * Free software with every Commodore 16, 64, 128, + 4, Amstrad 464, 664, 6128, & spectrum repair * Guaranteed seven-day return if in the UK * Repair guaranteed for six months * Postage & packing included in the price (all returned by Trakbak and compensation feeSecured Post). * All Spectrums .90 * Commodore 16/64/128/+4 .00 * Amstrad 464/664/6128 FROM .00 * BBC FROM .00 * Commodore Amiga & Atari ST machines will be quoted before we proceed. ** All cheques & postal orders to be made payable to N.C.L. * Access payment also welcomed. gange SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS SEEEEEEEEESSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSEEEEEEEEE 888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888 Pool of Radiance Relom the Rock Ranger Pacman Song Shos anion SAN Crown SAI og The Games Wir WEC LE Ww Mane 1305 1633 10:46 1395 3DISC .03 MAIL ORDER ONLY POSTAGE INCLUDED GREAT BRITAIN EEC 204 6135 D 120 PERITEM OVERSEAS TO PER ITEM FAST SPECTRUM AND DISC STATE WHICH LIST PLEASE NOTE THAT NEW GAMES WILL BE SENT DAY OF RELEASE "


"Peviews C+VG HIT! EMLYNT. INTERNATION MACHINES: 64, SPEC, This is where all the work is AMSTRAD CPC. done as far as setting up SUPPLIER: AUDIOGENIC. PRICE: SPEC CASS, .95; options is concerned. matches and basic game C64 CASS, 59.95; DISC $12.95; Move a pointer to the AMS CASS .95; DISC $14.95. bar, and four pull-down  VERSION TESTED: 64. menu titles appear. Move REVIEWER: TONY DILLON. the pointer over one of the \"Oooooooh! It's greeeet! titles and press fire. The know it, I know it!... No, it's menu then appears, and gone. You're me mate, you what a menu. On each of are. Eeeeeeh!\". The the four is a choice of at unmistakable tones of your least 15 options. That's over own Emlyn Hughes, 60 options in total, allowing sportsman, comedian, you to change team popular TV personality and names, players names and all round rectum pain has statistics (speed, attacking been given his own game. strength, defensive Oh dear... qualities), team colours, Take a look around these allow you to start a league Ready for the kick off. A two pages and match the or a cup tournament screen shots to the next between eight teams, any statement. Emlyn Hughes or all of which can be International Soccer is the under human control. On best ever 64 arcade top of that you can choose football, even better than to just save out a team or the fab Microsoccer. The two, or save out all the graphics are terrible, you game options, including may say. No they're not team colours, current cup The still graphics are less league status. In short, than wonderful, I know, but everything. the animated graphics are you get out onto the unbelievable. The pitch after all the decision movement is just so smooth making, and your team and fluid, it has to be seen runs out on pitch, to be believed. Though alongside the opposition. blocky, the graphics are Here is where the game amazingly clear, and at no gets special. As I've time is there any doubt as already stated, the to what a player is doing or graphics are amazing. ... and he's past the defence ... in which direction he's Large and beautifully going. animated. The diving ISL-1 The best way I can headers are terrific, and describe EHIS is to say that the goalkeeper diving and Audiogenic has taken the catching the ball is style of graphics from enough to have you on the International Soccer, edge of your seat. made them much better, The sound is pretty ace, added myriads of extra too. A quiet crowd rumble frames of animation and goes on continuously in the new moves, blended in the background, building league and cup bits from every time something Matchday 2, put in a spot of Tracksuit Manager you take a shot at goal and options here and there, miss. Persons with klaxons and come up with quite an honk out the familiar amazing product. \"Honk-honk, The first thing I will praise honk-honk-honk, about this game is its honk-honk-honk-honk etc\", amazing ease of use. as well as realistic Between matches, you are ball-bouncy sounds and presented with a large an interesting clank when blank 'workspace and a the ball hits the crossbar. ... and it's in!!! A bar at the top of the screen. Now I get to the best bit of "


"HUGHES C+VG HIT! DNAL SOCCER The goalie puts it out (Fnar). all: the gameplay. On the and he'll turn and stare options screen you can stupidly at the ball as it choose how advanced sails over his head. If he you want to play the game, saves the ball, then he and the later levels, though does the usual three step hard to get into at first, are run up and boots the ball well worth getting the hang into the other half of the of. At the very basic level, pitch. Should you score, the game plays much your little man runs away along the same way as from the goal, arms in the International Soccer. As air, and then you progress, the game acknowledges the roar of becomes far more the crowd with a fist in the realistic. air. You can choose how What other innovations many directions you are has Audiogenic come up able to kick in at the start. with? For a start, the game One way means that you is two player. That's shoot in the direction nothing you might as well you're facing. Three way whinge, but two player on means that if you hold the same team against the down fire and then push computer? That's a new left or right, you can shoot one on me. 45 to the left or right of the Two player one team is a direction you're facing. great laugh, especially if Five way gives you the you are playing with an choice of 70 and 20 shots in experienced and talented either direction. On top of professional like Garry that there are 28 strengths that there are 28 stre Williams. You can have of shot, and three heights endless fun passing to you can shoot at ground, each other, messing it up, normal and lob. and calling each other As normal, the man names for the rest of the currently under control is a match. When two players different colour to the rest on the same team are on of the team, and the screen, one is decked out computer automatically in a trendy red jumper chooses the best one for whilst the other either has you. This doesn't mean that gone for the skin colour top all the other players are or simply has just gone aimlessly milling about, topless. however. All the players Unfortunately, this game are given a little bit of came too late to be intelligence. If the ball is included in the league of rolling past them, they'll do football games in this a sliding tackle for it. If the month's football feature. ball is going over, they'll Just as point of information, jump for it etc. All this leads the points I would have to a pretty exciting game. awarded it are: Graphics: A great deal of 10, Sound: 8. Playability: 9. character has gone into Value: 9, Fun: 9. Total: 46. A the production of EHIS. For clear winner. a start at various points of Forget the sweaters. the game, different Forget the squeaky voice characters will do different and cuddly personality things. The goalkeeper, for and think about the game. example, stands in the goalmouth, head bobbing, watching the ball, jumping and saving SOUND at the appropriate VALUE moment. Should the ball PLAYABILITY go over the crossbar, his arms will drop to his side > OVERALL 94% GRAPHICS 10 A Looks a bit like an open goal to me. "


"WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE 1 BRIDGE STREET GALASHIELS TD1 1SW WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE 49 STONEY STREET NOTTINGHAM MasterCard NG1 1LX AE ATAR ST SOFTWARE ATARIST SOFTWARE     ATARI ST SOFTWARE 4. OH Road Racing COMMODORE AMIGA SOFTWARE O Road Racing Action Service Adung & Dragons och Operation Wall Sinbad and Throne of Falcon Hostage Alan Syndrome Barbariani Bards Tale Kennedy Approach Leaderboard Collection Birdie Black Tiger. sung Techno Cop... Carrier Command boleh hugoy Boy Motor Massacre Daley Thomson Olympic Chall Drar Mn Duncar Man Starglider Stary WhereTime Stood So traps 13.25 95 Type Corruption Daley Thompson Olympic Chali Dragon Nina 10.35 Time and Mag Dungeon Mante Echelon Elminato Espionage Victory Road FAST DELIVERY ON ALL STOCK ITEMS BY 1ST CLASS MAIL SPECIAL OVERSEAS SERVICE BY AIRMAIL WORLDWIDE CREDIT CARD ORDERS ACCEPTED BY PHONE OR MAIL NORTH, SCOTLAND SOUTH, MIDLANDS, N. IRELAND, OVERSEAS WALES 0896 57004 (24 HOURS) 0602 480779 Fernandez Must Die Zyra C64/128 Gncer Shot 064/128 SOFTWARE A Dunga Dragons ich 7.99 11.09 Savage..... L L Sports World Stay Corp Pro 5000 Cle Konami Arras Collection Supreme Change Comp Pro 5000 E Leaderboard Cod P4 Trio Con Op Hits Live & Late Bucher  By Fair Mas Foul The Presidenting Cybernoid il PERIPHERALS Daley Thomson Olymp Chat Auth Bahagi 525\" disk beelds 100 Adults Only.. Pre Soccer Simisto Track Suit Manager CHA Dust Cover Emyn Hugo in Soccer Type C64 D Drive Cover Ramboll Vimeo Red Storm Rising Uouchables C2N Dame Unit Game & Machi BLANK DISKS Gary Line Hot Shot Roy of the Rover WEC Le Mans 3.5DS/DO person 525d ded person Please make cheques and postal orders to WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE. All prices include postage and packing In UK. Overseas orders please add .50 per cass/disk for AIR MAIL delivery. Credit card orders accepted by phone or mall. Advertised prives are for mail and telephone orders. ATARI ST OWNERS DE The Instant Catalog X-MAS SPECIAL WIN AN ATARI ST. VOL. 1. NO. 5 Why not complement the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with the MIDLAND GAMES UBRARY. The greatest biggest and best Atari Club on the market. DISK APPROX 1500 ST TITLES NOW IN STOCK 10.15 10 15 SPECTRUM CASS DISKATARIST 19 Boot Camp.... 6.15 10.151 Saar Abernet 675 10.13 ADAD Heroes OR Pool Alien Syndrome...... Barbarian ...... 6.19 0.15 Day Olympic Challenge Carrier Command.......10.10 10.80 Driler.... Cybernoid I Final Daley Oly Chaill 614 10.15 Elite......... Dark Fun 5.408,80 Federation of Free Traders... Dark Side 15 15 Nebulus Empire Strikes Black ..75 10.15 Nighi Raider... Fits Throttles 8801015 Podrom Fig . 10.10 12.15 R-Type.. Football Manager 2.... .....6.5 10 15 SDI Fox Files Back 6.10 8.80 Speedball Frank Bruno's Big Bo B 10.15 Spider II Game Match 2 12.15 STOSGames Creator 10.10 13.50 Super HangGold Silver Bronze...... ....10.10 12.15 Tradvoll 6,10 10.15 Virs... DISK, COMMODORE CASH 16 | 19 | HH CHI 16.90 ADD heroes or pool .6.75 2025 A uer. 13.50 Armalt ... 16.90 Barbarian 13.50 Black Tiger 6.75 16.90 Bombal...... 225 Cybereid il 11. Daley Olympic 13.50 Dark Side 6.75 16.90 Enyin Hughesi Scor...... 6.15 16.90 Fernandez Must Die 1.0 Football Manager IL....... 6.73 13.50 Game Over il 8.75 R75 2.25 10.15 Games, Business Education and utilities MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over 5 years ago first conceived the idea of a software library Often purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members a tai chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Many very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany, Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast efficient and friendly service operating a computerised custom built system to keep track of all your records, requests are attended to immediately, virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service regular newsletters and program updates plus other inter club activities. SEND LARGE S.A.E. TO: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 READWAY, BISHOPS CLEEVE, CHELTENHAM, GLOS, Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programs are originals with full documentation Kari Art 17.50 Red Storm Rising 2015 Road Blasters...... 13.50 R-Type Salamander DS 16.00 Surip Poker Plus 5 01.00 16.90 Thunder Blade .50.00 Tiger Road.... 6.75 10,15 16.00 Throttle 16.90 \"Fichi Ace .... ......10.15 12.15 2025 Frank Bruno's Big Blos.........8.80 0.15 Leaderboard Par.... Mega Games Voll Operacion Woll.......... Outlander Pepsi Mad Mir Ramboll NEW ...10.10 10.15 AMIGA 10 N/A IAD & Heroes or Pool Carrier Command 10.30 13.50 Comic Setler 3.0 10.15 Daley's Olympic Chall 5.40 101 Drille... 5.40 .0 Fed of Free Traders.. 5.40 3.0 Fish 410 05 Football Manager 675 N/A Fasion 10 N/A Menance 540 890 News 10.10 12.15 Pandora ..... 8. Rocket Range ......80 11.50 Sarder Hl ... 12.15 Sr Ray 10 Tetra Quest .20 10.15 Triad Vall. .10.15 12.15 13.0 \"Glans... .... 160 Gold Silver Bronze 13.30 History in Making..... 12.15 Soldier of Fortune Space Ace. Sarip Poker 2 Supreme Challenge... Tato Cinop Hils.... Thunder Blade..... Ultimit The Work 11.50 62025 16.90 16.00 13.50 20.25 Leader Board Par... 10.15 Meu Cames VolL... Spact ... Sports World ..... Supreme Challenge........5 Taine Coin Op Hits.......... \"We are the Champion ....6.5 10.15 11.50 12.15 12.15 WIN WITH COURSEMASTER \"THE COMPUTER HORSERACING PROGRAMME  RATES ANY RACE IN SECONDS DAILY NEWSPAPER IS ALL YOU NEED.  NEVER out of date Both N. Hunt and Flat Fast data entry.  AMAZING ACCURACY!! Now you CAN BEAT THE BOOKIE!!  Works on the simple principle FAST HORCES BEAT SLOW ONESTI  Clearly identifies selection in every race plus these AMAZING features: . First, Second and Third choice shown for Tricasts etc. Actually works out your WINNINGS on most popular bets in C PATENT, YANKEE, CANADIAN, HEINZ etc. Good EACH WAY and long odds bets clearly shown  Will PRINT out your BETTING SLIP for you.  Maintains a BANK ACCOUNT BET like PROFESSIONALS do!  PLUSI! THE AMAZING COURSEMASTER SYSTEM Huge returns from small stakes. Try it! Can pay for itself many times over on the first day! Frog HOT TIP OF THE MONTH sent to every purchaser All for $14.95 Inc post & packing (Disc users add .00 for disc). Avaliable for Spectrum (48K and above Inc +3 dise versions), Commodore 64 & 128, Sinclair QL, Amstrad CPC, and all PCWs. Please state which TO INTRASET LTD (Dept C.VG), FREEPOST, & Gilderdale Close, Gorse Covert, Birchwood,  Warriggton WA36TH. Or large SAE for further detalls. INSTANT, Boston House, Abbey Park Road, Leicester LE4 SAN Mail Order Only. State Computer's make and model. P&P: 50p on orders under . EEC 75p per title. Whole World .50 per title for Air Mail New titles sent on the day of release. A 0533 510102 FOR DISK PRICES & NEW RELEASES PLEASE RING US. EST 190 "


"CRUCIAL COMPILATION OF BABBARLAN The Ultimate Warrior CRAZY CARS SCHWARZENEGGEN TARGET TU-EIN CROWD Ocea RARRERIAN GRYZOR Featuring at the game-play of the arcade original, Glyzer takes you into a thrilling alien world of force fields fanatical guerlas and strange then defence systems but you have the tite-power and be, with little sight and split second timing you can infiltrate the aliens headquarters Fly Grytor once and you'll be hooked 1 BARBARIAN THE STORY SO FAR...The evil speler Dear as agreed that a champion can be found whe able to defeat his demonic guardians the peacess Marian will be released from the wastelands comes an unknown barbacana mighty Warrior wielding his bitidsword with deadly skill can he vanquish the forces of Darkness ONLY YOU CAN SAY Software CRAZY CARS You are facing in the world's cities Face The Am an Cross Country Prestige Cars Race you are able to complete there before the time runs out you will get a fastercar You start with 4 Mercedes 560 SEC and only the worlds best divers may de a Ferrari CTO PREPARE TO START READY GOW PREDATOR You've heard about Predator the Schwarzenegger movie you can play the leading role. Take a and unit into the South American te to rescue a bunch of trapped diplomats. Should be easy enough and set would betweren't at the serious aben who keeps on taong out your hen. us weth Century Fine Arts Wh KARNOVO Karnav the fire breathing Russia stoogman, en his hacerdous quest to defeat the evit dragon kya and find the Lost Treasure of Babylon Karnevis a vast 4-way scrolling came that combines both strategy and fast action in nine challenging evels of gameplay it is recognised by arcade addicts everywhere as one of the best games of skin Karnevalse has something special in the way at characters have you ever been killed by a skeleton on an Ostrict Qurce Son COMBAT SCHOOL Konami sarcate tht now your home micro and already a Nothit Seven grueling events featuring the Assault Course Firing Sang Arin Wrestling and Combat with the instructor himselt Combat school throws down the challenge to the toughest of thoroughbred mesters 9 TARGET RENEGADE Every move you make every step you take they te watching you fight your way through the print the back alleys the cat para high! your way through the vious c unity, the skinheads the Beastie Boys, the bouncers. This is just the tip of the iceberg on you chilling quest to confront MR BIG PLATOON Lead you: Platoon deep into enery t ory, you can almost feel the humidity sense the threatenie sangers as you encounter the enemy and his many booby traps. Having found the derground mate of tunnecenter at your perill Enemy soldiers lunge at you from the mury waters within, but this is the only way you can find vital information you come out of this alive. You'll be just one of the few PM Fila Nume SPECTRUM CASSETTE AMSTRAD COMMODORE Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street: Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone 061 832 6633. Telex 669977 OCEANSG Ocean .95 "


"NeN INTERNAT player, or two humans against the computer. The objective is obvious stay alive by beating the others. MACHINES: C64/ST/AMIGA. There are seventeen moves SUPPLIER: SYSTEM 3. available, ranging from PRICE: C64 CASS .99, C64 DISK $14.99, ST $19.99, AMIGA mid-air split kicks to head .99. butts and backward VERSION TESTED: ST. somersaults. Each kick or REVIEWER: JULIAN RIGNALL. punch scored on an opponent awards the The beat'em ups available player with either one or on 16-bitare a pretty weak two points, depending on and weedy bunch but the effectiveness of the are successfully booted, that's about to change with move. The first fighter to 5,000 points are given. the release of IK+, a score six points wins the Every subsequent round fightin' 'n' fumpin' game bout, and the remainder of alternates between balls that knocks everything else the thirty second time limit and bombs. for six onverted to bonus The player starts a game It was written by Archer points. If the player has the classed as a white belt, Maclean, whose previous second highest points and as he goes through the games, International score, he goes through to rounds is promoted to Karate and Dropzone, are the next round; if he's last yellow, purple, green, both considered classics. he's out. brown and eventually to His latest creation is Every third screen takes black where the basically a translation of the form of a bonus round. opponents are very tough the 8-bit version, which In the first the fighter has a indeed. appeared during the shield and deflects balls as A very unusual feature of Autumn of last year, and they bounce on from the IK + is the mass of cheat has been enhanced with left and right. The more modes there are over digitised sound effects, balls deflected, the faster fifty of them! Some of the improved graphics, an they come dodge all 64 things you can do include extra bonus round and and 5,000 survival points changing the judge's shirt film-like opening are awarded. The second colour, altering the size of sequence. bonus screen requires the shield logo during the Unlike most karate bombs to be kicked off the bonus round, making the games, IK + has three screen before they fighter's trousers fall down on-screen fighters, either explode if the fighter and changing the two computer controlled gets hit by shrapnel the background colour. One against a brave solo round ends. If all bombs of my favourites is Six fighters boogie in the pause mode. PAUSE 28 SPEED = SHIFT A Red and blue psyche each other of BLUE HINS Brandishing the shield in the bonu bu "


"C+VG HIT! IONAL RATE + opening sequence and title screen, complete with psychedelic fighters, and the pause mode is great. Some may say that beat 'em ups are past their prime, but I defy anyone to pick this up and not get totally hooked. It's got all the elements of a classic, and has the timeless gameplay that'll keep you coming back long after 'big' games like R-type and Starglider I have been relegated to the software shelf. --GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY 9  OVERALL 93% activated by typing PAC The gameplay matches keep watching the the high standards set by background. There are the visuals and sonics, and also a wide variety of provides much messages, and the game entertainment and can also be put into furbo enjoyment. The difficulty mode, which is brilliant fun! level is set just right, and The animation is the fighters are very excellent throughout, with unpredictable there the fighters looking superb doesn't seem to be a 'safe and moving with a move that often flaws convincing cartoon-like games of this kind. fluidity. The range of Although the opponents expressions and reactions are slow on early levels. is absolutely superb. their erratic nature can further enhanced by the surprise even the most incredible digitised sound skilled opponents, making effects. The grunts and the game that much more thumping sounds are exciting to play. On very great, but the high levels play gets best ones of all are the unbelievably frenetic, and Bruce Lee screams and requires reflexes and wails in the midst of a complete concentration to fight IK + sounds just like ensure survival. the fight scene at the end the presentation is of Enter the Dragon! superb, with a lovely Plenty of fightin' an' fumpin' action. UPDATE... An Amiga version is following hot on the heels of the ST, and although it won't play differently, the sampled sound effects should be a little crisper. The C64 version has been available for well over a year now, and can now be found on the We Are The Champions compilation from Ocean, which is great value for money. er out Sfter a bout. 800x onusund. 1000 500 "


"EXPLORATION OF THE COSMOS Can you live with the reality of ..... \"Spectrum and Amstrad to have solid state 3D available: graphic versions SPECTRUM: E11.991 E14.990 AMSTRAD: E14.99 .99d\" \"LIPSTIK PLUS HEADSET AVAILABLE FOR CBM 64/128 See pack for details.\" L     50. ECHELON Only the chosen few are trained to operate the Lockhead C-104 Tomahawk the 21st century's most awesome combat and exploration vehicle. Only the chosen few experience the excitement and thrill of three dimensional graphics, the delicate manoeuvring of spacecraft and remote pilot vehicles and the cut and thrust of intergalactic combat. Only the chosen few have the opportunity to undertake a journey with the most advanced space flight simulator known to mad. Only the chosen few ate selected for ... TRATION PETER ANDREW JONES COPYRIGHT: SOLAR WIND LTD 1987 Angers Software Inc. CBM 64/128 TAPE .99 DISK $14.99 SPECTRUM TAPE .99 -3 DISK .99 AMSTRAD TAPE .99 DISK .99 PC .99 AMIGA .99 ACCESS Software incorporated U.S. GOLD: US, Gold and Units 23 Horford Way Holford Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 "


"ROMANTIC ROBOT present THE YEAR OF THE ROBOT works with MULTIPRINT MULTIFACE 12 only ACE digitiser turns pictures from VIDEOFACE a video camera or recorder into standard hi-res Spectrum screens Screens can be copied to printer, incorporated into animated 6 different screens can be held by other programs' saved to tapem drive disk VIDEOFACE and changed as you wish) VIDEOFACE menu-driven, fast and very easy to use all you need is a Spectrum COMPOSITE VIDEO Signal and a lead SENIE 44.95 VIDS INNING program at ANY point. PINT LOAD any program ND textop.codes GENIE can Star GENE RUN GENIE can ST VIDEOPACE STOP whenever Canals OMP 10 Winter SEARCH A VIEW and ALTE W and ALTER FOR NOW ALSO FOR AN ons of memory or 280 registeret INSIDER You can even adjust the gran (the black and white ratio) and create special effects! VIDEOFACE is a unique most useful and powerful add-on CACE ONLY ES Y .95 LOAD ANY GAME AULTIFACE ON LET LIFEGUARD CE QUE OR 128, FOR INFINITE LIFE S. AMMO, ETC. NDS IT YOULL WIN AGAIN AND AGAIN THE ULTIMATE PERSONAL COPIER Multiface ST FOR THE ATARI ST Magic 64K ROM cartridge with FREEZE BUTTON SAVES the whole PROGRAM or partsindl. SCREEN Instant MULTI-TOOLKIT TO STUDYMODIFYincl. POKE, Find Replace, FILL, PRINT in HexDec ASCII Fast& user-friendly DISK to DISK Copying FORMATS disks up to 410K 820K Instant fully automatic, menu-driven fontastic. =0 FOR CPC 464/664/6128 OWNERS wltilace two THE ESSENTIAL CPC COMPANION LIVES FINDER wultirace OLC + 120 MULTIFACE con stop ANY program at ANY point and COPY to ask cartridte wafer rape it works every times FULLY Autonet me driven useindly dotproof Absolutely EASY to usust load a game push a button to FREE 24 and let MULTIFACE COPY Option to SAVE and COPY screen. Most efficient COMPRESSING Built unique MULTITOOLKIT essental for poking fucking, etc BK RAM vital for GENIE GUARD LA GOOD REASON TO BUY SPECTRUM 3\" (Crush) \"If you want to use commercial Spectrum software with the Plus 3 you MUST also buy a Romantic Robot Multiface 3, or Amstrad's disk drive will be useless with commercial software. The Multiface 3 is the ONLY reliable way to copy Spectrum programs to disk. (Computer Shopper) Any 128K+3 owner will find it a wonderful device, indispensable even.\" (Sinclair User) \"THE PLUS 3 DISC SOLUTION\" Surfir er Atido THE ONE AND ONLY FULLY AUTOMATIC TAPE AND DISC COPIER THE YEAR OF THE ROBOT BE PART OF IT 14.95 I enclose a cheque/PO for ........... or debit my A NOL Name ............ Address Card expiry........ pOUK & MORE 1.000 Overseas (2000 MULTIFACE ONE (39.95 MULTIFACE 128 1449510 GENIE [9.95 INSIDER MULTIFACE THREE (44.95 M3 w/ through port ,95 MULTIPRINT C 39.950 VIDEOFACE DIGITIZER [ 44.950 LIFEGUARD [ 6.95 MUSIC TYPEWRITER [_7.950 MULTIFACE ST.950 MULTIFACE 2 1 47.950 Speempat ROMANTIC ROBOT SE LY 54 Deanscroft Ave, London NW9 BEN 24 hrs A 0 1-200 8870 (VG z "


"1 TURBO OSITION MACHINES: ST, AMIGA. that kind of track easy the screen giving the  SUPPLIER: LORCIELS. PRICE: $19.99. going, and go just that bit impression of movement. faster. On the more VERSION TESTED: ST. Not that they are REVIEWER: TONY DILLON. complex tracks, the cars necessary. The markings go slower, which makes it a on the road, coupled with Turbo Cup is the result of a little easier for you to get the smooth update of the large sponsorship deal on position, but not to stay on massive edge of the road behalf of Loriciels. In case the road. items (like grandstands, you didn't know in the The ATC is set over a buildings, trees etc) and Andros Turbo Cup race in weekend's racing. On the the ultra-slick hills and dips France one of the biggest Saturday, each car has to do all that is needed to celebrities is the one and do a solo lap to establish make this a convincing only Rene Metge who, an average lap time and game. That plus the judging by the grid position. So, before smoothly animated documentation I have on you can race, you get to computer cars and the him, has done more races do your solo attempt. You widening and narrowing of and rallies than you've start, looking down on your the track and, oooh, had hot dinners. As I said, remote control Porsche everything. this game is based around from behind and above. The sound is good and the Andros Turbo Cup, a a nd this is here you stay, a atmospheric. I didn't know gruelling jaunt around bit like Out Run, but with a that a Porsche 944 turbo in some of France's toughest much higher viewpoint. It's neutral sounded like a bus. tracks, including the twisty at this point that you realise Still, rev up the engine, wait and turny (with a bit of just how good the graphics for the light to turn green straight) Paul Ricard track. are. The Porsche is and push her into first. How track. amazingly well defined, do you push her into first? You can choose which of complete with Here's an innovation for four tracks you wish to recognisable interior and you, you get a choice of compete. For a beginner, Loriciels logo on the door. five different ways to you want to look for a track The road is in much the change gear. You can with lots of straights and same mould as Out Run, change it the ordinary way some gentle bends, to with the two-tone grey make the race a little stripes that scroll toward easier. Unfortunately, computer cars also find Turbo cup has top marques. Get ready to race. 000 KM 11.1 "


"O CUP DOOK PREHOTS your speed before the crash. What got on my nerves at this point was the way that the computer car was unharmed, and carried on going. Loriciels hope to market the software with a limited edition offer. A free die cast metal model of the Loriciels Sponsored Porsche (check (hold down fire and push round bends at high out our competition for up or down to change up speed. more details), complete or down), you can slam it. Once you've done your with movable steering into automatic or you can practice, you get yourself wheel and gear stick, use the keys one to five to positioned amongst the 20 opening doors, boot and change to gear one to five. Other cards in the race and bonnet and reclining All pretty basic. Then you wait for the race to start. seats. At only another few get two choices never seen The race itself is the same pounds (price to be before. You can use a as the practice, other than announced), it's definitely second joystick to change that there are more cars worth shopping about for up or down, or you can and it's a bit longer. What it. hold down fire to go into you're looking for is the clutch, and move the best race time possible, as GRAPHICS joystick in the same way as well as the best positioning SOUND a real gear stick to move at the end of it all. The into position, which, computer cars make it a VALUE though a little awkward at little difficult, however. PLAYABILITY first, soon feels much more Each has been given a natural. limited amount of artificial 1 OVERALL 8 So, you're off and racing intelligence. Basically, round the bends. What do they'll get out of your way UPDATE you notice then? The sticky so that they don't plough so that they dont hou cut The Amiga version is control. Unfortunately into you, but then they'll cut every game has a fault, you up so that you can't planned for release at the and with this it's the simple same time and boasts the fact that the programmers one of a three things same high definition have been a little bit heavy happens. You bump into graphics and even faster on the inertia, which make them and slow down a and smoother gameplay. the car very hard to little; you're sent into a C64, Amstrad and control. Plus the fact that recoverable spin out, or Spectrum versions are the car is hard to steer you're sent flipping and planned for release at a spinning and land on your later date. Obviously the roof, all depending on graphics won't be half as hot, but the gameplay promises to be just as good, if not a lot better. That's no way to treat a Porsche. An early attempt to take the field. 1981 0.11. HAWX fold "


"STAND OUT FROM THE CROWD You've bought Outstanding the mag, read Features the reviews, * High Durability now get blasting Advanced design and precision those nasties with engineering. the C + VG Joystick! * Rapid response Exclusive to our Guaranteed by readers it's a uniquely constructed customised version of But hurry, stocks are limited bearing and gate the Euromax Elite and the Ed is getting zippy!! assembly. *Ultra Sensitive model. Suitable for Atari, Commodore, Fitted with short With its advanced Amstrad and MSX. Also with travel micro design, accurate fire, interfaces:Sinclair, BBC and switches. unique colour and Electron. * Absolute accuracy giveaway price, it was In multi directional just too much for the Ed. Recently he was movement. Please send me C+VG *Reduced fatigue seen sneaking down Joystick(s) at .95 + .24 p+p. Advanced ergonomic the fire escape with a Total amount enclosed  design reduces crateful earmarked for Please make cheques payable to: effort suitable for his chums! Computer & Video Games. left or right hand play. So to stand out from Name ! *1.5m cord allow the crowd, all you have Address for best playing to do is fill in the position. coupon and rush down! Postcode * Guaranteed Full to your nearest post Please return to: Computer & Video 6 months guarantee box. Games Joystick Offer 14 Holkhom against any Road, Orton Southgate, Peterborough defective parts. PE2 OEF. TEL: 0733 237111. Allow 28 days for delivery "


"OPERATION NEPTUNE The tranquil surface of the Pacific Ocean belies the battle of wits taking place in the world's last unexplored territory. A perfect hiding-place for a determined enemy, or is it? Your jet-bike and technologically advanced bathyscaphe should help, but there are still the enemy bases to destroy, lines of communication to be knocked out, and the natural predators of the deep just waiting for a tasty snack at the first sniff of blood! So check your oxygen supply, and dive, dive, dive... Atari ST, PC, Amiga .95 CBM64, Amstrad .95 (disk), .95 (tape) INFOGRAMES, MITRE HOUSE, ABBEY ROAD, ENFIELD, MIDDLESEX, EN1 2RQ. NFO GRAMES "


"THE GREATEST SPORTS Open NICK FALDO WINTER OLYMPIAD O BOTHAM'S TEST MATCH KONAMI TE SNOOKER FEATURING ALL THESE FANTASTIC GAMES NEATCHDAY I WINTER OLYMPIAD SUPER HANGON-BASKET MASTER. STEVE DAVIES SNOOKER TRACK & FIELDSNICK FALDOS OPEN SUPERBOWLIAN BOTHAMSTEST MATCH CHAMPIONSHIPSPRINT Score a goal, race on two wheels, compete in that doesn't finish you off then throw jump shots the winter olympics with Bob Sled, Ski Jump. El against the basket ball aces, give it all you've got Slalom and downhill. Match strokes with Nick and go for a touchdown in the NFL Superbowl Faldo, make the winning break against Steve then you can sit down...in the cockpit of a Davis but play a straight bat as lan Botham. Formula 1 racing car as you compete to take the Enter the arena in Track & Field as you compete chequered flag!Check out GSM 2 the ultimate in 100 metre dash, Long Jump, Javelin, 110 metre in sports compilations for the SPECTRUM hurdles. Hammer Throw and High Jump and if COMMODORE and AMSTRAD micros. HAMSTRAD AMST || 17.25. Ocean 129 I A S S GC2077ACA WINTERHAD chester M2 5NS Telesha ean Software Limited 6 Central Street "


"ATARI ST PC COMPATIBLES CPC AMIGA BBC SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 PCW THE MAGAZINE THAT KEEPS YOU IN TOUCH. SOFTWARE REVIEWS FREEARE TEE CHATLINE I AM VERY INTERESTED IN MICRONET, PLEASE SEND ME FULL DETAILS. FREE MODEM WITH FIRST YEAR'S SUBSCRIPTION, WHILST STOCKS LAST. THIS OFFER APPLIES TO UK ONLY. COMMUNICATION, INFORMATION, CHATLINES, ELECTRONIC MAIL ... SOMETHING IS ALWAYS POPPING UP. Micronet's original and exciting magazines cover the Atari ST, PC compatibles, Amiga, BBC, Spectrum, CPC, Commodore 64 and PCW. And it's a communications network with 150,000 electronic mail contacts, telexing worldwide to 2 million terminals, chatlines, teleconferencing... all available on your screen 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. Micronet is truly interactive! Just complete the coupon and pop it in the post today, or contact our Sales Desk on 01-837-7872 and we'll put you in touch with the world. If you already have a modem and computer software, dial 021-618-1111, password 4444 ID 4444444444 for a free demonstration. The first Interactive magazine for your micro. TELEMAP GROUP LTD TELEMAP GROUP LTD DURRANT HOUSE 8 HERBAL HILL LONDON ECIR 5EJ NAME ADDRESS AGE COUPON TO BE COMPLETED BY PARENT OR GUARDIAN IF UNDER 181 TEL NO  MACHINE TYPE. TELNO I MICRONET COMSH/C1/10BB "


"OD: 14 CHRISTMAS, UAB ESE NEW YEAR ABC 9.00pm EXPLODING FIST + 9.00am SAVAGE When the snow starts a-falling and the wind starts a-howling there's nothing better to warm up those frost bitten fingers than the blistering heat of EXPLODING FIST +. If you're feeling guilty after stuffing your face with all that Christmas turkey, here's your chance to get back into shape -or get kicked into the middle of the New Year! Spectrum cassette .99 Commodore 64 cassette .99, disc .99 Commodore 64 screen shot BURI First out of the stocking this Christmas has to be SAVAGE. An epic of gargantuan proportions in three mind blowing action packed levels. Savage features graphics so stunning they'll put your Christmas tree lights to shame! Spectrum cassette .99 Commodore 64 cassette .99, disc .99 Amstrad cassette .99, disc $14.99 Amstrad screen shot JING NOCI Coke BEHIN 11.00am ELITE Intergalactic action hits the 16-bit screen with a bangas the all time classic ELITE explodes into solid 3D splendour. Be warned, this game is so addictive you'll be up all night ... and Santa won't leave any goodies if you don't get to bed on time! Atari ST $24.95 Amiga $24.95 Atari ST screen shot + un 3.00pm DYNAMIC DUO Going underground takes on a new meaning as you battle through pitch black tunnels and passageways in search of wealth beyond your wildest imagination. But beware of lurking monsters with no sense of tradition, it's duck not turkey on their Christmas menu. Spectrum cassette .99 Commodore 64 cassette .99, disc $12.99 Amstrad cassette .99, disc $14.99 AXASOAS Amstrad screen shot 6.00pm BLAZING BARRELS HANDLE WITH FIREBIRD Christmas just wouldn't be the same without a rip roarin' Western. So Firebird are proud to present, fresh from their famous ICOM studios, BLAZING BARRELS, featuring the all star cast of ... Bammo THE MEXICAN BANDITO TNT Tom THE REALLY BAD GUY You, alias Black Jake THE BOUNTY HUNTER Atari ST $19.99 Amiga $19.99 Atari ST screen shot AUGNON GAMES SOFTWARE Sequel to the blockbuster WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST! Christmas Viewing FIREBIRE For mail order please send your order and remittance (cheques payable to British Telecom plc or direct debit from Access/Visa card by stating number and expiry date) to: The Marketing Department, Telecomsoft. First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford Street London WCIA 1PS. Telecomsoft, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford St, London WCIA 1PS. Firebird and Firebird Logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications PLC A LEGEND IN GAMES SOFTWARE "


"eles SUPERSPOR then attempt to jump from it, perform as many flips and tumbles in the air as now and then and his possible, and then land in mouth moving amazingly a kiddies' inflatable out of synch. Not as good paddling pool. as Bobby Yazz. The slate smash is a Graphics are nice and laugh and a half. Two colourful, as seems to be sumo wrestlers stand either the norm with Amstrad side of your karate champ games these days. The and hold up pieces of sound is jingly, but slate. You have to punch or becomes grating very kick in the appropriate quickly YRMONLAR BRUKER INTO HD  )) A Shoot the dustbin lids in alley target practice. UINTE SNRSHED 16 DARE DE STWLL 0 A Oriental beat 'em up event. direction and try to break Although there is MEIGNT ON as many slates in the 60 technically nothing wrong seconds. with Supersports, I still don't Cross bow has you at the think I can heartily Going down aiming for paddling pool end of a field, with a target recommend it. I just didn't up somwhere and sit on a at the other side. Waggle have much in the way of wall or bin. Don't shoot at your joystick to build up fun playing it. And when it MACHINES: SPEC, AMS, these, or you lose five pressure, then press fire. comes down to it, it's the C64. points. Aim the bow using the little fun that counts. SUPPLIER: GREMLIN. This event isn't too hard sight provided, taking care PRICE: SPEC CASS, $7.99. once you get the hang of to compensate for the wind GRAPHICS DISK $12.99, 064/AMS CASS .99, C64/MS DISK $14.99. positioning your gunsight and distance and SOUND  VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD in the path of the target everything. CPC. and then blasting away. You don't have a time VALUE REVIEWER: TONY DILLON. The only things that make it limit, and you don't have a PLAYABILITY difficult are that after specified number of lives. Supersports bills itself as every six shots you have to Not much of a challenge, OVERALL 62 'The Alternative Olympics' reload which is a time really. Alternative. Yes you could waster, and you only get Finally, it's the say that. Just get to look at one and a half minutes to underwater assault course. what's on offer. score as much as possible. Swim the length of the The Spectrum and C64 First up is the Crack Shot After each event, you are black lagoon avoiding vesions are all being event. You have a shown a league table, clams, jellyfish and mines released at the same gunsight, a six-shot rifle, showing who's in the lead, and collecting coins, time, so all three should and an ordinary, and told if anyone has occasionally swimming to be in the shops as you everyday, city alley. You broken any records. the surface to get a bit of read this. The Spectrum gain points for blasting From the elegance of a air. Amazingly tedious, this version has all the same away at the bounding tin dirty alley, to the murky bit. graphics as the Amstrad, cans and pop-up targets depths of an Olympic size All this is overseen by although colour isn't used that appear from drains, bidet. The Dare Devil Dive. your zany commentator, so lavishly. and the round targets that the idea behind this little Gilbert, whose face The 64 version has much mysteriously float across barrel of laughs is that you remains perpetually in the the same in the way of the alley. Now and again a climb a ladder (anything corner of the screen, a little graphics and feel as the friendly Alley cat will pop from 40 feet to 400 feet) and speech bubble appearing Amstrad version. UPDATE... "


"eve S STORM ways to get maximum enjoyment from the product: you can bung on the key overlay, load the game, put it on easy and learn the game itself, or you can go through the manual and learn the game slowly and carefully. Now I don't know about the depths you can strike  MACHINES: C64. you, but I'm all one to A The start of a beautiful intro SUPPLIER: MICROPROSE. plunge right in at the deep se e deep sequence. PRICE: $14.95 CASS, $19.99 end, but that's the kind of DISC. guy I am. The manual, now REVIEWER: TONY DILLON. that I've got round to it, is Red Storm Rising is the great and has 108 pages of latest in a long, long line of very interesting wonderfully realistic and information, full of statistics amazingly involved on enemy vessels, simulations from weapons, areas around Microprose, and pretty the globe, full darn good it is too. As you might have already gussed, I think that Red Storm Rising is terrific. It's got everything a good simulation needs, good graphics, neat game layout: both in terms of the visual side of things and the accessibility side of things. It's got nerve shredding tension and a depth of play that my weekend's superficial playing barely managed to scratch. And it's by Sid Meier, well known for his contributions on other Microprose products such as Stealth Fighter, Gunship, Silent Service (another sub sim), and, so I've been told, the new superfast F19. As with all the most recent Microprose 'games', there are two A Whoops! battle analysis, complete step-by-step breakdown of the RSR controls and the capabilities of your sub, plus a large section completely devoted to battle tactics, which came in handy quite a few times during my underwater escapades. The first thing you should do when loading up is watch the intro sequence, What you get, after a few advertisements for other Microprose sims, is a complete history of the plot of the game, complete with animated films. I especially liked the bit when the Whitehouse is handed over to the commies, signified by the Stars and Stripes coming down and the Hammer and Sickle being raised to the Russian National Anthem. As with all the Microprose products, you are fed with an almost overwhelming number of options. You've got four skill levels and five subs to choose from, as well as nine different battle situations, ranging from The Duel, which is an underwater dogfight with a Russian sub, to a Carrier Task Force, which has you on all out assault on an aircraft carrier. Plus two training missions against a knackered boat or an ancient sub that gives out more noise than Gary Whitta. Select what you're going to do, press all the right buttons, slap on the incredibly useful key overlay (almost every key has a function) and it's away you go. Probably the the two most useful keys when you start out are the ULIMIT YOU ould mean the destructhe defeat of America A Fight for truth, justice and the American way, "


"Attack from below. RISING The key to the game, displayed as a trail on the however, isn't just mindless map, so you can look back 'There's a boat, boom, oh and see just how hard that no there isn't, oh look, particular enemy was to there's another one...' sink. To liven things up, and so on. The key is thankfully, you get short stealth. Go low and slow, animated scenes showing sneak up on them, launch the launching of the a quick but deadly attack, weapons, plus when if they then get out of sight again. hit, you get to watch the That's the secret. death of your opponent. Attacking is slow, Should you ever get however. You have to bored with the many remember that some of missions that are provided these weapons travel at the start, and I can't see through the water, and as that happening very they are guided, they are quickly, you can always try designed to double back out the full Red Storm Rising should the enemy take scenario, as based on the evasive action. The flight of book itself. the missiles/torpedoes is Red Storm Rising is ace, fab, brill, wicked and totally awesome. Well up to the Microprose standard of quality sims. I can't wait for the next one. GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY VALUE  OVERALL 93% UPDATE... At present there are no other versions available, though Spectrum, Amstrad, Amiga, ST and PC version 'may become available over the next 12 months\". Landing the trans that have nothing to do with the game). Pause key, handy for flicking through the manual when you suddenly realise you don't know what you're doing. and a Help key which enables the sub's battle computer to provide you with helpful advice like 'i'd launch a Harpoon or Tomahawk attack on that sonar pickup at 049 degrees, and then get out as quick as possible.' Once past all the glitz and glamour of the attract sequence, you get into the working environment of the sim proper. Viewed mainly as a set of readings and a map showing all sonar contacts in relation to you, it's clean, it's effective, and it's very easy to use. So, you're engaging the enemy and you've got a sonar contact. What do you do? Well, first you have to identify what's out there. This can be done two ways. If it's a ship, then you can just surface and check it out with the periscope. If it's out of visual range, or is an enemy sub, you have to go through the many screens concerned with 'sonar recognition'. The basic principle behind this, as far as I can understand, is that everything has a different sonar 'signature'. Your sub's on-board computer has all the details on anything you might be likely to meet, and it's by matching the signature against signatures held on computer that you identify the enemy. Once you know what it is, you then know what it's likely to have weapons wise, and also what its capabilities are, as well as what weapon to use against it.  Sk) d courage cm toPPe , taristic clique in the Kremlin, 1eading to peace and victory, or.. What a picturesque view (complete with tank). "


"BYRITE SOFTWARE EECH SYNTHESISER FREEZE MACHINE DISC BOX HLOS 1205 COMMODORE .99 EACH OR BUY TWO GET ONE FREE COMMODORE NEW TITLES FOOTBALL MANAGER LEATHER GOODESSES OF PHOBES CTO DO HITCHIRER GUIDE TO THE GALAXY E10 00 ENOURO RACER 1000 INT KARATE SPECTRUM .99 EACH OR BUY TWO GET ONE FREE TROJAN LIGHT PENGRAPHICS SOFTWARE2 PIJTITLES, S, OR MORE OVERSEAS ORDERS ADD 1.00 PER CASS SPECTRUM EDUCATIONAL PACK AGED 8-12 ONLY .99 KING ARTHURS QUEST AZTEC. CAR JOURNEY FOOTBALL WANDO FRACTALUS. ICE BUSTERS, COMIC BAKERY MONSTERS, SKATEROCK. DECATHLON MYSTERY ON THE NILE. MOUNTY ON THE RUN UTTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE, CENTURIONS  THAgua  , CLASSIONE C2.99 INC. BOBBY BEARING BRAIN BLOOD AXE QUO VADIS, WIZARDAY, FREQUEST COIN-OP CONNEXION 2.99 INC. CRYSTAL CASTLES, EXPRESS RAIDER METRO CROSS. BREAKTHRU DURELL BIG 4 VOL 2.99 INC. THANATOS, SIGMA7, DEEPSTRKEM SABOTEUR 6PAK YOL 2 63.99 INC. INTO THE EAGLES NEST BATTY, ACE SHOCKWAY RIDER INTERNATIONAL KARATE TRIO HIT PAC (2.99 INC ARWOLF 2. GREAT QURIANOSLOC CATABALL AMERICAN SPORTS PACK 23.99 INC BASEBALL CHAMPIONSHIP BASKETBALL COMMODORE .99 EACH DISC ROAD BLASTERS SUMMER OLYMPUD MOUNTIE MICKS DEATHMIDE TROUBLE IN LITTLE CHINA TUJAD HAC E DEATH SCAPE MERMAID MADNESS. TWISTER DOO QUADRANT, BUBBLER CHOLO SPACE SPECTRUM GAMES ON ROM ALL .99 EACH SPACE RAIDERS PLANETOIOS CHESS JET PAC HUNGRY HORACE, HORACE AND THE SPIDERS TRANZAM RAMA CUPS MISSION OMEGA HVPABALL HIGHLANDER. SKY RUNNER JSWIL PLAY YOUR CARDS RIGHT FIRELORD BIG SLEAZE MOON ROUGE TROOPER DAVY, PILE UP. THE TUBE POLAR PIERRE, STRATION. DOGGHT 18 ON THE TILES TRANSFORMERS ESCAPE FROM PARADISE, EAGLES HYBIRO, THANATOS THE WARLOCK, PRODIGY, OUT ON A LIMB DEATHSCAPE HYPERBIKER FUTURE KNIGHT SIGMA 7. MOON CRISIS 1999, JUMPIN JIMMY COMMODORE AMIGA SOFTWARE STARCROSS LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE 20K SPECTRUM COMPILATIONS KILLER RING. EXPRESS RAIDER MISSION MINDESTONE RED SCORPION WIESTARS CARY THE GEM COSTA CAPERS 10TH FRAME PULSATORLFE. DOON DARK EMPIRE COPOUT DOUBLE TAKE, KORONIS SKYFOX HACKER XCEL, BALL BLAZER, MOON CESTA ACTION REFLEX, Cas AINSTORM ano PARE SAILING Com o CONNEXION IN CRYSTAL CASTLE BREAKTHUR EXPRESS PAIDER, METRO 029 LUCAS FILM GAME COLLECTIONING THE E DOLON. RESCUE ONFRACTALUS, BALL .99 RACK 3 INC (THE HULK, LEVITATION WINTER OLYMPAID SECONDS OUT ATARI ST SOFTWARE WeSTARS MURDER OFF MAMIFIFTH NIGHTING W WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIRST XENO. CYBORE E ACTIONATE T TRIO HIT PAR HOLLYWOOD HIJINX MIND FOREVER VOYAGUNG W  MMAX ACOM O PLEASE CHOOSE ALTERNATIVE GAMES TO OLF 2.300. SPIRIT OF THE STONES. BEAM RIDER MIDWAY PITFALL SUPERMAN VIKINGS CAPTURED, HYPABALL ORUID EMPIRE GALACTIC CONTROLLER, MURDER BY THE DOZEN, THING ON A SPRING STALLION REDHAWX, M ONOT WILLIAM WOBBLER, TRACER SANCTION PARADISE LIGHTFORCE PAST FINGER, RED ARROWS. SUPERSTAR PING PONG. SUSPENDED SLARCROSS DEADLINEZOAK ZORK II, BORED OF THE RINGS COMMODORE .99 EACH DISC HITS SMARBLE MAONI SUPER SPRINT GAMESTAR BASKETBALL STAR RAIDERS BEST OF BEYOND. RAMBO, RAMPAGE, ORUNDI FIRETRACK, LUCAS FILM GAMES COLLECTION COMMODORE EDUCATIONAL .99 EACH RANCH NUMBER TUMBLERS SONG MAXER ALPHA BULD. FRACTION FEVER DANCE FANTASY ALF ALPHABET 200 AGEAN VOYAGE, STOHY MACHINE PLANETS PUB GAMES Y RUNNER, BIG BEAR PLEASE CHOOSE ALTERNATIVE GAMES TO AVOID DISAPPOINTMENT). SPECTRUM .99 EACH QUARTET MAGNETRON, STAR RAIDERS RAMPAGE GREYFELL, SAMUR TRILOGY SUPER SPRINT. DRAGONS LIAR PT2. FIRETRAP SURVIVOR IMPOSSIBLE MISSION WINTER JAILBREAK, NEMESIS. SUPERCHESS 35 PSIS      CATABALL 529 KIOS PLAY INC BOUNTY BOB MAISTOON ON THE RUN MANSPORT, NICHT GUNNER METABOLIS COMMODORE .99 EACH GAMESTAR SPORTS PACK INC AMERICAN FOOTBALL BASKETBALL ANO BASEBALL SPECTRUM NEW TITLES JAILBREAK, GRAND MASTER CHESS PITMANS ,    MPLOSION RAMPA, HYSTERA FIRETRACK, BOULDERDASHIAVENGER BOULDERDASH BACK TO THE FUTURE BLACKLAMP, BATTALION COMMANDER BATTLE IN NORMANDY.COMBAT LEADER INHERITANCE TWO, REVS ROAD RUNNER COLOUR OF MAGIC THUNDERCATS SOCCER CASS. STAR RAIDERS IL DRAGONS LAIR SENTINAL RYCAR RAMPARTS TRATOR PANDORA CHUCKIEGII, FLYING SHARK CHAMPIONSHIP SPRINT GALACTIC GAMES LAIR INTERNATIONAL KARATEIVAPS RACONS LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE SPET BREAKER GOLDEN PATH KINO QUEST WORLD GAMES SUPER CYCLE AMAZON NINE PRINCES OF AMBER ULTIMA JEWELS OF DARKNESS  Glo  WE, COLO GAMES, MONEY MANAGER CHUCKIE EGG BLACK MAGIC, GUNSLINGER EARTHLIGHT TELECON, DIAMOND EVNAPS INTERNATIONAL ST FIGHTER ROAD BLASTERS CAUNE A LEADERBOARD COMMODORE MISCELLANEOUS suous ABC a suous ABC ENTNE SPECTRUM MISCELLANEOUS ROTRONICS WAFADRIVE FREE 54K WINTER OLYMPAIDS STARGLYDER 085 S I NG PEP ORECAL DISC BOULDERDASH LA TRA WAFADRIVE CARTROOF 24.95 INTR. TO BASICPT1+2 CASS INTERNATIONAL SOCCÉRICART LOGOS DISC DESIGNERS PENCIL CLUEDOO MONOPOLY SCRABBLE FASSAM ASSEMBLER DISASSEMBLER DONKEY CONSCART) SUPER BASIC MER OLYMPIAD WINTER OLYMPIAD SECONDS OUT SPECTRAL WRITER (WORD PROCESSOR ON WALLER DAISYWHEEL PUNTERING TRACTOR FEED UNIT COMMODORE COMPILATIONS UNBELIEVABLE ULTIMATE PLATFORM PERFECTION 395 EACH INCPAP 129 BYRITE SOFTWARE DEPT C + VG PO BOX 589 LONDON N14 6SJ 01-882 6833 6795 1295 296 PLUNDERED HEARTS SPECTRUM 3 COMPUTER INC JOYSTICKSIK BE mer total antasy ROLE PLAYING GAMES BOARD GAMES Blood Bowl Curse of the Mummy's Tomb Fury of Dracula Dungeon Quest Heroes for Dungeon Quest Dungeon Quest Catacombs .99 .99 E14.99 .99 Ski..........Tactics....... Strategy.... .Decisions............Excitement. . Tension.... Action TD TNT non LUNG QUALITY STRATEGY GAMES from E & SOFTWARE Established 1984) EUROPEAN CHAMPIONS * NEW THE INTERNATIONAL CHALLENGE OF THE EUROPEAN NATIONS CUP Genuine Nations Cup Format with full Random Draw of 32 Seeded Teams Fixture List, Results and League Tables of ALL 8 Groups Discipline Medical Reports Squad of 22 Players plus Other players available 17 Month Itinerary of Qualifying Group (Arrange Friendlies and Finals Plus many more Superb Features and Options. EUROPEAN CHAMPIONS includes E&J's MATCH PLAY SYSTEM an imaginative and exciting new style of match presentation which captures the ACTION, DRAMA & TENSION of International Football WORLD CHAMPIONS A COMPLETE WORLD CUP SIMULATION Select Friendlies 25 Players Qualifying Group 2 In Match Subs Discipline Table Select Tour Opponents Extra Time Final Rounds Players Gain Experience 7 Skill Levels TEXT MATCH SIMULATION including Bookings, Goal Times, Named & Recorded Goal Scorers, Injury Time, Corners, Free Kicks, Match Clock Penalties PLUS many more Features PREMIER 11 CAN YOU HANDLE ALL OF THIS? Play all Teams Home & Away Unique Transfer Market Team & Substitute Selection Named & Recorded Goal Scorers injuries Transfer Demands Continuing Seasons Squad Listing ALL Teams Financial Problems 7 Skill Levels Offers to Manage other Teams Sackings Managers' Salary Save Game Team Styles Bank Loans AND many more Features EUROPEAN II. THE MOST COMPLETE SIMULATION OF EUROPEAN CLUB FOOTBALL YOU CAN BUY Home & Away legs Full Penalty Shoot Out (with SUDDEN DEATH) 2 In-Match Subs Away Goals count Double til Drawn) Full Team Sub Selection Extra Time 7 Skill levels. Enter your own PREMIER II Winning Team TEXT MATCH SIMULATION plus Sending Off and Disallowed Goals Results TablePLUS MUCH MORE! CRICKET MASTER A SUPERB SIMULATION OF ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL/COUNTY CRICKET Weather Wicket & Outfield Conditions Batting & Bowling Tactics Team Selection Fast, Medium Spin Bowlers 4 Types of BatsmenSelect Field Layout 3 Skill Levels Wides Byes No Ball Run Out Misfield Dropped Catches Scoreboard Batting & Bowling Analysis Run Rate Single Option 3 Game Speeds STAR FEATURE a complete MATCH OVERVIEW showing Ball by Ball Action and Commentary and MUCH MORE! TEST MASTER NEW A COMPREHENSIVE SIMULATION OF A 5 DAY TEST MATCH Includes most of the Features of CRICKET MASTER and MATCH OVERVIEW plus Declarations Nightwatchmen Light Meter Rain Stops Play Varying Number of Overs per Day Follow On Save Game New Ball Bad Light Interruptions TEST MASTER is a True representation of a Complete Test Match and offers the ULTIMATE CHALLENGE to All Cricket Enthusiasts CRICKET MASTER TEST MASTER prices Include a FREE pad of SCORESHEETS Software Spectrum Commodore Amstrad availability Any 48/128K 64/128K CPC Tape Disc + 3 Tape 5%* Disc Tape 3\" Disc EUROPEAN CHAMPIONS .95 .95 n/a n/a WORLD CHAMPIONS .95 $10.95 .95 .45 .96 .95 PREMIER II .95 .95 .96 .45 .95 EUROPEAN 16.95 .95 .95 $10.45 67.85 11.95 CRICKET MASTER .95 $11.95 .95 $11.45 8.95 12.95 TEST MASTER .95 .95 .95 FANTASTIC VALUE: Special Discount of .00 for every EXTRA game purchased (eg, buy 2 Games deduct .00 from TOTAL buy 3 Games deduct .00 from TOTAL 4 Games 16.00 etc! ALL GAMES are available by MAIL ORDER for IMMEDIATE despatch by 1st class post and include Full Instructions. OUTSIDE UK please add 1.00 for postage and send payment in Pounds Sterling only PLEASE STATE WHICH MACHINE AND TAPE OR DISC Cheques or Postal Orders payable to E & J Software. Send to: E & J SOFTWARE, Room 5.37 Westmoor Road, ENFIELD, Middlesex EN3 7LE Chainsaw Warrior Kings and Things Warlock of Firetop Mountain 1. Warrior Knights Blood Royale Railway Rivals Superpower Judge Dread Roleplaying Game Talisman 2nd Edition Judge Dread Boardgame Rogue Trooper Boardgame Block Mania Renegade Legion + Many More C12.95 .99 16.95 F19.95 12.95 12.95 $14.99 Dark Future .99 Warhammer Fantasy RPG 14.95 Advanced Dungeons and Dragons from $9.96 Basic, Dungeons and Dragons from 7.95 PAINT SETS Citadel Colour Paint Set Creature Paint Set Monster Paint Set Expert Paint Set 25.99 BOX FIGURES Bugman's Dwarf Rangers Nightmare Legion (Skeletons Harboth ORC Archers Skarlo's Wood El Archers Ruglud's Armoured ORCS Ulthar's Dragon Company Goblin War Chariots Dwarf oneer Skeleton War Machines Imperial Space Marine Space ORK Raiders Devastators Rhino (Vehicle Kit Elf War Chariot .98 .99 E14.99 .95    E8.95 ROLEPLAYING GAMES Runequest Advanced Runequest Runequest Monsters Land of Ninja Griffin Island Rogue Trader Battle Rules Warhammer Battle lll C10.99 .99  14.99 .99 E14.99 E14.95 .95 WARGAMES Ar Superiority Air Strike Team Yankee Tank Leader Soldiers + Many More .95 .95 .95 ,95 .95 Stormbringer RPG Paranoia il Hardback 13.95 P+P: ADD  IN UK. ADD  FOR OVERSEAS   TOTAL FANTASY Bucktons Yard, Darlington, Co.Durham DL3 70L Telephone: 0325 381686 JERUM "


"L'eviens 020 of Action points, and it's these that govern how much that character can do during a turn (IT COSTS one action point (AP) to turn through 45', four to walk FIRE forward over level ground etc) and once his supply Change has worn out, he can't do furnithis mhaveniny dbanyut ILOILOR CANCEL rotate him using the left and right keys, and push MACHINES: SPEC, C64, forward for him to move in AMSTRAD. SUPPLIER: TARGET GAMES. the direction he's facing, PRICE: SPEC/C64/AMSTRAD and pull back to make him $9.95 CASS. walk backward.  VERSION TESTED: SPEC. Graphics are large, REVIEWER: TONY DILLON. colourful, full of character H HO, HI Ho, it's off to maim we go... and instantly Aside from the rather naff recognisable. The packaging, Laser Squad is attention to detail is one of the best games amazing have ever played on any Sound is fab. It's actually computer. It's one or quite amazing the sounds two-player tactical Mr Gollop has managed to warfare situation on a get out of the little rubber small scale with great keyed thing. graphics, sound, playability and go down into an alien hookability to boot. mining colony and rescue One-player it's great, the three humans two-player it's unbeatable. imprisoned there. The You are put in command aliens have to stop them. of a group of around half a Player one wins if the dozen characters, each humans are rescued. with different statistics Player two wins if he concerning weaponry and manages to wipe out five computer won't let you Laser Squad is one of the basic strength (both humans, laser squad or deploy anywhere else. hottest games I've ever manually and not. Once all this is done, you played. If that isn't enough characteristically). The Before a scenario, each can get into the game. Targetis releasing group's role depends on player has to select armour A plan of the map can expansion packs for the which player you are and and weapons for their be called up by selecting game, with more scenarios which of the three basic respective teams. You are Scanner on the pop-up and more ideas. Me, I want scenarios that you can presented with cash and menu. On it you can see to see a construction set. choose to play have to buy the best the positions of all your In the mansion in the first The first is the armour and most powerful men, plus the positions of scenario there are a Assassination weapon you can, which is the enemy in any of your couple ofbathrooms, Player one plays the a painstaking process. You men's field of vision, which each complete with aloo Laser Squad, a band of have a lot of weapons to extends 45' either side of and a sink, as well as lots of Rebels given the job of choose from, which one the direction a man is other rooms, all fully assassinating Sterner you choose depends on facing. furnished and some even Regix, one of the biggest where you are going to It's this line of sight' rule crime bosses. Player two fight. It's no good having a that governs the combat! have some pretty takes the role of Sterner Ja destructive rocket rules. If you have your back attractive carpet. and his house security launcher if you're going to to an opponent, you won't droids, each armed with be fighting in an enclosed be able to shoot at him,  GRAPHICS high powered lasers. area. You have to basically because it won't SOUND Player one wins if he deploy your characters. register on your scanner, or manages to kill Sterner For the uninitiated, VALUE even on the main display. within 20 game turns deployment is a merely You can scroll the main PLAYABILITY (cycles). Player two wins if positioning your display around, but you he manages to wipe out characters in there start 97% won't find any enemy units, OVERALL the Laser Squad positions. The areas you which is far more realistic Second comes can deploy in are than some previous efforts. Moonbase Assault. highlighted, and the Each man has a number UPDATE... As before, player one takes the part of the Laser A 64 version will be Squad, who this time have available mid-December to attack a moonbase from and boasts some inside, wiping out all the enhanced graphics and databanks and computer sound. The gameplay analysers in the base. remains the same. Player two has to defend it. Expansion Pack One Player one wins if he should be available manages to wipe out all as you read this. the computers. Player two It has two new wins if he manages to wipe adventures, the second of out the laser squad. which is set in a huge Third is Rescue from the allen landscape and is mines. B593sIBUSSURD spread over two levels. The Laser Squad has to A Scanning for dem dare bad guys. Sounds good to me. loooo C+V6 HIT! "


"\"ABSOLUTE CO TIGER ROAD An ancient tale from ancient China ... birthplace of martial arts disciplines. As Lee Wong you must halt the savagery of ruthless Ryu Ken Oh by overcoming flying Ninja warriors, awesome dragons and acrobatic Sumo wrestlers to name but a few. You'll need all your martial arts training and skill with the spear, chains and sickle to seek out and defeat Ryn Ken Oh in a furious and bloody battle with the scourge of the Orient CBM 64/128 .99t .99d . Atari ST .99d. Spectrum 48/128K .99t .99d Amiga .99d. (Tiger Road .99) Amstrad CPC .99t .99 "


"IN-OP POWER 1943At last. your chance to take part in the Battle of Midway. This sequel to the highly acclaimed 1942 places you at the controls of an American fighter plane. Your mission is to destroy the Japanese carrier Yamato. Exhilarating action! STREET FIGHTER Travel around the globe and do battle with the best fighters that Japan, Thailand, USA, England and China can throw at you. CAPCOM Screenshots from various systems GIANTS OF THE VIDEO GAMES INDUSTRY C) 1988 CAPCOM CO. LTD. Manufactured under licence from Capcom Co. Ltd., Japan. Tiger Road, Street Fighter and 1943 and CAPCOM are trademarks of Capcom Co. Ltd. licensed by GOI Media Holdings Ltd., a division of U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham 36 TAX. TeL: 021 358 3380 "


"IS REAL EXCITEMENT PASSING YOUBY? GUNSHIP 21st CENTURY WARRIOR APACHE THE AWARD WINNING ATTACK HELICOPTER SIMULATION Experience the challenge and danger of attack helicopter flying. Gunship is an award-winning simulation of the Apache, the world's most sophisticated warrior helicopter. Incredibly detailed and featuring revolutionary 3-D graphics, it has flown straight to the top of the UK's best-selling charts. As pilot you must fight your way through the war zones of the world. You'll use the same amazing array of advanced weapon systems as real Apache pilots laser guided missiles, radar and infra red warnings, night viewers, cannons, rockets and jammers. The dangerous combat missions will take you from the training fields of the USA to the battlefields of South East Asia, Central America, the Middle East and Europe. If you've got the skills to survive you'll be rewarded with medals and rank promotions Gunship. The simulation which blows all other helicopter simulations out of the sky. Available for C64/128 Cassette .95, Disk .95, Spectrum .95, Spectrum +3 .95, Amstrad Cassette .95, Disk .95. Atari ST .95, IBM PC .95. MICROPROSE SIMULATION SOFTWARE MicroProse, 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Glos. GL8 8DA. Telephone: 0666 54326 "


"So you think you grew up in a tough neighbourhood, go see a film about black belt huh? Well make my sums but Escalante is breakfast, punk! East LA is probably this month's most no easy lay the homeboys charismatic hero so when and their floozies, they all he says Stand and Deliver carry Uzis. So when it comes (15) you'd better give him to school, ya gotta stay the goods. Faced with a cool... (Enough of this group of surly students who c... rap! Ed). can hardly add two to two, What I'm trying to say is Escalante uses every that this month we have two technique from karate chops movies set in the sort of area to playing with toys to where you wear a bullet persuade his class that they proof vest to go shopping. Freeze, movie-goer! You have the right to can understand calculus. The gangs rule the streets, remain silent as Ward R Street prowls the Faced with his muscular dealing drugs, eliminating latest film previews in the C+ VG patrol car. approach to maths even the their enemies, displaying toughest of the tough their Colors (18). Not the eventually give in, putting in sort of beat for an average hours of overtime to take a cop... but then again, Bob major exam. But their Hodges isn't an ordinary success is so overwhelming cop. that the education Hodges may be no angel authorities won't believe but he steps in where even they didn't cheat. So, having the foolish fear to tread. successfully battled against He's the law but he a society which told them understands the language of they would never achieve the ghetto, which has helped anything, Escalante's class him build a sort of trust with now has to fight to hold on to the streetwise kids. Not so its victory. Danny McGavin, his new All this would be a nice, partner. He's only a little heart-warming little tale but older than the gang members for one thing it's all true. themselves, and his idea of There is a teacher called diplomacy is a gun in the Jaime Escalante and he back or a nightstick to the A Sean Penn (right) in Colors. really has worked skull. Who'd be an East LA Cop? mathematical miracles. Like Who'd be an East LA Cop? atmosphere, and though the Worse who'd try to reach Colors the atmosphere of the Warfare escalates as film may not be quite the machine gun fire sprays maths in an East LA school? streets and classrooms is deep statement it wishes to from the side of a passing For some crazy, crusading be, it is exciting and unbelievably vivid, with car, shattering the silence of frightening. Watch this one reason Jaime Escalante has great performances from all the streets. When the smoke then get paranoid as you given up a perfectly good job the students. But best of all has cleared, the screeching walk home. in computers because he is Edwared James Olmos of tyres faded into the wants to train the urban Castillo in Miami Vice distance, yet another corpse terrorists of Garfield High in joking, threatening, leaks blood onto the the mysteries of advanced persuading them that they sidewalk. It's a jungle out calculus. This stooping can do the impossible. there but the police CRASH figure with his crater It's good to see a film teams are fighting back, complexion is obviously a which says that everybody wearing their colours too. madman. can achieve things if they Will Hodges softly-softly You may think I'm pretty only have the confidence approach to McGavin's wacko too, advising you to and work hard. Compare gung-ho aggression win the Weird goings on in The Seventh Stand and Deliver with Nico day? (18), a formulaic thriller When Colors appeared in postponed from last month, the States it caused an in which the 'hero\" uproar because people said it overcomes his glamorised the gangs. I can't underprivileged background see Colors as a recruiting by becoming a violently film for street fighting if unorthodox cop. If it comes the guns don't get you, the to a toss up between street drugs will. But I'm writing warfare or classroom calm, from the peace and quiet of I'm on the side of Escalante England. There really are and Hodges rather than Nico areas of American cities and McGavin. which the police have Another delayed release is surrendered to the The Seventh Sign (15), a not teenagers, and Colors paints too horrific horror flick in a terrifying portrait of total the Omen mould. That great anarchy. More naughty children in Stand And Deliver. warehouse in the sky has run Robert Duvall is excellent out of souls so the as the sane and sober Hodges apocalypse is now. Despite while Sean Penn convinces some effects work, most of as the hot-headed McGavin the gore is kept hidden. Not but then again, he's had a so with The Hidden (18). bit of practice. Dennis Here the horror drips, Hopper directs for maximum squelches and bleeds in explicit colour. Sign. "


"If East LA cops have problems, the ones faced by pseudo-theological mess. Tom Beck are literally out of Told with all the freestyle this world. Investigating the of a jazz improvisation, case of a staid businessman daddio, Bird drifts from who suddenly goes mad and poverty to fame, battles embarks on a killing spree, with drug addiction and Beck is given a new depression, attempts suicide assistant, a young FBI man and spends time in mental named Gallagher. institutions, told via a series Is there something strange of flashbacks and memories. about the self-assured How good is this film? Well, I rookie? Beck doesn't have went in never having heard time to wonder because now *Bird' play and came out another man has gone loco, music this is one dazzling looking for a late night springing up from his solo from first to last. record store to buy an intensive care hospital bed At around two and three album. Get hip because the to live for kicks! Something quarter hours, Bird is just a Bird' really is the word. very strange is happening couple of minutes longer I better mention while something which looks like a than Last Temptation of we're on matters musical huge slug and which oozes Christ, which gives you some another film, which out of one man's mouth just idea of how jazz fans appeared at the end of before he dives into the body worship Parker and October. Imagine: John of another. See, I said it was without wishing to appear Lennon which is a yucky! blasphemous, this story is a documentary compiled from The idea of an alien lot more interesting and over 200 hours of film from parasite using its human better made than that the late-Beatles' private hosts as disposable shells collection. For anybody while it lives for fast cars Hands up or we shoot. interested in the band, or and rock'n'roll is a great one even what happens when a and the first half of the film perfectly ordinary Liverpool is enormous fun. But lad wins fame and fortune creativity tails off in the last beyond most people's half hour and the movie imagination. coasts in to its climax rather Talking of superstars, than racing at full speed. Switching Channels (PG) Some times it seems like has three of them but still America or more comes out as a weak comedy specifically East LA is the about satellite TV news. only place where anything Quite how Christopher A Pierce Brosnan in Taffin. happens. Then all of a A Thumbs down for Switching Reeve, Burt Reynolds and sudden you're supping Channels. one of the most intelligent Guinness in a small Irish actresses in Hollywood, seaside town and everything Kathleen Turner, got mixed erupts around you. It's times up in this mish mash is like this you call for Taffin difficult to understand. (18), at all, at all. Turner is the ace reporter Taffin is the local strong about to quit to marry spoilt arm man. He collects debts, young playboy Reeve while leans on people, that sort of her boss and ex-husband, thing and you know he's Reynolds, tries to hold onto not just a common thug her to cover one last story. because he's played by Fans of old movies will brooding hunk and one-time recognise this story from Bond contender Pierce several other incarnations, Brosnan. But when big but Switching Channels business moves into town, doesn't fail because the plot with plans to develop the is creaky it just fails to do Watch the Bird says Ward R. picturesque cliffs into an it with the style of previous Street, industry development, even VILA versions. Despite the title, nt, even VIUV Taffin has his hands full. you cannot switch channels With its pretty scenery in the cinema. Pity! and a liberal touch of the Slightly more interesting is blarney, bejabers, Taffin is Kansas (15), the story of a fairly entertaining. But college kid, played by somehow it isn't tight Andrew McCarthy, who enough to keep you on the meets up with drifter Matt edge of your seat and its Dillon and ends up on the underlying debate about the run for robbing a bank. How use and abuse of violence is McCarthy falls in love and forced A Kansas is full of corn. tries to avoid the psychotic A John and Yoko in Imagine. If you want a film which Dillon is entertaining really flies try Bird (15) enough but the film fails to the story of the great jazz capture the bleakness of saxophonist, Charlie Parker. middle America in the way Okay so this won't please that Badlands or last year's you Status Quo fans but if Promised Land did. Despite you're into more mellow good performances, in the end Kansas is full of corn. VA "


"You don't need a computer to work out how good these offers are. 02 ZVE VE 64/128 T CASSETTE . CAME VOLUME-ONE California WESSO Buy this and get a free Gremlin game. Buy this and get a free Kixx game. NOMTEJNO BARBABIAN BALANCE It's no secret where you'll find the best offers on these compilations. Because now Boots are giving the game away. To get yours, all you have to do is send in the form when you buy either Megagames or Giants. Buy The In Crowd, on the other hand, and you could end up in New York. A two week trip to the Big Apple is the prize you stand to win if you can answer five questions correctly. But whatever you do, don't play a waiting game. Offers close on February 28th. Ocea Buy this and enter a free trip to New York competition. A better buy at Boots THE COMPILATIONS ARE AVAILABLE ON AMSTRAD, COMMODORE AND SPECTRUM FORMATS AT LARGER STORES ONLY SUBJECT TO STOCK AVALABILITY PRICES FROM 12.95 TO 17 99 "


"A STONKING GOOD FORM ONE: T SHIRT WITH SUBSCRIPTION Yes, I think this fabulous T shirt is easily worth .99 or more if I live abroad and I enclose my eque postal order made payable to COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES. My shirt size is Medium (S/C 14) XXXL (S/C 15) Your shirt will be sent separately, but may take up to 28 days. Quite the best T-shirt you' ever buy for only $17.99 Please start my subscription at the. ...............issue. Tick the correction box: One year UK and Eire .99. One year Europe .99. One year rest of world (Air Mail) .00. One year rest of world (Surface Mail) .00 C+VG comes up with the goods again with the T-Shirt that is the talk of the software industry! Join top bods from US Gold, Ocean, Telecomsoft and the rest in proudly sporting the games world's most credible logo on your ample chest! It's a stonker, and no mistake! Each trend-setting garment is made from guaranteed 100% material and comes complete with stylish label on the inside of the neck and the \"wild and crazy\" C+VG sunburst logo slap bang in the middle. And of course, each one comes complete with 12 issues of Britain's biggest selling computer mag posted to your door the minute they leave the presses. It just happens to be the offer of the century, but if you are of the type that likes a monthly chat with the cheery chappy down the newsagent, then don't despair: you CAN get the shirt without the mags. Just fill out the second form on this page that's the one that says \"T-shirts only\" on it and post it off with a cheque for only .99. A snip amongst snips! My cheque postal order is made out for . OR Please debit my Access/Visa account card number Amount Expiry date Name Address Signed Return to COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAME SUBS OFFER, Subscriptions Dept, PO Box 500, Leicester LE99 OAA. Orring our special 24 hour Orderline Service and quote your credit card number. Tel: 0858 410888. ENQUIRIES: 0733 555161. FORM TWO: T SHIRT ONLY The 1988 C+VG SHIRT COSTS .99. Please send me..........Tshirt(s). I enclose a cheque or P.O made payable to COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES for ..................(.99 times however many shirts). This price includes postage and packing. I know the shirt(s) may take up to 28 days to arrive. I want this many medium ones. ... And this many XXL ones. +Video Name Address I will now put this form in an envelope and send it to: COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES T SHIRT OFFER, EMAP Premium Sales, 14 Holkham Road, Orton Southgate, Peterborough PE2 OUF. plus a free year's subscription to your favourite magazine! P.S Anyone entering the Spitting Image competition (see FAX this issue) and wants to draw a cartoon of one of the fine and upstanding body of boys and girls pictured above may find it useful to know which is which. Left to right at back: Lora, Andrea, (Little) Matt, Seamus. Front: Garry. Jaz, Euge. Remember, some of these are caricatures already! "


"MICROPROSE SOGGUR po J'll WHAT'S THE SCORE? rite It's fun, fast, exciting and addictive. MicroProse What's the score with MicroProse Soccer? It's a Soccer keeps you on your toes, however often you winner. play. Pick up the best football kit. Now available for Challenge the computer or a friend, competing Commodore 64/128 Disk .95, Cassette .95, in the World Cup, International Challenge or the IBM PC + Compatibles .95. indoor league. Coming soon for Atari St, Amiga, Spectrum and An overhead perspective of the pitch makes it Amstrad. easy to play good graphics and sound effects make every match seem real. Fully animated players can perform a whole variety of movements, including overhead and banana kicks. There are 29 different teams and a unique action-replay facility. SIMULATION SOFTWARE his MICROPROSE MicroProse, 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Glos, GL88DA. Tel: 0666 54326 "


"LEICESTER FUNNY O PETER SHILTON Footballs have been kicked around computer screens for just about as long as the gaming habit has existed. 1988 saw more releases than ever before Tony Dillon asks what is and what is not good computer football. NEWCASTLE BEATS DIRIR Of all the simulations, best, the worst, the one with authentic endorsements and the nicest graphics, the one plain old original attempts, that you couldn't tell the there can't be any topic that difference between the ball comes as close to a games and the players, or indeed player's heart that our very the players from the pitch, own Soccer. Even in the or simply the one that we very early days of paddles liked the most. Also, we've and mono displays, where put our heads together and the Grandstand home come up with a league table entertainment console of all the football games reigned supreme with it's around at the moment, MALCOLM MACDONALD VERPOOL Computer football second only in popularity to computer Ninjas. KEVIN KEEGAN high up in the list of best selling games. There were many early attempts at football games way back in the dawn of programming history, when programming people were just finding their feet. Now defunct Artic, for example, released World Cup I and II, which both featured small matchstick men, slow gameplay and a very low European Five-A-Side-budget footy smash. computer skill level. Funnily incredible 4-game selection enough, World Cup II was including the ones we didn't given a facelift (well, no football was one of them get to mention. So, here Admittedly it was nothing really a facelift, more a goes, straight into section snip-and-tuck around the more than computer tennis one, which funnily enough is chin) and was released by US with double the number of about. Gold under the title World bats, but it was still football. Cup Carnival to coincide And it was the first. with the World Cup Since then, many have Arcade tried to recreate the feelings happening at the time. It of running about on an open Footballl came packaged with lots of pitch, being buffeted by the photographs, posters and other World Cup wind, the cheers of the of the three genre of memorabilia. Nevertheless it crowd and smells of the football games (Arcade, flopped and went down in other players. What we at Managerial and Diagnostic), game history as one of the C+VG have tried to do is the arcade is easily. Judging worst games ever, ranking come up with a by the sales, the most widely up there with The Great comprehensive guide to the popular, though games like Space Race itself. more memorable ones, the Football Manager stil rank Probably the most STAN BOWLES 98 "


"LD GAME, TECIL? ALAN BALL TOTTENHAM FOOTBALL DIRECTOR the Spectrum anyway. It you tried to do a sliding featured large, well tackle, they wouldn't get up animated graphics, a again, so basically 80 goalkeeper that could dive minutes into the game, the and a chance to play through pitch would be littered with a knockout championship to dead players. win the FA Cup, as well as Both the Nintendo and simultaneous two players to Sega have their own soccer boot. Not long after that games. Nintendo's is called came Matchday II, which Soccer, and is quite playable had all the above and then and has several levels of some, such as jumping play. It also has a two-player headers, a league facility option, but suffers from with a code entry system, slightly sluggish joycard and improved graphics, not response. That to mention DDS. What's withstanding, it's still a lot DDS? The Diamond better than you can buy on Deflection System. What most home computers. this does is work out what Sega's World Soccer is one direction the ball's going to of C+VG's all-time favourite travel in when it hits off games, and can be held another player, with the responsible for many hours player's speed and direction of lost work time brought into account. particularly the case with DIRECTE 1 FAYE SUR STEVE PERRYMAN IPSWICH TOWN successful of the early arcade football games was International Soccer on the Commodore 64. Originally only available on cartridge (now released on tape and disc by CRL), it featured large blocky graphics, crude animation and a tendency to crash quite a lot (well, mine did!). The funny thing is, even with todays high programming standards and the high level that consumers expect to find of today's software, it's still one of the best you can get on the 64. Except, of course, for a slightly altered version Sega Soccer C+VG's all time fave footy game. I saw a while ago, changed by the hands of our dear Between these two came Gary Williams, the Ads friend, Mr Gary Moose the game that should have Manager. Unlike him, Penn, who changed the been a lot better and, though, the game is players from their running judging by its features, it absolutely brilliant and fully state, and placed them all in was. Unfortunately, it! captures the spirit of a big wheelchairs, which is sick, wasn't. Super Soccer game, with the players able and terrible (snigger), and included things like sliding to do overhead kicks, not (cough, splurt) at all tackles, energy levels and banana shots and slide (ready to burst) funny (Ha ha extra training, but was so tra training, but was so tackles. It's tackles. It's a shame that it's ha). bugridden and unplayable only available on the Sega, So, what else happened that it flopped. One major as it's the best soccer game that shook the world of bug was the energy thing. If on any home system. football gaming? Matchday you played a long game, the Up until recently, games did! Written by Jon Ritman, players would run out of have been displayed in semi and Bernie Drummond, it energy quite quickly. What forced perspective 3D, was quite simply incredibly they would finally end up which works really well but superior to anything that doing was jog around the often makes aiming for the had appeared before it, on pitch at a snail's pace, then if goal difficult. Now a new MICK MILLS FIVERPOOL JOHN TOSHACK "


"FUNNY OLD GAME, INNIT CECIL? SSO BET TREVOR BROOKING Microprose Soccer is the one to war trend is emerging: the the manager/secretary/overhead viewpoint. accountant of your chosen Games like European team and have to make all 5-a-Side and Supercup the right decisions with the Football let you view the ultimate aim of taking your action from above, which team to the top of their gives a much more accurate league and winning the FA look at the action, with the Cup/World Cup/Nations size of the ball increasing Cup/whatever. Of all the and decreasing to denote ones I've seen, rather than boots skyward. Easily the mention games that stand best, however, is the new out, I'm going to talk about one from Microprose/Sensible Software. It's smooth, fast, very playable and extremely polished and scored 95% in the last issue. It's menu system is incredible, and the game comes a very, very close second to World Soccer it's easily the greatest football game available for home computers. But these are mere highlights of all the arcade football games around at the moment. Check out the league table for the full C+VG report. Now, let's move onto the next section, which by some staggering coincidence happens to be about. BOBBY MOORE BOB WILSON SOUTHAMPTON Gary Linekar failed to score. Matchday superb on the Speccy. consisted of a series of BOLLORE 42 : 22 screens with a choice on some of them. After cycling through them, you get a few highlights of the match you just played, with matchstick men and beepy sound effects. Though not much by today's standards, it still has to get a mention for being the original. I wish I could say the same for it's successor, FM2. The only difference between them were screen redesign and better graphics on the game highlights. A shame really, considering what could have been done. One company that I have to mention are D+H games, a company almost solely devoted to managerial Managerial the companies involved. games, especially football First is Kevin Toms ones. Though none of their Football company, Addictive. They games require huge amounts released the first successful of thought, feature no Moving completely away managerial game way back graphics, have a tendency to from games that require fast in, oh, well it was a while be slow and are generally reactions and an eye of an ago. It was then hailed as the small, there is still an edge of eagle, and onto the slower, best football game ever (not the seat feeling when more thoughtful games that much of claim; check out the playing a match as minute by are around the managerial. opposition at the time!) and minute it updates the score. Typically: in a managerial was pretty simplistic. Probably their most famous game you take the role of Written in 100% bàsic, it one is Football Director. MIKE CHANNON "


"TRYBRIDGE SOFTWARE DISTRIBUTION CASA Title Title CASS DOS Atari Amiga IBM PC Atari Amiga IBM PC CASS BIS  745 10.45 Live Let Die Lords of Midnight Magnificant Marauder Mancha Leaderboard Bird Abome Ranger 128 A w War Vol. 23 A AS uvelet Die Manhattan De Lombard Rac Mind 9.56 13. A Reality 85  KORS Arkanoid Revel Doh Menace Mini Putt Motor M 9.95 ac Barbara Pwgnosi Barbara Palace Bards Tale Bards Tale 23 Batman Cape Crusader 5.95 Mini Office Persona Mini Putt  Barbaran 1 or 2 P Bad Tetor 2 Buman Caped To watch Nigel Mans GP Moonist Movie Manor Monor Made Bo Vol 2 88 Bener Dead Ms. Conser ON NONNONG 7.45 10.95 Overlander Black Tiger Big Bams Neyromancer Buscher Hill Cattomia Games 7.45 10.45 Baton vs Rommel Night Raider Bubble Bobble Bubble Ghost 1196 Outrun im N ,, Peter Bedste Combal Game Comba School Cybeid 102 Daley Thompson 8 7:45 10:56 Captain Blood Camer Command Chess 2000 Combat School Corruption Cybemid 102 Pro Soccer Sim Race Against Time Doods Revenge Double Dragon Defender of Croan De M on Deluxe Part 2 Rento Return to Genesis Road Blasters Rolling Thunder E E NNNN l Park, 2 or 3 n Hughes Football Roy of Roos Deluxe Print 2 Rolling Thunder Europe Abaze Deus Video Salamander OR Racing Scribbe Deluxe Dragon Nina Dungeon Fares or Fou 888RRRRR   29 Throttles Five Comt its Empire Strikes Back Enlightenment Skych Soldier of Fortune Fly Ace F16 Combat Pot 7.5 10.35 10:45 1295 Snace Herrer STAC 10.5 12 S word Soy Soy Arctic Fanavision Fai Fac Rom 3195 Startight 15 SE For Manager 2 Ford Must Stah Figh Street Fighter  55, % 888% 15 Stage Final Command Flight Sim 2 Disc 7 11 Die Duro 895 11.95 Supersports 8.95 11.96 Supreme Change 10 Mega Games 20 Chartbuster Game Sot Match 2 Buv Dawn Rachel Kim E 2009 R38 101613 Tech Cop Football Manager 2 Super Hangon Sword of Socian Techno Cop 106 Test Drive The Games W Gardregons Domain Game Over 2 Three Stooges Garrison 2 Time Std S *8BRRRRRRRR 88888888990 99 12.55 Tri Pursuit New Begin Tyger Tyger Heroes of Lance Kara Ace 10.45 12.96 6.95 12.95 Ultimate Golf Victory Road Room Collection ods Bact UMS Scenario 2 ENERO Iron Lord L'Board Par WEC Le Mans Whrigg World Tour Goll We Le Mans Word Or 26.95 14.95 Jewel of Darkness Live And 6.96 2. Kannedy Approach World Tour Golt Laser Souad Please send cheque, PO Access Visa No. and expiry date to: TRYBRIDGE LTD, 72 NORTH STREET, ROMFORD, ESSEX RM1 1DA. Please state make and model of computer when ordering. P&P inc UK on orders over .00. Less than .00 and Europe and .00 per item. Elsewhere please add .00 per item for airmail. TEL. ORDERS: 0708 765271.. "


"FUNNY OLD GAM INNIT CECIL? ALAN WOOLETT What a lot of people don't that gives you a continuous controls and is sooo easy. know is that Football flow of text telling you Needless to say, it's still Director is only part of a what's happening on the riding high in the budget series. As well as the usual turf. All this would normally software charts. Makes you Football Director II, which cost speed, but in this case it think, doesn't it? boasts nicer screens and doesn't. The speed of the But of course, there are faster gameplay (except on game is fully adjustable via many others. This is just the the +3, which is six times the joystick, from the full 45 cream of the crop and we slower than any other minutes a half, right down to simply haven't the space to version), there's a eight seconds a half. The re-review all the old games, two-player Super League, Spectrum version is a bit for the simple reason that which is identical to Football slower than the Commodore there are so many of them. Director except that it boasts version, and boasts a We came up with over 30! two-player simultaneous Plus there are lots of pools action, and International compaction. All the data just prediction things and record Manager, which is Football fits, and looking at the filers and lots of other Director set in the topsy statistics I've been given, serious gimmicks that can't turvy world of international there were two bytes left at be classed as games. football, the end of it. The funny We leave you now with The last company I have to thing is there were two the league tables. We've mention is the company that spelling mistakes, done two because it just isn't has recently written the best \"Substitute\" and the other fair to class arcade games ever managerial game, one escapes me for the alongside strategy games, Goliath Games. Headed by moment. The point I am If you've written a Doug Mathews, of two letters missing football game that you think ex-Scanatron fame, Track altogether, so if those letters is any good, or you Suit Manager was the were included, there would know of one that isn't company's first release, and be no room left at all. mentioned here and you think was well-received by I can't talk about it should be, then why not everyone and featured all managerial games, though, drop a line to C+VG. Even if the teams in the World Cup, without mentioning the it doesn't get reviewed in and all the players in all the worst: Soccer Boss. Soccer the mag, we'll still get back teams (around 700 in all) as Box is not a very good game. to you and let you know well as accurate statistics on In fact, it's very bad. It what I think of it. Please all of them, a revolutionary boasts amazingly s-l-o-w include an S.A.E. if you match commentary system gameplay, unresponsive want the tapes returned. Football Feature League table 1 Strategy Home ground Realism Depth Speed Visuals Tot MICK LYONS Title 41  06 00 O O O O O      19 DOTA W OTOVO 10.05 NNOT COCO COIN O O  -19 Tracksuit Manager Goliath Games Brian Clough's FF CDS Football Director 2 D+H Games The Double Scanatron Football Director D+H Games 2 Player Super L. D+H Games Int. Manager D+H Games Football Manager Addictive Football Manager 2 Prism Leis. 14 On The Beach Cult Soccer Boss Alternative All the marks are corresponding to the best version of that game. The +3 version of Football Director 2, is six times slower than any other version, so it would be unfair to review that version. Football Feature League table 2 Arcade Title Home ground Graphics Sound Payability Value Total Sega Soccer Sega MicroSoccer Microprose Match Day 2 Ocean International Soc. CRL Match Day Ocean European 5-a-side Silverbird Gary Lineker's SS Gremlin Peter Beardsley's Grandslam Supercup Football Silverbird Super Soccer Imagine Roy of the Rovers Gremlin World Cup Carn'. US Gold OD 0 O 100 COCO 100 4 t 1 2 2 2 3 -13 1000 --00000000 CO J -NO -10 -"


"SOFTSELLERS 12 SANDPIPER CLOSE, LONGBRIDGE PARK, COLCHESTER, ESSEX CO4 3GE 36a Osborne St. WE WILL MATCH ANY PRICE ADVERTISED BY 5 DOGS HEAD ST. Colchester, ANOTHER MAIL ORDER COMPANY PROVIDING Ipswich, Essex VISA THE ADVERTISEMENT IS A CURRENT ISSUE AND Suffolk. NOT A SPECIAL OFFER. JUST STATE THE (0206) 560638 MAGAZINE+COMPANY CONCERNED. (0473) 57158 PLACE YOUR ORDER NOW ON (0206) 869668 (0206) 863193 SOFTSELLERS .99 .99 .99 $12.99 $12.99 AMIGA Dungeon Master... Eliminator Elite .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 115.99 .99 .99 Fish ...99 .99 $15.99 .99 .99 .99 .99 ATARI ST Army Moves .99 Alien Syndrome.... . ....99 Action Service... .99 Ace Il.... .99 Barbarian II.. .99 Combat School............. .99 Dragon Ninja .99 Double Dragon............... .99 Eliminator... .99 Football Manager II.... .99 Game Over II. .99 Guerilla War. [1299 Gryzor .99 Ghosts & Goblins .99 International Karate + .99 LED. Storm......... .99 Leathernecks... $12.99 Lancelot.......... .99 Mach 3... .99 19 Boot Camp .99 Nightraider .99 Operation Wolt .99 Overlander... .99 Paperboy .99 Quadralien... .99 Roadblasters... ..99 Rambo Ill........ .99 Space Harrier .99 Skychase .99 Star Ray... .99 S.D.L.... .99 Super Hang-On........ ..99 .99 15.99 115.99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 $15.99 .99 ..99 ATARI ST Tiger Road Thunderblade.......... Time And Majik....... Victory Road.... Virus Where Time Stood Still..... WhirligigAlterburner BAT... Butcher Hill. Battlechess Captain Blood. Carrier Command...... Corruption........ Driller Dungeon Master.... Elite Fish Fernandez Must Die Heroes of the Lance... Hostages Iron Lord......... Legend of the Sword.... Menace Nigel Mansell Powerdrome Pool of Radiance... Project Stealth Fighter Type.............. Shadowgate... ST Five Star....... Star Glider Il.. Skate or Die.. Techno Cop... Chrono Quest Federation of Free Traders Rocket Ranger AMIGA Barbarian il............. Double Dragon. Exelon Eliminator............ . 4 X 4 Football Manager II...... Game Overil Lancelot... LED Storm... Leathernecks................. Outrun..... Sentinel Skychase Time and Magik...... Tiger Road................ Virus Whirligig... Afterburner Amiga Gold Hits............ Army Moves Bairds Talelor il Birdie (Leaderboard). BAT. Butcher Hill Battlechess Combat School Carrier Command..... Corruption Daley Thompson's 0.C Dragon Ninja.... Driller... .99 Fernandez Must Die...... Fusion Guerilla Wars Ghosts and Goblins.... Gryzor. Hostages.................... Heroes of the Lance....... Interceptor Iron Lord.... Legend of the Sword..... Menace............ Nigel Mansell Grand Prix Overlander Operation Woll Pool of Radiance.... Powerdrome.... Paperboy Platoon... Quadralien.. R Type... Rambo Ill..... Roadblasters... Shadowgate... Space Harrier Skate or Die.... Starray Star Glider Il... Techno Cop... Thunderblade........ UMS. Victory Road............ Where Time Stood Still... Federation of Free Traders... Rocket Ranger Chrono Quest. .99 .99 ...99 ....99 .99 .99 ....99 .99 ...99 ....99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 ..99 ...99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 15.99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 $15.99 ..99 ..99 ,99 ...115.99 $15.99 .99 .99 .99 C15.99 .99 .99 .99 C15 99 .99 .99 .99 ..99 .99 $19.99 .99 8 BIT DISC PRICES R.R.P. .99 .50 R.R.P. .95 R.R.P .99 = .99 .50 M THUNDERZ <BLADE 6.99 LOO TITLE Afterburner Action Service Barbarian Il Bairds Tale Barbarian (Psygnosis) Butcher Hill Buggy Boy Beardsley's Soccer Batman Captain Blood Cybernoid Il Carrier Command Daley Thompson's O.C. Double Dragon Dark Side Dragon Ninja Empire Strikes Back Eliminator Echelon Fernandez Must Die 4 X 4 Frank Bruno's Football Manager II Fist and Throttles Guerrilla Wars Gold Silver Bronze Games Winter Edition Gunship Giants Game Over 11 Heroes of the Lance Hawk Eye History in the Making Iron Lord Last Ninja Il SPEC C64 AMS 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.30 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.30 6.99 6.99 5.50 6.99 6.99 6.30 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.30 6.99 6.99 10.50 10.50 10.50 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 8.99 8.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.30 6.99 6.99 8.99 8.99 8.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 8.99 8.99 8.99 5.50 6.30 6.30 10.50 10.50 10.50 6.99 6.99 10.50 10.50 8.99 8.99 8.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 17.99 17.99 17.99 6.99 6.99 8.99 8.99 8.99 TITLE Live and Let Die LED Storm 1943 19 Boot Camp Netherworld Nigel Mansell Night Raider Operation Woll Overlander Par 3/4 Rambo III R Type Robocop Red Storm Rising Samuri Warrior Sub Battle Simulator Supreme Challenge Salamander Savage Star Trek S.D.I. Street Sports Soccer Typhoon Tiger Road Taito Coin Op Track Suit Manager Thunderblade Techno Cop Untouchables Victory Road Vindicator Virus Where Time Stood Still Whirligig WEC Le Mans R.R.P. .95 .95 SPEC C64 AMS 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.30 6.99 6.99 6.30 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.30 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.30 6.30 6.99 6.99 10.50 10.50 10.50 6.30 6.30 6.99 6.99 6.30 6.30 10.50 6.30 6.30 6.99 8.99 8.99 5.50 6.30 6.30 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.30 6.99 6.99 5.50 6.30 6.30 6.99 6.99 8.99 8.99 8.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.30 6.99 6.99 6.30 6.99 6.99 6.30 6.99 6.99 6.30 6.30 5.50 6.30 6.30 6.99 MM 10.50 SAFTER BURNER M WAN OPERATION 5.50 Oh 8888 6.30 6.99 TITLE Comp Price Name: Address: Tel No. ST's & AMIGA'S CVG DEC Total Cost  IN STOCK! Cheques & Postal Orders payable to SOFTSELLERS. Post & Packaging Free in UK. Overseas .50 per item. Shop prices may vary, but personal callers can claim approx 10% discount off RRP on production of this advert. "


"ICROSELL Selling? Buying? Here's the Market Place!! If you wish to place AMSTRAD 464 colour +DDIC64. Cassette unit, ATARI 800XL. Cassette, disk disc drive, votager, 7 modem excelerator + disc drive, 2 drive, 's worth of games an ad in Microsell with Skywave software, ESP Joysticks Mk 5 freeze frame, (including Gauntlet, Ninja and send it together with light pen Mkil, 2 joysticks, disk box, 25 disks,  of many more), Touch Tablet and 15 to: C+VG dustcover, 21 disc games, 94 software, manuals, all boxed. remote control, Joysticks, tape games (all originals), 9 Sell for . Tel Ed:  ono. May separate. Tel: (Microsell Dept), books on programming, etc. 0306-888456 (after 6). 01-908 2295, after 7.30pm & Priory Court, 30-32 75 mags. Worth ,550 +. Sell weekends. for  ovno. Tel: 204-0617. AMSTRAD, CPC, 6128, Farringdon Lane, Colour and software. New AMIGA A500 + modulator, Edmund (10 till 10). London, EC1R 3AU. . Sell for . Cassette six weeks old, 10 months LOOK C64, data cassette, player and other accessories guarantee left. As new, Joystick, over 125 games, all bought for , sell for  included. Will sell separately. CBM 64. Data recorder, originals including Cast Ninja, ono. Buyer to collect. Phone excelerator +, disc drive, 2 Tel: 04973-398 between Nimitz, Stealth Fighter, Tony after 5pm weekdays. power packs, freeze machine, Platoon, Gunship. Only  4.45pm and 6.45pm. (0268) 412223 Neos mouse and cheese, ono. Phone (0273) 476808. AMSTRAD CPC64 with .50 worth, software. FOR SALE Sega Master Boxed. Excellent condition, ATARI 520STEM NAD SM104 colour monitor, disc drive, Arcade System, good only .50. Tel: 259 61299 monitor,  software, worth expansion, s/disc, speech/s condition, in boxes, includes , sell  ono. Also CBM and tonnes more.  +. (Alva). light gun, control stick, many 64, recorder, Joystick and Highest offer gets video games. Worth , only COMMODORE 128 + Vic 20,  software, worth , digitiser free!! Phone Ray on 2 data recorders, 2 joysticks, . Tel: (Sheffield) 352669. sell  ono. Telephone: 993-3174, 8.30pm + over  worth, software. WANTED CBS colecovision (Simon) 01-428 4388. C64, 1541C, C2N, Joystick, with large collection of Sell for  ono. Telephone: CBM 64, music maker, new Freeze Frame III, books, disk games, or games only, will (0472) 72645. power pack, cassette, box, blank discs, tapes buy for cash or swop Sega AMSTRAD CTM 640 colour Joystick, 140 of software, 4 reference guide,  of System with 15 games monitor, plus 20 games and cassette holders, 32 mags. software, only . Tel: Bromsgrove 0527 32230. Image system. Sell . . Tel: 041-641 5676. (0604) 712712 after 6pm. CBM 64, tape unit, freeze Phone: Gerald on 843-2435 BBC B, disk drive 80/40 Trak, AMSTRAD 464, green frame, education software, after 6pm. data recorder, + screen, modulator,  of worth , games worth SPECTRUM + 48K, Interface software, AMX Mouse + Super software, light pen, 2 , joystick and Joycard, and over  of original Art Rom. Good condition, joysticks,  of magazines. plus full set of input books. All games, only . Phone worth , sell for . Tel: Total . Sell for . Tel: for  ono. Tel: 0823 (0706) 74184. Bristol (0272) 867346. 01-556 9368. Ask for Paul. 288747. GET IT BEFOR    Don't let some weirdo buy your copy! Place a regular order with us your newsagent NOW! Dear Mr Newsagent, reserve me a copy of Computer + Video Games. Name Address Simon 1917 S 1987 "


"No FXCUSES ALSO AVAILABLE THE GAME OF THE GODS ||m2  Atari ST Screens NO EXCUSES from Arcana, just superbly addictive gameplay. You'll need fast reactions, lateral thinking and above all a cool head to play this fascinating game. Fifty sheets of joystick tingling excitement and a superb construction kit will keep you playing and playing and playing... NO EXCUSES .95 Amiga .95 Atari ST To order direct from Arcana, tick the relevant box and send this coupon with payment to the address blow or ring (0272) 297162 Name Address SA POWERPLAY .95 Amiga .95 Atari ST A stunningly original quiz game for one to four players A ARCANA Arcana Software Ltd, 2 Clare Street, Bristol, Avon BS11xs, UK, Telephone 10272) 297162 Fax 102721 226586 "


"Dark! Obstacle counters pop out of card sheets Computer role playing and adventure gaming is changing fast. Their definitions are becoming blurred at the edges plus all sorts of technological breakthroughs are happening that are giving a tremendous fillip to this new genre. To cater for this new breed of games, C + VG is proud to present AGM, a specialist column written for the advanced games player by world experts on the subject: Keith Campbell, Wayne B Gamer and Eugene Lacey. So, if you're interested in role playing games like AD+D, Ultima and Bard's Tale, as well as leading edge adventures, board games, PBM and anything else that is truly challenging, AGM is the essential monthly read. Text Adventures Dead enough to be a DeWe wonen Jester's Score: 828 Dark Future may be the role playing bu game launch of the year definitely G Work Shop's biggie and highly conveni to computer. Set in a grim future world where crin D gangs terrorise the highways. The game creates a battle between the gangs and equally tough breed of bounty hunter 1 box will be used A wind of change is blowing through the UK's top adventure companies a right royal force ten gale from the role playing game developers that threatens to kill the static lateral thinking puzzle on computer stone dead. Already Level 9 have committed to producing Fantasy Role Playing games and have also announced that they have developed a new, highly animated, graphics based system for their adventure games a system more akin to the Sierra 'Leisure Suit Larry' and 'Police Quest' system than to anything else. Magnetic Scrolls Ken Gordon describes the official company line as to be tight lipped about future projects.\" But what he would say is that he believes that adventure and RPG are two different things, that RPG is not particularly new because games like Wizardry were around five years ago, and that next year there would be dozens and dozens of Dungeonmaster clones on the market and that they just might not be bought by anyone Shogun Infocom flash their piccies. DARK FUTUN TRON OVERTRUKE DISPLAY Cuse the mouse, type a ber from 1 to 4, to select the to reversel You succesfully reverse the 2 of Lares into Granola oro dester stoffs, A lytired Accardi G ranola of Book . dead you are John Bithorne t ot adottet tot oude Zork Zero adventures are changing. Infocom are not quite so conservative. They have already decided on what for them can only be understated as a Thatcherite U-turn of the most enormous proportions. Wait for it all new Infocom games from now to eternity will have graphics. This is a complete change of policy from when Infocom boss Dave Lebling told our sister magazine CU only twelve months ago that he believed the firm had a long way to go with developing personalities of characters in games through text rather than adding graphics and other frills just because the 16 bit machines had this potential The new Infocom graphics system and parser (the mechanism that tells you whether you have the right answer or not) will so far only work on the IBM po and compatables. An Amiga version is planned, and an ST version is being considered, but there will definitely not be a Commodore 64 version because of memory limitations. that chat fout Dutch w hot andre ie directly forward tur tight and free to The th the i n front at the T HIN THE WHEEL News "


"Fitures = Rules for advanced game and scene setting novella News Toon Toon TOON CONFIDENTIAL FUTUS Out of control Wheel fails you how badly you have spun all the track. SON OF A Adventure Club Magazine. STEVE JACKSON GAMES Large sports cars belong to the Law Engorcement Agency A Toon cartoon role playing, Scrolls Back Adventure Club Son of Troon is a cartoon role playing game from ace designer Steve Jackson. Design your own cartoon characters and play with them is what Toon is all about Son of Toon provides more info for GM's (Games Masters), expands on the original game and is also going dead cheap in some shops so don't miss the bargain. New AD+D Games ng board the sides are armed to the hilt with fast cars, ly Gamd mega death dealin weapons, extras. vertible Dark Futures is not at all like the sometimes disappointing contents of a GW criming box. This one is packed full of expensively zame produced cars, tracks, counters and rule and aan books, Loadsa bits and so it should with a ter. Bou befty $19.99 price tag. Magnetic Scrolls are to produce a number of mini-adventures exclusively for Official Secrets, the discount mail-order and adventure club run by Tony Rainbird. The disks will be distributed free with 'Confidential', the club magazine, mailed to all OS members. Confidential magazine will be produced every other month and is described as \"produced by experts with experts in mind. Membership of the club costs $19.95 and includes discounts on new adventure games, free hints and tips, the magazine, and competitions. Dungeon Naughty Larry II The smaller buggy style cars are driven by gangs like the Maniacs and kill Crazy Commando's. A AD&D two new games. A host of new adventures are about to arrive from Sierra Police Quest The Vengeance, has the local jailer murdered, and your girl-friend kidnapped. And finally Larry Assemble the track any way you like-ina circuit or a drag strip Larry II Looking For Love (In Several Wrong Places). With Larry off on a dream cruise on the \"Lover's Boat\", he doesn't reckon to get caught up in espionage and intrigue. A development of the Quest format is evident in a totally new adventure, Manhunter, in which the picture is the view as seen by the hero, rather than being a view of the character himself. Sierra On Line games will be released in the UK by Mediagenic/Activision. True to their word S.S.I have launched two new Advanced Dungeons and Dragons products, The Dungeon Masters Assistant is a utility for owners of the Commodore 64 version of Pool of Radiance which was the first official AD&D game and a storming success in the US charts. It is only now going into the shops in the UK with Spectrum, IBM, and ST versions not expected until late and early next year. The Dungeon Masters Assistant enables you to generate your own encounters and offers over 1.300 monsters and characters (including all monsters from the official AD&D Monster Manuals I and II. Hills Far is the second totally new AD&D game being more arcady and enabling you to take with you your characters from Pools Don't expect to see it in the UK until next Spring. popular and Games World "


"On exiting the catacombs, keeps it until it takes effect. At you come back up to the dungeon proper, but not in the your right read out what is on original place you left! You the card and hand it over to have to add together all the you. The effects range from catacomb cards you have almost instant death to the collected, roll a 10 sided die power of levitation. and then refer to a simple The expansion kit itself plays chart. This tells you where you quite well, and will extend the have re-surfaced. interest of the game for quite a SUPPLIER: GAMES For your money you receive Included in this expansion long time... if you live that WORKSHOP one ten sided die, 12 new room set are some new room cards. is!! I must admit that the PRICE: .99. cards, 8 new treasure counters, GW recommend that you take instant death and roll a COMPLEXITY: NOVICE UPWARDS. 20 new room tiles, 12 new out certain existing cards from certain number or your dead\" REVIEWER: WAYNE. search cards, 12 new room the original game and replace options put me off a little. This cards a couple of new Crypt them with the new ones is because too much rides on Dungeonquest Catacombs is and trap cards plus two otherwise the game becomes pure luck. the second expansion kit for rulebooks. unbalanced. I would agree with It is quite possible to start the Dungeonquest boardgame The basic idea is to mingle them, as after playing the game this game and die almost and you are unable to use it as a the new catacombs room tiles quite a few times, I found it immediately on a regular basis. game on it's own. You need to with the originals and when quite lethal to say the least. The I must also admit that when I own a copy of the original drawn, they enable you to enter new room counters include opened the box, I found the game. the catacombs, if you wish to some very formidable foes, actual contents to be lacking For those of you who do so. These tiles are marked including the deadly Doom for the price asked. I would haven't heard of the original with a black arrow pointing Shadow who follows you want more for my hard earned cash than just five sheets of full coloured, well printed paper and two thin rulebooks. If you do intend using the Catacombs, then I would suggest giving your characters a couple of extra life points and changing some of the new CATACOMBS game before, I'll give you a brief rundown. Dungeonquest was designed by a couple of GENQUEST Scandanavian gamers to be played in a quick, fast and decisive manner. Really and truly a board game it can be played by up to four players and there are also rules for solo play if required. The aim of the game is to enter Dragonfire castle, defeat any monsters or trops that get in your way and eventually end up in the Dragon's lair. Here you have to steal as much treasure as possible without waking the Dragon, and then exit the castle with your booty. You have 26 turns to achieve all of this. The original game is perfect for absolute novices to play, as it is easy to play and introduce new gamers to the basic concept of boardgaming. However, for anyone other than this, the original game would soon become dull as there is not enough material to A Catacombs not one of GM's greatest. maintain a continual interest. down for easy recognition about and eventually kills you, \"instant death\" counters to GW released Heroes for Once in the catacombs you unless you can shake him off, encounters that rob you of 4-6 Dungeonquest, which was must remove your characters and the annoying Snotlings, life points. I found that my reviewed in September's playing piece from the board who are not hard to defeat, but characters lasted longer and we C + VG. This gave the game and place it on your character sap your Life Points. had more fun that way! more playability, by sheet. At the start of your next Also included are a new set introducing twelve new turn you must draw a of Magic Amulet counters, VALUE catacomb card and follow it's which, when found, can be PLAYABILITY 7 while, the novelty of this begins effects. This could be anything worn or ignored. If you find PRESENTATION 9 to wear off so they have now from fighting a horde of rats to one of these magic artifacts, released Catacombs, which a cave troll or finding some the player on your right takes LASTABILITY expands the game even further. treasure. the top magic amulet card and OVERALL 108 "


"COMSOFT SCOTLANDS LARGEST MAIL SCOTLAND'S LARGEST MAIL ORDER FIRM Cannon Fax 110 Personal Fax Machine Free one year on Amstrad PCW Range: Free One Years on Site Maintenance Amstrad DMP3250 dl Printer With One Years on Site site maintenance RR Price 1926.25 Our price 1733.63 Maintenance Amstrad CPC Range of Home Computers PCW8256 a fully integrated word processing system, The DMP3250 diuniquely designed, user-friendly and Amstrad Computers in your home cassette or disk, mono or full keyboard, screen, 256K of RAM, 360K 3\" disc drive, software industry standard, offering PC and Epson FX compatability colour, trust Amstrad to bring you the very best in advanced and printer Established over the last two years as the market together with dual Paralleland Serial interface. The DMP3250 home computers. Comes complete with 17 games & joystick leader Only 401.35 di's Flatbed design makes it easy to switch between single Free List of games free with the CPC6128 Trivial Pursuit! PCWB512 offering double the internal memory of the PCWR25 sheet and continuous stationery and it offers problem free Monopolyl Cluedo! Scalextral Scrabblel Qabbaiah The Prize! plus an additional 720K disk drive which both avoids the need printing on sticky labels, cards, envelopes etc, all up to 160 cps Supertest Day 1! Supertest Day 21 Tubarubal World Series or tradunt disc swapping and gives you greatly increased Plus the DMP3250 di incorporates its own printer stand which Baseball! Shape & Sounds! Doors Of Doom! Hunchback ! lets you stack input paper under the printer itself, reducing desk Hunchback It Roland in Timel Nomad! data storage capacity at only . VAT more. Only .35 space used. Only .73 PCW9512 featuring a wide carriage daisywheelprinter, black Amstrad DMP4000 PRINTER. With One Year on Site CPC454MM 199.00 CPC454CM 299,00 CPC8128 299.99 CPC6128 399.99 and white screen, 512K RAM, 720K disc drive, enhanced SPECTRUM COMPUTER GAMES BOYSTICKPACK ISTRAD13 keyboard and LOCOScript 2 word processing software with The DMP4000 wide carriage flexibility combined with SPECTRUM COMPUTER GAMES JOYSTICK PACK AMSTRAD 19. integrated Spellcheck and Mailmerge facilities, giving you top rugged reliability and high throughput at speeds of up to quality performance all round. Only .85 200cps. Inbuilt tractors allow fast paper slow rates, and PC and Amstrad PC1512 range. Free one year's on site maintenance. Epson FX compatibility ensures that the DMP4000 will run off The PC512 the ideal computer for office work, homework and almost any PC business, software package. The perfect printing device for spreadsheet Output, invoicing, programme after work. The revolutionary PC comparable range that established Amstrad as the business computer market leader Amstrad PPC Range Free One Year on Site Maintenance listing or any high demand data dumping. Onlym .00 The PPC portable computer range from Amstrad the is now priced to target both home and small business Amstrad LQ3500 dl Printer With One Year on Site applications. All PC1512's are currently supplied with Migent ultimate personal productivity tools. With a supertwist LCD Maintenance Ability, a fully integrated software package containing a word screen and full AT type enhanced keyboard, plus a choice of The LQ3500 di 24 pin versatility to address all your printing processor spreadsheet, database and communications 512K or RAM, one or two 31\"disc drives and inbuilt modern requriements. The LQ3500 di races through draft work al up to facilities, as well as four top selling computer games from US (PPC640) to communicate with office computers, the PPC 160cps, produces needle-sharp letter quality at up to 54cps for Gold. Dam-Busters! Bruce-Loe! PSI-5 Trading Company! range offers you PPC computing capabilities no matter where word processing applications and also happily prints Tag-Team Wrestling you are. The PPC512 and PPC640 portable power at take superlative graphics output at ultra-high resolution. Supplied PC151250MM 458.85 1512SDCM 631.35 151200M 631.35 away prices as standard with dual Parallel and Serial interfaces, club on tractor and featuring PC and Epson LQ compatibility, the 1512DDCM 803.85 PPC51250 458.15 PPC5120 691.35 PPCHOS 57.3 PPCHAOD 746.35 LO3500 di offers unparalleled printing potential. Only 440.00 Amstrad PC1640 Range Free One Yoans on Site Maintenance Amstrad LQ5000 dl Printer With One Year on Site Amstrad DMP2160 Printer Maintenace The PC1640 range with 640K of internal RAM, and a choice of DMP2160 Printer is a perfect match for Amstrad CPC range of The LOS000 di the ultimate in impact printing flexibility. The top quality displays, EGA comparable enhanced colour, OGA computers. Capable of taking single out sheet or continuous wide-carriage L05000 di is robust 24 pin printhead offers the compatable colour or MDA Hercules comparable paper may be used, and the ingenious flatbed design allows business user perfect letter quality and pinpoint graphics monochrome. The versatile PC1640 comes as standard with the insertion and alignment of both tractor and friction feed output. Print speeds of up to 288cps and fully adjustable inbuilt both parallel and serial ports, plus three full sized expansion paper. Printing speeds of 160 characters per second will make belt tractors ensure high-speed throughput rates for almost any slots for additional cards. Specifically designed to satisty the rapid work of even the most lengthy drafts. The DMP2160 will size of paper. The inclusion of PC and Epson LQ compatability requirements of the professional user, the PC1640 offers you also operate with any other personal or home computer (for together with dual Parallel and Serial interfaces allows the top end quality at low end prices. example the AMSTRAD CPC series or the Acorn range of BBCL05000 di to operate directly with most hardware and software ENHANCED COLOUR microcomputers) which provide standard parallel printer combinations. The LQ5000 dihigh performance, high MONO MONITOR COLOUR MONITOR DISPLAY output. In addition, the printer may be used (via a suitable quality and high reliability at and unbelievably competitive C1540S0 MM 370.5 C18050 CW 746.35 PC164050 ECO 918.5 interface) with computers which provide serial printer output price. Only .73 PC154000 MM 746.35 PC154000 CM 918.00 PC164000 ECO 1091.35 (for example the Commodore or Sinclair ZX Spectrum range of PC160MM 1991.35 PC1540HD CM 1253.45 PC1640HD ECD 1036.35 Computers). Only 159.00 DETAIL OF GOODS 1943 Barbarian 2 Bards Tale Bionic Commando Buggy Boy Daley Thompson's Olympic Ch Empire Strikes Back Football Manager 2 Gold Silver and Bronze Hawkeye Nightraider Outrun Overlander Peter Beardsley's Football Platoon Road Blasters Salamander Starglider 2 Street Fighter Supreme Challenge Target Renegade Track Suit Manager Vindicator Virus We Are The Champions TOP 25 GAMES AMSTRAD CPC COMMODORE SPECTRUM ATARI ST PC/IBM AMIGA CASS OUR DISCOUR CASS OUR DISK OUR CASS OUR DISK OUR DISK OUR DISK OUR DISK OUR R.R.P PRICE R.R.P. PRICE R.R.P. PRICE R.R.P. PRICE R.R.P. PRICE R.R.P. PRICE R.R.P. PRICE R.R.P. PRICE R.R.P. PRICE 9.99 8.74 14.99 13.12 9.99 8.74 14.99 13.128.997.87 12.99 11.37 19.99 17.49 19.99 17.49 9.99 8.74 12.95 11.339.99 8.74 -19.99 8.74 24.95 21.83 9.99 8.74 14.99 13.129.99 8.74 -124.95 21.83 24.95 21.83 9.99 8.74 14.99 13.12 9.99 8.74 11.99 10.49 6.99 7.87 12.99 11.37 19.99 17.49 19.95 17.49 9.95 8.71 14.95 13.08 9.95 8.71 14.95 13.08 7.99 6.99 14.99 13.12 19.95 24.99 21.86 9.95 8.71 14.95 13.08 9.95 8.71 14.95 13.089.95 8.71 14.95 13.08 19.99 9.95 8.71 14.95 13.08 9.95 8.71 12.95 11.339.95 8.71 14.95 13.08 13.95 17.46 19.99 19.95 17.46 9.99 8.74 14.99 13.12 9.99 8.74 14.99 13.12 9.99 8.74 14.99 13.12 19.99 17.49 19.99 17.49 19.95 17.49 14.99 13.12 24.99 21.87 14.99 13.12 17.99 15.74 14.99 13.12 17.99 15.74 -9.99 8.74 12.99 11.37 19.99 9.99 8.74 14.99 13.12 -9.99 8.74 12.99 11.37 19.99 17.49 19.99 17.49 9.99 8.74 14.99 13.12 9.99 8.74 11.99 10.49 8.99 7.87 12.99 11.37 19.99 17.49 9.99 8.74 14.99 13.12 --17.996.99 12.99 11.37 19.99 17.49 8.95 7.83 14.95 13.08 9.95 8.71 14.95 13.08 8.95 7.83 18.95 17.45 9.95 8.71 14.95 13.08 9.95 8.71 14.95 8.71 14.95 13.08 9.95 13.08 9.95 8.71 14.95 8.71 14.95 13.08 18.95 13 17.46 19.95 17.4624.95 9.99 8.74 14.99 13.129.99 8.74 14.99 13.128.99 7.87 12.99 11.37 8.95 7.83 12.95 11.33 24.95 21.83 24.95 21.83 9.99 8.74 14.99 13.129.99 8.74 14.99 13.12 8.997.87 12.99 11.37 18.99 12.95 11.33 16.95 14.83 12.95 11.33 16.95 14.83 7.83 14.95 13.08 8.95 7.83 12.95 11.33 17.95 6.96 14.95 13.08 -9.95 8.71 -9.95 8.71 8.957.83 12.95 11.33 8.957.83 14.95 13.08 7.95 6.96 14.95 13.08 6.96 12.95 11.33 19.95 17.46 19.95 17.49 9.95 8.71 17.95 15.71 9.95 8.71 17.95 15.71 9.95 8.71 17.95 15.71 SEND FOR OUR CATALOGUE OF OVER THREE THOUSAND TITLES FOR AMSTRAD CPC PCW-PC, COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, ATARIATARI ST, BBC MSX ELECTRON, APPLE SERIES 2 APPLE MACINTOSH COMPUTERS ALL AT DISCOUNT PRICES. P+P 50p ALL ORDERS OVER .00. POST FREE COMSOFT MAIL ORDER DEPARTMENT, 48 DUKE STREET, COLDSTREAM, SCOTLAND TD12 4LF Tel: 0890 2979. 24 hour order service on 0890 2854. Fax: 0890 2927 "


"TAGM Helpline you can tie to it. Use that password to get into Part 2, and the gatekeeper should present no problem! Reading the October Helpline, Cieron Faux decided he could help Christopher Waite and Gary Edwards, who were both stuck in Wolfman. Look in the Clues section, lads! Meanwhile, Stuart Day's problem has quite a complicated solution, says Cieron, who invites Stuart to write to him (with SAE) at 23 Norman Road, Tunbridge Wells, Kent TNI 2RT, for a full explanation. Help came this month from: Stephen Englhart, Ingolstadt; Cieron Faux, Tunbridge Wells; Paul Hardy, Sheffield; A.J. O'Donovan, Southampton; Christopher and Anthony Albon, Southampton; and Jorn Jensen, Hobro, Denmark. Just as I thought Infocom had St. Julians, Malta, are playing month! Robert Sanders of Tow won the Great Parser Debate, Ultima IV. They are getting Law, wants to know where to here comes Dai Teague to desperate for the CODEX find the satin turban in 1068 throw a spanner in the works! where are the stones they need Acheton, and how to get to the After playing his first Infocom to get the keys, and how can pirate's hideout in Sphinx. game, Leather Goddesses, he they get them? Sphinx was an Acornsoft was very disappointed. \"I didn't much enjoy the game scenario anyway, and I didn't think much of the parser, either. Compared to Magnetic Scrolls' near-perfect parser, I would say it comes a definite second,\" says David. adding: \"Hate me for this you may, but maybe other Infocom games (I'm ordering some) DEFEAT THE ARCHVET may bring me round to your DEFEAT THE PLANE way of thinking.\" My way of ACHERON thinking? Have I ever said what that is? Me, I just stand in engitsance fair: The Tantanti in tetan skiy SLAY WRITOS BLOEAF the middle and stir things up... SLAY KA RIIN Some adventures become classics, and almost every Ultima IV if you're stuck drop us a line. A Beyond Zork KC has the clues. classic adventure has its classic Darryl Bartlett has a whole adaptation of Colossal Cave, problems! Hitch Hiker's Guide host of questions it seems and if the pirate problem was «snaun  has its Babel Fish and he's multi-tasking a number of faithfully copied, then the 241 30 Bulous ou loII I9af Screening Door problems, games simultaneously! Where pirate's hideout is in the maze 341 138 0 1 asn ose puejjers Hulk its ants, and The Pawn its is the gold coin to give to the near the orange column. UOSA, y Suisn kino Boulder and Dragon problems. peasant, in Custerd's Quest? Matthew Conway was 139 \"Malay jea ITM you But more recently, Beyond How do you free the girl after recently held up by the 341 'ur aflejaney nok uUM Zork has come up with a killing the dragon in Claws Of gatekeeper in Karyssia. Greg | *5  11 Buiddols  problem so difficult, that Despair? How do you get past Quinn of Portadown has come uo sdis snSun you people who have finished the the door to enter the castle, and up with the answer and it's a werand it's a Mop!yi qul Toplay game have failed to crack it! how do you get the rabbit, in bit of a shocker! It seems there 01 08 nok ssey jayloway Even C + VG's own Paul Zacaron Mystery? And how do are TWO passwords that allow Eystery 2 And how do are TWO passwords that allow usy pue 'wy nag sngun Coppins, (yes, he still lends his you open the chest in the tower you to get into Part 2, and only |   332112 1 ok expert's hand to answer the of Styx, in Inferno? one is correct. What's worse, op! ayi wojama a4 138 01 Helpline mail!) who, legend Ian Wall, of the Essex you won't necessarily know if YHOZ (INOX18 has it, solves an Infocom Constabulary, wants to arrest a you're using the bad one \"uTudo  i  1s  adventure each day before drunk, but doesn't know how except you won't be able to get pur nok fuMONTOJ S! 1! un breakfast, and two Magnetic to go about it! He's playing past the gatekeeper! At a guess, Teuljjoo ayi veau 191Uow Scrolls adventures by Police Quest, of course! Matthew, you are using ay ssed ol V INHSV adki lunchtime, telephoned me the There's a dragon protecting ORLA, Wrong! To get the real suuau i uspjens aussed other day, desperate to know a gem upstairs in Shadowgate, one, says Greg, you must first 01 PIAC SS! Pue 'paq olur how to get the jewel from the and Christopher and Anthony find the silver falcon, a feat 128 'ssaspun 'y uoou yi idol! At last, thanks to Stephan Albon want to know how to get achieved by planting the acorn 10 y3019 01 sureno 41 yea Englhart of Ingostadt in West it! Who can help? in the soft ground S, E, N, S,S, find pue' uuexa 'woolpaq Germany, I can reveal all! Some old Beeb adventures of Florassia's shop, and ay ur yieap PIOAROL Jean Solar and his friends in come in for a reprise this climbing down the rope that INVW. TOM "


"101suou 341 11!4 pue yinos 08 Tuetuim 0534 01 TMOH 01 kn pue 'uu 341 01 08 ( qe) adl dn 59 Pinoys uoow al lsaud ou 41 Sussed Apoq 341 aow pue'sagije 'woos de ay 13 OL auwexo 'asdoy oyi uasioy *M1 nok Basaud 41 ssed on Sea 08 pue 'ascoy inok junow WONHA puij nok Suryana ayel Letters EXON US : SOUTH bound A Venom go east twice young man. GOLD 604 \"Juaned jaoue se Dejanbseu rendsoy Sa OL NOILANO suin Itaje veq qnd ay us auoyd ay danse uay. \"Suraq 148u ay uym Woj suni or speje juawasnue 24 ur op!A1W 133W :S37335 A OC *39018 ay uo map yapay woj ||015 suaray ayl vapun puen, ay anado .LVOMOCVHS 389 news ta 'Slej asja e l'uoaunp 4 adeasa o pues ud! Hd993 NACIO9 SHL 01 Land Francis Burraston from Bath Sven Hajbourge from Norway wants to be a champion! \"I writes: \"Sometimes you tell read your review of people to enclose a Stamped Champions in the July issue of Self Addressed Envelope when C + VG and as it was a enquiring about certain F.R.P departure from the usual kind and P.B.M. items, however, I of FRP game that I usually and many other F.R.P. players play. I went to my local hobby who are based abroad cannot shop and tried to buy it. do this. Please help me find a However, I was told that the solution as I would very much game wasn't in stock and, as it like to write away to some of was imported, I wouldn't have the games companies for a chance of obtaining it information.\" anywhere. Therefore I am What you should do Sven is to turning to you Wayne to help go to your nearest post office me locate a copy and tell me and get an International Postal where I can buy it. Certificate and send it to the No problem Francis. Contact: relevant company. This allows Chris Rule, c/o Games of them to claim the value of Liverpool, 89 Victoria St, second class postage Liverpool, LI 6DG with a large anything they send you, ssae and they will send you excluding parcels. If you can't their catalogue, which contains get one of these, try obtaining the original Champions an international money order rulebook as well as all the from your bank for the sum of supplements which are .00 and it should sort the available for it. matter out. Another FRP'er in trouble is Dear Wayne, Alex Monty, who has painting Is it true that Warhammer is problems. \"I like to paint going to be available for Miniature Fantasy figures and, computer. Can you tell me if like Wayne Yeadon in a there will be a Spectrum previous C + VG letters page, 1 version and when will it haven't had much success in appear. finding books which will help Jane Scroggins, my fantasy painting technique. Manchester I have heard from a friend Dear Jane, though that a book called There will indeed be a \"Hero's For Wargames\", Spectrum version Jane, but published By Paper Tiger exists don't expect to see it until well and that is supposed to be a i into '89. really brilliant guide for movie Dear Wayne, painters. Do you know where I have heard of a phone-in FRP can get it from as I need it game called Fist? How do I get desperately?\" involved in it and how much I have heard that such a book will it cost. exists, in fact a FRP'er by the Matthew Bilger, name of Robert Bunston wrote Bounds Green. and told me about it. However, Simple just phone 0898 800 I don't know who sells it, if it is 876 and all will be revealed indeed still in print, or how BUT BE WARNED it costs a much it costs. Can any C + VG lot 25p per minute af cheap FRP'er out their lend a hand?rate and 38p per minute at If so drop me a line at C + VG peak. We will shortely carry a and I will give a prize to the review of the game so I'd first person thar sends in the advise you to wait till you read correct info and publish their it before reaching for the letter. phone. DODHEART Corruption KC knows how to get out of the hospital. INTERVIEW ROON BLAN Inadequacy in the person under interrogation. A Sarouent is SUDDoSed to stand next to the door to the south to ensure fair play during questioning. ning interview room AGM "


"CLASSIFIED ADS ZX SPECTRUM 48/128. CASSETTE ONLY EURO ST ADULT GAMES ADRIAN'S ARCADE The software library specially for COMMODORE users: 16, 64, 128 and Amiga Hire before you buy. Large exciting list of up to date titles. Same day dispatch. Regular updates and newsheets SAE for list and details to:7 Woodley Headland, Peartree Bridge, Milton Keynes,  . FANTASY Leccon your color, ut pour JOYSTICK and get stuck FREE GAME/FREE HIRE OFFER Our receipt of your .00 membership fee to biggest Atari Hire Library you will receive. Full Hire List NEWSLETTER A FREE game on Disk Your first Hire FREE British and Irish Cheques/Postal Orders to EURO ST, Kinsella House, Johnstown, Sea Road, Arklow, Wicklow, Ireland. C64 Disk Library available. Membership .00 (includes game/demo disk). Send to above address he exhausted COVER UP! be doing or wearing HT TH BUTLER SAW BRITISH MEMBERS NOW ACCEPTED! DISCOUNT SOFTWARE Up to 21% off RRP for ATARI, COMMODORE, SPECTRUM AMSTRAD, BBC, MSX and IBM PC. Ring for Info Pack on any of the above machines: 24 hour HOTLINE: 0456 613377 B. BYTES COMPUTER SYSTEMS, 19 Southfield Road, Hinkley, Leicestershire LE10 1UA. ATARI SPECIALISTS These are NOT games! FREE NAUGHTY GIET when you were the E R [5.50 Esch .00. GIFT C14.00. FREE OFTS R'N'HM CROTEC 22 Maal Way Stoke Pages B UCKS SL240D FREE MEMBERSHIP!! Hire CBM64, Spectrum, Amstrad and VIC 20 Software (Top Titles) Send 2 x 18p stamps for your hire kit Computersoft (CV), PO Box 28 North PDO, Nottingham NG52EE (Please state which machine) ATARI 400/600/800XL/ST AMIGA SOFTWARE We have all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE Apply now and hire your first four games free Around 1,500 different originaltites for full details send large stamped addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends LOW ATARI PRICES Atari 520 STEM 1299.90 post free + 15 disks Antic and Analog magazines available Amiga A500 at only .90 p.f. BEST QUALITY DISKS Memorex 5WS.S/DD Discs 10 for .95 p.f. Unlabelled 5W D.S./DD Discs 10 for .95 p.t. Top quality unlabelled 32 double sided disks 10 for .95 51 for $54.95 25 for $29.95 100 for $99.95 GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept. C+VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thomney Close, Sunderland SR3 4PD Tel: (091) 528 6351 UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64 NOW ALSO FOR THE ATARI ST Send sae for fast response and details to UK Software Exchange Club (CVG). 15 Tunwell Greave. Sheffield S5 9GB VECTOR SOFTWARE Dept 1 VECTOR SOFTWARE 10 Barleymow Passage Chiswick London W4 4PH Advance Orders Accepted Call 01-994 6477 and ask for VECTOR SOFTWARE (Office hours) ENQUIRIES ALWAYS WELCOME SPECIALISTS IN MAIL ORDER COMMODORE AMIGA Thunderblade 18.50 1650 Operation Wor AType Sargon 3 Chess 675 1050 Ocean Compton Open Wolf Ourun Gary Linekers Hot Shot 550 9.50 Uimas in Golf Pacmana 350 Sky Chase 1350 Pamo 3 Polo Radiance ID 675 10.50 15.50 Atterburner Barbarian 2 Bards Tale Bands Tele2 Carrer Command Colossus Chess 10 Daley Thompson Grone Ranger 2 Gold Silver Bronze 875 1050 575 10.50 675 1050 ATARIST 10:50 10.50 12.50 625 10:50 18.50 Title . Starglider 2 STAC STOS Supergos The Games Wine Tiger Road Us Royal Rowers Salamander Toto's Condo 13.50 Double Dragon Eliminator Sorginage Te & Mage Untouchables 69988 ... AMSTRAD 464/664 Football Manager 2 Galdragons Dom Garyline Shot Grone Ranger 2 Heherster Heroes of the Lance IDD) . Leaderboard Collection Led Stom Live and Lot Die 13.50 575 1050 575 10.50 6.75 9.50 6.75 10.50 625 10:50 Dungeon 1650 Fodor Traders Warehampions 6.5 12.50 COMMODORE 64 1943 Arumer 875 1050 Barbara Bords Tale 675 10.50 Bards 2 Bards Tale 3 Cybermeid Daley Thompson Double Dragon Barbarian 2 Bards Tale Compion Domi2 Day Thompsons 88 Double Dragon 625 1050 525 1050 5.50 9.50 6.75 10.50 6.75 950 9.50 6.25 10.50 Nigel Mansel GP Night Raider Ocean Compilation Operation Wolt Outrun Disc Food Director 2 675 10.50 8.75 10.50 1650 Cone Ranger 2 1995 Hot Site 16.50 Horses of the Lance Empire Strikes Back Leaderboard Collection Lad Storm Legend of the Storm Lords of the Rising Sun Live and Let Die Motorbike Madness Netherworld Nigel Mansel GP Night Raider Operation Wall Uimas Umale Gol Untouchables Vindicator We are the Champions SPECTRUM 48/128/+3 Cuss 1943 Action Service Arumer Antura 5.50 Barbarian 2 Bards Tale Carrier Command 10.50 Corruption Cybemod2 5.50   Double Dragon 6.75 Echelon 6.75 5.50 9.50 9.50 100 675 625 10.50 6.75 625 950 550 950 13.50 6.75 9.50 9.50 6.75 8.25 Joan of Arc 13.50 1050 10.50 12.50 10.50 10.50 Eliminator Empire Strikes Back Fists and Thrones Football Manager 2 F Bruno Bg Bos Game Set & Mach 2 Gary Lines Hot Shell 11.50 Football Manager F. Bruno Big Box Game Set & Match 2 Gary Linekers Hot Shot Gl Hero Gnome Ranger 2 Gold Silver Bronze Guerila War Heroes of the Lance IDADI 1550 Caderboard Collection 1650 od Storm 1550 Live and Lot Die Pool of Radiance R-Type Rambo 3 Return of the Jedi Roadsters Roy of the Rovers Spiting Image Supreme Challenge Tato's Coinop Hits The Games Winter Thunderblade Tiger Road 9.50 10.50 6.75 9.50 10.50 90 1250 6.75 1050 8.75 9.50 10 50 1250 10.50 12.50 6.75 10.50 10 50 1650 10.50 10.50 Come Ranger 2 Gold Silver Bronze 950 9.50 5.50 625 950 Realm of the Trolls Acungi the Jedi Rock Ranger Tye Sargen Chess Shoot Em Up Construction Sky Chase Space Hair 16.50 Nigel Mansel GP 19.95 Night Raider 1650 Operation Wolf 160 Ourun Heroes of the Lance 9.50 9.50 Last Ninja 2 Leaderboard Collection Pool of Radiance 060) 10.50 Lancelot Last Ninja 2 Leaderboard Collection 875 Led Storm Live and Lot Die Fists and Throttles 9.50 10.50 1050 10.50 10.50 10.50 1050 Live and Lot Die Netherworld Untouchables 875 6.75 675 6.75 675 9.50 16.50 Rain of the Trolls 18.50 Reum of the Jedi 13 50 Roadster 825 1050 550 950 550 9.50 Football Manager 2 5 Sargide 2 Summer Olympia 75 1050 Virus Ocean Compilation Night Raider All prices include VAT and P&P in the UK. Please add  to overseas orders for P&P. Add 50p to your order if your require recorded delivery (UK only). Please make Cheques/Postal Orders payable to VECTOR SOFTWARE. Orders normally dispatched within 24 hours. Send SAE for free Price List please specify machine. Any titles which are not yet released when ordered will be sent on day of release. No visitors please we are a specialist mail order company. "


"PAMMBI4:18.PNAFTNINMFMofft C&v . combat tactics and strategy >> standing when it comes to Dungeonmaster would leave Ultima V QUOTES Ultima V Warriors of Destiny XUNMY.MM.MPPMATH.FPFAB1418.PNARY:NINS:FM-ff1) SO 44M4.MWMPPMath.PP.AMPABI418.PAMENIST:+46-4f71] (One of the best computer RPG's I have played.>> (The Ultima series-the gaming.>> most successful sagas in the history of computer Ultima Vis Available Now From Lord British, one of fantasy gaming's in a desperate call to arms you are most imaginative authors, comes Ultima V. summoned back to Britannia to discoverthe fate latest in the award-winning Ultima saga. More of Lord British and to defeat the self-righteous than four man-years in the making a labyrinth tyranny that is founded in misguided virtues, of mystery and intrigue, Ultima V: Warriors of Available now for C64/128, Disk .95, Destiny will be your greatest challenge! The fantastic discovery of the new underworld entices Lord British from Britannia to explore the vast reaches of the unknown Mysteriously, all contact with the good king and his companions is lost. In Britannia, fear turns to panic when thegroup's sole survivor returns with dreaded tales of the expeditions fate. Origin, MicroProse, 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Glos, GL8 8DA. Tel: 0666 54326 HORIGIN PAPABIH-18.PNAFpNIIT: r off "


"4 LEPU 31 Tiu LHERE the \"Rung ho thoug SUPPLIER: MANDARIN SOFTWARE/LEVEL 9. The next day, after the MACHINES: DISKS WITH GRAPHICS .95, ATARI ceremony, Arthur related that elot recognised many of the many of his knights were held ST: AMIGA: AMSTRAD hose of former great knights. CPC/PCW: MACINTOSH; imprisoned in Logris, a land 11 to hear a scraping. Perhaps SPECTRUM +3. DISKS WITH outside his territory. \"Go there os were unsheathed nearby GRAPHICS .95, BBC at once, and free my men who anosel Haredi sant entered from 128/MASTER: COMMODORE 64. DISKS, TEXT ONLY are under seige, that they may .95, APPLE II; ATARI return to me,\" he commanded, XL/XE. CASSETTES, TEXT the glances exchanged between A Lancelot prays for success. ONLY .95, AMSTRAD Lancelot and Guenevere CPC; ATARI XL/XE; passing unnoticed. had imprisoned many of COMMODORE 64: MSX; So Lancelot rode to Logris, Arthur's brave knights. SPECTRUM. REVIEWER: KEITH where treacherous knights However, it was protected by CAMPBELL. roamed. Before long, despite secret devices which concealed the trickery of Sir Phelot, he the pit in which the knights Squire Lancelot rode his steed had rescued the hawk were held. Sir Lancelot soon towards Camelot, slowing belonging to the Dame decided that rescuing Sir down as he approached a ford. Lyonesse, and driven away the Meliot would be a far easier The Black Knight challengedarmy that held her manor quest... him: 'Show you are worthy, under seige. By now, in The adventure is in three before I will allow you to company with the lovely parts, with the first two parts cross!' he exclaimed. So Damsel Maledisant, and the consisting of different areas, Lancelot did attack him, and stalwart Red Knight, whose life Camelot and Logris. On the before long, being a capable he had spared, he started larger memory machines, swordsman, he had the knight searching in earnest for moving from one to another at his mercy. Behaving in the Arthur's missing knights. simply causes a pause while a most chivalrous way, he was His quest was not easy, new set of data is read in. The IM. rewarded with an invitation to involving challenges all along third part is a progression from the King's presence the next the way. Sir Turquin, for parts 1 and 2, and involves day, to be made a Knight of the example, soon surrendered to Lancelot in the quest for the Round Table, for the Black the sword of Lancelot, but Holy Grail. It can be started Knight was none other than quickly ran off to the safety of without the need to complete AKC self portrait King Arthur himself. his manor house, wherein he the first parts. LANCI AWFUL LITTLE GRI Fold away board. PUBLISHER: STEVE JACKSON GAMES. SUPPLIER: GAMES OF LIVERPOOL RATING: ABSOLUTE NOVICE UPWARDS. PRICE: .75. REVIEWER: WAYNE. themselves laid eggs. The babies turn into adults. In this If you have even seen the monsters went forth and game the older you are the episode of Star Trek called The multiplied, and now the crew better you fight, so an army of Trouble With Tribbles and has just realised the adults is preferable. The enjoyed it, then this game is for predicament they are in, as the monsters then Move as far as you.!! monsters have a nasty habit of they can and Attack the crew Like that particular episode, eating them!! members if possible. Finally a space ship and its crew, who This is a board game for two they can Wake up any of their boldly want to go where no one players. One player plays the associates that have been put to has gone before, stop off on a crew, his aim is to destroy all sleep by various weapons. planet and discover a world the monsters, whilst the other The Crew player performs with semi-intelligent life. After takes the part of the Awful fe. After takes the part of the Awful hi his turn sequence as follows: completing all their tests and Green Things, and try to eat all Grab Weapons, Move, Attack, experiments they leave, taking the crew. Wake Up. Again this is very along what they thought was a The crew must now discover easy to follow and self mascot. the monster's whereabouts and explanatory. The combat What they didn't know, was combat can begin! This is system involves the rolling of that the supposed mascot, in where the fun starts. The varying numbers of six sided the form of a mineral sample, monsters move first and play dice depending on the attack was in fact an alien egg. On their turn in this self total, adding them up and board and in solitude, the egg explanatory sequence; Grow, seeing if the total dice roll hatched into an Awful Green Move, Attack, Wake Up. As exceeds the constitution Thing. This little monster grew stated above, the monsters number printed on the and in turn laid more eggs. Grow at a phenomenal rate. In opponent's chit. If it does they These in turn grew into Awful the Grow phase fragments and die and are removed from the Green Things and they eggs turn into babies, while board, if it doesn't they survive Green plastic box about the size of two KitKat's, fits in your pocket no problem. 114 Designed by the best boys Steve Joch ar "


"the ch the fightwhen the royal party CELOT thing like that.\" everything went crazy, the Red Adventure authors should Knight started attacking me, be extremely careful when and eventually, failing to deter writing in a reply like that him, I was forced to restart. their parser and vocab has got So whilst it is very good, I to be 100% watertight if the wouldn't describe it as Level player is not to be offended. I 9's best ever, any more than 1 was offended a number of would agree with Mandarin's times, and also a little irritated Press Release claim that Level unave you join the Company at the to be told. \"There is no verb in 9 is the acknowledged world und Table. Come to me tomorrow, at that sentence' after a perfectly leader in adventure software. legitimate command had been Whilst Level 9 are certainly one entered. This, it seems, is a of the top companies in the peculiarity of the parser when field, without a doubt the hand, Sire? attack sheep dealing with complex GO TO's honour of world leader must (eg GO TO MERLIN), go to Infocom, hotly pursued A Britain's green and pleasant although it also crops up when by Magnetic Scrolls. land much simpler commands are in conjunction with \"Lancelot' is based on the entered. Lancelot, there is a treasure fifteenth century book \"Le In short, the game does not hunt competition, with a Morte D'Arthur\" by Sir have the same robust feel about ,000 replica of the legendary Thomas Mallory. Researched it that was characteristic of by Pete Austin, it has the Ingrid. The OOPS and RAM This has already been hidden at authentic flavour of the legend SAVE commands are more a secret location in the UK, and of the knights of the round useful than ever with this plot, competitors for it will have to table. and GO TO, FIND, and RUN take part in a two-stage contest According to Mandarin TO, take the drudgery out of based on clues within the game. Software, Pete Austin of Level trudging around from place to Lancelot comes in a sturdy 9 describes it as their best place, speeding up the pace of cardboard box, complete with adventure yet. the game immeasurably. But in a map of Arthurian England, It is a fine adventure, but using these, somewhere along and a 20 page glossy whilst the atmosphere is the way I must have tried instruction book, and excellent, it tends to lack something just a bit too background story. humour somewhat, taking complicated, and came itself just a little too seriously. unexpectedly across a The graphics, although artist VOCABULARY 8 hay-making scene. I can only drawn, are nowhere near the assume that a bumper harvest ATMOSPHERE 9 standard found in Ingrid's was in progress, for I got the PERSONAL Back. And the game is not reply: \"A voice in the distance A boat could be useful. above replying in the vein: shouted 'Wod! A stack VALUE \"You must be mad to say a overflow.\" From then on, EN THINGS FROM RSPACE both well explained and funny at the same time. The game itself is very, very easy to play and can be played time and time again. Experienced gamers may and stay. is to play for Victory Points. well like this game because of The aim of the crew is to use these vary according to the the novelty value and the all of the weapons available to way the game ends. If the general lunacy that can be had them to dispose of the aliens. monsters take over the ship, playing it. It also benefits from There are nine weapons they score a maximum, being compactly designed, available, which range from however, if the Crew manages because as it is pocket sized, fire extinguishers, gas grenades to set the ship on self destruct you can carry it around. to rocket fuel and pool cues. before this, the monster's Basically, if you want a There is even a robot available, victory points are halved. couple of hours of cheap, which is pretty lethal to the The game itself comes in a enjoyable, wacky aliens and kills them off in very handy plastic pocket sized entertainment, you won't go massive quantities. Althoughb ox, which contains all you far wrong with this game. the crew has more powerful need to play except the dice, of weapons, monsters can which you need to buy a total PLAYABILITY 7 reproduce quicker and have of six. You also get a fairly COMPLEXITY 2 almost unlimited large colour map, which reinforcements. It really is a represents the spaceship. DESIGN case of can the crew blast away Also included is a 24 page,  VALUE the monsters before they are easy to read rulebook, which is whittled down by overwhelming odds. There are quite a few ways a player can win the game. One way is to play until one player decides that things are looking hopeless and gives up. Another Cut out card board bits. 115 e Jackn und co. "


"Commodore Amiga Atari ST The Knight one of three Converse through character simple commands classes. and menus. DISCOVER AN ARCADE ADVENTURE WITH HIDDEN DEPTHS Discover Times Of Lore, Origins first adventure on cassette. Acclaimed British designer Chris Roberts has taken the best of arcade and adventure fast and furious combat stunning graphics and animation, unrelenting danger and challenge-and introduced the depth of a classic fantasy role playing game. Entirely joystick driven, Times Of Lore conC64/128 tinuously tests your combat skills while you gradually become involved in a compelling plot. With 13,000 screen locations, a powerful but easyto-use menu and icon interface, scores of interactive characters and music by Martin Galway, it ventures further than other arcade adventures. Origin have broken new ground in Times Or Lore. Isn't it time you did too? Available for: Spectrum C64/128 Cassette .95, Disk .95 Spectrum 48/128K Cassette .95 Spectrum +3 Disk .95, Amstrad 464/6128 Cassette 19.95, Disk $14.95, Atari ST .95, IBM/PC & Compatibles $24.95, Apple .95, Commodore Amiga $24.95. Amstrad Journey through an immense world of cities dungeons and a stunning variety of natural terrain. Origin, MicroProse 2 Market Place Tetbury, Glos, GL8 8DA. Tel: 0666 54326, ORIGIN "


"proach 16.99 Dandy ...MAIL SOFT... SIMPLY THE CHEAPEST MAIL ORDER COMPANY Spec Spec 064 064 Am Ams Spec Spec...064.064.Ams.Ams ...Cass Os Cass DskCass Osk Software STAmiga I Software Titles Cass DskCass Dsk Cass Dsk Software STAmiga Software... STAmiga 1499 1875 Gunship 15 99 Magnificent 7 Spectrum 512 6.99. 05699056.9905 Heroes Of Lance 19.99.19.99 Mansells Racing 7.50 D37.50 D4 750 D4 Action Service Motor Massacre 16.99.15.99 Hitchhikers Guide 16.99.16.99 30 Hercopter. A 625 02 750 4 750 D4 Art Studio 14.99 D 3D Wander 13.99 15.99 HS Mission 1114.99 14.99 6 99 8 .99.03 6.99 02 Alter Burner 6.9903 Monday 2 5 Star Hits 5T 6.99036.9003 Interceptor 18.75 550 01 699 036.99 02 Starglider Alien Syndrome 630 Night Raider Action Service 13 99.13.99 ineral Soccer 7 50 02 750 4750 D4 13.99.13.99 Airbourne Ranger 750.03 After Burner 13.99 15.99 Ocean Comption 1 Iron Lord 890. OS 750 1750 8.99 D58.99 DS Stargoose Arcade Force Four 6.99 Alien Syndrome 13 99.13.99 14.99 1599 Ocp Art Studio B 99 .994 Artura 15 99 Jewels Of Darkness 11 99 11.09 STOS Operation Wolf. 599.03 6.99036.99. 04 Barbarian 11 13.99 13.99 Street Fighter..........15.99.19.99 Outrun...... 6.99 02 750 047.50...04 Arstil GK 12.99 Batman. 13.99 15.99 Overlander... Super Hang On......13.99 550 01 699.03.16.99 .03 Artisti 3 Disk 1499 Battle Chess 18.75 King of Chicago.... 19.99..19.99 Super loe Hockey Pacland... .630. 6.99...03...16.25 Artura........... 625 02 Bermuda Triangle....16.99 15.99 SO 699 03 Barbanan il.... 6.25 D3 69903 ..6.99D36.99. 03 Beyond Ice Palace. 13.99.15.99 Lancelot Techno Cop 13.99.15.99 Pegasus Bridge ...8.99. 899 05 8.99 D5 Bards Tale... Bionic Commando... 15.9918.75 18.75.18.75 .50 04 Leaderboard Col15.09.19.99 7,5004 Peter Beardsley..6.30.. ......6.99 D3 6.99 03 Batman 6.25 D3 699 03 Leathernecks Black Tiger 1 3.99 13.99 Psycho PON UXB6.99 The Pawn Batteld Germany 8.99 11 9911 99 Pulls Saga...........6.99 04 750 047.50.04 Led Storm 15.99 19.99 Three Stooges. 15.99.19.99 Black Tiger. Bomb Jack 13.99 1599 6. D2, 70 D4 750 D4 Legend Of Sword .... 14.99.14 99 Thunder Blade 15.99..19.99 Question Sport. 9.90 029.99059.99. 05 Bubble Bobbie 1 199 11 99 Linekers Hot Shot 1599 Time Stood Sull Rambo 111 ...5.99D3 6.993 6.9903 Carrier Command 9.99 D3 ..9.99 04 Buggy Boy ...... Linekers S. Ski Time Magick 13.99.13.99 Red October ...... ..9.99 9.99. 05 9.99.05 Cybernoid 116 .25 126.99 D Buicher Hill 15.99 15.00 Road Blaster. 1 39913 99 LiveLet Die 16.99 02 Trivial Pursuit... 13.99 ... 6.99D2 ..750 04 7.50.04 Dandy.............. 6.50 1999 1999 Mike Reads Quiz .... 13.90..15.99 Robocop ......5.99 D3 ..6.99. 03 6.9903 Try Pursuit New15.99.15.99 Dark Fusion Captain Blood 15.99.15.99 15.99 15.99 5.40 D2 Roy Or Rovers Motor Massacre 6.25 02 Ultima 3 16.99.16.99 75004 Dark Side Carrier Command 14.99 14.99 16.99 16.95 type Ultima 4 ..5.99. 03 .6.99 03 Double Dragon Champion Cricket13.99.13.99 Netherworld D3 Salamander ..6.99...03 6.99 03 15.99.15.99 Chessmaster 2000 1875 1875 18.7518.75 Samurai Warrior S25 .5.99.01... 5.9903 D. Toms Olympics Chuck Yeagers 18.75 18.75 15.9919.99 6.99 DS 6.99 6.25...02 Uninvited 5.9903 9.99 04 Corruption Obitrator Silicon Dreams Verminator 8.99...02 8.9905 6.99 04 Operation Wort 13.99.15.99 Victory Road ..750...04 6.99 04 Soldier Of Fortune 599 De Luxe Scrabble 13.9913.99 Outrun 6.99...03 Espionage 65001 6.2503 Defender of Crown 19.99.19.99 Overlander 8.9904 13.99.15.99 War Middle Earth 15.99 15.99 Exploding Fist 5.99 Sorcerer Lord Double Dragon1399 15 99 WEC Le Mans 1399 1599 Fist Throttle 899 03 3.9903 Dragon Nina 8,992 13.99 15.99 9.99 DS Pintstones.... 550 6.99...03 13.99 13.99 Dungeon Master 15 99 15 99 Summer Olympiad FBnnos Bax 9905 D. Toms Olympics 1399 15 99 13.99 13.99 Super Sports Echelon Head Cleaner 356.99 Eliminator Tato Coin Oos 13.99.13.98 Pool Of Radiance 1699 1999 10 X Unbranded 999 Target Renegade Gauntlet 11. 5.9902 Techno Coo 18.9918.98 Guerilla War 62503 Empire Strike 13.99 1399 Comp Pre-Back 11.99 Guild of Thieves. 38.99 Espionage Comp Pro-Clear 12.99 F15 Strike Eagle 15.99 13.99 The Games Que son of Sports 1399 1599 GL Hono Fernandez Must Die 15.99 15.90 The Pan 128K Rambo 111 Game Set. Mach 2 399 DS Final Command Red October 1599 1599 Theatre Europe Quickshot 2 Turbo -10.99 on Lond Thunder Blade Return To A nts Fighe Sum 2 Thunder Cats Return To Genises 11.99 11.99 Koi Autore 10.99 Robocop 13 991599 Tiger Road Kama The Stood Sot Foot Director 11 Rocket Ranger 1 5.9919.99 Foot Manager 2 Time Mag R Type 15.99.15.99 Special Offer On J er. 3 Disk Frontier Sargon 3 Chess 1699 16 99 Disks x 10 Niort Ore Town Ecipe Scenery D T 16 99 16.99 Sony Kodak Maxell JVC Konami Collection 6.99 05 Game Over 11 Scenery Disk X1 16.99 Track Suit Manager Verbatim DSDD Garfield 13.99 15 99 Scenery Dok Japan 13 99 Only  8.99 02 Garrison 1 or 2 Scenery Di Europe 13.99 ...10.99 05 Ghost & Goblins 13.99 15 99 Victory Road 6.99 03 6.9903 6.99 02 Goldrunner 15.99 15 99 Sent Service Also available on Disk Format: 16.99 16.99 The Vindicator Hotshot 525 02 Golden Path............... 11.99.11.99 Sabad 5.25 D1 D108.99, 02 E10.50 15.99.19.99 Linekers Skil 6.25 02 Gnome Ranger... 13.99.13.99 Soccer Supremo 10.99 10.99 D39.90, D4.11.99 LiveLet Die WEC Le Mans 5.99036.99 D3 D5-12.50, D614.99 6.99...03 Magnificent 7. 6.99 02 Guld of Thieves....... 14.99.14.99 Space Harrier 11 13.99 1599 5.99D25.99 D3 6.99 03 P.P included in the UK, EEC add 1 per item. Elsewhere add .50.Ch.PO, payable to Mailsoft VG) PO Box 50, London NIS 6. Please specity machine type in your order and also a second choice in case software is out of stock or not toased yel. New releases will be sent out on day of release .... . . .. . .... .........PRICE MATCHING you see a software tem advertised cheaper by another company, send us the lower amount and we will match the price. This does not apply to other companies special offers Access and Visorders welcomed 688 88888 688 88 88888888888 $$$ NANON $$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$ 28 88 88 88 888888 88 8 888888888888 8888 88888 88888888 888 888 888 8888 88 888 88 888 8 88 228888 888 8888888 88 24 COMPUTER REPAIRS CASPARES SINC HOUR SINCLAIR QUALITY APPROVED REPAIR CENTRE HOW TO GET YOUR 48K SPECTRUM REPAIRED FOR ONLY .95 VOS QUALITY TEN * REPAIR SERVICE While you wait repairs 22.50 48K Spectrum. .00 Spectrum+2 All computers fully overhauled and fully tested before return Fully insured for the return journey. Fixed low price of 19.95 including post. packing parts, labour. Spectrum-2 repairs only .00 fully inclusive + Discounts for schools and colleges Six top games worth .00 free with every Spectrum repair. Now includes FREE memory/keyboard test. We also repair Commodore 64's, VIC 20. Commodore 16+4. Spectrum+2 and +3. The most up to date test equipment developed by us to locate faults within your computer Rubber keyboard repair ireplacement membrane only. Just .00 including p-p.  3 month written guarantee on all repairs Commodores Repaired Spectrums Repaired BEST SERVICE BEST PRICES! ARE YOU ANOTHER CUSTOMER fed up waiting weeks for your estimate? Need your computer repaired fast? Then send it now to the Videovault 24hr Repair Service. We are able to repair your 48K Spectrum using all the latest in test equipment for only 19.95. We can also supply you with power supplies & membranes We will repair your computer while you wait and help you with any of your technical problems. Commodore computers repaired for only .00. Please note we give you a 100% low fixed price of .95 which includes return post and packing VAT, not a between price like some other Repair Companies offer. We don't ask you to send a cheque in for the maximum amount and shock you with repair bills 630 upwards. Don't forget we are Amstrad approved for quality and speed, don't risk your computer to any other unauthorised repair centre. We don't just repair the fault and send your computer back, we give your computer a free overhaul. FREE OVERHAUL WITH EVERY REPAIR WE DO:We correct colour, sound, keyboard, check the loading and saving chip, even put new feet on the base if required. Check for full memory, check all sockets including ear/mike and replace where needed. All for an inclusive price of .95 which includes VAT, parts & labour return post, packing & insurance. No hidden extras whatsoever. (Should a computer be classed as unrepairable due to tampering there will be a charge made of E10 We may be able to offer a replacement circuit board at an additional charge. URGENT NOTICE Don't be misted by adverts showing between prices. Arecent complaint against a Manchester repair firm, Mancomp was upheld by the Advertising Standards Authority on two counts. \"It had stated BBC repairs between  and  then charged the customer E85. Their guarantee policy was misleading as it did not make clear that all repairs were not covered E abwene Mideo Vault ovaWUWhy not bring your THE VIDEOVAULT COMPUTER COMPANION Send your computer to:EDITION NOW HOT OFF THE PRESS Old Kingsmoor School Railway Street, Hadfield, New bigger catalogue now available containing over 2.500 Cheshire SK 14 BAA. Tel:04574 66555/67761/69499 items including software for all computers.joysticks, spare Main Office, enquiries and orders only parts business software books, plus many more. Just send 3x 180 stamps for your free copy. Over 20 pages full of top Manchester telephone 061-236 0376 While you wait centre only qualty products delivered to your door by return post. FAX NO. 04574 68946  COPYRIGHT VIDEOVAULT NO. 889061 computer in for while you wait services YOURS CREUM REPAIR TAPE TO TEST YOUR .00 6GREAT FREE GAMES LUSS FREE TESTER ON EACH PONO KEYBOARD MEMORY TEST * YOURS FREE WITH EVERY "


"lay Masters A very big, red-leaved and autumnal welcome to Playmasters. This month there's a bumper package of maps, hints and tips across all formats. Firstly there's the second part of the mega Last Ninja Il map, followed by an expansive Armalyte map to help you through this fabulous shoot 'em up. We also have a Starglider Il player's guide to give potential Egron busters a helping hand, as well as the usual supply of mini tips, hints and POKES. If you have some tips, maps or POKEs, send 'em in to: Playmasters, C + VG, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Don't forget that there's a bundle of software for the best tips of the month Bruce Wood and Daz Hall of Harworth, and John Maguire of Dublin were winners this month. BANGKOK KNIGHTS (System 3) Type in this listing if you're finding System 3's kick boxing game too easy. When you've finished, RUN it and press play on tape. You didn't forget to put in the tape did you? Cheers to Bruce 'n' Daz for this C64 listing. 10 FOR A = 608 TO 624: READ B: POKE A,B:NEXT 20 FOR A=53123 TO 53256:READ B: POKE A,B:NEXT 30 SYS 608 40 DATA 32, 44, 247, 32, 108, 245, 169, 128 50 DATA 141, 237, 2, 76, 166, 2, 76, 221, 207 60 DATA 169, 32, 141, 249, 3, 169, 246, 141, 250 70 DATA 3, 164, 207, 141 251, 3, 169, 16, 141 80 DATA 252, 3, 169, 127, 76, 81, 3, 169, 234, 141 90 DATA 75, 169, 0, 141, 250, 75, 169, 234, 141 100 DATA 170, 17, 141, 171, 17, 90 PACLAND (Grand Slam) If you're a C64 Pacland owner, you might find this Bruce and Daz listing very useful for the little yella fella. Just type it in and RUN it for infinite lives. TO HELL AND BACK (CRL) I quite like this game it's not brilliant, but it's fun and that's what counts. It's even more fun when you enter this William de Sausmarez POKE, Load the game and reset the machine. Type POKE 32371, 173 (RETURN) for unlimited lives, or POKE 32524, 173: POKE 32483, 173 (RETURN) for infinite energy. Restart the game with SYS 30464 PLAYER ONE DAN FISTS (RETURN) and you'll find life HHHHON 5200) a lot less difficult. NO HI NS ONE WIN FMy Toy ALL SOUNDS. A Bangkok Knights 141, 162, 9, 252,0 you've finished, RUN it and 1090 DATA 0, 96, 169, 49, press play on tape. Another 141, 159, 2, 169 Bruce and Daz C64 special 1100 DATA 234, 141, 160, 10 DATA 32, 86, 245, 169, 2.76, 237, 246, 0, 0 0, 141, 28, 4, 169, 208, 141, 29,4 BATTLE VALLEY (Rack-It) 20 DATA 96, 169, 0, 141, Hewson's budget label has 67, 50, 141, 46, 58, 169, 165, spawned quite a few good 141 titles and this is one of 30 DATA 184, 69, 76, 132, them. If your tank and 255, 0, 0 helicopter are being blown up 40 FOR A = 53234 TO before you get the chance to 53263: READ Z: POKE A, Z: complete the mission, type in NEXT this wild 'n' whacky listing for 50 POKE 646, 5:POKE 157, unlimited everything. When 128: SYS 53234 PAUSED FIRE A To Hell and Back REVENGE OF DOH (Imagine) If you're fretting because I didn't print a cheat for the C64 version last month, quit worrying. Just type CHEETAH into the highscore table and you'll be graced with a million billion lives. John Maguire found that interesting little feature. INT tot 1000 FOR Z=53179 TO 53242: READ A 1010 POKEZ, A: NEXT: POKE 646, 3: POKE 157, 128 1020 SYS 53174 1030 DATA 169, 207, 141, 41, 3, 32, 86, 245 1040 DATA 169, 32, 141, 187, 3, 169, 240, 141 1050 DATA 188, 169, 2, 141, 189, 3, 160 1060 DATA 15, 185, 222, 207, 153, 240, 2, 136 1070 DATA 16, 247, 96, 238, 32, 208, 238, 33 1080 DATA 208, 169, 189, NETHERWORLD (Hewson) What's the point completing a level the hard way when all you have to do is press 2,4 and E together to finish a screen. That's another one from John Maguire of Dublin. ROCHETS 58 COUNT A Baffle Valley L "


"PSYCHO SOLDIER the bottle is collected, all picked up a ground-to-air (Imagine) STUNT BIKE SIMULATOR energy is replenished. Okay all you C64 owners. If missile), change into a A clock is found on level (Code Masters) your Psycho Soldier is more Porsche and back. You shoot If you're an Amstrad owner, seven it's on the warp with foward and the chopper flies like a Psycho Knobhead, type a massive cacti and sand try out this bijou tipette from off for some mysterious in this listing to make her well dunes in the background. David Baker of Bromley, hard. When it's finished and reason. This works even if you kent. Just press A, S and D keep shooting the black hole haven't got the first four extra keys together during the checked. RUN the listing and (which is two holes to the right weapons. press play on tape to set this of the warp at the top of the game to slip to the next level. When you're in the air, play BIONIC COMMANDO (GO!) Bruce and Daz listing into screen). There's also a red this bit as a normal shoot 'em motion bottle, located on the warp up. Try and keep the missiles has a little bug. When you Apparently the C64 version with the red exit. Just keep 10 FOR X = 541 TO 578: from the ground section, or shooting along the ground READ Y: POKE X, Y: NEXTlike you did on level three. have a powerful weapon, pick them up as soon as 20 POKE 157, 128: sys 541 possible you need them for restart the game and the 30 weapon will be retained for the helicopters. Keep to the DATA 32, 86, 245, 72, ACTION FIGHTER (Sega) left or right of tanks. When 169, 32, 141, 84, 3, 169, 2, the next game! Thank you Yes, more console tips! you get three subs, take your very murch to William de 141, 86 These were sent in by Phil Sausmarez of Guernsey for 40 DATA 3, 141, 52, 10, time and spend most of the Marley of Poynton, Cheshire. that. 169, 59, 141,51, 10, 104, 238, time dodging their missiles. On level one, collect A, B, SHINOBI (Sega) 32, 208 Try and hit each sub in turn, Simon Scott of London was 50 DATA 96, 72, 77, 80, SCORE 3808 ROWER SO 169, 141.8, 232, 76, 0, 130 very quick to find this cheat mode for Sega's new martial arts game. On the title screen FANTASY ZONE II (Sega) push the controller diagonally Good old Colin Chan has sent up and right and press fire in some very useful hints on button number two and you'll this acid house Sega game. be able to select which screen Well, it's certainly garish you'd like to tackle. enough! MIKE TYSON'S On level two, walk along the PUNCH-OUT (Nintendo) ground and continue to bomb Further to the Mean Machines until a red bottle appears. tips last month. If you want to Pick it up and the ship will be tackle a new order of boxers, awarded with extra fuel just enter 135 792 4680 as the capacity. There's also a pass key and hold down select and the A and B buttons simultaneously and A Fantasy Zone II. Mac is promoted to \"Another C, D, E and F as soon as rather than take them out one World Circuit\". possible. If you have the by one. The reason for this is RAD RACER (Nintendo) choice of entering the SEGA that the last sub on the screen Nintendo's new race game truck and collecting a letter, moves up and down as well as go for the truck. The extra moving left and right, making review, but if you've already arrived just a little too late for weapons should make it a lot it very difficult to score three easier to collect the letters. As hits on it. got it, you might be interested soon as you collect A, B, C On later missions the tanks in this cheat. Start the game and D you are able to knock fire in all directions, so watch by choosing a car, and get a motorcycles off the road, but the ground as well as the air, demonstration screen. Next, don't try it with cars and air, increase the tachometer and bomb the tanks when you ambulances. Keep an eye out get the chance. The airship's reading by pushing the B for road signs warning of button. Now push the start missiles are pretty easy to impending forks and sharp avoid if you don't fly too far button while also pressing the corners. To get rid of the control pad diagonally up and forward. helicopter (if you haven't right and push the B button. OOTINUE This increases the indicator by two. The first one and two hidden shop. represent course one and two, and the next four Level three has a surprise. numbers mean course two. If Find the red warp, then go to a you set the indicator at the shop and buy a laser from maximum 16, you start on them. Go to the part of the course eight. Using this landscape where the method, and with a little background is made up of experimentation you can start diamond-shaped stones and position yourself at the bottom on any course you like. Apparently the final screen half of the screen and shoot. A has a surprise use the clock appears and you're tachometer trick to see it, but awarded an extra ten seconds you need to press the B when you confront the button at least 60 times! end-of-level guardian. There's a blue bottle on ROAD RUNNER (US Gold) level four. It's on the warp with Eeek-a-mundo! John Maguire a load of straight edges and is here yet again with a simple flames, just above the floor to 'n' easy-to-use C64 POKE. the left of the warp hole near Just load the game, reset the the top of the screen. When A Netherworld computer and enter POKE 43241, 36 (RETURN) and LLLL 22 LE4 "


"asters for weapons, they always Rocket Launcher: a luxury seem to carry valuable for the early levels, Power is ammunition. awesome, but lacks QUICK TIPS WEAPONS LIST ammunition and has a nasty habit of blowing up the user if Always leave your men on Heavy Laser: powerful, with he is too near. opportunity fire. loads of ammo, but heavy and  The Marsec auto-gun is the burdens your men, reducing MOONBASE ASSAULT best all-round weapon. their action points. restart the game with SYS The bottom-left is probably  If a door remains open it Marsec Auto-gun: best 4126 (RETURN). Now you the best place to deploy your means that there is a man (i.e. all-round weapon, powerful have an infinite supply of lives an operative) in it. men. Split your squad into two and accurate. to make Wil E Cyote's life a for the best effect. Move your . On level three (The Mine). M4000 Auto-gun: the best complete and utter misery. men towards the central area examine all the dead \"budget\" gun, but lacks the with the most KONAMI'S ARCADE operatives when you kill accuracy of the Marsec databanks/analysers. If a COLLECTION (Ocean) them. You'll find that one is be Auto-gun. door is open it usually means A trio of POKEs for three of carrying a Video Key L50 Las-gun: not very that an operative is in it. Oil the games on this excellent (normally the one near the powerful or accurate, a drums and gas cylinders can C64 compilation. video room). Take this to the For Iron Horse load, reset room which contains the and enter POKE 3368, 181 video console and insert it (RETURN) FOLLOWED BY into the Vidi-screen. This SYS 2176 (RETURN) and activates the video cameras unlimited lives are there, in the mine and allows you to there, there and there for your see the operatives when you pleasure and enjoyment. The select the scanner mode. ever-so-crappy Jailbreak is  On the lower skill levels similarly POKEd into buy the Rocket launcher, the submission by loading the explosion from this is game, resetting the computer awesome. and typing POKE 52050,  The price of weapons on 174:POKE 52097, 174 each level does not vary, so (RETURN) followed by SYS you can calculate how many A \"Road Runner, Road Runner... 51200 (RETURN). Finally, credits to spend on armour so disappointment. be shot at to give a nice Nemesis is made infinitely that you have enough money Sniper Rifle: lacks autofire, explosion and usually a chain easier by resetting the left to buy weapons. but is cheap, powerful and the reaction. Be careful, an machine and entering POKE . Don't go on a spending most accurate. operative does not blow one 5975, 189 (RETURN) and spree if you have money left. Marsec Pistol: has autofire, up next to you. SYS 5768 (RETURN). Cheers can eers Carrying too much reduces but lacks any power: a bit of a once again to John Maguire the available action points to a turkey. from Dublin Dagger: very good for close SCENARIO TIPS  Take your time, you have combat, if you ever get it! THE ASSASINS LASER SQUAD (Target plenty of turns. Explore the AP50 Grenade: good for On the first skill level you can Games) area carefully and ALWAYS blowing up operatives who equip your men with Rocket Colin and Gavin Young have leave your men on autofire. are waiting on autofire around Launchers and blow up the supplied some very  Use a couple of men to a corner. CAUTION get out of house, (and Sterner Regnix) comprehensive tips for this guard the rear of your squad. its field and ALWAYS without even entering the utterly superb Spectrum . On higher levels always remember to prime it before building! On latter levels game. Go and kick ass! scavenge the dead operatives throwing it! better progress can be made if you split your squad into two parts, one at each end, and explore the building carefully. You will find that the droids usually keep some pattern but this is not always the case. When you find Sterner concentrate your fire on him because once he is dead the game is over. man. RESCUE FROM THE MINES Before you use the explosives, which you need to blow up the prison door, move the prisoner away from the door as he will be caught in the blast. When blowing the door always remember to prime the explosive before dropping it, but make sure you allow yourself enough time to get clear of the explosion. As previously mentioned, try and get the video key as this will allow you Romi Finmec 19 to ambush the enemy. en Thin CANVAS \"Beep Beep now, your\". "


"HOLMESOFT ALDERWOOD CENTRE SEDGLEY, DUDLEY, W. MDLANDS, DY3 30Y MAIL ORDER DIVISION OF ESTABLISHED RETAILER (TEL: 0902 313600/8809711 DESPATCH TITLE Spec Spec C64 C64 AMS AMS Cass Disk Cass Disk Cassis 16-BIT AMIG IBM 10 Boot Camp On Road Racing 7.45 11.96 749 11.99 On-Road  Alen Syndrome Aron Syndrome de Force Four The Pro's Choice no caine Stran 2 9.90 12.95 8.88888888888888888 Beyond le Ompetition PRO Bone Commandes California Games Captain Blood oooo 990seg 888888 Champion Sprint Command Performance Covert Action 8:38 a& Thompson Dungeon Master 10.99 P. Fed. Of Free Tracers Farande Must Die Arcade quality joystick fitted with super sensitive microswitches for the ultimate in joystick control. Features include dual fire buttons for left or right hand operation; fimm base pads for non-slip control and a robust steel shaft with rubber retum for a smoother operation. F. Bruno's Box 2.8888888 Footsi Football Man G. Link Sup Skills F & Throles 14.0 1895 Grear una Post Director Fon Figh Back .95* Herpes Of The Lance Garw. Set & Mac Competition PRO Tall War Gold Star Bronze .... Gurship Apache Kennedy Approach Leaderboard Laure Salt Larry i ingrid's black 10 -21 ........ Netherworld Kami Arcade Coll Nhà Laderboard Co Sada CLEAR quality joystick with all features of the Competition Pro 5000 but with an exciting clear case. SCORE LIKE A PRO! seo EDES 8 99 1099 P. Beardsley Fhal Mapa Games Vol. 1 Motor MARBACH 7.49 1199 1095749 11.99 7.49 11.09 Pool Of Radianca Suration of Soon Return of dead Rodos 9888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888 .................. Ocean Completion 88888888888888888888888888 88888888888888888888888 888888888 38 T&C .95 233 338 $49.94 695 H P 6.49 1190 ix Garne Space Maniero Speed Ompetition PRO 3333 8.99 DONN EIGHEET EXTRA ........ 8.20 30 49 Serabble Deluss Where Times Sur Labore .... A brand new fully microswitched arcade quality joystick. Features include RPID FIRE; UNIQUE SLOW MOTION; dual fire buttons; firm base pads, for non-slip control and a robust steel shaft with rubber return for a smoother operation. Sko D. Sokol Fortune 1594 640 Sportowe Soring Images Street Fight mn  6.491099 2495 Cruiser AP 24.95 Dale Joystick go on $16.49 FRX2XXXXNNNNNN comp Tenan Games Or 3205 Koning.Garte 16 SSSSSSSSSS88888 Great Am Focal Great Volleybal They Sold A MinThe Competition Pro range of joysticks carry a two year guarantee The Competition Pro 5000 and Pro Extra are suitable for use with the following computers: Amstrad/Schneider (certain models require an interface for Rapid Fire Slow Motion features): ZX Spectrum (when used with an interface MSX computers: Atari ST: Commodore 64; VIC 20 and Amiga Amstrad; ZX Spectrum, Alarl, and Commodore are trademarks respectively of: Amstrad Consumer Electronics Atari International, Commodore International Lid Lite Soccer 34.5 Dualor interface Recorder Load 2495 Player A 10 1905 Vanes 25 AM) 1996 24.95 10 N We Are Champion Whilig Cheque/PO/Cdraft cash payable to: Holmesoft UK P&P Inc (Red deliv: 50p) Europe add 75 per item Elsewhere .50 (Airmail) UNLISTED ITEMS 20% off Full Price Software 10% off Budget Games 5% off Cartridges & Add-Ons 2295 Data Recorder Splin 22.96 2295 Damer Load 22:16 Stock items usually by return Note Forthcoming releases will be sent on day of release SAE for software/hardware lista # Available from Boots, Argus and all good computer retailers NEW COIN STREET ROYTON OLDHAM OL26JZ ENGLAND TELEPHONE 061 626 7222 TELEX: 669705 COING PERTH WEST BRO DYNAMICS marketing Ltd PHG "


"Welcome to part two of our epic Last Ninja 2 map. If the Gods are with us you may actually be able to buy the game itself by the time you read this! Here we go through the last three loads (load seven being merely the end of load six which programmer John Twiddy couldn't fit on) thanks to Mark, Stan and John at System 3. Climb the ladder and walk back into the last screen where you should Wind you way through the collect the credit card. boxes to exit at the right of the screen. Walk along the catwalk to the door at the far end. Here you should enter the room, defeat its guardian, and collect the food out of the dog bowl on the right (bleurgh!) Whiz back along the catwalk and down the ladder again (If you jump off or try to climb the ladder while holding something you die so don't!) START Walk through these screens on ground level, but be sure to jump over the trolley tracks or you will be crushed. Jump these trolley tracks (they are electrified) and eat the extra life hamburger on the floor to the left. LEVEL 4 One of the hardest bits of the game: only one route works through the boxes, and it matters not only which ones you use but also where on each you stand before the jump. There are two routes you can take once inside the lab. First walk diagonally left, then turn round the corner to dip the meat you have collected in the box of dope (near the back wall). Now go back towo the door, and walk right into the room the panther. Feed it the drugged meat, and you can exit the loaded through the doors. Use the credil card from the startoe level to open it. "


"FINISH Go left jumping the gap (check out Superman in the skyl) and make your way to the next ladder. Climb to the roof and ... leap onto the ladder dangling from the helicopter to escape! LEVEL 5 The fan will blow you off the ledge. Don't try to jump its effects (you can't) but stand by the wall next to it, and by walking at an angle into its path you should be able to get past before you get blown off the edge. Don't climb the ladder, but go through the grating. You end up in the lift shaft, where you should climb the ladder, and go through to the armoury. Don't bother picking up a gun (Ninjas don't use them, remember?) but go through the door to the left. Go through this door to get into the first office. Operate the computer terminal on the right hand side to access a password you will need later on. It is not stored, so write it down! START At the end of the blue corridor is an open area with two doors not shown. The one on the right leads to the red office, but this is a totally pointless Journey because there is nothing there. Go through the second door and you get to the panelled study. Move the pen on the desk top right, and a secret door opens in the wall. LEDE FINISH FAE NINJA 2 ward alk om w eat, it the the art one "


"START STARTER Last ninja 2 You must drop from the helicopter at exactly the right time onto the top turret to the back (using fire or pulling the stick). Now jump onto the right hand turret, then the free standing one that looks like a chimney, and finally down the skylight on the second screen. LEVEL. Go back through the first door and down the dumb waiter on the back wall you will die if you try this without the rope. PUM This is the very end of the game ay two screens but we'll leave it a mystery as to whyou have to fight and what you have to do, don't youhink? Don't go down the stairs because you will trip the infared lights and the alarm will make all the guards much more vicious. LEVEL 7 You land in the middle of the landing. Going through the second door near the stairs takes you into the bedroom where you can take the bellpull (rope) hanging near the bed. You exit in the kitchen. Exit into the hallway and through the other door into the library where you can turn the alarms off at the panel on the far wall. You can now go back up the stairs safely (though you don't need to). FINISH Go out thregh the door on the far right, b first turn on the lights at thpanel near the door. If you ho turned the lights on it will look e the top picture, if you forgot will be dark like the bottomYou must redirect the deadly stem that comes from the boiler moving the plates on the boir door to get past. There is another doorway hidden behind the potted plants. Go through it and you end up in the cellar. "


"Play Masters targlider 8899) how to get the Icarus' pilot counch for them, please let me know!). With these, you must destroy the projector bases being built on the moons of Millway (only bouncing bombs will do it). This gives you enough time to collect all of the needed parts for the bomb. Eventually though, all of the projector bases will have been built, and work begins on the space station. Luckily, Hints 'n' tips by this time, you should have 000076 the neutron bomb ready (what do you mean you haven't?), 3 0020 so use the missiles and a few blasts of your lasers to Use the maps provided to dispose of the mini-sentinels help you get around. Here is a protecting the station, then go rundown of the planets and and collect old Mr Neutron.. moons... That's it, sling it under your SOLICE: Red and yellow in ship, and fly to the Space colour, this is the sun. Don't station. Polish off any go near! remaining mini-sentinels, DANTE: Red in colour, this is then destroy the station itself the first planet of the system. with the neutron bomb. And the hottest. All that remains for you to VISTA: This is blue, and is do now is to congratulate the second planet of the yourself ... and do it all over system. again, with less time before APOGEE: This is grey and is work beings on the space the third planet of the system. station! The Icarus begins the game Radiation Detected: 9518 Trem asks you to collect... here. It has a tunnel system an asteroid, and keep it in on with building the thing A case of nuclear fuel The (see maps). It has two moons. range of the Icarus, and you whilst you are galavanting last planet will provide this. ENOS: This is dark grey, and will energise. If it blows up around in the Icarus. A lump of mineral rock The pretty dull. before you are completely Fly to Broadway, and moon of the last planet. CASTRON: This is also grey, recharged, find another one, through the tunnels to the A crate of castrobars Blow and has its own tunnel system and do the same to that one. depot. There they inform you up a few pirates! DON'T collect the asteroids to that Professor Taymar is A cask of vistan wine Blow are in this depot energise off them later, as doing some galavanting of his up a few more pirates! MILLWAY: This is the gas they explode if they are own in his souped-up An Egron mini-rocketgiant, and is bright red in jettisoned. Emma-2. He is always flying Same place as bouncing colour. Don't go near it! It has Don't get to close to things around on Broadway, so b ombs. seven moons. that you are attacking, as collect him as you would any An asteroid In space, BROADWAY: As with the when they blow up and have a other object. While you are in no-one can hear you get rest of millway's moons, it is habit of throwing shrapnel the Broadway depot, you may them! dark red. It has a tunnel into your shields. as well collect the four A flat diamond On the system. Take notes of which moon missiles that they have built second planet. APEX: The second moon. of millway is having a for you (there's more where A cluster of nodules On the ESPRIT: The third moon. projector base built on as the that came from!). hottest planet. QUESTA: The fourth moon messages come in. As soon as you can, fly to Professor Halsen Taymar WESTMERE: The fifth moon. The Mission the tunnel depot at Castron Burning rubber on Broadway. SYNAPSE: The sixth moon. Follow the tunnel down on and collect the four bouncing Of course, some things can WACKFUNK: The last of Apogee until you reach the bombs. (If anybody knows be found elsewhere! Millway's moons. depot. They ask you if you Map of tunnels. ALDOS: This is the last want them to build you a planet in the system. It is light personalized neutron bomb, APOGEE BROADWAY CASTRON which, of course, you say yes Q-BETA: This is the lone to. They then ask you to moon of Aldos. It is dark blue. DEPOT collect the ingredients The space station is in DEPOT needed for this (see following geo-stationary orbit around it. chart). Fly back out and General Tips: collect the needed things Use the 'Painting with Rolf' from the option on the title screen to planets/moons/space by get yourself acquainted with tractor-beaming it, then the different objects you will collecting it. BEWARE! The DEPOT meet. Icarus can only hold two or IN IN IN Re-energise by flying along three objects at a time, so power lines (trying not to when you have collected your NEUTRON MISSILES BOUNCING crash into them), or maximum, return to the BOMB BOMBS preferably, by flying out into Apogean depot, and heftison In at 83-34 In at 79-92 In at 75-30 space and space-hopping them there. Try and get the asteroid field. Tractor-beam Prof first, as he can be getting Turn Left Turn Right Turn Left Turn back up Turn Right right tube Turn Left blue "


"OPERATION WOLF COMPO Operation Wolf is a wicked sort of game, everyone knows that. Read between the lines of the C+VG Christmas Crackers booklet and you'll work out that most of the staff are confident it'll be THE number one this Christmas. We couldn't fit another competition into the book, so we've got one over here in the bulk of the magazine instead. Besides all the various men you have to send to meet their maker, there are a fair number of helicopters, armoured cars and ships you have to blow sky high. And tanks, plenty of tanks. Ocean have provided us with a bunch of top notch Tamiya model kits of tanks and stuff from throughout the ages, and we're giving ten away (Julian is filching the rest). We've a A American M1 Abrams and British Challenger: two of our giveaways. modern British Challenger, a World War II Tiger tank, a Leopard tank... and loads more. Each is made of genuine plastic, comes complete with all the transfers etc you'll need, and is worth around fifteen quid. Tamiya are generally reckoned to be the best of the plastic model kit manufacturers (though no doubt Airfix etc would disagree) so you can't say that your pals C+VG don't treat you right! Send your entries to this address within the next few weeks for a chance: Operation Wolf Compo, C+VG, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. A couple of Op Wolf style armoured cars. Name........ 2) What was the operation to evacuate the British Expeditionary Force in 1940 from Europe called: Address. a) Operation Thunderblade b) Operation Dynamo c) Operation Budgie 1) What was the name of the operation to invade Sicily in WWII: 3) What was the name of the Allied operation to retake Europe which began with D day: a) Operation Ferret b) Operation Husky c) Operation Wildebeast a) Operation Overlord b) Operation Overkill c) Operation Ovary. "


"BUS SOFTWARE SABIAN ISLAND The Lost Legacy of SABIAN ISLAND Fight through the enemy traps to recover a missing timing device and save New York City. Available in: Spectrum .95 (T). Amstrad +3 .95 (D). Amstrad .95 (T) .95 (D). C64 .95 (T) .95 (D) THE LOST LEGACY OF XIM The first in a series of adventures starring our hero detective Rick Shaw in his first mission to recover a stolen diamond encrusted eagle and solve the mystery of Xim. Available in: Amstrad/ PCW E14.95 (D). Spectrum 48/128 .95 (T). +3 214.95 (D). XIM A Simple Coseo Dusk Espionage OF ESPIONAGE sp DUSK OVER ELFINTON You have been transported to the land of Elfinton for an adventure in a place of magic and Over mystery. A two part graphic adventure for the: Spectrum 48/128 .95 (T). +3 .95 (D). Available soon for Blinton Amstrad and ST. A SIMPLE CASE OF ESPIONAGE The second adventure starring our hero detective Rick Shaw in what started out as another divorce case but finished as anything but! Available in: Amstrad/ PCW .95 (D). Spectrum 48/128 .95 (T). +3 .95 (D). Elfinton SCREEN SOLAR WARRIOR BOUNCE Arcade adventure on the planet 049 as you try to collect the crystals of ZEB from inside a pyramid. One mistake and your transporter flies out of control. Available in: ST .95 (D). Spectrum .95 (T). +3 214.95 (D). C64 .95 (T), E11.95 (D). Amstrad .95 (T) .95 (D). Amiga: available soon SOLAR WARRIOR The only hope left for mankind is in the hands of you, the only remaining Solar Warrior. You must defend Earth's supplies both in deep space and on the surface of our remaining territories. Available in: Amstrad 29.95 (T) .95 (D). Coming soon in: Spectrum C 64, ST Amiga (0) Spectrum 27.95 () Bounce BIG SCREEN HERO Fight your way through your roles as the Big Screen Hero to Hollywood, fame and fortune. Available in: Amstrad .95 (T) E14.95 (D). Other formats available soon. MAIL ORDER COUPON CUSTOMER HOTLINE Order your games by phone. Access or Visa. 091 567 8058 (Rock City) Please send copies of Format _Price NAME (BLOCK CAPITALS) ADDRESS DEALER HOTLINE Trade enquiries and orders phone 091 565 8473 I enclose  (including 50 pence P & P) cheques payable to SKYSLIP MUSIC LTD or debit my ACCESS VISA account. Expiry date Card No: More information tick box o To: Skyslip Software, 5 Stockton Rd., Sunderland, Tyne & Wear SRI 3NR "


"ARMALYTE Printed on the following pages are levels one, two, three and five of Armalyte, Thalamus' brilliant new C64 shoot'em up. We didn't think it was worth including level four it hasn't got any scenery! The rest of the levels will be printed next month. What do you mean you haven't got Armalyte yet? Masters re! LEVEL 1 Jay "


"LEVEL 2 emens di S ARMALYTE Three inli Play Masters "


"ROBBEARY Bertie, an agile and clever bear has targeted a famous 24 floors store for his last and most daring ROBBERY With no alarms or visible guards and fabulous treasures, yet it has been avoided like the plague by the criminal fraternity. Bertie soon discovers why? AMIGA .95 HIGHWAY HAWKS Grand Prix driving skills is essential to negotiate the crowded highway at speed. Obliterate the assassins cars and the ones that get in your way but keep the tiger in your tank fed, the engine cool and the tyres and steering intact. Acquisition of faster cars and lethal weaponary depends on your driving and trading skills AMIGA .95 (2 DISCS) TIT EMERALD MINE A giant arcade adventure which has received rave reviews. Each level has its own unique solution and requires ingenuity and dexterity to complete. One player or two players TEAM action for added enjoyment. AMIGA .95 CBM64-PLUS 4 .95 (D) .95 MANIAX Maniax relentlessly pursued by the creature undertakes to clear the thick fog engulfing the world capitals. An addictive game requiring quick thinking and action AMIGA-ST-IBM .95 CBM64-PLUS 4 .95 (D) .95 5 QUANTOX Progress through 24 levels of this fast and furious action. Lightning responses are secondary to the strategic choices between better weaponry or better defence. AMIGA .95 FACE OFF Experience the sheer pace and exhilaration of ICE HOCKEY. Be prepared for the body checks, fouls and rough play. League competition, 1 or 2 player option AMIGA-ST-IBM .95 FACE OFF STRIP POKER II PLUS A sizzling evening with Sam & Donna AMIGA ST-IBM-ARCH. E14.95 SP-AMS-MSX-BBC-ELECTRON CBM64-PLUS 4 .95 STRIP POKER II PLUS DATA DISCS Requires Strip Poker II Plus disc to load Disc 1 Beverly & Dawn Disc 2 Lee & Roy Disc 3 Suzanne & Bianca Disc 4 Rachel & Kim AMIGA-ST .95 DAWN MICRO TEXT MICRO BASE Ideal for home and business use Menu driven to enable a novice to use powerful capabilities with minimal reference to the tutorial manual Micro base a powerful data base with fast SEARCH and SORT facilities includes a very flexible label printer. Sorted files can be used by the Micro Text word Processor to send personalised letters. A boon to any Club Secretary AMIGA .95 EACH BEVERLEY ANCO SOFTWARE LTD, UNIT 9-10 BURNHAM TRADING ESTATE OFF LAWSON ROAD, DARTFORD, KENT DA1 5BH TEL: 0322 92513 MAIL ORDER HOTLINE: 0322 522631 FAX NO: 0322 93422, PAYMENT BY CHEQUE, P.O., VISA OR ACCESS ANCO "


"Mailbags Perhaps we've been a touch mean in the past. As from now, the best letter to Mailbag each month wins a brand spanking new C + Vg T-shirt! So new, we're not even quite sure what they look like yet! So now you've no excuse, get writing to: Mailbag, Computer and Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1R 3AU.  That Tony Dillon is getting because you can't see their ribs, moving the stand when I wasn't time that the Apple II got a almost as bad as Tony Takoushi while Corrine Russel can't be looking), I still made it to the mention, when you consider is it only coincidence that because she's too \"naturally C + VG stand eventually, that a lot of the games coming their names are so similar, we thin'') staggering over on weakened from America are often initially ask? Every last game the both of Yours sincerely, knees after disembarking from released in Apple Il format. It them review is the best, most Stuart Neil Hardy the helicopter simulator (see, it amazes me that the Apple does mega they've ever seen etc: P.S Is there going to be another was no use hiding, I spotted not seem to have gained the until the next one they review, large poster of Melissa Raven you from the air), sporting my acceptance in Great Britian of course. At least Dillon flame? tasteful \"I survived the which it enjoys in the United doesn't write every second Microprose/WH Smith States and Australia. Try using word in capitals yet, but he's Editor's reply: No. experience\" sticker. On my last \"Mean 18\" golf simulator on getting that way, and his solegs, I struggled to focus my an Apple II GS, and then forget called jokes are useless.  Hallo Peeps! I am write this watery eyes for what seemed about your Commodores and On the plus side, the mag is letter because I am wodering like an eternity. Then, Ataris. looking pretty good these days. when the new Nintendo games suddenly, I was rewarded with John Thornley FAX is great especially (grovel, arrive because if they don't a vision of the famous Mr New South Wales grovel). But why do often all the come to Eng' soon, I am going Eugene Lacey, gracefully Australia mags have the same game on to put the Nintendo manag of modelling the oh-so-chic the cover some months? I'm Eng on a kebab skewer, and \"Stonking good read\" T-shirt, I was recently looking beginning to get really bored throw the peep into a Sega nymph-like in his elegance. My through some old with these \"Q\" magazine style factory to show him how well prayers have been when I came across a feature on so-called compilation covers. they do. Then I will get the Sega answered ... how to Make your own alien\" You know, where the front of with the tiny-weeny-peeny bit Right, now that's out of the (Nov 1986 issue). As I read this the magazine is made up of a of mon I may get for the white way, let's get down to business.section I decided it would be whole bunch of screen shots and grey box with three over As always, the Adventure interesting, though difficult to and looks like a dog has been size carts which are a column goes from strength to make one. Now the point of sick all over it. Sticking with a loadarubbish. So if all the strength, and as for the reviews, this letter: could you please tell bit of artwork was definitely the gooed games arrive Chris' the impeccable taste as usual me where I could obtain latex right idea, even if the above will not happen... thanks for all the ST games and how much it would cost illustrations are a bit ropey Luke Drummond covered. You seem to have got me. Thanks. I'd like to end my some months. The guy who did Pangbourne, Berks out of that habit of printing on a letter with a joke, but I haven't Xenon and Roadblasters is dark background, so as far as I got one. especially great. Let's have Editor's reply: Get your Harry can see, this time there are no Giles Preenel more! Enfield characters a bit mixed complaints. The cover of the Brierly Hill I saw you at the show, even if up at the end there? Oct '88 issue is not bad at all... W. Midlands your stand was a bit little and Keep up the excellent work. stuck around a corner and LETTER OF THE MONTH Sophia Chan Editor's reply: I'm afraid the really crowded. This year's T Surbiton joke is that there aren't any shirts looked ace really  Hail and well met (again)! latex shops in Brierly Hill. unusual though you couldn't 'Tis I, pilferer of plastic bags, Editor's reply: Are you sure Have you considered tell they were really about swiper of stickers, otherwise you were really at the show? plasticine? computer games. Must go. known as the Surbiton We DID have carrier bags Keep up the good work. contingent of the C+VG (tasteful white ones) and as Me and 126 friends (well, 6 Mike Swaine appreciation club. for Eugene being nymph-like actually) have had a wicked Huddersfield I write to concede that this idea for the mag. How about a year you have managed to Still, hope you like the new section were all the millions of  Software companies have thwart my attempts at look AGM. readers can send in their own taken quite a lot of stick lately collecting the prized C+VG programs to you and you concerning their advertising memorabilia so bountiously Wonder of Wonders! In the July review them, give them marks methods to promote games. I bestowed at last year's PCW 1988 issue you actually and if a reader would like to am of course referring to the Show. Is there a new defense mention Apple Il computers buy it they can write to you and increasing use of semi naked system integrated into the THREE times. I honestly had pass the order onto the maker. page three girls (Long and C+VG stand an S.E.P. field begun to think that the British Simple huh? boring bit cut out here about generator, maybe? thought that the only Your admiringly the pros and cons of girlie Gone were the generous computers made by Apple NEIL 'THE 8 BIT WONDER advertising, including the handouts of stickers and lurid were Macintoshes, so I am glad JEDRZEJEWSKI bizarre assertion that Maria yellow plastic bags ...oh, woe! that you proved me wrong (or Whittaker and Sam Fox are Well, sling whatever sagacious was it an error?) P.S. If you use my idea don't both professional models snags into my scheme (like Seriously though, it is about give machine code games a "


"Mailbag so good. For something four inches square, it certainly is powerful. Paul Tweedle, Kirby, Merseyside. Editor's reply: As you may be starting to notice, big things are happening with Mean Machines. You can expect it to be bigger and have many new features ... other than that, it's a case of waiting and seeing. higher mark just because basic George Walsh G games some times use block Clacton-on-Sea a graphics. P.P.S. Ha! I've beaten Exolon. PS. Who is the balding fat man? P.P.S. How about this then. I've made Operation Wolf and Editor's reply: Andrea and Out Run in basic. Lora say you're gorgeous P.P.P.S: I've made Afterburnertoo, George. as well. P.P.P.P.S. Let's have more on  I would like to know if I am Afterburner. the only person who has P.P.P.P.P.S. I'd better go now noticed the almost uncanny I'm getting boring. resemblance between Matt Bielby and ultra-groovy pop Editor's reply: You must be person Rick Ghastly? joking we're overworked Are they in any way related enough as it is! to each other or is it just a very spooky likeness? Could you  Thank you for your fantastic . Thank you for your fantastic please print a piccie of the two magazine. It's much better than hunks side by side. It would its German copy \"ASM\" make my day (even week! although reading (and Phoebe Burrows especially) writing in English is London not that easy for me. A Rick Astley with bimbo. But the reason for my letter is I think you lot are rip off something else. Where in merchants. God's name is your new mag, Every month there is a \"The One\"?? I waited for Issue competition to win some One, but it didn't arrive at my marvellous prize like a trip to lousy dealers. I'm not willing to Disneyland or a day out in a miss issue two, so if you don't Ferrari but you never read want me to do a little \"Trantor\" about the winners, or see their job on Farringdon Lane (?? Ed) names in the magazine. send The One to Germany as Do these prizes really exist or fast as possible. I count on you. do you just make them up to Hansjorg Allstadt make people buy your Hamburg magazine? Mike Hunt Editor's reply: We've had a Reading number of letters on this. Write to the Subscriptions Ed's reply: So you want Dept at the address on the proof. OK next month we contents page. A European A Matt Bielby. will show you pictures of a subscription costs .00 and I'm not one to complain, but I but when I looked at the screen C+VG reader in Disneyland for the rest of the world it is read Mean Machines in C+VG shots ... the captions were and a C+VG reader being .00 surface mail/.00 air October and I suddenly felt an under the wrong pictures, or at chauffered to school in a mail. urge to grab a pen and a piece least it looked that way. It didn't Ferrari. of paper and scribble away. For bother me so much as I am the I was wondering about an a start, the column should be a proud owner of a Nintendo, but advertisement for a magazine  Congratulations on having lot longer as more and more my brother was both such gorgeous girlies working called \"The One\". I have seen people are buying consoles. I has a Sega. I liked the P.C. for you! I was quite happy to understand it is hard to get hold Engine bit. The it in your magazine and would understand it is hard to get hold Engine bit. These machines like to buy it, but cannot find it stand and stare at your stand all of stand and stare at your stand all of games to review but surely look really ace judging by the day and admire the assortment Mean Machines doesn't have anywhere. Can you tell me two page review of it in the May about it and where to get hold of luscious lovelies rather than to be all reviews. You could issue. No slip ups either! You of it walk around the rest of the have a console games chart, didn't need to write anything show. Sven Anders, letters or even a competition under the screen shot, as even Gis' a job, I can turn my hand Anyway, in October an idiot could work out that it Norway. Ed's reply: See? We've had a to almost anything, honest. thoroughly enjoyed reading it was baseballthe graphics are lot of letters on this. "


"DON'T GET OO LEFT IN THE DARK... OO o a OO DUO Spectrum cassette .99 Commodore 64 cassette .99, disc .99 Amstrad cassette .99, disc .99 FIPTERA for mail order please send your order and remittance (cheques payable to British Telecom plc or direct debit from Access/Visa card by stating card number and expiry date) to: The Marketing Department, Telecomsoft, First Floor 64-76 New Oxford Street, London WCIA 1PS. Telecomsoft, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford St, London WCIA 1PS. Firebird and Firebird Logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications PLC A LEGEND IN GAMES SOFTWARE "


"LEVEL3 Play Masters SUS . 2SC2 CROC II. 2SO ARMALYTE LE 1900 "


"LEVEL 5 ARMALYTE 3. SC lay Masters "


"COMPETITION PRIZE Can you become The World Champion? TAIR MEA OR FOVANJ OR FOUL AMSTRAD CPC A Fair Punch BBC MICRO COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM The Ref Sees a Foul Move Opponents Facing Up A Foul Move BECOME THE WORLD CHAMPION BY FAIR MEANS OR FOUL A realistic boxing simulation. You can even cheat... If the ref's not looking! You're behind on points and time is running out. The ref looks half asleep. You've won, but in the next championship contest you meet a boxer who A quick head buff and a sly punch below the belt and your opponent is knows more dirty tricks than you. It needs skill and cunning, lightning toppling over. But as he falls, his knee strikes you a paralysing blow. responses and deadly strategy. Have you got what it takes to become the \"Foul\" shouts the crowd, and your opponent is disqualified. World Champion By Fair Means or Foul? FAIR AND FOUL MOVES Head Punch Head Butt Body Blow Foul Knee Upper Cut Moves Groin Punch Duck Punch Kick COMMODORE 64/128 SPECTRUM AMSTRAD CPC 464/664/6128 BBC MICRO B/B+MASTER MASTER COMPACTO ACORN ELECTRON Cassette: .95 Spectrum Cassette: .95 C64, Amstrad, BBC Electron 5V4 Disc: E11.95 C64, BBC 31/2\" Disc: $12.95 Spectrum 3V.\" Disc: $14.95 Amstrad, BBC Master Compact Fair Moves VISA 7 SUPERIOR SOFTWARE Limited Dept. BF6, Regent House, Skinner Lane, Leeds LS7 1AX. Telephone: (0532) 459453. Please make all cheques payable to Superior Software Lid\" OUR GUARANTEE  All mail orders are despatched within 24 hours by first-class post . Postage and packing is free  Faulty cassettes and discs will be replaced immediately This does not all your statutory right 24 HOUR TELEPHONE ANSWERING SERVICE FOR ORDERS "


"WRCADEACTION THE LONDON REPORT video games, London is t he mostly 2008 go compared If you're ever in London, and have time to kill, why not visit some arcades. Julian Rignall reports one where you can find the best ones. If you think your town or resort deserves a mention in C + VG's arcade report, write in enclosing details of all the arcades in your area, and a map if possible to C + VG Arcade Report, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. If your report gets printed, you'll win a fabulous C + VG T-shirt. If you want to find the latest relatively cheap for London video games, London is a mostly 20p a go compared pretty good pace to be. with 30-50p in most other Casino Amusements at the arcades. Definitely the place top of Tottenham Court Road to go first! is the testing site of Further down the road, in Electrocoin, Europe's biggest Oxford Street, is the London arcade machine suppliers. Leisure Centre. This massive The arcade is quite small, but arcade has recently been at the back you'll find a refurbished, and has an selection of the hottest new enormous selection of videos, titles around. The stock varies as well as a plethora of fruit from week to week; the latest machines. New games selection includes Cabal, include Galaxy Force, Dragon Ninja, Assault, Blasteroids, Cabal, Galaga Bonzer Adventure, Chase 88, Assault, Vindicator, HQ, Volleyball and Vulcan Venture, Xybots, Superman. Games are Dragon Ninja and Superman things go Boeiter THE BIANCO ational BULOVA ACCUTRON 2001 2001A A Piccadilly Circus in the wild West End. "


"ARCADE ACTION to name but a few. There's also a good range of oldies, including Flying Shark, Top Speed, R-Type, Salamander, Nemesis, and Asteroids of all things. TOTTENHAM COURT AMUSEMENTS THE LONDON AMUSEMENT MAP ROAD LONDON OXFORD STREET DEAN WAR DOUR CHARING CROSS RD Head towards Shaftesbury Avenue, and you'll go past CASINOENTS Family Leisure in Old Compton Street, and Las Vegas. Family Leisure is an excellent arcade, with all the latest games, but unfortunately you have to pay through the nose, with newer games costing an enormous 50p a go! However, if you don't care about your budget, this place is great if you want to play the LEISURE newest titles. Sega's Power CENTRE FAMILY Drift was tested there a couple of weeks ago, and ToTTENHAN LEISURE should have returned by the COURT RD time you read this; at the moment it's the only one in UK. Dynamite Dux is also there, as well as Assault, OXFORD Dragon Ninja, Ninja Spirit, CIRCUS POW and Checkered Flag. There are plenty of oldies too, including Halley's Comet, Out Run, R-Type, Fighting CRYSTAL Soccer, Operation Wolf and ROONS Pole Position! The stock varies from week to week, so if you visit, you could be in for some surprises! Las Vegas used to be a LEICESTER personal favourite, but in the s last couple of years they've got further and further behind. If you want to play old games like Enduro Racer, PICCADILLY Star Wars, TX-1, Pole CIRCUS Position, Galaxians, Sprint 3, Bomb Jack, Centipede, AMUSEMENTS Nemesis and the like, this place is ideal, especially as JR's definitive guide to London's West End Arcades. they're all 20p a shot, but Superman amongst others. meagre selection of videos variety of London pubs there are hardly any new Just off Leicester Square is the best bet is to check out the particularly recommended is titles. Crystal Room, another ones listed above. the Crown and Anchor in Between Shaftesbury arcade that was good a few The West End is definitely Shoe Lane where none other Avenue and Leicester Square years ago, but now isn't so hot but not the beginning than the esteemed editor of is the Amusements, found on hot. It's usually very and end of arcade game C+VG used to pull pints. the corner of Chinatown. It crowded, and boasts only a playing in London. You will find that none of has a varied and up-to-date few new titles. There are There are also hot arcades these tend to get hot new selection of games, and plenty of old ones, but overall to be found in Islington games as fast as the selected although not as quick as it's a bit of a disappointment near the Wimpy in the High West End ones we name, but that Casino, or Family Leisure, it's when compared with other Street, two at Kings Cross, doesn't mean many happy still worth a visit. Stock arcades in the area. one in Camden High Street, hours can't be thrashed there invariably changes, but at the There are other arcades Portobello Road (the Jet and quite inexpensively last visit there was Bubble dotted around central Setters Arcade), White too. At least by comparison! Bobble, Top Speed, Cabal, London, but most are fruit Chapel High Street, and Then again, there is always Operation Wolf, P-47 and machine based, and offer a Walthamstow plus a the local chippy/kebab house. REGENT ST etap 370 AFTSBURY AVE SQ LEICESTER "


"* FIRST THERE WAS STAR WARS THEN STAR EMPIRE STRIKES BACK WARS TAL ONS NOW hat DOMARK BRINGS YOU.... "


"STAR WARS RETUR The third fabulous game of the Star Wars trilogy! A stunning direct conversion of the coin-op which follows the thrilling action of the movie. Three great levels of gameplay... In the first level you are Princess Leia on her Speederbiker rushing through the forest of Endor. Level Two sees you controlling Chewbacca's Scout Walker. On level Three you are Chewbacca and Lando flying the Millennium Falcon. Fight off T.I.E. Fighters, survive the lethal tube, blast the reactor and turnaround from the exploding Death Star. RETURN RETURN LEVEL 1 JEDI LIVES LEVEL LEVEL B3BBBD 005310 BOKUS B30DBD SCORE 004170 RETURN RETURN JEDI MAJOR ARCADE COIN-OP HIT LEVEL 2 LIVES LIVES LEVEL 030080 830000 SCORE 012650 Spectrum Commodore Amstrad 5 Cassette .95 .95 .95 Disk .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 Programmed by CONSULT COMPUTER SYSTEMS CONSULT Amiga Atari ST May the Force be with you "


"NEDI Published by Always 1984LUCASFILM LTD. (LFL) & TENGEN All Rights Reserved *DOMARK LTD Registered User DOMARK Ferry House, Lacy Road, London SW15 IPR 01 780 2224 "


"STALLONE He's back and this time he's taking no prisoners! Colonel Trautman has been captured by the Russians in Afghanistan and there is only one person capable of freeing him. Negotiate the minefields, explore the Russian camp, lay boobytraps, avoid detection, free the Colonel and then ... move on to the explosive climax! RAMBO IS BACK! NA RAMBU SPECTRUM COMMODORE AMSTRAD B.95 9.95 9.95 55385895 Ocean COMMODORE AMSTRAD 14.95 DISK CASSETTE 14:05 Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Telephone 061 832 6633 Telex 669977 OCEANSG RAMOMS CAROLO PICTURES All Rights w h owed up to the "


"ARCADE ACTION 5241) Over the waterfall 42930 Welcome to Britain's Bubble Bobble title screen arcade highscore table, appears, quickly move player where experts vie for one's joystick left, press the the top positions on the jump button, move player records tables. If one's joystick left again, press you're a nifty player, the one-player button, why don't you send in joystick left again, press fire, your scores and tips to: joystick left yet again, and  + VG Arcade finally press the one-player Highscores, Priory button. If you do this before Court, 30-32 the title screen goes off, a Farringdon Lane, POWER UP message London ECIR 3AU. appears at the bottom of the screen. When a game is GAME OVER BUBBLE BOBBLE started, Bub is endowed with A group of avid arcade goers speed-up and bubble-up, A All action in Vindicators. in Littlehampton found this making the game somewhat brilliant tip for Taito's classic easier. Better still, when he VINDICATORS game. How they found it, dies, all the features are If you're playing a nobody knows but it's retained, making the odds a two-player game, always be incredibly useful. When the little more even. the first to reach the exit. Always accumulate as many points as possible at the end of the level, points EANS amassed are converted to fuel so the higher the score, the more fuel is awarded. If you're on your own, and start on the hard level, spend your stars wisely. The best combination is 15 stars on shot power, five on bomb cannons or smart missiles (whichever are on offer), SWCO eight on shields, and twelve on shot range. Maximum shot range is important, since it allows the player to take out gun emplacements while staying out of their range. Look out in the future for more arcade tips in C+VG it is an area we have semi-ignored for a while, but A One star you won't see down your local arcodes. enough of you are writing in requesting them that we have rethought our policy. A Past the nasties. 618180 918219 Pore063 10000 003 30000 bl. A White water fun. TOOBIN 5,879,538 ASSAULT 204,750 CONTINENTAL CIRCUS 8,766,450 APB 45,000 VULCAN VENTURE 789,200 R-TYPE 984,700 P-47 1,101,975 GALAGA 88 1,234.100 OUT RUN 43,050,040 VINDICATOR 84,500 BLASTEROIDS 1,402,300 GALAXY FORCE 1,380,900 Martin Deem (MJD), Portsmouth Martin Deem, Portsmouth Julian Rignall (JAZ), Brighton Martin Deem, Portsmouth Mike Murray (MIK), Southend Martin Deem, Portsmouth Peter Escher (PDE), Blackpool Julian Rignall, Brighton Martin Deem, Portsmouth David Peters (DEP), London Jason Dean (JCD), Great Yarmouth Wayne Davies (WAD), Swansea TOOBIN' This is a useful tip for expert players or those with money to burn. If a player gets to stage four, and a second player joins in the action, he's awarded a 1,800,000 starting bonus. AD "


"ARCADE ACTION ARCADE SHOW ROUND-UP SIT TRITOS SPECIAL level monsters which are a is slippery, Cloudy means you your job to catch them and poor imitation of those in can't see the runway until shove them into the back of a R-Type. you're almost on top of it. Police Van. With guns The graphics are in lovely On choosing your blazing it's not too diffult to Preview time has come round shades of pastel which make destination you are told what get the first couple to again and in early October | them very difficult to type of craft you're flying, the surrender. Run up to them and went to look at what's going differentiate close up, the wind speed and your altitude. they'll obligingly follow you to be the new mega coin-ops game looks far more The dials round the screen to the van. The problems start for 1989. The show, held in impressive when viewed from continue to give other vital when you run into a rival London, gives a taster at what a distance. 245468 21 Thunder Cross is also very we can expect to see hitting 27688 the arcades later on next difficult. The game is very year. fast, calls for skill and quick The last couple of shows reflexes and completing even have been really exciting with one level is hellish. Thank likes of OutRun, Operation heavens for the continue play Wolf and Wec Le Mans facility. The game is nicely put making their debuts. This year together but if you want to go there was very little of interest for this type, play one of the either in the big game stakes classics. or in the bread and butter Remember Midnight range. Landing? The huge simulator Other than Power Drift and which gave you a taste of how RoboCop, there were only a nerve racking it is to land a few other games that were 747 in driving rain at the worth playing. All the other dead of night. Well Taito has games we have already just launched its sequel with looked at Taito's excellent the original game of Top Chase HQ, and so on. Landing. Thundercross information as you start your gang of thugs. descent. Messages pop up on If you let any of this gang screen accompanied by a get too close, or get Super Weapon-cannot be used without an option and airtraffic control telling you more than likely to find their voice presumably a worred distracted your captives are are limited. Fire with Option adjust button. to turn left or right if you look courage, duff you up and as if you're veering off escape. So the sooner you get course. The rest is up to you. them into the van the better. As you continue to play the As you travel through the landing game, you'll find game the numbers of mobsters wind speed and wind increase and your chances of direction changing as well as ploughing your way through your starting position. These the lot of them slip away. obviously all have to be taken Finding extra weapons is Macro Laser into account, so you can't rely always a help and with the Nuke Bomb Flamethrower on repeating your last extra bullet power it's quite Thundercross landing. easy to blow most of them into Konami presented to the In fact, I couldn't get to Top Landing wouldn't hold next week. Occasionally the industry for the first time grips with Midnight Landing my interest for long, but it is a path you have to follow Thunder Cross which is neither and without fail managed to test of skill. I know I wouldn't narrows to places where new nor particularly exciting. ditch my craft time and time stand a chance in the real you're easily ambushed. In fact it's very much a rerun again. Now Top Landing, thing, but I did enjoy a quick Alternatively, you'll find your of Salamander, Nemesis et though as sophisticated as its flight with my feet planted on way blocked and on the other al. As you've probably predecessor isn't as difficult. terra firma. side are hordes just waiting guessed, it's a horizontally Within three attempts ! Konami's other offering at for you to rip away through. scrolling shoot'em up with a managed one safe take-off the show was Gang Busters Keep your eyes on the man large variety of pick-ups to and also landed a trainer at a cartoon style cops and holes. These tend to conceal enhance your ship and Sydney airport. No mean robbers game starring two one of the gang who'll pop weapons systems and a huge feat I can tell you. idiotic policemen with up, lob a gun at you and just range of aliens skimming At the beginning you're fluorescent punk hairdos. as quickly duck back again. towards you information. given a choice of eight This is a one or two player Luckily these only have a Need I add that there are airports including Rio, Paris game to apprehend a gang of short range and as they the obligatory cannons and San Francisco, Your bank robbers. Having just explode a cartoon style. mounted on both ground and choice may also be influenced bust the local bank, the gang WOW! flahes up for a ceiling and you'll have the by the weather conditions at forgets the getaway car and moment. Crossing streets is picture. Other dangers lurk in each clear, cloudy or each one scurrier off down the also hazardous. Try not to get the blue lava which spouts out rainy. Rainy means that vision street a bag of loot. mown down by manic drivers. of volcanoes and in the end of is obstructed and the runway You hot foot it after them, CONT. ON 148 EDE 144 "


"PLUS PLUS PLUS LUS PLUS PLUS Professional PLUS PLUS PLUS PLUS PLUS F Simulator ECHO DYNO Mongoose OMNO DYNO SCREENSHOTS EXPANT ENX PRESS STB STRET COMMODORE C64 RICHARD DARLING Research and Development DAVID DARLING Television Promotions COMMODORE C64 A Richard Darling 'Pro BMX has got to be my best game! Four player action, three totally new race meets-Quarry Racing, Dirt Biking and Desert Riding each with five exciting circuits. It's just like the real thing-the burms, bumps and ramps really work! 'Fifteen incredible courses make Pro BMX the biggest best BMX game yet! David Darling 'Richard's Pro BMX simulator is excellent now with 4 player action, two tapes and a color BMX poster it's amazing value at SPECTRUM PLUS PLUS-PLUS-PLUS 140 ABS AMSTRAD Plus .99 COMMODORE C64 AMSTRAD, SPECTRUM CODE MASTERS SOFTWARE CO LTD. PO BOX 6, LEAMINGTON SPA CV33 OSH "


"BINAY zzz LAZER ENHANCED DESTRUCTION Amiga .99d Amstrad CPC .99t, .99d CAPCOM CBM 64/128 .99t, .99d Atari ST .99d Spectrum 48/128k .99t, .99d GIANTS OF THE VIDEO GAMES INDUSTRY SCORE ENERGY ELE Tear along the highways of the sky, free of the tedium of road hogs and pedestrians, only the twists and turns of a heavenly motorway stretching out before you. But you've more than the angels to keep you company Kamikaze opponents bar your way, skyjack terrorists blast endless voids in your celestial pathway. The struggle is not all one sided lazer powered turbos give you unbelievable acceleration and the power to fly, whilst your fusion enhanced controls will enable you to steer a path through the most devastating opposition The road narrows the space is tight time to transformat the speed of light into the nuclear powered jet bike. Take to the skies in an aerial extravaganza of race skills. daredevil pilotry, fearless road warring through nine totally distinct landscapes EXERTS ENERE Screenshots from various formats 1988 CAPCOM CO. LTD. Manufactured under licence from Capcom Calid Japan. LED Storm M. and CAPCOM are trademarks of Capcom Co Lid. Licensed by GOI Media Holdings Lid., a division of US. Gold Lid.. Units 2/3 Hollord Way, Holford, Birmingham BO ZAX. Tel: 021 356 3388 "


"TACHINE LH ULTIMATE DEVASTATIONE ::::::. Uu2 "


"91 Just because you're a copper rockets to take these out. advance base and it's here doesn't mean they'll stop. Soon you're flying over the you'll come across four Gang Busters is a nice little sea. Small speed boats beetle gigantic armoured tanks game but there's nothing here around before firing clouds of which have to be knocked out to get too excited about. Very shot at you. More aircraft and before you can proceed. much a game which will earn choppers attack and the Mission three sees you to the Konami their bread. screen is full of missiles of one enemy's secret base not TIME 00732 Thank God the war ended sort or another. Dodging much imagination went into in 1945. Capcom treated us these is very difficult and this story line. to 1942 and 1943. Scramble offers a real challenge. Scramble Spirit is nothing Spirit from Sega could be Next comes the enemy very new but it is fast and has 1944' and no doubt we'll aircraft carrier and it's at this some nice touches. A soon see a 1945 look-a-like. point that the game shows challenging game which is Scramble Spirits a itself as something different definitely worth a quick bash vertically scrolling shoot 'em from the usual Flying Shark up with a bird's eye view of types. Your craft zooms into a the game. The idea is that few feet above the carrier, the POWER DRIFT Earth is being invaded by a better to blast away all the mysterious enemy and you've canons. The graphics got several missions to For a really whacky, stomach undergo a rapid change and churning ride, get into the intercept the aliens, find their are magnified to such an Power Drift cabinet and hold secret base and save the extent that each pixel is onto your breakfast. Yet another mega-game from Sega, Power Drift follows Out Run. After Burner and Galaxy Force. However, 025131 AGOST: 92315 it's like none of it's predecessors other than the A Giant wheels add speed. fact that the cabinet he turns round and shakes his movements are even more fist at them. In fact, he spends exaggerated and are likely to more time looking backwards foss you out of the driving seat and smirking than LOBSTER if you don't strap yourself concentrating on what's tightly in. coming up round the next Power Drift is a cartoon bend. If it wasn't for the fact style racing game with some that you're in control of the lovely graphics, a roller wheel he'd end the race last coaster course and all of 25 every time. circuits to be raced. Its main T he first level has five feature lies in the track layout. circuits, each one more This loops around itself, tortuous than the last, and on leaving you bouncing over every track the other 11 bridges of logs, then competitors are harder to swooping on to a stretch of beat. You've got to get the A Power Drift disappointing post Out Run racer from Sega. straight before being pitched hang of the game pretty into a tight hair-raising quickly if you're to make it to planet from an inter-galastic visible. Once you've blown corner. There's lots to thir track number 25. And at  a takeover. up as much as you can on the about just keeping your throw you're also going to be So it's Scramble, Scramble, carrier your plane takes to the buggy on the track and it's pretty broke. Scramble as you speed up skies once more and a just as well as you can't The graphics are excellent into the skies en route to percentage of how much oversteer and drive into a tree large sprites, breathtaking becoming a hero. The game is damage you've inflicted is or blow yourself up. backdrops and eleven manic very fast with masses of shown. It's quite easy to get And there's bags of drivers competing against firepower and very sensitive into the 90s and your points variety, too. There are 12 you offers a neat challenge. controls. Squadrons of the clock up accordingly. drivers to choose from and Each circuit is fairly short and enemy zoom in from the top of End of level battle craft boy! are these a case load. to move onto the next you the screen, take them all out soon hove into view, spewing Punks, thugs, a Mr.T. have to complete the course in for extra points. Extra out homing missiles and lots of look-a-like, a city gent and a at least third position. The car protection can be found by shot. As usual you've got to blonde are just a few of the is very sensitive and it takes a attaching to your wing tips fire at the nerve centre of each choices. And they've got few pounds to get the hang of two smaller version of your monster craft to explode it characters to match. Just wait handling the buggy on the own craft which triples you and this takes some shooting til you get them behind the raised log tracks. The car firepower. Tanks swarm over a lot of wasted lives. wheel and then sit back and handles worse than when on the ground below sending up Mission two takes you on a watch. Every time Mr T solid ground and it's a simple anti aircraft missiles. Use your trail to find the enemy's whizzes past another driver matter to lose control, drive "


"ans off the edge to end up on the coin-op. The cabinet really happened to Robocop. straight below throws you left and right Data East has done an Antics like this don't help simulating the movements of excellent job on Robocop your position rating and the your car. The game itself can which, in fact, is the follow up computer helpfully screams get repetitive and once to the successful Dragon 'Hurry Up' on each occasion. you've got the hang of the Ninja. Same large sprites, Not that it does you a lot of controls it shouldn't be too same style graphics and a good, but at least the next difficult to drive a fair way hero who charges round time you travel that stretch of into the game. I played the annihalating everything road you should know where deluxe version and imagine which comes into weapon you went wrong. that the ordinary upright range. The screen is well laid out You've probably all seen wouldn't be nearly so exciting. At a quid a go, it's a falls foul of the gangsters and with the main view being like the film starring the cop who that of Out Run the back of fairly expensive way of gets blown to bits. Then come your car racing round a track wasting the readies but the high-tech guys who put which unfurls and undulates nevertheless it's one game him back together again, before you. To one side is a you've just got to give a whirl. shove him into an armour map of the circuit and ranged plated suit and let him loose across the top of the screen on the city's gangsters. are the mug shots of your The games a scrolling shoot competitors telling you what em up, though you'll have to your position is in relation to ROBOCOP be quick on the trigger if them. you're to survive the Power Drift is made by the We have the technology onslaught of flying bullets, cabinet which has the hottest grenades and the like. You we can rebuild him. And movement I've yet to see on a that's basically what start off in a dingy back street, tatty warehouse doors cling to the doorjambs, windows are cracked and broken and huge packing crates litter the area. The streets are quiet as you stroll past the gutters. Suddenly a group of gangsters bursts out of a doorway guns blazing. RoboCop gropes for his shooter in a grinding slow-motion action which comes straight out of the film. But from then on, there's nothing hesitant about his intentions. He just blasts away. The gangsters are powerless, lifted into the air by the stream of bullets and die an ignoble death. More stream in to attack. Guns appear at the windows spraying bullets wildly down on you. Being a cyborg, there's no way you can dodge them all, only speed and accurate shooting will get you out of this mess. Everytime you're hit, RoboCop flickers and his endurance slides down a notch. But it takes a lot to put a good robot down. Crates, strewn around, create impossible obstacles. The only way to pass them is to blast them. Occasionally one will conceal a weapon, blast the crate and pick it up. You'll be well rewarded with CONT. ON 152 MADE THE AMERCAN WAY Rob cop coin-op similar to the home version. "


"SURE FIRE SMASH THUNDER BLADE CBM 64/128 .99c-.99d SPECTRUM 48/128K .99c.99d AMSTRAD CPC .99c-.99d ATARI ST .99 AMIGA .99d IBM PC & COMPATIBLES .99d ECHELONCBM 64/128 12.99% $14990 SPECTRUM 4B/128K .99c-.99d AMSTRAD CPC $12.99 — $14.990 IBM PC .99 AMIGA .99 ROAD BLASTERSCBM 64/128 .99c.990 SPECTRUM 48/128K .99c-.990 AMSTRAD CPC .99c.99 AMIGA .99 ATARI ST .99 TCERROAN AUNT LED STORM CBM 64/128 .99c-.99 SPECTRUM 48/128K .99c-.99d AMSTRAD CPC .99c-.990 ATARI ST .99d-AMIGA .99 IBM PC .99 THE GAMES SUMMER EDITIONCBM 64/128 .99c-.99 SPECTRUM 48/128K .99c-.99 AMSTRAD CPC .99c-.99 ATARI ST .99d MSX 64K .99 TIGER ROADCBM 64/128 .99c-.99 SPECTRUM 48/128K .99c-.99d AMSTRAD CPC .99c.99d ATARI ST .99d AMIGA .99 PECT | YOUR USGOLDSI U.S. GOLD U.S. Gold, way ahead of whoever's "


"HITS FROM The Best Software in the World Available from the Best Software Dealers in the U.K. THE LANCE Virgin (Rotall) 28-32 Union Street, Glasgow G1 3OX Tel: 041 204 0866 EIRE Virgin (Rotall) 14-18 Aston Quay, Dublin 2. Tel: 777180 SOUTH WEST ACE Computers 42 Connon Street, Bedminster, Bristol B53 1BN. Tel: 0272 6.37981 Computerbase Co. 21 Martel Avenue, Cty Centre, Plymouth Devon PLI IPG. Tel: 0752 671228 Eagle Business Computers Glomorgan House, David Street, Cardiff 1 3FH. Tel: 0222 390256 Judya Computers 7/9 Beer Rood, Exmouth, Devon. Tel: 0395 254593 Software Plus Unit 8, The Boulevard, Welington Centre, Aldershot, Hans Tel: 0252 29862 Virgin (Retail) 18 Merchard Street, Bristol Avon BST 3ET. Tol: 0272 294779 The Computer Shop 329 Ashley Rood, Porkestone, Poola, Donsel BH14 OAP. Tel: 0202737493 LONDON Double Vision 32 High Street Eoling London WS. Tel: 01 566 100V340 6278 Erol Computers 125 High Street Walthamstow, London E17 708. Tel: 01 520 7763 Goal Computer Services 45 Boston Road, Hanwell London. Tol: 01 579 6133 MicroTek Grove Green Rood, Leytonstone. Tel: 01 556 2275 Shekhana Computer Services 221 Tottenham Court Rood, London WIR SAF. Tel: 01 800 3150 Logle Sales 19 The Broadway, The Bourne, Southgate. Tel: 01 882 4942 Silica Shop 52 Tottenham Court Rood, London (ST & Amigo Specialist. Tal: 01 580 HEROES OF THE LANCE CBM 64/128 .99 AMSTRAD CPC .99c.990 AMIGA .990 ATARI ST .99 IBM PC .99d confor DNT 3EFT he Computertop Martin NORTH WEST Alan Heywood Computers 174 Church Street, Blackpool. Tel: 0259 21657 Bits 'N'Bytes 18 Central Station, Ranelagh Street, Liverpool LI T. Tel:051 709 4486 Just Micro 22 Carver Street, Sheffield. Tel: 0742752732 Micro-Chip Shop Computer Store 190 Lord Street, Pochwood. Tel: 0391779511 Micro-Snips (Mall Order) 37 Seaview Rood, Wallosey, Merseyside 145 4ON Tel: 051 6303013 Northwich Computers 79. Witton Street, Northwich, Cheshire CWG SOW. Tel: 0606 47883 Orade Computer Systems 230 High Street, Winsford, Cheshire. Tol: 0606861253 PV Computers 104 Abbey Street, Accrington, Lancashire 385 1EE Tel:025435345 Tim's Megastore 29/31 Sunderland Street, Macclesfield, Cheshire SK11 GIL Tel: 0625 34118 VU Data 221c Old Street, Ashton-under-Lyne, Lancashire OL67SR. Tel:0613390326 The Computer Shop Unit T, Knightsbridge Mall, Amdale Carr, Manchester Tel: 061 832 0878 NORTH EAST The Computer Shop 7 High Frien Bdon Square, Newcastle upon Tyne Tel: 091 2616260 Sunderland Computer Centre 29 Growiree Rood, Sunderland SR1 3JU. Tel: 091 565 5711 Top Soft Computer Software 3 Hombletonian Yord, Stockton-on-Toes Cleveland 1518 188. Tel: 0642 670503 TopSoft Computer Software 6 Wellington Court Mews Grange Road, Darlington, County Durham. Tol: 0325 486689 Virgin (Retail) 94-96 The Brigate, Leeds, North Yorta LS16BR.Tol: 0532 443681 York Computer Centre 9 Dovypote Arcade, Devygote, York YOL 250. Tel: 0904641862 C.H.I.P.S. Computer Shop 151/153 Linthorpe Rood, Middesborough, Geveland Tel: 0642219139 C.H.I.P.S. Computer Shop Cartes Yard, Darlington, County Durham DL3 7QH. Tel: 0325 381048 MicroGamer 20 Cleveland Street, Doncaster DN1 3EF. Tel 0302329999 The Computer Shop 9 Maritime Terron, Sunderland. Tel: 091 510 8142 The Computer Shop 14 West Row, Stockton-on-Tees Cleveland TS18 1BT. Tel: 0542 606166 WEST MIDLANDS Burton Software 51/52 High Street, Burton-on-Trent, Steff OE14 IS. Tel: 0283 34388 Call Conngon11 Newcao gt, lunlam, Shon go ogl: 0 97909 Comarla Shopping Mall, Merry Hill Shopping Centre, Brierley Hil. Tel: 0384261698 Comarla 204 High Street, Dudley, West Midlands. Tel: 0384 239259 Mir Disk 11-12 Three Shire Oals Rood, Bearwood, Birmingham. Tel: 021 429 4996 Software City 3 Lichfield Possagn, Wolverhampton. Tel: 0902 25304 Software City 1 Goodall Street, Walsall Tel: 09222482 Software City 59 Foragate Street, Stafford. Tel: 0785 41899 Spa Computers 108 Corendon Street, Loomington Spa CV324PE. Tel:092637648 Venture Television Brood Street, Sidemoor, Bromsgrove. Tel: 0527 72650 Virgin (Retail) 98 Corporation Street, Birmingham B4 6SX Tel: 021 236 1577 Watchdog Home Entertainment 40 Queen Street, Wolverhampton Tel: 0902 313600 Castle Computers 6 Hope Stroe, Honley, Stoke-on-Trent. Tel: 0782 267952 Miles Better Software 221 Cannock Road, Chodimore, Cannock, Stoff Tel: 0543 466577 Bull Ring Computers 7 Waterloo Terraco, Bridgnorth W164EG. Tel: 0746 766839 EAST MIDLANDS DK Sound & Vision 7 Lightwood Road, Burton, Derbyshire SK17 7RT. Tel: 0298 72066 Gordon Harwood Computers 69-71 High Street, Alfreton, Derbyshire. Tel: 0773 836781 Mansfield Computers & Electronics 33 Albert Street, Mansfield, Not NG18 15A Tel: 0623 31202 Mays Computer Centre 57 Churchgate, Leicester LEI 3AL Tel: 0533 22212 North Notts Computers 23 Outrom Street, Sutton-in-Ashfield, Notts NG1 BA Tel: 0623 556686 Virgin (Retail) 6-8 Wheelergate, Nottingham NGI 2N6. Tel: 0602 476126 The Computer Shop Unt 250, The Vidoria Contre, Nottinghan. Tel:0602410632 SCOTLAND Capital Computers 12 Home StreetTollero, Edinburgh EH3 9LY.Tel: 031228 4410 The Micro-Shop 271-275 Dumbarton Road, Glasgow GI1 GAB. Tel:04139908-32 Inverness Computer Centre 15 Martel Arcode, Inverness M IPL Tel: 0463 226205 Virgin (Retail) 131 Princes Street, Edinburgh EH24AH. Tol: 031 225 4583 START Software Plus In Shops, 37-43 South Mol, Edmonton Green, London. Virgin (Retail) 527 Oxford Street. Tel: 01 491 8582 Virgin (Retail) 100 Ordord Street, London. Tel: 01 637 7911 SOUTH EAST Bits 'N' Bytes 47 Upper Onwell Street, Iprwich, Suffolk Tel: 0473 219961 Bits 'N' Bytes 45 Orwel Street, Forstown, Suffolk. Tel: 099 279266 Computer Leisure Centre 117 High Street, Orpington, Kert BRS OLG. Tel: 0689 21101 Crowley Computers 62 The Boulevard, Crowley, West Sussex RHIO IXH. Tel: 0293 37842 Computer Business System 88/90 Lurdon Road, Southend-on-Sea, E . Tel: 0702 335443/330995 Computer Plus 40 New Condul Street Kings Lynn, Norfok. Tol: 0553 774550 Estuary Computers Victoria Precinct, Southend on Seq, Essex. Tel: 0702 614131 Faxminater Lid 25 Market Square, Hemel Hempstod, Herts. Tol: 0442 55044 GB Microland 7 Queens Parodo, London Rood, Waterlooville, Hampshire PO7 7EB Tel: 0705 259911 JKL Computers 7 Windsor Street, Uxbridge, Middesse. Tel: 0095 51815 Logke Sales 6 Midgate, Peterborough PEI ITN Tel: 0733 49696 Silica Shop 1-4 The Mews, Hotherley Rood, Sidcup Kant DA14 4DX ST & Aniga Specialist Tel: 01 302 8811 Softsellers 36e Osbourne Street, Colchester, Essex CO2 708. Tel: 0473 57158 SoftSpot Computers 61 Meredith Rood, Clodon-on-Sea, Ex Tel:0255 436462 Software Plus 8 Buchtwins Square, Burnt Mik, Basildon, Ex Tel: 0268 590162 Software Plus Liberty Shopping Mall, Basildon, Essex. Tel: 0268 27922 Software Plus 15 Kingsway, Colchester, Essex. Tel: 0206 760977 Software Plus Und 1,28/31 Moulshan Street, Chelmsford, E . Tel: 0245491746 Software Plus 336 Chartwell Squons, Southend-on-Sea, Essex. Tel: 0702 610784 Software Plus Une 1, Queensgate Centre, Orsoll Rood, Grays, Essex Tel: 0375 391164 Software Plus 22 9 Matthews Street, lwich, Suffolk. Tel: 0473 54774 Software Plus 35 High Street, Gravesend, Kent. Tel0474 333162 Software Plus 13 Town Square, Stevenaga, Herts. Tel: 0438 742374 Software Plus Und 94, In Shops The Mohings, SAlbans, Hert. Tel: 0727 54347 Software Plus Unit 2, 4-6 Orange Street, Canterbury, Kant. Tel: 0227 458112 Software Plus 43 Burleigh Street, Cambridge. Tel: 0223 353643 Software Plus Unit 11, The Boulevard, Harpu Centre, Bedford. Tel: 0234 66598 Video City 45-47 Fisher Green Rood, Stevenaga, Herts. (ST & Amiga Specialist Tel: 0438 353808 Video City 10 Station Rood Letchworth, Herts ST & Amige Specialist The Video Machine 194-196 Canterbury Street Gillingham, KantME7 5XG Tel: 56460 Viking Computers Ardney Re, Norwich NR3 3QH. Tol: 0603 401982 Virgin (Retail) 157-161 Western Road, Brighton, Sussex. Tel: 0273 725313 Worthing Computer Centre 7 Warwick Street Worthing West Sussex Tel: 0903 210661 you get there anderwerp California GIANTSUNILETI-OUT RUN ROLLINGTHUNDER 720 CALIFORNIA GAMES CBM 64/128 .99c-.99 SPECTRUM 48/128K .99c-.99 AMSTRAD CPC .99c-.99 IR DEALERMO s number 2! TOP PRESS!! Thunder Blade the No.1 In-store Dec 2nd. "


"neayy ahyun meny montanto throw not you from the hack your task even easier. knock out the higher the score. And like all good games A nice touch this, and one there's got to be an end of which requires quite a bit of level baddie to make your co-ordination. hair stand on end. On level Next is a saunter through a one, which is fairly easy, it's a breaker yard. The van load of thugs. Blast the background graphics are van to stop it and when the superb in every detail. Broken doors at the back open to spill down cars are piled high, the out a gang of thugs, hit them breaker's crushing machine is where it hurts. Some will take a deadly obstacle and the more punishment than others hordes of gangsters are as and they are the ones thick as before, though this carrying rocket launchers. time more cunning, When the last is dead the Make sure you don't get scene ends with a telling message from the armoured Speccy home version looks good hero, \"Thank you for your co-operation.\" He's not a man of many words and repeats these thanks in a gruff tone at the end of each level. If you've done well in the scoring stakes you can go on to a bonus stage which is like a cross between Operation Wolf and Discs of Tron. You control two cross wires on the horizontal and vertical axes which can be moved up and down and left to right. Where these lines cross is where your missile will hit. Now bring the cross-hair to rest on the objects which are being Film that spawned a million spin offs. A Droid cop looks tough, is tough knocked out by flying heaps of scrap metal, or crushed by the huge stamping weights which thud to the ground every few seconds. Getting past a row of these is a nightmare, and to cap it all you've still got to shoot the hell out of the enemy. And your troubles haven't even started as you come across the car crushers. These are huge and you've not much time to nip under the horizontal bars before they slam down to reduce any lumps of metal to a paper thin thickness. The enemy stand on top of these throwing bits of cars at you, and again your only hope of survival is to kill them before they knock you unconscious. Apart from knocking the stuffing out of the gangsters you'll occasionally have to free the odd hostage. The trick here is to shoot the criminal and let the hostage run free. It's not too difficult and the cries of help bring you to the rescue in double quick time. RoboCop is an exhilarating game. Taking all the most playable aspects out of the film and combining them into one hell of a shoot 'em up. It must be said that apart from the style of the characters, the gameplay is not original. Though the game's very similar to Dragon Ninja, it has its own flavour and will, no doubt, be a great success. "


"J.R.R.COLKlens, SAR IN FB RIDDLES SE ARTH an interactive experiences in tolkien's trilogy Available on:ATARI ST. AMIGA C64. IBM PC  APPLE II GS. AMSTRAD  SPECTRUM MELBOURNE HOUSE DISTRIBUTED BY MELBOURNE HOUSE 24 Vernon Yard, 119 Portobello Road, London W11 2DX Telephone 01-727 8070 Telefax 01-727 8965 Setting New Standards IN COMPUTER SOFTWARE "


"CHALLENGING + ADDICTIVE! IT'S YOUR OIL R-TYPE 'ST version looks identical to the arcade version., -C & VG November '8 ''An absolute must for Spectrum-blasting fanatics ..., -C & VG November '8{ E M ail order: Activision, Blake House, Manor Farm Estate, Manor Farm Road, Reading, Berkshire. Consumer Enquiries/Technical Support: 0703 229694 "


"BEXCELLENT SHOOT 'EM UP! Termini NLY DEFENCE Available on Commodore 64/128 cassette (.99) and disk (.99). Spectrum (.99), Amstrad cassette (.99) and disk (.99), Atari ST (.99) and on Amiga (.99). R-TYPE ELECTRIC DREAMS  1987 IREM CORPORATION SOFTWARE LICENSED TO ELECTRIC DREAMS 88 Coco Commodore 64 screen shots shown Spectrum screen shots shown "


"I RAME OK you lot, listen up, this is the Editor speaking. I getting sick and tired of all those space ships, dragons, and heavy metal bands you keep sendi to Frame Up. Christmas is coming so how ! about something festive maybe with a hint of sci-fi thrown in for good measure. Oh yes, and Gary Williams wants you to send Frame Up stills of Sabrina. Go to it. DnAX 88 Drax supplies us with a pic of my Testorossa. Psygnosis's Barbarian piccy on the 64 from Stuart lee Nuke your parents with DR and Quinch from Noel Wallace. A well timed burst from Star Wars, courtesy of Simon Clark. "


"nding Starglider Two on the ST by a man with no name. of A well constructed piece of Greek technology once again by Stuart Lee. Neat Plants by Jason Pritchard. JOO Micky Mouse meets streetfighter, again by John Wood. SRL Magicians Gambit by Oh God, Stuart Lee. Say Hi to that freaky old guy from S. Lee. "


"Irma AMIGA ATARIST C64 DISC/CASS ATARI ST AMIGA HAMNE MAGIC BYTES DOOD AMIGA ATARI ST "


"\"Rex is a brilliant combination of strategy, dexterity and shooting and it has that vital just one more go' quality which so many games lack YOUR SINCS DER 1988. YOUR Si nowadays.» F YOUR SINCLAIR Z MEGAGAME Distributed by The thick-skinned mercenary, is here to do a job. He's come to Zenith to do away with the humans that have built their fortunes around The Great Tower. Utilising the massive underground cave system, and armed with the greatest weapon system yet seen, with its array of cannons, lasers, multiple spray guns and smart bombs, Rex leaps from cave to cave in a mad blitz that wreaks havoc and destruction on his chosen enemies. Once in The Great Tower itself, new challenges await the mighty Rex. A multi-load, multi-level arcade extravaganza of epic proportions. Devasting debut of death-dealing and destruction SINCLAIR USER DEC. '88 Spectrum 48/128 Cassette .99 Amstrad CPC Cassette .99 CBM 64/128 Cassette Spectrum +3 Disc .99 .99 Amstrad CPC Disc .99 CBM 64/128 Disc .99 Martech is the registered trademark of Martech Games Limited, Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE Tel: (0323) 768456 Telex: 878373 Martec G Fax: (0323) 764460 ELECTRONIC ARTS Home Computer Software "


"can i ver Lachines MACHINE: SEGA. PRICE: .95. REVIEWER: JULIAN RIGNALL. Shiver me timbers! Data East's ageing and obscure arcade game has just been converted to the Sega, and those responsible should be made to walk the plank! The game is basically a variation on the Ghosts 'n' Goblins theme, although it's nowhere near as good as the Capcom classic. The player guides the sword-wielding Captain Silver across a horizontally December is a bumper month for Nintendo and Sega owners, with no less than four new Sega games under scrutiny, as well as an early Nintendo title, and an exclusive 'head to head between the Sega and Nintendo versions of Double Dragon. There's an in-depth look at the Legend of Zelda, with maps and tips to help players go far, and, of course, there's all the latest console news. the Rigging is climbed to reach other parts of the ship, where pistol-toting seadogs jealously guard offers nothing new. The graphics are gaudy and extra weapons, and the hold is entered by unimaginative, the climbing down an animation is amateurish, Word and the sound harsh. The available ladder. The Captain of the ship is found allowing gameplay is badly flawed, MACHINE: SEGA. und allowing you to get PRICE: $24.95. at the bow, and Silver through the first three levels REVIEWER: MATT BIELBY. confronts him in a duelto 10 with complete ease, and You could be forgiven for the death. If the black-garbed renegade is bumped right up, making then the difficulty level is thinking that all Sega defeated Silver moves onto the platform section games are the same. Search the village. Except for the odd treasure Island. Later scrolling landscape, difficult to clear. honourable exception still comes a platform avoiding the poorly-drawn section where Silver has to played a Ghosts 'n' Those who have never Thunderblade. say, or Afterburner they're all monsters that attack from negotiate a series of Goblins-type game before hack and slash both sides or slaying them moving floors. with a quick thrust of his might find this fun, but to be adventures. Play one The problem with stabber. When a corpse honest there are many Shades of Rastan Saga. Captain Silver is that it has better examples of the disappears, a letter or blue all been seen before it block remains, which is genre fry Alex Kidd or picked up for extra points ints Buy some provisions. Wonderboy instead. and money. Later in the GRAPHICS game, Silver is able to SOUND enter shops and buy items, including a shield (which VALUE allows him to be hit twice PLAYABILITY before he dies) and the OVERALL 47% ability to shoot stars from his sword. The first level is set in a village. Get to the centre of the hamlet and the action switches to a ship.     160 "


"A S ovo playing this. It's challenging, addictive and varied and there's plenty to explore and uncover. The argphics and quality indeed, and all the  MACHINE: SEGA. screens. In two reside different sections combine PRICE: $24.95. faries, which reveal details to produce a highly REVIEWER: JULIAN RIGNALL. of Golvellius' quest: to entertaining and collect seven jewels. compulsive arcade Sega's candidate for the Another three are shops adventure. whackiest title of the year where extra items are award is, in fact, an bought if enough cash GRAPHICS -Malt gets wet. excellent arcade has been collected. The SOUND Rastan Saga-clone and VALUE you've played them all. PLAYABILITY A harsh judgement, yes, but Lord of the Sword OVERALL 84% does little to dispute this claim. Lord of the Sword is the story of Landau, a young man on a quest to POWER rid his land of the demons and evil creatures that have overrun it, and in the GOLD process become king. GOLR Armed with both sword and bow and arrow, he HELCOME HEH HEH cuts a suitably heroic dash, HILL SELL THEE but is perhaps one of the least charismatic heroes POTION OF LIFE FOR ever. 300 GOLD HANT That is what the whole DON'T HANT game lacks: a sense of character. Landau's quest A That worm is meant to scare ha. A Why not? Rignall'll buy anything. involves finding a adventure set over a last one leads to a legendary tree which is the variety of terrains. vertically scrolling cave symbol of the royal family. At the start of the mission, inhabited by flying killing all the Goblins and Golvellius is given a sword creatures and a large bat. destroying the statue of and a pair of boots by a Bash the bat and a Evil. haggard old crone, and snowman appears not a Some of these monsters from then on he's on his cute 'n' cuddly one like are quite inventive, but own. Raymond Briggs' brilliant with the backdrops being The first level comprises a creation, this one is mean mainly wooded creas, and horizontally scrolling trek and throws the same beasties through a worm-infested energy-sapping Icicles at consistently cropping up, it it cave. Slithering creatures  MACHINE: NINTENDO. really seems to lack the inch their way towards the If he's destroyed, PRICE: $19.95 variety to put it at the very hero and are sliced before Golvellius is returned to the REVIEWER: JULIAN RIGNALL. peak of this sort of game. they have a chance to Gauntlet level, where an Just about every computer There are many better make contact: if they do, a exit opens to another level and console in existance examples of the genre chunk is knocked off similar to the previous one has some form of football about. It's okay. Golvellius' energy bar. If but set in desert. As the game available for it, and both attack moves work the bar is depleted twice. adventure progresses, well and collision the mission is over. Halfway more and more of the Nintendo Soccer sick as a parrot. detection is fine, and there through the section a giant mission objective is USA 00 PAUSE is a lot of game to explore, worm bars the way, and is uncovered, and better but it loses out in an defeated by repeated weapons and useful items undistinguished plot, a sword slashes. When it dies may be purchased to help lack of visual imagination if drops jewels, which are Golvellius find the elusive and variety. picked up to add to the jewels. cash total. A little further on At the end of a game, a GRAPHICS is the cave exit, which code is given, so that the SOUND leads to a Gauntlet-style player may start at the O level comprised of nine VALUE same position at another 7 flick screens. time, and there's also a PLAYABILITY Some of the screens have holes which are continued option for those OVERALL 64% entered to access other who like to persevere. I must say that I enjoyed intendo occer "


"SEG TV ARCADE ACTION CERTAINLY THE BEST ARCADE GAMES IN THE WORLD NOW FOR YOUR HOME FROM .95 SEGA MASTERSYSTEMTM FROM .95 (Includes: Mastersystem . 2 Control Pads Free Game 'Hang On\") SEGA MASTERSYSTEM PLUSTM FROM .95 (Includes: Mastersystem . 2 Control Pads Light Phaser Free Games 'Hang On' and 'Safari Hunt) SUPERSYSTEMTM FROM .95 (Includes: Mastersystem 2 Control Pads. Light Phaser 3D Glasses Free Game 'Missile Defense 3D', Sega Products are available from leading stores of Woolworths, W.H. Smith, Dixons, John Menzies, Toys R Us, Kids Store, Toy and Hobby, Harrods, Selfridges, Virgin, Children's World, Morrisons, Hamleys and your local computer dealers. Distributed in the U.K. by Mastertronic Ltd., 2/4 Vernon Yard, Portobello Road, London W11 2DX. Tel. 01-727 8070 Fax. 01-727 8960 "


"Mean Machines A DAL  MACHINE: SEGA. player can only fire very PRICE: $24.95. short bursts of fire. If things REQUIREMENTS: LIGHT are particularly grim, PHASER. REVIEWER: JULIAN RIGNALL. can be launched to kill either a grenade or rocket Rambo, defender of mom's everything on-screen. apple pie and all things If the player survives for a right of the Republicans, predetermined time, has gone to Afghanistan to energy and ammo 10 remaining are converted battle the Russians. Well, in his third film he has, to bonus points, and the because in real life he'd second level begins with the Nintendo is no At first glance, Nintendo have trouble finding any even more soldiers and exception Russian soldiers to murder Soccer doesn't look that helicopters to contend At the start of the match, good, with some poorly since they're all pulling with. The game continues the one or two-player in this fashion, with an defined players and a out. option is set. After that one distinct lack of scenery increasing number of Still, that hasn't stopped of seven teams is chosen Sega producing this forces every level. It's almost like playing a and the timer is set to 15, 30 Sunday league game! game-of-the-film. The film Rambo Ill is an or 45 minute halves. If one However, it's graced with centres on mass genocide Wolfrip-off, but it's a good unashamed Operation person is playing the oodles of playability, and and Sega has decided to computer, one of five skill one and combines great even though the game is a capture the ambience of levels is chosen. little on the slow side, an abbatoir with an graphics and smooth The viewpoint is a there's plenty of scope for Operation Wolf style game, challenging and frenetic scrolling with some very traditional one, with the football fans to hone their played over a left to right match being played over skills. horizontally scrolling gameplay. In fact It's a horizontally scrolling The five different skill landscape. Soldiers pop almost too hard, and it ders pop up from all angles and are field. The player is given takes an awful lot of levels combined with control over the nearest blasted with a well-aimed seven teams of varied practice to get past the player to the ball, and can ability give plenty of shot of the light phaser either kick at the goal, or long-term challenge, and before they open fire. If an enemy manages to shoot a the two-player option, as PAUBI ever, is brilliant couple of rounds out of the Nintendo Soccer is one screen, some of Rambo's of the best simulations of energy is lost, represented the sport, and shouldn't be by a bar at the bottom of left on the sub's bench. the screen. A depleted bar means death, so good GRAPHICS hand-to-eye co-ordination SOUND is required to survive. Ammo is limited, and the  VALUE rounds remaining are PLAYABILITY shown next to the energy pos200 OVERALL bar. If the ammo is 83% completed used up, the A Blast that Chopper. A Nintendo Soccer loses to Sega. second level mind you, pass to a teammate. The when you're shelling out receiver is indicated by an this much money for a arrow, and is usually the game, you want player who's nearest in the something that lasts more direction the current than a few nights of play! player is running. By only gripe is that there When the ball is shot at isn't a joycard option. As a goal, an arrow behind the result many Sega owners posts can be moved up will miss out a shame, and down to bend the ball because Rambo Illis an out of range of the keeper. excellent game. If the opposition get the  GRAPHICS ball into your area, keeper control is handed over to SOUND the player, and 000000 VALUE he can dive at PLAYABILITY the ball. Rambo III looks like Op Wolf. OVERALL 81% "


"EXPANDING THE WORLD OF PLAY (ELECTROCOIN PRESENTS THE VIDEO SYSTEM WITH SO MANY FIRSTS IT'S SECOND TO NONE. The link between you The link between you and all the firsts. Nintendo OOOO The Control Deck brings you graphics that almost jump off the screen. Nintendo The Zapper, the one and only light sensing video gun. R.O.B., your first off screen partner. No one has come out with more innovations at one time in one place, than the Nintendo Entertainment System. First of all, there's R.O.B.,\" your Robotic Operating Buddy. R.O.B. becomes your off the screen partner, putting the action between you, him and the screen. And first of all, Nintendo introduces the Zapper. It's the one and only light sensing video gun that's going to trigger a whole new kind of fun. And first but not last, Nintendo offers superior graphics on all 17 game paks. Fifty-two colour/dot capability allows for brilliant tone refinements, realstic 3D images, convincing depth of field and actual shadows. Discover the Nintendo Entertainment System. With all these firsts, you'll love it in a second. PLEASE SEND ME GAME PAK DETAILS AND: DESCRIPTION QUANTITY PRICE MAIL ORDER & INFORMATION: DE GALE MARKETING LIMITED 81 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD, LONDON W1A 1EY TEL: 01-637 5735 PRICE LIST CONTROL DECK. ..00 ACCESSORIES ROBOT... ..95 ZAPPER GUN. .95 GAME PAKS FROM. ...95 DELUX SET ONLY.... ...........95 DG4 TOTAL (Features Robot, Zapper, Deck + Free Software) (All prices include p&p) Signature... Mr/Mrs/Miss......... Address.............. I enclose cheque/PO for .. made payable to: De Gale Marketing Ltd Please deduct ............ ....... from my Access Account (Signed)............. Nintendo ..... Post Code... ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM "


"Mean Machines it blocks enemy arrows and happens! missiles Generally explore as much Scattered throughout the as possible and don't be land of Hyrule are different afraid to experiment. There magical objects pick these are four short cuts hidden up to provide much-needed around the map which allow help if Link is to collect all Link to cross the map with eight pieces of the Triforce ease, and there are also and defeat the evil Gannon al secret caves, found by the end of level nine. Heart pushing rocks and blowing up containers boosts Links cliffs heart capacity by one, adding Most important of all vital extra health to his total. read the instructions carefully There are two types of they contain many hints and boomerang. The wooden one_clues which should help put stuns enemies, while the Link on the road to victory. metal one (found in the Finally, if you can't beat hardest room in level Two) kills Gannon and are overcome weaker creatures. Keys open with curiosity as to what the doors but are only used once. next level has in store, register your name as Zelda and you'll automatically start on level two regend whereas the magic key can be In this month's Mean Machines in-depth tips used over and over again. Like the boomerang, there section, Legend of Zelda comes under are wooden and metal types scrutiny as we reveal how to get the most out of arrow. The former is less of this massive Nintendo arcade adventure. powerful. The ladder is used to cross small rivers or holes, Link, the hero, starts his quest advantage and life becomes a while the items which can be unarmed, so the first thing to lot more difficult. dropped in the path of do is get a sword by entering kill everything that way oncoming creatures. Water of the door at the top of the first you're ensured of a constant life is essential for higher screen. Once it's in Link's supply of rubies money levels, blue water tops up possession he can really start with which Link can buy extra Link's heart meter once, and adventuring weapons and items. The best a red one does it twice. The Try and keep Link's energy weapons to buy are the white whistle is the most helpful of levels topped up to maximum sword and the magical sword all items Link can't he can throw swords when these are extremely complete his quest without it. all his hearts are red. If he powerful. The magic shield is Blow it in the Overworld and gets hit he loses his also a good one to go for since something surprising A LEVEL 1 B LEVEL 2 CLEVEL 3 D LEVEL 4 E LEVEL 5 F LEVEL 6 G LEVEL 7 H LEVEL 8 I LEVEL 9 THE LAND OF HYRULE THE WORLD OF ZELDA OST BEBE LA TO: 96. 000 DS C : 39 165 "


"«THE DAY THEY COME TO CONQUER YOU, MY FRIEND!\" FOUR TESTS, FOUR ARCADE GAMES IN STUNNING 3D RING PURSUIT: a 3D race across the rings of Saturn; BREATH-TAKING BRAIN-BOWLER: a bull of Argy balanking, Thically of the breality walls: HAIR-RAISING 0023 0823 TIME JUMP: a colosal escap Through fitney Tse: RAIHD.BLORING SLO ATARI ST. AMIGA PC. AMSTRAD CPC COMMODORE 64 Weird aliens. Hof at al Tike us.nmy friend "


"SATURN DAY TRONIC-SLIDER: a frantic search for energy in an orbital areno... Seated at the controls of the Tronic-Slider, capable of 90-degree turns: DIZZYING... And always remember my friend: EXXOS IS GOOD FOR YOU! Infogrames, Mitre House, Abbey Road, Enfield, Middlesex, ENI 2RQ A ATA HOGLO HUU.... "


"THEALLTIME GREATEST Game COMPILATIONS, An outstanding collection of the best hits from the best software houses. Not Just a good buy because of its amazing value for money, but are to be donated to ente' Nafidharlee Society and the Royal Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children. 10 GREAT GAMES PO SPECTRUM 48K .99 (Ocean Software) 10 GREAT GAMES FOR CBM 64 STARSTRIKE (Realtime) THE BACK PACK COMPILATION BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK MAILSTROM (US Gold) XENO (ANF Software) DEACTIVATORS (Ariolasoft) .99 LUNAR JETMAN (Ultimate Play the Game) NIGHT GUNNER (Digital Integration) MARSPORT (Gargoyle Games) STARION (Melbourne House) MONTY ON THE RUN (Gremlin Graphics) ALL PROCEEDS TO THE NSPCC & RSSPCC A FUN FILLED WAY TO HELP OTHERS..... ITS KIDSPLAY THE BACK PACK COMPILATION XENO (ANF Software) BARRY MCGUIGAN'S BOXING (Activision) DEACTIVATORS (Arlolasoft) BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK (US Gold) STARION (Melbourne House) SPINDIZZY (Electric Dreams) BOUNCES (Beyond Software) MONTY ON THE RUN (Gremlin Graphics) ELECTROGLIDE (English Software) SKYFOX (Electronic Arts) ALL PROCEEDS TO THE NSPCC & RSSPCC AMGREAT GAMES FOR .99 THE BACK PACK COMPILATION KNIGHTSHARE ( Ultimate Play the Game) NOMAD (Ocean Software) MARSPORT (Gargoyle Games) XENO (ANF Software) STARSTRIKE (Realtime) DEACTIVATORS (Ariolasoft) STARION (Melbourne House) NIGHT GUNNER (Digital Integration) YOU HAVE THE FUN..! THE NSPCC/RSSPCC HAVE THE PROCEEDS TEMPEST (Electric Dreams) MONTY ON THE RUN (Gremlin Graphics) ALL PROCEEDS TO THE NSPCC&RSSPCC BACK Battle Against Cruelty to Kids. The 1987 software industry charity promotion in support of the NSPCC&RSSPOC BACKPACK A compilation of 10 first class software games donated free by software companies KIDSPLAY thanks this magazine and the following companies for the generous donation of their vices CAMEL ADVERTISING. GOL SERVICES ROWLEY STUDIOS FRIARSGATE STUDIOS, PRE-PRESS SERVICES CRYSTAL DESIGN, AMPERSAND. STEEL SPLASH, PRINTING CENTRE, LYNE PRINTERS WILLBOND ARTISTS. PAUL CANNY D ROWE and INTERMEDIATE "


"MIKE TYSON: UNHURT, UNDEFEATED, UNDISPUTED HEAVYWEIGHT CHAMPION OF THE WORLD. HE'S TOUGH. HE'S MEAN. AND HE'S WAITING FOR YOU! OK now listen kid, and listen good. You've laid out ten opponents to get here today. If you pull this off you'll be Heavyweight Champion of the World. Yeh, I know it's Mike Tyson sitting in the other corner. But you got the skill, the strength and the stamina. So just go in there, kid. Weave, dodge, jab; keep your guard up and your mind on that title. And remember, this is Nintendo, right? So you might get beat, but you won't get hurt. Puny 92B 1. You're Little Mac and your first opponent is Glass Joe. 2. The bell's gone. Now it's up to you. 3. Go for it belgem MIKE TYSON'S PUNCH-OUT!! PUNCH-OUTH Fight Train The Drew Bout.  Challenge ters from around the globe W and become WAVE A Change Gone B ende ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM LOOK OUT FOR THESE EXCITING NEW NINTENDO TITLES IN BOOTS AND OTHER LEADING STORES: DU ZELDA SUPER MARIO BROS METROID PRO-WRESTLING TOP GUN R.C. PRO-AM 9787 Nintendo Now you're playing with power. "


"Mean Machines egend lips TAPE LEVEL 1 LEVEL 3 LEVEL 2 "


"Of Zelda LEVEL 5 ELT 16 LEVEL 6 "


"Ni For GAMES .2 NOVEMBER 1988 USER 355 pta MFL 6.75 DM 6.50 WIN AN AMIGAL THUNDERBLADE UNVEILED OPERATION WOLF 10 + AMIGA *SPECIAL OFFER! INo.1 FOR AMIGA GAMES Out October 26th AMIGA NEBULUS SPACE HARRIER PACMANIA 64 CYBERNOID2 APTAIN BLOOD DRAGON "


"( SOCCER Simulators Richard 'Pro Soccer's got everything! There's four soccer games 11 A-Side Soccer, Indoor Soccer, Street Soccer (fouling allowed!) and Soccer Skills (with skill training penalties, pushups, sit ups, weight lifting, dribbling and more!) Superb Value! BICHARD DARLING David ... and Pro Soccer's got Research and Development simultaneous 4 player action! It's taken our team of \"Code Masters\" over a year to perfect these football games. Don't miss out on the best all action, 4 player, football game ever! Absolutely Brilliant! 1 11-A SIDE SOCCER ZINDOOR SOCCER 3 SOCCER SKILLS C STREET SOCCER DAVID DARLING Television Promotions ! AIRE ES! il Las FREEXICK  COMMODORE C64 (DISK $14.99) 9.99 TAPE 19.99 AMSTRAD CPC (DISK 14.99) $8.99 SREETRUM (+3 DISK 12.99) $19.99 AMIGA BiB GOLD $19.99 ATARI ST $19.99 PC AND COMPATIBLES 19.99 ATARI ST AMSTRAD SCREEN SHOTS CODE MASTERS SOFTWARE CO LTD., PO BOX 6, LEAMINGTON SPA CV33 OSH "


"DALEY THOMPSON'S BASE 02:669159 CAN YOU TAKE DALEY INTO THE MEDALS? Enter the Olympic Challenge with Daley Thompson as you 'work out' in the gym, where your efforts will directly affect your performance in the competition itselfanother first from Ocean. Ten Olympic events include Long Jump, Shotput, High Jump. 100m Sprint, 400m, 110m Hurdles, Discus, Pole Vault, Javelin and 1500m. You will need all your skills to build on what you hope was, an impressive work-out, and, as is necessary for all top flight athletes, your judgement to select the most effective equipment for each event is now vital a decision which can win or lose you a place on the podium. This isn't Just another sports simulation, this is a Daley Thompson 'event' where all his talent and humour burst through to make a thrilling and entertaining game play for all the family. Go for the Olympic Challenge! AMSTRAD ATARI ST AMIGA SPECTRUM COMMODORE Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone 061 832 6633. Telex 669977 OCEANS G COMMODORES 9.95 $19.95 $24.95 "


"Mean Machines ATO through the game, the is chopped at the top and opposing gang members bottom, leaving unsightly become increasingly black borders, rather like a ferocious, and the mission Postbox format film on felly, ends with a fight to the death Both versions suffer from with the grrederasaveldical partre lahy bad, and it's That's up to you. often difficult to tell the hero Considering that these are apart from the enemy. The conversions of the same Nintendo doesn't flicker so arcade game, there are quite often, but the bottom halves a few differences between of sprites disappear Sega and Nintendo Double occasionally when things get Dragon. The first thing that busy. instantly strikes you are the On their own merits, both graphics. On the first level versions are competent. I both versions adhere pretty think that the Sega version well to the arcade original, could have been a little but from then on it seems that better, as it doesn't play quite the designers have added as well as the Nintendo, but their own artistic touches, and nevertheless it'll satisfy both differ quite Double Dragon fans. The Nintendo unfortunately lacks the two-player option, but more than makes up for this deficiency with an extra MACHINE: across the horizontally one-on-one Street considerably. Overall, the SEGA/NINTENDO PRICE: SEGA .95, scrolling landscape, the Fighter-style game included Nintendo has the edge over on the ROM. As a solo game NINTENDO NIA. opponents become more the Sega, with more detailed it's engrossing and fun it's REVIEWER: JULIAN hostile, and start attacking and colourful graphics. The ashame it won't be available RIGNALL with weapons like baseball sprites are also different on until next year. bats, petrol bombs and both versions, with the whips. If they're dropped, Nintendo's looking typically Double Dragon, Technos' SEGA NINTENDO the player can pick them up cuter, compared with the tough street fighting game and use them against the squatter Sega counterparts. GRAPHICS 7 7 has been in the arcades for enemy usefull Another major difference SOUND 6 nearly two years, and only 7 At the end of the level is a between Sega and Nintendo now has appeared on the big bruiser, who is defeated VALUE 6 N/A is the screen size; the home consoles. to move onto the next level. Nintendo is practically PLAYABILITY 7 7 The game puts one or two As the players progress full-screen, whereas the Sega players in the roles of  OVERALL 76% 83% denim-clad street fighters, The Nintendo version: better than the Segal who have to go and rescue a girl who's been kidnapped by a rival gang. This means an excursion to the wrong side of town, and every step is fraught with danger. At the start, an introductory sequence shows the girl being abducted by the gang a notorious-looking bunch of ETC hoodlums. Then the action begins with the player(s) walking onto the scene. Immediately gang members attack, and attempt to wear down the player's energy bars with well-aimed kicks and punches. The heroes can reciprocate with their arsenal of mid-kicks, uppercuts, head-butts, high kicks and punches. Most opponents have to be floored several times before they give up the ghost. As the combatants walk 11 .cTIME-I85 H 18288 "


"KONIX NAVIGATI BREAK THROUGH THEY PERFORMANCE BARRIER Ergonomic design ensures perfect fit for every hand. Minimum fatigue maximum efficiency. The new Konix Navigator a new dimension in precision joysticks. It spells total control from its unbreakable precision shaft through to its ergonomically designed grip, making reaction speed limits a thing of the past. The Konix winning formula of sound development advanced design and fail-safe construction puts high scoring accuracy at everyones fingertips. So break through the performance barrier this Christmas with the new Konix Navigator. And look out, for two more exciting new products from Konix the Predator and the Megablaster. Firepower just where you want it, in the palm of your hand. Fire button positions directly beneath your trigger finger for super-fast reactions. Unique micro switch modules give precision control that lets you hear and feel every move. Unbreakable solid steel shaft means complete control plus rugged reliability. For use with: all Atari computers (including ST), Commodore 64, 128, VIC 20, Amiga), MSX Computers, Amstrad CPC computers (no autofire), Spectrum and Spectrum Plus (with suitable interface), Spectrum +2, Spectrum +3 (no autofire). To: Konix Products, Unit 35, Rassau Industrial Estate, & Ebbw Vale, Gwent, NP3 5SD, U.K. Please send me Navigators at .99 each (Price includes p&p) Make of home computer to be used I enclose cheque/Postal Order for  (Made payable to Konix) or charge my Access/Visa Credit Card No. Expiry Date Signed Name Address (Block Capitals) — The fastest reactions in the business Unit 35, Rassau Industrial Estate, Ebbw Vale, Gwent, NP3 5SD, U.K. Telephone 0495 350101 Post Code Please allow 14 days for delivery. Credit Card holders may order on 0495 350101 "


"NEW LOW PRICE ST! From only .51 per week. Return coupon for details. AARI 52057 ATARI VIVY ONLY FROM SILICA  260 +VAT=2299 SO MUCH FOR SO LITTLE Finally, there's a personal computer that not only solve problems like other computers, but also solves the one problem that other computers have created Amordability Slica Shop are pleased to present the ST range of personal business Computers from Atart The ST w designed w ing the most recent breakthroughs in semiconductor technology, producing a personal computer that performs tasks with lower parts. Which means it costs to make and loss to buy. The lateat ST computer now include built in power supplies and built in disk drives, The TOS operating system and GEM window environment are now on ROM chips which are already installed in the ST keyboard. This enables automatic instant booting when you switch on Silica Shop are pleased to offer the complete Atari ST range. Our mail order apartment is situated in Sidcup and we have retail outlets at Sedcup Lion House Tottenham Court Rd) and Selfridges (Oxford Street. We have eight years experience of Atari product longer than any other company and are weltbed as the UK's No 1 Atari specialist with a group fumover of over 9 on and Inces of 30 we offer you unbeata service and support. We provide several facilities which you will find invaluable during your Atari computing life and most of these facilities are available ONLY FROM SILICA We suggest that you read through what we have to oner, before you decide where to purchase your Atari ST FREE STARTER KIT-Only From Silica When you purchase any Atari ST keyboard, you will not receive the best value for money computer BASIC Language Disk \"BASIC M STO Menu TOS GEMON ROM you buy your ST from Seca Shop, you will also receive NEOchrome Sampier-colour graphics program at Word Word Processor In addition, we at Silica would like to see you get off to trying start with your new computer, so we have put together a special ST STARTER KIT worth over 100, which we are giving away FREE OF CHARGE with every ST computer purchased at our normal retail prices. This kit available ONLY FROM SILICA and is aimed at providing users with a valuable introduction to the world of computing. We are continually upgrading the ST Starter which cont public domain and other licensed softwa, w as books magazines and accessories are to ST computing Return the coupon below for details There is nothing that can compare with the incredible value for money offered by Atari's 520ST-FM. For only  (+VAT=). you can purchase a powerful 512K RAM computer, with a 95 key keyboard (including numeric keypad), MIDI Interface, GEM, a palette of 512 colours, mouse controller, and a 512K built-in disk drive. The 520ST-FM has a TV modulator built-in, and comes with a lead to allow you to plug it straight into any domestic colour television set. The mains transformer is also built-in to the keyboard, so there are no messy external boxes. You couldn't wish for a more compact, powerful and stylish unit. Atari ST computers are now firmly established in the UK, there are nearly 500 software titles already available for a wide variety of applications and the list is growing all the time. And that's not all. When you buy your new 520ST-FM (or any Atari ST computer) from Silica Shop, you will get a lot more, including a FREE Silica ST Starter Kit worth over . Read the ONLY FROM SILICA section on the left, to see why you should buy your new high power, low price 520STFM from Silica Shop, the UK's No1 Atari Specialists. For further details of the range of Atari ST computers and the FREE Silica ST Starter Kit, complete and return the reply coupon below. ATARI 520ST-FM NOW ONLY  (+VAT=) 520ST-FM with 512K RAM & mono monitor  (inc VAT) Upgrade from 512K RAM to 1024K RAM  (inc VAT) DEDICATED SERVICING Only From Silica AL Silica Shop, we have a dedicated service department of seven full time Alari trained technical staff This team is totally dedicated to servicing Atari computer products. Their accumulated knowledge, skill and experience makes them second to none in their field. You can be sure that any work carried out by them of the highest standard. A standard of servicing which we believe you will find ONLY FROM BLICA In addition to providing servicing facts for Alan ST Computers (both in and out of warranty, our team is also able to offer memory and modulo grades to ST computers 1Mb RAM UPGRADE: Our upgrade on the standard Alari 5205T-Mor SOST-FM keyboard will increase the memory from 512K to a massive 1024K. It has a full year warranty and is available from Slice at an additional retail price of only 06 (VAT ) TV MODULATOR UPGRADE: Sitics can upgrade the 1040ST-F to include a TV modulator sa that you can then use it with your TV This is an internal upgrade and does not involve any untidy eternal boxes. A cable to connect your ST to any domes TV is included in the price of the upgrade which is on 49 in VAT). The upgrade forary 5205T computers at the same price THE FULL STOCK RANGE Only From Silica We aim to keep stocks of Atari related products and our warehouse carries a stock of over million We import many software titles direct from the USA and you will find that we have new releases in advance of many of our competitors. Unlike dealers who may only stock selected titles, we have the manga, in addition, we carry a complete line of all books which have been written about the Atari ST. A range as wide ours is something you will find is available ONLY FROM SILICA ATARI 1040ST-F NEW PRICE We are pleased to announce new reduced price point on the 1040ST-F which is now available for only 409 Cine VAT) The 1040 is a powerful computer with 1MB of RAM and also includes a built-in 1Mb double sided a disk drive. The 1040 has been designed for use on business and professional applications most of which require a high resolution monochrome or colour monitor. It does not therefore have an RF modulator for use with a domestic TV sat. Modulaton can be fitted for the fine VAT ATARI AFTER SALES SUPPORT Only From Silica Ressured that when you buy your ST from Silica Shop, you will be fully supported. Our freemailinge pive news of releases and developments. This will help to keep you up to date with new software releases well as what's happening in the Atari market. And in addition, our sales staff are at the end of Selephone line to service all of your Atari requirements. If you purchase an ST from Silica and would like any technical advice, we have a full time fechnical support team to help you get the best from your computer. Because we have both the staff and the wystems specifically dedicated to providing her sales ice on Atar ST computer we are confident that our users enjoy a caption Nigh level of Noort. This can be received ONLY FROM SILICA FREE CATALOGUES Only From Silica Al Silica Shop, we recognise that serious as require an in-depth information service, which is why we nail free newsletters and price lists to our ST owners. These are up to 48 pages long and are crammed with technical details as well as special offers and product descriptions. If you have already purchased an ST and would to have your name added to our mangel plass complete the coupon & return it to This information service is available ONLY FROM SILICA you would further details of 100STF, return the coupon below MEGA STS NOW IN STOCK For the user who requires even more RAM than the 520 or 1040 ST's offer the new MEGA ST computers are now available There are two MEGA ST one with MD of RAM and the other with a massive 4Mb. Both new computers are fully compatible with existing STs and run currently available ST software. The MEGA STS are styled as an expandable Central Processing Unit with open architecture and a detachable keyboard. They are supplied with GEM a free mouse controller and all extra as with the 520 or 1040. Prices are as follows: MEGA STO Kayod CPU FREE OVERNIGHT DELIVERY From Silica If you would hurther details of MEGA ST return the coupon below Most orders are processed through our computer within 24 hours of receiving them. Most hardware orders are sent by the overnight GROUP 4 courier service FREE OF CHARGE lo customers within the UK. This method helps to ensure minimum delay and maximum protection PRICE MATCH Only From Silica We hope that the combination of our low prices, FREE UK every service, FREE Starter Kit and FREE there is something you wish to purchase, and you find one of our competitors offering it at a lower price then please contact our sales department, providing us with our competitor's name, address and Selephone number. If our competitor has the goods in stock, we w normally match the offer (ona same product same price basis) and provide you with our normal free delivery. We realise that we are not ne only company who will match a competitor's price. However, if you come to us for a price match, you wilaito be entitled to our after sales service, including tree newsletters and technical support. This our pricemach promise rather special something you will receive ONLY FROM SILICA We don't want you to go anywhere for your Anal products So shop at the UKs Not Alar Special To: Silica Shop Lad, C+VG 1288, 1-4, The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent DA14 4DX PLEASE SEND ME FREE LITERATURE ON THE ATARI ST Me/Mrs./Ms........... Surname: Address: SIDCUP (& Mail Order) 01-309 1111 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX LONDON 01-580 4839 Lion House (1st floor), 227 Tottenham Court Rd, London, WIP OHX LONDON 01-629 1234 ext 3914 Selfridges (1st floor), Oxford Street, London, WTA 1AB Postcode: Do you already own a computer If so, which one do you own? "


"With Grand Slam set to launch a Thunderbirds computer game in '89 and a new feature fill starring the old puppet One of my earliest television memories is a puppet show heroes around the corner John Minson asked me 'What do you do?' starring a cowboy called Tex went to meet MR Thunderbird Gerry For the first time in my life I was Tucker. Seeing that Four anxious to impress somebody Feather Falls first appeared in Anderson for an exclusive C+VG so I said 'Actually I'm a 1958, I must have been interview. producer And she just said, watching a repeat. Even series was an attempt to better Right Milk? Cream didn't goggle the box before the previous one. I'd been so Suddenly realised, producer's was out of nappies! ashamed of those pictures that I are two a pecny. But what I had Its successor featured a tried to improve them. Eyes and been doing made me a very jet-powered flying car and I mouths began to move. We special sort of producer.\" probably saw that later too. replaced painted backgrounds His most recent special There's every chance I watched with cut outs with depth. And it productions include award the first run of the space got to a point where I saw the winning commercials and Dick adventure that followed films could be respectable.\" Spanner, the private eye who though, and by then I was old Working under extreme inhabits an alternative universe enough to know the name of the pressure to produce each where the oddest things genius behind Fireball XL5 and episode there was little time for happen to the accompaniment all those other itles Gerry refining techniques or of the oldest jokes. Anderson. developing intricate plots. But But the inventive Anderson Mike Mercury. Troy Tempest.hurried decisions proved to be imagination is never at rest. the Tracey family throughout ipsired. Take the origin of Even though his adventures are the sixties my imagination Supercar: \"The puppets out of favour in certain trendy A Gerry Anderson soared with Anderson's Flights couldn't walk properly so I TV quarters he has two major operation of fantasy. And if, around thought how can get them to Thunderbirds really were God new projects. He's already 1968, 1 forsook move fast on the screen without He even made two feature films Space Police which sounds made a one hour pilot for made a one hour pilot for Supermarionation for the flesh actually having to walk featuring International Rescue, and blood adventures of the make a vehicle that can do incredible. It's a combination Avengers, there was a whole one of which features a puppet of people, actors and special anything we can rush the new generation discovering Cliff Richard who said they puppets to any situation while effects, all rolled into one that there were no strings on thought he was a wooden head everthing I've ever done and they're sitting down.\" Captain Scarlet After earthbound and space anyhow it is a damn good show. It will But if anyone had tried to tell_adventures, Anderson took the Despite the superior be made, I'm sure, but it ain't me, back in the days when I was plunge underwater with puppetry and effects and for easy.\" manoeuvring a model of Stingray. This was another once Anderson announces Then, while I'm still taking this Thunderbird 2 around the ground breaker the first himself satisfied with them in, he hits me with the big one. kitchen floor, that one day I'd colour IV series to be made in the films were not great \"At this moment I'm talking be chatting with the only man the UK! By now Gerry successes, and though there about a new Thunderbirds who really knows what Lady Anderson wos as much a part of series, including the beautiful were several more puppet feature film. I've come around Penelope and Parker got up to the Sixties as The Beatles to thinking, now one can do when they weren't racing still remember the thrill of models of Captain Scarlet, in such wonderful things, about around in her pink, six wheeled hearing that Thunderbirds proper proportion for the first bringing back the old Roller, I'd have thought it about would be in hour long episodes live action/Supermarionation time, then Joe 90 and finally the characters, but with real as likely as joining International It marked acceptance for the actors.\" What will it be like? Rescue combiantion of The Scarlet marionettes and a marketing Anderson says it will be Now I'm sitting in Service, Anderson wanted to revolution for Anderson who escapism but will contain some Anderson's office wondering if by now had his own toy work with real actors. social comment. I can't wait! he can pull some strings and get company and publishing His opportunity came with Finally I ask Gerry about the me a trip in Thunderbird 2. No Dick Spanner another feature film, philosophy behind his series. gol Never in the field of Doppelganger, which He thinks for a moment before television has so much pleasure concerned a tenth planet on the replying: \"I've always been been given to so many by one far side of the sun. Despite an interested in triggering off man but Gerry Anderson is Academy Award nomination things in children's minds modest, almost apologetic for its special effects, it's hardly things that could continue after about it. ever revived a pity as it was the show is over.\" \"It was just one of those a classy piece of sci-fi. Then And here I am, living proof things. I'd formed my own film came the live action series that he succeeded. Twenty five company and we were on the UFO. The Protectors and Space years after my first exposure to 1999. point of bankruptcy. Then an Anderson's world, those authoress came along with The Twelve years after he'd hung puppets live on in my mind. I Adventures of Twizzle, and up his heroes, Anderson wonder if the same will be true asked me if I'd film it. The returned to puppetry with for the generation raised on answer had to be yes. We had Terrahawks, using a refined Grange Hill no money, were starving, in technique he called Dick Spanner Vol 1: The debt so it was 'What a hell of a Supermacromation. Why the Case of the Human Cannon good idea.' Otherwise I would U-turn? In the late 70's he'd Ball, joins Thunderbirds, never have been in puppets.\" moved to Hollywood where he Stingray, Captain Scarlet, A softly spoken serious man, was, by his own admission, Terrahawks, Joe 90 and UFO Anderson admits that each lonely and depresed. \"I went on Channel 5 video, all of for a coffee and the waitress .99 each "


"BLOCKBUSTING SEE THE MOSTEXCITI R HOMEN MICRO. AVAILABLE NOVEMBER 1ITH FROM VIRGIN VISION MOVIE ON VIDEO ROBOCOP Take on the role of avenging angel as youmete out rough justice to the perpetrators of evil and lawlessness Some of the most exciting scenes ever to fill a computersgreemreonfront you. The future is here and now when you take up this challenge SPART MAN — PARLMACHINE ALLEOP ROBOCOP Also available for AMIGA .95 and ATARI ST $19.95 SPECTRUM .95 .95 COMMODORE AMSTRAD Ocean Software Limited: 6 Central Street Manchester M 5NS. Tolonhon 061.90 GO T O TOON "


"OFFICIAL Advanced Dungeons Dragons COMPUTER PRODUCT In the mystical world of Krynn an epic battle rages between the forces of good and evil. Eight brave companions enter the treacherous ruins of the temple of Xak Tsaroth seeking the precious Disks of Mishaka!the only end to this infernal struggle. Draconian monsters, skeletal undead, powerful magic and countless other terrors face the adventurers but the way is barred by the ancient black dragon, Khisanth. Find the key to destroy Khisanth or you are doomed to failure. COMPUTI PRECT ed Dungeons Dragons HEROES OF THE LANCE ARCADE ACTION OCIAL Dungeons Dragons Advanced POOL OF RADIANCE COMPUTER PRODUCT CBM 64/128 SPECTRUM 48/128 AMSTRAD IBM PC&COMPATIBLES OF THE LAMA AMIGA ATARI ST BALL The fabled city of Phlan has been overrun by monsters your quest: discover the identity of this evil force. No detail is missed, 6 player characters; non player characters; the Adventurers' Journal packed with history, maps and clues, and the Translation Wheel. The gameplay is exhilarating and the graphics state-of-the-art portrait displays, 3D-perspective, tactical combat display and personalised weapons: the ultimate breakthrough in fantasy role playing computer games. CBM 64/128 AMIGA ATARI ST IBM PC & COMPATIBLES POOL OF RADIANCE FANTASY ROLE PLAYING SIMULATIONS, INC. 1985 TSR, Inc. All rights reserved. Advanced Dungeons and Dragons is a trademark owned by TSR, Inc. Lake Geneva, WI, U.S.A. and under license from SSI, Inc. Mountain View, CA, U.S.A. SEL U.S.Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way. Holford, Birmingham B6 TAX. Tel: 021 356 3355 "


"COMPUTG ext +video GAMES Onth THUNDERBLADE, US GOLD'S WHOPPER CHOPF ALL VERSIONS REVIEWED. OUT THE 16TH DER "


"The meanest fighting machi NI "


"hi ne ever to storm the skies... «Sheer arcade brilliance.... captured\" "


"** A KALEIDOSCOPE OF STUNNING SOFTWARE from Rainbow Arts famed for their exciting and original games. Don't miss these three new software sensations. 1** ** Screenshots are from various formats Amiga .99 Atari ST .99 IBM PC .99 SPACEBALA REALM OF THE TROLLS\" REALM OF THE TROLLS--Encounter over 200 troll grottos and be prepared for hundreds of hidden surprises as you recover the priceless treasures stolen by the tyrannical trolls. JOAN OF ARC Relive the fantastic destiny of France's most famous heroine. An action packed game filled with deeds of valour and also with intrigue and political infighting. SPACEBALL Win back the planet Utalis from the dreaded Jitterbobs by playing Spaceball the ball game of the future requiring intense concentration and skillful reflexes Amiga .99 disk Atari ST .99 disk Amiga disk .99 IBM PC .99 disk Atari ST disk .99 CBM 64/128 .99 cassette CBA 64/128 cassette .99 .99 disk disk $14.99 U.S. Gold, Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 Raimon "


"DOBO5470 N SCORE 00018200 NE 07 SC00002100 10328967 Hold on to your stomachs, unscramble your brains for the journey of a lifetime as you take the controls of the most advanced Helicopter armaments specialists could ever conceiveoutmanoeuvre the fastest jet fighter, outgun the most dangerous gunship. Traverse the war-torn skyline of skyscraper city as you sharpen your skills for the battle ahead. Plunge out to sea for an epic encounter with an immense, heavily armoured gunship. Race on to a shoot-out in the rocky canyon and dense forests, where your flying expertise is tested to the limits as you dive, hover and skilfully manoeuvre your way through this fortified maze. CBM 64/128 .99 TAPE .99 DISK SPECTRUM 48/128K .99 TAR "


"SIHII THE PEPSI CH GAMEOF THE SEGAS his game has been om Sega Enterprises THUNDERBLADETM and rademarks of Sega Ente CTRUM 48/128K .99 TAPE .99 DISK_AMSTRAD CPC .99 TAPE .99 DISK "


"IIT PEPSI CHALLENGE ME OF THE YEAR! This game has been maactured under license Ero Sega Enterprises Lad.. Japan, and THUNDERBLADET and SEGA\" for SEGATM) are trademarks of Sega Enterprises Ltd. EUS. GOLDE ATARI ST .99 DISK AMIGA .99 DISK IBM "


"Screen shots taken from various formats QO008490 SOLIS 000000 MIST  i  der Blade 013430 KI32345673 Thrusting forward you gallantly roar ahead blazing enemy gunships, armoured tanks, jet fighters avoiding heat seeking exocet missiles through the perilous oil installation to reach the final encounter-the awesome APACHE battle cruiser, the action never ceases. Never that is until you emerge victorious Golden Gunner-master of the meanest fighting machine ever to hit the skies. U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021-356 3388. 24.99 DISK IBM PC & COMPATIBLES .99 DISK "

