"98p OCTOBER 1986 S&4.60 Dm6 285pta HFL 6.50 COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMA COLOUR OF MAGIC PREWEWED/200 FREE GAMES RETURN OF THE VIDEO GAME / MEET LEATHER GODDESSES! ROLE PLAYING/WIN C16 GAMES/VORTEX'S REVOLUTION REVIEWED DODGY GEEZERS CAPTURED/FANTASY FILM ROUND-UP/FREE FIST POSTER "


"The Arcade PET SSIEN | 184 ATARI BUL Officially Licenced Coin Op Classic The very best Elite Titles are available at selected branches of: 322WHSMITH Mentres.wo "


"ANTS   CAPCOM, \"Officially Licenced Coin Op Classic\" ntro NOW i Spectrum Amstrad Amstrad Commodore Commodore Cassette Cassette Disc Cassette Disc Cassette .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 C16 Mail Order, just send a cheque or postal Access VISA order payable to Elite, or quote your Credit Card number. the in Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands, WS9 8PW. Telephone: (0922) 59165. Telex: 336130 ELITE.G. Supra "


"FEATURES CONTENTS 16 FIST COMPETITION 18 FIST REVIEW 52 REALMS OF FANTASY 56 LETTER FROM AMERICA 61 SANXION COMPETITION 63 LISTING 64 FIST II POSTER 70 200 FREE GAMES OFFER 75 ADVENTURE NEWS 76 ADVENTURE HELPLINE 80 ADVENTURE REVIEWS 86 DODGY GEEZERS 88 COLOUR OF MAGIC 91 FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR COMPETITION U.S. NEWS/P56 92 C16 COMPETITION 97 IDEAS CENTRAL 102 FILMS AND VIDEOS 106 D.A.R.Y.L. COMPETITION 108 CLEVER MUSIC 111 BUGHUNTERS 116 ARCADE ACTION 118 LEATHER GODDESSES OF PHOBOS 124 MAILBAG 126 NEXT MONTH REVOLUTION/P30 NEWS & REVIEWS 19 REVIEWS THIS ISSUE: GAME OF THE MONTH: It's another double top this month. C+VG awards its highest accolade to Dan Dare, Virgin's long-awaited game, and Super Cycle from US Gold. C+VG hits go to Parallax, Psi Chess, Vera Cruz, Infiltrator, Mission Elevator and Revolution. Plus lots more reviews. 80 ADVENTURE Good old KC and his sunshine band of reviewers take a look! at Phantasie, Futurezoo, Lapis Philosphorum, Mandragore, Jewels of Darkness and Hunchback 8 NEWS AND HOSSIP GOSSIP More news from the far-flung frontiers of space. A screen shot of Beyond's Star Trek has materialised in C+VG's transporter room. Don't miss it. Are you C+VG's most loyal reader? We want to here from you. Hot Gossiper Tony Takoushi enthuses this month about the Return of the Video Game. Sega is launching its Master System, Nintendo is producing a home console and Atari's long-awaited 7800 should arrive soon. LABYRINTH/P102 "


"INSIDE STORY * * * Bull Ere, John, where did you get this copy of C+VG then? Got a load around the back, John. Don't suppose you've got a copy of this new Fist game they are raving about Nah, sorry John, top security job that one. Maybe next week.'Ere! They've got a picture of us in here! Dodgy Geezers! I like that! The cheek of it. No more dodgy than that Alien thing in that new film they've got pictures of. Naassty! So are these Leather Goddess characters by the sound of things. And they think WE'RE dodgyl And as for that bunch of people who go in for role-playing games acting out their innermost fantasies and even dressing up to do it. That's what I call really dodgy. Still, they to enjoy it. Tell you what I enjoy, John. What's that, John? A bit of football and in this issue there's a Footballer of the Year competition. I'll go for that, I need a new tracksuit. Got some of those around the back too, John, if you're interested. Well that's really magic, John. So's the new game from Delta 4-the Colour of Magic. They got that in this mag too then, John Course, John, C+VG is magic. I better grab a few copies off you then, John, 'cos they are bound to disappear pretty quickly. That's right, John. Now, about this tracksuit... FIST IV/P18 Jim THE INHERITANCE/P23 TIPT RO TEEN SANXIONS/P61 HIGHLANDER/P102 EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John DESIGN Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Paul Coppins Steve Donoghue Jim Douglas AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeley SOFTWARE CONSULTANTS Tony Takoushi Chris Cain PUBLICITY Marcus Rich ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Garry Williams AD PRODUCTION Debbie Pearson PUBLISHER Rita Lewis COVER Simon Harrison EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR JAU Tel: 01-251 6222 July-December 98,258 TROUBLE..? THE BUGS/P111 TO BE ONTINUED.. U.S. NEWS/P56 DAN DARE POINTS. .000 ABC DAN DARE/P19 "


"Sinclair THUE VIDEO VIDEO Na my GRAPH < RUN BREAK 2 are with BravoT Flora i ima c na CODE -LOAD ENTER CAPS SHIFT SYMB SHIFT MONSTER MEM "


"GET YOUR HANDS ON THE NEW SINCLAIR 128K+2. BEFORE EVERYBODY ELSE DOES. 12K ZX Spectrum +2 The new 128K ZX Spectrum +2 is more than just a monster memory. It's the ultimate family computer. With a built-in datacorder for easier loading, superb graphics capability, two joystick ports, a proper typewriter keyboard and more games available than you can shake a joystick at (well over 1000 software titles, in fact) Better get your hands on the new 128K ZX Spectrum +2 soon. Before they do. E149 1 ORY. MONSTER VALUE To: Sinclair, P.O. Box 462, Brentwood, Essex C14 4ES, Please send me more information about the Sinclair 128K ZX Spectrum +2. Name Address Available from: Allders, Boots, Clydesdale, Comet, Connect, Co-op, Currys, Dixons, Electric Supreme, Laskys, John Lewis, John Menzies, Power City, Rumbelows, Ultimate, WH Smith, Wigfalls, and good independent stores. We recommend Sinclair Quality Control Software. inclair "


"Two years in the making, TT Racer, the new game from Digital Integration got into top gear at the Personal Computer World Show. But before the show, top Suzuki Grand Prix rider Paul Lewis took TT Racer for a spin in a break during practice for the recent British 500cc bike Grand Prix at Silverstone Paul fared better with the Spectrum than the real thing as it turned out. He fell during the opening lap of the Grand Prix, which was run in disgustingly wet conditions, and injured his ankle. At least when you play Dl's latest simulation you won't have to suffer any broken bones but it is the closest you'll get to racing Two new software companies will start up in the autumn. Both are off-shoots of Ariolasoft. 39 Steps will handle adventure releases, about Star Trek, Beyond's new game, which should be due in earth orbit around Christmas. This screen shot, which was beamed up into the good ship Spectrum and C64 at prices from .95. More martial arts mayhem is on the way from Martech. But Uchi-Mata is an encounter of a more subtle kind. It's based on Judo -a martial art so for neglected by the computer fraternity. Brian Jacks, Britain's judo champ, has helped Martech produce what could be the best simulation of the sport yet seen. The graphics and animation are splendid. Uchi-Mata will be launched in September for the 64 with other versions to follow. TERCER C+VG's transporter room, shows the digitized faces of the Enterprise's crew. Fragments of paper found in the transporter suggest that in the game you control the main characters Kirk, Spock, McCoy etc in the battle to beat the evil Klingons and their psiemiter. There are, apparently, more than 1,000 stars in the game, and 256 subplots. The game will also include solid 3D graphics and 3D vector graphics. More news as and when... CINEMAWARE movies utilise full 3-D animation and each has a professionally composed original soundtrack Now the bad news. The movies will be produced solely for the Amiga, Macintosh and Atari ST. CINEMAWARE's creators include Jerry Pournelle, the bestselling sci-fi author. BELECTION ELEY LORD and Reaktor will release arcade/action games. First out is They Stole a Million from the adventure people, and Deactivators on the arcade front. The programs will be From the wild frontiers of available on the Amstrad, deepest space comes more news Movie lovers who've always monsters and a beautiful princess. wanted to be directors, need be Bob Jacob, president of Master frustrated no more. The first Designer Software said: interactive motion pictures were \"CINEMAWARE gives everyone unveiled at Chicago's Consumer the chance to be an Errol Flynn or Electonics Show by Master a Humphrey Bogart in an Designer Software, open-ended movie that offers CINEMAWARE Interactive many potential plotlines and movies are \"played on the hundreds of hours of nonrepetitive computer. CINEMAWARE play. It is absolutely a new genre.\" emulates the grophic look of a movie, employing pons, closeups and zooms. The interactive movies incorporate cinematic themes as well, Defender of the Crown is set in the days of Robin Hood complete with tournaments, pitched battles and damsels in distress The King of Chicago is based upon the Warner Bros gangster epics of the 1930s. S.D.I. sends a dashing American rocket pilot in a suicidal mission to save the human race Sinbad and the Throne of the Falcon features a loveable genie, fierce warriors, mon-eating a 500cc Grand Prix machine. \"It really does provide a realistic simulation of a racing bike,\" Paul told C+VG at Silverstone. Paul and the Suzuki Heron Grand Prix team gave programmer Rod Swift loads of help and guidance as he developed the simulation. The game has a huge number of options, types of bikes, circuits, etc and the graphics are pretty near, too. Each of the 12 circuits "


"is an accurate representation of the real thing. To prove it, C+VG's own ace biker asked Paul if he knew where he was as he attempted a computerised lap of Silverstone. \"Just coming into Abbey bend,\" he grinned, easing down to a sedate 150 mph! Apart from choosing your circuit you also get to set up the bike in the pits before the race selecting the correct tyres and gears are crucial. And those of us who don't happen to have the circuits implanted in their brains like Mr Lewis, you can always refer to the circuit maps provided. If you're not up to the Lewis standard-never fear! You can always opt to race at club level on 80cc or 125cc bikes. So there's hope for all of us would be TT Racers. The game is available now for the Spectrum 48 and 128 and will set you back a very reasonable .95. The new game from those people at Bubble Bus, is called Ice Temple and it looks set to reach the top of the charts. It's an arcade adventure with Ultimate style graphics. You play the part of Nick, a space council worker and part-time mega-hero. You've just bought a brand new carand someone's just pinched it. After much galaxy trotting you track your car down to a planet that is in the throes of an ice-age. Nick figures he must shut down the main reactor and save the planet from a cold future. But the aliens, who are trying to freeze everybody, try to stop him. Ice Temple will be on the Spectrum 48/128 and sell for around .95. MILLION bytes in ONE cartridge your car with the prize money you This is 250,000 times more than a win. VCS cartridge, 31,250 times more Choplifter, boy this is really than the best Coleco cartridge, and turning into a classici Dan Gorlin's 125,000 times more than the best epic sees the light once more on Vectrex cartridge! the Sega and Alari systems and By Tony Takoushi Now do you begin to has been translated to the arcades understand what I am getting at? The unit will come with a Combo The Sega System has special o all you pensioners out Mega Cartridge (1048K) featuring control pads (joysticks to you) and there remember the Hang-On-the arcade hit-and a Light Phaser for when you dedicated video games Safari Hunt. want to shoot your TV during consoles Remember all those Games due for release on the EastEnders! really brill games on the Coleco, Astron card include Iransbot, a Sega has released the system in Vectrex and Atari VCS? space shoot'em up, My Hero, a Japan and the States although Don't know about you, but I miss kung-fu hero against punks, Ghost plans for a UK launch are still to be them SO much! House, a classic arcade adventure, finalised, a price of around  Happy days will soon be here again as three, YES THREE, games consoles will soon to be on sale in Your high street stores. Atari is launching its long-awaited 7800 Games Console with many of the classic coin-op games and quite a few conversions of hit micro games. Sega is launching its Master System with industry-shattering memory specification cartridges. Nintendo, another major force in the arcades, is set to enter the home console scene in the UK after great success in Japan. It claims six million units have been sold there. The Atari 7800 has been around for a couple of years but Teddy Boy (a maze chase there never seemed to be any real derivative and F-16 Fighting news of its launch or development. Falcon a flight/combat simulator It is now said to have around W ill it replace my MACH3 100 sprites with a large There are seven Mega cartridge/memory capacity. Atari Cartridges due for release. These say it is comparable with the Sega are all one megabyte in capacity system. and should set the standard for all Games that will be available console games. Space Horrier include Pole Position 2 (comes with here we come! the unit on purchase), Joust, Black Belt is a karate game in Robotron, Xevious. There are just which you plough your way the start, Atari promose. through entire enemy armies trying On the home micro front Atari to restore order to the world. has ensured a crossflow with All Star Wrestling offers twenty conversions of some real classics. different holds and wrestling Titles due are, One-on-One, techniques. You can also indulge in Skyfox, Touchdown Football, out of ring battles, weapon Choplifter, Summer+Winter fighting, attacks from the corner Games, Impossible Mission, Super post and two man charges. You has been mooled with cartridges Huey and Rescue on Fractalus. have to clear 30 complete rounds around . Atari say the 7800 should be on before you can have a shot at the The Nintendo games console sale just before Christmas and it championship has been a huge success in Japan, will be firmly established in 1987. It Hang-On/Safari Hunt comes establishing itself as number one in should retail for around  with with the console. Hang-On is a 3D the home market. cartridges ranging from  to motorcycle game in which you It sells for $156 in the U.S. with . race through grasslands, seasides, Cartridges between $20 and $30, When I was told about the Sega valleys, night time cityscapes and Nintendo will be releasing their system my mouth just dropped even racecoursesl. Safari Hunt hos arcade hits onto the home console, wide open. Pull your ears back and you scrambling around the jungle so keep your eyes peeled for the listen to this... trying to survive with all the usual Mario Bros games and Punch Out The game console has 128K of dangers thick rain forests, At the moment Atari is the only ROM and 128K of RAM. It can gulping bogs and alligators. company with firm plans for take Astron cards these are like Fantasy Zone is real weird! The launching its console in the UK. The credit cards with a capacity of graphics and sound are really out other companies are still sorting 256K of machine code. of this world. You have to build a out internal problems and To try and put this into ship and then take off for the marketing arguments. perspective, the Atari VCS Fantasy Zone flying through So if you want to hear the news cartridges are usually 4K. The planets along the way first make sure you read C+VG Coleco offered, at best, 32K World GP is a car race game every month and forget about capacity and the Vectrex 8K. with a difference. You design the those boring, zopped out, other The Sega system offers ONE track, race on it and help build up mags... Cyborg. A cybernetic organism. Trinium layered plasti-steel shell. Black Infra-red vision. A tough character. It's the new \"biggie\" from CRL. After an horrific accident, a man barely alive is repaired, rebuilt, and renamed by scientists. Armed with super-sensory equipment and a gun on his right arm, it was decided that Cyborg should be retained for special operations. Soon after starting the game, you will find yourself in a full-blown combat situation. Armed with a laser rifle and carbine, you must defend yourself and your allies from marauding aliens. Cyborg is an arcade adventure in the true sense of the phrase. 3D movement in four directions, slick scrolling graphics and a horde of nasties are all included. The game will be released in October on the Commodore 64 and Spectrum. continued on page 10 "


"THE SOFTWARE Players Software are producing games by the bundle! They have seven games for imminent release on the Commodore 64 and 16, Amstrad and Spectrum. For the Commodore there is Velocipede II, featuring Mr Megafat on a unicycle and it's Clean Up Time in which you play the part of a janitor in a platform game. Both run on the C64. Spectrum owners can look forward to two graphic adventures. Shrewsbury Key Fregseft. Presents wage requirements plus individual tackling, passing, running, and kicking abilities. The matches themselves will be played using \"artificial intelligence\" and you may see any fixture you wish. The Double will be initially released on the Commodore 64 and Atari, price .95, and later for the Spectrum The first person to achieve the Double will be invited to meet HOWARD KENDALL, of Everton FC and will see a league fixture at Goodison Park. CBM 64/TOP 10 1 Leaderboard/US Gold 2 Dragon's Lair/Software Projects 3 Green Beret/Imagine 4 Speed King/ Mastertronic 5 Ghosts and Goblins/Elite 6 Knight Games/English 7 Ninja Master/Firebird 8 Thrust/Firebird 9 Tau Ceti/CRL 10 Second City/Novagen SPECTRUM TOP 10 places you, as a modern-day commuter, in an amazingly interesting adventure based on a trip to Shrewsbury. The second program is a science-fiction game, Zarcon Mystery. The gamer must save Earth from destruction. Frageaft Open the Trapdoor on one of the most ingenious and graphically pleasing pieces of software released this year. Piranha's game based on the new television series of the same name will be a huge hit. By the time you read this, Trapdoor will already have started its television run. It covers the adventures of Berk, a blob like creature which looks a little like one of the Mister Men characters, who lives in the cellars of a dank uninviting castle. He is the overworked and underpiad servant of a \"thing upstairs\" and must look after him. In the middle of the cellar is a trapdoor. Open this and there's a whole host of weird and wonderful creatures ready to emerge into the light. The company behind the television series is Terry Wogan Productions, and the series is narratted by Willie Rushton. 1 Jack The Nipper/Gremlin Graphics 2 Kung Fu Master/US Gold 3 Ghosts and Goblins/Elite ACE/Cascade 5 Ninja Master/Firebird 6 Molecule Man/Mastertronic 7 Video Olympics/Mastertronic 8 Knight Tyme/Mostertronic 9 Bobby Bearing/The Edge 10 Green Beret/Imagine LU The November issue of Computer and Video Games is something a bit special it's our fifth birthday issue! Believe it or not C+VG has been going for FIVE whole years. That's 60 action packed issues since we first appeared on the scene way back in November 1981. To celebrate our birthday we'll have lots of special features and competitions but we want you to join in the celebrations too. We want to find C+VG's most loyal reader the one who has been getting C+VG the longest AND who can answer a few simple questions about their favourite magazine to prove it! The longest serving reader will get a free lifetime subscription to C+VG, plus copies of the top 10 games for their machine according to the Gallup Software Chart for November. The winner will also receive a Big Red t-shirt, plus his, or her, picture with the C+VG team, which we'll print in next months magazine. 1) What did the cover of C+VG's first issue look like? 2) Name C+VG's first editor 3) Which adventurous long-serving C+VG writer has had his name in EVERY issue. We might also want you to prove that you've got every copy of C+VG since 1981 so dust off your binders before you fill in the coupon below. Send in your entry to Computer and Video Games, Long Service Award, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. In order to get your picture into the next issue we'll need your entries by September 29th. By K.Hornell 1985 1 2 3 BBC/TOP 10 Thrust/Superior Commando/Elite Air Wolf/Elite Cricket/ugbyte Mikie/Imagine Tennis/Bugbyle lan Botham's Test Cricket/Tynesoft Star Force 7/Bugbyte Winter Olympics Tynesoft Commonwealth Games/Tynesoft 5 6 Amstrad users can choose between Magic Maths and Big Top Barney. Magic Maths is an educational title, while BTB is set in a circus, and requires the player to perform various feats before the crowd. Auriga is a space shoot-em-up on the C16. SRL 9 10 2 Building up a squad and managing a football club to win the First Division Championship and The Cup is the ultimate aim of 3 4 5 AMSTRAD/TOP 10 Kane/Mastertronic Harvey Headbanger/Firebird Ghosts and Goblins/Elite Molecule Man/Mastertronic Green Beret/Imagine Elite/Firebird Storm/Mastertronic Knight Tyme/Mostertronic Speed King/Mostertronic Thrust/Firebird The game features the bumbling Berk, his greedy pet spider, Drutt, and skull-mentor, Boni. Berk keeps getting ordered to do various things by \"thing upstairs,\" mostly concerning food. Berk must complete his task before his master loses patience and insults Berk. Don Priestly is the man behind the Spectrum version of the game and he's really come up with a superb creation. The animated characters are great Trapdoor will sell for .95 on the Spectrum. AL SALL SQUAD DETAILS 10 ATARVTOP 10 C+VG LONG SERVICE AWARD Name Address The Double, a new soccer game from Johnson Scanatron. You will be approached by a Third Division club and offered a managerial contract. All you have to do is achieve success either by promotion or attracting larger clubs with your expertise and end up by managing a club with a squad of players good enough to win the Double. You will all be trying to build successful squads, buying and selling on the transfer market while trying to balance your individual clubs finances. There are 1050 players each with individual transfer values and Kick Start/Mastertronic Beer Belly Burt's Brew Biz/ Americana Vegas Jackpot/Mastertronic Thrust/Firebird One Man and His Droid/Mastertrona Action Biker/Mastertronic New York City/Americano Submarine Commander/Creative Sparks Nuclear Nick/Americana Last V8/Mastertronic 10 I've been reading C+VG for — years. Machine owned Our Fist Il cover this issue was created by 19-year-old Simon Harrison who dropped in to the office one day and amazed us all with his artistic talents. Simon has also done work on a couple of heavy metal album covers -SO watch out for them! In the meantime if you think you're talented enough to have your work used on a C+VG cover why not send some examples of your work in to us at Computer and Video Games. MACHINE KEY My answers are: SP SPECTRUM BB = BBC CO=COMMODORE 64 AT ATARI AM = AMSTRAD EL=ELECTRON CI-C16 ENT = ENTERPRISE V20 = VIC 20 DR DRAGON COMPILED BY GALLUP "


"NEW CLASSIC TITLES AT -99 from 2-99. DT 9 SPECTRUM 56-7 66-2. NO weekly releases of the best top games new games.. A ... re-releases OCT E SP -0... available from all good RETAIL OUTLETS... TORNADO LOW LEVEL SINCLAIR SPE RUT JUSTICA CON or order direct from 2-99-CLASSICSquoting your credit card number or send a cheque or postal order for .99 (each incl. P+P) made payable to 2.99-CLASSICS Anchor House Anchor Road Aldridge. WalsallWest Midlands WS9 BPW OCT 13/ SP "


"PILOT OF THE FUTURE THE STORY SO FAR... COLONEL DAN DARE HAS LOCATED THE ASTEROID BASE OF HIS ARCH ENEMY THE EVIL MEKON...HE MUST DESTROY THE BASE AT ALL COSTS! BUT FIRST, HE MUST DEFEAT THE DEADLY TREENS AND THEIR EVIL MASTER... JOIN COLONEL DARE AND HIS VALIANT COMPANIONS ON THEIR JOURNEY THROUGH PERIL IN... TO BE CONTINUED... DAN DARE PILOT OF THE FUTURE. THE FATE OF THEIR MISSION DEPENDS ON YOU!! IPC DAN DARE LTD Part of the Dan Dare Nastaya Coc Wivice by a dare AVAILABLE NOW FROM VIRGIN GAMES ON SPECTRUM 48/128, COMMODORE 64/128 AND AMSTRAD CPC RANGE OF COMPUTERS .95 ON CASSETTE AND .95 AMSTRAD DISC PLEASE SEND ME DAN DARE PILOT OF THE FUTURE IMMEDIATELY! SPECTRUM 48/128 CASSETTE .95 COMMODORE 64/128 CASSETTE .95 AMSTRAD CPC CASSETTE .95 AMSTRAD CPC DISC .95 Name ...... Address..... Please make cheques or postal orders to Virgin Games Ltd. Please do not post cash. VIRGIN GAMES LTD, 2/4 VERNON YARD, PORTOBELLO ROAD, LONDON W11 2DX CVG10/86 "


"Breakneck speed and dazzling graphics are the ingredients of Trailblazer, one of the latest multi-format releases from Gremlin Graphics. You control a bouncing ball along a trail divided into multi-coloured squares, avoiding the gaps and cracks and leaping open spaces. Some coloured squares have PLAYGA SC GG00GSO LEV A TIM 36:03 EASY GOING SHER IS . TRAILBLAZE ULTTU BY EASY GEWO runs and runs. And there's a new piece of software to hit my sweaty improved version of the world's palms is the official Sigue Sigue most popular football game which Sputnik game. will be available for the Spectrum, Don't groan! It's poor, it's ugly, Amstrad, C64, BBC, Electron, Atari, it's offensive and it's down right Vic-20 (16k). And there'll be a mean, but I love it! special win-a-day-out-with Kevin Your problem, readers, in Toms at the 1987 FA Cup Final deciding whether this review is competition. legit! SSS are well known for their hype and general bad taste and I would hate to ruin that reputation. Hold it! I've just seen the C64 The game is based in the 21st version of Dan Dare and it's a Century and you play it in front of totally different game. The Plot is a giant video screen which splits still the same, but the graphics, your TV screen into four equal sound, and playability are quarters different. Dan even gets into fights You are faced with dozens of TV no laser guns, but fisticuffs! channels to choose from and There is also some wonderful various characters take to the animation on Stripy, who is Digby's video screens and try to blow Tony alien pet, who is not featured in the James to bits (hooray). other versions. Oh, also note that You control Tony James (who is the Amstrad version has more to beautifully animated) at the bottom do than the Spectrum one, but is of the screen and can strut around almost the same apart from the firing at the beastly attackers. graphics which, although colourful, When you have destroyed an are not as good as those on the attacker in one window he Spectrum. Watch next issue for a reappears in the next window and full review of Dan Dare on the so on until all four video screens C64. have been filled. When one window is cleared there is a clapperboard countdown from Radarsoft, the people behind seven to one and that attacker the quirky Floyd the Droid appears in that window as a large reviewed in full next issue, are all animated graphic. set to unleash Al \"Madman\" Bluntz Each level has four attack waves on the world. Mad All has to save and each wave has 400 sprites. a fair damsel from the clutches of There will be six levels to work the Manic Monk and his army in through (at four waves per level the 2,000 screen arcade that makes 2400 sprites, this must adventure called Hopeless. It be a record). doesn't look that bad though The general feel of the game is and it will be released by very good and despite its basic Ariolasoft in October. 64 shoot-'em-up theme there are a lot owners will have to find .95 to of very exciting ideas and graphics get their hands on them. that will grab and hold you for many a session. Other characters who appear \"No, no\" I screamed, as the editor include Madonna, Michael grabbed me by the hair and Jackson, Phil Collins, Norman dragged me kicking to my Tebbitt, Maggie, and a mysterious Commodore 64. roadie. Again all are larger than \"I don't want to review it!\", 1 life and very well animated. protested. It's just hype, the game Tony Gibson is writing the game doesn't really exist!\" and has developed a new graphics \"Now calm down Tony,\" Tim system (\"A computer generated ordered. (Tim's the kind of guy who character set') to handle the very can make a kick in the teeth seem special effects. reasonable...) The game should be released in Having wired my chair to the September and will initially be mains, Tim suggested I get on with released on the Commodore 64 the review before a fuse blew... (around .95) with versions to Who am I to argue? follow for the Spectrum and the latest, not to mention hottest, Amstrad FIT 5 different reactions on the bouncing ball. One colour may give extra bounce, while another will stop you dead in your tracks. In Trailblazer you can race against the clock, against another computer controlled ball or human opposition. Trailblazer will cost .95 on the Commodore 64, Amstrad and Atari, .95 on the Spectrum and MSX, and .95 on the C16. Commodore and Atari disk versions will cost .95. ROCOIN Prepare to have your mind warped and your senses shifted Deactivators is here! The game puts you in charge of a bomb disposal team-droids not people and you must get a number of terrorist bombs out of your top secret research HQ before they blow up. The bad news is that the terror team have reprogrammed your guards to attack everything in sight, the really bad news is that each of the rooms has different gravity. Deactivators features 3D graphics, five levels of increasingly awesome difficulty and even a screen editing facility to enable you to create your own baffling rooms. Deactivators will be released by Ariolasoft on the new Reaktor label for the 64, Amstrad and Spectrum on cassette and disc. 517 The longest running football story must be Kevin Tom's Football Manager saga. It just FIREBird "


"The Arcade GA GHOSTSNGOBLINS SSE ATARI   Officially Licenced Coin Op Classic The very best Elite Titles are available at selected branches of: WHSMITH Montes, WOOLWO "


"ERBOY CAPCOM Cassette Cassette Disc Cassette Spectrum Amstrad Amstrad Commodore Commodore C16 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 Disc Cassette Access Mail Order, just send a cheque or postal VISA order payable to Elite, or quote your Credit Card number. the In Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands, WS9 8PW. Telephone: (0922) 59165. Telex: 336130 ELITE.G. "


"RO ? MIST DAAD AAN FISTII O COMPETITION 39,  coMPETITION ZOO F HOUSE FIST II C+VG/MELBOURNE COMPETITION Name Address The Fist is back. Meaner and more mystical than ever. And to celebrate the comeback of the karate kid and C+VG's fifth birthdaywe've got a very special Fist II competition. You could be the proud owner of a Gilo karate suit what every well dressed martial artist will be wearing this year. We've got TWO of these amazing suits to give away to our first prize winners. They'll also get a copy of the Fist game and a giant Fist poster. Copies of the Fist II game will go to 25 runners up. All you have to do to win is identify the six mystery martial arts games from the screen snippets pictured on this page. Once you've done that, fill in the coupon and rush it to Computer and Video Games, Fist Competition, Priory Court, Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is October 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and the editor's decision is, as ever, final. Pic A is: Pic Bis: Pic Cis: Pic Dis: Pic E is: Pic Fis: Computer owned: "


"Leo Gemelli] pepe POUNDED SISASTRO NEW OUR TOP YOUTH ir RAISING to IS EAR OLDS The best selection of gear in town. Lee. Aitch Gallini' Le Shark. We've got them all. If you're a young teenager and you want style that fits, look up your local Top Man. TOUGH LUCK IF NOT AT YOU ASHOCKIN Treebie Ahair raising offer spend  or more and you'll be given a tube of Shock Waves Super Firm Hair Gel. Sobuy yourself a pair of jeans and complete your style with an exciting hairstyle. Spikes or slick back-you can do it all with Shock Waves. Offer available while stocks last. with Shock Waves, offit all le shark "


"C+VG OCT software REVIEWS O FIST II PREVIEW CAME GAME OF THE C+VG C+VG HIT! he Way of the Exploding Fist spawned a thousand 30 imitators none of which really managed to capture the magic of the first martial arts combat game from Melbourne MOS House. It also meant that the Aussie programmers, lead by Gregg Barnett, had a really tough act MONTH to follow when they decided to This is C+VG's highest honour. come up with a sequel. But it looks very likely that It's granted to the game which, in they'll have another monster hit our honest opinion, is the most on their hands this Christmas. playable, original and exciting They've taken some of the game released during the month. ideas which didn't make it into We look for all the key points the original, added a few bits of listed below but also that extra added ingredient which makes tricky programming picked up the game stand head and when they were developing the unsuccessful Rock n' Wrestle. shoulders above the best of the slipped in an element or two of rest. arcade adventuring and came up with Fist II. This time Fist is up against a really tough enemy and he has a mission in life. Our hero has to PARKET fight and defeat the evil Warlord who has enslaved the Warriors of the Fist. mit This symbol is C+VG's way of But before he can embark on telling you a game is the the ultimate conflict with the BUSINESS! Warlord, Fist must search for a \"Who writes your reviews?\" That's a number of mystical scrollsknown as trigrams or zaroths question our readers often ask. and return them to various Name the guilty ones, they demand. temples. So that's what we're doing. Satisfied Once you've restored the now? eight scrolls to their rightful opponents Fist encounters, he'll combat game for the unitiated homes, Fist is granted extra also have to do battle with giant to polish up their martial arts C+VG'S REVIEW powers. cobras and swift panthers. skills on. If Fist gets the Force scroll Don't expect the skills you Greg Barnet has described TEAM back to the temple he is learned in the first Fist to help Fist Il as: \"The first of a new LESLY WALKER: Lesly brings a rewarded with the power to out too much. Many other breed of computer game.\" And gentle touch to the C+VG review knock down heavy objects. If he tactics and strategies will have who are we to argue with him? gets the Fire scroll back to a to be picked up. The proof will be in the team. She enjoys GOOD games, temple, he'll be able to see in For example you can't playing of course and we were whatever they are. But nothing has dark placesand so on. hope to wipe out an enemy with hoping to bring you a full really come close to her favourite The temples also have secret a low kick while fighting in a review of the game this issue. game Sorcery yet anyway... exits to other parts of the game swamp. Why? \"Cos you'll drown But as has become the norm TIM METCALFE: The veteran Ed map. The scrolls are scattered stupid! And don't try with most products, last minute has been around with C+VG almost around the 100 screens of the somersaults in a cavern. Unless delays meant we hadn't since it started and as he's getting on game and are protected by you want to lose your head. received our preview copy from a bit now likes to do more restful the Warlord's evil minions. Fist has an amazing armoury Australia in time for those There are 15 opponents of 21 different moves to punch, unrelenting deadlines which things like basket weaving. But he which come in four main types. kick and swipe at his enemies plague magazines like C+VG. has been known to get stuck into a The weapons and skills change with. So be prepared to get your But in the meantime prepare good shoot-'em-up. Generally it's the as you get further into the joystick fingers in a twist! yourself for the biggest game more leisurely games like flight-sims game. On the B-side of the tape event this year by entering our and such like. Leaving the more stre Apart from the many human there will be a one-on-one special Fist Il competition! nuous stuff to the rest of the team. Typical... JIM DOUGLAS: Jim \"Crockett\" PAUL BOUGHTON: C+VG's CHRIS CAIN: Our junior joystick NICKY TREVETT: The mysterious Douglas is first and foremost an smooth, sauve and sophisticated dejockey Chris \"Odduns\" Cain likes Nicky reviews Beeb games from her adventure person -but he is also a puty ed is well known for his joystick nothing better than an arcade advencountry retreat in Hertfordshire. An fan of arcade adventures the BBC, skills. Paul is a sporty type and enture or a good shot-'em-up between enigmatic figure Nicky is another and extremely trendy clothes. Jim is joys all those sport simulations munching packets of dodgy crisps. arcade adventure fan-but does ena wordsmith who writes reviews so which require you to totally destroy The Commodore is his favourite joy a bit of martial artistry from sharp you could cut yourself on the stick. Which he does. Fremachine but he has been known to time to time. them. quently. actually touch an Amstrad. STARTS HERE "


"C+VG OCT software REVIEWS 2 DAN DARE DAN DARE PILOT OF Machine: Spectrum (Version Reviewed)/ Amstrad Supplier: Virgin Games Price: .95 Cass/.95 Amstrad Disk Remember Eagle, that \"Boys Own\" comic which featured the fantastic, wonderful and heroic hero Dan Dare. You do... Good! Now he's in a game, which! have to say is one of the hottest new releases yet! A bold statement maybe, but I believe it's true, and it all starts with a message from the Mekon... over to you Dan... I was just relaxing in my penthouse apartment when I heard a message on the vid-box. Quickly I turned the volume up so that I could heard what he was saying... \"Earthlings, listen and listen good (He's obviously been watching some of those old movies), I have an ultimatum. People of Earth will surrender to me, and I will spare your planet, Yes, Earthlings, have set an asteroid on course for your Earth, and when worlds collide... (He definitely has been watching old movies.) I quickly rushed off with Digby, my faithful sidekick and chief dishwasher. Grabbing my laser gun, I leapt into the intergalactic star cruising rocket ship which just happened to be parked outside, and we were off to find the asteroid and destroy We landed on a small crater just beyond the mountains, and I instructed Digby to wait for me while I set about doing various heroic deeds. First of all discovered a lift and on going in it, I went down to a rather mega-complex looking city. I figured, as heroes do, that I must stop this asteroid by placing five pieces of a self-destruct mechanism into a small room where they would go BOOM! and stop the terrible threat on earth. Now to work. As I reached the corner, a Treen spotted me and fired his laser at me, quickly dodging the blast with all the acrobatics had learned at the Hero Training Academy, and blasted him with pinpoint accuracy. Now knowing full well that I had only got a certain time limit, I set upon my quest with great HEILLEUR DAN DARE PILOT OF THE FUTURE at the door so it was out with the old laser and fire away! Blam! Two down. Zap! Another two and then the final one started running and I mashed his hide just as he thought he had got away. I must move quickly, the second piece awaits... Ok, I've stopped being Dan Dare, and am now taking on the role of the reviewer. Dan runs about very well, with his laser gun tucked up under his arm. The rest of the graphics are really stunning, they move about just like sprites on the 64, STAMINA and the backgrounds are very well coloured indeed. SCORE 255 The sound is just about average for the old Spectrum, with beeps and bips all around the game and maybe the speed, which was not that much occasional squark. There are of a good thing to do. Because also some very nice touches as I ran, I bumped into another included in this game; for Treen who knocked me out cold instance, as you fall you see and placed me in a nasty Dan go into a Hero's fall looking cell. As luck would have position; legs slightly bent, it I found that the door was arms up with his face contorted faulty and quickly started into an evil grin. searching again. The title page was amazing I continued to search until for a Speccy a picture of the found what I was looking for Mekon and our hero in full the first piece of the detonator, cartoon style. This has to be the Picking it up caused the video best Spectrum game I have ever screens around me to buzz and seen. It's graphically wonderful, then the Mekon shoutedPut addictive and very, very that down, Dare. You will not playable. In fact, I would almost succeed,\" Taking no notice I ran consider buying a Spectrum to where I believed the reactor just to play it! room to be and, of course, I was A brilliant game. right. I placed the piece into its Chris hole in the control panel and Graphics got the message that the door Sound to sector two was now open, so off I dashed. Value Hundreds of Treens appeared Playability instance to a Heroily bent. started into any 10 SCORE Z0375 "


"Without music, graphics and sound the Board Game has become the most popular in the world. Now it has them. Chival Pursuit THE COMPUTER GAME COMMODORE-GENUS EDITION domy \"Over 3,000 questions of no vital importance.\" John Mendes A Spectre r128K Commodore od 28K Available now on Spectrum 48/128K Commodore 64/128K BBC 'B' Amstrad CPC Cassette and Disk  20 20 John Membres and all local stockists HORN ABBOT INTERNATIONAL  Atana  TRIVIAL PURSUIT is a Trade Mark owned and licensed by Horn Abbot International Ltd. Published by Domark Limited, 204 Worple Road, London SW 208PN. Tel: 01-9475624. Trivial Pursuit was programmed by Oxford Digital Enterprises. DOMARK "


"The 5th official Organised by Database Exhibitions AMSTRAD COMPUTER SHOW Home users... business users... educational users... this is YOUR show! Champagne Suite & Exhibition Centre NOVOTEL HAMMERSMITH LONDON W6 Friday, October 3, 10am-6pm Saturday, October 4, 10am-6pm Sunday, October 5, 10am-4pm Confirmed bookings from: Two whole floors of the Novotel, easily reached by tube, bus or car. * All that's new from Amstrad and leading hardware and software suppliers. Unrepeatable bargains to be found right round the show. Free advice from the experts about all your computing problems. Non-stop demonstrations and videos in the Amstrad Theatre Electronic mail in action the world comes to your fingertips. Amstrad Advanced Memory Systems Advantage Amstrad User Club Amor Bernard Babani Publishing Boume Educational Software Cambrian Software Works Caxton Software CDS Software Celcom Systems Citadel Products Compact Software Computer Manuals Computing with the Amstrad Connect Systems Corner Creative Sparks DK Tronics Dictaphone Digital Research EG Computer Graphics Fineground Ltd Future Publishing Garwood Software GEM Distribution Gultronics Headline Communikations Highsoft HSV Computer Services Interlock Services Jerart Designs JB Software Kempston Data KDS Electronics LCL Educational Software Load & Run Loadplan MAP Computer Systems MicroLink Micronet 800 Micropro Micro Simplex Minerva Systems Miniature Tool Co Mirage Micro Computers MML Systems Modem House Newstar Software Overbase Quest International Pace Microtechnology PCS Preston Software Pride Utilities Professional Data Services Romantic Robot Rombo Productions RSC Sagesoft Sandpiper Software Saxon Software Setanta Shakhana Siren Software Software City Software Plus Sunshine Books Tasnan Software The Electric Studio Timatic Tirith Transform Velda Publishing Vidox Case Co Vukan Electronics Wilberry Zonelour Don't miss it! Avoid the Advance ticket order queues! POST TO: Amstrad Show Tickets, Europa House, 68 Chester Road, Hazel Grove, Stockport SK7 5NY. JAMSTRAD Champagne Suit Centre, Novotel, Hammersmith, W6 OW October 3-5, 1986 Get your ticket in advance and... Please supply Adult tickets at  (save )............. Under 16s tickets at  (save ).... TOTAL  Cheque enclosed made payable to Database Publications Ltd. TO Please debit my credit card account: Name Address     Access SAVE  A HEAD! Visa Admission at door:  (adults).  (under 16s) Signed PHONE ORDERS: Show Hotline: 061-456 8835 PRESTEL ORDERS: KEY *89, THEN 614568383 MICROLINK ORDERS: MAILBOX 72:MAG001 Please quote credit card number and full address + Ref. CvG10 "


"C+VG OCT software REVIEWS 3 PSI CHESS the only gripe is that it is difficult to play with the Lewis pieces quite why isn't clear It's terribly difficult to get the difficult to get the bits to move using the joystick. mis CHVG Graphics Sound Value Playability Staphics CCHEMA N/A 10 Machine: Spectrum Supplier: The Edge Price: .95 Psi Chess must be the ultimate conversion of this intellectual pursuit The program has so many different options that it's impossible to list them all here. It's suitable for the novice and the almost Grand Master, and can be played at arcade game speed or properly You can play with the joystick or the more straightforward algebraic method where you type in the moves. You can play in 3D mode, or a simpler heads up \"newspaper chess\" style board. You can use the regular chess pieces or the classic Lewis carved set which is extremely attractive, but difficult to play with You can rotate the board through 360 degrees, change the skill levels, set times for each move the list is seemingly endless The package includes a comprehensive instruction booklet. Instructions on how to use the software NOT how to play chess. You'll have to take out specialised books for that. It's an excellent program for the beginner and experienced player alike. The beginner is offered facilities like a special skill level and the ability to check back on moves The advanced player can alter response times up to congress level, or set up pieces in various positions to play through set problems or work out game winning strategies. This is an extremely user friendly program, easy to use and terrific fun to play-even if you've never played chess before. In fact it would be good introduction to the people wanting to learn to play chess. is GO (GO 80 60 16 CHANGES 00 00 00 PAPERBOY SCORE 00 9540 099550 PFERBOZ BONUS 000200 Machine: Spectrum Paper Boy is sick arcade action Supplier: Elite at its best. And the really great thing about it is that you can Price: .95 more or less play at your own On ver bike! It's time to deliver speed the papers. Look, I know it's six If you're an experienced o'clock in the morning, it's player you can zap through the pouring with rain and Mr Jones' Paper Boy's week at express Alsatian is bound to be lurking speed. But if you're a beginner behind the hedge again. But if or a Telegraph reader who you want the cash to buy Elite's likes to take things a bit more latest arcade conversion then slowly then the game allows you're just going to have to get for you too. And it's so simple with it! to learn that even a Sun reader And you are going to want can cope with it. this game. No doubt about it. You earn points by correctly SCGRS adosso FROZQORUS 000 900 people may have cancelled their subscriptions because you failed to deliver properly, but on a good day someone may have been persuaded by your window breaking activities to actually reorder their paper. You win some, you lose some. delivering your papers to the people who've ordered them You can tell by the little post boxes with Sun written on them outside the house. Some silly people don't want your papers but you can lean on them by slinging the odd spare paper through their windows and scoring bonus points at the same time More bonuses can be scored by hitting dustbin lids off. getting papers in the bird baths zapping hazards with a well aimed paper and, of course, completing the BMX course which appears at the end of your daily run. At the end of each day your newsagent presents you with a report of your progress. Some PLEX PAPERBOY EXTRA! The Mai AMAZING PAPERI TE'S "


"C+VG OCT software REVIEWS O AR THE INHERITANCE Machine: C64/128 Supplier: Martech Price: .95 /.95 If you've got Uridium, you may as well forget W.A.R. The games are nearly identical. Earth is being invaded for the umpteenth time this month, and it's your task, as a top-hole super pilot, to fly the most technologically advanced ship towards the oncoming attack force and destroy it. The gameplay is astoundingly similar to Uridium. The music is marginally superior to its predecessor. Other than this, though, everything about the game makes one's head simply reel with deja vu! The sound effects and the high-score routine with scrolling letters are exactly the same. Jim Graphics Sound Value Playability Machine: Amstrad reception where a taxi is different game. The graphics Supplier: Infogrames waiting. and game play are unlike Price: .95 (disk) The whole game is cursor anything around on the activated. Move the little red Amstrador any other There you are, moping around square over items you wish to machine for that matter. It's not your dingy apartment, counting examine/open/aive away and quite an advanture, not quite an the cracks in the wall and that's what happens. A new arcade game, not even quite an shuffling the pile of unpaid bills twist to the current trend arcade adventure. In the words which litter the floor. Then towards icon driven games. of the famous TV presenter The there's a knock at the door. You If you successfully manage to Inheritance is \"Something are reluctant to answer it leave the apartment building completely different.\" could be the landlord after the you won't do it easily I can tell That means it might not be to rent. But then a voice shouts, you!--you get a taxi to the everyone's taste. Definitely not \"There's a telegram for you!\" Opening the door your find the caretaker with a slip of paper which brings you this amazing bit of news. \"Your aunt, our client, has just died making you sole heir to her forturne. However, there is one condition you have to repeat her achievement of the thirties to win a million dollars in one night in Las Vegas.\" No point in hanging around, is there? You sling a few things into a bag and head for the lift. And it's then your problems start! You have a limited time to reach the airport for the flight to Las Vegas. But it seems almost everyone in the building wants back something you've borrowed. And you better have it in your rapidly packed case otherwise you're going to miss that plane for sure! airport where you have to a game for those of you who Getting out of your apartment ensure that you catch the flight enjoy unceasing action to the building is just the first of three to Vegas. And that's just as exclusion of everything else. parts of this original and difficult as leaving the building. But it is well worth a look if you entertaining French game. I believe me! can persuade your local don't think there has been Finally you find yourself in computer store to run it up on anything quite like it before. Vegas in a tour of the Casinos the machine for you. As I've already said, part one in an attempt to fulfil the I enjoyed it a lot -and can't involves you making a quick conditions of your Aunt's will. wait to see more Infrogrames getaway. The game opens in Each Casino has a different product. They could just be a your dingy room. You have to gambling game to play in. welcome breath of fresh air .. use a cursor to pick up objects These include fruit machines, Tim and money and deposit them in boule and dice. And if you Graphics your bag. It only takes a few manage to win a million then Sound N/A attempts before you know what you're a better gambler than the people you are likely to me! Value meet on your way down to The Inheritance is a genuinely Playability Beware of different hazards as you progress through the \"days\" and work out what you can ride around or over to avoid things. You can ride over flower beds and lawns the flowers actually crumple as your bike bounces over the flowerbeds. Don't go blasting away with your papers even though you get additional supplies at various points, it is possible to run out at crucial moments. Paper Boy is extremely playable, very addictive and incredibly easy to get into. What more could you ask for? A well crucial addition to your games collection. Paper Boy is on its way for the 64, Amstrad and BBC soon. Tim Graphics Sound Value Playability C+VG HIT! CONDO EoY OF THE KORIS Baily Sun ERHOY DELIVERS! MYSTERIOUS SEISU TOFFLES TITE. BESIDENTS "


"ALLEYKAT ROLLING THUNDER IT'S ALLEYKAT! Take up the challenge and ride the wheel of death... you'll have two things on your side lightning speed and heavy firepower but to blast your way through the 32 events on the space race calendar you'll need cash, skill and nerves of steel.. will yours be the new name on the trophy? Another fantastic and visually stunning game by Andrew Braybrook, author of Paradroid and Uridium. For Mail Order send a cheque P.O to Hewson Consultants Ltd Order by Credit Card sending your Access Barclaycard number, and a specimen signature. Don't forgello enclose your name and address: FOR COMMODORE CASSETTE .95 DISK .95 Don't miss it! HEW SON SO M a nding Estate, Milton Abingdon, Oxon OX 14 ARX DOUBLE VALUE PACK! .95 for Commodore, on Cassette. Paradroid is available from November Uridium, and the new mega-fast version of As part of our continuing ovelopment oppvative software we are always happy to evaluate software yait as with a view to publication "


"Konami. 1999 SHADE HANS ROAD Epoo 18:100 HI 25000 SIPI Chearsadehi InNour home. 1.    S2 GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGP5GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG Screen shots from arcade version-home micro versions may differ. it follow up to ie Ar Kung-Fu Spectrum Commodore 64 and Amstrad versions coming soon. Our hero has finally mastered the secret martial art \"CHIN'S SHAO-LIN\" but is trapped by triad gangs. With kicks and other secret powers, escape from and travel SHAO-LIN'S road to freedom! Published under licence by The Edge, 36/38 Southampton Street, London WC2. Tel:(01) 831 1801 TX: 892379. "


"C+VG OCT software REVIEWS 6 PARALLAX the aliens for whom they were working are going to attack Earth at any minute. If it's a computer, then you will have to go through a couple of stages before you can operate it. Things get a little tricky here. In order to escape each level, you need to break down a security barrier. This can only be done by shutting down the Machine: C64 Supplier: Ocean Price: .95/.95 (disc) Neeeeoooow! Stafe those suckers! Budda budda doom! Yes, sir! This is the sort of exclamation which issued from the amazingly adult C+VG review team when they looked at Parallax. Looking like an upmarket Uridium, the screen scrolls in four directions, and your ship rotates around and moves in much the same way as in Asteroids. The aim of the game is to escape a horde of nasty aliens. It started off as a very friendly visit to their planet, to exchange information on technology. However, while having a reasonably innocent poke around in one of their restricted area, you come across some rather startling info. It appears that they have been sending messages back and forth, arranging an attack on Earth. Eeek! Your mission is now clear; rescue the scientists who are strewn across the planet, and escape. Your success is vital if you don't make it, there will be no hope for Earth. The graphics are simply wonderful. The most exciting feature is the way you can fly under or over the various parts of the landscape. By pulling back on the stick, you increase altitude, and by pushing forward, you dive. An ever-present shadow flies along beneath your ship, allowing you to judge height The surface of the planet is littered with features; small meshes, bars, roofs and hangers. The hangers are the key to the game. In each one, you will find something necessary to your quest. it may be a scientist, whom you will have to stun in order to get him back to the spaceshipI mean, it would be pretty tough trying to convince a boffin that \"RIS ..... THE SIG JNE INSERT KARD CECCO VERA CRUZ Machine: Spectrum Element which has caused Supplier: Ariolasoft Tujad to throw a wobbler. Energy sapping aliens Orpheus abound but extra lives and Price: .95 weapons can also be acquired. Tujad, which has been Humph! Another mad computer. Faulty circuits. The licensed by Ariolasoft from very future of space is at risk Orpheus is a tediously unless ... I bet you all know standard maze game with nothing particular bad about it what's coming next ... unless except the loading screen which you can repair the rogue machine. is awful. You've probably played many games very much The computer is called Tujad like it. and you control Gen 19, supposedly the most advanced It's also overpriced. combat droid ever built. Paul The droid must be Graphics manoeuvred around 100 rooms of the computer to collect 50 pieces of circuit board and Value rebuild the faulty Sub Processor Playability Machine: Amstrad copy key (on the Amstrad Supplier. Infogrames Supplier: Infogrames version) enlarges the picture Price: .95 (cassette) and gives a description of what you've found. .95 (disk) For example, close The body of an attractive examination of the ashtray woman lies sprawled on the shows it contains two cigarettes floor of her apartment. She has -one a Rothmans, the other a been shot through the heart. A Camel, with traces of lipstick gun lies on the floor near her Now being a smart detective right hand. It looks like a case of this suggests to me there may have been another person in suicide. But something's not the room. Possibly male, since quite right. It could be a case of murder! one cigarette does not have As the newly appointed lipstick traces. Detective Sergeant in the Crime It's then back to the police Squad at St Etienne in the Loire You can use the Diamond Computer Network to enter area of France you have to investigate the death. evidence, compare statements, L'Affaire de Vera Cruz is the check interviews, access other second game to be released in police computers. Again we Britain by the French company won't name the suspects who crop up in the investigation into Infogrames and it's far better than the rather pedestrian the death of Vera Cruz. Mandragore. If you like detective stories The game is in two parts and whodunnits then check out the first centring on the scene of Vera Cruz. It's a very arresting the crime where you must game. examine various objects, take SP Spectrum, Commodore 64 notes, and the second use of the and MSX versions will follow police computer to collate Paul information, send messages, Vocabulary and obtain statements. Atmosphere At the scene of crime you use the cursor keys to move the Personal camera about. Pressing the Value ok 00 miloilta Glicini "


"C+VG OCT software REVIEWS 6 system which helps to run the and music. planet. All the graphics move Now, I don't want to explain smoothly, and the numerous in too much detail just how this aliens which you must deal with is done, but you need to are all amazingly \"correct\" for compile a code word to access it. the feel of the game. Parallax is The program is very great. Fast, slick, smooth and professionally presented, with above all entertaining. music playing as the game Jim loads, and some great title Graphics sequences. These really set the Sound C+VG mood, with small words on a Value HIT! large screen giving credits to the authors of story, graphics Playability COCO OOO 40 120 20140 FEEL Machine: C64 Supplier: US Gold/Epyx Price: .95 Cassette/.95 disk SHTELOS.DEFCCCCCC SCRUZ VERA BORN 12-5.51 completed this track with same ease, and was quickly whisked off to the bonus track where you have to hit flags that are in the road for lots of lovely bonus points. The tracks from then on varied in size and shape, with different, attractive backdrops. Eventually it had to happen, came off my bike. I hit a cone in the road and laughed as my biker fell off backwards and his bike made a strange sort of BANG! sound. Shortly the bike miraculously repaired itself and was back on the track and biking again. I managed to complete all of the courses, and got a hefty sum of points which the 64 saved to disk for me. How kind of it! The graphics on this game are of Pitstop ft quality, but the sound is that of an average 64 game. I played the disk version, which made constant use of disk, so I think tape users will have to put up with all that multi-load stuff. Still, never mind, it's worth the fuss There will be conversions for the Spectrum and Amstrad soon. Chris ST-ETIENNE This new motorcycle racing game from Epyx is set to become racing fanatics latest craze game. You race across a range of various tracks, some harder than others, others with obstacles. The object of the game is, of course, to complete all the courses and get as many points as possible: On disk the game loaded at mega-speed perhaps the Vorpal loading system had something to do with it Anyway, after listening to the fairly average music hit the fire button, and started the game. First I selected the colour of my bike and the colour and style of my leathers. This is a nice touch. Then I picked the beginners level and there I was on the track. The flag went down and zoom I was off! I found that I was going incredibly slowly then changed into second gear and sped off into the sunset! I still was not up with the leaders but changing into third sent me speeding past. Now for the next track. Sure enough it popped up. I ORIS CRR LTON DEST CIE ST-ETIENNE  OTORIOUS PROSTITUTE APPRE RANT TIMES FOR SOLICITING PUBLIC STREETS, HAS NEUER THE CAME OF HER PINP. E = Extation CE Comparison Graphics Sound Value Playability Type HAC5 56743 de seisung od 0 0 0 CO 100 -40120 2010; TL SCHWEL ix "


"THIS LITTLE MONEY... GO FOR THE GOLD PEPPER of the Nidarole AMERICANA 299 AMERICANA 6299 AMERICANA 290 AMERICANA E29 OBSIDIAN DIESGAS THINGY AP THE DOODS OLÉ TORO AMERICANA 6299 AMERICANA 299 AMERICANA 29 AMERICANA 299 CIS AMERICANA 129 G AMERICANA 6299 FOR THIS MUCH QUALITY. Unbeatable quality at outstanding prices ... Americana Software is now available for more systems than ever, bringing more titles, more value for money, to more games enthusiasts. Don't settle for less, look for the best ... 15 new titles just released. ---FOR THIS MANY SYSTEN DISK :99 AMERICANA :99 TAPE LICENSED TO THRILL SOFTWARE AMERICANA Software, Units 2/3., Holford Way, Holford, BIRMINGHAM B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388. "


"The Edge...do you have it? BOBBY -95 BEARING Let the good times rou! CRASH Smash \"I love this game... if you don't buy this, throw away your Spectrum!\" C&VG Game of the Month August 1986. «Bobby Bearing is very nearly perfect. This may sound a bit over the top but this game deserves a whole string of superlatives.\" P ZX Computing August 1986. MONTH -95 The Ultimate Quest... You are Prince Kyle accompanied by yourloval warriors in this fantastical quest for the legendary Mindstone. This is the first icon-driven graphics adventure to boast the full featuresofan adventure and strategy game. Bound to enter the annals as a true classic m micro adventures. Spectrum ELILL Commodore 64 and Amstrad versions coming soon. "


"C+VG OCT software REVIEWS Highways of the Serwis THE PROGRAMMERS Vortex Software has built up software house, Vortex now quite a reputation since it was plans to expand the launched back in 1982. Each of programming side of its its releases has been business and the hunt is now on progressively better witness for more programmers. the success of the recent The object of each puzzle is to Highway Encounter and Alien make two blocks, one made of Highway, matter and the other Other releases include anti-matter, disappear. Touch Android One, Cyclone and one with the bouncing ball to Tornado Low Level. The men change its colour. You then behind Vortex-Luke Andrews have to touch the other block. It and his brothers-in-law, Crete will also change colour and the and Coast Panayi-have hardly_two blocks will disappear. Solve blitzed the market, Quality has the four puzzles and it's then on always been their aim. to the next level. And with the release of But of course things are not Revolution on the Spectrum that simple. The blocks change and Amstrad, Vortex has — if back to the original colour after there is any justice in the world a certain time, so you have to a number one hit. move quickly. And the recently announced There are also various link-up with US Gold will do the hazards blocks which kill company no harm your bounce; delicate US Gold will now dandelion shaped things which But the really great thing game, the computer randomly manufacture, promote and prove lethal: areas which slide about Revolution is that while it conjours up a new grid for each market Vortex games but at the you away from where you want is very hard to progress through level and randomly chooses the same time Vortex will retain its to go. the levels you don't get bored puzzles for each level. This individual identity and logo. Of course, if you're clever trying to crack the same old means that it could be a long Without the day to day these things could be put to use puzzle each time, time before you play the same headaches of running a in solving the puzzles. Each time you play a new puzzle twice. THE GAME Machine: Amstrad/Spectrum Supplier Vortex Price: .95 / 14.95 (Amstrad cassette/disk) /.95 Spectrum First impression: Revolution is a great garne Second impression: It's definitely a great game Lasting impression: It looks good, it sounds good and, by golly, it is good. Revolution is very much in the tradition of past Vortex games with excellent graphics presented in exciting 3D. Both the Amstrad and Spectrum versions are very similar and for the curposes of this review, will be treated as one. The main differences are the Amstrad's better colour and sound. The Spectrum's monochrome graphics due to the good old attribute problems-look a little drab in comparison. The idea is to control a bouncing ball it has four levels of bounce-through eight levels of play, solving four puzzles per level. Simple maths tell you that there are 32 puzzles in all to be solved. It's also possible to pause the game and consult a map to show you where each puzzle is on the playing grid. Revolution has been around nine months in the making and the effort certainly shows. Ams Spec Graphics Sound Value Playability 52TA. ES DO "


"REACH FOR THE TOP STRIKE FORCE ARRIERS Can you meet the ultimate challenge? NEW Spectrum .95 tape NEW Commodore 64 $9.95 tape, $12.95 disk Amstrad CPC .95 tape, $14.95 disk BBC/Electron .95 tape, .95 disk MIRRORSOFT Purnell Book Centre, Paulton, Bristol BS18 5LQ "


"ALLIC CANES ALLIGATA BITES BACK ALLIGATA BITES BACK AND THEY CALL THEMSELVES PUB ADULTS!!! GAMES LES BACK The times they've left you at home because 'you're not grown up' or 'not old enough to come to the pub and look what they get up to when they get there! Here's your chance to find out what it's really like in those smoke filled haunts of adulthood. The opportunity to see how good you are at these ADULT?? games. Why let the mums and dads have all the fun. Pub Games can be a laugh for everyone. a compilation of BAR BILLIARDS. DOMINOES DARTS TABLE FOOTBALL POKER & PONTOON BAR SKITTLES available on Commodore 64/128 Spectrum 48K Amstrad Available soon BBC MSX Alligata Software Ltd., 1 Orange Street, Sheffield S1 4DW. Tel: (0742) 755796 BITES BACK OUT NOW! ALLIGATA BITES BACK ALLIGATA BITES BACK . BITES BACK "


"Full 3D action 1 player or 2 player option. Lightning 99 moves Six Spectacular Backdrops. See the cuts and the bruises on the faces of the boxers, as they kick and punch in this gruelling contest. with 3D action! Enhanced 128 versions for that extra smooth animation and sound effects. CBM 128 Disc only CBM 64/128 (cass) oise only .95 (disc)2 70.95 with 3D action! BOXING COMING SOON AMSTRAD MSX SPECTRUM ATARI ST AMIGA ANCO CBM 64/128 ANCO SOFTWARE, 4 WEST GATE HOUSE, SPITAL STREET, DARTFORD, KENT DA1 2EH. Telephone: 0322 92513/92518 Mail Order: Payment by Cheque, P.O., Visa or Access. 24 Hour Credit Card Service: 0322 522631. "


"C+VG OCT software REVIEWS  PACIFIC SVERSTONE FULL THROTTLE Machine: Amstrad Supplier: ERE/PSS Price: .95 'Ello, and welcome to the not so wonderful undersea world of Jaques Cousteau. This is another offering from those French guys at ERE and unfortunately it just doesn't match up to the addictiveness and playability of their earlier offerings Get Dexter and Doomsday Blues. OK, so it's very pretty and all that. Although the animation isn't up to much. But it's one of those games where you seem to wander around for ages without very much happening, The idea behind the graphics what appear to be wrecked is that you are a diver exploring ships. These often have the seabed for the treasures of useful objects and hidden Atlantis. irritating booby traps which Your time underwater is serve only to upset the player limited to the air supply in your and make him/her hit the tank but if you find an \"suicide\" button. undersea air-pump you can Not the best from the PSS drop by for a top up French Collection by any Barrels marked with a skull means. If you've got some cash and crossbones can be used to burning a hole in your pocket blast through irritating rock and you want a good game for barriers but remember to your Amstrad, go for Get clear off the screen with the Dexter! barrel once you've shot at it and started the count down to Graphics detonation. Sound You'll also come across oddiy Value positioned doors in the rock which open into the interior of Playabilty Cauve Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Elite/.99 Classics Price: .99 Full throttle is the first of the 100 or so back titles bought up by Elite and released at a budget price. We first reviewed it way back in '85. This time you're placed on a 500cc Grand Prix motorcycle on the starting grid with 40 other bikes. There's a choice of ten top circuits, ranging from Paul Ricard in France to Silverstone. The race can last anything up to five laps. Apparently, you're given the best bike in the race but that doesn't really help when you're skidding and crashing all the time. Full Throttle is good fun at a nice price. Paul Graphics Sound Value Playability iP.Biscay MISSION OMEGA USA ASENSOR PRE RENTREI ISS DESTRUCTIVE POWER BISCHARGES BISCHARES ACCEPT CANCEL Machine: Spectrum/Amstrad Supplier: Mind Games Price: .95 (Spectrum) .95 (Amstrad disc) This may well be a good game. Trouble is the instructions are so inadequate that it's hard to tell. The basic idea is fairly good. You have to construct literally a team of droids to explore a moon-sized UFO code-named OMEGA which is hurtling towards Earth and threatening to collide with our home planet. The military want to destroy it but scientists think it should be explored and possibly deactivated by a disposable team of droids. You have just one hour to complete your task. The first part of the game involves constructing your droids. You have a limited supply of materials to do this. Once out of the construct droid screen you find yourself actually on OMEGA. A window on the left shows a large plan view of your surroundings while the right hand side has various status and control windows accessed by an arrow cursor. It also shows a small picture of the droid you currently control. Then it's really all down to you. You have to guide your droid team aroundattempting to find the four reactors which will shut OMEGA down before it is destroyed by a defensive missile strike from Earth. There is a map option which enables you to find out just where the members of your team are within OMEGA. It appears there are four quandrants and there are teleports which you can use to reach them. The map only operates when one of your team is in that particular quadrant. You'll also come across defence droids in OMEGA's many rooms and corridors who seem constantly hostile to you. The game is totally icon controlled. These work quickly and smoothly in both versions of the game. A nice touch is the \"program\" option which enables you to \"tell your droid how to move without having to guide him around manually via keyboard or joystick I've a feeling that Mission Omega could well grow on you after prolonged exposure. But you're going to have to be a fan of this type of game to be prepared to give it that chance. Going back to the limited instructions for a momenthere's a little gem from them. \"The first of these icons is the one you should select first.\" Yeah, OK! The packaging and instructions should always reflect the complexity of the game in this case it doesn't, Graphics Sound Value Playability NON "


"I OCT software REVIEWS SE DO Machine: C64/128 Supplier: US Gold/ Mindscape Price: .95 (disk only) OSKAAT E EDHE ce Who is the infiltrator? Is it Tim, Jim, Paul or Chubby? No, it's Johnny. Who's Johnny? Well, he is Johnny Jimbo Baby McGibbits, Ace helicopter pilot, ballistics expert, neurosurgeon, rock star, motorcycle racer, and a devil-may-care all round good guy, with a nifty haircut. That's who! He is also known as the Infiltrator. And he has been assigned a very dangerous mission to stop the Mad Leader (gasp, wow, gulp!). The Mad Leader is one of OUGH LUI those Blofeld types from James CK JIM130-131113Y! Bond, wanting total control of the world. So, you must stop him, we can't have him ruling the world because he spits when he talks and begins all his sentences with the word \"Basically\". To start your mission, you must climb into your Gizmo DHX-1 Attack Helicopter, and head for the enemy base. First you must power up your 'copter and then set your ADF computer heading by looking at the tactical map, and then programming it into your on-board computer. Control of your 'copter is fairly difficult at first, but once you've read the instructions carefully, you'll soon get the hang of it. But, just when you REGUEST IDENTIFICATION think you can handle yourself, some guy starts hassling you for your ID code. What do you do? Well if you think he is an enemy, you send the code OVERLORD. But if you think he's one of your buddies, then send the code INFILTRATOR. If you get the right code, the other craft will give you an encouraging message and you may proceed. If he fires a heat seeking missile, launch a flare and it will chase that instead of you. Now it's your turn, and you can blast him with laser cannons or heat seeking missiles my favourites. The secret is this. Wait until the guy is in your view then turn da da dum dum dum dum, infiltrate it. You now find towards him and let him have it. another one bites the dust (Get yourself in the enemy base, If all goes well he should detour on with it! -Ed). which of course is where the in front of you, and bam! Now once you have found the enemy must hang out. Another one bites the dust, yer base, you must land and Johnny is armed with a camera, mine detector, a spray can of gas, and five ga's grenades, some explosives and essential and vitally important forged papers. What you must do now is photograph the enemy plans. By exploring the various buildings, and dodging guards you will eventually come to the papers and photograph them. You have to be very careful when exploring the building though as some guards will be able to tell a forged pass and will sound the alarm. If someone does this you can get your own back by silencing them permanently! Once you have got the photo, get back to your 'copter and get home, where another mission is all ready for you to take it on. Infiltrator is graphically excellent. You get a nice view of the cockpit with realistic hands at the controls. When you move the joystick, the hands move too. Great stuff! The sound also adds to the realistic effect. You get a very real sort of whooooooo and chug chug chug as the blades spin round. The game play is good but the initial difficulty may put you off. But remember, perseverance will pay off. Anything to complain about? Well, one thing. The disk could be a little faster, perhaps a turbo load such as Vorpal might help. The time it takes to dish up the map and damage report is quite annoying. Other than that it's a great game. And we all thank the man who made it possible, Johnny Jimbo Baby' McGibbits. (Don't forget he had a little help from Chris Gray Ed). P.S. We can now reveal, due to the playing skills of our staff, what the other missions are. There are two more missions:Mission 2: You must rescue Dr Phineas Gump, and destroy the enemy weapons lab. Mission 3: The Final Mission. You must destroy the enemy ICBM Launch and Tracking Base. This must be the most important mission, as it tells you that the fate of the world is in your hands. Chris Graphics Sound Value Playability JAMIE Mi "


"Any more realistic and you'd need insurance to ride it. There are two guys in front. One coming up from behind. And another just off your elbow. The screams of the bikes are deafening. The wind is pulling your face off your head. Your adrenaline is pumping like Hoover Dam You kick your bike to the right. He's bumped. He's flying. You push on. Take your eyes off the road for a millisecond, and you could end up a part of the road. It's all a blur. No time to think. You've just gotta pump it. The next turn's the steep one. Bank, bank! The curve's wide open, but the screeching wheels of the bike in front are kicking gravel right in your...your... You hear a phone. A phone? Hey, wait a minute. This isn't a bike. It's a chair. It all comes back now. Yes. You're home. The pizza's here. The computer's on. Looks like it's going to be another quiet night after all. UL 11:38 On Super Cycle! If it were any more realistic, you'd need insurance to ride it. Commodore 64 Spectrum 48K Amstrad Disk Cassette Cassette Disk Cassette $14.95 $9.95 $7.95 $14.95 $9.95 SUPER CYCLE Manufactured in the UK under license from Epyx by U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 2/3, Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham, B6 ZAX. Telephone: 021-356 3388 Epy a trademark No. 15270 Screen Shot from Commodore 64/ version of game . GOLD) COMPUTER SOFTWARE "


"Post Haste Software & GET DEXTER (PSS) C&VG Game Of The Month and highly praised by many other reviewers. Your Amstrad will dazzle you with this terrific arcade adventure! Amstrad (C) .95 Amstrad (D) .95 BATMAN (Ocean) Rated at 10 out of 10 for value and 10 out of 10 for playability by C&VG \"A game that's destined to become an all-time classic Spectrum (C) .95 Amstrad (C) .95 Other computer versions imminent The total postal software service! Post Haste is part of GB Microland, the South of England's unique computer shop. Thousands of software titles. Lots of experience. The place that gave new meaning to the word \"friendly\". But not everyone lives nearby. So Post Haste Software was born. To bring the best to your door. With top service. Here's how. No \"Club\" to join, no \"subscription to pay. You come in our shop for free. Why pay to buy by mail? Unique \"double-your-money\" voucher with the 40-page catalogue. Check the box in this advertisement! Postage free in the UK Europe? Add 95p. Elsewhere? Add .50. For the whole order. not each program. Order by post or phone, day or night. Check the coupon for details. Then relax. It's fast! Pay by cheque, bank draft, PO, Access, Visa, Mastercard, Eurocard. Post Haste is convenient! INFILTRATOR (US Gold) Chris Gray's incredible and graphically amazing three-part game. It will take your computer to new heights and you to unexplored territory as you battle to get even further than before! \"What a project. Infiltrator is the most incredible new games concept to hit the market Zaap. Comm 64 (C) .95 Comm 64 (D) .95 Amstrad (C) .95 Amstrad (D) .95 Spectrum (C) .95 DRUID (Firebird) We're proud that Firebird's great new release was created by regular Microland customers. And it's terrific! Check this PWC review! \"Superb! Fast action with the monsters and spellcasting of a role playing game. For more than an arcade sap, it needs fast reflexes, a good memory and puble soluing skills. It's a winner! PCW. Comm 64 (C) .95 Amstrad (C) 17.95 Spectrum (C) .95 SUPER CYCLE (Epyx/US Gold) In the great tradition of \"Pole Position\", \"Pit Stop\" and other winners, \"Super Cycie\" now puts you in the perilous saddle of a racing motorbikel Stand by to test your skills to the limit! \"Wowl Super Cycle is a \"Hang On\" player's dream come true! -Zaap Comm 64 (C) .95 Comm 64 (D) .95 FIST II (Melbourne) \"Way Of The Exploding Fist\" was an instant sensation and smashed its way to Number One best seller. Now Melbourne have done it again with this fantastic sequell An absolute winner! \"Beats the chart-busting Way Of The Exploding Fist every way. A fantastic sequell-Gamesman Comm 64 (C) .95 Comm 64 (D) .95 Amstrad (C) .95 Spectrum (C) .95 TRIVIAL PURSUIT (Domark) You've waited a long time but it's here at last the game of the wear has arrived for your computer! \"Promises to be as addictive and exciting as the original! The board game took the world by storm. Now the computer version is about to do it all over again! Sound and vision add a whole new dimension to the pursuit of excellencel THE POST HASTE SERVICE We can supply any program you've seen advertised. If it's released, you'll usually get it by return. If it's not, you'll get it faster when it does come out. Simply order it and sit back That's Post Haste service! ALREADY SEEN SOMETHING YOU WANT ON THIS PAGE? GO RIGHT AHEAD AND ORDER NOW! Use the coupon or write on your own paper. Be sure to include all the details from the coupon Cross cheques and POs for safety. Your software will be on its way by retum. So will your catalogue. And your unique \"double-yourmoney voucher! Phone Orders (24 hrs) (0705) 269333 TO GET YOUR CATALOGUE WITH THE \"DOUBLE-YOUR-MONEY\" VOUCHER OR TO ORDER SOFTWARE, USE THIS COUPON! Send your catalogue. I've enclosed 90p Don't forget my  80 \"Double Your Money\" voucher for me to use with my first order! Send your catalogue and I want to order software too. The details are below I've added 90p for the catalogue to the value of my order so don't forget my .80 Double Your Money\" voucher! My name is................ I My address is ADVENTURERS! SPECIAL EXTRA SECTION! There are dozens of adventures in the Post Haste catalogue from virtually every major producer. Just about all the superb Infocom range is there and many others too! And Post Haste carries the Infocom Invisiclues, plus hint and guide books to other adventures too! Answers to the problems that keep you awake at night? The catalogue lists them all! ................ Post code ... My computer is Can we contact you by phone if there's a query? | STD/Exchange Number IF YOU'RE ORDERING SOFTWARE. PLEASE PRINT DETAILS OF THE PROGRAMS YOU WANT! PROGRAM NAME PRICE THE POST HASTE CATALOGUE The Post Haste catalogue is just 90p with a unique \"Double Your Money\" voucher tucked inside! Yes, the Post Haste catalogue contains a .80 voucher to use for your first order! How's that for value? Recreation, utility, strategy. adventure, arcade they're all there! And so is your .80 \"Double Your Money\" voucher! Programs for five micros. Amstrad Atari, BBC, Commodore 64/128 and Spectrum. You're spoilt for choice with Post Haste! And your catalogue is the gateway to a huge program range from Post Haste. Over 4,000 titles spanning 10 major micros! Where else is there such a choice? Comm 64 (C) .95 Comm 64 (D) .95 Amstrad (C) .95 Amstrad (D) .95 BBC (C) .95 BBC (D) .95 Spectrum (C) .95 ULTIMA IV (US Gold) Ultima IV is sixteen times larger than the hugely successful Ultima ll A milestone in computer adventure gaming to challenge your physical and mental slals and the fabric of your character! \"A masterpiece of programming. If you only buy one game this year, make it this one.\" PCW Comm 64 (D) .95 Atari (D) .95 SPEECH (Superior) At last speech synthesis at a price you can afford! Takes up less than 9K of RAM has an unlimited vocabulary, will say anything you want! Speech can be incorporated into your own programmes \"One utility which can't be beaten on quality or price!\"Micro User Comm 64 (C) .95 Comm 64 (D) .95 Amstrad (C) .95 Amstrad (D) .95 BBC (C) .95 BBC (D) .95 HEARTLAND (Odin) A fantasy and adventure game with a difference! You can control the way it ends. Will good or evil triumph? Either producers special effects \"What makes this particular idea so inventive is the way you become involved, and the way you can put things to rights. Heartland is realy very good indeed\" C&VG Comm 64 (C) .95 Comm 64 (D) .95 Amstrad (C) .95 Amstrad (D) .95 Spectrum (C) .95 PAPERBOY (Elite) The top arcade game on your own computer screen! The eagerly awaited official version! Spectrum (C) .95 Comm 64/128 (C) .95 Amstrad (C) .95 Comm C16/Pls 4 (C) .95 Amstrad (D) .95 Comm 64/128 (D) .95 GHOSTS'N'GOBLINS (Elite) Another officially licensed arcade smash-hit from the team that produced \"Commando Spectrum (C) .95 BBC/Electron (C) .95 Amstrad (C) .95 BBC (D) .95 Amstrad (D) .95 Comm C16/Pls 4 (C) .95 Comm 64/128 (C) .95 Comm 64/128 (D) .95 Catalogue with .80 voucher Add .90 Postage is totally free in the UK Add .00 Europe postage for whole orderA dd .95 Airmail elsewhere for whole order Add .50 TOTAL AMOUNT ENCLOSED  PAYING BY CHEQUE OR POSTAL ORDER? Please make it payable to Post Haste Software 1 and cross it for safety's sake! Don't send cash! CHARGING IT TO YOUR VISA, ACCESS. MASTERCARD, EUROCARD? May we have your card number, expiry date and signature? IIIIIIIIIII Expiry date Signature Now mail your order to POST HASTE SOFTWARE GB MICROLAND, 7 QUEENS PARADE LONDON ROAD, WATERLOOVILLE HAMPSHIRE PO7 7EB, UNITED KINGDOM Orphone (24 hours) 0705 269333 BIGGER RANGE! The Post Haste range now includes programs for the Commodore C16 and the Atari ST. Send for lists! "


"C-VG OCT Software REVIEWS O E XARQ and depth charges. All have Machine: Spectrum limited life-spans and their Supplier: Electric energy levels can be checked on Dreams status meters at the bottom of Price: .99 the main play screen. Missiles and mortars are Oh Xarq! I was beginning to controlled via a wonder whether the title of the keyboard/joystick combination. game was some obscure and destroy the central power which is Xarq. Destroying locks As in Panzadrome you have to Rumanian swearword when my reactor. Why? Because Xarg and flooding trenches in order give them a range to the target Nik Nik Hi-Speed Hydraboat has thrown a wobbler and is to float your heavily armed Nik which is indicated by a bar in was zapped by a torpedo/gun threatening to burn off the Nik does Jim Davidson know bottom centre of the screen. turret/jet fighter for the trillionth surface of the planet. about this? Hydraboat into a Press the appropriate key to time in a couple of hours. To reach the central reactor_strategic zapping position. access which weapon you want Xarq isn't the easiest of You must find your way through your boat is armed with a then press the fire button to get games to get into. Then, the maze of steel and silicon laser, guided missiles, a mortar the range you want. coming from the Ram Jam Corporation you wouldn't really expect it to be, would you? NZNZNE You'll probably recognise the similarities between this game and Ram Jam's other arcade excursion, Panzadrome. There's the same totally wreckable scenery but in this case roads and tanks have been replaced by canals and boats. Your mission, should you choose to accept it, is to enter Xarq -a self regenerating computer controlled base on a planet covered by oceans I SIIIIIIIIIITQ0192029 DLA STRIKE FORCE HARRIER Machine: Amstrad/Spectrum Supplier: Mikro-Gen Price: .95/.95 (Amstrad disc) Mmmm! What a nice cover! The guy on the front looks like an all-American hero, if ever! set eyes upon one. He's got lots of leather gear, a fast car, a dame in more leather, an enormous gun, and a pair of mirrored sunglasses. This, readers, is Ricky Steel tough guy and defender of truth, the meek and nice red cars. The game has a brain-squeezingly original storyline Dr Vardos is going to conquer the earth with his horde of androids. You must stop him. The game comes in four zones, each featuring Ricky in a different situation, be it on foot, battling against helicopters and suchlike, or in his car, Nightwind, driving along a dusty desert road. The whole program is remarkably similar to Spyhunter. Movement is quite smooth, but the game is very reminiscent of some early Spectrum stuff from Imagine. This game is so mediocre that even the Ed himself couldn't bring himself to play it for more than a few minutes. Sorry, Mikro-Gen, try again. Jim Graphics Sound Value Playability STAINLESS STEEL Machine: Spectrum/C64 Supplier: Mirrorsoft Price: .95 (.95 C64 disc) It's been a long time coming but it's been well worth the wait. Commodore and Spectrum pilots can now take to the skies in the computerised version of the Harrier Jump Jet. The original Beeb version got a rave review in February. And I see no reason for us to change our minds. Despite the Spectrum's graphic inadequacies this version of the game/simulation is very playable. With the enhanced pictures and sound the 64 version is great, too. You can enjoy Strike Force Harrier on two levels and a straight forward zap-the-enemy combat game or a complex flight simulator. There are over 30 controls to cope with if you decide to actually fly the thing. If you select the combat option you put yourself in the hot seat on a mission to destroy an enemy HO. The combat practice mode puts you in the air right away with a squadron of Migs in front of you. Zap them with cannon fire or Sidewinder missiles but you only get a couple of these, so use them wisely. The Spectrum graphics don't look bad — although the enemy Migs go tend to be a bit jerky when the bank in front of your Harrier. The C64 version is very smooth and you get a real impression of gazing out of the Harrier's cockpit. Strike Force Harrier is set to become a classic of its type on all formats. Take off after it today. Tim C64/Spec Graphics Sound Value Playability 16 O 0000 LIFE! TESO FLD "


"C+VG OCT software REVIEWS 11 RCANA It's fairly easy to judge distances if you reckon that one square of the structure is equal to one section of the bar that's one press of the fire button. The missiles can be guided by the joystick or keyboard. You have to listen out for submarines -they make sonar type blipping noises. You can knock them out by firing depth charges from the keyboard. But it's difficult to outrun torpedoes once they've been fire at you. Graphics are attractivealthough your Nik Nik boat is small and unimpressive. Sound is average and game play frustrating. If you liked Panzadrome and are prepared to stick with the game for a prolonged period of learning-then Xarq could be for you. Otherwise give it a miss. Tim Graphics Sound Value Playability Machine: C64/128 evil book before the local Supplier: New bad-guy gets his clawed fingers Gen/Virgin upon it. Once discovered, you must smash the book (or Price: .95 dispose of it in another, suitably Oboargh! The room is spinning, dramatic, way) and thus save my mind is being squashed. the Land of the Bright Elves. Wait! I can remember. It's all The screen is presented flooding back. Peculiar 3D side-on in semi-3D. It's possible graphics, bizarre flying to move \"into\" the screen by Doors line the walls. They can creatures and a word. Yes, the pushing the stick forward. be entered, if they're not locked, letters are forming... Although the nature of the by simply walking at them. K.RNA.H... KARNATH! And isometric graphics makes Sometimes, though, you can there's more... ENT.MB.D. everything look a tiny bit stupid, blast away at the lock with a ENTOMBED! your character-Baladur magic spell. There's no getting away from moves with pleasing speed and Arcana is really a direct copy the fact that, however much the scrolling is top-notch. of the two games mentioned Virgin's PR people tell us that The game takes place in a earlier. It's fun to play, but \"Arcana is a delightful arcade large castle, comprising many certainly to be avoided if you adventure with finely detailed different rooms and corridors have either Karnath of graphics\", this game is As you plod around, looking for Entombed. Therefore, the Value astoundingly similar to Staff of interesting thingies which will, rating may suffer. Karnath and Entombed-the without doubt, be of Jim Ultimate \"classics\". earth-shattering importance, Graphics Once loaded, a melodic tune numerous beasties fall from Sound strikes up and a fairly mediocre above and sap your energy. options screen appears. The Bats, demons and witches make Value idea of the game is to steal an up some of the opposing side. Playability 000000 MISSION IMPOSSIBLE BEYOND THE FORBIDDEN FOREST Machine: Amstrad Supplier: US Gold Price: .95 This award winning game was released on the 64 a couple of years ago and now Amsters everywhere can get their hands on it. Unfortunately, this conversion doesn't match up to the more recent Spectrum version graphically. Your mission as a super secret agent is to penetrate mad Prof Elvin Atombender's robot infested maze of an underground HQ. The mad Prof intends to hack into the world's defence computers and launch an atom attack that will destroy the world! Cute, huh? You have to find bits of code and piece them together using your on screen pocket computer in order to find the password to the Prof's control room. Impossible Mission is a game of action and strategy -and is still THE ultimate platform game. The Amstrad conversion isn't the prettiest thing to look at -but the old Impossible Mission addictiveness and playability lurks underneath the chunky graphics Tim Graphics Sound Value Playability Machine: CBM 64 flow of melodic sound, which monster stamped on my head, Supplier: US Gold gave me the power to get up, and it was back to the old have a bowl of soup, and Price: .95 Disk resurrection bit. Eventually got appear back in the forest. through to the second level, But you don't get resurrected which consisted of bats, a hyrda There I was, running around for nothing. You have to pay the and an armour plated almost exhausted, having just price of a golden arrow or two, demigorgon. I didn't manage to had a nasty run in with a and if you don't have any, you kill him though, and he put my Scorpion the size of an elephant. DIE Sol was up on my feet and triumphant stand to an end. which is NOT an everyday shooting arrows at everything The graphics on this game occurence believe me! When that moved, which wasn't are worse than the first one. suddenly, a giant worm came much. It seemed that Due to advanced techniques, out of the ground and everything had gone. But wait, we have perfect ZX81 graphics swallowed me whole. This was what's that noise? From out of on a C64. Has to be a first. The going to be one of those days. the blue came a huge dragonfly. sound is nowhere near as good Yes, after being munched by with four wings. One mighty as the original, a worm, I thought I was dead. shot was all that was needed to They've apparently designed But no! This game really is kill this beast and then I had a new firing method, which is weird, 'cause I just been enough gold arrows to see me supposed to be better, but it's resurrected guv' and no through to the next level, or sol not, and I think it had to be put mistake! A bright, blue light fell thought. in because of their amazing upon me and was engulfed in a Pow! A massive froggie \"OMNIVISION 4D' which uses the up and down movements of the stick. That's why they had to have a new system. This game will probably only appeal to those who like spending money on useless products. If you don't mind terrible graphics, naff sound, pathetic gameplay and long loading time, you should get this. It's a pity because I liked the original one, although I was probably the only one. Chris Graphics Sound Value Playability Wauw "


"BARGAIN SOFTWARE: Dept. C+VG1; Unit 1; 1 Esmond Road; London W.4. 1JG. BUY BY PHONE RING 01-995 2763 PRICE PROMISE If you wish to purchase any product from our list and find that you can buy the same product cheaper from another mail order company, simply enclose the lower amount, stating the name of the other company and where you saw the advert. (It must be a current issue). Price Promise does not apply to other companies **Special Offers\". ORDERS OVER DEDUCT 10% SPECTRUM COMPILATIONS COMMODORE 64 OUR PRICE 5.90 6.70 RRP 14.95 9.95 R.R.P. 7.95 8.95 8.95 9.95 7.95 9.95 7.95 SPEC. MEGA HITS PSYTRON WHEELIE FALL GUY BLADE ALLEY PENETRATOR 3D STARSTRIKE BLUE THUNDER SON OF BLAGGER AUTOMANIA BUGABOO QUR PRICE 11.20 7.45 7.45 5.90 PAPER BOY MINDSTONE STAINLESS STEEL PSI-CHESS VIRGIN CHALLENGER MISSION OMEGA W.A.R. CAPTAIN KELLY NEMESIS TIME TRAX LEADER BOARD PSI-5 TRADING CO LAW OF THE WEST DRAGON'S LAIR 8.95 6.70 8.95 7.95 SPEC4 CRASH SMASHES WIL SPY HUNTER NIGHT GUNNER 34 GAMES DUN DARACH 5.90 7.45 5.90 9.95 054 4 ZZAP SELLERS WHO DARES WINS II DROP ZONE WIZARDS LAIR THING ON A SPRING 7.95 5.90 5.90 9.95 8.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 19.95 9.95 14.95 9.95 14.95 ART STUDIO PAPER BOY TRAP DRAGON'S LAIR N.O.M.A.O. JACK THE NIPPER MISSION OMEGA BEYOND FORBIDDEN FOREST QUESTRON ULTIMA IV (D) TIME TRAX EXPLODING FIST II DECISION IN THE DESERT DAN DARE GEMSTONE WARRIOR (D) SUPER CYCLE IRIDIS ALPHA ROOM 10 (D) LIGHT FORCE TRACKER POWER PLAY SUPERMAN TRIVIAL PURSUITS UCHI MATA THAI BOXING 7.95 7.95 9.95 9.95 7.95 7.45 7.45 16.95 7.45 7.45 11.20 7.45 11.20 7.45 6.70 10.50 7.45 5.90 SPEC. SPORTS PACK SNOOKEA DARTS FOOTBALL OLYMPICS DERBY DAY C64 SPORTS PACK WORLD CUP FOOTBALL 9.95 2.99 8.95 9.95 LIGHTFORCE POWER PLAY SUPERMAN DARK SCEPTRE T.T. RACER FULL THROTTLE UCHI MATA REVOLUTION HARRIER 2.99 7.45 7.45 2.99 TURBO 64 TEST MATCH CRICKET DERBY DAY GOLF 9.95 2.99 8.95 9.95 11.20 7.45 7.45 7.45 SPEC/C4 LAMES PACK VIEW TO A KILL CODE RAME MATT 2 FRIDAY THE 13th TEST MATCH PYBAVID BEAKY & EGG SNATCHERS SPECACTOR PACK MISSION IMPOSSIBLE EXTERMINATOR ARMAOEOON FREEZ BEES SAM SPADE BRAIN DAMAGE 12.95 8.95 14.95 2.99 14.95 9.95 7.95 8.95 9.95 9.95 9,95 8.95 8.95 8.95 11.20 7.45 5.90 7.45 W 7.45 BEST OF BEYOND SPEC. ASTERIX STAR TREK LEADER BOARD MIAMI VICE GALVAN KNIGHT RIDER STREET HAWK VALHALLA SHAOLINS ROAD MISSION ELEVATOR 054 PSI WARRIOR 6.70 6.70 CORDERONS SHADOW SAAMES LAKE MINUS ONE ENIGMA FORCE DOOMDARKS REVENGE SHADOWFIRE 2.99 2.99 ACE ONLY 2015 SHADOWFIRE ENIGMA FORCE WAR 8.95 9.95 8.95 9.95 8.95 14.95 22.95 5.70 7.45 6.70 7.45 COMPUTER HITS 2 11.20 20.95 W 10 GAMES 3 5 SPEC. CODENAME MAT WIZARDS LAIR TECHNICIAN TEO MUTANT MONTY SNOOKER ANDROID 2. ON THE RUN COVENANT SUPERPIPELINE 2 CIRCUS 7.45 PUB GAMES (7 Games) MI QUESTRON (D) GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR GREEN BERET WAY OF THE TIGER TAU CETI MURDER ON THE MISSISSIPPI (D) SUPERPIPELINE 2 MUTANT MONTY HENRY'S HOUSE GRIBBLYS DAY OUT SNOOKER MAMA LLAMA RASKEL AQUA RACER FRENZY CIRCUS 9.95 9.95 14.99 11.30 STAR TREK HEARTLAND 9.95 7.45 DYNAMITE DAN 11 7.95 5.90 MIAMI VICE 7.99 PUB GAMES (7 Games) 9.95 TRIVIAL PURSUITS 14.95 JACK THE NIPPER 7.95 5.90 THEATRE EUROPE HI JACK 9.99 7.45 BOBBY BEARING 7.95 5.90 9.95 7.45 CAULDRON II G. GOOCH'S CRICKET 9.95 7.45 FOOTBALL MANAGER 8.95 GHOST & GOBLINS 7.95 5.90 GREEN BERET ELITE 14.95 GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR 22.95 TURBO ESPRIT JOHNNY RED II 7.95 STREET HAWK KNIGHT RIDER 7.95 5.90 GALVAN SPECIAL OFFERS TO C+VG READERS TWISTER 7.99 3.99 MANIC MINER 7.99 2.99 MATCH POINT 7.95 GAMES DESIGNER 9.95 4.99 VIEW TO A KILL 10.99 3.99 WORLD CUP FOOTBALL 7.95 2,99 SPIDERMAN 7.95 2.99 ANY MASTERONIC 1.99 1.99 ANY MASTERONIC 2.99 LORD OF THE RINGS 15.95 PYRACURSE SKYFOX ASTERIX 9.95 NEXOR 7.95 5.90 KUNG FU MASTER 7.95 BATMAN 5.90 QUAZATRON 8.95 6.70 MONOPOLY 7.45 URIDIUM 6.70 3D STARSTRIKE SCUBA DIVE 2.99 9.95 6.99 14.95 6.70 SOLD A MILLION II SPEC BRUCE LEE KNIGHT LORE MATCH POINT 9.95 14.95 BRUCE LEE EATOMEO MATCH PONT MATCH DAY SUPERBOWL HERBERTS DUMMY RUN INTERNATIONAL SOCCER FOOTBALL MANAGER ACE EQUINOX INFILTRATOR (D) BOULDERDASHI KNIGHT GAMES SUMMER GAMES 1 GHOST & GOBLINS CAULDRON II BIGGLES SOLO FLIGHT 11 PARATHAUR (D) 9.95 6.70 SOLD A MILLION 4.99 9.95 8.95 9.95 9.95 8.95 DALEY'S DECATHLON SABRE WULF JET SET WILLY BEACH HEAD 9.95 DALEY'S DECATHLON STAFF OF KARNATH JET SET WILLY BEACH HEAD 6.70 7.45 9.95 8.95 SPEC. OR CSA HOW GAMES II 7.95 1.99 G. GOOCH'S CRICKET SPITFIRE 40 SABOTEUR SHOGUN ANY MASTERONIC ANY MASTERONIC ZIM SALA BIN ADVENTURES OF BASILDON BOND VIEW TO A KILL HARD BALL 7.45 1.99 2.99 AIR WOL 2.99 SPEC. OR 054 NOW GAMES BRIAN BLOODAXE ST RANDE LOOP PYJAMARAMA ARABIAN KNIGHTS FALCON PATROL II 9.95 8.95 4.99 CHUCKIE EGG TIR NA NOG CAULDRON WORLD CUP 9.95 9.95 10.99 9.95 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT 406.70 ---BARGAIN SOFTWARE ORDER FORM Please send me the following titles. BLOCK capitals please! Type of computer Name Title: Amount Address Tel. No...... Total Enclosed  Please make cheques or postal orders payable to BARGAIN SOFTWARE Prices include P&P within the U.K: Europe please add .75 per tape: Elsewhere please add .00 extra per tape High Road London 474A Chiswick VISIT OUR SHOP W4 "


"C+VG OCT software REVIEWS 12 CAULDRON II C+VG CHVG HIT! sco o Machine: Spectrum/ Amstrad Supplier: Palace Software Price: .99 Cauldron II The Pumpkin Strikes Back was C+VG's Game of the Month in June when it came out on the Commodore 64. And in converting it to the Spectrum and Amstrad, Palace Software has successfully captured all the quality and addictive play of the original. Only the sound has really suffered but that's the fault of the machines. In the first Cauldron game you played the part of the witch Pumpkin is out for revenge on trying to rid her world of the witch pumpkins. This time things are to do this the pumpkin must reversed. The sole surviving collect a lock of the witch's hair traps, spiders, skeletons and a vast variety of other creatures. If you decide to buy the game then hunt out a copy of the C+VG August issue and turn to the special poster sized map of the game. We don't guarantee the Spectrum and Amstrad versions will be exactly the same, but it will give you some idea of what you're up against. Cauldron Il is a delightful game. At the end of the Commodore review we said: \"Don't delay, buy it today.\" We see no reason to change our opinion Paul SPEC AMST Graphics Sound Value Playability Playability 10 10 and drop it in her cauldron. The game is set in a huge castle, covering a vast number of levels packed with puzzles, covering avastanuteser MIAMI VICE do BA Www Machine: Commodore 64/Spectrum/Amstrad Supplier: Ocean Price: .95/.95 /.95 Bringing the slick, black Ferrari to a screeching halt, I drew my shiny .45 and kicked down the door. Dammit. The punks had obviously been wise to my subtle entrance and had blown out of the place. Back in the car, wise-ass Tubbs gave me a guizzical look. I donned my Ray Bans for the umpteenth time and drove off, looking as manages to perform with such moody as possible. ease on TV are devilishly The game has arrived. The difficult ultimate game for You accelerate by pushing would-be-dudes, Miami Vice is forward with the stick, and about the hippest game to decelerate by pulling back. appear for a long, long time. Set Right and left turns are -amazingly enough in the achieved by moving the stick blistering heat of Florida, the right and left respectively. or Ricardo to enter. Once you've game features you (as Crockett These movements remain the done this, the screen changes to or Tubbs) on the trail of a big. same no matter which way you reveal the inside of the joint. bad drug smuggler. are facing. This makes life more Subtlety goes straight out of the The screen has two main than somewhat complicated. window, and you pace around modes, the first is a For example, if you are the various rooms with your bird's-eye-view of the streets travelling down the screen, gun aloft and at arms length and buildings of Miami, moving the stick right will cause Any evidence which is left lying showing your amazingly cool you to turn and head left. It's all around will be displayed as a jet-black convertible and the very sensible if you can imagine sack on the floor. Thankfully, other cars \"cruisin' the high being inside the car all the time, Ocean has refrained from streets\" (man!). This is but at high speeds, this isn't writing \"Swag' on it. probably the most important always possible. To help you get started, part of the game to get to grips Music is really quite good. Ocean has included a schedule with. I mean, you can hardly The original theme plays when for Monday (it's played against catch the bad guys in a you are in the car (available in a the clock one second real high-speed chase if you record store near you!) and time equals one minute game continually bash your car into even plinks moodily away when time) showing where possible any palm tree or building in you enter a building. deals may be going down. On sight. building your trail to Mr J you will Driving the car is very difficult When you have decided to probably come across indeed. Travelling in straight check out a particular building, numerous punks who will lines is easy enough, but those you must drive to it, park and need to spend some time in City flashy turns which Sonny then decide if you want Sonny Hall, in cuffs to \"chill out\". Miami Vice isn't a mega-game. It will probably sell more on its name than its addictiveness, but it is a good program, professionally put together and fun to play. Jim Graphics Sound Value Playability 0000 "


"A can of worms, boiled slimies and eyeball crush are just some of the delicacies demanded by bumbling Berk's bellowing master. Can you satisfy the hunger of him upstairs and resist the temptation to open the Trap Door? For there is always something lurking in the dark waiting to come out... Spectrum . Commodore  Amstrad .95 STRIKE FORCE COBRA Lead the toughest commando squad, of all time in a desperate battle to save the World. Fight your way through the Enemy's labyrinthine fortress, rescue the hostages and destroy the vital computer complex on which the Enemy's power depends. Time is running out. The countdown to destruction has begun. Spectrum . Commodore  Amstrad . .95, Available from your local games stockist or, in case of difficulty, from: Richard Bason, Piranha, 4 Little Essex Street, London WC2R 3LF Tel: 01-836 6633 Manha "


"Vera Cruz! Pit your wits against a Criminal Genius... SAFFAIR CAN REPUBLIQUE FRANÇAISE XO X ONE XV XOMONE INFOGRAMES SESOZOSO VERACRUZ, The FIRST in Infogrames' Crime Series. Available for AMSTRAD, CBM64, MSX and SPECTRUM MITRE HOUSE, ABBEY ROAD ENFIELD, MIDDSX. EN1 2RQ TELEPHONE: 01-364 0123 "


"Conquest Steers You From Victory To Victory. It's What You've Marvel At The Solid 3-D Graphics, Thrill As Your Action-Packed Pursuit Of Come To Expect From Firebird ... Publishers Of The U.K's Most Exciting Software TAPE .95 TARE STARSTRIKLIIN DISC .95 Available now for the Amstrad series. FIREBIRD MAIL ORDER Please state name of game, machine, cassette or disk and Quantity required Enclosed crossed cheque/PO made payable to FIREBIRD SOFTWARE All offers are subject to availability. Orders are despatched promptly. All prices inclusive of VAT and postage MAIL ORDER: AUNTIE KAY, \"FREEPOST FIREBIRD, FIRST FLOOR, 64-76 NEW OXFORD ST., LONDON WC1A 1PS. \"No stamp required Firebird is a Registered Trade Mark of British Telecommunications pla FIREBIRD SOFTWARE FIRST FLOOR, 64-76 NEW OXFORD ST., LONDON WC1A 1PS "


"C+VG OCT sobtware REVIEWS 13 RIDIS ALPHA Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Activision Price: .99 (cassette) .95 (disk) Code Red! Behind Jaggi Lines, which was later called Rescue on Fractalus, is now on the Amstrad ... and it's pretty hot. For those of you who don't remember what the game is all about, you have been chosen for a mission, a daring rescue no less! Human pilots are stranded on the hostile world of Fractalus. The Jaggis are the race which inhabit this world. To say they don't like humans would be the understatement of the year! You must rescue your pilots from the Jaggis and return them safely to the mothership. The graphics use Fractual mathematics, so they move speedily and solidly, just as you would see it from a real space ship. The effect of flying through the mountains is incredible--it has to be seen to be believed. The Jaggis come in all shapes and sizes, some in ships, and some on foot and boy do they look mean in the flesh. A great conversion, better than the 64 version. Go get it! RESCUE ON FRACTALUS WARP GATE GILBY CORE NOT CORE Sa Points aaaaaa wa ANERGY Points a weaa wir Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Llamasoft/Hewson Price: .95 cassette/.95 disk Welcome to another mêlée with the mind of Minter. It's the first tie up Jeff's Llamasoft and Hewson, those people who bought you the ever-so wonderful Uridium. But the game is pure Minter and that's enough for the multitude of his faithful fans to rush out and buy it. It's the same old mix of admittedly very successful high speed arcade action zapping, dazzling colours and fantastic sound You control what is known as a Gilby Robot fighter. That much is quite clear. Little else is. Those gathered around the CBM 64 began to show signs of extreme confusion about what was happening. Chris \"Odduns\" Cain, who quite shamelessly has expressed a liking for past Minter games, was actually spotted sneaking Irdis Alpha out of the office and later admitted he had played it for three hours at home. \"I still didn't like it,\" he said. Paul Graphics Sound Value Playability Chris Graphics Sound Value Playability on v0000 C+VG HIT! MISSION ELEVATOR Machines: Amstrad/ Trouble is that each floor is the bomb. eight lives quickly unless you C64/128 inhabited by an army of agents Each floor is packed with bits stay sharpespecially playing dressed in their best of furniture which must be Supplier: Micropool the 64 version which appears to trenchcoats who are out to examined carefully to find parts be slightly tougher. Price: .95/.95 stop you. of the all important code. You Don't forget to go to the (Amstrad cass + disc) The hotel is split up in units of do this by simply standing in reception desk on each floor as .95/.95 (CBM eight floors each. Within each front of an object and pulling this is where you'll find the pass unit, you can move up or down down on the joystick. A key to the rest of the doors on cass + disc) by using any of the lifts. The message window at the bottom that floor. And you must jot This game will give a lift to even emergency exit leads to the of the screen relates what down all the code words as you the most jaded gamester a lift. next eight floors. you've found if anything. find them, the computer doesn't Well, several really, It's a sort of You need a key to open the Examine a table and you find store them away for you. copy of the arcade hit Elevator emergency exit which is at yourself playing a dice game. And don't shoot the beautiful Action featured in our arcade present in the porter's back You gamble points and could stranger you find lurking behind action pages some time ago. trouser pocket which together end up with a nice bonus if some of the doors. It only loses Mission Elevator is one of the with its owner has gone into you're lucky. you points. first German written games to hiding in one of the hotel Also in the message window Mission Elevator is fast, well reach these shores and if it's rooms. But to find the porter you'll sometimes see 'whispers' presented and very playable. any indication of what's to you need the master key to from the people you come One of the best games around come then we could be in for a open the room's doors. But across. These sometimes give for the Amstrad right now. And treat. beware, danger lurks behind you clues to the puzzle. You it's not bad on the 64 either. You play the part of a super every door... travel around the floors using Check it out. Tim secret agent sent on a mission To stop the countdown, you lifts and dodging the enemy to save a big hotel from need the code consisting of 16 agents who are pretty quick on C64 Ams destruction. Foreign agents parts. You will find two parts of the trigger. You have to be as Graphics have hidden a time bomb the code per eight floors. well. Sound somewhere on the 62nd floor Each part of the code will Watch out some of the Value and you have to reach it and specify a direction. All 16 agents crouch down to zap you. defuse it. directions are needed to defuse It's pretty easy to lose your Playability TITUT "


"C+VG OCT sobtware REVIEWS 14 FREAK FACTORY JACK ATTACK ACTION REFLEX LAP OF THE GODS Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Mastertronic Price: .99 Machine: CBM 64 Machine: BBC Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Firebird Supplier: Bug-Byte 48k Price: .99 Price: .99 Supplier: Mirrorsoft Price: .95 Mmmmm-mmm. There's I think this is meant to be called nothing like a good arcade Jack Attack-that's what the adventure. \"Wait a minute,\" I hear you cry. screen says, but the tape cover \"I read all about Action Reflex in The best point is the title insists it's Jack Attac. page. You are shown a little the super August issue!\" Well, In Jack Attack, you are Jack, that was the \"penultimate\" man in sunglasses, running and you must rescue your along a paved walkway, being version. Now I've got my mits sweetheart Jill who is on the real one, and am going pursued by a nasty monster. A languishing in a cell. To do so freak, I suppose. to tell you about it, whether you you must find the correct key, like it or not. The idea behind the game is and to find the key, you must The object of the game is to unbelievably silly. You are the explore the beanstalk and top agent in the galactic police. move through the various penetrate the Giant's castle and screens, avoiding death which After reports have filtered back gardens. is dished out by various regarding some disturbances Odd sort of beanstalk, this, amongst trading colonies, the fiendish and not-so-fiendish with locked doors barring your GP decide to send you to clear traps littered about the game. path, moving platforms to bear up the place. On arrival, you will you aloft, keys and assorted Just about the only difference see nasty creatures roaming the things lying around, we could find when comparing it to our pre-production copy streets. mean-looking nasties was that there are now large The best course of action is patrolling. More like a computer green funnels which suck up probably to try and discover game than Jack and the your ball and spits it out where the problem lies, and Beanstalk, if you ask me. It only somewhere else. There isn't an sorting it out that way. Tivens up when you find the key awful lot to the game, and the Movement and graphics are to Jill's cell, which has the effect price will prohibit its inclusion remarkably bad. And the of waking up the Giant, giving in all but the most extravagant program crashes with merciless you just two minutes to make of software collections regularity. Freak Factory is your escape. rather disasterous all round. Familiar stuff, with nothing Avoid it at all costs. much to distinguish it from all Jim Graphics those other ladders n' mazes games you've played. Sound Nicky Value Graphics Graphics Playability Sound Sound Value Playability Value Playability Hey! It's another find-the-crystals-in the-maze-full-of-little nasties game. But it is well presented, looks averagely attractive and costs under two quid. At the dawn of time the eight Gods of Zzarn ruled the universe. You, -a little droid thingy are trapped in a comet's time vortex and only the Gods can return you to the future IF you deliver to them the buried Crystals of Zzam. Game play is pretty basicbut addictive nonetheless. It's not original, and not up to the standard of Knight Tyme but a playable budget offering from Clive Brooker. Tim Graphics Sound Value Playability Jim Ano SPEED KING OCTAGON 64/128 SQUAD LD NO Machine: CBM O 64/128 Supplier: Mastertronic Price: .99 STAR MAN Machine: Spectrum/ Amstrad Supplier: Firebird Price: .99 Good grief! Where on earth did Firebird dig this up from. It looks as though it comes out of the ark. Star Firebirds is nothing but a sub-Space Invaders clone with absolutely nothing to recommend it. Every expense has certainly been spared. At .99 it's still over priced. Chris Quite honestly Speed King does Machine: Spectrum not deserve a place on the same Supplier: Mastertronic starting grid as Super Cycle, Price: .99 especially in the graphics stakes. Right! Get fell in you 'orrible You get a choice of ten Machine: Amstrad little droids! And you! Get your circuits to race on, three skill Supplier: Mastertronic capacitor polished! Now, listen levels and 19 opponents. Price: .99 carefully 'cos I'm only going to There are six gears to master tell you this once. There's been on the bike, each controlled by a an unprovoked chemical attack backwards or forwards This is another value for money on one of our planets. The movement of the joystick game from Mastertronic. It's a Octagon Squad that's you Acceleration or braking is 3D maze game in which stupid! have been chosen to achieved by pressing or Molecule Man must explore go in and get out the releasing the fire button. around 256 screens to find 16 survivors... As for the 19 other riders circuits which will make a The idea is to move your didn't really see much of them teleporter work and enable him team around the complex, except as they disappeared to escape. All this is against the blocking off exits and entrances into the distancel spent most clock and rising radiation levels. to prevent the alien life forms of the laps swerving from side There is a maze designer from taking over. to side, or skidding across the program which allows you to Octagon Squad is a grass. Really quite difficult to e game completely competant strategy gameout control, save your pennies Tom or change the existing one. it really needs a bit more the full price game. Chris explanation to help out the first Paul time player. Graphics Graphics Graphics Sound Sound 5 Sound Value Value 7 Value Playability Playability Playability Tim CO Graphics Sound Value Playability vo 00 SHORTS "


"THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST WORLD POVERTY WOW. ANT GAMES ALL PROCEEDS TO WAR ON WANT 14 FABULOUS TITLES FOR ANY 48K SPECTRUM FOR ONLY .95! ARTIC_SPECTRUM CHESS II AUDIOGENIC-BUGEYES BEAU-JOLLY PEDRO CDS-WINGED WARLORD FIREBIRD-MR FREEZE LLAMASOFT -HEADBANGER'S HEAVEN MASTERTRONIC WIZARD'S WARRIOR War on Want supports long-term development projects in over 30 countries to provide selfsufficiency in food production, better health care and improved education for the world's poor. MELBOURNE HOUSE HELLFIRE OCEAN-HUNCHBACK II PSIONHORACE & THE SPIDERS PSS-XAVIOR QUICKSILVA RUPERT & THE ICE CASTLE STAR DREAMS-CYBERTANKS VIRGIN-DR FRANKY & THE MONSTER Please send me _copy(s) of WOW games I enclose a cheque/PO made out to WOW (trading) Ltd for  Name. Address Town ... Postcode Send form (with payments) to: WOW Games. Room 62A, 1, London Bridge St. London SE1 SSG or order by Access or Visa: Phone 01 403 2266 AND ASK FOR GAMES DEPARTMENT "


"Does your micro answer backe. Does your micro chat to 70,000 people across the UK?  Can your micro interview pop stars, hackers and doyennes of the computer industry?  Can your micro provide the answer to your technical and software problems? Could your micro send and receive telex's worldwide?  Does your micro do your shopping for you-and have it delivered to your door? Is your micro an answering machine, delivering your private mail whenever you log-on?! NO? .. Shame! Bring your micro to life. To: Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1 Please send me a brochure on Micronet 800 Name Micronet 800Address Micronet 800 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5EJ Telephone: 01-278 3143 Telephone No Micro Age CVG L "


"DOPER ONE MAN WAR MACHINE You are Rogue Trooper, last of the blue-skinned Genetic Infantrymen. In the eternal and bloody war raging across Nu Earth, your comrades have been betrayed and slaughtered, reduced to microchips that you still carry with you. Find the traitor, destroy the enemy and rescue your friends from electronic limbo.  BP Step into Rogue's boots and try to survive this action-packed arcade battle! SPECTRUM COMMODORE AMSTRAD .95 Available from your local steckist. In case of difficulty, order from: John Darvill Macmillan Distributions Ltd Houndmills Basingstoke RG21 2XS Make cheques or postal orders payable to Macmillan Limited and state the machine Further information from: Richard Bason, Piranha 4 Little Essex Street London WC2R 3LF Tel: 01-836 6633 Milan hac "


"C+VG OCT software REVIEWS 15 MINDSTONE Machine: Spectrum 48k Supplier: The Edge Price: .95 Long, long ago, in a land where people were cursed with the most preposterous names there was a ruler named Jorma. Jorma ruled the Teia people, who-amazingly enough were The Bar in Elantor peaceful and contented. Exits : South Jorma had two sons, Kyle and Nemesar. He favoured TSINS Kyle, which irritated Nemey no end. Now, the problem with Trade Look trying to bring up a family in Pick co such early times is that it's so Examine DC difficult to teach the social Meditate Ecce graces. I mean, it must be pretty  tough to persuade the kiddies not to vomit at dinner when all Taking the role of Kyle, it is Should you find yourself round them are scenes of your quest to seek out your without the suitable object with barbarism and unbridled brother and return the which to bribe or despatch the hiccupping. Such behaviour has mindstone to a safe place, obstacle, you can always try to obviously worn off on poor old The game takes place in the kill it (providing it is an animate Nemesar, as he has become relative desolation of the life-form). really quite unsociable. Shadowlands. You guide a Often in combat, a member of He bumbed-off his mum, and party of three warriors, each your party will be killed. then took control of the possessing different attributes. Usually, though, they do Mindstone, which holds the From time to time, your path manage to defeat their power to do amazing things. will be blocked by an obstacle opponent, so the sacrifice is When in the hands of the Good, of some kind. These are rather generally worthwhile. it can do wonders for crops, diverse you could encounter The graphics could not be healing and the weather. In the anything from a wall of ice, described as all that amazing, hands of a malicious soul, though a leopard to a crocodile and there is very little however, trouble will brew on vour travels. Usually you will animation. The characters quicker than you can say \"Oh be given a hint as to how you move around when attacking or crumbs!\" should approach each problem. trading with other creatures, but are essentially static. The second is far from exciting. which leads this reviewer to the question \"So what is the appeal, eh?\" Well, fortunately for all at The Edge, the program has great game-play! It's all done with the joystick. Although they claim that it's all \"icon driven\" is perhaps a little tenuous you highlight words instead of pictures 60% of the time it's easy to get started. You can select your movement direction by pointing at a specific arrow, and hitting fire. Alternating character control is handled in the same way, and is a \"joy\" to use. You can barter with the wandering tradesmen which litter the landscape, but you can't attack them. Mindstone is quite good, and the price is reasonable. You get a map on the back of the considerably extensive instructions, though I couldn't decipher the decidedly arty script. Jim Graphics Sound Value Playability covov KNIGHT GAMES that softhe louki Machine: Amstrad a human. This is a bit tricky on Supplier: English the Amstrad, since there is only one joystick port. Software The second player must use Price: .95 the keyboard cursor keys to move around. Not very Tootle-ey-toot! What's that? convenient but it's the best that English Software blowing their anyone could be expected to own trumpet, no doubt. And do. The other events are there they've certainly got the right to too, and they have various do so now they've released the backgrounds. Some are very Amstrad version of Knight pretty, some aren't. Games. The only events which stray Stepping out in the cold light from the standard movements of day, I entered the first battle, of left, right, and other strikes a simple sword-fight. The are the crossbow and archery graphics are more colourful events. Here all you have to do than the Commodore, and very is move your sight around the well animated. mid-distance and then release a The next event, which you bolt or arrow. reach by loading from tape, is Knight Games is really just the Quarterstaff. Here you are another combat game, but it atop a log which rests has enough originality to make dangerously above a it worth a look fast-flowing river. You do your Jim utmost to knock your foe off the log. Graphics If you get tired of attacking a Sound simulated knight, you can elect -through the rather pleasant Value menu screen-to play against Playability Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: US Gold/ DataSoft Price: .95 (disk) I had doubts that Mind Pursuit would turn out to be very American in it s choice of questions, you know, name the wife of the fourth president that sort of thing. But during the time I played I was unable to find any truly outrageous bias, toward the other side of the Atlantic For example, under the History and Geography section one question asked: The Roman name for the Greek goddess Aphrodite was Diana, true or false? Now everybody should stand a reasonable chance at that one. Shouldn't they? In Mind Pursuit up to four players or teams can compete. Subjects Science and Nature History and Geography, TV and Film, Sport and Games, Culture and, finally, Grab Bag are chosen with the role of a "


"C+VG OCT sobtware REVIEWS 16 INTERNATIONAL MKIE. KARATE Machine: BBC Supplier: Imagine Price: .95 In this latest effort from Imagine and Konami, you are Mikie, an American High School Romeo whose sole aim in life is to get a message to his girlfriend. Yes, honest. In the process, he has to avoid a manic teacher, a manic janitor, a manic chefeveryone at this school seems to be a manic-not to mention (wait for it) dancing cheerleaders, with their literally stunning kisses! Tacky, huh? Needless to say, it's all an excuse for just another arcade game, with the peculiar denizens of an American school standing in for the usual aliens, Mikie the equivalent of the intrepid star fleet captain, and hearts-yes, hearts! standing in for jewels, weapons, fuel or whatever you usually go around collecting in an arcade adventure. You can even zap your manic companions by chucking chickens and basket balls at them. You piece together your message I'm thankful to say didn't get far enough to find out what they complete message is by collecting these hearts lying around, \"hip-zapping\" other kids out the way if need be. You move from classroom to locker room, canteen to gym, and finally to the schoolyard where you finally deliver the message. If you've survived the maniacs, whose touch is lethal. OK, so it's original. The graphics aren't much-a bit blocky and sluggish and you can see through the characters. The background music is Hard Day's Night (and boy, it sure is), and there's a bug in the high score table, which sometimes seizes up for a while. Probably sickened by the sight of Mikie making such a fool of himself. Bring on the aliens, that's what I say. Nicky Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Endurance Games Price: .95 (cass) .95 (disk) Hey yah, International Karate for the Amstrad, Yeah! Great, let's load it. Oh my God, turn it off. Quick!!!!!! International Karate is as you may already have guessed, one of those Fist rip-offs. Fortunately, it's very good on the 64, but the Amstrad version is a disappointment. The game has the basic Karate moves but it has one very special feature ... The Flying Kick. The flying kick is, would say, pathetic. When you perform this move, you must rise, oh, at least two and a half inches of the ground. The rest of the action is pretty wooden and if karate is like this then no wonder it's a dying art. If we had a symbol for a very naff game, I'd give this one three of them. Chris Graphics Sound Value Playability Graphics Sound Value Playability ww ID PURSUIT SAVAGE POND 30.0 Roundt Hold the SPACE BAR TOT011 die Release the SPACE BAR to pick category computerised dice. Mind Pursuit contains There are three types of thousands of questions and question, ranging from True or none are apparently repeated False to Multiple Choice and while each particular game is in finally where you have to fill in progress. the blank space. Quite good fun to play but it is Points are awarded for rather slow and laborious. Paul correct answers and taken away Graphics for incorrect ones. There is also Sound a game board mode which can be played as an alternative to Value the straightforward text game. Playability Machine: BBC eventually becomes a frog, when he must contend with Supplier: Bug-Byte mutant bumble bees, protect Price: .99 his colony of eggs and tadpoles from water fleas and all those The life of a tadpole is not a other predators, catch happy one. Never mind the dragonflies with his tongue Bronx, you want a savage place before they can fill the pond to live, go live in the pond. with any more of those vicious A tadpole is born, whose aim, nymphs... naturally enough, is to grow This recycled game is good into a frog. To do so, he must fun. The graphics may not be eat, avoid the dreaded hydra very polished, but at least the with its lethal tentacles, dodge pond creatures look like pond the hydra's equally nasty creatures, and they are cousin, the jellyfish, and catch extremely lively-I particularly the dragonfly's eggs before liked the frenzied efforts of the they turn into fearsome savage-looking nymph as he dragonfly nymphs. Dragonfly plunges wildly about in the nymphs just love tasty pond foliage, hunting for the tadpoles. There's also the water cowering tadpole. spider's web to watch out for. Nicky The greatest enemy of all Graphics needless to say, is man, who is Sound prone to use the pond as a dump for radioactive waste. Value If your tadpole survives, he Playability coco coco "


"\"GAMES AT THE SPEED OF LIGHT... LIGHTFORCE is for VENGEANCE... LIGHTFORCE is the Punishment Arm of Galactic Fighter Command. When a Terran-settled system at the edge of the galaxy is seized by an alien force,revenge comes in the form of a lone LIGHTFORCE fighter. LIGHTFORCE confronts alien in a dazzling battle above the strange landscapes of the Ice-Planet,the Jungle Planet, Alien factories and the impassable Asteroid Belt. LIGHTFORCE at the speed of Light from FTL. SHOCKWAY RIDERS are the pick of the street gangs ATHLETIC, AGGRESSIVE & ARROGANT -as they cruise along the triple-speed moving walkways that circle the great MEGACITYS of the 21st Century, THE ULTIMATE AIM OF EVERY RIDER is to go \"FULL CIRCLE\" to do that, he must fight off the Block Boys, the Cops and the Vigilantes as well as negotiating the Speed Traps and Rider Ramps erected by the angry local residents! SHOCKWAY RIDER is the most original, arcade game of the year THE ULTIMATE FUTURE SHOCK!! LIGHTFORCE AVAILABLE SEPT. 86 SHOCKWAY RIDER AVAILABLE OCT. '86, SPECTRUM .95 AMSTRAD & COMMODORE .95 FASTER THAN LIGHT FTL FASTER THAN LIGHT, CARTER FOLLIS GROUP OF COMPANIES SEDGLEY ROAD EAST, TIPTON, WEST MIDLANDS DY4 7UJ. Tel: 021-520 2981 (4 lines) "


"MAIL-SOFT 6.75 6.99 5.75 ** SPECTRUM ** COLOSSUS CHESS 4.0 QUAZATRON CAULDRON II MINDSTONE SILENT SERVICE 650 6.50 6.99 6.50 + COMMODORE 64 IROIS ALPHA-01 EUTE-02 ALLEYKAT -01 GAULDRON II -01 URIUM 01 \"PAPER BOY BIGGLES01 WARRIOR OF RA-01 1.C.U.P.S. THE SECOND CITY KUNG FU MASTER-01 SPUT PERSONALITIES SRENT SERVICE-01 TRAP WINTER GAMES-01 6.99 6.50 11.25 5.95 6.50 LORD OF RINGS ACK THE NIPPEA STAINLESS STEEL SPITFIRE 40 VIRGIN CHALLENGE pAPER BOY BOMB JACK THEATRE EUROPE REVOLUTION 5.95 6.50 6.99 6.99 7:25 5.99 11,25  7.25 WINTER GAMES MISSION OVEGA * TT RACER DRAGONS LAIR TAU CETI TOMAHAWK THE PRICE OF MAGICK 6.99 725 6.99 5.99 ****AMSTRADE GREEN BERET-01 ELITE-CASS-03 11.00 CAULDRON-01 TOMAHAWK 01 CASCADE 50 -01 LEADERBOARD-01 PRICE OF MAGICK GHOST+GOBLIN-01 *TT RACER CITY SLICKER -01 KNIGHT GAMES_D1 NIGHT GUNNER-01 PACIFIC-D2 *REVOLUTION 01 SILENT SERVICE -01 ***** BBC THRUST COMMANDO-01 WIK: BOMBACK SOUTHERN BELLE GRAPHIC ADVENTURE AIRWOLF-01 COMMONWEALTH GAMES 5,95 IAN BOTHAMS BEACH HEAD 3.99 ATARI MERCENARY 6.99 SECOND CITY 4.99 SPELLBOUND 2.99 ALTERN. REALTY-D 16.95 TALES OF BETA LYRA 7.25 CRUSADE IN EUROPE 12.95 SOLO FLIGHT 11-01 7.25 L.C.P. IST ONLY 32.95 MONOPOLY WAY OF TIGER EXPLODING FIST SCRABBLE MANDAGORE CLUEDO **C16***** WINTER EVENTS FRANK BRUNO BOXING IAN BOTHAM YIE AR KUNG FU EXPLODING FIST INALTRATOR-01 TAU-CETI -01 MIAMI VICE-D1 VIRGIN CHALLENGE HEAVY ON THE MAGICK DRAGONS LAIR-01 TORBUK LEADERBOARD-01 QUESTRON-DISK SUMMER GAMES 1-01 ALTER EGO-DISK THE FORCE MISSION A.D.-01 PSI-S TRADING-01 KNIGHT GAME-01 FAIRLIGHT-01 11.50 6.98 ARAC FIGHTER PILOT BIGGLES FUROMAX 22.00 5.75 7.75 6.99 7.25 725 725 7.25 6.50 7.45 7.25 10.50 1795 21.95 5.75 SOUTHERN BELLE BLOCK-GOLD RUN YIE AR KUNG FU DESERT RATS ACE WAY OF TIGER RAMBO MUGSY REVENGE TURBO ESPRIT DESERT FOX ROLLER COASTER HEAVY ON THE MAGICK ROCK N WRESTLE GHOST+GOBUN FARLIGHT IAN BOTHAMS DYNAMITE DAN II ARNEHAM SOUTHERN BELLE GERMANY 85-01 GOLF CONS SET-01 G.A. CREATOR -CASS G.A. CREATOR-DISK COLOSSUS CHESS 4.0 LORD OF RINGS-13 MERCENARY GHOST GOBLIN -01 MISSISSIPPI DISK SOLO FLIGHT II -01 PARALAX-01 \"HEARTLAND MISSION OMEGA 6.99 7.50 6.99 3 725 5.50 Shoes 6.99 725 725 6.50 5.75 5.75 PSI-5 TRADING LEADERBOARD Disk version available: D1 =$11.95, D2 .95, D3.95 Post & Packing included in U.K. Europe add  per tape. Elsewhere at cost. Ch/Po to: Mail-Soft. P.O. Box 589 London N15 6JJ. Access orders accepted *Denotes new releases, subject to release dates TELE-GAMES The leading Video game specialists offer 100's of cartridges forCase switched joystick for ease of use, durability and reliability. ATARI The most advanced micro 2600 GET THE BEST INTELLIVISION smooth action. travel gate giving really Ultra sensitive switches, short FORGET THE REST FUROMAX The name for joysticks Send for lists (state make of game) TELEGAMES, WIGSTON, LEICESTER, LES 1TE (0533-880445) WARNING: cheap imitations of our range are available. Please be careful and insist on our product to ensure full guarantee of satisfaction. THANKS FROM C+VG TO ALL OUR READERS For the ultimate games player ANOTHER 15% YEAR ON YEAR GROWTH IN SALES NEW ABC 97,876 Contact your nearest computer store for details on full range or clip the coupon. Prices from .95 .95 Euromax Electronics Ltd., FREEPOST Pinfold Lane, Bridlington YO16 5XR O 0262 602541 A Access Accepted Please send me full details. STILL BY FAR THE LARGEST SELLING GAMES MAGAZINE IN THE WORLD Name .. Address "


"Ever wanted to be someone else? A wizard, perhaps. Or maybe an orc. How about Doctor Who or Judge Dredd? Role-playing games could be just for you. C+VG investigates. REALM EALMS ANTAN Take a look at the people walking in the street, sitting on the bus or in your class at school. Notice anything strange? They may appear to be very ordinary, dull and dreary people, careworn and weighed down by the problems of everday life. But behind that ordinary exterior could beat the heart of a secret magician, a noble wizard, evil witch or all-round-clean-cut-good-guy hero who, at the drop of a distressed maiden's handkerchief, would not stop at anything to cleave any monster's head from its shoulders in an effort to rescue her. Yes, you never know who you're sitting next to on buses these days. Who are these people who have what could be described as strange and potentially disturbing alter-egos? They are of RPGs Role-Playing Games. The best-known role-playing game is Dungeons and Dragons, invented by American Gary Gygax back in 1972. It's estimated that there are about a million players in Britain alone, judging by sales of the game. Now there are about 50 RPGs on the market, catering for every form fantasy in the nicest possible sense, of course. But just what is a Role-Playing Game? Basically it's a game which allows the players to adopt the personality Dragon Aid in action of a character and guide him through various adventures set in a world of fantasy and imagination controlled and refereed by one person. In the case of Dungeons and Dragons this person is known as the Dungeon Master. The aim of the game-especially in Dungeons and Dragons is usually to find treasure. The players-eight or nine seems to be the ideal number are given various attributes, such as strength, mental and physical capabilities wisdom, dexterity etc. There is also a choice of races, from human to elvish, from hobbit to dwarf, each having different characterisicts. The game is controlled by the Dungeon Master using a rule book, tables and dice. The dice are very important. It decides various strengths, the amount of damaged players suffer in fights or encounters with monsters. Some players use small figures to represent players and monsters during the game, others don't Recently a group of role-playing enthusiasts emerged from the dungeons and into the publicity spotlight to stage Dragon Aid, a marathon session of playing Dungeons and Dragons to raise money for the starving in Africa. They took a suitable cellar-like basement off London's Trafalgar Square and played continuously for more than 80 hours. Victoria Kassner, one of the organisers of the Dragon Aid event, explained how she first encountered the mysterious world of Dungeons and Dragons nearly a year ago. \"At the time there was some publicity in a newspaper. A few months later got a copy of the magazine Imagine (now defunct) which was dedicated to role-playing games. Through that I got more involved and joined a group,\" she said. She continued: \"It's a great release for the emotions. You can do things that are made in your imagination which you can't do in real life. I now play regularly every Monday night for about five, six or seven hours. It's an ongoing game, continuing from where we leave off each week. It's a game which depends a lot on the people who are playing with. It can be as complex or as simple as you like. If you want you can simply kill anything that moves.\" She does admit that some find the idea of dungeons and Dragons and other RPGs slightly odd. \"A lot of people think: 'Oh, yes, what's wrong with you?' But others are really enthusiastic about it.\" How do role-playing games compare with computer adventure games. After all there are many similarities between them. 'I know a lot of people who play them,\" says Victoria,\" but a lot of mainstream role players say they lack the personal touch.\" A large and expanding industry as followed in the wake of Dungeons and Dragons, including specialist magazines, fanzines and shops dedicated to RPGs. A basic Dungeons and Dragons set will cost in the region of about .95. On top of this there is a whole series of more advanced sets, extra scenarios playing aids, posters BUMI "


"SOF FANTASY For more information about Games Workshop role playing adventures write to the company at Chewton Street, Hilltop, Eastwood, Nottingham A brochure containing more details about Lore Lord Fantasy Adventures can be obtained from 14 Claremont (Basement). Hastings, East Sussex, TN34 IHA and books. There's even a double LP, called First Quest, which contains back ground music to add a little more atmosphere to games. Games Workshop, probably the biggest name in Britain's role-playing field, produce and distribute a wide range of games. Top selling game at the moment is one based on the 2000AD comic book character Judge Dredd. About 500 of the .95 game are being sold each month. Other popular sellers at the moment are the Middle Earth series of games based on J.R.R. Tolkien's Lord of the Rings books. Other games on the market include Indianna Jones, war games such as Julius Caesar, Drive on Stalingrad and Battle for the Ardennes, murder games superheroes, Conan, and wild west. And there's even the oddly named Teenage Ninja Mutant Turtles. That sounds more like a nightmare rather than fantasy But one thing is certain in the role-playing games world. The word of game master is sacrosanct. \"As one Dungeon Master's saying goes: \"We'll get along fine as soon as you realise I'm god\". And for those who want to take their role playing adventures one step further, there's a company started up which allows you to take part in \"real-life\" adventures which can last When \"Time In\" is called, present from six hours to five days. The style is day reality is suspended and the very much Dungeons and Dragons with players are required to act in the costumes. appropriate manner for the time in For instance, a 48-hour weekend which their adventure is set. adventure run by Hastings-based \"Time Out\" is called usually after a Lore-Lord Fantasy Adventures would battle when the referee adjusts game cost  per person. For that you get scores costume, weapons, camping Besides the main adventure games equipment and food. But you have to be Lore-Lord organises other various at least 14 to take part. activities to keep players amused, The adventures are set in the historic especially on the long five-day countryside of East Sussex-you holidays. know, 1066 and all that where These include Advanced Dungeons players need little imagination to know and Dragons indoor games; duelling, that a troll, vampire, or dragon could be where characters test their combat hiding just out of sight. skills; manhunts, where a fugitive is Themes of the adventures range hunted and, hopefully captured, and from prehistoric, Arthurian to Medieval banquets. and the characters involved fall into five main categories -warrior, wizard, Addresses: cleric, theif and crusader. If you wish to send a Each main character type has various contribution to Dragon Aid, sub-classes, each with their own write to particular skills Dragon Instead of a Dungeon Master Aid, controlling the game, the person in 108 Twyford charge is known as the referee. He House, keeps the score for players, deducting Chisley points for \"injuries,\" checks morale, and making sure that when London someone is \"dead\" they N15. know it. www "


"GO RINN Seft PEND D0000 DODOO CBM SPEC MSX 7.95 FUROMAX GHOSTS 'N' GOBLINS 7.95 BOMB JACK 7.95 GREEN BERET CAULDRON 7.15 MERCENART 2ND CITY 4.15 TIME TRAX 7.95 BOUNCES 7.95 DRAGON'S LAIR SPLIT PERSONALITIES 75 SOLO FLIGHT 7.95 LEADERBOARD GOLF 7.95 LC.U.P.S. 135 SABOTEUR 7.5 TA C NEXUS 7.95  6.25 BATMAN GHOSTS 'N' GOBLINS 6.25 GREEN BERET 6.25 CYBERUN 7.95 PENTAGRAM 1.95 QUAZATRON 7J5 BOBBY BEARING 6.25 PYRACURSE 1.95 HEARTLAND 7.95 CAULDRON 7.15 JACK THE NIPPER 6.25 KUNG FU MASTER 6.25 SPLIT PERSONALITIES 6.25 LC.U.P.S. TJ5 EQUINOX 7.95 TOAD RUNNER BOMB JACK 6.25 KNIGHTMARE BILLIARDS HYPER RALLY BOXING SOCCER PING PONG HYPER SPORTS HYPER SPORTS 2 HYPER SPORTS 3 YE AR KUNG FU YE AR KUNG FU 2 WAY OF THE TIGER NIGHT SHADE PRICE OF MAGIK 2005 BOUNDER WANDRAGORE H.25 1.25 1.25 14.25 14.25 14.25 14.25 4.25 1.25 14.25 M.25 7.95 7.95 7.95 7J5 TRAP 75 135 2.95 HOW TO ORDER 1) PRINT NAME AND ADDRESS 2) PRINT THE GAME/S REQUIRED 3) ENCLOSE CHO/P.O. A ND AND SEND RINN SOFT 477 MAUCHLINE ST GLASGOW G5 8HJA 27 MAUCHLINE ST JR SOFTWARE 764 Downham Rd, London, N1 5BG COMMODORE 7.40 Winter Games Zoids SPECTRUM e The latest optical encoder mouse available superior in all aspects combined with a sophisticated yet easy to use full colour graphics software 57.40 15.95 Airwolf Berkes Trilogy Commando Favourbe Four Gun Slinger ES.70 15.25 8. M ugan Boxing Botham Cricket Bomb Jack Boundar Comp Vo2 65.50 S.95 FORGET THE REST GET THE BEST MOUSE-CHEESE Jet Set Wily Il package. 11.75 AcroJet Biggles Bomb Jack Core Cauldron 2 Electra Glide Ghosts & Goblins Green Beret Golf Construct Hard Ball Lazer Basic Compler Lazer Genius Law of the West Leader Board Lord of the Rings Merad Madness Very Vision AD Bobbywing $11.75 11.75 11.75 11.95 Space Plot Slippery sid Sky Hank Thai Boxing Word Dup Winter Olympics Botas Cadet En Groen Beret Ghost Bobins FR MAX The name for joysticks addddddddddd SC 11.75 11.75 11.75 Night Games Pub Games WARNING: cheap imitations of our range are available. Please be careful and insist on our product to ensure full guarantee of satisfaction. Lord of the Rings Southern Bele Shogun Ps 5 Trading Rock & We Quron Reptil Seach Sir Force Hammer Southern Bele The Quill Winter Olympic Tau Ceti 15.95 211.00 MOUSE-CHEESE Turbo Esprit Tiger in the Snow --> Sabour Year Kung Fu Winter Games Undium Zapp Series ATARI Boulder Bash Polar Pierre...... Ghostbusters 27.40 27.48 Contact your nearest computer store for details on full range or clip the coupon. Prices from .95 .95 Euromax Electronics Ltd. FREEPOST Pinfold Lane, Bridlington YO16 5XR O 0262 602541 Access Accepted ENTER OUR FREE DRAW 1st Prize 2nd Prize 3rd Prize Any 3 games Any 2 games Any Game Up to  MRP Up to  MRP Up to  MRP All payments in Sterling. Postage FREE in the U.K. E1 for Europe and  elsewhere overseas. Please send s.a.e. for lists. Comp Pro 214.50; Konix Speed King .95; Revs Hotshot .50 JR Software Dept CVG7 76A, Downham Rd, London N15BG Please send me full details... Name .... Address "


"110-10 HEADEOAGI Will catch you with its web of intrigue and playability. Computer & Video Games An arcade adventure with 100 screens featuring some of the finest graphics ever seen. You must guide Arac to assemble his army of animal slaves which together with the dreaded Arachnidroid will enable him to penetrate the fortified citadel and deactivate the three reactors. You will need all your strategy and arcade skills to get you through this one! .95 for the Commodore 64 Headcoach will become for American Football what my Football Manager has been for soccer fans-unbeatable. Kevin J Toms This is an American Football Manager with all the enjoyment of building a team that can climb up through the leagues to win the Superbowl. Not only will you manage the quality of your team, but also direct each actual gameplay throughout every match, thus driving your creation up through the tables to success. Weeks of enthralling entertainment .95 for the Spectrum KIREL VIREL the 3D arcade challenge for the thinking player Seventy mind stretching screens, each one more complex than the previous, but providing its own individual challenge. .95 for the SPECTRUM MONSTER HIT ZX Computing, July 86 T-SHIRTS If you play Addictive games you must want one of these (the shirt!!). Small/ Medium/Large or XL.50 each PAYMENTS Addictive products can be bought from all good software stockists but in case of difficulty may be obtained direct from us by mail order at the prices shown (UK P&P included but overseas customers must add .50). Accessorders can be telephoned through on M (02021296404 YOUTRAL FOOTBALL MANAGER Still in the charts after four years, Britain's most popular Football Management game ever. Now available on Amstrad at .95. Atari at .95 BBC at .95. Commodore 64 at .95.C 16 Plus 4 at .95 Electron at .95 Spectrum at .95 VIC 20 plus 16K wat .95 ZX81 at .95 Vddictive Addictive  Addictive Games Ltd 10 Albert Road. Bournemouth Dorset BHI IBZ Tel: 0202-296404 V Addictive Games Ltd. 10 Albert Road  Bournemouth Dorset BHI IBZ Tel: 0202-296404 "


"* Don't look on the shelves yet you have to grope around the dark alleys to find them. There's a lot of new, super HOT software coming out, so we had C+VG's master American snoop, Marshal M. Rosenthal, para chuted behind enemy lines to find it for you. His report... Letter from * * * * * BATTLE ZONE SMO O TH TALKER se vratiti nove screens allow you there II Timothy Leary's dead\" goes defeat with spells, and MadBirds to DV includes 27 special effects robot as it weaves its way through the old Moody Blues fune. shoot down with magic arrows. like wipes, fades and dissolves as the rooms and corridors. But watch But it 'taint so. He's not only A window on the left displays well as expansion/compression of out for security guards, automatic alive, but kicking us out of our text information, while the one on images, and multiple frame animaalarms and the dreaded Crushers. complacent reality with Mind the right shows what is happening. tion. Through patience and planning Mirror. The program invites you the realm is dangerous and you You can even rotate the image you'll be able to bypass the system to \"turn on, tune in and boot up.\" must build up your strength and along its axis. Of course you also while your robot secures top-secret Yes, there is a sense of humour, as wisdom through encounters as you have full control over colours, text, information from the bowels of a Dr Leary leads you through an progress onward. musical scores as well as digitised hidden safe. Designed for the Amiadventure in awareness. ga and Atari ST, Hacker 2 feaScrutinise yourself through intures realism combined with a teractive text adventures that sense of urgency. No keyboard probe into your attitudes of life: to commands are used either (mousemagnify, plot or change your conmouse-mouse). cepts through inspection. Results If you're into destruction, then can be displayed through a special Epyx's Movie Monster Game mind map, as well as by analytical will be right up your alley. This is a text. totally reworked version of their The Life Simulations section classic from \"way back in the early allows you to chart another indi'80s,\" and lets you become the viduals path through events and famous monster of your choice. interactions. Don the persona of Pick a city and go to town (bad Rambo, or become Dolly Parton, pun, but you know what I mean). it's part game and part philosopher Mayhem was never so much fun. on a disk. RINGS OF ZILFIN If you're more into quiet Be entertained in private, or get strategy, then you'll want to pick a group together. The program Combining animation with tradisound effects (a library of sounds Rogue (violent but no sound expands your perception of the tional adventure \"text\" commands and images is included). effects). Wind your way through universe through past and present, (using the keyboard or joystick) has Steve Cartwright of Activision changing rooms and passages as with a wry sense of humour that is produced a very playable game does it again with Hacker you pick up treasures and fight off definitely Leary's own. that doesn't let up for an instant. 2: The Doomsday Papers. monsters. Thinking here is just as Learn all you can during your rest Here you have been recruited to important as bashing heads. Winperiods, for evil stalks the land — penetrate a secret Russian installadowing techniques ease game and they're searching for YOU. tion for the good of national play so that you can concentrate security, of course. on the essentials. Multiple view screens allow you Leather Goddesses of Arcade games really look sharp to monitor your remote control Phobos is not your typical Inwith vector graphics, their smooth contoured lines and threedimensional shapes make you feel I didn't believe my ears the first like you're really part of the action time I heard Smoothtalker Well, the power of the 68000 chip read out loud. Smoothtalker is an allows for miracles, and Battleincredible software program that zone, for the Atari ST, delivers integrates real-time voice into a everything, the fervent arcader micro computer. Screen Burns could ask for. Its use of advanced logarithms With Outside the viewscreen of your eliminates the need for special Forbiddent futuristic tank looms a bleak and sound synthesis chips, and there foreboding night-time world of isn't a noticable slowdown in comPassion and geometric shapes. Opposing you puter speed. Global are monstrous tanks and homing Imagine a natural sounding Want missiles. Use your radar screen to voice (you decide male or female) detect their presense deflect with pitch, volume, bass and treble their fire by hiding behind a cube control. Have it recite program or triangle. listings, spreadsheet data, selected, Eliminate the transport saucer or all parts of text-you name it. and zero in on a tank. Fire a quick Hobbyists can incorporate speech salvo, and watch the sucker disinteinto their own Basic programs as grate into itty-bitty pieces. well. Strategic Simulations Speaking of presentations, beefs up their fantasy line with you're going to flip when you see another hot time. Rings of Zilfin what the Amiga can do when places you in the role of a young Electronic Arts pulls out the stops. boy possessing strange and arcane Deluxe Video is the newest mystical powers. addition their line of incredibly \"Recovering the two Rings will graphic programs. DV really does not be easy, but only their incalcucreate \"desktop\" videos, of a kind able power will enable you to of quality that would have required defeat the dreaded sorcerer Dra. a $50,000 system just a few years gos, who has enslaved the land in ago. Now you have a full-featured perpetual darkness and gloom. production studio for creating This graphic animated adventure graphics and special effects that allows the happy welding of can be moved onto video tape strategy and arcade, as both are (and don't forget it's compatible MINDSCAPE'S S.D.I. employed. There are demons to with Deluxe Paint). PADA * * * * * "


"-AMERICAN focom adventure text game. First, with the ultimate question. How to it comes with a scratch 'n' sniff avoid being seduced by volupcard. fuous Leather Sex Goddesses. Secondly, it can be played in. Obviously tongue-in-cheek (at any of three \"naughtiness\" levels. least to start), this is not the most Modelled on the sexy, soapserious bit of interactive prose ever operish pulp magazines of the written. But it sure is a heck of a lot 1930's, the game confronts you of fun. SOUNDWAVE 8 ELLERY QUEEN Music lovers will take to To paraphrase Monty Python Soundwave 8 for the Atari ST. \"Now for something completely This a professional eight-track different from Spinnaker.\" Bemusic sequencer that interfaces become a detective and solve the tween the computer and any synthheinous murders in Agatha Christesiser with a MIDI (Musical Instruie's Behind the Screen and ment Digital Interface) port. Ellery Queen's Operation: Notes are transmitted and Murder. Clues must be located, stored by the computer as you play situations investigated and witneson the synthesiser keyboard. It's ses checked. like having an expensive music But there's no computer. Instead, studio that includes all types of you watch a broadcast-quality 30 editing control, filters and multiminute murder drama on video tracking. A single track version is tape. Secret clues are periodically also available for those wanting to revealed, deciphered only with the ease into using all the functions. special red and blue glasses proCommodore has found out vided. what most of us knew a long time Keep track of what's going on ago the C64 is a great machine. before committing yourself in mak. Now it has been reworked and ing an accusation. One to eight renewed as the Commodore players may participate, and there 4C. A critical look will show that is a different murder to uncover the power supply has been imeach time you play. proved, and that the interior of the Mindscape's new line of machine has been realigned for Cinemaware programs are greater durability, Cosmetically, it specially developed to take advanMINDSCAPE'S DEFENDER OS THE THRONE ponuer of the og rutin DEFENDER OF THE THRONE now resembles its new brother the tage of the power of the new 16 128. Of course it also runs all of bit machines. Titles such as Sinthe library of 64 programs. bad and the Throne of the GEOS is included, and this new Falcons, Star Rush and King software package is hot. It stands of Chicago force you to become for Graphic Environment Operatpart of the action, as they are ing System, and it creates a deplayed in \"real time.\" sktop design on a 64 or 128 Graphically advanced, these inmachine. If also provides a noteteractive games feature pans, tilts, pad, alarm clock, calendar and closeups; even 360 degree, threecalculator as desk accessories. dimensional turns. All of the DOS functions are now Multiple windows allow fight simplified as ICONS. Using a scenes and adventurous situations mouse or joystick, files can be to be viewed from a variety of viewed, copied or executed. A perspectives (although I doubt built in read/write fast loader you'd want to see the Black speeds up the 1541 disk drive as knight's lance coming at your head well. Also included is Geo Write for from even ONE point of view). word processing, and GeoPrint for Animation is sharp and quite fluid, art. GEOS can also be purchased with all commands activated by the separately. mouse. Master D Surat Per Dested by KELLYN BEECK C A D de by Sculpture Sale Inc. Special Effects Original So Compared by MCLOMO Unipes Action DEFENDER OF THE CROWN d Diction by JAMES SACHS h BRYAN BRANDENBURG flac Sreca MARC HALBERSTADT MCLOMOTH DEFENDER OF THE THRONE "


"BUFF ----Based on Judo, UCHI-MATA, is probably DOBE the most advanced and challenging martial arts simulation to date. All the skills 'n' spills without the bruises!!! Brian Jacks received his black belt, 1st Dan, when only 15. He is now a 7th Dan, an elite world group Having won the British Championship eleven times, the Open Championshp five times, the European Championship four times and an Olympic Medal, he is one of the most knowledgeable and foremost exponents of Judo in the world Commodore 64/128 Cassette .95 Disc .95 Spectrum 48/128 Cassette .95 Amstrad 464 6646128 Cassette .95 Disc .95 MSX Cassette .95 Technical consultant, Brian Jacks, completing a successful UCHMATA, one of the many exciting throws incorporated in the game martech a Martech is the registered trademark of Software Communications Limited, Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME PHONE: (0323) 768456 TELEX: 878373 Martec G "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES The largest range of discount computer software ** SPECTRUM *** COMMODORE 64 AMSTRAD *** RRP Our Price 9.95 7.96 7.50 7.95 6.96 .95 5.95 9.96 9.96 7.95 8.95 8.99 9.95 9.95 9.95 14.95 B.95 7.50 6.75 7.95 795 12.96 7.50 5.95 995 7.95 795 7.98 8.95 7.95 8.95 6.96 5.98 5.95 8.95 14.95 9.99 6.78 8.96 12.95 7.95 7.50 896 9.95 9.95 9.95 7.50 * PAPERBOY-D2 EXPLODING FISTI 2 CAULDRON II -DI MONOPOLY-D2 TOMAHAWK-D2 BOMBIACK-D2 ELITED KNIGHT GAMES D2 NEXUS-Da CONTAMINATION-D2 CAULDRON I-D2 GHOST AND GOBLIN-D2 MIAMI VICE REVOLUTION D2 DRAGONS LAR-D2 MISSION OMEGA-D2 IAN BOTHAMS CRICKET QUESTPROBE INTERNATIONAL KARATE-D2 GREEN BERET-D2 DESERT FOX 02 LORD OF THE RINGS-D6 WINTER GAMES D2 LEADERBOARD-Da  DO MINI OFFICE 2-D4 CITY SLICKER-D2 KUNG FU MASTER-D2 SILENT SERVICE-D2 9.95 7.50 7.50 8.98 6.75 235 6.75 3.98 7.95 8.95 9.95 750 8.95 12.95 6.95 12.86 PAPER BOY *EXPLODING FIST II COLOSSUS CHESS 4.0-CI EQUINOX-CI CITY SLICKERCI LEADERBOARD \"SILENT SERVICE IAN BOTHAMS CRICKET PYRACUESECI LC.U.P.S. VIRGIN CHALLENGE-CI EXPLODING FIST PUB GAMES ARNEHAM ARAC QUAZATRON --CI BOMB JACK Cl SITE_CI REVOLUTION LORD OF THE RINGS FAIRLICHT-CI \"TT RACER TOMAHAWK HEARTLAND MISSION OMEGA-GI DRAGONS LAIR ARCADE CREATOR LIGHTFORCE HI-JACK-C1 STAR STRIKE II PSI-5 TRADING COMPANY MIAMI VICE FIGHTER PILOT BLOCKBUSTERS GOLD RUN THEATRE EUROPE TRANSFORMERS SPITFIRE 40-CI MINDSTONE TRIVIAL PURSUITS MANDAGORE STAINLESS STEEL-CI 8195 9.95 9.95 8.96 15.95 12.96 750 12.95 14.96 9.95 999 9.95 7.50 15.96 995 *PAPER BOY-D2 EXPLODING FIST II-D2 TRIDES ALPHA-DI ALLEYKAT-D1 THE SECOND CITY GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR FILTRATOR-DS WARRIORS OF RAS-D2 SPEECH DI CRUSADE IN EUROPED SOLO FLIGHT II-DE DECISION IN THE DESERT-D4 ACROET DRAGONS LAIR-D2 TOUCHDOWN FOOTBALL-D2 LCU.PS. TRAP_02 THE ART STUDIO D3 GHTFORCE ARAC SILENT SERVICE-D2 KNIGHT GAMES-DI MANDAGORE-D2 GHOST AND GOBLINS-D2 LORD OF THE RINGS DA BIGGLES \"TRACKERD3 LEADERBOARD-D2 PARALAXDI GOLF CONS SET-D2 GERMANY 1983 --D2 TOBRUK02 SUMMER GAMES 2-D2 GAMEMAKER D4 FARLIGHTDI URIDIUM_02 EQUINOX \"HEARTLAND RISMARK D2 GREEN BERETD2 MIAMI VCEDO SUMMER GAMES I-D2 BEYOND FORBIDDEN FOREST-D CAULDRONU ARCANIA ELITE-D3 INTER SOCCER PSIS TRADING COMPANY-D2 MISSION ADD2 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT TAU CETI-D2 CYBERUN ROCKY HORROW -128 VERSION 7.50 12.95 12.86 14.96 8.95 8.95 7.50 7.50 6.95 10.95 9.95 7.96 6.95 9.95 9.95 750 24.96 17.30 14.95 9.95 7.50 HITCHHIKERS (6128 or PCW) JEWEIS OF DARKNESS-6138/PCW TOMAHAWK (PCW) G GOOCH CRICKET (PCW) ESP LIGHT PEN (PCW) INFORCOM TITLES IN STOCK FOR 6128 AND PCW 1996 7.95 29.96 24.96 7.50 750 7.50 9.95 9.96 8.95 6.95 8.75 7.95 7.95 6.98 19.95 24.95 7.95 12.95 8.75 *** BBC ELECTRON +++ COMMONWEALTH GAMES COMMANDO BBC/ELECT-D2 9.95 BOME LACK BBC 9.95 GRAPHIC ADV CREATOR GRAPHIC ADV CREATOR DISK 2786 EXPLODING FIST BBC/ELEC MENTE IAN BOTHAMS CRICKET (B/ELEC) *IMPOSSIBLE MISSION EL TE DISK 19.95 AIR WOLFSBC 9.98 THRUST-DI 798 9.95 9.95 7.50 995 7:50 998 8.95 750 7.50 750 8.95 7.95 9.95 7,95 17.95 7,95 6.50 9.95 7.95 795 9.95 750 ++ ATARI +++ TENNIS JACK THE NIPPER GALVIN TURBO ESPRIT PSI CHESS XARO \"FIRELORD URIDIUM DYNAMITE DANI STRIKE FORCE HARRIER GHOST AND GOLBINS MERMAID MADNESS PYJAMARAMA THE ART STUDIO (OCP) YLE AR KUNG FU *DESERT FOX MOVIE DESERT RATS-CI WINTER GAMISS JOHNNY REBIT GRAPHIC ADV CREATOR KUNG FU MASTER HEAVY ON THE MAGICK REBEL PLANET CAULDRON II BOUNCES 7.95 22.99 12.95 9.95 795 7.95 7.95 995 9.95 9.95 9.95 7.90 14.95 1.99 TALES OF BETA LYRA-D2 HARDBALL D2 SOLOFLICHTI_02 CRUSADE IN EUROPE MERCENARY SIDE WINDER-D2 SPSHLBOUND THE SECOND CITY 9.95 7.60 WINTER GAMES D2 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-D4 FIGHTER PILOT-D2 SPITFIRE 4002 MAIL ORDER MONSTERS-D2 ANY MASTRONIC TITLE ANY MAD RANGE TITLE ACED SUPER CYCLE-D2 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION -D2 MERCENARY-D1 YJE AR KUNGFU F15 STRIKE EAGLE-D3 COLOSSUS CHESS 4.0 --D2 QUICK SHOT I JOYSTICK 2.99 7.96 796 22.95 19.95 7.50 9.95 9.96 9.95 3195 7.95 7.50 9.96 9.98 14.96 12.95 9.96 7.50 8.95 34.99 22.50 THE SECOND CITY THE PAWN (ST ONLY)-D L. C. PEOPLE-ST ONLY ALTERNATE REALITY-D KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT-D SOLO FLIGHT IT ULTIMA TV 19.96 13.96 CI-COMPATIBLE WITH SPECTRUM ESK + DISK SOFTWARE E 14.95 19.95 14.95 * 12.98 99.99 24.95 *** SPECTRUM 128 TITLES *** 14.96 12.95 24.95 45.00 + MSX MANDAGORE SCRABBLE MONOPOLY CLUDEO INTERNATIONAL KARATE ANY CONAMNI CARTRIDGE 1ACX THE NIPPER WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST 796 9.96 QUESTRON SCENARY DISKWEST USA GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR ALTER EGO THE SECOND CITY FLIGHT SIMULATORI TEMPLE OF ASPHAI TRIOLOGY EXODUS (ULTIMA IIT) ULTRAMA TV THE EXPERT CARTRIDGE FREEZE FRAME CARTRIDGE FAST LOAD CARTRIDGE INFORCOM TITLES IN STOCK FROM 14.96 7.95 7.95 7.95 7.95 2.99 7.50 19.96 9.95 2.99 9.95 INTERNATIONAL MATCH DAY GLADIATOR 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE IONICHT TYME SAMANTHA FOX LALLELER HACKER THE MUSIC BOX FAIRLICHT NODES OF YESODS GHOSTBUSTERS ROBIN OF THE WOOD 9.95 7.95 796 24.96 6.95 ***C16 YEAR KUNG FUN   WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST JET SET WILLY WINTER EVENTS LAN BOTHAMS CRICKET Also available on Disk Dl 1198 D2 .95 795 5.95 796 9.95 7.96 596 For Mail Order Customers please send cheque PO to: S.C.S. (Dept C-VG) PO Box 394 London N15 6JT P&P included in UK Europe add l per tape. Elsewhere at cost, SAE for list For C64 C 16 SPEC AMSTRAD BBC MSX If you would like to pick up your discount software from our shop please bring your copy of this advert to: S.C.S. Compucentre, Unit 5 221 Tottenham Court Road London WIR 9AF (near tube station Goodge St) Open six days a week 10.00am-18.00pm Acces and Visa card orders: 01-809 4843 Credit Card line 2 01-800 3156 0 01-631 4627 Credit card orders despatched same day subject to availability *All new releases are subject to realse dates from software houses. Please ring to confirm availability of new releases. "


"MICROS E IL MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell duplicated or pirated software on tape or disc. You will now be liable for prosecution. All suspect advertisements will be forwarded to the Federation against Software Theft for further inspection. Amstrad 464 over 50 top pokes and cheats including Batman, Spindizzy, Who Dares Wins, to name a few:All printed out on a DMP1 easy to keep easy to store. Send .50 to Mick Keryk, 10 Philip St, St Darwin, Lancs BB32DJ. Atari 800XL + 1010 data recorder + Wico Joystick + Magazines and over  worth of software.  or will accept  if quick response. Tel:0423 884692 after 4.15pm during the week. BBC Owners, original games for at least 25% off. Knight Lore , Blagger, Son of Blagger, Classic Adventure and Book , Micro Olympics, Ghouls, PCW Games Collection . Send cheque to Jamie Hart, Murray House, Hammers Lane, Mill Hill, London NW7. P+P included in price. Atari 1050 + Happy enhancement  ono. Also Atari ST Software original and still boxed. The Pawn .00. Time Bandits .00 or swap for your software Phone Colin 0783 498807 For Sale Commodore 16, includes datarecorder, joystick, four books, and 16 cassettes, including BMX racers and Formula 1 simulator, also C16 games pack and Beach Head. Sell for  ono. Tel: Hythe (0308) 65834 after 5pm and ask for Alastair. 48K Spectrum + Kempston pro interface, Quickshot il, over  worth of software including:-Skyfox, Movie, Wintergames, Sir Fred, Marsport, 'V', Starstrike II, etc. Sell for  or  with cassette recorder. Yuk Kin Butt, 180 High Street, Burton Latimer, Kettering, Northants. NN15 5JR. Commodore 64 Games for sale including, Theatre Europe, Little People, Summer Games II, Barry's Boxing etc. Please send sae for full list. Will also swap games. P Brownley, 16 Leads Road, Methley, Nr Leeds L526 9EQ. Atari 800 XL Computer, cassette deck, joystick plus  worth software.  ono. 7 months old. Phone Cambridge 0223 60141. Buyer collects. For Sale CBM Modem. Runs on 64 & 128K. Worth  will sell for best offer over  or will swap for disk drive. Modem is brand new. Unused, unwanted gift. Ring Adrian (0622) 20287. After 4pm weekdays, any time weekends. Commodore 64 + tape deck & over  s/w including Hardball, Uridium and Arc of Yesod.  ono inc p&p. Tel (0277) 213450. Spectrum 48K tape recorder worth  + software worth over . Would cost over . Sell the lot for  ono. Contact Tony 01-428 7628 after 5pm. Everything in excellent condition. Atari Games: Elektradlide, Chopsuey, Fractalus, Sub. Commander, Ghost Laser, Decathlon, Hard Hat, mac, Kissin Cousins, Colourspace,  each. NY City, Action Biker, Scooter, Ollies Follies,  each.  the lot. Barry Jordan, The Haven, Brewery Lane, Hook Morton, Oxon OX15 5NX. Acorn Electron computer with Data Recorder, Joystick, Interface, leads, books, manuals, 200 top games including Yie Ar Kung Fu, Frak, Killer Gorilla and many top Acornsoft originals, many magazines and full 372 year guarantee for computer, recorder, joystick + interface and leads. Worth . Quick sale--the lot for around offers welcome. Swap for Spectrum 128K or Commodore. Telephone 0274 572807 ask for Nadeem. I will arrange delivery FREE For Sale, Commodore 64, C2N Tape Deck, Joystick, Magazines, and over  worth of software including Summer Games 2, Winter Games, Elite and Exploding Fist, will sell for  ono. Tel: (0209) 218738 For Sale. 48K Spectrum, cassette recorder, Kempston Interface and two Quickshot Il joysticks. Over  worth of software inc. Mugsy's Revenge, Way of Exploding Fist, etc. Plus Many magazines. Worth  will sell for  ono. Contact C. Prichard, 10 Llandraw Rd, Maesycord, Pontypridd, Mid Glam, CF37 1EU or Phone (0443) 407683 Amstrad 464. Over 50 top pokes and cheats including \"Batman, Spindizzy, Commando, Whodares Wins, Knightshade to name a few: All printed out on a DMP1. Easy to store: Send two pounds fifty pence to Mick Keryk, 10 Philip St. Darwen, Lancs BB32DJ. Atari. Basic Utility. Full renumbering program alters Goto's traps etc. Plus block delete .Byrne, 15 Churchill Ave, Newmarket, Suffolk. Spectrum 48K for sale + Kempston. Interface and Joystick + Microdrive + Tape Recorder. All this for  o.n.o. Write to: N.Z. Blow 47 Oakwood Road, Bricket Wood, St. Albans, Herts AL23PZ. Disks 1054D/D D/S for .50 inc. Post and Packing. Send to: S. Richards, 14 Beech Grove, Acomb, York. Tel: 0904 791067 Amstrad owners Software for sale, 20 titles all originals, including Who Pares Wins (disc), Defend of Die, Hypersports, Knight Lore, Locksmith (disc), Tascopy, Assembly Language Course and more. For those without printers, have your screens dumped, programs listed for a small charge. Phone Mark on (01) 428 1415 for more info. Merlin Software Exchange Club. Membership free. Any Micro. Send name and address and Tel. Number to us and we will put you on our files. You can swap or sell your unwanted software through us, or find what you are looking for by sending an s.a.e to:Merlin Club, 1 Merlin Close, Hainault, Ilford, Essex IG6 3XL. It's Wizard! or to sell or swap Tel:-01 501 3616. Amstrad CPC464 elderly games enthusiast (26) wants to swap information, ideas and software. Australia or overseas. Disc or Tape. Please send list to: Peter Scherr, 11 Flew Street, Whyalla 5608, South Australia. Commodore 64 Software for sale. Many titles including Off the hook, Skyfox, Starship Andromeda, Revs, Kennedy Approach, Summer Games one and two, Plus many more. The lot for  or will split, Send SAE for full list. Also fully computerised Scalextric with loads of track and 11 cars for sale at . Call round or write to: Darren Joynson, 34 Windsor Road, Wrenthorpe, Wakefield, West Yorkshire. Bargains too good to be missed. Bombshell The cult computer magazine for the C64, Spectrum, Amstrad and C16. Issue 4 out now! Only 80p +20p p+p. 198 Iron Mill Lane, Crayford, Kent, DA1 4PE. Spectrum 48K, Data Recorder, all the leads,  worth of software inc. Bounder, Kung-Fu Master, The Quill and Bomb Jack. Kempston Pro Interface. Will sell for  ono or swop for CBM04 will sell separate. Spectrum +, data recorder and original software including Shadowfire  (incl. postage). Interface 3 . Cambridge programable Joystick interface  (joystick interface not compatable with Spectrum + or 128K) Tel (0236) 25231 any time. "


"COMPETITION Ct 2) In October 1938 a radio broadcast of The War of The Worlds caused panic in America because people thought it was really happening. Who starred in the radio broadcast: A) Mae West B) Orson Wells C) Jimmy Cagney 3) In Day of the Triffids the alien invaders were: A) Scottish B) Plants C) Little green men Invasion Alert... Invasion Alert ... Invasion Alert... The world is facing an onslaught from space launched by the Galactic Empire who fear man's potential to dominate space. Faced with this peril from deep space, the world's super powers unite and launch Operation Damacles. As a defence against the alien attackers they build up the Sanxion fighter, an advanced atmosphere craft to do battle with the alien invaders. That's the theme of Sanxion, the first game from the new software house, Thalamus. It's packed with enough zapping to test you joystick juggling powers to the utmost. As a member of the Planetary defence corps. It's up to you to constantly patrol the planet zapping as many as many of the alien nasties as is humanly possible. There are ten different waves spread over 483 screens of varied landscape, at the end of each wave the player has to contend with one of the ten different bonus screens. Programmed by the previously unknown Stavros Fasoulas, Sanxion features a split screen display with some ultra slick graphics. And thanks to Thalamus we've got 50 copies of the Commodore game to give away in our alien invaders competition. All you have to do is correctly answer our questions which deal with invasions on earth. Send your answers together with the printed coupon to Sanxion Competition, Computer+Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date for entries is October 16 th, and the editor's decision is final. Questions: 1) Who wrote The War of The Worlds, the famous story about a martian invasion of earth? Was it: A)H.G. Wells B) Jules Verne C) Jackie Collins 4) What recent television series had lizard-like creatures who wore human skins. Was it: A) Doctor Who BV C) Coronation Street C+VG/THALAMUS SANXION COMPETITION Name ... Adress. "


"MICROSE L I MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell duplicated or pirated software on tape or disc. You will now be liable for prosecution. All suspect advertisements will be forwarded to the Federation against Software Theft for further inspection, Wanted Commodore 64, will swop for Spectrum T, will include over  worth of Software, joystick interface, and mags. Tel: John 0803-25372. John Loizioes, 48 Abbey Road, Torquay, South Devon, England. CBM 64 Sale; Skyfox (disc) ; Spiderman ; Ghostbusters ; Staff of Karnath-; Booty, Taskmaster  each; Horace goes ski-ing --; Hovver Bovver ; Purple Turtles — /all aforementioned games  (all boxed, ex. cond) Also 1541 disc drive. Write to Luke Jacobson, 29 Carmalt Gdns, Putney SW15 6NE. Amstrad Games for sale. Half price or less. Many titles including Batman, spindizzy and fairlight. Send a S.A.E. for full list. Write to Steven Gibson, 23 Cooper Wood, Crowborough, East Sussex. For Sale 48K Spectrum Plus. Including: Tape Recorder, Interface 1, Microdrive + Cartridges, Curram Micro Speech, plus  worth of original games, all together worth  will sell for  ono. Phone 0249 712020 after 5.00pm. Please ask for Michael Bargains: Electohome RGB high resolution colour monitor . Pace 400K double sided 40/80 track disc drive -. Unusued AMX mouse + softwrae, rom, utilities etc — . BBC Software (over 50 games) including Elite, Revs, Knight Lore, Exploding Fist, Alien 8, Castle Quest, White Knight MK 12 etc . All items in excellent condition. If interested. Tel Rugeley 5792 or Little Haywood 881 468 after 6pm. Wanted Amstrad 6128 with boxed colour monitor. Boxed if possible. No games required. Will pay . Write only to D. Cawkwell, 88 Airmyn Road, Goole, N. Humbs, DN14 6XD. Spectrum 48K Cassette Recorder, Kempstonb Pro Interface and over 140 games including Commando, Now Games, International Karate and Exploding Fist. All for . Tel. Chelmsford 440139 after 6pm please. Heavy on Magick. Complete solution and map to this excellent game (all 3 exits). Send just  & S.A.E. to Lee Hodgson, 54 Church St, Tewksbury, Glos GL20 5RZ. For immediate reply CBM 64 with 1541 disk drive. C2N Cassette Deck. Quickshot Il Joystick plus over  of software on disk and cassette. All still in original boxes  phone 05436 3097. Wanted Commodore 64 1541 disk drive reasonably priced. Call Simon Docwra at Chalfont St. Giles 2690. 16 Great programmes for the Spectrum, includes MAC-DRAW, Milkman, and Character generator. All for .95. MAC Software, 69 Merland Rise, Epsom, Surrey KT185RN or Ring Burgh Heath, 58943, NOW. 48K Spectrum + boxed as new. Including a joystick interface and 2 joysticks. Datarecorder and all leads. Spectrum magazines. Over  worth of software (Rock 'n' Wrestle, Superbowl, Ping Pong, Bounder etc.) Also a \"Black and White portable T.V.* also in superb condition. Will sell for  ono. Ring (0401) 51029. Amazzing, Electronic Key Rings. Just whistle to find it! Only , Digital Watches , state male or female. Calculators, digital watches .50. Also available ORFC1/ATMOS and Electron Software Packs. SAE for details to Lee Taylor, 75 Milburn Ave, Cleveley's Blackpool, Lancs FY5 2LD. Amstrad Software for sale, includes Elite, D.T. Supertest, 3D Grand Prix, Boulderdash, Exploding Fist, Contraption Beach Head, and many many more. For full list and prices ring B'ham 421 6668 after 5pm. Ask for William For Sale Commodore 64, tape recorder, joystick, computer desk and over 50 games including: Uridium, Commando, Summer Games I & II, Winter Games. Worth over  bargain at  o.n.o. Tel: Retford 702547. For Sale. 48K Spectrum, cassette recorder, kempston interface and two Quickshot Il joysticks. Over  worth of software inc. Way of Exploding Fist etc. Plus many magazines. Worth  will sell for  ono. Contact C Prichard, 10 Llandraw Rd, Maesycoed, Pontypridd, Mid Glam. CF37 1EU or Tel:(0443) 407683. Alternative Reality complete map. Professionally drawn. Includes all Tavernas, Guilds, shops, Smithies, Healers, secret passages and brothels etc. Also includes hint sheets, potion list and helpline number. Delivery by return post. All this for . Cheques and P.O. to M Daniel, 11 Guernsey Red, Dewsbury, West Yorkshire, WF12 7EH. Spectrum and data recorder, spare keyboard, joystick and interface, cheetah specdrum, 33+ Mags, loads of software, inc Laser basic + Laser compiler worth , Starion, critical mass. Worth . Manuals inc. swap for Amstrad CPC 64K colour only. Tel (0705) 580169 after 4pm and ask for Damian. Commodore 64 software to swap. Lots of great titles. Write to:James Tominey, 1243 Argyle St, Glasgow, G3 8TH, Scotland, New Titles every week. Zork 1 map, marvellous detail and complete solution and help line number .50. Delivery by return post. Join the elite few to have solved this gigantic adventure. Cheques and postal order payable to M Daniel, 11 Guernsey Road, Dewsbury, West Yorkshire, WF12 7EH Spectrum and data recorder and original software including Shadowfire  (incl. Postage) Interface 3 . Cambridge programable joystick interface  (Joystick interface not compatable with spectrum+ or 128K) Tel:(0236) 25231 anytime. Atari 800XL (5 months old) + 1010 tape recorder + joystick + over  worth of original software, including Elektraglide, Fractulus and others + several Atari User + page 6 magazines. Will sell for  or vno. Tel:Burgess Hill (04446) 44715 after 6pm. Atari Basic utility. Full renumbering program alters goto traps etc. Plus block delete .Byrne 15 Churchill Ave, Newmarket, Suffolk. Disk, 105/4D/D D/S for .50 inc P&P. Send to S. Richards, 14 Beech Grove, Acomb, York. Tel:0904 791067. C64 penpals wanted. Swap software. Latest games Ping Pong, Arc, Pandora, Uridium etc, To:-NC Blow, 47 Oakwood Road, Bricket Wood, St Albans, Herts. ALZ 3PZ. Spectrum 48K for sale + Kempston Interface and Joystick + Microdrive + tape recorder. All this for  ono Write to NZ Blow, 47 Oakwood Road, Bricket Wood, St Albans, Herts, ALZ 3PZ. Spectrum 48K, program data recorder, kempston interrace + Joystick and magazines. Many games still boxed, excellent condition still under guarantee. All worth over . Quick sale, will sell for . Tel: (0303) 79703 after 6pm and ask for Darren. "


"ODOS HANTOME PHL:N TOM IRON ROAD So you get a budget and we want you to build us a railroad! Remember you need at least one engine for tracklaying and one each for every town the railroad is serving. SPECTRUM As soon as this project came up I knew you'd be just the city slicker to pull it off. You see, it all started after a game of five card stud in the Crazy Horse saloon. I was just about leaving when Bill Mitchell, who owns the joint, hustled me into his office. Now, I'd better explain something here. In this little old town of Finsville we've had the same Mayor for 30 years, and old Eli Jakes has made himself mighty popular in that time. But we were sorry to hear that he's going to retire in September this year. Well, Bill's made no secret of the fact he intends to run for office, and he had a campaign idea he wanted to sound me out on. This town suffers a little because it's a few miles the wrong side of nowhere, and the railroad company won't extend the line beyond Start City, nearly a hundred miles west of here, on account of they think it'd take too long to pay for itself. \"We know they're wrong, don't we?\" said Bill. \"They haven't reckoned on the six or seven towns between here and Start There's mining there and if some of those places were connected up, a railroad could easily make a profit.\" Anyway, the most important thing he had to say was that he'd got the railroad company to agree to adopt a track and run it for him if he could raise the initial finance and get a contractor to build it and start it running. And, of course, if he could get this done by the elections in September, he'd be sure of election to office. Everyone in town wants a railroad. Of course, the track must be completed in time, and Bill's rivals will try to stop it being done. THE LISTING When you see a  sign it means Inverse space. To obtain this type 8 in INVERSE GRAPHICS mode. If you run this program on a 128, the cursor keys to use are 5, 6, 7 and 8. Between lines 9010 and 9029, the letters are to be entered in GRAPHIC mode. All the machine code is part of the Basic, so nothing else is required to run the 99 game. This listing has been checked and rechecked so it should be perfect. So if you do have a problem you should make sure you have entered correctly. If you are still having problems you can telephone C+VG and we'll try and sort it out for you. 10 DEF FN p (m$) =USR (USR \"a\"-1 36): DEF FN J$(X,Y$)= (CHR$ 17+CH R$ 7+CHR$ 23+CHR$ (32-LEN STR$ X -LEN Y$)+CHR$ 0+Y$+STR$ X): DEF FN D$ (X) =STR$ X+ (\"st\" AND (x=1 0 Rx=21 OR X=31)) + (\"nd\" AND (x=2 OR X=22)) + (\"rd\" AND (x=3 OR x=23 >) + (\"th\" AND x>3 AND (x<21 OR <> 23) AND x<31) 20 CLEAR USR \"a\"-137: GO TO 80 00 30 FOR n=1 TO 13: IF t>t(n) TH EN NEXT n: STOP "


"TASIA "


"COMPUTER +VIDEO "


"A MISSION YOU CAN NEVER COMPLETE ? SOMME : SPECTRUM serte Ter-Glie .95 AMSTRAD Imagine Software (1984) Limited 16 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Tel: 061 834 3939 Telex: 669977 SPECTRUM "


"IRON ROAD 40 PAPER 7: PRINT AT 12,15; \"ST ATUS .AT 13,15; \"Date: TAB (26LEN STR$ (t-t (n-1)));FN d$(t-t in -1)); \" \";t* (n); AT 14, 15; \"Cash: \"; FN J$(c,\"\");AT 15, 15; \"Miles Lai d:\"; FN J$ (m, \"\");AT 16,15; \"Income :\"; FN J$(i,\"$\");AT 17,15; \"Worker S:\"; FN J$(w,\"\"); AT 18, 15; \"Guards :\"; FN J$(g,\"\");AT 19,15; \"Materia 15:\"; FN J$(r,\"\"); AT 20,15; \"Engin es:\":FN j$(e,\"\"): PAPER 5: RETUR FAPER 4;\" and \"b;\" guards\"; : LET 9-9-b 130 PRINT PAPER 4;\" have\". \"bee n killed\": RANDOMIZE USR (USR \"a \"-54): FOR n=1 TO 50: NEXT n: RA NDOMIZE USR (USR \"a\"-54): RANDOM IZE USR (USR \"a\"-54): G0 SUB 30: FOR n=1 TO 200: NEXT n: GO TO 5 THE IZE FN p (m$(wy, wx)): GO TO 1040 1060 LET nd=($=\"E\") +2# (k$=\"S\")+ 3# (k$=\"W\") +4* (k$=\"N\") 1070 IF ABS (nd-d) =2 THEN GO TO 1040 1080 LET nx=x+ (d=1)-(d=3): LET n y=y+ (d=2)-( -4) 1090 IF m* (ny, nx+5)=\"\" THEN L ET m$ (ny, nx*5-2 TO nx*5+2) =CHR$ 18+CHR$ 1+\"\"+CHR$ 18+CHR$ 0: R ANDOMIZE FN p (m$(wy, wx)): GO SUB 30: GO SUB 50: GO TO 2000 1100 IF nx+ (nd=1)-(nd=3) >64 OR n x + (nd=1 ) (nd=3)<1 OR ny+ (nd=2)-( nd=4) >20 OR ny+ (nd=2) (nd=4) 1 T HEN GO TO 1040 1110 IF $ (ny, nx*5) =\" \" AND nd< >d THEN GO TO 1040 1120 IF m (ny, nx+5)=\"\" OR (m$( ny, nx*5) >\" \" AND m$ (ny, nx*5)<\" \") THEN LET m$ (ny, nx*5-4 TO nx *5)=i $ (20+d): LET V=3: GO TO 118 PHANTOS 50 PRINT AT 12,0;: FOR n=1 TO 9: PRINT PAPER 4; TAB 15': NEXT n: PRINT AT 12,0;: RETURN 55 PRINT AT 12,0;: FOR n=1 TO 9: PRINT TAB 15': NEXT n: PRINT AT 12,0;: RETURN 60 IF C+v*i-v*w#5-v*g*4<@ THEN LET v=0: LET c=0: RETURN 70 LET c=c+v*i-v*w*5-v*g*4: LE Tt=t+v: IF t >=274 THEN GO SUB 30: GO TO 2050 75 RETURN 80 LET i=i (town+2): IF e-1<=to wn THEN LET i=i (e+1) 90 RETURN 100 IF town AND e>1 AND INT (RN D# (50+g)) <3 THEN GO SUB 50: PRI NT PAPER 4; AT 12,0; \"Tombstone T ex\". \"has attacked\" \"one of your trains and made\" \"off with the \"\"wages!\": RANDOMIZE USR (USR\" a\"-81): FOR n=1 TO 50: NEXT : R ANDOMIZE USR (USR \"a\"-81): RANDO MIZE USR (USR \"a\"-81): LET C=C-g *4-w#5: GO SUB 30: FOR n=1 TO 15 0: NEXT n: GO TO 50 110 IF NOT W OR NOT in OR INT ( RND# (10+g-in)) >2 THEN GO TO 140 120 GO SUB 50: LET a=INT (RND* w/10)+1): LET b=INT (RND* (g/5)+1 ): PRINT PAPER 4; AT 12,0; \"One o + your\".trains has been\"'\"attac ked by\" \"indians! 'a;\" workers\" :: LET w=w-a: IF 9 THEN PRINT 140 IF e AND INT (RND* (200+g) < 3 THEN GO SUB 50: PRINT PAPER 4;AT 12,0; \"One of your\"'\"trains has been\".\"sabotaged by\" \"your r ivals!\" \"The engine was\". \"destr oyed!\": LET e=e-1: GO SUB 80: RA NDOMIZE USR (USR \"a\"-30): GO SUB 30: FOR n=1 TO 400: NEXT n: GO TO 50 150 RETURN 1000 IF r<1 THEN PRINT AT 19,15 ; OVER 1; FLASH 1: INK 2; PAPER 7,,: FOR N=1 TO 500: NEXT N: GO TO 1500 1010 IF w<1 THEN PRINT AT 17,15 ; OVER 1; FLASH 1; INK 2; PAPER 7,,: FOR N=1 TO 500: NEXT N: GO TO 1500 1020 IF e<1 AND > 0 THEN PRINT AT 20,15; OVER 1; FLASH 1; INK 2 ; PAPER 7,, FOR N=1 TO 500: NEX TN: GO TO 1500 1030 PRINT PAPER 4; AT 12,0; \"PRE SS DIRECTION\"; AT 14,7; INVERSE 1 ; \"N\";AT 15,6; \"W\"; INVERSE %;\"+\"; INVERSE 1; \"E\";AT 16,7; \"S\".. \"M\"; INVERSE 0;\" for menu\" CURSOR KEYS\"\" TO SURVEY\"; 1040 LET k$=INKEY$: IF (k$>\"8\" 0 Rk$\"5\") AND k$<>\"N\" AND k$<>\"S \" AND k$<>\"E\" AND K$<>\"W\" AND k# <> \"M\" THEN GO TO 1040 1045 IF k$=\"M\" THEN GO TO 1500 1050 IF k*<\"9\" THEN LET wxrwx+5 *(k$=\"8\" AND WX<227)-5* (k$=\"5\" A ND Wx>1): LET wyrwy+ (k$=\"6\" AND wy<11)-(k=\"7\" AND Wy>1): RANDOM 1130 IF m$ (ny, nx*5-4 TO nx*5) =i$ (3) THEN LET m$(ny, nx*5-4 TO nx *5)=i (25): LET V=10: GO TO 1180 1140 LET v=1: IF m$ (ny, nx*5-4 TO nx*5)=i(19) THEN LET m$ (ny, nx *5-4 TO nx+5)=i $ (26): LET town=t own+1: GO SUB 80: GO TO 1180 1145 IF m$ (ny, nx*5-4 TO nx*5)=i$ (26) THEN GO TO 1180 1147 IF m$ (ny, nx*5-4 TO nx+5) =i (2) THEN LET in=in+1 1148 IF m$ (ny, nx+5)=\"\" THEN L ET Sw=sw+1: LET V=2 1150 LET m$(ny, nx*5-4 TO nx+5)=i $(10+d+4* (SGN (nd-d-(SGN (nd-d)* 4* (ABS (nd-d) >2))))) 1180 LET X=nux: LET y=ny: LET d=n d: LET mm+1: LET r=-1: LET V=I NT (v#100/w+.99): GO SUB 60: IF NOT V THEN GO TO 2060 1190 LET wy=y-5: IF wy<1 THEN L ET wy=1 1200 IF wy>11 THEN LET wy=11 "


"TRON ROAD TH T2 1,6,16,0, 151, 17,6,16,0,156,17,6,1 6,0,157,17,6,16,0,158, 17,6,16,0, 159,17,6,16,0,160,17,6,16,4, 161, 17,0,16,6,148, 17,0,16,6, 149, 17,0 ,16,6,150, 17,0,16,6, 151, 17,6,16, 0, 162, 17,6,16,4,160 9010 DATA \"AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA  \" 9011 DATA \"A FIT AAAA\" 9012 DATA \"A AA BB BB AAA\" 9013 DATA \"A c BBBB BB AA\" 9014 DATA \"A  BBBBB AAA A\" 9015 DATA \"A  BBBBBB AAAA A\" 1210 LET Wx=5*(x-) +1: IF Wx<1 T HEN LET Wx=1 1220 IF wx >231 THEN LET Wx=231 1230 RANDOMIZE FN p (m (wy, wx)) 1240 FOR N=1 TO 10: BEEP .1,-60: NEXT N 1250 GO SUB 30: GO SUB 100: GOT 1000 1500 GO SUB 30: GOSUB 50: BEEP .5,2: PRINT PAPER 4;AT 12,6; \"OP TIONS. INVERSE 1:\"A\": INVERSE ;\" Lay Track\". INVERSE 1; \"B\"; IN VERSE 0;\" Send to Depot\"INVERS E 1;\"C\"; INVERSE 0;\" Sack Worker s\"INVERSE 1; \"D\"; INVERSE 0;\" S ack Guards\": IF m$(y,x+5)=\" \" 0 R $(y,x+5)=\" \" THEN PRINT PA PER 4; INVERSE 1; \"E\"; INVERSE ; \"Hire Workers\"' INVERSE 1; \"F\"; INVERSE 0;\" Hire Guards\" 1515 PRINT PAPER 4; AT 19,2; \"CUR SOR KEYS\"\" TO SURVEY\"; 1520 LET K$HINKEY$: IF k*<\"5\" OR (k#>\"8\" AND K*\"A\") OR (k$>\"D\" AND m$(y,x*5)<>\" \" AND m$(y,x*5 ><>\" \") OR K$>\"F\" THEN GO TO 1 520 1530 IF K$\"9\" THEN LET Wx=WX+S *(k$=\"8\" AND Wx<227)-5*($=\"5\" A ND Wx>1): LET wy=wy+ (k$=\"6\" AND wy<11)-($=\"7\" AND wy>1): RANDOM IZE FN p (m$(wy, wx)): GO TO 1520 1540 GO SUB 50: IF k$=\"A\" THEN BEEP .5,4: GO TO 1000 1550 IF k$=\"B\" THEN LET VINT ( m/20+1): GO SUB 60: GO SUB 100: GO SUB 1700: LET v=INT (m/20+1): GO SUB 60: GO SUB 100: GO TO 15 00 1570 IF k$=\"C\" THEN GO TO 1610 15B0 IF k$=\"D\" THEN GO TO 1650 1590 IF k$=\"E\" THEN GO SUB 1800 : GO TO 1500 1600 IF k$=\"F\" THEN GO SUB 1820 : GO TO 1500 1610 LET A=0 1620 IF a>w OR 1 THEN PRINT A T 17, 15; OVER 1; INK 2; PAPER 7; FLASH 1,,: FOR N=1 TO 500: NEXT N: GO TO 1500 1840 1850 LET c=c-a*500: LET r=rta: OTO 1700 1860 INPUT \"How any engines do y ou want to purchase? \";a: IF a 0 OR a*5000 THEN GO TO 1860 1870 LET c=c-a*5000: LET eeta: GO SUB 80: GO TO 1700 1880 IF fi+1>town THEN PRINT P APER 4; AT 12,; \"The Railway has\" \"not yet proved\" \"its viability !\": FOR n=1 TO 300: NEXT : GO S UB 50: GO. TO 1700 1885 LET fi=fi+1: LET a=INT (RND #100+1): IF fi>3 OR a<=fi#25 THE N PRINT PAPER 4;AT 12,0; \"No fu rther\" finance is\"\"available! : FOR n=1 TO 300: NEXT ni GO SUB 50: GO TO 1700 1890 PRINT PAPER 4;AT 12,0; :\"A further\".\"$\";a*500;\" has been\" ** advanced!\": LET C=c+a*500: GO SU B 30: FOR n=1 TO 250: NEXT n: GO SUB 50: GO TO 1700 2000 PAPER 1: INK 7: GO SUB 55: PRINT FLASH 1; \"CONGRATULATIONS\" ; FLASH O'*\"You have\" \"completed the\".\"line in just\" 't-60;\" days .: PRINT AT 5, 3; FLASH 1; \"SCORE : \"; (274-t)#town #10+INT (c/100)+ 500* (town=7) 2010 IF INKEY*< >** THEN GO TO 2 010 2015 PRINT AT 19,0; \"Do you want\" \"another game?\" 2020 LET k*=INKEY$: IF K$=\"Y\" TH EN PAPER 5: INK 6: PRINT \"Pleas e Wait....\": GO TO 9000 2030 IF k$=\"N\" THEN STOP 2040 GO TO 2020 2050 PAPER 2: INK 7: GO SUB 55: PRINT FLASH 1; \"CONTRACT LOST!! ; FLASH O'*\"You have failed\" \"to complete the\"\"line on time.\";A T5,4; FLASH 1; \"SCORE: \";town*10 +INT (c/100): GO TO 2010 2060 PAPER 2: INK 7: GO SUB 55: PRINT FLASH 1; \"YOUVE GONE BUST\" FLASH O'\"You have\" \"insuffici ent\":\"funds to pay\". \"your worker 9016 DATA \"A BBBB RRR AAA A\" 9017 DATA \"C BB RRRRR A\" L9018 DATA \"A AB RRRRRR AAAAA A\" 9019 DATA \"A AA BB RRRRRR AA AAAA A\" 9020 DATA \"A AA BB RRRRRRR AAA AAAA A\" 9021 DATA \"A BBBBBBB RRRRRR AA AAA\" 9022 DATA \"A BBBB RRR AA A A A\" 9023 DATA \"BBBBBB RR AAA AA AA\" 9024 DATA \"A  AAA HRNTOT "


"N: GO TO 1500 ent\" funds to pay\"*\"your worker  AAA A Star Dreams production for C+V Programming: Paul Jefferies Design and concept: Mike Turner THE CREDIT 1630 INPUT \"How many Workers do you want to dismiss?\";a: IF a 0 OR a>W THEN GO TO 1620 1640 LET w=w-a: GO TO 1500 1650 LET A=0 1660 IF a>G OR G<1 THEN PRINT A T 18,15; OVER 1; INK 2; PAPER 7; V FLASH 1,, FOR N=1 TO 200: NEXT N: GO TO 1500 1670 INPUT \"How many Guards do y ou want to dismiss?\";a: IF a OR a>g THEN GO TO 1660 1680 LET g-g-a: GO TO 1500 1700 GO SUB 30: IF NOT V THEN G OTO 2060 1710 BEEP .5, 3: PRINT PAPER 4;A T 12,0; \"OPTIONS\". INVERSE 1:\"A\"; INVERSE 0;\" Buy Engine\" INVERS E 1; \"B\"; INVERSE 0;\" Materials\". INVERSE 1; \"C\"; INVERSE 0;\" Fina nce\" INVERSE 1; \"D\"; INVERSE 0;\" Hire Workers\". INVERSE 1; \"E\"; I NVERSE 0;\" Hire Guards\";AT 18,0; INVERSE 1; \"R\"; INVERSE 0;\" Retu rn to Railhead\"; 1720 IF INKEY \"\" THEN GO TO 1 720 1730 LET k$=INKEY: IF k#<\"S\" OR (k$>\"8\" AND K$\"A\") OR (k#>\"E\" AND k#<>\"R\") THEN GO TO 1730 1735 IF ($=\"R\" THEN RETURN 1740 IF k${\"9\" THEN LET Wx=wx+5 *(k=\"B\" AND Wx<227) -5* (k=\"5\" A ND wx >1): LET wyrwy+ (k$=\"6\" AND wy<11)-(k$=\"7\" AND wy>1): RANDOM IZE FN p (m$(wy, wx)): GO TO 1730 1745 GO SUB 50 1750 IF k$=\"A\" THEN GO TO 1860 1760 IF k$=\"B\" THEN GO TO 1840 1770 IF K$=\"C\" THEN GO TO 1880 1780 IF k$=\"D\" THEN GO SUB 1800 : GO TO 1700 1790 IF k$=\"E\" THEN GO SUB 1820 : GO TO 1700 1800 INPUT \"How many Workers do you want to hire? \";a: IF a< OR a >100 THEN GO TO 1800 1810 LET w=w+a: RETURN 1820 INPUT \"How many Guards do y ou want to hire? \";a: IF a 0 OR a>100 THEN GO TO 1820 1830 LET g=g+a: RETURN 1840 INPUT \"How many track secti ons do you wish to purchase?\"; a: IF a< OR a#500>c THEN GO TO s!\";AT 5,4; FLASH 1; \"SCORE: \"; to wn#10: GO TO 2010 B000 PAPER 8: INK 8: PRINT \"Plea se Wait....\": RESTORE 8000: FOR n=-136 TO 151: READ a: POKE USR \"a\"+n, a: NEXT n B001 DATA 62,2,205,1,22,42,11,92 , 17,4,9, 25,94,35,86, 42,136,92,23 5,62,22,215, 175, 215,175, 215,6,10 ,197,6,90, 126, 215, 35, 16, 251,1,23 0,0,9,62,13,215,193,16,238, 237,8 3, 136, 92,237,75,118,92,201 8002 DATA 33,15,0, 17,30,0,229,20 5,181,3,225,17,16,0,167,237,90,1 25, 254, 255, 32,237,237,75,118,92, 201 8003 DATA 33,0,2,17,5,0,229,205, 181,3,225, 17, 16,0,167,237,82,32, 240, 237, 75, 118,92,201 8004 DATA 6,20,197,33,0,3,17,1,0 ,229,205,181,3,225, 17, 32,0,167,2 37, 82, 32, 240, 193,16,233, 237,75,1 18,92,201 B010 DATA 0,8,40,52,84,82,138, 13 7,0,68,187,0,0,68,187,0,60,102,2 23, 231,251,219,102,60,60,66, 223, 199,223, 223, 94,60,0,85,255,85,85 ,255,85,0,36, 126,36, 126,36,126,3 6, 126,0,170,255, 170, 170,255, 170, 0,126,36, 126,36, 126, 36, 126,36 8020 DATA 126,36,254,84,84,248,8 0,0,36,125,39,125,37,31,5,0,0,10 ,31,42,42,127,36, 126,0,160,248,1 64,190,228,190,36,0, 80, 248, 84, 84 ,254,36, 126,36,190,228,190,164,2 49,160,0,126,36, 127, 42, 42,31,10, 0,0,5,31,37,125,39,125,36,60,126 ,199,239,239,239, 110,60,0,0,0,84 ,56,16, 124, 8030 DATA 6,0,24,36,90,189,189,1 89 9000 RESTORE 9000: PAPER 5: DIM i #(26,5): DIM m$(20,320): FOR n= 1 TO 26: FOR O=1 TO 5: READ t: L ET i $ ( no) =CHR$ t: NEXT O: NEXT n: FOR n=1 TO 20: READ a$: FOR O =1 TO LEN a$: LET m$ (n.o*5-4 TO 0*5) =i $ (CODE a$(o)-141+110* (alo ) =\" \")): NEXT 0: NEXT 9001 DATA 17,6,16,0,32,17,7,16,0 , 32,17,6, 16,0,144,17,1, 16,7,145, 17,6,16,4, 146, 17,6,16,2, 147, 17,6 ,16,0,152,17,6,16,0, 153, 17,6,16, 0,154, 17,6,16,0, 155, 17,6,16,0,14 8,17,6,16,0,149,17,6,16,0,150,17 AA AA\" 9025 DATA \"A AA  AAA AAA AA\" 9026 DATA \"A AA  AAA AAAA AA\" 9027 DATA \"A AA E AA AAAAA\" 9028 DATA \"A  AA AAA AAAAA\" 9029 DATA \"  AAAADAAAAAA\" 9400 LET fi=0: LET Sw=0: LET in= : LET : LET town=0: LET t=60 LET C=75000: LET m@: LET i=0: LET W=0: LET g=0: LET r=0 9410 FOR n=7 TO 55 STEP 8 9420 LET X=INT (RND*8+n)*5+1: LE Ty=INT (RND*18+2): IF m$(y,x TO x+4)=i$(2) OR m$(y,x TO X+4)=i (4) OR m$(y,x TO x+4)=i # (20) THE N GO TO 9420 9430 LET m$(y,x TO X+4) i $(19): NEXT n 9440 DIM i (12): FOR n=3 TO 12: R EAD i (n): NEXT n 9450 DATA 100,300,600,1000, 1500, 2100, 2900, 3700, 4600, 5600 9460 DIM t (13): DIM t$(13,3): FO Rn=1 TO 13: READ tin), t$(n): NE XT n 9470 DATA 0,\"\",31, \"Jan\", 59, \"Feb\" 90, \"Mar\", 120, \"Apr\", 151, \"May\", 18 1, \"Jun\",212, \"Jul\", 243, \"Aug\", 273, \"Sep\", 304, \"Oct\",334, \"Nov\", 365, \"D ec\" Please send me made payable to STAR DREAMS for West. I enclose a cheque/postal order copy(ies) of Wild Address Name C+VG/Wild West Offer Close, Seaford, East Sussex BN25 3EW. NOT +VG—to Star Dreams, 17 Barn .50, made payable to Star dreams — Just send a cheque or postal order for Dreams Wild West tape offer. send off for our special C+VG/Star Wild West listing then remember you can If your can't be bothered with typing in the 9490 POKE 23658,8: LET =8: LET x=1: LET d=1: LET wx=1: LET wy=3 9500 INK O: PAPER 5: BORDER 5: C LS : RANDOMIZE FN p (m$(wy, wx)): PRINT AT 0,19; i $(1); Praire\"; AT 1,19; i $(2); \" Indian Land\";AT 2, 19;i $(3); \" Mountain\";AT 3,19; i $( 20);\" Swamp\";AT 4,19; (4); \" Riv er\"; AT 5,19;i $(19);\" Town\";AT 6, 19;i $(11);\" Track\";AT 7,19; i * (21 );\" Bridge\";AT 8,19;i $(25); \" Tun nel\" 9600 GO TO 1500 "


"FREEBIE In August we brought you an exclusive preview of CRL's new Commodore 64 Cyborg. In September we gave you a Cyborg poster. So what can we give our much valued and loyal readers in October, mused the brains behind Ideas Central How about the game itself, someone suggested. So that's what we're going to do. Thanks to our friends at CRL who, after a brief, frank, but very fulfilling talk with Big Red, readily agreed to give away 200 copies of the game for absolutely nothing! All you have to do is collect two C+VG/Cyborg Coupons. One is printed in this issue and another one will be printed in the November issue. Send the two coupons to CRL not to C+VG and the first 200 to arrive will receive a copy of the game. Send the TWO coupons to Cyborg Offer, CRL, CRL House, 9 King's Yard, London E15 2HD. CYBORG OFFER Name Address... CYBORG C+VG TOKEN 1 CYBORG I enclose two Cyborg coupons from C+VG. "


"** *** Commodore 64/128 .95 Spectrum 48/128 .95 MA4444AA c. G. . UDERZOMELBOURNE HOUSE The Home of the Hits! ME Melbourne House (Publishers) Ltd. Melbourne House 60 High Street Hampton Wick Kingston Upon Thames Surrey KT1 40B. Telephone: (01)9433911 Telex: 935425 MELRSO Facs: (01)9432688 "


"had to think quickremember where I seen that key or I'd be hotfootin' it over a fire pit. That's when the headbone come flyin' at me. This wasn't gonna be no day at the beach\" Montezuma's Revenge FEATURING PANAMA JOE If you've got a mind like Einstein and reflexes to match, then Montezuma's Revenge is the game for you. It's a revolutionary game that challenges you to think smart and react fast. Join Panama Joe'sTM search for buried treasure. Figure a way to get him over the fire pits. Behind the locked doors. Through a hundred\"rooms crawlin' with critters. Get Montezuma's Revenge and get ready for action and adventure like you've never had before! Montezuma's Revenge is available on cassette and disk for the C64 and Atari: cassette .95 disk $14.95. Available from all good computer stores or post free from: Databyte, 15 Wolsey Mews, Kentish Town, London NW5 2DX. Telephone 01-482 1755. (When ordering please state machine). Mestemma's Revenge la Table Saltmare ime t upia Share Inc. Distributed under agrement by Detabyte. All rights r ed Commodore 64 Atari 400/600/800/XLXE DATABYTE "


"An event NOT to be missed! Atari Christmas Show Royal Horticultural Hall Westminster, London SW1 Friday November 28 10am-6pm Saturday November 29 10am-6pm Sunday November 30 10am-4pm The first ever Atari Show last spring was an outstanding success. From all over Britain Atari enthusiasts flocked to London to find out all they could about their favourite machine. Organised by Database Exhibitions Soon the record-breaking Atari Show will be back with three days devoted to the exciting developments in this expanding market. Make a note in your diary NOW to make sure you don't miss this great Christmas extravaganza! * All the latest software from publishers in both the UK and USA New hardware releases from Atari and other major companies Experts from Atari User and Atari ST User to answer your questions * Experience the fascinating world of computer communications * Everything on show from stocking fillers to complete Atari systems They'll all be there! Games consoles, 8 bit machines ... the entire ST range! Whether you're a new user or a seasoned addict, you'll find the show overflowing with ideas to help you expand your computing horizons! Avoid the Advance ticket order POSTTO:Atari Christmas Show Tickets, Europa House, 68 Chester Road, Hazel Grove, Stockport SK7 5NY. queues! ATARI COMPUTER Please supply Adult tickets at  (save ) ............. Under 16s tickets at  (save )....  TOTAL  D Cheque enclosed made payable to Database Publications Ltd. Royal Horticultural Hall, Westminster, London SW1 November 28-30, 1986 Get your ticket in advance and... Name Address Please debit my credit card account: ........... Signed .  Access    SAVE  A HEAD! Visa Admission at door:  (adults),  (under 16s) PHONE ORDERS: Show Hotline: 061-456 8835 PRESTEL ORDERS: KEY *89. THEN 614568383 MICROLINK ORDERS: MAILBOX 72:MAG001 Please quote credit card number and full address Ref.CVG 10 "


"They knew it as Hell You knew it as Re-enact one of the most bitter conflicts of modern times. One of the most controversial episodes in the history of warfare. In this tactical wargame take charge of the combined forces of the American and South Korean armies in their bloody struggle against the elusive jungle fighters of the Viet Cong and battle hardened regulars of the North Vietnamese Army. Direct the operations of your massed regiments-infantry, artillery, paratroopers, marines, rangers and air cavalry in six historical encounters. Patrol dense jungle in search of the underground strongholds of an enemy who, like an apparition, appears, makes bloody contact then slips away to confuse again, Relive the bitter street fighting that ravaged the city of Hue during the Tet Offensive. This most tragic of human conflicts resulted in a surprising defeat for the forces of democratic freedom. This is your opportunity to change the history of the world, to halt the progress of the communist war machine and; thwart their plans for world domination CBM 64/128 cassette .95 disk .95 ATARI disk .95 GOLDE U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX Tel: 021 356 3388 "


"C+VG : NEWS You must have read the C+VG literally hundreds of books, (KC): 6 Project Thesius, June 86, mailbag in the July issue, and seen magazines, and tapes. Rating (JD): 10 Enthar Seven, \"Adventure players are that poor attempt at literacy by From having absolutely no October 86, Rating (JD): 10 the best computer users Matt Dougherty. Obviously he has interest whatsoever in computers, All these will be available on kind, friendly, and made an attempt at some I am now totally absorbed in them disk only. Enthar Seven, a much always helpful!\" That extremely difficult adventure Amongst the books was your bigger game on disk only in its (such as Adventureland!), failed very interesting Book of original BBC format will be priced was a quote printed in miserably, and feels the need to Adventure. I haven't yet managed at .95. The rest will cost .95. the Adventure column vent his frustration on the nearest to get your listing working, simply BBC's Ceefax has recently in March 1984, and was. target, i.e. YOU! because I can't decipher some of launched a new section aimed at taken from a letter from Or maybe he is an arcade freak the printing. Does the listing work, micro users, called NEXT. Help who has lost his mind trying to or are there any amendments? with adventures is available, under reader Simon Marsh. commit genocide of the thingies Two tapes I have are The Quill the title Adventure SOS, and is Simon later became a from outer-somewhere, and who and Illustrator. There are no written by Richard Hewson. SOS member of the Helpline doesn't dare to try an adventure instructions with them. I can implies swift help in an team for some 18 because it actually requires understand a couple of sections in emergency. But if you are an thinking! the Quill, but the rest is a complete adventure fan who can access months. Things haven't Either way, he should be put in a puzzle. Ceefax, don't get too excited. The changed, and ever nursing home somewhere, with all T. Haslam, pages are only updated once since reading that the other poor, blind, fools, where Brampton, every three weeks, on a Friday. letter, I am frequently he can be looked after properly. NEXT starts on Ceefax page 266. Chesterfield. Anyway, you still have the Keith's reply: The Spectrum Hulk, the first of the Marvel reminded how true it is! support of all us loyal adventurers listing should work, although the Comic Questprobe series by The annual out here (you knew that anyway. TRS-80 Microsoft listing is the \"get-together\" at the didn't you?) and if they try to cut definitive one. If it won't run on the Americana label, at .99 down on your page space, we will PCW Show is always a As well as Spectrum, Amstrad, properly, here is your ideal all kick up such a stink, that the chance for some de-bugging and C64 versions, with instant very friendly affair. walls of power (Ed's office, not all the logic can be found in the graphics, there will be text-only When the crowd grows, Whitehall) will shake! book! As the The Quill, I version for the C16. Hulk was adventurers who have Philip Hancock, wouldn't advocate attempting to revied in C+VG's May 1984 issue. East Ham Valhalla, hailed a couple of solved a game another use it without the manual. It Keith's reply: Thanks for saying makes writing an adventure years ago as the first animated player is asking about, it, Philip! Hear that, Ed? easier, but it is still a graphic adventure, is re-released will often step in and We write to you courtesy of the complicated business! You could as a Bug Byte title, at .99. Text take over, so that we, clinical staff of the Asylum. attempt writing to the software input and output is accompanied The great shrink William F. on the stand, can get on company for a replacement set. by a 'stage' on which the Derman had mercy on us, seeing Robico Software announce the characters walk around doing with helping the next in our pitiful state after the latest final part of the Rick Hanson their own thing. Not a bad buy, if the queue! And the electroshock session, and placed trilogy Myorem. Another you've got the patience of a saint, writers of adventures into our hands a torn, coffee mind-bending plot is promised, and thirve on bugs. Reviewed Feb are just as friendly and stained copy of a computer mag, with a surprise ending in store for 1984. Meanwhile, Bug Byte has your very own C+VG. those who complete it. produced a Spectrum and C-64 helpful, too. Anita Needless to say that you are our And there is an extra incentive version of the more recent Souls Sinclair from Magnetic last hope! The problem is this. We to complete this one, for it is of Darkon. Originally for the Scrolls, drove Brian cannot find the magnetll! There is linked to a competition. To enter.it Amstrad, this was reviewed in Feb Moriarty from Infocom, of course, the telephone, but as we will be necessary to finish the 1986 (KC Personal Rating 6). are academics we cannot handle game, and return a completed Incentive's Graphic down to this device, and with neither of us form to Robico, by a Adventure Creator is now Weston-Super-Mare to playing Boogie, the \"Look Up\" sign yet-to-be-announced date. A prize available for the Commodore 64. spend a day with the doesn't seem to help a lot of  will go to the winner. Originally released on the Therefore we suggest the Although it won't be necessary Amstrad, at the beginning of the Austins of Level 9 following deal: If you can get usa to have played the forerunners, year, the C64 version closely recently! I was clean magnet, we shall endeavour Rick Hanson (Assassin) and follows on the heels of the reminded of the to risk our own escape and send Project Thesius, it will be an Spectrum version. Disk GAC will friendly nature of you a complete map of Asylum's advantage to have done so. cost you .75, whilst the tape adventurers by meanders with all connections, Robico's range of adventures, goes for .95. The finished revolving doors, etc., by fixing it to hitherto only available for the BBC adventure will run independently someone who shall the rocket belt, and firing it and Electron micros, are to be of the GAC. Both versions are able be nameless! from through the hole in the ceiling. Converted for Star XL XE to save data files, and finished Rainbird Software. Deal? machines. The conversions will be adventure, to both tape and disk. \"The trouble with Anita Andreas Gudat and Matthias carried out by Nick Gregory, Time Of The End, originally a Wolpers, using his Slave adventure writer, Quilled Spectrum adventure, is, she's so nice, and too which hs been enhanced to (reviewed April 86, KC Rating 7) friendly!\" complained West Germany Robico's specifications especially makes a re-appearance as a the Person. \"But how Keith's reply: An attractive for the job. The Slave Adventure Quilled C64 Adventure, at the can you criticise her for proposition, but the magnet and Creator was reviewed by Steve same price of .95. Two sequels I are poles apart! Any dealers Donoghue in C+VG August 1986, are planned The Ministery Of that?\" I asked in around? personal rating: 9 Alience Affairs, and The amazement. \"Well, she I am at the moment Initially, four games are lined up Bottomless Pit. These will come tells everyone how recouperating from an operation. for conversion, and are listed together on the same cassette, A month ago, to help ease the good Infocom are!\" below with their C+VG review Mandarin Adventures, who boredom of my enforced dates and Personal Ratings: Island produce this series, will also be idleness, my wife bought home a of Xaan, June 85, Rating (KC): 9 publishing a free newsletter second-hand Spectrum, and Rick Hanson, August 85, Rating entitled Mandarin Muse. "


"THADUERTURE HELPLINE meoneith Nic Ulrich Gutter, of Wildberg, be packed. Before long, the complains Mandy. \"It used to Germany, is into Telarium computer room will be deserted, work! My question is: Can a PATIENT adventures. In Dragonworld, he save for the silent screams of a program develop a bug by itself, can't find the dragonscale, while million problems restlessly during play?\" That is a rather PLEAS he needs help with interrogating thrashing around magnetically on tricky question, Mandy in the witnesses, in Perry Mason. tapes and disks, condemned to Sherlock, even the bugs have What budding young lawyer can the tortue of unsolved bugs! First, let me introduce someone come up with a few searching confinement. Quite a number of readers ask who has a special relationship with questions? No more postcards, no more how to get hold of back issueshis micro. Paul Exey's computer Nick Golus, of Joannina, problems, nothing in sight but the particularly those with an finds him extremely attractive. \"It Greece, can't get into the stage sky, as I head above the clouds, to adventure supplement, and an must do,\" says Paul, \"I turn it on coach in Wild West. sunshine and sand, on Portugal's omnibus collection of clues. Back every day!\" Paul is currently Simon Hammond, of Bolton, is Estoril coast. Miles from a hint of a issues are not handled at Priory having problems with reality, and new to adventures, and was computer or an adventure game to Court, and if you require any, you would like to know: \"If all else is having trouble with the boulder in worry me! No adventurers are should write to: Computer + imaginary, what is real?\" This is a The Pawn (until we put him out of likely to be found there, now, are Video Games (subscription conundrum he faces in Ultima IV. his misery! I suspect The Pawn they? department) Competition House, Stuart McLean is playing City may be the introduction to Five years ago, when I was a Farmdon Road, Market of El Dollah, and cannot get the adventures to many people who lad, you could recognise an Harborough, Leicestershire, ruby out of its room. Anyone who have started into computers with adventure when you saw one. enclosing the appropriate knows about, or who has even an Atari ST. Don't let being new to Today, what with graphics, and remittance. HEARD of the game, is welcome to the game put you off, though, sound, and animation, and Oh dear! I wrote to the rather write! Simon. joysticks, anything seems to be profuse Russell Mills, of A rap for Zzap 64 comes from The Atari ST seems set to able to call itself an adventure. Bodicote, suggesting he keep his Stuart Troy, of Sydney, Australia become one of the more popular Embarrassing it can be too, when letters a little shorter, as they were Three weeks has passed since he adventure computers! Two old you're chatting away to a game, taking up too much space in my wrote to the Wiz with a problem hands at writing to the Helpline, only to find it's not the type of 'pending' tray! Russell was on Wizardry. \"As you would have have just turned up in the mailbad game you thought it was! Still, mortified: \"Okay, okay, so I do guessed, no reply! I think that is with onel Reiner Wald, of Bonn, that's liberation for you. I suppose write a few more letters than most! really slackl If you take the time to has been playing Borrowed Time. \"Back to Victorian values, I say, But at least I give clues! Maybe I'll write to them, they should at least and can't open the lock on the \"when a quick glance at a TELL throw myself off the path into the print it!\" park gate. Meanwhile William ME WHAT TO DO told you where gutter, and wait for the rain to To be fair to Zzap (and I don't Hern, of Aberdeen, is stuck in you stood.\" wash down a nearby drain!\" Don't see why I should!) they have Ultima 2. Trying to find Father So, I'm off, away from it all, to do it Russell! But if you must, let's hardly had time to get your Antos, G forces crush William has write my memoirs. And they will hope it doesn't rain before you problem into print yet! This takes he takes off for the planet where be revelation, believe me. receive your T-shirt you should around six weeks, depending on he believes him to be. Is he on the There will be some red faces be suitably dressed for the when your letter arrives during the right track? around, I can tell you, when I occasion, who knows who else monthly production cycle. But do Steve and Lorraine Wright are reveal all about how the evil editor you might meet down there?! bear in mind, no magazine can be wandering around in a castle in Tim Metcalfe chained me to a William Church, of Liskeard in expected to print everything it Plumstead, but all the doors are computer until I solved Hulk. The Cornwall, was horrified at the receives shut. How can you open them, they story of who the lovely Lesly prospect of needing a true 80 What Stuart wants to know, is ask? All castle doors have been Walker sent T-shirts I had column screen to be able to play how to proceed further than the closed this month, it seems, for at promised to readers, back to her Trinity (see review, August issue.) 4th level of Wizardry. There are the east of a long dusty passage in family Glasgow, to sell in the local Unfortunately. C +VG's no doors he has not been through, Tylon's Castle, you might spy Dave market. How sub-editor Seamus St Craig-the-Desia's scissors he claims, and the creatures all Collins trying to get through the John bombarded me with soft slipped when he was laying out return him to the first floor. He has closed door. His castle is in brown lumps out of a can. And the page, and he chucked away two knock spells, and one skull to Kentilla; Stuart and Lorraine are how Craig Kennedy regularly the bit that said I found 80 columns knock, but can find no use for a in See Ka of Assiah. There's a sabotaged my column by snipping on a 14-inch TV connected to an Sunburst. Can anyone out there crowd gathering in this game, and out key sentences, and throwing Atari STM, quite comfortable to help? they are all walking round trying them away read, I can't vouch for the C-128 on There seems to be a lot of to find open doors to go through! So Nice-Guy Dep-Ed Paul a TV, though, so ask for a demo Zzapers about this month! Helen Goddard, of Dagenham is Boughton thinks he will come out before you buy! \"Apologies are in store!\" writes the latest victim to become of this unscathed, eh? Ah ha! I Martin Rimmer, of Southport. \"I trapped! know all about his feet. wrote two letters, one to you, and \"How do you sail the ship, and Read all about Five Years of THE ITALIAN one to the White Wizard. But I (a what do you do with a FROGBALL Adventuring (if Metcalfe dares to wally) put the wrong addresses on spell and pile of coal?\" asks Hildo print it!) in the Fifth Birthday Issue JOB the envelopes, so you got Zzap's, Biersma, of Breda in the of C+VG--the only magazine and they got yours!\" Well, Martin, Netherlands, who is playing ever known to have traded an that just goes to show how reading Causes of Chaos. ampersand for a plus and It arrived the Helpline card Zzap can damage your brain! survived! written in Italian to Andreoli (Anyway, I trust the answers in my reply postcard were up to the quality of those you got from Zzap? AND NOW The political saga of Denis I'M OFF... continues. \"Ian Fleming needs to CHAT withdraw the money from the listening bank, and he'll have to dress neatly for his bank Well, that's it, the sixtieth Mandy Rodrigues is puzzled! She manager,\" writes N. Thomson, of Adventure column wrapped up. has been trying to light the lamp in Stevenage. \"He will also need the Soon the printer will be silent, the Sherlock, so as to be able to magic word BUPA. Meanwhile, drives of the TRS-80 still, and the continue her hunt for clues after N.T. is stuck in the phone box, with dust cover in position. dark. The response is always no number to dial. Then will be the time for bags to WHAT? \"It didn't used to say that!\" ADVENTURE T.O.K.E.N "


"Marco, of Turin. (See last month's Helpline.) Andreoli was indeed shocked, as I had forecast! \"My mother put it on the table, and said: \"This must be another advertisement indeed it was handwritten. Fifteen seconds later I was shouting like mad, making jumps like Zebedeel I thought that an Englishman who lives in England that writes to you in Italian, is out of this world!\" The bad news is, that Andreoli has just been called for military service in the Italian army, and will be away from his friends, his home, and his 64, for 12 months. But he will continue to buy C+VG for the year, to keep in touch with the world of Adventure. ADVENTURE CLUES TISLA DxOu mo     oot xpou  Buruajst teie din po ay u Bru au doip pue '1ofesoo ay yeny nu e puy on peq au sapun Yoo LALILSNI IHL NOT GOOD..    q  NOYAHSH jezeu poeq pure kauwry ay ybnonul WIE VTS WIZ PIOMS pure s au ya stevo po PIEM pure 'yub e M Bageu au alebeld ONWTSI THIONTANI uuedo olepis tempo e o seum fontoo pue 'loop au ynom oor preis au jo pue aun uo uue em UIM Yooy eu id \"TIPE BY BUY HVISSY  S II \"Tros et O poob s LOTB89guoi eu sequeuter ybronn eouo Lexy sy req [esko v WTH SONT \"Mos eu o poo s uossapoo jey sequeues unor eouo kst eu s req reisho Y  O STOS ia \"pedeysbe eq Ta burpena pue qqnq e MOLA soop ou episoj ederey keld YLTAISYYS wsgoudku PIOAR O Yoj au aurus  . 'ador au Burdooseta q perios s qord Kxy SOVH JO SISTVO \"SIMES   'dreus snbx jeun jueumnsuruq e 10  Malcolm Harden of Minster in Sheppey, wrote to have a good old moan about Runestone, the \"landscaping' adventure from Firebird. \"This is totally runied for me by the final problem reaching Kordomir's fortress,\" complains Malcolm. \"The author expects the adventurer to search the whole of the map for a tunnel in the rock. The winding tunnel takes over 20 moves, and a single wrong move will trap the adventurer with no idea how to go forward or back This is a completely illogical problem, whose sole prupose is to frustrate the adventurer, and convince him there is more meat to the adventure than there really is. If you expose this in your column, possibly it will deter other programmers from including illogical problems in their games.\" Exposed, Malcolm! Lets hope we have no more of these. Perhaps your comments will deter people from buying it too, if they don't like the sound of the problem. Phil Symonds reckons he is jinxed! He has just bought Hunchback. He found it so bad that he recorded over the game with some Beethoven. \"There is no SAVE GAME facility, so you have to play parts 1,2,3, all the way through,\" complains Phil. (I won't mention the four-letter word he used to describe the game! Jim you are obviously too kind, by far! Help came this month from: Hildo Biersma, Netherlands; Philip Hancock, East Ham; Christian Martensen, Copenhagen; Hugh Walker, Burphan; Dane Ward, Wantage; C. M. Wilson Glenrothes; A. E. Dixon, Walsall; Paul Exley, Bury. HELPLINE TOP TEN House 10. Sorceror of Claymorgue Castle; Adventure Soft/US Gold just wondered if, after so many games with artificial intelligence, he has started a new craze artificial stupidity?\" dig out the old original hint sheets for the game. It took ten minutes of staring at it before I noticed that the command on the hint sheet was spelled SYPHON. Obviously, the alternative spelling had not been included in the vocabulary of the game! A second letter from Aengus confirmed that he had subsequently completed the adventure. \"In two weeks I have completed three adventures, two of them thanks to yourself.\" SUCK IT AND SEE Here are the Helpline ratingsbased on the number of times mentioned in the Helpline mail over the past month. They represent the top ten games currently being talked about by C+VG Adventurers. . See Ka of Assiah; Mastertronic 2. Seabase Delta; Firebird 3. Kentilla; Mastertronic 4. Price of Magik; Level 9 5. Hulk; Adventure Soft Americans 6. Lord of the Rings; Melbourne House 7. Zzzzz; Mastertronic 8. Fantastic Four; Adventure Soft/US Gold 9. Mordon's Quest; Melbourne Did you know that there are two PS. \"A short while ago I heard ways of spelling the word that Philip Mitchell had to make SIPHON? I didn't realise this, until I Watson in Sherlock a lot less read a letter a few months back, intelligent. On playing the game, I from Aengus Stewart, of Co. found that Watson was as thick as Down. He know that he needed to three short planks,\" writes Stuart use the verb in a particular McLean, of Warrington. \"I am not adventure (OK, quiet, all those complaining,\" Stuart continues. \"I who know which one!) but it just wondered if, after so many wouldn't work. Was there games with artificial intelligence, something wrong with his copy? he has started a new craze I was so puzzled, I decided to artificial stupidity?\" "


"MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY 400/806 NOW LOOK. ST Over 8.000 different tities available for hire for the COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, BBC, AMSTRAD, ATARI, MSX, ELECTRON, IBM and APRICOT  ARCADE, ADVENTURE, EDUCATIONAL and BUSINESS software too. * HIRE PRICES from only 750 INC P&P 20% DISCOUNT off all purchase software  FREE HINTS AND TIPS * FAST RETURN OF POST SERVICE (if reserves are given) * ALL GAMES manufactures ORIGINALS with full documentation  OVER 12.000 satisfied members EUROPEAN members welcome. Life Membership 15.00. Your first tape hired free to the value of .25  Fully computerised system keep track of your order. We pride ourselves in being the most professional Hire Library in the United Kingdom, with staff of 14 who know what the word service means. Backed by our own software company and programmers MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY, 28 College Street, Worcester WR1 2LS Tel: 0905 611072 Please rush me my free catalogue stating machine Name Address XLUXE ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and pur. chase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 ATAR ST/800XLXE OWNERS 11.95 Atari 400/600/800/XL 130XE Atari 520ST Commodore 64/Vic20/C16/Plus 4 Spectrum/BBC/Amstrad Hardware Software Peripherals Mediatech 544 Discs (SS/DD) Mediatech 544 Discs (DS/SS) 12.95 LOCKABLE 100 DISC BOXES 9.95 PHONE OR WRITE FOR PRICES LIVINGSTON COMPUTER CENTRE 17 THE MALL, CRAIGSHILL LIVINGSTON. (0506) 36978 POSTAGE .00 FREE POSTAGE AND PACKING ON ORDERS OVER 120 Callers Welcome Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with the MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY. The greatest, biggest and beat Atari Club on the market. Now incorporating ST software into our stocks and approaching 15 titles MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over 4 years ago first conceived the idea of a software library Now over 1,700 titles on disc, cassette and Rom (games, business education and utilties: Often purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Over 2.000 very satisfied members, many as far away as loeland, Sweden, West Germany Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast efficient and friendly service operating a computerised custom built system to keep track of all your records Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter club activities Important: Midland Games Library are in no way connected with or responsible for Midland Computers Ltd. of Worcester. SEND LARGE S.A.E. TO: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos, Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our Dr o gas full documento GRAND SALE  SINGLE TAPES CASSETTE EMPIRE OF KARN JEWELS OF BABYLON HEROES OF KARN BREAK FEVER MOON CRESTA SUICIDE EXPRESS LAZY JONES KOSMIC KANGA ZIM SALA BIM HAMPSTEAD UNDERWORLD HTTP BLACKWYTCH OUTLAWS MASTERMIND BY LEISURE GENIUS SPELLUNKER BLAGGER GOES TO HOLLYWOOD SON OF BLAGGER WHO DARES WINSHI KNOCKOUT [2.95 HUNCHBACK 6295 HUNCHBACK 2.95 HIGH NOON (250 CAVELON 295 CHINESE JUGGLER 250 ENCOUNTER (2.95 REVENGE OF MUTANT CAMELS .95 ADVANCE OF MEGA CAMELS 1.95 ADVANCE OF MEGA CAMELS 195 SHEEP IN SPACE (3.95 GRIBBLYS DAY OUT 4.50 10 COMPUTER HITS ,50 MATCH FISHING [4.50 ANCIPITAL .50 MA WIMPY 14.50 ROLANDS RAT RACE .95 DALEY THOMPSONS DECATHLON .95 FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD .95 GILLIGANS GOLD .95 ANDROID 11 .95 PSI WARRIOR 295 PSYTRON 295 DOUGHBOY (295 COMBAT LEADER [3.95 TOY BIZARRE .50 TALLEDEGA .95 GROGS REVENGE F250 FORT APOCALYPSE E2.95 BEACH HEAD [2.95 UP & DOWN .95 UP & DOWN .50 VALKYRIE 17 .95 TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY [2.95 SPIRIT OF STONES (CASSI .95 SELECT 1 (12 GAMES) .95 CASCADE (50 GAMES .95 GHETTO BLASTER .95 SUMMER GAMES BUY .00 WORTH OF PROGRAMS AND GET AN EXTRA .00 WORTH FREE COMMODORE 64 DISCS INTERNATIONAL SOCCER .95 .50 GALACTIC CONTROLLER .95 JACK ATTACK .50 .95 HIGH FLYER E ROBOTRON 2094 BY ATARISOFT 5 95 .95 RAIL BOSS [3.95 DONKEY KONG BY ATARISOFT 5.95 .95 FLYER FOX .95 DEFENDER BY ATARISOFT (5.95 [2.95 ZORK .95 MOON PATROL BY ATARISOFT .95 .50 ZORK 2 64.95 MS PACMAN BY ATARISOFT .95 [1.50 ZORK 3 E4.95 DIG DUG .50 STARCROSS .95 UTILITIES & PERIPHERALS [1.50 DEADLINE E4.95 TOUCH TYPE CASS) .95 E3.95 SUSPENDED TONY HARTS ART MASTER CASSI .95 .95 SPIRIT OF STONES DISC  4.95 MONEY MANAGER IDISC) .95 .95 FANTASY FIVE DISC .95 COMMODORE MODEMS .95  EXODUS ULTIMA III 4.95 INTRO TO RASIC PT ICASS) .95 .95 SUPER ZAXXON 63.95 INTRO TO BASIC PT CASS) 4.95 .95 8 GAMES DISC INC .50 SOOPER FRUIT, DEPTH CHARGE, STELLAR WARS INTRO TO BASIC PT. I DISC) (3.95 PAGE LABYRINTH, THE QUEST. PATIENCE 2 50 EASY FILE DISC) .95 PROGRAMMERS REF GUIDES 3.95  BARGAINS FROM 1st PUBLISHING MACRO ASSEMBLER DEVELOPMENT DISC .95 8 BOOKS FOR JUST .95 . 62.50 p&p .95 1.95 Normal RRP over 50.00 ASSEMBLER TUTOR IDISC 9.95 E YOUR 64 CASSETTE BOOK GRAPHICS BOOK FOR THE COMMODORE 64, PEAKS & POKES FUTURE FINANCE DISC) 14 95 .50 C64 TRICKS & TIPS FOR YOUR COMMODORE 1295 .95 54. ADVANCED MACHINE LANGUAGE BOOK DR. WATSONS 54 ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE E1.95 FOR THE C64. IDEA BOOK C54, MACHINE COURSE DISCI .95 LANGUAGE BOOK FOR THE C64 .95 1st PUBLISHING PROGRAMS ON DISC COMMODORE 128 MUSIC MAKER .95 ALL JUST $10.95 EACH MUSIC STUDIO BY ACTIVISION ICASS. 3.95 .50 FIRSTWORD WORD PROC. EASY SPELL (DISCI .95 735 FIRSTBASE DATABASE) BASIC 64 .50 PASCAL LANGUAGE) p&p 75p all orders .95 ADA TRAINING COURSE overseas .00 per tape, 2.95 POWER PLAN (CALCULATION PROG) .50 per pack ASSEMBLER MONITOR COMPILERI .95 .00 per peripherals .95 64 CARTRIDGES .95 WIZARD OF WOR .95 LOGIC SALES LTD .95 STAR RANGER .50 6 Midgate  Peterborough Cambs .99 MUSIC COMPOSER .95 24 hour ordering on 0733 313870 I MANIC MINER BC'S QUEST FOR TIRES QUO VADIS AUTOMANIA DUMMY RUN EVERYONES A WALLY VIEW TO KILL EUREKA BLOCKBUSTERS CRAZY COMETS SPYS DEMISE/SPY STRIKES BACK ARC OF YESOD WHIRLNURD SPACE PILOT "


"IT'S A SCREAM Uro tsa Holler! Jeux Sans Frontières 71 TON T It's a crackerCA CICCLESI By arrangement wie BBC Enterprises Limited. OP IAKEL SPECTRUM COMMODORE OCEAN SOFTWARE 6 CENTRAL STREET MANCHESTER M2 5NS TELEPHONE: 061 832 6633 TELEX: 669977 OCEANS G DISTRIBUTED IN GERMANY BY DISTRIBUTED IN FRANCE BY OCEAN FRANCE ARE TELEPHONE: TELEPHONE: 02101 60040 010 33 93 42 7144 EACH AMSTRAD "


"REVIEWS/1 PHANTASIE aga Ta Supplier: Strategic Simulations US Gold Machine: Co 64, Apple. Price: .95 (disk only) Phantasie is a D&D type game, in which the adventurer gathers a party of adventurers around him, and goes off to explore the Isle Of Gelnor. His objective is to defeat the dreaded Black Knights, and to destroy the evil sorceror Nikademus. There are a number of towns on the island, and the player starts off in Pelnor. In each town, there are five places to visit the Guild, Bank, Mystic, Armoury and Inn. The Guild is where a party is gathered, and since you won't get very far on your own, this must be your first call. Once inside, you have a choice of recruiting a number of the residents, from a range of fighters, monks, priests, rangers, thieves and wizards. Each character will be a member of a particular species, from human through halfling to elf You can add your own characters to this list, and then select the mix you want to accompany you. At the bank, members of the group can withdraw the funds necessary for weaponry and for overnight accomodation There is a wide range of weapons available at the armoury. and so, bristling to the teeth with maces, clubs, spells and shields, the bold adventurers set forth on their exploration. The countryside of Gelnor is populated with a fearsome collection of monsters of all types, and likely the party will be attacked. Fleeing is an option sometimes scrolling the list itself when the successful, but winning a battle window boundary is met. Pressing will give survivors of the fight the button adds a member to the more experience points, and party, who is then listed above the booty-the treasures carried by window. the monsters. Control passes to a YES/NO icon Play is controlled by joystick on the right, asking whether more throughout, the only exception to members are required this rule is when you wish to enter A master menu on the right the name of newly created offers the option of moving, or characters from the keyboard. alternatively you can inspect any The joystick is used to select member of the party, use a potion, either text or graphic icons. The or cast a spell. way this is implemented is very Inspection of a character brings slick, and makes what might up a whole screenful of otherwise be a difficult game to information to him, relating to his play very simple. possessions, attributes, age, The screen is generally laid out experience and hit points. with a largish window bottom left. Selecting MOVE brings up four Adding members to your party, is direction icons, and holding the achieved by selecting ADD from a joystick to cover the required text list on the right hand side, word, continues moving the party which then causes the window to in discrete steps, at an easily fill with a list of all the characters, controllable pace. and their current status; i.e. An encounter with monsters will whether they are OK and more often than not end up with a available. fight. The options to flee, fight, beg The joystick now drives a for mercy, greet or threaten are highlight up and down this list, selectable on the right of the screen. To the top, the party is listed, with a colour highlight to denote who is active, sleeping, or dead, together with his hit points. Having decided to fight, control passes to the member list of active fighters, and their modes are all set to \"parry\". To the right is a list of tactics, such as lunge, thrust, slash, and selecting a character allows his tactic to be changed. To commence battle, \"carry on fighting\" is selected, and a graphic screen fills the window, with a commentary given at the top. The battle, complete with sound effects, is quite dramatic. After each \"round\", the cycle re-commences so that the tactics can be changed. If the game sounds complex, don't worry. It can be played on a simple level to start with, after no more than a few minutes perusing the glossy 32-page instruction manual. After playing for a while to get the hang of things, you'll probably want to read the manual in a bit more depth, to better control the course of events. And the manual has depth, just as the game. There are detailed tables of hit-points, spells, and magic points, by class and level of adventurer, and lists of spells weapons, armour, and shields. The manual is written for the Apple version, but there is a Commodore 64 appendix. All in all, this is quite the best game of its type that I have seen. Keith Campbell n/a Vocabulary Atmosphere Personal Value FUTUREZOO Supplier Clwyd Adventure Software Seaf (no, not one of those things, object? Are you in the wrong Machine: Spectrum 48k with flippers that swims!) to be put place? Or are both words Price: .95 on display. recognised, but the action invalid? But when it comes to unloading. There's just no way of knowing. Man has reached out to the stars the precious Seal has gone Many words so unrecognised, and found many inhabited planets, missing carried off by one of and the number seems greater but none with intelligent life. In the the strange creatures. Your job is than it is, due to the YOU CAN'T year 2130 it is decided to set up a to find and retrieve it. feature. Although EXAMINE is a zoo of alien life-forms for a This is a promising scenario valid word, I have not yet found population always seeking bizarre with overtones of Strange anything that CAN be examined. new entertainments. Odyssey. But this text-only This given a subject as Then man encountered the adventure, in two parts, is Quilled, imaginative as an alien zoo, fails to Senissa, an alien intelligent race, and not very well, at that. exploit the full potential of the from a Planet some 200 light-years All too often comes the reply scenario. distant. In signing a treaty the YOU CAN'T, with no indication of The first problem, of course, is Senissa presented Earth with a why. Have you not the correct getting into the zoo. But the solution doesn't come anywhere near the classic 'entering the game problems, as found, for example, Pyramid of Doom, and Mystery Fun House. Clwyd offer a Clueline postal service, entitling purchasers to ask two written questions during each of the six months following date of purchase. Keith Campbell Vocabulary Atmosphere Personal CHVG Value HIT! ON "


"REVIEWS/2 JEWELS OF DARKNESS Lihat next? N You cannot move in that direction. cannot move in that direction. t next? E move in that direction. are on the steep east side of a y over grown with branties of Machines: CBM 64, Amstrad CPC, Spectrum 48/128k, Atari 800, Supplier: Rainbird/Level 9 Price: $14.95 Jewels of Darkness is a three-pack of Level 9's earliest games. Colossal Adventure, Adventure Quest, and Dungeon Adventure, once known as The Middle Earth trilogy, are now combined in an enhanced form. Colossal Adventure is itself a revamped version of the first adventure ever-Crowther and Wood's mainframe Colossal Cave adventure. The Level 9 original added to it a whole new end -game, and now they have added graphics, up-dated the text, and put the whole thing on their new adventure system. You start off by a brick well-house, and progress to find a hidden grating leading into the cave itself. In here are the early problems of logic and deduction, which went to make adventure playing such a popular pastime. The bird that flies away when you try to trap it in the obvious place, a cage planted in a previous location; the serpent or snake that will not allow you to pass until driven off by the bird. Two mazes in the game may well appear to be one and the same to the unobservant player. One has twisty passages all the same, and the other has tisty passages all different. Having become known as the 'same' maze defeat the demon Lord Agaliarept. In Dungeon Adventure, (reviewed C+VG September 1983) the Demon Lord is dead, and it occurs to you that there may be great treasure left unguarded in his dungeon... For the fast-typing player, who is, perhaps, typing his way back into the game, this means that there is so much activity on the screen at any given time, that the text becomes a little difficult to take in. The graphics are reasonable, and a little less abstract than Level 9's early graphics, but nevertheless, you are not likely to gasp in astonishment when you see what the inside of the cave looks like, for the first time over! Basic pictures, competently drawn, with rather unnatural colours in most cases, is what you'll get Three separate cassettes, or one disk, are contained in Rainbird's standard sturdy and glossy box, which is attractively illustrated, and a delight to handle. also in the box is a fairly hefty glossy booklet, containing game instructions and a 'novell based on the games. If you haven't played the games before, then at , Jewel of Darkness undoubtedly represents excellent value for money, providing you with a well-packaged compilation of three quality adventures, at a mere  each! Keith Campbell o pongo Adventures otheelerts le stone bridge leading and the different maze respectively, both must be mapped if you hope to get anywhere. Adventure Quest and Dungeon Adventure are both original scenarios, but, with a bit of frictional background, they are connected to form sequels. In Adventure Quest, your task is to HUNCHBACK Supplier: Ocean The graphics are quite small Machine: Spectrum 48k, Amstrad, taking up the top region of the 64. screen. There is a large strip, stretching from one side to the Price: .95 (Spec) .95 (C64, other. On top of this background, a Amstrad) small picture of the current location appears, and on the other On the outskirts of Paris, mischief side, each object you have picked is afoot. Two evil characters, the up (six is the maximum) is shown Cardinal and his sidekick Bishop, too. have captured Esmeralda, and are This pictorial representation is holding her captive somewhere in quite a good idea, but the pictures the area. You, as Quasimodo, must are too small. Everything on the rescue Esmerelda. screen becomes cluttered, and I After an apparent age, had to read everything twice to Hunchback -The Adventure, has make sure I hadn't missed a vital finally arrived. As you begin, some point. very colourful (if not particularly The descriptions are very well clear) graphics will pop onto the written, and always witty. screen, and some pretty, Although there are some errors, redefined text will tell you what such as Paris being spelled with a has happened so far. lower case 'p', everything sails along with lots of jokes, all in area, you investigate and discover keeping with the period. it is the choirboys' stalls! A dodgy On your travels in the early lot, these choirboys.... stages of the game, you encounter As in Never Ending Story, there a number of uncouth and very are three parts and no SAVE violent guards. Should you have facility, and the same maddening come across a weapon, you can programming slips. THROW KEY throw your soul into battle. produces the mind-boggling During the fight, you are given a THERE IS NO VERB IN THAT running commentary, and as this SENTENCE. happens, cartoon strip style Despite its shortcomings, pictures take the place of the Hunchback is a great game. It is location graphics. well assembled, fun to play, and The most popular objects in the offers a reasonable challenge. game seem to be books. Zen and the Art of Guillotine Maintenance Jim Douglas is a personal favourite. Wandering around in the cathedral, you will Vocabulary come across a number of locations Atmosphere which serve little purpose other than to help the game along. Personal Finding a thoroughly vandalised Value NO "


"Paris for breakfast, Tokyo for lunch and the Golden Gate Bridge for dinner. escape near Big Ben. Or just gobbling up the Golden Gate for good. But don't expect a warm welcome. Expect everything else those pesky humans can throw at you. Tanks. Here's a switch. Instead of running from monsters, you are the monster.. Your choice of Godzilla The Glog. A Giant Tarantula. Mechatron Robot. Or others equally unsavory. What's your favourite city? Paris? Tokyo? New York? London? How about Moscow? Yeah. A nice little trip to eat the Kremlin would be pleasant. Or how about a daring rescue in the Big Apple. A bold F-111 fighters. Cops. The Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines. Even a nuke now and then. Stop complaining. You know very well you had it coming. You monster you. \"MOVENSTER GAME Commodore 64 Disk .99 Cassette $9.99 ACTIO: BREATHE FIRE TIME 15:08 ENDURANCE KONGER PLUS DICOS To Factory woo Commodore 64 Disk $14.99 Cassette .99 U.S. GOLDI Cza EPYX COMPUTER SOFTWARE Epimedad No. 1 Screenshot from Commodore 61/139 seni ole "


"2 VANE REVIEWS/3 LAPIS PHILOSOPHORUM TO COLODODD Stone An encounter with a large unfriendly bird didn't help much, and being thrown down the side of an abyss did my health no good at Beli Supplier: Ariolasoft ÔMachines: Atai XXE, C64 Price: .95 (Disk only) Lapis Philosophorum or The Philosopher's Stone, is a graphic adventure with 83 different screens. The graphics are quite detailed and, best of all, very fast. According to the packaging, it has seven different routes to completion, and by that, I presume it means the game does not have to be solved in a set procedure. The story unfolds in a small kingdom of Alkanian, where the King, having no son of his own, has decreed that his stepson will succeed him on his death. To hasten this event, his stepson poisons him. With little time left before he dies, the King issues orders for all healers and wizards to come and save him. Expecting such moves, his stepson warns all would be healers to stay away, or face death in a most unpleasant manner. At this point, you enter the game. A retired alchemist, enjoying a quiet life, your peace is shattered by the arrival of a king's messenger who begs you to try and find a cure. You know of only one, the Philosopher's Stone. I started on my quest with little else than a book and my trusty old lute. Having no money with which to buy items, I turned my hand to busking for a living. Soon, with a With most of the obstacles behind me, my instincts told me the final solution lay across a fast moving and dangerous river. The only way across was via a small ferry, which was moored on the other side. I could see the ferryman in his boat, but no matter how much I shouted or waved my arms, the ferry man saw me not. But before long I was on my way, once more with the pig in tow, looking for the elixir of life. The Philosopher's Stone is of German origin, and has been translated into English, But beware of some of the responses, they're really wierd. They don't make the game any harder, just a little unusual. The only negative aspect of the adventure involves buying tools at the start. You are not told which items are available. Instead, you are required to guess, buy typing, for instance, BUY AXE. If such an item is available, then you'll get it, but otherwise you have to keep trying different objects. Steve Donoghue Vocabulary Atmosphere Personal Value little cash in hand, I started to equip myself for the adventure. My first problem was escaping the walled city where I lived, as the guards at the only exit had been told not to allow me to leave. However, my good deed for the day presented me with a hypnotic solution, and I was soon on my way. Not alone, I might add, but with a pig of all things, for a companion Once outside the city I had to figure a means of getting past a bunch of drunken knights, (out for a knight's fun, you might say) who take pleasure in killing poor defenceless alchemists. I wandered on through forests, gathering objects I thought would be useful later in the game, and solving the problems. NNO 7 MANDRAGORE Supplier: Infogrames Machines: Spectrum, C64. Amstrad MSX Price: .95 So this is the great French adventure from the biggest software company in Europe (the French Connection, C+VG August 86) It is more like D&D, and Phantasie than a true adventure. Unless you settle for the bunch of characters already provided, you start off by building four of your own characters. You assign their attributes up to a total of 80 points each. Pressing any key winds the points up for an attribute until RETURN is pressed, when it is entered. Then the next on the list takes its turn. If at any time you exceed the points remaining available, instead of an error message with the facility to edit your previous entries, the whole lot is blanked out, and you have to start in again. Name, race, Occupation and sex (\"yes please\" is NOT accepted!) are then entered, and here is an inconsistency. You type in your name in the normal way. But next, race is required, and the screen does not react unless you hit the initial letter of one of the races in the game, at which time, the whole word is displayed. Once your four characters are created, off you go to the map of Mandragore, about which you can traverse by use of the N, S, E, and W keys. This action is quite smooth and effective. Then comes the thrilling bit! When you come across one, you can enter a chateau! You can command a member of your party to do something. The characters, each assigned a number one to four, are listed in each of the nine chateaux. I was down the right hand side of the lucky. I played a disk version on screen, together with experience the Commodore 64. Each chateau and life points. At the bottom is a must be loaded separately. On box with lines A-D, and if any disk, this is almost transparent to objects are present in the room, the player. But on tape, the correct they will be shown here. position for the appropriate To save typing, or, more likely, chateau must first be found, and to save providing a parser or the instructions recommend that icon-driven command system, the before starting to use the game, commands go like this: Character you run through the cassette, number (to be commanded), verb, noting the tape counter positions. object letter. The verb list is A more clumsy way to load provided in the instructions, and (from tape) and enter commands, I the first one or two letters of the haven't seen in a lona verb are typed. The whole word is The graphics aren't bad, but then displayed in the input area, at there seems little depth in the the bottom of the screen. game itself. So, \"Supremo attack Tickel\" is Keith Campbell entered thus: 1 AT B, for example. The picture of Supremo then flies Vocabulary alarmingly about the screen in the general vicinity of Tickel for a moment or two Personal It is said that there is a problem Value "


"'Ere John, have you 'eard abaht Lever and Jones' latest caper? What's that then John? Anuvver bank job? Or an enforced holiday in Spain? Nah, they've gone into computers 'aint they. If you ask me it's all a bit reels of cotton and definitely dodgy. Well, John that pair were always a couple of Dodgy Geezers. And that Keith Campbell character isn't much better is he? Is that who Lever and Jones were seen talking to before you know, the wassname happened? Yeah, that's right John. Well, there you go John. Fancy a VAT? In September 1984 Lever and \"It's a good job none of our Jones unleashed a new adventure mates have computers, or they game concept on the world in the might get hold of the game. We'd shape of Hampstead fun and have some Mafia-type characters frolics at the expense of trendy from a certain Italian restaurant folk. Then came Terrormolinos round in no time, I can tell you!\" he more fun and frolics at the world's added. Maybe you'll recognise worst holiday resort. Now here some of them? comes Dodgy Geezers-packed Justin Perrier: You may have met full of Minderspeak and set in the him before, in Hampstead. Now twilight world of petty criminals he's the manager of the very bank and assorted hard nuts. you are about to do over. Dodge Geezers is a two part Bullet-Proof George: A veteran of graphic adventure and as you'd the Long Ditton Spaghetti Caper, a expect, it's full of Lever and Jones real event in the lives of Lever and style humour. Jones, in a slightly different guise. \"There are some old familiar George has so many bullets still faces in Dodgy Geezers,\" inside him from the caper, that promises Trevor Lever, \"Although he'd never get through a metal you won't have to have played detector. Hampstead or Terrormolinos to be Tweedle Dee: A racing tipster, able to complete it!\" \"But it would and a good source of inside info. be appreciated!\" quips Peter Always keeps his ear to the Jones. ground. They are very enthusiastic about Cracker: A skilled man, there's no their new title, perhaps it's the safe that he can't blow with just thought of all those royalties one more stick. pouring in that does it! Little Ken: Ken's name belies his You can play it successfully, height. At 6 feet 6 inches in his without understanding all the socks, Ken has grown quite a bit implications of the plot. But to get since his holidays in the most out of the game, you Terrormolinos. An amiable manshould make a point of going the nice guy, who will always wrong, now and again, just to see muck in what happens, they tell me. \"Some Soapy: A sweet old man modelled of the best gags appear when you on Alec Guinness in The Lavender do something wrong!\" says Hill Mob. He used to work for Trevor Justin Perrier, as Head of Security. You play the part of an ex-con, Now he's a con-artist, specialising just released from prison after in little old ladies. doing a stretch for your part in the Mr Video: Nickname Hi-Score. An Long Ditton Spaghetti Caper. You electronics genius with a PhD, he were framed, of course, and has a home-made custom-built completely unconnected with the joystick, which he plugs in at affair. arcades. Favourite game Spice \"Actually, it was matter of Wink, renamed from the revenge,\" explains Trevor. \"You Lever-Jones original, by were grassed on,\" confides Pete. Melbourne House. Australian They nod in agreement. I sense pronunciation, perhaps? that they are hiding something! Tricks: A greasy garage Anyway, on your release from mechanic, with a flair for getaway jail you decide to go straight. Not cars... an easy task, for very soon all your Dodgy Geezers started off life old mates are around, persuading as a film-script, and early on in its you to organise the next job. life, was converted to a game. They've lined up a nice little What Trevor and Pete would bank, and the manager is none really love to do now, is to write other than Justin Perrier, from the book of the game. something of an annual event. easier game than Hampstead, and Hampstead. \"There's a song with the game It was September 1984 when this time less limited in appeal. Your job is to recruit the gang. tool\" announces Trevor, \"It will be they unleashed Hampstead. The Not that they are averse to a You need three characters to help on the reverse side of the tape.\" aim of the game was not to get to difficult adventure. But the more you with the robbery, and there \"Bruce Springsteen and Sting Hampstead, but to attain difficult a game is, they feel, the are about eight to choose from. both asked if they could do it for Hampstead the ultimate state of more interesting it must be made. Only the right people will be us,\" says Pete, proudly. \"But we well-being. to compel the player to successful in the raid! wanted our own friends to sing it. Their aim is to entertain, and completion. \"All the characters in the game so we had to say 'no' -it was a they reckon that if less than 70 per The attraction of their are real. Chalky White was an old shame, really.\" cent of players fail to complete a adventures is that they related to school friend of mine, and should It seems the song lyrics will give game, they have failed by making real life. Neither are not too he ever see the game, there's no a few clues to the game. few clues to the game it too boring. interested in the fantasy doubt he'll recognised himself in The appearance of a Melbourne Wanting people to enjoy the goblin-bashing type of adventure, it. Under a different name, of House comedy adventure from gags, in September last they came which they feel has been course,\" Pete adds hurriedly. Trevor and Pete, is becoming up with Terrormolinos, a much overdone. "


"Geezer \"You'll notice that of all the cynical about clever parsers. comedy adventures around, ours \"There's too many simple ideas are the only original ones, they dressed up to look complicated in have completely original story a six-word parser,\" said Trevor. lines. All the others are satires on Moving on from parsers to existing adventures and stories,\" vocab, I mentioned the problem in they claim. Terrormolinos, over which I had Entertainment, and comedy in taken them to task some time ago. particular, is an area in which they DOWN STEPS was the way out have some experience. Apart of the loft, and the wordline was from having been involved with eluding many players, DOWN not two rock groups in the past, they being a verb. were for a short while a comedy \"That was a programming duo called The Three Ronnies. It problem. You were quite rightdidn't last long. the trouble is, we just didn't have They went on to produce a pilot the knowledge or experience to comedy video for Channel 4 avoid doing it that way, at the \"The Open Polytechnic.\" It was time.\" designed as a promotion for Trevor and Pete have a novel Slough-to encourage people to approach to graphics. \"You've got live, work, and holiday there. to have graphics, or the big stores Pete is now working for a PR won't stock the titles,\" complains company that promotes films, and Pete. Hampstead was difficult to has recently been involved with a get hold of, because of that. new series, Space Police, by \"But what's the point of drawing Gerry Anderson of Thunderbirds a picture of a scene that is fame. described well in words, Trevor is about to be anyway?\" chipped in Trevor, restructured, but currently claims So instead of location graphics, to sell computers, not your in Terrormolinos, there were common or garden micros, but snapshots that had to be taken, BIG stuff. You want a computer for and developed\" on screen a space shuttle, to do real-time Since the object was to return multi-tasking, and he'll sell it to home with ten photos, this was a you. substitute for SCORE One can never be quite sure, \"Let's face it, you've got to have talking to these two, whether a something to let the player know story is true, or just invented. whether or not he's making Neither lays claim to being able progress. This is a more to write a computer program, and interesting way of doing it.\" so their method is to produce the So in Dodgy Geezers, the basic game using the Quill. graphics of the characters come From this prototype, it is up as their police record, and the re-programmed, all the rest are event-driven. \"specifications\" being contained \"If you don't get a picture for within the Quill's data files. quite a while, you should begin to The re-programming of this suspect you are not on the right year's offering, Dodgy Geezers, lines,\" explained Trevor will offer more than before, and far As for their next game, they more than the Quill. haven't given a thought to the Although basically a two-word story, yet. But as Pete is getting input game, Roger Taylor's parser married in a short while, what's the will automatically give them betting us adventurers don't end multiple command input, and a up being best men at a crazy few other goodies. But they are wedding? "


"Right, no apologies. We featured Delta 4 last month but this off-beat software house is back again, this time with The Colour of Magic for Piranha Software. The equally off-beat Jim Douglas finds out what's going on. Colo he might just get too close for comfort. The programming involves some in-house graphics work. Although the pics won't be as numerous as in some of their other games, they should be just as good. There will be pictures of the major locations. They will be \"very pretty\". That sort of things Delta 4 to choose a book title. There are eight days in a spring to mind when The game is now being week, and so on. Also, the you mention Delta 4? programmed on the eighth colour of the spectrum Well, a number of very Commodore. Until now, all of is Octarine-the colour of peculiar things, but aside from their development work has magic. those, great adventures. Since been done on the Spectrum \"We are going to make the Bored of the Rings, all those \"Because the 64 has the most EXAMINE command very years ago, they have gradually primitive Quill,\" explains powerful indeed,\" claims built up a reputation for being Fergus, \"it's easier to convert Fergus. That command may able to create humorous to other machines.\" prove very useful in certain games with reasonably The game follows the areas of the game. Without complicated storylines. storyline of the book very giving away too much, you will Their latest venture is for the closely. Instead of \"altering the find that at one point, anything new software house Piranha. plot in order to avoid giving so you imagine will exist. Quite a Colour of Magic is their first much away\" they decided to handy trick. Of course, as in book conversion, and Fergus stick to the same style of the best nursery rhyme McNeill is very excited by the problems, but alter the traditions, you must BELIEVE whole thing. situations a little. This makes in the item you are imagining. \"It's not quite as mad as our the game more faithful to the or it won't appear other games. The humour is source novel. Throughout the game, slightly more subtle in Colour Although the Quill input can Death, in the shape of the Grim of Magic.\" be a little limiting in some Reaper himself, is always hot Set to be released at the cases, it is friendly enough to on your heels. Make a slip, and PCW Show in September, the allow a whole line of text to be game centres on Rincewind, a typed. It picks out the most hopeless magician. The important two words. adventure takes place in a Luck is vital in any world every bit as bizarre as adventure, but in Colour of Delta 4's own creations. Magic, it's a matter of life and Everything is based on a disc death! During the game, the which rotates upon the back of player will come across a a giant turtle. Now the aim of number of situations where the the game is to look after correct action is essential. Twoflower, a tourist, during Making the wrong move will his visit to the discworld. not bring the game to a halt The game is Delta 4's most there and then, but will advanced to date. It comes in decrease you luck rating. four parts a break from The number eight is very their now infamous three-part important. It pops up all over style and there are upwards the place. On the discworld, of 200 locations. Characters everything revolves around it. number around 60, and of those, about half are worth talking to. The game came about after MacMillan, a large publishing firm, decided to branch into computer software. Adventures were an obvious beginning and Fergus' name came up. It was the decision of www.www. Rincewind\" \"Broken Dr tavern, on from north bustle of Twofle into \"TOLL while "


"ur of Magic As an example of the luck as well forget it! mentioned earlier, you will From the sound of it, Delta 4 come across a large troll seem to work very close to blocking your path. It's their deadlines. \"Oh, yes, the necessary to get rid of him ideas come about 15 minutes somehow, but it all depends before being programmed. It's on luck. If you have performed more fun, but involves a lot of enough good deeds while late nights. Certainly on this playing, it's worth trying to game.\" attack him. Otherwise you may At the time of viewing, the game could hardly be described as complete! Part one is really solely there to set the scene, and give the player who may not have read the book an introduction to the strange world he is entering. The book, unfortunately is not supplied with the game. There isn't going to be a bonus game with Colour of Magic. Maybe they are running out of ideas for that sort of thing? The game is going to be released on the Spectrum, Amstrad and Commodore. The Spectrum version should be ready at the PCW show. Colour of Magic COMPETITION d ood outside the a rather sleezy Dri busy street running ono south through the th kh-Morpork. d The Luggage came What is magic and fulfils all your dreams? A Computer+ Video Games competition, of course. Thanks to Piranha we're giving you a chance to sample not only the Colour of Magic game but also Terry Prachett's book. Here's what we want you do to. In the Colour of Magic there is a place called the Dungeon Dimension, where your wildest imaginings can be turned into reality. What we want you to do is draw or paint a monster you would like to see created in the Dungeon Dimension. Send your entry to Colour of Magic Competition, Computer+Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is October 16th and the editor's decision is final. The first ten winners will receive a copy of the game and the book and the next ten runners-up will get a stuffed Piranha...? Noice, bez C+VG/PIRANHA COLOUR OF MAGIC COMPETITION Name Address ......... My computer is: Spectrum CBM 64 D Amstrad O "


"TM CRYSTAL CASTLES Crystal Castles Diamond Plateaus in Space he Legend is born. Summer '84, a computer game was created, a game that made the blood of all who played if flow through icy veins. It travelled through the dusty vaults of the software underground, surfacing here and there, creating a Legend. Next month the Legend will be born. Crystal Castles is a once in a lifetime opportunity to experience a true software legend. A legend that will continue because it is to be produced as a Limited Edition. Now that you've heard of it you must buy it otherwise you'll have missed a true software experience. \"When I first saw Crystal Castles, its. shock waves almost knocked me off my feet. That was so long ago. I cannot conceive that you will ever buwit in a shop. I'll believe it when I see it!\" It's like a state of manic hysteria on diamond plateaus in deep spacesome things are beyond description.\" Julian'Rignal! 19.99 DISK .99 Available on: CBM 64/128  BBC ELECTRON Coming soon: Spectrum 48K & Amstrad. U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B67AX. Tel: 021 356 3388. U.S. GOLD Como "


"COMPETITION Dbada YDNL S.PA + NIM C+VG/MELBOURNE HOUSE C16 GREATEST HITS COMPETITION Name. What more could a Commodore 16 owner ask for -ace games for their computer and a year's supply of their favourite computer mag for absolutely nothing. Yes, that's the goodies on offer in this competition from the software house from the land of OZ Melbourne House. First prize is a year's supply of C+VG plus a special binder and a copy of Melbourne House's C16 Greatest Hits. The games include Roller Kong, Wizard and Princess, Dark Power and Classic Adventure. The next 20 runners-up will get copies of the game. Right, all you have to do is answer the following questions which have an Australian flavour to them. 1) Where in Australia is Melbourne House based? A) Sydney. B) Melbourne. C) Canberra. 2) How long has Melbourne House been producing games? A) Nine years. B) One year. C) Six years. 3) What was the name of the famous Australian bandit now a folk hero? A) Sam Kelly. B) Ned Kelly. C) David Kelly Finally, name three other Melbourne House games. Address Send your answers to together with the printed coupon to C16 Greatest Hits Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. The closing date is October 16th and the editor's decision is final. "


"and life I MUSTA FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR sight COMPETITION Treble-sha COMPETITION Wedne to sh Nick his si +0 UP THE VIP guest at the EA. Cup Fin dreamed of cover Questions 1) Who won the 1985/86 FA Cup Final? 2) What was the score? 3) Which team was runner-up to Argentina in this year's World Cup Final? Get some goal action with this sensationally super C+VG/Gremlin soccer competition. Footballer of the Year is the new football program being released by Gremlin Graphics for the CBM 64, Spectrum, Amstrad, MSX, C16/Plus 4, Atari and BBC Electron And in an exclusive pre-season transfer deal, C+VG has got some great Gremlin Goodies to give away -including tracksuits, footballs and copies of the game. In this new and exciting game, you adopt the role of a professional footballer. You start your career at the age of 17 with a Fourth Division team,  in cash, ten goal cards and the footballing world at your feet. The aim is to develop your career and be nominated FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR The game features transfers, career record cards, (goals, incidents etc.) League, E.U.F.A., F.A. and Milk Cup games, and, providing that you're good enough, the FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR award ceremony. All you have to do to stand a chance of scoring some prizes, is to answer these football questions. But first the prices. The first two winners will get a track suit, a football and a copy of the game each. The next five runners-up get a football and game and the next ten get the game. Send your answers together with the printed coupon to Footballer of the Year Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is October 16th and the referee's decision is final. 4) Who was the top scorer in the competition? C+VG/GREMLIN FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR COMPETITION Name Address Please indicate which computer you have. CBM 640 Spectrum Amstrad O C16/Plus4 D Atari BBC/Electron MSX O "


"Daringly Original Arcade Adventure. It's What You've Come Enter Into The Magical World Of Druid. Experience The New And To Expect From Firebird ... Publishers Of The U.K.'s Most Exciting Software DRUID .95 .95 Available now for Commodore 64 and Spectrum 48.128 and available soon for Amstrad. citi MAIL ORDER Please state name of game, machine, cassette or disk and quantity required Enclosed crossed cheque/Pomade payable to FIREBIRD SOFTWARE. Al affers are subject to availability Orders are despatched promptly. All prices inclusive of VAT and postage MAIL ORDER: AUNTIE KAY, \"FREEPOST FIREBIRD, FIRST FLOOR, 64-76 NEW OXFORD ST., LONDON WC1A 1PS. \"No stamp required Firebird is a Registered Trade Mark of British Telecommunications ple. FIREBIRD SOFTWARE FIRST FLOOR, 64-76 NEW OXFORD ST., LONDON WC1A1PS "


"..WE DO IT BETTER! Future Trailblazer art available on BBC Electro WHATEVER WE DO.. Footballer of the Year rehe England PC he w a s city are presented with Just aird Division to the conal e injuries. He pulled a left a transfer offer for The game to answer every boyhood dream -the of the chance to make it to the very top of football star the esterday in an exhibition from the leag dom. Starting on your path to glory as a 17 scoring a spectacular however year old apprentice with a Fourth Division against Ranon team and only $500 and 10 goal scoring cards in your pockets, the footballing world is at your feet Adopt the identity of a professional footballer and develop a career through the ups and downs of match days, trans fer deals and injuries etc. Display your talents In Foot ball League, EUFA, FA and Mak Cup games and then if you're good enough the ultimate accolade of your sort the Foot baler of the Year Award personal ace in the So the Cup. as restored to the saints ne Eagles ahead of ed Glenn Watson for Ma head of It's not been a bareluctant to Witson for the popular star Kerry successfuln Allen although I'm sure he would swap his personal as success for a place in the . although I'm sure he C16+ 36.95 MSX Spectrum $7.95 Amstrad, BBC/Electro Atari CEM 6417 .95 Disk .95 njoyed a successful av at a dinnerina of the Match stimonial fund. Kerry Allen, left out as Success for United, a week earlier was nised bis delicad k Rangers th goal of th 7th League d Divisio 1 6 ch was 21 drove As the Seas ind Cha n has mjap fro. Division to e of the Engla ad, in the space or ew months. He just missed selection for the International in Europe this week, but to be Tplaced on standby bar itself recognition nes remarkable JURE missed selection nternational in s week, but tob standbywa gnition of e rise. ft Sin for left-back ma The corpe uay IRST DIVIS Rangers boss alarke, last night \"No-Sale sign ield superstar urton, and isappoint ampionshi offer FOO Charlie B omorrow reco bink orpe for the an offer rirst Division yiants and opted to stay with Rovers. This promising centre-back has signed a new contract, team manager David Thorpe announced Cox, attracted by lly, had nd Me looked at al aybe the oft tractive as it nation. The sfer uns at gid at. today after i bs Gay settled on a The 26 ye. Di triker has been on Wuek-to week contract at Unit fter not signing a Contract. His departure d of an era Talling th abl Troll Thunder the winow breaknecke pushing your ther Ima ne der and method one or fe e d tavoiding the death doom that and around the mystery. S o me you proceso con with me Luences and some dupuree Ny or mayol juga Keepalen en te dodate Do you come you the w e you bo  64 vron emaze Ing2 per mu e med De version contain en cole Baine today. GILBERT Future 's IN DEBUT Derek Derek W Klat \"Ima Rovi doph b bh up WIN the challenge of death this has been the bar Tad Aek edinte ith MICK DICKENS I've de KEVIN COOPER is Hutches Sort the art Acting upon a from ded, je back t imensions Unit di analin the act our in Nicky urope today to face SSR n your Omnibot Mark ew speculat. ne debut M ock ut and verture fort punto your beloveds actors Defend yoursel nobily Street bout his future w against the Berserka Securtydroid Fight ty. your way through 20 grueling levels imprc . to the planet's surface into Sobots Cooper out of foott Where the face of miles 12 months, with a kn with the outcome of your mortal Jury, broke training English combed with the swesome Henchododena veek to make a secret a y and brewery o a French clinic to obts et in this modem nedical treatment frc couc dyre? pert Pierre Renoir w the rest has treated other top Eun because o pean Stars. He is likely to return ius chances as City are presented with Na transfer offer for him m the league leaders, wever City will be reluctant to part with hiry United looked the mor cing side in the open with Russell Taylor Alpha House, Available Future Knight dexample in my 10 Carver Street, November! Gremlin Graphics Software Lid., defence v Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423 joj English International linic to obt striker KENNY MORGA fre could be out of actic Renoir withe rest of the because of a lo The injury 9th National later is or him Trailblazer Available November! "


"Tre not Electron C16+4 95 trun 4BK 95 Electron 64/128 95 95 en T H A LA MUS ugh sign erstar and th R int onship cre consi the 23 IP TEST ITE By STAVROS FASOULAS CASSETTE .95 DISK .95 THALAMUS LIMITED Front Office, 1st Floor Advance Works 44 Wallace Road, London N1 1PQ Distributed by US GOLD LIMITED, Unit 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX able ber! "


"OFFwdook CHARITY COMPILATION TAPE ALL PROCEEDS GO TO THE PRINCE'S TRUST LIGHTNING DISTRIBUTION LTD 841 HARROW ROAD LONDON NW10 48K SPECTRUM PITFALL II ACTIVISION PSYTRON BEYOND FALL GUY ELITE AD ASTRA GARGOYLE SAM STOAT SAFEBREAKER GREMLIN GRAPHICS SPLAT INCENTIVE MUGSY MELBOURNE HOUSE KONG STRIKES BACK OCEAN CHEQUERED FLAG PSION BLUE MAX U.S. GOLD COMMODORE 64 PITFALL II ACTIVISION SPACE PILOT 2 ANIROG PSYTRON BEYOND FALL GUY ELITE DEMONS OF TOPAZ FIREBIRD. SHEEP IN SPACE LLAMASOFT KONG STRIKES BACK OCEAN BLACK THUNDER QUICKSILVA DEATH STAR INTERCEPTOR SYSTEM 3 TALLADEGA U.S. GOLD "


"1.D.E.A.S Hi, Mellissa Ravenflame, here. I.D.E.A.S. Central is one-year-old this issue. It's incredible how time flies. All the Bug Hunters have survived 12 months of incredible adventures all except X who has gone to join Professor Video in that great computer room in the sky. But that's life. Over the next 12 months we're determined to continue bringing you all the best hints, tips, pokes and maps. But remember I.D.E.A. Central needs your help and we're willing to pay for it. So keep sending your hints and cheats to Mellissa Ravenflame, I.D.E.A.S Central, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. 1985 JERRY PARIS SPECTRUM SPECTRUM POKES POKES All in a twist with Twister on the 65364.210:RANDOMIZE USER tip, says it can be used at any a lead bar. Spectrum? John Goodrige of 65340 point and in any area of the game. 4 The bar in kranos has unlimited Plympton, Plymouht is at hand to 25 POKE 32421, RANDOMIZE amounts of drinks available. So all guide you. USER 23450 Robert Beever, of Penistone, your party can increase their Screen 1: Take your time in Now rewind the tape to the offers the following help to those strength rate to 200. jumping as you can see what is beginning and enter this POKE. playing Mindstone. 5 Buy the object off the pixie. coming next. Avoid the horseshoe Now type RUN and just start tape. 1 The Open spell will remove a Swap this with the object or missile. When confronted with To gain infinite lives, shields and boulder. belonging to the woodelf. The just one way to go and an evil bombs on Mikro-Gen's Stainless 2 The Fireball spell will destroy a tiger amulet can be swapped with object in the way, move to the Steel press P.A.S.D and ENTER wall of ice. the sorcerer in Kranos middle or just passed your present keys at the same time.R 3 The Alchemy spell works only if 6 A talisman can open the slab and jump Papworth, of Fife, who sent in the the character casting it is carrying doomgate. Screen 2: It is essential that you shoot the spring as it will kill you if it comes near. Pick up as many shields and ammo as possible. It is badly needed. Shoot as many Charlottes as possible. Keep to Okay, all you C16/Plus 4 owners, SYS 6129 962,115: POKE 963,141: POKE the middle so it is easier to collect we've got a bumper load of pokes Runner: POKE 8992,34 POKE 964,245: POKE 965,128 the letters. for you. They're from R. B. Porter, 8993,35 SYS 4120 (RETURN) Screen 3: Again keep to the of Rotherham. Thanks R.B., but Commando: POKE 13197,234 Now type SYS 686 to LOAD the middle, shooting as much as why so formal? SYS 9846 game. When it RUNs you should possible. With all these games you have Galziana: POKE 9635,234 POKE have lots of pumpkins. Screen 4: Use your backpack to to LOAD as normal and then 9636,234 SYS 4768 thrust above symbols and then press RESET. All of the above will give you Michael has also sent us a drift back-but don't take too Kickstart: POKE 10403 234 infinite lives except Legionaire listing for Bomb Jack long POKE 104,234 SYS 8192 which will only give you 255. 10 FOR A = 300 to 313: READ Screen 5: Always get Charlotte B:POKE A,B:NEXT Here what Michael Perks, of Solo: POKE 13595.234 POKE and the spring 13596,234 SYS 10915 Wyboston, Bedfordshire, calls 20 DATA 169, 173,141,216,15 Fed up with being floored in Sai Robin to the Rescue: POKE some \"ultra cool\" POKEs for 30 DATA 169,1.141,195,14 Combat? try this POKE on the 8808,234 POKE 8809,234 SYS infinite pumpkins in Cauldron II. 40 DATA 32,132,255,96 Spectrum from Willia Wade, of 9984 Right, rewind the cassette and Type LOAD (RETURN) and push Spalding, Lincolnshire, which will Punchy: POKE 4234,234 POKE type in: POKE 1:POKE 783,1: PLAY to LOAD in the first part of 4235,234 POKE 4236,234 SYS give 255 lives. the game ad when the READY POKE 830,34: POKE 832,50: 5 CLEAR 24610 4112 SYS 62828 prompt appears, enter the 10 INPUT \"Number of lives (1 to Booty: POKE 9013,96 SYS 4120 Press PLAY when instructed following: 255)\";I:<1 or 1> Invaders: POKE 8517,234 SYSand when the READY prompt POKE 1011,44 255 THEN GOTO 10 4110 appears enter the following: POKE 1012,1 15CLS: PRINT \"PLAY SAI Spectipede: POKE 6791,234 FOR K 679 to 767: POKEK, POKE 306,(1-250) size of bonus. COMBAT TAPE FROM START.\" POKE 6792,234 SYS 4218 PEEK (K+8192): NEXT Run (RETURN) will LOAD and run 20 LOAD \"CODE:POKE Legionaire: POKE 10202,255 (RETURN) POKE 961,169: POKE the game. continued "


"ATARI ATARI Coff this throwust fin One way to complete Mercenary T ake the pass and exit through 11 The Second City on the Atari one-way teleport and then take is, according to Gary Whitehead, the pas to (08_**) and climb to of Bolton, to collect the Novadrive 5,000 feet and look down. You and take it to the Interstellar ship should find an elevator which you which is hidden in the city. can operate with the pass. Go To find the ship you must find down and you should find the the maze which is through the ship plain door off the hanger at Location (13-08). Once through the door you will be in a green Here's a magical hint from room with four doors. Andrew Waller of New Eltham, Take the left door into a London, for the Atari version of four-doored blue room. Take right The Price of Magick. When you door into green room and then die, says Andrew, the game right into blue room. Turn round and exit through the door you «Restart\" have just entered. You should Type \"restore\" or Restart\" now find yourself in a green room several times and the lenslok with four doors. should appear. Type only Now take the right door into incorrect letters and not the blue four-doored room, then right correct code. After the lenslok is into green room and right again finished you should be where the into purple room which has a pass game ended with about 245 in it. stamina points Sal 98b1 BBC The excellent Citadel on the Now move to the screen left of Acorn Electron continues to the Central Tower and jump on attract a lot of interest. These to the platform. When it is at its hints come from Paul Drew, of highest point jump right to land Manchester. higher on the Cental Tower. Crystal one is in the room Go into the C and you will get above the main hall. The transported to where the fourth second crystal is in the Witch's crystal is. House. To get in, bounce on top For the last crystal get the of the roof using the \"Tutankhamen\" heads. Go into When your man goes in the (d) Sidewinder (e) Gecko (1) trampoline. Go on top of the the pyramid by going left where cr e crouch position ready to Python (g) Salamander (h) Iguana chimney and jump up. the top serpent is and following an invisible trail to the entrance. 9 perform his sweep, your (1) Cuttlefish (1) Octopus (k) Giant Before you can collect the crystal you must kill the Witch. clam (1) The Kraken By dropping the heads in the anticipation of your move. To do this get the green skull first two screens you will stop Before you have a chance to from the West Tower. Jump the mummies attacking you. Can anybody help Salmaan finish your foot sweep press over the cauldron and it will fall Get the chicken from the ESCAPE' and D to do a sidekick. sick Siddiqui, from New Southgate, in. Do the same to the magenta freezer and cook it in the bone and the cyan bone from This method has taken me on to London, who needs help with kitchen. Take it to the temple tenth Dan and has achieved Elite on the BBC Model B. the Pyramid. The Witch will die past the star port until you very high scores. How do you get into witch space allowing you to get the crystal come to the ocean where the Alan Ball, of North with the Thargoid on purpose? from the room below. muliticoloured ball stops you. The third is in the lab which is Is it possible and if so how do Humberside, pleads for more collect the statue and take it and more BBC POKES. Here's you do it? down the well. to the bottom of the pyramid his offering. Can you do better? Any Elite addicts who can help To get it you have to collect where the last crystal will Planetoid: Press ESCAPE should send their advice quickly to the ice crystal from the cellar appear. and go to the East Tower where Other Electron tip from Paul's after loading all parts and type I.D.E.A.S. Central. 78276B=&99:GOTO 200 and the green key is. collection are: Meanwhile Salmaan sends press RETURN. This gives you The water will be frozen so Beach Head: When you go to these extra lives POKES: 99 lines and smart bombs. you can get the key. Take it to meet your enemy fleet move Snapper: ?&FDD=* Meteors: Again press the well wheel and pull the your cross to the big open gap ESCAPE after loading all parts Meteors: ?&1711+ lever. where a white line stops you Monsters: 781F04+* of the game and type Then get the cannonball from going back out again. When you 7&1711+36°GOTO 400. This Chuckie Egg: 7&V4BFD=' the mountains, the powder have defeated the enemy fleet gives 36 lives. Any moreand the Killer Gorilla: ?&1138+ from the west wing above the you can go back through the program will crash. Remember will equal the arena and go down the well. secret passage and fight the BBC Model B owner Salmaan number of lives you want. Go right at the screen second Go right at the screen second enemy fleet again. This can be Siddiqui, of New Southgat, Poor old Rodney Patrick of from the bottom of the well. done as many times as you London, sends these POKES for Stockport, is well and truly stuck Walk into the cannon which will wish and it greatly improves Rubble Trouble. 78 24355 No of while playing the BBC B version of knock down the wall and you your score. lives and 78 2435=&7A for Ultimate's Nightshade. can get the crystal. Yie-Ar Kung Fu: Knocking infinite lives. \"I was wondering if you know of The fourth crystal is in the your opponent out at the same cental tower. First go to the an infinite lives POKE or listing time as he knocks you out gives screen next to the tower and which works successfully with you, for some reason, PSST! Pass the word on about throw the switch. somewhere in the region of Superior Software's Repton. Nightshade or if you know of Next go to the top of the East 200,000 to 300,000 extra points. 200,000 to 300,000 extra points. BBC-type person Tim Matthews, someone else who could possibly Tower and fall off diagonally of Bollinaton Cheshire, has sent provide a solution to my growing Way of The Exploding Fist: getting killed by the monk, On levels from third Dan I.D.E.A. Central all the passwords burdon?\" pleads Rodney. again fall diagonally and you upwards a way that never fails to the game. Well, can anybody put him out will land on the blue wall. is as follows: Press ESCAPE and Here goes: screen a) Screen of his misery? Write in without Go left and pull the lever. X to perform a foot sweep. one (b) Chameleon (c) Terrapin delay and tells us. "


"JACK THE NIPPER m Gremlin Graphic's Jack the Now quickly go to the left again Nipper, C+VG's Game of the util you see a key. Pick this up and Month in September, is naughty go to the bank which is on the but nice. same street. Drop the peashooter Mark Jakes. 16. from Sandy outside and then go inside and Bedfordshire, has cracked the drop the key. Now (this is quite game on the MSX. But he swears difficult to explain) go towards the his hints and help will be of use for secret passage so that half of the game on other formats. This is Jack's body is in line with the wall. from Matthew Wilkinson, of This prevents him from going into Sutton Coldfield, in the West the tunnel, but allows him to pick Midlands up the floppy disk. Pick up the peashooter from the Now leave the bank carrying shelf in the room. Go to the 'l. the floppy disc. Go to the Bloom' shop, shooting as many \"Playskool' and pick up the potty. people as possible with your Go to the china shop, leave the shooter. floppy disk outside. Go in and As soon as you enter the shop. jump up onto the shelf. Pick up jump to the right to avoid the one plate and drop it so it moving plant. Jump up onto the smashes. Now drop the potty so it shelf on the right and pick up the too smashes. If you like you can second lot of bottled weedkiller. now pick up the other plate and Go to the end of the street and drop that as well. Leave promptly not forgetting to pick up the floppy in the wall. Go to the end of the disk drive you left outside. next street as well and do the Make your way to the same. Now go left until you get to technology research but on the the cemetery. Shoot the two way go to the policy station and moving ghosts before they chase pick up the battery vou. Now move one more screen Go inside the technology left and you will be in the carden. research and jump up so you are Drop the weedkiller and leave standing next to the computer when the screen stops flashing. running the factory. When the Go back into the cemetery and shoot all three ghosts. Take the bag of fertilizer and drop it in the garden Cemetery screen stops flashing you can the 'Hummo Sock' shop. Again, drop the disk. stand on one end of the conveyor Go to the Just Micro' shop and belt than after the screen has drop the battery in front of the finished flashing, drop the weight irror-like object. NOW g and drop the battery properly. Leave the street and go to the Go to the Playskool again and bank, pick up the key and go pick up the clay. Leave and then inside. Drop the key and enter the make your way back again. Go secret passage. into the play room and drop the Pick up the washing powder clay anywhere, but make sure you and the credit card. leave quickly Go to the 'Laundrette' and jump Go one screen to the left and up and down in front of each enter the 'laundrette'. Pick up the machine causing each one to glue. Leave and go to the police overflow. Drop the powder and station. Go inside and then into leave quickly. the jail. Pick up the weight. Leave. Go to the bank and jump up at Leave this street through the the credit machine, this will go opening in the wall and you'll find wrong so that you can drop the yourself outside the denture shop. card. Go inside and jump on one end of Go inside and pick up the key. the conveyor belt. Drop the glue Go to the museum, pick up the and leave quickly. statue and drop it so it smashes Go left one screen and enter so that you gain more points. Go down the secret passage, collect the horn and the bomb from the haunted house and leave so you arrive back in the graveyard. Use the hooter to scare the cats in your living room, the police station, the playschool. Use the bomb to free the prisoners from the jail. saya 98610 2 Plaaske), your Cemetery Bank house S.P. = secret passage To Gummo's Chomping molars Technology I. Blume Hummo gummo s Socks NChomping Molars Research Koy Just Shop ILNrette SUS China Police Shoppe] Station Start Just Micro DS.P1 To za coperteng Down "


"Beyond the wheel THE BEST BEYOND ROOM TEN RBOY BOBBY BEARING Bismarck SPECTRUM YOUR SPECIWN CRUL Best of Beyond SPECTRUM .95 BEYOND 03 Bobby Bearing C64 .95 THE EDGE Room Ten C64 .95 CRL Bismarck C64 .95 Paper Boy SPECTRUM .95 ELITE SYSTEMS HEARTLAND IRIDIS IOC FISTII The Legend Continges BY JEFF MINTER REET HAWK MELBOURNE HOUSE Street Hawk SPECTRUM .95 OCEAN Fistil Heartland SPECTRUM .95 ODIN LLAMASOFT HEWBON Iridis Alpha C64 .95 HEWSONALLAMASOFT Pub Games SPECTRUM .95 ALLIGATA SPECTRUM .95 MELBOURNE HOUSE C64 XARO Xara Hole In 1 C64 .99 MAD CRAM Uchi Mata C64/128 .95 MARTECH MAGIC CAULDRON Asterix & The Magic Cauldron (64 9.95 MELBOURNE HOUSE SPECTRUM .99 ELECTRIC DREAMS Ninja C64 .99 ENTERTAINMENT USA ROOM TEN PEERBOY ARL Psycastria BBC .95 AUDIOGENIC SOFTWARE Winter Events Room Ten Jack the Nipper C16/PLUS 4 .95 SPECTRUM .95 C64 .95 ANCO CRL GREMLIN AVAILABLE FROM SELECTED BULLDOG DEALERS Paper Boy C64 .95 ELITE SYSTEMS TOYS AUS Littleweeds makro SPERRINGS Lewiss AND FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE DEALERS BULLDOG DISTRIBUTION LIMITED TEL: (0782) 563399 TELEX: 36247 BULLDOG "


"HACKERS U.S. GOVERNMENT NEEDS YOU! Ba BILAN HACKER SH The Doomsday Papers THE RUSSIANS HAVE A DOCUMENT KNOWN AS THE DOOMSDAY PAPERS THE CIA NEEDS YOU TO STEAL IT THE BUREAU WILL LET YOU HOOK-UP TO THEIR HIGH TECH HARDWARE AND THEIR SATELITE SO YOU CAN DO THE JOB ON YOUR COMPUTER THE PROBLEM THE LOCATION OF THE PLANS. THE GUARDS THE SECURITY MONITOR OR SOMETHING CALLED.... THE ANNIHILATOR. ....HELP!.... ACTIVISION HOME COMPUTER SOFTWARE For Commodore 64/128 cassette and disk. Sinclair ZX Spectrum cassette, Amstrad CPC cassette and disk, Atari ST, Commodore Amiga, IBM PC, PCjr. Apple Il Series and Apple Macintosh Available from all SERIOUS Home Computer Software stockists! "


". ALIENS Fantasy film fans are in for a real treat this autumn. There's a whole host of action packed movies coming your way in the shape of aliens, mystical martial artists, Scottish time travellers and even a duck! Just when you thought it was safe to back into your local picture palace to .. Cow about this for a irritating younger brother could be spectacular line up of whisked away by goblins or fairies. entertainment on the silver And funnily enough that's just what screen? Labyrinth starring David happens. Filled with remorse Sarah Bowie, Aliens--the follow up to descends into the Labyrinth to rescue Ridley Scott's Alien, Highlander -a her brother from the Goblin King. tale of time-travelling immortals, BigHere she meets up with some of Mr Trouble in Little China -martial arts Henson's creations -who include mayhem in San Fransisco, Howard the cute Hoggle, Sir Didymus, the the Duck-George Lucas takes on a giant ludo and tons of assorted evil cult comic book characters, beings and creatures. Solarbabies -sci-fi adventures on Labyrinth evolved from Henson's roller skates! All that plus a couple of last feature film, Dark Crystal, science fantasy videos Explorers and featured on the front cover of C+VG D.A.R.Y.L. many moons ago. Labyrinth features Don't know about you, but it looks some of his even more sophisticated as if the entire C+VG team are going radio controlled creations. to be spending the next few months The whole movie looks quite stuck in the back row of the cinema stunning and with a soundtrack by living off a diet of dodgy popcorn and Bowie himself, will provide some ice-cream. stunning viewing. We'll be looking in Four of the above films will have depth at the creation of the computer game tie-ins. That's Aliens Lucasfilm/Activision game based on and Big Trouble coming from Electric the film in a future issue. Dreams, Labyrinth from Activision and Highlander from Ocean. ALIENS LABYRINTH O ALIENS HIGHLANDER BIG TROUBLE IN LITTLE CHINA SW. Terminator. Sigourney Weaver again plays Ripley, the Melissa Ravenflame of the silver screen, who defeated the awesome alien in the original film. You'll remember that Ripley escaped the Nostormo in a escape pod. ALIENS finds her 57 years later drifting through space still dozing in her sleep capsule. She is taken to a space station orbiting high above the earth where she is horrified to learn that while she has been asleep the planet where the crew of the Nostromo found the alien hatchery has been colonised by foolhardy earthlings. Ripley attempts to persuade the administrators of the danger. But, you guessed it, they don't want to believe her horrifying story. But the chiefs start getting a bit worried when all contact is lost with the colony. Ripley agrees to go with a squad of highly trained space marines to the LABYRINTH Let's kick off with Labyrinth David Bowie's collaboration with the Muppet man Jim Henson. Bowie plays the shapeshifting Goblin King who rules the weird world of the Labyrinth, battleground of the goblin race. Star of the film is Sarah, a young lady who wishes and wishes that her Next up is ALIENS, the follow up to the classic gothic science fiction horror film released way back in 1979. That film told the gripping story of the crew of a space freighter who discover an indestructible alien lifeform on a forgotten planet in the far reaches of the universe. The new film is directed by James C ameron the same man who gave you Arnold Schwartznegger in  LABYRINTH "


" HIGHLANDER distant planet-and that's when the nightmare starts all over again. Amazing effects, terrific attention to gritty detail, make this movie a worthy follow up to the original. If you live in London you might just recognise one of the locations used by the filmakers. It's the disused power station at Acton, West London, which for the duration of the film became the Atmospheric Processing Station on the unhospitable planet of Archeron. The interior was converted into a cavernous alien organic labyrinth by set designer Peter Lamont Such was the attention to detail that the director enlisted the help of British Aerospace who supplied some of the latest laser weapons technology for the space marines! ALIENS is coming your way soon. Don't miss it. Greystoke. Christopher has a tough time with our peculiar inflections accent-wise. Large chunks of the film take place in Scotland in 1536, requiring Mr L. to assume a voice so amazingly unnatural to him that he has to practically wrestle every syllable to the ground. Not only does he have to speak in a strange accent, but he must keep his raincoat on nearly all the time. It just isn't the done thing to plod around dark streets with a sharp metal blade hooked through your belt. The Kurgan has no such qualms. He is Connor's final enemy. Kurgan is played by Clancy Brown. As well as getting to wear the best outfits amazing battered leather and chains in the present day, and a truly spooky skeletal battledress in the Scottish Highlands) and some cracking lines -like \"Nuns no sense of humour!\"he also has the most impressive sword. On arriving in a seedy hotel, he goes up to his room and unpacks a wonderful component broadsword in the same way an assassin would assemble his rifle. Russell Mulcahy's direction seems more at home in the dark and eerie streets of N.Y.than on the rolling hills of Scotland. In order to appear normal, Connor must be seen to die every half-century or so, before assuming the identity of a dead child, and starting a new life. It's not much fun, being immortal. Just when you settle down with your ideal mate, someone will discover that you can't die. Connor was banished from his Scottish tribe after such an event. Five years later, up pops Sean Connery and with little more than \"You're immortal. Follow me!,\" they're off getting ready for The Gathering. Although Mr Connery is far from the most prominent character, he is wonderfully flamboyant, and gives a memorable performance as Ramirez. The swordfighting sequences are each other. The story of Big Trouble in Little China is based on Chinese mythology. These myths almost invariable concern human beings with magical powers, not gods. And according to this mythology, perpetual life on earth is accorded not only to the forces of good, but also to the demons of evil those from Hell. Chinese mythology is filled with such people as the Dragon King, the Monkey God, the King of the Dead, the Dark Warrior, the Green Dragon of the East and hundreds more. masterfully executed, and Big Trouble In Little China adds decapitations are quite tasteful ... the evil Lo Pan, who's been around Highlander is a real adventure for over 2000 years, looking for a movie. The music of Queen which green-eyed maiden to free from an plays throughout fits well, and ancient curse and restore him to his Clancy Brown gives the most, um, physical body. *memorable\" rendition of New Jack's troubles begin when he York, New York while taking Brenda accompanies his friend Wang Chi, a Wyatt (as Roxanne Hart) on a tour of plucky restauranteur, to the airport the city. Worth a trip to your local to meet his future bride, who is triple screen for! kidnaped before their eyes by heavily-armed thugs. BIG TROUBLE IN In their pursuit of the kidnappers, Jack and Wang Chi acquire as allies LITTLE CHINA Gracie Law, a local attorney, Egg Shen, an enigmatic tour bus driver There's more mayhem in Big who seems to know a lot about Trouble in Little China -which stars ancient Chinese magic for a tour bus Kurt Russell, who you may have seen driver, and Margo Litzenberger an in the neat sci fi movie Escape from eager but inexperienced reporter. New York. Big Trouble is a sort of Together they do battle with an action adventure kung fu monster, outlandish array of enemies, sporting ghost comedy story set in the names like Lightning, Thunder, wonderful city of San Fransisco. Rain, The Wild Man, The Eye, The Kurt plays a great character called Sewer Monster, The Door Guards, Jack Burton-an All-American Needles, Joe Lucky and One Earhero. He gets caught up in a web of all under the command of the inscrutable Chinese gangs who seem centuries-old Lo Pan. who is not your to have only one aim in life-killing average villain. HIGHLANDER And then came Highlander. Madison Square Garden. New York. 1986. Two men stand facing each other. One is dressed in jeans, trainers and a raincoat. The second man is shorter, stocky, with sunglasses and a pintstripe suit. Both men are holding broadswords. There's real trouble brewing. These men have been around for centuries. They're both immortal. Highlander is the story of Connor Macleod, and his bid to survive The Gathering. Unfortunately for us mortals, it's been decided that the Gathering shall take place in New York, in 1986. Here, ALL the immortals will gather, and only one will be alive at the end. Whoever survives will decide the fate of the world. Highlander is the latest vehicle for Christopher Lambert, star of Subway and the Tarzan movie, BIG TROUBLE IN LITTLE CHINA "


"STRELESS SUSE: Spectrum/Amstrad Cassette .95 Amstrad Disc .95 MIKRO-GEN Unit 15 The Western Centre Western Road Bracknell Berks. leinar "


"EXPLORERS On the video front watch out for Joe Dante's Explorers. Surprisingly, it's not being released for the cinema. It tells the tale of a bunch of whizz-kinds who build their own space ship out of scrap and travel off to a planet where they meet Wak, Neek and a whole bunch of wacky aliens. It's a fantasy adventure with some fun special effects. Worth renting from your local video shop. Also on video is D.A.R.Y.L. You can read more about elsewhere in this issue. You can win a copy of the movie on page 106! One of the most featured figures of Megatron, badly injured in the fight Chinese legend, Lo Pan was with Autobot leader Optimus Prime, subjugated to an eternal hell of returns to the Decepticon base, only fleshless existence by the first to be \"ejected into space by his . emperor of China, Qin Shi Huang, \"fellow Decepticons. over 2000 years ago. He has the Megatron meets up with the power to transform himself from a all-powerful Unicron and soon wheelchair-bound old man to a returns, powers fully restored, to youthful, seven-foot-tall mystical menace. Featuring the Dinobots, the The places Burton and his friends Sharkticons and the excellent are led in their rescue are equally Junkions (with Eric Idle as the voice eerie and mind-boggling. They must of Wreck-Car), the Transformers visit -and survive the Room of smash their way through this the Upside-Down Hell, The non-stop-action-packed movie. Honorable Hall of the Infernal Judge, The Mansion of the Disloyal, SOLARBABIES The Hell of the River of Ashes, The Spirit Path, The Iron Basin and The Solarbabies is all about a bunch of Great Arcade. orphans forced to play skate-ball, a Big Trouble is a fun film-packed game which is a mixture of Rollerball with action and laughs. Jack Burton and Rollerhockey. They live in a is a truly terrific character. Could society dominated by the Energy their be a sequel? Protectorate, which controls all the water on a drought hit Earth. During HOWARD THE DUCK one game their mascot Daniel discovers an object called Bodhi This is a strange movie, having which they later find might possess read the comics this film is based on the power to overthrow the I can tell you that the original flavour Protectorate is still there. This kicks off a mammoth chase A normal, average duck gets with the Solarbabies being persued transported by laser from his own by the forces of evil as they dash planet, Duckworld, across the across the cursed Earth encountering Cosmos and dropped into the middle many awesome enemies. of Cleveland, Ohio. Cleveland is, apparently, the armpit of America and it takes Howard little time to find himself in big trouble--and there's plenty of that. This film has a little of everything. Countless punch-ups, an all-girl rock band, car chases, truck chases, microlite chases, the obligatory over-the-top special effects from Industrial Light and Magic (of Star Wars, Indiana Jones fame.) Poor old Howard has to also deal with a well hideous monster, dim policemen and as if Howie hasn't got enough on his plate--it's duck hunting season too! The funniest scenes by far are those involving the villain, a human scientist, possessed by an off-world demon intent on destroying all human life. ..VDEO TRANSFORMERS The battle between the Heroic Autobots and the Evil Deceptiocons continues in this animated movie, based on the adventures of Transformers toys. Daniel a mere earthling-and his Autobot friend Hot Rod are caught up in the battle when the Decepticons, led by Megatron, attack Earth-based Autobot City. EXPLORES D.A.R.Y.L. EXPLORERS "


" COMPETITION 7 SMORENE 2002 D.A.R.Y.L. COMPETITION On the face of it Daryl looks like an ordinary all American boy. Cute, clean-cut and very wholesome. Just like C+VG's editorial team, in fact. But Daryl has a secret. He's not human at all. Daryl stands for Data Analysing Robot Youth Lifeform. And that explains why he's been \"targetted for destruction\" Interested in what happens next? Would you like to win the video of the film? Then just read on and find out all about this great C+VG/RCA/Columbia competition. But first back to the plot ... The film opens with Daryl wandering alone in the hills following a hair-raising car chase and crash. He is fostered by Joyce and Andy Richardson, a couple unable to have children of their own, who soon grow to love him. But who is Daryl? He cannot remember anything of his past but is obviously a very special child. Once he learns something it is always done to profection he is a mathematical genius, a computer wizard, a brilliant baseball player and he plays the piano like Rubinstein! One day Daryl hits a home run in the Little League baseball game and his picture appears in the paper. Then out of the blue Daryl's \"real\" parents arrive to take him home. What follows is a battle for survival as Daryl tries to unravel the mystery and discover the truth about himself. Now for the competition details. We've got 20 copies of D.A.R.Y.L. to give away as prizes thanks to RCA/Columbia Pictures Video UK. Here are the titles of four science fiction films all jumbled up: RYLDAR. EKTR RATS. IENSAL. SRAT AWSR. All you have to do is unravel them and send your answers together with the printed coupon to D.A.R.Y.L. Competition, Computer+ Video Games Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date for the competition is October 16th and the editor's decision is final. C+VG/RCA/COLUMBIA D.A.R.Y.L. COMPETITION Name Address .......... Please indicate which video format you have, VHS O Beta "


"Maungart SAVEEEES 5l«Disks *FREE!! SAVEELES FREE E/SES have Wit as 1052 I TIFF 10 GET 12  50GET59 Compumart 544 Disks Home Library Care Ten Dicks Slank Disks Quality .  +2 FREE Disks end 10% . 10 pole sided .+ 10 FREE Disks Somedy . . Sopouble Sided Hub Rings, Envelopes, Labels etc Work Quality 39Microdisks TOP abels BOXED IN 10's -LABELS etc.... SINGLE SIDED DOUBLE SIDED 135 T.RI. 135 T.RI. 10-AMSOFT 3°CF2 Microdisks ... .com .W:00 Same Day 24 Hour Credit Card Order Line 0509-233893 Despatch o Before 4pm ALL Prices Inc. VATPlease send cheques/postal orders to: Compumart, (Dept CVG) Unit 8, Falcon Street, Loughborough, leics, LE11 IEH Compumart -0509-262259= HOTLINE) SUPA SOFT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE THANKS FROM C+VG TO ALL OUR READERS ANOTHER 15% YEAR ON YEAR GROWTH IN SALES NEW ABC 97,876 STILL BY FAR THE LARGEST SELLING GAMES MAGAZINE IN THE WORLD CUT PRICE SOFTWARE (PRESENT THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL OFFERS TO C+VG READERS) (BORING STATEMENT BUT JUST CHECK THE REST AND COME BACK TO THIS AD FOR THE REAL BARGAIN SOFTWARE) SPECTRUM RRP OUR RRP OUR RRP OUR 1495 10.00 Sold Milion 9.95 6.50 Ace Ghost & Goblins 7.95 5.00 Street How 7.95 5.25 Equinox 9.95 6.50 8.96 6.00 Sainless Steel 8.96 6.00 intrator 995 5.50 9.95 6.50 Hunchback oven 7.95 5.25 Inftrator (D) Cave Adventure 7.95 5.25 Bouncers 9.95 7.25 Paralex 8.95 5.00 Mantra 7.95 5.25 Bobby Bearing 7.95 525 Parallax (0) Paperboy 7.95 5.25 LC.U.P.S. 8.95 6.00 Knight Games Biggles 9.95 6.50 XFist 2 8.95 6.00 Expert Cart) 7.95 5.25 Int Matchday (128) 9.95 6.50 Triv Pursuit (0) 19.95 15.95 Spitting Images 7.95 5.25 Sam Fox 8.95 6.00 Rock & Wrestle 8.95 6.00 COMMODORE 64128 Turbo Esprit 8.958.00 Starstrike 2 7.95 5.00 Nexus 9.95 6.50 Pentagram 9.95 6.50 Price of Magick 9.95 6.50 AMSTRAD Cass Disk Movie 7.95 5.25 PSI 5 Trading 9.95 5.50 Sold a Million 2 6.95 10.00 Trivial Pursuit 14.95 10.00 PSI 5 Trading (D 14.95 10.95 Bomback 6.95 10.00 Saboteur 8.95 6.00 Leaderboard 9.95 6.50 Green Beret Turbo Esprit 8.95 6.00 Leaderboard (D) 14.96 10.95 Batman 6.25 10.00 Titanic 9.95 6.95 Sabateur 8.95 6.50 Batman (8256) Heavy on Magick 9.95 6.50 Solo Flight 2 9.95 6.50 Monopoly 7.00 10.95 Price of Magick 9.95 6.50 Trivial Pursuit 14.95 10.00 Sam Fox Miami Vice 7.95 5.25 Paper Boy 9.95 6.50 Scrabble 10.95 700 Jack the Nipper 7.95 5.25 Solo Flight 2 (D) 14.96 10.95 Mini Office 2 Kung Fu Master 7.95 5.50 Iridis Alpha 8.95 6.00 6.25 10.00 7.95 5.00 Alleycat 8.95 6.00 Trivial Pursuit 10.00 15.96 Outron 8.95 6.00 Hunchback Adven 8.95 6.00 Tau Ceti 7.00 10.00 Rebel Planet 9.95 6.50 Street Hawk 8.95 6.00 Spin Dizzy 700 1000 G. Bert 7.95 5.25 Way of the Tiger 7.56 5.25 Bite 14.95 10.96 Price of Magick 7.00 NA Dynamite Dan 2 7.95 5.25 (D) 17.95 13.96 Mice 625 10.00 9.95 6.50 Mission Ad 8.95 6.00 Movie 525 10.00 9.95 7.00 Groen Beret 8.95 6.00 Way Tiger 700 10.05 Tantalus 8.95 6.00 XFist 2 7.00 10.95 City Slicker 8.95 6.00 Mike 8.95 6.00 Room 10 5.00 10.00 Uridium 8.95 6.00 Graphic Creator 22.95 17.00 Jack Nipper 6.50 10.00 Firelord 8.95 6.00 Graphic C(D) 27.95 22.00 Superbowl 6.50 10.00 Yie Ar Kung Fu 7.95 5.00 Sold Million 2 9.95 6.50 Paperboy 7.00 10.96 Ping Pong 7.95 5.00 Saboteur 8.95 6.50 X Fist 2 Atlantic Challenge 7.95 5.25 Tau Ceti 9.95 6.50 Turbo Esprit 6.50 10.00 Graphic Creator 22.95 17.00 Tau Ceti (0) 14.96 10.95 G. Gooch Theatre Europe 9.95700 NOMAD 7.00 10.00 Cauldron 2 8.95 5.50 Atlantic Challenge 8.95 6.00 Sold a Million 6 95 10.00 Cheque and PO (sterling only please) made payable to: DISCOUNT SOFTWARE, Dept 3, 210 Nicholls Tower, Harlow, Essex CM18 6EF (Overseas orders add 75p per tape) (Any game which is not released when ordered will be sent on day of release) COMM 128 AMSTRAD Kung fu Mater Cases Disk Theatre Europe Monopoly Dragons BEHARRER Price of Mago Gooen Cart Turbo Esprit Trva Porut Heavy on Maple Trivial Pursus Sient Service Groen Bere es Games Exploding Fist 2 Indis Ahe Way Of The Sam Fox Stro Para Poerboy Price of Magic Winter Games 15.95 10.95 Cauldron 2 Green Baret Mervyn Mage.. Greener Heartland ..............95 696 Knight Rider...... 6.50 10.00 Start 2 PAP included. Overseas onders please al 750 per tape. Make cheques payable to C.P S a ssorders welcome by phone CUT PRICE SOFTWARE Unit 6, Stort House, Riverway, Harlow, Essex CM20 2DW Tel: (0279) 24433 (24 hour ansaphone) or 31956 During Office Hours "


"PAPADADADADADAD tempo staccato accel. IPA PA PA PAPARACADA cresc. decresc. Ever wondered who the people are who are responsible for the jingles on adverts which drive you completely barmy? Well, Jim Douglas thinks that Clever Music has a lot to answer for... Entering the studio of Clever Music is quite an experience in itself. The room is semi-soundproofed, with no windows. It's pretty disorienting, as you lose all track of time. The sheer amount of equipment is impressive. Heading the bill is a Commodore 64. Then there's a Yamaha CX5 (\"The little brother of the DX5\") and a YK10 keyboard. A 21 band graphic equalizer, noise reduction unit, compressor, amp and a hand-held vacuum cleaner also help to make Clever Music one of the most innovative companies around when it comes to sound production. During my visit, Robert Hartshorne, following sounds are all about, as well as keeping the listener amused. According to Robert, \"Tunes, beat and rhythm count\". Listening to his music, I can well believe it! «When I listen to that,\" he says with a slight grimace,\" \"I immediately think that it's too cluttered.\" I, of course, thought it was wonderful. On further listening though, I could begin to see what he meant. \"After a while, you get too close to the piece that you're working on\". This is beginning to sound like Rob Hubbard! \"And then you lose your critical factor. You end up sticking loads and loads of effects on, and muck it up in the process. \"The way to expand with game soundtracks is to produce just that -a soundtrack. In Rocky Horror, we had an individual tune for most of the characters. It's better than just having a single tune that plays on and on.\" Like every programmer, Robert has had his disasters. During the completion of the music for Back to the Future from Electric Dreams I found myself looking at the screen, and the disc was going round for a very long time. There was just nothing I could do. 2 Clever Music's producer, showed me around, and while twiddling various knobs, answered some silly questions. Robert is half of the company. The person who was sensible enough to be away when I turned up was Graham Jarvis. \"He's the electronics whizz,\" ROBERT HARTS HORNE says Robert, knowingly. As well as some rather impressive names in the advertising field, Robert proceeded to explain how everything I was trying my best not to look too and Graham have a long list of game works. The CX5 is linked to the baffled. After this, Robert decided it tunes to their credit; Rocky Horror, Commodore, which in turn, is linked to was time for a musical demonstration. Blade Runner, Space Doubt, Wizardry, to a tape deck. This is the place where Rummaging around for a while in a lan Botham's Test Match, Gyroscope, the sounds which cannot be created by large leather bag, he announced that Back to the Future, Spindizzy and \"normal\" methods are created. It all he'd play me their demo tape. Shortly, Tubular Bells. looks rather similar to many of the he emerged from the holdall and slid the The company has been around in its music programs which are available on tape into part of the stack of equipment present form for around a year now. the market today. Once they've made occupying some rather precariously They work from a converted bar up the sound, it's time to make up the balanced shelves. The tape is pretty underneath an estate agent's other tracks, before putting them all amazing. A truly professional job, it has somewhere in Sunny Tooting. together through the mixing board and an entertaining piece of conversation Firing up a large Philips TV, Robert tape machine. between each tune, explaining what the osajpopusauod DIS & We lost the whole lot.\" Their entire store of CX5 sounds was erased recently. They are still being re-created. Slowly. While I tried exceedingly hard to avoid dropping Muesli biscuit crumbs into any important equipment, I asked C tempo TVA PA PA PAPADOPPADA "


"PAPALAPAPAPA PA PA PA staccato cresc. decresc. VER M USIC tempo staccato accel. Opavavavahaba heard what the music will sound like wouldn't really have any idea of exactly through different mediums. There's not how to go about the project. much point listening to a radio advert They have incorporated this idea into through a pair of fantastic speakers, as their demo tape. Two characters are most people will hear the music through discussing that a company wanted to a portable radio.\" They've got a set of have a cheer in one place (as a cheer speakers to emulate just about very type sound in the background) and a roar in of output; radio, TV, stereo system or another (a roar is heard). It certainly Walkman (\"the ultimate test!\"). makes more sense to have an amusing Many people would like to get demo, rather than straightforward tape involved in the music business, Robert full of music. It explains that the started saying, \"When I was about 13 company is versatile and capable of or 14, my mum put me down for producing virtually any sort of tune. piano-lessons. The first record lever From a Russian choir, to a deserted Mr H what he thought of compact discs. bought was The Monkeys. I like \"Oh, they're going to be the next big anything that's good. It can be anything thing', aren't they? I think all the from Gary Glitter to Dire Straits. I library music will be stored on them.\" certainly don't like crass disco stuff, Graham and Robert have aimed though.\" themselves toward the middle-to-lower The demo tape finished, Robert gave price range in advertising terms. There a satisfied little huff and removed the isn't much point trying to attack the cassette. Glancing around the room, my larger companies at the moment. He's a eyes fell upon a couple of storyboards little sceptical when it comes to for advertisements. \"Ah, this one,\" 'inspiration'. \"We write to order. We said Robert, motioning toward a sheet like to think that we can produce quality pinned to a large board in one corner, music to a timescale and usually to a \"was for the BBC originally. It's for the budget.\" World Cup. Unfortunately, it ended up He is very honest when talking about on TVSW. We tend to do a lot of stuff desert island, from the World Cup to an what is and is not possible on a for regional areas. The lower-middle employment agency --Clever Music computer. \"You can't synthesize a real range of the market.\" seems able to simulate the lot! instrument on a computer. It's not Sometimes there are sounds which worth the effort. As long as the sounds just can't be electronically constructed. which you produce are pleasant to listen In some instances (like a very \"big\" to, it doesn't matter if they sound like a drum track) the sounds have a certain guitar, or whatever, or not.\" quality that is impossible to create. In The duo worked extensively on music such cases, the infamous use of equipment development for the sampling appears once more. Sampling Enterprise computer. «That was a bit just in case you haven't already been disastrous\", admitted Robert. told — involves making a recording of a Their partnership with CRL on a lot sound, and then reproducing it through of their computer-oriented music has the synthesiser. In one extreme case, seemed most successful. Assuming his Robert had to sample the sound of a most mysterious voice Robert Calor gas heater being struck with announced: \"There will be more along Storyboards are often considered a something heavy. The sound was played those lines soon!\" vital component in the business of backwards and -with a little electronic I quizzed Robert about the number of composing a soundtrack. Everything wizardy --was made to sound utterly speakers which occupy the room. Surely has to be timed perfectly in order to musical! there was no need for so many. \"The \"work\" without a layout of what Clever Music currently operate from reason we've got so many is so we can happened on the screen, Clever Musica converted basement beneath an estate agents \"Initially the place was going to be a bar, but then that idea was put aside. For a while it was rumoured to be an, um, place of ill repute.\" In my brief excursion into the music world, I tried to understand the various types of synthesis which were available. \"Emphasis is very good. You can simulate the difference in sound between a piano being played normally, or being hit with a sledgehammer.\" After they realised by their own admition--that they were too old and ugly to be pop stars, Graham delved further into the electronics field, while Robert became a songwriter for a while. He wrote a song for Shakin' Stevens which was, sadly, never recorded. A man who has crossed America \"coast to coast\", visited most of Europe and lived in Australia for three years, Robert said that Graham has been to the Isle of Wight. \"He thinks it's near Lanzarote!\" Clever Music seem to have cornered their own area of the market. With an increasing number of small companies being able to afford reasonable advertising rates, and more and more computer software houses requiring inventive and professional music to fit their games, it seems that they have secured themselves a livelihood for a long time to come. staccato cresc. decresc. JPA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA   od PAPADA DAPACITE "


"A Unique Opportunity to Experience the Magic of Flight and Exhiliration of Aerial Combat Can you deliver the Mosquito's sting to the heart of Germany \"No British aircraft will ever homb Berlin\". Luftwafle chiel Herman Goering had often boasted But in the middle of a Navi anniversary speech in January, 1943, his listeners duck for cover as a carefully timed raid of RAF Mosquites strikes Berlin in broad daylight Ace of Aces captures the spirit and puts you in the cockpit of the Mosquito, maverick RAF lighter bomber of World War II Down the Nari bombers, sink the U-boats, outrun the rockets and stop the cochly trains. Choose your weapons and fuel wisely once you're out on mission, there's o coing back. To become Ace of Aces, you must complete all missions successfully From the moment you won thround the clouds in a scrap with Nazi fighters to the heart-stopping second you spot the U-boats of Kid, the defence of the Allied world is in your hands. Are you equal to the challenge! 2 Once you master a few flying tricks in your speed bomber, you tackle strategy: selecting the right number of machine guns, rockets and bombs to achieve your mission. Your intercom flashes 'warning' on your starboard engine. An enemy lighter attack has left your Rolls Royce engine in flames. Cut back your boost and throttle. Hit the extinguishet before the line spreads. What does it take to be an Acel From you, legendary British pride and guts. From US Gold, legendary playability. US Gold has done its part. The rest is up to you. CBM 64/128 .99 Tape_Spectrum 48K .99 Tape U.S. .99 Disk Amstrad .99 Tape GOLD .99 Disk U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 3563388 "


"THE FIRST LAW OF ROBOTICS: A ROBOT MAY NOT INJURE A HUMAN BEING, OR THROUGH INACTION, ALLOW A HUMAN TO COME TO HARM... COURSE IT15! APART FROM THIS I GREW UP IN THIS LOUSY WEATHER... SECTOR...NEVER HAD ANY TROUBLE... IT ALWAYS SEEMS TO RAIN WHEN WE GOI WOULDNT WANT WAS THAT..? ANYTHING TO HAVE ARE YOU SURE SPOILT TONIGHT... THIS ALLEY-WAY LOOK, WE DON'T 15 SAFE..? WANT ANY TROUBLE. FELLAS...O.K..? WHAT? RREZ I'LL CALL IT IN, DANNY... LET'S GO HAVE A LOOK! THIS 15 UNIT FIVE... REQUESTING BACK-UP GOOD GRIEF! THEY'RE RIPPING SOMEONE TO SHREDS... DID YOU HEAR THAT..? OLICE YOU'RE ALL UNDER pping Qui ONE right FI WRITTEN AND DRAWN by JERRY PARIS 01986 "


"...AND NEW JUSTIN OF ANOTHER ROBOT RELATED KILLING.. A YOUNG COUPLE WERE TORN TO PIECES IN WHAT APPEARS ...WHICH TOOK TO BE A MOTIVELESS|| ATTACK.. MINUTES AWAY FROM LAST EVENINGS INCIDENTS THIS EVENING POLICE TONIGHT'S VICTIM'S HAVE REVEALEDA HAD BEEN GRUESOME TWIST ILPARTIALLY EATEN TO THESE MURDERS... 52 57 NEWZ HAVE YOU HEARD THE LATEST REPORTS? TWO MORE DEATHS.. THAT MAKES TWELVE THIS WEEK... THIRTY EIGHT IN ALL! WE VE GOTA CITY FULL OF FRIGHTENED PEOPLE IT'S ONLY A MATTER OF TIME BEFORE THEY START TO DISTRUST EVERY ROBOT! AND IF THAT HAPPENS...WHICH 15 WHY I CALLED YOU HERE TONIGHT... GOOD EVENING, MELISSA HEY, OTISS... IT'S YOUR FAVORITE LADY..AL I DONT THINK 50, JACKSON, HAVING COMMANDED A TRIPLE RSQUAD FOR EIGHT YEARS I'M WELL AWARE OF THE SITUATION... B-CON! LET ME INTRODUCE YOU TO THE NEW BUG HUNTERS! CAN'T YOU JUST HAVE A CAR IN YOUR GARAGE LIKE EVERYONE ELSE. *ROGUE ROBOT RUB-OUT SQUAD-ED. "


"GAMESTART ARE YOU GOOD ENOUGH TO TACKLE THE ULTIMATE IN SPORTS SIMULATION? CHAMPIONSHIP GBA CHAMPIONSHIP BASKETBALL GOLF Two-on-Two The Great Courses of the World In the US one company is hailed as the undisputed champion of sports simulation \"GAMESTAR'. That's because GAMESTAR is the only software label devoted exclusively to realistic and challenging sports action. Now the ultimate is available in the UK, so if you like your sports software to be a real life full action simulation of the real thing, if you want tough competition and all the colour and spectacle of the big game: start training now, because GAMESTAR is the real thing! Volume One : Pebble Beach KONSEP BASKET GLAMO in a m o UP GOLF her ral of them And Beach will for every inch CHAMPIONSHIP BASEBALL GBA CHAMPIONSHIP BASKETBALL Two-on-Two Designed by Troy Lyndon, Scott Orr and John Cutter The computer basketball challenge that picks up where the best of the others leave off. Here's the first and only computerized basketball game with two-on-two team action. A bur-division, 23-team league gives you the chance to reach the playoffs and go for the GBA Championship. It gives you real choices. Really lets you show your stuff. Game after game. Season after season. For Commodore 64 and 128. Coming soon for Apple / Series Commodore Amiga, Atari ST, IBM PC and PC ind Tandy 1000 CHAMPIONSHIP GOLF The Great Courses of The World Volume One: Pebble Beach Designed by Jerry Shurman and Henry Perkins with Interplay Productions You are there. Pebble Beach. Here's a stimulation so real you'll feel the crack of the ball as it sails off your driver... and sand in your shoes as you blast out of a deep bunker. So go ahead. Tee it up on Number 1. It's only 6600 yards to the 18th green And Pebble Beach will make you work for every inch. For IBM, PC, PC XT and AT and Tandy 1000. Coming soon for Apple il Series and Commodore Amiga You're the of cold, hengs in the NEW CHAMPIONSHIP BASEBALL Designed and produced by Scott Orr: developed by Darin Massens of Synergistic Software. Step into the major leagues of computerized Baseball. The lastest in premiere sports simulations from Gamestar US FOOTBALL FANS ..... WATCH THIS SPACE "


"WE'RE USING RED AGAIN..? HELLO! AFRAID SO. AND WHO'S THIS? THIS 15 LIEUT.LAWW. HE'S ON LOAN TO US FROM LONDON METRO. B-CON YOU ALREADY KNOW. WE'VE ER.... ADDED A FEW ITEMS... GOOD EVENING, M5, MELISSA... I'M SORRY TO INTERUPT BUT THERE'S A NEWS ITEM THAT YOU SHOULD VIEW... THE NAME'S GRILL. I'M A PYRO-TECH USED TO WORK, WE SURE HAVE.I'VE GOT MYSELF A NEW ANTI-GRAV UNIT WITH MULTIROLL CAPABILITIES AND PETRO-CHEM. DIV. ORIO OOD EVENING, MA'AM. HE LOOKS TOUGH... PUT IT ON SCREEN ONOT155... HE IS TOUGH. NOT BADEH? SHUT-UPB-CON! THE MILTON'S ONLY TEN MINUTES FROM HERE... WELL TAKE THE BUG-JET: LAWW.B-CON. YOU COME WITH US... THE REST OF YOU STAY HERE AND TRY NOT TO GET IN ANY TROUBLE... ...THIS 15 ED MED FOR KWX NEWS, JUST TO RECAPA IN MAINTENANCE ROBOT HAS TAKEN A FAMILY HOSTAGE IN THEIR LUXURY SUITE AT MILTON ROM AND WHO'S IDEA WAS IT TO CALL. THIS THING THE BUG-JET? ! I'LL BRING YOU FURTHER NEWS AS IT HAPPENS BUT NOW WE'LL RETURN YOU DO TONIGHITS TWILIGHT ZONE EPISODE, ALVIN THE AEROSOL... B-CON, NO SMART-A55 COMMENTS WHEN WE ARRIVE! MESS UP AND THAT CROWD WILL BOY. THAT MAKES JUST AS LIKELY PULL YOUR ME FEEL SETTER LITTLE TIN HEAD OFF! ABOUT THE WHOLE JOB.. VER CONTINUED...NEXT MONTH! "


"WHEN MERE MAN WAS NOT ENOUGH... ' IT WAS THE TIME OF... TUDND CRL Hot Line: 01-533 2918 URELLEUP PLC, CRL House 9 Kings Yard, Carpenters Road London E15 2HD "


"3. OW O SALAMANDER Salamander is so like Nemesis that at first sight they could almost be one and the same game. The fact that both are manufactured by Konami comes as no surprise. Konami has already got one highly successful game in Nemesis, one can only presume they hope to repeat the winning formula with Salamander Whatever the case, Salamander is a fast space shoot'em up and plays like a Defender/Scramble hybrid. Like Nemesis the idea is to fly from the left to right down a long tunnel and weave and blast your way through a whole bunch of assorted obstacles. By the graphics I'd say the same programmers worked on both games, yet they've managed not to duplicate too much. Arcade Action again gets to grips with the latest fighting warrior game Rygar. Clare Edgeley also reviews Konami's sequel to the fantastic Nemesis —enter Salamander, the latest shoot-em-up to test your reactions. ORYGAR Set at the dawn of time, or rather a few millenia after dinosaurs prowled the earth, there was a nitwit called Rygar. I mean anyone who wants to fight off mutant beasties single-handed must be soff in the head. Anyway, Rygar's the hero and you've got to help him achieve his lifelong ambition of world domination. The legendary Warrior has arrived, or so says the advertising blurb. For me, the Legendary Idiot has decided to make a wrong move. The game is fiendishly difficult, especially if, like me, you've been blessed with two left hands. Every time I thought I was getting somewhere, a winged lizard would drop some suicidal horned beast from the sky and splat! I was flat on my back and very dead. Still there's always another 20 pence and a few more lives. The nasties come in a variety of shapes and sizes, and move at different speeds. This can catch you out as you might be concentrating on putting an end to some legless Brontosaurus when a whooping gorilla puts an end to your legendary exploits. Concentration is the key. Luckily you have five attack moves, all made with a combination of joystick and fire button which copes with most of the monsters' antics. A rotation attack is espically good for knocking lizards out of the flame coloured sky. It is the dawn of time, I suppose. This manoeuvre sweeps Rygar's arm in creatures like the Bronfasuarus on your chips are up. However, I did a 180 degree arc (he must be stumps and the jumping attack will find that you can leap on top of triple jointed!) and takes flying take the leaping gonilos off their them without dying. Their touch nasties unaware. The lower attack guard. only seems to be fatal if you've got is great for dispatching lowly If one of the nasties touches you, both feet on terra firma, A map at the bottom of the screen shows how far you've travelled through each section and there are 27 rounds to fight through with around 300 screens. It should take you a while to get to the end and prove you're every bit the meglomanioc you thought you were. Rygar is extremely colourful with lots of punching action. Karate and Kung-fu type games have proved their popularity and have been done to death. Tecmo, the manufacturers, have at least used the concept in a totally new storyline, with original graphics. And the best thing of all is there's no soppy girl to rescue. Well worth a bash. I found it very tricky "


"O oma loo OXO * *wu You start off fairly quietly though it's only a brief lull before the storm, so beware. Shoot up a few waves of flying nasties and pick up the green blobs they leave behind. These attach themselves to the tail of your space craft and offer multiple firepower. Those of you who've played Nemesis will recognise the feature. You can pick up other blobs and what look like stray space craft to increase your speed, give missiles, force fields, lasers and ripple losers. Ripple lasers are devastating, they swirl outwards in spiral loops with a huge destruction range. Many of the obstacles seem to be laced with red veins giving a hombly gruesome appearance. In other screens you'll find yourself blasting a bloodly path through a shapless mass of pink squidgy stuff looking like some creepy alien's flesh. Yuk! Then there are the sweeping tentacles which waft down from the cavern's roof and floor to catch you. These have to be shot in the mouth before they disappear. You'll also find lurking in their shadow a space craft or blob which can't be picked up until the tentacles have been annihilated. Also watch out for the horns which shoot out from the sides like great pointed tusks just waiting to catch you off guard. You've only got three lives as they're easily wasted. However, when you do get killed there's no annoying delay, a replacement ship appears instantly, though without the additional attachments like Ripple lasers. A help in the initial stages is the voice-over which shouts instructions on what to pick up. At first, I couldn't understand what it was blathering on about but soon managed to decipher the blur into Pick up for multiple The pace is fast, the graphics excellent and though Salamander loses out on the originality stakes, a good game in its own right. N emesis fans should have no trouble with this one.  NEMESIS opponent, your ego is in tatters, GURIANOS your armour's dented and your arm's aching. Hardly a fit Great Gurianos! Two sword and combatant. Luckily, the first baddie shield fighting games in one month is fairly easy to dispatch. By using However, there the similarity with the three fire buttons, you can Trojan ends, for Toto's latest stab' your sword at head, chest release is a weird game of and knee height. If you use your one-to-one combat. shield and look for a hole in his Set in a star date light years into defence, you should have no the future, the inhabitants of this trouble. Kill him three times, leap mixed-up planet have been reading the history books. They've meet the Lady Irene a plump adopted the ancient Roman and dangerous maiden dressed in gladiator fights as a way of testing pink. Before you get to her, one's prowess with the sword. however, you'll have to deflect Battle to the death with a number another set of objects. of heavily armed brutes and prove Each new opponent comes with you're not a wimp. different scenery, a more tricky You start by clanking down a corridor of objects, and a meaner corridor wearing the space-age equivalent of a suit of armour outwards, like a giant-sized and boy do you need it! knuckle duster. Just the sort of thing Great balls of fire! What's this? A you would find in the arena, wave of flaming spheres rush upon while you're fighting your aim, you in formation, however, a spot other than to kill your opponent, is of nifty joystick manipulation sets to knock his armour off, leaving your shield in motion and blocks patches of bare flesh, thus making them. There's hardly time to it easy when you go in for the kill. breathe before your shield is Unfortunately, I found it usually needed again, this time to deflect happened the other way round, the path of a steel arrowhead. If and my opponent almost totally you're successful, it'll clang to the undressed me, so bad was my floor and earn you 2,000 bonus shield work. And using the shield to points when you step on it. block the enemy attacks was one In the early stages of each level of the most tiring features of the before you meet your opponents game. The fast pumping joystick you're given the treatment. To action is reminiscent of Doley exhaust your joystick arm (pushing Thompson's Decathlon and all the joystick rapidly up and down those knackered muscles and moves your shield in the same joysticks direction) and to damage your Great Gurianos is fairly simple armour, the enemy sends wave but not particularly enthralling, ond upon wave of objects down on there are better games to play. you. Each time they connect, you However, it does offer a challenge, lose a mask, a shin pad or some and tired though I was, I could not other vital piece, if an arrowhead beat the wretched thing, idow gets through, you can say up to being a coward and not goodbye to one of your lives. waste precious energy fighting a By the time you meet your first load of cloth-heads. We need your high-score! If you have a good score on any machine we want to hear from you. Write to High Scores, Arcade Action, Computer and Video Games, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, ECIR 3AU. "


"Meretzky The following document is all that remains from a mysteriously destroyed building purported to be the headquarters of the United Nations Security Police. Please make this information public. It could be our last hope. A friend. LEATHER AN UNKNOWN AMOUNT OF TIME LATER... SECRET FILE# IC1-AT2-FD1 TOPIC: LEATHER GODDESSES OF PHOBOS SUBJECT: IMPENDING DOOM NAME: STEVE MERETZKY AGE: 29 OCCUPATION AUTHOR/INTERACTIVE E FICTION THE FOLLOWING IS HIGHLY CLASSIFIED CE QUE Orches local culture Steve Meretzky is responsible for bringing the saga of the Leather Goddesses of Phobos to light. It all began in 1980 by watching his college room mate testing a new interactive text game called ZORK 1. Meretzky found this more intriguing than the curriculum at M.I.T., but finished getting his degree in Construction Management He also got involved in testing ZORK 2 and 3, until one day when he was given the chance to write his own adventure. It became Planetfall, it became a success, it became what he wanted to do. The next interactive jaunt was The Sorcerer, followed by The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy written in collaboration with Doug Adams. Then came A Mind Forever Voyaging. Which takes us to the present, and to the wicked Leather Goddesses of Phobos who, for the sake of brevity, will be referred to from now on as LGOP. Since retribution from the Leather Goddesses is probable, measures have been taken to protect Meretzky from recognition. He is wearing a disguise, and his voice is being altered through the use of a 1984 New Year's party horn. The following interrogation is being conducted by C+VG's ace American investigative reporter, Marshal M. Rosenthal. C+VG: How did LGOP become a reality? Steve Meretzky: Well, the way I work is that I have a bag of ideas. I take them out and go through them, and let others look at them and tell me what they think. Years ago, I conceived the name Leather Goddesses of Phobos. That's all it was. A great name that made people chuckle. But there was something about it that got remembered. When I was looking at the feedback from my last session of passing out ideas, LGOP was mentioned. The more I thought about it, the more I liked the idea of doing a humorous and sexy take-off of the lurid style of science fiction pulps of the early 1930's. "


"GODDESSES subjecting the entire human race to untold AH, THE PRISONERS erotic mayhem. I had to AWAKE WOULDN'T THEY IAVE BEEN DISAPPOINTED escape! TO MISS THE SNAKE C+VG: How did you FEEDING --ESPECIALLY manage that? SINCE TODAY'S MAIN SM: There was another COURSE IS... prisoner there--from Alaska. Together we embarked on a series of amazing adventures. C+VG: What kind of adventures? SM: I mean danger, sex, suspense, terror, sorcery and Machiavellian machinations. Sword death and breathless strange warnings that fights aboard alien romance. The stories kept coming in my spaceships. Fair were usually good, but dreams. damsels to rescue from it was the covers that C+VG: What kind of heinous fates worse grabbed your attention warnings? than death. Mystifying and got you to buy it. I SM: Well at times it puzzles to solve and decided that I wanted to seemed that the story messages to decipher. write a story that was was writing itself, with Aliens and strange true to the artwork. ideas and locations devices. We sailed the C+VG: Pretty different jumping from my canals of Mars, hacked from A Mind Forever fingertips onto the our way through the Voyaging, wasn't it? keyboard. Maybe I had teeming undergrowth SM: IT WAS a change of tapped into the great of the jungles of Venus, pace. Mostly I work at collective walked the deadly dull the office, although I unconsciousness which streets of Cleveland. It's end up using the was trying to help me to a good thing we figured terminal at home. But warn others about the case out how to use those LGOP was so much fun terrible threat of the Black Circles. that it didn't seem like Leather Goddesses. But C+VG: What's that? work. Everything went the dreams got worse. SM: You'll find out about so well that I had a lot 0+ VG: Go on that soon enough. That more time for other SM: It's 1936. I'm sitting sucker's one handy things, like spending in this really sleazy bar form of transportation. time with my wife in some god forsaken C+VG: Were you just C# VG: Didn't she wonder place called Upper trying to escape and about just what kind of Sandusky, Ohio. I'm save your own skins? research you were minding my own SM: No way. We gotta try doing for the story business when to put together an C+VG: What was it about SM: The truth is that you A BLAM-I've been anti-Leather Goddesses them that you found so can never find a kidnapped and of Phobos machine. appealing Leather Goddess when imprisoned by the Otherwise they're going SM: The covers. They you need one! So I spent Leather Goddesses of to make hash out of all were great! The a lot of time reading Phobos. They're picking of us. artwork was exciting books on the genre, and up people at random to C+VG: Tell us more. and spoke of violent t rying to ignore the torment first, before SM: There are some pretty continued "


"relating the adventures of Lane Mastodon, hero of the future. Lane battles those LGOPS and whips them good. There're also clues in the comic that will help you. Finally, there's an invaluable map of the secret catacombs. For that we should have charged extra. IT DOESN'T LOOK LIKE YOUR FATHER IS HERE. exciting he/she is always the moments same gender as you. ahead, but I'm C+VG? We've noticed not one to kiss and that this person seems tell. Let's just say that to get the short end of if the Sultan's favourably the stick a lot. disposed towards you SM: You mean because well... he's got 8,000 he/she occasionally gets wives. I even discovered blown up or run over? I the boudoir of the thought it'd be fun to Leather Goddesses have a bit of slapstick in themselves. But then I the story. Besides, woke up! C+VG: Too bad. But OH, LANE, I'M since you put all of this SO GLAD YOU'RE into the story, would SAFE! you mind explaining the \"naughtiness\" levels? SM: Well, there're three of them and they affect the descriptions found in the game. The levels let you choose just how much excitement you can stand. The really civilised folks will go for Tame (yawn) mode. Suggestive is okay, a bit like late-night TV. It's only in Lewd that the pacemaker warning goes into effect. C+VG:LGOP gives you the choice of playing as a boy or girl, right? SM: Absolutely. You decide right at the start. Since beer at the bar is only five cents a glass, it's plain that you're he/she gets out of going to overindulge. trouble almost as easily You feel an \"urge\" as he/she gets into it, which requires although the immediate attention. If explanations are pretty you race off into the far-fetched. Little Girl's room, then C+VG: Does the that's what you are. packaging include any Either that or very clues or aids in the confused. quest to defeat these C+VG: Are there menacing Goddesses? differences depending SM: Absolutely. First, upon your gender? there are a series of SM: Haven't you hit scratch 'n' sniff spots. puberty yet? Sure there These odours are an are. The descriptions important part in alter to suit your being understanding some of masculine or feminine. the various areas and You've also got your items that you run friend from Alaska to across. There is a 3-D help you in defeating comic book (including the Goddesses, and the red/blue glasses) C+VG: Any truth to the rumour that LGOP has sparked a whole new division to be called Nymphocom? SM: Well, I've been .. SUDDENLY A ROUGHLY SCALED TENTACLE APPEARS AND WHISKS MERETZKY AWAY IN A BUILDING FLASH OF GREEN LIGHT!! Was it the Editor's tentacle that reached out to end a decidedly near the knuckle interwiew? Did that scaly limb belong to Mary Whitehouse? Or could it be the Leather Godesses themselves?!! All will be revealed in the next exciting instalment of C+VG. If they print us again after this.... Author's bio: Marshal M. Rosenthal's cover is that of an advertising photographer. Otherwise, he handles delicate interrogations for various publications domestically and abroad dealing in computers, video and high technology. ends here EMAN AND LATER STILL.., OH, LANE, HOW CAN I EVER THANK YOU FOR SAVING MY FATHER?! THE END EXCITINTHESE OF.. CANE MASTODON "


"The mountains are waiting to claim you. Travel with us back in time to the Prehistoric Ages. Here you must guide Adam in his quest to rescue his wife from the clutches of the hostile mountain men. She is well guarded, the desert is crawling with mighty beasts, prehistoric birds roam amongst the caves, rugged savage mountain men will try to kill you as you enter the dead lands, there is no turning back from this nightmare journey. Can you succeed or will you perish like all those who went before you. A full colour 3D cartoon action packed arcade strategy spectacular. PROGRAMING COMPUTER CRAPHICS Art Huff Polar Pierre is a one or two player arcade game where two can play at the same time. Guide Pierre or his cousin Jacques through an icy obstacle course, racing through ski jumps, mystery chalets, lifts, electrogenerators, shooting snowballs, springboards, stompers and thunder and lightning. Polar Pierre also includes a construction set so you can design and play your own screens. Both games available for: Commodore 64/128 cass 9.95 disk 14.95 Atari 400/800/XL/ XE 48K ram. cass 9.95 disk 14.95 1 OR 2 PLAYERS 100 ACTION PACKED GAME SCREENS BUILD YOUR OWN Available from all good computer stores or post free from: Databyte 15 Wolsey Mews, Kentish Town, London NW5 2DX Telephone 01-482 1755 Adam Caveman and Polar Pierre are TM'S of Digicorp Inc. 1986 Digicorp Inc. "


"OMICRO ADS KATH'S DISCOUNT SOFTWARE ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE personally guarantee to delivery your order or your money back SPECTRUN LOW ATARI PRICES 1301016 Drie IT QUALITY ONICS The Three TO HINTS-POKES-MAPS Sand SAE of PP de Overseas As Sp Por Tape Most onder die some of oder Express Delivery ChePOS mode Pato Discount Sowe KATS DISCOUNT SOFTWARE 120 LORD STREET, HODDESDON HERTS. ENTENP TELEPHONE 092) 41524 If you wish to advertise in our classified section the cost is .00 + VAT per single column centimetre. For further details call Katherine Lee 01-251 622 Ext 2479 MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64 Send s.a.e. for fast response and details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG). 15 Tunwell Greave Sheffield S5 9GB EMPIRE SOFTWARE SPECTRUM 595 Crusade in Europe 12.50 Fight Nemesis 7.50 11.25 Orph Ad Creator 7.50 Virgin Atlantic 7.50 Dempsey and 1950 Mike 7.50 Bodor Dani 595 Undum 03 Run Fu Mastrot 750 Mason 595 Way of their 3 7.50 Med Stone 5.95 Stent Service Ye Kung Fu Ps-Ches 7.50 Fughe DO 6.7 Mb S95 Sales 6.75 Terror of Trans Turbo 7.50 h Desat 7.50 Sony 750D 7:50 Malaba 750 Add Ego De 7. Thai Boxing 120 Tau Ceti 10.50 Kg Games 3.....6.75 Go Go To 7.50 R Panel 01 Theatre Europe 7.50 Hardbal 1 7.50 board D1 Who Duros Wine il 5.95 Dragons 7.50 WAR Postage included UK. Please state which micro, Fast service Send cheque Poto: MEGASAVE, Dept CVO, CH Sutherland Street Victoria London SW1 V4JX MAIL ORDER ONLY: Send for FREE Mar Amar C16, MSX 0-Disks Available. Di af 12.50 af 10.50 Please send SAE for a cotologue of gomes for Spectrum, Commodore and M.S.X. and all the other computers. Please make cheque's or postal order's payable to Empire Software EMPIRE SOFTWARE DEPT CVG9 118A Palmers Rood, New Southgate, London N11 1SL Telephone enquiries welcome. Phone: 01.361 1933 "


"MUMBLES Super Spy Your mission is to find Beldar the Available for: mad scientist and destroy his laboratory before he destroys the Commodore 64/128 cass 9.95 world. The only clue you have is that Beldar was last seen entering disk 14.95 the sewer system of the city, But Atari 400/800/XL/ be careful he has an army of XE 48K ram gangsters and has wired the underground with control panels, disk 14.95 cass 9.95 sliding doors, laser rockets, bombs and many other hazards. Available from all good computer Good luck on what could be your stores or post free from: most dangerous mission yet. Databyte 15 Wolsey Mews, Kentish Town, London NW5 2DX Telephone 01-482 1755 Mumbles Supepy is of Dicorp in 1996 Digicorp Inc "


"Tilbag COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU Big Red replies: The brains at IDEAS. Central say the modem shouldn't be a great problem but finding suitable software to allow your computers to talk probably will Even if you did manage to get a private link up the phone bills will probably be astronomical. Mum and dad will not be pleased. However, why not check out Micronet 800 which has a mailbox where messages can be left. Calls using the system are only charged at a local rate. Anyway, I'm wondering why next-door neighbours just can't talk over the garden fence? Oh, yes, I see you've explained that And you have to do a lot more crawling to get a T-Shirt P Rauch, G'day, this is one Aussie who Mailbag section just to print already guessed, are The Lords enjoys your mag... well, to put their addresses Or do you of Midnight and its sequel it simply, a lot. Because we got sneak a read of the letters? And Doordark's Revenge. Late your mag up to one month if you continue your system will 1984, I discovered that there later, can we still enter your you pay the postage on our was to be a third and sadly final competitions? There is one letters? epic game using the thing that baffles me. When Please answer this as ! wonderful landscaping people say the C64 has 64K consider this to marr an technique-Eye of the Moon. memory, does that mean RAM otherwise excellent and Eagerly Iphoned the software as well as ROM or just RAM worthwhile scheme house Beyond and Could you please tell me? Ashley Cotter Cairns, enquired when it was to be Anyway, I have had an King's Langley released. September 1985, they Aquarius Ives, one of thosel for Herts said Well, September came a year and am probably going Big Red replies: Hope we've got and went with no sign of the to sell it thank goodness your surname right but it was game. I phoned them again hope to buy a C64, I read in one very difficult to read. The Easter 1986. Guess what? of your previous issues that you reason we do not print full reason we do not print full Easter passed with no sign of it. said you won't be printing any addresses is in an effort to stop Then the curious events more listings. Is this a result of cranks writing in. And as to began to occur. Beyond no Your survey? your other points, the answer is longer answered the phone, or Well, at least I've had my say no to both my letters to London or Market and as many of your readers Harborough. Nobody seemed say, keep up the good work!! I have been buying your to know where they were magazine since April 1985 ! immediately assumed the fatal Australia think it's faultless... or is it? tragedy bankruptcy but Big Red replies: It means RAM, have a few ideas that I hope will then in the sh but 54k of memory is only make your great magazine even noticed a new release by available when using machine better Beyond and then another and code being a proud owner of an another. I am slowly going Apple, am disappointed that berserk! I craved for The Eye of I am writing to complain you do not cater for this the Moon. Just like an about the state of the software marvellous machine, apart from addiction. Can you please industry today. once or twice in the adventure enlightenme? Where is Beyond My first point is about the section. I dare you to spare a now? When will the game be price of the software itself. thought for international released? You are my lost hope There was a time, less than two readers have tried everybody else! years ago, when you could buy Your competitions are great, at can think of please helpl a brilliant game for only 5.95 but the closing date is only a SJ Harding, In the short time since then, that month after publication. Your Staffs figure has increased by 2 and magazine arrives Big Red replies: Beyond has in some cases more. It is approximately three months been bought by Firebird and extremely maddening that Tate which makes entering have moved offices. As for Eve well-established software competitions impossible. Could of the Moon, Beyond says it companies can produce games you, if possible. PLEASE make won't be ready before that are by no means excellent. the closing dates a few months Christmas and charge  for them. Then you find companies who Sam David, 1 (Scott) own a 48K Spectrum release very good games and Australia and my friend and next-door charge under 3 for them. neighbour (Wayne) owns a My second point concerns the Olread your magazine for the Commodore 64. We are writing advertising of software. Some first time June issue and to you the best magazine by companies spend surely found it very enjoyable. I will miles to ask you in your infinite thousands of pounds make sure I get the next issue, wisdom (God, Wayne, are you advertising games which do not but first, I feel that you may be sure all this crawling will get us exist. I think there should be a able to help me. So prepare T-Shirts?). Where was 17 Ah, restriction on the advertising of yourself for one of the strangest yes, to ask if we could get software. I believe the tales you have heard for quite modems that would enable us companies should only begin to some time to talk through our different advertise a game when that \"Software is now almost a computers? program has been completed cliche, as is the phrase \"a I know what you're thinking. and is ready for sale in the great game but, out of the Why do nextdoor neighbours shops. So let's get our software seemingly bottomless depths of want to talk to each other via industry into shape. the software market. I have computer when they could lean Simon Machell found two software items which over the garden fence? The Merseyside have no egual, they are utterly answer is that I am completely and undeniably moving to wait for it.. Thank you for the inclusion of brilliant West London. We would be the Pen Pals page. It is a very They are both for the very grateful if you could help good idea and I have written to Spectrum, they are both from Us on this matter many interesting people. But the same software house, and Yours modemly. please can you tell me why you they are both penned by the Scott 's for Youhool Ratti and have to forward our letters to fantastically superb Wayne (Cor! What the bill be English pen-pals. Surely it's programmer Mike Singleton Nke) Lewis faster for us and easier on your These games, if you haven't Swansea I am the owner of a C64 and am thinking of updating it to a Commodore 128. I also own a lot of software for my computer. I have heard from some people that all of this will work on a 128. From other people I have heard that not all software for the 64 works on the 128Could you verify this problem for me Also I would like to know when Paperboy from Elite Systems will be released on the C64/128 Owas Syed (Dri. Hornsey Big Red replies: The vast majority of your C64 software should run on the 128 Hopefully Paperboy should be out by now. But you never know. Oh by the way, doctor, I've been having a terrible che in the circuits down my left side. Sometimes my memory goes totally blank. Do you think the two are connected? Or perhaps disconnected would be nearer the truth. I am one of the few surviving Atari owners still at large in Australia. It seems the attitude of most leading software houses is to completely ignore the existence of the Atari. Over here as well as in Old England, the Commodore Spectrum, and Amstrad are the leading lights in our computer industry. I think people are prejudice to the underdogs, if you don't own a Commodore you're a nobody. Don't people realise that the Atari's, the Apples, the Electrons etc. are all computers too. Top marks to US Gold for the work they are doing for this "


"ubag COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU computer. So K.C. Bing, of Torpedo is non-existent, the Herts, should shut up. It's not music is nothing like the James the Atari's fault, I think it's the Bond Theme' it sounds more software houses that should be like 'Peter Gunn' by The Art of shot. Nolsel to me On a much lighter note, the You did not even mention the computer owners in my town, great speech and sound effects which is not what you could call you hear whilst loading the big, prefer your mag to most of game or the chance you have of the business magazines which switching from normal to wide are about the only Australian graphics screen computer magarines available Since when have you been which advertise expensive able to get Rock and Wrestle for computer systems which the .99 by Mastertronic and Kane average Aussie can't afford at for .95 by Melbourne House? all. Your mag provides This was just one of the many information about the stuff we printing and spelling errors want to know about Games!!! spot every month, now come So keep up the good work or on C+VG pull your socks up. you'll hear the complaints all B Ingalls the way from here. Eastwood KJ Rendell Nofts Kalgoorlie. Australia l enjoy reading your magazine but when I get to the I have been buying your mag reviews section well done to for over a year now and I have all those who write the reviews watched it get worse and -I find hardly any games for worse. In some issues of your the Atari BOOXL. Is this because magazine you have more Atari games are rubbish or Commodore 16 reviews than what in future editions of BBC This is ridiculous. There C+VG I would really like to see are far more BBC owners than more Atari reviews so that Commodore 16 owners when I buy a game I may know Even if you do review a BBC whether it is good or bad. game you do not review it Phillip Ross properly. Take Bruce Lee, for West Byfleet example, on the BBC version Surrey there is no Ninja, yet your review said that there was. Also Spy Hunter, on the BBC version there are no 'ice patches' on the road and Doctor O Excuse me, but I wish to ears closed or he was dazzled complain. How on earth do you by the graphics get so many mistakes in Yes, I have owned an Atari ST C VG's August edition? You for a while and I too have played reviewed Rock 'n'Wrestle and these games on it, but, by no Kane with the wrong headlines means is the sound good! Come on pull your sock up. Did would say you could compare Big Red fall on the office? them to a ZX Spectrum Also what do you mean about Because of the bad sound not seeing any Oric games? facilities Isold the ST and Xenon II has just come out and bought myself an Amiga and you haven't reviewed it. Why the first thing I did was to not? Also please stop reviewing import Marble Madness from so many Spectrum games the USA. This game give a real Robert Cook demonstration of the Amiga Birmingham facilities, fast animation, Big Red replies: So many beautiful graphics and stereo mistakes, eh? If only you know sound. what conditions we worked One piece of advice to all the under. Tough wouldn't even gameters on a C64 XL XE begin to describe them. As computer. If you do want to buy matter of fact I did fall on the a 16 bit computer save up the office. money for an Amiga, it is worth every penny What did I hear Tony The General Tokoushi say in the Hot Gossip Holland column of the August edition? Are the sound facilities of the Watch out for Mailbag Atari ST as good as the highest next month, when we arcade standard? Well introduce a new sounds to me that Tony had his member of the team... LIEUT. LAWW BIG RED is  COPYRIGHT 1985 JERRY Phrs. "


"NEXT MONTH 1 ALIENS is the awesome sci-fi movie of the year. And there's going to be a game of the film coming from top software creators Electric Dreams. We take a sneak peek at the game that could turn your every waking moment into a nightmare! Watch for the 'orrible Allen on the cover and get your teeth into C+VG before it catches up with YOU! Awwwk! PLUS: Special fifth birthday competitions! PLUS: More on Domark's smash hitTrivial Pursuit! PLUS: Free adventure poster! PLUS: Tons of stuff we haven't thought up PLUS: Oh Godi Someone turn their typewriter off, we're running out of space Happy Birthday to us, happy birthday to us, happy birthday C-VG, happy birthday to us! What's this? Someone celebrating or something? You bet we are! C+VG is FIVE years old next month. That makes us the longest surviving games magazine in the UK. Wo reckon that's quite an achievement and we intend to celebrate it in style with special features and competitions plus another of C+VG's ever popular freebies tasteful stuck to the front of the magazine. Read on for more details. Five years on we'll be announcing our Birthday Honours. Who'll be getting the Longest Lasting Software House award, what was THE game of the last five years, who is C+VG's most loyal reader, and then there's the most ancient program. All these questions and more will be answered in just 28 days time. FREE with November's C#VG is the IDEAS CENTRAL Handbook Il. Son of the amazingly popular freeble we gave away with our July issue, this new collectable 24 page, full-colour booklet will be packed with play10-win tips from the programmers who brought you games like Ghosts n'Goblins, Dan Dare, Infiltrator, Jack the Nipper, Miami Vice and many more. Melissa and her team of Tipsters have been gathering together the info that will help you got more out of your micro-games. You better get hold of your copy of November's C.VG before someone else does! ON SALE OCT 15th. PBM, C+VG, OK! Yes, next month we launch our brand new computer moderated Play-by-Mail game called Conquest. Conquest is a game of conflict-and, er, conquest. All would be dictators should sign on for this new departure in global warfare next issue. There will be monthly prizes plus lots of fighting fantasy. Don't miss your chance to get in on the action. November is nostalgia month in C-VGI We'll be looking back at some of the games that changed the face of the computer. We'll be looking back at how CVG began. Just what DID the first issue look like? Our longest serving writer Old Campbell himself, will be taking a nostalgic look back at Adventures he has known and loved, and nominating his all time favourite fantasy. "


"Ocean each Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone: 061 832 6633 Telex: 669971 recent Commodore eocu 3: Amstrad "


"Ens-DJ-OD CREATED BY CHAN THE GAME THAT ROCKED AMERICA... Available for COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM & AMSTRAD Versions coming SOON! \"What a project. Infiltrator is the most incredible new games concept to hit the market.\" ZZAP 64 Commodore CASSETTE .SK U.S. Gold Limited Birmingham B6 7AX Telephone: 021-356 3388 GOLD Al Saw "

