"98p SEPTEMBER 1986 S$4.60 Dm6 285pta HFL 6.50 COMPUTER MPUTER ROGUE GAMES TRIVIAL PURSUIT THE PREVIEW/RETURN OF THE FIST! BRAYBROOK'S ALLEYKAT REVEALED/INTERACTIVE MAGIC  JEWELS OF DARKNESS COMPETITION/SPUTNIK SECRETS MULTI-USER GAMES/WIN THE BOGGIT'S MIDI SYSTEM/FREE CYBORG POSTER KIREL GAMES PLAYERS GUIDE/SECRET LIFE OF DELTA 4/VIRGIN CHALLENGER COMPETITION "


"The Arcade GIA GHOSTS'N GOBLINS SEPET SSE ATARI clite w An Come Officially Licenced Coin Op Classic The very best Elite Titles are available at selected branches of: WE John Menzies. WOOUVORTH "


"INTS EN CAPCOM ERBOY .95 .95 ES Spectrum Amstrad Amstrad Commodore Commodore C16 Cassette Cassette Disc Cassette Disc Cassette .95 .95 .95 .95 Mail Order, just send a cheque or postal VISA Access order payable to Elite, or quote your Credit Card number. W: HP Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands, WS9 8PW. Telephone: (0922) 59165. Telex: 336130 ELITE.G. Fax: (0922) 647359 "


"FEATURES LABYRINTH/NEWS/P8 CONTENTS 16 ROGUE TROOPER EXCLUSIVE 38 JEWELS OF DARKNESS COMPETITION 41 IDEAS CENTRAL 44 FIVE STAR INTERVIEW 47 VIRGIN ATLANTIC CHALLENGER COMPETITION 49 BRUCE LEE JUNIOR LISTING 54 CYBORG POSTER 57 ADVENTURE NEWS 58 ADVENTURE HELPLINE 60 BOGGIT COMPETITION 62 DELTA 4 FEATURE 65 ADVENTURE REVIEWS 68 ADVENTURER OF THE YEAR 70 TRIVIAL PURSUIT PREVIEW 72 TRIVIAL PURSUIT COMPETITION 74 MULTI USER GAMES/STARNET 78 KIREL MAP 80 SAS COMPETITION 82 VIVA VIC COMPETITION 84 COMPETITION RESULTS 86 ARCADE ACTION 88 EXTRA BITS 90 GALAFORCE PREVIEW 92 CUSTOMISED COMPUTER COMPETITION RESULTS 95 INTERACTIVE VIDEO 97 BUGHUNTERS 102 MAILBAG 106 NEXT MONTH ARAC/REVIEWS/P29 NEWS & REVIEWS 18 REVIEWS THIS ISSUE: GAME OF THE MONTH: Jack the Nipper. C+VG Hits! Ghosts 'n' Goblins, Harvey Headbanger, Storm, Toadrunner, Hijack, Arac. Plus lots more. 75 ADVENTURE Keith Campbell, Adventurer supreme set out on a quest to find Delta 4 and finds a world of wonderful weirdness. He also reviews Delta 4's latest, The Boggit. 8 NEWS Catch up on the latest releases from Beyond including Star Trek plus a look at Alleykat, Andrew Braybrook's latest. Hot Gossiper Tony Takoushi brings you the marvellous Marble Madness. FIVE STAR INTERVIEW/P44 "


"INSIDE STORY Is this issue of C+VG value for from top disco group Five Star money or what? There's so much in about his Commodore 64. And it we're amazed that it's not we've got some tickets for Five bursting at the staples! First off Star's London concert to give we've got a special sneak peek at away. Keith Campbell has been Design Design's Rogue down to meet the Delta 4 trio Trooper. Can the cult comic hero and bring back news of the goings become a cult computer hero? on in their sleepy country village. Find out inside. Yet more previews We take a look at MUGS no, in the shape of Domark's official not the things you drink tea out of Trivial Pursuit the computer stupid -Multi-User Games. It's a version, Andrew Braybrook's magical mystery tour through a Alleykat and the long awaited weird and wonderful world. Then follow-up to Exploding Fist! there're tons of competitions, and Star games and star interviews too. all your favourite regular features. We've talked to the pioneering And a free pull out Cyborg Mel Croucher about his poster. And it's all yours for just incredible new interactive video 98p. How do we do it? Who system, and Delroy Pearson knows...? ROGUE TEP ROGUE TROOPER/P16 Jim JACK THE NIPPER/P21 TERTS ALL TOLE KIREL MAPPED!/P78 ARCADE ACTION/P86 TRIVIAL PURSUIT PREVIEW/P70 AAN EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John DESIGN Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Paul Coppins Steve Donoghue Jim Douglas AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeley SOFTWARE CONSULTANTS Tony Takoushi Chris Cain PUBLICITY Marcus Rich ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Louise Matthews ASSISTANT AD MANAGER Chubby Williams AD PRODUCTION Debble Pearson PUBLISHER Rita Lewis COVER Jerry Paris EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222 July-December 98,258 BUGHUNTERS/P97 the rock daar was locked ABC THE BOGGIT/P62 Jenus "


"JOEN REBE oder e armies are ding anyone old ough to hold a musket is a time for brave an fearless men. You are Johnny Reb-one of the bravest of them all WITO AGENT An accurate full scrolling Argus Press Software Liberty House 222 Regent Street Argus Press LONDON WIR 7DB Software Group 01-439 0666 whics battleulen Spectrum, Commodore, Amstrad .95 LOTHLORIEN "


"FISTT Smash your way through an immense, hostile world where Ninjas and Shoguns lie in ambush crouch ready to strike! Take the challenge only you a true FIST master can survive to the top! C64 Cassette .95, Disk .95. Soon available for Spectrum and Amstrad. Actual screen shots from C54 version. Other versions may MELBOURNE HOUSE The Home of the Hits! M Melbourne House (Publishers ltd Melbourne House in High Street Hampton Wick Kingston Inn Thamae Crow KTH AND Talonnat 2014 Tala EADEM Den EA D GOD "


"Peter Jones and Trevor Lever are a pair of dodgy geezers. They were the people who teased you with Terrormolinos and harrassed you with Hampstead. Their latest enterprise takes you into the twighlight world of petty criminals, ex-cons and assorted hard-nuts. Dodgy Geezers is a two part graphic adventure packed with Lever and Jones humour. C+VG's very own dodgy geezer, Keith Campbell, will be looking at the latest Lever and Jones adventure in depth in a future issue. And he'll have them bang to rights, guv! @GUTIER Gountlet Championship Wrestling allows you to play the role of Besides Gauntlet, US Gold various monsters which have is also getting in on the craze for starred in sci-fi films. arcade conversions with The monsters are Godzilla, Xevious (C64, Spectrum, Giant Wasp, The Glob, Megatron Amstrad), the shoot 'em up, and Robot, Tarantula and King Cream two Data East games, Express Masters of the Universe will be available on all these Puff(?). There is a choice of various Raiders, a great Western epic of Gauntlet and Masters of formats plus the BBC, C16 and scenarios to be played out in biff, bash and bang, and Break the Universe head a powerful MSX. various cities of the world. For Thru in which you control a pretty release of US Gold games set to the players must help He Man instance, trampling a famous amazing leaping jeep through five dominate the charts this autumn and his fellow heroes Battle Cat, landmark or just eating everything hazardous levels. and into the New Year. . Teela, Man-at-Arms and Orko in in sight. Gauntlet, a huge smash for their fight against the evil Skeletor. World Games (C64, Atari in the arcades, is now being The arcade game should be out Spectrum and Amstrad) is another developed by Gremlin in October with the adventure those sports simulation which were Graphics for C64, Spectrum, following in November. such a smash last summer. Events Amstrad, MSX and Atari. An Atari Infiltrator (see last month's include cliff-diving in Mexico, ST version will be developed in C+VG for screen shots) will be out bullriding in America, log-rolling in conjuction with Adventuresoft first on the 64 with Spectrum and Canada and caber tossing in The game consists of four Amstrad versions following. In it Scotland. It should be available by characters: Thyra the Valkyrie who you play the role of a secret agent November. has strong armour, Thor the who must stop a plan to destroy Express Raider Warrior, skilled at hand to hand the world. combat, Merlin the Wizard who Among the Epyx games US has the best magic of all and Gold will be releasing are Questor the Elf who has the gift of Super Cycle (C64, Amstrad and GOLD CITY TUELE speed. The key to success depends Spectrum), a breakneck speed on how long you last the onslaught motorbike race game, of your many attackers from Championship Wrestling ghosts to demons. You have to (C64) and Movie Monster which search through the mazes to find Break Thru the exit to the next level to enter a further stage of furious action and spellbinding excitement! Masters of the Universe is based on the highly popular television series. There will be two different games an arcade one for the C64, Spectrum, Amstrad and Atari ST and an adventure game which "


"By Tony Takoushi thought last month's review of Atari ST games would be impossible to top But it's actually happened. The ultimate conversion is here, Marble Madness has arrived. That is the good news, the bad news (unless you have .25 to sparel) is that it runs on the Commodore Amiga. It was written for the American company Electronic Arts and it will be released in late August in the UK by Ariolasoft with a arcade conversion quality). retail price of .95. For those of you who missed out Marble Madness is one of on MM it goes like this... The aim is the few games that truly transcends to guide a Marble through six all areas of arcade play, from different platforms. Each platform Zapsters (uh-hmm) to keen has different dangers to negotiate strategists. It offers a frenetic and a time limit is enforced to energy and compulsion to play ensure you do not dawdle along that quite possibly few will ever the way. If you run out of time the experience in their lifetime. game is over. (HEAVY, but honestly there is no So much for the overview, down equal across any format in terms of to the nitty-gritty. When the game the programmers at Lucasfilm about this exciting movie tie-in and we'll be bringing you his report in a future issue. In the meantime enjoy the pictures from the film! vamp has loaded you are presented with an options page. Here you can select your difficulty level (0-7), control (joystick, mouse or two trackball options) and one or two player game (more on this one later). The six levels to work through are titled, Practice, Beginner, Intermediate, Aerial, Silly and Ultimate (the BIG one). continued on pope 10 watch on his strength, which will be shelves. It isn't just another karate reduced by various forms of combat game. Fist Il is a REAL physical exertion, but which can be matial arts adventure. replenished by eating and First of all our hero has a sleeping. mission. He has to fight and destroy A series of clues are hidden at an evil warlord who hides away in various locations around the a volcano fortress. But before he island. All of these must be found can do this Fist must learn some lost and pieced together to discover and very ancient martial arts skills. the location of the missing treasure. He learns by finding trigrams or The program was designed and zaroths that are scattered about written by Tony Baden and Tony the 100 screens and in mortal Milner and is available initially on combat with deadly opponents. the Commodore 64, with Amstrad The world of Fist Il is a and other conversions following sprawling, hostile land of dank shortly. The price will be .95. swamps and dark forests, of mountains and caves. At the end of this adventure lies the volcano fortress of the evil warlord, ruling the blighted land from behind a deadly defence of mercenary guards and traps. The warlord can only be destroyed by a true Fist Master, one who has learnt the forgotten fighting techniques of the once mighty warriors of the Exploding Fist by studying the ancient trigrams. Watch out-Fist is on his way There will be 15 different back! The bone-crunching hero of opponents. Some of which you'll the game that took the games encounter more than once-but world by the throat last summer is the second time around they'll planning a comeback bout. Way have different skills! of the Exploding Fist is a You're going to need all the tough act to follow. Can joystick skills you leared in the Melbourne House's Aussie original Exploding Fist to programmer Greg Barnett and compete in this new challenge graphic genius Gregg Holland plus a few more. Each different come up with something even combat situation requires different better? C+VG's spies staged a skills. Ninja style raid on the Fist Il will be released on Melbourne House HQ to find August 14th on the 64 and will cost out. The exciting news is that Fist just .95. Amstrad and Spectrum II: The Legend Continues owners will have to hold onto their looks so hot that you'll burn your cash for a bit longer. Bet you can't fingers snatching a copy off the wait. We can't! and colodvent Pieces of eight, pirate gold, death under the sunthat's the promise of John Silver's Return to Treasure Island, a graphic and text adventure from Software Projects. The game which ties in with the current television series-casts you in the role of Jim Hawkins in a race to get the remains of Captain Flint's treasure from its hiding place on the Island The island itself is accurately reproduced in 3D from the original Treasure Island maps, with mountains, rivers, trees, beaches etc., all displayed in full perspective with approximately 200,000 locations and eight angles of view from each location giving over 1.5 million possible views. Each view occupies the top 3/4 of the screen, with the status area below. The game is played in real time, and has a dusk/night/dawn sequence to give added atmosphere. The player must keep a careful David Bowie has done most thingsexcept star in a computer game. Activision and Lucasfilm are about to remedy that by translating Bowie's latest fantasy movie, Labyrinth, into a game. The movie has already opened in the States and is due in this country sometime around Christmas. It also stars some of Muppet man Jim Henson's spectacular puppets. You may remember Dark Crystal which featured his earlier creations. Henson's Labyrinth creatures were made at his Hampstead studios a stone's throw from Activision's new HQ. The movie has a heavy Dungeons and Dragons theme. Bowie plays the Goblin King who rules a vast underground complex the Labyrinth. Our American correspondant Marshal M. Rosenthal has been talking to "


"everything in sight (for which there can ride the wave to cross are bonuses). The choice is very platforms and get to the home goal much yours. quicker. As you make your way through Other little tips you have to learn each level some real adrenalin by experience, like falling down As you start each level you are boosters are thrown in to keep you the metal tubing to get to lower given a time limit to complete it, on your foes. There is a hydraulic platforms (and getting a bonus) (levels one to five being 60, 75, ramp which must be approached and entering ice bowls at just the 45, 30 and 25 seconds) at just the right moment or you will right place so you do not slide into If you complete a level with time rebound and lose precious time. oblivion. to spare this is added to your time Slinkies, how I hate Slinkies, these Marble Madness played allowance for the next level. A guys stun you and then try to eat solo is finger-stickingly addictive. bonus of 100 points for every you by jumping in the air and However, if you take the two second remaining is added to your landing plush on top of you (they player option (one Red, one Blue) score. even lick their lips!). and challenge a friend then be If you are destroyed along the There are evil Black Marbles Ariolasoft has released five prepared for all hell to break roving around whose intentions course you lose time as a new ball programs for the Amiga including loose! has to be formed and the old one are to get in the way and be a Being the sport I am, I naturally the specially developed Articfox. nuisance. The acid pools are a is cleared by a sweeping brush. play a totally aggressive game and Articfox is a strategic combat no-no, keep away from them! They All the graphics are of the tank simulation in which you save try to rom my opponent into slime around and if you make highest standard and there are six everything in sight. the earth from a lot of aliens. tunes (one per level) to play along contact your ball is dissolved. If you manage to pass your The other Amiga releases are The Vacuum cleaners (that's to. The tunes are in stereo and Skyfox, Archon, Seven opponent and get a screen length what I call them) are real beastly. complement the game to Cities of Gold and ahead then he loses five seconds These yellow 'hooters' spring-up at perfection. One-on-One. All titles sells for off his time and rematerialises on .95. The play screen comes up and it the side of the pathways and try to the same screen as you. is made up of pathways with an suck you in (some fast waggling The player who finishes the attractive metallic sheen. Your gets you past them). The Hammers course first also gets a five second Marble is formed a la Defender (oh no, NOT the Hammers!) are bonus for the next level and a Room 10 by CRL is to be with many bits of Marble flying real crazy, they pop out of the score bonus released on the Commodore 64, around to form a ball on the ground and clobber you senseless. To do this game justice is almost price .95. The game aC+VG launching platform. The metallic prod-poles shoot impossible, it has to be PLAYED. It Game of the Month in September Now the fun starts, the ball rolls out of the ground at random. If you is that simple and THAT addictive, is named after a cell or room in around and you have to develop a are rolling across them as it The Amiga's graphic and sound a leisure complex of the future in \"feel\" for it, as it has inertia built in _happens you are truly shofted into capabilities for exceed anything on which they play a ball game One of the beauties of this game the air and fall to certain the home micro front at present, known as glyding. is that you can play to your own destruction but its price is prohibitively high. style. If you are the passive (Clark As you learn to play each level The price WILL drop and hopefully Kent) type you can try to go you will find some short-cuts. The soon. around the obstacles, OR really mechanical wave can best be The game will, thankfully, be Elite, the people behind the Commando, Bomb Jack and go-for-it and try to bump off described as a Surfer's delight! You released on the Commodore 64 soon Ghost'n' Goblins, are to launch a new range .99 budget out his very own alien calendar for September and will sell for under games over the next few months. a bit of fun. . The game comes with a The games, which will be Andrew's Alleykat is bound to free comic book. re-releases of former full price further his already considerable Oooh awwwooo titles, will be published at a rate of eputation as an ace coder. The awwwoooo! Excuse me, but I'm one each week. game will be released by Hewsons just practicing my lord of the jungle Elite has bought around 100 on the 64 in September. war cry in preparation for the back titles from various companies. arrival of Tarzan. Martech, Heading the release schedule is fresh from their success with Full Trottle on the Spectrum. Here's a first look at Palace Samantha Fox, has signed up Games to follow are 3D Death hazards -static and moving. Software's follow up to the Edgar Rice Burrough's Chase (Spectrum), Skool Daze This is the background to highly successful Cauldron II famous jungle hero for his first (Spectrum and Commodore 64), Andrew \"Uridium\" The Pumpkin Strikes Back. computer adventure. The game Valhalla (Spectrum and Braybrook's latest all action You play the part of Tal must find features some novel graphic ideas. Commodore 64), and Pool. thriller, Alleykat, due to hit the some secret armour to enable him You appear to be looking through 64 in September. He's taken to destroy aliens tyrants. The the jungle and watching Tarzan Uridium, turned it upside down Commodore graphics look dash about behind the lush The time is the future. The place and come up with an original excellent. Spectrum and C64 vegetation. There are temples and space. The event the Alleykat space race game. versions should be out in late caves to explore as well. More Championship! It's the ultimate You have to compete in a soon. race. Contestants from all over the season of Alleykat races which galaxy have gathered in their take place in eight space wheels. race-prepared space-ships to There are 32 different races to Get an eyeful of Iridis Alpha, compete for the Alleykat Champ attempt in all. But it'll take you time the new Jeff Minter arcade title. Unlike earthbound racers who to try them all as there's an element strategy shoot'em up for the Commodore 64. of strategy built in. You have to win compete on a flat track these ace prize money to enter the races pilots race around specially It's the first result of the new tie and to win cash you have to win up between Minter's Llamasoft. constructed space wheels. These races. Catch 22... company and Hewsons, who oval tracks are crammed with You race in one event per space stunned the world with Uridium. \"month\", choosing carefully which After the initial screens your race to enter bearing in mind your Gilby Robot Fighter warps into the particular race skills and the money first of the five upper planets you've got in the kitty. displayed in the top third of your The game begins on an option screen. screen which allows you to scroll Iridis Alpha for the CBM 64 through the months but don't will sell for .95 cassette and expect the normal January, .95 disk and will be released in February stuff. Andrew has worked mid August continued on page 12 one each be publisher full price 0910 "


"NEW CLASSIC TITLES AT -99 from 2-99. Classics -BMA'84 OP AUG 25th (CBM EDS Micro POOL Class VALHALLA SP 66-ZNI SEPT Ist) PECTRUM 16/4 weekly releases of the best top games ..EALTIME Chcetes SPEC DURELL 230 STARSTRIKE new games... ... re-releases Furance available from all good ...RETAIL OUTLETS... ZX SPECTI or order direct from 2-99-CLASSICS. quoting your credit card number or send a cheque or postal order for .99 (each incl. P+P) made payable to 2-99-CLASSICS Anchor House  Anchor Road Aldridge Walsall. West Midlands WS9 8PW SEPT 15th_SP "


"TUNITI her. He believes that she can end Tujad, the strategic his years of torment. shoot-'em-up created by the Eventually, she faces the Orpheus team, ranks alongside vampire alone one night and the Knight Rider and Asterix as a blood is drained from her body. long awaited production. Now it's She does, however, manage to coming out on the Ariolasoft destroy the vampire by keeping it label. Tujad stars GEN 19 the with her until the first rays of most sophisticated combat droid sunlight hit the windows of her ever built (yawn). GEN's job is to room. restore to sanity the mighty TUJAD The game falls into three computer by rebuilding a circuit. sections. First at the castle of The game will be available for the Dracula. J Harker has just realised Spectrum and Amstrad. he has been tricked by the Count. He has left the deeds to the house Following the success of their in Wismar on the table in the official Star Trek Graphic Adventure Creator, dining-room and starts the game in arcade/strategy game. Incentive Software are one of the many bedrooms on the The team designing and bringing out a new range of games first floor of the castle. He must programming the game is headed under the Medallion Adventure retrieve the deeds before sunset. by Mike Singleton. It will be title. This will be a separate entity The second part is set in the town released initially on four formats, from Incentive. of Wismar. If Dracula has the Spectrum, Commodore, Amstrad The games in this range will all deeds to the house you're in and Atari ST. have been programmed by the trouble. He can start his reign of Marc Peirson, Beyond's people who bought and compiled terror, creating an army of Undead marketing manager, says: \"We their own games on GA.C. from the town. expect this project to be a most It exists, it really does. Honestly. The first game to be released on the final part of me game is a significant step in me ev tep in the evolution of And to prove it here's a screen shot this title is Winter Wonderland The Harker's house. There you must the computer game.\" of Elite's Scooby Do game on for the Amstrad. Release date is put protective measures around This year sees the 20th the Amstrad. Hopefully the next October. the house but only when you know anniversary of Star Trek and stage will be that the game is At the moment GAC. is out for from September onwards released. the Commodore, Spectrum, come through a window, in the countless conventions will be Amstrad and the BBC. There is a form of a bat, a god or a wolf. taking place around the world possibility of an Atari version in the The game ends when you celebrating two decades of the future. expose the vampire to the daylight most successful science fiction Any readers who have bought television series ever. GA.C. and think they have come up with a good adventure, Incentive Software are very This is war! Well W.A.R. to be ENTE keen to see your efforts. accurate. It's the latest from Who knows, your game could Martech for the Amstrad and it be the next one published under looks just a teeny bit like the Medallion Adventure range Hewson's Uridium, don't you Watch out for Strike Force and earn you a few quid. think? It's a scrolling shoot 'em up Cobra, the toughest commando A \"special deal\" for standard set inside an alien industrial squad in the world. GA.C. owners is the change to complex packed with stuff like This new Piranha game's set in upgrade to the Amstrad GA.C. Steve Turner, the Drodian craft power stations and the near future. You're in command plus CPC464 (disk drive) CPC programmer who brought you fuel supply lines. of an elite international squad 664 and CPC 5128. such classics as Dragontorc and drawn from the World's top Avalon and more recently the \"special forces\". ace Quazatron is busy working The mission to penetrate the on a new innovative Spectrum HQ of an evil criminal genius who game called Rana Rama. He's is threatening the world with a gone back to his magical D&D terrifying nuclear weapon. learnings to create a new look His HQ is guarded by a game which stars a frog-yup, murderous gang of heavily armed you read right, a frog. But this little guards and a terrifying array of amphibian didn't always leap robots and electronic weapons about on four legs. Once he was a and traps. major magician. But some evil Meanwhile how would you like wizards ganged up and cast a spell on Get an eyeful of Starglider to get your hands on a snappy on the Atari ST, Rainbird's to turn him into a frog. T-shirt? Thanks to Piranha we've In the game you'll be able to arcade-style flight simulation. gotten to give away to the people challenge wizards to magical Conversions will follow for the who come up with the best Piranha conflict in the equivalent of the Spectrum, Amstrad and jokes. Nosferatu the Vampyre, transfer game in Quazatron. Commodore 64. For example: Where do the cult gothic horror film, is being Instead of firing pulses of energy Piranhas go mountain climbing turned into a creepy game by along circuit connectors you'll be Answer: The Piranhese. Piranha, Macmillan's new label. blasting a way on a battlefield with Get the idea? Send your joke to In the game Count Dracula has magic bolts. Rana Rama is still in Piranha T-Shirt Competition, moved out of his castle in it's very early stages and Steve Computer + Video Games, Priory Transylvania to a large, rambling says it will probably be in the shops Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, old house in Wismar. The estate after Christmas. And Rana is Latin London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is agent, Renfield, sends Jonathan for frog -in case you were September 16th and the editor's Harker, husband of Lucy Harker, to wondering ... decision is final.. give the deeds to the Count. Harker travels to the castle, where he is attacked by the Captain's log. Star Date C+VG/Piranha Competition vampire and barely escapes with 16/10/86. The men from Chill out man! Sonny and Tubbs his life. Dracula travels by sea to Beyond have boldly gone where will be coming your way in Miami Name: Wismar and takes up residence. He no software company has gone Vice, Ocean's computer game of meets Lucy and falls in love with before and are to produce the first the hit TV series. Coming Address: Small Med Large "


"The Edge...do you have it? BOBRI -95 Let the good es roll! CRASH Smash \"I love this game...if you don't buy this, throw away your Spectrum!\" C&VG Game of the Month August 1986. \"Bobby Bearing is very nearly perfect. This may sound a bit over the top but this game deserves a. whole string of superlatives.\" ZX Computing August 1986. VG I -95 The Ultimate Quest... You are Prince Kyle accompanied by your loval warriors in this fantastical quest for the legendary Mindstone. This is the first icon-driven graphics, adventure to boast the full features ofan adventure and strategy game. Bound to enter the annals as a true classic m micro adventures. EL Spectrum Commodore 64 and Amstrad versions coming soon. "


"Available now on: Dasma litics SPECTRUM 48/128K CBM 64 CBM plus/4 AMSTRAD CPC CRASH Sma Pick of the week = Popular Computing Weekly \"....superb animation.....\" Your Sinclair @ CH-VG HIT! \"Gladiator is a great game\" Sinclair User DOMARK \"'This combat game gets the thumbs up from C+VG\" C+VG The Accolades Keep Coming \"Highly addictive with that CRASH one more little go element about it Smash GLADIATOR SIM MONSTE THE THUMBS UP MEANT I WAS THE EMPEROR'S CHAMPION! C+VG HIT! Go and buy it.\" Commodore User Screen Star Available now on: SPECTRUM 48/128K CBM 64 AMSTRAD CPC DOMAR "


"Konami 1999 SHABA ROAD 123 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Pne ar in you 11 12 11 10 11 12 11 141 SHOP 190999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999995 Screen shots from arcade version-home micro versions may differ. The smash hit follow up to Ar Kung-Fu Spectrum Commodore 64 and Amstrad versions coming soon. Our hero has finally mastered the secret 0 martial art \"CHIN'S G SHAO-LIN» but is trapped G by triad gangs. With kicks G and other secret powers, escape from and travel In SHAO-LIN'S road to In freedom! Published under licence by The Edge, 36/38 Southampton Street, London WC2. Tel: (01) 831 1801 TX: 892379. "


"PROCHE PE ROOPER Readers of the science fiction weekly comic the clues to the traitor there are the Southern 2000 AD will need no introduction to Rogue contained on vid tape-he troops. These will be must make his way to the Trooper, fighting man supreme. Now city of Millicanum. encounter Rogue. They may thanks to Piranha Software the cult hero will He will face a whole host not shoot at him, but then be appearing soon on a home computer. of enemies-bowler-hatted again they might. Braving the perils of Nu-Earth, the planet of scavengers, dream weavers On his mission Rogue will perpetual war, C+VG brings you this preview who can conjour up need to restock his of Rogue Trooper's latest battle. dreadful visioins, poison ammunition from various gas and, of course, the Nort stores in both the Southern Nu-Earth a poisoned, the biochip buddies. He foot troops who will kill and Northern territories. A wasted planet of holds everything Rogue Rogue Trooper on sight if good source of information never-ending warefare light Trooper could need they are quick enough. And and food for Rogue are the years away from the Solar System. Across the surface of this unhealthy world of dust, decay and death strides the titanic figure of Rogue Trooper, one of the meanest, fiercest fighting men of all time. This blue-skinned, opaque-eyed soldier has been specially engineered to survive and operate in the terrible conditions which exist on Nu-Earth. He doesn't need the special disguises, ammo, the protective clothing and all-knowing war computer, respiratory equipment vid tape, chem kit, Grations which other soldiers use. and Scum Sea survival kit. Helping Rogue Trooper are his biochip buddies GAME OUTLINE Gunnar, Helm and Bagman. The game opens with Rogue Like Rogue Trooper, they Trooper standing alone were once Genetic among his dead colleagues Infantrymen but they -Gunnar, Helm and became casualties of the Bagman. He has a matter of war. He removed the chips seconds to collect the containing their personae biochips from the fallen and placed them into his Genetic Infantrymen to help equipment. him in his mission to find Gunnar adds power to his clues to a traitor who has gun and can fire on his own. betrayed the cause of the His slightly psychopathic Southers, one of the armies tendencies mean he fighting on the blighted encourages Rogue Trooper planet. to take part in non-stop Rogue Trooper, himself a fighting. That's not too wise. deserter from the Helm provides protection Southerners, must cross in Rogue Trooper's helmet, many different and increasing his defences hazardous territories -the when under fire. Scum Sea, the Ozart And then there's Bagman, mountains, ruined cities and perhaps the most useful of deserts. Once he has found "


"PEVOM * of domes, where both sides comments live. Rogue Trooper will by Gunnar, Helm have to use Bagman to and Bagman will be provide disguises for him. displayed. These After all his blue skin and will appear mowhawk style of hair cut make him a striking and very noticeable figure. wear special protective THE SCREEN in speech bubbles, similar clothing or in style to those found in quickly breathing gear 2000 AD, with // gained him a hence his The screen will be divided the tail pointing/4 huge blue skin and opaque into two main areas, the to the revelvant following. slits for eyes. His mowhawk larger one being a biochip. N Rogue's style hair is based on a cut window onto part Rogue Trooper popularity is that used to be worn by the playing area is being second only to Elite American troops in the which will show programmed for the comic's lead Second World War. cities, seas / burnt out character Judge His buddies in battle were vehic les and new name of Macmillan Dredd. 2000 AD, originally going to be a crumbling walls Software by itself launched in platoon of identical Genetic which provide cover Manchester-based Design 0 February 1977, sells Infantrymen. But this was for the fighters. Design. more than 100,000 copies dropped and it was decided Rogue is seen crossing Programmer lan Wareing each week-more than the to make Rogue the last of the planet's surface, mainly says: \"The main part of my Eagle, Battle or Roy of the his type. His friends would walking. But he will be able job is to portray Rogue Rovers. be biochips with voice to hijack vehicles. The Trooper as accurately as The stories are complex synthesisers so they could remaining part of the screen possible. Rogue freaks will but the central theme talk to him. is divided into three recognise it immediately.\" always concerns the Gerry Finely-Day still segments which provide an perpetual war which rages works on Rogue Trooper element of strategy to the on Nu-Earth. and also Action Force for game. He was created by writer Battle. Dave Gibbons has The first one is the Battle ROGUE TROOPER Gerry Finley-Day and artist worked for DC Comics in Computer which will display Dave Gibbons after 2000 America since 1982 drawing long range information -THE HISTORY AD's editor Steve McManus Green Lantern about what is going on out decided he wanted a future Many artist have worked of range of the main playing appeared in 2000 AD, IPC's war story for the comic. on Rogue Trooper over the screen. cult science fiction comic, in Rogue was a new type of years but the current one is Next to the Battle September 1981. soldier, genetically Cam Kennedy Computer are the graphics The clever humour of the of the three biochips and stories together with PROGRAMMER hostile environment of next to their messages and action-packed fighting Nu-Earth without having to Name: lan Wareing Game: Rogue Trooper Favourite food: Beans on toast Favourite drink: Tetley Bitter (\"Handpump only.\") Favourite TV programme: haven't got a television not bad for an ex-television engineer.\" Thing most hated about the computer industry: Charts PROFILE "


"POCHE TROOPER COMPETITION o Are you a true blue blooded Rogue Trooper fan? Then you can't afford to miss out on the chance to win these wonderful Rogue Trooper prizes. The first three winners will each receive an exclusive Rogue Trooper clock. The ten runners-up will get copies of the Rogue Trooper annual, and T shirts. The next ten runners up will get a Rogue Trooper annual. Here's what you have to do. We want you to compile what you think would be Rogue Trooper's top five favourite records, the type of disks he would listen to on a desert island. Perhaps he likes Blue Moon or Song Sung Blue. Get the idea? Send your five nominations together with the printed coupon to Rogue Trooper Competition, Computer+ Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is September 16th and the editor's decision is final. Piranha/C+VG ROGUE TROOPER COMPETITION I think Rogue Trooper's favourite five records are: NM 5:Name "


"IRIDIS OC BY JEFF MINTER CAN YOU KEEP PACE WITH THE POWER OF IRIDIS ALPHA? Enter into the world of Jeff Minter's IRIDIS ALPHA Manoeuvre in the bizarre world of high speed surrealism. Bombard your senses with dynamic visual experiences whilst keeping pace with fast and furious bi-directional scrolling, Mega blast your way through 5 planets each with 20 different levels. Get to grips with IRIDIS ALPHA The key to your survival is -ENERGY! (GSH For Commodore 64 and 128 Cassette .95 Disk $12.95 For mail order send a cheque postal order to Hewson Consultants Ltd. Order by credit card by sending your Access Barclaycard number. and enclose a specimen signature. Don't forget to enclose your name and address LLAMASOFT 566 Miton Trading Estate, Milton, Abingdon, Oxon. OX44 4Xenor As part of our continuing development of innovative software we are always happy to evaluate software sent to us with a view to publication "


"We are proud to announce Jusial Rinuit \"The Computer Game of no vital importance\" TRIVIAL PURSUIT is a Trade Mark owned and licensed by Horn Abbot International Ltd. Published by Domark Limited, 204 Worple Road, London SW 208I'N. Tel: 01-947 5624. Trivial Pursuit was programmed by Oxford Digital Enterprises. HORN ABBOT INAINTERNATIONAL DOMARK "


"CAVG SEP software REVIEWS O JACK THE NIPPER 10. PE PERE POCKET GAME OF THE Machine: Amstrad MONTH (featured version) This is C+VG's highest honour. Spectrum and MSX It's granted to the game which, in Supplier: Gremlin our honest opinion, is the most Graphics playable, original and exciting Price: .95/.95/ game released during the month. .95/.95 for Amstrad We look for all the key points disc listed below but also that extra Ooooh! I'm feeling positively added ingredient which makes wicked after playing Jack The the game stand head and Nipper. And what a rotten little shoulders above the best of the begger he is too. Jack's sole aim rest in life is to amass points on the naughty-o-meter\". This is very C+VG simply done, simply by being bad. Now, a naughty nipper would be pretty ineffective were he without means of wounding a passing grown-up. Jack is C+VG HIT! hardly defenceless, though. In RASH the first room, he'll discover a This symbol is C+VG's way of pea-shooter. One civic-minded telling you a game is the adult has no doubt put the BUSINESS! offending item out of harms way, atop a shelf. With a bit of NAUGHTYOMETER \"Who writes your reviews?\" That's a childish ingenuity the item can 0100 question our readers often ask. be easily obtained. Name the guilty ones, they demand. Now he's armed, and ready to So that's what we're doing. Satisfied go. Moving through the hallway bott. It you get caught with the potential of a truly and out into the street, Jack intent to commit a wonderous naughty, and a lot now? waddles around with an air of naughtyness, then you're in for of planning, too. Dropping sheer mischief. The graphics a stiff dose of nappy rash. Once objects for a height will destroy C+VG'S REVIEW are great, and very reminiscent your rash gets to critical level, them, so you need to be careful of the Sweeny Toddler cartoon you lose a life. while you are juggling the TEAM strip. Scores on the N/meter are At the end of the game, you items. tough to amass. Pea-shooting will be given a rating to indicate the screen is shown in LESLY WALKER: Lesly brings a everything in sight may work everything in sight may work quite how horrid you managed semi-3D, and Jack can move in gentle touch to the C+VG review for a while, but eventually you to be. and out by using the diagonal team. She enjoys GOOD games, will find yourself being chased T There are lots of nice touches. joystick positions. They're a whatever they are. But nothing has by a horde of miffed adults. The buildings you have to enter little weird, but not difficult to dogs, shop assistants, swatty have invariably wacky names, use really come close to her favourite schoolkids and ghosts. Of such as the Hummo Sock Walking Jack into dangerous game Sorcery yet anyway... course, sensible people don't Factory. There are bill posters places; like a radiator, will TIM METCALFE: The veteran Ed believe in ghosts, and so they on the walls, too, advertising cause severe nappy rash. can't see them. Logic, eh? everything from soft drinks to has been around with C+VG almost Jack The Nipper is very good The sound on the game is jumbo nuts\". The real fun indeed. Go and break open your since it started and as he's getting on very good, with a very melodic comes whilst plotting nasty little sister's piggy bank and buy a bit now likes to do more restful tune plinks and plonks away in activities. Should you take the it! Jim things like basket weaving. But he the background, while all the battery to the computer shop has been known to get stuck into a sound effects zoom and ping at and fuse all the machines? Or Graphics the appropriate times. could you mix the battery with Sound Now, as every nipper knows, another item, to make a more Value more leisurely games like flight-sims the most ghastly fate to befall devastating impact them is the dreaded smacked and such like. Leaving the more strePlayability it takes a lot of practice to see nuous stuff to the rest of the team. Typical... JIM DOUGLAS: Jim \"Crockett\" PAUL BOUGHTON: C+VG'S CHRIS CAIN: Our junior joystick NICKY TREVETT: The mysterious Douglas is first and foremost an smooth, sauve and sophisticated dejockey Chris \"Odduns\" Cain likes Nicky reviews Beeb games from her adventure person but he is also a puty ed is well known for his joystick nothing better than an arcade advencountry retreat in Hertfordshire. An fan of arcade adventures the BBC, skills. Paul is a sporty type and enture or a good shot-'em-up between enigmatic figure Nicky is another and extremely trendy clothes. Jim is joys all those sport simulations munching packets of dodgy crisps. arcade adventure fan-but does ena wordsmith who writes reviews so which require you to totally destroy The Commodore is his favourite joy a bit of martial artistry from sharp you could cut yourself on the stick. Which he does. Fre machine-but he has been known to time to time. quently. actually touch an Amstrad. S screend Jack nedia    them. STARTS HERE "


"software REVIEWS 2 1.C.U.P.S. MURDER ON THE MISSISSIPPI Machine: Spectrum Essentially, the game is 48K presented in the same manner Supplier: Odin as many other Spectrum Price: .95 programs. The Mikro-Gen series of Wally games springs Heartland continues the to mind. Animation is flawless. story-line which seems to run You take the role of an odd-job throughout nearly every fantasy style character, all togged up in and adventure game. A once a smart manservant's uniform, peaceful land has been ravaged complete with top hat. As you by war. It's the old story of good walk around-hand holding versus evil. What makes this onto your hat-the little guy particular idea so inventive is will swing his arm and stride the way you become involved, about most convincingly. Now, and the way you can put things that hat is pretty useful, in fact. to rights. You come across a When assaulted by a member book which chronicles the war. of the 'other lot' (who As your read it, you become presumably want to see evil aware that it is far more triumph) you can sling it toward important than a mere fairytale. them, to defend yourself. But, as you near the final The ugly problem of attribute chapter... the pages are clashes rears its head once more drift down the screen-should missing. in Heartlands. Despite the fact There is also a large skull and It is your task to enter a world that most of the colour use is you be lucky enough to find one crossbones type thing to show which contains the pages, and quite simple, and safe, -before bouncing off the how much energy you have left. collect the correct ending. Yes, sometimes colour will get bottom and floating back to the another twist! There are two At the end of the game you washed out of the top. There is a wide variety of monsters that you have to avoid will be told what percentage possible endings. If you finish background scenery when you you have achieved, and how the book so evil wins, terrible jump over it. or destroy. Zombies, knights, many pages you've collected. things will happen, and the The sound isn't all that good, pop up in the appropriate area. wizards and even spacemen Heartlands is really very Heartland will be sucked into a so I'll tell you about the more good. whirlpool of very frightening interesting points which have Once you have collected the Jim pages, they will be assembled events indeed. You have to been included. Graphics into the book. An egg-timer collect the Light pages, which When you have found the runs constantly at the top of the Sound contain the cheery ending to the book, (nicely drawn) you can screen, to indicate how much, Value story. start hunting for pages. These or how little, time you have left. Playability Machine: Commodore Machine: Commodore 64/128 64 Supplier: Activision Price: .99 disc only Supplier: Thor Price: .95 Being one of the World's finest detectives can be a positive ICUPS is a straightforward albatross at times. There is game in two parts. Neither part nothing more tiresome, I can is particularly thrilling. In the tell you, than being called upon first stage, you find yourself in a at an unearthly hour by a fighter, pointing towards the top hysterlical lady, claiming that of the screen. On either side, a here prize-winning toy-poodle wall of multi-coloured has been \"wrenched away from metalwork zooms past at her loving bosom by a game of breakneck speed. It's very armed ruffians\". smooth. It was after a string of such The aim of part one is simply events that I, Sir Charles to survive. As soon as you leave Foxworth decided it was time to the safety of your mothership, a take a break on the cruiser Delta swarm of enemy fighters will Princess. surround you, and shoot the While strolling one bright crap out of you without a morning, I happened to notice moment's noticel Using the that the door to cabin number joystick, you can manoeuvre around the screen, dodging and four was slightly ajar. There was a crumpled heap of shooting the nasties. clothing lying in the centre of After completing a handful of the floor. The proof of slick, these screens, you will be ruddy liquid seeping through automatically transported to the the floorboards left no doubt in second stage. Here things get a my mind. This man was lot more interesting. You are definitely dead. now a strange sort of alien It's my job to interview all WEBES character, with a jetpac. And the passengers and crew, and you fly around a complicated try to find the person who's cave system, zapping tomatoes committed the crime. and other strange objects. It's a great game. A Get the picture? considerable challenge, but Yup, it's not any good at all. offering hours of reasonably And for .95 you could get a aimless fun. Jim much better game twice Graphics over. Sound Graphics Value Sound Playability Value Playability OOO "


"Post Haste Software for GET DEXTER (PSS) C&VG Game Of The Month and highly praised by many other reviewers. Your Amstrad will dazzle you with this terrific arcade adventure! Amstrad (C) .95 Amstrad (D) .95 The total postal software service! Post Haste is part of GB Microland, the South of England's unique computer shop. Thousands of software titles. Lots of experience. The place that gave new meaning to the word \"friendly\". But not everyone lives nearby. So Post Haste Software was born. To bring the best to your door. With top service. Here's how. No \"Club\" to join, no \"subscription\" to pay. You come in our shop for free. Why pay to buy by mail? Unique \"double-your-money\" voucher with the 40-page catalogue. Check the box in this advertisement! Software for other computers? No problem. QL, Apple and IBM. Ask for lists. Post Haste has the BATMAN (Ocean) Rated at 10 out of 10 for value and 10 out of 10 for playability by C&VG. \"Agame that's destined to become an all-time classic Spectrum (C) .95 Amstrad (C) .95 Other computer versions imminent THE POST HASTE SERVICE We can supply any program you ve seen advertised. If it's released, you'll usually get it by retum. If it's not, you'll get it faster when it does come out. Simply order it and sit back. That's Post Haste service! lot? Postage free in the UK Europe? Add 95p. Elsewhere? Add .50. For the whole order, not each program. Order by post or phone, day or night. Check the coupon for details. Then relax. It's fast! Pay by cheque, bank draft, PO, Access, Visa, Mastercard, Eurocard. Post Haste is convenient! POST HASTE: WHAT THEY SAY! It's only a few months since Post Haste was born. Now, thousands of customer orders later, we've a compliment collection to make us proud! Here are just a few..... \"This time I'm not just surprised but completely amazed at the speed of your response. expect plenty of orders from me!\" K.B., Haslingfield, Cambridgeshire. \"Thanks for a fast service please keep it up!\" F.R. Beisfjord, Norway \"I'm amazed at the speed you work! I received the disk just 4 days after I sent off to you and that includes a Sunday! That's what I call service!\" RH, Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands \"Congratulations on your excellent service! For BFPO addresses, you re the best way of obtaining up-to-date software In my case, you're the only way! Keep up the good work!\" C.B. BFPO 36. \"Many thanks for a superb service!\" .J.G.. Andover, Hampshire \"The last order I placed with you was received just over a week from the date I mailed it two weeks faster than any other firm I've dealt with!\" R.E. Kleppe, Norway. \"I've just received your catalogue and I'm amazed at the quality!\" P.D. Torpoint Comwall \"The programs I ordered arrived in 8 days. Considering this included Easter and an air strike in Australia, that's fantastic!\" AK, Morpherr Vale, South Australia Our thanks to everyone who's written from everywhere in the UK and all over the world. We appreciate it and we'll go right on working poste haste at Post Haste! ALREADY SEEN SOMETHING YOU WANT ON THIS PAGE? GO RIGHT AHEAD AND ORDER NOW! Use the coupon or write on your own paper. Be sure to include all the details from the coupon. Cross cheques and POs for safety. Your software will be on its way by retum. So will your catalogue. And your unique \"double-yourmoney\" voucher! Phone Orders (24 hrs) (0705) 269333 TO GET YOUR CATALOGUE WITH THE \"DOUBLE-YOUR-MONEY\" VOUCHER. OR TO ORDER SOFTWARE, USE THIS COUPON! | Send your catalogue. I've enclosed 90p Don't forget my  80 \"Double Your Money voucher for me to use with my first order!  Send your catalogue and I want to order software too. The details are below. I've added 90p for the catalogue to the value of my order so don't forget my .80 \"Double Your Money\" voucher! My name is: ..... My address is 1 ADVENTURERS! SPECIAL EXTRA SECTION! There are dozens of adventures in the Post Haste catalogue from virtually every major producer. Just about all the superb Infocom range is there and many others too! And Post Haste carries the Infocom Invisiclues, plus hint and guide books to other adventures too! Answers to the problems that keep you awake at night? The catalogue lists them all! Post code... My computer is:... Can we contact you by phone if there's a query? PAPERBOY (Elite) The top arcade game on your own computer screen! The eagerly awaited \"official version! Spectrum (C) .95 BBC/Electron (C) .95 Amstrad (C) .95 BBC (D) .95 Amstrad (D) .95 Comm C16/Pls 4 (C) .95 Comm 64/128 (C) .95 Comm 64/128 (D) .95 STD/Exchange ............. Number IF YOU'RE ORDERING SOFTWARE, PLEASE PRINT DETAILS OF THE PROGRAMS YOU WANT! PROGRAM NAME PRICE PERRY MASON (Telarium) A tremendous graphic adventure. The Case Of The Mandarin Murderer and you're the famous detective, Penry Mason Zzap 64 says \"definitely recommended\" Comm 64/128 (D) .95 THE POST HASTE CATALOGUE The Post Haste catalogue is just 90p with a unique \"Double Your Money\" voucher tucked inside! Yes, the Post Haste catalogue contains a .80 voucher to use for your first order! How's that for value? Recreation, utility, strategy, adventure, arcade-they're all there! And so is your .80 \"Double Your Money\" voucher! Programs for five microsAmstrad Atari, BBC. Commodore 64/128 and Spectrum. You're spoilt for choice with Post Haste! And your catalogue is the gateway to a huge program range from Post Haste. Over 4,000 titles spanning 10 major micros! Where else is there such a choice? MOVIEMAKER (Ariolasoft) A stunning program! Lets you quickly and easily create and save long and hugely impressive animated action sequences using your own creative talents Comm 64/128 (D) .95 Atari (D) .95 GHOSTS'N'GOBLINS (Elite) Another officially licensed arcade smash-hit from the team that produced \"Commando\" Spectrum (C) .95 BBC/Electron (C) .95 Amstrad (C) .95 BBC (D) .95 Amstrad (D) .95 Comm C16/Pls 4 (C) .95 Comm 64/128 (C) .95 Comm 64/128 (D) .95 Catalogue with .80 voucher Add .90 Postage is totally free in the UK Add .00 Europe postage for whole order Add .95 Airmail elsewhere for whole order Add .50 TOTAL AMOUNT ENCLOSED  PAYING BY CHEQUE OR POSTAL ORDER?! Please make it payable to Post Haste Software and cross it for safety's sake! Don't send cash! CHARGING IT TO YOUR VISA, ACCESS. MASTERCARD, EUROCARD? May we have your card number, expiry date and signature? IIIIIIIIIII Expiry date Signature Now mail your order to POST HASTE SOFTWARE GB MICROLAND. 7 QUEENS PARADE | LONDON ROAD, WATERLOOVILLE HAMPSHIRE PO7 7EB, UNITED KINGDOM Or phone (24 hours) 0705 269333 BIGGER RANGE! The Post Haste range now includes programs for the Commodore C16 and the Atari ST. Send for lists! GAMEMAKER (Activision) One of the most astonishing programs we ve seen! Create your own games and make them as complicated as you like. \"An excellent package Zzap 64 Comm 64/128 (C) .95 Comm 64/128 (D) .95 "


"C+VG SEP software REVIEWS 3 GHOSTS 'N' GOBLINS hug. Machines: unpleasant grave. The most numerous. There is also a small Unless you cheat ..., Spectrum/Amstrad and prominent nasty on the first bridge to cross. Not much of a The game involves a good Commodore 64/128 stage is the zombie, a rather sad problem, until the fire leaps out deal of concentration if you creature when you think about Supplier: Elite hope to get anywhere. Each from below and cooks you it. They simply plod around, alive! time you lose a life, your man Price: arms outstretched, hoping for a The tombstones mentioned will be thrown back to the last .95/.95/.95 earlier literally litter the scene. marker\" that the programmer (tape)/.95 Commdore This brings up another You can't move for more than a has included you don't go all interesting point. The first time few feet before one of the and Amstrad disc the way back to the start of a your character gets attacked, he_damned things pop up and you level if you have progressed a Ghosts 'n' Goblins, the smash will be stripped of his armour. have to jump over it. The fair way into it. hit game from the arcade, has The next time and, well... one problem is, they're whacking The actual physical action finally reached the home life gone. You have five men to great things. On the Spectrum required to play the game is not computer. It's been worth the begin with. Because each has a version, things aren't too bad. too extensive. But you will have wait. new suit of armour, you You can fly through the air with to improve on your reactions. The plot is identical to the effectively have ten lives. This minimal effort. Commodore After some time playing the arcade game, and similar to a may make the game sound owners, though, have a slightly game, you will find yourself large number of programs that easy. Wrong. The creatures more difficult time of things. I hopelessly addicted and very have emerged over the past few come at your from every found it very difficult to clear very determined to beat the months. While out strolling with possible angle, and will strike the stones, invariably getting blasted thing. Arcade your girlfriend, a demonic you dead without a second caught pressed up against one. conversions have built a overlord swoops down from thought. unable to jump forward. In this reputation as being a bit naff. on-high, as they do, flapping his There are a large number of situation, it's necesssary to back G'n G should change things, up a little (usually involving The programmers, Keith walking through the very Burkhill for the Spectrum people you are trying to avoid version, and Chris Butler on the The game has a number of Commodore, have made stout levels, each with a different efforts to produce games that backdrop such as a town are not merely satisfactory, but adjoining an ice palace and the surpass that level. initial graveyard scene. The The scrolling on CBM and ogres will appear at the end of Spectrum has to be admired. each section, in an attempt to Commodore owners may prevent your progress, usually believe that this goes without by stomping on your brains. As saying, after seeing the quality this is far from desirable, you of Uridium. Spectrum users may be surprised to hear, though that their version is very nearly up to the same level. The Amstrad version of the game isn't really up to the quality of the others. The graphics are colourful, but they are just too flickery to watch. For some reason, you play on a magnified area of the screen, too. This results in everything being blown-up. This makes for even more blocky pictures, Music on this version is disappointing too. It's quite good the first time round, but as the tune is extremely short, and repeats itself ad nauseam during play, I was glad to have a volume control on the machine. wings and making a frightful inventive touches in the game. have to try and fell this rather Ghosts and Goblins is the din. Amidst the confusion, he After your lose your armour, enormous foe before he can get game to buy for your 64 or snatches your gal and flutters you will be granted with a short his feet near you. This is the Spectrum. away leaving you in period of invincibility. This is most tricky part of the game, Jim. considerable consternation. As pretty vital, as it gives you a Commodore/Spectrum/Amstrad it's been a rather boring day so chance to escape a particularly far, you decide to go and rescue ferocious attack. There's not Graphics her. Chivalry is back in style. much point having the Sound The game plays some very protection of armour if you get Value peculiar music once it's loaded. killed as soon as you lose it! Playability The screen is presented There is a wide variety of side-on, with your little man (in creatures which will attack you. armour at first) running for all There are (deep breath) he's worth left and right across zombies, gremlins, ogres, a scrolling landscape. As soon demons, venus fly-traps, birds, as you start, you will discover little funny blue things that spin that the game is far from easy: around, ghosts and flying there is a positive horde of goblins. Also, there are a creatures just dying to drag you number of static problems, down into a decidedly huge pits in the earth are TIME \"1:48 ----WEAPONSCORE 001000 TOP 005600 CON DOO COCO TERENDE WEAPON SCORE Top 10 "


"Does your micro answer back.? Does your micro chat to 70,000 people across the UK? Can your micro interview pop stars, hackers and doyennes of the computer industry? Can your micro provide the answer to your technical and software problems?  Could your micro send and receive telex's worldwide? Does your micro do your shopping for you-and have it delivered to your door? Is your micro an answering machine, delivering your private mail whenever you log-on? NO?. .... Shame! Bring your micro to life! To: Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1 Please send me a brochure on Micronet 800 Micronet \"800Name Address Telephone No. Micronet 800 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR SEJ Telephone: 01-278 3143 Age  331) "


"C+VG SEP sobtware REVIEWS O O O O MISSION A.D. IN I Kn Machine: Commodore tuneful. There are lots of 64/128 locations to explore, in search of your prey. There is an echoey Supplier: Odin cathedral, a very rough Price: .95 disc (tape night-club, an office and many to follow) more. My favourite area is the statue park. It's filled with Who says shoot-'em-ups are bizarre sculptures. long dead? Well, quite a few To help you in your mission, a people in fact, but that's beside map appears in the lower the point. Personally, I'm fed up right-hand corner of the screen, to the back teeth with all these showing your position, and any involved and complex games. renegade aliens which are loose Nothing too complicated about in that sector. You can use the Mission A.D., I can tell you! It's map while in the teleport to a straightforward game of choose which destination is the assassination, and I love it! most sensible to visit. By In the game, you take the role cycling through the various of a Blade Runner style locations, you can drop a grey character in a futuristic city. Overlay over each area. Beneath Aliens have run amok and the this, some little dots will appear whole city seems to have gone to mark the position of aliens. beserk. Every character you see the only problem I found speed through the screens, with one exception) is armed with this is that the map was a blowing away anything that The unarmed guys look vaguely little too small. At times, I had to stands in his path. Arabic, with a turban and flappy peer at the screen for quite a Apart from your main foes trousers. You don't have much while in order to check whether the guys you have to shoot in time to check out these weirdos, or not the little white dots fall in the time limita considerable though. You'll be far too busy or outside the grey area. This problem is posed by the baggy plugging the creeps with the wastes valuable time. You're suit brigade and the robots. The baggy space-suits, and those playing against the clock, too. man in suits stomp about, flying robots are real killers. Something horrible will squeezing off the occasional probably happen to the World if round in your direction. Robots you are carrying out your the time runs out. are by far the most dangerous, desperate mission is great. It's The animation is great. Your through. They fly around at very sci-fi and genuinely little character rushes at great about chest height, blazing 9 975 Tui ni OUD away indiscriminately! Mission AD certainly isn't for the strategy and mapping lobby, but it is a real joy to get straight into the important business of killing things again. Jim Graphics Sound Value Playability C+VG HIT! 0000 MERMAID MERMAID MADNESS Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Electric Dreams Price: .99 As an \"arcade comedy\" I must admit I found Mermaid Madness as amusing as a smack in the kisser with a cold kipper. Okay, I did bare my teeth at one stage I had to grit them to keep on playing. Myrte the Mermaid is looking for love in her ocean world. Gormless Gordon, a diver, has become the love of her life, but the passion is not returned. The game starts with Gordon leaping into the sea. He swims off under a wreck to hide and goes to sleep. Myrtle has to rescue him from his potential underwater tomb and so embarks on a fairly straightforward, maze-style arcade adventure. The graphics are colourful, the characters are cartoon-style Myrtle herself is big, yellow and wobbles a lot. So if fat ladies-or in this case mermaids make you smile, then Mermaid Madness could be iust what your waiting for. Paul Graphics Sound Value Playability VOCO C+VG HIT! HERCULES Machine: Amstrad together with programmer (Knight Tyme) Atari David Jones' zany sense of humour. (Spellbound) Both games used a window Supplier Mastertronic menu system to take decisions Price: .99 and get information called Although Spellbound and Windimation. This is a little Knight Tyme are available on tricky at first but, once you get different machines, they are use to it, there is no problem. part of the continuing Both these games are little adventures of Magic Knight. gems, at fantastic prices. Our Spellbound sees good old MK advice is simply to buy them. on a mission to rescue his We doubt if you feel your friend and tutor Gimbal the money has been wasted. Wizard from the Mystical Castle And in case you're interested, of Karn.Knight Tyme follows on C+VG printed a players' guide from Spellbound. MK has been to both games in September. catapulted into the future and Paul onto a spaceship USS Pices. His Amstrad/Atari mission here is to find his way Graphics back to his own time and space. Sound Both games are arcade Value adventures, packed with clever puzzles, and tricks, laced Playability Machine: Commodore 64 Supplier: Alpha-Omega Price: .99 SPELLBOUND) KNIGHT TYME Colours on the screen are rather dreadful, too. Sometimes it's very hard to read the text which pops up after you have been killed and at other times during play. It's really quite bad and not even worth the asking price of .99. The movement okay, but the whole sorry package isn't much better than a type-in listing. DOO Hold onto your hats. This is a mega-game if ever I saw one. Okay, I own up. It involves that horrible little blocky character running around the ledges. How interesting. Based on the Greek myth, the storyline makes considerably more interesting reading than the gameplay. Graphics Sound Value Playability "


"C+VG SEP Software REVIEWS 6 CRICKET Dragon's Lair before you can reach the final screen where, hopefully, Singe gets his just desserts Dragon's Lair also features a new and rather interesting multi-load system which allows the next screen to load while the game is being played. Plans are already underway for Dragon's Lair // using more ideas based on the arcade game. Paul Graphics Sound Value Playability Machine: BBC Supplier: Bug-Byte Price: .99 The cricket season might be over, but would-be Bothams needn't worry. Bug-Byte has stepped into the breach. Or has attempted to. OK, Cricket is recognisably cricket. Just. There are two wickets, a bowler, two batsmen, a wicket keeper, and some fielders. There's a ball, a remarkably spongy one it's true, but a ball nevertheless. The bowler bowls, the batsman bats, the ball does what cricket balls do, albeit in slow motion, and the scoreboard displays the score. So far so good. But the quality of the graphics...! It's Bug-Byte Tennis all over again. Blocky people, crude and sluggish movement, peculiar perspectives, very little skill or satisfaction involved. Certainly no cricketing skill. I'm sure it's not easy to program something as graphically complex as this, but that's no excuse. It's not the John Player League and that's a fact. But liked the music, and that's something you dont get at Lord's. Nicky Graphics Sound Value  Playability Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Software Projects Price: .95 The current hunger for computer versions of arcade smashes seems to know no end. Witnesses the success of Elite's Commando, Bombjack and Ghost 'n 'Goblins. Software Projects must have their collective fingers crossed that Dragon's Lair will follow in their tracks to the top of the charts. Dragon's Lair, a huge slot machine smash and one of the first laser disc games to reach the UK, presents a daunting task for any programmer. The original had cartoon graphics by Walt Disney illustrator Don Bluth. They were brilliant. Even so it sems to be the general opinion around the C+VG offices that Software Projects didn't use the graphics capabilities to the full in bringing Dragon's Lair to the small screen. Nevertheless the game is fiendishly difficult to play. You play the part of Dirk the Daring who must rescue Princess Daphne from a fire-breathing monster called Singe, reacting to various computer dictated situations, overcoming problems, collecting points etc. There are nine levels to battle through, with exotic names such as The Falling Disk, Skull Hallway and The Burning Ropes HIJACK in smaller icon displays but those lucky enough to own bigger sets shouldn't find it a problem. There is an end game where you travel to the scene of the hijack where you'll see if your campaign to defeat the terrorist was successful. It could mean a medal or the sack. Hijack, for me is a breath of fresh air, in a boring month of reviewing Paul Graphics Sound C+VG Value HIT! Playability agent, CIA man, military assistant, political assistant, publicity officer, financial officer and secretary The heads change colour Machine: Spectrum As the head of the head of the when that character is in the 48K/128K Hijack Division, some sort of same room as you. If you're Supplier: Electric obscure government quick enough you can question department, it's your job to them, receive information and Dreams decide on the best plan, keep give instructions. Price: .99 the President and press happy, At the bottom left of the Crisis, drama, shock, terror-a organise your colleagues, fight screen is an icon displaying normal day in the C+VG game off power struggles, raise cash what useful items are about as review complex. But today's and gather information. All the you walk past. different. There's a hijack going time the clock ticks down to the played Hijack on a fairly on and I've got to crack it. terrorists' deadline. small sized television and found It's hard enough having the The main part of the screen is it a little difficult to see the CIA and FBI on my back but now taken up with a view of the the President's playing up. various rooms and offices of Things are looking very bleak. Hijack HQ. You can move from But there's nothing bleak in room to room, meet various the future of Electric Dreams' people, talk to them and arcade, strategy and simulation examine objects of use. A map game Hijack. It's a gem. of the office complex is useful The objective of the game is because it's easy to get lost. to end the hijack. There are At the top of the screen are a three ways to do this -buy series of ten heads. These are them off, persuade them to give the people in the building. They up or scare them into are The President, military submission using military might adviser, political adviser, FBI times ext ave nes e bad, king hent is than Jim ITH Der "


"EXTRA .00 WORTH FREE PROGRAMS AND GET AN WORTH OF BUY .00 GRAND SALES .95 .95 .95 SINGLE TAPES CASSETTE ANCIPITAL .50 COMMODORE 64 UTILITIES & PERIPHERALS EMPIRE OF KARN MR WIMPY .95 1st PUBLISHING PROGRAMS ON DISC AZIMUTH 64 CASS .95 JEWELS OF BABYLON ROLANDS RAT RACE 12.95 ALL JUST .95 EACH DESIGNERS PENCIL CASS FIRSTWORD WORD PROC. .95 DALEY THOMPSONS DECATHLON .50 HEROES OF KARN FIRSTBASE DATABASE BREAK FEVER FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD .95 LOGO DISC LANGUAGE 12.50 .00 BASIC 64 MOON CRESTA .95 GILLIGANS GOLD .95 PASCAL LANGUAGE PILOT DISC LANGUAGE .00 SUICIDE EXPRESS ANDROID .95 ADA TRAINING COURSE BREDENS BASIC DISC  POWER PLAN (CALCULATION PROG LAZY JONES .95 02.95 PSI WARRIOR ASSEMBLER MONITOR COMPILER MEGAWARS 11.00 PSYTRON .95 ULTISYNTH CASS SWAG 11.00 DOUGHBOY .50 EDUCATION PROGRAMS ALL .95 64 DOCTOR (CASS BY COMP PATRICK MOORES ASTRONOMY DISC KOSMIC KANGA 51.95 COMBAT LEADER SOFTWARE ASSOC 13.95 B.J. BEARS GET READY FOR NUMBERS .95 ZIM SALA BIM .95 TOY BIZARRE .95 B.J. BEARS GET READ TO READ PRACTICALC CASS .95 HAMPSTEAD .95 TALLEDEGA .95 SPIRATES & SNOWMEN SABRE WULF DR WATSONS 64 ASSEMBLY 1395 ASK THE FAMILY .50 GROGS REVENGE LANGUAGE COURSE DISC UNDERWORLD .95 HISTORY OF 20th CENTURY .50 FORT APOCALYPSE .50 I ROB CARRIERS MENUE PLANNER ,50 BEACH HEAD WHITE LIGHTNING CASS .50 GERMAN INC. BASIC LIGHTNING .95 BLACKWYTCH .50 Up UP & DOWN .50 MATCHMAKER OUTLAWS .50 VALKYRIE 17 .95 GEOGRAPHY MUSIC STUDIO BY ACTIVISION CASS MASTERMIND BY LEISURE GENIUS .95 TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY .95 .95 LETS COUNT PLANET OF DEATH ENGLISH LANGUAGE AH DIDDUMS GO MICRO INC. DATABASE QUIZZES SHIP OF DOOM .50 BIOLOGY SOUND AND GRAPHICS .95 PENETRATOR .95 COMPUTER STUDIES ESPIONAGE ISLAND THE SPANISH TUTOR KNOW YOUR OWN 10 EASY SPELL DISC .95 INCA CURSE MORDENS QUEST .50 PATRICK MOORES ASTRONOMY MICROSOFT MULTIPLAN DISC RETURN TO EDEN .95 NUMBER PUZZLER FLYER FOX PHYSICS O LEVEL C.S.E. REVISION .95 PANDORAS BOX TOUCH TYPE CASS .95 BY LONGMAN SPIRIT OF STONES CASS  2.95 PATHFINDER SCARABUS HENRYS HOUSE VOLI .95 CASTLE OF DREAMS TONY HARTS ART MASTER CASS. INC HENRYS HOUSE, JETBOOT JACK SPELLUNKER .95 FACEMAKER NEPTUNES DAUGHTER STRANDED .95 HUMPTY DUMPTY BLAGGER GOES TO HOLLYWOOD .95 MONEY MANAGER (DISC  2.95 HENRYS HOUSE VOL 1 FRENCH SON OF BLAGGER INC. HENRYS HOUSE, WITCH SWITCH COMMODORE 64 PACKS COMMODORE MODEMS .95 WHO DARES WINS IN .95 SOLDIERS OF FORTUNE, LEGEND OF IMAGINE PACK INC. INTRO TO BASIC PICASS. .95 KNOCKOUT .95 .95 KNUCKER-HOLE ARCADIA, PEDRO, COSMIC CRUISER JET SET WILLY .95 SELECT 1 112 GAMES .95 B.C BILL, INVADERS, 3D JUMPIN INTRO TO BASIC PT. INCASS. .95 MANIC MINER .95 CASCADE  JACK .95 INTRO TO BASIC PT. DISCI .95 BC'S QUEST FOR TIRES .95 GHETTO BLASTER .95 HILL MCGIBBON PACK INC. EASY FILE DISC  | AS .95 .50 SUMMER GAMES SPECIAL AGENT CAR JOURNEY .99 BALLOONING PYJAMARAMA AUTOMANIA .95 .00 Zaxxon .50 PROGRAMMERS REF GUIDES .95 AUTOMANIA LONGMAN SOFTWARE PACK .95 COMMODORE 64 DISCS 3D HYPERMATHS BMX NUMBER MACRO ASSEMBLER DEVELOPMENT DUMMY RUN GALACTIC CONTROLLER .95 JUMP, WORD WOBBLER .95 DISCI .95 EVERYONES A WALLY HIGH FLYER .95 COLLINS SOFTWARE PACK 4-8 YRS. ASSEMBLER TUTOR DISC .95 VIEW TO KILL RAIL BOSS .95 WHATS THE TIME, KNOW YOUR EUREKA TABLES. FIRST NUMBERS .95 FUTURE FINANCE DISC) .95 ARCADE EXTRAVAGANZA GREMLINS INC 5 GAMES COLLINS PADDINGTON PACK INC Simons Basic Extension Disc .95 BLOCKBUSTERS .95 MAYHEM, ICARUS, PANDORAS BOX PADDINGTONS EARLY VIS T. .95 CRAZY COMETS Easy Script Disc .95 HUMPHREY PUNCHY PADDINGTONS GARDEN GAME .95 PADDINGTON AND THE SPYS DEMISE SPY STAKES BACK 12.95 FLYER FOX .95 DISAPPEARING INK Easy Stock Disc $12.95 ARC OF YESOD .95 ZORK .95 THE 'O' LEVEL PACK VIC 20 EXTRAS WHIRLNURD .95 ZORK 2 .95 PHYSICS 'O& 'A' LEVEL COMMODORE 1010 EXPANSION SPACE PILOT IL .95 ZORK 3 .95 CHEMISTRY 'O' LEVEL, MATHS 'O MODULE .95 + .50 p&o HUNCHBACK .50 STARCROSS .95 LEVEL, BIOLOGY 'O' LEVEL .95 or 13.00 each 16K RAM PACKS .95 HUNCHBACK .95 DEADLINE 14.95 PRACICALC PLUS CASS: HIGH NOON .95 .95 SUSPENDED 64 CARTRIDGES .95 CAVELON .95 SPIRIT OF STONES DISC  4.95 INTERNATIONAL SOCCER .95 VIC SUPER EXPANDERS .95 CHINESE JUGGLER .95 FANTASY FIVE DISC  3.95 OMEGA RACE .50 VIC 20 PROGRAMER REF GUIDES .95 SKYFOX WIZARD OF WOR FRAX BARGAINS FROM 1st PUBLISHING SIMPLICALC DISC) .00 13.95 STAR RANGER GRIBBLYS DAY OUT 13.95 8 BOOKS FOR JUST .95 + .50 p&p MUSIC COMPOSER p&p 75p all orders .95 Normal RRP over .00 overseas 75p per tape. BLACK THUNDER YOUR 64 CASSETTE BOOK, GRAPHICS JUPITER LANDER .50 per pack .50 CLASSIC ADVENTURE $2.50 .00 per peripherals BOOK FOR THE COMMODORE 64 RADAR RAT RACE ENCOUNTER 12.50 PEAKS & POKES C64 TRICKS & TIPS LOGIC SALES LTD CLOWNS REVENGE OF MUTANT CAMELS FOR YOUR COMMODORE 64 $1.50 .50 6 Midgate  Peterborough Cambs ADVANCE OF MEGA CAMELS ADVANCED MACHINE LANGUAGE BOOK AVENGER ,50 .50 FOR THE C64 DEA BOOK C64 24 hour ordering on SHEEP IN SPACE  MACHINE LANGUAGE BOOK FOR THE DIG DUG .95 (0733) 313870 .95 .50 "


"CAVG SEP software REVIEWS 6 ARAC Machine: CBM 64 preferred this game. Supplier: Addictive Dotted throughout the screens are creatures who will Games help you later on in the game, Price: .95 but first you have to collect There comes a time when them. surely every computer gamer To do this you fire a net from wants to get away from zapping the top of Arac's head. Once aliens, manoeuvring high-flying netted, they appear caged at the aircraft and having to use their bottom of the screen. When you brain too much that time is are at a stage where you can't here now. penetrate the hedgerow or Arac is the new release from climb up, it is time to recall your Addictive Games and is \"captives\". The icon board programmed by Paul O'Mallay, reveals exactly what and how who first found fame with many of each creature you Boffin. It's another platform have. They all have their own game and the objective is to uses which I shall leave for make your way through the 100 you to discover for yourself. screens to gain access to the There are some nice little Citadel. touches in this game-watch Your first option is to decide Arac get annoyed if you leave whether to play the \"short\" or him standing around too long \"full\" game. The only difference and when you have between the two, is that on the transformed into the 'short' game, the Aracnadroid is Aracnadroid, he can fly up already complete, but, on the through the screens and walk \"full\", you have to go around along the ceilings. and collect the bits of robot The sound is below average before he is formed-1 for the Commodore 64, and as I HII da its web of intrigue and playability. Lesly for graphics, well, the usage of sprites was good, though the background graphics could have been better. The one annoying fact I found after many hours of playing, was when you ran out of energy, you had to start right back at the beginning again but, that aside, Arac will catch you in O C+VG O Graphics Sound Value Playablity O OO FOR WORDEN line Machine: C16/128 Supplier: English Software Software Price: .99 Let the games begin! The men cheer, the ladies scream, and the trumpets well, er ... trumpet, I suppose. Anyway this is all to put you in the mood for Knight Games, the new one from English Software. As you may have heard, Knight Games is all about medieval combat. Sir Lancelot and all that. So after reading the very clear instructions, decided to challenge the computer at the first eventSword Fighting. I pressed the button and the game began. I found myself face to face with a big, bad knight, who started to bash me across the arm with his sword. I'm not having that I thought so quickly moving the joystick up. I crashed my sword on his head, I think I hurt him... As you continue to battle, you win shields from your opponent, which all add up at the end of the fight. Also, your energy is made of small round rose-shaped cricles which are displayed on the lefthand side of the screen. After four minutes, which is the time the fight lasts on the novice level, I had smashed my opponent very hard indeed, and I had more points, I had won! This was so exciting, I couldn't wait to get on with the other events starting with Quarterstaff. After it had loaded yes, I'm afraid it's one of those awful multi-load jobs pressing the button took me into the fight once more. Smack, Pow! It's easy to start fighting again because English have made all the events with the same control, with the exception of Archery and Crossbow. After mashing him to death again, thought I'd go on to the next one, Archery. This was different as you had to aim the cursor, and then press fire to quite obviously -fire. This event got a bit boring, so I quickly went on to Ball and Chain I'll bash him across the head with this mace. This was really good, and pretending that I was playing against the Ed was even better. After playing the next two events, I came to a nasty conclusion, they were all near enough the same. I'm afraid so. Although you look different in each one, the moves are basically similar and it gets very boring after a while. Still as this game has good graphics and sound, it may get bought up quickly, but if you stop and stare at it, you may change your mind. Check it out before you buy, it may save you .95. Chris Graphics CHVG Sound Value HIT! Playability Machine: C16 Supplier: Elite Price: .95 Bomb Jack, that little guy who has the strange hobby of collecting bombs, has decided to show up on the C16. The basic idea of Bomb Jack is, as I said, to collect bombs all over the world. You, as Bombjack, can fly, jump and walk your way through different layouts of bombs, collecting lots of points. Bomb Jack features different graphic backdrops, well at least on all the other versions it does. The C16 version really is quite poor in comparison, only having one backdrop. The sound is also not up to the original versions. Unfortunately all you get is a muffled fog horn at the start and the beeps and bips, that's it. As to your actual character, welll Your man has some very bad attribute problems, those usually associated with the first batch of Spectrum games. At its very best, Bomb Jack on the C16 is a terrible game. It's sad to see this sort of rubbish being churned out on the C16 for .95, when you can get something like Trizons for .991 Chris Graphics Sound Value Playablity BOMBJACK OOON comm US GUSTA con PLAYER IL TORON2 PLAYER Z1090075 "


"LLLL HEADCOACH Will catch you with its web of intrigue and playability. Computer & Video Games An arcade adventure with 100 screens featuring some Hof the finest graphics ever seen. You must guide Arac to assemble his army of animal slaves which together with the dreaded Arachnidroid will enable him to penetrate the fortified citadel and deactivate the three reactors. You will need all your strategy and arcade skills to get you through this one! .95 for the Commodore 64 Headcoach will become for American Football what my Football Manager has been for soccer fans-unbeatable. Kevin J Toms This is an American Football Manager with all the enjoyment of building a team that can climb up through the leagues to win the Superbowl. Not only will you manage the quality of your team, but also direct each actual gameplay throughout every match, thus driving your creation up through the tables to success. Weeks of enthralling entertainment. .95 for the Spectrum KAREL KIREL KIREL K IREL the 3D arcade challenge for the thinking player Seventy mind stretching screens, each one more complex than the previous, but providing its own individual challenge. .95 for the SPECTRUM MONSTER HIT ZX Computing, July 86 T-SHIRTS If you play Addictive games you must want one of these (the shirt!!). Small/ Medium Large or XL -50 each PAYMENTS Addictive products can be bought from all good software stockists but in case of difficulty may be obtained direct from us by mail order at the prices shown (UK P&P included but overseas customers must add .50). Accessorders can be telephoned throughon M 02021296404 ddictive Games FOOTBALL MANAGER Still in the charts after four years, Britain's most popular Football Management game ever. Now available on Amstrad at .95 Atari at .95 BBC at .95 . Commodore 64 at .95 C16 Plus 4 at .95 Electron at .95 Spectrum at .95. VIC 20 plus 16K at .95 ZX81 at .95 Addictive Addictive VoAddictive Games Ltd. 10 Albert Road. Bournemouth Dorset BHI IBZ Tel: 0202296404 VoAddictive Games Ltd 10 Albert Road. Bournemouth Dorset BHI IBZ Tel: 0202-296404 "


"ELEVATOR MICROPOOL 96 DTM Shine 86140 Miss'ÉLEVATOR The Central Intelligence The Central Intelligence, Unit of the FBI has been attacked by a hostile, Secret Service, you must find the bomb and the stop-codes for the timer before the enemy lose their patience ...... all leading Available from computer stores .95 .95 Amstrad CPC Cassette Amstrad CPC Disc .95 Commodore 64/128 Cassette .95 Commodore 64/128 Disc 85% Overall Happy Computer, Germany Micropool International Ltd. 4, Mercury House, Calleva Park, Aldermaston, Berkshire. RG7 4QW Tel. Tadley (07356) 77486 * STARLINE 3 Deutsch/Englisch "


"C+VG SEP software REVI HEADBANGER Machine: Amstrad filling the whole screen with red Supplier: Firebird squares. I can't have that, I Price: .99 thought, so I moved around the screen pasting blue squares all Harvey Headbanger, what a over his. strange name for a game! Then zzap!, I found that when thought as it was thrown at me I closed up a square of blue across the room. I do hope that squares, the ones in between the game isn't as bad as the changed to blue too. Also a lot title. of cocktails appeared and as ! So, with caution, I placed the collected them, my twisty tube tape into the Amstrad and away at the side of the screen filled it went. After about a minute my up. I was winning. Now onto the graphics. The ears were assaulted by what! Then it had to happen, we characters are cute and swing thought was a horrible version bumped into each other, we around with some good of the Monty Python theme. both blacked out. We wandered animation. They are also nicely Unfortunately, the tune kept around the screen hopelessly coloured, and in quite high-res playing while the game was for a good few seconds, before rare for the Amstrad. loading, so it was a 'quickly hit returning to normal control. To Now to the music, which is the sound control' job. At last, it win a point, you don't have to quite good, it's a nice little tune, was loaded! fill the whole screen with your which you can turn off if you There I was, plonked in colour, you must trap your want. mid-battle with Hamish opponent, by boxing him in and Overall, Harvey Headbanger Highball and he was quickly filling the box with squares. is a great game, despite its title MW and horrible loading music. If w e get this kind of quality for .99, we should get Arcade quality for .9511 Chris Graphics Sound Value Playability C+VG HIT! COON ady Snodger TRIZONS TOADRUNNER SNODGITS Machine: C16/+4 the C64, which is very rare on Supplier: Bubble Bus the C16. Then after my initial Price: .99 shock I settled down to playing the game. Trizons! What an original name. As this is a 'Blast them to I wonder if the game's as mega-galactic dust type of original as the title. Only one game, I found it pulling me in way to find out... Load it. very quickly. The action is fast GUILTY On loading Trizons, I was and furious, and my joystick presented with a niffty coloured thumb went into its well Bonus 000070 word, which was TRIZONS practiced routine. High OOOOOO (How amazing-Ed.) You control a space shipPrev. DOD000 The first thing that hit me was oh yes, and you must stop the Score 000000 the scrolling, well wicked. It was invading Trizon force from Machine: Spectrum to solve the case yourself. just as smooth as any game on taking over or destroying the 48K Nothing particularly amazing as yet. But I haven't explained Supplier: Creative about the graphics. They are a Sparks little like Ultimate's 3D Price: .99 excursions, except they scroll, Snodgits is wonderful. It's and are hugel Your character, as all the others, is very well Machine: cheap, simple to pick up, hard time it's Toadrunner from animated, and decidedly Spectrum/Amstrad Ariolasoft. This game is your to put down, and extremely pretty! \"cute\". You can walk around Supplier: Ariolasoft sort of \"Wally come Sabre You take the role of Benton the mansion, going up and Price: .95 (cass) Wulf\" type, and I think it may be the Butler, servant to the down stairs, in search of the set to become a classic .95 (disc) object or person you are The aim of the game is to... Snodgers, a frightfully well-to-do couple. In the family pursuing. Every now and then, a new idea wait for it... find the princess household, some very peculiar There are also various items on an old theme pays off. This and then who knows what you happenings have been, um... of scenery dotted around, such happening. Objects have been as grandfather clocks, baths, going missing. This spate of bookcases, plants and desks. \"Snodgering\" has reached such Despite being a little jerky, the an alarming rate, that a team of animation is good. famous, though largely Snodgits is well worth the incompetent, detectives have money. Extremely entertaining, been called in to try and solve and easy to get going with the case. Jim Being a more than marginally Graphics smart bulter and not wishing to Sound believe the disturbing rumours of Snodgits stealing all the household objects, you decide Playability 9000 CO Value 66!! "


"C+VG SEP software REVIEWS 6 Software 8 Niti u WW012 Machine Amstrad monsters. Pick up food and Supplier: Mastertronic drink to preserve your energy, and discover bits of armour to Price: .99 protect yourself. Storm is by far and away the Find a scroll and you can use best budget game I've ever its magic like a Smart bomb to seen on any micro. A big claim. destroy all the inhabitants of a Maybe so. But my advice is to room but you'll have to zap play it yourself and find out for the monster generators you yourself. find to stop more enemies Storm is the first of a bunch of being created Gauntlet clones about to hit The main aim of the game is your home games machine. to collect three snake brooches Gauntlet, just in case you which give you the power to haven't seen the game in the unlock the door to Una's lab arcades, is an amazing where Corrine is being held multi-player D+D adventure. captive. The official version is on its way But along the way you're in from U.S. Gold but watch out for some tough battles and for other clones. But while baffling puzzles. you're waiting if you own an The graphics would look thing I've tasted all day!\" Amstrad get some practice in good in a full price game. flashes up. with Storm the Warrior and Extremely colourful. You get an You have to move pretty Agravain Undead on a mission overhead view of each room quickly to succeed in Storm to rescue Storm's wife Corrine, and look down on the character there's always some thing or a prisoner in Una Cum's castle. you control. Messages about somebody out to kill you. And The game can be played by each room, sometimes giving even if you've cleared one room one or two players one clues, scroll across the top of the monsters will return if you controlling each character. You the main play screen. More try to re-enter it. More fun for have to find your way through messages about items you the map makers out there... many maze-like rooms packed discover also appear here. The only thing I didn't like to the walls with Una's When you eat something a about the game is that you barbarian soldiers and nasty message like \"That's the best don't get a joystick option. The WWWWWW STORM whole thing runs from the keyboard. This addition would make Storm as good as many full-price offerings around right now. A budget game that thinks it's worth nine quid! Tim Graphics Sound C+VG Value HIT! Playability CON BOOTY 0 MON 00 planet. To stop them you must The graphics are the best! blast through 32 different have seen on a C16 so far. The levels, which unfortunately get scrolling is really smooth yes harder each time. I know I said that earlier, and the The aliens attack in different aliens even have shadows. wave forms too, so it's hard to The sound is about average, know what's going to happen but the gameplay is definitely next. This is not space invaders above average for a C16 game. style though, it's more like Jeff So go buy Trizons, if you like Minter's attack of the mutant blasting, it's a real knockout. camels, well the same sort of The best C16 game I've seen scrolling anyway. for a long while. To reach the next level, you Chris must build up your Triz force, which is shown in the top right hand corner of the screen, by Graphics zapping the aliens. But yes, Value C+VG there is always a but if you let Sound HIT! some Trizons slip past you, Playability your Triz force will be depleted. might receive! But first you one of which is safe, the others must find the Stone-master, deadly. and kill him. Classic scenerio, One feature which makes the eh? game a little difficult is the thief, Your character is, of course, a sly type who goes around the hero, a big toad who is quite pinching objects. But as with all intelligent I think he may nasty types, he's a bit dim and have been a prince once. will drop whatever he is You must use objects found carrying to pick up something around various screens.to else. You can kill him, but if he solve lots of diabolically devious is carrying a vital object you and logical puzzles. Great stuff! may not be able to complete the When you start off you find game, so keep an eye on him. yourself in a room with a rather As with most games you have nasty looking sort, making lives and Toadrunner is no strange vacuum type noises. exception. You have a jar of You must first sort out how you energy which runs down a little are going to get past him, and everytime you hit something then you notice a lighter which horrible. he appears to be standing on. Chris So what do you do? Well if you remove the lighter, it's Ams/Spec fairly easy, they guy will move Graphics down away from the exit Sound allowing you to pass. Simple. You then find yourself faced Value with a problem of multi-exits, Playability Chris and the original? Well I don't know where to start. Jim is so microscopic, I wonder how the pirates can see him, there music In short and simple terms, Booty on the C16 is terrible. Good old John F. Cain, who wrote the original version which was brilliant, should have got someone GOOD to convert it. While I'm saying all this, let me add that I thought the 64 version was terrible as well, the only good version being the one written on the Spectrum. Booty was a good game, still is, but not on any of the Don't buy it, it's not even Commodores. is terrible. worth .99. Graphics  Value Sound Playability Machine: C16 Supplier: Firebird Price: .99 \"Oh no, not again\", I hear you cry. You've had Booty on the Spectrum, Booty on the 64 and even Booty on the Amstrad. Now hail the newest Booty on Well what can I say about Booty. It's been reviewed so many times I think the computers are getting bored loading it! Booty, for those who have had their heads buried in the sand for the past three years, is about cabin boy Jim and his quest to nick all the pirates' treasure and get away. Yes, I told you you'd heard about it. Jim must walk around the ship collecting various keys, treasures and dodge the pirates that are out to make him walk Anyway, what are the differences between the C16 the C16. the plank! 0000 "


"C+VG SEP sobtware REVIEWS 9 SUMMER SANTA olked about Second instructions. he message MERCENARY IL SECOND CITY Machine: C64/Atari 48k too big and fired up my Supplier: Novagen dominion dart, in search of stardom, riches, and a job. Your Price: .95 Cass/.95 pocket computer, Benson, tells Disk you about various messages The much talked about Second you receive, I read in the City is here! Yes folks, instructions, and sure enough Mercenary is about to bitvour up popped the message JOB youtOFFER\". screen. The Second City or SC as it But it seems to me that all the will be referred to from now, is same stuff is still in SC, only a a new dataset, for Mercenary I. bit harder. The graphics in the Needless to say, you can't play game are white and red, just SC if you haven't got like the packaging, which is Mercenary. exactly the same as the old one. Now on the packaging If you are interested in buying accompanying this new disk, which has the same artwork on this one, check it out carefully the front-only in red, it tells you before buying as it all seemed that SC has a new degree of the same to me. Chris complexity, new buildings, and Graphics no clues as all records have been destroyed. Sound Well this may be so but I Value decided that no challenge was Playablity Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Alpha-Omega Price: .99 Summer Santa ? Could this be a game that didn't see the light of day when it was supposed to? That's as maybe but this offering from a new budget label is pretty basic arcade adventure stuff. Pretty basic graphics, pretty basic sound, pretty basic ideas but pretty playable too! The idea of the game is to help Santa get presents from his grotto to the house which is full of stockings waiting for gifts. Hazards include barking dogs, rampant kitchen equipment and awkward parents. Santa has to hop, skip and jump his way around the house delivering the presents one by one. He can only take one gift from the grotto at a time you see. You get points for delivering pressies and for drinking the sherry that has been left out for you. Despite several glasses, old Santa still manages to keep from falling over. Strange this... You also get a demo mode which shows you how to deal with many of the hazards in the house. You can play using keybard, or joystick and define your own keys if you want. Not brilliant but not bad either Graphics Value Sound Playability A3 SOCCER 86 Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Loriciels/Activision Price: .95 France may have been one of the best sides in the recent World Cup but this soccer simulation from the other side of the channel leaves a lot to be desired. You only get four teams to choose from, game control is decidedly dodgy, scrolling is jerky and it's much too easy to score. The look of the game is similar to Match Day/International Soccer. The teams run across the screenbut you have to wait for the scrolling to catch up with your player if you move to the side of the screen to fast for the machine! The graphics are chunky and the sound pretty average. Not the best soccer simulation on the market. Definitely well offside, Saint! 3 Graphics Sound Value Playablity  DEKORATING BLUES Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Alpha-Omega Price: .99 This is probably one of the best presented budget games out right now. It has lots of little frills like loads of different joystick/keyboard options a nice loading screen, built in speech and pretty game over\" sequence. But it still doesn't stop it being a bit like Pac-Man His devious plot includes, of flipping me onto the next in reverse bribing the building's security floor even before I'd finished Instead of eating power pills guard to arrest you, dragging a your little paintbrush leaves skinhead off the street to deface was playing. Not one that will little dots behind as it dashes Walter's work with his aerosol keep you busy for long. around the different screen can and he even releases a Tim patterns chased by venomous snake into the numerous nasties. Walter Wall building's corridors. Walter has has to decorate a 101 storey some wallpaper paste which Graphics building, however his arch rival, can be dropped to temporarily Sound Matt Gloss is determined to stick his pursuers to the floor. Value disrupt work that Walter has Graphics are a bit small and done. fiddly. My version had the habit Playablity "


"9.30am AND PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT PRECIPITATES A MARKET POSITIONING CRISIS! SWIFTLY THE PRODUCTS STRENGTHS ARE ANALYSED BY HIGHLY-PAID EXPERTS TARGET CONSUMER DEMOGRAPHICS ARE IDENTIFIED Strutt, Whelk, Pozer, Souse BOOKED AT THE POZEUR ASSOIFFe est . peri, e B ini and laterale . Sa We product is strongest Indicates that ve more sophisticated mobile ABC body aware probably computer we health conscious anda wardly with above averenspirational Valve R The and late e todo but w M Sorry A The Sucat treet ve SNOW QUEEN acagind The cha A . CUK power 1 and full of users fun VY MESSAGES ANOTHER LONG DAY AND BY NOON AN INSISTENT NEW SHELF PRESENCE HAS BEEN VISUALISED BUT THEY LL BE 77 ACK AFTER THESE/THE SNOW QUEEN An unusually intriguing illustrated text adventure from St Bride's 03 S09 THE SNOW QUEEN Amstrad mat eum C TWICE SHY THE SNOW QUEEN THE GROWING PAINS OF ADRIAN MOLE CONTAINS NO ARTIFICIAL SHEETEVERS THE ARCHERS The all-natural adventure Car Corrinodore Seetrain and wow Amstrad! MOSHIL PUBLISHING BO LROOKS & MERCHANDISE BOOKS: Rogue Trooper comic strip albums, 1, 2, 3 and 4, now available. 64pp. .50 each, incl. P&P (see pic on right) T-SHIRTS: Full colour in small, medium and large. .30 incl. P&P (Design pictured on left). Send cheques or Postal Orders only to: FORBIDDEN PLANET LTD. (Dept. CUG) PO BOX 378, LONDON E34RD, ENGLAND WHERE TO FIND US FORBIDDEN PLANET 1 The Science Fiction and Comic Shop 23 Denmark St. London WC2H SNA Tel: 836 4179 FORBIDDEN PLANET 2 The Film and TV Fantasy Shop OPENING TIMES: 10am-bom 58 St. Giles High St. London WC2H BIH THURSDAY: 10am-7pm Tel: 379 6042 ENGLAND'S PREMIER SCIENCE FICTION, COMIC BOOK AND FILM & TV FANTASY SHOPS! "


"C+VG SEP sobtware REVIEWS 10 DYNAMITE II objects, you may not have it for very long. (but there is an object that will stop the sprites stealing from you.) One nice feature about this Machine: Spectrum then proceed to the next island 48k and do the same task. The sprites by the way, can Supplier: Mirrosoft steal objects off of you so even Price: .95 if you collect one of the useful Dr Blitzen is back, and now his meaner than ever. There's only one person who can stop him and that's, (Drum roll please), Dynamite Dan. Yes good ol' Dan is back and its up to him to stop that Blitzen bloke again. But as you may have guessed already, its not that easy. (You don't say) What Dan has to do is this, First he must land his Zeppelin air ship on the first island. Then he must find the record lyes the one that has music on it) and then locate the jukebox, and the record!!! After Dan has collected the record he must then find the fuel to charge up his zeppelin, and get off the island. He must game is the fact that the controls are Auto Select. This means that you don't have to use the same old boring menu, which we see at the start of most Spectrum games. The computer will automatically select Kempson, if you have the Kempson interface plugged in. Dynamite Dan II is definitly an above average platform game, it uses nice colour graphics and also some rather nice music, if you can hear it! We had the office 'nutter' Garry singing so it was a bit hard to listen to it! Dynamite Dan II is well worth the money, its a great challenge to play, and if you bought Dynamite Dan then you'll definitly want to get the sequel. Chris Graphics Sound Value  Playability ONO DANTE'S INFERNO Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Beyond Price: .95 I am the way into the doleful city, I am the way into eternal grief, I am the way to a foresaken . EXCLUSIVE PREVIEW EXCLUSIVE PREVIEW eternally around the game, two of which Abandon every hope, all you Pilgrim can carry at any time. who enter. They are displayed at the bottom of the screen. Join Pilgrim, the hero of In the first level you'll need a Dante's classic medieval good rope and a bag of money. adventure Inferno, on a journey Carry these to the underground into the depth of Hell to reach entrance to the next level and Mount Purgatory on the other descend. side of the world. The perilous You'll find yourself standing journey leads to conflicts with on the edge of a lake or river. A the evil monsters and sinners boatman will paddle by. Pay that inhabit Hell, ending in a him the money and he will take confrontation with Lucifer you across to the other side. But himself. don't hang about otherwise a The damned and a whole swarm of hornets will kill you. host of demons attack Pilgrim, Basically Dante's Inferno is a each more fiendish as you maze adventure. Maps are progress through each level necessary to avoid being Various objects are scattered hopelessly lost. Points refiact the amount of success you have in the game. Fail and you will suffer the same fate as the sinners on whose level you perish. The only real grumblc about Dante's Inferno is the quality of the graphics. The Commudore is capable of better. One thing you can be sure of with Dante's Inferno is that you'll die the agony of a thousand deaths. Paul Graphics Sound Value Playability Justice it was that moved my great creator: Divine omnipotence created me, And highest wisdom joined with primal love. Before me nothing but eternal things were made, and I shall last N00 OBJECTS DAY SCORE 1200 HISCORE 1250 OBJECTS DAY SCORE HISCORE 00000000 EXCLUSIVE PREVIEW EXCLUSIVE PREVIEW "


"C+VG SEP Software REVIEWS 11 THRUST Machine: BBC Supplier: Superior Software Price: .95 (tape) .95 (disk) Thrust received rave reviews when it first appeared for the Commodore 64, and it's easy to see why. This game has class, and it's lost nothing in its move to the BBC It's a real pleasure to find a space arcade game that's not just another whizz-bang shoot 'em-up, all reflexes and precious little brain. The story beind the game is simple. You must visit 24 planets in turn, heavier than the ship — then picking up Klystron pods via hightail it for the cosmos and your tractor beam, and if possithe next planet. ble destroying the planet's reacIt's difficult to explain the tor in the process. sheer addictive pull of this But never mind the storyline, game. The graphics might be what grips is the graphics. Your smooth, with very superior spaceship drifts above the movement, but they're not planet, pulled every which way planet, pulled every which way spectacular to look at. It's all in by the forces of gravity, inertia the sheer skill and delicacy and momentum gravity. You that's needed to pilot that control it by rotating right, left spaceship. Try it. and a touch of thrust. This is Nicky ballet in the air. You must manouevre your apparently weight Graphics less craft out of the way of Sound hostile fire, pick up fuel and the Value all-important podswhich are, to make things awkward, Playability 10 1888 AttestCTED EESTICI WINTER EVENTS Machine: BBC Supplier: US Gold Price: .95 Machine: C16/Plus 4 Supplier: Anco Price: .95 Summer is here and the time is right for... Winter Events! Yes, Anco's long-awaited feast of fun and games in the snow is here at last. Well almost. The preview copy sent to C+VG lacked two of the ski events. But if the remaining sports match up to the rest of the games this will be a nifty simulation and a must for C16 and Plus 4 owners. Okay, there's nothing dramatically new about Winter Events. There are quite a few games like on the market but this latecomer is one of the best. You get all the usual trimmings to the gameopening ceremonies, choice of countries and one to four players. The graphics are excellent and the events-biathlon, bob sled, ski-jump, skating are guaranteed to cause maximum distress to your joystick. Great fun. Check it out. It's one of Anco's best. Paul Graphics Sound Value Playability This is a compilation of three of Ultimate's tried and trusty favourites -Alien 8, Lunar Jetman and Jetpac. Alien 8 is the one where you manoeuvre a cute little robot around a vast ship invaded by aliens, all attempting to wipe out the last of a dead planet's cryogenically preserved race. It's basically Knight Lore in space, with the now familiar superb scrolling graphics and imaginative features. Secund on the tape is Lunar Jetman, a straightforward arcade game in which Jetman has to save planet Earth by destroying the aliens' missile installation, driving around in his Hyperglide Moon Rover. The graphics scenario isn't up to Alien 8 standard, but better than most arcade games of its type. On the flip side of the tape is Jetpac, another arcade game wherein you flit about the Galaxy amassing as much treasure for yourself as you can. As a game it's pretty standard stuff, but again the graphics are above average and the music is classier than most. All in all, if you're an Ultimate fan (and who isn't?), a good one for your shelves. Nicky Graphics Sound Value Playability COSMIC BATTLEZONES D.R.B DEOT TINE G: 2:1 TIME: 0.48.5 PPP PETER ON "


"C COMPETITION KEITH'S LEVEL 9 QUIZ 1) Which Level 9 Adventure was named Adventure of the Year at the C+VG Golden Joystick Awards? 2) Which character, created by famous Monty Python star Terry Jones starred in a game written by Level 9? 3) Which famous schoolboy's secret diary was turned into an Adventure by Level 9? Adventurers are notorious hoarders of treasure. And here's your chance to lay your hands on some more thanks to those generous people at Level 9 and Rainbird. They have just released Level 9's Middle Earth trilogy as a compilation newly titled Jewels of Darkness. And they want you, dear reader, to get your paws on some jewels from top high street jeweller H. Samuel. We've got  worth of H. Samuel vouchers to give away to the lucky adventurers who can answer Keith Campbell's Level 9 Quiz questions. Two first prize winners will get  vouchers to spend in their local H. Samuel store, four runners-up will each get $25 vouchers. So get into your thinking mode and puzzle out the answers to Keith's quiz. Then send your entry coupon to Computer and Video Games, Jewels of Darkness Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date for the competition is September 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and Keith's decision is final! C+VG/LEVEL 9/RAINBIRD JEWELS OF DARKNESS COMPETITION Name Address My answers:  COMPETITION "


"DYNAMITE DANI Find and destroy Blitzen's secret record-pressing plant, hidden deep in the 8-island complex of Arcanum. 200 screens of crafty sprites, foottapping, music, and totally addictive gameplay! BATA SCORE 00023 ENGIGE SCORE 00003 SS GYM OUT NOW FOR SPECTRUM .95 AMSTRAD VERSION COMING SOON MRRORSOFT Purnell Book Centre, Paulton, Bristol BS185LQ "


".95 Roman to AE LETO THOR COMPUTER SOFTWARE LTD. IC.U.P.S. SALES 01-379 6755 01-240 9334 INTERNATIONAL 44-1-379 6755 SPECTRUM 48K-COMMODORE 64 1986 THOR Computer Software "


"IDEAS Welcome to IDEAS CENTRAL. My name is Melissa Ravenflame, I.C. co-ordinator. IDEAS CENTRAL is where you'll find the Bug Hunters' HQ and the man who keeps those rogue robots in order Jackson T. Kalliber. Jackson makes sure OTISS, Big Red, X and B-Con get out there to find the hints, tips and pokes you all so desperately need for a happy existence. Don't tell them but I can't rely on them to make a good job of it. So the IDEAS CORPORATION and yours truly, Melissa R., need YOUR help. Remember, the IDEAS CORP will pay a large amount of credits to anyone assisting our enquiries. So, send your hints and cheats to Melissa Ravenflame, IDEAS CENTRAL, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. 1985 JERRY PARIS COMMODORE COMMODORE Darius Heydarpour is from Haastrecht in Holland and he has sent in some tips for a game which he thinks is the best flight/combat simulator ACE Approach the refuel-plane from behind with a speed 20 knots higher than the refuel plane itself. Landing at airfields: When you approach the runway reduce your speed. If your altitude has come to 300 put your wheels down. If you touch the runway the voice will say 'touchdown\". Reduce your speed to zero. On higher levels ALL the never change your altitude or speed: if your tank is full and you are not docked any more, dive down to avoid a collision with the refuel plane. Ground attack: Keep your altitude between 150 and 250. Don't use air to around missiles to shoot down helicopters. You will need them for the SAMS and tanks. If you run out of missiles use your machine guns, but this is rather difficult and dangerous because you have to attack at low level. So be completely sure of your target when you fire off a missile. Don't waste them! Enemy planes: If the enemy planes appear on the map, climb to an altitude of about 35000. Always keep your speed at a maximum. To shoot the planes use your normal guns. Only use your air to air missiles if you are absolutely sure to hit a plane. If an enemy plane is behind you shoot a decoy-flare and pull your joystick back to get behind the enemy plane. Enemy ships: Almost the same technique as the ground forces. Don't waste your missiles. best thing to do is to keep moving! For those of you who have International Karate, our master martial artist Chris Cain tells you how to reach Black Belt. When you start to play, put the game into two player mode. Your opponent will not move, and you can bash him without worry. Hit your opponent as fast and as accurate as you can trying to get full points on each hit. On the tiles stage, keep doing left/right movements when the \"Get Ready message comes up until the end of the screen, as this part is based on reaction, you will break all the tiles. On the next fight just keep hitting him hard and fast, so that you receive lots of points. The reason for all this is that you will now be playing the computer, because you were the winner of the two player bout. In exploding fist, the move that is most used is the sweep. IK's most useful move is the crouch punch. This can be used close up as well as a distance away When you start a fight on the green belt level go straight into a foward somersault, and then push recharge lasers then press up the stick into a flying kick position, when you are in front of a yellow before your man lands. This will and red outlet on the wall. cause him to jump straight up and Jon Wilde of Barnsley has kick, so you get 1000 points. these tips for Green Beret. The On higher levels, never attempt defenders who carry guns are a roundhouse kick unless you are able to walk up ladders. So, if you absolutely sure it will strike home. are on top of a lorry or a platform This is a dangerous move. Also beware at all times. The use punches rather than kicks as defenders who don't carry guns they are faster. sometimes start to jump, but, to Here's some extra tips if you kill them, all you have to do is have the Game Killer cartridge, jump in the air and start to stab by Robcom. Press the button to them. Try to save your weapons stop all sprite/sprite collision till the end because they have a When/if you get on to the second final charge before you enter the bonus round, the very difficult one next level. with spears, you won't be killed, On level 2 (the harbour) when just stand there and collect bonus you see the man in the parachute points. in the sky go to the far left hand A few hints for 'V' from Paul side of the screen as his bullets Cayne of Jarrow. To open a don't reach that far. But, beware security door switch to security of the defenders coming in from mode and get all of the alien digits the left hand side. the same, this will soon become Finally, at the end of level two very easy when the enemy launch the mass To set a bomb you take the first attack on you, you will encounter a four digits of the clock from left to bouncing dog! use the same right and type them in exactly the method on them as the jumping way they appear. An initiation defenders. Beware! They will message should flash on. attack you from both sides! After setting the bombs you must have all five parts of the red The latest game to get the dust formula to complete the Kenneth Henry breakdown is game. Go to the air plant. To get Koronis Rift, and the general tips the right code you must add up the go as follows. Stay on the move alien digits and divide by base six and never try to fight a saucer in Once this has been done go back front of a hulk, no matter how to the docking bay and press up useful or useless it is. You stand a on ship chance of blowing away the hulk. If you don't know how to Discovering which hulks are continued on page 42 255 334 64 "


"COMMODORE rapidly lose your fuel, which is one thing you don't want to do. Try to collect all fuel, because extra points mean extra lives, and extra lives mean more playing time. On the third planet, you will notice there is a ledge with three fuel pods and a gun limpet. This is the only place where I recommend that you don't collect the fuel as it is extremely difficult to do it. When in doubt, blast! You lose no points for blasting things, and as you seem to have unlimited firepower, it makes sense. Blast all limpet guns, as these can be a real pain, and it gives you lovely points Try not to spin around in circles too much, although this may be fun, eventually you will get overpowered by the ball you are towing and it will bring you crashing into the planet. Soy L 4861 useful is a case of trial and error. The brown laser only fires two shots before needing recharging, whereas it is very difficult to fire a single shot from a green or purple laser. Most hulks have useful modules and some are more useful than others. Let Psytek decide the value of the module, then you can pick and choose between them. Make sure you have a good power unit, generator, shield, and laser. Try switching on a newly installed module and see if it switches off any other module. When you want to replace a module, this is the time to use the \"add module\" option, not any other time as you can just move the indicator over a blank slot and press the fire button. Radars are not classed by colours. A radar when installed and switched on just points to a module. So, when you think you have looted all hulks because there are no blips, switch on a radar and if there is still no blips, beam up and sell the radars for scrap. Note down all the hulks found before you got killed and go straight to them in the next game. On rift one you must loot hulk one first and then replace your violet shields with the green shield, otherwise you could be killed by any firebomb. The colour class is red, orange, yellow, green, blue, purple. Some hulks on different rifts tend to give you the same modules, eg red frog on rift two and red tin opener on rift three, both give you exactly the same coloured modules, made by the same race. Most useful modules on rifts one and two are marked in the descriptions. But when you are certain you stand a chance, go straight to the saucer base on rift 20. If you know a hulk is useless, then shoot it (unless you have the disk version, where you can beam up and sell the module then beam down to the same rift again) Here are some general tips on Firebird's brilliant Thrust, for the 64. Thrust is a game of skill, so you will need these tips to master SPECTRUM SPECTRUM John Flett of Inverness has come Furso who robs the jewellers. The card which you can now wear. up with these hints for Redhawk. wellies protect you from him. Take the chocolate heart from On starting the game go to Fleet Merling who robs the gallery Derby IV and give this to Sharon, Street and into the newspaper Simply change identity here. command her to help for a vital offices. Read the sign to get the Having beaten these villains clue. Take the Advert from her job. When the Editor tells you to examine them and take the cards and the Gas mask-drop this say what you need, say \"Film\". they are carrying as they defuse with the cloak and shield. After this turn into Redhawk and the bomb, this can be found by Drop the Advert in front of the visit the following places and following the map. airlock and use it to jump up and collect the items there. This is as far as John has get the Starmap and the pewter  Power Station: magnet. managed to get as the Professor tankard. Give both of these Professor's House in keeps killing him, but, a few objects to Gordon and you will Smallman Street: gloves. general tips are: now be able to move the starship. Ed's House in Brook Court: Give Lesley the pink tube on the Fly to Starbase 1. When you cat. train. Give the Ed any pictures you arrive command Gordon to help Director's House in Oxford take to get more money. Keep and he will mend the transporter Gardens: Wellies. Redhawk your popularity up. Get items Taking the Advert, beam down should wear these. analysed by the scientist or to location X1,Y2,23. Give the There is also a vase, at the professor. To find out more about glue to Hector, and continue warehouse. Fly to the docks to get people, go into the library as moving towards the right. When this, then take it to the Museum in Redhawk and say the persons you get to the end use the Advert Back Street, and give it to the name. to get the boots Curator/Caretaker. He will give Return to the starship by you a map. Knight Tyme tips come from J. beaming to XO, YO,ZO and drop the Once you have arrested Blakeley from Leeds. First, boots with the gas mask, etc. Fuel someone-remember to get a unwear and drop both the shield the Starship and fly it to Monopole photo of themyou will be given and the cloak of invisibility (it is (always fly at Tyme Distort 1 as a police radio. Drop this, change wise to drop these in the same this uses up less fuel). When you back to Kevin and take it again. place). Now go to the bridge, take arrive, wear the cloak and the gas This item is vital if you are to keep the Mctable food from Sarab and mask and beam down to X1,Y track of the muggings and super the film from Gordon 8.24. villains. The muggers are useful to Now, take the camera from the Go towards the right and pick keep your popularity up but the recreation room, find Klink and up the piece of sundial from the super Villains are vital to cracking give him the film and camera and floor. Now find Hooper and take the game. command him to help. the magic talisman, the piece of They are: Techno who robs the Take the photograph, and find sundial and beam back aboard the bank in Side Street. Throw the Derby IV, command him to help the starship. Unwear the gas magnet at him to beat him. The and he will give you the I.D. card mask and cloak, and wear the Rat who robs the warehouse at Now find S3 E3 and take the glue. talisman the docks. Drop the cat here. This will give you the valid I.D. Drop the pieces of sundial in a Count how many shots it takes to destroy the nuclear power station (the thing that looks like a dummy run. When you play the game properly, you should blast the station, one or two less than it takes to destroy it, at the start of the sheet. When you have got the ball, and are about to leave the planet, blast the station and then run and you will collect your 4000 bonus When you are collecting fuel, only activate the tractor beam when you are near enough to it, if you put it on earlier, you will "


"SPECTRUM heap and fly the starship to Beam to X8, Y9,Z6 and move to Retreat. When you arrive, wear the right. When you hear a the cloak, boots and gasmask and booming voice, make sure you beam down to X8,Y4,Z1 and find have the sundial Do Not Wear the barrier, make sure you are It!! Keep moving until you find the wearing the talisman and cast the Guardians of Tyme. Beam aboard Remove Barriers spell. the ship and fly to Gangrole (the Now find Murphy and take the black hole) and move to the far piece of sundial now drop the right of the USS Pisces and you talisman. Beam aboard the will notice a tyme machine has starship, drop the piece of sundial appeared, mend it by casting a with the others and cast a Lightning Bolt, make sure you are Lightning Bolt. This will fuse them at Gangrole, and launch the tyme together to form the Golden machine to end the game!! Sundial of Alpha. Unwear the Below you will find a Star Map necessary and fly to outpost, wear for Knight Tyme which was sent the cloak, boots and gas mask in by George Aslanis of and pickup the sundial. Tunbridge Wells David Gentry of Bristol has sent in a list of jewels and fireball combinations for Eidolon. Level 1 red jewel 3 red fireballs Level 2 green jewel 4 yellow fireballs Level 3 blue jewel-5 green fireballs Level 4 red-green jewels-6 blue fireballs Level 5 blue/green jewels 7 yellow fireballs Level 6 blue/red jewels 8 blue fireballs Level 7 blue/red/green jewels 9 red fireballs Level 8 -you need all 3 jewels which are floating in the tunnels. On level 8 the dragon is a little more complicated. Keep hitting it with the reds until it changes colour. Do the same with the yellow, green and blue fireballs. You should now have a three headed dragon. Hit this with yellows until it changes into a two headed one, then hit this with blues. The single headed dragon remaining is killed with red fireballs. To avoid running out of energy during any dragon battle, keep tapping the space bar. This way most of what is shot at you can be safely collected. A hit is only recorded on the dragon when it lights up the colour of the fireball you shot at it. @1985 JERRY PARIG STAR MAP GANGROLET ARIDIA DRAGON EGG PALARIS BRIGHT STAR LIMBO DENEB STARBASE EDEN GATH MONOPOLE HERRSCHELL PORTHORS PLOP PLOP NAFF POKES 90 REM***** INSERT More for the MSX! SPINDIZZY DISK ***** The first one is for Mutant Monty 100 REM *** PRESS and comes from Brian RETURN. YOU WILL *** Lafersonne (again!) and will give 110 REM ***** NOW HAVE you endless lives. RUN the INFINITE TIME ***** program and PLAY Mutant 120 REM ************ Monty on the data recorder 130 OPEN 5,8,5,\"O: 10 CLEAR 100,&H871 SPINCHEAT,P,W\" 20 BLOADCAS: 140 PRINT 5 CHR$(167); 30 POKE-27871,0 CHR$(2): 40 DEFUSR=&H9000 150 FOR T=0 TO 92:READ 50 A=USR(0) A:PRINT 5,CHR$(A), NEXT Simon Dobson of Devon has one 160 CLOSE 5:PRINT HACKED for Blagger and Manic Miner. TO BY J.R.C.S.!\":END get onto any screen of Blagger, 170 DATA 169,0,32,144,255, press space bar and cursor to get 234,234,169,8,170,168,32, into cheat mode then press cursor 186,255,169,5,162,248 up, to view the levels and space 180 DATA 2,32,189,255,169,0, bar when you get onto the level 32,213,255,238,252,2,173, you want. Type in 10 Bload 252,2,201,50 \"CAS:\"R: Bload \"CAS:\" 11 185 DATA 208,3,32 Defusr O=&H9254,255 z Usro(0) 190 DATA 213.10.201,51,208.3 Manic miner. Load first section 32 using BLOAD MINER\". Next Edit 200 DATA 65,99,201,53,208, line 8 to change 211,169,96.141,109,133,76 BLOAD MINER\", R to 0,96,32,207,255,240 BLOAD MINER\", then type the 210 DATA 251 76 167.2.0.0.0.0 following and RUN 0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,83,80,73, 10 POKE 39211,0:POKE 78,49,0,0,0,227 39212,0:POKE 39213,0 20 POKE 61856,2 220 DATA 2,227,2 30 Defusro=39165:zUSRO(0) T. R. Matthews of Cambridge Julian Legg has a short program has a few tips and an infinite lives for C64/128 DISK only owners of routine for Cyberun on the Spectrum Spindizzy which will give you When you first start the game infinite time. Type in the listing, collect the boosters on either side save it and switch off your computer. Turn it back on, load of your start position. Collect SPINCHEAT, insert the original everything else along your path. When you have collected these, Spindizzy disk and press RETURN proceed down into the cave 10 REM ** SPINMAKER ** system and find parts of the ship 20 REM ****** WRITTEN You can only use the pick up arms MCMLXXXVI BY ****** when they are flashing. Type in 30 REM*** GREMLIN *** the program below and start the 40 REM **FOR J.R.C.S ** 40 REMFORROS master tape from just after the 50 REM ****** RUN THIS basic loader program WITH A BLANK ****** 1 CLEAR 24191: LOAD\" CODE 60 REM ****** DISK IN INK O: PAPER O: PRINT USR THE DRIVE,AND **** 24576: PRINT AT 19,0;: LOAD 70 REM** THEN RESET ** CODE: FOR i=23446 to 23453: 80 REM ***** LOAD READ a: POKE,a: NEXTI: SPINCHEAT\",8,1 PRINT JSR 23424: DATA 62,167,50, 207,244,195,128,92 TRANTORE PLINKIT RETREAT OUT POST MENO PAUSIA BINGO NIRVANA LYNX HELP HELP Nine-year-old Bryan Stanley of Aylesbury owns an Amstrad 464. He would like some infinite lives pokes for Manic Miner. After reading the July issue of C+VG, Robert Harpham of South Yorkshire would like some one to tell him the Spectrum codes for View to a Kill. He also wants to know how many areas you have to go through to reach the fortress on Commando. Jamie Kitchen of Sutton Coldfield bought the Flintstones game Yabbadabbadoo!, but has found it extremely hard to play and just as hard to map. Does anyone have a map or any pokes for this game? Finally, Terry Walsh of Australia followed our hints for Gates of Dawn in the October Book of Maps, but, after finding three of the swords he has come completely stuck and just can't find the fourth one anywhere. Anyone care to put him out of his misery? ends here "


"STAR interview FTER a hard day's work at the doesn't go to the arcades. recording studio Delroy \"The only time I have ever been to Pearson likes nothing better the arcades is in Southend for day than kicking off his shoes and trips and visits. I really don't like to loading some games on his go to arcades. But as far as arcade Commodore 64. games are concerned, one of my Delroy is one fifth of the favourites is Pole Position. It's nice phenomenonly successful group and fast.\" Five Star who have achieved Also in the studio were the other worldwide hits with songs like All members of the group, Delroy's Fall Down, Let Me Be The One, brother Steadman and sisters Can't Wait, and the recent chart Lorraine, Deniece and Doris. So I topper Find The Time. asked the rest of them, do they like Delroy has owned a Commodore computer games? 64 for quite a few years now, after A sudden silence gripped the he convinced his parents to buy him studio, and then a voice was heard. one. It was Deniece who said. \"Computer \"When I was at school, I was games are fun to watch. I prefer taking Computer Studies\", Delroy watching Delroy playing the games. told me when I talked to him at But I tell you what I do like, it's C.B.S. Studios, London during a Karate games.\" break in recording. How about a Five Star computer \"As well as doing programming game? \"Yeah, it would be a good during the lessons, my school idea and rather nice. It seems a friends and I used to play computer good idea to me\". Delroy said. games. You know, the kind you type Has Delroy ever considered into the computer from program getting some musical add-ons for listings. At the time, the only his Commodore 64? access I had to a computer was \"I haven't until recently, but it is during my Computer Studies something I'm looking into lessons, or going to a friend's house Something like the Commodore to play games, so I thought it would Sound Expander and Sound Sampler be nice to have a computer at home, really appeals to me, as I think it which my parents agreed to.\" would cut down on the costs of What made him choose a getting equipment. I like the idea of Commodore 64? \"It seems as though sampling sound through a the Commodore 64 has got the best Commodore 64. The 64 is ideal for games around.\" music and I'm sure I could maybe do What types of games does he some rough demos on it with the like? \"I like to play arcade games. right equipment. At the moment, my favourite game is What are the future plans for Five Pitstop 2. I also like the martial art Star? \"Well, we have our new album Karate games like Yie Ar Kung Fu out which we are promoting at the in September for the lucky winner of and Way of the Exploding Fist. moment in the UK, then later on, it's our famous five competition! And \"I like a game that offers me a off to Europe, America and wherever ten runners-up will get a copy of challenge, something that will get else our records are doing well.\" Five Star's latest hit LP. All you have my mind working and how I will plan Later a thought strikes me with to do is answer the questions below. my strategy via the joystick. I don't so much music now being written for fill in the coupon and rush it to like games which are too easy to the 64, would Five Star ever Computer and Video Games, Famous play. consider releasing their own 'cover' Five Competition, Priory Court, The problem with the majority of version, of music from a 64 game? 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR games, is that once you've bought Who knows, with Delroy so keyed up 3AU. Closing date for the them and worked out how you play on computers, anything is possible. competition is September 16th, them, you quickly tire of them and normal C+VG competition rules don't play them often.\" FAMOUS FIVE COMPETITION apply and the editor's decision is Surprisingly, while Delroy plays We've got a pair of tickets for Five final. Now, just answer the famous computer games at home, he Star's spectacular London concert five quiz. .. 1. Name Five Star's first UK hit single. 2. Name the famous five which Michael Jackson started out with 3. Name the author of the Famous Five series of books which also became a TV series. C+VG FAMOUS FIVE COMPETITION My answers are: Name. Address Age. "


"**DDDD BEING A HERO IS EASY. STAYING ALIVE IS MORE DIFFICULT! .95 MSX -95 -95 Spectrum 48K/128K Amstrad 464/664/6128 -95 CBM 64/128 Martech is the registered trade mark of Software Communications Limited, Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME. PHONE: (0323) 768456 TELEX: 878373 Martec G "


"ALLI PUB ALLIGATA BITES BACK ALLIGATA BITES BACK . (AND THEY CALL THEMSELVES PUB ADULTSII! Corso LES BACK The times they've left you at home because you're not grown up' or 'not old enough to come to the pub' and look what they get up to when they get there! Here's your chance to find out what it's really like in those smoke filled haunts of adulthood. The opportunity to see how good you are at these ADULT?? games. Why let the mums and dads have all the fun. Pub Games can be a laugh for everyone. a compilation of BAR BILLIARDS DOMINOES DARTS TABLE FOOTBALL POKER & PONTOON BAR SKITTLES available on Commodore 64/128 Spectrum 48K Amstrad Available soon BBC MSX Alligata Software Ltd., 1 Orange Street, Sheffield S1 4DW. Tel: (0742) 755796 BITES BACK NOW! ALLIGATA BITES BACK ALLIGATA BITES BACK . BITES BACK "


"ALLI OCOMPETITION ALLIGATA BITES BACK THE VIRGIN _CHALLENGE THE VIRGIN CHALLENGE ALLIGATA BITES BACK That old man river. To celebrate Richard Branson's amazing record breaking Blue Riband run across the Atlantic, C+VG and Virgin Games are proud to offer you the very special Virgin Challenge Grab Bag-packed with goodies! Three top prize winners will get a Grab Bag complete with a Virgin Challenger t-shirt, a copy of the new Virgin Challenger game and a copy of the Now Music 6 LP. The 25 runners up will get a copy of the Challenger game, which will be available for the 64, Spectrum and Amstrad. What do you have to do to win? Simple. Use the clues to identify the silhouettes of the ships on this page, fill in the coupon, answer the tie breaker question and send your entry to Computer and Video Games, Virgin Challenger competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Closing date for this competition is September 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and the skipper's decision is final. Man the lifeboats and launch your entry today! A clipper which brought tea for R more than two. D ES BACK The German ship which sank HMS Hood. Name Address VD Dive! Dive! Dive! In German, of course. W ITTES BALAS BIIES BALN Computer owned: Spectrum C64 D Amstrad (tick box) Tie breaker: Name the ocean passenger liner which previously held the record for the Atlantic crossing Ship A is Ship B is: Ship Cis: Ship Dis: COMPETITION T "


"Become the hunter and then STREET TM ...Burn treadon the streets! 8-95 SPECTRUM 48k COMMODORE 64 AMSTRAD 7-95 8-9,5 TM & C 1984 Universal City Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. Licensed by Merchandising Corporation of America. Inc Ocean Software is available from selected branches of WOOLWORTH, WHSMITH, SORE Ocean Software John Menzies LASKYS, Rumbelows, COMET Ocean House 6 Central Street Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Manchester.M2 5NS Telephone 061 832 6633. Telex 669977 Oceans G "


"AMSTRAD 464 170 IF x=2 AND Y=5 THEN GOSUB 5063 180 IF INKEY(72)=AND X=5 OR INKEY (72) AND x=14 THEN Yy-3: IF 454 T HEN y=5 ELSE LOCATE X PRINT CHR$ 291)LOCATE +3 PRINT CHR$ 32GO SUB 299: GOSUB 413 Hey! Yah! Pow! Krak!!! Bruce Lee 190 IF INKEY( 73 ) AND X=S OR INKE Jnr is in town. He must do his deeds, Y( 73 )=0 AND X= 14 THEN Y=y+3 IF 2 as they say, and rid the mines of the THEN Y=23 LOCATE X 9-3 PRINT CHR evil within. You must kill all the bats, $ 32: LOCATE XYPRINT CHR$(200) EL but watch out for the nasty spiders SE LOCATE PRINT CHR$ 202) LOCAT which attack you. EXPRINT CHR$ 82): GOSUB 299:GO You walk left, right, and kick by SUB 410 pressing the fire button and moving 200 IF INKEY( 740 THEN XX-GOSUB the joystick. This program runs on 359: LOCATE X PRINT CHR$ 203 CHR$ an Amstrad 464. (92: GOSUB 290 GOSUB 410 Program Variables: 210 IF INKEY 75 = THEN XX+1 GOSU A$ = Bruce kick left B 380 LOCATE -1.3 PRINT CHR$ 32 OCH B$ =Bruce kick right R$ 2014): GOSUB 299 GOSUB 410 SP = Speed of spiders 220 IF X=1 THEH LOCATENFRINT 0 Level = Used to add a little more HR$238)x=x+1 LOCATE PRINT CHR time to the game $(2014) Score = quite obvious really 239 IF >=20 THEN LOCATE PRINT Bruce = lives left CHR$ 238 ) X -1 LOCATE PRINT CH WK = wait for a kick R$203) m,t = position of spiders 249 IF INKEY 74 AND INKEY ERU bat,baty = positions of bats THEN LOCATE PRINT CHR$ 32 oldx,oldy = used to remember 1:y=y-1: GOSUB 350 GOSUB 383 LOCATE Bruce's positions X/PRINT $: GOSUB 449: GOSUB 320 EI up = test for kicked bats DI LOCATE XYPRINT\" \" X -1:y= + m, bx,by,bt = used to build mines 1 LOCATE PRINT CHR$ 203):GOTO 1 Note: On each level the time will increase, but you will move slower. 259 IF INKEY 76 AND INKEYS =0 THEN LOCATE PRINT CHR$ 82 ay By Anthony Guyon -1 GOSUB 359: GOSUB 380 LOCATE X P RINT $ GOSUB 440. GOSUB 920 EL DI L 5 REM BRUCE LEE JNR BY TONY GUYON OCATE X, PRINT\" \"X=X+19=y+1 LOO 10 BORDER O INK .0 INK 2.2 INK 3,2 ATE PRINT CHR$ 294) GOTO 1451 6: INK 4,3: INK 5.4: INK 615: INK 7.19 269 EI INK 8. 13:23 SPEED INK 5.5: INK 9.12 270 WEND INK 10,18 289 END 29 ENT 1,100,2.8 ENV 1,100,2, EN 290 REM update score 2.15.-1.10 380 score=score+1 PRINT14. score 30 GOSUB 2000 REM u.d.9's 310 RETURN 49 GOSUB 9999: REM titles C2H FE1 RIT FCIE KICK 50 a $=CHR$(207)+CHR$( 208 ) : b$=CHR$(2 330 FOR Wk=1 TO 90: NEXT 99 )+CHR$ 210) 340 RETURN 60 tim=49: SP=20 levels score=0:=2 350 REM holds bruce in screen bruce=3 360 IF x<=1 THEN XX-1 70 GOSUB 1000: REM drawing the platf 370 RETURN Ons 380 REM holds bruce screen 80 GOSUB 5000 REM set up bats 390 IF X 20 THEN I 90 GOSUB 8000 REM set UP top of sch 499 RETURN een 410 REM sound of step 109 EVERY 50 GOSUB 2150 REM set tim 420 SOUND 2, 4090 18.6 . 1 er 439 RETURN 110 EVERY SP, 1 GOSUB 3000 REM set u 440 REM SOUndot kick PSPiders 450 SOUND 2.0. 18.12.2.5.12 120 X=18:Y=5 REM Places bruce at st 460 RETURN art 1899 REM drawing the platforms 130 PEN 3 LOCATE XY PRINT CHR$(20 1010 PRINT CHR$ 22 )+CHR$(1) REM tur non transparent mode 140 WHILE tim 1020 by=6 150 DI 1630 FOR bx=1 TO 4: GOSUB 1119 NEXT 160 LOCATE 2,5 PEN 8 PRINT CHR$(143 1940 FOR bx=6 TO 13: GOSUB 1110: NEXT >PEN 3 1050 FOR bx=15 TO 20: GOSUB 1110: NEX BRUCE LEE Jnr -----continued -"


"3190 SOUND 4.2,3,4,,41 1060 IF by=21 THEN 1970 ELSE by=by+ 3119 RETURN 3 GOTO 1930 4009 REM hit by spider 1076 FOR bt=5 TO 24 LOCATE 1. bt PEN 4019 bruce-bruce-1 9 PRINT CHR$(143) LOCATE 1.bt PEN 4020 PRINT3,STRING$(bruce. CHR$(2013 4 PRINT CHR$(199) NEXT 1080 FOR bx=2 TO 20:by=24 GOSUB 111 4030 SOUND 2.0, 120, 152.0.15 3 NEXT 4940 IF bruce=0 THEN DI SOUND 1.100 1099 FOR bt=24 TO 5 STEP-1. LOCATE 2 190,91.1 FOR rollu TO 40 STEP B. 0.bt PEN 9 PRINT CHR$143); LOCATE 1 OUT &B000, 1:OUT 8BD00. roll NEXT G 20. bt PEN 4 PRINT CHR$(199): NEXT OTO 7000 ELSE RETURN 1199 PRINT CHR$( 22 )+CHR$(09): RETURN: 5990 REM set up bats REM turns off transperent mode 5010 FOR bat=6 TO 16 STEP 5 1110 LOCATE bx, by PEN 9: PRINT CHR$ 5020 FOR baty=7 TO 19 STEP 3 143) LOCATE bx by:PEN 4: PRINT CHR$ 5030 PEN S LOCATE bat, baty PRINT CH 198) R$(205) 1120 RETURN 5049 NEXT: NEXT 1139 RETURN 5050 RETURN 1999 REM bruce, bats ect... 5060 REM test for all the bats gone 2009 SYMBOL AFTER 180 5070 oldx=xoldy 2010 SYMBOL 198,822,622,8.FF, 8,88,888 5080 x= y= FF:844, 44: REM brick hor 5090 FOR U=175 TO 495 STEP 160 2020 SYMBOL 199,8278E4,83C8.24,827 5100 FOR P=105 TO 300 STEP 59 E4,83C.824 : REM brick Ver 5119 IF TESTEX+ +P 5 THEN xold 2030 SYMBOL 2008.1C810,849.87F, $.10 Y=oldy RETURN &8.& 14,822 : REM bruce 5120 IF TEST(X+u +P) THEN NEXT N 2049 SYMBOL 201,850&50&49.33E810 EXT &8,614.8.14: REM up 6900 REM set higher level 2050 SYMBOL 202,10810&8.SSE5D 6010 LOCATE 3,5 PEN 8 PRINT\"CONGRAT 8,49,855,814 REM down ULATIONS!!\" 2060 SYMBOL 203,818.818.888.870.810 6020 FOR note=200 TO 49 STEP-10 SOU &14824,862: REM left ND 2. note: 5 NEXT 2079 SYMBOL 204,818818.11.&3E838 5030 LOCATE 3,5 PRINT STRING$17,32 818&24&36 REM right 2980 SYMBOL 205,6998.99. S.BD.85A818 6040 susp-1 IF SP<14 THEN SP=15 ,824,40,80: REM bat 6050 level=lewel +4 2099 SYMBOL 206.80.80.80.80.80.842 6960 IF level >60 THEN level =50 &BD, 15 : REM spider 6079 tims40+ level 2100 SYMBOL 297,819,84.8381.80.80. 6080 GOSUB 5900: GOTO 100 &0&0: REM kick left 1 7000 REM end of game 2119 SYMBOL 208.&188DA, 864,8.F8, 8E 7019 MODE 1: PEN 1 .80.80.80 : REM kick left 2 7920 LOCATE 10.5 PRINT\"SORRY IT'S T 2120 SYMBOL 209,818,85B.X26,81F87 HE END!\" 80,&0, 0 REM kick right 1 7030 PEN 2 LOCATE 1.15 PRINT\"Never 2130 SYMBOL 210.898,829.8.208.80.80 Mind you got a score of\";score: \"DO 80&9REM kick right 2 2149 RETURN 7040 PEN 2 LOCATE 9,16 PRINT\"think 2159 REM timer You can do better?\" 2160 timtin-1:PRINTP2, tim 7950 PEN 3:LOCATE 4.20 PRINT\"Do you 2179 IF tim=0 THEN bruce=1:GOTO 490want to try again? ( n)\" 0 ELSE RETURN 7060 yn$=INKEY$ IF yn=\"\" THEN 7060 3000 REM set up spiders 7070 yn$=UPPER$(yng) 3019 PEN 2 REM colour for spiders 7980 IF yn$<>\"Y\" AND $<>\"N\" THEN 3020 FOR t=8 TO 20 STEP 3 7060 3030 LOCATE mit PRINT CHR$(206) REM 7990 IF yn$=\"Y\"THEN 7160 ELSE CALL Prints spiders 3040 IF >2 THEN LOCATE M-1, PRINT 7100 CLS LOCATE 7,5 PRINT\"DO YOU WA CHR$(32) NT INSTRUCTIONS?\" 3050 IF >17 THEN LOCATE mit:PRINT 7119 PEN 2: LOCATE 17.10: PRINT(Y/N) CHR$( 32 ): FOR wipe=8 TO 20 STEP 3 LO CATE -1, wipe: PRINT CHR$(32): NEXT 7120 ynS=INKEYS IF yn$=\"\"THEN 7120 *2 7130 yn$=UPPER$( $) 3060 IF X=M AND t=y THEN GOSUB 4999 7140 IF-YY \"Y\" AND $<> \"N\" THEN REM tests for spider hit 7120 3076 NEXT 7150 IF yns=\"*\"THEN MODE RUN 40 3080 M=m+1 ELSE MODE RUN 50 3990 PEN 3: REM resets bruces colour 8000 REM set up top and bottom of s BRUCE LEE Jnr continued "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES Present the following special offers to C+VG readers Price SPECTRUM + PAPER BOY + EXPLODING FISTO SPESTIVING IMAGES 32.95 7.50 THE SECOND CITY GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR SHOEN-D2 WARRIORS OF RAS D2 TIGERS IN THE SNOW-D2 CRUSADE IN EUROPE D4 9.95 9.95 796 MANTRONIC CI 6.50 9.95 12.95 5.90 THEATRE EUROPE IAN BOTHAMS CRICKET PYTACURSE THEIR FINEST HOURS FALKLANDS 82 EXPLODING FIST PUS CAMES 9.95 9.95 9.95 7.95 8.35 9.95 9.99 7.96 5.96 6.96 DESERT RAIS MELTDOWN D2 THE PRICE OF MAGICK ARNHEM GHOST AND GOBLIN-D2 HEAVY ON THE MAGICK-D2 EQUINOX-D2 TURBO ESPRIT-D2 SABATOUR-D2 LAN BOTHAMS CRICKET TO BRUKE SHOGUN DE GREEN BERET-D2 SKYTOX LORD OF THE RINGS-D5 WINTER GAMES D2 DAMBUSTERS COMMANDO DO MINT OFFICE 2-D4 WAY OF THE TIGER D2 WING FU MASTER BATMAN De SSSSSSSSSSSSSS 8.95 DAHAN 1.95 15.96 9.95 790 9.95 9.95 6.75 5.95 11.96 7.50 796 7.50 750 14.95 7.95 15.95 9.95 15.95 9.35 9.95 11.95 7.50 6.98 750 750 10.95 795 DECISION IN THE DESERT D4 ACROJET BATTLE OF BRITAIN-D2 TOUCHDOWN FOOTBALL-D DESERT FOXD2 HUNCHBACK BATTLE OF MIDWAY THE PRICE OF MAGICK LAW OF THE WEST-D2 SILENT SERVICE D2 KNIGHT GAMES-DI BOMB JACK D2 GHOST AND GOBLINS-D2 LORD OF THE RINGS-4 BIGGLES SPINDIWYD2 LEADERBOARD-D2 HEAVY ON THE MAGICK GOLF CONS SET-D2 GERMANY 1985-D2 ROCK AND WRESTLE-D2 SUMMER GAMES 2-D2 GAMEMAKERD4 FAIRICHT DI URIDIUM D EQUINOX DOOMDARK REVENGE STARSHIP ANDROMEDA D2 GREEN BERETD2 STAR QUAKE HARD BAND SOUTHERN BELLE CAULDRONE BORED OF THE RINGS ELITED3 INTER SOCCER PS15 TRADING COMPANY D2 WORM IN PARADISE AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT TAU CET-D2 WAY OF THE TIGER D2 9.95 9.95 7.50 7.50 ** DISKS *** HITCHHIKERS (612B or PCW LORD OF THE RINGS (PCW) HOBBITT PCW FAIRIGHT PCW ESP LIGHT PEN (PCW) INFORCOM TITLES IN STOCK FOR 6128 AND PCW 888888 995 750 8.95 5.95 5.95 675 750 190 795 9.95 6.95 9.98 9.95 750 236 ARAC QUAZATRONCI BOMBLACK-CI ELITE CI COMMANDO LORD OF THE RINGS FAIRICHT BACK TO SCHOOL TOMAHAWK SWORD AND SORCERY SWEEVOS WORLD ROCK AND WRESTLE CI WHO DARES WINS 2 CYBERRUN HITACK STAR STRIKE IT STTENE THE CHALLENGE GAME FIGHTER PILOT BLOCKBUSTERS GOLD RUN PING PONG THE PLANETS SPITFIRE 40 WORMIN PARADISE THE PRICE OF MAGIC SOU A MILLION 2 SKYFOX BATMAN SPEEBOIL TACK THE NIPPER BICCESS TURBO ESPRIT ALIEN HIGHWAY ENIGMA FORCE SABOTEUR CRITICAL MASS WAY OF THE TIGER STRIKE FORCE HARRIER GHOST AND GOBLINS VERMAID MADNESS SESCUE ON FRACTILUS THE ART STUDIO (OCP) YTE AR KUNG FU YOUNG ONES MOVIE DESERT PATS 01 WINTER GAMES BEACH HEAD II B McGUIGANS BOXING KUNG FU MASTER HEAVY ON THE MAGICK REBEL PLANET CALL DRONE BOUNCES 6.78 14.99 14.95 +*BBC ELECTRON*** THRUST 7.95 COMMANDO BEC ELECT-D2 BOMBACK-BBC GRAPHIC ADV CREATOR 295 YIE AR KING FU BBC ELEC EXPLODING FIST OBCELEC REBEL PLANET (BBC) LAN BOTHAMS CRICKET (BELEC) THE PRICE OF MAGICK BRUCE LEE BBC AIRWOLF BBC 6.35 750 750  9.95 5.95 750 190 6.75 6.95 750 7.50 9.95 9.95 1.99 2.99 ***ATARI + TALES OF BETA LYRA D2 THE PRICE OF MAGICK STEVE DAVIS SNOOKEP WORM IN PARADISE MERCENARY SIDEWINDERD KORONIS RIFT D2 THE SECOND CITY WINTER GAMES-D2 SKYFOX DI FIGHTER PILOT SPITFIRE 43 SABOTEUR ANY MASTHONIC TITLE ANY MAD RANGE TITLE QUICK SHOT 11 JOYSTICK ACE-D2 COMBAT LYNYS IMPOSSIBLE MISSION DE MERCENARY DI YLE AR KUNG FU FI5 STRIKE EAGLED3 COLOSSUS CHESS 40-D2 750  12.96 9.95 2.95 8.95 595 9.95 7.95 5.90 SSG 14.95 9.95 7.95 *** DISKS +++ THE SECOND CITY THE PAWN ST ONLY)-D HITCHHIKERS GUIDED ALTERNATE REALITY-D KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT-D SOLO FLIGHT 750 dos 7.50 695 17.50 24.96 2438 7.50 ** 7.95 12.95 29.96 12.96 +++ DISK SOFTWARE +++ ALTERNATE REALITY 19.95 CRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR 27.95 ALTER ECO 24.95 THE SECOND CITY KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT 14.95 HOTCH HIXERS GUIDE TEMPLE OF ASPHAI THIOLOGY 14.95 EXODUS (ULTIMA ID) ULTIAMA IV FLIGHT SIMULATOR II MISSISSIPPI 14.99 +INFO TRATOR 14.95 Also available on Disk Di=111.95, D2= 12.96 D3=514.95, D4=E17.50, D5522.50 9.95 +++ SPECTRUM 128 TITLES INTERNATIONAL MATCH DAY GLADIATOR 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE NIGHT TIME SAMANTHA FOX BAILBLAZER HACKER THE MUSIC BOX 795 49.95 888888888888888 THE WAY OF THE TIGER SCRABBLE MONOPOLY CLUDEO BOUNDER THE PRICE OF MAGICK TACK THE NIPPER WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST 282388 995 12.95 8.35 AMSTRAD ** 9.95 9.95 7.50 NODES OF YESODS SWEEVOS WORLD ROBIN OF THE WOOD CI = Also runs on the Spectrum 128K COMMODORE 64 + PAPER BOY DO EXPLODING FIST DI D2 BOULDER DASH 3D GLADIATOR 7.95 ** *PAPERBOY-D2 SPINDWYD JACK THE NIPPER-D2 MONOPOLY-D2 TOMAHAWKD2  2 ELITE-D2 895 7.50 7.98 7.50 C16*** COMMANDO BOMBACK WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST FRANK BRUNOS BOXING JET SET WILLY IAN BOTHAMS CRICKET 9.95 1295 795 For MAIL ORDER please send cheque PO to: S.C.S. (Dept C+VG) PO Box 394 London N15 6JL Telephone: 01-800 3156 P&P included in UK Europe add l per tape. Elsewhere at cost. SAE for list. If you would like to pick up your discount software please bring your copy of this advert to: Compucentre, Unit 5 221 Tottenham Court Road London W1 (near Goodge St tube station) Open six days a week 10.00am 18.00pm Access and Visa card hotline ring 01-800 3156 01-631 4627 Credit card orders despatched same day subject to availability * Please ring to confirm availablity, "


"creen 8019 PEN 2 8020 FOR 9=1 TO 3 8030 FOR W=1 TO 20 8040 READ LOCATE W, 9:PRINT CHR$(e 8050 NEXT NEXT 8060 DATA 143, 143, 143, 143, 143, 143, 1 43, 143, 130, 129, 130, 129, 143, 143, 143, 143. 143, 143, 143, 143 8070 DATA 143, 143, 32, 143, 143,13012 9.212, 32, 32, 32, 32.213. 130, 129, 143,1 43.32, 143, 143 8080 DATA 212,32,32,32,32,32,32,32 32,32,32,32,32,32,323232,32,32:21 8090 WINDOW Pt1.9.13.2.2 PENH1,10 PR INTF1,\"MEN\" 8100 LOCATE 1,25 PEN 6 PRINT \"TIME\" LOCATE 10.25 PEN 7:PRINT\"SCORE\" 8110 WINDOW P2,5,9,2525 PRINTP2, ti 8120 WINDOW F3.9, 13.3.3: PRINTP3, STR ING$(bruce. CHR$( 200 ) 8130 WINDOW 74,15,24,25,25 PRINTP4, score 8140 RETURN 9000 REM title 9910 MODE 1 LOCATE 13,1 PEN 1 PRINT CHR$(24)\" BRUCE LEE Jan 9020 LOCATE 13,2 PRINT\" by TONY GUY ON \"CHR$ 24) 9030 LOCATE 1.4: PEN 2 PRINT\"You are Bruce Lee jnr. \" PEN 1 : PRINT CHR$ 200PEN 2 PRINT\"Your at the top of a old house and all you have to d O 15 90 to the other side.\" 9040 PRINT\" Simple!!.......only trou ble is you can only get to the nex thouse by jumping up and kicking out t all of the bats \"PEN 1 PRINT CH R$ 205 ); CHR$( 32 ); CHR$(205) 9054 PEN 2: PRINT\"that hang from the rafters. Still not toobad, but for a 11 the deadly spiders\"; PEN 1 PRIN T CHR$(206): CHR$(32); CHR$(206) 9960 PEN 2 PRINT\"that walk the floo s. You can 90 from floor to floo using the anti-gravity'ducts in the floors\" 9070 PEN 3 PRINT\"To Play you have t o use the joystick to move left and right, up and down when a promia te). To kick Press the fire but ton and move left or right.\" 908@ PEN 1 PRINT\" The game will end when you stand on the flashing qua re AFTER kicking all the bats, or when lives or time runs out. If you finish you. 90 again but YOUM Setti retired so you 90 slower. But you se t more time. 9999 PEN 3 LOCATE 9:25 PRINT \"PRESS ANY KEY TO PLAY\" 9100 WHILE INKEYS=\"\":WEND 9110 MODE O 9120 RETURN BRUCE LEE Jnr BRUCE LEE Jnr BRUCE LEE Jnr BRUCE LEE Jnr ENDS HERE "


"AHHI. WHAT A LUVERLY DAY.... FOR A WALK TO THE SHOPS... And you'd better behave yourself ...& HERE WE ARE! JUS MICRO NOW IN... Course / Will Mum! CAN YOU PUT A STOP TO THIS LITTLE MENACE'S EXPLOITS? OH NO! NOT HIM AGAIN Oiload in Jack the Nipper for me-or else! THE NIPPER.. ...OR SO THE STORY GOES-WE THINK! AND SO... A STAR IS BORN... FREE badge with every progran Tluv scaredycats And I always (have a smashing time Me's a star Just look what I can do Ha Ha I'm a monster maker Bet ya can't Stop me freeing prisoners Ugh teddies, they must think I'm a baby! SPECTRUM 48K. MSX AMSTRADGremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423, Telex No: 547274 ARE YOU TOO MUCH OF A WIMP TO PLAY THIS GAME "


"DRAW CODE MANDROID DEPT:MILITARY SECURITY DATE: 2221 PROJECT SECURITY CLASS:A1 GAL.CORP. FILE CODE: TC 3 KZINTI CYBORG FILE CODE: TC3 KZINTI ACCESS: EYES ONLY COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES CLASS ASSIFICAT NIUIV NEURO-OPTICAL MULTI-LENS VISUAL SENSORY UNIT. WIDE ANGLE ZOOM, INFRA RED LASER RANGING. INTERNAL (MINDS EYE) MINIATURISED DISPLAY UNIT. INCORPORATING DIRECT INTERFACE WITH COMPUTER AND BRAIN. EMOTIONAL LIMITER EL-T4.DIOTHIC INSTANTANEOUS RECEPTION. ONE MILLION DIGIT CODING, CODE KNOWN ONLY TO CREATOR COMPUTER PLASTI-ORGANIC, SKIN-METALRUPTURE RESISTANT JOINT. TRINIUM LAYERED PLASTI-STEEL JOINTS AND MUSCLE CELLS. ORGANICALLY ENGINEERED. TRUE MUSCLE RESPONSE. FRICTION FREE JOINTS SYNTHETICALLY LUBRICATED. CLEVER METAL SKIN. SELFGENERATING LIMITLESS AREA REPAIR. HEAVY DUTY PARTICLE BEAM DISRUPTOR. BUILT IN POWER SUPPLY. MINIATURE NUCLEAR POWER MODULE LIQUID MANUAL\" OTERRIDE\" DISPLAY AND INFORMATION FOREARM UNIT. ACCESS CODED WITH LINKED MEMORY AND ANALYSIS BANKS UMBILICAL, EXTENDABLE "


"UMBILICAL, EXTENDABLE COMPUTER PROBE NUCLEAR POWER MODULE, LIQUID NITROZENE COOLED MANUAL OVERRIDE TARGETING. OR ALTERNATIVE INTERFACE WITH EYE RANGING AND TARGET SELECTION THREAT ANALYSIS. MODULE INCORPORATES FULLY MANIPULATIVE HAND UNIT, PALM \"LOCATED SENSOR 22. FULL HOSTILE DEFENCE JAMMING AND PENETRATING SCAN AVAILABLE, CONTACT ACTIVATION, LINKED DIRECT TO ANALYSIS BANKS. CONVERTING TO VISUAL DISPLAY UNIT, OR AUDIBLE MODULE. HUMAN ROBOTIC CENTRAL FUNCTIONS NETICAL MESH TRINIUM BASED SKELETAL REINFORCEMENT. BREATHABLE AND CLEVER METAL ENHANCED. ROBOTIC SYSTEMS POWER UNIT FIVE MICRON PLASTI-SKIN SHEATHING LIGHT SENSITIVE. RADIATION AND HOSTILE ELEMENT ARMOURED. FULLY FLEXIBLE UNDETECTABLE BUT RETAINS ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE UNDER VACUUM CONDITIONS AND HOSTILE PRESSURES ARMOURED CENTRAL BODILY FUNCTION AND BLOOD CONTROL UNIT. DISEASE ELIMINATION ABILITY, SYNTHETIC MUSCLE GROWTH CONTROL, REACTING DIRECT FROM THE SUBCONCIOUS HUMAN BRAIN. INCLUDING OXYGEN GENERATION AND FILTRATION SYSTEM. ONE/ TWO HOUR STORAGE CAPACITY. REINFORCED SPINE WITH REDUNDANT BYPASS NERVOUS SYSTEM DUCTING. CENTRAL POWER UNIT FULLY LANIUM SCREENED. NUCLEAR POWER UNIT. NEW MODEL LIFETIME UNKNOWN. MINIMUM ESTIMATED 100 YEARS. 50% POWER INCREASE OVER STANDARD MODEL. GEN. STATISTICS HEIGHT 2.01m. WEIGHT 102kg. 1.Q. 198 PREVIOUS ID: CLASSIFIED BACKGROUND: CLASSIFIED CONSTRUCTION: ERL DESIGNER: M.A.BROMLEY "


"DRAGONS LAIR UNEDOV MAGICOM INCANDUSED BY PERMISSION ADDS NEW CHALLENGE TO THE MAGICAL ARCADE ADVENTURE! cente...On the Quest to rescue the fair Princess from the clutches of an evil Dragon. You control the action of our daring adventurer finding his way through the castle of the dark wizard who has enchanted it with treacherous monsters and obstacles. In the mysterious caverns below the castle your odyssey continues against the awesome forces that oppose your efforts to reach the Dragons Lair. Lead on adventurer, your quest awaits. SOFTWARE PROJECTS .95 AVAILABLE NOW ON Commodore 64/128 AVAILABLE SOON FOR: Spectrum 48/128 Amstrad Tape 464/664/6128 Disc .95 .95 .95 Software Projects Ltd., Bearbrand Complex, Allerton Road, Woolton, Liverpool L25 7SF. Telephone: 051-428 9393 Telex: 627520 d DRAGONS LAIR Owned un     tt  Thn tah by permission. Con Maicon A ssen AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD COMPUTER RETAIL OUTLETS OFFICIALLY LICENSED HOM COMPUTER VERSION OF THE NO. 1 ARCADE HIT "


"C+VG SUU NEWS OS hear that any original winning All Commodore versions will be sequence of commands, will still on display at the PCW Show, and ADVENTURE enable each of the new games to prices are: 64/128 .95 (two or COMPILATION be successfully completed three disks): Amiga .95 (one Prices: Commodore 64/128 disk). .95 (three cassettes or one disk); Spectrum, Amstrad CPC — .95 (three cassettes); Amstrad Rainbird Software has CPC/PCW .95 (one disk). GUILD OF THIEVES unveiled Commodore versions of Magnetic Scrolls' Pawn, and PAWN II Level 9's Middle Earth trilogy. At THE CHATTY new offices in New Oxford Street, the arrival of these new additions ADVENTURE Guild of Thieves, the follow-up to the Rainbird range were but not a sequel to The demonstrated by Anita Sinclair Pawn, is also set in Kerovnia. and Mike Austin. \"Pawn is definitely NOT an easy You will be able to see these Anita Sinclair took the floor to game!\" Anita Sinclair admitted, \"It games running for yourself, on the demonstrate the Commodore is easy enough to get about 150 Rainbird stand at the PCW Show versions of Pawn. On the Amiga points, but from there on, things early in September. there is introductory music, start to get tough!\" Mike Austin demonstrated created by an old friend of C+VG, This was a deliberate policy Dungeon Adventure from Jewels John Molloy from the band decision. Having spent some three Of Darkness, which is a Mainframe. The adventure can or four years developing their completely re-vamped optionally be played with adventure system, Magnetic compilation of Clossal Adventure, simulated voice \"reading the text Scrolls wanted to throw Adventure Quest, and Dungeon output. This, it is hoped, will open everything they had at it, to prove Adventure, up a whole new field of leisure for its worth. Now Pawn is complete, In his penthouse In their new format, the games the blind. You type in your it is the time to relax a bit, so with apartment in the use the same parser and operating command in the normal way, and Guild, the player will get an easier IDEAs Central system as Price of Magik. the text displayed on the screen is adventure, In the days when the three spoken through the Amiga's sound I explained to Anita how building Keith games were originally released, system. desperate all C+VG Adventurers Campbell, one of Level 9's techniques were far less If an unrecognised word, or were for further news and details the few survivors advanced, and much less could be typing error is entered, then the of Magnetic Scrolls adventures. fitted into memory. of the corporate voice simply tells you that it As the tears came to her eyes, she Using more sophisticated text doesn't understand, and lists the begged me to join her for an purges which compression, the trilogy has been individual letters that were typed. exclusive sneak preview of Guild, swept through the completely re-written and now The 64 and 128 versions come If the puzzles are not so software industry offers RAM SAVE, OOPS, and on the same disk. (Pawn will not mind-bending, wait till you see the graphics, as well as multi-tasking. when the IDEAS run on cassette.) The program graphics! They make even those The latter enables the player to detects the mode or machine in of Pawn seem crude in Corp was type whilst the picture is still which it is running, and acts comparison! One scene, set establishing itself drawing, and then to interrupt the accordingly. There are two around a snooker table with a busies himself graphics to continue with the separate programs, and one set of game in progress, is so full of game. Mike reckons theirs are the with an intricate graphics is shared by both. detail, that you can almost choose only adventure programs in the The text is displayed in green, and time which shot to play! We moved on world to provide this feature. giving the effect of turning your into an elegant lounge. consuming task. In addition to all these goodies, telly into an expensive \"There-doesn't that say more His job is to collect the vocabularies of the games has green-screen monitor. The than a thousand words?\" asked been considerably enhanced, to graphics, although lacking in the and collate all the Anita, triumphantly. Indeed it did. help the player. Difficult variety of colour in the Amiga and A three comered settee, data relevant to adventures, Level 9 have tried to ST versions, have the same detail positioned in the centre of the adventure games make them more playable by They also have the 'roller blind room, was so complete that I could and dispense inexperienced adventurers, by characteristics of the other even make out the buttons in the incorporating Help words of wisdom versions. As an extra, a cameo of upholstery! The rest of the 'It doesn't seem fair to let each graphic is displayed in the furnishings were depicted just as to people with someone spend hours trying to top right hand corner of all text faithfully, and the whole problems. open an unopenable grating. screens, from which position it can atmosphere of the room came This month the Despite the fact that you have be moved anywhere on the over, at a glance. described it as covered with Adventure Helpline screen. Even my jaded \"text concrete they will STILL try!\" Both these versions, played brings much HELP will tell them that such an adventurer's\" spirit was touched without graphics, will run by these fantastic graphics. Take needed help, object definitely has no use. considerably faster, but back all I have said about them in advice and hints Commands are much more performance can be varied with the past, if anyone else can to the troubled flexible, too, in the new versions. the following graphics commands: produce graphics of this quality, I For example, there are about 14 NORMAL, displaying each full think I may soon be converted into and tormented different ways of lighting a lamp. picture the first time a location is a picture freak! I really am quite adventure games and if you can't hit on the right entered: VERBOSE, always impressed! player. words, then perhaps you ought not showing the full picture; BRIEF Programming is well under way, even own a computer! Old hands displaying only the cameo; and but the game is unlikely to arrive at the games may be interested, OFF, running as a very fast in time for Christmas. So save your and Helplines will be relieved, to text-only adventure. pennies for the New Year! OME of "


"HELPLINE 4th September, and the show is open to the general public from Friday 5th to Sunday 7th September. Come along and say Hello or something similar we're dying to meet you! YOU'VE GOT CHEAT'S CORNER What's that I said about no bugs in Level 9 games? Ah, well, here is a very sophisticated one, and unlikely to be encountered in normal play. It's from James McKiernan, who has the Commodore version of Price of Magik. \"Make sure you have the crystal ball,\" says James, \"Use the FIN spell and then cast ESP in an available direction. When your astral self has left your body type EXAMINE ME, and on return to your body you will be in a location with every object in the game. Take everything, and cast BOM at the picture to return to Stonehenge and continue.\" ADVENTURE FANZINES haven't been going to evening seared past me, and a voice classes Neil thank God boomed out 'Watch your YOU THINK A-levels are over' Campbell, language, buster!\" Strange! It also second in line to the hereditary happened with the word supplied penthouse suite, asked his by James, but the least said about bi-lingual girl friend Nadia to that, the better! PROBLEMS translate... Michael Smith of Peterborough Apologies to P. Loods and Alan had me searching everywhere in Wall, whose problems I had The Pawn for Mister Men. Could I promised to give an airing, but am find them? I told Michael, and he See Ka Of Assiah is the problem unable. The wordprocessor wrote back to say they were a game this month-pity document that included their figment of his imagination, brought Mastertronic didn't think to send problems got lost in transfer from on by his frustration in not being me a copy! Getting a rod of light my portable Model 100 to the able to find a source of light. out of a block of ice is like getting Model 4. The Model 100 locked up Shame on you, Michael! blood out of a stone to Shaun on initiation of the file transfer, and One day, IF my brand new Atari Green of Newport. Look in the upside down section for help. required a cold start to free up. I'm ST should ever enjoy a period of convinced there's a bug in the good health long enough to end its The more mundane job of built-in software somewhere... regular visits to The Silica Shop for opening a gate is baffling Lcpl Sweeney of BFPO. Meanwhile, Seems with the Ultima games bomb disposal, I might even be able to finish the game! Gregory Quinn seems to be doing you either ignore them or get quite well so far, and has 9 hooked! Tim Hammond is trying Simon Bond of Malvern to help Andrew Bethel, and complains that the June Adventure successfully overcome the section had \"... absolutely zilch as Guardian, only to discover a hook reports that the Lord of Time is at the bottom of a VERY hidden far as colour is concerned. Please in his room! Now what can be dungeon. You need to use the tell the editor to put a bit more in done with that? Seabase Delta from Firebird is Moon Gates to get to it, the one just It spoils what is otherwise below the Dark Forest, says Tim. probably the best adventure another popular puzzler. A caged Helpline.\" PROBABLY, Simon??? I He thinks you must enter these hen, and an un-levered cannon are when the moons are at 5,7. In put the point to the Ed who, loathe facing Ray Nurden of Newport return Tim asks if Andrew or down in the base. The budget to say that it's brilliant enough adventures seem to be doing great anyone else knows where the without colour lest I should ask for business, and at .99 a time it is fourth card is? a rise, was last heard muttering hardly worth the effort to pirate David Stinson is responsible for \"... if he prefers text to graphics in one. Perhaps there's a lesson here help with the rats in Pub Quest an adventure, why should he want for other companies. I wonder (see clues) and seems to have progressed quite a way with the Apologising for his bad writing, how price-sensitive the adventure market is? game. But the sewer has him beat! Richard Clegg of Preston claims it Not content with getting stuck in \"It is impossible to map, as was caused by the boredom just one game, like so many other everything you drop gets swept induced by playing Planet Of adventurers. Ray has also away. I don't know if I've got the Death. \"It does to your brain what patience to cope with them, as the two blows from a sledge hammer managed to grind to a halt in torch keeps going out!\" do to your body!\" comments another. This time it's Castle Blackstar, where flames keep And finally, the clue I was never Richard, adding \"Ignore what that exploding Ray's dynamite, and sent! Richard Clegg sent in a looney from the Channel Islands excalibur is eluding his grasp. goodly number of clues, but let me says, and carry on plugging Scott's Eyvindur Tryggvason of down with Robin of Sherwood! \"I games.\" was going to tell you how to use Iceland is in Chaos, and not without Cause! The cheese is Marion's hairgrip in connection bothering him-should he give it with her chastity belt,\" says SEE YOU AT to the rats? Seems it is putting Richard, \"but as C+VG is a family them to sleep, for Eyvindur mag. I thought better of it!\" His OLYMPIA? wonders what to do with them concern with the moral welfare of then? C+VG readers earns Richard a Andreoli Marco of Turin is t-shirt! Once again, the Adventure truly an adventure fanatic! A Helpline will be in residence on student of 21, he has begun the EMAP stand at the PCW Show DOZENS of adventures, he says, ADVENTURE With the Helpline database but has solved only a few. To running, plus loads of notes and players of Masquerade, he CHAT clue sheets, we will be on hand to suggests typing a rude word. I'd help you with your adventure leave you to work out how to get problems, and to chat about out of it, if you take the advice! When you die in Price of Magik, adventures in general Most of Andreoli's troubles are you can continue where you left As well as meeting us, you will with Infocom games, so I passed off by typing a four-letter word be able to buy one of the coveted him to Paul for a chat over says James McKiernan of Adventure t-shirts, (or a Big Red breakfast. Stratford, London. Was this a t-shirt if you must!) and catch up His most frustrating problem of de-bugging aid, accidentally left with an odd back issue you all, is the first command in Jewels in the program, I wondered? missed, which will be on sale at of Babylon. CLIMB DOWN Pete Austin explained that a few half price. LADDER, Andreoli, and you're off words like DAMN have been The PCW Show is at Olympia in to a good start! included as synonyms of OOPS, London (change at Earls Court to a Meanwhile, a shocked Italian the command you enter after shuttle tube on the District line.) will be receiving a Helpline reply making a nasty move. However, Trade and press only are admitted his native tongue. No, I when I tried, a bolt from the blue on Wednesday 3rd and Thursday Adventure gaming as a pastime, has grown enormously over the past couple of years. The growth in popularity of Adventure has seen the launch of a number of clubs and Fanzines devoted to the subject. Here is a rundown of the ones I have come across. All of them include reviews of games from newish to middling, readers letters, and a helpline with clues and contacts for further help. ORCSBANE is run by Nick Walkland, and going from strength to strength since it was launched last year. The 'zine is strong on artwork, and has some amusing cartoons. The whole thing is put together with a humorous and slightly irreverent style, to fill about 40 A5 pages in photo-reduced type. Nicely finished off with a coloured outer T.O.K.E.N. "


"is om CLUES say jure, — num o budou toe iyb 10j podumis oquod NMHd . uoo uanod ayeu u  sdeyd \"    .. ATTIS BOTOA eu e non sem um  dn un Taay oi 'no mol O1JaH au pue bus sawoOWLVO gs in is a suoebump sure pure sepseo mo sabe mod \"SUMO yra are alal. MD    ue saum Ioy s AI HIL ( 'pds od jo wood ay u loop am uedo wOOI ay wo skatel) eaq yl alem        snssopo jo woo au uamuoq aui asn MOd IO ONIX 19 mua adi en on 2439 -S LHO  STIL: I ad TIVO ATOH HL NO Land \"S'M'N'MM'MS IN'3'S' MS'S' ' 'MS' 'N' ' au moto. LoL TOROS y 1aB OL SONIC  10  Our in a PIEZA au IPL OL ebes jo me ou as dIHS  IHL ANVENIS duren   dj      qets Y sier a4 uo ILSTED axous ai asn LS3no and cover, the whole stapled through the middle. About bi-monthly, Orcsbane costs 50p, and is available from Nick Walkland, 84 Kendal Road, Sheffield, S6 4QH. THE ADVENTURER'S CLUB LTD., is a fully-fledged club catering for Adventure enthusiasts, and produces a bi-monthly DOSSIER. Packed with reviews, solutions, hints, helpline, and news. Consisting of 40 corner pinned A5 pages, it is somewhat difficult to get around. Pete Austin is President of the club who comes up in print in each issue. The Dossier also has a buy. sell and swap section, a series on writing your own adventure in Basic and a Master Adventurer's Competition. The trouble with this is. I have reckoned you would need at least three computers, (including one with a drive) to have been able to play all the games in the quiz Club membership offers a phone-in helpline, and runs out at .95 a year; details from Henry Mueller, Adventurers Club Ltd., 64c Menelik Road, London NW2 3RH New on the fanzine scene is ADVENTURE PROBE written by Pat Winstanley and Sandra Sharkey. The reason for starting the 'zine, claim the two ladies responsible, is that no Adventure sections in magazines, nor pure adventure magazines contain specifically what they want. What exactly that is, they do not mention, so perhaps it can be gleaned from the eight A4 pages of the first issue. A series of cryptic clues a la C+VG, precedes a help wanted section, making up one page. Best part of another page is given over to serialised solutions to a number cf games. Rather than playing hints, however, these are of the W W. OPEN DOOR, DROP BRICK variety. As well as reviews, a variety of features fill the remaining pages, including an adventure exchange section and a questionnaire. Interestingly, a play-testing and commercial appraisal service is offered for budding adventure authors, and one wonders what experience and know-how backs this offer Adventure Probe is printed single sided direct from a printer, PIOMssed spopa san apurAuOD 01 nopeu buthni 10 Tapey Buka PIOMssed Boj auryeur aur ou u 1191 reta LS3no S.NOAHOIA |  O PEIS \"Kem moku spues epopol II ZZZZ quepreng    ue 'prus ges ai d HVISSY JO V 3315 sey e uado o ar e serei Il es ueo nok ay o wey BON 01 18 OL   NIXON soun te je areno prap  Kire deas agi  KEIS OL HTTILNI rebbe a djey sayo amsean ay um day 103 INI VIWS WIZ chat session, helpline, and concentrates on longer, in-depth reviews of the bigger games, like Fahrenheit 451, and Lord Of The Rings. Resident Infocom reviewer Jamie Osborne covers a Infocom game in depth in each issue. Australian readers interested in subscribing, should contact Stuart Elflett, M.S.F.550, Toogoolawah Queensland 4313. Finally, TIME TRAVELLER is the official journal of Adventurers Anonymous, Maps combined with playing tips are a feature of Time Traveller, and Worm In Paradise comes in for the treatment in the first issue. Time Traveller is written by Richard Gibson and Gavin Day. Rivendale, Nethergate Street, Bunday, Suffolk NR35 IHE. the game. Very appropriate! (Sorry Derek!) Having changed his SAVING Mastertronic tape three times, he has come to the conclusion this is a BUGS... DUG.. bug, and not a poor tape. ADVENTURE In the BBC version of Bored Of The Rings, the pepper is on CLUES Featherwop as normal, writes Thanks for the help this month to Matthew Phillips of Huddersfield Antonio Peluso, Forest Gate; in reply to an earlier plea. But BBC George McGluckin, Glasgow: Bored is bugging him a bit. LCPL Sweeney, BFPO, John Objects disappear when he saves Manifold, Ulceby: Mark Watson, a game, and he cannot restart after Lancaster; Nick Carter, dying in part two. Has anyone else Southampton; Alleyn Conway, Co suffered from this problem? Offally; Gregory Quinn, Here is a warning about Portadown; Mandy Rodrigues, Kentilla. Antonio Peluso has Llandudno; Carl Young. discovered that the Save and Load Nottingham; Paul Exley, Bury: routines on the Commodore David Moore, Portishead; Daveid version do not work, and CRASH Stinson, Smethwick if the venture takes off. Costing . it is available from 13 Hollington Way, Wigan, WN3 6LS. Not to leave our Commonwealth cousins out, ADVENTURE NEWS is a Commodore 64 newsletter from Stuart Elflett in Australia Xeroxed on foolscap paper, it has a very clubby atmosphere, with a "


"otale I BIMBO FACGINS BOGGIT HOLE... -ROMICS' & DEL24 THE 9050 What's this, then? Bimbo Faggins has been struck dumb. All his speech bubbles are blank. Somebody took the words right out of his mouth. Never mind, we're giving you the chance to make sure the hero of Delta 4's new spoof adventure, The Boggit, has something to say for himself.  COMPETITION And if we like what he has to say, you could find yourself the proud owner of an Amstrad Midi hi-fi system. Yes, that's the prize in the seemingly endless competitions to be found inside the packed pages of your favourite mag. All we want you to do is make up the appropriate speech bubbles to go with this cartoon from the pen of lan Ellery, ace artist and Terribly Important Person at CRL. There are thirty runner-up prizes of the game which will be available for the spectrum, Amstrad and Commodore 64. When you've done that, send your entry together with the printed coupon to Boggit Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The competition closing date is September 16th. O COMPETITION C+VG/DELTA 4 COMPETITION Name Address "


"Organised by Database Exhibitions Now the great record-breaking Commodore Sho? moves North Renold Building, UMIST, Sackville Street, Manchester Friday to Sunday, September 12, 13 & 14 THEATRES The Official Commodore Computer Show-the show that hit the headlines when it attracted record London crowds in May now moves North, supported by all Britain's leading suppliers of Commodore hardware and software. Spread over two exhibition floors will be stands featuring the very latest developments for the entire Commodore range, including a wide variety of EASY RAIL TRAVEL! newly-released games, business 300 yards from and utilities software. It's going Piccadilly railway to be an action-packed show station, with speedy that will bring you right up to connections from all parts of the North, date with all the exciting Midlands and Wales. developments now taking place EASY COACH TRAVELI in the Commodore world! Bus and coach stations serving all parts of this vast region are just a short walk from the UMIST campus. EASY PARKING! On show for the first No problem finding somewhere to park time outside London either within the campus itself or the fabulous Amiga! nearby car parks. AMIGA THEATRE Demonstrations of the most talked about computer of 1986, showing the growing range of business and recreational software. 8-BIT THEATRE Leading Commodore experts show how to make the most of the 16, 64 and 128 range, answering questions on games, graphics, utilities and communications. PLUS! Live shows from top groups Commodore music as you've never heard it before! Avoid the queues! Adult tickets at  (save )......... Under-16s tickets at  (save )  The 8th official commodore Advance computer show ticket order Post to: Commodore Show Tickets, Europa House, 68 Chester Road, Hazel Grove, Stockport SK7 5NY. Total  O Cheque enclosed made payable to Database Publications Ltd. Get your ticket in advance and... Name. Please debit my credit card account Address Access/Visa SAVE  A HEAD! Admission at door:  (adults),  (under 16s) Signed PHONE ORDERS: Ring Show Hotline: 061-456 8835 Please quote credit card number and full address + RefCVG9 "


"C+VG TAIDUEN CUIRE FERGUS MCNEILL —ADVENTURE'S NEW STAR Despite the popular image of computer games authors as teenage whizz-kids, this is not generally true. There are always exceptions to a rule, and at 17, Fergus McNeill has already made a name for himself, in satirising popular serious adventures, such as The Hobbit. KEITH CAMPBELL went along to find out where he is going to strike next! Full Shartly, the Sri Re arrived to Slaim Bi The end had some! games using Quill, under the title Dragonstar Trilogy, and took them along to show Tony Bridge at a Micro Fair. To his joy, five people actually bought a copy, and encouraged, he went on to write Quest for the Holy Joystick. All this was a far cry from the 15,000-20,000 people who, a year later, were to buy Bored of the Rings. A year ago, Fergus was attending sixth form college, a tedious journey from his village. But his thoughts were elsewhere. In the knowledge that Bored was doing extremely well, Fergus oom 101, The Sheiling, read the address on the headed notepaper. I searched for some sort of building that could house a hundred or so rooms, Perhaps a row of shops, with offices above, I thought? Swanmore, Hampshire is a small village off the beaten track. Could there be a giant office block here? Weary of SAYing TO VILLAGER \"WHERE IS THE SHEILING\" I called in at the Post From west to east, the dark Office. \"Down there on the left trees of the Troleslaws thinned the little bungalow just past the out onto the edge of Wilberland, Haberdasher's shop,\" said the B. sbort way to the east, across helpful lady behind the grille. the loud waters of the Brunette Another of Fregus' spoofs! River, the pre-fabricated Room 101, the HQ of Delta 4 dwellings of Rivendut were software, was you've guessed it cerse distinguisbable. Fergus' bedroom. Mind you, it IS an unusual bedroom! Not so believed he could make a success away the time in a local shopping much wardrobe and chest of of writing more adventures and, in precinct. drawers, as monitors, microdrives, his own words, became a college Judith followed Fergus out of keyboards and recording drop-out. sixth form, and joined him in his equipment. The walls are Judith Child, who had been to promising new venture. They colourfully adorned with posters school with Fergus, was helping believe they can make a go of it, and trophies, including a C+VG him create these adventures. She and have their eye on a small Joystick certificate. too was becoming increasingly office premises, just up the road. Fergus' career in Adventure disenchanted with sixth form, not Part-time member of Delta 4, is began in 1984, when he wrote a least because in the long gaps Colin Buckett, currently following couple of programs in Basic. He between lectures there was a B-Tec course in Computer wasn't at all happy with them, but nowhere to go. Often she would Studies. He helps with things started to change when he get moved on by Security Guards, conversions, particularly tried out The Quill. He wrote three whilst sitting on a bench whiling Judith Child Commodore 64. Colin recalls his time at school in O level computer studies. His main objective was to make the teacher's life hell. On one occasion, he was carefully rearranging all the keys on a Beeb. \"I had this big pile of square plastic bits,\" he grinned, \"when I heard the teacher coming down the corridor. I managed to cover the computer with a mass of printout, just in time. \"Games playing was strictly forbidden, but of course, everyone did that and pirating. Down the road is the biggest bunch of pirates in the country!\" Both Colin and Fergus agree . "


"that O level computers was a dead loss. Fergus wanted to enter Bored as his project, but was told it wasn't permissible, being written using the Quill. He subsequently discovered, reading the small print in the syllabus, that it was a perfectly legitimate entry, under the category of Applications Programs. There is more to getting on the road to financial success than just creating the adventures. Judith acts in a secretarial capacity, as well as helping with the writing. But her speciality is cutting out Re 'er, Death There was, at the time, some published on the Pirhana label, used for the purpose for which it sort of tie-up between CRL and by Macmillan. was made. Silversoft. Both had office Fergus and Judith have a few Scott Adams was responsible accommodation in the same other ideas up their sleeves. for two flushable toilets, one in the building. \"There we were on the Fergus is developing his own Count, the other in Pyramid. The car park, with a shouting match adventure system, partly in Basic, latter manifested itself as a throne. going on between the two part machine code. He already has on whch sat a formidable iron companies,\" Fergus remembers. two titles lined up for this system. statue. Chain-pulling was CRL finally advised signing Joystick 3, and Enchantress. necessary to find a hidden exit. with Silversoft-since Enchantress promises to be a Telarium's Perry Mason, and this disappeared, along with a number serious adventure, and a new month's Beer Hunter (see review) of Delta 4 master tapes, and a label, probably called Abstract are among the more recent toilets good deal of royalty money. Concepts, will be set up, to to have featured in an adventure. \"They paid us what they said distinguish it from the spoofs for But here at last is the first they owed us, but we later which Delta 4 has become functional toilet to accept a couple discovered they had sold far more famous. of plain English commands in four copies than thay had ever InEnchantress, you will play a letters, beginning with an Sor a C. admitted,\" said Fergus. woman, using brains rather than From its murky depths it. Fergus is currently somewhat brawn, in a battle against other disgorges an ugly monster, to bite embarrassed by Galaxias, one of women. the unsuspecting adventurer in a his early Quilled games, now With \"real\" graphics, the new most tender place before featured on the Fourmost system will have more text, disappearing again with a Adventure compilation. \"Tony Ram-save, music, contrast control gurgling sound! Bridge rang me and asked if I had for TV, and a new idea in Your journey, in the company of a game to 'pad out a tape',\" adventure programs-a note-pad Thomy and Grandalf, takes you explained Fergus. \"I mentioned facility. This will enable the player towards Rivendull, after a brush Galaxias, but pointed out it wasn't to make notes on his progress with some trolls who in real life, very good. I assumed it was going from the keyboard. figured in some of Fergus to be for a small mail-order affair. Meanwhile, CRL have plans to McNeill's less happy business Suddenly it's being hyped up and produce Rocky Horror The dealings. given rave reviews full of bullshit. Adventure, and Fergus will be A visit to Beorn's house offers up It is really a completely NAFF writing the text on another new some marmalade sandwiches, game. And you can tell everyonel system. This will be a disk-only whilst if you call in on Smelrond, said so!\" graphic adventure, and the you will probably catch him in the graphics, as well as the system, act. Looking up from a tall elf, he FUTURE will be produced by CRL. Rocky will generously give you a packed Horror, although being primarily lunch, which may prove a whole PROTECTS produced for the US market, will lot more nutritious than Beorn's be released in the UK. feast. What is in the pipeline to follow I asked Fergus what had Eventually you find yourself in a Boggit, the game Fergus and attracted him to adventure writing Goblin's dungeon, complete with Judith have spent the last four in the first place. \"Adventure high window. If you are lucky, a months writing? programs are easier to write than little upper-level-dungeon cleaner The Colour of Magic is a book arcades,\" he claimed. But Fergus robot will appear, and reveal a by Terry Pratchett, said to be the y Terry Pratchett, said to be the has a way with words, (if not with bluish trapdoor... next best thing since Hitch Hiker's spelling) both on the screen and in Boggit comes in three parts, and Guide. Fergus is all set to start in conversation, that make it a tape save must be made to pass on it, hoping it will be ready in inconceivable that having chosen between them. Being given the time for the PCW Show. the field of computer games, he option to move on does not Judith isn't too happy about this, could write anything but necessarily mean you have the she simply doesn't like the book at Adventures. wherewithall to succeed in the all, and argues with Fergus about next part. There is a RAM SAVE its humour. \"I just didn't find it THE BOGGIT option which can be used locally funny!\" she complained. Will she in each part. cut ALL the jokes out?! Supplier: Delta 4 Graphics are pleasing and Colour of Magic is set on a Machines: Spectrum 48K, effective, neatly edged with a disc-shaped world, which rotates Commodore 64, Amstrad couple of swords rampant, and not upon the back of a giant turtle, forced upon the player at every Great A Tuin, who carries it Price: .95 location through the interstellar gulf. Boggit is to Hobbit what Very Big Boggit shows a surer touch, and The two main directions in this Cave is to Colossal Caves, but greater confidence in approach, strange world, are Rimwards and even less respectable. than its predecessor Bored. Some Hubwards, and at right angles to Starting off in your tunnel-like of the jokes are quite subtle, and these, the traveller can move burrow, before you can get very the text has occasionally to be Turnwise or Widdershins. far, Grandalf crashes in, straight read a second time, to check There are eight seasons, eight through the closed window, and whether it really means what you days in a week, and eight colours deposits a box of exploding thought it meant, or if it is just your in the spectrum, on the disc. In chocolates at your feet. twisted mind at work! fact, the number eight has a Dealing with this problem is not As a bonus, there is a 'freebie special significance, and the too difficult, and before long you program included on the tape. eighth colour, Octarine, has are on your way if you can get a Sceptical II, is a 200 page Ceefax special associations with music. word in edgeways! lookalike, bringing you inside In Colour of Magic you will play The action is frequently information on the Delta 4 crowd. the part of the failed wizard, interrupted with screenfuls of If you've met them, I have, you'll Rincewind, who is given the task humorous narrative, in which realise that the names dropped of accompanying Twoflower, a among other things, you are asked are all real people. It gives you the tourist from the Counterweight to \"Come on down!\" and guess the lowdown on all the village Continent. Twoflower's luggage is value of one fourteenth of Thorny's scandal. carried around in a very strange treasure. Keith Campbell trunk, endowed with hundreds of As well as the round green door Vocabulary little legs. It also has great teeth in in the tunnel, there is a round its lid, which will snap shut on green toilet, and this is the first Atmosphere anyone trying to steal from within toilet I've come across in an Personal Colour of Magic will be adventure that can actually be Value Colin Bucket Fergus' bad jokes. \"You mean the ones that are too naughty for public consumption?\" I asked. \"No, the ones that are just not funny!\" she replied, and gave Fergus a tight-lipped look. It makes sense for the people who create games, to pass on the worry of publishing them to someone specialised in their marketing and distribution. But there can be pitfalls here, as Fergus discovered to his cost. The biggest mistake in my life, was signing up with Silversoft,\" admits Fergus. By all accounts, the way in which the contract was signed sounds farcical. @ego. "


"DESIGN TAKING... .... TIGER MOUNTAIN THE ODDS ARE AGAINST YOU! You'll have to plan for the future and use your tactical skills to take the attack-tank through to \"TIGER MOUNTAIN \"TAKING TIGER MOUNTAIN\" is in 3D colour, set in a real-time battle environment, which makes it the most advanced battle simulation available. For the AMSTRAD CPC Range AMSTRAD 3\" DISC .95 R.R.P. AMSTRAD CASSETTE .95 R.R.P. (Price includes P&P) TECO UNT THE COUNTDOWN HAS BEGUN.. One man stands alone to defend the ultimate weapon «NEMESIS\" from the Andromedan robot forces. He has to escape with the \"NEMESIS\" intact, or start the countdown to self-destruct. Time is running out, every second counts... For the SPECTRUM and AMSTRAD CPC Range. AMSTRAD 3\" DISC .95 R.R.P. .95 .RP Selected \"Design Design\" titles are available from:WOOLWORTH WHSMITH con Mences COMET and all leading software stockists, or direct from:Design Design Design Design Software, 125, Smedley Road, Cheetham Hill, MANCHESTER M8 ZRS. Trade enquiries: 061-205 6603 "


"GN DESIGN REVIEWS/1 A MIND FOREVER VOYAGING Supplier: Infocom/Activision PLAN.ELEMENTS, and Machines: Atari ST, Amiga, RYDER.SPEECHES The current file can be read, or Commodore 128 the next on the list selected for Price: Various reading. The library files contain a Written in Infocom's Interactive lot of background information, and Fiction Plus system, it should be much of the game consists of noted that this game is not retrieving and absorbing available for the full range of information, rather than solving machines normally supported by puzzles. Infocom. AMFV was the first Interface Mode gives you the production in this format, and capability to control external preceded Trinity, reviewed the devices. By this means you can last issue. reschedule the rush hour traffic Quite a different game from the period, shut down the heating and usual type of adventure, even for ventilation in the building, or Infocom, you play the part of change the janitor schedules. PRISM, the world's first thinking Initially, at least, Simulation computer. As such, you are not Mode is the most important, for normally able to move around and one or your first tasks is to record do the sort of physical things usual some simulated real-life in an adventure. But more of that experiences, for analysis against later the background of the validity of Set in 2031, with the world on the the plan. brink of chaos, USNA, the United Simulation operates in 'true' States of North America is adventure mode, and whilst in threatened with being turned into simulation you are asked to record a giant police state. This is due to experiences such as: visiting a East West missile defence movie, attending a court in systems being in balance session, visiting your apartment, attention has been turned to Speaking to a church official, and miniaturisation of nuclear so on. weapons into cigarette-pack sized The simulation takes place in devices which can be smuggled Rockvil, South Dakota, and the right into the heart of a city tourist pamphlet-map of the town Crime and urban decay are provided will help you find your rampant. Schools are violent, and way around. This does not give a ill-suited to education. So what's detailed picture of the places you new? Sounds just like Thatcher's can visit, but is very handy for Britain getting your bearings, and But there is a plan the Plan for deciding the most likely areas to go visit, to record your assigned named PLAN.CRITICISMS Renewed National Purpose, PLAN POPULARITY, Senator Richard Ryder's pet encounters. project. It is pretty drastic. It must Once your recordings have be tested for validity before it can been analysed and found to be be put into effect. And that's your good, part one of the game ends job, as a computer! and you enter part two. Among other things, the plan Colour is an option on the PC, calls for: Tax cuts of 50%; and if selected, comes up as a pale Deregulation of major industries; blue header band with black text, Termination of aid to nations not and a royal blue screen. pro-USNA, Termination of I also tried the diskette on a PC government aid to outmoded XT, but found that even though it industries: Emphasis of was write-protected when fundamental and traditional values installed on the AT, it would not in education; Mandatory run on the XT. I queried this with conscription for troublemakers Alison Hale of Activision, but she and criminals. was unable to throw any light on As PRISM, there are a number the problem. of different modes in which you A Mind Forever Voyaging can operate. Starting out in comes in the standard Infocom Communication Mode, by a simple packaging, with high quality code you can access any of the glossy magazine-style instructions audio and visual sensor units and background stapled into the installed in the building, including box, the Rockvil plan, the security those at the office of Perelman, disk, and a genuine cheapo your 'boss'. Perelman it is who is ball-point pen advertising Quad conducting the experiment to test Mutual Insurance, as well as the Mutual Insurance, as well as the the Plan. A flavour of the kind of disk and operating instructions for world of the day can be gained by the appropriate computer. accessing WNNF, World News It is an enormous game, with a Network Feed. The flow of vast amount of text, and gives you non-stop sport scores, news, and the distinct impression that with advertisements is seemingly AMFV, your mind can, indeed, endless. voyage forever Library Mode realistically Keith Campbell simulates access to a series of Vocabulary computer files. To read a file, you must first open the appropriate Atmosphere directory. The directory for PLAN Personal DATA, for example, contains files Value THE BEER HUNTER Down in the cellar, however, there is only one barrel, and it's empty. Seems the landlord gets his beer as powder in a sachet, and merely mixes it with water! Your travels in search of ale Supplier: Global Software Machine: Amstrad 464/664/6128; Spectrum 48K Price: .95 \"An adventure for Amshtrad computersh\" is the introduction to this light-hearted adventure, which lays no claims to be difficult or complex The party you are at is in imminent danger, (shock, horror) of running out of beer, and your job is to rescue the situation. Trouble is the town is deadsville not a pub around worth drinking at. All the decent ones have been turned into trendy wine-bars. If you're really desperate for booze, you'll grab anything going and some stale lager outside the pub is too good to leave, but dubious in hindsight take you as low as the sewers, and will enjoy the humour in this game. as high as the rooftop of the Plotted in the Globe and Engine Barbican. There are bars over much Shepherd Neame everywhere, but you don't seem to Masterbrew (if a bit sleepy, a be able to get any beer.. wonderful pint when well-kept) it Anyone with a taste for Real Ale was written using Incentive's Graphic Adventure Creator. Or at least, it claims to have been 'originally developed' on the GAC, whatever that might mean Although the parser accepts multiple commands and full sentences. I found the actual vocabulary a little lacking. However, the overall impression is of a game that's fun to play, and not too difficult once you get used to operating the display system Keith Campbell Vocabulary Atmosphere Personal  Value RSE : NON at now? "


"hah APE Gusto REVIEWS/2 MAFIA CONTRACT II Supplier: Atlantis Software Ltd Machine: Spectrum 48K Price: .99 This is the sequel to Mafia Contract, in which your boss, Don Capolla, has been threatened by Vito Rossi's men. He has panicked, gone into hiding, and put out a contract on everyone he fears including you Your objective is to kill Capolla and Rossi, then go on to find documents about Capolla's gurmen, which will give you control of the city. There is no time to lose, for even as you enter the game, Rossi's men are raiding Capolla's mansion, in which you sit at your office desk Out of the room, down the corridor, and as you reach the top of the stairs. There they are in the lobby below, spraying you with bullets. No spare moves to experiment-get it right or die! Out of the mansion then, and watch out for Rossi's men lurking precede some of the locations. In others, there are mini graphics, which display instantly. Just as effective as the full pictures, even these don't match the bold, cartoon-style BANG and CRASH screens, which appear from time to time, and strangely enough, add to the atmosphere rather than destroy it. The anti-violence brigade will be best advised to avoid this one, but if you fancy a cracking good blood and guts adventure, you find this hard to beat. At the ridiculous price of .99, it's a must! If you don't see it in your local store, add 36p for P&P (43p for two games, free for three or more), and order direct from Atlantis Software Ltd., 19 Prebend Street, London, N1 8PF. Keith Campbell Vocabulary Atmosphere Personal Value in the bushes, waiting in ambush of the pitfalls are foreseeable. It's Perhaps the armour-plated car? learning how to behave as a But the gates of the drive are shut. gangster, and making sure you Outside the grounds with no have the equipment to do it, that transport, beware! They'll pepper provides the puzzles to back the you with bullets in a bus, given half excitement. the chance! This is a graphic adventure, and The pace is fast in this cleverly the only thing that slows it down, constructed adventure, and many are the full-screen pictures which NO TREASURE TUNNELS Supplier: Plasma Touch Machine: Amstrad Price: .50 (inc P&P) Treasure Tunnels, another offering using the Incentive Graphic Adventure Creator is as its name implies, a treasure gathering exercise. As a variation on the theme, treasures are classified as Precious Metals, Jewels, and Antique items. You must deposit five of each category at its appropriate store locations and it's up to you to decide if an object is a treasure, and if so, in what category to place it. You start off facing a large brick to carry around that tiresome different and slightly strange building. Your journey leads you lantern, and having to remember adventure, in which you find underground, where there are a to turn it off whenever possible, to yourself stuck in an attic, with few treasures that give themselves conserve the oil or battery nowt but a magazine, Ninja sword, up easily There is no HELP command, but lead miniature, a bar of soap and a The problems get more difficult perhaps most disappointingly, the dressmaker's dummy. You're the further you go, and breaking word SCORE is not recognised. A tired, but can't seem to sleep. into the last fifteen or so of the 50 pity, as I always feel that horders Hmm... very strange, and not locations in this game requires of treasure, like misers, get a great easy at all! I never even got out of some hard thinking deal of pleasure out of counting the attic. But there is a prize for the Shifting a dragon (yes it's been their assets from time to time. person who comes up with the done before, but differently!), how This is a pleasant adventure, best interpretation of the game! to enter a bright area, and picking and can be recommended for Keith Campbell up hot items, are no easy beginners who are prepared to do Vocabulary problems. a bit of hard thinking. Atmosphere For a change, although set Not so the 'extra' adventure, undergound, the rocks themselves Experience, which is on the back Personal are luminous, so there is no need of the tape. This is altogether a Value THE ADVENTURE CREATOR Supplier: Incentive Software Machine: Spectrum 48K Price: $14.95 Incentive's excellent adventure creator utility, released originally for the Amstrad, has made its promised appearance on the Spectrum. A conversion of Sean Ellis's original program, by Brendan Kelly, this has the same easy editing facilities. (See review, C+VG January 1986.) The Spectrum, of course, is quite a different beast from the Amstrad, but within the constraints of the machine, this version faithfully reproduces the original. A graphic creator option is included, and uses a similar method to that of its predecessor. As before, the game can be play tested from within the program, and includes a debugging aid. A Quickstart file can be loaded, which sets up common verbs, messages, and low priority conditions associated with them Two demonstration adventures are recorded on the reverse of the tape, one of which can be used to practice editing. Up to 9999 locations can be created, and filled with up to 255 objects, 255 is also the maximum limit for verbs, nouns, adverbs, and markers, whilst up to 127 The actual number and mix of each of these achievable in practice, is, of course, determined by the memory limit of the machine. Free memory is constantly monitored on the main menu, and powers up at 23194 bytes Commodore 64 owners have yet to see the release of their version, but it is well on its way. Keith Campbell of 255 can be used. "


"ok REVIEWS/3 SPYTREK ADVENTURE Sind Supplier: Americana Software US Gold Machines: Amstrad, Spectrum 48K, Commodore 64; Commodore 16 (test only) Price: .99 A government agent, realising he was in danger, hid some secret plans somewhere in Europe just before he was killed. Your job is to find them and bring them back. You start to find yourself in the most comfortable place in the car in which you are travelling. It's a hearse, and you are in the coffin! Dumped in a storeroom, you are left to your own devices to obtain the necessary equipment for your mission, including your passport, you've been taken to the airport. You play the part of Mike Rodot, a spy. Had this game been published by Firebird, you would no doubt have been famous reporter Ed Lines. The author of this little piece is Peter Torrance, already known for Subsunk and Seabase Delta. Very much in the same throwaway style as its predecessors, the prompt asks: \"What now them Mike?...\" and often gives the same atmosphere-destroying reply: \"Thanks, but no thanks!\" I have my suspicions that Ed was lined up for this job, and the program already written before the starring role was given to Mike. Indeed, if you try to buy a drink at the airport bar, the author slips with the reply: \"I'm not thirsty, Ed!\" A graphic adventure, it has the annoying habit of redrawing the picture unnecessarily when only the location text needs to be changed. There is a rather illogical trigger command at the airport, in that you have to complete one action before Sorry Mike. What's one of those? The driver of the passing car turns head towards you. His face turns while He swerves in front of your cars HALLOP! It's CURTAINS for you! you're in a coffin..PERMANENTLY! Press a key for another gane. something entirely unrelated can be achieved. The vocabulary is claimed to be \"large with a flexible parser, so that, for example, \"Take the pill and swallow it is understood. But there are parsers and parsers, and I found ALL in \"Take all to be treated as an unrecognised obect. \"Take the wig and beard,\" appeared to be understood, but unfortunately only the first item ended up in my inventory. Although quite enjoyable, it is too jokey to give the right atmosphere for its subject. Keith Campbell You are lying in a large OAK COFFIN. Thin shafts of light from air holes Vocabulary Pierce the near total blackness. The Pungent smell of wood warnish irritates Atmosphere COFETN which is inches from the Personal What now then Mike?. Value . co CLOAK OF DEATH Supplier: Bug-Byte water from your local. Machine: Atari Why else should you have been dumb enough to make a bet that Price: .99 you would spend the night in a Cloak of Death is no newcomer to creepy old house? After all, it's the adventure scene, having first only been empty for 30 years. appeared some two years ago, Strange things started released by Argus Press Software. happening, and I worried, but it Argus have bought up the now was over the vocabulary rather defunct Bug-Byte name, and use it than the house! I was facing a door for their budget games. that insisted of slamming shut As this adventure begins, you when I walked through it, locking find you've had just a little too me in the cellar with no means of much of that old falling down escape. The obvious answer was to wedge it open with a suitable object, but after trying umpteen different verb/noun combinations and not getting very far, I decided to drop everything I was carrying and go in search of a bacon sandwhich. Bingo! One of the objects I had dropped just happened to fall in the doorway a strange way of doing things I am sure you will agree All things considered I found this adventure quite interesting to play. It has only 26 locations, but each is packed with some very sneaky puzzles, the answers to which may have a deeper meaning than you might, at first, realise Paul Coppins Vocabulary Atmosphere Personal Value NA 67 "


"THOMUERTURE ADVENTURER OF THE YEAR Here is the competition you have been waiting for! All you have to do at this stage is to fill in the form, and send it off to Adventurer of the Year Competition, Computer+Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. You must enclose three of the special tokens that have been appearing in the magazine since the July issue. The closing date for entries is 16th October, so you have two whole months to enter. And if you missed out on one of the tokens, we will be printing just one more, in the next issue. From the entries, we will be picking out ten semi-finalists. They will be quizzed on Adventure in general, and some of the games they have listed as solved. From these three finalists will be selected. They will be invited down to Priory Court, to meet the Adventure team, and battle to become C+VG Adventurer of 1986! There will be a separate competition for overseas readers, with a separate prize, so please make sure you put an X in the \"Overseas box if you are not resident in the UK. ANSWER THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS: 1) Which adventure firm produced the Silicon Dream trilogy? 2) Who wrote Voodoo Castle? 3) In which game do you have to be carried through a window? 4) Name the odd game out, and why: Sherlock, Curse of Crowley Manor, Ten Little Indians. 5) Name the odd word out, and why: Bunyon, Plugh, Temple, Away, Blowpipe, Yoho. 6) What was the name of the national monthly that specialised in Adventure? 7) Who writes the Questprobe series? 8) How many parts has the game Zork? 9) What was the name of the first ever mainframe adventure? 10) Which adventure firm writes in ZIL? DI C+VG ADVENTURER OF THE YEAR PCCIO NameMy answers are: Address: Age. Overseas Reader? (Put X in Box) List Adventures solved and the machine you played them on. Name your favourite Adventure Name THREE well known authors of Adventures 5 "


"R SUES Spectrum/Amstrad Cassette .95 Amstrad Disc .95 MIKRO-GEN Unit 15 The Western Centre, Western Road Bracknell Berks. Steinar "


"EXCLUSIVE PREVIEW Meet Professor TP. That's Tee Pee to you. He's going to be your master of ceremonies for the most addictive computer quiz you've ever encountered. And if you're good at picking up clues you've probably already guessed we're talking Trivial Pursuit here! The original board game took the entire world by storm--and now the computerised version is about to do it all over again. rofessor TP lives in a comfortable academic residence among the dreaming spires of Oxford, the centre of all knowledge. Which is quite appropriate for someone who can give you the answers to all the questions in Domark's computer version of Trivial Pursuit. It was David Pringle, head of the ODE programming and development team, who discovered the Prof languishing among a pile of dusty old books in the Old Bodleian Library. The Prof's background in studies of tremendously obscure and totally irrelevant subjects qualified him perfectly for the Trivial Pursuit project. In BB OARERLUE Oscuence Geog Stor Sport Centment You have thrown a 3 TRIVIAL PURSUITS rivial Pursuit leo continents. fact the Prof reckons that he's probably got a certificate which proves he is the proud owner of a degree in Trivial Pursuits from the university. He jumped at the chance to help David Pringle and his team of programmers, and was even more delighted when they offered him a starring role in the finished product as a sort of eccentric quiz master. So pleased was the Prof that he even offered his study as the location where the quiz takes place. That's why, when you play for questions requiring the finished game, you'll musical knowledge. Sound find yourself in the Prof's and vision add a whole new study surrounded by odd dimension to the pursuit of antiques collected by the excellence! Professor on his many And you can even play the adventures to dark computer version on your continents. own -which will enable Also in the Prof's study you to put one over on you'll see other items which people when you play the make the computer version real thing. Just think of all of Trivial Pursuit even more the secret practice you'll be challenging than the able to get in. original board game. The game basically takes There's an old slide place on two screens projector which the quiz there's the familiar Trivial master uses to project Pursuit board represented on one-while the actual questioning takes place in Prof TP's study. This is a graphic representation of his room in a splendid Oxford house. Prof will pictures for illustrated show you slides, play you questions, and a piano or music or simply ask you text wind-up gramophone questions as in the original depending on which version. computer you're playing on Trivial Pursuit Goleo 000000 recognize? ship? appearances? What cricketer has made the most Test match What two flavours make mocha? Goering? Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque? Mutiny on the Bounty? What painting movement was conceived by had a $5,000 bounty put on his head by Hermann What American actor and World War II airman Who portrayed Captain Bligh in the 1962 film Islands? What country's flag flies over the Canary Where did the rumba originate? of the flute? What was the name of Charles Darwin's survey . What shepherd god was the legendary inventor What was the first decimal coin to be issued? on 77 Sunset Strip?  What was the name of the parking lot attendant  How many official languages does Switzerland "


"REVIELUSIVE PREVA Genus VE PREVIEW 0900004 Genus Trivial Pursuit Goleo On loading the game, players are presented with the menu screen to allow them to set parameters and select options for the next game. You select colours for counters and enter your mentioned, the question fresh. names, the computer will screen shows a view of the Domark's refer to each player by name study in Prof TP's Oxford computer version from that point. residence. Various objects promises to be as Other options available chosen by the computer. relevant to the question addictive and exciting as the include setting a time limit The Board screen depicts subject lie about the place original article. for answers and allowing the TP board with the and the Prof himself enters Trivial Pursuit will be wagers on questions. The current players position dressed in clothes launched at the PCW Show time limit on answers can be indicated. appropriate to the question in September on Spectrum, set by the players from Beside the board is an subject. He then asks the Commodore 64, Amstrad 5-300 seconds, counting enlarged view of the question, aided by his slide and the BBC at .95. begins when the question, players' counters showing projector for pictorial including any aural or The story behind Trivial questions and his piano or any coloured segments pictorial elements, has been gained. The subject Pursuit is as amazing as the wind-up gramophone for presented in full. success of the board game. questions involving music. categories and their If the time limit expires It was invented in just 45 corresponding colours are minutes on a rainy night in the answer is displayed but shown underneath the Montreal, Canada. the player may still declare a board. The next day brothers correct answer, this is Two text lines run along Chris and John Haney and permitted so as to allow for the bottom of the screen. friend Scott Abbott sat last second answers. The lower right area of the down to get together the The details for wagering screen is reserved for the Agrandfather clock in the first 6,000 questions. have not been finalised but antics of Professor TP! corner will count down the Creating the concept was each player will be able to The Prof's first task is to time if the timing option has the easy part. Convincing bet on himself or against an assist the player in throwing been selected. When the people that it was a good opponent answering a the dice. The board is, player has announced his idea was considerably more question correctly. naturally, divided into six answer to his fellow difficult. They suffered five The other options on this segments, these normally contenders he presses the years of rejections before screen are save/load, load have decorative pictures in joystick fire button to find if Trivial Pursuit finally got off them but for the purpose of his answer is correct or the ground with the help of dice throwing, the numbers incorrect. friends and relatives. The 1-6 replace the pictures. Everyone returns to the first 20,000 boxes of the The exact manner in game were soon snapped board screen and the player muit which TP operates varies upand the trio were well has another turn, or play on the way to fame and from machine to machine, passes to the next player as fortune. but options include firing an appropriate. Trivial Pursuit has now abandon game, turn on/off, arrow to hit one of the At the end of the game sold almost 70 million game analysis on/off and numbers at random and Prof TP bestows a small copies worldwide, three quick set up pulling a lever to stop the award on the winner. million of those in the UK The menu screen can be numbers spinning. The one player mode alone. The game has been accessed at any time from When the dice has been contains extra features. translated into many the board screen and any of thrown all the squares that Examples are enhanced languages including the options or parameters can be reached by the timing facilities such as a Japanese, Chinese, Arabic can be altered. This facility player's counter will flash, time limit for the whole and even Icelandic. A accommodates players who the player then uses the game and a points system factory in East Anglia wish to leave the game or joystick to select one of based on number of churns out over 100,000 join a game in the middle of these squares and his questions answered copies a week to meet the play. counter is moved to it. At correctly. worldwide demand. When everyone is this point TP strolls off the Once you've got the The three creators are satisfied with the options board screen and original computer game reckoned to be worth selected, the Board Screen you'll be able to get hold of accompanies the player to around 22 million dollars. A is displayed and play figure which is far from the question screen. special additional question begins. Order of play is triviall modules to keep the game As we've already EXCLUSIVE PREVIEW EXCLUSIVE PREVIEW EXCLUSIVE PREVIEW EXCLUSIVE PREVIEW "


" COMPETITION QUESTIONABLE PURSUITS Gold! Gold! There's gold in these here pages. And it's your chance to set off in hot pursuit of it in Domark's Trivial Pursuit Golden Challenge. The top prize is a Trivial Pursuit board game with solid gold playing pieces. All the trays, segments, die will be made of gold. It will be the only set of its type and the insurance value is ,000. To stand a chance of winning vou must compete in the great Computer + Video Games Trivial Quiz. Other computer magazines are running similar competitions and the winners of these will meet in a Golden Final in London during December which, say Domark, will be compared by someone really famous. (It won't be Tim Metcalfe C+VGS Big Ed, though) The winner of the C+VG Quiz plus four runners up will receive a copy of the new Genus Il Edition of the Trivial Pursuit Board Game. Here's what you have to do. Below are printed ten questions in Trivial Pursuit style. All you have to do is answer them correctly. We also want you to make up your own Trivial Pursuit question. If it's good enough Domark may be able to use in a future data tape for its Trivial Pursuits computer game. Make sure you send the answer and the source. carmail mestu My Trivial Pursuit question is: When you've answered the questions send them with the printed coupon to Invial Pursuit Golden Challenge, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR SAU. The closing date is September 16 and the editor's decision is final. 1) How long did the Hundred Years' War last A. 116 vears B. 50 years C. 100 years 2) Puffinus Puffinus is the zoological name of which seabird A. Puffin B. Manx Shearwater C. Herring Gull 3) What was King George VI's first name? A. Fred B. Albert C. Charles 4) Panama hats come from which country? A. Ecuador B. Italy C Panama In what month and year was C+VG first published A. Nov 1981 B. April 1983 C. January 1979 6) How many golf balls are there on the moon? A. Three B. None C. Ten 7) What is Desperate Dan's favourite food? A. Cow pie B. Mince pie C. Pie and mash 8) What is the longest river in the world? A. Yangtze, China B. Nile, Egypt C. Congo, Africa 9) How many editor's has C+VG had? A. One B. Two C. Five 10) Amelia Jenks Bloomer (1818-1894) wore and popularised which female garment A. Stockings B. Bloomers C. Blouse Answer: Where you found the question: Name: Address: Age Menus Cyprus Teenus A Venus Alexan Seven OM   Epson H 1000 Wanderers West Ham and Bolton The Mohicans William L. Shirer Nadia Comaneci Macbeth Sunday wurde Canaletto Its tail Sweden Nijinsky What's Neues Suttolk's "


"BARGAIN SOFTWARE: Dept. C+VG, Unit 1; 1 Esmond Road; London W.4. 1BR BUY BY TOPHONE RING 01-995 2763 DEDUCT 10% REC QUR 4.99 9.95 7.95 7.45 5.90 8.95 4.99 5.90 4.99 6.70 7.45 7.45 7.95 8.99 2.99 9.95 7.95 6.70 7.45 5.90 5.90 5.90 9.95 7.95 www 7.45 6.70 4.99 8 2.99 PRICE PROMISE If you wish to purchase any product from our list and find that you can buy the same product cheaper from ORDERS OVER another mail order company, simply enclose the lower  amount, stating the name of the other company and where you saw the advert. (It must be a current issue). Price Promise does not apply to other companies \"Special Offers\". SPECTRUM CBM 64 AMSTRAD REC QUR PAPER BOY 8.95 6.70 PRICE PRICE PRICE PRICE PYRACURSE GLEN HODDLE SOCCER SHOGUN 9.957 .45 HYPER SPORTS DYNAMITE DAN II LEADER BOARD 9.95 7.45 RAID KUNG FU MASTER 8.95 4.99 7.95 BOULDER DASH HII 9.95 7.45 STATION 8.95 PUB GAMES (7 games) KNIGHT GAMES 8.95 FU KUNG IN LAS VEGAS 8.95 3.99 THEATRE EUROPE MERMAID MADNESS 9.99 7.45 ALIEN 8 9.95 HI-JACK 4.99 9.95 SUMMER GAMES 9.95 VIEW TO A KILL 10.99 3.99 BOBBY BEARING 5.90 SOUTHERN BELLE 5.90 GHOST & GOBLINS 8.95 CAULDRON II TAU CETI 9.95 7.45 SHIP OF DOOM MERMAD MADNESS RED HAWK 8.95 6.70 INCA CURSE 8.95 JACK THE NIPPER 2.99 WAY OF THE TIGER 7.45 PLANET OF DEATH 8.95 PAPER BOY 7.95 BEYOND FORBIDDEN FOREST 9.95 7.45 ESPIONAGE ISLAND 8.95 9.95 7.45 GHOSTS & GOBLINS 9.95 7.45 ON THE OCHE (DARTS) 2.99 ACTION REFLEX 7.95 PUB GAMES 9.95 7.45 AMERICAN FOOTBALL MANTRONIX 7.95 TOUCH FOOTBALL 9.99 7.45 AMS GOLF BIGGLES 7.45 35.00 7.99 CAULDRON 1 8.99 6.70 STOCKMARKET IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 7.95 5.90 EMPIRE 9.95 6.99 SPACE HAWKS EQUINOX 9.95 6.99 BOMB JACK 7.45 CODENAME MAT ATTACK OF THE KILLER TOMATOES 5.90 PAPER BOY 9.95 7.45 SPLITTING IMAGES LASER WARP 35.00 BIGGLES SPLAT 7.99 7.45 MEGA HITS (10 games) 7.45 SILENT SERVICE 9.95 3D INVADERS ENIGMA FORCE 6.99 SOLO FLIGHT II 9.95 7.45 HUNTER KILLER GLADIATOR GREEN BERET 8.95 7.45 GRAND PRIX DRIVER QUAZATRON 35.00 URIDIUM 7.99 8.95 CHUCKIE EGG 6.70 SWEEVO'S WORLD 5.90 GAME KILLER (Carl) 15.95 11.90 NIGHT SHADES MASTER CHESS 6.99 NEXUS 9.95 SABRE WULF 4.99 G. GOOCHS CRICKET 9.95 7.45 NODES OF YESOD M.S.X. INTERNATIONAL SOCCER 14.99 4.99 SPORTS PACK (6 sports games) 5.99 SOLD A MILLION (4 Top Games 9.95 7.45 INTERNATIONAL KARATE POLE POSITION SOLD A MILLION 1 (4 Top Games) 9.95 RAID OVER MOSCOW ANY KONAMI (Cart.) 7.95 5.90 REVS 14.95 11.20 MAYHEM BEACH HEAT II 7.95 ROCK 'N' WRESTLE 9.95 ZAKIL WOOD GHOST & GOBLINS INTERNATIONAL KARATE 6.50 TANTALUS 6.70 SPITFIRE 40 9.95 7.45 HUMPHREY TOAD RUNNER 6.70 SABOTEUR 8.95 6.70 CRAZY GOLF THE PLANETS 7.45 MASTER OF THE LAMPS 3.99 PUNCHY SAI COMBAT 6.95 5.20 MUSIC STUDIO 12.99 CHUCKIE EGG REBEL PLANET 9.95 ENIGMA FORCE 9.95 5.99 VACUUM MANIA GREEN BERET NOW GAMES (6 Titles) 8.95 5.99 SPECIAL OPERATIONS BOMB JACK NOW GAMES II (6 Titles 8.95 5.99 PANZER ATTACK LORD OF THE RINGS 15.95 11.90 FIGHT NIGHT 9.95 LAZY JONES ELITE 14.95 11.20 WINTER GAMES 9.95 6.50 BUZZ OFF WAY OF THE TIGER 9.95 7.45 PSYTRON BAT MAN 19.90 VIEW TO A KILL 6.99 PSI WARRIOR LAZER BYKES 8.99 INTERNATIONAL KARATE 5.20 FAME QUEST MORDEN'S QUEST 7.95 4.99 PARATROOPERS SUPERBOWL 19.00 5.99 9.95 7.45 ELECTRON ELECTION TRAIL TAU CETI 9.95 POOL CHALLENGE EMPIRE SOLD A MILLION II (4 Top Games) 9.95 7.45 THE PIT 29.00 SNAPPER ARCADE HALL OF FAME (5 Top Games 9.95 5.99 7.45 GHOST MANOR & SPIRES PEAK STARSHIP COMMAND COMPUTER HITS II (10 Top Games) 7.45 WORLD CUP FOOTBALL 7.99 2.99 PLANETOID HOT SHOTS (4 Top Games) ON COURT BASEBALL 10.99 4.99 NOW GAMES II (5 Games) TIME MACHINE 6.70 ON COURT FOOTBALL 10 99 ARROW OF DEATH NOW GAMES (6 Games) FRIDAY 13TH 8.99 3.99 GOLDEN BATON 6.70 VIEW TO A KILL 8.99 3.99 TEN LITTLE INDIANS 50 GAMES CASSETTE 10 99 3.99 WIZARD OF AKYRZ CLUEDO 7.45 SPIRIT OF THE STONE 14 95 ARCADIANS STARSTRIKE 5.90 BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK 9.95 4.99 HOPPER WINTER GAMES 5.90 COMBAT LEADER CHESS 8.95 BACK TO SKOOL 5.20 MUSIC SYSTEM 14.95 7.99 SWORD & SORCERY CYBERTRON MISSION 8.95 7.45 POPEYE ELECTRON INVADERS BOUNCES CAMELS 9.95 2.99 FIVE A SIDE SOCCER G. GOOCH'S CRICKET 7.45 HELL GATE 9.95 2.99 JET POWER JACK VIEW TO A KILL 8.95 HOVVER BOVVER 9952.99 FELIX IN THE FACTORY THREE WEEKS IN PARADISE 8.95 6.99 HEROES OF KARN 9.95 2.99 ALIEN HIGHWAY SNOOKER 9.95 5.90 BREAK FEVER 9.95 2.99 STOCK CAR 8.95 3.99 ART STUDIO 11.20 ADVENTURES OF BASILDON BOND 9.95 CHUCKIE EGG WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST DEFENDER 64 9.95 GOLF GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR 8.95 20.95 GANDOLF THE SORCERER 2.99 KAMIKAZE 8.95 TOMAHAWK 7.45 LAZER ZONE 9.95 KILLER GORILLA 8.95 BOUNDER 5.90 PYJAMARAMA 9.95 2.99 R080T70M 9.95 PENTAGRAM AU DHABIA 9.95299 TALES OF ARABIAN NIGHTS HEARTLAND CYCLONE ATTACK X --1 BARGAIN SOFTWARE ORDER FORM Please send me the following titles. BLOCK capitals please! Type of computer Name 8 5.90 5.90 6.50 4.09 Conne &&&&&&&&&&& 7.95 7.95 7.95 5.90 6.95 7.45 9.95 7.45 4.99  8.95 6.70 MONOPRASPRIT 7.45 8.95 9.95 4.99 7.45 8.95 8.95 8.95 2.99 2.99  . Title: Amount Address London High Road 474A Chiswick VISIT OUR SHOP Tel. No. Total Enclosed ! Please make cheques or postal orders payable to BARGAIN SOFTWARE Prices include P&P within the UK Europe please add .75 per tape: Elsewhere please add .00 extra per tape W4 "


"It's a MUG's life on C+VG-Multi User Games, that is. Interactive modem-linked games are now becoming very popular. They can bring a whole new world of fantasy and adventure into your living room. Kyle Jones has been mugging up on MUGs... ulti-User games are quite a Legend one of the ranks in \"belboz, OK-see you there in two recent phenomena, having Mud-second only to wizard) armed minutes!\" only been commercially with your bare hands! You'd It is this interactiveness that available for about 18 months. The probably last about a minute, if makes MUGs so enjoyable and first commercial MUG was the now you're lucky. addictive. famous Multi-User Dungeon, Unlike even the most sophisticated Players can kill each other, help abbreviated to an affectionate MUD single-user adventure, your each other, gang up, go on quests which although written years ago opponents in a MUG are other, together, or simply have a good chat was for the first time put on a public intelligent humans, and not some You might ask someone for help. network, Compunet, in Christmas totally dumb Orc. and they might demand an item of 81. Having said this, there are the treasure in exchange for their Since then, MUD has flourished. equivalent of non-player characters information The author, Richard Bartle, is now (NPC's for D&D players) known as You hand over the treasure and in the process of finishing MUD2 mobiles. The strength of these splat, he kills you and runs off with which is already up and running. mobiles is set by the program, and his ill.gotten gains. Vendettas and is constantly being improved. they range in type from Dragons to, arising from actions like this can Even though I say being improved, it in one game, a Roadrunner! last for ages, and as a wizard it's is perfectly acceptable, and is great Mobiles are for the most totally quite funny to be able to sit back and to play. I look forward immensely to thick. They will normally attack on watch all this happening around playing it again in a few months to sight, with varying degrees of skill you. see the developments and strength. Even a novice could The aim of most MUGs is to get to A multi-user game is basically an kill a poor zombie, but only the more an ultimate rank, normally Wizard adventure which more than one adept and powerful players could or its equivalent. Once achieved, you person can occupy and play at the attempt the Dragon. are power incarnate, with the ability same time. These players can Communication within the game to kill mere mortals with a casual interact by helping each other, or is very simple, and normally flick of a finger. killing each other at the other operates on three levels. Firstly, you In MUD, there is no higher extreme! can SHOUT a message, in which achievable rank. I say achievable Some powerful players even go to case all players in The Land will get because there is in fact a higher rank the lengths of acquiring a private the message unless they have a ArchWizard. army, made up of low-ranking hearing problem possibly resulting Archwizards are appointed by the hapless mortals who don't know any from being magically deafened game's creators to oversee the game better. Unfortunately, desertion rate which will affect ALL forms of and its wizards, and even wizards is pretty high because of the risks communication. must obey them or be FODded involved. Secondly, you can SAY a message, Finger Of Death). After all, how would you as a and all players in the same room as Even though Wizards have the low-level character you will hear it. Lastly, you can power to kill people out of hand, and like to take on a communicate on a in some games create their own highly experienced one-to-one basis by rooms, monsters, puzzles, and typing the player's name treasure, they are expected to behave and then the message. For responsibly. example: Gandalf, meet Though they have incredible me in the cottage power, they are also the game's entrance hall, OK?\" To servants, making sure that problems which or queries a player has are answered, Gandalf and disputes are settled. Of course, might even Wizards feel the urge to be reply: mischievous sometimes, so don't be surprised if you suddenly find yourself surrounded by zombies, or being strangled slowly by a telephone lead... Your character, to get to this ultimate position of power and authority, must undergo severe testing on the battlefield known as The Land. In your quest for points, you will doubtlessly be killed many times. The first time you are killed in a fight, you are in shock for about a minute before it all sinks in. It's amazing how emotionally attached you become to your alter-ego within the game. There is a lot of confusion among non-MUG players as to what exactly happens when you SAVE, as you would in a normal adventure. This is rather complicated to explain, as it varies so much from MUG to MUG. In the original MUD, when you saved, your attributes (eg stamina) and your score are saved. Your possessions are not. Every few hours or so, the game is \"reset' and all objects, mobiles, and puzzles are returned to their starting states which may be random. As points are scored by collecting treasure and dropping it in the swamp where they cannot be reached again, these treasures must be returned to the game. The same thing happens to weapons. Effectively, it is like switching off the computer and reloading. In other games, you can buy weapons and armour which you can keep even after a reset, and in GODS, you even have your own hotel room, with personalised descriptions. As you rise in rank, so you are given another room, until you end up with a suite! GODS also differs from other MUGs because once you have reached the ultimate rank of, yes, thats right, a GOD, you may only remain one if you are very careful! Once a God, you are given a temple. To remain a God, you must have a lot of magical points which can only be obtained by getting mortals to offer their treasures to you. When they do this, you as a God are given half of the value, and the mortal the other half. To encourage players to offer treasures to your temple, you have to somehow entice them. This can be done in a number of ways, some of which again make Gods stand out from other MUGS. Say, for example, that you have stolen a highly valuable object from a fellow player. Naturally enough, he's be rather peeved and would probably come after you with a vengeance to try to kill you. "


"T OF MUGGING You could strike a bargain with network, Comp-U-Serve, which runs one of the Gods and say that in on approximately 60 mainframes exchange for offering treasure in his will shortly be opening MUD, temple, he must enable you to kill of licensed to them from USE. your pursuer. IMAGE, which stands for He could do this by leaving a spell Interactive Multi-User Adventure package\" in your hotel room, so that Game Environment, is another game next time you logged into the game, that is quickly gaining new you could activate the package and members. assuming that he is playing the As in MUD, the aim is to get to game, kill him! This method raises Wizard. some rather important questions. However, in IMAGE when you Wizards are supposed to be SAVE, you keep your weapon and incorruptable beings wnu do not give armour, and when you re-enter the away treasure or give away excessive game you appear from where you help. In GODS, you are virtually left oti, and not at the start as in forced to do the opposite in order to MUD. survive as a God. As this feature of If you have laboured long hours to spell packages has not yet been battle your way past hordes of evil implemented, I cannot say what will beasties, then being able to quit and result, but it will certainly be re-enter the game from where you interesting to watch! left off is a blessing. Unfortunately, GODS is not run in this IMAGE retains some of the features of normal adventure games. only support a very limited number On the other hand, if you are of users. MUD on the other hand can trapped in a room with a Dragon, it easily support over 30, although the would be nice to be able to quit and game does tend to get a little re-enter from a different location crowded then. rather than face almost certain Those of you in the know out there death by being scorched to a cinder may scoff and laugh when I say this, by the whim of some uncaring beast. but MUD2 has now repaired its Still, it's all in the spirit of the game! faulty sails and is running at almost Wizards in IMAGE can also create full speed. their own rooms, and will in the MUD2 had notorious speed future be able to add their own problems a while back, but the mobiles, puzzles, and treasuresto problem was finally tracked down, these. and the debugging literally took If the module is good enough, it about ten minutes, may even be added to the game. I Now commands are acted upon in have created a series of three rooms seconds, and Simon Dally, boss of called Hell in mine. If I see a players MUSE Ltd who are writing the doing game, says that further speed something increases are imminent. that Hopefully in a few months time, MUD2 will have changed beyond recognition into the world's foremost multi-user game. Realising the success and potential of MUD, the Ameri I think is particularly nasty or evil. I If you want to play a multi-user summon him to Hell. game, you'll firstly need a modem From here he must type \"Zaphod I that can handle 1200/75 baud. These repent\" to re-enter the game, can be picked up for about 270. otherwise he will be incarcerated Phone Modem House on 0392-213355 forever! for details on modems and software. These arenas as they are called You'll also need one of those can also be used as duelling grounds. 'in-phone sockets that BT will rip Take two players, dump them in a you of for about 15 to install. simple maze with about 20 locations, Charges ranges anywhere from and hide two weapons somewhere 50p hour to ,00/hour depending therein. which game you play, and how many Then you let them battle it out to credits you buy. the finish, the victor being suitably CONTACTS rewarded, and the loser losing his Contact MUSE on 01-608 1173 for life! information on MUD2. Contact Never forget that a Wiz can help Compunet on 01-965 8866 for details you, or hinder you, resurrect you or on Compunet MUD, and contact kill you at their whim, so it is best to Paul Chappell at Viewdata Systems stay in the wizzes good books, on 0935-22221 for details on IMAGE. because they generally keep a GODS does not have a contact phone black-list of abusive, annoying and number. You can play Mud on a particularly violent players. demo a/e if you have a 300/300 baud Micronet are also working on a or a 1200/75 baud modem on 01-997 MUG, developed from a game called 9133 and 01-998 8899 respectively. Shades which is quite similar to The I.D. is MUDGAMES, the MUD. Contact Mike Brown at password Micronet on 01-278 3143. PROSPECT WHAT YOU NEED can "


"There's a bitter and bloody revolution going on. Intrigue, plots, counter-plots, double-dealing, murder and mayhem. INTRIGUE IN SPACE If you're not involved in the revolution, it's because you're not caught up in Micronet 800's Starnet. To describe Starnet as just a The ships move directly from when there was no Emperor, the likely to begin with you cease to computer controlled galactic star to star. They can't stop in the Imperial Computers will decide exist in their game. But you can warfare game would be less than intervening empty space. Travel to the course of the Imperial Fleet. re-register again the next day.\" adequate. The computer is not the a friendly star and you will When or rather if--you are The players are drawn from a enemy. You play against other automatically take part in its Emperor you will have to specify wide spectrum of people from people around 600 of them at defence if it's attacked, Travel to which star and sector you are the murderous to the friendly. the moment who are hell-bent an enemy star, you will travelling to with your Throne The current Emperor has the on domination, exploitation or automatically attack it. Ship two turns in advance. code name Jemal. He's a general 70010012a That, basically, is the game. It practitioner from south London. does, however, provide a vast But whether he's still in control STARNET GALACTIC INDEX scope for various strategies, form by the time you read this is or break alliances, cheat or unknown. plunder. But it could come down How would you Ike to try your COLUMNS simply to this: terminate or be hand at survival in the rough, 1234567 terminated! tough, cut-throat world of Starnet was originally designed Starnet? Interested? ROW 12 by Mike Singleton, the man who What we want you to do is come bought you the Lords of Midnight up with an idea for a new and Doomdark's Revenge. But it interactive game which could be proved too complicated to run on Micronet. administer and was taken off the The person who comes up with EACH GALACTIC ROW IS A LINE OF 7 STAR Micronet database. But the the best idea will get a year's free SECTORS THE 3RD DIGIT IN A SECTOR'S software was then re-written for NUMBER REFERS TO ITS COLUMN EAST WEST subscription to Micronet plus free the BBC by Micronet member registration to Starnet and 50 free KEY IN THE LAST DIGIT TO GET MICRONET 800 (C) 80003080aOp. STRAIGHT TO THE MAP OF THE SECTOR STARNET GALACTIC INDEX just plain survival. Battles at a star are always The power plays range and rage decisive. The Starnet computer over a galaxy which has been takes many factors into account divided into 343 sectors, forming a when calculating the result. 7x7x7 cube. Each of these sectors Money is very important. contains nine stars. That gives a Galactic Stellars are acquired by total of 3,087 suns in all. taxing conquered stars and To play, you have to be a through investment at a Trade LEVEL 5 subscriber to Micronet 800, the Star. Prestel-based communication, Your objective is to build up information and telesoftware enough power and influence to THE GALAXY IS A 7x7x7 CUBE OF STAR SECTORS THE IST DIGIT IN A SECTOR'S network. To enrole for Starnet sieze the Imperial Throne ship and NUMBER REFERS TO ITS LEVEL UP/DOWN costs another 99 pence and each become Emperor. move costs 25 pence. Once you are Emperor and in STUDE 23 dont sector not go there You are then stationed in a control of the Imperial Fleet you Goto 8 for GAME GUIDE particular star sector under your must keep that power as long as Star Captain code name which you can!... Lawrence Kirby and Starnet was moves. identifies you and your ships for The longer your reign, the more soon back up and running. And if the idea is taken up and the duration of your survival. famous an Emperor you will be Micronet's Technical director used on Micronet you could be At the start you have one and all your moves will be free of Mike Brown says: \"The central onto a nice little earner... command ship and a number of computer acts as a moderator, or Send your idea together with ordinary ships. Lose the command The Throne Ship continually croupier, but Starnet really exists the printed coupon to Starnet ship and the game is over. tours the galaxy, collecting taxes out there on the network. It's Competition, Computer+Video Each sector has a map giving and gathering ships for the all done via Mailbox and Starnet Games, Priory Court, 30-32 the name, type and position of Imperial Fleet which accompanies Chatline and this is where Farringdon Lane, London ECIR each star. The map's \"b\" frame it. alliances are forged. 3AU. The closing date for the has details of who owns the star, The Galactic News page carries \"All of it is intrigue, plotting, competition is September 16th their starships, their wealth and leaked details of the strength of lies, fighting and blood-all battle record. the Imperial Fleet and which plotted by the Star Captains From now on how you decided sector it will be visiting next!... themselves. It's a continuous C+VG/Starnet Competition to act or move is up to you. At the beginning of the game, game. If you get killed which is Name Address la es una The longevror you w Mike B "


"HEARTLAND Lern COMPUTER GRAPHICS LTD. 5ALES 01-379 6755 01-240 9334 INTERNATIONAL 44-1-379 6755 SPECTRUM 48K-COMMODORE 64/128-AMSTRAD/SCHNEIDER "


"Kirel is the cute little hero of the game of the same name. Ideas Central has mapped out the first nine screens, with the help of Addictive Games, and given clues to help you battle through. Enjoy it! Screens 1, 2, 3 and 4 are all in will come across invisible walls and teach mode, so the secret is to Sub-terraneous transporters -these practice, practice, practice. go under the pyramids to the floor Throughout the 71 screens you and ultimately to the exit. COCO 2009 Screen 1: You only have to collect the bomb then head for the square at the back which is flashing. This will lead you through to screen two. Coco C+VG PLAYERS GUIDE Screen 2: You will see a row of bombs at the back right hand side. Run along this line, keeping the joystick in the same position. You will drop down to the next line Collect the last bomb, but watch out, as Kirel can fall down here and get stuck. When you have the bomb run back along the back edge of the board, anti-clockwise to the exit. 0000 COCO Screen 3: Build steps with the blocks. This will enable you to reach the roof. Go diagonally across to the right hand corner, come back one square and remove it. You will fall through to the cube underneath, which if you land on it will break down the structure. Screen 4: On this screen time is working against you. Use Kirel to jump onto the cake and use this to gain access to the block at the top-left hand side. Keep the top block. Go quickly to the bomb. Don't side-step and don't stop to collect anything else. Take the shortest route and go back to the exit door at the bottom left-hand side. Climb on to the top of the block on top of the exit and remove this to activate the exit to screen five. "


"REL.. COCO Screen 7: Take Kirel and gather single blocks to build a staircase up to the level of the first bomb. Move Kirel onto the circular transporter. Move over and defuse the bomb and then use the transporter to return to the staircase, you must then get back to the exit. COCO 240 C+VG PLAYERS GUIDE Screen 6: Out of the nine screens mapped here, this is the most important. Kirel must keep a block in hand at all times. Otherwise he will find it impossible to climb up to the bombs. Screen 8: Rotate screen through 180° bridge press \"b\"and then cross to and use blocks to build a stairwell up reach the other bomb. Back track to to the level of the blocks. To build a the exit way. COCO Coca Screen 5: On this screen Kirel must go and collect the bomb quickly. Once he has collected the bomb, rotate the screen through 180 degrees. He must then collect the Screen 9: Climb up and then go back bomb to bomb. To reach the exit, block and climb back down the steps. down one block and this will help climb on top of the collapsible block. Move Kirel across to the exit steps you gain access to the transporter And that's all the help we're giving. and you will pass through to Screen 6. which subsequently leads you from The rest is up to you! "


"C+VG COMPETITION STRIKE FORCE Ever played right through a game and been You are going in to bring him back REALLY disappointed by the end of it all? whatever the cost. Bet you have. Well, here's your chance to Mission Six is the Embassy. A seige has get one up on the programmers by felling being going on for 39 hours. Police have them just how you'd like a game to finish. been trying to defuse the situation but the Mikro-Gen are the people giving you the terrorists are determined. Shots have been chance to fit a finale to their brand new heard but the terrorists say that all inside Strike Force game. It's based on the crack are safe. Demands have been made and Special Air Services regiment and their deadlines are due to run out in just under tough training. The aim of the game is to nine hours. You have try and defuse the complete six special missions. situation before things start getting nasty We want YOU to come up with the seventh The Final Mission is ... all up to YOU! and final mission. Mikro-Gen want you to design a scenario Mission One is the raid on the farmhouse for the seventh and final mission. A terrorist group's training centre has been Please give us as much information about located in a remote farmhouse. There are the mission as possible. The location, how woods and open fields surrounding the you see rooms, buildings, surrounding farm. It is believed that there are seven countryside, fitting into the mission you people in the farm. Your task is to take the want the Strike Force to undertake. farmhouse and secure the arms being held Don't forget to tell us the strength of the in this location. enemy or terrorist forces you are up Mission Two is the research against and if you like the establishment. It has been infiltrated by a personalities of the terrorists involved. Are terrorist group who are demanding the they mercenaries or freedom fighters? release of fellow terrorists held by the You can either write everything down or military. There are 25 to 30 terrorists in the provide us with a storyboard including the block. There are 15 hostages being held in graphic details you think should be the building. Your job is to secure the included. building and hostages and capture or The winning entry will have his or her destroy the terrorists. scenario actually built in to the finished Mission Three is the oil tanker. It has been Strike Force game which will be on sale taken over by terrorists. The tanker is full of before Christmas. grade one oil, holding about two million The winner will get a replica of an AP 74 gallons. Your task is to stop the terrorists semi-automatic rifle and the two carrying out their threat to blow up the runners-up replicas of .44 Magnums. tanker in the Panama Canal. Interested? Then rush your entry to Mission Four is the airport. Terrorists Computer and Video Games, Strike Force have managed to take control of the air Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 traffic control tower at the world's fifth Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. largest airport. The Strike Force have been Closing date for the competition is called in to take back the control tower September 16th, normal C+VG rules apply, before any harm is done. and Mikro-Gen/C+VG judges' decision is Mission Five is the hospital. The President final. DON'T forget to include the entry of Outer Mizzi has been injured during a coupon with your scenario. civil uprising. The country is now under rebel rule. He is believed to be in a particular mountain hospital under guard. C+VG/MIKRO GEN STRIKE FORCE Before the uprising an agreement was made between the President and the COMPETITION Government of your country. This meant Name that he would take up exile in your country. Address Age Computer owned "


"MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS 7.50 6.75 3.50 3.95 The Best Discount Shop in U.K. ARCADE INTERNATIONAL SOFTWARE SHOP SALES ONLY! Fight Night C64 4.95 B. of Planets Spec.. Blockbusters C64 295 Twister Spec Kennedy Approach C64 Bullseye Spec 2.95 Music Studio C64 Gyroscope Spec. 2.95 Z C64 3.95 Fintstones Spec 395 395 Imp Mission Spec. Nick Faldo C64 3.95 R of the Wood Spec Wizardry C64 R of the Wood C64 Mega Hits C64 2.95 Comp People Sir Fred Spec 2.95 Technition Ted 2.95 New Titles coming in daily at big reductions. Sold on first come basis. New release titles coming in regularly. New titles up to .70 off retail price. Been looking for the illusive game, visit our new .99 stall and you will be surprised at the titles being sold on this stall. Games stocked for C16/4, Amstrad (Best selection in London) C64, Atari, Spec, M.SX Visit us in East London Arcade International M ARCARD Shoppihall, Myrtle Road, London E6 VISA THIS IS NOT A MAIL ORDER ADVERT 4.95 CUT PRICE SOFTWARE SPECTRUM Who Dares Wins il 5.95 Bounder D1 7.50 Fairlight 7.50 Nemesis 5.95 Boulder Dash lll Elite 11.25 Equinox 7.50 Undium D3 Ace ... 8.00 Grph. Ad Creator 19,50 Kun Fu Master D1 7 .50 Kung Fu Master 7,50 Bounces Commando 7.50 Virgin Atlantic 5.95 Room 10 5.95 Back to Skool 5.25 Core 6.75 Twister 5,50 Rock'n Wrestle 6.75 Time Trax 7.50 Way of the Tiger 7.50 Tomahawk 760 Pyracuse 7.50 FA Cup ........ 5.95 6.75 Dynamite Danil 5.95 PSI:5 Trading 1........ 7.50 Hi-Jack 7.50 Action Reflex 5.95 Fairlight D3 6.75 Pub Games 7.50 Mind Store 6.75 Starship Andromeda 7.50 Ye Ar Kung Fu 5.95 Silent Service 7.50 Green Bere! 6.75 Spitfire 40 7.50 Cauldron Il 6.75 Zzap Sizzlers 7.50 Stainless Steel... 7.50 Soitting Image 5.95 Tigers in the Snow... 7.50 Gladiator 6.75 Terror of Tranoss 5.95 Off the Hook 7.50 7.50 Snow Queen 7.50 Biggles 7.50 Superbowl 7.50 Nexus 7.50 Tubular Bells 5.95 Mermaid Madness 7.50 Toad Run 5.95 DCsion in the Desert 12.50 Turbo Esprit 6.75 Tantalus 6.75 Golf Construction D1 9.95 Jack the Nipper 5,95 Laser Genius 12.50 Mermaid Madness 7.50 The Boggt 5 .95 Bobby Bearing5 .95 Mission AD 7.50 Way of Tiger.... 7.50 Dark sceptre 7.50 Touchdown D1 7.50 Bomb Jack 5.95 Hartland 7.50 RAL Titanic 7.50 FA Cup ....5.95 COMMODORE 64 Spindizzy D1 7.50 Arcade Creator 12.50 Knights of the Desert 7.50 War Play 5.95 Heavy on Magick 7.50 Germany 1985 7.50 CUPS 6.75 Sam Fox Striptease 5.95 Summer Games II DI 7.50 Price of Magick 7.50 Batman 5.95 Starduake 7.50 Popeye 5.95 Hunchback adv 5.95 Mercenary D3... 7.50 Ghost n' Goblins 7.50 Paper Boy 5.95 Cyborg 7.50 D3 7.50 Mandragore 7.50 Zoids D1 6.75 Silent Service D1 7 .50 Res. Fractulus 5.95 Summer Games 1 D17.50 Core .. 750 Green Beret 5.95 Winter Games D1 7.50 Grph Ady Creator 19.50 Price of Magick 7.50 Acrojet D1 7.50 Cauldron ll 6.75 Quazatron 6.75 Who Dares Wins 6.95 Infiltrator Disk 12.50 Bounder ............ 7.50 Commando 7.50 Parallax 6.75 Bothams Cricket 5.50 Mercenary II 5.95 Art Studio 12.50 Beagles 7.50 Game Maker 12.50 Laser Genius 12.50 Sirike Force Harner 7.50 Mugsy's Revenge 6.75 Altered Ego Disk 19.95 Alien Highway 5.95 Rock & Wrestle 1 7.50 Shogun D3 7.50 Soindizzy 7.50 Solo Flight it 7.50 Nexus D3 1.C.VPS Core 7.50 Hunchback adv 6 .75 Knight Games D36.75 Dragon's Lair 7.50 Desert Fox D1 7.50 Time Trax 7.50 Starstr kell 5.95 Trap 7.50 Rebel Planet D1 7.50 5.95 Hardball D1 7 .50 Leaderboard D1 7.50 Ghost n Goblins 5.95 Dragons La 7.50 Samantha Fox.... 7.50 Theatre Europe 7.50 Crusade in Europe 12.50 Batman Postage included UK. Please state which micro. Fast service. Send cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept CVG, 49H Sutherland Street, Victoria, London SW1 V4JX MAIL ORDER ONLY: Send for FREE list Amstrad, C16, MSX Disks Available, D1 at .50, D3 at 110.50. (UNDER NEW MANAGEMENT NEW FAST SERVICE NEW PRICES) SPECTRUM Cass AMSTRAD inst 09 Heavy tina ERVICIOS 238 Hes Exploding Fist Whout Ndes DYS 525 Havana ATLON PSP cudet Om s orders please add 750 per tape Mexe chees payable to C P S V Accesorders welcome ty phone CUT PRICE SOFTWARE Unit 6, Stort House, Riverway, Harlow, Essex CM20 2DW Tel: (0279) 24433 (24 hour ansaphone) or 31956 During Office Hours JR SOFTWARE 76A Downham Rd, London, N1 5BG SPECTRUM BE SOON, GAMES AT THE SPEED OF LIGHT.... $7.40 Mount Vesuvus et Set Will PO Pet Commando Crin Europe Cadran 2 Flestia Glide Em Ghosts & Goblin tenere Dot Construct Bal er B er Compiler Bergens w the West Comp His See Pin Boby Benny Two kingdom Vale Tha Boxing World Cup Winter Oly Botha's Crickel Hyber Force ATARI 3 303aaaaa 11 95 7.40 15.95 Halotame 7.40 $5.95 Lord of the Rings Mermaid Marine Mercenary 595 (11.75 1175 Laret Concler Lazer Gens 11.75 Nioh Games Fing Pong Prof Mag Pits Rambo Revs Se Service F15 Sinhe Eagle Jumpet King of the thing bb 56 60 511 75 .50 Pro MOK Param Pin Games Rebe Rito Host 5740 5740 97 40 17.40 C70 Southern Belle Shoun Ps: 5 Trening Suber Box Smash Hits 1560 S.95 5.75 Spire Ace Warmin Paradise Tiger in the Snow $5.95 Blockbusters 17.00 Bus Eye 17. Commando 57.20 TE 1760 Count Down 11195 17.40 15 50 War Prad Exploding it .70 is 50 an Sizzlers Feel Street Editor 130.00 Winter Gates Lord of the Rings 12.00 Mon Cresta 15 95 Hepton il 16.50 Winter Games C16 Speath 15 60 15.25 Strike Force Harrier 17.40 Southern Bele 595 COMMODORE Treasure Hunt 40 The Dull 11 00 15.95 Winter Oy 15.95 57.40 Ye At Kung Fu 16.60 Bom 57.40 Botas CC ES.95 17.40 SPECIAL OFFER PAPERBOY 5.60 SP C16:26.20 AMS 16,99 C64, BBC All payments in Sterling Postage FREE in the UK E1 for Europe ad elsewhere overseas Please sends de forlist Comp Prof 14.50, Konix Speed king  Revs Hotshot E1050 JR Software Dept CVG7 76A, Downham Rd, London N15BG 15.70 15.25 FASTER THAN LIGHT "


"COMPETITIONER AN ALLAMARMINGLY AMAZING COMPETITION! Don't throw it away! That's our message to Vic 20 owners everywhere! We've got 20 copies of Llamasoft's amazing Viva Vic compilation to give away to all you lonely Viesters out there. Viva Vic! is a collection of Jeff Minter's classic early games including Abductor, Gridrunner, Metagalactic Llamas and Hellgate. This is an offer no self respecting Vic owner should refuse. It's even worth trying to remember who you sold your old Vic to just so you can enter. All you have to do is write a witty caption that fits the picture of The Beast on this page. Something like, \"If you do that again I really get the hump!\" or \"This is your early morning ALLAMA call.\" (Oh Dear, -Ed) We're SURE you can do better than that. Can't you? We'll look forward to reading the entries you send to Computer and Video Games, Viva Vic! Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR SAU. Closing date is September 16th, normal C+VG rules apply, and the editor's decision is, as usual, final. C+VGLLAMASOFT VIVA VIC! COMPETITION Name Address Age My Allamarmingly funny caption is: "


"OMICRO ADS ATARI 400/600/800 XL XE OWNERS UTILITIES ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE We have an all round selection of disk Cassettes and HINTS-POKES-MAPS Stunning Valse\" -Tony Bridge, Popular Computing Weekly The monthly handbook packed with tops pokes Sms soluto o p latest tewers, competitions, ple much more Adventurers Handbook CSM SPEC CIG Pua 4 Handbook Arrarad Handbook RRC Handhar Commodore Arcade Handbook Spectrum 148 128) Arcade Handbook Or for even better valake tage of our reduced enton rates 3 13.5 5 0 12 00 Send cheque or PO HAD Services (CVL 1338 Ashton Old Road, Bicher Openshaw Manchester MILIJC Tel: 061-370 SGS games free Around 1.000 different originaltitet Foru details Sendange stamped addressed eve telephone evenings 7 10mot weekends LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 DISC DRIVE 131.90 postre 3 | 4 | 130 ES-1050 Drive 257 90 postre Antic and Analog magas available BEST QUALITY DISCS Unlabelled DDS.S. (11.95 for 10 post free 199.95 for 100 pont free Memorex 3% discs SSDD. Brno 10 02 92 ON TAPE AND DISK. ALSO DISK DRIVE ENHANCEMENTS. FOR FULL LISTS OF UTILITIES AND GAMES SEND LARGE SAE GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept. CSVG 35 Tilbury Ron Thorney close Sunderland SR3 APO Tel 0783 288351 FREE MEMBERSHIP SOFTWARE HIRE  VIC-20  COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM Send an sae for your hirekitto: VSH (CV), PO Box 65, Nottingham NG1 Please state which micro THE COMPUTER DEPOT 205 Buchanana Street Glasgow G1 2JZ 041 332 3944 ATARI 400/600/800/800XLIVEST Mail order only Seven days delivery STOCKSOFT 15 WOODBROOKE ROAD BIRMINGHAM B30 1UE UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64 Send s.a.e. for fast response and details to UK Software Exchange Club (CVG). 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the marketty co m m e with the MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY The greatest biggest and best Atan Club on the market Now incorporating ST software into our stocks MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY The company whol dea of software brary Now over 1.000tles ondesc case and Roma n education ten Durchsulotamm e Guest chance Aways adding a m oy new me Adorosching 2000 very member s and SAW Germany Hand Denmatkad A fast eient and trendly server com e dystem to see Your records. Requests are attended toda y Sunda of service Regular newsletters and programme s US Cuba Important: Midland Games Library are in no way connected with or responsible for Midland Computers Ltd. of Worcester SEND LARGE S.A.E. TO: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos, Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programmes are originals with full documentation MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY Over 8.000 different titles available for hire for the COMMODORE SPECTRUM BBC AMSTRAD ATARI MSX ELECTRON, IBM and APRICOT ARCADE ADVENTURE EDUCATIONAL and BUSINESS software too HRE PRICES from only 750 INC P&P 20 DISCOUNT of Surchase software FREE HINTS AND TIPS FAST RETURN OF POST SERVICE reserves are given ALL CAVES manufactures ORIGINALS with full documentation EUROPEAN members welcome Le Verbership E6 00. Your first tapered free to the value of t 25 Fully computer sed system keeps track of your order We bride ourselves in being the most professonal Hire Library in the United Kingdom with staff of 14 who know what the word service s cked by our own software company and programmers MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY, 28 College Street, Worcester WR1 2LS Tel: 0905 611072 Please rush me my free catalogue stating machine Name Address i Atari 400/600/800/XL 130XE Atari 520ST Commodore 64/Vic20/C16/Plus 4 Spectrum/BBC/Amstrad Hardware Software Peripherals Mediatech 5°/4 Discs (SS/DD) 11.95 Mediatech 5/4 Discs (DS/SS) 12.95 LOCKABLE 100 DISC BOXES 9.95 PHONE OR WRITE FOR PRICES LIVINGSTON COMPUTER CENTRE 17 THE MALL, CRAIGSHILL LIVINGSTON (0506) 36978 POSTAGE .00 FREE POSTAGE AND PACKING ON ORDERS OVER  Callers Welcome DISCOUNT SOFTWARE 400/806 NOW  CASS DISKCOMMODORE het LOOK XLUXE ST ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software. If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 NA BBC ELECTRON Very C AN Send SA E for full list of titles P&P included Overseas Add 750 Portape Cheques POS Sterling only made Payable to Discount Software DISCOUNT SOFTWARE, 120 LORD STREET, HODDESDON HERTS. EN11 8NP. TELEPHONE (0992) 441524 "


"Have I won? Whos the winner? Tiy next time Here we have the competition results from Wrexham. Darius Heydarpour, Holland. the May and June issues. Samantha Jones, Wallington. Paul Burns, SOUTHERN BELLE Liverpool. Lee Pentith, Anglesey. Richard Thomas, Gwent. RJ Walker, Belfast. Paul Jason Ramchurn, London. David Wilson, Ullathorne, Goole. Rhys Carnall, Leicester. Surrey. Ewan Brooke, Sheffield. G J Paul, Jimmy Lui, Dublin. Michael Andrews, Dorset. Simon Smith, Sheffield. David Cardiff. Christopher Waite, Chelmsford. Connor, Liverpool. Barry Martin, N Ireland. Owain Jones, Hampton Hill. Mark Wilkins, JM Learmouth, Swindon. Nicholas Thrope, Walsall. Matthew Hopgood, Banbury. Notts. Sabu Felix, Middlesex. Darran Joynson, Wakefield. Jason Stobbs, GOLF Southport. Michael Atherton, Wigan. Neil lan Moria, Ascot. Darren Broughton, McNicholl, Londonderry. Houghton Regis. James Blowden, Devon. CHESS Neil Wallace, Lancs. Graeme Johnson, Tyne R Davidson, Birmingham. Steven Garner, & Wear. Paul Lucas, Herts. Stuart Innes, Cleveland, Kerry Overington, W Sussex. Fife. Scott Griffin, Gwent. Scott Davies, Andrew Philpott, Herts. Gary Smith, Notts. Worcs. M Whitby, Essex. David Greenwood, Caroline Middleton, Sheffield. M Schultze, Lancs. Jason Marshall, Swindon. Jason West Germany. Robert MacCallum, Norfolk. Hogan, Birmingham, Mr P Hogg, Martin Smith, W Midlands. Talib Yousry, Portsmouth. Mark Bond, Walton. Kin Tak Aberdeenshire. Stephen Pottage, York. Tsang, Northampton. Craig Meiklejohn, Glasgow. Richard Walker, Dudley. Howard ARCADE CLASSICS Roberts, Hastings, Karl Dodd, York. Mark C Selwa, Cheshire. Philip Butler, Bagshaw, Staffs. A Keyworth, Hull. Nottingham. Aaron Ferris, Belfast. Lee Nicholas Snape, Cheshire. David Nowik, Huggett, Huddersfield. Jeremy Little, Nuneaton. Andrew Hartley, W Yorks. David Bristol. Paul Prichard, Clwyd. Alistair Hope, Hall, Dover. Ian Airey, Hull. Matthew W Sussex. Jonathan Biddle, Suffolk. Robert Hassall, Chester. Shaun Blake, Gloucs. Milner, Newcastle upon Tyne. L Philip Sayegh, Dubai. Trevor Cobbe, York. Montgomery, London. Martin Harris, Staffs. Craig Lovelace, Norfolk. Tony Salt, Warley. Graham Jones, Shrewsbury. Edwin Iyawe, Paul Greenough, Manchester. Reg Burns, W Surrey. Andrew Tinning, Harrogate. K Midlands. G Pole, Merseyside. Stephen Murphy, Fife. Matthew Macay, Gwent. Nicol, Edinburgh. Stephen Wicks, Herts. Darren McSherry, Kent. Martin Besseling, Simon Williams, Dyfed. Graham Della, Nederlands. Jon Tipper, W Midlands. S London. Paul Roach, Derbyshire. Simon Kennett, Kent. James Hinchcliffe, Hull. Warner, Devon. Marc Holland, E Sussex.M Robert Woolley, Cheshire. Nigel Griffiths, Roberts, E Sussex. Paul Effinton, Notts. Lee Gwent. Philip Askew, Staines. David Lalor, Hodgson, Glos. Kevin Steer, Cornwall. London. Antonio F Candeias, Portugal. Richard Downer, Essex. I S Munslow, Mark Curley, London. Mr C Rogerson, Derbys. Andrew Paynter, Clwyd. Shropshire, Kwai Lam Li, London. PA TAU CETI Hariot, Holland. Noel Bafley, N Ireland. S Bacon, Suffolk, D Pinkman, Merseyside. Tom Williams, Avon. Phil S Irish, Shropshire. re. Vincent Campion, Ireland. Kevin Chitolie, Anthony Hughes, Shropshire. Simon Watts, London. Jason Caro, Cardiff. Amar Shah, Berks. Martin Smith, W Midlands. Andrew Essex. Dave Harry, Lancaster. Philip Wilson, Rahaman, Surrey. M Priestly, Lancs. Steven S Yorkshire. Andrew Ifejika, Glasgow. Carl Hirst, Notts. Neil Curtis, Gateshead. Martin Fraine, Manchester. M Bredesen, Leeds. Peverley, S Yorkshire. Matthew Reed, Nigel Ferris, Cornwall. Stephen Lewis, Nr Surrey. Philip Wrighton, Leicester. Adrian Bristol. Jon Bond, Cleveland. Mark Haines, Tanner, Germany. Sam Roads, London. London. John Leray, Cleveland. Paul Stuart Brown, London. Richard Sueiras, Wadsworth, Kent. Jarle Olsen, Norway. Hants. Steven Divers, Kent. David Baker, Nr Alle Allan Brown, Birmingham. Sheffield. John Chadwick, Cleveland Andrew Man, London. J Singh, Shrops. BATMAN Kenneth Banks, Glasgow. Ian Cook, Simon Wren, Hants. Layton Parslow, Bucks. Suffolk. Jamie Sunderland, Bristol. Ben Jelf, A MacDonald, Essex. Christopher Fraser, Derbyshire. Alex Muir, East Kilbride. London. Gillian Sparks, Lancs. Stephen BIG CAVE Milner, N Humberside. Antonio F Candeias, ADVENTURE Portugal. Mrs C Moore, Sheffield. Jonathan Hallowell, Cheshire. Mr AJ Bruce, Xavier Pick, York. Ben Holland, Middlesex. Gareth Deynon, Suffolk. Steven Merseyside. Angus Lee, Aberdeen. Jade Walton, Wallsend. Mrs C Middleton, Davey, Hackney. Gary Smith, Beeston. Clint Sheffield. Alvaro Ciglia, London. Burak Evans, Gent. Jonathan Mitchell, Babacan, Turkey. Perry Krell, West Bournemouth. Daniel Green, Radlett. Mark Germany. Martin Kool, Holland. Vibio Puddefoot Eckington. Lucie O'Brien, York. Vincenzo, Torino. Michael Wong, Cheshire. Kari Voorinne, Finland. Andrew Paynter, Per Fischer Olsen, Denmark. won? Whos the winner? Tuy next time "


"Daringly Original Arcade Adventure. It's What You've Come TURTWON: Whos the winner! Ty next time Enter Into The Magical World Of Druid. Experience The New And To Expect From Firebird ... Publishers Of The U.K.'s Most Exciting Software DRUID , .95 .95 Available now for Commodore 64 and Spectrum 48.128 and available soon for Amstrad. FIREBIRD MAIL ORDER Please se name of game machine Castors and quantity required Enclosed Crossed cheque/PO made payable to FIREBRO SOFTWARE AB offers are subject to availability. Orders are despatched promptly. Al prices inclusive of VAT and postage MAIL ORDER: AUNTIE KAY, \"FREEPOST FIREBIRD, FIRST FLOOR, 54-76 NEW OXFORD ST., LONDON WC1A 1PS. \"No stamp required Firebird is a Registered Trade Mark of British Telecommunications pic. FIREBIRD SOFTWARE FIRST FLOOR, 64-76 NEW OXFORD ST., LONDON WC1A 1PS "


") O . . rcade Action gets into gear once more as C+VG's Clare Edgeley road tests Atari's latest racing game Super Sprint lll. She also reviews Atari's Road Runner a game based on the famous T.V. cartoon. Que SPRINT III CLASH ROAD easant hottest brings in Formula One, track racing, even stunt car bash 'em ups aren't a new innovation by any means. Some like Pole Position and TX-lare wonderful, others are no more than tin pot affairs, seemingly hastily put together Road Fighter for instance. So when I went to see Atari's Super Sprint ill, didn't know what to expect It comes as a refreshing and pleasant surprise, and at the time of writing is the hottest game in the arcades. By that I mean it brings in lots of loot! Using the already successful multi-player feature pioneered in Gauntlet, Super Sprint lakes from one to three players simultaneously, all in direct competition with each other. And, And, of course, the usual as usual, it doesn't matter when hazards of oil slicks and traffic you join or leave the game. cones lurk round most comers. There are eight tracks to choose Avoid them. It's hairy stuff. And you from, ranging from a simple don't stay at the same level either, round-you-go-no-problems to the each time you drive over a golden intricate and downright impossible. Wrench your car gains just a little Take my advice and start on an bit oxtro-super traction, higher easy one, it takes a while to get speed, turbo acceleration, and it used to the very sensitive controls. goes on until you have a vehicle Unusually, for the better racing which is probably so souped up games -even though this doesn't that it is almost impossible to pretend to be a souped-up controll simulation the whole track is Unlike other racing games, displayed on screen. It doesn't there's a higher crash tolerance, so unfold in front of you as you whiz you can bash into other cars and round. That necessarily means that barriers without exploding on the cars have to be quite small, but impact. It happens to the best of us there's still plenty of room on the at some point. If it does, the car will track for a free-for-all go up in a spectacular whoosh of The speed at which you travel is flames. And to add a touch of the alarming, though you needn't drive unreal, your new one is delivered like a maniac with your foot flat on by chopper. the accelerator. If you're not Super Sprint lll's got so much careful, you'll find yourself tuming going for it. Fast and challenging. a full 360 degrees while negotiating a hairpin bend and lose the race to the competition Four laps make up each race and They're a real test of skill. But it's the way the tracks have been designed that makes this game really challenging. As you move onto harder tracks, hidden gates open and close giving access to short cuts if you're quick and agile enough, there are tunnels to drive through blind as the track doubles under itself-rather like a mini spaghetti junction, there are banked turns and even jump ramps. Producing a bicycle racing game must really test the programmers imaginations, I mean, there's not an awful lot you can do to make it exciting. The main ingredients are a bicycle, a rider and a road. Then perhaps some other cyclists to roce against and a few obstacles. And that less than inspiring description is Data East's Clash-Road, though thankfully the game is saved from disaster by some pretty graphics and one or two additional features. However, nobody wears the yellow jersey in this race especially Data East The idea is to get as far down the road as possible ahead of your rivals without flying off the bike an action which is spectacularly unreal. For the most port, the other cyclists are pretty harmless, though they're not above crowding you off the road. However, there are two or three thugs -all mohican haircut and huge chins who are full of dirty tricks. Their idea of sport is to steer you into the verge by throwing punches as they ride past. Nasty pieces of work. Luckily you can give back as good as you get, though you haven't much of a chance when it's one against two. Still, you can always accelerate or decelerate to avoid them. And of course you can jump. You'll need to, when you see the obstacles --sleeping it'll keep you on your toes, and it's just as much fun playing against the computer as with two others. Alari's come up trumps again HI-0050000 CLASE 1P-0039650 2P-0000000 CALCIO TRTTERIZZ22992 START "


". Yo looma o BEEP!! OXO HI000 CLASH-RORD 1P bo6030 TIME 00:36:18 b00000 CALORIE 1 ROAD RUNNER 18240 SEED METER policemen, manholes, logs and charms all have to be negotialed, To gain points you must steer into tortoises(i) which amble slowly across your path. And if you rido into the female jogger, she disappears and give you more points. Seams pretty pointless to me. Finally, there's the parrot. This flies down and lands on your head. I didn't stay alive long enough to find out whether that was a good or bad thing, but having played this dalt game, it wouldn't surprise me if cycling round the countryside with a bird on your head was considered lucky. There's not much more to say. The movement and background graphies are fairly smooth, and the gome gets horder, with larger and more frequent obstacles as you cycle further down the track An average game. Road Runner, the fastest cartoon character in the west has just dashed into the creadas, and in hot pursuit, as always, is that old rascal Wile E Coyote. Can you save this brainless bird from the dinner plate? Thanks to Alari who's licensed the whole caboodle from Warner Bros, you can now play the wingless wonder whenever you want. So on with the show. Beepl Beepl Zrooom! Splati That's roughly the way the game plays, at least with me at the controls. You, of course, play Road Runner with your partner or the computer controlling lil ol' Wile E hundred feet, you lose a life as feather-brained gadgets. The idea is to outrun the coyote, well. But that's not all folks. Miss Up and down gullies, around eat all the birdseed, and try to frip five piles of seed and you lose a hairpin bonds to feeter at the cliff him up in the traps he's sel you life anyway. So unfair... edges, crevices and obstacles to Sounds simple? It isn't. And then there are the hazardshop over, mines to dodge Road The graphics are wonderful, a you won't know what's hit you Runner's full of whacky humour. little on the small side but faithful half the time. Lorries scream past of The best way to gain points and cartoon replicas. Even the music, suicidal speeds, cannon shot time is to trick the coyote into his that silly ingle which you can never disguised as bird seed has a fatal own traps, and then watch as he remember at the end sequence, is altruction to the magnet-wielding goes up in smoke. Just like the the same as the cartoon clips. coyole and once the shot's cartoon, he's just recognisable by So with a loud Beepl Beep inside your lum, I'm afraid you'll be his shape, a charred and smoking you're off. Zig-zag up and down left without a feather and stuffed semblance of his former self running over the pile of birdseed into the bargain. Then there's the think Road Runner the cartoon and scoring points for each pile rocket which wile E. rides os he is wonderful and Atari's done a you pick up. Hang around for a zooms in for the kill -that's great job on the conversion. The second and you'll get grabbed by downright impossible to avoid; and game's so like the original, you the scruff of the neck by the old to add to his deadly arsenal there's could almost be watching it on TY. villain himself, and apart from the skateboard, the scissors on a Only this time, you're the bird being dragged back a few spring and a host of other equally brain SEED METER 6330 res STAGE 2 I ME 01:00:28 LOFIE TEATS ALE TOATS GOAL "


"EXTRA BITS BY ROBERT Contact Banbury Business SCHIFREEN the sound of barking dogs! Computers on 0295 720812 for The whole system is very FREE WP FOR Hi there! Extra Bits is back more details. Business well made and sounds brilliant SPECTRUM with a round up of all that's computers? So that's what just ask the person who new in the world of hardware business people use their kept trying to tear me away Saga's range of keyboards for and peripherals for your micros for! from it at the recent the Spectrum has recently micro. If there's any type of Commodore Show in London! increased. The latest is the add-on that you'd like C64 MUSIC model 2001 which uses reviewed here then drop me a EXPANSION YOU READ IT infra-red light beams to link it line care of the magazine. to the computer, instead of a Also, if you've spent your wire. Just like the remote HERE FIRST! Walk into just about any hard-earned cash on a product computer or hi-fi shop at the the control on a TV. So, for , As I predicted in July's C+VG, that you now think was a waste moment and you'll usually find hent and you'll usually find Commodore have launched you can use your Spectrum or money, use this page to tell without having to sit down at a crowd of buddinde musicians the b4C in America. This is a the manufacturer just why you the table. If your neighbour don't think much of what around Commodore's latest new version of the 64, and is has a 2001 keyboard as well, expected in the UK soon. By they're producing! offering. The Music you could always try pointing Espansion System is a full saying \"soon\", Commodore your keyboard through his REAL 61-note electronic keyboard mean that they don't want to window and taking control of bring in the new machine until which turns your 64 into a his computer! SOFTWARE pretty sophisticated they've cleared out stocks of Oh yes, and Saga are giving The most unusual attraction at synthesizer. The software the old one. away a copy of The Last the recent Beeb show was a allows you to write, edit and The new machine looks like Word word processing special printer ribbon that lets save your own compositions, a 128, with a stylish, sloping program with the keyboard, you design and produce your and play them back. The white case. The operating which normally retails for own iron-on transfers for interface, software and system used is called Geos around . Saga are on 04862 t-shirts and other clothes. keyboard costs  and an which, like GEM, uses icons as 22977. It looks just like a normal optional sound sampler is on the Macintosh and Atari Epson ribbon, but contains another . The sampler 520ST. Bundled software COMMODORE special ink. What you do is allows you to program the includes word processor, a design a picture on your micro keyboard with drawing package and comms INTERFACE I n using, say, AMX Art, then print any day-to-day system, as well as a desktop If you're stuck with a the design on a sheet of paper sound. So, for with notepad, calculator and Commodore 1541 disk drive, using the special ribbon. example, you clock/calendar. There's no you may think that Then, you put the printout could news yet on the 3.5 inch disk Commodore's drives have on a T-shirt, handkerchief etc, record the drives that were rumoured last always been slow. Actually, and iron over it. The image dog time. that's not the case. Early drives gets transferred to the cloth, barking and it won't wash off. and then The ribbon contains black compose a ink and costs around ten tune pounds. If you want to produce using colours, there are special pens available to colour in the transfer before you iron it onto the clothes. "


"All Amstrad show was a  adaptor that converts your Amstrad colour monitor into a pretty good colour TV. Get all the gen on 0493 602926. used on the Pet featured a parallel IEEE (as opposed to Centronics) interface which was very fast and, in later models, allowed up to a megabyte (a thousand K) on each disk. Brainbox Ltd have now brought out an interface that lets you use these old Pet drives with the 64 and 128 machines. So, if you have upgraded to a 64 or 128 from a Pet, and still have the old drive, then this may be what you're looking for. The interface also allows you to link up to an IEEE printer, which some Commodore dealers may be trying to get rid of at the moment for pretty good prices. The interface plugs into the cartridge port on a 64 or 128 and has a through-connector so that you can still use cartridges even if the interface is connected. It costs just under  and details can be had from Brainbox in Liverpool on 051 220 2500. AMX MASTER MOUSE The AMX Mouse is now available for the Beeb Master series computers. It costs .95 and includes a special ROM and AMX Art software. Pagemaker is an optional extra. Mice are becoming fairly popular at the moment, and many software houses are adding the facility to their programs to allow you to use a mouse instead of the keyboard. Your local dealer should be able to get a mouse for you. If not, call AMX on 0925 413501 and ask them where your nearest stockist is. They should also be able to supply you with an up-to-the-minute list of software that can be used with your electro-rodent. JOYSTICK ADAPTOR If your trigger finger's getting Ace was the first micro to use a bit sore, here's news of an Forth instead of Basic. adaptor that converts any However, the machine didn't joystick into an auto-fire one. really take off and you can Brittania Software's Auto Fire . now get the 16K machine for adaptor costs .95 and, they just  from Boldfield say, works with any joystick Computing. So, if you fancy and computer. learning a new language, you It contains a special may prefer to get an Ace program to find out how the instead of buying a Forth computer reads the joystick, interpreter for your micro. It and then makes itself may even work out cheaper. compatible. Nifty, eh? All enquiries to Boldfield Ask your dealer for more Computing on 0223 61175. info, or contact Britannia direct in Cardiff on 0222 MORE FOR 481135. THE AMSTRAD SPEECH FROM Remember all those interfaces SETANTA BEAT YOUR from DK \"Tronics that plugged into each other on Setanta claim that their NEIGHBOURS your Spectrum and made the Speech Synthesizer for the machine about eight feet long? Amstrad CPC machines is the If you want to get your own most powerful on the market. I Well, they've now done the back on the neighbours, this same with the Amstrad CPC heard it at the show recently, may be just what you're and it really was attracting machines. looking for. Cheetah have Each of their interfaces and quite a bit of attention. If you launched a version of their add-ons is in an identical want to hear it for yourself, ask Spectrum drum machine for Setanta on 01 733 7014. Oh, plastic box which plugs into the Amstrad. AmDrum costs the machine or, if you already and Setanta was a legendary .95 and will convert a CPC hero in Irish mythology in case have one in the machine, into micro into a drum synthesizer. you wondered... the interface. There are eight different synthesised sounds available If you have the complete NEXT TIME range, you'll probably have with the unit. Different versions of the software, to difficulty finding a desk top In the next gripping provide more sounds, will be big enough to put your installment of Extra Bits, ALL available on cassette soon. computer on! the news about the major The unit plugs into the micro The list currently includes add-on launches planned for and a lead links it to the back light pen, 64K expansion, Christmas. And news of some of your hi-fi or mixer. The speech synthesizer, Ram Disk Commodore-compatible and 256K expansion. software operates either in monitors that are a fair bit record mode, which allows On display in a corner of DK cheaper than the official you to compose, edit and then Tronics stand at the recent offerings. play a rhythm, or in real time mode which allows you to play live by tapping the keys on the keyboard. AmDrum should be at your local dealer now, and also at Boots and John Menzies. So open the windows wide and start playing. ACE NOT QUITE DEAD QUITE If you want to learn Forth, it may be cheaper to buy a new micro than a Forth interpreter. Forth, you may remember, is a computer language that runs much faster than Basic but is a bit harder to learn. The Jupiter "


"TIL ATARET TRETIEN After neglecting the BBC a little, we've found a game that looks set to be one of the hottest on the Beeb this year. Jim Douglas has the story. And it's all in colour too! What more could you ask? The tortuous heat of the day was companies. The main reason for my getting to me. Another red-hot story trip, though, was to see their new in the bag, I was relaxing, feet atop game, GalaForce, in action. the only operational typewriter in the office. A memo landed on my desk. It Exclusive Preview: was only paper, but it carried a lot of GalaForce weight. It bore the gold seal of the Editor's Office. Machine: BBC/Electron I read it: \"Douglas, it's time to Supplier: Superior \" check out the BBC World. We haven't Software covered it much. Get over to Leeds Price: .95 / .95 and see what those Superior people (BBC disc) screen, chances are you will be Astro-Blaster, the amazing coin-ap bombarded by a horde of nasty machine which could be found in just multi-coloured creatures, with very about every game arcade in Britain. little on their miniscule minds, other Little blue horrors zoom back and than your destruction! You are forth, dropping lower and lower granted three men to begin with, and every second. these are supposed to last you Green aliens are around the top of through the siteen waves of nasties, the screen, trapping your man in a Fat chance. Even the extra mand hail of gunfire, before diving down to granted at 20,000 points won't do smash you in a head-on collision much to help unless you put in an After every four waves, a awfully large amount of practice Space-invaders style layout win The graphics in the game are appear. This part is probably the great. The aliens move atwach speed, toughest part of the game. Each alien though, that it's hard to make ont takes about five shots to before exactly what they look like! excploding. They work their way When the BBC is programmed down the screen with frightening well, it can work Wonders Kevin reliability! Edwards has written some very The program has been very tightly clever stuff in the part working on coded. It works in Mode 2. Now, if special loaders for cassette games any of you have tried to write a game and disc protection. This is his first in Mode 2, you will understand quite games program that I have seen, how amazing this is. For a start, though. you've only got 12K left to work in! There are sixteen zones, each A problem that we found when made up from a selection of differing using the game on a TV instead of a aliens and attack waves. In the monitor was that the screen tended to background, hundreds of little stars jump around quite a bit. This could twinkle away and scroll down the have merely been owing to the rather screen. You are fortunate to be armed battered state of our C+VG with a multi-firing cannon. You can communal TV, but it's something to play with either the keyboard or bear in mind. The last thing you need MOHA apo as you are approaching the end of a wave is the screen to lurch into black and white and start vertical scrolling! SOOOO P are up to.\" And that's how it all happened. The following morning, I was sitting alongside my accomplice, C+VG Ad man \"Chubby\" Williams on a train pointing North Superior Software is now quite & large business, and is probably the only remaining BBC Software hottest to have been in on the boom from the very man. Back in 1982, Richard Hanson (no connection with the adventure of the same name) set up the firm, armed with very little other than his degree in Computational Science. Now Richard is the Managing Direction, and still bears the same loyalty to the BBC and Electron as his partners The company has grown up a lot since those days in the dim, distant past. Now they're putting the final touches to conversions from other xxxxxxxx Written by Kevin Edwards, the game seems to offer all the action and violence which BBC owners in particular seem to crave. When we joystick and the explosions are visited, the program was nearly animated, too. completed, and looked pretty Of course the game features all the damned impressive. GalaForce is in usual features, such as flags to show A feature which will please all the classic mould of so many arcade how many screens you have parents, concerned about the state of games that have gone before it. This completed, a high-score table and their BBC keyboard, is that you can time, a computer conversion seems to demo mode. simply hold the fire button down to have on tripped many of its Aliens are well drawn and produce a continuous stream of fire, predecessors animated. There is hardly any flicker instead of having to hammer away Positioned in a small, single-seater to be seen, and they hurtle around the for hours on end. space ship at the bottom of the screen at amazing speeds, bombing GalaForce can hardly be described screen, it's the old \"you against a with relentless accuracy and as the most brain-teasing game in the horde of alien Killers syndrome. The frequency. A pleasant tune tootles world, but then it isn't supposed to be. game draws on many arcade away while the demo mode is in It's simple to get into, fast and fun to machines and BBC games too. The operation, and an inspiring chord is play. It'll be in the shops at the end of closest program to this is Zalaga, struck as you launch into the start of August. from Aardvark which in turn, drew each new wave. Graphics its inspiration from Galaga, the The presentation of the game is of Sound G+VG arcade game. a very high-standard. Some of the Value HIT! As soon as you appear on the attack waves reminded me of Playability & O CO CO CO "


"WHAT? WHO? WHEN? WHERE? BANG THECOMPUTERGAMESVIDEOFILMSRECORDS TELEVISIONNEWSINTERVIEWSPEOF LEPERSONALITIES HAPPENINGSCOMPETITIONSRELEASESCHARTS THOUGHTSOPINIONSJOKESFACTSFICTIONMUSIC EXPLOSION "


"RESULTS COMPETITION ON dW COMPUTERS CASINOISIO & Back in June we featured the work of Belgian artist Steinar Lund, the man who customises computers with weird and wonderful designs. We also offered you the chance to win a Spectrum Plus customised to your own design. Here's what happened. The talented reader who will be getting a customised Spectrum is 14-year-old David Renwick, of Hornchurch in Essex. His was the winning design picked by Steinar Lund out of a monster post bag. Steiner says: \"I have chosen David's design because the intense eyes in the face give a centre of focus to the painting and, as the face is partly obscured by the keyboard, a sense of mystery is added. This is accentuated by the light bursts and clouds emanating from behind the keys. \"So the design incorporates the keyboard layout without having to embellish it with painting, which is not desirable because the keys carry information and are in constant use.\" Also printed here are a selection of other entries. Zobb 1299 TIM MEWS SESSUYU BARBRA DAWSON ofta CHRIS LAPERSONNE COMPETITION Ay NYE JAYESH GHEDIA LEO REINDERS RESULTS RESULTS "


"BANG WHAT Bang is the new weekly newspaper for Computer Kids, tying the software world of the monitor screen to the outside world of video, films and music. BANG will be aggressive, demanding, humerous, investigative, sympathetic, colourful and spontaneous and will become a focus for the best freelancers and personalities from the entire world of entertainment. WHO WHEN Specialist Retail Press publishers of CTW Britain's Top Trade Weekly. BANG will be launched amid the razamataz of the PCW Show at Olympia on Sept 3rd 1986. WH Smiths, Menzies, major news agents, news-stands, and corner shops nationwide. BUY BANG EVERY WEDNESDAY from Sept 3rd — 40p cheap "


"WE CAN BE HEROES Mel Croucher has always been at the forefront of computer entertainment. Ever since his first early tinkerings with a ZX81 Mel's productions have always been to say the least different. Now he's pointing the way forward again with an entirely new concept. Don't believe us? C+VG's editor Tim Metcalfe couldn't believe his eyes... ver wished you could play lead guitar with Dire Straits, dance along with Phil Collins, knock bricks out of The Wall with Pink Floyd or even play the hero in your favourite movie? If you've got a computer, a video machine and Mel's little Black Box, your dreams could all come true. Sooner than you think. For the past couple of years Mel Croucher has been working to create the ultimate computer controlled entertainment. He wanted it to combine real video images with computer generated graphics and allow YOU to take part in events and adventures you never thought possible. Now Mel's idea is a reality and gets its first public showing at the Personal Computer World Show in a month's time. The first interactive video production from Mel's new company, called Scorpio Interactive, will combine music videos with computer generated games. The games themselves are simple but remember this is just a demonstration of the tremendous potential of Mel's Magic Box. The musicians featured on the first Scorpio Interactive production are Dire Straits, Phil Collins, Pink Floyd, Godley and Creme, David Bowie and good old Elvis Presley. In each of the six \"games\" you take part in something relating to what's going on in the video. The title of these games will be See Me, Hear Me and Touch Me. For example, in the Elvis track you have to stop him getting put behind bars as he sings the classic Jailhouse Rock. As David Bowie sings Space Oddity you have to help keep an orbiting astronaut alive by maintaining his life support system. While images from Pink Floyd's epic movie The Wall appear on screen you take part in a serious Breakout game unless you want to become another Brick in the Wall. You help Hary and Sal stack microwaves and freezers as Dire Straits sing Money for Nothing and dance along with Phil Collins as he sings Can't Hurry Love. If you fail to keep up with old Phila long music hall hook appears and yanks you off the \"stage\". How does all this happen? Well it all comes down to the fact that you can combine video images and a computer program on one very ordinary video tape. You can use VHS, Beta or the new Video 8 format. The difficult part is synchronising the computer bits with the video bits. That's where Mel starts working his own particular brand of technical magic which, understandably, he doesn't really want people to know about just yet. If you've seen Mel's early bit of computer magic, Deus Ex Machina, the first and so far only \"game\" to have a synchronised soundtrack, you'll remember the countdown technique which keeps the computer and video parts running in time with each other. Mel has developed the interactive system on an MSX machine but by the time the first public showing comes around it should be working on the Spectrum, Commodore and Amstrad. Mel won't say how much it will cost to get your hands on his magical black box or even when it will be available in the shops. His reluctance is because he doesn't want to make vague promises and then disappoint. All he would say is it should available some time in the New Year. Mel won't say how much it will cost to get your hands on his magical black box or even when it will be available in the shops. His reluctance is because he doesn't want to make vague promises and then disappoint. All he would say is it should available some time in the New Year. Scorpio Interactive has secured the rights to several major films which may get the treatment and there's the chance of a simultaneous release of a single/interactive video with a major band. The idea of playing a part in a feature film sounds mind-blowing. The game, according to Mel, can go on for just as long as the player wants. \"This is what I wanted Deus to be,\" says Mel, «But at the time we didn't have the technology. Now anything could happen!\" Mel adds: \"It's a very new field as far as I am concerned. It's old Croucher taking a flier again.\" The potential of Mel's system is enormous. Imagine playing an adventure with real pictures and real sound, or actually taking part in a film. The possibilities are endless. If you've got a simple home micro the future is at your fingertips... ..JUST FOR ONE DAY "


"They knew it as Hell You knew it as Freund Re-enact one of the most bitter conflicts of modern times. One of the most controversial episodes in the history of warfare. In this tactical wargame take charge of the combined forces of the American and South Korean armies in their bloody struggle against the elusive jungle fighters of the Viet Cong and battle hardened regulars of the North Vietnamese Army. Direct the operations of your massed regiments-infantry, artillery, paratroopers, marines, rangers and air cavalry in six historical encounters. Patrol dense jungle in search of the underground strongholds of an enemy who, like an apparition, appears, makes bloody contact then slips away to confuse again. Relive the bitter street fighting that ravaged the city of Hue during the Tet Offensive. This most tragic of human conflicts resulted in a surprising defeat for the forces of democratic freedom. This is your opportunity to change the history of the world, to halt the progress of the communist war machine and thwart their plans for world domination CBM 64/128 cassette .95 disk .95 ATARI disk .95 E GOLDE U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX Tel: 021 356 3388 "


"Conquest Steers You From Victory To Victory. It's What You've Marvel At The Solid 3-D Graphics, Thrill As Your Action-packed Pursuit Of Come To Expect From Firebird... Publishers Of The U.K.'s Most Exciting Software TAPE .95 TAPE STARSTRIKE I Disco DISC .95 Available now for the Amstrad series. FIREBIRD MAIL ORDER Please state name of game, machine, cassette or disk and quantity required Enclosed crossed cheque/PO made payable to FIREBIRD SOFTWARE A oners are subject to a bility Orders we despatched prompty. Al prices inclusive of VAT and postage MAIL ORDER: AUNTIE KAY, \"FREEPOST FIREBIRD, FIRST FLOOR. 64-76 NEW OXFORD ST LONDON WCA 1 Firebird is a Registered Trade Mark of British Telecommunications ple FIREBIRD SOFTWARE FIRST FLOOR, 64-76 NEW OVENANT LAINA une "


"TIGDOG HUNTERSON MUST DET OTISS! MB-CON! GET MELISSA CLEAR! DON'T PANIC 115.MELISSA E'LL SAVE YOU I THINK...) GOOD GRIEF THIS 15 DISGUST quired 111 rices "


"SHE'S FREE MR.KALLIBER!  , VIS YOU GO... TRY AND GET HELP. BUT MR.KALLIDAMMIT, OTISS. I SAY!! NOT A CHANCE, SCUM! WITHOUT THAT SCYTHE YOU'RE JUST ANOTHER HELPLESS. PATHETIC -WOUGH! WHAT...ARE... you... DOING..?! TAKING...YOUR LIFE ... WITH MY HANDS, YES, YES.. . S KALLIBERO UAAGH.NO.! NOT... BEFORE IVE TAKEN YOURS... FOOL...* "


"How much should you pay for your child's education? Making sure your children get the best possible education can be an expen sive business. Yet, by spending just a little extra in the right way, you can afford to give your child that extra edge in certain vital subjects. A Casio scientific calculator could make a tremendous dillerence to your child's potential in maths, for example, science, economics, engineering, and a whole range of number-related subjects. Yet it can cost as little as .95. That's the price of the wallet-style Casio fx-250, with 59 functions (43 of them scientific), an 8 digit LCD display and independent memory. It will see your son or daughter safely through the GCSE syllabus. For just a few pounds more, he or she could graduate to the Casio fx-85M, a solar powered model with battery back-up for memory retention and 63 scientific functions out of a total of 79. Or to the fx-920, another solar-powered calculator with 6l scientific functions and 77 functions altogether. Casio offer you not just value, but the largest and best-selling range of scienti fic calculators in the country. So for still higher achievements, there's a whole selection of brilliant calculators like the 135-step programmable fx-200P. This retains everything in its seven memories and 4 programme areas even with the power switched ofl. And with no less than 145 functions, 82 of them scientific, it costs just 122.95. which isn't much to pay for the chance of a better than average education. * 200 A CARD 12345678 723456-99 DERE ARDCDEFF 1723456-99 JOUUOD JOUDU DOUDO II ]]] j ODOOD WOOD 2099 1]]) ]]]] ]]]]  ADORO DDDDD ORM JJJ JJJ INJINI \"]]]ndao ]]]000 OOO a f-920 14-85M CASIO 200P memarie B Conversions and Statistic redhatterhack-up\" se conversion 920 77 total functions. Solar Poweredagarithms. Trivare fri Statistic digit62 ) 15.95 RRPinc. VAT) I 10 digit 10+ 2) 22.95 (RRP in VAT) -250 59 total functions agarithms. Try are the Statistic digit 6 ) Fractions and improper fractions. Engineering her Statistics digit(+3) 15.95 RRP im VAT) Recommended p ANGOS. BOOTS, COMET DOONS LASKYS. JOHN LEWIS PARTNERSHIP JOHN MENUS RYMAN SELCES WH SMITHUNDERWOODW P 145 totalfunctions. I stupprogrammable non(RRP in VAT) ISM Total function Solar p a tien ts E NT WOLWORTH A a les. Check Heffers "


"OH! MYS HEAD HURTS!! THEN AGAIN, MY HEAD ALWAYS IT'S RED! HEY, RED. YOU I NEVER MIND HIM... WE'VE GOT TO GET MR.KALLIBER 15 IN SERIOUS TROUBLE... YEAH... THERE'S A CREATURE UP THERE... ITATE X... JUST SLLW  WHOLE.. IT EVEN TRIED TO EAT MS.MEL 155A! WE SAVED HER, BUT... ... MR.KALLIBER INSISTED THAT HE STAY ANDSAMT THE CREATURE YOU LEFT HIM UP THERE ALOWE WE'VE GOT TO GET BACK INSIDE... WHOLE...SGULP JE WHAT... THAT... WON'T BE..NECESSARY... IT'S OVER. PLEASE SLOSE THE JORS THE BUG HUNTERS 1986 JERRY TRIS. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. ANEW BUG HUNTERS ADVENTURE BEGINS NEXT MONTH! "


"ONLY FOR BIG GAME HUNTERS You need lightning reflexes, nerves of steel and plenty of brain power when you tackle today's big games. That's why you'll find COMMODORE USER your favourite ally. We don't just review the Megagames first, but give you maps, hints, tips and inside information to help you tame the most difficult of beasts. Taman The new look... COMMO USER MIEL ON SALE THE 26th OF EVERY MONTH EMPIRE SOFTWARE SPECTRUM RRP Price AMTEAD 675 MEGASTREAM LIMITED WE GUARANTEE BEST TITLES AT DISCOUNT PRICES AMSTRAD RRPP GASINET ROYO THE DROO 998 NOT GAMES WAY OF THE SURGETH MELTDOWN WORLD CUP HEAVY OF THE CARNIVAL 675 LEADERBOARD AXS 675 SHOGUN   SLAPSHOT  SLFNT SERVICE  INT KARATE  Hits VOL 23 TIMETRAX PENERANDT SUMMANDO STRE DAVIS BRUCE LFF COSMIC BATTLE GHOSTS & CHESS 4 SWIONER 9.96 6.75 HEAVY OF THE SAUZE 996 6.75 CARO URIDRIM WEST BANK 895 600 1495 11.50 STRIKE FOAS 1495 11 50 IER 9.95 5.15 KUNG RI MASTER 995 575 REVENGE 896 600 TRUST WE ENSURE A FAST AND EFFICIENT SERVICE Please add 50p Postage and Packing Overseas orders add 750 per title. Mail order only Cheques or postal orders (sterling only). Made payable to Dept. C.V.G. 1st Floor, Commerce House, 146/150 Commercial Street, London E1 GNU Undi Hard Bal Krught Rider 80570 Kung Master 995 740 Desert Fox Barry Mc Boong 23.90 EG Tau Ceti 9.95 748 World Cup Cara They Sold a Million II 9,96 745 Saboteur The Weekend 995 745 oder 8.95 6.70 Knigham 7.95 80 Heavy on the Magick Rock W Wrestle Seethawk Gladiator 7.56 5.30 Zeus Pug Pong 796 Salon CRRC 9 740 Ted Lang B. 70 Back to the Pune Eugh Rider 18 S 9.98 750 ondeck Ping Pong lord of the Rings Alen Highway One Beret Studio 8.6 70 Bender 151 RMS Titanic 146 120 Trade Co. 9.6 765 Probe 9.95740 Way of the Tiger 9.96740 Superbowl 7.95 5.30 Brod Planets 9.96 786 140 Commando 5.90 Mermaid Mactress 1011 Sartre Sa Comba Computer Farlight Chical Mass RRP Pechback A re Computer Heavy the Magic 96 Qube Somblack Roller Cow The Young One Mantronix 7.6 925 Lugar Thai Boxing Beve Davies Snooker World Cup Carnival domblack World Cup .30 745 ADVERTISEMENT INDEX 6.96 7.96 796 796 5.20 3.8 5.50 5.90 ICUPS Mermaid Madness Dragons Chan Goblin They wa Mite Livingstone Logic Sales Addictive Games....... Arcade Aligata Argus Bang Bargain Bude of the Regies Ghost 7.85 5.90 Peperty RRP Price 83745 MSI 14    RRP Price 1735 14.96 Mailsoft MH0854 Megastream... Melbourne House MCU World Cup Carnival 23 9.96 9.96 8.96 9.36 9.36 740 Rebel Planet 740 Commando 6.70 Bomb Jack 7.60 Moon Cresta 140 Lord of the Rings Back to the Pare 9.38245 Way of the Tiger Computer Has 6 15.96 1130 Ping Pong Konami) 9.96 745 Render 101485 Theatre Europe Charnwood.. Cut Price Database Design Design IFC 3 11  40,77 Mikrogen Micropool Mirrorsoft Mosaic Ocean Odin SJB Disks Shekhana Software Projects Softek Supasoft Titan Books US Gold 105 Domark Elite Empire... Firebird Gremlin GB Microland Gargoyle Hewson JR Software ...85 996 1 Way of Pub Game 9.95 740 Commonwealth Game 995 745 Monopoly Please send SAE for a catalogue of games for Spectrum, Commodore and M.S.X. and all the other computers Please make cheque's or postal order's payable to Empire Software. EMPIRE SOFTWARE DEPT CVG9 118A Palmers Road, New Southgate, London N11 ISL Telephone enquiries welcome. Phone: 01-361 1933 81 68833 81 "


"Milango COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU So, you want to know the What's the matter with as I agree with Melissa that this other game of Bobby Patterson. ... this ... creature deserves to you lot? The last Well, being a loyal Eagle reader, be soundly punished for the I will tell you claims that she made on being time I got my hands It all started when Bobby was the only female tipster, and on Mailbag 1 given a note by Martin, who much as I applaud told Bobby only to open it if wholeheartedly Melissa's thought I would anything strange happened. decision to take action on the become an over The next day, Martin matter, I feel I must warn her disappeared, so Bobby read the that if you go to Ludlow to night sensation, note. It said that Martin was dispense justice accordingly a cult figure, trapped in the computer and she will be walking straight into Bobby had to play 10 games a trap. A horrible, loathsome mobbed in the and the Ultimate game. So he and totally unscrupulous trap. streets, deluged typed the code and began to You see it has come to my play. with fan letters. attention through channels These games would then would be only too happy to Do you know how become reality with Bobby in divulge should you wish to the action. If he won all the interrogate me on them (faint) many I received? NOTHING. games, Martin would be free. that H Smith does not exist. Zilch. You lot must do better now. But no on believed Bobby when She is, in fact, only a cartoon he told them about Martin. He character and is furthermore, if first played Zyklon Attack, as a you study the picture of her I read your magazine for the another. I am slowly going sort of practice and won. Then clasping the champagne bottles first time (June issue) and berserk! I craved for The Eve of Martin's mum and dad threw a rather badly drawn one at found it very enjoyable. I will the Moon. Just like an the computer away as they that. Therefore-be warned. make sure I get the next issue, addiction. Can you please thought it was a bad thing, not Lord only knows what they but first, I feel that you may be enlighten me? Where is Beyond knowi knowing that Martin was inside. have got skulking in wait for able to help me. So prepare now? When will the game be Then Bobby took it home and you down there but the mere yourself for one of the strangest released? You are my lost hope continued to play the games. fact that they have not shown it tales you have heard for quite -I have tried everybody elsel Before the computer was rather suggests to me that it is some time. can think of please help! thrown away, he played Wizard something underhand, \"Software\" is now almost a SJ Harding, of Wor and won. treacherous and sly. cliche, as is the phrase \"a Staffs At home now, he played If you wish to use me as a great game\" but, out of the Otiss replies: Beyond has been Pastfinder and won. Next came human shield I am only too seemingly bottomless depths of bought by Firebird and have Rescue on Fractalus, he won happy to offer my services. the software market, I have moved offices. As for Eye of the again then came The Great And all I ask for this found two software items which Moon, Beyond says it won't be American Cross Country road information (apart from the have no equal, they are utterlv. ready before Christmas. Race, Ghostbuster and Walls of knowledge that Melissa is now completely and undeniably Jericho, which he won. But aware of my miserable brilliant. then, came Desert Fox, he lost! existance) is a signed picture of They are both for the I have been reading C+VG for . He was then sent to the Melissa which I will place in a Spectrum, they are both from about two and a half years, and It two and a half years, and nightmare zone. He met Martin, position of honour in my the same software house, and have never seen a review as and the zone was where things humble dwelling. Grovelingly they are both penned by the disgraceful as your one about kept killing them, but they and obsequiously yours fantastically, superb Pentagram from Ultimate. To reformed and kept on being Rex V Barnes, programmer Mike Singleton. describe the graphics as killed. This went on forever. But, Bromley These games, if you haven't \"nothing special\" is ridiculous. then Bobby challenged the Otiss replies: We also already guessed, are The Lords Ultimate were the pioneers of computer and he was sent to suspected the said H Smith was of Midnight and its sequel 3D animation and have play Shoot-Out in the Wild nothing more than the figment Doomdark's Revenge. Late produced brilliant games since West. He won this and so of someone's imagination. 1984, I discovered that there Knight Lore was made. returned to reality. Fancy challenging Miss Melissa was to be a third and sadly final It was quite obvious to me, Next came Psi-5 Trading to mud wrestling! Not that \"epic\" game using the that the reveiwer was basing Company which he won again. Melissa is not capable of going wonderful landscaping the review on the similarity of The story then returned to the for the best of two falls, two technique-Eye of the Moon. Ultimate's games, not on the nightmare zone and Martin, submissions or a knockout Eagerly phoned the software actual game reviewed. If where he found a once-chance while up to her cute neck in house-Beyond and enquired Pentagram is such a bad game, tunnel. He chose a game on a mud. But it's just not lady-like, when it was to be released. how can you justify your marks spinning wheel, and he gained is it. But never fear we're September 1985, they said. for Mantronix which appear to freedom only if he won. He working on something which Well, September came and be very similar to the Ultimate played Uggabullon, a caveman will expose the truth about went with no sign of the game. I standard of games? game, which he lost. Bobby is Miss Smith to the whole world. phoned them again Easter 1986. The Pentagram review was a now all set to play Silent Guess what? Easter passed with gross injustice to the game and Service. lown what must be, in my no sign of it. it should be reviewed properly! I hope this is enough opinion, the best home Then the curious events Andrew Elliott, information for you. computer to be put on the began to occur. Beyond no Cleveland Mayank Patel, market. It is, of course, the Oric. longer answered the phone, or Otiss replies: Nobody would Surrey, Sadly, due to bad marketing my letters to London or Market dream of denying that Ultimate Otiss replies: Have I blacked and software problems, it never Harborough. Nobody seemed has produced a great range of out or something? What does did catch on. to know where they were. games. But, even with the this letter mean! I'm not saying that the Oric is immediately assumed the fatal threat of Big Red sitting on him, a rubbish computer, far from it. tragedy bankruptcy but our reviewer still sticks to his Today in the pages of Crash, 1 There are a number of mail then, in the shops, I suddenly verdict on Pentagram. read with a glow of pride, of order companies which offer a noticed a new release by Obviously you don't agree, Melissa's challenge to the wide range of software and Beyond and then another and which is your right, Andrew. wretched usurper Smith. Much hardware. In 1984 Oric kept killing nd kept on bever. But Kepormen is wer "


"computers were best-sellers in months. These include Wantirna megabytes. Highest graphics France and number two in 1984. Playground 21, Damsel in Australia resolution is 672 by 512 and can And today the Oric is doing very Distress, Gubbie and Xenon III Otiss replies: Informed sources have up to 256 colours on the well in France So the Oric is from IJK software and an Oric close to nobody in particular screen at the same time. Stereo far from a lost cause. version of the Quill Hardware tell me the two games are sound with four voices. There must be thousands of support in the form of different. Incidentally, Rob Fantastic editing facilities. Eight proud Oric owners who feel peripherals and repair is also Hubbard just did the music on function keys. For more serious they are being left out in the still available. the Martech game. users it has a built in cold and all alone. Computer Gary Ramsay, wordprocesser and a fully magazines don't want to know 1.O.U.G. Wise Oracle, Master of the expandable VIA 64 way about the Oric. I have not seen 1 Kingsway Cres, Seven Hidden Paths, this one interface. It can convert as much as a review in the past Burnage, who is unworthy even to play Spectrum programs to run on it year. Manchester, thy cast-offs would humbly ask (with added software) and has This has spurred me on to M19 1GA help from thee. many more features. If other produce a 16 page top quality The task in question is readers wish to obtain more newsletter which is totally I am a Sinclair Spectrum 128 Exodus Ultima Ill. I have information from the devoted to the Oric. It features owner. I have had a few of them completed most of my destiny independent enterprise user software reviews, news, charts, and I think they are fab. I am not but still I cannot find the shrines group write of them at I.E.U.G. hints, tips and adventure. new to computing as I have where I must pray. Orcs Blood, I 12 White Gates, 100 Station Oric owners need never be about 6 years experience, so, say, the Wizard in the Party is at Road, New Barnet, Herts, EN5 left out in the cold. A year's should know what I am talking level 99 and still has no more 1QB subscription is only .50 for six about. I am getting very angry magic points than when he John Foster issues. For more details send a with those sloppy people who started at level 1! Sheffield S.A.E. to Keith Thompson, Your write into magazines to moan I hope you see a favourable Oric Newsletter, 41 Morden about the incompatibilities of 48 future in store for my party, that What's all this that I have Gardens, Mitcham, Surrey, CR4 and 128 games. The games that we may advance further toward been reading? C+VG isn't the 4DH. I have come across that don't thy exulted status. best computer magazine in the PS: We would like to say that work with the 128 are Robin Owen the Druid world. What is wrong with its we are not responsible for the of the Wood, and Sky Fox Bletchley new look? Nothing of course, errors within the newsletter that tha's it just two Otiss replies: Alas, Holy Druid, think it makes the magazine may appear from time to time. I am getting so angry that! my disk loadeth not, nor am I look a lot better. C+VG's new hope you like the newsletter. have set up a Spectrum 128 blessed with clues. See even! look makes it a lot easier to spot Keith Thompson, helpline. This service is free of can write like ace adventurer on the shop shelves, so why all Mitcham charge, but, please when you KC. the moaning. There are only Otiss replies: Alas, poor Oric write to me, PLEASE enclose a three minor things wrong and etc etc. Thanks for the stamped addressed envelope. Is your Adventure writer they are: newsletter, Keith. We would This helps me to send letters Keith Campbell the Keith 1-how many mistakes can also like to say we is nit quicker. If you wish to enclose a referred to in the Spitting Image you put in a magazine at one respunsible for the horrors wot program on cassette that does song? The resemblance time. might appear in C+DG from tim not work then the best way to between Keith's almighty self 2you spelt my name to tim. I hop you lick the send it is by 'Recorded and the slightly over-muscular wrong the last time. magazine. Delivery. The address is as gentleman with the brain the 3I would like to see some follows: size of pea, who walks on as Atari reviews, not a lot, just With reference to Robert Scott Hatwood they mention your name, is some. It would stop me buying Hatwood Hi-Tech Software Ltd Cook's letter, there is indeed an a hopeless game just because astounding! organisation for Oric users. The 128k Helpline John Manifold, the graphics look good. Independent Oric Users Club 156 Leinster Ave Ulceby, Carl Fraine has now been in existence for Knowle S Humberside Manchester over a year and although it has Bristol Otiss replies: Keith is not guilty received various publicity it has perhaps you're thinking of lam an Amstrad CPC 6128 still managed to escape many I have been reading your Gordo? owner and up until now a happy people. fabulous magazine for the past one. My problem began some 1 set up the group with the two years, and have been A couple of years ago I was a time ago, when I bought aim of helping Oric users to building a Games Review regular reader of your Software Project's Manic Miner, help each other. To this end Library C64, with the help of magazine. This had to stop the game, as you have probably distribute our your diligent staff. Your mag is though, when you stopped guessed, did not load correctly. newsletter/magazine I.O.U.G. second to none in my eyes supporting the Dragon which exchanged it for another, but, which comes out every six to down here for us kangaroo incidentally is still alive and this too failed to work. The next eight weeks on average. chasers in the Land of Oz, kicking. Recently I bought a new thing I did was to return my Anyone who would like a copy please keep up the good work. computer which is probably the computer, but the retailer could of the current issue should send My only problem to date is, best in its price range, so I find nothing wrong with it. 40p cash, cheque or P.O. also have several copies of Big decided to buy a copy of your Not long after I read that made payable to l.O.U.G. K another computer mag which magazine only to find that you certain games designed for the plus an A5 stamped addressed in their August 84 they do a do not support this one either. I 464 could not loaad on thd 6128 envelope to the address given. minute review on a game called know you have heard of the due to a speed loader. This Alternatively people can write Zoids by Gordon Russell, Enterprise because the word is cheered me up a bit, as it meant for more information or supplied by Softex. Your April printed in your software chart there was nothing wrong with telephone me on 061 431 4160 86 Game of the Month is also a machine key. So why don't you my computer. between 6.15pm and 8.00pm. game called Zoids by Rob support it? If there are people Recently I bought An important point to note is Hubbard, supplied by Martech. out there who have never heard Mastertronic's Nonterraqueous that there is no membership fee This brings me to the obvious of this computer I suppose I had and was greatly pleased with it. and that members can, if they question. Are these two Zoids better explain why I know it is Later on school trip, I bought 1. order one issue at a time. games the same with the April such a good computer. The Soul of a Robot. While Soul As for the issue of software version only an updated edition smallest version has 64k works, Spellbound does not. It there have, in fact, been several of the earlier release? memory (a 128 is available) does not even register when new releases over the past few Robert Lawrence This is expandable to almost 3.9 loading or cataloguing, Is there "


"COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU someway to fix this, is it a bug, games for this computer too, especially on the Atari 520ST. A quote out of C+VG's July or doesn't it work on the 6128but, NO. Can you put me out of But in truth software issue said: 'A team of it says it does on the cover. my misery about whether or not companies do not send out a programmers have been You may think this is a lot of Ocean's Matchday or Daley lot of Atari games for review. working on the game for six fuss over a budget game, but, Thompson's Decathlon are out Ocean tells me that Matchday months and the game will reach Down Under they aren't for the Atari. I saw them and DT's Decathlon are not 'new standards in football budget I mean. advertised in my mother's available for the Atari. As for simulation'. This is not true at Another problem I have is catalogue before Christmas and Elite, presumably the company all. Could you explain why the with Knight Lore by Ultimate ordered them but they never does not think putting out Atari two games are identical, by After completing the game the came. After many phone calls games would make them asking US Gold. Also do they game refuses to load. Do you they said the two games were money. give refunds? know why? out of stock. I decided to write I am writing to you expecting Michael Crawford, Matthew Trevor to Ocean on a number of an explanation, not on your part Birmingham Australia occasions but recieved no but, the part of a certain top Otiss replies: A lot of Otiss: Can anybody offer a answer. The games hadn't been software company called US people are unhappy like reasonable explanation to advertised in any computer Gold. On June 27th I bought US you, Michael. The quote Matthew? magazine, but wait for it, in Gold's new release World Cup about the game in C+VG Atari User Decathlon appeared Carnival which cost .95. After came from US Gold. They in the Top 10 with Elite the playing it I thought it was not I have a few points to make haven't actually sent us a copy game that had never been very good. of the game-despite concerning the Atari computer released. I would be very Then on June 28th, I bought a requests. Could it be because which is becoming more and grateful if you could give me a football simulation game called we and other magazines more popular. definate answer to all my World Cup Football from Artic might have twigged it was just Every month when I look questions. Software which cost .99. To a tarted up old game and said through your review pages Michael Ives my amazement the two games so? We don't feel like having to find the vast majority of games Newcastle were exactly the same but with explain away US Gold's reviewed for the Amstrad, Otiss replies: We would love to Spectrum and Commodore. I decisions. Perhaps the the game from Artic you get extend our Atari coverage and flashing adverts and instead of company would care to know these are the most have in recent months, 24 teams you get ten. write and tell us? popular games computers in Britain, but, the amount of Atari software is growing all the time. So why didn't the following software appear in your pages? King of the Ring, Sidewinder, Boulderdash II, Knockout, Great American Road Race, Night Raider, Archon 2, One Man and his Droid, etc, etc, etc. Were they not good enough? Secondly I have bought your mag over the past two or three years and like the way you have changed its appearance, but, there is one thing I think could be done and other non Ams, C64 or S48 owners would agree with is if you donated about ten to 15 pages to the other computer on the market. At the moment ! think I am getting a raw deal paying nearly .00 for five lines of news for the Atari, a token review and a couple of adventure game reviews. My third and last point concerns two of the biggest software companies in Britain, Elite and Ocean. I'll start with Elitebefore Christmas all Elite games were for the C64/128, Ams and Spectrum. Since then they have started producing software for another four computers. When you consider the Atari's sound, graphics, and memory capabilities you would think Elite would produce "


"MAIL-SOFT 5.75 NONDON 725 7.25 SUPA SOFT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE (PRESENT THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL OFFERS TO C+VG READERS) (BORING STATEMENT BUT JUST CHECK THE REST AND COME BACK TO THIS AD FOR THE REAL BARGAIN SOFTWARE) SPECTRUM RRP OUR RRP DUR RRP OUR 14.95 10.95 Sold Milion2 9.95 5.50 Ace 9.95 6.50 Ghost & Goblins 7.95 5.00 Street Hawk 7.95 5.25 Fook 9.95 6.50 Sam Fox 8.95 6.00 Stainless Steel 995 6.50 9.95 5.50 Hunchback Adven 7 95 525 Inftrator Cave Adventure 7.95 5.25 Bouncers 8.955.00 M onics 7.95 525 Bobby Bearing 7.95 525 Prix D) 12.955.00 Paperboy 7.95 525I.CUPS. 8.95 6.00 Knight Games Biggles 9.95 5.50 X 2 8.95 6.00 Export Cart) 31.95 26.00 795 5.25int Matchday (128) 9.95 6.50 Germany 85 Spitting Images 7.95 5.25 Sam Fox 8.966.00 Rock & Wrestle 8.95 6.00 COMMODORE 64/128 Turbo Esprit 8.95 600 Starstrike 2 7.95 5.00 Nexus 9.95 650 9.95 6.50 Price of Magick 995 550 AMSTRAD Cass Disk 7.95 5.25 PSI 5 Trading 9.95 6.50 Solda Milion 2 6.95 10.00 Spitfire 40 9.95 6.95 PSI 5 Trading (D) 14.95 10.96 Bombjack 6.95 10.00 Saboteur 8.95 5.00 Leaderboard 9.95 6.50 Green Beret 6.25 10.00 Turbo Esprit 8.95 6.00 Leaderboard (DI 14.95 10.96 Batman 6.25 10.00 8.95 6.50 Batman (8256) NA 10.95 Heavy on Vagick 9.95 6.50 Solo Flight 2 9.95 6.50 Monopoly 7.00 10.95 Price of Magick 9.95 6.50 Heavy on the Magick 9.95 6.50 Sam For 6.25 10.00 World Cup Carnival 9.957.00Paper Boy 9.95 6.50 Scrabble 10.957.00 Jack the Nipper 795 5.25 Solo Flight 2 D) 14.95 10.95 Mini Office 2 NA 1495 Kung Fu Master 7.95 5.50 Iridis Alpha 8.95 6.00 V 6.25 10.00 Batman 7.95 5.00 Aleykal 8.95 600 Shogun 7.00 10.95 Quatro 8.95 6.00 Hunchback Adven 8.95 6.00 Tau Ceti 7.00 10.00 Rahel Planet 9.95 6.50 Street Hawk 8.95 6.00 Spinn Dizzy 700 10.00 7.95 5.25 Way of the Tiger 10.95 14.95 14.95 10.95 Price of Magick 7.00 NA Dynamite Dan 2 795 525D 17 95 13.96 Mile 6.25 10.00 Priorse 8.95 6.00 Movie 6.25 10.00 9.95 7.00 Green Beret 8.95 6.00 Way Tiger 7.00 10.95 Tantalus 9.95 6.50 Winter Games 7.00 10.95 City Sicker 8.95 6.00 Mike 8.95 6.00 Room 10 6.00 10.00 COMMODORE 64 BOMB JACK-01 WORLD CUP CARNIVAL 7.25 CAULDRON II URIDIUM-01 7.50 BIGGLES LORD OF THE RINGS 10.95 BATTLE OF MIDWAY 750 THE SECOND CITY KUNG FU MASTER D1 6.99 DESERT FOX-D1 7.25 SILENT SERVICE 7.25 MUGSYS REVENGE WINTER GAMES-01 7.25 GLADIATOR 6.95 THE PRICE OF MAGICK 7.25 TAU-CETI -01 7.45 COMMANDO-01 6 99 ROCK N WRESTLE-01 6.99 HEAVY ON THE MAGICK 7.25 DRAGONS LAIR -01 7.50 CRUSADE IN EUROPE 11.96 LEADER BOARD-01 740 LAW OF THE WEST-01 7.25 BOUNDER 11 7 25 SUMMER GAMES 1401 7.40 ALTER EGO-DISK 22.00 THE FORCE 7.25 WAY OF TIGER01 725 PSI-5 TRADING -11 7.25 KNIGHT GAMES-01725 FAIRLIGHT-D1 7 .25 TIME TREX SOUTHERN BELLE 6.95 SABOTEUR 6.50 GOLF CONS SET-D1 10.50 CRITICAL MASS SOLO FLIGHT I7.50 COLOSSUS CHESS 4.0 7.25 LORD OF RINGS-03 11.95 MERCENARY GHOST + GOBLIN-01 7.25 MISSISSIPPI DISK 11.90 LASER BASIC-03 11.25 CYBORG 6.95 TUBULAR BELLS 5.95 SPIN DIZZY ** SPECTRUM ** SABATOUR 6.50 QUAZATRON WORM IN PARADISE THE PLANETS BATMAN PYRACURSE 6.99 LORD OF RINGS JACK THE NIPPER WORLD CUP CARNIVAL 7.25 SPITFIRE 40 WHO DARES WINS 11 5.95 EQUINOX BOMB JACK 5.75 THEATRE EUROPE CRITICAL MASS 6.50 FLITE 11.25 WINTER GAMES COMMANDO 5.75 TRANSFORMERS GUN FRIGHT TAU CETI 6.99 TOMAHAWK THE PRICE OF MAGICK REBEL PLANET FIGHTER PILOT 5.50 BIGGLES MAX HEADROOM SOUTHERN BELLE 5.75 BLOCK GOLD RUN YIE AR KUNG FU DESERT RATS 725 7.25 GREEN BERET-01 ELITE ---CASS-D3 11.00 NODES OF YESODS TOMAHAWK-01 CASCADE 50 -01 SAI COMBAT PRICE OF MAGICK GHOST + GOBLIN-D1 6. TURBO ESPRIT SABATOUR PRO TENNIS NIGHT GUNNER-01 HEAVY ON THE MAGICK SOCCER 86 EQUINOX-01 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 7 COMMANDO-01 BRUCE LEE BOMB JACK YIE AR KUNG FU -01 PRICE OF MAGICK AIRWOLF-01 JET SET WILLY IAN BOTHAMS BEACH HEAD ***** ATARI ***** MERCENARY SECOND CITY MERCENARY (ST ONLY) 22.50 ALTERN REALITY D 16.95 TALES OF BETA LYRA 725 PRICE OF MAGICK SOLO FLIGHT 11-D 11.96 SUM. GAMES 1-D 11.50 MONOPOLY WAY OF TIGER EXPLODING FIST SCRABBLE THE PRICE OF MAGICK CLUEDO 6.99 5.75 6.50 10.95 WAY OF TIGER RAMBO MUGSYS REVENGE TURBO ESPRIT THE WRITTER ROLLER COASTER HEAVY OF THE MAGICK ROCK N WRESTLE GHOST + GOBLIN FAIRUGHT LAN BOTHAMS DYNAMITE DAN 11 ARNEHAM L.C.KUPS TOAD RUNNER STAR QUAKE 7.25 6.75 5.75 NNNNNNN 5.95 7.25 JET SET WILLY FRANK BRUNO BOXING IAN BTHAM COMMANDO EXPLODING FIST 8.95 6.00 Graphic CD 27.95 22.00 Superbowl 6.50 10.00 Yer Kung Fu 7.95 500 Sold Milion 2 9.96 6.50 Paperboy 7.00 10.95 Ping Pong 7.95 5.00 Saboteur 8.95 6.50 XFist2 7.00 10.95 Atlantic Chalenge 7.95 5.25 Tau Ceti 9.95 6.50 Turbo Esprit 6.50 10.00 22.95 17.00 Tau Ceti (D) 14.95 10.95 G. Gooch 7.00 10.00 Theatre Europe 9.95 7,00 N.O.M.A.D. 8.95 6.00 Bomblack 7.00 10.00 Cauldron 2 8.95 5.50 Atlantic Challenge 8.95 6.00 Solda Milion 6.95 10.00 Cheque and PO (sterling only please) made payable to DISCOUNT SOFTWARE, Dept 3, 210 Nicholls Tower, Harlow, Essex CM18 6EF (Overseas orders add 75p per tape) (Any game which is not released when ordered will be sent on day of release) 5.75 Disk version available: 01 .95, D2 .95, D3 .95. Post' & Packing included in U.K. Europe add  per tape. Elsewhere at cost. Cho/PO to: Mail-Soft. P.O. Box 589 London N15 6JJ. Access orders accepted Compumart SAVEEEES I FREE ASIS Blank Disks 2 FREE Disks Quality Valck aty Ocaught Buy 10 GET 12 A BAY 50GET 69 org . Compumart NO FREE Disks elio TOP .com Quality 37% Microdisks Hub Rings, Envelopes, Labels etc BOXED IN 10's -LABELS etc.... SINGLE SIDED DOUBLE SIDED 135 T.RI. 135 T.PI. 10-AMSOFT 3\"CF2 Microdisks ....00 Ob :05 Same Day 24 Hour Credit Card Order Line 0509-233893 Despatch On ALL Orders Before 4pm-ALL Prices Inc. VAT VISA Please send cheques/postal orders to: Compumart, (Dept CVG) Unit 8, Falcon Street, Loughborough, Leics, LENI IEH Access ( 0509-262259HOTLINE "


"That's when the music takes me yeah, man, C+VG goes musical next month with a look at Clever Music, the micro maestros who do wonderful things to computers to make music for computer games like CRL's Tubular Bells and TV jingles. And while were on about music, we've got Crunch! something REAL SPECIAL up Arragh! our sleeves. But were not Zonk! Bam! saying a word yet because Boom etc. Yes, other magazines will get Fist II, the very jealous ... follow up to Melbourne House's mega-successful The Way of the Exploding Fist, is about to beat up a computer near you very soon. But already C+VG has been battling it out with the Fist follow up. Is it any good? Find out on September 16th. We'll be venturin off to take a look the fascinating worl of Dungeons and Dro gons. Who are the peo ple that take part in thes role-playing fantas games? Are they nor mal? Find out i around 28 day from now. FISTT THE LEGEND CONTINUES NEXT MONTH Next month we've got a special Melbourne House Commodore 16 competition. The top prize is the chance to win Star Dreams, the people who a year's subscription to C+VG. brought you The Wizard of There're also games up for Tallyron games, have now grabs. There're also the usual come up with Wild West, set ingredients that have made in the rough, tough fronC+VG the Number One tier world of the railway. And if you can't be Ace adventurer Keith Campbell computer mag-latest news, bothered to type in the has cast a spell and got his hands on tons of reviews, listing there's a spea copy of The Colour of Magic, The Delta competitions, Hot Gossip 4 adventure from Piranha. It's based on the cial tape offer excluand the Bughunters. All sive to C+VG readriotously funny fantasy book by Terry this and more. C+VG-on ers. sale on September 16th. So Pratchett and is about the extraordinary don't forget to make a Discworld, set on a turtle's back, which is about to date with your experience its first tourist. Get the picture? We might newsagent. even throw in a competition for you. "


"A MISSION YOU CAN NEVER COMPLETE ? uring ok at world Drapeohese atasy nor1 in days win eme SPECTRUM AMSTRAD Imagine Software (1984) Limited 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Tel:061 834 3939. Telex: 669977 SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 "


"14651SJPEICITIRUM COMMODORE|6141 JAIMISITIRIADI 7:195  8  95  TM MIAMI VINE WAKELIN, Ocean LOUIS OCEAN SOFTWARE OCEAN HOUSE O CENTRAL ST MANCHESTER M25NS TELEPHONE OOI 832 0033 TELEX OO9977 WE'RE CRUISIN YOUR HIGH STREET NOW *TM and  1984 Universal City Studios, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Licensed by Merchandising Corporation of America, Inc. "

