"JULY 1985 633A 95p S$4.70 Dm6 GAME SHADOWFIRE THE COMPETITION PLUS FREE E-TEAM POSTER INSIDE 225FREE GIANT 007 POSTER & COMPETITION FREE 36 page BOOK OF GAMES, LISTINGS FOR SPECTRUM, C64, ATARI, AMSTRAD, BBC, VIC 20 VIN AN OMNIBOT A TRIP TO THE LONDON PLANETARIUM CREATE YOUR OWN MAX HEADROOM SUPERGRAN, AIRWOLF PRIZES TO BEWON! "


"BOUNTY BOS STRIKESPACK! THE MOST ADDICTIVE PLATFORM GAME LEDEVASED Twenty-five all-new levels Multi-channel music Automatic Demo Mode Level Warp ability TITET Se Available for AMSTRAD Yukon 1 Yohon Super Slippery suid\" ATAR 64 ATARI SPECTRUM BBC STARRING BOUNTY ..... BOB CASSETTE .95 U.S. Bounty BobTM returns in this new and exciting follow-up adventure to Miner 2049er. This time around it's even tougher than before and Bob needs your help more than ever to guide him through the mine. The mutant organisms have multiplied and over-run the mine entirely, making it extremely difficult to survive the hazards of the underground passageways. Using the high-powered special equipment in the twenty-five new caverns is Bob's only hope of achieving his objective of securing the mine and defeating the plans of the evil Yukon Yohan! GOLD DISK -95 u Software HEALTH WARNING: BOUNTY BOB CAN SERIOUSLY DAMAGE YOUR SANITY! "


"FEATURES A VIEW TO A THRILL......... Can you pass the James Bond Intelligence Test? It's the only way you can win! THE CHARTS. 26 Yes, they're back! The moment you've all been waiting for. TEA FOR TWO......... ***............63 Ah, but this is not tea with just anybody this is tea with SUPER GRAN! AIRWOLF COMPETITION.... Spot the differences and win yourself an Airwolf digital watch. LETTER FROM AMERICA.... PROBLEM PAGE....... Cover: Courtesy of Domark Our three part trailer for the new Bond game reaches its thrilling climax on page 12! ...44 ..50 NEXT ISSUE OZWZED ..66 ON SALE 16th Aior STAR SEEKER... As Halley's Comet approaches the Earth again, Tom Sato takes a look at some of the new astronomy software on the market. PROFESSOR VIDEO'S MAPS SPECIAL: Prof Video's Productions present a selection of reader's maps! EVERYONE'S A WALLY........... BACKPACKER'S GUIDE. .............46 STAFF OF KARNATH..... ............48 BRUCE LEE......... FINDERS KEEPERS........ ...............64 WIZARD'S LAIR.. GIFT FROM THE GODS.......... PROFESSOR VIDEO'S WORKSHOP.....54 SHADOWFIRE COMPETITION.............. The E-team are here with a vengeance -and you could win the original painting of our poster if you enter the Shadowfire quiz! SHADOWFIRE POSTER..........................58 THE MAX FACTOR...................................70 Find out how to generate your very own Max Headroom in our guide to computer movie-making. HALL OF FAME... ADVENTURE.......... ........ ADVENTURE HELPLINE. ADVENTURE REVIEWS The secret is out. OMNIBOT COMPETITION....... Computer & Video You've always wanted your very own robot, right? Well, now's Games, already the your chance most popular and BUG HUNTER......... ....69 successful magazine THE PRICE IS RIGHT. 92. of its type, is going to Pocket money power has brought a boom in budget-priced get even better. games. C&VG takes a look. Turn to page 105 to ROCKY HORROR SHOW read more about COMPETITION.......... these new and ex. Here's how to get your hands on some Rocky Horror Show goodies! citing developments. MAILBAG... YOU HAVE BEEN WARNED!............... 105 Editor Tin Metcalfe Deputy Editor Paul Boughton Editorial Assistant Lesley Walker Stall Writer Seam St. John Designers .72 72 WARNING: ...96 Sylvia Wells Production Editor Mary Morton Adventure Writer Keith Campbell American Correspondant M Rosenthal Publicity Marcus Rich Arcades Clare Edgeley Reader Services Marcus Jeffery Advertisement Manager Louise Matthews Assistant Advertisement Manager Bernard Dugdale Advertising Executive Sean Brennan Production Assistant Melanie Paulo Publisher Rita Lewis Editorial and Advertisement Offices Priory Court, 30 32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR JAU Tel: 01-251 6222 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES POSTAL SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE. By using the special Postal Subscription Service copies of COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES can be mailed direct from our offices each month to any address throughout the world. All subscription applications should be sent for processing to COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES Subscription Department). Competition House, Farindon Road, Market Harborough Leicestershire. All orders should include the appropriate remittance, made payable to COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES. Annual subscription rates (12 issues): UK and Eire (15. Additional service information, including individual overseas mail rates available upon request. Circulation Department: EMAP National Publications. Published and distributed by EMAP National Publications ...99 NEWS AND REVIEWS GAMES NEWS........ Tony Takoushi met his match when he tried his hand at Commodore's Tennis not to mention going a few rounds with Frank Bruno! REVIEWS......... Our Reviews pages get a new look this issue let us know what you think! We've also introduced a new C&VG seal of approval the Blitz Game! Look for the stars. ARCADE ACTION. ..106 News of Magmax the latest game from Nichibutsu -plus heaps Game of the Month of hints on Kung Fu Master and Hyper Sports. Knight Lore NEXT MONTH. In .A. Printed by Severn Valley Press. Typeset by In-Step Ltd. ..........12 "


"Seconds out!!! Round one and Slugger Sam comes out swinging, looking for that killer punch, but the Italian Stallion is ducking and weaving like a ballerina and there it is, the famous \"Joystick Shuffle,\" Slugger hits the canvas 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 and out. The Stallion wins and can now go on to challenge for the heavyweight title of the world. Better than a ringside seat be there in the ring swapping punches but never feeling a thing. Box clever with KNOCKOUT the fight game of the century. CBM 64 Spectrum 48k ARE YOU THE MICROWEIGHT CHAMPION OF BRITAIN? 26.95 TREE 032 Alligata Software Limited 1 Orange Street, Sheffield 51 4DW Tel: (0742) 755796 Send for your free full colour product brochure (enclose a stamp) "


"ELIDONS K Elidon is a secret forest hidden from mortal eyes. It is a place of magic, inhabited by tree spirits and the shy fairy folk. They dance and flitter in the crisp morning air. In a time long since past, Queen Finvarra was the ruler of this magic place. She foresaw troubles could one day befall Elidon and left magic flowers that would protect it from outsiders. Each year they must be collected in order that Elidon may survive. Once gathered, the flowers are made into a garland that the Queen wears at the May ball. Now the magical world of Elidon has been captured by Orpheus as a computer game. And Computer & Video Games and Orpheus have come up with a great magical fairy competition Top prize is a Commodore 64 computer and the ten runners-up will receive copies of Elidon in handmade wooden presentation caskets. All you have to do is answer the three simple questions printed with the entry coupon. Send your answers with the printed coupon to Elidon competition, Computer & Video Games, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1 3AV. The closing date is July 16 and the editor's decision is final. C&VGIORPHEUS ELIDON COMPETITION Name. Address.. . Questions. 1 What is the name of the person in William Shakespeare's play, A Midsummer Night's Dream, who ends up with an ass's head?.............. 2 JM Barrie wrote a story about Never Never Land. What is it called? 3 A sprite is another name for a fairy, spirit, elf or goblin: But what is a sprite in computer language?...... I want to win this competition because (not more than 20 words) DESIGNER OF ELIDON Name: John B. Marshall Born: Ipswich, 1966 Game: Elidon. John Marshall was conceived and created in Ipswich, Suffolk 18 long years ago. The slight non-conformist young man saved up the money from his paper round and purchased an MK 14. This created the desire, and with a part exchange allowance, after much haggling, he graduated to an Ohio Superboard. On this he wrote a few games, selling them through PCW, and got a lot of fun and excitement (as well as the ). His first professional task (on a friend's borrowed Oric 1), was to create a string of games Centipede and The Ultra for PSS, followed closely by Ratsplat for Tansoft. John joined Orpheus full time last December and most of his time has been spent on Elidon, his first title for the Commodore 64 His aspirations, apart from gold-plating his TR6, are to produce more high quality games such as Elidon. He enjoys being good and is already several steps on the way to being the best Favourite Food: Chinese Steamed Dumplings. Favourite Drink: Perrier water. Favourite TV Programme: Young Ones. Countries visited: America, Portugal, Jordan, Dubai, France, Germany, Austria Favourite Computer Program: Lunar Jet Man Favourite Music: Restless, Big Country, Clash, The thing I hate most about the computer industry: Zoomers. los first professito create a for Pss. first pro was to the Site Computermany, AusPortugal, Tansotember The thing, "


"H-O-T G-O-S-S-IP BRUNO'S OK K.O. FACE THE ACE It's seconds out for the You control Bruno's 15-00 PLAYER 8 latest hit game from Elite. powerful punch. And when we say HIT We The more hits you land on mean it as champion boxer your opponent the more Frank Bruno is the star! powerful your punch gets You become Bruno in a working up to the killer quest for the computer KO punch which flattens boxing world title. You take your opponent. But your on eighty beefy big and power points are knocked bouncy opponents in eight off if you let the other three minute bouts which fighter knock you about! really test your skill and If you defeat your stamina. opponent then you get a The graphics as you bash at the next one. After can see from our screen each victory you'll get a shot are some of the best code to enter which around for the good old enables you to load up the Spectrum. And there will next fight. This means that be Commodore and you don't have to go back arley water at the The graphics are on the Amstrad versions of Frank to confront the \"lesser\" ready, I settled down same lines as International Bruno's Boxing too. The fighters again once you've to play Commodore Soccer and are large and well! Spectrum graphics feature played the game a few Tennis on my 64. Amidst defined. The court is set some of the largest times. cries of \"You cannot be horizontally on screen (the animated characters ever We'll have a full review of Frank Bruno's Boxing from serious'', I took the Psion version has a vertical seen on this machine. If you've ever played the Elite, plus an exclusive computer on at level four — view). the hardest level and The crowd are wilder in the arcade game called Punch Elite/Nike Sportswear proceeded to get well and Commodore version they Out, you'll have some idea competition next issue. truly thrashed. reach frenzy pitch as the what this game is all about. Don't you dare miss it! Having got that out of my action hots up. FIGHT 1 SEBE system, I can tell you about Guess who's the tennis the game! Commodore fan in real life?! TIME DE Tennis takes the mantle from the scoreboard is set STATUS Psions' Matchpoint on many laterally behind the playing points. It has larger, more court and is large and clear, life-like graphics, a cleaner as is the marking of points to score display and a fun touch players. at the end. When the match is over, There are four levels of you lift your arms in triumph difficulty for a one player and your opponent runs off in game and the obligatory two disgust. You are then player mode Almost all subjected to film style sports are better against a scrolling credits for the friend. You can also choose production of the game and whatever colour kit you like. the final statement that this It is the best of three sets game was \"A CBM Sports and is played to proper LTA Presentation'. Whatever evergreen DC Comics hero. rules. You can control your next! will be the star of a new position on serving and the am a great fan of the game on a new label. Beyond Software are the pace by prudent prodding of Psion original but I feel its people behind Monolith so the fire button, and all court time has passed and the you can be sure of a high mobility is essential to cover Commodore version is quality game. those volleys and drives. The better. The world famous Man of The Superman game has feel of the game is close to It will be available on tape Steel will be coming up been licensed from the US Psion's and in this respect for .99 and will be against a mighty Monolith company First Star Software there is little to choose released around Wimbledon soon. Yes. Superman the the Boulder Dash people, between them. time. 6 "


"H-O-T G-O-S-S-1.P MERCENARY MANOEUVRES from corner to corner and with \"Do Not Enter\" on the backed away from it into the door. Now do as you are told distance in complete 3D and leave this room well perspective. A-mazing! alone. I know its secrets and The bridge was also they are TERRIBLE! unique. I flew over it, did a To leave the chambers, 180 degree loop the loop and you must find your way back dived down below its to your spaceship and carelegs\". fully manoeuvre through an I have concentrated on the opening to the surface. graphics heavily but game The planet's surface is well play is equally absorbing. over 1,000 screens long on On the planet there are the 64 version and around Mechanoids who are willing 500 on the Atari. It comprises sectors each of around 250 \"screens\" to be investigated. Just one final mention of Wouldn't it be nice if you messages of your current to bribe you to work for the radar post on the surface. could have the three status and will relay any them. However, you will This is shaped like an oblong dimensional graphics of Elite messages from the colony. have to work out how to leaf and rotates a full 360 and the true playability of ship or enemy. communicate with them. degrees as you approach it Solo Flight? Well now you You fly down to the planet This game is NOT a flight from any angle. You can can in a hot new game surface to seek out various simulator and incorporates a actually fly into the curved called Mercenary. objects. All the objects are flight sequence, zapping and dish as it rotates around you! The game, for the C64 and drawn in wire-frame and the some adventure puzzles. Such is the power of Paul Atari, is from Novagen, and Wokes' 3D plotting routines! the programmer is a very Mercenary will be released talented man by the name of for the Commodore 64 and Paul Wokes. Paul has spent Atari around the beginning of eight months so far creating July. There are plans to his 3D masterpiece when I convert it for the saw the game it was still six BBC/Electron, Spectrum and weeks away from comAmstrad. It will retail for pletion. But the game is so .95 on tape and .95 amazing, I can't wait any on disc. longer. I HAVE to tell you about it! You take the role of a 21st 1. Prepare for the invasion of the 1541s. Commodore Century Mercenary who are set to release around travels from a colony-ship 50,000 1541 disc drives to orbiting the Planet Targ to the public. This will be in the the planet below in search of 3D routines are in a class of You will start every game form of a disc club where a supplies and energy crystals. their own! with varying amounts of fuel disc drive is given free but You are presented with You can fly into, up. and possibly other you are committed to buying two basic scenarios, flying around, down and across variables still to be a set amount of software above the planet, or some of the planets' instaldetermined by Paul plus over the coming year! exploring below in the underlations. random planet features. So 2. Talking of drives, ground chambers. Visually Playing this game is so every game will be different. received a fun item from a this game is truly stunning exhilarating! The way you on your travels, you will hacker. It's called Drive air-sick bags at the ready! can approach objects from a find passages leading under Music and is 1k long. I loaded Flying above the planet, you distance and enter them and ground. You enter these by it in my 64 and ran it and my will encounter radar posts, move around inside them in swooping out of the sky and drive then started to play a airports, a bridge, pylons. TOTAL 3D perspective is an zooming down a tunnel into tunel Daisy Daisy give me roads and a Cuboid to name experience you will not an underground hangar. your answer do.\" Blah, blah, but a few spectacular 3D forget. Two objects that Now the puzzles begin. blah... constructions. really stunned me were the You can leave your craft and It must have taken To help you along the way 3x3 Cuboid and the bridge. hot-foot around trying to find someone an awfully long time to program, or has is Benson, a ninth generation entered the Cuboid from crystals and other goodies to Commodore installed a new robot. He will inform you the top, flew straight down line your pockets with. SID chip in its drive? by a series of scrolling text it, looked back up, moved However, there is a room "


"The Gremlin's always got. JOIN TODAY Only .99 SSWOR OF DESTINY GREMI GANG co The Gremlin Gang is a software club whose membership have the opportunity through the regular newsletter to get a direct insight into one of the premier software houses, to exchange ideas with other members and to benefit from many exclusive offers. Every new member will receive an official enrolment certificate, personally authorised by the Gremlin master, along with the amazing Gremlin Gang sweatshirt. If you're looking to get ahead of your friends. join the Gremlin Cang today. Order Form Please complete the following and return with a cheque or postal order for $10.74 (includes 75p for post and packing), made payable to Gremlin Graphics Ltd. Allow 21 days for delivery of goods. Name Address Post Code Chest Site 28\" 30\" 32\" Age 34\" 35\") Other Armed with only his magical sword, the wandering lost soul of master warrior Kelok, must overcome the horrors of the eerie Abyss of Death In order to reclaim the brave and vallant heart stolen from his dying body on the battlefield, by Xarphas the evil warlock. Plasma rocket fallure pa known to any civilised his disabled spaceships Zowbats? Zowbats KGE IPY GUMPHREYSIPERSTEUTI HITS Spectrum Spectrum M 48K CRASH 1984 AVAILABLE Spectrum 48K Commodore 64 COMING SOON Amstrad The original adventure of this famous friendly mole. Searching out coal he encounters enormous dangers, mechanical and human, and bravely faces the awesome challenge of the mighty King Arthur and his personal bodyguard, armed to the teeth with mammal repellants. Ageing. losing his sight and panic stricken with overwork can Grum the geriatric store detective, hold down his position in this deparuits fantasia. A kind assistant is needed to help round-up the thieves, ale and tidy the warehouse. Would you fit the bill? The Gremlin master enjoys his computer entertainment just as much as ery helpers have devised this classic collection that'll guarantee hours of fun Colour, Outstanding, Graphics and lots of intrigue are the features bw reputation for quality soffa So when you next sit down at your keyboard, follow them fingers over a Gremlin spaa Available from all good softya "


"jus finger on the buttons ... GAMES E695 ilure. A face shattering collision with a planetold form not sed sol system and a dazed, confused Dork awakens to find Ship stri triped and hidden throughout the underworld Kingdom the evil little Zowbats. bats! Deklittle creatures living in an underground maze. Tycoon Tex is a 'rootin', oll tycoon in the true wild west tradition. Guns blazing, the faster he can make his pipeline patrol the quicker he can add to his bank balance Sand, Ice or snow can't halt Tex's speedy draw as he fights off the dangers of falling bombs, arrows, surface missiles, and crash explosives BEAVER BOB WHERE IS HE NOW? MONTY'S ON THE RUN.' 6:01 7985 PEAVER BOB Grumpy mphrey. departmeStore ves, cage gorilla Chased by sharks, crocodiles and a host of underwater nasties. Hounded by irate townsfolk, angered at the drought his dams are causing, Bob seems destined for a life of havoc, not the peaceful rest he has always longed for. The underworld are rallying round to help this innocent folkhero throw off the chains of oppression and find a new life in a sunnier climate. But even the best kept secrets can be betrayed and Monty must surface at some time on his journey to the channel ports ( GELL as eviyone else that's why he and his team of specialist funnd absorbing challenge from your computer. Skill. es bwhich the Gremlin master has established his software. me Grnlin master's example and run your speel. Graphics Alpha House, 10 Carver Street Sheffield S1 4FS Tel: (0742) 753423 ftwre stockists. "


"3913 RSS Ja LIDON ASE VaR Commune 3910 SWW W WCW VW Waray ELIDON With the awakening of Spring, in the secret forest of Elidon, comes the seven magical flowers of Finvarra which will grace the crown of our Queen. I have been chosen to search for the ethereal flasks of potion needed to make the flowers bloom. Yet the forest has dark, evil places where jealous tree spirits whisper and hide, hungry for the dust that sustains me. I have only you to guide me, in my hazardous task. A stunningly animated arcade adventure for the C.O.M.M.O-D-O-R.E 64 LORPHEUSD 34wwt NEVER LOOK BACK... Orpheus Ltd, The Smithy, Unit 1, Church Farm, Hatley St. George, Nr. Sandy, Beds SG19 3HP Please send me........... ...........copies of Elidon @ .95 P&P free (UK only) .00 P&P overseas. To........... Address ....... AS SEEN ON T.V. RM3.2013 RSS Wor 392 M2 saison WA MM.O.D.O.R.E 64 present ROMANTIC ROBOT present A Wriggler USCRITS New! The only fully automatic and professional utility for transferring Spectrum programs from: CARTRIDGE to CARTRIDGE OF TAPE 10 CARTRIDGE OF DISC to DISC OF WAFER TO WAFER DISC OF WAFER  TAPE 1 TAPE CARTRIDGE to TAPE A CRASH SMASH You diny seen nothing Plus a bonus COMPLETE MUSIC SYSTEM ZX Spectrum FOR THE ZX SPECTRUM A very professional plece of programming, easy to use, excellent screen presentation error trupping and helpful prompts zx Computing \"Extremely user friendly, lets you get started within minutes. Crash \"The notation has to be seen to be believed \"An ingenious piece of software \"Puts many expensive professional systems to shame. Your Spectrum .. . Features ... Performance\" PCN A novelty maze arcade game. Superb graphics and action. \"Excellent and to aching the basis of music Which Miure! Great fun' The Liste \"A valuable utility for microdrive users.\" An extensive map, over 250 locations, full of features and \"If you are interested in music and own a computer then got it Sinclair User creatures unseen as yet. New, funny, addictive compelling. ZX Computing \"HIGHLY RECOMMENDED\" PCN NEW! Part NEW! Sheet music quality printout on dot matprinters NEW now fully automate-you just START/STOP the tape A WINNER. PC Weekly Microdrive compatible transfers, modifies relocates te structures & helps to RUN also been on side B: 'A Star Game PCN NEW SUPPLEMENT fox 4.95 BATA CONVERTER 10 we music turho, headerless, extra lang including 48K) parts, etc The best possible success ratio, the easiest & fastest in use. THE MOONS OF JUPITER in your own programs. MICRODRIVER puts MT to drives NEW 3-Please send SAE for details. _ Trade enquiries welcome.. ------Divers Deliveries normally by return. ---TEuropean orders please PL 2: i enclose a cheque PO for ................ add  overseas ) Please send me (tick as applicable) WRIGGLER  5.95 O MUSIC TYPEWRITER  9.95 D MT Supplement .95 jor debit my AENOL TRANS-EXPRESS: part 3 only  5.50 O Name..... ..................... Card expiry........... all parts on tape .95 D or cartridge  14.95 O Address.......................... 0-2 on tape .50 D or Rotronics wafer .95 O Updates of TRANS-EXPRESS or MUSIC TYPEWRITER  3.50 Signature.......... Date................ TRANS-EXPRESS upgrades from tape to cartridge  6.95 O ROMANTIG ROBOT 77 Dyne Road London NW6 7DR 24 hrs orders 01-625 9463  cve 10 "


"GAMES N.E.W.SI sa te LIVING FANTASY CHAOTIC FUN Games Workshop continues its interest in multiplayer games with Chaos, a game of spellcasting for 1-8 players. Chaos is a startingly original mix of arcade action and strategy. Up to Plans are underway to build by two teams of five or six Britain's first computer people. ised fantasy world of action Dressed as space and adventure at Wellingsoldiers, they battle ton Pier, Great Yarmouth. against one another amid Tenant Leisure Developstrange surroundings of menta Ltd want to open a lights, music and smoke. Loser Combat Area by next All the equipment is linked summer. by radio signals to comThe initial cost of the puters which run customdevelopment which is still designed software for the subject to planning pergame. The computers also mission will be around ce note when a player has been million. hit and credits the score of The Laser Combat Area the attacking player. Each will be similar to the Planet team strives for maximum Photon Centre which points. opened in Dallas in 1984 Architect, Mr Peter the first of what have been Dean, of the Paul Robinson described as \"interactive Partnership which is acting participation games.\" for the developers, says the Photon has been attractLaser Combat Area will ing nearly 3,000 adtake entertainment and venturers each week, who leisure \"into the 21st pay $3.00 to take part in a century.\" six minute game. It is played DYING FOR LAUGHS Ever wondered just what to do with a dead computer? Apart from using it as a doorstop or something to throw at the cat? Cartoonist Fred Pipes has wondering a lot lately He has transformed his musings into a book of highly amusing cartoons And YOU could win one of these desirable items if you can drag yourself away from your monitor long enough to enter this competition. All you have do is tell us just what YOU would do with a dead computer. We've got eight copies for the best suggestions! Write it down and send it to Computer & Video Games, Dead Computer Contest, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU Closing date is July 16th CLEAR FOR TAKE OFF EXCHANGE OF IDEAS the ranks of Squadron Leader and Wing Commander to Group Captain. Variable weather conditions push the newly acquired skills of the player to the limit. Speech is incorporated in Jump Jet adding realism. The game will be released first for the C64 then for the Amstred, Spectrum, BBC, C16 and Vic 20. Anirog's latest release Jump Jof was created by Vaughan Dow, a genuine Harrier pilot! As a squadron test pilot, he had the honour of demonstrating the full capabilities of this unique beroplane at the Farnborough Air Show. All the major attributes of the super-jet have been included in the program, enabling the player to experience the thrills and risks of being in control of this fantastic plone. The program gives the budding pilot the chance to practise landing before he undertakes the mission to \"seek and destroy\". There are four skill levels, plus a practice level. The skill levels reflect the ranks in the R.A.F. The player starts as a Flight Lieutenant, Flying in calm conditions, and progresses through The Corn Exchange. Brighton was the venue for the second TI Users show, organised by Clive and Audrey Scally of TI MES newsletter.. Between 500 and 700 visitors Orrived from all over, and one from down under. an enthusiastic Aussie. The recent demise of the TI Home Computer Users Group has left some 2.000 disgruntled owners some of whom complained \"they had been dumped\". The hardware and software support is increasing not lacking. 50 exchanging ideas and problems could be solved by them contacting TIMES. 40. Barrhill, Potcham, Brighton, East Sussex, DN1 BUF. eight rival wizards, who can each be real or computer controlled, seek to destroy each other with a barrage of spells. Most of the spells cast creatures, which the wizards can then command. Some cast magic weapons, or castles to hide in, or just plain magic bolts. There are over 50 spells in the game, each of which is represented by a fullyanimated character. As the nature of the universe swings from law to chaos, so the abilities of the wizards change. Chaos for 48k Spectrum is available now at .95. WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST Watch out for The Way of the Exploding Fist, a new martial arts game for the Commodore 64 from Melbourne House, price .95 Conversions for the Spectrum and Amstrad expected later this month July! COME AND MEET US! TIME Y OPULT The Wally saga continues with the release of Herbert's Dummy Runavailable for the Commodore and Spectrum at $9.95. Herbert. the baby who first made such a pest of himself in Everyone's A Wally. is now a toddler and has gone shopping with Wally and Wilma But as they enter the department store. Herbert wanders off The aim of the game is to re unite the troublesome toddler with his parents. And that's when the probletns start We are looking for three special October and 31st December people! How would you like to 1971), and telephone number lif visit the C&VG offices all anyl. Mention any humorous expenses paid, to play a game so books you have read and enjoyed new that it is not yet in the shops, just list them) and also list the and have a slap-up lunch with Adventure games you have Keith Campbell and the Editor? played. We're not letting on what to qualify, keep this brief, on special qualities you have to have one side of a sheet of writing but, to be eligible, you must have paper, and address your letter to: been born during the last 3 ADRIAN, COMPUTER & VIDEO months of 1971, and you must be GAMES, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 male! You should also be prepared FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON to visit London for a day during EC1R 3AU, to arrive no later than your school holidays. 30th June. Write to us, giving your full If you are one of the three name, address, date of birth fre\"Master RIGHTS\", you could be member, it must be betweeg 1st in for a great day out!  BABY! "


"JAMES BOND'S omark's game, created by as they chase after you! villain has planted a bomb which the Softstone programmers, Your aim is to get to the place will destroy half of sunny faithfully follows the plot of where the girl lands and extract California if it detonates. Your job A View to a Kill. It's a three part some vital information from her as Bond is to defuse the bomb and arcade adventure game with an which will help you save the world! rescue Mayday, who has suddenly explosive ending! Well, America anyway... become one of the good guys! The first part of the game takes Part two of the game takes place The game will be available for place in the streets of Paris you in San Francisco's City Hall — the Spectrum, C64, Amstrad and play the part of Bond who drives which has mysteriously caught the Enterprise and is on sale now! off in hot pursuit of Mayday, a fire. Your job is to escape the But before you rush out to buy young lady who has just paraflames but first you have to the game or see the film enter chuted off the top of the Eiffel rescue a beautiful Bond girl and our A View to a Kill competition Tower! solve some puzzles along the way. you might just win yourself a The one-way system of the Paris The third part happens under brand new Enterprise computer! streets may hold you up but the ground in a mine where the superFrench cops are more of a problem THE C&VG JAMES BOND INTELLIGENCE TEST 1. Name the writer who created James Bond. 2. Name any two actors who have played the part of 007 on the big screen. 3. Goldfinger, Octopussy, The Eiger Sanction, Thunderball, For Your Eyes Only, Never Say Never Again. Which is the odd one out? 4. Name the Bond film which you've admired our front and we're offering an Enterprise Shuttle. featured the NASA Space cover, gasped at our giant 128 computer as first prize in our 5. James Bond works for a free 007 poster which fell spectacular A out at your feet when you opened competition. View to a Kill special branch of the British this extremely special issue of Intelligence Service. What is it C&VG and now you can win an gence Test below and rush your Answer the James Bond Intellicalled? exclusive C&VG James Bond entry form to Computer & Video C&VG/DOMARK \"A VIEW prize, thanks to our friends at Games, James Bond TO A KILL\" COMPETITION Domark. Domark, the people who Farringdon Lane, London ECIR! Name....... Competition, Priory Court, 30-32! brought you Eureka, are all set to 3AU, before the closing date July Address..... launch an exciting trio of arcade 16th. games based on the brand new Bond movie A View to a Kill The winner will receive an Enterprise 128 computer, plus a C&VG has been bringing you special Domark A View To A Kill top secret information about the t-shirt and a copy of the theme My answers are: new 007 game over the last couple tune by supergroup Duran of months. And now we're Duran. offering YOU the chance to win a special Bond prize. Twenty-five runners-up will get A View to a Kill will be the first plus a copy of the Duran Duran a Domark/A View to a Kill t-shirt real blockbuster game available single. And all you have to do is for the new Enterprise micro answer these simple questions... 1......... 2.... 12 "


NA


"PLAY THE BIG FIST FRANK BRUNO GREAT BRITAIN Now, meet eight of the world's most unlikely heavyweight contenders in the boxing simulation to beat 'em all! 3 ANDRA PUNCHEREDOV 6 RAVIOLI MAFIOSI USSR ITALY Andra is a fast, dancing Ravioli is not a man to mess Russian who goes to your with. He knows all the dirty head faster than a neat tricks, and uses them glass of Vodka without a care in the world. (THE CHALLENGER) 1 CANADIAN CRUSHER CANADA The big, plodding, lumberjack from Canada, with the beauty of a grizzly bear and the speed of an elephant. 7 ANTIPODEAN ANDY AUSTRALIA Fed on a diet of empty lager cans, this man feels no pain. Pure un-interrupted punch power. 2 FLING LONG CHOP JAPAN All the way from the land of the rising Hi-Fi is Fling Long Chop, a martial arts master of No-Can-Do. 4 TRIBAL TROUBLE AFRICA Tribal means trouble for anyone, he has a temper that gets the better of you! Landing the punches with unnerving accuracy. 5 FRENCHIE FRANCE Frenchie may appear to be cool, suave and sophisticated, but this deceptive façade hides a rather menacing individual, ready to make you see stars. 8 PETER PERFECT USA World Famous, World Champion Peter Perfect. The most neat and accurate boxer in history is set to drive his engine of glory all over you. Could anyone be a match for macho man? Every single 'Elite' product carries the unique 'Elite' Holographic Sticker. Make sure your copy does, it's your guarantee of quality. Mall Order: Just send a cheque or P.O. payable to 'Elite' or quote your Visa number "


"COMING SOON COMMODORE SPECTRUM .95 .95 AMSTRAD .95 Frank Brunos GAME FEATURES Eight fiery opponents, each with their own distinctive fighting style. Smooth-scrolling camera action, giving the best view of the fight at all times. Furious three minute rounds with 'knock-down' and 'knock out' features. Warm-Up and 'Autoplay' sequences. K.O. Meter, Best KO. Time, Score and Bonus displayed on screen. Additional boxers to load from tape. Hall of fame. Endorsed by Heavyweight Champion Frank Bruno. Kion LIVIE mas: SPECTRUM SCREEN SHOT Elite Systems Limited Anchor House Anchor Road Aldridge Walsall West Midlands Telephone (0922) 55852 Telex 335622 SPETELG "


"R.E.V.I.E.WS no BLITZ GAME ON of Knight Lore, the game has I mean, why buy more than more than one colour on the one Ultimate game nowascreen at the same time. The days, good as they are? difference this makes to the It's not worth paying ten game is extraordinary. pound each for games which The detail contained in the are often so similar to their graphics actually shows up, predecessors that it's hard to instead of being hidden by a tell the difference between murky screen bathed in the them. same coloured light. It also makes it simpler to guide your  Graphics character around the dun Sound geon, as you can actually  Value keep track of what's going on.  Playability Even if your player disappears behind another object, you know where he is, instead of frantically having to search for a tiny corner of his head poking over a wall. cursed with a spell that turns One interesting part of the KNIGHT LORE him into a werewolf at sunset game is that you can actually and doesn't return him to nor. push objects from room to MACHINE: Amstrad mality until dawn. room. And, according to the SUPPLIER: Ultimate Your quest is to help the manual, you need to do this if PRICE: .95 explorer find the wizard Melkyou are to stand any chance hior and cure him of the wereof completing the game. Ultimate, the software house wolf curse. But it must be Overall, I liked the game every other company comdone within 40 days or the which is not something pares their software to have spell will become permanent, could have said about Knight released their first game for and he will become a wereLore on the Spectrum. The exthe Amstrad CPC 464. And it's wolf forever. tra colour to the game does a real cracker. The game is an adventure add a startling new dimension Knight Lore is a multi-through literally hundreds of to the program, but I wouldn't roomed graphic adventure, rooms, displayed in threelike to see the next Ultimate placing you in the shoes of a dimensional perspective game for the Amstrad to be a young explorer who has been Unlike the Spectrum version clone of knight Lore. which will free you from the apparently intent on your desadventurer left or right, Z to KNIGHT LORE curse of the werewulf ... truction. The 3D perspective, go forward I lost count of It's great stuff certainly which makes the scenario the times I went straight into a MACHINE: BBC the first game I've ever particularly realistic also wall or threw myself over a SUPPLIER: Ultimate played where you keep makes the game a lot harder parapet A to jump and PRICE: .95 turning into a werewulf at the to play -you try hopping up Shift to pick up or drop most inopportune moments a twisted staircase, as each I was hooked right from the You await the rising of the and the graphics do full stair you reach starts to sink, start. Great to look at and moon with fear and dread for, justice to the plot. They are while trying to work out the great to play as day turns into night, the really superb. direction and height of the vile disease takes hold The adventurer, in human next step. all in a split  Graphics your limbs writhe, your face shape, is an endearing little second!  Sound contorts and you become a creature in a huge safari hat The animation is smooth . Value hideous werewulf, who toddles gamely about the and very impressive, partic  Playability Which makes it all the simple but beautifully realised ularly in the way your more imperative to uncover castle locations. There are a adventurer changes into a the secrets of Knight Lore myriad enemies to watch out werewulf. It's a painful castle, wherein the aged for including phantoms, process to watch! Wizard Melkhior weaves his demons, armed guards and There are charms to spells. For he, and he alone, sundry monsters not to collect -they're not easy to can save you mention some really fiendish find and objects to pick up Yes, you have just 40 days traps. if you can and nights to explore the vast There are moving floors You'll probably find the and rambling castle, avoid the and stairways, an evil-minded controls uncomfortable at fiendish traps, collect the portcullis, bail chains and first. You use two of the charms and cast the spell goodness knows what. all cursor keys to turn your 16 "


"REV.I.E.W.SI b bbb) screens — an armless, onesafety on a ledge away from footed charmer called Gribby, the more primitive creatures But the real star is Gribbly. Could this be the debut of a that infest Blabgor. His large eyes, comic new cult figure? Joystick mastery is vital as expressions, and bubbleIn his first original game for Gribbly bounces and levitates blowing antics are a real Hewson Consultants, Andrew over 16 screens, each springtreat. Braybrook could be on to a ing to more than 30 times the We defy anybody not to winner with Gribbly's Day screen display area. smile at him. Out. Gribbly has an unusual way Gribbly's Day Out comes Gribbly lives on Blabgor, a of seeing off these unfriendly complete with a small booklet world of elevated islands, lifeforms. Deadly rays or explaining all about life on forests and cosy caves massive explosions are not Blabgor and the joys and perils GRIBBLY'S DAY OUT He shares this world with for him. He simply blows to be found there. the young Gribblets whose bubbles at them. MACHINE: CBM 64 hard shells shield their Gribbly's Day Out features  Graphics SUPPLIER: Hewson Consultants developing brains from the some very smooth scrolling  Sound PRICE: .95 sunshine. graphics and multiple sound  Value Something strangely cute is Gribbly must collect these effects. It's fun to play  Playability about to hit our computer Gribblets and get them to especially for the younger CO COCO The idea is to guide your expected a lot more from the ICICLE WORKS character through various company that brought us MACHINE: Spectrum rooms constructing various Boulder Dash and Frak. SUPPLIER: Statesoft toys from the parts you find Wait for Boulder Dash 1 PRICE: .95 buried in piles of snowballs and 2 to appear for the Not only has this game which roll around Boulder Spectrum coming soon pinched the name from one of Dash fashion as you burrow from Beyond. my favourite bands but also through them. nicked its theme from one of the scrolling is slow and  Graphics my favourite games! Icicle jerky and the graphics are  Sound basically a reworked pretty naff.  Value version of Boulder Dash was quite disappointed  Playability but without much of the dash. when I first saw Icicle Works, TALLADEGA chance to sit behind the powered sound effects and sleep at the wheel. wheel of a 250mph speed animated pit-stop sequences. Overall, Talladega is fun for MACHINE: CBM 64 machine and race against The game hasn't got the a while but its lasting appeal SUPPLIER: Audiogenic Richard Petty, king of the long lasting appeal of games could be limited. For race PRICE: .95 American Super Stocks car like Pole Position or Acorntrack addicts only. race scene. soft's Revs for the BBC. While Ready, steady, go! Put your First you complete the I could happily sit in front of the foot down to become a stock qualifying lap, then ride the Atari race game for hours  Graphics car sensation with Talladega, killer curves in the 30 lap screeching around hair-pin . Sound the high-speed race thriller. main event all in 3D race bends. I'm afraid that Value In Talladega you get the graphics including V8 Talladega just sends me to JO caves, collecting clams as the quality of the cartoon-like BC II GROG'S REVENGE goes. characters. Rocks, potholes, tiredactyls If you liked Quest for Tires. MACHINE: CBM 64 and the mighty Grog all conyou'll probably love. Grog's SUPPLIER: US Gold spire to thwart Thor's Revenge. Also available soon PRICE: .95 progress. for the Atari, Amstrad, After having completed the BC and friends is one of Spectrum and BBC. Quest for Tires, Thor is back America's most successful looking for the meaning of cartoon strips. The cartoonist, Johnny Hart,  Graphics  Sound And that means another supervised the graphics  Value tortuous unicycle ride up throughout the game's  Playability mountains and through development and it shows in FLYERI 0000 "


"So sole R.E.V.I.E.W.S Graphics Are they really as mind-blowing as the adverts say they are? Does the screen scroll effectively? Do those aliens really leap out of the screen at your? This is how this category is judged. GHOSTBUSTERS of some description, ghost building watch out for the you'll lose one of your lives. traps, marshmallow bait and a Roamers. Steer your vehicle On the city map, there is MACHINE: Amstrad laser entrapment system from towards them and vacuum sometimes a marshmallow SUPPLIER: Activision the remaining money. them up. alert when an enormous PRICE: .99 Once you've bought all the This keeps them from monster made from marshGhostbusters on the Amstrad equipment you can afford, the getting to the Temple of Zuul.mallows tramples over the city. closely follows the theme of game flips to a map of central Each one that makes it to Zuul If you fail to the highly successful film. New York. boosts the city's PK energy. the money for the damage is As one of the Ghostbusters. This shows all the buildings And that's not to be deducted from your bank your task is to rid the city of its in the city's centre including encouraged. account. paranormal occurrences and the Temple of Zuul. If one of Once you have reached the Ghostbusters is bound to be keep New York's psychothe buildings begins to flash building, you must lay the one of the biggest sellers on kinetic energy as low as red, it has become haunted by ghost traps and activate your the Amstrad this summer. possible, ensuring that the a ghost and your help is atomic back-pack to suck the ghosts won't reappear. desperately needed. ghost down into the trap.  Graphics You must first set up a So it's into your car and off If you actually catch a  Sound Ghostbusting agency with the to the scene of the haunting as spook, you'll get paid and the  Value $10,000 dollars a bank has lent fast as you can. money will be deposited in  Playability you. Then you must buy a car on the way to the haunted your bank account. If you fail, NO ILL dropping bombs, frogs, flying kangaroos which tend KISSIN' KOUSINS caterpillars and bats. to swoop down and flatten DEFENCE 16 You'll need your wits about you just when you think MACHINE: CBM 16/Plus 4 MACHINE: BBC/Electron you. Although there's nothing you're getting somewhere. SUPPLIER: English Software SUPPLIER: Probe Software vastly original about this An amusing game, and PRICE: .95 PRICE: .99 straightforward arcade-style cheap at the price. Electron Back in the good old days of game, it's punishing on the owners will find their version Poor old planet earth. Yet the West, a man had to prove reflexes. Jumps must be on side B. Another version on another invasion to cope with. he was a man before he got timed exactly right from the the B side of the tape is a good Once again, aliens from a his gal. In Kissin' Kousins, our first screen, and the moving idea. I'm sure C16, Electron far distant galaxy try their hero sure has to do a lot of opposition is particularly and ZX81 owners agree! luck with a touch of strong provin'. Lying between him fiendishly timed. arm tactics and the odd mutaand his sweetheart are a The graphics aren't bad at tion here and there. whole lotta obstacles in his all, although the pleasant This time the aliens are  Graphics path like dustbins, fire small-town scenery seems called Swarmers and Vaks.  Sound hydrants, stoves and bushes oddly at variance with the Probe Software says there  Value and a whole lotta no-good mayhem in the streets! 1 . Playability are 255 lightning attack varmints to dodge, like planes particularly liked the lethal waves at nine levels. Get zapping! ner of monsters. are playing over a long time, There has been quite a void THE WIZARD AND Armed with a selection of each stage can be loaded and of Commodore 16 software for sometime since the machine THE PRINCESS spells including a cure of run individually. wounds and one to conjure up The idea of loading in was originally launched. But a fireball the quest covers section after section makes Defence 16 seems to indicate MACHINE: CBM 16 five different stages. The first good use of the limited an upturn in the quality — and SUPPLIER: Melbourne House is an obstacle course of memory size. perhaps even quantity of C16 PRICE: .95 mountains and trees in which software. We're off to see the wizard you are attacked by wolves,  Graphics  Graphics ... but not the one from Oz. Orcs and trolls.  Sound  Sound This wizard is decidedly. As each stage is com Value  Value evil and holding a princess pleted, the next part is auto Playability  Playability captive, guarded by all manmatically loaded. Or, if you ON 00 But getting this exclusive is collect his equipment The game features STRINGER easier said than done as camera, flash bulb. press cartoon-type characters, five ace reporter and photopass and the key to the suite skill levels and full joystick MACHINE: CBM 64 grapher Stringer finds out. — which has been hidden in control. SUPPLIER: Addictive As the paper's deadline various rooms of the hotel. PRICE: .95 nears. Stringer has the hard And just to complicate  Graphics Hold the front page! Film star task of finding the reclusive matters, Stringer is chased  Sound Polly Platinum is in town. star in the penthouse suite of from floor to floor by hotel  Value Ideal for a front page picture a local hotel. staff determined to throw him for the Daily Blurb.  Playability Not only that, he must also out. 18 "


"JUMP El 95 CASSETTE .95 Written by Vaughan Dow Jump Jet Pilot AT Every pilot has the dream of flying one of these unique and complex fighting machines. Here is your chance to do what few pilots have the privilege to try. Depending on your skill, confidence and courage, you have the choice of remaining near the landing pad, learning to hover and land, or venturing higher to practise your approaches. When you think you have mastered these, then acce Jump Jet into an attack fighter. Use the radar and range finder to seek and destroy the enemy, by launching heat-seeking air-to-air missiles. Beware! His radar and missile systems are as good as yours. Reckless pursuit is ill-advised: you must maintain a fuel level that will enable you to relocate and return to the aircraft carrier, executing the skills you have learned to achieve a successful landing. You are now ready to proceed to the next skill level to face additional hazards, such as unpredictable swell and treacherous cross-winds. Be warned, this program is not a toy or game. You will need to co-ordinate your hands, eyes and mind to successfully complete each mission. Do not hope to achieve in a short time that which took the author three years to learn as a Jump Jet pilot, and over a year to record on this computer program. ANIROG TRADE ENQUIRIES: ANIROG SOFTWARE LTD UNIT 10 VICTORIA INDUSTRIAL PARK VICTORIA ROAD DARTFORD KENT (0322) 92513/8 Mail Order: 8 HIGH STREET HORLEY SURREY 24 HOUR CREDIT SALES HORLEY 02934 6083 Payment by: P.O. ACCESS. VISA "


"REVlEW.S Rockin' Rodney is an ace dudes cruising the mean rhythms. Turn the sound up HHHHH dude born with an unforgetstreets. and the walls come tumbling table fire to dance to the They include Jack Flash, down. rhythm of the night and go Gangsters of the Groove. If the C&VG games ratings walking on sunshine during Bandits of the Beat and The went higher, Ghettoblaster the day. Tone Deaf Walkers. Get into a would get 19. But the heat is on for duel with them and you'll do was born to love you, Rodney who works as a more than cry. The message Ghettoblaster. Would I lie to messenger for a record is don't come around here no you? company called Interdisc. more. If they get reaily mean, They give him no rest. His job Besides delivering the they'll damage your ghettoGHETTOBLASTER is hanging on a string. tapes, Rodney must also get blaster or even worse tapes, Rodney must also get b He has to deliver 10 demo the people dancing in the they could damage you? MACHINE: CBM 64 tapes to the company's head streets by blasting them with Watch out for Jumpin' Jack SUPPLIER: Virgin office in Funky Street before music. Flash. He could give you a new PRICE: .95 the day is through. As Rodney enters various direction. Look mama, could it be I'm But first he has to find the houses and shops around falling in love. I've made eye tapes which are hidden all Funky Town, messages to eye contact with Ghettoover town. As he grooves appear telling you how he is  Graphics blaster and it sends me so far around ghettoblaster doing.  Sound  Value away that I want to spend the perched on his shoulder, he And the music is truly funky night playing it  Playability faces all sorts of dangerous with 12 original rockin' ooo Strangeloop first came out find the control room. for the Spectrum towards the Armed with just a laser gun CAVE FIGHTER FEB EEL end of last year. The CBM 64 and an old leaky space suit, MACHINE: Vic 20+3.5K version, promises Virgin, has your spaceman must brave ciddi ve SUPPLIER: Bubble Bus \"completely new puzzles and the perils of no oxygen, zero PRICE: .95 enhanced graphics.\" gravity, soaring temperatures But the plot remains the and sharp pieces of industrial Bubble Bus have converted same. Your mission is to waste. their popular Cave Fighter regain control of a robot The graphics and sound and come up with a good factory on the edge of a far are good and the joystick oystick game for the unexpanded Vic. distant solar system. gives smooth and easy You have to guide your STRANGELOOP The factory has been control of the spaceman. pothole person through a invaded by an alien force It also comes with a game maze of caverns leaping. MACHINE: CBM 64 which is re-programming the save facility. jumping and fighting off SUPPLIER: Virgin robots as they come off the nasties as he goes. PRICE: .95 production line, turning them \"Dare you accept this into fierce killers.  Graphics  Graphics mission?\" that's the The action ranges over 250  Sound  Sound tempting lure for the \"new locations only 240 with the  Value  Value and improved\" Strangeloop. Spectrum -and the aim is to  Playability  Playability probably the most horribly the alien meteorite. Well, I disable lasers and change hyped game of all time think that's the case but features of the game to suit Legend make a comeback bid the instruction sheet is so your mood. You can also with Komplex badly written that it's hard to change the map of the Komplex is a giant tell Komplex system at will should meteorite which just happens Once you are on the sur you wish. to be making a passing visit to face of the meteorite, you find Legend have done it again earth. It is said to contain yourself in a landscape con-or rather they haven't. They evidence of an alien culture sisting of alien telephone will soon end up with the title and the boffins want soboxes and telegraph poles of producer of the world's KOMPLEX meone to pilot a probe to which fire at you. The telegreatest one hit wonders. discover its secrets. Just a phone boxes lead to other it's a game that just MACHINE: Spectrum slight similarity to Arthur C. levels of the meteorite via ser doesn't quite make it too SUPPLIER: Legend Clarke's Rendezvous with vice tubes. Komplex you could say! PRICE: .95 Rama here, eh guys? There are guardians of the Legend have a habit of mak. Your probe can stop meteorite called Monitors and  Graphics ing pretty looking games Komplex zapping out into the Wardens which you can zap  Sound which don't live up to their galaxy again by getting hold with your laser.  Value romises. After the disaster of seven modules hidden in the game also features an  Playability of the Great Space Race the many different levels of \"editor\" which enables you to OUTLD 20 "


"R.E.V.T.E.W.S mm) 22 I think that this game, of Daley has been produced going to have to go into some above all the others have which doesn't exactly run fairly hard training before seen for the Amstrad, proves across the screen, perhaps can collect my winner's its undoubted superiority over \"minces\" is a better word! medal. Many of the events. the Spectrum and ComTo make Daley run, you including the high jump and modore computers. move the joystick from side to shot putt, were beyond me I just couldn't get the correct are superb and the animation The faster you move the angle to get a high enough of Daley as he runs and jumps stick, the higher the power score. across the screen is brilliant. meter rises and the more I'll just have to give up fags. DT'S DECATHLON His sulky expression after he energy Daley has to run, jump booze and playing that strip fails to qualify for an event or throw a shot. poker game until 4 o'clock in MACHINE: Amstrad adds a little comic humour to The game simulates the the morning! SUPPLIER: Ocean a perfectly executed simuDecathlon exactly. There are A gold medal for Ocean. PRICE: .95 lation which looks, and plays, ten events to be completed on Despite the fact that the next more like the arcade game over two days, including the I don't think I need to Olympics won't take place for Track & Field than the game's 1,500 metres and the shot answer that! another three years, I'm sure previous versions on other putt. that Ocean Software's Daley machines. In each event there is a  Graphics Thomson for the Amstrad will Instead of an indistinguishqualifying time or score which  Sound sprint into as many homes as able blob for the main characyou must beat to accumulate  Value the Spectrum and CBM 64 ter of the game, a very real points on your way to a  Playability versions istic cartoon representation Olympic medal. I'm afraid I'm STORE The only confusing thing pathway for a spark which is ting to put out your fire! TUTO about Incentive's latest itching to get to an unexplodI played the Amstrad and ++ +E release is why it's not in the ed bomb spinning away at the Spectrum versions and both top ten yet! This fast moving edge of a square — which were totally addictive. CITI puzzle game will have you looks a bit like a circuit board. So when you're next lookhooked as soon as you start Once you've made the coring for a game to spend your playing. rect connections with your cash on, don't be confused by Remember those plastic shuffling squares, the spark the huge choice which conpuzzle squares you used to reaches the bomb and fronts you at your local store get in Christmas crackers? detonates it. Then it's on to go for Confuzion! CONFUZION The ones where you have to another puzzle square bigshuffle squares around to ger with more bombs. Later MACHINE: Spectrum/Amstrad/ make a picture or word? Well squares feature added  Graphics CBM 64/BBC/Electron  Sound Confuzion is a bit like that. Exhazards to your fuse, inSUPPLIER: Incentive B  Value cept you have to shuffle cluding a drop of water which  Playability PRICE: .95 GAME squares around to make a chases you around attempCOCO O computer game version of the cult rock music show. Load in the game and you'll find yourself inside the weird mansion home of Frank N Furter. You can become either the hero or heroine — Brad or Janet -but your aim is the same. To find the dismantled parts of the DeMedusa machine and ROCKY HORROR activate it before the mansion transforms itself into a giant alien space craft and blasts MACHINE: Spectrum, CBM 64, off for the stars! You also Amstrad have to save your partner SUPPLIER: CRL PRICE: .95 GAME along the way. The mansion is inhabited Despite what the hero of The by some odd people Frank, sounds good and is very Rocky Horror Show keeps of course, plus the evil Riff addictive just like the show telling you it is easy to Raff, and Magenta, Frank's itself! You'll have to excuse have a good time. Especially assistant. me — I'm just off to do the if you're playing CRL'S Rocky Horror looks good, Time Warp again!  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability ONDO "


"Pastfinder. For serious arcade players who also want to stretch their brains. WHAT THE CRITICS SAY PASTFINI \"Strange semi-abstract, beautifully animated, this game should keep all arcade enthusiasts enthralled for weeks.\" BRISTOL EVENING POST \"An action packed science fiction shoot-'em-up which raises the standards of 64 graphics yet again.\" PERSONAL COMPUTER NEWS \"A very worthy addition to the growing Activision range\" ZZAP 64 \"Very original game that mixes arcade action with exploration and adventure... from the company that gave you Ghostbusters. EAGLE & TIGER ACTIVISION. \"There is plenty in this ZZAP 64 game to keep the hardened player going for hours It is 8878 AD. Exploration has become a rare combination of qualities. thing of the past. The stamina to search carefully through Everything there is to know about our hundreds of uncharted lands.The ability to dissect universe is known. complex maps. So it is natural to look backwards. The perception to select only the proper An elite group of interstellar explorers tools for survival. And the unending desire to live have been given the critical task of journeying dangerously. Pastfinder stretches all your game. back through time to unearth the mysteries and playing skills to a new level. adventures of the past. It is truly three-dimensional. The Pastfinders. It insists that you use your brain at least To join their ranks, one must possess a as much as your co-ordination of hand and eye. AVAILABLE ON COMMODORE C64 CASSETTE AND DISK. ACTIVISION HOME COMPUTER SOFTWARE "


"BER-E.V.I.E.W.S Playability: Will the game keep you up until the early hours of the morning, as you attempt to complete just one more screen in a desperate attempt to beat it? Or does it send you to sleep the moment the introscreen appears? Could you spend hours locked away in your bedroom with it? Pass the L-plates and get set There are three games to throne for a topsy-turvey, threeselectMagic Carpet, Master of the Lamps dimensional magic carpet Seven Trials and Throne contains some great sound ride to meet the Master of the Quest. Magic Carpet is for — vital to solving some of the Lamps. flying practice only game's stages and excitYour task is to help a essential if you want to ing graphics. prince return a bunch of conquer the tunnels to the Is this a work of GENIEmischievous genies back to genie's dens. OUS? Perhaps not, but their lamps and gain his rightIn Seven Trials mastery of there's definitely a bright ful place on the throne. the genies is achieved on spark behind Master of the Easier said than done. completion of one sevenLamps. Flying through twisting piece lamp. tunnels to confront the genies B ut in Throne Quest three  Graphics is hard enough. But once seven-piece lamps must be  Sound there you must solve riddles completed. Then you must fly  Value of music, memory and colour through one more tunnel back  Playability to proceed. to the palace to claim the LAMPS MACHINE: CBM 64 SUPPLIER: Activision PRICE: .99 00 BECTOR OBERTO SHIELDS LEPIEDEREN version. But when you get down to it, it's really just a simple zapthe-aliens shoot out! The disc version includes \"attacks\" on earth cities like London and Paris with authentic looking skylines. Cassette owners will be able to get these on a follow-up tape called Ciphoid 9 Earth CIPHOID Attack It's very pretty but a MACHINE: CBM 64 pricey way of getting pretty SUPPLIER: GB Standard pictures on your C64. PRICE: .95 (cass) .95 (disc) Ciphoid is a game that flatters Graphics Sound to deceive. The graphics are  Value great. With lunar and earth  Playability city backgrounds on the disc anything to go by! This is a Wizard's Lair/Sabre Wulf-type game set in a steaming Amazon jungle. The graphics match any. thing from British software houses and the game will soon have you hooked. Saimazoon is the first of a trilogy of arcade adventures starring Prof. Indiana Smith The second part of the adventure is called Babaliba. SAIMAZOOM MACHINE: Spectrum SUPPLIER: Silversoft/Dinamic PRICE: .95 The games from Spain WON'T be going down the drain if Saimazoom produced by a Spanish company Dinamic is  Graphics 1. Sound  Value  Playability 00 000 OOOO revamped Quicksilva the game different. The off how long will the appeal of organisation. It's basically a programmer has made a big the game last? 3D shoot-out but with lots effort to create original aliens. of added ingredients. Buggy The destruction of the alien Blast meets Star Wars! citadel is pretty neat too!  Graphics You begin your mission to Glass is an extremely well  Sound destroy 14 alien citadels in a presented and playable  Value launch tube and you are game. But once the novelty of  Playability blasted into a hostile sector the neat graphics has worn full of Metalliks. Survive your limit in one sector and you GLASS warp onto the next where more dangers await. Some MACHINE: Spectrum sectors take place among SUPPLIER: Quicksilva Star-Wars type towers — you PRICE: .99 race through mega-speeds It's 2185 and the Planet avoiding them. Others take Hygon has fallen to the place in space where pseudo-conscious Metalliks! 2010-type space craft pass And as usual you are the before your laser sights. loony chosen to blast the These space ships are simply FB nu ESD aliens back to where they stunning. The graphic detail came from! on them is superb. This is the scenario of the And talking of graphics, | latest game from the these are really what make "


"Nuclear Ned's mine, dealing harder platforms. with a multitude of mutantsJourneying around the mine, intent on over-running everyBob comes across various thing items left by Nuclear Ned — It's the same format as such as a mobile suction unit, Miner 2049er but a lot pulverizers, elevators and tougher. Bob must walk and hoists. jump between the various A real feature of the game platforms bringing death and is the delightful scoring destruction to the mutants. system. As the high scores There are 25 caverns for and players change, birds fly him to tackle, many conback and forth picking up taining new features such as individual letters and Suction tubes, grain lifts and numbers before putting them hoists. And Bob needs every into the correct order. A joy to bit of help. In one screen, see. there are 26 mutants to deal Bounty Bob is the follow-up to with!  Graphics the marvellous Miner 2049er. We defy anybody not to be  Sound And a worthy successor it is, hooked instantly and it will be  Value many hours before you  Playability Bob is once again back in complete the progressively BOUNTY BOB MACHINE: CBM 64 SUPPLIER: US Gold PRICE: .95 too. won't start in the morning and to Camden Town the SSOREN SOROCAND IS ACE he must get to work in time nearest stop to TV am's for the beginning of the show studios. or the TV producer will giveAs you guide Roland him the sack through the maze of tunnels, So Roland decides to go you are pursued by many back underground, to the varying opponents and scene of his life before obstacles which you can imbecoming a super-star rat — mobilise temporarily with the sewers of London. your glue gun. You enter the sewer and But be careful because you run around looking for the yourself can become glued to parts of the secret door. Once the floor. you've put them in place, you Amusing if not particularly SA 2233 must find the key to open the stretching Suitable for door and free your two younger gamers. friends. You then must find your way through the maze of ROLAND RAT Roland Rat, the star of TV am tunnels and sewer pipes until  Graphics is now starring in his very own you happen upon the tube MACHINE: CBM 64 Sound computer program. SUPPLIER: Ocean  Value The game begins with Then you must get on it  Playability PRICE: .95 Roland Rat finding that his car at all costs and take the tube 000000 RT3 driven by David Hunt during 1984 and the circuit is Silverstone David Hunt, brother of the former race ace James. worked in close collaboration with software author Geoff Crammond to produce this simulation All the working elements of the car have been considered -engine, downforce, gears, REVS tyres, G forces and brakes. The authenticity also MACHINE: BBC expands to the race itself. All SUPPLIER: Acornsoft the other cars are doing their PRICE: .95 (cass) .65 best to win. Slow down in (disc) front of one and the result Acornsoft is promoting Revs could be a nasty collision. as the \"most advanced race The graphics are excellent simulator yet.\" A bold claim and the view from the driver's but one which is probably cockpit is very realistic. justified. Both the car and the race  Graphics track are painstakingly modelled on the real thing.  Sound  Value The car is the Acorn sponsored Formula 3 Ralt L  Playability CHICANE circuit from the driver's cockpit, while the view from the car MACHINE: BBC in Chicane is higher up. SUPPLIER: Kempston But the advantage of this is PRICE: .95 that there is a better chance of The public's demand for seeing tight curves in advance. racing simulation games Chicane is based on seems insatiable. Chicane, Formula Ford 2000 single from Kempston, invites direct seaters competing in the comparison with Acornsoft's British Championship. It was Revs, also for the BBC. But written with the help of that would be unfair. Chicane Kempston Micro Racing is a lot cheaper and comes Team. The game features a It's not as sophisticated as choice of six Grand Prix Revs in its attention to the racing circuits including details of driving the racing Silverstone and Monaco, gear car or the quality of the changes, working wing graphics. mirrors, spins and crashes. But at the same time it's a Good fun and value for far easier game to get into money. and have fun with. Revs takes longer to master  Graphics but Chicane offers more or  Sound less instant race action. Value For example, Revs gives the  Playability player a view of the race COCO 24 "


"missions. SUPER HUEY The training flight is one of MACHINE: CBM 64/Atari the best \"learning\" options we've seen featured in a SUPPLIER: U.S. flight-sim program. The Gold/Audiogenic \"helicopter computer PRICE: .95 (cass) .95 system\" takes you through a (disc) series of manoeuvres with Don't be confused! Both prompts appearing to guide Audiogenic and U.S. Gold you through your first flights. ARE marketing this game You are still in complete thanks to a strange licensing control of the chopper quirk. however and a wrong Whichever company you move could end in disaster. choose to hand your hard Graphics are pretty basic earned cash over to, you can but the sound is great you rest assured that you'll be gethear the roar of the engine ting one of the best flightand the swish of the blades. simulations around Super Huey is a hi-tech  Graphics helicopter and you can fly it  Sound on Training Rescue,  Value Exploration or Combat  Playability get into the C&VG Hall of SPYHUNTER Fame like this great game MACHINE: CBM 64/Spectrum/ has? The graphics on all Atari versions are good and the SUPPLIER: US Gold game is totally addictive. Get PRICE: CBM 64 (disc) .95 it. (cass.) .95, Spectrum .95 A classic arcade game becomes a classic computer game with this all-action scrolling shoot-out from US Gold. Drive your spy-car along a treacherous roadway packed with enemies attempting to wipe you out. Take a dip in the river as your car converts to a superhydro boat and blast the  Graphics villains who set out to sink  Sound you.  Value How far can you go? How  Playability high will your score be? Will it 000 no RAPID ROUNDUP BBC/Electron CSM Kosmos Software Alligata Mirrorsoft Level 9 Software interceptor Micros English Software Micrograf AMSTRAD Micropower Robico Software Robico Software A&F Software Martech Imagine Ultimate Mr Chip Software CRL Gremlin Graphics Granard Communications SIM Answer Back Sport Night World Quick Thinking Plus Emerald Isle Tales of Arabian Nights Kissin' Kousins Vampire Castle Hacker 2000 Corpuscle Castle Quest Beeline Banjax Orpheus Brian Jacks Superstar Challenge Wizardore Knightlore Pacmania Graphics Master Olympic Skier Berks Major Blink Xargon Wars Crazy Golf Harbour Attack Stellar Wars Cuthbert in Space Mansion Adventurer 1 Williamsburg Adventurer 3 Arena 3000 Cuthbert Enters the Tombs of Doom Twin Kingdom Valley The Wizard & The Princess Classic Adventure Minipedes Petch Las Vegas Out on a Climb Catacombs Galaxions Robin to the Rescue Grand Master Chess Berks NV Defence 16 Dark Tower BMX Racers Tower of Evil Return to Eden The Snowman Booga-Boo (The Flea) Spooks & Ladders Argus Press MSX Magazine on Tape Melbourne The Hobbit Electric Studio Sprite Editor Mastertronic Finders Keepers Activision Decathlon Ghostbusters Alligata Defend or Die Interceptor Chopper Squad Software Anirog Survivor Flight Path 737 House of Usher Digital Fighter Pilot Intergration AMsoft Osprey Software Jet Set Willy Projects Final Frontier Wintersoft Rings of Darkness Software Interceptor Heroes of Kam Micros Artic Computing Ltd Amstrad World Cup Melbourne House The Hobbit Anirog Moon Buggy Taskset Warnrnrn Vortex Android Run Melbourne House Sir Lancelot Incentive Confuzion Scorpio Games Ltd Vampire Killer Micro Power Killer Gorilla Cable Software Digger Barnes Incentive Millionaire Gamma Cribbage Software Ocean Software Kong Strikes Back Hunchback 1 Daley Thompson Decathlon Argus Press Amstrad Magazine on Tape Ultimate Knightlore A&F Software Screaming Abdabs Software Projects Jet Set Willy Argus Press Atari Magazine on Tape US Gold Dropzone Pac Man Mr Do Dig Dug Ariolasoft Murder on the Zindemeuf Hard Hat Mack Mule Archon Activision Decathlon Space Shuttle English Software Kissin' Kousins Argus Press Vic Magazine on Tape Microdeal Bug Byte Melbourne House Anirog DRAGON ATARI Solar Software Audiogenic CRL Probe Software Melbourne House Mastertronic Creative Sparks Level 9 Software Quicksilva MSX Kuma VIC 20 25 "


"Via Sibro THIS LAST MONTH MONTH WEEKS IN CHARTS \"MACHINE SP CO SP CO SP CO SP CO BB EL AM SP CO BB EL SP BB AM SP CO AT OS Sp SP CI CO BB EL SP CO AM AT MS CO SP CO SP CO CI BB EL SP CO AM SP CO AM MS SP CO BB EL AM W O-NENOWNWAWAPO \"&&9& SP CO CO 2 SP CO SP CO CI SP BB SP CO MANUFACTURERS QUICKSILVA US GOLD IMAGINE DURELL MARTECH ULTIMATE US GOLD MELBOURNE HOUSE ADVENTURE INT. ACTIVISION CBS BEYOND SOFTWARE ADDICTIVE GAMES OCEAN VIRGIN DATABASE PUBLICA COMMODORE CBS PALACE ULTIMATE MIKROGEN MASTERTRONIC A & F SOFTWARE FIREBIRD MASTERTRONIC MASTERTRONIC ELITE SYSTEM 3 OCEAN US GOLD ATARI ELITE FIREBIRD INCENTIVE MASTERTRONIC LEVEL 9 ANIROG ULTIMATE MASTERTRONIC DIGITAL INTERGRA SOFTWARE PROJECT MACSEN SOFTWARE PROJECT OCEAN CREATIVE SPARKS ACORNSOFT DK TRONICS HEWSON CONSULTANT CDS US GOLD SOFT AID SPY HUNTER WORLD SERIES BASEBALL COMBAT LYNX BRIAN JACKS SUPERSTAR CHALLENGE KNIGHT LORE BRUCE LEE STARION GREMLINS GHOSTBUSTERS PITSTOP 2 SHADOWFIRE FOOTBALL MANAGER DALEY THOMPSON'S DECATHLON SORCERY MINI OFFICE INTERNATIONAL BASKETBALL IMPOSSIBLE MISSION CAULDRON ENTOMBED EVERYONE'S A WALLY BMX RACERS CHUCKIE EGG 2 BOOTY FINDERS KEEPERS VEGAS JACKPOT AIR WOLF DEATH STAR INTERCEPTOR HUNCHBACK RAID OVER MOSCOW POLE POSITION GRAND NATIONAL GYRON MOON CRESTA CHILLER EMERALD ISLE FLIGHT PATH 737 ALIEN 8 FORMULA ONE SIMULATOR FIGHTER PILOT MANIC MINER BLOCKBUSTERS JET SET WILLY MATCH DAY TOWER OF EVIL ELITE MINDER DRAGON TORC STEVE DAVIS SNOOKER ZAXXON % SP CO CI V2 DR SP CO SP CO AM SP CO BB EL V2 SP CO SP CO BB EL AT ANACO SP CO SP CO SP CO BB AM AT SP CO CI BB EL SP ARYSOSSAAN SP CO Z8 AM SP CO BB AM OR SP CO BB EL SP CO AM DR MS SP CO SP CI CO V2 BB EL SP AM SP SP AM SP CO BB AT DR SPECTRUM TOP 10 1 3 SOFT AID VARIOUS 2 1 SPY HUNTER US GOLD 3 2 WORLD SERIES BASEBALL IMAGINE 4 5 STARION MELBOURNE HOUSE 54 SHADOWFIRE BEYOND 6 7 BRUCE LEE US GOLD 7 10 CHUCKIE EGG 2 A & F SOFTWARE 8 RE FINDERS KEEPERS MASTERTRONIC 9 RE BRIAN JACKS SUPERSTAR CHALLENGE MARTECH 10 6 GYRON FIREBIRD AMSTRAD TOP 10 COMMODORE C64 TOP 10 1 KNIGHT LORE 11 SOFT AID VARIOUS 2 DALEY THOMPSON'S DECATHLON 2 3 PITSTOP 2 CBS 3 GHOSTBUSTERS 3 2 INTERNATIONAL 4 SORCERY BASKETBALL COMMODORE 5 COMBAT LYNX 4 5 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION CBS 6 FIGHTER PILOT 58 CAULDRON PALACE SOFTWARE 7 JET SET WILLY 6 NE ENTOMBED ULTIMATE 8 EMERALD ISLE 7 4 WORLD SERIES 9 MINI OFFICE BASEBALL IMAGINE 10 STEVE DAVIS SNOOKER 8 NE GROGS REVENGE US GOLD 9 6 AIR WOLF REALTIME 10 RE BRIAN JACKS' SUPERSTAR CHALLENGE MARTECH *SP-SPECTRUM, CO=COMMDORE, BB-BBC, EL-ELECTRON, C1=C16, AM-AMSTRAD, MS-MSX, AT-ATARI, DR-DRAGON, V2VIC 20, 28-ZX81, OR-ORIC 26 "


"PUICKTWOC Shoot to win! Winning is all that matters when playing video games. SVI \"QuickShot\" joysticks give you a better grip on games which are getting tougher each day. That's why over 4.5 million have been sold since 1982 SVI \"QuickShot\" is the original, award-winning joystick that offers true one-hand control with features like a hand-contoured controller, thumb/trigger fire button and Suction cups that give the thrill of arcade game play. SVI \"QuickShot\" joysticks are getting better each day. They have more winning features than ever. There are models with auto-fire switch, touch-firing pad, interchangeable controllers and for the latest MSX computers. Go with the winner and see the wide range of SVI \"QuickShot\" joysticks at your nearest dealer. SVI «QuickShot\" Joysticks. 4,500,000 Sold Worldwide. \" INNOVATIVE COMPUTING FOR TODAY AND TOMORROW SOLE AGENT: Spectravideo Ltd. 165 Garth Road Morden, Surrey SM4 4LH U.K. Tel.: 01-3300101 Tlx.: 28704 MMHVANG SPECTRAVIDEO MSX is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation BHL-024/5 "


"BEYOND CHALLENGING SOFTWARE THE FIRST ADVENTURE GAME WITHOUT TEXT! CHALLENGESOFTWARE YOU ISSUE COMMANDS THROUGH JOYSTICK KEYBOARDAIA CORLIGHT PENIS AMBASADORKBMXIX IS HELD CAPTIVE ABOAROGENERAL ZOERS STARSHIP YOU HAVE SIX FUTURE HEROES AND DO MINUTESOR REAL TIME TO RESCUE HIM GASP AT THE RELENTLESS PACE THRILALA TO THE SON GRAPHICSUVKY BE INSPIREDBA BY THEYS MUSICON  [COMMODORE BALI SHADOWFIRE IS AVAILABLE NOW FROM BETTER SOFTWARE DEALERS EVERYWHERE MAILORDER:BEYONDACOMPETITION HOUSE FARNDON ROAD MARKET HARBOROUGH ANNI LEICESTERSHIRE LE 16 9NR PRICE [9/95 YAYAN FOR SPECTRUM 48K & COMMODORE 64 INCLUDING P&P, ACCESS & BARCLAYCARD RING 0858 34567 CHEQUES & POS MADE PAYABLE TO BEYOND "


"BULGE BATTLE FOR ANTWERP For Spectrum 48K and Commodore 64 Accurate strategic simulation. Real-time combat with full scrolling graphics Lannials Liberty House, 222 Regent Street, London W1R 7DB Telephone 01-439 0666 LOTHLORIEN Argus Press Software Group "


"like. he hooded figure sits object. Or just about anything you'd quietly at the desk. He begins to manipulate The manual is well written and, knobs on a strange panel. thank goodness, understandable by Behind him, a metal figure stirs those of us who want to use computer to life. The dark and astonished programs not write them! henchmen look on nervously, ANDY won't be able to serve you awed at the control their breakfast in bed, or even bring your master possesses over the slippers, but what a painless and fun way to get started in the exciting mechanical man ... world of robotics. Once upon a time you'd read this sort But some people are never of thing in cheap pulp comics. satisfied. Want more? FRED — the Cowled villains created fantastic Friendly Robot Educational Device robots to wreak havoc and has what it takes to fulfill your ye destruction. But now we've caught for a bit more \"bite\" in a mechanical up even with the wonders featured in man films like Fritz Lang's Metropolis, and FRED is one of a series of such control is now not just possible, sophisticated robots from the but affordable as well. California-based Androbot Nolan Bushnell pretty much started Corporation. TOPO is the flagship of computer gaming when he created the line an advanced, and Pong — the original bat and ball expensive, machine that can be proarcade game not so many moons grammed for independent ago. You'd expect the originator of movement and voice. FRED shares Atari and the Chuck E. Cheese the same tailor as his older brother, Theatre Time restaurants to create as they both have distinctive something that'd knock your socks geometric shapes. Unfortunately off. And his new company, Axlon, they differ in price. He retails for TEINTER delivers the goods with ANDY, the $119.00 programmable robot. Axlon's ANDY is made of metal and high impact plastic. He's certainly not impressive at first glance, but he's kind of cute, being barely over a foot tall, all in white with black trim. But it's what he can do that will impress you and your friends. ANDY can be linked to an Atari or Commodore 64 computer by a long cord which attaches to the second joystick port. Providing that you keep his four batteries fresh, this little guy will move at your command, spin, and blink his eyes on and off. He'll produce sounds to your specifications and has sensors that can be programmed to respond to light and/or sound. Two programs are provided on disc. The demonstration program responds to letter-indicated commands and also allows ANDY to be joystick controlled. Also included is the Personality Editor program. This lets you really tailor ANDY to your wishes. It uses English commands to set up IF/THEN statements which can then be incorporated into the operation program. You could create an \"angry\" personality, causing ANDY to react by beeping and spinning around every time he bumps into an $499.00. That's a far cry from TOPO and a mile from the eldest, BOB Brains on Board — who retails for over $7,000. FRED may only be 14\" tall, but he updated versions of these titles on doesn't stand short when you disc for various computers, including examine his specs. He can be the Atari which reader Lester is directed by a wireless remote unit, or most concerned with. So they should used with an Apple or Commodore be available in the UK soon. Lester 64. An optional interface is required would also appreciate some tips on when a computer does the directing level 87 of Lode Runner. Anyone out and is used with FREDSOFT, a Logo there with answers? like language sold separately for Speaking of games, did you ever $79.00. wonder what kind of colour monitors FRED's tether is a 16 foot infra-red game reviewers prefer? After all, light link. they tend to spend hours before a One of the neatest things about tiny screen muttering to themselves FRED is his digitised voice. He about \"knows\" over 55 words which can be program. programmed into sentences. In fact, My solution is to blow everying up he'll speak out when his batteries on a projection television. Games start to run down. It makes him hard look great and you really feel like to ignore. you're part of the action. It may not be the highest resolution, but what's ELSEWHERE good really shines when it's bigger In a recent letter from Hong Kong, a than life. And it's a lot easier on the reader, Lester L, asks about the status old eyeballs too. Add a pair of wireof the LucasFilm games, Ballblazer less joysticks and it's an unbeatable and Rescue at Fractalus. combination. What happened was that the It's a good thing I stay in shape, original LucasFilm/Atari programs because all this month has been one were pirated left and right months long adventure. I've been battling before their planned release in June everything from wizards to monsters, of '84. Then Atari went under and moving through strange and mystical everything got put on hold. lands including one that is all too Epyx of Sunnyvale is now releasing real. You'll find out about that soon! 30 "


"bridges, leaping across space and many years, and all that's missing are solving problems. Seven separate the sewer alligators. screens pit Conan against dangerous The mailman brings a late arrival. adversaries, each screen to be Perfect timing it's the Adventure defeated before finally confronting Construction Set from Electronic Arts the evil Volta. (C64). Designed by Stuart Smith of Gathering my wits, I begin Master Ali-Baba and Return of Heracles of the Lamps from Activison (C64). As fame, this arcade/graphic program an Arabian Prince, your missin is to enables you to create whole worlds recork the Genie who has escaped of adventure and fill them with from his lamp. But first your must fly creatures and objects of your own your magic carpet through everchoosing. spiralling geometric shapes. Falling Imagine being able to play Zeus off returns you to the start. Successful and ordain the pattern of events for navigation with the joystick brings mere mortals to follow. you into his magical Den. The program comes with a miniQuick thinking will enable you to series of adventures that act as a ring the coloured bells so that they tutorial, and there are three subsets match the notes the Genie is blowing to use Fantasy, Spy/Mystery and down at you. Beware, though, as Science Fiction. A full-blown game each note has the power to push you called Rivers of Light is also right out of the Den and back to the included. I wish I had had this kind of start. control before. A piece of the lamp is a reward for I think I'll quit adventuring for a completing a level you win when while. I've lost 10lbs. and can't stop the lamp reassembles itself and checking behind doors for hidden contains the Genie once again. But traps. then there are two othermore Maybe it's time to go back to deadly, Genies yet to face! blowing up aliens! AMERICA oonish. Strategic Simulations are best known for their series of wargame scenarios. Gemstone Warrior (Apple/C64) is an exception to this. being an excellent addition to the list of arcade-style adventures. You have been chosen to recover the long-lost gemstones. Passing through a mystical gate takes you through a myriad of screens, each filled with mystery, treasures and danger. Using keyboard and joystick, you must fight off monsters and demons as you strive to set the world right. Magical objects discovered become part of your arsenal and you must always be prepared to fire arrows or hurl magical fireballs. Each screen is loaded from disc, and access time is amazingly fast even from the Commodore disc drive. Adventure lovers will find this most diverting. Robert E. Howard's barbarian, Conan, has made the transition from the printed word to comic-books and movies. Now he stars in his own video game (Reviewed in C&VGs April 85 issue). Datasoft's Conan (Atari/C64) has the muscular hero jumping over A kaleidoscope motif is integral to the game and combines with the Manufacturer's information: music to create an atmosphere that is ADVENTURE CONSTRUCTION SET both pleasant and cartoonish. Electronic Arts Now comes a change of pace from 2755 Campus Drive mystical worlds to a setting stranger San Mateo, California 94403 than any can imagine perhaps the ANDY THE PERSONALITY ROBOT greatest adventure of all, more terriAxlon, INC. fying than anything you've ever 1287 Lawrence Station Road known. It's NYC, the Big Apple Sunnyvale, California 94086 (Atari/C64). How dare Synapse CONAN Software create a game that parallels Available in the UK from US Gold. life here so well?! NYC isn't so much FRED about gaining points as it is about just The Androbot Corporation plain survival. 550 Charcott Avenue You play the part of a tourist driving San Jose, California 95131 your car around a graphic representGEMSTONE WARRIOR Strategic Simulations, INC. ation of the City. You can park in a pay-lot or take a 883 Stierlin Road, Bldg. A-200 chance on a vacant space. You then Mountain View, California 94043-1983 move your small figure about the MASTER OF THE LAMPS various buildings. Activision Home Computer Software Points are accumulated as you try 2350 Bayshore Frontage Road to post mail, capture stray animals in Mountain View, California 94043 the Central Park zoo, and eat lunch. NYC-THE BIG APPLE All the while, the City is conspiring Synapse Software against you. You could get hit by a 0041 Central Avenue car and forced to pay extravagant Richmond, California 94804 hospital fees. Or watch with horror as | Author's bio: your car is towed away. Or When not operating his experience any of the many other photographic studio in New York arcade-style dangers. City, Marshal M. Rosenthal is a This is a superbly entertaining computer columnist for a number of game that will have you climbing the publications dealing in computers, walls graffiti covered of course! video and high technology. I've been living in New York City for 31 "


"OC COMPETITION AIRWOLF B3352 Ten first prize winners will get a very special Airwolf digital watch. We've Airwolf stars Jan Michael Vincent, also got 20 copies of the game for who plays Stringfellow Hawke, an ex. second prize winners and 20 glossy, Vietnam chopper pilot and the only full colour, giant 5x3 Airwolf man who can master the billion dollar helicopter known as Airwolf. posters for the runners-up. Although the TV super 'copter is Airwolf, the game, is available for fictional, it does include features the Spectrum, C64, Amstrad, C16, actually built in to some of America's Atari and Einstein micros. hi-tech military helicopters. It is All you have to do to win a prize in designed to look like an ordinary our Airwolf extravaganza is tell us executive aircraft but is really a how many differences you can find in wolf in sheep's clothing! our two Airwolf illustrations. Once you've decided how many differences there are, fill in the ico C&VG/ELITE AIRWOLF coupon and rush it to Computer & and rush it to Computer COMPETITION Co Video Games, Airwolf Competition, i Name. Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, Address......... London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is July 16th, normal C&VG competition There are ............. differences. rules apply and the editor's decision ! Computer owned. is final. irwolf the super 'copter — A will be blasting back to your LTV screens very soon. And, to celebrate the return of this exciting series, C&VG and Elite, the people who brought you the exciting computer game based on the show, have put together an Airwolf Competition exclusively for C&VG readers. The prizes are pretty exclusive too! 32 "


"BEYOND CHALLENGING SOFTWARE Now for Spectrum 48K and Commodore 64 CHALLENGING SOFTWARE NOMINATED FOR MICRO FIRST BRITISH COMPUTINGOLO AWARDS 1985 Spy vs Spy is two player cartoon fun! The black and white spies chase each other around the embassy. They steal secrets and plant traps, playing against each other on a split screen display, Available from software dealers everywhere or direct from Beyond Competition House, Farndon Road, Market Harborough, Leicester LE 16 9NR, Access/Barclaycard telephone: 0858 34567 Price .95 inc, P&P "


"om Bally MIDWAY. Bally/MIDWAY NEW! Up Down OFFICIAL OFFICIA OUR ARCADE GAN HITS. WE BROUC PLATER 155636 MI SCORE SO24 ROUND 1 Nuo Down Here at Sega, we like to think we know a thing or two about quality. Our reputation has been forged in the World's most competitive market, the American arcades. Discerning arcade players and they know a thing or two as well: have voted our games some of Like chasing the mighty ape up Monkey Mountain in CONGO BONGO, number 3 in the Billboard Chart in 1984. You'll ride hippos, dodge charging rhinos and do battle with Jungle creatures: but make sure you don't end up as a lunch time treat for a man eating fish! Or you can have a smashing time with Bally Midway's UP'N'DOWN. This is a frustrated motorists dream you bash your way over rough roads. Suss00312220 12736 0 innovation as one chatt-topper has followed another But why should the arcade players have all the fun we were asked. Of course there was no reason at all: and so we decided to bring our games home and let all the family have a piece of the action. We have re-written the programs for many of the popular home computers and now everyone from junior to grandma can have a gol the best of all time. They've enjoyed high speed action, breathtaking graphics, thrills and spills, variety and Commodore 64 Spectrum Amstrad leap dead ends, canyons and crush nn wh gets in the way Ne in SPY HUNTER NOW NOW SOON the Play Meter Conversions Poll. UP'N'DOWN is one smash hit that TAPPER NOW NOW SOON really is a smash! UP'N'DOWN NOW SOON SOON And if all that doesn't drive you to drink then TAPPER willi This has got CONGO BONGO NOW SOON SOON to be the loudest, wackiest saloon bar ZAXXON** NOW* NOW SOON there's ever been. The action gets truly out of hand as the overworked BUCK ROGERS NOW NOW SOON bar tender scrambles to serve his unruly (and very thirsty) customers. Published by Synapse Software Corp. under licence from Sega Enterprises Ltd. **Atari version of ZAXXON available on cassette and published by Datasoft loc under licence from Sega Enterprises Ltd Videoganje copyright 1983 g Enterprises Ltd. Sally Midway is a trademark of Tally Midway Mfg.Co Package and program copyright  1984 Sega Enterprises, Inc. TAPPER and SPYHUNTER are trade "


"DWAY 571750/2 \"CDU NEW BUCKROGERS +HUNTER   em GATE EOL OFFICIAL MES WERE SUCHBIC CHT THM HOME GO or a destroy deadly space hoppers and alien saucers. Your race against death has just begunl Prepare for battle with your most powerful enemy.. the mother ship. You must hit her dead centre-anything less wift only waste fuel. Aim steady, but hurry...your fuel is dangerously low! And finally there's the legendary ZAXXON-the ultimate experience. You'll pilot a space fighter through force-fields and enemy fire on your PLAYER 1 1398 ENEM PLANES Work your way through the wild Western Saloon to the Sports Bar. From there to the slam dancing Punk Bar and into the Space Bar where the customers really are out of this world Down to earth with SPYHUNTER from Bally Midway. But don't expect any chance of a rest. After all, this was the number 1 arcade game of 1984 and now you're in the hot-seat of the deadliest machine on four wheels. You're after enemy spies. The situation is life and death. You'll need every weapon you've got machine guns and guided missiles, oil slicks and smoke sereens. But the enemy is everywhere. On the road, in the water, even in the air. So you'll have to be more than fast to stay alive in SPYHUNTER: you II need brains and guts as well! Fly into the 25th century and bear the mantle of the legendary BUCK ROGERS. Skillfully slip through deadly electron posts. Dodge and SORE 049370 RRR We're bringing all this action home to you and now under the U.S. Gold label you'll find versions for the Spectrum and Amstrad too. With U.S. Gold and Sega, the arcade winners, you'll be a winner too. Hands down! ***** U.S. GOLD 37793 mission to do battle with the deadly ZAXXON. Countless others have gone before: now it's your turn to do battle. You'll quickly see why ZAXXON is one of only ten games that have made it into Electronic Games' American Hall of Fame. SEGA bar THE ARCADE WINNERS Commodore 64 Cassette .95 Manufactured in the U.E. by U.S. Gold Commodore 64 Disk .95 Limited. Unit 10, Parkway Industrial Centre. OCCO Spectrum 48K Heneage Street. Birmingham B7 4LY .95 Telephone: 021-359 8881. ZAXXON is a trademark of Sega Baterprises Inc. Copyright  1984 Sega interprises Inc UP'N'DOWN is a trademark of Sega Enterprises Ltd. manufactured under licence from Sega Enterprises Ltd.. Japan m arks of Bally Midway Mfg.Co. Videogame copyrighe 1989 Bally Midway Mfg.Co. All rights reserved. CONGO BONGO is a trademark of Sega Enterprises, Inc. Copyright 1983. Sega Enterprises Inc. es Ltd trade "


"JONAH: BARRINGTON'S FEATURING Reprosound ll the speed and excitement of championship squash is now available at your fingertips in a game so realistic you'll need a shower afterwards! Written with the help of Jonah Barrington, former World Squash Champion, the game keeps to the International Squash Racquet Federation rules as far as is possible. You serve in a 3D glass-backed court to play against your computer, or, using the game's two player option you can challenge a friend There are 4 levels of difficulty, and depending how fit you are you can play 1, 3 or 5 game matches! Check your score with the on screen display, but as your eyes are too busy watching the ball, Jonah Barrington acting as marker calls out the score for you. All this is due to a programming breakthrough that enables your computer to accurately reproduce the human voice without any hardware add-ons! The game also incorporates a User Defined Joystick/Keys option which means that you can set your keyboard to suit you, or play with just about any make of joystick So get in training for this high-powered action game now It's your service next! FOR Commodore 64 and all 48K Spectrums .95 News. Generation Tes your service next! Software (GSH) New Generation products are. sold according to their terms of trade and conditions of sale. FREEPOST, Bath BA2 4TD. Tel: 0225 316924 "


"OG Dear Sirs (writes the very polite money? one of those cleaning tapes as they Carlos Garcia Fernandez from Yours confusedly, tend to wear your head away. Espana), Rebecca Corwell. I write about the MSX program Now here's something interesting. Major Tom. I have hunted a bug. The BBC model B+, just in case Five minutes ago I opened a letter Line 720 says IF STRIG(O) THEN you didn't know, was launched at from Nick Phillips who says that usGOTO 80 ELSE GOTO 720. the beginning of May. The price of ing a name of CODEBUSTERS and an I think that the line should be IF the plain old model B is still , account number of 00166605 on that STRIG(O) = -1 THEN GOTO 80 while the B+ enters the market at certain well known game will give ELSE GOTO 720. $499. At almost  for a 64k 6502 you a million dollars. I put it aside, to I wish, if is possible, you publish micro, it's twice the price of other decide whether or not to print it, more MSX programs. machines in its class and the when I came across a similar letter Actually, Sir, we're both right. number of improvements over the from Neil Shaefer from Billingham. If Next time you sit down at your still-overpriced model B can be you have Ghostbusters, he says, try keyboard, try typing PRINT counted on the humps of a camel. using a name of CODEBUSTERS and 2+2=4. You'll find that the There's 64k of RAM, which an account number of 00166605 and computer prints 1. Next, type leaves a minimum of 32k free you'll get 85,000 dollars. Strange, eh? PRINT 2+2=5 and you'll find zero whatever screen mode you're in. Hey, what's this? Another letter printed instead. What this shows is And there's more ROM sockets, about Ghostbusters? This time it's that, to the computer, 1 is the which will save you having to pull from Robert Wilby in Blackpool. Hey, same as \"true\" and 0 is the same out VIEW with a screwdriver when guess what?, he says. Er, it's not how as \"not true\". you want to use SLAVE. to get 85,000 dollars, is it Robert? Or a Now, when you type IF And there's a built-in Disk Filing million? No, 850,000. Really! How? STRIG(O), what you're actually System (DFS to those in the know) Just type in a name of CODEBUSTERS saying is IF STRG(O) IS TRUE, with FORMAT and VERIFY V and an account number of ... which is the same as IF commands included. STRIG(O)= -1. The opposite of IF Acornsoft, the software division Dear BH, STRIG(O), by the way is IF NOT of Acornetti, have no plans to Is the new Amstrad machine worth STRIG(O). It may make the A introduce any software exclusively buying? I've heard good and bad program a little less easy to for the B+, though the same can't reports, and can't seem to make up understand, but it does save be assumed for other software my mind. memory. I hope this is of use to houses. If you do a lot of The new Amstrad 664 is the same you, Sir, and hope that you can programming, the extra memory as the 464, but with built-in disc find someone to translate my reply will be useful. But, if you have drive. It comes with CP/M and for you.  to spend on a micro, stick to LOGO. While LOGO may not be the standard BBC and buy yourself the most popular language under I was wondering, says Gary Betts, if a few games with the change. the sun, it is fun to use, and makes you could set up a bulletin board a change from Basic. And CP/M, which people could subscribe to. Barnaby Legg has a 48k Spectrum (no in case you didn't know, is the Then I could get C&VG through my it's not a poem, it's a letter), but most popular operating system for modem. recently, he moans, his cassette | Z-80-based micros. Which means Bulletin boards and viewdata recorder will load games perfectly 1 that loads of software should soon systems, like Micronet, are great for but won't save any, What can I do be available, though it'll mostly be some things but not for others. You'll about it, he asks. serious stuff like word processors find most of C&VGs Spectrum and Well, assuming that you remember and business software. As a games BBC programs up there from now on, to press RECORD when you save, I machine, it's similar to the Specso if you're a member you can put can't say for sure. It may be that your trum and, if you ever see Knight away your typing finger. However, head (on the cassette recorder, silly) Lore on it, you'll agree that it's a have you ever seen pictures as good is dirty and affecting the quality of the pretty good buy for the money. as C&VGs on Micronet? At the mo recording. Alternatively, it could be ment, you just can't do it. In a few the Spectrum. Find a friend with a Well that's about it for this month. years, though, Picture Prestel will Speccy, if you can, and ask him to try Remember, if you have a problem mean photo-quality bulletin boards, loading one of the games that you've with your micro, or there's but the cost of a Picture-Prestel ter saved. If it turns out to be the Spec something in the manual that you minal is about the same as a 250 year trum at fault, and it's still under just can't get to grips with, drop subscription to C&VG. guarantee, return it to the shop me a line to the C&VG office or to where you bought it and ask for it to the Bug Hunter account on Dear Bug Hunter, be mended. If it's the cassette Micronet, number 0127865576. Can you tell me something about recorder, do the same. But before Please mark your envelopes Prothe new BBC micro that was you do anything like that, try cleaning blem Page, so that we can separate launched last month. Is it better than the head with some head-cleaning the problems from the Bug Hunter the model B? Is it worth the extra fluid on a cotton bud, but DON'T use letters. 37 "


NA


"Herbie Briggs has just destroyed the myth that all floppy discs are created equal. floppy stiffer. Stronger. And your data safer. To resist bulging, warping, puckering, or opening up. MEMOREX SOLID-SEAM BONDING: Every inch of every seam is sealed shut. Tight as a drum. They seem equal. Until you look at the seams. That's where equality ends. Most companies seal their discs with a spot here, a spot there. Leaving most of each seam not sealed at all. Sooner or later, the seams might do what comes naturally: they bulge. Warp. Pucker. Open up. Pens, pencils, fingernails-even a fouryear-old's, like Herbic-can catch and snag in those wide open spaces. That's sloppy. And dangerous. Because if you put a sloppy floppy into your disc drive, it can jam your drive. Ruin your drive head. Lose your data. So much for their seams. Ours are different. THE SLOPPY FLOPPY: Sealed with a spot here, a spot there. Leaving unsealed seams everywhere. To resist all the things that can jam your drive, ruin your drive head, or lose your data. Which proves that a Memorex floppy disc isn't equal to all the others. It's better. Solid-Seam Bonding is just one example of the extra care that goes into every Memorex floppy disc. Be it 8' 574\" or the new 312\" Extra care that lets us guarantee every Memorex disc to be 100% error-free. The next time you're buying a floppy disc-or a few hundred of them-just remember this: It's always better to be safe than sloppy. For more information on the full line of Memorex quality computer media products, including computer MEMOREX tape, call Memorex U.K. Ltd., 96-104 Church Street, MEMOREX Staines, Middlesex. Tel: 0784 51488 Memorex uses a process we developed, called Solid-Seam Bonding. Solid-Seam Bonding seals shut every inch of every seam of every Memorex floppy disc. Tight as a drum. That makes the Memorex Your Data. When it matters, make it Memorex.\" MEMOREX Memorex is a registered trademark of Memorex Corporation 1984 Memorex Corporation "


"STAR SEEKER Watch the skies this autumn and you'll see a spectacular sight. Halley's Comet is streaking across the heavens and will be close enough to be observed with the naked eye by the end of this year. It only comes around every 76 years — so don't miss it! While you're waiting for the comet to turn up, you could be observing other interesting objects in the skies not just passing UFOS either. Our MSX expert, TOM SATO, who also used to study astronomy and often spent time overseeing observation work at the University of London Observatory in North London, now looks at the odd goings on in the night sky and some of the new astronomy software which can help you enjoy the wonders of the real universe... here's no doubt that the Between November this year and arrival of Halley's Comet March 1986, you too will be able to will be one of the most witness this great event. It will spectacular celestial events of the appear low in the western sky just decade. after sunset. It will be more easily This comet has punctuated our observed in the southern hemishistory every 76 years with phere but it should be visible to the awesome display. The earliest naked eye in the skies above this record of its appearance was in country. 87BC. For many centuries the great You'll also be able to watch it on comet terrified people. It was television. The Americans, blamed for famine, revolution, Russians, and Japanese are sending plague, and wars. Now we know spacecraft to take a closer look at better, but it was not until 1682 that this fascinating object. The astronomer, Edmond Halley European Space Agency is also discovered that the comet sending a probe, called Giotto (proapproaching that year was the very nounced Jotto), using the Ariane launch rocket. The space craft Giotto is now being built by British Aerospace and will approach the LOOKING comet as close as 300 miles to take DUE WEST TV pictures of the comet's surface. 23 STARS PLOTTED 1-0 1984 DEOSENSH ELEVATION 1518 12 E FIELD 900 46 STARS PLOTTED 1 Oct 1984 17.00 GMT temperature. The solar wind, then carries this plasma away from the comet nucleus to form the \"tail\". While you are waiting for the comet, you could still see some amazing sights in the night sky. It's good fun solving the mysteries of the universe and there are many fascinating phenomena you can observe simply by looking up. If you go hill walking in midsummer, and if the air is clear enough and city lights far enough away, you can see many streaks of light appearing in the sky. Often the streaks are so faint that you might think that you were seeing things. However, what you are seeing is a typical meteor shower. A good meteor shower to see is the Perseids in mid-August. You'll see about 12 meteors per hour! What are meteors? Well, they are dust particles smaller than a grain of sand floating about in space. When they come near to the Earth, the gravitational pull of the Earth attracts these grains and they start to fall. When they reach the Earth's atmosphere, the particle starts to burn because of the friction. Most meteors just burn up in the upper atmosphere and rarely make it to the ground but every day the Earth is showered with these objects. Occasionally, the Earth passes through a patch in space where there are a lot of these floating dust particles. It's thought that they are left over from passing comets. As comets whizz around the solar system, they gradually break up and leave a dust trail behind them. These dust particles tend to travel together and that's why there are streams of meteors which the Earth passes periodically. Recently a number of software houses have realised the potential for astronomy software to cater for the growing interest in astronomy. as Halley's Comet approaches. Three astronomy programs have just been released which are now available for the BBC: Star Gazer by Century, Star Seeker by Mirrorsoft and Astronomy by BBC publications. Star Gazer and Star Seeker are star map programs which show you what can be seen by the naked eye. The Mirrorsoft Star Seeker ELEVATION FIELD 900 Do you want to send this to the La STEBAZE YOUT OptionsLic.. UN,P. H Please press the appropriate ke U STEP 89 SCALE 3 Longitude: 0.06U atitude: Press \"S\" to stop the motions Orion same one that had appeared in Many astronomers now widely 1456, 1531 and 1607. He did some believe that comets are just huge calculations and predicted that the snowballs containing rocks. comet would appear once again in When they approach the Sun, the the year 1758. When the comet intense radiation evaporates the returned on cue, it was named surface of the comet and gas and Halley's Comet to honour the dust are blown away as a glowing astronomer! plasma at an extremely high 40 "


"STAR SEEKER MACHINE: BBC B/C64/Spectrum/ MSX PRICE: .95 FORMAT: cassette PUBLISHER: Mirrorsoft STARFINDER MACHINE: BBC B PRICE: .95 FORMAT: cassette PUBLISHER: Century Communications STARSPHERE program was devised by Dr Paul Philips of University College London. Star Seeker allows you to move the cursor to the position of a star and find out all the facts about it of which over 300 are covered. This package includes a program called Solar System which shows the position of the planets and also works out where Halley's Comet is. Most useful in the coming months. Star Gazer is also a star mapping program but it includes a 100 page book on astronomy written by Heather Cooper, who is the current President of the British Astronomical Association. MACHINE: Spectrum PRICE: .95 FORMAT: cassette PUBLISHER: Eclipse Software SPACE SCAN Spectrum owners can look to the heavens using software packages like Starsphere from the aptly named Eclipse Software. Starsphere can plot 355 stars in 45 constellations and is menu driven. It gives a map of the entire night sky which can be rotated to show how the star patterns change with the passage of time. Space Scan from MacMillan is an educational package. It won't give you star maps but it will show you the shape and position of any one of 15 constellations. You also get a quiz option to test your knowledge. Eaglesoft's The Solar System is a sort of Hitch Hiker's Guide to the objects \"captured by the gravity of the Sun\". The menu allows you to select various text information about various subjects combined with graphic illustrations. MACHINE: Spectrum PRICE: $5.95 FORMAT: cassette PUBLISHER: MacMillan THE SOLAR SYSTEM If you would like to hear up-to-date news on astronomy, why not give British Telecom's Spaceline a ring. It is run by Dr David Whitehouse and updated every week. To hear the recording, phone (01) 246 8055. MACHINE: Spectrum PRICE: .50 FORMAT: cassette PUBLISHER: Eaglesoft WIN A TRIP TO THE PLANETARIUM! If we've aroused your interest in comes nicely packaged with an 4) When was Halley's Comet last watching the heavens then why not informative booklet. seen from Earth? Once you've answered all the 5) Which famous astronomer was the competition! There's more than one questions, fill in the coupon, not for first to use the telescope? way to learn about the stars but we getting to tell us which computer you reckon the best is to take a trip to the own, and send it to Computer & London Planetarium where you can Video Games, Star Seeker Compe-C&VG/MIRROR C&VG/MIRRORSOFT STAR watch all the wonders of the universe tition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon SEEKER COMPETITION unfold around you. And you don't Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing need a ticket to ride on the Space date for the competition is July 16th. My answers are:.. Shuttle to get there! Employees of Mirror Group NewsAll you have to do to win a FREE papers, Pergamon Press, their agents 2.. ticket for two people to gain and families are not eligible to enter. 3.. admission to this intergalactic house Normal C&VG rules also apply and 4 of fun is answer the simple astronomy the editor's decision is final. quiz below We've got 10 double tickets to the THE QUESTIONS Name............. Planetarium to give away, thanks to 1) What is the Pole Star also known the people at London's big tourist as? attraction and Mirrorsoft, publishers 2) How many planets are there in our computer owned (tick box): of the Star Seeker program. 25 Solar System? Spectrum C64 BBC/Electron runners-up will get a copy of the 3) Which planet is furthest from the MSX Mirrorsoft Star Seeker tape, which Sun? Address......... "


"Meet the Gang! Wilma Tom Herbert Everyone's a way IST EVER MULTI-ROLE ARCADE ADVENTURE Includes Hit Single on reverse \"Everyone's A Wally\" performed by Mike Berry Spectrum 48K .95 HOUSE Commodore 64 .95 Amstrad CPC 464 .95 44 The Broadway, Bracknell, Berks. 0344 427317 MIKRO-GEN YEAR GOLDEN "


"MAMA LLAMA commodoret Price .50 Lamosoft ORIGINAL SOFTWARE DEDION AVAILABLE FROM W.H. SMITHS, BOOTS, WOOLWORTHS AND MOST COMPUTER RETAILERS OR FROM LLAMASOFT 49 MOUNT PLEASANT, TADLEY, HANTS (TEL. 07356 4478) SAE FOR CATALOGUE & NEWSLETTER *THE NATURE OF THE BEAST! "


"FESSO ROFE MAPO ere they are! YOUR maps in print! Ever since our dear old Prof. began giving lessons, his office has gradually been dis. appearing under a vast mound of maps sent in by his loyal students. So he managed to get hold of the editor and persuaded him to use some of these masterworks in the magazine. We've got maps of Everyone's a Wally, Staff of Karnath, Airwolf, Finders Keepers, Bruce Lee and Wizard's Lair-plus the winning map in our Gift from the Gods contest. So if you've sent the Prof. a map, dive between these pages to see if he's picked out yours! SPECIAL VIDEO EVERYONE'S A WALLY TE O-OO We moes WEKET F. GAME om SATE PA T O KET SHOT NORMAL PAINWAY EPY OW CLAYA See-up)  WY WAY SW RUSSE ROND MIL RE. DockS TK R. LAO 1 NOMRW ENDURANCE ENDURANCE ENDURANCE: 19. t. 0\" 44. "


"is first role was in Automania, 4) Go into the Zoo and swap the nuts move away and you can climb to the then Pyjamarama and now the for the Monkey wrench. Without the top of the pylon and replace the epic Everyone's a Wally. Who? nuts you are not allowed into the zoo, insulator. Wally of course! and you get thrown into the TO STAMP THE PARCEL: In this game, the object is to open Aquarium one of the \"arcade\" 1) You must be WILMA. sequences, not unlike Decathlon. 2) Get the rubber stamp and the the money contained within, in order You can also get thrown into the parcel. to pay your family The Gang Aquarium by standing on top of the 3) Walk to the end of the Post Office, wages for work they've done. First, fountain, or by going into the safe and it will be stamped. though, each character must do his without a piece of the combination. 4) Now you have to bring it to the work. Each character there are five 5) Stand on top of the fountain in the docks. But I'm not sure where to put has their own special abilities. town square. The fountain is now it! Wally is the Gaffer, an odd job man, mended! TO REPAIR HOOK: Dick is a plumber, Tom the Punk is a TO BUILD THE WALL: 1) You must be WALLY. mechanic, Harry the Hippie is an 1) You must be WALLY. 2) Get hook and super glue. electrician and Wilma is Wally's wife 2) Get the bucket and the sand. 3) Go to workshop, jump around the and, sexist though it is, her speciality 3) Stand in the fountain bucket fills. equipment and it will be fixed. is shopping! By the way, there 4) Go to the cement mixer and move You'll have to work everything else appears to be a few clues to the game around it until you hear a noise. out for yourselves folks! Anyone who on the song by Mike Berry on side 5) Get the trowel and go to Wall has any more problem solutions for one of the tape, but my lips are Street. Everyone's a Wally should send them sealed! 6) Walk along the wall and the wall is to Prof. Video's Workshop. One last There is a sixth character, Herbert, now built! thing. If you're wondering how one Wally and Wilma's baby, but he is TO MEND THE FUSE: screen can be entered from the uncontrollable and lowers your 1) You must be HARRY. centre of the lower one, it's easy. Just endurance on contact. The where 2) Get the fuse wire and the fuse. The walk into the blank space between a abouts of any character can be found fuse is now fixed! building and a bush or whatever and by pressing keys 1-5, which will TO REPAIR THE ELECTRICITY press the Exit/Enter button. Now you cause the name of the street or build PYLON: know why the map is the way it is! ing they are at to be printed. Without 1) You must be HARRY. further ado, I will give you some help 2) Jump into the telephone booth and Micro-Gen have started a special in getting into the game. play Asteroids until a short tune is Wally phone-in helpline for unTO MEND THE FOUNTAIN: sounded fortunate addicts of the game. 1) You must be DICK. 3) Leave the Booth and get the good Comfort and help can be found on 2) Go to the Bakers and take the insulator (Wilma usually has it). 0344 56447. A soothing voice will Monkey nuts. 4) Get the screwdriver from the issue hints and tips on the Wally 3) Go to the Post Office and take the Railway Station. games. plunger. 5) Go to School Lane, the sparks will 45 "


"BACKPACKER'S GUIDE A seseorang permanen A mi mammm my warm y I O Shaman bo Tra la lie Lam Lamar mand Pas y Am 6 Z los M Langue EL En de las $7200 Sharon 21 Jermos FELNn the ruha haze Jau rnon lorrunde ab my mia A au T pero my guerra de Troups 5 GRAM Avrupe s u prug bam aman Sanomat  re Lut 207 kang gurita malzeme y fram um amimaan roy a nn noch m e n met me te mos 5 a Maxivovane e per arrenale WAVVmdam Su ndrammes og Bergneva a Sant P ere BAC barwner D Thargon ice n Double headed Emw of Thwark Love poems Qually Googlybird Tranquilliers Unidragedile B E Grass Gobhoblin J Magie wild berries bome headed Hook K Slymewold cheese Spiny Norman L Maggots Refrigerator Sottoid Mega Mandkerchief u rt Tas bags GUIDE TOWN Hydrogen i Co Sirian Prickle Puss Flufflelump projected Image) f Blood Fluff "


"= ne of the Prof's ace advisers, the legendary Des Claypole from Peterborough, came up with this massive map of The Backpacker's Guide. We had two choices of what to do with this masterpiece wallpaper the entire C&VG office with it or shrink it down to size using the wonders of modern technology and stick it in the mag. As you can see, we dealt with it that way. Big or small, Mr Claypole's map is a real winner! 39 SPECIAL ESSOA 16 Lomamm am more on wraps Lamba DEO'S Tutup mot mune cas y MARRRR  odrej are many rere m terma . laminans E Sony Moran Shame UM pay mucho es fa Shad She er moramo    Sada pa * ? gewer s em FALAS un aus pwede mo nang du 219 Sas 2 rich G e rmany pusowel para man h umlamamu rond mehr * 18 un z Mat Can Sarana es Say Sne Day w Em on mo s paau Toner het LAU ALUNMAZ Sj l eerzame mannen eller Commons et ger hWe mus NOTAS man sal 2 S9. am Frans jang 2 si wanca y POE men min og Emmy RA  STROFE DE SISOIT Irodurreser Error Flat maar huwa wawi Tasman 2 hamam new Morelles Teatteri A CKPACKERS TO THE AVENT "


"OFESSOS ROFE SPECIAL The Staff of RRRRRO6 KITCHEN STORE-ROOM NORTH TOWER LOWER EAST TOWER LOWER GREAT HALL LAUNDRY SERVANTS QUARTERS ARMOURY WEST TOWER LOWER LOWER GUARD ROOM SOUTH TOWER LOWER GROUND FLOOR LOWER GUARD ROOM: Use \"Forthrin\" on armour. ARMOURY: Stairs to dungeons. WEST TOWER LOWER. Careful footwork. SERVANTS QUARTERS: Use \"Forthrin\" on ghost. NORTH TOWER LOWER: Using \"Ibrahim\" on the spider releases the piece of the pentangle in the storeroom. GREAT HALL: Zap the piece of the pentangle in the fire with the \"Aeulus\" spell. KITCHEN: Use \"Forthrin\" and fancy footwork. EAST TOWER LOWER: Wait for the skull to go to the right and grab the piece. LAUNDRY: The cross from the upper guard room is needed to get in here. When in just grab the piece. SOUTH TOWER LOWER: The vampire guarding the door to the laundry will move only when you have the cross from the upper guard room. STORE ROOM: Piece in the cobweb. To get it use \"Ibrahim\" on the spider in the north tower lower and make a run for it. UPPER GUARD ROOM: Use \"Forthrin\" to deal with the witch temporarily. There is a cross on the shield which is hanging on the wall. This is needed to move the vampire from the laundry door in the south tower lower. To get it, first zap the shield with the \"Throbin\" spell. When the cross falls onto the floor zap it with the \"Omphalos\" spell and pick it up. TIMELESS ROOM To get the piece on the bed, fire the \"Throbin\" spell at the carpet and then run onto it before it levitates. WEST TOWER UPPER: Use \"Ibrahim\" on the troll. TREASURY: \"Knossos\" causes the serpent to levitate. NORTH TOWER UPPER: \"Stoly\" shuts down the electric door long enough to get through. BALCONY: Use \"Forthrin\" on monk, also use \"Forthrin\" to shield against electric shocks from the suits of armour. MORNING ROOM: From left hand side of room zap flowers on table with \"Ibrahim\" until they fall off the table. LIBRARY: Fire \"Yerobas\" at the piece of pentangle before picking it up to stop the skeleton attacking. EAST TOWER UPPER: Duck under the skull when it rises. WAITING ROOM: Wait a minute and watch the wall above the fireplace. UPPER FLOOR SOUTH TOWER LOWER: Nothing in here. DUNGEONS: \"Ibrahim\" stops the troll in his tracks for an instant. Walking between the second and third coffins raises the red skull further to the right in the dungeon to reveal a piece of the pentangle. When you hear the beep, run to the skull as it closes pretty quickly. The ghosts guard ing the coffins can be zapped with \"Forthrin\". ABODE OF KARN: \"Forthrin\" can be used to deal with the gargoyles. OBELISK: Use \"Baracata\" to enter all 16 pieces of the pentangle into the obelisk. When the last piece is inserted, the side of the obelisk will rise up to reveal the staff of Karnath. When it is revealed, quickly select the \"Menhir\" spell and zap the staff. TIPS ON PLAYING 1) To dodge the missiles from the bird in the \"Abode of Karn\", wait at the left hand side of a horizontal part of the path. When the bird is about to fly over you, quickly move to the right. This will cause the bomb to miss. 2) Start off collecting the harder pieces. This way the going gets easier and, if you get killed collecting one, losing a piece or two at the start is a lot better than losing 13 or 14 pieces after a half hour of play. 3) If trying for a harder part and energy is getting low, get an easier piece and go back for the harder part later on when the energy level is higher. 4) Harder pieces are namely: Dungeons (two pieces) Treasury Library Great Hall Laundry 5) More often than not, strategy gets better results than firepower. LIBRARY NORTH TOWER UPPER MORNING ROOM EAST TOWER UPPER TREASURY BALCONY WAITING ROOM WEST TOWER UPPER TIMELESS ROOM UPPER GUARD ROOM SOUTH TOWER UPPER 48 "


"TISTRADOS CO3 SE! HYPER SPORTS Konami. HE... Be only at your peak as you enter the HYPER SPORTS stadium to compete in six NEW exhausting events in this state of the art simulation-the officially eGo endorsed version of the No.1 arcade game. e-Glute Continuing the challenge where 'Track and Field' left off. Imagine Software is available from:WOOLWORTH. WHSMITH. Marmes . LASKYS, Rumbelows. COMET Spectrum Shops and all and dealers "


"TUP050W PAUSED FALLS 84 TPS PAUSED FALLS S FALL PAUSED BER n the screen is the courtyard of an ancient Chinese fortress with red tile roofs and paper lanterns. By the stone lion statue a battle is taking place between Bruce Lee and the Green Yamo, a giant Japanese wrestler with green skin. With a wicked chop to the head and two flying kicks, the Green Yamo is easily dispatched. But a Ninja appears, and knocks our hero down with a bokken stick! No, this isn't a scene from Enter the Dragon but from Bruce Lee, the game distributed by US Gold for the Atari, Spectrum and Commodore 64. You play the part of Bruce Lee and must break into the Wizard's fortress to destroy him. To gain access to the various secret chambers, lanterns which hang from the ceiling must be collected. Along the way you must defeat the vicious Green Yamo and his Ninja army, evade electrical discharges, pan-lights and exploding Tsung-lin bushes and master paths of random particles. To help you defeat the Wizard, here is a picture map of the Wizard's fortress along with some tips for conquering each chamber by C&VG reader, Hans Hsu of Cambridge. The screens are numbered in their order of appearance. If you would rather fight the Wizard without help then read no further, but do feast your eyes on the superb pictures from the Atari version of the game and contemplate the perilous adventure that awaits you. Otherwise, fellow martial artists, read on. General Combat Skills It takes three hits to defeat the Green Yamo and two hits to defeat the Ninja. The flying kick is the most effective blow to use, although the chop can be effective in close quarters. When the Green Yamo and the Ninja attack together, it is best to get the Green Yamo first before turning your attention to the Ninja. One effective attack formation used by the computer is with the Ninja in front and the Green Yamo closely behind. A kick or chop knocks the Ninja down, but it leaves you vulnerable to a kick from the Green Yamo. The strategy to use here is to kick and then duck. While you are ducking you are impervious to the Green Yamo's attack, however, the Ninja can come and poke you with his bokken stick. Screens 2-4 These three screens are the front courtyard of the fortress. You must collect all the lanterns in these three screens before you can proceed to screen five. The entrance to screen five is a trapdoor in the bottom centre of screen three. If the fighting becomes too intense for you to collect that last lantern, just exit to another screen briefly and then return. You will find that the Green "


"RDCASE RONJFORTIERE KELL DAY OR P2000 PauSED FAL01 Yamo and the Ninja have magically disappeared to give you a chance to collect that lantern. Once the trapdoor has opened, you can gain some extra points by standing next to the opened trapdoor and, as you are attacked, kick your opponents into the gaping hole. This is somewhat tedious, but those extra points will add up to gain you a valuable extra life. TUP853525 PAUSED Screen 5 This is the first underground chamber. Note that Bruce Lee is in the ducking position mentioned above. Time your fall to the bottom levels to miss the electrical charges. Only the lanterns on the bottom level need to be collected to gain access to the next chamber. Screen 6 In this picture, Bruce Lee is jumping to the next chamber. Only the left lantern needs to be collected to proceed to the next chamber. Avoid the white spikes while you are climbing up the path of random particles. Time your fall to the next chamber to avoid the electrical charges. Screen 7 Exploding Tsung-lin bushes first appear in this screen. They are activated by the pressure of your foot as you run over them, and moments later send forth a deadly shower. They are quite useful for disposing of a closely pursuing Ninja or Green Yamo. All the lanterns in this screen must be collected. Collect all the lanterns on the top two levels first to STRIS THR$ 16 51 "


"W FALLS 8 3333333333333333333333333 P848950 .. TITILIST sapag HHH gain access to screen eight. In upper right hand corner. chambers. Good timing is essential screen eight another lantern must be Screen 10 and there must be no hesitation once collected to gain access to the Collect all the lanterns and exit to the you've started across. Do not attempt bottom level of screen seven. It takes left. You will find yourself in screen to run and then hop to avoid the pan good timing over the streaming pan five. Go through the doorway at the lights. Instead, jump forward in one lights to get the last lanterns in this top of the path of random particles motion and continue to jump until screen. If all else fails, continuous for and emerge into screen three. A you get across. Note that you can rest ward jumps work pretty well. siren warns the Wizard that you have before crossing the top three levels, Screen 8 breached his underground but there's no safe resting place for First get the leftmost lantern to gain defences. Proceed right, into screen the bottom level. access to the lower level of screen four and past the stone line into the Screen 18 seven. Collect the lantern in the next screen. Collect all the lanterns and then lower level of screen seven to gain Screen 11 proceed right into screen 19. access to the remaining lanterns in Go up the ladder, across the scaffold Screen 19 screen eight which will give you a before they disappear, down the This is the most difficult screen. First route to screen nine. Avoid the white ladder, collect both lanterns and collect the lantern on the bottom spikes. If you get stuck on the path of down the hatch into screen 12. level. then climb up to the middle random particles, just let it carry you Screen 12 level. Don't forget to duck to avoid to the top. Eventually it will change Collect the bottom lantern, then jump the electrical charges. Hop across to directions and carry you down. on the white vine frame and climb to the left to get to the vines and then Screen 9 the next level. Collect all the lanterns climb up to grasp the rail. Now go All the lanterns in this screen must be and then exit at the upper right hand over hand to the right and climb collected to gain access to screen corner. to the top level. Get across the ten. First collect the lanterns at the Screen 13 streaming pan lights, being careful bottom level. The pan light in this Go up the path of random particles that the electrical charge doesn't screen streams away from you, so it is and avoid the black spikes. The three take your head off! Climb up the possible to get across without doorways lead to screens 14, 15 and vines and go hand over hand to the jumping. Wait until the pan light 16. right. Time your drop down the shaft appears at the left edge and run after Screens 14-16 to avoid the electrical discharges and it. If you are late, you can always All the lanterns in these three exit to the right. jump the last few steps. Once the screens must be collected before Screen 20 lanterns on the lower level have been access is gained to screen 17. In You have made it to the Wizard's collected, go back to screen eight screen 16, be sure to get the lantern chamber. To destroy the Wizard, and climb up the path of random on the upper level before dropping dash across to the right and get that particles to gain access to the upper down to the middle level as there is last lantern. But watch out for the level of screen nine. After all the no way back up. Wizard's deadly fireballs. lanterns in screen nine have been Screen 17 Screen 21 collected, a door will appear in the This is one of the most difficult Victory!! The Fortress is in flames! 52 "


"120 PREPARE YOURSELF FOR THE HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER. Vorter SOFTWARE APPROACHING FAST... BRAIN-BLOWING GRAPHICS...MEGA-BLASTING POWER...FAST-ACTION PLAYABILITY... 'HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER'... A TOTALLY NEW DIRECTION FROM VORTEX. ONCE YOU'RE ON IT...THERE'S NO TURNING BACK. HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER FOR SPECTRUM 4 8 K   7.95 VORTEX SOFTWARE (SALES) LIMITED. VORTEX HOUSE, 24 KANSAS AVENUE, OFF SOUTH LANGWORTHY ROAD, SALFORD MS 2GL. "


"S PROFESSOR VIDEO'S AVALON Now we have a plea for help from W. Carvalho of Amersham. He's been playing Avalon and is stuck in the Labyrinth where he doesn't know how to open the chests or what to do with the Egyptian Face. He also has problems in the High Temple of Chaos, poor chap. If anyone can put him out of his misery, write to Prof. Video and mark your envelope Avalon tips. A t last, the powers that be have realised how important I am and this month I've been given two pages to play with. So, let's get on with it! BEACH HEAD First of all let's finish off Beach Head with the help of Michael King. Last issue, I left you attacking the ships. Now we move on to the tanks and you need a lot of concentration for this one. Stick to the central route. Any other route will get you stuck between rocks or blown up by the gun emplacements. The more tanks you get by, the more obstacles you'll come across. Deal with them all like this. Let the object fire at you then move so that you pass directly above/below the bullet. Just before the missile leaves the screen, get down to the line of the attacking object and fire quickly if you miss, move quickly back out of its firing range. If you find this confusing or want to plan your route, press PAUSE and plot your moves. Now on to the final screen and the Gun. The Gun is placed on a mound which will have white squares appearing on it. You only get 10 seconds to shoot them all, so move quickly. Try lining the barrel of your tank gun up with the bottom of each white barrel. Remember, the number of tanks you have to attack with depends on how you manoeuvre your ships through the secret passage. FINDERS KEEPERS Bhauneet Shergill has sent in some tips for Mastertronic's Finders Keepers and also to ask for help. First the hints. Excalibur: Get the Blacksmith who is in the \"Room with a View\". Enter the slimy lower maze, go down to the bottom and turn RIGHT, UP, RIGHT, UP, RIGHT, UP and get the Broken Sword and hey presto! Gold Bar: Enter the slimy lower maze, go RIGHT, UP, RIGHT, UP, RIGHT, UP, RIGHT, UP, RIGHT, DOWN, RIGHT and get Philosopher's Stone. Then go DOWN, LEFT, DOWN, get the bar of lead and the valuable gold bar. Don't bother with Gordon's foot or the glass shoe. You can't light the candle with any of the flames. A ship in a bottle very valuable! Clown's nose and Jester's hat do not combine. Don't take glue or sticky bun as you can't drop them. GAMES WORKSHOP HOLSTENT EAMON'S A WINNER n t GONTOR text Meet the king of Dragontorc 14-year-old Eamon McGing, of Surrey. He became the first person to finish the game on April 7, six days after buying it. To mark Eamon attaining the rank of High Lorelord, Hewson Consultants, the game's publishers, have presented him with a citation. Pictured with Eamon is Dragontorc's author, Steve Turner. Says Eamon: \"The more problems I solved, the more I wanted to go on playing it.\" Steve describes Eamon's six day triumph as ''amazing' and adds: \"It took three months to write some of the adventure scenes.\" The quest that Eamon completed so magnificently was to seek out the five crowns of Britain which had been forged from the mystical Dragontorc and free Merlyn from the evil grip of Morag the Shapeshifter. Andrew Hewson, commenting on Eamon's success, says: \"It seems many people have been playing Dragontorc into the wee small hours during the Easter holidays. In fact, Eamon was the first by only a few hours several more completed the game the next day.' Hewsons has been inundated with requests for Dragontorc clues. All those who send a stamped addressed envelope to Hewson Consultants, 56B Milton Trading Estate, Abingdon, Oxfordshire, will receive a reply. One stumbling block appears to be what to do when bitten by a snake or spider. Sometimes the poison causes tunnel vision, the screen goes blank and only Maroc and the scroll are visible. The solution requires only the selection of the Heal spell. "


"PROFESSORI Spark of life combines with pile of mud to create a Mud Monster. The moonbeam does not combine with Moonrock. They're the hints. Now can YOU help? Bhauneet is having trouble with the cat as he can not bribe him with saucers of milk or new glass shoes. What does he use? Walk up to the Ogres with the sword in your hand and you will automatically fight them. You always win unless Troll comes up behind you. You are unable to fight on the stairs. Dear Mr Anon if you would like to get rewarded for your tips please get in touch, otherwise I shall have to put the proceeds into Prof. Video's retirement fund! DRAGONTORC STAFF OF KARNATH The \"Tipmaster\" from Surrey has sent in a few hints for the first stage of Dragontorc. Take the seal as this opens the trapdoors you will also need it later on. Don't go into Lorcris! Kill all the wisps with bane then get a jewel from the pond. Find a bow, then trade those two for a message and a sickle. The sickle can cut the plant, so, you can now enter Lorcris. Fill the chalice by the pond, then put it on the pedestal to get a spell. There are three chests in the adjoining room — one is opened by the servant, another by the key you will find in the first chest and the last one by the key in the second chest. The rest next issue. Before we finish off Staff of Karnath, I have a correction to make to the list of tips that were in April's edition. Jim Donnelly has written back saying that to make the serpent rise it is the KNOSSUS spell that should be used. Use the following hints, courtesy of Zaqir Shaikh to complete the game. Go to the Coffins next to the Dungeons. Wander up and down between the 2nd and 3rd coffins until you hear a high pitched PING! Then rush off to the dungeon where you see a red skull. It will lift up and reveal a pentacle, but, be quick! In the North Tower shoot the spider with the IBRAHIM spell until you hear a high pitched PING! And then rush off to the store room. Upper Guard Room: Cast your eyes on the shield and shoot it with the THROBIN spell and then with the OMPHALOS spell. A Cross should KNIGHT LORE The following POKES for Knight Lore and Underwurlde add a REAL multilife facility to both games. 1. Load the first part of the game. Press BREAK as soon as you hear the first of the five beeps: 2. Enter:Underwurlde POKE 24731,215:POKE 24733,192 Knight Lore POKE 24731,209:POKE 24732,238:POKE 24733,63 3. Type CONTINUE, start tape. Get the Cross by simply walking over it. Now go to the South Tower Lower and the Waiting Room. Just hang in there for a moment!! To destroy the Staff use the MENHIR spell. That's your lot. I can't give everything away as the game wouldn't be worth playing, would it? GAMES WORKSHOP SPIRIT OF THE STONE Has anyone played Spirit of the Stone? Richard Downer from Bedforshire has collected all the easy diamonds but, after that, he is stuck. Can anyone help him out? CASTLE QUEST This set of hints for Castle Quest has been sent in by an anonymous reader from Kent. Let us know who you are! Pick up the torch which is where the Red Men are. Just to the left of where you start. To get the sword you must first squash all the Red Men together so that they look like one. Do this by chasing them with the torch into one of the two rooms and slowly advance until you can't go any further. Make sure all four are firmly squashed together! If they are in the room at the top of the screen, chase them to the bottom and then stop them from coming back by standing at the top of the ladders. They will eventually work their way left until they go up a few steps into the Spider's Room. The first spider will kill one of them on the way in. When you are in the centre of the room stop and store the torch and pick up the sword. The second spider will kill two more Red Men as they pass him and come back towards you. As the last Red Man passes you, stay close behind him. The first spider will kill him and you can exit the room safely. When you have the sword, you will be able to fight the Ogres, but not the Troll. Pass the Troll by throwing the ruby at him and while he goes to hide it you run past him. SHADES Although you can carry eight objects, Jon Shields of Belfast, assures us that to travel around most of the screens you need only five. The \"Mould\" is very useful because when your strength reading goes into the red you can use the mould to refresh your strength to maximum. You can use this often. The Orb is useful for tricky situations. When a creature is killing you, you can use the Orb to transport yourself to another part of the game. The Wand can be used to kill numerous creatures. But beware vou may have to use it a few times to kill some of them. The Crossbow and Quiver have to be used together to kill creatures. But don't waste any. Your experience goes up each time you kill a creature or find an object. If you have a lot of experience, you can kill almost everything. The Shades can be useful in bringing you to a particular screen. Though at times they can be lethal! If you open any secret doors, they will remain open until the game is turned off. Traps change position each time you view them. 55 "


"GRO 29B SHADOWFIRE COMPETITION C&VG/BEYOND SHADOW FIRE COMPETITION Name. Address......... Computer........T-shirt size (S,M,L).... My answers are: Illustration A is. Illustration B is.. Telcome to the first icondriven competition! Shadowfire is Beyond's latest smash hit game an original, all-action, icon-driven adventure featuring the sci-fi E-Team featured on our special pull out poster this issue. And YOU could be the lucky winner of the giant original painting on our poster if you can answer the simple Shadowfire quiz! All you have to do is match the seven names to the seven illustrations reproduced here, complete the General Zoff tie-breaker in ten words or less and then rush your entry to Computer & Video Games, Shadowfire Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The first prize winner will receive the framed original painting of the Shadowfire squad, by C&VG artist Jef Riddle, plus a copy of the game, plus an exclusive Shadowfire t-shirt. In addition, ten second prize winners will get the Shadowfire game and a t-shirt. Fifteen runners-up will get a t-shirt. So remember to tell us your t-shirt size small, medium or large. Now look at the seven illustrations, labelled A to G, and match them to the names, which are: MAUL, ZARK, MANTO, SYYLK, SEVRINA, TORIK, ZOFF. Then complete the Zoff tie-breaker Illustration C is...... Illustration D is.. Illustration E is.... Illustration F is....... Illustration G is. Tie-breaker: Remember, General | | Zoff is the arch-villain in Shadowfire i and dictator of the Cosmos. i Complete this tie breaker in 10 words and get your coupon to us before the ! or less. For example \"I, Zoff, closing date which is July 16th.! Normal C&VG competition rules 1 command all Beyond players to bow before me!\" apply and the editor's decision is \" final. \"I, Zoff.. Only 100 Shadowfire t-shirts are i being produced so they'll be real i collector's items! ................ 003 56 "


"ATARI 600XL ENTERTAINMENT PACK Great news for games addicts who appreciate high quality graphics and sensational arcade action gameplay. For Only 59. you can buy a 16K Atari 600XL Computer with two top arcade ROM cartridge titles and a joystick. These two ROM titles are the famous arcade hit Donkey Kong and another favourite Qix (We only have a limited number of packs with Qix. When these run out Qix may be substituted for an arcade entertainment cartridge of the same value) The 600XL Entertainment Pack offers real value for money and enables you to save  96 nearly half of the normal RRP's of the pack items when purchased individually. Silica Shop have a wide range of ROM cartridges available including arcade favourites such as Asteroids Centipede. Missile Command Popeye, Q'Bert Star Raiders Super Cobra for only 9 95 each! The 600XL is a programmable home computer with the Basic Programming Language built in and if you later add a 1010 Program Recorder (XLP 1010 ), a range of hundreds of cassette programs will become available to you. The Atari 600XL is recommended as a first class games machine ATARI PACKS POWER WITHOUT THE PRICE! ATARI 600XL ENTERTAINMENT PACK 16K Atari 600XL .99 Donkey Kong (R) .. .99 Qix (R) .... .99 Single CX40 Joystick .......... 799 Total (it purchased separately ....... .96 Less Discount (approx 48.15) ......96 PACKAGE PRICE (XLC 1600) .00 ATARI $69 The 64K 800XL is packaged here with the 1010 recorder, an economical storage and retrieval unit a smash hit arcade game and programming aid. all for a package price of only 129 fret: XLC 1010), a saving of  96 off the RRP's of the individual items which total [194.96. The game included in this pack is Pole Position. Now on cassette from Atari, Pole Position is an accurate reproduction of Atari's own highly successful arcade driving game which has all the thrills and spills of the grand-prix racetrack. On the reverse of this cassette is a demonstration program of Atari's amazing sound and graphics capabilities giving an example of the high quality performance of the Atari BOOXL Also included is an Invitation to Programming 1 Cassette which takes you step by step through the first stages of programming in Atari Basic using Atari's unique soundthrough facility which allows prerecorded human speech to be played through your TV speaker All you need is a joystick (ATJ 0400 .90 for Pole Position), to be up and running with this package. The Atari 800XL in this pack comes with a Silica two year guarantee ATARI PACKS POWER WITHOUT THE PRICE! ATARI 800XL PROG. RECORDER PACK 64K Atari 800XL ...............99 1010 Program Recorder ........ .99 Pole Position + Demo Prog (C) ... .99 Invitation to Programming 1 ....99 Total of purchased separately) ....... .96 Less Discount (approx 33 %) .......96 PACKAGE PRICE (XLC 1010) .00 ATARI 800XL AND DISK DRIVE This pack includes the 64K 800XL with a 1050 Disk Drive for mass storage and speedy information retrieval as well as a brand new adventure game and a powerful home help program, all for only  (ref: XLC 1050), a saving of .96 off the RRP's of the individual items which total .96. The first of these programs is The Payoff on disk, a new adventure game which is a fantasy simulation in which you play the leading role. An exciting introduction to adventure programs which are always popular with a demonstration program of Atari's amazing sound and graphics on the reverse). Also included in this pack is Home Filing Manager to help you organise your files. It allows you to catalogue and file details of birthdays book your stamp collection or anything else which would normally require you to use filing cardsThe Instructions for Home Filing Manager are on the reverse of the disk and all the disks which come in this package are in protective paper wallets. You get an extended two year guarantee on the BOOXL and 100 free programs with the disk drive when you buy this package from Silica ATARI PACKS POWER WITHOUT THE PRICE! ATARI 800XL + DISK DRIVE PACK 84K Atari 800XL... .99 1050 Disk Drive ......... . . .99 Home Filing Manager (D) ....... .99 The Payoff Demo Prog (D) .99 Total of purchased separately....... .96 Less Discount (approx 310%) ..... .96 PACKAGE PRICE (XLC 1050) . .00  NEW ATARI 130XE NOW IN STOCK RL 30XE C169 Atari's new 128K computer, the Atan 130XE offers an enormous 131,072 bytes of RAM for only  The 130XE comes with built in Basic and full operating instructions and is now in a newly designed case with a modern full stroke keyboard. The XE is fully compatible with both the 400/800 and the XL ranges of machines, this means that it can run approximately 90% of all Atari Computer software on the market. This provides a range of over 1,000 software tities as well as a large selection of accessory and peripheral items. Initial stock of the 130XE will be limited, so it's first come first served SILICA SHOP LTD, 1-4 The Mews. Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Tel: 01-309 1111, ORDER NOW-OR SEND FOR OUR FREE ATARI BROCHURES To: SILICA SHOP LTD, Dept CVG 0785, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Telephone: 01-309 1111 LITERATURE REQUESTA Please send me your FREE brochures on Atari Home Computers. O I already own a ................... Videogame I already own a Computer Surname: Mr/Mrs/Ms: ........... Address: WE ARE THE UK'S No1 ATARI SPECIALISTS Since the introduction of Atan Video Games into the UK Six years ago. Silica Shop has been selling Atari products and supporting Atari owners with a specialist marling service which we believe is unbeatable. We stock Over 1,000 Atari related product lines and have a mailing list including over 300,000 Atari 2600 VCS Owners and over 50.000 Atari Home Computer Owners Because we specialise in Atari, we aim to keep stocks of all the available Atari hardware Software peripherals and accessories. We also stock a wide range of Atari dedicated books and through us, the owners on our list can subscribe to several American Atari dedicated magazines We can provide a full service to all Atari owners and are now firmly established as the UK's NUMBER ONE Atari specialists Here are just some of the things we can offer you FREE POST & PACKING ON MAIL ORDERS FREE CLUBS & INFORMATION SERVICE HIGHLY COMPETITIVE PRICES AFTER SALES SUPPORT SERVICE REPAIR SERVICE ON ATARI PRODUCTS If you would like to register on our mailing list as an Atari computer owner, or just because you are interested in buying an Atari machine, let us know. We will be pleased to keep you up to date with all new developments on the Atari scene free of charge. So, post off the coupon with your order or enquiry and begin experiencing an Atari service that is second to none Postcode: .... ORDER REQUEST: PLEASE SEND ME: 16K 600XL Entertainment Pack  All prices include VAT 64K 800XL & 1010 Recorder Pack.  O 64K 800XL & 1050 Disk Drive Pack .. Post & Packing O 128K 130XE Home Computer .........  is Free of charge O enclose Cheque/P.O. payable to Silica Shop Limited for the following amount: E........ O CREDIT CARD Please debit my: Access/Barclaycard/Visa/American Express/Diners Club My Card No is .................  601-309 1111 "


"BEYOND CHALLENGING ARE "


NA


"KA "


"Nice Password Shame about the Identity. It's a unique combination. Your Special Identity Number and Personal Password. The valuable key to huge databases teeming with activity, set on our Mainframes across the nation. On Micronet 800, you're a valued individual, adding your own special flavour and personality to the database. Take our exciting new \"Gallery\"You control your personal screens for all to see. The intriguing \"Chatline\" public conversation service gives you freedom to express your views and meet some remarkable people. All part of a tremendous Communications section that networks you to 50,000 Micronet and Prestel users across the country. Try Teleshopping, or interview celebrities live on «Celebrity Chatline\" every Wednesday night. And there's FREE (& instant) National Electronic Mail, plus International Telex, and the Contact and SwapShop bulletin boards. Get computer news first on Micronet's daily and controversial) «Newsflashes\" and read up on the latest reviews and courses. Feast from our regularly changing menu of programs to download straight into your microabsolutely free. You also get access to Educational Computing's \"School Link\" and Prestel's huge 300,000 page database, including world news, business & share bulletins and optional homebanking. For only .50 per quarter, that's less than the price of a daily paper! Micronet is unique amongst networks and bulletin boards as it keeps your phone costs very low with special local* rate calls whenever you connect up that's around 40p for a whole hours entertainment each evening. The only accessory you need is a Modem, to get the best value for money around in micro communications. Fill in the coupon for the full facts and send to Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIRSEJ. But be warned, Micronet 800 is a 'living service with ever-expanding features. So maybe you'd be better to call in at your local Micronet 800 Action Station. There are thousands of Micronetters waiting to meet you! To: MICRONET 800, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5EJ. Telephone 01-278 3143. Please send me the full facts about Micronet 800. micronet 800 Name Make/Model of Micro Address Telephone ---CVGZ  For 98% of telephone users Prestel is a trademark of British Telecommunications ple. On Prestel "


"See Micronet 800 in action! See Micronet at John Lewis, main Boots, Laskys or your local computer store, AVON ESSEX Preston. 4Mat Computing NOTTINGHAMSHIRE Cardiff. Randall Cox, 18/22 High Bath, Boots, 1 Marchants Passage, Basildon. Basildon Software 67 Friargate, tel: 0772 561952 Newark Jacobs Computers, Street Arcade. Tel: 0222 397162 Southgate. Tel: 0225 64402. Centre, 78-80 Liberty Shopping Preston. Laskys, 1-4 Guildhall Preston, Lasky Guildhall 13 Middle Gate. Tel: 0636 72594. Mold. Clwyd Personal Computers, Bristol Avon Computer Rentals, Hall, East Square. Tel: 0268 27922. Arcade. Tel: 0772 59264. Nottingham. Telstar, 280 Huntingdon Unit 19, Daniel Owen Precinct. 16 West Street, Old Market. Braintree. Mirage Microcomputers I Wigan Wildings Computer Centre Street Tel: 01602 SOSSRS Tel: 0352 56842. Tel: 0272 550600. Ltd, 24 Bank Street. Tel: 0376 48321.11 Mesnes Street. Tel: 0942 22382. Sutton in Ashfield. HN & L Fisher. Newport. Gwent Computers Bristol Boots, 59 Broadmead. Chelmsford. Maxton Hayman, LEICESTERSHIRE 87 Outram Street. Tel: 0623 54734. 92 Chepstow Road. Tel:0633841760. Tel 0272 293631. 5 Bromfield Road Tel: 0245 354595. Leicester. Boots, 30-36 Gallowtree Worksop. Computer Grafix, Swansea. Boots, 17 St Marys Bristol Laskys, 16-20 Penn Street. Chelmsford. Way In Computers, Gate. Tel 0533 21641. 32 Bridge Street Tel: 0909 472248. Arcade, The Quadrant Shopping Tel 0272 20421. 7 Village Square, Tel: 0245 467858 Market Harborough. Harborough OXFORDSHIRE Centre. TeL: 0792 43461. Clevedon. Computer Centre, Colchester. Boots, 5-6 Lion Walk Home Computers, 7 Church Street Abingdon, Ivor Fields Computers Swansea. The Microstore, 35-36 12A Old Street, Clevedon. Tet 206 577303. Tel: 0888 63056 Tel 0272 879514 Singleton Street. Tel: 0792 467980. 21 Stern Street, tel: 0235 21207. Colchester. Colchester Computer LONDON Banbury. Computer Plus WARWICKSHIRE BEDFORDSHIRE Centre, 3a Short Wyre Street W1. Computers of Wigmore 2 Church lane Tel: 0295 55890. Coventry. Coventry Micro Centre, Bedford. Boots, The Harpur Centre, TeL: 0206 47242. Street, 104 Wigmore Street Oxford. Absolute Sound & Video, 33 Far Gosford Street. Harpur Street. Tel 0234 56231. Grays. H. Reynolds, 28a Southend Tel: 01 486 0373 19 Old High Street, Headington. Tel: 0203 58942. Luton Datasinc, Delaport House, Road Tel: 0375 31641. W1. Laskys, 42 Tottenham Court Tel: 0865 65661. Coventry. Impulse Computer S7 Guildford Street. Tel 5824558601 Harlow. Harlow Computer Centre Road Tel 01-636 0845 Oxford. Science Studio, 7 Little World, 60 Hertford Street Precinct BERKSHIRE 17 Staple Tye. Tel: 0279 22846. W1. Lion House, 227 Tottenham Clarendon Street. Tel: 0865 54022. Tel: 0203 553701. Slough. MV Games, 245 High Hornchurch. Comptel Computer Court Road. Tel 01-637 1601. SCOTLAND Coventry. JBC Micro Services, 200 Street Tet 75 21594 Systems, 112a North Street. W1. Sonic Foto Micro Center, Earlsdon Avenue, North Earlsdon Aberdeen Boots, 133-141 Union Tel 0402 446741. BUCKINGHAMSHIRE 256 Tottenham Court Road. Street. Tel: 0224 585349. Tlford. Boots, 177-185 High Road Tel: 0203 73813. Bletchley. RAMS Computer Tel: 01-580 5826. Edinburgh. Boots, 101-103 Princes Coventry. Laskys, Lower Precinct Tel 01-553 2116. Centre, 117 Queensway. W1. Tomorrows World Today, Street. Tel: 031-225 8331. Tel: 0203 27712. Tel: 0908 647744 Romford. Software Plus, 27 Oxford Street. TeL: 01-439 7799. Leamington Spa. IC Computers 72 North Street. Tel: 70 65271. Glasgow. Boots, 200 Sauchichall Chesham. Reed Photo & W1. Walters Computers, DH Evans Street. Tel: 041-332 1925 43 Russell Street. Tel: 092636244. Computers, 113 High Street. Southend-on-Sea. Computerama. Oxford Street. Tel: 01-629 8800. Leamington Spa. Leamington Glasgow. Boots, Union Street 88 London Road. Tel: 0702 335443. Tel 0494 783373 WC1. Transam Micro Systems Southend-on-Sea. Computer and Argyle Street. Tel: 041-248 7387. 3487387 Hobby Centre, 121 Regent Street 59-61 Theobalds Road. CAMBRIDGESHIRE Tel: 0926 29211. Glasgow. Tom Dixon Cameras, Centre, 336 London Road Cambridge. Boots, 65-67 Sidne, Tel 01-405 S240. Nuneaton. Micro City, 1a Queens 15-17 Queen Street Tel 0702 337161. WS. Laskys, 18-19 Ealing Broadway Tel: 041-204 0826. Street and 28 Petty Curry Street. Road. Tel: 0203 382049. Southend-on-Sea. Estuary Rugby. O.E.M, 9-11 Regent Street Tel 0223 350213 Personal Computers, 318 Chartwell W8. Walters Computers, Barkers, Shopping Centre. Tel: 01-567 4717.\" SHROPSHIRE Cambridge, Cambridge Computer North, Victoria Circus Shopping Tel 0788 70522 Kensington High Street Store, 4 Emmanuel Street. Shrewsbury. Clairmont Centre. TeL: 0702 614131. Enterprises, Hills Lane. WEST MIDLANDS Tel 01-937 5432 Tel: 0223 358264 Birmingham. Boots, City Centre Peterborough.Logic Sales, Unit 6. Cheltenham. Laskys, 206 High Tel: 3647 52949. GLOUCESTER SE7. Vic Oddens Micros, House, 16-17 New Street. Shrewsbury. Computerama, 13 Midgate Parade, Peterborough. 5 London Bridge Walk Tel: 021-643 7582. Street. TeL: 0242 570282. Castlegate. Tel: 0743 60528. Tel: 0733 49696. Tel 01-403 1988. Birmingham. Laskys, 19-21 Telford, Computer Village Ltd, Peterborough Boots, Cheltenham. Screen Scene, SE9. Square Deal, Corporation Street. 144 St Georges Road 2/3 Hazeldine House, Central 40-42 Bridge Street, Queensgate. 373-375 Footscray Road, Tel: 021-632 6303 Tel: 0242 528979. Tel: 0733 65352 Square. Tel: 0952 506771. New Eltham. Tel 01-859 1516. Dudley. Central Computers, Gloucester. Boots, 38-46 Eastgate Telford. Telford Electronics, SE15. Castlehurst Ltd, 152 Rye CHESHIRE 35 Churchill Precinct Street. Tel 0452 423501. 38 Mall 4. Tel 0952 504911. Lane, Peckham. TeL: 01-639 2205. Tel: 0384 238169. Chester. Boots, 47-55 Foregate HAMPSHIRE EC2. Devron Computer Centre, STAFFORDSHIRE Street. Tel 0244 28421 Stourbridge. Walters Computer Basingstoke. Fishers, 2-3 Market 155 Moorgate, tel: 01-638 3339. Newcastle-under-Lyme. Chester. Computer Link, 21 SL Systems. 12 Hagley Road Place. Tel: 0256 22079. N14. Logic Sales, 19 The Boume, Computer Cabin, 24 The Parade, Tel: 0384 370811. Werburgh Street. Tel: 0244 316516. Petersfield. Foly Micros, The Broadway, Southgate. Silverdale. Tel: 0782 636911. Walsall New Horizon, 1 Goodall Crewe. Midshires Computer 45 Chapel Street. Tel: 0730 66841. TeL: 01-882 4942. Stafford. Computerama, 59 Centre, 68-78 Nantwich Road. Street. Tel 0922 24821. N22. Boots, 38-40 High Road, Portsmouth. Micro Choice, Foregate Street. Tel: 0785 41899. Tel 0270 211086 West Bromwich. DS Peakman, Stoke-on-Trent. Computerama, Wood Green Tel: 01-881 0101. 159 Havant Road, Drayton. Hyde. C Tech Computers, 184 7 Queens Square. Tel: 021-525 7910. Tel: 0705 327591. NW3. Maycraft Micros, 11 Market Square Arcade, Hanley. Market Street. Tel: 061-366 8223 YORKSHIRE Tel: 0782 268524. Portsmouth. RDS Electrical, 157-58 Rosslyn Hill, Hampstead. Macclesfield. Camera Computer 161 Kingston Road Tel: 0705812478. Tel: 01-43 SUFFOLK Bradford. Boots, 11 Darley Street. Centre, 118 Mill Street Tel: 0274 390891. NW4. Davinci Computer Store, Southampton. Business Bury St Edmunds. Boots, Tel: 0625 27468 Leeds. Boots, 19 Albion Arcade, Electronics, Micromagic At Atkins, 112 Brent Street, Hendon. 11-13 Cornhill. Tel: 0284 701516. Macclesfield. Computer Centre, Bond Street Centre. 7 Civic Centre Road. Tel: 0703 25903. Tel: 01-202 2272. 68 Chestergate. Tel: 0625 618827. Bury St Edmunds. Suffolk Tel: 0532 33551. NW7. Computers Inc, 86 Golders Waterlooville, GB Microland, Marple. Marple Computer Centre, Computer Centre 1-3 Garland Sheffield. Laskys, 58 Leopold 7 Queens Parade, London Road Green. Tel: 01209 0401. 106 Church Lane. Tel 061-447 9933 Street. Tel: 0284 705503. Street Tel: 0742 750971. Tel 0705 259911. NW10. Technomatic, 17 Burnley Wilmslow. Wilmslow Micro SURREY York. York Computer Centre, Centre. 62 Grove Street. HERTFORD Road, Wembley. Tel: 01-208 1177 Bagshot. P & H Electronics, 22-247 Stonegate Arcade Tel: 0625 530890 Potters Bar, the Computer Shop MANCHESTER Guildford Road. Tel 0276 73078. Tel: 0904 641862 Bolton. Computer World UK Ltd, 107 High Street. Tel: 0707 44417. Croydon. Laskys, 77-81 North End CLEVELAND 208 Chorley Old Road Stevenage. DJ Computers, Darlington, Darlington Computer 11 Town Square. Tel 0438 65501 Tel: 01-681 8443. Tel: 0204 494304. Croydon. The Vision Store, Shop, 75 Boadgate. Tel 0325 487478. Watford. SRS Microsystems, Middlesbrough. Boots, Manchester. Boots, 32 Market 53-59 High Street. Tel: 01-686 6362 94 The Parade, High Street Street. Tel 061-832 6533. Croydon. The Vision Store, 88-90 Linthorpe Road, Manchester. Laskys, 12-14 St. Tel: 0923 26602. 96-98 North End Tel: 01-681 7539 The Cleveland Centre. Marys Gate. Tel: 061-833 0268. Welwyn Garden City. DJ Tel: 0642 249616. South Croydon, Concise Computers, 40 Fretherne Road, Manchester. Mighty Micro Computer Consultants, 1 Carlton CUMBRIA Tel: 0707 32844. Sherwood Centre, 268 Wilmslow Road Tel: 01-681 6842. Kendal. The Kendal Computer HUMBERSIDE Road, Fallowfield. Tel: 061-2248117. Epsom. The Micro Workshop Centre, Stramongate Beverley. Computing World, Manchester. NSC Computer 12 Station Approach Tel 0539 22559. 10 Swabys Yard Dyer Lane. Shops, 29 Hanging Ditch. Penrith. Penrith Communications, Tel: 0372 721533. Tel: 0482 881831. Tel: 061-832 2269. Guildford. Walters Computers, 14 Castlegate. Tel: 0768 67146. Manchester. Walters Computers, Army & Navy, 105-111 High Street Whitehaven. P D Hendren, KENT Ashford. DGH, 10 North Street. Kendal Milne, Deansgate. 15 King Street. TeL: 0946 2063. Tel: 0483 68171. Tel: 061-832 3414. Wallington Surrey Micro Systems, Workington. Technology Store, Tel: 0233 32597 Oldham. Home & Business Ashford. Geerings of Ashford, 53 Woodcote Road. Tel:01-6475636. 12 Finkle Street. TeL: 0900 66972. Computers, 54 Yorkshire Street. Woking, Harpers, 71-73 DERBYSHIRE 80 High Street. Tel: 0233 33366. Tel: 061-633 1608 Commercial Way. Tel: 0486 225657. Alfreton. Gordon Harwood, Bromley. Boots, 148-154 High Swinton. Mr Micro, 69 Partington Street. Tel: 01-460 6688. SUSSEX 67-71 High Street. Tel: 0733 832078. Lane Tet 061-728 282 Chesterfield. Boots, 35-37 Low Bromley. Computers Today. Bexhill-on-Sea. Computerware, 31 Market Square. MERSEYSIDE 22'St. Leonards Road. Pavement Market Place, Chatham. Boots, 30-34 Wilmott Heswall Thornguard Computer Tel: 0424 223340. Tel: 0246 203591. Square, Pentagon Centre. Systems, 46 Pensby Road Brighton. Boots, 129 North Street. Chesterfield. Computer Stores, TeL: 0634 405471. Tel: 051-342 7516. 14 Stephenson Place Tel 0273 27088 Liverpool. Hargreaves, 31-37 Gravesend. Gravesend Home Brighton. Gamer, 71 East Street Tel: 0246 208802 Warbreck Moor, Walton Computers 39 The Terrace. Tel 0273 728681. Derby. Boots, 1 Devonshire Tel: 0474 23871. Tel: 051-525 1782 Brighton. Laskys, 151-152 Wester Walk Tel: 0332 45886. Gillingham. Regal Software St. Helens. Microman Computers, Road. Tel: 0273 725625. DEVON Supplies, 49 High Street. Rainford Industrial Estate, Mill Crawley. Gatwick Computers, Tel: 0634 579634. Lane Rainford. Tel: 0744 885242. 62 The Boulevard. Tel: 0293 37842. Exeter. Boots, 251 High Street, Maidstone. Boots, 56-62 King Southport. Central Studios, Crawley. Laskys, 6-8 Queensway. Tel: 0392 32244. Street. TeL: 0622 53912. 38 Easibank Street. Tel 0704 31881.Tel 0293 544622 Exeter. Open Channel, MIDDLESEX Maidstone. Kent Micros, 51 Union Central Station, Queen Street. Eastbourne. Boots, 15 Eastbourne Street. TeL: 0622 52784. Enfield. Laskys, 44-48 Palace Amdale Centre. Tel: 03232 7742. Tel: 0392 218187. Rainham. Microway Computers, Garden Shopping Centre Paignton. Computer Systems Ltd TYNE & WEAR 39 High Street. TeL: 0634 376702 Tel: 01-363 6627. Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Boots 35 Hyde Road. TeL: 0803 524284. Sevenoaks. Emest Fielder Harrow. Harrow Micro, 24 Eldon Square. Tel: 0632 329844. Plymouth. Syntax, 76 Cornwall Computers, Dorset Street Springfield Road. Tel: 01-427 0098. Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Laskys, Street. Tel: 0752 28705. Tel: 0732 456800. . Hounslow. Boots, 193-199 High 6 Northumberland Street. Seaton. Curtis Computer Services, Shortlands. The Village House Street. Tet 01-570 0156. Tel: 0632617224 Seaton Computer Shop Southall. Twillstar Computers Ltd, Newcastle-upon-Tyne. of Computers, 87 Beckenham Lanc. Slc Harbour Road. Tel: 0297 22347. Tel: 01-460 7122 7 Regina Road Tel: 01-514 5271. RE Computing, 12 Jesmond Road. Tiverton. Actron Microcomputers Sittingbourne. Computer Plus, Teddington. Andrews, Broad Tel: 0637 815580. 37 Bampton Street. Tet 0884 252854 65 High Street. Tel: 0795 25677. Street. Tel 01-997 4716. DORSET Tunbridge Wells. Modata Twickenham. Twickenham WALES Bournemouth. Lansdowne Computer Centre, 28-30 St Johns Computer Centre, 72 Heath Road. Aberdare. Inkey Computer Computer Centre, 1 Lansdowne Road. TeL: 0892 41555. Tel: 01-892 7896. Services, 70 Mill Street, The Square, Crescent, Lansdowne. LANCASHIRE Uxbridge. JKL Computers, Trecynon Tel: 0685 881828. Tel 0202 290165. Blackpool Blackpool Computers 7 Windsor Street. Tet 0895 51815. Aberystwyth. Aberdata at Dorchester. The Paper Shop Store, 179 Church Street NORFOLK Galloways 23 Pier Street. Kings Road. Tel: 0305 64564. Tel: 0253 20239. Norwich. Adams, 125-129 King Tel: 0970 615522. Poole. Lansdowne Computer Burnley. IMO Business Systems, Street. TeL: 0603 22129. Cardiff. Boots26 Queens Street Centre, 14 Amdale Centre, 39-43 Standish Street Thetford. Thetford CB & Micros, & 105 Frederick Street. Tel: 0202 670901. Tel: 0942 44382 21 Guildhall Street Tet 0842 61645. Tel: 0222 31291. micronet Phone 01.278 3143 for your free information pack now! Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1 "


"ALL HE RESULTS 3 ADVENTURE PLANNER The 10 winners are as follows:Darran Cooper, Norfolk; B E Pedersen, Norway; N Illingworth, North Yorkshire; V Timbrell, Dorset; Allan Jones, Cardiff; Martin Schultze; West Germany; Paul Carruthers, Glasgow; JM Brooker, London; Mr N Knowles, Essex; Kelly Medor, Milan. THE QUESTIONS 1. Who wrote the Super Gran theme Is it a bird? Is it a jumbo net? No — tune? IT'S SUPER GRAN! And, thanks to our 2. What is PC Leakie's first name? friends at Tynesoft, she could be 3. Name the two famous footballers swooping down and sweeping you Super Gran's grandson was named off for a spot of afternoon tea at a after. secret location somewhere in 4. Who is the only person in the TV London. You'll be able to talk to her series who can render Super Gran about all her exciting adventures and powerless? enjoy some cream cakes at the same 5. Name ANY three of Inventor time. Black's inventions. To win this exciting day out with ---TV's most popular superheroine, all | C&VG/TYNESOFT SUPER GRAN you have to do is answer the simple | COMPETITION SUPER GRAN quiz below and rush | My answers are: the completed coupon to Computer & Video Games, Super Gran Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farring i don Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Normali C&VG competition rules apply and the editor's decision is final. Closing date is July 16th so get your skates i 5........... on! Name. Ten runners-up will get a copy of 1 the first ever Super Gran game from Address............ Tynesoft which will be available for the CBM64, C16, Amstrad and I C64 Computer owned (tick box) Spectrum Spectrum. You'll get a t-shirt too! So Amstrad C16 don't delay enter today ... SILICA SHOP STAR WARS 10 readers have won themselves a copy of Star Wars. Have a look below and see if you are one of them. Sebastian Sampson, Surrey: Gary Watts, Essex; J M Gagen, E Sussex; Darryl Gleave, Northampton; I Henderson, Tyne & Wear; DP Shallis, Newport; Neil Collier, Birmingham; Sean Beattie, Cardiff, Mark Sharp, Kent; Stephen Lawson, Bahrain. GIFT OF THE GODS Only one person could win the fantastic hand-painted diorama from Ocean in this competition and that lucky person is Andrew Crichton from Cheshire. Congratulations, Andrew! A further ten runners up receive software for their machine: Jeremy Tankard, Lincoln; C & A Nightingale, Kent; Ian Moore, Northampton; Andrew Paynter, Clywd; Timothy Curry, Devon; Stephen Powell, Middlesborough; James Birchenough, Crewe; Paul Stockwell, Kent; Alistair Knapp, Berkshire; Elizabeth Watts, London. EUREKA Sheridan Gray, Bristol; Jackie Edwards, Avon, Anthony Brun, Middlesex; Michael Homewood, Edinburgh and David Steel, Tullibody each receive a signed print from the Eureka Handbook DRAGONTORC This competition proved to be harder than expected, but, we did eventually come up with a winner and 50 runners up. Neil MacDonald from Worcs was the first person out of the box with the correct answers and so wins the Amstrad computer. Congratulations, Neil! A full list of the 50 runners up is available from the C&VG office. ! 63 "


"OFESS. FINDERS KEEPERS SPECIAL VIDEO'S The Magic Knight wishes to blacksmith and the broken are impossible to get to without become a member of the sword produce the fabled first going through the upper Polygon table, so the King has Excalibur (). maze and reaching its bottom sent him to the dreaded Castle Beware the Tube of Glue, the left corner. There you will find a of Spriteland to prove his Transmat key (see below), and tunnel which is a one-way drop. worth. You, as the knight, must the Sticky Bun all worth  Getting rid of the cat blocking collect as many valuable objects but impossible to drop. the Exit is done by collecting the as you can and escape the castle, Upon starting the game, you charcoal and the sulphur and or you may collect as much will find yourself in the Castle then dropping them exactly treasure as possible. Teleport Room. Among the over the saltpetre in front of the You may collect and trade collection of platforms overhead cat. Drop the magic flame onto objects (shown on the map and is a rotating corkscrew or this lot and say goodbye to the in the game as triangles). Some similar looking objectcat. of these objects will combine to standing on it will transport you If you keep getting killed off, form more useful, or more through the roof and on to a try MERGEing the first part of expensive, objects. different floor. the program in and entering: The bar of Lead and the On both levels you will find POKE 34252,0 in between the Philosopher's Stone will create a mazes many times the screen LOAD \"\" CODE and the RAND bar of Gold, worth . The size. Parts of the lower maze USR. + TO LOWER MAZE -te's P TITUTO LOWER T45 = 5. TO 2R D . 17/ 00 MAZE 1.TO 28 PA MAZE COLD UPPER MAZE IN/OUT Il 1A os PL = TO 1R $ SLIMY LOWER MAZE C=CAT T-TRADER N=TRANSMAT DEATH RS KEEPERS E 5 DAPEI ab225 MAPIO MARK HENRY 1985. "


"OFESS e're off to find the Wizard. thanks to C&VG map-maker Neil Shim well from Derbyshire, who has delved into the mysterious Lair and come up with a stunning technicolour map. Neil has mapped out all seven levels of this magical Bubble Bus game. These levels are: 1) The Caivo Level 2) The Hawlo Level 3) The Crypt Level 4) The Dungeon Level 5) The Vault Level 6) The Liayr Level 7) The Lyons Level. Enter at your own risk! SPECIAL DEO'S Wardrobe Lift Wadide note A-lable 55-enores + COS KA Knight in armour Magic Lift  Decorated Poong unless othenrise LC Longcome docks. TA -Tropeo Stanu spund WpPposry wyrag. un do VAULT 1942 083 D dresor ken Kom (3 out puu. Luem ma FEE, in on 65 "


" GIFT-FROM TH.GOPS   de  00 0000-000 PPPPP PROD. O200.000 HOOOOOH: ODD000000 00 ETITIETTIPIPOTIROT.. "


"ORD CODE LIC DROID his is the first prize winning map in the C&VG Gift from the Gods contest, created by ace map maker Andrew Crighton from Cheshire. Andrew won a specially created Gift from the Gods model, made by Tim Olsen for the Games Workshop plus  of Ocean games of his choice. As you can see, Andrew put a great deal of time and effort into his map as did all the many hundred entrants in our Gift from the Gods competition. Thanks for all the hard work and better luck next time to everyone who didn't collect a prize. But we hope you still enjoy looking at Andrew's winning map! Hail Orestes King of Mylenea? CCFP PC This area is quite complicated Passing through the hole in A tends to However the revenge is not true. Passing through the hole in B also leads to y also hie terese rute does haos the teste offect. OFEST SPICIA LIDEO'S I For | CCCCB-to 3 SIA P100 Key to Gift from the Gods Map. 000 exit leading daum I dead ends exit leading up Charbers, each contain four exits teading up and our Euclidiar shapes connecting routes between Tooms Guardian's charber. Correct shapes must | Door heading to charmber or other roommy T he placed here 1 Although he to hous trits 4p and bout the ladyinth Appar's to ite om one Aerved. The exits is and dour act as 'sournet passages Amy thaniber Arith a number is linked a nother charibu bearting the Same number, Charibers Arroupeed e s are ssible Attisting feathions HITE IN OR ONE ON IN OR OR "


"U.S. GOLD) ScanSorte presents: for ATARI, 64, BBC, SPECTRUM,) AMSTRAD REVENCE GRO 100 SCORE 300 Outstanding Cartoon-Style Graphics TOLL 50 Thor is out to find the Meaning of Life but to get there he must have E 100 clams. Oh, but it's a hard journey. Climb steep hills. Dodge rocks and potholes. Speed through treacherous caves. Avoid Tiredactyis and the Mighty Grog! 60 Follow the straight and narrow. Cross each bridge as you come to it Take the high road and the low road and you too can learn the Meaning of Lifel Yes, it's worth every clam to see GROGS REVENGE! SCORE 200 Commodore 64 version manufactured under licence from Sierra On-Line Software. All other versions manufactured under licence from Sydney Development Corporation. US Gold Limited, Unit 10, Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. DISK CASSETTE .95 .95 "


"BUG HUNTER WRITE TO HEAT COMPUTER& VIDEOGAMES PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC/R 3AU.OR PHONE ME ON Q1-2516222. DOTMAN GAMES:POSITION 10,6:? LOOKING AFTER \"ADVENTURE HELPLINE\" A number of people seem to have 15 POSITION 15.8:? \"PRESENTS\" YOUR TAPES been having problems with the 20 POSITION 10, 10:? I recently received a very interesting Amstrad Dotman program from the letter from Mr. A. Mathison in West May issue. First of all, our printer has 10,11:?\"'* PORTRAIT Germany. He had a number of cleverly printed pound signs () DUNGEON\":POSITION 10, 12:? comments to make on handling instead of hash symbols (+) in lines * ****\" cassettes (and one or two about our 430 and 1850 one of the problems 30 POSITION 11,15:? \"BY PAUL cover flexy discs!). Here is at least of being British! COPPINS\":POKE 764,12:RUN \"C\": part of his letter ... The other problem most people and I have a Spectrum, a ZX-81 and a have had is with the graphics found 10 POKE 9.255:POKE 2,65:POKE Nascom 2 which I built in 1979, and as in the PRINT statements (lines 1610 to 3,185:TRAP 202 60: POKE yet no discs. So I think I am qualified 1840) which appear as just characters 53774,64:POKE 82,1:POKE to give a few hints on problem free in the listing. Stephen Sutherland, the 83,38:POKE 710,160: POKE loading using cassette recorders. author, helps out with the following 709, 10:GOTO 20 1) The tape should be of good middle two lines, which should be entered Hopefully this will put an end to the quality. Hi-fi tapes are less important before typing the program: finger twiddling and head than having a tape completely free 1. FOR F=1 to 18: READ A : KEY DEF scratching. from dropouts. Ferro tapes are A,1,103+F,71 +7,199+F: NEXT adequate, with C5, C10 or C15 being 2 DATA 44,35,45,37,36,34,27,67,50,60, MEGA-MACHINES the best sizes. 51,42,55,49,63,43 2) Tape heads and pinch wheels The PRINT statements can now be The new wave of 16 and 32 bit should be cleaned approximately entered by holding down the CTRL nal computers that will be every five to ten hours. key and typing the appropriate letter, winging their way to this country 3) Always record at, or slightly as shown between the inverted from America look set to revolabove, level 'O' VU. commas. utionize home computing. Dodgy 4) On playback adjust the volume to graphics, poor animation and pokey get the \"loading bars\" on the screen SMARTY BERTY little adventures crammed into a few (Spectrums only) to be approximately miserable K of memory will soon be equal thickness. Slightly thicker bars, To all those readers who couldn't get only a fading memory. on the first header tone only, are Smarty Berty to run on the BBC micro. Atari and Commodore are leading sometimes helpful why not? Having typed in the this push into more powerful 5) Pick a cassette recorder with complete program myself (a very machines at affordable prices. Atari's variable input level (no auto level). tedious task), it ran fine. Obviously new range of ST computers include a VU meter(s). variable output level, you'll need a Model B. If you have a 16 bit computer for under  with and most importantly AC erase and disc system fitted, type in the follow128k built in the ST 130 and a 32 AC bias. To check whether a ing before running: bit with half a megabyte of memory particular recorder has AC erase, FOR 1% = PAGE TO TOP : on board for  or ,000 with a look at the erase head (not the one in ?(I%+&!400-PAGE)=?I% : NEXT colour monitor. the middle) and if it has two wires PAGE=&EOO The prices may not be peanuts in coming from it then it is AC erase. No *TAPE comparison to most games wires means that it must be DC to download the program, leaving computers, but when you consider erase, having a normal magnet. room for the 20k screen mode. that the STs are comparable with the 6) A stereo recorder gives an Apple Macintosh and even have automatic backup copy if you link the some more interesting features cassette inputs together. Then, if the PORTRAIT including 255 colours on the screen left track fails, you can always try the DUNGEON simultaneously instead of the Mac's right track. Don't try to read them black and white display they start both together because you'll get Errors within errors! Readers of last to look very good value for money. phasing errors. month's column will no doubt have Commodore's 128 and Omega 7) Using a head alignment tape is been delighted to see the amendcomputers will follow later in the year always a good idea. You'll find ments to Portrait Dungeon. These and promise to be as exciting and adverts for these in electronics included the elusive first program innovative as Ataris. magazines. and a reprint of line 10, only they Atari are also promising to stand Mr. Mathison claims to achieve weren't printed. So here you are: the disc drive market on its head by 100% error free loading by following 10 ? :POKE 752,1:POKE offering  disc drives for all its these guidelines. Certainly a lot 710,160:POKE 709, 10:POSITION 8,5:? makes of computers as well as other better than I've been able to with five COMPUTER & VIDEO manufacturers' machines. different cassette recorders! "


"The MAX FACTOR graphic sequences, or have a video depend on your programming skills be able to make your very own either. There's a whole bunch of recorder with an edit facility, you'll computer-movie. Max Headroom is taking TV by good graphic art utilities around The computer is sending visual storm with his unique mixture which you can use to create complex images — but no sound — to the of old jokes and hot music computer pictures without complex video in the same way as any broadvideos. Max is the first comprogramming! cast that you can receive via your TV puter-generated superstaraerial. but did you know that you can SETT Since videos have differently create your very own talking head? NIGEL WATSON tells To start making your own Max, signals that come in through the you how. handbook or dealer before you start rax Headroom may have all simply set up your micro and video arranged controls for tuning in the doing anything you might regret to the best jokes but you can recorder as illustrated on our create your own computerdiagram. You'll have to tune your aerial socket, it is best to consult your your machine. When you play back the recording, person without all the high-tech video into the computer's signal from the computer can be recorded video wizardry. All you need is your once you've done this, the graphics micro and a video-recorder. Basically what you are doing is you should DISCONNECT the do this, the computer will interfere The kind of visual images you can easily onto video tape. recording your computer graphics or computer from the video. If you don't with the pictures which are sent from create on your computer and transfer animation onto tape. If you create the video to the television set. to video tape does not entirely 70 "


"MOVIE-MAKING ANY IDEAS FOR INSTANT SUCCESS? music. length. If you only take a brief look through computer books and magazines, you will soon find program listings that help you draw static and animated graphics. If you have the spare cash, British Micro produce a Grafpad that is probably the ultimate drawing aid for Spectrum, BBC Model B and Commodore 64 owners. Also, with the help of light pens and digital tracers, you can create some interesting artwork, even if you have little artistic ability Another useful aspect of these devices is that they add animation to the graphics in a way that can be easily controlled. You can record onto video tape each graphic or animated graphic one after the other until you have completed the desired sequence of pictures. This is known as assemble make a pleasing pop video. What kind of programme can you with music accompanying them can You can take this idea further and make? Well, first of all, it is best not to produce more complicated images be too ambitious. So plan something and sounds for such productions. No that will last two or three minutes. idea is too wild! Local pop groups This might not seem long but it is might even beat a path to your doorsurprising how many images and step if they get the chance to see the sound effects you require to make a kind of pictures you can put to their worthwhile programme of this These techniques can also be used You can use computer pictures and for illustrating graphs, diagrams, and sound to produce virtually any type of programme cartoons, stories or The good thing about this kind of even documentaries. computer programming' is that you If you are stuck for ideas, you can can produce a tangible result almost perhaps make your own mock instantly. So even if you do not yet commercial. Just think of any product have the skill to produce a computer and then try to invent a TV advertisegame, you can still become a telement for it which you can easily vision producer! produce. But steer clear of Blipverts! A sequence of random patterns ons, storiese plans. plans. d thing about is that you editing If you own a more expensive video machine, you might find an insert edit facility. This allows you to insert pictures into the sequence you have already created without upsetting it. With experimentation you can see what effects you can create on your computer and how they look when built into a sequence of images on TV SET. video tape. SOUND EFFECTS! Signals to TV receiver. Aerial out socket. VIDEO. So far we have only mentioned the visual aspects of this technique. Once you are satisfied with your pictures, you can add sound. This is accomplished via the audio-dub facility on the video machine. This allows an audio tape recording input or a microphone input to insert sound on the tape without disturbing the pictures you have already recorded. Sound will make your computermovie come alive. Just a few sound effects such as footsteps accompanying a figure walking across the screen-can make all the difference. The BBC produces records and cassettes which contain all manner of sound effects but, as with prerecorded computer programmes, you must be careful that you do not infringe the rights of the copyright You can use your own computer to produce sound effects and there is some commercially produced software that will help you. If you are musically inclined, you can produce computer generated music to enhance your pictures again software is available to help you do this. An interesting idea is to attach a speech synthesiser to your computer and use this to produce dialogue, or your own Max Headroom jokes! Aerial in socket. Signals to video. holder. COMPUTER TUNE INTO THE PICTURE BOX ng he on't ere Instead of receiving signals from an aerial, the computer is used as a source of signals for the video recorder and television receiver. com "


"C&VG'S HALLA OF FAME C&VG HOTSHOT OF THE MONTH! M his issue we proudly announce ! CONTEST a new look C&VG HALL OF FAME. We will still be printing I'd Name.. top scores on your favourite games | Address... but the REAL challenge will come when YOU take the C&VG Hotshot of My score on Drop Zone was.... the Month title. i Date...............Witnessed by......... How do you get to be a C&VG Hotshot? Simple. Just get a high score on our nominated Hotshot Game of I Machine (tick box) C640 Atario ! the Month and send your score in on the form provided to Computer & We're still interested in your hiVideo Games, Hotshots, Priory Court, scores on other games and 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR remember the number one scorer 3AU. from each game we print each month Then we'll pick out the two highest gets a C&VG t-shirt. And DON'T scorers and invite them to come to forget to send a photograph of the C&VG offices in London where yourself along with your Hall of Fame we'll hold a play-off. entry! We like everyone to see just what a C&VG Hall of Famer looks The winner will get a special C&VG like! Hotshot prize package — and the runner-up won't be going away C&VG HALL OF FAME empty handed either. So don't delay get your score into us today! Name THIS MONTH'S HOTSHOT GAME OF Address THE MONTH IS DROP ZONE for the Atari and C64. Drop Zone is a fast, all-action shootName of game.. out set on a planet being attacked by horrible aliens. You play the part of a I scored.. jet-powered space-captain out to save the droids on the surface from Machine....... the evil aliens. C&VG voted this the T-shirt size: (S,M,L)...... best (available) Atari game for Witnessed by............ ages! 72 "


"ONTHERUN SPECTRUM 48K .90 DE-IEUW 85 Selected Design Design titles are available from:O WOOLWORTH John Menzies COMET WHSMITH and all leading software stockists, or direct from:Design Design Design Design Software, 125 Smedley Road, Cheetham Hill, Manchester M87RS Trade enquiries:-061 205 6603 Price includes p&p "


"RUN FOR YOUR LIFE WITH TAKO Canyon FOR D eep in the steamy Amazon jungle danger lurks amongst the swamps and creepers. Armed only with a blowpipe and a limited number of poisoned darts, your journey takes you through some of the last unexplored areas of Rainforest. Look out for treacherous headhunters and scorpions, while above you deadly tree snakes wait to strike at easy prey. Try and outrun them, but you'll have to stop, load and shoot eventually! Your adventures take you through dank, eerie caves echoing with the sound of bloodsucking, vampire bats. Wierd wraithes chase you out to face the climax of the game around a ruined temple. Dodging the crumbling masonry you must combat giant spiders waiting to entwine you in their deadly webs. But are you accurate enough with your blowpipe to face the final conflict? There are 4 levels of difficulty spread over 3 incredibly detailed 3D scrolling landscapes and should you be caught out, the end you face is definitely not for the faint hearted. Realistic sound adds to the thrill of the chase make sure the screams aren't yours if you are dragged away by the awesome Quetzalcoatus. Load up, and be ready to shoot! Commodore 64. Price .95 Hot Line Mail Order Service 0225-316924 65 Generation Software (GSH New Generation products are sold according to their terms of trade and conditions of sale. FREEPOST, Bath BA2 4TD. "


"Become the hunter and SPECTRUM48k COMMODORE 64 AMSTRAD and burntread on the streets 6-95 7.95 8.95 Ocean Streaming Ocean Software is available from selected branches of WOOLWORTH. WHSMITH. Bank John Menzies, LASKYS, Rumbelows. COMET, Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Ocean Software Ocean House 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Telephone 061 8326633. Telex 669977 Oceans G 1 "


"huoquoHJOJ O10ISU "


"COMING SOON! IS HE DEAD? WELCOME TIMI So many C&VGreaders write to the Let's not beat about the bush we Adventure Helpline and after the ALL know that the date is 22nd July, The Helpline team gains a new inevitable delay before receiving a don't we? (22/7 = Pi, get it?) What we recruit this month in Jim Douglas reply, write back to say that they had don't know is the venue. whose reviews you may have read in solved the problem before hearing Well, if we haven't heard anything the March and June issues. In danger from us! Perhaps that is a better thing by this 21st July, even if there is no of being overwhelmed by an ever from the point of view of enjoying an claim on the 22nd, Pimania will be increasing number of Helpline Adventure — it proves you CAN over. By next year the game and prize letters, we decided the time had solve the problems given time. At the will be so dead that no one will even come for us to get extra help! same time, you have the comfort of think about it. So, if the Sundial From Twickenham, Jim has been knowing, at the end of the day, help remains unclaimed this July, here is writing letters to the Helpline is hopefully! — on the way! What our challenge to Mr Penfold. Publicly regularly for over a year and many of do you think? auction the Golden Sundial and give them reveal a good knowledge of the If you are a subscriber to Micronet, the proceeds to Soft Aid or we'll inner workings of the BBC and its you can Mailbox me on System know that with Pimania Automata Adventures. Jim is just completing 019997181. If you are not, but are perpetrated the biggest ever prizehis O levels and, as soon as they are then write to adventure RIP OFF! over (hurry, there's a pile of letters Micronet 800, Durrant House, 8 waiting for you!), he will be joining Herbal Hill, London ECIR SEJ, for Simon Marsh, Paul Coppins and details. myself in answering your cries for There are some great new Adventure help and contributing reviews to the THE PI-MAN — titles lined up for release during the Adventure reviews section. summer and autumn! The long awaited Midwinter from THE A'TRAIL the keyboard of Brian Howarth About a year ago, we thought we should soon be making an appearThose of you who are subscribers to knew the annual date for claiming ance from Adventure International. Micronet 800, will know what the Pimania's Golden Sundial said to be Midwinter is being completely A 'Trail is my spot on Micronet! For worth ,000. Word had it that there revamped from its original format the uninitiated, A 'Trail is the was a very good chance of a and will have animated graphics and Adventure Trail, and starts on page successful bid for the prize. \"That arcade sequences. It will probably 800132 the base number of my would make a great story for come in two parts on the same tape. \"area\". C&VG!\", we thought. Tynesoft plan to launch a Super A few weeks before Easter I was So Eugene Lacey, then C&VG's Gran Adventure. Guess who will be busy composing frames to form the deputy editor, rang Christian Penfold writing that? Brian Howarth and Mike basis of the Trail, using my BBC micro and asked how about us being on the won being on the Woodroffe! with a slick piece of software called spot, complete with camera, to cover September should see the release Sent MCTELE which emulates the Prestel the event for our readers? Mr Pentold of The Rats which promises to be a editor. This way, frames can be built obviously wouldn't reveal anything at very unusual game. Based on the up off-line and stored on disc. that stage, but promised he would book by James Herbert, it will be be With the help of Matthew give Eugene 24 hours notice of the published by Hodder & Stoughton Lemming, who spends most of his time and place. We, of course, were Software for the Commodore 64 and school holidays working in the sworn to secrecy Spectrum, written by Fiveways Micronet offices, I started the date we had in mind came and Software. \"uploading\" the frames to the main went — Eugene and I had kept a And of course, there's Questprobe Prestel computer on Easter Monday. whole weekend clear! And now 3 still to arrive. Where has the Thing Bulk uploading entails putting all the nearly a year has passed. When I got to? individual frames into a bulk up load spoke to Mr Penfold recently he file and then \"crunching\" the file into denied the promise. \"No, 20 minutes Prestel format, using a special warning, if there was a claimant, is CLUB OFFER Viewdata Rom. Finally comes the onwhat I promised!\", he said. Now how Vaata Rom. Finally comes the onwhat promised! , he said. Now now if you wish to take advantage of our line bit, whereby the BBC is conwould he know, 20 minutes in exclusive -off offer on any Level 9 or nected via a modem to the approadvance, if anyone was going to turn Adventure International cassette or priate Prestel computer and the up at the appointed location? And disc, send this token, together with the crunched output file 18 bulk what use would 20 minutes notice be coupon from the C&VG Adventure uploaded. Immediately the uploaded to us? Club, to Computer & Video Games, frames are available for access to Eugene is quite definite that that, Adventure Club, Priory Court, 30-32 anyone logged onto the system. was NOT the promise. Farringdon Lane, London EC1. 77 "


"DONT LET THE GREMLINS GET THE BETTER OF YOU, WRITE TO... wa GRAMPIAN ADVENTURE M ichael Bolam of Consett, who wrote to say he had compLletely solved Claymorgue Castle, added: \"By the way, I saw you on 4 Computer Buffs the other night. Ever thought of becoming an actor? No? Well don't! I'm sending Michael the smallest tshirt we've got — you never know, it might strangle him when he tries it on! And the bad news, Michael, is that people in the Grampian TV area will be having to put up with me again! At the invitation of Patrick McDermot, I flew up to Aberdeen for the day recently, for a recording session with Bobby Hain, the presenter of Grampian's Bits 'n Pieces programme. At the studios I met up with a very friendly crowd, including producer Peter Webb and his assistant, Sue Hough. After lunch I had a pint of the local brew with Tony Crowther of Killer Watt and Blagger game but I'd better not mention arcade games in this column! Bits 'n Pieces is a series of six programmes and will be screened from about mid-June onwards. even a special screwdriver included escape, Gaz! in the kit. How do you get past the Hobo in Steven Swain asks when the Wizard's Challenge (BBC) asks Helpline will be appearing next at a Leonie Kyriacou of Enfield. computer show? Well, word is, that \"After seeing the demonstration of we will be around again in Sep-your Helpline Database on 4 tember more details later! Computer Buffs, and being very Carl Muller of Taranaki, New impressed, I might add (grovel, Zealand, sent a letter explaining how creep) I have one question. Please to write an Adventure in 544 bytes. HELP!\" He has ingeniously fitted an AdvenThat must be worth a full-size t-shirt ture game into an unexpanded Casio for Timothy Smith of Colwyn Bay, PB-100, using the exclusive string for who wants to know how to remove input and storing text in string varithe retaining clips from above the ables. \"Use small line numbers for bunks in Pulsar 7, and where to drop GOTOs,\" advises Carl, \"and steer the Stilton in Sphinx. Hey, that's two. away from plots like Snowball!\" I've been had! Ivan Lamont and Simon Walsh of Andy McGowan of Clydebank is Dublin are working away to earn a tpuzzling over Labyrynths of La shirt. As well as some really cunning Coshe. What does Gigo mean and methods of cheating, they have put how can one talk to the stranger in together an excellent hint sheet on the forest? Lords of Time. A couple of their clues David Mair of Co. Antrim asks: are in the upside down section. \"How do you cure leprosy?\" while \"Maybe we're after C&VG t-shirts? Daniel Banks has a less startling Dead right, but not yet though, more proble next month!\" they wrote. I couldn't get the rod of light in See-ka of resist sending one, on account, as it Assiah. were! Kingdom of Hamil has an old lady unwilling to part with her goblet and it is killing Darren Sillett of DESPERATE Camberley. What use can Chris Bacon of DEMANDS! Darwen make of the flint and plank of wood in Zim Sala Bim? Meanwhile, Hey! Is there a conspiracy afoot this the Duckett family of Hitchin are lanmonth? After some years on the guishing in a dungeon in Zim and market, Sphinx has produced the have been trying to escape, without same hitherto unasked question in success, since December the same mailbag! Where is the boat Commodore's Quest: The two to cross the lake? Apparently Acornheaded serpent is slaying Sandra soft are suggesting their customers Philpotts and her neighbour in write to C&VG to find out pity they peaceful Surbiton. \"Do we need the didn't send me a copy of the game! mace to overcome the problem and, Token of Ghall is galling John if so, how do we get it?\" asks Sandra. Greenwood of Sheffield. What do How should Dave Bunce of Grangeyou do in the throne room and how over-Sands combat the Snake God do you get past the door in the skull and Sidhe in Tir Na Nog, and how can room, he asks. he get out of the library? Jason Thornton of Warley can't EUREKA! (1) How do you get into work out how to get past the velvet the village without being burned? (2) drape in the Castle of Terror library, What to give the priest in Arthurian? nor get through the bookcase. G (3) How do you get into the shelter Tomkinson of Willenhall has got the avoiding the guard who says \"Heidi\" maiden but can no longer jump the and how do you get through the spiked pit. I should drop the maiden minefield? in it and make good your own In Upper Gumtree, does the gypsy ADVENTURE CHAT Try drinking tidepool or lake water in Savage Island Part I, says Jeff Beck from BFPO 53 in Cyprus who gets a tshirt for this Adventure funny. \"Is there something wrong with the Commodore version of Eureka which crashes even after cleaning the tape head?\" asks Richard Mead of Tunbridge Wells. It could be the head alignment is out, Richard this is very critical on turbo loads. I can recommend the Azimuth Head Alignment Tape from Interceptor which makes adjustment of the C2N Datasette a simple operation there's 78 "


"GOT A PROBLEM? DON'T SUFFER IN SILENCE! WRITE TO KEITH CAMPBELL'S ADVENTURE HELPLINE, COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES, PRIORY LANE COURT, 30-32, FARRINGDON LONDON S EC1R 3AU MAILBAG want the coin, why do I get killed going into the flat-roofed building Joueus oj snojauab Lax aq xau obojazym tee pure Toros au pear of To escape from the coffin in and how do I deal with the three Snowball Pull Lever sharks after falling through the trapNYX O IDWS In Classic Adventure a magic word door in the Nissen hut?\" deos ay asks is PLUGH Matthew Gregg of Smethwick FEM apoyqon ay our Woor buquerds ay urog In Urban Upstart, the large key will Vilmore Rochester of Peckham has dn pure jsem ob pure Mens ay JM Joop eo au open the front door. come to the conclusion that the oven tepun deb ay y009 'eurs uz ayi ised jabolI'm pretty sure that those will help in Count is not solar powered NOISSIN TYNId fellow Adventurers in a jam, they because there is still heat and light certainly helped me. Now that I've coming out when the sun is setting. ADVENTURE helped other Adventurers, I've got a That So, Vilmore? But his main few problems. problem is this: \"How can Dracula How do I complete all the Level 9 move so fast? Whenever I'm in the Adventures? What is the secret pantry I'm always bitten. I mean, how Here is a sample from some of the complete Eureka? Who committed does Dracula know where you are? I telephone number needed to many letters that have been pouring the crime in Sherlock? bet this question will never be in! answered!\" Mark Eldridge Poor student Lars Larsen of Dear Keith, Laindon Hojberg, Denmark, spends all his I have a Spectrum copy of Eureka, Basildon. money on Adventures! Still, he's and my daughter and her boyfriend, Keith's reply: I can see you've got earned some clothing through the the Commodore version. In the the Helpline off to a t(shirt)! But clues he senta t-shirt! Commodore version of the you missed out a good clue. The In Valkyrie 17 what do you do with Prehistoric Adventure, it is possible magic word written on the rusty the shaving foam, asks a beardless A to pass through the Neanderthals' axe in Adventureland! J Glover of RAF Benson, Oxfordshire. village quickly, and follow other And finally, in Return to Eden, how routes, but this does not seem to Dear Keith, can Martin Pavey avoid getting work in the Spectrum version. Here, You are wise, Father Campbell, the thrown off the autoscythe? you are captured, being unable to young man said, take any of the routes indicated. Not wanting in Terror to quit, My question is: (1) Do I have a With the aid of the mind in your faulty tape? (2) Is there a program gallant head, error on the Spectrum version, Why can't I get over the pit? presumably stopping completion of You are kind, Father Campbell, the the adventure? (3) Am I doing man then cried out, Thanks for help this month to Hazel something wrong? And the past? That was something I Topham, Darren Aylward. I have played the game on both lacked, machines, so I do not believe I am For if Nightmares I've had, I'm droy jubur Meno pur e 'espew ay ssed or to blame. Can anyone throw any beginning to doubt, UTVdS30 JO SMOL light on this? Has Examiner's brain simply \"oung ay burynd azojeg reur au bur Robert Robinson cracked? -gerd pure foued ay bubog 'urerp ay but Kidlington You are good, Father Campbell, the \"UMO mo burbuey sembar uopnjos Ays y Oxford young man sobbed hard, n S, MAXIH HOLI And the Snowball has passed as a Dear Keith, IBMX uop S M To get this letter off to a good start, dream, Isano TISY But the monster, alas, the North I'm going to use some bad bank doth guard,  yi ur sudrms rqnop PS,  language. Ready? \"Arcade Games!\" I am stuck (as the rest) it would SNITW35 Now on to your column. Great seem!       u  sg though it is I'd like to see a lot more Ian Urquahat -oudky os ybnoua si buried res pue DM OYL clues, as it seems as if the ones Edmonton N303 OL NUN printed are for an Adventure that Keith's reply: I've got or they are always for par au dois oj spreoqroog ay nag Nightmare remembered, a foe so problems that I've past. ZLATO malign, So here is my selection of Enrages enough to make score, suo preus as sy 'wagord exceedingly unhelpful clues: biq euo jou si preeq SUBWOM ay bumuog Whilst a fishy solution leviathans To get out from your house in the ONIXIA SHL like, 3 Hobbit Open Door Of the pit I can tell you no more. SIMPLE SOLUTIONS 79 "


"MORE GAMES WITHOUT FRONTIERS The game takes place aboard your CUDDLES flagship and progresses through space to a far distant alien world. This Finally, Keith had a look at Cuddles, may prove too difficult for beginners, another of the 8th Day series, and but the experienced Adventure nut after being cut by a \"broach\" on his will love it, especially its weird obNanny's dress and finding he had to 8th Day Software is one of the new jects such as the lead ball and lighterrefer to it as a \"broach\", and that all breed of \"cottage\" software houses than-air docking badge! Great stuff! subsequent text referred to it as a that have grown since the advent of Personal Rating: 9 \"broach\" he says he could not bear the Quill. What makes the company to bring himself to continue with the different from most of the rest is that game, let alone review it! their games, once priced at .75, still cost only .50 each. The co\"Games Without Frontiers\" are for directors of the company are Michael the 48k Spectrum, priced .50, and White and Gary Kelbrick, who also available from 8th Day Software at 18 write all the games using the Quill. Flaxhill, Moreton, Wirral, Merseyside I asked them why their games cost L46 ZUH. so little compared with other AdvenSimon Marsh tures, and their answer was quite controversial. Gary and Michael both think that 99 percent of Adventure GREEDY DWARE games on the market are overpriced for what they contain and feel, to a There has been a noticeable upsurge certain extent, that many games are in the number of new Adventure written badly, story-wise, with titles for the BBC, of late, and many of unoriginal problems. Naturally, they them are of a high standard. Greedy also feel that their games are always Dwarf is one such it concerns a original and worth every penny. dwarf who has robbed King Ardanga So I thought I'd take a look at this of his favourite gems. Naturally, it series, to see if it is all that its profalls upon you to recover them. At the top of the spiral stairs ducers claim. leading into the dungeon, where the dwarf in question is said to live, lies a FOUR MINUTES TO MIDNIGHT convenient lamp, and down is obviously where the true adventurer This game was written by Michael should go. Being perverse, I thought White and is concerned with events I'd have a look on the surface first, after a deadly virus is released into ICE STATION ZERO but that was not to be, because a the atmosphere from a high security guard quickly killed me for returning research station in America In this one, you are cast as a secret without completing my quest. The virus has killed most of the service agent who must defeat the So down it was, where the many world's population and only a few, evil genius Stirling. Stirling, it seems, traps set by the dwarf lay in wait. A seemingly immune, have survived, has planted a nuclear bomb some number of these were of the type including you. where near the south pole. Setting where, having taken all the precauYou must learn the skills of the old off, you find yourself standing in the tions of looking and examining things technology and recruit five members freezing snow, from where you move in advance, you move into the next to form a team to travel across the on to discover ice floes, yetis etc., location only to end up dead for no States to disarm nuclear weapons which must be overcome before killreason that can be anticipated. I tend which have been left unguarded and ing the maniacal Stirling. to tire very quickly of games of this still threaten the remaining Personal Rating: 7 sort but, to give Dwarf a fair crack of population. the whip, I tried and tried again. I This game is well thought out, and IN SEARCH OF ANGELS soon changed my mind about it. quite difficult. At the start, you are This is one of the easiest of the series Having discovered where the traps standing at a petrol station. A few lay, I learned, with a little skill and seconds later a car crashes into it and and is based upon Ian Fleming's earcunning, that it was possible to pass explodes. From inside the car you ly novels. You are cast as a rather through these apparent dead ends. poor man's version of James Bond hear screams. If you manage to This was achieved with a combinrescue the occupant, he will help you and you find a dead CIA agent floatation of logic and hope! Mind you, it with your mission. ing face-down in the Thames. From was necessary to try a few different there you progress around the world The game continues along these ideas out before I hit upon the right lines and is quite fun to play. trying to stop an organisation known as \"\"The Company\" from taking over. answer! Personal Rating: 7 Greedy Dwarfis a nicely presented Personal Rating: 5 text Adventure. It has a fast response QUANN TULLA I FAERIE and no spelling mistakes that I could find. The only bug seemed to be a Without doubt, the best game of the This has to be one of the most spinetendency to tell me, every time I exseries is Quann Tulla, and I think this chilling games available! It has amined something that I shouldn't, should be picked up by a major comnothing whatsoever to do with the that \"I see no compass here!\" So pany. The story is of an evil empire notorious \"Pink Fairy\"! before entering the maze, I decided that has fought a long and bloody war The plot is, to say the least, complithat I should look a bit further for a with the Just Foundation. The Foundcated with many sub-divisions. You compass, and so I found one which ation is losing, and your mission is to are sent off into the underworld to later proved to be extremely useful! destroy some top secret manuals, kill find the three treasures of Isi-Tunn, Greedy Dwarf is from Goldstar. a traitor and destroy a crippled space and it's not easy! Personal Rating: 8 Personal Rating: 8 Keith Campbell ship. 80 "


"Could YOU get a Newspaper Scoop? Addictive launch STRINGER Reporter Extraordinaire in 'The Hotel Caper' Stringer LURP E141 .  Press 23/2+ Stringer 05.0 TVI s Hriaplanet Inc.yacht, tur STRINGER is an arcade adventure game in which you are a press photographer for the Daily Blurb set the task of snatching a shot of a Film Star, Polly Platinum in an hotel. To hinder your attempts your camera, flashbulb, press pass and the key to the lady's room have been hidden in the hotel and these items have to be recovered before the all important shot can be taken. To add to your troubles the hotel staff are bent on catching -you before you reach your goal and your Editor has set you a strict deadline for the completion of the task. The game has 5 skill levels and 10 screens of increasing difficulty. It is tantalisingly playable, graphically excellent and, of course Addictive! Available. ... Commodore 64 .95 ALSO AVAILABLE Football Manager. The All Time Classic Software Star Available for... Spectrum 4BRL0.95 ... cames the Kevin Toms hallmarks of mention Commodore 64 .95 Amstrad CPC 64 to detail and carefully tuned di Miculty Popular .95... BBC 'B' .95 Electron .95 .. Computing Weekly, February 1985. Oric-1 Almos 67.95 Dragon 65.95.. The game can be incredibly subtle\"Pick of the Vic 205.95...ZX 81 .95 Week Popular Computing Weekly, February 1985 Available Spectrum BK 65.95 Commodore 647.95 Amstrad CPC 64 17.95 ddictive To: Addictive Games Ltd, 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth, Dorset BH2 6HE Please send me: cassette(s) of Stringer for ... cassette(s) of Software Star for .......... cassette(s) of Football Manager for..... Tenclose cheque postal order for ....... Please debit my Access card No................. (computer) (computer) (computer) When you openan Addictive Game, there's a new world of discovery waiting for you. ddictive Delete as applicable Name ......... ..... Address............. .. Postcode............. ... Tel: ........... Accessorders can be telephoned through on 102021296404  Addictive Games 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth BH2 6HE Telephone: 0202 296404. "


"..MINDSHADOW Who are you, where are you, and how did you get to be on a deserted beach on a remote island? That is the question you ask yourself as you stroll to see what's around the corner and find a sheer cliff impossible to climb But people have been to this island before, for there is a decrepit straw hut and the remains of an old boat. Unfortunately, the most interesting routes lead to the quicksand! You are itching to get off the island could that be a ship on the horizon, or is it just an illusion or just wishful thinking? These are some of the problems that confront you at the outset of Mindshadow, a graphic Adventures you walk across the land you get a on disc, for the Commodore 64 and Sudden Sinking feeling Ohh no!! Apple. Since all the pictures are Quicksand!! stored on disc, there is an inevitable It seems that the game has ended delay every time you take an action Would you like to try again? (YAN that results in a change of scenery, like taking or dropping an object, or moving to a different location. On the time not being too mind boggling. only answer three calls in a game. Commodore, on which I played, that there is an unusual HELP comAfter a while, I managed to escape can be frustratingly slow! How could mand which features the wise Conthe island, and found myself aboard a esign a machine with such a dor, a bird who talks in semi-riddles pirate ship with an ugly crew and a slow loading system, I often wonder? about your problem. Which he ship's doctor who looked like a halfHowever, once read in, the picwit and specialised in brain surgery. tures are fast to draw and quite detailDon't think I'll use his services or ed although, disappointingly, only in should I ...? (Why not give it a try two or three colours. ...? Ed) The text responses are fast, and a Mindshadow is from Activision on chime announces the fact that there disc only for the Commodore 64, IBM is more text to be read before you PC and Apple. can start another input. Press a key Personal Rating: 7 and it will scroll up. Press RETURN Keith Campbell and the picture will clear to reveal the last 24 lines of text, a novel and useful way of checking on your reTHE JEWEL OF POWER cent moves. The problems are fairly well placed A game that I thought was going to and the difficulty level provides for be very mundane turned out to have some hard thinking and experimentguesses, on most occasions, with unsome very novel features and ation with ideas, whilst at the same canny accuracy. But the Condor will puzzles. In Jewel of Power, you find yourself in an ordinary houseexcept I couldn't find a bathroom! but there is something most peculiar going on down in the cellar. Here you get your clue as to what the Adventure is all about, and this is done in an original and entertaining way, using graphics to great effect. Leaving the house behind you in a mysteriously abandoned village, you make your way into the countryside, where there are some rather more unusual buildings. One of these is a mysterious monument in the middle of nowhere -a red tower with a door at the base of all four sides. Inside, there are stairs leading up and down, but something very disorientating happens to you. Elsewhere you hut to the north. might be dish of the day for a giant, or become incarcerated in a prison cell. You stand before a primitive, badly There is also the desert, with a very deteriorated hut. unfriendly oasis! This is a machine code Adventure with instant response, including "


"Charlie ishere... ROOM 43 4 ARCADE GAMES +BOOK ARCADE ADVENTURE in Charlie and the Chocolate Factory WWW IX X X SCORE: HIGH: 100 GATES LIVES: 11, === S:s sa = = : : :: : : : BERRI For the dassette + Book .95 Cassette only .50  Warner Brothers 8 Grafton Street, London W1% 3LA Hill MacGibbon "


"GARGOVLE GAVIES SPECTRUM 48K AMSTRAD 464 .95 GARGOYLE GAMES LTD., 74 KING STREET, DUDLEY, WEST MIDLANDS DY2 8QB Telephone: (Sales) 0384 238777 (General) 0384 237222 "


"en respond to somewhat inelegant, REVIEWS: graphics. To start, the graphics are in one word poor! rather crude and garish, but they THE TALISMAN Personal Rating: 1 improve as you move away from the Talisman is one of Games Paul Coppins house. Some are very effective and Workshop's latest offerings for the they all interact with the game. What Spectrum and, after battling my way THE PAY-OFF is more, they form an integral part of through Tower of Despair, I was look Atari software is usually associated the game, for many of the features ing forward to much the same sort of depicted are not mentioned in the action. Unfortunately, I was diswith zapping away at coloured blobs text, but require reference by the appointed. of light. That's fine if arcade action is player. your scene, but I find I prefer someThe introduction tells of an action The commands required are thing that stretches the imagination packed arcade style Adventure for mainly two words, but occasionally more. Consequently, being an Atari one to four players. There are over 50 three words are needed as in \"open owner, I have had a limited choice. graphics locations a successor to front door.\" That, hopefully, is about to change. Valhalla, perhaps? So I started into My one complaint about the game the game, and then came the crunch. mended their ways and moved into For it would seem that Atari have is that on quitting or dying which After the initial novelty had worn off, I isn't difficult the game cannot be the world of Adventure. continued without either reloading So for those of us who have stuck the program or data. with Atari here comes the Pay Off in The end is somewhat inelegant, the form of a full text, disc Adventure producing a STOP statement and using a minimum of 48k. Basic line number. But don't be There you are, standing in Luigi's fooled into thinking that listing this betting shop in New Jersey, in will give you any clues all the text possession of a red hot tip. Now New is hidden away in the machine code Jersey turns out to be the sort of place part! Fertile ground for peeking where nicking the gold fillings from cheats, though! your best friend's back teeth is the The Jewel of Power is for the 48K order of the day — and that's while Spectrum, from Slogger Software. they are awake! So, seeing that you Personal Rating: 7 owe a lot of people a great deal of Keith Campbell money boy. have you got problems! GROUND ZERO Nevertheless, Luigi is not so bad as far as bookies go he is the only one International tension is rising and who is prepared to give you a second already law and order are breaking look, let alone credit. But, of course, down. It's every man for himself. there are conditions whenever you There are queues outside food approach Luigi you have the shops, and if you join one you'll be choice of paying what you owe him, told to clear off. Squads are out with or accepting his invitation to a paddle rifles ready to shoot anyone caught in the Hudson river whilst wearing looting. Nuclear war is imminent. concrete wellies. Your objective is to survive the atThings are not all that bad because tack and its aftermath using a number you hear of a man on the streets who of potentially useful items lying will part with $40,000 to anyone who around your house. How and where can supply him with the fabulous to use them to shield yourself is the lost interest and it became a real bore Jang-y-Ryn Diamond. Taking up that problem. Should you risk a trip into to play, just like Valhalla. I have never offer would allow you to pay back the town to try to get in some supliked these so-called \"arcade advenLuigi, place that bet and start living plies, or should you get on your bike tures\" anyway, so therein could lie again. and pedal away as fast as you can? the whole problem. As you may have gathered, New This is a text Adventure with twoThe graphics in Talisman by no Jersey is the type of place where word input and fast response. As well means come up to the same standard even saying the word \"Police\" is as the overall strategy you must as those in Valhalla. They may be guaranteed to get your head parted develop to survive, the plot hides about ten times faster, but they are from the rest of your body. This is other little problems which, pleasing reminiscent of a very old cartoon reflected in the puzzles and humour ly, the adequate vocabulary allows film, even down to clouds of dust and of this Adventure into the world of you to unravel without the frustration flashing words which surround the crime. For example, walking into a of word-hunting. characters fighting it out. shop and parting with any of your Although a well-written game, I Moving around on the screen is money is considered to be the found the subject too depressing to achieved by use of the two cursor world's greatest sin. The normal be enjoyable. Nuclear war is hardly a keys. On reaching the edge of some practice is to come out with more subject for humour, and I didn't find screens, you are asked if you would money than you went in with plus any in the game. I do enjoy a bit of fun like to go north; or whatever. I found some goodies as well. Also, there are in an Adventure, which I think should that trying to stop just before the many words in the game that have a be for relaxation and escapism edge of the screen was a little diffidouble meaning, such as \"fence\" through fantasy. This one seemed too cult instead of stopping when I let use it in the wrong way and you much like a grim possibility some go of the keys, my little character could end up with a broken nose! would say probability. I know we kept on going all by itself. The layout of this Adventure is very should all be aware of the horrors that These, of course, are my personal similar to that used by Scott Adams, would ensue, but a game is not the views if you are the sort of adveneven down to the same amount of right vehicle for this sort of turer who enjoys playing this type of text that appears on the screen at any education. game then you may decide that it is one time. Personal Rating: 4 the best thing since floppy discs, but . Personal Rating: 6 Keith Campbell for me this Adventure is summed up Paul Coppins 85 "


"THE FOURTH PROTOCOL SU m. MU It sure is tough mixing in the world of counter-espionage, high-powered politics, bluff and double bluff. But that's the world of The Fourth Protocol, the new offering from Hutchinson Computer Publishing, based on Frederick Forsyth's best selling novel A crack Soviet agent has been placed undercover in Britain to work on Plan Aurora which could spell devastation for the United Kingdom. Your mission as M15 investigator, John Preston, is to head the operation to expose and thwart Plan Aurora ... meanwhile, time races on towards an unknown deadline and an appointment with doom. Preston has on-line access to the resources of Cen Com, MI5's central communications computer, and use of the intelligence networks of friendly nations. During the game Preston's rating and progress are constantly monitored by the powers that be. If he fails to You are outside \"Chez Fawcett\", impress, the unfortunate spy-catcher about to investigate the death of Macould find himself moved out of his job to a less demanding position jor Fawcett. Lying around the house perhaps in the Falklands as Chief are various clues and using these you Security Officer in charge of penguins. must put two and two together to solve the mystery of who dunnit. The first sections of the game use There are various characters icon-driven graphics enabling you to around who may be questioned, inaccess the computer, use files, telephones etc. The Fourth Protocol will cost .95 cluding the gardener, who gets very They are easy and-above all fun for the Spectrum and Commodore 64 upset if you try to dig up his prize to use. Used properly, they will enable on cassette and .95 for the lawn! The Adventure is quite well writyou to keep a close watch on all the Commodore disc. ten, with graphics at many locations. information and clues gathered. Unfortunately, the presentation is Needless to say, the C&VG team CLUES 'O\" very ordinary-the text display is on did not manage to save the world. But ly passable, for instance, \"you also that could be that the game was a Here is another detective Adventure, see:-\" remains on the screen even if pre-production version which lacked with an awful pun as the title! You there is nothing following it — and certain screens, music, some play the part of a French detective, the graphics are rather mundane, graphics and one or two objects. No but that is not to say you have to although instant. wonder we didn't get very far! bungle things! Of course, it is all very well joking about Sherlock and its bugs perhaps one does that because one expects so much from it. However, Sherlock very much puts a game like Clues 'O' in the shade, for the characters seem lifeless and wooden in comparison with Basil, Watson and co. In fact, I mistook Mrs Fawcett, who I discovered in the cellar, to be a corpse! No \"Good morning, Clueso\" or \"That is brilliant, Clueso\", from her! In fact she let me kick her and prod her at will without any sign of protestation! She uttered one cryptic netwodes sentence when I questioned her, and promptly left the cellar! There is some humour in the game, especially over the french doors, where the computer thinks you are getting English and French mixed up! Clues 'O' is from Imperial Software, for the 48k Spectrum, priced .95. I think it is overpriced. Personal Rating: 5 Keith Campbell FREDERICK FREDERICK FORSYTH THE FOURTH PROTOCOL FORSYTH professional team of games designers, papie artists, games programmers and editors que use of des graphismes forest friendly game under the players complete control stroccante and makinesi plalines g an accurate depiction of life is the intelligence THE FOURTH PROTOCOL A world d vere, based in the chain e of the respionag test thens with poder contin ht ME the . cm . FORHOTUOthe t he Varm be the layout l an C MS the the both and the THE GAME I o deset puts the player ander cesta press P the n eed PORTPROXY edhe za THE GAME for Gucci WIRD 86 "


"SIGHTS Unexpanded ATZARD'S VIC 20 Arcade Game BOAR ARDELL MSX and Einstein Original Board Game Arcade Adventure for Spectrum 48K RAM MAKE MORE OF YOUR SPECTRUM... USTLER HUS Pool Game BIG MONEY for Good Programs Send your C16, MSX, C64 Einstein and Spectrum QUARA Program 084 3D SPEED BOAT RACE Send Stamped Addressed Envelope Catalogue The Enque OFFER * 3 SPECIAL HI-R Two great new add-ons to boost the power of your Spectrum (and Spectrum Plus). The Ram Interface Mk.Il JOYSTICK is Kempston INTERFACE MK II compatible. It lets you get the best out of your action games, with all the best joysticks around even the Quickshot Il rapid fire joystick.Electrify your enemies, with real power and lightning-fast reactions at your fingertips. AQUA RACER OFF Coming WIZARD'S LAIR Send 25.99 is Bube bubble bus software A 87 High Street Tonbridge, Kent Tel: 0732 355962 Telek: 95151 Then there's our Spectrum Upgrade Kit. Boost your 16K memory to a fantastic 48K and run all the latest superb action software. MILES BETTER SOFTWARE 221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffs WA11 2DD Tel: 05435 3577 * SUMMER SALE * SPECTRUM UPGRADE KIT FOR LESS. (Both Ram products are made to last. And fully guaranteed.), Get some real action into your Spectrum Games today! Simply return the coupon below to Ram Electronics (Fleet), Ltd., Dept. CVG ,106 Fleet Road, Fleet, Hampshire GU13 8PA. Or call our credit card hot line on 02514 25252. Title & Machine Cass Disk F15 Strike Eagle (64).....95 .95 Beach-head (AT)................N/A .95 Indiana Jones (64)..........95 N/A Beach-head (64)..... 17.95 .95 Tapper (64)........ .. .95 .95 Beach-head (2x).............95 N/A Tapper ZX)..... .95 N/A Conan (AT).... ..N/A .95 Congo Bongo 1641.... ..95 .95 Conan (64)...... .............N/A .95 Spy Hunter (64)........ ..95 .95 Pole Position (AT).. ....95 .95 Spy Hunter (ZX!..........95 N/A Pole Position (64)............95 .95 Quasimodo (64)... ..27.95 N/A Mi Do AT....... .95 NIA Quasimodo (AT)..... .....95 N/A Dig Dug (AT)............. .95 N/A Grogs Revenge (64).........95 N/A Pacman (AT)........... ....95 N/A Bounty Bob (64).... .95 NIA Dropzone (64)............... ..95 N/A Blue Max (AT). .......... ...95 NIA Dropzone (AT)........ .95 .95 Blue Max (64)........ .95 N/A Raid over Moscow (64)... .95 .95 Blue Max ZX... .95 N/A Raid over Moscow (ZX).. 16.95 N/A Zaxxon 164)... ...........95 .95 Super Huey (64)..............95 .95 Zaxxon (AT)...... .........95 .95 Bruce Lee (AT)... E10.95 .95 Zaxxon (ZX... .......95 N/A Bruce Lee 164)........... .95 .95 Sentimal (64)........... .95 N/A Bruce Lee 12X)....... .16.95 NIA Fort Apoc. (64)...... .95 .95 Dallas Quest (64).. ...N/A .95 Fort Apoc, (AT)..........95 N/A Dallas Quest (AT)...........N/A 10.95 Combat Leader (64)...E10.95 .95 Solo Flight (AT)............95 .95 Combat Leader (64).......95 .95 Solo flight 164)...........10.95 .95 Dambusters/64).............95 .95 F15 Strike Eagle (AT)....210.95 .95 Miner 2049er (AT) ROM....N/A .95 COMING SOON Bounty Bob Atari), Gross Revenge (Atari), Ultima Ill (64), Beach-head (Amstrad), Buck Rogers (ZX), DoughBoy (64), Dig Dug (64), Mr do! (64), Pacman (64), Mission Asteroid (64), Wizard and the Princess (64). Access/Visa welcome. Please telephone for software availability and software lists for 64, Atari and Spectrum. Add .00 for overseas orders Please send me Spectrum Joystick Mk.IlInterface(s) at .95 Quickshot Il rapid fire joystick(s) at .95 (only when purchased with interface. Normally .95) Spectrum Upgrade Kit(s) at .95 or 3 Please state issue 2 er Please add El pp for UK orders. 3p+p for Europe) enclose cheque postal order or charge my Access Visa for Expiry date Name... Address.... Postcode Telephone To: Dept. CVG Ram Electronics Fleen Lid 106 Fleet Road Fleet. Hampshire GU13PA Trade and export enquiries welcome 87 ' "


"DO YOU FIND CHOOSING SOFTWARE HARD? At the VIRGIN GAMES CENTRES, we've worked long and hard to put together the UK'S BIGGEST RANGE of COMPUTER SOFTWARE GAMES. We've got an unrivalled selection of... Arcade Games, Adventure Games, War Games, Classic Games, Family Games, Sports Games, Business and Educational Software. For Spectrum, QL, Atari, BBC, Electron, Commodore 64, Commodore C16, Enterprise, MSX and Amstrad machines. Plus a large stock of utilities, peripherals, chess computers. books and magazines and a range of Sinclair Commodore and Amstrad hardware. And if you find choosing software hard, we have a team of knowledgeable staff to help you. Nirgu GAMES CENTRE 172 Union Street, Aberdeen . 94/96 Briggate, Leeds  22 Oxford Street, London W1 EUROPES LEADING EUROPES LEADING SOFTWARE 'ATARI MAIL ORDER EXPRESS SPECIALISTS INTERNATIONAL MATHS FOR SENIOR SCHOOLS. A series of five learning programs NEW ATARI 130XE COMPUTER (128k). ... .99 (available individually). Which follow the CSE and GCE 'O' level Phone for availability syllabus, with many excellent features. Year 1, 2, 3, 4 and Revision C/D .95/.95 per year. BOOKS COMPUTES GUIDE TO ADVENTURE GAMES 10.95 THE XL HANDBOOK 5.95 ENTERTAINMENT EASY PROGRAMMING FOR ATARI MICRO'S 6.95 ATARI GRAPHICS AND ARCADE DESIGN 13.95 MAPPING THE ATARI 12.95 CONAN (D) 14.95 MR. DO (C) 9.95 TECHNICAL USER NOTES 17.00 ANTIC ANTHOLOGY 6.95 QUASIMODO (C/D) 9.95/14.95 DIG DUG (C) 9.95 POST AND PACKING 75p COLOSUSS CHESS (C/D) 9.95/12.95 PAC MAN (C) 9.95 UTILITIES FIELD OF FIRE (D) 34.95 POLE POSITION (C/D) 9.95/14.95 BASIC XL (ROM) 68.99 BASIC XL TOOL KIT (D) 34.99 ASYLUM (D) 25.90 MASK OF THE SUN (D) 35.95 ACTION (ROM) 86.99 ACTION TOOL KIT (D) 34.99 MINER 2049er (ROM) 12.95 BOUNTY BOB (ROM) PHONE MAC/65 (ROM) 86.99 MAC 65 TOOL KIT (D) 34.99 DOS XL (DISK) 34.99 MONKEY WRENCH 800 (ROM) 39.95 MAGAZINES MMG BASIC COMPILER (DISK) 69.99 MONKEY WRENCH (XL) (ROM)39.95 ANTIC 3.50 PAGE 6 90p PROGRAMMER PACK U.S. DOUBLER(INC SPARTADOS) TRUE DOUBLE DENSITY FOR 1050 DRIVE 79.95 ANALOG 3.00 ATARI USER 90p INVITATION TO PROGRAMMING 1 INVITATION TO PROGRAMMING 2 | INFOCOMS INVISICLUES .10 PER TITLE + 25p POST & PACKING COMING SOON INVITATION TO PROGRAMMING 3 ATARI 520 ST COMPANION CASSETTE PERIPHERALS PHONE FOR DETAILS INSIDE ATARI BASIC 101 TIPS .95 OKIMATE 207 COLOUR PRINTER) 299.00 PERSONAL IMPORT & EXPORT SERVICE AVAILABLE MIRACLE TECHNOLOGY RS232 INTERFACE C/W SOFTWARE 59.95 MIRACLE TECHNOLOGY WS2000 MODEM 149.99 ATARI SERVICE DEPARTMENT NOW OPEN PADDLES 9.99 SEND SAE FOR OUR PRICE LIST. HOTLINE 31 STONEYHURST ROAD ERDINGTON, BIRMINGHAM B24 8HA TARO ADA BHA (021) 384 5080 "


"-LRASPIN AND OMNIBOT COMPETITION GREETINGS HUMANS. I AM AN OMNIBOT. LET ME INVADE YOUR HOME! Want to have a mechanical pal who's fun to be with? You do? Then get your pens and paints out and start designing a Computer & Video Games office robot for us! If we like your design then you could win your very own Chatbot or even an Omnibot! TOMY You can create your robot out of any material you want — as long as you can get it through the post! But remember to fill in the coupon and attach it to your entry. There's another thing we'd like you to do. We want you to suggest a good nickname for the Omnibot and Chatbot. Make them as original as First prize winner will get an possible just like your designs for Omnibot from Tomy. the robot the C&VG office robot! experts. The Omnibot is the world's Once you've completed your first home entertainment robot. It is masterwork and thought up a couple programmable and has a built in of good names, fill in the coupon digital alarm clock and cassette below and mail it to Computer & player. Omnibot comes with a Video Games, Robot Competition, remote microphone So you can Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, send it off on a mission to deliver London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is messages to your friends or family! July 16th, normal C&VG competition He has robot hands which can grip rules apply, and the editor's decision and carry almost anything. is final. Adopt a droid today! So if you want to get an early morning call from your very own C&VG/TOMY ROBOT personal robot carrying a nice cup COMPETITION of tea enter this competition NOW! (Attach this coupon to your entry) Second prize winner will get a Name.. Chatbot the latest thing in home entertainment droids. The Chatbot Address............... moves at its master's command and can repeat messages with its unique voice generation system. Chatbot comes with a remote control unit Age ....... My names for the Omnibot like his big brother Omnibotand is and Chatbot are:.... yet another giant leap forward in robot technology from Tomy. 89 "


"PLAY THE GAME 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM AMSTRAD BBC MODEL B 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM BBC MODEL B OZ 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM BBC MODEL B FILA 48K SINCLIR SPECTRUM AMTRAD BBC IODEL B 3 ANNATAr |||| 2 38), 04 pis _2 ^p . OTS COMMODORE 64 COMINIODORE 64 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM TU\" AMSTRA CPC 464 Sun RHARLE INTER 2010 ED TSJERSEISTISK GUGGESTIONS «ALIEN KNIGHTLORE UNDERWORLDE,\"SABRE WOLF ENTOMBED\",\"STAFF OF KARNATH\" recommended retail pice .95 inc VANT. ATIC ATAC\" recommended real oncer .95 inc WAT. Available from WHASMITHS, BOOTS, J.WENDIES WOOLWORTHS, and all good software retail outlets. Also available from ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME. The Green, Ashby-de-la-Louch, Leicestershire LE6SJU, PRP are included Tel-00 4183; "


"arcade action detailed colour graphics ADVANTAGE Artworx sixteen screens problem solving scenario (P&P are included) Tel: 0530 411485 FGUHEN RISKOSZ GHOST CHASER GHOST CHASER features detailed graphics, sixteen game screens and an action oriented, problem solving scenario. You'll meet Harry the Ghost Chaser and a host of weird phantoms as you explore the different rooms of Fairport Manor. Points are scored each time you blast the large ghosts that materialize at random. The only way to capture these spirit adversaries is to find and collect the 8 keys needed to open the ghost chamber. Watch out for the many tricky obstacles and above all avoid contact with anything that moves!... they'll send shivers up your spine. EXTE CASSETTE DISK $14.95 .95 U.S. GOLD Selected U.S. Gold software is available from all good computer shops and specially selected branches of: BOOTS.W.H. SMITH JOHN MENZIES WILDINGS WOOLWORTH U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B74LY.. Telephone: 021-359 8881. Telex: 337268.. "


"Buying computer games can be an expensive business. Some can cost anything up to . To buy all the latest titles as they come onto the market would cost a small fortune. And that's beyond the pocket of most people. So it's no wonder that software companies have started producing a range of games costing no more than a couple of pounds. Unfortunately, besides being cheap, some were very nasty and a waste of money. It seemed far better to save up and buy a top price game. But such is the potential of the market that the quality of the games has improved while the prices have been kept low. So Computer & Video Games thought it would be worthwhile to take a look at some of the the hands of the Ghost Pirate as he searches through the hold of the Black Galleon in search of treasure. Another favourite is Gogo the Ghost on the Commodore 64 which has, believe it or not, 150 frames of haunted happenings. New games shortly to be introduced into the Silver range are Microcosm for the BBC B, Subsink for the Commodore 64 and Don't Panic for the 16k and 48k Spectrum. Mastertronic, formed in April 1984, now claims to be the brand leader in budget games Dragons-style Adventure Velnor's Lair for the Commodore 64 and Nicotine Nightmare and Self Destruct, both on the Spectrum 48k. The last two have proved so popular that Atlantis is in the process of converting them for the Amstrad a move which again points to the growing popularity of the machine. Mike Cole, of Atlantis, says: «We believe in the Amstrad as the next thing to come. It's a lovely machine. We will be supporting it.\" Being launched this spring is The Sparkler range of games from Creative Sparks at .50. Sandy Mackenzie, of Creative Sparks, says: \"There is a a need to supply good quality software at prices affordable to kids\". The company's decision to produce cheap software was THE PRICE IS RIGHT current budget games on the market from software houses. Firebird, British Telecom's software company, is now in the process of updating its Silver catalogue which was launched in October 1984 with great success, with all the games selling for .50 Star of the original 20 titles was undoubtedly Booty on the Spectrum 48k and Commodore 64 which, claims Firebird, has sales now in excess of 100,000. It's now being converted to the Amstrad and should be available by late summer. In Booty, Jim the cabin boy faces death by drowning or at its extensive range sells for just .99 each. In its first 12 months of trading, Mastertronic says it has audited figures of sales for two million games. New developments for 1985 in the .99 range include two semi-educational games in its Mistertronic titles Make Music with Mistertronic and Type Rope aimed at the six to 11 age range. Earlier this year, Atlantis Software launched three games under its new Atlantis Gold label, selling at .99 each. They were the Dungeons and prompted to a great extent by the large number of excellent games sent in by amateur writers. \"By promoting games in the budget range,\" says Sandy, \"we are opening the industry to new talent, and also serving the interest of games buyers by publishing good games at reasonable prices. After all, low prices doesn't have to mean low quality.\" So it seems that pocket money power is being recognised at last and computer star wars could soon become computer price wars. About time, too! blood-sucking bats. And then graphics, good sound and a TASKMASTER there is the ultimate real challenge. challenge the cast of the MACHINE: CBM 64 Birdmen SUPPLIER: Creative Sparks  Graphics Taskmaster part of PRICE: .50  Sound Creative Sparks' new  Value Dare you meet the challenge Sparkler range is an all ac Playability of seven deadly tasks? tion Adventure with great The prize is great the hand in marriage of the king's daughter But first you must rid his land of the cruel hordes of vandals and murderers who terrorise it With each task there is a new challenge either fighting off zombies, wicked wizards, devil worshippers or BMX RACERS MACHINE: CBM 16 SUPPLIER: Mastertronic PRICE: .99 On your bike for the Mastertronic Gold Cup. Pedal power takes you over five hazardous and energysapping courses in this fast and gruelling test of bicycle skills. A standard race game for a nice price Bonus 02910 High 000000  Graphics Sound  Value  Playability 92 Score 033480 "


"ooo030 L1 oeseo deo @ 20 SCORE2200 HSCORE9185 000 CHOPPER doors to various levels of the The Helm is an adventure factory and hunt down the FOURTH wacky-windups as they text game in which you have MACHINE: CBM 64 to solve puzzles and perform ENCOUNTER rampage over 16 screens of SUPPLIER: Creative Sparks action certain tasks to solve this PRICE: .50 Watch the feathers fly! MACHINE: Vic-20 + 8k entertaining riddle. Helicopter games seem to be SUPPLIER: Creative Sparks You may need a long lifeall the rage at the moment. PRICE: .50 if not immortality — to solve  Graphics Chopper is another variaThe future of the human race this tion on a well-known theme.  Sound is in YOUR hands. It's a do or  Value This time you are the comdie fight to beat off wave after  Graphics  Playability mander of the latest and wave of ferocious aliens as  Sound  Value deadliest helicopter gunship. they swoop down from the  Playability Your mission is to destroy sky the enemy base set in the FINDERS KEEPERS High scores are vital to side of a seemingly impreggain extra lives to carry on the nable cliff. MACHINE: MSX battle. Fast and furious DON'T PANIC But first the helicopter has SUPPLIER: Mastertronic action to run the gauntlet of enemy PRICE: .99 MACHINE: Spectrum planes, helicopters and Computer & Video Games  Graphics SUPPLIER: Firebird secret flying weapons. gave this a star game rating  Sound PRICE: .50 when the Spectrum version  Value Load a space cargo vessel was reviewed in April's issue.  Playability with items scattered around a  Graphics And the same applies to the multi-level loading bay using a  Sound MSX version droid. Value It features Magic Knight PLUG IT An easy task until it comes  Playability who is sent to get a birthday face to face with the monster gift for a princess in the MACHINE: CBM 64 of the bay who happens to Castle of Spriteland which is SUPPLIER: Scorpio Gamesworld feel a little peckish To QUACKSHOT packed with treasure and PRICE: .99 complicate matters some of energy draining monsters. Sixteen screens of arcade ace the cargo has been contamiMACHINE: Spectrum There are mazes and tion in which you must plug a nated with a deadly toxin. SUPPLIER: Creative Sparks puzzles to be solved in this gap at the bottom of the But don't panic! You can PRICE: .50 game which combines screen before a giant drops beat these deadly foes with Everything has gone platform action with a touch bombs to blow the bungs your decontamination laser. quackers at the Acme of adventure. away. Lose the game and clockwork toy factory. There are two ways of wingreen gunge fills the screen.  Graphics All is peaceful for the ning — collect as much Not the greatest graphics  Sound nightwatchman until the treasure as possible and in the world but not bad for  Value toys led by large yellow escape the castle or collect the price.  Playability ducks stage a rebellion enough treasure to please the Armed with a stun gun and king and his daughter.  Graphics duckbuster bombs the night. A hit.  Sound JALOPIES watchman has to shoot and  Value blast his way out of trouble.  Graphics MACHINE: CBM 64  Playability The nightwatchman also SUPPLIER: Scorpio Gamesworld  Sound has to collect keys to open  Value PRICE: .99  Playability THE HELM Hello, Jim, gotta new motor? That's Junkyard Jim's aim in MACHINE: Spectrum life -to earn money by putSUPPLIER: Firebird ting old wrecks together and PRICE: .50 selling them as cars Have you the cunning, power time bombs do not make But the rust monster and and knowledge to crack the Jim's job all that easy dark one's lair and discover the Helm of Immortality? Find this fabled object and  Graphics wrest it from the grasp of Lich  Sound and you will win the gift of  Value immortality  Playability com 00 0001 no &&deo Bless Beetle OOOO "


"CHICKIN' CHASE SKYJET NICOTINE SHORT'S FUSE MACHINE: CBM 64 MACHINE: CBM 64 NIGHTMARE MACHINE: Spectrum SUPPLIER: Firebird SUPPLIER: Mastertronic SUPPLIER: Firebird PRICE: .50 PRICE: .99 MACHINE: Spectrum PRICE: .50 Sacre bleu! It's a tough job Danger is all around in SUPPLIER: Atlantis The evil Boris is holding the ruling the roost in Chickin' Mastertronic's explosive SkyPRICE: .99 world to ransom... by plantChase. jet. Save the world from the evil ing multi-detonator bombs in The cockerel must defend A helicopter pilot has to weed tobacco, that is the capital cities of the world. the chicken house against brave a constant barrage Your task is to break into But Sam Short is out to hungry enemies, including from tanks and jets to transfer the cigarette factory and work defuse them or get blown up. hedgehogs, rats and stoats, supplies to safe bases. At the your way through the various And when one city is cleared, who are looking for eggs and same time submarines carry departments switching off the Sam is off to help out another chicks to eat. enemy reinforcements and production lines and bringing beleaguered capital. And if he fails in his tasks, must be destroyed the factory to a halt. But is this really a good he ends up hen-pecked. Great fun, good graphics, An arcade adventure that's subject for fun and games? A great game when the nice and noisy — that sums a bit of a wheeze. Soon to be Terrorism for entertainment! feathers fly. But don't get egg up Skyjet. A real bargain. released for the Amstrad Short's Fuse is a cheap and on your face. nasty game.  Graphics  Graphics  Sound  Graphics  Sound  Graphics  Sound  Value  Value  Sound  Value  Playability  Playability  Value  Playability Playability 000 00 vo 00100 00 00 SELF DESTRUCT SUBSINK MACHINE: Spectrum MACHINE: CBM 64 SUPPLIER: Atlantis SUPPLIER: Firebird PRICE: .99 PRICE .50 Your manned station Condemned to Davy Jones's develops a serious radiation Locker: trapped in a stranded leak. The order to evacuate is nuclear sub, your only hope of given and the station's selfrescue is if you find out how destruct mechanism is set. to send a distress signal. But your space suit is still Subsink is a text adventure in the control room and the with graphics which will test race is on to see if you can your powers of logical get to it before the big bang. thinking SCORE 800378 LIVES 2 HISCORE8243 A nice teaser which will  Graphics have you well and truly Sound scuppered It could turn out to be mission  Value impossible. Your task is to DON'T BUY THIS  Playability  Graphics rescue the clones from the Game titles are Race Ace, Sound swamp using an armed heliMACHINE: Spectrum Fido 1. Weasel Willy, Fido 2  Value copter with an unlimited SUPPLIER: Firebird and Fruit Machine  Playability supply of bombs. PRICE: .50 It's hard to rate games that But beware of the heat Don't Buy This claims to be a are publicised as being bad seeking Dollopoids collection of the five worst But they are good for a laugh. HELICHOPPER games ever. We believe it. Perhaps it's the start of a new  Graphics Firebird proudly boasts: cult. MACHINE: Spectrum  Sound **This is the beginning of the  Value SUPPLIER: Firebird As Firebird warns: \"Apend of games as we know proach this tape with PRICE: .50  Playability them.\" caution.\" And don't forget to tick the box to indicate which computer you have. C&VG/SPARKLER COMPETITION (Please attach this coupon to your entry) Name.... Put a sparkler into your computer All you have to do is to make the with the help of Computer & Video most number of words you can from Address.. Games and Creative Sparks. Sparkler. But each letter can only be We've got 40 of the latest pocketused once. money priced Sparkler priced games Send your answers together with and you could win by entering our the attached coupon to Sparkler simple competition. Competition, Computer & Video Please tick the appropriate box for The titles are Taskmaster (CBM 64), Games, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, Chopper (CBM 64), Quackshot London ECI 3AV. The closing date your type of computer. (Spectrum 48k and Fourth Encounter for entries is August 16 and the CBM 64 Spectrum 48k Vic 20 + (Vic 20 + 8k). editor's decision is final . 8k D 94 "


"LAUNCHPAD SOFTWARE & The best of British software for the Spectrum, CB64, BBC, Electron, Atari, Amstrad, Vic 20 Everywhere www (OVERLORDS SP.48K .95 LOTHLORIEN 5***** GAME ceses (WITCH SWITCH CB64 .95 'Sheer Magical Brilliance' from English SoftBrilliant action-packed war game with outstanding features. For two players. Can be networked across two Spectrums. Microdrive compatible. Action replay. Battle over twelve screens. Levels of play. Frenzied action-to-thedeath. Well worth the 5star status accorded by Sinclair User. ware. Monkeys, swamps, magic powers, leprachauns, cats on broomsticks, deadly ravens, poisonous lakes, dark forests, erupting volcanoes. Fascinating look for ward to end screen feature. Great music, graphics. Go buy it the family will love you for it. CASINO ROYAL SP.48K .95 VIDEO POOL SP.48K.95 STAIRWAYS THOR CB64 .95 OCP VIDEO POOL CASINO ROYALS Classic games from OCP CASINO ROYAL for Roulette and Pontoon. Realistic with Currah Microspeech. Microdrive compatible. Excellent graphics and game play. Well worth considering. CRASH May '85. VIDEO POOL. Probably the best snooker) of the lot CRASH May \"85. Accurate angles, flicker free, edit mode and variation game play. Should be in every SpecRock'N'Roll, Bouncers and Booze The night club is in full swing, the band is belting out some fantastic rock'n'roll, the music is really great. Now there's some action on the dance floor. But if you're trying to leap glasses to avoid the evil bouncer, you've got to watch your energy level; and another table shows your hunger level. There are of course, sober/drunk scales; it is important to keep drinking as the bubbles are helpful in warding off an impossible attack of flying boots The overall effect is an immensely amusing game that should do well in the charts. Totally original amd completely entertaining. You have to be quick to accomplish the game before your energy runs out and is, as a consequence very addictive. CHUCKIE EGG NIGHT WORLD BBC/ELECTRON .95 ALLIGATA VIGE WORLD Following on its success on the BBC, Spectrum, Dragon, CM64, A'N'F have completed the conversion of the classic arcade game onto the Amstrad (.90) and Atari (.90) micro's. Now even more users can enjoy \"Chuckie Egg.\" Popular Computing Weekly \"Destined to become a Spectrum Classic.\" (They were right!!) A chilling arcade adventure in search of the golden fleece. A nerve tingling exploration of secret passages and the unknown terror of the cavernous underworld where the demon lord rules. A fearsome encounter with the devil's curse that changes your very being from human to gargoyle at a moments instant. PLUMB CRAZY VIC 20 & 8K .95 TERMINAL SOFTWARE PUMB -CTRZY! There is a crisis: and dapper George your favourite plumber is the man to solve it. Or is he? There's no doubt that he's got the skills, but has he got the nerve and speed. This is the problem: a water tank is about to blow up with disastrous consequences, but the day can be saved by George the Plumber if he can only lay a pipeline to the stricken tank and join up its escape valve to the new pipe. Wait a minute! What's that menacing green thing slithering down towards you? * 100% Machine code action + Hi-res graphics * Full colour sound effects Hi-score features * 5 levels and 9 phases of progressive play + Plumb with joystick or keyboard Term load fast loader. MAYHEM MSX .95 It's fun all the way with Beserk Droids, escaping BlibMr. Micro's Mayhem. bles, wounding wafoids no wonder the starship captain is going to round up this lot. A great game to delight the entire family. One of the best yet for the MSX. Neat tunes and very smooth graphics. RTRSTEN Dealers: Launchpad Software is available on full S.O.R. through R & R Games; Greyound; Twang; Wayfarer; Limetree; Pcs Ireland and other distributors. Please contact GOLDTAPELT PO BOX 130 DERBY TEL 0332 518940 IF YOU HAVE ANY DIFFICULTY. "


"COMPETITION Let's do the Timewarp again and step CRL Rocky Horror Show t-shirt and a 3. The world famous Time Warp backwards, forwards and sideways copy of the game for the C64, dance song goes like this: \"It's just a in the weird world of The Rocky Spectrum or Amstrad. Twenty jump to the ... and just a step to the Horror Show! runners-up will get a copy of The ...\" Fill in the blanks! Fans of this cult rock opera won't Rocky Horror Show, CRL's latest hit 4. Frankie says: \"It isn't easy having want to miss out on our great Rocky game. a...\" Having a what? Competition because the first prize is To win, all you have to do is be a fan extremely special Thanks to CRL_Of The Rocky Horror Show C&VG/CRL ROCKY HORROR SHOW we've got our hands on a very rare because then you'll be able to COMPETITION copy of The Rocky Horror Show answer the Rocky quiz below. Name. Audience Participation double Once you've done that, rush your album. It's got all the catchy little entry form to Computer & Video Address..... numbers from the show on it plus Games, Rocky Horror Show Compthe correct responses from an etition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farring audience full of Rocky fans. Strange_don Lane, London ECIR SAU, My answers are: but there's nothing quite as Closing date is July 16th and normal strange as a Horror Show fan anyhow! C&VC rules apply. The editor's The first prize winner will be able and Rocky's decision is final! to join in with all those weird people THE QUESTIONS who dress up in Rocky gear and I. Who invented the Rocky Horror perform their very own version of the Show? show. He or she will get the exclusive 2. What are the FULL names of the I own a C64 Spectrum shrink wrapped double album, plus a hero and heroine? Amstrad (tick box) om 96 "


"BY ATARI 400/800 600XL/800XL/130XE 48K SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 DOOMARK'S REVENGE GHOSTSUSTERS TALES CARABIAN NGHTS KOROTOWU ACHEAD AQUA RACE RAM TURBO INTERFACE FIGHTER PLOT 8999FTS. TIR NA NOG PROUECT FUTUR SERRES MOON CRISTA EVERYONE'S A WALLY apvil OH OH 2013\",dumdan 1d15   BRIAN BLOODANE RAID OVER MOSCOW MEGA HITS WORLD SERIES BASEBALL w THE DALEYS SUERTES GRANO NATIONAL QURES OF HAZZARD AMSTRAD VA CRTS DUMMYBUN DALES SUPERTEST QUAD MOOSEVEN H BBC ELECTRON TALES OF ARAAN NIGHTS LONDON EC1 Tel 01.404 4245 SABRE WULFHOC ONLY SOFTWARE Unit 15.25 AFFORDABLE PRODUCTS GEWILTO HARDWARE White Lightning COM641 Basic Lightning ICBM041 Machine Lighting ICOM64 Graphics Tablet Koalal Music Keyboard CAM4 Kempton Interface Pixstilight Den Quickshot 2 4.95 .69.95 CBM ZX ES24.95 .. .95 ZX 4.95 CEMEX 195 INGRAM STREET GLASGOW GI 2 COMMODORE 64 Cauldron Dambusters Nutcracker Wizardore 4.95 5.25 7.50 Revs disk AMSTRAD Rock 'n'Bolt Master of the Lamas SPECTRUM Beach Head Rad Over Moscow Shadowtime Ghostbusters Combat Lynx Lords of Midnight Emerald Isle Buck Rogers 911/TS Impossible Mission Mutant Monty Lords of Midnight Station Soft Aid E'ones A Wally Soft Aid Bruce Lee Up '' Down, Soy Hunter Super Huey Haunted Hedge Doughboy Detective American Football Raid Over MOSCOW Ene the Viking Grog's Revenge Jammin Bounty Bob Ring of Darkness Gift from the Gods Mr Wong's Laundry Conturion Technician Ted Street Hawk Mega Hits Fantara Dimond 6.25 Daley's Super Test 6.25 Rocky Horror Show Brian Jack's Challenge...8.25 E'Ones A Wally F15 Strike Eagle The Hobbit 11.25 The Quil 12.95 Elite diski Daley's Super Test Fighter Pilot Confusion Moon Cresta D WHAT Moon Cresta 30 Star Strike Shadow fire 30 Starstrike Gribby's Day Out Day in Life of Wally Dropzone Jonah Banton's Squash 6.25 Blockbusters Ghost Chaser Roland's Rat Race 6.25 Chuckie Eeg 1 Grand National Mission Astrodd Murder on Waterfront.11.25 Technician Ted Combat Lyn Sam Staat Herbert's Dummy Run 7.75 Great Europe Road Race 625 Jet Set Way Re Red Jonah Barron's Squash 6 25 BBC Ghostbusters Hamsted Block Buster MSX Psychedelia Ghostbusters Track & Fid Rom. 14.75 Tigers in the Snow Castle Ouest Track & Field ll Rom 14.75 Hypersports Rom 14.75 Raid Over Moscow Hypersports Rom 14.75 F15 Strike Eagle Yle Ar Kung Fu Rom 14.75 Ene The Viking Inew Time Pilot Rom . 14.75 Battle for Normandy mossible Mission new Hyper Rally Rom. 14.75 Nato Commander Lode Runner Jet Set Willy .6.95 Postage included UK. Please state which micro. Overseas orders add 1.00 per item. All cheques payable to Affordable Products Send 1.00 for our exclusive catalogue with up to the minute new releases for the Amstrad Atari/BBC/CAM4/ZX Spec/MSX 5,0743\", d'77mm TM d'7\", d'1-WL, \"da\", d'1-W/CDS 14PTMELIPTI "


"CHART BUSTERS! 300,000 and still climbing. 1984 COLUMBIA PICTURES There's never been a computer game like Ghostbusters. It's broken all records, not just in the UK but around the world. If you don't have yours already, don't panic. Just get on down to your local software store. Ghostbusters is there, ready and waiting. Available on Commodore 64 cassette and disk, Sinclair Spectrum, MSX, Amstrad and AHC Disk. ACTIVISION HOME COMPUTER SOFTWARE AVAILABLE FROM SELECTED BRANCHES OF BOOTS, WH SMITH, JOHN MENZIES, LASKY'S, SPECTRUM, RUMBELOWS, WOOLWORTH AND GOOD COMPUTER SOFTWARE STORES EVERYWHERE. "


"GPO ALL THE ADS! ADS ADD Hamilton | UNFAIR ON THE but there is nothing New Zealand. sinister about it. More EXTRA VALUE Editor's reply: Thanks for FAIR SEX? than likely the first the high praise, Stewart. version of the game ready Dear C&VG As for page numbers Dear C&VG, to roll is used for screen In reply to A Haynes's like you say who needs I felt I had to write to say shots for the cassette letter in your February them! Seriously, that I agree with Sandra inlays which-like issue, I personally find the sometimes the design of Saunder's statement that magazines have to be adverts an essential and the page makes it women should be printed well in advance. most enjoyable aspect of impossible to squeeze a encouraged to use your exceptional number on, strange as it computers. Many people GAMES WITH magazine. Being a devoted may seem. We don't know seem to think that Commodore 64 fanatic, I about Talent's artist but computers are intended MAGNETIC APPEAL find most of the glossy full agree about the artwork. for boys rather than girls Dear C&VG page adverts from and find it strange that Why don't one of those renowned software houses GET RID OF some girls might prefer big computer firms invent like US Gold and Micro alien zapping to reading a program reader to romantic stories! magnetically pick up the buzz, especially when they Dear C&VG There have been listing from magazines show a couple of screen For the sake of mankind I campaigns to encourage such as yours. If your shots as well. Oh yes, and decided to write and girls to think of listings were magnetized, who is the artist for Talent complain about all those engineering and building as numbers on cheques software? That hollow skull as careers, so why not a stupid adverts you show. are, then, when the on page 145 of your When I spend my 95p on campaign to interest more magnetic reader is passed January issue is really C&VG, I want some girls in computers? I have over the listing line by fantastic do you know if had a TI-99/4A for two computing techniques Talent possibly produce line, the program could be not ads. years which I enjoy using quickly picked up. posters of the same thing? If I was running this both for playing games Otherwise somebody Anyway, just one point mag. I would do the and for programs. I'd like to make before I doggedly types in the following:1. Sack Tim Thanks for your great program, spending hours finish and that is this ... Metcalfe. 2. Give Robert support of the TI and well over it, only to find the Why, why, why, do you Schifreen an extra two done for producing a program not to their REFUSE to number all pages for Bughunter. 3. fantastic magazine at such interest or full of bugs. I your glorious pages? In Destroy all ads that come an unbeatable price! think this invention would Jan's issue, 98 pages (that's within 50 yards of the Louise West be gratefully appreciated 59.5%) of the magazine magazine. 4. Bring back Hereford by computer nuts. was left devoid of a page the Bugs. 5. Bring back the IWHY NOT THE David Lee number! Well, who gives al Top 40. 6. Put the Bugs Tyne & Wear damn anyway! back on the top of Editor's reply: So would we! Oh yes, and a message Mailbag. 7. Bring the price to all you budding pirates down to 85p. Dear C&VG COMMODORE GAMES out there. I personally (and) If you follow these Over the last year or so, a great many other instructions, you will have \"UNPLAYABLE\"? more software houses respectable computer the best mag in the world. have started putting Dear C&VG, fanatics as well no doubt) S Matthews screen pictures of their Having owned an Atari 400 feel that a cheap, second Southampton game on the inlay cards since 1982, I decided rate copy of a classic Editors' reply: Well, Mr which is good because it recently to buy a piece of software is Matthews, you've gives you some idea of Commodore 64. NOTHING to be proud of! certainly given us a lot to what the game is like. What has struck me is There's nothing wrong think about. Tim is being BUT, why do some games the sheer unplayability of with making copies of reprogrammed even as I have the screen picture of the few games which I your expensive games, as write! The C&VG charts another computer's now have for the CBM 64. long as you have the page is back in this issue Iversion? The Spectrum Of the five I own, only one original as well, using the the Bugs may be back version of Bruce Lee is playable enough to hold back-up copy only, so at Christmas for a special shows a screen from the my attention. your tape recorder can guest appearance. We Commodore version. Also But of the 23 Atari games wear the hell out of the can't destroy the ads as the Commodore version of I have, only two are in the copy instead of the they help make this Gremlins shows the screen impossible-to-get-going original. You'll be cutting magazine economically picture from the Spectrum league. your own throats if you possible. And we like to version. Have I been unlucky continue to copy (or rather think we already have the Adrian Matthews with my choice of steal) someone else's hard best mag -95,000 readers Wolverhampton. Commodore games? work. each month can't be Editor's reply: Packaging P. Moneypenny Steward Wood wrong. lis a funny thing, Adrian I Belfast RIGHT SHOT? 99' "


"SCFREDDODOCES19 Battle your way to three enemy bases. Do you have the courage, stamina and skill to become a Game Lord? .99 SPECTRUM 48K From QUICK YUVA The most powerful games in the Universe! Available from all good software shops. In case of difficulty write to: QUICKSILVA Ltd. Liberty House, 222 Regent Street, London W1R 7DB tel: 01 439 0666 Argus Press WIR 708 tot 01 48 "


"Don't Buy another tape... (OR DISK!) Mr. Software COMMUDURE CLUB 4352 MECA 663 BRITAIN'S NO.1 SOFTWARE CLUB INSIDE POCKETT SOFTAID 1 May 13 Until you've seen the low, low prices in our Spectrum and Commodore 64 Catalogues. Light up your bank manager's face by getting Shadowfire for just .95 (saving ), steal yourself a bargain with Spyhunter at only .95 (Spectrum) and .45 (Commodore 64), or make a megasave on Megahits at (14,95 (saving ). Need we go on? There are over 200 more products we could tell you about. TOP TENn ing over the Lage 3 the rice and we get information about me. Software Spectrum Club So what's the catch we hear you say? How many tapes must I commit to buy in a year? The answer is none. Once you have joined our Club, for an annual subscription of .00 you need buy nothing! ough the en down on what the have said about our is a lot of money td Volume BRITAIN'S No.1 SOFTWARE CLUB FREE 2 GAMES! THIS ISSUE he the last thing you 29th May 1985 TOP TEN REVIEWERS   But wait. There's more to this Club than just the f's you'll save on software. As a Member you will receive a bi-monthly magazine, packed with in-depth reviews (including lots of screen photos), competitions to enter, game playing tips and lots, lots more. Hurry now. If you apply for membership within four weeks we will give you a  voucher towards your first purchase. So send off the coupon now and we'll send you our most recent Club Magazine by return. If you are not absolutely delighted we will give you your money back! WINA CUDDLY W WRIGGLER WHAT THE PAPERS SAY SHADOW FIRE GAME TIPS BUMPER ISSUE Hotline FREE GAMES! wering the member on MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION CVG 7/85 Please enrol me as a member of your Software Club, for which I enclose .00\". I have a: Spectrum/Spectrum + Commodore 64 I understand you will send me your most recent Club Magazine by return and that if I'm not completely satisfied after two weeks I can claim a refund. e miten Name (BLOCK CAPS) Address..... nr. Software KELVIN HOUSE TOTTERIDGE AVENUE HIGH WYCOMBE HP13 6XG (0494) 450586 Postcode. Cheque/Postal Order No: Or charge my Access/Visa account DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD (* applies to UK & BFPO only. Other rates are  Europe,  USA & Middle East,  Australia, Far East & S. Africa) "


"NUTCRAKA In this polly perb game you take the role of Cyril the Squirrel who is in constant porch of food Guide nim JET SET WILLY II THE FINAL FRONTIER Recovering in hospitalitat a b are Bowie Wly called in the builder He thought it odd that they had green Skin, but needing the work done in a hury had the love the atendig edges trom i r Trouble was they did more war than anod, adding toom to lumaon Mariais demanding that Willy clean up the men and he hasn't even found all the roomd yet who were these strange people? Why did they need to add Rocket Room Patience and stamina required to explore the ended house and NASA Guide to Simple Space Travel.is recommended reading for those foolhardy anaugh to help Willy clear the MERE HUNCHBACK AT THE OLYMPICS Can you help modo with the respect and admiration of his weetheart Etherida by Going for Gold\" in the Olympics. He has to compete in venalan All of which need quick thinking and Walch hence the clock in both the 100 metres dash and the hurdlessee his dexterity with the lovelindicus and shot put Look at the ce-fall way he travel through the air in the long jump and high jump events will be eam the Tuts ready for his winter liberation Once all the ants have been collected you then at the age of the be aware of the roaming animals which wander the countryside contact with any of these tatal and do not forget the Teatrictive time limit for each to of BINKY The phone rings in the offices of Binky and Sons Painters and Decorators. It is quickly picked up by Binky Hello can help you, a VOICE at the other end of the phone explains he has need of Binky's service A al storey building in the city needs the floors painting. It seems that this job has been given to other companies in the city, but shortly after starting the job they quit without explanation, other than saying it wasnt safe in there. Binky accepts the job and All its hazards Amstrad $5.95 Jonger than hecessary scrolling action and large graphics make this a very entoyable and playable CEM 64 Spectrum 18.95 16.95 8.35 crowd as well as amarelda or the boo's and jeers of an exceedingly disappointed gathering Only you can decide as you hop Quando in these exciting track and field events,  64 $5.95 GEM6+ 5.95 5.95 HUNCHBACK FIRST CLASS SPECIAL OFFER! Summer Excitement from Software Projects C&VG 6-85 GAME MACHINE PRICE mens we are inserts plus ou abes 13 x 18 glossy potem For all mail-order of the case 1983 Poster Calender Pure Collectors em AND ALL FREE Please add .00 for all orders outside U.K. ACCESS CARD No: NAME: ADDRESS: The game that launched a thousand look alikes, but non can compare to the original 20 screen Maria Miner. Each screen is a seperate challenge which involves careful planning and calculation if you are to succeed. Sheer enjoyable frustration SOFTWARE Sectores Projects Led PROJECTS de kans of tomos) Software Projects Ltd., Bear Brand Complex, Allerton Road, Woolton, Liverpool L25 7SF Telephone: 051-428 9393 (4 Lines) Telex: 627520 Spectrum  64 Dragan Amstrad Orc/Amos Memotech Einstein "


"Wish you were here! 77SSYMAN sic ang are The sequal to Manic Miner, just as enjoyable but bigger and better This game offers 60 rooms to be conquered but it is not as easy as it sounds, timing is essential. Probably the most played game of 1984, and one which is likely to feature in most games players software collections Spectrum E 5.99 Can schor Sava Cute Chicron hungry dimos can I Thorsrucky the Dino M ost wreaking Have on the coutryside. Thor is pretty brave, but not really a match for him, If Thor does crash, don't worry: he has four wheels. But true love is calling him, so use all your agility and cunning to help him rescue Cute Chick! You are a highly trained Galactic Commando deep in enemy territory Power hungry leaders of the repressive Bungeling Empire have stolen a fortune in gold Your goal? To recover every last ingot of Bungeling booty You'll need quick wits and brains! FACILITY FOR CREATING YOUR OWN SCREENS! Spectrum E 9.95 9.95 Dragon (Coming soon) 9.95 7.95 MSX 7.95 8.95 HBC 7.95 Dragon Einstein Momotech 2.95  64 ES.95 "


"Master Of The Lamps: A Unique Adventure In Home Computer Software. The King Is Dead. You're Next In Line. But wait. Before you put on the jeweled turban and lift the royal sabre, there are a few \"formalities\" you must go through. Sometimes...\"deadly\" formalities. When the king dies, three lamps are shattered, the pieces scattered to the wind and three evil genies escape. Now your journey to the throne begins, the perils await. As prince you must retrieve each piece of each lamp and capture each genie. Fly with the wind on your carpet of magic. Enter, if you dare and if you can, the incredible world of each genie. Hold on to your carpet as you swoop, dive, bank and careen through always-moving diamond-shaped gates. Gates that guard each genie's domain. Calculate. Plan. Consider. Quickly. Quickly. Your heart is racing. Your mind must race ahead. Each genie will challenge you with his ancient, mystical trials. Concentrate. Listen to the tones. Watch the colors. Remember. Hone to their sharpest, your mental and physical reflexes. Each trial is harder. And the time to respond gets shorter. The throne awaits, but not forever. The gong is struck, it tolls... Lamps Available for Commodore 64\" ACTUVISION Commodore 64 is a trademark of Commodore Electronic 1985 Activision, "


"PLAYER 2 BOB FITCHE ABLE 1 JFBEEN TITUUTTUNUTTI IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII Pass the word... changes are in the air at Computer & Video Games. Yes, the universe's most popular and successful games magazine is going to get even better. Hard to believe, but it's true. We like to think we're already tops for news, reviews, features, competitions and listings. And from our circulation figures officially 95,247 each month and rising you all agree. But far from resting on our laurels, C&VG is shaping up to meet the challenge of the future. That's why your favourite magazine will soon be getting an exciting new look. Over the next few issues we'll unveil more of our plans. So if you don't want to be left behind, place a regular order for Computer & Video Games with your local newsagent. YOU HAVE BEEN WARNED! C+VG 105 "


"ARCADE ACTION OUT ON A LIMB HYPER SPORTS Imagine a planet where you Aliens tend to be hidden, have to collect together the and they are more of the scattered limbs from your robot type. The human ele torso before getting down to ment doesn't figure much in a spot of alien bashing. this game. Although they That is basically the have to remain stationary, scenario of Magmax, a new they are a lethal bunch movgame from the Japanese ing up and down on the surcompany Nichibutsu. On face of the planet and can brstarting, you are equipped ing you to your knees — if only with the torso of a you've got any by spitting robot, happily armed with a fast rolling balls on a collision machine gun. Head, course with you. These often shoulders, arms and legs are travel in tight formation and, all scattered throughout the for the unwary, there is little various levels of the game escape. and, once collected, you'll When you stumble across ed, greater care should be if given half the chance. feel about seven feet tall! a part of the robot it is nortaken as a hit from a rolling The game speeds up as The planet's landscape is mally the head first and legs ball will instantly cost you a you progress deeper into the totally flat and laid out in a last — it becomes attached pair of legs and take you planet's core via a series of series of well defined paths. automatically. As the body is back to square one. It is not lifts. The pace gets hectic, The view actually looks more assembled, more weapons only the legs that go first aliens are faster and more like a patchwork of fields are added to your arsenal bird-like creatures will quite intelligent, resulting in a batseen from a great height. Once the robot is assemblhappily knock your block off, tle of wits. Kung-Fu Master once each, then move in, King-Fu Master has proved a duck and kick. great success and, for those Fourth Floor: Wizards wishing to save Sylvia, here to get past butterflies, walk are some tips from Stephen Straight on without stopping Beat the athletes at their own Bryson and Brian Hill from and jump over lowest hole game. Cameron McDade London. before a butterfly emerges from Wakefield in Yorkshire Floor One: Master Of Stick To kill the wizard wait until has come up with some tips Try to punch as much as he throws his first bomb and for Hyper Sports which will possible as this will double then walk into him until he is put you amongst the medals. points for any trainees hit. To anven back To driven back towards the towards the get past Master Of Sticks, stairs. Then duck and punch jump into him while he still Swimming: has the stick behind his back If you can manage to tie with and punch once then move the computer controlled Long Horse: forward and repeat until he swimmer, you will be award. Jump Jump off the horse as norfalls. ed 1,000 points! mal, but tip the man onto his head. Let him fall and, as he Floor Two: Master of Boomerang bounces along the floor, the Kick baskets falling from ceilArchery: bird from the javelin bounces ing. Yellow baskets contain Try and score a \"Nice' with after him awarding bonus fire-breathing dragons if every arrow. If you are sucpoints. cessful, three apples should hit by flames, half the energy appear which can be shot for Weight Lifting: is lost. Green baskets contain snakes which crawl on before he fires. If he creates 1,000 bonus points apiece. After you have successfully the floor and take half your another image then wait until lifted a weight, your man will energy. Baskets which hover one fires and then attack that| Skeet Shooting: drop the barbell. Press both blow-up and any shrapnel wizard. run buttons at the same time Shoot every skeet and wait as it hits the ground. If your which hits you takes half your energy. Wait until he tion X Floor Five: Head of Organisa-for the flying ghost to aptiming is correct, three girls throws the first boomerang, pear. If it appears from the will lift up a card with 1,000 throws the first boomerang. Last Floor. Behind this man is right, shoot it in the left hand on it your bonus. move toward him and kick at your beloved Sylvia. his feet. sight and vice versa if it apTo kill the Master of pears from the left. This will Pole Vault: Floor Three: Master of Brute Organisation X, you have to give you a perfect bonus If you can clear the bar with Force combine all moves because score. A small bird will then your speed still at maximum Only trainees, dwarves, and he blocks your punches and fly across the screen. Shoot 1050cm/sec a mole will knifemen on this floor. To kill kicks. He jumps over your it as many times as possible dig his way out of the ground Master of Brute Force wait floor sweeps, but also kicks and earn 1,000 points for and award you with more until he punches and kicks and punches back. each hit. bonus points. 106 "


"SPECTRUM 48K .COMMODORE 64 FRANKIE ABAN BANGI HOLLYWOOD GOES TO ONLY 9.95 FREE! FREE! FREE! Extraordinary Arcade Animation An amazing journey to the centre of the Pleasuredome Discover the secrets of the final screen! WAKELIN Unique LIVE recording of RELAX, never released in the U.K. Exclusively from Ocean in dalaline twin cassette pack. Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone: 061 832 6633 Ocean Software is available from selected branches of: WOOLIVORTH WHSMITH,Sam Memes ,LASKYS, Rumbelows, COMET, Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. ocean "


"— FROM CAMEBOARD = =TO KEYBOARD:MONSTER TRIVIA 664 CASSETTE .95 DISK $14.95 SODIOOOOOUOOO000000000000 3333333333 KISS TALLADÉGA Free R N FLASZ EBBASE HUEY DO OVER 2,000 QUESTIONS 1-4 PLAYERS. ARCADE GRAPHICS GOLD U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage St., Birmingham B7 4LY. Tel: 021-359 8881. SUPER HELICOPTER FLIGHT SIMULATOR Commodore 64 .95 .95 machines only Cassette 1 Disk TALLADEGA Commodore 64 & Atari .95  .95 Cassette Disk "


"When you need fast computer repairs ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE Beware of the Cowboys We have an all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE Apply now and hire your first 4 games free. Well over 800 different original titles. For full details send stamped addressed envelope or tele phone evenings 7pm 10pm or weekends LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 DISC DRIVES E192.95 Purchasers of the above receive free membership BEST QUALITY DISCS, BOXES OF 10 Single density discs E16.50 Double density discs (18.00 Antic & Analog magazines available GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept C&VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney Close Sunderland SR3 4PD. Tel: 0783 286351 3 VIDEO VAULT INTERNATIONAL 10 * Repair Service. Don't be misted by an 'Average' price for Spectrum computer repairs, Video Vaults price is $19.95 inc Parts. InsP&P. No hidden extras. Any other computer Comm 64-BBC-VIC 20 Atari 2600) quoted for at most competitive rates WHILE YOU WAIT, OR REPAIRS BY RETURN BY PROFESSIONAL COMPUTER ENGINEERS. * 3 MONTHS WRITTEN GUARANTEE * INTERNATIONAL REPAIR COMPANY. GENUINE SINCLAIR PARTS USED. * DISCOUNTS FOR SCHOOL REPAIRS. * OVER 8 YEARS EXPERIENCE IN COMPUTERS * FULL RETURN JOURNEY INSURANCE. #OPEN 7 DAYS A WEEK * FREE SOFTWARE WORTH .95 WITH EACH SPECTRUM REPAIR. * SPECTRUM 16K UPGRADE TO 48K .00 + .50 P&P. SPECTRUM UPGRADE KIT ONLY .00+ .00 P&P. SPECTRUMS UPGRADED TO SPECTRUM 'PLUS' C30.00 + C1.50 P&P. SPECTRUMS REPAIRED & UPGRADED TO SPECTRUM 'PLUS' C49.95 OFTEN COPIED NEVER BEATEN, REPAIRS BY RETURN. Phone for free estimate or send computer (Not leads or Power supply with 1.75 UK EIRE, OM, C.I.) or C650 (Europe, Scandinavia) we will contact you same day by phone or 1st class mail should you require quote first TRADE ENQUIRIES MOST WELCOME ACCESS WELCOME 100 Video VaultDept., SU7, 140 High St., West, Glossop, Derbyshire, England. Tel: 04574 66555 FREE GAME WORTH THE PAGES MAGAZINEK FOR ALL ATARI COMPUTER OWNERS ATARI 400/800/FOXI,800XL THE BEST NEWS PROGRAM LISTINGS REVIEWS from USA TUTORIALS UK UTILITIES AUSTRALIA PUBLIC HINTS & DOMAIN TIPS SOFTWARE plus more LIBRARY SPECIAL OFFERS PAGE 6 is published bl-monthly. Annual Subscription is .00. Send TODAY to: PAGE 6, P.O.BOX 54, STAFFORD, ST16 1DR Tel. 0788 41183 G $5.95 WITH REPAIR EACH SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64/VIC 20 ATARI 400/600/800 XL XE OWNERS UTILITIES TURBO LOAD SOFTWARE C5 Case for CBM64 makes fast loading copies of your tape based programs reduces load time to same as 1541 disc drive Prace 16 BACK-UPS Tapes ar SAE for Lists CRACKER WAMIC you download your person withar without mic knowledge. Hours at lunchanging te vers e s Stuck on an adventure search for conse cts back up your Atari tapes Alfonly 10 TDK Tape 16K Pour Free PROGRAM RETRIEVAL SOFTWARE (C10 Cassette) with RESET BUTTON will retrieve and re-list 'crashed-out programs incredible value and essential for the serious programmer Price  Send cheque or PO, with address Price in PSP except overseas add 1 MUNDY & ROBERTS LTD, Box No 11,5 Crompton St, Bury, Lancs BLY DAA Mover s in a boat lapor dik Come on double sided disk at KLFITER Will allow you to play games wit 400 800 range on E10 Post Free XL tapersion 15 DYNAMIC  BLANK DISKS 5% Blank Disks price per box of 10 Single Side/Double Density SCOTCH 3M.... ....95 DYSAN ........95 MEMOREX (with free case)......95 Double Side/Double Density SCOTCH 3M.. ..95 DYSAN........... . ....95 MEMOREX (with free case)......95 WINTER GAMES G Serbia Ski Game Disk anly 10 Postre SXI CONSTRUCTION SET This was written construct Winter Games and you to construct Your Own Arcade games within one hour. Diskonly PICTURE RUNNER Acre handing micro pane, Kod ucts-will -with or without time delay. Also fade in and out Double sided dish 10 Pest Free THE TRANSPAC Bougie dink drivesturk with programes on THE TRANS PACi Multi tapetoisk disk to tapete toisistik multimover, etc. Connes ont le double sided Menores disks 25 Mlades postre. Made only 24 hodech STOCK SOFT 15 Woodbrooke Road, Birmingham B30 TUE 156 Lower High Street, Storbridge West Midlands. DYN ITS SPECTRUM Gyron Brian Biodaxe Shadowline 16-25 Cauldron 17:45 Shadow 08-25 Entombed.... 17:45 Elite.... Na Noo ES5 Knight lone SJB SUPER SAVERS 50 Memorex single side/double density blank disks in a perspex storage box, only .95. Wizards Lair Tur Na Nog 57.45 AMSTRAD HARDWARE 06 Ram Turbo 57.90 Ram MKI CH-80 Slik Stick DT Decathlon... 57.25 Sure Shot All tapes batch tested any faulty tapes replaced on return P P FREE) plus complementary Fact Sheet on loading problems Tel: 0384 376409 for our price on any new release SPECIAL DEAL FOR ATARI 400/800/XL/XE 0WNERS 50 Memorex double side/double density blank disks in a perspex storage box, only .95. All prices INCLUDE VAT. Delivery in UK is FREE. Please send cheque/PO to: SJB DISK SUPPLIES, Dept. 01. 11 Oundle Drive, Nottingham NG8 1BN Tel: 0602 782310 ELECTRON OWNERS We are a Software Library solely for the Electron. Many titles available including best sellers. Life membership C6 inc. free hire of first tape). For further details write to: SOFTWARE LISTING 'Elderhurst'. Lobley Hill Road. Meadowfield, Durham Tel: (0385) 780753 No. 1. Hire your first two games FREE from our extensive range of software. Up to the minute releases available No, 2. Buy all the latest software titles at best possible prices new releases available direct from US). Atari hardware and modems now available at discount prices. For further details send s.a.e. es CHARNWOOD GAMES 27 Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Leicestershire Tel: 0509 412604 A SPECTRUM 48K ADVENTURE THE MARIE CELESTE FREE MEMBERSHIP SOFTWARE HIRE VIC-20 COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM Send an sae for your hirekit to: VSH (CV), PO Box 65, Nottingham NG1 Please state which micro Can you discover the secret of this stranges and its missing crew? Or will you suffer the same fate an The Marie Celeste! To find out send .99 per tape plus 50 postage to WALRUS COMP., 73 LANDOR DRIVE. GLANYMOR PARK, LOUGHOR, SWANSEA SA42GL BBC MODEL 'B' computer with Disc Inter face, Acorn cassette recorder, analogue and quickshot joysticks,  of software plus books and magazines, all excellent condition. Cost +, will sell for . Telephone Wargrave (073522) 2441. Also available on Micronet 800 109 "


"DOMARK presents YOU. as... 007 AVIEWT0 A KILL THE COMPUTER GAME .......... From 7th June, YOU will become James Bond in his first arcade/adventure on Spectrum 48K, Commodore 64, Enterprise 64 and watch out for Amstrad, MSX and others 1 ORDER YOUR COPY NOW! To: Domark Ltd., 204 Worple Road, London SW20 8PN CALL 01-947 5624 DOMARK Telex: 894475 G NAME: (BLOCK LETTERS). ADDRESS ............ COUNTY.. ............POSTCODE. Please send me. ................ copies of \"A View to a Kill The Computer Game\" at .99 (includes postage and packing). Tenclose a cheque/P.O. for ... My computer is: ............. You may order by Access Visa American Express by post or telephone (01-947 5624). Please debit my CREDIT CARD I Signature:.... Account No: I IIIIIIIII Expiry Date: .... Expiry Date: ........................... .......................... Eon Productions Ltd. Glidrose Publications Ltd. 1985 Domark Ltd., 204 Worple Road, London SW20 8PN. Tel: 01-947 5624 Telex: 894475 G "


"WHY DO SPECTRUM USERS FROM LONDON DEVON, ESSEX,& CAMBRIDGE SEND THEIR MICROS TO US FOR REPAIR Average price  Only Co. in all UR offering while you wait CARTRIDGE CITY Simply the best cartridge rental service for Atari Computers. Oor 24 hour turnaround every micro insured for return journey Ophone or send for free estimate one. 1.50 UK, LOM Eire, CI No hidden handling charges Ospecial rates for schools MANCOMP LTD. Printworks Lane. Levenshulme. Manchester M19 JP Tel: 061 224 1888 PERSONAL SOFTWARE USERS ASSOCIATION Benefit from our huge library of cassettes for exchange or hire. More than 1000 titles for the Spectrum, CBM 64, Vic 20, BBC, Dragon, Atari, T.I. and Oric. Cheap hires and exchanges and special sale lines. For details send large SAE to P.S.U.A., 19 Lammerton Terrace, Dundee DD4 7BR stating which micro. . For der Full information pack from CARTRIDGE CITY 25 Gaitside Drive, Aberdeen, AB1 ZBH. Tel. (0224) 37348 OP.S.U Warrace, NEW CONCEPTS IN SOFTWARE BBC Attention Commodore 64 Users THERE'S A WHOLE LIBRARY OF SOFTWARE FOR YOU AT THE MIDLAND ..COMPUTER.LIBRARY. LIFE MEMBERSHIP JUST ! HIRE YOUR ...FIRST GAME FREE! Choose from the very latest titles Hire from just ! 25 inc. p + p for 7 days Hire as many games as you want All games are originals with full documentation  Business and educational software too Fast return-of-postservice Low prices if you want to buy 14 day money back guarantee Over 1000 games in stock including US imports Computer aided learning template system for teachers. Enables any teacher to quickly acquire a library of personalised teaching software Price .00 CBM64 Dr John and the battle of the entropy. The Energy Rce Educational fun game for and A Level Technician courses. Teaches fundamental concepts of engineering and heat A revolutionary new approach to teaching with an emphasis on learning through play with full back UD material Price .95 SPECTRUM O and A Level Physics packages NEWTONS LAWS WORK AND ENERGY Super BASIC EDITOR. RESERVES space for code 16.95 in REMS FIND AND REPLACE everything Variable speed TRACE, DELETE blocks of BASIC and much Send to: NEW CONCEPTS CVG Rosenython, St. Keverne, Helston Cornwall TR12 6QR ATARI HARDWARE SJB SUPER SAVERS ATARI BOOXL + ATARI 1050 DISK DRIVE .95 includes home filing manager and pay off adv. and demo disks) ATARI BOOXL+ATARI 1010 RECORDER .95 includes Pole Position + Introduction) to Programming cassettes) ATARI 800XL COMPUTER........95 ATARI 1050 DISK DRIVE.......179.95 fine free box of discs! All prices include VAT FREE fast delivery in UK Send cheque/PO to: SJB DISK SUPPLIES, Dept. 01.. 11 Oundle Drive, Nottingham NGS 1BN Tel: 0602 782310 VISA 16.95 es e MIDLAND COMPUTERS Please send a cheque or postal order for  stating your machine, or send a large SAE to Midland Computers Limited, 28 College Street, Worcester WRI 2SL Telephone: (0905) 611072 ATOMIC STRUCTURE A COMPUTER VIEW Award winning 48k Spectrum program illustrated. 13 important physics experiment with high-res graphics and text. Suitable for 'A' level. Price .50. Send cheque/PO to: NEW CONCEPTS SOFTWARE, C&VG. ROSENYTHON, ST. KEVERNE, HELSTON, CORNWALL TR12 6QR SPECTRUM OWNERS LOOK! Are you bored of BASIC? Then why not learn machine code? We offer a monthly machine code for beginners course which will also contain a section on writing adventures and 20% off selected games + much morel Send SAE  for information or [9 for 10 Issues complete course) or E6 for five issues. Make cheques or PO's payable to: P. DAVIES Victoria Inn, Bradwell Village Milton Keynes MK 13 9A0 o ATARI USERS Feel left out? Our system will make you many new friends: S.A. E. for details to: Viaduct, 71 Hiliwood Road, Halesowen, W. Midlands Microsell ... Microsell... Microsell ... Microsell... Micro ATARI 400 16K, 1010 recorder, software, magazines, excellent condition worth  accept  ono. Telephone 091 267 7840. ATARI GAMES to sell or swap. All original cassettes: Spiderman, Preppie!, Galactic Chase, Airstrike, Diamonds. Tel: 0582 26694 after 4pm ask for David ATARI 400 48K and cassette recorder, joysticks, leads, manuals basic & cartridges including Star Raiders, Pacman, and cassettes, Blue Max, Bruce Lee. All boxed and in excellent condition. Still under guarantee. ition Still under quarantee Price . Telephone Bristol (0272) 685373 SPECTRUM SOFTWARE, all brand new, Great Space Race .75, Valhalla .75 (RRP .95 each). Alien 8, Everyones A Wally. Ghostbusters, Tir Na Nog .45 each (RRP .95 each), Boulder Dash .90 (0223) 843964 after 4.30pm ask for Peter. FOR SALE Tristar 777, C.T.E. Galaxy 1000 Linear Amp, Sigma 4, and 3 Element Beam plus Power Pack and all extras  ono or will consider selling separate. 1 Adelaide Court, Kenworthy Road, Hackney, London E9. ACORN ELECTRON with Acorn plus 1 interface, Quickshot Il joystick, over 's worth of software and an excellent cassette recorder. .99 ono. Tel: (061) 427 4964 FREE ADVANCED home computer course 1-30 in binders and other books when you buy Oric Atmos 48K and 7 games boxed under guarantee  ono. Phone Martin, Slough 43805 evenings. BBC SOFTWARE for sale. All originals and at half price! All in great condition. Phone (0642) 313298 and ask for Nic after 4pm. DRAGON 32 good condition lots of software  ono. Tel Hull 447947 will send through post. SPECTRUM GAMES to sell Great Space Race Airwulf etc prices from  to  ring Mike on 01-776 1425 (5pm onwards) or sae 256 Wickham Chase, West Wickham, Kent BR4 OBS VIC 20 for quick sale. Includes C2N recorder, 16K ram (switchable) software, books, Introduction to Basic 1. Still boxed. Bargain at . Phone Robert on 01-590 0402 after 4pm CBM 64 disc software sale. Includes, Tapper, Ghostbusters, Frak, Pole Position, Buck Rogers, Boulderdash, Zaxxon plus many more. All converted Speedload Original still guaranteed. All very cheap. Sheffield 0742 616528. I WILL SWAP my Atari 1020 printer and  for an Atari 1050 disk drive or I will sell for . Telephone Fleetwood 70858 after 6pm. 48K SPECTRUM, complete with Currah microspeech, Quickshot II, Comcon interface, W H Smith cassette recorder, approx 300 games,  Phone Wrexham 84270. CHEAT! A must for the Spectrum games player! Obtain infinite lives etc. on: Underwurde, Jetset Willy, Manic Miner, Sabre Wulf, and many others! sae to A Quick, 470 Fishponds Road, Fishponds, Bristol BS16 3DU. 48K SPECTRUM, Currah speech synthesiser Kemston joystick interface cassette recorder Quickshot Il joystick . All boxed plus  worth of software want around  ono. Call Garry Fee on Manchester 061 740 3397 COMMODORE 64 with cassette unit and 11 games including International Soccer, Hunchback, TLL, total cost over . For sale  or exchange 48K Spectrum with interface and games. Telephone Weybridge (0932) 45479 ask for Jonathan. CRICKET FOR TRS-80, Video Genie 16K limited overs, full scorecards. Play computer or friend. sae details or .99 to Richard Hanna, 1 Fortsandel Avenue, Coloraine, Co. Londonderry BT52 1TL ATARI OWNERS: Chargen lll character set designer utility. Also an Atari 400 for sale at a mere . Phone Steve for details on both Hatfield 67331 evenings and don't delay! COMMODORE 64 software to sell or swap over 400 titles: Track and Field, Pitstop II, Spelunked, Sorcery, disk only. Send list to: Danny Chaston, 12 Cherry Orchard, Gaderiadge, Hemel Hempstead, Herts HP1 3NQ. TO ANYONE interested in starting a Commodore 64 Club in which we can have reviews etc. write to Neil Reynolds, 55 Leam Crescent, Solihull, West Midlands B92 BPB. ATARI SOFTWARE wanted. If you have any 64K or less games, please send a list to T. Ishikawa, 4 Talway Gardens, Stanmore, Middx or tel 01-954 1853 on Sundays including adventures. Thank you!! ATARI 400 48K, colour television, 1010 recorder, joystick, basic and assembler cartridges, over 100 games, seven books and some manuals plus 25 magazines . Phone Jamie after 6pm Chesterfield 852 822. 48K SPECTRUM, cassette recorder. Kempston interface, Quick shot joystick, books, 41 bought games including Technician Ted, Monty Mole, Sabre Wulf, Lords of Midnight, Pyjamarama, Quotomania, Potty Pigeon, Cost  will sell  ono. Will split. Software , rest  Worthwood 25364 ATARI 400 48K cassette, joystick, Star Raiders, Defender etc cassette games  ono. 0474 60495 ZX SPECTRUM speech synthesizer and joystick interface,  lightpen  title-page generator, program, . Crowborough 4279. HELLO CBM 64 User! Do you want software, etc? Large INFO. Write to: Postlagerrnd Kennwort \"Why not\" 4300 Essen 1, West Germany. SHARP MZ8OK integral monitor and tape deck excellent condition  ono. Write to A Murphy, 457 Bordesley Green, East Yardley, Birmingham CHEETAH 32K ram pack: For sale as good as new still boxed rear edge connector price . Tel: 06333 67904 in the evening. PC ad. 111 CVG "


"N-E-XT M-O-N-T-HN-E-XT Just what is the Max Factor? And just who is this Max person anyway? Find out in August's C&VG when we bring you an exclusive interview with the world's first computer generated TV presenter the one and only MAX HEADROOM! | HI-N-O-W I-X-3-N  H-I-NWant to annoy the neighbours? Then enter our Virgin Games Ghettoblaster, contest and win one of those monster machines. You won't believe your ears when you tune into C&VG next month! ATARI Want a fight? Then rush out and pick one with top British boxer, Frank Bruno! Scared now, eh? Well if you want a ringside seat for a very special C&VG competition, based on Elite's brand new Frank Bruno's Boxing game, then you won't want to miss the next issue of C&VG. It's a knock-out! OK Atari owners this is where YOU get the special C&VG treatment. We've got a spectacular Atari supplement lined up for our August issue, packed full of news, reviews, listings and competitions YOU asked for it — so here it is! In C&VG next month! [ M-O-N-T-H N-EX-T o M-O-N-T-H N-EX-In Did you know that some software houses are sitting on a whole bunch of great games and they just won't let you get your hands on them? Find out all about the games THEY refuse to release in C&VG next issue! C&VG/ALLIGATA BLAGGER i COMPETITION NAME ADDRESS Win a computer holiday. Find out all about graphics packages. Discover who is C&VG's first Hall of Fame challenger. News, Hot Reviews and lots, lots more... Tel No. Unique Blogger Goes to Hollywood Number............ (supplied with every game) My answers are: 1 I should like to go to Hollywood because (complete in not more than 15 words) All entries must be returned by 31st July 1985 to Alligata Alligata Software Ltd 1 Orange Street Sheffield Sl 4DW z E-XT-M-O-N-T.HU 112 "


"COMPUTER SOFTWARE SPECIALISTS ATARI 400/800/XL ATARI 400/800/XL COMMODORE 64 cass COMMODORE 64 Pacman. Pole Position Zork 24.95 ROM 14.95 14,95 14.95 1295 9.95. Tallink Froper Bert Centipede Jungle Hunt 23 00 23 00 Mask of the Sun.... Star Bowl Football Star League Baseball Cutthroats 29.95 11.95 11.95 Suspended Deadine 35.95 28.75 Donkey Kong Donkey Kong Jun Cutthroat 29.95 14.95 14.95 7.25 14.95 Pole Position Roberton Dig Dug.... Miner 0429er. Seat Graphic Art Department Arcade Construction Set Summer Games Ultime Dancing Feats music utilityl... Combal Leader 50 Mission Crush Rails West Flight Simulator il SAM speech PM Anno 21.55 14.95 14.95 Boulder Dash Flip Flop Dig Dug Pitstop II Fogyan.... Encounter Tigers in the Snow Battle for Normandy Combat Leader Knights of the Desert 7.50 12.95 18.95 8.95 12.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 41.95 41.95 25.95 BC's Quest for Tyre Pitfall Decathlon Space Shuttle Buty Bob Strikes Back 49.95 69.75 Jaw Breaker 12.95 12.95 12.95 disk 12 55 Spelunker Lade Runner Davids Midnight Magic Operation Whirlwind Raid on Bungeling Bay Choplifter Hard Hat Mack Real of Impossibility 25 95 34 95 39 95 7375 9.95 9.95 9.95 ACE Enhancer Fort Apocalypse Shamus Protector Bruce Lee Dallas Ouest Solo Flight 12.95 12.95 12.95 14.95 12.55 ROM Night Vision Pub USD Sparta Dos Base Debugger Basic Commander Data Manager Data Manager Data Perfect Atal Writer Home Word Basie XL ACTION Ma 55 a 55 with OSA. Atari 850 Interface The Protect it to both sides of disk Disk Collector Catalogue disks .12.55 12 55 12.50 39 95 48 95 66.95 Archon Murder on the Zinderul 11.95 8.45 56.95 72.90 12.95 14.95 Nate Commander Pesto Dragon Riders of Per 8.95 8.95 14.95 5.25 Attack of the Mutant Camel Ghostbusters Conan The Barbarian... F15 Strike Eagle 84.95 38 954 1.95 Impossible Mission Flyer For Jetboat Jack Superbase 54 Flight Simulator IL SAM speech Master Type Master Type Al activision and U.S. God i 14.95 14.95 12 89 17.95 12.69 ATARI SOFTWARE Trade enquires welcome NA ROM Colossus Chess 3.0 Combat Ladder 14.95 NA 32.75 12.55 s titles stock Tale of Berre 14.95 Plus 100's more titles available. Send S.A.E. for free catalogue or telephone 01-723 0562 between 10am and 7pm. All cheques, 46 HUNTSWORTH MEWS, LONDON NW1 6DB P/O made payable to Zoomsoft. ZOOMSOFT SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES QUR OUR OUR RRP PRICE COMMODORE RRP PRICE 1495 11 25 ELITE BOULDER DASH 9.95 9.95 9.95 750 750 7.50 RRP PRICE 8.95 7.25 9.95 750 101998.99 ON FELD FOOTBALL STAR LEAGUE BASEBALL STRIP POKER 14.99 999 9.95 GHOSTBUSTERS KNIGHT LORE UNDERURLDE DAEY THOMP DECATHON MATCHDAY TAPPER MOON CRESTA SPY HUNTER EVERY ONES A WALLY GYRON MATCH PONT TECHNICIAN TED SHADOW FIRE DARK STAR STAR STRIKE ANIMATED STRIP POKER KONG STRIKE BACK HOBBIT DUN DARACH NIGHT GUNNER DRAGONTORC GRAND NATIONAL DUMMY RUN CHUCKY EGG 2 BACKGAMMON 7.50 7.95 7.95 5.95 7.95 9.99 9.95 7.95 5.95 3.95 7.95 5.90 5.90 5.75 5.90 7,50 7.50 5.50 4.45 750 590 TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY BEACHEAD SOLO FLIGHT DEATH STAR INTERCEPTOR BRUCE LEE NATO COMMANDER 9.50 4.99 9.95 750 14.95 11.20 9.95 7.50 9.95 7.50 9.95 750 9.95 750 11.959.99 8.95 6.99 9.99 250 12.959.99 995 7.50 700 5.25 995 750 14.95 11.20 8.95 4.99 ROCKY HORROR SHOW SYSTEM 15000 TESTMATCH FUGHT SIMULATION STEVE DAVIS SNOOKER STREET HAWK 9.95 750 5.95 5.25 7.95 5.90 TIR NA NOG AIRWOLF PYJAMARAMA CONFUZION POLE POSITION RAID OVER MOSCOW WORLD CUP FOOTBALL THE FOURTH PROTOCOL SUPER GRAN ROCK N BOLTS CONGO BONGO 6.90 525 905 759 5.95 5.50 6.95 5.50 6.95 5.50 7.996.70 7.95 5.90 6.95 5.30 12.959.99 9.95 7,50 7.95 5.90 7.95 5.90 GHOSTBUSTERS BATTLE FOR MIOWAY FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD DALEY TOMS SUPERTEST ALL LEVEL 9 JEWELS OF BABYLON THE WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST ZAXXON SUMMER GAMES DUO VADIS SHERLOCK BAMBUSTERS MATCHDAY RAID OVER MOSCO STAFF OF KARNATH 9.95 7.50 9.95 750 14.95 11.20 9.95 750 14.95 10.99 9.95 7.50 7.95 5.90 9.95 750 9.95 750 HORRITT KONGS REVENGE SUPER HUEY COMBAT LYNX LORDS OF MIONIGHT THE FOURTH PROTOCOL SHADOWFIRE ARABIAN KNIGHTS CAD CAM WARRIOR F15 STRIKE EAGLE BLACK THUNDER ARCHON IMPOSSIBLE MISSION CASTLE OF TERROR HUNCHBACK MATCHPOINT RAID ON BUNGLING BAY CYPHOID 9 TIM LOVES CRICKET SYSTEM 15000 INTERNAT. FOOTBALL ROM COLOSSUS CHESS GREMLINS JET SET WILLY THE BOSS SUPER GRAN EVERYONES A WALLY ROLAND RAT RACE BOUNTY BOB ENTOM BED CAULDRON AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT) CHOPLIFTER HARD HAT MACK REALM IMPOSSIBILITY GRODS REVENGE 11.959.99 8.95 7.50 9.95 750 7.90 5.90 7.95 5.95 9.95 7.50 7.95 5.95 8.95 7.50 14.959.99 14.95 11.20 9.95 7.50 9.95 750 10.99 899 995 MINDER FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD SUPER GRAN ADVENTURE DALEY TOMS SUPERTEST KOKOTINI WILF A VIEW TO KILL AMSTRAD SUPER CRAN ARCHON EVERY ONES A WALLY BEACH HEAD RAID OVER MOSCOW DALEYS TOMS SUPERTEST DUN DARACH COMBAT LYNXS FIGHTER PILOT ALIEN 8 KNIGHTLORE GHOSTBUSTERS STREET HAWKS AZIMUTH 7.50 9.95 9.95 7.50 750 22.95 18.00 RAM TURBO INTERFACE MANIC MINER J BARR SQUASH BEACHEAD SABRE WULF LORDS OF MIDNIGHT GREMLINS 8.95 5.90 795 590 7.95 5.90 9.99 750 9.95 750 9.95 750 5.95 4.75 7.95 5.90 7.95 5.90 6.95 5.50 9.95 9.95 7.50 14.95 7.50 5.99 4.99 10.998.99 7.95 5.95 7.95 5.90 12 95 10.99 9.95 7.50 10.95 825 8.95 8.75 9.95 7.95 9.99 9.95 7.95 8.99 9.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 750 5.95 750 7.50 5.90 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 THIEN BUCK ROGERS FULL THROTTLE 8.95 6.75 8.95 8.90 8.95 695 TAPPER EUREKA INT BASKETBALL A VIEW TO KEIL MANIC MINER DALEY THOMP DECATHLON SCRABBLE FIGHTER PLOT PITSTOP JET SET WILLY DUASIMODO DUMMY RUN STREET HAWKS EVERICAN FOOTBALL MONOPOLY SPY HUNTER WORLD SERIES BASEBALL FISTFUL OF FUN SPITFIRE 40 SLAP SHOT WEB DIMENSION 6.95 5.90 9.95 795 750 5.90 BLAGGER OLYMPIAD HAUPSTEAD 7.95 5.50 9.95 12.95 750 10.50 8.95 6.95 5.95 8.95 7.25 UP AND DOWN WORLD SERIES BASEBALL ONE ON ONE EUREKA AMERICAN FOOTBALL HARD HAT MACK BRUCE LEE ALIEN 8 ALL LEVEL 9 DEATH STAR INTERCEPTOR ZAXXON FIGHTER PILOT ALL LEVEL 9 COMBAT LYNXS MANIC MINOR ELITE CASSI ALIEN KNIGHT LORE MATCH DAY 14 95 750 999 799 8.95 6.95 7.95 5.90 9.95 7.50 9.997.99 7.95 5.90 7.95 5.90 795 5.90 1295 11.75 9.99 7.50 7.95 5.90 9.95 7.50 9.99 750 8.95 750 10.998.99 LUNAR DOCKING LAS VEGAS CANDE SLALOM SUPER GRAN SUPER GRAN ADVENTURE AIRWOLF ROLLER KONG 5.25 5.25 525 6.50 7.50 5.25 5.75 9.95 7.95 5.58 ALL PRICES INCLUDE P&P IN UK EUROPE ADD 25P PER TAPE ELSEWHERE AT COST CHEQUESIPD PAYABLE TO S.C.S. DEPT ICVGD 653 GREEN LANES NS DOY. LONDON TEL 800 3156 SAE FOR LIST COME AND PICK UP YOUR SOFTWARE AT MARBLES SHOPPING CENTRE UNIT 11-12 527.531 OXFORD STREET, LONDON WIR 1DD (1 MIN FROM MARBLE ARCH TUBE STN) FURTHER TITLES AND OFFERS AVAILABLE AT OUR SHOP WHICH IS OPEN 7 DAYS A WEEK FROM 10AM 19.00 ABOVE DISCOUNTS APPLICABLE ON PRODUCTION OF THIS ADVERT AT OUR SHOP 113 "


"MEGASAVE SOFTWARE ATARI 400/600/800/800XL 1 THORNHILL, Nth WEALD, EPPING, ESSEX COMMODO  RRP OURS COMMODORE 64 RRP OURS 995 Gremlins 7.95 Amon Warrior Gates of Dawn Agus Racer 5.50 Herberts Dummy Run Balso the Bulge 99 Hunchback Olympics BC2 Gros Revenge 9.95 240 Bounty Bob 2.40 Blagger Goes to Hollywood 5.59 Breakdance 8.95 Jet Set Willy 2 6:95 B Superstar 6 BO JOYSTICKS Confuzion Gunshot 2JS 8.99 CBS CBM Pixst IX 29.95 25 95 UTILITIES 6.40 14.95 7.50 Cale Result Adv 99 00 89.00 Elite Calc Result Easy 49 94 39.95 Entombed DFM Database Labels 33 99 28.99 Everyone's A Wally Inyostat 30.00 27.95 Frankie Goes to Hollywood 5.95 4.60 Got Argus! 7.99 5.20 19.95 17.95 Give My Regards to Broad White Lighting 19.95 17.95 7.99 5.95 All prices are tape versions Disks available All prices include free fast delivery and same day despatch Overseas orders add 50p Offers apply to mail oder only 10% discount on all orders for seven or more tapes or to a vole of over 45. Cheques/POs payable to ED40 Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY The greatest, biggest and best Atari library on the market An ideal present for old and new Atari owners. MIDLANDS GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over 2 years ago, first conceived the idea of a software library Now approaching nearly 1.000 titles on disc cassette and Ram (games business, educational and utilities). Often purchasing popular programmers in multiples of 5 or 6 to give all our members a fair change. Always adding approximately 40 new programmes monthly Over 1,000 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany. Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast, efficient and friendly service Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates plus other inter club activities. Now introducing original software written by existing members. Send large s.a.e. to: Stre MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos. Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programmes are originals with full documentation AMSTRAD THE TOMB OF KUSLAK AVAILABLE FROM MOST COMPUTER STOCKISTS OR SEND .50 TO THE ADDRESS BELOW FOR A COPY BY FIRST CLASS RETURN POST TELEPHONE YOUR ORDER USING ACCESS ANYTIME INTRIGUE TRADE SOFTWARE ENQUIRIES WELCOME Cranbrook Road, Tenterden, Kent TN30 6UJ The opening scene. We have discovered the entrance Can you recover Kuslaks Treasures? Telephone 05806 4726 An exciting graphic and text adventure that will appeal to all age groups. MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS RECORDMANIA Music Studio 12.50 Bounty Bob ... 7.50 Frankie Hollywood... 7.50 Blagger Hollywood... 7.25 Shadowfire.............6.95 Breakdancer 7 .75 Moon Cresta ...5.50 Murder by Dozenid) 15.50 Gates of Dawn 6.75 Cauldron..............5.95 Grog's Revenge. ..7.50 Dropzone... 7.50 Op's Wirlwind 8.50 Elite 11.00 Elite (disk) Basketball. .. 4.95 14 DAVYGATE CENTRE, YORK (0904) 33993 Beat these prices — minimum order  15.50 SPECTRUM [2.49 2.49 ...(2.99 Terminal Invaders Terminal Meteor Blaster Terminal Log Run Terminal Kiss the Werewolf Termal Rescue from Castle Dread Terminal 7.50 299 82 49 6.95 12.99 E2.49 1249 13.99 .99 SPECTRUM Alien . Skooldaze............ 4.95 3D Starstrike..........4.75 Air Wolf 5.20 Underwurde . 6.95 Knight Lore.. 6.95 Doordark's Revenge American Football....8.50 Ghostbusters .7.75 Shadow Fire ........6.95 World Baseball.......5.25 Pyjamarama.........5.20 Beach Head. ..5.95 Lords of Midnight....5.95 White Lightning 12.50 Dev Pac 3 10.50 Password 2.. . 11.75 Gift of Gods ... 7.25 Hunchback 1 ..5.80 One on One........... 7.50 Hard Hat Mac...... 7.50 Zaxon 5.95 Raid Over Moscow...5.50 Everyone's a Wally. 7.50 Duke's of Hazzard...5.25 Technician Ted....5.25 Brian Bloodaxe........5.50 Archon 9 .50 11.25 illustrator ... 12.50 Emerald Isle 5.50 Tapper . 5.50 Spy Hunter... ...5.50 Bruce Lee 5.95 Flightpath 737 6.85 Brian Jacks .5.95 Gremlins ...... 7.25 Day in a Life.... ..5.85 Komplex8 .50 Wizards Lai ...5.50 Gyron Formula 1 Grand National.... .5.85 Fantastic Voyage..... 5.85 Chuckie Egg Il... 5.85 Confuzion 5.25 Dragontorc 5 .95 Minder 7.50 Station 5.75 Frankie Hollywood 7.50 Rocky Horror Show.5.75 Buck Rogers .6.85 Moon Cresta.......... Super Gran..........8.50 Cauldron 6.85 Icicle Works 5.85 Jo B'ton's Squash 6.85 Dummy Run......... Nodes of Yonod,... 8.50 Daley's Supertest....5.85 Soft Aid 4.99 Fourth Protocol 10.50 James Bond. ...9.50 Rockfords Riot 7.50 Ashkeron....... ..5.85 Charlie Choc Fac7.50 Broad Street 6.75 5.50 Dun Darach 7.50 Streethawk. ... 5.25 Spy VS Spy Battle Midway.........7.50 Falcon Patrol 2 5.85 Bulge 18.50 Pipeline Light Magic .. 12.50 COMMODORE Staff of Karnath.... 7.50 Bungleig Bay 7.50 Choplifter ...7.50 World Baseball..... 5.90 Everyone's a Welly 7.50 Beach Head... 7.50 Pole Position. . 7.50 Slap Shot .. .6.75 Tri Na Nog ..........7.50 Impossible Mission 6.75 Lords of Midnight... 6.99 Soft Aid 4.99 Super Huey .10.50 Mr Do...... 8.50 Almaz 8.50 Brian Jacks. 6.75 Gremlins Rocket Ball...... ...6.85 Pipeline 11 7 .50 M Zindeneus....... 8.50 Archon 8.50 Rock 'n' Bolt 8.50 911/TS 7.50 Valhalla Legend Great Space Race Legend Hunter Killer Proreck Manic Miner-Buy Byte Black Crystal Cartel.... Splat incante... Sherlock Melbourne House War of the Worlds CALL Beaky and the Egg Snatchers Fantasy The Pyramid Fantasy Matchpoint Since Dynamic Graphics Procam Alchemist Beau Jolly Oracle's Cave Dorcos Empires Opera Spectrum Virgin Lost Virgin Angler Virgin Strangeloop.. .6.85 Spitfire Fourty 7.50 Dambusters Brian Jacks.......6.85 Theatre Europe..........6.99 Pitstop ll ... 8.50 Nodes of Yesod...8.50 Fourth Protocol . 10.50 Fourth Protocol dl.. 13.50 James Bond...... 9.50 Rocky Horror Show 6.95 Rocky Hor Shwidi...9.50 Quake 1 7 .50 Tracer Sanctionidl. 17.00 Mind Shadowidl.. 17.00 Jump Jet..... ....8.50 Brian Bloodx 6 95 Jet Set Willy 1 6 .95 Amazon Warrior..6.85 Streethawk...........5.95 Dambustersid 1 2.50 On Court Tennis....9.25 American Fball Acti 9.25 Star League B'ball 9.25 The Bulge 8 .50 Nosheratu Tema Vix Plode Abrasco Caps and Robbers Abrasca Sub Space Striker Owcksva Trader Quicksilva Star Quest Quicksilva Harvester Quicksilva...... Pixel Palace Quicksilva Cosmiads Boy Byte E2 49 [2 49 E2.49 Quil 19.99 1249 12.49 12.49 Time Gate-Guicksilva Gridrunner Duicksilva Mission Mercury Virgin Annihilato Mogul Earthquake-Mogul Super Trak Mogul Pyramid-Mogul Polywop Moon Great Adventure Pack Mogul Metamorphosis Moot Sea Woll-Mogul...... Chomper Man Mogol Ludwig's Lemon May Panic Be Bre Asteroids Bug By 1249 Boogie Boo the Flea Quicksilva 115 Cavern Fighter Bug Byte 11.50 Transylvanian Tower Richard Shepard Transylvanian Tower Richard Shenand each Invincible Island Richard Shepard Devil's of the Deep Richard Shepard Super Spy Richard Shazard The Code Soft Cancer 6.85 Daleys Supertest....5.95 Conanid). 12.50 Entombed 7.25 Monster Trivia.. . 8.50 Shadowtireld) 11.75 BBC Revs.... 12.50 Revsid) 15.00 VIC 20 Scramble Buy Byte Bricks Palace Squish Palace Reversi-Tarminal COMMODORE 64 Hall of the Things Crystal The Evil Dead M Power...... Oracle's Cave Darco . American Football Mind Games 12.49 .245 [249 2.49 .99 Postage included U.K. Please state which micro. Fast Service Send cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept. CVG. 76 Westbourne Terrace, London W2 Make cheques and postal orders payable to: Recordmania'. Please allow at least 7 days for delivery. P&P free. 114 "


"Gyron Software THE ULTIMATE GRAPHICS PACKAGE FOR THE COMMODORE 64 ARTSTAR OP THE COMMONOPFA ULLAMAA APSTAR Producing high quality colour graphics on the Commodore 64 has never been an easy task, yet almost every program benefits from well designed graphics, displaying information in a more readable form and an almost essential part of computer games. The methods of producing such graphics previously ranged from expensive hardware add-ons, such as tablets and touch pads to tedious and time consuming paper and pencil techniques or primitive sprite or character editors. UNTIL NOW THAT IS....... ARTSTAR is a professionally written and comprehensive graphics package covering full screen multi-colour bit mapping advanced sprite and character design including sprite animation. ARTSTAR has been written with the user in mind and FOR ONLY being menu driven, requires little or no knowledge of computer programming to use , yet providing high quality colour graphics which may be incorporated into your own programs with ease, in a fraction of the time previosly required. $15.95 GIU CASSETTE 1.95 DISK *100% MACHINE CODE * FULL MULTI-COLOUR AND HI-RES SPRITE CREATOR AND EDITOR WITH USER DEFINED SPRITE ANIMATION DISPLAY * FULL MUTI-COLOUR AND HI-RES CHARACTER CREATOR AND EDITOR * MULTI-COLOUR FULL SCREEN PAINT BOX INCLUDING: * VERTICLE AND HORIZONTAL ADJUSTMENT * RAPID FILL CIRCLES ETC *FULL 16 COLOUR PALETTE * KEYBOARD, JOYSTICK OR LIGHTPEN CONTROL *SAVE SPRITES, CHARACTERS AND MULTI COLOUR SCREENS FOR USE IN YOUR OWN PROGRAMS * LOAD PREVIOUSLY SAVED SPRITES, CHARACTERS AND MULTI-COLOUR SCREENS FOR ALTERATIONS BI EFX GVRON ART STAR GYRON ART STAR KEYBOARD PODE MULTI COLOUR PAINT BOX This fun package comes complete with full instruction manual & protective case, and is available on disk or cassette for the Commodore 64. SPRITE EDITOR CHARACTER EDITOR Gyron Software Mersal 01 472 5567 P.O. BOX 194, MANOR PARK, LONDON E12 60L Sold according to Gyron Software terms of trading copies of which are available on request "


"Now after the gloryofgold enter mosons SUPER TEST PISTOL SHOOTING SPRING BOARD DIVING TUG O' WAR GIANT SLALOM CYCLING ROWING PENALTIES SKI JUMP SPECTRUM48k COMMODORE64 AMSTRAD 6-9,5 7.95 3.95 na poloer Ocean Ter Ocean Software is available from selected branches of WOOLIVORTH, WHSMITH, Saab Sonn Menzies , LASKYS, Rumbelows. COMET Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Ocean Software Ocean House 6 Central Street Manchester. M2 5NS Telephone 061 832 6633. Telex 669977 Oceans G "

