"95p FEBRUARY 1986 S$4.60 Dm6 285pta I COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES TUITO EXCLUSIVE PREVIEW THE MAXGAME FREE BOOK OF GAMES LISTINGS FOR SPECTRUM,C64,BBC, ATARI, AMSTRAD, QL, WIN OUR BACK TO THE FUTURE VIDEO CAMERA WIN: BLADE RUNNER'S COLOUR TV!/WIN: AMERICAN FOOTBALL KIT ROBOT MESSIAH MAPPED/BECOME A FLEET STREET EDITOR/WIN: KORONIS RIFT "


"TOMMANDE Spectrum-.95 Commodore 64/128.95 (cass)  14.95 (disc) Amstrad.95 (cass)  14.95 (disc) BBC-.95 (cass)  14.95 (disc) CRATHI quality an in the Galluphis, it's The 'Official' home version of the smash-hit No. 1 arcade game. Armed with a sub-machine gun and a pocketful of grenades, you face overwhelming odds in this desperate death-or-glory bid to destroy the enemy fortress amazing!\" Superb graphics, quality animation and some of the fastest action yet on any home micro Crash, Jan' 86. No wonder it went straight to No 1 in the Gallup' sales chart. \"If you want a game, then look no further than this, it's an 86 "


"WILS Spectrum- 6.95 Commodore 64/128.95 (cass)  12.95 (disc) Amstrad- 8.95 (cass) .95 (disc) **** to CRASH Fast-action, theme park excitement comes home, Experience the thrill of the stomach-churning 'Big Dipper' and the neck-wrenching, motion of the mind-spinning waltzers. Hold onto your hat on the log-flume and join the fearless band who dare to ride the terror of the 'Ghost Train'. Another 'Smash' from Elite, \"This is everything a game should be, totally unpretentious and tremendous fun to play\" -Crash, Jan' 86. \"Thigher Smashain and join the fealispinning Big Dipper Smas ELE. Elite Systems, Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, England. Tel: (0922) 59165 Consumer Hotline\" "


"TIT BE THIS ISSUE  This month's C+VG has MAX-imum impact. Not only has it got a totally FREE 32 page book of games but it also features a preview of Quicksilva's new game based on the exploits of that TV hero Max Headroom. There's also a chance to win some Max goodies. We've also got some great prizes up for grabs in competitions based on Gyroscope, Koronis Rift, Bladerunner, Super Bowl and Back to the Future. Do you produce a computer-related magazine at your school or club? If so, don't miss out on the competition based on Mirrorsoft's Fleet Street Editor. It could be your chance to hit the headlines. There's also a spot of magic among the regular features. We meet the world's one and only Micro Magician. And just for good measure we've got a map of Robot Messiah If you're in need of salvation from Alphabatim's new game. MAX HEADROOM/P42 GYROSCOPE/P37 EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John DESIGN Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Paul Coppins Steve Donoghue Jim Douglas AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeley SOFTWARE CONSULTANT Tony Takoushi PUBLICITY Marcus Rich ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Louise Matthews ADVERTISEMENT EXECUTIVE Mike Corr PRODUCTION ASSISTANT Melanie Paulo PUBLISHER Rita Lewis COVER John Higgins COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES POSTAL SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE By using the special Postal Subscription Service, copies of COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES can be mailed direct from our offices each month to any address throughout the world. All subscription applications should be sent for processing to COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES (Subscription Department), Competition House, Farmdon Road, Market Harborough, Leicestershire All orders should include the appropriate remittance, made payable to COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES. Annual subscription rates (12 issues): UK and Eire . Additional service information, including individual overseas airmail rates, available upon request. Circulation Department: EMAP National Publications. Published and distributed by EMAP National Publications Ltd. Printed by Severn Valley Press. Typeset by In-Step Ltd. ... and the Bug Hunters Jerry Paris EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222 THE BUGHUNTERS/62 C+UG TOP 30 CHARTS PAGE 64 Yi "


"FEATURES I DOTIE QUI PAGE 37 KORONIS RIFT/GYROSCOPE COMPETITIONS 40 FLEET STREET EDITOR COMPETITION 42 MAX HEADROOM/PREVIEW AND COMPETITION PIONEER 45 IDEAS CENTRAL PSL WARRIOR BLADERUNNER — WIN A MONITOR WIZARD OF THE MICRO 58 ROBOT MESSIAH MAP 62 DEAR BUGHUNTERS DEMA TOP 30 SOFTWARE CHARTS SUPER BOWL COMPETITION ADVENTURE NEWS 70 ADVENTURE HELPLINE 73 ADVENTURE REVIEWS ADVENTURE CREATORS 85 BACK TO THE FUTURE COMPETITION 87 FOOTBALL QUICK QUIZ COMPETITION 88 HALL OF FAME/HOT SHOTS 94 CHIMERA DIARY PART TWO ESTUFFING BOWL OF A BELLOU. 96 MAILBAG NEXT MONTH NEWS + REVIEWS 8 NEWS  Demented demons hit the headlines with System 3's new game, Twister. Tony Takoushi lifts the lid on a new game for the Atari — Party Quiz. A Trivial Pursuit game with over 2,000 questions. 14 end of a Pi see exits parking lots REVIEWS  Sweevo's World, the cartoon-style caper from Gargoyle, is C+VG's Game of the Month. The C+VG review team have gone Wild West crazy this month with a round-up the best shoot-out games for your micro FEBRUARY REVIEWS/14 50 ARCADE ACTION "


"SABOTEUR! DURELL software getting harder SI 3489022) SPECTRUM AMSTRAD R.R.P. .95 DURELL sales dept., Castle Lodge, Castle Green, Taunton TA14AB "


"YOUR MICRO NEEDS GREMLIN!! .95 OF DESTINY GULLWING FALCON C16 SWORD OF DESTINY C16 The ultimate defender. The lone saviour of your planet's destiny. Can you master the Gullwing Falcon and put to flight the invading space pirates. Pilot your awesome craft through waves of attackers, making full use of the Desert of Pillars, blasting your way to glorious victory. Armed only with the magical sword, the lost soul of Kelok must overcome the horrors of the eerie Abyss of Death and reclaim the heart of this brave warrior stolen from the battlefield by Xorphas the evil warlock. C16 CLASSICS PETALS ARGON AWARS OF DOT  A Gremlin Graphics 4HITS FOR THE COMMODORECI6 PLUS4 .95 12 Gras C16/Plus 4 C16 CLASSICS C16 KUNG FU KID C16 JETBRIX The years finest compilation of C16 spectaculars. An outstanding collection of games that have made their mark on their own but as a collection provide unbeatable value for money. Action packed martial arts spectacular the like of which has yet to be seen on the Commodore 16. Mind your head it's raining bricks! Watch your airspace the walls are taking over. You've got to be fast on the move, quick to the fire button to dodge this aerial assault and blast them to bits before they eventually overtake you. Real hovva bovval KINGOFTHERINO ARGON'S LEVEL .95 .95 Atari 48K Atani 48K ZONE X Atari KING OF THE RING Atari XARGON'S REVENGE C16 The age of technology makes its demands, nuclear energy opens new horizons, but more and more plutonium waste is ever generated, however can it be made safe? Government storage tanks are full so they've resorted to disused mineshifts. But mankind breeds its own subversives, bent on destruction, who attempt to seize plutonium from one such shaft. The theft went badly wrong leaving this awesome material scattered around emitting its deadly radiation. Someone must put their life at risk before this tragic disaster becomes an awful reality. Not merely a boxing game, a complete campaign of action to take your man to the very top world championship. Guide your fighter from fresh faced novice through his programme of training and fight preparation for every contest. Instruct him in tactics with \"between rounds\" comments. Be his mentor in carefully selecting the next opponent match your man carefully. Finally the big chance the world championship. Defeated and broken the warriors of Xargon have regrouped and reformed. Infiltrators have alerted them of your horrific plan for their total destruction and now strengthened by the knowledge and experience of terrifying defeat they lie in wait to take their revenge on your invading armies. Atari C167 Plus 4 .95 .95 C16 CLASSICS Gremlin Graphics Software Limited Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423 "


"* NEWS superzapper recharged on level 42. I gave in and answered the door. It was my American cousin, come to show me his latest game. \"Howdy TT, I just came on over with my two sons to show you my new game, Party Quiz.\" \"Party Quiz?\" Twenty minutes later I had got into the swing of Party Quiz and was loving every minute of it. Maybe I will sleep tonight... I am always on the look out for new and exciting games for all you Hot Gossip fans and this month I've got what is probably the ultimate Trivia micro game. Party Quiz is for Commodore Watch out for Uridium the latest stylish shoot-out from Paradroid author Andrew Braybrook. Hewson Consultants promise super-fast scrolling and authentically addictive action packed with Andrew's neat graphics and super sonics. Here's just a glimpse of the game. More next issue. On the Spectrum there's Four Minutes to Midnight, Cuddles, Quann Tulla, Ice Station Zero, In Search of Angels and Faerie. Quann Tulla, Ice Station Zero and Faerie are available for the Commodore 64 and Amstrad. Word of Power, Supreme Master of Unarmed Combat. They live only to help others resist the evil that infests the world. Seeing that you were alone and needed care, the monks took you in and you became an acolyte at the Temple of the Rock. Nothing was made of the strange birthmark, shaped like a crown which you carry on your thigh, 14570 URIDIUM There must be thousands of you games addicts out there who've become caught up in some marathon playing sessions. But have you beaten 24 hours non-stop? Well, that was that 14-year-old Bristol schoolboy Alan Tuckett and two friends achieved recently — and in the process raised around  for famine relief in Ethiopia. Joining Andrew for the games playing were Stephen Davies, 14, and Paul Gamlin. The games the boys played included Castle Quest, Alien 8 and Revs on the BBC. The computer stood up well to the continual use but, said Andrew: \"It did get a bit hot.\" Take a sneak peek at Probe's new Basildon Bond game starring a computerised version of zany comedy star Russ Abbot. As you can see, the game is set in a TV studio and features other Abbot characters like Cooperman and Blunderwoman. Watch for C+VG for more details. ODOZOS | YOYU616 IN A LARGE YPY REAO FEREXAYROC STIRE: 3688288 28BERBESYEROS = Softsel and Infocom have come together to produce a special Christmas promotion announcing tremendous reductions on some of the most popular games. The promotion of the 'Infocom Classics' is scheduled to begin mid November and will run through the duration of the Christmas period. Games to be featur are Deadline, Hitch Hin Guide to the Galaxy Planetfall, Seastalker and Zork/ all of which run on the most popular machines. The reductions on the adventure games are substantial. The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy, which has been totally re-packaged, will drop to a recommended retail price of .95. Deadline, Planetfall, Seastalker and Zork I are all coming down by between .00 and .00 to .95 each. The machines catered for in the promotion are the new Amstrad CP/M, Apple II, Apricot, Atari 800 and 520 ST, Commodore 64 (128), Macintosh and IBM. The Way of the Tiger is the first of a series of text and graphic adventures from Gremlin Graphics this year based on the fighting fantasy novels of the same name. The story begins of the magical world of Orb where there lies the mystical Island of Tranquil Dreams. Many years have passed since the time when, as an infant, you first saw its golden shores and emerald rice fields. A servant brought you, braving the distant leagues of the ocean from lands to which you have never returned. Your loyal servant laid you at the steps of the Temple of the Rock, praying that the monks would care for you, for she was frail and dying of a hideous curse. Monks have lived on the island for centuries, dedicated to the worship of their God, Kwon, He who speaks the Holy Demons are a girl's best friend at least for Twister, the evil star of System 3 Software's new game. And she'll haunt your dreams unless you manage to destroy her. Twister has already got quite a reputation based on the fuss at the PCW show in September when System 3 boss Mark Cale hired three scantily-clad dancers to publicise the game by prancing around his stand several times a day. The end result was they were banned. After the never-ending delays in the launching of System 3's International Karate, many thought that Twister was just a figment of Cale's imagination. But not so. The game actually exists and remarkably good it is with excellent graphics and good game play. The game was originally called Twister, Mother of Harlots. But, after accusations of \"bad taste\", it's now just Twister. Set inside the nightmare world of a twisted brain, BY TONY TAKOUSHI My hand began to shake as ! mopped my brow clean of salty sweat. The room slowly started to spin around me and I felt the walls start to close in. I craved a joystick and video screen. I HAD TO HAVE THEM! It had begun. I knew there would be no sleep for me that night unless I gave in to my craving... So I fired up the Tempest and I Robot machines and settled down to a mega-zapping session. I had barely started to play when the front door bell rang... \"No,\" moaned as my Eighth Day Software's Games Without Frontiers range of adventures are now available for the following machines, priced .50 each. 8 "


"64 and Atari micros. Suncom, an American company, is better known for its joysticks than its games. Do not be mislead, Suncom has incorporated the best of both worlds and produced a game that features novel, exciting game elements. Party Quiz is for one to four players and closely follow the Trivia mould. But what makes this Trivia derivative special? It is played with joysticks. The game pack comes with four joysticks (Quick Response Controllers), which are plugged into an interface box which in turn is plugged into two joystick ports via an interface cable. There are also two floppy discs and an instruction manual included. One disc is the program disc, the other is a question disk. You start the game with an options screen. Here you can choose the number of players (1-4), the response time to answer the question (3,4,5 or 10 seconds) and the number of question rounds to be attempted for the game (5,8,12,16 or 20). You can also determine the type of game to be played, either Competitive or Social. Competitive is exactly that, each player competes to answer a question before another does. I preferred Social, here all players can answer and score if they get a question right. For all you brain boxes there is also a handicap feature. If this is used, a player only gets half the normal response time to answer a question. Once the options have been set you go to the play screen. This is divided into four sections, at the bottom of the screen a time bar counts down the answer time and decreasing score. Phew! Each round has ten questions and when a question appears a choice of either four (multiple choice) or two answers is given to choose from. The first player to press the right button on their PAUSED PAUSED joystick get the points. The quicker you press the more points you get! Because of the two answer formats, Multiple choice and True/False, two scores are given, 1000 for Multiple Choice and 500 for True/False (well, you do have a 50/50 chance). If the player gets the question right, a little tune is played, if wrong, a naughty bleep is heard. If any of you sneaks try the cheat then you will suffer, if a button is pressed before the question appears on the screen, your score is replaced with the word \"CHEAT\". (Ha, ha, — that will teach you). For those precious little moments like answering the front door or popping off to the loo, there is a pause mode, activated by the space bar. To keep you on your toes there is a real nerve jangler called the Lightening Round. These happen on rounds 4,7,11,15 and 19 (if you play all twenty rounds). Here each player has to answer ten questions in twenty seconds, this is real pressure cooker stuff, believe me. My friends have nicknamed me Jacques Costeau because I am so cool under pressure, but this section ruffled even me. To keep everyone in the picture a report card is shown every two rounds with each player's score and various funny comments. What does TRY CHEATING mean? The package has 2,500 questions covering History, Arts, Science, Geography, Sports and Entertainments. It must be said that it is an American package and many questions reflect this just what are the ZIP codes for Utah? — but it really is fun because everyone stands the same chance of getting the answer wrong! A special editor disk is available for the Atari version that allows the question disk to be edited for British questions and answers. Party Quiz is not cheap at , but it is probably the most luxurious and comprehensive version on disk. So all you Commodore and Atari owners looking for a fun family game that does not tie everyone to the keyboard, go for this package. Party Quiz is available from Software Express in Birmingham or most software retailers. Hold on to your hats! That all time classic, Star Raiders, is set to make a come back! Star Raiders II should be with us quite soon. A special version was on show to a select few at the Comdex show in Las Vegas in December. It looks HOT! It will be initially released for the Commodore 64 and Atari ST micros. the idea behind the game is Twister will cost you .50 Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, to destroy the evil at its in the shops — but if you want London ECIR 3AU. centre. You do this by to save some cash, read on. Twister will be available on zapping your way through There're two ways you can cassette for the Spectrum, five screens full of demons, do this. If you send the token Amstrad, 064/128, Atari and ghoulies, devils, monsters. on this page, together with a BBC. Everything about Twister cheque or postal order for . is impressive — from the But if you want to wait until TWISTER strategy behind the game, you get your hands on the animation and graphics. March issue of C+VG you Although there were could save another  by minor changes to be made cutting out the second token. to the Copy sent to C+VG Just send the two tokens Twister is shaping up to with a cheque or postal order be the best System 3 game for  to Computer and Video COUPON NO.1 yet. Games, Twister Offer, Priory SOME MISTAKE SURELY? So, did you spot last issue's deliberate mistakes? C+VG/SYSTEM 3 You must have spotted that the Bug Hunters strip TWISTER OFFER had two pages transposed. Look, I know it was a weird story but it was supposed to make sense. Name... Despite all precautions like actually writing the page numbers on the artwork SOMEONE — who'll Address ... be getting a visit from Big Red managed to get them around the wrong. So if you'd all like to turn to page 120 of January's issue it should really be page 121 So you'll have to read it backwards. I enclose a cheque/PO for Right?! You just can't get the staff these days... Bodge No. 2: On the contents page three was an enormous white space above the Combat Zone heading. Now our spies tell us it was a Green team I enclose ........... ..tokens member who swiped the missing item. But if you can tell us just what should've been in that gap you could win yourself a t-shirt. The best Machine owned.. suggestion will get a visit from Big Red. "


"This NEI All the 232 KNIGHT RIDER Your driving skills will be driven to the limit in this simulation of the hit T.V. series. Just you and a car named «KITT» — the ultimate driving team! THE Warrior robots in disguise. Earth has been invaded by powerful robots from the planet Cybertron. Transform into the role of the heroic autobots (Jazz, Hound, Mirage and Optimus Prime) in their deadly battle with the evil decepticons. TRANSFORMERS More than meets SPEC the eye! JOLA COMMC AMS Ocean House  6 Central Street  Manchester  Mi Ocean Software is available from selected branches of: Boole WHSMITH, John Menzies , WOOLWORTH, "


"V YEAR TJ from a RAMBO FIRST BLOOD\"PARTI The box-office smash hits your screen with all the high-energy drama that only Rambo can create. Take the role of Sylvester Stallone in the explosive all-action battle scenes. 2053 39 105 18 Become the hunter and the hunted in this breathtaking simulation of the famous film and TV series with Hyperthrust feature, helicopter attacks and daring rescue attempts that only the man and machine combination of CTRUM Street Hawk can survive. Don't miss itburn tread on the streets! ODORE 64 STRAD LETREET 3.95  5NS . Telephone 061-832 6633 . Telex 669977 LASKYS, Rumbelows.Greens. Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Trade enquiries welcome. "


"SCOOBY the Castle ulusteru Scooby DOO «Knoc evers $6.98 LOMM95 SI PERSAT! Seconds out for the challenge of the season, guess this month's mystery Microgamer and prize! you too could win a super | «My two top contenders» 1. Scooby Doo by Elite In the red corner we have Scooby Doo-a real heavyweight when it comes to catching criminals, ghosts and other things that go bump in the night. 2. Super Sleuth by Gremlin Graphics And in the blue corner another Super Sleuth. Which one will come out tops? Hard to say, Harry, but both are champs in my book. I THORN EMI Computer Software International Micro Software Division "


"\"Take a ringside seat and sample the excitement\" RUMPY GUMPHREYHANCER DUP CO2 lochdad SUPERSLEUTH MINI MIOFFICE by New Generation This fighter doesn't use his fists, man, but everything else in sight! Cannons, boulders, boomerangs and bombs all come in handy for Cliff who has to do something to stop the bandit shooting up the canyon. Spectrum 48K .95 by Gremlin Graphics Keep your eye on the clock and look sharp! All your best moves have to be executed on time or you're in big trouble. Catch the shop thieves and above all keep the Manager happy my motto exactly! Spectrum 48K .95 by Database Comprising word processor for writing letters and reports, a database for storing addresses, and a spreadsheet for storing complicated numbers. Pretty high-powered stuff, don't you think? BBC .95 MAD DOCTOR kout games for fans where' MARSPORT by Creative Sparks As Mad Doctor, in this blood-curdingly evil game, the player must create new life out of freshly killed body parts. If he arouses the villagers' suspicions, they'll kill him. A light touch on the scalpel is required. Commodore 64 .95 ---Win COOBY SIPASIRIT COOBY by Gargoyle Games Box your way out of this one! The World needs a Champion (what about me?) Yes, but you can be the champ here. That is if you sneak the defence plans from the doomed city and reinforce the force sphere. Not easy, with aliens attacking your every move. Spectrum 48K and Amstrad .95 by Elite Slippery customers throw in the towel when this ace detective is around. With your help he can track down and solve the mystery that haunts his friends. Join the elite band and pit your wits against the spooks. Spectrum 48K .95 Commodore 64 .95 Amstrad .95 DYNAMITE Spot this month's mystery microgamer and win a fantastic prize. Ten 2-pack program prizes must be won plus single game prizes for the first 100 runners up. If you think you now the answer, send this coupon to us, no later than 14 December 1985. The first ten correct entries will each receive SCOOBY DOO and SUPER SLEUTH. 100 runners up will each receive a super game for their machine type. by Mirrorsoft Count to ten and concentrate. You think you can win on points? Well I tell you this game will have you reeling! He may not be a Jumbo or a Bonecrusher, but one thing is certain, Dynamite Dan is hard to beat. Spectrum 48K .95 Amstrad and Commodore 64 .95 SPARKLERS SPECIAL I say the Mystery Microgamer is: by Sparklers A fist full of games at a fantastic price. And nobody is pulling punches here. These games really are the greatest anyone who disagrees will have me to reckon with! Not to mention Slurpy, Orc Attack, River Rescue and Black Hawk. Spectrum 48K and Commodore 64 4 games for .50 \"Games to keep you on your toes\". Send me your latest full list of software programs. Name Machine Address Machine Address ARROMS D | \"Non-stop thrills from start to finish' by Database These guys can sure move. But their game is a non-contact sport, if you get my drift. You can try your hand at formation flying, looping the loop and all the other tricks. Duck, dive, dodge, swerve and break only don't hit anyone here. Versions for most machines. Cassette .95 Disk .95 & .95 WHO DARES _Postcode CVG4 Send to: THORN EMI Computer Software Mystery Microgamer Competition, Thomson House, 296 Farnborough Road, Farnborough, Hants GU14 7NU WINS Last month's Mystery Microgamer was Ian McCaskill. Prizes are on their way SPOT THE BALL by Creative Sparks Two sports classics in one pack, but you only play one at a time, OK? There's soccer and snooker. Both need skill and timing as well as a joystick and 32K ram. Go to it! Atari 32K .95 by Alligata Only the brave survive (and the lucky). Upper cuts and left hooks are no good to you here. You need to find the ammunition dumps to knock the stuffing out of the enemy and free your friends. Commodore 64 .95 Amstrad, Spectrum and Commodore 128 | versions available soon. Prizewinners Andrew James, Swansea Bobby Earl Birkenhead Mark Johnson, Knottingley Stephen Hirst, Castleford Barry Cheeseman, Swindon Graham Langlands, Dundee Tim Walter, Bristol Paul Cooke, Blackpool Robert Wooley, Peterborough John Baxter, Coventry All games featured above are available from Laskys, WH Smith and other good software stores. "


"C+VG FEB software REVIEHS1 SWEEVO'S WORLD GRAPHICS Are they really mind-blowing 3D technicolour visions like the adverts tell you or does it look like someone has simply scribbled on the screen with a magic marker? Does the game sound like a Duran Duran LP played at half speed? Or does the noise from your micro knock you half way across the room? The C+VG review team don't play games with their ears blocked up you know! VALUE Is the game really worth all those pennies? Will the novelty last? Is it worth going without C+VG for a month because your parents won't come up with the extra pocket money? Or could YOU write a better game?  Machine: Spectrum Amstrad  Supplier: Gargoyle Games Price: .95 Could this be the world's first slapstick computer game? Well, maybe. But one thing is for sure. Sweevo is a character who will bring a smile to the face of even the most jaded games player. Sweevo or Self Willed Extreme Environment Vocational Organism — has been given the job of cleaning up a problem planet called Khutz Folly. It's an old planet Created b. Baron Knutz and his wife Hazel. The Baron indulged in some odd genetic experiments and the results of this dabbling have now completely overrun the planet. Sweevo's job is simply to tidy up the planet. He has to discover just how to use the objects he discovers on the planet — and what effect they have on the creatures. Each of the deadly guardians of Knutz Folly have a special weakness which our hero has to discover and make use of to get rid of them? Sweevo looks most unlike a robot or android. He looks a bit like William Wobbler — with a long neck and a winning grin. The rooms he has to explore are full of deadly fruit. Yes, fruit. Don't walk into them or you'll injure poor old Sweevo. He's allowed three falls before he loses a life. You begin the game with five. The rooms are drawn in Ultimate 3D style. Each contains objects which may or may not be useful. Some can be collected and used. You'll come At the end of each game you across the Word \"BOO' in get a percentage rating — plus various locations. Collect this a list of the things you have or and you can say BOO to the haven't collected/done and a Goose which lays the Golden comment about the level of Egg and gives you more energy! your performance. Your current energy rating is Sweevo's World is a truly indicated by a 'face\" at the top different and atmospheric game. of the screen which begins with And it has built in humour. Lots a big grin which gradually turns of nice touches that will keep to a grimace as you lose energy you and Sweevo on your toes by bumping into things. One for hours. bump to many and it turns into Lots of baffling puzzles and a skull. amusing jokes. Watch out for the air vents Could we be witnessing the which blast you back to another birth of a cult character here? level. But some times they can Only time will tell. But in the come in useful if you've done meantime do yourself a favour what you came to do. by grabbing a copy of Sweevo's You can begin the game at World as soon as you see one. any one of four starting points. You won't regret it. We Simply select which one you guarantee it. want at the start of each game. Sweevo sits and waits until  Graphics you've made your choice and Sound then heads for a hole and parachutes through using his  Value trusty umbrella.  Playability Oroon PLAYABILITY Will you be playing until the early hours of the morning as you attempt to complete just one more screen? Or do you fall asleep the minute the intro screen appears? .....THE FUNNIEST CARTOON ADVENTURE YOU'LL EVER TAKE PART IN....\" BLITZ GAME > DUCH BLITZ GAME C+VG's way of telling you that the game must not be missed! INTERNATION/ INAL KARA BLITZ GAME Machine: Spectrum Supplier: System 3 Price: .50 backgrounds and terrific speech. If you already have The Fist this may not be on your list. However, I've got both and play them equally.  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability Well, it's finally here, after much singing and dancing (PCW Show). Will it topple Exploding Fist as Karate champ or not. Let's compare the two. Exploding Fist characters are nicely drawn and excellently animated. However, although not bad, the animation and graphics are not quite up to that standard. The backgrounds on Fist were colourful and ornamental, but on International Karate they are colourful, recognisable and superb. The gameplay on Fist was good with only one life, whereas with International Karate it is the best of three fights on each round and after each round a bonus screen can be attempted which consists of, on the first bonus screen, a wood block smashing attempt with bonus points for each block smashed and, on the second bonus screen, smashing or avoiding flying objects. Sound on the Fist was limited to spot effects which were good but sparse, International Karate boasts great spot effects, music and excellent clear speech which announces the start, the scores and the results of the contest (a bit like Jimmy Hill). Altogether the package is a winner with its international STARTS HERE "


"C+VG FEB software REVIEWS 2 COMMANDO Y RAMBO  Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Elite and Ocean Price: .95 BLITZ GAME you are invincible. Unlike Rambo, facing by hitting the space bar. with his depleting energy, you Lorries, trucks, mortars, have only to be shot once and motorbikes and a lot more bar your next life takes over. your way but still you soldier There are five stages to on. complete, getting increasingly Altogether a maddening, difficult as you go. You can only totally addictive arcade copy shoot as fast as your finger can which definitely makes Rambo hit the fire button so prepare for look like Mr Puniverse. No doubt aches and pains. about it! Although you don't have as large an arsenal as Rambo, you Rambo Commando do have one little trick up your sleeve ... grenades.  Graphics 8 However, these can run out. Sound Fear not, supplies can be found .Value all along the way. These are  Playability fired in the direction you are COCO GO TRANSFORMERS Machine: CBM 64/Spectrum Supplier: Ocean Price: .95 (Spectrum) .95 (CBM 64) Those robots in disguise finally make it to the screen of your computer thanks to Denton Designs. You have to help the five remaining Autobots the goodies battle the evil Decepticons the baddies in a do or die battle for the future of Earth. The Autobots are suffering an energy crisis and have to fly around and run around a structure which looks a bit like an oil refinery in search of the four bits of the Autobot Energon Cube and transporting them back to Autobot Centre where they will end the crisis. The Decepticons will try to steal these cubes which are scattered far and wide among the girders and walkways of the game. You control five Autobots, Optimus Prime, Hound, Jazz, Mirage and Bumblebee. Each has varying energy, firepower and strength levels. You have to select the right Autobot to collect the various parts of the cube. It's no good sending the relatively weak Bumblebee off on a long search when you should really send tough old Optimus. They either shoot at you or make kamikaze dives into your shields weakening them until your Autobot is destroyed. You can't rebuild your Autobots but the evil Decepticons have perfected the art of robo-cloning so there's no end to them! You can give your autobots a zap of life giving energy by dashing into the nearest Defence Pod. These podszap your energy, firepower and shield levels back up to battle status and MUST be used if you are to succeed. The Autobots can transform into their earthly disguise as trucks and sports cars etc but this seems more of a frill than a real game tactic. The Decepticons still attack you whatever you look like! Also you can race along a girder and crash off the end before you've had a chance to change back to an Autobot all too easily. Which brings us back to controlling the game. This is the most difficult part of the whole game. It'll take you some time to get used to the ultra-sensitive controls and become aware of what you can run/fly through without being destroyed. Graphics aren't bad and the Transformers' theme tune is copied very neatly. Not a brilliant game -but not a terrible one either. Play a friend's copy first. Graphics  Sound Value Playability Rugged, athletic, mean, butch, offensive. That's Rambo Ocean's muscular little sprite is bound for big bucks. The idea is for Rambo to rescue his buddies somewhere in a screen jungle littered with little animated soldiers. His first mission is to photograph the prison camp where Vietnam Po.Ws are being held. Rambo, being the hero he is, just seems to get the urge to rescue all and sundry Rambo is armed at first with only a bow and arrow (also the famous exploding war head arrow!) and a knife. To make sure he's not noticed by the opposition, he must try not to use any noisy weapons. Along the way he can find machine guns and rocket launchers lying redundant in the fields which he can use to good effect. He then has to find a helicopter and rescue his buddies. All pretty straight-forward, huh? Not really There are a lot of elements of Commando in this arcade adventure, but not enough real gameplay to be addictive enough. However, Commando by Elite is a different kettle of fish altogether. This sticks closely to the arcade game and has great music by that Commodore maestro Rob Hubbard (Monty on the Run music) your little G.I. Joe is beautifully animated and looks really rough and tough. This doesn't mean that .1!3.725.1. 213 TOMAHAWK accurate background work that has obviously gone into this excellent program. Tomahawk is an extremely well put together piece of software. Impressively presented and documented. And, on top of all that, it's got real atmosphere — something that's hard to get into a game. That's if you should really describe it as a game. Somehow it seems all too inadequate ... Tomahawk is destined to become a classic. BLITZ GAME Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Digital Integration Price: .95 What's the toughest helicopter around? Blue Thunder? Airwolf? No. The Apache Advanced Attack Helicopter is the king of the skies. It can climb 1400 feet in just a minute. It carries enough weapons to sink at least a couple of battleships. And it's REAL. You may never get a chance to fly the real thing but Digital Integration can put you in the hot seat if you own a simple Spectrum. The long awaited follow-up to their Fighter Pilot flight simulation is a complex and highly detailed representation of what it's like to fly one of these hi-tech fighting machines. The screen display shows a heads-up view of the terrain you fly over, plus an impressive range of instrumentation. Fortunately you don't really need to keep an eye on these all the time. There are audio alert signals which call your attention to the gauges when they need it. Graphics for the landscape are draw vector graphic style and — despite that limitation are very accurate. You can fly over mountain ranges, trees, buildings, military installations and the ever present enemy. Controls are extremely responsive. You can mix keyboard and joystick and there's a two joystick option for the really experienced flyer. It's difficult to do justice to the amount of detail and Graphics Sound Value Playability non ON 320 BANGET SCORE "


"MASTER OF THE ART..... SPECTRUM 48K 6 Wimmm..mmmmm THE DCP ART STUDIO '.'.'.'. RAINBIRD APEDUCQBOQN SCGOWAEE CAT *** TE CHTETE STATUS EMCEL 2B AT LAST A SPECTRUM GRAPHICS PACKAGE THAT IS FUN AND EASY TO USE. THE OCP ART STUDIO CONTAINS EVERY FEATURE YOU WILL NEED TO CREATE BEAUTIFUL ILLUSTRATIONS. IT WORKS WITH THE AMX MOUSE FOR EVEN GREATER EASE AND OUR HARD COPY OFFER MEANS YOU CAN HANG YOUR MASTERPIECE ON THE WALL DO IT ALL CREATE AN IMAGE. SHRINK IT, EXPAND IT, MOVE IT, ROTATE, COPY IT, COLOUR IT, SPRAY ON A PATTERN OR SHADE. MAKE ELASTIC LINES, TRIANGLES, RECTANGLES, CIRCLES STRETCH AND MANIPULATE. ADD TEXT OR CHARACTERS, UP, DOWN, SIDEWAYS-ANY SIZE OR PROPORTION. ZOOM IN TO DRAW IN FINE DETAIL. SHRINK THE WHOLE PICTURE TO ADD BACKGROUND. Pull down menus. * Icon driven. SINCLAIR USER CLASSIC THE OCP ART STUDIO .95 Keyboard, joystick, mouse control. Dot matrix printer dumps, 5 sizes \"An extremely powerfull utility which should be of use to OR and grey scale up to 80 columns. professional artists and designers as well as the home user\" EXTENDED ART STUDIO .95 Supports 17 printer interfaces. For use with disc or microdrive only, and compatible 16 pens, 8 sprays and 16 brushes. with K DOS and SP DOS disc interfaces (supplied on 32 user-redefinable texture fills. Wash texture. * Undo facility. cassette). Includes disc and microdrive operating Snap facility. Pixel edit systems, screen compression programme, four extra Cut, paste, turn, enlarge, reduce. fonts and Kempston mouse compatibility (in addition to Magnify (3 levels) pan and zoom. AMX). (Available Mail Order Only) Text. 9 sizes, 2 directions, bold. Font editor with invert, rotate flip, FOR 48K ZX SPECTRUM clear, capture from window. Elastic line, triangle, rectangle. Low cost full colour prints offer. Upgrade offer. Mouse offer. RAINBIRD TM THE DOP ART STUDIO MAKE CHEQUES OR P.O. PAYABLE TO RAINBIRD SOFTWARE BARCLAYCARD AND ACCESS ORDERS TEL: 01-240-8837 (24 HOURS) BANEIRO is a division of British Telecommunications ple. RAINBIRD is a division of British Telecommunications plc. LONDON WC2H 9DL TEL: 01-240-8838 RAINBIRD SOFTWARE BRITISH TELECOM WELLINGTON HOUSE UPPER ST MARTIN'S LANE "


"There's never been a better reason for looking forward to Winter! WINTER GAMES Screens from Commodore 64 version of game COMMODORE 64/128 CASSETTE .95 DISK .95 Available Soon for Spectrum 48K & Amstrad STYULIERU TOTAL L LURUSH CA SEL Titles available NOW! STRAD ASSETTE AMSTRAD DISK ATARI CBM 64 CASSETTE CBM 64 DISK SPECTRUM CASSETTE Winter Game Summer Games Summer Gamest Impossible Mission, Pitstop IL Breakdance Spectrum versio .95 You've captured the gold in Summer Games and Summer Games II TM now it's on to the Winter Games! And what an incredible setting-a completely realistic winter wonderland featuring six action-packed events. You can compete against your friends or the computer. First choose the country you want to represent. Then it's practice, training and learning a winning strategy for each event. Now the Opening Ceremony and the competition begins. Will you be the one who takes the gold at the Awards Ceremony? The quest for the gold continues... And it's all here the strategy, the challenge, the competition, the art and pageantry of Winter Games! Six Winter Events: Bobsled, Ski Jump, Figure Skating, Free-Style Skating, Hot Dog Aerials and the Biathlon Opening, Closing and Awards Ceremonies complete with National Anthems Compete Against the Computer or Your Friends and Family Unique Joystick Control Requires Timing and Skill One to Eight Players U.S. GOLD) EPYX COMPUTER SOFTWARE "


"C+VG FEB software REVIEHS 3 THUNDERBIRDS Machine: Spectrum C64 Supplier: Firebird Price: .95 Thunderbirds are Go! This maze puzzle game, one of the first in Firebird's new Super Silver range, manages to capture the spirit of Gerry Anderson's classic TV puppet series. You have to help the pilots of Thunderbirds One and Two rescue a couple of archaeologists trapped inside an ancient Egyptian tomb. Being a typical tomb this one is packed with traps, secret doors and deadly nasties. You have to solve the puzzles, beat the traps and save the missing archaeologists before their oxygen runs out. Each screen is a puzzle. You have to move coloured blocks around, using both Thunderbirds to create a pathway to the doomed men as quickly as possible. No mean feat — and you have to look out for fuel along the way. Thunderbird One can move blue blocks, Thunderbird Two moves green blocks. Both craft can move red blocks. You often need to use both craft to solve the puzzles and move on to the next screen. Before take-off you can equip Thunderbird Two with various bits of machinery and gear that HEOLOGISTS ARE TRAPPED IN AN 19. AVINY help in the mission. Each bit of chances of finishing. equipment you take reduces If you come across a screen your starting score. Taking where one of the items in nothing at all reduces your Thunderbird Two's hold will help Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Ultimate Price: .95 Machines: Spectrum Amstrad Supplier: Ultimate  Price: .95 Howdy partners. This is Sheriff Sabreman talking to you from the troubled city of Black Rock. We're having a lot of trouble with a mean bunch of outlaws right now. There's Buffalo Bill, Billy the Kid and a host of other infamous names out to give me and the peaceful folk of Black Rock a tough time. Luckily I've got my trusty sixshooter and my faithful steed Nightshade to help me run these varmints outta town but I'd like you along as parta my posse. Fancy comin' along to help me clean up the town? Then grab this badge and pin it on your Spectrum boy... Take a whole lot of Nightshade, add a couple of \"duck shoot' arcade bonus screens, spice them up with some nice Western graphics and you've got Gunfright. The idea is that as the sheriff of Black Rock you have to get rid of all the baddies inhabiting the town. The locals help you by pointing the way towards the particular baddie you're hunting as you patrol the streets in the guise of Sabreman in a stetson. Once you've found him you have a gunfight. The 3D style screen changes to a 2D heads up view of the baddie you've come across — with a cross hair sight. You have to move the cross hair and draw your gun in time to shoot your opponent down. Each time you wipe out a baddie you get a bounty. Cash which enables you to buy more bullets to go out hunting the next baddie. The price of bullets like petrol varies from time to time so you need all the cash you can get if you're to succeed in cleaning up the town. seek out the outlaws and revenge the town. Pushing the joystick left or right will cause the horse to move in that direction. Keeping it pressed will move the horse from a trot to a gallop. Pushing the stick forward will cause the horse to jump. Shooting is also easily controlled by the stick. The idea is to get the baddies before they get you. They will attack on horseback or when in town a seemingly innocent passer-by will sudenly draw a gun. Fast reaction will be needed to beat him to the draw. The graphics and sound are okay and the game is quite playable. But with Ultimate the hope is for something new and original and for them Outlaws is rather ordinary The townsfolk can be helpful but they do tend to get in the way when you're hunting down the villains. Shoot an innocent bystander and you lose cash. Bump into one and you lose a life. The graphics are identical to Nightshade except for a few Wild West touches to spice them up. Beside the main play area window a colourful wanted poster appears showing you the particular baddie you're looking for. Buffalo Bill is the first and he's pretty easy to gun down. After that you're on you own! Billy the Kid and the rest are pretty tough to kill and your TV could end up riddled with bullet holes. Sound effects aren't up to much though. Gunfright doesn't have the puzzles usually associated with an Ultimate arcade adventure but it is unusually playable. I don't think it'll have the usual lasting appeal however. The packaging also includes a few hints and tips on game play another first for Ultimate! At first I found it difficult to tell which were the baddies and which were the male inhabitants of the town. Then I worked out that the little men jumping up and down and pointing weren't going to shoot me down and were just showing me where the baddie was hiding out. Lots of bounty money was lost before I'd worked this out. Still, if you're after a soupedup version of the ancient old Gunfight arcade game then this is for you. But all the frills and pretty graphics don't make the game worth nearly . Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability What can you say about Outlaws? Nice, glossy packaging, slick artwork and an intriguing storyline printed on the cassette inlay. Well up to Ultimate's normal standards. But what about the game, I hear you cry, thumbing the hammer of your Colt 45 and pointing it in a mean manner at the reviews page. Okay, I give in and spill the beans but you'd better sit down first. Outlaws is really quite ordinary. But first the setting. A town lives under the shadow of an evil gang of outlaws. Nobody dares stand up to them. Months pass and then a man with no name and no past rides into town. It's the Lone Rider. Controlling the Lone Rider and his horse by joystick you must Graphics Sound value . Playability CD 0 CONTINUED FROM PAGE 15 "


"C+VG FEB Software REVIEHS SUPERMAN out — the computer takes over and you get a short animated sequence in which the item is used to your benefit. More fuel can be found inside the tomb. But DON'T move away from a screen once you've discovered some fuel. If you do, it won't be there when you get back. Thunderbirds is a game for the strategy minded games player. If you don't like solving puzzles and just want to zap things, then don't bother picking this up. If you like a challenge and have a few hours to spare, then grab a copy now. Very addictive, long lasting and fun. a trial of strength with one of his worst enemies, Darkseid, an evil tyrant who threatens the entire universe. The game starts off well with two great digitised pictures of Superman and Darkseid. But after that, the graphics are not so hot. The battle rages across a variety of screens ranging from the city streets of Metropolis to Darkseid's subterranean lairs. Superman must rescue the good citizens of Metropolis as they are captured by the super-villian and at the same time both use their superpowers to defeat each other. Darkseid uses his Omega Beam, a mysterious force generated from his eyes, to attack Superman and teleport his victims to his lair. Superman counters these powers with his super-breath, strength and ability to fly. The game can be played either by two people or one player controlling Superman against the computer. Victory is achieved by using up all your opponents strength or once all the citizens have been captured or rescued, the player with the most wins. The best graphics appear on the intermediate screens between the six play levels. The 3D effects of the Man of Steel flying are quite nice. But the main play screens tend to look a little flat. Graphics Sound Value Playability OD ODGO  Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Beyond Price: .95 Is it a bird? Is it a plane. No it's Superman and it's a little bit of a disappointment. The Man of Steel indulges in Graphics Sound Value Playability WEST Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Ariolasoft Price: .95 casssette/.95 disk Big Nose Bill and his gang of outlaws have captured Fort Snake. SIT DOWN AND WOIT You must try to recapture it by making your way through a whole series of Wild West scenes, collecting various objects as you go. The action includes a bank robbery, a shoot-out with the local sheriff, a stagecoach ride and a rodeo and lasooing contest. Various pioneers, indians and cowboys also cross your path from time to time. All standard Wild West type SIT DOWN AND SO ingredients, you're thinking. And you would be right. But a strange dimension is added to the game by three \"sprites'. Quite how these strange little which appear below the screen creatures have turned up in the and give help and advice. For Wild West is not explained but instance: \"It's boring here, let's they appear harmless enough. go,\" or \"Examine skull\" and Wild West is graphically \"Take a Rest.\" excellent. It's up to you which piece of Graphics advice you take. The choices Sound are disclosed by movements of  Value the joystick and pressing the fire button chooses the desired one. Playability Machine CBM 64 Supplier: US Gold Price: .95 Gold Gulch is a tough Wild West town. All the Sheriff has to do is survive until sundown. But there are mean dudes around determined to fill him up with lead. And that means you have to think quick talk fast and move your Colt 45 like greased lightning. We've only seen a preview of this game and it certainly looks like one to keep an eye out for You have to converse with nearly a dozen of the town's most notable characters, for information or co-operation as you try you darndest to maintain law and order in Gold Gulch. They include the wisecracking saloon owner, and various bad characters who talk with their guns. Your performance is judged after each game, regardless of whether you survive or end up in Boot Hill and survival doesn't mean much if the bank gets robbed, the robbers get away, and you accidentally shoot the schoolmarm trying to stop them. But be warned the program contains language that, say the makers, may be unsuitable for children! COCO BELVETHEPLANEERS IN  CONTINUES ON PAGE 21 "


"THE WAY OF THE  4 The Way of the Exploding Fist is virtually beyond criticism technically brilliant and visually absorbing.\" POPULAR COMPUTING WEEKLY Melbourne House's karate simulation explodes on to the Amstrad. This is a great arcade scoring game as well as wonderful family entertainment. In Way of the Exploding Fist, Melbourne House have scored a great hit. J) Become a master of this mysterious ancient art: progress from novice to Tenth Dan and test your strength and discipline. You can control your character with either joystick or keyboard 18 different manoeuvres including blocks, flying kicks, leg sweeps, roundhouse and even somersaults! Challenge the computer, facing opponents of progressively greater skill, or compete with a friend. THE WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST has it all addictive competitive action, dazzling graphic animation and sound. The wait is over you are about to face the challenge of a lifetime! \"Spectacular, startlingly original epic, most televisual gamelhave encountered.\"Daily Mail. \"Quite simply the best program.\" Popular Computing Weekly AMTIX As a sports simulation, this is one of the finest and most realistic we have seen. As an arcade game, it's addictive and pacy. It's clearly destined for the top. SINCLAIR USER ci can't tear myself away from this hit game, a karate contest called The Way of the Exploding Fist. DAILY EXPRESS 1 The graphics made my eyes pop out. Fantastic sound effects, state of the art animation and brilliant game play. One of those games that you can get out time and time again.\" ZZAP By far and away the best sports combat simulation available. Exploding Fist on the Spectrum is the best game. CRASH DIR AVAILABLE FOR THE C64 AND BBC ON DISK AT .95 AND ON CASSETTE FOR AMSTRAD, C64, AND BBC AT .95, SPECTRUM .95. MELBOURNE HOUSE Melbourne House (Publishers) Ltd., Castle Yard House, Castle Yard, Richmond, TW10 6TF. Trade enquiries call 01. 940 6064 Available from selected branches of B .WHSMITH,John Menzies, WOOLWORTH, LASKYS, Rumbelows,Gre Spectrum Shops, and all good software dealers "


"C+VG FEB Software REVIEWS GLADIATOR the fire button selects. You can MERCENARY  Machine: Atari/CBM 64  Supplier: Novagen Price: .99 cassette/.95 disk NO The wait is over Mercenary is here at last. And well worth the wait it is. If you loved the graphics of Elite and also like flight simulations all wrapped up with a spot of zapping and puzzles, this is the game for you. You play the role of a 21st Century mercenary who crash lands on the planet Tharg and must use his brains to survive in this strife-torn world. To help in this difficult task, Benson, a ninth generation computer helps you with a series of scrolling messages, relays messages and status reports. The opposing factions on Tharg are the Players and the Mechanoids. Keeping alive on Tharg will be hard enough in this hostile environment but the ultimate aim is to find a craft and escape the planet. There are also various flying and ground based craft to be used and also a vast subterranean complex to be explored. With excellent graphics, challenging game play, Mercenary is a game to look out for. BERRI the fire button selects. You can choose to use a shield instead of a second weapon. The dagger is placed in your belt and only comes into play if eMachine: Spectrum possible it is your turn to you have thrown or lost one of @Supplier: Domark practice. Select the two player your original hand weapons, option and practice each Joysticks are recommended. Price: .95 movement in turn against a The controls are pretty complex Combat games keep on coming stationary opponent. they have to be as there are So far we've had warriors, One of the skillful arts of the so many moves you can make karate kiliers and championship gladiator was his choice of while fighting It'll take you boxer. But never Gladiators. weapons for a particular fight. some time to work out all the Until now. You are allowed to choose three combinations, so be prepared to Domark's latest release weapons from the armoury of practice. The time you spend dumps you in the bloodstained 45, one for each and and one here will make your enjoyment arena much loved by the Roman for the belt. of the game all the greater rulers. You can try to match the This combat game gets the Life as a slave is fine if weapons to the moves which thumbs up from C&VG! you've no ambition and you can make or to combat Meanwhile, to those who are nowhere much to go, but if those of your opponent = about to die, we salute you you're young and eager to get unfortunately you won't see his on in life you have to try to win weapons until the fight starts. Graphics your freedom any way you can. The hard weapons are Sound That's why you find yourself selected first, using either Value in the arena. joystick or keys, the directions Your training starts with you move to the next weaport while Playability watching the best fighters of the day in the ring. You even have the chance to wager a few copper coins on the outcome of NEWS 8 2EUS each match. The next stage is for you to have a chance to practice the 25 possible blows and thrusts on a stationary target. You can learn to cut and thrust with no danger to yourself. Finally, there are the combat trials with a real opponent. If you work hard practice long hours and use both your strength and intellect you can become the Emperor's champion, a feat equalled by very few. The real incentive is freedom. When you have seen the range of movement that is over impressive. Zorro himself appears as a black silhouette with no features at all. Sad that the man of mystery has become Machine: CBM 64 just a black, jerky blob. The rest  Machine: BBC  Supplier: US Gold of the animation is up to or rather down to — the same  Supplier: Alligata Software Price: .95 cassette/f 14.95 standard.  Price: .95 disc The music is allright but Now you too can follow in the Old film legends don't die nothing spectacular. steps of Daley Thompson without they just resurface as computer Graphics ever leaving the comfort of your games. Such is the fate of that own home. masked master of swordplay Sound Olympic Decathlon, which Zorro. And a sade fate it is.  Value comes on disk, allows you to try Graphically this rather Playability your hand at all ten Decathlon standard platform game is not events: 100m, 400m, 1500m, long jump, shot put, javelin, hurdles, discuss, pole vault and high jump. There is a choice of joystick or keyboard control. If you opt for the keyboard, you must select keys to control your left foot, right foot, and a throw/Jump key. You compete in all the events using a combination of these three movements. Hurdling. long jump and high jump involves running and jumping, for example, the javelin means running and throwing, and so on. You can also choose whether to practice each event individually, or take part in a full marathon. I strongly advise that you practice, BD Graphics Sound Value  Playability OLYMPIC DECATHLON OVO because the technique in some of the events is hard to master, if not downright obscure. In each event you are told the qualifying time or distance, your own score, and whether or not you have qualified. If you are very lucky, you may set a new world record. I set a world record in the javelin, and failed everything else. It's an ingenious idea, but disappointing and sometimes tedious to play. Running in particular is wearying, the aim being to move your athlete's two feet as quickly as possible. There doesn't always seem to be much skill involved in achieving a high score, although in most of the events you can improve through practice. But the graphics are good, and if you don't like to be beaten by a game, there's a lot of challenge. Graphics Sound  Value  Playability CONTINUED FROM PAGE 18  CONTINUES ON PAGE 23 "


"Post Haste Software POST HASTE IS BEATEN! The sheer volume of new releases just can't be described in this advertisement! But, of course, as the premier mail-order service, we've got them all in stock! Or, fi they're about to be released they're here within hours and on their way within minutes. Fight Night, Rambo, Commando, Goonies, Tomahawk, Lord of the Rings, Zoids and many, many more! LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE DISCOVERY KIT (Activision) This has to be the most unusual program of the decade. You'll have your very own Little Computer Person. He'll live in your computer in a three floor house. You'll feed him, talk to him, play games with him, and be part of his life. He'll certainly be part of yours! In fact, he'll probably take it over. We promise you this will be the most astonishing and irresistible creation you've ever loaded in your computer and you'll feel awful when you turn it (him?) off! This is not, incidentally, a game! \"Animation of the Pet Person is incredibly lifelike. A stunning advance in computer entertainment 97% overall rating!\" Zzap. C64/128 [D] .99 C64/128 (C) .99 ROCK 'N' WRESTLE (Melbourne) The eagerly awaited fighjt sequel to the record-breaking \"Way of the Exploding Fist\". All the action you'd expect and a lot you won't believe! One or two players, 10 possible opponents, over 25 joystick moves, astonishing graphics, unbelievable animation It's the sequel everyone wanted! Spectrum .95 Amstrad (C) .95 C64/128 (C) .95 Verum 1* The total postal software service! Post Haste is part of GB Microland, the South of England's unique computer shop. Thousands of software titles. Lots of experience. The place that gave new meaning to the word \"friendly\". But not everyone lives nearby. So Post Haste Software was born. To bring the best to your door. With top service. Here's how. No \"Club\" to join, no \"subscription\" to pay. You come in our shop for free. Why pay to buy by mail? Unique \"double-your-money\" voucher with the 40-page catalogue. Check the box in this advertisement! Software for other computers? No problem. QL, Apple and IBM. Ask for lists. Post Haste has the lot! Postage free in the UK. Europe? Add 95p. Elsewhere? Add .50. For the whole order, not each program. Everything mailed in special cartons. No used boxes or padded bags. Who needs squashed software? Order by post or phone, day or night. Check the coupon for details. Then relax. It's fast! Pay by cheque, bank draft, PO, Access, Visa, Mastercard, Eurocard. Post Haste is convenient! ALREADY SEEN SOMETHING YOU WANT ON THIS PAGE? GO RIGHT AHEAD AND ORDER NOW! Use the coupon or write on your own paper. Be sure to include all the details from the coupon. Cross cheques and POs for safety. Your software will be on its way by return. So will your catalogue. And your unique \"double-yourmoney» voucher! SWORDS & SORCERY (P.S.S.) 18 months in the making, it's here at last! The supreme role-playing Dungeons & Dragons game, based on the newlydeveloped MIDAS adventure system, which will lead to other adventures and extensions to Swords & Sorcery itself. \"It's very difficult to do this game justice in a few words -the sheer size and depth defy labelling. An impressive piece of software indeed.» — Crash. Spectrum (C) .95 YIE AR KUNG FU/(Imagine/ Konami) At last! One of the biggest programs of the year! The current arcade hit brought into your own home, with all the dazzling action you'd expect! Fight your way through screen after screen! A smash-hit if ever there was one! \"Konami's arcade hit brought home. Just Great!\". Games. Amstrad (C] .95 Comm 64[C] .95 Spectrum (C) .95 THE POST HASTE CATALOGUE The Post Haste catalogue is just 90p with a unique \"double-your-money\" voucher tucked inside! Yes, the Post Haste catalogue contains a .80 voucher to use for your first order! How's that for value? You get 40 big pages crammed with over 100 program descriptions. Recreation, utility, strategy, adventure, arcade they're all there! And so is your .80 double-yourmoney\" voucher! Pack pictures, screen shots, review quotes. and much more. Programs for five micros: Amstrad. Atari, BBC. Commodore 64/128 and Spectrum. You're spoilt for choice with Post Haste! And your catalogue is the gateway to a huge program range from Post Haste: over 4.000 titles spanning 10 major micros! Where else is there such a choice? Phone Orders (24 hrs) (0705) 269333 TO GET YOUR CATALOGUE WITH THE I \"DOUBLE-YOUR-MONEY\" VOUCHER, OR TO ORDER SOFTWARE, USE THIS COUPON! Send your catalogue. I've enclosed 90p. Don't forget my .80«Double-YourMoney\" voucher for me to use with my first order! I want to order software right away and the details are below. I want the catalogue too so I've added 90p. Don't forget my .80«Double-YourMoney\" voucher! My name is: My address is: ........ ............. Post code ... My computer is: Can we contact you by phone if there's a query? STD/Exchange ............ Number ........ IF YOU'RE ORDERING SOFTWARE, PLEASE PRINT DETAILS OF THE PROGRAMS YOU WANT! PROGRAM NAME PRICE ........................ WINTER GAMES (Epyx/US Gold) The success of Summer Games and then Summer Games II is now legendary but until you've seen and played \"Winter Games\" you ain't seen nothing yet! Six stunning winter sports simulations to learn and master as you go for gold. An absolutely brilliant program playable by all the family at once! Bob-sled, ski jump, figure skating, and more! \"Extraordinary graphics, incredibly skilled programming, immensely playable, totally absorbing. An absolute winner all the way!\". Computer Games. C64/128 [D] .95 C64/128 (C] .95 95 1 ADVENTURERS! SPECIAL EXTRA SECTION! There are dozens of adventures in the Post Haste catalogue from virtually every major producer. Just about all the superb Infocom range is there and many others tool And Post Haste carries the full range of Infocom Invisiclues, plus hint and guide books to many other adventures too! Answers to the problems that keep you awake at night? The catalogue lists them all! THE POST HASTE SERVICE We can supply any program you've seen advertised. If it's released, you'll usually get it by return. If it's not, you'll get it faster when it does come out. Simply order it and sit back. And here's our promise: we'll never cash your cheque or charge your credit card until a program is packed and ready to mail. That's Post Haste service! MERCENARY/(Novagen) The wait's been worth it! Another total winner! Incredible 3-D vector graphics, changing with amazing speed. And the game's different each time you play! You'll really feel as if you're flying above the planet Targ! Believe us! \"We couldn't believe the speed. Smashing!\"Zzap 64. Comm 64 [C] .95 Comm 64 [D] .95 Atari [C] .95 Atari [D] .95 Catalogue with .80 voucher Add .90 Postage is totally free in the UK Add .00 Europe postage for whole order Add .95 Airmail elsewhere for whole order Add .50 TOTAL AMOUNT ENCLOSED  PAYING BY CHEQUE OR POSTAL ORDER? Please make it payable to Post Haste Software and cross it for safety's sake! CHARGING IT TO YOUR VISA, ACCESS, MASTERCARD, EUROCARD? May we have your card number, expiry date and signature? OTION Expiry date Signature Now mail your order to POST HASTE SOFTWARE GB MICROLAND, 7 QUEENS PARADE LONDON ROAD, WATERLOOVILLE HAMPSHIRE PO7 7EB, UNITED KINGDOM Or phone (24 hours) 0705 269333 -22 "


"C+VG FEB software REVIEHS6 HARRIER THREE FORCE WEEKS IN STRIKE PARADISE G9999 hing          STUFF OFS Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Mikro-Gen Price: .95 Everyone loves Wally. And when his family (Wilma and little Herbert) are kidnapped by hungry natives while the Week family are on holiday in the Scilly Isles — where else? AXE. everyone will want to help Wally BOUL OF rescue them. Won't they? Sure they will! And Wally could win over yet more fans The jungle is populated by to change Wally's colour to many animals including lions, avoid any nasty colour clash on arcade adventure. Three Weeks crocodiles, nasty insects and the really colourful screens. in Paradise follows closely the deadly bats. There's also the The graphics are the closest Wally-game tradition. Wally has horrible Can Nibbles tribe who to the fabled \"cartoon quality to wander around the desert kidnap Wilma and Herbert and yet to be seen on the good old island finding objects, picking plan to turn them into TV Spectrum. The jungle screens them up and using them to dinners unless Wally can come are really impressive. solve many taxing problems and to the rescue in time, Animation of Wally and the puzzles. Below the main playing screen other characters is above Wally himself seems to have you'll find the objects that Wally standard. The tune gets a bit added a few extra inches to his is carrying -he can hold two irritating after a while but beer-belly and wanders around items at a time, the number on you can switch it off and just just a bit more slowly but Wally's left you begin with listen to the sound effects if that won't bother you as there's four, the nibble-status of Wilma you like. lots to marvel at on every and Herbert plus a picture Graphics which gradually forms as you screen. Graphics are as colourful and play which could end up Sound varied as ever -they appear showing something horrible Value bigger and bolder than previous or nice. Let us know which! Playability Wally epics. For the first time you are able SNOOP Machine: BBC Supplier: Mirrorsoft Price: .95 (tape) .95 (disk) At last, your chance to take that amazing British invention, the Harrier jump jet, up for a spin, and a bit of in-flight mayhem if you're feeling aggressive. Not that I made much use of the opportunity on my first four flights I crashed within ten seconds. I begin to see why it takes a small fortune and goodness knows how long to train a Harrier pilot. This is a superb simulation, developed with the help of British Aerospace who, presumably, vouch for its accuracy. You are offered a choice of game type (practice or combat) and skill level (pilot, commander and ace). The graphics are more than adequate. The display takes the form of the view from the cockpit, with ground/horizon/sky instruments and indicators much where you would expect to find them. You can operate the game entirely from the keyboard, or via a combination of joystick and keyboard, and I strongly advise the joystick. You get a 'flight manual' with the game, which tells you about the Harrier, gives you hints on how to fly it, and describes the mission you're supposed to carry out when you can actually stay in the air. The mission involves destroying an enemy HQ 500 miles away, but first — you have to destroy the enemy tanks menacing your own ground sites. It might take some time before you establish an operational area free of enemy tanks a map grid is supplied so you can keep track of where you are in relation to enemy HQ. The really tricky part comes when you're forced to join battle with enemy aircraft. This is where you really need to understand the capabilities of the Harrier and the classic defence and attack techniques. A classy, polished and highly addictive simulation, this is a game to keep. BLADE RUNNER Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: CRL . Price: .95 Terrific music. Shame about the game. That just about sums up CRL's brave attempt to turn the classic Blade Runner movie into a computer game. Which probably explains why they call the game an \"interpretation of the film score by Vangelis\"!? Licence, what licence? Anyway what you get once the game has loaded is a Ghostbusters-style game. The basic idea is to track down rebel replidroids in your hover-car and terminate them. Like Ghostbusters you get a plan view of the city to move your bounty hunter's craft around on — except this has more than one screen area to move around on. You also see a large scale \"map' for the rest of the city which indicates just where the replidroids are hiding out. You must use the large scale map to move to the sector inhabited by a droid represented by a flashing square — make contact with it. Then it's onto the scrolling chase scene. Your craft lands and a large white figure gets out. That's your bounty hunter. He has to chase along the city streets packed with awkward pedestrians to gun down the droid. Running into pedestrians and killing them is a crime \"pedestricide' would you believe! You'll be penalised for committing it. You have to dodge the crowds — but don't stay in the road too long otherwise you'll get run down by a speeding C5! The graphics are pretty crude. Although the white running figures in the street section of the game are quite effective. The backgrounds in this part of the game are nice too. Not a great follow up to the epic Tau Ceti for CRL and a waste of a good idea. Maybe Blade Runner would work as a budget product — but at nearly  you can spend it wisely elsewhere.  Graphics  Sound  Value Playability Graphics Sound Value 00000 O Sacrae S Playability CONTINUED FROM PAGE 21 GOOD CONTINUES ON PAGE 24 23 "


"BALU G-VG FEB software REVIEHSI SCALEXTRIC Scalextric is a challenging split screen race game. One for race addicts who like building their own tracks. Better than Racing Destruction Set but not quite Pitstop ll which, in our humble opinion, still holds Pole Position CC Graphics Sound Value Playability LOCO Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Leisure Genius Price: .95 I used to love playing with my Scalextric set. It's the nearest I've ever come to real motor racing. Building a track was half the fun, racing the cars the other half. But all that plastic track and little buildings took up a lot of room and the dog was always crashing across the circuit at crucial moments. Now, thanks to Leisure Genius, the problem is solved. They've crammed all the bits of track and a couple of cars into the C64 with Spectrum and Amstrad versions to follow It's like Pitstop ll without the pitstops but with a track building option like Ariolasoft's Racing Destruction Set. When you're racing, you get a split screen display as in Pitstop Il. You can race against the computer or a friend. There are 17 pre-set tracks based on the Grand Prix circuits of the world. These have varying difficulty levels. You get a construction window\", while at the top of the screen you see icons representing different bits of track available to you. These include different straights, corners and chicanes. Different bits of track have different characteristics when you actually come to race. SABRE WULF  Machine: CBM 64  Supplier: Ultimate/Firebird Price: .95 If we waited a long time for Underwuride to make it onto the Commodore, then it's been an eternity waiting for the excellent Sabre Wulf. Again it's worth it. The Ultimate format is very familiar by now and does not detract from the game at all. And time doesn't dull the surprise at the quality of the graphics and the immense size of the game. The idea, once again, is to escape from the seemingly neverending jungle. On the way you must collect the four pieces of an amulet scattered throughout the game. As the pieces are collected more and more jungle beasts appear making life more than a little dangerous. A map is essential if you are to conquer the game, otherwise you'll become hopelessly lost. Sabre Wulf is a classic game. Buy it. Enjoy it, and tell your friends. 100 en e Graphics Sound  Value Playability Machine: Atari/CBM 64 there's an 80 second time limit O Supplier: English Software on each sector too. All this adds up to a fast and Price: .95 (cass) .95 good looking game one that (disc) you need to play in a dark room If it's speed and super-sonics with your TV's volume turned you want from a game then up full. The sound effects and look no further. Elektra Glide music have to be heard to be must be the fastest game on believed. the Atari right now and You get a driver's eye view of English Software promise the the road ahead which same speed for the 64 version disappears into the misty soon to be released. distance with some nicely Elektra is a driving game drawn mountains on the without overtaking or pitstops. horizon. There are five different It's more in the Mad Max mode. zones to race across A desperate race aginst time selectable from an options and hazards like spinning screen at the start of the game. cubes and bouncing balls which These are Scotland, England, look like refugees from The Wales, USA and Australia. Each Prisoner. And there's a jet zone has different landscape which drops electrostatic graphics. columns to block the road ahead T he scrolling is extremely fast of your speeding car just to add and super smooth matching to your problems. Oh yes, the classic Drop Zone for sheer speed. When it comes to playability the game is more for your soul than to provide an out and out arcade challenge. There's no running score totaliser, or a hiScore to measure your achievements against in the Atari version but it will be added to the C64 game. The jet which swoops overhead to beam down the dangerous electro-columns is an original touch. And the sound it makes as it blasts overhead is brilliant! Listen for it as you play. Elektra Glide is superbly presented and looks extremely stylish — we rate it as the second best Atari game released this year. First? Drop Zone of coursel  Graphics Sound Value  Playability POD for maximum grip, your initial test of skill is to manoeuvre through the chicane your first corner. This isn't as easy as it may sound, but don't despair. All it takes is practice, and you'll soon be racing through this section in fourth gear, pushing maximum speed into the home straight. Though not truly 3D, the car graphics are excellent, changing size and detail with distance, and you'll see the other drivers, each with their own characteristics, jockeying for position in your rear view mirrors. Revs is in a completely different league to most race. games. Don't expect to lean on the joystick and attain a new lap record on your first outing. UNDERWURLDE  Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Ultimate/Firebird Price: .95 When C+VG reviewed the Spectrum version of this Ultimate classic we noted that it had been a long time coming but was well worth waiting for. That review appeared in the January 1985 issue. One year on and the Commodore version has appeared. Was it worth the wait this time? The answer is yes. Underwuride is well up to the standard expected of an Ultimate game. The look and the layout of the game is very similar to the Spectrum version. Your score is shown at the top of each screen together with how deep you are in the Underwurlde. The idea of the game is to escape from the Underwurlde by climbing through various levels, using the objects scattered around the many screens and avoid the multitude of perils. Underwuride is excellent fun and great value. Firebird has done a good job with the conversion. Machine: C64728  Supplier: Firebird e Price: $14.95 (cassette) .95 (disc) Acornsoft were certainly in top gear when they produced Revs for the BBC Micro, which is probably the most realistic racing simulation available on any home micro Now Commodore 64 owners can also experience the thrill of the race and get the adrenalin running as they speed for position in the conversion by Firebird. Revs gives you the chance to drive a Formula 3 machine at breakneck speed around Silverstone. Starting in practice with the wing settings angled Graphics Sound Value  Playability Onco Lap Time 0:00 Graphics Sound Value @ Playability "


"SHE'S COMING TWISTED TYMU ILI To System 30 Available for Spectrum 48k, CBM 64/128, All Amstrads, All 48k Ataris, Atari ST, BBC B, MSX ALL TAPES AT 7.50 Amstrad CBM 64/128, All 48k Ataris ALL GAMES ON DISK 10.99 Atari ST (Disk only) 21.50 SYSTEM 3 SOFTWARE SOUTHBANK HOUSE BLACK PRINCE ROAD LONDON SE1 75J TELEPHONE: 01-735 8171. TELEX: 295555 LSPG "


"mt mt got not More, Sleidung reprenedure ** *. VS of op It ^ THE ISLAND CAPER KLOM TUDO OBOL DO L SOODU 4:23 Limpopo AN If you accept this mission, then you will non stop action strategy game have to battle with the elements and available now for your Atari overcome the many natural hazards that 1 or 2 players option await you on Spy Island. Real time Cassette .95. Disc .95. animation, seven levels of difficulty, full Available from all good computer scrolling screens. Simul vision (TM) software stores, or post free from Simul play (TM)/2 players can play at Databyte, Suite 31A, Grove Terrace, the same time, shark attacks, quick sand, Highgate Road, London NW5 1PL. punji stakes, snare pits, fire bombs, Telephone 01-482 1755. napalm and sword fights etc. Spy vs Spyll The Island Caper is a trademark of First Star Inc. Spy vs Spy is a trademark of E.C. Publications Inc. Both used Make this your toughest challenge so with permission. Distributed by Databyte under licence from First Star Inc Distribution arranged by Interational Computer far. The most challenging, most exciting, Group. FOR ALL ATARI COMPUTERS: 400/800/XL/XE WITH MIN 48K RAM FIRST ATAR OFTWARE INC Atari is a trade mark of Atari Corporation af of the UATABYTE Power to your palette UATARY TEAM Department The Graphic Art Department is the most powerful, most versatile graphics design program available for the Atari Home Computers. It's simplicity of use make it a joy for people of all ages to paint with. It has more than 30 different commands to choose from. An incredible 128 different colours can be used in any one picture. A three stage Zoom feature allows one the ability to do very detailed and intricate work. Other features include: the use of text in your pictures, 40 different brush patterns, abrush editor to create your own brush patterns, character editor, circle draw, brush speed control, mirror and you can even obtain a printout of your pictures. These are just a few of the many fine features to be found in the GAD. Ask your dealer fora demonstration now. Disc: .95 "


"ALL GAMES GUARANTEED IN STOCK Intisorit Distribution FREEPOST ORDER FORM  5% DISCOUNT ON ORDERS OVER .00 FREE SECURICOR DELIVERY OVER .00 TICK TICK: TICK 5.95 ... 11.20 7.50 SPECTRUM Commando... Deathwake. 5.95 Zoids... Barry McGuigan...... 5.95 Artstudio Transformers ......... Gunfright Lord of the Rings......... . 11.20 International Karate 4.50 Ruinstone .......... Rasputin 5.95 Impossible Mission ............ 5.95 Bounty Bob.... Elite 11.20 Panzer-Drome 5.95 Tomohawk..... 7.50 Rambo..... 5.95 Yie Ar Kung Fu ...... 5.95 Their Finest Hour. 7.50 Beach Head 11 5.95 Neverending Story 7.50 Schitzophrenia ...... 5.95 Worm in Paradise 5.95 1 Think 5.95 Saboteur .... 6.70 Miki 5.95 Blade Runner 5.95 Swords & Sorcery. 7.50 COMMODORE Commando 6.70 Rambo... Fight Night 7.50 Little Computer People..... 7.50 Young Ones... 7.50 Skool Daze. 6.25 Outlaws........ 7.50 Goonies 7.50 Yabba Dabba Doo............ 5.95 Mercenary 7.50 Blade Runner ........ 6.70 Reds 7.50 Enigma Force Ball Blazer....... Arc of Yesod................. 6.70 Gyroscope .... 6.70 Crazy Comets. 5.95 Transformers ........ 6.70 Quake One. 7.45 Friday 13th 6.70 Neverending Story.............. 7.50 Superman .... 7.50 Wild West..... 7.50 Starion.. 7.50 Hall of Fame 7.50 Deathwake... 5.95 Scalectrix..... 5.95 AMSTRAD Starion.... Worm in Paradise 7.50 Exploding Fist... Gyroscope Sabre Wulf. Nightshade...... Sold A Million .. Hypersports 6.70 Barry McGuigan............ 7.50 Zorro.... .............. 7.50 Who Dares Wins If ........ 6.70 Deathwake. 5.95 ATARI Goonies. 7.50 Zorro Hacker. 7.50 Electraglide ........ 6.70 Mercenary ......... 7.95 Up 'n Down.... 7.95 Ball Blazer.. 7.95 Tapper... 7.95 Drop Zone 7.95 Gt. American Road Race... 7.95 Peripherals 1. Datek Micro Stick ....... 10.95 2. Quick Shot II ........ 6.25 MIC64 C64 CRAZY COMETS COMMODOREN CRAZY COMETS MERCENARY ST. DIT MERCENARY — — — — — — Name Address SEND ORDER TO FREEPOST, UNITSOFT MADEIRA HOUSE, 31 OSWALD STREET, GLASGOW G1 4QRT Cheque/P.O. "


"ACUNNING FOE WHO KNOWS NO FEAR DESERT FOX CBM64/128 The cunning Desert Fox, the wily Rommel, is on the rampage, sweeping face conflict with his ground and air attacks. Be as wise and as cautious as across the desert sands, laying low the allied forces and swarming the most battle hardened general in planning your strategy and calculating through allied territory. It is on your shoulders Lone Wolf, to halt the your tactics to rescue your supply depots. In short Lone Wolf, if you fail in progress of this awesome foe and rescue the North Africa campaign from your destiny as the complete warrior, the final conflict a head to head his grasp. Step forward with the courage of a fearless leader in face to tank duel with the mighty Desert Fox himself will be your last. REALISTIC VOICE SIMULATION Listen in on enemy radio messages, plan your tactics to combat their manoeuvres. DARDIR Shadow ABITU) TE DA TT S GOLD 02 0 LARDAN 11100 Stuka attack: Keep a close eye Convoy: Protect your convoys Map: Be wise in your campaign Ambush:The valley is on your radar, an early warning from aerial bombardment at all strategy, protect those depots in infested with enemy forces will give you some chance against costs, without their supplies your danger from enemy forces, rally but no matter reach the other the enemy stuka attacks depots will fall. But in your your firepower to it's most side you must. Good luck and eagerness watch out for the allied destructive effect. happy shooting. Spitfires. U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 8881 an so tware "


"JR SOFTWARE 5 Brookes Court Baldwin Gardens London EC1 Telephone: 01-242 5409 All orders despatched immediately JR Price 6.60 6.60 6.60 7.40 6.60 7.40 6.60 11.30 7.40 7.40 7.40 6.60 VECK McCoy 6.60 6.60 9.60 6.60 7.40 JR JR SPECTRUM Price COM. 64 Price AMSTRAD BATTLE FOR PLANETS 7.40 NIGHT SHADE 7.40 \"V\" SIR FRED 7.40 OUTLAWS 7.40 STREET HAWK 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE 7.40 DRAGON SKULLE 7.40 KNIGHT KING FUN 5.40 RAMBO 6.60 SPITFIRE 40 INT. KARATE 4.75 NEVER ENDING STORY 7.40 SKYFOX SHAD. OF THE UNICORN 11.30 MONTY ON THE RUN 7.40 TAU CETI SABOTEUR 6.60 UNDER WURLOE 7.40 WHO DARES WINS CRITICAL MASS 5.95 RACING DEST. SET 9.60 ELITE WS BASKETBALL 5.95 MERCENARY 7.40 WORM IN PARADISE SUPERBOWL 5.95 STAR EVENTS 6.60 BOULDERDASH WORM IN PARADISE 7.40 FRIDAY 13th 6.60 DYNAMITE DAN FRIDAY 13th 6.60 WORM IN PARADISE 7.40 FRIDAY 13th RAMBO 5.95 COMP PEOPLE 7.40 ELITE 11.30 B.MAC BOXING 7.40 COMMANDO 5.95 EVIL CROWN 7.40 ATARI TAU CETI 7.40 OUTLAWS 7.40 SMASH HIT 4 EXPLODING FIST 6.60 THE FORCE 7.40 ELECTRA GLIDE SUPERTEST 5.20 GERRY THE GEN. 5.95 REALM OF IMPOSS. (D) EVIL CROWN 7.40 SCALELECTRIC 12.95 JUMP JET THE FORCE 7.40 BLADE RUNNER 6.60 FIGHTER PILOT ARENA 7.40 REVS 11.25 CYBERUN 7.40 \"Z\" 7.40 GUN FIGHT 7.40 SUPERMAN 7.40 MSX SUPERMAN 7.40 ENIGMA FORCE 7.40 KNOCK OUT LORD OF THE RINGS 11.75 STAR 101V 7.40 SKY JAGUAR BACK TO SKOOL 5.15 COMMANDO 7.40 HYPER RALLY NOW GAMES II 6.60 ELECTRA GLIDE 6.60 PING PONG PANZADROME 5.95 GOONIES 7.40 ROAD FIGHTER SWEEVO'S WORLD ZORRO 7.40 TENNIS SKY FOX 6.60 ZOIDS 6.60 YIE AR KUNG FUII INT. RUGBY 5.95 NEXUS 7.45 HYPER SPORT III ENIGMA FORCE 7.45 MUGSY'S REVENGE 6.60 BOUNCE 7.45 SPELLUM KARS 7.45 BLADE RUNNER 6.60 URANIUM 6.60 C16 THINK 5.95 SPACED OUT 6.60 KARATE KID REALM OF IMPOSS. 6.60 CAUSE OF CHAOS 6.60 TAI BOXING SPITFIRE 40 7.45 \"V\" 6.60 WORLD SRS BASEBALL \" \" 5.95 STREET HAWK 6.60 CLASSICS STREET HAWK 5.95 COMIC BAKERY 6.60 AIR WOLFE KNIGHT RIDER 5.95 BOUNDER 7.45 STAR EVENTS SURF CHAMP 8.50 Special offer: Comp Pro Joystick .50. Konix Speed King 19.50. Both joysticks have one year guarantee. If game released. Send s.a.e. for list, stating which micro. Any cheques/POs to the following address: JR SOFTWARE, Dept. CVG2, 5 BROOKES COURT, BALDWIN GARDENS, LONDON EC1 5.95 11.00 11.00 11.00 11.00 11.00 11.00 11.00 You'll know he's the real McCoy once you've sampled an Atomic Drop. 5.95 5.20 4.45 5.20 5.95 5.95 5.95 ROCK'N WRESTLE For less than the price of one game You could get your hands on over 500 great titles! (not to mention pop videos) Please tick the appropriate box: Please send me more details about the Matrix Club Please enrol me as a Matrix member. I enclose a cheque for  made payable to Melrica Agencies a My interest is: Spectrum Commodore Amstrad Pop videos Name With top titles costing anything from  upwards to buy, renting your software from the Matrix Club makes very good sense. Our once only enrolment fee of  gives you access to over 500 titles on the Spectrum, Commodore and Amstrad systems including all your latest favourites. Added to that is the opportunity to hire top pop videos at similar low rates, and using the same fast, easy to operate system. Use the coupon on the left to receive full details of membership with no obligation or enrol right now to get a weeks free hire of one of our classic titles. CLUB Address MATRIX Post to: Matrix Membership, 271 Stansted Road, Bishops Stortford, Herts. CVG 2 — — — — — — — SOFTWARE "


"C+VG FEB software REVIEHS CITADEL ROLLER COASTER   Machine: Spectrum Amstrad/ CBM 64  Supplier: Elite Price: .95 (Spec) .95 (CBM 64) .95 (Amstrad) Roll up, roll up! Take your places please for a fun packed journey around a theme park. Ride the weird ghost train, speed down the water-chute in a hollowed out log, brave the dangers of the big wheel — and finally try out the stomach churning Roller Coaster itself! Now, here's a new twist on the platform format. All the rides work as they would in real lite. The object of the game is to explore the fairground and discover bags of gold which are dotted around on the many rides. You may have to risk life and limb to get them. You begin the game with five lives — you lose a life if you fall off something, get hit by something or simply run out of \"lifeforce''. The graphics are extremely colourful similar to Monty and JSW but with extra added pizazz! Sixty screens worth of pizazz to be exact. Ride the Roller Coaster just once and you won't want to get off for a long, long time. Graphics Sound Value Playability The game contains 100 screens, all in colour. The idea is to beam yourself to an alien planet, grab a figurine, get back to the teleport, and smash it all to bits; thus avoiding the alien invasion and saving the world. Simple, eh? Game play is fast and exciting, with trampolines, rope swings, platforms and elevators to walk over. Death manifests itself in the form of monks, stardust, cannonbails, thorns, big square things, big flashing square things, spotted things on spindly green legs and a few others besides. Superior have backed the game with yet another competition. The first person to complete the game gets a cool 200 greenbacks and a piaque. Also, three crowns have been hidden in hard-to-reach locations. The first person to tell Superior where two of the three can be found gets . Citadel is fun to play, and allows extensive exploration without having to complete a sticky problem to reach the next screen. It represents good value for money, even if you don't win the competition! REKLETY Machine BBC/Electron quantity. Now, thankfully, they Supplier: Superior Software have adopted a more agreeable Price .95 (tape) .95 attitude. If they want to be considered as a quality software (disc) house, Citadel will help a good Calling any game \"The best deal. Arcade Adventure ever\" isn't On running the program, a very sensible. For one reason pleasant enough title page something just a little better will appears. It is, in fact, one of the appear eventually, and more best I've seen on the Beeb. importantly, it sounds incredibly \"Citadel, Citadel, Citadel,\" false! growls the BBC. Goshi Speech Superior have, until now, tool Well, no. Not really. After concentrated on getting announcing itself in rather tinny programs onto the market in tones, the speech clams up. Graphics Sound . Value  Playability DO O THE LAST V8 FUEL Unexploded nuke-warheads which detonate from time to time. Fortunately your car warns you of an imminent blast and you must dash for safety inside a shielded bunker before it goes off. You have to dash from shelter to shelter in a bid to discover the survivors. TIHE Your V8 is difficult to control. 100 You'll find yourself skidding off EPH EPH the road and into the landscape TURBO at every available opportunity SHIELD when you first load the game. RIIN Practice might just make you a CREATED EY DAY better driver — should you wish to persevere with the game... The roads you must travel twist and turn with alarming regularity but there are some short cuts across the nicely Machine: CBM 64 is this. The year is 2008, the drawn landscape. Supplier: Mastertronic world has suffered a global The voice synthesis feature at nuclear war and a global nuclear the start of each game is simply . Price: .95 winter. You survived both as annoying after a couple of Great sound — shame about you were working on a secret listens! And you can't turn it the game! This release in project deep within a bunker off... Mastertronic's new M.A.D. range that special project was The V8 is a nicely presented features some absolutely Last V8. This is a real super-car, program but without much brilliant sounds from ace shielded from radiation, substance. composer Rob Hubbard and computerised and powerful. some pretty graphics from And you are going to use it to  Graphics programmer Dave Darling. But attempt to contact the remnants Sound game play doesn't match up to of mankind left on earth after Value the frills. the holocaust. But there is still The basic theme of the game danger on the surface. Playability . Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Ultimate Price: .95 What's this? Ultimate meets Jeff Minter? Something must be wrong here. The latest Ultimate release isn't an arcade adventure -it's an out and out shoot 'em up. In a big departure from their normal style, Ultimate has sprung a surprise on their public with Imhotep Several people played this game for several hours just to discover if there was more to it than blasting your way across an Egyptian landscape Defender style. But, surprisingly, that seems to be it. The game is packaged in the normal Ultimate style leading you to believe that it's a regular adventure — but it isn't. The theme -described in Ultimate's normal mysterious style is this. Zoser, Pharoah of all Egypt, is having a tough time. His lands are drying up and the peasants are revolting. Zoser turns to Imhotep the Wise for help in ending the famine. Imhotep starts out on a quest to find Thoth the only person who can end the drought which is causing the famine. He begins by flying on a mystic bird armed with mystic power-bolts which he must use a en CONTINUED FROM PAGE 24 "


"C+VG FEB software REVIEHS 9 GEOFF CAPES STRONGMANAGE to actually think about the strategy behind the play. Good fun. The game is also available on Spectrum, CBM 64, BBC B. Electron, MSX and Atari. Graphics  Sound O Value  Playability cocco  Machine: Amstrad The six events Geoff must  Supplier: Martech compete in to win the  Price: .95 Strongman title are the truck pull, log chop, barrel loading, car What are you — man or roll, fairground bell and sumo mouse? That's the opening wrestling. challenge from Martech. Well, Between each event there is a next to Geoff Capes that's not short rest period which you can an easy thing to answer. re-distribute remaining muscle Anyway, generally squeaking, energy. we're a tough, rough lot at Geoff Capes Strongman is a C+VG, ready to rise to any good simulation, lifted above challenge. many of its rivals by the need Geoff Capes Strongman is a simulation game with an added dimension. Instead of just undertaking the various tasks, you also have to train for them. Poor old Geoff's body has been split into eight bits, represented by \"muscle icons'. Only his head is missing. Is that significant, we wonder? Brawn without brain? Each muscle contains a gauge to show how fit it is and how much energy is available. Different events require different muscles so while training for the six events you must prepare the right muscles. If during any of the events the energy gauge hit zero, Geoff collapses. Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Cascade Games Price: .95 There are flight simulations and there are flight simulations. And then there's Ace. Digital Integration's Fighter Pilot has been widely acknowledged as the best of the bunch but that accolade must now go to Ace. Not that there is anything stunningly new about the game, it's just incredibly well presented. There is a wide choice of battle conditions. Combat can take place during the day or night, winter or summer. Using a map to locate the enemy, you can chase and engage them on land, in the air or at sea. The screen layout is fairly clear and easy to understand. The top half is taken up with the view from the cockpit, the bottom half with instruments. Congratulations to Cascade on a good game. Graphics Sound  Value Playability con to blast other flying enemies riding on what look like broomsticks. But maybe they are mystic birds too. Other hazards include catapults which fire stones at you. It appears these stones can hit you anywhere despite the fact that they appear in the distance and grow larger. Small or big, if you're in front of them when they appear, you lose a points with just five lives to move from level two where the game always seems to start for some reason. All Ultimate would say when we quizzed them about the game was that it gets harder Hmmm. Ultimate have made a brave step away from their traditional style but in the wrong direction. Try again Ultimate! life. As you progress through the game you come up against other hurtling hazards which all serve to make your life as Imhotep that much harder. You have to amass 10,000 Graphics Sound  Value Playability on.  Machines CBM 64  Supplier: Rhino Price: .95 There's always room for another good shoot 'em up and Z pronounced Zee — is just that. The idea of the game is pretty simple. Blast all the aliens, capture energy bombs, zap force barriers surrounding the Transporter Units until you've got a big enough hole to guide your ship through and warp to the next sector where it all begins again. The game takes place on a planet with a computer controlled defence system. The system has malfunctioned and now the computer can't tell the difference between friend or foe so it attacks everyone! Only a starfighter as experienced as Z that's you can destroy the system before things really get out of control. The game features multidirectional wrap around scrolling screens with some stylish arcade game style backgrounds. Some sectors have a lunar backdrop, others a Paradroid style cityscape. Defence ships come in many different forms and are all extremely deadly. Some craft, like the Big Mothers you'll find on level three, need to be hit several times before they disintegrate. The Control Ship at the end of each game has to be blasted by energy bombs five in all — before it can be destroyed. The energy bombs are carried by special craft which you have to blast to release the bomb capsule. Chase the capsule to pick up the bomb. The ship features inertial control — which means you have to be nifty to fly it and win. It has twin laser cannon which make blasting a bit easier and a central bomb chute to launch those energy bombs. Z comes from Chris Butler, the programmer who brought you Hypercircuit which became something of a cult game among 64 owners. Z should do just the same. It's fast, furious and lots of fun. Don't miss this extremely attractive, truly addictive zap-tokill extravaganza. Graphics Sound  Value Playability D CONTINUES ON PAGE 32 "


"C+VG FEB Software REVIEHS 0 ERDURANCE VECTRON RACING Machine: Spectrum Supplier: CRL Price: .95 From the programmers who brought you CRL's popular Formula One team-manager simulation comes Endurance Racing which does the same thing for long distance motorcycling racing. You have to look after a team or teams of racing bikes out to win the World Endurance Racing Championship. You control the preparation of the team, the selection of riders, the turning of the machines and must also oversee the pit work for the team during these all important championship races. Endurance motorcycle racing is a team effort. Success depends as much on the maintenance of the bikes during many pit stops as on racing ability of riders. A crash may not be terminal. If your rider can ride or push the bike back to the pits, repairs can be carried out and lost time made up. Authentic team names and riders are already stored in the computer but these can be changed. You can customise you own team, selecting your team name, bike type, colour, numbers and rider names. Each bike must be prepared for the race. The engine or chassis characteristics are adjustable and you must make your own decisions in line with the level of play. A bar-graph will increase showing an increase of power, m.p.g. etc. Throughout the race the first six bikes are displayed on the score-board and the order of the first sixteen bikes are shown from left to right in front of the grandstand. The team name of the leader and distance he had covered are also displayed. If your bike number turns red it shows that something is wrong. During the race, instruction can be given to your riders by pressing the select keys and entering the bike number. All riders start off riding normally but they can be instructed to take things easy, if protecting a good lead or ride as fast as possible. . Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Insight Price: .95 Hang on a minute! Everything's moving too fast! Just let me catch my breath a second and I might be able to write this review ... This is the second game we've seen which is based around themes from that terrific Disney movie Tron. You and your Spectrum have been transported to a maze like complex where lurks the deadly ROM Robot. You must find your way around the matrix, zapping tanks and randomisers those awesome two-legged spacecraft featured in the Tron movie in order to find your way to the Central Complex and the ROM Robot. The many corridors of the complex will have you baffled unless you call up the map which overlays the main playing screen. So if you're REALLY clever you can leave the map up and see what's going on outside. Not really advisable for beginners however as you'll find the game so fast that you're going to need your wits about you. At first you'll find yourself bouncing off the walls and attempting to make fast turns. Practice makes perfect but then you'll have to work out how to take out the tanks and Randomisers. Fortunately the loading sequence includes scrolling instructions the bad news is that you can't call up these instructions during play. The sound — especially the opening theme — is great. The graphics are a mixture of vector and solids. The tanks and Randomisers are drawn as solid looking craft. The best way to take out the Randomisers is by blasting one of their legs off causing them to spin and smash into the sides of the maze. Graphics  Sound Value o Playability Graphics Sound Value Playability coco MAD SURF CHAMP VIDEO DARTS  Machine CBM 64 Supplier: Zion Systems  Price: .95 Video Darts is about as exciting as a stale pint of beer with a stubbed out cigarette floating in it. It has absolutely nothing to recommend it at all. A sad thing to say, but true. The game of darts itself played either against the computer or another player is spectacularly unexciting. Consistent scores of 180 are easily obtained therefore removing the slightest challenge from the game. The graphics, considering the superb animation now available on other Commodore games, are extraordinarily crude a standard equally matched by the packaging. The music, a grating rendition of Roll Out the Barrel. But the real killer is the price .95. Can Zion be serious? Graphics Sound Value Playability  Machine: Spectrum  Supplier: New Concepts  Price: .95 Irish software house New Concepts are out to make waves with Surf Champ and its revolutionary surfboard-shaped keyboard overlay. By applying pressure to the surfboard, which sits on the Spectrum's G key, real-life surfing moves can be performed. New Concepts say this is the ultimate sports simulation. Before being able to ride the waves, the player must make a up view of the surfer on the number of decisions. Surfing wave. gear must be selected and this Using the miniature surfboard depends on age, sex, and is very frustrating to begin with, weight. Board length and weight but with practice it becomes must also be selected. easier. Once these selections have Graphically the game is a little been made, it's time to head crude, but if you fancy a unique out to the waves. The screen challenge then you'll get a then changes to a view of the square deal surf from Surf sea from the beach. The surfer Champ. must paddle out into the sea, ducking and dipping under the Graphics waves to a chosen point. Sound Once the best wave has been Value selected, the player hits a key, Playability the screen changes to a close    WO  CONTINUED FROM PAGE 31 CONTINUES ON PAGE 35 "


"LIITTITURRITURESNUASHED DISNELLNESS ATARI 1050 DISK DRIVE 9 WITH FREE SOFTWARE SAVE WORTH .98 . 1 1111 H. ATARI 1050 VIOUS PRICE $1 NOW ONLY 111111111111111111 POWER 41 VI UUUU OR 12 MONTHS AT .46 WITHOUT THE PRICE NEWS FOR ATARI 8-BIT COMPUTER OWNERS FREE SOFTWARE BUY NOW PAY LATER Silica Shop, the UK's leading Atari specialists, by the 410 or 1010 data recorders. Many proThe new price for the 1050 disk Drive is not. To help you to take advantage of the new low based in Sidcup Kent have announced a mass-fessional/business programs are only available the only good news for Atari Owners. The price of the 1050 Disk Drive, we have now ive drop in the price of the Atari 1050 Disk on disk and not cassette. Until now, only a Disk Drive now comes with three FREE softnegotiated favourable credit terms with HFC Drive. The 1050 is compatible for use with the small proportion of Atari Computer owners ware titles, in addition to the DOS 2.5 Disk Trust. You do not need a bank account to Atari 400/800 and XL/XE computers and allows have been able to benefit from the power and and Manual. The first of these is The Payoff take out credit with HFC, and no deposit is access to a range of over 450 disk-based soft-speed of the 1050. Now Silica are pleased to on disk, a new adventure game in which you required. Repayments can be made by post, ware titles. The 1050 comes with DOS 2.5, be able to offer the 1050 at a new low price of play the leading role. On the reverse side of standing order, or personally at your local and can also be used with other Atari Disk only  including VAT and FREE delivery. this disk is a demonstration program showing HFC office. If you wish to use these facilities, Operating Systems, making it compatible with We also offer credit facilities allowing Atari Atari's amazing sound and graphics. Also insimply complete and return the coupon below. the complete range of Atari Corp and Third owners to purchase it over 12 months for cluded is Home Filing Manager which will We will then send you further details and an Party software for Atari 8-bit computers. The only .46 per month. The total purchase help you organise your files. It allows you to application form by return of post. addition of a disk drive is a great enhanprice over 12 months, with interest at a flat catalogue and file details of books, birthdays, cement to any computer system, increasing rate of only 16%, is only 12x .46 = .52 your stamp collection or anything else which OUR SPECIALIST SERVICE storage facilities and cutting information access (APR 32.3%). There has never been a better would normally require you to use filing cards. We are now firmly established as the UK's time to seconds instead of the minutes taken time for Atari owners to buy a Disk Drive! The software which comes free with the Disk NUMBER ONE Atari specialists, so when you Drive carries a normal retail price of .98 buy an Atari computer product at Silica you SUPERB TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS and is as follows: will be fully supported. Our mailings keep The 1050 is a dual density disk drive. This refers to the amount of information that can be stored on a HOME FILING MANAGER .99 you up to date with news of software releases single side of a disk. Three things determine the density of a particular disk format: The number of THE PAY OFF ADVENTURE .99 and developments. Our technical support team bytes in each sector, the number of sectors per track and the number of tracks per disk. Single DOS 2.5 DISK & MANUAL FREE and sales staff are at the end of the telephone Density formats give eighteen 128 byte sectors on each of their 40 tracks, thus giving a total capacity SOUND & GRAPHICS DEMO FREE line, to deal with your problems and supply of 18x128x40 or 92, 160 bytes. Double Density formats give sectors that are twice as large as the single Normal cost of FREE software density sectors and are capable of holding 256 bytes on each sector. This yields a capacity of 184 W34.90 your every need. We aim to stock all available .98 kilobytes per disk. There is also a third format, Dual Density which is the one used by Atari's new 1050 Atari hardware, software, peripherals and Disk Drive with DOS 3 and DOS 2.5. It has 26 of the 128 byte sectors on each of its 40 tracks, giving a FREE POS & PACKING FREE POST & PACKING accessories. We also stock a wide range of total capacity of 133 kilobytes, which after formatting comes down to 127K. The 1050 is capable of Mail Orders to the UK and BFPO are sent Atari dedicated books and magazines. Here running disks formatted in either single or dual density and can run either DOS 2, DOS 2.5, or DOS 3, from Silica with post and packing FREE. We are some of the many facilities we can offer: this makes the machine completely compatible with all of the previous old style software. The 1050 is provide a 24 hour service and aim to despatch *FREE POST & PACKING ON MAIL ORDER compatible with the 400/800 and the new XL XE series of Atari computers. However, if you run a 400 orders on the same day that we receive them. *FREE NEXT DAY SECURICOR DELIVERY or 800 you would need to already have at least 32K RAM of memory in your computer. The 1050 has a built-in 6507 micro processor and an onboard ROM operating system for automatic standby capability * INFORMATION MAILING SERVICE 12 MONTH GUARANTEE It has automatic switching from single to enhanced density modes. It has a 'Disk Busy indicator and TECHNICAL SUPPORT TEAM up to 4 disk drives can be controlled at once. Included with the Disk Drive is the Owner's Manual, the The 1050 Disk Drive comes with a full 1 year * HIGHLY COMPETITIVE PRICES DOS 2.5 Master Diskette, Reference Manual, I/O Data cable and Mains Adaptor. The 1050 disk drive guarantee. Silica will replace any faulty 1050 * AFTER SALES SUPPORT SERVICE comes with everything you need to plug it in and use it immediately. Disk Drive with a new unit within this period. *REPAIR SERVICE ON ATARI PRODUCTS ORDER NOW OR SEND FOR A CREDIT APPLICATION FORM Silica Shop Limited, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Telephone: 01 309 1111 HOTLINFO 1050 0 To: Silica Shop Ltd, Dept CVG 1285 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Please send me .......... 1050 Disk Drive(s) at  each Mr/Mrs/Ms: ............... Initials:........... Surname: Address: If you can't wait to get your hands on a brand new 1050 Disk Drive for your Atari 8-bit computer and you have a credit card or charge card, phone our hotline now! We accept Access, American Express, Barclaycard, Diners Club, Mastercharge and Visa. Telephone our hotline with your card number and your address details and we will dispatch a disk drive to you TODAY! You can also call the hotline to request a credit application form if you wish to take out credit facilities with HFC Trust. Postcode:.. O I enclose a cheque: for . Please debit my credit card: .... (made payable to Silica Shop Ltd) CREDIT CARD NUMBER: We accept: Access, American Express, Barclaycard, Diners Club, Mastercharge, Visa 0 I wish to pay by credit: (12 monthly credit instalments) Please send me written details and an application form o 01-309 1111 -----"


"Vie ArKUNG-FU THE ARCADE SMASH COMES HOME! Also for the BBC Micro 9.95 eGe Konami eGe Imagine Software is available from: Booli.WHSMITH, John.Menzies , WOOLWORTH, LASKYS, Rumbelows,Greens, Spectrum Shops and all good dealers. Imagine Software (1984) Limited  6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS Tel:061 834 3939.Telex: 669977 "


"C+VG FEB Software REVIEWS FRIDAY THE 13TH SCORE: 0000000 WEAPON  Machine: CBM 64, Spectrum, Amstrad  Supplier: Domark Price: .95 We're not trying to shock, protests Domark at suggestions of bad taste surrounding the advertising of Friday the 13th, just trying to get attention. Really? Their advert, featuring an ice hockey mask in a pool of blood with a knife thrust through the eye socket, certainly works on both counts. EMAP, publishers of C+VG, originally had doubts whether to publish the ad. Menzies, the newsagent chain, even insisted the cover art work be changed before it would be displayed. Of course, Domark, while appearing suitably shocked, love the fuss. It's great publicity. A game based on the exploits of a psychopathic killer who hacked, slashed and stabbed himself into film notoriety, is bound to attract the odd criticism. And well they know it. But what has this to do with the game? Not a lot, actually. The packaging and publicity may be sickeningly bloody and gory, but the game isn't. Blood-curdling screams — at least on the Commodore version are as bad as it gets Jason such a nice name for such a fiendish killer is wreaking havoc at Crystal Lake holiday camp where you have arrived on holiday. e He appears to be just one of the normal holidaymakers at the camp until he attacks you/or the others with an axe. You have to find a safe sanctuary screen. Strength is indicated by Friday the 13th is not a where Jason cannot go and a dumbell. computer nasty\" and contains then persuade the other The other characters at the no more violence than most holidaymakers to join you or kill camp are shown in the bottom other computer games. If that him. right corner. If Jason or you kill disappoints you, Domark have Weapons are scattered one of them they are replaced thoughtfully provided two throughout the game which you by a tombstone. foaming blood capsules for you can use in a bid to destroy The mask shows how close to chew and spit blood at the Jason you are to going mad and, computer. Most of the screen is taken therefore, the amount of time. Such are the marketing skills up with a 3D scrolling view of you have left before the game is of the Domark team that Friday the holiday camp, covering over. the 13th will be successful. rooms, walls, fences etc. The graphics on Friday the your panic rating and 13th are surprisingly crude and  Graphics Jason always attacks the person chunky on the Commodore with the highest rating is  Sound version. The character you shown by the height of hair on control also makes a noise like a  Value the character's head at the machine gun when he walks.  Playability bottom left-hand corner of the Quite why, we can't work out. vo THINK! HERE BLITZ GAME brilliantly simple and lastingly addictive. We think it's a winner. The scores for graphics and sound are not really relevant as they are not vital to the game. AXIS ASSASSIN  Machine: CBM 64Atari Supplier: Ariolasoft . Price: .95 cassette/.95 disk on CBM/.95 Atari Disk At first sight Axis Assassin is an interesting game but somehow it never quite satisfies its promise. The battle against the Master Arachnid and his multi-legged marauders ranges over a choice of 20 grids and five zones. All you have to defend yourself are three Axis Assassins, armed with unlimited fire power and pulse bombs. The game starts as spiders spin webs across the grids. Then the Master Arachnid releases his army of hunters, drones, spores and exterminators. Your Axis Assassin can move up, down and across the grid, trying to destroy everything before they get you. Summing up, there's nothing really wrong with Axis Assassin but there's no real reason why anybody should make time to play it. coco Machine: Spectrum everything in that line or column Supplier: Ariolasoft is moved along including the spaces. Get the idea?  Price: .95 One clever — or false move Think! I thought. I moved. I lost. can change the whole But was I disappointed? Not complexion of the game. A one jot. seemingly certain victory can Ariolasoft, mainly known for become defeat. their imports of American There are seven levels of software, has come up with a difficulty, hint facilities, different gem of a game with Think! And speed games and set problems it's British, designed by the to solve. brains at Tigress Marketing. Think! is instantly playable, Think! contains that all too rarely found quality: a new and simple idea cleverly executed. Basically, Think! is a board game on computer, easy to learn, difficult to master. All you have to do is get four of your counters in a row on a six by six grid. You play against a friend or the computer, making alternate moves. The winning lines can be vertical, horizontal or diagonal. The counters can only be moved onto the grid from the bottom or right edge of the board. When a new counter is introduced into the grid  Graphics Sound  Value  Playability 2 Spectrum Graphics Sound Value Playability CONTINUED FROM PAGE 32 ENDS "


"DYNAMITE! HOT HOT RASPUTIN RUNESTONE Ivan the Crusader's epic quest to end Rasputin's evil reign puts this isometric multi room arcade adventure in a world of its own. The evil Orcs ravage the land of Belorn you control the only characters who can save it. Stunning landscapes plus intriguing adventure in Venturescope' FIREBIRD PIRCbird MOT gerry the germ _HOT COSTA CAPERS CAS BODY PAIN Crazy multi-screen adventure-failed Germ Gerry proves his worth by laying waste to his victim's bodyuntil he reaches the heart.. Ted's Great Summer Blow-Out-over 40 whacky screens as he tries to avoid sunstroke, drinks like a fish and blows all his hard-earned money! trestred Rireerd Four great, sizzling games from Firebird — the all-new Hot Range. Available for the Spectrum, Commodore 64 and Amstrad see them at all good computer stores now! FIREBIRD MAIL ORDER Please state name of game, machine, cassette or disk and quantity required Enclosed crossed cheque/PO made payable to FIREBIRD SOFTWARE. All offers are subject to availability. Orders are despatched promptly. All prices inclusive of VAT and postage. MAIL ORDER: AUNTIE KAY, 'FREEPOST FIREBIRD, WELLINGTON HOUSE, UPPER ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON WC2H 9DL. \"No stamp required. FIREBIRD SOFTWARE WELLINGTON HOUSE UPPER ST. MARTIN'SLANE LONDON WC2H 9DL TFIREBIRD IS A TRADEMARK OF BRITISH TELECOMMUNICATIONS pic "


"GYROSCOPE COMPETITION COMPETITION Koronis Rift Competition is a Okay, so you think you're good. Quick thinking, fast reactions, a master of joystick gyrating. The perfect computer gamester, infact. Well we're giving you a chance to put 'those skills to the test. We've got 50 copies it looks like a little spinning top of Gyroscope from Melbourne House up for grabs as prizes in another great C+VG competition which will put you into a spin. A gyroscope disc or wheel mounted to that it is able to rotate about any axis. When spinning and left undisturbed it will maintain its direction in space independently of its relation to the earth. So much for the science and onto the game. In the game you control the gyroscope down five different courses, avoiding aliens, magnets, negotiating narrow ledges and avoiding pits. Difficult and demanding, we think you'll love Gyroscope. So here's how you can win the game, which is available for the Commodore, Spectrum, Amstrad and BBC B. Hidden in the word square below are the names of five Melbourne House games. Find them and send your answers to C+VG. A A BD RC ADVUT SELM I GYROSCOPE ROKMN OBSGCBD E F G HGi RIBD Kajwili i K P P D A Y ZN STEEK F G H I J OUVWWH A MT HEJUK E F THE RINGS K L M L 0 B x WF Z EI HF POR IM00 X E WYSxGGHFHNNOX FIGHTING WARRIOR A UZ PIDSTUK IZP|0Y TVBC EF SVRO OMNW X C+VG/MELBOURNE HOUSE GYROSCOPE COMPETITION Name Address BBC Amstrad Spectrum Please tick the correct box for your computer. CBM 64 Koronis Rift + the legendary weapons testing ground of the Ancients. For every scavenger and get-rich-quick merchant in the Cosmos, this fabled hiding place of technological treasures would offer the key to power and wealth beyond the dreams of avarice. And now those dreams are about to become reality for you. Wandering through the galaxy earning a living as a techno-scavenger, you discover the Koronis. Its treasures are for the taking. I f your dare! Koronis Rift is the latest action strategy game from Activision, following hot on the heels of Rescue on Fractalus and Ballblazer. And thanks to -Activision, C+VG has got 30 copies of the Commodore 64 game for you to win. All you have to do is answer the following questions and then send the answers, together with the coupon printed below, to C+VG Koronis Rift is created by designers who work at Lucasfilm Games. And the man at the top is George Lucas, creator of the Star Wars film adventures. The questions are all about the Miras of George Lucas. Send your answers to Computer and Video Games, Gyroscope Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is the 16th February and the editor's decision is final. 1) Name the two other films in the Star Wars trilogy 2) The evil Darth Vader was played by an actor who also plays the road safety hero, the Green Cross Man. What is his name? 3) George Lucas and a Hollywood director combined their talents to produce a hugely successful action adventure film starring Harrison Ford. What was the film called? C+VG/ACTIVISION KORONIS RIFT COMPETITION Name.... . Address.... Send your answers to C+VG, Koronis Rift Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. The closing date is the 16th February and the editor's decision is final. "


"MIRRORSOFT FLEET STREET A QUICK TOUR ROUND THE DEPARTMENTS Each Fleet Street Editor page is constructed as a series of panels, with up to 8 panels per A4 page. Here's where you construct those panels: CITY OF LONDON EC4 Editor OOOOO Welcome to the world of personal publishing on your BBC Micro! GRAPHICS LIBRARY 200K (about 400 pieces) of ready-touse art-illustrations, symbols, and display typefaces which can be incorporated into your own work. STUDIO Where you modify existing art from the Library or your own collection, or create your own. All the graphics in the Library were created here. FLEET STREET EDITOR gives you everything you need to produce professional-looking printed materials in one package! The different stages in newspaper and other types of print production processes are represented by the six different departments in the program. By following these stages through the program and comprehensive manual, you can blend text and graphics to produce printed materials for a wide range of applications. Whatever information you want to communicate, FLEET STREET EDITOR will make your task easier and more enjoyable... and save you money! That's right FLEET STREET EDITOR not only provides you with a complete publishing package. As part of the package, you also receive valuable money-off coupons for Cumana disk drives and Touch-Pads and for Mannesmann-Tally dot-matrix natrix printers. COPYDESK Input your text here, using either the program's word processor or existing View or Wordwise files, and watch it wrap automatically round your graphics. Use different fonts, too. PAGE MAKE-UP Define the format for your page and construct it from the catalogue of panels you've built up. Some panels are provided ready-made for you to experiment with todos PREVIEW AND PRINT Preview a reduced representation of your completed page on screen, approve it, and send it to your printer using one of the built-in printerdrivers you can write your own, too. ADMINISTRATION Set up the program to suit your system configuration, format disks, integrate graphics from most Mode 4 programs, and further manipulate Fleet Street Editor files. Just .95 including VAT! "


"FLEET STREET EDITOR January 1986  AND PICTURES or separately .. Issue NO.1 GIVES YOU WORDS In any way you wish together If you find yourself in the newesheet A hotseat... Fleet Street Editor is the personal Pub lishing Package YOU Must have. 31 You can use text in Mat ways: regular, bold, iniverse and, of At this, and more, can be course, with fancy done in this one package with nothing extra to buy! Headlines &Titles Mirrorsoft in your text. Please tick THE FIRST EDITION ORDERS Publication: January 23rd 1986 I would like to order FLEET STREET EDITOR. The minimum equipment you need to become a FLEET My disk system is as follows: STREET EDITOR is: * BBC Model B with disk interface * 40 track single-sided disk drive * Dot matrix printer capable of 640 dot bit image I enclose my cheque No._for .95 OR mode and true descenders Please debit my Access/Visa account no. * Monochrome monitor or TV You can configure the program to any type of drive combination via the Administration department. Signature FLEET STREET EDITOR is supplied on two disks one Please allow 21 days for delivery containing the program and one containing the graphics library. These are formulated in different ways for different INFORMATION Please tick drive configurations, so take care when ordering or buying Please send your detailed brochure on FLEET STREET EDITOR that it matches your current FLEET STREET EDITOR system. Upgrades are available. The registration card supplied in the back of the manual, when completed and returned to us, will ensure you receive Address details of new software designed to enhance your FLEET STREET EDITOR. Complete the coupon and return it to us for a detailed Post code brochure or to place a firm order. FLEET STREET MIRRORSOFT LTD, FREEPOST BS4382, Paulton, EDITOR should also be available from good software Bristol BS18 5BR stockists everywhere. MIRRORSOFT LTD FREEPOST BS4382, Paulton, Bristol BS185BR (no stamp needed) Name "


"WORLD EXCLUSIVE FORWARD WITH BRITAIN COMPETITION Drunks VICAR EATS TART in drag hijack a bus Ever fancied being an editor of your very own magazine? Perhaps you already are. Judging by the numbers of fanzines we receive at the C+VG IDEAS CORP penthouse offices there are quite a few budding editors and designers out there in the real world. Now we're giving you the chance to win national recognition thanks to Mirrorsoft. If you produce a computer related magazine at your schooi, or at your local computer club, or even if you just produce your own fanzine along with a few friends, you should enter the C+ VG Father Dezmund O'Herlihy heard to groan as he was Fanzine of the Year age 56 — of Nether Wallop wheeled away from the competition. was admitted to casualty last furious crowd. Winners will get a really evening after surviving a Mrs Crunch, a widow of 73, neat bit of software from horrifying ordeal at the village said the pie was unique and Mirrorsoft, a neat bit of hardfête. she was heartbroken by the ware from Kumana plus a trip The incident occured after \"butcherous act\". Edith is still around the Daily Mirror HQ in the judging of the \"Christmas fuming and has been seen London.* The software is Fleet Street Edibles\" entries. Father working out in the primary Editor, a terrific package O'Herlihy awarded first prize school gym. which enables you to write, to Edith Crunch and proceed Father O'Herlihy has taken layout and print your own to consume the entire 12inch to carrying a can of MACE magazine all with just the aid diameter pie. under his vestment, and says of a trusty BBC. which is April 16th 1986. \"I didn't think anyone would he won't go out after dark Fleet Street Editor is a mixWe'll give you updates on the mind,\" the stunned vicar was fearing the consequences. ture of a word processor, progress of the contest from graphics package and design time to time before we Here's a brief look at the things from collections you have utility all wrapped into one. announce the winners later in you'll be able to do with created yourself, or create And it's just what every buddthe New Year. Mirrorsoft's terrific Fleet your own. ing magazine editor needs to So if you want to be the Street Editor package. COPYDESK: produce a high quality proud holder of the C+ VG . GRAPHICS LIBRARY: A simple word processor for product... Fanzine of the Year title get A collection of illustrations, entering text on to a page The package includes all the cracking on your next issue symbols, and typefaces which panel and wrapping it around major departments» that any today. If you've never had a go magazine or newspaper needs at producing your own mag can be incorporated into your any graphics you may have already created for that panel. to operate — the graphics then why not start now? own work. library, the copy desk, the Your entries will be judged  STUDIO:  PAGE MAKE-UP: design studio, page make up by the editor and designer of A drawing package on which Defining the format you want and, of course, printing. C + VG, and representatives of the art provided in the your page to take and conUsing Fleet Street Editor Mirrorsoft and the Daily Graphics Library has been structing the page from the couldn't be easier and you can Mirror newspaper. Don't forget produced. You can also use it panels you have created. produce a really professional to fix the coupon to your entry! to modify existing art, either O PREVIEW AND PRINT: looking magazine or newsletter. * Subject to availability from the Graphics Library or Provides a reduced repreAnd a Fleet Street Editor packsentation of your completed age could be yours if you enter page on screen and enables our great competition. C+VG/MIRRORSOFT FLEET STREET EDITOR you to send the page to your There are three categories. You can enter a school COMPETITION printer. . ADMINISTRATION: magazine, your club or user The Name.... group magazine or if you're 'housekeeping' department. This is where you an individual who produces an set the program up to suit your independent magazine you can Address particular equipment, prepare enter that too. All you have to do is send us Age......... blank disks for use, and an issue or issues of your integrate graphics created magazine before the closing Title of magazine... under another program or date of the competition system. Category (tick box) SCHOOL CLUB/USER GROUP O INDEPENDENT time ress of the updates 86... haled into one "


"The T.V. science fiction series invades your home computer. Earth is visited by seemingly human aliens... These reptiles soon reveal their ultimate aim however...to take over Earth and enslave its population... SPECTRUM 48 K ... Your mission as resistance leader Michael Donovan is to seek and destroy their Mother Ship using all the skills and weaponry at your command. All-action, multi-level Arcade game for your Spectrum & Commodore. COMMODORE 64 .95 SPECTRUM 48 K AMSTRAD ocean Ocean Ocean Software is available from selected branches of Bool WHSMITH.'John Menzies , WOOLWORTH, LASKYS, Rumbelows, Greens, Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Trade enquiries welcome. Ocean Software Limited, 6 Central Street, Manchester M2 SNS. Telephone: 061 832 6633 Telex: 669977 Oceans G C 1983 Warner Bros. Inc. All Rights Reserved "


"PERILS OF PLASTIC MAX Question: Who once won first place in a Bonny Micro Chip contest before becoming a huge TV cult? Max Headroom, that's who. Now he's about to take on the computer world with his own game. C+VG's Paul Boughton investigates. Max Headroom, the man with over and lodged in the viewer's the vinyl complexion, a smile as mind before they realise what dazzling as a searchlight and a has happened. cute stutter to humanise his The Blipverts have a nasty computer-generated plastic side effect for the viewer — perfection, is back. they make the body Yes, the cult hero from twenty self-destruct. minutes into the future will be Investigative reporter Edison on Channel 4 within the next Carter, who works for Network few weeks presenting a new 23, takes on his own bosses in series of pop videos linked by an effort to expose this scandal. his machine-gun chatter, corny But an anfortunate \"accident» jokes, wit and wisdom. happens to Carter. Bryce Lynch, And not only that. The man who created the Blipverts, takes who is proud to be a CAD — Carter's brain patterns and with computer-aided design, that is ) the aid of a computer creates is the hero of a new Max Headroom. computer game from Quicksilva A pirate TV station, Bigtime due for release any day now. Television, running endless And if successful it could be the 1980s pop videos, is badly in first of a series of games based need of a ratings boost. And on Max. when Max Headroom is brought The game is loosely based on to them by Breughel and the film which launched Max on Mahler, a couple of heavies, an unsuspecting nation last they realise his potential as a April. TV star. The setting of both the game With Max Headroom fronting and film is a world where the the videos, Bigtime's ratings soar only growth industry is much to the anger of Network television and ratings are the 23. Everybody's out to get Max. only things that matter. And he's not happy about it ... Network 23, run by a man Quicksilva's game — which named Grosman, is the top rated will be available on the station, thanks to the brilliant Spectrum Commodore 64 and but evil invention of Blipperts, Amstrad differs from the compressed TV commercials film by making Edison Carter which happen so fast they are and Max different people. "


"FIAT HEADROOM GRAPHICS DE Edison Carter is attempting to friend, and \"injected\" into the bringing Max to the computer is the original scriptwriters to rescue Max Headroom from the compaters which control Network Manchester-based Binary Designs, write some jokes, we 7 digitise Network TV building at night. 23's offices. Andy Hieke, Binary's and put it on the cassette The Max personality generator Maxhunter must take control managing director, says: \"The although it's difficult to get is situated on the 210th floor of of various systems in the majority of the game will be something that's produced on a the building in the computer building at different times and played on the top ten executive machine that's worth millions on lah. In order to reach that floor, give Edison directions to get to floors. There are various games one that's worth a hundred Edison has to have an access the directors' offices which lie at various levels. Because you're pounds.\" code for the lift. Only the on the top ten floors and not the only computer in the And a final word from Max president of the network and the eventually the president's suite building, you have to fight for himself. \"A lot of people see me computer genins that created at the very top control of the lifts and doors.\" as something very special and Max have that and neither are to win the game you must The game, he says, will be I'm humble enough to accept going to help. get to the top levels, find the arcade adventure and strategy. other people's opinions — There are also security guards various codes, access the Quick reactions are also they're right. I was brought onto to contend with and two computer lab and free Max. Max important in several parts of the the networks to give them a assassins who are hunting must then be taken to the game play. Little more pezaz, fiz, Edison ground floor and out of the As a bonus for completing the razzamataza, and other words The player takes the role of building before six o'clock in the game, you get to see Max and with lots of 2s in them. the Maxhunter, a computer morning when the staff return. hear him speak. It's hard to be perfect but I program written by Carter's girl The team given the task of Says Andy: \"We would like try 3) Name the creator of the Blipverts? Max Headroom's sense of humour is well known if you've watched the TV series. Write what you think would be a great joke for Max to tell As Max mania spreads, a whole series of spin-offs from the series is about to appear. And so you don't miss out on all the fun C+VG and Quicksilva have grabbed a few of the goodies as prizes in our great Max Headroom competition. The first 25 winners will receive a video of the film which launched Max last year and was re-screened at Christmas. The next 25 lucky winners will get copies of a new book, Max Headroom's Guide to Life. And to stand a chance of winning just answer the simple questions below and send the answers together with the coupon printed below to Max C+VG/QUICKSILVA MAX HEADROOM COMPETITION Name Address Headroom Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is 16th February and the editor's decision is final. 1) On what floor of Network TV's building is the Max Headroom personality generator kept?_ 2) What is the Maxhunter? Tick your video type: VHS O BETA "


"SET TO STUN... READY TO RUN WILLOW PATTERN THUNDERBIRDS UNDERBIRD 2 DONT PANIC MICROCOSM WUUUUU CHICKIN CHASE CYLU BOOTY FAT MAN SAM CHIMERA STAR DRIFTER AMSTRAD 301 CYLU 302 DON'T PANIC 303 BOOTY 306 CHIMERA 310 WILLOW PATTERN 313 THUNDERBIRDS SPECTRUM 304 CHIMERA 308 WILLOW PATTERN 311 THUNDERBIRDS 315 CHICKIN CHASE COMMODORE BBC 317 MICROCOSM 309 WILLOW PATTERN 319 STAR DRIFTER 312 THUNDERBIRDS 321 FAT MAN SAM 316 CHICKIN CHASE 318 MICROCOSM 307 CHIMERA 314 THUNDERBIRDS 305 CHIMERA ELECTRON 320 STAR DRIFTER ATARI SUPER SILVER EACH MAIL ORDER Please state name of game, code number and quantity required. Enclose crossed cheque/PO made payable to FIREBIRD SOFTWARE. All offers are subject to avail ability. Orders are despatched promptly. All prices inclusive of VAT and postage, MAIL ORDER: *FREEPOST FIREBIRD, WELLINGTON HOUSE, UPPER ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON WC2H 9BR. \"No stamps required. 168.95 FIREBIRD SOFTWARE, WELLINGTON HOUSE, UPPER ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON WC2H 9DL. TEL: 01-379 6755/5626 Firebird and the Firebird logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications pic c "


"DE WE IDEATA popod Welcome to IDEAS CENTRAL. My name is Melissa Ravenflame, I.C. co-ordinator. IDEAS CENTRAL is where you'll find the Bug Hunters' HQ and the man who keeps those rogue robots in order Jackson T. Kalliber. Jackson makes sure OTISS, Big Red, X and B-Con get out there to find the hints, tips and pokes you all so desperately need for a happy existence. Don't tell them but I can't rely on them to make a good job of it. So the IDEAS CORPORATION and yours truly, Melissa R., need YOUR help. Remember, the IDEAS CORP will pay a large amount of credits to anyone assisting our enquiries. So, send your hints and cheats to Melissa Ravenflame; IDEAS CENTRAL, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. POKES TIR NA NOG To make Cuchulainn invisible go to Lon Liath and get the objects behind the locked doors and goblet. Then go to the stone tablet and drop the objects. The stone tablet will read W.N,EN,E,7. Follow these direction and drop the spade. You will recieve half a torc the other half being in the ice cave. When you put them together you will become invisible. Thanks to Andrew Watts of Northampton. them when autopilot disengages. Tanks mostly appear in groups of five and planes mostly in groups of four or so. Make full use of the computer. Use the tactical maps above and zoom in on sectors to see what actually is there. If you are going to try any of the invasions, one general tips is to stock up on missiles before taking the planes and mothership. Stock up on fuel, shields and missiles before flying through the cloud layer to fight planes or motherships. let him punch you. This zaps his endurance and not yours. Boom Boom Barnet: Try and knock his endurance down to about 20 and then move the joyustick left. This should keep his guard down. You should be ready to hit him. Flashy Fenwick: Very easy. Same as Pedro! That's as far as Bradford has got. Anyone know how to beat the next two. first gyroscope, you can normally zoom straight onto the square. If not, wait for the second alien to go into the furthest right corner and then move quickly. You will now be on the fourth level. Not too many difficulties here. The first screen of level five is the same as the cover of the box. Travel slowly and think before you move! ONE FOR THE TEXAS!!! SKYFOX A regular to these pages is Kenneth Henry and this time it is with hints on Skyfox. Always pay attention to your scanner. One good tip is too thrust into a clear sector using the afterburners and call up the computer's tactical map. When on the ground and the tanks are just blue/black specks on the horizon, destroy them with your cannons before the cause any serious shield damage. When on tanks, don't bother using missiles, save then for the planes. Be ready to expect tanks or planes when using autopilot as you usually fly straight past BARRY MCGUIGAN One more for the sport fanatics Barry McGuigan's Boxing from Bradford Barter of Croydon, who tells us how to reach Rank 13. Cannonball Corby: Punch him in th face and stomach. Try and get him into his corner and you should be able to knock him out in the 1st round. Pedro Rameiz: Pedro is very easy to beat. Just keep hitting him till he falls John 'Kid' Cutter: Have two furious rounds with John and then let your guard down and Help Who can help Richard Mills of Kent who bought Monty on the Run nearly two months ago and has been stuck in the sewers' for the last month? Nick Rush has rushed (sorry about that, Nick, but Otiss couldn't resist the pun — Melissa) these latest hints over to the office for the Spectrum game Gyroscope. The first two levels are fairly easy, but when you reach screen 1, level 3, things might start gettting a little difficult. You will encounter a narrow ledge with two magnets on it. You must travel quickly through these magnets, but be sure to slow down after that, otherwise you will travel to fast down the slope and will skid across the glass and over the edge. If you get this far on your Yes Texas lovers, your computer has finally made it onto these pages. Pick yourselves up off the floor and read on to find out some tips on Parsec, sent in by Roger Marsden of Leicestershire. After you have inserted the cartridge and got the title screen, press any key to begin play. At the bottom of the screen the 'Press fire to Begin' message comes up. Do not press! Instead, go to the top of the screen as far as possible by pressing the E key, then get your ship moving as slowly as possible backwards, let go of the S key and you should still keep on going. Normally your ship would come to a halt but if you hold down the E key "


"peppe in 13 JERRY PARIS. continued from page 45 after releasing the S key your ship should ignore the barrier and will keep on going. When you release the E key, your ship will stop and, by quickly pressing S and/or D. you can put yourself in such a position that half your ship is on the left hand side and the fuel coming out the back is on the right. Press fire to begin. The advantages of doing this are apparent when you are on the asteroid belt or when fighting swoopers or LTFs, you can use the fuel coming out of the back as a marker to line up your shots. When fighting the killer satellites keep moving and firing all the time because the missiles they fire do not disintegrate before reaching you. On the asteroid belt always stay in lift three unless you want to 'play safe on the first two screens by staying near the top and using lift two. On the first screen when you are fighting the dramites, go up in lift two firing all the time, this should destory them all. you where to go next. It seems most people had no problems with Wispwood but the Vaults were another matter, and step on to the cube to so, let's go into them in more transport to the stone circle in detail. Once inside, go to the Wispwood. Strike the stones teapot room and search the with the Leyrod to reveal the teapot with the Servant spell to Leycubes. Pick up Merlyn's Seal obtain the rune. Go on to the and step on to the yellow cube. fireball room where you have to touch the stool with the QUICKIES Servant spell to change it into a chest. Go out by the right Here we start a new section in back door, dodge the skeleton which readers write in with and go through the rear door, Quick Hints and Tips to make grab the spell, dodge the your favourite games easier to skeleton and leave by the rear play. door. As the skeletons follow First up is Adam Brake of you through the door use the Dorset with some hints on Missile. Take the chalice. Go Super Pipeline Il. Keep one left and then through the front workman with you and leave right to the pool room. Kill the the other running around, this skeleton and dip the chalice in man will take out the odd the pool. Go back to the creature. On every screen, fireball room and go out of the there is a place to stay and right back door and then right just shot and so be out of again to arrive in the pedestal danger. Sometimes it is better fountain room. Empty the to sacrifice a workman than to chalice into the fountain to shoot the creature, but, only if obtain the Heal spell and sit on you have two workman the fountain to boost your together. energy. Proceed to the room When one of the workmen is with the chests. Open the first mending the pipe, stay by him with the Servant spell and take as the enemies try to kill him the key which you then use to before he is finished. If you open the third chest. Take that start to run out of water and key and open the second chest, your score starts to rapidly to reveal another key and the decrease, sacrifice your life as Leyrod spell, take both of you can lose all your points in these. A word of warning here a short time. make sure that you avoid From E. Nieland of Holland all spiders. here are some passwords for Take this key to the fireball Hacker, and System 1500 on room and use it to open the the CBM 64. chest. Take the rune the First of all, Hacker. The log fireball changes to a half on code is Australia. moon, so take this as well. Passwords for Security checks Proceed to the room with E are: Level 1 Magma Ltd. rune fixed to floor. Leave all Project. the items you have collected, Level 2: AXD-0314479 here. Level 3: Hydralic Search both dead skeletons. Level 4: Australia One holds the last rune and On System 15000 you will the other the Missile spell and find the following telephone Evil Eyes. Use the Bane spell to numbers useful. kill the Evil Eyes. Go back to 6723427, 4935429, the room adjacent to the entry 7464460, 2297629, room and touch the flying spell 3634017, 9307269, with Servant, otherwise it will 3481408, 7239293, kill you. Return to E room and 9527001, 3634017. lay the three runes on E in the 8004310 with Password Arcles order XIT. A leycube will 01012129765858 with Password appear. Collect all other items | Pip537 Bryan Morrison of Kirkcaldy has been playing all his C64 games to come up with the following cheat modes. Thing on A Spring: When the title screen is one hold down TH,1,N,G, back arrow and Inst/Del If the borde goes grey, you have unlimited oil. Frak: When you get a high score, instead of typing in your name put the shift lock on and type American Express — with a space between the words. The border should now have gone white. Take off the shift lock, press Return and start the game. You should now be able to walk any place on the screen. But NEVER go up any ropes. If you do you will not be able to move left or right. Miner 2049er: To advance a level, just keep your finger on the fire button for about 10-15 seconds. Quo Vadis: The following set of pokes will ONLY work if you have a Reset switch. When the game has loaded press the reset switch and enter these pokes. Poke 24709,234 Poke 24710,234. Then type SYS 3488 to start the game. Your knight will not die when his energy reaches zero but lava pits will kill him. Spy Hunter: When the weapons van drops you off at the side of the road slowly edge your way to the right of the screen until you can driving along the black strips at the side. You are virtually indestructible and can make some rather large scores. DRAGONTORC OF AVALON Over the last couple of weeks we have been hearing pleas for help with this game so we shall quickly go over a few points to see if they will make the playing any easier. You start off in Wispwood will spells Bane, Servant and Move. To select a spell use up or down to wind the scroll. When the arrow indicates the spell you need press Fire once to select it and twice to activate it. Use the Servant Spell to collect the Seal of Merlyn which you will need later on. Explore the wood to collect the Missile spell, the sickle the herb and other items. Find the stone slab lying in the forest and use the Seal to get under it and into the Lost Vaults of Locris. Attack the Skeletons in the vaults with Missile — collecting further spell as you go. After completing Wispwood and the Vaults, Merlyn will tell | "


"cascade + CASSETTE SPECIAL FREE WATCH OFFER... cascade DO ASS THE NATIONAL NEWSPAPER 00006 MAIL ORDER PROTECTION SCHEME COMPUTER GAMES ON ONE CASSETTE YOURS FOR YOURS .95 including FREE Watch and Postage) 20 KEY, MULTIFUNCTION CALCULATOR WATCH AMSTRAD CPC 464 Avoid the rockets and anti-aircraft guns and DYNAMITE the dam, only the most skilful pilots succeed. NEMESIS a sophisticated version of Othello with many colourful options and levels of play. Amstrad Cassette 50 includes arcade type games, war games, adventure games, logical, tactical, and educational games, a flight simulator, and a business strategy game. 1. Maze Enter 13. The King's Orb 25. Trucking 31. Hopping Marbert 2. Cyclons 14. Play Your 20. Rally 3000 39. Dynamite 3. Handicap Golf Cards Right 27. Sitting Target 40. Timebomb 4. Rush Hour Attack 15. Creepy Crawley 28. Nemesis 41. Day at the Races 5. Rayal Rescue 16. Hangman 29. Space Ship 42. Lunar Landing 6. Star Trek 17. Pantoon Bet 30. Jet Flight 43. Space Mission 7. Whirly 18. Fireman Rescue 31. Dragona Maze 44. Rats 1. Attacker 19. 3D Maze 32. Intruder 45. Motorway 9. Fighter Command 20. Colony. 9 33. Inferno 48. Dungeon Adventure 10. Draughts 21. Back common 34. Ghosts 47. Space Pod Rescue 11. Evasive Action 22. Solit 35. Fantasy Land 41. High Rise 12. Noughts and 23. Yani 38. Space Base 49. Craps Crottet 24. Three Cardbrag 37. Planets 50. Exchange with every order for a Cassette 50 COMMODORE 64 Only you can save Europe from destruction! It's ROCKET LAUNCH, the thrilling war game that reproduces a European map. More ambitious? Try rescuing your crew under an ultrafast GALACTIC ATTACK and escaping back to your spaceship! Just two of the great games on your Cassette-50, featuring high resolution and user-defined graphics, sprites, sound and music 1. Maze Eater 13. Boggles 26. Overtake 38. Black Hole 2. Galactic Attack 14. Pontoon 27. Sitting Target 39. Dynamite 3. Space Mission 15. Ski Jump 28. Smash the 40. Do Your Sums 4. Lunar Landing 16. Hangman Window 41. Derby Dash 5. Plasma Bolt 17. Old Bones 29. Space Ship 42. Space Search 6. Startrek 18. Thin Ice 30 Jet Flight 43. Universe 7. Radar Landing 19. Orbitter 31. Phaser 44. Rats 8. Attacker 2 0. Motorway 32 Intruder 45. Tanker 9. Galactic Dog Fight 21. Force Field 33. Inferno 46. Parachute 10. Psion Attack 22. Nim 34. Ghosts 47. Jet Mobile 11. Evasive Action 23. Tunnel Escape 35. Submarines 48. High Rise 12 Noughts 24. Barrel Jump 36 Rocket Launch 49. The Force Crosses 25 Cannonball Battle 37 Planets 50. Exchange ELECTRON Can your FORCE FIELD protect the city from Alien Attack or maybe you have the skill to DYNAMITE the dam and flood enemy headquarters! Fifty different games with high speed, high resolution colour graphics, user-defined graphics and excellent sound and music. Not to mention full use of screen modes. Fifty fast paced, fascinating games. ORIC ATMOS Have a go at GALACTIC ATTACK you'll need fast reactions to beat the invaders in this alltime favourite or if you prefer you can travel through space at warp factor 9 in SPACE MISSION, a realistic 3-D version of space warfare as seen from the cockpit of a spacecraft. Everyone has a favourite game on Cassette-50. With fifty classic and original games featuring user defined graphics, sound effects and increasing levels of play. VIC-20 Will it be BALLOON DODGERS, or the prizewinning DUSTMAN DAN? Play these and 40 other fabulous games including many automatic double loaders on your unexpanded 3,5K VIC-20. And with an BK or 16K expansion cartridge you can choose from 8 additional games like STARTREK or SKULL CASTLE. Special effects user-defined graphics, super sound and music. SU MO TU WE TH FR SAJ CZ Normal 12 and 24 hour time mode Calendar mode Calculator mode Alarm mode WORTH OVER  8000 No O'60i ZX81 Even a small computer gets more from Cassette-50! You can run 39 games on just the basic 1K ZX81, while 11 more will play with the addition of a 16K expansion pack. Where else could you watch your radar instruments and judge your final approach in games like RADAR LANDING a realtime flight simulator, or enjoy the thrills of PSION ATTACK. Logical, tactical, maze. arcade all kinds of gamos on just one tape! BBC A/B An advanced computer like the BBC demands a sophisticated games cassette. That's why Cassette-50 gives you full use of screen modes with high resolution colour graphics, user-defined graphics. excellent sound and music, joystick compatibility and many high speed games. HIGH RISE gives you the chance to beat a realistic roulette wheel, with all the extras, and you'll need the fastest reactions of all to beat EVASIVE ACTION as you trail across the screen in a frantic search for oxygen. With multi-levels and superb graphics this game is totally addictive. ORIC 1 SPECTRUM 16k/48k or + 'Incredibly frustrating!' that's the verdict on Cassette-50's FROGGER. Satisfied users tell us it's one of the most challenging you'll find it's almost as good as the arcade version! CARGO has you trying desperately to complete your helicopter mission under attack. Plus 48 other tactical, logical and adventure games featuring multi-coloured and user-defined graphics, scrolling and full use of the Spectrum sound capabilities. 1. Muncher 13. Microtrap 26. Laser 39. Nim 2. Ski Jump 14. Motorway 27. Alien 40. Voyager 3. Basketball 15. Labyrinth 28. Cargo 41. Skatch Pad 4. Frogger 16. Skittles 29. The Race 42. Blitz 5. Breakout 17. Race Track 30. The Skull 43. Fishing Mission 6. Crusher 18. Ski Run 31. Orbit 44. Mystical 7. Startrek 19. Tanks 32. Munch Diamonds 8. Martian 20. Solar Ship 45. Galaxy Defence Knockout 21. Ten Pins 34. Raiders 46. Cypher 9. Boggles 22. Cars 35. Field 47. Jetmobile 10. Alien Attack 23. Stomper 36. Draggold 48. Barrel Jump 11. Lunar Landing 24. Pinball 37. Space Search 49. Attacker 12. Maze Eater 25. Cavern 38. Inferno 50. Space Mission Cassette 50 includes PLASMA BOLTS, a superb high speed version of the classic arcade Centipede game. Watch out it's really tough! DRAGON 32 If you like the light cycles of TRON, you'll love JETMOBILE a thrilling 2-player game featuring high speed graphics. APPLE Cassetto 50 gives you 50 great games to choose from including a classic STARTREK and BLAZING INFERNO. ATARI Munch, Munch... it's the MAZE EATER! Can you eat the ghosts before they eat you? Or would you rather chance it on the MOTORWAY? Your Cassette-50 is compatible with the 400/800 and 600XL/800XL sories ATARI computers. Advanced features include high-resolution graphics, sound, music and mixed mode screens. Many games are joystick compatible. 73 Bowls C calculator watch with every Cassette 50 EXPRESS DELIVERY-ORDER NOW! -ONLY .95 FREE Postage FREE in U.K. Add .00 for overseas orders. Free watch and tape will be despatched within 14 days. I enclose a cheque/ made payable to postal order for Cascade Games Ltd. or through any Post Office by TRANSCASH (Giro No. 655 6655) For even faster ordering when charging to Access, Barclaycard and Trustcard Visa use our 24 hour service. (0423) 504663. VISA No. Name Address COMMODORE 64 ATARI ORIC 1 BBC A/B SPECTRUM VIC 20 ZX 81 APPLE AMSTRAD ATMOS U DRAGON ELECTRON Cascade Games Ltd., 1-3 Haywra Crescent, Harrogate, North Yorkshire, HG1 5BG, England. Telephone: (0423) 504663. Registered Number 1755554 Post Code Country CVG 1/85 "


"AT A MEETING OF THE PSI SECURITY COUNCIL DR. BELLOWS, WHILE UNVEILING HIS PLANS FOR THE DESTRUCTION OF THE PSI CREATURES, BECOMES THE TARGET FOR A PUPAE ASSASSIN'S BULLET: WARRIOR CAM USD DIVIS INN. SAA09 TAKE THAT YOU MEDDLING FOOL... DIE SECURITY HAVE OVERPOWERED THE PUPAE, BUT IT'S TOO LATE! 3 WITH BELLOWS DEAD THE EARTH'S FINISHED! IT CAN'T END LIKE THIS, IT CANT... BLAM BADOOMS BADOO A BOLT OF UNIMAGINED POWER LEAPT FROM PS1 WARRIOR AND COVERED DR. BELLOWS WITH AN INPENETRABLE SHIELD OF PSYCHIC ENERGYAND THE ASSASSIN'S BULLETS EXPLODED! HARMLESSLY! SESSME S SECURITY GET THAT PUPAE TO AN ISOLATION CELLS. I DON'T KNOW WHAT YOU DID OR HOW YOU DID IT, TYR, BUT... SEV Ali OH, MY GOODNESS, AND GET DR. BELLOWS TO A SAFE PLACE! WARRIOR "


"THE No. 1 HIT AIWA K FOR NOW AVAILABLE SPECTRUM 48K AND AMSTRADA COMBAT THE ACTION-PACKED SIMULATION OUT OF YOUR COCKPIT WINDOW AS YOU SWOOP DOWN TO TAKE OUT SOME TANKS Spectrum Screen 'SKYFOX' is the most realistic awe-inspiring combat simulation you've ever seen on your computer. 'SKYFOX'special features includeAIR TO AIR & AIR TO GROUND COMBAT 3D SCROLLING FLIGHT SIMULATION 15 SCENARIOS (from training mission to massive invasion) 5 SKILL LEVELS (from cadet to ace of the base) AUTO PILOT FEATURE FOR LAUNCH & ENEMY SEARCHES ON BOARD & BASE TACTICAL-COMBAT COMPUTERS CONTINUOUS LASER CANNONS HEAT-SEEKING & GUIDED MISSILES JOYSTICK & KEYBOARD CONTROLS Amstrad Screen ENEMY PLANES ATTACK SUDDENLY WITH DEADLY FORCE  GET SKYFOX NOWO ariolasaits Available from all good software retailers if its not there, please order it-or in case of difficulty send your crossed cheque/P.O. made out to Ariolasoft U.K. Ltd., including your own name and address, to Ariolasoft U.K. Ltd., Suite 105/106, Asphalte House, Palace Street, London SW1E 5HS. SKYFOX-Spectrum Cassette .95 SKYFOX-Amstrad Cassette .95 UK orders only. Prices include P&P. Please allow 28 days for delivery HIGH PERFORMANCE PROGRAMS "


"*ARCA 2 TIME METAL CLASH 6 PAAA FLAG 1 1 0 km. 250 A double-jointed, kicking, punching robot is the theme of Data East's Metal Clash. Imagine the scene. A space station in the background, floating over it is this weird, mad, hilarious battle between a load of Metal Mickeys. In fact your robot — the green one — must bear a : pretty healthy grudge against the silver robots.. Pehaps its his rather sickly hue. Anyway, whether he's fighting to protect his planet or merely enjoys kicking the hell out of the others, he's having a whale of a time. Clunk! Metal connects with metal and the screen is filled with fragments and sections of robot as it disintegrates. The joystick control is very easy, you can punch or kick it in a variety of directions depending on which way you're travelling but you must make contact with you opponent — whether it's a small floating droid or another robot as large as yourself. Some of the larger species of these inhuman creatures will need several blows before they explode — that can be difficult as they'd dodge around the screen. You not only have to direct your punches but you must chase your victims over BUGGY BOY the space station. That menas keeping your chappie above ground as long as possble. The better you do, the faster they appear until the screen looks a bit like a metal scrap merchant's yard. Watch your back, you might be fighting one battle, but passers by are not averse to aiming the odd kick in your direction, and if you recieve too many of those will literally fall to pieces. Talk about a nervous breakdown. The two player game is more fun — a lime green robot against a rosebud pink one. It's quite a challenge. The first person to kick his -20&P If you're a cautious driver, steer clear of Buggy Boy. But if you've got neves of steel, climb in, fasten your seat belt and prepare for the ride of your life. With the gear set at low, foot on the accelerator and sweaty hands gripping the steering wheel, I waited for the sign to GO. Accelerator hard down, into top gear and I careered round the track. Careful driving doesn't enter into this race against time — it's a suicide run; at best you'll end up in the drink, at worst you can only crash. Console yourself with the fact that the buggy is very resiliant and will take a lot of knocks, unlike the fragile, highly bred Formula One creatures in Pole Position. The aim to drive your buggy round an obstacle strewn course, beating the set time limit before moving into the next stage. The theme is the same as most other racing games, but Buggy Boy is slightly different. It's amusing for starters — split second decisions and a steady hand still count for a lot, but how can you take it seriously when you have to leap boulders and gates and run over coloured marker flags? The track resembles a death trap. At some points there are so many hazards it is difficult to find a clear way through, but that's where the fun lies. To get past many obstacles you have to be able to dodge quickly and jump when necessary, changing course in mid-flight. The marker flags are very important and are colour coded. To earn extra points, run over them in the correct order, dictated by a grid at the top of the screen. There are numerous flags of each colour so it is not a difficult task. You must also steer through gates and will pick up extra points if you successfully negotiate those with numbers on them. To jump some obstacles use small scattered rocks to launch your car into the air by just hitting them. If you perfect your technique, you should be able to tilt the buggy and steer a narrow path on two wheels. Watch out for tunnels and bridges, especially on the second lap. You may find a rival buggy making for those at the same time, as they are only wide enough for one. The manufacturer, Tatsumi, obviously belives in the maxim 'the bigger, the better' as Buggy Boy is a Goliath amongst arcade machines — larger that TX-I with three screens giving a massive panoramic view of your thrilling ride. Three screens are not really necessary, but the sit-down cabinet certainly beats an upright and makes you feel you're getting you money's worth. FROM am CHINA "


"DE ACTION TANK 0050200 ROOT JEE FUEL FUEL 000 W000 ONON RD O 1 CHOPLIFTER opponent to bits is the winner, but it is no easy task and somehow more difficult when playing against a human rather than the computer. Perhaps that's because your opponent is less predictable.. Metal Clash is a welcome change from the present craze of martial art simulations. Granted it's still hand to foot combat, but you can't really take it seriously when you see yourself dissolving into hundreds of little pieces. It's amusing and provides a lighthearted break from the rigours of more serious space battles. It's a welcome change to descend from space and, with your tank tracks planted firmly on terra firma, blast anything that moves in one of the old style arcade games. Although SNK's Tank is very much in the conventional mode it is nevertheless an action packed game. Starting point is from the deck of an amphibious landing craft which leads straight onto land and into enemy territory. The war is on. You mission is to destroy the enemy HQ which is, predictably, at the end of a long, hard trek through lakes, woods and around numerous obstacles. The route is tortuous — winding round buildings, over bridges, through town and jungles and at almost every junction there lurks a possé of enemy tanks. With guns blazing you disembark to be met by a squad of foot soldiers. There is not much time to make strategic plans as the enemy taks are semiintelligent, and converge upon you if you hang around for too long. However, if you hide behind the building, you can pop out, fling a few bombs in their direction, while remaining safely out of harm's way. If you suffer too many hits and don't repair the damage, your sturdy tank starts to glow red a few seconds before it explodes. The joystick is an eight directional knob which controls both the direction you are travelling and the direction of the gun turret which swings in a 360 degree circle. I particularly like Tank because of its very simplicity. It's a challenge, but most importantly, it's one of those few games which is instantly playable. HI-SCORE 36056 You'd better get that trigger finger into training if you are to join an elite band of pilots on a suicidal rescue bid. Your brief — to fly into enemy territory and pick up 32 hostages. And if that sounds simple, wait for the snag. Your chopper can carry only eight passengers. On top of that, there is the constant worry of running out of fuel if that should happen, you're likely to topple out of the sky. Starting point is at the helipad. As soon as the blades are whirring you can take off. It's a good idea to make sure of the controls first — I forgot myself in the excitement of seeing the chopper rise straight into the air and immediately crashed. The controls are very simple and the chopper responds instantly to your instructions. Fly off to the left and you will immediately enter the war zone. Enemy cannons do their utmost to bring you down as you search for the first batch of hostages. In the earlier stages it is easy to bomb the ground and put those out of action before their shots reach your flying space. Later on when there are more of them, packed closer together, it becomes a bit of a headache. Enemy aircraft also do their bit and the same rule applies in the early stages. It is easy to dodge them or bring them down in flames if you are an accurate machine gun operator and fast on the joystick. The first prison block looks like a Red Cross outpost very disconcerting. Knock a hole in the side for the hostages to escape and they will literally stream out waving their arms in simulated panic. Watch the enemy at this point, if the hostages are strafed by gun first you can hear them screaming — in agony? wasn't impressed by that touch it's a bit to realistic for fun. The next step is to land close by, at which point they will automatically run to the chopper and climb in. Now the journey back to the heli-pad which is every bit as hazardous as the outward trip. As I mentioned earlier, the controls are relaistic and so is the animation, especially when the chopper turns 180 degrees to fly in the opposite direction. As it turns, you are given a head-on view and it is then that you can use your bombs. Those are most useful it is possible to hover for greater accuracy. Of course, if you hang around too long, you are likely to be blown up — a risky manoeuvre. Further screens include rescuing people from caves and burning warships. Sega's Choplifter is packed with action and is accopanied by a pacy, rousing jingle. Defintely a must, but not for the faint-hearted. "


"ESPECTRUM MSTRADE WAK ELIN The officially endorsed version of the No.1 arcade game by Laelam Imagine Software (1984), 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS. Tel: 061-834 3939. Telex: 669977 SPECTRUM 48K Mikie plays a knockout frantic farce in the classroom, locker room and the high school cafeteria. Hip-zap, door attack, throw balls and pies...but can you make him hand his love letter to his girl-friend? RUM 48K MIKIE He's the hottest coolae in school! AMSTRAD Imagine Software is available from selected branches of: Bono,WHSMITH,John Menzies,WOOLWORTH, LASKYS, Rumbelows,Greens, Spectrum Shops and all good dealers. "


"COMPETITION DLADE KUIVIVER 973 312 14CBA dan ke Mari 9 TUTTE ESEL HD 'n REPLICANT ALERT! REPLICANT ALERT! If you can track down and destroy the mutant marauder then you're in with a chance to win great prizes in the C+VG Bladerunner/Tau Ceti competition. CRL are giving away a 14inch Phillips colour TVmonitor as top prize and copies of the game to the 20 runners up of Bladerunner and 20 copies of Tau Ceti. All you have to do is find the way through our maze to find the replicant and terminate him just as you have to in CRL's game, which is based on the Harison Ford film. The runners up will have a choice of the Bladerunner game which is out on the CBM 64 or Tau Ceti on the Spectrum, a complex game combining elements of Elite, Impossible Mission and 3D Tank Duel. Right, getting tracking. C+VG BLADERUNNER COMPETITION NAME ADDRESS ROUTE Please tick which game you would like. Bladerunner CBM 64 Tau Ceti Spectrum Send your entry to Bladerunner/Tau Ceti Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. The closing date is 16th February and the editor's decision is final. "


"AVAAVAAVALAVA LAVA or many people computers are magical objects. They are capable of fantastic feats, spellbinding illusions, dazzling tricks and powerful pieces of prestidigitation. Now conjuror David Hambley has combined his talents as a magician with his self-taught computer programming skills to become what is believed to be the only magician in the world to use a home computer in a commercial magic act. And the computer which co-stars in David's act is none other than the humble Spectrum. So successful has the computer act been that David — nicknamed The Micro Wizard by the Magic Circle — has produced a collection of Spectrum tricks which he hopes will soon become commercially available. Called The Magic Box, it is the result of 500 programming hours and will allow Spectrum owners to perform a one hour magic show. He has also written a 40,000 word booklet to accompany the package. David, 31, recently visited C+VG's discreet and very exclusive cabaret club situated at the back of the computer room where the glitz and the glam of the software world are frequently entertained, to give a private show of his micro magic. And very impressive it is. The tricks cover Telepathy, ESP, card tricks and that old favourite where you \"think of a number and the computer knows it. Very baffling. David became interested in Pebble Mill at One, Video and magic when he was a young Chips and the Book lad and before long he was Programme. performing card tricks at In 1982 David bought a school. At 16 he entered the Sinclair ZX81 to help run his Magic Circle's Young Magician business accounts and of the Year competition and bookings. shortly afterwards turned As his self-taught prosemi-professional. gramming skills developed, In August 1984 he turned David hit on the idea of using fully professional. «I had to,\" he the computer to perform simple said, «I couldn't keep two jobs tricks. going. If I hadn't done it I might The result was that later in never have done and would 1982 he published what is have regretted it.\" thought to be the world's first Besides his cabaret work, book on magic and the microDavid has appeared on telecomputer called Computer vision programmes such as Magic with the ZX 81. «It sold Pin het GEN WIZARD OF THE AV AV LAV GAV LAVAAVAA by *** Hoteles en Padre "


"2 25 en stor VAVAAVAAVAAV/AVLAV fairly well,» said David, \"but at hold centre stage. that time it was a very limited \"I don't try and make the market.» computer the main focal point. In late 1983 David won a I'm still the magician. I use it Spectrum 48K. \"I was able to as another prop. I still have the upgrade the tricks, incorporate magical knowledge. Anybody colour and high-resolution can do the trick, but can they graphics.\" make it entertaining. It was about this time that \"I want to see the use of David took a gamble and computers grow within the started using the computer on magic fraternity,» said David. stage. «I wanted something «It's slowly getting there.\" different, something novel. I But right now magic seems knew there was an interest in to be growing in the computer computer magic so I decided to fraternity. David's magical incorporate it into the act.\" display has so far inspired an Because David did all the unknown member of C+VG's programming himself, he was staff to try some micro magic. nicknamed \"The Micro Wizard\" And if we ever find out who by fellow members of the Magic tried to saw a Spectrum in half Circle. and couldn't get it back David is careful not to let the together, they're fired! computer take over the act and AX81 TWENTY-ONECARD TRICK BOOOOOROND DUCADO AD COB maaaaaa Amaze your friends with some choose one of the cards and marvellous micro magic. memorise it without telling the Magician David Hambley magician. He then is asked to has written this version of the press key one, two or three to twenty-one card trick for the indicate which row the chosen Spectrum. card is in. Once the trick is proThe computer then shuffles grammed in, everything is dead and re-deals the cards and the easy. All you have to do is spectator is then asked to say perfect your stage patter. which row his chosen card is Three rows of cards will be now in. This repeated just once displayed on the screen, all face more whereupon the computer up with seven cards in each suddenly displays the card that row. was originally chosen. Your \"victim\" then has to Just like magic! II II II PRINXNK OF 2. 10 REM THE 21 CARD TRICK 20 CLEAR : GOSUB 490 30 LET a$\"4H AD 7C 6C BH 3D 2 40 LET DS=\"KC SH 6H JD QD 9C 7 50 LET CS=\"AH 2D 7D JC 9D 4C9 60 FOR Q=1 TO 3 70 CLS : PRINT\" INK 4: SIMPLY THINK OF A CARD.\" 80 PRINT AT 5,5; FLASH 1; INK 2:\"1\"; FLASH O:\" \"; INK 1; as 90 PRINT AT 10,5; FLASH 1; INK 2:\"2\": FLASH O:\" \"; INK 1:5$ 100 PRINT AT 15,5; FLASH 1; INK 2:\"3\": FLASH :\" ; INK 1:$ 110 PLOT 53, 144: INK O: DRAW 16 7,0: DRAW 0, -24: DRAW -167,0: DR AW 0,24 120 PLOT 53, 104: INK O: DRAW 16 7,0: DRAW 0,-24: DRAW -167,0: DR AW 0,24 130 PLOT 53,64: INK 0: DRAW 167 , 0: DRAW 0, -24: DRAW -167,0: DRA W 0,24 141 FOR ZE53 TO 197 STEP 24: PL OT 2, 144: DRAW 0, -24: NEXT Z 151 FOR z=53 TO 197 STEP 24: PL OT 2, 104: DRAW 0, -24: NEXT 2 161 FOR z=53 TO 197 STEP 24: PL OT 2,64: DRAW 0, -24: NEXT 2 170 PRINT AT 19,5; \"ENTER WHICH ROW IT IS IN 180 LET ZSINKEYS 190 IF z \"1THEN LET dbs+a $+$: GO TO 230 200 IF z$=\"2\" THEN LET ds-a$+b $+$: GO TO 230 210 IF ZS=\"3\" THEN LET ds-b$+c $ta$: GO TO 230 220 GO TO 180 230 LET asrds (1 TO, 3) +ds (10 TO 12) +d$ (19 TO 21 ) +d3 (28 TO 30) +d$ (37 TO 39) +d$ (46 TO 48) +d3 (55 TO 57) 240 LET b$-ds (4 TO 6) +d5 (13 TO 15) +d3 (22 TO 24) +d5 (31 TO 33) +$ (40 TO 42) +d5 (49 TO 51 ) +d5 (58 TO 60) 250 LET $uds (7 TO 9) +0$ (16 TO 18) +d3 (25 TO 27) +d5 (34 TO 36) +d3 (43 TO 45)+ds (52 TO 54)+d3 (61 TO 63) 260 NEXT 9 270 CLS : LET 10: LET X 280 INK 3: LET US YOUR CARD I S.....\" 290 GO SUB 360 300 LET t$=$(10 TO 11) 310 PLOT 151,79: INK O: DRAW O, 41: DRAW 26,0: DRAW 0,-41: DRAW -26,0 320 FOR X=7 TO 11: PRINT INK 2 ; FLASH 1;AT X, 19; \"UUU\": NEXT X 330 PAUSE 50: FOR 7 TO 11: PR INT AT X, 19; \" \"; NEXT X 340 PRINT AT 7, 19; FLASH 1; INK 1;ts; AT 9, 20; INVERSE 1; INK 3; t$; AT 11, 19; INVERSE O; INK 2: ts 350 PRINT AT 20,0; \"PRESS ANY KE Y TO CONTINUE.\": PAUSE O: CLS : GO TO 10 360 REM *************** 370 LET base PEEK 23606+256.PEE K 23607 380 FOR C=1 TO LEN ts 390 LET cde=CODE ts(c) 400 LET address-base+B+cde 410 FOR = TO 15 STEP 2 420 POKE USR \"S\"+r , PEEK address 430 POKE USR \"S\"+r+1, PEEK addre 55 440 LET address-address+1 450 NEXT 460 PRINT AT Y,x+c-1; CHR$ 162; A y+1,x+c-l;CHR: 163 470 NEXT C 480 RETURN 490 REM ************** 500 RESTORE 550: FOR N=1 TO 5: READ ks 510 FOR f=0 TO 7 520 READ a: POKE USR k$+f, a 530 NEXT f: NEXTn 540 RETURN 550 DATA \"U\", 87, 155, 87, 155, 87, 1 55,87, 155 560 DATA \"h\",0,0, 54, 62, 28,8,0,0 570 DATA \"d\",0,0,8, 28, 62,28,8,0 580 DATA \"C\",0,0,28, 42,62,42,8, 590 DATA \"S\",0,0,8,28,62,54,8,0 VAVOLAVAVAJAVAAVAV4 Anita yang "


"SOFTWARE SERUICE DISK 11.10 11.10 11.10 11.10 11.10 13.20 7.30 10.50 LORD TOFF 14.30 9.70 9.50 1.1.20 (new) CART 12.30 12.30 12.30 12.30 10.70 ATARI CASS DISK COMMODORE CASS RESCUE ON FRACTALUS 7.30 11.10 SUPERMAN 7.30 TAPPER 6.50 BLADERUNNER 8.95 SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD 11.10 GREAT AMERICAN ROAD RACE 7.50 RED MOON 5.00 PINBALL CONST. SET MERCENARY 7.30 MAIL ORDER MONSTERS MURDER ON THE ZINDERNUEF 11.10 RACING DESTRUCTION SET BALL BLAZER 7.30 11.30 EXPLODING FIST 7.30 GREAT AMERICAN ROAD RACE 8.10 11.10 SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD PINBALL CONSTRUCTION SET 11.10 ELITE 11.00 MUSIC CONSTRUCTION SET 11.10 RUPERT AND THE TOYMAKER KENNEDY APPROACH 7.30 11.20 FRANK BRUNOS BOXING 5.75 ARCHON 8.75 11.10 LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE 7.30 ONE ON ONE 7.30 10.70 BLOCKBUSTERS 6.50 CHOP SUEY 6.50 9.50 KENNEDY APPROACH 11.50 MR DO 7.75 SKY FOX 7.45 BLUE MAX 2001 7.75 MONTY ON THE RUN 7.00 M.U.L.E 8.95 11.10 SPY Vs SPY II 7.30 HACKER 11.20 TERRORMOLNOS 5.75 AMSTRAD MSX EXPLODING FIST 7.30 YIE AR KUNG FU II (new) BEACH HEAD 7.30 HYPER RALLY FRANK BRUNOS BOXING 6.50 BOXING (new) DUN DURACH 7.30 SOCCER (new) MORDONS QUEST 5.00 GHOSTBUSTERS 9.30 JUMP JET 7.30 BOULDERDASH 5.95 A VIEW TO A KILL 8.00 TIME PILOT ALIEN 8 7.30 LE MANS 7.50 BOULDERDASH 7.30 DECATHLON 9.30 ROBIN OF SHERWOOD 7.30 BEAMRIDER 8.75 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT 8.00 11.20 THE HOBBIT 11.00 HIGGINS SNOOKER 7.00 10.00 PINBALL 5.75 ARCHON 9.50 THE WRECK 11.00 BBC RIVER RAID 8.85 SORCERY 7.00 DAMBUSTERS 6.00 JUMP JET 6.50 SPECTRUM COMBAT LYNX 6.50 INTERNATIONAL KARATE SCRABBLE 11.20 SPY HUNTER 6.35 MONOPOLY 11.20 FIGHTING WARRIOR 6.50 THE HOBBIT 15.50 ONE ON ONE 6.50 ALIEN 8 7.75 FRANK BRUNOS BOXING DESIGNERS PENCIL 9.50 INTERNATIONAL BASKETBALL 4.80 GREMLINS 6.00 FAIRLIGHT 7.25 SPIDERMAN 6.00 UNDERWURLDE 7.25 RED MOON 5.20 TERRORMOLINOS 6.50 ELITE 11.00 14.00 YIE AR KUNG FU 6.50 Please state name, address, title and micro clearly with order. Postage included UK. Overseas add  per order. Send s.a.e for software list. Cheques/POs payable to: 12.30 5.00 His Knee Drops can really put a guy's nose out of joint. 5.20 ROCK'N WRESTLE J.J.B. SOFTWARE SERVICE 14 Loraine Crescent, Darlington, Co. Durham DL1 5TF TEL (0325) 288102) SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES CON 19.95 7.50 12.95 8.95 6.95 7.50 14.95 14.95 2.99 14.95 14.95 8.95 3.99 7.95 OUR OUR OUR OUR SPECTRUM*** RRP PRICE ***SPECTRUM PRICE ***COMMODORE*** RRP PRICE **COMMODORE*** RRP PRICE ELITE 14.95 11.95 ROLLER COASTER 5.50 LORDS OF THE RINGS 15.95 12.95 MINI OFFICE 5.95 4.99 STAR QUAKE 7.95 5.95 THREE WEEKS IN PARADISE 7.50 LORD OF THE RINGS (DISK) 17.95 LITTLE PEOPLE DISCOVERY KIT 14.95 11.95 SOWRDERONS (ELINDOR) 9.95 7.50 WINTER SPORTS 5.95 BIG DADDY ROCK + WRESTLE 9.95 7.50 COLOSSUS CHESS 4.0 9.95 7.95 LORD OF THE RINGS 15.95 12.95 CYBER RUN (Ultimate) 7.50 ELITE 14.95 11.25 SCOOBY DOO 7.95 5.95 FAIRLIGHT 9.95 7.50 GUN FRIGHT (Ultimate) 9.95 7.50 WIZARDRY 9.95 7.50 MASQUERADE (DISK) 14.95 11.95 SHADOWFIRE-TUNER 3.99 I, OF THE MASK 9.95 7.50 SUMMER GAMES II (CASS) 9.95 7.50 COMMANDO 9.95 7.50 ROBIN OF THE WOODS 9.95 7.50 SURF CHAMP 12.95 10.99 BEACH-HEAD II 9.95 7.50 IMHOTEL 9.95 SUPERMAN .. 9.95 7.50 ROBOT MESSIAH 7.95 5.95 DR. WHO 14.95 13.50 DRAGONSKULLE (Ultimate) 9.95 7.50 KNIGHTSHADES (Ultimate) 9.95 7.50 MUGSY'S REVENGE 7.95 5.95 DR. WHO (DISK) 17.95 15.50 OUTLAW (Ultimate) 9.95 7.50 FRANKIE GOES TO HWOOD 9.95 7.50 ANY MASTERTRONICS MAD GAMES 2.99 2.99 DIARY OF ADRIAN MOLE 9.95 7.50 LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE 9.95 7.50 ANIMATED STRIP POKER 6.95 5.75 SUPER SLEUTH 7.95 5.95 SUPERMAN 9.95 7.50 SKOOLDAZE 6.95 5.50 KNIGHT LORE 9.95 7.50 ARTISTII 12.95 10.99 F. BRUNO'S BOXING 7.95 5.90 BAULBLAZER 9.95 7.50 WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST 6.75 F. BRUNO'S BOXING (DISK) 9.95 YIE AR KUNG FU 8.95 BIG DADDY ROCK + WRESTLE 6.75 *AMSTRAD *** SHADOWFIRE II ENIGMA FORCE MUGSY'S REVENGE 7.50 8.95 6.75 GYROSCOPE 7.95 FIGHTER PILOT (DISK) 5.95 11.95 DONALD DUCKS PLAYGROUND 7.50 7.95 THE YOUNG ONES F. BRUNO'S BOXING HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER 6.95 6.75 5.95 5.25 SUPER ZAXXON 7.50 ZOIDS 8.95 ASTRO-CLONE  7.95 5.95 SUPERMAN 7.50 BLUE MAX 2001 7.50 MINDSHADOW 9.95 14.95 DR. WHO 4.99 13.50 INTER. BASKETBALL INTERNATIONAL SOCCER RAMBO 11.25 8.95 WHAM THE JUKE BOX SPY V SPY 9.95 6.75 7.50 7.50 ULYSSES GOLDEN FLEECE (D) 11.95 KNIGHTRIDER 8.95 FIGHTER PILOT 7.95 5.90 RAID (OVER MOSCOW) 7.50 WORM IN PARADISE 7.50 RETURN TO OZ 9.95 ARNHEM WORLD SERIES BASKETBALL 7.95 5.95 7.95 SABREWULF 7.50 ANY MASTERTRONIC MAD GAMES INTER. KARATE 6.50 DR. WHO 4.99 13.50 FRANK BRUNO'S BOXING LUCIFERS REALM (DISK) 11.95 6.75 TRANSFORMERS 8.95 HYPERSPORTS 6.75 7.95 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT .95 7.50 GYROSCOPE MONTY ON THE RUN 7.95 7.50 5.95 MARSPORT MICKY MOUSE (DISK) 11.95 WAY OF EXPLODING FIST SCARA BEUS SHADOW OF THE UNICORN 9.95 14.95 11.95 7.50 UNDERWURLDE 9.95 7.50 9.95 WORM IN PARADISE 7.50 7.50 CYRUSS II CHESS SHADOWFIRE TUNER THEY SOLD A MILLION 9.95 7.50 SORCERY+ (DISK) 11.50 FIGHTING WARRIOR 7.50 ***COMMODORE C16*** MARSPORT 9.95 7.50 LORD OF THE RINGS 11.95 9.95 WINTER GAMES AIRWOLF SCOOBY DOO 7.50 6.95 6.75 9.95 SHADOWFIRE 7.50 WINTER GAMES (DISK) DALEY TOMS STAR EVENT 14.95 INTERNATIONAL BASKETBALL DUN DARACH 11.25 5.99 7.50 4.75 SPY V SPY II 9.95 STEVE DAVIS SNOOKER 7.50 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 7.95 THEY SOLD A MILLION 5.95 7.50 WORLD SERIES BASEBALL FIGHTER PILOT SHADOWFIRE II-ENIGMA FORCE 7.50 YIE AR KUNG FU 9.95 6.75 7.50 PITSTOP II C16 CLASSICS (4 GAMES) BOUNCES (CRISES 3000) 7.50 9.95 FIGHTING WARRIOR 7.50 6.75 WINNER THE POOH (DISK) 12.95 10.99 CRITICAL MASS 8.95 6.75 7.50 BIG DADDY ROCK + WRESTLE STARION 9.95 7.50 ALIEN 8 9.95 ***MSX*** LORDS OF MIDNIGHT (DISK) 7.50 11.50 MONTY ON THE RUN 9.95 7.50 WORM IN PARADISE 7.95 BOUNTY BOB 3D BOXING 7.50 9.95 5.95 7.95 FIGHTNIGHT 9.95 3D GRAND PRIX 7.50 THE HOBBITT MINI OFFICE 14.95 5.95 7.50 11.95 4.99 FIGHTNIGHT (DISK) 14.95 GLEN HODDLE FOOTBALL 11.25 NIGHTSHADE DIARY OF ADRIAN MOLE 7.95 9.95 7.50 THE GOONIES 7.50 KNIGHTLORE YIE AR KUNG FU 7.95 BRUCE LEE 5.95 THE GOONIES (DISK) 14.95 11.25 7.95 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION SCOOBY DOO ALIEN 8 9.95 6.95 5.25 ZORRO 9.95 MINI OFFICE 7.50 HYPERSPORTS 14.95 COMMANDO 7.95 4.99 12.95 5.95 ANY MASTERTRONIC TITLE 1.99 ANY MASTERTRONIC TITLE 1.99 1.99 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT 1.99 7.50 QUICK SHOT II JOYSTICK 8.99 HOBBITT 14.95 11.25 MONTY ON THE RUN 6.95 ELITE (DISK) 17.95 14.95 **ATARIA ARNHEM 9.95 7.95 7.95 SCRABBLE CRITICAL MASS 8.95 DIARY OF ADRIAN MOLE 9.95 6.75 7.95 MONOPOLY 9.95 FRIDAY THE 13TH 7.50 6.75 EXPLODING FIST (DISK) 14.95 SUPERMAN 11.95 RAMBO *RETURN TO OZ 9.95 6.75 7.95 HOBBIT 14.95 11.25 WORM IN PARADISE 9.95 7.50 WINTER GAMES 7.95 5.95 GYROSCOPE 6.75 NEXUS 9.95 7.50 BEACH-HEAD (DISK) 14.95 11.95 BEACH-HEAD II 7.95 5.95 COMMANDO 7.50 PARADROID 7.95 SPY HUNTER 9.95 5.95 7.50 DALEY TOMS SUPERTEST EXPL. FIST/FIGHTING WARRIOR (D) 6.95 5.50 17.95 DESERT FOX STRIP POKER 9.95 9.95 7.50 7.50 FIGHTING WARRIOR HYPERSPORTS 7.95 7.95 5.95 7.95 THE YOUNG ONES BALLBLAZER 9.95 5.95 7.95 TERRORMOLINOS LORD OF THE RINGS 7.95 5.95 12.95 THEY SOLD A MILLION 9.95 7.50 SUMMER GAMES I (DISK) 14.95 11.50 ARCADE HALL OF FAME 9.95 7.50 *BBC UK RACING DESTRUCTION (DISK) 14.95 11.25 MERCENARY 9.95 7.50 BACK TO SKOOL 6.95 5.50 GYROSCOPE 7.50 ARCADE HALL OF FAME 9.95 7.50 MERCENARY (DISK) 12.95 9.95 MINDSHADOW 9.95 7.50 COMMANDO 7.95 EUREKA 14.95 4.99 SPY VS SPY 9.95 7.50 FRIDAY THE 13TH 8.95 6.75 NIGHTSHADE (Ultimate) 7.50 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 9.95 7.50 AIR WOLF 7.50 TOMAHAWK 9.95 7.50 SPY HUNTER 7.50 WAY OF EXPLODING FIST 9.95 7.50 FIGHTER PILOT 9.95 7.50 TAU CETI 9.95 750 WORM IN PARADISE 7.50 MERCENARY 9.95 7.50 SPITFIRE 40 9.95 7.50 SWORDS & SORCERY 9.95 7.50 EXPLODING FIST 7.50 MERCENARY (DISK) 12.959.95 GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR 22.95 19.99 SWEEVO'S WORLD 7.95 5.95 YIE AR KUNG FU 7.50 QUAKE MINUS 1 9.95 7.50 THE GOONIES 9.95 7.95 ALL PRICES INCLUDE P&P IN U.K. EUROPE ADD .00 PER TAPE. ELSEWHERE AT COST. CHEQUES/POS PAYABLE TO: S.C.S., DEPT. CVG 4, PO BOX 394 LONDON N 15 6JL. TEL: 01-800 3156. SAE FOR LIST. PLEASE STATE MACHINE IN YOUR ORDER. PLEASE RING FOR AVAILABILITY. BARCLAYCARD AND ACCESS HOTLINE RING 01-631 4627 ONLY. GOODS DESPATCHED SAME DAY SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY. COME AND SEE THE LATEST GAMES ON VIDEO FROM BULLETIN 1000 ********OR******** IF YOU WOULD LIKE TO PICK UP YOUR DISCOUNT SOFTWARE FROM OUR SHOP, PLEASE BRING YOUR COPY OF THIS ADVERT TO: \"COMPUCENTRE, UNIT 5, 221 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD, LONDON W1\" (NEAR GOODGE ST. STATION). OPEN 6 DAYS A WEEK 9.00AM-18.00PM.  7.50 7.50 9.99 9.95 9.95 7.50 9.95 9.95 "


"3GLADIATOR IT'S NOT MUCH FUN BEING A SLAVE... ..SO / TRAINED LIKE MAD TO BE A GLADIATOR I WAS SHAKING LIKE A LEAF IN MY FIRST FIGHT... .. BUT / SOON GOT THE KNACK THE THUMBS UP MEANT I WAS THE EMPEROR'S CHAMPION! MY FREEDOM AT LAST. BUT CAN YOU BEAT ME? Name Address Spectrum 48K at .95 Choose from 45 weapons and fight for your freedom Write enclosing .95 (inc. p+p) to 204 Worple Road, London SW20 8PN or telephone with your credit card number on 01-947 5624. DOMARK "


"00486 KANAAN VAANIKAAN KUAMIN KARAKAYANIN WARRIRANIRA SA MALIN Lalalta hata                    .A KARANIRWANAWNERVRAR KAVRARIAS M ASAK KARRIVAR DESOO_AMOSI ENDHOUD Ore 00711 PROWA f lalalalalalalalalalalala AMAAN MALAM MAMMA MWA SO200 ole Ada Ala ANANAAAAAAAAA MAMLAMAMLANAMAN $8700 aC energy 00216 ZoDoo lai AN                   MERR VERKAR VAKFASUS F D800022035 Saboo a $ MAMAMA Mala Makatuladhata LMA MAAsla Anda hatakanlah RANTAURINKIMAKERTO KASAKRUASAIA VALLEN 66toe aras Baua KA sally             . WISSEN into the adventure. hints which should help you move deeper of level one of the game plus some general Here we present screen shots of the whole faith in C+VG is not misplaced. arcade adventure Robot Messiah? Fear not! Your complicated caverns in Alphabatim's 152 screen Are you praying for deliverance from the cunningly 1997 CFVG MAP "


"Th the moving conveyor baffic lights and return to them and you will have to gun in level three of the game The three envelopes that must be collected are located in level three of the game. These must be collected and then returned to the Master Computer which is found in the caverns. You can only carry three objects at a time and you will need to carry a Power Supply Unit to enable you to work the teleport in the Test Centre, to return to the caverns. Carrying the gun is very useful and you will have to return to the Test Centre at least once more So do not eat food recklessly, although some of it will be replaced, there will not be enough unless you are frugal. The only route to the Test Centre is by using the buggy and the only return r oute is via the teleport. The buggy is situated beyond the traffic lights and the moving conveyor belt at the bottom of the caverns. There are two sets of traffic lights in the game, one at either end of the tunnel. For the traffic lights to change from red to green, you will need two objects which are hidden in the caverns. So as not to make this map a giveaway we have removed these objects. The gun has been dropped in a place where it is not usually found. Once you have picked up the gun, to operate it you then collect the numerous bullets which are scattered around the game Each bullet is worth twelve shots, but once more, do not pick them all up at once vvvvv Evvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvv  wwwww 2 00159 MALAWAKUWAWA KAMA KALIMANTAN WEKWA MAWAKANAN wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww Na Score 00171 00171 WEKA WAVA,  vvvvvvv MAAKUNTA werp pom al len SNVAS 00216 SCORE 0882 energ DEWA SA anera wwwroopan www ge 00660 SCORE 00690  wwwwwwwwww BE KM energy Ore oo534 BCORE 00156 energy MEVLAN AN wwwwww mm VE NOWN. 59 "


"STEVEN SPIELBERG Presents TM A ROBERT ZEMECKIS film Whis THE COMPUTER PROGRAM FROM Available on Spectrum 48K Plus, Commodore 64 and Amstrad from Electric Dreams Software 31 Carlton Crescent, Southampton, Hampshire S01 2EW Tel: (0703) 229694 Dreams  UNIVERSAL CITY STUDIOS INC. SOFTWARE "


"MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS MOLOTOV MICK Zorro 5.95 SPECTRUM Rambo............. 5.95 Battle of Britain....... 7.50 Spy Hunter.............5.50 Streethawk 5.95 Bladerunner ............ Pole Position...........6.85 Transformers .......... 5.95 Fighting Warrior......5.95 Hyper Sports..........5.95 Never Ending Story..7.50 Spy vs Spy II..........7.50 F.B. Boxing.............5.25 Spitfire 40.............. 7.50 Nexus....................7.50 Exploding Fist.........6.95 Ping Pong............ 5.95 Bounce............. .....7.50 Highway Encounter.. 5.95 Gladiator 6.75 Racing Destruction..9.75 Basketball Int. (Elite) 4.95 1.C.U.P.S. 6.75 Pinball Construction.8.95 Fairlight............. ...7.50 Spellbound..... 2.99 Summer Games I..... 7.50 Scooby Doo............5.25 Finest Hour........ 7.50 Winter Games.........7.50 Monty on the Run...5.95 Dath Wake. 5.95 Mail Order Monster..9.75 Robin of the Wood..7.50 Gun Fright. 7.50 Night Fights. .7.50 Geoff Capes...........5.95 Pentagram...... 7.50 Goonies...... 7.50 Superman......... 7.50 Nomad.... 5.95 Harvey Smith..........6.85 Elite....... ...... 11.25 Flintstones........... 5.95 Doctor Who.......... 11.50 I of the Mask..........7.50 Arena..... .7.50 Sold a Million..........7.50 Blade Runner ..........6.95 Winter Games....... .5.95 Comp. People (dk). 11.50 Fighting Warrior......5.95 Thing...... 5.95 Ball Blazer..............7.50 Shadow of Unicorn 11.25 Desert Rat..............7.50 Who Dares Wins.....5.95 Winter Sports.........7.50 Superbowl............ .7.50 W izard ................. Bounce...................7.50 Office Master........ 12.50 Commando............. 7.50 Zoids................ ... 5.95 McGuigan's Boxing..5.95 Lord of the Rings... 12.50 Impossible Mission..5.95 Skool Daze..... 5.25 Starquake........... ...5.95 Goonies.. .5.95 Enigma Force..........7.50 Doctor Who.......... 11.50 Swords & Sorcery...7.50 Critical Mass............6.75 Mugsy's Revenge....6.75 Sold a Million..........7.50 Rock & Wrestle.......7.50 World Basketball.....5.95 COMMODORE 64 Little Comp. People. 7.50 3 Weeks in Paradise 7.50 Impossible Mission.. 7.75 Yak's Progress........7.50 Lord of the Rings... 12.50 Shadowfire............. 6.95 Friday the 13th.......6.75 Commando............. 7.50 Elite..................... 11.00 Roller Coaster.........5.95 Sir Fred..................7.50 Basketball...............4.95 Gyroscope..............6.75 Back to Skool.........5.25 Pitstop II............. .7.85 Koronis Rift............8.00 Enigma Force..........7.50 F.B. Boxing.............5.95 Young Ones 5.95 Swords & Sorcery...7.50 Exploding Fist..... .7.50 Elektra Glide... 6.75 Mugsy's Revenge....5.95 Blackwyche......... 7.50 Arc of Yesod.. 7.50 Rock 'n' Wrestle.....6.75 Beach-head II......... ..7.50 Ping Pong....... 5.95 Tomahawk ............. 7.50 Summer Games II....7.50 1.C.U.P.S........ 5.95 Gyroscope..............5.95 Sky Fox.................7.50 Death Wake........ 5.95 Cyberun ............. ... 7.50 Mercenary ............. .7.50 Flintstones....... 5.95 Robot Messiah........5.95 Terromolinos...........5.50 Arena............. Friday the 13th.......6.75 Zorro .................. 7.50 Outlaws .............. 7.50 Wham's Music Box..7.50 Zoids ........ 6.75 Dragon Skulle..... .7.50 Saboteur ................ 6.75 Batalyx........... .7.50 Time Tunnel...... .7.50 Roller Coaster.........5.25 Scooby Doo............5.95 Desert Fox...... 7.50 Super Sleuth...........5.95 Crazy Comets...... .5.95 Superbowl.. 7.50 Young Ones..... .5.95 Karateka.............. ..8.00 Revs............... 11.25 Arc of Yesod.... .7.50 Starion............. ..7.50 Hardball..... .7.50 Wartoad.................5.95 Monty on the Run...7.50 Wild West........ .8.00 Mikie ............. ..5.95 Geoff Capes...........6.75 Lords of the West...7.50 Yie Ar Kung Fu.......5.95 Robin of the Wood..7.50 Sci-Fi..................... 7.50 Knight Rider............5.95 Superman.......... ..7.50 Laser Basic........... 15.00 Postage included U.K. Please state which micro. Fast Service. Send cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept. CVG, 76 Westbourne Terrace, London W2 Mick's Headbutts will really grab you. No butts about it! 7.50 ROCK'N. WRESTLE... FREE WITH JOE JORDAN SOUTHAMPTON ANDYDERE LUTON SUPER VALUE MATCH STEVE HUNT WEST BROM FA.CUP FACT FILE LTMATCH!] CH& AND A unique collection of 31 colour cards together with a super plastic wallet to keep them in. Each card features one of the biggest stars in England and Scotland and on the reverse you'll find facts, figures and fun stories to fascinate you YOUR FIRST SIX CARDS PLUS WALLET FREE WITH THE JANUARY 25TH ISSUE It's a really original free gift that no fan will want to miss. PLUS Great colour posters of the top players. Match Facts the world's greatest results service. On-the-ball features and news stories. Don't miss out place and order with your newsagent for Britain's most sought-after football weekly. Only 42p JANUARY 25TH ISSUE ON SALE NOW hummel HARE "


"DEAREILIGPUNTES For instance, if you try to LOAD and SAVE this program, it'll take about 70 seconds, using the new commands, these operations only take about ten seconds! Hopefully you won't be hearing from me next month. Rik Link reckons he'll soon have himself free of the all-enfolding plastic ball, and assures me that he already has a new foolproof plan of infiltration. He'd better!! A NOTE FROM YOUR EDITOR: Even if he does consider himself to be an ace reporter, that wimp Rik Link has failed in the line of duty this month, and naturally he has been severely reprimanded. All that I ask of him is that he obtains the info from the Bug Hunters, since they don't seem disposed to give us the information openly. Rik really does manage to come up with the most ludicrous excuses for his failings. This month he game me some cock-andbull story about entering the Recreation Room disguised as a large, bright orange beach ball. \"I just rolled right on in!» he told me. Unfortunately, it would seem that all four Bug Hunters were away on some important mission at the time, and Rik had a severe case of premature deflation before they returned. Well, I don't know whether you really believe that sort of rubbish, but the fact of the matter is, he's got nothing to report. Never fear. Following in the footsteps of the greatest editors of our time, I bring you something equally stupendous. Well, were the truth to be known, it's a darned sight more stupendous than Rik's column. Introducing an international element to the proceedings. I'm proud to present a superfast TURBO LOADER for the Commodore 64 microcomputer (passed on to me by kind permission of Big Red). Written by Luc Pycke from Belgium, this utility will greatly increase the speed of loading, saving and verifying tape-based programs. Having typed in the program, which includes a checksum for the mass of data to ensure that you've got everything right, just save the program to tape. Then, if run, it'll have worked correctly if you get a message telling you that: L is the new LOAD command, S is the new SAVE command, V is the new VERIFY command. These work in exactly the same way as the normal commands, but quite remarkably faster. O REM SUPER FAST LOADER FOR THE CBM 64 1 REM BY LUC PYCKE 2 LP-0: CVO-500001 POKE646, 21 POKE53280, 1:P OKE53281,1 3 PRINTCHR$(147) 1 PRINT: PRINT\"PLEASE WAIT! ... PRINT PRINT 10 FORI-CVOTOCVO+6961 READALP-LP-A: POKEI . AI NEXT 20 DATA169.91.181.8.3. 169.195.141.9.3.96 . 32, 115.0.240.8, 201.95.260.3.76,231 30 DATA167.32. 115.0, 201, 83.240.11.201.76 .220.16. 201.86.240.21.76.8. 175. 32 10 DATA115.0.32, 280, 199.76.178.167.32.11 5.0.32, 224, 196. 76. 174, 167.32. 115.0 50 DATA32, 227. 196.76.176.167.0.0.0.0.0.0 .0.0.0.0.0.0.83.85.80.69.82.77.79 60 DATA78. 32. 54.52.13.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0. 0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 70 DATAO.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0 .0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0 80 DATAO.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.162.5.134, 171. 32. 212, 225, 162, 4. 181. 42. 149. 171, 202, 208 90 DATA249.32.56. 248. 32. 143. 246.32.125.1 96.32.185.196, 165, 185, 26. 105. 1. 202 100 DATA32. 177.196.162.8.185.172.0.32.17 7.196.162.6.200, 192.5.234.208.242.160 110 DATAO. 162, 4, 177.187.196.183.124.3.16 9.32, 202.32. 177.196.162. 5. 200, 192, 187 120 DATA208. 237. 169.2.193.171. 32. 143. 196 . 152.32.177.196.132.219.162.7.234, 177 130 DATA172.32, 177.196.162.3.230.172.208 .4.230.173.202.202, 165, 172, 197. 174 140 DATA165.173.229.175.144, 231, 234.165. 215. 32. 177.196.162.7.136.208.246.200 150 DATA132. 192. 88.24. 169.0.141, 160, 2.76 . 147.252. 160.0, 132, 192, 173, 17, 208, 41 160 DATA239. 141. 17. 208, 202, 208, 253.136.2 08. 250. 120.96, 160.0, 169.2, 32, 177.196 170 DATA162.7.136. 192. 9. 208.244.162.5.19 8, 171, 208, 238, 152.32, 177.196.162.7 180 DATA136,208,247202, 202.96.133.189.6 9.215.133.215.169.8.133.163.6.189.165 190 DATA1, 41, 247.32.211.196.162.17.234.9 8.32.211.196.162. 14. 198. 163. 208. 233 200 DATA96. 202, 208, 253, 148.5.162.11. 202, 208.253.133.1.96.162.0, 44.162.1. 164 210 DATA43.165.44, 134, 10, 134, 147, 132, 195 133. 196.32.212.225. 32.253.196. 32, 122 220 DATA225. 76. 116. 164. 32.97. 197. 165. 171 . 201.2.240.8.201.1.208.243.165.185 230 DATA240.10.173.60.3.133. 195.173.61.3 .133.196.32.80.247.32,228.255.240, 251 240 DATA32.48.168. 164. 183.240.11. 136. 177 . 187.217.65.3. 208. 206. 152, 208, 245.132 250 DATA1AL. 32.210.245.173.62.3.56, 237.6 0.3.8.24. 101.195.133.174.173.63.3.101 260 DATA196.40.237.61.3.133.175.32.118.1 97. 165. 189.69.215.5. 184,240, 4, 169.255 270 DATA133. 144.76.169.245.32,175. 197.20 1.0.240.249.133.171. 32.221.197.145 280 DATA178. 200, 192, 192, 208, 286, 280, 45.3 2. 175. 197.32,221, 197, 196, 147, 208, 2 290 DATA165.195.209.195, 280, 2. 134. 14,69 . 215.133.215.230. 195. 208, 2, 230, 196 300 DATA165.195.197. 174, 165.196.229.175. 148,221.32.221.197.32, 125, 196, 200, 132 310 DATA192.88.28. 169.0, 161, 160, 2.76.167 .252.32.23. 248.32.125.196.132.215. 169 320 DATA7.181.6. 221, 162, 1, 32, 240.197.38. 189. 165. 109. 201. 2. 208. 205. 160.9.32 330 DATA221. 197. 201, 2.240.239.196.189.20 8.232. 32.221. 197. 136. 208.246. 96. 169 340 DATA8. 133. 163. 32.240.197.38.189.234. 234, 234, 198. 163. 208, 244, 165.189.96 350 DATA169.16.46.13. 220.240, 251.173.13. 221, 142.7.221.72.169.25.141.15.221 360 DATA104.78.74.96.0.253 370 IFLP<>83794 THEN PRINT \"ERROR IN DATAI 1 STOP 380 PRINT PRINT\"_L-LOAD\". PRINT\"_S SA VE\" PRINTMV VERIFY\" PRINT 390 SYS CVG: NEW Got a problem? Feel the need of a bit of help and assistance? Then why not write to the Bug Hunters at Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. "


"NEWS FROM LLAMA-LLAND (Hants) The range of hairy software continues to grow with... BATALYX: Six linked games, each of which can be played in its own right, integrated into a multi-game package. Once play is started the player can jump between the six sub-games. The six include an enhanced version of ATTACK OF THE MUTANT CAMELS and a stripped-down PSYCHEDELIA the remainder are completely new games concepts. The computer keeps track of each game and returns the player to the correct point of play on re-entry. BATALYX is marketed under the LLAMASOFT name and logo by ARIOLASOFT, a mutually-agreed experiment to apply ARIOLASOFT's marketing expertise to one of JEFF MINTER's individually-styled games epics.95 on tape, .95 on disc **************************************************** YAK's PROGRESS: A fascinating collection of Jeff's work for the '64, illustrating the development of the Llamasoft game style. Including such classics as MATRIX, REVENGE OF THE MUTANT CAMELS, SHEEP IN SPACE and ANCIPITAL eight games in all great value both in cash and entertainment terms. In presentation box, with JM's historical notes .45 on 2 tapes, .95 on disc ************************************************** COLOURSPACE: The COLOURSPACE software is a development of Jeff's PSYCHEDELIA programmes, the evolution of a unique form of computer entertainment. Anyone who can use a joystick can enjoy COLOURSPACE, creating a dazzling kaleidoscope of flowing chromatic patterns. Great to play to music, great to play at parties! COLOURSPACE is now available for 3 machines * BBC at .95 on tape * ATARI 8-bit (including HE130) .50 on tape * ATARI ST 520 .95 on 3.5\" disc (with manual) The 'ST' version is definitely a bit (in fact, 16 bits) special.. with a host of ZARJAZ effects, including spectacular, dynamic, background and foreground graphics, starfields, gravity effects, fire fountains and more, more, more... ********************************************* LLAMASOFT L37 ZARJAZ SOFTWARE LLAMASOFT 49 MOUNT PLEASANT, TADLEY, HANTS (TEL. 07356 4478) SAE FOR CATALOGUE & NEWSLETTER "


"THE SOFTWARE CHART FEBRUARY Het off the presses is the latest C + VG Gallup Software Top 30. It's the most accurate and up to date chart currently published in Britain. Just one look through the latest C + VG charts will tell you which top name games are selling the quickest making it easier for you to choose the shoot-em-up, karate game or boxing program you want. It's a knock-out. TOP 30/ALL FORMATS THIS MONTH OLAST MONTH MACHINE WEEKS IN CHART REKOVOU — SP, C64, AMS SP, C64, AMS, BBC SP, C64, AMS SP, C64, AMS SP, C64 C64 SP, C64 C64 SP, C64 SP SP, C64 SP, C64 SP SP, C64 SP, C64 SP, C64 8 14 GAME Commando Elite They Sold a Million Way of the Exploding Fist Yie Ar Kung Fu Formula One Simulator Winter Games Computer Hits (10) Rambo Finders Keepers Back to Skool Beach-head 2 Little Computer People Monty on the Run Tomahawk BMX Racers Action Biker Frank Bruno's Boxing Arcade Hall of Fame International Karate Fight Night Last V8 Saboteur D. Thompson's Super Test Robin of the Wood Gyroscope Impossible Mission Rockman Fighting Warrior Vegas Jackpot -000001111110110 17 15 MANUFACTURER Elite Firebird/Acornsoft Hit Squad Melbourne House Imagine Mastertronic US Gold Beau Jolly Ocean Mastertronic Microsphere Access/US Gold Activision Gremlin Graphics Digital Integration Mastertronic Mastertronic Elite US Gold System 3 US Gold Mastertronic Durell Ocean Odin Melbourne House Epyx/US Gold Mastertronic Melbourne House Mastertronic 16 17 SP 19 20 21 22 1 23 24 SP, C64 SP, C64 SP, C64, AMS C64 SP SP SP, C64 BBC SP, C64 SP, C64 SP SP, C64 SP 25 26 27 16 28 29 30 101 AMSTRAD/TOP 10 SPECTRUM/TOP 10 C64/TOP 10 2 They Sold a Million/Hit Squad Grand Prix 3D/Sotware 3 Formula 1 Simulator/Mastertronic 14 Finders Keepers/Mastertronic 5 Soul of a Robot/Mastertronic Yie Ar Kung Fu/Imagine 7 Nonterraqueous/Mastertronic Chiller/Mastertronic Raid!/US Gold 10 Way of the Exploding Fist/MH 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Elite/Firebird Commando/Elite Back to Skool/Microsphere D. Thompson's S.T./Ocean Monty on the Run/Gremlin G. Saboteur/Durell Tomahawk/Digital Int. Int. Karate/System 3 Way of the Exploding Fist/MH They Sold a Million/Hit Squad Winter Games/US Gold Commando/Elite Rambo/Ocean Last V8/Mastertronic Little Comp. People/Activision Fight Night/US Gold Summer Games 2/Epyx/US Gold They Sold a Million/Hit Squad Who Dares Wins 2/Alligata Monty on the Run/Gremlin Grap. 7 8 9 10 BONUS FIGHT CASASLAN ve MACHINE KEY SP = SPECTRUM C64 = COMMODORE 64 AMS = AMSTRAD BBC = BBC AT = ATARI ELEC = ELECTRON ENT = ENTERPRISE Frank Bruno's Boxing Number 18. Spy vs Spy creeps upwards. COMPILED BY GALLUP "


"ROCK AL WRESTIS. Rock'n Wrestle-the first truly 3 dimensional combat sports simulation game. Dynamic graphics, state-of-the-art animation, 1 and 2 player mode, brilliant gameplay, 10 different opponents and complete rock sound track. More joystick moves than you imagined possible-over 25-Including the atomic drop, aeroplane spin, piledriver, body slam, back breaker, arm twist, elbow drop and turnbuckle fly. Rock'n Wrestle-the challenge begins here! Available for Spectrum .95, C64 and Amstrad .95. Thom MELBOURNE HOUSE AVAILABLE FROM THESE DEALERS:Robinson Ltd., 89 High St, Huntingdon. Jones Computers Ltd., Canterbury Computer Centre, 56/57 Palace Street Star Video, 138 High Rd., Beeston, Nottingham. Lansdown Computer Centre, 1 Lansdown Crescent, Bournemouth, Dorset. Gamer, 71 East Street, Brighton, East Sussex. Helston Computer Centre, Helston Arcade, 22 Coiurge St., Helston, Cornwall. Electron Equip, 36-38 West Street, Fareham, Hants. North Notts. Computer Centre, 37A Outram St., Sutton-in-Ashfield, Nottingham. Softcentre, 2 Bruntsfied Place, Edinburgh, Scotland. Miles Better Software Ltd., 221 Cannock Rd., Chadsmore, Cannock, Staffordshire. Posi-Tron Computing, 15 Central Precinct, The Market, Llanelli, Dyfed. Northwich Home Computers, 79A Witton Street, Northwich, Cheshire. Mighty Micro. 268 Wilmslow Rd., Fallowfield, Manchester Topsoft Computer Software. 3 Hambletonian Yard, Stockton, Cleveland. P&H Electronics Ltd.. Radio House. 22/24 Guildford Rd., Bagshot. Patrick McNutty & Sons, 24/26 Belmore Street, Enniskillen, Northern Ireland. Long Eaton Software Centre, 91 College St., Long Eaton, Nottingham. Fidget Computerware, 150 Desborough Rd., High Wycombe, Bucks. The Micro Workshop, 12 Station Approach, Epsom, Surrey, KK Stationers, 187 Edgware Road, London W2. Trowbridge Computer Shack, 8 Timbrell Street, Trowbridge, Wilts. Computers Plus, 65 High Street, Sittingbourne, Kent. Alan Sinclair, 9-11 Church Street, Basingstoke, Hampshire. Business Information Systems, Swan Square, Bridge St., Haverfordwest, Dyfed. Adrians Records, 36 High Street, Wickford, Essex. Sweetons Bookshops Ltd., 48 Fishergate, Preston, Lancs. Stockton Software, 10 South Road, Norton on Tees, Cleveland. Computer Centre, 17 Campbell Street, Belber, Derbyshire. "


"The COMPLETE (PART 1 SPECTRUM All you want to know about the world's best-selling computer A Database Publication 100100 3 Spectrum DELETE GRAPH PLOT EXTEND ZX Spectrum EAGT nike CAPS SHIFT Cat MAS COPY Song Cape BREAK EDIT INPUT 8 RED CAPS LOCK \" MAGENTA TRUE VIDEO ENTER PLOT COS GREEN INV.VIDEO CAPS SHIFT READ CAPS NEW SHIFT OPEN DRAW ACS RESTORE SHO SAVE REM DI SLLOW BEEP WHITE CLEAR RAND MERGE ERASE GTHEN RETURN STRS Y AND PAPER CONT GOTO CLS FLASH &AF AT LAST! The partwork more than 2 million Spectrum owners have been waiting for! PART 1 NOW ON SALE AT YOUR NEWSAGENTS In six monthly parts .50 "


"C+VG COMPETITION COMPETITION It's rough, tough and very exciting. What is it? American Football, of course. And Ocean hope to capture all the excitement of this complex sport with the release of their game Superbowl which should be hitting the shops right now. So you don't miss out on the all-American action, C+VG and Ocean have come up with a superbowl competition for you to enter. And we've got some great prizes for all you Spectrum, Amstrad and Commodore 64 owners. The first 30 correct answers — 10 for each machine — picked will receive a copy of Superbowl plus a great American Football hat and sweatshirt. The next 45 correct answers for each machine will just get the game. All you have to do to stand a chance of winning is to give the full names of the following teams. Washington New York Dallas Miami. New England. C+VG/IMAGINE SUPERBOWL COMPETITION Name Address Send your answers to Computer + Video Games, Superbowl Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. The closing date is 16th February and the editor's decision is final. Tick your make of computer and sweatshirt size Spectrum Amstrad 0 CBM 64 0 Small D Medium Large I "


"Based on the Story From the RICHARD DONNER Production THE by STEVEN SPIELBERG GODNies The return of the legendary crusader -skilfully fencing through screens of mystery and danger! Exciting Multiscreen Action and Adventure! ONO U.S. COMMODORE 64 AMSTRAD ATARI. BBC SPECTRUM 48K DISK CASS CASS .95 .95 .95 (GOLD) =s Datasoft win Be Al can Sot Software Datasoft is a registered trademark of Datasoft Inc. Zorro is a registered trademark of Zorro Productions C 1985 Zorro Productions. The Goonies is a trademark of Warner Bros. Inc. 1985 Warner Bros. Inc. All rights reserved.  Warner-Tamerlane Publishing Corp. and Reilla Music Corp. All rights reserved. Used by permission.  1985 Datasoft Inc. COMMODORE 64  ATARI  SPECTRUM 48K  AMSTRAD  BBC "


"C+VG ADVENTURE NEWS WELCOME TO STEVE DP M BER URE Did you spot the deliberate mistakes? Deliberate? Well, er This month we welcome an adventurer of some years' experience, Steve Donoghue, to join the Helpline team to help us cope with the ever-increasing volume of readers' letters. Steve, who lives in Sunderland, will also be contributing to the Adventure Reviews section on a regular basis. Steve is hardly a stranger to C+VG readers. His name first appeared in the November 1983 issue, in connection with an apparently immovable horse in Scott Adams' Ghost Town. Desperate and heart-rending letters from Steve, for help with Ghost Town, regularly fell upon the C+VG doormat. So critical did I diagnose his condition to be, that only the most drastic treatment could be considered I sent him my home phone number, which he used late at night when the malaise gripped him. He was, in fact, suffering from a Lack of Locations Syndrome, about which he was later to report, in the March 1985 issue. Adventure Club comes bottom of Steve has written reviews from Rob's list ... this isn't worth time to time, and his most recent the paper it's printed on ... he contribution to C+VG was a has the best Adventure Corner feature on mapping in the in any British magazine, and the December Book of Adventure, worst club effort ... However, in which he took a most original Nick, the Ed., intervened to add: approach to advise readers on 'Actually, the C+VG Club works techniques for improving their out for the postage only...I adventure map-making skills. don't know whether to feel insulted or complimented! The first issue of Orcsbane contained 28 pages (32 if you ORCSBANE count the extras!), costs 50p, and is run on a non-profitmaking basis. Containing about 10 C+VG reader Nick Walkland reviews of adventure games was planning a new adventure ranging from getting on a bit' to 'Fanzine' called Orcsbane for 'right up to the minute, it also some time and wrote to wam me has its own Helpline, a number about it. Before I could catch of feature articles, and a wellthe postman and tell him to push drawn cartoon drawn cartoon strip featuring off, he had slipped a copy 'Shermlock Shomes'. through the C+VG letter box! There is artwork throughout, I therefore felt obliged to leaf which breaks up the fairly dense through it in a rare moment of text — making it more idleness, and my first impression digestible, and a any streak of was how thick it seemed for a humour running through it's mere 50p. I soon discovered that pages, which gives it a nice was because the crafty Nick had 'clubby' atmosphere. stapled one set of pages in Altogether, I was impressed. If twice! you are interested in getting Perhaps it was coincidence hold of the next bi-monthly-ish that the doubled-up pages issue, send a 50p postal order to contained a review of Adventure Nick Walkland, 84 Kendall Road, Clubs by 'Rob'. The C+VG Sheffield S6 42H. WHERE WAS BUCKARoo? We referred to a sneak preview of Buckaroo Banzai on page eight of the supplement. That was the dreaded Metcalfe's wishful thinking space limitations prevented the preview from appearing! But to make up for it, read all about Buckaroo plus a few other games that have not appeared in the UK in this issue! VILLAGE OF LOST SOULS In the review of this BBC Adventure, we omitted to mention that it is available by mail order only from the publishers, Magus, 4 Toronto Close, Durrington, Worthing, W. Sussex BN13 2TD, price .95 including postage and packang. MAIL BAG Magus, Dear Keith, been sold in the UK, in order as he thought. see that he played the same right I own a T1994/A and the new to secure a reasonable return Secondly, the program makes the way through to the end, Enterprise machine. I have for the cost of conversion and use of all the memory it can, but something which many reviewers almost exhausted the supply of initial duplication costs. To does not use any OS work areas. tend not to do! Scott Adams Adventures for the their credit, Level 9 is unique The only way we can think of a We were delighted that he TI, and I must recommend the in producing very quickly, ROM interfering with play, is if it thought the split-screen graphics module Return To Pirate's Isle. conversions of their software is active in the background and were good, but unfortunately no It is great, the only one with for almost every micro that has is relying on some Basic credit was given to the co-author stunning graphics' for the Texas. a significant following. language storage locations. of the game, Jon Lemmon, who Do you know if Adventure There are no plans at If this is the case, perhaps Jim was responsible for these. International are planning to present for Enterprise versions could let us know which ROMS Project X was written using convert any of Scott Adams of the Questerobe series, but he has, and we will do our best Gilsoft's Quill and Illustrator in games, especially the obviously, if more Enterprise to rectify any problem they may conjunction with a new product Questerobe series, onto the computers are sold, more inadvertently cause. from Gilsoft called The Patch. Enterprise? I have only been software will start to appear Martin Moore and Glen We were able to use this prior to able to play these with Spectrum for it from different sources. McCauley, its launch due to the fact that we friends, and they are becoming Watch out for Mordon's Quest know the author Phil Wade. more determined to solve them in an Enterprise format. That is Worthing. We are now working on a for themselves! one not to be missed, and is sequel to Project-X, and will Enterprise adventures are not available now! Keith's Reply: send you a copy as soon as it's too plentiful at present, up to Jim's Beeb is stuffed to complete. now I have only managed to Dear Keith, overflowing! He has Wordwise, Jon Lemmon and Tim Kemp, obtain Emerald Isle and While we thank Jim Douglas Graphics and Printmaster (all Compass Software, Dungeon Adventure from for his review of our game, from Computer Concepts), Norwich. Level 9, which I have completed. Village of Lost Souls in the Micronet, Viewdata (for bulk Will you be producing reviews December Adventure uploading to Prestel), Prestel for the Enterprise, as I'm sure Supplement, we would like to (Acorn), AMX Mouse and DFS Keith's Reply: other owners would like more reply to a couple of complaints (Acorn). That's all he can think Ah, if we could but always knowledge of adventures? he made. of for the moment, anyway! play a game right to the end Ian Goodsall, Firstly, the reason for the in time for a review! But Paul Norwich. confusion over location exits is, Dear Keith, is our secret weapon, and he in fact, because he had fallen We would like to thank Paul has most games wrapped up Keith's Reply: foul of one of the first traps in Coppins for his excellent review before the tape has had time Many companies do not the game, which can have the of our adventure Project X to rewind! Looking forward to support a machine until a effect he mentioned. Hint The The Micro Man (C+VG the sequel, and I hope we get minimum number of units have boots he found do not function November). We were pleased to the credits right next time! "


"C+VG ADVENTURE HELPLINE NEWS FROM AFAR things he would like to say when the genie says to him: \"What is your wish, master?\" But he PLEAS FROM doesn't know which one he In his penthouse PLAINTIVE should choose for his reply! He apartment in the PLAYERS is in The Magic Mountain, where else? IDEAs Central James Smith was stuck up the building Keith loft in Terrormolinos, Campbell, one of I have been getting letters about unable to escape. A silly the few survivors the Fourth Protocol. problem this. An example of Perhaps we made a mistake in poorly thought out commands. of the corporate including the review of the game What James needed was the purges which in the Adventure section. word DOWN STEPS a swept through the Although definitely a \"mind sentence without a verb, and a disgrace to any game that calls software industry game\" it can't really be itself an Adventure. That's why I when the IDEAS described as an Adventure. s This makes it difficult to decided to answer James' Corp was catalogue the clues to dispense problem \"in the clear\". establishing itself, to readers, and so those players Can anyone tell Stuart Elflett busies himself who are in trouble with the (see News from Afar) where to find the Red Jewel in Ring of game should watch Ideas with an intricate Central for tips on the Power? and time strategy to adopt. John Macciocci's main mission consuming task. Meanwhile, the latest pleas in life at present, is the His job is to collect come from L. Bailey of Egremont electrifying Mission 1. He's having trouble with the and collate all the in Cumbria, who wants to know how to enter CECOM's files ventilation shaft to the first floor, data relevant to stored at Blenheim, and from which he cannot escape without adventure games Sean Connolly of Holywell, who a severe dose of electrocution. and dispense asks: \"What is the answer to Sir Another electrical problem is Anthony's question?\" a fence, and this time the came words of wisdom Mark Rendle of Chessington is is Upper Gumtree. How to people with seeking Arka the dwarf, so that can Steve King of Poole get problems. he can kill him, and thus finish Wally's gloves and turn the fence This month the off Greedy Dwarf as well. off? Steve adds that he cannot get any help from the Gypsy, Adventure Helpline Dwarf followers where is he? Philip Baydell of Westerham in despite crossing her palm with brings much Kent, is still battling El silver and giving her a teacup. needed help, Diablero a year after he was \"I find Upper Gumtree a very good game, but have never seen advice and hints recommended it by Simon. Now he can stand being driven mad it mentioned anywhere,\" writes to the troubled no longer, and is desperate to Steve. Look up the April 85 and tormented know how to kill the coyote, issue, Steve, and you'll find the adventure games where he should dip the twig, review! Where have you been? Richard Greenwood of where the beetles are, and how player. to get into the chasm after Stockport has got a few riddles getting the skull. Now I see why that are making Riddler's Simon left in such a hurry.....! Den live up to its name! He \"Tell Catface of Bexley he isn't thinks that the plinth and the paranoid,\" says Ruth Bingham. mouthwash will help him to get She has the same problem as past the fallen gargoyle with the him, in Arthurian Eureka, and sore throat. To this end, he seeks is wondering if she might be advice on how to get the plinth able to use the cloak at the and the red dragon. marsh. A problem of a different sort \"A person as omnipotent as comes from Ann Roest. Recently your god-like self obviously has retired, she seeks not only the very important things to do, like whereabouts of the mouse in Don't suffer in making sure the sun rises in the Sphinx, but also adventure morning etc.\", Hello, wait for it. freaks in the Chalfont St. Peter silence. Write to \"But if you could find a nano area of Buckinghamshire! Write second or three to help one of to me c/o the Helpline, and I will your more worshipful and less pass your letters on to Ann. intelligent subjects I will perform Just while he was trying to get Adventure an extra special sacrifice to your the Aramaic phrase book, a tree Helpline, all-powerful self. How do I fell on Toby Blake's head. survive the system of caves in He tried his hand at getting Priory Court, the abysmal Invincible hold of the jester's hat, only to Island?\" writes Mark find himself frizzled into a pile 30-32 Farringdon Hardwidge of Tonypandy. \"If I of bath salts! can find the cat, I will perform Of course, he was playing Lane, London the sacrifice, although the fur Quest for the Holy ECIR 3AU. still hasn't grown back since last Grail, and this dotty game is time, you know!\" he adds, in the sending him potty! Who can worst possible taste. help him with a translation and a Jason Nicholls has 100,000 laugh? The \"points bug\" in Castle of Terror has a counterpart in Pub Quest, so writes Stuart Elflett from Toogoolawah. In case you're not quite sure, Toogoolawah is, of course, in Australia. \"Keep moving west then east, and your score will climb,\" says Stuart! Stuart runs an Adventure Club Newsletter in his native Queensland, with the help of Jamie Osborne of Western Australia, and he sent me a copy. With its own Helpline, the top adventures for unsolved problems down under at the moment are: Thermonuclear Wargames, Asylum, Hulk, Valkyrie 17, and Institute. Asylum comes in for a full page in Australian Commodore Review, in the form of a letter of tips and questions, sent in by Stuart. From Italy I was sent two pages from VIDEO GIOCHI (Video Games) headed \"L'AVVENTURA — La \"pagina amica\" per tutti gli avventurieri elettronici,\" which means the \"friendly page\" for all electronic adventurers. Giancarlo Fantechi of Como explains how the pages are laid out. There is a review, Wishbringer from Infocom, a list of \"super-adventurers\" a sort of Hall of Fame, a selection of readers adventure problems, and hints. It's all very like our own adventure scene. The current games troubling readers are similar, too, featuring Zork, Aztec Tomb, Golden Baton, Planetfall, and Zim Sala Bim. But there is one section that intrigued me: Piccolo dizionario dei sinonimi. This is a list of English verbs commonly used in Adventure games, with their Italian infinitives, followed by a list of English synonyms. So that's how they do it! HELP! Got a problem? Keith Campbell's T-SHIRT ROLL OF HONOUR T-shirts for interesting letters and extra-helpful hints, go to: Mark Renshaw of St. Helens, Robert Arnold of Whitchurch, Bryn Lucus of Colchester, Ann Roest of Chalfont St. Peter, and Giancarlo Fantechi of Como, Italy. "


"HAMPSTEAD: You need the lathe retaining bracket from the industrial estate, before getting on the train. MESSAGE FROM ANDROMEDA: Cut the ropes to free the skeleton, for missiles to defeat the scaly thing. Wear gloves, get fungus goodbye slug! ZIM SALA BIM: Check the Sultan's jacket to sleep in Sultan style, Look at Sultan's fireplace to escape with treasure pile. SHERLOCK: Code for the ripped note: A=I BEN E=U F=M G=D H=E I=V KESLEO M=K N=A P=G Q=D RUB S=H TER UET V=W W=L X=P Y=P. Code for the singed note: A=M COR D=B G=D I=O KET L=W O=P PEL R=U S=A U=E WES X=N Y=T Z=Y, and then read it backwards! PUB QUEST: Say something to get past the tramp. EUREKA ARTHURIAN: To purchase a boat, take statuette from banquet hall, and have a good feast, but don't go upstairs! ASYLUM 2 (TRS-80): In the circular passageway is a wall that can be chopped down. After hacking the electrician to pieces and getting the fuse, try and kill the hypochondriac. Close all the doors, ten on each side, using the silver card, to get a present from the footsteps. FANTASIA DIAMOND: JEWELS OF BABYLON: Unlock and open the door with the key. It's at the dead end, S and W of the pit. Be shadowed to canyon by crab, then shout! Then check north of rockpool. Go and open the iron door, and get Boris to kill the guardian for you, or use his gun to do the deed yourself. VALKYRIE 17: The key to Room 20 is hidden in a handbag. BORED OF THE RINGS: You need to summon help to escape from the willow! CASTLE OF TERROR: Get a spear and have a break, To find the Drac's heart-piercing stake. P SIEHO Siepeer jo ed e tepun ung got s soq s  'qpnozoqld Jo upn uery 'uuog jo PPM louy '1ejseyPro to Seoni ukig efood jo bury eers 'puesueeno JO HOUIS penis 'propeig jo STOYOIN cose 'budOM JO SION Kuot 'ssWIOAUT JO esfera qol WOW 'seno ou on buynquuoo Iof 40w sy si!pero RIVESTRE SONTO UNQUENTE "


"GOOD BYTE SPECTRUM OUR RRP PRICE 5.95 8.95 6.70 7.95 GAME THINK... REALM OF THE IMPOSSIBLITY BLADE RUNNER.. SKY FOX.. . SPITFIRE 40.......... 8888888 \"V\". BRUCE 7.95 THE MUSIC STUDIOS. ELEKTRA GLIDE.. ZORRO.... ZOIDS... GOONIES........ WORM IN PARADISE.... LITTLE COMP. PEOPLE... GERRY THE GEM. BLADE RUNNER... REVS \"Z\"..... WINTER GAMES. SABRE WULF. UNDERWURLDE... ELITE RAMBO........ STARION .... D.T.S.T. SCALETRIX..... FIGHT NIGHT....... ROCK 'N' WRESTLE 6.70 7.45 5.95 5.45 7.45 7.45 7.45 7.45 7.45 8.95 5.95 11.20 6.70 7.45 6.70 7.45 7.45 7.45 5.95 6.70 11.20 7.45 7.45 7.45 7.45 11.20 6.70 7.45 6.70 9.70 7.45 7.45 9.96 9.95 .9.95 14.95 8.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 11.95 7.95 6.50 7.95 & 14.95 7.95 AMSTRAD 8.95 STREET HAWK.... KNIGHT RIDER......... B.MAC BOXING....... BATTLE OF THE PLANETS SIR FRED.................. 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE.. SURF CHAMP. PANZADROME INT. KARATE.. RAMBO.. ELITE... LORD OF THE RINGS. SWEEVO'S WORLD. FRIDAY THE 13th.... NOW GAMES 2... CRITICAL MASS... SUPERBOWL...... TAU CETI......... STAR QUAKE... SOUTHERN BELLE.. YIE AR KUNG FU.... GOLD RUN... EXPLODING FIST....... THE FORCE EVIL CROWN........ ARENA.......... BACK TO SKOOL.... GUN FRIGHT........ CYBERUN.......... ZOIDS.............. 5.95 11.20 11.50 5.95 8.70 6.70 5.95 5.95 7.45 5.95 5.95 5.95 5.95 5.95 7.45 7.45 7.45 5.20 7.45 7.45 5.95 GAME \"V\"... STREET HAWK... KNIGHT...... SPITFIRE 40........ SKYFOX... TAU CETI........... ELITE... FRIDAY THE 13th... WHO DARES WIN II... ROCCO OUR RRP PRICE 8.95 6.70 6.70 6.70 7.45 6.70 7.45 11.30 6.70 6.70 5.50 8.95 && & 7.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 6.95 9.95 9.95 7.95 MSX COMMODORE 64 OUR GAME RRP PRICE KNOCKOUT........ ..7.95 5.95 HYPER RALLY....... 14.95 11.20 PING PONG.................... .14.95 11.20 ROAD FIGHTER............ 14.95 11.20 TENNIS..... 14.95 11.20 YIE AR KUNG FU II.................. 14.95 11.20 HYPER SPORTS III..........................................14.95 11.20 Bruce's Armlocks can really spin you out RRP 9.95 GAME SPY HUNTER. KAISER URIDIUM... SPACE CLOUT... CAUSE OF CHAOS. WILD RIDE 7.95 8.95 8.95 8.96 QUICKSHOT II NOW ONLY .50 6.95 \"V\" 8.95 ALL PRICES INCLUDE P&P STREET HAWK... KNIGHT RIDER.. BOUNDER....... MIND SHADOW. KORONIS RIST.. NIGHT SHADE...... OUTLAWS........ MERCENARY..... MUGSY'S REVENGE SCARABEUS.. FRIDAY THE 13th.. SUPERMAN....... ENIGMA FORCE.... 8.95 8.95 9.95 .9.95 9.95 9.95 -9.95 ..9.95 8.95 .9.95 8.95 .9.95 9.95 OUR PRICE 7.45 5.95 6.70 6.70 6.70 5.20 6.70 6.70 6.70 7.45 7.45 7.45 7.45 7.45 7.45 6.70 7.45 6.70 7.45 7.45 Goodbyte offers some of the most competitive prices for software available. If you don't see the the game you require listed, please ring for the most up-to-date news on releases and back catalogue flies on 01-731 4807. PLEASE NOTE IF OUR ORDER EXCEEDS  YOU GET 10% FURTHER DISCOUNT SEND CHEQUE/P.O. TO GOODBYTE UNIT 10-11 IMPERIAL STUDIOS, IMPERIAL ROAD LONDON SWB (TEL: 01-731 4807 ROCK NI WRESTLE NEW!!! LOW COST SHORT TERM FINANCE NOW AVAILABLE Compumart Mega Deals Best Price for Best Prices for SATARI HARDWARE BLANK DISKS ATARI ATARINN in the U.K. WAAL ATARIA in the U.K. ATARI in the U.K. Top Quality 514\" Bulk Packed Disks (Hub-Ringed and in White Envelopes with a Lifetime Warranty) FREE!!! Plastic Library Case worth  95 Atari 130XE Computer when you buy 10 Disks . +ope +  p&p FREE!!! Perspex Disk Storage Box worth  when you buy 50 Disks 95 . FESPORTE . +p&p 00 . +F1P&P Atari 1050 Disk Drive (with FREE Home File Manager, Payoff Adventure, Demo Disks & 10 FREE Blank Disks) +  p&p Atari 1027 Letter Quality 10-514\" Single Sided/Double Density 95 Printer (with FREE Atari Writer) Blank Disks (with FREE case) +  p&p +  p&p Atari 130XE, 1050 Disk Drive 10-574\" Double Sided/Double Density  +  p&p $13. 95 Blank Disks (with FREE case) & 1027 Letter Quality Printer (with FREE Home File Manager, Payoff Adventure, Demo Disks, Atari Writer 00 50—574\" Single Sided/Double Density & 10 Blank Disks) +  p&p Blank Disks (with FREE Storage Box) Goods despatched : SAME DAY PARCEL POST 12 Month Warranty: ANY PRODUCT FOUND TO BE DEFECTIVE WITHIN 12 MONTHS OF 50-514\" Double Sided/Double Density PURCHASE WILL BE REPLACED FREE OF CHARGE Blank Disks (with FREE Storage Box) GOODS DESPATCHED : Same day 1st Class Post CONTACT US NOW FOR THE LATEST MONEY BACK GUARANTEE : If you are not completely PRICES + AVAILABILITY OF ALL satisfied with your purchase we will either exchange your disks or give a FULL REFUND that's the ATARI PRODUCTS Compumart Guarantee. Please send cheques/postal orders to : Compumart, (Dept CV) 71 Gracedieu Road, Loughborough Leics. LE11 OQF  +85p&p . +52p&p . sepp 0509-262259 LES Comput...Compumart....Compur STLINE....HOTLINE.....HOT "


"C+VG ADVENTURE REVIEWS/1 SEAS OF BLOOD  Supplier: Fantasy Software/AI You are the captain of the enters a combat mode in which to be plundered and respectable Machine: Commodore 64, pirate vessel Banshee, and for a the lower half of the screen ships to be burned and looted, Spectrum 48k, Amstrad successful voyage you must depicts two dice and displays not to mention skirmishes with return 20 treasures to the top of and updates the relative skill and other ships. Price: .95 a mountain at the southern end stamina of the opponents, giving But all is not looting, pillaging Written by Mike Woodroffe and of the Inland Sea. The sea is a a commentary on the details of and plundering there are Brian Howarth, and based on the seven by thirty grid, and the the battle. When on land the some real problems as well! Fighting Fantasy series of books ship can be sailed by the adventurer can chicken out and What do the sea Sprites want? by Steve Jackson and Ian commands SAIL (direction). run, by hitting X, but at sea the What's the best way to defeat a Livingstone, this is the first of a You can leave the ship to go fight must go on to the bitter zombie? Aha, and there's the new adventure series on the pillaging on land — should you end. During the many times I traditional red-herring in there Fighting Fantasy Software label, sight it! Mind you, on land you played the game luck was nearly somewhere, too' Mike Woodroffe from Adventure International. may not find the plundering too always on my side. I am told told me! Al's Adventure System, using straightforward, for as well as there is worse to come, so All this combines with split screen text and in-memory some typical adventure perhaps it wasn't luck, but excellent graphics to make a graphics, is now familiar to problems, you are likely to meet intended. However, I have never very good adventure, easy many adventurers. It was used to some stubborn resistance from found computer lights based on enough to get into but it's not create Gremlins and Robin of natives, ghoulies, and ghosties. random numbers particularly so simple to tie things up on the Sherwood, as well as the UK Some of these attack, rather to credible, so I looked upon a mountain top! conversions of Scott Adams' my disappointment, zapped me fight as a somewhat risky way to Keith Campbell games. It is slick and fast, right out of the game without obtain a treature or find a providing an attractive warning. I suppose I should have hidden exit.  Vocabulary framework upon which to build known better than to annoy Sailing the seas can be Atmosphere an adventure story, and stands them! interesting, for as well as finding Personal up well in this new series. During a fight, the program land to explore, there are wrecks @coco THE Supplier: US Gold/Sierra  Machine: Commodore 64, Disk  Price: .95 Unashamedly a game for kiddies, Winnie the Pooh is set in the Hundred Acre Wood. All the residents of the wood have lost something, and are waiting for someone to return it to them. Become their hero, by returning all the objects, and have Christopher Robin and his friends throw a party in your honour! Pooh starts in the company of Teddy and a pile of bricks in Christopher Robin's playroom, after a short title screen to the accompaniment of the wellknown Winnie the Pooh tune. A novel feature is hidden in the toy box, for inside is a disk, and it is here to where the player must return to save the game position. Once in the woods, when you meet up with one of the characters, you are given a clue about what object he wants. For example, Mrs. Kanga is neat and tidy, so if you come across a broom... And there's her son Roo, who loves playing in his sandpit. When the correct object is dropped by the appropriate character, the player is rewarded with a little tune. However, the objects change from game to game, making this a game that can be played over and over, without being an exact repitition. There are hazards too. If Tigger gets hold of you, he will bounce you to a random location. Sometimes the wind blows, (you can hear it) and scatters all the remaining objects to different locations. On other occasions, a mist comes down and you lose your sense of direction. This is a very easy game for youngsters to play. After short text narratives, the player is given a number of options and suggestions about what to do next. At the successful conclusion of the quest, Christopher Robin invites the player to his party but the location has to be discovered! It is worth it, too, for here is a picture that is a joy to behold, and a tune to congratulate the junior adventurer. The graphics are excellent, quick to load and draw (especially for a Commodore), full of colour, and in a cartoony style worthy of the Disney name on the label. Altogether, a game to be highly recommended for younger children not yet into full-blown adventure games. Keith Campbell Vocabulary Atmosphere Personal 3\" "


"REVIEWS/2 SOULS OF DARKON  Supplier: Taskset  Machine: Amstrad, Commodore 64, Spectrum Price: .95, cassette LOOK. One or two other strange messages appeared from time to time, as well. For all that, the game is quite a good one when you get used to it. Keith Campbell  Vocabulary Atmosphere  Personal vo picture, whilst the player's continues to ignore me! Perhaps commands are entered at the I am using the rather limited bottom of the screen. vocab in the wrong way. Since the descriptions are There seems to be a glitch or narrative, it is necessary to type two with the replies, as when LOOK for a list of exits and having typed GO OUT to leave objects. There are three facilities the hut, the narrative location' for HELP. One is to simply type text told me I was hovering over the word, but more often than a swamp, yet the picture not you will be referred to the showed I had remained in the other two methods: LEGEND and hut, a fact confirmed by the VOCAB. The latter is simply a subsequent reply to typing list of the valid words, whilst LEGEND may tell you a bit about the background of the location. The graphics are a let-down, consisting of blue line-drawings on a green background, but they are fast, and they do serve to identify where you are without the necessity of having to struggle through the location text. There are a couple of characters to be found early in the game — a toiling woodman, and a guide. Both seem rather wooden, for I have not found a way to make them listen yet, let along engage in a useful conversation, despite paying the guide for a service he just accepts the money and then The brief backgound story to this game is rather ludicrous, for you are cast as a bionic warrior on the planet Megron, laid waste by the evil Darkon. With nothing but a faithful robot watching over you, you are presumably (for it doesn't say as much) sent to find and overthrow Darkon. The environment in which you find yourself will pass for good old mother Earth anyday, with trees and mushrooms, not to mention a log hut complete with woodman, the remains of a brewery, a blacksmiths, and the odd fountain and monument here and there. The game takes a bit of getting used to, as the text is so horribly gothic that it is almost indecipherable at first. The screen has an unusual layout, the top half describing the location in a narrative sort of way, with a picture below it to the left. The computer's replies are shown to the right of the Souls of DARKON BUCKAROO BANZAI Over the next few months, I will be bringing you previews of some games that are being enjoyed by Adventurers in faraway places. The revelation that a Scott during 1984, but not yet released Adams game named Buckaroo in the UK. Banzai has been on release in Buckaroo, half American, half the US for some 18 months, yet Japanese, is a brilliant exnot seen over here, will no doubt neurosurgeon, who discovers a have Scott's European fans dimension passage through drooling in anticipation, and space with the aid of his jet-car, posibly somewhat hurt that they a vehicle able to travel through haven't been privy to this secret. solid matter. Using his amazing Buckaroo Banzai is a car, he comes across the strange title, you might think. Lectroids — a race of aliens who However, it is based on the threaten the entire world. exploits of the hero of a Disposing of this menace in Twentieth Century Fox film of the the film, Buckaroo is about to set same name, shown in the US off on a well-earned holiday, only to have his plans disrupted. Before they left, the Lectroids planted a nuclear device deep inside the Kyn mountain in Arizona. Any attempt to disable it will result in its detonation Telephone communication has been cut in the ensuing mass panic and evacuation of the area. The President charges Buckaroo with the task of saving Arizona. \"Buckaroo, I want you to...\" And this is where you take over — the adventure now starts. From the Yoyodyne office in Trantham, just by the Kyn mountain, you set out to see what's what. On a parking lot by the mountain rests your jet car, but with no fuel or battery. A deserted gas station yields a battery — but it is flat! A supermarket holds a few useful objects, as does a shack on a deserted road. Scott is fond of the shack as a location, have you noticed? First there was the grass shack in Pirate, followed by the allimportant Radio Shack (surely a double entendre for TRS-80 owners?) in Ghost Town. Next, chronologically, is the Buckaroo shack, making three, but Scott's shack makes yet another comback in Questprobe Three, right next to the tar-pit Back with Buckaroo, his first problem seems to be to get the jet-car working. All the items seem to be there — but how do you fit them together? Meanwhile, on a different tack, a spot of digging must be called for — Buckaroo has come across a spade. Here is an utterly unexpected and quite original digging problem, accompanied by equally impressive animated graphics. The version of BB that I played was in Sagaplus format on a Commodore 64 disc, available at present only in the States. Will it be seen over here? I spoke to Mike Woodroffe of Adventure International UK. \"We're waiting for the film,\" he explained. \"It's sitting over here in cans, waiting for Thorn-DMI to release it!\" However, there are some doubts about the future of BB in the UK. I asked Scott how the film was received in the US. \"It was released during the '84 Olympics,\" he explained. \"Everyone was either watching the games, or getting out of doors to enjoy the good weather. They weren't going to the movies! But it did develop a sort of cult following, rather like Rocky Horror.\" Personally, Scott admitted he saw it three times before he began to understand it. So will we be seeing Buckaroo Banzai, the adventure, in the UK? As things stand, that is entirely in the hands of the film distributors. Keith Campbell TEISTETESSIER YOYO DYNE the corner of Main St. kory Ave, and I see here a YOYODYHE building a gas station. I see exits to the north, South, east, and west. "


"THE ULTIMATE GAMES FOR THE COMMODORE 64 TAOTOKA SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS och AST PLAY THE Sabre Wulf, Underwurlde and Nightshade are available on the Commodore 64 at .95inc.VAT FIREBIRD Firebird Software Wellington House Upper St Martin's Lane London WC2H9DL MAIL ORDER Please state name of game and numbers required. Enclose crossed cheque/P.0. made payable to FIREBIRD SOFTWARE. All offers are subject to availability. Orders are despatched promptly. All prices inclusive of VAT and postage. *FREEPOST FIREBIRD, Wellington House, Upper St. Martins Lane, London WC 211 9BR Firebird isa Trade Mark of British Telecommunications plc, "


"SPECTRUM TITLES SOFTWARE ...............95 ..............95 BACKPACKERS GUIDE... ..95 IMPOSSIBLE, DIMENSION DESTRUCTORS, THE DRIVE-IN ... .75 KOKOTONI WILF .45 ARMAGEDDON, POOL .... .... .95 CODENAME MAT. .75 CRAZY CAVERNS ..95 *FREEZE BEES, CYBER RATS, BRAIN DAMAGE LINKWORD FRENCH .50 NIGHTFLITE ..45 SPACE STATION ZEBRA, THE ISLAND, RUNES OF LINKWORD GERMAN. .50 SHADOWFIRE. ..45 ZENDOS. ..45 MAGNETS (EDUCATIONAL)....... ............ ...95 DAY IN THE LIFE............................................. .95 THE BULGE ........ .............. ..95 RUNES OF ZENDOS.... YOUNG LEARNERS & PENETRATOR ......... SUBTERRANEAN STRYKER .............................. .95 SURVIVAL (EDUCATIONAL) ...... ......................95 DRAGONTORC... ............... ....95 EDUCATIONAL PACKS SMALL BUSINESS ACCOUNTS .00 MONOPOLY... ..75 * BRAINTEASER PACK INC. RIDDLE OF THE SPHINX, HUNTER KILLER .95 THE ARTIST .... ..75 UNDERWORLD FIRST MOVES, SNAFFLE, .95 ... .75 BRIDGE PLAYER II.... WORD WIZARD ....95 SCRABBLE.. ................00 AUSTERLITZ............. ..75 PACKS *6-10 YEAR OLDS PACK INC. SUM SCRUNCHER, ARNHEM.................................. ..75 Please quote pack contents in order ROBOT RUNNER, WILD WORDS, A.B.C. WATERLOO .............. .75 *VU CALC, VU FILE, VU3D. ..95 LIFT-OFF .... DESERT RATS .... .75 *SHIP OF DOOM, PLANET OF DEATH, ESPIONAGE *4-8 YEAR OLDS PACK INC. COUNT ABOUT THEIR FINEST HOUR ..75 TINY TOUCH 'N GO (typing tutor)............ LUNAR LETTERS, HOT DOG SPOTTER ........... .95 ISLAND, INCA CURSE, EMBASSY ASSAULT, ..00 EUREKA .50 REVERSI...... * MR T'S TELLS THE TIME, MR T'S MEETS HIS DOOMDARK'S REVENGE .95 *BACKGAMMON, 4D ARCADE ADVENTURE, MATCH, MR T'S SIMPLE SUMS..................... .50 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT... ........... ..95 BIORYTHMS, REVERSI, DEVILS OF THE DEEP, * MR T'S NUMBER GAMES, MR T'S SHAPE GAMES. VALHALLA..... ...50 MANIC MINER ...... ...........95 MR T'S MEASURING GAMES ....................... .50 SHERLOCK ..... ............ ..50 * SMALL BUSINESS ACCOUNTS, COLLECTORS PSYTRON .95 * ROSE SOFTWARE PACKS INC. INTERMEDIATE PACK, CLUB RECORD CONTROLLER...............50 HAMPSTEAD. .95 ENGLISH 1, INTERMEDIATE ENGLISH 2, ABERSOFT FORTH .95 *COSMIC CRUISER, BC BILL, PEDRO, ZZOOM, ZIP INTERMEDIATE MATHS 1, INTERMEDIATE HORACE GOES SKIING ....... .00 ZAP, ALCHEMIST...........................................95 MATHS 2... ................95 BRAXX BLUFF ............... ......95 *WAR GAMES, INC. DREADNOUGHTS, PANZER * YOUNG LEARNERS 1 INC. ABACUS, TELLING TIME, PROJECT FUTURE............. .95 ATTACK, RED BARRON, PARAS.....................95 SHOPPING, SNAKES SYSTEM 15,000 .............. ..95 *SPORTS PACK INC. SNOOKER, ON THE OCHE *YOUNG LEARNER 2 INC. ANGLES, TABLES, PYJAMARAMA/AUTOMANIA .... ..95 (DARTS), OLYMPICS, ST. ANDREWS GOLF, DERBY DEDUCE CAPACITY, PRIMARY ARITHMETIC... .95 STOP THE EXPRESS .95 DAY, WORLD CUP FOOTBALL....................... .95 * FIVE TITLES, INC. TRIGONOMETRY, EQUATIONS & CONFUZION .. ..95 INEQUALITIES, GEOMETRY, FRENCH TERRAHAWKS.. ..95 * POOL, DUNGEON MASTER, TRANSYLVANIAN VOCABULARY, PHYSICS HURG ...95 ..95 TOWER, INVINCIBLE ISLAND, THE MAGIC WAR OF THE WORLDS............. ........... ..95 ROUNDABOUT, TIMEBOMB ...95 SELECT 1 (12 games)............... .......... ..95 *WINGED WARLORDS, OTHELLO, SPECTRUM XAVOIR ............. ..95 SAFARI, CATERPILLAR, GERMAN IS FUN, CURRAH SPEECH & SOUND. .95 HIGHWAY CODE PROGRAM....... .95 LEAPFROG........ ...........95 SINGLE PORT INTERFACES ..95 GET SET (EDUCATIONAL)..... .95 QUICKSHOT II JOYSTICK. .95 NUMBER FUN (EDUCATIONAL).. .95 *SPACE RAIDERS, TRAXX, HUNGRY HORACE, COMMODORE JOYSTICKS....... ..00 FAIRSHARE (EDUCATIONAL). .95 CATERPILLAR, SPELLBOUND, PLANETOIDS.... .95 DK'TRONICS KEYBOARDS............95 (.00 p&p) PAT THE POSTMAN........ ......... .95 * IT'S THE WOOLUF, THE ISLAND, HALLS OF THE ALPHACOM 32 PRINTERS ............95 (.00 p&p) GHOSTBUSTERS ........ .95 THINGS, ROMMELS REVENGE, DUNGEON MASTER, SAGA EMPEROR KEYBOARDS ..... .95 (.00 p&p) ASTRONOMER II ......... ..75 INVASION BODY SNATCHERS........................95 SAGA ELITE KEYBOARDS............  74.95 (.00 p&p) ANDROID ONE ....... .95 *CATTEL I.Q. TEST, SURVIVAL, MAGNETS, CHESS DK LIGHT PEN .95 ANDROID TWO. ...95 KEMPSTON CENTRONICS INT.. TUTOR, FORTH, FLIPPIT .95 ...95 CYCLONE ..95 SEIKOSHA GP50s ... .95 (.00 p&p) ..95 * EXTERMINATOR, SPELLBOUND, MISSION Mail Order Offer Only — P&P, 70p Software, 70p Peripherals (unless otherwise stated), 70p per tape overseas, .50 per pack overseas PERIPHERALS ....... T.L.L COMMODORE 64 TITLES . .. ........... CARTRIDGES BY COMMODORE ......... PACKS . .... SOFTWARE VALHALLA. ..95 WORDS WORDS WORDS MYCHESS II.... ..25 LOGO.... .95 BBC MASTERMIND CEASER THE CAT ............ ...95 PILOT. .95 ROB CARRIERS MENU PLANNER HERO .95 SIMON'S BASIC ............. .00 ZIMSALA BIM.............. .95 EUREKA ................ .95 MOTOCROSS. .95 EASY SCRIPT..................... .............50 COMMODORE SUICIDE STRIKE. .95 EASY FILE ................ ..........50 JUICE ............ .95 INTRO TO BASIC PT. 1... ..00 HARERAISER .............. .95 QUO VADIS.... ...95 JUPITER LANDER ............... .50 PENETRATOR ...... .25 FIRE QUEST.... ................................. .95 ..95 OMEGA RACE...... .50 ASSEMBLER 64 ........... .25 LE MANS ............ .50 STELLAR 7. .95 PINBALL SPECTACULAR..... EDUCATIONAL TITLES J.S.W. .50 .25 CLOWNS...... ...50 GOODNESS GRACIOUS .95 HAMPSTEAD ....... .95 ROCK 'N BOLT.............. .95 JUST .50 EACH HUNCHBACK II............ .95 PATHFINDER INTERNATIONAL FOOTBALL ..... ..95 SPIRATES & SNOWMEN * AZTEC, ANCK, MR ROBOT .. ..95 JACK ATTACK... .95 HUMPTY DUMPTY * MR T'S NUMBER GAMES, SHAPE GAMES, AGENT U.S.A. ..... .95 FACEMAKER MEASURING GAMES ...... ..50 HEATHROW A.T.C. .25 GET READY TO READ * MR T TELLS THE TIME, MEETS HIS MATCH, CAD CAM WARRIOR. .95 MATCHMAKER MR T'S MONEY BOX... ...50 64 BASIC PROGRAMMING COURSE.. ............. .95 LET'S COUNT CHEMISTRY BY LONGMAN 'O' LEVEL CSE........ .95 GERMAN PERIPHERALS PSYTRON ......... .95 GEOGRAPHY COMMODORE JOYSTICKS........ ..00 FORT APOCALYPSE ...... ..95 COMPUTER STUDIES VIC 20 PADDLES (PAIR).. ... .95 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT.......... .95 PATRICK MOORE'S ASTRONOMY PROGRAMMERS REF GUIDES.. ...00 SHADOWFIRE .... .25 FRENCH CURRACH SPEECH 64 .50 PYJAMARAMA/AUTOMANIA ..... ...95 KNOW YOUR OWN 1.Q. QUICK SHOT II's....... ... .95 SELECT 1 ...95 HISTORY 20th CENTURY WICO TRACKER BALLS... ................95 SPY V SPY ........ ..95 PHYSICS P&P: Software orders 70p, Peripherals 70p. Overseas add 75p per tape and .00 per pack. Please state machine and pack contents LOGIC SALES LTD 6 MIDGATE, PETERBOROUGH, CAMBS PE1 1TN Telephone: (0733) 49696 76 "


"C+VG HDUENTURE REVIEWS/3 WORM IN PARADISE  Supplier: Level 9  Machine: All formats  Price: .95 With Worm ends the saga of the colonists of Eridani, which started with their journey in the Snowball, led by Kim Kimberley. After her survival in Return to Eden, the plant has been tamed, and the colonists live in a high-tech utopia run by robots. Eden is a benevolent right wing bureacracy in which there are no taxes, government revenue being raised by fines and health charges. If the general idea sounds familiar, then remember it is ruled by a woman, The Third Kim. Whilst no right-thinking' person would consider challenging the system, there is a thinking minority who dislikes it, and are branded potential socialists'. The adventure starts in a were sensible enough to play it) garden, with beautiful lawns and memories from Snowball will full of fragrant flowers. Its walls, come flooding back. Then the festooned with roses and other problem is there, in the form of climbing plants, are seemingly a puzzle crack it and you unclimbable. An ever-growing may be on your way to the seat worm might lead you out if you of power, to save the world. succumb to the temptation, but it Worm in Paradise is the first will not take you far, and one product of Level 9's new way or another, Reveline will adventure system, and certainly bring you to your senses, and in the presentation of text it is you will find yourself in the city reminiscent of Interlogic, and of Enoch. Infocom system. Worm has a Exploration of the city brings vocabulary of over 1000 words you to places like the museum, plus many abbreviations, yet this casino, theme park, and dozens is all in memory! The range of more. commands understood is very Questions gradually form, and flexible; full sentence and produce a feeling of unease — multiple complex commands are that all is not well in the ultimate accepted, such as EXAMINE of civilisations. Questions, but no ALL BUT THE TATTOO, When I real problems bar your passage first tried EXAMINE through the city. But if you are EVERYTHING I got a list which the nosey type — eventually included descriptions of objects I something will click, and (if you hadn't even discovered! The Silicon Dream trilogy is now complete, having spanned the evolution of Level 9's Adventure System from the original 2-work input, text only format in Snowball, through the introduction of graphics in Return to Eden, to this smooth and flexible new form of presentation. Here is science-fiction-based political saga which you can just sit back and enjoy, or, if you prefer, involve yourself at a more challenging level in an attempt to reach the seat of power and save the world. Play it either way — I'm sure you ll agree it's superb! Keith Campbell Vocabulary ! . Atmosphere  Personal 9 W QUEEN  Supplier: St Bride's inseparable pair of Gerda and Machine: Spectrum 48k Kay, two frightfully nice kids. A decidedly freaky goblin had a  Price: .95 fiendish idea — he made a Elation was not exactly my mood mirror which made everything while this game based on the look horrible, except things that story by Hans Christian were already ugly, which it Andersen was loading, and a made appealing. further blow was dealt by the The mirror shatters, and two appearance of a rhyme on the fragments become lodged in screen. It's all too ghastly to Kay's eye and heart. Kay . repeat, but it does give a brief becomes more obnoxious, and idea of what the story is all goes out to play with the big about. boys of the village. Suddenly, in For those of you who don't a jolly large blizzard, Queeny already know it, Ill outline the appears, grabs Kay, and whisks plot. You play the role of Gerda, him off to her pad in the the female half of the supposedly mountains. As Gerda, your daunting task where can it be?\" the next time in the adventure is to rescue you return! your pal from the clutches of this The game is in two parts, icy dame, even though she may making a total of 64k, and Part not be all that keen to be two begins as you make your rescued! Well, despite being cast way towards the Ice Palace. as a female, it doesn't sound too The Snow Queen probably bad, does it? And in fact, it is won't achieve such chart success quite pleasant to play. as a blood and guts adventure, There are some pretty and many gamers will no doubt standard puzzles, most of which find the story idea rather involve doing the proper thing' repulsive. ie returning a lost purse to its Jim Douglas correct owner. A bug of sorts lurks in this area; once you have  Vocabulary returned the purse, the owner is . Atmosphere perfectly happy to reward you, . Personal only to repeat cries of \"Oh, now co THE SPECTRUM ADVENTURER finished it are two a penny, Mike Gerrard having bought the whole solution. . Duckworth .95 On the other hand, I suppose I'm not quite sure whether or not people who have been genuinely I agree with the idea of frustrated for many months, do publishing complete solutions to have a right to know the answers adventure games. It takes the to the mysteries for which they essential element of mystery out have paid, and so to be put out of a game if you know you only of their misery. have to toddle along to From the point of view of the WH Smith to learn all that has author and publisher of a game, been baffling you. Perhaps it I suppose it is all right for their also reduces the sense of secrets to be revealed when the achievement felt by a player who game has been around a long finally cracks a game himself, while. knowing that people who have In The Spectrum Adventurer, Mike Gerrard provides 100% solutions, including complete maps, for four games: Valhalla, Snowball, Twin Kingdom Valley and Urban Upstart. For the latter three, the solutions are arranged as an index of problems, which are then looked up in the text that follows. Valhalla is presented in a slightly different format, with a fairly long introduction on the strategy to adopt, followed by a commented list of locations. All the maps appear as appendices at the back of the book. As one would expect with Mike's name on the front cover, the book is impeccably written in an easy style, and represents good value to anyone who is irretrievably stuck in even one of the four games. If you are just mulling over a sticky problem though, my experience is that a full solution to hand is too much of a temptation, and even the most determined adventurer will make the feeblest excuses to himself to look up something that is temporarily stopping progress! Still, I suppose it would make my life a bit easier. ... Keith Campbell "


"Because of their complexity, Adventure programs are not easy to write. To do so, one must be very conversant with one's chosen programming language, be it Basic or Assembler, since the program carries out complex string operations to convert the player's English command into a machine usable form. Most Adventure software houses and authors, perfectly capable of producing a machine code program, have their own Adventure System, enabling them to speed up the production of the finished game once the plot has been defined. Here, Keith Campbell takes a look at two new utilities recently released for the Amstrad. ADVENTURE CREATORS THE GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR Incentive Software example, when you add a new Having entered a lot of data, it FILL. This may have to be Amstrad CPC464, 664, 6128 room, for example, you are is essential to be able to keep repeated a few times with the asked the connections, and must track of it all, so as to be able to cursor in different positions, but  Cassette .95; Disk .95 enter the direction followed by compare the numbers assigned it is a quick process. There is Written by 19-year-old Sean the destination. If the direction to the various words, objects, also a facility to superimpose Ellis, an undergraduate in has not already been supplied, rooms, and so on. Although one picture upon another, and Cybernetics and Computer the checking prevents this from these can be viewed from the this can be used to very quickly Science at Reading University, being entered, and a message editor, it would be impossible to build up a series of different this is a very clever and user tells you why. fit them all on the screen at pictures using picture 'modules' friendly piece of software. This error message, when I once. This is where the PRINT already created. Operation of the program is first encountered it, led me to option comes in handy, enabling Pictures are thus very easy to from a main menu, with separate the horrific discovery that the any of the lists, including create, and each is associated options for the entry of verbs, direction must be entered on the reference numbers, to be put out with a room number, using the nouns, adverbs, objects, room VERB list! Thus to go east, if an on an Amstrad printer. This room option. Once done, the descriptions and messages, as allowable abbreviation is to be E, allows a careful study of well as three levels of conditions then E must be included as a everything that has been and graphics. verb. I also concluded that the entered, and saves the user Entry of the vocabulary is verb list, or at least a verb to be having to keep a careful handsimplicity itself — the user just used elsewhere, must be entered written list of everything as he types in each word, preceded by first, a point that I was unable to enters it. its reference number, on a line spot in my pre-publication copy Perhaps the most striking at the base of the screen, and of the manual. feature of this utility is the presses ENTER. The number and There is a way round this graphics option, which is a joy word supplied are then inserted problem, however. Should the to use. Straight lines can be in alphabetical order into a list player be allowed to be long drawn by simply pressing the filling the major part of the winded and type GO EAST, COPY key once, and moving the screen above. those words must be included on cursor using the arrow keys. The An arrow is positioned halfway the verb and noun lists resulting line will be a straight down the list, pointing to the respectively, and the resulting one from the start position to the entry which will be made movement must be entered as a current cursor position — in available to edit if ENTER is condition in the local condition other words, it will not turn pressed with no text in the input list applying to a specific room. through an angle. Where a field. The up and down cursor There are three levels of change of direction is required, control keys are used to scroll condition: Local, applying to a the list against the arrow to specific location; Low Priority; effect the selection. and High Priority. These are Room, objects, messages and entered in a form resembling a conditions, have a slightly high-level computer language: different form of entry. The user IF (VERB 6 AND NOUN 1 AND is prompted for the entry CARR 5) DROP 5 OKAY END number, and then, in turn, the and IF (VERB 14 AND NOUN 1 various parameters associated AND AVAI 5) 1 SWAP 5 CTR O with it. With objects, for + 20 CSET O MESS 15 SET 2 example, the description is first WAIT END displayed. This can be edited if Not difficult, but there are it exists, or will be added if it is keywords and a syntax here a new one. On pressing ENTER, which must be learned if the the room number in which the utility is to be used effectively. Change Dot 2llipse ill hk Picture object is to start is shown, and To build up a plot, there are 255 Rectangle Shading dete hole pi this is followed by its weight. markers and 127 counters Validation is carried out on the available for use in the condition steps back/fud data as it is entered. For lists. tapping the COPY key twice picture will automatically display effectively breaks the current when the player enters that line and starts a new one. location, and it is very fast in A pen' to the right of the doing so. window moves up and down, For those wishing to create a indicating by contact with the text-only adventure, the provision paper' beneath it, whether of graphics is optional, and to DRAW is on or off. protect the sensibilities of the A choice of four colours is text-adventure player faced with offered, and any four can be a graphics adventure, when selected, with shades of running the game, the player has combinations of any two of those the ability to switch the graphics four also available. An area off and on. enclosed by lines is filled with The game can be fully played hange Dot 21lipse ill Lek Picture colour by first selecting the from within the Adventure Rectangle Shading Edete Ahole pi colour or shade required, Creator, and an appropriate ter's back/tud moves csr, CTRLpositioning the cursor inside the message will be displayed when area, and then pressing F to an error is encountered, to help A "


"C+VG ADVENTURE GENESIS debugging. As a further aid to though, for once mastered, this testing, play can be interrupted seems to me to have the to view a diagnostics screen flexibility to meet most plot showing the state of all the user's requirements you are likely to flags — the markets and dream up. It is easy to learn and counters. After viewing these, use, and provides a very slick the game may be continued from method for entering and editing the point at which it was left. data. When complete, the game I put it way ahead of the created can be saved to disk or Quill. tape, and the saved version will run independently from the CRL Group PLC utility. Amstrad CPC 464/664 You will need to study the .95 The Genesis Adventure Creation LAST System consists of a suite of three programs. TEXTURE is the text editor, the business part of the package, in which the adventure is created. DEPICTER is the graphics and sound creator. CLONER is the module used to save the adventure created on to tape and in a playable form. The Text editor is operated from a series of menus, which always occupy the top half of the screen. The menus are displayed in a box to the left, to the right, memory usage is constantly monitored. The lower manual carefully and play about half of the screen is the with the Creator quite a bit input/edit area. Upon selecting before you sit down and write an one of the options from the main Adventure for real. Worth it, menu, a sub-menu replaces it without the screen completely I was asked for a name for the clearning. Where there are status! Nowhere could I find any further sub-menus, the same guidance as to what on earth I process continues. Input of should be putting in for either vocabulary, object and location this or the status itself. data, etc., is carried out in the Things seem incredibly lower half of the screen as the complex for a utility that is appropriate prompts appear. supposed to make adventure Despite trying hard, after some creation easier than five hours spent reading the programming! For example, the manual and experimenting by ACTION for a TAKE command inputting location and object is entered as: details, I was nowhere near to CALL <30>: understanding how the utility is (OBST(CARRIABLE.OB1)=01 supposed to be used to create an MSG<17.1> FINISH: adventure, let alone have the (OBLC(OBI) PLOC1) MSG 9,1> beginnings of one up and FINISH: running. (OBST(CARRY,OBI O) The main menu screen is MSG 8,1> FINISH: displayed in 80 character mode, COPY<1;OBST(CARRY,OB1)> and is none too easy on the CALL<39>FINISH: eyes. Presented in unfriendly I was beginning to get the words whose meaning is not very feeling that learning Assembly obvious, the option headings and Language would be just as easy prompts are not at all helpful, and a whole lot more useful: with choices such as: Obj.Status Graphics are created on an list, and Def.Objects. If in doubt, entirely separate program, it is usually helpful to consult DEPICTER, and although I fared the manual. a little better using this, I found Unfortunately, the manual does it was heavy going, and I failed not make easy reading either — to produce a picture. The sound the size of the text is feature also offered a challenge, microscopic. After borrowing my but one that I soon abandoned. grannie's specs, I just about Because the graphics creator managed to read it, but was is a separate program module, disappointed with what I saw. It the complete adventure cannot is not very well ordered, and be run from within the utility. starts off with generalised To create the fully playable examples before getting properly version is fiddly to say the least. to grips with the subject if it first. data must be saved from ever does. I always find it easier the CLONER module, and then to use a program if there is a to the same tape must be added concise list of instructions, with saved data from both the text an example or two, rather than a and graphics editors. lot of verbose technical waffle. Although the utility appears to Turning to the Texture Options be well programmed, the overall Reference Section, I started by impression I got was that it was trying to enter my first object. In written by professional addition to a reference number, programmers for professional I was dismayed to discover that I programmers. But having said had to give it a name quite that, I would emphasise that I separate from the actual found it very difficult to follow description of the object to how to use this utility. appear in the game. Every time I I therefore conclude that tried to go back on a previous Genesis fails in its objective — object, I seemed to get the to simplify the task of creating message telling me that this was an adventure game. a new entry, and asking me to Next month in the Adventure confirm it. 'Bytes used' started to Reviews section, Keith Campbell be registered, but other than and the team will be taking a that, the object seemed lost long, hard look at the long forever, as I exited the option awaited Lord of the Rings with no confirmation or adventure from Hobbit man comment. My input had either Philip Mitchell. Has it been been soaked up, or ignored I worth waiting for? Keith, Paul wasn't sure which. and Jim will be telling you just Associated with the object 28 days from now. Don't miss this definition option is an object mega-review in C+VG in your status option. On selecting that, shops from February 16th. COMPARISON TABLES INCENTIVE CRI GAS Price (cassette Price (disk) .95 $9.95 $24.95 Manual 6/10 2/10 9/10 1/10 Ease of Data Entry Condition Action syntax Graphics 7/10 2/10 Sound ma 3/10 10/10 Saving program Print option Play within utility Yes 255+127 Markers/counters Overall ease of use 2/10 "


"LOOKING FOR A BARGAIN? WEEK AFTER WEEK LOOK NO FURTHER — AT THESE PRICES EVERY DAY IS SALE DAY TE FLYING LEAGLE e.g. C64 SPY VS SPY .00 C64 COMBAT LYNX .00 C64 SHERLOCK .00 SPECTRUM BRIDGE PLAYER 2 .00 SPECTRUM KONG STRIKES BACK .00 BBC EDDIE KIDD .00 AMSTRAD FOREST AT WORLDS END.00 VIC 20 TOM THUMB .00 .00 THIS IS A SAMPLE OF OUR SUPER SAVER PRICES His Turnbuckle Fly will show you the ropes. We stock 15,000 tapes and disks covering the following machines. Atari 400/800, Atari 2600, Amstrad, BBC, Commodore 16 and 64, Dragon, Electron, MSX, Oric, Spectrum, Texas, 99/4A, Vic 20, ZX81. Plus: Games Machine Supplies also available. Stockists of Hardware, Software, Consumables, Books, Magazines and all computer requirements. Free mail order. Send s.a.e. to: J.B. SOFTWARE P.O. Box 247, Birmingham B11 3SD | Hotline 021 236 1976 (Ansaphone outside of working hours) ROCK'N WRESTLE ARCADE INTERNATIONAL SOFTWARE BEST DISCOUNTS IN BRITAIN MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY A SUBSIDIARY OF PLATINUM GOLD 7.95 9.95 14.95 9.95 Our Price 6.75 7.25 5.75 7.25 7.25 7.25 7.25 5.75 7.25 6.75 \"y * OVER 4,000 different titles available for hire for the COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, BBC, AMSTRAD, ATARI and MSX computers. * ARCADE, ADVENTURE, EDUCATIONAL and BUSINESS software too. * HIRE PRICES from onlay 60p INC P&P. * 205 DISCOUNT off all purchase software. * FREE CATALOGUES. * FREE HINTS AND TIPS. * FAST RETURN OF POST SERVICE (if reserves are given). * ALL GAMES manufactures ORIGINALS with full documentation. * OVER 6,000 satisfied members. * EUROPEAN members welcome. * LIMITED PERIOD ONLY FREE MEMBERSHIP. Fully computerised system keeps track of your order. We pride ourselves in being the most professional Hire Library in the United Kingdom, with staff of 14 who know what the word service means. Backed by our own software company and programmers. 7.25 6.75 7.25 6.95 5.75 0.00 1.75 10.50 7.95 7.25 7.25 7.25 7.25 Our SPECTRUM RRP Price RRP COMIC BAKERY 7.95 5.75 COMIC BAKERY 8.95 COMMANDO 5.75 WINTER GAMES 9.95 SUPERMAN 7.25 SCOOBY DOO 7.95 ELITE 10.50 NIGHTSHADE ENIGMA FORCE 9.95 7.25 SUPER BOWL 9.95 RAMBO 7.95 5.95 OUTLAWS 9.95 THUNDERBIRDS 3.95 2.95 DRAGONSKULLE 9.95 WILLOW PATTERN 3.95 2.95 DEATH WAKE 7.95 TRANSFORMERS 7.95 5.75 FIGHT NIGHT 9.95 SUPERBOWL 9.95 7.25 YIE AR KUING FU 8.95 CYBERUN 9.95 7.25 HARD BALL 9.95 WANTED GUN FRIGHT 9.95 7.25 STREET HAWK 8.95 PENTAGRAM 9.95 7.25 BALLBLAZER 9.95 WINTER SPORTS 9.95 7.25 MERCENARY 9.95 STREET HAWK 7.95 5.75 PING PONG 7.95 PING PONG 7.95 5.75 0.00 YABBA DABBA DOO 7.95 5.75 ANY MASTERTRONIC TITLE 1.99 BIG DADDY ROCK & WRESTLE 8.95 6.75 REUS 14.95 THEY SOLD A MILLION 9.95 7.25 PITSTOP II 10.95 BACK TO SCHOOL 6.95 5.25 SUMMER GAMES II 9.95 ROLLER COASTER 6.95 5.25 EXPLODING FIST 9.95 HALL OF FAME 9.95 7.25 ROCK & WRESTLE 9.95 DEATH WAKE 7.95 5.75 ZORRO 9.95 SUPERMAN 9.95 7.25 SCOOBY DOO 7.95 7.25 C16 ANY MASTERTRONIC TITLE 1.99 1.75 ROCKMAN 1.99 YIE AR KUNG FU 7.95 5.75 LAS VEGUS 1.99 DR WHO 14.95 10.50 13 M.X. RACERS 1.99 WINTER GAMES 7.95 5.75 FORMULA 1 1.99 DESERT RATS 9.95 5.75 TUTTI FRUITTI 1.99 ARGONAUTICA 7.95 5.75 SPECTIPEDE 1.99 SQUIRM 1.99 C.16 titles in stock. Please phone for price. COMMODORE 64 COMMANDO 9.95 7.25 AMSTRAD RAMBO 8.95 5.95 STARSTRIKE II 7.95 ELITE 14.95 10.25 ROLLER COASTER 8.95 THEY SOLD A MILLION 9.95 7.25 YABBA DABBA DOO 8.95 ROLLER COASTER 7.95 5.75 RAMBO 8.95 TIME TUNNEL 9.95 7.25 COMIC BAKERY 8.95 HALL OF FAME 9.95 7.25 ANY MASTERTRONIC TITLE 1.99 DESERT FOX 0.00 0.00 WINTER GAMES 9.95 YABBA DABBA DOO 7.99 5.75 (All prices include post and packaging. Overseas orders please add  per tape). If the game your require is not listed, please phone 01-471 8900, 9.30 to 5.00; 01-519 1540, 6.30 to 9.30 evenings Remember our prices are hard to beat. Send cheque/PO to: ARCADE INTERNATIONAL SOFTWARE Unit 202, Shopping Hall, Murtle Road, East Ham, London E6 Telephone: 01-471 8900 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 5.75 MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY CVG 28 COLLEGE STREET, WORCESTER WR1 2LS TEL: 0905 611072 Please rush me my free catalogue stating machine. Name Address 6.75 6.75 5.95 6.75 1.75 7.25 VISA "


"YES. ..place an order for our magazine and we'll send you one of the above games absolutely free. We will also enrol you in our Discount Software Club enabling you to purchase software & utilities at huge savings over shop prices. We offer all the latest titles at up to f4 off shop prices (see panel for details) plus many older products at pocket money prices. In all we carry Over 300 titles each for the Spect Commodore 64 and Amstrad SIX MAGAZINES A YEAR HOTLINE KEEPS YOU UP TO SEE HOW YoU SAVE WITH MR.SOFTWARE \"BONUS PRIcs Ww of the Unicorn A subscription of just .00 will bring you SIX magazines a year through the post. Each magazine is packed with reviews of  all the latest software, reader's game play ing tips, competitions to enter, our reviewer's personal choices and a summary of how the other magazines rate the new leases, Subscribers to the magazine can phone our 24 hour Hotline for up to the minute news of the latest releases. A three minute recording, updated Weeky, details the new titles and their prices. Credit card holders may order by phone too! of the Exploding Fist Who Dares Wins  HARDWAR SUPPLEME Every new subscriber to the magazine gets a 24-page review of some of the more | popular utilities such as word processing software and hardware including joysticks and Spectrum interfaces EASY ORDERING FAST SERVICE You can order from our substantial range | as and when you like. There are no minimum order requirements you don't have to buy anything at all. When you do order we do our best to despatch your goods within a week often quicker, tch Soils of Daron DSpectrum + ommodore 64 wish to subscribe to your magazine for the next 12 months and take advantage of the \"Free Game\" for which I enclose  plus 75p post & packing for the free game. The game I would like is:ders Keepers Spellbound. The Last V8 2 Chequered Flag nachines) (Spectrum only) (C-64 only) (Amstrad only). (Spectrum Only) ote: If you would like to order some of the games shown in the piece of paper and add the total cost to your payment. On a separate eque/postal order no arge my Access/Visa Card No  fourteen days understand that if I am not fully satisfied with the goods, I may return them nd of the cost of the games and the Magazine subscription. Name (BLOCK CAPs) RsoTWARELIMITED IN HOUSE ERIDGE VENUE, HIGH WY S0MBE CKS HP13 6KG Export Customers: We welcome orders from all parts of the world, please note the following subscription and postage rates outside UK:Europe Subscription 7.00. Post ; U.S.A. and Middle East Subscription , Post ; Australia, Far East and South Africa Subscription .00, Post . Please note that all Magazines are despatched by Air Mail postage to keep you right up to date. "


"This month the Adventure begins! Guide to the helicopter simulation Tomahawk, and an impressive competition, not for the feint hearted, featuring the high sport of Gladiators. Such a package to keep travellers away from my hospitable inn, and instead at home with their keyboard friend. Remember as you pass the sign of the Dancing Newsagent, there is no better adventure than the February issue of Sinclair User. Recently I have been burning the midnight oil, to ensure that no gallant adventurers have been left in limbo to be put upon by bands of straggling orcs or such like. For hours on end I have been searching for the true answers to The Hobbit and Lord of the Rings. Following the weary traveller in Dun Darach, entertaining the yuppies in Hampstead and tackling the problems in Fairlight; . . . I have searched the hinterlands hi & lo, conversed with drunkards and bards, noblemen and thieves to bring you the best tips on the FIFTEEN top adventure games of the year. Only now as I sit at the Dancing Ogre, exhausted from my search, can I reveal that after all my hard work The Gordo Greatbelly's Book of Adventure will be FREE with the February issue of Sinclair User (that mad mania of generosity must have really affected the editor). Rumour has it that the assorted elfs, dwarves and trolls that also work on the magazine have been busily beavering away, to bring you extensive reviews of Enigma Force from Beyond, Commando from Elite, Yie Ar Kung Fu from Imagine, and that temptress from the east Twister Mother of Charlotte, a latter day visitor to my cosy establishment. Plus a review of a new tool of terror the Sinclair 128, an extensive Official Players' BRITAIN'S BEST SELLING COMPUTER MAGAZINE OFFICIAL PLAYER'S GUIDE EXPLORING THE SPECTRUM 128 GORDO'S BOOK OF ADVENTURES Gordo Greathelleyi LORD OF THE RINGS FAIRLIGHT ROBIN OF SHERLOCK DUN DARACH FOURTH PROTOCOL VALKYRIE 17 AND MANY MORE P.S. The February issue of Sinclair User including Gordo Greatbelly's Book of Adventure is on sale Jan 18th. GORDO GREATBELLY, LANDLORD "


"BAD BARNEY TROUBLE BIG RED 5 O COPYRIGHT 185 JERRY PERS. Dear Newsagent Please reserve me a regular copy of COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES, otherwise I'll have to send my friend Big Red round!! Barney's Clothes Line will really choke you up. Name Address ROCK'N WRESTLE ROMANTIC ROBOT present present TRANS-EXPRESS 56K Spectrum extension? Instant back-up of any program ? Joystick & video interfaces ? YES! All this & even more with NO1 SPECTRUM MULTIPURPOSE INTERFACE The software way of transferring Spectrum software. 4 utilities for m'drive, 2 for wafadrive, 2 for Opus Discovery. Invaluable for cartridge/disk maintenance & automatic transfers. Highly professional, user-friendly, versatile and comprehensive. An ingenious piece of software. ***** Features ****. Performance PCN TOP SOFTWARE AT BOTTOM PRICE ultinace Slovenian Wriggler UNPRECEDENTED UNPARALELLED UNBEATABLES One of the best games for an muchine I've seen for very long time. Wriggler is a totally original game. CRASH SMASH STAR GAME PCN Great game, good music, well recommended. What Micro \"The grahics and sound are excellent and the game is totally addictive. 10/10 value & playability. 9/10 graphics & sound. C&V Games This is a great game. CAS 'Well worth buying ZX C & Crash If you've any sense you'll order your copy now. PCN A WINNER !NOW FOR AMSTRAD!!SPECTRUM version at Xmas PRICE! * Internal 8K ROM and 8K RAM open new concepts in Spectrum computing: 100% reliable saving of anything, anytime and onto all types of peripherals with extra 8K at user's disposal and with a full peek & poke facility covering the entire 56K. MULTIFACE ONE does not take any part of Spectrum RAM & does not need any additional software. Just push a button to freeze a program, save it and restart from the same point next time. Peek/poke facility and 8K RAM (say with a monitor disassembler) are also ideal for studying, modifying, developing programs. * Menu driven with prompts & one-touch commands: 1) Push button 2) Select function: exit/return/save/poke 3) Input name 4) Save to: tape/cartridge/water/opus/beta * Extremely poverful & efficient compressing for fast re-loading & using minimal room on cartridges, tapes, wafers, disks. A 7K screen can be compressed to a few hundred bytes, the whole RAM into a few K (depending on a program). * Option to save a full 24-line screen only * Pressing the button & return can restart a \"crashed\" computer * Through extension bus for connecting other peripherals *User friendly, fully error trapped, simply magic *Users must ensure the copyright laws are not infringed Expand your Spectrum to 56 K and stretch its capabilities even further with MUSIC TYPEWRITER Complete Spectrum music system for writing, editing, playing, printing & storing music. Its real notation graphics and ease of use make it an ideal educational tool. Great fun to play with & a lot to offer in serious use (transposing, dot matrix printout etc). A very professional piece of programming, easy to use, excellent screen presentation error trapping & helpful prompts. If you're interested in music and own a computer then get it! ZX Computing MIDI compatible with MIDI MUSICIAN package New overlay for Spectrum + Now at Xmas price! Multinace OMA ESSENTIAL SPECTRUM COMPANION MIDI compatible with MIDI MUSICIAN package I enclose a cheque/PO for ......... for debit my A or debit my NOL Name Address.. (UK & Europe orders please Please send me (tick as applicable): .... add  overseas ) TRANS-EXPRESS cartridge .95 ( disk (Opus Discovery) .95 . Card expiry. MUSIC TYPEWRITER .95 WRIGGLER Spectrum tape .95 0 WRIGGLER Amstrad tape .95 O MULTIFACE .95 U tape (for mdrive)  7.95 ) wafer (Rotronics)  9.95 with supplement  9.95 or cartridge  6.95 or disk version .95 ROMANTIE ROBOT 77 Dyne Road London NW6 7DR 24 hrs A orders 01.625 9463 0 CV "


"auno esor software getting Harder DS 1 technical Assistance from Lotus Cars Ltd. tute. DURELL ARMED VAN SIGHTED ON EAST 22nd BY MIKE RICHARDSON. NEW YORK MAP HIT-CAR CLOSING IN! Spectrum and Amstrad R.R.P. .95 DURELL COMPETITION Entry Coupon Cut out this coupon and send it with a completed entry form included with any of the new Durell games. DURELL sales dept. Castle Lodge, Castle Green, Taunton TA1 4AB "


"C+VG COMPETITION COMPETITION PETITION STEVEN SPIELBERG Presents A ROBERT ZEMECKIS Film WANTED: FILM DIRECTORSI Fancy yourself as a film director? Course you do. Well thanks to Electric Dreams, the people bringing you the Back to the Future game, you could become the next Steven Spielberg. Those extremely extravagant Dream people, not satisfied with the prizes they gave away in C+VG last issue, want you to win a JVC video camera plus all the add-ons that will turn you into a movie mogul. Make your own sci-fi films to equal Star Wars or simply take moving pictures of you and your mates being very silly. An amazing prize for one of our amazing readers. And 10 runners-up will get one of our special Big Red tshirts which make even the puniest person look like Conan the Barbarian, plus a giant movie poster. What do you have to do to win? It's really pretty simple. Just pick your favourite film and create a poster for it. You could even pick your favourite book that you think should be made into a movie and begin the advertising campaign early! You can paint or draw the poster it can be any size you like. But remember it's got to come through the post undamaged. Once you've completed your masterwork attach the special C+VG coupon to it and rush it off to your nearest postbox addressed to computer and Video Games, Movie Poster Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Closing date for the competition is February 16th and normal C+VG competition rules apply. THE PRIZE What you'll win if we choose your poster as the winning entry is an amazing JVC Camcorder. It's a camera that does everything bar make the tea for you in the mornings. It uses special mini C-type video tape and is completely self contained. No heavy battery packs to carry around. You simply stick in a cassette and away you go. You can even playback what you've shot directly from the camera to your TV. C+VG/ELECTRIC DREAMS MOVIE POSTER COMPETITION Please fix this coupon to your entry Name Address T-shirt size Med Large (tick box) "


"A number one arcade hit for 2 your computer tt Z FUMANAX The OFFICIAL coin-op video game COMMODORE 64/128 The ONLY martial arts game YOU ever really wanted. KUNG-FU MASTER Travel through the wizards temple to rescue the fair maiden, beware the weapon weilding hench-men, defeat the deadly quardian of the five floors. TAPE TAPET DISK DISK .95 $14.95 KUNG-FU MASTER * U.S. & GOLD ware U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY.Tel: 021-359 8881 DATA EAST "


"C+VG COMPETITION COWIES WITHEY FOOTBALL TRIVIA Rothmans Football Quick Quiz Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-31 Farringdon Lane, London, ECIR 3AU. Closing date is December 16th and the editor's decision is final. If you're not chanting sports journalist and C+VG right now you editor of the Rothmans should be ashamed of Football Yearbook. The yourselves. \"bible\" of the soccer Yes, the world's world. champion computer mag And thanks to the proves once again it's in a people at Holt-Saunders, different league from all we've got 25 copies of the the rest by bringing you Quick Quiz as prizes to another great the people who can competition. answer the five football And this time we've questions below. gone football crazy! Rothmans Football Quick 1) How many clubs in the Quiz, published for the football league have an X Spectrum by Eastbourne in their name? based Holt Saunders, is a A 3 must for all avid soccer fans. Quick Quiz consists of D 6 1,000 questions on British, 2) Which was the last European and second division team to International soccer, with win the FA Cup? subjects ranging from A West Ham United famous goals to trivia. B Southampton The questions were C Sunderland written by Peter Dunk, D Ipswich Town 3) Italy won the 1982 World Cup Final by three goals to one. Who scored West Germany's goal? A Rummenigge B Breitner C Hrubesch D Fischer 4) Who was the football league's leading scorer in 1983-84? A Treavor Senior (Reading) B lan Rush (Liverpool) C Kerry Dixon (Chelsea) D Keith Edwards (Sheffield United) 5) Which of the following countries have never beaten England? A Peru B Chile C Mexico D Norway. Send your answers, together with the coupon printed below, to C+VG/ROTHMANS FOOTBALL QUICK QUIZ NAME ADDRESS ANSWERS UAWN "


"SE HALL OF FAME HOTSHOTS QH-SCORES Searchlight beams danced and 800 to 600. Graham around the Computer + Archer conceded defeat. DALEY THOMPSON'S DECATHLON Video Games offices. Sirens The Hot Shot game for wailed. February is Elite's ComIt was a breakout! mando for the Commodore 1 Steven Mallon, Barrow-in-Furness — 2,174,089 Two desperate men were 64. Send your score on the 2 Chris Scott, Worthing 1,985,163 on the loose, eager for printed coupon below to Hot 3 Andrew Blood, Hartshorne, Staffs — 1,592,421 action and the thrill of Shot of the Month, 4 B Lucas, Leicester — 544,147 danger. Computer + Video Games, 5 Darryl Hulme, Barnsley — 543,444 Desperados Graham Priory Court, 30-32 Far6 Paul Managhan, Fishguard — 498,639 Knight and Graham Archer ringdon Lane, London, ECIR 7 Scott Worlev. Gosforth, Newcastle — 486,336 had been incarcerated in the 3AU. 8 David Dishon, Edinburgh — 381,345 office cells for attempting to the games that we have \"lift\" the C+VG November picked for previous Hotshot Hot Shot of the Month title competitions have proved BRUCE LEE on Monty on the Run, after extremely popular with you, his daring escape from our readers. But not even 1 Mike Rudge, Wolverhampton — 12,967,315 Scudmore Prison. C+VG gets it right all the 2 Mike Stratton, Ayr -6,780,000 But only one of the time and we'd like to know 3 lan Teasdale. Hillingdon 5,483,975 Grahams would take the Hot which games you would like 4 Andrew Williams, Bormborough 5,206,360 Shot haul by winning on the to see in the Hotshot hot 5 Peter Heasman, Duston, Northampton — 4,680,375 Pote month's nominated game. Challenge. As armed guards looked So, don't delay get your down from the watchtowers, nomination in the post now. SPY HUNTER the two 13-year-olds settled And please don't forget to at the computer to battle it keep sending your hi-scores 1 Andy Coopoer, Sedgley — 3,232,075 out over five rounds. The one in. 2 Barry NcNeill, Airdrie — 1,998,975 who took the most would be You do want to get your 3 David Johnstone, Bowness — 973,085 the winner. name in the universe's best Graham Knight, from magazine, don't you? 4 Richard Lee, Leicester — 260,300 Luton, kicked off with a score of 750. But it was not THE WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST enough to beat Graham Archer, of Sible Hedingham in Essex, who countered with 1 Mark Saunders, Wandsworth — 931,230 1,050. 2 Declan Kiernan, Co Wicklow — 111,400 Stunned into action 3 Andrew Marriage, Stanford-le-Hope — 93,750 Graham Knight scored 2,100 to Graham Archer's 900 to DALEY THOMPSON'S SUPERTEST draw the rounds. From then on things went totally Graham Knight's 1 Corey Brunt, Sheffield — 194,883 way, taking the third and 2 Matthew Wheeler, Southampton — 119,260 fourth rounds 650 to 400 FEBRUARY HOTSHOTS FEBRUARY HI-SCORES Name: Name: Address: Address: My score on COMMANDO was: Date: Name of game: I scored: Machine: T-shirt size (S,M,L): Witnessed by: _ Witnessed by "


"VICIOUS VIVIVIAN You'll get a real kick out of his Knee Drop. P.W.PROMOTIONS.P.O.BOX 21. MANCHESTER M16 SEA. ROGAT WREST MAKE MONEY WITH YOUR MICRO! you could earn over  per week-in your spare time-and you don't need any special programming skills... ADVERTISEMENT INDEX .80 47 NO 00 61 Arcade Software. Ariolasoft... Cascade ....... Compumart.... Cut Price Software.. Database Publications.. Databyte.. Domark Durell...... Electric Dreams. Elite Systems... .....66 ......93 ........26 .. 57 6. 84 91 .80 97 FC Llamasoft. Logic Sales..... Matrix. ......... 29 Match Weekly........ Melbourne House....29, 61, 65, 72, 80, 85, 89, 92, 93, 98 Megasave.. Micro-Ads ......92 Microsell. Micro-Dealers..... Midland Computer Library....... Mikro-Gen. Mirrorsoft........ .38-39 Mr Software.. 81 M.O.D.. OBC Ocean Software.... 10-11, 41, 99 Rainbird ....... Romantic Robot.. .83 Silica Shop...... ..33 System 3.. .25 Thorn EMI.. . 12-13 U.S. Gold... ...............17, 28, 68, 86 Unitsoft... Firebird.. G.B. Microland.... Goodbyte... Gremlin Graphics.. .........36, 44, 75 ..22 ........72 95 16 Imagine.... 52 JB Software. JJB Software. JR Software.. .80 56 29 ... 27 Send 17p stamp for details to: MICRO ENTERPRISE CLUB, CUT PRICE SOFTWARE OUR OUR OUR SPECTRUM RRP PRICE COMMODORE RRP PRICE AMSTRAD RRP PRICE Elite 14.95 11.00 Elite 14.95 11.00 Exploding Fist 9.95 7.45 Shadow of the Superman 9.95 7.45 Starion 9.95 7.45 Unicorn 14.95 11.20 Spy vs Spy II 9.95 7.45 Scrabble 9.95 7.45 Impossible Mission 7.95 5.90 Nextus 9.95 7.45 Superman 9.95 7.45 Winter Sports 9.95 6.95 Winter Games 9.95 7.45 Frank Bruno Boxing 8.95 6.70 Starquake 7.95 5.90 Summer Games II 9.95 7.45 Sorcery + Monty on the Run 7.95 5.90 Monty on the Run 9.95 7.45 disk only) 13.95 10.20 Rambo 7.95 5.90 All Ultimate 9.95 7.45 Beach-head 9.95 7.45 Bounces 9.95 7.45 All U.S. Gold 9.95 7.45 Marsports 9.95 7.45 Superman 9.95 7.45 All Activision 9.99 7.50 Amstrad Disks 12.95 10.00 Shadowfire 11 9.95 7.45 All Ariolasoft 9.95 7.45 Warlord 8.95 6.70 All U.S. Gold 7.95 5.90 All Beyond 9.95 7.45 Raid over Moscow 9.95 7.45 All Ultimate 9.95 7.45 Shadowfire 11 9.95 7.45 All Ultimate 9.95 7.45 Exploding Fist 8.95 6.70 Rambo 8.95 6.70 Devils Crown 9.99 7.50 Fighting Warrior 8.95 6.70 Daley's Supertest 7.95 5.90 Sorcery 8.95 5.00 Robin of the Wood 9.95 7.45 Quake Minus One 9.95 7.45 Transact 29.95 5.99 Sorderons Shadow 9.95 7.45 Starion 9.95 7.45 Invosat 29.95 5.99 Yie Ar Kung Fu 7.95 5.90 Lit. Com. People (d) 14.99 12.99 Codename Mat II 8.95 6.70 Dr Who 14.95 12.95 Lord of the Rings 15.95 12.95 Spy vs Spy 9.95 7.45 Friday the 13th 8.95 6.95 Revs 14.95 10.00 Sold a Million 9.95 7.45 Lord of the Rings 15.95 12.95 Revs (d) 17.95 12.95 Glen Hoddle's Soccer 8.95 6.50 Free game with every order over .00. Spectrum: Bicycle Works or Braxx Bluff. Commodore: Boulderdash. Amstrad: Flight Path 137 or Harrier Attack P&P included. Overseas orders add 75p per tape. Make cheques payable to C.P.S. Visa/Access orders welcome by phone. CUT PRICE SOFTWARE, 4 Slacksbury Hatch, Harlow, Essex CM19 4ET Tel: (0279) 24433 (24 hr ansaphone) "


"In the great felmuany issue of ... COMMODORE New computer owners start here If you've just acquired a 128 don't miss our 128 Software round-up. The best guide to what's available now for your machine. C16 and Plus/4 owners can look forward to all the latest game reviews plus free type-ins for the baby Commodore. The G Force Big games like e G Force won't be joining in the festivities this Christmas. They have a bag full of game reviews to keep them glued to the screen. Big games like Desert Fox, Rock and Wrestle (please Melbourne House) Zoids (please Martech) and Yie Ar King Fu. Plus reviews of all the latest games under development including a sneak view of 'V' and several others. Programmers! Get stuck into part two of our Secret Service feature showing you how to generate codes with your Commodore micro. Plus Computer Magic — short programming tricks for your 64. Once again Commodore User demonstrates that it is the only magazine covering what's happening in America. We bring you an exclusive report from California — the inside story on Epyx — manufacturers of Summer Games II, Winter Games, Impossible Mission and Pitstop. Not to be missed if you want to find out what games to look out for next year. O on the front cover of next month's issue PLAY BETTER — the most comprehensive round-up of hints and tips, maps, peeks and pokes to help you score higher on your favourite games. There's 24 pages of them all in full colour. If you are into games on the 64 you have GOT TO GET THIS FREE SUPPLEMENT. All this plus your letters, lots of competitions, peripherals reviews, the best adventure column in the business, Gallup Top Twenty games chart, and all the games gossip in Hot Shots. To avoid disappointment order your copy from your local newsagent now. ON SALE JAN 26. A giveaway at 95p. "


"OMICRO RETAILERS ASK YOUR LOCAL EXPERT Every month selected computer specialist shops will be listed in your favourite magazine. If you want to buy anything you've seen in the magazine, go and see your nearest specialist. AVON KENT MICRO COMPUTERS MIDDLESEX 57 Union Street SOFTWARE PLUS Maidstone INNOVATIONS, COMPUTER & VIDEO 12 York Street Kent 0622 52784 9 Harmondsworth Road Bath 0225 61676 West Drayton MICROWAY COMPUTERS Middlesex UB7 9JS 0895 420457 39 High Street BERKSHIRE Rainham STAFFORDSHIRE BRACKNELL COMPUTERS Kent 0634 376702 MICROTRONICS 44 Broadway MODATA COMPUTERS LTD 27a Market Street Bracknell 0344 427317 30 St John's Road Tamworth Tunbridge Wells 0892 41555 Staffs 0827 51480 SOFTWARE CITY Tatung Einstein Specialist 47 Cheap Street LEICESTERSHIRE SUFFOLK Newbury Berks RGI 45BX 0635 31696 DIMENSION COMPUTERS LTD COMPUTER MAGIC 27-29 High Street 24 Crown Street Leicester 0533 57479 DERBYSHIRE Ipswich LINCOLNSHIRE Suffolk MBX 91999 2473 FIRST BYTE COMPUTERS SURREY 10 Main Centre MKD COMPUTERS London Road 24 Newlands SOFTWARE CITY Derby 0332 365 280 Lincoln 0522 25907 14 Thames Street Kingston DORSET LONDON Surrey KTI IPE 01-541 4911 DENSHAM COMPUTERS ARCADE SOFTWARE WARWICKSHIRE 329 Ashley Road Unit 202, Shopping Hall OEM COMPUTER CENTRE Parkstone Myrtle Road Rugby Micro Centre Poole 0202 737493 East Ham 9-11 Regents Street 01-471 8900 London E6 0788 70522 Rugby GAMES WORLD ESSEX 129 King Street WEST MIDLANDS ESTUARY PERSONAL COMPUTERS Hammersmith MBC COMPUTER CENTRE 318 Chartwell North London W6 01-741 4467 17-19 Lichfield Street Victoria Circus Shopping Centre LOGIC SALES Wolverhampton 0902 29907/29021 Southend on Sea 0702 614131 19 The Broadway H. REYNOLDS The Bourne YORKSHIRE 79 Orsett Road Southgate THE COMPUTER CENTRE Grays 0375 5948 London N14 01 882 4942 26 Anlaby Road SHEKANA COMPUTERS Hull MINNIE MICRO COMPUTER CENTRE 221 Tottenham Court Road North Humberside 0482 26297 11/12 Eastern Esplanade London W1 01-800 3156 JUST MICRO Southend 22 Carver Street SOFTWARE CITY 0702 615809/62033 Essex 382 Kings Road Sheffield si 4SS 0742 752732 HAMPSHIRE London SW3 5UZ 01-352 9220 LOOK & SEE SOFTWARE STORE 45 Belmont Bridge RAM ELECTRONICS 35 London Road Skipton 0756 60078 106 Fleet Road London SW17 01-685 1476 MICRO BYTE Fleet 02514 5858 VIC ODDENS 36 County Arcade 6 London Bridge Walk Leeds 0532 450 529 HEREFORDSHIRE London SE1 01 403 1988 MICRO FUN HONEY SETT COMPUTERS VIDEO WORLD 11 Sheffield Road Rentals Barnsley 0226 207063 17 Union Street Hereford HRI 2BT MICRO FUN 0432 279404 282 Harrow Road London W2 Unit 12 01-289 3102 The Guardian Centre |  MANCHESTER Rotherham 0709 60000 RECORDMANIA BUDGET SOFTWARE CENTRE ANIROG COMPUTERS 14 Davy Gate Centre 51 Fennel Street York 0904 33993 29 West Hill Manchester M4 3DY 061-834 2808 Dartford RECORDMANIA 0322 91649 Kent MERSEYSIDE Units 5/6, In-Shops Market Cross CANTERBURY SOFTWARE CENTRE BLUE CHIP COMPUTERS Selby 0757 700988 9 The Friars 77 Allerton Road YORK COMPUTER CENTRE Canterbury 0227 453531 Liverpool L18 2DA 051-722 3037 7 Stonegate Arcade York 0904 641862 DEALERS: If you would like to see your shop included in this new service, please call 01 251 6222 EXT 2461 MICRO RETAILERS "


"OM I CRO ADS ATARI 400/600/800/800XL/XE Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY The greatest, biggest and best Atari library on the market. An ideal present for old and new Atari owners. MIDLANDS GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over three years ago first conceived the idea of a software library. Now over 1.300 titles on disc, cassette and Rom (games, business, educational and utilities). Often purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly. Over 1.500 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany. Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast, efficient and friendly service. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities. Now introducing original software written by existing members. Send large s.a.e. to: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos. Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programmes are originals with full documentation ANGRY ARDUL ATARI OWNERS You'll learn the drill with Abdul's Pile Driver Are you having difficulty finding suitable software to purchase. If so, then look no further. We have available one of the largest selections of both U.K. and American titles for sale. Games and Utilities for all ages. If you would like further information please send s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS 30a Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough, Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 WRESTLEM LISTING SERVICE for BBC and Electron Users. Also Screendumps, Wordwise, View. S.A.E. or phone Scorpiosoft, Dept C&VG2, 18 Dragon Drive, Liverpool L35 3QW. 051-427 2091 AMSTRAD Sharp M2700, games six pack (Warboat, Gladiator, Sharpshooter, Karate Kings, Tugbug, Arrowshot). Priced .49 including postage. Cheques and P.O's payable to Scott Carey, Pacetapes, 40 Bainton Grove, Clifton, Nottingham NG11 8LG. Please state machine. ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE We have an all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE. Apply now and hire your first four games free. Around 1,000 different original titles. For full details send large stamped addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm 10pm or weekends. LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 DISC DRIVE .90 post free 130 XEs .90 post free 130 XES+1050 Drive .90 post free Antic and Analog magazines available BEST QUALITY DISCS Unlabelled S.D.JS.S. .95 for 10 post free .95 for 100 post free Memorex S.D.S.S. .50 for 10 post free D.D.JS.S. .95 for 10 post free Memorex 34\" discs S.S.D.D. Boxes of 10 E28.92 TRADE ENQUIRIES INVITED FOR ALL THE ABOVE GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept. C&VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney close Sunderland SR3 4PD. Tel: 0783 286351 LIVERPOOL. Full First Division, F.A., Milk and European Cups, Team and Tactics Selections etc. Disc version has 4 Divisions, Transfer Market, Income, Expenditure etc. Cassette: Atari .45, spectrum .45. Disc: Atari .95. P.M. Corbishley, 212 Walmersley Old Road, Bury BL9 6SA, Lancashire. FREE MEMBERSHIP SOFTWARE HIRE  VIC-20 COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM Send an sae for your hirekit to: VSH (CV), PO Box 65, Nottingham NG 1 Please state which micro SPECTRUM 48K originals for sale: 31 in all, including Bruce Lee, American Football, Megahits, Scrabble, Valhalla, Broad Street and Fantastic Voyage. All boxed and at great prices: Ring (0604) 38195 and ask for Jeremy. Only one of each So hurry! ATARI 400/600/800 XL XE OWNERS UTILITIES SPECIAL DEAL FOR ATARI 400/800/XL/XE OWNERS SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and the Dragon. Send s.a.e. for details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG), 5 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB TAPE CRACKER REV 2 SIDE A. Will list m/c progs to screen, you edit, download your personalised version with or without m/c knowledge. Hours of fun changing text to leave personal messages on screen. Stuck on an adventure, search for clues. SIDE B. For the advanced user contains a disassembler. All this for only  on T.D.K. Tape. Post free. PINBALL 48K. 2.5 Pace Age Pinball games on a double-sided tape (order no. D/03) only . Post free. XL FIXER. Will allow you to play games written for 400, 800 on your XL or XE. Tape version ; disk version . Post free. Games on disk from . Games on tape from . Full lists send s.a.e. Mail order only. Seven days delivery. STOCKSOFT, 15 Woodbrooke Rd, Birmingham B30 1UE No. 1. Hire your first two games FREE from our extensive range of software. Up to the minute releases available. No. 2. Buy all the latest software titles at best possible prices (new releases available direct from US). Atari hardware and modems now available at discount prices. For further details send s.a.e. to: 1986 GAMES Games for the Amstrad, BBC and Acorn Electron Cassette 1 Inu ............... .................50 Cassette 2 The Heist ...... ...................50 Both cassettes .00 Send cheque/PO to: MRJ, 64 Reva Road, Broadgreen, Liverpool CHARNWOOD GAMES 30a Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Leicestershire Tel: 0509 412604 "


"MICROS E LI MICROSELLS — It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! GORGEOUS AGREG The Challenger — staying alive is the challenge! ATTENTION!CBM 64 owners. I want to swap software on disk. Please send your list to Robert Sisk. 1A Maxine Close, Sandhurst, Camberley, Surrey, GU17 8QX. Reply as soon as possible. ATARI SWAP or for sale 500 games for further information write to Postbox 76, 29952i. Heerjansden, Holland. A PRISM VTX 500 modem for ZX Spectrum, connects to Prestel Micronet 800 and other view data services. Bargain at only  ono call Andy at 01-866 3982 after 5 pm or anytime on weekends. WANTED COMMODORE 64, exchange for a Spectrum 48K + games. Include Fairlight, Critical Mass, Exploding Fist and many more new titles. Phone Nicholas on 061 973 0052. SPECTRUM 48K Ferguson Data Recorder, 43 games worth . Books, leads etc, still under guarantee.  Starion, Exploding Fist, Frank Bruno's Boxing. Phone Melbourne Derbyshire 2921 still guaranteed. Boxed plus all leads. COMMODORE 64 1701 colour monitor 1541 disk drive, Binatone data recorder, lots of disk containing over 250 games + books + printer,  no offers. Telephone North Thoresby 840666 ring after 7.30pm. SPECTRUM 48K + for sale still boxed with tape recorder brand new. Plus software, blank cassettes, Kempston Interface up to date model, Atari joystick, and mags etc, still all boxed — brought last January. Worth at least  sell for  ono. Telephone Steve (Mevagissey Cornwall). COMMODORE 64. Software to swap only disk including Winter Games, Jet Set Willy II. Write to Samppa Havisto, Hyhkyrink 10A 70100 Kuopio 10, Finland. SPECTRUM CLASSICS for sale in one large batch 25 original titles including Sherlock, TLL, Matchpoint and others worth , sell for . Telephone Carl Brookes on Lymm (Cheshire) 6260. 48K SPECTRUM, ZX Printer with 6 rolls printout paper, tape recorder, Kempster Interface, Stack Light Rifle, 19 games, books. Everything boxed and in good working order.  ono. Sutton, Surrey 01 642 0432. SPECTRUM 48K plus over 50 original tapes worth around . Nightshade, Doomdarks, Starstrike, Alien 8. Sell the lot for . Tel. (0527) 22451 Redditch. ATARI! software for sale. 125 games and progs including Donkey Kong I & II, Boulderdash, Pooyan, Bristles, Flip & Flop, Vanguard and more. Will swap for disk drive. Phone Mark on Chichester 782545. BBC \"B\" for sale, over  worth of software including leads, manuals and a dust cover and joystick. Everything is in excellent condition bargain at only . Also includes cassette recorder woth . Contact Robert Sweeney, 102 Eskdale Avenue, Northolt, Middx, London. CBM 64 games to swap disk only large collection to swap. For more information send latest list to N. Bateman, 56 Gorsedale, Sutton Park, Hull, Humberside, HU7 4AT. ATARI 800 48K + 1010 program recorder + 23 games + joystick, in very good condition. Worth over  will sell for , call Manswgh on 01-735 8650, evenings. ATARI 600XL for sale , also Atari 1064 RAM Pack . All in working order. Telephone Mike 0543 254625. SPECTRUM + in good condition, new games such as Nightshade, Fighting Warrior, Hypersports etc, loads of mags, amplifier, Kempston Pro joystick interface. Quickshot II, Saisho data recorder. Loads of games all without problem. Worth  sell for  or swap for CBM64 with tape deck. COMMODORE 64 software to swap. All the news and some oldies. Send your list to VIP:, Postfach 1127, 2160 Stade West Germany. By the way, greetings to S8 ABC, Teh Empire and TBC. CBM64 SOFTWARE Encounter, Bounty Bob, Zaxxon, Psychedelia, Pitstop cartridges  each. Loco, Mr Robot, Manic Miner, Stix  each no offers or swaps. Doncaster (0302) 61672 after 6pm. ATARI 64K 600XL, 1010 Recorder, Trackball, Crackshot, Quickshot 2, many cassettes including Solo Flight, Pitfall II, Pole Position, Computer War, two cartridges; Centipede, Star Raiders. Six books, many books on Atari Basic Programming, including all leads, worth over , sell for  ono or swap for colour CPC464. Tel. 0532 672723. TI99 GAMES. Mash, Soccer, T.City, Invaders, Munchman, parsec, Wumpus, Car Wars  each. B. Rogers, D. Kong, Micro Surgeon  each. Super Sketch . Manuals included. Phone after 5pm (06977) 2480. ROCKI WRESTLEM SPECTRUM 48K DK Tronics keyboard, programmable joystick interface, Quickshot II joystick, Lightpen and loads of new software including Daley's Decathlon, Daley's Supertest, Spy Hunter, Bruce Lee and lots more. Boxed for . Simon Wright, 11 Ashburnham Gardens, Upminster, Essex RM14 1XA. ATARI ELITE exchange. Swap or sell many titles. Contact Apollo at 105 Upham Road, Swindon SN3 1DP, Wiltshire or telephone (0793) 641537 (after 6pm). SPECTRUM PLUS 48K, hardly used, still boxed and under guarantee with tape recorder, joystick, joystick interface and lots of software. Cost over , sell for  ono. Tel. 01-980 5014. COMMODORE 64 games for sale, International Tennis, Spy Hunter and Pole Position  each also Dragon 32 games for sale, Speed Racer, Manic Miner, Frogger etc  each. Ring 0734 475187 or write to Andrew, 34 Chiltern Road, Caversham, Reading RG4 7HT. SPECTRUM 48K Lo Profile keyboard music/speech synthesiser interface 2, Quickshot Il joystick, data recorder over  software magazines, books  or swap for CBM64 + C2N data recorder (0582) 699127 after 4pm. COMMODORE 64 software to swap. Many new titles from Holland, Germany and USA. write to Jesper, Rasmussen, Rovsingsgade 85 ITH 2220 N Denmark or phone 01 832965. ATARI SOFTWARE wanted to swap (disk only) contact Simon on 0904 225016 after six weekdays. WANTED CBM64 disk drive with games to swap for a Honda X75 child's scrambler in very good condition (age 12-16). Telephone Nottingham 0602 582474. ATARI 800 Program Recorder with Dust Covers, Basic Programmers Kit includes Basic Cartridge and Manual,  of games software on cartridge and cassette, all for  ono. Phone Bishop Auckland 764586. "


"CONCLUSION would write a particular TUESDAY to program. Think about what might cause you problems. Do THURSDAY comment liberally. It helps to One can draw a few useful have a good working knowpoints from this exercise. The ledge of the machine. Always first point is that it is quite keep strict rules about entry This month sees the second and possible to write a very good and exit conditions of final part of programmer Shahid game in a week, as I have subroutines; do not rely on Ahmad's Chimera Diary, the day proved. values that may be lying This can be countered by the around. by day story of how he fact that no programmer worth Remember, write with clarity attempted to convert the game to his salt would dare attempt to in mind. If your code is not the Amstrad in just one week. design, create, implement and clear, you won't understand it program a game of top quality when you're trying to debug it! To see if he succeeded in his in this short space of time, Optimise it for speed aftertortuous task read on. though watch out, I may try it wards, and only if it is sometime in the future. necessary. Do not become a Chimera is available for the It helps a great deal to have _\"speed junkie.\" It is not a preAmstrad, Spectrum and a good system to work on. I requisite for games Commodore 64, price .95. used the Amstrad CPC6128 programming. system with colour monitor and That's all there is to it! Oh, the Hisoft Devpac 80 macro one more thing, it'll help a you've never seen before in assembler, both products for great deal it you can listen to DAY FOUR your life within the space of a which I can honestly say that it a great album like \"Nip It in the SATURDAY week is no mean feat, and has been a pleasure to use Bud\" by Joe Hubbard! The day started at noon for me takes a lot of hard work, them. How should you approach today, and I realised a drastic determination and self-control. I am now a convert to small debugging? Simple. You just time plan change had to be in fact, I took care of most of disks, but I feel Amstrad should turn the machine off after made. I would probably spend my debugging today! The have chosen the more sensible getting a fresh listing (I hope the whole day debugging D.P.A, screen looks good, and I've (and popular) 3/2 inch format. you have a printer!), then go and the mainline routines and been moving the man around, I also have a few words of and get a beer or a coffee, and the adventure handler would and seeing some background warning to all you budding look at the listing very, very have to wait until Sunday or animation, but I still haven't programmers out there, carefully for half an hour. You'll Monday. written the adventure handler! especially those delving into nearly always find the cluprit. A good thinking session was y session was ANIRAV machine code. DAY SIX MONDAY machine code. in order, so I plugged my bass What if you can't? Give up Please pay attention to programming and take up through my compressor, turned Well today is the last day — or ! design. Think about how you tennis or aerobics!! my amp right up to full volume is it? You will by now, fully and had a thoughtful two hour appreciate that there are seven break! days in a week, assuming that Fully refreshed, I tackled the you count from one. problem with renewed vigour Well, therein lies the catch, and in view of the ever looming because I'm sure that you also deadline, I decided to take a realise that programmers (and logical approach. I'm no exception) count from The best way to cope with zero, not one — sneaky eh? this situation was to (you Fear not, because yes, I did guessed right!) put the Joe have a working version of the Hubbard album on the turnprogram that can be played and table, get a printer listing and completed relatively early in go through it looking for the the evening. proverbial needle in the My D.P.A method works a haystack. treat and there are now no Well needless to say I found glitches in it at all, and with a it (or rather, them!) and man on the screen and an exterminated them one by one animated object, the speed is As the saying goes, the only ridiculously fast. So fast in fact, good bug is a dead bug! that I've had to put many delay finally got D.P.A working at 2amloops in it to slow the game and it was truly astonishing, the s truly astonishing the down. down. speed left me breathless, At last, I had written the adventure handler, and at the DAY FIVE — end of the day, I had a version of Chimera that could be SUNDAY played, completed and even I woke up at the crack of noon enjoyed. today, and I'm one of those The only thing that I have people who is usually a bear in leapt over is some sound and a the mornings. Well today I was title page, but these are trivial a mouse, and I was frightened tasks that do not even need a to death of how much time I thought, except, perhaps, in IMERA had before my head was to be their presentation. placed on the block. If I have to dedicate this Well, it wasn't quite that game to anyone, then surely, serious, but trying to get a good the honours must go to Joe machine language game Hubbard, who else? This is a running on a computer which truly knackered signing off. "


"WEST BANK VETERIK 90 STOG 322201 Defend the spoils of the famous gold rush, guard the riches hidden behind the walls of the West Bank. Desperate characters plan and scheme their way to the gold, AVAILABLE bloodthirsty gunmen try to blast their way to SOON instant fortune but watch out for the innocent bystanders — a stray shot will harm your Amstrau reputation for ever. Keep a keen eye on the horizon and your trigger finger poised for action Spectrum 48K the law of the West is still the law of the gun. Gremlin Graphics Software Limited Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423 u Gremlin Graphics "


"COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU ANN.  I think your magazine is brilliant, although I would make the ratings out of 100 and have an overall score. It is great value for 95p, so keep up the good work. Anyway getting to the point, I have a problem! About two months ago, my brother and myself bought an Amstrad 6128 and also got Sorcery+. After many hours of practice I rescued all eight sorcerers and hey presto the Necromancer's eyes came up and I played for about one minute on the new level and was promptly killed. Then on the screen it said that I could now play the new mode available. I pressed the fire button, the space bar and all the other keys but nothing happened. When I replayed the game the Sorcery One game started. What am I supposed to do? I have played it again and again, but, when I played the new game after saving the eight sorcerers, I can't play after that. Please, please, please help me. Carl Johan Campbell Perthshire . I bought your mag for the first time (December) and I think it is absolutely brilliant. I loved the poster and your competitions are brilliant, especially the Commando one. I think you should put the price up to $1.50 as you issue three mags for the price of one, eg, the C+VG, Adventure Supplement and a Games Book. The reviews are very good and I liked the bit on Arcade Action. I have now asked my local newsagent to reserve me a copy every month. Paul Phillips Bristol . I own a Spectrum 48k and I buy your magazine every month as I think it is an excellent read and very informative about the computer games world. But I would like to add that I also buy Crash every month and I also like this magazine. Anyway, to get to the point of this letter — I have just read Mailbag in your December issue and quite honestly I am fed up reading letter after letter putting down your mag and comparing it to Crash. I know that it is important to you, that you know what people think of your mag, but quite frequently these 'moaning minnies' go over the top and this in turn causes people to write-in defending your magazine and we have to go through the same sort of letters each month. Why don't you issue an annual questionaire to find out what people think and what new items they would like to see? It would save a lot of boring letters having to be read and that way everybody would get their say. Although I say some letters are boring I was pleased to see that this wasn't the case with Richard Hammond's letter. I found his letter interesting and very informative (December issue). It is also stupid to compare C+VG with Crash because C+VG deals with a wide range of computers while Crash deals only with the Spectrum. It is totally idiotic to break down and compare two mags with different main topics unless of course you compare the Spectrum bits of C+VG with Crash (which isn't fair as Crash would win hands down, due mainly to content). So, come on C+VG readers, let's have some original and interesting letters in future Mailbags as I'm sure most of you are as fed up as I am. I thought that the comic strip competition was an original and fab idea. Let's have more competitions like it. Steven Hargadon Strathclyde page is quite large too. Unlike odd other readers who have complained about noncomputer articles and too many adverts in C+VG, I totally disagree — there are never enough adverts, as they tell you what games or hardware are coming out long before anyone else I, of the Mask from Electric Dreams for example, which even shows screen shots in the advert. The specialized articles are great, and always interesting to read as they create a good contrast with the games reviews. You wouldn't want just reviews, would you? I also like the American reports which tell us what's happening over there. Finally I must thank you for the great set of maps you keep printing, made up of colour screen-prints. A lot better than a line-drawing in boxes! The Highway Encounter map was great, as was the Alien 8 one. Keep up the good work — especially the amazing push you are giving adventures you were the first magazine I read to include screen shots of adventures and now you do them in colour! After all, these games are as popular now as arcade games. Good work C+VG, keep it up! Can't wait for the next issue! Christopher Hester W Yorks  I have been getting you magazine for some time now but all I hear from the Mailbag section is complaints from BBC users being starved of great games. Rubbish! This may be hard to believe, but it's true! U.S. Gold are bring out some great games such as Bruce Lee, Bounty Bob, Dambusters, Raid Over Moscow and...wait for it... Impossible Mission! That's not all, Ocean have brough out Match Day and Imagine are bringing out Hyper Sports and Yie Ar Kung-Fu. Nick Orlando is bringing out Firetrack which will be, as usual, brilliant, and Superior Software have brought out a brilliant sequel, Repton 2. So Beeb owners stop complaining software houses have realised the versatility of the machine. Many thanks to the software houses mentioned and keep producing these excellent games. Alan Dooley, Notts  I have been wondering why we don't see Miner Willy's face? Is there something special about it that you don't want us to see. For instance in Jet Set Willy he has his face stuck down the toilet, on Manic Miner you can only see his boot, on Perils of Willy he is lying on the track with his bowler hat over his face and on Jet Set Willy II he has a space helmet on, with the visor covering his face. Would it be possible for you to let us see his face? Please! Lee Henry, Houghton. Editor's reply: Are you crazy! Don't you know...?  I have bought your mag every month over the last year or so and have been very amused by the continual slanging match that goes on between the owners of the different machines. I feel that it does tend to go on a bit, and it must now be time to put a stop to it. All you have to do is to make a direct comparison between the machines under different sections ie, price, graphics, sound, software back up, ease of use, add-ons and ability to do home grown' programs. Sean McCarthy, Co Meath  I must congratulate you on you finest issue yet! (Dec 1985). I found it packed with information, news and articles on films and networking for your computer. I found the Adventure Supplement the best yet with superb designs and layout. There were dozens of tips and even a sneak review of Questprobe 3 by Scott Adams! I though the pages on mapping your adventures were very clear and useful — may I suggest that when you've got a complete map on paper, you can draw it out easier on an 'Adventure Planner pad from Print N' Plotter Products. Ever since you have redesigned the magazine it's gone uphill, looking a lot more coherent, with some really nice large colour screen-prints from games. I like the new BugHunter cartoon — very well drawn, and the tips and pokes  I have been reading C+VG now for many a month and I haven't seen too many letters from Arcade fanatics. As I am an avid supporter of the coinoperated machines, I would like to see a high score table along with a tips section in you magazine. These would be two of the best additions you could make to your already fab mag. I would also like to say that most of the best 'arcade games players do not get their highscores in the amusement arcades, but in pubs or cafes. I personally reside in a cafe called Pat's, where the machines cost only 10p. In Pat's there are games like Ghosts 'n' Goblins, Pac-Land, Hyper-Sports and Star-Force. In this cafe my mates and myself get much better scores than in the nearby arcades, apart from a few exceptions. Gavin Pike Norwich "


"SENSATIONAL SOFTWARE FROM MIKROGEN ) ) ) ) ) EUR Combo Three Weeks Paraclise 48K SPECTRUM .95 Unit 15, The Western Centre, Bracknell, Berkshire Tel: 0344 427317 "


"MISSOURI BREAKER The Breaker's Mad Charge will send you for a bum steer. NEXT MONTHSE ROCK'N WRESTLE. IN Scooby-Do, where are you? In C+VG next issue that's where! And you could be the first in your street to win one of Scooby's new games hot off the presses from Elite. So stop munching those Scooby snacks and get on down to your newsagent to order the March issue of C+VG. Swords and Sorcery, the ultimate computer conversion of the roleplaying game Dungeons and Dragons, is giving many hardened adventurers sweaty palms as they explore the awesome dungeons. So to make your life just a tiny bit easier we persuaded S&S programmer Mike Simpson to give away a few of the dungeon's secrets. We've got an exclusive map of the dungeon's first level plus some game playing hints from the man himself. Grab your trusty broadsword and hack a crimson path to the shop that sells you C+VG next month! C+VG's ace adventure team have been questing through Lord of the Rings to bring you a special triple review of the game EVERY adventurer has been waiting for. That makes the March issue of C+VG worth waiting for too ... The Return of the Bug Hunters. You missed Otiss, Big Red and the others this issue. But they'll be back next month now that Jerry can afford to buy a new pencil sharpener. Don't miss the exciting party when Big Red takes B-Con's advice and becomes TOTALLY irresistible. You won't believe your eyes when you read MAGNETS, next ish. PLUS The results of our Dan Dare cartoon strip contest. We print some of your amazing artwork! PLUS We know we've said this before — but next issue we WILL take a look Behind the Iron Curtain at Hungary's Andromeda programmers who are bringing you the ultimate simulation of Max Headroom's favourite game. ON SALE FEB 16 "


"WANTU. UT TAIN MY, TOAD FIE SCUM BAG 1. UROSS Ocean In the vastness of space lies the heart of an Intergalactic Criminal Network. TALOS and at its head the evil CYRUST.GROSS, A last ditch attempt by the Free Worlds to rid the Universe of this seemingly unstoppable force has called on the services of the NEMISIS ORGANISATION, a hardened cadre of humanoid and robitic free booters who have assigned NOMAD (Nemisis Organisation Mobile Attack Droid) to penetrate GROSS's heavily armed homeworld and destroy this vile despot once and for all. Your mission must SUCCEED. You are the NOMAD controller. SPECTRUM 7-95-AMSTRAD 8-95 Ocean House 6 Central Street  Manchester  M2 5NS  Telephone 061-832 6633 . Telex 669977 Ocean Software is available from selected branches of: BW.WHSMITH,Sohn Menzies, WOOLWORTH. LASKYS, Rumbelows.Greens. Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers Trade enquiries welcome, "


" f s     AT  M.U.D Multi User Dungeon \"MUD leaves conventional adventures for dead» (PCW) \"MUD is the addictive game» (Telelink) \"10 out of 10 on all counts» (What Micro) It's here The most talked about computer game in the world. M.U.D is more than Adventure, more than Communication, more than a new way of using your Micro. It's fun, it's addictive, it's challenging, and, if you have a modem, a computer and a phone-line, it's all yours! Hundreds of people are already playing. This is your chance to join them. Call the MUD-Line now 01-608 1173 a) O CONFUCIUS is a division of British Telecommunications plc. MUD is a trademark of BT/M.U.S.E "

