"Britain's best selling computer magazine APR 89 SP-$7.20 Dm6.50 350pta HFL 6.75 AR02 E1.20 +video DREAMS INDICATORS NKIN TIEDIE POPULOUS TS DIVINE EXCLUSIVE PC ENGINE REVIEWS PC ENGINE DEALER LIST CD ROM GAMES ARE HERE WIN LOADS OF WEIRD DREAMS GOODIESSTATESIDE GAMING — SPECIAL REPORT "


"JOIN THE CR They BAD DUDES ARE TOP HITS! The Guardian NO PULSE! Tour Opponents in your battle for supremacy are four types of Evil Minja star-throwing, Assassins whose skills are manifold and dangerous. Also out to spoil your day are Acrobatic Women Warriors and vicious Guard Dogs. At the end of each level you must overcome the Ninja Master in order to progress, some examples of these superhuman Ivillains are A fire-breathing Fat Man, an Armour Clad Giant Ninja= who has a disconcerting habit of suddenly multiplying into an am Take on the role of avenging angel as you mete out rough justice, to the perpetrators of evil and lawlessness. Some of the most exciting scenes ever to filla computer screen confront you. The future is here and now when you take up this challenge PART MAN PART MACHINE ALL COP ROBOCOP CCCCCCCCCCCCCCC PART L MACHINE ALL EXPLOSIVE FIRE, NOW BAD DUDES DRAGONNINJA AOLOCOF HAZARD SPECTRUM .95 AMSTRAD COMMODORE .95 SPECTRUM AMSTRAD COMMODORE PACK WITH 1992 POSTER SO OB WITH .the name of the game Ocean Software Limited 6 Cenik Telephone: 061 832 6633 Telex fing "


"RITICAL LIST! INGUIN GETS HOKERI PE Cor MIRROR CRASH VICTIM! AL O Comics famous super HER hero Batman breaks onto the catcheen in a wha! FOUR Acide adventures you engage the Forces of ew in Gotham City Start in the Batcave anthicugi: the world ollunand excitement as vous Chiese customer of all -, the Penguin \"Save some rabattlecanead with the dastardy Joker however the thrilling cilmas Cartoon style graphics and Reanimation make fortunning realism with innovative game vifor long lasting entertainment TM & c DC COMICS INC. 1988 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. AVENGER WEC Le Mans is the 24-hour world endurance championship. All other races pale in comparison Ho other race challenges a driver, physically.br emotionally, as WEC Le Mans 24. The racer must push himself and his car far beyond limits required by any other race He must use his Sint sense as he becomes one with machine which is perilously insensitive to human trallies, N FEEL POWER A BE HE CAPELACRUSADERS WEC TE MANS SPECTRUM AMSTRAD Porter COMMODORE Included SPECTRUM AMSTRAD COMMODORE LE MANS STICKER .95 19.95 $19.95 .95 The name Flhe game All available for... ATARI ST CBM AMIGA .95 .95 al Street Manchester M2 5NS 1977 OCEANS G Fax: 061 834 0650 "


"Contents APRASES Intro The PC Engine Is here. It is now avallable in the UK and it is going to explode Mke a 'H'bomb in the computer games word. Inside this Issue we check out the CD Rom add on for the Engine and two of the games that go with it. Plus Welrd Dreams and FOFT — The two games that have been hyped out of sight this Winter. Do they dellver? Hybris ups the stakes in the shoot 'em up wars. P 58. Fax The revolutionary new Bralnstick takes the strain out of gaming, Horrorsoft bring Elvira to Me In pixels, and who won the Thuderblade machine? Weird Dreams Weird Dreams has nearly as much hype as the Bruno Tyson fight. But is there a decent game ini? We bring you the first review of the Motormouth game and also offer you the chance to stop dreaming about owning a Sky Satellite for you and your famlly. A Leisure Suit Larry's new love. P 70 1 kevicius WHICATORSCD Rom Revolution. P 106 Federation of Free Traders is g/ven a thorough golng over by Paul Glancey, Populous scoops our Game of the Month award, and there are hits for Sword of Sodan, Hybris, and Gradius. Big Screen Ward R Street checks out Oscarhopeful Rain Man and the not so hopeful batch of new horror flicks. AGM X FUEL FUEL L.** T This This month Advanced Games Master reviews Lelsure Sulf Larry II, Tianlous Adeptus, and the new Joe Deever fantasy role playing book Slaughter Mountain Run. A Vindicators — Domark's Atar. P 40. "


"CES'ers Palace 81 Highlights of the new games and gadgets on display of the recent Consumer Electronics Show. Mailbag Mailbag 86 The Yob answers your questions about all things C+VG'Ish. Playmasters Julian Rignall's summary of the most useful hints, tips, and pokes around. A Taito's Final Blow-boxing is back in fashion P 98 ArcadcAction A Populous. Is it a miracle? P30 Clare Edgeley's low down on the latest coln-ops coming to an arcade near you soon. V Weird Dreams sweet dreams or nightmares&P 18 75 08:25:37 McanMachines 102 score 88 7286 Exclusive first reviews of Gradius (Nintendo), Dragon Spirit, Space Harrler, and Vigllante (PC Engine) plus where to buy your PC Engine. C+VG's advice. A The Brainstick. P8 PC Engine-CD Games 106 Street Fighter and Hitsuko Mano -the first games on CD and the first reviews. BLOCK HEADS Next Month Lots to look forward to. A Vigilante-fighting in the street. P 108 OutToLunch John Minson talks to the pirate killer Bob Hayfop man at the Federation Against Software Thert. } EDITOR: Eugene Lacey. DEPUTY EDITOR: Julian Rignall. ART EDITOR: Andrea Walker. STAFF WRITER: Paul Glancey. ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER: Garry Williams. SALES EXECUTIVE: Johanna Cooke. COPY CONTROL: Lora Clark. PUBLISHER: Terry Pratt. Subscription Enquiries to: EMAP Frontline, 1 Lincoln Court, Lincoln Road, Peterborough PE1 2RP. TEL: 0733 555161. FAX: 0733 62788. EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISING OFFICES: Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1 3AU. TEL: 01-251 6222. FAX: 01-608 2696. ABC EP 0093200 AT 0399.00 A Gradius first Mean Machines C#VG HiP 104. FRONT COVER STEINAR LUND 109 ANT "


"POWER TAITO COIN-OP HITS 'THE ARCADE COMPILATION OF THE YEAR Featuring: RASTAN CRASH = Rustanis slick and compelling YOUR SINCLAIR — So another spanker from imagine. You'll be a foolit you miss it! SLAPFIGHT COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES — Simple Smooth. Very addictive, A winnet. ZZAP-A superb durcade conversion and a treatshoot em up. This one for the ZAPPERS collectln. RENEGADE ARKANOID COMMODORE USER=ASCONVERTON BO REVENGE OF DOH this u Lakuamabat T AMTIDI — \"Excelle nt metaphorically Taulut A futuDE MET One: YOUR SINCLAIR — The graphic are sa shick YOUR SINCLAIR ULTIS PIEL Vouteilly feel you're part of an action movie and chronicaliyaddictive. A Ciastie. rather than just playing game BUBBLE BOBBLE ARKANOID AMSTRAD ACTIONEL ZZAP:64 I thoroughly recommend Definitely a game should keep coming Arunoid for the simple reson that's bucla to simple areeous playing with GAMES MACHINE Packed to the brim COMPUTER GAMES WEEWThe take with enotnment LEGEND OF KAGE home Emple. You want met CRASH = \"Onel won't put down rede gue?\" FLYING SHARK Houshia the Beatlevel COMPUTER WITH THE AMSTRAD, CPC — This banescellent me.\" ACE = Incredibly frustrating CHITTEM CALLE VITAE 1127 playable and addictive THE IN 129 FIGHT name AME Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS "


"R PACKS! IN-CROWD 8 SPECTACULAR GAMES IN 1 SPECIAL PACK RELIABLAN CRAZY CARS GRYZOR \"If you're looking for a high speed action-packed game that's good to look at and exciting to play trab Grydor now Your Sincluir BARBARIAN mits reputation for being the most bloodthirsty computer game ever meira ehunt its phnomenal success will undoubtedly continue — — Sinclair User COMBAT SCHOOL *Combat School is brilliant definitely the best arcade conversion around= Isap 64 TARGET RENEGADE you're attesome exciting beat em up action this CRAZY CARS od excuse 13 part with all your hard-earned cash, crash G dans tout dime on: FELME PREDATOR tion. This Predator is kuperb tie-in and really hits ultimate gir game Sinclair User them -ZZAPISTEET KARNOV PLATOON *Stunningly colourful screen ... the most Platoon is absolutely superba milestone Accurate comedian at ang dentin in in the Indy by W YOL Your SINELHET other shall be judged. -Zapp 64 S EROWD THE GREATEST SPORTS COMPILATION EVER A R, TER UM wo wwwth, carpet karke Bob Sled. 14 p. Saland downhill Watch them with Nick da, tule the winning brik ialast Stew Dwie but play wight but ymslan BothmL E T the RAIN Track Flld YOU.COM 100 dich. Loar dumpeln, 110 mt hurdle Hammer Throw and High Jumand if that doesn't finish you all then thing w h the basketball ace and golor a touchdown in the NFL Superbowl=hen you can be down in the cockpit of a Formula 1 racing crk you compete to take the chequered ay! Check out GSM 2-the ultimate in sports compilations CATEL 113 WINTER 88 Witam wpakhir Telephone: 061 832 6633 Telex: 669977 OCEANS G-Fax: 061 8340650 "


"Logo a Go-Go ay Progressive, go-ahead company that they are, Domark are soon to be using a new logo, because they thought the old \"DM\" thing was beginning to look a bit nall. Why are we telling you this? Well, because they want you, the imaginative C+YG readers, to design it for them! Cor! Domark supremos, Dominic Wheatley and Mark Strachan will be judging the competition, and will reward whoever has the best idea artistic skill is not essential) with a prize of ! Cor again! So, what are you waiting for? Put your idea down on a plece of paper, fold it carefully and bung it in an envelope with the following writing on it: Domark Logo Compo, C+YG, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, ECIR 3AU. DOMARK BRAINSTICK Comoo Okyou can put that phone down now the WordyBlade Compo from our January issue has finally been drawn. US Gold put up a terrific ThunderBlade coin-op for the porson who could get the most words out of the letters in \"Thunderblade\" and that person wascua lantare party popperer svelte blondes handing out complimentary balloons) Stephen Lodge of Horbury in Wast Yorkshire. Stephen came up with no less than 2,124 words, all of which were checked and counted by the C+VG dictionary squad Iso no ringing us up and saying you don't believe it, OK?) Incidentally, this particular compo was "


"Is That a Joystick or What? Who you Gonna Call ore 2012 12 wanego na c3 bulwe kn the conversion line Dan EISLEyer made to Kardus IC Contently on the phone to the Real Chose at that We don't State Unelt springtime et to protect you. That Who s A4 which is listi ALSO Wit Nina nepongum should whet. Vous appetite Da game which incidentally Hot Sim, which puts you an haunted city starts with only position coming at your HTUD MEIE IS 114 110110 Civision's which nen though I's: Willy only going to be available anche disk is going lor ON TEAM o p 10. Trong 9 Tantomoly selected mission and me theateswar to play in Home AUCE Yes. We ve looked long and hard at this picture, and it's undoubtedly a joystick. In fact It's a new joystick going under the really exciting name of the Quick Joy Supercharger which leatures such wonderful accoutrements full microSwitch operation. two fire button, table suCTION cups, an auto-lire switch and bit of a unusual one. this Amstrad selection switch which allows you to ume the auto-fire ona GC machine. The price for such a cuddly controller? Only twelve of your English pounds (and 95 pennies).    m reputable dealers and no doubt a few unreputable one, we're not that sure Congrats one of the most popular in living mdmory. and the C+VG Post Carrying Operative was literally staggered when each new day brought another huge sack of entries for him to deliver to our penthouse office. Equally mated was ace envelope-opener, Paul \"Moosehead\" Glancey who, as our photograph shows, was letting his work qet on top of hlen for once. AMUUT GOIN-op, this time a tipping brilliant R-Type machine was also claimed this month by a certain Sinh Huynh of North Peckham in London. He was the winner of Activision's R-Type Master Blaster Compo in pur-November and December issues, in case You were wondering... And finally, these lavely folks at Ocean will be sending a Tamiya model tank to the following fortunates who won the Op Wolf Compo in our Decemberish: K Leose of Stoke on Trent, Neil Richardson of Nottingham, Philip Martindale of Newton-leWillows, Chuen Ming Yuen af Rotterdam, Greg Brown of Hull, Daniel Hose of Cobham, Jody-C-Gorton of Kilmacolm Christopher Thompson of Portsmouth, Graham Hadfield of Hayward's Heath and N lingworth of Norton Malton, Congratulations one and all! Hechtdal Hamelmaus gel nome nung am conlag up, or wher? Um, well, yes they hawn ochwally, you should be able To from the conchaki The game with a solul al bone is the latest shom up from Tony Crowther and David Bishop, called Phobia. Irun ........ ... ... psychotit maits to bladd your way througlu. Phoble alto enluth fint sage of new hardware bug which crom 31 coleson M Tomon than the machine gunoud to be capable of Thitsaturn ihould make migh on ladingulikable rom the Amlod and ST W H wlich geling la lori legend of the thin. Crime Town Depths kanother shoot om onthly one booting rother good graphic in Iad, Image Works are going so formato call them \"Sate of the Art, and how many tilians of time have a heard that belone Palladin k a 16-bit lentasy trek across a tortured land to a wird's lowel, during while you must bequire moglcul power from other morgeront and light of forest donn. Later the year Imagwork well launchi la Super Mario Brother-le platform game called DDT, the mig enem ol which runs In HAM mode (4095 calounil), and the Brothers blaster which you may have glimpsed on Channel t'u Unnal pou r Elgaal heen both describes them as \"orlounding\" "


"Supercharger Compatibility Commodore 64, 128, Amiga, All Atari computers, Amstrad CPC, MSX, Spectrum (Interface required) Finger and thumb fire buttons Autofire 8 direction control 4 suction cups o micro switches .95 Quiddoy SV123 QUICKJOY III Hypersonic space-age styling Please send me _Quickjoy Superchargers @ $12.95 each (incl P&P) i enclose a cheque/postal order for  Made payable to De Gale Marketing Ltd ITTLE INITIALS SENAME Signature Date ... ANCHES Please debit my access card Acco card spiry date AMEDDE ORDERS & ENQUIRIES TO: DE GALE MARKETING LTD 81 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD, LONDON W1A 1EY TEL: 01-637 5735 TELEBITDCOM EMDE ORO T V "


"Charts Cok Tells ATAMA5110R LIM Oparallon Wali Ouwen. ay Thunder Wlada = us Cold.  www Wrebird Battle Chun kleu. Art Currently eroksing the Channel ane three bijou programottes From French Sltwater Coldal Visan Dakar 89 sa Todd racing game based on the famous acros-desert rally. As You can setron OLI MCShol, the dowiad trom an unusual angle so it'll be interesting to see how the game plays I earn t he adventure tot in four ailing kingdoms. Save each one by tracking down tour questi and you win Djolatum some rathar nice graphic and lots of subgames to keep even the most hyperactive knight happy Finally, thou's European Space Shuttle which simulale the ESA space shuttle Holmes and pands the player on one or lour missions All should be on the streols by March on ST and Auniga lotinais Speedwall Mirtorvett. Formania Grand Slam. $1. Talion Nightmare on N spurloorball word sodan Die Operation Wolf Oren. Thund Blade Used 4 Geordio software supremos, Tynesoft, have launched Horronoft, a now label which they claim calers for a massive untapped market in horror computorgame. The first game on the new abel, to be launched at the end of March is an 51 Amiga/PC? C64 product called Personal Nightmares which was written by the leam of programmers who produced Heroes of the Lance for SSL Like Horoes of the Lanca il will be an arcade adventure with a definite bias on the adventure. The programmers consider size to be important and the ST version has four disks of rooms to explore and puzzles lo solve. This \"good clean horror as Tynosoft call it is to be publicised by no less a parsonality than vampish vixen Elvira, who is also to be the subject of Horrorsolt second game, So now all you siekos are no doubt wondering how horrific these games are going to be. Well, dontfexpedheaps of writhing gore, because the Horronoff leam are going more for the traditional Hammer horror style plals which place the onus on supernatural goings-on rather than ritual dismembarments and vonom vomiting character. Meanwhile, on Tynesoft's main label we should soon be seeing the seven ovanli of Rodeo Games, then there's Mayday Squad and First Person Pinball. Mayday Squad casis you as a commando who gets up to all sorts of SAS heroics, rescuing hosloges from larrorists, and that sort of thing... First Person Pinball promises to be an unusual addition to the gonra insofar as YOU are the ball and you view the pin table with all its Hippers, bumpen and drop largats in glonowe 3D. The mind boggles Robotep Ocean Mamb Jack Incare. robba Dabba Dos Hugbyte. 5 Yegi Bear Alternativa Ad, boll Simulator Hy leer = Code Weitere Matern 9 Super Stuntman Ceda Masters 10Awe Encore Orient Expressions TARUSINOPTEN orrot. Talton = M Thunderlad us Gold. maybe maison Operation Wall Duo T OTUL in T a luttuun matin (Help , mp w a dem. IDTARC Det han inte s ky M e what you FILM , L a d taken P S the TI, SEMA Play S athon DRESSUM asi vibe algthen w Lombard AC Rally Mandarin, b Alat Murner Mutlululon. V EURE u O B-lype = Electrl Dream. Elita = Frehlrd. W WOST La rut n ew hindi i th incity limit in the exis t e. THE with a) Thuit hould be und indum , L' Ball To Me Batman Otras 9 Spand Mall Mimernatt. TO Joanhnui Dald. ng DUOME On od she "


"Odd Balls at Cor, this 3D business — dunnit get everywhere? After producing such 3D greats as Stargliders 1 and 2, Carrier Command and Elite, Telecomsoft have applied their perspecto-visionaries to (of all things) a Pool game starring the current European Pool Champ, \"Maltese\" Joe Barbara. What d'you mean, \"Who?\" As well as being able to play against Joe or one of his four mates, you can take part in a two player head to head game, or just practise trick shots if the fancy takes you. And of course, the 3D element means you can view the shot from any angle. A FISTFull of Fun Steve Jackson hantasy Interactive Semark By Telephone? Anew dimension in fantasy faming Fighting Fantasy fans who run up their parents' phone bill by playing Steve Jackson's telephone FF game, FIST, can now delve into the deeper dungeons of Castle Mammom in FIST IL. Your misulan lalo recover the five rings of Allion from the Digga Mate whilst hyoiding or slaying the belligeremt servants of the High priest Kaddis Ra. As in the FF books, you make decisions by bolecting numbered scenes. Uncept that in FIST You only have to dual the required number on your telephone. You can ev e your position at untimo, 10 that you can eat the game at a later dain with your Loon and your character attributes intact And though AST II Es almed at the movie player, it should present a lasting challenge because the layout of the eight-level dungeon arranged the t echnGath. You can log-on to FIST II by dielling 0858 800 877, but be warned that the cost par , ,, Ha at peak time. Hewson Good News, Son For those of you drumming your fingers, waiting for the arrival of Hewson's Cyberoid ll on the Amiga and ST, the word is that they'll be in the shops in April. The 16-bit versions will feature extra levels and weapons, and for added grossness, animated wormy landscapes. Grool Feast yer eyes on the screenshot and believe. Also on the road from Abingdon is the arcade adventure Stormlord on the C64, which features graphics by Hugh Binns, sound by Maniacs of Noise and programming by C64 Cybernoid hacker, Nick Jones. Can't wait? This piccy should whef your appetite for the review next ish. Fancy a peep behind the scenes at FIST HO7 Computerdial need one would-be monster la go on umpen -puld day out in London and take part in a recording session so that they can have their voice put in the FISTII dungeon, where it can terroriza FIST player for all immity. All you have to do is dia3800870 (charged at the traits described above to hear Gemlata recording of five montbus growli. Then look at the list below and try to work but which to the aight be made whileli na tel. Then write your live lavoured momilers on the back ol a poucard or sealed-down envelope, in the order in which you heard them, then and it all to THE PHONEY RIST COMPO, C+ VG, Priory Court, 0-2 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR BAU. And don't forget lo Include your name and address or you won't win owt. The Monsters: Banshee, Darkbone Skeleton Flend, Ose-Eye Care Giant, Ducky, Nazorilla, Hapscallion First impressions CA This It Ralder, Hrst release from me Label Impatilom (\"Software With Style\") which he to make its debut on Amlousheht In mld-March, priced at $19.9. Gameplay will be famlilar to anyone who's played Old of Thrust, and puts you lm p ecul, blasting gun turnels of  ELT uing your timelor biom to collec HAN some of which feature-invere gravity and Invible pland, and we'll be looking at it carelully nut lua. "


"IT IS THE YEAR 2019 *The Running Man\" is a dead me that no-one had ever survived. But..... Schwarzenegger has yet to play. The Running Man is an action packed, sidewa parallax scrolling game in 5 sections with some spectacular backdrops and impressive sound. Look out for The Running Man Video by Braveworld, kul_LIIllI. LLU LILIEL.NLL_1.051 AMIGA SHOT AMIGA SOT TERREN SPECTRUM SHOT SCHWARZENEGGER SPEITRIT SINOT AVAILABLE ON: ATARI ST; AMIGA & IBM/PC E24.95 C64 & AMSTRAD CPC DISK .95 SPECTRUM +3 112.95 C64& AMSTRAD CPC CASSETTES 19.95 SPECTRUM CASSETTES E8.95 THE RUNNING MAN @1989 TAFT ENTERTAINMENT MOTION PICTURES KEITH BARISH PRODUCTIONS -1989 GRANDBEAM ENTERTAINMENES VID. 1.1 RALL STREET LONDON EC2AJS TEL: 01-27 5434 GRANDSLAM "


"Shadey Deals at Here's a raro pluotograph of the CFVG Rad Lads (and Lastes) sporting the very latest in Summertime optical accoutrements (\"shades\"\" lo you). They go by the calchy handle of Sunrapz and take the form of a shaped strip of plastic whichi rolls into a cylinder. When you unrall them and put them on your lace the springy plaslle tries lo relorm Inl a cylinder, and so the edges grip the side of your head gently but securely. providing all-round shelter from harmful ultra-volut and infra-red rays. The Sunrapz come la mirrored, or Unted, in a varlety of colours and will be in the shops this summer for the princely sum of .99. Il you just can'l wait to look as cool as the C+VG Formalion Summerwear Modelling Team, here's your chance lo get hold gl your own advancu balraSunat, Montpellier Trading have provided us with 30 pairs of Sunrapz lo give away to the first 30 people to write in, telling us the distance between the Earth and the Sun in mlles. Send your entries to: You Are My Sunshine Compo. C+VG, Priory Court. 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1R 3AU. SEO Now that Mindscape have set themselves up an Independent software publisher In this green and pleasant land, they we been releasing plans concerning the software seeds they're going to be nowing this spring. It's not often you get such a lyrical opening to a new story is 187 Anyway the game. Balance of Power 1990 san up-to-date sequel to the highly acclaimed 16-ble simulation of global nuclear polltles, which boasts a host of new features over the original. That one will be out on Amiga. Pl and later on, ST. Next up on the C64 and 16-bit machines are the American Sport series, which includes Indoor Soccer, Clubhouse SpOFIL that'. 30 Pinbul Binardi. Table Football ChaTv Pl. Shooting Gallery and Skol Ball (7) Ice Hockey and two other, whlich Mindaci de me ketalna under WTO lor the OTHENL All the games have a managerial strategy side to them as well buna arcade sport. II. At the end of Manch, 16-bit Owners WH be able to enter The Colony. Whiloti luhe venue lor a 30 arcade adventure, VEN much in the Menena v vein. LOOKS very interna, din Vislond of Altermath: The Boomtown, a PC imulation of survival after the bomb has dropped. Should be an education, Bitta Brings Bucks EvhaustionE== Radleve LED Life spent==EEE =EEEEEEEEELIhaus RadEVEL 2012 IK STORE Haten 100TOKE Ucuales 57 Walor Fuel Hetal ALBANOOD NEDAGOHODOU HI tre Lunber HrrOVE REFLE Paris Corts SOA15 Goodies Heegersenger Herbs Parts Cart Astute software house CDS sold so many of their Football Fortunes computer/ board games (starring Notts Forest manager and part-time pugilist, Brian Clough) that they're re-releasing it across every format, even on the BBC, Alari 8-bits and Commodore +41 Prices range from .99 to .99, and it should be in a shop near you at this very moment. Sui Good. Aprire 185 Space 121 Capacity250 Arrows have goods, Bar la que "


"Charts Psygnosis Bowled Over LLIDENAUSTDATIN Op= onen: -Weblap — Onun. 2 Aalluinen. Allie Hunnar Thundan Wimdu us bold, Wtan, eta, there! certainly seems to be a growing abundance of futuristic ball sports on the software scene these days. In fact, chalk up another one, dear reader, because Psygnosis are releasing Ballistix on the ST and Amiga. The game is alleged to be a variation on football with multiple mama lock Iran. 5 Muu 1 Canada ON D. Dragan Mulhouine Mouna. accoutrements, including 130 pitches, multiple balls, bumpers, Hoovers, redefinable gameplay and \"much more!\" Jablade 1 May berman Duran Tol Comments mere License to Thril SPECTRUM TONTIN 1 Rebarap Orean. Afterburner Adivalen, Operetlen Wol Quran 4 Thunder Blade US dold. 5 Domark's licenses of the Atari/Tengen coin-ops APB, Xybots and Toobin' are old news, so we won't tell you about those. However, did you know that they have also acquired the license to convert Atari's latest road racer, Hard Drivin, which we raved over in our ATEI report last issue. This should go nicely with their other up-and-coming motor racing conversion, that of Atari's Final Lap. Plans for the ST and Amiga versions of this game include a data-link between two computers allowing you to race against a friend, just like the arcade gamel Also on the Domark motoring front, famous Aston Martin/Lotus driver, James Bond, is soon to be making his fourth appearance on the Domark Label, in the game of his latest film, License to kill. The game should hit the street just as the movie hits your cinema screens, which, in Gregorian calendar terms, is June. We'll be having a lot more information on that in an imminent issue, ok? (winks a knowing wink). Pavle Grand Prix Alternative Ac3Conrad.. Kalmare Mastertrenk. Through the Frop Dear All 10) Barbie bal ceuckt Pirates Outlawed kebetup = Otran. Sprite Editor Alterburnu httlululon. 3 Mersprave Soul. Mprabe. on = Mel, Haute0. D n . All you potential Shoot 'Em Up Constructors had better watch out, because there's a pirate version of Outlaw's Amiga utility currently doing the rounds on the European pirate circuit! You don't care do you? Well, you should, because not only does this bootleg version lack many of the features of the finished program, it also comes with a very nasty virus which is immune to most virus killers! Hmm, nasty, eh? \"But,\" we hear you cry, \"where is the kosher SEUCK so we can satisfy our perfectly natural urges to build best-selling blastsé\" The answer is that the program's launch has been put back to late March or early April, to give Outlaw time to incorporate a number of improvements. Operation Wall O 6 Thunder Wade U5 Gold. DESTINATION UPY Home laik Inor. GFRIEHO Prabu slo: C. Manten. 9 Azn 1 Contada le Oregenlat Whought ab Duu when HILE you une pure boten into the "


"ADVERTISEMENT REVIEW FRANGER achieved your objective, you must make tracks for your rendezvous point where you will be picked up by a waiting Osprey. However, one word of warning-there is a strict time limit to each mission * MACHINES: so, athough stealth may be C64/SPEC/AMS/ST/IBM/ Important, lack of time AMIGA ALLHUAHIRAZHART might occasionally mean *SUPPLIER MICROPROSE having to run the gauntlet in * PRICE: C64 $14.95 order to succeed. Are you CASSETTE, .95 DISK man enough to handle the SPEC .95 SPEC +3 pressure? $14.95, AMS $14.95 AIRBORNE The action is real-the CASSETTE $19.95 DISK, suspense triggers the $T $24.95 # VERSION adrenalin rush that starts TESTED ATARI ST your senses working overtime. Airborne Ranger is an addictive strategy game that will have you JARAHIA playing over and over RANGERE again in an effort to twelve missions, set in three starts to hot up as you run, complete the next mission different parts of the world. walk or crawl your way and get back in one plece. Amongst the frozen wastes towards your objective, \"Alrborne Ranger is a of the Arctic, you must picking up the dropped move away from the beware the pitfalls of supplies as you go. The simulation side of walking on thin Ice. In the difficulty can be altered MicroProse releases but is more temperate climate of before each mission, thus still a step above the Central Europe, you are affecting your chances of normal Rambo/ faced with the prospect of survival. However, those Commando style of shootcoming up against the best with experience can go for frontline troops that the ahlgher risk and the combination which should massed Communist hordes greater glory that ensues attract those looking for a can produce. Alternatively, on return from a successful Not content with the thought-provoking game' you could end up mission. purely Ilfellke, militaristic TGM somewhere in the Persian simulations that MicroProse Although proving \"... an excellent game Gulf taking out a fuel dump have brought out in recent where. If the enemy doesnt die-hards, seasoned popular with simulation with a first-class mix of Ames, Major Bill Stealey strategy and arcade get you, the heat and decided to take a step out arcade players will also action.' 'Once I'd learned fatigue almost certainly will. enlov getting to of line and introduce some enjoy getting to grips with that stealth with a knife gets of the strategy and quick On each mission, you Alrborne Ranger. The game you further than blasting reaction thinking that can choose from an can be played as a fasteverything in sight... trying MicroProse simulations are impressive array of moving.hit-and-run action to complete the other renowned for and pump weaponry and supplies game, but players will soon missions was quite them into an 'action that will form the contents of find that it will require some compelling. A game which strategy game. The result? three supply canisters that thought and pre-mission needs careful thought as Airborne Ranger, an will be your lifeline on your planning If one is to well as great firepower is addictive game mission. Grenades, succeed in achleving revealed\" Crash combining the best of magazines for your each objective. This is MicroProse strategy with carbine, LAW missiles. where MicroProse's fast arcade achon where ATARI ST reputation for excellence in knifes, time charges and you control one of the first ald packs can all be strategy and simulation * GRAPHICS 82% troops belonging to that selected to best suit your games comes in. Often it is * SOUND 70% crack American combat needs for the coming a matter of getting to your * VALUE 95% unit who have earned the mission. objective in as quiet a Once packed, you are manner as possible, ** PLAYABILITY priviledge to wear the 95% exclusive black beret. flown to your destination in thereby ensuring that the * OVERALL 90% As the best of the best. an Osprey alrcraft. Having enemy remains unaware you are chosen to singleparachuted safely down to of your presence, handedly accomplish terra firma, the action really Once you have ulor Bill Stealer out fatigue MICROPROSE «THIS IS NOTAC&VG REVIEW» MICROPROSE 2 MARKET PLACE. TETBURY, GLOUCESTERSHIRE GLB 8DA. TEL: 0666) 54326. TLI43422 MPS/UKG "


"The Ratings M ke      forleden erit GRAPHICS E    hoouhl Wurthe n  : E | #VG REVIEWS SOUND Sound and met that enhanc e s me high mark. The mand ning li the multor bets are appropriate Toupheric VALUE With this rate we take conderboom the price of the me, the amount en toden, und the que the plant and abon, Lily the pre C+VG GAME OF THE MONTH PLATABILITY This tell you how addictive and enjoyable the pine the higher the rating the      POPULOUS Become a being of ultimate good or evil in Electronlc Arts' utterly stunning deity simulator.  The most important r olnil. This what we think dlu m iwhole, kong into consideration the other rating. In short, how good the y C+VG HITS! DENARIUS Brilliant horizontally scrolling action in US Gold's progressive shoot 'em up. VINDICATORS Tank it up with Domark's superb ST and Amstrad conversions of the Atari coin-op. The Marks SWORD OF SODAN Large sized characters and brilliant sound are all part and parcel of this HITI beat'em up. HYBRIS Discovery's vertically scrolline shoot'em up blasts in for a HIT! review. WANCHCATE 35+ AC+VG HITI An outstanding game that shouldn't be maxed. 70-85 A very good gume that minted out on a higher secolide due to minor discrepanciel. Should definitely be tried, though GRADIUS Nintendo owners shouldn't miss this excellent Nemesis conversion. 40-70 Varies between jut below average to fairly Food Could stid appeal to fans of the enne DRAGON SPIRIT A superlative PC Engine shoot 'em up 106 awesome in every sense. 109 SPACE HARRIER Another PC Engine stunner that looks as good as it plays. 10-30 Generally 1 poor me that mighen tenen appeal to the most ardent fan 907 OF Ugh! A ghastly travelty to buy for your wonteneny THE REST WEIRD DREAMS FOFT TITAN CHASE SPACE HARRIER (AMIGA) CYBORG HUNTER MACH RIDER NINTENDO BASEBALL VIGILANTE ELIGENE EUCE LATEY\" E en been in the lindumine lewer than hech nembard Gry knowd and when he CHO Tre a les to foodtrade adventure and not play DTE DE FAVEGAFIES Semar Amiga) Gadin Serder arcade) COAT CLARUNBRENNAN When it comes to computere Chat a lot mnya, Hen Ama and ST owner     FAVE GAMESHybri, Hong JULIAN JAZ IGNALL Fritty the roads and of Bruchytom P l ebes that e m Coutine bila boundar computers and console. Shoot 'arm up arn Eh u  y no to a good and dreard or be ET p. FAVE GAMES Drapen Sprit, Vindicator PAUL BUS DOT GLANCEY D tipitel d u Thul wild tick Hispa mani, in love agade adventure and Butlet Haware, sot de to the odd sheat em up FAVE GAMES I dol sodas. Manta. Dr. "


"WERD em \" E ***E rt: 90 part: 75 80:26:24 00:26:18 score 687280 score 887 288 EXT Swing over his head or he7 chomp you. Which door and what is the dock for? DREAMS BZZIZITZZZZZZIIIIIIIIE  Rainbird ST/Amiga .99, C64 Cass .99, Disk .99, Amstrad Cass .99, Disk .99, Spectrum .99. programme you proceed through the game by answering general knowledge questions — in the game you have to rely on games playing ability The hero of the game is one Steve Trevathon who, whilst lying on an operating theatre dreams some very weird dreams. Poor old Steve is mad, you see. He lost his marbles as a result of a failed love affair. His only hope is surgery. It is down to you to look after Steve in his dreams protecting him from his worst fears. Of course you are going to have to get him out of the candy floss machine first. And if you want him to wake up a perfectly healthy and sane individual you must also find the six orbs scattered throughout the game and take them to a final encounter in the desert with a giant brain. Hmm, sounds weird. It is weird, The game certainly lives up to its fitle in this respect. Some of the TV exposure is a mixed blessing. Rainbird thought they had cracked it when they got Weird Dreams onto Motormouth every Saturday morning. Great they thought you punters are going to see little bits of the much talked about arcade adventure supposedly whetting appetites to see even more of it. Sounds like a great piece of hype, right? Wrong. A large number of punters do go into the shop to enquire about Weird Dreams but they expect it to be a quiz like Trivial Pursuit. Apparently quite surprised to learn that Weird Dreams is in actual factan arcade adventure. In the TV HOT "


"9812614 t: 90 | 88:26:44 Score A87 208 170188:26:45 Score 887 288 Burp. Pardon me. I'm gonna do you with this fish. more the giant condon of lateral thinking in and a bit Keyoted House, but in the most visited landscapes are desert-like with entertainment. Rainbird are dried cracked ground, pushing hard the fact that it is sun-baked monsters and an adventure as well. Some of brightly coloured flying fish. the puzzles are quite tough There are other scenes in the requiring a good hard look at gamelike the fairground, everything on screen and a bit the English garden, the Musical of lateral thinking. There is also Keyboard, Hall or Mirrors, a correct order in which things Haunted House, but it is the have to be done and places desert scenes that are the most visited memorable. There is just Some of the scenes in the something totally oddball game have a haunting about beating a monster with a nightmarish quality about rainbow coloured fish that you them. The little gir in the have just leapt into the air and garden for example. So caught. innocent and sweet playing But there is more to Weird ball beside the flower bedsDreams than simple arcade but what's that behind her back Chomp. and what is happening to that the dentist the week Weird ball2 Dreams was conceived Weird Dreams is also a race hence the toothiness of the against time. Should you monsters. There is also a survive the giant candy floss chicken-like monster that machine you will find your self was inspired by a bird In the fairground where you defrosting on fellow author confront a giant wasp. You can James Hutchby's kitchen table. escape from it this time by Coding Weird Dreams did dodging into the Hall of nothing for getting rid of the Mirrors but it is only matter of duo's nightmares though. They time about twenty minutes are both still petrified of wasps. until he breaks through to get This is all very well, it's good fun, has excellent graphics and Weird Dreams provides a sound effects but one question unique insight into the workings comes to mind to anyone who, of a game designer's mind like me, saw Weird Dreams at Hermann Serrano had been to the PC show last Seplember. of the scene you, cont. 17 0 88:28:87|| part: 170 68:28:87|| score 887288 Scor 1887288 HOT 130p 4 shots "


"FULL WARNING STATUS: CONDITION RED TOIDS TALENT THRUSTER LAUNCH! WARRIOR LAUNCH! SPEEDERO LAUNCH! STRAIGHT FROM THE ARCADES COMES BLASTEROIDS. TENGEN'S CLASSIC MIX OF ONE OR TWO PLAYER ACTION. WITH FULL POWER-UPS. RIP-STARS. SHIELDS. DOUBLE-UP AND MORE. THIS IS THE COIN-OP CONVERSION OF 1989. AND BEWARE MUKOR AWAITS! COMING SOON FOR COMMODORE AMIGA E 24.99, ATARI ST E19.99. C64 SPECTRUM. CPC AND MSX DISK .99. CASSETTE .99.  1987 TENGEN. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.  1989 MIRRORSOFT LTD. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. HEADWAY HOUSE, 66-73 SHOE LANE. LONDON EC4P 4AB. TEL: 01-377 4645. LEAF-BLA "


"evions i WEIRD ev DREAMS 80 20127139 Score B07288 Score 887283 A The knife comes out if she gets bored. A Colch my ball bitle girlie. there are just not enough That said, I cannot get away disk or two. As it stands in the What's new? There just doesn't scenes to discover. Part of the from an overall feeling of game play value for money seem to be enough dreams to reward in playing any arcade anti-climax. If only they had stakes I am not sure you are get through. The ones that are adventure is to explore it and given us a bit more of ihe same getting full value. there are fine but most of find out what graphical delight perhaps by adding another EUGENE LACEY them we have seen before is locked behind the next door. either at the PC Show or on I have a feeling that gamers UPDATE Motormouth. It's not as if are going to discover Weird THE 5T version will be on SI Motormouth only shows you a Dreams' secrets a little bit too saloin a wael's fime GRAPHICS 83% small percentage of the quickly. followed by the Amigos SOUND 70% dreams — it shows you most of \"In fairness to the authors months later, and VALUE 49% there are some new things in Spochramond Co The game does have several there 60% like the demonic lawn vertoninum APC PLATABILIIT challenging and well thought mower in the garden and fish Version is also in OVERALL 59% out puzzles, with a sting in its tank in the keyboard scene, development though tail at the end of the game BUT and the best end-game tricki noldus for launch und have ever seen. The Autumn them. B0129788 2012 SCOT 687286 ICON 0872 A Neshe doesn't want to dance The candy floss machine will mangle you. LEAF-BLA "


"Room DREAMS Stop dreaming about owning a Sky TV dish. Stop All you have to do to win is send in a picture of dreaming about being the smartest kid on the block, your worst nightmare. Remember to write your or even down your streetthe one with the wacky name and address on the back of your drawing. We new TV channel. can only return drawings if you enclose a large Stop dreaming about it and get down to entering stamped, addressed envelope. And if you don't have our Weird Dreams competition in which we will give nightmares just use your imagination. away a Sky dish to the lucky winner. Five not quite Our poutliscious Art Supremo Andrea \"Scalpel' so lucky runners-up will receive a blow-up fish to Walker will judge the competition and her decision play with in the bath or, if you live in Grimsby, take will be final. Your entry must reach us no later than to the football with you. April 16 1989. Ten even unluckier runners-runners up will Entries to Ooooh What a Nightmare Compo, receive a Weird Dreams/Motormouth T Shirt. How C+VG, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, about those for prizes — weird, or what? London ECIR3AU. Name...-.. Address.... "


"SMARTER THAN A POCKETFUL OF CASH. A Barclay Plus account is a brilliant new way of saving for anyone 14 and over. You can apply for a special cash dispenser card so you can get at your money whenever you like. And instead of your savings just sitting at home in a jam jar, with Barclay Plus they'll carn you a good rate of interest as well. BarclayPlus 9282 101 So get down to your local Barclays branch now and find out how + + YOU'RE easy it is to open a Barclay Plus account. BETTER OFF Once you've got your card TALKING TO you can say goodbye to jam BARCLAYS jars forever. MEMBER OF IMAO "


"Reviews THE  GREMLIN GRAPHICS ATARI ST/AMIGA, .99 Well, it's been two years in the making, but the space flight Simulation which the pundits reckoned would wipe the floor with Elite has finally arrived. attributes. \"Wowl\" you're thinking. Well, cool your jets, baby there's more. Your ship is kitted out with a computer through which you can save and load games to and from disk, view a ship library and access the SIMPLE from FOFT HQ and other traders, order spare parts for instant delivery to your ship and arrange the sole and purchase of merchandise. Trading is as prominent a feature as it was in Elite, but the range of commodities is rather OOOOOOOOOO EDERATI REE TRADE EVERYTHEN and I mean part-time Elite Fonts wer and Now, here's the paradox everything and I mean line editor which lets you fill Paul Glancey, reviewer and EVERYTHING — that a space 16K of memory with your own part-time Elife fan is presented simulation pilot could possibly computer programs written in with the game which will, he is want. FOFT is played in a miniature programming assured, change his life. Said simulated space which is the language. reviewer plays game, but does equivalent of 18 trillion light Further to these, the not leave the computer with a years across. This space computer lets you access euphoric grin on his face. So, contains some eight million Galnet, a kind of interstellar what went wrong? planets to explore and trade communications system There's no denying that, on belween, each with its own set through which you can transmit paper at least, FOFT provides of physical and cultural and receive messages to and larger in FOFT, running to 28 items in six categories. The price of each is determined by the attributes of the planet, as you would expect, and changing supply and demand causes prices to fluctuate as you watch, so there is even a fiming element to trading success. If you would prefer to live by OS "


"90 TILES WATER 11701 SP 12 LIE the laser, there are seven weapons of varying strength classifications available for connection to your ship's three weapons systems. Some of the more exotic armaments are Sand Dispensers, which lay clouds of sharp sand particles some purpose in your life. Get one in Elite, with dots on blasts which are vapourising on to Galnet, dial up FOFT and coloured stalks indicating the your shields, the enemy ship is they will hunt through your relative position of other ships out of sight. Give me the tense records and give you a mission The red traces are enemy craft, dogfighting tactics of Elite any suited to your combat rating and these usually show up on a day. (which, incidentally, runs from passive Warning Radar as they The alterative to fighting is cadet, through the ranks, to lock missile targeting beams on to talk your attacker out of admiral as you complete you. killing you byou can't run away, Combat is one respect in incidentolly, because your ship which FOFT does not resemble doesn't fly fast enough, and the Elne, basically because it is Time Skip interplanetary jump heavily flawed. First you have drive doesn't operate when to locate your enemy, so there are enemy craft in the naturally you check your vicinity). To do this, you have to RADAR zooming in fo about deactivate your weapons missions). Co-ordinates of your X5 magnification to get an systems and go into destination planet are then fed uncluttered view of your communications mode, which into your navigation conputer. surroundings. At this displays an orientation barat Selecting the NavComp magnification, enemy ships fly the centre of the main screen. If displays a 3D map of the spiral a very fast, and apparently you can manoeuvre an enemy armed galaxy you're in, and random course around a point ship into this sight, you are once you've finished spinning it halfway between your ship given its twelve digit Galnet ID around with the joystick you and the edge of the scan code, so you can contact him. can zoom in on your current which is just out of visual range. Well, you can contact him if location and lock in a course. This makes them impossible to you: select the main computer, That done, you can undock sight until they break and start type NET to select the from the space station and a high speed strafing run on communications software; key prepare to enter hyperspace. your ship. Trying to place a in your own twelve digit ID, or Once you're back in real shot at this stage is more a alternatively type HELP then space your 3D RADAR is lit up matter of luck than skill, enter your name; press T to with traces from nearby craft. because by the time you've transmit; type in his twelve digit the scanner is similar to the swung around to face the laser ID lyou remembered to pause destroyarest hos they huntelease to cut pursuing enemies to shreds, drones, which fly at your wing-tips until you release them, and then they hunt down the nearest hostile ship and destroy it, and Gauss Guns, which use magnetic induction to shoot pieces of scrap metal at a target in front of you. Once you're tooled up and ready for action, it's time to get "


"CALA MATE transmit: type in his twelve digit ID (you remembered to pause the game and write that down, didn't you?). Then, IF you get through before he's blasted you to fragments, you can indulge in conversation with a semi-intelligent computer simulation of an alien gossip. E FED ZOHA ERIES 472-31 TE ETTE CDm7 2003 01 UITO ITED.COM A The NavComp displays its 3D galactic chart. have neither the space or the spaceship, flying through yardage of typewriter ribbon interplanetary space you to detail the key-strokes wouldn't see the stars move, necessary to buying a ton of and in fact you'd have to be ferrous metals (clue: after going flipping fast just to see gefling into Galnet, it takes 15 the planets move. In his quest to buy then get back to the for realism, the programmer |l\"l EDERATI REE TRADI Almost good, that is. the computer, the type NET main screen). Look, I'm sorry to has observed both rules, and If only the problems were (why you need to access go on about this, but the the upshot is no feeling of restricted to those described Galnet to evaluate the contents computer is one of the game's movement at all. To get above, but alas, they are not. of your own ship is a mystery to key elements and it's such a yourself between planets An inventory screen is me), type in your twelve digit chore to use that it quickly quickly, you're supposed to use always handy to have. In Elite ID or type HELP then your becomes irritating to have to the Time Skip Drive, but that you press a function key and name, hit the key and you're write down codes, typ them deactivates as soon as a red there it is. As befits a more there. Only another ten out, then wade through menus blip appears on the RADAR, \"realistic\" program, FOFT's key-presses and you're back to to get where you want to be. and the abundance of enemy inventory facility is more the flight window. Trading is an Realism also claims a victim craft means you can only Time difficult to access. First select even lengthier process, but I during flight. If you were in a Skip for half a second before Closing on the local space station, 7 All systems fully functiona, cop'n. there. Only another tee back to to get where so claims a victi DAMAGE CONTROL ESCAPE FOR CADITION FREE DROIDS DISARHED GREEN E 2001 MAY (32 Thu 1 EECH FREE 473-21 "


"E ENDER MULTE 22-03-1 ION OF ERS A Winging it over the surface of a planet: A Flying towards a planet at full speed (which isn't very fast, actually). you have to stop. To continue, and trade. Unfortunately, to but let's just imagine) you have would recommend any you must destroy all enemy reach the runway you have to a whole six and a half pages of interested gamers to take a ships in range, and I've already fly at high altitude, doing very reference information to help very long look at it before told you how difficult that is. little apart from watching a you, which is nowhere near buying. Consequently, any progress distance meter counting down enough. The manual also PAUL GLANCEY you make is very slow. the miles to go to the runway. compares different types of Speaking of slow, I might This goes on for about five engine and weapon using arbitrary figures with no units, IST so their meaning is lost. 78% The signs are that after many | GRAPHICS: months of thinking up brilliant SOUND: 69% game concepts and producing  PLAYABILITY: 46% technically excellent graphic VALUE: 49% minutes before the runway sequences, the final touches  OVERALL: 44% hoves into view, then you have were rushed, ruining the a frantic ten seconds trying to gameplay totally, I'm afraid line up your ship (you can't that the programmers haven't control your speed in this realised that the more complex UPDATE stage) before you fly past the you make a game, the more The Amiga version Funny and h  5 h effort you have to put into h bop mention the planet-landing again. making it easy to operate. read this. It will feature section. If a mission It really grieves me to have Unfortunately, FOFT's ships sampled sound effects necessitates you taking a trip to criticise FOFT further, but I'm systems are so user-unfriendly and twenty tunes on a down to a planet surface, you afraid I must make reference to that it is a real chore to play. music disk, which are treated to a 3D scrolling the game manual, which runs Even after a week of should be an Virus-type landscape littered to only 28 pages. This might concentrated play, I have yet improvement over the with gun emplacements which sound like a lot to read to break through the frustration nineteen take very accurate pot-shots at through, but it leaves a lot of barrier with this game. It has to unatmospheric your ship. Your goal in this detail out. If you feel the need be one of the greatest melodies which section is to follow an arrow to to program the computer (I disappointments of recent acompany the ST a runway where you can land can't see anyone needing to, months, and at thirty quid version. Coder Glancey heads for the stars. U PUUUUUU TITLES DRIVE IRGO HOLD D CD 1-013-E    DIFE IL12 "


NA


"The next thrilling step into infinite adventure. Congratulations mortals. You have survived the perils of Castle Mammon. Now a boundless new adventure begins as you descend even deeper into the dark abyss. Who knows what newly created terrors you may encounter as you enteran ever transtorming terrain of thrilling combat. For this is the realm of ELST. 2, in which you embark on the quest of your life in search of a magical prize of great worth: \"The Rings of Allion. Again your journey begins peacefully in the Black Claw Tavern, when suddenly a fraught figure bursts through the door. It is the Sorcerer Allion. He has lost his fiveall powerful Wizard Rings.snatched from his very fingers during the night by Demon Prince Kaddis Ra's Rapscallions. This prize they have borne off and hidden deep within the many levels of the Digga Maze, a newly unearthed section of the endless dungeon, beneath Castle Mammon. Allion needs you to rescue his rings from these forbidding depths and return them to him. But it's a race against time, for the dreaded Death Watch Patrol is constantly at your heels. You have but minutes to find a Crypt of Sanctuary before they track you down. Escape with your booty and Allion will shower you with pure gold. Tread carefully champions, for new horrors prowl the chill shadows of this freshly unearthed domain, a labyrinth that magically changes shape every thirty days. But you are not alone, for Allion is with you in spirit, telepathically guiding your blade. Will you emerge triumphant? Or will you be swallowed for eternity within the winding belly of this infinite maze? Step forward. Answer the call of Allion and descend deeper into the darkness. 0898 800 877 Steve Jackson presents IST 2 Fantasy Interactive Seenarios by Telephone The Rings of Allion. YOUR NEXT THRILLING STEP MF MULTI FREQUENCY PHONES RECOMMENDED. CALLS CHARGED AT 25P PER MINUTE CHEAP AND 38P PER MINUTE PEAK AND STANDARD. FOR YOUR FREE ADVENTURER'S PACK, SEND S. AE. TO-COMPUTERDIAL LTD., 7 LEAPALE ROAD, GUILDFORD, SURREY GU1 4JU. "


"eyes ) PUL humoad chordorial simand A Is this Norfolk? indeed! In this wholly original and unique game, you can become an ultimate being of ELECTRONIC ARTS good or evil and exercise your ST/AMIGA .95 divine powers over early It's great fun being a God, you civilization know. Sitting there on a cloud. At the start of a game three looking down on all your options are presented: custom, devoted followers, lutorial and conquest. The first occasionally lobbing a allows you to change over thunderbolt at an unbeliever's sixty game parameters, and bumor even doing the odd choose to play against another miracle every now and then to human, an Amiga, or set two boost flagging church Amiga characters against one attendances. Yes, it's certainly another. Tutorial simply fun being a God take it from explains the game, and me, I've been one. conquest starts the game I've also been a bit of a proper. devil, and I enjoyed that too. The objective is very Giving those goodie two-shoes straightforward. Playing a Gods a run for their money being of good or evil, the and generally disporting player simply has to myself in a thoroughly wicked ensure that his or and loathesome manner. her followers And you could be either a survive God or Devil too if you play Electronic Arts' latest game, 'cos that's the sort of game it is a deity Simulator. Yes well-written A desert world. things out, and once you get into the game it all becomes very quick and easy and conquer to control. the people that There are two main displays; follow the opposing the largest one shows a = 1. God or Devil. However, close-up portion of the map, doing that is far from easy. while a smaller one at the top The screen display looks left of the screen shows the pretty confusing at first, but entire map and the location of Enemy settlement "


"The skull depicts the enemy leader, A divine hand, all your people and settlements white dots are your towns and hamlets and red represents your opponent's, and blue and grey dots are you and your opponent's people respectively. At the bottom left of the swamps, volcanoes and floods on your opponent's area and wipe out vast areas of his land. If you become powerful enough, you can access the ground). battle icon, an armageddon There are also mode that puts both God's five divine actions: papal magnels in the centre of create earthquakes, the map and force both volcanos, war, swamp and populations to converge on floods. These only come into them and fight a bitter battle. screen is the play as you become more There can be only one main icon panel, powerful, and are used to surviving race, so if you elect to and from here you can decimale population. press this divine smart bomb, scroll the map, electa The default icon is raise and make sure your population is leader, create knights (which lower land, which is very bigger than the enemy's. go on crusades tor you and important since your There are a thousand kill the opposing people and population won't be able to different computer levels to raze their settlements to the grow unless they have flat land tackle, progressively getting The papal magnet. to cultivate. And you can also harder the higher you go. Early create new tracts of land to levels are quite easy, with the allow your people to cross seas opposing God unable to and conquer neighbouring create earthquakes and the islands. So, to get going make like, but as the enemy becomes your lands as flat as possible. more aggressive, strategy and The other four icons give you thought come to the fore as some control over your you attempt to outwit the other people: 'go to papal magnet God. It's certainly tough going. makes people head to where with the computer having some your religious icon is planted, very mean tricks up its pious settle' sends your people forth sleeve. to explore and colonise new One of the many impressive lands, 'gather together' makes features of Populous is the your people look for each presentation—it's absolutely other and combine to become superb. The manual is stronger and fight then settle is informative, but isn't heavy the same as settle, but your going, and the on-screen people look for the enemy to presentation is utterly brilliant. attack before settling down. It's obvious that the As your people's civilization programmers have thought becomes more powerful, so do long and hard over this aspect you, and you're able to create of the game, and it has paid "


"Peviews ) PULOUS dividends. While the gameplay itself is very deep and has many, many facels, it's very easy to use and gives a feeling of total control and freedom within the game. The graphics and sound are excellent, combining to create a convincing atmosphere, and the whole thing hangs together lo produce one of the most addictive gomes I've played in yearsI was kept glued to the Amiga for hours on end when I first played it, and have been going back to it regularly for weeks. The difficulty is beautifully set to keep up a constant challenge, and the unpredictable nature of the gameplay makes sure that there's plenty of nasty surprises to keep you on your toes. And a thousand levels AND a two-player mode (via modem or datalink cable) giving lasting appeal that should run into 7 One of many option screens. A it's a bit chilly! OPTIONS FOR GOOD E CAN MODIFY LAND CAN ATTACK TOWNS CAN ATTACK LEADER CAN USE EARTHQUAKES CAN USE SWAMP I CAN USE VOLCANO E CAN USE KNIGHT CAN USE FLOOD CAN USE ARMAGEDON months, I'd class Populous with The Sentinelas a classic computer concept, and think that it's one of the best games available on 16-bit. Some may find the gameplay a little too abstract and esoteric, but those willing to persevere will find that Populous is one of the most enjoyable and rewarding games to appear on a computer. It's divine in every sense of the word JULIAN RIGNALL I AMIGA | GRAPHICS 90% SOUND 87%  VALUE 90% PLAYABILITY 97%  OVERALL 96% UPDATE Only an ST version is planned at the moment, and should be identical to the Amiga to all intents and purposes. AGRESSION I-HIGH RATE SLOW I FAST GANCEL "


"FOOTBALLO MANAGER oxpansion ... PLAY THE GAME, BUT BEND THE RULES NOW YOUR FAVOURITE FOOTBALL MANAGEMENT GAME IS EVEN MORE MANAGEABLE! Addictive FOOTBALL MANAGER 2 EXPANSION ROT IS A MOST FOR IT THOUSANDS AND THOUSANDSorrorRALE MANAGER 2 FANS, SS FRORALE 2 NOW YOU CAN BE A PLATER WANACH STARF INTOON ONE--90LONGCA TOPSTATUD I'm proud to say that FOOTBALL MANAGER 2 has been in the Gallup charts for 35 weeks. CUSTOMISE YOUR OWN LEAGUE MUAY TOERNATIONAR SE IN THE WORLD un PLAY IN THE EUROPEAN SUPER LEAGUE TUTTO RIIA TATOUTE LATEN TASTIAN FREEL INSIDE inagem CBM 64/128 .99 .99d AMSTRAD CPC .99 .99d AMIGA .99dIBM PC .99d ATARIST .99d. SPECTRUM 48/128K .99 Booklets 19:. C hat Primi LALINE Componente. Als NEMO LINT, CH GT de ba trily proud. ddictive MACHINE ALIVE PLACE PIUSM LEIKUHE CORPORATION PLCN11. Bund Rod Deld. Md . 3 \"The lads done Brilliant! "


"\"clone Kafakis, and... Lad arcade players up format, with the usual extra weapons to bolt on and stonking great monsters to pump laser bolts into at the end of each level. Pretty standard stuff, eh? Nothing yer average legal department could object to there, is there? Hmm, well, there are still signs of the game's roots, most notable of which is the weapons pod which you can atch on the front of your ship.  US GOLD But still there are just as many AMIGA .99. eatures taken out of the C64 DISK .99 original, the most notable of \"Hey-up,\" you're thinking, \"this those being the lack of a looks a bit familiar.\" And well it beam-up facility, allowing you should do, for in a previous to hold down the fire button incarnation this was the then release a really powerful lawsuit-lumbered R-Type shot. Hence, if Denaris is going \"clone Katakis, and, to win friends among the hoo-whee, the stories I could arcade players' fraternity it's tell you about that one, matey! going to have to do it more on Anyway, after Activision pulled its own merits than on those of the rug on katakis, US Gold R-Type. were a bit loath to drop a Will it succeed? Well, after game which had attracted such several days of concentrated rave reviews, so they shipped it pray di play on the Amiga version, back to theprogrammers at think I can ay that it will. The Rainbow Arts with instructions gameplay is very ast, with a to alter it so that it could be disconcerting number of aliens rereleased without reviewers packing out the screen at all like me saying, \"Cor blimey, it's times. Denaris is one of those R-Type.\" Denaris is the result. games in which you have to In case you missed the game learn where the next wave of first time round, here's the gen. nasties is coming from, as it's You're put in the ejector seat of very dangerous to be caught a heavily-armed space-glider, out of position. If you do die in ouring the surface of the planet the middle of the level, you Denaris and using your mighty lose your weapons, but the armament to rid it of the generous programmers have nefarious cyborg monstrosities arranged for thepod and who have recently moved in. bouncing laser to appear It's played in the familiar horizontally-scrolling shoot 'em A Denaris not at all like R-Type. KUR 08593 THIGH-SC ALTP 2 9580 A Seven stunning back drops. "


"come from ottemp Howingle have in spe plave almost straight away, which is by the end of game tune which a big help. sounded like the title theme to Some of the extra weapons, a BBC schools programme. such as the aforementioned It's probably not a good bouncing laser, obviously idea to compare Denaris with come from R-Type, but Denaris R-Type, because it is much makes no attempt to copy the more of a mindless blast, lacing helix or terrain-following R-Type's strategic position 'n lasers, no does the pod behave fry gameplay, which the real in the same way. R-Type player lives for. It's a pity thsere's no pick-up providing rapid fire, as the PAUL GLANCEY game is a real thumb-buster, and one which shoul definitely be played with your joystick auto-fire switched on. One item which aused much  GRAPHICS 83% consternation was the SOUND 75% speed-up, which gives your I PLAYABILITY 85% space-glider a hefty kick forward as soon as you collect 1 VALUE 86% it-triff and brill, but the OVERALL 85% sudden loss of control is bad news if you're coming to a solid obstafclel Oh, but who am I to gripe about shallow fopperies like these on such a good-looking There are no plans for game? Graphically, Denaris is any other versions very smart, sporting some apart from C64 disk slick-looking spacecraft to which has twelve levels torch and seven detailed in comparison to the backgrounds to fly over. Notis Amiga's seven. It is up the in-game sound lacking, for against much stiffer your ears positively ring to a competition on the 64, cacophony of blasting noises the market being awash to keep your nerve endings with horizontallyraw and your trigger finger scrolling shoot 'em enraged! Ooh, getting a bit ups on that machine, carried away there, but it is but the Rainbow Arts rather good in that team seem to know department. The music isn't bad what they're doing so either, but I wasn't impressed the game should be well up to scratch. End level nasty takes a bit of beating. Hy OBERFEES Mint HA KEL RESO DOO HIGHESTORES A The robot snake one of Denaris tougher opponents. "


"OPERATION NEPTUNE ELF The tranquil surface of the Pacific Ocean belies the battle of wits taking place in the world's last unexplored OPEN territory. A perfect hiding-place for a determined enemy, or is it? Your jet-bike and technologically advanced bathyscaphe should help, but there are still the enemy bases to destroy, lines of communication to be knocked out, and the natural predators of the deep just waiting for a tasty snack at the first sniff of blood! So check your oxygen supply, and dive, dive, dive... Atari ST, PC, Amiga .95 CBM64, Amstrad .95 (disk), .95 (tape) INFOGRAMES, MITRE HOUSE, ABBEY ROAD, ENFIELD, MIDDLESEX, ENI 2RQ. INFOGRAMES "


"ORODODELIODO Four directional Arkanoid clond. TITAN they've ever done. Titan is almost the exact. opposite of what you would think it is from the title. In my mind, the title Titan automatically made me think of something very big and imposing, like some hideous alien force about to take over the galaxy. Titan is an eight way scrolling Breakout variant. You control a small block set Easy is too big a word. If I said in the middle of the screen that I got to level three without which is positioned somewhere actually moving the joystick, I within a maze of bricks. Some wouldn't be lying. of the bricks are destructible. Graphics are pretty bad on Some of the destructible bricks all formats. The screen scrolls dissappear when you run into at a very fast, smooth rate. This them. The other destructible wouldn't be a bad thing were it not for the highly detailed backgrounds, causing quite a bit of eye distress to all who witnessed it. The Amstrad graphics are, funnily enough, way, way better than the Amiga's. At least the Amstrad version has got colour. The Amiga verson is, believe it or not, more or less monochrome. Sound is blip-blip-blip on the Amstrad and some 'heard it before, probably on another Breakout game' drum samples on the Amiga. As a game it's far too fast to be playable. Not fast as in joystick wrecking, but fast as in \"help-l-don't-know-what-I'm doing' fast. Dull, Boring, Badly Programmed, Unplayable, e Graphically and Sonically Average. DBBPUGSA. If you take some letters away and change a few, they make the word average. Says it all really. TONY DILLON TITUS SPEC CASS .99, C64 CASS .99, DISK .99 AM CASS .99, DISK .99, ST .99 AMIGA P .99. Here's something you don't normally see. An original Titus game. This game is not a rip-off of any recent arcade or popular computer game. In a way it's a bit of a Breakout clone, but only in the most basic terms. The sad fact is, it's miles worse than anything else V Patterns change but gomeplay doesn't k un humu TRADA EJ DOPPOPOTE AMSTRADE A The skulls spell death, bricks have to be destroyed by GRAPHICS 68% by SOUND other means. What other 60% means? The most innovative \" VALUE 67% game idea ever. You have to PLAYABILITY 32% hit them with a ball. A ball is OVERALL 57% normally found banging around somewhere in the maze. You have to bounce the ball off your bat in such a way GRAPHICS that it hits the bricks and 51% destroys them, Knock out all 1 SOUND 40% the bricks and it's on to the next  VALUE 29% level. PLAYABILITY 32% There is only one way that OVERALL 37% I've come across where you can actually lose a life. Little skulls can be found knocking about on later levels. Should you or the ball touch them, you UPDATE lose a life. The funny thing is. All versions will be on they don't start to appear until sale in March apart from level four, which kind of makes the Speccy which won't levels one to three alittle easy. be ready until May. EER "


"Save a Princess, save the planet, save . Advanced Dungeons Dragons FEDERATION OF FREE TRADERS CAPTAIN BLOOD PURPLE SATURN DAY EMPIRE TRIES BACK *Tis a noble offer Buy any two software titles for .95 each or more at Boots, and we'll demand  less of your fortune than usual Our coffers are laden with games in all formats (from ancient gems to the best new releases). But make haste, this heroic gesture ends on 1st April. Available at larger stores only, subject to stock availability. A better buy at Boots "


"PAC-LAND TM and 1984 NAMCO Ltd. B AT REAR TIME 1 tb AMS SCREENSHOT SPECTRUEEREENSELY LATEERIST SCREENSHOT 00 PAC the world's most famous computer character is back. There are many imitations but only one original PAC-LAND. This superb conversion of the internationally famous coin-op is not to be missed. COMING SOON! TM and  Namco Ltd. 1989 Grandslam Entertainments Ltd. 12-18 Paul Street, London EC2A 4JS. GRANDSLAM Available on: Atari ST and Amiga .95 C64 and Amstrad CPC Disk $14.95 C64 and Amstrad Cassette .95 Spectrum .95 "


"els INDIC OH NEILMEL TIT DOMARK SPEC/AMS/C64 A veritable minefield! $9.95 CASS, .95 DISK, ST/AMIGA .95 At the last PC show, Domark pulled off a very neat deal with Tengen, Alari's coin-op division, and secured the rights to five of their newest games: Xybols, Toobin, Dragon Spint APB and Vindicators — which is the first to appear. The Vindicators coin-op is one of my favourite arcade machines, and I've been waiting for the computer versions to appear in the hope that they're faithful renditions of the original machines. And I'm glad to say that the ST and Amstrad versions definitely are. The game is set in the far future. The all-powerful Tangent empire is slowly and inexorably conquering the galaxy, and the only thing between them and complete domination are two brave and heroic tank commanders, who have decided to take on the might of the whole empire single-handed. The Tangent organisation is spread over fourteen different space stations, each one The Amstrad title screen. comprised of five levels. The screen scrolls vertically, and objective is to enter each also horizontally if the play station and destroy its control area is wider than the screen. centre situated on the fifth The slations are all well level. In the fourteenth station defended, with gun control centre resides the emplacements and enemy Tangent Boss, a giant squid-like tanks infesting the landscape. monster that has to be blown All shoot at the intruders and away to save the galaxy. attempt to wear down their At the start of the mission, fuel is supplies with repeated one or two-player mode is hits. The tanks can shoot back selected. After that one of with their own guns and take three starting levels is chosen, out the oposition for points. On which has an appropriate later levels super tanks, flying points and star bonus awarded saucers, huge gun depending on the difficulty emplacements, mines and selected. Il tell you more electical barriers are about stars in a minute. incorporated into the defence When a level has been system, making the going very chosen, the action begins. The tough indeed. proceedings are seen in forced Stars are found scattered perspective 3D, a bit like liberally throughout the space Gauntlet, with the tanks moving station, and can be collected up the screen blasting and used to buy extra features overthing that moves. The for the tank — which are vital if FUEL DOIDOTO) CODE B.PROLSON L EGEL "


"WAVELAFERG-D DOO C+VG HIT! and T X\" TIS EUR 1,** TS A Boomshankal 7-WINERILATERSthe mission is to be completed (you can get up to 40 stars if you start on a higher lever). There are a wide range of power-ups, shields being the most useful. These lossen the effect of a hit although are themselves depleted, requiring extra shields to be bought when they run out. Extra shot range, extra shot power and speed ups can be bought to increase the ability of the tank, as well as armour plating the only thing missing is furret rolate, which is impossible to implement on computer. Homing missiles and bomb cannons are available, a mere five stars for ten of each, and are very useful when you hit strong opposition. Homing missiles whizz around obstacles and corners to hit their target, while bomb cannons are heavy duty shells YA single Amstrad tank attacks FUEL Toni. voli 00 OO 00 HOO 0000: 2001-WINDICATE A Pick up the key and go to the exit which decimate everything tough within the vicinity of its impact To finish each screen, the tank commanders have to Stars can also buy warps to locate eithera red or blue key, later levels and give bonus which open up the exit ports to points into the bargain. the next level. So as soon as Shields, bomb cannon, you've picked up a key, make a homing missiles and extra fuel bee-line for the exit. When capsules are also found dotted both tanks are safely through around the place, and come in the score gained on that level very useful when times are is displayed, and extra fuel is Y Heading for the exit ... added in relation to it, so the more you score, the more fuel added to your supply. After that the power-up screen is displayed so the players can buy extra features before the next level begins. On every fourth level is found the control centre entrance, an orange building which the tanks enter by blasting a hole in the side, Once inside the tanks are given a short time limit to collect any power-up goodies within and beat a hasly retreat to the exit before the whole place explodes. The multi-limbed Tangent boss lives on the last level, and puts up one hell of a fight as he and the tank commanders slug it out in a final do-or-die confrontation. It's a tough fight, and be prepared for a rather nasty suprise ... The ST version of Vindicators 100 UEL ET FUEL OO "


"opy eviens 99 KU INDICATORS aco INDICATORS 2500? is a stunning copy of the original machine, which looks identical and plays brilliantly. The graphics are first class, and I especially like the massive explosions, which give you a real feeling of destruction. All the sprites are smoothly amimated and finely detailed, and the backdrops are of similar quality. The gameplay is excellent; it's challenging, tough and very addictive, and the two-player mode adds that competitive edge to increase its lasting appeal. Amstrad Vindicators is also brilliant, with great graphics, sound and playability combining to give one of the best games available on this machine. If you want a stonking good blast, tank along to your shop and grob Vindicators. JULIAN RIGNALL FUEL FUEL T X FUEL 1,5 215 A The control centre on level three. CUSTOMIZE ATR TANRESSEO Cost 3 INCREASE SE cost 3 SHOT RANGE SADE18 To cost 4 INCREASE cost 5 SHOT PONER IST AMSTRAD  GRAPHICS 88%  GRAPHICS 86% TSOUND 86%  SOUND 81% VALUE 80% VALUE 81% i PLAYABILITY 89% PLAYABILITY 87%  OVERALL 87% UPDATE smoother scrolling, while the Spectrum and Spectrum, Commodore Commodore versions and Amiga versions are expected to retain should be available by the playability of the the time you read this. Amstrad version, but The Amiga Incarnation have worse and better should be the best of the graphics respectively. lot, with better graphicsNB: BOTH GAMES ARE and sound and HITSI SPORTO Shotgost 5 ETXEETX FUEL FUEL "


"BYRITE SOFTWARE THE COMMODORE 1.99 EACH OR BUY TWOGET ONE FREE YGI BEAM KONON RIIT. STARRION, ICE BUSTERS, MOUNTEZUMA SREVENUE COMIC LAKERY, HLIN CHACK 2 CHAIN REACTION LOREAE WILLOW PATTERN LITTLE COMPUTER PIORE GREYFELL. ARL OF YESOO, DAUID NEITHER EARTH SAIDE OF POTHUKULS DAARDIE INTERNATIONAL SOCCERCIUNT, DECATHLON SCART MONSTERS, SIJATEHOCIC STARDUALE. MOONCHESTA, TOMAHAWK THE BIG SALE ETATTLY,  ) AL LICATA, AICTION PACK SKYRUNNER KINETIK DIAMOND. THROUGH THE TRA DOOR, HYPALL KUFS ARE DANDY, SUPERSTAH PING PON. CHALLENGE OF THE GOHOTS WISTARSZENO DANTI ALE UP. DOFICHT 2101 ON THE TILES. HYD. AGENT OFUNGLEAGLES DEATIVATORS, PRODIGT SHADOWSKI MNTEAL CRYSTALS OF TONG GULLDOG VAC MADNESS DEATHSCAPE, HYPERBIKER EXPLORER NEOLYP DOULE TAKT TEMPLE OF TEHAOR, GAUNTLET, TEMPLE OF  ,   ERING VA FORCE, LORDS OF MONIGHT. PSYTHON, PLEASE CHOOSE ALTEHNATIVE GAMES TO AVOID DOSAPPOINTMENTL COMODOHE FLETEACHT ACTION FORCE, RAD 2000, FALCON RENEGADE LORO UNBELIEVAHLI ULTIMATE SUPERSPRINT GAMESTARUUSRET BALL IYNAPS, BIO NAME BONANZA DRAGON LAIL RAMPAGE ESCAPE FROM SNAGE CASTLEL PLATTOAM PERFECTION. EXDLON COLOUH OF WALLIC, THAIL, CONVOT RACER BOULDERDASHCONSTRUCTION IT CAPTAIN AMERICA ARMAGEDON MAN EARNON, QUE DEN TE THIS, HUNTEAS MOON TERRANARE DELTA, ANDY CAPP, SPORTING CLASS VAGNATHON, GOTHIC CHAMPIONSHIP SPAINT FAIGHTVERE SIDEWCZE HYGAR QUAMITET, NORTH STAR GALATIC GAMES, TALCKER, WARTER OF THE UNMEASE CHUBBY GRISLE PANDORA, LALTEA TA THANTOR BEDLAM ANDROLNICHTS SIHIP POREA JE SLANE INTERNATIONAL AJATE LLACE LAMP RANPARTSSENTINAL SPY FY THILOGY, VLHCM YOH SWINWIN PACE, HEVS +. CHOL, GAUNTLET 2. FIELD OF FIRE HATTALION COMMANDER, COLAT LEADER LATTLE OF NOHMANDY. CUMMIPIDIOTHECCOMPILATIONS BUCK VOL 2, NC INTO THE EAGLES NEST. BUATTY ACE. SHOCKWAY INTERNATIONAL GALATE. LIGHT ONCE TILO HIT PANO HMC AIRWOLF GT GULANS, DC. CATAHALL , CHAMPIONSHIP ROOTHALL BASEHALL AND BASKETBALL NOW GANESSON INTERNATIONAL EARATE, KACER LAST HASSLE REBEL KAT THAP PROHIBITION COIN OF CONNEXION E INC CRYSTAL CASTLES EXPRESS RAIDER, METRO CROSS RELEAS THE DEURE THAN USULFIL SIGMAT 10 GTGMESOS INCI AVANCU PUTIHOHT, VOUNDEFU. FOOTBALLER OF THE TEAM TRAILBLAZER HIGHWAY ENCOUNTEH, MONTTON THE FUN. ,,HLTH L COMMODOTTE DISCESTEACH VURDEN HY THE DOEN. GALATIC CONTROLLER LILL BLAZER PHODELY, CHAMELION EXPLOATAVION SUPERSTAARING PONGI FIGHTING WALIOHMA ROHOT. NORDHOLD. HEDATW, AZTEC FOLOH. PERE KINTIK, LIGHT POHCEL CAPTURED H LINE THE HEHHE ANH EH HY HEALTH VIEINARS, HEAMHUDEL BOHED OF THE RINGS. TRUNGFORURS, WITH ALL HERRI CCOMMODORE DESCENCH TALL THE MENTIRAMPAGE. FIE TRACK, AILEN. SUSPENDED STARCHUSS DEADLINE ECHIK TORT, IM RUNNER TOP FUITE CHALLENGE. YOGEDARE SPELTHUM .99 EACH OR BUY TWO GET ONE FREE OHLSTRUNNER WIST HANEM VISION, BATTLE OF THE PLANETS SEOGHAIT, REVOLUTION, POLE POSITION, TOY B E FIGHTING WILHAIDH. HANNSTORM ACTION REFLEX, SOLL LLLLATEMI, SY TO HACKERLACKOUT FERDGARTENET TGL LLLL HILLERAINO. MOONLIGHT MADNESS KNIGHTMERE MISSION OMDA SGOLES FED SCORPION TRAF FIFTH QUADRANT ULAVIN WINSTARS. TELALON, HTH COSMICK SHOCK AT-OFHER, DEADHVTEK NEMES THE WARTOCK DIAMOND, TEMPEST, ELLER PULSATOIL LIFE OF HARRY NO PODIGY. THE ELDOLONEPLORER DARE ENTRE, KOROMIS RIFT DOUFLE TAKE TEMPLE ON TRACH, DEAMOTIVATORS, TOE OF FHANESTLIN, THIANOS, LES FUCS TUAD, SPACE LHLITTLE DHUDGYAON, DEATH ON GLORY, AVENGER, NIHUST. DEFENDER ESPLCTHUM EXERCH, WYINTER OLYMPIAD ST, HEADCOACH. COLOUR THU L MU HE BALM HET HA | | | | | TVILOLION, DARE, SEPHOHOSSWIZE TE THIS, BLACK MAGIC, SUFERSPAINT.WINTER OAMES, SL THE GREAT MOUSE. DEFECTIVE ISWI MANIC MINOA TWIN PACK GALATIC GAMES, CHUCK ECO, VENMONT STREKES HACK EXPRESS, UNBELIEWABLE ULTIMATE THING NEVIS, SOUNCES HACE , TAG, WLCA, AWPOCALYSE, IT REAL GOTHIC, VUEL THILOUEN, ARNOV DRAGONS LAL NORTHSTALL BLOOD VALLEY, FALCON HENTUACE LORD, E #CAPTAIN AMERICA, CHU BY GASTLI, CHILLIONS ISPRINT ZYNAPS LIVING DAYLIGHTS. WAGNERTHON TERRAMAL. LAATHIGHT KUUPGI, STALAIDURSUS AJA FULLY. SURVIVOH. CHOLO. CHESS MUSTELLI SPECTRUM COMPILATIONS COIN OF CONNEXION INC CREACTHULHESS HADH METHON CHOSS. CHTISTAL CAME LUCARTILM CAME COLLECTION VING THE EDOLION, RESOULON FRACTULSE HALLHLIA, COZONIS HIFT We HIT PACK EM VOLI INTO THE EAGLES, HATTY ACE SHOCHLAY DE TENTEARATE, LIDHT FOHOL CH FUN PACKING THE HULK LIIVITATION, TRAMOR ALL 02 NOW CAVES SINC INTRATE.HACKERT PROHIBITION, REBEL. ST HASSLE, LAT TRAP ALL FOALS GREMLIN COMPENDIUM INC SHOVE A DGE. TIDOLY DAINOS, WOOL SNAKES AND HAZARDS ALL RON 119 N SPECTRUM EDUCATIONAL ALL FOR EACH CHANCE FANTASY, US ON KEYS, KINDER ALPHABET 200, FRACTION FEVERLAGEAN VOTAGE. MAKE A FACE DOGUMELE FRITUL INC TIME THAT BATTLE DE ANTWERP. SHEH. PANIC GLASS, SOULS OF DALHEON, RUPERT AND THE ICE CASE DECOM FORD Town DR FLUVEY AND THE MONSTERS, EVIL CACH. WIRSTAR: NICK MBOS OPEN WETUOSTOLV, DHATHWAIG. HOBEAL YOUR WICHO VOUSE MADERS, DAREMPAIL. FANTAUA, DIAMOND, HOCUS FOCUS, CO HTERSHILTON HILL MARADONNAL PICTANIN, 10 TANE HVIHULALTEEL QORADORS OF GENON, WO NOOITEAL APLIENOA, BLOOD TOUTS HOLDTO. QUETZALCOAL SPACE COMUANO LIELUN NOHTFUITE 1. LIGION OF DEATH STAR THUGH STRONTIUM DOO, 10 TUNNIL MUSHROOM VANIA, ESCAL. FIRESTORM THE CHIES FAYLIL NOMER HOU FEDOCATE, ORLICHTI, CARPET CAPERS PLANETFALL CHIOKUNNENLACENT ORANGE TULE CU JAVE. VHOW JULING VISION QMEQA TANTALUS. THE ELAND, STARTELE. ATALAS, NITI LILTER STAR WAAROM, ENOT ED SCORPION. ODDAD ATTACK CARTAN FLY MISSUE DETENCIL TWO GUN TURTLE ARTUNS. THAMANIA TILLY HONO, SECTOR QUICT, HIATROW,   , ,   THE UNNAD ZODT PANLAR ATTACK STL,HTH, PATROL HI DONG 500 DY FLYER FODALA OVERLOADS. THE LUDOS, TUTAUNCHKIVUN, 10. OONUOGY SPECTRUM MISCELLANEOUS HOTONICS WAFADHIME = TEHEEL WIDA DUGNC PAT HR WATAS DVOLACH SPECTIAL WHITE WORD MICE 5604H ON WATT DEACH AL PHILCOM PAPER LACOS ROLLSETES N TAEHAL SPUITTER. VONEY MANAGER COM VULNES CONTROL SYSTEM DU SPECTRUM POWER SUPPLY BYHTE SOFTWAHIE.. DEPT C+VG PO BOX 589 LONDON N14 ESU 01-0002 641 COMMODORE MISCELLANEOUS STAR GL TOEN AFTERFUAVH DEFENDER OF THE CROWN SIMONS BASICA SIMONS RASCHEXTN 110, MACAO ASSEMELER DEVLP DISC 10 05 00 DISC 05 NOS MOUSE CASS CTES INTHO TO BALIC PTS 13 INT SOCCER CART [13 FITMALS TANG TUTOR EASY STOCE OSL TES E801AM),LEET Epis COMMODOHE PSU 1135 SUHR ASIC CASS 1199 FASSANASS DISASSEMBLEA CASS [2.59 MUSIC STUD DOSCI D DESIONIAS PENCIL CASS 14 COMPUTEH STUDES CASSEL COMMODORE SOUND SAMLER DISC COMMODOHE SOUND EXPADEN E nglp chys o bic 014incho VICHOCLEHE 120 DISCONLY 19 MUCHOSCH PT 18 DESC ONLY E15 EOS 75 CNC GEOWRITELE 11:50 EN The Instant Catalog NCL REPAIRS 22a Bartleet Road, Washford, Redditch, Worcs B98 ODG 0527-510409 10 .75 ALL TITLES IN STOCK SPECTRUM COMMODORES DATARST S mulator 545 4 N H vali là TH | LI TI LINH, Hillun.   45 t Camat Cuma * ** Luan Spor martian Anoba 16 dhe me ards To 150 hasan mas Clipe Cam 55 Hartan lotta Cod P CIE By Cape Crude 145 Captama Creed likums 345 175 Our Fungsi De Dragon 52 Cynny ma 1100 Duonto FN THE CLIP LINH KIN LAP GHI THE Elmat Hotliwanag Cry Com 150 150 Fun Lanas 3.15 G od 345 Ft Game Ov Double Dagen yngh Game Stand Watch Llyn Hugh S1055 Leping SUS V LETE ADALCIH    Fish V The Hot gans of the Lange T he Managm 1459 T ag ! in Cow Comalaton Frumos bei Bau 15 lommal Land Game Send V 17 Laita L Luna Game Summe on 9 Lakunt u LTE 1 GUN LOR M as Vol Let any |   L    59   Op Wall WG tutu Piana Wench 17:16 CW Dragai hira ma anda Vic 1999 Het oled C an Wat AB Prema Targu Oy HCT Hambo HY H 115 Han Hobodno 145 14 Buchana Sports Honda 199 $706 Sune Chyba labai 1 100 Somethi Techno Santa Heli 9149 1213 pating The Bate Thund Band 13043 Toetage du Theo 096 Fi  TA Toe om 841 Tentoon Hotel Ede at in C the War ampaign TV 90 HA en Cho TA W REPAIRS TO ALL HOME MICROS!! Quote given before proceeding with repair it wished.  Free software with every Commodore 16, 64, 128, +4. Amstrad 464, 664.6128, & spectrum repair * Guaranteed seven-day return it in the UK * Repair guaranteed for six months * Postage & packing included in the price (all returned by Trakbak and compensation feeSecured Post).  All Spectrums .90 \" Commodore 16/64/128/ + 4 .00 Amstrad 464/664/6128 FROM .00 * BBC FROM .00 * Commodore Amiga & Atari ST machines will be quoted before we proceed. All cheques & postal orders to be made payable to N.C.L. * Access payment also welcomed. And also ex-Rental software for sale. Prices from 50p. INSTANT, Boston House, Abbey Port Road, Leicester LEASAN Me Order Onty. Slate Computer's male and model P&P: 5lpon orders und IS. EEC 7sp per title Whole World E1.50 per title for Ar M. New tiles on the day of release. 0533 510102 FOR DISK PRICES & NEW RELEASES PLEASE RING IN "


"13 CASTLE AVE., ROTHERHAM, S. YORKS, S60 2JN BARGAIN BASEMENT TELEGAMES AT LEAST 20% OFF Europes Largest Stock of Video Games & Cartridges for -Joe's FULL PRICED  TITLES! Budget Games .80 & .60 GAMES from ONLY 99p ENTRANCE ATARI CBS and INTELLIVISION 2600 IILIT HELILI SECONDHAND SOFTWARE ALL ORIGINALS FROM ONLY 50p each ASK FOR A FULL LIST HUIL EXTRA SAVINGS on NEW RELEASES ALL COMPUTERS CATERED FOR M NEW NEWZ GAMES NOW IN STOCK POP FREE IN U.K. Man (Nintendo POST niendo come NO BIL BULLS SEND LARGE S.A.E. FOR FREE CATALOGUE. (State the make of computer). VIILIT JOYSTICKS FROM .50 PC ENGINES NOW IN STOCK! WICO JOYSTICKS FOR NINTENDO IN STOCK NOW The leading Video game specialists. Send for lists (state make of game) TELEGAMES, WIGSTON, LEICESTER, LES ITE (0533-880445) TEL: ROTHERHAM (0709) 829286 | HEY YOU! DOGBREATH!! said Commander Slimebucket of Galactic Command 'Get me new THALAMUS games!!!\" SANXION the SPECTRUM remix *** COMING SOON *** HAWKEYE ATARIST & AMIGA The meanest leanest fighting machine is going to hit 16-bits soon. Lovel alter level of combat action as heroically bronzed Hawkeye rampages through strange lands living with mutant aliens. ZZAPI said \"An addictive and beautifully presented shoot 'em up of the highest calibrell\" Gold Medal 96%! The biggest blaster is about to hit town! Yes, previously a NUMBER ONE smash hit game on the Commodore 64, the brilliant shoot 'em up of all time comes to the Spectrum in a remixed form going beyond the magnificance of the Commodore version. Sanxion takes your Spectrum into a new dimension of intergalatic warfare with graphics to amaze and sound to astound. Fly over the surface of futuristic earth defending your right to fight as alien hordes sweep down with blazing laser death cannons!! Pit your wits against the perils of the skyll YS said \"A spectacular shoot 'em up!\" .99 cassette .99 plus 3 diskette ATARI ST & AMIGA Eight amazing levels of galadc conllic in the nightmare that lives beyond the deepest regions of Delta space. One or two simultaneous players can enter the levels full of superb graphics, briliant sound FX and music ZZAPI said \"This is Incrediblel A brilliant Daster whose gameplay and graphics knock others for sal Gold Medal 97%! SHARLA MAJOR FORMATS The adventure with landscaping graphics which takes any kopen explorer to losi planets with mystical lands in the search for Sharla. Absorbing and totally almospheric. Soon on all major 8and 16-bit formats. the SPECTRUM remix WITH A LA MU SE All Thalamus products can be obtained by writing 10: THALAMUS, 1 Saturn House, Calleva Park, Aldermaslon, Berkshire RG7 40W. Don't forget there's now a hyper-trendy Thalamus t-shirt available for .50: printed black on white (XXL) i features the Thalamus logo emblazoned across the front. Cheques and postal orders only please. "


"SWORD HSD the Sword of Sedaan Creaking, groaning, shricking, teeth clenching arcade realism. Déon dark forests, Misty eerie graveyards. Treacherous, Ruand=thilled streets. Dare to enter the evil castle, CHROMoore, Wield our ward through its winding corridors and rank notting dungeons, Your story will be the statest ever told Your reward will be the greatest ever known! FEATURES: Ralewib mene dated characters bar stard 23rds the size or be screer. Figuras Hero or Heroine browgb Incredibly cballenging levels! Study your past performance in Replav Noder terima meron required) Available for Amiga. Coming soon for IBM and compatibles. Apple II GS. Packed to SA wtb or EM JEGABYTES of detailed graphics and digitized WS DISCOVERY AMIGA screens shown OFTWARE Sword of Sodan is a trademark of Discovery Software International Inc. Amiga is a trademark of Commodore Amiga, Inc. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. GAINSTAR — UNIT 1 REAR OF WELLINGTON ROAD, SANDHURST, SURREX GU17 BAW. TEL 0252 877437 or 879718 TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME Hotel "


"78520 revie  DISCOVERY SOFTWARE >> AMIGA .99 Blinking sorcerors! They learn a couple of nasty spells and they just take over the place, transmogrifying people left, right and centre and generally subjugating the populace. Zora is one such magician, whose latest victim happens to be your poor old dad! So, it's time A Sodan features huge characters. to get the ceremonial sword off the mantlepiece and sally forth to Zora's city, hack your way through his nasty lackies, finally to enter his fortress, Castle Craggamoor and do battle with the man himself, thus avenging the death of your father. PISIJENNETTESHENGI SWORD OFS A The biggest bad dude of all-fills the screen. Sword of Sodan is a hack Barbarian-style flying neck and slay arcade game in the chops, unfortunately — and grandest of styles. You start the being a lithe young barbarian, game by selecting either a you can evade blows by male or a female warrior as leaping and ducking. Each your on-screen persona enemy you come across has a (they have identical fighting small energy bar at his feet, abilities), then and each hit you manage to BOOMSHANKA, there you score knocks pixels off the bar, are outside the walls of the city. until it disappears completely Have a quick look at the map and your enemy keels over, to check where you are, then dead. Your warrior is similarly you're off. equipped with an energy bar, Your repertoir of fighting as well as a supply of lives manoeuvres is limited to high, which can be replenished by middle and low swings no picking up items left behind by The little old man with his deadly web. recently deceased enemies Other collectables include Magic Zappers (essentially smart bombs), magic shield and increased hit strength. You can hold up to four extras at once and activate them individually using the function keys. The extras have to be used judiciously, as certain nasties, particularly the magic-users on the later levels, cannot be beaten without help. Zora's hench-beings come in numerous forms, starting off as lance-wielding soldiers, then ormoroured axe men, followed by club-bearing giants. As you approach the castle, you're faced with scorpion-lizards, vomit-spitting ghouls and, in the castle, wizards who fire lightning bolts at you. Some of the scenery is just as dangerous. Level two is played on a wooden bridge which has mental spikes popping through it at regular intervals. Even "


"larger spikes make an one that I've seen being the appearance on level six, decapitation of the giant at the accompanied by lava balls end of level three. There are which scoot along the ground, also bloody spurts stone columns which drop accompanying succesful sword down from the ceiling and blows, and sampled moans moving stepping stones which from dying solidiers. cross pits of flame. Indeed, the Amiga's sound Getting caught out by one of and graphics capabilities are the spikes is pretty impressive used very well throughout the visually — the screen shows the former being put to work on barbarian being impaled excellent music, sampled through the chest! There are sounds and vocal hints, and the other gory touches throughout latter producing huge, the game, the most spectacular colourful sprites and lovely, V Oucho spike gets Glancey from below. SCORE 120L NINT ODAN A The eerie castle your final destination parallax — scrolling eight). I doubt whether it's backgrounds. The animation is worthy of the title, \"best Amiga slightly ropey, but I'm a tolerant beat'em up\" — IK + is a more sort of bloke, and it soon pure example of became unnoticeable. expertly-digitised violence There are one or two but it's variety kept me at the gameplay bugbears that I joystick, and I'll stick with it until would gripe about, though the end is in sight. Real The main one is the length of case-hardened warriors may some of the early levels, which, find they finish it before they've once mastered, take no time at had their  worth, but all to complete. The short anyone in the market for a playing time is offset by lengthy playable, visually and sonically pauses between stages, during impressive game would do which the next part of the well to check this out. game loads from disk, the map PAUL GLANCEY is displayed, and you're given a piece of poetry describing the way ahead. All fine the first Aline the first me AMIGA time around, but when you've A GRAPHICS: 86% played a few games and are keen to get on, it becomes a bit A SOUND: 89% of a pain. A PLAYABILITY: 83% My other complaint is A VALUE: 79% specifically to do with the traps which appear on level six. A OVERALL: 85% These take the form of pits which appear out of nowhere, swallowing your warrior before you get a chance to There are vague plans take any kind of evasive action. for the ST and C64 Apart from these two things, version of Sodan, but I was well pleased with Sword o don't expect them for at don't of Sodan. It's not a least six months. complicated game, nor is it terribly difficult to play things don't get difficult until level Y Serpents of the trees. nowhere, UPDATE C+VO HITI "


"WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE 1 BRIDGE STREET GALASHIELS TD1 1SW WRLDWIDESOFTWARE WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE 49 STONEY THEET NOTTINGHAM AGILL TE 125 EM 16 PCHOME | MT       1. H  16La D L Dragan  15 116  THE  11  Hea 17. d 10 11  11.11  11   | Face , Oy H  HE , TU  H Tige Je 11 Who du App 15 TECO UU luga  Hutch  Til  2015  - HM ,   Chl= Fly 11 D  L M  Dana 117  17 YETKA Hem 111 Diego TH U VR IS Cornu 14 OW 121 The Coo  14 FOTO Donec  UH Fath  Hr Trah Car 115 1991   TE   duas 1111 May 13 Thunder IMA Digon Tagad HS gon  Todd Wall 27 EL UN Dungeon Water 12= FAST DELIVERY ON ALL STOCK ITEMS BY 1ST CLASS MAIL  Ley ES HS SPECIAL OVERSEAS SERVICE BY AIRMAIL WORLDWIDE Valian FC CREDIT CARD ORDERS ACCEPTED BY PHONE OR MAIL  NORTH, SCOTLAND OUTH, IEL  TOET  |  MIRELD, OPE WALES,  14 96 5004 | HOUR | 15  0602 252113 JOTITIONS CM TH    T C o 1  Camaro Hagen   LEVEL 11  IFTTETTEL 11.   GH5000 T  om 100 , and HO Aum TH LOW  cal  250 LF E 100 W HH Hai Em 1 110 C LED 1     U Angon That t  175  « Land 2011 15 PLOTHERS Complet The Tree 11 100 L114 11.1   Training   1 The 1001  100 UU Via 1121  ht  UG   Motor Mau 11  di CDC GU    11 N f  Hal Satury 11H Organ 11  OM DU 11 1110 LT  |  176 --11   | WD 11 110 AT DE Thug 11. Chart Com 1120      14 st  Please make cheques and postal orders to WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE. All prices include postage and packing in UK. Overseas orders please add .50 per cass/disk for AIR MAIL delivery. Credit card orders accepted by phone or mail. Advertised prices are for mail and telephone orders. NA PEN TE ROCK STAR || ROCK STAR Wackg Jacks , Could you manage this Rock Star? Could you manage this Rock Star ? FLI,LEAL,   +,  ,, "


"Dragon Ninja War in Middle Earth SOFTSELLERS MMM 12 SANDPIPER CLOSE LONGRIDGE PARK COLCHESTER ESSEX C04 3GE 3ba Osborne St WE WILL MATCH ANY PRICE ADVERTISED BY bBond SITE Cachester, ANOTHER MAIL ORDER COMPANY PROVIDING DSC ESSEX THE ADVERTISEMENT IS A CURRENT ISSUE AND Suffolk NOT A SPECIAL OFFER. JUST STATE THE MAGAZINE + COMPANY CONCERNED. 1010 , 11   m    24 hour Mall Order Purchase ine 0206)69666 0206)662193 TITLE SPECTRUM CBM 64 AMSTRAD ST AMIGA HARDWARE SEGA  ,  Syndro 4 12  ATARI 520 SUPER PACK den Fight  LEAH Abangan 11:30 131 na 70 BUSINESS  Action 130   1010 una 10.50 T ag 100 SPREADSHEET DIARY bloccm 10.50 HOPHTHE Thanh Ninh TH 10.50 ola ATARI 10-OSTEN ho 100 1050 PROFESSIONAL PACK WITH Das , CH MICROSOFT WRITE Hoa la , 11 ,1 ,11 WORDPROCESSOR HH  , , Duran SUPERHASE PERSONAL 119 1 1197 bingan mund TO 1 la 500000  Can ,g PROFESSIONAL du Der 02 , EET __449095 F1 et k om De PROFESSIONAL PACK WITH Tommi Dom , Faili  11 11    CT Bohem F PROFESSIONAL PACK WITH Fire hipag 1956 SETLOL Height Company 1050 The Late MONITOR 749,95 Humodul LLEH  Four ITHE Home | LINE la | E T ITLE ATARI 1040 SUPER PACK HE Dom TH  , Coupon LTH Genel ,  MONITOA 299,95 WE Com o ja 10 | , CUMANA 1 MEG DRIVE , M OTOR 7 10 10 103295 HOLY 99 10:50 Halli Hano) 17 11 111 HTTHE Dulc 10  10   1050 FAODULATOR, TUTORIAL DO 1 1050 10:50 ETTEEC159 Joom 1991199 HEMEITH  LE I GHI |  ITH | |    LO EXPANSION FITTED | IT La ! MODULATOR AND , 10.50  That ITH 1 ,, CULTITCH  , | ,11 1 x 1 1014S COLOUA  5 1550 5 10.50 | TIL ,  720 999 19 1199 17 HD ECORE cm 1050 J10 1350 Shoc AMIGA 9995 |  , Shanghai Pia ,  on 1939 AMIGA A501 MEMORY Sh 110 | |  1101010 EPSO + LCC tungti 10.50 1050 1010 HE |   A 1090 COMMODORE PC 1 pou HE TO 50 10 5051 291919 Spool 10 Po 13 TEM | , 1050 . 1050 13 PAINTER 199.95 suport LLOC 114 1050 11 card, Taldyboy  1950 1752 12H 15  Thurlo 1050 hardware Tet in the UK. Supuru hangi ,   det TOTIS  CHE Hurg 10 10 30 |  Wodalom DISCS. 9.35 101  |  dodh  7.50 wondo TY   S  DPITCH,  Tool , 11  al MOUSE MATS HIS -15  son ,  EETH TESTER Top  , ,   THH DTCT 10 1. | , PTTED INSTE T nik il Image CHEETAH STARFIGHTER Securitas T ida ,, 74 Tale 150 11111 US s. 10 10 30 |  1  Hoy load  10.50 FRO 5000 EXTRA L   EN T HT    Luh. 550 1056 6 sa tao HAEL, 10 de la 5 100 ,  1050  1 ) SEGA MASTER W 50 10.50 Take WEL a SYSTEM 11:35 Wala balcon jo laba 1050 1994 SE   Light SEGA SUPER 0 0 ned , IH  1295 :7 ,  ,     , ST NESSES 5 ||    1975 243 1905 7795 25 =  TO    90 50 a 50 10.50 12 Name: TITLE Comp Price Address; Tel No: A501 DRAGONS LAIR \"The Total Cost  2159.95 CVE APR Cheques & Postal Orders payable to SOFTSELLERS. Post & Packaging Free in UK. Overseas ,50 per llem. Mai Order Only Shop prices will vary but personal callers can claim approx 10% discount of RRP on production of this advert Subject to availability and price change without notice. Not all titles released at time of going to press. Min-crowd W "


"LELIEL ABBER SCORE BABBA SHIELDS the deadly Disgusmatrons' defence devices. There are four basic hazards to get through, before reaching the second wave of defences, which are even tougher. First up is a chase through a densely-packed asteroid field. The action is viewed in vector graphic 3D, and the objective is to whizz through the MASTERTRONIC boulder-strewn spaceways ST/AMIGA .99 and blast five Disgusmatron What is it with beautiful spaceships. These blue craft Princesses? They're always appear one at a time and are getting themselves kidnapped simply blown away with one aren't they? And then some well-aimod blast of laser fire. poor old hero has to risk his After that comes a leisurely neck going to her rescue. Well, scoot across a planet surface. guess that's happened in The idea is to guide the ship Mastertronic's latest 16-bit through a series of gates, budget title. A Princess has which sounds easy enough, but been abducted and a hero is unfortunately the ship's speed required to save her bacon. can't be regulated and And that hero is you, and the sometimes it's impossible to fly Princess in question is left or right for enough to get Chardonnay. through the next gate. Like the A kerr-rash, bank opps. last level, hitting anything results in the loss of one of the ship's ten shields. the third level is a hyperspace jump, where the hero flies the ship through a long funnel made up of squares. Fly through the squares and everything is Ok Fly outside and it's curtains! Finally, the ship zooms down a tunnel, avoiding oncoming obstacles and blasting Disgusmatron ships. When five have been totalled, the game returns to the first level, only it's harder. In principle, Chasesounds like it might be quite a neat little budget game, but unfortunately it's lacking in many areas. The four levels are very simplistic, and annoying quirks like the lack of a speed control on level two and Disgusmatron ships that seem to be flying outside the tunnel on the last level are very annoying. The gameplay is limited, and once you've been round the levels it all gets boring. The vector graphics are smooth and fast, and the 3D update convincing, especially in the tunnel sequence, but in the end they're wasted on what's an ultimately shallow and tedious game. JULIAN RIGNALL SCORE GHIELDS The game is set a few millenia in the future, so instead LEUEL BURE of going out to rescue her on a trusty steed, the hero thunders off in a fab 'n' groovy rocket ship. The evil swines who're currently holding the Princess captive are the Disgusmatrons, and they have all sorts of horrible and nasty things to do to her... So you'd better get your skates on, buddy! The mission of mercy isn't a straightforward nip in, nip out affair, and involves negotiating If this is 16 bit budget — shove it. A Half the price of elite — 7% as good. L696 BTB SCORE BEB88 SHIELDS 2001 GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY OVERALL 67% 54% 42% 43% 43% I AMIGA GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY OVERALL 67% 56% 42% 43% 43% UPDATE No other versions are planned. "


"Remember... STAR WARS. IMPRE STAR WARS STAR WARS RETURNEJEDI They are all highly successful Arcade conversions. Now the Creator of these Coin-Ops has asked Domark to convert its current range of Coin-Op hits onto your computer. A new label has been created for this exciting range. It's called TENGEN See a demo of the first Tengen title at your local store now!! Turn the page for a glimpse into the future.. TENGEN *Tengen is a subsidiary of Atari Games Corporation "


"VIA334 Vindicators is a faithful conversion of the popular Coin-Op Arcade hit The year is 2525. An armada of fourteen alien space stations approach Earth. Its posture, hostile. Long-range scanners indicate that a direct attack would be useless against the vessels heavy exterior armor. The only way to destroy the Invading force is to infiltrate the enemy with your SR-88 Strategic Battle Tanks, better known as Vindicators. For one or two gamers, WABUTADIRSA TENGEN The New Name in Coin-Op Conversions, "


"FEAFORS a Vindicators provides incredible action and graphics. It challenges you to negotiate each station's heavily guarded corridors, and locate and destroy its control room. Besides avoiding and destroying enemy tanks and bunkers, you must constantly replenish your tank's fuel supply with fuel canisters. Throughout the many levels of each station. Special features enable your tank to gain enhanced speed, shot range, shot power, force field or even \"Smart shots After all the enemy stations have been destroyed, you must still face the evil Emperor of the alien empire. Win and the world cheers with you. Lose and kiss it goodbye. Disk Distributed by DOMARK Cass 19.99 .99 19.99 Spectrum Commodore Amstrad Amiza AtariST Ferry House, Lacy Road, London SWTSITR 01-780-2224 .99 .99 $14.99 $19.99 .99 Programmed by Consult Computer Systems, 1988 TENGEN "


"NOW AVAILABLE ON CASSETTE O DISK FOR THE SPECTRUM & COMMODORE 64 AMIGA .95 MELBOURNE HOUSE Settins New Standards ATARI ST .95 QoKIPUTER SOFTWARE 2-4 Veren Yard, 119 Portobello Road. London WILDX Telephone 01-727 8070 Telela 01-727 8465 "


"A Get ready! rights to Space Harrierand carved out a reputation as the leading coin-op converter of the time. Three years on and the 16-bit versions arrive. Will they still thrill the way their Dredecessors did or will they appear too simplistic for ST and Amiga gamers? The first thing you notice about the Amiga version is that it fills the whole screen. No and you (the Space Harner) liny postage stamp-sized enter into \"mortal combat\" window through which you with these \"aliens of another view the play. The 3D effect is planet.\" so much more effective as a Basically — just jump into the result of filling the screen air as the machine yells \"get you really feel like you are ready\" and start blasting. flying. Just speed on the trigger and Space Hammeris a very nifty manoeuvreing of your simple 3D shoot'em up. Get as character are what is required far as you can destroy as much to dodge the aliens. as possible on the way, and At the end of each level is a see if you can stay in the air as nasty the first one being a the game accelerales. giant dragon recquining segment by segment destruction of its ugly, writhing torso. Later you come up against giant robots and still more dragons. There are no real rules with Space Harrierwhich is one reason I am so keen on it. It is an entirely unpretentious computer game full of weird and wacky nasties Altogether you have ten levels to deal with in this Amiga version the same as the ST. They get tougher as you go speeding upso that it is going to take you quite a while to clock it, Space Harrier fans will be well pleased with the 16-bit Versions. Eugene Lacey HARRIER Elite .99 Space Harrier was one of the first Sega sit down and ride as you blast games. It shook up the arcades as much as the players who played it, as the hydraulically driven coin-op didn't come cheap. An upright stand and play version of Space Harrier soon followed and the game became one of the monster arcade hits of '86. Sega quickly realised that they were onto something with hydraulics and spectacular 3D graphics — following up Space Harrier with classics like Afterburner, Out Run, and Thunderblade. Elite grabbed the home A Blast and stay alive. 83% AMIGA I GRAPHICS 81% SOUND 70% VALUE 80% it either works or fails on the I quality of its 3D routine and its PLAYABILIT speed. For these reasons people scoffed when Elite OVERALL 82% attempted to code it on 8-bit machines. Those people lived to eat their words then and any honest opinion of this version C64, Spectrum, and has to be that it is an excellent Amstrad versions of conversion. Space Harrier are The speed and the slight available on Elite feeling of air sickness are all compilations. They will there as your hero jet-packs his also be out on the way around the screen with his budget Encore label at heavy laser resting in his arms. .99—though The simplicity of Space probably not until next Harrier is emphasised year. ST and Amiga when you read the story line. versions are now in the All you are told is that the shops and a PC version Drogon land is occupied by will be launched later in \"barbaric and evil creatures the year. "


"Megasave PREMIER MAIL ORDER (FORMERLY TRYBRIDGE SOFTWARE) AT DE 0  0 | |  H 11 boom 245_  , -, 11 Airi,  in Chen  ||,  ST | CTC Ther  1 noc, Tiga po TS 1 LOS on see uch Con 2011 C C THE a hann     ,  ! |||| CH De    mm ac Dengan DO D Da Chori TH ,,  , Temu Lokalica Fit in the h     ,      aution THE to Wa nga ,DI |||  TO HOOL COM Hugh  Cor F1111||   ,     un  , RO na  11145 12 13 du De    011 Duke |  Foot Tag |||  | | GU 200 10 10  1.15 Bild 10 10 , go  DE  H=«   Ramona | mail is at % 11 10 133 US EELS 3 LESE ,  2 , gros  in Lage  JBOLESTER  |  Wega A 102\" a lot Chi Hali TERS wp38000 1  ,   15  | ETTE E || Art af -, 11 , Our Pod 1H 11H 11 1 TE painm 2 TI : TOT 10  MAIL SOFT SIMPLY THE CHEAPEST MAIL ORDER COMPANY VAL 11 10 lang 11 TY , P age  | | on 19 101 ) Wed The di Thea F C   111336 19.00 24 TE ge 19H 15 11 Long 110 10 TE     ,  , 11UE 13 1730 11011 11 a mbine 11   S 173  7100 C och ET sher ho Oy Supermo gen 10 huuuu-  ===  Tag 1150 ST kuma  | , 1 1 11, 1 BICI BB UNH 1. C # Technete T Then Meno HEN TI 2002750 151 It 1 ang  1 M 10 11 |  The F ina ,1111 w 1500 Tinn image H1 11 TA 14 10 735  ,  gam The T  « 1187 OF |  11 hamil 11211 11 metom agi Tule Tape To Woo Tige og Tutar Peru 1, 105 Th Tiga 12101750 TAP 15  TIL PA TA 115 Thes 14  Tagalog Tamil Tout Blandet Dign gon Tom Dragons Wacom homme le in 25  12 UT V 11 IME IS TA Padom   5 . 125 istan Dung   IT101 35 | |  Face || | 10 132132 17 SP1 75 TV 17:50 1150  , Camps FHS Find 1715 11  Mig TES Plugiu card Ching HEPACH,1Hn Cle I mumpeditMEITH Jial HD B BucketInSSLATE Burnt Mills.Basildon, Esse SS13 1B.. TEL: 0268-590766 These offers are available MAIL ORDER ONLY. Please state make and model of computer when ordering: T&P in UK on orders .00 L .00 Eur.00 ProE5 add 2.00 pfilm of tml Hlyn Tengo 2 Wall 110 1056 WE   ELL     , , ,   |    ,| , .  # #  , ,  ,   ,, "


"in the USA American Ice Hockey Action. Play centre or goalie and skate your team to victory Strategy. Coach the team and act as general manager Choice. One and two player options. Play against the computer or another opponent, or play two against the computer. Excitement. Exciting graphics and animation. Full player movement for up to 12 players on the screen Realism. Compete in a hockey league featuring players of varying abilities and ages. American Club Sports 6 complete games Realistic sound effects and colour graphics. A variety of menu settings, including skill levels from beginner to expert. Highest score tables that keep track of the top players in each game One and two player options. American Indoor Soccer Be the player. Headers, bicycle kicks, passes, dribbling, injuries = all the fast-paced action of indoor soccer. Be the coach. Pick the team, make the substitutions and decide tactics. Be the general manager. Buy and sell players. Can you build a team to top the indoor soccer league * Realistic graphics and animation. Up to 12 players at a time on the pitch. Play alone or with a friend. Play against the computer or another opponent, or play two against the computer. For further information on Mindscape Products and your local dealer contact Mindscape International Limited PO Box 1019, Lewes, East Sussex BN8 4DW 4 | F| MINDSCAPE UNTOUCHABLE FOR QUALITY SOFTWARE "


"OOO SUPPLIER: DISCOVERY PRICE: AMIGA, ST AND IBM — ALL .99 Those of you who own a 16-bit machine and have spent the last year decrying the lack of a good shoot'em up are about to be silenced for good as Gainstar's import of this ace Discovery blaster is all set to melt your screens in a veritable explosion of scrolling mayhem. So what's so special about this one? Especially as it makes absolutely no claims about \"stretching the machine's capabilities' or providing \"blasting action with a subtle twist. The answer lies in the playability, which has been pitched to the point of perfection and has had everyone who's played the game in the office hooked from the first attempt. After you've chosen to be either commander Maverick or Loveh (this makes no difference to the gameplay, but in case you're interested A Fire fiat in all directions. Loveit's a member of the fairer ground-based weapons sex) your ship is launched onto installations. a semi-tropical landscape. Although there are only At this point two things three levels to be negotiated happen: a pulsating (the second is watery and the soundtrack bursts into life and third appears to take place you're immediately set upon by above the internal organs of the first of many flying and some massive monster), they're shooting aliens, backed up by all quite long and take some 7 Fully fooled up for the end screen nasty. time to complete... but not if you stick with the standard weapons system. Weapon upgrades appear at regular intervals in the form of numbered icons (wait for it one to five), and when the complete set has been gathered up your ship will be :HYBRIS "


"TOOOTITI. WWE 12. 00   4 Split your ship to spread the flak detail that I'm almost sorry you. mentioned it. Hybris is quite Because the action is so hot, simply the answer to the 16-bit you'd be forgiven if the shoot'em up fans' prayers. presentation was a litle naff but it's far from it. There's an CIARAN BRENNAN impressive high score table, o molling demo (including self portraits by the programmers?l?) and an C+VG options screen which allows almost all of the games parameters to be altered. This last item can be abused however and can make the game far too easy if taken to extremes. The only really naff thing AMIGA that I could find was the GRAPHICS 78% occasional appearance of 82% flally unsuitable spritas Isuch SOUND as the banana's that can be I VALUE 78% collected for a bonus of 5,000 PLAYABILITY 9.4% points), but that's such a minor iOVERALL 90% y Nice congratulatory screen. UPDATE CONGRATULATIONS BRAVE COMMANDERY IBM and ST owners YOU HAVE COMPIETED FIRST STAGE don't have too long to wait to start their own AND HILL NOW BE TRANSPORTED TO drive through the Hybris scrolling THE SECOND. landscape, as both are just reaching their final HATCH OUT FOR SUBS stages of development and should be available soon after you read this. As far as PC graphics go, It's still Uncertain as to whether EGA or VGA graphics cards will be supported. A Power up No. 2 777 comes into view. os close as it's possible to get to indestructible. Good and all as the extra weapons are, they can be improved further by a neat little trick: simply spin the joyslick rapidly and the weapon \"axpands' to reveal even more destructive powers. Three expansions are allowed per weapon, and if you've forgotten how many times you've already used this trick There are three 'E' icons at the COMMANDER K. LOVETT "


"B-LAX PSYGNOSIS FREEPOST LIVERPOOL L3 3AB UNITED KINGDOM Tel: 051-207 0825 BALLISTIX Its a whole new ball game! Sick of silly old soccer ? Tired of pathetic pinball? Then you need a dose of Ballistix the fastest, wackiest, toughest ball game yet to appear on a computer Ballistix just explodes with excitement, puzzles and an amazing 130 different screens of frenetic action. The aim of the game is simple: score more goals than your opponent to win the match. Doing it is a different matter as splitters fill the screen with dozens of balls, tunnels hide them from view, bumpers bounce balls all over the show, fiendish red arrows speed them up to almost impossible velocity, magnets pull them away from your control, and much, much more. Ballistix is incredibly flexible, too. You can play against the computer or another player. set the speed if you can't stand the pace, define where the balls are fired and their velocity, rack up bonuses that will get you extra goals and then, at the end of an exhausting game, set your name in pride of place on the high-score table. And it's all played to the accompaniment of a throbbing sound-track anda crowd that applauds your every goal. Ballistix is definitely not a game for wimps. It's tough, fast, challenging and incredibly competitive in fact, it's just the kind of game you like. Two joysticks required for two-player game ATARI ST/AMIGA .95 pul them away from exible, too. You can POVLASE Screenshots taken from the Amiga version. "


"Stop me if you've heard this. Aman stumbles into a police station. \"I'd like to report a murder,\" he says. \"Who's the victim?\" the desk sergeant asks. \"I am gasps the man. It sounds like a joke but for Dennis Quaid it's deadly serious. The university lecturer has just discovered he's DOA Dead On Arrival (15). A slow acting poison gives him just twenty four hours to find out who has killed him and why Quaid isn't having a good time. One of his highly talented but highly strung students takes a suicidal dive right by his window. His wife gets her head split open by an unseen intruder. And when Quaid decides the murderer is another student, daffy Meg Ryan (Inner Space), he superglues her hand to his wrist so she can't escape. Well, maybe it's not all bad! Together they escape from the police, who have made Quaid number one suspect for his wife's murder, and set out. to find the real killer. While the plot, based on a 1943 thriller, doesn't stand up to much investigation, the cast is good and the direction by the people who brought us Max Headroom, is stylishly sombre. DOA is alive and kicking. I'd rather be in the dead of night than rising to a Tequila Sunrise. This promisingly exotic cocktail of a thriller ends up a simple cock up! It's another odd couple cop movie, in which Kurt Russell is a police officer and Mel Gibson plays his former friend, a coke dealer trying to go straight. The two are brought back into uncomfortably close contact when Russell is ordered to trap a major drug trafficker colleague of Gibson's. The third ingredient in the brew is Michelle Pfeiffer as the restaurant owner whose affections sway between them. Should she date dope dealing Melor is clean cut Kurt just courting her because she's a source of information. If the plot sounds familiar it's because a similar set-up appeared in Extreme Prejudice, an absurdly violent thriller last year. Tequila Sunrise is far more intelligent, but it spends so much time staring into the bottom of its glass you may end up wishing for some good old pyrotechnics to alleviate the boredom. For an even unlikelier there are two pairs of writers credited for the script. While the scenes between Schwarzenegger, showing he has a talent to do more than flex his muscles and snarl, and DeVito as deliciously sleazy as ever, are often funny, there's a ridiculous thriller plot which detracts from the characters and drags along at a snails pace. Perhaps they should have made two movies from Twins! Good films, bad films twin sides of Working Girl (15) is the coin... and only Ward R Street every bit as fanciful, though it can tell them apart. concerns two women. Melanie Griffith (Something Wild) is the ambitious secretary while Sigourney Weaver takes time off from those Gorillas in the Mist to be her boss. What follows is pure Cinderalla! On a skiing holiday. Weaver breaks her leg so Melanie takes the opportunity to put a few of her own executive schemes into operation. Her innocent accomplice in the million dollar deal is Prince Charming himself, Harrison Ford, who finds himself falling for Melanie's plan... and then for Melanie. But inevitably things go wrong when Sigourney A The man on the right has 24 hours to live. He is D.OA returns to uncover her teaming try Twins (PG). featuring those identical actors Arnold Schwarzenegger and Danny DeVito. (Arnold's slightly taller if you have problems telling them apart). Naturally nature couldn't nurture such an inspired pairing—the unlikely brothers are products of a genetic experiment to create a super-being. But instead of one baby it produced two — and guess who drew the T Weird twins — DeVito and Schwarzenegger Working Gid-girly career antics. dregs? secretary's ambitions — While Arnie, the Apollo, meanwhile Melanie discovers grew up in a tropical paradise, that handsone Harrison is her thousands of miles from boss's beau! The bitchy civilization, dwarfish DeVito boardroom battle that ensues sweltered in the sweat box means that one working girl of life, becoming a small time loses her job. While it doesn't hustler with big time debts and always work, Working Girl is even bigger guys after his still a neat little comedy. hide. Luckily Arnold is bigger Nobody could accuse The than anybody and he choses Adventures of Baron this moment to tum up on his Munchausen (PG) of being twin's doorstep either neat or little. This vast Unfortunately for Twins and rambling tale cost tens of millions of dollars but unluckily there's little evidence that any of it was spent on the story. Munchausen is a legendary German liar and Terry Gilliam, of Monty Python animation, Time Bandits and Brazil fame, is the director who dared bring "


"these tall tales to the screen. In some ways he's the ideal person. Munchausen's mad adventures are always on the grandest scale, and Gilliams wild visual imagination is well suited to his surreal deeds. But despite the spectacle it doesn't hang together. War is raging and the Baron insists it's because he and his servants relieved the sultan of all his gold. So he sets out to young lady called Christine Keeler a household name. Christine, a bright young thing from an ordinary background, was picked up by Stephen Ward, an osteopath. Ward invited her to live in his flat then introduced her to the rich and famous. What ensued is still fairly scandalous today — though we're more likely to be shocked at the way the establishment made Ward a scapegoai lar the whole affair: The film features superb acting by John Hurt as Ward, Jan McKellen as Profumo and A Baron Munchausen yawn city. find his odd friends and raise the siege, searching the moon and inside a whale before they're all re-united. There's no end of talent in the film, from Eric Idle as Berthold, who runs so fast he has to wear iron balls round his ankles, to Robin Williams as the king of the moon, whose body and head just don't get on. See it if you like spectacle but I'd be lying if I said you won't risk occasional boredom. A Hoffman and Cruise in Oscar A Roor-who swilched off my The secret of good movie hopeful— Rainman. computer making is not throwing money at the screen but telling an the sentimental or bleakly looking uncannily like the engrossing story with good depressing by the two superb original, Joanne actors. Rainman is just that performances: Cruise all Whalley-Kimer as Christine. A Two brothers, long separated, cocky, hard hearted charm powerful probe at British cross America together, and and Hoffman a shuffling. hypocrisy. thanks to Dustin Hoffman and croaking innocent. Director Of course the French have Tom Cruise it's a wonderful Barry Levinson follows Good always done these things with trip: often funny, sometimes Morning Vietnam with a movie far more style, even back sad but never boring. you shouldn't wait for a rainy before the revolution set Cruise is an ambitious day to see. heads rolling. Considering the young business man with big There's dirty doings in both Vicomte de Valmont's money worries while Hoffman Scandal and Dangerous dangerous liaisons, maybe is mentally disabled and Liaisons, so decide whether they should have chopped off unable to relate to the real you prefer sexual indiscretions something other than his world except through a series of the 18th century or 1960's. head. of closely regulated routines Either way it's pretty racy stutt. Based on the hit stage play. and rituals. Scandal tells the tale of the Les Liaisons Dangereuses, When Cruise learns of his Profumo affair which, in 1963, this is a superbly entertaining brother on the death of their led to one man's suicide, tale of bed-hopping by the father, he realises that the helped bring down the sensualist Valmont, the only way he can get his hands government, and made a picture of corruption as he on the old man's money is to take Hoffman from his mental hospital home and 'adopt him. This cynical kidnapping eventually turns into understanding as the two travel across America, Rainman is raised above tries to violate a virtuous young woman to win a bet with his former mistress. The cad! John Malkovitch (Empire of the Sun) plays the count with an evil smile always on his lips, and Glenn Close gets involved in an even more deadly affair than Fatal Attraction. Even if you don't normally like costume dramas consider a dangerous liaison of your own This month's horror movies are a fairly shoddy bunch, of which Fright Night Part 2 (18) is probably the least worst. Poor young Charley Brewster is seeing vampires and werewolves again, despite psychiatric help. This says very little for American shrinks — they failed to help the young protagonist of Phantasm 2 either a couple of months back TV horror show host Roddy McDowall is back too, as Peter Vincent, the timidest hero ever to stake a vampire. There are some good effects but the whole is less than the parts At least it's more coherent than The Unholy (18), a dreadful piece of pseudo religious rubbish in which young priest Ben Cross suffers at the hands of the devil's minions. These temptations of the Cross are supposed to be his secret desires, in which case he should never have become a priest in the first place. The Moderns (15) is by far A Lashings of tomato souce in The Unholy the most interesting movie of the month, though this tale of arty goings on in the world of painters, poets and writers in the Paris of the 1920's, won't be for everyone. Its evocation of that crazy decade and the eccentrics who made it so important is peppered with brilliant performances. A truly magical movie from Alan Rudolph (Trouble in Mind). "


"MICROPROSE SOCCER Now available on Atari ST, Amiga, Spectrum and _ Amstrad WHAT'S THE SCORE? It's fun, fast, exciting and addictive. MicroProse What's the score with MicroProse Soccer? It's a Soccer keeps you on your toes, however often you winner. play. Pick up the best football kit. Now available for Challenge the computer or a friend, competing Commodore 64/128 Disk .95, Cassette .95, in the World Cup, International Challenge or the IBM PC + Compatibles .95. indoor league. Atari ST .95. Amiga .95. Spectrum Cassette An overhead perspective of the pitch makes it .95, Disk .95. Amstrad Cassette .95, Disk easy to play good graphics and sound effects make .95. GAME OF THE MONTH C&VG every match seem real. Fully animated players can perform a whole variety of movements, induding overhead and banana kicks. There are 29 different teams and a unique action-replay facility. SIMULATION SOFTWARE MICRO PROSE MicroProse, 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Glos, GL88DA. Tel: 0666 54326 "


"Warhammer Doubtful RoboCombat The hottest news in fantasy role playing at the moment is the Warhammer the computer imminent release of the revised game is unlikely to see the light Advanced Dungeons and of day in 1989. Dragons manuals. The first release will be the The hit fantasy role playing new Players Manual, which is board game from Games Work This month Advanced Games expected in the shops in March. Shop was supposed to be This volume will be Master has a wealth of computer converted by Activision but approximately 256 pages long no work has been carried out on role playing and adventure news. and contain all the rule changes the game and it looks like the and improvements that have Keith Campbell discovers the Reading based company may been engineered over the last have lost the licence. risque delights of Leisure Suit Larry Games Work Shop ten years. It will also take into account the wishes and requests II, Wayne finds a good role playing spokesperson Andy Jones told of even thousand players who C+VG \"The Activision chapter book in Slaughter Mountain Run is now more or less closed\" and replied to a special TSR survey. The revised material will be and we bring you all the latest said that GW were in discussion presented in a clear, concise with a number of other news. format, with a complete index. software houses about The price is expected to be Warhammer and their other around the .95 mark. popular games Bloodbowl May will see the release of and Dark Future. the new Dungeon Master's Warhammercomputers guide. For around .95 still waiting. players can expect to receive a Battletech manufacturers the dust ridden wastelands of 191_peec beck-which it is FASA have released two new various planets by the ultra claimed will be written with products, namely Renegade modern equivalent of massive easy reference in mind. It is Legion and Renegade tanks. hoped that by releasing this Interceptor. Although not The two games have been definitive guide, it will clear up Battletech Supplements, these created to be used in VELMIEN all the inconsistencies, and two new releases cover the same conjunction with each other, so Townscape awkward mechanics that were hi-tech form of gaming that you can get a full scale war captured in the original, while fans of robotic combat will going on your living room at the same time adding a whole appreciate. table! Although both games are new realm of fresh and exciting The games take place in a straighforward, totally information futuristic setting, which has inexperienced players should While the aforementioned early Roman overtones. There not attempt them, because the books are officially are two groups of opposing amount of rules involved could \"Enhancements\" to the forces the Imperial Empire prove difficult to master. AD+D system the Monstrous and the Renegade Legion However, if you have already both of whom vie for galactic conquered the Battletech freedom or domination system, you should be qualified depending which side you are enough to give these games a on. Of course combat is the try. They don't come cheap name of the game and this is though, selling for a princely carried out either in the airless .95 EACH! void of space by squadrons of advanced space fighters or on Games Workshop have been edition of C+VG. Fever Battletech Sequel Renegade Legion ripe for very busy lately with no less allows for more complex computerisation than six new releases. motoring manoeuvres, new The most important release weaponand combat rules as will be Battle Titans. This is a well as a complete Vehicle box set of six plastic warlord design system. Fever will cost battle class Titans, solely for you a reasonable .99. use with their Adeptus Bloodblowl fans will be Titanicus game which is pleased to note that a new reviewed in this very issue of supplement for the game will C+VG. This will enable be released soon. Star Players players to recreate the epic is a booklet that gives you all battles that took place in the the information you will need Horus Heresy and generally for using super stars in your cause mass metal mayhem. Bloodbowl teams. This Each box sells for .99. includes full details of special Imperial Guard contains a skills available to players, new set of 36 plastic guardsmen, rules for creating your own F95A each of who come with separate heroes, 36 star player cards, arms and weapons to help you career stats of all the top players vry your game. Again this sells currently available, rules for for .99 and is intended for any extra large players you may use with Titans. wish to use and the current line White Line Fever us an up of eight of the greatest teams advanced rules supplement ever. for GW's Dark Future, which The two final releases are was reviewed in the January Slaves To Darkness and Battle RENEGADE LEGION FIGHTGRINGFING News "


"D-New Manuals News Origin Tell Tangled Tales The excellent Origin series of role playing games are about to be launched on a variety of new formats. Times of Lore received a C+VG hit when it was reviewed last year on the C64 and ST. From March Spectrum, CPC and Amiga owners will be able to attempt to restore peace to the troubled Kingdom of Alboreth. The 12,000 location epic that is Times of Lore is regarded as one of Origin's best games yet A Ultima -three for one deal even out performing the classic Ultima series in terms of Also new from Origin is a interaction and graphics. brand ecw game called Tangled Talking of the Ultima series Tales. Origin describe Tangled —No's I, II and III are being Tales as a departure from the bundled in America for the traditional \"dark and heavy\" price of one. Origin themes of role playing games. It spokesperson Martin Moth said tells of a wizard's apprentice \"the games will be available in the game player) caught up in the UK between March and an outlndish world that April at .95 on C64 and includes haunted houses and 24.95 for 16 bit. medieval fortresses. new versions for computer trickle through TSR announce new IDD manuals the biggest news in role playing for years. Compendium is an official players will be pleased to note replacement to the old Monster that TSRare not chaning the manuals. old AD+D game. The booklets All the monster information you have will still enable you to sheets will be punched to fit the play AD+D, but the new binder, enabling the player to releases will contain all the file the monsters in any order official rule changes and older, they desire. Volume two of the less well explained game Monstrous Compendium mechanics. available in August — will Mellnwhile Pools of Radiance contain a further 14 pages that the RPG based on AD&D has will fit Deatly into the original so far only been launched on binder, while volume three the C61 and PC. ST, Amiga availble in November will be and Spectrum versions are not dedicated exclusively to the expected for another month at Weird beasts of the Forgotten least. Heroes of the Lance — Realms. The prices are .95, the arcade adventure based on .99 and .95 respectively. AD&D is now out on all Finally, ardent AD+D formats apart from the C64. Head to Head Dungeons Image Works are about to pelce. launch the first head to head The game features in role playing game in the shape horizontally split screen which of Crystal Maze. enables ench player to explore Set in a huge castle with the different parts of the castle at now ubiquitous grey stone the same time. As they explore walls marking its labyrinthine they will mcet and can interact passages and corridors. The with several strange characters. quest is to find four crystals Crystal Maze will be which will enable you to cast launched in April for the two spells. One to banish evil Amiga, ST, C64 and PC. No and the other to maintain Speccy version alas, Crystal maze two player role playing. SEZHA A Rebel and loyalist titans square up. Warhammer Fantasy Warhammer Fantasy Roleplay: Soft Cover edition. Roleplay — Soft Cover edition Slaves is the second and final is a compplele gaming system release in the Realm Of Chaos for the Warhammer FRP series and explores the system. This enables a group of Warhammer mythos in depth players to create individual to cover such topics as the characters and run a cimpaign chaos bestiary, various army around a whole sword and lists and terrain generation. sorcery world. this is not at all Not bad for .99. bad value for .99. "


"«HEY GUYS, WE COULD BE IN SERIOUS TROUBLE HERE!\" REAL GRESTBUSTERS ACTIVISION HAVE JUST BROUGHT OUT THE NEW GAME AND THERE'S SOME REAL HEAVY DUTY GHOSTS FLYING AROUND IN THERE JOIN IN WITH ALL YOUR FAVOURITE REAL GHOSTBUSTERS HEROES AND SAVE YOUR CITY FROM A HAUNTING ARRAY OF GHOULS, GHOSTS AND THINGS THAT GO BUMP IN THE NIGHT Alan ST Screens shown ZAP AND TRAP AS MANY CREEPY GHOSTS AND SCARY MONSTERS AS YOU CAN BUST THE MAD MONKS OR THE GARISH GHOULS AND HEAD FOR SOME REAL BAD CRAZINESS! ACTIVISION PICK UP THE KEYS, DUMP THE GHOSTS AND SEEK OUT MORE SPOOKS — OR YOU'LL BE HISTORY! ZAW ORLD ETERN CENTRE F E STHET LORTow NWZ QUOTE PUFLAECE ACT CONTWEE L ILTECHNER TOW LTO, WEWE W TEL 0504791771 #1 0734 310003 * SMOOTH 8 WAY FULL COLOUR SCROLLING * ONE OR TWO PLAYER MODE THOUSANDS OF DIFFERENT CREEPY GHOSTS AND MONSTERS TO ZAP AND COLLECT GHOSTLY SOUND EFFECTS DYNAMIC INTRODUCTION SCREEN * FAST MOVING ANIMATION *IO EXCITING AND CHALLENGING LEVELS DAME DOG CERT DATA EAST USA, INC C1967 ALL 65 VED  , .  L || MARKETED AND DISTRIBUTED BT ACTIVISION TUKI LTD El 984 Co=. ES HOUSE 1903 COLUP T . TELE A CPT HOLD ALLES "


"Zork is Back News MilleniumDOUTO DA ter's ke 3 Yeke: 315 Sex Shocker Is it a strategy game, ani Building spacecrafts, mining adventure, or an arcade game? planets and their moons, and \"This is the question tormenting conducting the necessary TETET MIT VIE Activision who cannot slot their research to do this from are the forthcoming monster epic, basic mechanics of the game, TULPUT Millenium 2.2, into a but it has far more to offer than Les DE ROUE, or bypta sorbe from 1 to, to select the end you convenient classification. a mere prospecting game. at to EMSI The earth has become Played in real time, all sorts Veteran-the 2 of Lars into a granola of Soals. The uininhabitable following of unsuspected things happen collision with an asteroid. during play, providing real Foreseeing this event, man problems which require typical A Zork Zoro — Keith Campbell is wetting himself over his. established a base on the moon, adventurer style brain-bashing The first versions of Zork Zero, the current one highlighted sind now the nice is on for the to solve. prequel to Infocom's Classic with a flashing border. Tails last representatives of the Millenium will be available Zorks I, II, and III, are leading nowhere indicate exits human race, to exploit the for ST, PC, and Amiga, around beginning to appear in the not yet used, giving an resources of the solar system to the end of March. And the sex? USA. First off the production immediate picture of the 'holes\" return carth to a state capable There isn't any. line was the Macintosh version, in the player's exploration. of supporting life once more. to be followed by Apple, IBM, Most useful of all, the imap is Millenium 2.2's author — Jai Reidemann, und Amiga. Bad news for Atari IDUSE Sensitive. That mean ST owners is that there are no you can move about by clicking plans for an ST version, and on it = ind can even click on indeed, it would appear that the an empty space near an exit tail, ST has been dropped as a target to enter a new location. At this machine for all future Infocom point, the main screen returns titles. automatically, with the new An curly glimpse reveals ZZ location description displayed. has an extremely clever The player starts off as a lowly mapping system, displayed on a servant waiting at table for a separate page with the banquet hosted by the Great command MAP. All locations Lord Dimwit Flathead. In in a \"group\" (and I haven't quite sweeps the wizard Megaboz, worked out what constitutes a and the end of the Great group Yet) are displayed, with Underground Empire is at hand. IN Captain Frontier It's a Mythtery Well, everyone gets it wrong member, or become one, before occasionally! Our February the end of July. issue feature on Myth, the We also stated that graphics Magnetic Scrolls will only be provided on 16-bit mini-adventure going free to Versions of Myth. In fact, members of Official Secrets. Secrets have since decided that contained a couple of some 8-bit versions will also inaccuracies. have graphics. Here is Contrary to what we stated, complete breakdown of Myth will NOT be available (at availability: any price) to the general public, Myth WITH graphics: Amiga; nor even to members of Special ST; Macintosh; IBM PC with Reserve, the discount EGA (5.25 & 3.5 disk): C-64 mail-order software club disk: Amstrad PCW. associated with Official Secrets. Myth TEXT ONLY: IBM PC To get a copy of myth, you will without EGA; Spectrum +3; have to be an Official Secrets Spectrum 128 tape. A Captain Frontier rests his weary bones. Meet Captain Frontier, retired tnted the Assyndrian top secret secret service officer and citizen laboratory by miniaturising a of the planet Assyndra who is secret army of Warriors and brought back into service to hiding them in the terrarium. rescue kidnapped scientist Dr They overpower her, miniatuSlimms. rise her, and incarcerater her in Set in a world enclosed in a à tower. But where? That's big glass bottle i Terrarium for you to fathom in this adven— which is also the title of the ture come arcade game for game. Amigai, ST and PC. Courtesy of Frontier's enemy have infil. Image Works. AGM "


"JAGM are to complete it without getting killed you will have to Overcome all kinds of problems. Apart from the 100's of Bikers, Punks, Greasers and Hells Angels knocking about, there are many other dangers including poisous spiders, Coyotes, freak weather conditions, and cannibals to name but a few.  GAME: Whilst living underground, In fact, I found this book a \"SLAUGHTER you manage to learn a great deal lot harder to play than it's MOUNTAIN ** from your relations. Your uncle predecessor and you are really  CREATED BY: JOE teaches you how to refine going to have to think hard and DEVER gasoline and maintain fast if you are going to survive. PRODUCED BY: generators, whilst your aunt It doesn't matter if you teaches you first aid, how to BEAVER BOOKS haven't played the Freeway keep fit and generally assists in  PRICE: .50  education: In the year 2020AD, you leave your underground Joe Dever is a name well known existence to discover the to C+VG rcaders. Over the nightmare that the bombs left years Joe has won many behind. Hardly any structures prestigious awards, the most stand, once fertile plains are famous of which was presented now barren wastelands and the to him for his \"Lone Wolf! weather changes continually. adventures. In this twelve book. In the first book in the series best work to date. He writes in an cconomic, yet descriptive style that is full of short sharp punches, which never let you settle for a moment. My only criticism is that he has stereotyped most of the characters. All the baddies are the social outcasts of today (bikers, punks, skinheads and even American Indians!), whilst all the goodies are clean cut, white American males. About as original as mom's apple pie. What I would have given to see a baddie in a three piece suit. All ja all Slaughter Mountain Rui. wiil ke: p you occupied for SLAUGHTER MOUNTAIN Mad Mitch packed with illustrations: HABER DAN --which was called Highway Holocaust you have to lead your people across a hostile wildland, in search of food, water ind a saler place to live. However, during your adventure your girl friend, series you played the part of Kate Norton, gets kidnapped Wolf, the last Kai master, who by leader of a huge gang of aimed to re-establish the bikers called Mad Dog honour of the Kai people using Mitchigan, and try as you may, Warrior as each book can be Swordplay and magic. you just can't rescue her. played individually. However, About a year ago Joe chose to Slaughter Mountain Runyou can also combine the books depart from his usual sword the second book in the series to create an epic Solo Role and sorcery style and created a sces you try and settle that Playing game. new series of books called score by trying to rescue your Another advantage of being a Freeway Warrior which were kidnapped girlfriend. It would regular player is that you can set on Earth in a post-nuclear appear that Mad Dog has taken move your character Cal War society. the bulk of his bikers to a place from book to book if he In Slaughter Mountain Run called San Angelo for peace Survives that is! You are you play Cal Phoenix, a young talks with Mekong Mike, who allowed to take all the man who has spent cight years is also a leader of another large equipment they may have living in an underground manuding pack of bikers. obtained on a previous mining complex with his aunt During the obvious adventure with you as well as and uncle. The reason for this confusion and chaos caused by any Skill bonus points you may is that HAVOC — The Hijack, the talks, it would be possible have obtained. Of course this Assassination and Violent for one person to sucak in, find gives him a better chance of Opposition Consortiuman out where Kate is being held, surviving in the long run. It's organisation consisting of rescue her and then sncak out not that much of an advantage, political terrorists who are before anyone was any the but in a Role Playing book as funded by organised crime, wiser. tough as this one, you'll need have managed to cause total Of course this task is a lot all the help you can get. nuclear devastation. harder than it sounds and if you Slaughter is probably Joe's hours. This book is well over 300 pages long and contains 350 large gaming sections, a whole combat system, all the charts and tables you need, a well illustrated colour map and an introductory story. You get all this for just .50 and I consider this tremendous value for money. Recommended! WAYNE > PLAYABILITY 89%  COMPLEXITY 41%  DESIGN 91% VALUE 90% > OVERALL 91% "


"2. toll for DSAR IN IDDLES CARTH an interactive experience! in tolkien's trilogy Available on:ATARI ST. AMIGA C64. IBM PC. APPLE II GS. AMSTRAD. SPECTRUM IMELBOURNE HOUSE Salins New Standards DISTRIBUTED RY MELBOURNE HOUSE 24 Vernon Yard, 119 Portobello Road, London W112DX Telephone 01-727 8070 Telefax 01-727 8965 IN COMPUTER SOFTWARE "


"e3710f|SHA Rank Lo-lif SHE'S TOPLESS!!  ACTIVISION/SIERRA ON-LINE ATARI ST (DOUBLE SIDED DRIVE ONLY). AMIGA, PC .99 arranged recognition code phrases. And by even greater coincidence, the real spy is Lanty's double. The trouble with Larry is. he tends to chase after anything in a skirt, and many a wink and a wiggle leads Larry to his doom under a travelling laser beam, at the hands of a whole scries of Dr. Nonookie's lovely henchettes. Izave them alone, lamy, A Larry is smitten ... lust at first sight. LEISURE SUN / l SUA Haluk L ite Score. U of Sob Welcome back, Larry! But it's not like you to be mowing somebody else's lawn! Oh I get it payment in kind, I suppose! That lovable, loathable, randy little schmuck, would you believe, luas shacked up with Eve, a girl from his Lounge Lizard days. Only trouble is, Eve knows nothing about it yet, so when he arrives home to find LUTY installed, and calmly cutting hier gas she goes wild and Larry is sent packing, with nothing in his pockets suve a dollar, scavenged from a pair of Eve's old panties However, fortune is about to smile on Larry, in the shape of a short-sighted receptionist at the TV studios. Cheat that he is, Larty manages to become a aandidate for a Blind Dale with Barban Bimbo, a \"batchelorette\" from Airhend, California (hobbies include tantalising elderly men; turn-ofis include the aroma of resin core solder.) In a hilarious take off of the famous TV game, Larry wins 2 month's cruise in the company of this moronic female, and a million dollars a year for life. So off he goes to do some last minute shopping. But Larry II isn't all fun and games. Larry is about to get involved in the evil machinations of arch-villain De Nonookie, whose secret base is the interior ofan extinct Volcano on a remote island. No prizes for guessing that the underlying theme is a spoof of Ian Fleming's Dr. No. Now it so happens that by the time Larry joins the cruise, unbeknown to him, he is dirtying some top secret microfiche film hidden an antique Peruvian Onklunk. He'd been showing off again this time by chatting up a Spanish girl in a music shop. His Spanish was so poor that the sentences he uttered, by sheer coincidence, were pre(Did he say bachelor number TWO A Our hero on the prowl. Asolar OOK B1 of LDA A Blind date ST style. you know it makes sense! Ever stood in a queue at in Thought you'd caught a live Post Office? You're always one by the pool, didn't you, waiting at the wrong counter, and where did that lead? right? Well, it's like that for Yeah, the cold dip! And Larry at the airport check-in Larry, what are you doing desk, and nothing short of a with that bikini top stuffed in bomb will shift the queue that your pocket? Tarty decides to joinAfter i Larry soon has to make a perilous flight, Larry finds hurried departure from the himself in a jungle on cruise, and after 10 gruelling Nonookie's island. Killer days drifting at sea, finds bécs, an anaconda, deadly himself washed up on the quicksands, and pirhamas IC Sindy beach of a holiday isle. hazards now facing Larry Good restaurants, smart hotel before he meets his true love, rooms, a nude beach, and a daughter of the local chief] barbershop that does a special There follows a love scene line in wax treatment, are all that is enough to bring tears to within easy walking distance. your eyes — teans of mirth! But so are the KGB, and it Trouble is, before he will takes all Larry's cunning to Sanction a marriage, chiefy avoid recognition, and to wants Larry to prove himself, escape to the airport. first, by writing a program in. "


"lift 281 st Us Hall Larry! LOOK OUT incidental background animation, like a train running along a track in the distance, or a plane coming in to land, seen through an airport window. All this takes up storage space — the ST version comes on three disks, and they are double sided. The pictures do take a while to load, but this is alleviated by some clever picture catching in memory, eliminating disk loads when moving to locations recently visited. The story itself, however, is less spicy than its predecessor. Larry does score once or twice (try it with the hotel maid!) but invariably it leads to his demise. A nice So besotted — he dresses up in drag to impress her. JIT LARRY UI Rank: NovICA FACIAL Han least a couple of disks, to save all the positions you are likely to need. Some of the puzzles are extremely obscure, although none are very complex. Whereis in, say, an Infocom adventure, the player would have to figure out the detailed steps to get through the mechanism of a puzzle, here it is often a matter of talking (in general) to the right person, at which point the computer takes over by assuming, correctly, exactly what Lanty wants to say. The old theme tune is back (I like it so much I always let it play itself out)and there's a very haunting melody to accompany a couple of romantic interludes. Here, 45 in a few other parts of the game, fairly lengthy animated sequences are played out, during which the player simply sits back, watches, and reads the accompanying text. And a word of warning the first time you play, make sure you don't hita key whilst the titles are displaying, or you will miss the lengthy animated filtroduction to the story the title by-pass takes you straight into the story cold. The animation is superb, and includes some hilarious sequences in which Lary, dressed in dmg, unbelievably regains his balance when lettering on the edge of a cliffside path. And during the game, Larry himself can and will swim, dive, and crawl, at times, as well as having treat fun under the bedclothes! LITY II is a light hearted romp of an adventure, that tells a humorous story in a linear way. You get it right on you get it wrong, ini predetermined sequence. But more importantly, it is a superb piece of all-round entertainment, particularly, but not exclusively, suited to adventure players. Keith Campbell ST VOCABULARY 75% GRAPHICS 91% PLAYABILITY 76% VALUE 88% OVERALL 90% It's love at first sight Assemble code is route to a fair maiden's heart. Hak Setle=111 | Superb graphics in Larry IL embler, and then by defeating Nongokie, which he does in a studpendous finale that plays itself like a film. Sierra On-line have substantially upgraded their system since Larry's earlier appearance. Text windows not only contain far more, they look a whole lot smarter. Input text goes into a window that pops on to the screen as soon as any chancter key is pressed. The SAVE RESTORE options are far more user friendly than the somewhat confusing ones of old But by far the biggest improvement comes in the graphics, which are more detailed, with extensive animation, often even with touch is a filth Level control, infinitely variable between Clean-and Dirty, but even with this set to maximum dirty, the game barely achieves in Leather Goddesses \"tume\". The puzzles are mostly of the type where you have to get it wrong first, and then go back (often quite a long way) to get it right in hindsight. This means you MUST sve regularly, and I would recommend pre-formatting at 101 AH 4D "


"IAGM year training up a new GM to your character and get it to deal with it. attempt ideas and goals that The new area is now ready to YOU create. receive, so he has released a The start up in Yshkaris new revised rule book to deal .50 and for this you receive with it. This large A4 the rule book, an A3 map and photocopied booklet is a one free turn. Further turn fees daunting read, but is very are a very reasonable .25 and much worth the effort. It is well run to a minimum of 1000 put together, consisting of words. However, Mike claims player-friendly text and great that they can sometimes be artwork. Upon reading it you more than twice that length. cannot fail to be slowly but Interested players should The PBM scene has been expanding at a rapid surely drawn into the game. contact Mike at: MJR Games, rate recently and this can be confirmed by the Once again it is a single Flat 3, 19 Palace Rd, East character sword and scorcery Molesey, Hampton Court, amount of the new PBM games and companies affair, but not at all like many Surrey, KT 89DL. that have arrived on the market. Always first other of the hack and slay Another new game with a PBM's you will find on the growing reputation is Slades with the news, Wayne brings you the hottest market today. Magic in Mike's and Slavers which is run by PBM gossip around and this month he sorts the wor world is a very rare and feared Harry's Games. Each player phenomenon. Magic Users are controls ten characters with as good from the bad. more likely to be hated, not many special skills as they wish respected. to allocate!! Sword fighting and any other The game has a definite form of armed combat is a very objective, which is to kill the evil overlord. This nasty piece Quest is a new semi of work unleashed a mass of professional PBM run by death and destruction on both Michael Ward and his four the slaves and slavers, leaving associates. Quest is your typical them thirsting for revenge, hand moderated sword and albit for different reasons. sorcery PBM, allowing you to The slaves wish to kill the play a single human character overload for nothing more than who's aim is to travel the world vegeance, while the slavers and explore its surroundings. Want to kill hm so they can take Your character can be one of his place. On the way to sort either four character classes — out the 'orrible Overlord, your Warrior, Wizard, Thief or boat is suddenly wrecked on a Priest — each of which has its strange coast far from home. own special skills. Your characters are washed You have 40 points to ashore unarmed — and in the allocate these skills which range case of slaves-naked!! from stealth to science. Once You will soon find that the this is done you may choose one world your characters inhabit is of the eight gods to worship or full of flesh eating monsters and decide to become an atheist. evil creatures, so arming and Finally you can choose a protecting yourself is your main mutation for your character if objective you wish. This is left totally up to you and no hints are given to A WAYNE Yshkar-definitely worth playing\" Each turn is the cquivalent of one day and you may move four help you make up your mind. game this could be for you, if realistic, not to say deadly, hexes on your map each turn. \"The game is based on the you ire prepared to put up with option, and players who However, all this changes if you land of Questron =a name the tatty set up material. continually use violence to obtain either horses or boats, as obviously nicked from the Quest is run by Michael obtain what they desire will they increase your movement awful computer game of the Ward, 3 Queen Elenors Drive, soon end up with one dead dramatically. You are allowed same name where a constant Knowle, Solihull, character. as many actions as you wish, war bewecen the forces of good Birmingham. The whole Gtearas game except when large battles are in and chaos is being fought. You Now one game that really is originally grew from an AD progress, when you may wish have to boldly explore the worth playing is Yshkar. This +D campaign which, due to to reconsider your position. hostile regions, gaining hand moderated game has many reaons, was Combat is described in the experience points as you go, received high critical acclaim modified changed and turned most basic terms possible to which help your improve on the PBM grapevine and I into a postal game. I know that enhance the game speed so abilities. have met and spoke to head Mike tries his hardest not to people looking for graphic gore The rule book is a very small, honcho and full time GM interfere with what a character may well wish to look cheap and nasty photocopied Mike Richards many times. is trying to achieve, instead he elsewhere. affair, which is littered with He has created his world on a leaves this to the other players Start up in the game costs spelling mistakes and bad massive series of continents, and certain NPC's who are .00, and for this you get a grammar. It is also totally which are set on a totally flat pitted against both your aims rule book and three free turns. unhelpful and gives you no idea world called Gwaras. The and objectives. Future turns cost $1.50 each or what the game is supposed to original continent of Gwaras is The emphasis in Yshkar is on .00 if you do nothing more be about in fact over subscribed by pure role playing and the idea is than move. Potential players For me the saving grace of potential players at the to portray your character in the should contact: H Garvin clo the whole affair was the price. moment, but Mike had manner that you have created Harry's Games, 26 Newmarket A Start Up costs only .50 and anticipated this possiblity a it. There are no set aims in the St, Soleraine, Co Londonderry further turns are a reasonable long time ago, so in his spare game, and this is explained BTS2, IEH. 75p, so if you are looking for a time he created another area many times throughout the rule That's all for this month. cut price sword and sorcery called Yshkar and spent over a book. It is up to you to guide PBM "


"WHAT VIDEOVAULT HAVE GOT FOR YOUR COMPUTER MPWWWMA FOR ONLY >  www w VAT + P&P INCLUDING wwwwwwwwwww wwwwwwwwwwww VideoVault wwwwwwwww win THUSHPRINTERI JAT LONG LAST due to customer VISA demand the Video Vault have a fantastic printer at an amazing low price of only .95 LOOK AT ALL THESE AMAZING FEATURES: HUSHPRINTER by the Video Vault FAST Bidirectional text printing at a quick B0 characters per second QUIET less than 5608 noise lin case you need to hear a pin drop). IL VERSATILE Under control from you computer printline h can be set for double size characters at 40 per line or half size characters at 160 per line linespacing can be programmed to 45 6 org line to the inch. V Standard unit less than three pounds in weight including tooft of paper roll. ECONOMICAL Uses low cost thermal paper sharp tear bar permits economy tear off paperlengths use only what you need no ribbons to run out or replace, * RELIABLE — A full 12 months warranty. > Manual controls power on/offlinefeed. u Print modes text-bidirectional, graphics = un directional Print characteristics-alphanumeric 80 characters perline 40 characters perline in Expanded Mode 160 characters perline in Condensed Mode Graphic-dot addressable 4800 dots per square inch 160 vertical by Bo horizontali Self test build in standard, activated by holding downlinefeed switch with power off and then turning power on TRADE OVERSEAS ENQUIRIES MOST WELCOME W IBM OF ? compatible F BBC Model Atri Amstrad 3 A64 Spectrum How to order your Hush Printer Please supply me with Hush Printers for my tick bod Commodore 64 Spectrum Model 161/4317 +2 including interface Atan SE Amga Pilon AM or compatible R$252 Output. BBC Model B. Amstrad 464 288 at a total cost of .95 each including VAT and P+P. We also have avaliable a Battery Portable Model for those on the move for the TOM OF Compatible Prion 18 aomiy T49.95 inciyding WAT and P+P All overseas orders add E10 od for DP charges Payment can be made by cheave/dostal order Access Barciaycard Wade out t drovaut LTR. Psion be Amiga Commodore NAME VOE ADDRESS 288 vatuiti LIMITED POST CODE Tauthorise you to charge my Acce55/Visa card no Old Kingsmoor School, Railway Street Hadfield Cheshire SK14 BAA. Tel. 04574 66555/67761/69499 Fax No 04574 68945. Head Office and Access & Visa orders. queries Signature Send your order today to VideoVault Ltd, Old Kingsmoor School, Railway Street Hadfield. Cheshire SK14 BAA C COPYRIGHT VIDEOVAULT LTD. 981042 "


"JAGM Helpline KEITH CAMPBELL'S WRITE-IN two favourite sticking points for some months now, and This is an adventure with very marvels at its depth. tightly integrated problems. However, he has yet to hear of that must often be solved in anyone else playing it, and Sequence. The confusion feels he is missing out on part arises when obvious problems of the fun of adventuring, present themselves, yet the which is to be able to turn to player does not realise that he someone else for assistance, is way off having the means to or to get fresh determination solve it until he has solved a make more progress! \"I surely number of other puzzles can't be the only Universe II elsewhere in the game. player in the world!» he exclaims. I can't recollect having heard of the game from anyone except William, and I have certainly never had a copy of it reach my grubby paws! So if there's anyone out there playing Universe II — PLEASE drop me a line and I'll put you in touch with William. And at last, a happy ending for Allen and Mark Errington of Durham. Correspondence from Allen and Mark has The hunters of Wolfman are concentrated on Shadowgate after Svetomir Petrovic of an Uninvited for the past six Belgrade! As soon as he drops months. They certainly seem off to sleep, a compulsion to have been bitten by these with him whenever he inserts two games, and reading their a crystal into a recess in the letters, I began to suspect that altar, they kill him! When their entire lives had been Svetomir isn't playing taken over by them! But now Wolfman, he's likely to be all that has come to an end. found battling his way through Congratulations are in order Frankenstein where he also for Allen and Mark, who have meets an untimely end. This sent me 'official\" printed time the killer is a man completion certificates for standing on a street corner in both titles. Their a pool of light, in the company perseverance has finally paid of a woman. Who can help our off — but as the prompt goes: Yugoslavian friend to avoid What now? death — twice? Jason Golterman writes from Cairo, with problems in A Manhunter — help is at hand. King's Quest 3. He is having number of logical bugs in To illustrate the point, a great difficulty trying to find Fish, Scrolls latest. For constant niggle is: \"What the magic wand and the map. example, if you hold the should I be doing about the He thinks they are locked in crucible ON the fire, it is too urchin-he's obviously there Manannan's study, but he hot for you to hold, whereas if for a purpose?\" and this is can't find the key. Are they — you hold it IN the fire, the often coupled with the or is he simply wasting his gold melts. And hitting the question: \"How do you get WOLFMAN: time looking for it? His final mould with the hammer only through the arch in the Look around twice when you plea concerns the desert, \"Is works if you are holding the alchemy lab?\" You see, the climb up in the museum. there anything of importance mould,\" which,\"comments player has no way of knowing there?\" he asks. Stephan, \"would surely be a that the urchin is unable to FRANKENSTEIN: Three Wise words are bit painful?\" fulfil his task in the game, LIFT THE CREAKY sought after by David Boxall No doubt Ms Sinclair of until certain things have been FLOORBOARD! of Epsom. They are urgently Mag Scrolls will have some done beyond the alchemy needed for use in Dargoth's observations on the points arch! So look in the clues LURKING HORROR: Tower, on level three of you make, Stephan, but section for some guidance... Show the professor the note Bard's Tale II. meanwhile, who can say And even further back in fond on the great dome. Stephan Englhart of Infocom produces stories at the annals of Infocom, Zork 3 Horrify the urchin with a Ingolstadt, is not happy with all? At the time of writing they is puzzling William Hern of reincarnated hand! Fish! Stephan reviews haven't produced even a Aberdeen, a seasoned adventures for a number of bugged adventure in the last adventurer if ever there was FISH: German computer magazines, 12 months! one. William is trying to open Find a dry route after casting. and suggests that the Perhaps Infocom are the chest he found at the difference between Magnetic basking in their past glory, for bottom of a cliff. He can tie it LEISURE SUIT LARRY 2: Scrolls and Infocom, is that there is no doubt that their to a rope and pass it to the No passport when you need Infocom produces a good older adventures, which seem man at the top, but the trouble one? Visit Eve's again! entertaining story, to which hardly to age at all, are still is, this fellow simply steals the the puzzles are only being played avidly. Lurking contents. MANHUNTER: secondary, whilst Scrolls just Horror is currently making a William has another request Use the minimum successful try to hang a series of puzzles Helpline comeback with to make. He has been playing Kewpie Doll sequence that together. And he cites a Amiga owners, and there are a vast game called Universe II you already know! "


"520ST-FM SUPER PACK KATARI ATARI ATARI ST COMPUTERS 1Mb DISK DRIVE  OF SOFTWARE ARCADE GAMES Ananold Imagine 01295 Beyond The Palace Elita (1995 Black Lamp Firebird (1935 Buggy Bay Elite (18. Chopper Mastertronic EM ikan Wulon Elit (14.05 Marble Hades Electronic Arts 0245 Quadrul Logotron Ranma Hewson Consultants 10.15 Return To Gonale Firebird (1995 R  Melbourne House E19.95 Starque Mandarin (19% To Die Electronic Arts CN95 Thound Firebird SUBS Thundercat Elite 1995 Wlaball Coman .95 Tunion Melbourne House $19.5  Heron Consultants 119 SPORTS SIMULATIONS The ti c to a polu w to get o p rig maari Eddle Edwards Super S Elite  Enne the Palace a TV Seconds Oul Tyne [19.95 MUM, tu r en over Les Summer Olympiad Tynelt E19,95 by IT S . F OTO upom od PRODUCTIVITY SOFTWARE Organiser Triangle Publishing $49.95 JOYSTICK Atari cx Joyatlck Alari Corp 1499 FREE ATARI BUNDLE VALUE:.97 INCLUDING W With SM124 mono monitor  With SC1224 colour monitor:  The mange of Alum ST compulmon something for you. From the game thu who wanted the challenge of the way beat in de action to the burnin n who wants to Take Financial force or fault pe ntini. The ST ollen high quality graphia lound and und dort g er, when providing ulat ndiyondatordable solution to bug . The ST way established in the home rement and bs olim duction loc a tion, a writy al dengan bu S or g retch Coppa om die ENTERTAINMENT ACCOUNTSI, ART, COMMUNICATIONS COMPUTER AIDED DESION, DATARASES. DESKTOP PUZILISHING EDUCATION MUSIC. PROGFAUVING SPREADSHEETS, WORO PROCESSING und moto. Fornu ligil ole town , an d althe ST mange, complete and the coupon below 520ST-FM EXPLORER PACK WITH BUILT-IN 1Mb DISK DRIVE 1040ST-FM PROFESSIONAL PACK LORS NOW WITH TV MODULATOR For the house and the mai bun e le announce me pak t u nd the 104OST-EV The TO THEM TO FAM Mbyla built-in den drive a ddition, 10405T-EN NON COTE 1 TW modulator 11The pe able 100GT-F de la with more Glyd old motor who modulator. The module ilgama 1045T-F to 4 dod dana by na ty the TV and one bomow to so you do no, The Professional Prok\" thom Silica include the new 1440ST-FM ih module plus four high quality sole Backgs including spread hel, dmt , word procesor and programming languge. The Prodina Pack\" wimwele you to get traghi duen tabu t ciut mempur In mation to this so rtih C a buy Protest Pachthon School Out With 17 Sili ST Sure worth (2001. Free 0 Ch i pan tot unter termo The value for money o ned by the Atari ST range is rated in the Explorer Pack Naturing the 520ST-FM computer with 512R RAM. The 570ST-FM computer now com with built-a 1 Mb double sided disk drive well us are ou controller and a built-in TV modulator. The SOST-FM Explorer Pack includes the 520STFM computer, the arcade gamo Ramarim, i tutorial program and some umelul desktop bocora. In addition, if you buy the Explorer Pack From Slice, we will ve you the Salca ST Starter Kit worth or 1200, FREE OF CHARGE Aletum the coupon for details of our Starter Kit and of the full ST ringe. ONLY 52.51 TWEET 52602 + VAT   ATARI 1040ST-FM Computer .99 VIP PROFESSIONAL .Spreadshee 149.95 MICROSOFT WRITE (Word Processor .95 SUPERBASE PERSONALD 5095 BASIC DISK & MANUAL Langu 24,99 NORMAL RRP: .84.82 LESS DISCOUNT:  B2 PROFESSIONAL PACK PRICE: $499.00 + SM124 mono monitor: 398 + SC1224 colour monitor:  INCLUDNO VAT With SM124 mono monitor 598 With SC1224 colour monitor:  WHY SILICA SHOP? 2Mb & 4Mb MEGA ST The WGA ST compuem tyled na Ley d e CPU ned by phone with them on the VGA ST. Authpa o PAM Und the who h u rts de dim in to a CPU TE WEGA ST da morte mediului bun modu lire te humo why VOA ST purchased will will add the Pronian Fick wa C ) Serbia 14Mb MEGA ST IME MEGAST la ST SA HAII ICH TH L homolche Aure the couple mono monitor=0998 #mono monitors (1298 #colour monitor  colour monitor 1498 you can tur u t me STUCI STILTER UT W Gun C , EREL Tony WFE FIT buhok b . The WANT D e cat OFFICIAL PORT T om primim dhe ring TTF WE IT. FEWERT ER DUIDERMCI: T he ingesluit ou ve vid e o A ind op Tou na 1. TimOLT ON THE FULL STOCK RAVE U my heart A T amil ir IT LETTRES SUCHIT: The ich her I L ORO ding the wounded di SMD by IT de loomu FOU FOUR CALCUL Wed duho IDONTP The Domy n a op ha He then bringen d bout do One N E OVERNIGHT LIVE ematen EL Jocuro_ndund cond_tube ARC WATCH ONLY with me lui dorite our lor it. Complete and cum A B 300pen and TEE TEEL HELLY a home Allocated in your DTP PageStream . FREE SILICA STARTER KIT WORTH OVER $200 Omo A inon #111 they W HT The Hulo bed in o TLIT-FLOW AndUHO CHLAPHICA La BT MOTATION ON TEIT JUHICH + WANT OR TWIT ANT DECT ROSTICHET COLTELE all TE FUNCTION on RUTO MANUALERING H EATION the amourn OF OLEN E200 the n the DTP WITH EVERY ST RETURN COUPON FOR DETAILS ALL PRICES QUOTED INCLUDE FREE UK DELIVERY r DO YOU OWN AN ATARI ST? T A ST C ould field \"T ur, let us know We beplume lo wind you c FREE OF CHARO1 they becomwabia Complete und derengi LT We red on Our Mind o u protinim and m alena Dupon d un ou du do To: Silica Shop Ltd, Dept CVG 0429, 14 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kemt DA14 40X. PLEASE SEND FREE LITERATURE ON THE ATARI ST Mr/MrsMs Initials Surname: Address SILICA SHOP: SIDCUP (& Mail Order) 01-309 1111 11 Tha Waw, H harley Roud, Sidcup Rent QUATUOR OPEN WON-SAT LATE MIGHT: FRIDAY Form LONDON 01-580 1000 57 Tottenham Court Rond, London, WIP OBA O NUON-SAT & LATE NIGHT MOVE LONDON 01-629 1234 OXE 3914 Seifridas foi moord, Oxford Street, London, WTA TAE  , Postcode Do you already ohin a computer I . which orie do you own DTP I "


"JAGM ** VAT S a Top Ten few smiles providing you The  Spectrum; Commodore 64; know your EastEnder 1.5.E E Amstrad CPC; characters, who appear in this Cassette; .99 game under recognisable Reviewer: Keith Campbell pseudonyms. All very punny, This is a spoof of Eastenders, and fiendishly unoriginal. A Herbert Square in all its glory — yuk centred around the characters of Herbert Square. Effl's dog Willie has gone missing, and your first job is to find it. However, it turns out to have been literally flattened to death, ind so the quest turns into 1 hunt for the killer. To follow up the mystery involves asking people about This is a GACked adventure, graphics, flat uninteresting the showing of a different things. Most questions fail to with a rather poor vocabulary pictures of such fascinating picture, and your eyes have to yield useful information, that shows off the GAC's things as park benches, make a quick adjustment to making this a rather hit and gaspingly long response time to washing machines, and a pub read the text comfortably. miss affair, although some unrecognised words to its best bar. Every so often the text Cassette adventurers starving answers are designed to raise a advantage. There are a few background colour changes at for a game to run on their DEADENDERS Activision/Microillusions Commodore 64 disk: .99 Reviewed by: Keith Campbell 7 Julian (no relation) sets out on hest. Just released is a C-64 version of a Role Playing game downgraded from the 16-bit original on Amiga and PC. I say \"downgraded' as opposed to *converted' because although I have not seen the game in its earlier incarnations, I find it hard to believe that any 16-bit game could be as clumsy to play as this version. The objective is to rescue a Talisman, which requires the player to defeat the V The Amiga version still shines. ul D JULLEN TTBTHE JOUER. VIN VILLE THEY A Faery Tale disappointment. Necromancer (yawn). The player, in fact, is Julian, but should he die during his quest, one of his two brothers takes over. Lose them, and you have to start again. Moving Julian and his family Over semi-plan views of the fields and buildings is a pretty tamne affair if you have just polished off Leisure Suit Larry, for the animation is minimal, and the pictures boring. Buildings can be entered and searched, but the disk loading response time for this is poor, and not visually rewarding when you get there, anyway. And it is all very well entering building after building, but it is E GOLD BEN. LANTED THE LES 111 HAY "


"machines would do far better to get hold of some older previously unplayed titles, from the likes of Scott Adams, Brian Howarth, or Stefan Ulnowski. Vocabulary Graphics Playability Value  Overall 45% 28% 30% 49% 20% T Fancy a drink at the Old Queen not really inside 6-PRES Vould 1ld Queen is da le bl 2 L The first person to write in and tell us the name of this dog wins a C+VG T Shirt. W TALE ADVENTURE Hon his et Phillip, the second brother, was lucky and clever. all a bit mundane and boring number of commands seem without some sort of clue or completely unobtainable, and it purpose to provide interest and is difficult to tell whether this is incentive due to bugs in the program, But by far the worst feature omissions in the instructions, of the game is the command or, as I suspect, a mixture of and control system. Combat, as both. well as movement, is by A combination of boring joystick, but the control is too plot, uninteresting graphics, a crude to do more than just frustrating command system, juggle frantically, and hope you and instructions written by an smash your enemy to a pulp. If, incompetent, led me to turn off that is, you can recognise the the 64 before I suffered enemy in time, for as characters irreparable brain damage. approach there is no way of Yesterday's technology, knowing if they are friend or yesterday's game. What a waste foe until it is almost too late. of two disks. Yawn ... Alas, there is worse to come. RATINGS Commands from a small  Vocabulary n/a on-screen menu can be entered by hitting the 'appropriate\" Graphics 39% 11% key, but the scant instructions > Playability fail to explain this fully. Often  Value 9% the key hit will produce an entirely unexpected result. A > Overall 5% AGM "


"IRENEGADEN STHE FINAL CHAPTER UNE FINAL UNAFICH ANNIN HALEN ces the name of the game. Then a guy loses his girl = he mediaeval knights, and the torloses his mind! Now, in the mented undead. from within the Final Chapter. Renegade must tombs of Ancient Egypt. Your summon all his strength and lightquest finally takes you BEYOND ning reactions as he chases his the present to a time you'll never girlfriend's captors through time itforget! ... but remember ... your girl self. Fight against neolithic man. wants to see yoll alive! SPECTRUM .99 COMMODORE .99 . AMSTRAD 19.99  ATARI SI 119,99  AMIGA 124,99 ECYXOMYmW TATOVENEVE IMAGINE SOFTWARE 6 CENTRAL STREET MANCHESTER M2 5NS TEL: 061-832 6633 TELEX: 667799 OCEANS G. FAX: 061 834 0650 "


"PBM and casily understood. In fact I which give various was impressed by the player — advantanges to the Titans in friendliness of the whole system their control. My only criticism which — for me — made the here is that the Experience and game immediately playable. Skill levels system could have Obviously, the been vastly improved with just make-or-break factor in AT is a small amount of effort, the combat system, as the creating a game with a bigger whole game is mainly based role playing element. around fighting. I am therefore Although AT is a complete pleased to report that combat in game in itself GW have AT is fast, fluid and fun, even obviously got rules expansion if it is deadly! After playing the in nind, because this game is so game several times, the whole obviously interlinked with their gaming procedure will become Warhammer 40k system that second nature, as it is that casy complete new rules for Titan to to implement. Rhino and Titan to Marine unit GW are renowned for combat are only a stones throw supplying games that are way. complete in themselves, but are The idea of massive robots found sadly lacking when more fighting it out for the pure hell advanced play is required. of it is not unique. FASA have However, they have redressed done it before with BattleTech the balance with AT as this and ICE have done it with game covers long range, Robot Warriors. However, GW intermediate and close combat have managed to come up with all in one. 21 new and interesting angle on Furthermore there is a this kind of warfare, which will TITANICUS ADEPTUS Games Workshop Price: .99 Titanicus, is based around the combat between giant robots at the time of the Imperium in Warhammer 40K. These huge creatures are manned by a crew of around 5 space marines, who control its movement, fire its Weapons and repair any damage it suffers. Eight small polystyrene blocks, are used to represent buildings and the city terrain over which you will be fighting. The glossy box also contains six plastic Warlord Class Titans, Iwo sets of spare weapons, two range rulers, two sheets of colour counters that represent damage and bursts of line, a Sixty page rulebook, twelve Titan cards and four six sided dice. The model Titans need to be cut off a framework and constructed. All the models can be clipped together and no glue is required. Furthermore, all the supplied weapons are interchangeable apart from the power fist which only fits into a Titans left arm. I found that some of the weapons. especially the ones that fit underneath the Titan, were prone to work their way loose and fall out after several games, complete set of Advanced Rules appeal to a wide range of but a small amount of Blue for players who want to make gamers. The rulebook is Tack applied to the end of a their game that more realistic. excellently detailed by several weapon soon stopped this The advanced rules allow resident artists, including a happening. Titans to carry a whole new brilliant cover by John Once you have assembled the range of lethal missiles, ranging Blanche, and true to form, GW Titans — and this requires a from the powerful Plasma supply 1 complete descriptive modicum of skill to release the Missile — which splits into six background to the game, models from their plastic Warheads and causes immense making for more convincing framework — you will be ready damage due to an instantaneous play. to play the game. release of secthing plasma — IO Although pricey at .00 To start off you should use the Haywire Missile -which AT is good value for money as the examples of pre constructed creates a huge electrostatic contents aside the rules \"Titans that are supplied. By field, disrupting an opponents will give players many hours of using these you will get to grips electrical systems in the tabletop entertainment. If with the basic rules and learn to process. you've got the spare cash, it's a appreciate the advantages and Also included in the purchase worth considering. dis-advantages of the combat Advanced Rules is a system WAYNE System. allowing the crews of Titans to All in all the actual gaming obtain experience levels. This system is easy to learn and gives the opportunity to players simple to play. AT uses a strict — who have their Titans sequence of play, which manned by the more Value 80% consists of turns. Each turn is experienced crews — to make Playability split into five different phases, their opponents re-roll crucial namely Order, Movement, dice rolls in critical situations, Basic Rules 45% Repair, Combat and End. In improving their overall odds. Advanced Rules 50% the Order phase each player If the crew reaches the Presentation 95% selects one of the four Order highest experience level Ace Counters available and places it -they can begin to learn a face down, next to their Titan. whole range of new Skills, Overall This order largely determines what takes place in the remaining Phases. I don't have the space to detail the whole rules system, but anybody with a small amount of common sense could fathom it. out without any problems. The game is logical, straightforward 75% 85% AGM "


"ALDERWOOD CENTRE SEDOLEY, QUOLEY W VOLANOS DT3 30Y MAIL ORDER DIVISION OF ESTABLISHED RETAILER (TEL 0902 3136209711 HOLMESOFT SFATOH GET INTO CRIME! TITLE | »,, ,, You are the Ice cool leader ol gang ol drus chred Terrorists. Tourmalm meal is to become the richesi.    DARE YOU E FREE OFFER TH 1 PLAY.---TE HE CC1 HY E A kcijos ITC Fun TE JELL THE ho HE 11 ht La LOL 11 THE HE SEND YOUR NAME AND ADDRESS TODAY FOR YOUR FREE TRIAL OF ITS A CRIME THE WORLDS MOST POPULAR PLAY BY VAL GAME Write, quoties C+VG, 10KJC GAMES, PO BOX 11. LEVELEYS, BLACKPOOL LANCS FYS PUL DE LLE Ti --E ad FIL LLL 11 LE ELENA 11 SAMDALE COMPUTERS LTD \"\"Better than the Best of the Rest Credit Card Hotline 0621-742617 & RING NOW *FREE DELIVERY IN UK *ORDERS DESPATCHED WITHIN 24 hrs THE LATEST SOFTWARE FOR SEGA AMIGA A-TD 1 95 Sword of Sodan 173.90 Honba 11  Dragons Lain 02590 07355 Falcon 173 90 Afterburner 72495 Purple Saturn Day 119.90 Outrun 1.95 Racket Ranger 7190 Thunderbinde [74.95 Pioneer Plaque .90 Chaplitter (1995 Dungeon Master .90 Alem ud-lost stom .95 Rogor Rabbi TBA Nina 119.95 Galdragons Domain [15.99 Phantasy start 13495 Joint of Art .90 ATARI ST IBM Night Hunlar .90 Rocket Ranger 07399 Lombard PAC rally .95 F-19 Stealth Fighter (3196   | 1599 Phantom Fighter .99 Purple Saturn Day 119.90 Faleon 02-99 F-16 Falcon E1990  119.96 Joan of Arc .99 Flight Sim 13596 Powidone .90 Pool of Radiance [1999 Garliald .99 Lltima V (73 96 Return of the Judi [15.96 World Tour Golf [1596 Zainy Gali 19.96 Fishi 81999 Hundreds of titles available at new low prices! Also stockists for: MSX, Amstrad, Spectrum, Commodore. Ring 0621-742617 for your free price list. Or send us a letter or postcard stating name, address and machine type. If ordering please send cheque or P/O made payable to: SAMDALE COMPUTERS LTD 1A AUSTRAL WAY, HIGHFIELD GATE RISE, ALTHORNE, ESSEX CM3 6DN H AT THE Fan ET IE 11 Hu HH TH Thai 14 This ELT ch E. Cheque Por Edraftakich Pyable or Holm UR PLP Huadele: 10p] Lumpd75p per El 11.50 L UNLISTED ITEMS 204 ali Full Price Sohre 105. all Quagel GROS 9. on endom, W W e well, by far You Freeb U "


"CES-CRS nazax SILVERBIRD HCALEC SULLIVAN by phrases like wasn't it amazing or frightening Isn Tit . This year frightening. gadgets were the videophonlng. Immagine phone the wie Grom the pub next door.electronic playground at I meanifi'd hadaew home. Everything comes in a might slip into the usual pocket sized version-TVS. routine of \"I won't be back CD's and even fax machines for an hour love, I'm Just There is more to Las Vegas than slot for the busy executive can finishing some screen shots machines and neon lights. Nevada's sin be slipped Inside your for Mean Machines. Now overcoat whilst you walk that really is frightening city also plays host to the Winter the dog. Fortunately the company Consumer Electronics Show. This Of course not everything that make the video phone monster trade convention is the being shown at the C.E.S. have so far only developed a show is going to make it showcase for all the latest electronic still image prototype. Into mass production. I have Still Image video was very gadgets, TV'S, stereos, videos and serious doubts about an much to the fore on the Sony computer games. Eugene Lacey was electronic toilet paper and JVC stands. Both dispenser What is there is there to drool over the goodies. companies have developed a power cut?) and owning a a still-image video camera power driven door mat that may well make If Sony. JVC and all the other even Daffy Duck. Anything hardly strikes me as a matter conventional cameras a glant electronic you want to watch is there of life and death. thing of the past. The Sony manufacturers get their way at the press of a button and But that is what the C.E.S. Mavica stores images on a You won't want to leave the in cinema-like picture Is all about. There are plenty tiny disk which can be used house pretty soon. quality. Add stereo sound. of turkeys in amongst the and re-used. When you have As far as leisure is remote control, window million sellers. A lew years finished snapping you simply concerned you won't need overlays so you can check back the personal stereo plug the camera into the TV to. Imagine a TV twice the the other side, or sides, and was written off as a C.E.S. to view. No processing is screen size and twice the watch one, or two or three turkey and now needed. At less than two picture quality of the one programmes at the same Walkman's, or Walkmen are hundred pounds these parked in your front room. time. Plug your PC Engine in annoying the hell out of cameras were definitely Imagine a picture so clear with its CD-ROM add-on and people on tubes and buses considered show goers. that you can see the ==welll None of this is SCI-FI. the world over. Not quite a goer but minutest detalls — scratches It is all working now and on There is generally a bit of definitely a show stopper on cars, and the weave and its way to the shops in the a buzz about the hot things was the golden car on the texture of material in near future. at the show. You get into Phillips stand. The Royale is clothing. Consider that this Even if you are not the \"did you see that thing described in the show guide TV can pick up literally Indoor type and feel the conversations in bars and as a concept car, developed dozens of stations from need for some fresh air there bus queues, which are by a British company based sport, to news, to porn and is no need to leave your usually neatly rounded off in Worthing called LA.D. the "


"Royale is a customised a specially-developed car Subaru 2.7 litre saloon. computer with enlarged LCD Fitted with just about display, a Fax, seats, everything even the windows, exterior mirrors flashlest of techno-yupples the whole darned lot is could desire. We are talking push-button controlled. state-of-the-art electronics Even the map book is on-board. Secreted amongst electronic thanks to the the Royale's stylish cream Carin Navigation System. leather Interior are no less The navigator stores all of than thirteen speakers for the pages of the guide on the CD driven music system. laser disk and displays the two telephones, two page you require on an LCD televisions TECHARLECHTARE DE back and a third in the front, If the Royale was one of the bigger show stoppers there were plenty of smaller ones to catch your eye as well. In fact, smallness and slimness appear to be an abiding obsession with most exhibitors. Somehow, it your gadget is smaller, slimmer, lighter. Ideally water proof Farringdon to Brighton as and multi-coloured as well he travels home after a hard then you have an enormous day on the PC Engine. sales advantage. It makes Games wise the C.E.S sense though. I mean even belonged to one company Deputy C+VG Editor Julian Nintendo. Their football Rignall doesn't leave the pitch-sized stand dominated house before slipping his the West Hall where the portable colour Fergusson computer and video games Into his pocket before companies hung out. making his way to the train, Just about anybody who He tells me there is no Is anybody in the Japanese shortage of fellow coln-op world was showing commuters watching a range of games for the Nelahbours over his Nintendo. Capcom, Taito, shoulder on the 5.45 from Namco. Tengen, Data East. A Nintendo power pad-play and get fic S.N.K. they were all there with games like Dragon Ninja. Paper Boy, Double Dragan, Ikari Warriors and Guerilla War. In fact any The Zomerwacky Us joystick game that got anywhere in =an importers reading the the arcades is now avallable for Nintendo. It would be easier to list the ones that aren't than to list the ones that are But it's not just arcade games. There's a whole batch of film licenses Including Beetlejuice, Friday the 13th, A Nightmare on Elm Street, the Karate Kid and Who Framed Roger Rabbit and many more. The huge number of games for Nintendo that are available in the US is in stark contrast to the situation in the UK — where there are currently less than twenty titles available. The reason for this is a world shortage of the chips used to manufacture the cartridges, However, Nintendo are about to bring new chip making facilities on stream and quarantee more games will be available in the UK before the end of 89. The swelling catalogue of The power f/ove ultimate controller "


"V The U Force beat em up fans controller. titles available in the US IS Cifen ve de sexiest possible because of the huge was not all bad news from packer CD's number of potential Cinemaware though as the purchasers. There are company are promising to currently eleven million Increase the output of there Nintendo players in the US. extremely high quality #Ee Felled GaffeSVERONESHO year sold over two million watch out for are TV Sports units each-Mike Tyson's Basketball and Lords of the Punch Out, Legend of Zelda, Rising Sun. and Super Mario Bros. Not Epyx latest games were surprisingly this tends to put over shadowed by the the Amiga, ST and rumours circulating about Commodore 64 games scene the new 'Project X being firmly in the shade. shown to blg-time buyers This is a great shame as behind the scenes on their there are stacks of stand. The California-based Interesting. Innovative company are saying nothing games coming through from at all about their new baby a variety of companies. —refusing to confirm or One of my favourites is deny the main rumour that it Sim City from Broderbund. is a hand-held video games The game casts you as Lord system. Whatever this gizmo Mayor of one of seven of the turns out to be there was A Smallest TV-a near match box gizmo. world's most famous cities. also a couple of games on It is huge. I explored it for an You are challenged to display which suggest that hour and didn't once get Improve the quality of life the firm still have their feet back to the same location. I for your citizens by tackling firmly in the arcade don't know how many such urban problems as adventure business. Devon graphics are stored in Man pollution, traffic congestion, Aire in the Hidden Diamond Hole but it did appear pretty crime, and overcrowding. Caper Introduces a cat Infinite to me. Activision No mention of traffic burglar (Devon Aireina were also launching their wardens, though. graphically superb arcade range of Sega tities and very Cinemaware won the puzzler. Not quite Impossible nice they looked too wind-up of the show award Mission, but pretty good Including Rampage, Cyborg — for their CD-driven sound just the same. Hunter Reviewed in Mean enhancement of Defender of Showing that they too can Machines and Ghost the Crown on the PC. The cut it in the innovation Busters. West Coast company have stakes Activision, sorry Infocom were the other long been rumoured to be Mediagenic, were showing main highlight of the working on C.D.I. games Man Hole running on the Mediagenic stand. The so when the invitations Macintosh with Hypercard. Boston outfit have now were sent out to view the The user base of Mac owners thrown off their rather fist CD enhancement of a with Hypercard (a go faster snobbish puritan-like computer game a lot more add-on must be about half a commitment to text-only was expected than a few dozen in the UK. Man Hole is adventures by launching a extra sound effects stored on none the less impressive for range of graphically CD and synchronised to run that. It really is like excellent role playing with the game. No exploring a worl like Alice in games. Pretty soon we will Improvements in the Wonderland where animals be carrying reviews of graphics department at all. talk to you when you click Journey, Battletech, and What a disappointment. It on to them with the cursor. Quarterstaff the Tomb of CONT "


"Nintendo CEREAL SYSTEM MARIO BROS. ZEDDA ADVENTURES Type : LOCUST HITASOT Rider: None ne characters on screen via sensors that \"perceive hand and finger movements in three dimensional space.\" Going one step further than the U-Force the Power Glove. will have a range of games developed especially for it — to capitalise on the Increased control that the glove offers games players. The first of these is Bad Street Brawler' which will be launched in the US in the Autumn. Also breaking new ground in controllers -though again Nintendo only at this stage Is the Power Pad. This novel controller reads game moves from the playersfett as the player steps on numbered circles on a mat. The game was demonstrated with athletics games like Hyper Sports where a player ran on the spot to make the game athlete run. As the player Jumped so too did the video ADEH4--07 Machine Gun LA NEW He I L@5 T CT A Nan CTC breakfast Cerbai LLATOT OK 14 HLE ok ht le ta Setmath In AGM. Shogun also has graphic and looks Heretty adventure as well. But there was more than Just software to turn a gamers head at the C.E.SI Travemeversee such a wide range of joysticks and addons at a show. The Beeshu stand featured no less than 37 sticks for a variety of computers and video games systems. Apart from the utual assortment of multicoloured sticks and remote ----I-EFRIER R E The Zoomer-avaliable for the Sega, Nintendo, ST and C64. This handle bar like Stick has fire buttons mountedom two grippers and is just the ticket Tor games like Star Glider and Top Gun. By far the most impressive of the controllers on display A Bateletech — Infocom go Kole playing was Broderbund's U-Force. So far only available for Nintendo the U-Force is the most radical development in controllers since video gaming was invented. Yuhoittunud anything. In boxing games for example you simply sit or stand in front of your UForce and throw punches a . The U Force interprets these movements and translates them into the The Royale has clecere everything A Shogun dhe Adventure game on screen. This was most effectively game athlete. Nintendo demonstrated in the were singing the praises of Nintendo game Mike Tyson's the Power Pad at C.E.S. Punch-Out with the gamer clalming that you could use flooring Tyson at one point your Nintendo to keep fit as with a mighty right hand well as enjoying the game. swing. It adds a definite But if the add-ons and touch of realism in beat em controllers are getting up games but was also strange you ain't seen demonstrated with driving nothing yet. A whole games and arcade merchandisle Industry is adventures where it seemed mushrooming around equally effective. Nintendo. Most stockists Broderbund are not saying now carry a range of spinoffs when it will be avallable in from Mario sweat shirts, Europe or if there will be a pencil cases, and bags to U-Force for other systems. combs and even Not to be outdone by the sheets. Weirdest ol all U-Force were Mattel with though Is the recent their Power Glove. Slip the announcement of a glove on and the movement Nintendo-endorsed of your hand dictates the breakfast cereal. That's action of object and America for you. "


"CRECI TENSTAR PACKC Commodore WORTH OVER ! AMECAS G UID AMIGA FREEI AMEGAS by Playors FREE INSANITY FIGHT by Microdual LAKIEGHE MERCENATE CIC JFREE! MERCENARY COMP by Novagan FREE ART OF CHESS by SPA BARBARIAN FREE BARBARIAN, ULT WARRIOR by Palice FREE TERRORPODS by Psygno #VATE   FREE! BUGGY BOY by Elite FREEL THUNDERCATS by Elite WIZEALE INCLUDES FREE UK DELIVERY The Amcm 500 is one of a new breed of lochinologically advanced computers, which are now emerging as the new tandard for home computing, bused around the now Motorola 68000 chip The A500 has 512K. RAM and 1 Mbyte double sided disk drive built-in. It can be connected directly to a wide range of monilors, or to a domestic TV set through a TV modulator Designed with the user in mind, the A500 features a user friendly WIMP environment and comes supplied with a free mouse. And, when you buy your Amiga from Silici Shop. the UKS Nol Ariga specialists. Yu will e nhance an Aller los Service that is second to none, including a lachnical Support helpline and the newsletters and price list Return the coupon below for our current information pack, which will give details of the Silica srvice and the very latest Silica Artilga otters ELOE LORECENSIL FREE! IKARI WARRIORS by Elite FREE WIZBALL by Ocean WHY SILICA SHOP? FREE FROM SILCA PHOTON PAINT PACK A500 Computer .99 TV Modulator .99 Photon Paint .95 TenStar Pack .50 TOTAL RRP: .43 LESS DISCOUNT: .43 PACK PRICE :  When you buy Amiga 500 Shop, you will not only get a high pow, w hat chaty computer, og You me pectul o Fino all, w eluding i TV modulullohi ve A500 dinaryboard so you can plug your Ang straight to your TV me the modulator is al muded with the A502A1DSS cm hot dlou h monitors. Secondly, we have idded a Copy of Proton Punta Suced graphics ewan RARO 155 L and by non ta thil you can be up and running light y ung m g a TENSTAR GAMES PAOK As pulchuud ni Sic Shop. This plea leunen en top. Ans c h combined RAP of many 0730' xham te boupon for B eide en la route Gamintim in CO WHERE THE MANT COOL Wcwn g ula per on ig TFW bona o o producto r de   , EL (    ngol Anglated pro b leme de mind bond outdoor long hai PH qun Hai Bà Trng Thai Cata VIHA ITEMHE LIP THU THI TH HIN KH I Spend the Moon and more on REY and u ng chand to De Mall TO THE FULL STOCK RANGE The largest range of Amiga e d ipherals, and books and software in the UK AFTER SALES SUPPORT: The statiat Silica Shop te    '   t A FREE NEWSLETTERS Maled direct to your home soon as wit print them. Mauringo and latest role FREE OVERNIGHT DELIVERY: On a dwie orders whipped lo Silica Shop cutiomer wihine Uk muntand PRICE MATCH PROMISE We will normally watch our Tiptonomers on a \"ume product s e price FREE TECHNICAL HELPLINE: Fulltime beam of Amiga lechnucal empts to halp you with your technical que But don't just take our word for it Compen tuin me Coupon below for our latel Amiga mure id begin to E CO Salica Shopping Arth We FREE TENSTAR PACK 1084S MONITOR PACK A500 Computer  399.99 1084S Colour Monitor .99 Photon Paint .95 TenStar Pack .50 TOTAL RRP: .43 LESS DISCOUNT: .43 PACK PRICE :  When you buy v Am Ameda (14.95 e She S H TC Art of Chess .95 ukrepou be T al por i .95 Barbuurlani, Uli Warrior requigney e TENTAR Buggy Boy .95 GAMES PACE mor y en Warrion [24.95 230. ubroutely FREE Insanity Fighi $24.95 A500 purchased Mercenary Comp .95 The Te am P + ludnie or the 24.95 Termorpods 24.95 ch individual pack T hundercals to honor Wirbul|| 24.95 En 029,50 TOTAL RRP: .50 DO YOU OWN AN AMIGA? porady pud mod ligamg po mga We no and would REE OF CHARGE as they become bit more upon ang hd Deng To: Silica Shop Ltd, Dept CVG 0483, 14 The Mows, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kont DA14 4DX PLEASE SEND ME FREE LITERATURE ON THE AMIGA Mr/Meuls Initials Surname Addreds SILICA SHOP: SIDCUP CE Mail Order) 01-309 1111 Mews Hatena Roud. Skalcunu kent. DAT OOK OPEN MONATar Top CATENaHT FAH rn  LONDON 01-580 4000 53\" Tortem Court Raud, London, WTP QRA OPEN MONS AT     MIONE LONDON 01-629 1234 ext 3914 Sidoar moord. Oona' SHE London. WIA TA OPINE MONAT A LATET NGA TASCAVEL Postcode: Do you already compuller Howich do you ? "


"1 K10000 JU? speak up. Thankyou Kenneth Jackson! Living in Israel where the Sega is second only to those ancient PC's, I can't help noticing the kind of hype this machine is receiving — and it doesn't deserve it either. Both popular consoles are feeble when compared with most 16-bit micros. You say titles like Super Mario Bros still put the majority of 16-bit games to shame=you said it and made my day! SMB vs Baal? Great Football vs TV Sports Football. Top Gun vs Falcon? Oh yeah, sure . . . you're the ones that ought to open your eyes. Lior Meiry, Haifa, Israel. YOB: SMB is a million times better than Baal! You could go on for hours arguing about 16-bit and console games. You list the finest examples of 16-bit games but the quote was \"the majority — there are still a lot of crumy 16-bit The spring is sprung, the awful games like Legendary a game, it's either for the games out there. Generally grass is riz — we wonder Axe, Pinball, Chan and Chan, Amstrad, C64 or Spectrumspeaking, new console where the YOBBO is. Well, World Court Tennis and but never for the Sega or games (Salamander, Vulcan he's in the C+VG offices Dragon Spirit. Then we Nintendo. Before you shout Venture, Double Dragon, opening another bulging played Victory Run and at me for saying that they Track and Field Il etc) are all Gro-bag of mail, that's that was another cost too much, remember extremely good. You list old where. If you've got a moan, disappointment. The only Sega cards are only .95. games! groan, compliment, game that comes near the So please give away a Sega complaint or just have coin-op is Galaga 88. So we card. Dear YOB, something silly or witty to went home without a PC Robin Freeman, Edinburgh. Cut down on the black and say, send your letter to THE Engine. How much money white pages. Your mag is YB, MAILBAG, C+VG, did you get from NEC to turning out to look like a PRIORY COURT, 30-32 YOB: Tapes are easily print good reviews? newspaper. A few more FARRINGDON LANE, mass-produced if we were Patrick Coolwijk, 5367 AD colours perhaps? LONDON, EC1R 3AU. If, in Macharen, Holland. to give away a Sega card, Bruno Amorelli, Waltham we'd have to pay  for each his infinite wisdom, the YOB Cross, Herts. thinks your letter is fab 'n' YOB: Either you're blind or one, and that added to the brill, he'll send you a stupid. Any idiot can see that cost of sticking a card to each the PC Engine is by far the stonking good +VG t-shirt. magazine would push the YOB: Your wish is my So what are you waiting for best games machine cover price up to a mere . command, matey. As from get writing. currently available. I next issue, C+VG will have Next time you write to honestly can't understand complain, make sure your full-colour reviews and you saying that R-Type isn't Dear YOB will generally have more brain's not in neutral. like the original. I know fora After reading C+VG we colour than a test card. thought that the PC Engine fact that the arcade fiend Dear YOB, Rignall practices the game at Please could you send me a was a superb machine. So we Dear YOB, went to see friend who had home on his Engine, then Thanks for the free game in list of C16/+4 POKEs and one and we saw Galaga 88. nips down to his local arcade cheats. your February issue. Like We were really impressed, in Brighton to knock up a many other console owners, Howard Black, Aberdeen. but he only had Galaga 88 so highscore, and he says he I found it very interesting to we decided to make a trip to uses exactly the same tactics. YOB: No. look at, along with my It's our opinion, and we're 20-odd other freebies. .. Munich to see Games World where they sell PC Engines. not alone — that R-Type is almost worth buying a Dear YOB, We arrived at Games World 98% faithful to the original Spectrum for! But I think ! Please send me a POKE for machine. If I was you I'd totally exhausted and asked have another solution for us stick to tulip-picking and Commando on the C64. If 100,000+ console owners. the shop keeper to show us you can't, can any reader Edam-eating Either give money-off the Engine. After some you help me? Send it to 1 Lynors vouchers for cartridges and problems with the voltage obviously don't know an Avenue, Strood, Kent. we started to play R-Type. amazing machine when you cards, or increase the size of see one. Colin Crampton, Strood. the Mean Machine section, We were not impressed, with news, charts, features because you said that it is Dear YOB, YOB: No I can't. Can and more reviews, induding exactly the same as the I get your magazine every n PC Engine titles. coin-op. But we didn't think month, but I feel like I'm sure it would go down it was. cancelling it. I own a Sega Dear YOB, well, as more different Then we played a lot of and every time you give away At last, someohe dares to machines will be available in "


"the near future. Dear YOB, more for  is still good just as good as the C64 and On a lighter side, your Recently I was bored and was value, it has to be said that Spectrum. Please restart the infamous Garry Williams is forced, though I am now very few compilations have MSX-tra section and tell me obviously very intelligent to totally ashamed of it, to read games of equally high or low and others what you think of support Arsenal, as they are another computer magazine, value throughout. The the MSX. the pinnacle of English and was horrified to see that question is would you Jeffrey Richardson, football today. What is it said that the ST sound chip really pay 83 extra for some Sunderland. Garry's official capacity to is poor compared with that games that you'll never play? the nearest stone. of the Commodore 64. I think not. Michael Gregory, YOB: The MSX is a neat little Please tell me whether this But if the argument is a machine — but we don't Cullompton, Devon. is true. little weak on the cover it because it's got such Craig Dave, Wallasey, compilation front, I have YOB: The money off a miniscule user base. There Merseyside. recently seen Microprose vouchers sounds interesting are more BBC, Electron, C16 Soccer on sale for  —on and could, I am told, and Atari 8-bit owners out YOB: I'm afraid you'll have cassette. I admit that in this become a reality in the there — so it wouldn't be fair to top yourself, old chum case there are different types future. Keep looking. The just to run an MSX-only it's true. of footy to play, but surely Mean Machines column will this can't justify an extra fiver column. Sorry, Norry. grow with the consoles Dear YOB, being slapped on. If this and we're doing plenty of In the resurgence of policy carries on throughout Dear YOB. features, so you've got speculation regarding the industry, and frankly I am fully ashamed on your nothing to moan about software pricing and piracy, l after my experiences I'd say mag. It said in January's issue there. PC Engine reviews thought I'd better voice my there is a strong possibility of that there was to be given have just started this month opinion on the subject and this. Then a disk-based game away a free demo, and we and, Rignall assures me, will make a prediction. Way back will damage the pocket as think it will be a great hit'. continue. I think our in the heady days of the much as the already You must be joking. I can consoles news is second to rubber-keyed 48K Spectrum, overpriced 16-bit games. think of far more better none — and the only reason the name of the great Indeed, at a time when 16-bit games than Brainstorm. why we don't print a console Ultimate Play the Game was games really need to drop a Please could you not be so chart is because nobody on all Zx lips. They were THE little off their price, an 8-bit much I know your just doing does one at present. The leading games company, and surge will hardly be it to sell your mag. future of Mean Machines is their software, priced at encouraging, will it? Bruno Amorelli, Waltham looking rosier and rosier — .50, was second to none. I don't know — maybe I'm Cross, Herts. just watch it. Lastly, the only Imagine, then, the outcrywrong and these are mere reason why Garry Williams is when Ultimate released isolated incidents. But if it an Arsenal supporter is Sabre Wulf, a decent enough isn't and if the next crappy YOB: I'm fully ashamed 'on\" because they've got the only game, but at a price of .95 Christmas conversions you matey boots! E-for your ground with doors wide — almost twice as dear as its weigh in at  a throw, English, and a black mark for enough to let him through, predecessor Atic Atac. Can you'll know where you heard wingeing without cause. and big enough seats to you imagine it? You'll have it first. You have been house his massive expansive to, because there wasn't warned. Dear YOB, behind. His weight is one, save for a few Stephen Trask, Rochdale, classified, I'm afraid, and I disgruntled software I'm writing to you because I Lancs. would like all your latest info can't even give an reviewers. The general (posters and a magazine). So consensus of opinion, approximation to the nearest YOB: One thing you fail to though, was that, okay, it's a I would be grateful if you tonne. Sorry. mention is the budget little dear, but it IS Ultimate could send me stuff. I also market. Back in the olden after all and it did take six would like more Sega Dear YOB, days when games were a months to write. magazines in the shops. Why, why, why is poor old mere .50, the budget At that time I, being What have people got to Garry Williams being market didn't exist. In these youthful of mind and all, order in a shop? It's insulted because he's fat? days of overpricing, the ignored the nagging rediculous. The jokes (?) in the March budget market is booming, thoughts that warned me of a with loads of high quality Mario Samo. issue of C+VG were very prospective rise in software crap and stupid. Even if it games costing a mere . to come, and of course I was was a competition. I am 14 Having said that, software IS YOB: What do you think ! wrong. For within a further years old and very fat and expensive but there are am? A blinkin' charity or six months, Sabre Wulf, proud of it. I think Garry plenty of games which ARE something?? I don't give out should be a reviewer as well. selling in large quantities, worth the asking price. But any freebies, unless you lan Rothwell, Hemel triggered off a chain reaction the crux of the matter comes send me loads of dosh or within the industry, and the Hempstead, Herts. down to the fact that you something equally desirable price of software rose by at don't HAVE to buy a game if — like a beautiful sister if least three pounds. That you don't think it's worth the you've got one. Anyway, you YOB: We don't take the mick more or less brings us up to money. In fact you'd be forgot to include your name out of gargantuan Garry just date. Yes, I know an average stupid if you did. If next and address, so even if I did \"cos he's fat. We take the Spectrum game costs about a year's 'crappy Christmas want to send you something, mickey 'cos he's fat, pound less than its conversions are  you I couldn't. By the way, D-for loathesome and obnoxious. C64/Amstrad counterparts, really would be a dumb klutz your English. And because nobody likes but nowadays you still get if you actually bought them. him. very little change from a tenner for a full-price 8-bit Dear YOB, Dear YOB, Dear YOB, game. Town an MSX and I was Whilst I was in an arcade in Could you tell me if Sega are And now I think the same angry when you stopped Whitby I saw an Outrun Sim converting Super Hang-On thing is happening again. doing the MSX-tra section. I and went over to it. I hadn't to the master system? The compilation packages buy C+VG not only hoping seen an Outrun for ages, so Jason Samuel, Aberdare, Mid are the first to weigh in at for MSX-tra, but for news in I got, banged in 30p, Glam. anything from .95 about games and PBM's. At selected the tune, but when I upwards, and although some school my friends say the set off I moved the wheel to YOB: Yes: no. may argue that 10 games or MSX is crap, but I think it's the left and the s@ @ \"ing car "


"ARCADIA MUUS HUE COMENTE PERCAD) ASSAULT YOUR COMPUTER WITH 5 ACTION PACKED ARCADE SMASHES ...! The ultimate collection in death and devastation. The supreme challenge of skill and determination that only champions of skill. strength and stamina should even consider. Are you couurageous enough to put your computer through the arcade assault? ). 1:10H10 CONDIDOS ona tirthama playstko WWE ga ROAD BLASTERS STEEL TOCHTER morenohly 10. Give  SINCLAIR USER SUDI LES Ernst 30 SE SIRCHESTER ROAD BLISTEALS oon UG Y Doom! 1943 La 11. 30 CCM, ut to BIONIC COMIYLANDOT IDENTE 1983 SIDE ARMS STREET FIGHTER HELE SIDERMIS akots from Tor U.S. & GOLD CBM 64/128 tape .99 disk.99 Spectrum 48/128K tape.99 +3 disk.99 Amstrad tape .99 disk.99 BEATERS U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 ZAX. "


"that good-buy one. DE er Dear YOB, I have wrote (sic) to say \"I am not very pleased with Playmasters.\" Why do you just pick C64 cheats and pokes? You rarely print Amstrad cheats and pokes (I myself have an Amstrad). I am very disappointed but I forgive you on one condition — you print more Amstrad cheats next month. I have sent some tips for Harrier Attack to get you started. David Cornwall, Sorghall, Chester. HOUS YOB: Cor! Flippin heck! Tips for Harrier Attack!?! Stop the presses, Jaz! Look, Dave, if we received any decent Amstrad tips we would print them, wouldn't we? Obviously C64 and Spectrum owners are much better at hacking than Amstradders. CPC owners prove me wrong or face the scorn of the YOB! TALIS ROAD BLASTERS Dear YOB, went right. And the gears information about PBM to come. So don't worry — Crawl... ramble ... blah were opposite too! This has games on only one page. I be happy! ... fawn ... etc. really put me off Outrun, believe that PBM games Reiner Wald, Rathausgasse and i haven't been on it need two or three pages Dear YOB, 74,5300 Bonn 1, W Germany. since. even more! Most of my I am writing to see if you PS Anyway, your mag is a friends agree with me. would send me one of your Now I've got a totally STONKING good read. Mikko Mantyla, 00170 fab C+VG T-shirts. They're different question. Chris Rigg, Harrogate, N. Helsinki. so good I'd resort to Until the beginning of Yorks. anything, even flattery — February '89 I could watch YOB: A for your English, but viz: Your mag is exquisitely the English TV programme, I think PBM gets far too comprehensive in all forms SKY Channel. Then they YOB: There's nothing worse much coverage already!! FAX to AGM to Mean changed it to Eurosports and than putting your dosh into a They just smell too funny, Machines. It is the bestest SKY Channel can only be machine and finding it and are too vicious — well, games mag around in the seen in the UK. Just then SKY doesn't work. The other my Mongoose is, especially whole universe. started to broadcast the thing that makes me seethe when I play by it. Doesn't phase you, huh? Dolly Parton Show from the is when arcade owners don't Well, I'll have to resort to USA at 6:30 on Sunday renovate their machines Dear YOB brutality. If you don't give evening. I really went crazy properly pinball machines I currently own a brill me a T-shirt I'll break all your because I'm a great fan of with faulty flippers, coin-ops Nintendo, but I am worried arms and legs and shove a Dolly Parton. that don't have all eight that with the Konix console, copy of Commodore User So, now I want to ask if joystick directions, and down yer throat! the Atari ST console, the PC someone in the UK would be crappy fire buttons often Not threatened? Okay, Engine and Sega 16-bit all so kind as to record the show tempt me to put my boot okay, you win, I'll have to coming out soon, my for me on VHS video (I am into the coin slot. If you resort to grovelling. Oh, Nintendo will be forgotten willing to pay). I'm so bought a Mars bar, you about. Please reassure me please, please, please, desperate because here in wouldn't expect it not to that it won't! please may I have one of Germany our boring TV have any chocolate on it, your wonderful, stonking Joshua Galaun, Wimbledon. channels will never send would you — it's exactly the good T-shirts? I shall greatly these shows. same thing with coin-ops. treasure the T-shirt and it will Thanks a lot. YOB: Well, Josh, me old When I put in my money, I be one of my most prized mate, I'd like to be able to expect a full-working game possessions, and as an reassure you, but... Oh YOB: Sorry I didn't print added bonus it would be that I can enjoy. dear, oh dear... Nah. I'm good advertising and this your letter Reiner, but it was only joking! The other single freebie would a bit too crawly for my liking. consoles you mention might doubtless compel my fellow However, your PS was most Dear YOB have the edge technically, Australians to order one. entertaining. Doesn't it just I read every C+VG that I can but the standard of Nintendo So how about it? Did I earn go on to prove what people get. Usually I read it the games does seem to be on one? say about it \"taking all same day it comes to the up and up (witness Jason George, Victoria, sorts\", readers? Oh, well... Finland. C+VG is a good Gradius this issue!) and the Australia Anyone who can help magazine, but it has one vast user base in the US Reiner, please get in touch. problem. My hobby is PBM YOB: No. No. No. No. No. This has been a Reader games, and C+VG has of new titles for a few years No. No. If you think they're Service Announcement. "


"Masters lay It is with a smiling countenance that I bring you this month's Playmasters. For along with a splendiferous selection of low-down cheats, sexy POKEs and wholesome hints, we also premiere THE PLAYMASTERS, the definitive UK highscores table that covers all aspects of the gaming hemisphere. If you have some tips, hints or maps, send them in via Her Majesty's postal services, making sure your envelope is addressed to PLAYMASTERS, C+VG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON, EC1R 3AU. There's a big bundle of software on offer to the senders of the finest tips of the month. This month Mr Barr Monger of Hayes in the the shire of Middlesex walks off with a stonking great package of goodies. Who knows, next month it could be your turn ... Julian Biguan namco MUNSTERS Ocean's arm-wrestler. Load Those Doughnut Cracking the game and get yourself boys! Do they ever stop their onto the high-score table, hacking japes? Apparently then type in HINGSEN-J (use not for one of their number= HI-SCORE the \"-\" on the numeric keypad. The Breaker — supplied a D69990000 Press the DEL key and 5CORE: whole host of happy hacks. BBB03998 thelégend \"DEMO!!!\" should amongst them this set of C64 DE DO appear on the top of the reset pokes for Again Again's screen. Now type\"-J.\" and horrific game. Load it, hit the press the DEL key again and button and POKE 2176, 3 to FRUIT **MEGA-DEMO\" should change the speed of the. TARGET appear, and lo, you can game (you can try any partake in the event of your number between 0 and 5). choice Simply by pressing a POKE 6422 208 gives you function key. And with three infinite energy. Not to restart cans of Lucozade to boot! the game, type 2048,216 REVENGE OF DOH POKE 2049,120: POKE 2050. Kingsley Hyam reckons that if 32 (RETURN), then SYS 2048 A Ghostly help is at hand. you boot the Amiga version of (RETURN). this game, while holding down PACMANIA funky old beat 'em up. Get to can use the following keys the left mouse button, you will Another Breaker poke, this the high score table, hold for some wacky effects: be presented with the title time for the C64 version of this down CAPS SHIFT and B and F5 toggles between screen from Peter Johnson's wunnerful little game. Load, you should get an asterisk. invulnerability from forthcoming conversion of reset and enter POKE 28520, The level where you died aliens and walls. Robocop. Coo! 165 (RETURN), then SYS should reappear, but without F6 toggles invulnerability FUSION 14336 (RETURN) and the colour, so start playing again from alien fire. A rather jolly cheat mode for a game should restart with and when you move on to the F7 Infinite credits. rather jolly Amiga game from infinite lives freely available, next screen the colour should F8 gives mouse control of the programmers of this GAPLUS return, along with infinite lives the pod, making for a month's mega-game, Wot a triffic conversation this Simon Eden of Stretham is the pretty good two player Populous. Start the game as was, and here's The Breaker person to thank for that one. game. per usual, collect the ship of Doughnut Cracking R-TYPE SDI then fly to the top-left of the Services to lend a helping Jas from Omagh, N. Ireland, Another ST cheat revealed by playing area, where you hand in the form of an infinite Glenn Finnigan and Craig Jas of Omagh which lets you should get back in the buggy lives poke. Load the game, hit Moore of Ilchester and select levis simply by and drive into the corner. Now that reset button and type David Mitchell from pressing the function keys type in \"STONKER\" and POKE 32496.173 (RETURN) Pettswood all sent in this Get yourself onto SDI's high re-enter the ship. If you now followed by SYS 4099 cheat for the ST version of score table and type ALERIC press D. you will cycle (RETURN), and in the words the fabby shoot 'em up. Now you should be able to go through the available of Ron Pickering, \"away you Load the game as usual, where no man has gone weapons, and pressing C go!\" then when you're asked to before! puts you on the next level. TARGET RENEGADE Insert disk B hold down the DALEY THOMPSON'S Repeat this process on the In case you Spectrum owners HELP key and type ME. OLYMPIC CHALLENGE second level and you will be are feeling left out, here's a tip Press the up-arrow key and Reading's own Paul Bennett, able to fly through walls if you especially for you. Infinite put the second disk in the and our regular tipster-type. press the \"T\" key, and pick up lives are yours for the taking in drive to continue. Hit the Kingsley Hyamn have a petite switches if you hover over the Speccy version of this space bar to begin and y88 cheat forthe Amiga version of them and press \"F\". Thank 'ee "


"Sborata to Kingsley Hyam and David left, up the ladder and right, Bartle for that 'un. and you should see the Joker. DOUBLE DRAGON Hit him repeatedly until he Razz 'n' Dazz of Wickford runs off, then go up twice and reckon you should play in two hit him again. Go left and left player mode and get both again and hit the Joker as players killed until you have befor. Now go right down. one credit left and the left, down, left and take the CONTINUE message is elephant. Go down the displayed on both sides of the ladder, right, up get the milk, screen. Press both fire down, lett down, left, up, left, buttons simultaneously and down, take the object and you should find yourself with drop it, go up, right, up, up the infinite lives. Richard Smith of ISTAS ladder, up, collect the knife, Leigh-on-Sea claims that if go down, left, down and left you type 'RU CALLING MY A Spooky hints are here to haunt you. again until you see the Joker. PINT A POFF!\" on the title and pick up the carrot. Go the ladder, right, down, lelt, If you hit him as before he will screen and press Return down, right and up and down, right, up, left, up, up. fall over, giving you the you'll be able to kill every collect the gas mask which again and take the camera opportunity to slap the cuffs opponent with just a prod of you should use as soon as (phew! Are you following all on him. Once bound, he the DELETE key. you enter the room to the this?) Anyway, use the should drop a large card BATMAN right. Go down, left, down and camera then drop it Now go which you should pick up and If you're really stumped on down again. Go right until you left, down, down, then keep take right, up and left to a \"The Penguin Plot here are reach another ladder going going right until the words room with a similar card in it. some tips from Harry the up. Go up it until you come \"The Fun Fair\" appears in the Use your card and you should Hacker which should get you across some teeth, which you top left of the screen. Now go then be able to walk through well into the game. Batarang should pick up and use. Go. right, up, up and left, then the large card as if it were a the men with guns until they down, right, up, up, left, down. stand by the fruit machine and door. Go left, collect the can. speed up and they will drop a left up the ladder, down, left use the money. You should go down. Go down and you useful bag of crisps (you can and pick up the fish. Go right, now find some ammunition on should find yourself at the do a similar thing to the down and right again to find a the floor so pick it up and go Roller Coaster. Go right climb clowns in \"A Fete Worse Than bag of money, then go up. right, down, down then the ladder and go night until Death\"). Use the spanner to right, down, right, up, up the continue right until you can go you come to another ladder, fix the computer then insert ladder. Get the ears, use them up. Take the gun, go down, which you should also climb. the disk. Use the badge to get and then drop them. Go down right then up, take the Go left (remembering to duck past the policeman and take the ladder, down right up. coconut, then go down and when the eagles fly past). the rope, then climb up the right, up left, down, collect the continue right until you reach keep going and you should first ladder you come to pliers and you can now the shooting gallery. Use the eventually find Robin! collect the torch: Go down defuse bombs just by ammunition then the gun, and and use the key to open the standing next to them and keep pressing the fire button factory door. Use the rope to using the pliers. until the sunglasses get down the lift, then you To find the bombs you have appear. Grab them and walk should be able to walk right to go all the way back, so go left then up into the door with and pick up a key which letsup. right, up, left down the the teeth. Use the you go back up ladder defuse the bomb. sunglasses and get Those of you who have Head right, then down, then the turkey, then problems with the Joker in \"A left, down, left as far as you go Fete Worse Than Death\" can go and defuse the next should be pleased with this bomb. Then go up, left, down, complete solution from Barry left, up, up again, defuse the Monger of Hayes in bomb, go left, and deluse the Middlesex next bomb. Now, go left, then down and get the handcuffs. From your start position in the Go up, right, down the ladder, park go left down then right right, down, down, laft, up. and lick up the metal bar down, down, the ladder, left, Keep going right and get the and defuse the bomb. Walk light bulb. From there, go left left, climb up the lader, go up up. left and up, and take the and defuse the bomb. Then Batarang. Go down, left. it's right, up, left, down, left down and left. Use the light and deluse the bomb. Go up bulb in the dark room and go and defuse the bomb, then go to the door. Use the bar to down, right, up, right, down, break the door open, then left, down, down the ladder, drop the bar. Go left and get right up the ladder, right, up, the forch, then go down the up again, left, down the ladder. The next room is also ladder, left, up the ladder, dark so switch on your forch down, down, right, up, nght, and watch out for rats. Now, down, right as far as you can head down, then left and up go, then up, right, up, left, up 2009 1,21SETLE Choose your level and your weapons in Fusion. lay Masters "


"MASTER THE PLAYMATERS Calling all joystick-wizards! Here's your chance to put your top scores on display for the world to see. if you're a champion in the arcades or on computer or console games, send in your scores and they'll be entered into THE PLAYMASTERS, Britain's definitive games highscore table. So what are you waiting for? Put your top scores on the back of a postcard or envelope and post it to THE PLAYMASTERS, C+VG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. And don't forget to say which Version youF SCOFE was achieved on. 166,650 Kevin Langton, Chesterfield OPERATION WOLF 402,400 Paul Minton, Newcastle PACMANIA 530,300 Andrew Lacey, Billinghurst IT HOW 1,512,000 Kevin Langton, Chesterfield odo A Beat 575,900 on PC Engine R-Type. SEGA ALEX KIDD (LOST STARS) 19,650 Phillip Jones, Burnham-on-Sea BOMBER RAID 799.100 Julian Riynall, C+VG FANTASY ZONE 4,995 230 Jama Ap Howell, Cardult FANTASY ZONE 11 6.967,470 Phillip lone Burnham-on-Sea KENSEIDEN 81,450 Phillip Joney, Bumbum-on-Sea SHINOBI 192, 10 WILL Puch, Liverpool THUNDERBLADE 1.361.000 Phillip JOHG, Burham-on-Sea WONDERBOY (MONSTERLAND) 742,820 Philip Jones Burnham-on-Sea AMIGA DENARIS 53,900 Peter Evans, Horsham OPERATION WOLF 38 John Hoyle, Walsall PACMANIA 230,000 Mike Gibson, Doncaster SHUTH EPAT PPP, GR 46 84955343 WW NINTENDO CASTLEVANIA 72,350 Alex Bell, Kelvedon GUMSHOE 31,000 Alex Bell, kelvedon GRADIUS 12,670,000 Julian Rignall, C+VG KID ICARUS 1,590 V Ale Bell. helvedon KUNG-FU 125,700 key Milling. Wigan METROID 740 Kev Melling. Wigan RC PRO-AM 172.10 Alex Bell, Kelvedon URBAN CHAMPION 15 GLOVES Rev Melling, Wigan C64 ARMALYTE 1.175.900 Graham Calder. Lanark GREAT GIANA SISTERS 77 266 David Pocock, South Croydon LAST NINJA II 340,130 Robert Eddings, Stevenage SALAMANDER 235,645 David Pocock, South Croydon SPECTRUM BUGGY BOY 112,900 Seb Hallet, Cambridge ROBOCOP 120,600 lan Michaels, London ARCADE HIGHSCORES PC ENGINE ALIEN CRUSH 75,100,200 Julian Rignall. C+VG DRAGON SPIRIT 308,400 lulian Riinall. C+VG DRUNKEN MASTER 150.000 Tony Ng London R-TYPE 575,900 Julian Rignall, C+VG AFTERBURNER 16,241,H0 Paul James Stoke-on-Trent ALIEN SYNDROME 775.500 EGG, Portsmouth ARKANOID 1.241,300 Lee Waters (LEE), Hayling Island BUBBLE BOBBLE 9.999,990 Mohammed Nazir, Rochdale, Lancs CABAL 1.355,000 Mark Watson (MAW), Manchester CHASE HO 9.16 300 R Thompson, Tamworth CONTINENTAL CIRCUS 8.912,910 Rajbir kang (RA), Harlington, Midde FLYING SHARK 1,011,810 Gavin Davies (CA), Swansea GALAGA 1,234,100 Julian Rignall (AZ), Brighton OPERATION WOLF 414000 DAV, Hastings OUT RUN 9403 JU Andy Conwy. Cheltenham POWER DRIFT 5.574,745 Martin Deem (MD, Portsmouth ROBOCOP 2.194,100 Martin Deum, Portsmouth SPLATTERHOUSE 12.00 Martin hein, Portsmouth THUNDER CROSS 722,900 David Seals (DAV), Blackpool TIME SCANNER 1,673,000 Julian Rignall, Brighton TETRIS 172,600 Julian Rignall. Brighton TOOBIAN 10.550,495. Martin Deem. Portsmouth VINDICATORS 212,650 Julian Rignall. Brighton WARDNER 12,025, 175 Paul Stoko (PI). Aberdare ST ALIEN SYNDROME 718 000 Kevin Langlon, Chesterfield BACKLASH 1.450,000 Tame Bovd, London BIONIC COMMANDOS 1,270509 Steven Peters, Birmingham ELIMINATOR "


"Garden JOYSTICK AWARDS 88 VOLTRE It's that Golden Joystick time of year again. Voting is now open the Year, Game of the Year, Adventure of the Year, Arcade for Europe's most prestigious computer game awards. Golden Game of the Year, Strategy Game of the Year, Role Playing Joysticks is entering its sixth proud year. In the time we have Game of the Year, Programmer of the Year, Best Original been running the awards each year has seen a large growth in Game, Best Coin-op Conversion, Best Graphics (16 bit), the number of votes cast by you the C+VG readers. It's the Best Graphics (8 bit), Best Soundtrack (16 bit), Best reader poll that makes our awards the special ones. No Soundtrack (8 bit), Best Simulation. arbitrary panels, no reviewers sticking their noses in. The In addition there are four machine specific awards games that win our prizes are the ones you vote for. Plain and sponsored by individual magaiznes. These are the C+VG simple. Console Game of the Year, the Commodore User Amiga This year we are expanding the awards by inviting our sister Game of the Year, the Sinclair User Spectrum Game of the magazines in the Emap group (our publishers) to extend the Year, and The One Atari ST Game of the Year. voting to their readers. Voting forms will also be appearing in Get your votes in now. We have ten C+VG 'Stonking Sinclair User, Commodore User and The One. Good Read' T Shirts to give away to ten lucky voters who The game categories are as follows: Software House of are drawn out of our mail bag. Vote now. Best Coin-op Conversion...........!!! Runner-Up............ Software House of the Year......... Runner-Up -----------------Arcade Game of the Year......... Runner-Up..................... Best Adventure Game....-11.... Runner-Up............. Best Original Game........... Runner-Up.............. Best Graphics (8-bit).......... Runner-Up............ Best Graphics (16-bit)......... Runner-Up -----------------...... Best Soundtrack (8-bit)....... Runner-Up.......... Best Soundtrack (16-bit)...... Runner-Up............. Programmer of the Year........ Runner-Up................. Best Role Playing Game......... Runner-Up............. Strategy Game of the Year..... Runner-Up............ Best Simulation. Runner-Up........... Game of the Year.......... Runner-Up.................... Best Console Game............ Runner-Up......................... . EEEEE. Send your forms to: Golden Joysticks 1988, C+VG, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Road, London ECIR 3AU. Tobing Coupon "


"ARCADI A A dash through the jungle grabbing the weapons. MISSING IN ACTION Konami must be very short enemy is always hot on your of new ideas if they think heels but this gives you a they can fob us off with little breathing room. The Missing In Action-a game airfield scene is particularly which would have been new fraught. As well as dodging and innovative several years your pursuers you'll have to ago. find your way found the For Missing In Action is huge transport planes which horribly reminiscent of roll towards you with their Green Beret and a very bad propellors sweeping your Green Beret at that. The getaway route. The only way graphics are very stylish, out is up the ladder to the large, colourful and well cockpit, along the spine of drawn. But the movement! the plane and down the Just watching the game gave other side. Tricky when me a case of the shudders. under pressure. It's jerky and totally without Jungle scenes follow and realism. In fact, the you'll eventually play back characters all seem to have the way you came to the trouble running, I think it's airfield scene again the because of the high knee first time I've seen a action and the fact they horizontally scrolling game appear to be running a lot play from left to right. On faster than they actually are. the strategy side, all you That grouse aside, the have to do is make sure you game is much the same as keep one step ahead of the the original. You are given an enemy — hit before you're important mission which hit, and if you're out of means moving behind range, drop to the ground to enemy lines and you're avoid the bullets and immediately spotted. The grenades whizzing your way. enemy rush in from all Missing In Action is a sides and you've only got another attempt at a well your two fists to rely on, that worn theme. The graphics is, until you can pick up a save it somewhat but there weapon. are more innovative games Half the time your best out there. form of escape is to run up v Lost In Action owes a one of the many ladders and onto a higher level. The debt to Green Beret. premissing tempi A Impressive congratulatory screen at end of loveltwo. "


"A Image Right Sighining fasi vertical shoot em up. IMAGE FIGHT Irem's Image Fight has that ASUKA 'N' ASUKA certain something which My heart sank as ! makes it instantly more attempted to play Asuka 'n' playable. Asuka from Taito. It's not Once again you're poised that the game's particularly to take on the first wave of difficult, it's just that it's attacking enemy, and they similar to every other swoop down with a vertically scrolling shoot 'em vengeance spraying you with up ever released. clouds of deadly fire balls. You control a craft which As soon as you destroy the starts off at the bottom of the first attack wave you can go screen and must shoot the for the pods. Little satellite squadrons of alien craft. ships which attach Equipped with rapid fire themselves to your wingtips and a smart bomb effect, and duplicate your fire. Red annihilate each attacking pods are more erratic; they fire in the opposite direction wave to produce a pick-up symbol which increases the to your joystick movements strength of your weapons. and in 16 directions. Blue Some of the aliens are pods are more stable and fire pretty hard to deal with, Straight ahead. Up to three especially those which whirl pods can be attached and down like vicious catherin they make a hell of a wheels spraying the area difference of your fire with deadly fire. power. As in all such games, the The graphics are very best tactic is to keep a typical of Irem, and very weather eye on the canon close to the chunky colourful balls while systematically Style found in Mr Heli. The shooting everything else. sho game itself moves fluidly and However, there's not much there's enough coming at more to say about Asuka \"n\" you to offer quite a Asuka. It's a pretty average challenge. While there's nothing new here you'll find Image Fight extremely addictive. ACCOM V Asuka 'n' Asuko average stuff End level nasty in Image Fight. "


"NOW TAKENT Castle Computers DEPT C + VG.1. CASTLE HOUSE 11 NEWCASTLE STREET BURSLEM STOKE-ON-TRENT TEL: 0782 575043 (10 LINES) CASTLE COMPUTERS — OFTEN IMITATED NEVER BEATEN — PHONE US FOR SPECIAL OFFERS 6.99 5.50 61.00 ** 2.99 -. 1.79 179 -1.79 -1.79 SPECTRUM SPECIAL OFFERS SPECTRUM SPECIAL OFFERS SPECTRUM SPECIAL OFFERS SPECTRUM SPECIAL OFFERS SPECTRUM SPECIAL OFFERS SPECTRUM SPECIAL OFFERS 19 Boot Camp 3.95 Dragon Ninja _ 6.50 Tetor dhe Deep 1.99 Teor dhe Deep 1.99 Nobuka 2.99 SOL 5.00 Mega Apocalypa. 1.99 Wec Le Mans 6.25 Olink 175 Carrier Command 9.99 The In Crowd 9.95 Netheworld SAS Combat 2.99 Run Gountlet. Ovariander 5.50 Exploding F 5.50 Six Pok: Vol. $.99 Soldier of Fortune Emlyn Hughes 5.99 Albufer 6.75 Cory Cory... 5.50 RTV 5.95 Tailo Coin Op 3.95 Dark Fusion 6.00 Salamande 5,00 Rex 6.50 Fr and forget 6.50 Loaderboard 250 Ring Wor.. 5.50 inter Rugby Simi 1.79 War in Middle Earthi 6.99 Empire Strikes Back 6.75 Joe Hlade l... 1.75 Vidony Rodd. 5.00 Skole Ball 5.99 Blood Valley Retur dh Jadi 1.99 Frey 299 Black Tiger 6.00 Team 2.99 inter Speedway Slaine 1.99 Drud l... 1.99 Psycho Soldier 1.99 Ancient Baits 10.95 Heroes of the long 5.99 Football Frent TT Rocing Simulator 1.99 Double Dragon. 0.75 Quartet 2.99 Arus di Rom 7,99 Frighton 299 Ghostbudders THE LITH. 299 Gauntlet 275 Robo Opp 6.75 Soccer Lord. -7.99 School Daze LE FIT STLE Califomia Game 199 Urdlum. 275 Yogi Bear 1.50 Rounds Hoods 2.99 Last Ninja . 7.99 Nicode Classic 1.79 European 5-A-Sidi 1.99 Galactic Game 1.99 Red LED -1.50 Red pats 3.95 BBC Quiz Mader 2.99 Fru Sim Battle Tank 1.99 Gartic 1.99 Broar 2.99 Waterloo.... 3.95 Action Rellen M  Sim 179 Hatire allock 3.95 Hysturia. 2.99 Rood Blonders 5.75 Guadal Canal 1.99 Giant 9.95 Cantinel 200 Shootout 2.99 Glider Rider 1.75 Enduro Rooer 2.09 High Frontier 1.99 The Munsten. 5.99 Ning Scooter Sim 1.79 2.99 inter Cricket 1.75 Salling 10 2.99 Conflict 5.99 Ianon 6.99 Pulse Warrior 1.79 The Fury 299 Techno Cop 6.00 Bagus 1.75 Contlich 4.99 Cp'n Blood 5.99 BUT Simulator 1.79 Color of Magic 1.99 Butcher HILL .5.75 Zythum. _1.00 Billgrieg 6.95 Los Duel 6.75 Zybu Living boylights 1.99 Thunderblode 5.50 Super Sprint 1.99 Napokon at War — 6.95 Nebulus 2.99 Rally Sim 279 Bligeronds 6.99 Knightmare 1.99 Mas 3 2.99 kunhan.. 6.95 SOMEON 6.75 On Cu... Som Lord 525 Laser Toq 1.99 Bal Man I. -6.75 Desert Ross 8.95 War in Middle Earth 6.99 Nina Mascu Storm Lord 5.25 Last Mission 1.99 Typhoon 5.25 Stalingrad 6195 Ninja Monsodiu 275 Tomcat 1.79 Alrbourne Ranger 6.99 Loads of Midnight 1.99 Thing Bounas Bock 299 Yankee 695 4 Soccer Simulators. 5.99 Slug -1.79 Tom ... 6.75 Moon Selli 2.99 Tenis 299 Slaua Cray 5.50 ISS 6.99 Shanghai Karate 1.79 ndowd 9.95 Magnetron 2.99 View To AG 1.75 Yeti 299 Game Salond Match 2...... 8.95 Menital Army 1.79 Guerilla Wars. 5.00 Mag Ma 1.99 Sorogo 6100 Toidon 299 North Stor 299 Werewolf Sim Tim and Magic 4.95 Wiley althe Rule 1.99 Vi = 1***** 5.00 Football Manager .50 Silent SMR 6.99 SWAT 1.79 Cros 299 Ninja Hampster 1.99 Wof Man 10.95 Tracksuit Manager 6.50 Eogle Nes 1.79 Dark Scapine 2.99 Da Wall 6.00 International Matule 200 Yobba Dabba Do.... 1.75 Gunship 6.75 Rambo 5.75 Laser Squod 6.50 Final Masoul 6.75 Val2.79 279 179 WE NOW OFFER AN EVEN BTE USING 1st CLASS POST. PAS P&P 50p ON ALL ORDERYN OVERSE E LOWER PRICES (AI ALL FAULTY SOFTWARE CI -3.95 Empire NOW'S THE TIME TO BUY ST SPECIAL OFFERS ATARI ST SPECIAL OFFERS ATARI ST SPECIAL OFFERS ATARI ST SPECIAL OFFERS AMIGA SPECIAL OFFERS AMIGA SPECIAL OFFERS Gato 17.05 Sundng...! 6.99 Bool 12.95 Music Studio 395 Barbarian 12.95 Pystal 19.95 Cucus Gome 9.95 F15 Strike Eagle 15.95 Scary Vision 14.95 Mania Batman 10.00 S.TOS 19.95 K+ 12.95 Enduro Root 5.95 Borbanan. 12.95 Fiqh PT 737 6.95 Cop Fuzz 2.95 Mendic 12.95 Retum d the Jedi 12.95 1943 12.95 Buman 14.95 Fairy Tale Adventure Cosmic Parole 12.50 Shadow Gale 11.95 F16 Fighter Pilot 14.95 Night Raider 12.95 Robo Cop 15.95 Bethes. 15.55 CHOLEY Cars 12.50 Wild Dune 14.95 Catch 23 5.95 Super Hong On 12.95 CPN Fizz ... 10.50 GAL Football. . 895 Dragon Scope 1295 ST Wors 8.95 Mindshadow 1.95 Gurship 14.95 Coromig Games .14.99 Iron Lord L . 16.95 FIG Falcon 14.95 SAAK 12.95 Borowod Time 3.95 Vinn. 6.95 Do te Pirate..... ..1295 Lombard Rally Sam. 14.95 Fredergtion of Free Traders 19.95 Poc Mania 12.95 ST 5 Sion 15.50 720 13.95 Prison 12.95 Thender Fredarii 12.95 R Type.. 13.95 Tanglewood ...$195 Pro od Sloat Fighter. .. 15.95 E16 Foléon 19.95 GB Ar Rally ... .95 Goulregond Domone 1295 Atterbumer .13.95 Kennedy Approach 14.95 Legend of the Sword 14.95 Helter Sale 9.95 Pow Drome 15.95 Son Hamer 2 12.95 Thunderable 13.50 Poc Lond 12.95 USS.. 14.99 Elite... 149 Hell Bent 12.95 Sorglider || 13.95 Hero of the long.... 16.95 Rombo 12.95 moral .14.95 Robbeany He Shalom 9.95 Robo Cop 1295 Gotled 11.95 Hoe Mantels GP 7.95 Super Hang On 14.95 Foduction of Traden 19.95 ISS 12.95 Rocket Ronger 19.95 Rogue 6.00 Virus 12.95 Galdragons Domain ....... 12.95 Marble Modness von Lrd. 14.95 Looduboard Birdie. Low 12.95 Iron Lord. . 15.95 Unlawed 14.95 Corial 1395 Zynops 985 Join due 13.95 Paintworks 32.95 Karo Kidul 7.95 FOFT 19.95 Counter 2 13.95 Eliminato Mantation Dealers 1295 Double Dragon .. 12.95 Leisure Suit Lorry 15.95 Verttuinator 14.95 Hell Buni 12.95 Teopods Nie Hunter 12.95 Flying Shark 1295 Nebulus 13.95 Fight S L 25.95 Shoot Em Up Can Hit 15.95 Summer Olympiad B8. 795 Purple Saturday Day 14.95 Mandi -7.95 Plundrud Heart -7.95 Techno Cop..... -13.95 Word Dreams 14.95 Super 9095 Fish 1295 Winter Olympiad 88 7.95 Perry Mason 6.95 The Mundos 13.95 Vine Techno Dop 1395 Pwrde 14.95 Sumitor Olympiad 88. 7.95 Dank Casio.... 6.95 Teenaga Queen 13.95 Rocket Rangel 18.00 Teenage Ouedo 13.50 Skalaball14.95 Sorjon 6.95 Fire and Forget 145 B TRUYN HNH 17.95 Winter Olympiod 88 Beyond Zone 9.95 Skote or Die 14.95 14.95 Dungeon Magher 14.95 Wanted 12.95 Highway Hond Black Coudron 9.95 Tel Drive 15.95 Op Woll 12.99 Iyo .. 7.95 War in Middle Earth 15.95 nerdeplor Tracksult Manager 12.95 Slack 23.95 WEC Le Mans 1295 Tracksuit Manager 12.95 Supan. _9.95 Hostages 14.95 Wanted 1295 Lanolol 14.95 Coma Comand. 14.95 Sargon 3 Chess. 12.95 K ey Approach 14.95 Emerald Mine, War in Mio Earth 14.95 Kaning Grand Prix 5.95 Degas E. 14.95 Elintar 8.95 Manhattan D in 1. 1295 GPL Bad boll -7.95 Tony Goll 15.95 Dla Vu 10.00 Barbian 12.99 Skull _14.95 Purple Saturn Day __14.95 nlu Soco 12.95 Tanglewood 18.95 Hackal 3.95 Crous Garten 9.95 Skole of 16.95 11.95 14.95 6.95 "


"NOW TAKEH Castle Computers DEPT C + VG.1. CASTLE HOUSE 11 NEWCASTLE STREET BURSLEM STOKE-ON-TRENT TEL: 0782 575043 (10 LINES) CASTLE COMPUTERS OFTEN IMITATED NEVER BEATEN PHONE US FOR SPECIAL OFFERS SPECTRUN DISC L 054 DISC 1295 1295 12.95 12.95 17.95 1295 12.95 12.95 084 DISCS GAMES DISCS: NEW BUT UNTESTED 30 ASSORTED FOR $10.00 COMPLETE WITH INSTRUCTIONS BUT NO CASES MANY DIFFERENT TITLES BUT TAKE THEM AS THEY COME SOLD AS BLANKS 2.99 4.95 12.95 Rygar 18888ERRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRR22 0154 SPECIAL OFFERS 054 SPECIAL OFFERS   5.50 Ay Shan Sar Trek 0.75 Magneton 6.50 Legions of Death L-TV 6.75 Barbation Grila War 6.50 Frighmore her Burger 5.99 Nighiere Thunderblade 6.00 Enduro Roo ploding H + -5.75 n acht Io Waipon 5.99 Bangkok Knights SS. 6.99 Rampage Bobo Cop 6.75 Emlyn Hughe Soco. Toh Rood 6.50 Dantys: Infemo--#Vuncher 6,99 Super Dragon Slayer on ol Sport 9.95 How to be a Complute B. luni al Jadi 6.75 High Noon 101 6.00 Hunch Bock Inable Dragon 6.75 Trocher 2.0 Tutti Jer Moon 2.99 Tronton 2.99 North Sigi Hood Brother 2.99 Mosters Universe Erod Valley 2.99 May Super Hang On 3.95 Wim Games... der Boy 395 Winter Game. low Soy (Tom) 3.95 Lost Ninja 2 Summer Olympiad 3.95 Ladenood EU THE 2.99 Cove Man UG Lyrics BUTION 299 Skate or De 2.99 Back 04 SPECIAL OFFERS 054 SPECIAL OFFER 2.99 19 Boot Camp 3.95 Mood Sam Vol 1 2.99 korball 899 Skate Block 199 2.99 Hawk Eye 6.50 Sony Mom . 1.99 5.50 Lords of Widnight 1.25 120 299 2.99 Indiana Jone Lim Na HD 5.95 2.99 1.99 Read Blaster 6.50 2.99 Red Storm Rung Andy cop 2.99 2.99 lation Ford 295 Bedam 2.99 Micro Pros Socor 9.95 Toda 2.99 Puler Beadsey Soccer 5.99 4.95 6.99 Kung Fu Manet. 1.00 Sourpener Lord 695 1.00 299   595 6.50 Top Fuel Lahal 1.99 Anuls of Bome 7.95 1.44 PN 1.89 Powstruggle 2.99 1.99 Indoom Sports 2.99 Guadal Ounal. Rotball 25 Trocku Monager 0.50 Quorte 299 2.99 Poc Mania 5.50 E24 Bomber 2.99 Pacland 6.50 Down 2.99 404 d Rod Poong   1.99 299 Heroes in Londo 16.99 Ranelor Normandy 299 1.99 LED Storm 8.99 Loodboard 2.50 Black Tiger 99 Pily Saga 7.25 1.99 Impossible Mission 5.75 Corporation 1.99 7.99 KOTON 299 Toy 009 299 Aug 6.50 Chain ow Womiar 6.99 6.99 The Cowd 9.96 Jl Bumi 5. Now Games 4.99 Election 6.99 Soorling Casio 2.99 Delendir di Crown Winter Olympiad 395 0154 DISK Aircon Civil War Vol A fin di War Vol Aroncon Civil War Vol Bool Bolalar Normandy Come War   Hal, of Montezuma PUR ROTI Rochie Son Moun War PodStorming Sorel Wasteland Hard To Bora Tole Bords Tale Wor Mom Rood Warrion. Heplade Comas GB 4 Roy GALF Bangkok Nights Slation Fami Border Tone Suspel Plundred Hearts Moon Mu 299 12.95 12.95 12.95 12.95 1095 11.95 1095 10.45 10.95 3.95 2.99 1.99 2.99 Sovog 195 3.05 1.99 1.99 SPECTRUM + YAMSTRAD DISCS TO BE SOLD AS BLANES FIRST COME FIRST SERVED 5 DISCS FOR $10 10 DISCS FOR $17 BE QUICK FOR THESE AS THEY WONT LAST LONGI 2.99 3.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 1.99 199 1.95 EN FASTER SERVICE THAN EVER BEFORE T. PLEASE STATE C+VG IN ALL ORDERS. DERSUNDER . OVER 5 P&P IS FREE. RSEAS  PER TAPE. ES ON ALL AMIGA SOFTWARE \\RE EXCHANGED WITHOUT QUESTION NOW'S THE TIME TO BUY JOYSTICKS POOL 6.50 3.85 OU ODohodou AMIGA SPECIAL OFFERS SEGA SPECIAL OFFERS ATARI 2500 SPECIAL OFFERS 7.95 R-Type 20.95 Mouse Trap 5.95 Aderburne 23 95 Almanis 1.23 Typhoon 9.95 Powrth 19.95 Cortimando 12.95 U 1295 Kd 12.95 Gyula 4.95 Enduro Broor 19.95 Sky DEL 7.95 geri goice ==3 4.95 Kung Fu 19.95 nhanh TNHH 7.45 many Fight 7.95 Penguin Lond 26.95 7.95 Word Bel 7.99 Govellus 2295 Knight 7.95 Lice Goddess 12.95 Thunderblade 22.95 Private E. 7.95 DOC) 9.95 Chernobil 22.95 Skin Dive 7.95 h00 9.95 Alex Hd Los Sion 22 99 Bump & JUT 7.95 Thundarbo 4,95 Allen Syndrome 22.99 Real Soon Soccer 7.95 6.95 Wonderday Monster Land 22.99 Keystone Cape 7.95 Rutum olhe Judi 14.95 PO Wieding 17.95 Kangaroo 7.05 fame Underground -7.95 Great Gol 19.95 Pigs in Space 7.95 Sodd Sadan 18,95 Gredi Flball 19.95 Ghostbus 12.95 Hube 18.95 Ninja 19.95 Lemon Atlack logu Rabbit 14.95 Secret Command 1995 Stord Oued 7.95 15.95 Cube Zone 1.95 Droger 7.95 bitimde Gol 14.95 Chopter 19.95 Conlop 14.95 Black Belt 19.95 Milpedie 7.95 001 18.95 Action Fight 1995 The Socou 7.95 Son 24.95 Monopoly 25.95 Ventur 7.95 Land of the Sword 14.95 Fantasy Zone 19.95 Cortilval. Jack Loaderty. 7.95 Fantasy Zonell... 22.95 Smuts 7.95 Wen 12.95 Sea Washer System 7495 Altri 2600 Master System TES -7.95 Master Spilem Plus....... 89.95 Teo Joysticku + Games 14.95 Super Smule 119.95 Special Price.... . .95 Pape Boy 15.95 Control Silick 1295 he Gobling 15.95 ATAR B0013000/IL TE AMSTRAD SPECIAL OFFE Grand Prin 1.89 Blasterlods .99 Stato Sohn 1.99 Ahorburne Peinalin Pade 1.80 R-Yo 5.99 Percopp 1.89 Double Dragon 5.50 Hover Rover 1.89 Dragon Wind or Blade 1.89 B on || 5.75 Air Wat 1.89 Burtorion | Spooky 1.89 Paturi de la Bubble Trouble 195 League Chall 1.89 Durchlon Wol Micro Rhythm 1.89 Echelon 7.99 Tanul 189 Death Saat 279 non & Robot 1.89 Star Glider 3 Football Year 279 Class Wuncher 7.50 South 2.79 Losinja 2 solo 279 Dragons Lori 299 Zyber 279 Big Sko 1.99 Panic 2.79 Wash 3 Las Vegas 279 Captain Blood F  9.95 King Size 5.99 $a On 9.05 Pillall 279 Neron 1.50 Swinder 5.99 Guns 200 L a Puncil. 1.99 Come 299  3.95 Bands Tala 1 6.75 FiguraFun 1.99 on kod 2.99 Speed Run 7.94 London 7.99 Riverald (Cartridge) 7.99 My For Meany or Foul Ptal 2 (Cartridge) 7.99 Husa (Cartridge). 7.99 Pro 5,000 block .95 Navigator 10.95 Rom Delta .95 Cheetah Mark 1 .95 Cheetah Microswitch Deluxe $11.95 Konle Speed King .50 Cheetah 125+ .99 7.99 7.05 3.50 6.99 7.95 7.95 3.75 "


"A A nonchalant pose. Plenty of robot-biffing frolics. vertical stone, stopping only long enough to knock out razor sharp revolving knives STRIDER which lie in your path. Strider from Capcom is a The graphics are large, game which defies the laws movement is fast and the of gravity. It'll have you whole game comes over as climbing up the walls. being something a bit As the name suggests your different. However, there character strides manfully are one or two borrowed Over the rooftops of some themes, the main one being foreign city. Walking your traditional end of level presents no problem, it's just monster. the method which is a bit As you belt into the strange. Walking down a council room at the end of domed roof, your character the level, the councillors rise leans at an angle just short of and line up one after the 45 degrees and still manages other to form a huge not to fall over! thrashing monster complete Attackers and alien objects with massive pincers at the hurl themselves at you from front end and whipping tail all directions, though these at the other. The only way to are quickly despatched with defeat the thing as it writhes the aid of a flashing round the screen is to stand boomerang of light. Knock in the centre of the floor and our some flying aliens to pick keep firing. Eventually it'll up an object which follows form a circle and when its tail you around like some little meets it head you can robotic dog. The thing runs destroy it. Move out of the around you shooting your centre and you're a dead attackers — rather like a man. satellite ship in shoot 'em Further levels will see ups. more of the same with a So over the roof tops you bewildering variety of harge, cartwheeling over backgrounds, monstrous seemingly impassable gaps tigers and other creatures. and charging on through Strider is fast, it demands a catwalks to the next section fair degree of skill of play of the city. Climbing walls is and offers quite a challenge. a cinch as you shin up A Strider defies gravity "


"Kim Nang TINE Dynamite Joe A The contestants line up WIN4 A superior beat 'em up. FINAL BLOW After the excitement of the JUDEE, Bruno v Tyson fight, what better time to bring out a boxing simulation. Now you can step into the ring, experience the euphoria of being the winner and not have a bruise to show for it in Taito's Final Blow. This time there's been no attempt at the 3D approach, instead Taito have gone for good, solid graphics, and some realistic gameplay. from Dynamite loe to the There are a large variety of Detroit kid. You'll need punches and these and the different tactics for each strength of each hit are fight. And to make the game controlled by the joystick more of a challenge each position and pressing a Opponent has a different combination of three fire height, weight and arm buttons. reach. Tfound the game very Winning four bouts confusing at first, butas makes you overall champion, soon as you get the hang of and you can only win each the controls you'll be bout by a Knock Out or throwing good solid judge's decision. punches, punishing hooks Final Blow is hard work, and short, sharp jabs. but the challenge is worth it Select one of five to become champ. Move opponents from the ringside over Mike Tyson, Eugene the Ed's lacing up his gloves An arcade knockout. (groan). 1 DIE 99 "


"ROCKSTAR Gtif Pittard ROCK STAR Michael Google Could you manage this Rock Star ? Could you manage this Rock Star ? Code ghem Law Company LH FO 5 LEAMINGTON SP Vi CodeWaren Software Company Lie PO LEAVINGTON SPA CV CUM Get It!! Before It Stonks Off! Denne --w Dear Mr Newsagen, reserve me a copy of Computer + Video Games. Name Address "


"SHEKHANA MAIL ORDER SERVICES ESTAB SINCE 1978 ST 1 D 11  7:50 Lo   than     + 13 11  Cad Cell Dan Sim De Dragon Bren D D Tom Est ATTENTION ALL READERS. WE NOW HAVE IN STOCK PC ENGINES AND GAMES CCESS ORDEH BY CHEDT  LINE 1-31 2901 -340 9565 15 4 .   La Tien La Tita ITA  |  LI 14  11  WE V 1 Logo I han | TU Mae Mae Juh 110 TA Lokal MW  | | Night Made AL 1 Dall 10 C  pa Hot Du 18 CE An Patlan irt 17 Quickshu 15 Fagan 15 tun Pent SO  Pend TER Alan Pac 14 Aten Pagina 15 Price N 10 Peter LH Duration FSCH guide Dula Dig ,  Cape  Forty Targ 15  ci Gov Queron lo Olukom u Beod. DE I DA Om Cry Ch L Hurto Dina Fan |   Van |   Spus Hall MW Star LET  HY D Lager Hang Un Hunter 0 San urcia Hall u Baleno Dungeon Techno SA Dos 1 Skin 15.03 Thule Emilia T LnH Halil TIF , ant TW 20 Pemuda un H L a Gail 15 151   Hingam Liniai 50 form FWitary and TE FM met Can  Wir The WeGo The SW as Th123  Thala Tun Dr H LAD Alam Thir darba mga V O il Chalan Mill TI Oh Machi ITEDDIT   Cuando Time CW Icon HCl tream ||| Login atau Typ Kinney Approach | tart TV Sort De VZ111 WT Unh ot Mutila 11 Ylich more HC Am Vin 15 QuickTabe SE W ire Champ RA QS WEC LE V 750 Long  While , ST #   ,  |||  PET , tughe  # Thorn TO 1.  --    ||| |||| |||      I   KEELESESS fi an SW  Watch  Handla e ed ba LE ani  Hut F MW SAVAILABLEZ SAVAILABLES Engine 5 Wome min www. | ||    | |||||| | | |||||||     ,  HEETH #LESYN, + [219.99 CO Rom Unit [incl two games) Street Fighter & Trivia game.....  649 549.99 tral unit .99 5-player Adaptor Joypad unit E24 99 PC ENGINE SOFTWARE TITLES AVAILABLE NOW CTu, .00 ball Cut, ** .00 Chan & Chan (Kato Ken).. 130.00 Dragon Spirit. .00 Eurunk , E30.00 La ||  E3%, LH  .00 R-Type 1.  HTF 135.00 Shan [30.00 Son Son II .00 Space Harrier 645 00 Tales of tha Monsterpath... 130.00 PETF Hun Vigilante. c h 645.00 Wonderboy 130.00 TWgrld CUT  HD Please notin our PC Engines are Pal 1 systems they will connect directly into your T.V. at home. All leads and power supply are included in the price. All you have to do is n, Beware of other companles selling the cheaper NTSC System which is not compatible with the supply of electricity in the UK. This means they will not work with sound and colour on British T.V.\" Please note this is a selection of the games at present. We will be getting further titles soon. Also we will be stocking the Sega 16-bit and Kanix consoles. The CD Rom unit can also be used to play normal music compact disks.    -EL ## ## 1 1,) ||||| MIL ORDER CUSTOMERS ,  , , , ) |  |    , , ,  LE Tim Lial T -1 | |  ,,, || FIT: ,   "


"Mean Machines is meaner than ever this month. Everything is a red hot exclusiveincluding the first in depth look at CPC Engine CD software, reviews of Space Harrier and Vigilante, Gradius for Nintendo and Cyborg Hunter on the Sega. Plus all the latest console news. Start here for consoles. CYBORG HUNTER SEGA, .95 baddie tries to get in a few Cyborg Hunter from Activisionis thumps of his own in an attempt an arcade adventure in the mould to wear down the hero's energy of Zilion, and while it doesn't bar, score high marks for originality. Vipron's astle has different makes up for it with plenty of levels, which are accessed by Fighting and shooting action. entering the lift and travelling to The Cyborg Hunter in another floor. The higher the question is a tough 'n' ruthless floor, the tougher the robots mercenary who's more than a so it's best to stick around on little cheesed off with the antics lower floors until you're adept at of Vipron and his vast army of fighting homicidal robots. They've been The objective is to reach Vipor whooping it up and terrorising himself, and give him a damn good the nelghbourhood, and Cyborg thumping. And with you in Hunter has decided enough is control. Cyborg Hunter's not enough, and is going to stonk. going to fail, is he? right into Vipron's fortress and As I've already sald, Cyborg Hunter isn't the most original MACH RIDER EXIT 4 Cyborg Hunter arcade adventure for Sega. NINTENDO, .95 and blasting everything that Set in 2||2 AD. Mach Rider casts move Soloimilar to endurance the player a delander of justice but the road is far more twisting, and truth, destined to ride the and there aren't any other freeways of the far-flung future vehicles on the track speed is and rid them of the evil lnvading of the essence here. I further forces. Ye, old mother Earth is distance needs to be covered. in peril once again, and it's up to Finally, design lets you build you to save the day. Basially. Mach Rider is a Road your own tracks and race on them. Blasters variant, with the player Having sean Mach Rider screen Whitting down the road an. turbo motorbike blasting shocs I was looking forward to playing this, but unfortunately I anything and everything. The found myself coming away proceedings are viewed in typical disappointed. race game style In 3D from The 3D effect is fast, but the behind the bike. road moves quite jerkily and the At the start of a game there motorbike controls don't feel are four options fighting, solo, particularly good. The graphics endurance and design. The nights TEEN THAT PET Tias rauites 288, though the sprites are solid-looking the then forces. Fetiyes are given, and you have to race down The three modes of play is a the road avoiding obstacles and Your bike is erine avene that mann the way using the bike's cannons, or by bumping them off the road. 0801 Survive long enough to get to the end of the road and i bonus la awarded before the player progresses to the next, more difficult tock. If the endurance option is chosen, you have to travel a certain distance within a time kmit. Unlimited lives are givenYou just have to travel af enough to be able to go the the next stage, which requires an even greater range to be covered. This is far easier than the fighting mode, and allows you to rack up more points by being reckless cameround, buru is addictiveand challenging. With a large map to explore and plenty of robots to reduce to scrap metal. Zillion fans should certainly be in their element here, although those who find this type of game tedious should steer clear. JULIAN RIGNALL teach him a lesson he'll never forget As you can imagine, chez Vipron is a big, dark and foreboding place, and is packed with Vipron's horde of metal maniacs. They lurk in halls, outside lifts, and around just about every corner of Vipron's horizontally scrolling abode. Sa Cyborg Hunter is in for a bit of tough time. Being a mercenary type, CH & a hard dude, and an give as good as he gets, and any renegade robot who bars his way can be destroyed with a few well-almed kicks and punches. Mind you, while CH is kicking seven shades out of the robot, the binary SEGA GRAPHICS  SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY OVERALL 79% 68% 67% 78% a 76% "


"BASEBALL 97 MPH OUW NUDE PAUSE A Baseball strictly for fans of the real thing. Huo SH8KM NINTENDO, .99 disappointment was the order of the day. Nintendo's Baseball fails Although there are several types due to the speed of the gameplay of Baseball games available in — everything is very slow. amerian, including the superb Players waddle around as if RGI Buseball, only Nintendo's they're walking through treacle, own version is available here in and when you throw the ball it the UK at present flies along at very low velocity. The presentation is ver Even pitching is slow!! straightforward, with twomodes The graphics are also very of play, either a human against a weak, with blocky and badly computer team, or two players defined players, and a very lurld batding head to head. There are pitch. The animation isn't very six different teams to choose good eithr, nd the whole game from, each one having its own looks unconvincing strengths and weaknesses, Ardent Baseball fans will Two screens are used during doubtless glean some enjoyment the game, one which shows a out of this, but I'd personally wait close-up of the batter and for a better version of the sport pticher, and another showing the to be released before rushing out entire playing field, which pops up when the ball is hit outside the diamond JULIAN RIGNALL Traditional Baseball rules are NINTENDO strictly adhered to, and control has been deliberately simplified GRAPHICS 40% so that even a Baseball novice can > SOUND 38% easily get straight into the action. VALUE 4096 I enjoy Baseball games, and  PLAYABILITY 52% looked forward to giving this a few innings. However OVERALL 47% A Mach Rider fails to impress on Nintendo. tood Idea, but unfortunately the endurance and solo options are let down by being too easy allowing a mvice to get far into the game with little practice. Fighting, on the other hand, is very tough, almost to the point of being offputting. The difficulty levels Just-haven't been-balanced Very well. Having sald that, Mach Rider isn't totally dire — it just isn't good enough to justify the massive 230 price tag. The gameplay is fun for a while, but doesn't hold your attention long  JULIAN RIGNALL NINTENDO  GRAPHICS 61%  SOUND 42%  VALUE 33%  PLAYABILITY 59%  OVERALL 58% 4 PAUSE A Swing that back-STRIKE "


"C+V0 rocks upon which sit. Easter Island statues that spit glowing rings at the Rattler to the inside of the Bacteron fortress, which is bristling with gun emplacements and robot defence networks. Gradius is a thumping good arcade conversion, and combines food loods and brilliant top-notch shoot 'em up. The gameplay is very challenging and addictive, and kept me coming back to the Nintendo time and time again to see whether I could get just a little bit further. The graphics are superb, and fully recreate the look of the MACHINES empire. When an attack wave of craft is destroyed, an Icon is left behind which is picked up to advance the power-up weapons bar at the bottom of the screen, There are six features in all speed-up. missile, double-fire. laser, option and force field, and any can be chosen fenough icons have been collected. All the NINTENDO, .95 Konami's Gradlus, or Nemesis as it's better known in the UK. appeared in 1985 and is notable for being the first arcade game with power-up weaponry. The Nintendo translation has all the features of the original machine, and is far superior to the computer versions that were released by Konami a few years ago. The objective of this horizontally scrolling shoot 'em up is to conquer the evil Bacterion empire that's threatening the galaxy. It's just you and your trusty Warp Rattler space craft against seven levels of hostile and heavily armed alien forces. The mission starts on a volcanic planet, and the Rattler flies in and blasts at the fleets of Bacterion crafts that form the primary attack force of the ok919 YOD AT 0399 The ony hiding place on level one. UGODAY 029940 original machine, and apart from the very occasional flicker. everything moves smoothly — even when the Rattler has a full compliment of weapons. Sound is also faithful to the coin-op, with good background music and effects. As well as packing in all the features of the coin-op. Konami have added plenty of thelr own in the form of cheats and hidden bonuses. On each level it's possible to get an extra man and \"Blue Nose\" power-up5000 bonus points by completing for maximum protection a set manoeuvre, and there are also a myriad of other secret weapons are self explanatory, but bonuses and warps which I'll be If you're wondering, the option is revealing in Playmasters in the a ball which floats behind the coming months. Rattler and emulates all its moves Nintendo blasters are rare and firepower up to two can beasts, so don't let this one be collected with pretty escape. devastating results. JULIAN RIGNALL As with most shoot 'em ups of this type, the end of each level is guarded by a giant mothership which is destroyed to go onto GRAPHICS 98% the next stage. The levels are SOUND 78% varied, and range from volcanic VALUE 72% planets (complete with PLAYABILITY 92% boulder-spitting mountains) through a stage packed with  OVERALL 87% IP 0396Nearing the end and Rignall still has two-power ups. "


"E Number 1 for TV Arcade Action .95 RAMPAGE You and your buddy are ready for a ride nction tonight cause you just happen to be in the mood to bear up the low. You'il demallah buildings, grab and champ homilied spectactors and other yummy mornis, and flatten puny helicopters and other antagonista who try to stop you! Addictive gameplaywvellous grave combined with animal and gate of humour C+VG, Mitch TAO MASTERSYSTEM PLUST SUPER SYSTEM .95 MUHIT Sysian HU Super System \"R'TYPE They came from a Dimensional plane clear across the gabary, wreaking havoc and chaos Nom Larwyder to star synter. With an than other lanes with dear mod Lerror, the homd creatures of the Byde Empire are now knocking on Earth's front door. Hi by far the best bla ble on the Saga WITH THE FILM IND THE FILM farmhould be without C+YG, March 1999 CONTROL STICK .95 3D GLASSES .95 SELAIN HD GLISH The Secretard sorte CYBORG HUNTER ERSYSTEM .95 LIGHT PHASERT $29.95 The year. 2242 you are Paladin, the toughest bounty hunter in the galaxy. Monstrous Cybugs are threatening to take control of the Universe under the direction of their will lander, Vipron. Your mission lilo gain et to Vipran's chambers and destroy him. Sound arty enough? It han Honly scrolling architecture, om dea! CEVG, March 1989 MASTERSYSTEM Testi tu  \"The Sun Light That Spring Madness phases alable to you or any The No.1 best selling console in the UK The Sega Mastersystern inclusive of Light Phasar \"available to you for only .95. Recommended Retail Price (109.90 You art Aron Christian, a swordsmuin washed there by the might and luryola humcome. You were found hul dead by a kind and humble fisherman and he restored you to health. The fishing village sathe edge ol the real plan Alzing in the distance was a small mountain range with an ominou lower  Lee the h un old you they made the ugn of the Evil bye. It is the place where the troubles olour and began As you watched The lower, you knew that your destiny wanted there. The whole thing is incredible Thebe ndon Sign Your hand playinbibity and will keep you engrossed to a m C+VG, March 1969 Distributed by Virgin Mastertronic, 2-4 Vernon Yard, Portobello Road, London W11 2DX. w "


"The PC Engine has been an unceasing subject of amazement for the last year, with a string of incredible games and arcade conversions to its name. But, in the words of Al Jolson, you ain't seen nothing yet (baby). The sound ofjaws dropping was heard for miles around when the PC Engine CD-ROM player was brought into the C+VG offices. What is this wonder-widget? Julian Rignall has the story MACH CD-ROM ANTICS A See it is small. V The Rom Unit and games The pint-sized CD-ROM player is no bigger than a Sony Discman, yet has more memory than 1096 Amigas of 11416 Spectrums put together a massive 548 megabytes! Games come on conventional CD's, and are loaded in the same fashion as a computer disk but these CD's are also capable of storing hi-fi sound which can be played while the game is running The unit has outputs for headphones and a hi-fi link, so you can listen to your games in glorious stered and with the two games we've seen, the effect is nothing short of stunning. Since the CD discs store so much information, there's plenty of disc accessingduring the game. but the scanning system is very rapid, and pauses are kept to a minimum. Now to the games themselves. The two we've played are a conversion of Capcom's Street Fighter coin-op. and a very unusual Japanese role-playing-style game that translates something like Hitsuku Mano (apologies to Japanese readers we could be wrong!). Like all PC Engine conversions, Street Fighter looks and plays identically to the coin-op — but there's loads of extra speech and some incredible tunes that aren't featured in the original machine. The sound effects are brilliant, with digitised yells and chumps, and five amazing soundtracks for 106 "


"P1000000 101000 O PLOVE2 PA  HINES Street Fighting in China. each part of the world where you fight. Street Fighter is noisy. tough and addictive —but part from the superlative graphics and sound, doesn't otherwise offer anything that hasn't already been seen in a beat 'em up. The other title is far more Interesting and really shows what can be done on CD. It's a strange type of role-playing game A Go for it and has more speech and music section is a very surly than any other computer game questionmaster but you have we've seen! The story unfolds in support in the form of a tiny a long series of animated cameo cherubic female; both talk while screens, each accompanied by you answer the questions, and dialogue and pieces of music berate you if you answer and I mean real music, with Incorrectly. And if you answer Vocals, drums guitars and all!! three questions incorrectly At regular intervals you have you're thrown out of the game to partake in a Japanese get one right and you trivia-style quiz Hosting this continue (after being Street Fighter congratulated by the cherub. who leaps up and down with excitement). The graphics are great; very unusual oriental characters are to the fore, and some of the backdrops are outstanding. The game is absolutely huge — It's a shame it's all in Japanese. Hopefully, with the PC Engine being released in America, we'll see English translations. We hope so the PC Engine CD-ROM is definitely THE most exciting development in the game market since the advent of 16-bit. V CD-ROM-outstanding. A One of the Cameos. PIONGOOO. 091209 BLOCK HEAL Seue "


"TOP 10000000 SOB3959 SPACE HARRIER MACHI PC Engine, Mail Order only. DRAGON SPIRIT Sega's Space Harrier aused a sensation when it was released in sed in the arcades a few years ago, and looks set to make a similar impression on PC Engine owners How that it has been converted to this mega-machine Unlike the computer conversions that were released by Elite, PC Engine Space Harrier features al| 23 levels that were present in the coin-op original quite a feat of programing! And it looks and sounds very similar too! Storywise, there's not a lot to 2 say about Space Harrier-it's just a case of flying over the landscape blasting everything stupid enough to get in your way and avoiding the enemy craft and any missiles they fire in your general direction. The enemy are a pretty wild 'n' weird mob, and range from futuristic aeroplanes to robots, mammoths, gremlins and bouncing mushrooms! At the end of each level is a giant monster. which you have to destroy. On level one there's a dragon, level two has a load of spinning heads later ones include androids, a two-headed dragon, pods and opening and cleri opening and closing geodesics. One of the most impressive features of PC Engine Space Harrier is the graphics, the 3D is mooth and convincing and > PC Engine Mail Order pyromaniac reptile is capable of the backdrops and sprices are only spitting firey gobs at any flying colourful and detailed. The game enemy, and an also launch whitedoesn't just look pretty — it also hot phlegm bombs to take out plays brilliantly too. I would be you've ever wondered what it ground targeti. lying if I sald the gameplay is would be like being a dragon. Plenty of power-ups are tough, but it's addictive too. In flying over the landscape roasting available accessed by blowing up fact, I think the Engine version is a fact. I think the Engine version isa er crerything in your path, Wonder eggs on the ground and collecting tad more playable than the no longer. With Namcot's latest the items that are released, or by coin-op original! PC Engine conversion you can do blisting flashing baddles (co-er) What higher recommendation LESE that. Up to three extra heads tan be can I give! Dragan Spirit adds a new twist acquired for extn fire-power, to the vertically scrolling shoot and gathering red pods upgrades JULIAN RIGNALL 'em up genre with the player the dragon's armouny from gobt flyinga dirawch vermy to minit and ultimately feny landscape. The enormous blue breath, which b a very powerful PC ENGINE  GRAPHICS 87% SOUND 82%  VALUE 79% PLAYABILITY 90% OVERALL 89% HE SCORE TOP 10000000 B 412920 CU PAUSE "


"WS HINES VIGILANTE PAUSE > PC ENGINE, Mail Vigilante's is so easy to see. It's order only not that the game is easy, but it As if you needed any proof that was probably a mistake to put in the neighbourhood was going a credit systém, allowing you to downhill, a gang of skinheads have continue the game after you've kidnapped Madonna lost your three lives. The To recover his sweetheart. temptation is just too much, so le our Vij has to follow her captors' doesn't take much practice to get van throughout five of the Vij to the end of level five. seedlest, horizontally-scrollingest Having said that, Vigilante is still a flipping good game, even with street gangs. Vi] Es a meaty second time around. Anyone sort of bloke though, well-versed who ad who has played the Trem coin-op in martial arts, and he can le . Will be hard pushed to spot any duck, punch and kick to beat all discrepancies in this conversion, hell. because the graphics are spot on, At the end of the first four perfectly defined and beautifully levels are some pur-retty big animated. arch-thugs, who include a pair of It's not top of my Engine acrobatic pugilists and numerous software shopping list, but any fac, balding mon, none of whom beat 'em up fan should check out are called Garry Williams, Vigilante without delay. surprisingly enough, but all of PAUL GLANCEY whom an land very heavy blows. The big (and I mean BIG) boss guards Madonna at the end of  GRAPHICS: 87% level five, and in the unlikely event that you manage to knock > SOUND: 80% him down. Vij releases his girl and  VALUE: 74% carries her off into the sunset. > PLAYABILITY: 81% Happy endings like this are all  OVERALL: 80% very well, but it's a pity PC ENGINE weban. are simply gorgeous, with plenty Other features include shrink, galng on and not a fileker in sight earthquake, mega-flames, homing the giarit monsters are missiles, shields. extra lives particularly Impresive, especially banut points and skulls, which the huge flower. The sound is take away all power-ups (very also wuperb, with a brilliant  terco toundinck on each level there are there's n oth and good spot TIC, one very long and hazard-packed Dragon Spirit is a superlative Terrain includes, lce, Sen, volcanic shoot 'em up an esential ......-d..... ...-.-.--d an-americanine and each level has a giant monteer wopte tot plection at its and which is destroyed to JULIAN RIGNALL -------------Some of the momters are brilliant, with giant spiders, PC ENGINE urikes, dinosaurs and even a huge GRAPHICS 8996 sprite-spitting lower! > SOUND 9496 Gameplay is very tough and challenging, but remains > VALUE 8896 Incredibly addictive as you battle >PLAYABILITY 95% up the landscape. The graphics > OVERALL 94% "


"on British televisions for they'll also part exchange an NTSC PC Engine that won't work properly in the UK for a converted one. Ring for details. Shekhana also have PC Engine CD-ROMs for sale (a complete unit with Engine and games costs {500) and have 18 titles in stock (prices vary). For mall order details send an SAE to SCS (C&VG) 655, Green Lanes, London N8 OQY. You can also see and buy the Engine at Shekhana's shop at 221 Tottenham Court Road, London WI. KW PC ENGINE SUPPLIES GET YER PC ENGINES HERE PC ENGINE REVS UP At long last the PC Engine is now available in Britain — although only through mail order outlets at present. The prices of software and Engines are varied at the moment, so we have decided to round up all dealers and give a comprehensive list of what they supply, and how much it costs — it's up to you which one you choose, but we do advise you to phone first and ask about the availability of stocks. For more details, write to 'cos it's Japanese. Micro Media. The Moor Hall, The last two games are Clee Downton, Shropshire. Winning Shoc a golf game from Don't forget to enclose an SAE. IF Data East, and Son Son II. a you want to phone, ring 0584 translation of the Taito coin-op. 75604. We've seen Son Son // and it looks brilliant it's an arcade adventure of sorts, with the hero running.jumping and climbing around a multidirectionally scrolling landscape in search of his kidnapped friends. There should Some rather tasty looking be a review next month-look titles are soon to be available on out for it. the PC Engine. Rainbow Island (Bubble Bobble II) looks very nice — it's a wacky platform game and looks just the same as the coin-op Shekhana mail order services is original. Also coming soon is one of the oldest software Denanlus, a conversion of Taito's suppliers around, with over a vertically scrolling shoot 'em up. decade's experience in the and a superb-looking beat 'em up computer trade. They stock fully In the mould of Dragon Ninja — converted PC Engines that run we don't know what it's alled A new company that was formed solely to import PC Engines. They sell fully converted Engines that run on British tellies for .00, as well as the CD-ROM player (), an Audio/Visual Booster (with monitor/hi-fi connections) for , an autofire joypad () and five-player interface (222). They stock all available PC Engine software, with prices ranging from  for R-Type to  for Space Harrier. Nyou're interested, send an SAE to PES, 223B Waterloo Road, Cobridge, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffs. ST6 2HS for a complete price list, or phone 0782 213993 ,521 ki TELEGAMES Telegames sell two versions of the Engine. The cheapest comes with a SCART adapter and runs on monitors (such as the Philips) or televisions with a SCART interface, and costs .95. If you want one that plugs straight into the TV. you'll have to pay .95. The software range is good, with 16 titles ranging from  to . For the price list send an SAE to Telegames, Wigston, Leicester LEB IT or phone 0533 880445. MICRO MEDIA Another new company that deals exclusively with the PC Engine. They have large stocks of Engines the SCART version costs .95 (don't forget that you need a monitor or TV with a SCART interface) and a TV version costs .95. The CD-ROM unit costs  (with interface). All Engine games are stocked, each costs .95. "


"NEC «A NEW AGE HAS DAWNED» R-15 Chan + Chan Vigilante FROM .95p TV PC Engine is par an eine sole, it's a cheap arcade chine\" The Games Machine urger Nintendo and Secu, they r nt vn a it in the arean Terms of power and gameplay. Time Amigo would be very hard led when you come up against THE MOST POWERFUL CONSOLE IN THE WORLD** Computer and Video Games To flicker, detailed and smooth Oh gorgeous:/r** Corriputer and Video Games ames on the PC Engine are quite imply. the best you'we ever seen It's the most impressive piece of video game hardware I've ever E\" Geoff Minter. The Nature of the Beast \"The PC Engine is no fantasy Computer and Pidee Games IN AN IDEAL WORLD THE GAMES Instant game load and CONSOLE WOULD access (no waiting for disks OFFER YOU or tapes)  Multi-player interaction Unsurpassed software The fastest running speed excellence of any games machine in  Arcade-perfect graphics  State-of-the-art micro circuitry existence. Multi-channel stereophonic. The most compact design in the world. sound.  Unparalleled expandability — designed with the future in mind WELCOME TO THE IDEAL WORLD! dr . Powiak SET PC ENGINE = Em til at FALPC ENGINE = Ta n danden TY \" A H H TH T. BH TNHH | T H E THI COLOUE MONITOR E . AHU TOTAL M illegg mini lemy . Ey Dute = = = = = = = = Visa Cand H = = = TOTAL t ull detaili D HARDWARE — L i l Wanderia com a SOFTWARE = Al da INSS. R-Type Space he Echable Hurrier, Chan + Cun. Vidar Hul, Funny , LODH ODE erabile The Legendary Au, Viplants, Galaga T. E L awestal wodtrucks and ne w THPT Phan Anh | H THU CH EM Thi Thiu | W ebuy. They are all cloth op the c L the wawan har. Send SAE muning dan maladie for more detach DEPT.CUGI The Moor Hall, Ludlow, Shropshire. SY8 3EG. TEL:0584 75604,FAX=0584 75387 Trade Enquiries Welcome Endries MICROMEDIA "


"OMPUTER +video GAMES Avt Month Next month we have an all-formats review of System 3's new horizontally scrolling shoot 'em up, Dominator brought to you by the same team that brought you the Immensely successful Last Ninja games as well as indepth reviews of Vigilante, Zork Zero, Run the Gauntlet, Renegade III and Voyager from Ocean, and all the latest 8 and 16-bit games. Mean Machines has revlews of Californla Games, Time Soldlers and Vigilante on the Sega, as well as all the hottest PC Engine and Nintendo titles and an in-depth look at the 16-bit Sega and its new range of games. On sale April 14 for .20. Don't miss it. "


"CLASSIFIED ADVERTISEMENTS ADRIAN'S ARCADE THE COMMODORE SPECIALISTS 16, 64, 128 AND AMIGA Eucling rand votre for HIRE HARDWARE: Attractive Discounts Le Ama+1084 colour monilor (570. Software ALL mchine 2544 Discount Details Lilirge SAE to 7 Woody Haidland, Pour Brdou. Milion Krynis MKG 3PA — TRY \"N\" BUY SEGA GAME HIRE & DISCOUNT PURCHASE CLUB Tun T uang V Fre, and = LANG SA inka of The og de H ow Much Luc SALTO SORTIHAN PO BOX WHERIFOND YU THOUTLANDS OF TITLES C dl ang FREE MEMBERSHIP!! Hire — CBM64, Spectrum, Amstrad and VIC 20 Software (Top Titles) Send 2 x 18p stamps for your hire kit Computorsoft (CV), PO Box 28 North PDO. Nottingham NG5 2EE IP state which machine Cogno Box H. HEREFORD HUMU Trade Mark 1164713 consisting of the word \"\"PRISM\" and registered in respect of \"Tapos, ,,,, ind for or beating data recordings, computer programs recorded on tapes, cards discs, sheets or wires\" was signed on 22nd January, 1988 to Suur TV Survey Limited of Wortminster House, Old Woking. Surrey GU22 9LF to Reuters Limited ol 85 Fleet Stroot London EC4P AAJ WITHOUT THE GOODWILL OF THE BUSINESS IN THE GOODS FOR WHICH THE MARK WAS THEN IN USE ATARI ST AND AMIGA SOFTWARE War ound on el dia. FOR HIRE ALO h your au lour Around 1.500 din organ Folul details and a lo middenvoer phone Today in Friday. Tpm-10pm LOW ATAR PRICES A LO STFUL. . 15 d . la 500 ya.. . TEL LITT Top quality unibed 3] + doutil nord disk 10 or 12H WbH 21 1.45 100 lot.us Hic D rdo ST O 0150 pi U m ud backing up I ST Sahwin la date Sadius oral GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dupt. c+v0, 15 Tilbury Road, Thorney Close, Sunderland SRJ 470 Tel: (091) 528 1351 UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Saad Oud e nter Hogan be     NOW ALSO FOR THE ATAR ST Sand 2 or d o nd de UK Software Erche Club (CVE). 15 Tum Grimm, disa COMPUTER SUPPLIES ...95 ATARI ST OWNERS With hom The membru w WILLID LUMTS LEHT The bath Cute mai APPROX 1750 ST TITLES FOR HIRE Luna de les LUDLUS LULLY. The 0 m ya monthly and ogland. We am. Hot Demi A b oty ALWE Film SELL DEN LUET TO MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Redway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos Tel: 0242 67 4960 — 9.30am-4.30pm All our WOORT, Harianakwith ful documentation DISCOUNT SOFTWARE Up o 21% of AAP or ATARI, COMMODORE, SPECTRUM AUSTRAD, BBC, MSI and BWPC. Ringloring Padanny of the above much 24 hour HOTLINE 0455 511377 BL HYTES COMPUTER SYSTEMS, 10 Southland Houd. Hilny . Llo r LE10 TUA ATAAI SPECIALISTS C64 Power Supply ......... Spectrum Power Supply ---.... .95 Spectrum Membrane ..... ..95 Dust Cover (state computer) ... ....25 Used Microdrive Carts (10)............. .95 C64, C2N Data Rec --...-.95 Spectrum Data Rec........ .95 Prices include VAT and P&P. Chq/PO to OMNIDALE LTD (CV) 23 CURZON STREET, DERBY DE1 ZES Tel: 0332 291219 PC ENGINES NOW IN STOCK (See Telegames ad on Page 44) MICROSELLS BUYING OR SELLING? LOOK NO FURTHER! f5 own will for largest manbaru buca C +VG 3—7. Po THE THI MINH SPECTRUM +1. preciondition with 050 IS ALL IT COSTS FOR 25 WORDS ATARI STHM FOR SALE + many Den Woh Afirburner Double Drugom Over ) worth of Lybcium, w tym month old bond, will . TeL: 015610141 latar loo TANDY LEVEL HITESLabourd, VOU + untumal, worth isod. Excel condition, or (12 a. Phu Nida Sam a y.. 071534000. CH. 1911 DISK DRIVE, CAN Datacente, toute und chusty battle. h, Mrd Lagu, HD 11 CMtrG, Film 400/806 NOW LOOK maks, tunnlama, 000 an Pham Ben 10472)70270 for detalt AMSTRAD CPC 617 colour monitor, TV Tumut, care conder, leyatel, bland. diska Game worth 6150, dual cow , Tm Wind und Tor-all v e and book. N 200 = 500 T 0710150721 Frank of COMMODORE . c etim recorder, oyatick holm, w are and gas worth Lid, valor 150. TeL: Franko 150/7| fait par CHM e ybek plus 100 Worth W BUDOY. Wond etc and signal worth 750, bating at a realbargin af 230 An ideal preint. Tel 0734-772 SPECTRUM U ght pin data recorder, c. 1, nice drva, 1 cartridge jovic Mirage muraco, lo 110 + lot of Only 20 Phone Bob CBM H, 191-dhuk drive data recorder, mm , SFI Found umpler, Music M 5 find beim m condition. Only Tel Mich001-5576012 EINSTEIN COMPUTER with disk drive and colo mona indu instrucbon bli hurdly und, quod H loral m ulata condition Over 1050 w. lor [55Tolchuide Staal 01:14 CBS COLECOVISION super action controllen, roller controle, turbedring ht, 144m baud. Endal condition [1:40 una. Tel: 021) 4745471 Bitimingham var 1 SEGA MASTER SYSTEMY including Almar Burner, Outrun Hecky, etc. bound and in condition with 780 Hecept (10, Tel: 021 447 pm CA. DISEDHIVE CASE, monitor (500 Gunship und Gry o wiwo T ong for Elona Pronou CAM H. data recordar, yutick plus 150 an, in condom Sall for 12. Telephone D D1-0 U18 lutter CAMH disk drive data cause, Joysticks book, mag. 0400 of saltwane includu GEO$11. Mult i th knyboard, superb condition, quick sale 20 d. 01-09 1211 ha CH. 1941 disk dr. CN dalekua boud Wimcluding wat procent, ducational toware + load of game. Tal HO19 721 mytime CBMHCN data recordar, new po UTLcuku 1900 . Tot w 197, b aina only 6850. Tel: 01-01 313 aftar pem COMMODORE H 1541 disk drive the bystick Action Replay MKA + Garte Go cartridge, over 1700 guma demon He. 15 u , Wandt = Tel. W127041 ATAR IL, disa drve, a recorder, touch tablet, bruchball, L, 6110 Ju bookin und Fun d , 25 March det, Dan ona. Tel: 0751) 50774 H     EU   E ci manual, 6411 worth of original Hote, 050 worth el imput mariti 100 mand other bobin. Burda ring Hi l . | THI ET KE UTICH THI THIU war 40112 Sund your d o myl189uth with cheque Polar L to Micrubella C+VG. Prony Count 10-2 Faringdam Lane, London EC1R 1AU. t XIXE ST ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software. If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to:CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 5HD Tel: 0509 412604 one of the we have availalable software "


"Yo, ho, ho software and parrot on your shoulder jokes have been around about as long as Long John Silver himsell. Now long John Minson talks to Federation Against Software Theft boss — Bob Hay — about the pirates that are about to walk the plank. I've been keeping an eye on this guy for some time. He's the one they call Mr Big'. He knows all there is to know about program copying. He's been in the business of software piracy for years. But Bob Hay isn't a pirate. Just the opposite. In fact. He's the software industry's gamekeeper, director and co-ordinator of FAST the Federation Aginst Software Theft. The man who shouts, \"You're knicked!\" when Rambo, Robocop and Pacman kick in the door and arrest the young scallywags who've been ripping off their games. Or maybe not... It's hard to imagine this soft spoken, former Chief Superintendent raising his voice at all. Still, after thirty one eventful years in the force, which included the Iranian Embassy Siege. the Grunwick picket lines and the Southall riots, it's a fair bet that Bob Hay can take care of himself when he needs to. Look into his steel grey eyes and you immediately recognise the authority of the experienced policeman That's what brought Bob to FAST when he retired from the Met. Back in 1984 the software industry realised it needed to protect its products from copying. People who would never think of half-inching a paperback from Smith's had no qualms about ripping off duplicate tapes and disks. The law.proving once again that even if it's not an ass it's as slow as a mule, had failed to come to terms with the new technology. \"What is a micro-computer?\" learned judges asked. The problem was that when the copyright laws were drawn up STs and Amigas were mere science fiction. So the law needed a kick up the eighties. Twelve months later the legislation had been updated, thanks to FAST. Further victories followed and its membership grew, so that now all the major games publishers, as well as many business software companies are members. So how does FAST tackle the pirates? Like most good police work it depends on a little luck, a few inspired describe them. They're pathetic. They don't build or Create they just wreck.\" \"They say they do it because it's there. It's the same thing that draws per to climb Everest or trek to North Pole. They'd like to us believe that's what th too, but I don't believe software's the final frontius. There is one thing Bob Hay does believe though. Piracy, if it's allowed to continue, will destroy the software industry. \"It's like any high street store. They pass the losses from shop lifting onto the honest customers. Pirates grumble about the price of software, but they're driving it up. And It's the honest customer who suffers.\" Warming to his theme, he describes the situation in Sweden, where piracy is rife. \"If you allow piracy to go unchecked people don't bother to write software. There's no Incentive to stay un all night knocking your brains out if there's no way of getting a return on your investment.\" But what's the real scale of the problem? Last year counterfeit software with a street value of .5 million was seized in Britain. That's ,5 million which should have gone to programmers, publishers and, even if you don't give a damn about their losses, should have been ploughed back into new games. With the law now firmly on his side, industry-wide support for FAST and new measures on the cards such as an international anti-piracy body, Bob Hay believes that he'll continue winning the battle against pirates. But does a little copying really matter that much? \"How would you feel it somebody was photocopying your articles and stopp from selling them?'\" he Which does sort of brir home. According to Bob, it' battle to educale the plupru who support the pirates by buying their illegal copies, robbing the rightful owners of their share of the profits. Imagine some spotty oik slealing your dosh and see how you'd like it. Enough said. A Compilations: a fairer way of building your games library. hunches, a lot of hard work sign of organised crime and some solid detection, counterfeiting software since Take this recent history, hot the mid-eighties, according to from the files of Bob Hay. Bob, when a major forgery (Only the shoe sizes have operation was busted. But been changed to protect the there is an international innocent). network of pirates hacking There was this guy through protection systems advertising as a mail order and selling the copies. software supplier. Now luckily The pirates of the Spanish there are still a lot of honest Main have their contemporary people out there, and one counterparts today. Then who'd received this stuff could again, software prices in clearly see that it was pirated, Spain were, until recently. so he got in touch with the exceptionally high, which is publisher, which passed it just the son of climate that straight on to me.\" breeds piracy. But Bob Hay So did Bob send round the knows of copiers all around Sweeney? Not quite. FAST is the world, many of whom more Sherlock Holmes than escape scot free because Dirty Harry. \"We traced him local organisations refuse to via his advertisements then tackle the situation. made test purchases. More recently there's been Eventually we had more than the rise of the hacking crews. enough to interest both the defiantly wearing their T-shirts police and local trading around last year's PC Show. standards authority.\" Bob Hay is dismissive of these When the raid finally came program-busting poseurs. the pirate surrendered without \"The closest comparison a light. \"We could have can think of is the CB freaks. entered by force, but we're not They gave themselves in that melodramatic world. I nicknames. They loved the wouldn't flatter them. It's not sounds of their own voices. that sophisticated a crime.\" In They craved attention and the case in question the were desperate to create a accused came clean macho image. But what probably the wisest move as happened to CB? It was an FAST confiscated all his stock amusing phenomenon that and business records as came and went. evidencel You take away the image.\" Not all cases are so simple Bob continues, \"and there's though. There's not been any only one adjective I'd use to again, sparts to conten "


"Bort out the d MEN from the BOYS! ARUN THE GAUNTLET 00:00 ACCO 00:00 all the action thrills and Run The Gauntlet. NOWI What a brilli Ramel spills. This is an excellent game, so go and apart from technical excellence. It's the sheer range of plavable sections that makes Run The Gauntlet one of the best multi-event games JETSKIS HOVERS SPEEDBOATS METEORS BUGGYS Inflatables QUADS SUPERCATS THE HILL EXPLOSIVE EVENTS VECTRUM COMMODORE AMSTILAD ATARST. 118.99. 9.99 9.99 Ocean 19.99 24,99 8.999.999.99 19.99 24.99 LI Also available on DISK. 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Telephone: 061 832 6633 Talav 6699770GSANCHEG92ZCA "


"The heat is on ... and the chase is in full cry as East and West join forces to hunt down a Soviet drug-dealer. The two detectives from Chicago both have dir ferent reasons for capturing, one Russian, one their prey as they come face to face gang, fist fights, gun fire and with the Cleanheads [8.90 .99 29.99 to date tie-in a breathtaking bus Chas. feel the heat hottest film it's all action with stunning graphics .99 see REDI 24.99 SPECTRUM COMMODORE AMSTRAD ATARI ST AMIGA  1998 Carulco Pictures ist. All Rights Reserve Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Telephone: 061 832 6633 Telex: 669977 OCEANS G Fax: 061 834 0650 "

