"AUGUST 1985 95p JOIN US ON AN S$4.70 Dm6 ATARI SAFARI ULTIMATE'S \"ENTOMBED\" MAPPED WIN A COMPUTER HOLIDAY WIN: HENSHIN ROBOS WIN: A CASIO SYNTHESISER WITH \"GHETTO-BLASTER» EXCLUSIVE  FIRST REVIEW OF UT ELITE'S FRANK BRUNO'S BOXING WIN NIKE SPORTS KIT THE MAX HEADROOM INTERVIEW "


"SPECTRUM 48K . COMMODORE 64 FRANKIE HOLLYWOOD GOES TO ONIY WELCOME TO THE PLEASUREGAME     Extraordinary Arcade W X W W Animation and Graphics W W  A A  A  W heart of the pleasuredome A game of games to challenge the Arcade-King, Super Sleuth, and more WAKELIN plus FREE! ->> RELAX« SPECIAL LIVE RECORDING OF From Ocean in data lune twin cassette pack Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone: 061 832 6633 Ocean Software is available from selected branches of: WOOLWORTHWHSMITH.John Menzies, S.LASKYS, Rumbelows, COMET, Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. ocean "


"**.....41 I JOZUZES NEXT ISSUE ...85 -... 100 ON SALE 16th AUGUST FEATURES FRANK BRUNO'S BOXING CHALLENGE12 Win Nike sports gear for the sport of your choice. TECHNICIAN TED.. GAMES THEY REFUSE TO RELEASE... 18 Software spy Tony Takoushi tells you just what you're missing! THE MAX HEADROOM INTERVIEW......34 The world's best computer magazine interviews the world's bes TV personality and discovers that modesty is the best policy. GHETTOBLASTER!... Win a Casio synthesiser and other musical goodies. ART MASTERS Graphic secrets revealed by one of our top artists. PROBLEM PAGE. BUG HUNTER....... ENTOMBED.. 44 Ultimate's latest C64 spectacular mapped with Prof's hints and tips Cover: Courtesy of Nike TOPS HOLIDAY COMPETITION 48 How well do you know your It's the TOPs! Enter now and win a holiday. British boxers? Turn to ROBO COMPETITION. page 12 and have a bash! Win a bendy robot! FIREBIRD COMPETITION.. Don't buy this game win it! PROFESSOR VIDEO.. .82 Hints on Raid Over Moscow, Elite, Broadstreet, Impossible Mission and more. ATARI SAFARI.... Ten pages devoted to the Atari, packed with news, reviews, a competition and a listing. ADVENTURE. Our ace adventurers look into Askheron, Dragonworld and get Bored of the Rings. ADVENTURE HELPLINE.... MASTER OF THE LAMPS Editor Tim Metcalfe COMPETITION.. Deputy Editor MAILBAG Paul Boughton 112 Editorial Assistant Lesley Walker PEN PALS... 114 HALL OF FAME....... Seamus St. John ................ 120 Designer Brian Cookman LISTINGS Production Editor Mary Morton Adventure Writer LABYRINTH/BBC... Keith Campbell American Correspondant Dare you take on the legendary Minotaur in this compelling maze Marshal M. Rosenthal game? Don't ignore that ball of thread either! Publicity Marcus Rich APPLE CRAZY/SPECTRUM. 67 Arcades Clare Edgeley This Farmer's Boy has got his work cut out trying to catch all the Reader Services apples in his basket before they hit the ground. And they don't Marcus Jeffery fall one at a time! Advertisement Manager Louise Matthews DAREDEVILIVIC 20......... Assistant Advertisement Manager Bernard Dagdale Ever fancied being a motorcycle stuntman? Well now's your Advertising Executive chance! See how many cars you can leap over. Sean Brennan Production Assistant Melanie Paulo PARACHUTE/CBM 64.. Publisher The abandoned mines at Planet X are your destination in this Rita Lewis Editorial and Advertisement Offices: game. The main problem is you have to go down them by Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane parachute! London ECIR AN Tel: 01-251 6222 NEWS AND REVIEWS COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES POSTAL SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE. By using the special Postal Subscription Service, copies HOT GOSSIP of COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES can be mailed direct from our offices each month Bad tempered Donald Duck and that cute old bear Winnie the Pooh to any address throughout the world. All step into the limelight as we preview US Gold's latest Disney subscription applications should be sent for processing to COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES games. Subscription Department). Competition House, Farindon Road, Market Harborough GAMES NEWS. Leicestershire. All orders should include thd More on the Frankie game, a look at Mike Singleton's Quake, plus appropriate remittance, made payable to COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES. Annual sub the strongest man in Europe gets a grip on a brand new game. scription rates (12 issues): UK and Eire  REVIEWS REVIEWS................................................... 21 Additional service information, including individual overseas airmail rates, available Ooooofff! Way of the Exploding Fist is our game of the month, upon request. Circulation Department D EMAP National Publications Published and plus Dun Darach, A View to A Kill, and Frank Bruno's Boxing! a rah A Viento A Kiland Frank Ruino's distributed by EMAP National Publications ARCADE ACTION. ......... 108 Game of the Month NEXT MONTH.. ....... 122 Way of the Exploding Fist In Step Ltd It's getting closer even as you read this! . 106 Ltd "


"WATCH OUT! I IT'S  *** MES DYNAMITE DAN 94% «What makes the game is the graphics large, witty, bizarre and beautifully animated ... each screen has something remarkable, and horribly difficult puzzles ... Dynamite Dan is not just another Miner surrogate and is at least as essential to your collection.\" Popular Computing Weekly. 48K Spectrum/Spectrum + .95 Popular Computing Weekly Pick of the Week Crash Smash Maxwell House, Worship Street, London EC2A 2EN. Tel 01-377 4600 Trade orders to: Purnell Book Centre, Paulton, Bristol BS18 5LQ. Tel 0761 413301 "


"Computer + Video GAMES SPECTRUM/CBM64 AMSTRAD/MSX/ATARI/DC/VIC20 Trailer/C+UG/restyle/September CLASSIFIED INFORMATION HIBIE COUNTDOWUN LONTINUFS... There's just eight shari weeks before the meets look computer and liideo Games blasts off from pour local newsagent. It's hard to believe, but bere going to make the universe's brightest and besi dames magazine ewent beiter We'll still be bringing you up to the minute previews, reviews, news and features, but an exciting new hi-tech style. dih in the next isste e'll reveal more of our secrets, but in the meantime don't settle for second best-order your copy of the new look [+UG today. -OUPON What's more we've arranged a special offer for you. We're not giving the game away yet though you'll have to wait until next month to find out more. But if you cut out the coupon on the right and hang onto it until the next issue, you'll be able to save yourself  when De reveal all... C+UG/SPECIAL OFFER/LI OFF "


"H-O-T G-0-S-S-IP 09 : THE WONDERFUL we let me be WORLD OF WALT DISNEY This month's offering is something to eat they go and rather special it is an visit Eeyore the donkey, the rabbit and Christopher Robin exclusive preview of the to find they are all missing Walt Disney games to be released by US Gold. something! Christopher Robin tells Can the games really Pooh a blustery wind mixed capture the excitement of up everything in the forest and the cartoons and be worthy it will take a real hero to sort of the Walt Disney name? The Produce Market sees polines, tyres, boxes and out the mess. Tony Takoushi finds out. Tony Takoushi finds out. Donald catching produce nets. He then uses these Donald catching produce nets. He then use Pooh sets out to put thrown off a truck and placing items to set up a playground matters to right and you have I used to love diving into the it in the correctly marked bins. for his three nephews Huey, to guide him on his travels back row of my local fleapit If you make a mistake and put Dewey and Louie the final around the forest. There are on Saturday mornings, it in the wrong bin, it falls to goal of the game. ten objects to collect, each sweaty palms clasped tightly the floor and squelches! Obviously as this game is object belonging to a around a huge box of crisp McDuck Airlines is similar aimed at a young age group it particular character or place. popcorn. The highlight of the you have to identify luggage is designed to develop certain if you find an object, you morning was the cartoons! on a conveyor belt by its skills. The four sub-games then have to give it to the right Well they are back and with initials and then throw it into teach special relationships as person bearing in mind you a vengeance, in a rather difthe appropriate tramcar. well as matching and logic can only carry one object at a ferent format. A rather hairy place to work skills, whilst the concept of time. US Gold will be releasing a is the Toy Store. Donald has work, pay and use of money Plotting a map is helpful and series of games licensed from to put the toys on the shelves will help a child grasp a most recovering the objects quickly Disney, the first two in their correct places by fundamental concept. is essential. If you dal being Winnie the Pooh in the climbing up a ladder to the The graphics are straight dreaded mist comes. You lose Hundred Acre Wood and correct shelf. Perils are, of out of a cartoon. And the your sense of direction in the Donald Duck's Playground course, never far away and game is very entertaining mist and can end up in some They will be available on the the Amquack train trundles by provided that you play it on very strange places! Tigger is Commodore 64 and will be causing the toys to fall so the top level! Overall I have another problem (they tell me aimed at the seven to eleven you must make a dash for the only one qualm the sound he is \"bouncy\"). If you meet year olds. special shield that covers the could have been better! him, he will take anything you OK, so I like a good megashelves when the train are carrying and move you to zap, shoot-it-if-it-movesapproaches. Are you sitting comfortably? another part of the forest. arcade-adventure like most Finally we have the Then I will begin ... The only person who helps maladjusted video kids and Amquack Railroad here \"Oh bother,\" said Pooh. you is Owl who gives you Donald does not fall into any Donald has to guide the train. A knock at the door, it was helpful clues. of those categories. However by junction switches, his friend Piglet who seemed It is a good educational this is a new area and, like between two towns. He picks quite upset. program with competent slaughtering millions of aliens, up a parcel from one and \"Oh dear, I seem to be problem solving and comit can be fun! delivers it to the other. missing something,\" said prehension skills. Both these The game has stunning with all four jobs, Donald Piglet. games should be available graphics and immense selects the amount of time heThat's odd,\" said Winnie around August time, but will playability. It involves Donald wishes to work and on comthe Pooh, \"I think I'm missing cost around the .00 mark. running around town doing pletion of a shift is paid. He a few things myself. Oh well That wraps it up for this different jobs... waddle, can then go shopping in I'm feeling a little rumbly in my month — but watch out for waddle. Minnie's Five and Dime shop, tummy. Things are bound to next month. I have got you There are four places of Mickey's Hardware store or look a little better after a little two DYNAMITE pieces of work, McDuck Airlines, the Goofy's Junk Shop. He can something join me won't software one is the Produce Market, the Toy buy a variety of items ranging you?\" ultimate race game and the Store and the Amquack from ladders, monkey bars. So starts the Pooh other will have you swooning Railroad swings and slides to tramadventure. After a little in disbelief.  Not too long ago I have seen the light and you July issues of virtually all starting a disc club as mentioned to Ocean that the consumer will benefit Commodore user maga. reported last issue. They Konami had not marketed they have agreed on a zines have an \"exclusive\" tell us that our story was their games over here joint venture that will on the James Bond game. just an unconfirmed rumour although they were on shortly see konami games To set the record straight, and are fed up with answer release in the US. Similarly in the UK. C&VG had the first REAL ing telephone calls from Konami told me they were exclusive two months ago!! hundreds of C&VG readers! trying to put their own. It appears that Domark  Sorry folks! Apparently So please don't bother the package together for are burning the candle at Commodore are NOT offer. poor people at Corby and release in the UK. They both ends these days! The ing free disc drives or more... "


"H-O-T G-0-S-S-I-P had worked hard for this. Now my chance had arrived. This was the big one! SUMMER GAMES I had spared no physical agonies in my preparation. I had run the marathon (backwards), done high altitude training on the roof, ripped joysticks in half and endured the final test, THE BURN. I thought I had done enough, but boy was I WRONG! Summer Games II is it the sports challenge! The game starts with the traditional lighting of the Olympic Flame and the release of a flight of doves. You are then faced with a menu of game options. You can play all, some or even just one event. To ease you into the competition, there is also a training mode for each event and the facility to see the world records or the opening and closing ceremonies at your leisure. There are eight events in all and, unlike other Olympic games, the joystick waggling LYLYDYS is at a minimum. The emphasis is on timing and co-ordination. Let me stress that all eight events are quality items, although I will concentrate on my favourite four Triple Jump, Javelin, Rowing, and Cycling. CONTESTANT The Triple Jump is mean. You have to waggle the his ar u have to waggle the his arm goes back and he will screen. If you are pushing joystick up and down to build release the javelin when you the stick in the right direction up speed on the run up and push the joystick to the right but beautifully effective. release the joystick. Simple at the right time, you will pick up speed. at the three crucial steps. As you pick up speed, so This sounds easy, but your Rowing really tests your the arrow moves faster and Timind has to be immaculate timing you have to pusmeye band coordination te to make the jump successful. the joystick left and right in \" crucial to survive. If you fail, your athlete falls, relation to your rower's move I had my doubts about the sprawling in the sand. He ments. If your timing is spot Equestrian events. Could then picks himself up on then you will stroke that Epyx really deliver on a horse much more effectively and head down in shame! riding game? Yes, they could! The Javelin event is cover the distance a lot Very skillful timing is superb. The animation in this faster. Again, great graphics essential to leap the fences event looks like Impossible and a true quality arcade feel. correctly. Any falls and Mission with true to life The really gruelling event knocked fences earn you inertia built in! You have to to my mind is the Cycling. penalty points. If you get too press the fire button in time This event is very hard to many penalties, you are dis with the athlete's running master. To move your cyclist, qualified. Superb animation steps to increase pace. As he you must push the joystick in once again. approaches the line, you one of eight directions as in the High Jump, you push the joystick to the left, indicated by an arrow on the must gauge the angle of approach to the bar as well as monitoring your speed. I found this very hard to do initially, although a little practice soon cured the problem. A nice touch here is that you can put the bar at whatever starting height, you wish. As is standard you get three attempts to clear the height. Fencing is finnicky to play and some real dedication is needed. You can parry, thrust and step with the best of them but you have got to learn HOW first! If in solo mode, you take on a droid (I hate that droid!) and have a three minute bout in which to score as many points as possible. Considering the complexities of such a sport it has been translated well to the 64. Finally there is Whitewater Kayaking. This is really hard to play!! The water gurgles merrily away as you fight with the current to get your kayak through the 15 gates. Your man can paddle for control but the current takes over at the slightest lapse. If you fail to pass through a gate, you get penalty points which are translated to time penalties at the end. Other features in the game allow you to load the events from Summer Games one and play any game from the two packages combined. There is a high score table on the disc version I have, and you can select the number of joysticks you wish to use. The closing ceremony is stunning. It has the Jetman flying in from the distance and the infamous Blimp dirigible with scrolling messages. To crown it all, there is a firework display. Well, what else could there be? Epyx have Winter Games under development at present and, if it is half as good as this game, they have a real winner on their hands. Summer Games Il will be sold in the UK by US Gold and will be available around the end of August. "


"\"These are even crazier than I am, Folks!\" FRANKIE FRANKIE This month's 1 MicroGamer 1 zany program : \"My two bijoux choice-ettes\" 1. Frankie goes to Hollywood by Ocean A fab game featuring the intergalactic mega hunks themselves. 2. Mad Doctor by Creative Sparks. Fiendishly clever! A game crammed with gunk and gore (and other naughty bits). \"My pick of the Arcade and Adventure:\" The way of the exploding fist by Melbourne House Martial arts for two combatants, involving 18 manoeuvres such as kicks, feints, and blocks. By outwitting opponents, and gaining! complete control over your body, you can change from a cuddly kitten into a Tenth Dan. Spectrum 48K, Amstrad, Commodore 64 .95 I THORN EMI Computer Software International Micro Software Division "


"SHADOW FIRE by Superior Software The object is to retrieve diamonds from an underground cave system, using maps and passwords. But look out! Ferocious reptiles are lurking just around the corner. (Yuk!) BBC Electron .95 by Beyond The player has a 100 minutes of real time to rescue Ambassador Kryxix held captive by the horrible General Zoff. All commands are issued through picture symbols to enable the game to be played at a truly intergalactic pace. Commodore 64 Spectrum 48K .95 googlies, maidens, and silly mid-offs. It's just like real cricket, except that, with you in control, England may even win the Ashes! Commodore 64 .95 \"Something to de-scramble your brain with:\" MINI GHETTO BLASTER Chercran LM OFFICE by Virgin The player, alias Rockin' Rodney delivers demos to his record company. But first he must test their danceability by blasting the people of Funky Town to their feet. Stupendously fab soundtrack includes Baker Street and Electric Avenue. Commodore 64 .95 THE ADVENTURE by Tynesoft A whacky chase game based on the popular TV pensioner. Put on your kilt and your lavender water, wave your walking stick and zap the evil Scunner Campbell before he blams the world to bits. Commodore 64 Commodore 16 Spectrum 48K .95 by Database Comprising a word processor for writing letters and reports, a database for storing addresses, and a spreadsheet for storing complicated numbers. Pretty clever stuff, huh? BBC Micro .95 DUN   s mystery r makes his own n review... QUACKSHOT by Gargoyle Cuchulainn, the hero is trying to free a companion imprisoned in the corrupt city of Dun Darach. But first he must take part in hundreds of minor adventures. A game for brilliant warped minds. Spectrum 48K .95 \"A bonus for all you 'Stuff' fans:\" DON'T BUY THIS by Firebird A cringe-along compilation containing the five most forgettable games of all times about as exciting as watching grass grow. (Recommended for insomniacs). Spectrum 48K .50 ---Win -->> | UNMASK THIS MONTH'S | MYSTERY MICROGAMER AND WIN A 2-PACK PROGRAM PRIZE — TEN PRIZES MUST BE WON. by Creative Sparks A mad survival chase game, with the player as night watchman in a toy factory, pursued by crazed clockwork ducks. (I know the feeling) Spectrum 48K .50 FRANKIE HOTWOOD DESERT BURNER by Ocean A perilous journey to the centre of the 8 pleasuredome with those whacky Frankie boys. Plus a unique live recording of Relax. Commodore 64 Spectrum 48K .95 Something for zappers everywhere: by Creative Sparks Desert Burner is a powerful road bike capable of megasonic speeds. The rider has to deliver crucial weapon plans, but there are enemies attacking and traps to evade. Skilful, huh? Spectrum 48K .50 FRANKIE If you know the answer send this coupon in to us, not later than 30 July 1985. The first ten correct entries drawn will each receive FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD and MAD DOCTOR JUMP JET AVIEWTOA KILL I say the Mystery Microgamer is: by Domark The name is Bond, James Bond. The game is to tear through the 3D streets of Paris, escape from a raging inferno, then save the world from a ghastly time bomb (and the Duran Duran soundtrack!) Commodore 64 Spectrum 48K .99 by Anirog A sophisticated combat and flight simulator, requiring a strong nerve, and a head free of blancmange. The mission to seek and destroy in ever-deteriorating weather. Commodore 64 .95 Send me your latest full list of software programs. Name Machine MAD DOCTOR Address by Creative Sparks As Mad Doctor, in this blood-curdlingly evil game, the player must create new life out of freshly killed body parts. If he arouses the villagers' suspicions, they'll kill him. A light touch on the scalpel is required. Commodore 64 .95 \"Things for sporty hunks to play:\" Graham Gooch's TEST CRICKET Postcode SEND TO: Thorn EMI Computer Software, Mystery Microgamer Competition, Thomson House, 296 Farnborough Road, Farnborough, Hants. GU14 7NU CVGI from Audiogenic | Superb sports simulation, with lots of All games featured above are available from Laskys, WH Smith and other good software stores. "


"GAMES NEWS HOLIDAY CENTRE HYPERSPORTS Watch out for Quake Minus One, the latest creation from the minds of Mike Singleton and Warren Foulkes. It's a fast-moving, real-time action game set deep beneath the Atlantic ocean where a Tiran power station draws energy direct from the Earth's core to fuel the world's industrial nations. Quake Minus One You're all just about to go away on holiday, right? And you'll be thinking about all those wonderful postcards you'll be sending back to your mates. Well, here's a special C&VG challenge for you. We want to see the naffest, most boring or tasteless postcard you can find while you are away and send it to us at C&VG with a suitable message on the back. Then we'll pick the naffest postcards and send the fortunate person who mailed it to us a suitably awful prize. Interested? Good! But remember wed like to be able to print some of them in C&VG! Send your naff holiday postcards to Computer & Video Games, The Worst Postcard in the World Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Don't forget to tell us your name and address so we can send your prize to you. Ocean has acquired the rights to publish eight of Japan's top arcade games for the Spectrum. Commodore and Amstrad throughout Europe. Hypersports a sports simulation will be released first, followed by Konami's Tennis. Recommended retail prices for the games will be .95 for the Spectrum, and .95 for Commodore 64 and Amstrad machines. Ocean will also produce CBM disc versions on selected titles and these will be available at .95. Yie Ar Kung-Fu, Hyper Rally and Konami's Golf will be released during the following months. Mike, a classroom farce currently enjoying major success in the coin market, and Comic Bakery another fun arcade game are scheduled for release in November and December. A terrorist organisation — the Robot Liberation Front intends to sabotage the Titan's fail-safe devices and trigger off a massive earthquake. The Titan's computer will be destroyed and tidal waves will swamp the coasts of America and Europe. The game opens on the day the RLF sabbtage the Titan complex Quake Minus One. Government scientists have managed to reestablish communications with the computers which control Titan. Your mission is to capture or destroy the four remaining Titan computers Zeus, Poseidon, Vulcan and Ares. | DESIGNER OF THE MONTH RELAX — AGAIN? Just how many more versions of Frankie's Relax single are there? The boys who went to Hollywood seem to have more mixes of their number one smash than Mr Kipling's cakes! You'll get one on the new Ocean game based around the group. It's a live version of the controversial tune. The game also features another \"new\" tweak. You load the game and then play an audio cassette which gives you instructions on how to play the game on the a-side and some Frankie sounds on the b-side. \"Datatune is a new idea,\" says Ocean boss David Ward. But what about Deus Ex Machina then, David? highly successful Flightpath 737. He became interested in computer programming when he bought a Commodore 64 in October 1983 for his children. \"I thought I would learn the basics to teach the kids,\" he says. \"At the time I was also working as a flight simulation instructor for Dan Air. I was sure I could do something by way of programming a comparatively simple flight simulation game.\" The result was Flightpath 737 which has gone on to notch up sales of around 60,000 so far. Encouraged by the success of NAME: Vaughan Dow Flightpath 737, Vaughan then turned his mind to Jump Jet which involved \"far more complex programming.\" BORN: Edinburgh, 1945 Vaughan says Jump Jet is \"as accurate a representation of the problems of GAME: Jump Jet Jump Jet flying as the computer will allow.\" He is now working on another There can't be many computer proprogram but will not say what it's called grammers with more first-hand or what it is about knowledge of their subject than former Favourite Food: Steak RAF Harrier jump jet pilot, Vaughan Favourite Drink: Drambuie Dow. Favourite TV Programme: Yes Minister His latest game for Anirog is Jump Jet, Favourite Computer Game: None a flight simulation which also combines Countries Visited: Numerous combat action Favourite Music: Opera Vaughan, who now works as a pilot The thing I hate most about the for Dan Air, was also responsible for the computer industry: Nothing BUILD A BODY The next sporting superstar to get the computer game treatment will be strong man Geoff Capes. Martech, the people who brought you Eddie Kidd and Brian Jacks Superstar, are behind this new sports simulation which promises to be just a bit different. The game will be based around Geoff's exploits in those Strongest Man in the World extravaganzas shown on TV. Not only will you have to compete in some gruelling events but also \"build a body\" which is up to all that excercise! 10 "


"G.A.M.E:S NEWS \"Here we go, here we go, here we go...\" with Five-a-Side Football, a new game from Anirog. The software house says the game will include singing and close up screens of penalty shots. The game, available for the Commodore 64, will cost .95. An Amstrad conversion will be out in the autumn. St Bride's School in County Donegal, where grown women pay for the chance to re-live their jolly hockey sticks schooldays, is to become the subject of a computer game. The Secret of St Bride's, written for the Commodore 64 and Spectrum by Priscilla Langridge one of the school's regular \"pupils\" centres on the adventures of Trixie Trinian. She is a girl of just a little over school age who goes to St Bride's for a taste of storybook boarding school life. But she finds it a little too real. The Secret of St Bride's promises to be the first of a series of \"unusual\" games from St Bride's. Miss Marianne Scarlett, headmistress of St Bride's, says: \"The production of games software is a very undeveloped field in Ireland. We intend to strike ahead and fill that gap. You'll be hearing more of St Bride's.\" You've heard of MUD now get ready for MUNG! No it's not a strange creature from a Flash Gordon film — it's a new interactive game being put together by Infomania, the Hertfordshire-based computer club. The Multi User Network Game commonly known as MUNG, will eventually have thousands of users. Many will be bored Adventure game players, who have exhausted their last breath in a terrifyingly boring fight with a bearded pirate. Initially 50 or so users will be able to play MUNG simultaneously. For every action in the game which changes the MUNG world significantly there will be a reward of MUNG power points. Accumulate enough of these and the MUNG world quite literally, be yours! As your character is your entry point and sense system within MUNG he/she it is very important. Above all you must never [if you can help it] let them die. The MUNG game is scheduled for general release in the first half of 1985. Applications for further details should be made, in writing, to: MUNG Applications, informania, Carey Place, Watford, WD1 2LR, or telephone Watford 55122. CLUMSY COLIN ACTION BIKER Mastertronic, the budget to our customers, but we game specialist, has joincan only gain by having ed forces with the snack Skips' Clumsy Colin food firm KP to launch featured on over 100.000 a new computer game computer games. based on Clumsy Colin, the merchandising \"In addition, it seems character for KP Skins logical to link up with Clumsy Colin Action Biker another company who will sell for .99 and will has similar but not conbe available for the Speclitung interests. trum 48k and the ComAnd Mastertronic's modore 64. Martin Alper added: The link-up means the \"Most importantly, game will be publicized working with KP has on 12 million packets of given us access to the big Skips. multiples and having the KP's Bob Davis said: game publicized on all \"With our track record, KP Skips packs has we obviously feel that we sealed the game's are already well-known success.\" Up and coming games to look out for include Super Pipeline Il for the Spectrum from Task Set and Juggernaut, a driving strategy game for the Spectrum, from CRL. Both will sell for .95. A new after-sales service package to speed up the repair and replacement of faulty hardware has been announced by Sinclair research and its UK distributors, TBD. Each new machine is now accompanied by a Sinclair \"Blue Label\" which details the new procedure and includes a postage-paid voucher to cover the cost of its return direct to the factory. Customers who have a problem with their machine within the 12 month warranty can use the card to post it to Sinclair, together with proof of purchase, and the company promises return despatch within seven days of receipt. If the machine is taken back to the dealer where it was bought, it will be checked, and if necessary forwarded to Sinclair. The customer can choose to have the repaired machine returned via the dealer or direct to their home. Within 30 days of purchase, customers who experience a problem can opt for a direct replacement of their machine from the dealer. "


"C&VG/ELITE/NIKE FRANK BRUNO COMPETITION omputer & Video Games always knocks other computer games magazines for six but this issue we've decided to deliver a knockout punch with our EXCLUSIVE Frank Bruno's Boxing competition. Together with ELITE, the software company behind the Bruno boxing game, and NIKE sportswear, the people who make all the classy gear worn by top sports stars, C&VG are offering YOU some extremely special prizes. All you have to do is identify the three British boxers pictured, fill in the special coupon and send it to Computer & Video Games, Frank Bruno Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU.  First prize winner will get an entire NIKE sports kit for the sport of his or her choice.  Second prize winner will have a choice of two items of NIKE Sportwear.  Third prize winner will be able to choose one item of NIKE sportswear. 50 runners-up will get copies of Frank Bruno's Boxing which is available for the Spectrum, Commodore 64 and Amstrad. We want a good clean fight so get your entry off today! Boxer A is.. Boxer B is... Boxer C is ........... Name......... Address 12 "


"FRANK COMPETITION BRUNO Computer & Video Games visited Frank Bruno in training for his forthcoming title fight — at a gymnasium in Canning Town. You won't find any computers in the gym they are a bit too delicate! but Frank has seen the Elite game and likes it. \"It's a good game and it's pretty realistic I hope it sells well.\" By the time you read this, Frank should have fought the Swede Anders Eckland in the European Heavyweight Championship title fight at Wembley. We hope he did as well as Elite's version of the heavyweight championship challenge is bound to do! Frank wears Nike sports gear at all his title fights and you could win some Nike kit suitable for your favourite sport if you enter C&VG's exclusive Elite/Nike Frank Bruno's Boxing competition. And check out our round-up of the best boxing games around on page 22 and 23. The runner-up will be invited to help Frank decorate the gym. the gym. "


"RELEASE DATE AUG KARATE System 3 Software in ... AND YOU THOUGHT YOU'D SEEN A KARATE GAME.' INTERNATIONAL As you know, like the Martial Arts, perfection is the only accepted standard. So Play NOTHING until you've played SYSTEM 3's INTERNATIONAL KARATE. For the Spectrum, CBM 64, Atari, Amstrad at only .50 Telephone: 01-735 8171 Ex.68 Telex: 295555 LSPG SYSTEM 3 SOFTWARE SOUTHBANK HOUSE BLACK PRINCE ROAD LONDON SE1 75J ajemyos E Las175 "


"An Andrew Spencer-/ENTE Joint production COMING SOON Previously available only from Commodore U.K. for the CRM64, the author Adrian Spencer and Elite now combine to bring you the spectacular ternation tional Intern BASKETBALI GAME FEATURES For SPECTRUM .99 and AMSTRAD .99 Furious non-stop action with one or two player feature .Realistic animation with jump, block and steal manoeuvres You can even jump and turn in mid-air before slamming the ball into the basket Nine fierce skill levels from the utterly pathetic to the Harlem Globetrotter Three fiery opponents with unique intelligent player characteristics Multisection game with end-of-match presentation sequence  Sequel to immensely successful International Soccer Jon UK.COM CBM64 SCREEN SHOT International Basketball is from Andrew Spencer author of the Sensational BestSeller International Soccer Every single Elite product carries the unique Elite Holographic Sticker. Make sure your copy does. It's Your guarantee of quality Andrew Spencer Mail Order Just send a cheque or p. payable to Elite' or quote your Visa number SULÉ -Joint Production Elite Systems Limited Anchor House Anchor Road Aldridge Walsall West Midlands Telephone (0922) 55852 Telex 335622 SPETELO "


"Bet you can't sit still when playing Guide bouncy Thing' through this underworld fantasia searching for the armoury to equip himself carefully for the final encounter with the evil Toy Goblin. Commodore 64 (.95 Cu Gremin DHLCON Gremlin Graphics, Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423 "


"SZ ON TOP OF FACTORY WAGES DEPT ABRASION SLICE DUST SURFACE EXT ABRASION LEVEL 6 MATTHEWS ELECT. START. LAIR COND. TUBING, 1 1 TRADESMEN FIRE ENTRANCE ESCAPE QUALITY LASER FUMING CLEAN ASS SLICE CUPBOARD ROOM. DEPT. SEPPLANT LEVEL 5 worse and worse... lazy chips really easily! The Prof's jokes get says the quick map helps you jump over the often braved the dangers of the factory and help all you TT fans out there. Prof. Video has extremely useful map of the Chip Factory to reader A. Quick has come up with an for Hewson Consultants and CEVG echnician Ted was a surprise Top Ten hit ACIFT  OFFICIAL A BIT OF WE UNION | FRESH CALL FLAG AIR HIM SIR TED's DESK SILICON CANTEEN ETCHING TANK ACID BOTTLE STORE LIFT THE Pic LINE FACTORY RECEPTION CLOAK GATE ROOM SILICON SLICE STORE ELECTRO PLATING BATH MICROCHIP MOUNTING FURNACE LEVEL 3 SURBITON COLLIERY BAY MAIN THE SLICE SHOP DIFF STEWARD FURNACE BOARD PHOTO ROOM COPIER CORRIDOR HTC H VOLTAGE TESTING LEVEL 2 UNDER POWER POWER GENERATOR CABLES BEAKER STORE TEA BEAKER STORE TAN TEA MACHINE LEVEL 1 TECHNICIAN DIFE FURNACE MACHINE PREDOWN DOWN eir IN THE IN THE CELLAR CAVES SEWERAGE SEWERAGE Sortide et ea CELAR UNDER TER MACHINE FORGOTTEN ROOM "


"C&VG's Hot Gossiper, TONY TAKOUSHI is a dedicated games nut. And he just loves to tell the world about the latest and greatest games that he un. covers in his quest for the ultimate game experience. But his mission in life causes him a few problems. What happens when he gets a game that no. one else is ever going to see because the software supremos involved won't release it? We decided to put Tony out of his misery and let him give you a glimpse of a few games that you may NEVER see again! Moon Patrol are top class micro and better and I was shocked to hear conversions. that they were not going to release two Atarisoft has the licence to many games which I consider to be more arcade games and hopefully among their finest in the UK. they will be converted to the same They are Park Patrol and Zonehigh standard. ranger. Park Patrol has some of the cutest graphics and tunes I have seen bundled into a single game. It is VERY playable and very challenging. Zoneranger is a cross between Sinister, Asteroids and Gravitar(an Atari game from the arcades). Again it offers superb gameplay and presentation. The other titles I will mention come from miscellaneous games com panies, but are all of a high standard. Crystal Castles J-bird is a stunning version of Q-Bert. To call its graphics cartoon-like\" is an Parker Video was poised to enter injustice, they ARE cartoons! the UK games market with a host of top Mad Planets is also from the arcades name branded games. Unfortunately however, the author did not wholly they pulled out as they decided the finish the game (it lacks polish) as a GAMES THEY REFUSE T LOVE playing games. I eat, sleep home micro market was too volatile. licensing deal was never concluded. and talk games! This dedication This left many top quality branded This is a shame as the game is so close has earned me rewards, I now games sitting on the shelf in limbo. As to the original. The music is so good! have ten computer systems at home Parker Games are, in the main, Somebody somewhere likes Frak and over 2,500 games to choose from. licensed from the arcades, they are (the BBC micro original now on the 64 If all that isn't enough, I also have two produced to a very high standard. This and Amstrad) as they have written a full size arcade machines Tempestis reflected in Popeye, Gyruss, Star Frak Trainer. This version allows you and Radarscope-for those lonesome Wars, Q-Bert, Mr Do's Castle and to choose any starting screen with 20 hours between 12 and 4am. Montezuma's Revenge. All these lives. Incidentally, I hear (nudge This huge collection of games has games are produced to real arcader's nudge, wink wink) that if you type also caused me a great deal of frustra level Star Wars being the weak link \"American Express\" on the 64 version tion. There are so many good games in the chain and they would have while holding down the CTRL key, a while I receive from the US and Europe that had a price tag of around  each. message appears on the screen saying are never officially released in the UK. I cannot do these games justice. If \"That will do nicely' and put you in Why? Well, you'll have to ask the softyou liked the arcade originals then to a cheat mode! ware companies about that. But I'd like to give you a brief glimpse of the goodies you're missing! As there are so many see the lists to choose from I have selected some of the best for detailed examination. Atarisoft has produced many superb arcade clones for home micros and a few duff ones! Battlezone managed to gain popularity in the arcades but it was in a vector graphic format. The 64 conversion is quite close to the original but it is S-L-O-W to play. Miss Pacman, Mario Brothers and 6350 Montezuma's Revenge these are the real McCoy. I hear one I have seen quite a few versions of of the UK's top software houses could Crystal Castles but none to touch a be signing a marketing agreement version from Thundervision. This IS which would release some of these Crystal Castles, it has all the corridors, games. So keep your fingers crossed! secret exits and playability of the Activision games have got better original. Mr Do's Castle 18 "


"SCORE 001490 73 1 28 Super Zaxxon was written in the US from Atari originals. The list printed by a company called Hesware. This elsewhere is merely a taster. Hopecompany seems to have closed down fully someone will enter the UK and and there are now complications over market these games. the release of software it hasTwo unseen Atari games that must developed. Don't panic as Super be mentioned are, Behind Jaggi Lines Zaxxon is by no means a great game. and Ballblaster. SE TO RELEASE Atari Software You May Never See: Behind Jaggi Lines/Ballblaster/ Montezuma's Revenge/Landscape/ Music/Mission X/Keystone Cops/ Aquatron (A superb version of Defender)/MASH/The Last Starfighter/Centipede 5200/Ollies Folly/ Sea Dragon/Wayout/Preppie/Vanguard/Bandits/Follow the Flag (Way out 2)/AE/Captain Cosmo SUPPLS33333 C64 Software You May Never See: O'Riley's Mine/Sammy Lightfoot/ Protector/Battlezone/Popeye/James Bond/Ardy Aardvark/Cohen's Towers/Monster Smash/Mad Planets/ Gyruss/Star Wars/Star Trek/Spys Demise 2/Barmy Builders/Saucer Attack/Miner 2049'Er/Q*Bert (Wow!) -Bird (Double Wow!!)/Oils Well/Miss Pacman (C'est Brill)/New York City/ ATSION Wargames (from the film)/Mr Do's Castle (a l'arcade)/Air Support/ Whistlers Bros/Park Patrol (Superb)/ Park Patrol Zone Ranger (Excellent version of Sinistar)/Moon Patrol (THE version) It is a reasonable follow-up but does Jaggi Lines was written by Lucasfilm Jungle Hunt/Time Runner/Chopper not offer anything really new. and Atari together and is based on the Hunt/Frak Trainer/Blue Max 2/Crystal Being a fan of shoot-'em-ups, I film Return of the Jedi. Castles (the version from Thunderparticularly like Moon Shuttle from This must be the ultimate 3D game. vision)/Rainbow Walker/Solar Fox/GI Datasoft. It is a sheer unadulterated. The screen display has yet to be Joe/Ghostchaser/Journey to the mean 'zap-em' game. Juno First is also equalled. Hopefully this game will be Centre of the Earth/Mario Bros (from from Datasoft and compares out later this year as at present there |Atarisoft, this version is superb) favourably with the arcade original are copyright problems between Montezuma's Revenge/Trolls/Blagger Sirius Software is another US Lucasfilm and Atari. Construction Set/Space Taxi/Hes company to close down. But not In the game you fly around a planet Games/Dream House/Super Zaxxon before it had produced some quality zapping the enemy and picking up Devil Wheel/Juno First (The official games. Bandits is a colourful version fellow space pilots who have been arcade version)/Dino Eggs/Repton/ of Space Invaders-Centipede shot down. Slamball/Necromancer/Zepplin Galaxions and Phoenix all rolled into Ballblaster is a 3D one-on-one foot Bandits/Fast Eddie/Snoopy/Neutral one. Wayout is the ultimate maze ball game with superb graphics. It is Zone/Night Mission Pinball/Access game. You don't just PLAY this game very addictive and fun to play. Music Composer/Cave of the Word you are in it! I have had to restrict myself to the Wizard/Serpentine/Arctic ShipThe graphics are A-mazing. Totally skimpiest outline of these games as wreck/Genesis/Moon Shuttle/Squish| true to life as you move around the there are so many. If you have enjoyed 'em/Dragonhawk/Relax/Rally Speedmaze. this feature and would like to see more way (coming soon from Commodore) The Atari micro also has a wealth of detailed reviews or more features on Blueprint/The Music Shop (from games never released in the UK. In the same lines, write in and let me Broderbund Software) Wayout fact, many of the 64 games have come know! "


"Microsell ... Microsell ... Microsell ... Microsell .. ACORN ELECTRON for sale, with  worth of software, joystick interface and books sell for . Will split. Worth over . Tel. (0900) 825213 ask for Richard after 4.30pm. 48K SPECTRUM, data recorder, joystick interface Quickshot II, books and magazines over 's worth of games including Technician Ted, Brian Bloodaxe, Wizards Lair for just  (hardly used) phone (0384) 282794 BBC GAMES for sale. Mined Out, Cybertron Mission, Felix Meets The Evil Weevils, Twin Kingdom Valley, and Moon Raider. All .50 Phone 01-950 7293 and ask for Justin. ACORN ELECTRON, plus one, cassette recorder, view word processing of Electron User, lots of software including Elite, Tempest and Killer Gorilla. All boxed, excellent condition. Quick sale, hence only  ono. Phone Stephen (0582) 503938 (evenings). COMMODORE 64 software to swap. Disk and tape. All letters will be answered. Send your list to Stephen Zugler, Postfach 65A, 7057 Winnenden, West Germany. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE Eureka!: .00: Underwurde; Psytron; Midnight; Avalon: .50 Jetset; Trashman; Jetpack; Manic Miner; Starstrike; Defenda; Astro Blaster: .50 plus many many more IRCISAE to David Duffy, Headford, Co. Galway, Ireland. ATARI VCS, 11 games including Frogger, Chopper Command and Star Wars. Also Supercharger unit with 4 cassettes, Mindmaster, Survival Island, etc. . All in original boxes with instructions. Tel: 54438 after 5pm. WILL SWAP Acorn Electron, joystick interface, over 20 games including Elite, Zany Kong Jnr, etc. for Amstrad (will accept green screen) MSX or CBM 64. Phone Bracknell 423943 (after 6pm). SPECTRUM GAMES for sale: Lords of Midnight; Deathchase; Starclash; Full Throttle; Digger Dan; Apollo 2; many more. Tel 0222 627213 for Richard; prices from  to .00. SPECTRUM 48K. Full guarantee + data recorder + interface 1 + interface 2 + lots of games, including Matchday, Decathlon, Beachhead, Strangeloop. Kokotoniwilf, Jetset Willy etc + Library Member + n32 lightpen, all 3 weeks old. Phone 01-677 1352 ask for Zahid TEXAS mini memory module with manual and demo tape. Hardly used  ono. Tel 868 7594 SPECTRUM 48K bought at Christmas. Perfect condition. With tape recorder and 14 tapes. Also with Kempston interface plus joystick. Ring Ballyclare 40485. Weekends only. Or write to 101 Burn Road, Doagh, Ballyclare, Co. Antrim, Northern Ireland BT39 ORD  or nearest offer. VIC 20 games, four on one cassette for the un expanded machine. 100% mic. Great value at .50 including P&P. Send cheque or PO to Jason Davis, 4 Tenby Road, Macclesfield, Cheshire SK11 8TQ. T199/4A extended basic cartridge for sale. No reasonable offers refused. Tel Morecombe 419142 after 6pm.. VIC 20 16K switchable ram pack C2N cassette recorder joystick Introduction to Basic I and cassettes of choice 10 introduction programs, mags and book with manuals + boxes  ono. Many cassettes cartridges books at half price. Tel (0443) 204340 4.7pm. ATARI USERS want to swap software, disk only. Europe, USA, GB, Send list to J. Harrison, 50 Redbridge Towers, Millbrook, Southampton, Hampshire, S01 9AU. CBM swap or sell over 800 games send list to Marinutti Ph. 116 rue des Melezes 57070 Metz, France. ATARI 800 cassette recorder, Donkey Kong, Zaxxon, Airstrike 2, books on programming and many excellent programs, excellent condition hardly used worht over  seld for . Tel 0596 72865 ask for Andrew. SPECTRUM software for sale, Sinbad, Tank Trax, Select 1, BMX Racers + many more send sae for full list to Simon Walker, Pheasant Cottage, High Espley. Morpeth, Northumberland ACORN ELECTRON with Acorn data tape recorder, joystick interface, and joystick, just cover, six games including Elit, and three programming books, three programming books, bought price  selling price . COLECOVISION game for sale. Tutankham, Space Panic and Ladybug cartridges all at  each with instructions included. A complete turbo module with a turbo cartridge cost  but will sell for only . Tel (01) 855 3511. DRAGON 32, joystick, stand, leads, boxed as new. Software worth over  includes Speed Racer, Backtrack, The King, Buzzard Bait and many more. 20 Dragon User magazines. Worth . Overall value is . Yours for . Phone 0269 4829 for details 48K SPECTRUM, program, joystick interface, cassette recorder, over  software. Sell for  or swap for Atari 800XL + 1010 + software, joysticks etc. Tel Leeds 0532 672723. HEY THERE! C64 Freaks! Do you also want to swap big loads of software? (disk only) then please write to F. Tip, Van Bergaenlaan, 15 1901 JW Castricum, Holland come on Yanks! WANTED: BBC 'B', O.S.1 2 (DFS?). Cash paid. Will also buy software. Contact Harry (0946) 820 581 (after 4pm). ACORN ELECTRON, First-Byte interface, joystick and over  worth of software (including Elite) worth over  bargain at . Tel: (0946) 820 581 ask for Harry. SWAP CURRAH Speech synthesiser for Spectrum stack light rifle with included three games. Write to Scott Gillies, Keepers Cottage, Scarinish, Isle of Tiree, Argyll, Scotland PA77 BUH DISK USERS with more than 1000 64 games, send your new list to E. Peterheyer, Duyn V. Maasdamlaan 48 3445CC Woerden Holland. WANTED. Quality software for Commodore 64, Spectrum and BBC. All offers, including bulk purchases, considered. Telephone 01-892 6575. COMMODORE 64 Prism Modem 10001 and communications software 1000% compatible with Prestel most other Databases and Bulletin boards B.T. Approved . Track Ball . Easyscript . Write to D Wood, 1 Windle Royd Lane, Burnley Road, Halifax, West Yorkshire HX2 7LY. COMMODORE 64 software to swap. Cassette only, over 300 titles. Ring 0827 287886 ask for Alex. CBM 64 software to swap! I have about 700 games on disk including Pitstop 2, Crystal Castle, Dragonworld, Indiana Jones and many more. Marco Hoogendijk Dresdelaan 28 3055 we Rotterdam, Netherlands. All letters will be answered. SPECTRUM 48K, joystick, interface, speech synthesiser, recorder, software, books, magazines. Worth over  swap for Commodore 64 and (Hardware/Software) or cash or sell Jules, 94 Euston Road, Morecombe, Lancashire. ATARI 400 16K, cassette recorder, software including Donkey Kong, Dig Dug, Asteroids and Space Shuttle also basic cartridge, manuals and 2 joysticks only  Southend (0702) 545172. 48K SPECTRUM with Interface 1, Microdrive, Lightpen, Light Rifle, Currah Microspeech and Microslot, Kempston joystick and interface, Sinclair Printer and 9 Microdrive cartridges. Will swap for Commodore 64 and disk drive. Phone (0241) 76036 after 6pm. TI extended basic + six excellent software packages , adventure module + 2 adventures . Modules from . Phone 08518 70318 evenings ask for David. MSX SOFTWARE to sell or swap, all good titles, Blagger, Pinball, Punchy, 3D-Golf etc. All original games. Phone 0934 863646. Ask for Andrew 48K SPECTRUM, tape recorder, Kempston interface, Arcade Professional joystick, eleven games including Airwolf, Ghostbusters, White Lightning, Avalon. Worth over  sell for  ono. Excellent condition, under guarantee. Phone Plymouth 823436. SPECTRUM games for sale! Hardly used including Panzerattack, Cricket, D-Day, Stalag 13 plus many more! Bulk purchase possible all half price. Telephone Kings Langley 67392 48K SPECTRUM on off switch, 100 games programmable joystick interface joystick  or swap for Commodore 64. Otiers to Croft Cottage, Croft Road, Markinch, Fife, Kynyeq or phone Glenrothes 758570. SPECTRUM 48K games lots to sell or swap from - each. Ring for list of games plus Atari 2600 V.C.S. games to sell or swap from -. Telephone for list. Tel:St Albans 34675. 16K VIC 20 + cassette unit + Wico joystick, lots of great games and cartridges including Omega Race, Advertureland. Also books. Will accept  for quick sale. Phone Colchester 298443 anytime. ZX81 16K. 13 great games include Mazogs, Startrek and Combat Flight. Total value over  all in good condition. Going for  for quick sale. ATARI software to swap or sell on disc or tape. All the latest titles including: N.Y.C., Alley Cat, Electrician. (All Synapse) + 1200 baud tape backup and many others. I can get just about any Atari program! Phone 0425 618232 after 6pm. SPECTRUM software: sale or swap: Knight Lore, Jet Set, Atic Atac, Zzoom, Meteoroids, Orbitor, Zaxxon, Decathlon. Write to: John Myers, Penlan, Llandegai, Bangor, North Wales or phone (Bangor) 362496. Would like Starstrike, Bruce Lee, Death Star Interceptor, Pole Position, White Lightning. THE 5000000GIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII GOONIES en generalmente IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII THE Computer Game... Datasoft "


"REVIEW.SI At the first sign of summer sunshine everybody seems to have gone sports crazy. All manner of energy-sapping sports computer games have now been unleashed onto the market. Football, cricket, tennis, baseball, American foot. ball, karate and boxing are some of the sports covered. Activision has weighed in with the most titles all with a distinct American flavour On-Field Football, On-Court Tennis and Star League Baseball. DACC has unluckily picked a time when the reputation of English soccer has reached an all-time low to release Bobby Charlton Soccer. Karate appears to be one of the \"in\" sports which has attracted the attention of programmers. Melbourne House hopes to smash, chop and kick its way to the top of the charts with Way of the Exploding Fist for the Commodore 64, price .95. The program aims to simulate all the moves of this ancient martial art including blocking, ducking, jumping, kicking, feinting and somersaulting. Shaping up to take on Way of the Exploding Fist is International Karate from System 3 Software. Let battle commence and may the best man win! Meanwhile, the thwack of leather on willow will soon be heard when Audiogenic launches Graham Gooch's Test Cricket It has arcade and simulation modes both of which feature graphic animation. The main action takes place in the wicket area, with similarly animated outfield scenes. In the arcade model, the player has joystick control of the batsmen when his team is in or the bowler when his team is fielding. The teams are selected from squads made up of the cream of the English and Australian teams. Graham Gooch's Test Cricket will be available for the Commodore on fast-loading cassette, price .95 And if none of the new crop of summer sports games takes your fancy, there is always the many old favourites still riding high in the charts. For example World Series Baseball (Imagine), Brian Jack's Superstar Sports Challenge (Martech), Pitstop 2 (CBS), Football Manager (Addictive Games), Daley Thompson's Decathlon (Ocean), International Basketball (Commodore), BMX Racers (Mastertronic), Pole Position (Atari), Grand National (Elite), Formula One Simulator (Mastertronic), Match Day (Ocean) and Steve Davis Snooker(CDS). of Shaolin Monk. Each animated figure -as with the various Oriental backgrounds is a joy to see. Movement is fast, smooth and realistic. In all, there are 18 possible moves including punching, kicking, blocking. jumping, feinting and somersaults. The action is so realistic that you find yourself wincing as the The game has one and two blows find their target. The player modes. When playing sounds of punches, kicks and the computer, the object is to groans are just like the sounddefeat successive opponents track of old martial arts films and each one is slightly better. loud, totally over the top In the two-player mode, the but just wonderful. winner is determined by Points are scored on how whoever has the highest score well each move was carried after four bouts. Each bout has out. a time limit. For example, if a flurry of If you can't make up your aggressive action fails to make mind on which game to buy contact with your opponent, no this month, you could do a lot THE WAY OF THE Fist. It's brilliant. points are awarded. If the worse than to splash out on Fast and furious martial arts move is correctly carried out. The Way of the Exploding Fist. EXPLODING FIST action combined with player points are awarded. If you hit And mind the furniture. skill. What more could you your opponent but it is not a MACHINE: CMB 64 want? perfect blow, only a half-point  Graphics SUPPLIER: Melbourne House The game is set at a tournais scored.  Sound PRICE: .95 ment and the aim is to improve Current score is shown on  Value Forget Bruce Lee. Make room your fighting skills and screen by yin and yang  Playability for The Way of the Exploding eventually obtain the position symbols. no "


"REVIEW.S adrenalin flowing. tennis champions. intelligence\" which lets the And second best to the real the joystick gives full computer player vary his skill thing has to be Activision's On-control over racquet strokes, with yours. As you get better, Court Tennis serves and smashes. It also so does he. Everything is here for the triggers off your player's On-Court Tennis is an tennis enthusiast. Realism is service. Pressing the fire absorbing game. As with the the key word button sends the ball across real game, it requires practice The view of the court is the into the opponent's court — if to get anywhere but the effort same as you get on television you are lucky, of course but is well worthwhile. It's the only coverage of tennis. There's a the serve may go out of court way you ever win. ON-COURT TENNIS choice between one or two or into the net. Game, set and match to players, different playing When a rally is underway. Activision. MACHINE: CBM 64 surfaces — grass, hard court the computer automatically SUPPLIER: Activision or clay and a choice moves your player to the ball PRICE: .99  Graphics between three and five set allowing you just to  Sound Anyone for tennis? There's matches. concentrate on the shot.  Value nothing like a five set centre There is also a choice of A special feature of the  Playability court thriller to get the four players modelled on real game is the \"floating 10000 MACHINE: CBM 64 instructions on this game left are excellent. SUPPLIER: Activision me perplexed and confused. The instructions for the PRICE: .99 Just what is a \"knuckleball game are very comprehensive Any game which allows you to or \"reliever\"'? What is the point but it would have been a help \"bring in a knuckleball throwof a \"high slider\", \"a medium to have some of the more ing reliever when your starter screwball' or a \"slow sinker''? exotic terms explained. tires' has to be American. After having played the And Star League Baseball is game, I still have no idea.  Graphics just that — very American. Having said thatthe  Sound Most people have a rough graphics of the game are very . Value STAR LEAGUE BASEBALL idea of the aims behind base. good and the animation of the  Playability ball, but the expressions and players, batsman and pitcher BOBBY CHARLTON Match play includes all the ing it. You can also tackle your modules at regular intervals. authentic moves kick-off, opponent but whether you win those planned include World SOCCER throw-ins, goal kicks, corners, possession of the ball depends Cup and Canon League passing and shooting on the accuracy of the modules. MACHINE: BBC Two can play the game and approach and the relative skill Bobby Charlton also does a SUPPLIER: DACC a one person versus the levels of the players involved. voice introduction on the PRICE: $11.95 computer option is also the player under joystick cassette, giving hints and tips Bobby Charlton Soccer included control is indicated by a short on how to play. A press release combines the challenge of The game players get a black line below him. His with the game claims Charlton managership and the thrill of large, three-dimensional aerial number also appears at the was involved in the game's matchplay in one game. view of the pitch and sound bottom of the screen. \"concept giving guidance and The manager module is the effects including an ear. Game control is good and advice. \"dressing room\" phase of the piercing whistle and crowd the graphics are adequate. game. This enables you to noises. The players are a little on the  Graphics select team characteristics. A player under your control small side by this is probably  Sound player skills, accuracy and can gain possession of the ball inevitable to enable 22 men to  Value stamina. Optional injuries can in a number of ways. A loose fit on the field. DACC says it  Playability also be included. ball may be collected by touchintends to introduce further 20) 30) 20) 101 G strange sport become truly play along with yours. ON-FIELD FOOTBALL captivated As expected with an ActiFor those of you who love vision sports game, On-Field MACHINE: CBM 64 the game, Activision's On-Field Football contains considerable SUPPLIER: Activision Football will be a must. detail. PRICE: .99 You can play against a To the uninitiated, the world of computer team or take on a  Graphics American Football remains a human opponent. \"Floating  Sound  Value mystery. But those who have intelligence\" enables the Playability managed to penetrate this computer to vary its standard of 00 00 "


"REVIEWS BRUNO+ ROCKY = KNOCKOUT Float like a butterfly, sting like a bee! If you can't weight or is it overweight? team of reviewers punch your way out of a paper bag, you'll love the have been slugging it out with an assortment of new trend for boxing games. You can go a few musclebound monsters. Now C&VG invites you to rounds with a really big and nasty opponent and call take your ringside seat for some fighting talk! him all the names under the sun without having to Seconds out! Round One. And Elite boxer Frank experience the joys of hospital food. C&VG s heavy. Bruno steps into the ring... simulation, endorsed by punches or by activating the You control Bruno using rion 1 Britain's top boxer. KO meter which enables you keyboard or joystick either The object of the game is to to land a devastating KO way you'll feel as if you've defeat eight opponents in a bid punch! If you fail to defeat your been through a couple of for the Heavyweight Champopponent, you get a chance to rounds with a real bruiser! ionship of the World. Fighting have another crack at him. Overall a great sports styles differ from opponent to the screen shows the ring simulation. The animation is opponent -so simply learning with a huge crowd of specgreat and play action really the controls of the game isn't tators surrounding it. You look addictive. A champion game! enough. over Bruno's shoulders at a To defeat each opponent, cartoon style graphic opponent  Graphics the character you each of the eight | Sound control — has to knock him challengers is different. Frank MACHINES: Spectrum/CBM 64/ 10  Value rumDIVI 041 down three times during a began life as a wire frame  Playability Amstrad LITZ1 three minute round. figure as can be seen from SUPPLIER: Elite GAM A KO is achieved by our pre-production screen PRICE: Spectrum .95 reducing your opponent's shots. Since then Elite have Seconds out! Round two. CBM 64 .95 Amstrad .95 \"status\" indicated by \"bar altered him to become a fully fully And Spanish champion Bruno goes all out to KO the graph\" graphic at the top of animated and filled-in ship contender Rocky opposition in Elite's boxing the screen — by a barrage of character. bids for glory... 10 ROCKY The animation is great — board controlled and both will but unfortunately your get a bashing as you play. MACHINES: Spectrum/CBM 64 opponent in the ring doesn't Overall Rocky doesn't offer SUPPLIER: Dinamic get a facelift for each new quite as much variety, but if PRICE: Yet to be announced round. Only the graphic face at you're not into fighting strategy Thud! Crunch! Ooooooffff! the bottom changes and the and enjoy a good punch up The sound effects in this skill of your opponent alters. then Rocky is the boxer for boxing game from Dinamic, Each opponent gets tougher you. the Spanish software firm to KO — you have to knock behind the Saimazoom trilogy each one down three times in  Graphics of arcade adventures, are an \"energy\" bar graph display a timed round to progress to  Sound quite authentic! And make you for both boxers the next  Value reel back in pain as a fist Both boxers are drawn Rocky — no real relation to  Playability crashes into your jaw. Ouch! cartoon style no wire frame the films of the same name The screen set-up is similar figures in this version. But you is a boxing game for street k Seconds out! Round to Elite's Bruno with a little can't move about quite so fighters. No fancy footwork Seco picture of your opponent and much as in the Bruno game here -just well timed three. And the awesome a graphic representing you at it's much more an all out punches! Alligata duo square up to the bottom of the screen, plus slugging battle. The game is joystick or keyeach other! On KNOCKOUT! view. You can fight the select the skill of the opponent length figures. The \"create\" computer or another joystickyou wish to fight. And there's mode enables you to select a MACHINES: CBM 64/Spectrum controlled opponent an interesting \"create sequence of up to 30 SUPPLIER: Alligata If you win four bouts against opponent\" feature which movements. PRICE: .95 the computer, you qualify for a allows you to determine just Overall, a satisfying game second battle against a new how the other boxer will move, but loses on points to Rocky Stand up and fight! That's opponent on side two of the dodge and punch when you and Bruno! what you do in Alligata's tape. You must use a special come to fight him. Bit of a championship challenge. No code to load the second side cheat this, isn't it?  Graphics over-the-shoulder views for and you only get it after the animation of the boxers  Sound them. In this punch-out, the defeating the first opponent. is a bit wooden — but the  Value screen displays two full length There is an interesting menu controls are pretty easy to  Playability boxers seen from a side screen which allows you to master and it's nice to see full 00 00 00 "


"REVLE.W.S 2 Reino Your only defence against Alternatively, you can Amazon Warrior, although the dangers which lurk in the decide to try and outrun the reminiscent of Forbidden dense, steaming undergrowth jungle dangers. But, sooner or Forest, is a challenging game is a blow pipe and a fast pair later, you will have to stand which should keep you of feet. and face the foe. hooked The game is played in three The Amazon Warrior is Amazon Warrior was written phases — the jungle, the controlled just by the joystick by 35-year-old Geoff Sumner, DE LAKTS 40 caverns and the ruined temple. Pushing the stick forward a graduate of the Royal Each phase is packed with allows the warrior to load a Academy of Music and winner AMAZON WARRIOR nasties which relentlessly poison dart into the pipe if it is of the Royal Philharmonic prize pursue you, ranging from tree empty. Moving it left or right for composition. MACHINE: CBM 64 snakes, scorpions, head will raise the pipe through a SUPPLIER: New Generation hunters and vampire bats. variety of firing angles. Software  Graphics Points are awarded for each the graphics are nice and PRICE: .95  Sound kill and bonus points are given the screen scrolling is smooth.  Value Be careful not to lose your if a particular challenge is the perspective through the  Playability head in the Amazon jungle. overcome without losing a life. trees is also pleasing. This is a very, very strange from which life springs Web Dimension is an game. Weird, in fact. There is atoms, amoebas and plants. intriguing game which does no time limit to Web As these organisms and things not really fit into any specific Dimension, no scoring and no slide along the web, you must category. Nevertheless, it does lives to be lost. So what is try to connect them. If you're have an addictive quality there? successful, more creatures which keeps you playing. Activision describes the are produced and, according A game well worth getting game as \"a very unique to the game's notes tangled up with computerised music video with \"wondrously wild music will be an electrifying revolutionary your reward\".  Graphics web, rocked by exquisiteIf all the connections are  Sound effects and 11 outrageous made properly and all the  Value tunes\". organisms are frozen, you  Playability The screen is a grey web progress to the next phase. what WEB DIMENSION 00 MACHINE: CBM 64 SUPPLIER: Activision PRICE: $10.99 00 00 the mishaps and adventures of through the exciting and forward as they might appear. the Wally family. dangerous shop trying to find the game is packed full of This time the youngest Herbert's parents in the lost interesting, amusing and fairly member of the family. Herbert, and found department. difficult tasks for you to has got himself lost in a depart. Instead of a percentage complete and riddles to solve. ment store and has only four score to tell you how far you Mikro-Gen are one of the and a half hours to find his have reached in the game, you few companies who conparents before the shop shuts get a jelly baby score — sistently release better and for the evening. different, I suppose! better software. Herbert's Like the previous Wally There are various objects in Dummy Run is no exception. HERBERT S DUMMY RUN games. Herbert's Dummy Run the game which you must find Don't be a dummy-get to is an arcade adventure with and use to their best your local department store MACHINE: Spectrum numerous arcade game advantage. The tennis racket and buy it now! SUPPLIER: Mikro-Gen Screens included within it. is obviously used for playing PRICE: .95 Unlike the others, it is relatively tennis, as you'll find out if you  Graphics Herbert's Dummy Run, the easy to complete as long as play the game. Although the  Sound new release for the Spectrum you've had plenty of practice, uses of certain other objects,  Value and the Commodore 64 from according to Mikro-Gen that is the bomb for instance, are  Playability Mikro-Gen, is a continuation of Your aim is to find your way probably not as straightOPERATION SWORDFISH WODNICU World War celebrations. To attack the aircraft, the UOperation Swordfish is billed But with Operation Swordboat must surface and fire its as \"the ultimate war game\". fish you take the German side deck gun. But the sub It's good but not that good. MACHINE: CBM 64 as a U-boat commander who becomes vulnerable on the SUPPLIER: British Software has to stop an Allied invasion. surface when the convoy  Graphics PRICE: .95 Your submarine has been steams into view although its  Sound Another war game carefully damaged and is unable to dive guns have a range of more  Value timed to coincide with Second below periscope depth. than six miles.  Playability 000000 "


"DAKI Don't Buy another tape... (OR DISK!) me. Software COMMUDURE CLUB Volume 1, Issue BRITAIN'S NO.1 SOFTWARE CLUB OG WAS 1st May INSIDE Until you've seen the low, low prices in our Spectrum and Commodore 64 Catalogues. Light up your bank manager's face by getting Shadowfire for just .95 (saving ), steal yourself a bargain with Spyhunter at only .95 (Spectrum) and .45 (Commodore 64), or make a megasave on Megahits at $7.95 (saving ). Need we go on? There are over 200 more products we could tell you about. * WOCRETE * SOFTAID 27 w What makes a good software het reviews TOP TEN your wo wa mreformation about So what's the catch we hear you say? How many tapes must commit to buy in a year? The answer is none. Once you have joined our Club, for an annual subscription of .00 you need buy nothing! Mt. Software CCTUMCU Volume BRITAIN'S NO.1 SOFTWARE CLUB FREE 2 GAMES! INSIDE THIS ISSUE Watsonogh then you formation about them and se in May 1908 TOP TEN REVIEWERS CHOICE But wait. There's more to this Club than just the 's you'll save on software. As a Member you will receive a bi-monthly magazine, packed with in-depth reviews (including lots of screen photos), competitions to enter, game playing tips and lots, lots more. Hurry now. If you apply for membership within four weeks we will give you a  voucher towards your first purchase. So send off the coupon now and we'll send you our most recent Club Magazine by return. If you are not absolutely delighted we will give you your money back! PAPERS SAY WINA CUDDLY W WRIGGLER with me www. were to forestions about the home SHADOWFIRE * GAME TIPS Asing on you BUMPER ISSUE Hotline How the widers of the forc was saw a coup the Mansion es entre picked FREE red wine GAMES! MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION CVG 8/85 Please enrol me as a member of your Software Club, for which I enclose .00\". I have a: Spectrum/Spectrum+ Commodore 64 I understand you will send me your most recent Club Magazine by return and that if I'm not completely satisfied after two weeks I can claim a refund. m. Rowe Name (BLOCK CAPS) ......... Address Mr. Software KELVIN HOUSE TOTTERIDGE AVENUE HIGH WYCOMBE HP13 6XG (0494) 450586 Postcode.............. Cheque/Postal Order No. Or charge my Access/Visa account DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD (* applies to UK & BPO only. Other rates are  Europe,  USA & Middle East,  Australia, Far East & S. Africa) "


"Microsell ... Microsell ... Microsell ... Microsell ... FREE. Biorhyth Graphs, send your date of birth and s.a.e. 13 High St. Crosskeys, Gwent. SHARP MZ-700, printer, datarecorder, manual  worth of software Software catalogue. Bargain price for quick sale. . Phone 01-870 5425 after 5.30pm or 09322 25379 before 4.30pm for details. FOR SALE Atari 800XL, cassette unit, 2 books, joystick, software.  ono. Tel (01) 231 9543 after 5pm weekdays. 48K SPECTRUM, DK Keyboard, Currah Quick. shot Il and interface.  software over 80 magazines plus manuals signed by Clive Sinclair! All items boxed as new. V.G.L. Will swap for BBC 'B' with disk unit, cost . Accept , Ideal games machine. Tel: Cam. bridge (0223) 249033.. SPECTRUM software to hire. Membership  plenty of titles to choose from plus maps, tips and codes for most software. For more details send s.a.e to Steven Holmes, 12 Grove St, Gorseinon, Swansea, SA4 2FS ATARI 600XL, perfect condition, bought end of March 1985, with 1 joystick, several books and magazines also 1010 program recorder . No offers. Tel Chertsey 64606 SWAP Spectrum 48K + interface + joystick + tape recorder + 75 games, for Commodore 64 + recorder + joystick(s), or sell for . Many originals including Airwolf, Starstike, Beach Head, Moon Cresta, Pyjamarama, Technician Ted, Automania and others, Raid over Moscow, Knight Lore, Underwurde, Cyclone, Match Day. Ring Mirfield (W. Yorks) 6pm, 496938. CBS Coleco Vision Console plus 12 games, Super action, joysticks, turbo wheel v and foot peddle. Value new  excellent condition  OVNO. Tel 0908 642987 SPECTRUM software for sale from 90p to  including Moon Cresta, Airwolf, Spiderman, Knight Lore and Starstrike. Also (used) blank cassettes for sale from 18p. Telephone 0703 767519 ask for Richard. COLECO ADAM OWNERS? Would you like to receive the \"Adam Computing\" newsletter? It's bi-monthly and contains vital information, listings, reviews, tips plus an exclusive mail order service! Fore more information send s.a.e. to I.C.E. Adam Publishing, PO Box 22, Panbourne, Berkshire. ACORN ELECTRON, + official Data Recorder, Excellent software collection: including Combat Lynx, Educational Programs and magazines, offers around , Birmingham 021 358 6859, everything excellent condition. AMSTRAD with colour monitor and thirty games. Worth over  will accept  ono or exchange for Commodore 64. Tel Grimsby 77196 between 7 and 8pm. SPECTRUM 48K 6250 software many famous Kemston joystick interface, Jac2 joystick, 2 computing books. . Tel 01-455 2993 Melvin Weintraud, 43 The Ridgeway, London NW11 89P WE ARE A GROUP of Italian Spectrum users who would like to undertake an initiative of exchange of ideas, experiences and software with some English users. If you are interested in it, please write to: Spectrum QLUB Desenzano, Piervittorio Trebucchi, via castello 1, Italy COMMODORE 64 software on disc for sale or swap. Including Pitstop II, Dallas, Impossible Mission, Spy Hunter, Flight Simulator Il etc. Phone Northwood 27090 or write to Tony, 40 Reginald Road, Northwood, Middlesex HAG 1EE. ATARI SOFTWARE. Over 30 original cassettes for sale mostly adventures  each including P&P send SAE for list to P. Lister, 10 Cragg Street, Great Horton, Bradford BD7 4UQ. 48K SPECTRUM, cassette unit, joystick interface U Slot, lightpen, Micro Command original games or  ono or exchange for CBM 64 plus cassette unit and games. Phone Andrew 0908 642220 evenings. SPECTRUM GAMES for sale or swap 150 to choose from send your list for mine. Please write to Rune Larsen 4020 Hundvag, Stavanger, Norway. COMMODORE 64. Send return want quickly for Summer Games II, my list. Winter Games, list. Write to 1200 Hohmeier to Games Sperberstr. 21, 4019 Monheim, West Germany. ACORN ELECTRON, Data Recorder power software. Joystick interface, books and over  worth of software only . Tel Swansea 462343 after 4pm. T199/4A for sale plus Dual Cassette Leads Manual Cassettes Modules Adventure Gold Voyage Adventureland. Video Games I Tombstone City, original packing  ono phone 0703 767519 will split. ZX SPECTRUM games for sale at under half price. Phone Hartlepool 32793. Titles include Kosmic Kanga, Kokotoni Wilf, Backpackers Guide, Chuckie Egg, ZigZag, Atic Atac, Automania, 3D Starstrike, and D.T.'s Decathlon. 48K SPECTRUM, Lo-profile keyboard, Currah Speech, lots of games, books, mags, manuals and business software. Worth  + .  ono superb condition, must sell. Tel 065 76 227 after 5pm and ask for Bruce. ZX SPECTRUM stonechip programmable joystick interface, brand new. Will sell for  phone Lea Brooks (0773) 605783 after 6pm. VIC 20 and C2N cassette unit, 10 games including Arcadia and Pinball Wizard, Introduction to Basic part one and two. Cartridges, Star Battle and Omega Race  ono Phone Southend on Sea 219562. COLECOVISION with Smurf, Zaxxon, Avenger, Time Pilot, Q.Bert, Beamrider, Pitstop, River Band, Venture, Carnival, Lady Bug, Omega Race, Looping, Turbo, Roller Controller, Super Controller, all boxed as new.  phone 01-698 2705 after 7pm. I HAVE over 350 games to exchange with you. Also plenty of games on cassette. Games include Elite, Football Manager, Ghouls, Synthesiser and many more. All Level 9's adventure games: please write to Mr Jim Watson, Flat 3, 8 West Bank Road, Liverpool L7 9NA. ATARI DISCS, tapes, and roms wanted. Games especially wanted, are Tempest, Scraper Caper, any U.S. Gold or electronic art games. Tel 0269 3266 COMMODORE 64 wanted, with cassette deck, and some software. Tel 0269 3266. CBM plus 4 joystick cassette . Hardly used. Phone 01-363 9178 after 4pm. ZX SPECTRUM with Cheetah 32K ram pack, Plus D.K. Tronic lightpen. Worth  sell for  ono. Tel 01-360 2953 after 4pm and ask for Chris or leave a message. SINCLAIR QL, 3 months old. books. Software, U.G.CHardly used. J Version. Unwanted Christmas present. All but first edition of QL User. . No offers. Tel Bedford 781925. FOR SALE VIC 20 with cassette unit, 18 games plus Double O Level Maths tape also two games cartridges and joystick . Bewdiey 402960 after 2pm. NEW TURBO loader and assembler both .50 with instructions. Both for  send large s.a.e. to B. Horgan, 134 Trees Road, Mount Merrion, County Dublin, Ireland also game pokes .50 CBM 64 owner wants to swap software, Cassette only. I have over 650 games. Send your list to Tore Verlien, St Olavsat 5 2400 Elverum, Norway VIC 20 with complete start pack for sale, C2N cassette recorder, joystick, manuals, selection of games, only 6 months old, will sell for  ono. Phone 330 5473 after 5pm. BUSINESS opportunity for quality Games Software Programmer. I have an idea for an original computer game, but not the knowledge to program it. Help me out for 50/50 split on profits. Apply in writing to Computer Game, 41 Mount Pleasant Drive, Aqueduct, Telford, Shropshire TF3 12N. ATARI software many games for sale or swap including Gyruss Track and Field BC's Quest, Bruce Lee, Hulk, Boulderdash, Blue Max and many more. Phone Bristol 66475 ask for Paul CBM 64 I would like to exchange software I have 1500 programs. Send your list and I will send mine back. Write to Edmond Stragier, Sportstraat 121A, 8401 Bredene Belgium (disk or tape). SPECTRUM AND BBC software for sale all hal! price or less many new titles including Elite, Knightlore, Underwuride, Matchday etc. Write for details to 24 Huntingtower Park, Glenrothes, Fife KY6 3QF or phone (0592) 745244 SPECTRUM software club. Hire new titles at low prices you get a free catalogue an a monthly newsletter Send  for life membership now to D. Green, PO Box 94, Radlett, Herts WD7 7LX or call Radlet 2673 for details ATARI 600XL, 1010 recorder, books, games including Defender, Pole Position. Excellent condition. Only . Tel Cobham 67580. CBM 8032. Excellent condition, full working order. Complete with Strathclyde basic teaching course and operation manuals - ono. Phone: (09663) 2873. Ask for Andrew. COMMODORE 64 software Encounter, Decathlon, Impossible Mission, Super Pipeline, Valahalla, Cad Cam Warrior, Airwolf, Colossus Chess, Plum Crazy, Softaid, Worth over  sell for  ono. Write to Jason Blackett, 48 East bridge Road, Dymchurch, Kent TN29 OPG COMMODORE originals for sale, Bruce Lee, Raid over Moscow, Pole Position, Fighter Pilot plus many more Ring Darny 01-452 0189 after 5pm all offers listened to. CBM 64 software to swap many titles. Send lists to 80 Highburgh Rd, Glasgow G12 9EN for details, Phone 041-339 5498 disk only. erb Chess soffunes book keyboard, AVE Over 351 games. Managvelgs ade The SOBUOGIIIIIIIIIIIIIIlll GOONIES IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII THE Computer Game... Datasoft "


"REV.I.E.W.Sa there's a new game out for the simple. A time disturbance has overcome. It's possible to C16 and Plus 4 been traced to a distant planet. freeze the action when you're Game-starved owners of Thirty six time orbs have been EGOKILIZER L in difficulties in one time zone these machines should placed within the three time and move to a certainly take a look at zones. Destruction of the continue play. Timeslip from English planet is imminent. Timeslip's designer and proSoftware Your mission is to destroy all grammer, Jon Williams, has The most impressive thing the orbs and synchronise the come up with a nifty and about the game is how much time to 0000hrs in all three exciting little game. C16 TIMESLIP action and detail has been zones. owners should raise three packed into 16k. Zone 1 is the planet's cheers for him. MACHINE: C16/Plus 4 The game design is also surface and you control a starSUPPLIER: English Software unique with three-way splitfighter, Zone 2 is set in under Graphics PRICE: $6.95 screen scrolling sections. ground caverns and in Zone 3  Sound Each section is 15 screens you control a mini-sub.  Value Watch out for the stampede at wide. In each of the time zones  Playability your local software shop The Timeslip task is fairly there are various hazards to 000000 wonders why they had a green mansion or Maria will throw fanatics happy for several JET SET WILLY II screen, but out of politeness Willy out on the street. months if not years trying to MACHINE: CBM 64 didn't ask them, but what was Those people who have solve this complicated and SUPPLIER: Software Projects even stranger is that they seen or played JSW before absorbing game. PRICE: .95 added several rather strange will, on first sight, think that the Don't listen to the critics rooms to his mansion and game is exactly the same as who claim that the Jet Set Willy refused any offer of payment. the original and it is true that is a copy of its predessor — it The phenomenally successful What have these strange they do appear that way. But isn't. series of games starring the beings done to Willy's house each room has its new puzzles Bound to be one of this manic miner Willy, continues and what secret purpose does and unexpected surprises. summer's biggest sellers with the release of Jet Set Willy the rocket room hold in store Plus all the completely new miss it at your peril! for the poor unassuming rooms that have been added to The game continues in the miner? the game. same house that the original Your task is to help Willy tidy The game is harder than  Graphics Jet Set game started in. up the mess that the aliens JSW I, a lot harder according  Sound While Willy has been ill, he have left behind and, of to the two programmers, John  Value has employed some builders to course, explore the new rooms Darnell and Stephen Birtles,  Playability do some work on the stairs. He that have been added to the and should keep mining 0000 ELIDON MACHINE: CBM 64 SUPPLIER: Orpheus PRICE: .95 When Elidon arrived for reviewing. I must admit that the thought of a game about fairies certainly seemed different On loading (about five minutes) the graphical treats started to unfold. Elidon has taken some while to research The garland shown at the fine judgements, don't think that and the diligence by the writer beginning needs seven magic you can dispense with your reveals itself screen by screen. flowers to complete it, and skills. Using the joystick or keysince there are 300 \"rooms\". The game is visually board, you are able to select the need for mapping will be stunning, with the best graphics your options. The music obvious. I have yet seen on the accompanying the game is The animated fairy operates Commodore. Grieg's Anitra Dance. very well and a great degree of Looking at the visual accuracy can be obtained,  Graphics aspects, you begin to wonder especially with the joystick or  Sound where the space was for the in my instance, the joycard !  Value music in the available memory used. Since the exists and Playability (Elidon uses about 60k). entrances to the rooms need 0 00 TAPPER store you'll find the salesmen rushed off their feet getting copies of Tapper for eager Spectrum owners! MACHINE: Spectrum SUPPLIER: US Gold PRICE: .95 If you're thinking about taking a holiday job as a barman, here's the game to play if you want to check out just how suitable you are for the job. Basically the idea is to keep everything that's going on. up a steady flow of drinks Tapper is a fast and furious reaching your unruly game with good graphics and customers, collecting their average sound, it scores really empties hurled back along the high on the old C&VG playability bar at you, picking up tips and meter too! not dropping anything. If you fancy a fast moving The character on the screen game with an original theme nees at least ten pairs of hands then get your boss to give you and you need extremely a break from serving and rush quick reactions to keep up with around to your local games ON  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability "


"LREVIEWS BLIT! GAME n/a strange city degrees to get an all round view Most of them seem deterof your surroundings and mined to rip him off, stealing switch direction. At the top of 1 slake: 200 money and belongings from the the screen is a useful compass unsuspecting stranger! But which aids map making and they will also help him — if he your progress through the city. can find out what they want in Dun Darach is an enterreturn. taining game. It has real The city is divided up into atmosphere — you really feel seven different areas with as if you are pounding the different features. All have streets of a strange city. You various shops containing items have to learn how to make your which Cuchulainn will need way in this odd place, how to during his time there. He can befriend the right people and buy, steal or barter for items he above all, how to rescue your 1 omein wants. But remember, crime old mate Loeg. It's also a real doesn't always pay! step forward for the arcade Control keys have been tidied animation adventure game. up for Dun Darach. It's now The game comes nicely much easier to get a quick presented with an informative response from your character booklet and useful quick in a tight spot. The screen reference card for the DUN DARACH ears by the wind. display is similar to Tir Na Nog, characters. I can't wait to get Rushing back into the inn except that the initials for the back into the city! MACHINE: Spectrum Cuchulainn grabbed the other characters that you meet SUPPLIER: Gargoyle Games terrified innkeeper and forced in the city are displayed  Graphics PRICE: .95 him to reveal the full story. underneath the main graphics  Sound Skar was an ally of the window  Value \"Following a fateful, bloody and Conachtmen Cuchulainn had You can still turn your  Playability 10 largely pointless battle against so recently been fighting and \"camera angle\" through 180 the Conachta, Cuchulainn the Loeg had been taken in retriGreat was returning home to bution for the death of the Muirmethne in company of his Princeling Amhair during that faithful charioteer, Loeg. fateful battle. Loeg was being Towards the end of the taken to the secret city of Dun second day the pair came Darach! across a wayside inn and went This is how the scene is set inside to claim lodging and for the long awaited sequel to sustenance, leaving their war Tir Na Nog, the animated chariot beside a strange horse graphic adventure which drawn carriage caused such a stir among While they waited for food, gamesters last year. they were approached by Skar. Gargoyle's Dun Darach is a eveni a strikingly beautiful girl, who worthy successor to their fi told them that she was the now classic, adventure. It owner of the strange carriage breaks more new ground on the but was desperately troubled Spectrum with improved for her conveyance had animation of the odd characters developed a shattered axle, who inhabit the mist shrouded With somewhat unseemly city of Dun Darach and a haste, Loeg leapt to assist her considerably enhanced plot. and, together with Skar, left the basic object of the game the inn. is to rescue Loeg from the Cuchulainn settled back to clutches of the evil Skar. But ago jai di enjoy his food and drink. But there are several secondary 109 11 after a while he went outside to quests to be dealt with before find Loeg. Instead he found his you can even think about horses slain and Loeg gone Of saving Loeg. the strange carriage there was there are 11 other only a cloud of dust disappearcharacters, each with their very ing along the Eastern road and own personalities, who the hint of ghostly girlish Cuchulainn will come across in laughter carried back to his his wanderings around the MBS 28 "


"REVIE:W:S mm) 53 and flap position are also appears in a reddish blur. displayed. Speech is also incorporated The initial screen is a bird's in the Jump Jet program to eye view of the jump jet convey vital messages and positioned on an aircraft add extra realism-examples carrier are \"Prepare for take-off' and As the jet lifts off and gets \"Mayday\". above 50 feet, the view Jump Jer is a challenging changes to a split screen, one and absorbing game. The showing a side view of the graphics are nice and clear carrier and jet, the other a rear and the lay-out of the screen view. is also pleasing. Once the jet climbs to 200 Although it's important to feet, the screen changes again read the accompanying this time to the view from booklet, it's fairly easy to get the cockpit. airborne unlike some other JUMP JET challenge of coping with a Enemy aircraft can be flight simulations but the flight simulation but also the tracked on the radar and when rest of the mission is very MACHINE: CBM 64 thrill of combat the jet comes within five miles challenging. SUPPLIER: Anirog There are four skill levels, the screen changes again. The For those who like flight PRICE: .95 disc/.95 plus one for practice, ranging enemy disappears from the simulations. Jump Jet is well from Flight Lieutenant, radar and then reappears worth buying. Conversions will cassette Squadron Leader. Wing within the pilot's view. also be available for the This is it! Your chance to get Commander to Group Captain. Once visual contact is Amstrad, BBC, Spectrum, C16 your hands on the controls of the instrument panel is in made, the pilot must fight, and Vic 20. a Sea Harrier and take it on view all the time, showing hopefully surviving to return to a seek and destroy mission. radar, altitude, fuel, time, the carrier  Graphics Jump Jet was written by compass, artificial horizon, One disappointment is the  Sound Vaughan Dow, who for many power and warning lights. way the enemy aircraft is  Value years was a jump jet pilot. It Airspeed, missiles, angle of destroyed. There's no great  Playability combines not only the engine thrust, undercarriage explosion. The plane just dis00 29 "


"PLAY THE BIG FIST FRANK BRUNO GREAT BRITAIN Now, meet eight of the world's most unlikely heavyweight contenders in the boxing simulation to beat 'em all! 3 ANDRA PUNCHEREDOV 6 RAVIOLI MAFIOSI USSR ITALY Andra is a fast, dancing Ravioli is not a man to mess Russian who goes to your with. He knows all the dirty head faster than a neat tricks, and uses them glass of Vodka. without a care in the world. (THE CHALLENGER) 1 CANADIAN CRUSHER CANADA The big, plodding, lumberjack from Canada, with the beauty of a grizzly bear and the speed of an elephant. 7 ANTIPODEAN ANDY AUSTRALIA Fed on a diet of empty lager cans, this man feels no pain. Pure un-interrupted punch power. 2 FLING LONG CHOP JAPAN All the way from the land of the rising Hi-Fi is Fling Long Chop, a martial arts master of No-Can-Do. 4 TRIBAL TROUBLE AFRICA Tribal means trouble for anyone, he has a temper that gets the better of you! Landing the punches with unnerving accuracy. 5 FRENCHIE FRANCE Frenchie may appear to be cool, suave and sophisticated, but this deceptive façade hides a rather menacing individual, ready to make you see stars. O HD 8 PETER PERFECT USA World Famous, World Champion Peter Perfect. The most neat and accurate boxer in history is set to drive his engine of glory all over you. Could anyone be a match for macho man? Every single 'Elite' product carries the unique 'Elite Holographic Sticker. Make sure your copy does, It's your guarantee of quality Mail Order: Just send a cheque or P.O. payable to 'Elite' or quote your Visa number "


"AVAILABLE NOW SPECTRUM COMMODORE AMSTRADO .95 .95 .95 GAME FEATURES Eight fiery opponents, each with their own distinctive fighting style. Smooth-scrolling camera action, giving the best view of the fight at all times. Furious three minute rounds with 'knock-down' and 'knock out features, Warm-Up and 'Autoplay' sequences. OKO. Meter Best KO. Time Score and Bonus displayed on screen. Additional boxers to load from tape. Hall of fame. Endorsed by Heavyweight Champion Frank Bruno. pioni LIE OSEB SPECTRUM SCREEN SHOT Elite Systems Limited Anchor House Anchor Road Aldridge Walsall West Midlands Telephone (0922) 55852 Telex 335622 SPETELG "


"SE3 PITELINE SPECTRUM 48K .95 commodore 64 .90 AMSTRAD CPC464 .90 Taskset TASKSET LTD. 13 HIGH STREET, BRIDLINGTON Y016 4PR TEL:(0262) 673798/602668 "


"00 000 CONTRAPTION And it's not easy. The timing and have to start again WIZADORE has to be just right, and one of I'm not sure about the exact MACHINE: BBC my major complaints is the significance of the title 1 MACHINE: BBC B SUPPLIER: Icon rather arbitrary way you can suppose they couldn't think of SUPPLIER: Imagine PRICE: .95 sometimes be killed by being anything else to call such a PRICE: .95 This game is all about picking close to a hazard, as well as bizarre collection of locations Wizardore, from Imagine is an apples, but you can forget actually touching it. In a game and hazards. Beyond building exploration game in the classic about the harmless orchards that's difficult anyway, this can' up a score by collecting as sense. The plot is typical of a of your youth. Here the be really maddening many apples as possible, the fantasy adventure — saving orchards are filled with It's an entertaining little only point to the game is the the world from a terrible and a host of game from Icon which is fun of negotiating each screen dragon, Smaun, and taking deadly creepy crawlies, not to strongly reminiscent of Frak Icon describes the game as revenge for your grandfather's mention various identifiable i would say the graphics were madcap lunacy which just sudden demise and unidentifiable obstacles about on a par with Frak. The about sums it up. It will This is, of course, much You must brave the perils of screens are very lively with pleasantly while away a wet harder than it sounds, for each the pillars in the sky, the plenty of movement, although Sunday afternoon species of foe needs a dangers of the deep, the there are rather too many dead different spell to be defeated demons and fires of hell, the ends. There seems to be a  Graphics and the vital scrolls are very loathsome spider's lair, the fixed route round each location  Sound well defended chilling snow palace and five and, if something goes wrong Value Three parts of a golden other locations in your quest to a twig breaks off a tree, or sword must be collected in  Playability well, to pick apples! something you re trapped order to go dragon-bashing which in turn, will restore the Hidden in the depths of the robots must all be faced drawbridge, allowing you to DANGER MOUSE IN Peruvian jungle, Baron GreenAll the same ingredients enter the castle DOUBLE TROUBLE back has developed a 32K which made the Danger The screen is presented RAM DMOS ROM Robot Mouse game such a success «side-on\", like Manic Miner or Artificial Mechanism, Danger on other machines are present MACHINE: Amstrad Frak!, and works very well Mouse Operating System, in the Amstrad version. The landscape of trees, cliffs SUPPLIER: Creative Sparks Really 'Orrible Mouse! It is anM eanwhile, Danger Mouse and dungeon walls scrolls PRICE: .95 electrically erasable megawill be back in a brand new ahead of you, revealing the Following the success of mouse hardware unit. Danger adventure in the autumn. various types of nasty that you Danger Mouse on the Mouse, with the trusty Penfold And no doubt Baron Silas must overcome. These Spectrum and Commodore 64, as his side, sets out to track Greenback will be at the number six and are all nicely the super-spy rodent is back in down and de-activate this bottom of a fresh lot of trouble drawn in multi-coloured, mode action on the Amstrad deadly device before it's too 2 graphics. Three of these can Danger Mouse is up against late. be killed and are not really a  Graphics his old enemy, Baron Silas Venomous snakes, misproblem, other than preventing  Sound Greenback, the world's most chievous monkeys, mouseyou passing if you don't have  Value lainous toad who is bent on eating pumas, crocodilethe correct item  Playability world domination. infested waters and flying In the time given to review Ja game, it is not easy to tell just how long the appeal will last away by other witches. Your man who has to tackle the FIONA RIDES OUT/ Certain games, whilst looking job is to help her regain her worst motorcycle stunt of his like world beaters at the start DARE DEVIL DENNIS powers. life more than 80 different will fade after a very short To do that, Fiona must shoot levels amount of playing-time MACHINE: CBM 64 down her spell ingredients. The game has a strange I However, Wizardore looks as The game SUPPLIER: CSM pick them up and put them in beginning where Dennis II Jif it will retain its mysteries for PRICE: .95 a cauldron until one of her seen walking across the studio a long time to come and Fiona Rides Out and Dare tools appears above it set. As he goes, he must leap gradually unfold, rather than Devil Dennis is a two-game over flowers and up into the air being a flash-in-the-pan. If, however, Fiona's energy to y to capture escaped balloons deal on one tape at a nice falls below zero she is sent to for bor Imagine are offering a  price for bonus. Just quite why is not hell. If she escapes, she explained. Still, strange things prize for the first person to Fiona is the better game regains a life. But if sheh complete the game every happen in the world of films with good quality animated touches the burning rocks or month until August graphics, 12 levels of demons, Fiona is reincarnated F/D increasing difficulty and into the living world but this  Graphics  Graphics 8/6 frequent trips to hell  Sound can only happen five times.  Sound 7/6 Foul Fiona is a wicked witch . Value  Value The second game is Dare 9/9 who has had her power taken Devil Dennis, a movie stunt  Playability 8/6  Playability 00 ONO FALCON PATROL II helicopters and ground emplacements MACHINE: Spectrum The graphics are OK, the SUPPLIER: Virgin Games sound not too hot and game PRICE: .95 play eventually extremely Falcon Patrol // is a classic on boring. Give this one a miss the Commodore 64. Unfortunately the same can't be said about the conversion  Graphics  Sound The basic idea is to fly your  Value jump jet around over a Beirut  Playability style battlefield blasting enemy THE CAPTIVE drop items Many of the objects — if used correctly can help you MACHINE: CBM 64 escape SUPPLIER: Mastertronic While the graphics or the PRICE: .99 idea behind the game may not A new arcade style adventure be brilliant, it would be silly to from Mastertronic at a nice grumble considering the price price. of the game This is a real time adventure set in the Glen of Coloured  Graphics Corpses, blending scrolling  Sound screen landscapes, joystick  Value control of your player and key Playability board instructions to pick up or "


"HEADROOM INTERVIEW MAX M-m-m-m-Max Head-Head-Head. Headroom! For the first time the world's first computer generated TV personality reveals some of his secrets to the world's best computer magazine in an exclusive, no jokesbarred interview! So, if you are a sensation seeker or just want a good laugh read on! C&VG: Who IS Max Headroom? Max: A lot of people see me as something very special and I'm humble enough to accept other people's opinions they're right. I was brought onto the TV networks to give them a little more pezazz, fizz, razzamatazz and other words with lots of Zs in them. C&VG: How have you become so popular in such a short time? In other words, just what is the Max factor? Max: Well it's not doing jokes like that. My popularity comes down to my very high degree of perfection, plus a strong element of modesty. "


"C&VG: Are you interfacing with anyone at the moment? Max: What an old fashioned question! If you mean \"courting\", \"walking out\", \"dating\" or any other of these weird modern terms you youngsters seem to love, I suppose you want me to say I had a quick fling with the speaking clock. But I don't do jokes like that. C&VG: Is Max Headroom your real name? If not, have you a reason for changing it? Is there a guilty secret in your past? Max: Yes, No and No in that order. But if you want to sell more copies, you C&VG: I don't think you understood can change them round a bit. No, our last question. Never mind, what actually I kept the initials and just did is your ambition in life? a quiet name swap with Michael Max: I'd like to share a flat and underHeseltine. I think he wants to swap stand your last question. Also I'd like back, but I'm not strutting around in a to do my little bit to get the world back flak-jacket for anybody. to the peace, love and harmony of last C&VG: How did you get your stutter? August. Was it due to a programming error or C&VG: Will the new strides in Max: Mostly tears and emotional was it a planned imperfection? technology help you develop your outbursts from people who can't take Max: It was an accident, but now I like, character? the pressure that goes with working it. Defects are the way to get on in Max:I hope, above all, they'll help me with a highly successful almost perfect public life. Have you noticed how improve my stutter so I can stop half performer. They just don't have the many politicians can't say \"R\" spoiling jokes and start ruining them humility it takes. pwoperly? I think there must be completely. C&VG: What are your earliest courses in it for aspiring MPs. The C&VG: Who did you fancy for the FA memories? classic case is how old Meg Thatcher's cup this year? Max: Winning first prize in a \"Bonny voice is steadily getting lower Max: I hoped it would be the Queen Microchip\" contest. See, comedy although that could be a battery so I was disappointed to see the Duke comes naturally! problem. of Kent lifting the trophy this year. C&VG: You play a lot of music on C&VG: What generation do you C&VG: Do you play computer your show. What is your favourite represent? games? kind of music? Max:I appeal to a very wide group of Max: Of course not. It's not much fun Max: I love golf signature tunes, and people of all ages between 15 and playing with yourself. And it's boring I've just bought \"Another 20 Golden 1612. to win all the time. Golf Greats\" to complete my collecC&VG: Please give graphic details of C&VG: Where do your jokes come tion. My other current favourites are your life lifestyle. from? \"Digital Watch Tunes, Vol 2\" and an Max: Well, press photographers are Max: I still get fed silly things the early bootleg of ice-cream van music. always trying to catch me walking producer reads on a wall somewhere, C&VG: Who are your heroes? through airports, grinning and but all the really good material comes Max: Hollywood greats like Clint suntanned, carrying one of those from me. Eastwood and Robert Mitchum. I expensive leather shoulder bags. But C&VG: Who programmed you? suppose I'm bound to go for the I won't let them. Max:Originally the producer, but now robotic types C&VG: How did you stop them? I'm almost completely self C&VG: What is your idea of a good Max: I always use a plastic carrier. programming, and I'm about to night out? C&VG: Do people bug you? become the first ever computer Max: Getting my entire fan club Max:I happen to know that there are generated producer/writer/pertogether in one place and beating some at MIS who are very keen to. former. You wait and see the them at bridge. C&VG: Do you exist in your own time difference when it happens! C&VG: Thanks for letting us discover and space or someone elses? C&VG: Just what is going on behind more about the Max factor, Max. We Max: Do you mean I share a flat? No. you in the studio? still like that joke! "


"GHETTOBLASTER COMPETITION Dance to the music and let the beat go on for ever with a fantastic programmable synthesiser. That's the number one prize in another fantastic competition brought to you by Computer & Video Games and Virgin Games. Virgin has a hit on its hands with its new game Ghettoblaster which involves the exploits of Rockin' Rodney, a record company messenger in Funky Town. The 12 original pieces of music which accompany the game will have you dancing in your seat. The game is the work of Tony \"Gibbo\" Gibson and Mark Harrison, pictured right. Now they have come up with this competition for you to enter. In the game Ghettoblaster, streets are named after some well known songs. What we want you to do is name the artists that have recorded them. The person who gets most right will win a ghettoblaster and the 50 runnersup will get copies of the game (Commodore 64 only). In some cases, the song has been recorded by more than one person. Any correct answer will do. C&VG/VIRGIN GAMES GHETTOBLASTER COMPETITION PRODUCT Name. Address..... Song Artist Moonlight Drive Itchycoo Park Pleasant Street Tobacco Road Sunny Goodge Street ... Electric Avenue Route Sixty Six Gasoline Alley Strawberry Fields Blackberry Way Hold Me Close McArthur Park Tie-breaker: The best record of 1985 so far has been..... because in not more than twenty words)... 36 "


"GET THE PICTURE GET THE PICTUR NEW LABEL NEW TITLE with the STUNNING SOUNDS, AMAZING GRAPHICS, ACTION! WACTION! STUNNING SOUNDS, AMAZING GRAPHICS QUAKE MINUS ONE MONOLITY 3114 Edge Sort Mail Order: MONOLITH 3rd Floor, Lector Court, 151 Farringdon Road, London ECIR 3AD. Price .95 inc. P&P Cheques/POs payable to Monolith, Credit cards call 01-8372899 "


"COMPUTER  PHICS PACKAGES How many of you want to be the next top games designer? Come on. Hands up! Okay well, how many of you can program graphics? I mean REALLY program graphics to the standard of, say, the better games you've played. Not the sort of thing that looks like a heap of Lego bricks thrown up in the air. I'm talking about easy-to-use-brushes and colour, instant Light & Magic Ltd. stuff! Well, my brief, as the designer of this esteemed magazine, was to rough various Graphic Packages that are available for the home, user market. This means that I am going to give these games the once over, just like you will, in a shop or at home, get a first impression of the facilities and come up with how best they can be used. CREATIVE SPARKS Conardo onto LEONARDO Spectrum 48k Price: .95 Thorn-EMI have the \"ultimate graphics package\" for the Spectrum 48k which has almost everything. On loading, something I found tricky but then I find working a phone-box difficult you are presented with a choice of control. I used a joystick, which is essential for any serious graphics work. Then comes a blank screen with a flashing cursor and you can start to draw. Using this mode of BRUSH you can change its thickness and whether you want to draw straight lines or arcs or circles. By referring to the information window, you can see what is going on behind the screen. I found this to be a trifle confusing, as you have lots of numbers floating about. Leonardo has an interesting feature of WINDOWING, with which you can invert, draw and shift the image contained in the WINDOW. You can magnify parts of the picture. This is a very useful piece of graphics as it is difficult, if not impossible, to work on a picture using the clumsy pixels displayed on the screen. Colouring was fine though I found the Spectrum a hard task master for my puny memory. Which key does what? Luckily, the instruction manual has some keyboard maps to help, but overlays would have been better. Various other features were Mirror Images, Word Printing, 3-D Drawing and UDGs (User Defined Graphics). You also have an uninspired selection of standard characters in memory to use if, and when you want them. I didn't. The manual, although comprehensive, was far too technical for the average user and really you'd need to be a seasoned designer to get instant results. P owerful and pretentious. But cheap! THE DESIGNER'S PENCIL Commodore 64 Price: .99 This little gem from Activision has an excellent programming screen allowing fast drawing. What it basically does is give you various strings of characters all ready to call and, by moving an arrow cursor, you can compile your own program. This makes for a slow technique, but good end results even though, as an artist, I would have liked more freedom to jot and draw rather than have shapes \"dictated\" to me by the program. I have this dream of a simple jotting pad perhaps a light pen is the answer! The demos were the best of the bunch, showing what could be done but not how! It took a while to get the hang of entering the various levels, but fortunately the manual is well designed and easy to follow. I found the simple act of drawing difficult even though the colour facility was good. It still wasn't what I would call \"user friendly\" -the \"strings\" required parameters and locations and words like \"recursion\" were used! "


"ARTSTAR Commodore 64 Price: .95 After loading this program, you'll find \"fl\" will call up a simple brush and colour menu. Remember to call up JOY from the menu, though, or you'll spend 10 minutes trying to figure out how to move the cursor! The menu was good, with instructions and colours in a panel on the bottom of the screen. The commands were chosen by moving the cursor, a task I found fiddly and often inaccurate. But with use would no doubt be easier. The CAGE facility was no more than a Windowing mode but useful due to its expandability still it was hard to understand. Creating and storing new UDGs was very simple. You can call up this drawing facility and make a big image, reduce it to whatever size you like and store it for further use. The problemes I had with Artstar were getting worse as I went on. Perhaps it was just me, but I found that the cursor kept sticking. The fill commands sometimes didn't work -and generally gave me a hard time. Overall, Artstar, although powerful, was hard to understand and difficult to get the hang of. THE ARTIST Spectrum 48k Price: .95 This program arrived in a sort of unfinished state. The manual consisted of five typed pages, so it's probably unfair to criticize the packaging. The concept is a good one, and is obviously aimed at the games designer with its animated figures you can call up instantly. The program has an interesting OVERLAY facility giving CUT, COPY and ABORT to your picture. This, plus scaling and mirror use, makes this an attractive proposition from the start. MEULENISCAA826518 ABCDEFGHIJKLADOPASTU WWXYzbieasse 70 90000 GRAPHITO BBC Price: .95 It would be silly to have a review of graphic packages without at least one real hard-line program. This BBC disc or cassette pack is the real thing. Far more complex than the other programs, but a must for graphics freaks into zooms, x/y/2 lines and perspective with hidden line erasing. Easy to program using a sort of FORTRAN, I think. It is a joy to use and very powerful. Nice stored graphics and lettering, too. Advanced stuff though not really for gamers. LIGHTMAGIC Spectrum 48k Price: .95 New Generation Software have, in my opinion, come up with a winner in this delightful package. The main menu is clear and concise giving easy instructions with a screen editing panel letting the user have fast drawing. Ay/n response to most editing commands is a great help in failsafe design sor designs give maximum visibility to complex screens, and the use of an x/y line to give cursor location is simple to understand and accurate. Another feature I found a dead cert for the maze designer is the thick 3-D brush stroke, giving a various shaded wall effect at a 45-degree angle (see illustration). The greatest thing about Lightmagic, though, is the user ready icons everything from helicopters to tanks, boats and bricks. Just take your pick, move it around with the cursor and bingo! Instant games! This was what I was looking for in all these games user inendly with instant results and no complex programming SUMMARY OF TERMS BRUSHES: Should have a range like this. You just call one up and move it about with the joystick instead of a brush. UDG/CHARACTERS/ICONS: These are little figures or blocks which are stored in memory to be called up and moved around the screen. They are made up of... PIXELS: These are the building blocks of colour and shape, even texture, that builds up the picture. Imagine Lego bricks. LOCATION: This is usually the way the user places a pixel on the screen. Same as a map reference you know-9 up, 7 along, that type of thing! PRE-SET DRAWING: These are circles, straight lines and arcs that the user defines using formulae on the screen. Can be complicated but very useful and timesaving. X/Y LINE: This is really position marking (see LOCATION) but 2-dimensional unlike... X/Y/Z LINES: which are for 3-dimensional drawing. 39 "


"GET THE PICTURE GET THE PICTUBE NEW LABEL NEW TITLE ROCKFORD'S RIOT & BOULDER DASH ON ONE TAPE! ROCKFORD'S RIOT & BOULDER DASH BOULDERS, JE WELS, FIREFLIES, PUNISHING PUZZLES MONOLITH wainty Edge So SPECTRUM VERSIONN AVAILABLE LATE ADSUS Mail Order: MONOLITH, 3rd Floor, Lector Court, 151 Farringdon Road, London ECIR 3AD Price .95 inc. P&P. Cheques/POs payable to Monolith Credit cards call 01-8372899 "


"Dear Bug hunte SORE FINGERS? A DEVIL OF A PROGRAM Hi there, techno freaks. It's time to problems. If yours is one of those, I'd in SCREEN$ format. If you have used power up the old word processor like to hear about it. Drop me a line if your own design, type SAVE \"LOADyet again to bring you a whole new you have a problem with your C2N, or SCRN\" SCREENS. This saves the selection of goodies aimed at any other piece of computer kit. It current contents of the screen on tape helping you get more from your would be interesting to see just how and calls the file LOADSCRN. micro. And if this page is anything reliable home micros and peripherals Now, when you have written your like that introduction then it'll sure are. I'll give you the top 10 micros which game, save it on the same tape after the be worth reading! are the most unreliable in a couple of loading screen. months. Before the loading screen, you'll Meanwhile, if you buy a computer need to record a small program which and it turns out to be faulty, it is the says LOAD \"LOADSCRN\" SCREEN$: Before we start, though, a plea. If you've responsibility of the dealer who sold it | LOAD \"\" LINE 10. This will load your found a wonderful piece of information to you to put it right. If the machine is screen, then load your game and start about your computer that you want to under guarantee, there should be no the game running from line 10. If your share with everyone, please make sure problem. You should ask for your game starts at a different line, alter the that I can read it. If it's a short listing, money back or a replacement machine, 10 to a different number. it's best on a computer printout so that and try not to accept having the broken Why not try to produce a C&VG I can be sure that it works. Not that I machine repaired. loading screen at the beginning of the doubt your programming efforts, it's just Guaranteed periods on computers tape you record the magazine's listings that no one's typing is infallible and a are often not very long nowadays. If on? It will add a professional touch to mistyped POKE can cause a lot of your machine breaks down a few your games. angry phone calls and red typing weeks after the guarantee runs out, try fingers. writing to the managing director of the I feel like being kind this month, so company that makes the machine. Ask I won't actually name the person who him if it is common for his company's sent me a poke for Manic Miner on the Here's a program, beautifully typed by Vic, whose letter ended by saying than the guarantee period before a dot matrix printer (though on blue \"type SYS1639/4 to start the program\"! breaking down! paper) courtesy of Jon Paul Eldridge. I can't say where he lives as I've mislaid DOZY DRAGON GRAPHICALLY the letter. Luckily, though, Jon put his Here's a little routine which slows down name in a REM at the top of the the speed at which the Dragon 32 lists BETTER program. The idea of the routine is to a program. I'm sure many Dragon keep prying eyes from your BBC A couple of people have asked how to owners will find this extremely useful. listings and stop people breaking into get those fancy screens to appear on However, I can't help admitting that the them. In Jon's own words, it gives the your Spectrum when loading a game. main reason I'm printing this tip is hackers hell! You know, the flashing Manic Miner because I think the headline's terrific! To disguise your program, try to put logo or the gorgeous graphics that To make your Dragon drag on, type a number of lines in your program Ultimate use. POKE 359,60. Thanks go to Richard consisting of REM followed by speech Actually, making the screen load Chamberlain, of Dottygab, for this one. marks and then an \"@\" sign. For before the game is the easy part. example, 10 REM\"@. Save your heavilyDesigning the graphics is rather C2N PROBLEMS REMmed program, clear the machine harder. The Manic Miner logo is all and type in this clever little routine: We still get a couple of letters every done with flashing screen attributes. 100 *KEYO PAGE%=&1900:TOP% week here at C&VG from people com Although you can't normally have &19DO:FORATO TOP%: IF ?A%=&F4 plaining about the old Commodore 643 movement on the screen while a AND A%?l=&22 AND A%2=&40 cassette recorder. It appears that, while program is loading from tape, you can A%?2= =21:NEXT ELSE NEXT:M some readers never have any problems have a screen with a flashing message. Run the routine, which sets up key FO loading or saving programs on their 64, Now, suppose one part of the screen with the lock function. Now, load your some machines just don't like the C2N is blue flashing on a red background. BASIC program and press FO. That's all Scott Dawson, from London, and Paul At each flash, the colours are reversed, there is to it. Sobanski, from Cardiff, are this week's which gives the impression of moveBy the way, says Jon, try typing GCOL winners of the \"Who's got a faulty C2N\"ment. You'll see this technique used 232,4. OK, I will. competition. Scott's only loads some of quite a lot on Micronet, if you look his games. Paul's main problem was around. Well that's about it for this month. with his copy of Sea Side Special from To make a still picture, use one of the Remember, if you have a problem Taskset. Like most others, Paul returned art packages currently available for the with your micro, or there's his copy of the game to his local Spectrum. something in the manual that you computer store, where, you guessed it, Once you have designed your just can't get to grips with, drop he had no problems at all. screen, you'll need to save it. If you are me a line to the C&VG office or to Apparently, Commodore has using an art package, use the option in the Bug Hunter account on admitted that some C2Ns have had the program which saves your design "


"BUG HUNTER WRITE TO HEAT COMPUTER& VIDEO GAMES PRORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC/R 3AU.OR PHONE ME ON :Q1--2516222 First, to the problems with the LINE GRAPHIC CODE listings in the June 1985 issue. 6950 P (eight of them altogether) PYRAMIDS OF We haven't had any calls 7030 A, B (one of each) concerning Defuse (Amstrad), 7130 U (just one) AARON so presumably this is okay. (Spectrum) However, of the other three OGGS EGGS listings, one contains a few errors and the others have a (Atari) We've had quite a few enquiries couple of quirks. concerning this problem from our May No real problems here, but the printer 1985 issue. The main problem seems played up a bit. Some lines, such as to be with people being unable to type HUNCHY 190,290 and 801 to 820 have large gaps line 20. Well, having diligently typed (Spectrum) in them. These spaces are not in the program myself (from the significant and can be left out without magazine listing), everything worked, causing problems. including line 20! This is the bug-ridden program of the It is always best to remember that it did turn out that all the graphics month. Everything seems to be all printers often do print spaces where had been converted to upper-case right with the first program (page 71). they aren't necessary. The Comcharacters, without any indication that Line 20 of the second program modore will sometimes list a line that they should be graphics. Therefore, as contains the first problem. This isn't a seems too long-remember abbreviaa general rule, if you find any of the drastic bug, but the author obviously tions and you won't spend hours letters A, B, C, D, E, F, G or H, between had a microdrive and this line still pouring over a listing. inverted commas in a PRINT statecontains a microdrive load command. ment, then type them in graphics The purpose of this line is to load in PENGI mode. This will at least give you the user-defined graphics if they are not already present this is why it decent looking screens. (Commodore 64) Finally, for people still stuck on line checks to see whether the first byte of 20. There doesn't seem to be anything, the UDG area has been set to \"56\". If there are no errors or printing but here it is again: you always run the first program problems that we know of with this before the second, then just omitting program. Nevertheless, we've had 20 FOR F=80 TO 80: PLOT 150,175: this line will solve the problem. quite a few enquiries concerning line DRAW f,150+(20 AND f= -80): Alternatively, change the line to read: 201. The problem here is that the PLOT 40,150: DRAW f/2,-65+(10 20 IF PEEK (USR \"a\" >56 THEN Commodore 64 will only allow line AND --80): PLOT 200,160: DRAW LOAD \"hchar''CODE lengths of up to 80 characters (two f/3, -50+(15 AND f= -80): LET f=f+ Next delete the last line (1050) from screen lines). Unfortunately, line 201 (30 AND 1= -80): NEXT f the first program and run this. It will (as printed) conta set up the graphics, draw the screen, how was it typed in the first place? including the \"NOW LOADING...\" Obviously you don't need to type in message, then return to BASIC. Now the space after the line number which type the line: SAVE \"hchar\"CODE will save one character, leaving a total CRAWLEY USR \"a\",21*8 and save the UDG data of 83. In addition, the real trick is to use AFTER the second program on the command abbreviations. The best tape. From now on there is no need to known of these is \"PRINT\", which can run the first program. Just load and run be abbreviated to \"?\", saving four the second which will automatically more characters. This should now We've had quite a few enquiries about load the UDG data from tape. allow you to enter the 79 characters on the game Creepy Crawley in the April The other minor problems concern the line. However, for further saving, 1985 issue. Some of you may be having the new method we are using to show \"POKE\" can be abbreviated to \"P[s difficulties with the user-defined graphics. The symbol graphics in line E]\" (control mnemonics are the same graphics. Unfortunately, these are not 6520 should be SHIFT + '4', then '3', as those in the listing, ie. SHIFT+ 'O' shown in the rest of the listing, but then '7', whilist in graphics mode, not and so on). instead appear as normal upper-case the SHIFT + '1' shown. This should give These, and many more abbreviated letters inside the inverted commas of a table shape. commands, can be very handy on both PRINT statements. So, to get the The lines 6950 to the end of the the Commodore 64 and the Vic-20, so correct symbols, use Graphics mode program haven't had the UDGs you'll probably find it useful to for the printed characters in lines 1020, changed. These should be: familiarise yourself with them. 1030, 1050, 1270 and 1310 to 1400. CREEPY (Spectrum) "


"SEND US YOUR GAMES! Have you written a games program that you'd like to see printed within C&VG? You have? Then fill in this form and rush it to us at Computer & Video Games, Program Listings, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. We pay  for each listing we print So get your game to us today! We'd also like you to send us a photograph of yourself it doesn't matter how silly you look So we can feature your smiling face alongside your listing and make you REALLY famous. Money and fame what more could you ask for? Please fill in the form below carefully so we know exactly what's going on in your game. And please include full instructions and program details along with your tape. Don't forget to keep a copy of your game for yourself. We're afraid that \"to be published\" files. And that's where the waiting starts. We we can't return your tapes to you. receive several hundred tapes each month and loads of them Talking of tapes that's how we'd like you to send your are printable. So it can take quite a while to see your game in games in to us. On tape or disc with a listing if you have a print. But we like to think that it's worth the wait! printer. And starting here and now you could become C&VG's Lots of our readers have been asking just what happens to Programmer of the Year which we'll judge at Christmas time. their games when they arrive at C&VG. Well, we send them out to So you could get an unexpected Christmas bonus. And don't our team of hard working reviewers who let us know just what worry those of you who already have had programs printed they think of your game. If they like it, your tape will go into our you'll be eligible too! Program name:....... Machine make: ................. Model ..... Number of K needed to run it:...... Other models it should run on:.. Other equipment (joysticks, Extended Basic, add ons, etc.) needed to run it:....... Author's Christian name:........ .. . . . . Surname........ Address:...... Tel:............. ...................... Date: Type of game: (If original please say so)....... Loading instructions: Game instructions: (If not included in the listing)..... ......................................... -Office use only Date received: Evaluator's comments Good enough to publish Acknowledgement sent: Name of evaluator: .. Date sent out: Date due back: Needs some tidying up Not worth publishing 00000 N Date sent: Same game already published on this micro Needs to be returned to author for alterations: Due to be published in.. issue of magazine. Wouldn't load "


"TENTOMBED Tever having played Ultimate's first game for the Commodore 64, Staff of Karnath, I am unable to make a real comparison to Entombed all I can say is that Entombed is a far more complex game, with many maze-like corridors. If you're looking for help on the first screen, I can tell you that all you need do is jump at the eye in the far right wall. The statues will now remain parted. Now, look at the Level 1 map. There is Move onto room B and walk under the jumping at them! large beetle no skill needed here! After collecting numerous bird You are now in Level 2. You will find droppings, the moon sets, the sun rises and a scroll to read in room D, but read alla second scroll is shown. In room I there scrolls quickly because they are displayed is another scroll in a chest. To reach it you for such a short time that they cannot be must walk under the flying nasties and read twice. JUMP over the scorpion. Does anyone know the purpose of room In room J there are four ghosts in each C? Those who do, write to Prof. Video corner of the screen wailing threateningly right away! and, if you approach the tomb in the To gain access to Level 3, go to room E, middle, they all attack you. stand to the left (from your view) of the If you JUMP forwards towards the obstructing statue and whip it vigorously. obstructing statue and whip it vigorously. tomb, tl tomb, the ghosts don't attack you! Apart Keep moving closer to it as it moves or the from this, though, I haven't discovered statue will be out of range of your whip. anything else about room J. The door is now cleared and you can go The door is now cleared and vou can go Finally, does anyone know how to reach through the door. Level 5? I simply cannot remove that big You are now on Level 3. Go to room G, boulder in room K. Any ideas? where the statue is apparently immovable. GENERAL TIPS: Go to room F, touch the chest (don't forget Walk close to the wall in the corridors. The to use JUMP to clear this screen) and you mummy always appears at the bottom and will find a \"Small Idol\". Return to room from here you can jump at the passing G. The statue moves from the door. Falcons to gain extra lives. You are now in Level 4. Go to room H. Always keep an eye on your oxygen level See those things that the bird is dropping when in rooms A-N. Don't bother all around you? Well, you must collect collecting an extra life if it's going to cost them! Not by merely walking under them you two to get it! and touching them as they fall, but by AONGHUS DE BARRA room A and, using JUMP, make your way to the chest. Here you will find the magic whip but don't use it yet. Leave your function at JUMP and make your way back to the exit. Now switch your function to USE WHIP. When any unwanted creatures approach, give them 40 lashes! LEVEL 2 4 (3) AL LEVEL 1 Notes (1) Chest contains whip (2) Exit to Level 2 Notes (3) Entrance from Level 1 (4) Purpose unknown! (5) Whip the statue at the door from the left (6) Scroll (1) is here LEVEL 4 Notes *(11) Collect bird droppings! (12) Scroll (3) is here (13) Purpose unknown (14) Purpose unknown *In (11) scroll (2) 999 LEVEL 3 OLDOG Notes (7) Entry (8) Idol opens door here (9) Small Idol (needed for room (8)) here "


"90 U -120 Rumi SENI 55 ANASTA HUHE "


"SILVER RANGE... Seeing SCERE LIVESHELICHOPPER vertESQUS. Teisht L ettin THE HELM Adventure An amusing, stylish text adventure HELICHOPPER Arcade Fast and smooth multi-screen action MR FREEZE Arcade/Strategy Six compartments, each tougher to de-ice LOOTH CHICKIN CHASE Arcade Ruling the roost can be a hard life EXODUS Arcade Strange creatures emerging from the pits DUCK! Arcade Comedy and music in this novel duck shoot BEHRU REE DOOR LJ ESTRA Arcade Recover the sacred statue of Estra the Snake God MICROCOSM Arcade Addictive and challenging multi-level arcade action SUBSUNK Adventure with Graphics Trapped on the sea bed in a scuppered submarine FERRE 3 9831 Brunch RA VIKING RAIDERS War Game A test of strategy against the computer or friends RUN BABY RUN Arcade Multi-car cop chase and shoot-out ZULU Arcade 100 golden masks hidden in a magic maze  EDE DON'T PANIC Arcade/Strategy Amusing and challenging, a game with a difference DON'T BUY THIS! Compilation Five of the worst games you have ever seen THE HACKER Arcade/Strategy Terminal to modem, telephone network to mainframe Firebird and the Firebird logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications plc. "


"is believing .50 each.  01 45 RECERERE HOME CORE: 0000 \" SWORD: ROOMUNROOS FAHRENHEIT 3000 Arcade/Strategy Sixty four screens to meltdown GOGO THE GHOST Arcade/Adventure 150 different haunted castle chambers CIRCUS CIRCUS Arcade Twenty circus rings to escape HEADACHE Arcade Nervous Ned's quest to serve the Brain BIRD STRIKE Arcade Wing the planes and shoot the pigeons THE WILD BUNCH Strategy/Adventure Accused of murder, hunt the real killer BONUS QUID MICKEY THE BRICKY Arcade Four screens packed with fun FIREBIRD SILVER CATALOGUE AMSTRAD CPC 464 COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM 16K/48K 026 MR.FREEZE 015 MR.FREEZE 006 RUN BABY RUN 029 THE WILD BUNCH 017 BOOTY 035 DONT PANIC 042 SHORT'S FUSE 018 EXODUS SPECTRUM 48K 044 SUBSUNK 019 HEADACHE 008 VIKING RAIDERS 020 ZULU BBC MODEL B 012 THE WILD BUNCH 003 BIRD STRIKE 024 GOGO 014 MR. FREEZE 005 DUCK! 028 ESTRA 016 BOOTY 032 SUBSUNK 022 ESTRA 031 SUBSUNK 034 THE HELM 023 THE HACKER 033 THE HELM 025 MR.FREEZE 038 CHICKIN CHASE 036 SHORTS FUSE 041 CIRCUS CIRCUS 039 MICROCOSM 037 HELICHOPPER VIC 20 (UNEXPANDED) 040 DON'T BUY THIS! ELECTRON 002 MICKEY THE BRICKY 043 FAHRENHEIT 3000 027 BIRD STRIKE 030 THE HACKER MAIL ORDER Please state name of game (and machine) and numbers required. Enclose crossed cheque/PO made payable to FIREBIRD SOFTWARE All offers are subject to availability. Orders are despatched promptly. All prices inclusive of VAT and postage. MAIL ORDER: *FREEPOST FIREBIRD, WELLINGTON HOUSE, UPPER ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON WC2H 9BR O EOOTED TFEUE 120 BOOTY Arcade/Adventure Twenty holds full of pirate loot \"No stamps required DOOGOO SHORT'S FUSE Arcade/Strategy Sam Short secret agent versus Boris and his bombs FIREBIRD (1) FIREBIRD SOFTWARE WELLINGTON HOUSE, UPPER ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON WC2H 9DL. TEL: 01-379 6755/5626 "


"COMPETITION two runners up will receive TOPS T-shirts The date at which the holiday can be taken will be arranged between the winner and TOPS. Now here is what you have to do. Imagine you were going to be stranded on a desert island for one week. Which top ten computer games would you like to be marooned with? Also, say in not more than 25 words why you would like to win this fantastic holiday prize. Send your answers with the coupon and post it to TOPS HOLIDAY COMPETITION, Computer & Video Games, 30-32 Priory Court, Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is August 16 and the editor's decision is final. C&VG/TOPS COMPUTER HOLIDAY COMPETITION (Please attach this coupon to your entry) | Name.. Address... It's the TOPS a fantastic week-long holiday for one. Yes, that's the great prize up for grabs in another super competition brought to you by Computer & Video Games and TOPS, the specialists in activity and adventure holidays for young people. The lucky winner will stay at the TOPS activity centre in a converted country house at Hope-underDinmore, a short distance from the A49 between Hereford and Leominster. On your TOPS course, you will have exclusive use of either a BBC B with access to printer and disc drives or an Einstein also with disc drive. There are also buggys, robotic arms, light pens, computer chess, a complete Apple 2 business system, a range of Prestel facilities and an extensive software library. The winner will also get top class instruction to help improve his or her computer skills. And there will be a chance to enjoy other facilities at Dinmore rifle shooting, archery, swimming, canoeing and a full evening entertainment programme with discos, films and campfires, to name a few. Guests stay in dormitories which take six to 12 pupils. They are equipped with bunk beds, sheets, pillows and blankets. The house contains modern toilets and showers, kitchen and dining rooms, games rooms, tuck shop. coffee bar and television lounge. Most of the house is centrally heated and clothes washing facilities are available. The competition is open to those between the ages of nine and 15. the I would like to win the TOPS computer holiday because.......... 48 "


"PREPARE YOURSELF FOR THE HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER. Vortex SOFTWARE APPROACHING FAST... BRAIN-BLOWING GRAPHICS... MEGA-BLASTING POWER... FAST-ACTION PLAYABILITY... 'HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER'...A TOTALLY NEW DIRECTION FROM VORTEX. ONCE YOU'RE ON IT...THERE'S NO TURNING BACK.  HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER FOR SPECTRUM 4 8 K .  7.95 VORTEX SOFTWARE (SALES) LIMITED. VORTEX HOUSE. 24 KANSAS AVENUE, OFF SOUTH LANGWORTHY ROAD. SALFORD M5 26L. "


"ITALYRINTH Dare you enter the Labyrinth and attempt to stay the Minotaur! Somewhere in the heart of the maze it is waiting for you. he Labyrinth are weapons and items which may be of use. Pick them up and discard them at will. You enter the maze with a ball of thread which you must unwind as you progress through the passages. It is vital in linding the way out again. In Labyrinth you can decide on the complexity of the maze, the speed of the Minotaun and the difficulty of the light. When inputting this program, remember to take particular care over the data statements and the use of full stops and commas. 350 10 REM LABYRINTH BY JO EDKINS 1985 20 DATA \"pot\".1.0.4.-3.4.5.-1.0.5.1. 0.5.3.4.5.-3. 4.99 30 DATA \"bone\".2.0, 4.-4,0.5.-4.3.5,3.3.5.-3.2.5.3.2.5.3.3.5.4.3.5.4.0.5,3.0 .5.3.1.5.-3.1.5.-3.0.5.-4.0.99 40 DATA \"stick\". 3.0.4,-3.0.5.-3.1.5. 4.1.5.4.0.5.-3.0.99 50 DATA \"stone\".4,1.4,0,0.5.0.1.5.1. 1.5.1.0.5.0.0.99 60 DATA \"club\".5.2.4.3.0.5.-3..5.5.3.1.5.5.3.2.5.3.0.99 70 DATA \"dagger\".6.3, 4,0.1.5.3.2.5.0 .3.4.0.0.5.0.4.5.-1,4.5.-1.0.5.0.0.4.-1. 5.1.5.5.-2.5.1.5.5.-2.5.2.5.5.-1.5.2.5.9 340 Z$=GET$ IF Z$-\"Q\" THEN GOTO 860 360 IF Z$=\"B\" THEN GOTO 200 370 IF Z$=\"N\" THEN GOTO 170 380 IF DD>O THEN GOTO 440 390 IF Z$=\"F\" THEN GOTO 820 400 IF MX=PX AND MY=PY AND ES= 0 THEN GOTO 440 410 ON (INSTR(\"LRTMPDS\", Z$)+1) GOTO 420 . 460, 490.520.550.700.740.780 420 IF Z$=\"U\" AND UNWIND<>1 THEN UNW IND=1: GOTO 290 430 IF Z$=\"W\" AND UNWIND=1 THEN UNWI ND=2: GOTO 290 440 REM * ERROR 450 VDU 7: GOTO 340 460 REM * TURN LEFT 470 DIR-DIR-1: IF DIR<1 THEN DIR-DIR+ 480 GOTO 290 490 REM * TURN RIGHT 500 DIRDIR+1:IF DIR>4 THEN DIR=DIR510 GOTO 290 520 REM * TURN AROUND 530 DIR-DIR+2: IF DIR>4. THEN DIR-DIR560 80 DATA \"hammer\".7.4.4.2.1.5.-3.1.5. -3.2.5.2.2.5.2.3.5.4.3.5.4,0.52.0.5.2.2 .99 90 DATA \"sword\".8.5.4.0.1.5.9.2.5.0. 3.4.0.0.5.0.4.5, -1,4.5.-1.0.5.0.0.4.-1.5 . 1.5.5.-2.5.1.5.5.-2.5.2.5.5.-1.5.2.5.99 100 DATA \"spear\".9.6.4.3..5.5.-3..5.5 .-3.1.5.3.1.5.3.1.5.5.5..75.5.3.0.5.3.1. 99 110 DATA \"axe\", 10.7.4.3.2.5.-3.2.5.-3 .3.5.3.3.5.3.2.5.4.0.5.1,0.5.2.2.99 120 ONERRORGOTO3370 130 MAX=20 140 DIM MAZEX (2. MAX). MASK% (MAX), THX (2 MAX) 150 NO=10 160 DIM OBJX (NO). SVX (NO). OBJY (NO). SVY (NO). OB$ (NO). OW (NO). OK (NO) 170 MAXT%=0 180 MODE 4 190 PROCinit 200 DR-0: PK=O: UNWIND=0: PX=STARTX: PYS TARTY 210 DX=0: DY=0: ES=O: DD=0: DIR=3 220 FOR I=1 TO NO 230 OBJX(I) =SVX(I): OBJY(I) =SVY(I) 240 NEXT 250 FOR I=1 TO MAX 260 THX (1, 1)=0: THX (2.1)=0 270 NEXT 280 TIM=TIME: MX=SVMX: MY-SVMY 290 REM * MAIN LOOP 300 IF ES=0 THEN PROCmovemin 310 IF ES=2 THEN ES=0 320 IF ES=1 THEN ES=2 330 PROCdraw 540 GOTO 290 550 REM * MOVE FORWARD IF X=PX AND YEPY THEN GOTO 440 570 IF DIR=2 THEN PX=PX+1 580 IF DIR=3 THEN PY-PY+1 590 IF DIR=1 OR DIR=3 THEN NSEW=1 600 IF DIR=2 OR DIR=4 THEN NSEW=2 610 IF UNWIND=1 THEN THX (NSEW, PY) =TH %(NSEW, PY) OR MASKX (PX) 620 IF UNWIND=2 THEN TH% (NSEW, PY) -TH %(NSEW, PY) AND NOT MASK% (PX) 630 IF DIR=1 THEN PYPY-1 640 IF DIR=4 THEN PX=PX-1 650 IF MX>O OR MY> OR PX<>STARTX OR PY<>STARTY THEN GOTO 290 660 DD=2 670 SOUND 1.-15, 81,6: SOUND 1.-15.101 . 3: SOUND 1,-15. 117.3: SOUND 1.-15.129.3 680 *FX21 0 690 GOTO 290 700 REM * PICK UP 710 IF DR>O OR PK=0 THEN GOTO 440 720 DREPK: OBJX(PK) =0: OBJY(PK) = 0 730 GOTO 290 740 REM * DROP Illustration Steiner Lund "


"RUNS ON A BBC BY JO EDKINS "


" 750 IF DR=0 THEN GOTO 440 760 OBJX (DR)=PX: OBJY (DR) =PY: DR=0 770 GOTO 290 780 REM * SWAP 790 IF DR=0 OR PK=0 THEN GOTO 440 800 OBJX(PK) =0: OBJY (PK)=0: OBJX(DR) =P X:OBJY (DR)=PY: DR=PK 810 GOTO 290 820 REM * FIGHT 830 IF MX<>PX OR MY<>PY THEN GOTO 44 1200 PROCset: SVX(K)=X: SVY(K) =Y 1210 NEXT 1220 PROCset: SVMX=X: SVMY=Y 1230 PRINT \"\"Hit return to continue.\" 1240 Z-GET 1250 ENDPROC 1260 DEF PROCset 1270 FOR I=1 TO COMPLEX 1280 DIR=RND(4) 1290 DIST=RND (MAX) 1300 IF X-1 THEN DIR=2 1310 IF X-MAX THEN DIR=4 1320 IF Y 2 THEN DIR=3 1330 IF Y=MAX THEN DIR=1 1340 IF DIR=2 OR DIR=4 THEN NSEW=2 1350 IF DIR=1 OR DIR=3 THEN NSEW=1 1360 FOR J-1 TO DIST 1370 IF DIR=2 AND X<MAX THEN X=X+ 1380 IF DIR=3 AND Y<MAX THEN Y=Y+ 840 PROC Light 850 GOTO 290 860 REM * END OF PROGRAM 870 VDU 26: CLS: CLG 880 END 890 DEF PROCinit 900 CLS: VDU 31.0.5 910 PRINT \"You are Theseus about to e nter the\" 920 PRINT\" Labyrinth to slay the Mi notaur\" 930 PRINT \"You will find weapons insi de of\" 940 PRINT\" greater or lesser worth\" : PRINT 950 PRINT \"You have a ball of thread which\" 960 PRINT \"you can unwind to help you Pind\" 970 PRINT \"your way out\":PRINT 980 INPUT \"Complexity of Maze ? (1-Si mple)\": COMPLEX: PRINT 990 INPUT \"Speed of Minotaur ? (1-NO movement)\": SPEED: PRINT 1000 INPUT \"Difficulty of Fight ? (1-S imple) \": FIGHT: PRINT 1010 PRINT \"Labyrinth being constructe 1390 MAZEX (NSEW.Y) =MAZEX (NSEW.Y) OR MASKX(X) 1400 IF DIR=4 AND X>1 THEN X=X-1 1410 IF DIR=1 AND Y>1 THEN Y=Y-1 1420 NEXT 1430 NEXT 1440 ENDPROC 1450 DEF PROCdoor 1.460 IF A0 THEN GOTO 1480 1470 MOVE W. A: DRAW W, 1000-A 1480 MOVE W. A+B: DRAW WW, A+B: DRAW WW, 10 00-A-B: DRAW W, 1000-A-B 1490 W=1000-W: WW=1000-WW 1500 END PROC 1510 DEF PROCwall 1520 MOVE W. A: DRAW WW, A+B: MOVE W, 1000A: DRAW WW. 1000-A-B 1530 W=1000-W:WW=1000-WW 1540 END PROC 1550 DEF PROCpassage 1560 MOVE A+, A+B: DRAW A+B+B. A+B+B 1570 MOVE 1000-A-B, A+B: DRAW 1000-A-B-B .A+B+B 1580 MOVE 1000-A-B, 1000-A-B: DRAW 1000A-B-B, 1000-A-B-B 1590 MOVE A+B, 1000-A-B: DRAW A+B+B, 1000 -A-B-B 1600 END PROC 1610 DEF PROCdeadend 1620 MOVE A+, A+B 1630 GCOL 3.1: DRAW A+B, 1000-A-B 1640 GCOL 0.1: DRAW 1000-A-B, 1000-A-B 1650 GCOL 3.1: DRAW 1000-A-B, A+B 1660 GCOL 0.1: DRAW A+B, A+B 1670 IF DIR=1 AND X-STARTX AND Y-START Y THEN COL.85: PROCS (A+B, A+B, 1000-2*(A+B ). 1000-2*(A+B)) 1020 PRINT 1030 PRINT\" Please wait.\" 1040 MASKX (1)-1 1050 FOR I =2 TO MAX 1060 MASKX (I) =MASKX(I-1)*2 1070 NEXT 1080 X=RND (MAX) 1090 Y=0 1100 STARTX-X 1110 STARTYY 1120 FOR I=1 TO MAX 1130 MAZEX(1,1)=0 1140 MAZEX(2.1)=0 1150 NEXT 1160 RESTORE 1170 FOR K-1 TO NO 1180 READ OB$(K).OW(K).OK(K) 1190 REPEAT:READ Z: UNTIL Z=99 "


"GARGOYLE GAMES SPECTRUM 48K AMSTRAD 464 .95 GARGOYLE GAMES LTD., 74 KING STREET, DUDLEY, WEST MIDLANDS DY2 8QB Telephone: (Sales) 0384 238777 (General) 0384 237222 "


"RUN FOR YOUR LIFE WITH JATI ASOR FOR Deep in the steamy Amazon jungle danger lurks amongst the swamps and creepers. Armed only with a blowpipe and a limited number of poisoned darts, your journey takes you through some of the last unexplored areas of Rainforest. Look out for treacherous headhunters and scorpions, while above you deadly tree snakes wait to strike at easy prey. Try and outrun them, but you'll have to stop, load and shoot eventually! Your adventures take you through dank. eerie caves echoing with the sound of bloodsucking, vampire bats. Wierd wraithes chase you out to face the climax of the game around a ruined temple. Dodging the crumbling masonry you must combat giant spiders waiting to entwine you in their deadly webs. But are you accurate enough with your blowpipe to face the final conflict? There are 4 levels of difficulty spread over 3 incredibly detailed 3D scrolling landscapes and should you be caught out, the end you face is definitely not for the faint hearted. Realistic sound adds to the thrill of the chase-make sure the screams aren't yours if you are dragged away by the awesome Quetzalcoatus. Load up, and be ready to shoot! Commodore 64. Price .95 Hot Line Mail Order Service 0225-316924 VISA News Generation Software (GSH) New Generation products are sold according to their terms of trade and conditions of sale. FREEPOST, Bath BA2 4TD. "


"VEDAS DE FOOTTO PRESENTS FIUE ASIDE GAME SELECTIONS : FERALTY RIERS DIFICULTY LEVEL: PLAYERS PLAYER IS THE GOALE Penalty shoot out feature Fast moving characters leave competition standing. Ideal family entertainment. Voice Master generated speech. Exciting simulation for one or two players. Amazingly realistic animation. Speed and skill the essence of the game. Ingenious method of settling arguments. Demanding challenge at all three skill levels. Enormous fun from start to finish. CBM 54 64. Cassette  5.95 64 Disk E8.95 AMIROG TRADE ENQUIRIES: ANIROG SOFTWARE LTD UNIT 10 VICTORIA INDUSTRIAL PARK VICTORIA ROAD DARTFORD KENT (0322) 92513/8 Mail Order: 8 HIGH STREET HORLEY SURREY 24 HOUR CREDIT SALES HORLEY 02934 6083 Payment by: P.O. ACCESS VISA "


"LJUMP JUMP JET AVAILABLE FOR DISK CASSETTE BBC MODEL B/ELECTRON E11.95 .95 AMSTRAD .95 .95 CBM 64 .95 .95 VIC 20 16K .95 C16 .95 Written by Vaughan Dow Jump Jet Pilot Every pilot has the dream of flying one of these unique and complex fighting machines. Here is your chance to do what few pilots have the privilege to try. Depending on your skill, confidence and courage, you have the choice of remaining near the landing pad, learning to hover and land, or venturing higher to practise your approaches. When you think you have mastered these, then accelerate the Jump Jet into an attack fighter. Use the radar and range finder to seek and destroy the enemy, by launching heat-seeking air-to-air missiles. Beware! His radar and missile systems are as good as yours. Reckless pursuit is ill-advised: you must maintain a fuel level that will enable you to relocate and return to the aircraft carrier, executing the skills you have learned to achieve a successful landing. You are now ready to proceed to the next skill level to face additional hazards, such as unpredictable swell and treacherous cross-winds. Be warned, this program is not a toy or game. You will need to co-ordinate your hands, eyes and mind to successfully complete each mission. Do not hope to achieve in a short time that which took the author three years to learn as a Jump Jet pilot, and over a year to record on this computer program. ANIROG TRADE ENQUIRIES: ANIROG SOFTWARE LTD UNIT 10 VICTORIA INDUSTRIAL PARK VICTORIA ROAD DARTFORD KENT (0322) 92513/8 Mail Order: 8 HIGH STREET HORLEY SURREY 24 HOUR CREDIT SALES HORLEY 02934 6083 Payment by: P.O. ACCESS VISA "


"TABYRINTH 2100 SOUND 1.-15. 117.6: SOUND 1.-15.129 .6: SOUND 1.-15.117.6: SOUND 1.-15, 101,6 2110 SOUND 1.-15.81,6: SOUND 1.-15.101. 24 2120 PRINT\" NEW\" 2130 IF MAXTX>0 THEN PRINT \"Min time\": PRINT : MAXTX DIV 60;\".\"; MAXT% MOD 60;\" m in\" 2140 PROCbellow 2150 END PROC 2160 DEF FNnogap (R.S.T) 2170 IF S 1 OR S>MAX THEN =-1 2180 IF T<1 ORT>MAX THEN = -1 2190 IF (MAZEX(RT) AND MASK%(S))=0 TH EN =-1 ELSE =0 2200 DEF FNgap (R, S, T) 2210 IF S 1 OR S>MAX THEN = 0 2220 IF T<1 OR T>MAX THEN = 0 2230 IF (MAZEX(RT) AND MASKX(S)) = 0 TH EN O ELSE =-1 2240 DEF FNstring(R.S.T) 2250 IF S 1 OR S>MAX THEN = 0 2260 IF T<1 OR T>MAX THEN = 0 2270 IF (THX (RT) AND MASK%(S)) =0 THEN =0 ELSE =-1 2280 DEF PROCS (R, S,T,U) 2290 MOVE RS: MOVE R+T.S: PLOT COL.R.S+ 1680 I = 5 1690 END PROC 1700 DEF PROCline (R, S,T,U) MOVERS PLOT 21,T,U 1730 END PROC 1740 DEF PROCdraw 1750 X=PX: Y=PY: A=0: B=100: CLS: CLG 1760 VDU 28.31.31.39.0 1770 MOVE 0,0 1780 FOR I=1 TO 5 1790 W=A: WW=A+B 1800 PROCObjects 1810 IF DIR=1 THEN Y=Y-FNmove (2,X,Y .X+1, Y.X, Y) 1820 IF DIR=2 THEN X=X+FNmove(1, X, Y .X, Y+1, X+1, Y) 1830 IF DIR=3 THEN Y=Y+FNmove (2.X+1 .Y.X, YX, Y+1) 1840 IF DIR=4 THEN X=X-FNmove(1, X, Y +1,X,YX,Y) 1850 REM * NEXT 1860 IFMV: PROCpassage: A=A+B+B:B=B/2 1870 NEXT 1880 PRINT ''\"options\": 1890 IF DD=2 THEN PRINT \"You're\": PRINT out!\": PRINT 1900 IF DDO GOTO 2020 '1910 IF MX=PX AND MYEPY THEN PRINT\"F-4 ight\" 1920 IF MX=PX AND MYEPY AND ES=D THEN GOTO 2020 1930 PRINT \"L-left\" PRINT \"R-right\" 1950 PRINT \"T-turn\": PRINT\" round\" 1960 IF X<>PX OR Y<>PY THEN PRINT \"M-m ove\": PRINT\" forward\": 1970 IF PKO AND DR-O THEN PRINT \"P-pi ckup\": : PRINT\" \": OB$ (PK) 1980 IF DR>O AND PK=0 THEN PRINT \"D-dr op\": PRINT\" \": OB$ (DR) 1990 IF PKO AND DR>O THEN PRINT \"S-SW ap\": PRINT\" \";OB$ (PK): PRINT\" and\": PRI NT \" \": OB$ (DR) 2000 IF UNWIND<>1 THEN PRINT \"U-unwind \": PRINT\" thread\" 2010 IF UNWIND-1 THEN PRINT \"W-wind\":P RINT\" thread\" 2020 PRINT \"\"B-begin\"'\" egain\" 2030 PRINT \"Q-quit\" 2040 PRINT \"N-new\"!\" maze\" 2050 ZX-(TIME-TIM)/100 2060 PRINT'\"Time\"!:2% DIV 60:\".\":2% MO D 60:\" min\". 2070 IF DD<>2 GOTO 2130 2080 IF MAXTX> AND MAXTX<ZX GOTO 2130 2090 MAXT%=2X 2300 MOVE R+T.S+U: PLOT COL, R+T, S 2310 END PROC 2320 DEF PROCObjects 2330 IF I=1 THEN PK-O 2340 CEB/5 2350 IF MX=X AND MY EY THEN PROCmin: GOT O 2500 2360 IF DX=X AND DY=Y THEN PROCdeadmi n: GOTO 2500 2370 K=1 2380 IF K>NO GOTO 2490 2390 IF OBJX(K) =X AND OBJY(K) =Y GOTO 2420 2400 K=K+1 2410 GOTO 2380 2420 IF I=1 THEN PK=K 2430 RESTORE (10+10*K) 2440 READ Z$: READ Z: READ Z 2450 READ 21:IF 21-99 THEN GOTO 2490 2460 READ 22:READ Z3 2470 PLOT 21.500+22*C, A+Z3*C 2480 GOTO 2450 2490 REM * 2500 ENDPROC 2510 DEF PROCEight 2520 VDU 26: CLS: CLG: PRINT' 2530 IF DR = 0 THEN PRINT \"You have now eapon and no chance!\": GOTO 2790 2540 PRINT \"You have a \": OB$ (DR)' "


"ABYRINTH 2550 PRINT \"There will be a number fro m 1-9\" 2560 PRINT \"on the Minotaur's forehead . Il you\" 2570 PRINT \"hit it quick enough, you'l 1 kill\" 2580 PRINT\"the monster.\" 2590 PRINT: PRINT \"Hit return.\" 2600 Z$=GET$: CLS: VDU 19.1.0:0;: C=20 2610 PROCmin 2620 ZERND (9): RANDOM$=STR$(2) VDU 31, 15, 15 2640 PRINT RANDOM 2650 T-TIME-RND (200) 2660 REPEAT: UNTIL TETIME 2670 PROCbellow 2680 VDU 19.1, 7:0:31,0,25 2690 T=TIME: 21$ GET$: T1-TIME 2700 IF RANDOM$<>21$ THEN PRINT \"Wrong key\": PRINT: GOTO 2790 2710 IF Ti<T+OK (DR)*10*10/FIGHT THEN G OTO 2830 2720 IF T1<T+OW (DR)*10*10/FIGHT THEN G OTO 2740 2730 PRINT \"Too slow\": GOTO 2790 2740 REM * ESCAPE 2750 PRINT \"You have wounded the beas t and have the chance to escape\" 2760 IF DR<6 THEN PRINT \"but you have lost the \": OB$ (DR): DR=0 2770 ES=1 2780 GOTO 2880 2790 REM * DEAD 2800 PRINT \"Bad luck you're dead!\" 2810 DD=1 2820 GOTO 2880 2830 REM * KILL 2840 SOUND 1.-15.85.12: SOUND 1.-15.10 5.12: SOUND 1.-15.133.24 2850 PRINT \"Well done you've killed the Minotaur.\" 2860 PRINT \"Now you've got to find yo ur way out\" 2870 DX=MX: DY-MY: MX=0: MY=0 2880 REM * 2890 PRINT \"Hit return\" 2900 Z=GET 2910 END PROC 2920 DEF PROCbellow 2930 IF MX=0 THEN GOTO 2980 2940 2=ABS (MX-PX) + ABS (MY-PY) 2950 IF 2>4 THEN GOTO 2980 2960 Z=-3* (5-2) 2970 SOUND 1.2.0.30 2980 END PROC 2990 DEF PROCmovemin 3000 IF SPEED<2 OR MX=0 THEN GOTO 3070 3010 Z-RND (SPEED) 3020 IF 2-1 THEN GOTO 3070 3030 IF (MY<PY) AND FNgap (1, MX, MY+1) T HEN MY=MY+1: GOTO 3070 3040 IF (MY>PY) AND FNgap (1,MX, MY) THE N MY=MY-1: GOTO 3070 3050 IF (MX<PX) AND FNgap(2.MX+1, MY) T HEN MX=MX+1: GOTO 3070 3060 IF (MX>PX) AND FNgap (2,MX, MY) THE N MX=MX-1: GOTO 3070 3070 ENDPROC 3080 DEF PROCmin 3090 VDU 29.500: 500; 3100 MOVE-C, -4*C: DRAW C.-4*C: DRAW c.2*C 3110 MOVEC.0: PLOT 85.3*C, O 3120 DRAW 3*C, 2*C: MOVE 9*C.4*C: PLOT 85 . 3*C, 4*C 3130 DRAW-3*C, 4*C: MOVE-9*C, 4*C: PLOT 85.-3*C, 2*C 3140 DRAW -3*C.O: MOVE -CO: PLOT 85.-C. -2*C 3150 DRAW -C, -4*C 3160 VDU 29,0:0: 3170 ENDPROC 3180 DEF PROCdeadmin 3190 VDU 29.500: A+B: 3200 MOVE C, 6*C: MOVE 3*C, 4*C: PLOT 85.C .4*C 3210 MOVE 3*0,2*C: MOVE 9*C.0: PLOT 85.3 *C,0 3220 MOVE -3*C, O:MOVE -9*C.0: PLOT 85.3*c. 2*C 3230 MOVE -3*C, 4*C: MOVE -C, 6*C: PLOT 85 .-C. 4*c 3240 COL-85 3250 PROCs (-C, 4*C, 2*C, 4*C) 3260 PROCS (-3*C,0, 6*C, 4*C) 3270 VDU 29.0; 0; 3280 ENDPROC 3290 DEFFNmove(a,b,c,d,e, P.s) 3300 IF FNnogap(a,b,c) THEN PROCwall ELSE PROCdoor 3310 IF FNstring(a,b,c) THEN PROCline (500, A+B/2, A, A+B/2) 3320 IF FNnogapa,d,e) THEN PROCwall ELSE PROCdoor 3330 IF FNstring(a,d,e) THEN PROCline (500, A+B/2, 1000-A, A+B/2) 3340 IF FNnogap (3-a, p.) THEN PROCdea dend: MV=0: = 0 3350 IF FNstring(3-&, f.g) THEN PROC11 ne (500, A+B/2.500, A+2.25*B) 3360 MV=1:1 3370 REM * ERROR REPORT & TIDY UP 3380 MODE 7: PRINTTAB(0, 10) :: REPORT 3390 PRINT:\" at Line\"; ERL 3400 END "


"DO YOU FIND CHOOSING SOFTWARE HARD? At the VIRGIN GAMES CENTRES, we've worked long and hard to put together the UK'S BIGGEST RANGE of COMPUTER SOFTWARE GAMES. We've got an unrivalled selection of... Arcade Games, Adventure Games, War Games, Classic Games, Family Games, Sports Games, Business and Educational Software. For Spectrum, QL, Atari, BBC, Electron, Commodore 64, Commodore C16, Enterprise, MSX and Amstrad machines. Plus a large stock of utilities, peripherals, chess computers, books and magazines -and a range of Sinclair Commodore and Amstrad hardware. And if you find choosing software hard, we have a team of knowledgeable staff to help you. GAMES CENTRE 172 Union Street, Aberdeen . 94/96 Briggate, Leeds. 22 Oxford Street, London W1 MILES BETTER SOFTWARE 221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffs WA11 2DD Tel: 05435 3577 * SUMMER SALE * HIRE SPECTRUM SOFTWARE Title & Machine F15 Strike Eagle (64).......95 .95 Beach-head (AT)................NIA (10.95 Indiana Jones (64)...........95 N/A Beach-head (64) ..... [7.95 [10.95 Tapper 164).......... ...[7.95 .95 Beach head (2x) .95 N/A Tapper (Z).. [6.95 NIA Beach-head(AMS)............95 N/A Congo Bongo (64)...... [7.95 10.95 Conan (AT)..........................N/A .95 Spy Hunter (64)..............95 .95 Conan (64).......................N/A .95 Spy Hunter (ZX)..............95 N/A Pole Position (AT).... ..95 .95 Quasimodo (64).. ...7.95 N/A Pole Position 164)............95 .95 Quasimodo (AT)...... [7.95 N/A Mr Do (AT). .95 NIA Grogs Revenge (64).........95 N/A Mr Do (64) ....95 N/A Bounty Bob (64) ....95 N/A Dig Dug (AT)............. .95 N/A Blue Max (AT) [2.95 N/A Dig Dug (64).... .95 N/A Blue Max (64) [7.95 N/A ...........17.95 NIA Blue Max (ZXI.... .. ..[6.95 N/A Pacman (64)..................95 N/A Zaxxon (64)....................95 .95 Dropzone (64)... ... ..95 NIA Zaxxon (AT)...... [10.95 .95 Dropzone (AT)..................95 [10.95 Zaxxon (ZX).... [6.95 N/A Raid over Moscow (64)... .95 .95 Sentimal (64)...................95 [7.95 NIA Raid Over Moscow (ZX). [6.95 NIA Fort Apoc. 164)...........95 .95 Super Huey 164)..............95 .95 Fort Apoc. (AT).............95 N/A Bruce Lee (AT)... .10.95 .95 Combat Leader (64)..... 10.95 .95 Bruce Lee (64)............... 7.95 C10.95 Combat Leader (64)......E10.95 .95 Bruce Lee (ZX)............[6.95 N/A Dambusters 64)................ 7.95 .95 Dallas Quest (64)................NIA C10.95 Miner 2049er (AT) ROM.....N/A .95 Dallas Quest (AT)............N/A .95 Ultimata III 164)...............NIA .95 Solo Flight (AT).............. 69.95 .95 Buck Rogers (ZX)...........16.95 N/A Solo flight 1641..............95 10.95 Dough Boy (64)................95 NIA F15 Strike Eagle (AT......95 .95 Monster Trivia (64)........27.95 N/A COMING SOON Bounty Bob (Atari), Gross Revenge (Atari), Mission Asteroid (64). Wizard and the Princess (64), Beach-head II (64), Karateka (64). Access/Visa welcome. Please telephone for software availability and software lists for 64, Atari and Spectrum. Add .00 for overseas orders.  OVER 500 different titles available for hire including ARCADE, ADVENTURE, BUSINESS, EDUCATIONAL etc.  OVER 10,000 tapes in stock. All publisher's originals * LOWEST HIRE CHARGES hire up to 3 tapes at a time, from only 63p (plus P&P and VAT) for 2 weeks hire. * FREE printed CATALOGUE * FREE newsletter with hints, tips, reviews, etc * TAPES for sale at DISCOUNT prices. (eg MANIC MINER 12.00).  FAST, FAST SERVICE. All tapes sent by 1st class postage * HALF-PRICE OFFER LIFE membership ONLY .00 (normally .00).  FREE first hire tape. (For limited period). * EUROPEAN MEMBERS WELCOME (Payment in Sterling), Have you ever been disappointed with software you've purchased? Now you can hire it first. If you like it, buy it at .00 off our already discounted prices. If you don't, send it back and it will only cost you the hire fee. NSL is the best SPECTRUM library, with over 8,000 delighted members, the largest range of tapes and controlled by our computer with 22 mb hard disc JUIN TODAY, or, if you don't believe our claims write or phone 01-661 9240 for a catalogue, and check our competitors. We're confident you'll join NSL NATIONAL SOFTWARE LIBRARY 42 Harefield Avenue, Cheam, Surrey SM2 7NE, I enclose .00 for LIFE MEMBERSHIP. Please rush my membership kit to me. If, within 28 days, I'm not delighted with your service you'll refund my membership fee. Name Address CVG80 59 "


"Robots are all the rage right an incredibly trendy transeach to give away, thanks now. And here's your formable robot from to our friends at CGL. They chance to get your hands on Henshin. are big colourful creations, Henshin Robos are based just the thing to impress you on a successful Japanese TV mates with. series soon to be seen on And all you have to do is the small screen in this spot the differences country. The robots are the between our two Henshin baddies operated by Robo illustrations below, tell some mysterious bunch of us how many you can find aliens out to take over the fill in the coupon and rush it world. to Computer & Video We've got 12 Henshin Games, Robo Competition, Robos worth over  Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date for entries is August 16th and regular C&VG competition rules apply. Get your entry in NOW! ROBOTS COMPETITION --C&VG/CGL HENSHIN ROBO COMPETITION Name... | Address.... I found.................. differences. CAULDRON one to reach the offices was from Stuart Cook and F Munroe, from There was only one prize in the Aberdeen, who will be receiving the Cauldron competition and that was Golden Broomstick from Palace Softgoing to the first person to complete ware. Only one problem boys how the game and draw a map. The first can you both use it at the same time? DALEY THOMPSON THE HOBBIT COMPETITION 59 copies of Melbourne House's The Hobbit 150 winners each receive a copy of Daley Iwere up for grabs in the competition we held Thompson's Decathlon for the Amstrad. David lin our May issue. Here are the winners:Thompson, South Yorkshire; Peter O'Leary. Chris Little, Lancaster, Andrew Burlow, BREAK FEVER Co Cork, Kenneth Huthison, Strathclyde:Il Gloucester: Mette Bratlann, Denmark; T Mark Ratcliff, Canterbury: Bradley Clutton.l|Coxon, W Sussex: Ian Smith, Liverpool: MJ Seems we set you break dancers a problem Ilford: Jonathon Graham, Bucks; Peter Jess, is when we announced our Break Fever Co Down: Philip Routledge, Sunderland: Lars Hart, Birmingham; Mark Downer, Oxon; Jon Sendel, Sheffield; Stephen Brook, Preston; competition if we were to try out some christensen, Denmark: Mr SD Truscott. I ISteve Marshall, Cheshire: Richard Obadiah of the moves you made up I would be sitting here typing this with one foot and an Pontypool: Simon Cole, Devon; Kenneth London; Michael Flynn, Co Dublin, Jorgen elbow Macaskill, Alloa: Jason Hunter, Pontefract: Kirksaether, Norway, Stephen Minnikin. But, Niall Maguire came to the rescue and Chris Whitney Gloucester, Mark Potter. Tyne & Wear, Michael Look, Sussex, Nathan managed to undo the tangle to come up Sutton in Ashfield; Alex Whitford, Hants:||Tose, Sheffield: Matthew Lewis, Merseyside: Trevor Fowell, Stubbington; Abdul Shahid. Sean Poll, Norfolk; Simon Niven, Bilbrook: S with the winning entry. The 25 runners up Enfield; Iain McGilvray, Inverness; Philipl | Cooper, Avon; Henderson Neill, Luxembourg: each win a copy of the game:M Crowder, Herts; Paul Turnbull, WashingJOrion, Alvechurch; Adam Faiers, Leighton Simon Rowe. Gwyneed; Brian McGee, ton; Daniel Jeffreys, London: Paul Lucas, Buzzard; M Trask, Dyfed; Mr N Crowhurst, Wigan; Jason Siddall, Lancs; S Kenyon, Potters Bar: Simon Wolton, Herts; A Farrar, Surrey: A J Carroll, Ashton-u-Lynne: A Cleveland: GS Ranautta. Warks; Simon Luton; Martin Roper, Wigan; Graham Vaughan, Kent; M F Besseling, Holland; Freemantle, Southampton; R Moulton, N Philip Jones, N Devon; Jon Williams. Devon: Graeme Dolderson, Sheffield: B Daly, Peterborough; Nick Birch, Berks; Birkenhead: Peter Evans, Cardiff; Lee Daniel Kardani, Harrow: Pierluigi Cerutti Darbyshire, Cheshire; Neil M Addis, London; Allen Tiplady, Cheshire; Adam Hodgson, Glos; Garry McNamee, London, Edinburgh; Simon Hutchings, Devon; Neil Morgan, Wolverhampton; Russel \\ Galloway, Lincs; Theo Martianos, London: Woodley, South Queensferry, R S Wood, Kent: Mrs M Barnes, London: Charlotte Gill, Bucks ||Alex Sabeti, Geneva; A Nicola, London: Mrs Sansbury, Kirkby: Harald Vonkman, The Helal Ahmed, Middlesex, Mr V Lad, Notts:||D Ward, w Yorks; Martin Fuller, Suffolk; Netherlands, Ian Sen, Derby, Lee Slesser, Inderitt Singh, Herts; John Sanderson, Lancs:David McIlroy. Fife: K Tyne & Wear Robert T Ellison Clennel-White, Che Wall, Kent; Mark Lucas, Birmingham: A Devon, Hugh T Walker, Guildford: R Fletcher. Merseyside; Neil Saunders, Essex: Peter Morrison. N Yorkshire: Mr A Higson. Kent: Derbyshire; Richard Biggs, Lancs; Robert Creed, Dorset; Sikhander Hussain, s Lahdelma, Blackburn; Stephen Wilson, Young. Birmingham; S J Galloway, Lincs; Bradford; R Chesters, S Yorks; Mike Loughborough; Lee Mathews, Berks; Cherryl Mark Gambold, Gwent; Conn MacEvilly, Davies, Dyfed: SG Mitchell, Basingstoke: Nial Essex: Darren Russell, Notts; Les Dublin: Andrew Brittain, London: Russell Andrew Pickford, Staff. Isbister, Beds; P Lucas, W Midlands. Bowden, Oxford: Jed Lawler, London. 60 "


"PUICK 410 TM Shoot to win! Winning is all that matters when playing video games. SVI \"QuickShot' joysticks give you a better grip on games which are getting tougher each day. That's why over 4.5 million have been sold since 1982 SVI \"QuickShot\" is the original, award-winning joystick that offers true one-hand control with features like a hand-contoured controller, thumb/trigger fire button and Suction cups that give the thrill of arcade game play. SVI \"QuickShot\" joysticks are getting better each day. They have more winning features than ever. There are models with auto-fire switch, touch-firing pad, interchangeable controllers and for the latest MSX computers. Go with the winner and see the wide range of SVI \"QuickShot\" joysticks at your nearest dealer. SVI «QuickShot» Joysticks. 4,500,000 Sold Worldwide. \" INNOVATIVE COMPUTING FOR TODAY AND TOMORROW SOLE AGENT: Spectravideo Ltd. 165 Garth Road Morden, Surrey SM4 4LH U.K. Tel.: 01-3300101 Tlx.: 28704 MMHVANG SPECTRAVIDEO MSX is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation "


"DONT BUY THIS! C.O.M.P.E.T.I.T.L.O.N C&VG/FIREBIRD DON'T BUY THIS COMPETITION (Please attach this coupon to your entry) Name. Address... At last! Computer & Video Games presents a competition nobody will want to win. The prizes are copies of Don't Buy This published by Firebird Software, which contains five of the most uninspired games ever to disgrace the 48k Spectrum. These games were not released, they escaped. You have been warned! They are so bad, we think they are good. Don't Buy This is released as part of Firebird's Silver range of budget games, although Firebird's James Leavey says it should be in the \"lead\" range. He says: \"They are a good joke. You've got to have a sense of humour. People take things so seriously. Why can't we send ourselves up?\" He adds: \"We have no plans to My nominations for the five worst games are: convert the games for other machines Commodore and the BBC users should be very grateful.\" We've got 30 copies of Don't Buy This to give away, thanks to Firebird. So how can you win? All you have to do is send your nominations for the worst five games currently on the market. If we agree, a copy of Don't Buy This could be yours. You never know, it! could lead to a follow-up compilation Don't Buy This Again! The closing date is August 16 and the editor's decision is final. 62 "


"We'll take you beyond the Spectrum QUICKSHOT II AUTO RAPID-FIRE JOYSTICK SPECTRUM INTERFACE SPECTRUM UPGRADE KIT TURBO INTERFACE Four great new add-ons from Ram, Number One in everything for the Spectrum... TURBO INTERFACE Outperforms any other Spectrum interface. Supports Kempston, Protek, Interface 2 and ROM cartridge software, with a full expansion bus at the rear. The Turbo works with two standard joysticks, making the most of the Quickshot II's rapid-fire action. Features a unique built-in power safety device. Amazing value at .95. QUICKSHOT II AUTO RAPID-FIRE JOYSTICK The top games joystick with its sleek trigger fire button and an auto-fire switch for continuous shooting -a snip at only .95. SPECTRUM INTERFACE This Kempston-compatible interface adds real games power to your Spectrum. Costs just .95. SPECTRUM UPGRADE KIT Boost your 16K Spectrum to a full 48K, allowing you to run all the latest and greatest software. Only .95 Where can you get your hands on Ram's amazing Spectrum add-ons? You can see them at branches of Boots, Menzies, Greens, Spectrum Group computer centres, and good computer stores everywhere. Ram Electronics (Fleet) Ltd (Dept CVG), 106 Fleet Road, Fleet, Hampshire GU13 8PA. Credit Card hot line: 02514 25252. (Access & Visa). Please send me Spectrum Turbo Interface(s) at .95. Quickshot Il Joystick(s) at .95. Spectrum Interface(s) at .95. Spectrum Upgrade Kit(s) at .95. (Please state issue 2 or 3D) +l per order P+P ( Overseas) TOTAL  Olenclose cheque/postal order charge my Access/Visa ATTTIIIIIIIIITID Expiry Date_ Name Address Postcode Telephone 24 Hour despatch for credit cards and postal orders (7 days for cheques.) All products are fully compatible with the Spectrum, Spectrum + and Sinclair Microdrives. Ram Electronics (Fleet) Ltd (Dept CVG), 106 Fleet Road, Fleet, Hampshire GU13 8PA Trade and Export enquiries welcome. "


"USIK "


"Nice Password. Shame about the Identity. It's a unique combination. | Newsflashes\" and read up on the Your Special Identity Number latest reviews and courses. Feast and Personal Password. The valu from our regularly changing menu of able key to huge databases teeming programs to download straight into with activity, set on our Mainframes your microabsolutely free. across the nation. You also get access to EducaOn Micronet 800, you're a tional Computing's \"School Link\" valued individual, adding your own and Prestel's huge 300,000 page special flavour and personality to database, including world news, the database. business & share bulletins and Take our exciting new \"Gallery\" optional homebanking. For only You control your personal screens .50 per quarter, that's less than for all to see. The intriguing \"Chatline\" the price of a daily paper! public conversation service gives Micronet is unique amongst you freedom to express your views networks and bulletin boards as it and meet some remarkable people. keeps your phone costs very low with All part of a tremendous Communications section that networks you to 50,000 Micronet and Prestel users across the country. Try Teleshopping, or interview celebrities live on \"Celebrity Chatline\" every Wednesday night. And there's FREE (& instant) National Electronic Mail, plus International Telex, and the Contact and SwapShop bulletin boards. Get computer news first on Micronet's daily (and controversial) special local* rate calls whenever you connect up that's around 40p for a whole hours entertainment each evening. The only accessory you need is a Modem, to get the best value for money around in micro communications. Fill in the coupon for the full facts and send to Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR SEJ. But be warned, Micronet 800 is a 'living service with ever-expanding features. So maybe you'd be better to call in at your local Micronet 800 Action Station. There are thousands of Micronetters waiting to meet you! I TO MICRONET 800, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR SEJ. Telephone 01-278 3143. Please send me the full facts about Micronet 800. Micronet 800 Name Make Model of Micro Address Telephone --CVGS  For 9% of telephone users. Prestel is a trademark of British Telecommunications ple On Prestel "


"See Micronet 800 in action! See Micronet at John Lewis, main Boots, Laskys or your local computer store. AVON ESSEX Preston. 4 Mat Computing NOTTINGHAMSHIRE Cardiff. Randall Cox, 18/22 High Bath, Boots, 1 Marchants Passage, Basildon. Basildon Software 67 Friargate tel: 0772 561952. Newark, Jacobs Computers, Street Arcade Tel: 0222 397162. Southgate. Tel: 0225 64402 Centre, 78-80 Liberty Shopping Preston. Laskys, 1-4 Guildhall 13 Middle Gate. Tel 0636 72594. Mold. Clwyd Personal Computers, Bristol Avon Computer Rentals Hall, East Square Tel: 0268 27922. Arcade. Tel: 0772 59264. Nottingham. Telstar, 280 Huntingdon Unit 19, Daniel Owen Precinct 16 West Street, Old Market. Braintree. Mirage Microcomputers Wigan Wildings Computer Centre, Street. Tel: 0602 505585. Tel: 0352 56842 Tel: 0272 550600. Ltd, 24 Bank Street. Tel 0376 48321. 11 Mesnes Street Tel: 0942 22382. 42 22382. Sutton in Ashfield HN & L Fisher, Newport. Gwent Computers, Bristol Boots, 59 Broadmead. Chelmsford. Maxton Hayman, LEICESTERSHIRE 87 Outram Street. TeL: 0623 54734. 92 Chepstow Road. Tet0633841760. Tel: 0272 293631. 5 Bromfield Road Tel: 0245 354595. Leicester. Boots, 30-36 Gallowtree Worksop. Computer Grafix, Swansea. Boots, 17 St Marys Bristol Laskys, 16-20 Penn Street Chelmsford. Way In Computers, Gate. TeL: 0533 21641. 32 Bridge Street. Tel: 0909 472248. Arcade, The Quadrant Shopping Tel 0272 20421. 7 Village Square, Tel: 0245 467858. Market Harborough. Harborough Centre. TeL: 0792 43461. Clevedon. Computer Centre, OXFORDSHIRE Colchester. Boots, 5-6 Lion Walk Home Computers, 7 Church Street. Swansea. The Microstore, 35-36 Abingdon Ivor Fields Computers, 12A Old Street, Clevedon Tel: 0206 577303. Tel: 0858 63056. Singleton Street. Tel: 0792 467980. 21 Stern Street, tel: 0235 21207. Tel 0272 879514. Colchester. Colchester Computer _ LONDON Banbury. Computer Plus WARWICKSHIRE BEDFORDSHIRE Centre, 3a Short Wyre Street W1. Computers of Wigmore 2 Church lane. Tel: 0295 55890. Coventry. Coventry Micro Centre, Bedford. Boots, The Harpur Centre, Tel: 0206 47242 Tel: 0 Street, 104 Wigmore Street. Oxford. Absolute Sound & Video, 33 Far Gosford Street. Harpur Street. Tel: 0234 56231. Grays. H. Reynolds, 28a Southend Tel: 01 486 0373. 19 Old High Street, Headington. Tel 0203 58942. Luton Datasine, Delaport House, Road. Tel: 0375 31641. W1. Laskys, 42 Tottenham Court Tel: 0865 65661 Coventry. Impulse Computer 57 Guildford Street Tel 0582455860.1 Harlow. Harlow Computer Centre Rond. Tel 01-636 0845. Oxford. Science Studio, 7 Little World, 60 Hertford Street Precinct. BERKSHIRE 17 Staple Tye Tel: 0279 22846. W1. Lion House, 227 Tottenham Clarendon Street. Tel: 0865 54022. Tel 0203 553701. Slough. MV Games, 245 High Hornchurch. Comptel Computer Court Road. Tel 01-637 1601 Coventry. JBC Micro Services, 200 SCOTLAND Street. Tel: 75 21594. Systems, 112a North Street W1. Sonic Foto Micro Center, Earlsdon Avenue, North Earlsdon Aberdeen. Boots, 133-141 Union Tel: 0402 446741. BUCKINGHAMSHIRE 256 Tottenham Court Road. Street. TeL: 0224 585349. Tel: 0203 73813. Ilford. Boots, 177-185 High Road. Bletchley. RAMS Computer Tel: 01-580 5826. Coventry. Laskys, Lower Precinct Edinburgh. Boots, 101-103 Princes Tel: 01-553 2116. Centre, 117 Queensway. W1. Tomorrow's World Today, Street. Tel 031-225 8331. Tel: 0203 27712. Romford. Software Plus, Tel: 0908 647744 27 Oxford Street. Tel: 01-439 7799. Glasgow. Boots, 200 Sauchiehall Leamington Spa. IC Computers, 72 North Street. Tel 7065271. Chesham. Reed Photo & W1. Walters Computers, DH Evans Street. Tel: 041-332 1925. 43 Russell Street. TeL: 0926 36244. Computers, 113 High Street Southend-on-Sea. Computerama Oxford Street. Tel: 01-629 8800 Glasgow. Boots, Union Street 88 London Road. Tel: 0702 335443. WC1. Transam Micro Systems Leamington Spa. Leamington Tel: 0494 783373. Southend-on-Sea. Computer and Argyle Street. Tel:041-2487387. Hobby Centre, 121 Regent Street 59-61 Theobalds Road. CAMBRIDGESHIRF Tel: 0926 29211. Centre, 336 London Road Glasgow. Tom Dixon Cameras, Cambridge. Boots, 65-67 Sidney Tel: 01-405 5240. Nuneaton. Micro City, 1a Queens 15-17 Queen Street Tel: 0702 337161 WS. Laskys, 18-19 Ealing Broadway Street and 28 Petty Curry Street. Road. Tel: 0203 382049. Southend-on-Sea. Estuary Tel: 041-204 0826. Rugby.O.EM., 9-11 Regent Street. Shopping Centre. Tel: 01-567 4717. Tel: 0223 350213 Personal Computers, 318 Chartwell W8. Walters Computers, Barkers, SHROPSHIRE Cambridge. Cambridge Computer North, Victoria Circus Shopping Tel 0788 70522 Kensington High Street. Store, 4 Emmanuel Street Shrewsbury. Clairmont WEST MIDLANDS Centre. Tel 0702 614131. Tel: 0223 358264 Tel: 01-937 5432 Enterprises, Hills Lane. Birmingham. Boots, City Centre Peterborough.Logic Sales, Unit 6, Tel: 3647 52949. GLOUCESTER SE7. Vic Oddens Micros, House, 16-17 New Street. Shrewsbury. Computerama, 13 Midgate Parade, Peterborough Cheltegham. Laskys, 206 High 5 London Bridge Walk Tel: 021-643 7582. Tel: 0733 49696 Castlegate. Tel: 0743 60528. Street. TeL: 0242 570282. Tel: 01-403 1988 Birmingham. Laskys, 19-21 Peterborough Boots Telford. Computer Village Ltd Cheltenham. Screen Scene SE9. Square Deal, Corporation Street 40-42 Bridge Street, Queensgate. 2/3 Hazeldine House, Central 144 St Georges Road. 373-375 Footscray Road, Tel: 021-632 6303 Tel 0242 528979. Tel: 0733 65352 Square. TeL: 0952 506771. New Eltham. Tel: 01-859 1516. Gloucester. Boots, 38-46 Eastgate Dudley. Central Computers, Telford. Telford Electronics SE15. Castlehurst Ltd, 152 Rye CHESHIRE Street. Tel: 0452 423501. 35 Churchill Precinct. 38 Mall 4. Tel: 0952 504911. Lane, Peckham. Tel: 01-639 2205. Chester. Boots, 47-55 Foregate Tel: 0384 238169. HAMPSHIRE EC2. Devron Computer Centre, STAFFORDSHIRE Stourbridge. Walters Computer Street. Tel: 0244 28421 Basingstoke. Fishers, 2-3 Market Newcastle-under-Lyme. 155 Moorgate, tel: 01-638 3339. Chester. Computer Link, 21 St Systems. 1% Hagley Road. N14. Logic Sales, 19 The Bourne, Place. Tel 0256 22079 Computer Cabin, 24 The Parade, Werburgh Street Tel: 0244 316516. Tel: 0384 370811. Petersfield. Foly Micros, The Broadway, Southgate. Silverdale. TeL: 0782 636911. Crewe. Midshires Computer Walsall New Horizon, 1 Goodall Tel: 01-882 4942. 45 Chapel Street Tel: 0730 66841. Stafford. Computerama, 59 Centre, 68-78 Nantwich Road Street. Tel 0922 24821. Foregate Street. Tel: 0785 41899. Portsmouth. Micro Choice, N22. Boots, 38-40 High Road, Tel: 0270 211086 West Bromwich. DS Peakman, 159 Havant Road, Drayton. Wood Green. TeL: 01-881 0101. Hyde. C Tech Computers, 184 Stoke-on-Trent. Computerama, 7 Queens Square. Tel 021-525 7910 Tel: 0705 327591. NW3. Maycraft Micros, 11 Market Square Arcade, Hanley. Market Street. Tel: 061-366 8223. YORKSHIRE Tel: 0782 268524. Macclesfield. Camera Computer Portsmouth. RDS Electrical, 157 58 Rosslyn Hill, Hampstead Bradford. Boots, 11 Darley Street Centre, 118 Mill Street. 161 Kingston Road, Tel: 0705 812478. Tel: 01-431 1300. SUFFOLK Tel: 0274 390891. Tel: 0625 27468 Southampton. Business NW4. Davinci Computer Store, Bury St Edmunds. Boots, Leeds. Boots, 19 Albion Arcade, 112 Brent Street, Hendon. Electronics, Micromagic At Atkins, Macclesfield. Computer Centre, 11-13 Cornhill Tel: 0284 701516. Bond Street Centre. 68 Chestergate. Tel 0625 618827. 1 7 Civic Centre Road. Tel: 0703 25903.1 Tel: 01-202 2272. Bury St Edmunds. Suffolk Tel 0532 33551 Waterlooville, GB Microland, NW7. Computers Inc, 86 Golders Computer Centre, 1-3 Garland Marple. Marple Computer Centre Sheffield. Laskys, 58 Leopold 106 Church Lane, Tel 061 447 99331 T 7 Queens Parade, London Road. Green. Tel: 01209 0401. Street. Tel: 0284 705503. Street. Tel 0742 750971. 0705 250911 NW10. Technomatic, 17 Burnley Wilmslow. Wilmslow Micro SURREY York York Computer Centre, Road, Wembley. Tel 01-208 1177. Centre. 62 Grove Street HERTFORD Bagshot. P & H Electronics, 22-247 Stonegate Arcade. Tel: 0625 530890. Potters Bar. the Computer Shop, MANCHESTER Guildford Road. Tel: 0276 73078. Tel: 0904 641862. Bolton. Computer World UK Lid, 107 High Street. Tel 0707 44417. Croydon. Laskys, 77-81 North End CLEVELAND 208 Chorley Old Road. Stevenage. DJ Computers, Darlington, Darlington Computer Tel 01-681 8443. 11 Town Square. Tel: 0438 65501. Tel: 0204 494304. Croydon. The Vision Store, Shop, 75 Boadgate. TeL: 0325 487478. Manchester. Boots, 32 Market Watford. SRS Microsystems, Middlesbrough. Boots, 53-59 High Street. TeL: 01-686 6362. 94 The Parade, High Street Street. Tel 061-832 6533. 88-90 Linthorpe Road, Croydon. The Vision Store, Tel: 0923 26602 Manchester. Laskys, 12-14 St. 96-98 North End Tel: 01-681 7539. The Cleveland Centre Welwyn Garden City. DJ Marys Gate. Tel: 061-833 0268. Tel: 0642 249616 South Croydon. Concise Computers, 40 Fretherne Road. Manchester. Mighty Micro, Computer Consultants, 1 Carlton CUMBRIA Tel: 0707 32844 Sherwood Centre, 268 Wilmslow Road Tel: 01-681 6842 Kendal. The Kendal Computer HUMBERSIDE Road, Fallowfield. Tel: 061-2248117. Epsom. The Micro Workshop Centre, Stramongate. Manchester. NSC Computer Beverley. Computing World, Tel 0539 22559. 12 Station Approach 10 Swabys Yard Dyer Lane. Shops, 29 Hanging Ditch. Tel: 0372 72133. Penrith. Penrith Communications Tel: 0482 881831. Tel: 061-832 2269. Guildford. Walters Computers 14 Castlegate. Tel 0768 67146. Manchester. Walters Computers Whitehaven. P D Hendren, Army & Navy, 105-111 High Street. KENT Ashford. DGH, 10 North Street. Kendal Milne, Deansgate. Tel 0483 68171. 15 King Street Tel: 0946 2063. Tel: 061-832 3414. Wallington. Surrey Micro Systems, Workington. Technology Store, Tel: 0233 32597. Oldham. Home & Business 53 Woodcote Road. TeL: 01-6475636. Ashford. Geering of Ashford, 12 Finkle Street Tel: 0900 66972. Computers, 54 Yorkshire Street. Woking. Harpers, 71-73 80 High Street. Tel: 0233 33366. DERBYSHIRE Tel: 061-633 1608 Commercial Way. TeL0486 225657. Bromley. Boots, 148-154 High Alfreton. Gordon Harwood, Swinton. Mr Micro, 69 Partington Street. Tel: 01-460 6688. SUSSEX 67-71 High Street Tel: 0733 832078. Lane. Tel: 061-728 2282. Bromley. Computers Today. Bexhill-on-Sea. Computerware Chesterfield. Boots, 35-37 Low MERSEYSIDE Pavement, Market Place. 31 Market Square 22'St. Leonards Road Heswall Thornguard Computer Chatham. Boots, 30-34 Wilmott Tel: 0246 203591. Tel 0424 223340 Square, Pentagon Centre. Systems, 46 Pensby Road Chesterfield. Computer Stores, Brighton. Boots, 129 North Street. Tel: 0634 405471. Tel: 051-342 7516 Tel 0273 27088 14 Stephenson Place. Gravesend. Gravesend Home Liverpool. Hargreaves, 31-37 Brighton. Gamer, 71 East Street. Tel: 0246 208802 Warbreck Moor, Walton. Computers, 39 The Terrace. Tel 0273 728681. Derby. Boots, 1 Devonshire Tel: 0474 23871. Tel: 051-525 1782. Brighton. Laskys, 151-152 Westem Walk Tel: 0332 45886. Gillingham. Regal Software St. Helens. Microman Computers Road. Tel: 0273 725625. DEVON Supplies, 49 High Street Rainford Industrial Estate Mill Crawley. Gatwick Computers, Tel: 0634 579634. Lane Rainford. Tel: 0744 885242. 62 The Boulevard Tel: 0293 37842 Exeter. Boots, 251 High Street, Maidstone. Boots, 56-62 King Southport Central Studios, Crawley. Laskys, 6-8 Queensway, Tel: 0392 32244 Street. Tel: 0622 53912. 38 Eastbank Street. Tel: 0704 31881. Tel: 0293 544622. Exeter. Open Channel, Maidstone. Kent Micros, 51 Union MIDDLESEX Eastbourne. Boots, 15 Eastbourne Central Station, Queen Street Street. Tel: 0622 52784. Enfield. Laskys, 44-48 Palace Arndale Centre. TeL: 03232 7742. Tel 0392 218187. Rainham. Microway Computers, Garden Shopping Centre. TYNE & WEAR Paignton. Computer Systems Ltd, 39 High Street. Tel: 0634 376702. Tel: 01-363 6677. Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Boots, 35 Hyde Road. Tel: 0803 524284. Sevenoaks. Emest Fielder Harrow. Harrow Micro, 24 Eldon Square. Tel: 0632 329844. Plymouth. Syntax, 76 Cornwall Computers Dorset Street. Springfield Road. Tel: 01-427 0098. Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Laskys Street Tel: 0752 28705. Tel: 0732 456800. Hounslow. Boots, 193-199 High 6 Northumberland Street Seaton. Curtis Computer Services, Shortlands. The Village House Street. Tel: 01-570 0156. Tel: 0632 617224. Seaton Computer Shop of Computers, 87 Beckenham Lane Southall. Twillstar Computers Ltd, Newcastle-upon-Tyne. 51c Harbour Road Tel: 0297 22347. Tel: 01.460 7122 7 Regina Road Tel: 01-574 5271. RE Computing, 12 Jesmond Road. Tiverton. Actron Microcomputers, Sittingbourne Computer Sittingbourne. Computer Plus, Teddington. Andrews, Broad Tel 0632 815580. 37 Bampton Street. Tel: 0884 252854. 65 High Street. Tel: 0795 25677. Street. Tel: 01-997 4716. DORSET Tunbridge Wells. Modata Twickenham. Twickenham WALES Bournemouth. Lansdowne Computer Centre, 28-30 St. Johns Computer Centre, 72 Heath Road. Aberdare. Inkey Computer Computer Centre, 1 Lansdowne Road. Tel: 0892 41555. Tel 01-892 786 Services, 70 Mill Street, The Square, Crescent, Lansdowne. LANCASHIRE Uxbridge. JKL Computers Trecynon. TeL: 0685 881828. Tel: 0202 290165. Blackpool Blackpool Computers 7 Windsor Street. Tel: 0895 51815. Aberystwyth. Aberdata at Dorchester. The Paper Shop Store, 179 Church Street. NORFOLK Galloways 23 Pier Street Kings Road. Tel 030564564. Tel 0253 20239. Norwich. Adams 125-129 King Tel: 0970 615522 Poole. Lansdowne Computer Burnley. IMO Business Systems, Street. Tel: 0603 22129. Cardift. Boots, 26 Queens Street Centre, 14 Amdale Centre 39-43 Standish Street Thetford. Thetford CB & Micros, & 105 Frederick Street, Tel: 0202 670901. Tel: 0942 44382 21 Guildhall Street. Tel: 0842 61645. Tel: 0222 31291. Phone 01-278 3143 for your free information pack now! Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1 Micronet 800 "


"momenomaan ang romantizmomm APPLE CRAZY! RUNS ON A SPECTRUM BY MAX MILLS Cor! The Farmer's Boy needs quick reflexes to catch all the falling apples in his basket. If more apples are caught than dropped, you move up to the next level. But, as the apples then have less distance to fall, you will need quicker reflexes. Programmer Max Mills includes one tip. Although the apples fall randomly, towards the end of each level they are more likely to fall from the left. The Farmer's Boy can be controlled with a Kempston joystick or the q and w keys. You'll see right a table of all the user-defined graphic characters used in the program. Instead of confusing the listing by leaving them in, we've changed them to underlined upper-case letters. So, for instance, if you see 'A' in the listing, go into graphics mode (CAPSE SHIFT+9) then press the 'A' key (you'll see a graphic character), then press CAPS SHIFT+9 again to return to normal text. Lines 5 and 7 use symbol graphics (the ones on the number keys). When in graphics mode, type the underlined number. If the digit is preceded by sh, then hold G down a \"shift\" key while pressing the number, to give the reversed graphic. 1 woord w    con siste Illustration: Terry Rogers allika Attre en ANNA. saler the la AVE "


"sh 2 BORDER O: PAPER O: INK 4:0 LS 5 PRINT AT 4.7:\"shshshs sh3 sh8sh 8 sh8sh8sh8 sh 8 9h8sheshe sh8 as she sh8 sh8 sh8 sh sh shoshg sh8shshs shshshsan sh8sh 8 sh8 sh sh sh8 sh8 sh8 sh8 sh8 sh8 sh8 shshshs h8sh8sh8\" 7 PRINT AT 10, 7:\"shdshesh 8 sh 8 sh8sh8 sh8shosh85 shesh8sh5sh s h8 sh8 sh 8 sh 8 sh8 sh8 sh8 5 sh8 sh 8 sh8 shesh8sh8 shesh8sh8 sh5 s h8sh sh8 sh8 sh 8 sh 8 5shsh8 sh8 sh 8 sh8sh8sh 8 sh8 585 sh 8 sh sh 8sh&sh8 55h5\" 10: BEEP.2.7: BEEP.2.4: BEEP .4.0: BEEP.4,0: BEEP.2.0: BEE P.2.2: BEEP.2.4: BEEP.2.5: BE EP.4.7: BEEP.4.7: BEEP.4.7: B EEP .4.4: BEEP.6,9: BEEP.2.7: BEEP .6.9: BEEP.2.7: BEEP .6.9: BEEP .2.7: BEEP .2.9: BEEP.2,1 1: BEEP.2, 12: BEEP.2, 14: BEEP 1,16 20 BEEP.2, 12: BEEP.2.7: BEEP 1,12: BEEP .2.7: BEEP .2.4: BEE P1.7: BEEP.2.2: BEEP.2,4: BEE P .2,0 50 RESTORE 60: FOR P=USR \"a\" T O USR \"g\"+7: READ g: POKE fig: N EXT 60 DATA 36.24, 60, 126.255.126.6 0,24,255255255,255,255255, 127 . 7.255.255.255.255.255.255.254,2 24, 195, BIN 11000101,195. BIN 1110 0011, 127.63.15.15.195.163.195.19 9.254, 252, 240, 240, 15, 15. 15.28. 24 . 56, 48, 48, 240, 240, 240.56, 24, 28.1 2.12 100 REM intro 110 LET po=3: LET str=1 120 INK 7: PAPER O: BORDER O: C LS 130 IF str=1 THEN LET Z$=\" APPLE CRAZY 140 IF str=2 THEN LET PO=1: LE Tz$=\" by 150 IF str=3 THEN LET PO=5: LE T2 $=\" Max Mills (w) 160 IF str=4 THEN LET po=8: LE Tz$=\" Catch the apples as they fall \" 170 IF str 5 THEN LET po=9: LE Tz$=\" Use and w to move your man \" 180 IF str=6 THEN LET po=10: L ET 2$=\" Press k por Kempston joy stick\" 190 IF str=7 THEN LET po=11: L ET 2$=\" Press S for keyboard... 111111 200 FOR f = 1 TO 30: BEEP .001, P: PRINT AT po 30-4:2$ TO f): NEX Tf 210 LET str=str+1: IF str=8 THE N LET K=O: GO TO 230 220 GO TO 130 255 IF INKEY $=\"K\" THEN LET k=1 : GO TO 270 257 IF INKEY$=\"s\" THEN LET k=0 : GO TO 270 260 GO TO 255 270 REM setup 275 CLS 280 LET ca=0: LET dr=0: LET li ne= 7 290 PRINT AT 0,2; \"APPLES CAUGHT \": ca:\" MISSED \";dr 300 PLOT 0,165: INK 6: DRAW 255 ,0: PLOT 0, 166: DRAW 255.0 310 PRINT AT 2,0; OVER 1; INK 2 stugal 19 willen 68 "


"Herbert's Dumyadon Trouble In Store for Herbert MIKRO-GEN HOUSE C Spectrum 48K .95 Commodore 64 .95 Amstrad CPC 464 .95 erded SEAR 44 The Broadway, Bracknell, Berks. 0344 427317 JOYSTICKS AWARDS "


"EXPERIENCE ONE TO ONE AIR COMBAT WITH MAJOR BILL STEALEY UNIQUE TWO PLAYER COMBAT-5 SIMULATED KOREAN WAR AIR BATTLES MIG ALLEY --ACE e commodore 64 GOLD ATARI CSS OTHER TITLES AVAILABLE FROM OTHER TITLES. Microprose LR LIGHT COMMANDED CASSETTE .95 DISK .95 U.S. Gold Ltd., Unit 10. The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. Telex: 337268. "


") GOT THE TANICE, BUT HERE COME THE ENEMY SKYTHE MOST AWE-INSPIRING COMBAT SIMULATION YOU VE EVER SEEN ON YOUR COMPUTER. THE SKYFOX MAY BE UNTESTED, SKY-PILOT-BUT SHE'S BEEN BUILT FOR BATTLE! ENEMY PLANES ATTACK SUDDENLY WITH DEADLY FORCE OUT YOUR COCKPIT WINDOW AS YOU SWOOP DOWN TO TAKE OUT SOME TANKS Vw FEATURING... 3D SCROLLING FLIGHT SIMULATION .. AIR TO AIR AND AIR TO GROUND COMBAT... 15 SCENARIOS (FROM TRAINING MISSION TO MASSIVE INVASION)... 5 SKILL LEVELS (FROM CADET TO ACE OF THE BASE) ...JUST RELEASED IN THE U.S. NOW AVAILABLE HERE ON DISK FOR COMMODORE 64/128 APPLE II, II +, lic & Ile COMING SOON SKYFOX ON COMMODORE CASSETTE AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE DEALERS IF IT'S NOT THERE. PLEASE ORDER IT-OR IN CASE OF DIFFICULTY SEND YOUR CROSSED CHEQUE/P.O. MADE OUT TO ARIOLASOFT U.K. LTD. INCLUDING YOUR OWN NAME AND ADDRESS, TO ARIOLASOFT U.K. LTD., SUITE 105/106 ASPHALTE HOUSE, PALACE STREET, LONDON SWIE 5HS CBM 64/128 DISK... .95 Ola APPLE DISK... .95... INCLUDES VAT & PEPU.K ORDERS ONLY. HIGH PERFORMANCE PROGRAMS Explore the world of Sinclair Sinclair User, the monthly magazine, will ensure that all ZX81, Spectrum and QL users get the most from their computers. Every month we include exciting games programs, reviews on the latest software, bench tests on hardware and peripherals, as well as technical advice and development news on Sinclair products. Sinclair User interviews key people within Sinclair Research, authors of top selling games plus regular features on the developments in the fast moving computer industry. We cover all aspects of Sinclair, for beginners to enthusiasts right through to business users — Sinclair User will keep you informed. So, don't miss out place an order with your newsagent or complete and return the coupon below and we will ensure that your personal monthly issue is sent to you direct. Name Address Presente EMAP B Signed Date Chota contact Subscriptions Department Please send me SINCLAIR USER each month for the next twelve months. I enclose a cheque PO to the value of  (UK rate incuding p&pl. For overseas tate please SC Sa User "


"In the software industry the whisper is ATARI... AT U.S. GOLD WE ARE SHOUTING ATARI! Cassette Disk Blue Max .95 .95 Drelbs .95 $14.95 Bounty Bob Strikes Back .95 $14.95 It's time the whispering stopped. The word on the street says the next twelve months will see Atari really take off. To reach these new found heights in computer gaming all you have to do is zoom down to your nearest computer store. You'll discover under the U.S. Gold Label possibly the widest range of software available for your Atari, at prices that won't bring you back to earth with a bump. And we think that's something worth shouting about! Cassette Disk Ghost Chaser .95 .95 Ollies Follies .95 .95 Beer Belly Bert's Brew-Biz 2 .95 .95 w Strip Poker .95 .95 Aztec Challenge .95 Beach-Head .95 Caverns of Khafka .95 Bruce Lee .95 .95 Forbidden Forest .95 The Dallas Quest .95 Slinky .95 Pole Position .95 .95 O'Riley's Mine .95 Dropzone .95 .95 Snokie .95 Zaxxon .95 Battle for Normandy .95 .95 Conan .95 .95 Combat Leader .95 .95 Mt. Do! .95 .95 Tigers in the Snow  14.95 .95 Pac-Man .95 .95 Knights of the Desert .95 .95 Dig Dug .95 .95 Dambusters .95 .95 Quasimodo .95 .95 U.S. NATO Commander .95 .95 Spitfire Ace .95 .95 Selected U.S. Gold Software is available from all leading computer stores and major high street retailers. Dealers! For information on how you can become a U.S. Gold stockist contact Centresoft, Lightning. Microdealer or other leading distributors or write to: U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre. Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 8881. Telex: 337268 (GOLD Solo Flight .95 .95 America All F-15 Strike Eagle .95 .95 "


";\" <><>><><><><><><><><><><><>< > 320 PRINT AT 2,0; OVER 1; INK 2 : \" + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + 490 IF xpo=-1 THEN LET xpo=0 500 IF xpo=29 THEN LET xpo=28 505 IF SCREEN$ (yap, xap) <>\"x\" T HEN LET do=1: GO TO 540 510 LET xap=xap+1 515 IF xap=31 THEN LET xap=1 520 GO TO 505 540 BEEP.002, yap: LET yap=yap+ 1: PRINT AT yap-1, xap: INKO: PA PER 0;\"x\";AT yap, xap; INK 4; \"A\" 550 IF yap.>=ypo-3 THEN GO TO 7 00 580 GO TO 450 600 IF IN 31=2 THEN LET xpo=xp 0-1 330 PRINT AT 3,1; INK 4; \"AAAAAA \" 340 PLOT 0,line: DRAW 255,0: PL OT 0, line-1: DRAW 255.0 350 PRINT AT 20, 14; INK 5:\" FG \"; AT 19. 14; INK 5:\" DE \"; AT 18, 1 4; INK 2;\" BC\" 400 LET Xpo=14: LET ypo-20: LET yap=3: LET spo=17: LET spo2 = 28 405 LET qw=30 410 LET do=0 420 LET xaprINT (RND*30 ) +1: LET yap=3 450 PRINT AT ypo, xpo; INK 5:\" F G\";AT ypo-1, xpo; INK 5:\" DE \": A Typo-2, xpo; INK 3; \" BC \" 460 IF k=1 THEN GO TO 600 470 IF INKEY $=\"9\" THEN LET xpo = xpo-1 480 IF INKEY $=\"W\" THEN LET xpo =xpo+1 610 IF IN 31=1 THEN LET xpo=xp 0+1 630 GO TO 490 700 IF xap>xpo+2 THEN LET dr=d r+1: LET Gw=qw-1: PRINT AT yap, x ap; INK 0;\"x\": LET yap=3: PRINT AT 0, spo2: dr: GO TO 730 710 IF xap<xpo+1 THEN LET dr=d r+1: PRINT AT 0, spo2; dr: PRINT A Tyap, xap; INK 0;\"x\": LET qw=qw1: GO TO 730 720 PRINT AT yap, xap; INK 0;\"x\" : LET carca+1: PRINT AT 0, spo: ca : LET qw=qw-1: LET yap= 3: GO TO 730 730 IF qw=0 THEN GO TO 900 740 GO TO 420 900 IF drca THEN GO TO 930: P RINT AT 10, 12; INK 6; \"PROMOTION ! 905 PRINT AT ypo, xpo:\" \"; AT ypo-1, xpo; \" \";AT ypo-2, xpo; \" 1111111 910 LET ca=0: LET dr=0: LET xpo. =14: LET ypo=ypo-1 915 LET line-line+8: PLOT 0,lin e: DRAW 255,0: PLOT 0, line-1: DR AW 255,0 917 PRINT AT 10, 12; INK 6; \"PROM OTION!\": BEEP.5, -5: BEEP.5,-3: BEEP.5.-1: BEEP.5.1 920 FOR P=1 TO 250: NEXT P: PRI NT AT 10, 11;\" 921 PRINT AT 3,1; INK 4; \"AAAAAA \"; AT 0,1 7: ca; \" \"; AT 0,28;dr;\" 925 GO TO 405 930 PRINT AT 10, 12;\" THE END!\": BEEP 1.5: BORDER 6: BEEP 1,4: B ORDER 4: BEEP 1.5.3: BORDER O 935 PRINT AT 12,7; \"ANOTHER GAME (y/n)\" 1020 IF INKEY$=\"y\" THEN GO TO 1 00 1030 IF INKEY$=\"n\" THEN RANDOMI ZE USRO 1040 GO TO 1020 will vie "


"DARE DEVIL RUNS ON AN UNEXPANDED VIC 20 BY MARTIN HOWSE 2 CLR: GOSUB1000: HS-10 5 POKE650, 129 6 POKE 36879.218 10 DATA12.2.1.63.66,255, 165. 66.0.126.66. 66.255.195, 255, 102, 128.64, 32.48.40.36.34 . 33 15 DATA1.2.4.12.20. 36.68, 132,255.0.0.0.0 .0.0.0.0.6.2.31.35.63.85.230 17 DATA 6.1.63.66, 127.229.162.64.255.255 .255.255.255.255.255.255 20 FORF-7168107231: READA: POKEF. A: NEXT 25 FORF-7024 T07432: POKEF. PEEK(25600+F):N EXT: BU=-1 30 PRINT\" [CLEAR]\": POKE36869.255: PS=7790: P=PS: S=60: N=0: BU=BU+1: POKE36878, 7: NS-145 40 FORF=7812 T07833: POKEF. 4: POKE 30720+F. 2 : NEXT 50 FORF-7922 T07943: POKEF, 4: POKE 30720+F. 4 : NEXT 60 FORF=8076 TO8097: POKEF. 4: POKE 30720+F. 6 : NEXT 61 A=0 62 ZX=0 Test your nerve on a motorcycle stunt game. How many cars can you leap over? The number starts off at one but as you progress more cars appear. One tip try and land as near to the ramp as possible to get a good score. There are two controls one to accelerate and the other to decelerate. But that doesn't mean it will be easy. "


"730 PRINT\" [HOME] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [RED] [RVSON ] ANOTHER GO? (RVSOFF]\": POKE 198 .0 700 GETAS: IFA$=\"\"THEN 740 750 IFA$=\"N\"THEN POKE36869, 240: POKE 36879. 27: PRINT\"[CLEAR] [BLUE]\": END 760 RUN 800 PS=7680+JY*22+X 810 FORFEPS TO PS+ 4 820 POKEF.0: POKE 30720+F. 6 830 FORG=1 TOS+80: NEXT: S=S+40 840 POKEF. 32 850 NEXTF 860 POKEF-1.0: PRINT\" [HOME] [DOWN] [DOWN] [D OWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [RVSON] HOORAY\": POKE36878. 15: RESTORE 65 IFBU>THENA=A+1 70 FORB=8060-ATO8060 A+BU: POKEB, 1: POKE30 1720+B. 2: NEXT 80 POKE8059-A. 3: POKE8061 A+BU. 2: POKE3877 9-A, O: POKE38781-A+BU, O 85 IFPS>8053-ATHEN POKEPS, 6: POKE 30720-PS .6: GOTO100 90 POKEPS, 0: POKE30720+PS. 6 95 IFZX-OTHENPRINT\"[HOME] [RED] [RVSON] [DO WN) [DOWN GO!!\": FORL=1T04: FORM= 220-LT 0160-LSTEP-4: POKE 36876, M: NEXTM 96 IFZX=OTHEN FORM=160-LTO220-LSTEP4 : POKE 36876, M: NEXTM, L: POKE36 876.0: PRINT\" [HOME] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] 97 2X=1 100 GETA$: PRINT\"[HOME] [RVSON] [BLUE) SCOR E=\"!: SC:\"[RED] HIGHET: HS: PRINT 105 PRINT\" [PURPLE] [RVSON) SPEED: \":: FORFOTOINT( (650(S+350))*0.0153846): PRINT\"[R VSOFF] [BLACK) G\"; : NEXTF 106 FORF-INT( (650-(S+350))*0.0153846) TO1 O: PRINT\"[RVSON] \":: NEXTF: PRINT\" 110 IFA$=\"[F1] \"THENS=S+5: NSENS-2 116 IFA$=\"[F3] \"THENS=S-9: NS=NS+2: IFRND (1 >>.6 THEN POKEPS. 6 117 IFNS<128 THENNS=128 120 FORF-1 TOS +70: NEXT: POKEPS. 32: POKE 3687 4. NS 140 PS=PS+1: IFPS=P+21 THENN=N+1: GOSUB500 150 IFPS=8058-ATHENGOSUB600 160 GOTO85 500 IFN=1 THENPS=7900: P=PS 510 IFN=2 THEN PS= 8054: P= PS 520 RETURN 600 JS=INT( (200-S)/50) 610 POKEPS. 32 620 JY=17: JX= 4: Y=0 630 FORX=JXTOJX+ ( 2*JS) 2 635 IFPEEK( 7680+ (JY+Y)*22+X) = 1 THEN700 640 POKE7680+ (JY+Y) *22+X, O: POKE38400+ (JY +Y) *22+X, 6 642 FORF=1TOS +100: NEXT 645 POKE7680+ (JY+Y)*22+X, 32 650 Y=Y-1: IFY=-JSTHENN=1 655 IFN=1 THENY=Y+2 660 NEXTX: POKE36874,0 670 IF7680+JY*22+X=8062+BUTHEN700 675 IF7680+ JY*22+x=8061+BUTHENSC=SC+5*(B U+1): GOTO800 680 IF7680+JY*22+x=8063+BUTHENSC=SC+3* (B U+1): GOTO800 690 IF7680+ JY*2 2 +X=8064+BUTHENSC=SC+(BU. 1): GOTO800 700 POKE7680+ (JY+Y) *22+X. 5: POKE38400+ (JY + Y)*22+X,6 710 POKE36877. 200: FORL=15TOOSTEP-1: POKE 3 6878, L: FORM=1 T0150: NEXTM, L: POKE 36877.0 720 PRINT\" (HOME) [RED] [RVSON) (DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOW N] [DOWN] BOOO !!!\": FORF=1 T0300: NEX 861 FORF=1 T064: READZ: NEXT 862 READA, B: IFA=-1 THEN 870 863 POKE36876. A: POKE36875. A: POKE36874. A 864 FORF=1 TOB: NEXT 865 GOTO862 870 POKE36 876.0: POKE36875.0: POKE36874.0: FORF=1 TO 400: NEXT: POKE36879.216+INT(RND(T I ) *8) 877 IFSCHSTHENHS=SC 880 GOTO30 900 DATA 215.250, 225.700, 231, 130,225.130, 231, 130.235.500,-1,-1 1000 POKE36869.240: PRINT\" [CLEAR) [RED] DARE DEVIL\" 1010 PRINT\" (YELLOW) [SE] [SE] [SE] [ SE] [s E][SE][SE] [s E][SE] [SE]\" 1020 PRINT\" (DOWN] [BLACK] IN THIS GAME YOU ARE CONTROLING A MOTORCYCLE.[ PURPLE] YOU MUST\" 1030 PRINT\"JUMP OVER AS MANY ROWSOF CARS AS YOU CAN. (GREEN) THE GAME STARTS WI TH\" 1040 PRINT\"ONE CAR BUT AS YOU GET BETTER MORE CARS APPEAR. (BLUE) YOU MUST TRY 1050 PRINT\"AND LAND AS NEAR TO THE LAN DING RAMP AS POSSIBLE TO GET A \" 1060 PRINT\"GOOD SCORE. [BLACK)IF YOU DRASTICALLY OVERSHOOT THE RAMP THEN YOU 1070 PRINT\"BECOME A HOLE IN THE GROUND. 1080 PRINT\" [DOWN) [RVSON) [RED] ANY KEY TO CONTINUE\": : POKE198.0: WAIT198.1 1090 PRINT\"[CLEAR] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOW N] [DOWN) [RED] CONTROLS\" 1100 PRINT\" (DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN) [PURPLE] [RVSON) F3 (RVSOFF] : ACCELERATE\" 1110 PRINT\" [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] (GREEN) [RVSON) F1[RVSOFF] : DEC ELERATE\" 1120 PRINT\" [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN ] [DOWN] [DOWN] (RVSON) (BLUE) ANY KEY TO START\": POKE198.0: WAIT198.1 1130 RETURN "


"10 CLR: RESTORE: POKEV.2.1.0: K-1: POHE5321 6: POKE53280,6 12 PRINT\" (CLEAR (BLACK) (SOCYTISM ISN] [CY] ISM) is OLC Y 18 M 1 NIC Y] [SM] [SN] [CY] [CY] [CH] [CN[e HCN] [CY] [SO][cy] [sO] LY][CY 30 PRINT\" [CH] [CH] [CN] [CH] [s M] [CH] (CN) [CH] [CH] [N] [CH] [c N ] [c H] [c H] 35 PRINT\" [CH] [CH] [ N] [CH] [C N] [CH] [CN] [SM) [cP] [SP] [CH] [C N] [ M] [C Pls N] [CH] [8L] [SP] [C 15 PRINT\" [CH] [N] [CH] [N] [CH] [c N) [c H] [e N] [c H] [c H] [c N) { CH] [eN] [CH] [CH]\" 20 PRINT\" [s L] (CPILS N] (s LLC Plis @] [8L] (CP][SN] [SL][CP] [S @[CH] [8 L][c P][ 8 [e H] [c N) [c H) | SL] (CP][CP]\" 40 PRINT\" [DOWN] [DOWN (WHITE) YOU HAVE BE EN DROPPED FROM YOUR\" 42 PRINT\" STARSHIP ABOVE THE ABANDONED M INES OF\" 44 PRINT\" PLANET X. GUIDE YOUR PARACHUTE THROUGH\" RUNS ON A CBM 64 BY ROBIN JOHNS PARACHUTE Your mission is to arrive at a Top Secret Destination deep in the abandoned mines of Planet X. A starship drops you by parachute over the mines and you must guide it safely down the dangerous shafts, avoiding the sides and dead ends. There are four levels of play to master before you arrive at the proper destination. Keys to control the parachute are, = Left and right. behind the whole libere I nara NH Illustration: Brian Cookman 76 "


"DOMARK presents YOU. as ... 002 AVIEWTOA KILL THE COMPUTER GAME ORDER YOUR COPY NOW! CALL 01-947 5624 To: Domark Ltd., 204 Worple Road, London SW20 BPN Telex: 894475 G From 7th June, YOU will become James Bond in his first arcade/adventure on Spectrum 48K, Commodore 64, Enterprise 64 and watch out for Amstrad, MSX and others NAME: (BLOCK LETTERS) ........... ADDRESS COUNTY... .....POSTCODE ..... Please send me .................. copies of \"A View to a Kill The Computer Game\" at .99 (includes postage and packing). I enclose a cheque/P.O. for ................ My computer is: ... You may order by Access Visa American Express by post or telephone (01-947 5624). Please debit my CREDIT CARD Signature. Account No: Account No: INIT I Expiry Date: Eon Productions Ltd. Glidrose Publications Ltd. 1985 Domark Ltd., 204 Worple Road, London SW20 8PN. Tel: 01-947 5624 Telex: 894475 G CVG 1 "


"LAY THE GRME 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM AMSTRAD BBC MODEL B 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM BBC MODEL B 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM BBC MODEL B 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM AMSTRAD BBC MODEL B ATICATACI LAZA COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM AMSTRAD CPC 464 RLARLES 23 els ERNITI CUSSIA \"ALIEN 8\", \"KNIGHTLORE», «UNDERWURLDE\", \"SABRE WULF\", \"ENTOMBED\", & \"STAFF OF KARNATH\" recommended retail price .95 inc VAT. \"ATIC ATAC\" recommended retail price .95 inc VAT. Available from W.H.SMITHS, BOOTS, J.MENZIES, WOOLWORTHS and all good software retail outlets. Also available from ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME, The Green, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire LE6 5JU (P&P are included) Tel: 0530 411485 "


"---------------Could YOUwin: Could YOU get a Newspaper Scoop? Stringers MURB HET FOOTBALL MANAGER WILKO! Priest PASS Stringer FOOTBALL MANAGER Football Manager \"Absorbing and realistic Highly recommended\". Sunday Times February 1984 \"Completely fantastic I want one!\" Charlie Nicholas, Arsenal Striker in Big K, April 1984 This all-time classic Is now available for the following computers: Spectrum 48K .95... Commodore 64 .95.. Amstrad CPC 464 .95. BBC B .95... Electron .95... Dragon .95 Vic 20 .95... ZX81 .95. STRINGER is an arcade adventure game in which you are a press photographer for the \"Daily Blurb\" set the task of snatching a shot of a Film Star, Polly Platinum in an hotel. To hinder your attempts your camera, flashbulb, press pass and the key to the lady's room have been hidden in the hotel and these items have to be recovered before the all important shot can be taken. To add to your troubles the hotel staff are bent on catching you before you reach your goal and your Editor has set you a strict deadline for the completion of the task. The game has 5 skill levels and 10 screens of increasing difficulty. It is tantalisingly playable, graphically, excellent and, of course Addictive! Available... Commodore 64 .95. Adiciile (P&P are included) Tel: 0530 411485 Can YOU avoid the fangs! Could YOU bea 1 of a deadly spider? Software Star?! Q0 BOFFINS TAS SOFTWARE STARS WANTED If you have written a professional computer game then why not let us make YOU a software star. BOFFIN SOFTWARE Boffin is a challenging. action-packed game requiring a combination of cunning and slick keyboard control. Beware the Giant Puffer-Blimps in your way and give the massive Tarantulas a wide berth! Land on the giant hydraulic rams and they will slam you into deadly neutron magnets embedded in the cave roof! Manta-bats are useful allies and the trampolines will help you gain height but remember to use your umbrella to break a deadly In SOFTWARE STAR you take control of a software company and aim to take it along the precarious path to success. On the way you meet with staff problems, decisions regarding advertising, expenditure, finance and game launches, but your business awareness together with a few gambles paying off will make you a SOFTWARE STAR \"It carries the Kevin Toms hallmarks of attention to detail and carefully tuned difficulty\". Popular Computing Weekly, February 1985 \"The game can be incredibly subtle\". Pick of the Week, Popular Computing Weekly, February 1985 Available... Spectrum 48K .95 ... Commodore 64 .95... Amstrad CPC 64 .95 Software Star is a strategy game not a graphical game. fall! Available BBC Banc Electron... .95. ddictive  Addictive Games 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth BH2 6HE Telephone: 0202 296404. "


"Jack Charlton's MATCHFISHING .95 Available soon BBC & Amstrad soon Unique multi-player action! Spectrum 48K CBM 64 All the excitement of a real Fishing match and you don't have to get your feet wet... I believe Match Fishing brings a whole new meaning to computer entertainment joining up to 8 players in an atmosphere of friendly rivalry and competition. Combining the power of the computer, its memory and speed of action with the skill and excitement of Britain's most popular outdoor participation sport, Match Fishing is the first of its kind in allowing all players to participate at one and the same time. Computer enthusiasts, games players and fishing addicts alike, I'm sure you will enjoy the excitement as much as I do. Alligata Software Ltd 1 Orange Street, Sheffield S1 4DW Tel: (0742) 755796 "


"46 PRINT\" 4 LEVELS OF PLAY, EACH TAKING YOU\" 48 PRINT\" NEARER TO YOUR TOP SECRET DEST INATION\" 50 PRINT\"[GREEN] [DOWN] MAP THE DEAD ENDS SO YOU AVOID THEM INT: PRINT\" FUTURE GAM PARACHUTE ES\" 55 PRINT\" [DOWN] [DOWN] [PURPLE KEYS:. =LEFT .-RIGHT\": PRINT\" (DOWN) [DOWN [DOWN] [DOWN] [BLACK) PRESS SPACE TO PL AY\" 1 2 mensuales de 60 GETA$: IFA$<>\" \"THEN60 95 M=120: POKE650, 128 100 X= 2: V=53248: POKEV +21,4: POKE2042.13: F ORNEO TO62: READQ: POKE832+N, Q: NEXTN 105 PRINT\" (RED). [CLEAR] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN 1 (DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] (DOWN] [DO WN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN (DOWN] [DOWN (DOWN) [ DOWN] [DOWN) [DOWN[DOWN) [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN J (DOWN] [DOWN) [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DO WN] [DOWN (DOWN\": POKE53281, 0: POKE53280.0 110 REM ********** START OF GAME ********* 112 POKEV31.1 115 IFX 2 THENX=0: READA,B,C 120 FORI=1984 T01984 +34: POKEI, 160: NEXTI:F ORI=1984 +ATO1984 +A+5: POKEI. 32: NEXTI 130 FORI=1984 +BT01984 +B+5: POKEI, 32: NEXTI : FORI=1984+CTO1984+C+5: POKEI. 32: NEXTI 140 GETAS: IFA$=\". \"THENM=M-4 145 IFA$=\". \"THENM=M + 4 147 POKEV+4, M: POKEV+5.158: POKE198.0 148 IFM>255 THENM-255 150 IFPEEK(V+31 )<>OTHEN2000 160 X=X+1:L=L+1: IFL-100 THEN 2200 175 PRINT\"\": GOTO115 500 REM ********** SPRITE DATA ********* 505 DATA 3.255.192.31255.248.127.255.254 .255.255.255.255.255.255.255.255.255.211 510 DATA 75.47.153.74, 102, 205, 206,204,100 204.152.50. 205.48.26.253.96.14.253.192 520 DATA7.255.128.0, 180.0.0.48.0.1.254.0 0,48.0.0.112.0.0.80,0,0,216,0 525 REM ********* TUNNEL DATA ********* 530 REM ********* LEVEL 1 ************* 540 DATA11.17.23.11.17.23.11.17. 23.11.17 , 23.11.17.23.11.17.23.10.16.23.10.16.23 550 DATA9.15.23.9.15.23.8.14.23.8.14.23. 7.13.23.7.13.23. 6. 12. 23.6.12.23.5.11.23 555 DATA5.11.23.4.10.23.4.10.23.3.9. 23.3 .9.23.2.8.23.2.8.23.2.17. 23. 2.17. 23. 2.17 560 DATA23.2.17.23.2.17.23.2.17.23.2.17. 23.2.17.232, 16, 23.2.15. 23.2.14.23.2.13 565 DATA 23.2.12,23.2.11.24.2.10.16.2.9.1 5.2.8.10.2.8.14.2.8.14.3.9.15,4,10,16 570 DATA 5.11.17.6, 12, 18.7.13.19.7.13.19 . 7.13.19 575 REM ********* LEVEL 2 ********* 580 DATA7.13.19.7.13.19.6.13.20.5.13.21. 4.13.21.4.13.21.4.13.21.4.13.22.4.13.23 585 DATA4,13, 24, 4.14. 25.4, 14.26.3.15.27. 2,15.27.2,15.27. 2. 12. 18.2.12,18,212.18 590 DATA3.12.18, 4.11.18.5.11.19.5.11, 20, 5.11.21.5.11. 22.5.11.22.7.19.25.6.19.25 595 DATA5.19.25,4,19.25.3. 18.26.3.17. 27. 4.17.27, 14, 20, 27.14.20. 27. 14, 20, 27. 14.20 600 DATA 27. 14, 20.27.13. 20, 27.12.20, 27.11 . 20. 27.10.20, 27.9.20, 27. 8. 20. 27.7.20.27 605 DATA6, 14, 20.7.14, 20,7.14, 20.7.14. 20. 7.14.20.7.14.20 610 REM ********* LEVEL 3 ********* 615 DATA 7.14, 20.8.14.20.8, 14, 20.7.14.21. 6.14. 22.5.14.23.4.14. 24.3.15.25.3.15. 26 620 DATA3.16.27.10, 16, 27. 10, 16. 27. 10. 16. 26.10, 16, 25.10.16.25.9. 16. 25.8.17.25.7 625 DATA18, 25.4.10.25.4.10. 24.4.10.23.4. 10.22,4,11,21,4.1220.4.13.19.4.13.19.4 630 DATA13.19.4.13.19.4.13.19.4.13.19.3. 13.20.3.13.21.3. 14.22.3.14, 23.3.15.24.3 635 DATA15.25.3.16. 26.3.9.27.3.9.26.3.9. 15.3.9.15.3.9.15.3.9.15.3.9.15.3.9.15.3 640 DATA9.15.3.9.15.4.10.16.5.11.17.6, 12 .18 645 REM ********** LEVEL 4 ********* 650 DATA7.13.19.8.14, 20.9.15.21.9.15.21. 9.15.21.9.15.21,8.15.22.7.15.23.6.15.24 655 DATA5. 15. 25.2.8. 25.2. 8. 25.2. 8. 25. 2.8 . 25.2.9. 25.2. 10. 25.2.11, 25.2.12,25.2.13 660 DATA 25.2, 14, 25.2,15.25.2.9.15.2.9.15 .2.9.15.2.9.15.2.9.16.2.9.17.2.9.18.2.9 665 DATA 19.2.16.22.2.16.22.2.16.22.2.16. 22,2,16,22,2,15.23.2.14.24.2.13. 25.2.9 670 DATA15.2.9.15.2.9.15.2.9.15.2.9.15.9 1521,8,15.21.2. 15.27.2.15.27.2.15.27 675 DATA2,15.27. 2,15.27.2.15.27 2000 REM ********* DEATH ROUTINE ******* 2010 PRINT\" [CLEAR]\": POKE53281.1: POKE5328 0.1: POKE54296, 15: POKE 54295.0:VV=54272 2020 POKEVV+6.0: POKEVV+5.12: POKEVV+1, 20: POKEVV+4,129: FORNN=1 TO 2500: NEXTNN 2030 POKEVV+4,0: PRINT\"[DOWN] [DOWN] [BLAC K]BAD LUCK! YOU REACHED LEVEL\":K 2035 FORI-OTO2500: NEXTI: POKEV +4.0: POKEV + 5.0 2040 GOTO10 2200 REM ***** NEXT LEVEL ROUTINE ***** 2210 L=0: K=K+1: IFK=2 THENZ=30 2220 IFK=3THENZ=31 2230 IFK= 4 THENZ=158 2240 IFK=5 THENPRINT\"[c1] WELL DONE! YOU REACHED YOUR DESTINATION\":GOTO2035 2250 PRINT\"[HOME] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN (RIGH T][RIGHT] [RIGHT][RIGHT][RIGHT)\"; CHR$(Z); \"LEVEL\":K\"[DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN ] [DOWN] (DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DO WN) [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [ DOWN (DOWN]\": FORI=OTO1000: NEXT 2260 GOT0175 "


"S PROFESSOR VIDEOS First of all an apology. In the June issue, we published some pokes for Sabre Wulf and Jet Set Willy but, going by the deluge of mail, they didn't work. Sorry about that, folks! In future, PLEASE test your pokes carefully before sending them in and mark which computer they are for. avoid them. When the hover tanks arrive, leave them alone! After a while space ships will arrive. Move into the middle and move up and down to avoid the gun turret lasers. Wait there for the reactor. Level 4: While in the trench the reactor will appear. Zap it!! STARON Here are a couple of tips from Martin Neill, of Greenock. Take the first zone and the first time this will give you the BIBLE. Take this to the ninth time. There you will get the EEC. Take this to the seventh time and you will get the DIAMONDS. From there, go to the fifth time. That's where Martin runs out of tips. Who can give the Prof. the rest of the clues to finish the game? POKE CORNER GAMES WORKSHOP DRAGONTORC William How of Nairn (that's Scotland for those who don't know their geography) has sent in a list of the Dragontorc spells and their effects. Once you have opened up the leylines and explored a bit, you will find that not all your enemies are killed by the Missile Spell the winged devils and werewolves are unaffected. To kill these, you need to find the Warrior Spell which is in Merlyn's cave. In the cave you will find two seals. The Halgor seal will open the way into the Sanctuary of Halgor in Wolfwood. It can also be used to remove the curse on the spiders in the sanctuary. The Return Spell will help you find an anvil which will destroy the crowns of Brigan, Troynova, Dovil and Cantii. Wave the crystals of anti-magic over the anvil and you will have the power to control the HAND found in the cursed crypt of the western kings. The HAND will kill the witch queen of the north. The Demon Spell found in the ruined fortress of the Cantii will have a welcome effect on a demon found in Hellsmouth Cavern. The Dragontorc Crowns are found in the cursed crypt of the Western Kings, the ruined fortress of the Cantii, Hellsmouth Caverns and the Lost Vaults of Locris. Befriend the elves by giving them jewels and bows they will repay your kindness. The Heal Spell will cure snake, spider and werewolf bites. Some of your enemies may pick up something you want, so if you can't find a key go and try bashing some monsters. Let's see if we can get it right this month! Pokes for the Spectrum Kokotoni Wilf. First type Merge\"\" when the screen comes up four out of memory then type: 10 POKE 23693,0:CLEAR 24100:LOAD\" CODE: RANDOMIZE USR 65100:LOAD\" CODE:POKE 43742,0: RANDOMIZE USR 41712 This will give you infinite lives. Alien 8 This will give you infinite lives, but,  follow the instructions carefully and type DATA correctly. O REM ALIEN 8 INF. LIVES 10 LET TOT = 0:FOR N = 50000 TO 50089:READ A: LET TOT = TOT + A :POKE NA: NEXT N 20 IF TOT 10530 THEN PRINT \"ERROR IN DATA\": STOP 25 STOP 30 PRINT AT 10, 10:\"INSERT TAPE\": RANDOMIZE USR 50000 100 DATA 62,255,55,17,141,5,221,33,203,92,20,8, 21,243,62,15,211,254,205,98,5,48,233,33,86,176, 34,233,96,33, 157, 195, 17,28,238,1,200,0,237,176, 243,237,94,33,41,236,229,33,137,97,229,51,51,17, 41,236,1,242,1,33,253,94,253,33,239,96,221,33, 184,98,62,200,237,79,195,137,97,62,0,50,24,202, 62,201,50, 172, 173 110 DATA 195,0.99 Type in the program and run it. If you get the error message, recheck DATA, keep running the program till you get the stop message. When all is well, take out lines 20 and 25 and save to tape. Rewind, Load and Run. Now play the whole of the Alien 8 tape. Now a couple for the Spectrum and the Commodore from S. Kangis. Blagger for the C64 tap space bar very quickly and then press CTRL key + any letter from @to ) and you go onto a different screen. Revenge of the Mutant Camelstype in GOATS while the game is playing the words CHEAT MODE OPERATIVE come on the screen, then hit the space bar at any time to go onto the next wave. Now the Spectrum pokes. Guess what game these are for-JSW! But, I have been assured that these do work. To enter the pokes, type MERGE DEATH STAR INTERCEPTOR B. P. Askert from Hertfordshire wrote in with the following tips for levels 1-4. Level 1: As you launch, you stray to one side. To avoid this, push the joystick in the opposite direction in order to squeeze your spaceship through the stargate. Level 2: On the first skill level, move your X-wing to the top-left corner of the screen, then no enemy craft can hit you. If you're feeling like a zap, move around the top left corner shooting diagonally at the aliens Level 3: When you appear in the trench, move to the right of the screen and zap the barriers at the base. When the gun turrets appear stay on the right as far as the X-wing will allow and zap the turrets on the right wall. Only the turrets on the left will fire, allowing you to move up and down to "


"PROFESSORVIDEOS D can be searched by a \"Search-move, Search-move\" routine. This takes a bit of time, but, you will need all the \"snoozes\" for the harder levels. Remember where the \"games rooms are and use them for extra snoozes and lift resets. Use the phone! The bits of puzzle are a puzzle in themselves some pieces can be used twice and others are no use at all. Stop the tape when the first part of the loading stops. Type in the pokes, then type RUN. POKE 35899,0 Infinite lives. POKE 37925,0 Takes away Maria POKE 36545,0 Makes the Banyantree POKE 36358,0 Makes Willy jump higher POKE 37873,0 You get all the objects. If any of you have pokes for the less popular machines, send them in. It's the only way they will get featured on this page. Here's one for the Vic20 all the way from M. Fowell in Australia. To get 255 lives on Jet Pac do the following. Load the loader program without running it by just typing \"Load\". Delete line 70 which says SYS 5376. Hold shift down and press RUN/STOP. This loads the machine code and places it in the memory. Then type POKE 9179,X. X being any number from 1 to 255. For player two type POKE 9192,X. Then type SYS 5376 and press RUN/STOP to start the game. Pokes for the BBC from Lee Taylor, Blackpool. Chuckie Egg*LOAD\"CH-EGG\" (Return when it has loaded type, ?&28FD=250 Return CALL&29AB (Return) This will give you 250 men per game. 3D STARSTRIKE Michael King has been busy again and come up with a set of hints for 3D Starstrike. On the first stage, keep your finger on the fire button and, as your gunsight self centres, quickly move the gunsight as far to the top of the screen as you can and keep it in the middle. If you do this, you can always blast the ships before they get close enough to do your ship any damage. But keep an eye on your laser power as it will drain very quickly. To boost this power, take your finger from the fire button but do this only in periods of relative calm. On higher levels, just continually fire as you move your sight around the screen. The ships come in so fast that you will hit them all. The second stage requires you to act quickly but calmly. Do not get so eager that you end up flying your spacecraft upside down and miss all the tower tops. When you get more enemy craft, only shoot the ones which will hit you and do the damage. The third and hardest stage becomes easier if you remember to go under the high catwalks and over the low ones. This way you don't get as many hitting you. Also don't swerve from side to side. The last level is the easiest. Just hit the two crosses on either side of the rectangle. When you hit them, they change shape and flash. You only need to hit each cross once. Then it's back to stage ELITE Here are two short methods of increasing your Credits and Ratings on Elite by Steven Parker, Hull. To improve your credits:When you have amassed 400 credits, buy a Pulsar Laser. When asked \"Where to put it?\" reply O. The computer will say \"Laser Present\", then put on your Status page, showing your credits to be increased by 300-400 credits. KEEP REPEATING THESE KEY DEPRESSIONS:f3,5,<return>,0. To improve your Kill Rate:1. Before launching, choose a planet for hyperspace jump. 2. Launch. 3. Decrease speed. 4. Go into rear view. 5. Shoot at the hatchway of the space station!!! DO NOT MOVE !!! 6. Stay in this position for as long as possible even when you cannot see the hatchway you can still shoot the Vipers exiting from it: Do Not Chase Vipers That Escape! 7. When three or more Vipers have escaped your lasers, use either an Energy Bomb, your pre-set hyperspace jump or escape pod Remember you only need lasers mounted on the front and rear positions so, when you have enough credits, buy military lasers for these positions. Matthew Thompson of Bridgewater has come up with a few more tips on this game. As soon as you have enough credits, travel to a planet of Tech. Level 9 or higher and equip your ship with a docking computer, as this will save a lot of time and allow you to make money. Don't waste money on side lasers as these are practically impossible to use. When in combat with Thargoid invasion ships, ignore the small remote controlled thargon mini ships sent out. A GAMES WORKSHOP one.... RAID OVER MOSCOW Richard Lake from Herts wrote in with these playing hints: Inside the Hanger try to keep opening the doors until last thing as this gives you more time to get out. If you are about to crash into any walls, quickly press the sapce bar this will return you to the map without losing a stealth bomber. Try to get at least two bombers out of the hanger. Destroying the Silo first destroy the surrounding silos, as this will give you more points and an extra bomber per silo. If you now move to about one centimetre from the left of the screen, you should be able to kill off many enemy planes without being shot at. Do this until 30 to fifty seconds from impact and then destroy the main silo. US Commandos (bazooka) — first blow up the doors and then the towers with careful aiming, the top towers can be made to fall onto the tanks gaining double points. IMPOSSIBLE MISSION Peter and Paul from Middlesex have written in with these hints for all of you still struggling away with this game. First thing to do is map the game out and then search any easy rooms you come across. Keep as many \"snoozes\" in store as possible and only use them when you really have to. A lot of objects 83 "


"AAR EUROPES LEADING 'ATARI MAIL ORDER SPECIALISTS EUROPES LEADING SOFTWARE MAIL ORDER EXPRESS INTERNATIONAL MATHS FOR SENIOR SCHOOLS. A series of five learning programs NEW ATARI 130XE COMPUTER (128k). ... .99 (available individually). Which follow the CSE and GCE O' level Phone for availability syllabus, with many excellent features. Year 1, 2, 3, 4 and Revision C/D .95/.95 per year. BOOKS COMPUTES GUIDE TO ADVENTURE GAMES 10.95 THE XL HANDBOOK 5.95 ENTERTAINMENT EASY PROGRAMMING FOR ATARI MICRO'S 6.95 DE RE ATARI 17.00 ATARI GRAPHICS AND ARCADE DESIGN 13.95 MAPPING THE ATARI 12.95 CONAN (D) 14.95 MR. DO(C) 9.95 TECHNICAL USER NOTES 17.00 ANTIC ANTHOLOGY 6.95 QUASIMODO (C/D) 9.95/14.95 DIG DUG (C) 9.95 POST AND PACKING 75p COLOSUSS CHESS (C/D) 9.95/12.95 PAC MAN (C) 9.95 UTILITIES FIELD OF FIRE (D) 34.95 POLE POSITION (C/D) 9.95/14.95 BASIC XL (ROM) 68.99 BASIC XL TOOL KIT (D 34.99 ASYLUM (D) 25.90 MASK OF THE SUN (D) 35.95 ACTION (ROM) 86.99 ACTION TOOL KIT (D) 34.99 MINER 2049er (ROM) 12.95 BOUNTY BOB (ROM) PHONE MAC/65 (ROM) 86.99 MAC 65 TOOL KIT (D) 34.99 DOS XL (DISK) 34.99 MONKEY WRENCH 800 (ROM) 39.95 MMG BASIC COMPILER (DISK) 69.99 MONKEY WRENCH II (XL) (ROM)39.95 MAGAZINES US DOUBLER(INC SPARTA DOS) TRUE DOUBLE DENSITY FOR 1050 DRIVE ANTIC 79.95 3.50 PROGRAMMER PACK PAGE 6 90p ANALOG 3.00 ATARI USER 90p INVITATION TO PROGRAMMING 1 INVITATION TO PROGRAMMING 2 INFOCOMS INVISICLUES .10 PER TITLE +25p POST & PACKING COMING SOON INVITATION TO PROGRAMMING 3 ATARI 520 ST COMPANION CASSETTE PERIPHERALS PHONE FOR DETAILS INSIDE ATARI BASIC 101 TIPS .95 OKIMATE 2017 COLOUR PRINTER) 299.00 PERSONAL IMPORT & EXPORT SERVICE AVAILABLE MIRACLE TECHNOLOGY RS232 INTERFACE C/W SOFTWARE 59.95 MIRACLE TECHNOLOGY WS2000 MODEM 149.99 ATARI SERVICE DEPARTMENT NOW OPEN PADDLES 9.99 HOTLINE SEND SAE FOR OUR PRICE LIST. 31 STONEYHURST ROAD ERDINGTON, BIRMINGHAM B24 8HA 384 5080 Microsell ... Microsell ... Microsell ... Microsell ... SHARP MZ-80K with Hi-Res graphics, 2/4 MH2 switch, reset switch, joystick, advanced monitor/200 programs on 750 cassettes. Also dual disk drives with cables, interface cards, 1/O box, 300 programs on 60 disks: offers, will separate, phone Steve 01-590 8165. ATARI LISTINGS. Send me your basic program and I will send them back with a listing for .00 per listing. Phone Basildon (0268) 412549 between 6-9pm ask for Chris (any memory). 48K SPECTRUM +  worth of software + Kempston joystick and interface + carrying case +  of books and mags. Worth over  sell for  ring 01-363 5462 FOR SALE 48K Spectrum, light pen, keyboard overlay  worth of software, carrying case. Worth  selling for  ring (051) 425 4418 after 4pm except Saturday and Sunday. ENERGEN the brilliant game of logic from Fatal Games for the Spectrum, Commodore, Amstrad, BBC and Electron. Solve the puzzle and win one of 50 unique prizes! Send SAE for details to Fatal Games, 15 Wynmoor Crescent, Brampton, Barnsley, S. Yorkshire. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE: Deus Ex Machina, Steve Davis Snooker, Hunchback II. Will swap for interface Il or ram turbo interface. Must swap quickly. Mr S Flood, 117 Meltham Road, Lockwood, Huddersfield, West Yorkshire HD4 7BG. SPECTRUM 48K VTX 5000 modem, Kempson joystick interface and comp-pro 5000 joystick, computer compatible data recorder, and loads of software and magazines. Offers over  or will swap for good condition BBC \"B\" or \"ADAM\"computer. Tel: 0777 709476 evenings. 48K SPECTRUM, ram turbo interface, sound amplifier, 100 games including Alien 8, Hunchback II, Monty is Innocent. All boxed, V.G.C. cost . Will sell for  ono will split. Tel: Leigh, Lancs 60524 after 4pm SPECTRUM SOFTWARE massive software sale. Over 50 cassette programs and over 15 boxed programs for sale. Value over  sell for . Tities include Starstrike, Technician Ted. Will not split. Ring (034284) 2070 for titles list or to buy. Hurry! T199/4A  ono, modules from , six tapes , joysticks  ono Atari VCS and 13 cartridges, all the controllers, basic,  ono. WANTED: Moon Patrol, Star Wars, Drop Zone roms for Atari computer. Will pay  each. Phone 021 353 7427 WANTED COMMODORE 64-in exchange for Atari VCS + eleven games and Vic 20 with two adventure cartridges The Count and Adventureland. Phone Mike on (0903) 771890 after 4pm SPECTRUM ORIGINAL software exchange, Deus Ex Machina for Knightlore exchange Hobbit with book for Scott Adams Adventureland. Wanted issue one Crash will pay . Phone Tony (0909) 721113. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE, Manic Miner, Jet Set Willy, Alchemist, Caesar Cat,  each. Cartridges: Pssst, Space Raiders,  each or  for both. Phone (0223) 843964 after 4.30pm ask for Peter. BBC 'B' disc interface, cassette recorder,  worth of software (including Gemini business software, Elite, Fortress, Sabrewulf, Aviator, etc). Programmable Quickshot and self centering analogue joysticks,  of books, excellent condition, . Phone Wargrave (073522) 2441. ACORN ELECTRON. Still under guarantee. Complete system including joystick, interface, data recorder,  of software and complete library of books and magazines. Worth . Offers above  or swap for Atari 800XL with disk drive. Phone Dundee (0382) 739581. ARE YOU looking for games for CBM 64? Large information. Then write to: Postlargernd Kennwort \"WHY NOT\" 4300 Essen 1, West Germany. (New: Conan, Gorg's Revenge, Wargames...) CBM 64 software to swap. Disk only. Please send your list to Stephen Cattan, Pastorenkamp 8, D-284A Wagenfeld, West Germany. I have new American and English software ATARI 600XL with cassette recorder, joystick, mags and games all worth  only  ono. Ring (01) 707 4755 after six COLECOVISION AND ten cartridges, including Rocky Boxing and Super Action controllers will sell the whole lot for , cartridges  each, main console , Rocky Boxing . Phone 0592 755069 (Fife). EPSON P.40 thermal printer. RS232 compatable (BBC etc), brand new, bargain . Tel: (0782) 627353 ATARI 400 or 800 software: Basic cartridge, Stratos, Zaxxon and manual and books. Great offer! The lot for only . Telephone Rearsby (066 474) 751 and ask for Tim. T199/4A cartridges. Parsec, Invaders, Buck Rogers, Wumpus, Alpiner, Donkey Kong. Pacman, Pole Position, Speech Editor  each. Adventure cartridge with adventure cassettes . Extended Basic with manual . Speech synthesizer, Texas cassette recorder  each. Phone 01-319 0365. T199/4A for sale + joysticks, Ex-Basic, Parsec, Carwars, Connect 4, Protector 2, Buck Rogers and books worth  sell for . Phone Swansea (0792) 793865. ACORN ELECTRON 10 month guarantee Quickshot II joystick and interface and cassette recorder and all leads, 10 games, magazines and 1 year subscription to Electron Magazine + dustcover. All only  telephone Steve (021) 523 0452 ATARI VCS ten games including Pac-man, Super Breakout and others including joysticks worth  sell for . In good condition contact Andrew after 6pm weekdays 01.948 2739. VIC 20 + 32K switchable Ram Pack, over  worth of software, five cartridges, Introduction to Basic Part 1, four books, Quickshot II joystick, Dustcover, cassette case, victape issue, four computer magazines worth over  will sell for . Telephone 784 4365 (021) after 6pm. 48K SPECTRUM + Cambridge programmable joystick interface + cassette recorder + lots of software + magazines + books. Sell for  ono or swap for Commodore 64 with cassette recorder. Phone 01-551 2966 evenings 5.30 onwards. 84 "


"ENTER THE COMPUTER JUNGLE News Reviews Prizes to be won SAFARI PLEASE SEND ME FREE LITERAT ON THE NEW ATARI 520ST COMPUTER Mr Mrs/Ms Initials: Surname: Salica we have been successfully dedicated to Atari ever since their products first appeared on the UK rket. We can attribute our success largely to the Atari specialisation which we practice and to the user ck-up we provide. Rest assured that when you buy a piece of Atari hardware at Sitica you will be fully pported. Our mailings giving news of software releases and developments will keep you up to date with Atal market and our technical support team and sales staff are at the end of the telephone line to al with your problems and supply your every need With our specialist bias, we aim to keep stocks of the available Atari hardware software peripherals and accessories. We also stock a wide range of ari dedicated books and through us, the owners on our list can subscribe to several American Alati dicated magazines. We can provide a full service to all Atari owners and are now firmly established as e UK's NUMBER ONE Atari specialists. Here are just some of the things we can offer to our customers FREE POST & PACKING ON MAIL ORDERS If you would like to be registered on our mailing FREE NEXT DAY SECURICOR DELIVERY Ist as an Atal computer owner, or as a person INFORMATION MAILING SERVICE Interested in buying an Aland machine, let us TECHNICAL SUPPORT TEAM know. We will be pleased to keep you up to date HIGHLY COMPETITIVE PRICES with new Afarl developments free of charge. So, AFTER SALES SUPPORT SERVICE return the coupon today and begin experiencing REPAIR SERVICE ON ATARI PRODUCTS a specialist Alal service that is second to none. Address: Postcode: SILICA OTLINE SILICA @ 01-309 1111 Do you already own a computer If so, which one do you own? "


"A tremor of fear is running through the computer jungle. The Great White Hunter, Jack Tramiel, is on the prowl, gunning for anybody and everybody. Tramiel wants to be King of the Jungle and doesn't care who knows it. Has he the strength and power to climb to the top of heap or is he just bluffing? Will he fall victim to the headhunters? Join Computer & Video Games on an Atari Safari to find out what is going on. US/GOLD COMPETITION The Otca BY SEGA 15K FOR ANY ATARI COMPUTER Datasoft Computer & Video Games and US Gold have teamed up to offer the best ever software prize for game-starved Atari owners. We're offering to give away 30 completely different Atari titles to three lucky winners. US Gold are the leading light in the new resurgence of popularity in the Ataris. This year alone, they are planning to release over 40 top quality American games for the old and new ADAMI\"computer. Tel:0777 709476 evenings. BK SPECTRUM, ram turbo interface, sound implifier, 100 games including Alien 8, tunchback II, Monty is Innocent. All boxed, 1.G.C. cost . Will sell for  ono will split. Tel: Leigh, Lancs 60524 after 4pm. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE massive software jale. Over 50 cassette programs and over 15 soxed programs for sale. Value over  sell or . Tities include Starstrike, Technician Ced. Will not split. Ring (034284) 2070 for titles ist or to buy. Hurry! Atari computers all huge successes in the arcades or the American software charts. Among the 30 games, there are classics like Beach-Head, a complicated sea and land warfare game, Dallas Quest, the adventure game based on the popular American soapy, Conan the Barbarian, an excellent climbing game modelled on the character from Robert E. Howard's books and Pac Man which, of course, needs no introduction. All you have to do is to answer the information. Then write to: Postlargernd Kennwort \"WHY NOT\" 4300 Essen 1, West Germany. (New: Conan, Gorg's Revenge, Wargames...) CBM 64 software to swap. Disk only. Please send your list to Stephen Cattan, Pastorenkamp 8, D-284A Wagenfeld, West Germany. I have new American and English software. ATARI 600XL with cassette recorder, joystick, mags and games all worth  only  ono. Ring (01) 707 4755 after six three simple questions below, fill in the coupon and rush it to US Gold Competition, Computer & Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The thirty games are Beach-head, Strip Poker, Aztec Challenge, Caverns of Khafka, Forbidden Forest, Slinky, Bruce Lee, Dallas Quest, O'Riley's Mine, Pooyan, Zaxxon, Snokie, Nato Commander, Spitfire Ace, Solo Flight, F15 Strike Eagle, Fort Apocalypse, Blue Max. Drelbs, Dropzone, Pole Position, Dig Dug, Mr Do, Pac Man, Conan, Quasimodo, Ghost Chaser, Mig Alley Ace and Miner 2940er. worth of software, five cartridges, Introduction to Basic Part 1, four books, Quickshot II joystick, Dustcover, cassette case, victape issue, four computer magazines worth over  will sell for . Telephone 784 4365 (021) after 6pm. 48K SPECTRUM + Cambridge programmable joystick interface + cassette recorder + lots of software + magazines + books. Sell for  ono or swap for Commodore 64 with cassette recorder. Phone 01-551 2966 evenings 5.30 onwards. 84 "


"ATARI 1520ST POWER WITHOUT THE PRICE ATARI 520ST SPECIFICATION MACINTOSH v F1 v 520ST Imagine Fat Mas the SE2K Apple Macintosh but with a bigger screen for bigger keyboard with numerie Kaped, cursor and function keys, and colour gives you some idea of what the Ahari 5208T is like except for two important things First the Atari sana ter Becond the Atari system is about one third of the price June 1805 Jack Schofield. PRACTICAL COMPUTING APPLE APRICOT L ES OF LADICETTE al THE NEW ATARI 520ST Under the new leadership of Jack Tramiel (former boss and founder of Commodore Business Machines). Atari Corporation have marked their entry into the world of business personal computers with a machine which leaves the competition standing Tramiel's slogan 'Power Without the Price' has been implemented in the manufacture of the new 512K Atari 520ST colour computer which offers the user amazingly high performance at an incredibly low price Launched as a work-station, this new system incorporates over software packages as well as the 520ST computer with $12K RAM mouse controller, high resolution monochrome monitor 1640X600) 95 key keyboard (with 18 key numeri keypad), MIDI interface, GEM and SOOK 3 inch disk drive all for the package price of only .30 T+VAT 749) Dubbed the Mac beater and the \"Jackintosh (after Atari's Chief, Jack Tramell, Atari's new machine has been directly compared with the Apple Macintosh RRP  (+VAT 52985) which offers similar features and capabilities but at a much higher price. Favourably reviewed by the UK'S highly critical specialist computer press the 520ST is likely to make a great impact in this country as a sophisticated alternative to an IBM PC, APRICOT or APPLE MACINTOSH Unlike its overpriced competidors, the Atari 520ST can be linked up to a colour monitor to unleash a choice of up to 512 colours. The addition of colour brings out the full potential of graphics packages such as GEM USER FRIENDLY GEM OPERATING SYSTEM The power of the ST harnessed and made user friendly by the new operating system 'GEM from Digital Research. GEM stands for Graphics Environment Manager and allows a user friendly colour or B/W graphics interface which closely resembles that of the Macintosh This similarity extends to the use of moveable resizeable windows, Icons to represent objects such as disks and disk drives, and the use of pull down menus and a mouse. The advantage of all this is that the computer becomes extremely easy to use GEM has now been implemented for the Acom, ACT. Atari, IBM, ICL, and Olivetti Software written for OEM on one computer should also run under GEM on another computer. This will enable the market to quickly produce a large library of standard interchangeable software, FREE SOFTWARE AND FUTURE EXPANSION The Atari 520ST comes supplied with seven free software packages as listed below: 1) TOS -Tramiet Operating System based on CPM GSK 2) GEM Graphics Environment Manager by Digital Research (DAgiving a WIMP Window, Icon, Mouse Pull down menu environment. 3) DR GEM Paint for creating graphics masterpieces. 4) DA GEM Write for word processing 5) Logo learning language to enable you to write your own programs easily using turte graphics 6) DR Personal Basic a powerful user friendly version of the Basic programming language. T) BOS operating system giving you BOSS to dozens of business appilations packages ready available on the market Designed with future expansion in mind, the ST also features a host of different interfaces to the outside world and an impressive list of accessories is planned. Alari will soon be releasing a 1000K (1MB34 inch disk drive, and a 15MB hard disk storage system as well as a mass storage compact disk CD player capable of storing an entire 20 volume encyclopedia on one disk. A full range of inexpensive printers are planned including dot matrix. daisywheel and thermal colour printers. With its unbeatable graphics, speed and software at a price which is far below that of any comparable personal computer Currently on the market, the ST is all set to do battle with the competition To receive further details of the ST TO the coupon below with your name and address details and post it to Silca Shop Price: .30 .70 VAT = .00 This price includes: MEMORY VIDEO PORTS B3 RAM (S. bytes) Display Lowesson 45 com   ndbl t  Weigh Ass puso Ponor dan 12K plug-in ROM artigos Medium RGB tipul 200K TOS Operating Ho t ion monochrome (Black & W GRAPHICS COMMUNICATIONS in ly dresse 32 bitmapoed Bidirectional c on e l celor w waren graphics made prints or month of poput 40200 is in color madrasso VTS2 Terminal Emulation Software O penis in monochrome high M umbad Pata up to 19.200 1 shades of grwy in low mode 12 con now Popey sikerer Western Digi 2 loyalik ports one for 2 button ARCHITECTURE GEM WIMP ENVIRONMENT GLUE Cho MUU Mimary Mngmt un WIMP. W e loon Mou Pop-down DM Controller Graphics Processing Unit Two buton mouse Cooler GEM VOI-VI Device Interface GEM AES-Application Environment Services GEM BET. BORT of integ r ution Teslim o calendar 14 d ing modestype SOFTWARE DATA STORAGE GEM ment High speed hard disk with endly Montan a tion ryce Mbyte per second A n em based 6 CAM Kih Baat in cartridge acces hanical record store BOS-Business Opening System DISK DRIVE to run Suomated and and Bobine program opere GEM GOD  (ftermed aforge capacity SOUND AND MUSIC GEM WHITE procesor P BASIC ang pango Sound Ger originally writy D a ch Frequency controlom HE to above suite vis channel in waveshaping soundin g for the new of put down mong mustand Seperequacy done con VARIOUS ASALAH , Decay, Sunan R I Momertace for t h e syntes oppy disk 500KDOOK KEYBOARD Nard de CD compte Standard OWERTY typewriting The doma RGB & monochrome morcar Numen keet Te key incang ENTER One louer c or control LANGUAGES MONITOR Many other w oon be including A B CPL C. Cobol,Compied Basic Lisp Modular and Pascal Noora of the wore specifications are prer ew my wors t to change l 51933/33 Ha Monochrome Monitor 512 RAM 500K Disk Drive ,984 ,362  *512K RAM * MOUSE * GEM *B/W MONITOR *500K 3.5\" DISK DRIVE *KEYBOARD (95 KEYS) PRICE PRESS COMMENT Images and low C A PAAAA P The Atari ST Computers truly present to the consumer August 2014 FINANCIAL TIMES \"The slectronics in the machine are a work of art. The heart ST was the modem technology that \"This is the only personal com now at comes with of the 520ST Motorola 6000 one of the most power ordblin k age that a professional impression 15-bit proces around and in many respecta i la conto Puternight March 1965 PERSONAL COMPUTER WORLD being 32 bit ho when the machine per te shops May 23rd 1985 POPULAR COMPUTING WEEKLY The AST the most s ignature Per Bright June 1846 PERSONAL COMPUTER WORLD Alar has an original and elegant end of memory have the additional advantage of foving the PC version ading April 190 PERSONAL COMPUTER NEWS The machine wanany more powerful than an IBM PC PC in mi n would be si in poble to design a wrofire winning GEM or the de e main any price bracket The 64 delar end money for ne? To Myth 1985 PERSONAL COMPUTER NEWS which the only wels Try and stop mer March 1995 POPULAR COMPUTING WEEKLY neue at GEM make the new range of Aan Computer John Lwert July 1906 TLECTRONICS & COMPUTING found it ( OEM) extremely way and was very r and operating below being called The 120GT i technically excellent. The 520ST he nalurking under the that they are May 2nd 1985 COMPUTING Peberget Fab 1915. PERSONAL COMPUTER WORLD July 1946 YOUR COMPUTER 2749 SILICA SHOP LTD, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX SEND FOR FREE ATARI ST LITERATURE SILICA SHOP To: Silica Shop Ltd, Dept CVG 0885, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX PLEASE SEND ME FREE LITERATURE ON THE NEW ATARI 520ST COMPUTER Mr/Mrs/Ms Initials: Surname: AIARI WE ARE THE UK's No1 ATARI SPECIALISTS AT At Silica we have been successfully dedicated to Atari ever since their products first appeared on the UK market. We can attribute our success largely to the Atari specialisation which we practice and to the user back-up we provide. Rest assured that when you buy a piece of Atari hardware at Silica you will be fully supported. Our mailings giving news of software releases and developments will keep you up to date with the Atari market and our technical support team and sales staff are at the end of the telephone line to deal with your problems and supply your every need. With our specialist bis, we aim to keep stocks of all the available Atari hardware, software peripherals and accessories. We also stock a wide range of Atari dedicated books and through us, the owners on our list can subscribe to several American Atari dedicated magazines. We can provide a full service to all Atari owners and are now firmly established as the UK's NUMBER ONE Atari specialists. Here are just some of the things we can offer to our customers FREE POST & PACKING ON MAIL ORDERS I you would like to be registered on our mailing FREE NEXT DAY SECURICOR DELIVERY Ist as an Atari computer owner, or as a person INFORMATION MAILING SERVICE Interested in buying an Atarf machine, let us TECHNICAL SUPPORT TEAM know. We will be pleased to keep you up to date HIGHLY COMPETITIVE PRICES with new Alarl developments free of charge. So, * AFTER SALES SUPPORT SERVICE return the coupon today and begin experiencing * REPAIR SERVICE ON ATARI PRODUCTS a specialist Atari service that is second to none. Address: Postcode: SILICA HOTLINE SULLCA @ 01-309 1111 Do you already own a computer If so, which one do you own? "


"ATARI REVIEWS DROPZONE crystals which can power a space cruiser which is waiting SUPPLIER: US Gold to take the survivors of the PRICE: .95 devastating robot Wars on It's almost worth getting earth to the safety of another destroyed in Dropzone just to solar system see the fabulous firework The graphics are excellent display as you disintegrate into and the high-speed scrolling a thousand particles Rust it screen allows fast and very doesn't help your score. smooth action as you blast Your mission is to protecte d act nine different alien attackers men on the surface of Jupiter's satellite, lo, from being  Graphics destroyed by invading aliens Sound and return them to the moon Value base landing pad.  Playability The men are searching for O OOOO 00 00 0 QUASIMODO buildings The object of the game is to SUPPLIER: US Gold assault three specially marked PRICE: .95 cassette! targets within the city. You E14.95 disc only have one aircraft and The Bells! The Bells! very little time. Quasimodo, the famous and Anti-aircraft fire can much abused hunchback of damage your plane but repair Notre Dame, is having a right work can be carried out if you ding dong. can safely land on a friendly He's been accused of steal runway. ing the royal jewels and every. body is out to get him. To clear  Graphics his name. Quasimodo must  Sound find the precious stones stones Value The game consists of three  Playability levels each containing one of the jewels. The first is the Archer level where soldiers scale walls firing arrows at Quasimodo. He tries to fight them off by hurling rocks onto them. The next level is the Bells tower where Quasimodo must swing from bell to bell in search of one of the jewels But bats and a ghost do not make things easy for him. The third level is the Castle Wall and once again Quasimodo must brave the slings and arrows of outraged soldiers. At the top of the castle lies the third and final gem. Quasimodo is a very play. able game but the graphics aren't brilliant and the game is rather overpriced for what it is MOON PATROL Graphics SUPPLIER: Atari  Sound PRICE: Not available  Value  Playability Lunar fun as you drive your moon buggy across the satellite's rugged surface, BLUE MAX leaping rocks and craters while fighting off aliens who SUPPLIER: US Gold Swoop from above. PRICE: .95 cassette/ The graphics are good and .95 disc the scrolling, as you would There's something irresistible expect from Atari, is excellent. about dogfight games and the Blue Max is no exception.  Graphics A three-dimensional diagon  Sound ally scrolling screen allows you  Value to shoot enemy planes, strafe  Playability guns and tanks and bomb SPACE SHUTTLE SUPPLIER: Activision PRICE: .99 If you love flight simulation games, you'll love Space Shuttle. Your mission is to launch, rendezvous and dock with a satellite orbiting about 210 nautical miles above the earth and then return safely home. The simulation is complex it comes with a very detailed flight manual -and challenging. Hours of fun. FAG Graphics Sound  Value  Playability 2 on on an KISSIN' KOUSINS presentation To reach your kissin' SUPPLIER: English Software Kousin, you must overcome a PRICE: .95 variety of objects, each of Kissin' Kousins is the first which gets progressively British release for the Atari to harder. include digitized speech. The first objects to jump It's created with a special over a It's created with a special over are hydrants and dustsound sampling system with bins. Later ones include out the need for any extra caterpillars, kangaroos, bats hardware. and frogs. Bombs also fall from But, unfortunately, that's all the sky to complicate matters. that is really special about it. In style, Kissin' Kousins pays Graphics lip service to Hunchback Sound It is, however, a fast moving Value arcade game with good Playability graphics, sound and a nice 000 88 "


"REVIEWS ATARI o lo CO CO COCO ONNO ATARI SMASH HITS CONAN BRUCE LEE SUPPLIER: US Gold SUPPLIER: US Gold/Datasoft TAL PRICE: E14.95 disc/ PRICE: .95 .95 cassette If you play Bruce Lee for kicks The first computer game to you will not be disappointed feature Robert E Howard's The aim of the game is to muscle-bound fantasy hero, get Bruce through the fortress Conan the Barbarian. of an evil wizard, claim his Conan must fight his way fortune and possibly destroy through seven levels packed him with different foes and Bruce has to run, jump, kick monsters avoiding dangers and chop his way through 20 by leaping, jumping and hack screens defended by Ninja ing away with his mighty soldiers and the indestructible broadsword Green Yamo. The main object of the game Although it is basically in each level is to find a mystic another platform game, the gem and place it in a gem animation of the characters holder and find the key to the plus bold and colourful SON next level. graphics lifts Bruce Lee out of Speed, strength, stamina DECATHLON the ordinary and the will to win are all needed. Excellent graphics  Graphics  Graphics SUPPLIER: Activision Sound  Sound and a joy to play. PRICE: .99  Value  Value Ten events of strength-sapping  Playability  Playability  Graphics action. From the 100 metre  Sound dash to the 1500 metre race.  Value from the long jump to the  Playability discus throw, it's super stuff. VOLUME FORBIDDEN FOREST distance to the nearest camel. The group is gradually SUPPLIER: US Gold marching towards the side of PRICE: .95 cassette/ the screen and, if they reach .95 disc it, the planet Earth will have been destroyed. Score enough If you go down to the woods, hits and the camels will be beware of a big surprise. wiped out Lurking in the undergrowth are giant spiders, bees, dragons and skeletons.  Graphics And if you survive their on  Sound slaught, there is also a  Value phantom and dreaded demon  Playability to face ANISTRIKES BACA CAPTAINICKY'S You control an archer using a joystick and your skill with POLE POSITION the bow and arrow is your only SUPPLIER: Datasoft/US Gold protection PRICE: .95 cassettel .95 disc  Graphics Pole Position holds the honour  Sound of being the first decent race  Value simulation game to make it out ATARI 400/800/ Playability 600XL BOOKL of the arcades and onto home computers. ATTACK OF THE It set the standards others have followed. Admittedly. MUTANT CAMELS some have now topped it for graphics, sound and race SUPPLIER: Llamasoft detail. PRICE: .50 But in doing so, these rivals A conversion of the original have produced far harder ATARI HITS Back, Captain Sticky's Gold Commodore 64 game. Your games to play. That is all right and Hyperblast. tiny fighter plane takes on 90 if you want to spend hours SUPPLIER: English Software Volume Two has JBJ, feet high monster camels who mastering gear changes PRICE: .95 cassettel Airstrike II. Batty Builders, are determined to take over before getting a taste of the .95 disc Breath of the Dragon and earth. action Neptune's Daughters. Volume The camels are shielded by Pole Position, however, Three volumes of five games Three consists of JBJ, neutronium and have in-built allows you to enjoy the fun representing great value for Stranded, Diamonds. Robin laser defences. more or less straightaway. money even if you don't like all Hood and Citadel Warrior. Attack is a sideways Still a winner the games. scrolling game, stretching over For some strange reason,  Graphics ten screens. At the top of the  Graphics Jet Boot Jack (JBJ) is included  Sound current screen, a small  Sound in each volume.  Value 10 representation of the whole  Value Volume One has Jet Boot  Playability 10 game is shown so you can  Playability Jack, Fire Fleet, Dan Strikes work out the position and dHo CR OOON HYPERBLAST! "


NA


"BY SCOTT SMITH 20 CLR 40 OFEN #1,4.0, \"X\" RUNS ON AN ATARI 50 DIX 1$(5), IN (0) 60 DIK IN(10), C(10), L(10), 5(10).SH(10), OF(10), PT(10), 19(10).F(10), CX(10),cx 200) 80 DIN .ST (200) 90 DIX RF(20,1) 25 FOR DEO TO 6:INCD)-O:C()O:CL(D)=0:30)-O:SH(D)-0 (D)=O:FT(D)=0:0 ) 0: FD()=0:0XCD)-0:NEXT D 96 ENL-INT(RND (1) *20) +70 100 GRAFHICS O 120 POSITION 15,0:7 \"AN AFURNA\" Head a team of 18 climbers, 34 Sherpas and 130 POSITION 15, 1:2 \"-*** 25 porters trying to conquer Annapurna. 135 ? :? 140 ?\" ATARI VERSION BY\" It's your task to plan the route, supplies and 141 ? 142 ? \" SCOTI SMITH, AUG, 1984\" moves from camp to camp towards the 150 FOR D=1 TO 400:NEXT D summit. 200 GOSUE 10000 1000 GRAPHICS 0: 1 :IF D ENL THEN 9100 Scott Smith says his record for completing 1005 TLS\" DAY\":GOSUB 2000 this strategy/adventure game is 33 days in 1010 NX=0:RF=-1 1015 GOSUB 2200:GOSUB 2300: GOSUB 6000 computer time. \"Can you beat this?\" he 1020 IF W-1 THEN 1240 challenges. 1025 NM = 1 +1 1030 IF NM<=10 THEN 1040 1035 ? \"NO MORE CARRIES\":FOR PF=1 TO 500:NEXT PF:NNENM1:GOTO 1240 1040 ? :? \"MOVEMENT\":NM;\":\":? 1045 ? \"INPUT TYPE OF MOVEMENT\" 1050 ? \"1) CARRY 2)MOVE\" 2372 IF Z<>69 THEN 2370 1060 ? \"3) ROUTE 4) SUMMIT\" 2375 W=-1: RETURN 1065 GET #1, INS 2380 ? \"FOOR-STRONG WINDS\" 1075 M1=INS-48 2390 RETURN 1080 IF MI<1 OR MI>4 THEN 1065 240 ? \"GOOD-ONLY LIGHT SNOW 1085 IF M1-3 THEN GOSUB 4000:GOTO 1210 2410 RETURN 1090 IF MI=4 THEN GOSUB 5000:GOTO 1210 2420 ? \"PERFECT CONDITIONS\" 1100 ? :? :? :? \"INPUT TYPE OF LOAD\" 2430 RETURN 1110 ? \"1) EQUIPMENT 2)TENTS\" 2500 GRAPHICS 0:GOSUB 2000 1115 ? \"3) FOOD\" 2510 FOR D-O TO 6: POSITION 6+5*D.4:? D::NEXT D:? :? 1120 ? \"4) OXYGEN 5)NO LOAD\" 2-15 FOR S=C TO 6:1 RF(0,0)=RF(0,1) THEN POSITION +*+. :? \"-\": : NEXT D 1130 GET #1, INS:M2=INS-48 2520 FOSITION 0, $:? \"EQUIF\" 1135 IF M2<1 OR M2 >5 THEN 1130 2530 FOR OTC FCSITION 5+5 ,6:2 E ):: NEXT 1140 ? :? :? :? \"INPUT CARRIER.....1) CLIMBER\" 2540 FOSITION 0.9:? \"TANTS\" 1150 ? \"2) SHERPA 3) PORTER\" 2 50 FOR =O TC :FCSITION 6+5.. :21: :: NEXT 1160 GET #1, INS:M3=INS-48 2560 FOSITION 0,10:? \"O \" 1165 IF M3<1 OR M3>3 THEN 1160 2570 FOR S=O TO 8:POSITION 5+5 , 10:? :: NEXT 1170 ? \"CAMP OF ORIGIN?\" 2580 POSITION 0,12:? \"OXYGN\" 1172 GET #1,INS:M4-INS-48 2590 FOR DEO TO 6: POSITION S+5.1. 12:? OX():: NEXT 1175 IF M4CO OR M4>6 THEN 1170 2600 FOSITION 0,14:? \"CLMRS\" 1180 ? \"DESTINATION CAMP\" 2610 TOR DEO TO 6: POSITION 6+5., 14:? CL():: NEXT D 1182 GET #1, INS :M5=INS-48 2620 FOSITION 0,16:? \"SHPES\" 1185 IF WECO OR N5>6 THEN 1180 2630 FOR DEO TO 5: POSITION 6+5., 16:? SHO) :: NEXT D 1190 ? \"NUMBER OF LOADS \":: INPUT INS:M6-VAL(IN$):? \" 2640 POSITION 0,18:? \"PORTS\" 1195 IF MECO THEN 1190 2650 FOR DEO TO 2: POSITION 6+5+5,18: PT(2) : : NEXT D 1198 IF M6-0 AND IN$<>\"0\" THEN 1190 2710 ? :? :? \"NOW PLAN YOUR MOVEMENTS FOR DAY\": +1:? 1200 GOSUB 3000 2720 ? \"PRESS SPACE BAR WHEN READY\" 1210 ? :? \"ANOTHER MOVEMENT (Y/N)?\":GET #1, RMS 2730 GET #1.2:IF Z<>32 THEN 2730 1220 IF RMS=89 THEN GRAPHICS O:GOSUB 2000:GOTO 1025 2740 RETURN 1230 IF RMS 78 THEN 1210 3000 ME-O:GOSUB 3500:IF ME-2 THEN RETURN 1240 GOSUB 7000: GOSUB 9000:GOSUB 8000 3055 IF ME=1 THEN RETURN 1250 GOSUB 2500:GOTO 1000 3060 ON M2 GOTO 3070, 3080,3090.3100,3120 2000 GRAPHICS O 3070 EC(M4)=E(M4)-M6:EQ(MS)=EC (M5)+M6 2010 ? TL$:03 3075 GOTO 3120 2020 RETURN 3080 TN (M4)= N(M4)-M6: TN (N5)=TN(M5)+M6 2100 D=7 3085 GOTO 3120 2110 D=-1:IF IN(D) THEN HP=D 3090 FD(M4) FD(M4)-M6:FD(M5)-FD(M5) +M6 2120 IF D<=0 THEN RETURN 3095 GCTO 3120 2130 GOTO 2110 3100 OX(M4)=OX (M4)-M6:OX (M5)=OX (M5) +M6 2200 FOR DEO TO 6 3120 IF M1=1 THEN RETURN 2210 DC(D)=CL(D):DS(D)=SH(D):NEXT D 3140 ON M3 GOTO 3150,3160, 3170 2220 FOR D=D TO 2:0P(D)=PT(D):NEXT D 3150 CL(M4)=CL(M4)-M6:CL(MS)=CL(M5) +M6 2.50 BTU 3155 RETURN 2300 ? WEATHER: \": 3160 SH(M4)-SH(M4)-M6:SH(M5)-SH(M5 )+M6 2310 W-INT(RND(1) *3+1.4) 3165 RETURN 2320 ON GOTO 2340,2360,2400,2420 3170 FT(M4)=FT(M4)-MG:PT (M5 )=PT(N5) +M6 2340 IF AND(1) >0.85 THEN 2360 3175 RETURN 2350 ? \"VERY EAD-SNOW AND WIND\" 3500 IF M3C >3 OR M5< =2 THEN 3510 235 RETURN 3505 ? \"PORTERS TOO HIGH\":ME-1 2360 ? \"STORN-NO MOVEMENT TODAY\" 3510 ON M2 GOTO 3515,3520, 3530, 3540.3560 2370 ? \"FRESS E TO CONTINUE\":GET #1,2 3515 IF EQ(M4)-M6>=0 THEN 3560 "


"ANNAPURNA 3518 GOTO 3550 3520 IF TN(M4)-M6O THEN 3560 3523 GOTO 3550 3530 IF FD(M4)-M6 THEN 3560 3533 GOTO 3550 3540 IF OX(M4)-M6> 0 THEN 3560 3550 ? \"TOO FEW SUPPLIES FOR CARRY\":NE-1 3560 ON M3 GOTO 3570.3580,3590 3570 IF DC(M4)-MECO THEN 3600 3575 DC(M4)-DC(M4)-86:GOTO 3610 3580 IF DS(M)-M6CO THEN 3600 3585 DS(M4)-DS(M4)-M6:GOTO 3610 3590 IF DF(M4)-M6 THEN 3600 3595 DF(X4) DP (M4)-M6:GOTO 3610 3600 ? \"TOO FEN CARRIERS FOR CARRY\":ME-1 3610 IF N5-M4C-2 THEN 3620 3615 ? \"TOO MUCH HEIGHT GAIN\":NE1 3620 IF M5-M4C >2 THEN 3630 3625 IF RF(M4,1)>2 THEN 3630 2627 IF R(M441,1)<>RF(M4+1,0) THEN 3640 3630 IF RF(M4,0)=RF(4.1) OR M4>5 THEN 3650 3640 ? \"ROUTE NOT ESTABLISHED\":ME=1 3650 IF ME=1 THEN RETURN 3655 IF W-4 THEN RETURN 3660 IF N3-1 THEN RETURN 3670 WF-RND(1)(W+RND(1)) 3680 IF N5<-2 AND WF >0.8 THEN RETURN 3690 IF N5< =4 AND WF>1 THEN RETURN 3700 IF M5C-6 AND WF>1.25 THEN RETURN 3730 ME=1: RETURN 4000 GRAPHICS 0:GOSUB 2000 4010 ?? \"ROUTE FORCING FROM WHICH CAMP?\" 4020 GET #1, INS:M4INS-48 4025 IF M46 OR M4CO THEN 4020 4035 1RF< >M4 THEN 4045 4040 ? \"ONE TRY PER DAY\":RETURN 1045 IF EQ(M4) >0 THEN 4060 4050 ? \"NO EQUIPMENT AVAILABLE\":RETURN 4060 IT RP(4,0)(RF (M4,1) THEN 4080 4070 ? \"ROUTE ALREADY COMPLETED\":RETURN 4080 ? : RM4 4090 IF RF(M4,1)) THEN 4110 4100 ? \"YOU ARE ON A FRESH ROUTE\" 4105 GOTO 4120 4110 ? RF(M4,0)-RF(M4,1):\" ROPE\": 4115 ? \"LENGTHS TO GO TO FINISH ROUTE\" 4120? 4130 ? \"NO. OF CLIMBERS ON ROUTE?\":GET #1, INS 4135 M6-INS-48:IF M6THEN 4130 4130 IF CL(M4) (>0 THEN 4160 4150 ? \"NO CLIMBERS AVAILABLE\":RETURN 4160 IF CL(MA)-M6OTHEN 4180 4170 ? \"ONLY\":CL(M4):\" CLIMBERS AVAILABLE\" 4175 COTC 4130 4180 IF Y6C-4 THEN 4190 4185 ? GROUP TO LARGE\":GOTO 4130 4190 ? 4200 RT-INT(RM (1) 6+1) 4210 IF RTCO) THEN REEC() 420 EC(M)=E(MU)-RT 4230 RF(4,1)=RI (4,1)+RT 42.0 IFR (4,1)>=RF(M4,0) THEN 4280 4250 ? 11:\" ROPE. LENGTHS LAID.STILL \": 4260 ? RF(4,0)-RF(4.1):? \"LENGTHS TO GO.\" 4270 ? TRY AGAIN TOKO ROX\": RETURN 4280 RF(4,1)=RF (4.0) 4290 ? \"CONGRATULATIONS 4300 ? \"YOU HAVE COMPLETED THIS SECTION\" 4310 RETURN 5000 GRAFHICS 0: GOSUB 2000 5010 ? \"SUNIT ID\":? 5020 IF RF(6,1)-6 THEN 504 5330 ? \"TOF ROPE SECTIONS NOT LAID: RETURN 5040 IF CL(6) >2 THEN 5100 5050 ? \"TOO FEW CLIMBERS FOR BID\":RETURN 5100 IF RND(1) *W>2 THEN 5130 5110 ? \"EID UNSUCCESSFUL-\": 5120 ? \"TRY AGAIN TOMORROW: RETURN 5130 ? :SR-SR+CL(6) 5140 ? \"!!! SUMMIT REACHED!!!\": \"*** 150 ? :? \"CONGRATULATIONS\":? 5160 ? DO YOU WANT ANOTHER AT EXP\" 5180 ? \"(Y OR N)?\":GET #1, DS 5190 IF DS-89 THEN RETURN "


"Compumart Atari 800XL Computer & Atari 1050 Disk Drive (inc. Home Filing Manager & Pay off Adventure & Atari Demo Atari 800XL Computer Atari 1050 Disk Drive *NEW* Atari 130XE Computer *NEW* Atari ST. Range CALL NOW!!! BLANK DISKS Top Quality 5!\" Single Sided/Double Density Blank Disks Buying in bulk has enabled us to supply these disks at the Best Prices in the U.K. With a LIFETIME WARRANTY Box of 10 5\" SS/DD Blank Disks including labels and write protect tabs ONLY . Buy 5 Boxes and get a FREE Storage Case worth over !!! 50 5%\" SS/DD Blank Disks in a FREE Perspex Storage Case ONLY . Goods despatched same day .... Disks 1st class post, Hardware parcel post Postage & Packing .... Add .00 per box of disks, .00 per box of 50 and .00 per item of hardware Please send cheques/postal orders to:Compumart, 71 Gracedieu Road, Loughborough, Leics. LE11 OQF Tel: (0509) 262959 "


"Spaceflight epic Melbourne House Get the game everyone is talking about: STARION for the 48K Spectrum . CRASH SMASH: \"astonishing, astounding, phenomenal... well startling, doesn't even begin to say it.\" CVG Game of the Month: \"don't hang about waiting for Elite, rush out now and grab a copy of Starion.'  Sinclair User: \"Melbourne House has come up trumps with Storion.» Melbourne House (Publishers) Ltd. Trade enquiries call 01.940 6064 Castle Yard House, Castle Yard, Barclaycard and Access orders can be accepted Richmond, TW10 TF on our 24 houransaphone, just call (0235)83 5001. M "


"UnitSoft ATARI 400/800 a 600XL/800XL/130XE 48K co) HARDWARE *Gunshot Joystick Joycard........ Quickshot .... Music Maker (C64) Cass/Disk... Currah Speech (C64)..... Memorex Disks 48 PPS (10 pack.........13.50 AFFORDABLE PRODUCTS GUMILTO UNIT 6 136 INCRM STREET GLASGOW GI 5 COMMOOOHE 4 Frank Bruno \"Hyper Sports.... Exploding Fist..... BBC Lode Runner...............7.75 .75 .50 .75 Castle Quest Revs Cass. Revs Disk... * Contraption. Chicane.......... Gremlins Magic Mushroom... Cauldron.... Elite Cass Este Disk AMSTRAD \"Frank Brune... \"Hypersports A View to a Kill. Oun Darach. Hard Hat Mac Archon... 3D Starstrike \"Beachhead .. 11.00 13.00 .. .00 ...12.00 4.75 10.00 Mind Shadow Disk The Hobbit................. 10.50 American Footba Castle Blackstar 5 .25 Mig Alley Ace.. . 7.25 Monster Trivia............... 6.75 10.50 A Level 9 Alien B..... \"Knightore Hobbit System 1500 Kensington. \"Rapton 7.00 7.00 .6.00 7.00 .. 8.25 Knightliore Alien Sir Lancelot... Combat Lynx Special Ops... A level 9 Fighter Pilot Ram Turbo Interface 17.75 Frank Bruno 5.20 \"Hypersports Dun Darach........... 7.00 E'ones a Wally.. .7.00 Jump Jet International Basketbal 4.95 Rocky Horror..............6.50 On Court Tennis...............8.50 Gt. Am X Country............ 8.50 On Field Football Star League Baseball 8.50 Gribleys Day out...... J. Barton's Squash World Series Baseball Pitstop Grand Larchy . Herbert's Dummy 7.00 Music Composer... Nodes of Yesod... \"Cauldron. Dun Darah Knockout. Rocky Horror Quake Minus One PTMEEL, PEELPE 700 Hill \"Herbert's Dummy Run 7.00 MULE. Cass Buck Rogers Entombed G. Gooch's Cricket Knockout Shadowe Lords of Midnight . 5.00 J. Barton's Squash Hard Hat Mac Hard Hat Mac Disk Murder on Zinderneut Lords of Midnight Chuckie Egg Gt. Europe Road Race... 6.25 World Series Baseball......5.50 Tir Na Nog Murder on Zinderneut......8.75 Operation Whirlwind 8.50 Rad Bungling Bay \"Skyfox Disk NEW ......9.75 Dropzone Bounty Bob... Jet Set Wily ... *Congo Bongo 5 .75 Falcon Patrol ....... 5.50 Bristies 2.25 Encounter 2.25 \"Soy vs Soy 5.50 \"Elidon..........................5.00 \"Nodes of Yesod........... 7.00 Archon Disk..........11.25 Resim of impossibility...7.50 Reaim of impossibility Disk.. Dropzone... Ghost chaser Quasimodo Mission Asteroid Disk... 16.95 Decathlon (ACT.......7.50 Nato Commander... \"O'Reillys Mine............... 7.25 Battle Normandy.......... 11.25 F15 Strike Eagle............ 11.00 Combat Leader... .. 11.00 Mr Do........ Dig Dug...... Rocky... Spy Hunter..... 5.95 Up and Down.................5.95 One on One Realm of impossibility.... 7.00 Hard Hat Mas.............7.00 7.00 Archon..... . .... 8.00 Postage included UK Please state which micro. Overseas orders add 1.00 per wem. All cheques payable to: Affordable Products (GLWI Lid. Send 1.00 for our exclusive catalogue with up to the minute new releases for the Amstrad/Atar/BBC/CM54/ZX Spec. MSX ENGLISH SOFTWARE.. JEWELS OF BABYLON THEATRE EUROPE SPECTRUM COVE RS SUPERSTAR A VIEW TO TAIL MORDENS QUEST SLAPSHOT WORLD SERIES BASEBALL BATTLE FOR MOWAY DALEYS SUPER TEST TALES OF ARABIAN NIGHTS TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY STROOP GATES OF DAWN WORR ON THE WATERFRONT TIME=L,PTMEELP TEFLP TEFL,PTMEL,PPEL \"Zd7:5W, d'75-W, ROCKY HORROR SHOW SOFORION ROCKFORDS ROT CUARE MINUS JET SET WILLY WARLORDS PT EL PTI AMSTRAD MINI OFFICE FRANK BRUNO BORING BBC/ELECTRON H P POKER WIZARDORE   DARKSTAR DALEY THOMPSON DECATHLON TANKBUSTERS ALL NERCEPTOR TILES JACK AND THE BEANSTALK LOMOWA specAL     GREMLINS GHORTOWAY COMMODORE 64 GAME FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD A VIEW TO A KILL WAY OF THE EXPLODING IST. PLEASE NOTE IF OUR ORDER EXCEEDS ESO you get 10% FURTHER DISCOUNT SEND CHEQUEIP O TO  LEATHER LANE, LONDON ECE TEL: 01-04 2045 C16/pus 4 wat ons 95 "


"colourspace PRICE .50 INTHESISER I LICHT ATARI LLA 41005 Lamasah AVAILABLE FROM W.H. SMITHS, BOOTS, WOOLWORTHS AND MOST COMPUTER RETAILERS OR FROM LLAMASOFT 49 MOUNT PLEASANT, TADLEY, HANTS (TEL. 07356 4478) SAE FOR CATALOGUE & NEWSLETTER 'THE NATURE OF THE BEAST! "


"ANNAPURNA 5200 IF DSC >78 THEN 5160 5210 S=(SR 1000)/DD:? 5215 ? \"YOUR SCORE IS \";S 5230 GRAPHICS 0:GOTO 9130 6000 IF RND(1)<0.9 THEN RETURN 6010 ON INT(RND(1) 1.4+1) GOTO 6100, 6200 6100 GOSUB 2100:IF HP<1 THEN RETURN 6105 RF(0,1)-RF(0,1)-INT(RND(1) +1.5) 6110 ? \"AN AVALANCHE HAS SWEPT AWAY PART OF\" 6120 ? \"THE ROUTE BETWEEN CAMPS O 81.\" 6140 ? INT(RND(0) 2+1.5):\" LENGTHS OF ROPE HAVE BEEN LOST.\" 6160 ? \"THIS MUST BE REPAIRED BEFORE ANY\" 6170 ? \"LOADS CAN BE MOVED FROM CAMP 0.\" 6190 RETURN 6200 GOSUB 2100: ACEINT(RND(1) HP) 6220 ? \"CAMP \";AC;\" HAS BEEN HIT BY AN 6230 ? \"AVALANCHE!\" 6240 ? INT(RND(1) 2+1.6): 6250 ?\" TENTS HAVE BEEN LOST.\" 6260 TNCAC)-TN(AC)-INT (RND(0)*2+1.6) 6270 RETURN 7000 FOR DEO TO 6 7005 TP-CL(D)+SH(D) 7010 IF D< =2 THEN TP-TP+PT(D) 7020 IF TP=0 THEN NEXT D: RETURN 7025 IF D-4 THEN OX(D) FOX (D)-CL(D)/2 7030 IF D-5 THEN OX(D)-OX(D)-TP/2 7040 IF D-6 THEN OX(D) OX(D)-TP 7050 FD(D)-FDD)-INT(TP/4+0.5) 7060 IF QX(D)CO THEN QX (D) 7070 IF FD(D) CO THEN FD (D)=0 7080 NEXT D 7090 RETURN 8000 GRAPHICS 0:GOSUB 2000:? :XX-0 8010 ? \"SUPPLY CHECK\":? 8015 FOR D-6 TO O STEP -1:EV=0 8020 TP=CL(D) +SH(D) 8030 IF D< -2 THEN TP TP PT(D) 8040 IF TP-0 THEN NEXT D:GOTO 8175 8050 IF TPC=2TN(D) THEN 8080 8060 ? \"TOO FEW TENTS AT CAMP\":D 8070 IF TP4TND) THEN EV=1 8080 IF TPC4FD(D) THEN 8110 8090 ? \"FOOD IS RUNNING OUT AT CAMP\":D 8100 IF TP>6 FD(D) THEN EV-1 8110 IF D<4 THEN 8150 8111 IF D4 THEN 8120 8112 IF CL(D) >2*OX(D) THEN 8114 8113 ? \"OXYGEN IS RUNNING OUT AT CAMP FOURI!\" 8114 IF CL(D) >3*OX(D) THEN EV=1 8115 GOTO 8150 8120 IF TP<2*OX(D) THEN 8150 8125 IF D=4 AND CL(D)=0 THEN 8150 8130 ? \"OXYGEN IS RUNNING OUT AT CAMP\":D 8140 IF TP>3\"OX(D) THEN EV-1 8150 IF EV=1 THEN GOSUB 8500:GOTO 8170 8160 ? \"EVERYTHING OK AT CAMP\":D 8170 NEXT D 8175 ? :? \"PRESS ANY KEY TO CONTINUE.\" 8180 GET #1,DS:RETURN 8500 IF XX-2 THEN ? \"THE CLIMBERS AT CAMP\":0;\" HAVE DIED!!!\":XX-O:CL(D)-O:SH(D) =0:PT(D)=0:GOTO 8550 8503 ? :?\"! THE CLIMBERS AT CAMP\":0;\" ARE\" 8505 ?\" ... RETREATINGI\":? 8507 IF 0-1 0 THEN CL(O)O:SH(O)=0:PT(O)=0:2 \"THE CLIMBERS AT CAMP O HAVE GONE H OME!\":GOTO 8550 8510 CL(0-1)-CL(D-1)+CL(D):CL(D)=0 8520 SHD-1)-SH(D-1) +SH(D):SH(D)=0 8530 IF D<=2 THEN PT(D-1)-PT(0-1) +PT(D):PT(D)=0 e540 XX=XX+1 8550 RETURN 9000 RETURN 9100 GRAPHICS 0:? \"THERE WAS A HUGE AVALANCHE AND\":? 9120 ? \"ALL OF YOU WERE KILLED!!\" 9130 ? :?\" ANOTHER GAME?\" 9140 GET #1,J:IF J=89 THEN RUN 9150 IF J<>78 THEN 9130 9160 GRAPHICS 0:? \"THANKS FOR THE GAME!!\": END 10000 REM 10030 EQ(0)=100: TN(O)=75:FD(0)=900:0X(O)-80 10040 CL(O)=18:SH(O)=34:PT(O)=25 10050 FOR D=0 TO 6:READ ZX:RF(D,0) -ZX:NEXT D 10060 FOR DEO TO 6:RF(0,1)=0:NEXT D 10200 RETURN 10500 DATA 5,6,4,7,5,6,6,3 "


"THE ATARI FILE III HILL Games companies producing software in the States have dropped BY PHILIP MORRIS like flies over the last 2-3 years, leading to a shortage of new Atari titles, a problem in actually trying to market leading to a drop in sales for Atari. them. Until Jack Tramiel came to the rescue. At the time, the market had not yet Of course, Atari's attitude towards T unny thing, the home computer developed to the stage where home software companies in the old days business. Market a computer for computers were regarded as the best did not help. They appeared to go out use in the home, like Atari did in machines for games and entertain of their way to make it difficult for new America back in 1979, when they 979, when they ment generally. The Atari VCS, Mattel companies to produce quality released the Atari 400/800 machines, Intellivision and other American software, by restricting access to vital and nobody takes them seriously asmachines. long since extinct. programming information, by not computers! Other manufacturers, such dominated the market for games, with approving \"unofficial memory as Apple, couldn't believe that Atari all the titles on cartridge at around 30 upgrades (which boosted the sales of could actually manufacture a real dollars each. the Atari 400 model, incidentally). computer, after all Atari just made W ell, you would have thought that By not supporting the software games machines, didn't they? In fact the software companies who jumped companies whose efforts would have what Atari did was to manufacture a in to produce dames softw in to produce games software on greatly expanded the market for the computer which had superior features cassette and disc for the Atari excellent Atari machines, Atari, in to the Apple, and at a much cheaper computers would have set low prices, effect, cut their own throat. Now in price. say 10-15 dollars, to expand the sales 1985, of course, under its new Way back in the late 70s, which of the new \"games\" machines, thus leadership, Atari is making every seems like an age in home computer reducing the costs of manufacture for effort to help those companies upon terms, Tandy and Apple machines Atari etc, etc. If this had happened whose products Atari's very existence were being used mainly for business right from the start, Atari could have may come to depend! and educational purposes, and the quickly dominated the scene in much The sad fact about the above thought of JUST playing games on the same way as Sinclair did with the sequence of events is that by now them was abhorrent to a lot of people. Spectrum in the UK. Atari would have dominated the world Then Atari came along with a new Unfortunately, the software houses market for low price home computers, range of cheaper machines which had thought that they could stick to the 30 if only the marketing people at the Player/Missile (Sprite) graphics, 4 dollar price, even on cassettes and time had seen sense and decided to channel sound generators, built-in discs which are very, very cheap to market the machines at the prices at joystick ports and cartridge software manufacture. MAJOR MISTAKE. The which they are available today. But the slots-features previously unheard of average consumer will only put up people in charge made enough in home machines. And what with high prices for a time, and then mistakes for ten companies, let alone happens? Well, people think they are do one of two things: either stop one!! just higher priced, super-duper games buying games, or start copying other However the quality of the machines machines, and Atari find that they have peoples. was never disputed and the current 98 "


"MEMORIES ARE MADE OF THIS Although the product was good and reliable, the UK mass market saw the machines as out of its price range. Tramiel intends to change all that not only with the new range but also by cutting the price of the older machines. This means that an Atari 800XL with 64k RAM and Atari BASIC built-in can now be bought for around .99 compared with .99 previously. hanks for the memory that's Supporting peripherals such as the the message to Atari boss Jack 1010 program recorder now sell for Tramiel for the new Atari .99 (previously .99) and the 1050 computers. disc drive for .99 (previously The XE 130 is the first Atari onto the .99). market that has received the Tramiel Atari's software was also overpriced treatment. At .99 for 128K RAM, it in the UK. Titles that sold for around represents a remarkably good deal.  can now be bought for around But it is the imminent arrival of the .99. Atari ST range that is causing the real Added to the fact that most of Atari's excitement. The 520 ST which is software is compatible across the 512k of RAM is expected to sell at whole range of computers, many Atari 130XE computer, the first really independent software houses should between  and . The price will cheap now be encouraged to produce their include a separate 500k three and a 128k home computer, own titles for the Atari. demonstrates that the technology and half inch floppy disc drive. But as it is, Atari's own software design of the first Atari was way ahead Both the 520 ST and its companion range is very extensive both for games of its time back in the late 70s when 130ST have 192k ROM, expandable to and utilities. they were introduced. a maximum of 320k via the cartridgeFor example, the ATARIWRITER Clever entrepreneurs, like Clive slot wordprocessing cartridge can be Sinclair, were quick to see the market with the new Atari computers, bought for .99 while ATARI LOGO, for low price machines, even if they Tramiel certainly seems to be deliver-a schools educational language lacked most of the features that the ing his much vaunted sales philosophycartridge, costs .99. There are also first Ataris had, and soon the Spectrum of Power Without the Price.\" teach yourself courses on foreign became the cheap entertainment computer that the Atari machine had At the launch of the XE 130 earlier languages and BASIC programming. tried to become. But now with the this year, Atari (UK) Sales and Market So there's little doubt of the potential advances in technology. 128k ing Manager, Rob Harding, said: \"We now being displayed by Atari. The mass computer market is still computers with proper keyboards, didn't cut corners to achieve this proper sound chips and specially price. What we have done is use the headed by the Spectrum and the designed graphics chips are available latest chip technology so that we have Commodore 64, though, in many eyes, from Atari for less than , opening made one new chip do the work of Amstrad has now firmly staked its the way for more software companies several older ones. It not only claim as the number three machine. to produce games at the same prices decreases costs, but also boosts Will Atari be able to break the stranglehold on the market? that other people pay for Spectrum, reliability.\" Atari boss, Jack Tramiel, is confident CBM 64 and Amstrad games. And by sheer volume of manufacof once again becoming a formidable The next two years will undoubtedly turing, Atari hopes to keep its costs force in the personal computer see the launch of more sophisticated way below those of its rivals. market. Cynics say he cannot do it. machines from not just Atari, but also Tramiel, the founder and former Now only time will tell if Atari's Commodore and the MSX manufac head of Commodore, bought Atari in potential is ever realised. If not, it turers, all aiming at educating the July 1984 and immediately set about could well be just thanks for the public to 16/32 bit processors with the streamlining the company with the memory, Atari. \"promise of faster machines, promise that it would provide superior graphics and cheaper prices. technology for the masses not As long as the hardware manuFull Prestel facilities are now classes.\" facturers follow the right path, and available to Atari users with the help the software companies, then Atari home computers were first arrival of Miracle Technology's there should be room for most of the introduced in 1978 with the 400 and Multi-Viewterm Datatari modem major manufacturers to co-exist 800 models. These were updated in interface and software package. without the \"Computer Wars\" that 1983 with the Atari 600XL and 800XL, | The Datatari interface and Multihave been waged over the last two or more powerful versions of the original Viewterm disc-based software three years. We all know that competimachines. gives the Atari owner not only tion is healthy, and generally in the access to Prestel, and other interest of the consumer, so we should be able to look forward to more previously inaccessible viewdata --HELPLINEsystems, but also to electronic sophisticated games, satisfying a If you have any queries or problems mail, telex, database and user user widening range of interests, with the relating to Atari or its products, relating to Atari or its products, communications — plus allowing emphasis on LOW PRICES, most of all. why not call At why not call Atari's Helpline on (01) If the American software companies 309 7770. Telesoftware downloading. The package can be used with realise this now, then the future for new titles for Atari machines looks Atari models 400, 800, 600XL, The Helpline is staffed throughout very healthy. If they do not, then Jack 65XEM, 65XEP and 130XE. the week and it now operates on Tramiel should start to worry right The cost by mail order will be Saturday as well. NOW!!! .95 inclusive of VAT. "


"REVIEWS DRAGONWORLD should I say lack of it — slows the play, I found the Atari version more game down. exciting, whilst the number of arrows Of the few Telarium (ex-Trillium) I must say that Dragonworld is one I wasted on thin air with the adventures I have played, of the better adventures I have played Commodore got a bit maddening at Dragonworld is by far the best. One of for some time, and should provide times. This was mainly due to the fact the reasons I say this is because it was many hours of spills and thrills for that I killed a monster but the the first one in which I was able to play adventurers of moderate skill. I can't computer was still carrying on combat from beginning to end without having wait to see what Telarium have to offer commands from one move back. to go through one of those dare I say next! If you have not played a version of it? silly arcade games! That, for me, Dragonworld is available on disc the game before, then you might not has been the downfall in other games only for the Commodore 64 and Apple even notice this effect. Overall, a good in this series. II series. Adventure, worthy of its translation. Then again, if Adventures with a Personal Rating: 9 Personal Rating: 5 quick burst of arcade action are your Paul Coppins Paul Coppins thing, you can take such a route through the game and that, I feel, makes Dragonworld just that bit CURSE OF THE SEVEN FACES special. Just as in real life, there is no right After recently playing Clues 'O' from or wrong way to go about things. Each Imperial Software (C&VG June, time he plays, the adventurer may find Personal Rating 5), I was none too new and better ways of solving the keen to load a second offering from same puzzle! the same source, in a similarly plain In fact, in many ways, the game looking inlay. One shouldn't be inreminded me of Sorceror of fluenced by the packaging of course, Claymorgue Castle in that you but it's difficult. can use things you find in a multitude The game started by telling me of different ways. Use the wrong item about yet another evil wizard and how in the wrong place and you'll eventI must get his spell book, staff, hat and ually come screaming to a halt, I cloak, and what little hope I still held hasten to add! vanished! Most of the action takes place in It returned very quickly as I got into Kandesh, a city typical of its time, even the game. A variety of original down to the bazaar where it is possible locations, and some surprise ways of to meet a tailor who bears a remarkfinding new exits, combined with wellable resemblance to a certain cartoon written and fairly lengthy descriptions Dungeonmaster not that I watch it, to make an interesting game. of course! My journey took me through a room It is even possible to take your good of seven mirrors into a forest and a friend Hawkwind for a quick drink in magic garden, whilst other routes led the bar. He's a great guy, always on to the troll king rest room, from where hand to offer advice or help in any TEMPLE OF APSHAI his castle could be explored. sticky situation that might arise. Just Eventually I came across the troll like the Adventure Helpline plus No doubt any Atari adventurer of long king himself, standing by a rickety drinks, eh Keith)? standing will have heard of, if not bridge and demanding the return of Dragonworld has some really creat Dragonworld has some really great played the Temple of Apshai. Now laved the Tamnle of Anghe Now his crown before he would allow me graphics, and for once. much to my CBS Software with the aid of Envy across! Well, I didn't have it for sure! delight, I left them on the whole way have made this available on a The input can be the usual two through this classic a first for me, I Commodore disc. words most of the time, but longer must admit! To give this new version a good try. phrases are supported, increasing the Also, from time to time you are I blew the dust off my old Atari copy player's options for inventive treated to a short burst of music to and loaded both to see how they solutions. Being in machine code, the highlight reaching a milestone in your compared. Before I give my verdict, response is immediate and the replies, quest to free the last dragon in I'd better tell those adventurers unalthough not identifying an invalid Dragonworld. familiar with the game just what things word, do give a clue as to whether a Right now for some of the not-soare afoot. command is unrecognised or good points! One example is when I The Temple of Apshai is based on impossible. impossible. tried to cross the castle courtyard with a dungeon with four levels. Each must I would only fault the game on the a young prince I had rescued from the be entered to recover the 80 different r the 80 different fact that, from a number of locations, assassin's dungeon. I wanted to treasures that are to be found. Each of there are too many exits listed that disguise the prince with an assassin's the levels is packed full of hidden lead nowhere in other words, to the COWI and I found I could not do so traps. secret passages and rooms room you are already in. This tends to without a spare one. But I was carrying Some are hidden by concealed doors, make the text and size look a bit five of them at the time! Not to worry, whilst others are more open or are Infocomish and, while some of the text the problem was soon solved another they? is up to that standard, the size of the way remember that I said earlier The two different versions are very game is obviously not. Oh-that and game is obviousy hot there were many ways of solving a similar and the dungeons seemed the maze! I HATE mazes! problem! in all respects to be the same down to Perhaps a little overpriced at .95, The other idea I'm not too sure about the position of the traps and secret Curse of the Seven Faces is for the 48K is having coded clues on the back of doors. The new Commodore version Spectrum from Imperial Software of the instruction booklet rather like does have much better colour Imperial House, 153 Churchill Road, leaving a bag of sweets in reach of graphics and sound effects, although Parkstone, Poole, Dorset, Tel: young kiddies, as far as adventurers this seems to have been at the 0202-721666. are concerned! And, of course, the expense of keyboard response.  Personal Rating: 7 Commodore disc loading speed-orFor that reason, in my eagerness to Keith Campbell AUD 1966 100 "


"FROM OUT OF THE FIRE. . COMMODORE 64 48K SPECTRUM GYRON AIREBIRD Prested $9.95 Sobo Tape  14.95 Disk .95 FIREBIRO .95 $5.95 CYRON Spectrum 48K A serious contender for the Game of the Year award Personal Computer word. Mar 1985 h. Derbi Cash Seas 93+ng Mar 1985 ELITE Commodore 64 The game ofa etme Zzap 54 Go Meda A d May 1985 BUGCY BLAST Spectrum 48K FIREBIRD do Casa Smasa 'stating Feb DEMONS OF TOPAZ CommoFIREBIRD Stength to Stengt Comore Computingin Game the Month Ma, 1985 EDITION "


"Microsell ... Microsell ... Microsell ... Microsell ... SON OF KONG, excellent graphics in this all action arcade classic for the Commodore 64, only .99. Send orders to Mark Burrell, \"Glenview\" Smith's Road, Darnick, Melrose TD6 9AL ACORN ELECTRON. Perfect condition. Over  excellent software. Data recorder, cassette storage unit, blank tapes, book, leads etc. Worth  sell for  ono. Tel 01-460 6207 (evenings, ask for Nicholas). T199/4A home computer with extended basic lots of software, manuals, magazines will demonstrate if required  ono. Tel 0274 873255. BBC B, excellent condition, over  of software, cassette recorder, joysticks, all leads, books only . Tel Ascot 21290 VIC 20 with cassette recorder and Commodore joystick and a Book of 50 Games and 20 other games (new at Christmas). All in excellent condition  or swap with Spectrum 48K Phone Britton 4160, 3 Francis Place, Longwell Green, Bristol, Avon. NEW SIMONS Basic cartridge and manual for CBM 64 . New Commodore Music Maker . Fort Apocolypse, Choplifter, Blue Max, Combat Lynx  each. All originals. Tel 0685 813664 SPECTRUM software for sale: .50 each. Plantoids including Missile, Booty, Jetman, Embassy, Assault, Koakatoa, Korth 1 + 3, .00. Other games: Tomy Turnin' Turbo Dashboard. , with batteries, Tandy Space Shot . Ring 051 608 3564 ask for Robert evenings only. All games originals. AMSTRAD SHARP MZ-700 and Spectrum software the cheapest original full colour action games around prices between 75p to .75 for information send s.a.e to Pacetapes, 40 Bainton Grove, Clifton, Nottingham NG 11 BLG. 4BK SPECTRUM software for sale, Raid, Kong, Fall of Rome, Flight Sim, etc + data cassette recorder worth  asking  write to Lee Hiskett, 72 Flamstead Road, Dagenham, Essex. 48K ORIC 1 + book and 12 games including Harrier Attack, Hobbit, Xenon 1 printer, Sekosha GP-50A cost  approximately sell for  or will separate. Telephone (02214) 3179. COMMODORE 64 plus 2 data recorders. Reset switch, 2 joysticks, also more than  worth of software. Which includes, greate titles like Suicide Express, DT's Decathlon etc. Bargains only . Telephone 878 2499 ring evenings. HALF PRICE 64 software. Shadowfire, Sherlock, Boulder Dash and more; also Brother HR5 printer for use with any Commodore, 4 months old . Tel: Steve 0703 120 232 after 6pm weekdays 1pm weekends. ATARI USER wants to exchange software with users in European countries, USA and the UK. Send you list cassette only to Frazer Morrell, 62 Brackley Square, Woodford Green, Essex 168 7LL. COMMODORE 64, owner wants to swap software, tape and disk, send your lists to Steen Luc, Noordedestr 45, 8401 Bredene, Belgium. BBC GAMES. Half price. All in good condition, including, Sabre Wolf, Fortress, 747 for list, send sa.e. to Mr. Bursich, 18 Dennington House, West End Lane, London NW6 1AU. DRAGON 32 perfect condition complete with leads, 2 joysticks, 10 issues of Dragon User, over  of good original software. Cost , will sell the lost for . Tel Bishopton (0505) 862881. ATARI software for sale or swap. Roms: Donkey Kong, Jungle Hunt, Qix, Dig Dug, all . Cas: Jet Boot Jack, Dropzone, Preppie, Daleys Super Tests. Disk: Ghostbusters. Offers to Carl Munroe, 112 Abbey Road, W'borough, Northants or Tel 228473. ORIC 48K, joysticks, interface, cassette recorder, software, cost when new . Only . Marshall, Hull. Phone 09644 2586 after 4pm. ATARI GAMES to sell or swap, cassette only. Write to Paul Candler, 65 Abercorn Road, Farringdon, Sunderland, SR3 3LE for list. Enclose your name, address and games. I will write back. ATARI 2600 VCS for sale. Cost over , selling for only  with: joysticks, paddles, Quickfire adaptor, Starwars, Missiles Command, Defender. Donkey Kong. Super Cobra plus others. Write to Stuart, 24 Chestnut Close, Cheserton, nr Bicester, Oxon OX6 8XD. Enclose phone number. SOPHISTICATED GAME \"Party Daze\" a 46K Spectrum game up to four players customise mode for hilarious fun only .99. Post free. M. Cowley, 3 Cotswold Road, Cashes Green, Stroud Glos ACORN ELECTRON, plus 1computer compatible cassette recorder. Analogue joystick, volumes of magazines and books. Plus  of software everything as new. Sell for only . Phone after 6pm (01) 450 8333 SPECTRUM 48K software to swap, many titles to choose from. Send your list for mine. Write to: Paul Newall, 72 Dalmilling Crescent, Ayr, Scotland. SPECTRUM CURRAH Microspeech used only once. Complete with manual and 12 month guarantee . Don't send any money yet. Write to: Darryl Hughes, 20 Station Rd, Nant-yBwch, Tredegar, Gwent. NP2 3RY. SHARP MZ-700 64K plus data recorder, joystick, dust cover, books and plenty of games all new and all still boxed . Phone 01-801 3767 after 6pm on weekdays. ATARI 800XL, tape recorder 1010, Donkey Kong, Jungle Hunt, Defender, Pacman, Centrepeid, Pole Position, Galaxian, joysticks two months old. . Tel Ware (0920) 822216. ATARI 600XL and 1010 recorder still 9 months guarantee plus  software and over  books all for .00. Ring 01-385 0272. A. Wigley, 23 Delorme Street, Fulham, London W6 8DS BBC B O.S. 1.2 joysticks, manuals, data recorder over  software great condition all leads. 01-458 3660 + graphics rom . COMMODORE VIC 20, datarecorder, 3 games, games books, 1 joystick, 2 paddles. 1 month old unwanted gift. Excellent condition  ono. 432 York Road, Leeds 9 LS9 OHH, Yorkshire. BBC PLUS GP100 printer, wordwise etc. Smiths data cassette drive, joysticks and over  worth of games including Elite, Pole Position etc. Latest OS basic. All for  505 4655 (London). SPECTRUM OWNERS. Want some free software? If so send name, address and your software list to: Wolfy, 1 Heol-y-Graig, Crynant, Neath SA 10 STF. ONLY C&VG MICROSELL COUPON TO ADVERTISE IN C&VG MICROADS TEL: 01-251 6222 Sa > > 8 TERMS AND CONDITIONS 1. Trade advertisers will appear in the MicroAds section, private advertisers in the Microsell Section. 2. All free MicroSell ads are subject to space availability 3. The Publishers reserve the right to refuse an advertisement PLEASE PRINT IN BLOCK CAPITALS ONLY ONE INSERTION PER COUPON Minimum number of words is 15, maximum 40 (continue on a separate sheet where necessary) TOTAL number of words for ALL insertions ... (i.e. 15 words per advertisement to appear in two months 30 words in total) COST: MicroSell (Private) MicroAds (Trade) .00 40p per word 50p per additional bold word I enclose a cheque/P.O. for ............ made payable to Computer & Video Games Name ..... Address.. POST TO: AD. DEPT, C&VG, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU 102 "


"THE WAY OF THE Lightning exploding Become a master of this mysterious ancient art: progress from novice to Tenth Dan and test your strength and discipline. You can control your character with either joystick or keyboard 18 different manoeuvres including blocks, flying kicks, leg sweeps, roundhouse and even somersaults! Challenge the computer, facing opponents of progressively greater skill, or compete with a friend. THE WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST has it all addictive competitive action, dazzling graphic animation and sound. The wait is over you are about to face the challenge of a lifetime! \"Spectacular, startlingly original epic, most televisual gamelhave encountered. Daily Mail. \"Quite simply the best program.\" Popular Computing Weekly AVAILABLE FROM THESE LIGHTNING DEALERS:Derbyshire Gordon Harwood, 69/71 High Street, Alfreton, Derby Dorset Densham Computers Ltd., 329 Ashley Road, Parkstone, Poole, Dorset AP Glamorgan P&P Computers Ltd., 41 The Hayes, Cardiff Kent Canterbury Software Centre, T/A Socodi Music Ltd., 9 The Friars, Canterbury, Kent CT1 2AS Leicestershire Dimension, 29/31 Silver Street, Leicester LE15 E11 London Virgin Games Centre, 22 Oxford Street London W1 Tasmasound Ltd.,T/A G&B Computer Electrical, 230 Tottenham Court Road, London W1P 9AD Pilot Software Ltd., 32 Rathbone Place, London W1 Hamleys of Regent Street, 188/196 Regent Street, London W1R 5DF Manchester Courtgrant Ltd., T/A Courtgrant Computers, U44 Arndale Centre, Stretford, Manchester Northumberland Alnwick Computers, 26 Fenkel Street, Alnwick Staffordshire Micro Tronics, 27A Market Street, Tamworth S.Yorkshire Virgin Games, 94/96 The Briggate, Leeds Surrey Bentalls, Wood Street, Kingston-uponThames Landau Electronics, 215 High Street, Sutton SCOTLAND Aberdeenshire Dee Micro, 278 George Street, Aberdeen Virgin Retail Ltd., 172 Union Street, Aberdeen Cumbernauld Software House, 12 Ettwick Square, Town Centre, Cumbernauld Lanarkshire T.Dickson Cameras Glasgow Ltd., 36 Caledonian Road, Wisaw, Lanarks tom MELBOURNE HOUSE Now available for Commodore 64 at .95. Available soon for the Amstrad .95 and Spectrum .95. "


"time. You can question what day it is, horse, a temperamental cook and a but the time of day is displayed on a bedroom-infesting fly! number of clocks that are part of the Is the executioner in the torture furniture in some of the locations. chamber as evil as he seems? Will the I found Alice just about scraped into butler ever serve that jugged hare? the Adventure category but you And oh dear when will the wizard need a good joystick hand! It is a stop his imitation of the Wizard of charming game which should delight Frobozz? Still, that will hardly worry the younger computer games player Amstrad and Spectrum adventurers and plenty of older ones as well. who are unlikely to have seen his Alice is from Spinnaker Software for antics? Commodore 64, Apple II, and IBM PC. Ashkeron is a very playable  Personal Rating: 8 adventure from Mirrorsoft and is Keith Campbell destined, I think, to become very popular. It is for the 48k Spectrum and Amstrad CPC464.  Personal Rating: 7 Keith Campbell JELL J ERRINI YLE..19 ALICE IN WONDERLAND REVIEWS ASSASSIN MSCM COD This is a disc game in the Windham Classics series from Spinnaker Software and it falls right between the arcade and text categories. There are occasions when skill with a joystick is necessary to be able to make progress there are also problems to be sorted out. The method of play is by joystick only, but text commands can be entered by pulling the joystick towards you and pressing the button. You are then presented with a list of verbs (text icons perhaps?) and by moving a highlighting cursor across them and pressing the button, you can select the verb you want. A suitable reply will then replace the verb list. In this underground world you must manipulate Alice to run, jump, crawl and crouch, to get to many of the locations in the game. If Alice is in possession of a parasol, then she can float downwards instead of falling abruptly, (for which there is a time penalty) should she miss her target when she jumps. While in \"parasol\" mode, which is achieved by holding the fire button down, she can also be steered. There is a large adventure map, and each picture is read in from disc as Alice moves from one location to another. Following hot on the heels of Island of Xaan comes Assassin from Robico Software, another machine code text Adventure for the BBC. The game has what promises to be a good plot and performs every bit as well as its predecessor, but I have my reservations about it. You are Rick Hanson Special Agentand find yourself in a disused railway station. Most of the buildings are closed down and boarded up and the platforms are sealed off. Only the occasional freight train seems to thunder through, heading towards the dark entrance of the tunnel just up the line. There is trouble in store for you if you try to leave, in the shape of a mysterious character hiding behind a parked car outside. There is also danger from within, for a stranger in ASHKERON dark glasses and uptured collar is on the prowl, and he's none too friendly! Ashkeron is an Adventure with yet An explosive tape recorder so another approach to graphics. It is what's new? tells you your mission, described as a \"walk-thru\" graphics which is to assassinate General system with locations opening out in Garantz, who is \"threatening to nuke perspective before your very eyes. the lot of us\". The message suggests This is not quite an apt description, but you stay overnight at the Tavern in the nevertheless the method is quite next village. It's just getting there that effective. is the hard part! The graphics window occupies the The text in this game is very top third of the screen. Moving east or descriptive, as in \"...rusty patches west \"slides the picture across left or surround the bulbous rivets that line right a frame you can hear it the metal walls ...\" However, there brushing past! Going north or south seems little point in such descriptions, causes the picture to \"split open\", for when they apparently have no use. want of a better description. EXAMINE RIVETS merely gets the Moving east/west is therefore very reply I CAN'T GUESS, the game's way similar to the 3D scrolling Adventure. of informing you it doesn't understand. This method is more consistent, since this phrase is repeated all too often in all movements are by text input or reply to commands which the player joystick will very likely use to try to crack the Talking of text, there is quite a lot of problems. it. Events happen whilst you are The method of escaping from the thinking and there are characters you station assuming I am on the right can talk to, as in: SAY TO BOY track is cleverly implemented. But \"SADDLE HORSE\". Shades of Hobbit! although I have escaped, I have not The objective is to find five treasures yet managed to get through the tunnel, stolen by the wizard and return them let alone reach the next village. to the princess before crowning her. Adventures are problem games, but All this takes place in a castle which this one is very frustrating for its lack houses, among other things, a frisky of clues coupled with its poor In the game, you will meet up with a number of well-known characters, such as the Queen of Hearts, the Dormouse, a white rabbit, and even Lewis Carroll himself. When you meet up with someone, if you can get them to sing you a song, from then on you too can sing it. Singing a song to someone sometimes has pleasing results and is a useful activity! Play takes place over 65 days and some events and exits depend upon being in the right place at the right 104 "


"goods trains? And why do their trains REVIEWS . command vocabulary and CAN'T Quilled adventure but then it saying \"I see ...\" followed by a list of GUESS replies. certainly isn't a run-of-the-mill objects present, the narrative goes: The SAVE GAME option is rather adventure anyway. \"Upon further careful opticular conunusual in that it calls for a file name It comes in three parts on cassette templation of the immediate surroundto be entered. This can be a problem or microdrive and each part must be ing environment, I find the following\" if you inadvertently type in a noncompleted before proceeding to the and then the list. Unusual the first time existent file name when you try to next. There are many locations to round, maddening by the tenth. restore a saved game, as the computer explore and, although I nowhere near But it doesn't end there! Should you will lock up and you will have to visited them all, the map provided in type a command that the program reload the main program. the instruction book shows such doesn't understand, such as \"Move th this places as Berkwood and rubble\" at the blocked mountian pass, game, but ended up with one big Bewilderland. you will receive the following question. Why do British Rail only There's even the Land of the Cruel message: \"Unfortunately your subemploy aggresive guards expert in human linguistical attempts at simple Oriental fighting techniques on their communication are beyond me. Try goods trains? And why do their trains conversing in the Queen's English.\" only run in one direction? A message that strong is a dangerAssassin is for the BBC B from ous thing to put in any Adventure with Robico. a vocabulary any smaller than the  Personal Rating: 6 standard set by Infocom. Best to play Keith Campbell safe, on the basis that the programmer is more likely to have made an error of omission in the vocab., than BORED OF THE RINGS the player a typing or spelling error. Overall, the game performed well, Down at Fag End, Bimbo is talking to but didn't hold my interest for very Grandalf. They are seeking a lemminglong and the attempts at humour wore like individual for a suicide mission. thin very quickly. What I did like was Guess who walks in? the squelchy sound every time I Yes, it's you fresh from a party of pressed a key. Just what I thought a belching boggits. \"Catch\", remarks Spectrum keyboard should sound like! Bimbo, and throws you a small gold The Helm is for 48k Spectrum from ring-like object. With astonishing lack Firebird Software. of deftness, you catch it.  Personal Rating: 5 Perhaps the single most famous Keith Campbell computer-graphics picture in the world is that of a comfortable tunnelSERPENT FROM HELL like room with a green door, and this is where you now find yourself. The Why do I always get the worst games room is complete with green door and to review? The grave error of purple carpet the only thing that's judgement I was forced to play this missing is a chest. Thus you learn your quest as Fordo Reviewers. Perhaps that's where I month is called Serpent from Hell. The plot printed on the cassette Faggins, a feeble yet fat boggit, should head for one of the replies inlay has a very suspect feel about it. favourite nephew of Bimbo, and shows the game has no class. Yes, I The main idea is that the world is about cowardly star of Bored of the Rings. spoilt it all by typing HELP! You muiet take the rine to the hart Bored of the Rings is from Delta 4 for to be destroyed by an evil force called Land of Dormor, and destroy it! But d destroy it! But 48k Spectrum, cassette version at Goroth, the Serpent from Hell. You, .95, microdrive version at .95. being the last remaining Knight of the first you must go to Rivendull and  Personal Rating: 8 Smelrond, and in the company of your Round Table, have to find the sword Excalibur and destroy Goroth. friends Spam, Pimply and Murky. Keith Campbell It may be a good idea to quote from So you head east and before long a legend, but when you get two of come across Farmer Faggot's Triffid THE HELM them muddled up and then produce Farm, where many barrels of ale are a bad game, it's asking for trouble! stacked against a wall. \"Drink Ale\" of The Helm is another Spectrum game The program is written in a mixture course! \"Fordo drank the ale, hic written using the Quill and is text only. of Basic and machine code, so the cupped twice, threw up all over the The object is to find and restore the responses are quite fast, but the place, fell over and felt much better.\" sacred and powerful Helm of Immorvocabulary lets the game down. So Fordo heads off to the River Brandtality, currently held by the evil Lich. Graphics are to be found in the name, whose source is the Great Burst I groaned inwardly as I read about the game, but to me these were so slow Water Pipe and which is crossed by plot about as original as a sandwich and boring that they seemed a what looks remarkably like the Clifton in a lunch box complete waste of time and memory. suspension bridge. Go on, work it out! The Adventure lived up to my Serpent from Hell is for the 48k Bored of the Rings is a must for expectations in terms of its plot and Spectrum, priced .99, but only worth Hobbit-haters, and lovers of parody. It problems nothing special, as they the cassette it is recorded on. has large amounts of text in a Gothic say. Locked chest in first location.  Personal Rating: Avoid at all costs! character set which will, at the very Solution open chest with key I am Simon Marsh least, bring a smile to your face and carrying. Get knife since it's sure to be occasional pictures which only display needed elsewhere. Come across unThe C&VG Adventure Club is proving the first time you enter a location, or climbable rope hanging from tree. incredibly successful! With over 1,000 type LOOK. Solution cut rope with knife. To be members already. If you want instant Perhaps the most surprising thing is fair, they do get more difficult, but help from our phone-in Helpline, a that it was written with the Quill and seem rather mundane. newsletter and a neat badge, then Illustrator. I say surprising because it What does make the game different, watch this space for another chance does not have the look of a typical though, is the style of text. Instead of to join. 105 "


"DON'T LET THE GREMLINS GET THE BETTER OF YOU, WRITE TO. ID VAN ADVENTURE CHAT The Helpline isn't just a series of problems and clues! Many readers write to express their views on Adventure games, and ideas for the column like Gareth Williams of Swansea! \"How about a poll to find the favourite ending of an Adventure?\" he asks. He continues: \"People could let you know a score out of ten and you could work out the average and print the top ones each month!\" Gareth goes on to say his favourite Adventure endings are TKV: 8, Hobbit: 7, Hulk: 6; and Adventureland: 2. Another idea comes from Mark Hardwidge of Tonypandy. \"I have decided to ask you to initiate a new Hall of Fame in the Adventure world,\" says Mark. \"It will be called 'Adventure in which it is impossible to make progress and let me have the honour of putting forward the first nominee Jewels of Babylon. This game is totally without any logical progression. How in the name of Adams are you expected to win through if the game gives you no leeway whatsoever?\" Matthew Rily of Northfield, Birmingham, is a purist adventurer. \"Please relay a message to Melbourne House — don't sacrifice complexity and descriptions in Lords of the Rings just for graphics. A true connoisseur prefers to do without these altogether and not just have a graphics off switch, because memory is still consumed,\" he suggests. Rainer Fuchs writes from Frankfurt about getting past the Cavemen in Lords of time. He has managed to do it the \"wrong\" way! \"If you offer the caveman more than one object, eg GIVE MIRROR AND SHOVEL, the Fairy Queen from Time Zone I will appear, hand you a coin and disappear together with the Cavemen. You can also do this to get the cask of ale from the bartender.\" Of course, Rainer knew this wan't the right way to go about things, SO even though he had got over the problem he adds: \"But what do those Tuesday morning he will not enter and cavemen REALLY want?\" That shows tell you to try again! Andrew Watts of that the true adventurer is never a Swansea wins a T-shirt for this happy cheat he just HAS to know ingenious way of getting his own way! the right answer! C&VGhas a large number of readers in Germany, and many have written to A-LEVEL the Helpline over the past couple of years. Now here's an unusual appeal CHEATING for help! Actung, German readers! Brian Longstaff of Sheffield is attendIvan Lamont and his friend Simon ing Adult Education classes in German Walsh were slaving away in Dublin and hit upon the idea of taking along and fell drastically behind schedule. some German language adventures, so they started off by using the usual as a learning aid. Unfortunately, Level 9 verb check\": FOR 1% = &E00 despite contacting some German TO &7C00:J% = ?I%:IFJ%>31 VDU friends, and looking around in the UK, J%:NEXT ELSE NEXT he has not been able to find any! \"Nothing unexpected,\" says Ivan. Brian's search may soon be over for, Then they had a really sneaky idea. up in Birmingham at Adventure InterWhat about restoring the game with national UK, Mike Woodroffe and his some dummy location files? They team are busy translating Adventures found some really interesting things. into Spanish and German. First \"So here's what you do,\" explained language will be Spanish and the first Ivan. game will be Gremlins, followed by Save your best game position, and Hulk. \"Mike's getting quite good at *LOAD\"ADVDAT\" OE00 then hit BREAK. Type: PAGE = &1900: Spanish,\" his wife Pat told me, \"he's When it's loaded, quite a few object wandering round all day muttering positions are held between & 10DO and phrases like \"un enjambre de &1169. Set them all to one room 'say hormigas\" and \"Acuerdo Pesadillo\"* room &24 beside the fence' and save In the meantime, if there are any using: *SAVE \"ADVDAT\" OE0O IFF German readers who know of any FFFF. German produced Adventures, please Now reload the main program and let me know so I can pass on the load it up. If you find the things then information to Brian. Details of the you'll get \"quite a surprise!\" software company, micro and price would be most useful! *Translation: A swarm of ants. Remember Nightmare! PLEAS IMPASSIONED ELEMENTARY CHEATING \"Dear Lord Campbell,\" writes Kieran O'Donnell of Dundalk, \"Ruler of Pimaniacs, Lord of the asylum and allround jolly good fellow!\" I get the In the Spectrum version of Sherlock feeling I'm being softened up... \"We when Lestrade is at Kings Cross Road are nearly there in Philospher's Quest on the way back to the police station We are masters of the ME passages, on Monday evening, one move before we've cheered the octopus, fed the he climbs into the cab say to cabbie mouse, found Spots, the elephant runs \"Go to Bishop's Road\" or any place away from us in terror, but how do you name as long as it is not Parliament get out of the cell full of holes? Street. This puts Lestrade in a predica\"Philosopher's Quest will bite the ment, as he cannot get out, so early on dust yet! We do not give in!\" I can't 106 "


"LI GOT A PROBLEM? DON'T SUFFER IN SILENCE! WRITE TO KEITH CAMPBELL'S ADVENTURE LANE HELPLINE, COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES, PRIORY 30-32, FARRINGDON COURT, EC1R 3AU LONDON AH IS IT ONE OR REMEDIES help! Who can? Trouble is, I can't GP I don't know then — as I've played it, I might as Mark Eldridge is one of many myself! Now if some kind reader... well! You'll find my review on page troubled by the Eurekas! How can he 104. get past the guard outside the bunker, out of the plantation without getting killed, into the Roman army camp or NOT? RAPID past the robbers? In Castle of Terror, Steve King can't when is an Adventure no When is an Adventure not an find a stake to kill Dracula. Although Adventure? he can turn him into a bat, Drace just The picture has changed com Help comes this month from Mark flies off out of the window. The picture has changed comEldridge, Jason Karklins, Chris pletely since I was a lad. First there Merchant, Brian Lucas, Wayne Clare Ward of Barnsley has was the graphical Adventure, with a explored several rooms in the Castle Gooderham, Paul Williams and Peter picture of every location which disWarnes. of Terror, but not been able to get out. played as you entered. Then came a of the room full of treasure. He who new breed the so-called arcade jouo uoys e SitemSue ay onaa uns oL can lead the way may be well Adventure which made its debut on NYWAIDS ee App  rewarded! machines such as the Atari games ay ur bip 'apeuzb puey Apoy ay puy ol Tim Sattelkav writes to say that computer and soon found its way on TIVO ATOH JHL YOXLSINO although C&VG is very expensive in to micros when graphics and memory III     2pap his native West Germany, he buys it    dn    e suoo oN were up to it. IMOD IO ONIX because it's better than any German This type of Adventure is all ador Joj jezane jer ayi oi computer magazine. \"So please don't graphics and no words, relying on burato exoja sured payroos uo ssou na disappoint me help me out of my joystick control to move from screen VTIILNY dilemma in some adventures! I was 2r uo uos y doup If IIIx oI  to screen and to pick up objects. Not able to give him some help, but only ssado ay, wo MNYIM ay si BIOM quite like \"shoot-'em-up\" arcade iseyearq poob a little. So who can help prove that not games, it tends to rely more on joye ao peu ay en 'Kuopo ledenee OL only is C&VG the best magazine stick technique than problem solving. (ueuod van around but that its readers are the best r   , \"  A new and very popular example is bunch any magazine can have? Tim YWYY HLIM SNOAZANJU Castle Questand, although I have not bunea evojaq ds para 24 wants to know what direction to take played it, this seems by all accounts DNIJIA THI MINH from the Puerto Rican docks to get to to have more genuine problems than Yoo e VUOM Martinique, in Critical Mass, and what the average arcade Adventure. sir — 1su sif Mta oz dbe   NIYA JO 3X3 can he do, other than running, to get hybrid between graphical and | snuou) [IAuF into better shape in Mission Asteroid? arcade Adventure is the 3D-scrolling Pue parpiow'OIBN 'deau deow us oL Who can help an old man called Adventure. (ueeqque) V an Martin Jordan across the road in Pub abeko ayJo pu eyi de bir sanay.L Then there's the strategy/Adventure «rqoid de e ssod burano ouTA Quest? as in Lords of Midnight and Shadow(1) ANYTSI JOVANS My heartfelt thanks to everyone who fire. Shadowfire does have a small    ue 2  has written in with the solution to amount of text, but uses icons in place em pue djey toyse ' s om kq paypene i AN S.ATHOMIY ISTNOJ crossing the lake in Commodore of words to issue commands. Once the du mem e of YEOP Ouest. I hope I've managed to write method of controlling the game is a Teem 'PIOM Dew ay burles exojeg to you all individually, but can't mastered, Shadowfire becomes an Jemp ay o olay les (ajopouuop) LSno mention you all here or the Helpline intriguing game and it will be interestWoor a47 punore would take up an extra page! ing to see this technique developed yoor pueronok ked 'snes ay ssed oL Duncan Williams of Clacton can't further, as surely it will q get any commands to work when he So from now on, the Adventure en uedo III o 'sserq euo pue is in the stone ruins of The Island he section of C&VG will be confining pex uo '  ut shx    HONW 30UNAN 310 KALSAW is sure the treasure is there, as the itself to Adventure games that don't \"u i o oo Aes \"TORALS riddles tell him it will be in a place of rely purely on skill in handling a 30 VL ada repinoq eyi ised jab OL worship. Is he right? joystick. SAWOOVIH And finally, \"Please will you print a Which brings me to the big problem ansoddo req e um pue Orcoyooje apisut pienb el clue on how to light a fire in Eye of of the month! Shall I review Alice in Wes! OH Odense ()  Bain, which I hope will enable me to Wonderland from Spinnaker Soft Debuts ay to buos ayi jo werbeue pass the shapeless beast lurking in the ware? This game breaks all the rules ay pur pue euoq wo day anoway well? asks G. Pearce of Cardiff.of category I've just mentioned! OK (ueunyu) W3403 107 "


"ARCADE ACTION attack though they can be INDOOR dodged with careful manoeuvring of the joystick. SOCCER A scene from the film Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom has also found its Cheerleaders bounce onto the way into the game. Harry field, kick their legs and leaps into a mining cart and wiggle their bottoms. It's time whizzes off on a hair-raising, for the match to start. Two roller coaster ride into the teams stroll onto the pitch, depths, jumping chasms and their numbers sadly depleted, generally behaving like but ready, nevertheless, to Harrison Ford kick their way to fame. Pitfall II The Lost Caverns Indoor Soccer from is an enjoyable game though Universal is the most inaccurit may be too well known to ate pretence at a sports be an instant hit in the machine gun. simulation I've come across. arcades. Only time will tell. The aim is to beat the A new screen. Cannon fire rips through the silence but, computer, or a friend, at a being super-human, you game of football. However, it PITFALL IN turns out that winning is not manage to dodge that as well. the aim it's harder to lose! A bridge looms ahead and on Whatever happened to The adventures of Pitfall Harry it sits a soldier on a motorbike. eleven-a-side? Each team has continue, and those of you Can you take him out? for only three players including who own a home computer Points are scored for the goalkeepers. The keepers may already have met the rescuing captives and dedon't do an awful lot and the intrepid explorer created by stroying enemy generals and other four seem to spend American software house, their headquarters. Further on in the game, the various more time kicking their Activision. The opponents than the ball. Arcade manufacturer, stages each require a different Universal does not consider Sega, has bought the rights to approach and you will have to these unsporting activities as Pitfall 1 and Pitfall 11 The learn new techniques in fouls and no penalties are Lost Caverns and, for a getting from one side to the issued. The ref. is probably change, an arcade game has other. Avoid enemy trucks smiling. been produced from a and jeeps they will attempt game. COMMANDO computer That to mow you down. The jungle is very sparse happened once last year when Boulder Dash was converted Spend 30 pence and join the with only a few scattered for the arcades. commandoes in their fight Pitfall ll The Lost Caverns against guerilla warfare. is an amalgamation of Pitfall Commando from the I and II and is as good as, if not Japanese company, Capcom, better than, the computer is a game with a distinct game. military flavour. You play One despondent player You start off by guiding Super Joe, a crack jungle comments, \"You can play for Harry over a number of small fighter, who is dropped hours — it's very easy.\" I potholes within these lie behind enemy lines to wipe watch as he controls the red deadly scorpions. Using the out an army of invading team, taking the ball straight joystick and jump button, you guerillas not the furry kind. to the goal. The blue team must swing him across a lakeSuch is your talent that you controlled by the computer using some handy hanging are sent in alone, and, in my are busy kicking each other ropes. Logs must be jumped experience, face almost and paying no attention. The and you are into a compelling certain death. After all, ball goes in and the score is and playable game. commandoes don't have nine recorded. No matter that it is The aim is to enter the vast lives, only three and they a home goal. He eventually caverns beneath the earth's are easily lost. palm trees some screens gave up with the score standsurface and find lost A chopper takes you in. The have none and you are not ing at 7 to 0. The computer treasures. Keys, when picked trees sway alarmingly under offered much cover in your lost. up, will open passageways the sudden downrush of air mad dash across each screen. Someone else takes his leading deeper underground, and the noise is both realistic Arousing jingle accomplace. The game starts and Many dangers await Harry and deafening. Armed with a panies this fast and active then the whistle blows and, other than scorpions and gun and unlimited shots, and game. Movement is smooth three minutes is up and the frogs which lie underground, a grenade that needs replenand the graphics are well cheerleaders trot back. The crocodiles lurk in the murky ishing, you creep forward. defined in cartoon style, crowd roars for the winning patches of water that must be Trapped! Six evil-looking though they are not team or maybe for the crossed. In one screen, Harry guerillas appear, firing erraticparticularly colourful. Everylosers and it's time to must ascend a bottomless pit, ally at you. Bullets scream thing is that revolting shade of shovel in more money to give hanging onto a balloon. across the jungle floor as you khaki befitting a game on the the computer another chance Swarms of bees instantly let them have it with your sub-armed forces. to win. 108 "


"HYPER SPORTS Konami. Be only at your peak as you enter the HYPER SPORTS stadium to compete in six NEW exhausting events in this state of the art simulation-the officially e l e endorsed version of the endorsed version of the No.1 arcade game. eG le pleContinuing the challenge Available NOW where Track and Field' left off.NOW Imagine Software is available from: BEWHSMITH,Sohn Menzies WOOLWORTH, LASKYS, Rumbelows.Greens. Spectrum Shops and all good dealers. Imagine Software (1984) Limited6 Central Street. Manchester.M2 5NS-Tel:061 834 3939 "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES RRP 6.95 6.95 8.95 12.99 750 OUR QUR +++SPECTRUM RRP PRICE * SPECTRUM ** PRICE ***COMMODORE ** RRP PRICE ***COMMODORE +++ RRP PRICE F. BRUNO'S BOXING 6.95 5.25 WARLORDS 5.50 4 25 FLITE 14.95 11.25 ELITE DISKI 17 95 14.95 7.95 5.95 HOBBIT 14.95 9.99 ON COURT TENNIS 10.99 8.99 INT TENNIS 599 499 KNOCK OUT 6.95 5.25 GHOSTBUSTERS 9.95 7.50 ON FIELO FOOTBALL 10.99 8.99 AIRWULF 7.95 5.90 WAY OF EXPLODING FIST 9.95 750 MONOPOLY 9.95 7.50 STAR LEAGUE BASEBALL 10.99 2.99 HOBBITT 14 95 9.99 DAMBUSTERS 9.95 7.95 CLUEDO 995 8.95 WAY OF EXPLODING FIST 9.95 250 STRIP POKER DUN DARACH 9.95 7.20 GRAND NATIONAL 5.90 TIR NA NOG 9.95 7.50 AXIS ASSIN 8.95 750 MOON CRESTA 6.95 5.75 HERBYS DUMMY RUN 9.95 720 F. BRUNO'S BOXING 7.95 6.50 COMBAT LYNX 8.95 6.99 SPY HUNTER 5.90 CHUCKY EGG H 6.95 5.75 BEACH HEAD LORDS OF MIDNIGHT 9.99 7.50 EVERYONE'S A WALLY 9.99 7.20 BACKGAMMON 5.75 SOLO FLIGHT 14,95 11 20 THE FOURTH PROTOCOL 12.95 10.99 GYRON AVAION 7.95 5.90 MIG ALLEY ACE 9.95 7.95 SHADOWFIRE 9.95 7.50 MATCHPOINT 7.95 5.95 ROCKY HORROR SHOW 6.75 BRUCE LEE 9.95 750 ARABIAN KNIGHTS 700 5.25 TECHNICIAN TED 5.95 445 DRAGONTORC 795 5.95 NATO COMMANDER 9.95 7.50 GREMLINS 995 750 SHADOWFIRE 9.95 7.50 TESTMATCH 6.95 4.99 SPITFIRE ACE 9.95 750 F15 STRIKE EAGLE 14.95 11.25 DARK STAR FLIGHT SIMULATION 795 5.50 GHOSTBUSTERS 10.99 8.40 THEATRE EUROPE IDISK) 12.95 10 99 STAR STRIKE FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD 9.95 745 BATTLE FOR MIDWAY 9.95 750 ARCHON 11.959.99 ANIMATED STRIP POKER 6.95 5.50 STREET HAWK 6.95 5.25 FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD 9.95 7.50 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 9.95 750 KNIGHT LORE 9.95 7.50 SUPER GRAN ADVENTURE 9.95 DALEY TOMS' SUPERTEST 7.95 5.90 CASTLE OF TERROR 9.95 750 TIR NA NOG 9.95 7.50 DALEY TOMS SUPERTEST 6.95 5.45 OROP2 9.99 7.95 CAULDRON 799 5.99 AIRWOLF 6.95 5.50 GLASS 6.50 JEWELS OF BABYLON 7.00 5.25 MATCHPOINT 795 5.95 PYJAM.ARAMA 6.95 4.99 MACHINE CODE TUTOR 14 95 MR DO 9.997.95 RAID ON BUNGLING BAY 9.95 7.95 STRANGE LOOP 7.95 5.90 ARTIST 12.95 10.95 ZAXXON 9.95750 GREMLINS 9.95 750 POLE POSITION 7.99 6.95 PAINT PLUS 875 SUMMER GAMES 14.95 11.25 TIM LOVES CRICKET 8.95 7.95 RAID OVER MOSCOW 7.95 5.90 ARNHEM 9.95 7.50 INTERNATIONAL SOCCER 14.95 11 25 GRAHAM GOOCH CRICKET 9.95 7.50 HARD HAT MAX 8.95 7.50 THE ROCKY HORROR SHOW 8.95 6.95 IAN BOTHAM CRICKET 9.95 7.50 THE FOURTH PROTOCOL 12.95 10.99 DAM BUSTERS 9.95 750 +++AMSTRAD COLOSSUS CHESS 9.95 7.50 UNDERWURLDE 9.95 7.50 HYPERSPORTS 8.95 6.25 9.95 ENTOMBED 7.50 WAY OF EXPLODING FIST ONE ON ONE 9.95 8.95 7.50 RAID OVER MOSCOW 9.95 ONE ON ONE 750 BOUNTY BOB 9.99 7.50 CAULDRON 8.95 7.50 7.99 5.99 STAFF OF KARNATH 9.95750 EVERYONE'S A WALLY 9.95 7.20 PROJECT FUTURE ARCHON 11.95 6.95 5.20 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT 8.95 7.50 EVERYONE'S A WALLY FIGHTER PILOT 995 ***ATARI 725 7.95 5.90 TAPPER 9.95 BLUE MAX CASSI 750 9.95 995 7.95 MANIC MINER BEACH HEAD 7.50 5.95 3.50 EUREKA 14.95 2.50 9.95 HARD HAT MAC DROPZONE CASSI 7.95 8.95 J BARR SQUASH GHOST CHASERS 9.95 7.95 14.95 DALLAS QUEST DISK) 12.50 8.95 DALEY TOMS SUPERTEST BEACH HEAD. 6.75 7.95 5.90 10.99 8.50 A VIEW TO KILL OUN DARACH 9.95 9.95 7.95 SPACE SHUTTLE CASSI 720 HYPERSPORTS 7.95 5.75 DOUGH BOY COMBAT LYNX 9.95 7.95 GHOST CHASER CASSI 9.95 7.95 LOROS OF MIDNIGHT 9.95 7.50 8.95 6.90 DALEY THOMP DECATHLON 7.95 FIGHTER PILOT 5.90 BRUCE LEE CASSIDISK) 14.95 12.50 A VIEW TO KELL 1099 8.95 8.50 12.95 SKY FOX DISK) 11.95 ATARI SMASH HITS 1 CASS) 14.95 ALIEN 8 12.50 9.95 ARCHON 10.95 9.99 7.50 FIGHTER PILOT 9.95 750 MUTANT CAMELS CASSI 7.50 6.20 SIRIN KNIGHTLORE 9.95 7.50 7.95 5.90 PITSTOP 10.95 8.40 SOCCER ROM 9.95 7.95 POLE POSITION IUS GOLD BUCK ROGERS 9.95 7.95 6.50 JET SET WILLY II 8.95 6.75 9.95 795 POLE POSITION US GOLDI POLE POSITION CASS) 7.95 STREET HAWKS 6.50 8.95 6.75 9.95 GROGS REVENGE 7.50 DECATHLON CASSI 9.95 7.95 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT SPY V SPY 8.95 9.95 7.50 7.50 HERBYS DUMMY RUN 9.95 720 GHOSTBUSTERS DISKI 14,95 12.99 TALES OF ARABIAN KNIGHTS 5.50 4.25 STREET HAWKS 7.95 5.90 RIVER RAID CASS) 9.95795 WORLD SERIES BASEBALL 7.95 5.50 ***BBC/ELECTRON*** REALM IMPOSSIBILITY 9.99795 BEACH HEAD CASSI 995 795 JET SET WILLY 6.95 5.25 WIZARDORE 6.50 00 BOY 9.997.95 ARCHON DISK 14.95 12.95 EUREKA 14.95 7.50 KNIGHT LORE 9.95 7.50 SPY HUNTER 9.99 750 ONE ON ONE DISK 12 95 11.95 ZAXXON 795 5.90 REVS 14.95 11.50 WORLD SERIES BASEBALL 7.95 5.90 CONAN IDISKI 14.95 12.95 STEVE DAVIS SNOOKER 7.95 5.90 COMBAT LYNX IBBC ELEC) 7.25 FLIGHT SIMULATOR (SUBLOGIC 45.00 MULE DISK) 14.95 12.95 BRUCE LEE 795 5.90 MATCH DAY 8.95 6.95 SPITFIRE 40 9.99 7.50 HARO HAT MAC DISK) 14.95 12.95 9.95 750 ELITE CASS) 11.50 SLAP SHOT 8.95 7.50 RAID ON BUNGLING BAY (OISK 14.95 12.95 DEATH STAR INTERCEPTOR 7.95 5.90 ALIEN B 9.95 7.50 QUICK SHOT II JOYSTICK 12.95 8.50 DAM BUSTERS DESK) 14.95 12 95 ALL PRICES INCLUDE P&P IN U.K. EUROPE ADD .00 PER TAPE, ELSEWHERE AT COST. CHEQUES/POS PAYABLE TO: S.C.S., DEPT, CV, 653 GREEN LANES, LONDON NS OQY. TEL: 01-800 3156 SAE FOR LIST. PLEASE STATE MACHINE TYPE. COME AND PICK UP YOUR SOFTWARE AT MARBLES SHOPPING CENTRE, UNIT 11-12, 527-531 OXFORD STREET, LONDON WIR 10D (1 MIN FROM MARBLE ARCH TUBE STATIONI FURTHER TITLES AND OFFERS AVAILABLE AT OUR SHOP, WHICH IS OPEN 7 DAYS A WEEK FROM 10.00-19.00 SUNDAY 10.00-18.00. PLEASE BRING COPY OF ADVERT TO THE SHOP FOR ABOVE DISCOUNTS 6.95 7.95 8.95 ALIEN 14.95 MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS BARGAIN SOFTWARE Dept PCW5, Unit 1. 1 Esmond Road. London W4 1JG Ring 01-995 2763 for special offers Our Run... .. 7.50 8.50 ELITE 5.95 Quil SPECTRUM Soft Aid...................4.99 Cauldron................ 5.95 Alien 8................... 7.25 Fourth Protocol..... 10.50 Groq's Revenge.. 7.50 Skooldaze.... .. 4.95 James Bond............. 8.50 Dropzone................ 7.50 Underwurde..... 6.95 Rockfords Riot........ 7.50 Op's Wirlwind..... 8.50 Knight Lore.............6.95 Ashkeron................5.85 Elite.......... ......... 11.00 Doomdark's Rev......6.95 Jet Set Wily II.........5.50 Elite (disk)............ 15.50 American Football... 8.50 Dun Darach... . .. 7.50 Basketball...............4.95 Ghostbusters........... 7.75 Streethawk .............5.25 Dummy Run......... Shadow Fire..... . .6.95 Spy vs Spy.............6.95 Strangeloop 6.85 World Baseball.... 5.25 Falcon Patrol 2........5.85 Spitfire 40......... ..7.50 Pyjamarama............5.20 Bulge................ 8.50 Dambusters ............ 7.50 Beach Head... 5.95 Pipeline II.............. ...6.85 Brian Jacks.............6.85 Lords of Midnight....6.95 Darbusters...... 7.50 Theatre Europe........6.99 White Lightning..... 12.50 Pole Position.......... 6.85 Pitstop II...... Dey-Pac 3 10.50 Glass 5.95 Nodes of Yesod......8.50 Tassword 2........ Hyper Sports...........5.95 Fourth Protocol..... 10.50 Gift of Gods........... 7.25 Go to Heil...............5.85 James Bond............9.50 Hunchback 1...........5.80 Hocky Rocky Horror Show. 6.95 One on One.... .. 7.50 F.B. Boxing.............5.25 Rocky Hor Shwidl... 9.50 Hard Hat Mac.........7.50 Saimazoon..............5.25 Quake-1................ 7.50 Raid Over Moscow 5.50 The Covenant.........5.95 Jump Jet......... ....8.50 Everyone's a Wally. 7.50 On the Run.............5.85 Jet Set Willy li........6.95 Duke's of Hazzard 5.25 NF Open Golf..........8.50 Amazon Warrior......6.85 Technician Ted........5.25 Match Fishing.........5.85 Streethawk..........5.95 Brian Bloodaxe........5.50 Red Arrows............ 7.50 Dambustersidl....... 12.50 Archon................9.50 On Court Tennis......9.25 .. 11.25 COMMODORE Star League B'ball...9.25 Hlustrator.... . 12 12.50 Staff of Karnath......7.50 The Bulge......... 8.50 Emerald Isle............5.50 Bungleing Bay.........7.50 Quasimodo.............. 7.50 Tapper......................5.50 Choplifter .......... 7.50 Daley's Supertest....5.95 Spy Hunter....... ..5.50 World Baseball........5.90 Entombed................ 7.25 Bruce Lee......... .5.95 Everyone's a Wally 7.50 Monster Trivia.........8.50 Brian Jacks..... ....5.95 Pole Position........... 7.50 int. Tennis.............4.95 Gremlins................. 7.25 Slap Shot...............6.75 Hyper Sports..........6.50 Wizards Lair 5.50 Tri na Nog.............. 7.50 Knockout.. 5.50 Gyron.. 7.50 Impossible Mission,.6.75 FB, Boxing...... 5.95 Formula 1.............6.85 Lords of Midnight 6.99 Mig Alley.............. 7.50 Grand National........5.85 Soft Air..................4.99 Ghost Chase...........7.50 Dragontorc ............. 5.95 Mr Do.... 8.50 Dough Boy............ Minder ............. .7.50 Almazz. ... 8.50 Exploding Fist..... 7.50 Slation.. 5.95 Brian jacks..............6.75 Ghetto Blaster....... 7.75 911/TS... 5.75 Gremlins................. 7.25 Mini Office.......4.75 Frankie Hollywood...7.50 Rocket Ball..... .6.85 Nut Cracker.... 4.95 Rocky Horror Show. 5.75 Pipeline II............7.50 Rockfords Riot........7.50 Buck Rogers...........6.85 M. Zindeneus....... 8.50 Botham's Cricket..... 7.50 Moon Cresta .........5.25 Archon....... .....8.50 . N.F. Open Golf....... .8.50 Cauldron.............. 6.85 Music Studio......... 12.50 Match Fishing . .585 Icicle Works..... .....5.85 Bounty Bob............. 7.50 Red Arrows............7.50 Jo B'ton's Squash...6.85 Frankie Hollywood... 7.50 Castle Blackstar......5.85 Dummy Run............7.50 Blagger Hollywood. 7.25 Nodes of Yesod 8 .50 Shadowfire.............6.95 AMSTRAD Daley's Supertest....5.85 Breakdance........... 7.75 Beach Head Il....... 7.50 Postage included U.K. Please state which micro. Fast Service. Send cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept. CVG. 76 Westbourne Terrace, London W2 SPECTRUM RRP Price COMMODORE 64 RRP Price THE ARTIST 12.95 10.50 ARCHON 11.95 8.99 ALIEN 8 9.95 6.90 GRAHAM GOOCH'S CRICKET 9.95 725 ARCHON 10.95 8.50 BLAGGER GOES TO HOLLYWOOD 9.95 7.20 ARABIAN KNIGHTS 5.95 4.50 BROAD ST (REGARDS TO) 7.95 5.95 CAULDRON 7.99 5.99 BRUCE LEE 9.95 740 BROAD ST (REGARDS TO) 795 5.95 BULGE THE 9.99 750 HYPERSPORTS 7.95 5.90 CAULDRON 7.99 5.90 BULGE THE 9.99 7.50 ROMPER ROOM 9.95 6.95 CHARLIE CHOC/FAC 9.99 7.20 GHETTO BLASTER 8.95 6.50 CHUCKIE EGG 2 6.90 4.75 DAMBUSTERS 9.95 740 KNOCKOUT 6.95 5.25 JET SET WILLY II 6.95 525 14.95 11.00 DRAGONTORC OF AVALON 7.95 5.90 EMERALD ISLE 6.95 550 DUN DARACH 9.95 6.90 ENTOMBED 9.95 6.90 EMERALD ISLE 6.95 5.50 DROPZONE 9.95 7.40 EVERYONE'S A WALLY 9.95 6.90 EVERYONE'S A WALLY 9.95 6.95 FOOTBALL MANAGER 6.95 525 HYPERSPORTS 8.95 6.50 FORMULA 1 7.95 5.95 FORBIDDEN FOREST 895 6.95 JACKIE CHARLTON'S FISHING 6.95 525 GATES OF DAWN 8.95 725 GRAND NATIONAL 6.95 520 INTERNATIONAL TENNIS 5.99 4.99 GREMLINS 9.95 7.25 GREMLINS 9.95 7.25 GYRON 9.95 740 GRIBBLY'S DAY OUT 7.95 6.50 HERBERT'S DUMMY RUN 9.95 6.90 HERBERT'S DUMMY RUN 9.95 6.90 KNIGHTS LORE 9.95 6.50 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 8.95 665 LEVEL 9 GAMES 9.95 720 ICE PALACE 7.95 6.25 SPY vs SPY 9.95 720 INT BASKETBALL 5.99 4.50 MEGA HITS (10 TOP TITLES) 19.959.99 INT. SOCCER (ROM) 14.99 10.95 MINDER 9.95 740 JET SET WILLY II 8.95 6.50 MOON CRESTA 6.95 5.20 JUMP JET 9.99 750 NODES OF YESOD 9.95 720 VIEW TO KILL 10.99 8.50 RAID OVER MOSCOW 7.95 5.80 MEGA HITS (10 TOP TITLES) 19.95 9.99 ROCKY HORROR SHOW 8.95 6.50 MOON CRESTA 6.95 5.40 SHADOW FIRE 9.95 6.95 ON FIELD FOOTBALL 10.99 8.25 SHERLOCK HOLMES 14.95 10.95 PIT STOP 10.95 8.50 SPY HUNTER 7.95 580 ROLAND'S RAT RACE 7.90 6.20 STARION 7.95 5.70 SHADOW FIRE 9.95 6.95 SQUASH (J. BARRINGTON'S) 7.95 5.70 SLAP SHOT 8.95 6.50 VIEW TO A KILL 10.99 8.50 SPITFIRE 40 995 7.50 SUPERPIPELINE II 7.95 5.95 SUMMER GAMES 14.95 10.95 TASWORD 13.95 11.95 SUPER HUFY 11.95 8.95 WRIGGLER 6.95 4.99 SUPER PIPELINE 2 8.90 6.50 TIR NA NOG 9.95 7.50 THEATRE EUROPE 9.95 6.99 VALHALLA 14.95 3.99 WIZARDS LAIR WORLD SERIES BASEBALL 6.95 5.20 WORLD SERIES BASEBALL 7.95 5.75 ALL PRICES INCLUDE P&P. OVERSEAS ORDERS PLEASE ADD C1 PER TAPE EXPLODING FIST 110 "


"COMPETITION MASTER OF THE Journey with us to a mystic land and meet the Master of the Lamps. That's the magic prize in another great Computer & Video Games competition which is full of eastern promise. Our friends at Activision have made available 25 copies of their latest spellbinding game for you to win. Master of the Lamps allows you to embark on a three-dimensional magic carpet ride into an incredible world of genies and danger. You have to solve riddles of music, memory and colour in order to help a young prince reconstruct magic lamps and recapture mischievous genies. Here's how you can win a copy of this great game. Below are printed four spells -or rather mis-spells. What you have to do is rearrange the letters in order to reveal the true meaning. 1) FOETH MALPS TERSAM 2) INDALA 3) SIONTIVIAC 4) POMCUTER DAN EODIV MEAGS Send your answers, with the printed coupon, to Master of the Lamps Competition, Computer & Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECI 3AU. Closing date is September 16 and the editor's decision is final. Master of the Lamps, By Liebliche ACTIVISION HOME COMPUTER SOFTWARE C&VG/MASTER OF THE LAMPS COMPETITION Name Address Answers: 1).... O O .. ........ "


"EYE-CATCHING COVERS C&VG OFFENDS TUS SOFTWARE JA REVIEW ARAB READERS INVASION? OF PIRACY? Dear C&VG, Dear C&VG, Dear C&VG, Dear C&VG, I wish to make a comment I have had my C64 for a I think the main reason Every time I walk into one. about your April issue. I year now and I am very why copying occurs is . of the many shops that hope you will consider my pleased with it. I think I because when people walk stock your magazine, I am suggestion, especially as it am now a good judge of into a computer store and always able to spot it as I will not affect your software as I have also see a new release they walk towards the rack. magazine in any negative had a Vic 20 and a 48k will not buy it unless they Well, many other people manner. Spectrum. have seen a review of a may be able to do the I am, as are many fellow When I first got my C64, game. But no magazine same, I hear you say. But, Arab readers of your mag, US Gold had only just including C&VGas I am a keen artist not very comfortable started to import games. reviews software before it well at least I like to think about your use of a Star of The first of these games hits the streets so they I am I notice the quality David to indicate \"Star were Beach-Head leave it on the shelf. of front cover you always Games\". I would very Forbidden Forest and The moral of this story is have. This makes your much appreciate it if you Aztec Challenge. Even try to review a game magazine stand out from could use another figure now, a year later, I still before it enters the shops. the rest in my opinion. to indicate the status of rate these games as better Everybody is prepared to The artwork involved such games. than most English software buy an excellent game if impresses me no end! So The star not only offends produced today. Even so, they have read a review. I really must congratulate me, it could mean that I there was quite a lot of Stuart Sudworth, you on outstanding covers can no longer buy my good English software Lancashire. and an excellent favourite games magazine. around, like Revenge of Editor's reply: Are you magazine. It is not my intention to the Mutant Camels and listening, software houses! S Glossop involve you in politics of Hunchback. Since then, S. Yorkshire. any manner. I would just the shops have been like to keep on reading Editor's Reply: Thanks swamped with very high ELECTRONIC for the compliment, Mr C&VG, and may I remind class American software. Glossop. We try hard to you of your stance against TOP TEN Do not think that I am come up with new and Raid over Moscow which one of those people who Dear C&VG. interesting covers every you thought was offensive. always buys British I am in my opinion, having month. Besides you are not losing not. All I am saying is that music in a game is the any of your Jewish readers English software best idea since inventing EXPENSIVE if you use something other companies are not pulling the computer. Music helps than a Star of David. their weight. take the edge off a game, AMERICANS Samer Shuli, Stephen Sotiriai, it even soothes the nerves! Abu Dhabi, Middlesex. Dear C&VG I have chosen my Top Five United Arab Emirates. I am an American living tunes from my games Editor's reply: Well, we here in Europe. Your collection I have a 64. changed our Star Games They are: magazine is pretty good sign before we received LAST FAREWELL 1) Kong Strikes Back but, I have noticed that your letter, Samer we you do not give a lot of 2) Ghostbusters (C64 Dear C&VG, hope our new logo is information about US version) politically sound! As a faithful reader of software and computers. C&VG, I am proud to 3) Suicide Express 4) Spy vs Spy admit that I own a Dragon I cannot find software for the Apple IIc, or KUNG FU TAKES 5) Gyruss 64 one of the few. We Commodore P.TC. I would I often see many good must be the few because A BEATING games on the shelves of like to see in some future not only does C&VG now many shops in Colchester, editions something about Dear C&VG ignore our presence but but these are often let US software. Bug Byte takes a bigger also your advertisers and down by having poor Corressis, beating! I also have Kung seemingly most of the music which sounds like a Monaco. Fu! by Bug Byte and, in British computer industry. two year-old playing a Editor's reply: We do run reply to Ian Hudson's My faith has been mouth organ whilst a regular Letter from letter in the June issue of shattered by wasting 95p standing on his/her head America column, C&VG, I have beaten this on a magazine that since underwater. But some Corressis but it's score at Black Belt level 8 Xmas hasn't even games are good enough difficult for us to cover with over 500 points and mentioned the Dragon's to be able to do without the machines you mention can prove it! No lives lost funeral. I bid you all at music Impossible in any detail as they are either!! C&VG a farewell. Mission for instance. well above the price R.D. Walton, G. Smith, Peter Roe, range of the majority of Cumbria. Berks. I Colchester. our readers. THE DRAGON'S 112 "


"USE A JOYSTICK! | ever see the light of day SICK OF SCOTT? software and hardware day I HAPPY HAPPY again, let alone be scene. SURELY NOT! printed!! BIRTHDAY C16! You ask for ideas about D Mitchell what to put in the US Dear C&VG Southampton Dear C&VG column Well, how about How about giving us more Editor's reply: You could Over the past three years a US software chart and about computers for our be starting something of your existence, you computer selling chart? 95p? What I mean is we here with your jibe at Dr have had letters from Brian Donnelly buy the magazine to hear Who, Mr Mitchell! Just frustrated micro owners Bolton. about computers not watch these pages. What telling you that you are holidays (Deathtrap do the rest of you think forgetting about their YET ANOTHER Dungeon) or American about the general interest particular micro. articles we've been games (Photon) or where CONVERT TO C&VG First it was Atom Jeff Minter goes on running in C&VG? As for owners, then Vic owners Dear C&VG holiday!! your criticism of Scott and more recently BBC A few months ago, my I don't want to know Adams — well, point owners have had their say. favourite magazine was about The Last Starfighter, taken, but are you ready I'm not going to add to stopped, so while Gremlins, Electric Dreams, to deal with the giant the list but state that you browsing through all the Conan the Destroyer or Campbell arriving on haven't even mentioned newsagent's mags, I Dune, even if some of your doorstep with a blunt my micro even though it is picked up yours and them have computer instrument? now the cheapest colour flicked through it. I bought games based on them! micro on the market (I BUT YOU CAN it and after reading it I was Instead, why don't you won't say it's the best one) totally hooked. just tell us about the and it is now coming up to Your Adventure corner computer games and not its first birthday. My micro is the best I have ever the films? Dear C&VG, is the Commodore 16. seen and also the biggest. Also in June's issue you I feel I must complain So please start giving I think your support for tell us how the special about your review of Star this poor little computer a machines like the Atari, effects of Tron and The Avenger for the Amstrad, look in every now and MTX and TI could be Last Starfighter were in the May issue of C&VG. then. better. created. That's great if you Your reviewer said he Shaun Berry Maybe you could do an happen to own a was disappointed that the Midhurst article each month on the mainframe. controls were keyboard W. Sussex. very best software on By the way, I doubt if only. Well I find it Editor's reply: We have machines which aren't as you can do anything about ridiculous that a reviewer, been reviewing C16 popular as Spectrum and Doctor Who being taken who I presume gets free games and featuring news Commodore. off the air. The money software to review, cannot items about your Barry Ullah saved will be used to be bothered to do his job machine, Shaun. Five C16 London. create new and BETTER properly. This is the third games are reviewed this Editor's reply: Welcome programmes. review of this game I have issue. to C&VG, Barry. Glad you So I suggest that you seen and each time the like it. Watch out for an dedicate your pages same criticism has been Atari special in August. and our money to made. computer-based items. For On loading, the title THE INCREDIBLE example, why not some screen appears and at the Dear C&VG, Adventure extras, for the bottom it says \"PRESS I just dropped a line to say SHRINKING MAG. less popular computers, ie SPACE OR FIRE TO how much I enjoy reading Vic-20, Dragon, Tandy or START\". If you press start your magazine. I buy it D ear C&VG BBC? with the spacebar then every month and it is ACE. In the November and By the way, will you stop you have to use the keys. It stands out on the rack at December issues of last praising Scott Adams in If you press the joystick my local newsagents and year, 210 pages existed, your Adventure section? fire button then you can would be way in the lead but now only about 120 He may be a good use the joystick. Also on if I had to pick a favourite pages exist. Why is this? Adventure writer (the the next screen it says magazine. Also what has happened best?) but I get sick and \"USE JOYSTICK OR\" the I think your artists are to the Top 30 charts? tired of hearing about him! key layout shown. brilliant, especially Jef Christopher Brooks Why not give him a break Allan Mayers Riddle. Please could you Cornwall. and let another Adventurer Cwmbran send me his autograph Editor's reply: The size of get the limelight? Gwent. and, if possible, some of your C&VG depends on Do you have to go to all Editor's reply: Point his originals? simple economics, that trouble just to get free taken, Allan. But it would Even though I have a Christopher. The more copies of his games to help to have all the horrible Aquarius, I will adverts we get, the more give away. information printed on the never miss an issue just to pages overall. And the I doubt if this letter will I cassette inlay. read about the current Top 30 was back last issue! WHAT ABOUT A US SOFTWARE CHART? 113 "


"PEN PALS be interested in someone Dear Sir Welcome to Computer & Video Games' Pen about my age who would I represent a small group Pal Page.. This is the page that is designed like to swap software, of Atari computer users in for you to get in touch with one another. If Darryl Kilgallen the London, Essex and Staffs you would like to get in touch with some. Kent area. Although our group is quite small in one from this country, please write care of Dear Sir membership, it is very big C&VG (remember to mark your envelope I have an Intellivision in enthusiasm. We would game component and the with the person's name). Any reader who desperately like to contact computer adaptor. The lives abroad should write directly to them other Atari users and user Intellivision is very good groups with the view to you will find their address under each for games, but I cannot exchanging news and letter. find any games, listings or views etc. If there are Atari programs for the users out there, we want to computer. So, if there is find them. Dear Sir also enjoy games like anyone with an If you could print this, it I just recently bought your Bruce Lee, Ghostbusters Intellivision computer, would be a great help and magazine in a bookstore. It etc. I would like to make please contact me through ugn no-one could say that you is very interesting. I am contact with Spectrum Computer & Video Games. ignored the Atari, which of interested in writing to a owners in England. Oliver Hill course you don't. fellow-computer buff who Lastly, you don't Bucks Martin Smith also has a C64 (I have a necessarily have to like disk drive, datacassette Dagenham the software I mentioned. I Dear Sir and printer). I am a novice just want to talk and hear I am a Commodore Vic-20 programmer but I enjoy all about new and old user in Nelson, New Dear Sir types of programssoftware. Please send your Zealand and would like a Solo Software have just announced the formation recreational and letter to the address British pen pal who also educational has a Vic 20, for of the UK branch of the below. Chris A Raudonis Vignir M Haraldsson exchanging software and international MZ-700 45 Pelham Road Kirkjubraut 27 computer knowledge. My Owner's Club. Hudson Njarovik 260 other interests are tennis Membership costs .00 New Hampshire Iceland and arcade games. I am 15 per annum and hundreds 03051 and would like a male pen of people have joined in USA Dear Sir pal about my age. I have a the first few weeks since it I buy your magazine large collection of was announced. Dear Sir frequently here in Egypt. I interesting software. For an application form I own an Atari 800XL and would like to swap listings Please write to:to join the club, write or disk drive. I have lots of with another C64 owner. Andrew Trainer telephone Solo Software at great games for my Abdel Hadi Bukres 2la Examiner Street Unit 95B, Blackpole Nelson computer. I would like to PO Box 2820 Trading Estate, Worcester have some pen pals from New Zealand Hurria WR3 STJ (0905) 58351. Heliopolis exchange software, talk Cairo about our computers and Egypt send each other information. I live in Dear Sir We've got three of the latest Ultimate Northern Ireland and Help! Does anybody know games for the C64, BBC and Amstrad to would dearly love to share how to find the hat which playing tips for games is needed to pass through give away to our growing band of such as Ghostbusters, the skull in Mountains of overseas readers. All you have to do to Summergames and Bruce Ker? I am looking for a win Knight Lore on the Amstrad or BBC. Lee. Hope to hear from computer pen pal from you soon. any country, as long as or Entombed on the C64 is write and tell Richard Allen they can speak English. us just why YOU should win one of the N Ireland Gary Smith three great games. Easy? Send your entry Scotland Dear Sir to Computer and Video Games, Pen Pal I am a Spectrum 48k Dear Sir Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringowner and I collect I own an Acorn Electron don Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing games. I have got nothing and I would like to get in against Adventures but, touch with another Acorn date is September 16th. Don't forget to tell surprisingly, I just can't user. I am twelve years old us which game you want to win Knight play them, except the and I like all different Lore or Entombed. Lords of Midnight trilogy. I types of software. I would COMPETITION 114 "


"GUTS. STRENGTH. SPEED. THE WILLTO WIN. You'll need 'em all. TOUR DE FRANCE THE OFFICIAL COMPUTER GAME OF THE ACTIVISION HOME COMPUTER SOFTWARE TOUR DE FRANCE HER The world's no. 1 cycle race deserves the world's no. 1 sports software. Here it is. The fabulous Tour de France. Strive to win as many of the 16 stages as you can to win the most famous jersey in the world. The yellow jersey. Just like our block-busting Decathlon, Tour de France gives you the chance to combine joystick skills with sheer physical strength and mental tenacity to win through to become the outright winner. ACTIVISION HOME COMPUTER SOFTWARE AVAILABLE ON COMMODORE C64 CASSETTE AND DISK. ACTIVISION UK LTD.,15 HARLEY HOUSE, MARYLEBONE ROAD, LONDON NW1, TEL: 01-935 1428. FROM SELECTED BRANCHES OF: BOOTS, WH SMITH, JOHN MENZIES, LASKY'S, SPECTRUM, RUMBELOWS, WOOLWORTH AND GOOD COMPUTER SOFTWARE STORES EVERYWHERE. "


"When you need fast computer repairs Cowboys Beware of the ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE We have an all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE Apply now and hire your first four games free. Around 1.000 different original titles For full details send large stamped addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm 10pm or weekends. LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 DISC DRIVE 0173.00 post free *** VIDEO VAULT INTERNATIONAL 10 * Repair Servico. Don't be misied by an 'Average price for Spectrum computer repairs, Video Vaults price is 1995 inc Parts, Ins. P&P. No hidden extras Any other computer Comm 64-BBC-VIC 20 Atari 2600) quoted for at most competitive rates *WHILE YOU WAIT, OR REPAIRS BY RETURN BY PROFESSIONAL COMPUTER ENGINEERS. # 3 MONTHS WRITTEN GUARANTEE INTERNATIONAL REPAIR COMPANY * GENUINE SINCLAIR PARTS USED. *DISCOUNTS FOR SCHOOL REPAIRS. + OVER 8 YEARS EXPERIENCE IN COMPUTERS * FULL RETURN JOURNEY INSURANCE. * OPEN 7 DAYS A WEEK. * FREE SOFTWARE WORTH .95 WITH EACH SPECTRUM REPAIR. * SPECTRUM 16K UPGRADE TO 48K .00+ .50 P&P. SPECTRUM UPGRADE KIT ONLY .00 + .00 P&P. SPECTRUMS UPGRADED TO SPECTRUM PLUS C30.00+ .50 PAP. SPECTRUMS REPAIRED & UPGRADED TO SPECTRUM \"PLUS' .95. OFTEN COPIED-NEVER BEATEN, REPAIRS BY RETURN. Phone for free estimate or send computer (Not leads or Power supply with C1.75 IUK, EIRE. LOMCI) or C6.50 Europe, Scandinavia) we will contact you same day by phone or 1st class mail should you require quote first TRADE ENQUIRIES MOST WELCOME ACCESS WELCOME 100 ABOVE TWO ITEMS TOGETHER (245.90 pest free 130 XEs E169.90 post free Antic and Analog magazines available BEST QUALITY DISCS Unlabelled S.D.JS.S. (11.95 for 10 post free Memorex S.D.JS.S. 18.50 for 10 pont free D.D.S.S. 18 for 10 post free TRADE ENQUIRIES INVITED FOR ALL THE ABOVE GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept CAVG, 35 Tilbury Read Thorney close Sunderland SR 4PD. Tek 0783 286351 * ATARI 400/600/800 XL XE OWNERS UTILITIES deavaultet *VIUEOVaula ACCESS FREE GAME WORTH $5.95 WITH REPAIR LACH SPECTRUM E-oes e aos Dept., SU7, 140 High St., West, Glossop, Derbyshire, England. Tel: 04574 66555 Attention Commodore, Amstrad, FREE MEMBERSHIP SOFTWARE HIRE Atari and M.S.X. users  VIC-20  COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM THERE'S A WHOLE Send an sae for your hirekit to: LIBRARY OF YSH (CV), PO Box 65, Nottingham NG1 SOFTWARE FOR YOU Please state which micro AT THE MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY. SPECIAL DEAL LIFE MEMBERSHIP JUST 16! FOR ATARI Choose from the very latest titles  Hire from just 1.25 inc p+pfor 7 days 400/800/XL/XE 0WNERS Business and educational softwwe too Fast return-of-postservice Low prices you want to buy  14day money back guarantee  Over 1000 games in stock including US imports 2000. FIRST GAME FREE! BOUGHT A DISK DRIVE? Stuck with programs on tape. TRANS-PAC solves it. TRANS-PAC, REV 2 Now released! Six disks with more progs, more up-dates, including multi-tape to auto boot disk multi-tape to menu, disk to tape, tape to tape, disk to disk. Multi-move of files comes packaged on three double-sided Memorex disks. 25 post free *N.B. you are one of the 3,000 people who bought TRANS-PAC One, return it in original packaging plus  and we will exchange it for TRANS PAC Two. BACK-UPS Tapes or disks. SAE for lists. CRACKER Will list M/C progs to screen, you edit download your personalised version with or without M/C knowledge. Hours of fun changing text to leave personal messages on screen. Stuck on an adventure search for clues. Also acts to back-up your Atari tapes. All for only  on T.D.K. tape (16K) post free. BINO Moves binary files auto boot tape or disk. Comes on double sided disk. C10 post free. XL FIXER Will allow you to play games written for 400,000 range on your XL disk version , tape version  WINTER GAMES Six scrolling ski games. Disk only.  post free. SH CONSTRUCTION SETS This utility was written to construct \"Winter Games and allows you to construct your own arcade games within one hour. Disk only.  post free PICTURE RUNNER A picture handling utility micro painter, Koala and touch tab will auto run with or without time delay. Also fade in and out. Double-sided  post free PICTURE DISKS Four disks crammed with graphics, pictures and demo's to show the world Atari's No. 1, comes on two double-sided disks  THE HELPER Stuck on an adventure? The Helper will list prog to screen allowing you to search for clues (16K). Tape only THE CREATOR P.M.G. Editor, will do a month's work in half a day. Create image you wish and download your own basic program. Tape or disk. TDK tapes  each. 4BK Memorex disks only . All post free. Mail order only. For full lists send s.a.e. 24 hour despatch. STOCKSOFT 15 Woodbrooke Road, Birmingham B30 1UE Hire games as you want No. 1. Hire your first two games FREE from our extensive range of software. Up to the minute releases available No. 2. Buy all the latest software titles at best possible prices Inew releases available direct from US). Atari hardware and modems now available at discount prices. For further details send s.a.e. MIDLAND COMPUTERS CHARNWOOD GAMES 27 Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Leicestershire Tel: 0509 412604 Please send a cheque or postal order for 26.00 stating your machine, or send a SAE. to Midland Computers Limited, 28 College Street, Worcester WRI 2SL Telephone: (0905) 611072 ANY GAME FREE MEMBERSHIP SPECTRUM-ORIC-ATMOS SOFTWARE LIBRARY Over 150 Oric and 200 Spectrum titles SAE for details to: Miro Soft Dept. CVG. 113 Broomfield Road Marsh, Huddersfield Please State Micro ATARI USERS. Feel left out? Our system will make you many new friends. SAE for details to VIADUCT, 71 Hillwood Road, Halesowen, West Midlands. worth of discount vouchers with every order BANKRUPT STOCK TOP BRANDED NAMES FROM 99 pence!!! Send list for all machines: ALIEN SOFTWARE (CVG1) 46 Watling Avenue, Edgware Middlesex HAS OBR ULTIMATE BEYOND U.S. GOLD MIKRO GEN ACTIVISION GREMLIN GRAPHICS OCEAN COMMODORE MELBOURNE HOUSE FIREBIRD GOLD ELITE CREATIVE SPARKS Just send RRP to: BURTON SOFTWARE 248/9 WATERLOO STREET BURTON ON TRENT STAFFS. DE 14 2NA Full refund of any monies over paid Tel 0283 34410 FOR YOUR T199/4A REQUIREMENTS Write or call: ARCADE HARDWARE 211 Horton Road, Fallowfield, Mancheser M14 7QE Tel: 061 225 2248 Cassette cables, disk systems, Infocom adventures, Extended Basic, joysticks, printers, interfaces, Super Sketch, modules from T.I. and others and much, much more. ATARI OWNERS: Character Set Designer (superb). Phone for details. Also Atari 400good condition  ono. Phone Steve on 07072 67331. I'm also interested in software swaps with other owners. SOFTWARE EXCHANGE. Swap your used software, free membership, Spectrum/ Dragon, huge program base, sae please to UK Software Exchange Club (CVG), 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB. 116 "


"AMSTRAD 3\" DISKS HINTS AND POKES SPECTRUM/CBM 64/BBCAMSTRAD ISSUE 5 AVAILABLE NOW  ANI 100 Ata Aten S ISSEN  Ph ants SUNARO software LATEST TITLES AT LEAST 15% DISCOUNT AMSTRAD, BBC, ATARI, CBM64, ELECTRON, C16, SPECTRUM, MSX SUNARO SOFTWARE (CVG) P.O. Box 78, Macclesfield Cheshire SK 10 3PF 3 + An a nd Adventiste pline E ONLY 1100 tot Cat ISSN 1175 for SC Am M. C FO a to H&D SERVICES (CVGI 1338 Ashton Old Road. Higher Openshaw, Manchester M11 1J9 Tel: 061 370 5666 A SPECTRUM 48K ADVENTURE THE MARIE CELESTE 0 Boxes of 10 CF2 3\" disks for the Amstrad Only .95 +P&P Please add  P&P per box Goods Despatched Same Day Trade Enquiries Welcome Please send cheques/POs to: COMPUMART 71 GRACEDIEU ROAD LOUGHBOROUGH LEICESTERSHIRE Tel: (0509) 262259 SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and the Dragon. Send s.a.e for details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG). 5 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB Can you discover the secret of this strange ship and its missing crew? Or will you suffer the same fate on The Maria Colestel To find out send: C1.99 per tape plus 5Op postage to: WALRUS COMP.. 73 LANDOR DRIVE, GLANYMOR PARK, LOUGHOR, SWANSEA SA42GL Also available on Micronet 800 ATARI 400/600/800/800XL/XE > ATARI OWNERS TWO NEW programs for the serious home user: 'MONEY MATTERS' an electronic bank manager and \"DARKPAGES...' a secret diary. Presented for any 48K disk system, both packages come with full instructions and your first work disk FREE. Each package ONLY .95 Available now from: COMPUTER FEEDBACK 12 Oakfield Avenue, Golborne, Warrington, Cheshire WA3 3QU Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY The greatest, biggest and best Atari library on the market. An ideal present for old and new Atari owners. MIDLANDS GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over two years ago first conceived the idea of a software library. Now over 1.000 titles on disc, cassette and Rom (games, business, educational and utilities). Often purchasing popular programmers in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programmes monthly. Over 1,000 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany. Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast, efficient and friendly service. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities. Now introducing original software written by existing members. Send large s.a.e. to: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30 4.30 All our programmes are originals with full documentation cs = ASK YOUR LOCAL EXPERT Every month selected computer specialist shops will be listed in your favourite magazine. If you want to buy anything you've seen in the magazine, go and see your nearest specialist. VIC ODDENS 6 London Bridge Walk London SE1 01 403 1988 -Dem so WEST MIDLANDS MBC COMPUTER CENTRE 17-19 Lichfield Street Wolverhampton 0902 29907/29021 AVON SOFTWARE PLUS 12 York Street Bath 0225 61676 BERKSHIRE BRACKNELL COMPUTERS 44 Broadway Bracknell 0344 427317 DORSET DENSHAM COMPUTERS 329 Ashley Road Parkstone Poole 0202 737493 ESSEX ESTUARY PERSONAL COMPUTERS 318 Chartwell North Victoria Circus Shopping Centre Southend on Sea 0702 614131 H. REYNOLDS 79 Orsett Road Grays 0375 5948 | HAMPSHIRE RAM ELECTRONICS 106 Fleet Road Fleet 02514 5858 KENT CANTERBURY SOFTWARE CENTRE 9 The Friars Canterbury 0227 453531 MODATA COMPUTERS LTD 30 St John's Road Tunbridge Wells 0892 41555 LEICESTERSHIRE DIMENSION COMPUTERS LTD 27-29 High Street Leicester 0533 57479 LINCOLNSHIRE MKD COMPUTERS 24 Newlands Lincoln 0522 25907 LONDON CHROMASONIC COMPUTERS 48 Junction Road Archway London N19 01 263 9493 LOGIC SALES 19 The Broadway The Bourne Southgate London N14 01 882 4942 YORKSHIRE THE COMPUTER CENTRE 26 Anlaby Road Hull North Humberside 0482 26297 LOOK & SEE 45 Belmont Bridge Skipton 0756 60078 MICRO FUN 11 Shefield Road Barnsley (phone Rotherham branch) MICRO FUN Unit 12 The Guardian Centre Rotherham 0709 60000 YORK COMPUTER CENTRE 7 Stonegate Arcade York 0904 641862 m es DEALERS: If you would like to see your shop included in this new service, please call 01 251 6222 EXT 2461. 117 "


"FRETE CERCOOLES Battle your way to three enemy bases. Do you have the courage, stamina and skill to become a Game Lord? From .99 SPECTRUM 48K TUTKILVA The most powerful games in the Universe! Available from all good software shops. In case of difficulty write to: QUICKSILVA Ltd. Liberty House, 222 Regent Street, London W1R 7DB tel: 01 439 0666 Argus Press Software Group "


"| PIRATE SINKS CBM GAMES DON'T FORGET US PLEASE! Dear C&VG, A number of points: . Good mag well worth 95p.  Very impressive Adventure Helpline. It is nice to be replied to personally when there must be hundreds 1,000s? of screams for help. Ten out of ten to Keith Campbell, even if he wasn't able to help with Tir Na Nog.  Having just read your Golden Joystick awards for this year, I think it would be fascinating to publish a retrospective view of previous years. Imagine Software must be in there somewhere. . Finally a good moan. I find it extremely annoying to read reviews of new games to be told they are available for C64 alone and then find advertising for the Spectrum version and don't say it doesn't happen very often, because it does. Last month alone it happened with Shadowfire and World Baseball SO STOP IT! Dave, Cumbria. AN ALTERNATIVE OPINION Dear C&VG Regarding the letter from Michael Steinmets (C&VG, May) I have a few comments to make: 1) Frankie Goes To Hollywood shock only Radio 1 DJs and 13-year-olds 2) I can see why, to a generation force fed Electron, TI-99/4a and Drone Drone, Howard CBM16 have been \"Wimp\" Jones, Nik Gerbil permanently left out of and the like, F.G.T.H. C&VG they are all seem \"revolutionary\". popular micros. However, I am afraid I am pleased to see MSX they are not. Their rebel and Amstrad specials as pose is just that a pose. well as one for the TI, SO They are as plastic and how about one on the packaged as all the other Electron with no BBC Bs chart bands. They just in sight. happened to be packaged Finally, since you're extremely well fond of mapping out (congratulations, Paul arcade adventures, how Morley). about one for the Electron 3) I suspect that Michael is such as Sim by Viper too young to have Software which contains witnessed the 70 screens. phenomenon that was the Mark Turner, summer of '76. North Humberside. 4) F.G.T.H. are NOT the Editor's reply: We new Sex Pistols. They are haven't forgotten the a rock'n'roll swindle. Electron, Mark but it 5) Go to a good record appears the major shop, Michael. Find the software houses have. section \"Alternative/Punk\" (if IMPOSSIBLE?there isn't one, it's not a NOT QUITE good record shop). Find a 12\" single by Psychic TV Dear C&VG, called Unclean. Buy it! I feel that I must add my Play it! Smash your comments to your review Frankie records! of CBS/Epyx's Impossible Mission in your April 1985 Marcus Groan, issue. Manchester. No matter what your NEGLECTING THE reviewer says, nothing. I repeat nothing, can ELECTRON? convey the horrors that I, a dedicated, hardened Dear C&VG video gamer, went Well, I've waited and through in my attempts at waited, but will not keep completing this my cool any longer. masterpiece of silicon joy. Although your magazine is But I, yes I, a gibbering excellent in most respects, wreck, have completed you have only reviewed this mind bender and one game and printed two achieved the impossible. I or three programs for the am now returning to Acorn Electron since it normality because I have was launched nearly two heard the soothing female years ago. voice when the mission is It now has a fair amount completed of high quality games Why only award nine around, has a user base of points for the graphics around 4 million and has which are the most been the third best selling stunning and realistic on micro for several months. any computer? It seems a great pity to Billy McLaughlin, me that machines like the Londonderry. Dear C&VG I am very confused about a problem which has riddled me since the birth of the 64 many moons ago. Why are Spectrum programs cheaper than those for the 64? A piece of software for the Spectrum costs around .95, but for the Commodore 64 it costs .95 why? Don't tell me that its magnetic tape length or programming time is longer than that on a Spectrum in some cases less) Why is it then that software still costs .95 for the 64 and yet the same piece of software for the Spectrum costs say .95. A point I raised before about magnetic tape length. Take Beach Head. There is less mag tape in that than in the Spectrum version and yet it sells  cheaper than the CBM The same goes for conversion to the CBM. The programming time taken for inn Jenie is roughly the same as the time taken for its conversion to the CBM. Most of my software is pirated and on floppy disc (even turbo loaded software). I am not proud to be called a pirate but if computer giants put the prices - more than the original for the Spectrum then copying the software works out cheaper. If the companies dropped their games to a minimum level of say .95 then I would certainly buy more original software. But until that day I remain a pirate sinking software companies. Name and address supplied. Please drop us a line at: Computer & Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. 119 119 "


"COMPETITION C&VG HOTSHOT OF THE MONTH This issue we're continuing our new C&VG offices in London where we'll game has been supervised throughout look HALL OF FAME. We are still hold the play-off. its development by a top karate expert printing scores on your favourite games The winner will get a special C&VG which has helped to produce a realistic but the REAL challenge is the C&VG Hotshot prize package and the game where every bone-crushing Hotshot of the Month title. runner-up won't be going away empty move is completely accurate. How do you get to be a C&VG handed either. So don't delay get Hotshot? Simple. Just get a high score your score into us today. We're still interested in your hi-scores on our nominated Hotshot Game of the THIS MONTH'S HOTSHOT GAME OF on other games and remember the Month and send your score in on the THE MONTH IS WAY OF THE number one scorer from each game we form provided to Computer & Video EXPLODING FIST for the print each month gets a C&VG t-shirt. Games, Hotshots, Priory Court, 30-32 Commodore 64. And DON'T forget to send a photoFarringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Way of the Exploding Fist is an all graph of yourself along with your Hall Then we'll pick out the two highest action simulation of the ancient martial of Fame entry. We like to see just what scores and invite them to come to the art of karate. The programming of the a C&VG Hall of Famer looks like! C&VG HOTSHOT OF THE !! C&VG HALL OF FAME Name ..... | MONTH CONTEST Address...... Name ................... || Name of game...... Address.......... 11 I scored My score on Way of the Exploding Fist was..... 1 Machine Date .... ..Il T-shirt size (S, M, L)........... Witnessed by .............. !! Witnessed by ....... . ......... 120 "


"\"I'm horrified by whispers reaching my ears... A range of scandalous, down-market games for demented necrophiliacs starting off with a little number called 'Go To Hell? I kid you not.\" ZZAP 64 go to hell CRIPLE 660,FOR SINCLAIR SPECTRUM .99 "


"E NEXT = M-O-N-TH : NE: Meet the Psi-Warriorin our brand new cartoon strip. Thrill to the adventures of this super-hero, starting next month with two pages of colour action. Dance to the music in next month's C&VG. Music software programs for your computer are growing in popularity. We look at the various packages available for your computer. We also investigate how computers are used in recording studios. H:1-N-O-W-l:X-3-N H:I-N-O-WEver wondered how a software house produce a game from scratch? Well you can find out with part one of Diary of a Game, a week by week account of how a game is produced. How would you like to build movable machines to your own design? Enter our great Robotix competition next month and try to win one of these fantastic new motorised construction kits. M-O-N-T-H: NEX-In M-O-N-T-H: N-EX-T Jonah Barrington's Squash is shooting up the charts. But how would you like to get some personal coaching from the former world champion? That's the top prize in a competition we are running with New Generation Software. PLUS/A special Way of the Exploding Fist competition, Hot Gossip, listings, Hall of Fame, news, reviews and lots more. X.T-M-O-N-T:H 122 "


"BOTHAM'S TEST MATCH COMPUTER SOFTWARE CBM 64 A FULL CRICKET SIMULATION WITH THE FOLLOWING FEATURES TO MAKE IT A TRULY «FIRST CLASS GAME\" 3 GAME OPTION, LIMITED OVER, ONE DAY, TEST MATCH, SELECT YOUR OWN TEAM, SCORE BOARD, PLACE 9 FIELDSMEN ANYWHERE ON PITCH, CHOICE OF 4 BOWLING TYPES, FAST, MEDIUM, BOUNCER, SPIN, CHOICE OF BATTING STROKES, LATE CUT, GLANCE HOOK SQUARE CUT COVER DRIVE, OFF DRIVE, STRAIGHT DRIVE ON DRIVE, PULL, BATSMAN DISMISSAL OPTIONS, BOWLED, RUN OUT, L.B.W., CAUGHT, STUMPED, CAUGHT BEHIND. AVAILABLE DIRECT FROM TYNESOFT FOR .95 POST & PACKING FREE AVAILABLE NOW FOR THE C.B.M. 64 OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE IN THE NEAR FUTURE TYNESOFT COMPUTER SOFTWARE, ADDISON INDUSTRIAL ESTATE, BLAYDON, TYNE & WEAR NET 4ZE. TEL: (091) 414 4611 "


"Epyx goes 64 DISK .95 CASSETTE .95 DON'T BE SCARED... IT'S NOT DIFFICULT... JUST... MIMPOSSIBLE OGOLD. All the critics agree ... Impossible Mission has a unique place amongst today's software classics. Superb graphics, synthesized voice and original game concept will keep you coming back for more. Already voted \"Game of the Year» by British Micro Awards 1985, it is surely destined to become an all time great. Are YOU ready to face the most impossible mission yet devised??? \"Outstanding graphics, sound and amazing digitized speech\" ZZAP! 64 PITSTOPT TOP I Head to Head racing Superb Animation 6 different Circuits On-Screen Map Full Pit Facilities! \"Pitstop II is a stunning and innovative arcade game and should prove to set new standards in the race game ... The best race game yet.\" \"The graphics are excellent and the sound is greatlots of roaring engine sounds-best of all, though, Pitstop ll is great fun to play... A Star Game.\" Computer & Video Games -May 1985 ANA ** BREAKDANCE TX Epyx products are available al good computer stores and selected branches of JOHN MENZIES  BOOTS . W.H. SMITH Now anyone can breakdancel Popping. punking, stretching and breaking-Epyx makes it easy-but not too easy! U.S. EpYX GOLD COMPUTER SOFTWARE U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10. The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B1 3HS. Tel: 021-359 8881. HE "

