"ONLY COMPUTER ANN VIRTUALLY EXCLUSIVE! .25 LAWNMOWER MAN CONSOLE! HANDHELD! PC-CD! & FREE POSTER! ISSUE 145 DEC '93 68.00 ASCH DM12.50 S$13.50 $5.95 7000L FREE ROCKET KNIGHT BADGE! KONAMI SONY ISSN 0261-3697 SOC FREE! SONY XMAS CARDS FROM 12> IMAGESOFT 9 1770261\"369062 "


"Simulation Puzzler Platform Beat 'em up Shoot 'em up Secondary Communication Items: 1 The competition just got a whole lot tougher. "


"Role-play Adventure Nintendo Tertiary Communication Items: 1 Endline Packaging ns: 1 Packshot Nincontinent Nintimidating Nintendo Street Fighter II Turbo Headline Nintendo CAPCON SUPER NINTENDO PAL VERSION Console with game around . Game around . "


"PRINTED IN THE UK CONI EDITORIAL ASSOCIATE EDITOR: PAUL RAND COVER STORY COMPETITIONS PRODUCTION EDITOR: GARY LORD STAFF WRITERS: DENIZ AHMET AMANDA TIPPING RIK SKEWS 10 3DO AND JAGUAR: THE BIG BOYS HIT TOWN! They've been released at last, in the States at least, and CVG has got its hands on both these mammoth machines and taken them apart in a massive 10-page! extravaganza! 48 WIN A PRIVATE 82 WIN TONS OF CINEMA SCREEN VIRGIN GAMES! ING FOR YOU AND This issue Virgin is giving away a grand's worth of software! 30 MATES! 146 WIN LAMDo your pals a favour win this competition and give them a day BORGHINI GEAR! out at their own screening of No car we're afraid, but loads of Arnie's Last Action Hero, courtesy Lamborghini kit to be won in this of Sony! fab compo! AMIGAVCD32 CONTRIBUTING WRITERS: TIM BOONE DEAN EVANS CAL JONES DAVID UPCHURCH SIMON BYRON 32 TURRICAN 3 50 BOB'S BAD DAY MANAGING EDITOR: STEVE JAMES DESIGN ART EDITOR: JULIE HEAP 35 SPACE HULK 50 PRIME MOVER ADDITIONAL LAYOUT: NIKKI CREED ALEX PATRICK 38 THE 2ND SAMURAI 62 ALIEN3 63 PREMIER MANAGER 2 39 PINBALL FANTASIES 76 URIDIUM 2 42 THE LAWNMOWER MAN We bring you exclusive reviews of Storm's SNES and Game Boy versions of the game of the virtual reality movie! And not only that, we show you hot-off-the-press screenshots of the stunning PC CD version! ILLUSTRATIONS: STUART HARRISON AD MANAGER: Simon Hamar AD EXEC: Zoe Walker PRODUCTION ASST: David Nye MARKETING DIRECTOR: Marcus Rich MARKETING MANAGER: Karen Williams PRODUCT MANAGER: Sarah Hillard JUNIOR PRODUCT MANAGER: Nichola Bentley PUBLISHER: Garry Williams MANAGING DIRECTOR: Terry Pratt SUBSCRIPTION ENQUIRIES: CVG Subscriptions, Tower Publishing, Tower House, Sovereign Place, Lathkill Street, Market Harborough, Leicestershire LE 16 9ES TEL: 0858 468811 EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISING NEW HOME: Up the floor a bit, CVG Towers, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU TEL: 071-972 6700 FAX: 071-972 6701 PRINTED IN THE UK BY: Kingfisher Web Ltd, Fengate, Peterborough COLOUR BY: PrePress, London EC1 DISTRIBUTED BY: BBC Frontline (c) COPYRIGHT: Computer and Video Games 1993, ISBN NO: 0261-3597 CVG DISCLAIMER: CVG cannot be held responsible for errors, ommisions, misprints, mistakes and the like, so there. UF 40 ALFRED CHICKEN 80 DISPOSABLE HERO 192 JAMES POND 2 CD-i INTERNATIONAL TENNIS OPEN "


"TENTS ISSUE 145 DEC 1993 SNES HAND-HELDS PREVIEWS 123 ZOOL SNES 36 COOL SPOT 64 AERO THE ACROBOAT 99 THE ADDAMS FAMILY 124 SNAPPERAZZI AMIGA 42 THE LAWNMOWER MAN 68 THE ADVENTURES OF DR FRANKEN 100 BART VS THE WORLD 125 F117 MEGA DRIVE 80 SUPER CONFLICT 100 JURASSIC PARK 125 ZELDA IV GAME BOY 81 VIRTUAL SOCCER 101 DOUBLE DRAGON 128 WINTER OLYMPICS MEGA DRIVE 85 TOTAL CARNAGE 101 THE OTTIFANTS 56 WOLFENSTEIN 3D 58 SUPER PUTTY D0950 ACB + BCA ALAD 0.0 102 DESERT STRIKE 130 EVASIVE ACTION PC/AMIGA 94 DESERT FIGHTER PC 95 MIGHT AND MAGIC II 132 MAGIC BOY SNES 52 FRONTIER: ELITE 2 134 STARDUST AMIGA MEGA DRIVE/MEGA-CD 30 SENSIBLE SOCCER 84 SHERLOCK HOLMES 2 136 GRAHAM GOOCH AMIGA 60 TFX 59 ALADDIN 89 ZOOL 136 ALFRED CHICKEN SNES REGULARS 6 NEWS 137 WONDERDOG AMIGA WISHO 26 WORD UP 105 CHEAT MODE 138 LOTUS 2 MEGA DRIVE 141 RALLY PC 72 VIRTUAL PINBALL 77 SONIC SPINBALL 96 FIFA INTERNATIONAL SOCCER 112 ARCADE ACTION 116 YOB'S MAILBAG 144 NEXT MONTH 142 DAFFY DUCK: THE MARVIN MISSIONS SNES "


"he beginning of the end for NEWS Nintendo's dated NES? And on the Sega side there's a new Sonic on the way, only it's a bit cheesy; and yet another hot new pad from Spectravideo... SPEC SPEC THE FUTURE OF PAD THE NES Nintendo MATTEL VERSION Nintendo Those wacky joystick moulders at SpectraVideo are launching the QJ Propad 2. It has a six button fighting layout, independent autofire and slow motion and unique programmable synchro fire. It's a bargain at only .99, and it's out in December. Spectravideo: 081-902 2211. SONIC THE CRISP PACKET  27 SETTE,     Sonic the Hedgehog has become flavour of the month with the introduction of his very own crisp snacks featuring actual scenes from the Sega video games. Bensons, who is responsible for the original Hedgehog Crisps, has even shaped the crisps to look like Sonic himself, and they come in three chunky flavours, Cheese, Spicy Tomato and Salt and Vinegar. VIRGIN SCORE intendo bosses are stay. The NES a great machine ing rather tight-lipped for its time, and at a over the future of NES reduced price a good buy games after insiders in the video for the younger gamer. games industry revealed their European software supplies for the machine have been withdrawn. Six leading licensee publishing programmes across Europe have decided not to launch any new NES titles next year, while three others are only provisionally planning new releases. The growth of the Game Boy and the successful Super Nintendo have been blamed for the decline in the Has Mega Man had his popularity of the NES. day on NES? The softA Nintendo spokesman said: «The NES has not dramatiware companies seem to cally dropped bearing in mind it is sold worldwide. However think so. we can't confirm we will follow lines up in 1994 but at the moment we have an awesome line up of games, including Duck Tales II and Battletoads. \"You've got to remember that the demand for the NES is for a much younger age group, at just .99 it's cheaper than a SNES. And the games are also significantly cheaper and more affordable for younger people.\" New technology obviously will push out the older machines (turn to page 10 to read about the Jaguar and 3DO), so the decline of the NES will come as no surprise We could soon be waving goodbye to 8to the videogaming industry. bit Mega Man and his ilk. Sob. The brilliant Amiga soccer game from Virgin, Goal! (programmed by the man who brought you Kick Off, Dino Dini), has had its price slashed to just .99. This also includes a fabulous European footie fanzine which will keep you amused while you wait for the game to load. Sonic down to only 15p a packet. "


"THE VIDEO GAME ADAPTATION OF THE WORLD'S FIRST VIRTUAL REALITY MOVIE THE 3 LAWNMOWER MAN OUT DECEMBER! PREPARE YOURSELF FOR A CYBER KICKIN' VIRTUAL NIGHTMARE ALSO AVAILABLE ON PC CD-ROM, COMING SOON ON GAMEBOY RECESS GENESIS THREAT STORM OD Original Nintendo Seal of Quality Nintendo ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM SALES CURVE PAL VERSION Nintendo Nintendo Entertainment System The Nintendo Product Seals and other marks designated as \"TM are trademarks of Nintendo 1993 THE SALES CURVE LTD licensed from Allied VisionThe Big Red Trading Company All nights reserved "


"NEWS SEGA PACK 'EM IN KOMBAT GOES TO HOLLYWOOD Sega 071-373 3000 O Acclaim 071-344 5000 as Sega gone completely crackers this Christmas? For the bosses there have only gone and launched not one, two or even three games packs but no less than 14 configuration titles. The packs include Good, Bad and Ugly: Mega Drive II (Sonic, Terminator, James Bond), for the sports enthusiasts there's the Unbelievable Value Pack (Italia '90, Super Hang On, Columns, John Madden, EA Hockey, Leaderboard) and there's a host of puzzle packs, rescue packs and even a Saturday Night at the Movies Pack on Master System which includes Batman Returns, The Simpsons, Alien II and Sonic. Sega believe the move will encourage other games giants to increase the choice for shoppers over the Christmas period, saying maximum retail and consumer choice is the best way forward. We agree, there's no excuse for you whining about not finding the game you want now. TOTALLY NUTZ!? ot content with making millions of pounds out of the game, Acclaim bosses have approached film and television companies to turn Mortal Kombat into an even bigger feature film and TV miniseries. Midway Manufacturing Company, in Chicago, has struck a money-spinning deal with top American film producers to transfer Fancy being in Mortal Kombat the movie? You need to Kombat to the big screen. be fully conversant with martial arts and a masochist. Renowned American producer, Larry Kasanoff LIU KANG SCHNNY CAGE is set to produce this new project and here at CVG we were setting up an exclusive interview with him so he could leak us juicy bits of information about the big budget film and who he intends to star in it. Unfortunately staff writer Amanda Tipping lost his phone number (or so she says) so you'll probably have to wait a while to find out. Sorry. Meanwhile here's a couple picture of those im-mortal We're hoping CVG editor Rand will audition for heroes for you to have a Mortal Kombat the movie. He's insured you see. look at... cean Software bosses would like to set the record straight over rumours concerning Mr Nutz. They deny various reports in the press that Mr Nutz is simply a fictitious character who is being used as an advertising scam for their new New this month: games hype. Amiga and SNES game (reviewed CVG 144 84% SNES), and indeed back public claims of the sighting of the wayward squirrel. Despite question marks looming over Mr Nutz's head over his credibility in the hall of game fame, after he was spotted plunging 50 metres in a bungee jump, followed swiftly by another sighting of him bopping at a Take That concert. CVG photographers snapped him emerging from the Limelight Club last week with Madonna on his arm. Unfortunately she had just nipped to the ice cream van to get the 99 flakes when the picture was taken. Ocean 061-832 6633. SEGA CLOTHING INC.  Sega 071-373 3000 O AND COMING UP ON CHANNEL 4. tylish Sega is offering a dynamic alternative to video game merchandising with the introduction of their cybernetic range of T-shirts, hats, jackets and accessories with the underground clothing label Future Shooter. The Future Shooter characters include Trigger Happy, Future Shooter and Cyber Dread, all of whom represent the system-wise screen rebels set to lead today's video games into the next century. Here at CVG we have managed to get our sneaky hands on five T-shirts to Cool or what? contar give to the first five readers' names pulled out of a bag by January 15. Send your names and addresses to CVG EXCELLENT HARD T SHIRT OFFER, CVG, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC3R 3AU. RECORD BREAKER Mortal Kombat on Mega Drive in the UK is expected to go into the Guinness Book of Records soon with the world record for the most number of codes for one game. The Game Genie Code-testers have come up with 303 special-effect Game Genie Code for the game, which they claim has produced the highest number of codes ever produced by a game enhancer for a single title. bon ames publisher, System 3, has made a deal with the Channel 4 teletext department, making them the first games programme to appear on the teletext. Their weekly programme, starting on November 15, will show how a computer games program is put together and it is hoped that gamers will become involved in the series, offering their comments on the program. As well as that a book illustrating the series is hoped to be published. Mark Cale, MD at System 3, said: «The idea of running an updated weekly programme is very exciting and there is a lot of potential to involve the readers.» System 3 081-864 8212. "


"HOW DID WE SO MUCH TROUBLE INTO ONE BOX? Aargh! Hokus and Pokus already a smash hit on Amiga have let the Troddlers escape again! Now the action erupts as you go crazy trying to stuff these cute little guys back into storage. Try teleporting them and they just may grow into Zombies to make a zombie out of you! Sure, you'll be a bit handy with the new Super Nin Mouse. But with 175 brain-bashing levels, Troddlers is gonna wipe the smile off the face of even the cockiest puzzle guzzler. LICENSED BY lendo \"They're a new breed of trouble\" STORM SUPER NINTENDO Nintendo ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM PAL VERSION INCLUDES MOUSE OPTION SALES SEE EL ridicolor CURVE 4 TYPES OF GAMEPLAY: Single Player; Two Player; Team Mode; War Mode. \"This game will leave you numb and scrammed with different levels. \"Even better than Lemming's !\" \"Loads of levels and an excellent two grey, it will suck out your brains graphically vibrant and very addictive.\" \"Head and shoulders above the rest...! player mode.\" (85%) ...the sort of game that rewards you (89%) Cracking stuff!\" (87%) C&VG every time you play it\" (90%) GAME ZONE TOTAL SUPER ACTION The Sales Curve Ltd 50 Lombard Road London SW11 3SU Tel: 071 585 3308 Also available on PC "


"THE FUTURE — NOW! 10 "


"1981... SINCLAIR LAUNCHES THE ZX81, THE WORLD'S FIRST MASS MARKET HOME COMPUTER 1982. THE SPECTRUM ADDS COLOUR, SOUND, MEMORY AND GRAPHICS 1987. THE AMIGA GIVES GAMING A 16-BIT KICK IN THE PANTS 1990... THE MEGA DRIVE ARRIVES. IT'S AN INSTANT HIT 1993... THE NEXT STEP IN GAMING IS HERE... JAGUAR «Makes your SNES look like a Spectrum.\" «Chuck out your video, CD, console it replaces the lot.» TURN OVER TO FIND OUT WHAT WE THINK! 11 "


"3DO FEATURE THE FUTURE NOW! THE SECRET OF THE BLACK MAGIC BOX At last, the wait is over. The 3DO Multiplayer is with us. On import, at least; Panasonic launched its system in the States at the end of October, with the UK version scheduled to appear in the early part of 1994. Much has been written already about the machine regarded, by most of the videogaming industry at least, to be the next step in home entertainment. CVG got its hands on one of the first machines available, to take the lid off this 32-bit monster if you REALLY want to know all there is about Trip Hawkins' big baby, you've come to the right place. TECHIE TALK hen Electr onic Arts boss Trip Hawkins left the massive software company in 1990 to go it alone and set up his own firm, many in the industry believed him to be, frankly, barmy. When it was announced shortly after that his firm, The 3DO Company, was working on a new games machine, that barmy rating went up by a factor of 10; after all, the market was already saturated by Sega and Nintendo. Then came the news that this new system would be a 32-bit RISC, CDbased 'home entertainment system! and he began to be taken more seriously. Previously, the only firm to have dabbled in RISC technology for the home had been Acorn with its ultra-powerful but poorly marketed Archimedes computer. Surely, with EA's games market experience behind him, Hawkins would know what he was doing? The big boys in the electronics marketplace seemed to think so; Japanese giants Sony and Matsushita, as well as AT&T, the American equivalent of British Telecom, all invested big bucks in the project. It's taken three years since initial announcement for the machine All you technologically-minded types, get ready to slobber uncontrollably as here, for your viewing pleasure, is the tech spec for the Panasonic 3DO Real Interactive Multiplayer. Remember that, 100E because The 3DO Company has licensed out its technology to a variety of different hardware firms, there may well be differences between the specifications; but the basic spec should be the same throughout the different formats, allowing for complete compatibility. . The future of videogaming? 3DO certainly has all the right qualifications to be the next big thing. CENTRAL PROCESSOR: 32-bit ARM 60 RISC OTHER PROCESSORS: DSP, two graphics processors ANIMATION SPEED: Up to 64 Million Pixels Per Second CLOCK SPEED: 12.5MHZ SCREEN RESOLUTION: 640x480 pixels COLOUR: 24-bit. 16.7 Million colour palette SOUND: Eight channel, stereo 16-bit CD quality OUTPUT PORTS: TV Aerial, S-Video, Composite 12 "


"WORLD BUILDERS INC The title says it all; create your own planets while listening to Holst's 'The Planets' suite and gazing at Silicon Graphics-created pics. WHEN YOU'VE BEEN THERE, SEEN IT AND DONE IT... to finally appear, into a market that is becoming increasingly aware of the explosion in new technology, especially the CD multimedia aspect. And with systems such as Philips' CD-i and omodore's CD32 the latter boasting similar processing poweralready on the market in this country, it's going to be very interesting to see whether the financial muscle which 3DO has behind it will be enough in this battle of the giants. \"It's wonderful. We'll be supporting 3DO wholeheartedly.\" James Morris, PR Manager, Mindscape (Dragon Tales, Mega Race) BEAUTY OR A BEAST? Anyone expecting a sleek-looking addition to your existing home entertainment set-up, forget it. The Panasonic 3DO Real Multiplayer, to give the system its full title, looks more at home sat next to your TV with a cup of coffee and a sandwich sat on top of it, as opposed to nestling underneath your set with all manner of amazing effects blasting out of its 32 bits. As if the RISC chip itself wasn't enough, 3DO incorporates an array of custom chips, mainly to handle the manipulation of graphics, which gives the system the ability to shift on-screen images, as well as the behind-the-scenes donkey-work, at an incredible rate. Sound is, obviously, of 16-bit CD quality why have the features and not use them? And shove all of that together with a compact disc drive that can access six Megabytes of data per second, and you've got a piece of hardware that is, frankly, not shabby. And if you WHAT ABOUT THE FUTURE? TRY As 3DO is a multimedia machine, expect to see a variety of add-ons appearing over the coming months. New controllers are almost definite, as the one you receive with the machine is a bit on the clunky side, but what about peripherals for other applications? A keyboard has been mentioned, as has a modem allowing you to connect to other machines via the telephone system. Indeed, with AT&T heavily involved in 3DO, it's a distinct possibility that this system could be the one to introduce an ideal that has been touted for years home shopping. Users could link up to a central computer via their phone and see on-screen exactly what they want to buy, then key in an order and have it deducted from their account. There's also a Midi attachment in the pipeline, which will let you link your 3DO with synthesisers, electronic drumkits and the like to create and store music with the CD sound quality of the Multiplayer, you could become the next Take That in the comfort of your living room! THIS...      "


"THE COMPETITION \"In two years, we're going to be in millions of homes\" Hugh Martin, Chief Operating Officer, 3DO SHOCK WAVE This 3D blaster promises some of the most realistic graphics ever seen outside of a Steven Spielberg dinosaur film! Photo-realistic scrolling backdrops make this one stand out. Don't think that the 3DO Company is on the Yellow Brick Road, though, because it does have some competition out there, the biggest coming from Philips with CD-i. Although not technically as powerful as 3DO (CD-i relies on 16-bit technology similar to that used in 486 PCs), CD-i has the advantage of having a large number of software titles available, is the first on the market with FMV/Digital Video and, of course, was the company which invented compact disc in the first place. it AMIGA CD Then there's the charge of the Commodore brigade with their CD32. It's got the 32-bit muscle (in fact, it was the first 32-bit console on the market), it's got the software support (although, admittedly, the majority of titles are more-or-less straight conversions from the Amiga but hey, at least there are games available) and it costs less than . Both Commodore and Philips are spending a lot of money on advertising over Christmas which should stand them in good stead in this country, but neither machine has as much public awareness in America that 3DO has it should be quite an interesting tussle come the Spring. Watch this space. CD PGA TOUR GOLF Picture the 16-bit version of the golfing great with digitised graphics of players and courses, CD quality sound and the same great gameplay it's a cracker! ROAD RASH Another convert from Mega Drive to 3DO, this one is apparently being totally rewritten and is looking the business! JOHN MADDEN A smash on Mega Drive, the 3DO version has been totally revamped and features huge graphics and the same engrossing gameplay. MA FOLEY HOLEI 393 HOLE2 362 HOLE3 HOLE 4 HOLE 5 HOLE6 HOLE? HOLE8 HOLE9 DRIVER STROKE: 23 26 TO PIN: 220 260 REGULAR 100% 75% 50% 25% LOS TWISTED The game show of the future! You've got to save a TV contestant from the weirdest game ever devised. Loads of puzzles make this one for all the family! around which, if you haven't got one already, means you effectively save a couple of hundred quid. You can also link your 3DO to the family hi-fi, which gives much better sound quality than you get running music through the TV. 012012012 DOOOOO 1120120120 201201201 NSELELI ILHARACTER don't believe us, then just compare it to today's recognised games machines, Mega Drive's 64 colours compared to 3DO's 16.7 million. SNES' 1 million pixels per second animation speed compared to 3DO's 64 million. We are talking the next step here. But there's another use. The latest buzzword in the industry is MPEG, which stands for Motion Pictures Expert Group. And while that may mean little to you at the moment, bear it in mind because it's the recognised standard for the latest in viewing entertainment CD films. What has happened is that the entertainment industry has sat down and agreed a standard by which all full-screen, full-motion video (FMV material stored on compact disc must abide by, and that standard is MPEG. Hence, every machine which supports MPEG will be able to run the new CD videos and movies which are now starting to appear and should be pouring into stores in droves come the Spring. You have to buy a special FMV card for your machine in order to to able to play FMV/Digital Video discs, but the advantage is that, because so many ALL THAT AND MORE al have anything to do with it. Perhaps it's due to these days of recession, but companies want us to use the same machine for a variety of different functions rather than simply for games, or watching videos, etc. the 3DO Real Interactive Multiplayer, along with all the other CD-based systems around at present, can also play ordinary audio CDs just as well as any bog-standard CD machine CRASH 'N' BURN Mad Max-style drive 'n' shoot action comes to 3DO! We'll be giying this one a full review in the next issue, so don't miss it! Your console set-up in the bedroom could quickly become a thin thing of the past, if The 3DO Company, Philips et "


"PROS AND CONS OOOH... 3DO is a very powerful piece of hardware. It may not be the first 32-bit CD-based home system around (Commodore can proudly claim that fine accolade) but it has some real heavyweights behind it who have put too much money into the machine to see it fail. A large amount of software is guaranteed around 302 companies have signed up to create various titles for 3DO, with around 100 different packages currently in production. It's more than just a games machine 3DO has been designed not purely with Little Johnny in mind, but for the whole family: mum will be able to buy recipe discs and see exactly how that quiche she always mucks up is done; dad can stretch out on the sofa after a hard day's toil and slip in a CD Video, giving him CD sound and better than Super VHS picture quality. And, with the likes of Electronic Arts, Psygnosis and Virgin all busily producing for 3DO, you'll be able to play bigger and better games than are around at present if you can drag the rest of the family away from the machine, that is! Compared to similar systems available at present, however, 3DO costs an awfully large amount of money it's been launched in America at $699.99, which works out at roughly , but is likely to make the leap over The Pond at a dollar-to-pound pricepoint of . Mind you, that hasn't stopped ship-out stocks of the Multiplayer completely selling out (although you have to bear in mind that, with only 1,500 stores ini tially carrying the system the vast majority of 3DOS will have bee snapped up by the 'buy anything new techie types). There's not the glut of software releases that were expected when 3DO hit the streets either, and the game which comes with the machine Crash 'n' Burn from Crystal Dynamics whilst being graphically impressive, isn't particularly difficult or fun to play, and looks decidedly rushed; the CD drive is accessing data almost continuously, and there's a frightening amount of hold-ups while the machine updates certain screens. As we say, though, this is due to sloppy programming rather than the capabilities of the 3DO. systems will be supporting the MPEG standard, including 3DO, Philips' CDand Commodore's CD32, there should be a huge amount of visual material to choose from and run on any of those machines. And because it's on CD, it'll technically last forever! PAUL RAND \"We are very excited about the possibilities of this new system.\" Tony Reyneke, President, Dynamix (Red Baron) OR THIS... PETER PAN The Disney adventure comes to life on 3DO, using cartoon quality graphics to make the player feel as though he's practically Peter himself! US GOLD "


"JAGUAR FEATURE THE FUTURE NOW! ATARI'S $200 WORLD BEATER CRESCENT GALAXY The first horizontally scrolling shoot'em-up on the Jaguar and already it's got the best looking end-oflevel bosses ever seen outside of the arcades. Graphically this is exceptionally smart and makes full use of the 16.7 million colour palette in the system. All objects are ray-traced with lovely reflections and good use of lighting effects. Atari's 64-Bit Jaguar is the most technically awesome games console ever created. It's a revolution, not an evolution and it has the power to out perform most coin-ops. The system will offer massive games with up to 400 Megabits per cartridge, and get this it's around 849 times faster than a SNES or Mega Drive at animation! The game places you as Corporal Trevor McFur in a deep space reconnaissance mission to save the world. How original. Anyway, there are only nine levels and the action doesn't seem particularly engaging. Still, visually it has that \"wow\" factor. race that Atari «has a well planned launch campaign backed with a huge advertising spend and careful management.\" However, we've heard this sort of claim from Atari before. Its Lynx handheld proved that top technology doesn't guarantee success; then again, the Lynx tried to be a mass market games machine, but Atari didn't put a large enough marketing spend behind the machine. This time though, Atari has virtually emptied its bank account to make sure that next year you're going to know what Jaguar's all about! The price point of  is crucial. Says Bob Gleadow, Atari's UK MD: \"The Jaguar is ,000 of hardware for The 64-bit Jag makes yourself 32-bit out-offor a condate already! sole revolution. Atari's three-year secret has been revealed clearing the path for the next generation of games systems. Thing is, there isn't going to be another cartridge-based system to rival it for a few years, so it's unique. the only efficient way to offer which ever way you look at it, the Comparisons with 3DO are improved graphics and sound for a Atari Jaguar will offer you the best of inevitable, but frankly these are two game, so it's an obvious solution to both worlds. different systems: Atari's Jaguar is a make them bigger. Chris Gibbs, who's cartridge-based system while 3DO developing the Jaguar game runs off disc. A few years back there Cybermorph says: \"With compression, was a consensus among software and Jaguar games can get very big hardware developers alike that CD indeed.\" CD, on the other hand, is Atari claims that it has got its act would be the format of the future. fine but it's still primarily seen as a together with the Jaguar. Its UK However, its data transfer rates can storage medium by developers. So, Marketing Manager, Darryl Still, says be sluggish. The truth is, 700 odd Megabytes of CD game takes ages to develop, and lengthy development costs bucks. That's why action games on the likes of Mega-CD and PC-CD never make use of the full storage of a disc, Jaguar cartridges support an enhanced JPEG image compression sysand if they do it tends to be for tem (JagPEG). This permits 48 Megabits of uncompressed data per something silly like soundtracks. Atari cartridge or 400 Megabits compressed. The Jaguar can uncompress has made the sensible compromise in real time without altering the gameplay. There's 16-Megabits of and opted for cartridges plus a CD RAM inside the Jaguar to hold the game data while playing so you option. The difference with these car can imagine the potential for data transfer. The bus bandwidth of tridges is that they can store massive the Jaguar (which is how data moves around inside) can shift 106.4 games but at a low price thanks to Megabytes a second: more than twice that found in a 3DO. data compression. Cartridges are still SPEND TECH TALK ALIEN VS. PREDATOR You play the role of the Alien, Predator or Marine in a 3D maze environment. Each character has their skills and you must defeat the others. The version we've seen doesn't have any gameplay elements in it as yet but the scrolling graphics are creamy smooth and graphically moody. Lots of potential in this one. 16 "


"SOUND AAAAH... On the sound side the Jaguar has 12 channel full 16-bit stereo sound, which is as good as you can noticeably get. True-life effects can be sampled and the dynamic range is wide enough to deliver bass with conviction and treble with fizz. There's just no possible reason why any Jaguar game should sound naff, so developers you have been warned! With its processing power, the Jaguar works nicely as a complex multimedia platform. The controller ports can handle digital and analogue interfaces such as keyboards, lightguns and mice. It's equipped with a 32-bit expansion port, ensuring that anything connected runs at top whack. Next year Atari will release a CDROM module, offering the option of superimposing graphics on to full-screen, true colour video. Like most CD-ROM players, this hardware will play audio, Karaoke and Kodak Photo CDs. An MPEG 2 (Motion Picture Expert Group) is also in the pipeline. This will allow users to watch the new CDV format of full-length movies on three-inch CDs. More interestingly, there are plans to launch a Virtual Reality helmet because, quite frankly, the system has the technology to make decent use of one. Don't get too excited though, because even the Jaguar lacks the power required for true virtual reality and the helmet will have to pass US standards first. less than .\" It may seem a bargain to people who understand the technology but for Joe Bloggs it's just a games machine so the low price could be vital. MIPS (Million Instructions Per Second). That's a phenomenal amount of processing punch in itself; but the Jaguar has a custom object processor too, which teams up with the 3D specific hardware necessary for real-time 3D ray-traced graphics. Technology like this imposes no restrictions on graphic manipulation. You can move anything in any direction and in any quantity, As such, slow-down is something you definitely won't experience on a NIS FISH AND CHIPS The machine is named after the chip set inside. Pumping a full 64-bit architecture, the system is capable of 55 CYBERMORPH It's a bit like StarWing, but the PAUSED version we saw didn't have much action. The object is to rescue stranded survivors of a dying war hidden in numerous pods. Cybermorph shows the power of the Jaguar in handling vector graphics, with hills that are texture mapped and blessed with smooth shading and lighting. What we've seen so far is smooth, fast and technically very impressive, but the best bit is watching the Cybermorph craft morph into different shapes in real-time depending on what needs to be done, be it attacking or rescuing. Looks good, and we'll be reviewing the finished item next issue. Exclusively of course. Jaguar in handling UPLIM I S GET WITH IT OR THIS... Thankfully, Atari is allowing developers as much freedom as possible to develop their games, and that's vital considering that technology means nothing unless the software can make use of it. Atari has a list of over 20 development houses waiting to start on the Jaguar. Gary Bracey, Development Director for Ocean states: «Technologically, the Jaguar appears to be leading the pack at the moment; so we're excited by the prospect of developing for it. The price is right, the technology is right and, with the right profile marketing, the Jaguar will go a long way.\" US GOLD "


"IN THE BOX The Jaguar board has been carefully designed with expansion in mind. A 32-bit slot is the business when it comes to adding the likes of a CD-ROM; it allows faster data transfer. Even so, the slot can accept virtually any kind of device you care to think of. A virtual reality helmet is waiting for US standards approval, while a modem interface will permit Jaguar linkups and even head-to-head duels over the phone line! 000002 Display output from the Jaguar covers all possibilities. You can use a regular RF picture for your TV to ensure compatibility: but you get the best definition if you use Super VHS or RGB (as coin-ops use). Are we good to you or what? The only Jaguar in the country and we've taken it apart. The machine is designed around two custom chips called Tom and Jerry. The total system speed for the Jaguar is benchmarked at a staggering 55 MIPS (Millions of Instruction Per Second). Just bear in mind that this rating reflects the total system speed. Tom and Jerry are actually 27 MIP devices, but take it from us, the Jaguar's architecture permits fluid data handling with no bottle necks in the system. Outstanding! Tom is an unusual chip and consists of four other units: a blitter (for moving large graphics); an object processor (for generating sprites); a memory controller (for handling the two Megabytes of on-board RAM), and a graphics processing unit. Tom is capable of displaying a 720 X 576 resolution display (640 X 480 on the 3DO). Tom can also olution display (640 x 480 on the 3DO). Tom can also animate 850 million pixels per second (64 million for 3DO) in 16.7 million shades of colour. Jerry handles the superior DSP (Digital Signal Processor) for sound. Jerry also uses a 13.3Mhz Motorola 68000 chip (as found in Mega Drives) but just for controller purposes. nition output, with more than twice the resolution of a Mega Drive, using a 16 million colour palette to ensure photo-realistic definition as a standard in Jaguar games. MONEY Jaguar. As Kris Johnson of Statesbased Beyond Games says: \"The 64bit power of the Jaguar allows us to move light years beyond today's game standards.\" Graphically, the Jaguar is capable of the most advanced texture mapping yet. This is a process by which images can be wrapped around 3D polygons to smarten them up a bit. In addition, the hardware is also capa ble of special 3D effects including rotation, image distortion, morphing and pseudo lighting effects. This means that objects interacting on the screen can affect the way in which light bounces off their surfaces just like the effects found in films like The Lawnmower Man and T2. Naturally, all this is presented through a hi-defihere this side of Easter, but TEMPEST 2000 importers are promising to have A conversion of the classic arcade them available by the time you read game in which you rotate around difthis. Console Concepts (0782 ferent shaped structures while blast712759) will definitely have loads. ing 3D baddies. There are lots of new When it does reach our shores the additions, such as spins and twists official retail price of  will and a starfield background. The carinclude one game and one control tridge will include two versions of the pad. There are only 10 games game: the original shown here and an scheduled for the machine at the enhanced version with filled-in 3D time of writing, but it's still early polygon graphics making full use of days. Stick with CVG and together the Jaguar's advanced special effects. we'll follow the birth of a new It's an old game, but it's very addicfuture in entertainment tive. The sound effects will totally DENIZ AHMET blow you away. Atari will be spending 48 million on promoting the Jaguar next year. Initially, production will be limited with around 100,000 units in the USA before Christmas. You're unlikely to see the Jaguar in any quantity over CHEQUERED FLAG II Looks like Sega's Virtua Racing eh? Well, it plays the same too. You can move in and out of the car just like you can with the coin-op, but the graphics are very samey. The speed of this is incredible and, once again, very smooth. Handling is realistic, but the version we've been playing doesn't have any other cars to race against. Atari assures us that the finished version will be even faster and more detailed than the screenshots here. This is also likely to be the bundled game with the machine. Wild! OK. So it looks and feels a bit cheap but it gives you 17 buttons for gameplay. Plastic slips can fit over the keypad for instructions. The leads do look worryingly short on the pads that we've been using, but Atari assures us that they'll be made longer. * STOP PRESS * PRICE CUT RUMOURED At the time of going to press we received an unconfirmed rumour from a leading 3DO developer that, come the new year, the price of the 3DO will be cut by $400 dollars to $399. If true, we are witnessing the beginnings of a full-blown war for a new games market, involving not only the Jaguar but, here in the UK, Commodore's CD32, priced about the same as a $399 3DO. 18 "


"WOWWW! XX be AVAILABLE FOR: SEGA MEGA DRIVE MASTER SYSTEM, GAME GEAR, NINTENDO SNES, AMIGA, PCAND PC CD-ROM Lillehammer 94 8:45:54 0:45:08 096.63 kph NE Haine 51 D Screen shots from a selection of available formats Winter Olympics is the most heart-pounding, knee-trembling sports sim. you've ever had the courage to face. You're up against the world's greatest winter sportsmen in a race of mammoth speeds. Competing in ten spectacular snow-capped events, you'll need every last ounce of strength, skill and staying power to beat the rest and tame the piste. .S. GOLD 8:13:28 W i n t er OLYMPICS This Winter's hottest game. US GOLD  LOOC 1991  1993 U.S. Gold. All rights reserved. U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham, B6 7AX, England. Tel: 021 625 3366. U.S. Gold is a registered trademark of U.S. Gold Ltd. 'SEGA', 'MEGA DRIVE', 'MASTER SYSTEM' and 'GAME GEAR are trademarks of Sega Enterprises Ltd.,  1993 SEGA ENTERPRISES LTD. NINTENDO SUPER NINTENDO ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM, and the Nintendo Product Seals are trademarks of NINTENDO "


"COMPETITION THE FUTURE — NOW! GRAB YOURSELF A JAGUARILI Looks mighty lip dribbling en? Well, CVG is giving one away. WOW!! Incredible! You've read all about it now win the machine! You could be the first person to win a fabulous Jaguar console. It's ever so easy to enter. Just jot the answer to the question below on a postcard or the back of a sealed And the question is: which other Atari envelope, along with your name, machine was going to be named after address and, if possible a daytime a cat until it was scrapped? telephone number. Send it to: Jaguar Competition, CVG, EMAP Images, Simple, eh? Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is 15 December and first con ect ans wer out of the postbag wins. SMALL PRINT: Not open to employees of EMAP plc or Atari UK or their relatives (or friends), or people called Deniz. The Editor's decision is final. No correspondence, thank you very much. (Oh, that last category was a lie, we just don't like Deniz.) 30C What you looking at? It could well be one of the best looking shoot-'emups ever seen on a console. Probably. With games that look this good, who needs girlfriends? But just wait till you see them move! The reflections and lighting effects are fabulous. 20 "


"(ILTIMATE ENGLAND BRAIN EXPANDING     SOUTH Mega Byte, 103 Elmers End Road, Beckenham (081 676 8488) Brighton Computer Supplies, 295 Ditchling Road, Brighton (0273506269) R.J.Computers, 30 Westbourne Rood, Downend, Bristol (0272 566369) Discdrive, Unit 23-24, Chatham Market Hall, Chatham (0634 407593) Platinum Personal Computers, 155 High Street, Rayleigh, Essex (0268 778909) Exmouth Computers, 7-9 Exeter Road, Exmouth (0395 264593) Bits N Bytes, 8-12 Dial Lane, Ipswich (0473 233678) Computer Plus, 14 Scarrots Lane, Newport, Isle of Wight (0983 821222) Computer Cavern, 9 Dean Street, Marlow (0628 891022) One Step Beyond, 9/11 Bedford Street, Norwich (0603616373) Joysticks, 2 The Centre, Weston-Super-Mare (0934 644527) MS Pos The Best to Educacent GOLDU BOFERAT MIND BLOWING MIDLANDS Comtazia Gamestore, The Shopping Mall, Merryhill Centre, Brierley Hill (0384 261698) Comtazia Gamestore, Unit 25, Beechwood Place, 123 High Street, Cheltenham (0242 252767) Grantham Computer Centre, 1 Michelan House, Guildhall Street, Grantham (0476 76994) Software Superstore, 11 Market Square Arcade, Hanley (0782 268620) Bits & Bytes, Unit 5, St Peters Lane, Leicester (0533 513372) T.MJ. Computer Software, 390 Station Road, Desborough, Northants (0536 762713) Comtozia Gamestore, The Arcade, Walsall (0922 614346) Comtazia Gamestore, 8 Mealcheapen Street, Worcester (0905 723777) SUS SUPER NINTENDO NEW! 256 COLOURS PAL VERSION SIMULATOR Nintendo A1200 +A4000 (AGA) COMPACT REGA:CD 2 NORTH Vudata, 203 Stamford Street, Ashton-under-Lyme (061 3390326) Cave Distribution, 1 Slater Street, Barrow-in-Furness (0229 829109) Microsnips, 25-29 Grange Road West, Birkenhead (051 6500501) Bolton Computer Centre,148-150 Chorley Old Road, Bolton (0204 31058) Software Superstore, Unit 23 Shipgates Centre, Mealhouse Lane, Bolton (0264 365851) Computers Galore, 14 Corporation Street, Dewsbury (0924 451973) Gizmo, 50 Southgate, Halifax(0422 355079) Pudsey Computer Shop, 161 Richardshaw Lane, Pudsey, Leeds (0532 360650) Tim's Megastore, 29/31 Sunderland Street, Macdesfield (0625 434118) Vudata, 44 St Petersgate, Stockport (061 477 6739) North Notts Computer Centre, 23 Outram Street, Sutton-in-Ashfield (0623 556686) Software Superstore, Unit 7 The Courtyard, 50 Horsemarket Street, Warrington (0925 232047) SGM Electronics, 54 Wigan lane, Wigan (0942 321435) Software Superstore, 8 Golborne Gallery, The Galleries, Wigan (0942 826956) DUMMY PM 500 (2000) LIHAT ENFORCERO Wala lavier ORIGINAL GUN ACCESSORY IN GAME PAK NORTHERN IRELAND Computer Solutions, Unit 19 Buttercrane Centre, Newry (0693 250005) DMA Computing, Wrights Arcade, Frances Street, Newtownards (0247 820480) At last, everything you want from a specialist computer store at a High Street near you. ULTIMATE, your new independent local experts, bring you brilliant service, free advice and a superb choice of products at very competitive prices. Plus exciting promotions and much more. From the latest hardware to the newest game titles we're here to help and how! To find out more, call in to your nearest ULTIMATE or phone 0495 301651. SCOTLAND Moray Business and Computer Centre, 20 Commerce Street, Elgin (0343 552000) Game Masters, 9 Albert Ploce, Leithwalk, Edinburgh (031 5533215) Game Masters, 95-97 Saltmarket, Glasgow (0383 822989) Dragon Games Centre, 16 Links Street, Kircaldy (0592 643311) ON SPECIAL PROMOTION SPELLBOUND Quality entertaining educational software from the Lander Gold Series. The best in edutainment for ages 7 to adult. PANASONIC KX-P20 23 PRINTER This 24-pin quiet matrix printer boasts the latest ergonomic design and user friendly features, plus free sheet feeder PINBALL FANTASIES New improved colour graphics, higher quality sound and faster drive operation betters the popular original. ZOMBIES \"I have seldom played a game as good as this one... ...it's a game every person should own.\" Games Master, October 1993, 91%. LETHAL ENFORCER \"...so damn playable, it's scary...one of the best games you can get. Original gun accessory in each game pock. Games Master, November 1993, 93% LILTIMATES WALES Computer Supercentre, Glamorgan House, 15 David Street, Cardiff (0222 390286) MCB Computing 24 Mill Lane, Buckley, dwyd (0244 344063) Computability, 35 Bethcar Street, Ebbw Vale (0495 301651) Soft Centre, 28-30 The Parade, Cwmbran Town Centre, Cwmbran (0633 868131) Antron Computers, 10 Orchard Street, Swansea (0792 646664) THE SPECIALIST COMPUTER CENTRE THE BEST OF BOTH WORLDS "


"SEGA NEGA DRIVE monster levels    20  tiu ters, mummies werewolves all trying to kill the neighbours! These scary psycho's must be terminated and it looks like it's up to you. 8010 7000 ISO SUF mann "


"SUPER NINTENDO ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM RIES \"One of the most inspiring new releases in years. You really, really have to buy this.\" NMS, October 1993 92% \"What a fab game. Big, beautiful and just great fun.\" Total! October 1993 H. 21% \"What unore can I say? I have seldom played a game as good  Jaig J... ».it'  JaIIP Vai DlgDI luDull DDI)  Games Master, October 1993 ONAMI KONAMI (UK) Limited Television House 269 Field End Road Eastcote Middlesex HA4 9LS "


"FEATURE ReelMagic brings true Digital Video to your PC! Dirk the Daring gets zapped in the incrediblelooking FMV version of the classic Dragon's Lair. raphics. Games often live or die by them. Since Space Invaders and Pacman, games have used sprites, bitmaps, polygons (the Gouraud shaded, texture-mapped and light sourced variety), 16, 32 and 256 colours, digitised video footage and highresolution still pictures. The next advance? Well, what we really need now are crisp, clear TV quality images moving at TV speeds on a computer screen and this is where Sigma Design's ReelMagic PC! video card comes in a card that has the potential to create a revolution in games and entertainment. Tres Bon Jovi We're not exaggerating about the possibility of a games revolution. The ReelMagic card has that elusive 'wow' factor. When people FORRIED ed in comparison. With ReelMagic you get clear hi-res images and the potential for games is enormous. ReelMagie Andie Bear * Os duurd SPECII Mes the Settimal Computers Paildruct Referenser Chle DOS MAS DX see what is running on screen they stop and stare. Since we've had it in the CVG office we've been ringing everybody up, urging them to come and take a look because, despite the fact that all we've been showing is the Bon Jovi \"Blaze of Glory\" video demo that comes with the card, what we have here is Full Motion Video Bon Jovi; literally, TV on your PC. Now, Full Motion Video is a term that's bandied about with computer games all the time, usually meaning little more than low-resolution, poorly digitised American actors filmed against a blue backdrop then lobbed in front of another filmed image. These days TV quality is often taken for granted but remember, even the most advanced graphics are still grainy and pixellatReel Time So what does it do? Well, the ReelMagic is a video (and sound) card that sits alongside your VGA card in the PC. It plays a whole new game format MPEG CD-ROM and a whole new video format VideoCD. It runs these at resolutions up to 1,024x768, at a constant 30 frames per second. And it does all this in 32,768 colours. MPEG compression (MPEG stands for Motion Pictures Experts Group) is the same format used in 3DO and CD-i machines which squashes both video and sound data down by enormous amounts, up to 200:1. This means that the video information then fits within the CD-ROM transfer rate, so the data is played back straight from the CD disc with no loss of speed. It may look suspiciously like a boring old PC card, but believe us when we tell you that this could be a very hot piece of PC kit! 24 "


"negatives Return To Zork is one of the the first games available to make full use of ReelMagic's capabilities. ReelMagic really lets you show off your PC. be nominated for a Bafta or an Oscar for Best Supporting Actor in a Platform Game? Besides games, the aim is to put full-length movies onto a CD-ROM disc. The first VideoCD films capable of being played on the ReelMagic will come from Paramount Pictures and Warner Brothers, with other film studios following suit next year. The VideoCD standard is backed by a whole host of companies including Sony, JVC, Matsushita, Philips and Samsung, and by this time next year you may well be renting out your Friday night flick on CD-ROM disc from Blockbuster, rather than a crackly old video tape. Activision's Return to Zork, and both DOS and Windows software. Games are expected initially to retail in the - region, with 12 titles available by the time of the launch, and over 50 come the New Year. Better still, ReelMagic doesn't need much in the way of expensive hardware. You'll need a CD-ROM drive of course, but it will work just as fast on a standard 16MHz 386PC as on a super-powered 66MHz 486DX/2. It'll also run its 32 thousand colour displays even if you only have a standard 16-colour VGA card. It Does The Lot Not desperately exciting, but this pic gives you some idea of just what the ReelMagic card can do! PC-TV Hooray For Hollywood What you end up with is a TVquality image, running at the same If ReelMagic takes off we'll probframe rate as TV. The benefits of this ably see games moving towards are potentially massive, allowing movie production techniques and games developers to produce soft costs, employing script writers, ware that bring new levels of realism actors, artists, musicians, producers, to PC entertainment games that look key grips, best boys etc. and play like you're really there. Readysoft's beautifully animated classic, Dragon's Lair, looks no different on MPEG CD-ROM to what it did on the coin-op years ago. If anything it looks even better. The ReelMagic card goes on sale in this country very shortly at a price of .99. It will come with a demo CD, the full MPEG version of FMV Clint-alike in ReelMagic shocker! The Commitents Right now there are a number of games publishers and developers that have committed themselves to producing MPEG games for the ReelMagic, including high-profile names such as Sierra, Activision, Trilobyte, Readysoft, Virgin, Westwood Studios, Interplay, Psygnosis, Aris and LucasArts. MPEG CD-ROM titles under way include both new and existing titles; Rebel Assault, Lands of Lore, Return to Zork, Microcosm, Dragon's Lair, Space Ace, Police Quest 4, Outpost, MPC Wizard, VideoCube and The 11th Hour have been announced so far. For a start, both Coktel Vision's Lost in Time and Activision's Return to Zork use digitised actors. Zork has Wayne the older brother from the Wonder Years, some kid from Doogie Howser MD and a host of other actors plucked from various dull US sitcoms. If the trend continues maybe in the future you could So here we have a card that plays video CDs and a new breed of TV. quality video games, doesn't need expensive hardware, costs under  and comes complete with built-in sound. An impressive piece of kit, there's no doubting that, but, like many of the new machines cropping up lately, ReelMagic will live or die by the quality and quantity of software produced for it. We'll be watching closely. 25 "


"WORD UP WITH PAUL his month sees the launch of two of the most important pieces of technology that this industry has seen since the Spectrum. 3DO and Jaguar have hit the streets, one with a roar, the other a whimper. And to be quite honest, it really shouldn't be that way. We've had a 3D0 machine in the CVG office for about a fortnight from the time I write this, and we've all trotted down to Atari's UK headquarters to have a good old look at the Jaguar, and while both are certainly very impressive machines, it's the Jaguar which really got our jaws dropping. It's easy to see why, if you take a look at the tech specs in the 10-page feature running this issue from page 10. And, when you take a look at the respective retail prices of the two systems $700 for 3DO compared to $200 for Jaguar (UK prices not yet confirmed) you'd think it natural for companies to be taking a very keen interest in Atari's 64-bit wonder. COP OUT? Yet all the focus is on the CD-based 3DO, with companies reticent to even give us a quote as to the quality of the Jaguar, let alone whether or not they'll be publishing games for it. Now what I want to know is, why? Fair enough, a lot of firms have been stung in the past by Atari's failure to market its machines, but the company is putting its life and soul into making Jaguar one of THE machines to have in the Nineties; it's streets ahead of the competition in terms of technology. But you'll still hear the softcos whinge 'Yes, but it's Atari, isn't it'. What a cop-out! You'd think that, after years of whining about having to hand over wads of cash to Nintendo and Sega to publish games, they might at least have the foresight to invest a little bit of money in putting together games for a machine that could wipe the floor with either of those systems, without having to turn over large portions of dough to the company who owns the machine. After all, we are talking 400 Meg cartridges here, at a price of around , when the two big console firms are charging at least that for cartridges that are a twentieth of the capacity. BANDWAGON This is an industry that thrives on new technology. It's an industry that has made a lot of people very rich because they jumped on a bandwagon and it kept on rolling. Now those same people want to stay on the bandwagon come what may, shunning potential new avenues to trundle because they don't have the bottle to cough up a few grand out of millions to support the single biggest jump we've ever seen in new-tech. Yes, 3DO is a great machine and deserves to do well but at the expense of everything else? Easy money isn't everything, you know. PAUL RAND 26 "


"MEET THE CVG CREW: COMPO WINNERS PAUL RAND There was a time when you couldn't keep the CVG ed out of the public eye. Mingling with the stars, cropping up on radio and TV (OK, it was GamesMaster and some radio show in Lancashire with Andy Peebles, but what do you want?), then it all seemed to dry up. Recently though, the Rand has received a massive ego boost in the form of a number of celebrity minglings (Bob Hoskins, Michael Winner AND Jeremy Beadle!) and he even got a name check in top peoples' magazine, Time International! What next? Taking over from Anneka Rice on the new TV show 'Challenge Rand'?, We were absolutely swamped with entries for the CD32 competition. Alas, there can only be three winners and, after wading through the masses of letters and postcards in the sack, our lucky wand came to rest on the following trio: Paul Hart, Shrewsbury, SY2. Craig Lowe, Skegness, Lincs. Peter Oyediran, London, SW11. Enjoy your prizes, you jammy gets! 3Rbit POSTER POSER! GARY LORD Has Gaz ever managed any televisual debuts? \"No, the most I've ever managed was to appear in the audience in various programmes when I was a nipper. My first was in the audience of Crackerjack watching the legendary Don McClean and Peter Glaze, but I never made it as a contestant, so I never got that prized possession a Crackerjack pencil and pen.\" For our younger readers, this prized possession' was the juvenile equivalent of a Blankety Blank cheque book and pen. And Gary wanted one! (Editor's note: Gary is very old, so you probably won't remember Crackerjack. I don't!) We were rather surprised by a phone call from Nintendo's PR company the other week, informing us that we'd got the names of the bosses wrong on the Streetfighter 2 Turbo poster which we gave away last issue. We were also quite surprised to find a number of letters in the post, proclaiming much the same thing. Were they correct? had we, as they say, mucked up? Well, yes and no. The names of the bosses on our poster are, indeed, different to those on the UK version of the game. However, when we produced the poster we didn't have a copy of the UK cart, having to rely instead on the Japanese version which we had in the office. On there, the names of the bosses are exactly the same as those on our poster! So why the difference? Is it because of the same Mike Tyson/M Bison controversy that caused Nintendo to alter the names in the original SF2 cart? Probably. But we'd just like to apologise unreservedly to anyone whose Turbo poster enjoyment we spoiled by printing the names differently to those in the UK version. Sorry. AMANDA TIPPING Budding author Amanda hopes to become the new Jilly Cooper, with her debut novel 'Sweet Revenge almost complete. As you'd expect, it's full of dirty bits, and Amanda's rather proud of it; so proud, in fact, that she just can't help going on and on about it. She's used, to the limelight she'll be grabbing once her tome wins the Booker Prize, having just been given her own regular slot on Radio Sussex her Daily Star centre spread appearance with the California Dream Men will have helped too. Wait a mo, is all that mucky stuff in the book about big, muscly men really fiction? SPOT THE SHOT DENIZ AHMET Only two issues into the job, and already we're convinced that Deniz never leaves the house. Our Den's happier sitting in front of the TV scoffing a big pie, than being on the box spouting his games' knowledge. In fact, the only public appearance Deniz has ever made was at the front of the school hall in assembly, when he had to tell the entire school his secret fantasy! And what was it? Answers on a postcard please, to \"Dirty Den' at the usual CVG address. OK, so it was an easy one a couple of issues ago. But give us a break; it was the end of the schedule, we were running short of time and we had to get a shot in, so get one in we did and, as most of you rightly pointed out, it was Sonic Spinball! So, Mark Helliwell or Sheffield, expect a Super NES game through the post very shortly! This month, we've decided that, as the last couple of shots were a bit easy, we're going to really crank up the difficulty and make you sweat! Once you think you know what game we've taken this garbled grab from, write it down on a postcard and send it to: SPOT THE SHOT 7, CVG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. Make sure your entry reaches us by 14 December 1993, and please include the machine you wish your  software prize to run on. Good luck! RIK SKEWS Meet our new staff writer! Rik not only likes to spell his name in a funny way (his name's Richard), he's also a bit of a TV and radio star! While at college, the cameras from top cop show The Bill turned up, and CVG's latest recruit landed the part of 'Shocked Man *1' in a scene when a knife-wielding attacker ran past a crowd of gaping onlookers! Move over, DI Burnside. Rik's also been on Kilroy and Radio 4; but his biggest claim to fame has to be as session keyboard player for a certain Antipodean songstress! No names, but she swapped spit with Michael Hutchence from INXS for a while.. JULIE HEAP Here we all are, mixing with all sorts of celebrities (except Deniz), appearing on country-wide radio (except Deniz) and popping up on a variety of TV extravaganzas (except Deniz). Now Deniz has a cohort in Julie, whose only claim to fame is «knowing some bloke off Channel 4 called Crusher.\" Mind you, CVG's Art Ed has met Paul Daniels once in Spain! Was he magic? Not according Julie. \"Actually, he was a bit of a w...\" Surely she means wonderful person'? 27 "


"CD-I by PHILPS/INFOGRAMES .99 Out Now. Contact Philips (071-222 0833) for information. LERNYA UPYAL Is Infogrames' tennis simulation game, set and match or a stab in the back to CD-i? Grass, clay or cement you choose the court. TENNIS opponent from one of four they range from Julio Jiminez, the old boy of the game, to Robert Garrett, the world's number one player. Choose your oppo, then select whether to play on grass, cement of clay. After that, you hear a preface to the match from commentator George Eddy, and then you're into the game itself. PAUL RAND Which of these four top tennis players will you decide to go up against? an we first of all say a big \"Hello!' to the first ever CD-i review in CVG? Having received one in the office the other day, along with this tennis simulation from Infogrames, it's been hard to drag! those staff members into new-fangled technology (Rand, mostly) away from the thing! A load of balls International Tennis Open is, surprise surprise, a simulation of that game played with a racquet and ball, using CD-i's compact disc technology to hopefully bring as realistic a tennis game as possible to your TV screen. After being greeted by a burst of CD music, the player is taken to the menu screen, where you can select from a number of game options; whether to play a single match or a full tournament; fully manual controls defensive shots only or simply move ment of your player around the screen; full or limited commentary, etc. Once you've tailored the game to suit your requirements, you're given the opportunity to select an With the amount of storage space available on CD, Infogrames has stuffed International Tennis Open full of digitised graphics and sampled sound effects. There's full commentary from George Eddy (which can be turned off if you get sick of him), as well as fullscreen digitised images of all the players. And on the court, the two combatants are digitised too, and you get sampled ball sounds and crowd roars. ANAOS 93 GAMEPLAY GRAPHICS TENNIS VALUE Julio Jiminez to serve be on your toes or he'll ace you. STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES J. JIMENEZ V, PLAYER 57070 2/0/0 10 * VERDICT Things aren't going very well for Victor Player. CD-i has been a machine waiting for good software, and this is one such title. The programmers have filled the disc with sampled sound and digitised graphics. And for all you doubting Thomases who believe that you can't have good gameplay on CD, then think again International Tennis Open plays a very good game of tennis, and the difficulty level between the four opponents is well set. It's a pity there's no two-player option, and some of the animation is ropey at times, but generally this is an admirable tennis game. O-NWUOVO CO 111111 86 PAUL RAND Run in to the net to smash a point-winning ball! 28 "


"MANGA EXPLODES ONTO THE BIG SCREEN Nationality... Unknown Age............ Unknown Name........... Unknown Codename...... GOLGO 13 U.S.A 18 The Professional 13 MANGA LE A Manga Entertainment Presentation THE LEGENDARY COMIC BOOK ASSASSIN AT A CINEMA NEAR YOU FROM NOVEMBER 27th Saturday 27 November: Saturday 4 December: Saturday 11 December: Saturday 18 December: BIRMINGHAM ODEON HOLLOWAY ODEON LEEDS ODEON GLASGOW ODEON COVENTRY ODEON WIMBLEDON ODEON LEICESTER ODEON EDINBURGH ODEON BRISTOL ODEON MUSWELL HILL ODEON NOTTINGHAM ODEON DUNDEE ODEON STOKE ODEON ROMFORD ODEON MANCHESTER ODEON NEWCASTLE ODEON CARDIFF ODEON PORTSMOUTH ODEON SHEFFIELD ODEON LIVERPOOL ODEON All screenings are late-night performances. All dates and cinemas are subject to change. Check local press for details. ....... WATCH OUT FOR MORE MANGA CINEMA PRESENTATIONS IN 1994.... "


"MEGA DRIVE by SONY IMAGESOFT .99 | Out December. Contact Sony (071-734 5151) for information. SENSIBLE SOCCER Half-time Once you've selected the options to suit your style of play — length of game, whether or not you require music during a match, differing pitch conditions, it's into the game itself. If you've ever played Kick Off in any of its forms, you'll feel pretty much at home with Sensible Soccer, although when you get down to it, the gameplay differences between the two are quite radical. As in Kick Off, Sensi is viewed from above, but from much higher so there's more of the pitch on view, allowing for a more strategic style of play basically, you can see more of what's going on, in terms of player positions and such, so you can plan passes easier. In fact, it seems all that's missing is the half-time teacup throwing! Generally regarded as THE football game on Amiga, Sensisoccer's now scoring on Mega Drive! THE SWEETS SPICEFACK You can choose from a list of comedy teams including England! THE SWEETS UNDO GOAL! SERRES n the Amiga, there are two big battlers for the title of king of football games Sensible Soccer and Goal!. On the Mega Drive, a similar battle's just about to begin. FIFA Interational Soccer and Sony's Sensible Soccer are the two main contenders for your cash, with plenty of hype surrounding both. Sensible has the pedigree, being arguably the best game around in its Amiga incarnation. It's taken a while, though, for console versions to appear, but appearing they are, with Mega Drive being the first. A match-winning team, that. Is he going to burst through? And the keeper was nowhere! GRAPHICS INNOS DOWN ON THE BENCH FORMATION: It's all very well storming in with a 3-5-2 attack set-up, but it doesn't look very inspired when you're trailing 4-1 at half-time. It's here where you can alter the team's set-up once you return to the pitch, the players automatically fall into the new formation. POSITIONS: What if you go into halftime 0-0 and you need to bring on a bit of new blood to liven up what could otherwise turn out to be a lacklustre second half? Bring on the boss to tinker about with your players' positions perhaps you want to put all your star players up front, for instance? SUBSTITUTIONS: Not every player performs 100% all of the time, and you may need to bring on a replacement with a bit more 'oomph'. Or maybe one of your team has picked up a yellow card and you daren't risk a sending-off? Just pick the player you want to pull off, and swap him with one of your subs and you're guaranteed not to be sworn at, either. GAMEPLAY 95 VALUE Boi STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES 108 VERDICT A great scoring chance! IIIIIIIIII YOU'RE A STAR! ONWAUNO Mega Drive Sensi contains all the features of the floppy game and then some. The game runs at a frenetic pace, yet the controls are so simple you'll be scoring goals in no time until you come up against the top computer teams. Sensisoccer really comes into its own, though, when you team up against a friend if you're better than him you'll take great delight in whooping him, and if you're equally skilled then it's a real challenge. The most enjoyable game I've played on the MD in years well done Sensible Software and Sony! MITTITI ou can tell which player you're controlling as he's the one with his shirt number floating just above his head. But wait a moment, what about the ones with a number inside a star? They're your flair players, and each team has three of them. These are the boys you should look to when you're in trouble, as they're more skilful than the rest of the team and find it easier to get past the opposition, ride many of the heavier tackles and score some stunning goals just when you need them. 94 PAUL RAND 30 "


"Everything you could wish for in Woolworths. BEGR DRM SNED 16-BIT CARTRIDGE FOR USE WITH THE SEGA MEGA DRIVE VIDEO ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM .99 WOOLWORTHS Time AVIS) Time All items subject to availability IT'S RIGHT UP YOUR STREET. "


"AMIGA by FACTOR 5 .99 Out: November. Contact Renegade (071-702 3643) for information. REVIEW AMIGA TURRICANO Turrican was good, Turrican 2 was excellent, so will the third instalment be er... excellently good? hat evil bio-mechanical monstrosity known rather boringly as The Machine is up to its old tricks again. Not content with being humiliated twice already it has decided to have another stab at galactic domination. One of the best new features in the game is the addition of a grappling hook attached to your suit which enables you to reach inaccessible areas. If you've played Ocean's film licence of Batman then you'll be familiar with the grappling hook idea. However, in Turrican 3 the method of controlling the hook is extremely responsive and allows for very precise manoeuvring when attached to a platform. However, instead of just increasing the number of baddies on screen, Factor 5 has chosen to make them tougher which seems a more sensible idea as it allows the levels to be to be thought about rather than simply rushing in and blasting everything. The Machine has been destroying whole solar systems, just because it craves power and plenty of it. So who ya gonna call to stop this poor excuse for a baked bean tin annihilating the rest of the population? The United Planet's most decorated war hero, that's who. And by the way, that's you that is. After deciding your gingham shirt and denim hot pants probably aren't the most suitable things to wear while fighting ole Jonnie Machine you wisely decide to slip into your trusted exo-skeleton so that you stand some chance of adding to your medal collection. What this boils down to is basically the old run-and-jump platform romp set over five against-the-clock and-progressively-more-difficult levels, each of which is divided into three separate zones. Of course these aren't empty zones, they've been filled with all sorts of robotic minions created by The Machine. Huggy-types ENERG Ex112225312 5. 13100200 580 Hey, haven't I seen you in the movies or somewhere? The levels have a loose theme running throughout each one. The first, for instance, requires the destruction of as many Alien-esque face-hugger types as you wander through a A hatchery, while the fifth features S machines which are reminiscent of the Walkers from The Empire Strikes Back If you're a top notch gamesplayer it's possible to alter the difficulty level. But be warned because the maniac level is just that. There's loads of moving platforms to contend with during the game. GRAPHICS ONDOS x 13 SPOT Use the grappling hook to reach difficult areas or if you want to be Batman. National power Luckily your suit has enough power to make the National Grid blush, but your weapons are fairly energy intensive so it's important to grab as many energy bonuses as possible. Also available are a multitude of weapon upgrades which include multi-shots, missiles, shields, extra lives, all the regulars basically. GAMEPLAY STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES VERDICT 6x13.notzan Lan The maniac level is just like it says and is not something to attempt on your first go. Turrican 3 is one of the best platform games I've played on the Amiga. The 28 tunes are breathtaking and Chris Hulsbeck should win an award for the best Amiga music I've heard. It comple ments the frantic pace perfectly, as does the brilliant FX. AND the whole lot can be listened to in Dolby Surround. Add to this great graphics with heaps of background and sprite variety, a well set difficulty level that can be altered as you get better, mix the lot together and you've got a game that you'd better go and buy right now! O-NWAGOVO IIIIIIIIII MINUTI TITO x 13 izin key Here's one of the harder baddies that crop up during a level. They're nothing compared to the end-of-level guardians though. 87 DENIZ AHMET 32 "


"Timeyoucameandsaurus. Nintendo JURASSIC PARK SUPER NINTENDO. Ocea .99 ME 19.3 POUCES Nintendo Nintendo JURASSIC PARK GAME BOY Pocean JURASSIC PARK Nintendo SRLOUCA ACEST PRIS .99 0 P m .99 WOOLWORTHS Time A S All items subject to availability IT'S RIGHT UP YOUR STREET. "


"KEVIN KEEGAN'S PLAYER A DREAM COME TRUE! HUGELY PLAYABLE KICK OFF STYLE ACTION AND SOCCER MANAGEMENT ROLLED INTO ONE! w %09/ Nintendo Magazine System 2007. 09% FORCE TER AND COMPUTER SNES 90% CVG . SUPER NINTENDO. AMIGA & IBM \"ITISHALGODSEND\" \"PLAYER MANAGER CANT BE FAULTED\" \"QUITE SIMPLY THE BEST ALL ROUND FOOTY GAME ON THE MARKET\" \"AN UTTERLY ENTHRALLING GAIE\" \"A BLINDER OF A GAME\" DEO GA ANCO Imagine er ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM DISTRIBUTED BY ANCO ENTERTAINMENT LTD UNIT 7 MILLSIDE IND. EST. LAWSON RD. DARTFORD KENT DA1 5BH "


"REVIEW Out now. Contact Electronic Arts (0753 549442) for info. SPACE HULK GRAPHICS SOUND Whoops, looks like I tempted fate and spoke too soon! GAMEPLAY VALUE A futuristic Incredible Hulk sim? No! It's a computer version of Games Workshop's groovy boardgame t's the 40,000 century and man is fighting a battle against the alien genestealers. These fiends travel in giant starships known as Space Hulks killing any humans they find. Mankind won't be beaten though. As commander of a group of up to five of the emperor's terminators it's your job to lead them inside alien dreadnoughts and complete 50 missions; these vary from blasting genestealers to collecting artifacts. STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES, Things are a little too quiet for comfort around here. and is replenished by playing in real time. This computer version of Space Hulk is better than its boardgame equivalent. After all it's hard to feel threatened by a plastic figure charging down a cardboard tunnel isn't it? Space Hulk is scary. An unbelievably tense atmosphere is created by detailed graphics with terrifyingly realistic aliens, excellent sound FX (particularly the aliens' roar), but especially through engrossing gameplay thanks to trappings like dice rolling being removed. Combine this with the best elements of shoot-'emups and arcade adventures to create a game you simply must have. Just don't play it alone OK? Rik Skews is selected. For instance a flamethrower would be useful for destroying alien nesting sites while the powerful assault cannon is handy for destroying anything which gets in the way. Action is in real time with a 'freeze' option. However, to stop overuse, freeze time quickly runs out ONWAUOVO IIIIIIIIII You choose A choice of weapons is available depending on what type of mission 87 AMIGA by ELECTRONIC ARTS .99 (West Drayton) \"SENSIBLE SOCCER IS THE BEST GAME Paul Gascoigne I'VE EVER PLAYED SONY IMAGESOP semble 235 "


"SNES by VIRGIN .99 Out November. Contact Virgin (081-960 2255) for information. REVIEW E22230 Cooler than an ice-cube with shades, Mr Spot hits the SNES with added fizz! features and the scrolling's smoother. In fact you now have a bonus stage where Cool tries to spell out a word by collecting its letters. Each letter he finds earns him another continue. Impressed? You should be. Cool TIME remembering that you're against the clock all the way. The action becomes more manageable when you make use of the collectables which are liberally scattered. Health, time and continuation posts play a more crucial role the further you progress, while a Virgin Pill is the equivalent of collecting seven dots, which is good news considering that some dots are actually hidden behind objects! COOL 229 as... My hero is name is Spot, Cool Spot, and he even wears his shades indoors! But if there's one thing which gets up his nose, that is, if he had a nose, it's when his mates get kidnapped and caged up. That's when a hero is needed. Set in a land where everything is life size, except for Cool, our round friend has to tackle 11 distinct stages, utilising his character charms to do the deed. A new trend in platform characters is to leave them alone and see what they do. Cool Spot does a lot more than others, so here's the funny stuff and other Spot animations. Depending on your difficulty setting each level requires our round friend to collect a set number of dots before he can free his friends. This is all very well, but is the SNES version any better than the Mega Drive? Well, all the levels are the same, but they look sharper, have new graphical It's like a stage from Sonic! High speed cartwheels around a maze of platforms. Brilliant fun! Play boy GRAPHICS INNOS You Cooler than Iceland in winter ven a Spot needs some help to be extra cool. Here are the items which you can gather to sort your life out. This GrabI do gives need to bing this believe our pal collect pumps this seven dots, these before up your life adds an extra saving heaps you can rescue status. They 30 seconds to of hassle. But your friends. appear when your time. there aren't Some of them you shoot More vital on many around. are hidden. baddies. harder levels. EPLAY STRATEGY SKILL Leave him alone for a moment, and he'll whip out his yo-yo, clean his shades or even pull a silly face. He's very much your flexible friend, cartwheeling down the backs of deck chairs, climbing ropes and springing off mouse traps. If he falls off a great height he'll even dust his sleeves in disgust. There are lots of things out to halt! Cool Spot's travels, and while he can sustain six hits his only weapon is the ability to sling suds. To help him negotiate those hard-to-reach places Cool will often make use of balloons and bubbles for their floating properties. Misjudgment with these can be time consuming, so it's worth ACTION REFLEXES VERDICT Cool Spot is one of the most cleverly put together SNES games for ages. The Cool Spot character easily takes the title for best 'stand stillanimation routines, and he's funny on the move too. Visually, the scenes are fabulous and the action is immensely enjoyable. A lot of the levels have been blessed with graphical feo fures not found in the chart topping Mega Drive version, and the visuals are a lot smoother and more vivid. Cool Spot proves that there is still a lot of life left in platform games. Simple but cuteishly addictive. OOONOOMNO IIIIIIIIII OISI U DENIZ AHMET Cool Spot can use mouse traps to spring him over obstacles. 36 "


"PC by ORIGIN .99. 1 REVIEW PRIVATEER GRAPHICS INNOS LAY Wing Commander meets Elite in this space trading and combat sim. Out Now. Contact Electronic Arts (0753 549442) for information. who are out to steal your cargo, so combat plays a large part as well. Beyond that, there are missions to fly, galaxies to explore and bars to hang out in. Sounds fun? Err... The graphics are OK, but they're Origin has created Privateer, a games a bit old fashioned compared with set in the same universe as Wing other games. Add to that no storyline Commander, but instead of blowing and combat which is about as excitthe Kilrathi scum out of the sky, you're ing as watching paint dry, and you're freelance trader and mercenary out to on to a loser. make a swift buck. make a swift buck. The trouble with Privateer is the missions are fine, but they're not easy STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES Trader to find, and I wasn't aware of them until I'd stumbled across one by acciLike Elite, trading is central to the dent. The trading aspect prolongs the game. You need to make money by game a little bit, but it's all rather dull. buying commodities and selling them If you want a similar game with a more for a profit, then using your hard depth, look no further than Frontier: earned cash to upgrade your ship. Elite II. It's bigger, better, cheaper and You're always in danger from pirates comes on only two floppies. Si 5 ing Commander was a fast and furious space combat game with lots of action and excitement. Elite was a fast and furious space trading game with action, excitement and strategy too. Now ONWAGOVO IIIIIIIIIII 60 Happy lads, aren't they? When you can have Elite 2... ...why bother with this? An addictive puzzle game create clocks on 12 world monuments shoot enemies that rust your creations \"Eat your heart out Tetris. Gear Works is here to stay Alex Lee, editor of G.B. Action O IF YOU'RE YOU'RE DEAD SONY GAME BOY Cascade Gear WorksTM and 1993 Sony Electronic Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved. Game Boy is a registered trademark of Nintendo Sony Imagesoft and Imagesoft are trademarks of Sony Electronic Publishing Company. 1992 Sony Electronic Publishing Company IMAGESOFT "


"AMIGA by VIVID IMAGE .99 Out now. Contact Vivid Image (0923 50701) for more information. SECOND SAMURAO Now in its second incarnation, the beat-'em-up full of eastern promise is ready for a bit of kung fu fighting I think this fellow needs some sleep. Too many late nights has made him go green. Beware in this scene of the lead weight that comes crashing down at any moment (like now). rocket here the backdrops are spectacular and the action superb. The Samurai travels through various places to get to the end of the world, including Japanese gardens, a volcanic world, and a future world. Along the way there is plenty of wrestling, including karate, aikido, taekwondo and the revival of the 1970s cult fighting, kung fu. If there's one criticism to make it's the fact that it's really difficult to get from one level to another because the bloody exits are so well hidden it's a game in itself just to find them. But once the frustration is over and you start a new level the game just gets better and better. This is where the game begins, a serene area of waterfalls and caves. Oh and the guy in black is a friendly chap as if! In the underground cavern of demons this guy has let his battle skills go to his head. GRAPHICS INNOS 86 fter a two-year break oiling those well used arms and legs, the Samurai has returned to a complicated, but cracking platform world. He has to rescue his friend who has been captured by the Demon King and is trapped at the end of the world. Can he save him in time? Second Samurai, the sequel to First Samurai (where do they think of these original titles?) kicks off where the first one left off, and there are some significant improvements weapons scattered around, such as a massive sword, throwing daggers and even a special magic bomb. One thing which puzzles me is how does the samurai manage to jump about so nimbly when he's laden down with so many heavy weapons? . I'm sure Vivid Image is not that concerned about such a minor detail, since it has paid a lot of attention to more important details in the gameplay, such as a shoot-em up section where the Samurai straps on a GAMEPLAY 087845 02000ee. STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES Second Samurai's sumo pal he's called Sue you know. 9 VERDICT I'm not a massive fan of these ninja sort of games but as it happens this one is quite entertaining. The soundtrack is effective, giving the game a dramatic feel. There's plenty of hack 'n' slash, exploring, puzzle solving and platforms to keep you occupied well into the early hours of the morning and the backdrops are quite stunning, making a decent change from similar games. Vivid Image deserves a pat on the back for all the hard work it's put into this. And at the same time why not treat yourself and go and get your very own copy. ONWAUOVO It's all Jap to me For a start there are 10 difficult levels of high kicking, arm punching kung fustyle fighting with monsters, dragons, snakes, beetles, robots, ninjas and other samurai If that isn't enough to contend with there are the four sub games which involve yes, you've guessed it more fighting with asteroids on moving platforms which dissolve as soon as you jump on them so you have to be quick on your feet.. The game starts quite tame with the Samurai just using his bare hands and legs as defence, but as the game progresses he can pick up various 38 TIIIIITILIT 89 AMANDA TIPPING "


"1 REVIEW AMIGA by 21ST CENTURY ENT.99 Out now. Contact 21st Century Entertainment (0235 851852) for information. Another issue, another Pinball Fantasies review! This time it's on the A1200. Will it be a corker or will it end up a bit smelly? Read on intrepid reader and find out... by SEO hat I want to know is why on earth anyone would want to play pinball on a computer instead of getting off their wobbly bottoms and walking down to their nearest arcade? VRUL Don't get spooked by this ghoulish table it's one of the best in the game. Game Show and Stones and Bones (ghosts and ghoulies type thang). Each table has its particular bonus set-ups, pitfalls and sound effects which will keep you keep you flippin' away for some time. 500 Needles Picture the scene at your local arcade emporium: hot sweating body; itchy fingers, twitching and breathtakingly fast on the machine buttons. Either side of you a gang of unruly youths grunting in ecstasy as you push the machine to its limits with your sheer brilliance. It's not exactly idyllic is it? Above you a cloud of high-tar smoke forms, painting the ceiling with an acidic grey tint. And in the air a sweaty smell indicates at least one of WAD HOUS GOO90 85 ONDOS 86 GAMEPLAY GRAPHICS Win a billion dollars. (Well it's only pretend, but what the hell.) STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES VERDICT Pinball Fantasies on the A1200 is as fine a game as it is on all the other machines. But what use has been made of the AGA chip set? Well the tables now feature 256 colours and have been redrawn and touched up to give a more realistic and polished feel. The game also has modified ball routines to get the most from the increased processing power, and this power has also been utilised to make the game run even smoother. With the excellent gameplay still there you've got an essential game if you want the most realistic pinball simulator ever! Addictive, simple and the oldest arcade game ever! you in the group needs a lesson on personal hygiene. Pinball eh, what a top game? Pinball Fantasies, I think you'll find is a much more civilised option than nipping down to your local arcade. And if you're a regular reader you'll know how much we've been raving about the game, but if you're new to the magazine then I'll run through the game once more. ONWA000 IIIIIIIIIII um And pins Well, it's pinball pure and simple. Four tables; Partyland, Speed Devils (which is car based), Billion Dollar 90 PAUL RAND 39 "


"AMIGA AMIGA by MINDSCAPE .99 Out January. Contact Mindscape (0444 246333) for information. REVIEW O CCUEN N WE  N N C @@@@ 3 3 3 Is Mindscape's Alfred a tasty bird or a bit of a turkey? ifred Chicken is Mindscape's latest assault on the platform market, and in the game this cute little fellow is on a mission to rescue Billy Egg and his friends, who have been captured by the evil Mega Chickens (you don't want to mess with these guys they're certainly no yolk. (Any more of those and you're fired Ed)). Alfred's got a beak like a pneumatic drill that can kill the hordes of clockwork mice, worms and, indeed, anything else that walks, crawls, hops or flies in his direction SCORE: 013300 :6 6:001600 He doesn't move very fast but Alfred Grab the gems, but don't get can fly through the air to reach differnabbed by the snail. ent levels in the game. There are eleven different stages popped will he be transported into a to tackle in Alfred Chicken's quest to special bonus stage and then onto find his pals, starting off in the Cheese the next world. World and going on to the Baby World, Wood World, Book World, Cluck Me and Sci Fi World, with plenty of sub levels and bonus levels to have a Mr Peckles, the 90s equivalent of crack at in which you have to pick up a flowerpot man, is a friend of keys and extra points before you can Alfred's and he gives him pieces of progress in the game. Along the way_ advice to help him carry on with his Alfred has to peck at balloons, and quest, as well as jars of strawberry only when all of them have been jam which give him special powers, allowing him to shoot bullets which can blast away blocks and create exits from BOBY the level. Talking of which, there aren't that many levels in the game, but don't be fooled into thinking it's a piece of cake because it isn't. There's quite a lot of CCRE: 0040300:1 0:336 .05 something (I can't call it action or Cheesy goings-on in Cheese gameplay because it isn't) packed World, predictably enough. into each level which prevents you from leapng from stage to stage. The th SCORE: 002280 0:2 0:019 :36 :01 Alfred looks puzzled in one of the bonus levels. stos Cue 250 can get quite tedious, as well as causing quite a dent in your hand as you grip the joystick in frustration. Despite this minor setback once you get past the first few levels Alfred Chicken proves to be quite an enjoyable game. score: 0123000 :599 349 & ONNOS Hurrah! Alfred's got to the end of the stage with a full quota of gems his flowery friend looks on, obviously impressed. trouble is that if you die you go back to the stage where you last popped a balloon, and that could be quite a while away, so you have to repeat the whole process again. This GAMEPLAY GRAPHICS R VALUE STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES VERDICT 10 I'm not going to cluck on about how exciting this game is because frankly it isn't. Alfred is a cute enough character and it is quite a novel idea to have a chicken as a hero, but it doesn't seem to work and the game can become a little dull in some stages, especially when it takes yonks to get through a level and then you die and have to start all over again. However, to be fair the game is quite difficult and gets progressively harder and there is some excitement in finding the secret coves where Mr Peckles is waiting. There is a lot of scope to improve on the simple graphics, which are quite bland, and the soundtrack leaves a lot to be desired. But hey, it's not all bad and it's nice to see that tame games haven't become extinct just yet. NWALION COCO IIIIIIII A 6470 AMANDA TIPPING "


"GRAB. SOME HAWK JUNIOR (TP189) srp .99 SCORPION+ (TP137M) srp .99 *New digital design. *No trimmer required. *Automatic Centering for IBM PC/XT/AT 386/486 and compatibles. HAWK+ (TP123) srp .99 *Multi system joystick with six microswitches. *High-speed autofire capability. *Ergonomic new design. *Auto centering and free floating operating modes. *High speed autofire capability. *For use with IBM PC/XT/AT 386/486 and compatibles. TECW245 TECNOPLUS HAWK JUNIOR TECNOPLUS SCORPION+ TECNOPLUS SCORPION MULTI TECNOPLUS SMARD CARD TECNOPLUS HAWK+ SMART CARD (TP163) srp .99 *Game card complete with calibration software. *Supports 4.77 to 80 Mhz clock speed. For use with IBM PC/XT/AT 386/486 and compatibles. SCORPION JUNIOR (TP13110 srp .99 SNES CONTROL PAD+ (TP188) srp $14.99 *Digital joystick with six microswitches. *For Atari and Commodore games systems. MEGA CONTROL PAD+ (TP183) srp .99 *Independent turbo control for all fire buttons. *Hands-free auto fire capability. *Slow motion control. *Por use with the Sega Megabrive.\" *Independent turbo control for all six fire buttons. *Slow motion control *Hands-free auto fire capability. TECNOPLUS SNES CONTROL PAD+ TECNOPLUS MEGA CONTROL PAD+ TECNOPLUS SNES CONTROL PAD TECNOPLUS IEGA LUSONTROL PAD TECNOPLUS MEGA ONTROL TECNOPLUS MEGA CONTROL STICK TICK TECNOPLUS O CONTROL PAD MEGA CONTROL PAD NEW DESIGN SNES CONTROL PAD (TP182) srp .99 MEGA CONTROL PAD (TP181) srp .99 *6 fire buttons. *8 direction thumb-control pad. *3 fire buttons.*8 direction thumb-control pad. MEGA CONTROL STICK (TP135) srp .99 *For use with the Sega MegaDrive. TM LOOK OUT FOR: *High-speed turbo fire capacity. *3 fire buttons. \"Start button. * THE SNES CONTROL STICK (TP197) srp $14.99 *For use with the Sega MegaDrive. * THE PC GAME PACK INCLUDING HAWK+ JOYSTICK WITH SMART CARD (TP187) srp .99 * SWIFT AMIGA JOYPAD (TP200) srp .99 * EAGLE JOYPAD (TP191) FOR IBMPC/AT/XT 386/486 & COMPATIBLES srp .99 TECNOPLUS SKETTY CLOSE, BRACKMILLS BUSINESS PARK, NORTHAMPTON, NN4 OPL TEL: 0604 768711 FAX: 0604 769945 IBM XT/AT are registered trademarks of international Business Machines Corporation. Super Nintendo Entertainment System, Sega, Megadrive and all other registered trademarks are the property of their respective owners. "


"LREVIEW SNES by STORM .99 Out November. Contact The Sales Curve (071-585 3308) for information. Virtual reality, yes we know you're fed up to your back molars with hearing about it, but listen up because the film that started it all off is the licence for a rather special SNES game... THE LAWNMOWER MAN DR. ANGELO EXPERIMENTED WITH VIRTUAL REALITY TO VASTLY NCREASE JOBE'S INTELLIGENCE What!? Space Invaders return. You have to shoot a certain number before you can move. Lots of digitised movie grabs provide the eerie atmosphere for the game. They pop-up between every stage so you get a breather. ust imagine it, a level of intelligence greater than anything on earth. At least one person doesn't have to imagine anymore because Jobe (once a sad chap who used to mow the lawn) has become virtual reality itself. Locked away in his virtual world Jobe has threatened to merge with the knowledge of all the world's computers. He's totally out of control! Qualcast The Lawnmower Man game is as strange as the film. Its eight levels are morphed together by an array of sub-levels which are games in themselves. One or two players take control of Dr Angelo or Carla in a mind numbing journey through platform terrains and 3D shoot-'em-up action. All the platform stages are set in reality, hence familiar scenery, while all 3D stages are set in the world of virtual reality. Portals link the two worlds and flicker at locations where you can travel no further in reality. Carnage wise you carry two weapons comprising a basic plasma gun and a more complex device called a Bit Stream Weapon. It takes some time to charge up this device, but it becomes vital towards the end of the game where a variety of weird objects are out to kill you. Perhaps the most visually impressive stage in the game with lovely Mode 7 scrolling. VERDICT The first thing you notice about Lawnmower Man is the lovely presentation and moody music. Digitised movie grabs are presented throughout your adventure. On first play the game appears to be very bland with basic platform stuff. Hang-in and you discover a huge, well structured game with distinct sub games that don't push the rest of the game out of direction. All the 3D stuff is fast and furious, while every part of this game is playable. STORM is proving to be a quality SNES label. This is one of the best movie tie-ins ever, and definitely the best on the SNES. 1001 Remember Spy Hunter on the C64? Well this stage is like that, except it's horizontal, is a lot faster and has heaps of weapons. DENIZ AHMET "


"VERDICT SUPER Famicom SUPERMER To begin with The Lawnmower Man seems dull, but if you manage to hang on in there and get past the usual shoot'-em-up style of game and enter the Virtual World you'll realise that that's where the fun and excitement is! The graphics are bright and brilliant, especially the 3D bits which make the gameplay even more exciting and there are some excellent stills from the film. There are loads of levels to this game, and they just get progressively crazier and crazier. Enough to keep you busy until virtual reality becomes actual reality. PROS: Lots of variety in the gameplay and a sold movie tie-in. Hey it's Space Harrier! Almost. Shoof Jobe's head and then fly through the seven blocks behind him to deactivate the exit. Very hard I might add. CONS: Looks a bit out of date (C64-ish) on the platform levels. AMANDA TIPPING Cyberpunk Nothing special in platform terms, but some excellent Mode 7 visuals have been used. The main virtual worlds appear in three forms as separate levels: Cyber Run, Cyber Tube and Cyber War. The object in all of these is to reach the exit. Hyper-fast Mode 7 graphics make these quite spectacular considering that the game doesn't even use a DSP or FX chip. These virtual worlds are shoot-'em-up stages and are different to those found in the portals throughout the platform levels. Within those you find a hazardous course littered with bridges and pillars which you have to pass through without any contact. These are very difficult to master because they're bloody fast and you move under momentum so the trick is to move gently and very slightly. Very moody when it needs it and funky elsewhere. Well themed. THEY PROGRAMMED JOBE WITH THEIR OEI    TDEATM ENT TED A MONSTER. Jobe doesn't look too pleased at all, so blast his head again. destruct mechanism. You must destroy all of the terminals to complete the game. GAMEPLAY Lots of variety demands a range of different skills. Classic gaming Back to life Back in reality land your character will encounter obstacles like dustbins which when destroyed will release a fountain of data disks. When you collect enough of these you morph into a cyber suit which functions as a shield. Throughout the game you will come across 10 computer terminals. These present intelligence tests of which five must be completed per terminal in order to activate its self It's a big game, and it plays well. Good use of the licence. STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES 10 Shut that door! Inside you'll enter a tricky virtual world. 6 8 It's worth mentioning here about level four. It's during this level that you will notice Lawnmower Man is very similar to the old classic Space Harrier. Here you confront Jobe (well his head anyway) in a shootout to prevent him escaping into the VSI computer. Each time you defeat Jobe a grid of hexagons zoom towards you and the aim is to try and fly through each portal to deactivate it Obviously, you need to beat Jobe seven times so it's very demanding on the finger tips. This is a top licence and I've only covered a smidgen of the game here, so to find out more you'll just have to get it! Nom NOV IIIIIIIII HIT! The last level is a funky vertical shoot-'em-up against the doomsplayer. Swirling plasma backgrounds make this visually moody. 43 "


"REVIEW GAME BOY by NINTENDO .99 Out January. Contact Nintendo (0329 822565) for more information. THE LAWNMOWER MAN The Game Boy is not the best format for virtual reality, but that hasn't stopped Nintendo creating a spectacular game... am sure you all know the plot by the Game Boy screen does have its now, so I won't waste your time limitations. He has to dodge towering and mine by telling you all about blocks and huge grids in the race the not-so-clever Lawnmower Man against time to outwit the government Jobe, who is turned into a raving and take over the world, loonie by the not-so-clever scientist Dr Lawrence Anglo, who likes playing Virtually great around with virtual reality. The games starts off quite tamely in a Megalomaniac suburbian street where Jobe is being pursued by gunmen in a typical shootAnyway Jobe has got it into his vastly 'em-up style. The game progresses intelligent head that he wants to take with him being chased into many virtu over the universe (megalomaniac or a l worlds through the reality levels. In what?) but he's not these, which include bothered about the Data Tunnel, trivial disturbances you have to steer such as shoot outs your way very with the city's army troops Every now and then he slips into virtual reality which looks quite impres2640 sive considering TO carefully through the tunnel as you fly very quickly. It sounds easy but it isn't. There are many obstacles and enemies which are placed in your way and they are often difficult to avoid. If you fail you retum to the original entrance to the world and you have to try again. If you're not very good at this then it can hold you up for a long time and it can get quite frustrating before you move on in the game, The Lawnmower Man is virtually, the same as the SNES version which is quite commendable because normally the games are found lacking by the time they make it on to the Game Boy. Not with this one, however. TE40 Violence on the Game Boy still looks naff; there's no colour so the blood is all black. There are plenty of levels: Suburbia, The Shop, the Battle Chimps and finally the Doomplayer's VR Chamber from which he dominates his virtual worlds. Don't expect to reach this level in a day or so though. It takes patience and skill, something I don't have! GRAPHICS INNOS GAMEPLAY STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES Running through reality has its problems, namely guards! 8 9 Fly through 3D tunnels for heaps of fun. Shoot anything! VERDICT When I first played Lawnmower Man I didn't like it, probably because I haven't seen the film so I didn't know what was going on. But after a while the game's grown on me It's the first VR game on the Game Boy and considering the small screen it works well. There's plenty of action and shooting scenes, plus loads of sub-levels which are just as tricky as the SNES game. Considering the Game Boy's limitations, Storm have done a commendable job on Lawnmower Man. Very addicfive, very difficult and very enjoyable. ONWerovo  TITITIT IIIIIIIIIII 87 Scrolling graphics bring nonstop baddies. Very hard. AMANDA TIPPING "


"BLOOD DONORS REQUIRED GIVE GENEROUSU BRAM STOKERIS (3) MEGR-CD SEISIES Game LEAR GAME BOY (TETTERORISMENT SUPER NINTENDO Dil PC Based on the spine chilling movie. This game will go straight for your jugular. \"Majorly moody graphics and some brutally aggressive gaming\". Trenton Webb, editor of Nintendo Zone. SONY On sale on video from December 1st. AMIGA IMAGESOFT ** NOS Game screens are from Mega CD other formats vary. Bram Stoker's Dracula' and 01992 Columbia Pictures Industries Inc. All rights reserved Master System Mega Drive Mega CD and Game Gear are registered trademarks of Sega Enterprises Ltd. Game Boy Nintendo Entertainment System and Super Nintendo Entertainment System are registered trademarks of Nintendo Sony Imagesoft and Imagesoft are trademarks of Sony Electronic Publishing Company 1992 Sony Electronic Publishing Company "


"PC CD-ROM by STORM One of the first bungee jumps known to man. TBA PREVIEW The thing is he forgot one small detail... CHRISTMAS RELEASE Stage of Development ...the elastic. Luckily it's only virtual reality. 90% Complete Could this be the pièce de résistance of the Lawnmower games? TIT AWNMOWER MAN awnmower Man is soon to be available on CD-ROM! Although not completely finished yet (the programmers are in the process of piecing together the various sections of the game), we've managed to take a sneaky peek at the game and it looks a bit of a blinder! The plot is similar to that of the console and handheld versions, in that Jobe has become Cyberjobe, having been rocketed into the world of virtual reality by scientist Dr Angelo, and is out to rule the world as some kind of god. You control Dr Angelo and have to enter the VR computer and hunt down CyberJobe by travelling through a number of different stages, tackling problems and battling virtual enemies as you go. Rescuing your friend Peter and his mother Carla is your first priority and, indeed, a must if you wish to take on Cyberjobe. you may well be impressed by the graphics in CD Lawnmower Man. But you really should see them move! Your virtual character looks incredible as he makes his way around the landscapes not unlike the T-1000 from Terminator 2, in fact. And then there's the sound; Storm has got Steve Hillage of System 7 to create the soundtrack for the game, which sounds like a spaced-out house tune. All in all, an audio-visual treat. As far as the gameplay is concerned, we'd prefer to reserve judgment until we review the game in a month or so, since they are still making tweaks as we go to press. So stay tuned! Quick quiz: are these bees or wasps? Fluid movement and graphics. Graphics that make you go 'blimey'. Terminator Jobe has copied a number of people from his memory and has set them off to attack you, so you have to be careful as you search for the two Cyberstasis Spheres which he has hidden somewhere within the virtual universe and inside which Peter and Carla are locked. Taking a look at the screenshots dotted around the page. 46 As you can tell from this screenshot, the sound is going to be great. LM on PC-CD is gonna be F.A.B. "


"JENU TM KINJA = ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM SUPER NINTENDO CBM AMIGA AMIGA 1200 OCEAN SOFTWARE LTD. CASTLEFIELD MANCHESTER  M3 4LZ ENGLAND TEL: 061 832 6633  FAX: 061 834 0650 "


"COMPETITION TAKE OVER WIN A PRIVATE SCREENING OF FOR YOU SONY AND 30 OF YOUR MATES COURTESY OF ... IMAGESOFT Bonito es, indeed, woo your friends and become Mr Popular for the day if you scoop up the first prize in our great Sony Imagesoft competition. Yet another big movie hits the videogaming screen on all formats, including floppy. Big Arnie's The Last Action Hero is expected to be THE game for early next year. Sony Electronic Publishing reckons the conversions will be just as action packed as the film! In fact Sony is so excited about the new game that it is throwing it away to one lucky reader who will be whisked away on a minibus with 30 friends to a private screening of the film in London. Five runners up will also each receive a goodie bag of Last Action Hero CDs, T-shirts and a copy of the game on a format of their choice. Wow! I hear you hollor. You've got to admit it's a pretty good prize. And if you don't have 30 friends then you are pretty sad. And you could always call us up here at CVG cos we'd be only too happy to fill those empty places! On route to the cinema you may bump into some trouble... ..So it's worth having your mates with you to give you a hand. Then you'll get to this lovely cinema trouble free. SMALL PRINT: This competition is not open to employees of Emap Images, or Sony Electronic Publishing, their families, dogs, cats and budgies. The editor's decision is final. One last thing, please do not ring up to see if you have won. If you need to talk to someone that badly why not contact the Samaritans instead of bothering us hard-working (? —Ed) bunch of folk. 48 "


"THE CINEMA You can be a hero for a day by tak ing all your mates to a special cinema showing. CDs and T-shirts up for grabs too! All you have to do is answer three simple Last-Action Hero related questions and a little tie-breaker just so it makes our job more fun when we read the entries. Ha ha! So get those minds ticking over and draft up your party list as you could be on your way to London! 1. Who played the role of Jack Slater in the movie? 2. Who played Arnold Schwarzenegger's twin in the film of the same name? 3. What other blockbuster movie starring Sly Stallone is Sony currently converting into a game? And now for the tricky part. In no more than 15 words squashed on the back of an envelope or postcard please complete the following sentence in an original and amusing way: IF I HAD BIG MUSCLES LIKE ARNIE I WOULD... Send your hysterical entries to IF I DON'T WIN I'LL BE BACK, CVG, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC13AU. Please make sure your entry reaches us by the 14 January otherwise you'll get nowt. Goodbye and Good luck! 49 "


"BOB'S BAD DAY Out now. Contact Psygnosis (051-709 5755) for information. touched, deplete Bob's coin supply. Lose all your coins and it's a life lost for you, (shades of Sonic, perhaps?). The weirdest game yet arrives on the Amiga. And it's from Psygnosis GRAPHICS 68 SOUND 69 CAMEPLAY 00012 Amiga Mode 7 The real-time sprite rotation in BBD has been heralded as the Amiga equivalent of the SNES' Mode 7. It isn't as impressive, but it's smooth and inoffensive. But it's not the graphics that make BBD, it's the playability Bob moves realistically and the difficulty level is well judged. If you're after a game that's a little bit different, give it a go. Simon Byron Ladies and Gentlemen, may I introduce you to the Amiga Mode 7. Except it's not. STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES 10 NO COIN sit me or has anyone else noticed the increase in ball-related games? I blame the C64 classic Bounder. Since then we've had Putty, Morph, Blob and, er, Jimmy White's Whirlwind Snooker. Perhaps it is just me, then. Moving on... In Bob's Bad Day you play Bob, who is transformed into a ball and to recover his legs he has to roll through 100 mazes collecting coins and bonuses along the way. This is one of the weirdest game concepts ever. You have to rotate the maze around Bob so that he rolls in the direction you want. There are loads of gravity-affecting icons which alter the way Bob moves. Cogs are strategically placed which, when TA Onwenovac IIIIIIIIIII Roll, roll, roll your Bob, gently round the maze. Merrily, merrily... Bob's spent the night down the pub. As you can see, he's completely legless, AMIGA by PSYGNOSIS .99 Polish up your helmet because Psyggy's new bike game is here! Out Now. Contact Psygnosis (051-709 5755) for information. PRIME MOVER GRAPHICS ONNOS 80 00 65:88 miga owners are lucky enough to have the best motorbike racing game ever on their machine, namely No Second Prize. And now, thanks to Psygnosis, they have what is without doubt the most mediocre Prime Mover. The game offers you the chance to compete against a host of computer-controlled rivals in a grand round-the-world tournament. You GAMEPLAY 88 87 65: You're on a motorbike but where the heck are the handlebars? STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES 10 2 Crash and you're subjected to some naff sound effects. have five bikes at your disposal, each with differing top speeds and acceleration rates, the idea being to pick the one best suited to the current course (not that I noticed much difference between them). NEXT TRACK HEM BIKE RACE STATUS LOGO SAVE QUT RACING ever.\" Well, yes, it's smooth alright, very smooth indeed, but that's hardly surprising given that the trackside is emptier than John Major's head. Whoo! Feel that speed rush! Or don't. Prime Mover is technically very slick, no doubt about it, but if only the coding demons behind it had spent a bit longer adding sparkle to the gameplay rather than that oh-sosmooth road routine this might have been a game worth buying. As it stands, it ain't. David Upchurch Onweco IIIIIIIIII Slow mover Psygnosis claims that Prime Mover is (and I quote) \"the smoothest, most realistic arcade motorcycle game Quit and go play something else. AMIGA by PSYGNOSIS .99 50 "


"IMAGESOFT SONY Chuck Rock is a trademark of Core Design Ltd. 1992 Core Design Ltd. All rights reserved. Mega CD is a registered trademark of Sega Enterprises Ltd. Game Boy and Super Nintendo Entertainment System are registered trademarks of Nintendo. Sony Imagosoft and Imagesoft are trademarks of Sony Electronic Publishing Company. 1992 Sony Electronic Publishing Company. (89% NMS TAKES AGES TO BE THIS THROUGH FIVE PREHISTORIC WORLDS. BELLY-BUTTS AND ROCK-TOSSES HIS WAY VIDEO GAMING'S BEST LOVED HERO LOPI CB-03W "


"REVIEW PC Out No by GAMETEK .99 Out November. Contact Gametek (0753 553445) for information. FONTIER Why not try mining? Fly up to an asteroid and blow it to bits. The longest awaited sequel ever is finally here, but is it really as good as Elite? So much to do, so much to see The first thing which hits you about this game is the sheer scale of it all. Frontier takes in a galaxy which contains 200,000,000,000 (count 'em) star systems, each with between one and 20 planets. That's a whole lot of Ekal Satunk lite is the granddaddy of all space sims, and although a lot of games have tried to better it, none tise lo Reus 154 have succeeded. Until now, that is. Frontier is a game of space trading, combat and subterfuge, set in a galaxy where two empires are locked in a cold war, Want to be a fat cat stockbroker? You got it. A military spy? You got it. A ruthless assassin? You got it. Or the meanest taxi driver in the universe? No problem. Whatever you want out of this game, it's yours, so get into your spaceship and fly the not so friendly skies So what's so great about Frontier? We've been waiting five years for the darned thing, it can't really be that good, can it? Well yes, it can, actually. LAYE 51.4 km Selton 0 km Relative to love Stat HERNING Incoming More Coming out of hyperspace feels like riding a roller coaster after a night on the town. Bleurgh! Some things never change. Just fly up to a space station, open up and then smoke the coppers as they come out of the dock. Pure nostalgia. space to explore. More importantly, there is so much to do as well. You aren't limited to carrying out missions in a certain order, because you have the freedom to go out and do whatever takes your fancy. VERDICT What more can you want? There's so much to see and do that it could keep you going for years. Even better, the game comes on only two disks, and can be played from the floppy drive. The graphics and sound are excellent, but this is only the icing on the cake because the gameplay is so good. If you're the violent type and want to spend your game blowing people away, you can do just that, but if you'd rather play it safe and stay out of trouble, that's fine too. There really is something for everyone here. Mu k m Rahtise lo Mes Sel 772883 kalp Rimed Nana Back in the old days (Elite), if you saw one of these babies you kept out of the way, 'cos Vipers were police ships. Now you can fly one yourself. PAUL RAND 52 "


"VERDICT go out and get something a bit more appropriate. If you want to make a go of it as a trader, you'll need to get yourself a mother huge cargo ship, but if you aim to be an assassin or military troubleshooter, it's advisable to get yourself something small and fast with plenty of firepower. The world and his wife knows of the Elite phenomenon, and everyone's been waiting for Braben's sequel. Now it's here, and what an incredible game it is! Frontier is an immense piece of software: graphically gorgeous, with ultra-fast moving, excellently defined ships. Sound is terrific and gameplay is frankly unrivalled on the Pc. One of, if not the biggest games ever, Frontier is a title that will make the rest of your software collection obsolete. PROS: Gameplay, graphics and sound are all first rate. It's immense! CONS: It's not the easiest game to get into. AMANDA TIPPING Your old fave, the Cobra MK III, seen here on planet Earth. Mission impossible One of the biggest criticisms of Elite was the fact that it was a bit lacking in the mission department. That's not true of Frontier. Every time you land at a space station or on a planet, you can log-on to a bulletin board and read through all the missions available. Most of these tend to involve ferrying people around the galaxy, though you'll find assassinations, offers to buy your black market goodies and the chance to contact the military and carry out jobs for them. Every mission earns you money, but a lot of them could also earn you a hole in the head. Flying someone to another planet may seem straightforward enough, but if the Mafia wants that person dead, they'll come after you with all guns blazing. Jobs for the boys Like the original Elite, this game is based on trading (buy goods cheap in one place, then fly to another and sell them at a profit), and that's just what you have to do to build up your cash at the beginning of the game. Beyond that, it's up to you. You could get yourself a career in the military (either on the side of the good Federation or the evil, slavetrading Empire), become an explorer, turn to piracy, do a bit of mining or convert your ship into a passengen vehicle and ferry people around the galaxy for lots of dosh. The possibili ties are endless Stunning with the detail on full, but if you have a slower PC you don't lose too much. Relative to Earth SOUND Smart! The music is great, and you can turn off individual tunes if you don't like them. GIS A LITE But is size everything? Lots of freedom to do what you want, and plenty of variety throughout. Set 1. This is where you start: Merlin in the Ross 154 system. Pretty, innit? 4. You've got your meat, you've got your fuel, so now it's time to head for space. There are cheaper games around, but this one will keep you entertained forever. STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES at Majer Esports Near Eagaitt Tegal Cord: True, a small, interesting game is bet, ter than a big, dull one, but Frontier more than matches its mind-blowing size with gameplay. Having said that, it does take a while to get into. At the start of the game you have a very basic ship, and until you've got the hang of the controls, it's all too easy to get shot out of the sky by enemy traders. Once you've got the hang of it, though, you're in for a treat. The basic idea behind the game is to make money, and money buys you all sorts of handy equipment to bolt on to your ship. Unlike Elite, you can even buy a whole new ship. Yes, you're still able to fly the trusty old Cobra mk III from the original game, but if you're serious about specialising in a certain field, you'll need to 10 9 EKT335953 ORION # At to self  2. Check up on the planet you wish to trade with they may be less than friendly. 5. The Eagle is a good little fighter, but watch out for those pirate bullies. ONWOO LLLLLLLLLL MISS OK HIT! 95595 6. Oops! Too late. Someone took a liking to your cargo and blew you away. Back to the drawing board. Sigh. 3. Then buy as much as you can on the stockmarket. You don't have much money at first. Excellent texture mapping! The improved graphic style is one thing Frontier has over its predecessor. 53 "


"THE HEAVY METAL E Acclaim is a registered trademark of Acclaim Entertainment, Inc.  1993 Acclaim Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. Terminator, T2 Endoskeleton and depiction of Endoskeleton are  1993 Carolco Pictures International N.V. All rights reserved. "


"TERMINATOR 2 JUDGMENT DAY Nintendo Aklaim SUPER NINTENDO. SUPER NINTENDO TERIVANATORE JLDOMONT ON TERINATO EXPLOSIVE MOM 10-BIT CARTRIDGE SEGA Master System DESA DEZIVE GAME LEAR EYE OPENER. SEGA GAME GEAR JUDGMENT DAY: \"Well thought out and good fun! \"All in all a great conversion.\" 89% MEGA ACTION TM Aclaim demarks of Carolco Pictures International N.V.  1993 Acclaim Entertainment Ltd. All rights reserved. "


"REVIEW SNES RE Lerne kan find by IMAGINEER TBA Out January. Contact Imagineer (0322 292513) for more information. Oh dear! It's the big boss. Run! Hey, it's evil but we love to kill people. It's the only way to play this. Plenty of gore and blood in your beat\"em-ups, sir? You got it! f there's one thing which has annoyed SNES Owners of Mortal Kombat (judging by your calls) it's the lack of gore and blood. Well, Wolfenstein 3D is the bloodiest SNES game ever. When you shoot someone a fountain of blood splats out, they fall to the ground and a puddle of blood surrounds them. We couldn't believe it but we like it. Unfortunately, as we are going to press we are told that the blood may be taken out. wotenstein Brilliant! A secret room with health, ammo and a weapon: noises you can bet that there'll be a soldier waiting to pump you full of lead on the other side. Initially, you have a feeble hand gun, which is good but can take a few shots to kill people. As you progress you will find a satisfying selection of better guns, the best of which is a chain machine gun. Blasting like Rambo will waste more than a few bullets, particularly with those hefty weapons, so it's vital to top up your ammo before you loose your weapon. You do this by scavenging the supplies dropped when you blast a soldier. Nice sampled speech makes the effect even more realistic! Pump up the lead Set in a HUGE maze you rush around a succession of six levels, searching each floor for that elusive lift which will take you to the next floor. Enemies are abundant and a simple tactic is to listen for them. When you approach a door don't open it immediately, listen and if you hear any Clever dicks Easy? Not exactly, you see the enemy can get clever and attack you from all directions, so it's vital to learn where you can find food or a first-aid kit. The mazes become more complex, with heaps of doors and routes and you start meeting tougher, better armed guards, and occasionally you encounter a boss-type figure. Worse still, some doors get locked so you have to start finding keys and health which get hidden in secret rooms, As you can imagine, it's easy to get lost. But wait a second. All those dead bodies and blood act like a trail showing you where you've been. Other hints include the paintings which lie around, but for variety's sake, different sectors have different themes; some are bland and dungeon like, while oth ers are more grand and occupied with ornaments and paintings. Three difficulty levels control the intensity of assaults on your life. Unfortunately, you don't seem to get any more health items on harder settings so it all becomes a matter of leaming the routes. To help you out, you get access to a self-mapping chart which shows anywhere you've already been. Violence has never felt this good. GRAPHICS ONDOS GAMEPLAY ITEM HEALT STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES The Chain-Gun is devastating! VERDICT At first Wolfenstein seems very shallow, just mindless carnage. After a few levels though, you start to notice an element of strategy, in other words, you start to use your brain to find and unlock doors, discover hidden passages and balance your resources. This is good but you never really get involved, so its appeal will fade quickly, even though technically, it spits over the 3D sections of Jurassic Park with its fast and full-screen graphics. It's a big game and a solid conversion off the PC. Let's hope Nintendo doesn't take the gore out. ONWIN IIIIIIIIIII 80 DENIZ AHMET The dog gets it in the mouth. That should shut him up good. 56 "


"SONY White knuckle action adventure based on Stallone's blockbuster movie Uzi toting thugs, rock slides and avalanches are just some of the challenges you face, IMAGESOFT 2. SKIVSS ...as action packed as the movie\". Frank O'Connor, editor of Total IGAME BOY AMIGA CLIFFHANGER SXSCO Ciffhanger  Sony Electronic Publishing Ltd. Cliffhanger is atrademark owned by Cliffhanger B.V. and used by Sony Electronic Publishing Company under authorisation All rights reserved. Mega Drive is a registered trademark of Sega Enterprises Ltd. Game Boy and Super Nintendo Entertainment System are registered trademarks of Nintendo. Sony Imagesoft and Imagesoft are trademarks of Sony Electronic Publishing Company. 1992 Sony Electronic Publishing Company. Available to rent on video From December 22 "


"DEVIEW SNES by SYSTEM 3 .99 Out now. Contact System 3 (081-864 8212) for more information. RUR. Hd burim 2 SUPER PUTTY create such excellent graphics has certainly paid off, with clever breaks in the game showing the robots on their space saucer queuing up for drinks at a bar, as well as Uncle Ted, the mad magician, who helps Putty on his way by freezing his enemies and turning them into temporary dancing lightbulbs. If you think after all that that this is a simple game then what's wrong with you, idiot? With so much going on on the screen there's no time to hesitate. And with the horrible Dweasel laughing at your every mistake and trying to lure you into traps then you've got to keep your wits about you. You've heard of pigs in space, but what about pigs on space hoppers? Cute, pliable, funny and versatile and that's just our reviewer! 0 0 0 1 0 ACB + BCA Sixties groovers Finally for all you sad old cronies, who secretly play on your children's SNES after they have gone to bed, you'll delight in the soundtrack, which is a mixture of hits from the 1960s. Boogie on down. 0 emember when everyone was going potty over Putty. Well if you thought those days were over then you were wrong. This Blob of plasticine is on everyone's lips at the moment. (Well, not literally otherwise they would look pretty stupid), If ever there was a versatile character then Super Putty is him. Straight from the Tower of Zid on Putty Moon, the squidgy plasticine adventurer has to travel through six levels and 20 worlds of the looniest universe to free his robot friends and put them back on their flying saucer.. Super Putty can bounce, squash, stretch, splatter, punch, inflate, melt and even absorb enemies. Is there no end to the wonders of modern heroes? The game starts off on a training level at the gym and then progresses to Putty Moon, Dazzledaze, Villas and Technofear. Putty does some stretching. Uh oh, watch out for the orange Putty before he splats you. k : .. GRAPHICS 92 ONNOS 88 STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES Who needs plasticine? The game is essentially platform and there are various tricks Super Putty can do to speed himself along. These come in food form, which provide Super Putty with energy when they are eaten. There is the Terminator carrot, complete with sunglasses and leather jacket, bouncing mushrooms, sausages and beans, pigs on space hoppers, rabbits, lethal pip spitting oranges, and chickens which lay strange eggs which turn into exploding sumo wrestlers. The attention and time given to This blob of blue Putty is really going places. VERDICT Move over Mario, because this is no ordinary piece of plasticine! Super Putty has personality, panache and all the style that most game heroes don't. There's plenty of top laughs in this top style game which is packed with action and has some great graphics to go with it. How can you resist it? It's really entertaining watching Super Putty hiccup when he eats all the vegetables and it's so much fun looking at all the other silly animals and vegetables (but no minerals!) I can't find any major faults with the game. See for yourself. NONWAO 11lllllll MTTTTTTTTTT BOBSERR 90 AMANDA TIPPING The rescued robots celebrate. 58 "


"LREVIEW MEGA DRIVE MEGA DRIVE by SEGA by SEGA .99 Out December. Contact Sega (071-373 3000) for information. 3639 SALADDIN 50 Join the boy in the baggies in Sega's Arabian adventure! he archetypal baggy trousers boy, Aladdin, is the swashbuckling hero in this swish platform licence from Virgin The young arab's objective is to fight his way through the animated badlands of Agrabah in search of themagic lamp; and very good the whole thing looks too Genie-al Top marks have to go to the animators for the superb effects in this Sweat it out in the desert as you hunt the scarab. where you have to flee from large, rolling balls of flame, Indiana Jonesstyle. Once you've made the escape there's no time to rest since it's off to the Sultan's Castle for another showdown, but it's not until Aladdin reaches Jafar's Palace for the final level that can you really see an end to this sparkling platformer. And not a large, beaten boxer in sight. Enter the Cave of Wonder to climb fountains, dodge falling rocks and avoid horrible fish. BARTER BONUS 10 Use apples as hand grenades to kill the baddies. Grab the flutes and you'll find a magic rope to transport you to higher rooftops. Barter for extra lives and health by selling your jewels. GRAPHICS 96 ONNOS game version of the award-winning Disney blockbuster. Unfortunately for panto fans there's no Widow Twankey or Wishey Washey here to help little Aladdin on his way, although there are plenty of sword waving and knife throwing baddies who are quite comical as they grin slyly, enticing our hero to come fight with them. They are part of the gang organised by the sultan's wicked adviser, Jafar, who is also trekking across desert-strewn landscapes to find the mythical lamp, home of the big, blue genie. Genie-us Aladdin is a tricky game, and it does become very difficult on the later levels, but the early stages should be familiar to platform fans as you basically have to leap ledges, skip across gaping rooftops, somersault off flagpoles and climb magical ropes to reach higher platforms. There are various collectables along the way apples can be used to throw at Jafar's henchmen, but if you throw them at knife jugglers they just end up as apple strudel. Also, try and pick up as many jewels as you can because you can use them to barter later on for extra lives, and blue hearts give you extra health. It's pot luck to see if you'll win apples, diamonds or extra Ives or lose everything. RO GAMEPLAY VALUE STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES 10 00 VERDICT Even though Mega Drive owners are spoilt for platform choice, Aladdin just looks so good and plays so well that these factors alone should see it do well. Unfortunately though, it's easy to complete if you got the game for Christmas you'll need something else to occupy you by New Year's Eve. However moving platforms, magic carpets, ropes and high wires all provide the perfect ingredients for a great game while it lasts. Like Disney's cartoons, Aladdin on Mega Drive is lots of fun but perhaps suitable only to young children. But it does look lovely. A ONWAU  Genie-va There are only nine levels, but this isn't surprising considering the amount of animation and comic touches that Virgin has packed into each level. The first stage sees Aladdin scuttling through Agrabah market, then it's on to the desert; the rooftops of the city; dodging the spikes in the dungeons of the Sultan's Dungeon and the Cave of Wonders. Then it's The Escape level 80 80 AMANDA TIPPING "


"REVIEW! PC by DIGITAL IMAGE DESIGN .99 Out now: Contact Ocean (061-832 6633) for more information. FITX Possibly the best and most accurate flight sim this year. Could be... t could be a Tuesday or possibly a Wednesday, but it's sometime in the future. A future where civil wars still rage across the globe, from Somalia to Libya and from the former Yugoslavia to Colombia. After years of pointless talking, the UN has pulled its finger out and started the military ball rolling. Yes it's blue hats time because in TFX you take on the role of a top UN pilot, flying fast jets, escorting Hercules transports and bombing suspected drug factories. Whatever the call and whatever the weather the fate of the world is in your slightly sweaty hands. Top gun? Dacka dacka OK so it's another flight sim (you know taking off, flying from A to B, bombing target X and Y and going home, that sort of thing, but why is TFX special? Well, although the screenshots run heavily into shades of drab green and grubby grey, don't be put off because TFX moves and flies magnificently. It has to be seen to be truly appreciated, because watching TFX is like watching a movie where you can zoom low over downtown Tripoli, buzz Port Stanley, dodge A-A fire over Sarejevo and dogfight with MiGs. But what's new? If you think that TFX looks like just another flight sim hold that thought because you're utterly and hugely wrong. In TFX not only do you get to fly three shiny new aircraft, namely the European Fighter Aircraft (EFA), the F-22 Superstar and the F-117 Stealth Fighter, DID has also managed to cram in Gouraud shading, texture mapping, military spec flight models, a padlock view, fast 3D polygons and serious gameplay on a variety of levels. Look comprehensive up in the dictionary and it'll say 'See TFX', because this is a game that embraces all flight genre styles. The game structure reflects by offering you six very different game options namely: Arcade, Training, Simulator, Tour of Duty, Flash Points and UN Commander Check out that Gouraud shading, see how the UN logo has been texture mapped onto the tail. just wanna kill TFX is so easy to use you can be up in the air within a few minutes, barrel rolling, diving and shooting as if you had been bom in the cockpit. If you No guns and it looks ugly, but the F117A Stealth Fighter is built for, er, stealth. The tremendously sleek European Fighter Aircraft (EFA). VERDICT TFX is absolutely superb. Like the Aces series you can tailor your flight model and for die-hard flight simmers you have realistic flight models and accurately rendered 3D environments. It's fast, good-looking and fun and when I first saw it my jaw dropped so far it took me 15 minutes to find it again. I strongly believe that it is the best flight sim I have seen this year; Gouraud shading, fast 3D environment graphics, realistic flight models, the works. Put TFX in the sky against Falcon 3.0 and in my humble opinion, Falcon 3.0 is toast! PAUL RAND Dogfight your little heart out in the F22 Superstar. 60 "


"VERDICT Wow. If TFX is the shape of things to come then I want to work for DID. This game sets new standards in graphics, presentation and userfriendliness. It's a great flight simulator package and my only gripe is that it doesn't have a modem option so I can shoot my friends up. You're going to need a really fast computer to do it justice however, and although you can adjust the detail levels I'd say nothing less than a 486 will do the job properly. If Inferno is half as good as TFX is we're all in for a real treat. DENIZ AHMET GUESS WHO'S ABOUT TO BE RELEASED fancy a duck-shoot the TFX Arcade option offers you no-frills shoot-'em action, while at the other end of the scale, UN Commander enables you to design and fly your own missions. Best of all is Flash Points, a campaign option that incorporates various soap opera' style features including cutscenes, mission briefings, UN television reports and thrilling WNN news bulletins. Dogfighting over the Libyan desert. Swing left, swing right and then fire. Tailored G-forces If you're a fan of high-tec flying DID claims the flight models are highly accurate, modelled using USAF methods to include wave drag, roll inertia and lots of other things us mere mortals wouldn't understand without an aeronautics degree. But, if you're not a die-hard enthusiast and you and Mr Realism have never really got along, TFX allows you to tailor your flight model from easy arcade mode to full military spec. Break left! Like Strike Commander TFX has terrific music and sound and like Tomado it has a 'target rich environment' and loads of ground detail. TFX also boasts digitised speech and a built-in speech synthesiser and is possibly the best allround flight sim on the market. & GRAPHICS INNOS MEPLAY Good looking What really makes TFX stand out from the crowd is its fast and accurate 3D graphics technology. The graphic detail is quite superb, proving that if you have a good 3D engine you don't have to sacrifice detail for variety. TFX has the most realistic gaming world I've ever seen. All the major cities, towns, rivers, hills and mountains are in their correct and proper geographical location. In fact a total of one million square kilometres (equivalent to 20 per cent of the Earth's surface) has been carefully mapped by the DID team. STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES ? 10 10-NWAGON ITIIIIIII ITTUTTO UUTUU GREMLI 93 Fill her up please and don't forget the free crystal decanter and the six tumblers. "


"REVIEW AMIGA  by ACCLAIM .99 Out now. Contact Acclaim (071-344 5000) for information. WEAPONS Uggh, what did he have for breakfast?  In space no-one can hear you complain about movie-to-computer game licences f you think it can be a nightmare living on earth, then spare a thought for tough girl Ellen Ripley; admittedly she doesn't have to do any maths homework or cope with Monday morning traffic on the M25 en route to work, but she does have to contend with eight-feet tall, acidspitting aliens with razor sharp teeth getting in her way. TIME UP! YOU FAILE TO RESC ALL THE PRISONERS Grenade launcher. Very powerful as you can destroy the aliens with it before they reach you. Pulse rifle. A sure-fire way to blast away the aliens, although it eats up huge ammounts of ammo. It can shoot in all directions, which is handy. Flame throwers. The aliens hate fire so this is a powo erful weapon to use on the creatures that are guarding the prisoners. Hand grenades. Powerful deterrent against aliens in shafts and ramps. Don't explode immediately but they provide a good response when they do. Guns galore By this stage of the review you've probably worked out that Alien 3 the game has little resemblance to Alien 3 the film fact fans will recall that the planet Fiorina didn't actually have any weapons on it for starters. This, however, does not mean that the game's no good, because there is plenty to encourage you through this actionpacked blast. It's too late crying for help now. There are 14 difficult levels, which commence in the penitentiary and lead to the hospital, abbatoir and cell block, and all are set against the clock, making it a real race against time to rescue the prisoners. If you fail you get the unfortunate opportunity of seeing the aliens doing their usual belly-bursting trick out of the stomachs of the remaining prisoners. Mmm, how tasteful. SAIRE ENERGY Haircut Not content at simply surviving her spaceship crash on the penal planet Fiorina, Ripley feels obliged to save all the prisoners in the platoon who have been captured and glued to alien eggs in the colony. Armed with an arsenal of weapons including, a flamethrower, pulse rifle, grenades and grenade launcher, as well as a rather frightening Sinead O'Connorstyle haircut (only shorter), she sets out to totally destroy her old alien adversaries. GRAPHICS INNOS Blast away those alien-type space things to rescue those poor men. Taking on the role of Ripley you have to crawl through underground, bunkers dripping with slime, leap across moving platforms, scale pipes and clamber up and down ladders and steep ramps to reach and rescue the prisoners. Security doors have to be opened by operating the controls at the side these are especially good for trapping aliens in. O mic NEPLAY VALUE STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES Watch out for the unwanted wall hanging lurking in the background. 10N VERDICT Mmm I think a little floss and brushing twice a day will cure the problem. Having been converted from the Mega Drive, we expected Amiga Alien 3 to be a top title. The graphic are excellent the invading xenomorphs look remarkably horrific. Most Alien fans will be suitably impressed with this movie-to-game conversion which manages to pack in the action and keep you in suspense, since you never know when an alien is going to leap out into your path. Unfortunately the sound effects are crap, and the music sounded just like an alien chucking up, but these are minor points and don't spoil this otherwise fab game. ONWOOCO ull 89 AMANDA TIPPING 62 "


"REVIEWS HOTICEDOARE DICOTORS COMIDEO SUPPORTERS CORIOS CE2    Bond 211848\" HONDASNEEK FATCH TACTICS DLAYER ME NTK DSSH COF THO FOR PLAY PRICE 80B PRICES HAGE  P BRODSHAR L SIMPSON IKSURE O EO YEAR COHTRA ANDLING DARSON ZOOL'S ON VAWN AVINTOUW **NNNN MONNUMMET GOOG rowon ALE erea PLASEO SCORED CORECEDED DPTS TRAINING HOME LOR ODOM This isn't the Manageress, it's the token game bimbo LOL BALL BEEREOIZ Get your tactics sorted and so's your result. From Vauxhall Conference to Premier League how will you manage? around the pitch, or go in for the real crunching tackle. Or select whether to play the long-ball or a passing game with the chance of scoring on the counterattack. The only gripe I have with Premier Manager 2 is that it's bland; the actual match sequence is severely lacking in the graphics department. If you're a management fan who doesn't worry about pictorial niceties, though, this is the one for you. Paul Rand football manager's life is not a happy one. Crabby players, poor formations, dodgy dealings that are found out today's football managers don't have an easy time of it. Now you can recreate the life of a footy boss in Gremlin's Premier Manager 2, a game which, if you're an all-out action nut, won't appeal to you, but if you like to put a bit of thought and planning into your play, it'll go down a storm. GRAPHICS ONNOS GAMEPLAY ON ALL FORMATS STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES Options galore 8 2 Everyone's played a management game before, so few of PM2's features will be alien to you. What makes this game different, though, is the attention to detail and the sheer amount of options available to the player. In most football management games, you can only alter, say, the team's formation. In Premier Manager 2, you can also change the way the team actually plays you can choose whether to tip-toe ONWUOVO TILLITI SOON Nintendo SUPER NINTENDO AMIGA CD 32 GAME BOY 88 MEGA DRIVE MASTER SYSTEM GAME GEAR WID 33 LOOK OUT FOR ZO012 OUT SOON ON AMIGA Out November. Contact Gremlin (0742 753423). GREIL A Different kind of Animal Here's your options screen. AMIGA .99 GREMLIN GRAPHICS SOFTWARE LTD CARVER HOUSE 2-4 CARVER STREET SHEFFIELD S1 4FS ENGLAND TEL (0742) 753423 63 "


"LREVIEW SNES SNES by MARUBENI by MARUBENI TBA Out November. Contact Marubeni (071 826 8600) for information. 112105 UURVA Touching most baddies in Aero will kill you. Looks funny eh! Aero isn't a chocolate bar but he's full of milky goodness! ou know why bats have big ears don't you? It's because they spend so much time hanging upside down that gravity takes its toll. Well Aero's had enough of looking at the downside of things which is why he's set off to rid the world of a demented ex-clown So away you go, but which way? The levels in Aero are huge with at least four stages in each of the four worlds. The problem is that with eight-way scrolling you need a good memory to locate yourself, which isn't helped by the lack of memorable landmarks and expanses of empty space in the early stages. Fine, so this satisfies the explorers among you, but you can't help feeling that luck has too much of a role to play, especially during those 'leap of faith moments which are unavoidable given the structure of the platforms. A severe case of bad breath can roast Aero out in the woods. momentarily for a breather. However, It's the circus props which make the game far more fun. Most frequent are the trampoline and the cannon. Aero heaves the cannon into place, hops in and is launched faster than a speeding bullet (if you get the timing right) thus allowing our mate to make it to those parts of the level other bats cannot reach! Refreshers You soon master the various intractable objects and, just when you think you're beginning to tire out their possibilities, you hit a refreshing new style of level. These are of two types; the first is based on a roller coaster ride like those you see down the fairground, which has you jumping and ducking obstacles, while the second is an impressive derivative of Pilot Wings, which involves Aero highdiving in to a pool while flying through loops and being blown of course by his rival, Zero. Another circus prop, and Aero gets ready for a bouncy stunt. CLEVER BAT! Curly Whirly Blocks: Jump to make these vanish and you can find the exit. 105 ONNOS Despite having a head which is too big for his body Aero manages to show-off some nimble moves without being, well, big-headed about it. Aero's main attack is a creative little move which has him curling up and drilling into his opponents. He can also collect the odd star which he can use to sling at obstacles. The main pull' factor of the game however, is in discovering and utilising the various objects which help you make it through a level. Aero himself can cling to high wires and hover Cannons: Hop into these and you can reach higher platforms. GAMEPLAY 90 Oops! Run out of platform and Aero will do his balancing act. Float: Yep, Aero can hover briefly to examine the scenery. STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES RDM |||||| 10 VERDICT Teleport: Jumping into stars warps Aero further in the level. Normally, lots of object interaction in a platform game means a puzzle orientated adventure. Not so with Aero. This is an action platform game. Balanced with the crucial ingredients of variety, humour and a strong central character, it's rough and cute at the same time, while being huge and unmanageable with it. At first it seems to be quite basic stuff, but you soon discover a range of creative stages which make Aero all worth while. If you're good you might even reach the hilarious Bungee stage! Recommended. O-NWV lilllllll LITTLE ILLIUM Trampoline: Same as the cannons but with less reach. Unicycle: Just one of the props Aero can play with DENIZ AHMET "


"YOU WON'T SEE ME WITH SPOTS. That's it. That's all you need to know about how to get clean, healthy skin. And how to keep it that way. Of course, even when I'm really careful a persistent spot can slip through the FACIAL WASH DISPEN net. And if one does, I just use some FACIAL WASH Oxy 10. But I hardly ever have to. Helps preven Unblocks pares Antibacteria Helps prevent action With added moisturiser Unblocks pores Antibacterid action With added moisturiser HARDLY EVER. Twice a day, morning and night no more soap and water for me. Getting spots was no big deal. But given First, I wet my hands and clean them UNBEATABLE TREATMENT FOR STUBBORN SPOTS AND ACNE the choice, I can live without them. thoroughly with Oxy Clean Facial Wash. It's been a while since I've had one. Then I lather up some more and rub it Clinically Tested Nowadays I use Oxy* Clean Facial Wash. all over my face before rinsing it off. Always read the label. Oxy 10 contains Benzoyl Peroxide. *OXY and OXYCUTE 'EM are trademarks. OXY10 OXYCUTE 'EM! COLOURLESS LOTION MAXIMUM STRENGTH "


"WHEN IT'S OUT IT'S IN. Hou VREEN AVAILABLE NOW PLAY BEFORE YOU PAY IN THE AME SAMASTER ZONE LATEST RELEASES SUPER MARIO ALLSTAR MARIO ALL STARS Super NES Avaiable now Reviews: \"Brilliantly designed with every possible action thought through Games Master .99 PAL VERSION sha DO JURASSIC PARK Super NES Released: Available now Reviews: \"A great game based on a great film Games Master JURASSIC PARK 2356 BIOKESOUBG-2 SAGA SUPER NINTENDO, OCEO .99 12 THE COST VIRINGS THE LOST VIKINGS Super NES Released: Available now Reviews: \"Wel presented with good graphics and fab gameplay CVG .99 SUPER NINTENDO NINTENDO MAGAZINE SYSTEM RATING AT THE SUPER NINTENDO wit, Nigel Manseus World Championstup ML VERSION STREET FIGHTER I STREET FIGHTER 2 TURBO Super NES Available now Reviews: \"One of the best games ever to grace the Super NES\" Nintendo Magazine System .99 NIGEL MANSELL'S WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP Super NES Released: December Reviews: \"Shockingly good\" Nintendo Magazine System .99 SUPERANTE Foundow waiatto com ES BUBSY BOBCAT Super NES Available now Reviews: *If your mate's got Sonic, show him this.\" .99 YOU KNOW WHERE TO COME. Al release dates are estimated and are subject to change. All items subject to availability. Al prices shown include VAT except where indicated. Where a saving is stated, it is based on a previous price available at Comet for a period of 28 consecutive days in the previous 6 months or against a Manufacturer's Recommended Price where stated except Comet. Brstall Prices correct at time of going to Press. However, Comet reserve the right to alter or amend prices or offers without prior notification. O Comet Group Plc. Cannot be reproduced without their permission "


"ILLEGAL RACING, COPS AND GAMBLING Nintendo AMBOROTHINI AMERICAN CHALLENGE TITUS SUPER NINTENDO Nintendo AMERICAN CHALLENGE CAME DO GAME BOY LICENSED BY Nintendo *902C.OTAL 's a brillian 91% TOTAL \"It's a brilliant racer...\" 90% GAMESMASTER MAGAZINE 232 \"It's incredible, it really is. I'd advise you to obtain it with all conceivable swiftness\" 86% GB ACTION \"Instantly playable. Fast, furious fun» 2733 151. Also available: 'The Blues Brothers' on SNES and GameBoy, & 'Titus the Fox' on GameBoy. OOO TITUS LTD. UNITED HOUSE, NORTH ROAD, LONDON, N7 9DP, ENGLAND. OOO D0000000000000000000000 TITUS OOOOOOOOO SEND 10\" X 8\" S.A.E. FOR A FREE POSTER OOC DOO 0000 000 OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOC (STATE MACHINE OWNED) "


"LREVIEW SNES SNES by ELITE .99 Out December. Contact Elite (0922 55852) for information. Welcome to the wonderful world of Transylvanic Fresh from his Game Boy adventures, Franky bolts on to the SNES! ith so many monster games making a hit on the market it comes as no surprise to see another addition storming on to the scene. Yes, it's Dr Franken and it's a safe bet it will make all those other creepy crawlies a thing of the past. This novel platform game, which follows in the footsteps of the recent Game Boy version, has a very comical This guy's a bit of a big head. Dov0000 4:41 3:58 3 ) I don't know why he's pulling a face like that he's just died! The Adventures Of storyline which goes along the lines of Franky needing a bit of a rest to recharge his batteries and so decides to take a holiday with his girlfriend and Bitsy. Bertranken recharge by picking up battery icons scattered around each level. Some demons also give him extra power when he kills them. There's plenty going on while you're looking for Bitsy's parcels. In the parcels you will find bits of girlfriend or objects to travel the world with you can also pick up extra lives in the four bonus levels hidden in the game. O Holiday hiccup stomping ground Ed) so he can eventually put her back together again. There are 20 levels which start in the haunted castle and lead you round the world and to hell and back literally! He encounters fire breathing toads, ghosts among other ghouls during his trip. GRAPHICS Unfortunately, she doesn't have a passport. Thinking through his empty skull Frankie decides to dismantle Bitsy and post her to their holiday destination. But the braindead Dr Franken can't remember where he posted her and as if that wasn't bad enough the Transylvanian post has lost some of her packaging. I think there's a lesson to be learned here. Anyway, Frankie finds himself trekking across the globe to retrieve the various bits of Bitsy scattered across Transylvania (Isn't that Drac's, SOUND wielding cooks, witches riding lethal scythes, deadly flying heads, and zombies all eager to crush Dr Franken. However, our monster is not one to be defeated, and he can punch, kick, and even do backflips to fight off the evil enemies, as well as hurling bombs. As if that isn't enough to contend with, Franky also has to keep checking his energy levels. When his energy is running low he has to Let's be Frank Along the way Frank encounters axeSTRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES 9 VERDICT Here's a great game starring everyone's favourite munster. Dr Franken is a real cool guy who's rather frantic about finding his missus. There's lots of variation in the gameplay, with moving platforms, secret passages and hidden staircases and coves to maximise the fun. And it's worth just losing a life to see the hysterical expression on Dr Franken's face. It's a big improvement on the Game Boy version, with excellent attention to graphic detail and good sound to compliment the involving gameplay. Order your copy now. ONWA000 llllllllll MIT Hell hath no fury for a Frankenstein. 87 AMANDA TIPPING Travel through the spooky dungeons. 68 "


"SEGA MEGA DRIVE O \"It gets a top mark because it is a top class \"It gets a top mark product with attention to detail second to none....Amazing.\" Mega Action, September 1993 \"This is one of the best games I have ever played ... (lt) is and shall remain a classic for quite some time!\" Mean Machines, September 1993 ooy 91% 92%3E 92% \"...RKA is possibly the best game on the Mega Drive ever,\"...a fabulous game...\" \"It's a stormer.\" Games Master, September 1993 \"... Rocket Knight is a dead cert winner, it's a long time since we've seen a game of this quality on the Megadrive...Buy it.\" Mega Tech, September 1993 OFFICIAL KONAN SEGA SEAL OF QUALITY Konami (UK) Limited Teleuision House 269 Field End Road Eastcote Middlesex HA4 9LS Sega and Megadrive are trattare SR Ere s ia. Konami is a registered trademark of Konami Co. Ltd.  1993 Konami all rights reserved. "


"REVIEW CD32 by MINDSCAPE .99 Out November. Contact Mindscape (0444 246333) for information. DIGENERATION If only you knew what lay ahead... Become a courier of the future and do away with your horrid little motorbike in this CD translation of the Amiga original The first person you see is the frightened secretary. h dear. There you were relaxing, ace courier that you are, when a message came in from top Genoq scientist Derrida asking for a package to be delivered pronto. After a long jetpack trek (it is 2021 after all) you arrive at the Singapore lab's 80th floor to find things mysteriously quiet. This isn't going to be a regular delivery... Unknown to you an explosion has ripped through the building ten floors above where Derrida was working on his latest NeoGen biological experiment, the D/Generation an organism which can disguise itself as anything. On top of this its armour-like skin makes it virtually indestructible and one tough cookie. THERE ARE NUMBER UWZOO the trapped workers away, it's worth rescuing them as they often have something useful to hand which will aid you in your quest such as a pass word or a bomb, as well as information about Derrida. Also, for every worker rescued an extra life is granted highly useful on the later levels which are tough going. Other helpful items such as lasers and security keys can be found simply by examining carefully each room that you enter. Then again, you might find nothing. Because of this a rescue mission has been ruled out to save risking further lives. Unfortunately you don't realise the danger and step inside. Big mistake the door seals behind you. With no obvious means of escape it seems the only option is to find Derrida and give him the package in the hope he can sort out the mess. GRAPHICS ONNOS The Next Generation Genoq believes that the D/Generation organism and its three earlier versions have been released by the explosion and fear the workers trapped in the building have little chance of survival. GAMEPLAY Not the sort of welcome you were expecting though. STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES D/Generation Game What this game boils down to is an isometric shooting adventure which involves you wandering around ten floors each made up of a number of rooms filled with such delights as security traps, organisms and sometimes scared workers as you attempt to reach Derrida. As tempting as it is to simply blow VERDICT D/Generation doesn't look up to much. A shame, because underneath the plain graphics there's a cracking game. What it lacks in the audio/visual department is made up for with sensible but challenging puzzles and tense atmosphere. A thoughtful save game facility also stops the boredom of repeating completed screens. My one irritation is the fiddly character control but this is because of the joypad rather than a design fault. D/Generation is worthy of consideration but unlikely to get it, due to the graphical feasts expected by CD owners. ONWAGON TIILIITTITI ...ciuc Hie, but I'm going to need a sagnstand for Dia, inson Mapa DENIZ AHMET looks like this woman has more than a skin problem! 70 "


"GOTAMEN ALS TM For over 40 YEARS he's been making us Laugh... driving Mr. Wilson crazy! Now you can play the sling shot hero and join in on all his side splitting pranks. Dennis is his name and mischief is his game! So c'mon... IT::ST/ MTO MESSI H: NS UP ALINLETLE 8000 0280 bekeke E LECTROLE JKC OCEAN SOFTWARE LIMITED 2 CASTLE STREE CASTLEFIELD MANCHESTER : M3 4LZ TELEPHONE: 061 832 6633 FAX: 061 834 0650 DENNIS is a traie Enterprises, Inc. mark Soak Ketcham GAME BOY SUPER NINTENDO ENTERTAINMENT > SYSTEM ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM "


"MEGA DRIVE by ELECTRONIC ARTS .99 Out November. Contact Electronic Arts (0753 549442) for information. VIBIU A L  Drop the bumper wherever you want! The first pinball construction kit for the Mega Drive comes from those clever chaps at Electronic Arts! lipperdy doo dah, flipperdy day. Heck, it's a pinball construction kit! And the good news is that there isn't a chunky manual to learn before you can use it. PLAY BALL get you started, or you can modify the existing batch, but it's a lot more fun to just randomly splat up to eight! different items on a blank board and see what happens. Having designed a table you can freely play around with its theme and save it to one of 10 memory locations. Obviously, the creation aspect isn't going to appeal to everyone, but pinball fans are going to flip over it. Worth a try. The double table shown here is linked by the two holes in the centre of the pic! TOOG 16100 B00000000 0033600 RCO00DOC Pinball wiz It's not really aimed as a utility because the workshop' element is an option, so you get a whole heap of tables to play on as a standalone game. Each table has a theme which you can mix and match by changing the background boards, the objects and music. These are basically preference settings and as such the problem is that, once you find your favourite, you tend to stick to it. FOTO Cross Parts Bours SK sen Bisas Sarreros Suchos Techno F0002600G OOGOOOOO Tommy can you hear me? More options than you could shake a stick at! -00001000 TDOOOOOOO Pre-defined boards don't offer too much in the way of novelty. They're not big for a start, there are no hidden levels and no bosses. You get to see the entire table within a few min utes so it's quite easy to walk away with little satisfaction. Creating your own tables is the best way to go about things. A set of blueprints helps GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE TOO01 0000 : 0000000 STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES / VERDICT The best tables to play are the busiest ones — they get tough. A logical construction system makes this a fun approach to building pinball tables. Problem is, it's not much fun playing stuff you've designed yourself because you know what to expect. As with all recent ÉA games it makes use of its four-way adaptor, so three mates can join in one after the other. However, if you don't fancy making your own stuff the pre-defined tables are too dull and unimaginative to warrant purchase as a standalone pinball game. It's not bad for a first of its kind, but it could've been better. NO-NW ACCO  MITTIT Holis SS Hols tras SPOSO Doctor Blaster Grobbar DENIZ AHMET Put Bally out of business with your own creations! 72 "


"A STATE OF EVASION IS THIS JACKT.LADD? Information received early this morning suggests that the infamous debtor Jack T.Ladd, currently being chased by the Interstellar Revenue Decimation Service, is indeed at large. This photograph, taken by avid amateur photographer and trainspotter Wilbour A. Pratt, shows a man believed to be Jack T. Ladd, leaving the famous nightspot Vagrants. A favourite haunt of gangland bosses and soap stars, the club is in the heart of the capital and is reputed to serve the most expensive drinks in the universe. The photograph was taken at 3.00 am and the blonde accompanying our suspect is believed to be a Miss Fifi LaMour, a talented young actress and exotic dancer. A representative of the IRDS comments \"If this is indeed the man we are seeking, I'd like to know how much he spent at the bar, by rights that money is ours.\" Already known to have visited three planets, one Cloud City and at least four bars, this picture provides a vital clue in tracking down Jack T. Ladd. If you have any information on his whereabouts please contact your local tax office. Conero 3 DUCAT AVAILABLE ON PC AND AMIGA. immocent until caught WINS UNITED STATES OF PSYGNOSIS ANNOUNCEMENT fabulous Innocent Until Caught baseball jacket. Just answer this simple question: Who is Chasing Jack T. Ladd? a) MI5 b) the IRDS c) the FBI Send your answer on a postcard, stating your name, address, age, type of computer and the name of this magazine. To: Who is Jack T. Ladd? Psygnosis Competitions, Dept. 1770, Winterhill, Milton Keynes MK6 THQ, UK. ALATA Warning Jack T. Ladd is armed with 10Mb of data, superb gameplay, realistic 8-way movement, SmuttiText, Censo Round», CyniPlay. For the sake of your morals and sanity avoid him at all costs. If you have already encountered this man and are facing a dilemma call the Innocent Helpline. HELPLINE 0891 101 276 FROM THE UNITED STATES OF PSY All calls cost 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p at all other times. Please ask the bill payers permission before using the phone. For a full set of rules send SAE to Psygnosis South Harrington Building Selton Street, Liverpool D 480. Entries must be received before 31st December 1993 "


"SEGA RUMBE THE SPECIAL CHAMPION EDITION GAMES 24 MEG ACTION PACKED SPECIAL CHAMPION EDITION MEGADRIVE FREE RUMBELOWS PRICE VIDEO .99 FREE FREE VIDEO 16-BIT HINTS AND TIPS VIDEO EGG SOME RUMBELOWS PRICE WITH SONIC THE HEDGEHOG 2 & 2 CONTROL PADS NEW 16 BIT GAMES CONSOLE WITH SONIC THE HEDGEHOG 2 .99 WITH ALL SEGA & GAME GEHA MEGA-CD PACKAGED THE WORLDS FIRST 329 19 FREE FREE no problem MONTHS INTEREST FREE CREDIT 32bit VIDEO EREC FREE SONIC 2 PORTABLE COLOUR GAMES SYSTEM GAMES SYSTEM $179 99 ROAD AVENGER AND 2 CONTROL PADS C30 .98 THALF PRICE AM WITH SONIC 1 IGA COME IN AND PLAY BEFORE YOU VIDEO MEGA DRIVE II & MEGA-CD II WITH SONIC THE HEDGEHOG 2, ROAD AVENGER AND 2 CONTROL PADS PRICE WHEN BOUGHT SEPARATELY .98 RUMBELOWS PRICE RUMBELOWS PRICE INTEREST FREE CREDIT AVAILABLE THE MEGA-CD PACKAGE IL: CASH PRICE .98, 20% DEPOSIT, 6 EQUAL MONTHLY PAYMENTS OF $46.67 TOTAL AMOUNT REPAYABLE 6349.98. AVAILABLE TO ANYONEOVER 18.BY DIRECT DEBIT ONLY SUBJECT TO SI AMBLIN ENTERTAINMENT INC. WHILE STOCKS LAST. I SELECTED TITLES WHEN YOU BUY AN AMIGA CD 32. ASK IN-STORE FOR DETAILS. PRIO "


"Nintendo For Clintendo 20 MEG ACTION PACKED TURBO EDITION SUPER NINTENDO THE GUNES ARENU, TREE FREE SUPERAN CAPCOM ENTERTAINNENT SYSTEM VIDEO SUPER NINIENDO RUMBELOWS PRICE .99 PAL VERSIONI ma SUPER MARIO tandende SUPER MARIO > SUPER NINTENDO TOP TITLES PREVIEWED CDC | SUPER NINTENDO PAL VERSION RUMBELOWS PRICE Nintendo WITH SUPER MARIO ALL STARS & CONTROL PAD Nintendo PRODUCTS SUPER NINTENDO. 16 BIT GAMES CONSOLE $12999 BIT CD GAMES CONSOLE AMIGA CD 2 GAME BOY SAVE  ON NINTENDO FREE UNDER  PORTABLE PCC VIDEO GAME BOY MARIO BROS FEATURES: 32 BIT TECHNOLOGY. COMPLETE WITH 11 BUTTON JOYPAD. OVER X MILLION COLOURS ON SCREEN. PLAYS AUDIO CDS AND AMIGA CDS. RUMBELOWS PRICE $299 99 de GAME BOY. 9 GAMES FREE SYSTEM WAS .99 RUMBELOWS PRICE VIDEO RUMBELOWS PRICE + FREE A CD32 SOFTWARE .99 8 BIT GAMES CONSOLE .99 BUY AT THE NEW GAMES ARENA WITH SUPER MARIO BROTHERS & 2 CONTROL PADS FULL WRITTEN QUOTATION AVAILABLE ON REQUEST. LOOK FOR THIS BRAND ON ALL OFFICIAL JURASSIC PARK PRODUCTS. IF IT'S NOT JURASSIC PARK , IT'S EXTINCTI JURASSIC PARK AND DETAILS CORRECT AT TIME OF GOING TO PRESS. RUMBELOWS LTD, BAIRD HOUSE, ARLINGTON BUSINESS PARK, THEALE, BERKS, RG7 4SA. &  1992 UNIVERSAL CITY STUDIOS INC. & "


"AMIGA by RENEGADE .99 Out Now. Contact Renegade (071 702 3643) for information. One of the best C64 shoot-'em-ups of all time comes screaming into the Nineties on Amiga and about time too! f you weren't playing games seven years back then you'll probably think I'm some jabbering fossil who needs a good fix of hot chocolate. However Uridium I was one smart game, casting you as a pilot of a lone manta spacecraft as you charged over giant space dreadnoughts taking out the ground 'emplacements before escaping Return Of The Jedi-style with the dreadnought disintegrating behind you. The blaster of its time. So what's different this time around? The background story is probably best skipped because if you've played any other shoot-'emup you'll know the sort of plot to expect. If not, then hey, welcome to planet Earth. If you've got an AGA machine you'll get the benefit of the suitably titled mayhem mode where just about every feature in the game is thrown at you. And for two-player fiends there's an option of having a drone ship to follow the main manta, with the main ship concentrating on flying and destroying dreadnought 'emplacements while the drone sup, ports. This extra craft can also be controlled by the computer. O You never saw anything like this on the C64! (13 Manta banter On to the game itself then. First impressions suggest that this is in fact the C64 version playing. The loading music sounds suspiciously like Martin Galway, a music maestro on the 8-bit machine. However, it's the game that Watch out for that enemy fire... Too late! makes you think you've warped back to 1986. Andrew Braybrook has virtually recreated the original on the Amiga with nearly all the original attack waves present. Missing ones have been modified to make them easier. Also, the attack waves can now break formation and attack individually, The Manta can now turn upside down, as well as flip. Essential stuff as the enemy can't hit you while you're in those positions. Also, on later levels, sections of the dreadnoughts are raised up requiring some severe twist ing of the manta to stay in one piece. The only way to avoid the raised sections is to watch the scanner, but this is easier said than done with all the other action happening around you. GRAPHICS 89 ONNOS go Turn sideways and you'll be impervious to enemy fire. Nostalgia, it ain't what it used to be. Weapon pick-ups are available for increased firepower, but to stop the manta craft from being too powerful the enemy has chaff to confuse the power-ups. If you're talented enough to destroy a whole wave of fighters then you'll be rewarded with a victory token. Collect enough of these and you can land early. STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES 10 9 VERDICT This brings back happy memories of my old blasting days on the C64. Graphics are great and scrolling is smoother than a freshly bathed baby's bottom. Sound too is top notch and consists of groovy 64esque tunes, superbly atmospheric spot FX and sampled speech. Yes, it's not an original game and it's been done numerous times before but there must be plenty of younger gamers who won't have experienced this piece of software history and, as they say, if it ain't broke then don't fix it. ONWOO lillllllll Preying mantas After landing on a dreadnought the bonus screen appears. This takes place inside the dreadnought's reactor and the aim is to destroy it. This isn't as easy as it sounds as the core exerts a severe gravitational pull which varies the inertia considerably. On top of this the reactor chucks out all manner of defensive weapons in an attempt to protect itself. It's worth persevering though, because after the reactor is destroyed a shower of power-ups rain down. Then it's on to the next level then the next etc... 85 DENIZ AHMET 76 "


"REVIEW SONIC 1. SPINBALL Out November. Contact SEGA (071-373 3000) for information. Spikey, blue Hedgehogs are good at pinball. Discuss. GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY Seng cony STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES obotnik has taken over a Volcanic island, harnessing its energy to convert Sonic's fluffy friends into robotic tin-heads. And Robotnik has managed to engineer a defence system in the guise of a pinball machine. Five tables depicting stages of Robotnik's Veg-O-Fortress, are placed between Sonic and Robotnik containing familiar Sonic creatures to thwart your rescue attempts. As this is pinball you don't get to have much control of Sonic. It's all to easy too miss the flippers altogether... \"It's all too easy...\" ONWAUTONO IIIIIIIIIII Not spinsational Thankfully, the momentum on Sonic slips in a convincing performance of a ball so we do have a realistic pinball game here. There are all the usual pinball features too, such as bouncers, gates, short-cuts and accelerators which have been nicely worked into the graphics. Those aside, traditional Sonic elements have also been placed liberally: Rrings and switches to hidden sections are all in place Floating platforms beneath the flippers will provide a safety route if Sonic is lucky enough to catch hold of one, and even then he has to be quick to avoid the jaws of a lurking monster. Some nice ideas are to be found in the game, but it does little to promote the character as it's basically Sonic's casino level with flippers. Deniz Ahmet TIIIIIII MEGA DRIVE by SEGA .99 73 TOWER RECORDS PRESENT un IRAN MAIDEN LIVE AT DONINGTON August 22nd 1992 A REAL DESIGNE sale ends 15th December 'UK Prices only CD .99 MC #799 MC .99 CD .99 VIDEO IRAN MAIDEN MC 1999 $12.99 MC .99 .99 OPEN NIGHTS AND SUNDAYS DUBLIN KINGSTON BAYSWATER PICCADILLY KENSINGTON GLASGOW 01 671 3250 081 546 2500 071 229 4550 071 439 2500 071 938 3511 041 204 2500 TICKETMASTER "


"KONAMI'S CHRISTMAS CRACKERS! KONAMI Christmas comes early this year for CVG readers, thanks to the team at Konami! They've given every CVG reader a fine prezzy in the form of the smashing Rocket Knight Adventures pin badge which you'll no doubt have already found attached to the front cover of this very issue, and along with that, they've got a cracking line-up of software available over the festive period! Lethal Enforcers comes with the CVG seal of approval. ZOMBIES Mega-CD version is just as good. Well worth a look if you're a real fan of shooting games. Originally entitled 'Zombies Ate My Neighbours', Zombies has been created by LucasArts, the software arm of Lucasfilm. Normally associated with incredible graphic adventures such as the Indiana Jones and Monkey Island series, it has turned its hand to arcade action in this 55 level extravaganza which pays homage to the best and worst in B-movie horror! TINY TOON ADVENTURES Buster Bunny and his pals have been around on a number of formats for a while now, but the games are so good that you shouldn't miss out! On Mega Drive, Buster's Hidden Treasure has you controlling Buster Bunny in search of wicked Montana Max, who's nicked a secret treasure map. He's stormed on to the front cover in badge form, and he's stormed on to Mega Drive too Rocket Knight is a treat all round! Zombies was a massive CVG 88% hit last issue! Take on a host of creatures including zombies, mummies and 40-foot babies, collecting various powers and pickups to help you in your quest. Receiving 88% and a CVG Hit! on both Mega Drive and Super Nintendo, Zombies should be high on your Christmas shopping list! Cute platform romps don't come better than this. On Super Nintendo, Buster Busts Loose sees our cartoon hero in search of his beloved Babs, who's been kidnapped by Max and his minions. These platform romps feature some great graphics and demanding gameplay. Both scored highly in CVG Buster Busts Loose got 90% while Buster's Hidden Treasure gained 84%, so check 'em out. of enemies such as drug dealers, terpackage, Lethal Enforcers is a really rorists and armed robbers in a variety good convert from the coin-op. of scenarios Graphics are almost arcade perfect, With a light gun included in the and if you buy another gun two-player pistol Enforce the law in this shoot-to-kill extravaganza. packing is possible, although a friend can use a joypad if no second gun is available. Lethal Enforcers received a creditable 80% in CVG, O, and the LETHAL ENFORCERS A direct conversion of Konami's dedicated coin-op featuring plastic pistols instead of boring old joysticks, Lethal Enforcers on Mega Drive and Mega-CD is an all-out blast through the city streets, taking out all manner 78 A bit of Toon fun stops you turning into a blood and gore addict! "


"REVIEW 1Yes time has slipped, and so did the score of this game as we got past each level. Step back in time in more ways than one with this SNES shoot-'em-up ONNOS time and attack the earth when its inhabitants were still wearing furs and eating dirt. Well you get the general idea don't you. GAMEPLAY GRAPHICS LET h24 ime Slip is basically a run along and shoot-'em-up in the style of Super Probotector; there are platforms, hordes of cannon fodder and lots of guardians, and you can run around, jump, and shoot in all directions. The difference here though, is that there's no smart twoplayer option and the game takes Vince STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES 5 Butler Eva If it's flash Mode 7 graphics that you want, then look elsewhere. Muscly hero Dr Vincent Gilgamesh, played by you, goes back in time to defeat the high tech aliens and the dopey locals who are, bizarrely, on their side. You start off in ancient Egypt shooting archers, armies of men with sharpened sticks and Tirmatian assault craft, and so it goes on. The game is let down by the lack of a two player option, a dearth of meaty power-ups, and some very basic graphics; when you pick up a shield the effect (a spinning triangle in primary colours) looks like it was knocked up by a five-year-old with a potato print ONWONO IIIIIIIIIII you on a tour of a history of the world. You see the year is 2147, and aliens from the doomed planet Tirmat decide to relocate to earth. However realising that they'd have no chance against modern Terran weaponry they decide to go back in No it's not the flying rug sequence from Aladdin, sadly. 73 SNES by VIC TOKAI TBA KT KONSOLES World of the neo geo GAMES TO COME FATAL FURY SPECIAL. ART OF FIGHTING II TOP HUNTER. VIEWPOINT/RE-RELEASE MIRACLE ADVENTURE  ..... NEW RELEASES SAMURI SHOWDOWN.. 3 COUNT BOUT. FATAL FURY 2. WORLD HEROES 2 SUPER SIDEKICKS.. SENGOKU 2 ART OF FIGHTING. .CALL . . . .. .. HARDWARE SCART/PAL NEO GEO .... EXTRA STICK..... NEO GEO BAG.. MEMORY CARDS... NEO T-SHIRT. CARTRIDGE BOXES .. ART OF FIGHTING... EXCHANGE SERVICE SAME CLASS EXCHANGE FEE:   PLUS P&P (REGISTERED POST) EXAMPLE: NAM 75 FOR NINJA COMBAT =  + P&P (CLASS NO. 1) A.S.O. II FOR SUPER SPY = + P&P (CLASS NO. 2) FATAL FURY FOR EIGHTMAN =  + P&P (CLASS NO. 3) SOCCER BRAWL FOR BASEBALL 2 =  + P&P (CLASS NO. 4) 3 COUNT BOUT FOR SENGOKU 2 =  + P&P (CLASS NO. 5) FOR FURTHER INFO PHONE OR FAX US. PRICES LISTS AVAILABLE ON REQUEST $19 ..99 ...50   ...... OLDER TITLES ALWAYS IN STOCK MANY MOR GAMES ARRIVING DAILY CALL SNES NEW RELEASES THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK. ..........CALL TURTLES TOURNAMENT FIGHTERS.CALL ZOOL. BOMBERMAN & TAP...  ROCK 'N' ROLL RACING.... . ZOMBIES... . SKINS GAME RE-RELEASE MEGADRIVE NEW RELEASES STREETFIGHTER II ............. ...CALL NHL HOCKEY 94... . HAUNTING SHINOBI III.  20-20 BASEBALL............... MIG-29. . .. GAMES EXCHANGE SERVICE WE ARE THE LARGEST STOCKIST OF SECOND HAND GAMES IN BRITAIN, AT PRESENT WE HAVE THE FOLLOWING AMOUNT OF GAMES IN STOCK: OVER 200 MEGADRIVE, OVER 200 SNES, OVER 50 NEO-GEO TO FIND OUT WHAT TITLES WE HAVE IN STOCK PLEASE PHONE. ONCE YOU HAVE CHOSEN YOUR GAME WE'LL RESERVE IT FOR YOU THEN ALL YOU HAVE TO DO, SEND US YOUR UNWANTED GAME RECORDED DELIVERY IT COULDN'T BE EASIER! .  SPECIALS PC ENGINE STREETFIGHTER II CE ... SNES STREETFIGHTER TURBO JAP.. SNES SUPER BOMBERMAN JAP...... SNES SUPER FAMILY TENNIS JAP...E39 8-BIT MACHINES HAND HELDS MEGA CD DUO CD'S ALSO CATERED FOR KT KONSOLS TEL/FAX 0847 66949 26 PRINCES STREET, THURSO, CAITHNESS LW14 7BQ OPEN MONDAY TO SATURDAY 10AM 6PM "


"REVIEWS Out November. Contact Gremlin (0742 753423) for more information. Great new shoot'em-up, or can it be disposed of fairly quickly? GRAPHICS INNOS 80 85 65 GAMEPLAY VALUE STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES pparently, by the year 2874 the Earth will be technologically bankrupt. Even more apparently, some aliens get the blame for this and so a group of men and women undertake a mission to regain the blueprints for our technological salvation. As a certified D-Hero (D for dunce, it would seem) you must battle through six levels; numerous aliens and scenery 10 5 soon conspire against you, calling for tricky manoeuvres and nifty shooting. too much stopping and starting to do it. The aliens attack predictably and there's not enough of them to create a tense challenge, plus there's better stuff around on budget. Deniz Ahmet Mix and match Around the screen are blueprints which you must collect. These are plans for power-ups and, given time, the factory will build these for your benefit. Because you can mix and match different weapons there are hundreds of possible configurations. Graphically the game is smart and smooth, but it takes too long to power up with anything decent and ONWAO COCO IIIIIIIIIII MITTIIN MIT Good selection of alien craft. A relaxed shoot-'em-up. 79 AMIGA by ELECTRONIC ARTS .99 Out on import. Contact Dream Machines (0429 869459) for more information. Time for a strategy war game. Time for bed methinks RITACK 2 TRENOT SPEC WEAPON: A typical info screen with your combat stats filled in. ONNOS GAMEPLAY GRAPHICS et another war game I hear you cry! And cry you will with boredom. Playing against the computer, this game stimulates as much excitement as sitting in the world finals of the chess championships. Set in the Middle East it looks more like a game of Blockbusters than a war zone. Moving from hexagonal square to square, across rough terrain, desert, forestry and sea, you must kill the enemy within five skill levels and 55 scenarios for one player. If you experience playing this with a friend then there are only 16 scenarios. 1959 DEFL TACK  STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES, Auto war You have no control over the battle scenes such as Valley Ambush, Forest Flight, Lake Struggle and Island Assault themselves, which is rather disappointing. You make all the moves for your flag unit using the control pad and when you decide to go to battle, The battle commences... time for a cuppa. just press button A and the computer does the rest. So watch helplessly as you are blown away! If you manage to sit through the whole of the first level (congratulations by the way), each further level gets progressively more difficult; but the bland scenery and annoying supermarket-type music tinkering in the background do little to stimulate tension and interest in the gameplay. Defeated, methinks. A tragic end to a tragic game. Strategy I suppose with greater concentration in the strategy and skills department this could turn into quite a powerful game; but if you're like me and you want your action immediately then I'm afraid you will find this game is Yawn city, neh, Yawn Universe. Amanda Tipping ONWAO IIIIIIIIII E SNES by NINTENDO .95 40 80 "


"LREVIEW SNES by HUDSON SOFT .99 Out December. Contact Hudson Soft for information. VIRTUAL a Mikami HOLLAND Naughty old Mikami went in a bit too high. chosen type of game and the duration you wish to play for, you're taken to the tactics screen which is shown from an isometric 3D viewpoint. Here, you can select your team's formation from a number of choices, or even alter your team itself by swapping players around in the squad. A quick coin-toss later and it's on to the pitch. No England World Cup action? Vent your frustrations with Virtual Soccer on SNES! h well. It looks as though we'll not be going to the World Cup Finals in America this summer. Unless Poland beat Holland and we beat San Marino by at least seven goals which is likely, isn't it? But who needs to spend a fortune going 2 D Greavsie The game utilises all of the buttons on the SNES joypad, allowing you to pass, shoot, lob, ride tackles etc. Aftertouch has been included, letting you swerve the ball in mid-air when shooting, and even rules normally missing from soccer sims have been included in Virtual Soccer, such as offsides, so watch the position of your forward players when starting out on those scything runs on the opposition goal. Can you turn the scoreline around? Taylor couldn't... if you're just starting out down the road to on-pitch glory, a practice game where you can hone your skills without having to worry about the opposition muscling in on your possession. Once you've selected your STA ATE Unusually, Scotland haven't conceded a goal yet. It'll come. to the States for a month when you can plug in your SNES and settle down to a bit of computer footy in the comfort of your own home? ONNOS 89 O GAMEPLAY GRAPHICS Making use of the SNES' Mode 7 capabilities, Virtual Soccer treats the player to a host of different views. You can choose at the start Saint VALUE Oooh! A fine save from the small Japanese keeper, there. Hudson Soft's Virtual Soccer is a one or two-player game with a wealth of options and views. Players can take part in pre-season friendlies, a variety of European of World tournaments or, STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES VERDICT LITTI 09 Don't worry you don't need an expensive headset to play Virtual Soccer. What you do need is skill, certainly against some of the computer teams. Running at a fast enough pace in Normal mode, Virtual Soccer moves like lightning when you flick into Fast! Sprites are well animated and they wear the correct strips, and the Mode 7 effects work well. Two-player mode is where Virtual Soccer comes into its own though, especially when you play against a friend with similar skills unlike me who whooped Wodge The Publisher 10-3! A real six-pointer from Hudson Soft. ONWAR TILLITI TU UITID whether to play in a Kick Off, bird's-eye style, a side-on viewpoint or looking from the stand behind the goal, as in Striker. Not only that, but the viewpoint changes automatically when taking throwins and corners giving you the best view possible, and the camera also pulls back when the ball's high in the air most impressive. 85 PAUL RAND "


"COMPETITION WIN HUNDREDS OF POUNDS WORTH OF GAMES FROM 127 IN ALL ACROSS FIVE FORMATS! emember last month? Course you do; it was the month England all but got knocked out of the World Cup. Mrs Thatcher's memoirs notched up a million quid in three days. The whole of Britain went down with Asian flu. And Virgin gave away seven games machines to one lucky CVG reader. Busy 31 days, eh? But the fun doesn't stop there. For, in a fit of crazed generosity, Branson's boys and girls have dug into the games vault and surfaced with one, two, three... 27 mega software titles across FIVE different formats and once again, the whole kit and caboodle will go to just ONE LUCKY READER! 1400 MEGA DRIVE Robocop vs Terminator Cool Spot Lost Vikings Aladdin Populous 2 Terminator Speedball 2 Global Gladiators AMIGA Beneath A Steel Sky Cannon Fodder Krusty's Fun House Bart vs The World Mortal Kombat Global Gladiators Dune 2 Goal! SNES Cool Spot Young Merlin THE ARCADE GAME ANNON x02 00 ISODO LA LI Toà 82 "


"Want to know what you could be receiving if yours is the name pulled out of the hat? Just take a peek at the following list! As they say on The Generation Game, 'What a lot you get. Or something like that. Stick your entry in an envelope, not forgetting to include your name and address, and send it to: I HAVEN'T GOT TWO OF THE MACHINES BUT AAH, WHAT THE HELL, SEND ME THE GAMES ANYWAY, CVG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON ECTR 3AU. \"So,' we hear you holler, 'What do we have to do to win this fine and fulsome prize?' We want you to whip out yer Crayolas once more folks, 'cos it's drawing time again. Last month we asked you to come up with a Robo, Termy and Cool Spot cartoon strip; this month, by way of a change, we want you to design a brand new video game character incorporating some of the best features from Robocop, Terminator and Cool Spot! Sound a bit wacky to you? Good! Make your creation as funny and hard as possible, and then complete the following tie-breaker sentence in an amusing way, unlike last issue's tie-break answers which turned out to be as funny as Giles Brandreth writing Viz. Here goes: WHILST WASHING THE FRYING PAN THE OTHER DAY... Please ensure your entry reaches us by December 14 1993, otherwise it'll be hurled unceremoniously in the bin without so much as a bye or leave. Good luck, and happy creating. SMALL PRINT: Employees of EMAP Images and Virgin Interactive Entertainment and relatives thereof are not allowed to enter. The editor's decision is final, as it is on so many issues these days, and no correspondence will be entered into. So no phoning to see if you've won, otherwise we'll phone your mum and tell her you've been calling London numbers while she's been down the shop. MASTER SYSTEM Global Gladiators Cool Spot Jungle Book Robocop vs Terminator M KRUSTIS 77. FUN HOUSE 20mm BITUITA GAME GEAR Cool Spot Jungle Book Caesar's Palace Robocop vs Terminator Global Gladiators 007 1 20 83 "


"REVIEW MEGA-CD by SEGA .99 Out November. Contact Sega (071 373 3000) for information. Magne SHERLOCK HOLMES 2 Where were you on the night of the murder? More crime-busting the Victorian way but hasn't it all been done before? BARRAT HOLMES including Holmes' Book and notebook, a directory, the local newspaper and the Baker Street Irregulars street urchins full of interesting pieces of gossip. This takes you to your next place of interview Lemon Entry, My his is definitely one for those with intriguing minds who want to solve murder mysteries fast and efficently. There's no time to lose We're on the case. Sherlock Holmes Vol Il is exactly the same as the first game, except there are three different cases to solve. Plague the mind of Britain's most famous detective Holmes and his sidekick Dr Watson, who are following the trail of The Two Lions, The Pilfered Paintings and The Murdered Munitions Magnate. Each case requires a different line of investigation, and there are a number of things to help you on your way, The library with Miss Scarlet and the lead piping. horse and carriage to return to the video interviews with suspects, witnesses and other leads. When you think you have added up all the clues you can then select the Trial icon which leads you into the courtroom to allow you to make your conclusions on the case. If, however, you have not got enough critical evidence then you will find yourself back at the Map to find more clues. It's quite a good idea, putting the cinema screen onto CD, but if you are gong to do it then you should do it properly and in some parts of the game the actors look a bit sketchy. And the graphics leave a lot to be desired, with some of the writing in each clue too illegible to read. The game, which is for one player only, is a mixture of film clips converted onto CD format and a map of London containing different clues to help solve the case. Move Holmes' pipe to each different clue. When you have picked these up hop into the With enough evidence you can go to court Street urchins are great gossipmongers Asquith, Herter: Mr, suithi 33.YUL 1159 w energetic fellow is a tried and Frue mere her of the Liberal Por-y. GRAPHICS 72 GNOOS Take notes on the case and out them here NDON GAMEPLAY VALUE You're well on the way to solving the mystery. STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES VERDICT Diary in which everyone's name is listed. There's not much difference between this and the first Sherlock Holmes game except, of course, the different cases. The cases are quite easy to follow but there is a lot of time wasted messing around with the controls, and with complete silence in the background it's not difficult to fall asleep. I wasn't too impressed with this game, although given a lot of time and patience it could prove intriguing enough to keep you in suspense for hours. Frankly though, it could be one to sit on top of your wardrobe after a few days. O-NWAGON TULLIUM Holmes' files have information which may help IUI Read between the lines of the paper for clues AMANDA TIPPING 84 "


"REVIEW SNES SNES by THQ .99 Out December. Contact THQ (071-493 3662) for more information. *** 202 KICK ASS KICKASS This game's hard with two players so by yourself you'll need a host of weapons to help you. We provide you with the low down for the show down. Violence, blood and carnage no fun in real life, but great in THQ's new game... Like your standard weapon but it shoots three ways. Awesome at short range, but best used for guardians. => Multiple shots and multiple power. his game is lip trembling stuff. The amount of deathinducing baddies which come at you in this arcade conversion is outrageous! Total Carnage is the sequel to Smash TV, and as you'd expect it's visual mayhem. This time however the game has multidirectional scrolling so even the terrain is against Old tonsil face doesn't you. You have to dodge half shouf and holler. the pits, land mines, armoured vehicles and seek and destroy General Akhboob's nuclear plant while rescuing the odd reporter and civilian en route. Kills quickly, but is limited. The pink version is best. GOBE14 1, -10 Put these on and you'll run for your life very quickly. If anything touches this it'll die. Make the most of it. Commando clone Very like Smash TV only much, much harder. GRAPHICS ANNOS THQ's latest SNES release resembles the classic Commando game, but it's even harder. The game has been made harsh for one reason it's designed for two players. This is a shame because it destroys the appeal for solo players. It's not that you can't play it on your own, but you ain't going to get far at all. You start the challenge with a titchy gun, but soon locate heftier armoury. Once you start finding better weapons you know you're going to be hammered by something rather nasty and the end-of-level bosses are 89 no exception. And you'll find these mothers possibly the most difficult and time-consuming baddies ever to be turned into pixels. heaps of landscape. There are only a few of these on each stage, but if you use them you will probably miss out on some valuable collectables in between. Collecting keys, flags, jewels and hostages spins up those points and provides those extra lives necessary to complete the game. The firepower and combatants come at you thick and fast during the scrolly bits, and get this, if you don't keep moving you face certain death! Occasionally the screen stops and the onslaught overloads from all directions, just like Smash TV. Death is almost guaranteed at these stages and a nice touch to the game is the animated ways in which you die; would you believe that it's actually quite humorous being hacked to death and bumt to a crisp most of the time. Remember folks, don't try any of this at home it's more fun outside! GAMEPLAY Skip levels STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES to stand a chance of reaching the bosses with some lives to spare, you can use a warp disc to skip through 10 VERDICT Total Carnage is an excellent conversion of a coin-op game which just didn't manage to attract much of a following in the arcades. There's plenty of action to twitch the fingers, but the difficulty curve and awkward control configuration can hinder your reaction time in tight situations. You will find the scrolling is a bit jerky too, but credit is due to the programmers who've crammed heaps on to the screens without any slowdown. To summarise, some solid action throughout but best played with a friend. ONWAUONO 85 DENIZ AHMET He may look like Leonardo but believe me he's not as friendly. 85 "


"NOWAYOU CAN PLAY THE MOST EXCITING ARCADE GAME OF THE YEAR IN YOUR OWN HOME. ORIGINAL GUN ACCESSORY INCLUDED IN GAME PAK. L2T IN 000042 CREDIT ZP DO09 CHUSTONNI CREDIT PRESS OSTA RELOADYOUR GUN rees CRERIT KO "


"CAINN RESTAURANT RGERS REALISTIC COPS-ON-THE-STREET ACTION SO INTENSE YOU'LL WONDER WHERE YOUR PAY CHECK IS AT THE END OF THE WEEK! TEST YOUR SHOOTING SKILLS AGAINST ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM THE MOST DANGEROUS CRIMINALS IN TOWN, IN A FAST MOVING, MULTI-STAGE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE. MEGA-CD NAMI SEGA TEGA PRIVEO KONAMI (UK) LIMITED TELEVISION HOUSE 269 FIELD END ROAD EASTCOTE MIDDLESEX HA4 9LS "


"IF ONLY I COULD RUN JUMP SWIM SING DANCE PARTY AND SUCCEED CASCHIWARE asciiPad MD LIKE I DO WITH MY ASCIIPAD MD, LIFE WOULD BE GREAT! Whoever said, «life is unfair\" must have played against someone with an asciiPad MD. asciiPad MD Here's why: it's got TURBO FIRE (up to 24 shots per second), hands-free AUTO-TURBO and SLOW-MOTION CONTROL Plus, it looks cool, too. With this kind of control, you'll always land on your feet. Which is more than we can say about life. The asciiPad MD. There's nothing fair about it. FOR USE IT SEGA MEGADRIVE AND ALL MEGA CO SYSTEMS NEW from ASCIIWARE for MEGA DRIVEMEGA CD IT'S HOW TO WIN.  1993 ASCII Entertainment Software, Inc. P.O.Box 6639, San Mateo CA 94403 USA, asciiPad MD and ASCIIWARE are trademarks of ASCII Entertainment Software, Inc. All rights reserved. Sega, Mega Drive and Mega CD are trademarks of Sega Enterprises, LTD. "


"MEGA DRIVE by GREMLIN .99 The ninja from the Nth console. Has he improved? OUT: November. Contact Gremlin (0742 753423) for information time because each stage is played against the clock. The main tactic for making it through each stage is to keep killing baddies because some of them release orange wasps which Zool can gobble up to top up his energy. You need to be quick however, because they soon escape off the top of the screen. Obviously, Zool will need to contend with the odd level guardian on his travels, which is dimension is now on actually a good thing because he then gets to fly his ship temporarily in a bonus stage, searching for more lives and power-ups. Um, but it's not quite that simple though De TIE because Krool soon has his troops vil has only one objective, and To complete a on your tail. Zool get's his pants wet! Jump that's to make good things into stage Zool has to collect a set numon to that log for a ride. bad things. A chap called Krool ber of discs, and for high-score is apparently responsible for bad freaks there are plenty of collec Multicoloured things, a discovery which Zool tables available. Occasionally, Zool is a nice big sprite and handles painfully discovers when he Zool is joined by Zooz (his very well, but skids around a lot, and crashes on an isolated planet. girlie) who follows him unfortunately it's usually into badKrool is out to destroy the Nth around, mirroring his every dies. Admittedly the gameplay's dimension, a place of good move, but most of the time quite standard, but the attention to where Zool hangs out and so Zool has to make do with the visual elements make it colourful takes pleasure from turning the extra jumping power, bombs and enough to be captivating. inhabitants of numerous planets into disillusioned killers. The planet which Zool has been dumped on is a strange place, plastered with seven themed worlds on topics such as food, toys, carpentry and the tropics. Each world holds World one boss! Shoot his four stages which become increaswings first and then his body. ingly awkward in layout and logic. GRAPHICS SOUND Zool is cool To keep him safe, Zool has trained in the ways of the ninja, and his nimble body makes short work of obstacles. Zool can run like the clappers, stick to surfaces, kick, shoot and pentorm a deadly drill attack which splats anything in his way. The drill move also enables him to jump higher than normal so it's very useful. GAMEPLAY STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES Zool hits a continuation button. Lots to kill in this world. VERDICT mm Sweets are bad for you. These ones shoot you continuously. Zool is a fast paced Sonic type of game which is more frantic to play but lacks the depth. The graphics always hold your attention, but I can see people completing it quite quickly. The routes through each stage are obvious but it's somewhat annoying when you rush around at top wack and die because you've crashed into a baddie that's difficult to spot against the luminous backdrops. There's a lot of imagination used throughout the worlds, but the gameplay doesn't vary and doesn't require any new skills. Still, it's not bad. ONWAO VO M111111 82 DENIZ AHMET Shoot the drums in the back or the bullets will just bounce off. 89 "


"WIN WITH BARCODE BATTLER AND CVG! TWO BORED C+V.G READERS SIT IN THEIR SUMPTUOUS BACHELLOR PAD, BUT WHAT AILS THEM? REMEMBER, BEL SOPHISTICTED. BAL! Juicy, DNY OLD STRUE, FLOYD. SHALL YO! LADIES! SCHUMI....I AM AT A WE TROT DOWN THE X FANCY A MONSTEK SLOOSE END. ALL THE OFFY? THEM TOP MUNCH? JAMMY DODGERS BiRDS MAUREEN HAVE BEEN SCOPPED. AND OLIVE ARE (WHAT ARE WE TO DO? KNOWN TO HAUG ABOUT THERE. You HAVE (GOT TO BE (LETS) UN FASHIONABLE? JokinG! WHAT XGO ) Smoi? SORELY YELLOW) JA TAIR OF ((ALIVE USRAVE ROMPERS (NERDS! GET < THEY ARE STILL IN? A LIFE! SARE SO UNCod 13 FLOTD AND JUICY | KETSE TO  THEIR SORROWS WITH LUKE WARM Viking LAGER... AP FLOYD PARY GASPAR os TARRING ERSAS ING VERS JEANS! THE BAGGY SKATE Look! GREAT! COOL! WAIT, FLOYD.WHO Humo.... THUS FLOYD AND JUICY EMBARK WATS! NEED  Chicks ON A SPREE! VO EXPENSE SPARED! (WHEN WEVE GOT BUT WE NEED (BAR CODE BATTLED?) NEW BAR CODES CO-OP This \"STUPID Ski HAT! TO DO BATTLE! GREAT! COOL! SI AM Sick OF THE NOW FOR OWE ON THE FRONT SOME OF \"HELLO MAGAZINEN GROOVY TOGS! ke KLOBBER SA AND ALL WITH NEW BAK CODES. om TRAINERS! TLATER, OUTSIDE THE OFFT DONT MIND IF WE DO! 1 > COOL! WOW! THESE (NEW ADIDAS« \"TERMINATOR X\" (TRAINEES LOOK Boss! HEY GUYS! S WANT TO COME ( TO THE WARE) HABE RAVE TONIGHT? HEY! THANKS TO BARCODE BATTLERS WE GOT THE BABES Too! CHEERS! Look! It's FLOYD! (WHAT A DISH! AND JUICY! LET'S GO OVER! MASSN@ COR! BARCODE BATTLERS Too! HARDCORE! Check out the antics of the Barcode Boys, then see if you win with CVG and Barcode Battler in this fab comp! Simply detach the card from the cover of this month's CVG and scratch away! CLAIM FORM Please fill in the following details in BLOCK CAPITALS If you find 'Death Star' you have won  worth of Nintendo equipment from Index! Alternatively, if you find Volton' and you receive one of 30 Barcode Battlers! Name Address And, if you already have a Barcode Battler, you can use the card in your machine! RULES AND CONDITIONS 1. This competition is open to all UK residents. It is not open to employees of Index, Tomy UK Ltd, EMAP Images, their agencies, families or anyone connected with the organisation and administration of the competition. 2. Entry instructions for each game form part of the rules. All entrants will be deemed to have read and accepted the rules. 3. There will be one first prize of  worth of Nintendo gear from Index and 30 runners-up prizes of Barcode Battiers. No cash altematives will be offered. 4. No purchase necessary. Game cards can be obtained from Barcode Battler Master, Tomy UK Ltd, Wells House, 231 High Street, Sutton, Surrey SM1 1LD. 5. Cards will be declared void if found mutilated, illegible, altered, forged or tampered with in any way. 6. The editor's decision is final. No correspondence will be entered into. 7. Proof of posting cannot be accepted as proof of receipt. 8. The closing date for the competition is 31 December 1993. Any entry received after this date will be ineligible for entry. 9. The Barcode battler Tattoo Maniac competition is promoted by Tomy UK Limited who can be found at Wells House, 231 High Street, Sutton, Surrey SM1 1LD. Tel: 081-661 1547 HOW TO CLAIM Simply send your winning card with the filled-in coupon BY REGISTERED POST to: BARCODE BATTLER MASTER, TOMY UK LTD, WELLS HOUSE, 231 HIGH STREET, SUTTON, SURREY SM1 1LD Please ensure that all cards reach the address above by 31 December 1993! Prize Claimed L 90 "


"SHEIHANA VISA Retail Store: INSIDE MICROWORLD 257/258 Tottenham Court Road, London W1R 9AB Tel : 071 631 4627 Retail Store : 2 Gladstone House, High Road, Wood Green, London N22 0AA Wood Green, London N22 OAX \" Enquires/Credit Orders 081 340 8565 Tel : 081 889 9412 Fax : 081 889 9413 MEGADRIVE JAPANESSE SOFTWARE Fantasia, KA GE K1, Granada X, Klax, Mercs 2, Magical Hat, Monoco GP, Klax, Olypic Gold, Saint Sword, Pro Wrestling, Toki, Mickey + Donald, Darwin 4081, Turbo Outrun, Wanderner, Wonderboy 3, Magical Hat, XDR, Fantasy Zone,Jewel Master, Spiderman, Crackdown, Fantasia ALL .99 EACH OR ANY 3 FOR  GAME GEAR SOFTWARE Adams Family, Asterix Secret Mission, Chuck Rock 2, Cool Spot, Desert Strike, Donald Duck 2, Double Dragon, Dracula, Ecco The Dolphin, Formula 1. James Bond 007, Jurassic Park, Ottifant, PGA Golf Tour, Power Strike, Road Runner, RoboCod, RoboCod 3, Simpsons Bart V World, Sonic Chaos, Star Wars Strider 2, Terminator 2 J. Day, Ultimate Soccer, Winter Olympics All Above .99 each SONIC 2 JAP 19.99 SONIC 2 UK 24.99 SEGA MEGADRIVE 16 BIT MEGADRIVE 2 MEGADRIVE2 MEGADRIVE 1 MEGA CD UK .99 + 7 GAMES SYSTEM .99 PLUS 2 PADS .99 MEGA CD 2 + MEGADRIVE 2 + + SONIC 2 MEGADRIVE 1 GAME ROAD SONIC 1 & 2 Jap .99 + SONIC 1 & 2 AVENGER Version .00 .99 .99 6 Button Pad NEW.......... .14.99 Captain Planet..... 29.99 Jack Nicholas Golf............ ..34.99 Shadow Of Beast 2 .............24.99 Action Replay. 39.99 Championship Pro Am... 24.99 James Pond 3. ..39.99 Shining Force .44.99 Competition Pro Pad..... .12.99 Chiki Chiki Boys 24.99 John Madden 92. ...24.99 Shinobi 3 39.99 Control Pad...... 9.99 Chuck Rock 2..... 39.99 John Madden 93 29.99 Smash TV.......... 24.99 MD 2 To Philips MK11......... 14.99 Clue.. 24.99 Jungle Strike...... ...34.99 Snake Rattle & Roll.... ..39.99 MD 2 To Scart Lead 14.99 Cool Spot 34.99 Jurrasic Park ..44.99 Sonic Spinball .44.99 Mega Pad-Tecno-183... 12.99 Cyber Cop.... 24.99 24.99 King Of Monsters 29.99 Spiderman .19.99 Mega Stick-TP135 12.99 Cyborg Justice. 29.99 King Salmon........... ..24.99 Street Fighter 2. Turi. .54.99 Megamaster 24.99 Davies Cup Tennis..... 39.99 39.99 Krusty Fun House ..19.99 Streets Of Rage 2............ 39.99 NTSC Convertor 14.99 Double Clutch Landstalker 52.99 Strider 2 SG Pro Pad Clear .13.99 Dragon Fury 29.99 Lethal Enforcer 54.99 Summer Challenge.. 29.99 SG Program Pad. 34.99 European Club Soccer... 34.99 Mazing Wars ......... 34.99 Super Kick Off ...... 39.99 USA/Jap Convertor ..... ...7.99 Ex-Mutants 24.99 Mig 29............... 39.99 Superman... 34.99 SOFTWARE USA / UK EA Hockey .24.99 Mike Dittka Football T2 Arcade 29.99 VERSION E A Hockey 93 29.99 Mohammed Ali 34.99 Talespin....... 29.99 EA Soccer Aladdin 44.99 .44.99 44.99 Mortal Kombat................ Team USA Basketball.... .19.99 Faery Tale 34.99 24.99 Mutant Football.... 24.99 Techno Clash ............... ..39.99 Aliens 3 34.99 Fantasy Zone 24.99 Another World ..39.99 NHL Hockey 94..... Terminator 2 J.Day. ...44.99 Ferrari G. Prixs ... .24.99 24.99 Olypic Gold...... ..16.99 .24.99 Turtles-Tounament.. Aquatic Games... 44.99 Flintstones....... 19.99 34.99 Two Tribes-Pop 2......... .44.99 39.99 Astrix The Rescue.......... Formula 1 Racing 24.99 44.99 PGA Tour Golf 1 or 2............34.99 Ultimate Soccer ........... ..39.99 Back To Future.... Gadget Twins.. 29.99 Predator 2 24.99 Virtual Pinball ..39.99 Balljacks .29.99 Gauntlet 4..... Baseball 2020... .39.99 24.99 39.99 Pro Quaterback Wimbledon Tennis ..39.99 General Chaos..... ..29.99 44.99 39.99 Batman Returns ............. Pugsey. Winter Olypics-Multi ......... ..44.99 Global Gladiators. 29.99 ..34.99 Ranger X 39.99 Winter Olypics-Spec. Battletoads 39.99 Gunstar Heroes. RBI 93 .39.99 29.99 WWF. Wrestling .... Bill Walsh Football .29.99 ..39.99 Blades Of Vengence..... Haunting............. 44.99 39.99 Robocop 3......... WWF Royal Rumble.......... 44.99 ..39.99 Hit The Ice................ ......29.99 Robocop V Terminator .........39.99 Bubsy X-Men.... ..29.99 Bulls V Blazers .................. Home Alone... ..34.99 24.99 39.99 Rocket Knight. Xenon 2........... 29.99 Home Alone 2.. Rolo To The Rescue ..29.99 Young Indy ......... B.O.B. California Games..................19.99 ..24.99 Rugby 2 GAME GEAR SYSTEM .99 . . . 34.99 GAME GEAR 4 IN 1 PACK .99 MEGA CD UK GAMES CD X Pro Convertor......... 39.99 Batman Returns........ 44.99 Black Hole Assault...........39.99 C+C Music Factory..... 39.99 Chuck Rock 2 35.99 Dracula 39.99 Dune 39.99 Ecco The Dolphin 39.99 Fianl Fight...... 34.99 Hook 35.99 Jaguar XJ220. 39.99 Kriss Kross .......... 35.99 Lethal Enforcers........... 49.99 Music Video 1 INXS .......39.99 Night Trap..... ...44.99 Prince of Persia 39.99 Road Avenger... 34.99 Robo Aleste... Sewer Shark Sherlock Holmes 39.99 Sherlock Holmes 2. 39.99 Slip Heed. 44.99 39.99 Spiderman V Kingpin........39.99 Thunderhawk... 39.99 Wolfchild..... ...34.99 GAME GEAR + COLUMNS + TV TUNER .99 Football......... 39.99 39.99 .......39.99 -39.99 36.99 Sonic.... REPLACEMENT POWER SUPPLY UNIT MD OR G. GEAR .99 SUPER NINTENDO 16 BIT SNES USA SCART .99 USA PSU .99 UK PSU .99 UNIVERSAL CONVERTOR .99 NTSC DATEL CONVERTOR .99 UK STARWING PACK .99 UK MARIO ALL STAR PACK .99 GAMEBOY SYSTEM .99 3DO CONSOLE + MARIO WORLD .00 POA ...59.99 Terminator 14.99 JAGUAR SYSTEM EPOA 24.99 ...9.99 34.99 MANGA VIDEOS NOW IN STOCK 29.99 USA GAMEBOY GAMES Asterix 24.99 Barbie. Battletoads Best of the Best 24.99 Darkman... 24.99 Dracula 24.99 Dr Franklin II.. 24.99 Garfield... Goal........... Humans ... James Pond.. Jurassic Park. Kid Dracula....... 24.99 Lamborghini... Metal Masters Mortal Combat Pinbal Dream.. ..24.99 Pugsley Hunt... 24.99 Raging Fighter... 24.99 Ren + Stimpy ......... 24.99 Road Rash............. 24.99 Speedy Gonzales ............ ..24.99 Spiderman & X-Men..... ..24.99 Super Mario 2............ ..24.99 Talespin ........ 24.99 Tiny Toons-movie Viking Child.... 24.99 We're Back ..24.99 WWF King of Ring..........24.99 Zen ..................................24.99 Action Replay Pro... .... 39.99 Audio Lead....... ...7.99 Gun + 6 games USA........ 39.99 Jo-Jo Stick 39.99 Maverick Stick Megamaster .... 24.99 Pali booster ...... 29.99 Quickshot Invader 2............. 14.99 Quickshot Pad.. Quickshot Python 2B..... 12.99 Scart Lead.... ..12.99 SN Pro Pad Clear 13.99 SN Program Pad.. .......... SN Program Stick 44.99 Stealth Joystick.... 44.99 Super Advantage 44.99 Universal Pad........ SOFTWARE VERSION Aladdin... 49.99 Aliens 3..... ..44.99 aliens Vs Predators ... .44.99 Amazing Tennis 44.99 Asterix the Gaul............ 44.99 Barbie ............................. 49.99 Barts Knightmare... 29.99 Baseball 20/20 44.99 Battle Cars.......... ...49.99 Battletoads ....... 44.99 Bomberman & Tap. 59.99 Brawl Brothes...... 44.99 44.99 California Games 2.... 29.99 Champ League Soccer... 44.99 Chester Cheetah ...... 29.99 Chuck Rock 29.99 Cliffhanger 44 99 Cool World 39.99 Cybernator... 39.99 Diamond Challenge 49.99 Dungeon Master. 49.99 EVO.. 49.99 Famil Feud 44.99 SFC SYSTEM SCART E179.99 SF II Turbo NTSC............. T-2 Arcade............ 44.99 Tecmo Basketball 44.99 29.99 Test Drive 2 29.99 The seventh Saga 49.99 Top Gear 2. ..44.99 Tuff E Nuff 44.99 We're Back... 44.99 World League Soccer... 29.99 WWF Wrestling 29.99 Yoshi Cookie 39.99 Zelda legend... 39.99 Zombies 44 99 SOFTWARE VERSION Multitap.... 29.99 Batman Returns 29.99 24.99 Dimension Force 24.99 Dino City 24.99 F-Zero. 24.99 F1 Grand Prix... 24.99 Family Tennis .. 59.99 Final Fight 2. 29.99 Formation Soccer 59.99 Hook .............. 24.99 Jaki Crash 29.99 Looney Toons. 24 99 Mario Al Stars... 59.99 Pro Soccer 19.99 Rocketeer.vn 19.99 Rushing Beat 2..... 29.99 Smash TV. 24.99 Spindizzy World .24 99 Streetfighter Il............. 29.99 Super Bomberman... 59.99 Streetfighter Il Turbo...... 59.99 The Combatribes 24.99 Top Racer....... 24.99 World Heroes ........... 49.99 WWF .............. ...24.99 Final Fight 2... ..39.99 Fire Power 2000 NTSC.... 29.99 Football Fury ...... 39.99 Foremans Boxing ......... 34.99 Gemfire...... 49.99 Gods Goof Troop .... 49.99 GP 1......... 44.99 Hunt Red October 29.99 James Bond Jnr 29.99 Jimmy Conners. 44.99 Jurassic Park... 49.99 Kablooney ............. 29.99 Kendo Rage............ 44.99 Lemborghini Challenge 49.99 Legend of Ring 49.99 Lethal Weapon...... Mario All Stars... 54.99 Mario Is Missing 49.99 Mario Kart 39.99 Mario Paint. 49.99 Mario World No Box ...........19.99 19.99 Mech Warrior....... 39.99 Mortal Combat...... 59 99 29.99 NCCA Basketball... 29.99 Nigel Mansell NTSC.. 49.99 Phalanx... 29.99 Prince of Persia..... 34.99 Race Driving...... 29.99 Redline F1 Racer 44.99 Ren + Stimpy Veediots... 44.99 Road Riot 29.99 Rocky Rodent .44.99 Run Saber .... 44.99 Shadowrun. 49.99 Shanghai 2 29.99 Space Megaforce 2499 Spiderman + X-Men 24.99 Star Fox 44.99 Star Wars 44.99 Streetfighter II... 49.99 Super Bowling... 34.99 Super Conflict...................24.99 Boxing SOFTWARE UK VERSION Actraiser. 44.99 Adams Family 39.99 Aguri Suzuki F1 35.99 Another World... Asterix 39.99 Batman Returns 44.99 Best of Best..... 35.99 Blues Brothers... 35.99 Chessmaster 39.99 Crash Dummies 44.99 Cybernator......... 44.99 First Samauri 44.99 GP .1... 44.99 International Tennis 44.99 John Madden 93... 39.99 Jurrassic Park.. 49.99 Lagoon... 54.99 Lamborghini 44.99 Lemmings...... 44.99 Looney Toons. 44.99 Magical Quest 54.99 Mortal Combat... 54.99 On The Ball ....... 35.99 Parodious... 35.99 Pebble Beach Golf 44.99 Player Manager.. 44.99 Pop N Twinbee... 44.99 Powermonger .44.99 Rock n Roll Racing 44.99 Shadow Run..... 44.99 Smash TV..... 3499 Star Wars .......... 44.99 Striker....... 39.99 Sunset Riders 44 99 Super Air Diver 44 99 Super Aleste..... 39.99 Super Goal..... 35.99 Super Putty... 44.99 Super Swiv.. 34.99 Streetfighter 2 Turbo ....... 54.99 Tiny Toons....... 44.99 Tom & Jerry... 35.99 Toys... --39.99 Tuff E Nutf WWF Royal Rumble... 54.99 Zombies 44.99 24.99 AMIGA CD32 .99 Bubsy. WHOLESALE ENQUIRES WELCOME 081 081 341 9110 SEGA MASTER SYSTEM ALEX KID GAME .99 NES + MARIO 3 .99 GAMES FROM .99 ABOVE ARE MAIL ORDER PRICES ONLY. CHEQUES/PO'S TO: 655 GREEN LANES, LONDON N8 OQY P&P ADD .50 PER SOFTWARE TITLE,  FOR MACHINES. .50 P & P FOR PSU WE RESERVE THE RIGHT TO CHANGE PRICES WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE. E&OE. "


"CD32 by MILLENNIUM TBA Out Now. Contact Millennium (0223 844894) for information. JUNG Pond surfaces on CD, with more platforms than British Rail! These Mr Frosties can give you a nasty bite . Jump on their heads twice to kill them. here's nothing quite like a fish caught in the frying pan-oops, I meant in action, and there's certainly plenty of that with the second adventure for our fishy hero, James Pond: Licence to Gill. (Groan) This time he's been sent on a mission to thwart the dastardly plans of Dr Maybe, who has just taken over the central control of the toy factory at the North Pole. However, a number of toys are actually disguised as penguins carrying lethal explosive JAMES POMD 2 There was an old woman who lived in a shoe... Watch out for these flies. It's a pity you're not wearing insect repellent. Put a spring in your step and reach some new heights (ha ha) to gain extra points and armour for protection. charges. Pond, whose codename is Robocod, has just 48 hours to destruct the penguins before they wreak havoc throughout the world at Christmas. the cuddly toy department where you have to rescue the stuffed animals before Dr Maybe gets his hands on them. GRAPHICS INNOS gy Nine live There are nine parts to James' mission, starting off fairly easy in the sports section of the factory where you have to dodge giant boxing gloves and volleyballs. There's also GAMEPLAY VALUE Smiling happy faces, but not for long if it's up to James. STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES leche mode Before long you find yourself in the mechanical section where model trains, cars and crazy wind-up wheels chase you. Then there's bath time and board-games, castles, music and a grand finale at the Big Top. Phew! There are bonus points and secret levels scattered throughout the game, as well as extra lives hidden in secret coves, so search carefully in each level before you decide to move on because there is no turning back. 3 VERDICT A lot of work has gone into the design of this game and it has obviously paid off with the 2,500 colour screens used. The idea of the toy factory is great and Millennium has created quality backdrops, but there still is a lot of scope for improvement: there are too many open spaces. If you're looking for a fairly simple game then skip this, but those seeking a challenge, tuck in because there's loads of things to keep you busy for ages. Die-hard Pond fans should not be without it, if not just for the groovy CD soundtrack. ONWUO NO IIIIIIIIII MIN Don't pick up when Dr Maybe is in front of you, unless you want to be fed to the sealions at the North Pole that is. AMANDA TIPPING 92 "


"Nintendo TM WHEN THE GOING GETS TOUGH... STAY ON YOUR WHEELS. Ride out the punches and give out more than you take. Just one blow in the right place will send your assailants spinning out of their saddles and skimming the tarmac at 150 mph! Race against 14 of the most hostile bikers ever to hit the freeway. It's dagerous watch out for the stray stears, roadblocks and oil spills. But that's not all... look out for the black & whites those eagle-eyed cycle cops who'll haul you in for any highway violation... this race is illegal!   Ocean  Electronic Arts. OCEAN SOFTWARE LIMITED  2 CASTLE STREET  CASTLEFIELD MANCHESTER  M3 4LZ TELEPHONE: 061 832 6633  FAX: 061 834 0650 "


"SNES by SYSTEM 3 .99 Out January. Contact System 3 ( 081-906 0899) for information. DESERT FIGHTER SETUP GAME LEVEL PAD CONTROL The Gulf War may be over, but the battle for the best game based on it could soon be won... GAME LEVEL HARD DELIUPEDIZAL BUTTEPE TYPE-A L:SPEED UP R SPEED DOWN KAF TER BURNER A MISSILE You choose which type of aircraft you want to fly, such as the A10 Thunderbolt II, which is a great tank destroyer, or there is the F15 missile plane and the A10, which isn't very easy to steer but it has a turbo throttle which can pick up speed. At the beginning of the game there is a mission brief from the commander-in-charge who will tell you what to do. You cannot go on to the next mission until the first one is complete. (It makes sense doesn't it?) If you fail the mission you're crap and the game is over. GANE START No more wars I hear you cry. Well tough!! Choosing the right tanks can affect the whole war strategy. age? Unlike many other war games Desert Striker has not forgotten us hardworking journalists and there are 20 different news reports from TV station Global Network News. All these extras add up to the making of a great game. It's hoped to be out in the shops on January 15, the third anniversary of the day war broke out in the Gulf, how tasteful. Why did Alfred chicken cross the desert? Sorry, wrong game. Battle The various battle sites include the desert, cities, mountains, oil fields and factories but be careful you don't go to far with too little ammo because you'll have to travel all the way back to base to refill on missiles and fuel. One nice aspect of the game is that you have to make important decisions which could affect the whole of the war strategy. It's a caring, sharing game of the Nineties, for instance if you bomb a city, peace groups will start campaigning, and if you blast an oil slick the environmentalists won't be very happy. Finally what war wouldn't be complete without full media coverTanks are in place, weapons loaded, prepare for conflict! The Second World War launched a multitude of war films, and the Gulf War seems to be having a similar effect, only this time it's the videogaming industry that is reaping the benefits. Desert Fighter is the latest Desert Strike-style game to blast on to your SNES screens. As part of the combined allied forces you have to battle it out across the war-torn deserts of the Middle East in an attempt to quash Sadaam Hussein and his troops. It's not just a question of blowing Saddam's troops away though, you also have to ensure that you do not upset the balance of power in the UN. There are nine difficult missions which include battles with scud missiles, ammunitions dumps, bomb clearance factories and airfields, and the fight begins with you trying to achieve a successful allies landing. INNOS GAMEPLAY GRAPHICS STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES Look, we've spotted Elvis. The King lives on!! 9 VERDICT O NW AUOVO I'm not a fan of strategic war games at all, in fact I generally loathe them. That is until I came across Desert Striker. There is so much to do in this game and it isn't all about bombing every thing in sight, which is what I usually do! The graphics look very realistic and the accompanying sound is just as good. You can really hear the engines of the planes and the bombs blasting on the ground and it doesn't glorify war at all, which is another bonus. It's challenging and gripping and I'd say worth every penny. IIIIIIIIII 94 AMANDA TIPPING Be careful not to bomb your own backside. 94 "


"MIGHI Out November. Contact Elite (0922 55852) for information. REVIEWS MIG AND MAGIC Year 900 Dodgy D&D on the Super NES! of deatre foun in die This is where the 'game' begins. Quit now while the going's good. ini 50 GAMEPLAY GRAPHICS VALUESOUND ood morrow young serf, and Welcome to yonder village where a meeting with various alien forces awaits you. No, you haven't stepped back in time but you have walked into the review of possibly the dullest historical game on the SNES, which frankly makes homework seem interesting. Gone are the days when Dungeons & Dragons was the latest craze. But in an attempt to revitalise them Might and Magic II tries to conjure up images of Labyrinth-type creatures who breathe fire and dribble slime. Mmmm. magic OR and inns you come across along the way, and to pick up jewels and spells and fight off evil hatchet-wielding and sword juggling monsters. Sound fun? On the whole no. The graphics are quite good, but in these days of flash graphic adventures, you may just find that this text heavy game has past its sell-by date. Amanda Tipping STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES 10 Mialit ana stic ONWAO COCO In the days when heroes were leather-clad heroes and women were scantily clad bimbos. Unfortunately, me thinks you need extra points for working out what the hell is going on here, because it's taken me ages to try and fathom out what the storyline is all about, but it goes something like you being one of six characters who has to go from village to village, checking the castles IIIIIIIIII Role playing gamer Anyway, this is a role playing game for one player and includes the usual quirks such as hit points, character classes, experience levels and armour class. There is also a magical points system of spell-casting, it\" signe Meet your local landlord. A pint of your finest ale, mate. 39 SNES by ELITE .99 Out October. Contact Acclaim (071-344 5000) for information. Look out for all the bonuses hidden away above the lampposts. I GRAPHICS INNOS 61 . Will the Dummies have a smooth ride from the Game Boy to the SNES? Sound is a similar story. Twee tunes and weedy FX hardly do justice to the SNES sound chip and apart from a hint of sampled sound here and there the presentation is ropey. GAMEPLAY VALUE D STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES Unlike you, most of the baddies in this game aren't 'armless! DELLEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE so. we meet again Dr. Zub 10 ek! The Crash Dummies' creator Dr Zub has been kidnapped by one of his own early creations the evil Junkman. Junkman needs Zub to help him find the secret of his T9000 armour so he can develop an army of super robots to control the world. Owners of Crash Dummies on the Game Boy will know all about the plot, and it wasn't a bad piece of software on that format, and neither is this SNES version it's a complete stinker! The graphics are not bad by any means but seem so functional. Picture a colour Game Boy hooked up to a television and you're there. New money, old rope Playability's the game's main fault, though. To put it bluntly there's nothing here you won't have seen done better a hundred billion times before. There's no challenge either It's simply a case of running along platforms and remembering where the dangers are. Most other games add some new feature to this unoriginal format but Dummies doesn't. Avoid this like you would a 10-ton truck driven by a drunk on a dark road in the middle of a particularly bad icy spell. Rik Skews IIIIIIIIIII ONWA Dr Zub gets kidnapped by the evil Junkman. 43 SNES by ACCLAIM TBA 95 "


"MEGA DRIVE by ELECTRONIC ARTS .99 Out December. Contact EA (0753 549442) for more information. EA has spent the last couple of The best form of The incredible bicycle kick defence is in full flow. years producing brilliant versions always attack of American games like football and hockey. Now it has turned its attention to real sport, our own national game soccer. Will it be a hat-trick or a bit of an own goal? EA has obviously looked hard at the on-field opposition, and the decision to base its game on an isometric pitch is brave but it works well. The usual problem of the player towards the bottom of the screen having their goalie obscured by netting is avoided because every viewing angle is clear and the fast-scrolling pitch ensures long balls are easily intercepted. play modes: action and simulation. There's little difference between the two but in sim mode players get tired as the game drags on. rom somewhere unknown, like the third division, EA has produced a footy game which is apparently the most comprehensive available. It abandons the customary Sensi and J-League overhead and behind-goal perspectives, and also claims to be the most instinctive to play allowing the use of bicycle kicks, turning volleys and shimmies with little effort. they prove too infallible, so for a more realistic and playable game it's always a good ides to switch them over to manual control then you've got no one to blame but yourselves for mistakes. Flat back four You'd be hard-pushed to outdo Sensi when it comes to options but EA has tried pretty hard. One of the nicer ideas is the system used when the ball is booted out of play. Whenever a comer, throw-in or goal kick is given, a large yellow box is super-imposed on to the pitch. This acts as a rough guide so your attackers can be lined up, but it is only of real use for comers as goal kicks are basically just an opportunity to boot the ball as far upfield as humanly possible. The usual international sides are on offer and there are two Four-play fun As with all recent EA Sports games, FIFA is compatible with the Four-Way Play adaptor. This allows two players to team up against another pair, or assorted combinations including four against the computer! During the one-player game, the player under control is indicated by a large yellow star, which automatically shifts to the player you are passing to. However, for the four-player game, each participant is given a different-coloured star, and this proves confusing and rather tricky to piece together flowing moves because of the confusion of swapping between players. In addition, if the ball is punted towards your goal, it often proves tricky to switch control to the keeper to save it, resulting in goals which would even embarrass Stevie Wonder. Stick to the two-player mode we say... The goal kick system. Gordon Banks to George Best Of course if it looks like Ryan Giggs but plays like the England footy team then what's the point? Luckily FIFA is very playable but there's a nagging doubt over player control it often feels like the computer's in control rather than yourself. Goalies are great and respond to every shot. However, when controlled by the computer, Book 'im ref! If there's one single thing that has been greatly enhanced by the isometric viewpoint, it's probably the fouls. As the two teams bustle around waiting for a corner kick, over zealous attackers can often be seen shoving a defender out of the way! What's more, if a sliding tackle arrives a little too late, the crocked player rolls around the floor clutching his shin in true John Barnes style. Sound too is very groovy. The crowd roar, sing songs and the atmosphere generated is just perfect. VERDICT Everything combines to make Electronic Arts FIFA Soccer a stunning footy game. Lurvely flowing graphics with brilliantly sized sprites and a different to the norm perspective. The sound FX are as realistic as you're likely to get without actually getting up off your bum and walking down to your nearest footy ground. And of course the delightful gameplay is a joy to be part of. While it could certainly do with having more control over events, as it is nothing can touch it. The game's done more than good Brian PAUL RAND The goalie palms it away. 96 "


"LET'S JUST SEE THAT AGAIN... However, the ball dips sharply to the feet of the plucky midfielder. Turning quickly, he wellies it upfield hoping that there's someone on the receiving end. A long floating ball stretches into the oppositions' half. But there's no one there to meet it. BE A diving header fails to make contact, and it looks as if all might be lost. Thankfully, though, a winger gets to it before it runs off for a goal kick. GRAPHICS Lovely graphics and perspective all played at a great speed. ANNOS Only if you live next door to Man City do you get more realistic sounds. EA SPORTS With a quick spin, he boots it in for a daring cross, but it looks like the goalie will get it first. Butterfingers! Then the cross and it sails past him. Will it cross the line? GAMEPLAY Simplicity itself to play. It's an absolute joy to play. Plenty to keep you amused, worth every pound. Of course it does! This box out All that's left now is to head for would have been a bit pointless the nearest night club for some otherwise! fights and beer. The ref must have seen that! STRATEGY SKILL ACTION REFLEXES 106 6 MONWAU VOO  IIIIIIIIIII HIT! 4 WAY PLAY EA SPORTS Up for the toss... \"It's not soccer, it's footie!\" 97 "


"BOVIS HOUSE Please Add .00 Delivery For Consoles Victoria Road (Next Day Courier Service) Hartlepool Hartlepool Dream $1.50 For Games & Accessories Cleveland .00 For Joysticks TS26 BDB MACHINES (First Class Recorded Delivery) TEL.: (0429) 869459 Fully Computerised Stock Control & Despatch FAX: (0429) 274660 A Open 9.30am 5.00pm Weekdays & 9:30am 5:00pm Saturday ORDERS PLACED BEFORE 4PM WILL BE DESPATCHED THE SAME DAY MEGA DRIVE TOP 20 | SUPER NES TOP 20 vaMAWNOVU AWNALADDIN SEGA/VIRGIN/DISNEY STREET FIGHTER 2: S.C.E. CAPCOM TREASURE LAND SEGA (TREASURE) F-1 DOMARK DASHIN' DESPERADOS DATA EAST GAUNTLET N TENGEN GUNSTAR HEROES SEGA (TREASURE) 8 LETHAL ENFORCERS (INC. GUN) KONAMI AERO THE ACROBAT SUNSOFT 10 ROLLING THUNDER 3 NAMCOT 11 JOE MONTANA CD SEGA 12 MORTAL KOMBAT AKKLAIM (PROBE) 13 LAND STALKER SEGA (CLIMAX) 14 ROCKET KNIGHT ADVENTURES KONAMI 15 MONKEY ISLAND JVC-VICTOR 16 SONIC CD SEGA 17 FANTASTIC DIZZY CODEMASTERS 18 CHUCK ROCK 2 CORE 19 JURASSIC PARK SEGA 20 HAUNTING EA 16M UK 24M UK SM JAP 8M UK 8M USA 8M USA 8M UK CD USA 8M USA 12M USA CD USA 16M 16M+BB 8M UK CD USA CD UK/JAP UK 8M UK 16M UK 16M UK $42.95 $52.95 $39.95 $39.95 $39.95 $39.95 $34.95 $52.95 $39.95 $44.95 $47.95 S42.95 S CALL $34.95 $ CALL CALL $36.95 $39.95 $42.95 $42.95 CLAY FIGHTERS ACTRAISER 2 EMPIRE STRIKES BACK AERO THE ACRO-BAT ROCK 'N' ROLL RACING SUPER BOMBERMAN PARTY PACK ZOMBIES ATE MY NEIGHBOURS ART OF FIGHTING SECRET OF MANA 10 3D F-1: FINAL STRETCH 7TH SAGA 12 RUN SABRE 13 MACROSS 2036 14 LEGEND OF THE RINGS 15 MORTAL KOMBAT 16 STREET FIGHTER 2 TURBO SUPER CAESAR'S PALACE 18 REN 'N' STIMPY 19 KEVIN KEEGAN PLAYER MANAGER 20 SHADOW RUN 11 INTERPLAY 16M USA SCALL ENDX 12M USA/JAP SCALL NC (LUCASARTS) 12M USA $54.95 SUNSOF. 8M USA $44.95 INTERPLAY 8M USA $44.95 HUDSON SOFT 8M USA $59.95 KONAMI 8M USA $44.95 TAKARA 16M JAP SCALL SQUARE SOFT 16M + BB USA $54.95 LOZC 12M + DSP JAP SCALL ENIX 16M + BB USA $49.95 8M USA $44.95 8M JAP SCALL ELECTRO BRAIN 8M USA $44.95 AKKLAIM 16M UK/USA $49.95 CAPCOM 20M UK/USA $54.95 VIRGIN SM USA $44.95 8M USA $44.95 ANCO 8M UK $39.95 DATA EAST 8M + BB USA $49.95 UK UK SM 17 NEW MEGADRIVE GAMES TURBO DUO (CD) GAMES NEW SUPER NES GAMES THUNDERHAWK (CD) CORE NOV. CASTLEVANIA X KONAMI SCALL MYSTICAL NINJA 2 KONAMI REBEL ASSAULT (CD) WCASARTS NOV. COTTON HUDSON $42.95 SUZUKA 8-HOURS NAMCOT AX-101 (CD) MICRONET NOV. CREST OF WOLF HUDSON $49.95 MEGAMAN X CAPCOM COOL SPOT (CD) VIRGIN NOV. DOUBLE DRAGON II NAXAT/TECHNOS $44.95 DUNE (CD) VIRGIN NOV. DRAGON SLAYER FATAL FURY 2 $39.95 TAKARA HUDSON/FALCOM SPIDERMAN (CD) SEGA $29.95 DUNGEON MASTER JVC/T.T.I. $41.95 CLAYMATES INTERPLAY VIRTUA RACING (DSP CHIP) SEGA NOV/DEC EXILE 2 WORKING DESIGNS SCALL CLIFFHANGER SONY WWF2: ROYAL RUMBLE AKKLAIM SCALL GRADIUS II KONAMI $54.95 EQUINOX SONY KICK BOXING LORICIEL $29.95 HORROR STORY NECTOAPLAN $44.95 CHUCK ROCK 2 CORE IMNT: TOURNAMENT FIGHTERS KONAMI NOV. HUMAN SPORTS FESTIVAL HUMAN $34.95 ROBOCOP V'S INTERPLAY INDIANA JONES SEGA SCALL JIM POWER LORICIEL $44.95 SEGA SONIC SPINBALL NOV. TERMINATOR LOOM $39.95 LUCAS ARTS FIFA INTERN'L SOCCER EA NOV/DEC LORDS OF THUNDER HUDSON/RED $41.95 SENGOKU TAKARA MYSTIC FORMULA (NEW) MICRO CABIN $49.95 T2: JUDGEMENT DAY AKKLAIM OTHER BEST SELLING MEGADRIVE TITLES MARTIAL CHAMPIONS KONAMI SCALL BREATH OF FIRE (JAP-RPG) CAPCOM NAXAT SOCCER NAXAT $29.95 MADARA 2 (JAP-RPG) KONAMI NHL HOCKEY '94 ULTIMATE SOCCER GENERAL CHAOS POWER GOLF 2 L.T.I. SCALL FATAL FURY 2 TAKARA RANGER-X SHINOBI NI BART'S NIGHTMARE HOOK RAINBOW ISLANDS NEW TAITO $49.95 JURASSIC PARK OCEAN WIMBLEDON TENNIS CHAMPIONSHIP BOWLING SILPHEED RALLY CHAMPION INTEC $49.95 SPIDERMAN & THE X-MEN KEIO FLYING SQUADRON MIG-29 SHADOW OF THE BEAST PSYGNOSIS $36.95 ZOKU: LEGEND OF BISHIN MAGNIFACT JUNGLE STRIKE TWO TRIBES SNATCHER KONAMI SCALL CD F-1: FINAL STRETCH ...CALL FOR PRICES WORLD HEROES WORKING DESIGNS SCALL MACROSS CD BASEBALL (INC. DSP CHIP) JALECO ADVANCE FATAL FURY 2 + ARCADE CARD EMPIRE STRIKES BACK JVC (LUCASARTS) ORDERS COMING SOON...PLEASE CALL PLOK! TRADEWEST TMNT: TOURNAMENT FIGHTERS KONAMI TAKEN ON AND ALL NEW GAMES SIM ANT MAXIS TURBOGRAFX-16 GAMES ACCESSORIES NOW IN STOCK: AIR ZONK HUDSON SOFT $37.95 BOMBERMAN '93 HUDSON DOFT $39.95 MUSIC CD KEY RINGS DARKWING DUCK NECT/RADIENCE $37.95 DEAD MOON NATSUME $34.95 WATCHES 3-D POSTERS DEVIL'S CRUSH NAXAT/RED $29.95 FALCON S. HOLOBYTE $36.95 FINAL LAP TWIN NAMCOT $24.95 MEGA-CD (JAP) GAMES I ALL MEGA GAMES JACKIE CHAN HUDSON SOFT 534.95 3 COUNT BOUT 106 MEG $169.95 LEGENDARY AXE II RED/ATLUS $29.95 ART OF FIGHTING 102 MEG S CALL LEGEND OF HERO TONMA IREM $36.95 $24.95 ARE FROM JAPAN OR BASEBALL STARS 2 AFTERBURNER III 68 MEG $119.95 NEUTOPIA II $36.95 HUDSON ANNETTE AGAIN $44.95 NEW ADVENTURE ISLAND HUDSON $36.95 FATAL FURY 54 MEG $99.95 BARI-ARM $47.95 THE USA WE DO ORDER OF THE GRIFFON HUDSON $36.95 FATAL FUTY 2 106 MEG $169.95 DEVASTATOR SPLATTERHOUSE $49.95 NAMCOT $34.95 NOT STOCK UK TIME CRUISE FACE $37.95 KING OF THE MONSTERS 2 74 MEG CALL DYNAMIC GOLF (NEW) $44.95 REACTOR ? MEG SCAL EARNEST EVANS $24.95 TILES! F-1 CIRCUS CD PC ENGINE (GT) GAMES 128 MEG $169.95 SAMURI SHOWDOWN $CALL FINAL FIGHT .95 TO PLAY OUR GAMES SENGOKU 2 74 MEG $169.95 KYO'S FLYING SQUADRON $47.95 HUDSON SOFT BOMBERMAN '93 $39.95 SOCCER BRAWL 46 MEG $109.95 FINAL SOLDIER HUDSON SOFT ON A UK SYSTEM, NINJA WARRIORS $16.95 $24.95 KONAMI GRADIUS $24.95 54 MEG $159.95 SUPER SIDEKICK NOBUNGA & HIS NINJA FORCE $29.95 YOU NEED A COX PC KID 3 $47.95 VIEWPOINT 74 MEG SCAL SEGA GOLF CLASSICS SCALL STREET FIGHTER II: C.E. NEC AVENUE $64.95 WORLD HEROES 2 146 MEG $179.95 SOL-FEACE $29.95 PRO CONVERTER TWIN BEE KONAMI $39.95 SUPER LEAGUE '93 $49.95 PLEASE CALL FOR MORE NEW & USED TITLES THUNDERSTORM FX $29.95 * * * GAME ACCESSORIES * * * SEGA CD (USA) GAMES CALL FOR DATES & PRICES ADVANCE JAGUAR 3DO STREET FIGHTER II NEO-GEO GAMES | SCART GAMES ADAPTER PLAYS ALL LOCKOUT GAMES ON YOUR PAL UK MEGADRIVE OR SNES ONLY .95 MWM > Menusa 3 BATMAN RETURNS C&C MUSIC FACTORY DRACULA ECCO THE DOLPHIN HOOK JOE MONTANA CD NIGHT TRAP SEWER SHARK SPIDERMAN TERMINATOR CD THUNDERHAWK WILLY BEAMISH WONDERDOG SCALL SCALL $36.95 $36.95 SCALL $39.95 $44.95 SCALL SCALL SCALL SEGA 6-BUTTON PAD (JAP SMALL) SEGA 6-BUTTON PAD (USA LARGE) SEGA TAP (4-PLAYER) SEGA MOUSE (WORKS AS TRACKERBALL) POWER CLUTCH (SUPER JOYSTICK) ASCII PAD (MEGADRIVE OR SNES) SG-8 PAD II (TURBO & SLOW MOTION) SF-3 PAD (FOR UK SNES) GG RECHARGEABLE BATTERY PACK TURBOGRAFX PC ENGINE CONVERTER DUO TAP (5-PLAYER) PC ENGINE/DUO 6-BUTTON PAD $16.95 \"WINGS UNIVERSAL CONVERTER (SNES) $16.95 CITY BOY (6 BUTTON UKE APOLLO) $27.95 SUPER ADVANTAGE STICK (BY ASCII) $32.95 KONAMI HYPERBEAM (INFRA-RED) $32.95 CAPCOM FIGHTING STICK $18.95 CAPCOM INFRA-RED UNIT $13.95 SUPER MULTI TAP $16.95 MASTER GEAR CONVERTER $32.95 POWER SUPPLY UNIT $16.95 STEREO ACTIVE SPEAKERS $22.95 PRO ACTION REPLAY (MEGADRIVE OR SNES) $34.95 CDX PRO CONVERTER $14.95 $39.95 $39.95 $39.95 $59.95 $36.95 $29.95 $14.95 $8.95 $9.95 $36.95 $36.95 GAME FAN Magazine FROM USA COVERAGE FOR: MEGADRIVE/GENESIS SUPER NES/SUPER FAMICOM TURBOGRAFX 16 GAME GEAR & LYNX NEOGEO & 3D .00 31.95 IMPORT PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE DUE TO EXCHANGE RATES WE HAVE MANY MORE TITLES THAN WE CAN LIST HERE, SO IF YOU CANT SEE WHAT YOU ARE LOOKING FOR PLEASE GIVE US A CALL! TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME EXPORT ENQUIRIES WELCOME "


"GAME GEAR by ACCLAIM .99. Out December. Contact Acclaim (071-344 5000) for more information. HUN Addams Family The TV series was good, the film was great and the games released so far have been pretty hot too. Will the Game Gear version maintain the form? Addams Mansion desirable property, but has sitting tenants. oo! Hiss! Nasty old Abigail Craven has her eyes on the Addams' hidden family fortune. Abigail's so anxious to lay her hands on the loot that she will stop at virtually nothing to try and achieve her ghoulish goal. Family problems Poor old Uncle Fester has sadly been on the receiving end of one of Abigail's spells as part of her plot to get the loot, resulting in Fester Gomez is your central character so it's up to you and him to save the family fortune from Lez Dennis (Eh? Ed). mansion to try and discover just where it is that the family have been trapped. becoming her unwilling partner in crime. Abi has also managed to imprison Granny and the adorable (if you're Gomez anyway) children Pugsley and Wednesday within the huge Addams family mansion. Gomez is the character you control and your adventure begins in the woods near the mansion. There's plenty to explore outside your abode including a multitude of dungeon-based rooms. The aim though, is to find a key and get inside the only way for Gomez to rid himself of the foul spirits is to leap on top of them. With a flying hat (in the fez style of course) Gomez can fly but only for a limited amount of time. It also comes in useful for reaching otherwise inaccessible buildings at the top of the mansion. Massive mansion Although there are only six levels the game is on the large side of enormous with each room leading to more and more rooms. Get a pen handy to make a map because it's too easy to get lost. There's also a number of bonus rooms dotted about the house and these can be entered as many times as you want. This of course offers a great chance to stock up on power-ups and money. A number of power-ups are available for Gomez to use. A sword, for instance, can be used to slash and dispatch any ghouls that are floating nearby. Without it the You will probably need to draw a map to get through the mansion. Gomez again. A shame really 'cos Lurch is my fave character. Game Gear Addams Family has lost nothing in its translation to the small screen. The graphics are superb with massive variety in the backgrounds combined with detailed and very well animated sprites. Discover a long lasting challenge that you should invite to live with you as soon as possible. I must warn you now though, it's tough going. RIK SKEWS LOOK SOUND OVERALL 10 FEEL VALUE There are tons of bonus rooms to explore. 99 "


"DART PREVIEW GO! HELD North Pole as Bart attempts to pick up Krusty the Clown souvenirs while defeating the baddies. The game has a number of subgames, one of which includes controlling Bart on a skateboard as he whizzes horizontally across the screen, at the same time as trying to pick up bonuses while avoiding hazards such as large pot-holes. THE WORLD 18 Look out Bart, he's behind you! DEO GAMES HISON Yo Dudes! The verbally challenged Bart is about to tour the world Puzzler There are also two puzzle games; the old slide the tiles around to form a picture' type and the 'lots of face down cards, flip two at a time, remember them, flip 'em back and try to pair them up before you make five mistakes type. Although we've only seen a preview version the game already looks good, with faithful recreations of the loveable Groenig characters. Keep 'em peeled for a review soon. Rik Skews One of the sub gamesmove the tiles to form Bart's picture. Select a game option from here. ontgomery Burns, local nuclear power plant manager and Homer's boss, has discovered that Mr Simpson is almost entirely responsible for the plant's financial losses. Burns, though, has no intention of sacking Homer, he has other plans afoot... Intent on revenge Bums rigs a Krusty the Clown art contest Bart entered so that The Simpsons win a trip around the world. This doesn't seem much like revenge, but at each stop on the tour a member of the Bums family is waiting to cut short the Simpsons' fun. through his global treasure hunt because waiting for him at the end of it all is the grand prize a special guest appearance on the Itchy & Scratchy Cartoon Show.. All this platform action takes place in far flung places including China, Egypt, Hollywood and the Treasure hunt Bart, though, is intent on getting GAME GEAR by ACCLAIM _.99 Flip the cards two at a time, then try and pair them up. REVIE Enjoy Oh goody! Another Jurassic Park game! D-HELS Unless you're fed up of Jurassic Park, then it's worth giving the Game Gear version a look. Although there's five levels, you can only access the last one if you get through the first four without using continues, which is a nice touch, especially because, if you do use continues, then the game's quite easy to get through. Graphically it's above average, and there's a nice animated intro and even some sampled dinosaur roars. Not as good as the film, but GG Jurassic's nevertheless enjoyable. Paul Rand JURASSIC PARK I wish I owned the rights to this! ow much has the movie made?  million, that's how much. It's rocketed to the number one slot in the all-time biggest films chart and it's not even been released in some countries yet! Jurassic Park's a biggie, and now the Game Gear version's out to capture some of the spoils. You control Alan Grant, paleontologist and gung-ho kinda guy, who's got to battle his way through Isla Nublar (that's the name of the island on which Jurassic Park's situated), tranquillising the escaped dinosaurs as you go. What this converts into is a five stage mixture of platform and driving action, with you pootling along in a jeep while taking out dinos on the road, then continuing on foot to tranquillise the beasts. There are weapons and items galore to collect, and you'll need to use them wisely to succeed. LOOK SOUND OVERALL This place should be large enough to store the film's takings! FEEL VALUE GAME GEAR by SEGA .99 Out November. Contact Sega (071-373 3000) for information. 100 "


"REVIEW Elephant antics on your Game Gear! -HELD AND-H VIDEO GA t's not the most immediate animal that springs to mind when coming up with video game characters, an elephant. Hedgehogs, definitely. Lemmings, without question. Squirrels, hmm, at a push. But elephants? But that's what Ottifant is and he stars in this conventional, if colourful, platformer on Game Gear. The aim is to escape each level by collecting baby elephants which are dotted around the stages, then making your way to the exit. You can only leave a stage if you've picked up the required number of bairns, but some of the babies transport you to secret bonus rooms for extra points. You can also grab ice lollies collect three and you're given a mystery bonus. suck over a cart to his side of a spike-filled chasm, allowing him to ride over to safety. There are buttons to jump on to make hidden objects appear, moving platforms to ride the whole kit and caboodle, in fact. Who needs spiky hedgehogs, eh? Paul Rand Fine game, sad name. That's the boss. Not impressive. LOOK SOUND OVERALL Ot stuff That's the gameplay, but there's a bit more to Ottifants than first meets the eye. Being an elephant, Otti has one hell of a hooter, and he can use this to suck items towards him in the basement level, for example, he can FEEL VALUE When I see an elephant fly! GAME GEAR by SEGA .99 Out November. Contact Sega (071 373 3000) for information. REVIEW To help dispense the baddies to silicon heaven numerous weapons can be picked up including whips (missus!) and baseball bats. Apart from the baddies there's also natural hazards to watch out for such as broken bridges. Whip-crack-away! VAND Passé This is basically the arcade game and the sprites are large and well animated. There's a lot of variety in the backgrounds and enough of a challenge to keep attention. Down points? Well, apart from the game being prehistoric there's a lack of moves compared to modern beatDEO GAN em-ups and no variety in the way baddies must be killed. Essentially a game I'd recommend to anybody wanting as near as possible arcade conversion of a classic game. If you're looking for a Streetfighter 2 clone though, look elsewhere. Rik Skews Billy and Jimmy Lee come a thumpin' and a kickin' on to the Lynx. DOUBLE ORAGON Copyright 1993 Telegate The Lees hit the Lynx! 3. 0L 83 988 998 LOOK SOUND OVERALL illy and Jimmy have to rescue their friend Marian from the clutches of the Shadow Boss and his henchmen with the help of their martial arts skills. This is essentially a horizontally scrolling beat-'em-up where the baddies come thick and fast and vary from those which take just a couple of hits to massive sprites which take far more pounding. FEEL VALUE Time for a sharp exit. LYNX by TELEGAMES .99 Out Now. Contact Telegames (0533 880445) for information. 101 "


"| LYNX by TELEGAMES .99 Out December. Contact Telegames (0533 880445) for information. STRIKE Saddle up your A-64 Apache and take to the sky to destroy anything that gets in your way, in this stonking Lynx conversion SUGGEST VollOONPLETE THE It's not Iraq you're fighting, honest. headlines at the moment. He's General Kilbaba and it's up to you to give him a good kicking. elicopters are ace aren't they? You obviously think so because you're a top pilot fighting scumbags wherever they raise their nasty little head. One guy in particular is grabbing all the trigger-happy maniac to use up the cannon ammunition!), as is the fuel, but luckily there are supplies scattered around the landscape. These can be winched on-board. Missing in action soldiers wander about and if these are winched up and dropped back on a landing pad damage is taken off your armour, something else that is limited. Campaign The action takes place over more than 20 missions. These vary from helping prisoners break out of jail to destroying a large biological weapons complex. There are three types of weapon: a chain-gun is best used on weak targets while the Hydras (unguided missiles) are good all-round weapons, the Hellfires are guided missiles and very powerful, put them to good use on heavily fortified targets such as Enemy bunkers. Unfortunately weapons are limited (although you'd have to be some It looks like the Batcoptor, doesn't it? Listen it's some other Middle East country, not Iraq, OK? This is a brilliant conversion of an already excellent game. Great graphics which are wonderFully smooth, realistic sound and superb gameplay. It's challenging, long lasting and what you could call the thinking person's shoot-emup. The only down-point ! can think of is the lack of variety in the weapons. Overall though, the game gets a giant thumbs aloft. RIK SKEWS. 985 LOOK SOUND OVERALL 10 FEEL VALUE Well alright, maybe it is Iraq, but don't let on, right? 102 "


"LMP \\GAMESTER) DEO GAME ACCESSORIES POWER SCREEN MAGNIFIER 2.5 X MAGNIFICATION FOR GAMEGEAR FOR GAMEGEAR RECHARGEABLE BATTERY PACK COMPLETE WITH MAINS ADAPTOR FOR GAMEGEAR GALER FOR GAMEGEAR POWERGRIP XONANDOHE FOR GAME GEAR AGRANDISSEUR D'ÉCRAN GROSSISSEMENT DE 2,5 POUR GAMEGEAR BILDSCHIRMVERGRRERUNGSGLAS 2,5-FACHE VERGRBERUNG FR GAMEGEAR LMP EMESTER ACCUMULATEUR RECHARGEABLE COMPLET AVEC ADAPTATEUR SECTEUR POUR GAMEGEAR WIEDERAUFLADBARER BATTERIESATZ VOLDTT MIT NETZADAPTER FUR GAMEGEAR SUPER ACTION CASE: CARRY CASE COMPLETE WITH SCREEN MAGNIFIER, POWERGRIP AND MAINS ADAPTOR, (Gamegear Games and Batteries not included). MEGA DRIVE CARRY CASE: (Console and Games not included). ESTIARIUS B LMP GAMESTER winuo samt acessori VIDEO GAME ACCESSORIES THE RANGE OF VIDEO GAME ACCESSORIES. NOW AT A GAMES STOCKIST NEAR YOU! STONEMASON'S HOUSE, 75 RAILWAY STREET HERTFORD, HERTS. SG14 TRD TELEPHONE: 0992 503133 FAX: 0992 503061 "


"WHEN IT'S OUT IT'S IN. THE HEDGEHOG PLAY BEFORE YOU PAY IN THE AMESMASTER ZONE LATEST RELEASES PINBALL 59% STREET FIGHTER 2 SPECIAL CHAMPION EDITION Sega Mega Drive Available now Reviews: \"A strong contender for best Mega Drive game Mean Machines Sega .99 ALADDIN Sega Mega Drive Available now Reviews: \"If you've got a Mega Drive get Aladdin Sega Power .99 Polo LANDSTALKER Sega Mega Drive Available now Reviews: \"Landstalker is an adventure masterpiece\" Mean Machines Sega .99 are VD RELEASED SONIGUSSPINBAL SONIC SPINBALL Sega Mega Drive Preview: \"The ultimate Sonic game\" Mean Machines Sega F1 RACING Sega Mega Drive Released: 5th November Reviews: \"The best racing game ever on the Mega Drive\" Mean Machines Sega .99 T CARTRIDGE NOVEMBER RELEASED COMETE WINTER OLYMPICS Sega Mega Drive Preview: \"It follows the real Olympics down to minute detail\" Sega Pro .99 NOVEMBER OLYMPICS YOU KNOW WHERE TO COME. Al release dates are estimated and are subject to change. Al tems subject to availability All prices shown include VAT except where indicated. Where a saving is stated, it is based on a previous price avalable at Comet for a period of 28 consecutive days in the previous 6 months or against a Comet Group Plc Cannot be reproduced without their permission Manufacturer's Recommended Price or against an in-store price as indicated, except Comet, Birstal Prices correct at time of going to Press. However, Comet reserve the right to alter or amend prices or offers without prior notification "


"CHEAT DE MEGA DRIVE inter's certainly here now, so, while you're huddled in front of that flickering fire toasting your marshmallows and sipping hot chocolate, spare a thought for me, Amanda, having to grin and bear trekking through frosty Farringdon to reach the office and find a stacks of cheat modes for your favourite games. The thing is, my life would be made a lot easier if some of you great readers (Stop creeping Ed.) could find it in your hearts to send some of your very interesting tips because my fabulous brain is running a bit low. So while you ponder making your Christmas present lists to Father Christmas, take an extra sheet of paper and drop me a line including your most excellent cheat hints. Ta! Send them to Christmas won't be Crackers without my Cheat Mode, CVG, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. CAMPAIGN SEVEN MEGA DRIVE CAMPAIGN EIGHT CAMPAIGN ONE CAMPAIGN TWO CAMPAIGN FIVE JUNGLE STRIKE CAMPAIGN NINE Our international stylish magazine even has dudes writing to us from as far away as the Far East, just to show off their game knowledge. Take Jason Yip for example, who sent us hot tips on all the campaigns in JUNGLE STRIKE on the Mega Drive: Campaign 2 RLS6MHGJXZD Campaign 3 9VSD3WNSF3N Campaign 4 XTSMDYBXOGG Campaign 5 VNH3BXTNPJK Campaign 6 WSCB7MGJ3XZ Campaign 7 THGD3BXWWLR Campaign 8 TGY96ZDYK9G Campaign 9 N4FHVRWTZFT (12 lives) Thank you for that Jason, I'm sure it'll enhance our lives greatly. CAMPAIGN THREE THIS COMHNDER CRACCO ir SAFE HE GAVE OS THE LOCATIONS OF ALL THIC FUCE HND AMMO CAMPAIGN FOUR CAMPAIGN SIX 105 "


"GAME GEAR MEGA DRIVE I bet that hurt! > OS < Oh dear. Dr Grant looks like he's loused it up. MORTAL KOMBAT Mortal Kombat, Mortal Kombat? Don't you guys ever get round to playing anything else on that machine you bought two Christmases ago? As if we haven't devoted enough column inches to the martial arts phenomenon of the year, Tino Coelho of Hyde in Cheshire has written in with some Kombateering hints of his own. His tips are for the Game Gear version... Turn the Game Gear on (excellent start, mate). Hold down buttons 1 and 2 and start, then rotate the pad clockwise until the screen shows Now entering combat'. It should go straight on to the character selection screen; select a character, ie sub zero. When it says 'finish him', do the character's normal death move and a head ripping off sequence will follow and there will be blood on normal hitting scenes. OG MEGA DRIVE Leaping Velociraptors ahoy! JURASSIC PARK Hey you! No not the person who's peering over your shoulder (they can go and buy their own copy); no, we mean you, dear CVG reader. Played Jurassic Park on Mega Drive? Well you'll be grateful to Gareth Jones of Mid Glamorgan for giving us the passwords then, won't you? Dr Grant, Level 2: 2KDJJO1A Raptor, level 2: 121G0016 3: 4LR53051 3: K21G0018 4: 6UFS105L 4: M21G001A 5: 8VBVK2HO 5: 021G001C 6: AW04HK 7: CWNVR4HH Scary, isn't he? 106 "


"DID SOMEONE SAY ACTION293 BONY IMAGESOFT Based on the Columbia Pictures hit filmit could be the best action adventure game ever\"Dim the lights, pick up your joypad aaaand...Action!\". Steve Shields, Mega Machines. GAME BOY SUPER NINTENDO AMIGA EXTERBERWERTSETER Last Action Hero' and Columbia Pictures Industries Inc. 1993 Columbia Pictures Industries Inc. All rights reserved Mega Drive is a registered trademark of Sega Enterprises Ltd, Game Boy and Super Nintendo Entertainment System are registered trademarks of Nintendo Sony Imagesoft and Imagesoft are trademarks of Sony Electronic Publishing Company, 1992 Sony Electronic Publishing Company, "


"SNES TAZMANIA The party animal of the year has got to be cartoon star Taz and we've got a monster load of tips to get this game on the road.Taz's tummy is rumbling and he needs food now (much like new Amanda 'breakfast/elevenses/afternoon tea' Tipping). He has constantly got the snack attacks and needs to eat. So what does he do? Take a trip to the local supermarket? Raid MacDonald's? No, Taz is on the look-out for kiwis, large cute yellow-feathered birds, which are nifty on their feet. The best way to catch them is to run behind them buttonbashing the 'catch' button. Then dash up and down the road and gulp them down. There's a variety of creatures and vehicles on the roads to either help or hinder Taz, so be sure to watch out for these characters... 3:50 SBC 8.90 73, 170 Didgeri Dingo. He rides a scooter; if Taz runs behind him he will throw him a package to eat. To grab the pack age, press the Y button repeatedly. There's usually nice food or roller skates but beware of the harmful booby traps. She-devil. She just loves Taz, but she can ruin the whole game if you are not careful. One kiss from her puckered lips is deadly. Stay well away, no matter how amorous you're feeling. Code cracking Game Genie: 9 Timeouts for player 1: DB30 D43A 9 Timeouts for player 2: DB30D74A Infinite Timeouts for both players: 3C3A-OFAD Strange Archer And strange these things certainly are. They pop out from the ground and fire lethal arrows at Taz. 2:02 CROCO Wendal T Wolf Annoying little bird that jumps on Taz's back and puts his paws on Taz's eyes making it difficult to see. To get rid of him just use the tornado spin. 15. 220 2:54 13,299 or Pterodactyl Avoid this prehistoric predator at all times. If he manages to get hold of cute little Taz he transports him back to the beginning of the level. Buddy 'yuppie' Boar This boar can be a bit of a bore as he zooms up and down the road in his leather jacket clutching his mobile phone. He's rather perilous and is prone to mowing Taz down. So watch out, otherwise you could well end up looking like a skidmark. Acme Tour Bus. Talk about a mad driver? Has he just passed his test or what? He swerves from one side of the road t' other and will certainly kill Taz if he strays into his path. You can hear him beeping to warn Taz to get out of the way. 108 "


"MEGA-LO-MANIA MEGA GLOMANIA LICENSED BY Nintendo 2000H Are you Power crazy enough to take on the ultimate challenge of MEGA-LO-MANIA? A new planet has been born and lacks only a leader. You must face three conniving opponents and lead your race through the ages. To be successful you must mine, invent weapons, build fortress and above all fight. Move through the epochs and prepare for the final conflict the Mother of all battles The Conflict at the End of Time. 89% SNES FORCE \"Incredibly addictive\" Excellent strategy\" \"engrossing\" \"Heartlessly brilliant\" DOMINATIO SUPER NINTENDO. gee PAL VERSION LICENSED BY Nintendo Cyborg warrior, you are on Run Sabre mission. Take a friend if you can on your perilous journey hack through the jungles, battle underground, across the orient and in the air. Fighting the mutant armies of Dr. Bruford every inch of the way. Finally you come face to face with the evil and all powerful doctor himself. Your lethal weapons and specially designed powers will hopefully lead to ultimate victory. You are the Earths last hope. PAL VERSIONI Ima 81 Beer 21200 ALERT! zoso. DISTRIBUTED BY IMAGINEER (U.K.) LTD UNIT 7 MILLSIDE IND. EST. LAWSON ROAD DARTFORD KENT DA1 5BH Tel: 0322 287782 Fax: 0322 293422 Ima gineer "


"L a HMV KNOW HMVKNOW GAMES KNOW HIMV. KNOW GAMES You wanna know what's where and what's hot? Well it's all here... MEGA DRIVE SNES 1 STREETFIGHTER 2 TURBO (Nintendo) 1 ALADDIN (Sega/Virgin) 2 STREETFIGHTER 2 CHAPIONSHIP EDITION (Sega) 2 MARIO ALL STARS (Nintendo) KNOW HMV. KNOW GAMES ALL-FORMATS 3MORTAL KOMBAT (ACCLAIM) 3 MORTAL KOMBAT (Acclaim) 4 GOOF TROOP (Nintendo) on 1 ALADDIN (MD/SEGAMRGIN) 4F1 (Sega/Domark) 5 STRIKER (Elite) 5JURASSIC PARK (Sega) 6 TUFF E NUFF (Bandai) 2 STREETFIGHTER 2 CHAMPIONSHIP EDITION (SNES/NINTENDO) 3 STREETFIGHTER 2 TURBO (SNES/NINTENDO) 7 THE LOST VIKINGS (Nintendo) 8 BUSBY (Nintendo) 4 MORTAL KOMBAT (ALL/ACCLAIM) 6 NHL PA HOCKEY 94 (Sega/EA) 7 FANTASTIC ADVENTURES OF DIZZY (Codemasters) 8 ULTIMATE SOCCER (Sega) 9 LANDSTALKER (Sega) 5 ELITE 2 (AMIGA/PC/GAMETEK) 9 KEVIN KEEGAN'S PLAYER MANAGER (Anco) 6 JURASSIC PARK (ALL/OCEAN) 7 FLIGHT SIM 5 (PC/MICROSOFT) 10 WIMBLEDON TENNIS (Sega) 10 BATTLETOADS AND BATTLE MANIACS (Nintendo) 8 PRIVATEER (PC/ORIGINEA) 9 ZELDA: LINKS AWAKENING (GB/NINTENDO) KNOW HMV. KNOW GAMES KNOW HMV. KNOW GAMES 10 F1 (MD/MS/SEGA/DOMARK) 11 ALIEN BREED 2 (AMIGA/TEAM 17) AMIGA 1 ELITE 2 (Gametek) 2 ALIEN BREED 2 (Team 17) 12 PREMIER MANAGER 2 (AMIGA/PC/GREMLIN) 13 ALIEN (ALL/MIRGIN) 3 JURASSIC PARK (Ocean) 14 GOOF TROOP (SNES/NINTENDO) 4 ALIEN -3 (Virgin) 5 MICRO MACHINES (Codemasters) 15 STRIKER (SNES/PC/RAGE) Tort isson.cuied to dever the Oxcard core crocchia just o 50 days! 16 NIGEL MANSELL (GB/NINTENDO) 1 ELITE 2 (Ocean) 2 JURASSIC PARK (Ocean) 3 FLIGHT SIM 5 (Microsoft) 4 PRIVATEBN (Origin/EA) 5 STRIKER (Rage) 6 ALIEN BREED (Team 17) 7 INNOCENT (Psygnosis) 8 NHL HOCKEY (EA) 9 SYNDICAATE (EA) 10 GOAL! (Virgin) 6 PREMIER MANAGER 2 (Gremlin) 17 STAR WARS (GG/MS/SEGA) 18 TUFF E NUFF (SNES/BANDAI) 19 FANTASTIC ADVENTURES OF DIZZY (MD/CODEMASTERS) 20 DARKWING DUCK (GB/NINTENDO) 7 HIRED GUNS (Psygnosis) 8 SPACE HULK (Electronic Arts) 9 SYNDICATE (Electronic Arts) 10 COMBAT AIR PATROL (Psygnosis) 110 "


"Hookies NAME S8S More fun than other One-Armed Bandits! Based on Steven Spielberg's hit film non-stop action critically acclaimed game play eight levels. \"A stunning looking game with superli animation Frank O'Connor, editor of Total O Canno condition (NIE Watch the Premiere on the Movie Channel MEGC.CD SONY Hook  and associated character names are trademarks of TriStar Pictures Inc. 1991 TriStar Pictures Inc. All rights reserved. Mega Drive, Mega CD and Game Gear\" are registered trademarks of Sega Enterprises Ltd. Super Nintendo Entertainment System is a registered trademark of Nintendo. Sony Imagesoft and Imagesoft are trademarks of Sony Electronic Publishing Company. 1992 Sony Electronic Publishing Company. "


"22 RCADE ACTION Sur ER STREET FIGHTER 2 THE TOURNAMENT BATTLE BY CAPCOM BEAT-EM-UP 1-8 PLAYERS uch has been written about the hottest release in the arcades since the first Street Fighter 2 game, but only within the last few weeks have a select band of players been able to play the machine for themselves, and make their evaluation on whether its better than the original. The machine on test in one of London's special evaluation arcades is not the normal Super Street Fighter, launched in Japan last month, but an exclusive Tournament Battle edition that allows up to eight players to compete in this enhanced version against each other. You know Down at the Electrocoin Arcade, one lucky young whippersnapper gets his sweaty paws on one of the first linked Super Streetfighter machines in the country. What we want to know is, why isn't he at school? Ja04 112 "


"The main differences between Super Street Fighter and the original include the addition of four new players, with nine special moves. Cammy Spiral Arrow and Cannon Spike Kicks T Hawk Condor Dive and Skull Buster Punch Fei Long Fire Fury and Blazing Flare Punch Dee Jay Rapid Fire Uppercut, Double Rolling Hook Kick and Air Slasher. These new characters pad out this enhanced version of the game much! more than past upgraded SF2 boards such as Streetfighter 2 Turbo Edition and Hyper Fighting the basic score; get into a ruck with the other battlers in the Streetfighter competition and fight it out for the title of Champion. The real benefit that Super Street Fighter has to offer is the new linked action game. In prototype for some time, Capcom have allowed four cabinets to be connected together for simultaneous action never seen before. Players can buy in at the beginning and select characters (the machine even allows players to fight with the same character if they want.) They can also start a battle towards being the champion of the tournament. After each scrap the winner moves up the ranking until he is the best of the rest. One disadvantage with this is that the players have to actually move seats at the end of a game, depending on their ranking, which can become complicated to follow when you're in the thick of battle. All the graphics have been improved, new moves added to some of the more familiar characters. This is a must to play if you love the cartridge or arcade original. It's the next logical step more characters, more moves and more friends to beat up. If you thought the Streetfighter phenomenon was reaching its end, think again. Kevin Williams With 16 characters to play with, brand new special attacks and a link-up, 8-player tournament option, Super Streetfighter 2 makes all other beat-'em-ups look decidedly not very good! FINAL , RESULTS POSTCA PUNTO 09 RyU ARE DEALSTA BUKA RAITTING RANKING SUKNAREALDATU Meet Dee Jay, one of the four new fighters in Super Streetfighter 2 The Tounament Battle. He's a well-hard, wellhuge battler with an array of special moves and attacks that'll help him hold his own. GRAPHICS SOUND ? $&X-$55 GAMEPLAY 22 OVERALL 22 113 "


"SUPER FATAL FURY BY SNK BEAT-EM-UP 1 SAMURAI SHOWDOWN BY SNK SLASH-'EM-UP 1-2 PLAYERS 1-2 PLAYERS Up CORP.OF A RIO.. aus offer. This is still only an enhanced version of the original though, offering slightly improved Fatal Fury action to keep up with releases from other manufacturers rather than a complete reworking of the original, and with this in mind, players may be disappointed with what they get. Kevin Williams re you tired of beat-'em-ups and beginning to think there's nothing new? Well think again, because SNK have released a game that is a breath of fresh air when it comes to stale old fighting titles. Samurai Showdown involves a selection of 12 characters with different skills competing against enemy opponents, using a mixture of fancy sword play, fighting techniques and spectacular powers to defeat a growing number of enemies. The storyline to Samurai Showdown tells of Samurai, Ninja and Knights being gathered to medieval Japan to defeat the malevolent 'Satan's Shogun'. The players use special talents to attempt to defeat his murderous followers, using weapons, explosives and their animal friends. Samurai Showdown has everything. All that is missing is the kitchen sink. Players have great fun trying out each character's special talents, as well as defeating selected opponents. The graphics are stunning and the characters interact with backgrounds when fighting, cutting boxes and vegetation to ribbons when flashing their swords about. Another great feature of the game is the 'zoom-in, zoom-out' effect that keeps the action in the centre of the screen. The game really is thrilling, with you having to beat off the opponents with a mixture of specially timed sword chops, magical spells and button punching action as you try and win the advantage. Everything in Samurai Showdown is well rendered, with gushes of blood appearing everywhere when fighting, making other games look tame. It's about time companies starting looking at other genres other than the Streetfighter style, and with Super SF2 about to clean up, it's a good time to diversify. This is one you can't afford to miss. Kevin Williams BECMU Launched against Super Street Fighter 2, Super Fatal Fury also derives from a successful beat'em-up pedigree. The original was loved by arcade players in America and Japan, knocking Street Fighter 2 off the top spot when launched. Will the sequel do the same? From a player's point of view the game does not look anything special, sporting only more selectable characters, some new backgrounds and a jazzed-up soundtrack. But SNK's fighting games depend on their playability rather than just fancy graphics. For those who have not played the original, the story is that 12 of the world's best fighters are summoned to take part in a televised fighting match, hosted round the world, with the battler who sur vives all the different stages, including bonus skill events, becoming World Champion. Super Fatal Fury has the original list of twelve characters boosted to fourteen, now taking part in the renamed 'Grandmother of all Battles!' The players will find each character enhanced both in reaction times and special moves available. One of the main selling points of the original and, indeed, this game is the special foreground and background jump feature, allowing players' characters to jump from the front to the back of the screen, which gives the game much more depth of play than previously on OLUN GRAPHICS GRAPHICS 2 2 SOUND 2 SOUND 2 GAMEPLAY PLAYER SELECT PLACRO GAMEPLAY CA PLAYER 85 22 OVERALL OVERALL GIBRAROD NUDE 22 114 "


"ENHANCE YOUR CONSOLE!  SHOP & MAIL ORDER SERVICE & REPAIRS   LARGE RANGE OF PRODUCTS ON DEMONSTRATION EXPERIENCED & PROFESSIONAL TECHNICIANS  SAME DAY SERVICE. FREE QUOTATIONS & ADVICE  ALL PRODUCTS AND SERVIES FULLY GUARRANTEED  HARDWARE SOFTWARE ACCESSORIES  GAMES FROM UK, AMERICA & JAPAN  MODIFICATIONS. CONVERSIONS Try before you buy! All the latest releases (UK/US/Jap) for all consoles First for new products accessories/consoles/games -Have your machine converted to play all games (UK/US/Jap) on full screen with no borders MODIFY and to run at a faster speed & CONVERT -Have your machine converted to play any ANY CONSOLE game (UK/US/Jap). No need to use a TO WORK IN ANY double adaptor COUNTRY! -Have your machine converted to accept From PAL to SCART all UK/US/Jap joysticks, joypads From SCART to PAL or accessories From 50hz to 60hz or both Have your machine connected To play all UK, American to any TV or monitor via customized leads and Japanese games. There is no end to what we can do. We can proRepairs undertaken on the following: vide a tailor-made Sega Master System, Sega Megadrive, service for what ever your needs. Sega Mega CD, Super Nintendo, Gameboy, Give us a call SNK Neo Geo, Sega Game Gear, Sega to see what we can do Megadrive 2, Sega Mega CD 2, Nintendo for you! Nes 8-bit, PC Engine, Joysticks, Joypads, Accessories CONSOLE ENTERTAINMENT VIDEO GAMES OXFORD OXFORD REGENTS STREET CIRCUS ARGYLL STREET BOOTS CARNABY STREET GT. MARLBOROUGH STREET OXFORD STREET WE ARE HERE LOWNDES COURT TEL : 071 439 1185 RING US NOW FOR FURTHER INFORMATION 3 Lowndes Court, Carnaby Street, London W1V 1PP (opposite Boots) TELEGAMES PRICES INC. 1st CLASS RECORDED DELIVERY PLEASE MAKE CHEQUES/PO Payable to Replay REPLAY Dept. CV 60 Occupation Lane, Staincliffe Dewsbury W/Y WF13 4BP TEL/FAX 0924 402244 IMPORTERS & DISTRIBUTORS FOR PYNS AND ALL OTHER GAME SYSTEMS DOU DRAGON SOCCER NOW OUT CREAM LYNX VERSION NOW OUT NEW ATARI 2600 and 7800 TITLES AVAILABLE JAGUAR in NOW!! 3DO and CD32 in stock plus PC Engine Colecovision Game Gear Sega Megadrive Super Nintendo Game Boy Intelivision. Famicom Neo Geo  Master System.Nintendo, etc ORDER BY MAIL OR CALL AT OUR SHOPS SPECIAL OFFERS SET OF 12 SF II CHARACTERS .99 WITH PRESENTATION CASE .95 HALF SETS WITH PRESENTATION CASE .95 INDIVIDUAL FIGURES .50 CALL FOR BEST PRICES ON SEGA & NINTENDO PERIPHERALS (ALL FIGURES ARE HAND PAINTED AND MADE FROM POLYSTONE) ULTIST CHESS NOW OUT MD CONSOLES IT'S A KINDA MAGIC SPECIALIST IMPORTERS OF DEVELOPMENT SYSTEMS We are one of the oldest established over 14 years we have probable the largest selection of games for all systems in europe buy with confidence. Call in or send an SAE for lists QIX NOW OUT 0533 880445 TELEGAMES 0533 813606 WIGSTON, LEICESTER LE18 3TE SHOPS AT RIVERSIDE CENTRE HAYMARKET CENTRE PETERBOROUGH LEICESTER DESERT STRIKE LYNX NEED WE SAY MORE. OUR SUCCESS IS DOWN TO YOU!!! 0384 480047* PANASONIC REAL 3DO & JAGUAR IN STOCK NOW!! PHONE FOR LATEST FAR EAST CONSOLE ACCESSORIES UNIT F, THE WALLOWS TRADING ESTATE, FENS POOL | AVENUE, BRIERLEY HILL, WEST MIDLANDS DY5 IQA DESERT STRIKE NOW OUT "


"THORA HIRD Dear YOB, This is the first time I have written to a mag, and I know I risk you calling me a brain-dead saddo and so on, but I've just got to get this off my chest: everyone's forgotten how good home computers are. Nowadays everyone goes on and on about consoles, and all people want to know is which is best out of the Mega Drive and the SNES. Well, I've got a SNES and I think it's pretty good. I've also got an Amiga, and I've got to say I think it's better. Sure, consoles have the biggest games like Streetfighter and Sonic, but Amiga games have tons more depth and have a lot more thought put into them. I don't know why this is, but I spend a hell of a lot more time on the Amiga and the games are cheaper too. I've seen other letters from people who own PCs and they say the same thing. Just look in the swap sections of the mags and you see people swapping their cartridges all the time because they're bored with them. Sometimes you can get sick of a console game in less than a week, but that's very rare with Amiga games. I'm sure you're going to say that I'm talking out of my bum or something, but I think a lot of people will agree with me and they're just too scared to say it because consoles are the big thing at the moment. You don't have to print this letter, but thanks for taking the time to read it. PHILIP OWEN Dorking, Surrey. PS Is it worth me getting a CD32? Are they going to release a disk drive for it, because with all the Amiga games available I think it needs one.  WINNER YOB: As much as it pains me to say it, you're absolutely bloody right. Here at CVG we have access to every machine under the sun, and it's always games like Sensible Soccer, X-Wing and and Elite 2 we end up playing all the time. On the whole, you can count the evergreen console titles on one hand, but you'd need a million fingers to count the classy computer games doing the rounds. As for your question about CD32, my lowly-placed sources tell me there could well be a disk drive for precisely the reason you've stated. Your letter makes a lot of good points and makes them very well, so I've decided that you've won the cash. Congratulations. Suddenly I don't feel very well... ESTHER RANTZEN Dear YOB, Firstly, I'm cacked off with everyone taking the rise out of you. I'm sure you're quite a respectable gent. Secondly, I wish everyone out there would stop begging for the 100 quid. RUSSELL HAMMOND Northampton PS My cat has let rip. UGHQUICKPASSTHEDOMESTOS! Welcome to another award-winning edition of the most environmentally unsound letters page known to man: the one, the only. YOB'S MAILBAG. This is the place you'll find all the answers to your most burning questions and the odd slapping from the greatest name in games. If you reckon you're up to the standards set on these pages, or just want to know about games, fire off your wrinkly little writings to: SO WHAT IF I'LL NEVER MAKE MENSA? AT LEAST I MIGHT GET MY LETTER PRINTED IN YOB'S MAILBAG, COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. Remember, there's a quite ridiculously huge ONE HUNDRED POUNDS for the best letter of the lot and a kick in the quackers for the rest... 2 STO!? YOB: Sorry, is there any point to anything saying? When you were stuffing this letter into the envelope did you chuckle with glee at how clever you were or have you forgotten to plug yourself into the socket again? Why shouldn't everyone try for the money? The cash is up for grabs and this month it's been swiped but not by you. OP! DIA you In fact, this has to be the most pointless letter I've received in quite a while, and as such you receive Yob's Anal Retentive Award for proving yourself even less intelligent than a Butlins regular. PS Well, at least one of you has something interesting to say... APLID TWIT GECBUS. ACTUALLY OLD BEN PESTO 116 "


"Midland Livecash is available for 11-18 year olds. You must be 16 to receive the driving lesson vouchers and 17 to use them. OMIDLAND BANK plc, 1993. 25% OFF COMPUTER GAMES. JUST ONE MORE REASON TO OPEN A LIVECASH ACCOUNT. lies Hank Plank... 4 RUDE BIKE 339 100GGOOD SON SOUND When you open a Midland Livecash account, you get your own Livecash card, which gives you instant access to your money from more than 6,000 cash dispensers throughout the country. You also get a pack of discount vouchers, and for once, they're for things you'd actually want to buy. They'll save you up to  on many of the top Sega, Amiga or Nintendo games. They'll save you  on any Playhouse or Our Price Video. They'll save you money on all sorts of things from pizzas and cinema tickets, to clothes, CD's and cameras. And if you're over 16, they'll get you your first BSM driving lesson free, and save you  off the next five. Now that's what we call a savings account. For more information about Midland Livecash send this coupon to: Customer Information Service, Midland Bank plc, FREEPOST, Sheffield S1 1AY, or call us on 0345 626192 Monday to Friday 8.00am 8.00pm. NAME (MR/MISS/MS)* CVG/12 ADDRESS MIDLAND The Listening Bank member HSBC group POSTCODE "


"HE'S JUST FOUND SOMETHING NASTY INTHE CUPBOARD... MIL 36778894897 2347659874576 45767899987414590091241100 4681120044438 1120969255921 9907567986544 01666489 IL MILLI LILIL L . Brace yourself for the battle of your life. Since the arrival of the self acclaimed Emperor Boss the megalomaniac to top all maniacs, the galaxy will never be the same again. The once peaceful Nebulan inhabitants have become hardened warriors, sorcery sourcing wizards and mutated fighting machines. You must choose two champions to defeat the forces of evil in the four Barcode Nebulan Eras, before facing old misery guts himself The Boss. With the awesome Barcode Battler you can play against 120 computer generated foes or beat the pants off your simpleton friend. Create your own superheroes by cutting out the barcodes on everyday products. Who knows, the barcode on the magazine you are now reading may have more power than Arnie, Robo and Termie put together! "


"20000 BATTLER BARCODE WARRIOR-8  INSERT ARCODE COMMERCE CONFLICT MEGA BLASTER HP 3900  BARCODE BATTLER Spell points MAGIC SPELLS Get some magic points from enemy EffectLimitations increase own attack power Increase own attack power more Recover own Ufe Energy Recover more Life Energy Decrease enemy's detence power Increase own defence power BARCODE BATTLER NINJA STAR A lethal weapon which demands skill, patience and, most important, perfect timing. Send it spinning at the enemy when the Battler spirit is with you and the effect can be devastating. Time It wrong and the star may harmlessly bounce off! their defences. ENEMY-6 INSERT HP 50900 DARMAN CARD BATTLE SYSTEM L-POWER YUDU BY 3RUB R-POWER M ATTLERI L-BATTLE R-BATTLE BATTLE SIDE TIMIIIIIIIII 2002 0095438287654 67849003467 ON/OFF SELECT SET BARCODE BATTLER You've got everything you need to play all three modes, including an Instruction Booklet and Battle Manual in the Barcode Battler Pack. Which just leaves you to hotfoot it down to your local Barcode Battler store and demand: \"Free the power or the sad cashier gets it!\" * Free the power! CUT OUT AND TRY YOUR LUCK! "


"PENELOPE KEITH Dear YOB, I am writing this letter because I reckon you are safe from the pictures. questions? 1. You know in issue 138 where you had to tick boxes. How do I know if I've won or not? 2. In issue 140 can you please have more drawings of characters? 3. How much would you give the Master System? 4. How much would you give the PC Engine? 5. Why do Master System Joypads cost so much? 6. Why do Master System joypads break so easily? 7. What do you really look like? SORRYI FORGOTMYNAME Somewheresad AND THE DEBATE CONTINUES... ARE VIDEO GAMES Too VIOLENT? YOB: 1. You count up all the boxes you ticked, subtract the number of boxes you crossed, multiply by the number of boxes you left blank and divide by the size of your IQ. If your answer is the square root of the nearest cubed multiple of 16.8 you could be in with a winning chance. On the other hand, you could always invest in some exploratory cranial surgery to isolate the problem, and that's the course of action i'd recommend 2. Dear Stu, The utter stupidity of this question leaves me lost for words. You may wish to take over here... 3 and 4. Depends what they're prepared to do. 5. Because you keep buying them... 6. ...and keep forgetting to take them out when nature calls.  MAGIC 7. Let's put it this way: occasionally I earn a few FOUR Morris!! bob down at Madam u Tussaud's when the Axeman Executioner goes away for his annual overhaul. It's not much, know, but it beats doing this for a living... : T. BLACK DEKKI MARY WHITE HOUSE Dear YOB, ENOUGH! (I quite agree — YOB) Please, no more letters solely made up of questions. It was a laugh at first but the novelty has really worn off. There are more important things going on in the games world that no-one seems to give a damn about like the price of console games, lack of originality and most important the impact so-called experts have on games. (Y YOB) Like it or not, it's a fact. Remember the outcry over Night Trap which forced Sega to slap a 15 certificate on it? And now Mortal Kombat is subject to mass hysteria from concerned citizens. (A YOB) Yet nobody batted an eyelid at Prince of Persia (getting sliced in two) or at that oldie Barbarian. (W YOB) Remember chopping off your opponent's head and that little goblin dribbling it off screen? Don't let them get away with it! (N YOB) DEAN REILLY Birmingham mm CHAVENT 13 CSEEN Him 39 SOMEWHERE BEFOR wG YOB: If anybody out there would like to prove to Dean that they really do give a damn about the important points he has raised, write to me at the usual address. Are games too violent? Is he really as ridiculous as he sounds? Are Birmingham people thick or what? stamp featuring some crap old bloke and a crap postmark. I'd like to say that I'd rather blowtorch my backside than read another of his letters. You will think I'm joking but I'm not.PS All my friends say I should go round Ali's house and punch his lights out, but I don't agree with them. Lebanon is much too far away. KATE ADIE Dear YOB, I would like to justify the crapness of SF2 on the SNES/arcade. I'd rather eat my dog. I'd like to say that I'd burn my house just to play Super Mario Kart. You will think that I'm crazy but I'm not. ALI HMAIDAN Lebanon PS All my friends buy a SNES just for SF2, but I don't agree with them. They must get Super Mario Kart. YOB: I would like to justify the crapness of Ali's sad letter. It was crapply written on crap paper in a crap envelope with a crap 120 MARGARET THATCHER Dear YOB, Whilst looking through the August edition of GO! I noticed you were boasting about seeing Jurassic Park a full three weeks before us plebs. For the majority of readers this is true, but for me it isn't. Due to me living in Cyprus I am able to buy Jurassic Park, Cliffhanger, Last Action Hero and many other top films for  totally legally, if you know what I mean. So I've seen the film a whole three weeks before you plebs. Ha Ha! Yours non-plebby TONY BRENT Cyprus "


"SIENTO ini. 0° 0 :: VANESSA REDGRAVE Dear YOB, I would like to ask a couple of questions: 1. Which in your opinion is better: SNES or Mega Drive. 2. Is there a release date for SFIl on Mega Drive? If so, when? 3. Is the Menacer better than the Super Scope. 4. Are there any Rugby League games on either console? Thanks. JASON MORAN Darwin, Australia. PS Be serious when answering this. PSS Say Hi to the kids at Sanderson High School! # # 1 TB th YOB: 1. The SNES is technically a better machine, but the Mega Drive's got more games and, deep breath, I think Special Champion Edition Streetfighter is even better than Turbo. 2. Now. It's ace, by the way as fast as Turbo on the SNES and with a brand new Match Mode unseen anywhere else. 3. Nope. They're both as completely crap as each other. 4. Imagineer's International Rugby is pretty good on the SNES, and currently the best rugby game around. There should be a sequel coming soon as well. lack of support for the PC Engine in this and every magazine for as long as I can remember. If you want my opinion, NEC (makers of the Engine) are the finest console manufacturers in the world, but for whatever reason only die-hard gaming fans have ever really discovered them. Fans like us are a minority, and CVG has to take that into account when planning its issues. Although we'll keep covering the machine, big specials are currently out of the question. All this might change with the arrival of NEC's new 32bit monster, but we'll have to wait and see. 1 YOB:Your rather sad letter and details have been passed on to the Federal Bureau Of Copyright Theft, whose international agents assure me they intend to make an example of you by pressing for the stiffest penalty. By the time you read this, they may already have arrived. Please write from your cell at the labour camp and inform us once again how cool and clever you are. RAUS PIG! PONAD I DOH!.. SNAPI PRUNELLA SCALES S ME AND Dear YOB, YMY BIG Why the hell does (DELETED BY SPECIAL ORDER OF HM CUSTOMS AND Y MOUTH?. ? EXCISE, SOLIHULL BRANCH) eggs fry on a rock in Alaska! Oh well, I'd better go now. Keep up the good work, etc. BENJAMIN LEVY Allwoodley, Leeds DUEIL YOB: I have just one word to say to you: now, all I hope is that the Government Censors don't scratch it out before we're allowed to print the mag. They're a bunch of... you know, and they never spot anyD)))) thing. NORMA MAJOR Dear YOB, I have read CVG since October 1988 and have one complaint: why have you never done a complete guide to the PC Engine? The only feature I've seen was four pages in issue 137. Come on, how about a Complete Guide. DOUG ORR Burnley, Lancs. Po 0. O o YOB: If you're the regular reader you claim to be, you'd know I've been banging on about the criminal 06. G.uooo 121 "


". XTAUT ANN DIAMOND SEY! AND Dear YOB, NOTES TOU S lam one of those sad folk with some really crap questions. You're probably thinking 'Oh no, not another one' but I'm still gonna ask them. 1. Which is better: the Game Boy or Game Gear? 2. My mate has got a Mega Drive and I have got an Amiga. Could you tell him that Amigas lick the pants off Bw Mega Drives because he doesn't think so. 3. Could you tell me the location of Bombay Bob's? 4 Questions c2200 4. Is there any Mickey Mouse games coming out for the Amiga? was 9. 5. What exactly is SF Turbo? 79 6. Is there going to be a new Amiga advert because the last one was worse than the Bold Colour ad. 7. What happened to Tim Boone? 8. In issue 139 you said to Daniel Jones that Mario 4 is better than Sonic 2, but I think Mario 4 is a right pile of horse cack. 9. Is there going to be a new series of BAD Influence? If so, when? 10. Is Sonic 1 better than Sonic 2 on the Game Gear. 11. Is there really 100 quid for the best letter or do you just say that so people will write in? 12. If there really is a 100 quid, give it to me YOB old pal. D BRITTON Leeds PS My brother thinks you're dead funny, Il shooter as soon as you can because it's brill. 3. 94 yards North of the public convenience in Farringdon Lane and an equally convenient 10 minutes from central London's Tropical Disease Research Laboratory. 4. I think there are a few 'edutainment packages featuring the squeaky rodent, but they're a bit cacky and best avoided. Capcom holds the rights to Disney arcade games, and it's doubtful they'll develop anything for the Amiga unless somebody sublicenses it, which is unlikely. 5. It's this month's OAP Magic Word. Just approach any sleeping person of pensionable age, get right up to their ear and bellow \"SF Turbo!\" as loud as you can. Provided your parents are nearby you'll receive the reward you so richly deserve. 6. I sincerely hope not. 7. Paul Rand murdered him. 8. Well, by law you are entitled to your insignificant opinion. 9. See question 6. 10. Y-up. 11. Yes. 12. No. PS Your brother is probably as confused as you. Get him to write in with a dozen stupid questions and we'll hold a contest to discover which of you is thickest. Mark your envelope \"Not Brain of Britton\" at the usual address... spia Discuss BARBARA CARTLAND YOB: 1. Game Boy. It's got more games, they're miles better Zelda is completely skill it's easier to carry around and the batteries last longer. Who needs cacky colour when the games are as good as this? 2. Hmm. I'll tell him this: the Mega Drive's got some unbeatable games Gauntlet 4, Sonic 2 and Special Edition Streetfighter but the Amiga is still a kicking machine with some incredible games which get better all the time. Check out Sensible's new World War Dear YOB, On Flashback on the Mega Drive cannot get off Level 1. I have gone to the energiser but when I go to the machine that says you need a fully magnetised cart it doesn't work. What am I doing wrong? STEPHEN KESSEL Ardrishag Scotland YOB: Living? CVG CONSOLE CONNECTIONS TELFAX 0736 331131 SEGA MEGADRIVE (UK) SUPER NINTENDO (UK/JAP) SEGA MEGADRIVE 2 + ALLADIN .99 SEGA MEGADRIVE 2 + NO GAME .99 ASTERIX...... ...........99 STREETFIGHTE 2 F1 RACING...................99 BASEBALL 2020...........99 .99 GUNSTAR HEROES.....99 BOB ..99 + 6 BUTTON PAD BULLS VS LAKERS.......99 .99 JURASSIC PARK ..........99 ALADDIN BUBSY ...99 .99 LANDSTALKER. ..99 CHAKAN... ...99 SONIC SPINBALL CHAMPIONSHIP PRO ..99 MIG 29. .99 .99 CHUCK ROCK 2............99 MORTAL COMBAT........99 COLLEGE FOOTBALL .99 SPECIALS NHL 94... ROAD RASH 2 ..99 COOL SPOT ..................99 CYBERNATOR ..............CALL .99 RANGER X. .99 ANOTHER WORLD DAVIS CUP TENNIS .....99 .99 ROCKET KNIGHT .........99 DRAGONS FURY ..........99 STREETS OF RAGE 2 EA SOCCER.. ..CALL .99 ULTIMAT SOCCER .......99 ECCO. ..99 + MANY MORE CALL WIMBLEDON................99 SNES USA SCART .99 + 1 GAME .99 SNES UK + MARIO ALL STARS .99 ALIENS 3.......................99 STAR WARS.................99 ASTERIX.........................99 SUPER BOMBERMAN STRIKER ........................99 BATMAN RETURNS......99 + MULTITAP SF 2 TURBO..................99 BATTLETOADS .............99 .99 . .99 BUBSY............. .99 ZOMBIES ATE MY TOP GEAR 2. ...CALL CYBERNATOR ..............99 NEIGHBOURS KEEGANS PLAYER MGR.42.99 .99 DESERT STRIKE ..........99 CLIFF HANGER..............CALL BATMAN RETURNS LOST VIKINGS..............99 .99 FLASHBACK...................CALL JURASSIC PARK ..........99 PILOT WINGS UK SENSIBLE SOCCER......CALL MORTAL COMBAT........99 .99 SEVENTH GUEST (RPG) .99 ROCK N ROLL RACING.99 LEMMINGS ...CALL SPECIALS SPECIALS CALIFORNIA GAMES...... ...99 TOM & JERRY.. .99 DOOMSDAY WARRIOR.... .99 COOL WORLD .99 OUTLANDER... ..........29.99 OBLITERATER PAD.... ..99  .  ......... SE 2 USED USED UK/USA CHRISTMAS OFFER BATTLE SQUADRON............. IMMORTAL CASTLEVANIA....... .........24 SUPER SOCCER. CASTLE OF ILLUSION..... ..... POPULOUS  FREE SNES/MEGADRIVE GAME DRAGONS LAIR .................... S STRIKE GUNNER.  CHUCK ROCK ....... SPLATTERHOUSE 2............ . WITH ALL ORDERS OVER  JOE & MAC ......... ...... AXELAY.  CYBERCOP . STREETS OF RAGE  KRUSTYS FUNHOUSE.......... .. STREETFIGHTER 2.  ENDS 31.12.93 LEMMINGS S GHOULS & GHOSTS.  DESERT STRIKE.. ... TAZMANIA... .. POPULOUS .. SUPER ALESTE......  ECCO... ....... WORLD OF ILLUSION....  PART EXCHANGE SIM CITY....... .. BARTS NIGHTMARE.........  EURO CLUB SOCCER.. ...... WWF. SPIDERMAN  .. WING COMMANDER. F22........... WELCOME ...... SMASH TV... ........... MEGA CD UK ..................229.99 LETHAL ENFORCERS. ...CALL NEO GEO GAMES MEGADRIVE 2 UK + MEGA CD 2 | NIGHT TRAP .99 WORLD HEROES .............99 UK + ROAD AVENGER .99 SEWER SHARK .99 NEO GEO SENGOKU 2... ........... ...99 ATARI JAGUAR BATMAN RETURNS ...........99 SONIC CD ......... .99 3 COUNT BOUT ............ ..99 SPIDERMAN ....... .99 ECCO THE DOLPHIN .........99 ....99 FATAL FURY 2..................99 CALL INXS MUSIC VIDEO..........99 THUNDER HAWK. ...99 CALL USED GAMES  RETAIL & MAIL ORDER: CONSOLE CONNECTIONS, UNIT 2 , OLD BAKE HOUSE LANE, CHAPEL STREET, PENZANCE CORNWALL TR18 4AE MAIL ORDER HOURS: 10AM 9PM MONDAY FRIDAY 11AM 5PM SATURDAY SUNDAY VISA NEXT DAY DELIVERY NATIONWIDE .50 GAMES  CONSOLES ( 3-DAY) THIS CHRISTMAS ORDER WITH CONFIDANCE FROM AN ESTABLISHED SHOP 122 "


"DADD Dago SNES by MINDSCAPE .99 HELLO PREVIEW 36 JANUARY This is where little Alfie starts his adventure. We wish him cluck DED Stage of Development 95% Complete ALFRED CHICKEN beak that works a pneumatic drilli Jungle fever hits Alfred Chicken. Alf has a plucky plan to find his friends. We wish him cluck. up his feathers. He's armed with a beak that works a pneumatic drill that can kill the clockwork mice, worms and anything else that drifts around the screen. Although Alfred doesn't move particularly fast he is able to fly, which speeds things up considerably. No road yolks The SNES version seems to be far more playable than the Amiga original. The graphics are more varied and the levels have a more compact feel to them. In addition you get to peck at a new character called a Meka Chick Boss. It's bigger than something you might consider to be big, so basically its bloody hard. He turns up throughout the game and gets harder each time. We like what we have seen of Alfred on the SNES so far, and once we get our grubby little mitts on the whole Kentucky Fried caboodle we'll give you our final verdict. ou'll not find CVG resorting to any cheap chicken yokes; no not us, we'll leave that to the other sad mags! Alfred Chicken's having a quite a year. After entering the Christchurch by-election earlier this year he's since appeared in his own game which has gone down pretty well with the clucky computer press. Now he's winging his way over to the SNES so if you've not read about the game before here's your chance to discover just what all the feather ruffling's been about Alfred's mission (should you choose to accept it) is to rescue Billy Egg and all his yolk-like friends who have been captured by the evil Meka Chickens by taking part in a good old fashioned platform romp. Alfred, being the battery powered hen he is, has a number of tricks Alfred looks bewildered in this strange puzzle. ca un BCAA ABAB TE Alfred feeling a little edgy ( ho ho). Alfred puts a spanner in the works to complete his mission. 23 "


"AMIGA/PC SNAPPERAZZI by THE SUN .99 PREVIEW Sosn DECEMBER RELEASE Stage of Development 90% Complete DO D000 Fancy being a paparazzi photographer? Well now you can join The Sun's staff and do just that... OOOUSO Te 16 002790 xxxx ONLOG 391226 Now there's a far-out backdrop is ever there was one! 'Snap' up the money by photographing it. napperazzi is an ace paparazzi photographer, and is also the central character in The Sun's 'sensational venture into the world of computer games. Snazzi, as he's known to his mates down at Wapping, must collect rolls of film to take photos of celebs. You know, the kind you see of Madonna, Take That and the CVG staff out on the raz in The Sun everyday (if you buy it that is, and Rand does so that's how we know). By snapping the stars Snazzi is rewarded with cash. Extra money is eamed by collecting jewels and treasure. which is sub-divided into three parts. The ground level is where Snazzi must take photos of three major celebs. After this is achieved it's off underground where parts of a spaceship need to be found. When Snazzi has enough pieces gathered then he can resurface and jump into his spaceship where it's time to chase and snap three more major celebs As you might have guessed, Snapperazzi is sponsored by Domino's Pizza. The star seems happy about it. 8:03 000000 Freddie Starr This tabloid-type fun platform game is set over seven levels, each of Gotcha! Snapperazzi also features 16 random sub-levels. These take the form of simple reaction and memory tests and include a shooting gallery (where you take pot shots at a variety of major celebs), and Snap (yes, the card game) where celebs must be matched in pairs. Each sub-game lasts a minute and the idea is to clock up as much cash as possible before snapping back into the game. The game's nearly complete so keep an eye out for it and the review around Christmas. One of the Page Three girls you've got to rescue! Is that star attached to Snazzi or what? And why is the moon looking at you in a funny way? "


"| PREVIEW PREVIEW F117 MEGA DRIVE  ELECTRONIC ARTS TBA * 3 ZELDA GAME BOY  NINTENDO .99 For Is it a bird? Is it a plane? Erm, yes, it is. Not exactly a barrel of laughs. 155 $100 S200 Saldo SODE CADO SBD CEDO nce upon a time there was a mystical island of Koholint where you were found washed up on shore after your ship was wrecked during a terrible thunder storm. The enchanted island was unique for its massive giant egg which was crowned the central mountain. Legend has it that a mythical creature, the Wind Fish, lies sleeping inside the egg. OK, plot over with, basically your task is to unravel the mystery of the egg, as well as finding your sword and other belongings which were washed ashore. 450 SIDEHINDER: 2 TOTTON Apie 90e une RPG action that's looking good. DEHINDER BO9F Bandits at 12 o'clock! Arm your Sidewinders and let rip! ew from EA and the team behind the incredible helicopter flight/combat simulation THX comes F117, a game based around yes, you guessed it, the F117 Stealth Fighter. Using a souped-up version of the THX engine, F117 fea No medals for you. tures everything you'd expect from a combat flight game on Mega Drive There are the customary stack of and you don't have to muck about outside views for you to watch the with untold amounts of keys! action from, including spotter plane You're given a number of mis and a view from the enemy's cocksions to fly in a variety of world pit. Select different weaponry to do hotspots, with most of them calling the job, and make sure you don't upon you to destroy set targets such get lost by following your position as enemy bunkers, SCUD missile on the map. We'll be taking a more launchers and other attack planes. in-depth look at F117 in a short The beauty of Stealth is that the while at the moment it promises to enemy can't see you until you're very be very interesting. close to them, giving you the perfect Paul Rand opportunity to sneak up, blast away and then scuttle back out of the danger zone before the bad guys know what's hit 'em. bil | R . Look out for a review next ish! ... ATA @ 9 The fantasy island is full of castles, palaces, dungeons and nine labyrinths hidden under moving rocks. But you can't enter a dungeon unless you find the hidden keys to unlock the door. There are also loads of powerful monsters and creatures, as well as a plethora of magical items and weapons including a sword, shield, power bracelet and magic powder to help you round the mazetype island. As if you haven't got enough to look for, there are also treasure chests and musical instruments to collect, which help you solve the riddle of the Wind Fish. There are a lot of people you'll meet on the island, including the wise old man, some kids and shopkeepers, who offer advice on helping you complete the adventure. If you can work out the complicated map this should keep you intrigued for ages. And if you give up you can always save the game so you don't have to start right from the beginning which is cool. And, like all superheroes, if you complete the riddle you'll get to find the beautiful Princess Zelda. Look out for a full review soon. Amanda Tipping NOVEMBER RELEASE F117 looks a treat! NEW YEAR RELEASE Contact Nintendo (0329 822565) for more information. 125 Don't let the BAA know. "


"UTER AND COMPUTS Surrey Hereford CVG MEGADRIVE 2-SONIC MEGADRIVE 2. ALADDIN MEGADRIVE 1 STREET 11.2 CONTROL PADS 2 CONTROL PADS FIGHTER 2.2 CONTROL .00 .00 PADS .00 MEGADRIVE TITLES MEGADRIVE TITLES continued MEGA CD TITLES Micro Machines Mortal Kombat Busy Cool Spot Jurassic Park SF 11 Oct) 52.00 Rocket Knight Ady...... 38.00 ack Hole Assault to the Rescue Mig 29 ickey & Donald General Choas SAME DAY DESPATCH ON CREDIT CARD ORDERS SUPER NINPLACED BY 4PM WE PROVE LOW PRICES DON'T HAVE TENDO TO MEAN POOR SERVICE PART EXCHANGE WELCOME GAMES AT k Boys ALL GAMES INCLUDE UK | GAMEBOY, NES AND SUPER | BEST Tiny Toons special offer)......28.00 || P&P 55 ON CONSOLES NES AT SIMILAR DISCOUNTS PRICES MEGABYTES TEL: 081 335 4224 SHOP PRICES 22 CENTRAL ROAD, WORCESTER PARK, SURREY MAY VARY 8888 888888888 TEL/FAX: 0474 321838 GAMES  CONSOLES 32 BIT MACHINE LTO SPECIALISTS AMIGA CD NOW IN STOCK  NEO GEO  TURBO DUO . 3DO SEGA & SNES MAIL ORDER   SECOND HAND GAMES BOUGHT & SOLD   PART EXCHANGE WELCOME  Sonic CD Hoppers Specia NOW IN STOCK. LARGE SELECTION OF SECOND HAND NEO GEO GAMES Yorkshire Ireland SHAMROCK BATMAN RETURNS .50 BATMAN RETURNS CONSOLES PAL/SNES only  Tel from UK: 010 353 61 364193 Tel from Ireland: 061 364193 Sega Megadrive Super Nintendo Jungle Strike Streetfighter Il TurDO TUS/Jap) Cool Spot.... Cybernator (Pai) ... Bomberman Tap (US/Jap) Micro Machines Royal Rumble (Pal) Jurassic Park Bubsy (Pal) Pocket knight adventures  Mario A Stars Pai) Mortal Kombat Alladin Pal) James Pond 3..... Call Battletoads (Pa). .99 There are loads more available please call if you don't see what you want. SEGA NINTENDO MACHINES BOUGHT AND SOLD SECOND HAND PART EXCHANGE AVAILABLE Megadrive 2 $110 SNES Starwing/Mario All Stars 130 LARGE SECOND HAND SELECTION AVAILABLE MEGADRIVE GAMES FROM (15 SNES GAMES FROM 125 EXCHANGE YOUR GAMES FOR DIFFERENT ONES FROM ONLY 13 + P&P ADDRESS: 23 TULLYVARRAGA CRESENT, SHANNON, CO CLARE, EIRE WE ARE OPEN 9am TO 12 midnight 7 days a week. Prices subject to change without notice. Mail order only Cicci 8888888 8888888 6 CLEVELAND STREET, DONCASTER SOUTH YORKSHIRE DNI 3EF DISTRIBUTION . Yourshire's No.1 Console Retailer . imports Arriving Daily. OFF ANY GAME WITH THIS VOUCHER Voucher valid until the end of February 1994 ( off full RRP of game)  AU SAME VISA STOCKIST OF SNES, NEO GEO, MASTER SYSTEM & GAMEBOY. VISIT OUR SHOP FOR ALL YOUR CONSOLE NEEDS. FOR MAIL ORDER PLEASE ADD  P&P STOCKIST OF MANGA VIDEO Essex London View Passat CANES GAMES UNIT 3, SEVENWAYS PARADE, WOODFORD AVENUE ILFORD, ESSEX IG2 6JX (NR GANTS HILL STATION) TEL/FAX: 081-551 7541 SNES Megadrive Neo Geo SNES USA ....99 Megadrive 2 .99 Neo Geo Flashback ......99 Samuri Showdown World Heroes ...99 Robocop vs Term... ..... 44.99 Viewpoint Actraiser 2 ..call Turtles Tournament............99 Fatal Fury Spec.. Aladdin EA Soccer Art of Fighting 2.... Empire Strikes Back Terminator CD. ...call Miracle Adventure ..... LARGE RANGE OF CONSOLE HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE AVAILABLE WE ALSO STOCK JAP ANIMATION VIDEOS AND MODELS (SF II, DB 2) NEW AGE COMPUTER GAMES & CONSOLES 12 TOOTING HIGH STREET LONDON SW17 ORG THE LATEST OFFICIAL & IMPORT GAMES FOR YOUR CONSOLE MEGADRIVE MASTER SYSTEM GAME GEAR SUPER NES GAMEBOY WE BUY OR SELL YOUR SECOND HAND GAMES OPEN MON-SAT 10.00am TO 6.00pm TEL: 081 767 2575 $59 Sonic Spinball .99 .99 .99 {call call ..call "


"OUTER AND COMPUTS GVG Bean NYERS IDE VIDEO GA O GAMES VIDE Lancs * MERRY CHRISTMAS * from Cambridge NEW TO CAMBRIDGE... Tel: 0229 121192 ZEAL CONSOLES  PC ENGINE . SEGA MEGADRIVE GENISIS  SNES  FAMICOM  MEGA CD  Shop Address Boundary Garage, Burnley Road, Colne, Lancs BB8 8LF | CALL NOW 0282 871093 COMPETITION win any game from stock free! Simply send your name, address plus machine owned you to the shop address on funHOUSE Fun HOUSE The largest display of games and consoles in Cambridgeshire NOW OPEN Neo Geo Super Nes Airbourne Ranger Dracula Jurassic Park King Arthurs World Pop N Twinbee PTO SF 2 Turbo Super Air Diver Super Bomberman Top Gear 2 Mega Drive Dune 2 Gunstar Heroes Micro Machines Pro Striker Flintstones Jurassic Park General Chaos SF 2 CE Zombies ate my... Wizzy & Dizzy Mega CD Dracula Thunderhawk Monkey Island Keio Flying Squadron F1 (Soon) Burning Fist (Soon) GEO 1.CAN.G .O NEO OW Also Available Neo Geo Hardware & software Amiga CD32 Hard ware & Software CLUB WNER .C. NEO GEO NEO GEO THE ORIGIONAL... 081 904 0088 OWNERS THE FIRST... 081 904 0088 CLUB THE BEST... 081 904 0088 CALL 081 904 0088 NOW! BRAND NEW CONSOLES AND GAMES AVAILABLE THROUGH THE CLUB AT THE CHEAPEST PRICES IN THE UK. EXCHANGE AND SECOND HAND SERVICE AVAILABLE THROUGH THE CLUB For all enquiries relating to new membership please send a large SAE to: 10 Alverstone Road, Wembley, Middlesex HA9 9SB Between 6pm and 10pm call 0831 241 518 Imports Also stock e d Mail Ord er welcome Monday Friday 11.00 am 8.00 pm Saturday 9.30 am 6.00 pm Unit 11 Laundry Lane, Cherry Hinton Road, Cambridge Kent Scotland OVER 200_USEO GAMES IN STOCK CONSOLE EXCHANGE 3 14 Medway Meadows, East Peckham, Nr Tonbridge, Kent The UK's only NEO GEO Specialists Mail Order Line: 0622 871544 or 0831 825068 NEW SOFTWARE USED SOFTWARE Samuri Showdown.......... ..... Viewpoint.......... .. World Heroes II ......... ............. World Heroes II.. ............... Viewpoint ............ ........... Sold Out Fatal Fury II... ............. 3 Count Bout........... ............. Last Resort .......... ............. Art of Fighting ................................. Mutation Nation... Ring for further prices Ring for further prices If the game you require is not listed, please ring one of our sales lines to check its availablity. Coming soon for Neo Geo: Fatal Fury, Art of Fighting, Top Hunter Please ring for details of: 3DOCrash 'N' Burn & Atari Jaguar 64 bit . 4 6 3 2 2 1 1 7 MEGADRIVE  MEGA CD. SUPER NES.  MASTER SYSTEM NINTENDO GAMEBOY. BUY SELL EXCHANGE MON WED 2PM 10PM CONSOLE EXCHANGE, TOP LEFT BLOCK TUE THURS 10AM-6PM SAT 2PM 6 AM 58 CROWN STREET, INVERNESS IV2 3AZ EXCELLENT RANGE "


"MEGA DRIVE W i n t er by US GOLD LOLYMPICS .99 PREVIEW DECEMBER RELEASE US Gold has a years-old tradition of publishing Olympic-themed games with a compilation feel to them. Ice woman Amanda Tipping gets her ski mittens on the latest.... Stage of Development 95% Completed an't afford to go to the Olympics this winter? Don't worry, let them come to you in the form of the Mega Drive game which is based upon the official 1994 Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway. During the 12-month design of the game, negotiations have taken place with the organisers of the Olympics. The game is now a licensed product of the XVII Olympic Winter Games in Norway, which take place on February 12 and last for 16 days. iler ammer 194 This is not the way to ski. It's not big and it's not clever. You've got to be fit to try your skill at the biathlon. WARS But instead of standing in the freezing cold watching the games live you can relive the events and have a front seat ticket in the comfort of your own home. The heat is on the ice as the skaters race round the track. Realism There are 10 spectacular events, including bobsleighing, speed skating, ski jumps and even moguls in this game for one to four players, which should appeal to sporting enthusiasts of all ages. And Winter Olympics is very realistic -you can even be easily disqualified. Attention had been paid to the graphics especially the way the skiers jump, twist and crash. There's even a nice touch with the trees blowing in the wind so the skier knows which way to jump to get the best score. In true Olympic fashion the game starts at the prestigious opening ceremony with the skier zooming down a steep slope holding the torch, until he comes to rest at the bottom of the hill where all the players are stan parade in front of a crowd while a band plays. It's quite smart actually and there's even a closing ceremony to finish it off, there's no Desmond Lynam though. Ladies and Gentlemen take off your mittens and give a warm welcome to all the contestants of the 1994 Winter Olympics. May they \"pics. may mey light your fire too!!! 128 "


"Options There are 10 events to choose from. Here we see the initial, crosscountry stages of the biathlon. Note the shooters on the back.... If you don't want to compete in the Full Olympics to start with (if snow's not your forte), then you can play the Mini Olympics, which omit the opening and closing ceremonies and have a smaller number of events to take part in. There's a training session for beginners, too, where you can improve your technique and speed on all events. Winter Olympics can be played in eight languages and typical names from each country have been selected to add that international flavour, if you should choose to play a character from one of the many participating countries, which include Sweden, Norway, Portugal, France, Spain, Germany and Italy (there are 16 in total). The publishers, US Gold actually wrote to the sponsors and asked for a list of surnames from abroad just to ensure accuracy. Looks like this might be a classy addition to the genre. bos THE EVENTS: SKI JUMP: Build up plenty of speed as you plough down the hill. Don't try any fancy manoeuvres though because you'll land flat on your face and be disqualified. DOWNHILL: Dodge the flags and try to steer down the slippery slopes in this fastmoving event. To pick up extra speed you can crouch down, but don't go too fast or you will end up crashing into clumps of trees. LETME 9 0 Another version of the downhill event but on a differ ent track. This one's slightly more difficult. BOB SLEIGH: Good team spirit is needed in this fast downhill icy race, don't leave your team mate behind. GIANT SLALOM: Yet another downhill track with bends-aplenty and it's not at all easy! At least there's the crowd to cheer you along in case you get into difficulty.... SLALOM: Fed up with the flags yet? Well don't be because here's yet another alpine track to keep you from toppling over on your skis. If you ski into difficulty in any of the above four events try and keep your eyes on the tracks in the snow made by other contestants. They can guide you in the right direction. LUGE: Strapped firmly into your sleigh, steer with precision down the course which spirals down the icy mountain. This one will sort out the novices from the experts so stay on track at all times. BIATHLON: This one's a bit tricky and it's very exhausting. First of all you have to ski down a slope within a certain time limit, using your ski poles to guide you. Then it's straight over to a shooting range where you have to hit as many targets as you can. FREESTYLE MOGULS: One of my favourite events despite its stupid name. Steer your way down the extremely fast moving and icy track. If you go too far up the ramp you can roll over and ice sprays all over the TOM Higgins 1. Matsuoka place. It's a little unrealistic: in the real Mcoy the sleighs aren't built to crash but, hey, it makes the game all the more exciting. SHORT TRACK SPEED SKATING: This is a real buttonbashing event where you have to skate as fast as you can round the rink. There are four laps and four contestants. At the end of every event the results are displayed on a scoreboard. If any of the players win something, a medal ceremony takes place and the details are displayed on a separate table. There are also current Olympic and World records to view. Pretty neat, eh? From the sneak preview we have seen of Winter Olympics it looks like it could well do justice to the licence. 129 "


"PC/AMIGA by MINDSCAPE TBA PREVIEW Blast off to the future the inertia effect is unlike Ple anything in the game! Connon OUT NEW YEAR 1JEN Cor blimey! One of the outside views in Evasive Action. Stage of Development 70% Complete EVASIVE Want to fly the century's best combat planes and beyond? Mindscape gives you the chance! It's always good to have an outside view. LESTRINE SEUT SCREEN MOLE hen it comes to flight sims, there's little argument that the PC is king. But what if you want to just storm in there, all guns blazing, without having to worry about which of the eight million keys raises your flaps? Enter stage left, Mindscape with its brand new flight combat game, Evasive Action! Play Single Play Options ishes weapons or repairs damage done to your plane. And it's not just a one-player game, either; play in split-screen mode (surely a first for a flight game), or link up via modem or cable to another PC and keep your screen to yourself great fun. We've seen a 70% completed version of Evasive Action, and it's looking the part. Graphics are really something, especially the shaded planes which whizz around the screen with frightening smoothness on a 486 (be careful, 386 owners it won't be as smart on your machine). Where this game comes into its own is in twoplayer mode though battling away on your own would become a little tiring after a while, but shove a mate at the keyboard and you'll really have a battle on your hands. Look out for a full review soon! Top-hole The player can fly in one of four time zones World Wars 1 or 2, 1993 and in the future, with relevant aircraft to suit the scenario. Then it's up, up and away into the wide blue yonder to take on the enemy! This is pure, seat-of-your-pants dogfighting, and the different planes react to your controls as they would in real life. There's not just shooting to be done, though, you can perform stunts, successful completion of which replenChoose which plane you wish to fly your mission in. All guns blazing in the future scenario looks good! "


"CONSOLE CONCEPTS GENESIS SUPER NINTENDO Who are Console Concepts? We are a company that specialiases in video game console imports. We were one of the first companies to import the PC Engine, quickly followed by the Sega Megadrive (12 months before its release in the UK) and Super Famicom. We have been selling by mail order since 1988 and you are guaranteed fast and effiecient service. SEGA SALES HOTLINE 0782 712759 CONSOLE CONCEPTS, THE VILLAGE, NEWCASTLE-UNDERLYME, STAFFS ST5 10B Console Concepts mail order and shop have been established since 1988. Approximately 50,000 orders ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM have been processed. Please call for more details. Our second shop is now open in Hanley Town Centre. We MEGA also stock PC Engine, Lynx, Neo Geo, Game boy, Game Gear games and consoles. P&P .50 per game,  next day delivery per console. MEGA D Bor why not give us a try you may be surprised! 3DO NOW IN STOCK (LTD NUMBERS) NOW IN STOCK THE ATARI 64 BIT JAGUAR (Diregarom the USA) MACHINE SPECIFICATION We are now recieving small shipments of the 32 bit 3DO. The system comes complete with 7 button joypad, scart lead, power supply, Crash & Burn game. 16 Meg RAM 17 Button Controller RGB Output 24 Bit Graphics 16 Million Colours Better than CD quality sound CIFICATS GAMES 32 Bit Risc Processor & Co Processor 3 MB RAM Double Speed CD ROM Drive DSP Sound (16 Bit) 12 million colours *Soon MPEG 1 & 2 Total Eclipse Road Rash John Madden Jurassic Park Star Trek Next Generation (Call for prices & availablity) 109 This is the machine to give Sega & Nintendo a run for their money. Features to include 3 processors, 64 bit Rise Processor, 32 bit Rise Chip with built in DSP + 16 Mhz 68000 chip. The machine has built in texture mapping, scaling, rotation and distortion. The machine can move at an amazing 850 million pixels a second (that's 835 mps faster than the 3DO). The machines main processor runs twice as fast as the 3DO. GAMES ADD ONS TO COME INCLUDE Crescent Galaxy Cybormorph Kasumi Ninja Raiden Tempest 2000 F1 Jaguar Challenge Alien Vs Predator Dino Dudes Tiny Toons Modem Interface CD ROM Double Speed Drive MPeg Il Card for Full Motion Video (20 UK software houses developing software now!) The machine comes complete with power supply + 1 pad, works on Seart Tv (RGB Compatible) and comes with 1 game. GENESIS ADVENTURE SNES GAMES SNES ROLE PLAYING Aero the Acrobat Dungeon Master Aero the Acrobat Aladdin Equinox Actraiser 2 Lord of the Rings Alien Vs Predator Aladdin Ogre Battle Batman Returns CD Paladin's Quest Alien Vs Predator Bubsy Shadowrun Bubsy Secret of Mana Cliffhanger Seventh Saga Capt America & Cool Spot Ultima 6 Avengers Dashing Desperados Cliffhanger SNES SIMULATION Ecco the Dolphin CD Cool Spot Dracula CD Battle Cars Claymates Flashback Choplifter 3 EVO Flintstones Falcon 3.0 Flashback King of Rally Gunstar Heroes Mechwarrior Goof Troop Gauntlet Micro Machines Jurassic Park Hook Nigel Mansell WC Racing Kitaro's Adventure Pacific Theatre Jurassic Park Lawnmower Man Operation Jurassic Park CD Rock & Roll Racing Mario & Wario Night Trap CD Super Air Diver Mr Nutz Super Chase HQ Rebel Assault CD Plok Super Of Road: Baja Rocket Knight Adventure Top Gear 2 Pocky the Rodent Shinobi 3 Sunset Riders SNES SPORTS Sonic the Hedgehog 3 Super Empire Spiderman & the X-Men Bull Vs Blazers Strikes Back Spiderman Vs Kingpin CD Legends of the Ring Super Marion All Madden Football 94 Splatterhouse 3 Stars Mecarobot Golf Strider 2 NBA Jam Session Super Widget Tiny Toons NHL Jam Session T2: Arcade Game Zombies Ate My Neighbours NHL Hockey 94 T2: Judgement Day NHL Stanley Cup Time Slip Tecmo Super Bowl GENESIS STRATEGY WWF Royal Rumble Zombies Ate My Neighbours SNES FIGHTING Aero Blz Virtual Soccer General Chaos Art of Fighting Monopoly Clayfighter Fatal Fury Sonic Spinball CD Fatal Fury: 2 Shining Force Final Fight 2 Mortal Kombat GENESIS KICK & PONCH Sengoku Streettighfer Turbo Ed TMNT Tournament Double Dragon 3 Fighter Fatal Fury World Heroes Fatal Fury 2 SNES HARDWARE Final Fight CD King of the Monsters Capcom tick Super Nintendo System Mortal Kombat Pro Action Replay Streetfighter II Ch Ed Super Advantage & TURBODU ESEGAO Air Zonk TURBO GRAFIX Alien Crush Bomberman '93 Bonk In Turbo Duo System Bloody Wolf Maddern FB (SCD) Cadash Wizardry Chase HQ Wizardry 2 Cotton (SCD) Darkwing Duck Dead Moon Dragon Slayer (SCD) Dungeon Master (SCD) Exile (CD) Fighting Street (CD) Ghost Manor Hit the Ice JJ & Jelf Legendary Axe Legendary Axe II Legend of Hero Tomna Loom (SCD) Lords of Thunder (SCD) Magical Chase Military Madness New Adventure Island Ordyne Parasol Stars Prince of Persia Riot Zone Shadow of the Beast (SCD) Splatterhouse Sherlock Holmes (SCD) Sim Earth (SCD) Soldier Blade It Came From the Desert Time Cruise Valis III (SCD) "


"SNES by JVC TBA IDE PREVIEW JARRASCO CHRISTMAS RELEASE Magic Boy should be following that arrow to the right! Stage of Development 95% Complete TODOMOM URUS Fishies, blobby things and clouds galore! levels in all to wade through, made of of lands such as Plastic Planes and Water World. We were quite impressived see if the finished article lives up to our expec tations next month. sorts of surprises in Magic Boy, among them disappearing platforms, slippery walkways and time itself because, once you've captured some baddies, if you don't grab the rest quickly enough, the ones you've got escape and roam the stage once more! There are an impressive 64 Could it be magic for JVC with this nifty SNES puzzler? utesy games, out of fashion? My lord, no or at least, not according to JVC, whose follow-up title from the brilliant Super Empire Strikes Back (reviewed last issue 94%) is a deceptively addictive platformer very much in the Bubble Every dog has its day, and this Bobble mould. one looks like it's about to. Now that's magic You take on the role of Magic Boy, whose task it is to search the levels and rid them of monsters by first shooting them and then depositing them in boxes at the bottom of the screen. Sounds simple? The basic essence of the game is, but once you get down to it, you'll find that nothing could be Leap, sproing and dodge that further from the truth! dodgy-looking bird! As you'd expect, there are all MOD/ The platform you're standing on is safe, but the blue ones crumble under your feet, so be careful. 132 "


"SUPER NINTENDO ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM JUM FORWARD BALIS FORWARD BACK DEFENSE OFFENSIVE CROUCH DEFENSIVE CROUCH CROUCH WER True arcade action. You'll find that the only thing missing from our new Super Advantage is the coin slot. Okay, so we added an extra long cord. Still, it's about as close to an authentic arcade joystick as you can get, anywhere. The layout's familiar, and the construction's tough enough to handle the most challenging street fight or the ultimate battle for the universe. If you prefer control pads to joysticks, you'll love the asciiPad (also pictured). Either way, our controllers have a few features you won't find in the arcadesstate of the art effects designed specifically for today's coolest games. Special effects like Turbo Fire, Auto Turbo-even Slow Motion. The Super Advantage and asciiPad, for the Super NES. IT'S HOW TO WIN. SUPER ADVANTAGE Nintendo Nintendo SERVANTEE U The asciiPad. Small size. Big punch. AsciiWARE  ASCII Entertainment Software, Inc. PO Box 6639. San Mateo, CA 94403 USA, ASCIIWARE, and asciiPad are trademarks of ASCII Entertainment Software, Inc. All rights reserved. Nintendo, Super Nintendo Entertainment System. Super Advantage, and the official seals are trademarks of Nintendo "


"AMIGA by BLOODHOUSE .99 PREVIEW OOONTUOo NOVEMBER RELEASE Stage of Development 90% Complete The main game screen in all its glory. Here you can see one of the end-of-level guardians it's a right git I can tell you! To proceed, you have to hang on in there and do a real mean spot of baddy blasting. 24. 0900 500 That token near the enemy ship is a smart bomb. Grab it quick! Bloodhouse looks set to show that it's possible to mix brilliant presentation with decent gameplay that you desperately want to try to reach out and touch them. Virtual reality, you could say! Cu loodhouse claims this is \"the first Amiga game ever to make full use of ray tracing,\" — well for once you'd better believe the hype, because the graphics on Stardust are looking seriously groovy. Stardust is coded by the earlier mentioned Finnish coding team, Bloodhouse, and the game looks like a Nineties version of Asteroids. Your mission is to clear five worlds of meteors and alien ships. Each world is divided into six separate zones which can be completed in any order desired. The next world can only be accessed when the present one's completed. Meteor strength depends on colour. Golden meteors are strongest, followed by purple, blue and finally grey. When shot the meteors break up into smaller ones until destroyed. Sometimes a useful token is left and these provide extra weaponry such as gun power-ups, missiles, energy or an extra life. All this action takes place within a strict time limit and if it runs out an evil mothership appears with a horde of little fighters which are nearly impossible to destroy. The ship itself can take a couple of hits and it is also protected by a shield. The amount of damage depends on the speed of collisions with the meteors and alien ships. These ray-traced baddies are very impressive and look so realistic Dartford Once all the zones on a world have been cleared the next is reached by entering a 3D hyperspace tunnel. This is one of the most graphically stunning parts of the game where you have to guide your ship down the tunnel, avoiding the mines and shooting the asteroids which come hurtling towards you. It's difficult to describe but take it from Power-ups are a must if you want to survive for long. us: you won't have seen a more impressive effect on the Amiga. There is also a special mission after some of the worlds where the idea is simply to pick up as many extra lives as possible before fuel runs out. Rocking BOUW This frantic action is accompanied by numerous four channel techno tracks which, thanks to more technical trickery, allows the sound to be played at the same time. Basically this means that the Amiga is pumping out of six instead of the usual four channels of sound. Stardust is shaping up to be one hot game (not to mention sensibly priced other software houses please take note!) so keep reading for a full review soon. The explosions are rather tastefully rendered too. Yummy! 134 One of the tunnel sequences. It moves amazingly fast. Not only do the tunnels move fast but the sprites do too. "


"WIN in 2 minutes SEGA MEGA DRIVE 0839 44 22 67 BINGO Big cash prizes to be woni MOVIE TRIVIA QUIZ 0839 03 03 56 BIG MONEY GAME 0839 333 078 How To Attract Girls SUPER NINTENDO 0839 44 22 71 NEW. Scientists have now isolated and synthesised a natural female attractant ANDROSTENONE PHEROMONE. win .000 0839 03 03 36 21 25 27 28 WIN WIN WIN  0839 03 03 20 in 2 minutes JACKPOT 0839 66 4427 32 34 35 39 43 44 47 48 O = Cash THE FRUIT MACHINE GAME O O  Cash 0839 03 03 57 = Cash \"Minute quantities were spraved on a chair in a dentist's waiting room Women patients made straight for the chair\" Sunday Times \"Women are attracted to the smell\" Daily Telegraph \"The woman finds the man attractive but she doesn't know why.\" Lifestyle, \"The stuff attracts women like you would not believe.\" Colorado Telegraph Successfully tested on BBC TV's \"Tomorrows World\" CONTACT 18 contains ANDROSTENONE and Super ANROSTENOL PHEROMONE and is the best quality. most effective pheromone attractant available. Don't be misled by cheaper (or more expensive) imitations. Comes in a discreet 15ml atomiser (lasts 3 months). It really works! User reports confirm success: \"CONTACT 18 really does seem to work! The most dramatic instances have occurred when wearing it at discos. Girls just drift towards me and start flirting,\" D.T. Cardiff. \"I knew CONTACT 18 wasn't a gimmick when one of the girls at work. quite out of character, started to seduce me when we were alone in the office.\" S.D. Nottingham. Only .95 Postpaid. Fast despatch under plain cover 51 52 55 57 Calls COST 360 per min cheao rate 480 all other times Questel PO Box 3000 N20 9R8 You will also be told of other games Kids should ask their parents permission before calling SPECIAL OFFER: Order 2 (.90) and get an extra CONTACT 18 FREE! (Works out at only .63 each) Trade Enquiries Welcome 1 IFAN ADVERT IS WRONG, WHO PUTS IT RIGHT? MONEY BACK GUARANTEE: If you are not 100% delighted with CONTACT 18 simply return remainder within 30 days for a full refund No questions asked 24 HR CREDIT CARD GKS RESEARCH HOTLINE TECHNOLOGY PO Box 117, or 0534 61 71 81 St. Helier, JE4 8QZ| We do. The Advertising Standards Authority ensures advertisements meet with the strict Code of Advertising Practice. So if you question an advertiser, they have to answer to us. To find out more about the ASA. please write to Advertising Standards Authority, Department X, Brook House, Torrington Place, London WC1E 7HN. To: G.K.S. RESEARCH TECHNOLOGY P.O. BOX 117. St. HELIER. JE4 8QZ YES! Please rush me...bottles of CONTACT 18. I enclose Cheque /P.O.for ... .. ..(Foreign add ) Or debit my Access/Visa Act No..... Signature...... ...Expiry Date Name... Address.. ...CAPITALS Postcode. ....PLEASE .BLOCK ASA One Suite Although I Brian PLC Bath Street, St Helier, le dena m e pallim JE 450 utk the ne w PO Box in a unit This space is donated in the Interests of high standards in advertisements. SUPER NES (US)M DRAGON BALL Z $55 159  STARFOX /STARWING  NOV UO 2 CLAYMATES 949 WE ALSO STOCK NEO GEO, SUPER FAMICOM, SNES AND TURBO GRAFX 16 * KRAZY KONSOLES * KRAZY PRICES a 0422 -342 901* UNIVERSAL ADAPTOR SUPER FAMICOM * The Universal Adaptor will 2 JOYPADS. ALL LEADS. 60 HZ SCART.UK POWER allow you to play Imported SUPPLY UNI .......ONLY  cartridges on a UK Snes. As above +  *Plays Mario Kart, Pilot Wings * Play PAL-UK Games on S.BOMBERMAN + MULTITAP 455 2 JOYPADS. ALL LEADS. 50 HZ SCART TAKES JAP your JAP/USA Snes. & USA CARTRIDGES..... ONLY  * The Universal adaptor is a with Streetfighter 2 .... Top Quality product cased, Without Mario/1 pad..... KRAZY KONSOLES & boxed with full instructions. PO Box 20OHALIFAX Only .00 NBSCART MACHINES RUN 17% FASTER WITH NO BORDER WEST YORKSHIRE MXT 3LY TEL: 0422-342901 UNIVERSAL PRO SFIL-SD FIGURES (SET OF 12) ........ . OFFICE HOURS: MON TO SAT 9. APOLLO PRO JOYSTICK.... * Plays ALL/ANY GAME on 5.30PM CLOSED THURSDAY AM . SNES SF MOUSE (SCART)......... your UK SNES. (STOCKTAKING) TEL: 0422-367730 Only 215.00 SUPER MULTI TAP 5 PLAYER PORT ...... ............. EVENINGS 5.30.1 OPM & ALL DAY SUNDAY ST/FIGHTER 2 MODELS  SUPER FAMICOM JAP SUPER SPECIALS!!! -JAP SNES -USASOFTWARE SFR TURBO HYPER FIGHTING(SCART/20 BIT) 555 SOFTWARE! ALIEN VS PREDATOR 532 AERO THE ACROBAT SUNSOFT SUPER BOMBERMAN & MULTITAP.................$55 ACTRISER 2....... AXELAY $29 SUPER EMPIRE STRIKES BACK................. AUEN 3 UK PAL! BATMAN RETURNS ART OF FIGHTING (16 BIT).......... $35 SUPER STAR WARS........... BATTLETOADS IN BATTLEMANIACS... .................. $40 COMBAT TRIBES (12BIT) ALL JAPAN PRO WRESTUNG (16 BIT 4 PLAY).549 TOP GEAR 2................. DEAD DANCE/TUFF ENUFF (16 BIT) CONTRA SPIRIT/PROBOTECTOR COOL SPOL...... ZOMBIES ATE MY NEIGHBOURS(SCART) . DINOSAURS $49 .... DEVES COURSE GOLF (T&E SOFT).......... F1 EXHAUST HEAT DUNGEON MASTER (3D DSP CHIP)..... USA-SUPER SPECIALS DRAGON BALL Z PART 2... GOLDEN FIGHTER (12BIT) $25 EQUINOX 30 RPG/SOLSTICE ............ J. LEAGUE SOCCER PRIME GOAL JAKI CRUSH SUPER PINBALL $35 EYE OF BEHOLDER CAPCOM BARTS NIGHTMARE (NAMCO/SCART.............. ...949 JOE & MAC 2/CONGOS CAPER $24 FATAL FURY (12 BIT).... FEATURING THE SIMPSONS... NIGEL MANSELLS FI CHALLENGE (SCART) .939 PHALANX (SHOOT EM UP) GOOF TROOP. CAPCOM... CALIFORNIA GAMES ....... S. EMPIRE STRIKES BACK NOV RANMA 1/2 PART 2 (12 BIT) $55 PARODIUS JURASSIC PARK (16 BIT)..................... CHUCK ROCK SFI TURBO HYPER FIGHTING 20 BIT) + FREE SFI POP N TWINBEE... $54 COOL WORLD LEGEND OF THE RING BOXING! 856 FIGURE RUSHING BEAT RUN RIVAL TURE 2 (12 BIT) GODS....... ....... cio MORTAL KOMBAT (16 BIT)-PAL AVAILABLEI. . CALL SUNSET RIDERS.......................................CALL SKY MISSION/WINGS 2 ACES HGH KRAZY PRICES SUPER BOMBERMAN (4 PLAYER)......... GUNFORCE SONIC BLASTMAN $29 NCAA BASKETBALL SOUL BLADER $19 SUPER FORMATION SOCCER 2 (4 PLAYER)...$45 OPERATION LOGIC BOMB... JIMMY CONNERS PRO TENNIS (4 PLAYER) FROM KRAZY STARFOX/STARWING (FX CHP 3D)... ONLY $35 ROCK N ROLL RACING(SCART). KRUSTYS SUPER FUNHOUSE SUPER MARIO ALL STARS COL. (16 BIT)........ 952 SUPER GHOULSN GHOSTS... 525 552 RUN SABER ON THE BALL. KONSOLES SUPER NBA BASKETBALL TECHMO............. 945 SUPER MARIO WORLD Q-BERT 3 TINY TOON ADVENTURES $39 SECRET OF MANA....................... SUPER PANG/SUPER BIUSTER BROS.... TURTLES 5 TOURNAMENT FIGHTERS (16 BIT) 569 Cos SPIDERMAN & X-MEN SUPER SMASH TV SHADOWRUN...... WING COMMANDER WORLD HEROES (16 BIT) $59 SENGOKU TURTLES IN TIME DON'T JUST BUY WORLD SOCCER/STROKER. $55 WWF WRESTLEMANIA 925 STREETFIGHTER (16 BIT)...................... ON PRICE IT'S CUSTOMER ORDER COUPON PLEASE MAKE CHEQUES AND POSTAL ORDERS P+P ADD .50 PER GAME FOR 1ST CLASS RECORDED DELIVERY CONSOLES .00. 24 HR COURIER PAYABLE TO KRAZY KONSOLES SERVICE COST P+P THAT COUNTS!!!! I NAME ITEMS. ADDRESS... NEW GAMES ARRIVING DAILYIF YOU CAN'T SEE ITCALL! PLEASE NOTE: WE ONLY STOCK ITEL ALL CHEQUES REQUIRE A CURRENT NEW SOFTWARE GUARANTEE CARD NUMBER ON THE BACK. TOTAL.... $59 $55 &&&&&&&&&&&& JOE & MAC 2 $24 &&& 942   SATISFIED CUSTOMERS &&&&&&&  }     WARP SPEED PLEASE CALL FOR AVAILABILITY BEFORE ORDERING!! SUPER FAMICOM 2 JOYPADS ALL LEADS. Only......... "


"AMIGA England vs World XI? Time for our boys to be thrashed! by AUDIOGENIC Around .99 PREVIEW NOVEMBER Mama Tinglani wana XTSE Startottheisemming RLO SLASS LOOP: Stage of Development 98% Complete Graham Gooch's and many other relig SECONDS Who says those big and nasty software companies don't listen to you the meek and defenceless public? Audiogenic has INNINGS Freddie Trueman's match in 1964 where he became the first bowler to take 300 test wickets, and the recent Sussex VS Warwickshire Nat West Trophy Final where Warwickshire beat Sussex's record score with 15 runs in the last over. RIGHT: The game has a wealth of options to appeal to every cricket fan. World Class @meset neteh Options 3 Player Gayle rose to satis 2 Player Game Jozstela ovstiek Cupiter Carruter Game RestoreGacil Come un reset Amateur Greta Seinings EGe s Sound Effects Tiusas *  Deyanang-LEOR BOTTOM: That guy at the bottom left obviously has nerves of steel. mm eing the new staff writer it's me who gets the privilege to review or preview those games that nobody else wants to. Second Innings is one such game. However, this isn't because the game is bad, it's because nobody understands cricket in the office, we're all football fans you see. Audiogenic has taken its highly successful cricket game and implemented a number of changes in this expansion disk (you'll need the original to run it), many of which have been suggested by players of the original game. Firstly, and most obviously, the computer batsmen now provide a much tougher challenge. The scorecard can also be viewed for any innings and not just the current one. Specially created saved games can now be loaded in and a number have been included with the disk. The complete 18 English county squads with the 1993 batting and bowling averages are all present and correct. And there's more! The England squad heading to the West Indies this winter is also included. There's also an option to play one of five historic matches which include No cricket fans here According to Audiogenic there's more changes but these are only noticeable if you're a real cricket fan. This isn't much use to a lowly writer who doesn't know the first thing about cricket, but it certainly plays well, so if the sound of willow's your thing and you enjoyed the first game then you may be in for a treat. You didn't catch it. DOH! BOWL SPEED ist Labinos Buy to 1. Qxers 1MARAM 136 "


"AMIGA * by CORE DESIGN taxi     .99 EDGE PREVIEW NOVEMBER RELEASE egecogge 1 00140920 *** One of the many secret rooms contained within Wonder Dog. Dogs have more intelligence than we give them credit for and, apart from Rotweillers, they're wonderful creatures. So who better to save the world than Wonderdog? Stage of Development 95% Complete WONDERDO eneral Von Ruffbone and his loyal army of vicious dog troopers are rampaging through the galaxy intent, as these baddies always are, on having complete control of the galaxy. no A bit of ruff x 1 00135525 *** When the ground looks a slightly different colour get those claws out and start digging to reveal a new section. will come across numerous items that he can pick up. These include wings for energy, jewels which reward Wonder Dog with extra points, bones (once 100 of these are collected an extra life is awarded), whirlwinds for short term invincibility and Smileys which reveal hidden platforms leading to various secret bonus levels. This game came in just as deadline approached so we didn't't have time to look at it fully (that's our excuse anyway), but rest assured GAME OVER that, barring a meteorite strike, a full review should be in the next issue. Rex 2 00000275 **** Next in line for a bit of social control Ruffbone style is the tranquil, gentle and fun loving planet K9. As the despicable enemy approaches a young pup is hastily injected with the top secret 'wonder' serum and subsequently launched into space in a bone capsule. Many light years later Wonder Dog crashes back on to Earth where he must mature and develop his fighting skills by completing seven perilous levels, gaining the required combat skills and defeating adversaries in order to return and save his planet from total annihilation. The action begins at Bunny Meadow, where Wonder Dog's basic skills are learnt. Here he must collect as many of the bonuses as possible in order to increase his score and gain extra lives. The action then progresses through levels with titles as weird as Dogville, Scrapyard, Loony Moon and Planet Weird before the final confrontation back on Planet K9. During his travels Wonder Dog The background faces on level four look like a who's who of Mean Machines' staff writers!! OxZ 00000000 That's a bit cheesy! 2 00000150 A dog's gotta do... 33x200051635 *** Wonderdog goes for a saunter. 137 "


"15) KAH MEGA DRIVE 00010130 La by ELECTRONIC ARTS 000 HK 135 00000000 99 TBA PREVIEW CHRISTMAS RELEASE It's hard to see the track when you're driving in a blizzard. SELECT A CAR Stage of Development 100% Complete ELAN AH SPEED 0 SECC005 : 137 MPH 0-80: 6.7 SE CONOS MAH POHER: 165 BHP AH TONOUE TO LOOT It Hung SEGS LUTUS 2 \"he Lotus Elan smart car, but alas it's been scrapped by Lotus. If you feel the need for speed then this is the one to read! ame2 version of the Amiga game Lotus 3, and when we tell you this little baby is fast, we're not kidding! Based on the not-slow sports car company of the same name (but without the 2 bit), Lotus 2 roars along at a cracking pace and you can even create brand new tracks if you get bored of the built-in ones! Incorporated into the game is a clever system called RECS, which . . The Esprit makes a comeback. f you thought Lotus Esprit Turbo Challenge was good on Mega Drive, just wait until you take a look at the sequel! Lotus 2 is a conSEB Y KAMPENEE 250 nos 154 BHH OUDTBEGO 41941 illows you to create unique courses vithout having to go through the .Jassle of manual editing. What you do is simply alter a series of bars for the amount of bends you want, the speed of the opposition, size of hills, that sort of thing, and the game automatically creates a new course AND gives you a password so that you can come back and play the same track even when you've turned the Mega Drive off! No need for battery backup here. Road hog As well as that, the amount of cars available to you has increased. Now you can choose to drive in an Esprit Turbo, the smaller (and now defunct) Elan or the spanky (and rather speedy at 148mph) M200! Split screen two player mode is in there, and you can choose to play either against the clock or against another driver. A dozen different settings are included in Lotus 2, including fog, rain, a busy motorway (on which cars travel in both directions) and even a futuristic roadway complete with turbo boosting sections of track! Lotus 2 is due to storm on to the shelves in the latter half of December it's all finished, EA is just waiting for the final cartridges to come through The ultra-swish Lotus M200. DOHODO Choose tunes on the CD system! If you're a fan of fast action racing games, this should be just the thing to feed your need for speed. Full review next issue! If you smack into that oncoming Ferrari it'll wreck your no-claims. 138 "


"DAYBOARD LTD BUILD MUSCLES FAST! The Arcade PCB Specialists! Aero Fighter  Gunforce.....  Wrestlefest....  Airbuster ...... Final Fight...  World Cup 90 Aliens .......... Chopper 1..... WWF Superstars.  Chelnou ........ R-Type 2 .....  Asterix ........ Dyna-Blaster  Mortal Kombat POA Cadiles&Dinoscus Football Champ Sky Soldier.... Fighter History . Fal's Panic...  Snow Bros ... Knuckle Bash. Hit the Ice .....  Squash........ R-Type Leo.. Legionaire...  Turtles ..........  Shogun Warrior Outzone ...... Twin Eagle ....  Street Fighter 2. P.47.............. Typhoon .......  Street Fighter. Black Tiger.... Vendetta ..... Hyper Fighter .POA You can build a fantastic power packed body in only 12 weeks NEW! Fastest and best way to build muscles and strength without weightsEVER! Just 20 minutes daily in the privacy of your home will develop an amazing physique. MUSCLE DYNAMICS is a new bodybuilding system based on principles developed after years of exhaustive research. It is a total exercise programme involving the very latest scientific breakthroughs in the field of muscular development. It is the fastest, most effective way to build muscles in existence Noticeable results in 28 days guaranteed. Send for FREE Information Pack. MUSCLE DYNAMICS.P.O. BOX 70. DOUGLAS, IM99 1EH. Tel: 0624 801023 (24 hrs) IMUSCLE DYNAMICS, P.O. BOX 70, DOUGLAS, IM99 1EH | Yes! I want to build muscles fast. Please rush me a FREE information pack! Name .........BLOCK ALL JAMMA COMPATIBLE WILL PLUG STRAIGHT INTO SUPER GUN CONSOLE STOCK CHANGING FREQUENTLY PLEASE CALL FOR A COMPETITIVE QUOTE ON ANY PCB NOT ON PRESENT LIST Address.... ...................................CAPITALS! ...CAPITALS ..PLEASE Postcode ......... (A stamp for reply appreciated)  Dayboard Ltd Unit 6  Ravenstone Industrial Estate  Coalville  Leicestershire  LE6 2NB 364 UXBRIDGE ROAD HAYES MIDDLESEX UB4 OSE TEL / FAX : 081 561 2422 MAIL ORDER PRICES SHOP PRICES MAY VARY USA SNES + PAD + PSU + SCART .00 SEGA MEGA DRIVE + SONIC + 2 PADS .00 GAMEGEAR + SONIC +PSU .00 SECOND HAND GAMES ALWAYS AVAILABLE PART EXCHANGES WELCOME GAME GEAR/GAME BOY/MASTER SYSTEM GAMES/ACCESSORIES ALWAYS IN STOCK MANY MORE TITLES AVAILABLE STREETFIGHTER || TURBO..00 **PLUS ADAPTOR.. ..00 WWF ROYAL RUMBI ..00 BOMBERMAN.... ..CALL MARIO KART. .00 EXHAUST HEA ...CALL NIGEL MANSE .00 SUPER NBA ..00 TINY TOONS. .00 FATAL FURY .00 BATMAN .... .00 ADDAMS FAMILY ..00 CYBERNATOR .00 BUBSY BOBC .00 STARFOX... .00 STAR WARS. ..00 BATTLETOADS .00 ALIEN 3 ...... .00 B.O.B.... 243.00 POCKY & ROCKY .00 SUPER TURRICAN .00 E.V.O... .00 MULTITAP .00 .00 STREETFIGHTER II ECCO THE DOLPHIN. ROAD RASHII.. STREETS OF RAGE 1 PGAI .... MUHAMMED A TINY TOONS CHIKI CHIKI BOY SPEEDBALL UI WORLD OF ILLUSION MICRO MACHINES. ROCKET KNIGHT ADI ANOTHER WORLD JUNGLE STRIKE. BUSBY BOBCAT FLASHBACK ... STRIDER IL... COOL SPOT SUPER KICK TURTLES.. MICK & MACK .... FATAL FURY. GRAND SLAM. MORTAL KOMB .00 ...00 ..00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 243.00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .243.00 .00 ..00 ..00 ...00 ..00 SNES & MEGADRIVE LARGE RANGE OF ACCESSORIES ALWAYS IN STOCK SECOND HAND GAMES WANTED CALL US! GAMEFAN MAG ONLY .50 MORTAL LATEST SNES ADD-ONS & DEVICES FROM THE FAR EAST PLEASE CALL! *ACCESS * VISA CARDS WELCOME * CHEQUES TO 'CONSOLE ELITE' * Add: .50 postage & packaging (games) .00 (consoles) CALL US TODAY ----081 561 2422 ----IT COULD BE YOURS TOMMORROW! "


"Onion HEY YOWH Computer Supplies Led LOOK AT THESE FANTASTIC PRIZES YOU CAN RALEIGH, ACTIVATOR 2 MOUVEAU BIKE ANSWER 7 EASY TRUE OR FALSE QUESTIONS & YOU COULD BE A WINNER WIN 1 OF THESEGREAT PRIZES * PLEASE NOTE BIKE SHOWN MIGHT NOT BE THE ACTUAL PRIZE Office Hours: CVG Mon Fri 9am 5.30pm Sat-Sun 10am 4.30pm After office hours 5.30pm 10pm (ring 0850 799702) Tel: 0472 362236 or 0850 799702 Fax: 0472 362166 (24hrs) AMAZING, RIDICULOUS, STUPENDOUS, SILLY, RAZY CHEAP PRICES!! Special Caristmas Oller Buy 2 games from us and get the most expensive one for the same price as the same price as the cheaper one!! for the latest US & JAP SNES importsfor customer care if you're happy, we are!! USA SNES. JAP SNES. USA SNES  JAP SNES CONSOLES USA SNES SUPER HIGH IMPACT $43.99 WE ARE CHEAP-CALL USA SNES (SCART) ALIEN 3. $42.99 TECMO NBA BASKETBALL......148.99 BTOADS IN BATTLEMANIACS 1 PAD, ALL LEADS, TAKES TUFF E NUFF TODAY FOR FRIENDLY SCALL BLUES BROTHERS UTOPIA USA/JAP CARTIDGES SCALL SERVICE AND ADVICE! 20/20 BASEBALL $51.99 WHERE WORLD 549.99 ONLY .00 CYBERNATOR WOLF CHILD ..145.99 CAPCOM SUPER FAMICOM (SCART) CACOMA KNIGHT $45.99 YOSHIE'S COOKIE DOUBLE DRAGON JOYSTICK .143.99 1 PAD, ALL LEADS, ENGLISH ONLY $59.00 INSTRUCTIONS, UK PSU DESERT STRIKE. DUNGEON MASTER JAP FAMICOM SCART ONLY .00 DIG 'N SPIKE VOLLY COMBATRIBES $34.99 LEAD EVO $49.99 DRACULA... $38.99 ONLY .50 N.B. Scart machines are 17.5% FINAL FIGHT IL $49.99 DEAD DANCE $57.99 faster than UK PAL SNES, and FAMILY FEUD $49.99 DRAGONBALL Z 2. $59.99 SUPER FATAL FURY F1 EXHAUST HEAT II. also give a full screen of vision GOOF TROOP $54.99 ADVANTAGE FINAL FIGHT $39.99 ONLY $39.00 NO BORDERS!!! HOME ALONE 2 $28.99 JAKI CRUSH PINBALL $35.99 JURASSIC PARK PAL BOOSTER CALL KIKI KAI KAI. $48.99 UNIVERSAL ADAPTOR KAWASAKI CHALLENGE $44.99 POP N TWINBEE $49.99 ONLY .99 LOST VIKINGS PLAYS US/JAP GAMES ON $44.99 MARIO ALL STAR 15299 S FORMATION SOCCER 2 .99 YOUR UK SNES PRICE MATCHING MARIO & WARIO $64.99 \"Give us gry! We SUPER ROBOT TAISEN SCALL $64.99 MORTAL KOMBAT SCALL SUPER BOMBERMAN BEST QUALITY ADAPTOR ON 553.99 con usually beat NIGEL MANSELL $49.99 TETRIS II... THE MARKET $55.99 suppliers prices NFL FOOTBALL RUSHING BEAT RUN.. $45.99 PLAYS ALL DSP & SEX GAMES NCAA BASKETBALL PARODIUS. $38.99 UK 3 PIN SNES PSI (MARIO KART, STARFOX) OPERATION LOGIC BOMB SCALL Super Multi tap 5 player adaptor (for ONLY .99 SUPER SLAP SHOT games like Super Bomberman, Super ALLOWS YOU TO PLAY ANY SF II TURBO 566.99 Formation Soccer 2 etc) only $25.99 UNIVERAL PRO GAME ON ANY MACHINE ONLY .00 S IF YOU CANT FIND SOMETHING THEN PLEASE GIVE US A CALL PLAYS ALL .99 -------------------------------------------------------SEND TO: ORION COMPUTER SUPPLIES LTD, FREE POST DC1332 SWITCH (NO STAMP REQUIRED), GRIMSBY, SOUTH HUMBERSIDE, DN31 1BR YOUR NAME PLEASE RUSH ME THE FOLLOWING: YOUR ADDRESS ITEM PRICE P&P TOTAL YOUR TELEPHONE NO....... CREDIT CARD NO... ............. EXPIRY DATE ISSUE NO (SWITCH) ....SIGNATURE GRAND TOTAL CHEQUE P/O CREDIT CARD CARD TYPE. Please moke cheques/PO's payable fo: Orion Computer Supplies Ltd. Postage & Packaging: Please add .50/game title, $7.50/machines or /24 hr courier service. Overseas customers are welcome please coll for details. We reserve the right to chonge prices without prior notice. E&OE. UPER NINTENDO SYSTEM & Z TOP GAMES CARTRIDGES YOU CHOOSE WHICH PRIZE YOU WANT RUNNER UP PRIZES OF A NINTENDO GAME BOY OR SEGA GAME CARTRIDGES $49.99 A SEGA MEGA CD 0891 50 10 66 CALL NOW & YOU COULD BE A WINNER NV IN THIS EASY TO PLAY COMPETITION OR 1 OF 34 RUNNERS UP PRIZES >GIVING YOU EVEN CALLS CHARGED AT 36P MNCHEAP RATE, 48P ALL OTHER TIMES. F UNDER 18 YEARS OLD PLEASE MORE CHANCES TO OBTAN PERMISSION FROM THE OWNER OF THE TELEPHONE ANSWER 7 TRUE OR FALSE QUESTIONS WIN CORRECTLY AND THEN CHOOSE WHICH PRIZE YOU WOULD LIKE YOUR NAME ENTERED FOR NOUR GREAT PRIZE DRAW ALL RULES ARE OSTAINABLE FROM VTK LTD PO BOK 3443818 6DF PER VIDEO GA AGTON52 52. SUPER VIDEO GAMES FOR THE PRICE OF 2 52 terrific new games that's one new game every week for the next year! AT LESS THAN .93 A GAME FANTASTIC BONUS  WORTH OF GAMES DISCOUNT VOUCHERS FREE WITH EVERY ORDER PLUS LATEST GAMES LIST YOU HAVE TO SEE IT TO BELIEVE IT! Please, though, to enjoy this crazy low price SAVING  on even our normal price, we must receive your order on the coupon below within 7 days. PRIORITY ORDER FORM ACTION 52 MULTI-GAME CARTRIDGE Please send the ACTION 52 Cartridge plus my free  book of vouchers O (No.) Nintendo NES.......... (No.) Sega Megadrive..... Please send me your monthly list of top titles ALL CARTRIDGES AT THE SPECIAL PRIORITY PRICE OF ONLY .99 (INC. VAT) EACH! This cartridge is no illegal copy from the Far East. Produced to the highest standards in the USA, it is totally legal. The games themselves are all originals, most are multi-stage (up to 20 stages!), with games suitable for every level of play from beginners to top experts. And, of course, the ACTION 52 cartridge is entirely compatible with your Sega Megadrive or Nintendo NES absolutely no adaptors of any sort are needed, just slot it straight in! Name....... .............. Address......... For play on Nintendo Entertainment Systems and Sega 16-Bit Genesis Systems. This product is manufactured and designed by Active Enterprises Ltd. It is no designed, manufactured, sponsored or endorsed by Nintendo or Sega. Action 52 is a registered tradmark of Active Enterprises Ltd. Nintendo and Nintendo Entertainment Systems and Sega and Sega Genesis Systems are all registered trademarks of Nintendo Company Ltd, Nintendo of America and Sega Company Ltd and Sega of America respectively. ..............Post Code ......................Tel .............. ...................... enclosed (full payment for ACTION 52 Cartridge plus .50 for security packaging and delivery) Total .49. Payment only by cheque or postal order, made payable to IMPACT GAMES. Send to: IMPACT GAMES, PO Box 28, CF31 5XY. Marked 'PRIORITY ORDER'. Please allow 14 days for delivery. SEND YOUR ORDER NOW FOR US TO RECEIVE IT WITHIN 7 DAYS "


"AMIGA by EUROPRESS EVIEW .99 R 7 LONG STRT PH UUT NOVEMBER RELEASE Pixel Craft, the development team behind Rally, has liaised with Ford Motorsport, Mitsubishi and Subaru to get the detail just right. Stage of Development 100% Completed Broom, broom and lots of other obvious words for a car game intro. Europress' newie, Rally, comes racing (groan) on to the Amiga. MPH 00 30 Great graphics, but what about gameplay? Find out next month. bout five years ago Europress had considerable success with a racing game called Lombard RAC Rally. This sold the best part of 100,000 copies, which was no mean feat for five years ago and a pretty fine show even today. The game wasn't mindblowing by any means, but was playable enough and was one of the first to successfully create that through-the-windscreen look, as opposed to the viewfrom-outside-and-slightly-behind-thecar, plus it had realistic terrain effects like er... hills. in the game and the way they handle in different situations. Developers Pixel Craft spent ages driving around the real life courses to film the various stages of the final four-day section of the World Rally Championship, the tough challenge around which Rally is based. The cars too have been faithfully reproduced. For this the team visited numerous car companies such as Ford Motorsport, Prodrive (the Subaru rally team) and Mitsubishi. Both the Toyota and the Lancia teams sent in pictures and specifications which enabled Pixel Craft to scan them in at a high resolution and then translate them to the sprites which will be seen in the finished game. From the screenshots it would appear that Rally is another horrid Mega CD type game where there's plenty of decent looking graphics but very little in the way of control. Pixel Craft, however, has made sure this isn't so and the car is fully controllable, skids round corners and can even roll over. Although Rally has been developed initially on to the PC, Pixel Craft is making sure the game won't suffer in translation to the Amiga. The game's parameters will be alterable depending on the power of the machine being used. For instance you can choose the number of roadside trees with the result that less trees should mean smoother updates. Europress is touting the game as the closest thing to driving in a real rally. Let's see when we finally review the finished game in the next issue shall we? Five year mission So here we are five years later, five years older and five billion or so racing games later when Europress is close to releasing a sequel to the RAC Rally titled simply 'Rally'. But RAC fans needn't panic because although the RAC prefix has been dropped (Network Q is the sponsor this time), they've still been involved by providing detailed specifications of the cars IPH 00.00 000 Night driving is never easy, and in Rally you probably won't have cats' eyes to help you see where the middle of the road is. \"It's like driving in a real rally,\" but without the punctures! 141 "


"SNES DE SSASS * *00 by MARUBENI TBA PREVIEW HEALTH FLIEL January Like a duck to water, Daffy uses his weapons to blast the submarine. 882200 $88850 POD OSCORE Stage of Development 80% Complete Watch out Daffy, it's behind you! A rendezvous with some old pals. DAFFY DUCK It's the duck with has our hero of the spaceways, Daffy, attitude (and we on a mission to stop Marvin the Martian taking over the galaxy (no, don't mean Orville) not the chocolate kind). Daffy must fend off various aliens along the way et another cartoon character which would make anyone's feathers hits the games screen. Daffy stand on end, and he must also pick Duck follows in the footsteps of up gems and coins which give him his friends, Bugs Bunny, Tazmania, extra points( meaning extra energy). Road Runner and Speedy During his mission, which carries Gonzales. him through five main stages and The game is a spin-off from more than 20 levels, he has to keep Daffy's original cartoon up his health (indicated at the top of series, Duck Dodgers in the the screen) by picking up jugs of 24th and a Half Century and orange juice. What's up duck To fight back against attacks from Martians Daffy can purchase weapons, which include a blaster, freeze gun, electricity gun, bomb gun and anti-matter gun. However, don't forget to stock up on rocket fuel too otherwise Daffs will be coming down to earth with a hard bump! Don't bypass the money bags scattered around because the more cash he finds, the more weapons and other items he can buy. There are a few hidden rooms and areas that contain extra items which are worth picking up that can help him on his way later on in the game. Before Daffy can leave one stage he has to defeat Marvin and his hi-tech weaponp. Once the defeat is complete Daffy's strength and bravery is heralded by the local newspapers (in space, you've got to be kidding!) Anyway, it adds a nice touch to the game and gives your aching hand a rest from the joypad. Another cartoon special included in the bright game is a special nutty attack icon. If Daffy happens to bump into a mushroom cloud, his whole body seems to be taken over by a strange force and he goes mad, twisting, spinning and somersaulting round the screen knocking down enemies left, right and centre. If the graphics are anything to go by this looks like it could be a cracking good game, incorporating lots of fun and gameplay. We'll give you our full verdict in a review next month. RODO0150 SSASSO HEALTH FUEL HEALTH FUEL This vulture looks a bit moody, better blast it away. Spaced out or what? Daffy decides his next move in the mission. 142 "


"SATSJURASSIC! You have five minutesto beat T-Rexandwin  INSTANTLY! WIN A SEGA MEGADRIVE + MEGA CD! 06390 INSTANT WIN! SUPER NINTENDO+ JURASSIC PARK THENEW 0829406061 AMIGA CD! INSTANT WIN! 0839406068 GAME GEAR+ INSTANT A JURASSIC PARK 083940603 NSTANTIN AMIGA A1200+ WIN JURASSIC PARK  WORTH OF COMPUTERGAMES SUPER NINTENDO+ STREETFIGI TER II INSTANT WIN WIN! INSTANT WIN! E WIN! RALEIGH 0639 40606 ACTIVATOR 2 JOYSTICK! The latest multi-bution controller! Orany RR 0,9406057 mountain bike Any joystickup to ! up to 1200 In your team's colours 0839406055 PLAY THE BIG GAME! NSTANTW INSTANT WIN! Use your soccerskills to win  instantly! PLAY THE w! 0839406060 ALL STARS WRESTLING VIDEOS ADVENTURE!  WORTHOF of a worth, 0839406058 WIN! Fight your way across Beat the villain to na SUPER NINTENDO SUPER MARO ALL STARS RTR 0839406069 Calls cost 36p per min (cheap) 48p per min (other times). Max possible cost .60. Please be sure you have permission to make this call. Where Instant Win is indicated there is no tiebreaker and prizewinners are decided instantly by playing a deciding game. Other competitions close 30.11.93 and again on 28.02.94. All competitions involve multiple choice questions.Raleigh Activator 2 Nintendo Sega/Amiga/Streetfighter II & Jurassic Park are all registered trademarks of their respective companies. We are not related to or endorsed by them. For rules and winners please send SAE to: Info Media Services Ltd, PO Box 28 Northampton NN1 5DS. CVG DEC 93 "


"NEXT MONTH IT'S CHRISTMAS! Check out all the hot games coming your way this festive period and beyond! YOU'VE SEEN THE MACHINES BUT WHAT ABOUT THE GAMES! We review the first titles available for 3DO and Jaguar! OUT WEVE GOT IT ALL! AND DECEMBER YOU DARE NOT MISS OUT! 15TH THE CVG CHRISTMAS ISSUE MISS IT AND YOU'LL MISS THE BIGGEST CHRIMBO TREAT EVER! 144 "


"Britains biggest selling Nintendo magazine! Nintendo MAGA BENEDIOS DE BAY GAMES DESTOE! VOULE Nintendo ARMAGA INSIDE TUNBREOS DE VW GINES INSIDE WHY READ ANYTHING ELSE? ON SALE 19th OF EVERY MONTH IGHTER World Exclusive SUPER MARIO BRITAIN'S RUMBERS 1 NINTENDO MAGAZINE "


"COMPETITION automobil Lamborghe Peghini TEN LAMBORGHINI GOODY BAGS TO BE WON! VROOM! VROOM! We went loopy over the fast driving blast Lamborghini, from Titus, last issue and why not? Any game that offers a stack of tracks, loads of top racing action and a motor like the Lamborghini to drive deserves to be a good 'un and with a CVG rating of 82% it most certainly is! So check out this fab compo giveaway... CARRAZY WITHTITUS AND LAAABORGHINI 2 A Lamborghini featured in which of the following films: Smokey And The Bandit, The Cannonball Run, The Last Boy Scout? 5 Which of the following is NOT a recognised sports car manufacturer: Lamborghini, Ferrari, Lada? which country do you associate with the Lamborghini? es, those testides at Titus, in a fit of generosity, have decided to stump up the goods for this hot comp! What they're offering is TEN (count 'em) Lamborghini goody packs, stuffed to the gunnels with a load of official Lamborghini merchandise T-shirts, caps, sweatshirts, posters, videos, the lot! There's over ,000 worth of gear to be shared between ten of you, so you'd be a bit of a daft 'un to pass up the chance of winning just because you can't be bothered to buy a stamp. And just to give you even less of a reason not to enter, we're going to make it dead easy for you, too! We've come up with a few easy questions, the answers to which we want you to jot down on a postcard or the back of a sealed-down envelope and whizz off to us a bit sharpish, like. Here goes: There, so easy even Deniz could answer them. Probably. Here's the address to send your completed entries to: MY OTHER CAR'S NOT A PATCH ON A LAMBORGHINI EITHER, CVG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. The latest Lamborghini is called the Diabolo true or false? Please ensure your entry reaches us by 14 December 1993, otherwise it'll be taking a ride to the county dump. SMALL PRINT: This competition is not open to employees of Titus or EMAP Images, or their relatives. It's not open to Lamborghini employees either, though why they'd want to try and win their own merchandise when they can just nip into the storeroom and half-inch some of it is beyond me. The editor's decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into. Not even a little bit. ITUS 146 Lamborghini "


"SVINDERS TUTTA ITSU The dusty badlands of the Wild West are crawling with dirty lowdown bandits, each lowlife has a hefty price on his head and is sure to give you a run for your money! Seven levels of trigger itching, sharp shootin' spaghetti western action. 84000 84000 HU $100.. $22840... 52000 58 Original Nintendo Seal of Quality SUPER NINTENDO. KONAMI ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM Konami (UK) Limited Television House 269 Field End Road Eastcote Middlesex HA4 GLS "


"SPACEHEAD A groovy experience in arcade adventuring\" Mega Machines magazine 101 Electric Shocks ivuse City Streets Teleport Key Factory Reception Planet Detroitica 101 lei «Brilliantly original challenging Night Lights and great fun don't miss it. Sega Pro magazine The interaction is great and the puzzles are really sharp\" Mega Power magazine How Wom w would you prove Ean e universe! uter-space in yer face It's outer-spad p face! Here's Cosmic the first alien tou tion areas and solve the wildest puzzles characters in over 300 screens of bizarre cing astro-cars, robot attacks and asteroid Prove Earths 'S Existencer through 39 ich thropeas. We high-speed loin him dest bunch of charthe oddest bum excitement of racin len tourist in a s robot Screens Puzzles in the arcade actions! Zarre and freaky puzzles in the arca In a mad dash through the unive arcade adventure areas. Interact eaky locations! Experience high.. Lout of this world! \"Fields. It's cosmic LICENSED BY SEGA ENTERPRISES LTD FOR PLAY ON THE LICENSED BY SEGA ENTERPRISES LTD. FOR PLAY ON THE LICENSED BY SEGA ENTERPRISES LTD. FOR PLAY ON THE SEGA MEGA DRIVE SYSTEM SEGA SEGA GAME GEAR SYSTEM MASTER SYSTEM AND MASTER SYSTEM ALSO AVAILABLE ON Amiga, PC, N.E.S. ABRE EN Codemasters .99 .99 .99 FOR MORE INFORMATION PLEASE CONTACT: Codemasters Software Comany Limited, Stoneythorpe, Southam, Warwickshire, CV33 ODL, U.K. Tel: 0926 814132 The Codemasters Software Company Ltd (Codemasters) 1993. All Rights Reserved Codemasters and Cosmic Spacehead are trademarks being used under licence by Codemasters Software Company Ltd. Licensed by Sega Enterprises Ltd for play on Sega Megadrive. Ser Master System and Sega Game Gear. Megadrive. Master System and Game Gear are trademarks of Sega Enterprises Ltd. Codermasters using the trademark pursuant to a license. NES. is a trademark of Nintendo Company Limited. Codemasters is not affiliated or associated with Nintendo Co. Ltd in any way "

