"95p JANUARY 1986 S$4.60 Dm6 285pta MEGA-XMAS ISSUE ONLY 95p COMPUTER GAMES +VIDEO EXCLUSIVE: TDCINTIIDS GAME PREVIEW WIN A DREAM PRIZE! FREE INSIDE: GIANT C+VG CALENDAR WIN: FRED FLINTSTONE'S GHETTO BLASTER! WIN: HARVEY SMITH'S HI-FI SYSTEM!/WIN: FRIDAY 13TH COLOUR MONITORS! FREE TAU CETI POSTER/BLACKWYCHE/STAR QUAKE MAPPED/THE COMBAT ZONE "


"ULJA "


"THE SMASH HIT NO. 1 ARCADE GAME! HUMANI Japan Capsule Computers (UK) SUPER JOE CRACK COMBAT SOLDIER FIGHTS A LONE BATTLE AGAINST OVERWHELMING ODDS ALL THE ACTION AND TENSION OF THE WORLDS NUMBER ONE ARCADE GAME. Available forSpectrum Commodore 64 Amstrad/ Schneider and BBC. Elite Systems, Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, England. "


"THIS ISSUE Our cover feature this month is the new movie from Steven Spielberg Back to the Future. We've an exclusive preview of Electric Dreams' game based on the film and the chance to win some great prizes in our Back to the Future Competition. And if it's more competitions you want we've got loads of other goodies to give away this issue. The Flintstones ghettoblaster, Harvey Smith's hi-fi, plus tons of software for Spectrum, Commodore, Amstrad, Beeb and Atari owners in competitions you just can't afford to miss. This month we've been overrun by the Bughunters -there are a whole five pages of Jerry Paris' fantastic cartoons! Then there's our amazing Starquake map complete with exclusive playing tips from Stephen Crow — the author of the game. Plus a terrific reader's map of Ultimate's Blackwyche. from the very talented Mark Clements. Plus pages of game programs a FREE, totally exclusive Tau Cetl poster, and your Lord of the Rings pictures. We've also gone totally over the top on war-games. Pages of reviews of the latest and greatest strategy games plus you guessed it a competition. And you can also discover why the C+VG Hit Squad went into battle at the Combat Zone. You'd be mad to miss this issue of your favourite computer magazine -so stop browsing and rush to the nearest check. out and BUY it! You know it makes sense ... FLINTSTONES COMP/P153 AB WHO DYES WINS!/P41 MIKRO-GEN/P22 COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES POSTAL SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE By using the special Postal Subscription Service copies of COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES can be mailed direct from our offices eoch month to any address throughout the world. All subscription applications should be sent for processing to COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES (Subscription Department). Competition House Fordon Road, Market Harborough, Leicestershire. All orders should include the appropriate remittance, mode payable to COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES. Annual subscription rates (12 issues): UK and Eire . Additional service information, including individual overseas airmail rates available upon request. Circulation Department: EMAP National Publications Published and distributed by EMAP Notional Publications Ltd Printed by Seven Valley Press Typeset by In-Step Ltd EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John DESIGN Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Kolth Campbell Paul Coppins Simon Marsh Jim Douglas AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeley SOFTWARE CONSULTANT Tony Tokoushl PUBLICITY Marcus Rich ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Loulse Matthews DEPUTY ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Bernard Dugdalo ADVERTISEMENT EXECUTIVE Mike Corte PRODUCTION ASSISTANT Melanlo Paulo PUBLISHER Rita Lewis COVER Steven Gulbis ... and the Bug Hunters! Jerry Paris EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR JAU Tel: 01-251 6222 GAMES BOOK SCUE/SPACE MISSION GAMES BOOK/75 C+DG TOP 30 CHARTS PAGE 101 "


"S FEATURES 24 WAR GAMES EXTRA BACK TO THE FUTURE/P30 30 BACK TO THE FUTURE/EXCLUSIVE PREVIEW 45 DEATHWAKE COMPETITION 49 DEAR BUGHUNTERS 58 YOUR HOBBITS! 61 IDEAS CENTRAL 67 GHOST BUSTERS — WIN A VIDEO! 71 FRIDAY 13TH HORROR SOUNDS COMPETITION 74 FREE PULL OUT TAU CETI POSTER 96 BLACKWYCHE MAP 102 ADVENTURE 113 WIN HARVEY SMITH'S HI-FI! 117 THE BUGHUNTERS IN 'SNOW JOB 127 THE ART OF NOISE 131 TOP 30 SOFTWARE CHARTS 134 STARQUAKE MAP 140 HALL OF FAME/HOT SHOTS 144 PSI WARRIOR 149 THE CHIMERA DIARY 151 C+VG GOLDEN JOYSTICKS/VOTE FOR THE GAME OF THE YEAR! 153 WIN FRED FLINTSTONE'S GHETTOBLASTER/ WIN ELECTRA GLIDE! I COLLEARBLOK vz FotoRRELA PION 157 MAILBAG 162 NEXT MONTH NEWS + REVIEWS 8 NEWS  The hottest hot gossip this issue is all about Activision's C64 blockbuster Koronis Rift, but we also take a look at Beyond's Enigma Force 14 REVIEWS  The amazing Swords and Sorcery is our Game of the Month, but there're a few games giving it a close run for its money, like Elite's exciting Commando. CROR JANUARY REVIEWS/P14 54 ARCADE ACTION "


"GET EVEN MORE ATTAC 08 AMSTRAD T.V. Modulator for CPC 6128 .95 Joystick with additional joystick adaptor .95 Disc Drive with Interface and CPM for CPC 464 Speech Synthesiser and stereo amplifier .95 AMSTRAD AMSTRAD RS232C Serial Interface Light Pen complete with graphics softwa e.95 95 RS 232C Interface Inc ROM Software .95 AVAILABLE AT ALLDERS  BOOTS . COMET CURRYS  DIXONS  LASKYS RUMBELOWS. SUPREMEDIS "


"CHED TO YOUR AMSTRAD. ANASA AMSTRAD T.V. Modulator for CPC 464 Amstrad owners start out happy, and get even happier as time goes on. The first delightful discovery is that both the CPC 6128 and the CPC 464 are complete and ready to use as soon as you get them home. The CPC 464 comes with built-in datacorder, and the CPC 6128 with builtin disc drive. And both have either a full colour monitor or a green screen. But Amstrad owners can become even more attached to their computers with the simple addition of the peripherals featured here. They'll make your Amstrad faster, harder working and more entertaining. And they're very easy to attach. Simply plug in, and away you go, there's no need for extra interfaces. You may of course wish to get into some even more serious computing, for which you will need the Amstrad RS 2320 specialist interface. This opens the door to modems, networks, and serial printing. But whichever additions to your Amstrad you care to make you'll find their low prices an additional pleasure. Additional Disc Drive .95 uuulli Tell me more about the Amstrad range of peripherals. Name AMSTRAD W WW Address Address: i Amstrad peripherals i DMP 2000 Printer Amstrad, P.O.Box 462, Brentwood, Essex CM14 4EF \"REME DISCOUNT STORES TANDY . W.H. SMITH AND GOOD INDEPENDENT COMPUTER STORES "


"Over the last couple of issues we've been running a cartoon strip drawn by ace artist and would-be Rambo lan Ellery using his trusty Spectrum and Grafpad. Like all goods artists, he's great when it comes to drawing but if he has to write anything, well, nuff said. So what we want you to do is write some scripts for C+VG's Fowl-Up strip. The best scripts will be drawn up and printed in forthcoming issues. What are you waiting for? Send your scripts to Computer and Video Games, Fowl-Ups, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The long-awaited new Wally adventure, Three Week in Paradise, will be out soon. Meanwhile take a look at these exciting screen shots from the game which also stars Wally's wife Wilma and little Herbert all lost on the Silly Isles. The game won't use Mikro-Gen's Mikro-Plus system but the Wally people promise even better hi-res graphics and more adventure. Three Weeks in Paradise will cost .95. The game is packed in an A5 If you haven't been hiding in video case and comes with a closet for the last few deons an instruction booklet with you would have heard of MUD historical background notes of a modem mega dungeon which the campaign and maps and has amongst its multitude of photographs. Desert Rats is features an allowance for released by CCS on the conversation between characters Spectrum and Amstrad, price playing the game. .95. Now schools and user networks can play it too! Three MUD addicts from St. Albans School in Hertfordshire are writing their version of the game Here's a sneak look at with up to 2000 locations and Domark's Friday 13th spoof inter-character chat facility! horror game. As you can see there are ten characters involved in the game you select one to control. Then you have to get the The winner of C+VG's Russ rest of the characters to Abbott competition is 12 year. sanctuary — the place where old Craig Lovalce from you've placed a cross. Some will Gorboldishom in Norfolk. Thanks come willingly. Others need to Probe Software, the people more persuasion. And any one of benind me soon to be released them just could be Jason the Basildon Bond game, Craig will maniac knife wielding killer! The get to appear on stage with his game takes place in and around hero and win a few other the Crystal Lake holiday camp. A goodies too. Craig's joke for Russ nice touch is the \"scareometer\" went like this: \"Why did the in the left hand corner of the hedgehog cross the road? To see screen. As more characters get if he had any stomach...\"Urg! killed off the little icon's hair Despite the joke, Fergus gradually sticks up further and McGovern at Probe Software further... chose him as the winner. Watch this space for more details of Craig's starring role in the Russ Abbot show! Imagine collecting around ,000 for just 18 minutes work. But that's what happened to 15-year-old Juan Manuel Perez Vazqeux. Juan who believe it or not is married beat more that 30 other people to win Firebird's Gyron competition where the prize was elther a Porsche 924 or the cash equivalent. A simultaneous play-off of a specially adapted version of Gyron was held in three countries. In the United Kingdom, 28 people met In London to crack the 3D mare game, two people in Copenhagen and Juan in Malaga. Programmer Ricardo Pinto designed the special verison of Gyron to be completed in about Ihr 45mins. The best time managed In London was Ihr 37 mins. But then news of Juan's staggering time of 18 minutes came through. At first there was stunned disbelief. But the time was confirmed by Firebird's man in Malaga. A surprised Ricardo sald afterwards: \"He did not damage his ship once. He must have sat down and gone through the me perfectly.\" Herbert Wright, Firebird's Project Manager, said: \"I told him he had won in very bad Spanish. His parents are in a state of shock.\" Juan's reaction to the news was apparently stunned silence. He was probably busily converting ,000 into pesetas. Lothlorien's Waterloo is now available for BBC owners, price .95 on cassette and .95 on disk. Desert Rats, dealing with the North African Campaign in 1941-42, is the latest war Wet Zone, a BBC conversion game from Arnhem author of Imagine's multi-screen shootBob Smith. up game, Arcadia, is to be It recreates Rommel's distributed through Micronet 800. arrival in Tripoli to the Battle Phil Godsell, Micronet's of El Alamein, including Software Manager, says: \"It's very Operations Battleaxe and exciting to have the exclusive Crusader and the Battle of distribution rights to a game as Gazala good as Arcadia. It may have Desert Rats has a scrolling dated a little but its speed is as map with six scenarios for challenging today as it always one or two players. was.\" Rabbit, rabbit, rabbit ... Heard the latest gossip? Rabbit Software has been re-launched by Virgin Games. On offer are four \"mid-price\" games selling at .99. They are Zyto (CBM 64), a multi-screen arcade game in which you have to assemblea bomb: Doriath (CBM 64). adventure into magic labyrinths guarding a dark secret: The Great Fire of London (Spectrum 48K), involves you in a bid to change history by putting out the fire; High Rise Horror (BBC B). ghost hunting in a lower block. At last some NEW Atari software! Mediator comes from English Software and will be available just in time for Christmas priced at .95 for the cassette, .95 on disk. Mediator mixes medieval and futuristic themes with a doomesday machine and killer trees(?), slime creatures and dream monsters. Your job is to seek the Good distribution rights to Here's your chance to become a cartoon scriptwriter for C+VG! "


"ENIGMA FORCE awesome psionic powers on the guidance system of the Top creative group Denton nton Enigmacroft which plummets Designs are likely to do their helplessly towards the surface of reputation no harm at all with a planet. their latest brainchild entitled The next thing you remember Enigma Force, the long-awaited is coming round beside the ruins sequel to Beyond's Shadowfire, of your ship. Somewhere in the writes David Bishop. back of you mind you recall the Although slow, and sometimes computer's last message tedious to play, Shadowfire concerning destructor tugs on represented a courageous step their way to destroy the planet. forwards in game design and Meanwhile, back at the plot, this momentum has been reptiloid stormtroopers, loyal to continued with Enigma which Zoff, are locked in battle with off are locked in battle with follows the further adventures of the Insectoid inhabitants of the the Enigma team AFTER they planet. captured the Republican dictator 3. Oops General Zoff Shadowfire was a strategy game relying primarily on YOUR MISSION A bewildering array of icons The beauty of this game is elegantly designed icons and You must find the Insectoid are displayed on the lower half that you don't have to sit and status windows to provide a leader and enlist his support in of the screen. These are divided watch all this happen if you don't want to, instead you can be off graphical Tapestry which wasn't locating Zoff before the planet is into the following sections: quite convincing. destroyed. Then you must command, movement, characters instructing somebody else in a different part of the complex! Enigma, while retaining icons discover the whereabouts of the in present location, objects in as a means of playing the game, last remaining spaceworthy craft location, objects carried by Add to all this a generous has a much more fluid feel to it. remaining on the planet. character in play. helping of reptiloid baddies, You actually see the results of Your team can explore the sprinkle a few fleeting glimpses your instructions to the team planet's underground complex of the General and garnish with unfold in real time in the top INNOVATIVE GAME room by room and you can give some superbly atmospheric half of the screen. each member a stack of up to music and you have the recipe CONTROL! eight instructions (five on the for an extremely interactive and You play the part of the Enigma Spectrum version) at any one sophisticated arcade strategy THE STORY SO FAR... team leader. Each of the four time such as: select charter/pick game which, from the \"80% While escorting the captured members of your team possess up/explosives/move left/move previewable version\" we at General Zoff to the Emperor's particular skills which must be up/drop explosives/move C+VG had to tinker with, could homeworld to face trial he exploited to the full if your right/activate explosives/pick up prove to be a watershed in game escapes by concentrating his mission is to be successful. tool kit etc. concept and design. destroyed whereabouts of the location, objects 900 DOE DANDER GUARDIAN SAUCERS APPROCHICO FSHATITI III Mediator and end all this chaos. Two players can play this all action arcade adventure with lots of nice touches. Watch out for it. Mediator will also be available for the Commodore 64/128 at the same price. VA-VA-VOOOOMMMM!! The shell roared over my head. I dearly wanted to dive into the nearest pit for cover. \"All right men, this is IT. You Wargamers can now create must invade and investigate the their own battles with Battle enemy rifts and capture any Builder from Lothlorien. It will equipment along the way.\" cost .95 on the Amstrad. On I trembled at the thought of the Commodore it will be combat, but there is no escaping available for .95 cassette and it now, C+VG demands I do my .95 disk. duty. I leapt on to the surface rover, flipped the lid back and slowly clambered inside, my blood pumping fiercely through my Yeehah! Ultimate are out veins ... \"Go for it!\" I told gunning for you with two of its myself ... And I DID. latest releases. The Wild West is Welcome to Koronis Rift, the all the rage, it seems. latest game from those First there's Outlaws on the wonderful Lucasfilm/Epyx people. Commodore 64 and Gunfight for Koronis Rift is the third title the Spectrum and Amstrad. Read Rescue on Fractalus and the reviews in next month's Ballblazer being the other two C+VG. We'll shoot from the lip. to come from this All the titles sell for .95. combination. The quality of the last few The two previous releases games hasn't been up to their were fast paced all action usual standard and the C+VG encounters, but Koronis Rift has review team hope that Ultimate a laid back slant that gives it an can prove themselves number edge. Koronis Rift may not be one with this new batch of as playable as its predecessors games. continued on page 11 CLADOO STAY HERESAR "


"MOOTH GAMES GALORE! VIRRORSOFT STAR DYNAMITE DAN Battle your way through 48 of the most bizarre and hazardous screens you've ever seen to save the world from the dastardly Dr Blitzen and his deadly psychon mega-ray! Spectrum 48K .95 Amstrad/Commodore 64 .95 BOULDER DASH BOULDER DASH Search through 16 caves, each with five levels of difficulty, to collect as many jewels as you can in one of the great classic arcade games of all time! Amstrad/Atari .95 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER Take your seat in the cockpit of the RAF's most exciting combat aircraft to plan and execute a series of daring raids against powerful enemy forces. BBC B/Electron .95 tape, .95 disk ISTRIKE FORCE Sullive I ARRIE 1 SPITFIRE 40 Relive the Battle of Britain at the controls of the legendary Spitfire, rising through the ranks in your quest for the coveted role of Group Captain, DSO, DFC, VC. Commodore 64 .95 tape, .95 disk Amstrad .95 Spectrum 48K .95 Available from good software stockists everywhere. For free catalogue and further information contact: MIRROR Maxwell House, 74 Worship Street, London EC2A 2EN. Tel 01-377 4644 "


"There are twenty rifts to work through and as you move through each rift you will discover new weapon systems that you will have to save for use on higher rifts. There are a host of twists and strategies to follow and a little jotting pad will prove useful if you really want to crack all twenty levels. Along the way you will find items like new laser packs, power reserves, special radars and many alien forms (needing many DIFFERENT weapons and attack strategies). The graphics work well, in fact I would say they are better than Fractalus on the 64. You do get that feeling of movement in the Rover and the landscape is not hollow 3D; it is created with fractal arithmetic and plotted in solid form. I have a little moan over sound, it was OK but could have been a whole lot better with a little more imagination. My version came on disk and loaded very quickly indeed. Koronis Rift will be released by Activision at the end of November, it will retail for around ten pounds on cassette, and  on disk. I do have to apologise for the lengthy descriptions given in the review this month, BUT they do give an indication of the depth of this game as well as the audio/visuals. Koronis Rift is very playable, but this is NOT what this game is all about. It offers excellent presentation, play and DEPTH as a package. It will keep your interest for many an hour. Its strategic tentacles will slowly embrace your brain — urging you on to go for \"just one more rift!\". release for a new game based on surfing. The press release includes industry quotes on the products. The editor of Sinclair User, Bill Scolding, was quoted as saying: \"This game enriches the game player's existence.\" All you Atari fans can now sleep tight. Elite has been converted to the Atari and has entered the Atari top ten chart in the magazine Atari User. Strange no one told Firebird about it! continued from page 9 but it makes up for it in depth. The aim of the game is to leave the comfort of your mother-ship and investigate the planet below which is called Koronis. The planet holds great wealth in the form of weapon systems and all you have to do is pick the planet clean. If only life were THAT simple. You have a Surface Rover at your disposal to get around the planet, and a repo-tech robot that investigates and retrieves booty in any hulks you find on the planet surface. And a Psytek Science Droid that stays on the mother-ship waiting to analyse the booty you bring back. When you start your mission on the planet surface you are faced with a drivers-eye view out of the Rover and a bevy of instruments. The instruments are crucial for a successful mission, they include a scanner showing where hulks are on the planet surface, what additional systems are aboard, engine status, speed, power reserve, weapon reserves and shield status. The screen is split into two sections, the top half shows the planet, the bottom half is the control area. Here you can choose from a variety of control options, use a new weapons system, control your Repo-tech robot, call the mother-ship, instruct your Psytek Droid in the mother-ship and set game parameters. You can move around the planet quite easily, simply move the joystick left or right to face the direction desired and push the joystick forward to accelerate and backwards to stop. As you move about you face an undulating landscape of mountains and plains that give a rough ride if not taken seriously. By using the scanner you can locate the hulks quite easily. When found, the Repo is sent to loot it. However, alien ships attack you and they must be destroyed before Repo can return to the Rover. You can then return to the mother-ship with the booty and store it, or continue onwards, with it in storage on the Rover. If you return to the ship the Psytek Droid takes over and you can view its examination of the booty. The goods are passed to Psytek on a conveyor belt and you then decide whether to dismantle it and get Hilocredits, lolly to you! Analyse (show efficiency, power and value of the object), exit ship (go back to planet for more), or end trip and thus save your current position to disk for play at a later date. I do love this bit, the Psytek Droid has such tasty, little cherry eyeballs (yes, cherry!). As he logs your booty into the mother ship his arms and eyes peruse the goodies closely. recently had a sneak preview of Radar Raiders on the new Commodore mega-machine, the Amiga. Phew, it is a flight simulator with strong arcade elements. The graphics, sound and playability are hard to believe. The new generation of computer games is truly starting to arrive. I'll keep you posted on this one. Could this be the world's first slapstick computer game? Sweevo's World from Gargoyle Games is all about the adventures of an accident prone robot called Sweevo. He's the sort of chap who gets everything wrong — but he's been given the chance to redeem himself by sorting out the problems on a planet once owned by the extremely odd Baron Knutz and his wife, Hazel. Remember to check out the Eidolon, a fantasy action game from Activision, which should now be on the shelves of your local software store. C+VG grabbed the chance of a sneak preview of the game and we reckon Activision has another winner with this Lucasfilm game. Transported by the Eidolon, a strange 19th Century time machine, you find yourself in a maze-like world of magical caverns filled with weird creatures. The graphics are first class and with 20 levels to explore it should prove fiendishly difficult to solve. Activision also has another Lucasfilm game out, Koronis Rift. It's about a techno-scavenger, a kind of robotic hyend, scouring the fabled planet of Koronis for its ancient technological treasures. Mapping fans will have a field day with this one. You even have to map the mountains. I must get my eyes checked! In the November issue of Computer Gamer the front cover featured a picture of a certain winter sport and the claim that Winter Games from US Gold was reviewed exclusively in that mag. Wel, it just isn't so!! Commodore User also feature a full blown review of Winter Games the same month. Maybe next month... A recent chat with US Gold Supremo Geoff Brown proved interesting. He has just taken delivery of his new car, a rather stunning red Ferrari. Just how much did it cost him? It leaves little change from ,000. Talking of cars I hear the Ultimate team are gearing up. The team had driven Porsches, but Tim Stamper felt like a change, so he has taken delivery of a new, red colour of the month? Lamborghini. What's the number plate? Why, TM 19, of course! A little gem passed my desk this month. It was a press Are Gargoyle having a subtle dig at Ultimate? Will Sweevo make you laugh? Will C+VG have a review of this graphically excellent and funny game next issue? You bet! "


"FREBRD IS A TRADEMARK OF BRITISH TELECOMMUNICATIONS PLC BT Ses ELITE SA TRADEMARK OF ACORNSOFT LTD ACORNSOFT 1954 CAT "


"BE DANGEROUS. Play Elite the ultimate, award-winning space challenge. It's an interstellar mind-game with incredible 3D VectorGraphic space flight simulation. Elite's been called the \"Game of a lifetime\" Front View You take command of a Cobra MK Ill combat craft and trade with alien cultures on over 2000 planets in eight galaxies. Pick your destination on the starmap, check the computer's 4-way viewscanand make your first jump into hyperspace. Starting with COMMODORE 64 'Harmless' status, you pick up combat skills to win ratings of 'Average' to 'Dangerous'. If you can handle it you could become one of the Elite, and win the chance to compete in the Elite World Championships It's dangerous all the way. \"To play it is to be entranced, enthralled and ensnared... stunning.\" (Computer & Video Games Magazine). \"A brilliant game of blasting and trading... truly a megagame\" (Gold Medal Award, Zzap!64 Magazine). \"One of the most imaginative games ever designed to run on a home computer...\" (Crash 'Smash', Crash Micro Magazine). Elite is here now for the Commodore 64 and 128 and Spectrum, and (very soon) for Amstrad and Msx too-complete with Manual, Novel, Control Guide, Ship Identification Chart and more. Elite. Be dangerous. Front U *Zzap! 64 Magazine. FIREBIRD FIREBIRD SOFTWARE. WELLINGTON HOUSE UPPER ST MARTIN'S LANE. LONDON WC2H 9DL GOLD EDITION "


"VG JAN software REVIEWS Software BE SWORDS AND SORCERY GA OF E MOM Are they really mind-blowing 3D technicolour visions like the adverts tell you or does it look like someone has simply scribbled on the screen with a magic marker? SOUND game soured at han EXCUSEScx SOUND Does the game sound like a Duran Duran LP played at half speed? Or does the noise from your micro knock you half way across the room? The C+VG review team don't play games with their ears blocked up you know! VALUE Is the game really worth all those pennies? Will the novelty last? Is it worth going without C+VG for a month because your parents won't come up with the extra pocket money? Or could YOU write a better game? pages, and they wrote it!). If you imagine a line of text at ELI THE DULE the bottom of the screen with the left-most command ENCE STRO highlighted; \"HIT magic act talk use\" TERHOSIER Now, two keys will move the line left or right, highlighting EFENCE STANO each new command as it reaches the left hand side of the screen, and the third will select the option. SILENCE Each of these base commands will then produce a EBIRTo Do BATTLE sub-menu. \"Hit\", for example will display the various forms of attack you can use. If you're holding a sword, you could HACK you opponent. NOU HOLOING OUSI Magic works on the same HIT NAGIC HOCE UCI TOK principle, when you select the desired spell, there is as suitable  Machine Spectrum darkest recesses of the special effect, and the program  Supplier. PSS dungeon, and return with a suit will inform you how well it  Price: .95 of armour. Honestl worked. Okay, not the strongest of Handle and Act are very Swords and Sorcery has been plots. But I for one would rather similar. Both allow you to the root of many rumours in the go looking for a suit of armour manipulate objects. The easy Spectrum world. Remember than picking up every sparkling way to remember is that, Psyclapse and Bandersnatch? Of trinket that comes to handl generally, Act is for objects on course you don't. Those games One of the elements which the ground and Handle is to use never got beyond fancy adverts. sets S&S apart from anything something you are already PSS have taken a much more else is that is only uses six holding. The Act menu also sensible attitude. No hype. They keys. allows you to jump, which let the game speak for itself. Do not despair, purist (logically) causes the scenery to When Spectrum owners hear adventurers! Three of these are go down for a second! the name, a frequent reply is used for movement (turn left. The graphics are very good. \"Ooh. So it REALLY exists?!\" turn right and walk forward) Each monster (there are nearly Well, it most certainly does, and whilst the other three are used 50 different species) will loom it's been worth the wait. in conjunction with the out of the murky passage in 3D There is a quite phenomenal fiendishly simple menu system. before confronting you. All are amount of paperwork with the More on that later. clearly identifiable (and a little cassette About thirteen A4 The screen is set up into daunting!). pages. The first few hundred various sectors. There is a wide Also chests and various other words give an introduction. The band for text (insults, greetings objects, like bottles of wine and authors have made a brave and war cries) in the lowersandwiches are drawn. attempt to make the somewhat middle area. Talking to the people you humarum plot sound interesting. The menu system is not easy meet is great fun! You can be The aim is to venture into the to explain fully it took PSS four friendly or unfriendly, depending PLAVABILITY Will you be playing until the early hours of the morning as you attempt to complete just one more screen? Or do you fall asleep the minute the intro screen appears? BLITZ GAME BLITZ GAME C+VG's way of telling you that the game must not be missed! Once he's forked out for a Dino he can use it as a step ladder to get the rest of his house finished. Then he has to Once he's got the first level constructed Fred finds he needs a bit of assistance in the shape of a dinosaur Fortunately for Fred, Bedrock is growing around him and one of the first new buildings in the city is a Dino-Hire centre. But to hire Dino, Fred needs cash so he has to go and pick up some cash at the rock quarry. persuade Wilma to come home with him so they can set up home together. Once he manages to do that his life can begin in earnest... The game isn't as easy as it sounds. You'll need to make a map as you move from  Machine CBM 64  Supplier: Quicksilva  Price: .95 Yabba-dabba-do! It's good old Fred Flintstone and he's dabbling in a bit of stone-age construction work. In Quicksilva's adaptation of the famous cartoon series programmed by the Taskset people Fred is starting out life in Bedrock, Fred's needs are simple. He wants a house and a wife. So he sets about building a house and finding Wilma. Building a house isn't as easy as it sounds. There are rockdropping pre-historic birds, wild tortoises, dinosaurs and Fred's pet Dino who keeps getting under foot. All of these can hinder Fred's efforts. First he has to clear a space for his new home. Picking up the rocks and taking them to a tip for points. Then he must use more rocks, round ones this time, to begin building his home.  STARTS HERE THE "


"GAE C+VG JAN software REVIEWS 2 1 OF THE MASK OF TE MONH on you mood, insult them, bribe, transmitters and magical threaten, or shout at them. The barriers. computer will concoct a suitable Sometimes \"You sense a combination of the creature's trap' will appear on the screen. name and another phrase. The PSS say that jumping is a good characters will respond often way to escape these, but I physically! always jumped into a \"dirtySomething I found a little great-hole-in-the-middlefrustrating was the speed of of-the-floor\"!! combat. It is very easy to panic PSS are planning many addafter being attacked, and on modules to expand the game completely miss your desired three more dungeon levels option. Instead of hacking at a available in December and The skeleton, I found myself trying Village module used to to pick the lock on a sandwichl enhance your character's skills This is easily corrected, and and abilities and The Arena very rarely fatal. which allows you to get As in Dungeons and Dragons involved in combat with other and some superior games players. your character has a list of For real fans there are badges, attributes which will help him t-shirts and posters! through his quest. These This game can't be classified. determine whether it is feasible It's unique. When it eventually to ask Kevin The Strange to eat hits the shelves of you local the chest. store, raid your piggy-bank! To complement the living foes you will encounter, PSS have also included a number of other . Graphics traps. The standard \"dirty-great  Sound hole-in-the-middle-of-the-floor\"  Value crops up, as well as a number of more inventive things, like  Playability moving walls, matter  Machine: Spectrum  Supplier: Electric Dreams  Price: .95 Sandy White, the man who turned the games world upside down with Ant Attack is set to do the same with the surreal of the Mask. Once again Sandy has delved into the mysteries of 3D and has come up with a stunning new concept. The game features some of the most original graphics ever seen on the Spectrum. The idea of the game is this You and your Jet Suit have been entered in the Space Trials on Planet Newgama III. You've been dumped in the middle of a Hitchcock-style maze with crazily leaning walls and the odd farce field. Your job is to reconstruct a long lost all-powerful robot. You've heard that this robot is the most awesome creation in the galaxy. So awesome that its creators decided never to put all the bits together. They hid them within crystals themselves hidden within voids or \"universes\" within the maze. You want to get the robot together and use it to rule the universe. You must search the maze for the universes containing the crystals. Each universe holds three floating crystals. You have to select which crystal holds the part of the robot you need. Other crystals contain extra ammo for your laser another will beam you to different parts of the maze. Choose the right crystal and a huge section of the robot will float in front of you. Then you must bombard it with laser bolte to shrink it to a size you can rr. As you collect the parts they appear at the bottom of the screen. the last bit to collect is the mask. This hovers menacingly before you at the start of each game. And glares out of the screen, daring you to enter the mazel If you collect the mask first then you could be in trouble! You'll need lots of energy to complete the game and it runs down really fast. The graphics the spinning crystals, robot parts and the crazy maze lift this game away from the run-of-the-mill arcade adventure. O OD  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability no BLITZ GAME SHELLO SFORZAELE NASTY HOU HOLDING EREDO OUST DO 1005 10 location to location otherwise you're in danger of getting lost in Bedrock. Other buildings are being constructed as Fred works away these help you to work out just where you are. The buildings include a service station, a health club, and even a drive-in cinema! Wilma hangs around the health club and the burger bar so if Fred needs a bit of added encouragement he must find her. Finding Wilma increases one of two energy levels shown at the top of the screen and makes his heart beat faster, shown in another window at the top of the screen. Don't let Fred lose heart or he'll give up the building trade. The graphics are excellent recapturing the atmosphere and humour of the Flintstones cartoon series perfectly. Fred looks as if he's walked directly off the cartoon \"set\" and into the computer game. He walks and moves just like his cartoon counterpart and there's a nice routine when he falls over a dinosuar or mad tortoise. He sits on the ground and shakes his head trying to make the stars in front of his eyes disappear. The background graphics are excellent and the sound, especially the Flintsones theme tune is great. Gameplay is challenging. It'll take you quite some time to master building the house and avoiding the hazards. But it is difficult to work out just where you are in the city until a few landmarks start appearing a pen and paper beside your 64 will be helpful. DO053323 Graphics Sound  Value Playability Oo oo  CONTINUES ON PAGE 17 "


"SOFTWARE PRURI PT THE GAME Ocean Street Thiey solda T.IN They solda LUUNIT DALEY THOMPSONS DECATHLON The Best Group of \"HITS» Game History Ist NOVEMBER 1985 RELEASE DATE EYNOL POK BEACH-HEAD NOW SGUAD ALL THESE BLOCKBUSTERS TOGETHER ON ONE GIANT COMPILATION SPECTRUM .95 AMSTRAD .95 COMMODORE 64 .95 DISC .95 COMMODORE and AMSTRADI Stocked at Selected Branches of: WH Smith, Boots, John Menzies Woolworth Greens, Laskys and Rumbelows STAFF OF KARNATH REPLACES SABRE WULF ON THE COMMODORE 64 from... SQUAD MORE FOR LESS 6 CENTRAL STREET, MANCHESTERM25NS TELEPHONE: 061-832 6633 TELEX: 669977 "


"3 C+VG JAN sobtware REVIEHS PANZADROME GUTE BLITZ GAME the quit key! The graphics are interesting making good use of colour. Your first task is to find the Polycrete plant. Without a Polycrete module on your tank you can easily get trapped. Craters appear when you get shot at or when you destroy an enemy tank and you can't cross them unless you've got some polycrete on board to fill the holel Beginners will find themselves making good use of  Graphics  Sound  Value 8 the one  Machine Spectrum  Supplier: Ariolasoft  Price: .95 It's a far cry from adventures to an all out \"total destruction\" shoot'em-up. But the Ram Jam Corporation have taken that big leap for programmers and come up with a winner. RamJam are better known for that devious and amusing adventure Valkyrie 17. The tutonic flavour remains in Panzadrome but in name only. The game goes like this... You find yourself in control of a Hel-Tek robo tank deep inside the enemy Panzadrome. Your job is very simple. Get out there and destroy the 25 reactors dotted around the enemy city. Once you've loaded the game you see a blue-print of the bits of your tank with a technical specification below it. The computer sticks all the bits together for you and then it's out onto the battlefield. only t odo F dos GOODY ANTI-NAIN.HASSIS TIDEO0mm VARZO OTONA TURA SINGLE SHOT MORTAR REPAIR MODULE BLITZ GAME SPELLBOUND foup S»in Machines: Spectrum/C64/128 Amstrad/BBC  Supplier: Elite Price: .95 Go totally over the top as Super Joe, crack commando, takes on the world in an explosive rescue mission. Forget Rambo old Joe's in a class of his own on this battlefield. Basically what you have to do is reach the enemy fortress and rescue the prisoners held there. You have to be fast on your feet and quick on the trigger to defeat the massed forces of the enemy. They come at you on foot, shoot at you with mortars and bazookers, try and run you down with troop carriers and motorcycles. All decidedly unfriendly. Still, you've got your trusty machine gun and a handful of grenades to help you get through. And you can pick up more grenades as you dash across the battlefields, under the tunnels and through enemy strongholds. We played the Spectrum version for this review and the graphics, sound, animation and game play are all excellent. Better, we're afraid to say, than the Commodore version. We've yet to see the game on the Amstrad or Beeb. The Spectrum Super Joe is a big, well animated character. The background and enemy soldiers are also well drawn. The choice of colours is good. Scrolling is smooth and colour clash problems are kept to a minimum. Commando is really a pretty straightforward shoot-out. But the game is difficult enough to keep your interest and addictive enough to keep you coming back for more. There's only one hint really worth giving for beginners keep moving fast and keep blasting everything in sight! Spectrum owners shouldn't miss this Elite version of the classic arcade game. Commodore owners have more of a choice with Alligata's Who Dares Wins II and the soon to be released Rambo game from Ocean You pays your money and takes your choice, Commandos' not a bad choice. Machines: Spectrum English made some tiny errors  Supplier: Mastertronic and when Gimbal tried to make his rice pudding nicer he  Price: .99 was blasted through time to the Will you please welcome back Castle of Karn. the amazing Magic Knight in his Seven other unfortunate latest smash adventure characters were sucked into the Spellbound! castle with Gimbal including The main character of this Florin the Dwarf and Thor who first in a new mid-price range of wishes he had a hammer. games from Mastertronic is Magic Knight gets the call to called Magic and the game help his old friend and zaps off will cast its spell over you too. to the mysterious castle to save Old Magic Knight first Gimbal and the seven other appeared in Finder's Keepers. characters. The main feature of Now his creator David Jones the game is a novel technique has set Magic a new task. which David calls Windimation. Gimbal the Wizard has been What that means is that trying out some very old spells windows or panels full of to make his rice pudding taste options can be called up on the nicer. screen, overlaying the main Unfortunately the scribes who graphics area and each other. translated the spell from ancient These windows are full of COMMANDO COMMANDO COMNANDO ry adventure-style menu options like examine, read, pick up, drop, cast spell, etc which you select using the keyboard or joystick. The Magic Knight then does what you tell him. You also move Magic about the castle using the controls as in more conventional arcade adventures. Each of the seven characters has his or her own personality And Magic must take care of them keep them fed and happy. If he doesn't, the game will soon be over. You can examine the characters to check out their status and maybe discover if there's something they really want. Like Thor and his hammer. If you help them, the characters will help you. The game is not over when the wizard is free. Then you have to help the seven other unfortunates get back to their own parts of the world. The graphics are neat, the sound good and game play is quite simply magic! You'll soon get the hang of using the Windimation menu systemArcade games players and adventurers will enjoy Spellbound. It's tremendous value at just .99 and deserves to be a smash. MBER COMMANDS RURILABLE PICK UP OBJECT DROP OBJECT PROPOSE RAKUWXUN RRETHING D ON D SPELLBOUND RUSTMASTERTRONIC 1985 Graphics  Sound . Value  Playability  Graphic  Sound  Value Playability  CONTINUES ON PAGE 20 10 CONTINUED FROM PAGE 15 "


"THE COUNTDOWN HAS BEGUN From DURELL Commodore 64 E.R.. .95 Spectrum DURELL sales dept., Castle Lodge,Castle Green, Taunton TA14AB "


"THREE NEW TITLES FROM WA GAMES REALTIME SOFTWARE MITED ...THE PROGRAMMERS OF STARSTRIKE 1.95 Tape MATKA 1.95 Tape ZAVOD ZB 4 CBM 64 ONAVTIKA ARCON Arcade adventure from ancient Greece. Large colour sprites. Highly detailed graphics and game play (Unlikely to be available before Christmas) 14.95 SINCLAIR QL  FLJ Microdrive * ADDICTIVE ARCADE ACTION * CONTINUOUS MUSIC AND SOUND EFFECTS * UP TO 21 MOVING FULL COLOUR SPRITES * ONE OR TWO PLAYER GAME OPTION * JOYSTICK/KEYBOARD SPECTRUM + 48K STARSTRIKE II SHADED 3D Forget just vector graphics. Now you can have real shaded 3D, solid objects that pass behind one another. A space shoot-em-up which is more addictive, has more game and has more powerful graphics than starstrike. ALL ACTION ARCADE GAME Real arcade action for your QL Surreal adventure. A knightly quest astride a powerful mount over uncertain Available soon: * Starstrike II (Amstrad) terran * Argonautica (Amstrad/Spectrum) Don't just take our word for it SEE FOR YOURSELVES! ome... dress...*** .....payable to: Starstrike 1l (Spectrum) .95 Starstrike (Spectrum) .95 I enclose cheque/P.O. for .......... Starstrike (Amstrad) .95 Knight Flight (QL) .95 Please debit my Access No. Argonautica (CBM 64) .95 Rush me: Realtime Games Software Ltd., Prospect House, 32 Sovereign St.Leeds LS1 4BT 0532 458948 "


"C+VG JAN sobtware REVIEWS DOPPLEGANGER INTERNATIONAL RUGBY discovering certain objects. At the start of the game your scope for exploration is limited until you've found the first three ingots. Bring one back to the start point and you'll gain access to more of the castle. Then you'll be able to complete your task which is to take the bronze, silver and gold ingots back to the west battlements The castle is packed with nicely animated nasties and the puzzles are pretty hard to solve. The graphics are colourful and the sound effects add to the atmosphere One minor criticism is the representation of the sorceress. There's no animation of her figure at all and moving her around is a bit like shifting a cursor around the screenvery wooden. A nice addition to the growing number of arcade adventures for the Amstrad. Check it out. EXMBBTER 89 HALF 1 Machine: Amstrad  Supplier: Alligata  Price: .95 More nice software for the Amstrad at last programmers seem to be getting the best out of this machine. Doppleganger is a 3D maze arcade adventure featuring a sorceress with a split personality. She and her alter ego or Doppleganger that's what the word means folkshave to brave the dangers of Castle Doom and uncover a hoard of gold, silver and bronze ingots. You have to use the two characters to perform certain tasks. The sorceress can pass through blue framed doors while her green spirit form can pass through green framed doors. Both can pass through white framed doors. But they'll need keys to get through locked ones just like any ordinary person. There's a time limit indicated by an hour glass in the top left hand side of the screen. Once the sands of time run out it's the end of the quest for both characters. But your time can be recharged by HALF  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability CO COCO CRITICAL MASS DOEN + 92 CRITICAL MASS  Machines CBM64/Spectrum Supplier: Durell . Price: .95 Oh no! An outlying system of the Tarran Federation has set up an advanced anti-matter conversion plant on an old asteroid and some dastardly allens have taken it over and are threatening to destroy not only the asteroid but the entire galaxy as well. Hmmm! So who do the colonists send for? The Bug Hunters? The A-Team? Mike Hammer? No they send for can discover their evil plot. You begin the game in a pod which houses your craft. It opens up in a nicely animated sequence to reveal your craft You take off in search of danger and adventure The craft is very tricky to control. But it is protected by a force shield. So you have a bit of protection while you're learning to pilot it. There are the alien defence systems to contend with too some appear as sponge like balloons, others ride in ships similar to your own. You have a little jump pack which you can use to guide your pilot to the next pod using the pointer at the bottom of the screen. Your next craft awaits there The graphics on the Spectrum version are sparse, giving a sort of half finished appearance to the game Durell have come up with a nice idea for a game and included some good features, But the unfinished look of the graphics and the control of the craft knock a few paints off the final marks  Machines: Spectrum/CBM64/ Amstrad  Supplier: Artic  Price .95 There are loads of sports games around right now but no one has attempted a rugby simulation. Until now, that is. Artic could have a grand slam on their hands with this simulation of the Home International. You can play the computer or a friend in this novel game it features passing, line-outs, scrums and conversions. Everything you'd expect from a real-life rugby game. You can become the captain of England, Ireland, Scotland, Wales or France for a day and attempt to win the international series. The computer asks you which team you wish to captain and at which of the two difficulty levels you want to start. You also get a league table after each game Now the bad news. The graphics leave a lot to be desired. If Artic had taken a look at Match Day, this game would have been an instant classic As it stands, the two teams are represented by black blob like figures quite well animated but just not big enough to get any real lifelike effect. The man with the ball changes colour so you can spot him. The programmers have included a TV screen, International Baseball style at the top of the screen. This comes into play when it's time to have a crack at a conversion. You kick the ball through the uprights after first checking the wind direction and placing your cursor in the general direction of your kick. But beware the wind can change as you kick! You see this in close-up on the screen and also on the normal field display. This screen also flashes up the logos of companies like Boots and W.H. Smith when it's not in use for the game. Once the disappointment about the stick-men had worn off, I found myself really enjoying this game. It's best played with a joystick, but there is a keyboard option. If you like action sports games, look at International Rugby. We saw the Spectrum version maybe Artic are planning to do big things with the graphics for the 64 and Amstrad version. Hope so! If they do, the game could emulate the successes of the other ball games which have featured in the charts this year. It's your task to pilot your tiny, but well armed rocket-craft, into the centre of the enemy occupation and destroy the antimatter plant before the aliens  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability CD CONTINUED FROM PAGE 17  CONTINUES ON PAGE 22 "


"COMING SOON SPECTRUM cassette .95 COMMODORE cassette disc The worlds first themepark game with numerous hair-raising attractions including Roller Coaster, Ghost Train, Log Flume, Big Wheel, Waltzers and several other exciting mystery rides. .95 .95 AMSTRAD cassette disc .95 .95 1 SIRY slite Just send a cheque or P.O. payable to 'Elite' or quote your Visa number. Elite Systems, Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, England. Tel: (0922)59165 Consumer Hotline\" "


"C+VG JAN sobtware REVIEWS 6 SIR FRED QUAKE MINUS ONE  Machine: CBM 64  Supplier: Monolith  Price: .95 This is not so much a review or even preview. Consider it a progress report. Quake Minus One, released by Monolith, Beyond's new label, is shaping up to be a monster smash. The copy that arrived in C+VGs offices was virtually complete, lacking a few refinements which by the time you read this will have been made. The game scenario is as follows. The terrorist Robot Liberation Front have infiltrated the Titan power complex on the floor of the Atlantic which powers the world's industrial nations. They are demanding liberation of all robots or they will trigger off the destruction of Titan. The only way to avoid destruction is to capture or destroy the Titan computers. Quake Minus One features animated landscaping it has to be seen to be believed and icon driven commands. Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Mikro-Gen Price: .95 In a peaceful time, in a tranquil land, A good king ruled with the honest hand Sword to defend all his subjects born rights With the aid of his daughter and brave, loyal knights, But over the ramparts of dread Castle Feare, Lived a villainous Knight with a wicked idea, He captured the Princess and made her his slave Sir Hugh D'unnyt, black Knight unscrupulous Knave. The King cried \"Who'll champion the Princess so tender? And sent for Sir Vival, Sir Prize, and Sir Spender. But things were so quiet they'd gone off on a quest, In search of the fabled goldlamé string vest. In all of the realm but one Knight could be found, Who was not over ninety or overly round. He was not much to look at, in truth, he was rusty But none could deny he was valiant and trusty With fire in his heart and his hinges well oiled, (The same lubricant in which traitors were boiled) He set off, unknowing what trials lay ahead, Our chivalrous hero, the gallant Sir Fred. So begins the latest game from the Wally people. But this time the game isn't home grown. Sir Fred is the creation of three Spanish programmers based in Madrid And like many red-blooded Latins before him, Sir Fred is searching for a Princess! Fred has to search the many rooms of Castle Feare solving puzzles as he goes in order to rescue the fair Princess. Each time you start the game the computer selects one of 58 game patterns So the game is never quite the same each time you play. S. Fred is a cute character. A bit of a bumbler in fact. Not your average chivalrous knight in shining armour. He wanders about the castle looking as it he'd rather be down the old Goat and Nightgown quaffing a few real ales with his mates But he's got a job to do... Sir Fred's movements are as near lifelike as possible. He has inertia, which means that if he runs too fast he may fall down stairs or run into a wall. His power will reduce each time this happens. There are seven skill levels, which the computer automatically selects. Sir Fred has to hurt his opponent three times to kill him, unless his opponent is trapped in a corner and cannot move backwards. In this case only one hit is needed. Sir Fred can also use the bow and arrows or stones which he has collected The select key moves either a yellow or red box over each item. When you have chosen your object you can operate the use\" key to use that item. Some objects may be used only once, some nine times and others may only be used in certain places. Certain objects can be used as many times as you wish Sir Fred will please Mikro-Gen fans and maybe gain them some new ones with this atmospheric and amusing game. Graphics Sound Value  Playability  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability 999 ROBOT MESSIAH BLITZ A Semi-Ingelligent Droid known as SID has to collect three envelopes which contain parts of a master program. Each envelope must be fed into a master computer which will enable him to free his race and become the Robot Messiah. The version of Robot Messiah supplied by Alphabatim was not quite complete, small alterations and changes will be made to the final version. But it was still good enough to get to grips with. SID is a jaunty little character  Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Alphabatim Price: .95 Beware of press releases that make proud boasts of a game being \"the state of the art\". Believe it or not, they may not be telling the truth. However, that's the claim made for Robot Messiah, the latest creation from the minds of Daley Thompson's Decathlon co-authors Christian Urquhart and Mike Smith. Robot Messiah is certainly impressive an arcade adventure sprawling across more than 150 screens. who can walk, jump, pick-up objects and fire at the nasty gnomes who supervise the robots in the mines of the Android planet. As SID explores the screens he must carefully monitor his energy. Various foods scattered about the planet will keep him perked up as he completes the many tasks to progress through the game. For all those who like their action mixed with problem solving, Robot Messiah will prove a worthwhile investment. Map freaks will also find it a big challenge. Www Graphics Sound Value . Playability COCO SANKAXKA. SCORE 00450 energy "


"C+VGJAN Software REVIEHSG ZOOT BLITZ Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Bug Byte Price: .50 Oh Zoot! The Mankins win again! But I'll finish them off next time. Bug Byte bounces back onto the software scene as a budget label with Zoot an entertaining pick-up-the Bodkin, Spike, Grimbo, Jekyll, objects platform style game. Our Bogie, Uggy and Nevil all hero, Zoot, a cartoon style with their own characters. Zoot character has lost his marbles. has to deal with each of these Well, we all do from time to Mankins in different ways. He time, don't we? can bash them or trap them. Or Zoot's marbles have rolled he can wait for his mysterious down into the caverns inhabited mate Zip to come to his aid. by the Mankins Goopa, Zoot is an entertaining and addictive game above DOD0375 standard for budget products. The graphics are simple but really nice and the sound is great too. There's a really nice end of game speech synthesis. You hear your Spectrum shout \"Oh Zoot!\" when you fail to beat the Mankins. Get your parents to buy you a new Zoot for Christmas you might even want to miss the Queen's speech. SABOTEUR  Machine: Spectrum  Supplier: Durell  Price: .95 This is what View to a kill should have turned out like! Saboteur is the best game from Durell for an age. Your mission as an ace, Ninja trained, special agent is to infiltrate a high security headquarters, pick up a secret computer disc, blow up the building and escape. Saboteur is a real time all action arcade adventure. Your Ninja mercenary can locate and pick up weapons as he explores the corridors and tunnels but don't take too long or your time will be up. The best way to start the game is to rush to the computer centre and get the secret disc. Saboteur is an addictive, exciting and challenging game. A mixture of Exploding Fist and Impossible Mission. It's a winner-watch it climb the charts!  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability DUDE Graphics  Sound Value  Playability BRAINSTORM! VIE AR KUNG Machine: Spectrum  Supplier: Bubble Bus Price: .99 Fresh from their success with Starquake Bubble Bus set out to win over the pocket money people with Brainstorm and it's a budget game that thinks it's a full price program. Unlike many budget games Brainstorm is a high quality. highly playable game. Here's what it's all about. Professor Brainstorm had perfected a cloning system to produce a replica of any living creature. People were afraid of the Professor and his creation, so he hid himself away on a lost planet and built a castle. He constructed a warp tunnel to trap any creatures that happened to be passing by, so that he could perfect his cloning system to an even greater degree, which he would then use against his enemies on Earth. However, his plan backfired and the Clones he created turned against him and devoured him. Over the years they grew hungrier and hungrier, until one day our hero, Robin Banks, happened to be passing by. zapping aliens and generally minding his own business, when he was sucked into Professor Brainstorm's warp tunnel. He found himself surrounded by hungry Clones. Escape from the castle is his only hope of survival. The game has 650 different locations, 28 varieties of Clones, 62 doors to find and open using keys that are scattered around and eight Guardians of the Tower. Only three keys may be carried at any one time and only one of the special weapons. At the bottom of the screen there are two gauges, one for energy the other for damage. This can be repaired at the cost cost of some energy, or by finding a repair damage pod The graphics are above standard for a budget game, the sounds are average for the Spectrumand the game has that all important addictiveness. Tremendous value for just .99  Machine: Amstrad/C64/Spectrum/BBC  Supplier: Imagine  Price: (Amstrad/C64) .95 (BBC) .95 (Spec) Yie Ar Kung Fu is an accurate conversion of the Konami arcade game. You may have come across it in your local arcade. You play the part of a tough little character called Oolong who has to take on some of the nastiest Ninjas seen this side of a Bruce Lee movie. You start by battling a fat warrior called Buchu who leaps through the air in an attempt to squash you into submission. Buchu can be deceptively easy to beat but beware, those who follow him are far nastier. Kung Fu features many interesting new moves and you'll need at least half an hours practice to master the controls. There are ten to learn. New moves in this game include a neat jumping punch which enables you to take any armed opponent by surprise. Animation is superb almost an accurate copy of the arcade original. If you thought you'd already seen the ultimate karate game then think again.  Graphics Sound  Value Playability co DOORS 00000 DOLORE ELHU  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability 19 "


"WWWWUWXNYEKVIVPUPUU-XUSNJESIWNWESVUULAUW:XIEKVD HIMMAMUNIX MOYSINENSIA BIANRAPBTITNI NXOM DYGI DIATASINIX MDATIMA RAPITFAMX UPU XIV LVPEXVINNU WOJOWIEKVAPUSAUSAINWESV GAME ONE L DEALERS AVAILABLE FROM THESE MIRCOTRONICS 278 MARKET STREEL TAMWORTH STAFFS. ESTUARY PERSONAL COMPUTERS, 318 CHARTWELL NORTH VICTORIA CROSS SHOPPING CENTRE, SOUTHEND ON SEA. DALEVIEW VIDEO, 139 WEST MAIN STREET ARMADALE WEST LOTHIAN WEST WHITSHIRE MICROS, 3 WHITE HART YARD, TROWBRIDGE SEVEN COUNTIES COMPUTERS, 7 PARIS STREET EXETER CHOSEFAME MOTORS, T/A TROWBRIDGE COMPUTER SHACK & TIMBRELL STREET TROWBRIDGE LIGHTING RECORDS LTD. 108 HIGH STREET RUISUP MOOX CHIPEITS COMPUTER CENTRE, 128 SHIRLEY ROAD, SOUTHAMPTON COMPUTER SYSTEMS, 35 HYDE PARK, PNGNTON LTC LTD, 112 EAST STREET SOUTHAMPTON VIKING COMPUTERS, ARONEY RISE CATTON GROVE ROAD, NORWICH MIRAGE MICRO COMPUTING, 24 BANK STREET BRAINTREE ESSEX MICRO ANVIKA, 224 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD LONDON, W1 TASMA SOUND, TIA G.B. COMPUTERS, 230 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD, LONDON, W1. ALTON COMPUTERS, 62 HIGH STREET ALTON, HANTS, D.O.H. SOFTWARE, 120 LOWER VICARAGE ROAD, KENNINGTON, ASHFORD, KENT TERRIS COMPUTER & VIDEO, 17 FAIRWAY, PETTSWOOD KENE DENSHAMS COMPUTERS 329 ASHLEY ROAD PARKSTONE, POOLE, DORSET SOLENT MICRO SYSTEMS 25 BARGATES CESTCHURCH, DORSET GEORGES BOOK SHOP 141 ARADA WAY PLYMOUTH HAMLETS 188.196 REGENT STREET LONDON WIDESCOUNT VIDEO, 21 NEW GREEN STREET SOUTH SHELDS, TYNE AND WEAR ALNWICK COMPUTERWARE THE MARKETPLACE ALNWICK NORTCUMBERLAND BORDER SERIES SHOPS 9HDEHEL BERWICK ON-TWEED, COMPUTER EXCHANGE, 42 CANNON STREET BEDMINSTER. BRISTOL PP COMPUTERS, 41 THE HAYES CARDIFF BUCHANANS 112 HEATH STREET TWICKENHAM LANDAU ELECTRONICS 4 LODGE PLACER SUTTON CANTERBURY SOFTWARE, 9 THE FRIARS, CANTERBURY WORTHING COMPUTERS CENTRE 32 UVERPOOL ROAD WORTHING M E LP U R N E JO USE "


"2H SPECTRUM 1798 WORLD SERIES BASKETBALL 90s BH SPECTURE 2 ss RED SPECTRU IN NAKELIN eGO Ter-Gae Name your team, choose your colours, lace up and run'em off the court pass ... fake ... jump... shoot in off the backboard ... GREAT BASKETI Simulating all the excitement (including FOULS!) of the Basketball Challenge. Play head to head or against the computer REACH FOR IT! Imagine Software is avallable from:$ WHSMITH. Men, WOOLWORTH. LASKYS, Rumbelows.GreeneSpectrum Shops and all good dealers. "


"C+VG JAN sobtware REVIEHSO DISCS OF SURE FRA DEATH DR SL just scored. Another thing I discovered was that if you are carrying something and need some energy the cauldrons will take your energy away, but, use the item you are carrying and come back and you will be able to use that cauldron to boost your energy. After rescuing all eight sorcerers you must go back to Sanctuary and take your rightful place at the top of the pillar. This is when you can enter Part Two. A door in the sanctuary leads you through to the new levels. In this part of the game you come across different objects and creatures. The object of this part is not to rescue more sorcerers but to gather up the various hearts scattered throughout 28 screens. Then you must surround the evil necromancer with them. I am still trying to gather up these hearts. The graphics are of the same high standard as the original Sorcery which means they are superb. I especially liked the screen which appears between parts one and two. The screen goes totally black and two large cat's eyes peer out at you from the computer. The graphics in Part Two surpass themselves. Wait and see! This is definitely my all-time favourite game and I'm sure once Amstrad owners have played the game, I won't be alone. Still the best game around on the Amstrad. you are under SOURCTORY. CORREng a Sharp are. energy......35 Supplier: Amsoft Machine: Amstrad (disc only) Price: .95 How can you improve on a perfect game? That was the question I asked myself when Sorcery + arrived in the office The Ed groaned, \"Oh nol We'll never get her out of the computer room now! And he was right. Sorcery+ is brilliant. This time the game is divided into two parts. Part One being very similar to the original, with seven extra new screens. You have to rescue your eight fellow Sorcerers before time represented by a crumbling book runs out. Some of the methods of rescuing them have been altered and some of the sorcerers are in different locations, which all adds to the enjoyment. Throughout the game various objects can be picked up and used to help you on your quest. The strong sword kills the guard, the ball and chain for the evil eye and the biggest advantage, a shooting star and sack of spells, which when triggered off at the right moment kills off your enemies. But, one word of warning, make sure when you are carrying the shooting star you don't get too trigger happy, as many a time my thumb slipped and I wasted the star. One aspect of this version! particularly like is when you have killed something off, a small scroll appeared and told you how many points you had Graphic Sound Value Playability  Machine Spectrum Supplier: Artic  Price: .95 Remember that bit in Walt Disney's computerised movie Tron when two futuristic gladiators battled it out with deadly frisbees? Come on, you remember, there was an arcade machine based on the scene too! Well Artic's Discs of Death is based on this bit of the movie. You control an Impossible Mission style man who is armed with three Frisbees sorry, discs. He stands on a floating platform facing the computer controlled opponent who starts bunging his deadly discs at you. You must attempt to hit him before he gets you. There are a couple of other platforms which you can use to jump back and forth on to avoid his discs or get a good shot at the other guy. Should you get hit, you dissolve into a neat pile of electrically charged dust. The animation of the main character is good you soon get the hang of skimming your deadly discs across the arena and defending yourself against your opponent. But remember you only get three discs luckily they boomerang back to you once you've thrown them but it's not a good idea to leave yourself completely defenceless. And that's about all there is to it. There are three skill levels which basically means that you get fewer platforms to jump on and the discs move faster. If you liked the arcade machine, you'll love this. The graphics are a bit basic -a little more attention to detail would've made this a classic. As it stands it's a fun game to play. 10 3D BOXING BC'S QUEST FOR TIRES  Machine: Amstrad  Supplier: Amsoft  Price: .95 At last a boxing game for the old Ammie! But it's a bit of a disappointment I'm afraid, despite the 3D tag. You get a series of opponents to tackle. Each have different characters and boxing styles. But it doesn't really matter that much as you don t seem to have much control over what goes on in the ring. The boxers move far too jerkily across the ring and the punching action is slow. ageing game based on Johnny Hart's cartoon series. It's basically a \"reaction testing\" game with some nice cartoon graphics You have to help Thor rescue his girlfriend Cute Chick from the jaws of a hungry dinosaur. You have to be pretty quick on the joystick or keyboard to steer Thor successfully through all the obstacles he encounters and the game does get irritating addictive Graphics Sound Value  Machine Spectrum/CBM 64 Supplier: Software Projects Price: .95 (Spec) .95 (CBM 64) Software Projects attempt to breath new life into this now  Graphics Sound  Value  Playability Playability  Graphics Sound  Value  Playability mm  ENDS "


"efardistant future, assemble the cavel to the far die produced in de adventure ever produce the mystical me he best arcade a of history, trave ne depths of s'Probably the U.S.A. a map from th. Intergalactic Spaceship 3556 You are now in the far distant future, quide your craft to the allen planet but don't venture onto the surface for too long!!! 4818s 247 he Gnomes Explore the ayz jo bu! buy amovq pue    S The Black Hole 9999 After travelling through time. assemble the map and your incredible task is almost complete... California Gold Rush 1849 Deadly scorpions, beastly bats. and numerous nasties are on the attack as you search the cavernous gold mines of California. The Gnome Mansion the mysterious location of your fantastic time machine. Assemble the final parts of your craft and begin your epic voyage to past and future. Mythological Greece 43BCA confrontation with Medusa, a fight to the death with only your magical shield for protection Stone Age 9600BC Explore the dark and dangerous caves of prehistoric times, you'll need strength and cunning to reach your goal. Colonial Salem, MA 1692 Hubble, bubble, toil and trouble mix a ghastly witches brew and you'll win through, but watch out for the flying broomstick. f14.95 DISK .95 TAPE U.S. HA E GOLD America COMMODORE 64/128 U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 8881 Software "


"COMMODORE 64 Wizarury PEDIE «A dream come true!\" (Commodore User) \"Wizardry is magic!\" (ZZAP!61) *One of the best games... excellent...get hooked on this game, I sure did!\" (Cominodore Computing International) \"Wizardry proves that the Brits are still the best when it comes to gameplay, matching the best graphics and music with imaginative plotting and fiendish complexity\" (Commodore Horizons) PICK OF THE WEEK (CT Weekly. PC Weekly) FRONT COVER FEATURE/Com. Hor..ZZAPI641 "


"48K Spectrum chronicles of the land of fairlight 1. A prelude: the light REVEALED Fairlight BY BO JANGEBORG (author of 'The Artist') \"Maybe the game of the year!\" Your Spectrum, November 1985 \"... one of the most sophisticated games the Spectrum has ever seen.\" \"... one of the ten best programs ever made for the Spectrum.\" Popular Computing Weekly, October 1985. \"... the best arcade adventure of the year.'' Your Spectrum, November 1985 PEDAGE 12/12 Hanriott Strant Count Cardion nt Gardon London WC ALH TA.01.240142207877 Taley. 892379 "


"he future affects the Back to the Future game and past and present, just as at the movie that will be the past and present packing them in over affect the future. The past isn't Christmas. over and done with. It's still THE FILM there. And once we can find it all starts when Marty a way to penetrate it, we'll be accepts a mysterious invitation able to change things that from Doc Brown. The Doc happen tommorrow.\" wants Marty to turn up at a These are the words of deserted car park in the eccentric inventor Dr Emmett middle of the night to see a Brown, the man who turned a demonstration of his latest Deloren supercar into a fourinvention. wheeled time-machine. Well, Marty does just that and someone had to do his mind boggles at the something with them, didn't fantastic machine that rolls they? out of the back of the Doc's Doc Brown is responsible truck. for sending our hero, Marty It's a souped-up and highly McFly, back to 1955. Perhaps modified Delorean gull-wing not totally responsible. There sports car packed with hi-tech were a few machine gun goodies that have transformed toting Lybian terrorists involved it into a luxurious time too...But more of that later. machine. Get it travelling at The problems of time travel 88 mph and it warps through what happens in the future time. It can visit past of future if you alter something that all you have to do is happened in the past are program in a destination. the basis for the new smash The Doc tests it out with his hit sci-fi adventure movie pet dog Einstien in the driving Back to the Future, written seat. It works. So he throws and directed by Robert his suitcase in the back of the Zemeckis. Delorean, waves goodbye to Back to the Future has been Marty and is just about to set a number one in the U.S. box off for the future when the office ratings and is this year's Lybian terrorists turn up. Royal Film It seems that Doc has been It's one of those movies involved in some shady you'll want to go back to see dealings with these terrorists. more than once, more than he agreed to build them a twice. nuclear bomb just so he could And when the cinemas are get his hands on the shut you'll want to be playing plutonium he needs to run the computer game based on the Delorean time-machine. the film. He didn't build the bomb The game is being released and the terrorists are a bit on the Electric Dreams label unhappy to say the least. and is being masterminded by They come after the Doc with games guru Mark Eyles, ex guns blazing. Quicksilva, together with the The Doc makes a run for it. man who turned Rupert into a Marty attempts to make his computer cult, Martin Walker. getaway in the time-car. The A high-powered team for a terrorists chase him and Marty high-profile project. mistakenly exceeds the 88 Here we take an exclusive mph speed limit. in depth look at plans for the You know what happens He was never on time for classes. He was never on time for dinner. Then one day he wasn't in HIS time at all! Marty McFly, seventeen year-old would-be rock superstar, suddenly finds himself whisked back to 1955 in a souped-up Delorean time-machine. And that's where his troubles really start. Will he be able to make his Mum and Dad fall in love? Will he be able to persuade the eccentric professor that it was HIS future invention that landed him back in the past. And more importantly will he be able to get back to the Future? That's a condensed version of the plot of the latest U.S. blockbuster produced by that wizard of the cinema Steven Spielberg. It's also the plot of a brand new computer game from Electric Dreams. C+VGs time travellers zapped back a couple of weeks into the past to see what the Electric people have dreamt up this time... "


"next, don't you? Marty zaps with Rupert Bear. Outside they play guitar and so on. These He will only be able to back to 1955 and starts are surrounded by rolling options are shown by the dress up as an alien where messing up the past. For countryside and rural icons at the top of the screen. there are cupboards instance his Mum — much franquility inside they are 2) Action Icons. These containing suitable disguises. younger — starts falling in surrounded by computer gear indicate the range of different The drinks must be bought at love with him. Well, this isn't and musical equipment. actions Marty can use to a bar. The guitar must be on. After all what would You, as Marty, will be able influence the other characters played at the dance on the happen to him if his mum to react directly with other in the game. stage.' didn't meet his Dad...? characters in the game, to Marty can only use one of These different actions, and This is when the real action recreate the amazing these if he is in the right the punch, will have one of starts. Marty has to put the adventures Marty has when place in the playing area. three different effects on the past back to rights and he arrives back in 1955. While he is using one of other characters in the game. somehow find the power to The graphics will be a these the icon will flash. Then the characters will remain get him and the time mixture of 1955 and 1985 once he has finished his in the same place for a machine Back to the Future! styles. For example the time action the icon will blank out certain amount of time, or There's lots more to the film display see screen layout and he will not be able to they will follow Marty, or they than we've got space here to for details will be pure use that action again until the will run away from him. tell you — and if we did it 1985 and taken from the icon reappears. The possible in this way you are able to would only spoil one of the dashboard of the film's actions are: get the characters in the most enjoyable films to hit Delorean car, while other Trip. Marly can attempt to trip correct places and positions to you local cinama for an age. status readouts will be any of the other characters up set up situations in which Don't miss it. And don't miss displayed in 1955 style TV while they are passing him. Marty's father can impress the game of the film either. sets. Alien Disguise. Marty can Marty's mother. Read on for more details... The game is based on disguise himself as an alien 3) Hi-resolution Marty's efforts to return to to try and frighten any of the background. Possibly THE GAME OF THE FILM 1985 from 1955, and on his other characters. digitised scenes from the film. Back to the Future — the efforts to get his parents to Love Poems. Marty can hand This background scrolls computer game stars YOU fall in love. love poems to any of the smoothly as Marty walks as Marty McFly. Your job is The game is played on a other characters. about simple. Make sure your future screen with large animated Buy a Milkshake. Marty can The locations are as Mum and Dad meet up in the characters from the film buy a milkshake for any of follows: past. And find the power to Marty, his mother and father, the other characters. The streets of the town with get you and your time Biff the bully and the Doc. Guitar. Marty can play guitar entrances leading off into the machine back to 1985. The object of the game is to the characters. school, the coffee bar, the Simple? No... to arrange situations in which in the case of the love dance hall and the Doc's The game is being Marty is able to get his poems Marty must collect house, the school, the coffee programmed by Martin parents together. His efforts them before he can use shop, the dance hall and the Walker, whose most recent are frequently sabotaged by them. Doc's house. claim to fame is the Biff. graphically brilliant Rupert Once Marty has managed and the Toymaker's Party. A to get his parents to fall in far cry from the glossy sci-fi love, he must return to the world of Back to the Future, future, with the aid of Doc but Martin will be using a Brown, in the time machine. few techniques he developed during the programming of THE SCREEN LAYOUT Rupert for this exciting new 1) Marty. The figure is fully project. animated and coloured. You The Back to the Future control him with a joystick. He development team, Martin can trip, punch, jump or Walker and Mark Eyles, are perform other specific actions beavering away at Martin's in certain parts of the game. picturesque Lincolnshire home For example if he is at the called Nutwood Cottage, a bar of the coffee shop he will mark of Martin's obsession buy a milkshake, if he is on with everything connected the stage at the dance he will "


"Each location will be four increase the size of the heart screens wide a total play area are: of 20 screens. If time and Get Marty's mother and memory allow these locations father into the coffee bar. may be increased in size to Then get Biff to chase you six screens each. into the coffee bar and trip 4) The Crush Level. This him so that Marty's father is shows how romantic Marty's able to punch him. This mother is feeling. If you are punching action will occur able to engineer an automatically, you have to appropriate encounter arrange all the characters in between Marty's parents then the correct positions for this the heart in this indicator will manoeuvre to succeed. get bigger, if you are unable  Get Marty's mother and to produce an appropriate father together in the dance encounter then the heart will hall and play guitar, this shrink. encourages them to dance You aim is to get the heart together, Biff may appear and to it's largest size by the end separate them in which case of the seven days in 1955, at you will need to get Biff which time you will have to away and get the parents return to the future. back together. Typical situations which will  Give Marty's father the book of poems and arrange for him to meet Marty's mother without Biff around. In each of the different locations there will be scenarios similar to those above which may be used to increase the Crush Level. 5) Photo Meter. This is the photo of Marty and his brother and sister. At the beginning of the game the photo is only half revealed, as you play you will either lose more of the photo or reveal more. If the photo vanishes then you have failed and must start again. The photograph must be fully revealed in order that you are able to return Marty to the future. In the movie Marty carries a photo of his family which gradually fades the longer he stays in the past. 6) The Time Display. This is a copy of the time display in the car and shows the Present Time, the Time Departed which is set for the time when you must leave the past and the Arrival Time, which shows the time when you will arrive in 1985. By comparing the Present Time with the Time Departed you are able to find out how much time you have left to complete the game. Back to the Future will initially be available on the Commodore 64 with Spectrum and Amstrad versions to follow. The film should be at a cinema somewhere near you right NOW! C+VG COMPETITION Go Back to the Future with C+VG You've read about the game, you've heard about the movie, now try to win C+VG's terrific Back to the Future Time Traveller's Kit. All you have to do is simply tell us which five things you'd bring back to the future from a time trip to ANYWHERE in the past and why? How simple can you get? WHAT YOU WIN We've got 10 Back to the Future Time Traveller's Kits for the lucky winners. These consist of a Back to the Future soundtrack album, the paperback book of the film AND a copy of the Electric Dreams Back to the Future game, which will be available for the C64, Amstrad and Spectrum. For example if you'd like to bring back a real live dinosaur to terrorise your next door neighbours irritating dog. or perhaps you'd like a mint copy of the Beatles first ever hit record, or perhaps an original Sinclair 280 computer! COMING SOON. And that's not all folks! Next issue we'll be bringing you another great Back to the Future competition with more star prizes. Don't miss February's C+VG — out on January 16th. Now there's time warp for you... Just fill in the coupon, give the reasons for your choices and send your entry to Back to the Future Competition, Computer and Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Normal C+VG competition rules apply and the closing date is January 16th. C+VG/ELECTRIC DREAMS BACK TO THE FUTURE COMPETITION Tell us which five items you'd want to bring Back to the Future from ANYWHERE in time and why? Item 1 Item 2 Item 3 Item 4 Item 5 Name Address Computer owned (tick box) Spectrum a C64 Amstrad "


"THE HOST IN THE MACHINE M.U.D Multi User Dungeon \"MUD leaves conventional adventures for dead\" (PCW), \"MUD is the addictive game\" (Telelink) \"10 out of 10 on all counts\" (Which Micro) It's here The most talked about computer game in the world. M.U.D is more than Adventure, more than Communication, more than a new way of using your Micro. It's fun, it's addictive, it's challenging, and, if you have a modem, a computer and a phone-line, it's all yours! Hundreds of people are already playing. This is your chance to join them. Call the MUD-Line now 01-608 1173 T CONFUCIUS is a division of British Telecommunications plc. MUD is a trademark of BT/MU.SE "


"C+VG sobtware WAR GAMES WAR G THE BULGE BATTLE FOR ANTWERP. mod its shoralism minute properly Machine Spectrum CBM64. Mave Germany free to deal with Kampfgruppe Piper which oftob confusingly inaccurate. Supplier: Argus. Press Software Russia bloge. The Bulge's nearly stumbled on the depot C ombat Command \"A\" of 9 was unaware of its foxistence briefing booklet describes this Price .99 Armored Division, for example, plan as \"sound, although throughout the band Moreover, is described as \"9 CCA Many of the war games ambitious No senior had the fuel fallen into German Regiment\". released for computers are recommander on either side. hands it could not easily have Most of these objections can thought so been distributed to their entire be overcome by organising the based on real historical The Germans rapidly modified force. game for more than one player. incidents. But how accurate Hitler's masterplan, at first In the real battle of the Bulge in the real battle The game controller, with are the games O VG Lacitly and then openly into the like every other battle access to the computer, would decided to put the Bulge Small Solution', a double units got lost, tepotted enemy pass limited information to the e i the Battle for Antwerp to welopment of American forces where there were none. strategic player, sitting with his the test. east of the River Meuse, which exaggerated or underestimated -gwn map but without was the best they could hope to their own peril, blundered into a knoWedge of the enemy order We asked Dr Stephen actieve each other, were short by: of battle Dadsey Tormerly of the bel prosents were first the their own side and turned UNIK Athira player might be given Imperial War Museum and secret assembly and supplying exactly the right place be purest accoss to the tactical map to now working as a researcher of seves amourpal and thirteen accident. Non of this happes fight the battles in this way the n tontx division Tront an army in The Bulge advantages of the computer on the BBC's Soldiers gara short at parang gipment At the same time the player is program in bookkeeping and 109 ve bus expert opinion and their tower overcome the told too little of what a real movement would be maximised, The Bulgo based on the powerful artillery and alcforge : general would know. Two and its shortcomings in German Offensive in the which the Americans used to simultaneous levels of command historical realism minimised Ardennes in 1944. Jess than compensate for their ferlok a re offered. A strategic map But to play the game properly both way to being a good intanter and artrou the chief shows the area from the it is necessary to draw and keep wargameThis bo to the American arabilen was German frontier to the River one's own maps, and note: Bolayer to supply the other half identifying the nature of the Meuse (the Sambre in the movement and losses on paper Whdeas Argus nightly say, German Threal booklet), approximately the This is exactly the kind of books the traditional wargame The main reason for the initial operational area of the U.S. First keeping that the computer sometimes puts you in the surprise and success of the Army, on which units of both program is meant to render position of god rather than a offensive was that it simply did sides are shown moving. The obsolete, and after a while they Field Marsbal t bell not make sense as an operation plave jumps from this to a good player will abandon the booklet has dnutnber of of war: tactical map of a few kilometres program to carry on the game spelung errors the computer it was bound to fail, and it in which specific units fight the himself by more conventional proprer chn d ic General Patton at least enemy. methods. The Bulge is fun, and Intorination from the players in Wanted to offer no defence to On the general map which highly playable if the events it is the sorreranstier og bf was the first German penetration, still does not cover the whole meant to represent are ignored. which surrounded real letting them over-extend and area without scrolling military The victory criteria in The -commanders. The drawback is improving the American chance units are shown as NATO Bulge's program are based that, whereas Rongomputer pf destroying them completely. standard symbols, but no orders chiefly on a notional points watgame can be altered or \"The Bulge, in which the player can be given to them value of towns on the strategic Pimprovised, thus tinished program takes either side against the This double command level map held or captured. This also son rape cannot be improved computer or another player means again that the player has must be changed to provide 4, Kupon by the player it must be with linked Spectrums more knowledge, and takes realistic wargame. pecteat. replicates the initial surprise by more decisions, than any Given that the breakthrough This is what Argus claim to permitting the Allies no initial individual in the real battle. to Antwerp was not feasible, have done with The Bulge, and orders for their forces, and It is at the tactical level that the only objact of the offensive sadly they have not delivered. thereafter places, rightly, its the game is weakest. The Allied for either side was the inflicting The fundamental problem is one greatest stress on the artillery, their most important of enemy casualties: the o game construction Intonas intelligence bute encouraging weapon, is factored in to their Germans in their original hope with The Bulge, a program the player to interpret its brief units strength (although, oddly, of weakening or breaking the mechanism. Is writter first and steports and issue orders German artillery is shown as Western Allies, and the Allies in applied to a historical event accordingly distinct units). The German S. S easing their crossing of the later. What is far more difficult Unfortunately, the player is dits are given greater fighting Rhine in the spring. Mis to find out what happened told tar too much. Whereas the power because I mer few In the event, the Germans the historical event, isolate real battle was fought in a state King Tiget tanks Je succeeded just enough for the those points which made it of intelligence confusion, the In most cases these were far Allies to request an early diferent from any other event, game provides the player with to the rear of the column wie offensive in the East by the Red and find mechanisms to bring the complete order of battle, U.S. tankmen who saw Tigers Army this out for the player. including re-inforcements, for everywhere showed a marked Far From strengthening The Ardennes offensive was both sides, while in its course reluctance to engage arty Germany's hand against Russia launched through Hitler's belief the name, strength and status the name strength and status German armour the legacy of the Bulge was that the Anglo-American of both friendly and enemy The game neither enforces Russian rather than American Russian alliance was units is automatically and not requires units to keep tanks in Berlin fundamentally unstable. Its accurately given when desired. Tormation or present a solid object was to drive through to Even worse, the German front, both of which are major the coast at Antwerp cutting player is told that if the fuel problems in a real battle Graphics: off the British and Canadian depot at Spar\" (sic again, and it Despite the stress placed by Sound: forces which would then was not at Spa but near La the game on intelligence in Isomehow) be destroyed. The Gleize) is not captured alt noting the position of friendly Value: Western Allies would collapse, Garmant units move and fight at and enemy units the designation Playability: negotiate a separate peace, and half strength\". In fact they are given by the program is NGO "


"Post Haste Software & POST HASTE IS BEATEN! The sheer volume of new releases just can't be described in this advertisement! But, of course, as the premier mail-order service, we've got them all in stock! Or, fi they're about to be released they're here within hours and on their way within minutes. Fight Night, Rambo, Commando, Goonies, Tomahawk, Lord of the Rings, Zoids and many, many more! LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE DISCOVERY KIT (Activision) This has to be the most unusual program of the decade. You'll have your very own Little Computer Person. He'll live in your computer in a three floor house. You'll feed him, talk to him, play games with him, and be part of his life. He'll certainly be part of yours! In fact, he'll probably take it over. We promise you this will be the most astonishing and irresistible creation you've ever loaded in your computer and you'll feel awful when you turn it (him?) off! This is not, incidentally, a game! \"Animation of the Pet Person is incredibly lifelike. A stunning advance in computer entertainment 97% overall rating! Zzap. C64/128 [D] .99 ROCK 'N' WRESTLE (Melbourne) The eagerly awaited fighjt sequel to the record-breaking \"Way of the Exploding Fist\". All the action you'd expect and a lot you won't believe! One or two players, 10 possible opponents, over 25 joystick moves, astonishing graphics, unbelievable animation. It's the sequel everyone wanted! Spectrum .95 Amstrad (C) .95 C64/128 (C) .95 The total postal software service! Post Haste is part of GB Microland, the South of England's unique computer shop. Thousands of software titles. Lots of experience. The place that gave new meaning to the word \"friendly\". But not everyone lives nearby. So Post Haste Software was born. To bring the best to your door. With top service. Here's how. No \"Club\" to join, no \"subscription\" to pay. You come in our shop for free. Why pay to buy by mail? Unique \"double-your-money\" voucher with the 40-page catalogue. Check the box in this advertisement! Software for other computers? No problem. QL, Apple and IBM. Ask for lists. Post Haste has the lot! Postage free in the UK. Europe? Add 95p. Elsewhere? Add .50. For the whole order, not each program. Everything mailed in special cartons. No used boxes or padded bags. Who needs squashed software? Order by post or phone, day or night. Check the coupon for details. Then relax. It's fast! Pay by cheque, bank draft, PO, Access, Visa, Mastercard, Eurocard. Post Haste is convenient! ALREADY SEEN SOMETHING YOU WANT ON THIS PAGE? GO RIGHT AHEAD AND ORDER NOW! Use the coupon or write on your own paper. Be sure to include all the details from the coupon. Cross cheques and POs for safety. Your software will be on its way by retum. So will your catalogue. And your unique \"double-yourmoney\" voucher! SWORDS & SORCERY (P.S.S.) 18 months in the making, it's here at last! The supreme role-playing Dungeons & Dragons game, based on the newlydeveloped MIDAS adventure system, which will lead to other adventures and extensions to Swords & Sorcery itself. \"It's very difficult to do this game justice in a few words the sheer size and depth defy labelling. An impressive piece of software indeed.\" — Crash. Spectrum (C) .95 YIE AR KUNG FU/(Imagine/ Konami) At last! One of the biggest programs of the year! The current arcade hit brought into your own home, with all the dazzling action you'd expect! Fight your way through screen after screen! A smash-hit if ever there was one! \"Konami's arcade hit brought home. Just Great!\". Games. Amstrad (C) .95 Comm 64 (C) .95 Spectrum [C] .95 THE POST HASTE CATALOGUE The Post Haste catalogue is just 90p with a unique \"double-your-money voucher tucked inside! Yes, the Post Haste catalogue contains a .80 voucher to use for your first order! How's that for value? You get 40 big pages crammed with over 100 program descriptions. Recreation, utility, strategy, adventure, arcade they re all there! And so is your .80\"double-yourmoney\" voucher! Pack pictures. screen shots, review quotes. and much more. Programs for five micros Amstrad. Atan. BBC. Commodore 64/128 and Spectrum. You re spoilt for choice with Post Haste! And your catalogue is the gateway to a huge program range from Post Haste: over 4,000 titles spanning 10 major micros! Where else is there such a choice? Phone Orders (24 hrs) (0705) 269333 TO GET YOUR CATALOGUE WITH THE \"DOUBLE-YOUR-MONEY\" VOUCHER, OR TO ORDER SOFTWARE, USE THIS COUPON! Send your catalogue. I've enclosed 90p. Don't forget my .80 Double-YourMoney voucher for me to use with my first order! I want to order software right away and the details are below. I want the catalogue too so I've added 90p. Don't forget my .80 Double-YourMoney voucher! My name is: I My address is Post code .......... My computer is Can we contact you by phone if there's a query? 1 STD/Exchange ............. Number IF YOU'RE ORDERING SOFTWARE, I PLEASE PRINT DETAILS OF THE PROGRAMS YOU WANT! PROGRAM NAME PRICE WINTER GAMES (Epyx/US Gold) The success of Summer Games and then Summer Games II is now legendary but until you've seen and played \"Winter Games\" you ain't seen nothing yet! Six stunning winter sports simulations to leam and master as you go for gold. An absolutely brilliant program playable by all the family at once! Bob-sled, ski jump, figure skating, and more! \"Extraordinary graphics, incredibly skilled programming, immensely playable, totally absorbing. An absolute winner all the way!\" Computer Games C64/128 [D] .95 C64/128 [C] .95 and mont program np. figure ncredibly totally ADVENTURERSI SPECIAL EXTRA SECTION! There are dozens of adventures in the Post Haste catalogue from virtually every major producer. Just about all the superb Infocom range Is there and many others too! And Poat Haste carries the full range of Infocom Invialcluce, plus hint and guide books to many other adventures tool Answers to the probleme that keep you awake at night? The catalogue llete them all Catalogue with .80 voucher Add .90 Postage is totally free in the UK Add .00 Europe postage for whole order Add .95 Airmail elsewhere for whole order Add .50 TOTAL AMOUNT ENCLOSED  PAYING BY CHEQUE OR POSTAL ORDER? Please make it payable to Post Haste Software i and cross it for safety's sake! CHARGING IT TO YOUR VISA, ACCESS. MASTERCARD, EUROCARD? May we have your card number, expiry date and signature? MIIIIIIIIIII Expiry date Signature Now mail your order to POST HASTE SOFTWARE GB MICROLAND. 7 QUEENS PARADE | LONDON ROAD, WATERLOOVILLE HAMPSHIRE PO7 7EB, UNITED KINGDOM Orphone (24 hours) 0705 269333 1 THE POST HASTE SERVICE We can supply any program you've seen advertised. If it's released, you'll usually get it by retum. If it's not, you'll get it faster when it does come out. Simply order it and sit back. And here's our promise: we'll never cash your cheque or charge your credit card until a program is packed and ready to mail. That's Post Haste service! MERCENARY/(Novagen) The wait's been worth it! Another total winner! Incredible 3-D vector graphics, changing with amazing speed. And the game's different each time you play! You'll really feel as if you're flying above the planet Targ! Believe us! \"We couldn't believe the speed. Smashing!\". Zzap 64 Comm 64[C] .95 Comm 64 (DJ .95 Atari [C] .95 Atari [D] .95 "


"C+VG software WAR GAMES WAR G! WATERLOO GREEN GROSU CRUSADE IR EUROPE  Machine: Spectrum  Supplier: Lothlorien  Price: .95 Waterloo is a one player wargame, smartly packaged in a video wallet and includes a well-presented booklet, which contains all the necessary information to play the game together with some tactical hints and historical information. While not as detailed as Crusade in Europe, the booklet is easy to use and does include a printed map. Set in one of the most interesting of all wargame periods, the game is for one player only, giving you command of the French army and will appeal mainly to those seeking a challenge and to experienced wargamers rather than arcade game players. Unlike Lothlorien's last war game, The Bulge, the graphics are not to arcade standard but have been based upon wargaming symbols. While cannons and horses would have looked nice on the screen, there were definite advantages to receiving clear information about units without having to use the cursor to distinguish one unit from another. Control is by keyboard inputs giving a wide range of command options and there is always a screen prompt to remind you of your current options. Movement is quick and simple With every computer wargame the essential elements stand or fall by the \"skill' of your computer opponent and the variability of the game. There are three levels of play and the computerised British fight a demanding game at level three, I was unable to score a significant victory. The game also allows for the computer to take control of some of the French army corps or to split up the corps into individual units each under its own set of orders. Both of these options in different combinations give great scope for interesting replays of the game and add greatly to the overall playability. The map itself is clear and concise being somewhat larger than the full screen, but sound is rudimentary Overall, I felt that Waterloo is a welcome addition to the current crop of computer war games which seem to be a fast growing part of the market. While the game is sufficiently demanding for the experienced wargamer, the facility to give partial control of your army to the computer could make this a good buy also for the novice to \"cut his teeth on\". Definitely a game I shall continue to play.  Graphics 6  Sound Value Playability mo ASSAULT OR PORT STANLEY Machine: CBM 64 Garden: Battle of the Bulge: The  Supplier: Micro Prose/US Gold Battle for France  Price: .95 cassette and There are then a number of different variations available for disk each scenario. In addition to Normandy, The Rhine and the this, the player has complete Bulge the Crusade for Europe choice of 1 or 2 player game: is on. And it contains a good who controls which side: mix of action and excitement for the new wargamer and a lot different sides: Choice of Icon for the more experienced player. or token graphics: Style of This game follows the same movement: Joystick or keyboard pattern as a number of other control simulation type games currently the facilities within the game available which I am pleased viewing terrain, checking to see are becoming more overall situation, checking units and more popular, and generals are also quite The first point which is worth useful making is that although at an I must say, however, that initial glance many of these personally found the overall level simulations seem quite of graphics disappointing and foreboding, this is often not the although similar to the other case when it comes to the games in this series, not really actual play of the game. quite up to the current standard This is true with Crusade in of graphics in some of the other Europe. The game mechanics current wargames. I put this are, in fact, amazingly simple mainly down to their size. although there is still plenty to One of the options available think about for the more in this game is to view the experienced wargamer. Overall disposition of the troops. The booklet, which is To be frank, the drawing of this included in the pack, is map is very slow although it extremely well presented and does not really detract too easy to follow. If you just want much from the game to get straight into the play, you Sound effects are rudimentary do not really need to read very but not all that important. much at all for a game of this In general, I feel that this potential complexity. game is a good buy, well There is, however, a wealth of presented, thoroughly additional information in the researched and enjoyable to booklet for the real buff play. The levels of computer historical and military tactics built into the one player background, hints on play, game make it perfectly possible maps, details of units etc. All of for either the novice or the this, helps to create atmosphere veteran to have a good battle. and, I found, a quite surprising although I cannot help feeling sense of excitement and that the game will be better addictiveness value for money to the The player has an immense experienced wargamer than the number of options open to him novice or the arcade freak. on loading up the program. He  Graphic first of all chooses which major  Sound scenario he wishes to play: Battle of Normandy; Race for  Value the Rhine, Operation Market Playability  Machine Amstrad this sort of exploitation.  Supplier. Amsoft The game opens with you in Price: .95 command of a warship approaching enemy ships \"Relive the triumph of our brave blockading the islands. While forces who went to the Falkland Shelling the ships, enemy planes Islands to fight for the freedom will also attack you. There is of a small group of British also the option of taking off in subjects,\" says the cassette a helicopter from the ship to inlay. battle with the aircraft. But basically this is a battle Ultimately the mission is to game in search of a title. It reach the islands and pick up could be anything. Assault on troops who have been running the Isle of Wight, for instance sabotage missions. However, for some reason, Hardly an original idea, we Amsoft has decided to cash in think you'll agree on the still fairly recent troubles  Graphics in the South Atlantic. It must be annoying to many people who  Sound fought and suffered through the Value conflict to have to put up with . Playability Do non "


"GAMES WAR GAMES WAR GAMES BATTLE OF BRITAIN AUG. 28.25 UB: 209  Machine Amstrad/CBM 64  Supplier: PSS 234 SQUADRON  Price: .95 FIR. 15 Battle of Britian, part of the Wargamers series from PSS, is designed to appeal to both the more experienced wargamer and the novice The optional arcade sequences should make the game more accessible for the beginner. The Battle of Britain took place between July and October 1940 when the German Luftwaffes attempted to defeat the RAF and pave the way for a German invasion of Britain. Your mission is to control ammunition, landing strips and Fighter Command and deploy the size of the attacking forces You aircraft against the German Complex and satisfying, Battle airforce. You must also struggle of Britain builds into a very with the problems of flying time, atmospheric game. The arcade The instruction booklet is comprehensive and the only grouse is that it does not contain any historical background to the Battle of Britain.  Graphics  Sound  Value Playability sequence graphics which, include flying a Spitfire in air-toair combat and firing antiaircraft guns are more than adequate. DECISION IN THE DESERT  Machine: Amstrad  Supplier: CCS  Price: .95 the presentation of the onscreen information slightly less easy to take in at a glance as a result. The game itself is very good and there is little that could have been built in that would Arnhem simulates the \"Market Garden' operation in 1944 when the British planned to smash the German occupation of Holland. Three divisions of Allied troops were dropped behind enemy lines to capture vital ARRREM in the one-player games are a little stilted, slightly unimaginative and a bit predictable. I also feel that the stacking of the units and the graphic representation of their movements are somewhat cumbersome. I am, however, nit picking. Previous reviews of the Spectrum version of this game have certainly sung its prases and, in my view, quite rightly so. The game is user-friendly, and the mechanics are easy to follow. Certain aspects of the phasing of movement are reminiscent of Confrontation bridges. This is an attractively presented, well packaged game It comes in an A5 video wallet with an extremely well presented booklet containing some useful historical background. The screen layout is slightly altered from the Spectrum version of the game and I found really have enhanced it. The map and unit graphics are of a high standard and even the sound effects aren't too bad. There are five game options, covering different sections of the Arnhem Operation. (Option five covering the whole lot) and the player can choose from one, two or three player options. I feel that the German tactics  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability CONVOY  Machine Atari  Supplier: MicroProse/US Gold Price: .95 Decision in the Desert is the follow up to MicroProse's Crusade in Europe. The format and presentation are similar to Crusade. Five campaigns are covered, centering on North Africa between 1940 and 1942. They are Sidi Barrani, dealing with the British victory over Italian troops; Operation Crusader, a month long battle between Rommel and the British at Tobruk; Gazala, dealing with what is thought to be Rommel's finest hour; First Alamein, the last of the great mobile desert battles and Alam El Halfa, the beginning of the end for Rommel. There are variants to each of the scenarios for the players either one or two to excersise his military skills in an effort to alter the outcome. The player is provided with a wealth of game play information, which, although appearing quite complex at first, can be mastered with time and effort. The historical notes are quite comprehensive and, although it is not really necessary to read them to play, they add at lot of atmosphere to the game. The only real drawback about Decision in the Desert is the price. It's a little on the steep side and would probably discourage all but the most dedicated player  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability has the chance to decide at what point to drop his bomb as the aircraft \"flies over the ship in question. Again the graphics . Machine: Spectrum  Supplier: Budgie  Price: .50 Naval warfare during World War Two forms the back drop for this two-player game. Each player British or German takes his turn to enter his orders into the computer after which all the ships move and their positions are plotted on the map. Any ship-to-ship contact is advised to the players. If appropriate, orders can then be given to aircraft which go on scouting missions, again, any contact with enemy ships being advised accordingly. Engagements between ships are then displayed graphically. although in a fairly rudimentary fashion. When any aircraft have spotted enemy ships, the player poorly implemented and about 12 months out of date. The fact that the game is mainly written in basic does not help, certain parts being extremely slow, tedious and boring. On several occasions 1 waited over two minutes for the positions of the ships to be plotted. Orders for each ship (speed, direction) have to be laboriously entered via the keyboard and, before each player enters his orders, we have yet another wait while the positions of his ships are plotted. Navigation is very difficult. In summing up, I can do little more than say that this is a real bummer. Nice idea, pity about the product. But then what can you expect for .50. Best save your pennies for a worthwhile game.  Sound  Graphics . Value  Playability VE PRESS TO SAN here are somewhat rudimentary While there are some quite nice illustrations in this game, particularly of some of the ships, they do not unfortunately, make up for what is basically a good idea very "


"Another great new game from .Bubble Bus in EVIKKANS ENCR.L By Stephen Crow Author of Wizand's Law Spectrum 48K bubble bus software 87 High Street, Tonbridge, Kent TNS 1RX Telephone: 0732 355962 Telex: 95151 bubble bus software 87 High Street, Tonbridge, Kent TNS 1RX Telephone: 0732 355962 Telex: 95151 This Great Game now available for COMMODORE 64 AMSTRAD and SPECTRUM ADDREADAADWORDPRDHINDARDDIADOR Brill Games for a erry Christmas izace Www from ayan  ARRRRRRRRRRRRRR Bubble Bus wipe miqesume tema CONTACT US FOR CHRISTMAS SPECIAL OFFERS AND DETAILS OF OUR LARGE RANGE bubble bus software 87 High Street, Tonbridge, Kent Tel: 0732 355962 Telex: 95151 NABABADABADABAD Bubble Bus Software, 87 High Street Tonbridge, Kent TNS 1AX England Telephone 0732 355962 "


"SOUTHEND-ON SEA Computerama 88-90 London Road, 0702 335443 SOUTHPORT Central Studios, 38 East Bank Street 0704 31881 STRETFORD Courtgrant Computers, Arndale Centre, 061 864 2010 DOCTOR WHO AND THE MINES OF TERROR IS LUTON AVAILABLE AT THE FOLLOWING OUTLETS: Hobbyte Limited, Unit 16. Arndale Centre, 0582 457195 ENGLAND MAIDSTONE ACCRINGTON Kent Micro Computers, 57 Union Street, 0622 PV Tubes Computers, 104 Abbey Street, 0254 52784 36521 MANCHESTER ALTON N.S.C. Computer Shops, 29 Hanging Ditch, 061 832 Alton Computers, 62 High Street, 0420 87998 2269 BANSTEAD Computerama, 17 Nork Way, 07373 54717 BOURNEMOUTH Lansdown Computer Centre, 1 Landsdown Crescent, 0202 290165 BRIGHTON The Gamer, 71 East Street, 0273 728681 BROMLEY The Data Store (Micro Computers), 6 Chatterton Road, 01 460 8991 BRISTOL The Model Shop, 64 Fairfax Street, 0272 27344 CAMBRIDGE Heffers Booksellers, 19 Sydney St. 0223 358241 CHALFONT ST. PETER Softshop Limited, 55 St. Peter's Court. 0753 889010 CHEADLE UO Q.ES Computers, 60 Stockport Road, 061 428 6912 CHELTENHAM Computer Shack, 14 Pitville Street, 0242 584343 CHICHESTER Computermania, Southgate, 0243 779263 DORCHESTER Seven Counties, 20 High East Street, 0305 66022 EXETER Seven Counties, 7 Paris Street, 0392 211211 FAREHAM Timatic Systems, Fareham Market, 0329 236727 FAREHAM Electronequip 36-38 West Street, 0329 230671 MANSFIELD GRAYS Mansfield Computers, 33 Albert Street. 0623 31202 H Reynolds & Sons, 2BA Southend Road, 0375 31641 NORTH FINCHLEY GUILDFORD Adams World, 779 High Road, 01 446 7170 The Model Shop 23 Swan Lane, 0483 39115 NELSON HULL Suntaxsoft, Unit 109, Glenfield Park, Glenfield Road The Computer Centre 26 Anlaby Boad, 0482 262970282 698849 KINGS LYNN PLYMOUTH Electronequip. 17 Tenneyson Avenue, 0553 773782 Georges Booksellers, 141 Armada Way, 0752 661011 LEAMINGTON SPA PLYMOUTH Leamington Hobby Centre 121 Regent St. 0926 29211 The Model Shop, 11 Old Town Street, 0752 21851 LEEDS POOLE Virgin Games, Briggate 0532 432606 Landsdown Computer Centre, 14 Arndale Centre, LEEDS 0202 670901 MicroPower Northwood House, North Street, 0532 REDCAR 458800 Multicoloured Micro Shop, 8 Dundas Street, 0642 LITTLEHAMPTON 486643 Computermania, 17 The Lanes, 0903 716187 ST ALBANS LONDON SE Hobbyte Limited, 10 Market Place. 0727 41396 Vic Oddens, 6 London Bridge Walk, 01 403 1988 ST HELENS LONDON Microman, Mill Lane, Rainford, 074488 5242 Schkana Computer Services 221 Tottenham Court SOUTHAMPTON Road, 01 800 3156 Computerama, 112 East Street 0703 333958 SWOS ARE NO BRA OLREADY ma FOR UU The Model Shop, 22 High Street, 045 36 5920 SWINDON Barbury Computers, 89 Victoria Road, 0793 611487 UXBRIDGE J.K.L Computers 7 Windsor Street, 0895 51815 WELWYN GARDEN CITY DJ Computers, 40 Fretherne Road 0438 65501 SCOTLAND ABERDEEN Micro Shack, 18 Chaple Street, 0224 636081 ABERDEEN James G. Bissett, 12-14 Upper Kirkgate, 0224 644528 WALES CARDIFF Cardiff Micros 46 Charles Street 0222 373072 CARDIGAN Cardigan Electronics, Chancery Lane 0239 614483 LLANELLI Positron Computing 15 Central Precinct. 0554 759624 GLAMORGAN Bucon Limited, 35-36 Singleton St Swansea 0792 467980 EIRE BRAY Bit by Bit. 6 Castle Street, 0001 868541 CHANNEL ISLANDS GUERNSEY Art Products (Grutsl. 3-5 The Pollet. St Peter Port, 0481 24682 DISTRIBUTORS BULLDOG DISTRIBUTION 0260 277611 CENTRESOFT 021 359 3020 GEM DISTRIBUTION 0279 444615 GREYHOUND MARKETING 0532 436300 LAZER DISTRIBUTION 0392 50434 LEISURESOFT LIMITED 0604 46658 MICRO DEALER U.K 0462 37171 R&R DISTRIBUTION 0977 795544 TBD DISTRIBUTION LIMITED 0782 620321 THORN EMI SOFTWARE 0252 543333 TWANG IWHOLESALERSI LIMITED 0734 580200 WAYFARER DISTRIBUTION 0743 66922 WEBSTERS SOFTWARE 0483 62222 WONDERBRIDGE LIMITED 01 995 9060 DOCTOR WHO AND THE MINES OF TERROR WILL ALSO BE AVAILABLE AT MOST MAJOR HIGH STREET AND THE MINES SHOPS OF TERROR DOCTOR WHO MUCROPOWER MicroPower Ltd., Northwood House, North Street, Leeds LS7 2AA, "


"SPECTRUM TITLES *LOTHLORIEN ACTION GAMES, INC. BILLYBONG, TWO GUN TURTLE, MICRO MOUSE, BEETLEMANIA, BEDLAM BLASTER, GRID PATROL ..................95 *SPORTS PACK INC. SNOOKER, ON THE OCHE IDARTS), OLYMPICS, ST. ANDREWS GOLF, DERBY DAY, WORLD CUP FOOTBALL......... ...........95 *POOL, DUNGEON MASTER, TIMEBOMB, THE MAGIC ROUNDABOUT, TRANSYLVANIAN TOWER INVINCIBLE ISLAND . ...95 *SPACE RAIDERS, TRAXX, PLANETOIDS, HUNGRY HORACE, HORACE & THE SPIDERS, INVINCIBLE ISLAND ...... .........95 CITY .95 XAVIOR ............ . .... .95 SMALL BUSINESS ACCOUNTS .45 EUREKA .45 TINY TOUCH AND GO TYPING TUTOR.............3.95 BRUSH UP ON YOUR HIGHWAY CODE...............95 SCRABBLE..... .64.00 SELECT 1 (12 titles) ... .. ...(4.50 COLLINS CHEMISTRY 'O' LEVEL/CSE REVISION..95 MR WIMPY........ ... .95 WAR OF THE WORLDS...... .95 TASWORD .. ..00 HURG ............. ..... .95 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT...... .95 SHADOWFIRE .95 THE BULGE ... .95 PYJAMARAMAIAUTOMANIA .95 UNDERWURLDE ...15.95 SHERLOCK [5.95 GHOSTBUSTERS... .95 HAMPSTEAD.......... 05.45 DRAGONTORC..... [5.45 ARNHEM ABERSOFT FORTH .95 BRIDGEPLAYER ..... (175 ASTRONOMER..... ..75 MONOPOLY WATERLOO. ...75 THE ARTIST.... ...75 YOUNG LEARNING PACKS * MR T TELLS THE TIME, MRT MEETS HIS MATCH, MR T'S SIMPLE SUMS OR MR T'S MONEY BOX.... .50 SOFTWARE SINCLAIR CHESS........ .....00 HORACE GOES SKIING ... .C1.00 IT'S THE WOOLUF... .C1.45 THE ISLAND ........ ... ...C1.45 HALL OF THE THINGS ..C1.45 ROMMELS REVENGE C1.45 THE DUNGEON MASTER......... C1.45 INVASION OF THE BODYSNATCHERS... ........45 4D ARCADE ADVENTURE 1.45 MANIC MINER... .C1.45 POOL ... ..45 ORACLE'S CAVE... [1.45 SPEECH MARKS (EDUCATIONAL) ...45 BACKGAMMON. .45 BIORYTHMS .... ............45 DEVERS 1 ....... .45 ANDROID 1 1.95 ANDROID 2........ .C1.95 MAGNETS [2.45 SURVIVAL...... .45 DAY IN THE LIFE.. .C2.45 KOKOTONI WILF .C2.45 FORTH [2.45 CATTEL IQ TEST........ [2.45 CHESS TUTOR... ..C2.45 FLIPPIT ..45 RUNES OF ZENDOS .45 BRAXX BLUFF................ .45 CRAZY KAVERNS....... .[2.45 NIGHT FIGHT ...[2.45 SUBTERRANEAN STRIKER... [2.45 THE COMPUTER COOKBOOK (2 tapes).... ...C2.95 . CYCLONE .95 .[2.95 STOP THE EXPRESS..... .95 SYSTEM 15000.......... .95 VALHALLA .C2.95 CONFUZION PROJECT FUTURE... [2.95 LINK WORD GERMAN........ .C2.95 LINK WORD FRENCH..... .95 BACK PACKERS GUIDE...... .C2.95 DRIVING..... ..95 SOFTWARE STAR......... .95 STAR TRADER......... .C2.95 PAT THE POSTMAN.. 2.95 PENETRATOR *** .2.95 TERRORHAWKS................... .... ..........C2.95 *MR T'S NUMBER GAMES, MR T'S SHAPE GAMES MR T'S MEASURING GAMES. ..50 GET SET, NUMBER FUN, FAIR SHARE BY GRIFFIN SOFTWARE... .95 PACKS *VU CALC, VU FILE, VU3D. . ... ...... 05.95 SHIP OF DOOM, PLANET OF DEATH, ESPIONAGE ISLAND, INCA CURSE, EMBASSY ASSAULT, TRANSYLVANIAN TOWER ......95 ROM CARTRIDGES  EACH CHESS, PLANETOIDS, SPACE RAIDERS, HUNGRY HORACE, BACKGAMMON, JET PACK, PISST PERIPHERALS AND PRINTERS *BACKGAMMON, 4D ARCADE ADVENTURE, BIORYTHMS, REVERS, DEVILS OF THE DEEP, MANIC MINER ...25.95 *SMALL BUSINESS ACCOUNTS, COLLECTORS PACK, CLUB RECORD CONTROLLER..............95 *COSMIC CRUISER, BC BILL, PEDRO, ZZOOM, ZIP ZAP, ALCHEMIST....... *ALL LOTHORIEN TITLES, INC. DREADNOUGHTS, PANZER ATTACK, RED BARON, PARAS..........95 ALPHACOM 32's .........................95 (.50 p&p) SINGLE PART INTERFACES ......... .......95 ALPHACOM PAPER........................95 for 5 ROLLS DK'TRONICS KEYBOARDS........... .95 (.00 p&p) KEMPSTON CENTRONICS INT. 'E' .................. 37.95 QUICKSHOT II JOYSTICK...... ......................95 CURRAH SPEECH AND SOUND SYNTH. ...........95 WICO TRACKER BALL JOYSTICK..95 (.50 p&p) WH SMITH COMPUTER PROGRAM DATA RECORDER ....95 (.50 p&p) .64.95 COMMODORE 64 TITLES COMMODORE CARTRIDGES (3 EACH PINBALL SPECTACULAR, LE MANS, CLOWNS OMEGA RACE ..95 .95 ..95 .95 .95 ...95 .95 .95 ..95 [4.50 .64.95 [4.95 [4.95 [4.95 PACKS .95 .95 [1.95 [1.95 [1.95 ..C1.95 .95 ..95 (1.95 [1.95 .C1.95 [2.45 [2.95 ..C2.95 [2.95 [2.95 SOFTWARE NUMBER PUZZLER.... DEPTH CHARGE....... HUMPTY DUMPTY 'O' LEVEL FRENCH 'O' LEVEL BIOLOGY ........... HISTORY OF THE 20th CENTURY GEOGRAPHY JINN GENIE LAZER ZONE.. ANTICIPAL GYROPOD...... PERCY THE POTTY PIGEON PSI WARRIOR......... PSYTRON WIZARD OF WAR. DRAGON'S DEN... TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY... GOODNESS GRACIOUS EUREKA JUICE ..... . SUICIDE STRIKE............ MOTOR CROSS ASSEMBLER 64 HARE RAISER ......... PENETRATOR.... FIREQUEST QUO VADIS...... FORT APOCALYPSE CAESAR THE CAT........ VALHALLA USA... CHEMISTRY CSEPO' LEVEL ..... COMPUTER STUDIES CSEPO LEVEL MISSION I. TRASHMAN... BLACK THUNDER... STELLAR 7 BRIAN BLOODAXE ............ JET SET WILLY SELECT 1 (12 titles)... AMERICAN FOOTBALL BROAD STREET .... SPY VS SPY... COLLOSUS CHESS 2.0 ZIM SALA BIM. HEATHROW ATC ...... HARRIER ATTACK... CADHAM WARRIOR..... ROCK 'N' BOLT....... HUNCHBACK 11 .............. PYJAMARAMAIAUTOMANIA LORDS OF MIDNIGHT.. MY CHESS II ... THE BULGE HAMPSTEAD........ SHADOWFIRE .............. DR WATSON'S 64 BASIC PROGRAMMING COURSE.... LOGO (disk language) PILOT (disk language) ..... EASY SCRIPT (disk word processor)..... AZTEC (BEYONDI, A NKH (BEYOND), MR ROBOT (BEYOND).......... ....95 *PARAS (LOTH), JOHNNY REB (LOTH), SKULL EGBERT, AAARGHIHI, CONDOR, THE FABULOUS WANDA .........95 *MR T'S NUMBER GAMES, MR T'S SHAPE GAMES, MR T'S MEASURING GAMES .............. .......50 *MT T TELLS THE TIME, MRT MEETS HIS MATCH, MR T'S MONEY BOX ....50 [4.95 .[4.95 .95 .[2.95 ..C2.95 [3.45 13.45 ..C3.45 ..C3.45 .45 .45 ...50 ..50 .C3.95 ....C3.95 ..45 ..45 ..5.95 .95 .95 ..95 ...95 06.95 PERIPHERALS SMITH CORONA FAST TEXT 80 CENTRONICS PRINTER..................................95 ( p&p) MANNESMAN TALLY MT80+ .. ..95 ( p&p) CURRAH SPEECH 84...... ...50 WICO BAT HANDLE JOYSTICKS....... .95 WICO TRACKER BALL JOYSTICK....................95 QUICKSHOT II............. ..95 COMMODORE PADDLES (pair)............. ..95 .95 6.95 16.95 ..95 ..95 P&P: Software orders 75p. Peripheralsl 75p unless stated otherwise. Overseas add .50 per tape and .50 per pack. Please state machine and pack contents LOGIC SALES LTD 6 MIDGATE, PETERBOROUGH, CAMBS PE1 ITN VISA Telephone: (0733) 49696 "


"INFORM From left to right: Tim Metcalfe, Craig Kennedy, Lesly Are you tough enough to take on the dangers Walker, Louise Matthews, Julia Cox, Mike Corre, Mike of the COMBAT ZONE? That was the Pattenden, Seamus St John and Marcus Rich. challenge thrown down to the C+VG team by We were given a set of military fatigues, at lunchtime Worth every penny. that oddball bunch at CRL. Well, anyone that ammo-belts, hats, goggles and most To give you a taste of just what went on knows C+VG will realise that we all make importantly the weapons. Air guns and we asked the C+VG Hit Squad to relate Rambo look like Winnie the Pooh. It was an twenty rounds of the deadly dye filled their war stories. The stories of courage offer we couldn't refuse, wasn't it? So, don't pellets. and daring came from Lesly Walker, Once we were kitted out we headed for Lousie Matthews, Mike Corre, Craig adjust your magazine as we take you into the the woods. The two teams headed for their Kennedy and the Ed. COMBAT ZONE.... respective camps. C+VG was the Red If you are interested in learning more team. CRL were the Greens. about the COMBAT ZONE then write to OVER THE TOP simply the most fun you can have in the A few minutes working out the plan of the Combat Zone (London) Ltd, PO Box What is the Combat Zone? Well, it's this woods with your clothes on! attack and then battle commenced! Each 22, Loughton, Essex. IG10 9UD or call place where you can dress up as soldiers Combat Zone is based on an original battle lasted an hour and during the day 01-502-3494. It would be nice if you told and dash about shooting at people with American role-playing game called we played five winning three to CRL's them you heard about the Zone from air-guns loaded with dye filled pellets! Capture the Flag. Basically what you have two Told you that the C+VG team were C+VG... Sounds strange. But believe us it's to do is capture the flag from the camp of tough! the enemy\" team and return it to your Various tactics were employed all out own HQ. attacks, sneaky raids on poorly defended Sounds easy. But actually doing it camps and even kamakaze dashes into the requires a good sense of strategy team enemy strongholds. The flags were carried work and you have to be quite fit! backwards and forwards over the This last bit was the thing that worried battleground many times that day. Field Marshall Metcalfe most of all. Would Sometimes people were just in sight of the C+VG Hit Squad be up to all that their camp with the enemy flag when running around after weeks sitting in dark someone popped out of the bushes and holes playing computer games? shot them picked up the flag and Zero Hour came and saw the C+VG dashed back to their camp with it! team preparing for combat on the What does it cost? Well you'll need to outskirts of a wood somewhere near shell out  for the day. But that includes Brentwood, Essex hire of all the gear and guns and a meal Continued on page 42 "


"'Who dyes wins! Death and gblory: Slowly, slowly put pressure on the what was expected of me and oddly The voices of past Combat Zone heroes trigger... But wait, they are carrying a enough I didn't make a complete idiot of an the yells and whoops of support Green flag. And they are wearing red armmyself. Was that the theme tune to Bridge from the Red Dead Zone urged me on... bands... It's our own men! We've done it, Over the River Kwai I was humming! A zigzag run and two Greens fell to my we've won the first battle witheringly accurate shooting. But I'd Between looking mean and purposeful After that there was no holding us back I was laughing a lot, the sight of Private used all my bullets. And suddenly another and for me there was no more wanting to Benjamin Walker skipping through the Green appeared out of nowhere to grab the defend. I wanted to be right in the middle undergrowth in full combat gear, but, Red standard and head off towards their of what ever was going on. wearing last year's trendy shocking pink distant camp! Running through the undergrowth, booties and long gold earrings, couldn't be Then the other surviving Green blasted avoiding pellets, ambushing the guaranteed to induce dread and fear in the me. Another corpse for the Dead Zone and opposition, diving into any handy hole you enemy. a victory for the Greens. Curses! could find. Yes, I enjoyed myself. It was a bit like . For his considerable courage in the face By the end of the third battle we were playing soldiers at times but with guns of insurmountable odds Mike was later all walking around thinking we were pros that really fire. It was often chillingly awarded Player of the Day Award by the with our guns slung casually over our realistic Combat Zone organisers! shoulders. All my initial reservations were LOUISE'S STORY unfounded. LESLY'S STORY A shot in the back. A straight kill and CRAIG'S STORY However, I still looking back don't like I'm not going to like this. Anyone know What am the way I so easily fell into the killing for me another game was over. \"Into the where the nearest pub is? I doing here? That was my role I'll just have to accept that under this Dead Zone\" someone shouted at me -90 initial reaction on arrival at base camp Struggling into army fatigues in the Combat Zone! angelic exterior lurks a wee devil off I went, very reluctantly. I'll get my middle of a cold field is not my ideal of the revenge next time, I thought. I've always had this unfortunate ability best way to spend Saturday mornings. to put myself in potentially embarrassing Next game started and we stealthily THE ED'S STORY After being issued with our guns and encircled the enemy camp. Green flag bullets (Actually they were ink pellets There I was hiding behind this tree deep ahead and in we swooped amidst a hail of yellow, would you believe) we set off for the in Green territory. There were three of us. bullets. Five men down and five left but Red's Base Camp. Seamus, Mike and me. We could see the we had the flag and we had to get back After basic instructions we were asked few remaining Green troops wandering to base Off we sped, charging through the who wanted to defend the base camp and about aimlessly, guarding their flag. Just undergrowth as the enemy followed in hot who wanted to go and capture the Green as we thought. The rest of them had gone pursuit. flag. No prizes for which option I picked. off on a mass attack on our home base, Our camp was ahead. But a net of green Eventually I found somewhere to hide leaving their camp only partially defended. men surrounded it. and took up my position. A couple of This was our chance. We could grab the Bullets were flying, we were minutes passed and suddenly we heard flag and go for glory. It'l be easy! outnumbered, but our tactics paid off as something, guns poised we were ready to We crept closer and closer toward the we covered our men and they sneaked shoot. False alarm! We forgot it was camp until we were right on top of it. We through the enemy lines, unharmed. The Autumn and that conkers fall off the trees were so close we could smell them! Reds had won again! at this time of year. I made a dash for the cover nearest their Suddenly there they were running flag. No sign of any violence on their part yet. I checked that my gun was loaded and through the forest, they were coming to MIKE'S STORY get our flag! ready to fire. I didn't want any What an experience. Now I know how This is it. Cock the gun, makes sure the embarrasing moments with the safety Butch and the Sundance Kid felt when gun safety catch was off and get these catch. they got surrounded by hundreds of Greens lined up in our sights. I took a deep breath and dived for the heavily armed troops down in Mexico! flag. Suddenly the air was full of bullets! Just two bullets left three of the mighty I went off to sulk in the Dead Zone, Green army rushing down at me and I situations. Making a fool of myself seems covered in vellow slime. And the terrible was the ONLY Red team member left to come naturally which is probably laughter of C+VG artist Ian Ellery, a alive! Could I save the flag or die why I work on C+VG and why I took the Green for the day, echoed through the gloriously in a wild splurge of yellow ink opportunity to go to Combat Zone! woods behind me. He'll never work again, pellets? I also couldn't see myself in a military I thought to myself... situation. I mean, let's face it, I'm no John Wayne Running for a bus is my main form of physical activity. I'm more of a Wimpo than a Rambo! My body has a strong resemblance to a runner bean. I look like I should get sand kicked in my face. So, why was I at Combat Zone? What would my friends think? Is it morally right to go out for the day with the intention of killing as many people as possible? Wouldn't it be a bit violent? With all these worries in my head I was decked up completely in khaki, given my gun and ammo and led off into the battle area with an assorted bunch of mentally unstable colleagues from C+VG. The first game came and went, I did "


"FREE!!! ATARI TOUCH TABLET with a 130XE Computer Compumart flege Deals Best Price for ATARI HARDWARE ATARI in the U.K. ATARI Best Prices for BLANK DISKS in the U.K. Top Quality 5V4\" Bulk Packed Disks (Hub Ringed and in White Envelopes with a Lifetime Warranty) FREE!!! Plastic Library Case worth  when you buy 10 Disks Atari 130XE Computer (with a FREE ATARI TOUCH TABLETILIZI597 p& + p&p Atari 1050 Disk Drive (with FREE Home File Manager, Payoff Adventure & Demo Disks) + 3  sehe FREE!!! Perspex Disk Storage Box worth  when you buy 50 Disks 10-57\" Single Sided Double Density . +41 p&p . +33 p&p 95 +51 p&p ieke) . +p&p + P& Atari 130XE & 1050 Disk Drive (with FREE Home File Manager, Payoff Adventure, Demo Disks & Blank Disks (with FREE case) 10 Blank Disks FREE) 10-514\" Double Sided/Double Density 12. Atari 130XE, 1050 Disk Drive Blank Disks (with FREE case) & 1027 Letter Quality Printer (with FREE Atariwriter & 10 Blank Disks) 4 4 + p&p 50-51/4\" Single Sided/Double Density Goods despatched : SAME DAY-PARCEL POST Blank Disks (with FREE Storage Box) 12 Month Warranty: ANY PRODUCT FOUND TO BE DEFECTIVE WITHIN 12 MONTHS OF PURCHASE WILL BE REPLACED FREE OF CHARGE 50-51/4\" Double Sided Double Density Blank Disks (with FREE Storage Box) 20 GOODS DESPATCHED : Sameday 1st Class Post MONEY BACK GUARANTEE you are not completely satisfied with your purchase we will either exchange your disks or give a FULL REFUND that's the Compumart Guarantee Please send cheques/postal orders to : Compumart, (Dept CV) 71 Gracedieu Road, Loughborough Leics. LE11 OQF ..Compumart.... Compar 0509-262259 Comp \"UNE. HOTLINE....HOT BARGAIN SOFTWARE, Dept. CVG 3, Unit 1. 1 Esmond Road, London W4 1JG Phone orders welcome. Ring 01.995 2763 RAP 9.95 Price 7.45 5.95 COMMODORE 64 ROCK 'N' WRESTLE Our Price 7.45 7.95 RAMBO RAP 9.95 8.95 8.95 9.95 6.70 6.70 6.50 7.95 8.95 After 37 exploding fists, I was looking for a new way. 5.95 6.70 6.70 7.45 9.95 9.95 14 95 8.95 7.45 11.20 9.95 7.45 7.45 11.90 15.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 7.45 YIE AR KUNG FU FIGHT NIGHT SUPERMAN ROBIN OF THE WOOD LITTLE COMP. PEOPLE (D) FRIDAY THE 13TH ZORRO LORD OF THE RINGS WINTER GAMES ENIGMA FORCE SCARABEUS UNDERWURLDE STARIN WHO DARES WINS COMMANDO SPY VS SPY THEY SOLD A MILLION 14 top titles ARCADE HALL OF FAME 15 US gold titles FIGHTING WARRIOR BAALYX 7.45 8.95 6.70 5.95 7.45 995 14.95 9.95 745 7.95 SPECTRUM COMMANDO YIE AR KUNG FU INT. KARATE RAMBO ROCK 'N' WRESTLE FRIDAY THE 13TH TOMAHAWK THEY SOLD A MILLION 14 top titles ARCADE HALL OF FAME 5 US gold titles BEACH HEAD INT, BASKETBALL SUPERMAN ENIGMA FORCE GYRD SCOPE WHAM THE MUSIC BOX FLITE IMPOSSIBLE MISSION TAU CETI ROBIN OF THE WOOD NOW GAMES SWORDS & SORCERY LORD OF THE RING GEOFF CAPES ZDINS SABATEUR BACK TO SKOOL BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK SIR FRED 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE DIARY OF ADRIAN MOLE STAR QUAKE SELECT 1 012 titles NIGHTSHADES MONOPOLY BC's QUEST FOR TIRES FIGHTING WARRIOA WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST FRANK BRUNO'S BOXING DALEY'S SUPERTEST TERRORMOLINOS NEVERENDING STORY 1 OF THE MASK FAIRLIGHT BOUNCERS 7.45 7.45 7.45 7.45 ACE 9.95 7.45 7.95 5.95 5.95 4 49 9.95 7.45 9.95 7.45 7.95 5.95 9.95 7.45 11.20 7.95 5.95 5.95 995 7.45 8.95 6.70 9.95 7.45 15.95 11.90 7.95 5.95 7.95 5.95 8.95 6.70 6.95 5.20 7.95 5.95 9.95 9.95 7.45 7.45 5.95 4.99 7.45 995 7.95 5.95 7.95 5.95 8.70 6.95 5.20 6.95 5.20 7.95 5.95 9.95 745 9.957 45 8.20 9.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 10.95 7.95 9.95 9.95 8.95 12.95 9.95 5.95 7.45 7.45 CRAZY COMETS DIARY OF ADRIAN MOLE THE GOONIES ZOIDS RACING DEST. SET MERCENARY ELITE DRAGON SKULLE Ultimatel OUTLAWS (Ultimatel That's the problem with most computer games. However thrilling they are at first, eventually you master the tactics and the attraction begins to wane. You need a fresh challenge, but with games costing  plus, most of us can't afford to buy new titles every week. Renting your software from the Matrix Club provides the solution. Our members enjoy a wide selection of games which includes the very latest titles. Life membership of the club costs only  and hire fees start from as little as 60p a game per week. Complete the form below or write for full details of our service without obligation, and very soon you'll be playing your favourite games at a fraction of the normal cost. 6.50 14.95 9.75 7.45 11.20 7.45 7.45 9.95 7.45 8.95 AMSTRAD ELITE HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER SUPERMAN LORDS OF MIONIGHT YIE AR KUNG FU WAY OF EXPLODING FIST DALEY'S SUPERTEST SARINH ALIEN KNIGHTLORE SOUTHERN BELLE RAIDI 14.95 11.20 8.95 6.70 9.95 7.45 9.957.45 8.95 6.70 9.95 7.45 8.95 6.20 8.95 6.70 9.957.45 9.95 7.45 7.95 5.95 6.70 W IN IT MATRIX Name: Address: 9.957 .45 SOFTWARE CLUB 8.95 9.95 ANY ORDERS OVER 3090 DEDUCT FURTHER 10% System: Spectrum Commodore Post to: The Matrix Club, 271 Stansted Road, Bishops Stortford Herts. ALL PRICES INCLUDE P&P. OVERSEAS ORDERS PLEASE ADD  PER TAPE SEND S.A.E. FOR FULL LIST: PLEASE STATE MACHINE "


"CUT PRICE SOFTWARE MILES BETTER SOFTWARE OUR OUR OUR SPECTRUM RRP PRICE COMMODORE RRP PRICE AMSTRAD RRP PRICE Elite 14.95 11.00 Elite 14 95 11.00 Exploding Fist 9.95 7.45 Shadow of the Superman 9 85 146 Etario 9.95 7.45 Unicorn 14.95 11 20 Spy vs Spy i 9.95 7.45 Scrabble 9.95 7.45 Impossible Mission 7.95 5.90 Nextus 9.95 7.45 Superman 9.95 7.45 Scooby Doo 6.95 5.20 Winter Games 9.95 7.45 Frank Brune Boxing 8.95 6.70 Stargate 7.95 5.90 Summer Games 9.95 7.45 Sorcery Monty on the Run 7.95 5.90 Monty on the Run 9.95 7.45 disk only 13.95 10.20 Rambo 7.95 5.90 All Ultimate 9.95 7.45 Beach-hand 9.95 7.45 Bounces 9.95 7.45 All U.S. Gold 9.95 7.45 Marsports 9.95 7.45 Superman 9.95 7.45 All Activision 9.99 7.50 Amstrad Dicks 12.95 10.00 Shadow 9.95 7.45 All Arolasoft 9.95 7.45 Warlord ASU.S. Gold 7.95 5.90 ABU S. Gold 14.95 11.20 Raid over Moscow 9.95 7.45 A Ultimate 9.95 7.45 All Beyond 9.95 7.45 All Ultimate 9.95 7.45 Exploding Fist 8.95 6.70 Shadowfire il 9.95 7.45 Devils Crown 9.99 7.50 Fighting Warrior 8.95 6.70 Rambo 8.95 6.70 Sorcery 8.95 5.00 Robin of the Wood 9.95 7.45 Daley's Supertest 7.95 5.90 Transact 29.95 5.99 Sorderons Shadow 9.95 7.45 Quake Minus One 9.95 7.45 invosat Ye Ar Kung Fu 7.95 5.90 Summer G. R disk 14.95 11.00 Codename Mat 8.95 6.70 Dr Who 19: 295 Samsun. 9.95 7.45 Spy vs Spy 9.95 7.45 Friday the 13th 8.95 6.95 Lit. Com. People id) 14.99 12.99 Sold a Million 9.95 7.45 Lord of the Rings 15,95 12.95 Lord of the Rings 15.95 12.95 Glen Hoddie's Soccer 8.95 6.50 Free game with every order over .00 Spectrum Bicycle Works or Braxx Blu Corredore: Boulderdash. Amstrad Flighe Path 137 or Harrier Amack P&P included. Overseas ordere add 75 per tape Make cheques payable to C.P.S. Visa Accessorders welcome by phone. CUT PRICE SOFTWARE, 4 Slacksbury Hatch, Harlow, Essex CM19 4ET Tel: (0279) 24433 (24 hr ansaphona) 221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffs WA11 2DD Tel: 05435 3577 WET ZONE BBC/B] COMMODORE 64/128 RRP Goonies... (c) 9.95 Goonies................ ld) 14.95 Zorro... ........ .... (c) 9.95 Zorro........................ (d) 14.95 First Night.................lcl9 .95 First Night................. (d) 14.95 Winter Games.......... (c) 9.95 Winter Games........... (d) 14.95 Summer Games......... (d) 14.95 Summer Games il...... c) 9.95 Summer Games ll.... id) 14.95 Mercenary..................(c) 9.95 Mercenary.................(d) 14.95 Lord of the Rings....... c) 15.95 Lord of the Rings....... ld) 19.95 Little Computer People...................... (c) 14,95 Little Computer People...................... (d) 14.95 They Sold a Million....lcl 9.95 They Sold a Million.... (d) 14.95 Arcade Hall of Fame...lcl9.95 Arcade Hall of Fame... id) 14.95 Hitch Hikers Guide...ld) 24.95 Planet Fall.................(d) 19.95 2 Seastalker.................(d) 19.95 Deadline ................. (d) 19.95 Rock 'n' Wrestle........(c) 9.95 Rock 'n' Wrestle........ id) 14.95 Our ATARI Our price 800/400/XUXE RRP price 7.95 Smash Hits Vol 4.......(c) 11.959.95 10.95 Smash Hits Vol 4.......(d) 12.95 10.95 7.95 Elektra Guide................ c) 8.95 7.95 10.95 Elektra Guide............ Idl 12.95 Id 1295 10.95 7.95 Spy Hunter................lcl9.95 7.95 10.95 Spy Hunter..... ....... (d) 14.95 10.95 7.95 Goonies.................... (c) 9.95 7.95 10.95 Goonies.... . ... (d) 14.95 10.95 10.95 Zorro c) 9.95 7.95 7.95 Zorro id) 14.95 10.95 10.95 Mercenary.... . .....(c) 9.95 7.95 7.95 Mercenary........ . .(d) 14 Id) 14.95 10.95 7.95 Worm in Paradise....... (c) 9.95 7.95 12.95 Hitch Hickers Guide... (d) 24.95 21.95 15.95 Planetfall... d) 19.95 16.95 Zork ........................d) 19.95 16.95 12.95 Seastalker...............(d) 19.9 (d) 19.95 16.95 Deadline ................... (d) 19.95 16.95 12.95 Summer Games...... Id) 14.95 10.95 7.95 Ball Blazer..............(c) 9.95 8.95 10.95 Ball Blazer................. (d) 14.95 12.95 7.95 Rescue on Fractalus...lcl9.95 8.95 10.95 Rescue on Fractalus... (d) 14.95 12.95 21.95 Dark Crystal.............id) 19.95 16.95 16.95 Mission Asteroid........ Id) 14.95 12.95 16.95 Ultima Ultima ....................(d) 14.95 12.95 16.95 Ultima II.................ld) 22.95 19,95 7.95 W izard & Princess.....Id 14.95 12.95 10.95 Superscript ... di 79.95 54.95 classical arcade action fast, addictive, skilful only on Micronet. 800 or by mail order Send .95 cheque, cash or postal order to EVERISS SOFTWARE 37 Linkway, Denham Green, Uxbridge, Middlesex UB9 5NL Access/Visa welcome. Please telephone for software availability and software lists for 64, Atari and Spectrum. Add .00 for overseas orders Phone for new range of music CDs at discount prices.  Phone for all your Christmas software New Releases every week. SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES 295 15.95 NNNNNN  250 2.50 595 995 7.50 5.75 7.50 7.50 9.95 BLUE MAX 7.50 SOCCER 7.50 795 13.50  8.95 7.95 OUR OUR RAP PRICE ***SPECTRUM PRICE ***COMMODORE ***COMMODORE*** RRP PRICE 11.95 SWEEVO'S WORLD 595 1595 11.95 MINI OFFICE STAR QUAKE 5.95 ROLLER COASTER LORD OF THE RINGS DISK) 1995 14.95 UTTLE PEOPLE DISCOVERY KIT 14.95 11.95 SOWRDERONS ELINDORI 7.50 THREE WEEKS IN PARADISE 7.50 BIG DADDY ROCK WRESTLE 9.95 750 COLOSSUS CHESS 4.0 9.95 7.95 LORD OF THE RINGS WINTER SPORTS 5.95 ELITE 14.95 11.25 SCOOBY 000 795 5.95 FAIRLIGHT 9.95 7.50 CYBER RUN Ultimatel WIZARDRY MASQUERADE OLSKI 1495 1195 SHADOWFIRE TUNER 3.99 GUN FRIGHT Ultimatal SUMMER GAMES CASSI COUNNDO 9.95 750 ROBIN OF THE WOODS 7.50 L OF THE MASK BEACH HEAD FINE A SIDE SOCCER 595 10.99 14.95 1350 DRAGONSKULLE imatel SUPERMAN 9.95 7.50 ROBOT MESSIAH DR. WHO DISK) 17.95 OUTLAW Ultimate KNIGHTSHADES (Ultimatel MUGSY'S REVENGE DIARY OF ADRIAN MOLE 9.95 LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE FRANKIE GOES TO HWOOD 9.95 7.50 ANY MASTERTRONICS MAD GAMES SUPERMAN SKOOLDAZE 6.95 ANIMATEO STRIP POKER 6.95 SUPER SLEUTH F. BRUNO'S BOXING 5.90 BAULELAZER KNIGHT LORE 750 ANSTRADE YE AR KUNG FU 395 WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST 6.75 FIGHTER PLOT DISK 11.95 SHADOWFIRE -ENIGMA FORCE MUGSYS REVENGE BIG DADDY ROCK WRESTLE HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER 6.75 DONALD DUCKS PLAYGROUND 995 750 THE YOUNG ONES GYROSCOPE SUPERMAN 7.50 SUPER ZAXXON 9.95 7.50 ZOIDS F. BRUNO'S BOXING INTER. BASKETBALL 9.95 7.50 MINDSHADOW ASTRO-CLONE 7.95 5.95 SPY V SPY INTERNATIONAL SOCCER 14.95 11.25 RAMBO DR. WHO 14.95 13.50 RAID OVER MOSCOW ULYSSES GOLDEN FLEECE O 1495 11.95 KNIGHTRIDER WHAM THE JUKE BOX 9.95 750 ARNHEV WORN IN PARADISE 995 750 RETURN TO OZ FIGHTER PILOT SABREWULF ANY MASTERTRONIC MAD GAMES 2.99 WORLD SERIES BASKETBALL FRANK BRUNO'S BOXING LUCIFERS REALM DISK) TRANSFORMERS 8.95 INTER. KARATE MARSPORT AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT 8.95 7.50 GYROSCOPE HYPERSPORTS 795 6.75 WAY OF EXPLODING FEST MICKY MOUSE DISK) 14.95 11.95 SCARA BEUS 9.95 MONTY ON THE RUN 7.95 5.95 CYRUSS | CHESS UNDERWURLDE SHADOW OF THE UNICORN 14.95 11.95 SORCERY. DISK) 11.50 SHADOWFIRE TUNER NORM N PARADISE 9795 7.50 LORD OF THE RINGS 11.95 FIGHTING WARRIOR ***COMMODORE C16*** THEY SOLD A MILLION 9.95 750 SCOOBY DOO WINTER GAMES 7.50 AIRWOLF 6.95 MARSPORT 7.50 DUN DARACH WINTER GAMES DISKI DALEY TOMS STAR EVENT 6.95 SHADOWFIRE 9.95 THEY SOLD A MILLION STEVE DAVIS SNOOKER INTERNATIONAL BASKETBALL YIE AR KUNG FU FIGHTER PILOT WORLD SERIES BASEBALL IMPOSSIBLE MISSION FIGHTING WARRIOR 6.75 PITSTOP C16 CLASSICS 14 GAMES SHADOWFIRE-ENIGMA FORCE 9.95 BIG DADDY ROCK WRESTLE 750 WINNER THE POOH DISK BOUNCES CRISES 3000 9.95 7.50 LOROS OF MIONIGHT DISK) 11.50 THCS 9.95 7.50 CRITICAL MASS 8.95 6.75 7.50 MONTY ON THE RUN 9.95 7.50 WORM IN PARADISE ALIEN 8 7.50 30 GRAND PRIX 7.50 FIGHTNIGHT 9.95 7.50 THE HOBBITT BOUNTY BOB 795 GLEN HODDLE FOOTBALL FIGHTNIGHT DISK) 14.95 11.25 LE MANS MINI OFFICE 5.95 BRUCE LEE THE GOONIES NiGHTSupe DIARY OF ADRIAN WOLE 9.95 7.50 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION THE GOONIES DISKO 1495 1125 KNIGHTopc \"YE AR KUNG FU MINI OFFICE ZORRO ALIEN SCOOBY 000 6.95 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT ANY MASTERTRONIC TITLE COMMANDO 9.95 7.95 MONTY ON THE RUN QUICK SHOT JOYSTICK 8.99 ANY MASTERTRONIC TITLE 1991.99 SCRABBLE ELITE OSKI 17.99 14.95 HATARI+++ HOBBITT 14 95 11.25 FRIDAY THE 13TH CRITICAL MASS 8.95 6.25 INTER, KARATE CASS) 6.50 4.99 ARNHEM 9.95 RAMBO EXPLOOING FIST DISKO 14.95 11.95 DIARY OF ADRIAN MOLE MONOPOLY 7.50 GYROSCOPE 11.25 SUPERMAN \"RETURN TO OZ 795 COMMANDO NEXUS WORM IN PARADISE WINTER GAMES EXPL. FIST FIGHTING WARRIOR D) PARA DROID BEACH HEAD DISK) 14.95 11.95 BEACH-HEAD ***BBCIELECTRON DESERT FOX SPY HUNTER 9.95 7.50 DALEY TOMS SUPERTEST 5.50 TAPPER 7.95 THE YOUNG ONES STRIP POKER FIGHTING WARRIOR DR. WHO CASS 16.95 THEY SOLD A MILLION BALLBLAZER 9.95 795 TERRORMOLINOS 5.95 GYROSCOPE 7.50 RADING DESTRUCTION DISKI SUMMER GAMES I DISKO ARCADE HALL OF FAME COMMANDO 7.95 ARCADE HALL OF FAME 9.95 7.50 BACK TO SKOOL 6195 5.50 NIGHTSHADE Ultimatel 7.50 EUREKA 14.95 499 MERCENARY DISK MINOSHADOW 9705 SPY HUNTER IMPOSSIBLE MISSION SPY VS SPY FRIDAY THE 13TH 8.95 WORM IN PARADISE WAY OF EXPLODING FIST AIR WOLF TOMAHAWK REPTON 1 MERCENARY 9.95 7.50 FIGHTER PILOT TAU CETI EXPLODING FIST MERCENARY DISK) 12.959.95 SWORDS & SORCERY 9.95 YE AR KUNG FU 750 QUAKE MINUS 1 9.95 750 GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR ALL PRICES INCLUDE P&P IN U.K. EUROPE ADD .00 PER TAPE. ELSEWHERE AT COST. PLEASE STATE MACHINE IN YOUR ORDER, PLEASE RING FOR PROX. 394 LONDON N. 15 6JL. TEL: 01-800 3156. SAE FOR LIST. PLEASE STATE MACHINE IN YOUR ORDER GOODS DESPATCHED SAME DAY SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY. COME AND SEE THE LATEST GAMES ON VIDEO FROM BULLETIN 1000 PLEASE RING FOR AVAILABILITY BARCLAYCARD AND ACCESS HOTLINE RING 01 631 4627 ONLY * *OR* VISAIF YOU WOULD LIKE TO PICK UP YOUR DISCOUNT SOFTWARE FROM OUR SHOP, PLEASE BRING YOUR COPY OF THIS ADVERT TO: \"COMPUCENTRE, UNIT 5. 221 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD, LONDON W1\" (NEAR GOODGE ST. STATIONI OPEN 6 DAYS A WEEK 9.00AM-18.OOPM GS ooooooooooooooooooo 8993 9.95 5.95 750 888 NNN 52 7.95 650 NONONG 88888888 7.50 17.95 ALL 5.95 NNNNNNNN 7.50 Poco 8888 "


"THERE ARE JOJ AND THERE ARC FUROMAX 10 STICK EUROMAX TURBO *Top and bottom fire buttons. * Extremely responsive and positive. * Built to last. NW 96% ZZAPP ZRATING 96% ZZAPP ZRATING EUROMAX ARCADE * Rated by 'BIG K as 'The cheapest stick one can get really enthusiastic about'. * Positive micro switched action. * Fully self-centering. 97%22 ZZAPP RATINGS www EUROMAX COMP PRO * Top U.K. micro switched joystick * Very responsive. * Highly rated by 'Crash'. FUROMAX ELECTRONICS LTD. Freepost Pinfold Lane, Bridlington, North Humberside YO 16 5XR, England. Telephone: 0262 601006/602541 Telex: 527381 EMAX G. -------------> Please send me further details of the Euromax Joysticki range. CST Ask you local computer store for details on full range or phone us direct FORGET THE REST A GET THE BEST ACCEPTED USE EUROMAX JOYSTICKS SUITABLE FOR ALL POPULAR MICROS THE U.K'S LEADING QUALITY BRAND NAME ADDRESS............. ACCESS *********** ** ** * "


"COMPETITION piando The war is not going well. The enemy alliance holds vast areas of the homelands. As Commander-inChief, you have to buy time until your armies can re-equip. That is the challenge of Death Wake, a new arcade war game from Quicksilva. The enemy on the other hand, have time very much on their side, and are one step away from completing research which would give them atomic capability. Given the bomb the Homelands will inevitably be theirs. Attempts to put the research plant out of action have failed. The laboratory is built under the side of a mountain miles inland along a narrow Inlet. Air attack has proved useless, as have three commando raids, and there have been no survivors to tell the tale of failure. One hope remains — your last battleship, The Undaunted, has completed repairs and analysis shows that if you could get her into the narrow channel, her guns could devastate the atomic plant by firing upward under the protective shield of the mountainside. One daring raid might just succeed. Lose the ship, however, and you lose your last hope of preventing invasion and defeat. DARE YOU ATTEMPT IT? Well, now you can thanks to Quicksilva who are giving us 25 copies of the game as competition prizes. To stand a chance of getting in on the battle action all you have to do is answer the four questions below. Send you answers together with the printed coupon to Death Wake Competition, Computer and Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. The closing date of the competition is January 16th. QUESTIONS 1. On what date did World War Two begin? 2. Who was Britain's wartime Prime Minister? 3. D-Day was the name given to the day when British forces and their allies crossed the Channel to assault the beaches of Normandy. What was the date? 4 Who was Germany's wartime leader? C+VG/DEATH WAKE COMPETITION Name ....... Address ... Spectrum DCBM 64 Amstrad. "


"MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS BYTE SPECTRUM SABRE WULF. MONTY ON THE RUN............... NOW GAMES................................. TERRORMOUNOS.... .. 5.96 WIZARDRY.. CODE NAME MATIL RACING DESTRUCTION SET 7.96 THEATRE EUROPE HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER....... ...........7.05 NICK FALDO....... .... FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOO. ..9.26 HYPERSPORTS DALEY'S SUPER-TEST... SHADOWFIAE NODES OF YESOO FRANK BAUNO BOXING RAM TURBO INTERFACE NIGHTSHADE WAY OF THE EX. FIST DONALD DUCK WHO DARES WINS  ws SPY SPY KENNEDY APPROACH 6.75 INT BASKETBALL INT. KARATE BORED OF THE RINGS GOONIES ARCADE HALL OF FAME ch AMSTRAD STARQUAKE SHADOW OF UNICORN CODE NAME MAT TRIVA TERPORuoos WORLD SERIES BASEBALL CAULDRON 7.50 Release date say Ocean Dec CBM64: .75 SPECTRUM: .95 Yie Ar Kung Fu, Knight Rider, Rambo, Streethawk. Transformers: Never Ending Story .50 SPECTRUM Tau Ceti..............6.75 Geoff Capes..........6.75 World Baseball........5.25 Swords & Sorcery...7.50 Robin of the Wood..7.50 Spy Hunter.............5.50 Mugsy's Revenge....5.95 Superman.......... ... 7.50 Frankie Hollywood... 7.50 Rock 'n' Wrestle.....6.75 Battle of Britain....... 7.50 Daley's Supertest....5.85 Tomahawk ............. 7.50 Bladerunner ............ 6.75 Jet Set Willy Il........5.50 Int. Rugby..............5.95 Underwurde........... 7.50 Dun Darach... ... 7.50 Gyroscope ..............5.95 Fighting Warrior......5.95 Spy vs Spy.............6.95 Cyberun................. 7.50 Spy vs Spy II......... 7.50 Pole Position..........6.85 Robot Messiah........5.95 Nexus.................. Glass...... . ... 5.95 Arcade.. Bounce... Hyper Sports..........5.95 Friday the 13th.......6.75 Racing Destruction. 9.75 FB Boxing.............5.25 Wham's Music Box.. 7.50 Pinball Construction. 8.95 Exploding Fist.........6.95 Saboteur ... Summer Games L....7.50 Nightshade............. 7.50 Sweevo's World......5.95 Winter Games.........7.50 Highway Encounter..5.95 Roller Coaster.........5.25 Mail Order Monster. 9.75 Basketball Int. (Elite)4.95 Super Sleuth...........5.95 Night Fights............ 7.50 Fairlight................. 7.50 Young Ones............5.95 Goonies..... .......... 7.50 Terromolinos...........5.95 2112 AD................5.95 Harvey Smith. ..6.85 Scooby Doo..... ...5.25 Are of Yesod........ 7.50 Doctor Who..........11.50 Monty on the Run...5.95 Wartoad.................5.95 Arcadia (US Gold)....7.50 Robin of the Wood. 7.50 Mike 5.95 Sold a Million.......... 7.50 Geoff Capes...........5.95 Comp. People (dk). 11.50 Superman............... 7.50 COMMODORE 64 Bail Blazer Elite.. . 11.25 Impossible Mission.. 7.75 Who Dares Wins.....5.95 Marsport................ 7.50 Frankie Hollywood...7.50 Wizard .............. 9.75 I of the Mask........7.50 Shadowfire. --.6.95 Super Sleuth... Blade Runner......6.95 11.00 Chimera 3.50 Fighting Warrior......5.95 Basketball..... .4.95 mot nammm ... 7.50 Shadow of Unicorn 11.25 Pitstop .. 7.85 Commando.. 7.50 Winter Sports.........7.50 F.B. Boxing.............5.95 Lord of the Rings... 12.50 Bounce................... 7.50 Exploding Fist.... .7.50 Skool Daze.............5.25 Zolds... ... 5.95 Blackwyche...... 7.50 Enigma Force.........7.50 Impossible Mission 5.95 Beach-head IL....... .7.50 Swords & Sorcery...7.50 Macadam Bumper....5.95 Summer Games Il... 7.50 Mugsy's Revenge....6.75 Starquake.... .5.95 Sky Fox..................7.50 Rock & Wrestle....... 7.50 Doctor Who............. 11.50 McGuigan Boxing....8.00 Space Pilot l..........5.95 Critical Mass...........6.75 Mercenary........... 7.50 Little Comp. People. 7.50 Sold a Million..........7.50 Terromolinos........ 5.50 Falklands 82...........7.50 World Basketball.....5.95 Zorro 7.50 Saucer Attack.........5.95 Chimera................. 3.50 Hacker Yak's Progress....... 7.50 Beach-head li.........7.50 Friday the 13th.......6.75 3 Weeks in Paradise 7.50 Batalyx... Roller Coaster.........5.95 Panzadrome............6.50 Scooby Doo............5.95 Gyroscope Lord of the Rings... 12.50 Crazy Comets.........5.95 ACE 7.50 Commando............. 7.50 Karateka.................8.00 Koronis Rift.............8.00 Sir Fred.................. 7.50 Star Hon nu, 7.50 Young Ones... .5.95 Back to Skool.........5.25 Monty on the Run...7.50 Elektra Glide.........6.75 Enigma Force.........7.50 S. Davis Snooker.....7.50 Arc of Yesod..........7.50 Postage included U.K. Please state which micro. Fast Service. Send cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept. CVG, 76 Westbourne Terrace, London W2 DALEY THOMPSON DECATHLON .5.95 Elite F WORLD SERIES BASKETBALL MPOSSIBLE MISSION CRITICAL MASS ELITE EXPLODING FIST TIN EVERYONE'S A WALLY WIZARD'S LAIR BRIAN BLOCOAXE SORCERY DEVILS CROWN ROBIN OF THE WOOD INTERNATIONAL RUGBY COMMODORE 64 QUICKSHOT # NOW ONLY 68.50 ALL PRICES INCLUDE PAP UNDERWURDE NICK FALDO.. FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD.... WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST.................5 7.50 Goodbye offers some of the most competitive prices for .6.75 NODES OF YESOD BATTLE OF BRITAIN required, p ering for the most up-to-date news on see and back gue lies on 01-731 407 PLEASE NOTE OF OUR ORDER EXCEEDS IN YOU GET 10% FURTHER DISCOUNT SEND CHEQUEPO TO GOODBYTE BLACKWYCHE INTERNATIONAL KARATE.. WIZARD'S LAIR IMPERIAL STUDIOS, IMPERIAL ROAD LONDON SW (TEL: 01.731 407) MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY A SUBSIDIARY OF PLATINUM GOLD LOOKING FOR A BARGAIN? WEEK AFTER WEEK LOOK NO FURTHER — AT THESE PRICES EVERY DAY IS SALE DAY  OVER 4,000 different titles available for hire for the COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, BBC, AMSTRAD, ATARI and MSX computers. * ARCADE, ADVENTURE, EDUCATIONAL and BUSINESS software too. * HIRE PRICES from onlay 60p INC P&P.  205 DISCOUNT off all purchase software.  FREE CATALOGUES * FREE HINTS AND TIPS.  FAST RETURN OF POST SERVICE (if reserves are given).  ALL GAMES manufactures ORIGINALS with full documentation.  OVER 6,000 satisfied members. * EUROPEAN members welcome. * LIMITED PERIOD ONLY FREE MEMBERSHIP. * Fully computerised system keeps track of your order. We pride ourselves in being the most professional Hire Library in the United Kingdom, with staff of 14 who know what the word service means. Backed by our own software company and programmers. e.g. C64 SPY VS SPY .00 C64 COMBAT LYNX .00 C64 SHERLOCK .00 SPECTRUM BRIDGE PLAYER 2 .00 SPECTRUM KONG STRIKES BACK .00 BBC EDDIE KIDD .00 AMSTRAD FOREST AT WORLDS END .00 VIC 20 TOM THUMB .00 THIS IS A SAMPLE OF OUR SUPER SAVER PRICES MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY CVG 28 COLLEGE STREET, WORCESTER WR1 2LS TEL: 0905 611072 Please rush me my free catalogue stating machine. Name .............. Address We stock 15,000 tapes and disks covering the following machines. Atari 400/800, Atari 2600, Amstrad, BBC, Commodore 16 and 64, Dragon, Electron, MSX, Oric, Spectrum, Texas, 99/4A, Vic 20, ZX81. Plus: Games Machine Supplies also available. Stockists of Hardware, Software, Consumables, Books, Magazines and all computer requirements. Free mail order. Send s.a.e. to: J.B. SOFTWARE P.O. Box 247, Birmingham B11 3SD Hotline 021 236 1976 (Ansaphone outside of working hours) "


"cascades + CASSETTE SPECIAL FREE WATCH OFFER... ONAL NEWSPAPER COMPUTER GAMES ON ONE CASSETTE YOURS FOR COMMODORE 64 YOURS .95 including FREE Watch and Postage 20 KEY, MULTIFUNCTION CALCULATOR WATCH with every order for a Cassette 50 3-59 33 TV VIETNFA 50 M AMSTRAD CPC 464 Avoid the rockets and anti aircraft guns and DYNAMITE the dam, only the most skilful pilots succend. NEMESIS sophisticated version of Othello with many colourful options and levels of play. Amstrad Cassette 50 includes arcade type games, war games, adventure games, logical, tactical and educational games. a flight simulator, and a business strategy game. 1. Warter 13. The 'DID 25. Trucking Happing Workert 3. Handicap Galt 27. Sitting 40 T omb 15. Creepy Crew 21. Men 41. Day Royal Reserve the Races 42. Lunar Landing Sara 1. Firma Reneve 31. Dr Maze 44. Rats 18. 30Mere 12. Intruder 4. Materway Fiber Comand 4. Dunge Adventure 10 Drenghts 24. Ghosts 11. Eve Action 35. Fantasy Land Miche 3. Space Base 49. Cras 24. The Care 10. Enchange ZX 81 Even a small computer gets more from Cassette 50! You can run 39 games on just the basic 1K ZX81. while 11 more will play with the addition of 16K expansion pack, Whare alse could you watch your radar instruments and judge your final approach in games like RADAR LANDING realtime flight simulator or enjoy the thrill of PSION ATTACK. Logical, tactical, mare, arcade all kinds of games on just one tapa! BBC A/B An advanced computer like the BBC demands a sophisticated games cassette That's why Cassette 50 gives you full use of screen modes with high resolution colour graphics, user defined graphics. excellent sound and music, joystick compatibility and many high speed games HIGH RISE gives you the chance to beat a realistic rouletta wheel, with all the extras, and you'll need the fastest reactions of all to beat EVASIVE ACTION as you trail across the screen in a frantic search for Oxygen. With multi levels and superb graphics this game is totally addictive.  Normal 12 and 24 hour time mode Calendar mode  Calculator mode  Alarm mode WORTH OVER  Only you can save Europe from destruction! It's ROCKET LAUNCH the thrilling war game that reproduces a European map More ambitious? Try rescuing your crew under an ultratast GALACTIC ATTACK and escaping back to your spaceship! Just two of the great games on your Cassette 50 featuring high resolution and user defined graphics, sprites, sound and music 26 Overtake 18 Black Hela 2 Galactic Aiach 14 Pantan 27 Sitting Targer 19 Dynamite 1 Space Mission 15 Shi Jung 28 Smash the 40 De Your Sums 4 Lunar Landing 16 Hangman 5 Plasma Balt 11 Ond Bones 29 Space Ship 42 Space Search 18 Thin Ice 7. Radw landing 19 Orbiter 32 Intruder 9 Galactic Dog Fight21 Force Field 33 Interno 10 Prian Attack 22 m 34 Ghosts 11 E ve Arton 23 Tunnel Escape 25 Submarines 48 High Rise 12 Noughts 24 Barrel Jump 36 Rockar Launch 49 The Force Crosses 25 Cannonball Battle Pianets 50 Exchange ELECTRON Can your FORCE FIELD protect the city from Alien Attack or maybe you have the skill to DYNAMITE the dam and flood enemy headquarters! Fifty different games with high speed, high resolution colour graphics, user defined graphics and excellent sound and music. Not to mention full use of screen modes, Fifty fast-paced, fascinating games. ORIC ATMOS Have a go at GALACTIC ATTACK you'll need last reactions to beat the invaders in this all time favourite or if you prefer you can travel through space at warp factor 9 in SPACE MISSIONS realistic 3 D version of space warfare as seen from the cockpit of a spacecraft. Everyone has a favourite game on Cassette-50 With fifty classic and original games featuring user defined graphics, sound effects and increasing levels of play. VIC-20 Will it be BALLOON DODGERS. or the prizewinning DUSTMAN DAN? Play these and 40 other fabulous games including many automatic double loaders on your unexpanded 3.5K VIC 20. And with an 8K or 16K expansion cartridge you can choose from 8 additional games like STARTREK or SKULL CASTLE. Special effects user defined graphics, super sound and music ORIC 1 Cassette 50 includes PLASMA BOLTS, a superb high speed version of the classic arcade Centipede game. Watch out it's really tough! DRAGON 32 If you like the light cycles of TRON, you'll love JETMOBILE a thrilling 2 player game featuring high speed graphics. APPLE Cassetta 50 gives you 50 great games to choose from including a classic STARTREK and BLAZING INFERNO. SPECTRUM 16k/48k or + \"Incredibly frustrating that's the verdict on Cassette 50's FROGGER Satisfied users tell us it's one of the most challenging You'll find it's almost as good as the arcade version! CARGO has you trying desperately to complete your helicopter mission under attack. Plus 40 other tactical, logical and adventure games featuring multi coloured and user-defined graphics, scrolling and full use of the Spectrum sound capabilities 1 Muncher 13 Microtra 26. Laser 2 Ski Jump 21 Ahen 40. Voyager 1 Basketball 15. Labyrinth 26 Cargo 41. Shech Pet 16 Skittles 29 The Race 5. Breakout 17 Race Track 30 The Shu 10 Ski Run 44 Mystical 19 Tanks 20 Soler Ship 45 Galaxy Defence 21 Ten Pins 9. Boggles 47 Jesmobile 10 Alen Attack 23 Stampe 36 Dragold 4. Barrel Jurno 11 lunar landing 24 Pinball 37 Space Search 49 Attacker 12 More Later 25 Cavern 38 Intern 50 Space Mission ATARI Munch, Munch... it's the MAZE EATERI Can you eat the ghosts before they eat you? Or would you rather chance it on the MOTORWAY? Your Cassette 50 is compatible with the 400/800 and 600XLIBOOXL sarias ATARI computers. Advanced features include high resolution graphics, sound, music and mixed mode screens. Many games are joystick compatible calculator watch with every Cassette 50 EXPRESS DELIVERY-ORDER NOW! -ONLY .95 Postage FREE in U.K. Add .00 for overseas orders. Free watch and tape will be despatched within 14 days. I enclose a cheque/ made payable to postal order for Cascade Games Ltd. or through any Post Office by TRANSCASH (Giro No. 655 6655) For even faster ordering when charging to Access, Barclaycard and Trustcard Visa use our 24 hour service. (0423) 504663. Name VASANO Address I COMMODORE 64 ATARI ORIC 1 BBC As | SPECTRUM VIC 20 ZX 81 APPLE AMSTRAD ATMOS O DRAGON ELECTRON Cascade Games Ltd., 1-3 Haywra Crescent, Harrogate, North Yorkshire, HG1 5BG, England. Telephone: (0423) 504663. Registered Number 1755554 Post Code Country _CVG 1/85 ---"


"Got a problem? Feel in need of a bit of help and assistance? Then why not write to the Bug Hunters at Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. II. .. . allo ( d. DEAREL LIGT HLUNES The unfortunate incident with the drinks machine had been a bad break. What's more, the editor wasn't going to let me claim for the damage on expenses. In fact, the only extra money he'd agreed to pay me was danger money, thus ensuring that I'd have to volunteer yet again for a foray into the uncharted regions of the Bug Hunter Recreation Room. The editor's a nice bloke really, always very busy, and I'm sure he didn't mean to kick me out of the office quite so forcibly. At least I'd given him a chance to relieve his pent up frustration by letting him tear up my hospital bill. Just as I was leaving the building, there was a large crash as a potted plant smashed on the ground, mere inches from where I was standing. Looking up, I saw the unmistakable outline of our beloved editor's face. complete with cigar. \"Don't jump,\" I cried. \"I'll get your story.\" \"And don't forget to get the missing lines from those Spectrum listings.\" he yelled, then slammed shut the window. I dived for cover, as splinters of shattered glass fell to the ground. Entering the Recreation Room was proving to be more difficult than I'd originally thought. Nevertheless, being an ace reporter, I was determined not to give up, and had come up with a completely different tack. You see, I didn't really have to get into the room, just find out what was going on inside. I'd also recently noticed a Bug Hunter requisition for some rather lewd pictures. The storeroom next door to the Recreation Room was dusty, musty and obviously disused. After checking and rechecking my measurements, I started drilling into the wall, directly behind the picture with the false eyes. Bribing the droid to hang the picture in the correct position had already cost me all of my additional danger money Big Red and Otiss were the only two Bug Hunters visible in my rather limited field of view. Otiss was signing photographs of himself. \"I really can't understand how you could get so much fan mail\" Big Red was saying. \"I mean, I realise that you're much cleverer than me, and so on, but I haven't had any mail at all. Nor have X or B-Con.\" \"Not surprising really.\" Otiss replied. \"If we assume a reasonably intelligent magazine readership, then they're bound to recognise my superior attributes. \"Don't worry about it, Big Red,\" said B-Con, coming into view, closely followed by X. \"Have you ever stopped to wonder why all these letters Otiss has been getting are so similar? You see ...\" \"I don't know what you think you're implying with that remark,\" Otiss interrupted, \"but whatever it is, I deny it.\" \"What I don't understand,\" said X, \"is why you used a cheap photocopier to produce all those letters when I could have done a much better job for you. If I was feeling really generous, might not even have charged you as much as the photocopier.\" \"Well, it just so happens that the copier downstairs is jammed and gives free copies, sneered Otiss. \"Not that I've been using it, of course. Even if I did want to make copies of something, you'd probably continued on page 50 "


"DERELLIGE UNTER doesn't get anywhere. You should know by now that .. be the last person I'd consider having seen the mess you made of the listings in the November issue. You lot may not have been getting much fan mail, but B-Con has been getting mountains of letters concerning those two Spectrum listings: Poker and Injun. Jim.\" \"Ah...em, I think that might, possibly, in a roundabout sort of way be partially, figuratively speaking, my fault,\" muttered B-Con. \"You know how it is, getting stuff ready for deadlines, and X wasn't around at the time, and there was this ancient twentieth century printer lying around. So you see, X didn't actually do those two listings.\" \"No I certainly didn't,\" declared X. \"My copies are far better than that. Here are your correction sheets B-Con. See how I've underlined all the graphics characters and everything. Oh, I also 130 FOR 1 TO 30: PRINT AT 21, 1: INK 2: PAPER 7: \"F NEXT 150 PRINT AT 2. PAPER | INK 2 \" E AT 2-1, M INK 2 PAPER 7\" F: NEXT + 230 PRINT AT , PAPER INK 4: D\"NEXT F 240 PRINT AT d. at INK O: \"A\": AT d+1, at INK 1 \"B\" 1030 PRINT AT +1, a INK 1 \"B\" 1000 IF 0 THEN PRINT AT d, aCI INK 0:\"\"AT d.1,-; INK O; \"What's an essential luxury, Otiss?\" asked Big Red. \"What? Well it's a necessary item that we don't ... Well ... Oh, stop asking such stupid questions and get on with those envelopes.\" \"What he really means, Big Red, is that it's just another nonsensical phrase that he's invented,\" said B-Con. \"Look, Otiss, I know what you agreed to without consulting the rest of us but they have sent us those pictures on the wall over there, which you asked was MY decision not to talk to them, and they sent ME the pictures, think I'll take them into MY room.\" Grabbing the pictures. Otiss left the room, slamming the door. As Big Red started throwing the piles of envelopes down the waste chute, X came over to my wall and peered through the two holes. \"I know you've been there all along,\" he whispered. \"I'll let you off this time, but I warn you not to try this particular stunt again. See you next month.\" Thus ends my first pain-free encounter. I've printed the correction sheet The editor was so pleased that he's insisted I volunteer again next month. He even gave me a cigar. Though he did draw the line at giving me a bonus. By ace reporter, Rik Link. 1090 IF 0 THEN PRINT AT d, as IN O \"A\".AT +1, aj INK 11 \"C\" 2010 PRINT AT 10,19 INK F OVER # LET F=F+1 7010 PRINT AT d, at INK O: \"A AT d.1, al INK 1:\" B AT d+2, aINKO 1NEXT : INK O: RANDOMIZE U SR 23317. RETURN 8020 PRINT AT D-1, a: INKO, A Tdai INK O \"AEAT d1, ar \"B\". I Fd-20 THEN GO TO 6000 for.\" Carmel \"Okay,\" snapped Otiss. \"Have it your way. If it ** 145 PRINT PAPER 7 AT N, X| INK 2: \"RRRRR\", NEXT N. LET Y=X+61 NE XT U. LET YOU RETURN 170 IF HS-6\" THEN GO SUB CLE GO TO 500 175 60 SUB 105: LET SW-VAL HS: GO TO 300 510 FOR LEO TO 800 STEP 100: GO SUB (2000+L) 540 LET FHOILET PP-ON NEXT L 550 FOR 2-1 TO 2: PRINT AT 9+2, 1,\"PLAYER \"Z HAS 555 IF OZ) =3 AND J(5,2) <11 THE N PRINT JIS, Z FS (Z) GO TO 570 3100 REM (Anything you like) 6020 GO SUB GO. PRINT PAPER 2 4D5D607DAD IS A STRAIGHT FLUSHI 5 CLUBS 4,5,6,7 . 8. 6050 00 SUB GO: PRINT PAPER 2: Ciny vidA FLUSH(true vid) IS 5 CARDS OF THE SAME SUIT:AAAAA.5 HEARTS, CLUBS etc Don't forget you can call the Bug Hunter on 0151 6222, od 2470 every TUESDAY They ul be around to deal with your problems. Bo eleme memember to all Conh on a Turendah     remembered to send a copy to that reporter bloke for the magazine\". \"What's this!! Mutiny!!\" Otis virtually exploded in anger as he did a wheelie round the table. \"I thought we'd agreed not to give any information to those magazine people until they started giving us those small essential little luxuries we'd asked for. \"I'll stop you. The postdroid happens to be a very good friend of mine, and has done one or two little things for me in the past, so I'll make sure that correction sheet CON "


"The Commodore 128. When you look at the facts they do seem to weigh rather heavily in our favour. When you add it up, the Commodore 128 is really three computers in one. It can run 64K, 128K and CP/M software. Giving it the largest range of computer software in the world. Making it as efficient in business as it is entertaining at home. That's why Commodore has become the world leader in microcomputers. And why, on balance, the Commodore 128 has no equal. THE commodore "


"ACUNNING FOE WHO KNOWS NO FEAR DESERT FOX CBM64/128 The cunning Desert Fox, the wily Rommel, is on the rampage sweeping_ across the desert sands, laying low the allied forces and swarming face conflict with his ground and air attacks. Be as wise and as cautious as through allied territory. It is on your shoulders Lone Wolf to halt the the most battle hardened general in planning your strategy and calculatin progress of this awesome foe and rescue the North Africa campaian from your tactics to rescue your supply depots. In short Lone Woll if you failin your destiny as the complete warrior, the final conflict-a head to head his grasp. Step forward with the courage of a fearless leader in face to tank duel with the mighty Desert Fox himself will be your last. REALISTIC VOICE SIMULATION Listen in on enemy radio messages, plan your tactics to combat their manoeuvres. U.S. A O BRE GOLD Stuha attack: Reed close eye on Your Fadran carly warning will give you some chance ainst the CCTV stukas Convoylrotect your CONTOS from a crial bombardment at all cost without their stipplies your depots will fall. But in your CRCCSS watch out to the allied Spittine's Bew All Can softwa Maps Be wise in your campaign Siren protect the depan dancer in CICHY CES Rally Vorliepower to los destructive elect Ambush the valley is intested with chemy force buttonatter reach the other side you must Cod luck and happy shooting U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10. Parkway Industrial Centre. Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 8881 "


"COMMODORE 64/128 SPECTRUM 48K U.S. GOLD PUREDE HALL OF FAME COMMODORE 64/128 AZTEC CHALLENGE SPY HUNTER * Entered UK Charts 21st February 1985 Weeks in Charts = 16 \"Superb Arcade Game Zzap! 64 TAPPER * Entered UK Charts 10th January 1985 Weeks in Charts 9 \"Great Sound and graphics fast and addictive Your Computer UP 'N' DOWN Entered UK Charts 2nd May 1985 Weeks in Charts 7 Entered UK Charts 5th April 1984 Weaks in Charts 16 BLUE MAX * Entered UK Charts 24th January 1985 Weeks in Chanis 10 \"A great game highly enjoyable\" Your Commodore A curious, cute and highly addictive car game' Computer Trade Weekly 'It's gripping music and imaginative setting makes this saven screen thriller a cut above the rest' Zzap/ 64 SPECTRUM 48K BLUE MAX RAID!! FLAK ROCCO (Gremlin Graphics) HUNCHBACK II Entered UK Charts 22nd February 1985 Weeks in Charts — 12 \"Blue Max is certainly a great Entered UK Charts 4th April 1985 Weeks in Charts 22 'Absorbing, addictive and fun to play * Entered UK Charts 8th October 1984 Weeks in Charts 6 'Will you survive the Flak Your Computer * Entered UK Charts 1st July 1985 Weeks in Charts 6 * Entered UK Charts 19th December 1984 Weeks in Charts 18 85% Very playable and addictive Long life in terms of appeal Crash Smash Animation is great, if you want a quod punch up Rocco is the game for you Computer & Video Games Crash Smash CHARTBUSTING COMPILATION THAT EXPLODES WITH ACTION TF87 ous as culating fail in acad .95 TAPE US U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10. Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 8881 COMMODORE 64/128 Based on compiled data 16A /Sooctrum from Rom /r/Micro Dantor Chor "


"15*ARCA Claro Edgeley Ideas Corp's Arcade toy is relentlessly seeking now games. This month her investigations take her. martufacturers unvoll their latest creations O ARCADIA'86 FLAG RD NAP 17 5 km/h The Associated Leisure Preview 86 at the end of October held promises of a whole new batch of games to hit the arcades in the coming months. Many of the games were being shown in the UK for the very first time and there were a number of crowd pullers including Choplifter, Buggy Boy Gauntlet and Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom Indiana Jones was reviewed in December's issue and attracted a lot of attention. There was only one laser disc game Captain Zap from Universal modelled on the same format as Don Quixote launched at the same time last year Captain Zap a handsome young man, has given up his trusty steed for a huge motorbike probably because it gives him a better image and bikes are generally faster than mules. Anyway, he's off to rescue his loved one. kidnapped by an evil magus. and must prove himself by performing many brave and seemingly foolhardy deeds. Poor guy. I kept steering him into walls and he didn't get very far but if you follow the arrows which flash the direction he must take. Captain Zop will hurtle round corners. avoid deadly objects and the The game needs split second reactions and the arrows don't flash every time, so much of the game is played by trial and error. Still, it's a good laugh and the cartoon animation is excellent. Sego's Choplifter was apparently a huge success in the Japanese show held early in October and seemed to be attracting much attention of the show. It involves a rescue bid by helicopter of 32 hostages and calls for some very nifty flying through battle forn scenarios Tatsumi's Buggy Boy is a monster of a machine built on TX-1 lines, only much larger. It hos three screens giving a massive panoramic view of the track which is more like an obstacle course with boulders fences, other cars to avoid narrow bridges to cross and tunnels to negotiate, as well as coloured marker flags to hit for extro points. You have to drive at full tilt round the course in a set time and can use some of the smaller obstacles to leap your buggy into the air to avoid road blocks Those who went mad over Trivial Pursuit the general knowledge board game that mode such a killing lost Christmas will be thrilled to hear that there is a trivia wor taking place in the coin op industry. It seems that every man and his dog is producing a general knowledge quiz game covering such varied topics as sport, entertainment, history geography, sex trivia which isn't as bad as it sounds pop, rock 'n' roll, world at war. There are hundreds and thousands of questions just waiting for you to come along and answer them. Bally Sente has the rights to Trivial Pursuit and the arcade game is very SOEDO FEEDURMISSION "


"DE ACTION SHOOTOUT good simulation of the board game, giving the questions and answers in a multiple choice format, telling you the right answer if you ve made the wrong choice. For the rest, the games come in a multitude of shapes and formats. Some are easy others difficult and one or two are very amusing. Most incorporate o gambling mechanism so that you have to gamble a set number of points on your answer but none correct you if you give the wrong answer As someone said if you are told the right answer everytime, then you would soon learn the game and stop playing. However, you could always look up any queries in the Encyclopedia Britannica and the next time you play you can beat the machine hands down! Which ever game you play they all make a good attempt to test your general knowledge. Only time will tell if they have lasting appeal. It is hoped they will be a success. Taito has three new offerings Typhoon Gal Knuckle Joe and Legend of Kage Typhoon Gal is a rather silly game involving a judoor is it karate? match between a young girl and her male opponent. It's really wet and didn't think all that much of it. At the start Typhoon Gal runs behind a tree and strips off fossing her clothes over the unsuspecting countryside with gay abandon. Fortunately she doesn't come out from behind the tree. The next we see of her, she is leaping into a hut to take on her male opponent Other than a few weak kicks body blows and the occasional high leap, the fight is about as uninspiring as a wet blanket What makes it worse is that every time she loses she collapses to the ground and cries bucketfuls, and then throws herself across the lap of her unfortunate opponent. What a watering pot. YUK! Taito is certainly making full use of the present martial arts craze must be its Japanese heritage, Legend of Kage is far better than Typhoon Gal and features yet nother hero trying to rescue his loved one. How much longer can this story line be used? I would have thought that it had been beaten to death by now. The hero is some sort of good ninja up against a whole bunch of bod ninjas. He can leap as high as the trees throw poisoned stars with deadly accuracy and twirl his nunchukkas like the best of them. But is he a match for the fire breathing ninja king..? Knuckle Joe is entertaining but once again it's a game with a martial arts theme. Fight off hoards of baddies with bare fists and feet using walls and ledges to leap around the screen to catch them off their guard. Theres even one baddie on each screen with a weapon. Kill him pick up the gun blast the rest. Other than the change in scenario, the two games are almost identical although in my opinion Knuckle Joe is easier and the screens are clearer and less cluttered. SNKS Tank is fun and very much in the traditional style of blast anything in your path. Directional arrows indicate your route through a wortorn, maze. like landscape. Hazards to avoid include foot soldiers and enemy tanks. Your machine gun turret can be turned in any direction and the cannon fire is remarkably accurate SNK has another game ASO. For a spoce shootem-up it's great it hos fast action lots of noise and requires accurate shooting Fly over a green space station blasting formations of swirling swooping aliens and pick up energy units marked with the letter E. You have eight weapons bases which include shields, guided missiles, flame throwers and smart bombs. You can switch to any of those if you have enough energy. Once over the space station, battle with a deadly orange monster which looks like a huge mutant octopus. Many shots are needed to kill it and you may have to resort to one of the more powerful weapons. Watch your energy you may die if it falls too low, Those were just a few of the great games on show and I will be looking at each game in more detail over the next few months. The show was very busy, bustling with dealers and distributors. Hopefully it won't be too long before you will see these and many more games in your local arcades It's back to the bad old days in Data East's Shoot Out where the cops or in this case one cop takes on the Mafia single handed with only his trusty Colt 45 for company Shoot Out is reminiscent of the days of Al Capone before he went to Alcatraz that is One cop against the entire force of the Mafio. Gun in hand, he stands alert, waiting for the boddies. They crop up in the most unexpected places too from behind a fountain round the corners of buildings doorways and shop windows Even crowling onto the screen in an old black sedan and then spraying you with a sub machine gun. The aim is to blast them before they blast you, and if you've been practicing on similar shootem before theyget you games like Bank Panic and Hogan's Alley, you should find this a doddle. The baddies almost stroll from their hiding places in the first screen. There is bags of time to aim and fire. The second screen takes place in a fairground watch out for the guy behind the window, he's placed at a difficult angle for accurate shooting. Each level also has various objects to hit road signs, traffic lights, a roller coaster all of which earn bonus points. Each screen has a grand finale when a vehicle of some kind rolls up and the ground around you erupts with bullets Shoot Out is as much fun as Bank Panic and Hogan's Alley Each game is different, but the idea is the same. Take your pick all three ore great fun 3 0002803 DOO ODON GERNIETIR "


"RUGBY INTERNATIONAL WORID CUP ZX Spectrum 48K SPECTRUM SCREEN SHOTS embert 2 WORLD CUP II COMMODORE 64 \"YOU KIOK A CONVERSION BUT HAVE YOU COMPENSATED ENOUGH FOR THE WIND?\" INTERNATIONAL RUGBY WORLD CUP FOOTBALL Another excellent sports A fabulous simulation of simulation. You play as a real soccer with complete home international team, multi-colour graphics battling for the Triple Crown your aim is to become the or even the Grand Slam. holder of the most coveted The game includes all the trophy — \"The World Cup\". features that you would Play against a friend or expect from this superb the computer. simulation including an international league table. WORLD CUP 48K SPECTRUM UNDER PRESSURE YOU TRY FOR A DROP GOAL\". SOON TO BE RELEASED FOR THE AMSTRAD AND COMMODORE 64 NOW AVAILABLE FOR COMMODORE C16 AND AMSTRAD 464 SCOREOR TRY? WORLD CUP FOOTBALL AVAILABLE FOR INTERNATIONAL RUGBY AVAILABLE FOR SPECTRUM (48K) .95 (48K) SPECTRUM .95 COMMODORE .95 C16 AMSTRAD 464 AND WORLD CUP II COMMODORE 64 Artic Software is available from all good retail stores or direct from: ARTIC COMPUTING, MAIN STREET, BRANDSBURTON, DRIFFIELD, YO25 8RL. Tel: (0401) 43553 "


"OLEKSYEVA The most powerful games in the Universe FRED .99 Hide your pterodactyl Fred Flintstone is about to create! Build the beginnings of Bedrock in Yabba-Dabba-Doo! Available for the Commodore, 64, Amstrad and Spectrum 48K  QUICKSILVA LIMITED Liberty House, 222 Regent Street, London WIR 7DB. Telephone 01-439 0666 "


"THE LORD O Here we present the stunning illustrations that haveon Here are just a few of the hundreds of entries for our Melbourne House Lord of the Rings \"Draw a Hobbit\" contest. The response to this competition just overwhelmed everyone at C+VG it must be the biggest ever number of entries for any competition we've ever run. Not only that the standard of the illustrations we received was staggeringly high it made our job of judging them terribly difficult. You must have spent hours creating your entries. Sorry so few of you can win a prize but rest assured, your entries were all really appreciated and earned a special place on the C+VG office walls. They were judged by The Ed and C+VG's designer Craig Kennedy. Full results are detailed below. Hope you enjoy this glimpse of just a few of the winning entries. Robbie Nutall Winner: Peter Fussey Winner: Andrew Whithurst Winner: Scott Henderson Mr A Phillips CANDYCOPLAMABAMINERAP ALATGASALAN "


"OF THE RINGS ve won the Melbourne House Draw a Hobbit Competition. Goll me Mark S Mitchell bey Reeves Johnathon Eggelton Mark Hughes   bs/\\BRRA THE WINNERS: This lucky trio win special gold embossed copies of Tolkien's epic novel from Melbourne House. Andrew Whithurst, Hull; Scott Henderson, Middle Barton, Oxon; Peter C. Fussey, Hull. RUNNERS UP: Conor Malone, Belfast: Sidney Reeves, Birmingham; Mark Eggelton, Milton Keynes; S. Mitchell, London: Robbie Nutall, Edinburgh. Hughes, Milford Haven; A.B. Phillips, Rugby; Mark Dodd, Halesowen; Johnathon New Malden: Sinclair Elliott, Halland; Matthew Russell Lewendon, Upper Norwood; Mary Mancini, Largs, Ayreshire; Lyon, Basingstoke; David Patterson, Stevenage Ian Thody, Longnewton; Niki Barrows, Redcar, John Webster, Galbraith, Newcastle: Kevin Michael McEvoy, Liverpool; Graham Millyard, Feltham; Andrew Rickard, Oxford. NA"


"ASIERRA @ ba SOFTWARE PERSONAL COMPUTER SOFTWARE SIERRA OAY DISNEY PLAYING FOR FUN LEARNING FOR LIFE DONALD DUCK'S PLAYGROUND Walt Disney Personal Computer Software is designed to make the learning of basic, everyday skills and the development of knowledge a happy and fun-filled experience. Any child will be captivated by the stunning graphics, the familiar and delightful characters and the scope of the compelling and challenging activities in which they become engaged. A truly remarkable series of educational software, with the unquestioned quality for which its originators are renowned. A FUN-FILLED WAY TO LEARN ALL ABOUT MONEY Donald's mischievous nephews-Huey, Dewey, and Louie, would love to have a playground of their own. You can help kind-hearted Uncle Donald build them one. CAT IN THE HUNDRED ACRE WOOL THEPOOH WINNIE DOUBLE $9.95 CASSETTE DISK & DOUBLE CASSETTE MICKEY'S SPACE ADVENTURE ONLY ITS A DIFFERENT GAME EACH TIME YOU PLAY A blustery wind came up this morning in The Hundred Acre Wood; DISKit picked things up and blew them everywhere. Now it's up to you to find and return missing belongings to all the characters in the wood. EXPLORE OUR SOLAR SYSTEM THROUGH 150 CAPTIVATING SCENES You, Mickey, and Pluto can help put back together the shattered memory crystal\" of a far-off planet. Broken into nine pieces scattered throughout our solar system, the missing crystal stores the entire history of Oron and its inhabitants. Fire up the spaceship that'sbeen sent for you, and be on your way. CBM 64 .95 DISK "


"ERAT for the post and I shall try to find you some games for each computer. In the meantime the rest of you can have a quick scan over the following and see what is of use to you. Ancipital: Type LOAD (return) and then Run (return). When game has loaded type Poke 19938, number of lives (return) or Poke 18679,173 (return) for unlimited lives. Then type SYS 16384 (return) to start game. Spirit of the Stones: Type Load (return) Poke 1012,252 (return) and then Run(return). After the program has loaded and the computer has reset enter Poke 343322,234 (return) Poke 34323,234 (return) Poke 34324,234 (return) Poke 34328,234 (return) and finally SYS 32777 (return). You can now enter a building and be indestructible apart from a high fall. Wizardry: Type Load (return) and when first listing has loaded enter Poke 1011,248: Poke 1012,252 (return) and then Run(return). When the computer has reset type Poke 2969 (return) and SYS2816 (return). After the four sections have loaded type Poke 3216,255: Poke 50766,255 (return) Poke 3264,234: Poke 3264,234 (return): Poke 27214,234: Poke 50151,234 (return): Poke 50152,234: Poke 50153,234 (return) SYS2970 (return) will begin the game. You now have more energy and Welcome to IDEAS CENTRAL. My name is Melissa Ravenflame, I.C. co-ordinator. IDEAS CENTRAL is where you'll find the Bug Hunters' HQ and the man who keeps those rogue robots in order Jackson T. Kalliber. Jackson makes sure OTISS, Big Red, X and B-Con get out there to find the hints, tips and pokes you all so desperately need for a happy existence. Don't tell them but I can't rely on them to make a good job of it. So the IDEAS CORPORATION and yours truly, Melissa R., need YOUR help. Remember, the IDEAS CORP will pay a large amount of credits to anyone assisting our enquiries. So, send your hints and cheats to Melissa Ravenflame, IDEAS CENTRAL, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Due to problems with the Pokes in recent months, we have decided that in future we shall not be paying for thse until the month after they have been printed. That way will be able to tell by your response whether they work or not. So, be warned, if you want paid be sure they work. Now let's take a look at what the BH squad have come up with... 40 Poke 23439,201: Print USR 23424 (enter) 50Load Code (enter) 60 Poke 43117,255: Print USR 32768 (enter) 70 Poke 23697 (enter) now type Run (enter) and restart the tape. When the game begins you have 255 lives. You can adjust this by changing the value in line 60. Or try this Poke 36965,0 (enter) for endless lives. Poke 37999,201 (enter) for no enemies. Poke 43092.X-1 selects level where X 99 (enter). Use Poke 23756,1 to make the leader editable. Trans-Am: After the main block of code has loaded stop the tape and press break. Type Poke 25446,0: Continue (enter) restart the tape and when the game begins you will have infinite lives. Frank. N. Stein: Merge header and change it to 10 Border O: Inko: Clear 24750: Load \"Screen: Paper 0: Print at 0,6;: Load Code : Poke 28287, number of lives 0-55: Randomise USR 27890 (enter) you will now have infinite lives.  AMSTRAD Electro Freddy: Type in before running the program: 10 Memory 10000 (enter) 20 Load \"A1\" (enter) 30Load \"A2\" (enter) 40 Load \"A3\" (enter) 50 Load \"A4\" (enter) 60 Load \"A6\" (enter) 70 Poke 39356,255 (enter) 80 Call 39323 (enter) you will now have 255 lives. To change this alter value in line 70. Blagger: To get these pokes in you will need to remove the protection of the Basic. Poke 32518 x where X 240 to give X lives (enter). Poke 31938,0: Poke 31940,0 (Enter) makes the conveyors act like dry land. Poke 32579,0: Poke 32580,0 (Enter) gives infinite lives. deplenish your energy.  SPECTRUM To enter a Poke where no loading instructions are given load the first part of the program with Merge : List (enter) and enter the poke. Then type Run (enter) to load the rest of the program. Lunar Jetman: Type Merge : New (enter) and when OK appears type 10 Poke 23693: Border O:Clear 32767 (enter) 20 Ink O:Load \" Screen $: Load Code (enter) 30 Load \"Code: Load Coded Code (enter) POKES  COMMODORE 64 X,234, Next, Return. These pokes for Blackwyche Then type SYS 3080 return then have been devised by Peter press Fl and play the game. Melly of Copt Antrin, but you Sea Lally of London and his must have a reset button. It friends heard our pleas for will enable you to explore the help and sent in lots of pokes ship without being killed. After for Commodores, Spectrums the game has loaded reset and Amstrads. He has also your machine and enter the been picked as the winner of following: our 'Star Poke' for January. For X=04675 TO 4680: Poke So, Sean, keep an eye out DUMMY RUN Eventually with the help of Simon Tansly of Birmingham we have found out how to finish this game. I know there are hundreds of Continued page 64 "


"ORDER E NDE SERENA SIRAO 2COD 3-6 CONIC BAKERY WAK 5... PANIC BAKESHOP! IN THE Konami rast and furious arcade fun. Help Joe the Bake, defend his loaves from the Rascally Racoons and The name wasMITE con Meet WOOLWORTH LASKYS Rumbelows.Green Imagine Software is available from e G e Spectrum Shops and all good dealers. are Imagine Software (1984) Limited Central Street Manchester M2 SNSTel: 0618343939. Telex: 66990 "


"The Best Selling Spectrum Soccer Special Now Released On The AMSTRAD & BBC MICRO MATCH RICO ACER are A Am ocea Ocean Software is available from selected branches of: BUELO.WHSMITH. John Menzies,WOOLIVORTH,LASKYS, Rumbelows,Greens, Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Trade enquiries welcome. SPECTRUM 7.95 AMSTRAD S.95 BBC MICRO 9.95 Ocean Software. Ocean House. 6 Central Street  Manchester M2 5NS Tel: 061-832 6633. "


" JERRY PARIS. away from his lair, but, when he enters the lair he can only travel a short distance before the program crashes. Has anyone else experienced this? The rabbits lair is really a maze. Try breaking into the program (by pressing Break key) and then typing VDU 231 232 233 return and VDU 234,235,236 in mode continued from page 61 Mikrogen addicts waiting for these clues. After you have bombed all the buildings you will receive a cannon ball. Get the caps and, with the cannon ball, go to the room with the cannon in it. Walk down the steps till you are above the fuse at the end of the cannon. Walk off the steps and you will turn green and the cannon will blow a hole in the wall. Go through the hole and get the bouncy space hopper. Then get the tennis racquet and go to the break-out room. When you have knocked all the bricks away you will get the glove. Drop the tennis racquet for the glove. The glove and the bouncy space hopper will allow you to jump higher than usual in this room so jump at the ON/OFF switch...and there you are, you've done it. And for a little extra help on Herbert's Dummy Run, it's over to Richard Edgerton of Sutton Coldfield for some everlasting lives (Spec 48). Print in the following listing and start you tape from the start... 10 CLEAR 65595 20 PRIN AP 9.3 PLAY IN THE FREE MASTER TAPE AT 11, 10,\"TION THE START 30 WESTORS NO TOR -23296 TO 233211 KLAD AT POIKEA KLETN 50 DATA 221,039,000,000,017 60 DATA 012,000,173,055,205 70 DATA 086, 005221.05.224 80 DATA 252,012.06,002,062 90 DATA 233,093,209,086,005 100 DATA 201 110 RANDOTUS UR 23296 120 PORE 65093,263 FOR 65100, 190 190 FOR N-65271 TO 65299READ ALRIKE WAKET M. 140 DATA 017, 128,091,033,254 150 DATA 08.026,17,203,164 160 DATA 17,203,228,018,043 170 DATA 019, 123,294156,082 180 DATA 261,062,18,050.213 190 DACA 202, 195, 148,091 200 RANDOM THE USR 65093 MARSPORT The latest in a long line of hints from The Tipmaster' is for Marsport. First of all you must find a gun and charge it. Start from Leve Coma Sector D and go down the downtube, into Level Elis. On this level look for Sector G where there is a supply unit and uptube. In the supply unit you will find a gun permit. Take it. Go to Level Daly, Sector G via the uptube. Find Sector D and a locker. In the locker there is a gun next to a key station. Put the gun permit in the key station to retrieve the gun. To charge the weapon, go to Sector G and you should find a charge unit charge the gun. On this level there are three major items to collect. The water, the flour and the baketin. Once you have these items take them to Sector F where you will find a bakery room and a factor unit in the south wall. Put these items in the factor unit and they should turn into a cake. Put the cake in the key station next to the bakery and you should be able to enter. Inside there is a supply unit containing dough. Take it and go back through the door and find and collect the charcoal which is on the same level. Go back to the bakery and go through the far door. You will now be carrying a gun, charcoal and some dough. You will come out in another sector which contains a down tube which you travel down. You will find yourself in Level Farr outside a \"no-entry\". There is no turning back. General hints: Always try to keep your gun fully charged because there are many Sept warriors. Try to stay away from the warden sectors, they are immune to the gun and are quite deadly. The Tipmaster says make a map, have a dictionary or encyclopedia handy as a lot of items hide a clue and make a save copy regularly because if you make an item and you die you will have to make it again. They are useful when near Warder and Sept Warrior sectors. DUN DARACH J. Blakely of Leeds has sent in The Final Solution! A couple of months ago we left you hanging about the castle, so to get you moving again you have to drop the objects on the tables (not the scroll) and stop the combination at D.P.E. Go through the door to a room with a message \"Eight Rows and Bar For Key Find Skar\". There are several doors on each row and you must go through them in the correct sequence in order to go onto the next row. The order is: Row A: 3rd door Row D 5th door Row G 3rd door Row B: 3rd door Row E 4th door Row H 2nd door Row C 5th door Row F 4th door You should now find yourself in a yellow room with a locked door. Open this up with the scroll. You will find yourself in another \"combination room\". Drop the objects on the tables to stop the combination at O.A.K. Take the L-key and go through the door. In this room you will find Loea. Give him the L-key and he will give you another L-key in exchange. Follow him and he will take you to a door, this will lead to Oak Road. Go to Claw Lane with the L. key and unlock the locked door and you've done it! SIM DIFFERENT From Chris and Andrew Hutson of Lincs, a few hints and tips for a number of games. View to A kill the passwords are: Section two QRS21' and Section 3 'QQQQQQ: On Spy Hunter to pick up some points when the Mad Bomber helicopter appears, slow to a halt. It will hover just in front of you, dropping bombs. These miss you every time and you get 150 points for each one dropped. Some quick pokes for 254 lives in Spectral Invaders insert this Poke before the Print USR statement: Poke 25062 254. Infinite lives on Booty. Type in this program and run it. Start the tape from the beginning and it should load normally. 10 Border 0: Paper 0: Ink 0. 20 Clear 26870 30 Load \" Screen. 40 Load\" Code 26880 50 Randomise USR 26880 60 Poke 58294,0 70 Randomise USR 52500. Sim for the Electron was driving Patrick Lord crazy until the day he found a method of obtaining 255 lives. Here he tells you how to do it. Type Load to load the first part of the game. When the program has loaded delete lines 10 and 470. Run the program, change the keys if you wish and wher \"Searching\" appears on the screen press Escape and type *Load=2 and then use *load \"to load part 3 (Sim3). When the third part has loaded, type ?&198B = 255 and then type Call 84000. When you have done this the normal screen picture and \"searching will appear now start the tape and the rest of the game will load. You now have 255 lives. Since Patrick has used this method he has managed to get the carrot and tempt the rabbit "


"Can YOU avoid the fangs of a deadly spider?  JERRY PARIS. Addictive launch BOFFIN A Mad Professor on the Loose CO BOFFIN BOFFIN  Boffin is a challenging, action-packed game requiring a combination of cunning and slick keyboard control. Beware the Giant Puffer-Blimps in your way and give the massive Tarantulas a wide berth! Land on the giant and they will slam you into deadly neutron magnets embedded in the cave roof! Manta-bats are useful allies and the trampolines will help you gain height but remember to use your umbrella to break a deadly fall! Available BBC B and Electron ............ .95 ALSO AVAILABLE STRINGER FOOTBALL MANAGER Stringer is an arcade adventure The All Time Classic game in which you are a press Football Manager... Spectrum 48K photographer set the task of .95... Commodore 64 .95 .. snatching a shot of a Film Star in Amstrad CPC 464 .95... BBCB an hotel. The game is tantalisingly .95... Electron .95... Dragon playable, graphically excellent and .95 ... Vic 20 .95 ...ZX81 .95 of course Addictive! Available . . . .95. To: Addictive Games Ltd, 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth. Dorset BH2 6HE Please send me: cassette(s) for Boffin for.......... ................(computer) cassette(s) for Stringer for.............. (computer) cassette(s) of Football Manager for.................... ...(computer) I enclose cheque/postal order for ...... Please debit my Access card No....... \"Delete as applicable When you openan Addictive Game, there's a new world of discovery. waiting for you. ddictive Name... Address. Postcode ...................... Tel: Access orders can be telephoned through on (02021 296404 For overseas orders, please add .50  Addictive Games 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth BH2 6HE Telephone: 0202296404. "


"ARECER 09 COMMAND SCOOBY Frank Punos In the Castlelyste FREE-LANCE PROGRAMMERS A very small number of 1st CLASS Free-Lance Programmers are sought to work on a number of PRESTIGE TITLES to be published WORLDWIDE by Elite during 1986. If you wish to be associated with the publication of some of the major titles of the next twelve months, and can demonstrate responsibility for at least one TOP-FLIGHT published work, we would like to talk to you. A choice of Royalty or Contract payment systems are available to you, as an integral part of the Free-Lance force behind one of the most dynamic software houses in Europe. This is your chance to be part of a small team associated with the Company responsible for major releases including: Airwolf, Frank Bruno's Boxing and Commando which is now planning for Worldwide growth in 1986. Call Steve Wilcox now for a preliminary discussion on 0922 55852 or write quickly to: Elite Systems Limited, Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall WS9 8PW West Midlands. Elite "


"'C+VG COMPETITION GHOSTBUSTERS \"We ain't afraid of no ghosts.\" But are you? Well, now is the time for you to find out and put your nerves to the test. Ghostbusters has become one of the cinema's all me greats. Now RCA/Columbia Pictures Video UK has released the film on video. And thanks to our friends at Activision who produced the smash computer game based on the film we've got 20 of the videos, worth $70 sach, to give away as competition prizes. Bo if you want to enjoy your thrilla with chills and a lot of laughs, read on. All you have to do is. answer the following four questions and send your answers with the printed coupon to Ghostbusters Competition, Computer and Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. The closing date for the competition is January 16th and the editor's decision is final. GHSSTBUSTERS 1) What was the name of the man who had the worldwide number one hit song with the theme from Ghostbusters? 2) What was the name of the space horror film in which Sigourney Weaver starred? 3) What was the name of the monster who was good enough to eat? 4) In which city is the film set? C+VG/ACTIVISION GHOSTBUSTERS COMPETITION NAME ADDRESS Please state which video format you have VHS or Bata "


"LESLAV BEYOND BUMPER CHRISTMAS RANGE FOR CRM64/128 ITS THE GAME YOU PLAY DIRTY TO WIN! AMAZING CARTOON STYLE ANIMATION. CAPER SORDER ONS SHADOW THE FIRST LANDSCAPING AND TEXT ADVENTURE 6/00 LOCATIONS 1 KEY AND TE INPUT. PLAYER Spectrum 48K plus "


"BEYOND .95 OF CHALLENGING SOFTWARE FOR CBM 64/128 ATARI 400/800/XL SPECTRUM 40K/PLUS AMSTRAD 464/664 PERMAN THE COMPUTER GAME SUPERMAN vs. DARKSEID -THE ARCH-ENEMY OF MANKIND! YOU ARE SUPERMAN A GIANT ANIMATED CHARACTER PITCHED AGAINST DARKSEID'S PERILS. AMAZING GRAPHICS, AMAZING SOUND TOO! DENTON DESIGNS STUNNING SEQUEL TO SHADOW FIRE. FCRET BUT IS NOT A STRATEGY GAME! YOU CONTROL THE ENIGMATEAM INA DEADLY ANIMATED ADVENTURE WITH MAD GENERAL ZOFF AS YOUR QUARRY POR CBM64/128 SPECTRUM 48K/PLUS COLLECT THE FIVE BOYS FOR YOUR FREE POSTER AND GAME VOUCHER The five boys will be published in Beyond games, advertisements and the Beyond Newsletter Collect all five, mail them together with a SAE to the address below. We'll mail you the exclusive Five Boys poster and voucher which entitles you to 50% off the price of a Beyond or Monolith game bought through our FAST mail order service: 3. EXCITEMENT MAIL ORDER: BEYOND 3rd Floor Lector Court, 151 Farringdon Road, LONDON ECIR 3AD. Price of all comes .95 inc P&P. Cheques/POs payable to BEYOND. Credit cards call 01-837 2899. "


"BOUNCES THE SPORT OF THE FUTUR GRAB THE ACTION! CBM64/128 6A/128 SPECTRUM 9 Eage. Sommare O great games for ce of one! MONOLITH boulder Das . For 1 or 2 daring players Deadly future sport A SAINIAI ciant fast-moving, an game BOUNCES GET THE PICTURE QUAKE GET THE PICTURE SAIT INIINNONNVF WGET THE PICTURE QUAKE THE SLUGATHON SHOOT OUT ANNOUNCING ANNOUNCING & RIOT! c Boulder Dash ECTRUM 4BK PLUS Giant, fast-moving, al-time action game Commodore entral MONOV OTIS Two great games for the price of one! For one or two players 19 Face Sommer INI IN NONN Mail Order: MONOLITH, 3rd Floor Lector Court, 151 Farringdon Road, London ECIR 3AD. All games priced at .95 inc P&P. Cheques/POs payable to BEYOND. Credit cards call 01-837 2899 "


"C+VG COMPETITION ARRRRRGGGGGHHHH! SNICK. SPLATTTT! If YOU can tell us just what was going on at the start of this page, you'll have absolutely NO trouble solving our Creepy Friday 13th Competition To win the wonderful priges from Domark the people who will be bringing all your wildest nightmares to the screen of your machine all you have to do is call our special Horror Hotline. Listen to the weird noises that will come down the phone at you, work out what's going on using the clues we supply below, fill in the coupon and send it to Computer and Video Games, Friday 13th Competition, Priority Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Usual C+VG competition rules apply, closing date is January 16th, and the Editor's decision is final. You wouldn't want someone creeping up behind you on a dark night would you? The number of C#VG's Horror Hotline is 01-251 5633. REMEMBER this is an answerphone service so, if the number is busy, please keep trying! THE CLUES Just match these clues to the sounds you hear on the Horror Hotline. Once you've worked out what the sounds are, fill in the coupon and send it to w at C+VG! The clues aren't in any particular order so don't think we're making it too easy for you ... 1. Jason puts some creases into a pair of trousers with a hot iron with someone still in them! 2. Prisoner in chains runs away. 3. The death sentence is executed. 4. Jason's leg being sawn off. 5. Jason has a barbecue! 6. Jason has a whip round. 7. Enough rope to hang yourself. 8. Knock three times and ask for Jason. Some of these clues are red herrings! THE PRIZES First prize winner of this horrible competition will get to suffer all the tortures on the tape: No seriously the winner will get a special. Eureka computer monitor, compatible with most of the top home computers plus a Domark t-shirt. No more fighting about who gets to watch the TV or use the computer! Thirty, yes 30, runners-up will get some special Domark Friday 13th tshirts. Interested? Then dial that number NOW! DOMARK C+VG/DOMARK FRIDAY 13TH COMPETITION Sound 1 is Sound 2 is Sound 3 is. Sound 4 is Sound 5 is Name Address Computer owned T-shirt size "


"HALTE A CLOSER LOOK A GUMPHRA ou De 111 PPALLED AT HOW INCOMPETENT HE IS W BADLY HE NEEDS YOUR HELP GRUMPY GUMPHREYSPECTRUM 48K SPECTRUM SUPERSI FITH .95 Available soon Amstrad Ageing, losing his sight and panic stricken with overwork can Grumpy Gumphrey, the geriatric store detective, hold down his position in this department store fantasia. A kind assistant is needed to help round-up the thieves, cage the gorilla and tidy the warehouse. Would you fit the bill? AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE STOCKISTS Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423 "


"WINTER SPORTS Ice Hockey, Speed Skating, Ski Jumping, Down Hill, Sllom Giant Slalom. Bob Sled, Biathlon, SOFTWARE SSES Available on the 48K Spectrum and Amstrad from Electric Dreams Software. 31 Carlton Crescent, Southampton. Tel: (0703) 225282 "


"CRL PRESENTS *THE GRERLENT FEMPUTER GAME EL LLIM TENT\" contenente SE TAU-CETE M. Bromley (C) 1985 "


"No. 4 JANUARY 1986 GAMES BOOK FORT INVINCIBLE/SEA RESCUE /SPACE MISSION "


"c+vg/games book/fort invicible/1 FORT IN  AMSTRAD A mighty fortress of stone blocks must be overrun and captured. To achieve this you must dismantle it block by block. Easy enough, but the inhabitants of the fortress have other ideas and will attack any intruder. There is also the danger of losing your footing and plunging to your doom.  Nigel Clarke 10**** ** ***** 20 ***LORDER PROGRAMU 30 ****** * **** 40 MODE : SPEED INK 10.10 50 FOR TO 5 INK N. NEXT 60 PAPER 8 BORDER OPEN 1 70 CLS 80 TAG PLOT -2.-2,2 MOVE 254.240 90 PRINT \"FORT) 180 MOVE 158.192 PRINT \"INVINCIBLE, 110 PLOT -2,-2.4 MOVE 30.384 PRINT \"PROG RAM IS LOADING\", 120 MOVE 158.64 PRINT CHRS(164)+\" N.CLAR 130 MOVE 254,32 PRINT \"1985\"; 140 TAGOFF 150 PRINT CHR$( 22 )+CHR$ 1) 160 PEN 3.LOCATE 6.22 PRINT CHR$( 164 )+\" N.CLARKE 170 LOCATE 9.24 PRINT \"1985 189 PEN 3 LOCATE 2.2.PRINT \"PROGRAM IS L ORDING\" 198 LOCATE 9, 11PEN 1 PRINT\"FORT\" 200 LOCATE 6.14 PRINT \"INVINCIBLE\" PRINT CHR$( 22 )+CHRSC) 210 PLOT 136,250.1 220 DRAWR 360.0 230 DRAWR 0.-90 240 DRAWR-360.0 250 DRANR 0.90 260 PLOT 132,252,2 270 DRAWR 368,8 280 DRAIR O.-94 290 DRAUR -368,0 300 DRAWR 0.94 310 INK 0.0 INK 1.26 INK 2,2 INK 3.6 INK 280 IF ti>=3 THEN EVERY 50,2 GOSUB 1150 290 EVERY 25, 1 GOSUB 1350 308 CALL BBB3 310 WHILE nc 320 IF INKEY UP THEN DIGOSUB 640 330 IF INKEYC do )= THEN DIGOSUB 660 340 IF INKEYCle) THEN DI-GOSUB 680 350 IF INKEYCri) THEN DI GOSUB 700 360 IF de=1 THEN GOTO 890 ELSE de378 IF ad AND se THEN GOTO 890 380 IF x=t(en) AND y=1Crn)-1 THEN GOTO 8 90 390 IF INKEY( 79 X -1 THEN REMAINK 1 ) = REMAIN(2) GOTO 1490 409 WEND 410 '********* ***** 420 END OF LEVEL** 430 ***************** 440 1%REMAIN( 1 ): 12=REMAINK 2) 450 PEN c LOCATE ox, oy .IF TESTCOX*32)-1 6.364-Co*16)) THEN PRINT USING\"&\"dis ELSE PRINT USING\"&1025) 460 LOCATE XYPRINT USING\"&\") ; 480 IF 16 THEN tinti+1=1 490 IF ti>5 THEN tin 500 sc! c! +100 sc$=STRS sc! MID SC, 1 \"B\" LOCATE 4,7-LENK scs). 1 PRINT#4.scs 510 RESTORE 3610 528 FOR n=1 TO 7 530 READ dur Pit 540 durdur-10 550 SOUND 1. Pit.dur. 7 560 SOUND 1.0.3, 570 NEXT 580 GOSUB 1800 590 ol=1+<<ti-1 )*5) IF ol<-9 THEN SESTR scol) MIDS(19,1)=\"\"LOCATE #5.3-LENC 15) . PRINT#5, 15; ELSE IF ol>=10 THEN LOCAT E#5, 1.1.PRINTAS, USING\"#\"ols 680 GOSUB 2780 GOTO 288 610 ***** * 620 *MOVE MANER 630 Lt 640 yxy-2 GOSUB 728 650 EI RETURN 660 y=+2.GOSUB 720 670 EI RETURN 680 #X-2 mesi GOSUB 728 690 EIRETURN 700 x=x+2 $ GOSUB 720 710 EI RETURN 720 SOUND 1.100+<<1-1*12), 18.0.1 730 IF TESTCC**32), 374-<<y+2*16)) THEN de GOTO 740 ELSE de=1 =ox yay RETURN 740 te=TESTCCX*32)-8.344-(y+16) 750 IF te=1 THEN ncnc-1 oc9 sc !=sc! +10 760 PEN C LOCATE Oxo9 IF TEST(Cox#32)-1 6.364-Coy #16 >> THEN PRINT USING\"&\" d1s ELSE PRINT USING\"&\"1025 778 IF ti=2 OR ti=4 THEN IF tea9 THEN OC 21:ncanc+1 sc!=sc!-10 780 LOCATE X PRINT USING\"&\" $ 790 Oxxoyy 800 cc 810 test 820 IF xd HNL se THEN des1 830 IF xtcrn) ANC y=f(ra)-1 THEN de=1 840 scs=STRSK sc!):MIDS(scs, 1 \"\" LOCATE #4.7-LENK sc$), 1 PRINT#4, sc$ 850 RETURN 860 ** ** *** 878\" **MAN DERD** BBA EEEEE 890 REMRINC 1): i=REMAINK 2) 900 od-dowe Oxxoymyrnannt1 910 tel-TESTCOx+32)-16,364-oy*16)) 920 te2-TESTC Cox 32 )-16.344-Coy #16) 930 IF tei< AND te2<> THEN PEN CLOCA TE OXO PRINT USING\"&\"dis, 940 IF te1 AND te2 THEN LOCATE ox, oy PRINT LOCATE oxoy+1 PRINT \" \" 950 IF te AND te2<> THEN PEN CLOCAT E oxoy PRINT USING\"&\"d25 960 IF tel<> AND te2 THEN LOCATE oxio y iPEN 2 PRINT CHRS(204)+CHRS(285); LOCAT E OX0y+1PRINT 970 IF ti >=3 THEN PEN dc LOCATE od, oe IF TEST(Cod32)-16.364-Coet16)) THEN PRINT USING\"&\"015) ELSE PRINT USING\"$\"025 980 PEN PC LOCATE Crn-1), Icrn-1)-1 IF ESTC<tirn-132)-16.364-<<<<rn-1))-1 T 1 6>) THEN PRINT USING\"&\" dis; ELSE PRINT USING\",\"d2$ 990 OUT &BC80,8 OUT &BD00,1 1800 SOUND 7,0,135,0,2,0,20 1010 FOR n=1 TO 26 1820 INK 1. INK 9.n. 1030 FOR de 1 TO 75 NEXT de 1040 NEXT 1850 IF 1=1 THEN INK 114.INK 9,10 ELSE IF 1-2 THEN INK 1.22INK 9,13 ELSE IF I 3 THEN INK 1.24 INK 9,3 ELSE IF 1-4 THEN INK 1.5 INK 9.4 ELSE IF 1-5 THEN INK 1 6 INK 9.23 1860 OUT BCO0.8 OUT &BD00.0 1070 li-li-1 IF li<=THEN 1490 1080 CLSW2 PRINT#2.LEFTS<lis.Cli*35)+2) 1998 GOSUB 1800 1100 GOSUB 2780 1110 GOTO 280 1120 '****************** 1139 **MOVE 2nd DROID** 1148 1150 DI IF dEx AND e=y THEN de=1 EI RETU RN 1160 IF d>X THEN ded-2 GOSUB 1220 DI IF te THEN 1210 1170 IF KX THEN ded+2GOSUB 1228 DI IF tes THEN 1210 1180 IF dex PND ny THEN EI RETURN 1190 IF e> THEN e-e-2 GOSUB 1220 DIIF tem THEN 1210 1200 IF e y THEN ene+2 GOSUB 1220 DIIF te=0 THEN 1210 1210 EI RETURN 1220 IF d= AND e=y THEN del ten RETUR 1230 te-TESTCC0632-8.344-(et16)) IF tee @ OR te=8 THEN te=1 duode=ce RETURN 1240 PEN dc LOCATE od, oe IF TESTC Cod32) -16.364-Coe#16)) THEN PRINT USING\"&\"id18 ELSE PRINT USING\"&\" 25) 1250 IF TEST<< &*32)-8,344-C*16))1 THEN doc-1 ELSE doc-9 1260 IF ad AND ya THEN de=1 1270 LOCATE die PRINT USING\"&\"dds; 1280 od=dioene 1290 dcdoc 1300 te 8 1310 RETURN 1320 **************** 1330 ***MOVE ist DROID ** 1340 ***************** 1350 DIarn1f1 1 360 IF xatirn-1) AND rn-1)-1 THEN D el EI RETURN 1370 IF f10 THEN PEN PC LOCATE tirn-1). Crn-1)-1 IF TESTCCt(n-1)*32)-16.364-<< (Irn-1)-1)*16)) THEN PRINT USING\"&\" di 5ELSE PRINT USING\"&\"1025; 320 RUN!\" 20 ***FORT INVINCIBLEER* 30 *30) NCLARKE 1984** 48 EEEEEEEEE 50 ******INITIALISERE*** 60 ** * ** 70 ON ERROR GOTO 4818 80 SOUND 1.500, 500, 12 90 SOUND 2.499.499.10 180 SOUND 4.498.498.12 110 KEY DEF 7.1.48 120 KEY DEF 31,1.48 130 KEY DEF 25, 1.48 140 CALL LBB93 150 CLS 160 DEFINT 2-2 170 GOSUB 3400 180 GOSUB 2940 190 GOSUB 3800 200 GOSUB 3040 210 GOSUB 1920 220 GOSUB 3920 230 GOSUB 1680 240 GOSUB 2598 250 ****** *** 260 MAIN LOOP 270 ESSEREBESEBB "


"VINCIBLE 1380 IF rn25 THEN rn=1 1398 IF detCrn) AND e=lrn)-1 THEN rnern +1 f1=1 LOCATE de PRINT USING\",\"dds, G OTO 1360 1400 IF TESTC(tarn32 )-8.344-in-1 116 ) )=1 THEN Poc=1 ELSE POC=9 1418 IF x=(rn) AND y=1(rn)-1 THEN de=1 EI RETURN 1420 LOCATE trn), Crn)-1 PRINT USING 1439 LOCATE 25,15:PRINT ; 1440 Pampoc 1458 EI RETURN 1460 *************** 1470 END OF GAME 1480 1490 INK 11.26 PEN 11 PRINT CHR(22)+CHR $(1)LOCATE 6.13: PRINT \"GAME OVERT CHR$ (22)+CHR$C ) 1500 WINDOW#1.1.20.1.3 PAPER#1,0 CLS#1 1510 FOR 1 TO 13 1528 LOCATE 1.n+4 PRINT 1530 LOCATE 1.22-n:PRINT 1540 NEXT 1550 Is !=sc! 1560 GOSUB 1920 GOTO 220 1570 **** *** ** 1580 ***VARIABLES 1590 1600 sc! 1610 1=1 li-3 til 1620 d$=\" dd$=\"P irm d t 1630 RESTORE 4520 : FOR n=1 TO 19 READ ch 1649 d$=$+CHR$(ch) NEXT 1650 FOR n=1 TO 25 READ ch 1660 dd$=dd$+CHR$<ch) NEXT 1670 FOR n=1 TO 25 READ ch 1688 PS-PS+CHRS(ch) NEXT n 1690 FOR n=1 TO 35 READ ch 1700 m m +CHR$(ch) NEXT n 1710 FOR nel TO 35 READ ch 1720 ml$=m15+CHR$(ch) NEXT n 1730 FOR n=1 TO 26. READ ch 1740 01$=d1$+CHR$<ch): NEXT 1750 FOR n=1 TO 18 READ ch 1760 02-025+CHR$(ch) NEXT n 1778 FOR n=1 TO 51 READ ch 1780 md$=md$+CHR$(ch) NEXT 1790 lis-m1S+CHRS(11)+CHR$(8+16+CHRS(1 1 )+CHRS( 8 )+1$ 1800 x 10y=6 1828 IF ti>=3 THEN d=10 e=18 ELSE d e1830 od=doeae 1840 nc=24c9 oc=0 Pe=1 Poc= dc=1 doce 1850 M$=m1$ 1860 rn=INTCRND25)+1 1870 IF tarn-X AND Crn-1= OR tirnad AND ICrn)-1=e THEN 1860 2850 WHILE Sc!CVALCMIDSChstsich), 13 >> 2060 chech-1. 2070 WEND 2080 IF ch>1 THEN FOR N=1 TO ch-1.hsten whsts n+1 > NEXT 2999 hstsch)=nm+STRING(11-LENK nm >+<7 -LENK STR$<sc!>>), 32 +STR$(sc!> 2100 = 2110 **** *** *** *** **** 2120 ***DISPLAY TABLE & OPTIONS** 2130 ************************* 2140 INK 3,0 CLS 2150 KEY DEF 7.1.48 KEY DEF 31.1.48 2160 KEY DEF 25.1.48 2178 LOCATE 1,4 PEN 1 FOR n=10 TO 1 STEP 2180 PRINT TAB( 3 )hsts ) PRINT 2190 NEXT 2200 FOR n= TO 40 STEP 40 2210 PLOT 1/2, nr 2,2 2220 DRAWR 639-n, 2230 DRAWR 0.399-n 2240 DRAWR -639+n. 2250 DRAWR 0.-399+ 2260 NEXT 2270 PLOT 8. DRAWR 28,20 2280 PLOT 639, DRAWR -20.20 2290 PLOT 0.399 DRAWR 20.-28 2300 PLOT 639,399 DRAWR -20.-20 2310 PLOT 352,379. DRAWR 40.0, DRAWR @ -359,2 DRAWR -40,8. DRAWR 0.359,2 2328 TAG PLOT 400.780.2 MOVE 484,354 PRI NT \"SELECT OPTION\": 2330 MOVE 404,334 PRINT \" su 2340 OP=0 2350 TAGOFF 2368 LOCATE 27,10 PRINT \"1=JOYSTICK\" 2370 LOCATE 27.12 PRINT \"2=KEYBOARD\" 2380 LOCATE 27.14: PRINT *3=PLRY GAME 2390 LOCATE 27,16 PRINT \"4=BRIEFING\" 2400 LOCATE 27,18 PRINT \"5-WARM START\" 2410 INK 3,11 INK 2.6+INK 1.25 PEN 1 2420 IF P-72 THEN 2460 ELSE IF UPC) TH EN 2500 2430 IF uP=0 THEN 2460 2440 OP-VALINKEYS) IF OP >5 OR OP<1 THEN 2440 2450 ON OP GOTO 2460,2500,2540, 36602550 2460 up=72 do 731 les74ri=75 2470 LOCATE 27. 10:PEN 3 PRINT \"1=JOYSTIC 2480 LOCATE 27, 12-PEN 1 PRINT 2EKEYBOAR 2730 WINDOW#5.7.14.2.2 PAPER#5,8-CLS#5:P ENHS) 10 PRINTS\"00\" 2740 WINDOW#6,7,14.3.3 PAPER#6. CLS#6 P EN#6, 1@ PRINT#6,\"000000\" 2750 sc$=STRSK sc! >:MIDS<sc$,1)=\"0\" LOCAT E #4,7-LENK sc$), 1 PRINT#4.sc 2760 ol=1+Cti-1)*5);IF 01<=9 THEN 15=ST RS(olMIDS(16,1)=\"0\" LOCATE #S, 3-LENSIS >. 1.PRINT#5.15) ELSE IF 01>=10 THEN LOCA TE#5.1.1:PRINT#S, USING\"#\"ioli 2770 15$=STR$< 1s!) MIDS(1s5,1)=\"\" LOCAT E #6,7-LENC Iss), 1PRINT#6, Iss 2780 CLS ON 1 GOSUB 2888, 2890, 2900.2918. 2920 2790 FOR n=1 TO 25 2800 READ ton, In 2810 LOCATE tn).(n) 2820 PRINT USING\"&\" ds 2830 NEXT 2840 LOCATE PRINT USING\"&\" ms; 2850 IF ti >=3 THEN LOCATE de: PRINT USIN G\"&\"dds 2860 LOCATE tirn), tcrn)-1.PRINT USING\"&\" PS, 2879 GOTO 2930 2889 INK 1,14 INK 2:22 INK 9,10 RESTORE 4400 RETURN 2898 INK 1.22: INK 2.9 INK 9.13 RESTORE 4 418 RETURN 2900 INK 1,24 INK 2.12 INK 9,3 RESTORE 4 420 : RETURN 2910 INK 1.5 INK 2.23: INK 9.4 RESTORE 44 30 RETURN 2920 INK 1,17 INK 2,6 INK 9,23 RESTORE 4 440 RETURN 2930 RETURN 2940 DIM < 25), 1(25), hst (10) 2950 Isle 2960 RESTORE 4480 2970 FOR n=10 TO 1 STEP 1 READ cho 2980 hstsanech 2990 NEXT 3000 RETURN 3810***************** 3028 **TITLE SCREEN 3830 **************** 3040 MODE 1 SYMBOL 255,255,254,252, 248.2 40,252, 254, 255 3850 FOR n=0 TO 3INK n NEXT 3060 PAPER @ PEN 1 BORDER @ CLS 3070 PRINT PRINT PRINT PRINT PRINT: PRINT 3080 RESTORE 4679 FOR rous1 TO 5 3990 tis\" 3180 FOR n=1 TO 19 RERD ch 3110 tisatiS+CHRS(ch) NEXT 3120 PRINT TAB( 11 ), ti$ -NEXT row 3130 RESTORE 4720 FOR rou=1 TO 5 3140 tis=#FOR n=1 TO 38 READ ch 3150 tis=tiS+CHR${ch) NEXT 3160 PLOT -10-10.1 3170 TAG-MOVE 8,214-Crow*16) 3180 PRINT tis; TRGOFF NEXT row 3190 PLOT -10.-18.3. TAG: MOVE 298,32 3280 PRINT CHR$( 164 )+\" N. CLARKE 1985\"; 3210 PLOT -10.-18.2 MOVE 232,378 PRINT\" PRESS SPACE\" | TAGOFF 3228 PLOT 8.0.2 3230 DRAWR 639, 3240 DRAWR 0,399 3250 DRAWR -639,0 3260 DRAWR 0,-399 3270 PLOT 16.16.2 3280 DRAWR 607.8 3290 DRAWR 0.367 3300 DRAWR -687,8 3310 DRAWR 8, -367 3320 WHILE SOK 1 )>=127-WEND 3330 RESTORE 4770 FOR n=TO 3. READ chi NK nch NEXT 3340 SOUND 1,100,1.8 SOUND 1.180.1.@SOU ND 1.180.1.0 SOUND 1. 100, 1.0 3350 nu=1 RESTORE 3580 3360 ON SRK I) GOSUB 3499 3370 CALL &BBO3 3380 IF INKEY(47x>-1 THEN mu=B: GOTO 339 2490 GOTO 2440 2500 UP=69 do=71 le=39 ri=31 2510 LOCATE 27,12 PEN 3 PRINT \"2=KEYBOAR 1890 * ** ** 1900 **HIGH SCORE TABLE 1919 * ** 1920 MODE 1 1930 SOUND 135.0.1.0 1940 BORDER PAPER INK 8.0 CLS 1950 INK 3.11.INK 2.0 INK 1.0 PEN 1 1960 POKE 46312.255 1973 KEY DEF 7,1, 138 1989 KEY DEF 31.1.46 1990 KEY DEF 25.1.45 2000 CALL BBB03 2010 IF Sc!>VALCMIDSchat ) 13)) THEN L OCATE 1.12 PEN 3 PRINT \"YOU HAVE MADE IT INTO THE HI-SCORE TABLE\" ELSE 2140 2020 LOCATE 1.15 LINE INPUT \"PLEASE ENTE R YOUR NAME..\", IF \"\" THEN 2020 E LSE MUPPERS() 2030 M$=MIDS nm, 1.10) 2040 ch=10 2520 LOCATE 27,10 PEN 1 PRINT \"1=JOYSTIC 2530 GOTO 2440 2540 PEN 2: LOCATE 27.23 PRINT \"PLEASE WA IT\" RETURN 2550 POKE 46312,0 CLEAR SYMBOL AFTER 255 MODE 1 CALL GBCO2 GOSUB 4930 PEN 1 LIST 2560 * ***** * **** 2570 ***SET UP SCREEN** 2880 * ********** * 2590 MODE @ 2600 PAPER OPEN 1 2610 BORDER @INK 8.0 2620 RESTORE 4630 FOR n=3 TO 15 READ ch 2630 INK n. ch. NEXT 2640 WINDOW#0.1.20.4.25 2650 WINDOW#1.1.7.1.3 2660 WINDOW#2,15.20.2.3. PAPERW2.9 CLS#2 LOCATE#2,2,1 -PRINT#2. USING\"&\"LEFT$(lis, Cli*35)+2); 2678 WINDOW#3, 15, 20.1.PAPER#3.0 CLS#3 PEN#3, 10:PRINT#3,\"LIVES.\" 2680 PAPER#1,0 CLS#1 PEN#1.10 2690 LOCATE#1.1.1 PRINT#1, \"SCORE 2700 LOCATE#1.1.2 PRINT#1, \"LEVEL\" 2712 LOCATE#1.1.3: PRINT#1, \"LAST 2720 WINDOW#4,7,14.1.1 PAPER#4,CLS#4:P EN 4,10 PRINT#4,\"000000\" fort invincible continues p78 "


"c+vg/games book/fort invincible/2 4890 SYMBOL 217.0.64.192.64,192.240.208 @ELSE 3380 3390 RETURN 3400 ENT -1.1.-127,1.5,24.1 3410 ENV 1.1.15.1.5.-3.2 3420 ENV 2, 15,-1.9 3430 ENV 3.3.5.1.5.-2.3 3440 RETURN 3450 ********* 3460 ***MUSIC** 3478 ********** 3480 RESTORE 3580 3490 IF mu=0 THEN SOUND 129.6.1.0 SOUND 130.0.1.SOUND 132.0,1.8 RETURN 3500 RERD dur, Pit 3510 IF Pit=@ THEN RESTORE 3580 SOUND 1 0.500.SOUND 2.0.500,-GOTO 3579 3520 dur=dur-10 3530 SOUND 17.Pit.dur. 7 3540 SOUND 10.Pit, dur, 3.1.1.2 3550 SOUND 1.0.3.0 3560 IF Pit. THEN WHILE SQ<1)>=127 HEND RESTORE 3580 SOUND 129,8.500.0 SOUND 13 0.0.500, 3570 ON SQ(1) GOSUB 3490 RETURN 3580 DATA 30,239, 30,239,30,239,20.319,20 319,20.239.40.239.50, 190 3590 DATA 30,239,30.239.30.239.20.319.20 319,20,239.30.239,50.284 3600 DATA 30,239,38, 239, 30,239,20,319.20 319,20,239,38, 239, 30, 190 3610 DATA 30, 179.30. 169.30. 179, 30, 190,30 239.49.201.40.239.500.0 3620 RETURN 3630 *** ***** * ** 3640\"**INSTRUCTIONS** 3660 MODE 1 PEN 2 LOCATE 13.2 PRINT \"MIS SION BRIEFING\"; 3670 LOCATE 13,3 PRINT\" = 3689 PEN 1.PRINT PRINT 3690 PRINT YOU HAVE BEEN ORDERED TO GE TAS FAR INTO FORT INVINCIBLE AS YOU CAN. HOWEVER FORT INVINCIBLE GOES ON FOR INFINITY. YOUR TASK IS TO CHANGE THE C OLOUR OF ALL\") 3700 PRINT THE DISCS WHILST DODGING THE TWO ROBOT INHABITANTS OF THE FORT WHOS E JOB IT IS TO DESTROY ANY INTRUDERS.\" 3710 PRINT YOU MOVE USING THE JOYSTICK OR KEYS CAZ,< & >> AND MUST CHANGE THE COLOUR OF ALL THE DISCS TO MOVE ON TO THE NEXT LEVEL.DELETE ACTS AS MISSION ABORT.\" 3720 PRINT PEN 3 PRINT TAB(9), \"GOOD LUCK YOU'LL NEED IT 3738 LOCATE 124 PEN I PRINT TAB(3), \"PRE SS SPACE TO RETURN TO THE OPTIONS\", 3740 WHILE INKEY( 47 )-1 WEND 3750 INK .@INK 1. INK 2.0: INK 3.0 3760 GOTO 2140 3770 ************ 3790 '**U.D.G.'s** 3799 E** 3880 SYMBOL AFTER 32 3810 SYMBOL 48.124,198, 198, 206, 206.206,1 24, 3820 SYMBOL 49.24.24.24.56.56.56.56.@ 3830 SYMBOL 50,126.102.6.126.96.110,126. 3840 SYMBOL 51, 126, 102.6.62,14,110,126.8 3850 SYMBOL 52.284, 284.220.254, 28, 29, 28, 3860 SYMBOL 53, 126, 102.96.126.14.118.126 3870 SYMBOL 54.126.102.96, 126, 110, 110.12 6,0 3880 SYMBOL 55, 126, 102, 12.12.28.28. 28.0 3890 SYMBOL 56.62.54.54,126.118,118.126. 3900 SYMBOL 57.126.102.110. 126.14,14,14, 3910 RETURN 3920 SYMBOL 280.1.15.63.127.127.63.15.1 3930 SYMBOL 201.128.240.252, 254.254.252, 240.128 3940 SYMBOL 202.0.0.0.0.0.64, 112, 126 3950 SYMBOL 283.0.0.0.0.0.2,14,126 3960 SYMBOL 204.127.127.127. 127. 127,63,1 3970 SYMBOL 205.254.254.254.254.254.252 240.128 3980 SYMBOL 206,0.3.3.0.0.0.3.3 3990 SYMBOL 207.8.192.224.0.0.0, 192, 192 4080 SYMBOL 288.3.3.1.1.1.0.0.0 4010 SYMBOL 289.64.192, 128, 128, 128.0.0.0 4828 SYMBOL 210.8.0.0.1.1.1.0.0 4030 SYMBOL 211.0.0.0.64.224,192.0.0 4040 SYMBOL 212,128..0.0.0.0.0.0 4850 SYMBOL 213,0.0.0.2.2.0.0.0 4060 SYMBOL 214,0,0,0,0,0.1.0.0 4070 SYMBOL 215.8.8.8.8.2. 192.0. 4080 SYMBOL 216.2.2.3.2.3, 15.11.18 4100 SYMBOL 218,10,11,3,3,0,,0.8 4110 SYMBOL 219,80.208.192.1920.0.0.0 4120 SYMBOL 220.@.@.@.1.0.0.0.1 4130 SYMBOL 221.8.8.8. 128.0.0.0.128 4140 SYMBOL 222.1.8.8.8.3.0.0. 4150 SYMBOL 223.128.0.16.2.192.0.0.0 4160 SYMBOL 224.0.0.3.5.7.3.1.1 4170 SYMBOL 225.0.0.128.64.192,128.0.0 4180 SYMBOL 226.3.14.31.19.0.0.0.0 4190 SYMBOL 227.128,224,248,144.@.@.@@ 4200 SYMBOL 228.0.0.0.2.0.0.0, 4210 SYMBOL 229.0.0.0.128.2.0.0.0 4220 SYMBOL 230,0,1,0, 12.0.0.0.0 4230 SYMBOL 231.0.0.0.96.0.0.0.0 4240 SYMBOL 232,0.3.7.0.0.0.3.3 4250 SYMBOL 233.. 192, 192.0.0.0.192.192 4260 SYMBOL 234, 2.3.1.1.1.0.0.0 4270 SYMBOL 235,192,192, 128, 128. 128.0.0, 4280 SYMBOL 236.8.0.0.2.7.3.0.0 4290 SYMBOL 237.0.0.0.128. 128. 128.0.0 4380 SYMBOL 238.1.0.0.0.0.0.0.0 4310 SYMBOL 239.0.0.0.64.64.0.0.0 4320 SYMBOL 240,0,0,0,0,0.3.0.0 4330 SYMBOL 241.0.0.0.0.0.128.@.@ 4340 SYMBOL 242,126, 112.64.0.0.0.0.0 4350 SYMBOL 243, 126, 14.2.0.0.0.0.0 4360 RETURN 4378 ** **** * 4380 ***SCREEN DATRE 4399 **************** 4400 DATA 18.7.8.9. 10.9. 12.9.6.11.8.11.1 0,11,12,11,14.11.4.13.6, 13.8.13.10. 13.12 13.14.13.16.13.6.15, 8, 15, 10, 15, 12.15, 14 15.8.17.10.17.12.17.10.19 4410 DATA 10.7.8.9.10.9. 12,9,6,11,8,111 8,11,12,11,14,11.4.13.6.13,8,13,18,13.12 13,14,13,16,13,4,15, 10, 15, 16, 15.4.17.18 17.16.17.4.19.10.19.16.19 4420 DATA 4.7.10,7.16.7.4.9.10.9.16.9.4. 11,10,11,16,11.4.13.6 13.8.13.10. 13.12.1 3.14,13,16.13.6.15, 10, 15, 14.15,6, 17, 10,1 7.14.17.6.19.10.19.14.19 4430 DATA 18.7.4.9.6.9.8.9. 10.9, 12.9.14) 9. 16.9.8.11. 12. 11.4.13.6.13.8.13.12.13.1 4.13.16.13.6.15.10.15, 14, 15,6.17.8.17, 10 17.12.17.14.1710.19 4440 DATA 8.7.18.7.12,7.10.9.4.11.8.11.1 0.11.12.11.16, 11.4.13.6.13.8.13,10,13,12 13,14,13,16,13,4.15.8.15, 10.15.12.15.16 15.10.17.8. 19. 10. 1912. 19 4450 ********* ** **** 4460 SHI-SCORE TABLE** 4470 ****************** 4480 DATA **STAR** 3800, ARNOLD 2500, ROLAND 2000, MINER WHO 1500, GENIUS 1000, THE SPY 750. ACG 600, SUPERMAN 50 8. HIPPIE 258, P.J.K.! 100 4499 *************** 4500 ***STRING DATA** 4510 ************** 4520 DATA 15,1,208,201.22.1. 15.2.8.8.202 203.10.8.8.204, 205, 22.8 4530 DATA 22.1. 15.6.216, 217,8,8,10,218.2 19.8.8.11.15.7.220.221.8.8.10.222.223.22 4540 DATA 22.1.15,8,224, 225.8.8.10.226,2 27.8.8.11.15.7.228, 229.8.8.10.230.231.22 4550 DATA 22.1. 15,3,286,287.8,8.10.208,2 09.8.8.11.15,5,210,211,8,18,212,15,4,8,8 .11.213.8.10.15,8, 214, 215, 22.0 4560 DATA 22.1. 15.3, 232, 233,8.8, 10.234.2 35,8,8.11.15,5, 236, 237,10.8.8.238.11.15, 4,239.10.8.8. 15,0.248.241.22, 4578 DATA 22.1. 10. 200, 201,15,0.8.8. 242.2 43,8,8.11.15.2,204,205.8.8.15.8.202.283, 22,0 4580 DATA 22,1,10, 200, 201,8,8.15,0.242.2 43,11.8.8.143.143,22.0 4590 DATA 22.1. 15.12.170, 171,8,8,15,13,1 72, 173, 8.8.1514, 174, 175,8,8,15,15. 176,1 77.8.8.15. 12.10.178, 179,8,8.15, 13.180.18 1.8.8.15, 14, 182, 183.8.8.15, 15, 184, 185,22 4700 DATA 32,143.32.32.32.32, 143, 32.32,1 43.32, 143.213, 215,32,32,32, 143.32 4718 DATA 32,14332,32,32,32,213,143, 143 212.32.143.32,213,215, 32, 32, 143,32 4720 DATA 32, 143, 32,215,32,32,14332,143 32.32.143.32, 143.32,215,32,32,143,32.21 4.143.143.32, 143.32, 143, 143, 143,215,32.1 43.32.32.32, 143.143.143 4730 DATA 32, 143,32,143,215, 32, 143.32.14 3, 32, 32. 143.32.143.32.143.215.32, 143.32 143.32.32, 32, 143.32,143,32,32,143,32,143 , 32, 32, 32, 143, 32, 32 4740 DATA 32, 143, 32, 143,213,215,143,32,1 43.32.32, 143, 32, 143,32,143,213,215,143.3 2,143,32,32.32,143.32, 143, 143, 143,255,32 143,32,32,32, 143, 143,32 4750 DATA 32,143,32,143,32,213,143,32,21 3,215,214.212.32,143,32, 143,32,213,143,3 2, 143,32,32,32,143.32, 143.32.32, 143,32,1 43,32,32,32, 143,32.32 4760 DATA 32. 143.32, 143.32.32,213,32,32, 213,212,32,32,143.32, 143, 32, 32, 213,32,21 3, 143, 143,32, 143, 32, 143, 143. 143.212.32.1 43, 143, 143,32, 143, 143, 143 4770 DATR 0,25.6.2 4780 ************************** 4790 ***ERROR FOUND IN LISTING** 4809 ** * * *** * 4818 CALL &BC82 4820 i=REMAIN( 1 ) =REMAINK 2) 4838 POKE 46312.0 4840 KEY DEF 31. 1.46 KEY DEF 25.1.45 4850 CALL &BB03 4868 SOUND 135.0.1.0 4870 MODE 1: PEN 1 PAPER @ CLS 4889 GOSUB 4930 4890 SYMBOL AFTER 255 4900 PEN 3. PRINT THERE IS AN ERROR ERR \"IN LINE\" ERL 4910 PEN 2 PRINT \"PLEASE CORRECT BEFORE RE-RUNNING PROGRAM PEN 1 4920 END 4930 WINDOWWE, 1.48.1.24 4940 KEY DEF 7.1.138 4950 KEY DEF 31.1.46 4960 KEY DEF 25, 1.45 4978 WINDOWAZ,1.40.25.25 4980 PAPER#7.2 PEN#7.3 4990 CLSN7 5000 PRINT#7. TAB(6);\" PROGRAM CODE \"CHR $(164), N.CLARKE 1985 5010 CLS 5020 RETURN INVINCIBLE FORT 4680 *** ** * * 4610 **COLOUR DATAR 4629 *************** 4630 DATA 2.12.16.13.6.25.10.25.26.0.0.0 4640 ** *** * **** 4650 ***TITLE PAGE LETTERS** 4660 * * * * 4670 DATA 32,143, 143, 143, 143,32,214, 143, 143.215.32, 143, 143, 143,215, 32, 143, 143, 14 4680 DATA 32, 143.32.32.32.32.143.32, 32,1 43.32,143,32,32,143.32.32.143.32 4690 DATA 32, 143, 143, 143, 32.32, 143, 32.32 , 143, 32, 143, 143, 143.212,32,32, 143,32 fort invincible ends "


"SCOOBY the castlemustery LACHINE \"Scooby Doo\" The First Ever Computer Cartoon! Whether he's being hotly pursued at midnight over an eerie castle rooftop, or scrabbling around in the darkness of a creepy old dungeon the napless Scooby is always at the centre of the action. In his first computer cartoon Scooby goes hurting through underground caverns in a run-away coaltruck and finds that even a leisurely paddle with shaggy in a nckery old rowing boat can turn to be an unofficial attempt at the waterspeed record when he pursued by an angry shark Scooby Doo the compute cartoon contains over 100 sometimes creepy often crazy scenes of startling animated action. We think It's going to start a whole new craze in com puter games. What do you JOS itselenler COMMODORE SPECTRUM 26.95 $7.95 AMSTRAD .95 Juuru Elite Systems Anchor House Anchor Ron "


"c+vg/games book/sea rescue/  SPECTRUM SEA RESCUE Mayday...Mayday...Mayday... Ocean liner has sunk ... few survivors. As commander of a helicopter rescue team you must find and save these poor souls from a watery grave. The survivors are split into three groups aboard emergency dinghies. With time against you, find and rescue the survivors. But beware the poisonous birds which will hinder you. The controls are O=Left, P=Right, Q=Drop Rescuers.  Eamon and Kieran Tighe 97 IF m=1 THEN LET d=d+1 105 IF m=2 THEN LET d=d-1 110 IF INKEY$=\"q\" OR INKEY$=\"Q\" THEN GO SUB 1000 113 IF d >=28 THEN LET d=31 117 IF do THEN LET d=0 123 IF x >=28 THENLET X=31 127 IF x<O THEN LET X=0 130 PRINT AT 2,*; INK O; \" \"; IN K 1; \"GH\"; INK O; \" \" 140 PRINT AT 0, 0; \"RESCUERS :-\" 1 REM RESCUE 2 REM KIERAN TIGHE 3 GO SUB 3000 4 INPUT \"DIFFICULTY (1=HARD 6=EASY) ?\";le 5 IF le>6 THEN GO TO 1 6 IF le<1 THEN GO TO 1 7 GO SUB 2000 8 LET n$=\"BAB\": LET ti=50+le *5: LET r=O: LET s=le3 10 LET a=20: LET d=INT (RND#30 ): LET z=20: LET X=10 15 BORDER 5: CLS 20 FOR P=O TO 31: PRINT #1; AT 0,f; INK 5; PAPER 7; \"I\": NEXT f 25 LET hi=0 50 LET q=INT (RND*3): PRINT AT 16, a;hs 60 LET M=INT (RND*3) 70 IF INKEY$=\"p\" AND a=28 THE N LET n$=\"SAB\": LET a=a+1 80 IF INKEY$=\"0\" AND a > THEN LET n$=\" CD \": LET a-a-1 90 PRINT AT 21,d; INK 0;\" \"; I NK 3; \"F\"; INK 0;\" \" ;5;\" \" 145 PRINT AT 2,10; \"RESCUED :-\" 150 IF q=1 THEN LET X=x+1 160 IF q=2 THEN LET x=x-1 170 PRINT AT 0,16; \"TIME LEFT :\";ti; 180 IF ti<=0 THEN FOR f=1 TO 1 00: NEXT f: GO TO 5090 190 LET ti=ti-1 200 IF r=3 THEN GO TO 5200 210 IF s<=O THEN PAUSE 100: GO TO 5090 sea rescue continues p84 "


"ACORN ELECTRON VERSION RELEASED 1 January 1986. THE BEST ARCADE ADUENTUDE EVER. Ibidem NOISSA ODING! AVAILABLE NOW! CE E TL SOODOS 2.**! ***, TERRE ELIAS ACORN A huge adventure featuring over 100 beautifully detailed screens packed with challenging puzzles and awesome foes. You start in the vast 3-towered citadel with its curious cellar and well. ELECTRON Should you survive the perils within, you can venture on to the witch's house, Stonehenge the BBC pyramids, and across the desert to the mountains. Cross the ocean and you will reach the mystic MICRO temple on the island. You should devise how to use the ice crystal, trampolines cannonballs, Egyptian statues, etc., to the best advantage in your onerous mission. Cleverly realistic animation (flickering torches, splashing water, and smouldering furnaces), is used throughout to depict your movements and to vividly portray the fearsome monks, mummies and wolves. COMPETITION 2 CHANCES TO WIN! Three crowns have been craftily hidden within the adventure; the first person to locate any two of the three crowns will win $100. The maximum score which can be obtained is 99 points; the first person to reach this score will be presented with an impressive personal engraved shield and a cheque for $200. KEYBOARD OR JOYSTICKS CASSETTE VERSION 9.95 BBC DISC VERSION $11.95 WE PAY UP TO 20% ROYALTIES FOR HIGH QUALITY PROGRAMS SUPERIOR SOFTWARE LTD. Dept. XU17, Regent House, Skinner Lane, Leeds 7. Tel: 0532 459453. OUR GUARANTEE All mail orders are despatched within 24 hours by first class post Postage and packing is free Faulty cassettes and discs will be replaced immediately VISA "


"OF THE MASK 1,OF THE MASK -B Y SANDY WHITE Rebuild the robot and dominate the world in this 3-D Visual Extravaganza 1, OF THE MASK. 1, OF THE MASK 1, OF THE MASK 1.0F THE MASK , T, OF THE MASK T, OF THE MASK  1, OF THE MASKI SOFTWARE Available on the 48K Spectrum, Amstrad and Commodore 64 from Electric Dreams Software. 31 Carlton Crescent, Southampton. Tel: (0703) 225282 SPACEMAN "


"KORoo Dragged back for another term, Eric continues his one-man fight against the Education system. All his old adversaries are there, plus escapees from the Biology room and, even worse, girls! Lucky he stocked up on stink bombs over the holidays! Back to Skool (48K Spectrum) .95 Skooldaze (48K Spectrum & CBM64) .95 Available from all good computer shops or direct from: Microsphere Computer Services Ltd., 72, Rosebery Road, London N10 2LA. "


"c+vg/games book/sea rescue/2 220 IF d<=0 THEN LET d=0 230 IF d>28 THEN LET d=28 240 IF X<=0 THEN LET X=0 250 IF x>28 THEN LET d=28 350 GO TO 50 1000 LET S=5-1: BEEP.05, 0: LET w=16: LET O=1 1020 FOR f=0 TO 10 STEP 2: PRINT AT W, a+2; \"E\" 1025 PRINT AT 16, a;n$ 1030 LET w=w+o: PRINT AT W-1, a+2 r had sunk with only a few su rvivors in groups in three ding hies. your mission: -Rescue all th ree dinghies by\" 3020 PRINT AT 11,0; \"sending down rescuers. Watch for po i sonous birds and keep an eye on the time limit.\" 3030 PRINT AT 15, 13; \"KEYS\" 3040 PRINT AT 17,0; \"P-Right 0Left Q-Drop rescuer\" 3050 PRINT #O; AT 0,4; \"Press any key to play\" 3060 PAUSE 5: PAUSE O: RETURN 5000 FOR f=0 TO 20: BEEP .01,f: BEEP .01, 12: NEXT f 5010 LET r=r+1 5030 CLS : GO TO 10 5090 PRINT AT 10, 10; \"FAILED MISS ION \": PAUSE 100: GO TO 5300 5200 BEEP.5,5: BEEP.5,0: BEEP .5,5: BEEP.5, 12 5210 FOR 1=0 TO 7: FOR b=O TO 7: BORDER b: NEXT b: NEXT 1 5220 PRINT AT 10, 10; \"All Rescued 1035 BEEP .002,f 1040 IF W>=20 THEN LET OS-1 1050 PRINT AT w+1, a+2;\" 1055 PRINT AT 16, a;n$ 1060 IF w<=16 THEN RETURN 1070 IF ATTR (w+2, a+2) =59 THEN GO TO 5000 1080 IF ATTR (w+2, a+2) =57 THEN GO TO 5050 1100 GO TO 1020 2000 FOR =USR \"a\" TO USR \"i\"+7: READ a: POKE f,a: NEXT f 2010 DATA 0,64,64,96, 127,0,0,0,2 55, 16, 124, 242, 255, 126, 68, 254, 255 ,8,62,79, 255, 126 2030 DATA 34,127,0,2,2,6,254,0,0 ,0,0,0,0,0, 129, 129, 126,0,0,0,0,0 , 195, 219, 219,90 2040 DATA 0,0,1,0,29, 33, 64,0,0,0 , 64,0,92,66, 129, 128, 128 2050 DATA 129,195,255,255,255,25 5, 255, 255 2100 RETURN 3000 PRINT AT 2, 10; PAPER 2; INK 7; \"SEA-RESCUE\" 3010 PRINT AT 5,0; \"You were in y our rescue office when a mayday call came in. An ocean-line 5225 RESTORE 5225: FOR n=1 TO 8: READ a,b: BEEP a,b: NEXT n: DAT A .5, 12,.5,9,.25, 16,.5, 12,.25, 12 , -5,7,.5,4,-5,0,.5,0 5230 GO TO 5300 5300 PRINT AT 21,0; \"Press a key to Play Again\": PAUSE 4e4: BEEP .5,0: BEEP.5,12: RUN 9000 FOR f=USR \"i\" TO USR \"j\"+7: READ a: POKE f,a: NEXT f 9010 DATA 0,0,1,0,BIN 11101,BIN 100001,BIN 1000000,0,0,0,BIN 100 0000, 0, BIN 1011100, BIN 1000010, B IN 10000001,BIN 10000000 sea rescue ends "


"TM RAMBO TM FIRST BLOOD PARTI OFFICIAL COMPUTER GAME OF THE BOX-OFFICE No.1 SMASH HIT. TAKE THE ROLE OF SYLVESTER STALLONE IN ALL THE ACTION-PACKED BATTLE SCENES. RELEASED NOW (STALLONE 7.95 OceM 8.95 TM a Te 1985 ADESENV And Arabassin NV Loty Stroj Co Product SPECTRUM48k COMMODORE 64 & AMSTRAD Ocean House 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Telephone 061 832 6633. Telex 669977 Ocean Software is available from selected branches of: BANE.WHSMITH, John Menzies,WOOLWORTH. LASKYS, Rumbelows,Greens, Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Trade enquiries welcome. "


"c+vg/games book/space mission/1 SPACE MISSION fire button. The same procedure is needed  ATARI 16K when docking at the ship. Do not touch the cavern walls or you Steel yourself to guide your space shuttle will lose one of your five lives. through tortuous caverns in search of Points are gained by picking up the crystals and return them to your ship. crystals and returning them safely to the To collect the crystals you must position mothership. the shuttle just above them and press the By Ciaran King 3 REM * (C)1985 * 4 REM # C.KING # 5 REM *********** 10 GOSUB 30900 15 GOSUB 31000 20 GOSUB 20000 30 POKE 53278, N1 100 S=STICK(NO) 101 IF PEEK(764)=33. THEN GOSUB 900 110 DX=DX+M(((S=7) OR (S=N6) OR (S=5)) AND (DX<5))-M(((S=N10) OR (S=11) OR (S=9) ) AND (DX>-5)) 120 DY=DY+M(((S=9) OR (S=13) OR (S=5)) AND (DY<5))-M(((S=N10) OR ('S=14) OR (S=N6 )) AND (DY)-5)) 125 IF X<48 THEN X=198 126 IF X>200 THEN X=48 127 ON Y<N10 GOTO 6020 130 X=X+DX:Y=Y+DY:POKE 53248,X 140 A$(Y, Y+23)=\"<$$ fgcc\" 150 IF STRIG (NO)=NO THEN 1000 450 FUEL=FUEL-0.01: COLOR 32:PLOT FUEL, 23:IF FUEL<N6 THEN 6020 460 ON PEEK(53252) >NO GOTO 6000 465 VOL=ABSC(DX )+ABS(DY))*N2:IF VOL >15 THEN VOL=15 470 SOUND NO, 255, N6, VOL 475 ON LE=N4 OR LE=5 OR LE=7 OR LE=N8 OR LE>16 GOSUB 8000! 480 ON LE>N8 GOSUB 9000 500 GOTO 100 900 POKE 764,12:IF PEEK(764)=33 THEN 900 901 IF PEEK(764)< >33 THEN 901 902 POKE 764, 12:RETURN 1000 X=INT(X):Y=INT(Y) 1002 IF X/N4=INT(X/N4) OR CAR=N1 THEN 1100 1003 IF (X+N1) /N4=INT((X+N1) /N4) THEN X=X+N1 :POKE 53248.X:GOTO 1100 1005 IF (X-N1)/N4=INT((X-N1)/N4) THEN X=X-N1: POKE 53248.X:GOTO 1100 1010 GOTO 450 1100 IF CAR=N1 THEN 1300 1110 CHX=(X-48)/N4:CHY=(Y-15) /N8:LOCATE CHX CHY.CHR:POSITION CHX.CHY:? CHR$ (CHR) 1125 IF CHR=192 THEN GOSUB 1400:COLOR 32:PLOT CHX, CHY:PLOT CHX+N1, CHY:CAR=N1: POK E 704,61:DX=NO:DY=NO 1130 IF CHR=192 THEN LX=CHX:LY=CHY:GOTO 450 1200 GOTO 450 1300 IF X<94 OR X>98 OR Y<53 OR Y>55 THEN 450 1310 CAR=NO: POKE 704, 119:GOSUB 1500:DX=NO :DY=NO: COLOR 160 1315 FOR K=5 TO 38:PLOT K, 23:SOUND NO, 255, 10, 10:FOR W=N1 TO N6:NEXT W:SOUND NO, N O, NO, NO:NEXT K:FUEL=38 1320 SAFE=SAFE+N1:IF SAFE=5 THEN 5000 "


"1330 GOTO 450 1400 FOR K=N1 TO 30:SOUND NO,K,N10, N10:FOR W=N1 TO 5:NEXT W:SOUND NO, NO, NO, NO: PO KE 77, NO 1410 SC+SC+N1: POSITION 5,21:? SC:NEXT K:RETURN 1500 FOR K=30 TO NI STEP -N1: SOUND NO,K, N10, N10:FCR W=N1 TO N6:NEXT W:SOUND NO, N O, NO, NO:POKE 77, NO 1501 SC=SC+N1: POSITION 5,21:? SC:NEXT K 1505 FOR K=FUEL TO 5 STEP -N1: COLOR 32:PLOT K, 23:SC=SC+N1: POSITION 5, 21:? SC:SOU ND O,K*2,N10, N10:NEXT K 1510 SOUND NO, NO, NO, NO: RETURN 5000 GOSUB 5200:GRAPHICS 18:GOSUB 30800: POSITION NI, NO:? #N6; \"SPACE MISSION\":POS ITION N4, N2:? #N6;\" (C) C.KING 1984\" 5002 POSITION NO, N4:? #N6;\"level\":LE;\" completed\" 5006 POSITION 5,N6:? #N6;\"score \";SC:IF SC >HI THEN HIESC 5008 POSITION 5,N8:? #N6 ;\"high \";HI 5010 POSITION 5, 10:? #N6:\"PRESS FIRE\" 5020 POSITION 3,11:? #N6:\"FOR LEVEL \"LE+N1 5030 IF STRIG (NO) THEN 5030 5040 SAFE=NO:FUEL=38:LIELI+N1 :LE=LE+N1:GOTO N20 5100 GOTO 5100 5200 POKE 53248,96:FOR K-54 TO 74 STEP 0.4:A$(K. K+13) -\"<$$ fgCC\" 5210 SOUND NO, RND (NO) *255, 12, 12:NEXT K:SOUND NO, NO, NO, NO:POKE 53248, NO 5220 FOR K=NO TO 15 STEP 0.1:SOUND NO,255,N8,K:POKE 707,42+K:NEXT K 5230 FOR K=838 TO 768 STEP -1.5:SOUND NO,K/N4, N8, 15:POKE 707,K-(256*N3) 5240 A$(K, K+24)=\"< %[=%=[Z $B\" 5250 NEXT K:SOUND NO, NO, NO, NO:RETURN 6000 POKE 53278, N1: POKE 77.NO 6005 FOR P=N1 TO 100:NEXT P 6010 IF PEEK(53252)=NO AND PEEK(53261)<>N1 AND PEEK(53262)<>N1 THEN 465 6020 FOR K-N1 TO 100: SOUND NO, RND (NO) *250 N2 12:POKE 704 K NEXT K:SOUND NO, NO, NO NO 6030 A$(Y, Y+30 )=NUL$ :POKE 704,119 6040 IF CAR=N1 THEN POSITION LX.LY:? \"@\"; 6050 FOR K=N1 TO 100:NEXT K 6070 LIELI-N1: POSITION 5,22:? LI;\" \" 6080 IF LICNI THEN 7000 6090 X=96: Y=54:CAR=NO:DX=NO :DY=NO:FUEL=38 6100 POSITION NO, 21:? \"SCORE\";SC:POSITION 20,21:? \"LEVEL\":LE:POSITION 0,22:? \"LI VES\";LI: POSITION 20, 22:? \"HIGH\";HI 6110 POSITION NO, 23:? \"FUEL= 6120 A$(Y, Y+23)=\"<$$ fgcc\":POKE 53248, X 6130 POKE 53278, N1:GOTO 100 7000 IF SC>HI THEN HIESC 7004 GRAPHICS 18:GOSUB 30800: POSITION N3, NO:? #N6;\"SPACE MISSION\":POSITION N4.N2 :? #N6;\" (C) C.KING 1985\" 7006 POSITION 5, N6:? #N6;\"score\";SC:IF SC>HI THEN HIESC 7008 POSITION 5,9:? #N6 ;\"high \";HI 7009 POSITION N6, N4:? #N6 ;\"game over\" 7010 POSITION 5, 11:? #N6; \"PRESS FIRE\" 7012 IF STRIG(NO) THEN SOUND NO, PEEK(N20).12.N10:POKE 710, PEEK(20):GOTO 7012 7014 GOTO 15 8000 AX AX+ADX:IF AX<54 OR AX>194 THEN ADX=-ADX 8005 AY=AY+ADY:IF AY>176 OR AY<104 THEN ADY--ADY 8010 POKE 53249.AX:A$(256+AY, 276+AY)<TC BB%\" 8015 IF PEEK(53261)=N1 THEN POP :GOTO 6000 8020 RETURN 9000 ASTEAST+LE/N3:IF AST>200 THEN AST=40 9002 IF PEEK(53262)=N1 THEN POP GOTO 6000 space mission continues p89 "


"OFORM Heatonite Regain 00.000 Zi (Ur. (APCHEN), O,FI) OH, 16H, 2nd Moon Rijar. Jse invisible cat+code: string etc. Full cerebral combat status needed e ntial albo all times. Halt Heatonite prod. Access via Blue print (part) supplied. Ky-Al-Nargath construct P The Master reports \"proming results. (LIVE ALIEN cortical preparation.) o Mine/Factory vention urgently requested. ? ? ?ELD??? Disable TIRD Machine skill VITAL. Doctor: ultimate risk scenario. Your -Cha os weapon. UV COMBAT NOX BRAIN AV TO HOJ BRAIN MEGA SECURE !!! ramme concealed in game Pack Who would think of a Police box?! Madrag (genetically boosted saurian] + psycho DOCIAR (WHO AND THE MINES OF TERROR Force futile. Weapon Skills NA3 Who's?) Time Instant Replay Unit +brain -robotics + techno trickery = UOMODOUDOW IN ASSOCIATION WITH THE BBC SPECTRUM COMMODORE .95 AMSTRACASSETTE "


"c+vg/games book/space mission/2 9004 POKE 53250, AST:RETURN 20000 GOSUB 30300:? \"\" 20005 POSITION NO, N4 20010 ? \" < > %$ %$) \"; 20015 ?\")< %!!!!$ %$)<>) %#1 %##!$\"; 20020 ? \"!!!######$ ?#! ! ! ! ! $ %!##1 ?####\"; 20025 ? \"#**####*##!!!!!!########! ! ! ####] ?####\"; 20026 QE=LE 20027 IF QE>N3 THEN QE=QE-N3:GOTO 20027 20030 GOSUB QE*100+20000 20032 GOSUB 30800 20034 POKE 53251,92: POKE 53259, N1 20036 FOR K=768 TO 838 STEP 0.5:SOUND NO,K/N4,N8,N8:POKE 707,K-768 20038 A$(K,K+N20)=\"< %[=y=[Z $B\" 20040 NEXT K:FOR K=14 TO NO STEP -0.1:SOUND NO,255,N8,K:POKE 707,42+K:NEXT K 20042 A$( 40,842)=\"\"<\":POKE 704, 119:POKE 53248,96:FOR K=74 TO 60 STEP -0.4:A$(K, K+13)=\"<$$ fgCC\" 20043 SOUND NO, RND (NO)*255, 12, 12:NEXT K:SOUND NO, NO, NO, NO 20050 X=96:Y=54:CAR-NO :DX-NO :DYONO 20060 POSITION 0,21:? \"SCORE\";SC:POSITION 20, 21:? \"LEVEL\";LE:POSITION 0,22:? \"LI VES\";LI: POSITION 20, 22:? \"HIGH\";HI 20062 POSITION NO, 23:? \"FUEL= 20070 IF LE>N8 THEN POKE 706,91:A$(554,568)=\"CBB<$$$$<BBC\" 20090 RETURN 20100 ? \"#[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[& [[(#\"; 20105 FOR K=9 TO 18:COLOR 93:PLOT NO,K:COLOR 63:PLOT 39,K:NEXT K 20110 ? \"#$ @ %! $ ( %! $ @( %! $ @( %! $ 90 %#\": 20115 ? \"## ! ! ! ! ! ! ### !!!!###!!!!###!!!!###!!!!!!##\": 20120 RETURN 20200 ? \"#[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[& [[[#\"; 20205 FOR K-9 TO 19:COLOR 93:PLOT NO.K:COLOR 63:PLOT 39,K:NEXT K 20209 ? \"#!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!#\": 20220 V=12:FOR C-5 TO 29 STEP 12:GOSUB 20290:NEXT C:V-N16:C-11: GOSUB 20290:C=23: GOSUB 20290:RETURN 20290 POSITION C,V:?\" @(\":POSITION C, V+N1 :? \"%1111$\":POSITION C. V+N2:? \" [&! \":RETURN 20300 ? \"##[[[[###[[[[###[[[[###[/C###[& C###\": ##\" ; 20302 ?\"] ? ? ? ? 20303 ?\"] ? ? ? ?$ ?\"; 20304 ?\"] @ ? @ ? @ ? @ ?#!!!!$ ?\"; 20305 ? \"#!!! ?!!! ?!!! ?!!! ?& $ ?\"; 20306 ? \"##[& ?#(& ?# [& ?#(& ? ) ?\"; 20307 ? \"#& ?\": 20309 ?\"] %# %# %& a( ] ?\": 20310 ?\") %!#& %!#& %!#& %18 !!!& ?\"; 20311 ? \" ?\"; 20312 ? \"#$ %#\"; 20313 ? \"##!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!##\": 20314 IF LE>N3 THEN POSITION 30, 11:? \")< >)\":POKE 201,7:POSITION 5.N16:? \")))) 20315 IF LE>N3 THEN POSITION NO, N16:?\"] %# %# %# %& all ?\" Madrao loenetically boosted saurianl psycho %# 0 M CASSETTE & 78 95 ROM/DISKI49.95 20399 RETURN 30000 DIM A$(1024):V=PEEK(134)+PEEK(135)*256:P=(PEEK(106)-16)*256+1024-PEEK(140) -PEEK(141) *256 30005 POKE V+3, INT(P/256):POKE V+2,P-256*INT(P/256) space mission continues p90 89 "


"c+vg/games book/space mission/3 30008 NO=O:N1=1:N2=2:N3=3:N6=6:N3=8:N16=16:N20=20:N4=4:N10=N8+N2 30010 POKE 54279, PELK(106)-13 30012 REM GOTO30250: REM SKIP UGS'S 30015 CRO=PEEK(756)*256:CRA=(PEEK(106)-8)*256:FOR K=0 TO 1023:POKE CRA+K, PEEK(CR O+K) 30017 POSITION 7,12:? #6:\"*\":1023-K:\"+ \":NEXT K! 30020 DIM R$(1) : POSITION N2.10:? #6:\"nearly finished\" 30025 FOR K=1 TO 14:READ R$: R=ASC(R$):IF R< 32 THEN R=R+64 30026 POSITION 7, 12:? #6;\" *\";14-K;\"* \" 30030 IF R<96 THEN IF R>31 THEN R=R-32 30035 FOR I=0 TO 7:READ A:B=I+R*8+CRA:POKE B.A:NEXT I:NEXT K! 30110 DATA !,85,85,238.187.238.187.238.187 30120 DATA #, 236, 187,233,187,239,187,238,187 30130 DATA $.64,64,208,144,228,186,237,185 30140 DATA %,1,1,6,7.30,27,110,123 30150 DATA &,237,185,228,186,208,144,64,64 30160 DATA , 110, 123,30,27,6,7,1,1 30170 DATA ,128, 170, 175, 189, 189, 175, 170, 128 30180 DATA (,2,170,250.126.126.250.170.2 30190 DATA ),0, 42,38,42,12,207,60,12 30200 DATA <, 42, 38, 42,3,195,3,3,3 30210 DATA >,0,42,38,42,192,0,0,0 30220 DATA 1,238,187,238,187,238,187,85,85 30230 DATA 1,237,185,237,185,237,185,237,185 30240 DATA ?, 110, 123, 110,123,110,123,110,123 30250 DIM M(1), NUL$(30):M(1)=0.25:M(O)=0:NUL$=\"\" 30270 RETURN 30300 GRAPHICS NO: POKE 82,NO:DLEPEEK(560) +PEEK(561)*256: POKE DL+N3,68:FOR KEDL+N 6 TO DL+25:POKE K, N4:NEXT K 30305 POKE 756, PEEK(106)-N8 30307 POKE 708, 40:POKE 711,78: POKE 709,200: POKE 710,144:POKE 53277,N3: POKE 559,6 2:POKE 752, N1: POKE 623, N8 30310 RETURN 30800 A$=\"\":A$(1000)=\"\":A$(N2)=A$ 30802 FOR K=53248 TO 53251: POKE K.NO:NEXT K:RETURN 30900 GRAPHICS 17:POSITION 3,0:? #6;\"space mission\":POSITION 2,2:? #6:\"(c) C.K ING 1985\" 30920 POSITION 2,8:? #6;\"LOADING GRAPHICS\":POSITION 4,10:? #6;\"please wait\":POS ITION 7.12:? #6;\"*1024*\" 30930 GOSUB 30000 30960 POSITION 5,14:? #N6 ;\"press fire\"| 30970 IF STRIG(NO)=NO THEN SOUND NO.NO, NO, NO: RETURN 30980 K=K+2.5:IF K>250 THEN K=0 30990 SOUND NO,K, N4,10:IF K/10=INT(K/10) THEN POKE 709,K 30995 GOTO 30970 31000 GRAPHICS 18:POSITION 3,0:? #6;\"SPACE MISSION\":POSITION 1,2:? #6;\" (C) C.KI NG 1985\" 31003 LE=N1:SC=O: LI=5: FUEL=38:CAR=NO:SAFE=NO: AX=70: AY=150:ADX=N2:ADY=N2: POKE 705 .12 31004 POSITION N4,10:? #N6:\"SELECT LEVEL\" 31005 POSITION N3,5:? #N6 ;\"high\":HI:POSITION N3, 7:? #N6:\"level \":LE:\"\" 31090 POSITION 5, 11:? #N6;\"press fire\":IF STRIG(NO) THEN POKE 711, PEEK (N20):SOUN D NO, PEEK(N2O), N6,10 31092 IF PEEK(53279)=5 THEN LEELE+N1:IF LE-21 THEN LE=N1 31094 IF PEEK(53279)<>N6 AND STRIG(NO) THEN 31005 31099 SOUND NO, NO, NO, NO:RETURN space mission ends "


NA


"An Anoren pancer Elite Joint production AVAILABLE NOW Previously available only from Commodore U.K. for the C 64, the author Adrian Spencer and Elite now combine to bring you the spectacular ational Interna BASKETBALL GAME FEATURES For SPECTRUM .99 and AMSTRAD .99 Furious non-stop action with one or two-player feature Realistic animation with jump block and steal manoeuvres You can even jump and turn in mid-air before slamming the ball into the basket .Nine fierce skill levels from the utterly pathetic to the Harlem Globetrotter Three fiery opponents with unique intelligent player characteristics Multisection game with end-of-match presentation sequence. Sequel to immensely successful International Soccer Jonny UNIX COMIDARE CBM64 SCREEN SHOT International Basketball is from Andrew Spencer author of the Sensational BestSeller International Soccer Every single Elite product carries the unique Elite Holographic sticker. Make sure your copy does. It's your guarantee of quality w Mall Order Just send a cheque or PO, payable to Elite or quote your Visa number Elite -Joint Production Elite Systems Limited Anchor House Anchor Road Aldridge Walsall West Midlands Telephone (092255852 Telex 355622 SPETEL G "


"SET TO STUN... READY TO RUN WILLOW PATTERN THUNDERBIRDS MICROCOSM CHICKIN CHASE CYLU FAT MAN SAM CHIMERA STAR DRIFTER AMSTRAD 301 CYLU 302 DON'T PANIC 303 BOOTY 306 CHIMERA 310 WILLOW PATTERN 313 THUNDERBIRDS SPECTRUM 304 CHIMERA 308 WILLOW PATTERN 311 THUNDERBIRDS 315 CHICKIN CHASE COMMODORE BBC 317 MICROCOSM 309 WILLOW PATTERN 319 STAR DRIFTER 312 THUNDERBIRDS 321 FAT MAN SAM 316 CHICKIN CHASE ATARI 318 MICROCOSM 307 CHIMERA 314 THUNDERBIRDS 305 CHIMERA ELECTRON 320 STAR DRIFTER ANGE JGEVER MAIL ORDER Please state name of game.code number and quantity required, Enclose crossed cheque/PO made payable to FIREBIRD SOFTWARE. All offers are subject to avail ability Orders are despatched promptly. All prices inclusive of VAT and postage, MAIL ORDER: \"FREEPOST FIREBIRD, WELLINGTON HOUSE, UPPER ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON WC2H 9BR. \"No stamps required M8.95 FIREBIRD SOFTWARE, WELLINGTON HOUSE UPPER ST MARTIN'S LANE LONDON WC2H 9DL TEL: 01-379 6755/5626 Firebird and the Firebird logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications plc FIREBIRD "


"From the black and white pages of a dusty book emerges the colourful and gripping adventure of Bu : Your NEVERENDING STORY Save the world of \"Fantasia\" in this thrilling adventure. Cast as the hero Atreyu and aided by Falcor, the Luck Dragon, vou face the trials and terrors of the ever consuming \"Nothing\". Enter the quest in this richly illustrated and highly imaginative computer movie. C61 AMSTRAD C61 AMSTRAD  Neue Constantin 9.95 14.95 Filmproduktion GmbH 1984. SPECTRI  18 DESK Ocean Software Limited Telephone: 061-832 6633 6 Central Street, Manchester M2 5NS Telex: 669977 Oceans G Ocean Software is available from selected branches of S .WHSMITH. Mendes WOULIVORTH.LASKYS, Rumbelows. Greens Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Trade enquiries welcome 9.95 14.95 Ocean "


"TRANSFORMERS...MORE THAN MEETS THE EYE! THETRATS NOT RUOTS Ceon Ocean Softwalked CatStreet Mandate M2 SNS Telephone: 06 832 6633 Telex 669972 1985 Hastic Industries All Rights Reserved TRANSFORMERS \"WARRIOR ROBOTS IN DISGUISEM EARTH HAS BEEN INVADED BY POWERFUL ROBOTS, FROM THE PLANET CYBERTRON. TRANSFORM INTO THE ROLE OF THE HEROIC AUTOBOTS (JAZZ, HOUND MIRACE AND OPTIMUS PRIME) IN THEIR DEADLY ESPECIERUV 481 BATTLE WITH THE EVIL DECEPTICONS. G'OIVLIVIODORE 62 Ocean Software is available from selected branches ol DOWHSMH on ennes WOOLWORTH. LASKYS. Rumbelows.Greens Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Trade enquiries welcome 7-951 "


"BACHChe nel THE DECKS OF BLACKWYCHE START DECK MO3 = Shu    # jh of 60 ic N  pEQK () (  . NU Share 2011 ot  ::    nt     , ,  Wow 10 EOS   . . , ex , : STICH.00% punon ** # #    hu gow  , As (     11T b oys Now A 14 kOr E3 * * * * * MAP. () 1985 MARKcLEMENTS   4 (*) U12 10.   "


"rom time to time at Ideas Central we get mape that samang that we jual of the MARK BISNIS Is the enter of ning sample of the ap a rt. And he wrote   Bare no end to his talents GENERAL MPP KEY | LOMP   BORREL CANNON BALLS BUCKET UP TURNED BUCKET SWORD SMOLL CONNON SKELETON TROP DOOR  TOBLE 3 SHELF 200 GRBIN SACK SE LADDER, UP CHEST 0 CUPBOPRD AROT Blackwyche is without doubt the most in this room so be careful. from 1A and go down to BOW 3 difficult of the Ultimate C64 games to Look on top of the highest barrel and (DOUBLOONS on this level if not actually play. It requires every ounce of you will see your goal, a telescope already taken). your arcade skills Avoid the trap door and JUMP up for At BOW 3, there is a cabinet on the The greatest danger to your energy the telescope. When you have it, get left of the room, go to it and pick up is, of course, the Harpies. Learning to out quickly! It is not possible to do the BOOK. From here, go to BOW 4. defeat these creatures without loss of this room without losing some energy Pick up MAP Piece (C). Now go to the energy is the key to completing so you must be quick as those grain opposite end, to BOW 5, to fight off Blackwyche sacks are mean! the ghost pirate using the BELL See my general gameplay tips for my Go to 3C and, despite what I said BOOK and CANDLE picked up earlier. method of dealing with the Harpies earlier, you will have to use a trap door to fight him off, walk to the far right, One room I've worried about for to get down to DECK 4 it is the next to the barrel and fight him with some time is room 3B on the map. only way at this stage. You should now your sword. After changing colour a This room appears to have a bug be in a small room with cannons. Don't few times, he will disappear and you because every time you try to leave it, pick up the bag, it contains are free to take MAP Piece (D). you get stuck and have to restart. DOUBLOONS which you don't need at You're all clear kid! Go out the right However, if you wish to see it, you this time door and walk. Soon a door will appear, can enter it by walking to the edge of Go left to 4C When there, pick up a hidden door, room (X) on the map the longest plank in room 2B and then the grey bucket and go through BOW Go in! walking forward in the direction of the 4 to the other side of the ship Pop in You will find that all too familiar door (push joystick forward). This room room 4D and walk over to the cannon, skull with the Captain's soul trapped doesn't do anything anyway so let's once the cannon ball is fired, go over within. To free him forever, walk up to just get on and pick up the anchor. Now go to 4E. the skull and use the sword. Use the map to find the rooms In here it is important that you mentioned and if you get stuck, use the avoid the middle of the screen because GENERAL TIPS ON GAMEPLAY various map references and keys for of a trap door. In the left hand corner help. Your start position is between of the screen, on the floor, are two HARPIES: Defeating these annoying rooms A and B on Deck One grain sacks. creatures is the only way you'll have a Start off by going to room 1B. Here, Walk right to the bottom of the chance of completing Blackwyche pick up the SWORD and go to 1A for screen and stand just to the right of There are two methods, one being energy replenishment. Do this by the first sack. Use the sword and a faster than the other. There is a striking the bottom of the bell with the hole will appear in the sack, using it method for going left and a method for tip of your sword. again will produce the MIRROR. Pick going right, (the left being the faster). Now go to IE where you will find a it up and go to STERN 4 to get the Going Left: When you exit a room, grain room. In the left hand corner of candle Now go to 4A. walk onto and stay on the second the room, between two sacks of grain You will see that there are three trap plank. When the HARPIES fly on, on the first shelf, you should see a doors altogether in 4A. They are placed just keep walking to your destination yellow object shaped like a bottle Like as accurately as possible and it will When the white one flys over your the bell in 1A, tip it with the end of take practice to navigate this screen head, clip it with the end of your your sword, if you miss, keep trying. It successfully (Make sure you JUMP sword. You can do the same with the should fall and present you with MAP over the last one). When you have the green one, but it tends to be less Piece (A). COMPASS, leave the room carefully dangerous than the white and doubles Now go to ID. On entering the room, and go next door to 4B. When there, back over your head occasionally. you will fall down a trap door into 2D, grab the DOUBLOONS for energy and If you miss the white one, make sure a deck below. Quickly run and grasp go back to 4F and down the ladder. you turn around immediately and the bag of gunpowder avoiding the You are now in 5E. Walk over the destroy it. Use room-ducking as often cannon fire. Now go to STERN 2 puddle to obtain the water, then go to as possible When there, stand next to the chest 5C fight off the skeletons with the Going Right: This is a tedious against the wall and give it a good sword and grab the SEAWEED. Go method but, unfortunately, the only hack with your sword. Hey presto, one through BOW 5 to 5B. one. When you leave a room, walk on bell. Before continuing, return to 1A In here is the SEXTANT. JUMP the second plank again and keep going. and stock up on energy, you will need over the low bouncing ball and walk When a HARPY appears you must it! under the high bouncing ball. From double back to meet it and then From here, go to 3E using the ladder here you must go all the way back to destroy it. Do the same with the at 2E because the other has DECK 2. If you are low on energy on SQUID. Time is valuable, and whenever DOUBLOONS which replenish your the way back, by all means take some the screen is clear, get as much energy and you don't need them yet. DOUBLOONS scrolling done as possible When at 3E you will need the JUMP On DECK 2 go to room 2B once option because there is a trap door there, walk up to the chain and you QUICK REFERENCE under the bouncing cannon ball. JUMP will receive a COMB. The COMB and TO THE OBJECTS over the space where the ball hits the MIRROR together go to the mermaid. floor. Go now to STERN 1 and take the It's worth noting here that it is far PEARL Return to the bell room (1A). *=0=&+*+2=15+6+1 = (*) wiser to use ladders to get down a deck and replenish your energy. Then go than trap doors. The fall from a trap down to BOW 2, where you usually door decreases your energy and more lose all your energy, as this is now safe. + + +=CW often than not, there is a nasty Go over and get the SKULL, then surprise waiting for you when you fall. return to BOW 1. From 3E go next door to 3F where When you enter the room, the you will find another grain room SKULL and CROSSBONES which you watching out for the falling sacks! The collected earlier will now fix themselves idea in this room is to keep on the to the empty flag to form a Jolly move at all times. If you check the Roger which will rise revealing a KEY. map, you will see there is a trap door After taking the KEY, get some energy u ruct o r @ OBJECT LIST THE* SYMBL MARKS THE POSITION OF THE OBJECT :OBJECT:NAME: LOCATION: SWORD 115 MDP(A) 1E PEYRL STERN 1 KEY BW 1 COMB 2B GUNED&R 20 BELL STERN2 SKW BOW 2 DOUBLOONS 3943 TELESCOPB 3F COMP999 47 BUCKET 46 NCHCR 4D MIRROR 4E CANDLE STERN 4 CROSSBONES STERN3 BOOK BOW MDP76) BOW 4 SEXTANT 58 gesWEET 5C WOTEX 58 MoPl) STERN5 M?(0) BOW # "


"THEIR ONLY HOPE WAS YOUR PROMISE TO BRING THEM BACK ALIVE.... BEACH-HEAD II BENCIDEID II. THE DIGITATORSTE KEEPERS INCREDIBLY REALISTIC VOICE SIMULATION ONE PLAYER PLUS TRUE HEAD-TO-HEAD TWO PLAYER FACILITY HIGH RESOLUTION ANIMATED GRAPHIC SCREENS OVER 100,000 PEOPLE CAPTURED THE BEACH-HEAD IN 1984! DARE YOU RETURN IN 1985??!! U.S. NOW AVAILABLE AMSTRAD cass. &9.95 disk .95 SPECTRUM 48K cassette &7.95 All screens an this advertisement as seen on Commodore 64 Beach Bead must be one of the best games to make its way across the Allande ZZA (GOLD an Software ACCESS C6 CASSETTE The continuing saga pits allied forces against the cruel dictator who escaped the destruction of the fortress with remnants of his army and prisoners captured during the land battle. Produced for the COMMODORE 64 and coming to a computer store near you! Written by Roger & Bruce Carver . Directed by Bruce Carver . Produced by Chris J. Jones  Distributed by David L. Ashby! illustration by Oliver Frey (Newsfield Publications)  Manufactured in the U.K. by U.S. Gold. "


"JA TWARE | SinCIEL Spectrum CHEQUERED FLAG FREE GAMES! Hy w MASTER  All Mache MJO EINDERS KEEPERS For:* Spectrum * Amstrad * Commodore 64/128 Computer Owners AM a S YES....place an order for our magazine and we'll send you one of the above games absolutely free. We will also enrol you in our Discount Software Club enabling you to purchase software & utilities at huge savings over shop prices. We offer all the latest titles at up to  off shop prices (see panel for details) plus many older products at pocket money prices. In all we carry over 300 titles each for the Spectrum, Commodore 64 and Amstrad. SIX MAGAZINES A YEAR SEE HOW YOU SAVE WITH MR.SOFTWARE \"BONUS\" PRICES HOTLINE KEEPS YOU UP TO DATE Title Shop Price Bonus Price You SAVE 14.95 14.95 7.95 9.95 9.95 11.45 10.95 5.95 6.95 6.95 A subscription of just .00 will bring you six magazines a year through the post. Each magazine is packed with reviews of all the latest software, reader's game playing tips, competitions to enter, our reviewer's personal choices and a summary of how the other magazines rate the new releases Subscribers to the magazine can 'phone our 24 hour Hotline for up to the minute news of the latest re recording, updated weekly, details the new titles and their prices. Credit card holders may order by phone too! Shadow of the Unicorn Elite Fighting Warrior Spy v Spy Tau Ceti Frank Bruno's Boxing Monty on the Run Way of the Exploding Fist Critical Mass Starquake International Karate .00 $2.00 .00 $3.00 6.95 7.95 9.95 8.95 7.95 6.50 5.95 6.95 5.95 5.95 4.50 02.00 .00 .00 $2.00 2.00 Who Dares Wins ll Monty on the Run Winter Games Way of the Exploding Fist Spy V Spy i 7.95 9.95 9.95 5.45 6.95 7.95 6.95 5.95 2.50 .00 2.00 13.00 .00 HARDWARE AND UTILITIES SUPPLEMENT Every new subscriber to the magazine gets a 24-page review of some of the more popular utilities — such as word process ing software — and hardware including joysticks and Spectrum interfaces. EASY ORDERING FAST SERVICE You can order from our substantial range as and when you like. There are no minimum order requirements — you don't have to buy anything at all. When you do order we do our best to despatch your goods within a week — often quicker. 9.95 14.95 10.95 ACE 7.95 13.00 Lords of Midnight 3D Grand Prix Battle of Britain Marsport Match Day Souls of Dakron 9.95 8.95 9.95 9.95 8.95 9.95 6.95 6.95 7.96 6.95 6.45 6.95 13.00 2.00 22.00 .00 12.50 13.00 SUBSCRIPTION FORM CODE: 456 | My computer is a: Spectrum Spectrum + Amstrad Commodore 64/128 I wish to subscribe to your magazine for the next 12 months and take advantage of the \"Free Game\" offer, for which I enclose  plus 75p post & packing for the free game. The game I would like is! Finders Keepers Spellbound The Last V8 Chiller Chequered Flag (All machines) (Spectrum only! (C-64 only) (Amstrad only) (Spectrum Only) Note: If you would like to order some of the games shown in the panel above, list them on a separate piece of paper and add the total cost to your payment. I enclose a cheque/postal order no value  please charge my Access/Visa Card No I understand that if I am not fully satisfied with the goods, I may return them within fourteen days for a full refund of the cost of the games and the Magazine subscription. Name (BLOCK CAPS) Address MR.SOFTWARE LIMITED KELVIN HOUSE, TOTTERIDGE AVENUE, HIGH WYCOMBE, BUCKS HP13 6XG (0494) 450751  Export Customers: We welcome orders from all parts of the world, please note the following subscription and postage rates outside UK Europe Subscription .00. Post : U.S.A. and Middle East Subscription . Post ; Australia, Far East and South Africa Subscription .00, Post . Please note that all Magazines are despatched by Air Mail postage to keep you right up to date. "


"REVEL IN THE THRILLS & SPILLS OF AUTHENTIC AMERICAN FOOTBALL The official NFL authorised computer simulation Bowl Final live on n uary 26th 1986. ne RELEASED ON JANUARY 14th 1986 $9.95 FOR THE SPECTRUM 48K, SPECTRUM +, COMMODORE AND AMSTRAL All Machine Formats NFL-Ocean TM +  1941 NFLP Inc. All Rights reserved. Ocean Software Limited authorised user Ocean Software Limited, 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Telanhan NA JANUARY 26, 1986 LOUISIANA SUPERDOME, NEW ORLEANS LOT "


"THE ULTIMATE GAMES FOR THE COMMODORE 64 ZEMK DAGSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS TIME 14 THE GRME 486 Sabre Wulf, Underwurlde and Nightshade are available on the Commodore 64 at .95inc.VAT FIREBIRD Firebird Software Wellington House Upper St Martins Lane London WC2H9DU MAIL ORDER Please state name of game and numbers required. Enclose crossed chequer.o. made payable to FIREBIRD SOFTWARE. All offers are subject to availability Orders are despatched promptly. All prices inclusive of VAT and postage FREEPOST FIREBIRD, Wellington House, Upper St. Martins Lane, London WC 2196 Firebird isa Trade Markof British Telecommunications plc "


"C+VG ADUENTURE NEWS DOOR. The door is now open. You must admit the first is easier! Look at Ten Little Indians in the Mysterious Adventure series. To dig a hole, no DIG. Oh no! USE TROWEL For goodness sake, EVERYONE types DIG! And I hear that Zork itself demands object: DIG GROUND. Are you really going to try and dig a hole in the Grue standing in front of you? No, you are not. Finally, do STOP plugging Scott so! Or rather, carry on plugging him, but plug the others also. When I actually write ZARK (maybe 1997) I shall expect massive plugging from C+VG. P.S Could you tell me how many letters I have written to Helpline? John Yeates, St. Clement, Jersey. Keith's reply: I lost count about a year ago. John! But have you ever played Ghost Town (oops, there I go. plugging again) You have to dig in an unusual place to complete that game! reviewed were really good. So By the way, there's a bugged quality made up for quantity! version of Fourth Protocol on A PEEK INTO THE Didn't it? sale. This appears to be an PENTHOUSE Jason Nicholls has got a few unfinished version of \"The complaints about adventures! He Bomb\" where the option to get a ARCHIVES has nearly finished all the games taxi is missing. he has, but that is just the Entering one location in the trouble! \"So many adventures Barbican causes the program to have a problem at the end which crash, and the gate guard can * mid the untidy piles of is just about impossible!\" he be quizzed continually, despite cassettes, the overflowing says. the fact that he says he will ashtrays, torn up The other thing that irritates answer only one question. unprintable reviews, and the Jason is the words used. \"Who Yet another example of empty Perrier bottles littering the would expect to type in ROTATE carelessness spoiling a good luxury apartment atop the Ideas SPHERE in Message from game. Perhaps you could make Corp building, is a very Andromeda when there is no mention of this in your column, important pile of letters destined hint to do it?\" he asks. to warn adventures and to for the Archives. These are the Agreed, Jason, and if you embarrass the publisher! letters that contain neither want a real nasty sting in the I have just returned from my problem nor clues, yet have tail, wait until Mystery local software shop where I something of interest to say Funhouse comes out for your discovered The Pettigrew about the world of adventure. micro! Chronicles for .99, so I Once every two or three years, lashed out. I really am a soft these letters actually get filed touch. and lost to the world forever. But The problem is that only 10% in the meantime, it is only a THE FIEND of what I buy is in any way what matter of kicking away the debris REPLIES.... I would call a good adventure. to find the pile and sample its Yes, I really must settle down contents. and write my own. If it pleases \"Have you thought of opening me, then it must be good! a branch office over here in Here follows an extract from Well, I suppose I had better Adelaide?\" writes Adrian Stetco The Fiend's latest missive. It finish off with a couple of tips, from South Australia, \"then my arrived printed in tiny print on a not that you seem to care friends and I would have roll about a metre long. With it whether I do or not. But I don't someone who we could contact was enclosed a pocket care, I will forge ahead anyway. with our problems! It would be a magnifier.... A vanimar, vanimalian, nostari, lot cheaper and faster (for us!).\" The Fiend, he adds. Dear Mr. Campbell, Faringdon, That's quite a thought, Adrian, It must have been a pleasure for Oxfordshire. perhaps you could try and you to meet me at the PCW Watch out for some Fiendish tips persuade the Editor to send the Show. Perhaps if you had paid in the next issue, IF I have Helpline on a world tour? If you more attention instead of staring managed to read them by then! can do that, I'll send you a intently at the next stand... Oh t-shirt! well, I suppose I am no match Christopher Waite of Boreham, for half-naked crumpet leaping Chelmsford, visited the Helpline about INTELLIGENT..? stand at the PCW Show in Mind you, I think it was not on YOURE JOKING September and had a chat with to expose those two young boys us about his problem in Jewels to such debauchery, I mean, all of Babylon. Then he went they know about is playing home and finished the game! adventure games and slaying the Dear Keith, Chris was so pleased he wrote odd dragon. I hope their The advent of the \"super an \"Adventure Booklet\" for us, mummies don't find out! intelligent type any old garbage packed with solutions and clues Well, I had intended and it will be interupted into a to all the games he has played, introducing myself at the show, command\" text input systems has ranging from Heroes of Karn but I didn't actually realise how ruined Adventure. to Red Moon and Robin of TALL you are. I thought you was All right, have complex input Sherwood. a little weed, with a large commands if the game needs it, That's the sort of thing that cranium and glasses, a bit like eg Sherlock, Deadline earns t-shirts too! Of course, Brains from Thunderbirds. etc. whilst writing Christopher just Ex-champion boxer are we? Or But there is NO POINT in couldn't resist asking the odd something less aggressive, like a wasting memory on these question or three....! scrum forward! So discretion routines. In the old days, if you \"I think it's horrible how the became the better part of valour, had four keys with you and rest of the magazine appears just on the slight chance that at typed UNLOCK DOOR, the superior to the adventure some stage I may have given program would check all your section. I mean, look at unwitting offence about some keys and unlock the door if you October's issue there were 25 trifling point or other. had a suitable one, opening the arcade reviews to seven I mean, it's not YOUR fault door afterwards. Who would adventure reviews, including that I'm too thick to realise that unlock a door and then leave it Lord of the Rings\" says SA has a cabin in his kitchen. closed? Daniel O Mahony of Your boys were helpful, Nowadays, if you type Fordingbridge. however, and as a result of your UNLOCK DOOR: With what? There weren't many new chat I have polished off WITH KEY. Which key? USE adventures around that month, Claybore and opened all but GOLD. It does not fit. USE RED. Daniel, but luckily the games we one gate in Final Mission. The door is now unlocked. OPEN NEW RELEASES THE PAY OFF Originally on disk only by Atari for the Atari, this game is now on release from Bignose Software, on cassette for Spectrum, Amstrad, Atari, BBC and Commodore 64, as well as on disk for Apple II, BBC and Commodore. Disc versions cost .95; cassettes are priced .95. You are in debt to Luigi the bookie, and when you meet him you either pay him or end up in the Hudson wearing concrete wellies! But getting hold of the Jangy-Ryn diamond could solve all your problems Reviewed in the July 1985 issue of C+VG. show, comed Adventure complex inp QUEST FOR THE HOLY GRAL Based on the Monty Python film, Holy Grail from Dream Software has now been re-released by Mastertronic for Commodore 64 and Spectrum, priced .99. This is the game in which you 21 need the famous shrubbery, when you come up against the Knights who say NIC! Reviewed in November 1984 C+VG. Three new utilities for generating adventure programs have been released. "


"C+VG ADVENTURE HELPLINE THE PINK FAIRY BOWS OUT One of the Marshals near the upper shuttle bay in Shadow fire seems invincible, In his penthouse complains Andy Li. He always apartment in the seems to kill off the whole Simon Marsh joined the over the last two years. Enigma team in one blow! How IDEAs Central Helpline in January To Jim Douglas, the new can he be dealt with, asks building Keith 1984. As well as boy on the street. All at Campbell, one of reviewing games and Priory Court, my thanks Shadowfire Tuner could the few survivors come in useful here, to make answering your letters. for the immensely matters easier? of the corporate he is the survivor of two enjoyable times I have \"That's the Spirit purges which PCW Shows and a had up there. And, of game in which Susan Bowman of swept through the skilled Orc Buster. course, to Keith who Kings Lynn is stuck. Susan wants software industry to get an object out of the Simon has now left gave me the chance.  church, and get into Frisby's when the IDEAS school and has got Thanks mate!\" Store. Can anyone help her? Corp was himself a job in Simon, how could Another blank was drawn by establishing itself, insurance. you? Just as you'd Geoffrey Pickard of Basildon. busies himself He writes: \"This is my learned to put the full \"Do you know anything about with an intricate Lost City from Superior te farewell message to you stops between the Software?\" he asked. and time all. I am leaving the sentences, too! Anyway, Unfortunately I don't, and consuming task. Helpline. The reason it's been just as there is poor Geoffrey, stuck His job is to collect near a rockfall, arms full of enjoyable for us having being that I can no things which all seem useless and collate all the longer afford the time or you, thanks for all the apart from a drill. data relevant to effort to give the position good work you have The game appears to adventure games the justice it deserves. done to help the recognise very few verbs, says and dispense Most of my spare time is Geoffrey, and if you try to USE Helpline thrive. words of wisdom anything, it comes up with AND now spent with my rock It just won't seem the HW EXACTLY ARE YOU to people with group, Teacher's Pet. same eating out on one GOING TO DO THAT? Does problems. This m This means that I cannot of our jaunts, and our anyone know exactly how? This month the Russell Grimbley of Sheffield solve as many table not getting funny Y is right Upper Gumtree Adventure Helpline Adventures or reply to looks from the rest of the with dogs, a bull and a bleeding has to say a fond as many letters as I customers in the wound. Who can patch him up farewell to one of would wish. restaurant! and get him past the animals? Warlord from Interceptor the most I must thank Paul (Gets out hanky and has R.N. Lorkins of Morpeth experienced orcCoppins for the starts sobbing ...) struggling to get past the bear. bashers — Simon friendship he has shown Another reader playing the same Marsh. Endearingly game wants to know where the weapon to kill the warrior is? known in Look in the clues section, you Adventuring circles may find an interesting entry! as The Pink Fairy. STICKING POINTS command to beat the problem. John English of Northfield, Kevin Lea of Coventry, for Birmingham, is aspiring to the example, is not one to be afraid heights of Grand Master in of trying ANYTHING, and when Colossal Cave,from Level 9. playing Jewels of He has all the treasures, but his dventure problems cause Babylon he described his problem is getting them all out A the deepest despair and desperate and outlandish in time. utmost frustration when attempts to solve the problem in He reaches a score of 310-330, they can't be solved! \"Rush me hand. Got a problem? but afterwards the cavern closes an answer urgently!\" write many \"I have tried EVERYTHING, and catches him on the hop. Don't suffer in adventurers who write to the from trying to eat one of the Can any grand master explain Helpline, so desperate that they natives, to having a ...\" A their technique? silence. Write to want to beat the queue for an WHAT, Kevin??? Kindly leave Michael Huxley of Wigan is answer. the room! playing Sorceror of Keith Campbell's One ploy to grab attention first Can YOU save lives and Claymorgue Castle, and is the suicide threat, especially minds by helping out the poor, is having trouble with the Adventure suicide by unusual and original depraved and wretched Dragon! Not the usual Helpline, methods. adventurers who were reduced unshiftable dragon in the game, Like Gary Barrett from to writing gibbering letters to the but the Dragon 32 version of the Priory Court, Omagh, who this month had the Helpline recently? game. urge to stick his head between M. Dance can't get anywhere He thinks he has found a bug 30-32 Farringdon two pieces of buttered bread, beyond the castle in Supersoft's involving the Yoho spell, it and offer himself to that great Goblin Towers. \"I've been causes it to operate incorrectly, Lane, London mouth in the sky! That doesn't getting C+VG for two years now and thus make the game ECIR 3AU. beat the queue, but it does make and haven't seen any tips for it,\" insoluble. Has anyone else come the mail amusing to read! he says. The reason is we've not up against this problem or is This, of course, is a last resort, had any readers with problems it one? after trying every possible on it until now! My thanks to Neil Townson HELP! and outlandbed his attempts 103 "


"and Jonathan Allen for some She rang the Helpline, and to very detailed blow-by-blow our horror, we found we hadn't a accounts of Kentilla, single clue! Valkyrie 17. and Erik the A.H. McLean of Doncaster has Viking. I wish I could reply managed to rescue the maiden personally but you forgot to in Castle of Terror, but include your address! Do doesn't think he has gained the remember when you write, maximum points. He usually there's no way you can get an finishes on about 260. He knows answer if you forget to include all about the soup points, but your complete address! can anyone tell him how many Mrs R. Batham cannot pass the he ought to be able to get Great Barrier in The without cheating? Inferno. She is carrying a He goes on to ask: \"What does rope, staff, shield, torch, sheet SUETOFOR mean in the and boots, and Virgil is with her. Fourth Protocol? My answers to Sir Anthony Plumb's questions are: Traitor Faulkner, assumed name Nilson, real name Stenberij, proof fingerprint; where it happened Pizza House; Traitor was recruited by False Flag,\" Jamit Watson wants help in Crystals of Carus. \"How do you get the white and green crystals, and where does the Staff of Power come in?\" he asks. Darren Halde of Newent in Gloucestershire cannot get past apes one way, and gets stuck at while playing Search for King Solomon's Mines. After writing for advice on a dead body, Holy Horrors player Dave Yates discovered what to do before help could reach him! One problem leads to another, as usual, and now Dave is repenting his irreligious deeds, and desperate to get into the church. How can B. Logue of Tangley Grove cross the bridge guarded by the Darg-Vool? \"If Elva has to shoot it, then with what, where is it, and how do you get it?\" asks BL? ADVENTURE HOTLINE HIDUERCURG CLUES the uranium mine, check the EUREKA CARIBBEAN: In and S in the swamp. the swamp rose, go E, SW, E EUREKA ROMAN: To find to last three colours in code. the colour buttons corresponding mortuary and enter it, then press first three colour codes. Find the until they correspond with the corridor examining the lights colour button. Walk along the elevator, then press the third down. Go down and into the first colour code you wrote last colour is the same as the examining the bracelet until the through doors and head north, north end of the cylinder. Go crewmember's code. Go to the video viewer, and take down the crewmember. insert mempak in SNOWBALL: To find the The Adventure Hotline is a series of frames on Micronet 800, where adventurers with problems can get help from the C+VG Adventure Helpline. If you are a subscriber, look up page 800132, and you will find the weekly Help column written by Jim Douglas. So what's been going on since April when I started the area? The main difference is that it's now written and uploaded by Jim, rather than myself, and a good job he makes of it too! Paul and I come in now and again to help Jim out with some of the problems and this works quite well-all three of us are subscribers and are able to send mailbox messages to each other through the system. It has been slimmed down considerably from its original size, due mainly to the sheer time it takes to produce. Appearing weekly on a Tuesday, there are now twelve frames of chat based on mailbox messages received by Jim from Netters. The previous five editions are also available and routed' from an index page. For those who were mystified by the appearance of a similar but new title, it was due to an enthusiast organisation called Clubspot 810, who objected, claiming to have been the first to start an Adventure Helpline. Although they aren't above ripping off C+VG's adventure reviews from time to time. For those Micronet subscribers who want the REAL thing don't forget you can contact Jim direct by keying page 8001327. if you can make a Giblet sneeze. Morona gate is passed with ease, BORED OF THE RINGS: breather! miniature, you could use a overcome the problem in MORDON'S QUEST: To Use this to get the sword. gauntlet. yourself of the demon get the sword, go east and after ridding CATACOMBS: To take the climbing first! cross the stream, do a bit of AZTEC TOMB (Part 1): To proof vest. rival gang boss, wear the bulletwire. To survive meeting with defuse the bomb, cut the blue MAFIA CONTRACT: To radio! slice of bread, give the grocer a GROUND ZERO: For a handle! bit of plunging with a broom overflow, be a sucker and do a SUBSUNK: To stop an the perfume, adjust the telly. HOLY HORRORS: Read know how to do it! mighty hole in a log if you paddle? An axe can carve a EMERALD ISLE: Fancy a runway and then just jump in! Follow the plane down the count all the way to the shower. "


"ARINA ARENA Following the recent death in combat of the previous champion you have been selected to represent England in the Arena, the 21st Century's warground. Have you the skill and application to prove yourself a champion? Available for: COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM 48K AMSTRAD CPC464 .99 Dese Available from all good software shops, In case of difficulty write to: LOTHLORIEN Liberty House, 222 Regent Street, London W1R 7DB "


"REVIEWS/1 NEVERENDING STORY  Supplier: Ocean  Machine: Commodore 64/Spectrum Amstrad Atari  Price: .95 Based on the film of the same name, this adventure is set in the land of Fantasia Fantasia is faced with oblivion by the all-consuming Nothing, unless you, as Atreyu, can save Starting off in a forest of twisty turning paths, the location text is well merged into the rest of the text. But many of the locations have similar text, and wandering through the forest can get a little boring and a bit confusing. There are three parts in all, and each must be completed before loading in the next. To proceed from part to part, it. the program must be loaded with unknown word. What really one of three sets of data. niggled me was, for example, on Any object carried at the end entering the command THROW of a part is automatically STONE AT ... (object), the transferred with you into the next reply I got was THERE IS NO one. VERB IN THAT SENTENCE. The screen format is rather We all know, and forgive, the unusual. It has a very effective occasional \"obvious\" words that wide screen picture at the top, are missing from a game's vocab, and scrolling gothic text but the reply shows a slackness beneath. During play, a mini in attention to detail in the picture is superimposed upon programming, which loses the the main graphic, this shows adventure all credibility. either an action or the current Play is in real time, and location. although there is a PAUSE To the right of this, up to five command, I always find it objects the inventory limit irritating to be hurried through are depicted in miniature, an adventure, for if one hangs together with any companions around long enough to draw a that are accompanying you. respectable map. YOU WAIT The vocabulary leaves a lot to appears on the screen from time be desired. There is no to time, and lots of nasty things EXAMINE verb, and HELP is an can be happening without your participation The limits of Part 1 took me to a swamp and the foothills of a mountain, under which I found a crystal in a glass box. To be quite honest, from there on I found it difficult to know what I was supposed to be doing. By the time I had wandered around and got over a few minor obstacles, I had a potential weapon and no-one to kill with it. I couldn't end Part 1 and so proceed to Part 2. Neverending Story is a passable adventure but that is Keith Campbell Vocabulary Atmosphere  Personal rating MERLOCK THE MEDE  Supplier: Terminal Software  Machine: Spectrum (Amstrad version to follow)  Price: .95 Whilst we were at the PCW Show, a strange looking fellow with a flowing cape and odd jerkin approached our stand, and smiled. Being of true adventurer stock, the whole team shuffled back a few paces and looked around for visible exits. He winked, and with a swish of his rather grubby cape, vanished into the crowd .... The event had almost been forgotten, until loading Merlock the Mode. Who should appear on the cover and title screen but the very same to your seat in the inn and character, cape and all. explains his plight. There are two games in the His mildly insane and package, one on each side of the decidedly nasty uncle seemed to tape. Yes, great value for money, have the same mentality as the but not much use if one fails to famous J. Pierpont, Flathead: \"I load... I can't have the money, no-one The games are the first in a can!\" The deeds to his plush series casting you as Merlock residence have been hidden a helpful chap who jaunts away, and before the young man around the countryside helping can inherit, he must ... You get folk in need. the idea. The game which loaded, The The graphics are much like Deeds of Glengary those of Colditz (Phipps). They Hall, begins with a few screens are component designed, which of instructional bumph to set the cuts down the variety. They can scene and explain who you are. be turned off, but you still have Whilst drinking some brown the feeling that the memory liquid sold to the locals as ale, a space could have been better nervous looking man comes over used In my travels I found only a handful of objects, most of which seemed useless. The descriptions are brief, and much of what is included seems irrelevant. Most of the locations are corridors, landings, stairways and rooms. There's a digital watch up for grabs if you crack the games. I suppose you could take the view that paying six quid for a watch isn't bad, assuming you have the patience to play through the game! Jim Douglas  Vocabulary  Atmosphere  Personal rating "


"C+VG ADVENTURE , REVIEWS/2 LUCIFER'S REALM  Supplier: All American doors to the left and right and a Adventures notice announcing that Satan  Machine: Commodore 64 (disk), suspects one of his inmates, a Atari (disk) certain A. Hitler, of plotting to overthrow him. He who succeeds  Price: $14.95 in proving this will be released If ever there was a lost to ascend into heaven. opportunity to gain a C+VG On with the plot. Take the left personal rating of 10 for an hand door well, why not? adventure, this was it! Here is a Through an underground highly original scenario with caver, the player reaches his some stunning possibilities, and old friend, Nazi war-criminal it has all been wasted with a Adolf Eichmann. Wearing the clumsy input/output format and a uniform of the Third Reich, he diabolical vocabulary. will not let you pass him to see Perhaps diabolical' is an apt A.H. until you answer the word, for the devil himself question: \"Why do you want to features in this game! Here, the see him?\" game starts with you on the I'm not usually lost for words, will no doubt find a skull verge of death in a hospital bed. but try to sum that up in two! amongst the foul-smelling Should you be successful in But there are no clues. remains of decaying human accomplishing the task of dying, The other alternative has to be flesh. things take a turn very much for better, so off we go through the The more astute will find that the worse you go down rather right hand door. After passing it rattles. Here the word than up! That is if you can through a few caverns, another difficulty comes in, for there is manage the commands to go dead end is met in the form of no way I could find of making anywhere at all. John Wilkes, Abraham Lincoln's use of this fact. Now the problems begin, and assassin. My logic went as follows: It you can either spend an eternity He is guarding further rattles either because there is a in a nastily tiled room half-full of progress on the direct orders of useful object inside, or because stagnant water, or solve the Satan himself. Not so lethal as the noise of the rattle itself is problem and arrive at an Eichmann, he will only stop you useful. altogether warmer place at an by slapping your face quite a Following the latter train of even lower altitude. gentle character really! thought, I tried RATTLE, When you hit bottom you find So back we go, and the SHAKE, and as many other yourself in a circular room with observant sinners amongst us words as I could think of, to no avail. Following the other track, I tried EMPTYING the skull, tipping it, inserting hand, breaking it, you name it, but no detail could I see, no object could I obtain. The graphics, superb as they are, take an age to load. What a shame, the potential is there, but it hasn't been exploited it has been spoiled. Keith Campbell  Vocabulary  Atmosphere Personal rating THE MAGICIAN'S BALL  Supplier: Global Software strange house, whose kitchen  Machine: Commodore 64 loads into a room containing a diabolical demon encased in Spectrum/Amstrad to follow green slime. Another room Price: .95 houses a witch a bit of a To free the ruler's daughter, and pickpocket on the quiet. It is up to escape with her from the Dark to you to discover how to Lands of the evil magician, is encourage her to steal that your task as Caro in this unusual which is not essential to your adventure. task! The story starts in a rather Eventually, after a sticky encounter with a spongy floor, animated, with a text description the action moves on to a forest of the location to the side. This is where I deducted a few Despite being so small, the atmosphere points, for here I graphics contain an amazing discovered that my main ally in amount of detail, and serve to thwarting the magician is a giant help the player instantly tree! recognise into which location he Admittedly I was under the has moved. influence at the time, but I found The publishers, in describing the concept of talking a tree into the game, make a great thing of carrying me around and doing the 'unforgettable music of the deeds of which I was Oldfield's Tubular Bells' incapable too bizarre to gel with excerpts play throughout the the plot. game. The fact that the tree talked in I suppose there has to be Arborian didn't really help music at any ball, but it came either. over as an irritating dirge, and I There are two characters, soon turned the sound right Caro and Azul, who are down. interchangeable throughout the With the \"Bells\" cast into game. Of course it had to oblivion, the game is a pleasure happen, and it did! Type AZUL to play it is so user friendly. and you become Azul, type Keith Campbell CARO and yous become Caro. The visual presentation of the  Vocabulary game is fast and clean. A split  Atmosphere screen is featured, the top half showing a mini-graphic, often  Personal rating Caro says I can't read Caro nek. "


"COMMODORE 64 Boschyde O \"DRAGONSKULLE\", \"OUTLAWS\", \"BLACKWYCHE\", \"IMHOTEP\" recommended retail price, .95 inc VAT. Available from W.H.SMITHS, BOOTS, J.MENZIES, WOOLWORTHS and all good software retail outlets. Also available from ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME, The Green, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire LE6 5JU, (P&P are included) Tel: 0530 411485 PLAY THE GAME "


"48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM CYBER UN JaMa GUNFRIGIT DEAD ALIVE ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME \"CYBERUN\", \"GUNFRIGHT\", \"PENTAGRAM\" recommended retail price .95 inc VAT. Available from W.H.SMITHS, BOOTS, J.MENZIES, WOOLWORTHS and all good software retail outlets. Also available from ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME, The Green, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire LE6 5JU, (P&P are included) Tel: 0530 411485 PLAY THE GAME "


"ADVENTURE REVIEWS/3 WISHBRINGER WARLORD  Supplier: Infocom Morning Star, and one for each meeting old old friends! There's  Machine: Atari, Commodore of her lost loves. even the chance to take a peek 64, Apple Wishbringer starts with into a Grue's Nest and live to tell you standing outside the Post the tale! But the best laugh for  Price: .95 Office in the village of Festeron, me came when I found myself The Legend of Wishbringer in which the game is set. You standing by a white colonial starts in the instruction book, in have taken a job there and your house ... the form of a beautifully first task of the day is to deliver There are two difficulty levels illustrated poem. It tells of how a letter to the old woman who in Wishbringer you can Morning Star, a baby girl of rare runs Ye Old Magick Shoppe. either solve the problems using and perfect beauty, was There are some pretty strange pure logic, or invoke magic kidnapped by the evil Queen rumours going around about her. instead. That is the easy way, to Alexis so that she may in time It's not surprising considering be used only in the last resort, become her daughter. the way she mutters on about so in fact it is a form of Six brave knights had tried to trolls, quests and somebody cheating! But by using it you win the hand of Morning Star by called The Evil One. It is even don't score any points for the completing dangerous tasks set said that she has a rock that achievement, but nevertheless it by the Queen. All, of course, makes dreams come true! is great fun! had failed, just as the Queen It is not until you step outside As is usual for an Infocom had planned. the old woman's shop that you game, the packaging is superb, In the ages that followed, the get the first hint that there are and includes not only a disk, but kingdom turned to dust. All was indeed strange things afoot. To also a map of the village of lost save the heart of the say more about the plot at this Festeron, your very own glow-inprincess, which with the passing stage would give too much away! the-dark Wishbringer, and a of time had turned into a Wishbringer has been most special sealed letter. glowing stone, known as The given a new story format, which Paul Coppins Wishbringer. The reason for the makes it a very friendly game to Vocabulary title is simple it is said that he play. who bears the stone will be One or two references to other  Atmosphere games crop up, this was like Personal rating It is not until you that you game, the packaging, disk, but 999 MISSION ASTEROID  Supplier: Interceptor Software  Machine: Spectrum, Amstrad  Price: .00 The Roman and Celtic gods have become personally involved in the battles taking place on earth, and both are trying to force a conclusion in their favour. Open warfare between the gods is imminent, and fearing that the world could be destroyed, a truce has been called. A mortal champion from each side is sought, and transported into one of the Celtic Otherworlds. The outcome of the war will be decided in favour of the winner. The Romans have chosen their finest centurion, and the Celts have their Warlord YOU! As the adventure opens, it is an easy task to set forth from a mountainside and start to unlock the secrets of the Otherworld. Gods from both sides pop up all over the place, some helping with a gift and a smile, whilst others set about doing all they can to slow you down. After a speedy start I quickly came to one of those spots that everyone experiences at some time or other in an adventure the immortal words NOTHING SPECIAL HAPPENS. A quick plea to the Helpline (thanks, Adrian!) soon solved what turned out to be a truly salty problem, and I was on my way to the next meeting with the Gods. One rather strange thing I noticed whilst playing this adventure was its funny habit of letting you solve a puzzle without letting you know! For example, the first time I went through an enchanted wood, the path was clear and easy to follow. The second time, I was not carrying what I had taken to be a rather useless stafflike object, and without warning, some very strange things began to happen! Warlord is a split-screen graphics and text adventure for the Spectrum and Amstrad computers. There are about 100 locations, but only a few of them have a picture. The Amstrad graphics are far superior to those on the Spectrum version. Paul Coppins with the essential part of your mission. Then the thinking must begin, for if you are to blow the asteroid up, it must be done not only before it reaches the earth, but preferably with you out of range of the blast. Here is an unassuming adventure, ideal for the Keith Campbell  Vocabulary  Atmosphere Personal rating  Supplier: All American read in from disk is inevitable Adventures even on replays.  Machine: Commodore 64, The player's input is limited to Apple, Atari (disk only) one and two-word commands, and although this is quite  Price: $14.95 acceptable as a method, more You are summoned to mission intelligence and a wider control and told to go out into vocabulary would have enhanced space and destroy an asteroid on the game considerably. collision course with Earth! It is quite fun learning to pilot The catastrophe is due to the rocket, and providing you happen at 7.15 pm, and as you take the sort of precautions every start, your watch tells you that astronaut should take when the time is midday. You have entering and leaving his craft, your work cut out making your all should go fairly smoothly way through the Mission Control until you actually come to grips building, getting briefed, learning your flight plan, collecting the supplies you will need, and generally making sure you are fit and healthy for the task ahead. The game has graphics which occupy all the screen, bar the five lines forming a text window at the bottom, but previous messages can be seen by pressing RETURN, which will flip the picture on and off. The graphics are quite pleasant, without being spectacular. Unfortunately, they cannot be turned off completely, and so the delay while they are 110 home  Vocabulary  Atmosphere  Personal rating "


"ATARI 4OO/8OONLINE 48K ATAR.LKE LEKTRA CBM 64/128 BU 101 m2 PTC 10 Cassette 18.95 Disk .95 ARTLEASE 4 SurIVATE ENGLISH SOFTWARE, ENG AR REDATE ORE SOFTWARE. ENGLISH SOFTWARE ENG JAR COMPASTON SOFTWARE. ENGLISH SOFTWARE. ENC OFTWARE.. ENGLISH SOFTWARE E VARE H SOFTWARE. ENGLISH SOFTWARE... ENC Jan. 2nd 1986 1 North Parade, Parsonage Gardens, Manchester M60 1BX Tel: 061-835 1358 DO HUBYER ( 100 150 0 0 5 BLEVER Cassette .95 Disk .95 IPLAYER 1 fangan UU COD000 CBM 64/128 ATARI 400/800/XL/XE 48R IPLAYER 2 UU1000000 1000000 Available from all good software retailers, or POST FREE from English Software. MEDIATOR NAME ADDRESS GAME(S) COMPUTER ob enclose Cheque/P.O. CASSETTEDISKO "


"GYROSCOPE Test your reaction and reflex skills to their limit, in an attempt to guide a fast and furiously gyrating gyroscope over a number of challenging and hazardous terrains, GYROSCOPE THE GAME TO SEND YOU SPINNING OFF YOUR HEAD Available for Spectrum at .95 and Commodore 64, Amstrad and BBC B at .95 Steinar MELBOURNE HOUSE Melbourne House (Publishers) Ltd., Castle Yard House, Castle Yard, Richmond, TW10 6TF. Trade enquiries call 01.940 6064 Available from selected branches of S .WHSMITH, Asmenines, WOOLIVORTW, LASKYS, Rumbelows. Groans, Spectrum Shops, and all good software dealers "


"COMPETITION C+VG COMPETITION COMPEON DONT LOOK A GIFT HORSE IN THE MOUTH SODO B E hat goes clippettyguess what, our old friends at be simpler? Well, the tie Normal C+VG competition clop KERRRR Software Projects have breaker questions are pretty rules apply and the closing RUNCHI? Big Red decided to present the first simple — and we want you date is January 16th trying to impersonate Harvey prize-winner of C+VG'S to answer those as well We know C+VG readers Smith! competition with a  before you rush your entry won't want to look a gift Now YOU can attempt to Sanyo Midi Stereo System. coupon off to Computer and horse in the mouth and we're emulate the world's most Second prize winner will Video Games, Harvey Smith's expecting an unbridled famous show-jumping get a Sanyo personal stereo Showjumping Competition, response to this competition personality but without system AND a full range of Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon so get your entry into the risk to life and limb or the Software Project's games for Lane, London ECIR SAU. ring NOW! need to keep a horse in your their machine. The 20 front room. runners-up will get a free Software Projects have just Software Projects game C+VG/SOFTWARE PROJECTS Game 4 is released a very original Remember, Software HARVEY SMITH'S showjumping gamed based Projects make games for the Game 5 is SHOWJUMPING on Harvey's exploits in the Spectrum, BBC, C64 COMPETITION Game 6 is. showjumping ring Amstrad, Dragon, Oric, MSX You'll find a review of this and the Vic-20. Name TIE-BREAKERS: interesting new addition to The winner of the first Address 1. Name that tune! Both the the range of sports game prize will be presented with Commodore and MSX software elsewhere in the the stereo system by Harvey versions of Harvey Smith's magazine. But here we're Smith IN PERSON at a top Computer owned (tick box) Showjumping have the same offering you the chance to showjumping event later in Spectrum o Commodore D. win a very special Harvey tune. Name it the year Amstrad Smith prize. 2. What is the maximum BBC O Vic-20 What do we want you to number of faults you are Anyone who watches stuff do? Just look at the bits of Dragon Oric MSX allowed to accumulate before like the Horse of the Year Game 1 is you are eliminated? Show on TV will know that games reviewed in past issues Harvey is sponsored by of C+VG and tell us what Game 2 is Answer 1 Sanyo, the hi-fi people. And the games are. What could Game 3 is Answer 2 "


"PLAY THE GAME 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM AMSTRAD 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM/AMSTRAD 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM AMSTRAD CYBERUN WANyal GUNTRIGT TAM IDEAD-ALIVE ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 PUA E OL E JE OSAKALANCE, DB JD \"CYBERUN\" \"GUNFRIGHT\",\"PENTAGRAM\",\"DRAGONSKULLE\":\"OUTLAWS\", BLACKWYCHE\",\"ENTOMBED\" recommended retail price, .95 inc VAT. Available from W.H.SWITHS BOOTS, J.WENZIES, WOOLWORTHES and all a00d software retail outlets. Also available from; ULWHATE PLAY THE GAME, The Green, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire LF65W (PP are included Tel: 0550 411485 "


"MIDLAND COMPUTERS VASA THE UK'S LARGEST STOCKISTS OF COMMODORE AND AMSTRAD SOFTWARE 28 COLLEGE STREET, WORCESTER WR1 2LS. TEL: 0905 611072 COTTACCO almannmu apn nrc SHADO DATA RECORDERS BBC COMPATIBLE (Identical to BBC Recorder)  Can also be used with Spectrum, MSX, etc. SHADO COMMODORE COMPATIBLE RECORDER Plugs directly  into Commodore or Vic 20 COMMODORE SUPER VALUE TWIN PACK COMMODORE 64 COMPUTER PLUS 1541 DISK DRIVE FREE GAMES DISKS ZAXXON & EXODUS ULTIMA III  R.R.P. .99 FREE BBC CASSETTES COMMODORE CAN CASSETTE UNIT..... ......95 C64 GAMES DISK (6 GAMES ON 1 DISC)............ ... .95 C16 CASSETTE CONVERTER. ..95 C16 JOYSTICK CONVERTER......... .45 C64 GAME CASSETTES (ASS).... ..50 C64 EASYSCRIPT (DISK)........... ...95 C64 HIGH FLYER (DISK). .50 C64 MODEM................. .95 STACK LIGHT RIFLE FOR 64..........95 INTRO TO BASIC DISC C64...........95 COMMODORE JOYSTICK 1311......95 STACK RIFLE FOR VIC ............... .95 VIC INTRO TO BASIC PART 1..... .95 COMMODORE MUSIC MAKER..... .95 VIDEO CABLE...... ........... ...00 GAMEPACK SHADO 20/64 RECORDER + 4 GAMES CASSETTES .... .........95 MITSUI MSX QUICK DISK DRIVE ONLY FREE FREE CBM GAMES MEMOTECH 500 COMPUTER ... 512 COMPUTER .95 ..95 Tammstang COMMODORE MONITOR PACKAGE COMMODORE 1701/2 MONITOR COMPLETE WITH FREE SEIKO RC1000 Dealer price WRIST TERMINAL  R.R.P. PRICE .95 MSX: Starter pack includes Sanyo computer 64K, data recorder, joystick and software. R.R.P. .99 NOW ONLY .95 PCW8256 includes Loco Script Word Processor and Free Software our price .95 CPC6128 Colour includes Free Software and CPM our price .95 DMP 2000 Printer our price .95 RS232 Interface our price .95 DDI Disk Drive our price  144.95 ADD Disk Drive our price .95 Light pen our price .95 JY2 Joystick our price .95 Speech Synthesizer our price .95 TV Module for 128 our price .95 JUST IN: For PCW8256/CPC6128 Stock control/Invoicing/S. Ledger P. Ledger. All for only .95 Disc only. All prices include VAT DISKS SS/SD SS/DD DS/SD DD/DD Gold Seal or 3M 25+ 9.95 10.95 11.95 12.95 13.95 14.95 18.95 19.95 RRP 19.95 22.95 26.95 34.95 GTOMAGANI A ATARI 600XL ..............ONLY .95 AT LAST IT'S HERE! ! ! ATARI 800XL ..............ONLY .95 DATA RECORDERS ......ONLY .95 THE FIRST 2 PLAYER JOYSTICK INTERFACE JOYSTICKS .............................95 SMITH CORONA PRINTERS .. .95 FOR THE AMSTRAD CPC464/CPC664/CPC6128 FOR ATARI, CBM, AMSTRAD, BBC Allows use of any two standard joysticks with your Amstrad. No AND SPECTRUM longer do you have to grovel 15\" from the screen using the All prices correct at going to press and keyboard, while your opponent sits back and uses the only joystick subject to alteration. for that crucial point. All items subject to availability. Available now only from M.C.L. at .99 inc. VAT All orders under  please add  Trade and export enquiries welcome postage per order. Patent pending M.C.L. Midland Computers Ltd, 28 College Street, Worcester WR1 2LS Please rush me the following items: 1 ....... ......Qty........@ ......Qty........@_ Total ..Qty........@__ ... Qty........@ Postage  ........................ ..Qty........@_ .....Qty........@ Total NAME ................ N w Address... Visa/Access No.............. .... Date ............ .... Signature ....... "


"ARCADE INTERNATIONAL SOFTWARE R SOFTWARE 5 Brookes Court, Baldwin Gardens, London EC1 All orders despatched immediately SPECTRUM 10.30 HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER FRANKE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD DALYS SUPERTEST KUNGU NIGHT RIDER YE AR KUNG FU INTERNATIONAL KARATE DYNAMITE DAN SCOOBY DOO RRP EXPLODING FST ACTION BIKER THEY SOLD A MILLION NEVER ENCING STORY GEOFF CAPIS STRONGMAN NEVER ENDING STORY GEOFF CAPES STRONGMAN 9.95 7.95 Inc.p. 6.60 9.60 740 SCOOBY DOO INTERNATIONAL KARATE MPIA  FARUGHT LAS VEGAS JACKPOT NOW GAMES AANSAS SABRE RULF 7.40 AMSTRAD SABRE WULF THEY SOLD A MELON THE GOONIES ELITE 7.40 7.95 INTERNATIONAL BASKETBALL SPY HUNTER ELITE IMPOSSIBLE MISSION HENTING WARRIOR NOTERA QUAROS FINDERSKEEPERS CN FXPLOOING RST 7.40 7.40 9.95 ORABONTORC BRIAN JACKS INTERNATIONAL KARATE YNAUTION the . 725 12.95 SPECTRUM RAP THE SECRET OF ST BRIDES 7955.95 PARADROID 9.95 ROBIN OF SHERLOCK 7.95 5.95 INTERNATIONAL KARATE 6.50 4.95 BEACH HEAD 9.95 ROBIN OF THE WOODS 8. MCGUIGAN'S BOXING 9.95 SHADOW OF THE UNICORN 14.95 11.30 CRAZY COMVETS SABOTEUR 5.95 FIGHTING WARRIOR CRITICAL MASS 7.95 5.95 RACING DESTRUCTION SET C) 12.96 WOALD SERIES BASKETBALL 7.95 SPY vs SPY II 9.95 SOUTHERN BELLE 7.95 5.45 MONOPY CLUEDO SCRAB 10 12.95 WORV IN PARADISE 9.95 UNDERWURDE FRIDAY THE 13th 8.95 6.60 SABRE WULF 9.95 RAMBO 7.95 5.95 OYNAMITE DAN 8.95 11.30 FIVE A SIDE 5.95 STAROUAKE 7.95 5.95 MONTY ON THE RUN MONTY OF THE RUN 7.95 5.95 NEVER ENDING STORY 9.95 SWORDERON'S SHADOW 9.95 RAMBO 8.95 COMMANDO DRAGONSKULLE Ultimatel 9.95 TAU CETI 9.95 7.40 OUTLAWS Ultimate THE ARTIST 12.95 NIGHT SHADE Ultimatel THE WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST 8.60 DALEY'S SUPERTEST 5.20 AMSTRAD FORMULA ONE 6.50 DEVIL'S CROWN 12.95 NIGHTSHADE RAID DI 12.95 SWORDS AND SORCERY SORCERY PLUS DI 12.85 YIE AR KUNG FU 30 BOXING THREE WEEKS N PARADISE 30 GRAND PRIX 7.40 FRIDAY THE 13th 8.95 SIR FRED MikroGeni JUMP JET 9.95 BATTLE OF THE PLANETS HERBERT'S DUMMY RUN MikroGeni 7.40 DYNAMITE DAN BOULDERDASH 9.95 COMMODORE BATTLE FOR BRITAIN 9.95 1 OF THE MASK 9.95 SPY V SPY 9.95 THE UTTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE 9.95 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT WORM IN PARADISE 7.40 MARSPORT 9.95 FRIDAY THE 13th 8.95 CAULDRON 8.95 SCARABEUS 9.95 WORM IN PARADISE 9.95 PITSTOP 9.957 .40 SOUTHERN BELLE BATTLE FOR BRITAIN FIGHTER PILOT DI DALEYS SUPERTEST 7.95 5.90 EUTE 14.95 MERCENARY 9.95 7.40 SPITFIRE 40 9.95 WINTER GAMES 9.95 7.40 SKYFOX 8.95 FIGHT NIGHT 9.95 7.40 NIGHT SHADE Special offer: Competition for Pro Joystick RRP .95 our price .50. One your parente pames is released Send s.n.. for list, stating which micro. Any cheques P0s to the following address: 5 BROOKES COURT, BALDWIN GARDENS, LONDON EC1 9.95 NIGHT RIDER NIGHT RIDER NOTERA QUARUS TRANSFORMERS TRANSFORMERS COMMODORE 64 SUMMER GAMES BEACH HEAD I WINTER GAMES IRON FIST DALETS SUPERTEST RACING DESTRUCTION SET 9.80 8.80 CEOFF CAPES STRONG MAN INTERNATIONAL BASKETBALL HYPERSPORTS 7.25 Marel HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER 10.75 WORLD SERIES BASEBALL FORMULA 1 6.80 7.40 7.40 740 7.40 ACTION BIKER FRANKE COES TO WOULTR000 THEY SOLD A MILLION HYPER SPORTS MATCH DAY IMPOSSIBLE MISSION BAUCE VE 895 9.95 6.80 11.30 7.40 MONTY ON THE RUN ASTRO CLONE ENIENT RIDER FRANK BRUNO KUNG FU PITSTOP KUNG FU Mik) 12.95 ALACHITON C16 LAS VEGAS JACKPOT BMX TRIALS SPECTIPEDE STARQUAKE FORUM RAMBO TRANSFORMERS All prices include post and packaging. Overseas orders please add 1 per tapel. Trade enquiries welcome. Send cheque PO to: ARCADE INTERNATIONAL SOFTWARE Unit 202, Shopping Mall, Murtle Road, East Ham, London E6 Telephone: 01-471 8900 9.95 7.40 JTD Software formation entre ervice ADVERTISEMENT INDEX Quickshot ..... . Protek Interface....................... 11.00 Konix...... ATARI Archon MULE 7.25 11.00 11.00 11.00 8.85 11.00 8.78 11.00 7.25 11.00 725 11.00 11.00 11.00 725 11.00 725 11.00 COMMODORE G. American Rd, Race........ Pinball Const. Sat...... Mall Order Monster Racing Dest. Set Exploding Fist... Archon... MULE Fourth Protocol Addictive Games...... ....... 65 Albany Computer..... Amstrad.. Arcade Software.......... 116 Argus. ................57, 105, 148 Artic. 56 Logic Sales....... 11.00 11.00 7.25 11 DO 7.25 7.25 9.50 DU Bruce Lee Droprone.... Rescue on Fractalus Beach head 70 Sole Flight 1 Strip Poker... G American Ad Race.... CR Blue Max 2001 4 Hard Hat Mar Red Moon Space Shuttle.... Murder on Zindermeul 7.25 8.10 11.00 11.00 Dropzone Rescue on Fractalus... Dambusters Bargain Software...................43 Beyond Software.......... Bubble Bus....... \" 68-70 Spy vs Spy ANNESANNE Rupert the Teymaker Seven Cities of Gold Cascade. Commodore..... Compumart.. Cut Price Software............. Megasave Software...... Melbourne House...........24. 112 Meirica........ . Micro Ads... 124 Micro-Dealers................. Micronet 800..... 44 Micropower...... ...... 39, 88 Microsphere. Midland Computer Library.47, 136 Miles Better... 44 Mikrogen Mirrorsoft.. 10 Mr Software...........................99 ..140 5.70 Digital Integration................... IBC Domark...... ....... 145 Durell... ................... 139, 152 IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII Ocean Software...16, 63, 85, 94, 95, 100, 154, OBC Elidon 13893389 Seos Electric Dreams.................73, 82 Elite Systems........IFC, 3, 21, 66, 79, 92 English Software............... Firebird........12-13, 93, 101, 145 Poste Haste Software..............35 Pabal Cont. Set Murder on Zinderneut Music Const. Set Beach head Seven Cities of Gold (I Marcanary AMSTRAD MSX la Exploding Fist. Boulderdash... 10 Beach head Ghostbusters Ya Ar Kung Fu 1R International Karate Frank Bruno Backgammon. Decathlon..... Dun Darach Time Bandits Boogaboo the Fles A View to a ka Le Mans Football Manager Beamrider Daley's Decathlon Higgins Pool. 6.50 9.50 SPECTRUM 8.50 10 20 Inter Basketball Robin of Sherwood 725 Inter, Karate Pyjamarama... 8.50 9.50 One on One.. 6.50 30 Starstrike Alien 8 4 Higgins Snooker Fighting Warrior Settle Spy Hunter 5.70 Red Moon Underworld 7.25 The Quil..... Fairlight....... 7.25 Lords of Midnight Exploding Fist. Jumg Jet Red AITOWS.. Terrormolinos.. Please state name, address, title and micro clearly with order. Send s.a.e for software list. Cheques/POs payable to: J.J.B. SOFTWARE SERVICES 14 Loraine Crescent, Darlington, Co. Durham DL1 5TF Tel: (0325) 288102 5.70 75 Rainbird Realtime..... 137 7.25 Gargoyle Games.................... Goodbyte.. Gremlin Graphics.................. 72 Shekhana..... Softek Superior ........... Imagine...............25, 62, 154 ..47 JB Software....... JJB Software...... JR Software.... ..116 116 Ultimate................... 108-109, 114 U.S. Gold...... 27, 52, 53, 60, 98, 132, 133, 147, 150, 161 "


"PRESENTING: THE WORLD'S WEIRDEST WORK-TEAM... OKAY, THERE'S OUR PROBLEM... THE SNOW JOBE MACHINE... ITSATOTAL SENSORY IMMERSION GAME. YOU GET IN AND IT HAPPENS ALL AROUND YOU... TROUBLE 15, IT KEEPS HAVING MASSIVE POWERSU SURSAESES GETTING OUT... IT'S WARPING TME AND SPACE? AND EVERY FEW MINUTES IT REACHES OUT A BIT FURTHER... OU MEAN.. 2003 "


"OO ooo Oo OO THE BUG HUNTERS COPYRIGHT 1986 JERRY PARIS. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 09 00 BROUGHT DOO TO YOU BY: TED Ooooo por su PEDRO HENRIMJERRY PARIS ER-CO-PLOTTER: THE WORLD'S SECOND WEIRDEST WORK-TEAM, IF YOU ASK ME. "


"HOME MICROS PRINTERS HERE At last! E -REPAIRED — All dot matrix printers of under 300 cps (this price does not include print heads which are subject to quotation) REPAIRED ACORN; BBC model B model B plus, Electron ADAM (keyboard only) AMSTRAD (keyboard only). ATARI; 400, 800, 400XL, 800XL, 130XE. 420 260 AQUARIUS, COLECOVI. SION, COMMODORE; VIC20, C16. C64, C128. plus 4. SX64 CPU (keyboard only! DRAGON; 32, 64, EINSTEIN, ENTERPRISE: 64, 128, LYNX; 64, 128 MEMOTECH, ORIC; atmos PSION organisor SINCLAIR pectrum, Spectrum +. SPECTRAVIDEO, TANDY TRS 80 model 1. All MSX computers. 32 TELEVISIONS & MONITORS DISK DRIVES MPUJTE REPAIREDAll televisions and monitors up to 16 in. (this price does not include tubes which are subject to quotation) REPAIREDAll 3in., 3% in., 5% in. disk drives including Amstrad on-board disk drives (this product does not include drive heads which are subject to quotation) All repairs include VAT, labour, parts, 6 month warranty, collection and delivery. * full soak test before despatch * FREE collection and delivery in mainland UK * Full 6 month guarantee on repairs * No extra charge for parts Phone TODAY We Collect TamMAROW! COMMODORE berte OL-398 8055 .95 THE BUG HUNTERS COPYRIGHT 1986 JERRY PARIS. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. .95 Sede KEYBOARD  25.00 COMPENDUIM CHRISTMAS PACK DK TRONICS Please send me: Commodore Compendium SINGLE PORT INTERFACE Christmas Pack(s) .00 The best selling single port interface for your Commodore Disk Spectrum, suitable for all Drive Pack(s) .00 games and all Atari type joysticks. -DK Tronics Single Port R.R.P. .95 Interface(s) t5.95 -DK Tronics Dual Port DUAL PORT INTERFACE Interface(s) .95 This interface allows two joysticks to be us-DK Tronics Keyboard(s) .00 ed at the same time and has the same Quickshot Il(s) .95 characteristics as the 3\" Diskettes CF21s) .25 single port. R.R.P. .00 I enclose a cheque/Postal Order KEYBOARD for Spectrum, with As seen on T.V. the perfect introduction to for spacebar. family computing, including a Commodore Please debit my Visa/Access R.R.P. .95 64, a Commodore data recorder, Adrian Mole Barclaycard Account No. software, an amazing graphics programme and a music make enabling the 64 to be turn TTTTIIIIIII ed into a musical keyboard. R.R.P. .99 Signature Free! Quickshot II Name The worlds most popular joystick and extra BLOCK CAPITALS PLEASE joystick with auto game. Address fire option. R.R.P. .95 DISK DRIVE PACK I This value for money pack includes a Commodore 64 and a 1541 disk drive. C & VG R.R.P. .99 ALBANY COMPUTERS Free! Albany Works, Queens Road, Thames 13\"DISKETTE Discettes Ditton. Surrey. Tel: (01) 398 8055 --Suitable for AMSTRAD. .25 Suitable for AMSTRAD. All prices include VAT, P&P ALLOW 14 DAYS DELIVERY Offers subject to availability For Spectrum I QUICKSHOT IL .85 5280.00 "


"17. APART FROM THE WOLVES, TALK TALK, TALK. THINK WE SHOULDAS 3 SWITCH'IM OFFIP THE PLANET TOGLU...) 00 OOO * UT MOT OKAY... AH, PEACE! PERFECT PEACE! O The * o OO to BUT WHAT ABOUT ME? YOU CAN'T LEAVE ME HERE WITH A FLAT! RIGHT! LET'S POUR IT INTO THOSE YETIS! Oo K AND... AND W-WITH THE W-WOLVES CLOSING IN... OT155?. GOD DAMN: ESPOSA 2 Gospena z TERMINATED!! ry "


"3 GUESS WE'LL JUST HAVE TO CALL UP THE GUIDE-BOOK AND PLAY OUR WAY OUT... LET'S SEE, WE'RE ALL ARMED WITH BORKELSNORKEL AND WITH THOSE 3 WE SHOOT THE PLICE-WOLVES S THAT HIDE IN THE TREES...) BUT IT CAN'T BE... MELISSA ISN'T RUSSIAN WHILE WE SEARCH FOR THE GIRL OF OUR DREAMS, A BEAUTIFUL... RUSSIAN COUNTESS WHO'S BEEN STRANDED IN THE FOREST BY HER ILLICIT LOVER... GOOD POINT... WE DON'T KNOW HOW BIG THIS THING'S GOT...X... WE NEED SOME TRANSPORT... 1 OKAY... A SQUIRT OF SYNTH TOUCH OF CHEM85 FUNNY, SLIKE MIOS MELISSA \"BUT IF WERE N HERE, 50 MIGHT SHE BE... Miku omoioare LATER. LET'S GO.. o'o 00 Olo OTISS... WHAT'S HAPPENING? A SLED. TWELVE DOLLARS AND FIFTY CENTS, PLEASE. 09 0 .0° "


"OF COURSE... IN OUT OFM THE GAME...50 I'M OUT OF THE GAMES REALITY... BUT THE OTHERS ARE STILL IN IT... . muke on een ALRIGHT... THIS CALLS FOR SOME zo (WEAVEY 2 1 LET'S SEE HOW THEY LIKE A GUTFUL OF ROBOT-STOPPER... WHICH MEANS IT'S DOWN TO ME TO TAKE ON THE AMOK MACHINERY... WITO HURL MYSELF ORT-CIRCUITINGS...) ST DE RECUITINGS... UH... WHAT HAPPENED? T'M BACK IN THE REAL SE u WORLD.. ANG LED (LIFE, LIMB AND Y BATTERIES.2) 1 AND PULL ITS UG OUT) TAKE THIS. you MELISSA-MLESTING MONSTER! NO. MR.KALLIBER! AND... HUH? YOU DIDN'T HAVE TO DO WE'LL PUT IT DOWN AS SELFDEFENCE... L. W hen you wiatu. HMM...WELL, TELL YOU WHAT... BIG RED TAKE'S B-CON'S ADVICE AND BECOMES TOTALLY IRRESISTIBLE... "


"OMICRORE T A ILERS ASK YOUR LOCAL EXPERT Every month selected computer specialist shops will be listed in your favourite magazine. If you want to buy anything you've seen in the magazine, go and see your nearest specialist. AVON KENT MICRO COMPUTERS MIDDLESEX 57 Union Street SOFTWARE PLUS Maidstone INNOVATIONS, COMPUTER & VIDEO 12 York Street Kent 0622 52784 9 Harmondsworth Road Bath 0225 61676 West Drayton MICROWAY COMPUTERS Middlesex UB7 9JS 0895 420457 BERKSHIRE 39. High Street Rainham STAFFORDSHIRE BRACKNELL COMPUTERS Kent 0634 376702 MICROTRONICS 44 Broadway MODATA COMPUTERS LTD 27a Market Street Bracknell 0344 427317 30 St John's Road Tamworth Tunbridge Wells 0892 41555 Staffs 0827 51480 SOFTWARE CITY Tatung Einstein Specialist 47 Cheap Street LEICESTERSHIRE Newbury SUFFOLK Berks RGI 45BX 0635 31696 DIMENSION COMPUTERS LTD COMPUTER MAGIC 27-29 High Street 24 Crown Street Leicester DERBYSHIRE 0533 57479 Ipswich LINCOLNSHIRE Suffolk MBX 91999 2473 FIRST BYTE COMPUTERS 10 Main Centre SURREY MKD COMPUTERS London Road 24 Newlands SOFTWARE CITY Derby 0332 365 280 Lincoln 0522 25907 14 Thames Street Kingston DORSET LONDON Surrey KTI IPE 01-541 4911 DENSHAM COMPUTERS ARCADE SOFTWARE WARWICKSHIRE 329 Ashley Road Unit 202, Shopping Hall OEM COMPUTER CENTRE Parkstone Myrtle Road Rugby Micro Centre Poole East Ham 0202 737493 London E6 01-471 8900 9-11 Regents Street ESSEX GAMES WORLD Rugby 0788 70522 129 King Street WEST MIDLANDS ESTUARY PERSONAL COMPUTERS Hammersmith 318 Chartwell North MBC COMPUTER CENTRE London W6 01-741 4467 Victoria Circus Shopping Centre 17-19 Lichfield Street LOGIC SALES Southend on Sea 0902 29907/29021 0702 614131 Wolverhampton 19 The Broadway H. REYNOLDS The Bourne YORKSHIRE 79 Orsett Road Southgate THE COMPUTER CENTRE 'Grays 0375 5948 London N14 01 882 4942 26 Anlaby Road SHEKANA COMPUTERS Hull MINNIE MICRO COMPUTER CENTRE 11/12 Eastern Esplanade 221 Tottenham Court Road North Humberside 0482 26297 London W1 01-800 3156 Southend JUST MICRO Essex 0702 615809/62033 SOFTWARE CITY 22 Carver Street 382 Kings Road Sheffield S1 455 0742 752732 HAMPSHIRE London SW3 5UZ 01-352 9220 LOOK & SEE SOFTWARE STORE 45 Belmont Bridge RAM ELECTRONICS 35 London Road Skipton 0756 60078 106 Fleet Road London SW17 01-685 1476 MICRO BYTE Fleet 02514 5858 VIC ODDENS 36 County Arcade Leeds 6 London Bridge Walk 0532 450 529 HEREFORDSHIRE London SE1 01 403 1988 MICRO FUN 11 Sheffield Road HONEYSETT COMPUTERS VIDEO WORLD Barnsley Rentals 17 Union Street 0226 207063 MICRO FUN Hereford HRI 2BT 0432 279404 282 Harrow Road London W2 01-289 3102 Unit 12 The Guardian Centre KENT MANCHESTER Rotherham 0709 60000 RECORDMANIA BUDGET SOFTWARE CENTRE ANIROG COMPUTERS 14 Davy Gate Centre 51 Fennel Street 29 West Hill York 0904 33993 Manchester M4 3DY 061-834 2808 Dartford RECORDMANIA Kent 0322 91649 MERSEYSIDE Units 5/6, In-Shops Market Cross CANTERBURY SOFTWARE CENTRE BLUE CHIP COMPUTERS Selby 0757 700988 9 The Friars 77 Allerton Road YORK COMPUTER CENTRE Canterbury 0227 453531 Liverpool L18 2DA 051-722 3037 7 Stonegate Arcade York 0904 641862 DEALERS: If you would like to see your shop included in this new service, please call 01 251 6222 EXT 2461 OM I CRO RETA I LERS "


"OM I CRO ADS GETHE GE MAGAZINE FOR ALL ATARI COMPUTER OWNERS ATARI COXLBOOXL THE BEST NEWS PROGRAM LISTINGS REVIEWS from USA TUTORIALS SPECIAL DEAL FOR ATARI 400/800/XL/XE 0WNERS CLOSING SALE All software must go at ridiculous prices. Over 1,600 titles for Spectrum, CBM64, BBC, Oric, Dragon, ZX81, Atari, T.I. 99 4A, Vic 20. Prices from 50p to .00 per cassette. All originals. For lists send s.a.e. with name of your micro to: SOFTY'S DEN, 3A York Place, Edinburgh EH1 3ED UK UTILITIES AUSTRALIA PUBLIC HINTS & DOMAIN TIPS SOFTWARE LIBRARY plus more SPECIAL OFFERS PAGE 6 is published bi-monthly Annual Subscription is .00. Send TODAY to: No. 1. Hire your first two games FREE from our extensive range of software. Up to the minute releases available. No. 2. Buy all the latest software titles at best possible prices (new releases available direct from US). Atari hardware and modems now available at discount prices. For further details send s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD GAMES 30a Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Leicestershire Tel: 0509 412604 PAGE 6, P.O.BOX 54, STAFFORD, ST16 1D THE GAMEPLAYER'S HANDBOOK. Pokes, hints and clues for hundres of games including the latest releases. For full details and a list of the games covered send s.a.e. to: STERLING SERVICES, 37 Grove Gardens, Birmingham B20 2EZ. Tel. 0785 41153 1986 GAMES Games for the Amstrad, BBC and Acorn Electron Cassette 1 Inu .... .....50 Cassette 2 The Heist ............. .....50 Both cassettes .00 Send cheque/PO to: MRJ, 64 Reva Road, Broadgreen, Liverpool DAVID SOFTWARE 25% OFF LATEST SOFTWARE RRP ALL COMPUTERS PHONE 01-555 9303 OR WRITE TO: 294 ROMFORD ROAD FOREST GATE, LONDON E7 ATARI 400/600/800 XL XE OWNERS UTILITIES BACK-UPS. TAPES OR DISKS SAE FOR LISTS. CRACKER Will list mic progs to screen, you edit download your personalised version with or without mic knowledge. Hours of fun changing text to leave personal messages on screen. Stuck on an adventure, search for clues. Also dots to back up your Atari tapes. All for only  on T.D.K. Tape (16K). Post free. BINO, Moves binary files to autoboot tape or disk. Comes on double sided disk at . Post free. XL FIXER. Will allow you to play games written for 400, 800 range on your XL tape version ; disk version . For full free catalogue send large s.a.e. 7 day delivery. Mail order only. STOCKSOFT, 15 Woodbrooke Rd, Birmingham B30 1UE AMSTRAD SHARP MZ700 SPECTRUM original games software. Prices between 75p and .75. For information send sae to Pacetapes, 40 Bainton Grove, Clifton, Nottingham NG11 8LG. WoT? ME PROGPAM? ARE YOUR FRIENDS LEAVING YOU BEHIND? Don't worry! Here's a book on Spectrum programming written for ordinary people, not boffs and buffs. BASICALLY SPEAKING is a thoroughly structured course of book and cassette at an incredibly low price of .95. For FREE details send s.a.e. to: COMPUTER PUBLICATIONS Dept. CVG12, 5 Western Drive Shepperton, Middx TW17 8HJ SNOWY SOFTWARE. Sensational bargains on Commodore 64, Commodore 16, Spectrum, Amstrad, Atari, MSX, Dragon, Electron, BBC, Oric and Vic 20. For list state which computer. No s.a.e. needed within Britain. 48 hours despatch of orders. 36 Curzon Street, London W1Y 7AF. OPERATION COLOSSUS. Graphic adventure set in German occupied France during WWII, available on cassette for: Spectrum 48K, Amstrad, Commodore 64 (text only) at .95 sterling packed in attractive library case, send cheque to Omega Software, Garrettstown, Rathvilly, Co. Carlow, Ireland. LIVERPOOL now available for the Spectrum 48K, featuring full First Division, F.A., Milk and European Cups. League Table, Managerial Rating, Spying Missions, Team and Tactics Selections. Thirty skill levels. Only .45 from P.M. Corbishley, 212 Walmersley Old Road, Bury BL9 6SA, Lancs. ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software to purchase. If so, then look no further. We have available one of the largest selections of both U.K. and American titles for sale. Games and Utilities for all ages. If you would like further information please send s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS 30a Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough, Leicestershire LE12 BHD Tel: 0509 412604 ARARI 600/800XL 130XE DUAL OPERATING SYSTEM You could have a dual operating system with the flick of a switch This will allow you to run all known software written for the 400 and 800 computers on your XLIXE. It consists of a small circuit board which simply plugs inside your computer Price .95 Mail order only to: G. PAUL, 3 Francis Ward Close, Mill Top, West Bromwich, Wast Midlands B71 2PY BBC B OS 1.2 boxed with manual cassette recorder with leads, also book BBC micro magazines and software . Telephone: 0942 494102 after 5pm. SPECTRUM + (still under guarantee) with W.H. Smith tape recorder; Kempston interface; Quickshot !joystick; Currah speech;  worth of books;  worth of up-to-date games including: Spy Hunter; World Series Baseball; Glass; Way of the Exploding Fist. All valued at . Will sell for . Tel: 01-888 7133 (after 4 o'clock). FREE Special Offer For the Spectrum 16/48K and Spectrum+ The Book of Hints and Tips Absolutely Free when you buy The Book of Pokes only .95 inc p&p Both books cover hundreds of games from the Golden Oldies to the latest on the market. ARACDE, ADVENTURE, STRATEGY Too good to miss hurry while stocks last Send cheque/PO (made payable to Mr D. Richardson David Richardson, L. S. DODDS LTD, Old Town Hall, Spilsby, Lincolnshire PE23 5JH HINTS — POKES — MAPS Monthly handbooks packed with 100's of tips, pokes, maps, competitions and software offers. Amstrad Handbook. ........00 BBC Handbook .....................................00 Commodore Arcade Handbook (64/128)..00 Commodore Games Review Handbook (64/128)...... ...75 Spectrum Arcade Handbook ..................00 Spectrum Games Review Handbook ....... .75 The Adventurers Handbook (Spec/CBM)..00 Send cheque/PO to: H&D SERVICES (CVG) 1338 Ashton Old Road, Higher Openshaw, Manchester M11 1JG FREE MEMBERSHIP SOFTWARE HIRE  VIC-20 COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM Send an sae for your hirekit to: VSH (CV), PO Box 65, Nottingham NG1 Please state which micro 124 "


"MICROSE L MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell!  WILL SWAP Atari 600XL, hardly used, still boxed. 1010 recorder, joystick, books, games, Pacman cartridge. Excellent condition. For 1050 disk drive. Must be in good condition Tel (02269) 4686.  SPECTRUM GAMES for sale. 27 altogether including White Lightning, Spy Hunter, Raid over Moscow, Valhalla, Moon Cresta, Starstrike, Matchday, Booty, Tir Na Nog, some Ultimate. Worth . Sell for  and get joystick + interface worth  free. Tel 01 393 9611 after 5pm.  SPECTRUM, SAGA keyboard, TV sound unit, ram turbo interface, books, magazines and plenty of software  also have computer desk if required. Ring 01 203 0329 after 7pm. .WILL SWAP Trojan Lightpen, games Designer, Knightlore, Underwurde, Everyone's A Wally, Shadowfire and Currah, Write to Timothy Bamber at Rozel, Maespica Rod, Lower Cumtwrch, Swansea SA9 2PP. SWAP MINT condition Frog Racing Buggy, Controller, Faxt, Slow Charges, Two Body Shells, and lots of other accessories for Spectrum 48K and recorder or CBM 64 or MSX write to Richad Allen, 2 Ballymacash Road, Lisburn, Co Antrim BT28 3DR, Ireland.  BBC B, good condition with Ferguson Datarecorder, Kempston Joystick including all leads etc. Games include Acornsoft Elite, Mr EE, Zalaga and Frak with many more at an amazing price of only . Tel Blackpool 0253 47040 after 6pm. . COMMODORE 64 owner wants to swap games like Dallas, MULE, Summer Games, Ghostbusters, Zaxxon, Pole Position etc on disk or tape. will answer everyone. Send your list now. John loannou, 17A Monemusasias, Larnaca, Cyprus.  AMSTRAD CPC464 green screen software plus joystick Sell for  or swap for Spectrum plus software. Phone Cupar (0334) 54301 or write to Wilson Sinclair, \"Gramoir\", Carslogie Road, Cupar, Fife KY15 4HY. .48K SPECTRUM with TV sound,  worth of software, data loader only, two sets of cassette leads. Seven months old,  or swap for Commodore 64 with. C2N cassette. Ring Bristol 0272 656828 after 5pm. A PRISM VTX 500 modem. Will sell for . Tel 01 554 1150 Monday Friday after 6pm. HI 64 OWNER, I have over 800 good games to swap. Especially very hot titles. Send your list and wishes to Mr Nade Thierry, 17 rue de Metz, 57140 Saucny, France, .BBC SOFTWARE to sell or swap. 50% and more off all software. All in excellent condition. Ring 0484 603024 after 4pm for details for Paul. . CBM 64 TITLES to swap. Many titles. Disk only send list to David Miley, Holmlea, Red Hall Drive, Cochrane Park, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE7 7LJ.  PROTECT AN endangered species! Good home required for 32K ZX81, Hi-Res, Software, Manual, Leds and magazines. . Phone (0298) 4494 after 20.00 hours and ask for Nigel. Ideal for beginners. Also, Spectrum software for sale. Phone above number for list.  POKES FOR top Spectrum games like Atic Atac, Knightlore and Underwurlde. All kinds of pokes, 82 in all. Only 60p! Send stamp and 60p! Send stamp and 60p to: Nicholas Wareham, 33 Whitelands Avenue, Chorleywood, Herts (cheques to G.M. Wareham.  CBM 64 user would like to swap software over 450 titles. Telephone 0482 864098 ask for Peter. Ring after 6pm. FANTASTIC GAMEI \"'The Hacker\" an excellent hacking simulation. Who is stealing from your bank account? Intriguing puzzles. Only .50. 100% machine code. Lee Adams (Adsoft), 22 Lulworth Walk, Corby, Northants. .48K SPECTRUM, Sanyo Data Recorder, Kempston Interface 3,  plus software,  ono. Phone 01 670 4302 after 5.30pm.  CBM GAMES to swap. I have 500 games including Summer Games II, On Field Football and many others. The games are on disk and tape write to Sorliveien 8, 4030 Hienna, Stavanger, Norway.  FOR SALE: C-64 with Datarecorder, all Leads, Manuals, 10 excellent Arcade Games (incl. Donkey Kong, Splat, Mr Wimp, very good condition with original boxing. Worth over . Want around  ono. Telephone Ossie on (04024) 52288 after 5pm.  T1/994A COMPUTER plus joysticks and cassette interface and early learning module. Only  the lot. Tel 061 480 9532.  16K VIC 20 including Data Recorder, Super Expander, Introduction to Basic 1 and 2 Joystick, Computer Manuals, 19 Quality games. Boxed and in excellent condition. Cost  ideal present  ono. Leads (0532) 675311.  SPECTRUM 48K upgraded to Spectrum plus, good condition. Includes Data Recorder and 30 originals. Sell for  ono. Please phone Maidenhead 37942 after 6pm if interested.  ATARI 800XL, 1050 disk drive, two Quickshot II Joysticks, approximately 60 games including Ms Pacman, Donkey Kong Jnr, Stealth, Blue Max, 2001, Gyruss, Dropzone and other top U.S. titles. Worth over  for quick sale . Phone 061 682 2674,  SWAP CURRAH Microspeech plus 3 voice games for Alphacom 32 printer. Call Wayne Toal on (061) 431 6039.  ATARI COMPUTER 48K plus disk drive and many games also one joystick. All under one year old only  write to 22 Southlands, Aston, Oxon or telephone Bampton Castle 850982.  RECENT SPECTRUM Software. Frank Bruno, Shadowfire, Minder, Spy Vs Spy, 911Ts, Raid over Moscow, Lords Midnight. .50 .50 each. Kempston Interface, . Spectrum books (M/C etc), ask for details phone 0622 859744.  ATARI 1050 add-on. Write both sides of disk without cutting notches. Protect without labels. Simply plugs in. .95. Enclose disk for free game + DOS 2.5. P. Cunningham, 11 Berwyn Avenue, Penyffordd, Chester CH4 OHS.  48K SPECTRUM, good condition + Saga 1 keyboard (new), cassette recorder, light pen,  of software, magazines, manuals. Will sell for . Phone 716405 after 6.30pm ask for Ivan.  48K SPECTRUM, Loprofile keyboard, Kempston Interface and Joystick,  of software, Data Recordedr, nearly worth . Only  ono or swap for Commodore 64 and extras. Also Microdrive, Interface 1, Leads, Cartridges  ono. Telephone 253 7390.  SPECTRUM 48K, cassette recorder, speech unit, over 60 games, 8 books worth about . Swap for Commodore 64 or any reasonable offer. Telephone (0742) Sheffield 862460.  ATARI ADVENTURES: two great, new adventures: Warlock's Mountain and Legend of the Trollis Travel Through World's Unknown, Fight Monsters and find the treasures: both games on one cassette only .50 including P+P. Phone 552 3714 after 4pm for details.  ATARI COMPUTER cartridges wanted eg Hero, Pitfall 2, Space Shuttle, Gateway to Apshai, Parker Chess, Pencil Designer, Basic XL, Adventure Creator. Also some cartridges to sell or swap. 01 570 3690.  DISC VERSION of Liverpool now available for 48K Atari's 4 Divisions, Promotion, Relegation, Income, Expenditure, Transfers, F.A. Milk, European and Cup Winners etc. .95 from P.M. Corbishley, 212 Walmersley Old Road, Bury, BL9 6SA.  COMMODORE 64. Home computer for sale, together with Commodore. Communications modem. Both items in immaculate condition hardly used.  for both will sell separately. Telephone 0686 25238. DRAGON 32 home computer, good condition plus cassette recorder, two books, magazine and over 60 games including JSW, Manic Miner  ono. Phone Ascot 27088. .ATARI 410 program recorder . Excellent condition. Ring Tim on 066474 751 for a great bargain. Or write to me: 1794 Melton Road, Rearsby, Leicester LEY 8YS. oysticks.luding stealth ATARI TOUCH Tablet to 1029 printer screen dump. Disk only. Mike Jervis, 19 Portree Drive, Rise, Park, Nottingham NG5 5DY.  48K SPECTRUM with carry case, joystick and interface, tape recorder, also over  worth of software, books and mags. Only . Phone South Benfleet 52275.  BBC \"B\", all leads and software including Elite, Graphic Extention and Wordnize Rom's, joystick and intaface  ono. Phone lan on 01 8669987 evenings only. "


"MICROS E IL MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! SPECTRUM INTERFACE 3. Tape to tape or microdrive Only  wanted original software buy or swap many titles Knightlore, Alien 8, Frankie, Gyron. Write to A. Bellamy, 1818 Model Village, Cresell Worksop, Notts S80 4BT.  SPECTRUM 48K and Interface, Cassette Recorder, Portable Television,  worth of software, rnags, books, all for  or swap for Commodore 64. Tel York 703726.  SOFTWARE FOR Commodore 64. I have the latest games to swap (or sell) why not ring me or write to me. To 75 Mole Street, Sparkbrook, Birmingham B11 1XA. Telephone (021) 772 1758. T199/4A, JOYSTICK, cassette, leads, Invaders, Carwars, Parsec, Connect 4, Basic Tutor, Speech Synthesizer, Speech Editor. Total value  sell for  ono. Phone (0235) 32117. FOR SALE Spectrum 48K Protek Joystick Interface, Currah Microspeech over  of software worth over  sell for  ono. Tel (0900) 825213 ask for Richard. .48K SPECTRUM plus Amstrad Cassette Recorder, Joystick Interface, Cheetah Speech Unit, and well over  worth of games. All for just . Telephone (0628) 33747.  BBC B in good condition and  of software including Elite, Knightlore and Castle Quest all for  ono. Pleae phone Godalming or Cranleigh 273199 ask for David Lawy. VIC 20 with cassette recorder, joystick, 16K switchable ram pack, dust cover, Introduction Basic I, + games. 3 cartridges, Money Manager, Machine Code Course, Magazines. Some boxed.  ono. Andrew Philpott. Hertford 57671.  AMSTRAD OWNER would like to swap software, please send an sae for details to AJ.R. The Pharmacy. Dovermay, Porlock, Somerset TA 24 8PT. . COMMODORE VIC 20 + Recorder + 16K Expansion + Joystick. Introduction to Basic parts 1 and 2. Around 16 games, and over  worth of magazines. Ideal starter computer. Will sell for . Telephone Burgess Hill 46841 after 5pm.  COMMODORE SOFTWARE including World Series Baseball, Ghostbusters, also Zork I and Starcross Infocom Disk Adventurers for sale. Write to Phil, 229 Sunnybank Road, Unsworth, Bury, Lancs. BL9 8JU.  HALF PRICE Spectrum games for sale. All originals. Over 100 games to choose from. For lists send sae to A. Johnson, 117 Walgrove Road, Brampton, Chesterfield, Derbyshire S40 2DP.  ATARI TRAK-BALL (brand new) plus Missile Command and Bruce Lee.  for the lot. Send order to C.K. Man, 299 Southend Lane, Catford, London.  FOR SALE C&VG issues 1 current some sound . Your Computer June 1983 current . Personal Computer News issues 1-60  or  + P.P. the lot. Tel Bursledon 4303. SPECTRUM 48K, including an excellent joystick and interface, tape recorder, books, manuals and plenty of software. Boxed as new, top condition all for  ono. Tel 0481 55400.  48K ZX SPECTRUM, boxed +  of software plus Kempston joystick for CBM 64 plus datarecorder. Tel Royston 48335.  the lot. 4 Kipling Road, Royston, Herts SG8 7DT.  SINCLAIR QL ** must sell, boxed as new with leads, Psion software and microdrive cartridges including RS-323 lead for other peripherals. Ring Runcorn 718556 after 5.00pm.  MEMOTECH ORIGINAL software for sale. Prices between .50 to .00. Send for list to P. Arkley, 81 Blackburn Road, (Layton-leMoors, Accrington, Lancashire BB5 5JT. Please enclose sae. HURRY!!! .48K SPECTRUM with over  worth of games and magazines. Spyhunter, Psytron etc. Boxed with new transformer and manuals. Sell for  bought in 1985. Phone Bill on Cumbernauld 38572 . FOR SALE. Protek switchable joystick interface worth  will sell for . Also Atari 2600 VCS unwanted gift. Plus Soccer cartridge. Worth  will sell for . Both excellent condition hardly used. Ring John after 6pm. (0632) 4892055.  ACORN ELECTRON computer plus 12\" Monitor, Interface Plus 1, 2 Joysticks, Sanyo Cassette Recorder, Books and Games  ono. Please contact P. Keeble on 980 5517.  CBM 64 Whitby Softchip Basic Extension Cartridge includes Monitor Assembler and Disassembler. Stack Light Pen with Paintbox and Games. Also CBM 64 games. Worth over  will accept . Contact Mark Hopkins, 50 Slimbridge Close, Redditch B97 5XL. .48K SPECTRUM, DK Tronics Keyboard, Kempston Pro Interface, Joystick, Data Recorder + games. . Telephone Swansea (0792) 201268. After 4pm.  YAMAHA CX5M music computer, YK-10 keyboard, music composer cartridge, FM voicing cartridge, data recorder with ten blank tapes, 350 voices on tape. Five months old, perfect condition cost over  sell for . Tel Horley 771876. Buyer must collect.  CBM 64 and Apple. 2E Programmers Club. Beginners, Basic and Machine Code Programmers welcome. Please contact Stephen Bowman at 28 Leazes Crescent, Hexham, Northumberland NE48 3JW2 for more information.  CURRAH SPEECH and Sound Amplifier , ZX Printer + 2 rolls of apper  ZX Spectrum 48K issue 3 . Very good condition, manual + all cables, games, matchday = Dun Darach . Ring 0536 77150. .48K SPECTRUM, DK Tronics Keyboard plus approximately 50 original programs, joystick etc. Cost over . Will accept  or swap for Commodore 64. Tel 0604 781794 (Northampton) after 6pm. ATARI 400 32K, basic cartridge, manual and \"Basic\" programming book, much software including Boulderdash, Zaxxon and 2 roms. All for  ono. Phone (089 282) 3870 and ask for Stephen. TI USERS! I have several good quality software titles at very low prices. Also music files for \"Music Maker\" note: Exbas only. For details sae to G. Thomson, 12 Glenruin Road, Blantyre, Glasgow G72 SRB .48K SPECTRUM with 3 games including Planetoids. 3 books all leads, Cables supplied plus suitable cassette deck. As new  ono. Phone 385 2871 after 4pm weekdays.  SPECTRUM ZX almost new with 15 games and books, interface and two with joystick.  Sittingbourne 0795 24835 and printer. ATARI VCS Dragonfire, Atlantis, Venture, Night Drive, Tutankhaman, Asteroids, Cosmic Arc, Super Breakout, Soccer, Riddle of the Sphinx, Video Checkers. All  each will consider swaps. Telephone Brian Oakmoor 702201. VIC 20 Colour Computer Starter Pack plus 32K Switchable Ram Pack, Light Pen, 300 games plus books. All in good working order. Worth , sell for  ono. Tel Southampton 554780.  1541 DISK drive + over  original disk software bargain at . Also over  original cassette software.  ono.  books. Telephone Corby (0536) 63700 for details ask for James.  COMMODORE 64 + C2N cassette unit +  software + 2 quickshot Il joysticks  ono. Telephone (0536) 63700.  COMMODORE 16, cassette player, joystick, literature, over  software, Introduction to Basic. Two months old. Boxed, still under guarantee,  ono. Phone Sheffield 661251. .SONY 64K MSX with Databank. Sanyo DR202 Special Data Recorder, Toshiba Joystick. 12 of the best games. \"Hardly Used\". Guarantee. Cost over . Sell for  ono. Excellent offer. Telephone 091 263 2500 anytime. SPECTRUM + (under guarantee) comes with printer and paper, datarecorder, ram turbo interface, DK Tronics interface, joystick, spare leads  of software, computer books, graphics pack, all \"input\". Volumes  OVNO ring Darran on Watford (0423) 662443 after 6pm.  SHARP MZ-700 computer. 64K of memory with built in trouble free data recorder. Loads of software including MZ-80A basic. 3 years maintenance insurance as new  ono. Phone Paul on Blackpool 0253 58790. "


"MICRO SE LL MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! BBC B + DFS 32K Sideways Ram, Joystick, Tapedeck, Opus 5401 SS SD DRive 12 discs including Magic Mushrooms, Alien 8, Knight Lore, Mr Ee, Pascal, Sleuth. Excahange Commodore 64 plus cash or . Telephone Oxford (0865) 770908 ask for Russ. 48K SPECTRUM with data recorder plus  worth of software. Everything boxed as news. Sell for  ono Phone 01-311 after 4pm. COMMODORE 64 software for sale. Blue Max, FT, Apocalypse, Shamus I & II (cass) Musicalc, Zaxxon, Summer Games, Strip Poker, Suspended, Zork I, Impossible Mission (disk), International Soccer (cart). All prices negotiable. Telephone (04215) 61157. SPECTRUM 48K + Saga Keyboard + Data Recorder + Currah Microspeech and Slot and Interface lll + Joystick Interface + many books and magazines and over 300 software titles cost over  will accept first sensible offer. Tel 03745 55705 (South Benfleet, Essex.) ATARI SOFTWARE wanted especially Crystal Castles, Telegard, Gateway to Apshai, cassette or catridge only. Write to Donimique at 3 Goodwin Way, Rockingham, Rotherham, South Yorkshire 561 4DG. 16K Vic 20 plus 29 original games, incuding cartridges. Plus data recorder and programming course. Plus educational games for kiddies. Worth  yours for only . All in excellent condition. Phone 319 2947. ATARI 800 ROMS for sale. Atariwriter  Silicon Warrior, Donkey Kong Junior, Star Raiders, Asteroids, Pac-man, Chess, Quix, Tennis, Monster Max, Dig Dug, Defender, Pool 400  each or all for . Phone 061 766 2159 after 6.30pm. T199/4A SPEECH SYNTHESIZER and module. Joystick and 5 module (Parsec, Munchman, Attack, TIInvaders, Adventure module and cassette) manual, and books for games and programming cassette, leads.  ono please phone 0204 594551. ORIC-1 48K in very good condition + of software including Zorgon's Revenge, Zennon 1, Chess, Centipede, Flight Simulator plus two manuals + written programs. Write to Mr Richard Coe, 23 Pytchley Court, Corby, Northants or telephone 0536 202101 ext 333.  ono. LOOK!!! over 50 pages of tips, maps, pokes, including solutions to Starion, Tir Na Nog, Shadowfire etc. Cheap software club all for .50 including P&P (UK only) write to C Jenner, 9 Rodney Way, Boxgrove Park, Guildford, Surrey GU1 2NY (add  P&P outside Britain). 48K SPECTRUM with DK Tronics keyboard, Currah microspeech, AGF programmable interface, Quickshot II, over  software, magazines worth . All items boxed, in very good condition, ideal games machine (including manuals designed by Sir Clive Sinclair). Worth over , sell for  telephone Cambridge 10223) 249033 SINCLAIR QL CTS Interface and printer. Excellent condition. Six months old. Unused present. Selling for  telephone 0492 45514. COMMODORE 64 C2N cassette, joystick and holiday vouchers and Elite, Dropzone, Skyfox, Zaxxon, Music Studio, Talladega, 4th Protocol, Spy Hunter and others, all in excellent condition, boxed and under guarantee, . Phone 01-452 8310. 64 FOR SALE. Commodore 64 + music maker +  worth of well known games. Sell for around . Tel William on Liskeard (0579) 45689. 5pm-9pm. SPECTRUM + INTERFACE 1 DK Tronics Joystick Interface, Microdrive and six cartridges. All boxed also 22 original tapes:Hacker, F.B Boxing, Starion etc. will sell for  or swap for Commodore 64, Data Recorder etc. Jason Duncan, 3 Muirfield Way, Deans, Livergston, West Lothian, Scotland EH54 8DL. SPECTRUM original software. 40 games for  including Tir Na Nog, Nightlore, Jewels of Babylon, Doomsdark Revenge, Underwurlde, Sabrewulf, Rune's of Zendos, Eye of Bain etc. Bargain pack . Phone 0703 420016. WANTED CBM 64 disk drive with games to swap for a Honda X75 childs scrambler in very good condition (age 12-16). Telephone Nottingham 0602 482474. SPECTRUM 48K Turbo Interface, Kempston Compatible Interface, +  worth of software, swap the above for a Commodore 64 and accessories. Telphone Haverford West (0437) 5959 and ask for Victor. AMSTRAD SOFTWARE for sale. 3D Grand Prix, View to Kill, Arabian Knights, Ghostbuster, Dark Star, Codename Mat, Roland Time,  the lot. Will sell separately too. Telephone (Birmingham) 421 6668. BBC B with cassette, recorder, joystick, books, magazines and around 70 games including Elite, Frak, Castle Quest, Alein 8 worth + sell for  ono. Phone 04024 49709 after 4pm weekdays. PRINTER CANON 1080A. NLQ fast mode. Dot Matrix top quality only 3 months old. Cost  accept  manual included. Single sheet, tractor and roll paper feed. Phone 07283 129. COMMODORE 64, dust cover, graphics pack, 20 original games including Summer Games Il etc. 3 books. Oldest item 7 months old. Everything in excellent condition. All for  ono write to Mr Gary Watson, 56 Greenlee Drive, Patalpin, Dundee, DD2 2RJ.  COLECOVISION CONSOLE: plus 12 games including Hero, Decathlon. In excellent condition, brand new. Worth over  with turbo steering wheel. Selling for . Phone Brighton 682706. Ask for Stephen. ono. PRISM MODEM 1000. O.E. Lted Communication Cartridge and Mustang Downloader Software for Commodore 64.  phone Elgin (0343) 44735. CBM 64, C2N, Wico 3-way joystick,  of games including Dropzone, Spy Hunter, Bounty Bob + others. Also adventures, Level 9 etc. Also  of mags, worth , the lot for , sell for . Phone Southampton (0703) 766486 evenings. 48K SPECTRUM with tape recorder, Kempston Interface, Quickshot 2 joystick and approximately  of games mostly top 30. Worth . Will sell for . Telephone Walsall (02) 30786 ask for Nigel. FOR SALE due to upgrade. Minor Miracles WS 2000 modem. Baud rates:300/300, 1200/75, 75, 1200, 600/600 plus American standards. . Commodore 64 RS232 interface for use with Modem, Printer etc, . Brother EP22 Electronic Typewriter/Printer. LCD Display, built in memory allows text to be stored even when switched off: . Commodore 64 software Elite , Quo Vardis , and many more! Ronnie Tosh, 4 Peddie Street, Flat 4B, Dundee, Scotland DD1 5LS (0282) 60546. BBC B O.S. 1.2., cassette recorder, joystick,  software, computer cover and cassette carrying case. Worth + will sell for  ono. Phone Ringwood 3042. VIC 20 games for sale. Titles including Arcadia, Bullet, Gridrunner, Myriad, Race Fun, Computer War, Tower of Evil, Martian Raider, Magnificent 7, Demon Driver, Jupiter Lander (cartridge) Kosmic Kamikaze, The Wizard and Princess, 3D Maze, all . PHone (0425) 616960. COMMODORE 64 software to swap. I'd like Rupert and Toymakers, Le Mans, Wizards Lair, William Wobbler, Whirlynurd, etc, will trade for other great new games. Work Fast: Disk only. Toffo Drogius, Dosentintie 10, 02700 Kauniainen, Finland. ZX SPECTRUM 48K Joystick Interface, Cassette Recorder, Magazines and over  of software all original including Frank Bruno, Everyone's a Wally, Decathlon and other classic games worth , sell for  ono lan Griffiths, 37 WykenCroft, Wyken, Coventry, CV2 3AB, West Midlands. SPECTRUM 48K for sale with over 30 originals including Mugsy, DeathStar, Interceptor also Protek Switchable Interface (Kempston Sinclair Protek) paid  wants  ono. Ring 607 3927 after 5 O'clock, ask for Lee Townsend. FOR SALE BBC B Micro computer, includes cassette recorder,  of software, joystick, magazines and all leads, will accepts  Iquick sale). Telephone Ingatestone (0277) 35697 after 4.30. T199/4A plus extended basic + worth of original tapes. 5 cartridges, tape recorder, joystick interface, in very good condition cost over  will accept  ono. Telephone (062 082Z) 4086 ask for Andrew. ADVENTURERSI step by step instructions to solve these adventures. Golden Baton, Circus, Supergran, Robin of Sherwood + map. Send P.O/cheque for  payable to lan McAllister. Send sae to 36 Kimnundy Green, Westhill, Skene, Aberdeenshire AB3 6SF. "


"MI CROS E L L MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! SPECTRUM HINTS/Pokes No 1 including old and new (Nightshade, JSWII, Dynamite Dan, Hypersports), with mpetitions, 50: pokes alone and advertising column. Send .75 plus sae to J. Murray, 43 Taunton Avenue, Abington Vale, Northampton NM3 3LY (0604) 38195. ZX SPECTRUM 48K with real professional \"Saga'' keyboard, computer compatible television, data recorder,  worth of top selling software, books and magazines. All guaranteed for 6 months. Total value over  offers pleae on (0742S) 331729 ask for Rick. VIC 20 + 16K, C2N Recorder,  worth of games including Jetpac, Stop Thief, Rockman etc. Worth , will sell for . Phone 706181 (0440) after 7pm. Wanted: CBM 64. T1994A FOR sale with Speech Synthesiser and cassette leads, Ti-Logo plus more cartridges and cassettes. All in top condition. Selling for  ono Phone 302 5744 from 5pm. WANTED BBC B in exchange for Spectrum 48K, Kempston Joystick, Kempston Interface, Sound Amplifier, A Dixons TR30 cassette recorder and 600 games plus poster, mags, etc. Telephone (0268) 727369 aks for Mark. AMSTRAD CPC-464 + colour monitor + joystick + a few pieces of software + magazines + manual + introduction tape, as new, very suitable for beginners and experts alike. Worth  bargain  ono. Tel Marshland Smeeth 276 WANTED COMMODORE 64 and recorder in exchange for Cybernet Beta 100 C.B. plus power pack 40 channels ariel needed, worth  also give  cash write to J. Noble, 134 St Peters Road, Whitby. North Yorkshire YO22 4HX. SOFTWARE TO SWAP OR SELL. Titles are Pole Position, Bruce Lee, Space Pilot, 3D Time Trek, Manic Miner, DT Decathlon and F15 Strike Eagle as well. Phone (04946) 2483 48K SPECTRUM original keyboard + Kempston joystick + cassette + interface + 80 games + magazines worth  + bargain at  or swap for Commodore 64 tape deck and software. Telephone 805 5361. SPECTRUM GAMES: (Herberts Dummy Run, Combat Zone) . (Trashman, Psytraxx) . (World Cup, Brian Jacks Superstars) . Mark Griffin, 1 McDonagh Avenue, Mervue, Galway, Ireland. COMMODORE 64 C2N cassette unit, joystick, dustcover, over  software plus magazines manual etc, all boxed and guaranteed just . Phone Sam on 01-958 5013 FOR SALE Atari 800, 2 410 recorders, graphic tablet, 810 disk drive with archiver, joysticks over 600 games on disk and cassette, worth over , will swap for Commodore with drive and cassette unit with software. Offers considered. Telephone 01-660 6799 between 6pm and 10 pm or all day at weekends. CBM 64, VIC 20 original software for sale. Dead cheap. For lists please write to John Keogh, 30 Highwood Avenue, Finchley, London N12 8QP. SPECTRUM GAMES. Having sold my computer I have still quite a few games left and I'm selling them from 5p+. If you are interested please send an sae to Clarke Raffan, 42 Beaconsfield Terrace, Turfiff, Aberdeenshire AB5 44735. ACORN ELECTRON + Joysticks + Interface, Cassette Recorder, 12\" Monitor, Books + Games. Good condition,  phone 623 7500 Ext 6318 9am-6pm ask for Barbara. SPECTRUM software to sell or swap Knightlore, Ghostbusters, Horace Goes Skiing, Atic Atac, Lunar Jetman, Hunchback, Timegate, Chequered Flag,  each or  the lot. Write to Christopher Wood, 10 Chemin Des Baraques, 1290 Versoix, Geneva, Switzerland. THE GAMESPLAYERS Handbook. Hundreds of pokes for hundreds of games including the latest releases. Only .50 including P&P. Send cheque/P.O. to Sterling Services, 37 Grove Gardens, Birmingham B20 2EZ. SOFTWARE!! FOR sale. (Spectrum) I have many original titles including Legend .00, Chuckie Egg .00, Grand National .00, Gremlins .00, Cylon Attack .00, Call David on Nottingham (0602) 653563 NOW!!! P.S. a free Electronic game with orders over . COMMODORE 64/128 ideas and software to swap. Many new titles for CBM 64. Disk only. Send your list to Martin berg, Bekkefaret 2A, 2600 Lillehammer, Norway. BBC B computer for sale. Also lots of games including Elite, Mr EE, 737, Fortress, together with several roms including view graphics rom, screen dump, and lots more. Will split. 0341 281029 evenings. COMMODORE 64. Commodore Tape Recorder in perfect condition, 5 games: Pooyan, Twin Kingdom Valley, Harrier, Skramble (Anirog) and Aztec Challenge. All boxed. Worth . The lost for . Write to H. Tanaka, Wycliffe College School House, Stonehouse, Glos GL10 2JQ. SPECTRUM + with tape recorder, dual port interface, joystick, T.V. Sound, Currah Slot, complete with over  of software, books, and magazines, worth over . Will sell for  ono. Ring (0385) 61745. COMMODORE 64 games for sale. Ghostbusters, Decathlon, Colossus Chess, Panic Chucky Egg and Scramble and more. Telephone Harrogate (0423) 866544 ask for Andrew. All games  to . VIC 20 + Recorder + 24K switchable Ram Pak + Joystick, Introduction to Basic part 1 and 9 games + lots of books. Only . Telephone (02804) 7879. CBM 64 games to swap or sell USA titles and English. eg Exploding Fist and Solo Flight, View to a Kill, Cauldron. .00  .00 each. Telephone 061 928 1933 ask for Jamie. WANTED SIDEWAYS roms for BBC. Especially want Wordwise, Beebpen, Inter Sheet, Interchart, Ultra Calc, View Sheet, View Shape, Pascal, Exmon II, Disc Master, Master File II, Dis-Aid, Advanced Disc Toolkit, Sleuth accelerator, Brom, Slave, Accelerator, Brom, Clave, also any others. 0341 281029 evenings. .00!! FOR for Amstrad 464 colour, loads of games, 12 books, 6 months old. Excellent condition, Basic 1 Joystick whole lot worth nearly .00 urgent sale required please phone 796 6425 after 4.30pm must be a bargain at .00 yes .00!!! BARGAIN OFFER, Spectrum 48K, Printer, 5 rolls paper, Fuller Box + Joystick, Sharp Cassette Recorder,  worth of software including Forth Protocol, Spy Hunter, Dragontorc + Avalon. Many recent magazines, several Spectrum books. Total value well over  selling for only  ono. Tel 040481 3439 (John) after 6pm. FOR SALE, Memotech MTX 512, plus  worth of games, four books, sell for  ono. Write to lain MacPherson, 4 Lady Street, Hilton Fearn, Tain, Ross-shire, Scotland. IV20 1XE. SELL OR swap Dragon 32.  of software, magazines and joystick. Will sell for  or swap for Atari disk in working order. Also swap or sell Atari software. Tel: 0476 64439. NEW UNUSED Commodore SX-64 portable (disk drive + monitor) — unwanted competition prize runs all Commodore 64 software. Sell for . Phone 0707 328065 ask for Mr Wong after 5pm. For more details. ATARI 800XL: 410 recorder,  worth of software all originals including Decathlon, Dropzone, Mr Do and Atari Smash Hits No 2. Total value over  everything for  or near offer. Phone 01 443 0904 after 5pm. Spectrum games Nightshade, Nodes of Yesod, Knight Lore, Everyone's A Wally. All for  or  each originals write to Paul Wheeler, 32 Bunyard Drive, Sheerwater, Woking, Surrey GU21 5NU send sae. WANTED ANY Atari 16K text adventures also would like Decathlon cartridge contact Craig on 587339 or write to Craig Hollinshead, 17 Palm Grove, Stockton, Cleveland Fairfield TS1 97AY please phone after 6pm. SWAP COMMODORE 64, C2N, Joystick, Programmers Reference Guide, Introduction to Basic 1 + Software for Amstrad CPC646 colour or green screen. Contact G. Conlon, 1 Whitechurch Green, Ballyboden, Dublin 16, Eire. SPECTRUM 48K software to sell or swap. All originals including Knight Lore, Daley's Soft Aid, Underwurde, Wizard's Lair, I want F. Bruno's Boxing, Nightshade, Exploding Fist or Dragontorc. Contact Luke on 0901 30042 after 6pm. ATARI 600XL + 1010 Data Recorder and Dust cover,  worth of software, books and joystick, cost , will sell for  ono phone Kettering (0536) 517217. 1984 SPECTRUM plus manuals, magazines, boxes and guarantees. Interface 2, 2 joysticks and 25 originals of the latest games, worth  sell for . Phone Chris on Bristol (0272) 832032. "


"MICROS E IL MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! ATARI DISK VERSION Temple of Apshai wanted, buy or exchange from my large collection Atari software. State requirements, send lists. Infocom adventures especially wanted. Mr Keyworth, 52 Rupert Street, Lower Pilsley, Chesterfield, Debyshire S45 8DD or phone 851395. 16K VIC 20 with cassette recorder, switchable 16K Ram, joystick and books, over  worth of games and  of educational software, O Level maths, physics etc. Worth  sell for  ring 052 55 5354. ATARI SOFTWARE 900 baud back-up + 10 new rally speedway tracks and XL/XE Translator,  the lot. Phone 01-864 9361 after 5pm ask for Andy. BBC B GAMES: sell or swap. Tapes: Elite, Match Day, Knigh Lore, Death Star, Atic Atac. .50 each. Repton (40 track disc): . Buy 3 and get JetPower Jack .95 FREE!! Phone (0222) 842649. ACORN ELECTRON + PHILLIPS cassette player recorder + 7 games. As new only . Phone Swindon 38272 ATARI 1050 DISK DRIVE with Dos 3. Boxed with over 60 top games including Archon, Beaches, Boulder Dash, Jumpman, Lode Runner, Mask of Sun, Summer Games, Zork, Infocom Adventures and many more. . Telephone 0706 33475. COMMODORE 64 user wants to sell very updated games. Prefer disk. Write to Olof Stiekema, Paulaland 4, 2591 JD, The Hague, The Netherlands or ring (0) 70 857375 Holland. GAMES FOR SALE! Over 50 originals including Summer Games II, Exploding Fist, Karateka, Hypersports and lots more. Ring 01-452 3203 after 6pm ask for Laszlo. SPECTRUM 48K  of software. Quickshot II, Programmable Interface, Games Player Interface, Currah Slot, T.V. Sound Interface, Light-pen. Worth 5600 but will sell for . Phone 01-467 3325 after 6pm ask for Greg. COMMODORE 64 for sale. Excellent condition over 350 games cost over  accept  ono. Latest English and American titles. Two joysticks, two tape decks. Phone (0909) 544159. Bargain. CBM 64 computer for sale, offers please, includes cassette recorder and games. Also for sale Atari 400 48K + cassette and games. Write to Steve, 12 Windsor Close, Tamworth, Staffs, B79 BUH, soon!! COMMODORE 64 + cassette deck , also 48K Spectrum Recorder, Interfaces 1+2, Microdrive, Printer  inclusive or sell separately games worth approximately  including top games of last 3-4 years. Phone Wigan 10942) 37221. EXPLODING FIST and Spy vs Spy for Spectrum,  each or will swap both for Firebird's Elite (for Spectrum) phone 0484 29182 after 6pm. FOR SALE 48K SPECTRUM, Rainbow Electronics programmable joystick interface for fast furious game play . White Lightning for professional games design .50. Write to lan, 34 Orchard Court, Dundee DD4 9DB COMMODORE 64, C2N, Joystick, loads of magazines and games including Karateka, Wizardry, Elite etc, only  ono. Telephone Bedford 210 524 evenings. Ask for Jonathan CBM 64 software to swap Tities include Frank Bruno's Boxing, Summer Games II and Skyfox, all letters answered. Write to Paul, 97 Chain Lane, St. Helens Merseyside or telephone me on (0744) 59289. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE (originals) and a Currah Microspeech for sale Games include Everyone's a Wally, Chemistry etc. Sell all for  or sell seperately. Phone lan King on 021 557 5134. DRAGON SOFTWARE for sale: Includes Donkey Kong, Back Track and many more. Phone Andrew on (0455) 29077 after 4pm. 48K SPECTRUM boxed and under guarantee, with interface, cassette recorder, two joysticks, magazines and over 200 good games (Exploding Fist, Hypersports). All for only  or swap for CBM 64. Phone Mark on Ayr 264420 after 4pm. COMMODORE 64 wanted with recorder and software. Will swap for Atari 800, 48K, recorder and software or buy if less than . Phone 10269) 3266 anytime. A COMMODORE 64 and Data Cassette Recorder. Good condition -130 or near offer. Ring Craford 526630 ask for Ean anytime after 4.O'clock COMMODORE 64 software to swap. Send your list for mine to: Warren Craigie, 29 Bellfield Street, Portobellow, Edinburgh, EH15 2BR or phone 031-657 1423, disk only. Latest 400 America 48K SPECTRUM and full DK Tronics typewriter keybord with manuals, leads and  worth of software including Decathlon, Hobbit, Manic Miner. Worth  all for  phone 051 678 2095 ask for Paul. PRISM VTX 5000 Modem for any Spectrum. Four months old. Only  including postage. Write to Martin Bell, Kircubbin, Newtownards, County Down, Northern Ireland BT22 2RP. C64 PENPALS wanted to swap ideas and games please contact Carl, 13 Lipson Value, Plymouth, Devon PL4 7HF (0752) 665200. ATARI 600XL computer 16K plus four cartridges Pole Position, Donkey Kong, Defender and Basketball and Suncom joystick all in excellent condition and worth  only !!! Phone Bickleigh 496 ask for C Raynor. ATARI 1010 recorder joysticks  worth of games excellent condition original boxes also magazines, books, sell for . Telephone Shirley, Southampton 773155. 39 Regents Park Road, Shirley, Southampton. SEIKOSIA PRINTER for BBC also lots of software for sale or swap, including Elite, Mr EE, 737, Fortress etc. Also several roms inluding View, Graphics Rom and Screen Dump + lots more. Ring 0341 281 029 evenings ask for Richard. FOR SALE 48K Spectrum (good condition), cassette recorder, 3 books and 39 originals. Total value  will sell for . Telephone 061 793 8049 and ask for Glenn (must be able to collect or pay postage) Manchester area. SPECTRUM 48K boxed, as new with over  worth of software. With Sinclair Interface 2 and joystick. Plus loads of magazines and books. Worth over , sell for  — phone 01 504 2002 after 5pm. SPECTRUM HARDWARE: Lo Profile keyboard . DK Tronics Dual Port joystick interface . Currah Speech Synthesiser . Currah Slot . Datel Electronics Joystick Interface . All nearly new. Phone Fakenham 701622. ATARI CASSETTES Space Shuttle, Snowball Adventure, Adventure Quest. F-15 Strikeagle, .75 each or swap for Flight Simulation games such as Rescue on Fractalus etc. Telephone 66674 Glossop, Derbyshire. BBC B plus disk system , twin disk drive, , 280 processor  ono, manuals and software for all above. Phone 337 8524 (Morden, Surrey). QUEST OF THE MYSTICAL WORLD. A superb adventure for the Dragon 32. Price .65 including P&P. Make cheques or postal orders payable to A Pearson send to Espirit Software, 16 Fernhill Way, Bootle, L20 9JU, Merseyside, ATARI 48K 400. Plus recorder, basic, manuals, cartridge games and over 200 excellent games on cassette. Only . Phone Upminster 27697. CBM GAME TO SWAP I have got about 1,500 games please send list with your latest games to:Marco Hoogendijk, Dresdenlaan 28, 3055 WE Rotterdam, Netherlands. AMSTRAD includes green screen, manual, modulator, magazines, books. Software includes, Football Manager, Daley's Decalthon, Ghostbusters, Roland (Time) etc. (17) originals worth , except  ono. Telephone (041) 775 1163 CBM 64 data recorder and new Quickshot Il joystick plus over 20 games. All in very good condition  phone Hawarden 533062 ask for Stephen. WANTED AMSTRAD CPC-464, tape-based with preferably colour monitor and software. Will only except offer from Ireland and Northern Ireland. Write to Fidelma Carolan Church Street, Cavan, Ireland. COMMODORE 128 and 64 owner wants to swap programs with people all over the world. Has a lot but want more. All letters will be answered. Send list or just write to Henrik Togero Hyvelgatan 15 43200 Varberg, Sweden. ATARI USERS if you are interested in joining the Greenwell User Group. Then please contact: Paul Hollins, 114 Queen's Road, Cheadlehulme, Cheshire SK8 5HS. Tel (061) 485 1126. Also basic and machine code programmers please. "


"MI CROS E IL MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! SPECTRUM 48K software to swap. I have many games to swap. Send your list for mine I would also like to exchange hints and tips and get a pen pal. Jernej Pecjak, Poljanski Nasid 30, 61000 Ljubljana, Yugoslavia. EVER FOUND yourself copying out programs 3D lines long. Or have you lost your cool over a long program. Well now learn to make arcade games the easy way. Basic sense a new Electron, BBC, Spectrum and coming soon Commodore USA Club has arrived to turn you into a high quality designer. Just think a well written DIY game The book would cost .00 or more, but for every month for a year you get step by step instruction and sample games. For only .50. Write to Davi D Cowan, 14 Drumcree Place, Rathcoole, Co. Antrim, Northern Ireland BT379JA for details. SPECTRUM PLUS Quickshot Two Joystick, Data Recorder, latest software including Supertest, Street Hawk Exploding Fist, Rocky Horror Show, hundreds more worth  will sell for  or swap Commodore and extras. ACORN ELECTRON with Plus 1, Sureshot Joystick, Acorn Data Recorder and over  of original software, including Elite, Twin Kingdom Valley and Blagger. Excellent condition. Also, many Acorn and Electron User Magazine, all leads and books. Only  ono. Phone 061 445 0661. BBC B Games over 150 games on cassette to sell. Tel (0772) 713233 ask for Nick. Please call if at all interested!! FOR SALE Atari VCS cartridges, Amidar Grand Prix Skiing Super Breakout, Missile Command, Defender, The Empire Strikes Back Riddle of the Sphinx all  each. Telephone Leabrooks 606770. JOYSTICK, ATARI type with extra buttons, a few in stock. Just  plus P&P. Send cheque/P.O to M. Passmore, 19 Dunley Gardens, Rathcoole, N'Abbey, Co. Antrim, Northern Ireland BT37 9HZ. VIC 20 colour computer, data recorder, books, manuals, games tec worth over , very good Christmas present, will accept . Tel: Halifax 43241 CBS COLEVISION Console Atari Adaptor Turbo Console and Foot Peddle plus twenty games value at new well over , excellent condition sell for  OVNO. A great bargain phone Southend-onSea 68033 for details of games. 48K SPECTRUM, Tape Recorder, Turbo Interface, Joystick, Eleven games, LoProfile, Professional keyboard. Worth  sell for . Phone Rotherham (0709) 69176 after 7pm. BBC GAMES!!! All .50. Titles include: Wizardore, Chuckie Egg, Wallaby, Mr Wimpy. Plus many more. For full list write to: C. Putt, 97 South Lane, Sutton Valence, Maidstone, Kent. ATARI SOFTWARE to sell or swap Karateka, Kennedy Approach, Mercenary, Sky Fox, Hacker, Whirlynurd + more. Send offers or list, James, Whin Rigg, Borrowcop Lane, Lichfield, Staffs WS14 9DF. 48K SPECTRUM + Saga 1 Keyboard + D.K. Tronics Interface + Joystick + Cassette Recorder + lots of games. Jet Pac, Hypersports, Knightlore, Minder etc. + manuals.  ono or swap for Commodore 64 with recorder. SPECTRUM 48K, Cassette Recorder, Joystick, Kempston Interface Sound Amplifier, 6 books, 48 games, 21 original, worth over  selling space at  ono or swap for Commodore 64 plus extras phone Sheffield 0742 690138 ask for Simon. SWAP INTERFACE + Kempston Joystick, DK Tronic Lightpen and software + The Quill, Hypersports, Melbourne Draw, Hurg, Glass, Dynamite Dan, Lords of Midnight, Brian Bloodaxe, Strangeloop, Arabian Nights, Exploding Fist for Interface 1 and Microdrive. Telephone 412354. CBM 64 software to swap or sell tape and disk titles including Frank B Boxing, Wintergames, D.T. Supertest, Hyper Sports and many more. Send list to Haavard Kaarigstad, Aasveien 1, 4875 Nedenes, Norway. WANTED: ATARI 810 disk drive. Will pay  or more: Please phone Poole (0202) 686423 and ask for Warren. BBC 32K + DFS, 100K disc drive, graphic printer, masses of software, loads of roms, joysticks, 32K sideways ram, books, 30 disks, disk box. Will sell for . Phone Andrew 01 906 3572. SPECTRUM 48K + cassette recorder + Stonechip keyboard + programmable interface + joystick.  worth of magazines and also  of software + sound amplifier. Worth over  great Christmas present only  phone Darren (0705) 665272 WANTED SPECTRUM Educational programs especially O-Level maths or chemistry will swap or buy phone Derby (0332) 515187 ask for Daniel. COMMODORE 64, Atari 800XL. I would like penfriends to exchange software and ideas. Write to Paul Saunders, 24 Tyler Road, Hazelmere, High Wycombe, Bucks HP15 7NS. TOSHIBA MSX, magazines games, including cartridge, machine code manual, and tape recorder . Still under guarantee. Ring David (0942) 497441. SPECTRUM + Currah Speech, Turbo Interface, Quickshot II,  of programs, sell for  or swap for Commodore 64 and accessories. Phone 530 4784 after 5 O'Clock and ask for Robert. 48K SPECTRUM, Kempston Interface, Joystick, original games, Crash, Your Spectrum magazines, tape recorder together worth  all in very good condition sell for  phone 01 679 4908. 48K SPECTRUM, DK Tronics keyboard, Kempston Joystick & Interface, Cheetah Sweetalker, Centronics Printer Interface,  software,  books & magazines, very good condition, worth  will sell for  ono. Phone 01 674 3427 AMAZING OFFER! Unwanted 1541 disk drive, (secondhand but in excellent condition). Just send me your 10 favourite games (via Turbotape). The person whose games are the best will receive. Mr J Fletcher, 9 Beresford Road, Dorking, Surrey RH4 2DE. SELL OR swap, CBM 64 originals. Include Summer Games II, Karateka, Hypersports, Wizardry, Emtombed, Dropzone, Pitstop II, Exploding Fist, Shadowfire, Thing on a Spring. Especially wanted Paradroid, Mercenary. Terrormolinos, Gribbly's Day Out. Ring (0298) 77641 after 5pm and ask for Rob. BBC B Micro Computer plus data recorder, joystick, Protek joystick interface, and  of software. Total value over . Will accept  telephone 0924 479437 evenings or 0532 435354 daytime. AMSTRAD CPC464 colour computer plus lots of software, Basic 1 Joystick, Books, Magazines. In perfect condition in original boxes. Bargain at  ono. Must collect (Rochdale 353915. Wanted Electron software and joystick interface.  COMMODORE 64 software to swap/sell. Titles include Summer Games II, Exploding Fist, Frankie, Hypersports. If you are interested write to Clark Colquhoun, Loch Monzievaird, Crieff, Tayside, Scotland.  ACORN ELECTRON, cassette recorder, lots of software (worth over ) including Elite, Zalaga, Gauntlet. Magazines and books. Worth over  sell for  ono or swap for Atari 800XL 64K. Telephone Blackpool (0253) 301027 ask for Ken.  ATARI 800XL, 110 Programme Recorder, including Quickshot II Joystick, Games Cassettes, Cartridges, Magazines, Books and Manuals. All in excellent condition, cost over , sell for  phone 021 550 5768  MSX GAMES to sell or swap many many titles buy 10 games and get 5 free. For a mere .99 or 20 games with 5 free for only .99. Must sell as I have changed computer. Telephone 0926 881619 call Sean. T199/4A COMPUTER, cassette leads and joystick. Also extended basic, Chess plus five other cartridges and manuals. Assorted software, operator's manuals . No offers. Telephone Basildon 411336.  TOP BBC games for sale. All original. Only one pound each. Arcade and adventures for further details contact Julian. Telephone Southend 557063.  COMMODORE 64 Communications Modem for sale. Compunet and Micronet compatible includes software purchased from Compunet titles include Elidon, Mama Llama, Psychedlai, cost  in excellent condition  ono. Phone Dudley (0384) 42375. .48K SPECTRUM Interface 1, Ram Turbo Interface, Joystick, Tape Recorder, Cassette Holder containing  worth of software. Books, magazines and manuals. The whole lot . Pleae ring Wolverhampton (0902) 734768 after 7.30pm ... Simon. "


"MICRO SE I I MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! 48K SPECTRUM, Quickshot II Joystick and Interface. Over 100 games including Spy Hunter, Knightlore etc, Magazines and a  radio Cassette Recorder. All for just  contact Jason on Wallingford 32215. .48K SPECTRUM for sale, plus Data Recorder, Currah Micro Speech and  worth of original software, also lots of books and magazines. Only . Telephone Prudhoe 10661) 32522. AMSTRAD CPC 464. Complete with Colour Monitor, D.K. Tronics Speech Synthesizer, Quickshot II joystick and over  of software. Worth . I want  ono ring 445843 after 4pm and ask for Chris (West Drayton area).  ATARI 600XL, 1010 Recorder, Joystick, 14 games, Basic Starter Books all for , phone (01) 907 3749 ask for Damon, Stanmore Queensbury area (excellent condition).  ATARI 600XL, 1010 Data Recorder, Joystick, many games including Encounter, also many Utilities (sound DLI's etc), Book with over 30 listings, Dust Cover. All in excellent condition and boxed as new only  . Telephone Enfield 01 805 4948. LYNX 96K. Books, all leads, joystick interface, lots of software including Level 9 and Romik games. Only . XX81 also for sale, 16K and may games, all leads and manual only . PHone 01-204 1660. 48K Oric 1 swith 13 games, B&W television, recorder, joystick, all leads in excellent condition for . Ring 0949 37067 after 6.15pm or write to C. Cowley, 8 Douglas Road, Bingham, Nottingham NG13 &EL. ZX SPECTRUM software to sell or swap. All originals including Nightshades, Baseball, Monty Mole, Frankie, Spy Hunter, Highway, Encounter, Profanation, Frank Bruno's Boxing and many more. Telephone 0303 862744 after 6.30pm ask for Matt. BBC MODEL B 1.205 + Joystick and Interface + many games including Elite, Frak, Sabre-Wulf, Beach-Head, Jet-Pac, Fortess, Zalaga + many more + Data Recorder. All for . Telephone 643461 (Walsall). T199/4A Modules. Parsec, Buck Rogers, Donkey Kong, Jungle Hunt, Defender, Alpiner, Football Tapes, Pirates to Save Island 9 in all. Offers telephone 044 854 680 after 6pm. BBC B OS1.2, Sureshot joystick and over 's worth of software. Sell for  ono. Call Steven Wiseman, Liverpool, after 4.15pm on 051 427 5493. ATARI 800XL + 1010 Recorder + Manuals + Joystick +  of software, many American titles including Spy Hunter, Tapper, Zaxxon, Blue Max I & II, Dropzone, Ghostchaser, Bruce Lee, Miner 2049'er, Bounty Bob all for . Phone 354 1809 after 5pm. CBM 64 PLUS cassette recorder, both still under guarantee, 30 games, Quickshot Il joystick, owners guide and programming book. Quick sale  phone (0387) 64505 after 5pm. ATARI AND CBM 64 disk adventures wanted. Ultima , Ultima IV, Warlock's Revenge, Gemstone Warrior, Labyrinthe of Crete, Gwendolyn, Inside the Astral Rift, Alternate Reality Shadowkeep, other good adventures. Phone Nick 0703 420016. VIC 20 16K + recorder + joystick + Introduction to Basic pat 1, 6 cartridges + 14 cassette games worth . Sell all for  phone 0773 832522 after 5pm. 48K SPECTRUM with W.H. Smith's tape recorder also Kempston interface. Quickshot Il joystick and the starter pack of games.  telephone (0509) 503726. SPECTRUM 48K, Fuller Keyboard, Ram Turbo Interface, Atari Joystick,  of original software, including Sherlock, Hypersports, Daley's Supertest, etc. Worth almost . Sell for  phone Roxton 60038 after 4pm. Ask for Andrew. PHILIPS G700 videogames includes Killerbees, Nightmare etc. Around  per game all in excellent order. Telephone Finmere 7894 after 5pm ask for Paul. FOR SALE! ZX81 in excellent condition. 16K Rampack and three games,  ono. Alos BBC originals. Write to 36 High Gill Road, Nunthorpe, Middlesbrough, Cleveland, TS7 OEA SPECTRUM complete package. 48 Spectrum, Alphacom Printer, Kempston Joystick and Interface, plus dozens of games. Worth over  want . Ring Finmere 7894 after 4pm and ask for Paul. ATARI 800 Program Recorder with Dust Covers, Basic Programmers Kit includes Basic Cartridge and Manual  of games software on cartridge and cassette all for  ono. Phone Bishop Aukland 7664586. COMMODORE 64 games for sale. Blackwytch, Pitstop 2, Beach-Head 2, Raid over Moscow, Thing on a Spring, Zaxxon,  each. Beach-Head, Moon Cresta, Falcon Patrol 2 Super Pipeline, Chinese Juggler, Loco, River-Raid, Beamrider,  each. Booty, Spooks, Big-Mac, Hektik,  each. Telephone (0623) 554153. BBC MODEL B for sale. Over  software, joystick, cassette recorder, books, magazines and all leads necessary. Worth over ,700 selling for just . Phone Glenrothes (0592) 745244. Genuine sale reason. 48K SPECTRUM Plus for sale. 39 popular, original software titles, many hits, books, ZX printer and paper, Currah speech, joystick and interface and 20 magazines. Worth almost . Will sell for only  ono. Telephone Little Heath 6511 after 6pm. SPECTRUM GAMES: (Frank Bruno's Boxing, Fred, Mugsy, Chiller, Ghostbusters, Jump Challenge, Pedro, Stonkers) Just for  worth  also Airwolf for . Phone 061 766 7034 after 4.30pm and ask for Andrew. ATARI GAMES to swap, hundreds of titles on disk send list to Jason Parker, 24 Glasshouse Lane, New Whittington, Chesterfield, Derbyshire. Many other games also for sale. SPECTRUM 48K. Data Recorder, Protek Interface, Mags and over  of software. Games including Archon, Exploding Fist, Hyper Sports and many more. Everything together is worth , selling for . Tel: (0734) 780852 ring after 4 O'clock. BBC MODEL B for sale,  of software including Elite, Revs Castle Quest, Matchday and Knightlore. Also a data recorder and books, still in box. Just  Phone (0233) 39842. VECTREX GAMES WANTED! will pay up to  depending on game, also controller wanted will pay , and light pen + cartridge will pay . Phone: (021) 373 4404. Thanks!! COMMODORE 64 software to sell or swap. I have, Silent Service, Space Pilot 2, Winter Games. Please phone Amsterdam 020 190669 or write to Osdorperweb 565, Amsterdam, Holland. COMMODORE VIC 20, cassette recorder, joystick,16K switchable ram pack, introduction to basic part 1 programmers reference guide, Maths II O Level cassette, plus six books and 12 games, very good condition,  ono. Ring Richard Attree, Wellington, Somerset. Telephone 4384 after 6pm. CBS COLEVISION. 9 games including Zaxxon, Tuntankham, Ron 'n Rope, Cabbage Patch Kids. Total cost is . Will sell for bargain price of . Phone (0562) 88421. FOR SALE Spectrum, Saga 1 Emperor Professional Keyboard, Kempston Pro Joystick Interface, Quickshot 2, Currah Speech, Ferguson, Radio Cassette, 30 original games. All for a bargain price of only  ono. Tel Neal on (0482) 606507. SPECTRUM ORIGINALS to be sold. Including Tir Na Nog, Games Designer and Full Throttle. Very cheap. S.A.E. to M. Chedaki, 4 Gorsey Bank, Gale, Littleborough, Lancashire OL15 9ET. Don't waste time though. .MSX SOFTWARE. Unwanted prize, \"The Wreck\" brand new. Unopened. Still boxed. I don't own a MXS computer!  ono. Telephone Peterborough 253088 evenings or weekends. DISKS BUG OFF, Savage Pond. Cassettes Caverns of Mars, Leggit, Snowball, Lemonade, Kids Programs 1 and 2 (Educational). Cartridge Centipede. All originals with instructions. A. J. Hollis, G4 Division, HQ Northag, B.F.P.O 40. ZX SPECTRUM 48K, Data Cassette Recorder, Quickshot Il Joystick and Interface, Books, Magazines. Also over 's worth of recent software including Spy Hunter, Dun Darach, etc. Brand new, great Christmas present, . Phone (0384) 292794. SPECTRUM GAMES,  Bugaboo, Blue Thunder, Kong, Airliner,  Classic Adventure, Urban Upstart, Ah Diddums, Alchemist, Football Manager, Les Flics,  Fighter Pilot,  Hobbit with book. All for . Phone Andrew at 021 552 4032 after 6pm. "


"Zaxxon is back! IS THIS THE ULTIMATE CHALLENGE? O SUPER bansor 48K Atari version ended from SEGA. Commodore 6 version and from Hes SEGA THE RATTLEFIELD...Outmaneuver radar towers, armed quard posts and real seeking males Eliminate all obstacles or they will eliminate you THE TUNNEL. Enter with caution Fast and low enemy rack planes INSIDE THE TUNNEL. . The onslaught is never ending Follow the approach path Careluily the enemy doesn't get you one wrong and wil Q000 THE APPROACH...Baas You non this tricky entrance into the bortress AVAILABLE AUGUST 1985 THE DRAGON.. This is her all you've been through the ultimate enemy THE ULTIMATE CHALLENGE of Super Zaxxon is here. Based on the arcade classic, you knew this challenge was coming, but now we'll see if you're ready for it. Selected U.S. Gold titles are available from all leading computer stores. U.S. Gold Ltd., Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. CASSETTE $9.95 Disk *1495 "


"There's never been a better reason for looking forward to Winter! WINTER GAMES Screens from Commodore 64 version of game COMMODORE 64/128 CASSETTE .95 DISK .95 Available Soon for Spectrum 48K & Amstrad TAI You've captured the gold in Summer GamesTM and Summer Games II TMnow It's on to the Winter Games! And what an incredible setting-a completely realistic winter wonderland featuring six action-packed events. You can compete against your friends or the computer. First choose the country you want to represent. Then it's practice, training and learning a winning strategy for each event. Now the Opening Ceremony and the competition begins. Will you be the one who takes the gold at the Awards Ceremony? The quest for the gold continues...And it's all here-the strategy, the challenge, the competition. the art and pageantry of Winter Games! Six Winter Events: Bobsled, Ski Jump, Figure Skating, Free-Style Skating, Hot Dog Aerials and the Biathlon Opening, Closing and Awards Ceremonies complete with National Anthems Compete Against the Computer or Your Friends and Family Unique Joystick Control Requires Timing and Skill > One to Eight Players U.S. GOLD EpYX COMPUTER SOFTWARE "


"CHVG MAP FORSLAG PORN Stephen Crow is a brilliant programmer as Starquake, his latest smash hit creation, proves. But did you know that he's also a bit of an artist too? Well he is! And he drew the diagrams which go with our exclusive Starquake map. The diagrams show you just what to do with the objects and items you find and/or use in the Starquake maze. 0:: D PROJECTION letthet w SECTION EXPRESSION "


"STEVE ROWE ------bo ma ali na licenciat eli keeruliu Must see testiralicabledh ke badlella andra ord ORNARE clearly "


"GRIP STICK-GRIP STICK-GRIP STICK. GRIP STICK-GRIP STICK GRIP STICK GRIP STICK-GRIP STICK-GRIP STICK -> A totally new design gives instant response to your command movements. Up to now Joysticks of the Speedking quality are priced at  and over. The Speedking is microswitch based, and costs only .99, .99 for BBC & DRAGON machines. Designed to fit your hand, not the table top, meaning comfort during the --+ --> GRIP STICK GRIP STICK GRIP STICK G K. GRIP STICK GRIP STICK GRIP STICK GRIP STICK-GRIP STICK-GRIP STICK-GRIP STICK Now FINGER TIP CONTROL borgen IS WITHIN YOUR GRASP. konix GUARANTEED for Twelve Months. Available for Spectrum 48K and Plus Commodore 64, 128 and Vic 20 Atari, Electron, Amstrad, BBC and Dragon machines. Available in left and right handed models. SPEEDKING A Major Breakthrough in Joystick Design ONLY .99 Trade and export enquiries contact Keith or Wayne on (0495) 711988 Konix Computer Products is a trading name of Creative Devices Research Ltd STICK.GRIP STICK. GRIP STICK. GRIP STICK GRIP STICK GRIP STICK GRIP STICK GRIP STICK GRIP STICK GRIP STICK GRIP STICK Please send me .... Speedking(s) at .99 each Right handers please order ........... right handed model Computer make ......... left handed I enclose cheque/postal order payable to KONIX Please charge my Access/Visa Card holders can call (0495) 711988 to order Signature Name: Address: _Postcode Tel: Send to Konix Computer Products Unit 13 Sirbowy Ind Est Tredegar Gwent NP24QZ 89bus d' OUS N YOLS IN. XUS 9.XOULS IN XOLS IN YOLLS IN "


"«...THE FUNDEST CARTOON ADVENTURE YOU'LL EVER TAKE PART IN ...\" SPECTRUM 48K AMSTRAD 464 .95 SWEEVO'S O WORLD GARGOYLE SPECIAL EDITION GARGOYLE GA GARGOYLE GAMES LTO. 74 KING STREET, DUDLEYLWEST MIDLANDS DY "


"ODAK SAFE and then at the two next would object! We see to them (Fig. 2)... that the overall shape of This is the display you the original wave is would see on the screen strongly depicted by the of an oscilloscope if you many sample pulsos. were observing, say, a But, you may say, we 1000 Hz tone a very could do some crafty pure whistle similar to the filtering on the 5.0kHz setting-up tone you can sample by making what is hear on the TV after called a 'Low-Pass Filter! shut-down in the evening which will allow through or during the Test Card the original sine wave but transmissions. It reprewill block off or heavily sents the change in attenuate the high pitch voltage of the signal as a of the 5.OkHz sound. A function of time. good example of filtering Fig. 1a shows the pure is wax in your ears! sine wave and 1b shows All very fine, but where what the display would do the computers come look like if we 'chopped it in? switched it off and on Back to our original noul to the continuously at a graph. Look at pulse (A). speed five times faster We can make some very than the sine wave's own, useful measurements on which in the case of our this pulse in order to turn example is 1000 times it into a form that a per second. Thus the computer can recognize, 'chopping' or sampling store and then frequency is 5000 per manipulate. second, or more comFrom Time Zero [when Now it should be said particular shop and it monly 5.0 kilohertz. Now we start the sampling straightaway that there turned out to be duff, you you can see clearly that process) pulse (A) occurs is nothing new about the could hardly say with any the outline shape of the at, say, 200 milliseconds. technique of sampling. accuracy that 'All sine wave is still there in It has an amplitude of say, Ever since electrical cassettes from that shop Fig. 1b, but if you listened two volts. Immediately we measurements began are dud. If, however, you to the new sampled signal have two measurements back in the days of Hertz bought ten such games you would hear a comwhich define pulse (A) and Ohm people have and found them lacking, posite sound made up of exactly and in terms been attempting to take you would have a much the original 1.OkHz signal which can be readily 'short-cuts' in the stronger case for saying together with the much assigned to addresses in measurement of alterthat all games from that higher pitched and your computer's memnating signals whether in source were suspect. relatively unpleasant ory. So, if we have a the from of voltages or The easiest sound to sound of the 5.0kHz sampling circuit [known currents; charges or study is also the most sampling frequency. as an Analogue to Digital fields. Sampling is just boring to listen to the Let us suppose that we Converter or ADC for such a short-cut and we sine wave. But it is easy sample at 20kHz — a short] and a computer will be explaining the to draw and chop up into frequency only audible to with memory available, we significance of the and illustrates a few humans and then can store the sampled technique in terms of its how the 'rules' affect the only as a 'sensation' sound for future playeffects on modern music. actual sound you hear! rather than a sound back. Next month we'll If you bought a Video Take a look at the two proper, although the dogs see how the professional Game Cassette from a drawings below (Fig. 1) of the neighbourhood musician uses it. pulse -2002 Fig. 1a) A full cycle of a sine wave at 1 kHz. Fig. 1b) The same wave 'chopped' by a 5 kHz pulsed signal. Fig. 2b) The sampled wave with the 'dots joined up' Fig. Za] The sino wave showing the approxichopped (sampled!) by a mation to the original 10 kHz pulsed signal. waveform. "


"SABOTEUR! DURELL software getting harder SPECTRUM & AMSTRAD R.R.P. .95 DURELL sales dept., Castle Lodge, Castle Green, Taunton TA14AB "


"Sir Fred Combo A severe attack of Chivalry on a Moonlit Knight Ye Olde 48K Spectrume .95 MIKRO-GEN Unit 15, The Western Centre, Bracknell, Berks. 0344 427317 "


"THE SOFTWARE CHART  JANUARY Hot off the presses is the latest C + VG Gallup Software Top 30. It's the most accurate and up to date chart currently published in Britain. Just one look through the latest C + VG charts will tell you which top name games are selling the quickest making it easier for you to choose the shoot-om-up, karate game or boxir program you want. It's a knock-out. TOP 30/ALL FORMATS THIS MONTH LAST MONTH WEEKS IN CHART MACHINE SP, C64 SP C64, AMS SP SP I 16 18 26 1918 LINIO GAME Way of the Exploding Fist Frank Bruno's Boxing Daley Thompson's Super Test Fairlight Hacker Fighting Warrior Formula One Simulator Finders Keepers Now Games Action Biker Graham Gooch Test Cricket Spy vs Spy 2 Summer Games 2 Beach-head Bored of the Rings Impossible Mission Monty on the Run BMX Racers Terrormolinos Hypersports Chiller Shadow of the Unicorn Who Dares Wins 2 Ellte Nontorraqueous Sky Fox Barry McGuigan World Champions Marsport Karateka Sorderon's Shadow SP C64 SP SP, C64, C16 SP, C64, AMS, MS SP C64 SP, C64 SP, C64 SP, C64 C64 SP, C64, AMS, BBC, AT, ELEC SP, C64, BBC SP, C64 SP, C64 SP, C64, C16 SP, C64 SP, C64, MS SP, C64, AMS, MS SP SP, C64, AMS C64 SP AMS MANUFACTURER Melbourne House Elite Ocean The Edge Activision Melbourne House Mastertronic Mastertronic Virgin Mastertronic Audiogenic Beyond Epyx/US Gold Access/US Gold Silversoft Epyx/US Gold Gremlin Graphics Mastertronic Melbourne House Imagine Mastertronic Mikrogen Alligata Acornsoft Mastertronic Arillasoft Activision Gargoyle Games Ariolasoft Beyond NNA MANIA 25 7 15 C64 SP C64 SP, C64 AMSTRAD/TOP 10 SPECTRUM/TOP 10 C64/TOP 10 1 2 3 Way of the Exploding Fist/MH Finders Keepers/Mastertronic Frank Bruno's Boxing/Elite Nonterraqueous/Mastertronic Chiller/Mastertronic Grand Prix 3D/Software Invasion Lords of Midnight/Amsoft Formula One Sim./Mastertronic Locomotion/Mastertronic Highway Encounter/Vortex Way of the Exploding Fist/MH Daley Thompson's S.T./Ocean Fairlight/The Edge Fighting Warrior/MH Frank Bruno's Boxing/Elite G. Gooch Test C./Audiogenic Shadow of the Unicorn/Mikrogen Impossible Mission/US Gold Bored of the Rings/Silversoft Sorderons Shadow/Beyond Spy vs Spy 2/Beyond Frank Bruno's Boxing/Elite Summer Games 2/Epyx/US Gold Way of the Exploding Fist/MH Who Dares Wins 2/Alligata Sky Fox/Ariolasoft B. McGuigan W.C./Activision Karateka/Ariolasoft Beach-head 2/Access/US Gold Blackwyche/Ultimate 6 10 10 10 BONNE TIGEN TIME DE MACHINE KEY SP = SPECTRUM C64 COMMODORE 64 AMS AMSTRAD AT ATARI ELEC ELECTRON ENT = ENTERPRISE Frank Bruno's Boxing Number Two. New entry Spy vs Spy. COMPILED BY GALLUP "


"(SO HALL OF FAME HOTSHOTS 1985 they both agree to fight a deciding round. Round Eleven. What a contest. Bruiser Lambert My Lords, Ladies and quick start, jabbing to the summons up all his strength Gentlemen. This is the body and hooking to the to beat Basher by 28,590 to Computer and Video Games head. He scores 28,590. 27,990. heavyweight championship Steven \"Basher\" Lambert So Ladies and Gentlemen, of the month. CVS fails to settle down quickly. Steven \"Basher\" Lambert Introducing in the red Big fight nerves keep his OTSHOT takes the title of C+VG Hot corner, from Sale in score down to 28,290. Round OCTOBER Shot of the Month. Cheshire, 15-year-old Steven one to Bruiser. \"Basher\" Lambert, and in the Round Two. Bruiser Guth is  The Hot Shot game for blue corner, from Loughton forging ahead, scoring January is Alligata's Who in Essex, 16-year-old Jason 29,650 to Basher's 26,800. Dare's Wins for the \"Bruiser\" Guth. Round Three. Could this be Commodore 64. Send your This contest will be fought a walkover. Bruiser out. score on the printed coupon over ten rounds each on points Basher again, this with a 28,820 to 28,390 win. below to Hot Shot of the Frank Bruno's Boxing on the time by 27,600 to 27,530. Round Seven. Magnificent. Month, Computer + Video Spectrum. The contestant Round Four. Basher Basher outscores Bruiser Games, Priory Court, 30-32 with the highest score takes Lambert settles at last, 27,610 to 26,960 to lead by Farringdon Lane, London, the round. giving Bruiser Guth a 30,800 four rounds to three. ECIR 3AU. The victor will win the to 28,680 pasting. But Round Eight. Stunned into the games that we have highest accolade in British Bruiser still leads by three action, Bruiser Guth outpicked for previous Hotshot boxing the title of C+VG rounds to one. punches Basher Lambert by competitions have proved October Hot Shot. Round Five. Basher's 29,330 to 28,280 to draw extremely popular with you, Right lads, let's have a revival continues as he level again. our readers. But not even good, clean fight and may outpoints Bruiser 28,770 to Round Nine. Back storms C+VG gets it right all the the best man win. 28,580. Basher to win the ninth by time and we'd like to know Ding, ding... Round Six. What a 29,530 to 27,550. which games you would like Round One. Jason comeback. Basher Lambert Round Ten. The moment of to see in the Hotshot \"Bruiser\" Guth is off to a draws levels with Bruiser truth, Bruiser Lambert must Challenge. win this round to draw the So, don't delay get your fight. Can he doe it? Yes, nomination in the post now. with the top score of the And please don't forget to match 31,570 to 27,480. keep sending your Hi-scores At the end of ten rounds in. the result is a draw. But You do want to get your exhausted, battered and name in the universe's best bruised as both men are, magazine, don't you? QHI-SCORES e are still inter. forget to send in your scores ested in your highand a photo of yourself If scores on various you think we can stand It, computer games. So don't that is. JANUARY HOTSHOT JANUARY HI-SCORES Name: Nome: Address: Address: My score on WHO BARES WINS was: NL Name of game: scored: Machine: T-shirt size (S,M,L): Witnessed by: Date: Witnessed by: "


"SEE MICRONET 800 IN ACTION At selected Boots, Laskys John Lewis & your local computer store ottosto 69.SOOS T 031 03 AVON Dorchester. The Paper Shop Tunbridge Wells. Modata Bath. Boots 1 Marchants Passage, Kings Road Tel 030564564. Nottingham. Boots, 11-19 Victoria Computer Centre, 28-30 St Johns Bognor Regis Bits & Bytes, High Southgate. Tel 0225 64402. Poole. Lansdowne Computer Centre. Tel: 0602 470676. Road. Tel 0892 41555 Street Tet 0243 867143. Bristol Boots, 59 Broadmead Centre, 14 Amdale Centre Nottingham Testar, 280 Hunting in Eastbourne. Boots, 15 Eastbourne Tel 0272 293631. Tel: 0202 670901. LANCASHIRE Street Tet 0602 505585. Amdale Centre Tel 0323 27742 Weston Super Mare. Peter Blackpool Boots, 28-38 Bank Hey ESSEX Worksop. Computer Graphix Horsham Boots, 1 Swan Walk, Castell Lid. 28 Orchard Street Basildon. Basildon Software St & Victoria SL Tel 0253 22276. 32 Bridge Street. Tet 0909 472248 Tel 0403 53053. Tel: 0934 24778. Centre, 78-80 Liberty Shoppinen Blackpool Blackpool Computer Store, 179 Church Street NORTHAMPTONSHIRE Horsham. Orchard Computer BEDFORDSHIRE Hall, East Square. Tel: 0268 27922. TeL: 0253 20239 Kettering Boots, 35 Gold Centre, 34 East Street Bedford. Boots The Harpur Centre Braintree. Mirage Micros, Street. TeL 053614675. Tel 0403 64884. Bolton. Computer World UK Harpur Street. Tel 0234 56231. 24 Bank Street fet 0376 48321. Northampton Boots, 9 The 208 Chorley Old Road Worthing Boots, 48-52 Montague Bedford. Software Centre, Chelmsford. Maxton Hayman, Parade Tet 0604 22573 Street Tel 0903 207106. Tel: 0204 494304 5 Broomfield Road. Tet 0245 354595. Burnley. IMO Computer Centre, 52a Bromham Road, NORTHUMBERLAND TYNE & WEAR Tel 0234 44733. Colchester. Boots, 5-6 Lion 39-43 Standish Street Morpeth. Telerents (Northern) Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Boots, Leighton Buzzard. DJ Computers, Walk Tel: 0206 577303. Te+ 02825499. Lad, 31 New Gate Street Eldon Square. Tel 0632 329844. 17 Bridge Street, Tet 0$25 383929. Colchester. Colchester Computer Lancaster, Northern Lights, Tel 0607 513537. Newcastle upon Tyne. Luton. Boots, 82-86 Amdale Centre Centre 3a Short Wyre Street 89 Scouforth Road Tel: 0524 62634. OXFORDSHIRE RE Computing, Parkview House, Tel: 0582 20592 Tel: 0206 47242 Preston. 4Mat Computing Abingdon Ivor Fields Front Street, Lane Ends. Gray. H. Reynolds, 79 Orsett BERKSHIRE 67 Friargate, tel: 0777 561932. Tel: 091 2701740. Computers, 21 Stert Street, -Road Tel: 0375 5948 Slough. Boots, 178-184 High Rochdale. Boots, 50 Market Tel: 0235 21207. Sunderland. Business Micro Street, Tel: 0733 27267. Harlow. Harlow Computer Centre, Way. Tet 0706 53225. Banbury. Computer Plus, Communications Ltd, Refuge Maidenhead. Boots, 54-58 High 17 Staple Tye Tel: 0279 22846. LEICESTERSHIRE 2 Church lane. Tel: 0295 55890 Assurance Buildings, Saint Thomas Hornchurch. Comptel Computer Street Tel: 0628 27892. Leicester. Boots, 30-36 Gallowtree Odford. Science Studio, 7 Little Street, West Sunniside. BUCKINGHAMSHIRE Systems 112a North Street Tel 0763 64916 Clarenden Street. Tel: 0865 54022 Gate. Tel 0533 21641. Tel 0402 446741. Milton Keynes. Boots Leicester. DA Computers Oxford. Absolute Sound and Video, WALES 18 Crown Walk, Secklow Gate Wese Tlford. Boots, 177-185 High Road 1 19 Old High Street, Headington 104 London Road Tel: 0533 S49407. Aberdare. Inkey Computer Tel: 0908 607327. 1 Socklow Gate West Tet 01-553 2116. Market Harborough. Harborough Te+ 0865 5661. Services, 70 Mill Street, The Square, Romford. Software Plus, Milton Keynes Depson Business Home Computers. 7 Church Street SCOTLAND Trecynon Tel 0685 881828 72 North Street. Tel: 7065271. Systems, 65 Aylesbury Street, Aberdeen Boots, 133-141 Union Te+ 0858 6356. Aberystwyth. Aberdata at Bletchley. Tel 0908 367446. Southend-on-Sea. Computerama LONDON Street, Tel 0224 585349. Galloways 23 Pier Street 88 London Road Tel: 0702 335443. Aylesbury. Boots 69-70 Friars W1. Computers of Wigmore Dundee Boots, 49-53 High Street, Tel 0973 815sp Square. Tet 0296 83661. Southend-on-Sea. Computer Tel: 0382 21756 Street, 104 Wigmore Street. Cardifl. Boots 36 Queens Street Centre, 336 London Road Chesham. Reed Photo & & 105 Frederick Street Tel: 0702 337161 Edinburgh Boots, 101-103 Princes Tel 01486 0873. Computers, 113 High Street Tel Street. Tel 031-225 8331. 3191. Wi. Galaxy 230 Tottenham Southend-on-Sea. Estuary Tel: 0494 783373 Court Road. Tel 01-636 6500 Personal Computers, 318 Chartwell Court Road. Tel 01-636 6300. Edinburgh. Microworld Computer Cardiff. The Computer Shop 41 The Hayes Tet: 6272 26666 CAMBRIDGESHIRE North, Victoria Circus Shopping W1. Sonic Foto Micro Center, Group. 12 Leven Street. Cardiff Cardiff Microcomputers Cambridge. Boots, 65-67 Sidney Centre. Tel: 0702 614131. 256 Tottenham Court Road, Street and 28 Petty Curry Street Edinburgh Edinburgh Computers Tel 01-580 5826. 46 Charles Street. Tel 072 373072. GLOUCESTER Tel 023 350213 Newport. Gwent Computers 51-57 Lothian Road W1. Tomorrows World Today, Cambridge. Cambridge Computer Georges Road Tel: 0242 528979. Cheltenham Screen Scenic 144 SU 27 Oxford Street. Tek 01-439 7799. 92 Chepstow Road Tel 031 229 4418. Store, 4 Emmanuel Street WC1. Transar Micro Systems, Edinburgh. Silicon Centre, Tek 0633 84176). Gloucester. Boots, 38-46 Eastgate Tel 0223 358264 Newport Boots, 155-156 7 Antigua Street Tet 031 557 4546. 59-61 Theobalds Road. Peterborough. Boots, 40-42 Bridge Street Tel: 0452 423501. Tel 01-405 5240 Glasgow. Boots 200 Sauchiehall Commercial Street Tet 0633 51212. Street Tel: 0733 65352 HAMPSHIRE W8. Boots, 127a Kensington High Street. Tet 041 332 1925. Swansea Boots, 17 St Marys Peterborough. Logic Sales, Basingstoke. Boots 15 Old Arcade, The Quadrant Shopping Glasgow. Microworld Computer Street. Tel 01-937 6882. Unit 6 Midgate Parade, Basing Mall Tet 0256 51611. Centre. Tet 0792 43461. Group 11 Bath Street SET. Vic Oddens Micros, Tel 0733 49696. Bournemouth. Boots, 18-20 6 London Bridge Walk Tel 041 332 1116. Swansea. The Micro Store, 35-36 Commercial Road. Tel 0202 21713. TeL: 01-403 1988 St Neots. Compute, 3 Cross Glasgow. Boots Union Street and Singleton Street Tet 0792 46980. Keys Tel 0480 72013 Fareham. Electronequip, 36-38 SE15. Castlehurst Lad, 152 Rye Argyle Street. TeL041 248 7387. WARWICKSHIRE CHESHIRE West Street Tet 0329 230670. Lane, Peckham. Tel 01-639 2205. Glasgow. Tom Dixon Cameras Coventry. Boots, 38 42 Corporation Chester. Boots, 47-55 Foregate Fareham, Boots, 21 Westbury EC2. Devron Computer Centre, 15-17 Queen Street Street Tet 0203 26561. Street. Tet 0244 28421 Mall Tel 0329 232011 155 Moorgate. Tel: 01-638 3339. Tel 041-204 0826. Leamington Spa. Boots, Portsmouth. Micro Choice, Chester. Computer Link, 21 St. Glasgow. Commscot Lad 31 Parade Tet 0926 24945 N14. Logic Sales, 19 The Bourne, 159 Havant Road, Drayton. Werburgh Street Tet 0244 316516 The Broadway, Southgate, 30 Gordon Street Tet 041 226 4878 Leamington Spa Leamington Crewe. Midshires Computer Tel: 0705 327591. East Kilbride Boots, 33-37 The Tel: 01-882 4942. Hobby Centre 121 Regent Street Portsmouth. RDS Electrical Plaza. Tel: 035 52 2820 Centre 57 Earle Street N22. Boots, 38-40 High Road, Tel 0926 29211. (Portsmouth) Ltd. 157-161 Wood Green. Tel 01-881 0101 Falkirk Boots, 79-91 High Tel 0270 589191. Nuneaton. Micro City, 1a Queens Kingston Road Tel 0705 812478. Macclesfield. Computer Centre, NW4. Davinci Computer Store, Road. Tet 0203 382049. Street. Tel 0324 20535. Portsmouth. Boots, 194/204 68 Chestergate. Tel 0625 618827. 112 Brent Street, Hendon. Hamilton Tom Dixon Cameras Rugby. O.E.M, 9-11 Regent Street 8 Cadzou Street Tet 0698 283193. Commercial Road, Tel: 0705 825248. Tel 01-202 2272 Warrington. Boots, 39-45 Bridge Tef788 7052 Street Tel: 0925 574825. Southampton. Boots, 23-29 NW4. Boots, Brent Cross Peterhead. North East WEST MIDLANDS Above Bar Street. Tel 0703 333983. CLEVELAND Computers. 1 Ellis Street. Shopping Centre Tet 01-202 5256/7. Birmingham. Boots, City Centre Waterlooville, GB Microland, Tel 0779 79900 Middlesborough. Boots NW11. Computers Inc, 86 Golders House, 16-17 New Street 7 Queens Parade, London Rd SHROPSHIRE Tel 021-643 7582 Green Tel 01209 0401. 88-90 Linthorpe Road, The Tel 0705 259911. Shrewsbury. Computerama GREATER MANCHESTER Cleveland Centre. Tel 0642 249616. Dudley. Central Computers Darlington. Darlington Computer Potters Bar. The Computer Shop HERTFORDSHIRE 13 Castlagate. Tel 0743 60528. Altrincham Boots, 13-17 35 Churchill Precinct. George Sreet Tet 061-928 4471 Telford. Computer Village, Tel 0384 238169. Shop 75 Bondgate 197 High Street. Tel: 0767 44417. Tel 0323 487478. Hyde. C Tech Computers, 184 2/3 Hazeldine House, Central Stourbridge. Walters Computer Stevenage. DJ Computers, Square. Tel 0952 506771. Market Street Tel: 061-366 8223 CORNWALL Systems 12 Hagley Road 11 Town Square. Tel 0438 65501. Telford. Telford Electronics, St AustelL AB&C Computers, Tel: 0384 370811. Watford. SRS Microsystems, Manchester. Boots, 32 Market 38 Mall 4. Tet 0952 504911. Walsall New Horizon, 1 Goodall Street. Tet 061-832 6533. Duchy House, 6 Lower Aylmer 94 The Parade, High Street Manchester. Mighty Micro SOMERSET Square, TeL0726 64463. Street Tet 0922 24821. Tel 0923 26602 Sherwood Centre 268 Wilmslow Taunton Boots, 64-65 High WILTSHIRE Bdmin. Microtest, Welwyn Garden City. DJ Road, Fallowfield Tet 061-224 8117. Street. Tet 0823 76061. Trowbridge West Wiltshire 18 Normandy Way. Computers. 40 Fretherne Road Tel: 0208 3171/3182 Micros, Whatchcart Yard Ta Manchester. NSC Computer 6 28444 Shops 29 Hanging Ditch STAFFORDSHIRE Tel 02214 67259. CUMBRIA Kendal The Kendal Computer HUMBERSIDE Newcastle-under-Lyme. Tet061-832 27.9. Beverley. Computing World, Centre, Stramongate. Computer Cabin, 24 The Parade, Marple. Marple Computer Centre, YORKSHIRE 10 Swabys Yard Dyer Lane. 106 Church Lane Tet 661-449 9933 Silverdale. TeL: 0782 636911. Bradford. Boots, 11 Darley Street Tel 0539 22559 Tel 0482 881831. Oldham. Home & Business Stoke on Trent. Town Computer Whitehaven. PD Hendren, 15 King Grimsby. RC Johnson Lid Tel 0274 390891. Store, 30 Town Road, Hanley Computers, 54 Yorkshire Street Doncaster. Boots, 13-15 French Street. Tet 0946 2063 22 Friargate, River Head Centre, Tel 061-633 1608. Tel 0782 287540.. Workington. Technology Store, Gate, Tel 0302 62238. Tel: 0472 42031. Oldham, Boots, 1 Town Square Stoke on Trent Boots, 3-5 Market Barnsley. Boots, 34-40 Cheapside 12 Finkle Street Hull Boots, 48-58 Prospect Shopping Centre. Tel: 061-624 2525 Square, Hanley. Tet 0782 23271. Te026 82616, Tet 090 66972. Centre. TeL: 0482 22334 SUFFOLK Stockport National Micro Penrith. Penrith Communications. Hull Computer Centre, 26 Analby Huddersfield. Micro World Bury St Edmunds Boots Centres, 36 St Peters Gate Computers, 1006-1010 Manchester 14 Castlegate Tel: 0768 67146 Road. Tel 0482 26297. Tel: 061-429 8080 11-13 Comhill Tet 0284 701516. Road, Linthwaite. Tel: 0484 846117, DERBYSHIRE ISLE OF MAN Bury St Edmunds. The Suffolk MERSEYSIDE Alfreton. Gordon Harwood Huddersfield. Boots, 22 King Douglas. T.H. Coleboum, 69-71 High Street Tel: 0773 836781. 57-61 Victoria Street Computer Centre 1-3 Garland Liverpool Hargreaves, 31-37 Street. Tel 0484 21756. Warbreck Moor, Walton Street. Tet 0284 705503. Leeds Boots 19 Albion Arcade, Chesterfield. Boots, 35-37 Low Pavement, Market Place Tel: 0624 73482. Tel 081-525 178 Ipswich Computer Magic, Bond Street Centre Tel 0532 33551. KENT 24 Crown Street Tet 0473 50965. St Helens Microman Computers Tel: 0246 203591. Leeds. Micro Power, Northwood Ashford. DGH, 10 North Street Derby. Boots, 1 Devonshire Rainford Industrial Estate, Mill House, North Street SURREY Walk Tel: 0332 45886. Tel 0233 32597 Lane, Rainford. TeL0744 885242. Tel 0532 458800. South Croydon. Concise Southport Boots, 31-39 Chapel Beckenham. Supa Computers, Computer Consultants 1 Carlton Derby. First Byte Computers, Sheffield. PIP Micro Street. Tet 0704 33907. Communications, 9 Taptown 425 Croydon Road Road Tel: 01-681 6842 10 Main Centre, London Road Crescent. Broomhill St Helens Boots, 8 Church Tek 01-650 3569, Croydon. The Vision Store, Tel 0332 365280 Bromley. Boots, 148-154 High Street, 24 La Grange Arcade 53-59 High Street. Tel: 01-686 6362. Tel 0742 6610%. Sheffield. Boots 46 High lc 044 25 488 Street. TeL: 01-460 6688. DEVON Croydon, Boots, The Mall, Chatham. Boots, 30-34 Wilmott Street. Tel 074278333. MIDDLESEX 12-18 Whitgift Centre Exeter. Boots, 251 High Street, Square, Pentagon Centre Harrow. Camera Arts, 42 St. Wakefield. Boots, 26-28 Upper Tel 01-688 6021. TeL: 0634 405471. Anns Road. Tel 01-427 54.69 Kirkgate. TeL: 0924 376181. Tel: 0392 32244. Epsom. The Micro Workshop, Gravesend. Gravesend Home Exeter. Open Channel, Central York. York Computer Centre, Hounslow. Boots, 193-199 High 12 Station Approach 7 Stonezate Arcade Computers, 39 The Terrace Station, Queen Street Street. Tet 01-5700156. Tel 032 20333 Tel: 0474 23871 Tel 0392 218187. Tek 094 641862. Guildford. Guildford Computer Southall. Twillstar Computers Lad Paignton. Computer Systems LidRoadTel 0303 54007 Folkstone Boots, 24-26 Sandgate 7 Regina Road Tel: 01-574 5271. Centre, 5 The Quadrant, Bridge 35 Hyde Road. Tel: 0803 524284 Street. Tel 0483 578848. Teddington. Andrews, Broad Maidstone. Boots 56-62 King Plymouth. Syntax 76 Cornwall, Street. Tet 01-977 4716. Wallington Surrey Micro Street. Tet 0752 28705. Street Tel: 0622 53912. Systems, 53 Woodcote Road Micronet Twickenham. Productive Maidstone. Kent Micros, 52 Union Plymouth. Computer Base, Computers Lid, 72 Heath Road Tel 01-647 566 21 Market Avenue Tel 0752 672128. Street, Tel: 0622 52784. Tel 01-891 499i. Woking Harpers, 71-73 Plymouth. Boots 2-6 New George Rainham. Microway Computers Commercial Way. Tet 0486 225657. Street. Tel 0752 266271. con Uxbridge. JKL Computers 39 High Street. Tel: 0634 376702. 7 Windsor Street. Tet 0895 31815. SUSSEX Seaton. Curtis Computer Services, Sevenoaks. Emest Fielder Brighton, Boots, 129 North Street Seaton Computer Shop Computers Dorset Street. NORFOLK 51c Harbour Road. Tel 0297 22347. TeL: 0732 456800. Norwich. Adams, 125-129 King Tel: 0273 27088. Brighton. Gamer, 71 East Street. Tiverton. Actron Microcomputers Shortlands. The Village House Street. Tel: 0603 22129. 37 Bampton Street Tel: 0884 152854 Thetford. Thetford CB & Micros, Tel 0273 728681 of Computers 87 Beckenham Lane 21 Guildhall Street Tel: 0842 61645 DORSET Tel 01-460 7122. NOTTINGHAMSHIRE Bournemouth. Lansdowne Sittingbourne. Computer Plus Mansfield. Boots, 39 Four Computer Centre, 1 Lansdowne Crescent. Lansdowne. 0202 20165 Tunbridge Wells. Boots, 7-11 ansons Shopping Centre, Calverley Road. Tel: 0892 26486 Tel 0623 23089. 5 332028222002 Mansfield B Tunbrid treet Tel 0795 25677. Phone 01-278 3143 for your free information pack now! Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1. "


"DEF| WARRIOR GOOD, I'M GLAD YOU'RE HERE, TYR. THE MEETING 15 ABOUT TO START. GENTLEMEN, THE WAR WE ARE FIGHTING MAY SOON BE OVER) THANKS TO PR. LUDWIG BELLOWS. / YES, GENTLEMEN, THE PSI EVIL WILL SOON END! THE PSICLOPS INCIDENT OPENED A HOLE IN OUR UNIVERSE THAT RELEASED THE PSI MENACE. I BELIEVE WE CAN NOW PLUG THAT HOLE.., IF YOU WOULD LOOK AT THE VID SCREEN... BEFORE I CONTINUE, ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS? NO... CHARLIE! ARE YOU OKAY? BEHOLD THE SILO: WALLS 400 METRES THICK, MAGNETICALLY SEALED, SHIELDED AGAINST PSI ENERGY. IN FACT, PAS THE PSI CREATURES TOMB' YES!.. IT'S JUST MY HEAD... A... PAIN, I CAN'T... VISION NEXT: YES, HAVE A QUESTION ! HOW WILL YOU BUILD YOUR SILO WHEN YOUR INVENTOR IS DEAD! BRANSTORE "


"MONTE CARLO TRIP TO THE GRAND PRIX 1986 WINA  LEAVE THE REST BEHIND ut Infronti John Laps to go 5 COMMODORE 64.1 28 MAIL ORDER Enclose crossed cheque/PO made payable to Firebird Software, for .95 cassette or .95 disc, to Kay Newman FREEPOST FIREBIRD, Wellington House, Upper St. Martin's Lane, London WC2H 9DL FIREBIRE FIREBIRO FIREBIRD SOFTWARE WELLINGTON HOUSE UPPER ST MARTIN'S LANE LONDON WC2H9DL TREBIRD IS A TRADEMARK OF BRITISH TELECOMMUNICATIONS PLC LES SA TRADEMARK OF ACORNSOFT LTD GOLD EDITION "


"SOFTWARE SERVICE COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES Seen a game you'd like in this issue? DON'T MISS OUT You can order today from Computer + Video Games super new SOFTWARE SERVICE. It's the easiest way yet of buying all your favourite games and every month there's a unique offer or competition open to everyone who uses the Software Service. This month, three lucky readers will win  of free software the choice of software is left up to you. But that's not all for every game over  we give you 50p off (just deduct it from your cheque/P.O. if the game costs over , deduct ). All YOU have to do is fill in the coupon below and send it off to C+ VG *ALL POST AND PACKING IS ABSOLUTELY FREE!! So send away today and you could win yourself  of the games of your choice. DON'T FORGET TO STATE THE MAKE OF COMPUTER. RING OUR HOTLINE TO CHECK ON AVAILABILITY OF LATEST GAMES 731 4607 SOFOST A and so is fill SUPPLIER PRICE NAME ADDRESS Please send your orders together with a cheque/P.O. payable to the Computer + Video Games Software Service to: Computer + Video Games, FREEPOST, London ECIB IAA. All prices are as quoted in C+VG remember to deduct 50p off the RRP for each game costing over . minimum order . COMPUTER TOTAL COST "


"ELECTRIC MORE LIVE WIRE HITS COMPUTER DREAMLAND FROM THE OLLTE'S FOL, ES TWO EXCITING GAMES IN EACH AMAZING PACKAGE AT THE SUPERB VALUE FOR MONEY PRICE OF ONLY 999 BEER BELLY BURT'S BREW BIZ TAPE DISK AVAILABLE ON COMMODORE 64/128 & ATARI Electric Dreams, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020 Telex: 337268 "


"TLIEKSTEVA The most powerful games in the Universe! Braving enemy attack, the Undaunted must make her way through hostile waters and destroy the enemy stronghold, Only the most courageous crew will be able to take her there; only the most determined mind will be able to succeed. Available on: AMSTRAD CPC 464 SPECTRUM 48K Available soon: COMMODORE 64 .95 DEATH WAKE Available from all good software shops. In case of difficulty write to QUICKSILVA Ltd. Liberty House, 222 Regent Street, London W1R 7DB tel: 01 439 0666 "


"164 roses for me, quite the contrary, 'D.P.A' is about! in fact! What annoys me is that D.P.A is a near hysterical I have wasted a whole day in beast whose job it is to search of a bug that didn't exist, dynamically allocate priority for and yes, you have guessed, it all moving and animated turned out to be a \"feature\" in objects on a 3D isometric This is a story of torture, sleepless my assembler package. screen, thus \"Dynamic Priority I've got used to it now Allocator\". nights, self-denial and devotion to though, and at the end of the most conventional methods duty. In other words, the every day day, the assembler I'm using re-draw the entire screen for life of a computer programmer. with the Amstrad now is every update of a moving possibly the best I've ever used, object. D.PA concentrates on In this instance the programmer is and the only thing that bothers monitoring only those areas of Shahid Ahmad, creator of Chimera for me about it is the slow editor. the screen where a change has Firebird. He claimed he could convert Well, enough of my comoccurred. plaints, what have the game about an investigation of accomwell enough theory, all plished you ask? I managed to know is that it isn't working and a giant alien space craft orbiting get most of the major routines that deadline that I imposed earth to the Amstrad in just one working and finished today, and upon myself is beginning to week. the graphics I'm pleased to say look very crazy Indeed. I have look truly superb. I'm now using Tooked just about everywhere Next month find out if Shahid a full height 18 row screen as in my code, and I can't see the succeeded in keeping to his deadline. opposed to a 14 row screen on Flow, though Ive picked out a my other versions, and must few THE TASK typing errors and fixed flawlessly. I worked a fourteen say that the display is quite This those. Everything else looks all entire masochistic hour day and had three hours appealing. I should have done right, but I have until next campaign started when I boldly off. the adventure handler and the Tuesday in which to debug claimed that I could get a The Amstrad has been on all heater and missile subroutines, DPA, and write the main game conversion up and running on this time and not a single crash but I spent most of my time flow routines and the adventure the Amstrad within a week or disk error, and no overdebugging and trying to get my handling stuff. Things don't look At that point, I did not even heating! I am pleased so far blasted Epson FX80 printer totoo promising have an Amstrad, and the only with my performance, and work with my Amstrad. The Amstrad has performed thing I knew about it was that thanks to Phil Collins and U2 for flawlessly throughout these it had a sound chip and video getting me through the first day DAY THREE four days, and aside from that, chip similar to that of the BBC. with my sanity (and my disks!) FRIDAY Well that did not help, since I do the assembler is quite fast, and intact. Today is the day that I Joe Hubbard's incredible bass not know anything about the attempted to get D.P.A working playing keeps me awake in the BBC either. DAY ONE on the Amstrad. OK, I under early hours. The next day. Firebird told stand, you want to know what to be continued me what had been set up for WEDNESDAY me, and that I should start What is it that makes someone when ready! I thought that it get up at 10.23 in the morning might be an idea to Amstrad first and learn but for a Joe Hubbard album? something about it. That I duly I won't keep you guessing, it is did and here I am now, writing programming games! Even a prelude to a week that should when you are doing on stretch me to the limit. Can I do version, a bit of inspiration it? There is always a first time always helps, and mine is for everything. fuelled by listening to good bass playing, and occasionally DAY ZERO playing bass myself, despite the TUESDAY fact that I'm awful! CHIMERA And so started the first day of Well had a bit left over from yesterday, and I typed in the my week of self-inflicted torture DER STAD at 10.00 am, when most human e last remains of it and test 23523 assembled it. beings are already hard at work. The assembler did its job well, and my files were OK. It's NIE SITORS I knew what had to be done 3 first, and that was the graphics. stronge working with a reliable I had taken the liberty of system, especially after all the writing a simple graphics editor I'm used to! microdrive and 1,541 problems from Basic, because without it. Only two days have passed my task would have been and I have written the bulk of rendered impossible the code and finished off the Later on, amid o few short graphics bar a single toaster and frantic bass guitar slapping image, but I'm getting worried. sessions, I coded some of the Will finish on time? Will my more mundane routines like brain fail? Will the Amstrad collision detection and drawing_give up the ghost? Will Joe the 3D screen. Hubbard teach me how to play I received my shiny new the bass?. CA SMERA Hisoft CP/M & Macro Assembler this morning after finding bugs DAY TWO FOODS 7655 in the original version. I tested AL it on some large files and then THURSDAY everything went smoothly. As you may have guessed, hope it continues to perform today hasn't been a bed of M13 M "


"The Standard by which others will be judged. VIDEO This is Hardball from Accolade. The first in a new generation of game, software that sets the standard for others to beat, if they dare! With graphics so large and lifelike and sound effects so real, you'll believe you really are at the ball park yes, you can almost smell the hot-dogs! Sorry, we can't supply the hot-dogs: you'll have to bring your own-but everything else is here to recreate the atmosphere, tension and excitement of big time baseball on your own small screen. Accoladet D ON IOCOCOCOCO JO OUN). COOCOO 09 ILOUW P:Frisina R3.$ser. Granny Senaony HardBall! ByAccolade For Commodore 64 Cassette $9.95 Disk .95 U.S. GOLD Al Can Softwa tware "


"C&VG GOLDEN JOYSTICK AWARDS 1985/READERS POLL T ver wanted to give a software only major awards chosen by the people company some stick? Of course you who actually play the games. That's have. And now C+V6 is giving you YOU, the C+V6 readers. Other awards the chance to do just that. Yes, it's the are usually given away by people who Golden Joystick Award time probably haven't even held a joystick! again! So if you want to get in on the act Just in case you've had your head and tell us who should get our Golden stuck under a stone for the last couple Joystick Awards for 1985, just fill in of years wel fill you in on what these the voting form below and rush it to annual awards are all about. It's YOUR Computer and Video Games, Golden chance to vote for the games that had Joystick Awards, Priory Court, 30-32 you on the edge of your seat Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. throughout 1985. YOU get to tell us Don't forget to add your runner-up what game should get the prestigious choice in each category even if your Game of the Year award. You choose favourite game doesn't win a top award which software house gets the ultimate it could always come a close second. accolade of a Golden Joystick. You We're looking forward to getting your choose the Programmer of the Year. roles in so get cracking! And Plus lots of other glittering prizes. remember 20 lucky people drawn YOUR vole decides who gets what from the roles pile will get a free piece The C+V6 Golden Joysticks are the of software for their machine. C+VG GOLDEN JOYSTICK AWARDS 1985/READERS POLL GAME OF THE YEAR Runner up SOFTWARE HOUSE OF THE YEAR C&VG GOLDEN JOYSTICK AWARDS 1985/READERS POLL SUSRAAM A Runner up BEST ORIGINAL GAME Runner up BEST ADVENTURE GAME Runner BEST STRATEGY GAME Runner up BEST ARCADE STYLE GAME ADA Runner up PROGRAMMER OF THE YEAR   Name Address Computer owned "


"SEND US YOUR GAMES! Muha Klebs Have you written a games program that you'd like to see printed within C&VG? You have? Then fill in this form and rush it to us at Computer & Video Games, Program Listings, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. We pay  for each listing we print So get your game to us today! We'd also like you to send us a photograph of yourself it doesn't matter how silly you look -SO we can feature your smiling face alongside your listing and make you REALLY famous. Money and fame what more could you ask for? Please fill in the form below carefully so we know exactly what's going on in your game. And please include full instructions and program details along with your tape. Don't forget to keep a copy of your game for yourself. We're afraid that \"to be published\" files. And that's where the waiting starts. We we can't return your tapes to you. receive several hundred tapes each month and loads of them Talking of tapes that's how we'd like you to send your are printable. So it can take quite a while to see your game in games in to us. On tape or disc with a listing if you have a print. But we like to think that it's worth the w printer. And starting here and now you could become C&VG's Lots of our readers have been asking just what happens to Programmer of the Year which we'll judge at Christmas time, their games when they arrive at C&VG. Well, we send them out to So you could get an unexpected Christmas bonus. And don't our team of hard working reviewers who let us know just what worry those of you who already have had programs printed they think of your game. If they like it, your tape will go into our you'll be eligible too! Program name:....... Machine make:....... ......... Model........... . . . . . . . Number of K needed to run it:..... Other models it should run on:.... Other equipment (joysticks, Extended Basic, add ons, etc.) needed to run it:..... Author's Christian name:....... .... Surname...... Address:.... ........ Date: ...... ........ Tel:........ Type of game: (If original please say so)...... Loading instructions:....... Game instructions: (If not included in the listing).. Office use only Date received: Evaluator's comments Acknowledgement sent: Name of evaluator: ..... Date sent out:.... Date due back: Good enough to publish Needs some tidying up Not worth publishing Date sent: ...... Same game already published on this micro Needs to be returned to author for alterations: Due to be published in... issue of magazine. Wouldn't load "


"C+VG COMPETITION SIDE 3. Name the last British driver to win the Formula One Championship. 4. Which Grand Prix driver has won the greatest number of F1 races? Is it a) Jim Clark b) Nelson Piquet c) Jackie Stewart d) Niki Lauda? COMPETITION C+VG/ENGLISH SOFTWARE ELECTRA GLIDE My answers are: 3........ 4. Vroom, Vroom! It's time for all you armchair racers to take a firm grip on your joysticks and prepare to take off on a ride you'll never forget! Electra Glide is the new futuristic race game from English Software. It features some amazing sound, terrific graphics and is the fastest game around for the Atari and C64 right now. You race through an ever changing landscape, through tunnels, across deserts and all the while strange things are bouncing up the road at you. And there's an alien craft that just loves to construct deadly road blocks at crucial moments! If you'd like to take a ride on the road that goes on forever, why not enter our special Electra Glide competition? English Software are offering 100 cassette versions of their new hit game to C+VG readers. There are 50 C64 versions and 50 Atari versions up for grabs. All you have to do is answer the simple Electra Glide quiz below and a copy of the game could be yours. Normal C+VG competition rules apply, closing date for the competition is January 16th and the Editor's decision is final. Now get into gear and race to your nearest post box with your entry form! ELECTRA GLIDE QUIZ 1. Who is the 1985 Formula One World Champion? 2. Which is the fastest Grand Prix racing circuit? Is it a) Monza b) Silverstone c) Monaco d) Zandvoort? Name Address ....... I own an Atari/Commodore 64 (delete where applicable) THE FLINTSTONES closing date for the competition is January 16th, Ten lucky runners-up will get a copy of the game id you know that the first Ghettoblaster was court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU! Invented in the Stone Age? Bet you didn't. But recent evidence of a fossilised ghettoblaster normal C+VG rules apply. dug up during archeological work on a building not a million miles away from Priory court proves that for their micro. stone age man was listening to heavy rock music long before the Iron Maiden appeared on the banks of the Thames. and this one used to belong Now C+VG are proud to announce that one of our lucky readers will be able to win a replica of one of just like the these historic devices to that well known cave-person Fred Flintstone! To celebrate the launch of their brand new Flintstone game Quicksilva have given us a National Panasonic ghettoblaster to give away one Fred listened to his favourite rock bands on. So what do you have to do to win? Simple. We've printed a picture of Fred with an empty speech bubble. All you have to do is fill in the bubble with a suitable funny comment and rush it off to computer and Video Games, Flintstones competition, Priory C+VG/QUICKSILVA FLINTSTONES COMPETITION Name...... Address... Computer owned. C64 (tick box) Spectrum "


"Become the hunter   nec-7 SPECTRUM 48k COMMODORE64 AMSTRAD ...Burn tread on the streets! 7-95 8.95 3.95 Home Oceans Ocean Software is available from selected branches of; WOOLWORTH, WHSMITH.DE Sohn Menzies, LASKYS, Rumbelows, COMET Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Ocean Software Ocean House 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Telephone 061 832 6633 Telex 669977 Oceans "


"C+VG COMPETITION It's the battle of the giants in this double competition thanks to our friends at Mertech. Yes, it's Geoff Capes Strongman meets The Zoids! Mertech have just released games based on these fact and fictional characters. Geoff Capes Strongman is different from previous sports simulations because it does not rely just on \"joystick bashing\". Strategic planning is needed to bring Geoff to the peak of his physical fitness to undertake his strongman events. Zoids is an all action battle game based around the popular toys. What we want you to do is draw or paint a picture of strongman Geoff or one of the battling Zoids. And these are the fabulous prizes up for grabs in these competitions. The winner of the Geoff Capes Strongman competition will get a Body Build Family Fitness 4+ Exercise Kit. It includes chest expander, skipping rope, power bender and hand grips. The six runners up will get copies of the game and the next 25 will get a game poster. Top prize in the Zoids competition is a fantastic Tomy Omnibot. The next six people will get copies of the game and another six will receive a Zoids wind-up toy. Send your drawing together with the printed coupon to Computer + Video Games, Martech Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. The competition closing date is January 16th and the editor's decision is final. BODY BILD C+VG/MARTECH COMPETITION Name Address_ CBM 64 BBC BO Electron MSX 0 Atari Please specify your computer Zoids Spectrum Amstrad Geoff Capes Strongman Spectrum CBM 64 ( BBC B Amstrad MSX ans G "


"COMMODORE THIS I MUSIC 64 This is it — the definitive guide to musical add-ons for the 64. You can't miss our music special in your newsagents next month. It will have a flexi-disk on the front cover with a medley of hits by Heaven 17 — composed on the new TMS music system. Discover the sounds hidden in your 64 with this definitive guide. HE G FORCE The crack team have been busier than ever lately writing our new BIGGER reviews of the latest Christmas releases. For your enjoyment we check out Jeff Capes Strong Man Game, Rock and Wrestle, Rambo, Commando, Lord of the Rings, Gyroscope, Mercenary, all the cheapies, and all the compilations. Just don't forget, G Force reviews are always first and best. HAPPY HACKER Introducing a new Mr. Hacker with a new look guide to whats going on at Compunet and Micronet. Plus MODEMS what are they, which one, how much, and where to buy .000 WORTH OF PRIZES FREE TYPE IN GAMES Win TMS Music Systems, Elektra Glide's, Zoids and a free! Commodore User a month for 1986. Can't afford ten quid for the latest smasherooney? Worry not, there are always short, free games to type in CU. HOT SHOTS All the news that THEY don't want you to know about in this New Year Sleeze Special. On sale Saturday December 21. Make sure of your copy now. "


"COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU bank account. I have been buying your excellent magazine for around two years now, but I am starting to have second throughts about rushing down to W. H. Smiths every month to buy a copy, as your magazine seems to specialize on the Commodore and Spectrum. Nowadays, it only takes seven minutes to read all of your magazine. Have I got a gift for English, or is it that there is nothing to interest me and my fellow Atari owners? Most of the seven minutes is spent reading the fantastic advertisments from US Gold, which leads me to my next point, why do you always review the U.S. Gold games for the CBM64/C48? Is your Atari to start a shop!! I think your magazine is going to go down in history as the greatest and the most enjoyable magazine ever. Your Bug-Hunters and Psi Warrior comic strips are hillarious. Of the Bug-Hunters, I especially like Big Red. He may be daft, but he is cute. Your reviews are good but please make them a teeny weeny bit longer. I think I have just about got the message through to you that your magazine is the BEST in the universe and now will you please, please, please let me have one of your t-shirts with that cute little (little? Ed) Big Red on the front? Please. James Dodd Leicester Editor's reply: I knew there had to be a catch. Congratulations to C+VG. I've received you October issue and I liked the new look you gave to it. I liked The Bug Hunters cartoon. It made up a bit for the loss of The Bugs. I liked your Lord of the Rings article. Give my congratulations to the artist, Chris Achilleous. His illustrations in the article are incredible. However, there were two pieces of misinformation in the article. The third book is called Return of the King not Ring and the final defence was against Sauron, not Saruman, who, by then, had been imprisoned in Isengard by the Entsy. Unfortunately, the article didn't say which machine the adventure will be available on. I suppose it'll be on the Spectrum first, like Mr Michell's previous programs. It almost makes me wish I had the Spectrum and not the '64. I hope he'll translate it (preferably on to disk) to the '64 soon. I like your Konan the Barbeque cartoon. I'm sure there are many cartoonists out there who can produce cartoons like that, too. Why don't you put the cartoon on the borders of the pages like in the 'Mad magazine? It'll make your already enjoyable magazine much better. I find American computer magazines too serious for my taste. Hooray for British mags! Also, will the adventure team please state in ALL their reviews which machines an adventure program is available on, which one was used for the review and which company released it. It's frustrating reading about a good adventure and not knowing where to get it and on what machine it can be run on. Finally, Ilamas are the greatest. Long live Jeff Minter! May his hairy creations never cease to flow from his fingers. Soh kan Yung Malaysia. Editor's replay: Another well known C64 magazine may already have cartoons in the borders, Soh we could be accused of copying if we did the same! Thanks for putting us right on the Rings! game. I can reach the fourth level and Colin can reach the fifth. We both think that this game is marvellous and highly addictive and spend a lot of time playing it and even sometimes well into the morning. Do you know if you can get extra men along the way, or not? What tickles me about Frak is that you get a code for each different score you get. Colin's code is 'Hairy Hooters Fit Small Bugs Slowly' and the score is 21,000. Just one more thing before I go. In the March edition of Computer + Video Games you printed a game for the Vic 20 called Hero. You said that it will run in 3.5K. This I have found is not true because I ran out of memory whilst typing it in. Does this mean that you have to have 16K? Well I think that is about it for now. If ever you decide to include the games I have mentioned in your Hall of Fame, please include our hi-scores. Keep up the good work and keep printing lots of programs for the Vic-20 and Commodore 64. Marika Pollek, Reading Editor's reply: The answer to your question is Yes you do need 16K, Marika. collecting dust? How about borrowing some of the latest excellent Atari software from Silica Shop? Or why not pop up to the fantastic English Software company and give some of their games a pounding. Just one more thing, I plead with you to review some Atari games, so Atari owners can enjoy your magazine as much as the other computer owners. S Butler Bradford. Editor's reply: Don't know how you can say we ignore the Atari, Mr Butler. We devoted eight pages exclusively to the Atari in our August issue. And in our reviews we generally say when a game is available for your favourite machine. . This is the first time I have written to your magazine, mainly because it is the first time I have bought it. My regular magazine is CRASH because of their playing tips section, but I think I will start buying C+ VG as well, or instead of. The main reason for this drastic action is your Microsell section, Penpal section and all those competitions. It's okay reading reviews, you know that what you are looking at you can buy. But in C+ VG you get reviews for the majority of computers and you can contemplate which machine has the best games and then go out and buy it. Dezzy Gibbons Ireland  I have recently bought a copy of Palace Software's Cauldron for the Spectrum. I think that the game is very good but the sound is lacking a little. However, I do have one very big complaint. This is to do with the free game on offer with Cauldron called The Evil Dead. On opening my Cauldron cassette case I looked for the instructions. Hold on! What's this? No instructions to either game, only a pathetic effort of a poem!  At long last I am the proud . I am writing to simply say that owner of a Commodore 64 and 1 your magazine is THE best! Your am so pleased I felt that I must free posters and games book are write to you about it. I never sensational believed that the 64 could be such Your previews and reviews are a good machine and it was well mega excellent! YOUR fantastic worth the wait. book of maps is magnificent. Last week I bought three Your competitions are ceeazzy games. Ghostbuster, Lazy Jones don't make them harder now I and Frak. After playing them for have said that. about two days I managed to I first bought a copy of your reach good hi-scores. For magazine at a jumble sale. Ghostbuster I reached $29,000 (What? Ed) which I was proud of until my It was the March 1985 issue, boyfriend, Colin got $171,300. I and I have been collecting it since couldn't understand why we were then. given account numbers until we Your modern look for the loaded the game in again a few magazine is mind boggling. The days later and found that we very thought of your next issue could use our account numbers to makes my brain fizz. continue the game. I always like your maps, hints Frak is the most challenging and tips because I collect them. I game that we have ever owned have got enough maps from you and I think that it is a terrific So, I open C+VG, find the review of Caldron and at last find out what to do in this game. But what about Evil Dead? I cannot find any instructions to this game anywhere. It is very annoying. Can anyone help me? I am sure that many other readers are faced with the same problem. However, I must say that it is a good idea to have two games on tape, as it gives you value for money. I have noticed a few other software companies doing this, but not very many. Many people would choose a pack of two highquality games on one tape rather . I was relieved last Christmas when my father, instead of buying one of those machines that your magazine seems to be obsessed with, walked in with an Atari 800XL, which didn't close his CONTINUED OVER PAGE "


"+ Q 100ml |||||||||| COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU than one game on its own. And now to another complaint about the Cauldron package. In the game itself, a small flashing bag and similar chest can be found. On collecting these, they appear on the two scrolls on the top fo the screen. What are they for? Decoration? They are certainly not ingredients for the notion. D Cartwright Clwyd Editor's reply: OK, Bug Hunters! Get out there and get some Cauldron tips and some instructions for Evil Dead while you're at it. Can anyone else help? we had over 50 Members but by bring out Pi-Mania for the Atari, June of this year numbers had will Ultimate ever program for ye fallen to 20. However, we feel that olde Atari? 1985 has been a turning point for It looks like I shall just have to us; we have transformed an ailing go and have another bash at Star club into a thriving and forward Raiders. looking user group. Francis Crower We have learnt the importance Ireland of regular discussion and business meetings, where Members can  Last Christmas my brother express their views about current and I received a CBM-64. At first issues. We maintain interest in everything was going fine until one day the delete key came off. Basic programming by holding It was taken back to the retailer monthly programming and sent off to Commodore. competitions and occasional When it arrived back, I played on computer oriented quizzes, it for a few hours. After a few crosswords and puzzles. days it went wrong again. If any member has purchased Weird messages were put on the new software, they bring it the screen and sometimes there was meeting for us all to see, and we no K to use. have found that this has saved I was very annoyed and we had many an expensive mistake by it sent back to the retailer who in other members. Not all the turn sent it back to Commodore. software lives up to its advertising. When it arrived back, I started We have had good response to playing and once again it went a recent intense advertising wrong. campaign, although there is If anything was typed in, the always room for new members and new ideas. In conclusion, first letter was always missed off. would like to say that, if there are When I loaded a game the first any other groups going through part of the graphics were missed. difficult times, keep fighting for Eventually it got worse. We took your club, it's well worth the it back again and told them we effort. had had enough. After careful Should any of your readers be consideration we decided on an interested in either starting their Amstrad and haven't had any own group, or learning about problems since. ours, I would be happy to hear Simon Perry from them at the address below. Grimsby Linda Aberombie 2 Springwell lane  Thanks for printing the best Balby computer mag out. In Australia, Doncaster C+VG comes at least two months DN4 9AB after the publishing date but it is well worth the wait. Every month, sometimes take a month. Bravo to Software Projects for fast service and producing the best game out. for the Dragon. Now I have a few questions to ask. Since Jet Set Willy is an auto-executing game on the Dragon, is there any poke or command that will give me infinite lives and also a command that will allow me to jump from any height and not be killed? I know that you are sick of receiving pokes for this game but it would help a great deal if someone could come up with an answer. John Silverman Victoria Australia Editor's reply: Can anyone help John with his poke problem? Write to us and we'll pass your tips on to him. . I think your magazine is great! I think Anirog's games are great. Have you seen Tom Thumb? The Bug Hunters are great, I like Big Red and B-Con. Now a grumble. Why have the charts been shifted from the nice large colourful centre pages, to a boring black and white pictureless page? Would you do a Wunda Walker review for us Vicsters? IN case you don't know it is made by Interceptor Micros. Here is a quick tip for other Vic 20 owners. On Matrix for Vic-20 16K, to get onto the next level, hold down the following keys:SHIFT, SPACE, D.C, and F. I promise it does work well, on my computer anyway! One last word thanks Keith, the Helpline is great. I would be even better if I could have Mission Impossible tips. Marc Wallage Suffolk Editor's reply: We wanted to give our reviews more colour Mare and give our readers those special free pull-out posters. That's why the chart had to be moved. We'll keep an eye out for Vie games too... like Ri, Bug Huntem Thumkreat,  I would like to inform you of something that happened to me because of one of your adverts. I own an Atari 800XL and saw an advert in one of your issues for Software World in Birmingham. My father had to go to Birmingham so naturally I remembered this advert and grabbed the opportunity of visiting this \"marvellous\" firstfloor Atari centre. When in Birmingham I spent a fair amount of time searching for the street. When eventually I found it I saw it had closed down. \"Just my luck\" I thought. There was a poster, though, saying where the Atari centre had moved to. So, it was out with the A-Z. When I eventually arrived I was horrified to see that it was no bigger than a little newsagents. I went in anyway, enquired about some games which they stated did not exist. The assistants did not know what they were talking about, the shop was badly organised and the range of software very limited. I had had a totally wasted journey. A couple of weeks later I saw a micro-ad for another Atari software library in Sunderland. I rang up on the Sunday night and by Tuesday morning I had received full details and a cataluge which contained a wide range of new and exciting titles. The moral of the story? this just goes to show that readers should consult the micro-ads and not be influenced by the size of an advert. Luke Good, Leicester  Guess what, I or should I if your magnificent magazine is say my brother owns a machine, in an Atari 600XL 64K. By the Most of the time it is, but standards I expect from this sometimes it goes so fast I machine I haven't seen one cannot get a single copy and I solitary game for it worth buying. have to wait the whole month for My brother loves adventures the next issue. I have just bought especially Level 9's. I'm a \"zap it the August issue and reading before it moves\" addict, but I through it, I find the usual superb must admit Level 9 adventures are articles full of good advice for superb. every serious computer gamer. My Have you seen Attack of the favourite articles are Arcade Mutant Camels? Good ole Jeff Action and Mailbag because does it again. I luv it. Arcade Action tells me what Anyway, I just don't know why games to play at the arcades and the big Commodore and Spectrum Mailbag is bursting with hints for only software houses don't my computer which is the program on the Atari. It is a very TRS-80. good machine by all accounts. After hearing so much about So come on Ultimate, Mikro Software Projects' Jet Ser Willy, I gen etc. Though I think I know decided to send away for it. I was what they will say, program a surprised to find that the game game worth marketing, and we had arrived two and a half week will market it. Well, I'd like to see after I had sent the order off, Atic Attack, Alien 8 or which is great! A normal letter Pyjamarama. Will Automata even across town in Victoria can . We read daily of the current downward trend in the computer industry. This includes the demise of many famous software companies, computer manufacturers and even computer magazines. The computer user groups have also suffered during these difficult times, I understand that the Scunthorp club (from my own area) have had to close through lack of support. Our own group. The Doncaster & District Sinclair Computer Club, has also suffered from falling membership. Two years ago "


"TRO OTTODOS AMSTRAD 1993 PINGPONG The officially endorsed version of the No.1 arcade game by Konami Baterie SeGle Imagine Software (1984), 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS. Tel: 061-834 3939. Telex: 669977 You can almost feel the tension of the big match breaking through the screen... the expectant crowd is almost on top of you! You return the service with a Top-spin Backhand, then a Forehand Back-spin, the ball bounces high from your opponent's looping, defensive lob... SMASH!... a great shot opens the score.. but this is only your first point! Play head to head or against the computer in this, Konami's first and best table-tennis simulation. Imagine Software is available from selected branches of "


"Pen Pals Page 22  I am a Spectrum owner from Germany and would like to contact other owners. My hobbies are collecting software and playing arcade and adventure games. Andreas Schnoedewind Dessauerstr. 58a 4050 Moenchengladbach 1 West Germany  I am writing to inform your publication that a new computer club has been formed in the Whitehaven/Workington area. The club, which will be known as The West Cumbria User Group, will cater for computer and electronics enthusiasts. Activities to be undertaken will include open evenings, computer courses and working on various computer and electronic projects. At present these include 6502 and 280 machine code as well as an eprom programmer, graphics digitiser, lightpen and speech projects. For details of the User Group, and dates of meetings, ring P. Majid (0946) 62732 or K. Purkiss (0946) 66586. A. Johnson Secretary  We would appreciate your mentioning the newly formed 'Christian Micro Users Association. We hope to link together a large number of Christian micro users and also to promote the use of micros in Church activities. There is not only a great need to discover the few individuals and companies producing \"Christian' software. But also to share the expertise and ideas of the many people who have sought to use micros in their church related activities. For further details, and a sample magazine, please send a S.A.E. Christian Micro Users Association, c/o 6, Walkley Street, Sheffield, S6 SRG. P. A. Clark Sheffield Sth Yorks  We are a group of Spanish MSX users who would like to exchange ideas, experience and software with English users. Club Usuarios MSX Pza del Navio 1 28042-Madrid Spain  I would like to write to anyone who owns an Electron. I love Chuckie Egg but can only get to the 25th screen. Please write to me at: P Cain 9 Puriri Street Lower Hutt New Zealand  I own an Amstrad CPC 464 and would like to have penpals from anywhere. I am 1722 years old and would like to write to someone about my age. Adnan Abdullah Ali PO Box 3740 Salmiya Kuwait  I am a boy from Finland who would like a penpal who has an Amstrad CPC464 or 664. I would like to exchange software, news and just talk about computers. Mika Kuulasa Katiskalahdenkatu 21' 35800 Mantta Finland . I am an America drive and 1010 cassette gaming nut, anxious to player. Looking forward to contact other Apple and hearing from you. Atari computer users Lar Broberg throughout Great Britain. I Granstigen 8 am a student and just S-620 20 Klitenhamn starting to program. My Sweden other interests are the writings of J.R.R. Tolkien,  I own a Spectrum and a figurine painting and wide selection of games, attending Sci-Fi conferences. mostly arcade. I would like to be contacted by anyone, Riat C Fleischmann 3621 North 8th from anywhere, as soon as Tacoma WA. 98406 possible. USA John E Restano 6/3 Kings Yard Lane  Hi, I own an Atari Gibraltar 600XL and 1010 recorder  I am a Spectrum owner and am looking for penpals and I collect games. I would from other parts of the be interested in someone world. I also have a Texas who would like to swap and PB-100 pocket software, hints and tips. computer. Please write to Carles Ferry me and become by friend. Clot 25, A-1 Luay Hmoud 08026 Bacelona PO Box 1318 Espana Irbed Jordan  I own an Atari 800XL, Data recorder and disk  Hello everybody. I am a drive. I live in Somerset and Spectrum fan and I would would like to hear from like to write to any other other Atari owners. Spectrum owners from Martin Rogers anywhere in the world. If Somerset you would like to write to me, please do.  I am a proud owner of an MTX 512 and, thanks to Agust Ami Johnsson Snorrabraut 50 a cartridge produced by 105 Reykjavik Memotech, I will soon be Iceland able to play Spectrum games too! I adore  I own an Atari 800XL adventures and have quite a with disk drive. I would like few, however I enjoy a penpal to exchange playing other games, too. I software and information. am looking for a penpal Stephen Parker who owns an MTX or Scotland Spectrum. I don't mind the country  I am a lonely Atari If it's you, don't wait owner here in Sweden and another minute, get pen to want to get in touch with paper and write to the other Atari owners to find address below. out information and your Dino Mangion views. My brother and I 17 Zinnia Street have an Atari 400 and Sant Lucia 800XL, rama 1000 disk Malta "


"INDIANA JONES, J.R. & BRUCE LEE JOINED THE U.S.GOLD CLUB... ...NOW YOUCAN TOO! You are aware only too well, the ability of U.S. Gold to bring to you the very best of American Software at British prices. Previously American Software, whilst recognised as being of brilliant concept and quality, has been prohibitive in cost compared to home produced packages. In April 1984 that situation became history! During 1985 U.S. Gold will be releasing titles from the following well known software houses: DataSoft/Synapse/Sega/ Microprose/Cosmi/Access/Sydney/Sierra Microprose Cosmi/Access/Sydney/Sierra On Line Advantage/MindscapelAmerican Eagle/S.S.I./Big 5/Funsoft/Penguin/PDMand thats only Sixteen excellent reasons to join the U.S. Gold Club. Here's some more: Membership to the U.S. Gold Club Membership Fee-.99 + 75p P+p will guarantee you a regular newsletter includes: featuring software reviews, advertising material and future product information  U.S. GOLD SWEATSHIRT There will be regular U.S. Gold Software  U.S. GOLD BADGE offers and U.S. Gold merchandise offers.  POSTER Be 'In the Know' before your friends.  NEWSLETTER  U.S. GOLD MEMBERSHIP CARD Becomea member WARNING: of the U.K.'s Premier Desire for U.S. Gold Software might Software Club seriously affect your bank balance!! -To U.S. Gold Ltd.. Unit 10, Parkway Ind. Est. Heneage St., Birmingham B7 4LY. i I would like to become a member of the U.S. Gold Club. I OWNA COMMODORE 64/SPECTRUMAMSTRAD/BBC/MSX/ATARI. (Delete as appropriate) I have enclosed a cheque/Postal Order for .99 + 75p (p+p) to U.S. GOLD CLUB For my Membership Fee I will receive a Sweatshirt (26728 30/32\" O SOMOLO). US Gold Badge, U.S. Gold Poster, and my first Newsletter. I will receive a regular Newsletter and special U.S. Gold offers exclusive to members. Name Address .............................................................................. Post Code ***** TT US GOLDI American Software RE "


". NEXT MONTH IN ON SALE JAN 16  Crash! We've just hit you with one of the best Issues of C+VG so far. We bet you're still stunned and amazed at the value we give you for your money. And next month we're going to Zap you with an even better issue. Some of our \"rivals\" out there in the rough, tough world of computer magazines have even had the cheek to put their cover price up to .95 for a \"special\" edition which gives you less than we do every month. Unbelieveable, Isn't it? Right, here's what you get for your 95 hard-earned pennies. FREE a 32 page Book of Games packed with great programs for the Spectrum, Commodore, Amstrad and BBC. FREE A specially produced C+VG/Domark FRIDAY THE 13TH poster. Miss it and you'll be really cut up.  Our cover feature will be on the truly wonderful M.M.M.M.M.Max Headroom. He'll be back on our TV screens as a computer game. We also pull aside the Iron Curtain and take a look at what is happening on the software front In Hungary.. DINIS There's also a chance to meet the one and only Micro Wizard who does magical things with his computer. If you promise to keep it a secret, we'll tell you how to perform a spellbinding 21 card trick on your Spectrum. DINIS . If you want competitions, then look no further than C+VG. So far we've lined up competitions around Scooby Doo, Koronis Rift, Gyroscope, Tau Ceti and Bladerunner. IPIUS. We've also got a couple of maps for you. If you are a fan of Robot Messiah or Hacker, make sure you reserve your copy now!! . We've also got all the usual features, reviews, news, hints, tips, Arcade Action, fun, frolics and, of course, The Bughunters. T-SHIRT OFFER You too could have a body like this! Just send off the coupon below and IDEAS CORP will mail you your very own musclebound body kit to assemble and wear in the privacy of your own home. But if you don't have time to play around with, why not just send for C+VG's extremely attractive t-shirt? I can't wait to pose in my Big Red t-shirt so I've enclosed a cheque or postal order for a mere .50 and I await the arrival of my medium/large (delete as applicable) t-shirt trembling anticipation Name........... Address............. So if you want a square deal, value for money magazine, that doesn't alter its price from month to month, get Computer + Video Games. At 95 pence you know It makes sense. Tel. Send to: C+VG T-SHIRT OFFER, WARD LESTER, 14 HERTFORD ROAD LONDON NI (Please allow 28 days for delevery. Overseas readers should add P+P) "


"ON 48K SPECTRUM, ALSO AVAILABLE THE CHART TOPPING FLIGHT SIMULATION NOW ON ATARI FIGHTER CBM64 & AMSTRAD FREE COLOUR POSTER AVAILABLE WITH DISK VERSION BY D.K. MARSHALL ADAPTED BY NIK SEN 400/800/600 XL 800XL130 XE WITH AT LEAST 48K. A SPECTACULAR FLIGHT SIMULATION OF THE WORLDS MOST EXCITING JET FIGHTER WITH STUNNING 3D COCKPIT VIEW AND DEADLY 3D AIR TO AIR COMBAT Ia The SUPREME SIMULATION it leaves the rest at the runway threshold! SPECTRUM VERSION VOTED \"Simulation of the year 1984\" by CRASH MICRO READERS. eque of my with DIGITAL LINTEGRATION OAD add ATARI Fighter Pilot Disk .95 Fighter Pilot SPECTRUM Tomahawk 48K O .95 Night Gunner 48K .95 Fighter Pilot 48K .95 COMMODORE 64 Speed King Disk .95 Speed King Cassette .95 Fighter Pilot Disk Fighter Pilot Cassette D .95 AMSTRAD CPC 464, 664, 6128 Fighter Pilot .95 Fighter Pilot Disk .95 Please send to Cheques payable to Digital Integration Ltd I enclose a cheque/P.O. for Total Name Address Watchmoor Trade Centre, Watchmoor Road, Camberley, Surrey GU153AJ Or debit my Access Account No. Trade and Export enquiries welcome. Tele Sales Lifetime Guarantee. (0276) 684959 VAT and p. & p.inclusive within UK (Overseas inc. 55p. per cassette) "


"Ten. A BeWalke var The Invision is uit kane "

