"MEGADRIVE AMIGA MASTER SYSTEM GAME BOY NES PC GAME GEAR FAMICOM PC ENGINE NEO GEO ST 10.00 Dm 460 385 Ptas S 9770261369031\" .40 COMPUTER Solution + VIDEO FREE 75 GAMES 02 FEBRUARY\"92 ISSUE 123 INSIDE: SPEEDBALL MONEY ISLAND 10 JOHN ADDENIS GRADIUS AND MORE GAMEBOY GAME GEAR LYNX PC ENGINE GT ISSUE 4 FEBRUARY 1992 FREE!! 12 GO! INSIDE N A GATE BUGS BUNNY 0 0 QALAGA AND MORE T21 TOTAL NINTENDO EXCLUSNETT TERMINATOR ALBSEG COOPI B21 BRITAIN'S ONL AND-HELD MAG! KOBOLOF 2 EXCLUSIVE! MEGA CD V SUPER NES! WE TEST THE BEST! "


"ADDEDY Nintendo CAME BO» Games console ORION PICTURES CHP ALL AKTS RESERVED TMA DORION PICTURES CORPORATION ALL RGHTS RESERVED oc "


"PLAY FOR NINTENDO DRAGONNINJA A . Ta VAVVMMM SERT SINS 98FEE 1923   ORION PICTURES CAP ALL RIGHTS RESERVED *N*^*M* E los | LG }^{m}ET FOR MORE INFORMAT ON OUR NINTENDO PRO PHONE: 061 832 663 ASK FOR THE NINTENDO NINTENDO GAME BOY AND THE OFFICIAL SEALS "


"CONTENTS FEBRUARY 1992 ISSUE 123 10-HELT GAMEBOY TERMINATOR 2 GO! 12 BUGS BUNNY GO! 14 NAVY SEALS GO! 17 ROBOCOP II GO! 18 ROGER RABBIT GO! 22 TURTLES II GO! 23 36 68 GAME GEAR NINJA GAIDEN GO! 6 GALAGA '91 GO! 20 à MEGADRIVE SUPER FAMICOM THE TERMINATOR 26 JOHN MADDEN ROBOCON 46 FOOTBALL SPEEDBALL 2 48 SUPER FORMATION BEAST WARRIORS 86 SOCCER FIGHTING MASTERS 87 LEGEND OF ZELDA III CORPORATION 101 CHUCK ROCK 103 PC DESERT STRIKE MONKEY ISLAND 2 AMIGA EYE OF THE BONANZA BROS BEHOLDER 11 JOHN MADDEN LOOM FOOTBALL INDIANA JONES FANTASIC VOYAGE FATE OF ATLANTIS MASTER NEO GEO SYSTEM 2020 BASEBALL ALIEN STORM 20 THE TERMINATOR 26 PC ENGINE GRADIUS NINTENDO TERMINATOR 2 STAR WARS LYNX ROBOTRON 2084 GO! 8 HARD DRIVIN' GO! 21 LEMMINGS | GOI 22 VIKING CHILD GO! 23 8 28 ED FIRST In between his shark fishing expeditions, crocadile wrestling bouts and assisting the Sovie bouts and assisting the Soviet Union in their switch to a freemarket economy, Tim Boone still manages to find the time to knock out an issue of CVG. What a star, eh? NEWS What's been happening in the mad, mad world of leisure computing? You'll never know, unless you scour this month's thrill-a-minute News pages! If it's hot it's here! STRIKE ONE! STRIKE TWO! STRIKE THREE! YER OUT!!! 22 Neo Geo fans get ready for a sporting sensation and check out 2020 Baseball on the wonder machine it's a future sim of America's second fave game where the best are victorious and the sad men get blown-up by landmines! GO! FAB FOURTH ISSUE!! 7 It's unbelievable! This month's cover game Robocop 2 gets a full EXCLUSIVE Game Boy shakedown in Britain's ONLY mag for hand-helds, as does the lab Terminator 2 cart the cover of this month's CVG! Game Gear fans can be dumbstruck by GO! Reviews of Ninja Gaiden and Galaga '91 and there's tons of stuff for Lynx and PC Engine GT owners too. including a massive GT Lowdown! What more could you ask? EDITOR TIM BOONE (PIRATES MAY BE NASTY. BUT...) \"When I was at school me and my mates used to crawl under the partitions in our lockers and pinch sweets out of the other kids lunchboxes. It was daylight robbery. we did it for ages and nobody caught on. It was terrible and I still feel guilty about once every ten years DEPUTY EDITOR FRANK O'CONNOR \"The worst thing I ever did was lossen the bolts on this kid's bike and bet him he couldn't ride down this hill in less than thirty seconds. He pelled off down the slope, the bike fell apart and he went llying. I leel terrible about it now. ART EDITOR JON BILLINGTON \"When I were a lad I used to hide under the stairs, jump and out scare my grandad stupid. One day he was so petrified he almost had a heart aliack, so I got taken to one side and given a real telling off. Il didn t work, though 'Cos I still do it at work and it's a great laugh. STAFF WRITER PAUL RAND \"lonce sprayed loads of air freshener on my little brother's arm. to see what would happen and it came up in this massive orrible lump. you've never seen any. thing like it. I've been feeling guilty about it all week...\" "


"HE SAID HE'D BE BACK! 26 It's an Arnie invasion in CVG this month! Terminator 2 Judgment Day lines up for EXCLUSIVE reviews on NES and, in your fab fourth issue of GO!, Game Boy! And if that's not enough, an update on the original Terminator game on Megadrive AND an EXCLUSIVE look at the same game on the Master System! Your fingers must be burning with the heat! THE CVG QUESTIONNAIRE! Think CVG is tops? Want to see a bigger issue of GO!? Don't sit in a dark corner and grumble to yourself fill out our latest CVG Questionnaire and tell us what you want to see (and what you don't) in Britain's best games mag! Hurrah! YOBS MAILBAG 4/ THE BATTLE FOR TOMORROW BEGINS TODAY He's the man they can't gag and his girlfriend's a hag. Brltain's answer to something very poor indeed answers letters and invites you to give him a gobful of slaver! MEGADRIVE VS SUPER NES THIS TIME IT'S WAR! The Super NES is released in the UK this Spring! And you can bet your bottom dollar that Sega will be pushing forward the launch date for the Mega CD. To help you fight your way through the hype, CVG brings you a special four page pullout as we put the two head-to-head which one comes out tops? CHEAT MODE 59 He's the man in the known universe who wears shades in the middle of winter. Mind you, they are cool Ray Ban's. He's Paul Rand, he's everyone's hero and he's ready with a bunch of supercool tips just for you. THE RETURN OF THE CVG CHALLENGE! It's back! The CVG Challenge returns due to popular demand, as ace Speedball 2player Matthew Pont takes on the lads at his fave game but the sneaky CVG trio have a trick up their sleeves! THE OFFICIAL UK HIGH SCORES CHART! Sultry Sadie perches her fruity frame at the helm of the good ship High Scores with Britain's only Official Highscores Chart the most important reference point for the country's top gamers today! Have you got what it takes to make the grade? Check those scores and find out if you too can be a hero! JAZZA'S ARCADE ACTION 88 Bloody hell! Jaz Rignall bursts forth from the Southend arcades to bring news of Xexex. Pang sequel Tumble Pop and news of the incredible Star Trek pinball table! PREVIEWS 99 What a lot we've got for you this ish! Empire Strikes Back on NES! Chuck Rock and Corporation on Megadrive! Loom on CD-ROM! And the brand new Indiana Jones adventure! There's so much here you'll fill your pants and probably somebody else's too! 75 0000000 mag GO! MANAGING EDITOR JULIAN RIGNALL *There was this kid I really hated in the school rugby team, so I sprayed loads of Raljex in his underpants and he was hopping around in agony for ages. It was a horrible thing to do, but bloody funny and he deserved it.\" ADVERTISING MANAGER Jim \"Long John Owens SALES EXEC Greg Black Spol\" Watson PRODUCTION ASSISTANT Emma \"Little Treasure Sadler ADDITIONAL LAYOUTDipna\" Majhu MARKETING MANAGER: Marc \"Jolly Roger\" Swallow PUBLISHING DIRECTOR: Graham Pieces Or Eight Taylor SUBSCRIPTION ENQUIRIES (INCLUDING GO!): CVG SUBSCRIPTIONS, PO Box 500. Leicester LE 990AA TEL: 0858 410510 EDITORIAL AND ADVER: TISING SKILL ZONE: CVG Towers. Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR JAU TEL: 071 251 6222 FAX: 071 490 0991 STAFF PICTURES BY: ROZIE STOTT AND HER INCREDIBLE FLASHGUN OF DOOM PRINTED BY: KINGFISHER WEB LTD. FENGATE PETERBOROUGH COLS OUR BY PROPRINT LONDON E13 TYPESET BY: FABULOUS PHILIP AND HIS FAMOUS FIVE-FINGER SHUFFLE DISTRIBUTED BY: BBC FRONTLINE (C) COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES 1991 ISBNNO: 02613597. THIS MONTH'S QUICKIE QUIZ: WHADDYA CALL SOMEBOY WHO DOESN'T KNOW THE ANSWER TO LAST MONTHS? ANSWER NEXT ISH, AND FINALLY HELLO TO EVERYONE LIVING IT UP IN PENNSYLVANIA YOU KNOW WHO YOU ARE! "


"ED-FIRST PARTMAN. PART MACHINE ALL EDITORIU BOONE IS W elcome to another action-packing, thrill stacking, gob smacking issue of Britain's greatest games mag! Inside these very pages you'll find all the latest and greatest games on your machine and whatever you got for Christmas you can bet your booties we cover it here! First off, check out the incredible latest issue of GOI nestling gently inside these lovely pages. Inside you'll find the world's first EVER review of the incredible Terminator 2, Robocop 2 Exclusive and so much other great stuff you won't believe your eyes! In fact It's stuffed with so much hand-held action it might just stunt your growth, so handle with care... If T2 on the Gameboy ain't enough, we've also scooped the game on NES for the full Nintendo treatment. And If that still leaves you with any breath left, we've weighed in with Exclusive previews of the game on Megadrive and Master System. Woo! Once you've recovered from that, check out our incredible pull-out Mega CD v Super NES special and fab games including Monkey Island III, Speedball II, 2020 Baseball...the list is almost endless! So prepare yourself for some of the latest and greatest goodies in the world, and keep writing in with your comments, tips, hints, recipes, shopping lists, desert Island discs, cash, banker's drafts, certified cheques, indecently large diamonds, crown jewels and anything else that might give us a laugh -'cos that's what keeps us making mags as good as this! See ya next ish. Thani from boTin NES KOBDEDTORI IAN HES MEAN!!! Is Randy really this handsome? Jabon Mortimore from Teignmouth, Devon, certainly thinks so! the web The Man WOT A SPAMMY GET! By the time you read this, yours truly should be rubbing should ders with all sorts of famous people amidst the glitz and glamour of Las Vegas! I'm there to report on the CES Show, where zillions of great new games are unveiled to journos from across the world! This is where all the big-time games publishers unleash their latest goodies on the world, and we'll be there for the indepth report! So look out for next ish, which should be stuffed with more white hot Exclusive games news than anyone can handle, together with a full report on some pretty sad antics with those bloody fruit machines... DRAW THE BOYS FOR FAME AND FORTUNE! Wowza! We had a fab response to our Draw The Boys compo last month, in which we asked you to draw piccies of us just like those you find on CVG's review pages! For sad shamblers who missed it, we asked you to draw hilarious piccies of the CVG team and we're putting up a Megadrive for the very best of the lot and free software to whovever we think deserves it! So if you want the chance of winning, get that skill pic in to: THE BEST MAG EVER, CVG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. Meanwhile, here are a few we like the look of! ono a Paul Kennedy from Birmingham's the bodacious dude behind this fabbola piccie! "


"FATTETEVIPIMATTEET NELISHING HIND TO FIN LEB OF PATOS DESCUP ROFESS PUTATE TE THE FIRST PC TO BREAK THE SOUND BARRIER. And when it comes to using all that storage capacity it has a fast 80286 chip running at 16 Mhz so you'll be able to get through the business of the day with enough time left to play around. THE COMPLETE SYSTEM We gave the Amstrad PC5286 all the best features you need for serious business use and great games entertainment. Then we gave it features which were unheard of. As you'd expect, it has state-of-the-art graphics with a 14\" high quality VGA monitor which will display up to 256 colours from a palette of over a quarter of a million. Terrific for business applications but all that colour is wasted on games if your sound system comes from the dark ages. So we gave it a sound system that makes it unique. Its fully Ad-Lib' compatible soundcard with its twin external speakers, brings you closer to the action bringing a whole new dimension to the PC. If golf isn't your game the Amstrad PC5286 Family Pack comes with two other great games. Together with fully featured keyboard, mouse, DOS 3.3 with user-friendly graphical interface and a joystick. Also included is Microsoft Works the outstanding integrated business software package. So at $799 inc Vat it has to be a sound business proposition. BUILT FOR BUSINESS We gave the PC5286a massive 1 Mb RAM, 40 Mb hard drive and 1.44 Mb 3.5\" floppy disc drive. FOR FURTHER 0277 262326 AMSTRAUI Please tell me more. I like the sound of the PC5286 Name Address Postcode EESTI | Coupon information may be kept on a database. This may be passed to your Amstrad | dealer, if you object please tick box LINKS F-15 STRIKE EAGLE II PRINCE OF PERSIA Send to: Amstrad plc, PO Box 462. Brentwood, Essex CM14 4EF Tel: (0277) 262326. R.R. P's correct at 1/1/92, may change without notice Microsoft Works is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation Amstrad plc October 1991. All rights reserved. Available from selected branches of Allders, Dixons, John Lewis, Rumbelows, Rymans, Wildings and over 3,000 registered Amstrad computer dealers. "


"NEWS TUAL REALITY SPECIAL REPORT It's Virtual Reality, it's fab and it's here! VR is the b.i.g news right now. The ability to immerse yourself totally in a computer generated world has caught on like wildfire, and Leicester-based W Industries are about to take the arcade world by storm with a load of new VR treats so here's FRANK O'CONNOR to tell you all about 'em... WTLLALITY EXOREX W e reported on this game V V quite some time ago, but it's been through quite a few changes since then. The game is a networked four player shoot'em up, featuring elements of strategy and sneaky cunning. The players drive (if that's the right word) huge, dirt stomping Robots armed with missiles and lasers. The object is very simple... find your opponents and blow them to oblivion! The computer is there to make things difficult for you though, sending out armed drones to hamper your pro gress. The action takes place in a large maze of Skyscrapers, plenty of hiding places for you and your enemy. You can't leave the city though, 'cos a huge laser fence will vaporise you if you try it and the perimeter laser towers won't let you near it anyway. You can wander around at will, or call up a blueprinted map to help you find your way around. We've played early versions and the verdict is awesome. Look for a full review soon! DACTYL NIGHTMARE VA/hat's the scariest dinoV V saur of all? I'll tell you, it's the Pterodactyl. This fearsome creature ruled the skies millions of years ago until evolution came along and invented the sparrow Dactyl Knightmare is one of the most effective uses of Virtual Reality ever. Up to four players can participate and the object of the game is simple. You simply run around a maze of platforms and kill your pals. The problem is, a huge Pterodactyl is swooping around, ever hungry and always looking for fresh meat. The players can pick up extra weapons to make the job of killing their mates easier, but the flying fiend is indestructible. This particular game uses overhead sensors to detect where you're standing and the illusion of reality is excellent. Of all the VR games, this one is easily the most fun and it should prove a big hit. CYBERT CYBER QUEST ryber Quest is so hot that not a lot is known about it. We can tell you it's a three dimensional RPG along the lines of TV's Knightmare show. Featuring wizards and warriors galore, this is your chance to become Conan the Barbarian or at least as close as you can get. It's expected in Spring 92, so it shouldn't be too long before we have some more information. Watch this space! "


"BUSTERING PAGE SOCCER AT IT'S BEST. Nintendo Fast Realistic Fun to Play LIMAGINEER CO., LTD GAME Nintendo Original Nintendo IMAGINEER CO., LTD Nintendo Original Nintendo Seal of Quality FORTRAYTENDO TM 19 1990 1991 ANCO GAMES Nintendo ALL RIGHTS RESERVED ENTERTAIEMENT This Game Pak can only be used with the Mattel or NES versions of the Nintendo Entertainment System.\" Each player on the pitch is an individual with a unique combination of skills and physical attributes. Instinctive joystick controls to Pass, Dribble Shoot, Head and Chip the ball or do a Sliding Tackle. Curling Corner Kicks, controlled Throw Ins and Goal Kicks. Injury and Extra Time. Red and Yellow Cards. Set Piece Free Kicks and the famous AFTER TOUCH to let you bend, swerve and dip the ball. Plus a host of other options. Cup, League and Euro Trophy Competitions with PENALTY SHOOT OUT. Original Nintendo Seal of Quality IMAGINEER Co., LTD Nintendo GAME ROY the Nintendo product Seals and other mor desgrated as \"TM ats trademarks of Nintendo Innovation Through Human Network Distributed in U.K. by ANCO SOFTWARE LTD. 7-8 Millside Industrial Estate, Lawson Road, Dartford, Kent. Tel: 0322 287782 "


"WORLD CUP '92! No sooner has one World Cup finished, than another one gets ready to launch itself. The competition in question is the Cricket World Cup whoo! This very exciting tournament has been signed up by Soundware International who are as we speak creating a game to match the pace of the license. All the World Cup sides will be there to choose from including South Africa who have just been allowed to come back to world crickel. Amiga-owning cricket ans could well be interested to know that World Cup Cricket is pencilled in for a January 12th release at a price of .99. TOP GEAR THRILLS 'N' SPILLS! BATTEO SEE SELECT A TEAN TO LOAD DOLARE Jere's some news on a game set to become one of the hottest racing titles ever seen on consoles and that's saying something! Top Gear (which may be released as Top Racer) has to rank as the hottest racing cart yet on the Super NES (Famicom), and one of the greatest head-to-head console laffs ever! When the Big Ed himself rushes into the office with a preproduction cart, makes funny shapes with his face and gesticulates all over the place you know he's got something very good (or a dose of something very bad). Top Gear puts you in the driving seat of some of the swankiest cars around at tracks across the world. Race against the computer or a male for maximum laffs and select either Auto or Manual gears depending on how good you are! What really makes Top Gear stand out is the fact that it's being programmed by none other than Gremlin the publishers behind the outrageously succesful Lotus Turbo Esprit. You know it's got to be good! SZAT Sets STANCE GAMESMASTER IS HERE! After months of hard work, the computer and video games show Gamesmaster has finally hit our TV screens. The first programme was shown on January 7th and will run for another nine weeks. If you missed the first show, don't worry you only missed John Fashanu playing Manchester United Europe as well as a whole host of CVG bods doing their \"thang\" on the box! Future episodes will feature such big names as boxer Gary Mason, tennis girly Annabel Croft and snooker star Jimmy White. Each will be playing games based upon their own sports (hard to guess what Jimmy will be playing, eh?) either on their own or against members of the public. It's the first time a real computer and video games telly show has been screened, but what do you think of it? Why not write to YOB and give him your thoughts! 2.00 Kawasaki TURKEYS OF PREY? It's egg-on-yer-face time for Argonaut Software, the proIgramming team fronted by Jez San, who created the incredible Starglider Il amongst other things. Their long-awaited super sim Birds of Prey has arrived at lastand it's a bit of a sad case, to tell the truth. Yes, there are the forty different planes featured as promised, but there are a few snags. The flight control panel is the same for each plane, for one. Very realistic, huh? Then there's the ground objects or rather, the lack of them. A couple of hills and that's about it, really. But the most disappointing point is the outrageously slow update speed, making the game a chore instead of a joy to play. Considering Birds of Prey has been in production for around four years, it's not unfair to say that the finished article is a bit of a disappointment so don't say you weren't warned. Due for release by Kemco in Japan very soon, with Europe following later, this is definitely one to keep both eyes open for. Watch out for the full review the very microsecond it's ready to roll! 010 "


"STORM \"HIT THE ROAD!!\" \"WHAT ROAD?\" Pinned to your seat, engine howling, wheels spitting gravel and the marathon begins. you're about to encounter the six toughest stages of the gruelling Paris to Dakar rally. Your supercharged car may be built to be driven through hell and back, but to qualify for each stage you'll need every ounce of the driving skills you possess. No Sunday drivers or lunch breaks please this one's strictly for the pro-rallying crew. ORO ADA PARIS DAY SS ! so Screen shots from Amiga version. CHECK The Sales Curve Ltd, 50 Lombard Road, London, SW11 3SU Tel: (071) 585 3308. The Sales Curve Ltd 1992. Licensed from Jaleco. Big Run will undoubtedly test the skills reflexes and intelligence of even the most adept racing Fanatic\". Games X If this is the kind of stuff we can expect from the Storm label, let's hope it pours down\". ST Action Available: January 1992 Amiga .99 Atari ST .99 "


"WIN! NEO GEO! THIS FAB TAKE BEVERLY HILLS BASED ON THE EXPLOSIVE ACTION MOVE as anyone ever heard of I a film called The Taking THE TAKING OF Of Beverly Hills? If you have (and, more importantly, if you enjoyed it) you'll be pleased to discover that there's soon to be a game based on the movie, courtesy of Accolade! Called The Taking Of Beverly Hills, the player will take the role of Boomer Hayes, footballing hero caught up in a web of intrigue, suspense and action! Featuring digitised graphics and sound from the film, The Taking Of Beverly Hills includes over 120 different screens and multiple perspectives. It'll be initially released on the PC early this year at a price yet to be announced. NEOGEO NEOGEO NEOGEO It's the biggest, the brightest, the loudest and the most expensive console there is! It's the Neo Geo and it could be your's for the princely sum of big fat hairy zilch! Are we mad or what? Do you buy your software from mail order through CVG? Well this could be your lucky day! You could well walk off with a brand spanky new Neo Geo! All you have to do is buy your software from one of the mail order companies advertising in this month's CVG and GO! Once you've bought your stuff, register your entry for our great giveaway by recording your name, address and the name of the company you bought your stuff from, on the special Mail Order giveaway number: CUTE 'N' CUDDLY ATARI Ahhh, aren't those Atari lot a load of old softies. They linked up with a teeny mag to run a competition to design a Tshirt for the RSPCA. The design chosen by telly smart-piece Michaela Strachan and a Neighbours person was created by Elinor Jefferies from Chippenham, seen here wearing a shirt on which is printed her prize-winning piccy. Elinor's prize? An Atari 1040ST, with four runners-up receiving an Atari Lynx. 0839 At the end of each month we'll pick one lucky peep out of the hat and, if the lucky blighter is a genuine customer, we'll give away the console that dreams are made of! It's as simple as that. So, put on your special telephone pantaloons and get dialling... Special note: If you're under 18, make sure that the person who pays the bill has given you permission before you start dialling. Calls are charged at 36p per minute (off peak) and 48p per minute (peak rate). "


"Knightmare ou are setting forth into another place, another time, another world,\" said Treguard, The Dungeon Master. \"And what makes you think that you four mere mortals will succeed in the Quest when so many others have failed?\" I understood, at that moment, that our mission was going to take all our endurance, all our collective skill, and, most of all a depth of courage, that I wasn't sure we possessed. Ever since ITV's award-winning series hit our screens, the world has been waiting challenged to solve complex puzzles, logic problems and riddles that reveal a rich for a computer game worthy of the name. The wait is over. ever-more rewarding storyline Tony Crowther's amazing re-creation has everything Your journey takes you deep into the dungeons of Dunsheim to a cataclysmic Using the same game system that made Captive adventure game of the meeting with Lord Fear and the unthinkably horrible FrightKnight year for 1990. Knightmare makes dungeons and dragons games seem Whether or not the meeting is terminal is up to you. You will need like newts splashing around in a muddy puddle wisdom tenacity alacrity and, above all, courage Knightmare is a sophisticated role-playing adventure where you are But you have all those things don't you...? BROAD SWORD Available for Amina & Atari ST Knightmare is copyright Anglia Television and Broadsword Television Garne.copyright 1991 Mindscape International Limited Captive Copyright 1990 1991 Mindscape International Limited all rights reserved Written by Tony Crowther: ANGLIA MINDSCAPE Television and For your local dealer contact: Mindscape International Ltd The Coach House Hooklands Estate Scaynes Hill West Sussex RH17 7NG Tel: 0444 831 761 "


"A POWERFUL TRIAD IN ONE FORMIDABLE PACK AS Car GOL EGTEN SHADOW DOUBLE S O T. WRAGONWINIA DRAGON. NOU  TECMO LTD AMIGA ATARI ST Ocean AMSTRAD SPECTRUM COMMODORE TEL: 061 832 6633 FAX: 061 834 0650 Maste OCEAN SOFTWARE LIMITED 6 CENTRAL STREET MANCHESTER M2 5NS "


"VOTLINEC 0839 50084 WIN A PC ENGINE! WIN A MEGADRIVE! With an absolute stack of top games available, the PC Engine is the little baby with the power of a heavyweight! Annoy your friends by phoning the Hotline number and winning this cracking console! It's the world's most popular 16bit console and that's official! The Sega Megadrive is one heck of smart addition to your bedroom; win it by ringing that large number at the top of the page NOW! Nintendo WIN A GAME BOY! WIN A SUPER FAMICOM! The best-selling hand-held this Christmas could be filling a space in your trouser pockets if you're the lucky winner of this smart Hotline compo! But you'll get not a jot if you don't ring the number and answer those quezzies! Why wait until Spring to get your digits on a smart 16-biy Nintendo, when you can ring the Hotline number and win one? It's fab and groovy and it'll only cost you the price of a call, so DO IT! IF YOUR UNDER 18, MAKE SURE THE PERSON WHO PAYS THE PHONE BILL HAS GIVEN YOU PERMISSION BEFORE YOU START DIALLING. CALLS ARE CHARGED AT 36p PER MINUTE (OFF PEAK) AND 48p PER MINUTE (PEAK RATE). "


"REVIEW PC .99 BY LUCASFILM/US GOLD Oooh! It's the creepy graveyard! The Ghost Pirate LeChuck is dead-blown to bits by young adventurer Guybrush Threepwood. Now it's not every day you destroy a scourge of the seas, so naturally Guybrush is rather pleased with himself. The trouble is, nobody actually believes these wild claims of pirate extermination from Threepwood how could a young 'un rid the world of one of its worst devils? Actually, the folks aren't that bothered. They've got other problems, the biggest being the inability to earn a dishonest living thanks to the late LeChuck's right-hand man, Largo LaGrande, who has taken control of Scabb Island and is charging an impossible pirate levy. But hey, getting rid of Largo should be no problem for a ghost pirate killer like Guybrush. However, that's just the start of this quest, a journey which will take him to many islands, where he will be ignored, abused, imprisoned and eventually confronted by LeChuck himself, brought back to life with Voodo magic. How did it happen? What will Guybrush have to do to destroy LeChuck once and for all? And just what is The Big Whoop which Threepwood (and almost everyone else he encounters) ultimately seeks? Crumbs it's Le Chuck's hideaway lair! COSMETIC SURGERY In-keeping with Lucasfilm's policy of making their games simpler to play, a number of cosmetic changes have been made to the sequel to the excellent Secret Of Monkey Island. Graphically, Monkey Island 2 is more detailed and amusing, and the mousedriven selection system has A So what do I do with this lot then? been streamlined to use only a handul of verbs. When the cursor is placed over an object, that object's name is shown on-screen and the possible actions to do with that object are highlighted. On picking up objects in the game, a picture of, say, a pirate's hat (if that's what you have picked up) is shown, as opposed to just printing the text A pirate hat\" all little things which mean a lot in terms of Monkey Island 2's Loads of useful stuff here! LA ease of use. & 3 "


"REVIEW Undwerwater laffs ahoy! Fab! Acel Topper! Cushty! Just a small selection of words which describe my view of Secret Of Monkey Island 2 LeChuck's Revenge. The first Monkey Island game was great maybe even better than Indiana Jones and The Last Crusade but this, this soars way over its prequel in terms of quality and quantity. It really is a massive adventure, but at the same time totally absorbing. I managed to finish the first section in what I thought was perhaps an hour, but Imagine my surprise when I glanced at my watch to find that three hours had passed and I'd missed my bus and the pubs were shut and Imagine my disbelief when I told myself that I wasn't bothered because I'd enjoyed myself so much! Lucasfilm's new iMUSE music system is incredible and simply has to be witnessed to appreciate just what a difference it makes to the overall package no pausing between tracks, no massive and immediate differences in styles between one plece of music and the next; the tunes just flow into each other and change with the mood of the game! Everything about Secret Of Monkey Island 2 LeChuck's Revenge says Quality, so buy it! PAUL RAND ant lave On glories for Fabby fireside fun SO WHAT THE HELL IS THIS IMUSE JOBBY? Previous Lucasfilm adventures have been known for their stunning soundtracks. Now there's a new system in town to impress lovers of great game music even morel It's called IMUSE and it stands for Interactive Music and Sound Effects and what it basically means is that, instead of the normal process of a new musical score being played when a different location is visited, the soundtrack actually adjusts itself-without any breaks in between to fit the mood of the players' actions and position. This new system adds an incredible amount of atmosphere to the game; for the first time the sound is an integral part of the action as opposed to just a nice extra. Impressive, eh? MEET LOTS OF VERY TINTERESTING PEOPLE CU Lost in the forest... As with the original game, there are a variety of characters in Monkey Island 2 whom Guybrush can meet and interact with. Old faces such as the voodo lady MoJo and Stan (who's switched trades from boat salesman to used coffin vendor) mingle with new ones including Captain Dread (so called because of his cool dreadlocks) and Governor Phatt, the bloated dictator of Phatt Island most of the characters either own something which you need or know information vital to Threepwood's eventual defeat of LeChuck and discovery of The Big Whoop! GOSTUME SHOP OSCA "


"REVIEW EASY OR HARDYOU CHOOSE! Hello sailor... What the hell am I doing sat here writing this 'when I should be playing Monkey Il? This game is so totally brill it's got to be seen to be believed. Only then will you be gobsmacked by the superb graphics, bowled over by the incredible IMUSE sound system and rib-ticklingly totally by the hysterically funny humour of the game. Like the rest of the world I though Monkey I was the best game of last year. The sequel scoops its crown and adds a few diamonds for good measure, because it improves on every single aspect of an original which nobody thought could be beaten. Just like the original it's one tough mutha of an arcade adventure too, and you'll be scratching your head for quite a while before everything falls neatly into place and this weird and wonderful game is finally completed. Already Monkey It has staked a claim to the best game of this year, and it's only just started! Hard to see anything similar topping this, so buy it NOW! TIM BOONE Because many people complain that Lucasfilm's graphic adventures are too difficult, the programmers have included two versions of the game! An easy version contains less puzzles but also fewer locations, whilst the full game, for experienced players, has the lot! Whatever option you choose, here's a handy tip seek out MoJo the voodo lady as soon as possible, because she's got vital information which will help you in your quest (go down to the swamp)! SEAR? PIRATEST Can you gob for glory? PIRATES TN Come on, let's expectorate! Now THAT'S a map! S/CABB TRAVEL THE WORLD Rid Scabb Island of Largo LaGrande and Captain Dread will 5 let you charter his boat. Unfortunately, the Cap'n only knows the way to three islands Scabb itself, Phatt Island home of the treacherous Governor Phatt and Booty Island, paradise home of Governor Marley. Wait a minute: didn't Guybrush have a girlfriend called Marley in the first Monkey Island game? And wasn't she a governor too? Worth checking out, if you ask us! GOSTUMEUR SHOP open A Plenty of bargains here! UPDATE Amiga and ST owners out there can expect conversions in the not-too-distant! There are also vague rumours of CD malarkey on consoles we'll keep you Jeepers It's the island! posted... Lund Usland PC GRAPHICS 95 SOUNDS 96 PLAYABILITY 96 LASTABILITY 94 OVERALL 96 "


"Look out he's back! PAPERBOY No window is safe. No fence is too high. The paperboy is determined to deliver the paper to his subscribers any way he can. Tossing papers left and right, riding in three directions, jumping anything, this free-wheeling carrier visits more neighbourhoods and houses, faces more targets and obstacles, in more vivid colours than ever before. Plus, rad stunt riding and BMX tracks in bonus rounds. Choose to ride as either Paperboy or Papergirl too! Copyright 1991 Tengen Inc. Paperboy 2 is a trademark of Tengen Inc. All rights reserved MINDSCAPE For your local dealer, contact Mindscape International Ltd, The Coach House, Hooklands Estate, Scaynes Hill, West Sussex RH17 7NG. Tel: 0444 831 761 "


"REVIEW MASTER SYSTEM .99 BY SEGA Ahy can't these alien types just leave our V V planet alone, eh? Coming down here, taking over our bodies and changing their shapes sheesh, the cheek of it! Who's going to put a stop to these mutant scum? A robot or a bloke who looks exactly like Elvis Presley, that's who! Kitted out with some mean weapons, one of these guys is all that stands between peace and world domination by outer-space creeps! So pick up that artillary and go kick some ass across sixteen stages which make up four missions. Collect energy along the way so that you don't get creamed, and above all remember you're not on a picnic, you're on an alien massacre so give 'em hell, boyeee! 206520T KILL SOME ALIENS Now and again you'll see folk running along the road. Watch them carefully, because usually they aren't at all human! They're shapechanging space freaks who like nothing better than sneaking up on you and dusting your buns. What's the best way of dealing with these ugly critters? Blast them with your gun, of course! SSION 2 KILL SOME MORE ALIENS As well as the main walk along the street toasting enemies part of the game, there's also a couple of sublevels for you to tackle. Walk past a shop door and you'll walk through it, right into an Op Wolf-style shoot 'em up where you can shoot aliens and collect energy. At the end of each stage the action switches to a swiftly-scrolling run, where even more nasties can be despatched. Alien Storm may not be the greatest arcade game of all time, but it is a pretty good laugh even if it does have drawbacks in the playability stakes. So how does the Master System version measure up? Pretty well, actually. It has to be said that this is a very good conversion of the arcade original, but that simply doesn't make it a great game. Graphically it's as good as you could expect and sound is OK, but Alien Storm simply isn't the type of game you want to keep coming back to. It's great for a few goes in the arcades, but when it comes to splashing out notes for the catridge you have to ask yourself how long you'll be playing that game and there are plenty more games out there which will keep you playing much longer than this. Worthwhile If you're a big fan of the arcade game, otherwise I'd suggest a long hard look first. UPDATE If you can't find a conversion of Alien Storm on your machine, well, you must be a dribbling mass of sadness because it's out on practically everything! MASTER SYSTEM RAPHICS SOUNDS PLAYABILITY LASTABILITY OVERALL TIM BOONE "


"REVIEW FOOTBALL REVIEW AMIGA .99 BY ELECTRONIC ARTS John Madden HAVE YOU GOT THE BALLS? One of the great strengths of John Madden's is the sheer number of offensive and defensive plays available throughout the game. Choose from a huge list of possibles, and if you're not happy with your choice when the teams reach the line of scrimmage then flippin' well call and audible and change the plan to mess up your opponent! You'll quickly learn which plays work best in which situations, and which need to be avoided like the plague. When you're runner keeps getting flattened before he can gain a yard you know you've got a wrong 'un! It's got to be the most spectacular spectator sport in the world! There's nothing quite like it, and America loves it that way. It's American football, and this is the computer game! If you're the sad shambling wreck of a loser who doesn't know already, John Madden's was the game which took the Megadrive world by storm as the best ever implementation of the great game. Battle against the computer or a mate for supremacy on the field with big bucks for the winner and a long and lonely ride home for the runner-up. So how do the Famicom and Amiga conversions of the great John Madden's measure up? Read on and flippin' well find out! oes0 MY BALLS ARE BIGGER THAN YOURS The major graphical feature of John Madden's is the 3D viewpoint of the game, a sort of above-and-behind the play view which works extremely well to show off all the action. There's also a fab action replay option which allows you to relive those moments of glory in sad slow-mo so you can gloat over your victories and then fast-forward over the cock-ups! BUST YOUR BALLS! John Madden's features three basic play options: Pre-season for practice and fine tuning of skills, regular season and playoffs for the big boys. Plenty of practice is highly recommended, 'cos you can bet your bottom dollar the computer knows his stuff and will bust your butt if you don't know what you're doing! GREAT BALLS OF FIRE Megadrive owners will need no introduction to Maddens. CVG went crazy when we first grabbed the game and the fever hasn't let go since. Now the fab JM2 is here on Megadrive, taking an original which nobody thought could be topped and actually improving it hurrah! special I do normal hands normal field goal honds Now the fab JM2 is here on SAN FRANCISCO 8 * 12 proving Furahil CROSE After the apalling Super NES conversion, hopes were not high for Madden's on the Amiga, but we couldn't have been more wrong. What we have here is a spot on copy of the Megadrive version, with a few more control options and no other differences. The game itself is great fun, a finely balanced mix of strategic decision making and great two player arcade action. Graphically, Madden's is a top treat, it uses exactly the same scrolling technique as the Megadrive version and it looks slick and groovy. The music is a little different, but it's just as good as the original. All of the speech has been retained and the overall effect is stunning. This game features some of the best presentation I've seen on any machine, it all hangs together so well. This is the best American Footie sim on the Amiga and probably the best sports game ever. If you don't buy this then you obviously already have it on the Megadrive, either that, or you're a shambling waste of life. FRANK O'CONNOR A QUICK WORD FROM OUR SPONSOR SO FRANCISCO 4:52 151 016 \"Football is a game of oneon-one matchups. Real guys going at it. Win the matchups, win the game. That's what my game is all about.\" John Madden \"Football is a game of serious beer drinking round the telly and a good ogle at the cheerleaders when those blokes don't get in the way.\". Jon Billington \"It's not even bloody football.\" Paul Rand AMIGA GRAPHICS 90 SOUNDS 91 PLAYABILITY 94 LASTABILITY 93 OVERALL 93 "


"Oh no, first strike and you're out! REVIEW NB-TGI NEO GEO BY SNK  $0800 2020 AD BIG MONEY MALARKEY! 2020 Baseball features loads of opportunities to make some serious cash. A particularly impressive play will be rewarded with spot cash prizes ('cos the sponsors are a generous lot) and you can use the cash to upgrade the strengths and talent of your players! At any time you can call a Time Out and use the cash you've accumulated to buy a veritable goody bag of improvements for the sad shamblers on your team. Lash out ten grand on your best hitter and watch him swat the ball to the back of the stadium! The pitcher winds up for a massive strike! NB-TGI 05:55 POUER UP THANKS.. ...to Console Concepts (0782 712759) for the cartridge used in this review O TRIKE THREE! YOU'RE OUT! It's thrillin', it's chillin', it's 2020 Baseball and it's brill! That's right folks, the year is 2020 and the game has moved to great new heights. Now human teams can take on robot opponents, and there are big, big bucks for the winners. Select your best pitchers and hitters and set them against the ultimate your opponent can offer steal those bases and go for those big Home Runs. There's cash by the bucketload for the winner, while nobody's got the time of day for sad shambling teams who can't grind their opponents into the ground! Go get 'em, champ! COOL SELECT LEAGUE COMPUTER XCITING LEAGUE CRAZINESS 2020 Baseball features two CAS A play modes One Player League and Two Player. In One Player mode you have to take on the computer, and he's one hot boyo when it comes to strutting his stuff on Choose your team... the field! The computer knows all the tricks of the NB-TGI trade, and his ace in the whole is an uncanny knack of knowing just when to steal CHUS bases so his runner gets there just in time. Sometimes he'll get it wrong, and it's great fun to watch his runner scramble back to safety having made a bad call! A Darn! Thrown to the wrong base! FINB-TG So why are Baseball games so brilliant on the Neo? I thought Baseball stars was the best, and here's another which actually tops it in many respects! Super-slick gameplay combines with superb graphics and sound to plonk you slap bang in the centre of some of the toughest baseball around and the computer sure as hell takes no prisoners! The well designed and finely tweaked action ensures there's always plenty going on, and when you become bored with playing one team you can always switch for another to put a completely different perspective on the game! I never really found baseball too much fun as a spectator sport, but it's perfect for computer gaming especially in two player mode where tempers can really fray! This cart comes highly recommended to sports freaks and friction fans everywhere... MANIC MINE MAYHEAM As if you haven't got enough to worry about, 2020 Baseball has one ace up its sleeve you won't find anywhere on today's play fieldmines! That's right folks, as the game progresses the computer plonks more and more mines on the field and if any player touches them it's goodnight sweet princel Oh dearl Hit by a pitch! 16:56 NB, 0010 IS S05 "


"REVIEW E Baseball has become a tad too boring for the twisted sports audiences of the future. What's required is a more violent version of the sport and 2020 Baseball is just that! Baseball itself is great fun and this version adds to the glory. The addition of violence, land mines and superb graphics enhance the theme no end. Even for the mighty Neo Geo, the presentation is astonishing. The animation is slick, the music is brilliant and sampled voices scream and shout throughout. Gameplay-wise, Super Baseball is a laugh the batting is a lot easier than in other games of this type and it all hangs together brilliantly. As a one player game, it'll be months before you play in the final, but the real fun is in two player mode. Against a friend, things get really frantic and massively addictive. Easily the best sports game available on the Neo Geo and if you've got one, it's an essential purchase! FRANK O'CONNOR 202 1080p Thanks to Alex Beardshaw from Sheffield for the pix! BASEBALL IS BRILL! Some people say Baseball is the best game ever, others say it's the crappest sport ever invented. Actually we reckon it's the tops, and here's a quick lowdown of the CVG crew's least favourite games: Tim Boone: \"Beach Volley is skid central for me 'cos ! haven't got a crew cut, a sun tan or silly skimpy trunks to ponce about and show off in.\" Frank O'Connor: \"I think cricket is crap because I'm a bit of a thickie and don't understand the rules. The balls bloody hard 'n' all...\" Jon Billington: \"Curling is top of the craps for me because you have to run in front of the puck with that stupid brush and it reminds me of housework.\" Paul Rand: \"I can't stand badminton, 'cos girls often play it better than blokes do and that stupid little racquet isn't worth a light.\" Ooh! I feel good about this one! DONC This field is easy...no land mines! FIELDING FUN 'N' FROLICS Most Baseball computer games feature super-thickie fielders who couldn't catch a cold, let alone the ball! Not so with 2020 'cos these boys really know what they're doing! If the hitter slams the ball high, they'll try and position themselves underneath it to catch him out. Once in position they'll raise their hands to let you know they've got the sucker, but occasionally they can't quite make it and it's up to you to waggle that joystick to make sure they get there in time! NEO GEO GRAPHICS 91 SOUNDS PLAYABILITY 89 LASTABILITY 89 OVERALL 90 "


"SO WHEN DO THE SUPER WILL BE "


"YOU RECKON NINTENDO E HERE? "


"SPECIAL PREVIEW Afhen it comes to hot games, we don't much about CVG scoops the world yet again for every single console version of Terminator and T2! Yes indeed, on these very pages you'll find T2 reviewed on NES and Gameboy and Terminator previewed on all the Sega systems! So without further ado, here's PAUL RAND to tell you all about Terminator on Megadrive and Master System! Take it away that man... THE TERM INATOR nator on Megadrive and Water System Tak With the completion of Megadrive Terminator only weeks away, we decided to toddle off down Croydon way to pay a second visit to Probe, the development house pro. gramming the game, to check out the progress of what is shaping up to be one of the hottest licenses ever to hit the Megadrive and Master Syste. One of the most striking aspects of Terminator is the visuals which will bring Reese and the T-800 to life on your 16-bit Sega. But how were they created? WHAT'S WRONG WITH THIS PICTURE?! Kyle Reese and Sarah Connor escape A 0233AOGG Using a similar technique to that used to create the awesome animations in Prince of Persia, video recordings were made of actors performing the moves of the characters in the game. The \"actors\", in actual fact, were programmer David Perry. whose previous works include the Wally Week series of arcade adventures on the Spectrum, and producer Neil Young, who also handled the computer conversions of Smash TV). These recordings were then digitised in black and white onto the Amiga and, using Deluxe Paint, the characters were separated from the backgrounds. The characters themselves were then parted from each other and shrunk to fit. After cleaning up any rough edges, colour was added to the sprites and voila! All ready to dump onto a Megadrive cartridge! LACOSTITISA ?????) A * ** A Sample sprites 026 "


"SPECIAL PREVIEW Danger in the future complex! Where is everybody? COME WITH ME IF YOU WANNA LIVE In the future, Earth is in the grip of the machines. Run by Skynet, the supercomputer which ended three billion lives in a nuclear holocaust on August 29th, 1997. To eliminate the remaining pockets of human existence, Skynet created an army of lethal killing machines. The Cyberdyne Systems Series 800 Model 101 The Terminators. A virtually indestructible, hyper alloy combat chassis covered by living human tissue, the Terminator's role is to infiltrate rebel organisations and obliterate them. The rebels, led by John Connor, had smashed Skynet's defence grid they had won. Or had they? Skynet managed to send a Terminator through time to the year 1984. It's mission, to terminate Sarah Connor, mother of John, who was yet to be born. If Sarah was dead, the birth of Skynet's enemy could not happen and the machines would be victorious. But the rebels also sent an agent through the Time Displacement equipment. The agent was Kyle Reese. DON'T MAKE ME BUST YOU UP MAN! Things have changed since we first looked at Terminator, most notably on the graphics side. Remember the screenshots we showed you of the first level T-800s? Well, from being rather bland, blue figures they've now become strapping, seven-foot killing machines with enormous blast rifles a daunting sight, as you can witness here. Not only that, but Arnie himself has been altered! Well, the sprite has, at least. Now he's a huge, muscly bag of enormousness who pops up at various points throughout the game, sporting his Uzi 9mm and creating all sorts of havoc for poor Reese. Dashing through the streets of LA I MAY CLOSE EARLY TODAY... The game is played along the same lines as that on the 16-bit machine, and there are the same amount of levels to plough through. But, because the Master System can only call up one half of a level at a time, it's as if there are twice as many stages available to 8-bit freaks! DDDDDDD YOU SEE THIS SCAR HERE? What hasn't changed is the intro, an amazing replica of the movie's opening credits, and the unbelievable soundtracks, including an almost exact copy of the Terminator theme tune. Further gameplay tweaks are being made and the second the finished cartridge reaches us, well bring you review on this scorching license! Eat lead Armie! WOLUC HEY BUDDY, YOU GOT A DEAD CAT IN THERE? Okay, so you're a Master System owner who's feeling very peeved because your Megadrive mates are soon to get their hands on a Terminator game. What do you do? Go up to them and scream \"AAAAAAHHHH!!!\" 'cos The Terminator is being converted to your machine tool Even as you read this, Probe are putting the finishing touches to the game on the little Sega . and, as you can see from the pre-production screens shown here, the graphics are amazingly close representations of the Megadrive's piccies! O10001 HEY YOU CAN'T DO THAT... At the time of writing, it hasn't been decided whether the launch of The Terminator on Megadrive will coincide with its release on the Genesis in the States. If it isn't, though, that's another reason for Master System owners to chuckle with glee because their version will hit the streets in Easter! We shall bring you the full review just as soon as the game is fully complete. You'd be a raging loony to miss it! A There's a storm coming... "


"SPECIAL PREVIEW T2 THE LEGEND CONTINUES... The first Terminator was gone. Crushed in a hydraulic press in an automated factory. But that was only one unit from a production line of hundreds of thousands. Skynet knew, however, that if it sent another 800 series through time, it was probable that it too would fail to destroy Sarah Connor. A new plan was devised. Skynet sent through a prototype cyborg the T-1000. Made of liquid metal, it was capable of changing its shape to disguise its identity and it in with its surroundings. This time, the target was John himself, at ten years of age. But the rebels again learnt of the plan and, reprogramming a stolen T-800 with orders to protect young Connor, put it through the Time Displacement machine. It was just a matter of which one reached John first... Lere we go again! Not content with an Exclusive review of T2 on the Gameboy (see GO! for that!) we've flippin' well gone and scooped the NES version as well! Just like its Gameboy brother, the game comes from Acclaim so here we go with all the stuff you need to know... TERMINATOR JUDGMENT DAS MISSION PARAMETERS Controlling Arnie, the player will visit five stages based on scenes from the T2 Judgment Day movie. Starting in the Truck Stop, the T-800 moves on to a forced 3D perspective motorbike race to find John, while avoiding the juggernaut-driving T-1000. The action then moves to the Pescadero Mental Institution from where Sarah Connor must be rescued, before trotting off to find the CPU and arm taken from the first Terminator in the Cyberdyne building. Get past here and the final confrontation between the two Terminators awaits. B... 0 Well I did enjoy playing T2 on the NES. It's nothing new or innovative in fact, it's for the most part just a fairly straightforward platform shoot/beat em up but a reasonably enjoyable one at that. Graphically the game is reminiscent of Star Wars, which is also reviewed this issue, with some very high quality sprites and excellent animation throughout. I was also pleasantly surprised by the sound, which includes some great tunes but, sadly, no version of the T2 title track. While the beat 'em up fare becomes a tad repetitive, you find yourself wanting to get a bit further with each game, which is no bad thing. Don't expect whistles and bells from T2 because you could be disappointed to find that that's not what is on offer. Just approach it as a no-nonsense, slightly Inaccurate (Arnie was in the nude at the start of the film, but he's fully clothed in the game!) movie tie-in and you'll get a fair amount of pleasure from it. PAUL RAND YOU'RE NOT A TERMINATOR ANYMORE In the film, John Connor or ders the Terminator not to kill anyone. This is replicated in the game in as much that if after receiving a weapon, the player shoots a human in the chest, they die and he looses energy. To keep his power up, he must crouch down and shoot them in the legs, disabling but not destroying them. Watch out, the hospital staf are armed! 89 UPDATE Schwarzenegger fans can get T2 on the Amiga, ST and PC and all the 8-bit machines, courtesy of Ocean. But it's a totally different type of game and, to be honest, not very good. NES GRAPHICS SOUNDS PLAYABILITY 87 LASTABILITY OVERALL 84 "


"POPULOUS AMIGA BY ELECTRONIC ARTS AMIGA .99 $25.9 A PAIR OF POPULI There are two ways to play Populous II. In the Conquest game the aim is to take over a series of progressively more demanding worlds. Custom mode, on the other hand, lets the player compete in a random game using a variety of powers to suit the budding god. ods are funny old things. Take Zeus, for example: dashing around the world, getting up to all sorts with the mortal girlies. That's where you came from. A half-breed (part human, part god) you demand your place with the other gods atop Mount Olympus, but Zeus isn't going to just open the door to you. Populous Il follows on from the original hit game, with you taking on the ominous task of beating 32 other immortals across 1000 worlds. After creating your own persona, launch your deity-destroying career and beat up those baddies using your divine skills. And a bit of brute force, of course... MAGNETIC ATTRACTION As in the prequel, Populous Il features the good and evil Papal Magnels. They come in very handy when you want to trash a baddy's sites, and they're so easy to use just position the magnet somewhere around your opponent's domain then influence your followers to go toward it. They will do just that, beating up the nasties as they go! CHOOSE YOUR LOOKS Most games which allow you to create the looks of your character only give this option for purely cosmetic reasons, but in Populous II they have a direct effect on the way the game is played. Say, for instance, you select a scholar's hat-that makes you a thoughtful battle-planner. But plump for wild eyes and you'll be a mad, bad killing machine. Oh my god! Actually, there are a few gods in Populous II, the sequel to one of the most successful Amiga games ever. What Bullfrog have done is took the basic nuggets of the original and bolted untold amounts of extras on, making one helluva powerful piece of software. Really, this is something special. One look at the much improved graphics with far bigger characters doing their own thing tells you that this is going to be a bit of a cracker and Indeed, it is. I like the thought of the workings of the game being altered by the different features which you select for your deity, and with 1000 worlds to conquer this isn't a game which you're going to finish in a fortnight you'd have to be a bloody good god to finish it within a year! A resounding \"Hurray!\" is what's called for here, because Populous I could have been just a rip-off of the original but instead it's a brill god-sim in its own right. AMICA GRAPHICS SOUNDS PLAYABILITY 94 UPDATE If Populous Il doesn't hit every popular computer and console around then there's something seriously wrong with the world so expect to see it soon! PAUL RAND OVERALL 93 "


"REVIEW PC ENGINE .00 BY KONAMI SOFEDURI DOUBLE SOFFDUP DOUBLE K, no messin' abaat it's time to kick ass. Those alien scumbags are up to their old tricks again and now there's just one thing for it: they've got to be blown away! Basically they're giving everyone all sorts of jip by being generally unrad, so it's high time they were sent screaming back to wherever the hell they came from. So belt up inside your best blasting ship and prepare for the ultimate showdown with some of the meanest muthas this side of the CVG Playgroup at closing time... Cor blimey! Just look at the bolt-on weapons you can stick on your ship if you're dead ard-like we are: lasers, power orbs, front shields they reall.. Believe it or not, those faces blow deadly bubbles of dopm! . PICK UPS Gradius was one of the first games to feature pick-up wea. pons and the now obligatory multiples. It's a straightforward A-PLENTY! horizontal scroller, but the use of credit pods to buy weapons gives it a novel twist. The craft you fly is a sleek spacecraft, initially kitted out with a sad machine-gun. This pathetic weapon can be upgraded with the addition of lasers, double fire, air to ground missiles and a shield. The multiples are a useful addition to the ship: these glowing pods follow your craft and fire anything you happen to be armed with, effectively meaning you can quadruple your firepower! The object of the game is simple: fly along, avoid bullets and destroy baddies just the way we like 'em! me et de THANKS...to Console Concepts (0782 712759) for the review cartridge. Kill! Maim! Destroy! At last, Gradius (Nemesis) is released on the PC Engine and it's the best home conversion yet! The simple nature of the game hides a hideously addictive blaster, with some of the smartest graphics you'll ever see on the Engine. The best thing about Gradius was the choice of weapons and they're all here (unlike the sad NES version with only two multiples). There's also the added treat of an extra level, not seen in the original coin-op. Graphics are among the best ever on the Engine, faithfully reproducing the arcade original the only real difference is the slight vertical scroll as you reach the top or bottom of the screen in exactly the same way as R-Type did on the Engine. Music is superb. with faithful renditions of all the arcade themes. This game is spot-on: it has everything just right, the speed, the playability, the difficulty. If you have a PC Engine, you need this more than oxygen... FRANK O'CONNOR WEAPONS GALORE At the bottom of the play screen, you'll see a line of icons. Collecting a glowing pod will highlight the first the speed-up. Pressing the second button on the joypad selects this option LSDEEDUP/MISSILE DOUBLE and speeds up your craft. If you collect another pod without choosing speed-up, the next icon is highlighted. This is how you choose your weapons. It sounds easy, but in the heat of battle it can be hard to keep an eye on the icons. This whole idea gives the game a subtle element of strategy, the question you ask at the start of each level is: Double or Laser? LRSER OPTION Don't get it wrong! SZT HT100 "


"****** BIG BLASTS FOR YOUR BUCKS Included in the Gradius box is an advert for other topper new Konami PC Engine games. These are Salamander and Parodius both are sequels to Gradius. Salamander is the famous one: it's a direct follow up to Gradius and is very similar to the first game. Parodius, however, is a bit unusual. It is a sequel, but it's basically a parody of Gradius. Fun Central with Gradius so grab it! REVIEW 2012 Gadzooks it's The end-of-level guardian! He's ane mean mutha. THE AMA END OF LEVEL LARKS Every level ends in roughly the same way a dangerous challenge to overcome, followed by a large and gruesome guardian. On the first stage you have to destroy or avoid lava chunks as they explode from twin volcanoes, while the second sees you dodging hundreds of homing mines. The third is a rerun of the first, but with the added horror of space fiends loosing off missiles! It might be wise at these points to think about which weapon is best suited for each challenge. The guardian is the same each time, a big spaceship which moves up and down, firing large plasma beams at you. It seems quite simple, but that darned critter can be a bit swift at times! Gradius ranks as one of the all-time great arcade blasters, and this must rate as one of the best conversions ever! Absolutely everything from the coinop is there right down to those whiffy weapons icons you can't read in the heat of battle! Once again the Engine sits quietly on the table and pumps out arcade-quality graphics and sound and it's only an 8-bit machine! Initially fairly easy, the game toughens up from level 2 onwards and from that moment you're well and truly hooked. Playing Gradius on the Engine is a bit like stepping back in time: you'll think you've ended up back at Uncle Scruff's Seafront Emporium and go searching for the coin slot. In fact that's my only gripe about the game, Gradius is a tad dated and arcade fans will know it backwards already. Nevertheless this is top class blasting action, so grab it and agree! TIM BOONE Fomething nasty on the round? Blow it to bit. Ni missies! med E : DOUBLE LRSER B122 TM DOUBLE 5782 PC ENGINE GRAPHICS SOUNDS 92 PLAYABILITY LASTABILITY OVERALL 92 PLAYABILITY UAB Motel "


"Quick Shot RIGHTON TARGET The World's No1 Choice WARRIOR MAVERICK  PYTHON STARFIGHT CHIMERA OVER THIRTY MODELS . ALL FORMATS . COMPLETE CONTROL Bondwell AVAILABLE FROM ALL LEADING COMPUTER TOY & DEPARTMENT STORES "


"SECTION 1: ABOUT YOU NAME: ............ ADDRESS: .............. POST CODE:. MALE FEMALE HOW OLD ARE YOU? UNDER 10 10-12 13-15 16-18 19-21 22-25 over 25 &A ARE YOU: AT SCHOOL O COLLEGE UNIVERSITY PART-TIME WORK FULL-TIME WORK UNEMPLOYED WHICH MACHINE DO YOU OWN? AMIGA MEGADRIVE NES PC OST SUPER NES (FAMICOM) MASTER SYSTEM PC ENGINE GAMEBOY GAME GEAR OLYNX SOMETHING ELSE, NAMELY: TELL US WHAT YOU THINK AND WIN FREE SOFTWARE! WHICH OF YOUR MACHINES IS LESS THAN SIX MONTHS OLD? WHICH MACHINES DO YOU INTEND TO BUY IN THE NEXT SIX MONTHS? Here it is: your chance to help keep CVG the best games mag in the universe AND stand the chance of winning fame and fortune for yourself! We want to know what YOU think of CVG and the free GO! you'll find tucked inside this issue. It's your big chance to tell us exactly what's good and bad about both mags, and we've got an incredible ONE THOUSAND POUNDS of software to give away! Yep, we'll send  worth of free software to the first five completed questionnaires pulled out of the hat, and then print the names and addresses of the first 100 readers in these very pages! Yahoo! So what are you waiting for? Just fill in the form, carefully remove this page from the magazine, pop it into an envelope and send it off to: CVG QUESTIONNAIRE, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. Closing date is FEBRUARY 30, after which we'll sort all of them out and decide the winners. Go for it! WHICH GAMES DO YOU LIKE? ARCADE CONVERSIONS SHOOT-EM-UPS PLATFORM GAMES PUZZLE GAMES FILM/CELEBRITY TIE-INS ROLE PLAYING GAMES ARCADE ADVENTURES 3D ADVENTURES FLIGHT/BATTLE SIMULATORS TEXT ADVENTURES SOMETHING ELSE, NAMELY: HOW MANY GAMES DO YOU BUY PER MONTH? ONE TWO THREE FOUR FIVE MORE THAN FIVE 033 "


"HOW MUCH MONEY DO YOU SPEND ON COMPUTER GAMES EVERY MONTH? LESS THAN  -20 -30 -40 -50 + IF CVG WAS EVEN BIGGER, HOW MUCH WOULD YOU PAY FOR IT? .50 .60 .75 .00 SECTION 3: ABOUT GO! SECTION 2: ABOUT CVG IF YOU OWN A HAND-HELD, WHEN DID YOU GET IT? OBEFORE CHRISTMAS AFTER CHRISTMAS WHICH OTHER MAGAZINES DO YOU BUY? MEAN MACHINES ACE GAMES X SEGA FORCE SEGA PRO SEGA POWER TOTAL CLUB NINTENDO GAME ZONE ZERO SOMETHING ELSE, NAMELY: HOW MANY HAND-HELD GAMES DO YOU EXPECT TO BUY A MONTH ONE OTWO THREE FOUR FIVE MORE THAN FIVE WHAT DO YOU THINK OF GO? GREAT OK CRAP WHICH MAGAZINE IS YOUR FAVE AND WHAT'S THE BEST BIT IN IT? WOULD YOU PAY MONEY FOR GO? YES NO IF YOU BUY ANY OF THE ABOVE, WHICH IS YOUR FIRST CHOICE (BE HONEST!) OCVG ANOTHER MAG, NAMELY: IF YES, HOW MUCH WOULD YOU PAY FOR A FULL-SIZE GO! MAG? .00 .75 .50 .25 .00 LESS THAN .00 WHAT'S GOOD ABOUT GO!? PLEASE MARK THE FOLLOWING SECTIONS OF THE MAG FROM 1 TO 10 (10 = BRILLIANT, 1 = TOTAL CRAP) COVERS..... CONTENTS ... ED FIRST..... NEWS REVIEWS... PREVIEWS.... YOB'S MAILBAG..... CHEAT MODE ... HIGH SCORES..... CHARTS COMPETITIONS. ARCADE ACTION... NEXT MONTH WHAT'S BAD ABOUT GO!? FINAL COMMENTS ON CVG AND GO!: DO YOU AGREE WITH CVG RATINGS NEVER O SOMETIMES GENERALLY ALL THE TIME HOW WOULD YOU LIKE TO SEE US IMPROVE THE MAG? That's it! Thanks for taking part in this Questionnaire, don't forget to send it in and watch this space to find out whether you've won a software prize or a mention in the mag! IS THE PRICE OF CVG (BE HONEST!) TOO HIGH TOO LOW JUST RIGHT 034 "


"HA-CHESTER JAHANGIR KHAN World Championship. Fii Es S Southampionship SILVER C+VG 91% Manchester United Undoubtedly the most famous football club in the world now brought to you by Krisalis in this action pocked arcade game where you have complete management control. Features include: 1/ FULL ARCADE GAME Penalties  Real Time Digitising Throw in's (ST 6 Amiga) Corners Action Replay  Free Kicks  Referee 6  2/ MANAGEMENT GAME * Fully Animated Icon Driven (ST 6 Amiga) Player Training Management Report Team Selection Cup Draw Injury Lists League Fixtures Player Status Can you take Manchester United to a historic treble League Champion, F.A. Cup & Littlewoods Cup? JAHANGIR KHAN WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP SQUASH, brings the World's number one Squash Player to the small screen. The game features two stand alone simulations, Club Level, which is officially endorsed by Squash Rackets Association, this allows the player to compete in Squash Club Competitions, using menus which Include an eight rung league ladder containing forty players, ball speed control using spot colour option, Match length one, three or five games, play by new or old rules and player statistics. World Championship, the game simulates all the excitement and tension of the 32 seed World Championship Knockout competition. Play one on one two player option, or head to head against the computer. AMIGA G ATARI ST IBM PC G COMPATABLES C64: CASSETTE .99 .99 .99 .99 DISK ACE RATED YOUR SINCLAIR MEGAGAME World Championship Boxing Manager puts you in control of up to 5 boxers. You must use your skills as Manager Promoter against the computers artificial Intelligence, which controls 17 managers who together hove 100 boxers under contract A woming, the expectations of your boxers are high, you will need to utilise all your negotiation skills in this award winning simulation to secure bouts against rated boxers, which will increase the world ranking of your fighters on the rood to becoming champions of the world. There is a lot more I could go into. I could explain all the subtleties of the game. Discovering all the little complexities is just part of the fun, and trying to master the fame is the rest. But don't worry, you never will. An Incredible product. Commodore User Amiga. Rated 90% STATE YOUR AMIGA 91% WORED CHAMPIONSHIP MANG KRISALIS SOFTWARE LTD. Krisalis Software Ltd. Teque House, Masons Yard, Downs Row Moorgere, Rotherham 560 2HD. 0709 368403 "


"From City Hall to the city streets. NOTHING HITS HARDER... Jessica has been kidnapped by the lawless Mad Gear Gang and Haggar, Mayor of Metro City, must face his Final Fight. Available on Amstrad, CBM 64/128 Cassette & Disk, Spectrum Cassette. Atari ST & Amiga REC FDF Final Fight 1991 CAPCOM USA. INC All rights reserved CAPCOMISO registered trademark of Copcom USA, Inc CAPCOM USA First there was GAUNTLET*M, the arcade sensation. Then came GAUNTLETMII, an innovation. Now U.S. Gold brings to you GAUNTLET*MIII. The Revelation. Available on: Amstrad, CBM 64/128 Cassette & Disk. Spectrum Cassette, Atari ST & Amiga 1991 TENGEN INC All rights reserved * Alan Gomes Corporation +-TENGEN The ultimate in action, excitement and challenge by car, bike and jet ski. OUTRUN EUROPA! Available on: Amstrad. CBM 64/128 Cassettes & Disk, Spectrum Cassette, Atari ST & Amiga OUTRUN EUROPA trademark of SEGA ENTERPRISES LIMITED SEGA is a trademark of SEGA ENTERPRISES LIMITED 1988, 1991 SEGA All rights reserved USU TELONA 442025 NEED HELP? CALL THE HELSTAR. DRAGONS OF ILAMIHEROES OF THE LANCE NEED WELDS CANTUE LUCASH UM HELPLINE COMPETITION INDIANA JONES CURSE ON THEATRE RONDS POOL OF RADIANCI SICHST OF MONKEY ISLAND BATTLE OF ERITAN TIL 0039 654123 CHAMPIONS OF KETNN TEL: 0898 443026 NEW RELEASES COMPETITION TEL: 0839 654134 BUCK ROGERS SECRIT OF THE SEVER BLADS E OF THE BEHOLDER TEL: 0898 44 2030 COMPETITION C200.00 WORTH OF OPEBANON STEALTH LUTURE WARS. CRUISE FOR A CORSE TIL: 0139 654284 HINTS & TIPS LINE US GOLD GAMES TO BE WON EACH MONTH? Metodes Service provided by U.S. GOLD LTD. UNITS 2/3 HOLFORD WAY HOLFORD, BIRMINGHAM B6 7AX you are under 18 please get person to use the telephone Cell 34 per minute cheap ra p per minute alte "


"Mega mischief with the desperate duo twice the fun, double the trouble. Thrills and spills galore. Don't dare miss it! Available on: Amstrad, CBM 64/128 Cassettes & Disk, Spectrum Cassette, Atari ST & Amiga, EACH FOR MEGA TWINS 1991 CAPCOM USA, INC All rights reserved CAPCOM is a registered trademark of Capcom USA, Inc CAPCOM USA Monster Blood just in your street! Who you gonna call? Alien Busters! Mass beast busting in this perfect Arcade conversion. SORM Available on: Amstrad, CBM 64/128 Cassettes & Disk, Spectrum Cassette, Atari ST & Amiga. 1990, 1991 SEGA All rights reserved. ALIEN STORM is a trademark of SEGA ENTERPRISES LIMITED SEGA is a trademark of SEGA ENTERPRISES LIMITED SEGA ARCADE HITS Can the shady duo keep their cool, lay their hands on some hot property and still avoid the blues! It's up to you! I'M ROBO, WHO THE HELL ARE 400?// I'M MOBO, WHO THE HELL ARE YOU?// Available on: Amstrad, CBM 64/128 Cassettes & Disk, Spectrum Cassette, Atari ST & Amiga. 1990, 1991 SEGA All rights reserved. BONANZA BROS is a trademark of SEGA ENTERPRISES LIMITED SEGA is a trademark of SEGA ENTERPRISES LIMITED STREE SEGA ARCADE HITS COLD Screen shots are only intended to be illustrative of the gameplay and not the screen graphics which vary considerably between different formats in quality and appearance and are subject to the computers specification, U.S. Gold Ltd, Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX.Tel: 021 625 3366, "


"coin-op madness out ostane TRONE 100% PURE ENTERTAINMENT ninia Warriors xenon Virgin all on amiga (.99) atari st (.99) commy cass (.99) speccy cass (.99), ammy cass (.99). also on PC (.99) double dragon I & II, xenon, shinobi well? what are you waiting for? GAMES "


"REVIEW TEXT AMIGA BY US GOLD  0640 II DEAD HEAT IN THE 870 TIME ZEPPELIN STAGE RACE Robo and Mobo have a rather novel escape method! They always get away quickly and mysteriously and nobody seems to know why. Well, the secret is out. After A Don't bottle it, burgle it! each burglary, a dirty great Zeppelin swoops from the sky and rescues the criminal buddies. You'd think that a giant purple sausage would attract more than a little atten. tion from the local constabuSTAGE lary. Nope. These boys are top flight blag artists and no mistake! Sometimes you can be a silly burgler Inside the airship it's BIG BLAG BRILLIANCE the Bros! Bonanza Bros is a horizontal scroller which allows you to wander the buildings at will, armed with a rather slow and rather sad gun which stuns the security guards and other building staff. Once you've picked up an object, you sling it in a bag over your shoulder and look for the rest. Once you have all the objects on the list (different for each building) you make your way to the rooftop, avoiding guards. Then it's off to another building for more of the same. Hurrah! They fly, they spy, they death defy! It's the Bonanza Bros! Sega's answer to Raffles and Hudson Hawk, these guys are apparently the world's top cat-burglars! They have a rather difierent job this time round: instead of robbing houses for the money, a super rich corporation has hired them to test their security. Being the world's foremost experts on robbing houses, they seem like the logical choice. Robo and Mobo (bizarre names) have to check lots of buildings. To do this they must break in, avoid the security staff and pinch several objects on a list. Once done, Robo and Mobo have to reach the rooftop to be airlifted to safety! Then it's off to another building for a bit more light-fingered tomfoolery... GAME OVER Bonanza Bros Burgle those goodies and head for the stairs! 30985 TIME STAGE UPDATE Expect to see the Bonanza Bros doing their thing on ST and 8-bit machines right about now. Hurrah! Anyone who remembers Bonanza Bros from the arcades will recall the weirdo graphics and bizarre sound effects. Well, the good news is that both of these have been faithfully replicated on the Amiga version. The only thing missing is the control method. The arcade used two fire buttons to control the characters-one for jumping and one for firing. This method is lost on the computer versions and to jump you have to use a combination of up on the joystick and fire. The game itself can be a right old laugh: the buildings often get maze-like and the bad guys can be a real handful. The intro sequences are smart and the graphics throughout are attractive, even in they are weird! Neat tunes and extremely funny sampled speech add to the proceedings and you'll have many a chuckle over this. It all boils down to whether or not you enjoyed the arcade game, and if you did then this is the game for you! FRANK O'CONNOR DOOR SLAMMIN'FUN! As you progress through the game, you'll find that the gun is a bit limited. It can't fire through doors and this is generally where the guards hide. Fortunately, if you wait until they get close to the door you can throw the door open and smack them in the teeth with it! You can also hide in alcoves and wait until the guards go away. The only really safe point in the game though, is on the stairs. The baddies have a strange inability to climb, which is a bit of a godsend really! 80  GRAPHICS SOUNDS PLAYABIL LASTABIL OVERALL 82 "


"wieranianea. Perte .00 (U.K.) MEER DRIVE JAPANESE GAMES Allen storm Arcuss Oddysey Bare Knucle Crackdown Devil Crash Dick Tracy DJ Boy E. Swat Ghouls & Ghosts Golden Axe Gynoug Jewel Master Magical Hat Marvel Land Meres Mickey Mouse Monaco GP .99 Moonwalker .99 New Zealand Story $31.99 Rolling Thunder 2 .99 Sonic the Hedgehog .99 Spiderman .99 Strider .99 Wrestle War .99 Zend Wing $31.99 Super League .99 Power Stick .50 .99 Jap to UK Converter .00 .99 AMERICAN GAMES $24.50 Ice Hockey .99 $30.99 Roadrash .99 $31.50 Toe Jam & Cash .99 $25.99 Donald Duck .50 Full range of American .99 $25.99 Games in stock .99 Please Call .99 .99 JAPANESE MEGA DRIVE $24.99 With game of Compatible with .99 our choice! Jap/US/UK games .99 .99 .00 .00 Game Gear .99 Game Gear and any game .00 Master Gear: Play master system games .00 Power Supply .99 New Lynx 2 .98 Lynx 2 inc 1 game .99 Lynx 2 carry case .99 Power Pack call LYNX GAMES BESTSELLERS World Class Soccer .00 Pacland .99 War Birds .99 Ninja Gaiden .99 Chequered Flag .99 Turbo Sub .99 APB .99 Scrap Yard Dog $24.99 Road Blasters .99 Rygar $24.99 Fantasy Zone Galaga 91 Hayleys Wars Mickey Mouse Ninja Garden Pop Breaker Shinubi .99 Frogger $21.99 Golf .99 Head Buster .99 Monaco 9P $21.99 Outrun .99 Rastan Saga .99 Wonder Boy .00 .99 .99 .90 $21.99 .99 .99 GAME BOY GAME BOY SEGA MASTER SEGA MASTER SUPER FAMICOM TET includes: SYSTEM II SYSTEM PLUS Famicom (Scart) .00 \"Tetris\" game pack * Power base * Power base 1 Famicom (Scart)+ stereo earphones control pad & batteries and video * Two control pads game of your choice .00 light gun link for head to head Famicom (Scart) + competition. Mind * \"Alex the Kid\" * \"Hang on\" & 2 games of your blowing graphics and Game built in \"Safari Hunt\" choice .00 digital stereo sound Fantasia deal games built in thrush earphones ready to play Famicom (PAL) call immediately. .99 .99 Autofile Turbo pad .99 WE STOCK A FULL RANGE OF NINTENDO & MASTER SYSTEM SOFTWARE Please call for price lisi MAIL ORDERS SALES & ENQUIRIES DESK Gullaby Dellvery charges UK Mainland 0202 514533 HARDWWARE: 68.00 + VAT per box FAX: (0202) 293456 SOFTWARE: Postage paid FANTASIA ENTERTAINMENTS & LEISURE 18 MAGNOLIA HOUSE RED HILL DRIVE BOURNEMOUTH-DORSET OPEN SIX DAYS A WEEK MON-SAT 9-5.30 FOR A MAGICAL WORLD OF FUN & GAMES FANTASIA "


"GLUURGHRGHHHH! What a sad shambling travesty of decent letter writers you lot are! Honestly, my pat tarantula Fang could do better with a hangover! You lot are about as intelligent as a Bullseye audience member, so try and impress me with your wit and wisdom at: YOB'S TUMMY TICKLINGLY FUNNY MAILBAG, CVG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON ECIR 3AU. There's a stonkaliciously huge  for the best of the bunch, so get scribbling! WI YOBS MAILBAG I'M A POET AND I'M CRAP Dear Yob. I have something to say, It's better to respect Yob than to be blown away, So below is the piece of prose I chose: PC PROBLEMS! Dear YOB, I own an IBM PC and I've got some good games like Prince of Persia and Grand Prix Circuit, but are us ordinary computer owners ever going to get a glimpse of Super Mario Bros, other than on the NES? After playing Super Mario Bros on my friend's NES, I have turned into a bit of a Mario fan. Please tell me if I can get a copy of SMB 1, 2 or 3 on my PC, even if I have to get it imported from America! Please print this letter as I'm sure other computer owners feel the same way. John Day, St Albans, Hertfordshire 88888 Mr Yob is good at his job, His insults will make you sob, So you'd better watch 'Pob' He eats corn on the cob and hob-nobs For drink he has Yop. If you wont be intelligent then shut your gob, in your face Yob will fob, Of the 100 quid he will rob. Because only the best will get that bob, Being famous means he has a mob, At Super Tennis you can't beat his lob, Admittedly he's a bit of a sod, Accept it though. Yob is the Boz. SA Butt Mitcham, Surrey 8 CIC1 8 8 $10,000 SAD TRAIN SPOTTER TYPE YOB: Butt by name and Butt by nature, What a stupid nomenclature, You can't write and you can't spell, And frankly Butt your letter smells, If you want to be a poet, Take your brain and try to grow it, Although I like my good points chanted, You should take them all for granted, I am great and you are crap, That's all you need to know you sap. WHATS A NOMENCLATURE? YOB: Aha! You're in luck! it just so happens that a Japanese company have a Nintendo adaptor which will allow you to use Nintendo games on your IBM! It's called the Ichinaka 5000 and consists of the following: A Nintendo Joypad, an NES, a telly and a bit of hairy string. All you have to do, is disconnect your monitor, slap the NES and the telly on top of your computer and tie them all down with the bit of string. Simply plug in a Mario cart and away you go! Simple eh? This unit is available in your local Shambling Spaz Supply store and costs a mere 10,000 quid to anyone they see coming. QCO Booo DICTIONARY FOR BUTT HEADS "


". 4 WHAT? MORE PC PROBS? de u MY FRIEND IS A THICKY Dear YOB, I am always reading CVG and talking about computers, but one of my friends thinks that computers and consoles are rubbish and he wouldn't buy CVG if he was paid. Please put him straight. Paul Caffrey Wakham, Leics. Dear YOB. Your mag is rad! I have a few questions about game releases. 1. Will Final Fight reach the PC? 2. Will Alien Storm reach the PC? 3. Are R-Types 1 or 2 available on the PC? 4. Is TMNT 2 the same as the arcade machine? 5. Could you tell me the cheat for Gain Ground on the M.S.? 6. Could you recommend some good beat 'em ups on the PC? 7. Could you review some action games on the PC instead of just Sims? Bruce Darwin, Australia YOB: I will take great pleasure in answering your sad questions: 1. Definitely not. 2. Not a chance. 3. Nope. 4. Yep. 5. Can't be bothered. 6. Bruce Lee Lives is a smart beat 'em up. 7. Keep reading... VEGEMITE RELATED PROBLEMS Dear YOB. I'm a proud Aussie bloke who owns a Nintendo and I'd like to ask a few questions. I recently bought Bart Simpson VS the Space Mutants. When I brought it home and played it and saw that the graphics were crap I was a bit upset. Why's this when the review looked great in the mag? Can I use British and American carts on an Australian Pal NES? Did you know that by the time we got the issue telling us about the CES, there was only a week to go? One last thing, is your Auntie going to be back? Ha, bet that browned you off! Now you'll have to print my letter to call me a dozy git! Ha, ha. EC NSW, Australia YOB: You're not a dozy git. Oh no. You're a dozy Aussie gitand that's a lot worse... OH BROTHER! Dear YOB, At long last I have found you! I'm your long-lost brother, SLOB! All this came to light recently when some people stopped me in the street and said, \"here. you're that YOB geezer out of CVG!\" pretended not to notice them and walked on. When I asked my mum about all this, she told me I had a brother, but she gave him away when he was a sprog cos' he was such a lunatic. I had to be sure. so I walked down to WH Smiths and bought a copy of CVG to check. Sure enough, I opened the mag and I swear, it might have been my own reflection in the YOB pages. I was a bit concerned at you starring in a soft magazine about games, but I figured out that CVG stands for Cretins and Vicious Geezers! So if you want a reunion, or even a baseball bat fight. just contact me at this address: SLOB, BINS, BACK OF ORMSKIRK TESCO. PAULS FRIEND BEING PUT i'm so HAPPY/ STRAIGHT TO007. um SAD AD DISASTER Dear YOB, I am a good fan of your magazine and have been collecting it for years now. I was flicking through it the other day and I came across the Micro Sells advertising pages. To my surprise I saw an advertisement for a Game Gear with nine games including Mickey Mouse and Monaco GP and TV Tuner-all for only twenty quid. I was amazed. I immediately rang the number only to find it was a big joke. I then looked further on in the magazine and found an Atari Lynx with Slime World, Ninja Gaiden and Paper Boy, the mains adaptor, the pouch and visor, again for twenty quid. Guess what, another joke! I'm sure that there have been many more of these ads in the past and so all I'm asking of these obviously disturbed people is to stop it, so that other people can put proper adverts in and then go see a psychiatrist. Emmet Doyle Abingdon, Oxon YOB: Looks like you've COR!WHAT been taken for a bit of a A BARGAIN! ride, my old bumboil. Who the hell would flog a Gamegear with nine games for twenty quid? They'd only do it if they thought they'd find somebody with a brain the size of pigeon dropping. Next time you read the microsells section, connect your head to the rest of your sad body. Next... YOB: I can't be bothered to put him straight myself, but I'll tell you how to do it: talk to him calmly and reasonably, explaining the error of his ways. Then jump up and down on the obnoxious little turd until he's put straight straight into hospital... YOB: My long lost brother! I don't believe it! I thought you were lost forever. Last I heard, you were given away by Biffa Bacon's family cos' you were too rough. Cor, I thought I was an only child. When I was young I used to stay in my room all the time. It was full of rotten food, it smelled terrible, all the windows were smashed and I had no-one to talk to. It was great so bog off 'cos I never want to see you again. Where the hell are the computer games questions? ATARI VCS SECOND HANDI SOD "


"A DAFT PICTURE OF A MAD MAN AND HIS DOG EATING PLASMACED IN POBLIVION INDO OLIVION! PARTY PRANNIES... tures at the end, cause I've got my dog to do better. Mr Mad Man Dear Yob, Dangleberry on Sea Me and other parties have come to the conclusion that some I've come to the conclusion that you're about as useful as a loony in a straitjacket hired you to dress up in a leather jacket jobbie in the lobby on a warm day at Buttlins. Is it just me, and write a letters page and in these letters you were told to in or are you the biggest turd who's ever written to YOB in the sult as many people as possible. If this is not the case, then history of the mailbag? Probably not, because you're just a you're a waste of space in a good magazine, who wears Vanilla talentless piece of puke with skid marks instead of brains Ice shorts and a Bros T-Shirt and has a faulty toaster for a brain. and you'll never amount to anything in your whole worthOne last thing, who the hell is the person who draws the daft picless life. Apart from that, I think you're OK... PICCIES A-PLENTY Dear YOB. I have a picture of you when you was little with no clothes on. If you don't send me a hundred quid I shall tell everyone about the spotty on your botty and if you don't print this letter I shall tell everybody how your mum makes you go to bed at 7 O'Clock and she reads you a bedtime story. Lee Nutsey Pendlbury LOOPY LAPLAND LARKS USELESS LETTER AHOY LE Dear YOB. Why do you bother printing letters from prats like Hong Kik Lee? I say you should go round his house and knee him \"you know where\". Any way. I think your mag is brill. You are totally cool and street tough. If you do not print this letter, I will never buy the magazine again and I will label you a gutless girls blouse. Got that turd-brain? am a genius, I can complete SMB with over 200 lives left. So what do you think of that, dork? Gavin Jones Newport, Gwent PS My sister thinks you're lush. She wants to get in your underpants. She's an 18 year old sex pot. DURH? AIDS ASTORIES Dear YOB, This letter, it is coming from Finland. I live in Syote which is inside Lapland. Lapland is being north of Finland. My name it is Jani Riihiaho and I am being 12 years aged. I am reading CVG mag and I must be say for you, \"Not enuff trix rad, I am not bigger posters having.\" Ha ha ho. Here is some writes of some parts of your's mag. Level bug occurred when Robin Hood am playing was. Robin cannot move to anything. Ha ha ho. Jani Riihiaho Syote, Lapland HAHA, (HOHO! ROALOB DAHL P PP Mimo YOB: I don't care, if you want to show a picture of me in the nude, then do it. Just make sure that it gets shown on TV as well. You're right too, I do go to bed at seven...in the morning and the only stories my mum reads are horror stories. If you think you're getting a hundred quid from me, you can go crawl up your own bottom with a large pointed stick. SAD SCROUNGING SPAMHEAD Dear YOB I am writing to say that my Megadrive is totally ace but the one problem is I've only got Streets Of Rage, that amazing game. But Streets Of Rage has broken. So please, please get me Streets Of Rage for an Early Christmas. I can't save up myself because I don't have any pocket money. Sean St Anne's on Sea YOB: It just so happens, that I got another copy of Streets Of Rage for Christmas this year and that means I've got a spare. However, I'm not going to give it to you because I'm wearing my special Scrooge underpants. There is a bit of good news for you though, I do have a spare copy of John Madden's 2, but you're not getting that either so bog off 21 LEI YOB: I am liking your letter very greatly. Lapland is being almost normally fine. Snowing have you and muchness of so. Mind you, a simple puke pile sadly are you being and cheesing of person's feet is hapGAVIN JONES:GENIUS pened. Socks and cleanly must you be changing and YOB: You sound like to me lessons taking outside Englike a two-year old pile of lish maybe. Writing to us and I've seen your no more should you havsister but decided to ing, or we are me having to shack up with the back end kick your eskimo ass also. of a bus instead.   . "


"ARE YOU TAKING THE MICKEY? Dear YOB, I am writing to ask about the game Mickey Mouse, Castle Of Illusion. I just can't seem to pass the Chocolate Master Of Illusion. Also, can I have a signed picture? Andrew Suttle March, Cambs. YOB: I used to have trouble passing Chocolate of Illusion too, but a healthy dose of bran and six rolls of two-ply soon sorted me out. If you want a signed photo of me, just go \"PREFERABLY ANOR down the local Police station, pinch one of their smart Wanted posters and draw a big \"X\" on it... Or playing karate football or tennis, Fighting off King Bowser or Dr Willy, And bravely saving the Princess, Everyday is a new adventure, Living on his speed and skill, Though he never leaves the living room, He must be really ill. Fay Pilliner Bromyard, Hereford ALL THE DEAD PRESENT SAD POET'S There was an old mumma called Fay, Who sent in a poem one day SAD MEGA MATEY Dear YOB, I'd like to tell you about a strange thing that happened to my friend last week. An elderly relative of his passed on, leaving him several hundred pounds in a trust. He's a bit foolish with money. so he went straight down the local computer shop. He bought Sonic, Mickey Mouse, Gynoug, Batman, EA Ice Hockey, John Madden's, Mercs, Alien Storm, Streets of Rage, Spiderman, Strider and Golden Axe. He also bought another joypad, two arcade powersticks, a Master System converter, a copy of CVG and Mean machines, he handed in a subscription to Megatech and purchased a copy of the Complete Guide to Megadrive. He raced home and sprinted up to his bedroom with all his new swag. Then he remembered, he doesn't own a Megadrive. Is life a bitch or what? Rob Norton Daventry, Northants. YOB: It certainly is Rob-or is that Nob? Your handwriting is so bad I can't tell, but that sad little story says I was probably right the second time. SOCIETY Dear YOB, I have just read my son's November 91 issue and thought I could write a better poem than the one in \"Sad Poetry Corner\", so here it is... COMPUTER VIRUS My son has caught the virus, And lost the use of his feet, His energy's gone to his finIt's totally crap Her son is a sap And there's nothing more can say GIMME ONE! And he's no time to eat or sleep. Everyday he's a different Super Hero, Turtle Battle Toad or Mega Twin, Robocod Captain Planet or Mario, Ready to fight or die on the small screen, Chased by mushrooms birds and dragons, Dear YOB, Can I have the 100 quid? Kavan Youssefifar Cheadle, Cheshire YOB: Nope. GIMME ONE TOO! Dear YOB, Please can I have the 100 quid? R Sole, Bumbridge, Bottomley YOB: Oh, alright then. SLAG ME OFF AND WIN A FAMICOM/LET So you reckon you're hard, eh? Reckon you can match the wit and wisdom of yours truly in his Neverwash Multi-Skid boxer shots? Reckon you're tough enough to match the world's rudest thug? Naaaaah! No chance! You lot are about as much use as an old eunach's jock strap with a broken buckle and as funny as a Rottweiler in the Y-fronts. Well, here's your chance to prove you can be as fab, funny, and downright cool as yours truly: just ring up and insult me down the 'phone! That's right, your host with the most is right here and waiting for the very worst you miserable suckers can chuck my way. So if you've got something you want to get off your chest, like the greasy zit that keeps popping up on mine, ring this number and explode down the phone: 0839500845 I'll print a selection of the best printable insults right here in the mag, and there's a spanking new Famicom up for grabs to the loudest, funniest, coolest call of the lot. Remember though, any sad thicky can hurl obscenities down the phone and I've heard 'em all before, so keep it clean or you won't win a thing and look a right pranny. That aside, get dialling and tell yours truly where to put it... Special note: Make sure the person who coughs up the phone bill knows you're dialling and remember not to insult them too: they'll probably beat you up because you're a sad little wimp after all. Calls cost 36p per minute off peak and 48p per minute peak rate. "


"ARBLE PUSH Official Nintendo Seal of Quality MB NOW ekonomiche Arcade ces MARBLE ADNESS AVAILABLE Nintendo ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM BATTLE YOUR WAY THROUGH TIME TIMELORD Risky Romps Wicked Waves Slippery Slopes "


"REVIEW TESA DRIVE TEGA DRIVE MEGADRIVE .99 BY ELECTRONIC ARTS. Doctor Maybe might be a bit a megalomaniac, but he's not at all happy. First time round he had his butt well and truly kicked by the special agent to end 'em all: James Pond Underwater Agent. He's been hiding away ever since, planning his revenge and dreamIng of all the dreadful things he's going to do to our fab fish. After months of deep consideration, the perfect plan pops into Maybe's mind and it's all about toys. But how can harmless little playthings do any damage to mankind? Here's how: by altering their workIngs so that they become psycopathic killers, Maybe reckons he'll create the perfect army of killers and he's not far wrong. One trip down to the Arctic and the plans are put in motion, the toys are tampered with and Maybe's maniac army is all set to take over the world! Trouble is, Maybe never reckoned on the solid advances of fishy technology. F.1.5.H agents have devised the ultimate agent Robocod. Half aquatic animal, half machine, Robocod's directives are to shut down every toy in sight before shutting down Doc Maybe for good. Is our man Cod up to the task? JAMES POND CODENAME:ROBOCOD deee iecesce BY MILLENIUM ROBO RETURNS! Robocod may look more than a tad familiar, 'cos you've no doubt seen him before! He's none other than that original underwater super hero James Pond remodelled this time round for more thrills 'n' spills. Robocod is the sequel to James Pond, the computer and con. sole game which swept the world not so long ago. This time round the maniac brains behind the game have taken all the best bits and improved upon them, delivering a completely different style of play you'll have to se to believe! A James Pond lost in Football Land If you go own Most of you will already know all about Robocodon 16-bit machines. We reviewed the game a few issues back and it scored a comfortable hit. The Megadrive version is precisely the same game, using the strengths of the console to full effect to improve upon the original wherever possible and turn this into a finely tuned console romp. I played the original quite a lot and wasn't expecting to give this conversion much time, but it's just so slick it draws you back again and again! Graphics and sound are faithful to the Amiga version and for my money this on plays just a tad better because the joypad is a lot less bovva than the joystick. Here's a game which suits consoles perfectly, and if loads of laffs and jolly japes are right up your street then this game is where you want to be. TIM BOONE James Pond in his original guise! 046 "


"SOO REVIEW STRETCH FOR TOP SCORES! Our man Pond has a boxful of skills to draw on, including the ability to stretch his body in order to grab hold of the ceiling! Cod can rise miles by stretching his body straight up, then grab an object and shimmy along to avoid those annoying floor-based hazards! This can be a real relief when things are getting hairy, but sometimes turn into a right pain in the jacksie if you don;t know here the hell you are! A Robocod rises to the occasion! James Pond is back, only this time he's half robot, half fish! This is one brilliant platform game and a stonking conversion of the Amiga original. The graphics have been reproduced almost perfectly but just a little faster and smoother. Soundwise, Robocod is a laffs riot with a brilliant remix of the Robocop theme music and some smart sound effects. The in-game tunes are a bit twee, but suit the game perfectly. Gameplay though, is the main concern and Robocod has oodles of it. The platform theme is great and the game is fast, enjoyable and downright groovy. The game is huge, with tons of levels and secret screens the only real difference between this and the Amiga game, is that the coloured backgrounds have been replaced with less colourful, but more detailed parallax backdrops. If you liked the look of the Amiga version, then put on your special shopping Y-Fronts and get down to Mr Spanky's Cavalcade of Software and reserve one right now! D0182200 SUPER SWEETIES CENTRAL! Stuffed full of tons of gorgeous scolling screens, Robocod features all manner of amazing meanies to discover and destroy! Some of them are so weird and wonderful you'll see why Dr Maybe has more than a few screws loose, and a few are loosely based on characters you'll have seen before. We're saying nowt! 16, 2010FRANK O'CONNOR Good old Bertie Basset, he's Britain's greatest asset! BIG BEAUTIFUL BONUSES Not only does Robocod feature more than 2,500 screens of action, but the game includes loads of bonus rooms and a specially created bonus level! Here you can pick up some major points and power-ups to aid young Robo in his quest for the Doc. Hurrah! Invasion of the sweetie monsters! ! UPDATE Robocod's been around awhile on 16-bit but there are no immediate plans to unleash him on other machines. Watch this space for more info... ou go down to the woods today... ICINC ICING MEGADRIVE GRAPHICS 92 SOUNDS 89 PLAYABILITY LASTABILITY 91 OVERALL 91 "


"REVIEW MEGADRIVE  V elcome to another round of the toughest VV game in town: the one and only Speedball 2! As you'll know by now, street fights are a thing of the past nowadays the hard boys just pull on their shining suits of armour and beat the crap out of each other for B.I.G. bucks! Here we are at the Brutal Deluxe home ground for another feast of fighting fun, and I reckon we're in for quite a bit of bovver. In case you don't know the rules, I'll do a quick recap: there aren't any. Get the steel ball into the other team's goal as many times as you can, by whatever means you can. And don't worry if a few people get hurt whaddya think we pay them for? Get out there and get kickin'! BILLINGTON 92 EE Speedball 2 was an instant classic on the Amiga. You'll be glad then to discover that the Megadrive version retains every feature of the Bitmap's classic future sport. The differences are all slight improvements. The Megadrive conversion is a little faster and smoother and for some bizarre reason, it suits the joypad perfectly. Graphically, the game is a joy to behold. Detailed sprites, smart backgrounds and some nice special effects all add up to a veritable visual feast. The sound doesn't quite match up to the standard of the graphics, but it still includes some lovely samples and tunes. The options are comprehensive to say the least, with different combinations of teams, players and equipment available. All in all, the best sports sim available on the Megadrive and an essential purchase. FAST FURIOUS FUMPIN' FUN! Fast and furious are the watchwords for Speedball 2, converted from the Bitmap Bros' Amiga classic. The emphasis is well and truly on speed, strength and reflexes with no points for second place! The game centres on the steel ball which spins out of the central gun at the start of play. From this moment it's a fighting free for all, with just about anything allowed as you scrap for points. Tap the fire button quickly and the player with the ball will throw it at shoulder height. Keep the fire buttonm pressed down and he'll do a curling lob over the heads of the opposition, ready for his mate to catch further up the field. Catch the keeper off guard and you may just slap one in the goal for ten points, a big klaxon and an action replay Don't like the look of that bloke with the ball? Well, punch his head in! FRANK O'CONNOR THANKS...to Console Concepts (0782 712759) for the review cartridge "


"BIG BOY BONUSES REVIEW There's no room for wimpos in Speedball 2, and there are a variety of bonuses on offer to really sort out the men from the boys. All are useful and some are so darned good they can make all the difference at the very last minute as you crawl back into the lead: Stars: Stars line the playing field. Hit them with the playball and you'll score two points for each one. Light up the lot and you'll get a big 10 point bonus. Hurrah! The original Speedball was the best scrap 'n' score game outside the arcade, and Speedball 2 on the Amiga improved it still further. This is the Megadrive conversion of the 16-bit classic, and if anything it's even better in many respects! The gameplay Is certainly faster and smoother, and although you will see a tiny glitch in the scroll at certain times, you'll hardly notice. Graphics are great, sound's a laugh (and this time round there's no annoying little oik yelling \"Ice Cream!\" when you score a goal!) Gamplay's where Speedball 2 can't be touched, though. Fast moving from beginning to end, it's intensely competitive for every second you're playing especially if you take on a mate for head to head laffs. My only moan is that occasionally you lose track of the ball, but with a game this fast that would only happen in real life, so who's complaining? This is one of the strongest titles on the Megadrive at the moment, so I suggest you snap it up right now! Bounce Domes: Two of these little beauties lie dormant on the field. Hit 'em with the ball and it flies off in a random direction, racking up two points in the process! TIM BOONE Multiplier Ramp: Roll the ball in either direction up the ramp and you'll activate the Score Multiplier. Roll it up once and your scoring potential increases 50 per cent, roll it up twice and each goal is worth double just the thing if you're lagging behind and need to catch up quick! Beware though, 'cos the other team can turn off the lights just as quick as you can spark 'em on! Electrobounce: Two of these units line each side of the field. Hit 'em will the ball and it electrifies, glowing gold and knocking over the first player it hits from the other team! Warp gates: Four of these line the field, and throwing the ball into one of them will cause it to warp out of another further down the field. MANAGE YOUR MANIACS Speedball 2 offers you the chance to manage your team in or derf to get the best out of them and make sure they really know how to rough up the other side. In this section you can change your starting lineup, while the Gym screen allows you na to alter a wide variety of team factors including Aggression, B 2 B Attack, even Intelligence (or the lack of it!) it's grunts 'n'groans all the way as the big boys go for What did you call my sister? YOU JAMMY SLUGGER! Little known facts of life: CVG and Mean Machines liked Speedball Il so much we organised a knockout compo. Who won? None other than Paul Rand. How? We don't know either, but it must be something to do with those Bitmap-style shades he wears... BUTOL OLX all? BEVOLVER Paul. MEGADRIVE GRAPHICS SOUNDS PLAYABILITY 94 LASTABILITY 93 OVERALL 93 "


"CAN BE RIDDEN BY ANYONE FROM 6 TO 60 A REAL MINIRACERI WIN THIS 33cc FUN BIKE ON: 0839654334 Here's a Wheely Great comp! AS SEEN ON TV! W WIN THIS AWESOME 80cc SUZUKI QUAD IDEAL FOR ANYONE OVER 10! CALL: 0839-654335 WIN A KIDS 0839200cc GO KART WIN A 50cc HONDA IDEAL FOR ANYONE OVER 5 0839654336 CALL: WIN A CAR 08981966 BEETLE 33 4 CONVERTIBLE 0 9 5 WIN..... 0839AFTERBURNER THE ULTIMATE ARCADE GAME! WRESTLING BONANZA SIGNED HOGAN RUNNERS UP COLOURPOS A WIN A  0898JVC 334 CAMCORDER soke Line 0839 6543008 CALL:0839-654337 WIN  0898PILE OF 334 TOYS! OLIE 2023 091 JOBS WINA 0839PAIR OF  550 ROLLERBLADES! 039 soke ENS h tinM WIN A CD 0898MEGA-BLASTER 334 + MINI COLOUR TV 092 WIN THIS WRESTLEFEST ARCADE GAME! THE LATEST W.W.F. ARCADE GAME STRAIGHT FROM THE STATESI BATTLE AGAINST YOUR HEROES: HULK HOGAN. BIG BOSS MAN, MR PERFECT & LOTS MOREI PLAY TAG TEAM CHALLENGE OR BATTLE ROYALI TO BE IN WITH A CHANCE OF WINNING THIS MACHINE CALL: 0839-654301 BILLY WANNA FIGHT BUTT WANNA FIGHT? Starline 26 WIN HIS 'N' 0839HERS MUDDY 5 FOX MOUNTAIN BIKES ABUSE LINE WIN A KIDS 0839-? ELECTRIC 550 MOTORBIKE 03 CALL 0839654302 IF YOU DARE! PLUS 100's OF WRESTLING RUNNERS-UP PRIZES! 0898-334091 WIN A KIDS 0839MUDDY FOX 550 041 BIKE! PREVIOUS WINNERS SIMPSONS ARCADE GAME KATE POSEY, HANSTON, LINCOLN ROLLERBLADES DANIEL GREGORY, BECKENHAM YAMAHA BI-WIZZ A BRYAN KIDLINGTON SKATE PILE GARETH HUGHES, KIRKRUSHTON MOUNTAIN BIKE NATHAN O-REILLY, WILLENHALL YAMAHA PW80 MOTORBIKE GALIC ZDRAVKA, LONDON W12 SUZUKI LTSO QUAD ROBERT WRIGHT, ROCHESTER WAYNE TAYLOR, CARNOUSTE KEYBOARD H. TRIVEDI, STANMORE, MODX BASS GUITAR CLIFF MARUSSON, ABERDEBU LEAD GUITAR SIMON SMITH, BELFAST LIVERPOOL SHIRT STEPHEN FYLDES, CASTLE BROMWICH ARSENAL SHIRT VICKY BARROW, CHESTER NOTTS FOREST PRIZE LEE ROBERTSON LAURENCEKIRK ENGLAND FOOTBALL PRIZE MARK TATE, BARNSLE Calls cost 36p (cheap rate) 48p (at all other times) per minute in VAT. Megafone Ltd, Sandylands House, Morecambe. LAS 1DG. Average call duration 5.5 minutes. Ask your parents permission before you call. "


"REVIEW AMIGA  BY DMI FANTASTIC FRILLS 'N' SPILLS Fantastic Voyage bears more than a passing resemblance to the likes of R-Type and Salamander. You have to find your way to the poor old bloke's brain, passing through all the sections of his body even the 'orrible bits There are two main problems though. One: there are tons of evil critters infesting the body. Two: you need certain weapons and medicines to destroy obstacles. Can you do it in time? @GOOOOO Anyone seen a smart Sixties film called Fantastic Voyage? Here's the plot: a crazed scientist has perfected the technique of miniaturization, but an unexpected illness causes a blood clot in his brain. The problem with the shrinking process is that it wears off after an hour. The scientist knows how to stop this happening, but he's at death's door! You, a team of doctors and a submarine are all to be shrunk and injected into the scientist's, then make your way to the blood clot and destroy it. Thing is, you have to get in and out within an hour, otherwise you'll start growing again inside the bloke! Get to it! Ug NG : 00000 POOR RIEKE Voyag What an unexpected treat! Fantastic Voyage is a smart variation on the staid shoot'em up genre, with an ingenious plot and some brilliant special effects. In style it's a little like Atomic Robo Kid, a mixture of exploration and frantic blasting action. It's a great deal more exciting though, with a real sense of sus. pense as the clock ticks away and the baddies creep up on you. There are extra weapons galore and very necessary they are too. Graphically this is a treat and a half. The organic feel is brilliant, really slimy and icky! The spotlight effect on the ship as you drift through the body looks superb. Music is good, but you'll only hear it if you have a one meg machine. The game is only as big as a human body, but when you're less than a nanometre in size, that's a lot of area to cover. A smart addition to an otherwise lifeless genre! FRANK O'CONNOR A So, where do we start eh? BLOOD 'N' GUTS GALORE All the baddies in this game are revolting. The first things you come across are flying red blood cells and very realistic they are too. You'll also encounter massive cancer cells, all whirly legs and oozing pustules. There are really nasty things in there though, like lice shaped parasites, which at this scale are about the size of a blue whale. You also have to watch out for the body's defence systems, it may think you are a virus and send out gangs of antibodies to get youl 87 DUSTIE MIDDX RDEEN ELFAST WICH HESTER WE ALL LIVE IN A TINY SUBMARINE The blokes in Proteus (the submarine) only have an hour to perform the life saving operation and get out. To escape from the body, they have to drive the submarine into the tear ducts of the patient and pop out of his eye. If they don't do it in time, they'll rapidly expand, crushing themselves and ripping the patient apart in the process. If this happens in the head it's all over for everyone involved, but if they make it to his bottom, they might just escape with their lives! AMICA GRAPHICS SOUNDS PLAYABILITY LASTABILITY OVERALL 86 CEKIRK NSLEY "


"SHEKHANA CONSOLES USEIN 081-340 8565 SHEKHANA HAVE BEEN ESTABLISHED SINCE 1978. WE ARE THE OLDEST ESTABLISHED COMPANY IN C&VG, HAVING BEEN ADVERTISING EVERY MONTH SINCE 1984. DON'T BE LET DOWN THIS YEAR OUR PAST HISTORY IS OUR GUARANTEE. MERRY CHRISTMAS TO ALL OUR CUSTOMERS **NINTENDO GAMEBOY** GAMEBOY BATTERIES + HEADPHONES FREE PROTECTOR .99 AS ABOVE + ANY GAME YOU LIKE + GAMEBOY PROTECTOR ONLY .99 **NINTENDO FAMICOM** Famicom Scart VR3 ........199.99 Castlevania 4........................P.O.A Famicom Scart + 2 Games..279.99 Darius Twin ... .44.99 Famicon Pall VR.3............224.99 Dodgeball.................. 44.99 Famicom Pall + 2 Games ...299.99 * F-Zero... 39.99 (any 2 games up to  each) Final Fight... ................ 44.99 Famicom Scart version 3. + Sony Geoman Warrior ............. 44.99 TV/Monitor or Philips 8833 Ghouls & Ghost Aval Now...49.99 MK11 Monitor ......... ...449.99 ...449.99 Gradius III...... 39.99 Scart Lead External ...............29.99 Hyperball.......... 44.99 Audio Lead........... ..19.99 Jerry Boy 44.99 Control Pad. ...9.99 Joe & Mac... 49.99 Philips 8833 MK11/1084 *Pilot Wing ......... 44.99 Lead.... ...19.99 Populous....... 44.99 J.B. King Joystick............. .69.99 R-Type............. 44.99 Autofire controller........... .19.99 Sim City ......... 44.99 Autofire Pad................. 19.99 Super E.D.S.. 44.99 USA Games Adaptor ........... ..29.99 Super Mario 4 ................ 44.99 * Actraiser ............ ..39.99 Pro Soccer Kick Off .......... 39.99 * Baseball..... ..44.99 Super Tennis................. 44.99 Big Run 44.99 UN Squadron...... 44.99 Drakkhen USA Only.............49.99 \"AVAILABLE IN USA VERSION.49.99 Caveman Ninja......................P.O.A GAMEBOY DELUXE SET + FREE PROTECTOR INC TETRIS + 2 PLAYER LEAD .99 2 Player Cable.... ...9.99 Replacement Joystick....... AC/DC Power Supply ... ....9.99 Amplifier..... ....... 9.99 Battery Recharger Pack ............26.99 Large Carry all Case................19.99 Gameboy Protector .......... ....9.99 Light Boy (Mag + Light)........ ...19.99 Case Boy (Hard). 12.99 G Boy Pouch ... .... 10.99 Leather Case........... ..19.99 Tote Hard Case .............. 14.99 Repacement Lens ........ 4.99 Baseball, Batman, Bill and Ted, Boomers Adventure, Bubble Bobble, Bubble Ghost, Castelvania II, Cattrap, Daedalian Opus, Dragons Lair, Duck Tales, F1 Racer. Gauntlet II, Hal Wrestling. In Your Face, Kung Fu Master, Mercenary Force, Mickey Mouse, Ninja Boy, Operation Contra, Paperboy, Pipedream, Princes Biobette, Robocop, R-Type, Sneaky Snakes, Turtles, WWE Wrestling Ring for further titles ALL ABOVE HAVE ENGLISH INSTRUCTIONS ALL .99 EACH, ANY 2 FOR .00, ANY THREE FOR .00 JAPANESE GAMES AVAILABLE AVAILABLE NOW FAMICOM VERSION.3 FOR IMPROVED DEFINATION AND QUALITY PICTURE. PLEASE NOTE VERSION.3 FAMICOMS ARE NOT AVAILABLE AT ANY OTHER OUTLETS, IT IS ONLY AVAILABLE EXCLUSIVE TO SHEKHANA Lynx System II Ninja Gaiden Warbirds. Pacland. **ATARI LYNX*** ..84.99 Viking Child....... 29.99 Chequered Flag ...... 29.99 Turbo Sub............... 29.99 Battery Recharger Pack 888 8888 **SEGA MEGADRIVE** **IMPORTED VERSION** OFFER ONE MEGADRIVE CONTROL PAD + POWER SUPPLY UNIT **.99** **NEO GEO** Neo-Geo Complete System Scart of AV Pal System..... Control Stick..... Software from 349 888 OFFER TWO SEGA MEGADRIVE PAD PSU + ANY TWO JAPANESE GAMES UP TO THE VALUE OF .99 MEGADRIVE CONVERTOR WORTH .99 **.99** SAVE  **ABOVE OFFERS ARE FOR THE XMAS PERIOD ONLY** 24.99 **SEGA GAMEGEAR** GAMEGEAR SYSTEM PLUS FREE PROTECTOR WORTH .99 .99 GAMEGEAR ANY GAME .99 GAMEGEAR ADAPTOR **AVAILABLE NOW** LETS YOU RUN MASTER SYSTEM GAMES ON YOUR GAMEGEAR .99 AC/DC Power Supply ..9.99 Leaderboard Battery Pack....... 39.99 Mickey Mouse................. G.Gear Protector..... ...9.99 Ninja Gaiden ... 24.99 2-Player Cable ..9.99 Oufrun 24.99 GG Carry Case 19.99 Pacman 24.99 G.G Deluxe Case..... ..24.99 Putter Golf...... .19.99 Widegear Glass ..... 14.99 Rastan Saga.... 24.99 Widegear. Plastic..... ...10.99 Sninobi..... 24.99 Dragon Crystal ..... 24.99 Strider 24.99 Factory Panic ........... 24.99 Solotaire... 24.99 Fantasy Zone ....... ..24.99 Space Harrier.... 24.99 Galaga.. 24.99 Wonder Boy. 24.99 G-LOG............ 24.99 Woody Pop..... 24.99 Joe Montana........ .. .24.99 88 U.K. Official Megadrive ...................124.99 CD Rom Available Soon Arcade Power Stick.............. 39.99 Control Pad...... ............ ...12.99 JAPUK Megadrive Convertor ....... VERSION VERSION SOFTWARE JAP UK Hardball VERSION VERSION Immortal Airwolf 24.99 Insector X 24.99 Alien Storm... 29.99 34.99 Ka Ge Ki 29.99 Altered Beast............... 24.99 34.99 Last Battle......... Bare Knuckles. 39.99 Legend of Riden.. 29.99 Blockout..... 19.99 Marble Land........ 29.99 Buster Douglas Boxing..... 34,99 Mercs 34.99 Crackdown... 34.99 Mickey Mouse.............24.99 Curse............... 24.99 Moonwalker.............. 34.99 Degap Attack........... PGA Golf...... Devil Crush Phantasy Star Ill... Dynamite Duke........ 24.99 Rastan Saga 2.... DJ Boy 24.99 Road Rash El Viento Saint Sword Eswat Shining + Darkness E.A Ice Hockey....... 34.99 Sonic Hedgehog F22 Interceptor..... Strider..... Gairies... Sword of Sodan Ghouls + Ghosts....... Toe Jam & Earl..... Ghostbusters ...... Wrestle War....................34 Golden Axe.....................29.99 29.99 Zany Golf......... 8888 Outrun... 28.84.5 34.99 24.99 8382 8888888888888 34.99 8888 **PC ENGINE** PC ENGINE CORE GRAFF PALI VERSION PC ENGINE PORTABLE GT ..... RING FOR SOFTWARE 3999 ....99 ...........99 RETAIL STORE/MAIL ORDER INFORMATION RETAIL STORE: 2, GLADSTONE HOUSE, HIGH ROAD, WOOD GREEN 257/259 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD, ABOVE PRICES ARE MAIL ORDER ONLY. N22 0AA (Comer of Gladstone Ave) (100 yards Wood Green Tube Stn) LONDON W1 9AB. MAIL ORDER: CHEQUE P.O TO: SCS (CVG), 655 GREEN LANES (On Piccidilly Line) Tel: 081 889 9412 Fax: 081 889 9413. TEL: 071 631 4627 LONDON NS OGY. TEL: 081 340 8565 P&P ADD 75P FOR SOFTWARE, ES FOR MACHINES. 3-5 DAYS, NEXT DAY . TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME. WE RESERVE THE RIGHT TO CHANGE OUR PRICES WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE. EXOE. "


"XSFET A DRIVE SPECIAL FEATURE MEGR-CD men d MEGA THE BITMAP FLANGE RASTERDOOBRIE MED 1MbitRAM | MEGA-CD DER o here it is. The battle of the giants. Nintendo and Sega have been waging war in the console market for years now, with Nintendo always having the upper hand. Sega looked all set to change this around in the British market at least, with the launch of the Mega CD. Nintendo however had different Ideas and decided to bring forward the launch of the Super NES (Super Famicom to you and me). The launch is all set for spring, with Super NES machines in the shops, possibly as early as February. Sega don't plan to launch the Mega CD officially until Summer next year. Now here's the question on everyone's lips; Do you buy the Super NES, or wait for the Mega CD? It's not an easy choice, so here's a guide to what's hot and what's not about the two machines... The Mega CD is a compact unit that sits happily underneath the Megadrive. It's very similar in styling to the Megadrive and once in place it looks dead sexy. The internal gubbins are a mass of smart custom chips and processor doobries. The Mega CD uses a Motorola 68000 chip, like the one you'd find in an ST or an Amiga. This chip runs at 12.5 MHz, which is bloody fast, especially when used in tandem with the Mégadrive's own 68000. This is all very well, but a CD ROM really needs one thing...a RAM cache! What's a RAM cache? Well, when a CD unit sends graphics and sound to the host ma. chine, it needs to hold a lot of information in memory. If it can't do that, then you get a very irritating lag while the machine accesses the Compact Disc. This was a big problem with the PC Engine CD unit, the waiting time can get quite aggravating. Fortunately, the Mega CD has a large RAM cache and can handle up to 6 Megabits of info at one time, this is more than enough space for pause-free gaming. As far as sound goes, the Mega CD is a big improvement over the Megadrive. It has an extra 8 channels of PCM sounds and they are well up to the quality of a decent keyboard. These can be played at the same time as the Megadrive's chip and can also be used with live CD tracks so musically, you can't go far wrong. The extra processing power built into the new unit means that the Megadrive can now perform the kind of 'scaling and rotation tricks that the Famicom is famous for. All in all, a smart bit of kit. BIG IN JAPAN The Mega CD has been widely heralded in the land of the rising sun, as the machine that will bring CD ROM into the home. There are already a couple of CD ROM standards in Japan, the most successful of which is the Sharp FM Towns. This computer is basically a soupedMEGA-CD SYSTEM SPECIAL THANKS! CVG would like to thank the fine gamesters at Ace Consoles (071 383 0480) for getting a Mega CD to our office the very day following its launch in Japan! Best known for their Super NES (Famicom) expertise, Ace are expanding their horizons to take on Sega's wonder machine, so call 'em for info! up PC, with smart graphics and a built in CD unit. The thing the FM Towns is most notorious for, is the number of games featuring scantily clad women. It's widely expected that this kind of dodgy software will appear on the Mega CD, although Sega's strict quality controls should filter the worst of it MEGA SUPER "


"SPECIAL FEATURE out. The Mega CD was released in Japan last December and basically sold out as soon as it hit the shops. Sega cleverly released limited numbers, so selling out completely isn't quite as impressive as it sounds. The demand though is easily outstripping supply even now. In the UK, when the machine was launched, grey importers like Advanced Console Entertainment and Console Concepts were snowed under with orders. In fact, when we picked up our Mega CD, there was nearly a riot because it was the last one in stock! WHERE'S OUR BLIMMIN' MEGA CD? After months of sneak previews and much speculation, we finally got hold of a Mega CD! The machine arrived in the CVG office only days after its release in Japan. The excitement in here was unbearable. Problem was, when we first got it, we had no software. When you turn the machine on, you are presented with a really sexy demo. This shows the Mega CD logo floating in the sky, it starts turning, spinning and swooping around the screen. It's all very impressive, but it's even more impressive when you discover that the logo isn't a polygon, noparoony, it's a sprite. This gives just a peek at the machine's true potential. The music that plays during this demo is groovy, but hardly mind-blowing. Ry7RAM BPEX STOP TAUSE PLAT AUTO SERCH SERGE U RAM ! SEGA.CORON e. TRACK 96 TIME 02:08 52  370 138 11777»FRAM —NSE 39th. REPEAT RANDOM AL PROGRAM INTRO R-BREPEAT RANDON BIL SET T INE  SO IS IT ANY GOOD OR WHAT? Well, there's no doubt about it. The Mega CD is a dead hard bit of kit. Problem is, the first few games don't really take full advantage of it. There are a few Japanese RPGs available already, most with untranslatable names. The RPGs all follow the kind of Gauntlet inspired top-down perspective, with a lot of spell casting and wandering about. The one advantage CD brings to this type of game is in the lengthy graphical intros. You get treated to highly impressive cartoon sequences throughout and the accompanying music is quite awesome. We've only seen two arcade style games so far. The first, Heavy Nova is a cross between a shoot 'em up and a beat 'em up. It's a horizontal scroller, very playable and very fast. Again, this game features huge cartoon intros and smart music, but graphically it doesn't do anything you haven't seen before. Sol Feace is the second of the arcade games and it's a good old horizontal scroller. This is a real disappointment. As far as graphics are concerned, this is no better than say, Thunderforce or Gaiares. There are the now mandatory intro screens and the music is funky and well composed, but you could easily be mistaken for thinking this was a Megadrive cart. There are a few big titles penciled in for future release, expect to see a lot of Sega's arcade catalogue. G-LOC and Radmobile for starters. Best of all though, a little birdie tells us that Sonic 2 may well appear on the Mega CD first. From what we hear, it's gonna be something very special indeed! HI ELAPSED FR699666491 FESET SPACE CLERR OPTION A SONIC CATHEDRAL OF SOUND.. Not only is the Mega CD a smart piece of video gaming technology, it's also a bloody good CD player. Instead of the usual array of buttons and dials, all you do is slot in a normal CD and press start on your control pad. The screen then changes from the demo to a menu of options. These allow you to play any track on your CD at random, or if you like, in a preprogrammed order. There are tons of useful options and if you're into music you'll love it. You can for example, loop small sections of any track, useful for sampling chords or instrument sounds. There are a wealth of options and the sound quality is quite remarkable. Using the audio ports and connecting the Mega CD to speakers, the sound quality is easily as good as a decent CD player. Put through a good stereo system with amplifiers and the unit becomes a formidable bit of Hi-fi equipment. BUT WHEN CAN I GET ONE? The Mega CD has had its official launch in the UK penciled in as Summer 92. This is reasonably fast and we'll get it around the same time as America. The machine is certainly expensive as an import, around the 300 quid mark. When it's released over here, the reduction in price wont be all that great. Expect an official price of around 250 quid. The Mega CD imports will only work on SCART Megadrives at the moment, but the console boys are hard at work on a conversion and it should be available for Pal machines by the time you read this. 054 "


"SPECIAL FEATURE G THE BIG TOP SECRET THING THAT WE CAN'T TELL YOU ABOUT! After wearing our special investigator trousers for months, we discovered something about the SNES that will make you fill your pants with sheer bed-wetting anticipation. This makes the CD ROM look pathetic and it will change the face of SNES gaming forever! What is it? We're not allowed to tell you! Ha! Are we evil or what? All we can say is this, when it appears and you own a Famicom, you'll be even happier than a big bag of really happy things. Is it hardware? Is it software? We're not telling, but look out in future issues for more news. It's a biggie! THE CONSOLE WITH TWO BRAINS! The Super NES is a very strange machine indeed! Although it's a sixteen bit machine, the central processor isn't sixteen bit at all. It is in fact an eight bit chip.a 65C816 to be precise but a deeply confused one. It runs as fast as a sixteen bit chip and it thinks like one, but it ain't. Kind of like a Volvo with a Ferarri engine...it's not much to look at but it doesn't half shift! The Super NES' main attributes are its brilliant custom chips. These are used to create some stunning graphical effects. The colour palette is an enormous 32.000 and the machine can display 256 colours on screen at once. You can take a whole screen or a small area and expand or reduce it in size very quickly. This effect has been seen before in arcade games like After Burner and G-LOC. The Famicom can also rotate screens in real time, much the way Namco's Assault arcade machine does. The chips are powerful enough to combine these effects and clever programming can produce stunning results. The most impressive thing about the SNES though, is the sound chip. This uses eight channel digital PCM sounds, better quality than most mid-range keyboards. These sounds can be played in true stereo and the effect is jaw-dropping. Trumpets, pianos, guitars, all can be reproduced faithfully through the SNES. You can easily link your SNES to a hi-fi and hear the sound through decent speakers, it's well worth doing. In real terms, it's a much more powerful machine than Sega's Megadrive. THE GOOD THE BAD AND THE SAD The SNES obviously excels in anything that involves colour and sound, especially using the rotation/scaling hardware. Where it falls down a little is on its sprite handling. The SNES is capable of displaying tons of sprites, but the speed suffers when there are more than 128 on screen at once. Much has been made of this problem in the computer press, but the Megadrive suffers from this too, although not toon say, a beat 'em up or a the same extent. Where this driving game. There are problem arises most is in fast ways round this, with clever shoot 'em ups with tons of programming and tight use of baddies on screen at once. the hardware, but it's not as You'd be less likely to notice big a problem as you'd think. FABBY FAMMY FROLICS The initial batch of Famicom games upon its release in Japan was spectacular. The one to buy the machine for though, was Super Mario World. This was the fourth installment in the series and is still easily the best platform game ever. The games, unusually for a console included a couple of strategy games, namely Populous and Sim City. These went down a storm in Japan and shifted untold numbers of Famicoms. It's highly likely that the first batch of games will be the same as the first lot of Japanese games. Look out in the future though. for great titles like Street Fighter 2 and rumours already abound of Mario 5. 055 "


"SPECIAL FEATURE CD THOSE DAMN YANKEES! The SNES went on sale in America last year and was greeted with great interest, but it didn't do as well as expected in sales terms. There were two main reasons for this. firstly, the Megadrive already had a firm foothold in the market and secondly, NES owners were quite happy with their old machine. Software support was fine, with a lot of great titles released with the machine, but many stores had problems getting enough copies. After some teething troubles and a lot of speculation, the SNES is now doing great guns, with a SHENANIGANS Nintendo have had a lot of political turmoil with their CD ROM system. This should have been available now, but development changes put paid to that. The Nintendo CD ROM was to be de. veloped in conjunction with electronics giant Sony, but the deal fell through early last year. However, the unit was nearly finished and Sony still had the legal right to release the machine. It will probably appear in Japan in the next few months, it's to be called the Sony PlayStation. It will be entirely compatible with Famicom cartridges, but with the addition of a CD ROM drive. Early peeks at the machine reveal it to be a sleek black unit, similar in appearance to Sega's Mega CD. Sadly though, there will be little in the way of support for the CD unit, with most developers opting to use Nintendo's system instead. This new system has been designed with the help of Phillips and looks set to beat even the Mega CD, at least in terms of tech spec. It should be ready soon and there will be an interesting three way competition between Sega, Sony and Nintendo. SO WHICH ONE SHOULD I BUY? It's up to you. If you're dead wealthy, get 'em both, if not, ask! yourself these questions; How much do you have to spend? How important is CD ROM? Do I wait for official release, or buy grey imports ? Both the SNES and the Mega CD are brilliant machines and both have their strong points. The Mega CD remember, is an add-on and not a stand alone unit. The SNES is due for release very soon. Add all these points up and decide for yourself, but remember, you heard it here first! 056 "


"20/20 VISIO: PRESENTS THE MOVIE AVAILABLE FROM YOUR LOCAL VIDEO RENTAL STORE Shy. Sensitive. Law-abiding. Polite. Respectful. BRUCE WILLIS AWK TUDSON .... I don't think so. Now steal in on the game. \"Sheer, unadulterated addiction...which is guaranteed to last a lifetime...infuriatingly addictive game-play... grab onto it with both hands\" ACE \"Excellent graphics move well... the comic animation will raise a smile from even the most hardened hearts.\" ST ACTION Ocea OOOOOOOO  1991 TRI-STAR PICTURES, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED OCEAN SOFTWARE LIMITED. 6 CENTRAL STREET. MANCHESTER M2 5NS . TEL: 061 832 6633 . FAX: 061 834 0650 "


"TIN VUI Win a SUPER FAMICOM: Get Your Hands On This Amazing Console And Enjoy The Most Dynamic Games! We'll Also Throw In A Copy Of Super Mario World FREE! Call 0839 99 33 32 Now! WIN The Top 10 SEGA MEGADRIVE & NINTENDO N.E.S. GAMES! -WIN-WINSEGA V LE MANS 24hr SCALEXTRIC LEMANS 24hr MEGA DRIVE EFB 0839 99 33 35 | 0839 99 33 36 | 0839 99 33 3 Win an ATARI LYNXI The Complete Portable LYN Full Colour Entertainment System That's Driving Everyone Crazy! PLUS FIVE FREE GAMES! Call 0839 99 33 38 Now! WIND B art Simpson! 0839 9 THE BEST CHEATS, HINTS & TIPS! FREE su FREE Club Membership For All Callers. + Fantastic Prizes For Your Cheats! Call now for the largest selection of cheats and hints in the U.K. (Commodore /Spectrum, etc.) 8 bit. 0898 330 901 (Atari ST/Amiga, etc.) 16 bit 0898 330 902 (Sega Megadrive & Master System etc.) Consoles 0898 330 903 1.V. Ltd. PO Box 1650, B1 1AA. Calls cost 36p/min cheap, 48p/min other times. PLEASE ASK YOUR PARENTS BEFORE YOU CALL "


"Well, howdy doody, folks! 1992 is now upon us and soon we'll all be eating snails and saying \"Haw he haw\" like what those foreign types do. It's also just the right time for tons and tons of smart, new tips to come pouring through the letterbox, after your frantic buying of games over the Yuletide period. In fact, I had such a Jolly good time, sorting through your hints and cheats over the past month that I deliberately didn't go home for Christmas honest. Got a hint, cheat or a new clause to put forward to the leaders of Europe, Jot them down on a five pound note and send them to me at: PAUL RAND'S INTERNATIONAL CHEAT MODE, CVG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. There's a hundred smackers worth 'o' software for the best entry this month it goes to Gary Butler for his super spiff GG Shinobl map. Au revoir! MODE AMIGA RAINBOW ISLANDS Andrew Moorcroft of Derby reckons that if you wait until the rainbow display disappears and type SSSLLLRRS and SPACE. pressing SPACE allows you to increase the number of credits in your possession, letting you battle on with bags 'o' Bubs. Lordy! TO LIFE LOTUS 2 You simply would not believe the amount of peeps who have sent in the level codes for this cracking driving game. Daryll Powell of London SW19 was the first out of the bag, so he gets his name next to the cheat. You lucky old thing, eh? COURSE CODE MOTORWAY NIGHT TWILIGHT MARSH FOG PEA SOUP STORM SNOW THE SKIDS LIVERPOOL DESERT PEACHES BAGLEY RSS LIFE ENERSYE A Aaargh! These aliens are almost as 'orrible as Paul Rand! ALIEN STORM Blast more baddies than you ever thought possible in this top coin-op conversion, thanks to Glasgow boys The Toxic Weasels. Simply press F to skip to any level. START PA US ENERGY ENERSEI A Kick alien ass with good old Toxic's cheat GREMLINS 2 Should you find you're losing your Gizmo's faster than you can comfortably handle, take a tip from Chris Sharp, who lives in Halifax. Type in SINATRA on the high scores table to receive infinite lives. A Loads laffs with Lotus 2! On Marsh level, drive over green blobs in the road for extra time! On Storm level, drive over red blobs (appear after every two checkpoints) for turbo! Andrew Mackie of Leek, Staffs, not only sent the passwords, he also supplied a secret code for you Lotus lovelies to try out! To find a secret game, type DUX on the password option. More passcode prattlings, this one coming from Martyn Clarke from Basingstoke, Hants. Enter TURPENTINE on the password screen for infinite time. And to finish off this bumper Lotus spesh, Dave from Sheffield says that entering DEESIDE on the password screen advances you to the next level, even if the previous one has not been completed. Cor! "


"100% MEGADRIVE THE BEST ADD ON MONEY CAN BUY FOR YOUR MEGA DRIVE IS HERE! The definitive complete games guide with every title individually reviewed & rated. More Power packed Megadrive info than all other \"so called\" Sega Mags put together Over 100 Essential games reviewed in full colour The Latest MegaCD Rom news revealed Exclusive hot news in Britains' first Megadrive only Monthly Mag! Every thing you wanted to know about the Megadrive PLUS superb playing guides to the greatest Megadrive games. ALL THIS AND MORE IN THE COMPLETE GUIDE TO MEGADRIVE AT ONLY C2.95! Available in all good Newsagents now!! GET THE LATEST AND THE GREATEST CONSOLE GUIDE IN THE SERIES!! But if you live near bad newsagents, you can order one direct from us by filling out the coupon below and sending it to: Complete guide to Megadrive, ONLY Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC13AU. ONLY .95  THE COMPLETE GUIDE TO. GADRIVE OOOH! QUICK! Send me a copy of the complete guide to MEGADRIVE because I'm really desperate! I enclose a cheque/postal order for .45 (C2.95 + 50 p post and packing) made payable to Mean Machines. Overseas orders send .00 cash (UK Sterling only) 132 PAGES OVER 100 GAMES REVIEWED IN FULL COLOUR! -THE ULTIMATE GAME BUYER'S GUIDE 683 PLUS BUYING A MEGADRIVE IMPORT OR OFFICIAL? Name Address MEGADRIVE CD-ROM REVEALED! ESSENTIAL MEGADRIVE ADD-ONS! PREVIEWS GALORE! MERCS "


"HOUWVO A Will you make it past the bridge of doom? Hope so! CASTLEVANIA II Kendal May. Faversham, Kent and James Houlihan, Brighton team up to bring you a hint of password sauciness for this incredible arcade adventure-in-yer-pocket. Go to the password screen and use the following: HEART HEART HEART HEART to enter the hidden music mode. CANDLE HEART HEART CRYSTAL to advance to level two HEART HEART HEART BLANK to move to the third level. A Just blow up everything in sight that's Final Soldier! FINAL SOLDIER A rock 'ard shoot 'em up on this great little machine, now complete with an equally sturdy couple of cheats from Anthony Kontowski of London N9. Select Normal Game then press LEFT, LEFT, 1, RIGHT, RIGHT, 2, UP, DOWN, UP, DOWN to access level select (do this twice for a thin screen). Press LEFT, LEFT, 1, RIGHT, RIGHT, 2, UP, DOWN, UP, DOWN on the title screen to enter sound test. os PAUSEST Casemos essas Jeepers, here's a bit o' bother so cheat your way through More Castlevania frolics, courtesy of Kendal! GARGOYLE'S QUEST Listen and learn from Arni Vikingur Hafsteinsson (for it is he), that Icelandic hero who informs us that, on the password screen, entering X7SC-E66S advances you many levels and gives you a stack of items! PC ENGINE A Check out those fireballs of doom! PSYCHOSIS Can't say I've seen this game, but Upwan Rati of Singapore certainly has he's even sent in a cheat to prove it! Make sure all turbo switches are off, then press RUN and quickly hold down button 2. While holding it down press RUN again five times for level two, 45 times for level three, 25 times for level four and 100 times for leve five. Easy, eh? PAUSE!! DRAGON EGG Check out these joypad cheats, courtesy of one Mr Anthony Kontowski, inhabitant of London N9. Press UP, UP, DOWN, DOWN, LEFT, RIGHT, LEFT, RIGHT, 2, 1 on title screen for level select. To access the sound test, push DOWN, DOWN, UP, UP, LEFT, RIGHT, LEFT, RIGHT, 2,1 "


"THE HET FOOTO PEDAL ENHANCE YOUR HOME VIDEO GAMES QUICKJOY GENERATION . Sometimes just using a Joystick is not enough to beat today's generation of computer games ... The Foot Pedal Controller works in conjunction with a Joystick, .. By aligning any three of the Joystick functions to synchronise with the Foot Pedals it enhances any multi-functional game that includes flying, driving or playing sports ... games-playing will never be the same .. SET UP SV 129 EXAMPLE COMPUTER In a car racing game: NO USE FAST using joystick and Foot pedal together EF Change Gear Change Gear NO USE RIGHT SLOW 13+ FAST This setting transfers the up, down and fire controls from Joystick to 3, 2, 1 buttons of Foot Pedal respectively.  Simply plug any standard 9-Pin Joystick into the cable supplied.  Connect the Foot Pedal into your Computer Amiga, ST, C64, 128, Vic20, Amstrad CPC, Spectrum (with interface), BBC (with interface).  The Foot Pedal.is now ready to use. SLOW SPECTRA VIDEO SPECTRAVIDEO UNIT 27 NORTHFIELD INDUSTRIAL ESTATE, BERESFORD AVENUE, WEMBLEY HAO INU, ENGLAND TELEPHONE: 081 900 0024 FACSIMILE: 081 903 6625 SALES HOTLINE: 081 902 2211 "


"ATARI ST Staying with Super Mario Bros 3, A Belfast chappie who didn't include his name has found a cheeky way to stock up on enormous amounts of items! Who do you do it? Read on... To build up a collection of 28 items, complete world 3-4 then use the hammer to smash the boulder which blocks the path to the boat. Float to the islands to collect extra items, then get killed. Re-enter via 3-4 and repeat the process until you have grabbed your fill of goodies! DDD)) DDDD DDDDD A Fists and feet fly in Final Fight! FINAL FIGHT Short and sweet, this one from Gary Paton of Glasgow. Just press = to kill all enemies onscreen. DDDD DD) DDDDD DDDDD ATT BEDDED 25 DEEL 5 ) ) 3:333333 ORDENSROLA A Ooh, what's this 'ere then? Looks like trouble! RAINBOW ISLAND Brent Jacobz of Capetown, S Africa, has been battling away at this smart NES game for so long he's found this cheat. On the title screen, push up on player two's joypad, to select any of the seven worlds on which to begin. A Plenty of bad dudes to kick your ass! MAGIC POCKETS Gary Paton strikes back, with a quickie tip for the Bitmap Bros' cool collect 'em up. Pressing P lets you skip through the various levels. MEGADRIVE SRPEN ondon Sla NINTENDO A Don't worry about the woman she shows her bum to everyone... A bit of a stinker, this conversion of the old computer game of the same name, but that doesn't stop James Brotherton from Loughborough, Leics, fiddling about with his joypad to find a handy little cheat mode. Pause the game, press A four times, B three times, B once and A once to receive extra lives. Heeeres MOTTOator TOTS SUPER MARIO BROS 3 As Mario fever sweeps the country for the third time, Leeds lassie Joanne Stansfield sends in a mega tip to grab lots of lovely lives. Take it away, Joannel On level 5-2, go down the first pipe and, keeping to the right, land on a note box and bounce up to the right. Make your way to the top, avoiding the two turtles. Go up the pipe and, once at the top, climb down the next pipe and it will take you to a secret level. Go to the left and hit the first box which is sticking out. Turn into Super Mario and smash the bricks then hit the big question mark, then collect three extra men. Come out and get yourself killed and then go back inside and repeat the process several times to grab a multitude of Marios! One of the best road-racing games available for the Megadrive, Keith Harmer of Wallington, Surrey, has been beavering away at Road Rash and has come up with the following level codes. LEVEL TWO: 00000 00971 0001V 21 HOH with the Panda 600 LEVEL THREE: 00000 OOIV1 0138E 311Q8 with the Panda 600 LEVEL FOUR: 41007 046Q1 113BG 4F505 with the Diablo LEVEL FIVE: 00000 04KAO 1133S 5N246 with the Diablo "


"LA CONSOLE V CONCEPTS V POLE CONCEPTS Mail Order addres Console Concept * The Village Newcastle-u-Lymi Staffs ST5 1Q1 (0782) 71275 SHOP HOURS (DE Sat Weekdays 9.00 5.30 Thursdays 9.00 5.00 LATE NIGHT WEDNESDAYS OPEN TILL A DIVISION OF P.C. ENGINE SUPPLIES XMAS ORDER LINE 0782 712759 9am 6.30pm 3 lines) EVENING HOTLINE (STRICTLY ORDERS ONLY) 0782 213993 6.00pm 8pm MEGADRIVE XMAS PACK SPECIAL MEGADRIVE TV VERSION TV VERSION MEGADRIVE TV VERSION DELUXE PACK RUNS ALL GAMES FREE ALIEN STORM RUNS ALL GAMES JAP/UK/USA JAP/UK/USA FREE OUTRUN JOYPAD POWER SUPPLY. NOYPAD,POWER SUPPLY FREE MAGICAL HAT + 2 FREE GAMES OF YOUR CHOICE FREE SONIC HEDGEHOG FREE STEREO HEADPHONES UP TO  EACH OR ANY GAME UP TO  FREE DUST COVER 12 MONTHS GUARANTEE FREE STEREO HEADPHONES FREE DUSTCOVER FREE .00 WORTH OF MONEY FREE DUSTCOVER FREE STEREO HEADPHONES OFF VOUCHERS INCLUDED FREE EXTRA JOYPAD 12 MONTHS GUARANTEE FREE DELUXE CARRY CASE E170.00+P+P (Holds Mega Drive, Games, E190+P+P .00+P+P TOTAL SEPARATE SELLING PRICE Power Supply etc) NEXT DAY DELIVERY .00 + P+P 12 MONTHS GUARANTEE NEXT DAY DELIVERY SEGA MEGADRIVE FOOTBALL FRENZY ...CALL LEGEND OF SUCCESS JOE......... ...,00  CASTLEVANIA II.... ALL ABOVE GAMES ARE JAP CARTS UNLESS SPECIFIED CROSSED SWORDS.... [110.00 MEGAMAN (US).... .00 BARE KNUCKLE (US) 38.00 EIGHT MAN EA ICE HOCKEY UK) MORE IMPORT GAMES ARE NINUA COMBAT .00 GARGOYLES QUEST (US) 115.00 QUACKSHOT $36.00 AVAILABLE THAN WE CAN FATAL FURY CALL ROGER RABBIT EL VIENTO POSSIBLY LIST IN THIS ADVERT ROBOARY. CALL PERSONAL ORGANISER DEVILS CRASH E3400 FOOTBALL FRENZY. ...CALL ROBOCOPIL MERCS (COMMANDO 11) TERMINATOR IL CALL RUNARK (GROWL) .00 NINTENDO SUPER PC ENGINE SIMPSONS ..CALL BARE KNUCKLE MARVEL LAND FAMICOM GRADIUS (6M).. F-22 INTERCEPTOR MEGA DRIVE 239.00 STREET SMART .00 SUPER TENNIS (SCART) 239.00 GAMEBOY-JAP MONSTER PRO WRESTLING MEGA DRIVE .00 ROBOCOD.. CALL 239.00 RAIDEN (6M) NEMESIS II .00 JERRY BOY ROAD RASH(UK) .00 .00 238.00 MEGAMAN ROCKMAN WORLD .00 CORYOON PRO SOCCER STAR FLIGHT UK .00 $45.00 GHOULS AND GHOSTS .00 DRAGON EGG .00 MICKEY MOUSE 121.00 SHINING IN DARKNESS(UK) .00 TIME CRUISE PINBALL .00 PARODIUS 121.00 TOE JAM AND EARLIUK) .00 MAGICAL CHASE SUPER MARIO WORLD $21.00 238.00 .00 SOCCER JB KING MEGA JOYSTICK PC ENGINE CD ROMDUO GAME .00 400.00 THE IMMORTAL TMNT. .00 .00 GOEMAN THE WARRIOR ,00 HUNDREDS OF OTHER TITLES IN SONIC HEDGEHOG ...E31.00 GAME GEAR ACTRAISER/UK HINTS). STOCK, SEND SAE FOR FULL LIST .00 ALIEN STORM .631.00 ...24.00 DEVIL CRASH BIG RUN RASTAN SAGA ...00 VNY FANTASIA(UK) .00 LYNX OUTRUN OUT RUN MEGA DRIVE RAIDEN TRAD ...CALL DINOLAND .00 ROBO TRN. .00 NINJA GAIDEN 124.00 GAME GEAR FINAL FIGHT SPEEDBALL CALL 41.00 SHIN RUNNER .00 HALLEY WARS F ZERO 124.00 OUTRUN .00 129,00 FANTASY ZONE KABUKO SOLDER JOE & MAC (CAVEMAN NINJA) CALL .00 HARD DRIVIN 329.00 GALAGA 91 224.00 SUPER EDF 144.00 MARBLE MADNESS (UK) CALL $10.99 .00 GAME GEAR CARRY CASE SHADOW OF THE BEAST (UK), CASTLEVANIA IV. $38.00 CALL TURBO SUB SUPER R-TYPE 520.00 .00 GAME GEAR MAGNIFIER 141.00 F22 INTERCEPTOR (UK) .00 AMERICAN FAMICOM SCART... CALL NEW GAMES ARRIVING FROM USA GAME GEAR CONSOLE ANY FREE GAME 115.00 BUCK RODGERS (UK) ...CALL HI QUALITY DUSTCOVER EVERY WEEK, CALL FOR NEW TITLES FROGGER 29.99 .00 SPACE BATTLE GAMOLA .00 AX BATTLER ...624.00 PGA TOUR GOLF SUPER FAMICOM AUTO FIRE JOYPAD....E24.00 $4900 GAMEBOY-USA RUNARK MICKEY MOUSE FORMATION SOCCER CALL 525.00 124.00 CARRY CASES MEGA DRIVE CARRY CASES CAESARS PALACE... LEMMINGS CALL MONSTERWORLD.. 534.00 F1 GRAND PRIX CALL FINAL FANTASY LEGEND ROUING THUNDER .00 UNIVERSAL CARRIES ALL HANDHELD-GAMES. BUGS BUNNY 2 524.00 ROOS. PSU ETC AP89 BEAST WARRIORS .00 WWF SUPERSTARS WRESTLING ... 24.00 GAME GEAR-HOLDS UNT.GAMES..ARPE10.99 DE MONTANUS NEO GEO OPERATION C 124.00 GAME BOY-HOLDS UNT-GAMES. RAP E9.99 JOHN WADDENHUS 38.00 MAGICIAN LORD C110.00 ALTERED SPACE $24,00 ALSO AVALABLE-5 COLOUR WAYS GOLDEN AXEL CALL LEAGUE BOWLING .00 SUPER RC PRO AM .00 BLUE ON BLACK, GREEN ON BLACK GREY ON BLACK DOUBLE DRAGON CALL ASO II LAST GUARDIAN..... E110.00 DUCK TALES. ...24,00 BLACK PURPLE BLACK CALL GHOST PILOTS... .00 HOME ALONE ..124.00 WE CARRY A LARGE RANGE OF CARRYCASES UNDEAUNE CALL KING OF THE MONSTERS... .00 BATTLE TOADS ....CALL JOYSTICKS, JOYPADS ETC, FOR OUR ENTIRE CALL SENGOKUWAR DYNASTY .00 PRINCE OF PERSIA CALL QUACKSHOT RANGE OF CONSOLES. WHY NOT GIVE US A CALL MEGA DRIVE SOLPEACE COROM CALL BURNING FIGHT .00 BLADES OF STEEL 524.00 FOR MORE DETAILS. ALL OUR ADVERTISED HAND-HELD CONSOLES BUY NO COROM LOL BASEBALL STARS .00 WORLD CUP SOCCER .00 GOODS ARE AVAILABLE IN OUR SHOP PC ENGINE GT HANDHELD 1 FREE GAME .00 +P+P PC ENGINE SCART +3 FREE GAMES (OUR CHOICE) - P-P NEXT DAY DELIVERY 12 MONTHS GUARANTEE EXCELLENT XMAS PRESENT SUPER FAMICOM SCART INCLUDES SUPER FAMICOM, 2 JOYPADS, POWER SUPPLY 2 FREE GAMES 12 MONTHS GUARANTEE .00+P+P NEXT DAY DELIVERY JAMES POND MEGA DRIVE ATARI LYNX II 1 FREE GAME .00.P.P SUPER FAMICOM PACK VISA ORDER DETAILS: All consoles are despatched Parcel Force Next Day Delivery (Saturday delivery is extra .00) Cheques is extra .00) Cheques-Please allow 5 working days for clearance. P+P: Consoles .00, Joysticks .50, Each game .00 Please state if you are a new customer or please quote your customer number. WE RESERVE THE RIGHT TO ALTER PRICES WITHOUT NOTIFICATION ALL THE STAFF AT CONSOLE CONCEPTS (SUE, TONY, ROB, GEO & OF COURSE STEVE & COLIN) WISH ALL OUR CUSTOMERS OLD AND NEW A MERRY XMAS & HAPPY NEW YEAR "


"ess pts age me RBM OB RBM 759 (DEC 5.30pm 5.00pm EL 9PM RESCUE BLUE NINJA WEAPON:BLADE ON CHAIN MAGIC:WHIRLWIND TRAVELS ANYWHERE SPECIALITY:USE CHAIN TO SWING FROM CERTAIN ITEMS RBM ROLLING BALL MAN DT DYNAMITE THROWER MN MASKED NINJA AW AMAZON WOMAN FM FROGMAN SD SCUBA DIVER END LEVEL level 2 DO DT (and) Ron wwwsm STAND ON TOP PLATFORM AND KEEP FIRING level 1 ERY NUU THE VALLEY TOR Part 1 Part 2 THE VALLEY THE HARBOUR Fm Fm Fm 2 ASME SPA Emos SOLES -Extra Energy (use pirk) S m a (UP-Extra life Jumo orto Mogic when Bomb A Joutstretched Increase borard Fire F9 Fire Bresther berts at a Fm Frog Tron the mor HIT Homer Tan End Level ETTNT Tan. em Barrel ron Fm Clinging or Sexesexxx BE PACK TEM BMT cm M BEEBILLA Zeem RESCUE YELLOW NINJA WEAPON FIREBALLS MAGIC INVINCIBILIT SPECIALTYMORE FIREBALL POW BY HOLDING BUTTON LONGER "


"Une SYSTEMC VISA VISA TELEPHONE: (0602) 678184 (24 Hours) FAX NUMBER: (0602) 678185 (24 Hours) AT2 ATP BAAL BAAL SYSTEM ADDICT (Mail Order) 106A Chilwell Road Beeston Nottingham NG9 1ES AMIGA & ST FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR 2 799 799 PEGASUS 1799 NA IBM PC AND COMPATBLES 35'525 FORMULA 130 123.49 12.49 AM 17.99 NA ST PGA TOUR GOLF 1799 NA BOUNTIFUL DISK 30 CONSTRUCTION KIT DUAL 33.99 FORT APACHE 30 CONSTRUCTION KIT FIRESTONE DISK 12.49 1249 DUAL 20.99 PLAYER MANAGER 4D SPORTS BOXING 32.99 25.99 13.99 13.99 30 POOL FULL CONTACT PINEHURST DISK 9.99 999 8.99 NA POOLS OF RADIANCE 1Mb 4D SPORTS DRIVING 20 99 NA DUAL 20.90 FUN SCHOOL 2(58) AID TANK KILLER 22.99 NA POWER UP LONE WOLF 688 SUB ATTACK DUAL 16.99 14.49 14 49 2099 20.99 DUAL 20.99 FUN SCHOOL 28-) ACTON PACK 1799 1799 POWERMONGER MAD DOG WILLIAMS 2399 23.99 A10 TANK KILLER (ENHANCED) DUAL 28.99 20.99 20:50 ADDICTED TO FUN FUN SCHOOL. 216 13.40 13.49 14.49 1449 PREDATOR 2 MAGNETIC SCROLLS COMP ACTION STATIONS DUAL 24.49 17.49 1749 DUAL 26.90 AGONY MARTIAN DREAMS (HDLD) 25.49 25.49 FUN SCHOOL 3 (UND 5 1790 17.99 16.00 15.00 ARACNOPOBIA PRO BOXING SIMULATOR DUAL 17 90 : 7.90 799 AIR SUPPORT 1699 16.99 FUN SCHOOL 3(5-7 PRO TENNIS TOUR 2 1799 NA 1799 1749 MAVIS BEACON 2 (WIN 3.0) DUAL 24.49 9.99 999 1899 16.99 AUEN BREED (Mb) MAVIS BEACON 2 PROFUGHT FUN SCHOOL 3 (74) DUAL 24,49 16.99 NA 26.99 26.90 27 49 2749 1699 16.99 ALTERED DESTINY FUN SCHOOL. 4 (UNDER 58 MEGA FORTRESS (LD) 7.90 24.49 24.49 AUSTERLITZ 9.99 A TYPE 20.99 NA 999 79 MEGA FORTRESSHD 24.49 AMNIOS 24.4 FUN SCHOOL 45 TO 78) 999 ges 1799 NA 16.99 16.99 RALROAD TYCOON (ST1Mb) 2399 23.90 FUN SCHOOL 4 17 TO 115 APB MEGATRAVELLER2 2440 BIG BOX 2449 2399 2390 799 799 15.99 16.99 RALLY CROSS MENACE 999 996 AQUAVENTURA 17.99 NA GAMES SUMMER EDITION 799 7.99 RB 2 BASEBALL 2099 2090 BILL ELLIOT NASCAR CHALLENG 2449 2449 MERCHANT COLONY 20.90 ARMOUR GEDOON 22.96 GAUNTLET 2 1799 17.99 BLOODWYCH 799709 REACH FOR THE SKIES 23.99 20.99 MRCO BNGUSH(GCSE DUAL 1649 GODS BLUES BROTHERS ATE PEALTHINGS-SAFAR 17.99 17.99 1799 17.99 20 99 NA 9.99 999 GP TENNIS MANAGER MICRO FRENCHIGCSE AUSTERUTZ DUAL 1790 1799 BOSTON BOMB CLUB 18:49 1799 NA 999 RED HEAT 799 799 9.99 MIG 2M SUPERFULCRUM BREACH 2 (ENHANCED HEROES OF THE LANCE DUAL 30.4 20.49 1749 1749 20.49 799 799 RETURN OF THE WITCHLORDS 10.40 10:49 MGHT AND MAGIC 2799 2798 BARBARIAN 2 CADAVER HEROQUEST 1790 1799 1790 1799 RISE OF THE DRAGON 22.99 NA HITCHHIKERS GUIDE CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN MKE DIKAS ULTIMATE FBALL 20.99 23.99 23.30 20.99 ROBIN HOOD BATMAN THE MOVIE 1790 NA 7.59 7.99 MONKEY ISLAND 2009 HUNTER CASTLES 2008 BEACH VOLLEY 2099 20.99 23.09 23.99 ROBOZONE 799 1799 17.se 7.90 NORTHAND SOUTH 799 798 BIG DEAL COMP IAN BOTHAMS CRICKET 20.99 20.99 20.90 20.99 ROCKET RANGER CHARGE OF THE LIGHT BRIGADE 20.49 20.49 9.90 9.90 OBTUS 23.99 23.90 CHESS CHAMPION 2175 BLL ELLIOTS NASCAR RACING INDY JONES LAST CRUSADE 17.99 NA 2049 20.49 79 799 RODLAND 1799 1799 OUTRUN 790 CHESSMASTER 2100 790 BLOOD MONEY INTELLIGENT STRATEGY GAMES 16.90 16.99 ROLLING RONNY 799 799 16.99 16.99 DUAL 17.90 PENTHOUSE JGSAW INTERECEPTOR DUAL 229 CHESSMASTER 3000 BLOOOWYCH 10.90 NA 2449 2449 RUGBY THE WORLD CUP 9.90 1699 16.99 9.99 2299 2399 PENTHOUSE JIGSAW 18 CHUCK YEAGER COMBAT DUAL 23.99 BLUE MAX (ACES INTERNATIONAL KARATE 20.90 2099 7.90 799 SCOOBY DOO SCRAPPY DOO 799 799 PERSONAL PRO 1799 1790 IRON LORD DUAL 35. CISCO HEAT BLUES BROTHERS 17.99 1790 9.99 9.99 SECRETS OF MONKEY ISLAND 1M 17.90 NA 13.00 PGA TOUR GOLF 13.99 2049 COLOSSUS BROGE 4 20:49 BOSTON BOMB CLUB ITALIA 1900 1790 179 4.90 499 SECRETS OF SLIVER BLADE 1M 20.99 NA 17.99 1790 COLOSSUS CHESS 4 POOL OF DARKNESS (HD) 20.99 20.99 BREACH (ENHANCED JACK NICKLAUS GOLF 20.99 2009 NA 1749 SHADOW OF THE BEAST 799 799 POWERMONGER CONFUCT MDCLE EAST 24.99 2499 2049 2040 JNICKLAUSUNUMITED GOLF1 20.90 NA BRIGADE COMMANDER 17 99 NA SHADOW OF THE BEAST 2 1790 1790 23.99 23.00 REACH FOR THE SKCES CORPORATION BUBBLE BOBBLE JNICKLAUS COURSES V14 7.90 790 8.90 NA SHINOBI 7.997.90 DEATHS KNIGHTS OF KRYNN RDERS OFROHAN 20.99 2090 2140 240 BUCK ROGERS JNICKLAUS COURSE V5 20.90 NA 10.49 NA SILENT SERVICE 2 22.99 NA ROBIN HOOD DUAL 2008 CABEL JAMES BOND COLLECTION 790 799 16.90 1698 DEFENDER OF THE CROWN SILKWORM 799 799 9.999.99 ROCKET RANGER DELUXE SCRABBLE DUAL 16.99 9.99 999 CADVR JIMMY WHITES SNOOKER 17.99 1790 2090 20.99 SIM CITY POPULOUS 20.99 20.99 DUNGEON MASTER ROLLING RONNY DUAL 20. CADAVER THE PAYOFF 10 90 10.99 KICK OFF 2 SINBAD 9.99 990 ELITE PLUS 26.99 26 99  2 Mb UMS 2 NATIONS WAR 2799 2799 CALIFORNA GAMES 1799 NA SPEEDBALL 9.99 9.96 ELVIRA SCROOGE A CHRISTMAS CAROL 1549 154 2799 2799 KICK OFF EUROPE CAPTAN PLANET 1790 1799 7.90 NA SPEEDBALL 2 1799 1799 EXOTIC CAR SHOWROOM SECRETS OF THE SEVER BLADE DUAL 13.90 20.99 209 KICKOFF EXTRA TIME CAPTAIN FIZZ 7.99 790 799 799 SPIRIT OF EXCALIBUR 20.49 20.99 20.90 2009 SECRET WEAPONS OF LUFTWAFFE 2799 279 CARRIER COMMAND EYE OF THE BEHOLDER KICK OFF2FINAL WHISTLE 9.999.99 8.99 SPOT 8.99 13.49 13:49 TH F15 STRIKE EAGLE 2 2449 24.49 CARTHAGE 19.99 13.49 KING OF CHICAGO 9.99 9.99 STARFLIGHT 2 17 99 NA SLENT SERVICE 2 28.9 F117A NIGHTHAWK CHALLENGE GOLF 26.99 16.99 18.99 2090 20.90 KINGHTMARE STARGLIDER 2 9.999.00 SMCITY POPULOUS 23.092 FALCON V3.0 33 99 33.99 LASTNINA 3 CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN 1 Mb 20.99 NA 1799 1799 STARTEGO 1669 16.99 SMEARTH DUAL 2799 FUGHT SIM 4 ADO ON CHAOS IN ANDROMEDA LEANDER DUAL 23.99 1599 NA 20.90 NA STAKER MANAGER 1699 16.se SPACE QUEST1 VGA 26.99 26.99 FUGHT SIMULTOR 4 359 1790 1799 LEMMINGS 36.99 CHAOS STRIKES BACK (1Mb) 1759 1790 STRP POKER 2 (DATA DISK 1) DUAL 7.90 799 SPACE QUEST2 2018 CHART ATTACK (COMP) HAWAIIAN SECENERY LEMMINGS DATA DISK 1340 13.49 12.99 12.99 STRIP POKER DE LUXE 20.99 2009 SPACE QUEST3 9.999.99 DUAL 2790 1290 12.99 CHE GUERLLA IN BOULIVA LIFE AND DEATH JAPANESE SECENERY 16.99 NA SUPAPLEX 1790 1799 17.99 1799 2799 2736 SPACE QUEST EGAWVGA HD) LOMBARD RAC RALLY CISCO HEAT 790 799 SECENERY 79.11.12 17.99 1798 SUPER CARS SPACE WRECKED 7.99 790 LORD OF THE RINGS CAS ELEPHANT ANTCS 20.90 NA SUPER HANG ON FUN SCHOOL 3 (UNDER 5) 12.90 12.99 7.99 799 SPEECHACCESS  124 125 LOTUS ESPRIT 16.00 FUN SCHOOL 3 (57) 16.99 CLASSIC 4 1740 1749 20.99 2099 SUPER HEROES COMP. 7.99 799 SPEECHACCESS PACKD 12 12.49 16.00 16.09 LOTUS TURBO CHALLENGE 2 FUN SCHOOL 3 (OVER 7 CONFLICT IN EUROPE 1799 1790 SUPER SPACE NVADERS 9.90 9.90 SPEEDFALL 1609 18.99 98 99 MAD DOG WLLIAMS FUN SCHOOL 4 (UNDER 5 18.30 CONQUEROR 16.99 SPEEDBALL 2 1799 NA 20.49 20.49 799 799 SWAP 2440 240 16.9 1790 1799 16.99 MAGIC POCKETS FUN SCHOOL 4/5 TO 7) CORPORATION & MISSION DISK SWIV 1749 1749 SPEEDBALL 2 EGAVGA 2440 17.99 1790 24.0 MAGIC STORY BOOK FUN SCHOOL 4/5 TO 11) 18.991899 SPELLCSTING 201 2699 CRUISE FORA CORSE DUAL 900 20.80 20.99 TEENAGE TURTLES 9.99 GUNSHIP 2000 TERMINATOR 2 DUAL CURSE OF THE AZURE BONDS 1M2099 20.99 MAGNETIC SCROLLS COMP1 SPOT 1698 2099 20.99 17.99 1790 MANCHESTER UNITED EUROPE 1790 1799 HEART OF CHINA (VGAVEGA STARGLDER2 990 2799 27.99 DELUXE PAINT 4 TEST DRIVE 2 COMPILATION 990 61.99 NA 20.99 NA SUPERCAR PAK MAUPITY ISLAND HITCHICKERS GUIDE DUAL DUAL 20.49 20.49 229 9.90 DEATH KNIGHTS OF KRYNN THE GOLD RUSH COLLECTION 1799 1790 20.00 NA DUAL IAN BOTHA MAVIS BEACON TYPING SUPER SPACE MADERS DUAL 20.49 20:49 DEFENDER OF THE CROWN THE JAMES BOND COLLECTION 2099 20.99 999 999 1699 16.99 TEAM SUZUK MEAN MACHINE DEVIOUS DESIGNS 799 799 IMMORTAL 1799 1790 THE SHOE PEOPLE 20 40 1799 1790 NA TERMINATOR 2 MEGALOMANIA DOUBLE DOUBLE BLL 20.99 1799 INDY JONES LAST CRUSADE 24.99 NA THERRNEST HOUR 790 20.99 20.99 7.99 THE GAMES WINTER EDMON INTELLIGENT STRATEGY GAMES 20.49 20.49 DOUBLE DRAGON MEGATRAVELLER 1 799 799 THEIR FINEST MSSONS 10.99 10.99 THERPNEST HOUR 999 2099 IRON LORD 210 MENACE DRAGON NINUA 7.90 799 799 799 THREE STOOGES 9.99 9.99 999 THERNEST MISSIONS 10:30 10:30 MERCENARY 3 DUNGEON MASTER 1Mb 20:40 20:49 17.99 1798 THUNDERHAWK JACK NICKLAUS UNLIMITED GOL 279 20.99 20.99 27.99 TINTNONTHEMOON 799 799 MIAMI CHASE ELF (OCEAN 7.99 799 THUNDERJAWS COURSES VOL 12374 16.99 16.99 8.90 16.99 16 99 8.99 TURTLES ARCADE 20.49 204 COURSES VOL5 MIDWINTER 2 ELITE 1799 1799 2009 22.99 10.49 1049 TINTIN ON THE MOON 799 799 TV SPORTS BASEBALL 2049 200 MIG 25M SUPER FULCRUM ELVIRA (1 Mb JET FIGHTER 2 274 27.49 1999 1998 16.99 16.09 DUAL 2749 TV SPORTS BOXING MIG 29 SUPERFULCRUM EURA 2 27.49 26.99 1990 1999 TREASURE ISLAND DIZZY KICK OFF 2 1749 17.49 4.90 499 TV SPORTS ROLLERBABES 2449 200 MONOPOLY DELUXE EXLE 18.49 NA 17.99 1799 KD WORKS CREATIVITY KIT TURBO OUTRUN DUAL 2749 799 7.99 UTIMA 289 29 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER MOONSTONE 20.99 NA 2009 NA KILLING CLOUD TURTLES ARCADE 20.99 1799 VRTUAL REALITY F15 STRKE EAGLE 2 MOONWALKER 799 799 TV SPORTS FOOTBALL 999 999 KING OF CHICAGO 9.50 9.99 WATERLOO 999 999 MULTIPLAYER SOCCER MANAGER1799 NA F19 STEALTH FIGHTER KINGS QUEST 4 ULTIMA DUAL 27-39 20.99 20.96 20.89 20.99 WEST EUROSCENERY NAPOLEONI FALCON CLASSIC COLLECTION 2099 20.99 2499 20.99 UMS 2 NATIONS WAR 1Mb KINGS QUEST 5 (EGA) 20.09 20.99 DUAL 27.99 WESTERN FRONT 22199 200 FANTASY WORLD DIZY 6.90 NEBULUS 2 6.99 1799 NA  KINGS QUEST5 (HD) (VGA) 20.99 2009 31.49 31.49 WING COMAR SPEECH PACKHD 10.90 1099 NEW ZEALAND STORY FAST FOOD DWZY VIRTUAL REALITY LEATHER GOODESS DUAL 2099 20.99 3.99 6.99 WING COMMSPEECHPACKLD 6.99 1099 100 FEDERATION OF FREE TRADERS 9.00 9.90 NINA RABBITS 7.14 7.14 WATERLOO 9.99 999 LEMMINGS DUAL 23.99 WING COMMANDER 2H) 26.09 2.0 790 799 NORTH AND SOUTH PGHTER COMMAND WINGS 1Mb LEMMINGS DATA DISK 20.99 NA 10 99 10.99 20.49 20.49 WING COMMANDER 2 UD 28.909 OBITUS 2099 17.99 FIRST SAMURAI WINNING TACTICS LETS SPELL AT HOME 1799 1799 7.59 16.90 7.99 1699 WING COMMANDER HD FUGHT SIM 2 3592693 ONSLAUGHT 999 999 22.99 25.ee WOLFPACK 1Mb LETS SPELL AT THE SHOPS 2099 17.99 1690 16.99 WING COMMANDERD OPERATION WOLF 799 799 FUGHT OF THE INTRUDER WORLD CLASS LEADERBOARD 799 799 LETS SPELL OUT AND ABOUT WORLD CLASS LEADERBOARD 16.99 16.99 799 798 ORK 17.99 NA XENON 2 FLOOD LINKS 999999 28.90 28.09 WRECKERS DUAL 200 FOOTBALL DIRECTOR OUT RUN 13.49 1340 990990 799 799 1790 1790 BAYHILL DISK XENON 12.49 12.49 ORDER DETAILS: All prices are inclusive of VAT and p&p. Errors and omittions execpted. For orders under .00 please add 50p. Not all titles are released at time of going to press. Forward orders will be despatched within 24 hours by first class post subject to availability. Please allow up to 28 days for completion of order. PAYMENT DETAILS: Credit card orders: Please state the type of card, account number, expiry date and full name on the card. Payment will only be taken when goods are despatched. Most major credit/charge cards accepted. Please make cheques and postal orders payable to \"System Addict' and write your name, address and cheque guarantee card details on the reverse of each cheque. We reserve the right to sllow cheques to clear before orders are despatched. 2290 229 The above is only a sample of the software available through System Addict, if the title you require is not listed then please ring for details. We also stock software for Spectrum, C64. Amstrad, Megadrive. Master System, Game Boy, Lynx, NES, Super Famicom. "


"Part 1 Gm MMMM Parte UN end level HDD DD KO E BmJN. USE RED AND HIT HELICOPTER AS IT APPEARS IN FRONT OF YOU. WATCH OUT FOR KAMIKAZE MAN BELOW. -BOMB -MORE ENERGY -INCREASE ENERGY NINJA MAGIC TUP-EXTRA LIFE RACLA AB DKE DO DE OO Um TTTINT 109 UNE JN BB 55 DEN B ONFORTE 9999999999999AAROPA PATRY ARTWO JN JUMPING NINJA LM LASER MAN HM HAMMER MAN EM EXPLODING MAN GM GUN MAN RESCUE PINK NINJA WEAPON GRENADES MAGIC FREEZING SPECIALITY-WALKING UPSIDE DOWN ON LEDGES E HM Part WOOD LANDS RB ROLLING BALL MAN RB CS RBT BLADE THROWING MAN MM MONKEY MAN TC TREE CLIMBERS K KNIGHT CS CHARGING SWORD MAN END LEVEL ORRRR999999898 USE YELLOW AND FIRE AT MEN WHEN THEY DROP FROM HEAD Part 1 RESCUE GREEN NINJA WEAPON-SHURIKENS MAGIC EXPLOSIONS SPECIALITY SOMERSAULTS SENDING A SHOWER OF METAL STARS EVERYWHERE "


"SUPER FORMATION REVIEW SOCCER FAMICOM...4 FAMICOM BY HUMAN  Hurrah, It's a goal! THROW IN Sad computer puts the ball out of play! Cootball, the most popular sport in Britain. A PC ENGINE game of skill and agility, as well as an exer. cise in strategy and planning. This intellectual DELIGHTS side of football is often practised by the likes of Serious gamers will no doubt Vinnie Jones and Paul \"Gazza\" Gascoine. What remember the original PC Enwe're interested in though, is the hot action of the gine version of this game. It sport itself and that's what Formation Soccer is was programmed by Human, all about. It's a three dimensional simulation and a smart Japanese software so breaks the mould a little. Most footie games house. This is still the best are viewed from above, but this one puts you footie title on the PC Engine. right on the field. The game is a vastly tweaked The Famicom conversion reconversion of the PC Engine original and takes tains all the same options but full advantage of the Fammy's hardware. There the graphics and sound are are two distinct styles of play, one a tournament vastly enhanced. At first with you playing the computer and the other is a sight, this doesn't look anyhead to head contest with you up against a thing like the first game, but friend. The play follows the example of other the gameplay is very similar. games in the genre, with you controlling the player nearest the ball. The controls are simple, FORMATIONS you can only pass or shoot. So, get your football pants on and it's off down the park for a spot of OF DOOM Famicom footie! The most impressive feature Choose your favourite of Formation Soccer, is the TEAM SELECT brilliant formation selection option. This allows you to choose a definite play strategy before the game even starts. You have a wide range of team formations, so you can play a forward game, a defensive game, or even line your players up on GERMANY the wings. Players take it in ATKAN ATK turns to choose formation, so DEF MARATHI DEF the one who picks first will inRUN stantly give away his strategy to player two. Ha, player 33 ENG FORMATION SELECT EBEL two can then adjust his formation to kick ass all over 4-3-3 the pitch! 4-4-2 4-2-4 4-2-4 WHY WAS 3-2-2-3 3-2-2-3 PRO SOCCER 2-3-5 2-3-5 3-5-2 3-5-2 SO CRAP? When Famicom owners first AUTO heard that a version of Kick MANUAL Off 2 was planned for their KEEPER SEL machine, they must have filled their pants with fright. Thing is, Pro Soccer is a pile of pants. When this game is plugged in, it gives of the rancid stench of festering turds. It really is a travesty of a game and they ruined a potentially brilliant soccer sim. Fortunately, Formation Soccer is here to save the day. Let's play spot the ball! A Lining up for the kick off. I like it! Apart from the sad travesty that was Pro Soccer, this is the only real footie sim available on the Famicom. It uses the 3D chip to perform some jawdropping effects and you can run in and out of the screen at will. The gameplay has a couple of minor faults, but these don't really detract from the overall effect. To all intents and purposes, this is a straightforward footie game, you use all the same rules and it plays like most other games In the genre. The music is great and some of the sound effects are a bit special. In one player mode, this is a good laugh and the computer teams are challenging enough to keep you occupied for ages. Where it really comes into its own though, is in two player mode. Against a mate, this is a real laugh. The inclusion of after touch means you can curl the ball in any direction to fool the otherwise infallible goalie. A cracking little game and the only real choice for Fammy football fans! SPAUSE S FAMICOM GRAPHICS 89 SOUNDS PLAYABILITY 86 LASTABILITY OVERALL 87 FRANK O'CONNOR "


"REVIEW norge  13 BY NINTENDO MAGICAL MYSTERY TOUR The main ingredient of the Zelda games is sorcery. In this respect, Zelda 3 is no dif. ferent from the other games in the series. There are various magical spells available, but easily the most important is the magic mirror. This allows you to teleport at will from a number of magic squares in the magical kingdom. This makes getting around the world a lot faster and easier. One snag though, the mirror can be lost if you try to teleport through the evil underworld. Gadzooks! Zelda! To some people, this is the definitive RPG and now it appears in its third incarnation on the Super Famicom. The game features the exploits of a small elf named Link. Zelda is a smart and sexy little princess who spends most of her time getting kidnapped by evil magicians. This cause no end of problems for the hapless Link, as he's the one who always has to bail her out. Link is a strong lad and dead brave too. He must be strong though, because he can carry a quite unfeasibly large amount of stuff in his magic pockets. Armed initially with a small sword, his weaponry can be upgraded as you progress and certain weapons are needed for certain baddies. The game is viewed from a bird's eye perspective and you walk around the world of Zelda fighting baddies. The map is huge and map making skills would be an advantage. A Wonder what this magician will sell me? ms os as DUKE A Spooky going on in the underworld! The Legend of 2000 *** As well as the gauntlet style shooting and bashing, you will have to use your brain to solve some rather tricky puzzles. Perseverance and patience are required, but the game has a useful battery back-up facility, so you can turn off and continue later. I didn't half like the first two Zelda games and this one is a real sight for sore eyes. The success of the first two games was largely due to the immediately accessible arcade style of play. Zelda 3 retains this and the elements of strategy and adventure are added treats rather than annoying extras. The game has a lot in common with Gauntlet and games of that ilk. Most of the logic problems involve finding your way out of traps and mazes. You'll also have to decide which weaponsor magic powers are best suited to certain tasks. The graphics are very simple, but the animation is fluid and the game is packed full of colour. Sound-wise, Zelda 3 is spot-on. It has some great orchestral scores and lovely sound effects throughout. The Japanese text might look daunting, but it doesn't affect the game. play much at all. If you liked the first two games, or you fancy a spot of RPG related malarkey, then get this straight away, it's a corker! FRANK O'CONNOR TWO DIMENSIONAL MALARKEY Zelda is a huge game, but the shocking discovery of a parallel dimension makes it even bigger. This other dimension is an evil version of the Zelda world. The baddies change and the vegetation takes on a sinister aspect, but other than that, the layout is identical. You need to flip between worlds using A whole world spread out before you! the mirror if you are to complete the game, as the evil dimension contains some essential spells and weapons. One thing about Zelda 3 is the Japanese text. You'd be forgiven for thinking this made the game impossible to play, but you couldn't be more wrong. All you have to know is the difference between yes and no. Yes is always placed at the top of GRAPHICS your reply list and you can SOUNDS complete the game quite happily just by replying yes to any questions. It might work out expensive in terms of what you can afford to buy in shops, but it's better to be safe than sorry. FAMICOM PLAYABILITY 90 LASTABILITY 90 OVERALL 89 "


"REVIEW WHO'S WHO AND WHAT'S WHAT? PC .99 BY SSI/US GOLD With plenty of character types to choose from in EOB2, it's worth getting to know what they can and can't do, so here's a quick rundown on each: With plenty of character types to choose from in EOB2, it's worth getting to know what they can and can't do, so here's a quick rundown on each: Dwarves: Short, stocky and fit these little fellas are reliable team members. Elves: Slimmer and shorter than humans, they're quick on their feet and good in a crisis. Gnomes: Small in stature, high in intelligence but low on wisdom. Fairly foolhardy. Half-elves: Taller and heavier than most elves, they're mostly immune to spellcasting well handy! Halflings: A friendly race fairly resiliant to magic and good with sling shots. Humans: You know all about them! Wot's all this then? The time for battle has come. Fresh from your exploits with the forces of evil in Eye Of The Beholder, there's no time to rest and take things easy because foul things are afoot once again. This time round there's just one hope for mankind a direct assault on the dreaded Temple Darkmoon. But who will lead this treacherous mission? Who is brave enough, strong enough, talented enough and foolhardy enough to accept such a gruesome challenge? That's right matey, take two steps forward because it's gonna be you! ALL SORTS OF FAB FOLK All races have their own classes, or types, of individuals. They include Clerics (boring book and spell lovers), Fighters (hurrah!), Mages (more magicy types), Paladins (elite warriors, corl), Rangers (hanters and trackers) and Thieves (light fingered types). Make sure you get a good cross section ! in your team! A Crikey! 'Ere's somethin' 'orrible! 2000 1120 UT CO Looks like it's time for a scrap... 9126: 9152 Eye of the Beholder was a brilliant RPG and you'd think it would take some beating, but no! This sequel takes the original formula and improves upon it no end. The graphics have been revamped, the control system tweaked and the overall feel is much smoother and friendlier. RPGs tend to be a bit daunting for spaced-out laser junkies like myself, but Eye of the Beholder is a different kettle of fish. The control system is dead easy to get to grips with and tyhe tense atmosphere really draws you in. There are more traps and surprises in this sequel than in the original game. Finding your way out of the forest is hard enough, but the dungeons are truly labyrinthine. Music-wise, this is much the same as most PC games, a bit of a dead loss. The tunes are grim and uninspiring, but fortunately the decent sound effects save it. If you enjoyed the first game, then you'll find this is much more than a few extra levels. Watch out for it! FRANK O'CONNOR MAJOR MAGIC MALARKEY Magic moments are the order of the day in EOB2, with plenty of chances to use spells 'n' stuff to aid you in your quest. Characters such as mages and clerics can cast spells, but they have to have a bit of a rest before they can let loose their talents. Spells can be conjured up either by memorisation or prayer. The first is infinitely preferable, 'cos you don't have to put up with someone mumbling to himself for ages and throwing holy water all over the place... It's amazing the people you meet... 913619152 WP Porto "


"REVIEW ing Oooh! It's Mr Creepy... EYE OF THE more Th e models were ATTACK BEHOLDER Time for trouble! u so CALANDRA FOOD EYE EYE CAP'N! Just like the original, EOB gives you the chance to choose your team and modify their strengths and weaknesses for maximum effectiveness. Ro\" the dice to choose the attributes of your party, select individuals from all walks of life and kit them out with the goods you think they'll need. It's crucial that you get the right mix, because each individual's skills and talents could spell the difference between victory and disaster! 3168112512 A So what does this do? Time to find out! od OOH, THAT'S A BIG.'UN! Aaaargh! Eye Of The Beholder was the game which changed the face of role playing adventures, making them more fun than ever before. Everyone's been waiting for the sequel for ages, and SSI have turned in a fine product which more than does justice to the original. Basically this is an extension of the first (although of course you can play it if you're new to the game) with tweaks and improvements to graphics and gameplay. In one way that's a great strength, in another it's a weakness: fans of the first game will have kittens over this, while those who were looking for a significant march forward will be a tad disappointed. Just a tad, mind you, because nobody could realistically have asked any more of a sequel than EOB2 delivers a solid, improved, more challenging version of the original and one which should keep EOB devotees happy for a very long time... Still shivering over the gruesome horrors of the first EOB adventure? Well, the sequel features nasties so terrifyingly terrible they'll have you screaming for mum the second you clap eyes on them! They'll sneak up on you from behind, encircle your party and let rip before you have a chance to say \"Ooh, what's just bitten my bum?\" Luckily you can fight back with all manner of weapons from stones to swords. R 8 porco UPDATE Amiga and ST owning EOB fans can look forward to this in the not-too-distant. You can still get your hands on the original, by the way, and it's grand. PC GRAPHICS 85 SOUNDS 85 PLAYABIL LASTABILITY OVERALL 86 86 TIM BOONE "


"IT'S BACK! It's bad! It's totally rad! It's Britain's I greatest games playing contest. It's the CVG Challenge where we pluck one lucky reader from Sadie's throbbing High Scores mailbag and whisk them from the humdrum of everyday life to the glitz and glamour of CVG Towers to take on the big boys at the game of their choice! Want to play in the big league? Send in those High Scores sharpish! Here's Sadie to tell you all about it... WARZENEGGER This month's lucky so-and-so, pulled out of your pitiful pile of High Scores, was Surrey lad Matthew Pont who nearly filled his trousers when CVG phoned him up and asked him to come down to the big Smoke for the game of his life. Matthew had claimed a monstrously high 884-10 vs Revolver in Mirrorsoft's brilliant Speedball 2 so I insisted he come down to London and test his mettle against CVG wimpos Paul Rand, Frank O' Connor and Tim Boone. Tension was high. Frank almost wet himself when he found out just how good Matthew was and Paul threw his hands about yelling \"Oh God! Oh God!\" in that fidgeting, nervous sort of way. CHALLENGE 1 SPEEDBALL 2 (MEGADRIVE) MATCH 1 FRANK O'CONNOR Before the game started, Scotland's answer to Bonnie Langford started blubbing wildly and claimed he needed more practice until I bolted him in front of the monitor and threatened him with Bullseye videos. Things went badly for Frank in the first game Matthew took control almost immediately streaking straight up the pitch to slam in his first goal. Before the hapless Frank knew what was going on, Matthew was whacking the ball off the bonus stars at the side of the screen before flinging another straight into the back of the goal. Frank, concentrating hard, man. aged to pop in two reasonable efforts, but in a fit of blind tem per, Matthew obliterated him, finishing the first game 125-20! Oh dear. Frank was blubbing uncontrollably by now, but man aged to get a grip of himself for the next game. Frank took an early lead and was doing well. Matthew however, was not even remotely bothered and by the time the final whistle blew, he'd won 51-50. Frank left in disgrace and in the huff. MATCH 2 TIM BOONE The Big Ed was up next, wringing his hands and looking a bit too confident for his own good. \"No worries\", he announced, "


"CHALLENGE 2 KICK OFF 2 (AMIGA) and started running rings around the challenger and making good use of the bonus objects and the centre dome. But it was not to be. In the second half, Matthew took control and scored some truly inspired goals. He was a silver blur and the man Boone didn't stand a chance. The final score of the first game was a massive 74-10 in Matthew's favour. Tim gripped his joypad a little tighter and started the second game. Like a whirling dervish he sped up and down the pitch, dodging left, feigning right. Matthew made several valiant efforts to regain the lead, but the wrath of angry Boone was just too much and the final score stood at 36-34. The next game was a different matter entirely. Hard fought and exciting to watch, only three goals were scored. Unfortunately for Tim, two of them were Matthew's. It was all over, and we left Tim alone to cry quietly in the corner. KICKOFF MATCH 1 FRANK O'CONNOR Frank began with rare promise, taking an early 1-0 lead, but complacency led to some stupid mistakes, allowing Matthew to equalise in the second half and hold on for a score of 1-1 until the final whistle. Extra time saw no goals and the game went to penalties. Frank, a particularly unfortunate case, whined about his lack of penalty skill and the final score held up his claims Matthew 5, Frank 3. Tears and tantrums for a good fifteen minutes before Tim took the joystick. MATCH 3 PAUL RAND In swept Paul, his ego billowing behind him. \"I'm 'ard, I am!\", he cried. Matthew looked more than a little nervous and started shifting uncomfortably in his chair. The game was a corker. Hard fought and tense, the match seemed to take forever. In the first match, Matthew managed to score only one rather sad goal. The man Rand, on the other hand, was unstoppable. As the game progressed, Paul's defensive strategy paid dividends. Matthew couldn't keep up and Paul's keeper stopped some very brave tries. Rand soared up the screen and Slammed a ball in the goal. On the way up, he spanged the ball off the centre dome and tried to hold onto his slim lead of two points. As the Matt itching to get started. final whistle was about to blow, he rocketed another into the goal, securing a win in the first match. Matthew grimaced and prepared for the next game. It was too late though, Paul's special Speedball underpants were glowing with an intense fury and he began to humiliate poor Matthew. Paul, the evil toad that he is, showed no mercy. Showing off, he ran rings around Matthew and instantly became the World's Most Obnoxious Turd. Whooping with pleasure he won the match with ease, 4234. Ungracious in victory, he called Matthew poopy-drawers and ran around the Paul, fails to notice room like the spoiled brat he Frank's pranks is. So Matthew had won the first leg, but the sneakiness of the CVG team knows no bounds. Quite despicably, the boys trumped up an imaginary second leg from nowher \"You'll have to beat us at Kick Off 2 if you want a prize! they said. \"That's OK\", replied Matthew, \"I'm really gool at it\". The mood quickly changed. Tim threatened to go the huff and Frank looked more like a big girl's blouse than the one I was wearing. Paul, however, was ecstatic \"No-one has ever beaten me at Kick Off,\" he announce proudly as laughter filled the room. MATCH 2 TIM BOONE An exciting match with a few spectacular attempts on goal. both players managed to hold off the other to keep the score at 0-0 come half time. Things took a turn for the worse in the second half, however. Matthew's defence was as capable as his attack and, while Tim couldn't get anywhere near goal, the young challenger stormed up the pitch and launched a rocket of a shot, sending the Ed's keeper in entirely the wrong direction; and that's where it stayed. When the final whistle blew, it was Matthew 1, Tim zilch. Tim took it defeat slightly better than Frank, keeping his frustration to a short display of footstamping and holding his Boone's trousers are neavy breath until he turned blue. with fear. MATCH 3 PAUL RAND CVG's self-proclaimed Kick Off champion took his position and what a sight he was. He had brought his special Kick Off joystick and was wearing his lucky vest the one with beer stains on. What followed was one of the most outrageous dis. plays of gaming prowess ever. All the players did well, but Rand was inspired. A strange silence Tell over the small crowd of onlookers as Paul worked his magic. He was like a god a pale, skinny and rather pathetic god, but a god none. theless. Shot after shot saw his half time score at 4-0 and still he wanted more. Matthew put up a brave, if somewhat foolhardy, challenge but to no avail. When the final whistle blew, Paul had scored a massive 6-0. The CVG boys were jubilant. The spoils of war as toady escapes with his goodies! However, Randy's gaming skills could not alter the arithmetic. Matthew had won four games, CVG only two. Matthew was the winner! Graceful in defeat, the CVG crew shook Matthew's hand and wished him well except Frank, who crouched, bubbling, in the toilet and the lucky lad walked off with an armful of free software and a certificate to prove his achievement. Think you can do better, wimpos? Send in those high scores and I'll pick some spammy winner out of the bag! SADIE The man Boone cacking his pants! Frank takes his defeat with dignity. "


"TENSTAR WIN SEGA MEGA DRIVE 0898 313 565 fusell A ATARSE Answer 4 Simple computer rames questions correctly and you could win a Megadrive GIVE YOURSELF A BETTER CHANCE TO MEER PRIVD 520ST S AU WIN ATARI 520 ST FUN 0898 313 564 \" * WIN You have Ten Sheds to ZAF the monster and will GAMES under 18 year plantar permissmoon Moyenn EITHER A GAME MUSIC CD'S SUPER FAMICOM SEGA MEGADRIVE OR A Over 100 CD's available direct from Japan .......ONLY THROUGH US! CONSOLES: PC ENGINE, SUPER FAMICOM, MEGADRIVE, GAMEBOY, GAMEGEAR Software and Hardware available MAGAZINES: 15 different Japanese Games magazines in stock. Contact us for our full list of all the above products. 66-68 BREWER STREET LONDON I w1R 3PJ  071 439 1559 Shop open 7 days a week OR  CASH THE CHOICE IS YOURS PHONE JAPANCENTRE LONDON 0898 313450 CALLS COST 36P PER MIN AT CHEAP RATE, 48P PER MIN AT ALL OTHER TIMES READ THIS! FAST 7 DAY DELIVERY Buster 6.99 6.99 6.99 6.99 699 699 Pro Berg 8.99 699 6.99 6.99 6.996.99 ..6.99 6.99 699 69 6.99 699 699 6.99 BUDGET MEGA ST Moonwalker Advanced Fruit Machine ...6.99 699 North & South Altered Beast Quru Arcade Tra... 7.99 799 Platon Arcanoid 6.99 999 Power Dritt ATF 2 9.99 999 Aus Magic Hammer 8.99 699 Pub Trivia Barbarian ll 6.995.99 Radio Controlled Rao Batman the Movie Now Auff & Reddy Blazing Thunder 6.995.99 Scooby Doo & Scrappy Doo Bocble Bubble 6.99 6.99 Sherman MA Black Homel. 6.99 6.99 Shinobi Burgerman... 8.99 6.99 Shullepuck Cale ....... California Games 6.99 899 Skworm ch  6.99 6.99 Sky High Suntman CJ Bephant Antos.... Continental Circus...............6.99 6.99 Sunt Car Race Crazy Cars. ... 6.99 699 Super Saambie Cyberbal 6.9 899 Super Grand Pro Daley Thompson Olympic Chos.99 6.99 Super Hang On. Delonders of the Earth ........6.99 6.99 Switchblade ...... Double Dragon. ...6.99 6.99 Tennis Cup Dragon Sprite Dragon Ninja 6.99 6.99 The Sword and the Rose Dungeons Amets Alchemis899 6.99 Thunderblade Fantasy World Dizzy............6.99 6.99 Fast Food 5 11 nm. Prst Division Mano Forgotten Worlds Treasure Island Dezy . Puure Bike Simulator 699 6.99 Turbo Outrun. Gauntlet Il 6.99 6.99 Turcan Uime Darts Ghostus Volant Guwdan Angel 6.99 6.99 Volador. Hard Drivin Head Over Heels Wadky Races Heros of the Lance.... Wady Darts Hong Kong Phooey... 6.99 6.99 Wuba... Hot Shot 6.99 6.99 Indiana Jones & Last Crusade 6.99 6.99 599 699 Iron Lord... Ne 9.999.99 Xybob. 6.99 6.99 Yogi & the Greed Monster Karny Dalglish Soccer Yog's Great Escape dar FULL PRICE KUR 5.996.99 30 Construction Last Ninja 2... 5.99 6.99 Agony. League Challenge 6.99 599 Mean Madine Devious Desions ....... Miami Chase 5.99 NA F-15 Srka File Mig 29 Soviet Fighter 6.996.99 Golden Aze J. White Whirwind Snooku 19.96 19.96 COMPILATIONS Knightmare 19.50 19.50 Leander ....New..19.50 NA VIRTUAL WORLDS HOLLYWOOD COLLECTION Monkey Island......................15.99 15.99 Castle Master, Driller, Total Robocop, Batman the Movie, Nam 2499 2499 Eclipse, The Crypt Indiana Jones & the Last 1899 NA ST & AMIGA (19.99 Crusade, Ghostbusters 2 N NA 16.99 ST & AMIGA (16.50 Pfight... Now. 1750 1750 HANNA BARBERA CARTOONS Prince of Persia. ..15 50 15 50 Yogi's Great Escape, Hong Kong GRANDSTAND RBI 2 Rasa 1999 19.99 Phooey, Top Cat, Ruff & Reddy Gazzas Super Soccer, Pro Reams ST & AMGA .99 Tennis Tour, World Class Roerg Porry.... No. 1599 1599 Leaderboard, Continental Circus Augby The World Cup. Now .15.50 15.50 SOCCER MANIA ST & AMIGA E17.50 1399 1399 Sarable De Luxe Microprose Soccer Footbal Sul & Gossbones 16.99 15.99 Smash TV Manager 2, Gazza's Super ..14 50 1450 AJR/SEA SUPREMACY (NEW) ..13 50 NA Soccer & Football Manager Silent Service, Carrier Command, ST & AMIGA .99 Gunship, P47, F-15Strike Eagle TERMINATOR 2 ST & AMGA .90 THE SIMPSONS.. . w.1450 14.50 DIZZY COLLECTION (NEW) Thunder Jaws........ ...16.9 16.99 Treasure Island Dizzy, Magicland CHART ATTACK (NEW) Trivial Pursuit 1399 1399 Dizzy, Fantasy World Dizzy. Fast Lotus Esprit, Turbo Challenge Turtes Con Op Now 1750 NA Food, Kwik Snak Impossomole, Cloud Kingdoms 13 99 1309 ST & AMIGA (14.80 Ghouls & Ghosts, Supercars Wild Wheels ..1450 1450 ST & AMIGA 19.99 Wonderland 1999 19.99 SPORTING WINNERS WWF WRESTLBLNow.15.50 15.50 Daily Double Horse Racing RAINBOW COLLECTION ....Now. 14.99 14.99 Steve Davis Snooker & Brian New Zealand Story, Bubble Super Space Invadors. Now ...19.99 19.99 Clough's Football Fortunes Bobble, Rainbow Islands Suspicious Cago......Now...18.99 1899 st & AMCA (16.99 ST & AMIGA .50 CALI. US ON 24 HOUR CREDIT CARD HOTLINE 021 440 4108 K PLEASE STATE NAME, CREDIT CARD NUMBER. EXPIRY DATE A GOODS REQUIRED ORDER FORM AND INFORMATION. Al orders sent FIRST CLASS subject to availability. Just in the couponi and sent it to: PRICEBUSTER, UNIT 23, 14/20 GEORGE STREET, BIRMINGHAM B12 9RG BLOCK CAPITALS NAME OF GAME COMPUTER VALUE NAME... ADDRESS.... .. 599 699 6.99 5.99 8996.99 699 6.99 5.99 6.99 32.99 25.99 1899 NA 1899 18.99 CAVO POSTAGE TOTAL NA 1750 23.99 23.99 16.99 16.99 POSTCODE...................TEL NO:. .. POSTAGETES P 5 0 e urde unde 100 No EC 25 E PREISER "


"OFFICIAL U.K. HIGH SCORES Well, by the time you read this, you'll all be too fat and lazy to get any remarkable high scores. The Christmas turkey is now a wasteland of currles and casseroles and all your presents have lost their appeal. Still, a lot of you will have received game-related prezzles from Santa and I expect to see lots of console scores and a ton of Amiga show-offs next time. SADIE MASTER SYSTEM GAMEBOY A corking Golf score this month, from Gareth Watkins of London Obviously inspired by Paul Rand's incredible golfing antics in last month's issuel If you think you can do better, put on your special golfing underpants and get out to the Nintendo golf club and start swinging. F1 RACE AUSTRALIA 37.91 SECS Chris Skok, Epsom, Surrey TETRIS 212 LINES Chris Skok, Epsom, Surrey SUPER MARIO LAND COMPLETED Jason Turvey, Harold Wood, Romford Anthony Bell's amazing score on Pro Wrestling is one to beat. Alex Kidd makes a long overdue appearance on the chart again and we have an entry from none other than Brian Ferry. Obviously when he's not making smoochy pop songs, he enjoys a spot of Master System related malarkey HANG ON 624,510 Danny Beusch, Peterborough, Cambs. PRO WRESTLING 555,800 COMPLETE Anthony \"Ding-Dong Bell, Bucknall, Staffs. ALEX KIDD IN MIRACLE WORLD 97,600 Andy Hosell, Aberystwyth, Wales. BUBBLE BOBBLE 3,060,625 Brian Ferry, Hamilton, Scotland DOUBLE DRAGON 73,190 Peter Mason, Ruddington, Nottingham COMPLETED COMPLETED DUCK TALES Mark Atkinson, Dunstable, Beds. WORLD CUP Vernon Wright, Norbury, London GOLF Gareth Watkins, Tooting, London BURAI FIGHTER DELUXE Gareth Watkins, Tooting, London -20 JAPAN -12 USA 666,910 ACE SUPER FAMICOM MEGADRIVE Whoal The Megadrive is going through a bit of a renaissancel There are two count 'em, two strategy games in the score tablet Tim Kelly's score on EA Ice Hockey is a bit suspect though, seeing as the Soviet Union doesn't exist anymore. EA ICE HOCKEY 44-4 SOVIET UNION VS USA Tim Kelly, Bletchley, Milton Keynes STAR CONTROL COMPLETE ON AWESOME Tim Kelly, Bletchley, Milton Keynes ROAD RASH REDWOOD COURSE, 1 MIN 2 SECONDS Robert Parsons, Highbury, London STREETS OF RAGE 610,500 Steven Cheung, Foxhill, Sheffield MIDNIGHT RESISTANCE COMPLETED Paul Blackwell, Tliehurst, Reading STAR FLIGHT COMPLETED-953,000 MVS LEFT Russell Tuffin, Walton on Thames, Surrey JOHN MADDEN'S HOUSTON 77 ALL MADDEN 5 Russell Tuffin, Walton on Thames, Surrey Simon Wilmer gets the ultimate score on Geoman Warrior, com pleted with the max number of points possible. What a guy! Super Ghouls 'n Ghosts is almost impossible on hard mode, but not if you're the nigh-on superhuman Simon Wilmer. I bet he drinks Carling Black Label.\" SUPER GHOULS 'N GHOSTS 50,000 HARD Simon Wilmer, Cheltenham, Glos. ACTRAISER 23,240 Ryan Saril, Hitchin, Herts. GEOMAN WARRIOR 99,990 FINISHED Simon Wilmer, Cheltenham, Glos. PILOTWINGS COMPLETE Daniel Patch, Grays, Essex FINAL FIGHT Sam Armstrong, Bank Cottage, Little Chesterford 2,396,193 ARCADE Lots of good scores this month, but let's see some for games like Starblade and Steel Talons. Come and have a go if you think you're hard enough. PITFIGHTER 3,081,390 COMPLETED Lloyd Wright, Kidderminster, Worcs. "


"TOKI Alan Murray, Dalkleth, Scotland 63,670 COMPLETED 779,350 ARCADE TIME TRAVELLER Jez Matthews, Surbiton, Surrey MAD DOG MACREE James Leach, Wells, Somerset BLASTEROIDS Michael Leonards, Black Forest, Australia 6,387,610 23,650 NINTENDO 235,500 BLOOD BROS Lloyd Wright, Kidderminster, Worcs. THE SIMPSONS Susan Jamieson, Penzance, Cornwall 299 COMPLETED A massive Mario 3 score from James Catchpole in Bedford, If you think you've got the balls to beat that, then send in your score. The classic original Mario also gets a rather astounding drubbing from Trevor Thornicroft of Southam...he completed a massive 16 times In a row, must have taken hours! BUBBLE BOBBLE COMPLETED 1,072,080 Peter Barnes, Oakworth, Kelghley TEENAGE MUTANT HERO TURTLES 180,200 Derek Rutherford, Portsmouth, Hants. KUNG FU MASTER 230,120 Evander Mclver, Rosyth, Scotland SPECTRUM A superb score for World Class Rugby, from Mark Korner of Clapham. Next month though, Lemmings will have been in the shops so there's no excuse for not sending in some smart LemmIng related scores. R-TYPE Robert Trevethick, Yaddlethorpe, Scunthorpe 153,000 SPIKE IN TRANSYLVANIA Mike Andrews, Bath, Avon COMPLETED SUPER MARIO 3 COMPLETED 50 LIVES LEFT James Catchpole, Bedford, Lincs. SUPER MARIO BROS COMPLETED 16 TIMES Trevor Thornicroft, Southam, Leamington Spa MIAMI CHASE Alan Andrews, Bath, Avon 93,640 COMPLETED AMIGA WORLD CLASS RUGBY Mark Korner, Clapham, London WON FINAL 17-0 750CC GRAND PRIX Alex Dyer, Chippenham, Wiltshire COMPLETED 1ST PLACE Hal Scotland give Australia the drubbing they deserve in Martin Benedetti's superb Rugby World Cup result! Paul Beresford was a bit Impressive too, as he tears round the hard level of Lotus Turbo. Think you can beat that? Then get writing! MAN UNITED EUROPE 9-1 VS SLAVIA SOFIA Simon Wren, Braintree, Essex GODS 3,914,879 Paul Beresford, Chippenham, Wiltshire 148 HARD LOTUS TURBO Paul Beresford, Chippenham, Wiltshire KICK OFF 2 Paul Rand, CVG Towers, London 22-0 VS SAD JERRY HALL ST Two outstanding scores on the ST chart this month, Kick Off 2 got the treatment from Paul Youdan and there's a fairly massive score on Speedball 2. Look out next month for scores on WWF and the other Christmas biggles. SPEEDBALL 2 144-2 VS SUPER NASHWAN Martin Tannel, Rochester, Kent SUPERCARS 2 COMPLETED 35 POINTS Paul Youdan, Morden, Herts. KICK OFF 2 45-0 ON 4TH DIVISION Paul Youdan, Morden, Herts. SWIV 197,750 Chris Newton, Penzance, Cornwall RODLAND 337450-LEVEL 28 Andrew Harbidge, Ladybridge, Bolton RUGBY THE WORLD CUP 84-3 SCOTLAND V AUSTRALIA Martin Benedetti, Dennistoun, Glasgow TERMINATOR 2 233,300 COMPLETE Matthew Williams, S.Glam., Wales Right, wimpos, you know the drill every month CVG will be throwing down the gauntlet to all of you weaklings. Fill out the form below and send it to SCORE WITH SADIE at the usual CVG address. If your scores are good enough, they'll be printed in my Highscore Tables, and outstanding scorers may be called on to go up against the drooling CVG reviewers and a software house champion, with an expensive piece of computer or console gear (depending on what you already own) as a prize! DEAR SADIE, I THINK I'M GREAT MUCH BETTER THAN THOSE CVG CRETINS ANYWAY SO HERE ARE MY HIGHSCORES... GAME GAME GAME. SCORE ..SCORE. SCORE. NAME: ADDRESS:.. TELEPHONE NUMBER: ........ MY MACHINE IS: "


"520ST-E DISCOVERY MATARI ATARI ST PACK TRE S TENSTAR GAMES PACK tar scovery 520ST COLOUR RETURN THE COUPON FOR A CATALOGUE HARDWARE: 512K 520ST-E + MOUSE 329.99 ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE: FINAL FIGHT . Arcade Game 525.99 629.95 9 LIVES Arcade Garne. ROBOT MONSTERS Arcade .42 PRODUCTIVITY SOFTWARE: CONTROL ACCUMy Software FREE EMULATOR.ACC Undy Software FREE FIRST BASIC Programming 49.99 NEOCHROME Art Package .99 ST TOUR Tutorial PLUS! FREE FROM SILICA: TENISTAR GAMES PACK 5219.78 PRODUCTIVITY PACK TOTAL VALUE 0836.02 YOU SAVE 537.02 SILICA:  HOLIDAY ACCOMMODATION $ 299 MATARII ATARI 520ST-FM DISCOVERY PACK 1040STE FAMILY 1Mb 1040STE + MOUSE..... 399.99 1 PLAY LEARN CURRICULUM PACK 2. JUNIOR SCHOOL The Family Curriculum Pack 3. GCSE REVISION [55.54 comes with a 1040STE com4. BUSINESS COMPUTING ... (159.85 CREATIVE COMPUTING (134.97 puter and mouse plus 5 software PLUSI FREE FROM SILICA modules (3 titles in each), one for TENSTAR PACK ..... 1219.76 every age range. The combinaPRODUCTIVITY PACK.... 104.37 tion of education, creative and business software from Atari, TOTAL VALUE: .23 plus the FREE entertainment and YOU SAVE: .23 productivity packs from Silica, makes for a package the whole family can enjoy! PLUSI FREE HOLIDAY ACCOM SILICA PRICE INC WTFREE DELIVERY er der marchange the whole $ 3 9 9 09 INC VAT + FREE DELIVERY + FREE TENSTAR & PRODUCTIVITY PACKS ATARI ST MORE THAN JUST GREAT GAMES! FREE! FROM EVERA ATARI ST TENSTAR CAMES GAMES PACK The TenStar Games Pack is THE Software compendium for Atari ST owners, featuring ten top titles with a variety of different types of games for you to enjoy. Each title is packaged in its own plastic case, with a colour sleeve and full instructions. The TenStar Games Pack is FREE! when you buy your ST from Silica Systems. TENSTAR GAMES PACK TOTAL FREE PACKAGE TENSTAR GAMES PACK .78: Asterix By Coktel Vision ............................ .99 Chess Player 2150 By CP Software .95 Drivin' Force By Digital Magic ....................95 Live & Let Die By Elite ...... .99 Onslaught By Hewson .99 Pipe Mania By Empire Software ...... .99 Rick Dangerous By Firebird .99 Rock 'n' Roll By Rainbow Arts .99 Skweek By US Gold ................... .99 Trivial Pursuit By Domark .95 PRODUCTIVITY PACK .97: 1st Word Word Processor ........................ .99 Spell It! Spell Checker ......... .99 ST Basic Programming Language ..... .99 TOTAL RRP: .75 FREE! FREE PRODUCTIVITY EL SILISA SYSTEM PACK Every Atari ST from Silica comes with a FREE Silica ST Productivity Pack worth over 100 This pack has been specially put together by Silica to help you to get to grips with the productive side of computing from day one Each title has been tried and tested by tons of thousands of Atan ST own , who have begun word processing with 1st Word and programming with Atari ST Basic tot WORD from GST SPELL ITI for use with tot WORD .99 ST BASIC Nora $24.99 TOTAL RRP: .97 16 NIGHTS HOLIDAY EE HOTEL ACCOMMODATION Every Atari ST from Silica comes with a FREE 72 page, full colour brochure with accommodation vouchers. These vouchers entitle 2 people to stay up to 16 nights in one hotel (or any number of hotels to a total of 16 nights) with accommodation FREE you could take up to six nights for four people, or other Options. Choose from the 250 hotels featured in the catalogue. All you have to pay for are your meals (prices are listed in the brochure) Reduced rates in top London hotels and hotels in France are also featured MOR 2325 FREE! FREE! WORTH NEARLY: PLUS! FREE HOLIDAY ACCOMMODATION SILICA SYSTEMS OFFER YOU MAIL ORDER: Order Lines Open Mon t erey Holdcup, Kont, DA14 40X Tel: 021.309 No Late Night Opening Fax No: 081-308 000 LONDON SHOP: 52 Tottenham Court Road, London, WIP OBA Tel: 071-580 4000 Opening Hours Mon Sat 30am-6.00pm Late Night Thursday until 8pm Fax No: 323 4737 LONDON (SELFRIDGES): 1st Floor 369 Oxford Street, London, WIA 1AB Tel: 071-629 1234 Opening Hours Mon 30am-8.00pm Late Night: Thursday until 8pm SIDCUP SHOP: 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Tel: 081-302 8811 Opening Hours: Monat am 5300m Late Night Friday pm Fax No 081 300 0017  FREE OVERNIGHT COURIER DELIVERY: On all hardware orders shipped in the UK. . TECHNICAL SUPPORT HELPLINE: Team of Atari technical experts at your service.  PRICE MATCH: We normally match competitors on a \"Same product Same price'' basis.  ESTABLISHED 12 YEARS: Proven track record in professional computer sales.  BUSINESS + EDUCATION + GOVERNMENT: Volume discounts available for large orders.  SHOWROOMS: Demonstration and training facilities at our London & Sidcup branches  THE FULL STOCK RANGE: All of your Atari requirements from one supplier  FREE CATALOGUES: Will be mailed to you with offers and software/peripheral details  PAYMENT: By cash, cheque and all major credit cards. Before you decide when to buy your new Atari ST computer, we suggest you think very carefully about WHERE you buy it. Consider what it will be like a few months after buying your ST. when you may re. quire additional peripherals or software, or help and advice with your new purchase. And, will the company you buy from contact you with details of new products? At Silica Systems, we ensure that you will have nothing to worry about. We have been established for over 12 years and with our unrivalled experience and expertise, we can now claim to meet our customers requirements with an understanding which is second to none. But don't just take our word for it. Complete and return the coupon now for our latest Free Interature and begin to experience the \"Silica Systems Service\" To Silica Systems. Dept CVG-1291-63. 1-4 The Mews Hatherley Rd, Sidcup. Kent, DA14 40X PLEASE SEND FREE ATARI COLOUR CATALOGUE Mt/Mrs/Ms: .. Initials: ...... ... Surname: Address: MAIL ORDER HOTLINE SILICA 081-309 1111 SYSTEMS Postcode:.... ..... Tel: ... 63B Which computer(s), if any, do you own? ......... ... it. An indcan e paid in "


"REVIEW NES .00 BY JVC/LUCASFILM I'R KRN SOLO, CAPTAIN OF THE MILLENNIUM F'RLCON CHEWIE SRID YOU'RE LOOKING FOR PASSRGE TO TKE RLDERRAN SYSTEM He's hard he's Han Solo! Along time ago, in a galaxy far, far away...Star Wars is still one of the most successful movies of all time. All things to everyone: adventure, love story, visual spectacle, Star Wars has it all. The game follows the movie's plot faithfully and includes all its major elements. You start off on Tatooine, Luke's home planet. From here you have to enlist the aid of R2D2, Ben Kenobi and Han Solo. Once you have Han Solo working for you, you can zoom off to the Death Star...via a large asteroid field. Most of the game is a scrolling platform romp, but there are various sub-games, including a 3D section in the middle. It's all there, so get going! FATHE SABER INDICE A Oh my messy pants, it's Darth Vader! X-WING ANTICS There are two 3-D sections in the game, one in the Millen nium Falcon and one in the famous X-Wing fighter. In the first, you as Han Solo have to fly the Falcon through an aste roid field on the way to the Death Star. This is extremely tricky. The second 3D bit is when you !ly the X-Wing through TIE Fighter infested space. This section leads on to a verti cally scrolling shoot 'em up over the surface and into the tren, ches of the Death Star. Loads of levels to explore hurrah! USE THE FORCE You can't actually use The Force in the game, but there are a few mysterious tricks you'll need to learn. The first obstacles are jump related Luke can jump quite lar, but he'll leap a good bit higher if you discover his amazing sprinting ability Like the Mario games, you hold down fire to run, which makes Luke leap a whole lot further and enables him to reach those otherwise inaccessible ledges. Learning to control the momentum of Luke and the other characters is also vital, so you'll need plenty of practice. increase same "


"REVIEW 4,6 REVIEW ALL PALS TOGETHER You have to use all the good guys from the movie if you want to complete the game Starting with just Luke and C3PO, you seek the assistance of R2D2. Once you have him, Ben Kenobi will join the fun. Next you have to . find Han Solo and, finally, Princess Leia. Each character can be controlled and they all have their uses and it's up to you to find out who does what best. The film plot gives clues, so you shouldn't have much problem figuring it out! UPDATE Sorry Skywalkers, but if this game's your cup of tea the NES is the place to be. Snitt. Star Wars is one smart cart! It has all your favourite bits of the movie and a few goodies which weren't strictly in the film. The plot has been doctored slightly to make the game flow a little more smoothly, but you have to do everything in the right order. The main part of the game, a scrolling platform romp is great fun, with death-defying leaps and lots of allen scum to blast. The graphics, conside ring this is an NES, are completely groovy, with smooth scrolling, top-notch sprites and won derful backdrops. The cart contains a special music chip which enhances the NES sound capabilities. What this means to you and his that there are some thumping renditions of the movie themes, as well as brilliant sound effects. The game is huge: you can play for an hour and still only complete five or six percent of the whole thing! Definitely the best film tie-in on the NES and one of the best Nintendo carts for ages! FRANK O'CONNOR 'S YOUR MER'ILISHT BER. JURIDIN LLLILLLILILIKLA Don't get lost on the ladder, WHY IS C3PO 'Cos you never know where SO CRAP? you'll end up... Although C3PO is with you all the way through the game. he's completely crap. He doesn't do anything at all except complain all the time. He can't shoot, he can't jump and he can't even speak different languages like he's supposed to. This isn't actually an option, but it wouldn't be a bad idea to leave him in the Jawa sandcrawler. At least they could make him into something useful, like a trumpet or a waffle iron :: MY SCRUINERS SHOU TMRT R2-D2 IS LOCATED IN THIS SANDCRAILER. X-WING ANTICS There are two 3-D sections in the game, one in the Millennium Falcon and one in the famous X-Wing fighter. In the first, you as Han Solo have to fly the Falcon through an asteroid field on the way to the Death Star. This is extremely tricky. The second 3D bit is when you fly the X-Wing through TIE Fighter infested space. This section leads on to a vertically scrolling shoot 'em up over the surface and into the trenches of the Death Star. It's taken a while to touch down (say about 15 years!) but this game is fab! Lucasfilm have really gone to town here, turning in a game and a half which will have you doing a double take to prove you're actually playing an NES. There's nothing quite like this one anywhere, 'cos it's so faithful to the swashbuckling adventure appeal of the movie itself. Looking very Luke-like you journey through some gorgeous graphics to complete one mutha of a tough task! The sound track really stands out, ranking among the best I've ever heard on the 8-bit Nintendo. But at the end of the day what I really like about this game is the way it so closely mirrors the excitement and drama of one of the greatest movies ever. This is the one the fans have been waiting for, and here it is at last! TIM BOONE A Why is C3PO so crap? Funny answers on a postcard, free game for the winner.. NES RAPHICS SOUNDS 92 PLAYABILIT LASTABILITY OVERALL 91 90 "


"GAMEMAGICK CAVERN WALKS MATHEW STREET ST LIVERPOOL L2 ORE DIAL A TIP ORDER HOTLINE 051 227 1977 9.00am 6.00pm AFTER EVENING HOTLINE STRICTLY ORDERS 6.30pm 8.00pm 051 709 6226 GAME MAGICK SEGA MEGADRIVE.........129.99 GAMEBOY ........... JAP WITH A CHOICE OF ANY GAMES LISTED BELOW FOR .00 GHOSTBUSTERS 11... .00 QUACKSHOT..................34.00 SUPERMARIO LAND..........00 HATRIS.. . 21.00 DOUBLE DRAGON II..........99 STREETS OF RAGE..........35.00 MICKEY MOUSE II......... MOUSE 21.00 NEMISIS II MERCS. .00 ** 34.00 BUBBLE BOBBLE... RUNARK (indina Jones).......CA.LL  21.00 ROBOCOD (USA)............. 34.99 CHASE H.Q. .00 ROAD RASH (USA)...........37.00 CASTLEVANIA II...... ...00 FATAL REWIND (USA)... 33.00 DRAGONS LAIR...... .00 PACMAN..... .00 SPIDERMAN.... ..31.00 F22 INTERCEPTOR (USA).00 POPEYE II (HOT)....... .00 BUCK RODGERS (USA).......CA.LL TMNT II (HOT)....... .00 NINJA RYUKENDEN.......... 22.00 RING OF POWER (USA)......CA.LL PGA TOUR GOLF (USA).....00 JOHN MADDEN II (USA)...36.00 GAME GEAR .........JAP FIGHTING MASTER...........00 LAKERS V'S CELTICS (USA)....635.00 SONIC THE HEDGEHOG.... ......24.99 CD ROM (SCART ONLY).......CALL HEAVY WEIGHT CHAMP............99 DONALD DUCK (LUCKY DIME).....99 ALL ABOVE GAMES ARE JAP NINJA GAIDEN.................99 CARTRIDGES UNLESS AXE BATTLER...................99 OTHERWIASE STATED. PARADISE OF KUNICHANE 24.99 4 GAMES IN 1 COLUMNS, TENNIS JAP TO UK ADAPTOR......11.99 WITH SONIC AS UMPIRE CARD GAME CHEATS, TIPS AND GAME SOLUTIONS CHEATS GALORE 0891 101 234 FROM IRELAND RING 03000 21244 MEGATIP GAMES LINE 0891 299 388 AMIGA HOTLINE 0891 299 385 AMIGA GAMESTIPS 0891 299 386 ATARI S.T. GAMES TIPS 0891 299 387 CONSOLE HOTLINE 0891 299 390 CONSOLE GAMESTIPS 0891 299 391 SEGA CHEATLINE 0891 299 333 NINTENDO CHEATLINE 0891 299 313 SAM COUPE HOTLINE 0891 299 380 HELPLINES FIRST SAMURAI 0891 445 926 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER 0891 442 030 LAST NINJA III 0891 445 920 SHADOW OF THE BEASTI & II/ BARBARIAN II 0891 442 022 THE IMMORTAL 0891 445 928 MAGIC POCKETS/RODLAND 0891 445 928 FOR FULL INFORMATION ON OUR OTHER CHEAT/HELPLINES RING NINTENDO SUPER FAMICOM P & P  PER GAME ACTRAISER UK (HINTS)..99 |  PER CONSOLE F.ZERO .......35.00 WE RESERVE THE RIGHT TO ALTER PRICES WITHOUT NOTIFICATION. ALLOW 5 DAYS FOR CHEQUES TO CLEAR PAYABLE TO GAME MAGICK 0891 445 904 VISA PROPIETOR:JACQUELINE WRIGHT, P.O. BOX 54. SOUTHWEST MANCHESTER M15 4LS CALLS COST 36P PER MIN AT CHEAP RATE 48P ER MIN AT ALL OTHER TIMES KC's COMPUTERS & CONSOLE MAGIC 3 HIGH STREET, LOUGHBOROUGH, LEICS, LE11 1PY OPEN 9.30AM TO 6.30PM AMERICAN FAMICOM GAME GEAR MEGADRIVE GAMEBOY .24.00 US Famicom Scart and GAMEGEAR .95 JPN Megadrive Gameboy no game........54.95 UK Megadrive With Master Gear and Game Super Mario IV Gameboy 1 game of our .95 .95 .95 .95 choice. ......... ......69.95 Actraiser. 48.95 TV Tuner ... 74.95 + SONIC HEDGEHOG JPN Games Convertor Your choice...............74.95 D-Force... Master Gear ..............19.95 .95 39.95 Atomic Punk ..................24.00 .95 ..15.95 Wide Gear .......... F-Zero..... Altered Space.. .......24.00 39.95 Axe Butler..... ...24.00 Arnest Evans ............Call 688 Sub Attack . ...3700 Blades of Steel ............24.00 Final Fantasy II.... .48.95 Aleste ...Call Beast Warriors...........33.00 Abrams Battle Tank ....38.00 Bugs Bunny II............. .24.00 Ghouls & Ghosts... ..42.95 Batter Up................24.00\" ....24.00. Bare Knuckles ..... .....33.00 California Games.. ....38.00 Battle Toads...... ........24.00 Hole in One Golf. ...42.95 Donald Duck... .......24.00 Dino Land.................. 28.00 Donald Duck ............37.00 Bill & Teds Adventure...24.00 Home Alone ........ ..44.95 Dragon Crystal... ..19.00* Devil Crush ........... 34.00 EA Hockey.. .37.00 Choplifter II ..... .24.00 John Maddens ...........44.95 Factory Panic.. ........19.00* Double Dragon .........Call Fatal Rewind... .33.00 Ceasars Palace....... 24.00 Lagoon ............... Flogger gger .... ............24.00 Heavy Nova..................ca ....Call F22 Interceptor ......... .39.95 Double Dragon II .........24.00 Pilot Wings....................39.95 Furel. . .........Call . ..Call Kubuki Warrior ..............37.00 Fighting Master ........... .33.00 Dick Tracy ........... Sim City..........................42.95 Galaga 91................... 24.00 Marvel Land .... ..31.00 Immortal ......... .39.95 Fortified Zone ...............22.00 U.N. Squadron ..............39.95 Golden Axe........ .24.00 Magical Hat ...... 24.00 Joe Montanna Il............ .38.00 Gauntlet II. 24.00 Griffon.... ..24.00 Moonwalker ...................19.00 John Maddens 92 .........35.00 Gremlins II............ ...19.00 Call for new arrivals Halley's War ...............24.00* Mercs........... .... 33.00 Jewel Master ....... 34.00 Home Alone............... Convertor for US to JPN Joe Montanna ..... ....24.00* Ninja Bural........ ..Call Marble Madness............38.00 Mega Man........ ........19.00 carts only....................24.95 Kick Off ... .........Call Outrun.. 24.00 Mercs... 37.00 Ninja Gaiden ....... 24.00 Famicom Pal, 2 pads and Mickey Mouse .....24.00 Ringside Angels ........... 28.00 Pitfighter ... ...... ..38.00 Ninja Boy............... ...19.00 power supply Magical Guy 24.00 Runark (growl)..... 3400 Robocodau HHHHHHHHHHHHHH .. .........34.00 Navy Seals .................. .95 Ninja Gaiden.... .....24.00 Strider.. . 24.00 Road Rash ..... .36.00 Roger Rabbit..... Famicom Scart, 2 pads and ds and Outrun... ...24.00 Sonic Hedgehog... ...29.00 Sonic Hedgehog..........34.00 Robocop II. ..24.00 Poker... Super League 91 ...... .24.00 29.00 power supply Streets of Rage... .....37.00 WWF Superstars...........24.00 .95 Put n Putter .19.00* Undeadline......................Call Shadow of the Beast.....39.95 Simpsons ....................24.00 E.D.F...... Space Harrier... ...Call Veritex........................19.00 Shining & Darkness US .42.00 Turrican........................24.00 Sonic Hedgehog .........28.00* Wardner Forest...... 19.00 Star Flight ....................34.00 WWF Superstars..........24.00 Ghouls & Ghosts...........48.00 Shinobi...... 24.00* Wrestle War ...................29.00 Toe Jam & Earl .............37.00 Gamekeeper Holds Lightboy, Hyper Zone ....................38.00 Super Monaco GP........24.00* amplifier, Leads, Batteries, Joe & Mac ......................49.95 Wall of Berlin................24.00 SPECIALS .95 EACH Games ... ................... 28.95 Castlevania ..................48.00 Woody Pop.............. 19.00 Arrow Flash, Bonanza Bros, Crack Down, Dick Tracy, Gain Light Boy (player)..........15.95 3D Form Soccer..............Call Wonderboy............19.00* Ground, Miajong Detective, Mick Dikta Power Football, Battery Pack ................24.95 Thunder Pro...................Call * = UK Cart Available Mega Panel, Outrun, Wardener Forest, Whip Rush Call for other extras 24.00 24.00 .......44.00 SALES HOTLINE (0509) 211799 FAX (0509) 217492 TRADE TEL/FAX (0509) 217492 Postage costs: .50 per order, plus .50 on consoles. Payments excepted for 24hr despatch, Postal Order, Visa, Access, Mastercard. Cheques order are subject to clearance, to speed clearance write address and card details on back and add . Please enquire on part exchange games and console equipment for all consoles. We also supply Master System II, PC Engine, and Commodore CDTV, Please call for more information Customers are required to state Japanese or UK carts when ordering, and that games are compatable with their machines. "


"GALLUP ALL FORMATS HAME BY 1 NE WWF WRESLEMANIA 2 2 THE SIMPSONS TERMINATOR 2 4 NE TURTLES 2 DIZZY COLLECTION FINAL FIGHT LOTUS 2 BIG BOX PITFIGHTER 1013 ROBOCOD 11 14 RAINBOW COLLECTION 124 HEIMDALL 13 NE SOCCER STARS NE TEENAGE TURTLES 15 NE SMASH TV 16 17 JIMMY WHITE'S SNOOKER VIRGIN 6 MAN UTD EUROPE 18 19 BOARD GENUIS 1911 WORLD CLASS RUGBY 2015 CARTOON COLLECTION WWF tops the chart as expected! There's some hefty competition up there, though SO let's see what happens next month! RTS CVG CHARTS CVG CHARTS CVG "


"ATARI ST 1 NEWWF WRESTLEMANIA 2 4 SIMPSONS 3 5 LEMMINGS 4 2 LOTUS 2 5 3 JIMMY WHITE'S 6 NETEENAGE TURTLES 7 1 MICROPROSE GOLF 8 NEDIZZY COLLECTION 9 NERUGBY WORLD CUP 10 NESILENT SERVICE II OCEAN OCEAN PSYGNOSIS GREMLIN VIRGIN MIRRORSOFT MICROPROSE CODEMASTERS DOMARK MICROPROSE AMIGA It's those Wrestlemaniacs again, with Bart doing his thing at second place. Look out for more Turtles-related Japery though, 'cos they'll be hitting hard pretty darned soon! 1 NEWWF WRESTLEMANIA 2 5 SIMPSONS 3 2 ROBOCOD 4 1 HEIMDALL 5 4 LOTUS 2 69 JIMMY WHITE'S 7 NEBATTLE ISLE 8 6 ALIEN BREED 9 NELEANDER 10 3 FIRST SAMURAI OCEAN OCEAN MILLENIUM CORE GREMLIN VIRGIN UBISOFT TEAM 17 PSYGNOSIS MIRORSOFT TS CVG CHARTS CVG CHARTS CVG Yup, WWF does it on Amiga, pushing Simpsons to number 21 Keep your eye on Leander though It came from nowhere and could take the chart by storm! PC ENGINE Just as we suspected, the brilliant conversion of Gradius holds the number one spot. Look out next month for Its brilliant sequels, Salamander and Parodius. New In the chart is a smart conversion of vertical shooter, Ralden Trad, apparently, It's nigh on perfect! GRADIUS 2 RAIDEN TRAD 3 CORYOON 4 MAGICAL CHASE 5 PC KID 2 IS OL I VER THERE? "


"MEGADRIVE Electronic Arts' fabberoony platform adventure takes the coveted top spot and is closely followed by the long awaited John Madden's 92. Creeping in at number five is Madden's only competition, the chock full-o-speech Joe Montana 2! 1 ROBOCOD 2 JOHN MADDEN'S 92 3 F22 GOLDEN AXE 2 5 JOE MONTANA 2 22 ONDERS SERVICES GAME GEAR FotoNinja Gaiden goes straight in at number one, mind you, Game Gear martial artists are hardly spolled for choice, It's either this or GG Shinobi. Galaga 91 makes an unexpected re-entry and the brilliant (Ish) Joe Montana sits tight at number four. 1 NINJA GAIDEN 2 MICKEY MOUSE 3 GALAGA 91 4 JOE MONTANA 5 LEADERBOARD ISDA) RTS CVG CHARTS CVG CHARTS CVG PARE, SCORES 352 YDS EINS  KLIEE LYNX Atarl's Impressive conversion of Stun Runner is the obvious choice for the top slot and it's not surprising with superfast graphics and tons of sampled speech. Stun Runner will certainly turn heads on the bus trip homel Robotron Isn't too shabby elther, although we were a bit concerned about the control method! 1 STUN RUNNER ROBOTTON 3 HARD DRIVIN' 4 VIKING CHILD 5 SCRAPYARD DOG POHER (ES SCORE TI 99 "


"draw... ADSD117 Courtesy of Gremlin Graphics ancy the chance to watch all your favourite films in the comfort of your own bedroom? Want to own one of the spankiest videos ever? Want to tell people to bog off when they try to get their mitts on your wonder machine? Read on... SONY Those great gamesters at Gremlin Graphics are so proud of their forthcoming top gaming treat Video Kid that they're giving away a video to the lucky winner of yet another great CVG compo! It's true our lucky video victor will walk off with one of the fabbiest videos around and be able to tape all that great movie mayhem with a machine worth, wait for it, FIVE HUNDRED POUNDS! As you can see from these screenshots, Video kid is set for stardom as a top treat on Amiga and STs everywhere featuring the adventures of our hero after being sucked into a VCR! YNNNNNNN 2000 1 993 T ** Video Kid awakes to find himself in a video world chock 'a' block full of laffs and surprises. We're seen early demos of the game and it's looking a right old laff. Full review next ish. Anyway, back to the compo. What do you have to do to win this very large slice of video brilliance? It's simple we want you to draw a character for the game. You can draw whatever you like as long as your character fits the style of the game (in other words it's fun!) and looks good. Easy eh? So what are you waiting for? Grab your bits of paper and drawing stuff, draw that brill character and send the whole lot off to: GIMME THAT VID, KID, CVG TOWERS, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. So get your entry in by February 10 and amaze us with your fab Vid Kidness! enter as many times as you like. The Editor's decision is final and don't phone up to find out how you're getting on or Frank will rack up your phone bill with true and interesting stories about boring old Bath Small print: Hey, the type's gone all tiny which means we'd better tell you that all the usual CVG compo rules apply which means you can't enter if you're anything whatsoever to do with Gremlin or CVG or your name's Da. mien Johnston and you live in Harrow-On-The-Hil. Other than that you can "


"Gecommodore AMIGA AMIGA TO ARCADE ACTION GAMES PACK DRINT 1 STAND-ALONE 500 COMPUTER  512K AMIGA .99  TV MODULATOR.......... FREE  MOUSE CONTROLLER .. FREE PLUS! FREE FROM SILICA  ARCADE ACTION PACK .78  PHOTON PAINT 2.0.... .95 TOTAL RRP: .72 YOU SAVE: .72 SILICA PRICE:  PLUS! FREE HOLIDAY ACCOMMODATION WITH 1Mb RAM NEW! CARTOON CLASSICS PACK ARCADE HARDWARE: SOFTWARE PRODUCTIVITY 512K AMIGA 500 1329.99 DELUXE PAINT III .............. .99 A520 TV MODULATOR ........ FREE PLUS! FREE FROM SILICA A501 RAM EXPANSION ....... .99 ARCADE ACTION PACK .... 229.78 OFTWARE ENTERTAINMENT PHOTON PAINT 20 ............. .95 BART SIMPSON. ....... .99 TOTAL RRP: .67 CAPT PLANET & PLANETEERS.... 125.99 YOU SAVE: .67 LEMMINGS 125.99 PLUS! 16 NIGHTS FREE HOLIDAY ACCOMMODATION SILICA PRICE ING W + FREE DELIVERY SILICA PRICE INCLUDES VAT + FREE DELIVERY  FREE! FROM EVERA AMIGA ARCADE ASTION DUTE ..... .99 ARCADE ACTION GAMES PACK The new Arcade Action Games Pack is THE software compendium for Amiga owners, featuring en top titles with a variety of different types of james for you to enjoy. Each title is packaged in ts own plastic case, with a colour sleeve and full nstructions. The Arcade Action Pack is FREE! When you buy your Amiga 500 from Silica. TOTAL FREE PACKAGE ARCADE ACTION PACK .78: Asterix By Coktel Vision Chess Player 2150 By CP Software .... .95 Drivin' Force By Digital Magic ............ .95 Live & Let Die By Elite ... .99 Onslaught By Hewson .99 Pipe Mania By Empire Software ........... .99 Rick Dangerous By Firebird ............... .99 Rock 'n' Roll By Rainbow Arts ..... .99 Skweek By US Gold ...... .99 Trivial Pursuit By Domark. .95 ART PACKAGE .95: Photon Paint 2.0 By Microlllusions .... .95 TOTAL RRP: .73 FREE! WORTH B PHOTON PAINT 2.0 TAG GRAPHICS PACKAGE Every Amiga 500 from Silica Systems comes with a FREE Photon Paint 2.0 (RRP .95), one of the most advanced art packages available for the Amiga. With it, you will be able to harness the extraordinary graphics power of the Amiga and produce Inspirational pictures in minutes. With 4096 solours, your pictures will reach lifeike appearance. These can be Inimated in real-time using a vast ange of graphical effects, including Blending colours and dithering. stencils, shadowing. WORTH contour mapping and 589 05 surface mapping. 20 16 NIGHTS HOLIDAY HOTEL ACCOMMODATION Every Amiga from Silica comes with a FREE 72 page, full colour brochure with accommodation vouchers. These vouchers entitle 2 people to stay up to 16 nights in one hotel (or any number of hotels to a total of 16 nights) with accommodation FREE (you could take up to six nights for four people, or other options). Choose from the 250 hotels featured in the catalogue. All you have to pay for are your meals (prices are listed in the brochure). Reduced rates in top London hotels and hotels in France are also featured. FREE! WORTH NEARLY: PLUS! FREE HOLIDAY ACCOMMODATION  SILICA SYSTEMS OFFER YOU MAIL ORDER: 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Tel: 081-309 1111 Order Lines Open: Mon-Sat Om-.00pm No Late Night Opening Fax No DOC OROS LONDON SHOP: 52 Tottenham Court Road, London, W1P OBA Tel: 071-580 4000 Opening Hours Mon-Sat 9.30am-6.00pm Late Night Thursday until Bpm Fax No: 071-323 4737 LONDON (SELFRIDGES): 1st Floor, 369 Oxford Street, London, W1A 1AB Tel: 071-629 1234 Late Night Thursday until pm Ask for extension 3914 SIDCUP SHOP: 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Tel: 081-302 8811 Opening Hours Mon-Sat 9.00AM5300 Late Night: Friday until 7pm FREE OVERNIGHT COURIER DELIVERY: On all hardware orders shipped in the UK TECHNICAL SUPPORT HELPLINE: Team of Amiga technical experts at your service PRICE MATCH: We normally match competitors on a \"Same product Same price basis ESTABLISHED 12 YEARS: Proven track record in professional computer sales. BUSINESS + EDUCATION + GOVERNMENT: Volume discounts available for large orders. SHOWROOMS: Demonstration and training facilities at our London & Sidcup branches THE FULL STOCK RANGE: All of your Amiga requirements from one supplier. FREE CATALOGUES: Will be mailed to you with offers and software/peripheral details. PAYMENT: By cash, chaque and all major credit cards. fefore you decide when to buy your new Amiga computer, we suggest you think very carefully about VHERE you buy it. Consider what it will be like a few months after buying your Amiga, when you may squire additional peripherals or software, or help and advice with your new purchase. And, will the ompany you buy from contact you with details of new products? At Silica Systems, we ensure that Du will have nothing to worry about. We have been established for over 12 years and, with our unrivall d experience and expertise, we can now claim to meet our customers requirements with an understanling which is second to none. But don't just take our word for it. Complete and return the coupon now or our latest Free literature and begin to experience the \"Silica Systems Service To: Silica Systems Ltd, Dept CVG-0991-60, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX PLEASE SEND FREE AMIGA COLOUR CATALOGUE Mr/Mrs/Ms: ........... Initials: .............. Surname: Address: ...... MAIL ORDER HOTLINE 081-309\" 1111 Postcode: ...... SILICA SYSTEMS Which computers), if any, do you own? ............................................ ........................ ESDE Advertised prices and specifications may change presse return the coupon for the West Information "


"REVIEW FIGHTING MEGADRIVE BY TRECO  VA HACKI Two Megadrive beat 'em ups thumped their way into the office just in time for this issue, so we thought we'd put them head to head in another CVG slap-up special. Which one comes out on top? Read on and find out! SIMPLE BUT FUN! Fighting Masters couldn't be simpler: choose your fighter and slug it out with either a computer-controlled opponent or a chum for two-player lafts. There are few rules and the match is over when one of you is chewing the dirt. Simple and fun! go on, Goldrock! Give 'im hell! STREETFIGHTING AGAIN? It has to be said: Fighting Masters is the closest yet to the thrills 'n' spills of Streetfighter on the Megadrive. The influence is obvious, but the game is much simpler than the arcade classic. Fine try, though! A Medusa's got a \"crush\" on Goldrock. Take two fighting masters, put them into an Iarena and let them scrap it out! There can be only one winner, with no points at all for second place. Nothing matters except victory and at any cost. That's Fighting Masters for you, the game which pits you against a wide variety of opponents in all sorts of mystical places. Discover your secret moves, plan your tactics and let rip as your opponent attempts to do exactly the same. In this sport only the toughest survive, so have you got what it takes to be top of the pile? LARRY: A human from Earth, our Larry's a real muscle man with plenty of stamina and speed. Great at fisticuffs, but lacking way-out skills. FLAMER: Hot from planet Odd, this guy can breath fire and pack a pretty powerful punch as well. Good at attack but pretty poor on de. fensive moves. CHOOSE YOUR HERO! Fighting Masters features no less than 12 individual scrap. ping champs, each with their own special charcateristics Here they are: ELEPHA: Champion of the planet Mega, Elepha's a big old boy who knows how to use his weight to full effect. Tends to be a bit slow at times, though. MORIN: Hailing from the planet lona, she may be a girlie but Morin sure knows how to pack a punch with the pair of fighting sticks she carries. Swift and agile, but not too strong BEOWOLF: Straight from the planet Orion, Beowolf has the deadliest fingers in the business they're made of steel blades! As a special move he can turn himself into a spinning blade, but is surprisingly easy to dust. Hurrah! Here's a pretty nifty one-on-one scrapping game on the Megadrive, and it works really well! Obviously influenced by Streetfighter, this is basically a stripped down version of everybody's fave arcade thumper and I have to say it works very well. Graphics are fine, sound's a tad whiffy, but gameplay has been well designed for maximum laffs. In one player mode the game can become a tad samey, but find a chum to fight with and this cart really takes off! Everyone will fine their own favourite character (mine's Dio!) and perfect their skills to take on all comers. When people start yelling while they play you know the game's a good 'un and if one player mode was more fun this game would definitely score a CVG Hit! As it is, it's the tops in two-player mode and guaranteed lafts for fist fighting pals everywhere! TIM BOONE MEGADRIVE GRAPHICS 80 SOUNDS 81 PLAYABILITY 95 LASTABILITY 91 OVERALL "


"REVIEW MEGADRIVE  An unusual twist, I supWHERE ARE pose monsters in a wrestling ring. Perhaps a clever THE ROPES? way to jump on the whole wrestling games bandwa No ropes cordon off this gon. It's just a pity that wrestling ring it's electrified! Beast Warriors is a pile of Throw your opponent onto old crap. Nothing about it the invisible force field and Is remotely exciting. The he's toasted for a couple of BY RIOT graphics, although looking seconds before falling unconquite nice in these static screenshots, animate sciously to the floor: just the pathetically and the shadows beneath them are right time to give 'im a damn M onsters generally get a bad press. Porta complete joke: they flicker and they're all good kicking! Vrayed for centuries as slavering, brainexactly the same size and shape! Sound is If you think the music during less killing machines hasn't done much for pretty atrocious, especially the in-game tunes the game is a bit on the poor their publicity. In fact, they're an intelligent which are completely ill-fitting. Gameplay is bunch, who vent their anger not by stomping dull, simplistic and annoying in equal parts. Half out a few of these beastly around eating prehistoric man, but by climbthe time the monsters don't seem to respond to tunes and play them at full ing into a ring for a bit of a wrestle. Grab that the controls and I simply couldn't be bothered blast! Get It On T Rex. CroJoypad and become one of a variety of these to sit around and find out what the other half codile Rock Elton John. I'll massive maulers, taking on the challenge of was like. Actually, Beast Warriors has made me Be There The Four Tricflooring your beastly opponent before he gets feel quite ill, so I don't want to write any more era Tops. American Pie Pter the bett the better of you. Choose your fighter from a about it. anoDon Maclean. Anything wide selection, then take to the ring and, well, PAUL RAND by Des O Connor 'cos all beat ten shades out of the poor thing in front his stuff is monstrously bad. of you. Couldn't be easier. Honest. This ring's electrifying! BEAST WARRIORS A He'd better move and fast! TOMAHAWK: Head hombre on planet Birdy, Tomahawk's a top-flight scrapper who's king in the air but not so hot on the ground. Watch out for his swooping attack of doom! DIO: Fresh from the planet Tree, Dio's the sensation of the sport. He may be a poxy little plant, but he's brilll With his snapping jaws he can ac tually eat his opponents for lunch, and we think he's fab! GOLDROCK: Top of the pile on planet Raitan, Goldrock's one tough hombre made out of stone! He's fairly slow, though, and doesn't have too many moves at his disposal. MEDUSA: Hero of the planet Golgon, Medusa may be fat but he's fit as welll Lumbering around the screen, he can suddenly change into a spinning wheel of death from which there is no escape! EYESIGHT: Top man on planet Cyprus, Eyesight's boxing skills know no bounds. Great with his fists he's not much good anywhere else. ZAYGUNTE: Screaming in from the planet Sushi, where he's king lobster, Zrygunte knows how to grab his foe in a pincer grip of doom! Trouble is, if he misses he's wide open to attack! Oh dear... DRASON: Hotshot of the planet Rulgus, Drason the dragon's another with an un canny talent for blowing fire out of his gobl Make sure to time your attacks or he'll burn your botty... The ugliest monster of them all! UPDATE Beast Warrior shouldn't be available for any other system. Thank heavens for that! MEGADRIVE GRAPHICS 36 SOUNDS PLAYABILITY LASTABILITY OVERALL 26 THANKS... ...to Console Concepts (0782 712759) for the revien cartridges "


"ARCADE ACTION VOWZA! Arcade king Jaz Rignall pulls on This double-strength thermal undies and fights his way through the snow to track down all the latest and greatest on the coinop scene! Could those pants take the pace? Read on and find out! irst there was Pang. Then there was Super Pang. Now the third game in Mitchell Corporation's popular series has arrived Tumble Pop. Once again it's a one or twoplayer single screen platform game, but this time instead of busting balloons, it's hoover. ing the enemy into submission that's the order of the day... VACUUM ANTICS MULTIHOOVERED BONUS BADDIES Hoovering up and spitting out one baddie at a time is the safest way to play, but you end up with a rubbish score. Tumble Pop experts hoover and store as many baddies as possible and when the vacuum is about to explode eject them out all over the screen. The result of all this dangerous tomfoolery is a large points bonus, plus any hidden items on that particular screen being uncovered, which could mean more points or even powerThe two heroes are armed with vacuum cleaners with which to suck up the baddies. Once hoovered, they can be destroyed by ejecting them back out. The vacuum can store an unlimited amount of baddies, and the more you suck up, the more points you get. The problem is that they can only be stored for a few seconds, and if you don't eject them quickly it explodes and costs you a life! The object is to simply hoover up all the baddies on that particular level, and once done take on and defeat the end-of-level boss, with the ultimate aim of beating the Boss boss on the final level. ups! "


"POWER UP SEPED UP I love Pang and Super Pang, and this sequel is just as much fun! Hoovering up the baddies and then spitting them out all over the screen is a real laugh, and finding all the hidden bonuses as well as beating the seven shades out of all the different bosses is both challenging and very addictive. It's this aspect that keeps you playing the game you seem to find something new every time! The graphics and sound are both excellent, but really it's the simple, but horribly addictive gameplay that makes this one of the most fun coin-ops seen in a long time. Let's hope we see home conversions soon; in the meantime, get down to your local arcade and pump some coins into this -quick! JULIAN RIGNALL POWER-UP CENTRAL There are loads of powerBarups to collect, including speed-ups, super hoover power, a force shield, stun gun and a hyper cleaner a massive hoover which comes down from the skies 10pand decimates every baddie on screen! CRYSTAL PARERE FANER ALPHABET DOIN MONEY RUBY RUBY DIAMOND ALL AROUND THE WORLD Like its predecessors, Tumble Pop's baddie bashing is set across the globe. Starting off at the South Pole, the player travels to Moscow, Paris, New York, Fuji-Yama, Egypt, Peru and finally Australia which is infested with baddies from Caveman Ninja! GRAPHICS SOUNDS PLAYABILITY LASTABILITY OVERALL  OVERALL 72% What I want to know is how the hell do you pronounce the name of this latest horizontally scrolling blaster from konami? Is it zeh-zex, or should it be ex-ex-ex, or even zeks-ex? However you say it, the name is definitely the most original thing about the game! The scenario isn't really important, since what it boils down to is a scroll along, power-up, beat the end-ol-level boss routine, which, while it's fun hardly taxes your shoot 'em up skills. It's very similar to all the other hundreds of games in the genre, and apart from some lovely graphics and some thumping tunes, there's nothing here to keep you putting in more than a few coins. DATE GREASER 61931 KON ALL RIGHTS RESERVED PLESEE INSERT COIN CREDIT "


"ARCADE ACTION STAR TREK STAR TREK STAR TREK PINBALL OVERALL 86% This year that most famous of science fiction television programmes. Star Trek, celebrates is 25th anniversary. And as you can imagine, there'll be reunions, memorabilia, commemorative items and special conventions to celebrate the grand occasion. One such commemorative item is this new pinball table, which packs a fabulously drawn and brilliantly designed playfield and more speech and music from the television series than you think could possibly be squeezed into a pin table! It's one of the best pintables I've seen in a long time and should keep silverball fans short of change for quite some time. But what I want to know is. will there be an arcade game? Sega produced a vector graphic Star Trek game in 1983 which was pretty good using today's technology it could be updated into something really special! If there's any news on that front, you'll be the first to know. 090 "


"Commodore CDTV INTERACTIVE MULTIMEDIA THE WORLD'S FIRST MULTIMEDIA SYSTEM FOR THE HOME A New Age In Home Entertainment And Education Are you bored with the TV? Do you yearn for something a little more interesting, something which stimulates the old grey matter and indulges your desire to be entertained? Enter the Commodore CDTV, the world's first advanced learning and entertainment system which plugs straight into your television. Based upon the familiar compact disc player, the CDTV offers a rich set of information and communication capabilities. It brings together pictures, words and sounds in a new format, joining them together in a fascinating world of audio visual challenge and experience. The multimedia CDTV player combines a professional CD audio system, advanced computer technology and infra red remote control, to offer a wide variety of interactive applications. These range from games, music, gardening and personal health, to educational discs for any level. In addition, CDTV provides high quality audio reproduction for existing music CDs. CDTV is very easy to use and gives you total control over what you see and hear, offering you the chance to learn new skills and discover hidden talents  CDTV finds its place alongside the TV and HI-FI FOR EDUCATION system in the home. It is similar in appearance to exFor young children learning to read can isting video and CD players and, with its infra red be an adventure! In the title Cinderella, remote control, is just as simple to operate. But that's for example, they can use the remote just the beginning. CDTV transforms television from control unit to click on words and pica passive to an active medium. The vast storage tures to hear pronunciations, syllables, capabilities of the CD make it an ideal mass informaEDUCATION definitions and second language translation provider, capable of storing and tions. And learning about the world can be fun too. displaying a combination of colour picThe World Vista Atlas provides detailed fures, text, graphics, voice and stereo information in words and pictures on the music of the highest quality. CDTV offers history, architecture, language and a new realm of audio and visual exgeography of each country. This can be perience for everyone. ENTERTAINMENT cross referenced to compare with details of other countries. REFERENCE FOR REFERENCE FOR FUN For the classical There is a wide range of entermusic buff it is tainment titles available for every possible not only to age-group. Sherlock Holmes, hear Beethoven's Consulting Detective, includes a Fifth Symphony, but video and audio tour of Victorian MUSIC to see the orchestra London. Players can choose perform, follow the score and suspects for Holmes and Watson read about the composer's life to interrogate and can search and times. The Timetable of issues of the London Times for Science and Innovation walks you clues. A CDTV disc's graphics through 6,250 key events in sciencapabilities take action and tific history. It employs animated simulation games to a new level. maps to show where every event Falcon makes you a pilot of an occurred and a visual lift-off from F-16 fighter and has accurate the earth's surface. Key events Simulations of weapons systems, are accompanied by audio cockpit controls and flight charpresentations with graphics and acteristics allowing you to zoom sound recordings from the archives of the world's like the ultimate stunt pilot with extraordinary realism. great museums. Browse quickly or examine an exhibit in detail. FOR HOBBIES CDTV can also enhance your personal FOR COLLEGES & BUSINESS interests. The Gardenfax Series is When Toyota, decided to open a car assembly plant designed for use by novice or expert and in Derby, Derbyshire County Council commissioned provides hundreds of full colour illustrathe production of Japan World', a CDTV title which tions, as well as information on planting allows students to explore and exPERIODICALS and requirements for care perience the Japanese language, New Basics Cookbook provides full collifestyle and culture. It also provides a our illustrations of recipes, \"talks' to you valuable insight to businessmen with into offer tips as you cook and automaticalformation on Japanese business ly substitutes recipes with a click of the PRODUCTIVITY philosophy and negotiation protocol. I remote control CDTV offers a seemingly endless range of possibilities for learning, entertainment and enrichment for everyone whether in the home, the classroom or in business. INCLUDING VAT & DELIVERY Order ref: CCD 1000 FREE TITLES! With every CDTV from Silica, you will receive: WELCOME A GUIDE TO CDTV The 'Welcome' disc replaces a weighty printed manual with colourful and exciting animation, sound, voices and text. LEMMINGS WORTH: .99 Up to 100 loveable Lemmings drop in to over 100 screens full of danger in this best selling arcade classic HUTCHINSON'S ENCYCLOPEDIA WORTH: .99 The first British multi-media encyclopedia. It features over 1.8 million words, 700 biographies, 2000 pictures, 150 maps from ITN and 200 audio samples from the BBC sound archives FREE HOLIDAY HOTEL ACCOMMODATION Every CDTV from Silica comes with a FREE 72 page colour brochure with accommodation vouchers. These vouchers entitie 2 people to up to 16 nights FREE hotel accommodation (other options allow 4 people to stay up to 6 nights). There are also accommodation offers on hotels in London and France MAIL ORDER: 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Tel: 081-309 1111 Order Lines Open Mon-Salam 600pm No Late Night Opening Fax No: 061-308 0608 LONDON SHOP: 52 Tottenham Court Road, London, W1P OBA Tel: 071-580 4000 Opening Hours Mon-Sat 9.30am 6.00pm No Late Night Opening Fax No: 071-323 4737 LONDON SHOP: Selfridges (1st Floor, Oxford Street, London, W1A 1AB Tel: 071-629 1234 Opening Hours Mon-Sat 0.30am-8.00pm Late Night: Thursday not bpm Extension: 3914 SIDCUP SHOP: 1.4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Tel: 081-302 8811 Fax No: 081-300 0017 SILICA SYSTEMS OFFER YOU  FREE OVERNIGHT DELIVERY: On all CDTV players shipped in the UK mainland,  TECHNICAL SUPPORT HELPLINE: Team of technical experts at your service.  PRICE MATCH: We normally match competitors on a \"Same product. Same price'' basis  ESTABLISHED 12 YEARS: Proven track record in sales and service.  BUSINESS + EDUCATION GOVERNMENT: Volume discounts available for large orders.  SHOWROOMS: Demonstration and training facilities at our London & Sidcup branches  THE FULL STOCK RANGE: All of your requirements from one supplier  FREE CATALOGUES: Will be mailed to you with offers and product details . PAYMENT: By cash, cheque, all major credit cards, or extended payment plan RETURN THE COUPON FOR A FULL COLOUR To: Silica Systems, Dept CVG-1291-71, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup. Kent, DA14 4DX PLEASE SEND ME A CDTV CATALOGUE Mr Mrs/MS: ........Initials:............ Surname: ........ Address: Postcode: CDTV CATALOGUE SILICA 081-309 1111 SYSTEMS Tel (Home): Tel (Work): .. MAIL ORDER HOTLINE Company Name Gif applicable): Which computer(s), if any, do you own? ....... EIGE Advertised price we specificat "


"SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS Baca face fa F R E E MI C ROS E L L A D S ! ! ! (Well nearly) To make it much easier for you to place your classified ad in your favourite mag we've opened up a phone line. If you have something to sell or swap all you have to do is dial the number, follow the instructions, and chill out! Your ad will appear in the very next issue. No need to mess about with envelopes, and sending money just pick up the phone and dial that number...... ... What are you waiting for! a la THE MICROSELLS THE MICROSELLS cont. THE MICROSELLS cont. d e la boc c a la la la la la la la la la la la AMIGA GAMES for sale; Back to the Future II. PC ENGINE PAL with 15 games, 5 player adaptor FOR SALE Sega Gamegear with 4 games, will sell Shadow of the Beast II, Knightbreed, Joe Blade, and 2 control pads. For  ono. Tel: 0329 for  or swap for Sega Master System with at Crowd Kingdoms, Days of Thunder, Kid Gloves. 231537 after 5pm least 6 games. Phone Fareham 0329 230600 ask  each of  for the lot. Ring: 051 426 2873 ask FOR SALE Atari STFM 1040, double sided disk for Robin for Steve after 5pm drive, joystick, over 30 games, mouse and mouse PC ENGINE FOR SALE with Chase HQ, NINTENDO COMPUTER for sale.  + 5 pad. Worth over , will sell for . Phone: Wonderboy II, Dungeon Master and Legendary games Mario Bros 2, Robocop, World Cup 0744 883332 Axe. . Phone: 0742 589353, Richard Football, Turtles and Black Manta. Ring: 0992 SWAP 5 top Amstard games for 4 good Amstrad (Sheffield) 552714 ask for Simon games. Would prefer Transformers and any SEGA MEGADRIVE for sale, including joysticks WANTED Hero's Quest by Sierra for the Amiga, Spiderman game. Contact Omar after 4pm on: and joypads, just a few months old with 5 top great game must be Hero's Quest, not Quest for Glory 1. 526611 in Armagh games, batch of magazines and a japanese Will swap with Quest for Glory 1 or buy it. Phone FOR SALE Amstrad CPC 464 green screen, can convertor. All of this for only  ono. Tel: 081 Jamie on: 081 462 4719 get modulator, computer in very good conditionwith 440 0869 MEGADRIVE FOR SALE, sell for  with 7 top over  worth of games inculding History in the SEGA MASTER SYSTEM with 4 games, 2 games or swap for Super Famicom with at least 2 Making. Technocop. Sell for . + Computer controllers and a gun for sale. . Phone games. Call Richard on: 081 857 5635 desk for sale VGC for only . Or Buy computer Charles Thomlinson on: 691 0041. Broxley SE4 FOR SALE Light Gun for Nintendo Duck Hunt, and desk for . Tel Ed on: 0977 798921 after ATARI STFM with  worth of games, swap for will accept any reasonable offer. Please phone: Bpm Megadrive with 4 or 5 games. Phone Luke on: 051 678 8268 if interested and ask for Richard MEGADRIVE for sale, excellent contaction, still 0494 528592 after 4.30pm SEGA MEGADRIVE FOR SALE with Sonic the boxed, 2 months old, with Sonic, Dick Tracy. SPECTRUM -3 Ideal gift, light gun, joystick, dust Hedgehog. Joypad and Stereo headphones. All for Altered Beast and Revenge of Shinobi, a Bargain cover, boxed games including Batman, the amazing price of . If interested please call at . Phone Daniel on: 0626 55650 Ghostbusters II, Terminator II, Robocop and many Simon on: 0260 297558 SEGA MASTER SYSTEM Still boxed including more individual games. Around 200 games, all in AMSTRAD CPC 464 for sale, colour monitor, Control Stick, light phaser, and 18 games including good condition. Worth around , offers around joystick and over 100 games + magazines. All for Golden Axe, Psycho Fox, Rastan, Wonderbou III . Phone: 5288835 ask for Brad  ono. Phone: 021 423 3371 ask for Mark etc. . Ask for Dale on: 021 526 4037 COMMDORE 64 for sale,  worth of games. ATARI 520 STFM discovery pack, second disk OLD MODEL C84 cassette player, monitor, printer, swap for Gameboy with games. Or sell for  drive, quickshot python 1m joystick,  worth for disk drive, 2 jet fighter joysticks + over  worth ono. Phone: 081 429 0989 ask for Carl software, dust covers, disk box, accessories, 10 of software including many blockbuster games, + SWAP Blockout for Bare Knuckle, or Streets of months old, all boxed. Worth , Sell for  word processor and complete contol system for the Rage. Call Shanaz on: 061 366 0675 after 4pm ono. Phone: 0553 762686 after 6pm C64 worth , sell for . Ring Ed on: 0472 GAMEBOY for sale including Gamelight. COMMODORE 64C light fantastic pack, light gun, 840359 for details magnifier, carry cases and 2 games. Worth  joystick, some software, never used. All boxed. SEGA MASTER SYSTEM + includes light phaser, sell for . Phone: 0256 782322 Sell for  ono. Phone: 0553 762686 after 6pm control pads, 2 built in games + 3 additional GAMEBOY GAMES for sale, including Double WANTED Gameboy. Will pay  max. Call Nick games. Very good condition.  ono. Call: 0753 Dragon, Batman, Operation C and others. Sell for on: 04022 26854 886968. (Gerrards Cross)  each. Phone: 0256 782322 SWAP your megadrive games for mine. Interested NINTENDO ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM with 2 ENGLISH MEGADRIVE 11 months guarantee, phone: 0292 43555 for details. Games must have games, Turtles and Super Mario Bros II, 2 pads, John Maddens, Streets of Rage, Spiderman, instructions. brilliant condition. Still boxed only 6 months old. A Altered Beast, Wrestle War, extra pad. . Tel: COMMODORE 64 for sale, with 2 joysticks, lots of Bargain at . Tel: 0332 551196 0272 515582 or swap for an Amiga ask for Peter games and accessories, reset cartridge, fast load PC ENGINE for sale (Scart) 3 games, joypad. Very A BOY AND HIS BLOB (The Rescue of Princess and action replay cartridges, worth . Sell for good condition. Still boxed. 2 Japanese PC Engine Blobette) for the Nintendo Gameboy. . Tel: 081  ono. Also disk drive, good condition, with magazines. Sell for  ono. If interested ring: 908 0517 many games. Only  ono. Phone Ben on: 02230795 420962 ask for Des after 6pm (Sittingbourne) COMMODORE C64 for sale, 149 games, 2 834572 BOXED GAMEGEAR 2 games, excellent condition joysticks, 2 light guns and the computer. Ring: 504 SEGA MEGADRIVE for sale, 1 joypad, 10 games AC Adaptor. Sell for . Phone: 0923 31894 3993 ask for Glen including: Sonic the Hedgehog, PGA Tour Golf and SWAP my Gameboy for Atari Lynx. Gameboy has SPECTRUM 48K games for sale. 12 good games Castle of Illustion. . Contact Chris on: 0923 5 games, carry case. Tel: 0724 783004 for only  +  P&P. Phone Ross on: 823245 213672 PACK OF 17 Amiga games for sale brand new. between 4 and 7pm NINTENDO SUPER FAMICOM PAL+6 top rated Including RVF Honda, Kid Gloves and Microprose WANTED Atari Lynx 1 or 2 with 4 or more games. games, swap for Amiga and games or Megadrive Soccer.  ono. Phone: 0283 214768 after Call: 081 950 3719 ask for Jamsie Boy and games. Tel: 0352 715377 5.30pm SEGA GAME GEAR + Master Gear Adaptor, 5 FOR SALE 16 Commodore games and 7 Amstrad games, Shinobi, Mickey Mouse, Hastle Gobey. games.  each or all for . Contact Steven on: carry case for a Gameboy, swap for any Nintendo Wonderboy and California Games. Cost , sell 622 8658 games. Contact Jason on: 081 670 4628 after for . Ring: 0634 681298 ask for Peter NINTENDO SUPER FAMICOM PAL Never used, 4pm weekdays, or all day on weekends SEGA MASTER SYSTEM Light gun, rapid fire unwanted gift, with 2 games. Will swap for PC 6 FT SNOOKER TABLE with 2 cues, a spider, all unit, 2 control pads + 9 great games. . Tel: Engine GT, for sell for . Contact Dean on: 081 balls, chalk and a triangle. Good condition, still 0306 B82809 907 1876 boxed. A bargain at . Tel: 0332 551196 GAMEBOY with 10 games including Batman, Golf NINTENDO for sale, 2 pads, 4 games, Turtles, POWER TURBO 33 ROLLER BOOTS Size 9, with and Mario Land headphones and 2 player lead. Double Dragon II, Snake, Rattle and Roll, Hockey socks, S&S bearings, excellent condition. Will sell for  ono. Tel: 0704 65465 ask for Paul Probotector. Boxed. Bargain at . Will send with box. A bargain at . Tel: 0332 551194 WANTED Sega Megadrive games will pay  recorded delivery +  P&P. Phone: 0538 304595 COMMODORE 64 for sale, over 14 games, 1 Bach. Phone: 0253 875957 (You have to send the GAMEBOY for sale, with 8 games, gamelight, Joystick, 1 data recorder, good condition. Sell for games) magnifier, carry cases. Worth , sell for  . Phone: 0493 377458 ask for Lee FOR SALE NES Nintendo with 5 games, including Call Richard on: 0256 782322 FOR SWAP 100 commodore 64 games for Super Mario Bros 3 and advantage joystick and 2 NINTENDO ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM with 2 commodore disk drive or Gameboy. Phone controllers, . Phone Chris on: 0507 527559 joypads, excellent condition, still boxed, 3 great Seamus Smith on: 0861 527538 for detials SWAP Gameboy with 5 games including Mario games including Section Z. Worth  sell for and Double Dragon. Will swap for Gamegear with . Contact Medway 684991. Please ring after a games or Megadrive with a game. If interested 5pm la la la la la la la la la la la la la 18 & & & & & & & & & & & & & & & & & & & & "


"BUS.& & & & & & & & & & & & & & & & 8 8 878787 DIAL. ANA D NUMBER 0 8 3 9 5 0 0 8 4 8 PARA O MEMBER Calls cost 34p (Cheap rate) and 45p (all other times) per minute. If you don't pay the phone bill ask for permission THE MICROSELLS cont. THE MICROSELLS cont. THE MICROSELLS cont. SPECTRUM GAMES  worth will sell for  FOR SALE Spectrum 128K with over 60 games FOR SALE Panasonic Impact 24 dot matrix ono. Will need to pick up from Leeds. Also Sega including Rainbow Islands, Bubble Bobble and printer. KXP1124. 1 year old.  ono. Phone: Master System 12 cartridges, sell for  ono. New Zealand Story. All this for . Tel: 0483 0752 790729 ask for Nick Contact Chris on: 0532 326286 760591 (Woking) GAMEBOY FOR SALE 16 top titles including OFFICIAL UK MEGADRIVE arcade power stick PC ENGINE GAMES for sale, Motoroder, foreign games. Magnifier, Light boy, boxed as new Sonic, Mickey Mouse, PGA Golf, Populous, Super Dungeon Explorer and Wonderboy.  each worth . Will sell for  ono. Tel Liam on: Monaco, World Cup, James Pond, Golden Axe, Excellent condition. You send cash, I will send 0935 891378 Altered Beast. All for  ono. Phone Pete on: games. Phone Michael on: 0538 304595 AMIGA GAMES FOR SALE Predator 2, Back to 0296 67293 WANTED Amiga in good condition with some the Future 2, Knightbreed, Narc, Shadow of the COMMODORE C64 for sale, 2 joysticks, 2 software. Willing to pay around . Tel: 0282 Beast 2, 10 demo disks. The whole lot for  or lightguns and 149 games. Asking price . Call: 696033 will sell individually for  each or will swap for a 5043993 ask for Glen COMMODORE 64 for sale includes datacassette, Megadrive. 47 Clarence Road, Teddington. Tel: ATARI ST 25 games, 3 joysticks, 4 player adaptor. all loads and 53 games. Worth  will sell for 081 977 9138 ask for Richard Tel: 0869 240495 or swap for Super Famicom . Phone Neil on: 0642 581241 SWAP Japanese Shadow Dancer and Ringside ATARI ST520FM discovery pack, second disk ATARI STFM double sided disk drive with joystick Angel for any games (swap both for Rainbow drive, quickshot python 1m joystick,  worth of and mouse, lots of games including Kick Off 2. Islands) Outrun for sale for Master System  box, accessories, 10 black and white TV. All boxed  only. Phone ono. Prefer local swaps or around Middlesex area. months old. All boxed worth . Sell for  Antony on: 051 339 0733 Phone: 0344 778248 ask for Matthew ono.Phone: 0553 762686 after 6pm FOR SALE Megadrive and Amiga. Both for . COMMODORE 64 CONSOLE for sale comes with GAMEBOY for sale, 5 games include Mario Contact Matthew on: 0462 686052 7 games including, Batman, Navy Seals, Robocop Batman and Spiderman. All boxed, . Worth WANTED Sega Game Gear cheap. Phone: 0272 2 and Flimbos Quest, 2 joysticks. Worth . Sell . Contact Adam on: 0205 356939 734181 for -. Contact James on: 0788 561820 TO SWAP Monaco GP, Golden Axe, EA Ice COMMODORE 64 for sale, over 80 games, light BARGAIN Game Gear + 3 games including Hockey, John Maddens American Football, Hellire, fantastic pack, boxed as new. Ring : 0437 765087 Mickey Mouse and Wonderboy + Lynx with 5 Sonic the Hedgehog and Castle of Illusion. Will COMMODORE 64 computer console for sale, 200 games including Blue Lightening. Gauntlet 3 swap for any other Megadrive games. Please provisional games, 3 joysticks, all in perfect Rampage and Paperboy.  or swap for phone:061 431 5825 condition.  ono. Phone: 021 704 3155 Famicom with 2 games (TV Version) Contact Matt SWAP my Gameboy for Atari Lynx or Game Gear HANHELD PC ENGINE in superb condition with 4 on: 081 670 2432 weekdays after 6.30pm or Sell for . Call: 0724 78300 ask for Rob games including Jackie Chan and Formation COMMODORE 64 for sale, 1 joystick, 1 data COMMODORE 64 for sale with tape dock, over 50 Soccer.  ono. Phone: 0708 754140 recorder, over 40 great games. Sell for  ono.or games and magazines + 2 joysticks. Will sell for SWAP Super Famicom scart with 3 games, Super swap for Gameboy + games. Phone: 0493 377458  ono. Will also sell games seperately. Tel: Mario 4, Final Fight and Gradius 3, will swap for after 4pm ask for Lee 081 949 4087 Neo Geo with game. Ring Simon: 0889 847732 ATARI ST games for sale, all originals with box FOR SALE Sega Master System and joypad 3 SPECTRUM +3 disk drive includes Multiface 3, 5 and instructions, Batman , Knightbreed , Star games Wonderboy III, Teddy Boy and Sonic the disks full of games, cassette recorder,  worth of Wars Trilogy  + many more. Phone Rory on: Hedgehog. 5 months old, good condition. Phone gamos on tape, 2 manuels, joystick. Bargain  071609 0844 Elliot after 4pm on: 081 809 2782 ono. Contact David on: 0222 862330 AMMACO free style BMX for sale, competition SEGA MASTER SYSTEM with 2 games, California WANTED NES with 2 control pads and 2 games frame, MX Brakes, original pads, bought for over games and Galaxy Force. . Phone David on: for under . Phone Kate on: 081 398 9375 . Sell for . Slight repair needed to saddle. 084421 2303 MASTER SYSTEM+Light Phaser, 9 games, 2 Phone Rory on: 071 609 0844 FOR SALE Gameboy, all original packaging. joypads, a  joystick Games include Golden AMSTRAD CPC 484 colour monitor and 2 supplied with 8 games, gamelight and carry case. Axe, Mickey Mouse, R-Type, Rampage, Rocky. joysticks,  worth of games including Worth over . Sell for . Call Stuart on: Worth . Sell for . Ring: 0823 413089 Wonderboy and Mini Office 2. Worth over , 0483 422639 after 6pm ask for James Sell for  or swap for an Amiga. Ring: 0734 PC ENGINE portable, mint condition, 3 games all AMSTRAD CPC 64 with colour monitor and 842829 boxed. Worth , sell for  or swap for joystick, excellent condition. Includes over  AMSTRAD CPC 464 with colour monitor and Megadrive + games and . Call Chris on:0527 worth of software. Will sell at a Bargain at  joystick.  worth of software. All in good 510554 ono. If interested please phone: 021 475 7602 condition. The price is . Tel: 0403 790342 ATARI 520ST boxed as new, various manuels, 20 SEGA MEGADRIVE in brand new condition, with 2 SUPER FAMICOM for sale (scart) 4 games games, 2 joysticks,  ono. Ring Darren on: joypads and 5 great games including Golden Axe including UN Squadron. 2 joypads and PSU. . 0905 427013 (Worcester) and Ghouls and Ghosts.  or swap for Phone: 0703 676739 ask for Jim GAMEBOY for sale, unwanted present, 5 games, Commodore Amiga. Phone: 0708 754140 SEGA GAME GEAR with Mickey Mouse, Super 2 player adaptor, 4 player adaptor, headphones, COMMODORE 64 40 games, 1 joystick, cassette Monaco GP, Mains Adaptor. All for  ono. illuminator light and case which holds the lot. deck, good condition. . Phone Swansea 0792 Phone Simon on: 081 304 7440 Worth . Sell for .99 ono. Contact Lee on: 401419 after 4pm URGENTLY WANTED Lynx games, Gate of 0206 763097 SWAP Gameboy with 3 games, and 2 player link + Zendocon, Paperboy, California Games, NINTENDO NES for sale or swap for Gamegear  for English Megadrive with 2 games. Or sell Electrocop and Tinball Shuffle. Will pay up to  with at least 4 games. Phone Lee on: 0670 355537 for . Phone: 081 398 9375 ask for Gareth per game. If interested dial:0706 81733 ask for SWAP Master System with 1 built in game and 3 COMMODORE 64 light fantastic, for sale with top Des others. For Commodore 64, my computer has 6 title games + joystick. Quick sale . If SPECTRUM 128 games for sale include months guarantee left. Tel: 597 7108 interested phone Andrew on: 081 885 9258 Afterburner, Gunship, 1942 and many more, all COMMODORE 64 for sale with 100 games, new MASTER SYSTEM control pad, light gun,  boxed. Worth , sell for . Phone: 0223 model, very good condition with 2 good joysticks. joystick and 9 great games. Well worth over  316565 ask for Jason  or will swap for Amiga with 1 games. Phone: will sell for . Ring : 413089 (Tournton area) or SWAP Sega Master System with 2 control pads, 0709 360549 swap for Megadrive with Sonic rapid fire unit, 2 games for an NES with any of the SPECTRUM 48K double interphaser, 2 joysticks. NINTENDO with 7 games, World Cup, Teenage Mario's, any other games, if Interested contact 50 games, + 70 games without covers, Phone Paul Mutant Hero Turtles, Double Dragon II, A Zapper, James on: 0633 856910 on: 081 317 1979 Duck Hunt, and club membership. Sell for  SPECTRUM 48K & 128K GAMES for sale.  Phone: 0354 53290 ask for Robin worth, sell for  or swap for Gamegear and games. For further enquiries phone Breezling 0565 873575 and ask for James ,___ BA&&&&&&828 88888888888888 "


"SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSA DIAL AN AD NUMBER 0 8 3 9 5 0 0 8 4 8 fefefefefefefefc Calls cost 34p (Cheap rate) and 45p (all other times) per minute. If you don't pay the phone bill ask for permission THE MICROSELLS THE MICROSELLS cont. THE MICROSELLS cont. SWAP my Zeni Golf for Flicky of World Cup, Italian TO ALL AMIGA OWNERS I have the latest '90 on the Megadrive. Call Shanaz after 4pm on Number 1 game for Amiga. Its Jimmey Whites 061366 0675. Whirlwind Snooker. It has all the stuff in it-the FOR SALE ATARI LYNX with 4 games Paper disk, the manual, a free chalk and the history and Boy, Zenophobe, Electro Cop and California rules of Snooker.. If you would like to buy this, Games. Phone 03552 42672 and ask for Jamie. please contact Nelson-0282 690 990. For a SPECTRUM + 2  worth of games, joystick reasonable price of -00. microdrives, mo-den, printer, interface 1, multiface SEGA MASTER SYSTEM plus 17 games and 128, all leads. All for  ONO. Phone Jason on Spectrum 128K + 2 with over 100 games. Will 0452 770616. swap for a Super Famicom with at least 4 games. FOR SALE Amstrad CPC 6128 disk drive and Telephone number 025485 3051 computer. In perfect condition with cassette deck, SEGA MASTER SYSTEM + 17 games and a leads and 500 great games. Unbelievable offer! Spectrum 128K+2, with over 100 games will swap Worth  sell for  ONO. Call Andy on for Super Famicom with at least 4 games. 081-530 7519 (London). Telephone: 025485 3051 ATARI 520 FTFM includes mouse, joystick, 40 SWAP Sinclair with 4 games for NES with Super original games. Bargain at . Telephone 0533 Mario Bros. Call after 5pm 0293 782980 ask for 403580 (after 5pm). little David. Also games are for sale  each SEGA MEGADRIVE FOR SALE 9 games ATARI STFM with joystick, mouse, mat, loads of including Sonic The Hedgehog. Mickey Mouse, games and black and white television.  only. Super Real Basketball. Worth  sell for . Phone Anthony after 5pm on:051 339 0733 Also Atari Lynx for sale with 4 games including BOXED ATARI STFM for sale, joystick, mouse, Gauntlet 3 and California games. Costs  sell mouse mat,  worth of software and black and for . Telephone on 0706 521325. white TV, in very good condition. Phone Anthony ATARI LYNX FOR SALE still boxed includes after 5pm on:051 339 0733. Will sell for . mains adaptor and 2 games Road Blaster and ZX SPECTRUM +2 computer, comes with 1 California Games, 3 months old, all for  ONO. joystick, lightphaser and 70 games. Games Phone 0676 535041. include Midnight Resistance, Italy 1990, Gazza, GAMEBOY FOR SALE excellent condition with 5 Batman and Robocop. All for . Telephone: games Tetris, Mario, Teenage Mutant Nija 0733 78398 Turtles, Bobble Bobble and Magnifier and Light FOR SALE Gameboy, 3 games, 2 player lead, ear Telephone 021 427 9287 (after 5pm). phones and view boy, boxed as new. . Phone 1-8K SPECTRUM 2  ONO, 20 games, Nick on: 081954 4463 after 5pm joystick or swap for 4 Sega Master Systems SWAP Gamegear and GG Shinobie for NES and 1 games, preferably good ones. Telephone 0706 games. Telephone Rick on: 0706 214487 60077 (Lancashire). SPECTRUM 2 with joystick and  worth of PC ENGINE GT 5 months old, still fully boxed, as games, including Super Cars and Italy 1990. Its in new, 2 games, AC adaptor, batteries, 22 very condition. Selling for , Phone Roger on: magazines. Worth  will accept  No Offer. 021 360 5152 Phone 081-529 5858 (anytime). SPECTRUM 2A 128K computer, includes mouse FOR SALE Nintendo with 3 games Megaman 2. and art package, light gun and 7 light gun games, Skate or Die and 10 Yard Fight Price . Call Cheetah joystick,  worth of games, brilliant 554 6379 and ask for Andrew. condition. . Telephone Warrington (0925) 10 PC ENGINE GAMES F1 Circus 91, Splatter 413003 House, Operation Wolf, Die Hard, Pac Land, FOR SALE C64 New Model, with a data cassette, Shinobie, Vigilante, Chase HQ and The New light gun, with 55 games including Super Monaco Zealand Story.  each or  the lot. Phone and some magazine games. Excellent condition. 081 529 5858 (anytime). Looking for  No. 1 year old. Phone Sandeep FOR SALE Amstrad CPC 464 with green screen, after 4pm Monday Thursday on: 081897 9663 plus TV modulator and 40 games. Price ONLY AMIGA A500 1 meg, boxed as new, colour stereo . If interested phone Mark on 081 529 4357 monitor, 3 stereo joysticks, 2 mice, 30 demo disks. buyer collects. 50 top games all over 83%. All this worth ,150, GAMEGEAR with 4 master system game, 2 will sell for 500. Ring: 0494 765560 gamegear games, master gear adaptor plus AC AMSTRAD CPC disk drive, 47 games on the disk adaptor. Excellent condition still boxed. Sell for swap for Megadrive with 3 games or sell for  or swap for Amiga with games. Telephone .Write to Stephen Ramsdale, 213 Crambrook 0272 441097 and ask for James Road, Redland, Bristol. Telephone: 0272 441204 MEGADRIVE GAMES TO SWAP Japanese MASTER SYSTEM with 3 games swap for Wrestle Wars and English Populas. Any games Gamegear with a few games or sell for . Phone considered. Phone Mark after 5pm on 0926 Stephen on Bristol 441204 339181. FOR SALE Amiga goods, master sound sampler SEGA MASTER SYSTEM with 17 top games for recording music on Amiga, Software License including Physco Fox, California Games and to kill, Budokhan, Afterburner, Hydra, Altered Beast. Will sell for  or swap for a Thunderblade, Operation Thunderball. Great gift. Megadrive with a few games. Telephone 025485 All for . Telephone: 081 907 2361 3051. SEGA MASTER SYSTEM for sale, good condition, includes 4 games and 2 control pads. Bargain only . Contact Jo or Tony on: 0604 494945 AMIGA A500 1 meg, boxed as new 14\" colour stereo monitor, 3 pro joysticks, 2 mice, 30 demo disks, photon paint, 50 top games all over 93%. All this worth $2,150, will sell for just . Ring : 0494 765560 SPECTRUM 28 Operation Wolf, light gun pack plus Batman. Price . Multiprint printer interface for Spectrum 48K hardly used, boxed as new. Price . Call Simon 081-908 0517 (don't worry about answer phone). DOUBLE DRAGON for Gameboy . Call Simon 081-908 0517 (Don't worry about answer phone). ATARI ST GAMES FOR SALE Curtain, R-Type, Blood Money and 28 others, 43 demo's . 3 Lynx games Rygar, Gates of Zendicon, Chips Challenge  each, $30 all three. Call 081 941 4322 NINTENDO GAMES FOR SALE Batman , Roth of the Black Manter . Phone 0983 704 977. MASTER SYSTEMS GAMES for sale Corteck, Outrun, Heavy weight Championships all for  or  each. Or Swap all 3 for either WonderBoy 3 or Super Monaco GP. Phone Matthew on 0272 869334 WANTED Nintendo NEF. Willing to pay up to , no games necessary. Phone William on 081-878 1873. POW MEGADRIVE runs all cartridge with 6 games including Super Monaco, Fantasy Star 2, Arrow Flash, Fatman and Thunder Force 3. Price  or swap for Amiga or POW Super Famicom.. Call John on 0532 695 615 after 4pm. PC ENGINE POW for sale, excellent condition, 1 joy pad and 1 pro joystick Auto Fire. Including Atonic Robokid, all boxed, all for . Call John on 0532 695 615 after 4pm. HAVE Gynog, thunder Force 3. Wrestle war. Which Japanese to swap on the Megadrive. Any games considered, I especially want Revenge of Shinobie, Spiderman, Sonic and EA Ice Hockey. Please phone 07697 7722 and ask for Jasper. 1 will also sell these games. SUPER FAMICOM SCART -unwanted gift, used once. Price  ONO. Telephone on 081-788 9910. A bargain not to be missed!!! NINTENDO FOR SALE plus lapper and controls with 4 great games including Solo Jetman and Shake, Rattle and Roll. Worth  sell for . Phone Duncan on 0932 854 083 between 6-9pm. ATARI ST GAMES FOR SALE Double Dragon . After Burner . Star Wars . Outrun 3. Back To The Future 2 , Golden Axe  and Leisure Suit Larry , Flight Simulator2  and Robocop . Contact Joel on 081-952 9698. WANTED for Megadrive Streets of Rage, John Maddens, Mickey Mouse, Jail Rings, Strider, Hell Fire, Ghouls and Ghosts, Super Monaco GP. Pay  . got to be in good condition. Phone 061 766 4939. GAMEBOY FOR SALE 3 games Burai Fighter, Super Mario Land and Tetris. Games and console boxed, also headphones and 2 player lead. Price . Phone James on 0923 825722. NINTENDO, Deluxe entertainment system. @ @ control desk, 2 game controller, zapper gun, robot and 10 games. All boxed and with instructions. Price . Call 021 353 7375. @ @J SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSC "


"ASSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS] DIAL AN A D-NUMBER 0 8 3 9 5 0 0 8 4 8 D D D Calls cost 34p (Cheap rate) and 45p (all other times) per minute. If you don't pay the phone bill ask for permission D D THE MICROSELLS cont. THE MICROSELLS cont. THE MICROSELLS cont. D D D D D D D D D D ATARI LYNX boxed with 3 games, Gauntlet, MEGADRIVE UK under guarantee with power COMMODORE 64 with over  worth of Rygar, Blue Lightening plus power supply. Very stick,jack adopter with 14 games including The software. Over  worth of magazines with 150 good condition. Worth  sell for  Phone Immortal, Streets of Rage, Turricane and games. Also comes with 2 high quality joysticks. Lawrence on 0522 528365. Spiderman. Price  ring 081-205 8113. Worth nearly  will sell for  ONO or sell WANTED Shoot'em up construction kit for the MEGADRIVE GAMES FOR SALE Altered Beast separately. Phone James on 0728 746344. Amiga will pay  ONO. Must be in good and Super Thunderblade.  each or both for COMMODORE 64,  worth of games,  condition. Phone Mark 0606 557 657 after 6pm. . Also a new game Battleship Gorolla only . worth of magazines with 150 games and 2 NINTENDO FOR SALE with 3 top games including If interested please contact Min 0223 329621 or joysticks. Worth  will sell for  ONO or Mario 2 excellent condition, 2 joy pads. Usually swap for Gunouge. separately or swap for Amiga. Phone James on costs . Bargain for  ONO. Please phone SEGA GAMEGEAR AND GAMES TO SWAP 0728 746344. 0235 848533 after 5pm (ask for Connor). including Outrun and Mickey Mouse and want to SWAP MEGADRIVE GAMES for only  new and FOR SALE Atari ST selling with 250 games swap for American Football or any good games. If old games available. If interested phone Stuart on including Batman, Robocop 3 and Goldilocks 2 interested contact Dave 0924 274515. 0476 64439. which is hard to find in the shops. Telephone 081 PC ENGINE with 15 games, boxed as new. With ZX 128K SPECTRUM 2 with 40 to 50 games. 344 2666. POW and scart connections . Phone Stephen Please contact 0280 275394. WANTED Rescue of Princess Blobbette on the on 04024 49582 preferably after 4pm. FOR SALE one Amiga A500 plus 37 games. Gameboy. Telephone 081-205 5698. Please ring GAMEBOY FOR SALE includes Technoball, Mario Asking price about . Also Nintendo Super after 4.30 and ask for Idhan. Land, Final Fantasy Legend and F1 Race. Worth Famicom with games. Telephone number 081-691 ZX SPECTRUM 2A with light-gun and games. over  will sell for  ONO. If interested 2414. Plus  worth of software. Plus  worth of phone Blackpool 593 181 and ask for Andy. SWAP SUPER FAMICOM plus 7 games for either magazines, cover tapes and joy stick. Worth  FOR SALE Amstrad CPC 6128 with 20 brand new a CDTV or a CDI. If interested please contact but will sell for . Call Martin 051 848 3654. games like Darkman, Turtles, Scaletrix etc. Price Bruce Darlington on 051 356 0681. ATARI 520 ST for sale. Over 50 games, free joy  call 0802 294888 FOR SALE After Burner, Strider and Hell Firer. sticks and mouse. Will sell for  ONO or will UK MEGADRIVE for sale with 5 games and 1 joy  each and finally Python 3 joystick, never used, swap for an Amiga. Telephone. 071-359 9053. pad. Games indude John Maddens Football and for sale at .99. Please ring 0204 861132 after FOR SALE Spectrum 120K+. Will sell for . It World Cup 90. All in good condition only  5pm and ask for Dax. comes with 20 games, 1 joy stick Phone Ipswich ONO. Phone 0524 272354. ATARI LYNX as new with power adopter, comm 0473 210763. GAMEBOY plus 4 excellent games R-Type, Nija link cable, Electro Cop and Californian Games. AMIGA 500 FOR SALE with 30+ games and joy Boy, Mario Land and Tetris. All in excellent Will swap for Megadrive with a couple of games or stick. Worth over  sell for  ONO. Call condition only  ONO. Phone Morris on 0524 Nintendo with several games. Or sell for . 0344 52054 (after 5pm) ask for Robert. 272354. Phone 0257 792975. 9 AMIGA GAMES FOR SALE - or all for FOR SALE Super Famicom with 4 games. AMSTRAD CPC 484 and colour monitor. Over . Call 0344 52054 (after 5pm) ask for Robert Unwanted gift . Call 0527 28283. 200 games worth over  as new. Very good POWERCADE ARCADE MACHINE fully FOR SALE Sega Megadrive with 15 games  condition  worth of magazines. Ideal for compatible, requires scart monitor. Can be see Telephone 0527 28283. beginner. All for  ONO. Phone Ranjeton working. Bargain only ! Will swap. Buyer FOR SALE PC Engine plus 3 games and mains 0902 344045. must collect or arrange delivery. Phone 0306 adopter. Still boxed  ONO. Phone 0302 SWAP MY GAMEBOY AND GAMES worth  885003 532144. and my Amstrad CPC464 and colour monitor and PC ENGINE GAMES FOR SALE OR SWAP. Lots JAP MEGADRIVE FOR SALE fully boxed with games worth  for Amiga 500 and games. to choose from. All between -. Phone joypad and 3 games including Streets of Rage. Phone Ranjet on 0902 344045. 0306 885003.  ONO. If your quick I'll throw in headphones ATARI LYNX FOR SALE 3 games PSU. Phone LYNX TSU 5 excellent games, 2 player lead, all FREE! Phone 081-549 2494 and ask for Stuart Gavin after 5pm on 0297 443153. Price . boxed. Will swap for Gamegear and over 4 games ATARI LYNX for sale, fully boxed 3 games SOFTWARE EXCHANGE CLUB for information and power supply unit. Phone David on 081-950 including Rygar, power supply, car lighter adopter send S.A.E. to J. A. Holton, 10 Broad Lane, Hook. 0094. Please call if your in London area only. and comm link.  ONO. Phone 081-549 2494 Hants, RG27 9PF. All formats. WANTED Princess Blobbette on the Gameboy. and ask for Stuart after 4.30pm week days. AMIGA SOFTWARE FOR SALE. All first hand Willing to pay . Telephone number 081 205 MEGADRIVE FOR SALE with 4 games including no copies Includes latest games such as 5698. Phone between 5 6 pm. Ice Hockey. Phone 071-73067. Lemmings, Manchester United Europe, Gods and FOR SALE good as new Nintendo Entertainment AMIGA GAMES FOR SALE or swap, Final Fight, SWIV. All under . Many more games phone System plus Light-gun and 8 games.  the lot. Road Rash, Switchblade 2, Manchester United Rob on 0522 702588 after 2pm for details. Call 0524 734133. Europe or Last Nija 3. Sell for  or swap for Pitt NINTENDO GAMES FOR SALE called Nintendo AMSTRAD CPC 6128 FOR SALE colour monitor, Fighter. Contact N. Ireland on 09603 62715 and World Cup sell for  phone 091-251 5218 and TV tuner, tape and disc drive, tape and disc ask for John. ask for Simon. games, light-gun, 1 joystick, word processor disc. SWAP AMIGA 500 with 1 mega bit of RAM. Over AMSTRAD CPC 464. Excellent condition 40 Worth  +. Will sell for  ONO. Telephone  worth of software and 2 player Powerplay games including Operation Wolf. Price . 071-608 650 after 5pm. Cruisers for 1 Megadrive with 2 control pads, Sonic Telephone 0707 872144. AMIGA 500 FOR SALE including 2 joysticks, The Hedgehog, Streets of Rage, John Maddens NINTENDO GAMES FOR SALE Megaman 2 around 20 games and also a printer. It all costs also a printer. It all costs and EA Ice Hockey. Contact N. Ireland on 09603 sell for . Phone 091 252 6356 and ask for Neil  will sell for . Call Alex after 6.15pm 62715 and ask for John. SEGA MASTER SYSTEM plus with 2 control during the week on 0406 380844. AMIGA GAMES FOR SALE OR SWAP. Cost pads, control stick, light fazer and rapid fire unit AMSTRAD CPC 464 with colour monitor,  , games are Final Fight, Marks, Switchblade 2. with 8 top games including Golden Axe, Shinobie worth of games, light pen and joy stick. Excellent Last Nija 3, Manchester United Europe, Road and R-Type. Excellent condition worth over  condition. A bargain at  Telephone 0332 Rash, Nija Warriors, Dynamic Ducks. Contact N. its a bargain at . Phone 081-989 8133. 551196. Ireland on 09603 62715 and ask for John. UK MEGADRIVE and joypad plus 5 games MEGADRIVE GAMES FOR SALE including Super NINTENDO ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEMS with 4 including John Maddens Football and Golden Axe. Thunderblade, Altered Beast and Battleship games including 2 control pads. The No. to call is Swap for Amiga or sell for . Phone 0255 Gorolla. Sell for  each or swap for Gunoug. If 081-743 3635. 67294. Interested contact Min 0223 329621. SEGA MEGADRIVE JAPANESE runs all SEGA MASTER SYSTEM SYSTEM FOR SALE SEGA MASTER SYSTEM FOR SALE including cartridges. B cartridges with it including Sonic. ,5 games, joypad, light fazer or will swap for a light fazer gun and 2 games. Sell for . Phone  ONO. phone 0742 339847 (Sheffield). Gamegear. Call Sam on Barnsley 297601. 081-676 9054. 58 8 8 8 8 8 8 8888888888888&M "


"& & & & & & & & & 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 D D DLA L A N . AD NUMBER 0 8 3 9 5 0 0 8 4 8 D D Calls cost 34p (Cheap rate) and 45p (all other times) per minute. If you don't pay the phone bill ask for permission D D THE MICROSELLS. THE MICROSELLS cont. THE MICROSELLS cont. D D D D D D D D D D D D D 66666666666666666666666666666666666666666666666666666dddddddd D D D D D GAMEBOY in brand new condition with Tetris, SPECTRUM GAMES. Approximate 100 for sale. GAMEBOY FOR SALE with 5 games including Double Dragon and R-type. Sell for . Phone Price . If interested contact Matthew on 0883 Tetris, Castlevania 2 and more. Sell for  or 081-844 2163. 347120. swap for Gamegear. Call Simon on 081-954 8604. COMMODORE 64 in brand new condition with FOR SALE SEGA MASTER SYSTEM with 4 SUPER FAMICOM plus 8 games, scart, boxed, around 40 games and a joystick. All fully boxed games Mickey Mouse, Michael Jackson, the Nija excellent condition. Phone Sam on 081-310 7285 and selling for . Please phone 081-844 2163 and 2 built in games with gun. Call 522 3736. anytime (Thamesmead, South London). SEGA MEGADRIVE fully boxed, nearly new, 1 SUPER FAMICOM FOR SALE scart internal SEGA MASTER SYSTEM plus 11 games game, 2 control pads, sell for . Sega Master conversion,  ONO. Willing to negotiate. Only including Golden Axe, Wonderboy 3, World System 3 games, fully boxed, nearly new sell for a few months old. Call after 8pm on 071 586 0655 Soccer, Super Monaco GP. Physco fox and Joe  or will swap BOTH for Super Famicom with 1 SELLING A WHITE RALEIGH MOUNTAIN BIKE Montana. All software in perfect condition.  game. If interest phone 0527 65170 ask for Colin. 15 gears, excellent condition or swap for ONO. Telephone 0296 641607. NINTENDO CONSOLE still boxed plus 5 great Gamegear or sell for . Ask for Lee on 081 GAMEBOY including 6 games including Mario games Batman, Track and Field 2, Skate or Die, 809 5613. Land, Spiderman and WWF. All software in Turtles and Russian Attack. Price  ONO. SPECTRUM +2 128K excellent condition still perfect condition. Sell for  ONO. Telephone Phone Nick on 0565 632840. boxed, 2 joysticks. Approximately  worth of 0296 64 1607. JAPANESE MEGADRIVE GAMES FOR SALE games including Golden Axe, Iron Man and FOR SALE ZX Spectrum plus 15 games including Telephone after 5pm and ask for Robin on 071-831 Turtles. Price  ONO. Telephone 091 268 Paper Boy. Leader Board, Kung Fu and Bionic 0851. 6348. Commando, tape recorder, joy stick, 3 manuals COMMODORE 64 new design with data cassettes IF YOU HAVE AN ATARI ST and want to swap and gygar set. Will sell for -. Telephone for sale. Boxed as new. Over 130 great games, 2 some games then ring Jason on (Linconshire) number 353 161 (Tunbridge). joysticks, light pen and art package, also a reset 0673 858 382. SWAP Megaman 2, Turtles, ORC Proem for Super switch and manuals. A bargain at  ONO. MEGADRIVE FOR SALE 2 months old, good Mario 2, Duck Tails or sell for  each. Ask for Phone 0602 327854. condition, 3 games Streets of Rage, John Carl on 0495 305210. BOXED JAP MEGADRIVE with 4 top class Maddens American Football and Populas. Also JAPANESE MEGADRIVE FOR SWAP. Games cartridges including Sonic. Runs all games and powerstick. Price  ONO, Phone Philip on like Sonic The Hedgehog. Telephone after 5pm on comes with 2 control pads. Costs new  low 06973 44493. 071 831 0852 and ask for Robin. price for quick sale at  ONO. Call Rob on FOR SALE AMSTRAD CPC 6128 Good JAPANESE MEGADRIVE games for swapping. 0633 880783(Gwent). condition, games new and old, has a full colour My games include Sonic The Hedgehog, Shadow SEGA MASTER SYSTEM and Gameboy games monitor, MP3 TV modulator, tape deck, necessary Dancer, WonderBoy 3, Alex Kid, Strider and much for sale and/or swap. Megadrive. Truckston and leads, joystick. Ring Hamish on 0443 791810. more including 2 in 1 cartridge. Phone after 5pm Sonic The Hedgehog. Master System Sargo Fox, Price is  ONO. on 071-831 0852 and ask for Robin Wise and Casino Games. Gameboy 13 games. WILL SWAP ATARI ST joystick, mouse, over 160 SEGA POW MEGADRIVE boxed plus 10 games Phone Anthony (only after 4.30pm) on 081-441 games. Broken but can be fixed. It has 3 years including Moon walker and John Maddens, Scart 5138. guarantee, plus a half set of Spolding Golf Clubs or lead, joypad and transformers all for only . SWAP COMMODORE 64 with 15 games for Megadrive plus games. Contact Thomas on 041 Ring Tom on 081-989 0999. Gameboy with 4 games. If interested call 071 263 634 8972 ATARI LYNX FOR SALE comes with 6 games 9115 (after 4pm). AMIGA 1500 checkmate with 2 meg memory. 2 including Nija, Rygar, Californian Games and Gate MEGADRIVE with 7 games including Mickey disk drive, colour printer with extra colour cartridge, of Zendicon. All for  worth . Call Steven Mouse and Sonic The Hedgehog. Plus other mouse, Maverick joystick, over 3000 worth of on 081-904 5830. wicked games. Comes with joypads and the games, TV modulator. All complete with FOR SALE Gameboy with 3 games Tetris, Super arcade joystick. Sell for . Phone Martin on necessary boxes and leads. Worth over , Mario Land and Double Dragon. Price . 081-449 4479 offers around . Call Sharky on 0476 76979. Telephone 0475 27139. SEGA MASTER SYSTEM with 5 games like FOR SALE Amstrad 6128, built in disk drive, green AMSTRAD 6128 colour monitor also TV, disk drive Shinobie, The last Nija and Euro Racer etc. If monitor  or swap for a Gameboy. Phone and tape lead. 60 games, dust cover, computer interested call 350035 (Tunbridge, Kent). Price number 0706 818808. disk and radio alarm clock. Worth  sell for  (plus 1 joystick). GAMES ON THE AMSTRAD FOR SALE like . Telephone Anthony on 081-989 7404. COMMODORE 128  worth of games, NPS Golden Axe, Shadow Warrior, Silk Worm, SWAP C64 light fantastic pack, bo speed games 801 printer, 1541 disk drive and action reply Operation Wolf, Turtles, Turbo Outrun and many wanted PC Engine. Must have Mr Heli and PC Kid cartridge. The lot for  ONO. Call after 5pm more. Telephone Matthew on 0274 566143. or Bomber Man. Phone Dave on 0752 771158. on 061-3660675 (Manchester). FOR SALE official UK Sega Megadrive, 2 joypads, FOR SALE Multiface ST-, Terminator 2 , SPECTRUM -2 with 4 joysticks and over  Japanese convertor, 10 games, all magazines 1-14 Robocop 2. Shadow Warriors, Stun Runner, worth of games including Hero's Quest, Turtles and Price  OVNO. Also for sale Spectrum +2 and Double Dragon 2  each. Plus many more Pang with a few budgets. Had it for only 1year games  and Acorn Electron Computer games Telephone Tom on 0533 772203. Price  or swap with a working Amiga 500 or and magazines . Telephone 0248 351199. FOR SALE Commodore 64 games, over 500. Top Atari ST. Phone Stephen on 0775 726880. 1541 DISK DRIVE FOR COMMODORE. 28 disk names. Will sell or swap for Megadrive games. WE SWAP ALL CARTRIDGE FORMATS. Send games, price  or sell together with a Call Andy on 0482 8012950. 92 for our list of games.  per swap. Write to Commodore C64, tape deck, joystick, 17 games 13 AMSTRAD 464 TAPE GAMES FOR SALE,  Cart. Swap, 5 Block Hill, Badgerbar Road, . Phone Jason after 4pm on 0532 604313 each or the lot for . Telephone 0494 725714. Logerhead, Salop. (Leeds). AMSTRAD CPC 6128 with colour monitor and COMMODORE 64 128 25 games still under ATARI 1040 STE, 1 joystick and mouse, over 20 joystick and  worth of games. Worth  sell guarantee for 6/7 months. Swap for a mountain games including F19 Stelf Fighter, Kick-off 2 and for . Telephone 027674443 and ask for Brett. bike plus -. Telephone 021-472 1328. Pro-Tennis 2. Very good condition, only 10 SWAP Fantasy Zone, Vigilante or California FOR SALE SPECTRUM + 2 28K with joystick months old. Price . Call Tony on 081-566 Games for the Sega for the your Strider, Physco including 30 games ie. Robocop, Double Dragon 4663 (after 6pm and NOT on Sundays). Fox, Alex Kid, Shinobie World or Kung Fu Kid. and Out Run. All in good condition. Worth  SECOND HAND GAMES FOR SALE including Others considered, if interested phone 0494 will sell for . Telephone Gavin on 0908 567493. TFL Championship Football, Flame, License to kill. 725714. PC ENGINE FOR SALE 3 games, mains adopter Galactic Invasion, Cybernoid 2 The Revenge, SWAP Commodore 64 with 60 games. Light gun all boxed . Telephone 0302 532144. Xanon and Battie Valley.  each or  the lot. includes 10 games. 6 months old. Swap for A SEGA MEGADRIVE plus 14 games including Contact Simon Deel on 0276 29996. Megadrive with games. Phone 0902 28851. Road Rash, Ice Hockey and Alien Storm. A bargain at . Telephone Paul on 087 252544. D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D & & & & & & & & & & & & & & & & & & & & "


"SS GET YOUR GEAR HERE! & & & & THE DEALER DIRECTORY & & BEDFORDSHIRE FAXMINSTER LTD 18 Church Street, Dunstable, Bedfordshire LU54HU. 0582 475474 HERTFORDSHIRE Cont.. LOGIC SALES LTD 5 Lynton Parade, Cheshunt. Herls. 0992 25323 & & & TO ADVERTISE | IN C+VG, CALL GREG WATSON ON 071-251 6222 CAMBRIDGESHIRE LOGIC SALES LTD 6 Midgate, Peterborough PEI 1TN. 0733 49696 & LONDON EROL COMPUTERS 125 High Streel, Wallharmislow 081-520 7763 LOGIC SALES LTD 19 The Broadway. Soutigate, London, N14 6PH. 081-882 4942 THATZ ENTERTAINMENT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE co Shopping World, 259 High Street, Walthamshow. London E17. 081-503 6633 & & CORNWALL TRURO MICRO LTD Bridge House, New Bridge Streel. Truro, Cornwal, TH12AA. 0872 40043 & & & WE PAY CASH FOR YOUR UNWANTED CONSOLES AND GAMES We currently require: Megadrive / Mastersystem/ Gmboy Gam Send a list Indicating whether Jap UKUS, and encloses S.A.E. for a speedy roply. We will repond with a cash other! SOFTSCAN (CASH OFFER) PO BOX 84, HEREFORD HRA 9YU & LEICESTERSHIRE K.C.COMPUTER EMP 37 Pinfold Gales, Loughborough, Leics LE ISG 0509 211799 Fax: 0509 881600 & ESSEX THAT'Z ENTERTAINMENT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE Units 33/34. Rumford Shopping Hall Market Place, Homford. EsseX 0708 744338 THAT'Z ENTERTAINMENT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE Units 619. Pavilion Building, Lakeside Shopping Centre, West Thurrock GrayS: Essex BN-16 INT, 0708 890800 THAT Z ENTERTAINMENT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE 205 St. May's Lane, Upminster Essex Tel: 0708 640500 a & &               & STAFFORDSHIRE FOSTERS 59 Tamworth Streel. Lichfield, Stails. WS136.JW. 0543 262341 TO OF DEATH & & & HERTFORDSHIRE FAXMINSTER LTD 25 Market Square, Hemel Hempstead, 0442 255044 GAMESKEEPER 10 Slation Road Letchworth, Hels. 0462 672647 WEST MIDLANDS SOFTWARE SERVICES 278 Vicarage Rd., Kings Heath, Birmingham, B147NH. 021-441 1871 & & CAN YOU SURVIVE IN THE DARK LABYRINTH; DEFEAT THE DEMONS, CHOULS & ZOMBIES; OUTWIT THE CUNNING WITCHES & ACHIEVE RICHES BEYOND YOUR WILDEST DREAMS? S0898 100 610 ) WIN  and a CD NAUGHTY TRIVIA QUIZ 0839 03 03 28 CASIO WINPOCKET COLOUR TV 0839 44 22 65 & & c.c. Cam  10. | TAA photmap, ppm athine & SEGA WIN! GAME GEAR 0839 44 22 67 & ROCK TRIVIA QUIZ [DIE HARD! 0848771944 0839 03 03 26 KUNG-FU BUTCHER FOOTBALLTRIVIA QUIZ KICK HIS ASS 0839 03 03 27 AND WIN CASH! 094 95446 5p per 8 sec cheap rate 6 Seas other times meet 367 BEANAwo Condon N20 NRB Please ask permission before you call & WIN! NIKE AIR JORDAN VI's 0839 44 22 68 | sp BBSPHP & a calls cost 36p per min cheap. 46p all other times SSSS   -SSSSSSSSSS"


"TELEGAMES GOOD NAUGHTY CONFESSION SNOGGING LINE GUIDE JOKELINE 0898 800 242 SMUTTY JOKES 0898 800 207 0898 0898 800 209 CHAT-UP 800 LINES 206 Your ideal ULTRA HORROR LOVE NAUGHTY GH LINE JOKEUNE PARTNER 0800 800 205 0898 800 208 0898 0898 SOUNDS OF TORTURE 800 212 800 213 0898 800 214 THE VIDEO GAME SPECIALISTS FOR OVER 12 YEARS NEW FOR LYNX CHESS Based upon the most powerful chess playing technology from the laboratories of Fidelity Electronics the premier manufacturers of dedicated chess computers and the developers of the only USCF Certified Master Rated (2325) Program. This is the most powerful chess game available! QIX Neutralize Qix and its mutant offspring SPARX by claiming their territory before they frag you. Hundreds of levels of increasing intensity will shatter your nerves while stunning sound effects and a variety of patterns will rattle your brain. A practice mode sharpens your dexterity Europe's largest stock of consoles and games for SOM-NEGA DRIVE & Master System & Game Gear SNK CA R Engne IMIENIVISION Nintendo GAMEBOYSUPER FAMICON PC SUPER GRAFX Hand held MASTER -LYNX * 2600 * 7800 GEAR bes!!! in stock NOW!! G M IF AN 7/ ADVERT IS WRONG, 7 WHO PUTS IT RIGHT? Engine Neo-GO We do. The Advertising Standards Authority ensures advertisements meet with the strict Code of Advertising Practice. So if you question an advertiser, they have to answer to us. To find out more about the ASA. please write to Advertising Standards Authority Department X. Brook House. Torrington Place. London WCIE 7HN. Remember if it's a game it's at Telegames!! For games list send S.A.E. stating which console to our Head Office HEAD OFFICE AND MAIL ORDERWIGSTON, LEICESTER LES 1 TE Telephone (0533) 880445/889989 TELEGAMES TELEGAMIS SHOPS AND HAYMARKET CENTRE KILBY BRIDGE (A50) RIVERGATE CENTRE SUPERSTORES AT LEICESTER WIGSTON, LEICESTER PETERBOROUGH This space is donated in the interests of high standards in advertisements The most Godfather TM WE'RE GOING TO MAKE YOU AN OFFER YOU CAN'T REFUSE! TM and  1991 Paramount Pictures. All rights reserved. The GODFATHER is a trademark of Paramount Pictures. U.S. Gold Authorised User "


"An imperial walkerstalks the rebel base LUCASFILM till bowled over by the incredible Star Wars Review seen earlier in this issue? Well, that's just the start of the thrills 'n' spills for NES fans 'cos The Empire Strikes Back is on the way! You'll already know that Star Wars on the NES is the best thing since Darth Vader's hairdo, and from the looks of things Empire looks set for even greater things! THAT'S IT THE REBELS ARE CHOOSE FORCE POWER THERE Just like the movies, Empire picks up where Star Wars left off and the ultimate aim of the game is the defeat of Darth Vader in a showdown light-sabre A Use the force in a number of ways! battle to end 'em all! The action will take place across three planets and features enormous paths to explore. The game will also allow you to develop skills as you progress, operating loads of ships LIGHTSRBER 15 THE and weapons and even takSERPON OF JEDE. ing on those hulking great Imperial Walkers in a whifty little Snowspeeder just like the movie. A bit of advice from the old master THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK I WANT THAT SHIP, NOT EXCUSES Destroying the Death Star from the first game isn't the end of your quest. Oh no, matey! This time round you'll get to master the force and take on old Darth himself in a pants-fillingly exciting face-to-face climax! The Tauntaun is no for an Warpal APOLOGY ACCEPTED. CAPTAIN NEEDAH... The good news is that the game has been developed by those topper dudes at Lucasfilm they made the movie, for Cliff's sake, so it's got to be good! The bad news is that the game won't be available for a while, so in the meantime you'll just have to drool over these screen shots and rush out for Star Wars instead! VERSION DATE PRICE NES    "


"READY STEADY Got a hand held? Grab your free edition GAMEBOY GAME GEAR VIDED GAMES LYNX with C&VG PC ENGINE GT More hand-held action than you can stuff down your trousers! D GAMEBOY GAME GEAR Gameboy, Game Gear, Lynx and PC Engine GT we take them all to pieces and tell you which is the best! LYNX ENGINE GT chock-a-block full of the latest reviews and previews on the greatest hand-held games in the world! GAMEBOY GAME GEAR LYNX Latest and greatest, it's BRITAINS ONLY HAND-HELD CONSOLE MAG and it's free with C&VG! GO! Grab it quick it's going fast! COMPUTER PC ENGINE GT "


"VARBLE VIEW DESERT STRIKE VIRGIN ELECTRONIC ARTS W hat's very big, very busy and keeps coming out with totally brill games? Electronic Arts, that's what! Not content with some of the best Megadrive titles evar, they're all set to release another which will probably add to the list! Desert Strike puts you in charge of a pretty spanky chopper and right in the middle of a total war scenario. Basically the idea is to blow away as much of the opposition as possible, while keeping your own backside in one piece. It's a forced perspective 8-way scrolling affair, fea turing some spanky graphics and well 'ard gameplay. AS usual the CVG pilots have already taken an early version of Desert Strike for a bit of a spin, and it's looking the biz, More new just as soon as... Doll on! It's out on NES, n Gameboy and Megadrive now get ready for Marble Madness on the Sega Master System! This kerrrazzzy classic sees the player controlling a marble lost in a world of sadistic steelies, awful acid pools and manic mazes the obSilly Zone! Don't avoid the baddies! ject being to escape! All that stands between you and the exits to each level is the time limit a limit which gets ever-shorter the further into the game you proceed. A tall order for a marble but one which must be overcome if you are to succeed! Virgin, fitting this conversion into their oh-so busy schedule, showed us an almost complete version of the game and we were well impressed. Almost all the First level and it's all downhil from here! features of the coin-op are in there, with graphics closely resembling those of the coin-op! Something they haven't been able to include is the moving wave effect on level two, due to the fact that it would have took the size of the game over the cartridge capacity and to bump up the cart size would have cost the punter around a tenner extra! This omission shouldn't damage the gameplay we'll find out Ride those narly waves dude! when we review the game damn soon. VERSION DATE PRICE MASTER SYSTEM TBA TBA Incredible helicopter antics! Strafin', bombin' blastin' fun! VERSION DATE PRICE MEGADRIVE TBA TBA "


"You don't have to be Einstein to get the most out of your Amiga with... AMIGA CU Amiga offers you easy access to all the possibilities that your Amiga holds. Packed with a breadth of coverage beyond games, CU Amiga delivers 99999 The ultimate peripheral coverage. Extensive, clear guidelines on what's available, how you can use it and what's best to buy Unsurpassed hardware coverage. CU Amiga was the first magazine to regularly feature CDTV. The best buyers guide. At least 33 pages packed each month with all the information about what's best 60 non entertainment products put under the microscope each month 100+ games reviewed every month. Beyond games with... cu AMIGA "


"GENESIS CORPORATIO PRE VIEW R o oliooniga Choose Chuck Rock deals with a sabre-toothed pussy! VERSION DATE PRICE ccc07950 MEGADRIVE TBA TBA The game went down a storm on 16-bit machines everywhere, combining some pretty nifty 3D with .cryptic puzzles, natty nasties and arcade-style scrapping lafts! Stun guns at the ready, the CVG boyos have already taken a sneaky peak at the game and reckon it's looking well RiCK RLLEN RCCEPT wicked. Virgin are currently putting the finishing Oh no! Death from the skies! touches to the game, which should be unleashed in the Spring so look out for the Review to end all reviews on these VIRGIN tasty pages pretty bloody oh 'eck, missus you soon! Megadrive maniacs are in for a bit of a treat when The Corpration knows all, sees all Virgin unleash their longawaited conversion of this 16-bit smash onto a ready 'n' willing world. Corporation pits the player against the might of, um, you guessed it, The Corporation a gang of well bad beasties who have engineered all sorts of evil nasties: and you've got to beat the lot before the boot you well and truly up the bottom. A Let the ugly goon have it! MEGADRIVE till with those busy beavers down at Virgin they're all set to bash all and sundry over the head with a very big belly by the name of Chuck Rock! For sad nobodies who don't know any better, Chuck Rock originally came from Core and was one of the most popular games on home computer featuring the antics of a seriously dippy Caveman and the equally crazy cavemen who live in his laff-a-minute world. The aim of the game is to belly-butt your way through more than 500 screens of action as Chuck rocks away and tries to rescue the lovely Ophelia from his love rival Gary Gritter! Featuring loads of laffs and some criminally addictive gameplay, Chuck Rock looks like a great title for console and rest assured we'll be giving it the full CVG treatment as soon as we possibly can, if not sooner... VERSION DATE PRICE MEGADRIVE TBA TBA STOCK "


"AT LAST The first comprehensive guide to PC Entertainment and more! View Offering more than entertainment, PC Review tackles graphics, sound, hardware and productivity based software like no other magazine can. FREE discs for you to sample the best in entertainment software. FREE supplements covering the best games by genre. Comprehensive reviews and qualified information about past, present and future software. Huge Shareware section News section Buyers guide Packed with editorial about the ultimate in entertainment software. images PC Review available from all good newsagents NOW! "


"LUCASFILM/US GOLD The man with the hat is back! And this time, the game isn't based on a movie! Indiana Jones returns in a new Lucasfilm adventure, the idea for which comes from an Indy comic book, The Fate Of Atlantis in which Henry Jr is trying to find a gizmo which will save Atlantis. Hot on his tail, as ever, are those nasty Nazis, who also want to rescue the lost city but for very different reasons they want to harness its immense power and use it for evil. Joining Indy for the first time is Madame Sophia Hapgood, who follows our hero, not just because she's gorgeous and looks good on our screens, but also due to the fact that she can offer lots of assistance throughout the quest. And you'll need all the help you can get when you pick up that whip and don your jacket and hat, because there ain't no video of the film to refer to! E DIANAVIEW Indiana Jones The Fate Of Atlantis is to be the second Lucasfilm game to be given the IMUSE treatment (the first, Monkey Island 2 LeChuck's Revenge, is reviewed in this very issue!) so expect something very sexy in the sound department. As you can see from the screenshots, Indy 4's graphics are of the usual high quality let's hope that the gameplay at least matches that of Indiana's Last Crusade. We'll be reviewing Indiana Jones The Fate Of Atlantis pretty darned soon as usual! Give Open Pick up Talk to Use Push VERSION DATE PRICE PC TBA   AMIGA TBA   TBA   VIRGIN Alright, so it wasn't exactly the best film of all time but the computer game of the film could turn out to be one of the best PC titles ever! Those busy bees down at Virgin are all set to unleash this mammoth title pretty soon, and the early versionb we've already seen is looking grand. Basically the game is a big-time world conflict affair in which you struggle against your enemies for control of the goody which makes the world go round spice. Dune features some totally fab graphics and a style of play all of its own, and should definitely be one to watch out for. VERSION DATE PRICE PC SPRING  TBA so we must act soce possible others the Emperor Tight CM SEE DUNE MAPS TAKE AN ORNITHOFER "


"2b P471/7718 AT WANTED A few pieces of eight (well, $1.40 anyway) REWARD Yo Ho Ho lafis* in the world's greatest mag! Out February 15th It's a scream! * Sorry, no bottle o' rum "


"MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE This is your mission. Take over! Terrorists have kidnapped ingenious Dr. \"O\". And taken charge of his computerized defence system. Now they are threatening worldwide devastation. You and your three secret agents must stop them. With helicopters, speedboats and fast cars. Up in the Alps. On Cyprus. Through the streets of Moscow. Down the canals of Venice. Mission: Impossible: MegaVideoGameFun from KONAMI. KONAMI has even more top hits for the Nintendo Entertainment System : Teenage Mutant Hero Turtles II, Roller Games and Top Gun The Second Mission. Go get them now! KONAMI MegaVideoGameFun MISSION: PALCOM IMPOSSIBLE TOP GUNDE SECONOR MISSION BAE PALCOM Exclusiv for Nintendo Entertainment Systems Distribution: Bandai UK Ltd. (UK), Unit 26/27, Fareham Industrial Park, Fareham Hants, PO 16 8XB 1990 Paramount Pictures. All Rights Reserved Mission: Impossible is a trademark of Paramount Pictures PALCOM Software Corporation Authorized User PALCOM and PALMCOMGAMES are registered trademarks of PALMCOM Software Corporation. Underlying Source Code 1990 PALMCOM Software Corporation Nintendo and Nintendo Entertainment System are trademarks of Nintendo "


"LOSS OF CONSCIOUSNESS BY G-FORCE Available on: CBM 64/128 & Amstrad Cassette & Disk Spectrum Cassette, Atari ST & Amiga ARMED nunc DAMAGE COMP F.WING R.WING ENGIN FUEL SPEED AUTO FUEL RADAR Screen shots from Coin-Op version MISSION 6 FIME 31 HN1/9 SEGA) ARCADE HITS MARKETED BY     LOCK ON Screenshots are intended to be strative of the gameplay and of the screen graphics which vory Considerably between dierend Roma in quality and appearance and are subiect lo the computers specifications 1990, 1991 SEGA\". All rights reserved. G-Loc is a trademark of SEGA ENTERPRISES LIMITED. SEGA is a trademark of SEGA ENTERPRISES UMITED. U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 625 3366. con una gran resmi HILL STAR DRAGONS OF FLAMI HEROES OF THE LANCE NEED WELDO CAN TUE LUCASFILM MILPUNE COMPETITION INDIANA JONES TEL: 0898 44 2025 NEED HELPE CALL THE ZAK MOKRACKIN. MANIAC MANSION LOOM CURSE OF THE ATURI IGNOS POOLCH RADIANCE SECRET OF MONKET ISLAND BATTLE OF BRITAIN TEL: 0839 654123 CHAMPIONS OF KRTNN TEL: 0898 642026 NEW RELEASES COMPETITION TEL: 0839 654124 ET OF THE BEHOLDER TEL: 0898 44 2030 COMPETITION .00 WORTH OF US GOLD GAMES TO BE WON EACH MONTH. OPERATION STEALTH FUTURE WARS CRUISE FOR A COUPITEL: 083 654284 HINTS & TIPS LINE Service provided by U.S. GOLD LTD. UNITS 2/3, OLFORD WAY, HOLFORD, BIRMINGHAM B6 ZAX If you are under 18 please get permiten to use the telephone calls ou 34p per minute cheap rate, 45 per minute all other has GOLD PHONE "

