"Brams bestselling computer magazine Ng 11:20 6.50-3507 a HFL 6.50 COMPUTER +video GAMES FR64 DEMOS ESPECCV & Master Blaste! WIN AN-TYPE ON-OR NINJA || THE OFFICIAL MAP. REVIEWED: STELITE, PACMANIA, MOROPROSE SOCCER AND RED BOWL FRP. WINNER STAYS ON ROUND 11: MISSION MICROPROSE. IPS L CA VER ONS "


"THE GREATEST ACTION PACKED JAMES BOND 0077 GAME EVER! Goddam it boy! That darned Mister Bond bin at it agin'. He done and wrecked twelve o' my bran' noo po-lice cars, broke all da speed laws o' tha' county an' now he's causin' mayhem in that boat a' his! If ah ketch any o' yoo boy's or gals a' followin' his exam-ple now, you'se better be watchin' yo' ar@*. Shee-oot! Available from UBNE 20 October 1988 SOES team TOF 17 LEGO LEGE slite Production SOURCE CODE AND GAME FORMAT COPYRIGHT  1988 "


"IAN FLEMING'S JAMES BOND 007 LIVE AND LET DIE THE COMPUTER GAME Gun Symbol Logo 1962 Danjag SA and United Artists Company C Eon Productions Ltd. Glidrose Publications Ltd. 1988 Publication Terry House Lacy.Road Putney SW15012789 2294 "


"ontents DEEP Fax Hot new games from the PC sho Founded up with compos galore. ype The masterblaster comes home to play and we have the first review plus a chance to win the coin-op. Chaso ng is hol says JB P.140. SCRE UP MEN:2 B-Type 19 of 18 hs, win the car plus first reviews Inside Reviews Microprose Soccer pels kicked around the office P.28). Ellte is finally ready for the ST and Amiga and we have the first review (P.36). EA's first UK developed game is Powerdrome we fly it around a bit (P46) Pacmania's first home version is tested P.58), Speedball Is The latest from the Bitmap Brothers (P.69), and Baplus is an excellent Galaga clono for the Commodore 64 on page forly eight. Big Screen ward n Street sees A Fish Called Wanda. Dream Demon, and Kelly McGIS (slobber) In House On Carroll Street Fantasy Role Playing Fantasy 74 Role Playing. Bloodbowl and Twilight 2000 reviewed. Mission Microprose John 83 Minson takes to the skies with Wild Bill Stealey and checks out the Maryland based company's game plan. Adventure kelth Campbell gets up to all sorts with a dwarf called Ingrid. OBRE Blood Bowi-yankee foolle pols the FRP treatment P.74 British game SERBUR EN Mailbag The bill you write. Playmasters Last Minja ll the official' map is exclusively C&V's, Julian Rignall has a heap of pokes and who won round two of Winner Stays on. Mean Machines A bumper package 130 of Sega and Nintendo reviews including Thunderblade, Marlo Bros and a players guide to Punch Out. ArcadeAction Chase No. Superman. 140 all the news and a guide to Brighton's top arcades, TKO OutToLunch Minson is an angry 146 little luncher this month. What upset him? Shops that's what. Smack gel down Nintendo Punch Out tips -P.133. Speedball another C+8 hit from Bitm Editor: Eugene Lacey, Deputy Editor: Julian Rignall. Sub Editor: Seamus St. John. Staff Writer: Matt Blelby. Art Editor: Andrea Walker. Advertisement Manager: Garry Williams, Sales Executive "


"Don't miss... You are holding the best computer games magazines published in the UK this year. Don't miss part 1 of the official Ninja Il map. Winner Stays On, and stacks of red hot exclusives Including ST Elite, Power Drome, Speeball, and Live and Let Dle. Make sure your mag has a free tape with a playable demo of R-Type for the 64 and Spectrum. Thn u hv played these you may decide that you would like to win the coin-op. We are proud to offer you this opportunity. We regret that C+YG has to go up by 10p this month but we think you will agree that we are still ten times betler value than all our Imllators. will this Winner Stay On7 P.125. COR: 015100 BEAM Ainson in Maryland with Microprose-P.82. ST and Amiga Elite C+Y6 first again -P.36. HILIPS Ninja is finally out C+18 has it mapped P.114. 5-P.66. Thunderblade first review on the Sega-P.130. Scrum down in Fax P.8. on Jones. Advertisement Production: Lora Clark. Publisher Terry Pratt, Editorial and Advertisement Offices: Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR JAD. Tel: 01-251 6722. "


"TIGER ROAD An ancient tale from ancient China... land of mystery and intrigue, birthplace of martial arts disciplines. Ruthless Ryu Ken Oh is laying waste the countryside, enslaving children as brainwashed footsoldiers in his army of barbarians. It is you, Lee Wong-supreme student of the Oh Rin Templethat has been selected to put a stop to this savagery. Your mission is beset by countless enemies flying ninja, warriors, awesome dragons, acrobatic sumo wrestlers, giants and pikemen, to name but a few. Your Journey through endless levels is hampered by many hidden dangers, the rolling stones being but one. You'll need all your martial arts training and skill with the spear, chains and sickle and special snake weapon to seek out, let alone defeat Ryu Ken Oh. And if you attain the final confrontation then pause and replenish your karma in preparation for a furious and bloody battle with the scourge of the Orient. SI52:03 SCREEN SHOTS FROM ARCADE VERSION. mu  1988 CAPCOM CO. LTD. Manufactured under licence from Capcom Co. Ltd., Japan. Tiger Road and CAPCOM are try "


"TCERRDADE CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk Amstrad .99 cassette .99 disk Spectrum .99 cassette .99 disk Atari ST .99 disk Amiga .99 disk GIANTS OF THE VIDEO GAMES INDUSTRY are trademarks of Capcom Co. Ltd., by GO! Media Holdings Ltd, a division of S. Goldi. Uni 213 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham Bo7AX. Tel: 0213563388 "


"Superman Vs Batman To tie in with the imminent release of Domark's scandalous, outrageous, over-so-cheeky Spitting Image game see FAX last month comes the scandalous, outrageous. ever-so-cheeky Spitting Image competition. As you can see Andy and Fergy and baby Bea love C.VG so much that by royal decree they have allowed some lucky reader to be immortalised in latex by the Spitting Image crew just as they have been Yes! Yes! Yes! You too could have your features brutally fanared and your slightly squilty nose or rather sticky-outers cruely caricatured Impress your friends, scare the cat, it is without doubt the ugliest prize we have ever offered on C+VG. Rather luckier runners up will find that they don't have to undergo the arduous torture of visiting the Spitting Image studios to see how their puppet will be made, and instead will be able to rest comfortably at home with a mug of horlicks and some freebie Spitting Image books, videos and the like. So what's the catch, you ask? Wellas ever, you're nght, there is one, you suspicious little lot. As you hopefully haven't noticed, this compo or one very much like it is being run in many of the major magazines. We all have to produce a champion, it seems, and then present our champ down at the Limehouse studies for a quick No contest, really, you might think. After all, Batman is only a big bloke in a funny suit, whereas Superman is a bona fide son of Kryptan able to leap lall buildings with a single bound In the computer games stakes however things could be rather different. Tynesolt's Superman has some nice scenes representing comic book panels complete with speech bubbles, but Supes himself looked rather stilted in some bils and gameplay resembled a multitude of shoot-'em-ups. Batman from Ocean on the other hand, has some lovely character animation with the Penguin's waddle and our hero's stiff, determined posture captured to a (comic) tee From the look of things Catwoman and the manic Joker also appear Both games are .95/.95 on C64 and .95 Amiga, but on most other systems Bats comes in a pound or two cheaperand with icon-driven menues and multiload to boot att Turbo Good Oduvos abeuy bulltids peut One of French Software house Lonciels' most determined attempts to crack the elusive British market starts this month, with the English language version of their continental hit 944 Turbo Cup Based around their real racing Porsche driven by Dig\" name Rene Moto (who?) it comes in France complete with Dinky style model car though plans to do the same here are going down less than well with the big chain stores Based on real French courses, and with a wealth of background detail around the track Turbo Cup is at least unique amongst driving games in that you can tell what sort of car you're in Should hit the shops by some time in November for Specay, 64, Amstrad ST, Amiga and PC, though quite how you'll be able to get hold of the model we couldn't say attempt at imitating a well known Spitting Image latex Embarassing, we know, but worth it for the puppet, ne c'est pas? Best impression on the day gets the big prize, though I'm sure no one will go away mad, as they say. So how do I enter you ask? We want you to send in a caricature on paper of one of the C+VG statt just to give the rest of us a laugh, basically. We've all appeared in print at one point or the other more or less, but if you've never seen any of us, the picture you'll find on the T-shirt offer page may be of help. It could be the laughably fat Gany Williams, the pouting Eugene, the stork's nest hair style of Jazor the gorgeous Lora Or you could choose one of the others we're all fair game. Send it with your name and address and the form below to: C+VG Spitting Image Compo, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR BAU. Gianna NO NO SPITTING IMAGE COMPO Too late for inclusion for last month's ish came news from German Correspondent Carsen Borgmeir that Giana sisters in the Future World will no longer be released. The game was finished and all reading for shipping when Nintendo stepped in at the eleventh hour with the threat of legal action. Normally ultra keen to protect their licenses, Nintendo objected to the Rainbow Arts game due to its (undeniable) similarity to the famous Super Mario Brothers. They have a point, though quite why they didn't react so strongly to the first Giana incarnation remains unclear... Name.......... Address. Age. My cartoon is of............ Hurry, hurry, hurry! "


"The Circus Comes to oin-005 Converts for 88 After years of neglect in the computer games world (ahhh) circus games come out of the wilderness in force this autumn. Martech's Circus, Circus includes six events from the Human cannonball to tight-rope walking, with lion taming thrown in for a bit of variety. Out on the Spectrum at .99 cass/.99 disk. Meanwhile, up there in Newcastle, Tynesoft has Circus Games for ST. Amiga and PC (.95), and C64 and Speccy Telecomsoft has just announced its big three (.95 cass, .95/.95 disk). for early '89; conversions of More trapeze and tightrope, but coin-op hits Mr Hell, Bubble Bobble 2 a bit of trick riding and and this is the big one P47. With tiger-taming thrown in for good the original Bubble Bobble being a firm it shows the appeal of fave here at C+VG and Mr Hell's tat little cartoon the ring hasn't died just yet. helicopter being one of the cutest and most addictive of this year's crop of shoot 'em ups, It looks like they may have bought some very good licenses Indeed. However, the World War 2 shoot 'em up P-47, horizontally scrolling and with two player option looks like the joker in the pack. With a duel mission to knock out enemy fighters as well as their ground Installations in your big bombers, It looks like ideal conversion fodder, and must be one to watch out for in the months after Christmas. 20 Dacket 5 Forget the PC Engine there's something else out there even better!! In his never ending quest for superlatives, Our man with his eye on Japan, the inimitable Tony T has come up with a hot poop al yet another Japanese-only wonder machine This one is the Sharp 68000x microcomputer, it's brand new, it's only got a handful of games available for it, and by what we've seen seems to truly of arcade quality. Space Harrier and Afterburner (shown) have never looked better. not even down the arcades or so they say. Flest assured, just as with the PC Engine we'll bring you the facts as we get them ... well, nearly. Lucky Japanese commuters may be able to play their PC Engine amongst a pool of wires and mini-TV monitors on the bus to work, but you'll have to put up with the next best thing: these mini-LCD pocket games. Well, at least they're cheaper. Choose between Formula One, Soccer, Tennis, driving and the Imaginatively named Space Adventure in watch, clock and folding double-screened form. Okay, so they're simple, but they're handy and come with sound effects, two levels of play and two player option in many cases. All from Systema, and for only a few quid too. "


"Can YouStop The Russian Bear? Storm Based on the NO.1 best-selling book Red Storm Rising by Tom Clancy: Larry Bond co-author. Copyright 1986 by Jack Ry Enterprises Ltd and Larry Bond. All rights reserved. AVAILABLE NOW! to an astonishing variety of undersea environments, plunging you into challenging and exciting situations Prepare for action in this heart-pounding simulation, Available for Commodore 64/128 Cassette .95, Disk .95 The storm has broken. MicroProse's latest title is here. This high technology simulation of strategy and tactics is based on one of the most dramatic and detailed stories of modern Warfare Red Storm Rising, the international best-seller by Tom Clancy and his technical collaborator Larry Bond. Working with the authors, MicroProse have brought the book's intense action and excitement to your computer screen. You are put in command of an American nuclear attack submarine at a time when the two super powers collide. Standing between the Russian bear and global domini ation, you play a crucial role in the conflict. Missions take you MICROPROSE SIMULATION SOFTWARE RED STORM RISING by Tom Clancy 1986 by lack Ryan Enterprises Ltd and cany Bond Please send Copies of Red Storm Rising C64 Cassette -Disk Name (block capitals) — Address Post Code Tenclose f. including 55pPP. Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd. or debit my Access/Visa card. Expiry date. -No TITULLIITTI MicroProse Ltd. 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA, UK. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tix: 43422 MPS/UKG "


"Charts Acoletisers ATARIST TOP TEN Bomb Jack Encore Football Manager 2 Addletlv. Battleships Encore Gauntlet Kixx Air Wolf encore You could have been forgiven for ignorning The Big Apple, a new software label that first surfaced months ago promising big things, but released only one game. They're hitting their stride now, though, with Lasertrain (the tale of an alien attack on an Intercity!), Harrier Strike Mission 2 and adventure game The Fool's Errand all due for immediate release, and Thud Ridge (a Vietnam flight sim) with Greased Lightning, '60s hot rod street racing, waiting in the wings. We haven't played any of them properly yet, but it will be interesting to see what develops. ACE? Cascade Frank Brunos Boxing Encore Out Run Sege/Us Gold D. Thomp Oly. Chall. Ocean 110 5. Davis Snooker Blue Ribbon Fighting Falcon Alternative, Encore and US Gold all make Advences es publishers, of the Firebird, Masterfront and Codemasters Daley Thompson massa portularly strong showing of the overall chart If the world needs another a flight sim, then a plane worthy of such treatment would have to be the US F16 a fighter and a half as air force types are always telling us. Good job then that Digital Integration has decided to grace ST, IBM (.95) and C64 (.95 disk/14.95 cass) monitors with one such sim. F16 Combat Pilot which they claim US Airforce experts had a hand in designing, will later be available on Amiga, Amstrad and Spectrum. STOS Game Creator Virus Firebird 3 Super Hang On Electric Dreams 4 L'derboard Birdie Access/US G. Empire Strikes Back Demark Racing Hoppers Comoo Outrun Sega/US Gold Overlander Elite Gunship Mieroprose Gauntlet 2US gold More fun by far than 4x4 Off Road Racing (see review) are these Racing Hopper sets from Action GT. These slot racing sets feature boulders to dodge, tunnels and lakes to negotiate and mountains to avoid making things tough along the eighteen foot track. They're fun, but they ain't exactly cheap (.99) so it's just as well we have a couple of sets to give away, isn't it? Answer the questions below, and one could be yours. Send entries to Racing Hoppers Comp, C+ VG, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Road, London EC1R 3AU. Sinbad & the Throne C'ware 10 STOS, Super Hong On, Leaderboard and Sinbad are all new entries, with 16 bits sales increasing, despite the general drop off in buying due to the end o school holidays AMIGA TOP FIVE Munster Carrier Command Rainbird Masa Interceptor Electronic Arts Blonke Commando Capcom/Gel Platoon Ocean 5 Menace Ocean Name It's not unusual to see games based on big box office smash movies such as Ocean signing Robo Cop. or even novels but culi TV shows? Again Again Alternative's new full price label, have produced a game based around the lovable family of werewolves, vampires and monsters currently showing on C4. Available on 8 bit at .99 ST (.99) and Amiga (.99) it'll be shambling our way in about a month. New entries Platoon and Menace threaten the big we, with have merely swapped first and second places this month Address Phone Question 1) What Formula One team will Nigel Mansell be driving for next season Question 2) What famous British car manufacturers returned to motor racing recently and won the last Le Mans 24 hour race? "


"MUMS "


"se AVAILABLE FROM THE END OF SEPTEMBER ON C64, SPECTRUM & AMSTRAD STO Back with a Vengeance! IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII Commodore screens shown. Commodore 64/128 Cassette .99 and Disk .99 Amstrad CPC Cassette .99 and Disk .99 COOL @GM.. ZX Spectrum 48K/128KI + Cassette .99 MAIL ORDER — Please make Born in a time of peace, lived in the time of war; all cheques and postal the shadow warrior returns. Leaping the abyss of orders payable to: System 3 Arcade Software Ltd. at time he comes to fulfil his destiny! 23 Pond Street, London NW3 2PN DATELINE: 1988 Manhattan THE TIME: Now Tel: 01 435 8448 THE QUEST: to destroy the eternal evil... KUNITOKI!  1988 System 3 Software "


"Barrels of Laughs Plenty of shootings bectings and tickings and so couple of Firebird Te s tor Christmas Bling Bantal, and Exploding The While the latter is just one of the beat up action we've come to expect the computer putting you up again whole bunches strinjo-Blazing Barrelstokes the currently unfashionable Wild West's theme. A platform shoot 'em up like on o nocling under It's the old story of one mon cleaning up to one bod STIAmigo 1999 C IHST Oooooo BEMI Possibly the strangest, most surreal, and in many ways most impressive single game on display at the PC show recently was Rainbird's Weird Dreams... a program that was just plain bizarre. Featuring the best character design and most disturbing atmosphere we've seen in recent times, the game takes the player through a series of puzzles as you fight your way out of a crazed nightmare into the waking world. Rose bushes grow teeth and snap at you, footballs split into grotesque mouths and no one and nothing can be trusted. Artist Herman Serrano must be a star in the making! At .99 for ST, Amiga and PC. with C64 Cassetteldisk at .99/19.99 it looks like a MUST buy for Christmas Hellfire Club 000 00:00:00 PR:800 e 1000000 Hoping to steal some of Thunder Blade's, erm, thunder is Martech's newie for all popular formats, Hellfire Attack, Piloting a Super Cobra-style attack chopper, it's a shoot 'em up that takes place at day or night across varying terrain. Available about now, this is the ST version you can see before you, but Speccy, Amstrad, Amiga and 64 owners will also get a piece of the action. E.A. Returns After months of near silence Electronic Arts returns to the game in a big way just look at all the ads they've placed Caveman Ugh.Lympics has to be the worst pun of the month, but scores for topicality. Dinosaur racing. T-Rex pole vaulting and whacking each other on the heads with big sticks all appear, as does a whole load of joystick waggling. Available on C64 disk at .95 about now. Others for the smaller Commodore include Modem Wars -a strategy game which allows 64 owners to link up with IBM and Apple ll users Deathlord, which is Dungeons and Dragon's-ish and sports sim Powerplay Hockey Add to these their games developed by UK artists, such as Fusion, Powerdrome (see review this ish) and Games Workshop license Chainsaw Warrior, and you've got a pretty strong line up, ne c'est pas? "


"Tiltake Manhattan AMSTRAD TOP TEN Bomb Jack Encore Gauntlet Kixx Battleships Encore Fans of beat 'em ups like Target Renegade and so on will have cause to take note of the first UK release from French software house Silmarils. Manhattan Dealers takes a peculiarly gallic angle to it's story of New York drug barons and o bring them down. Bikers, muggers, ninjas ATV Simulator Code Masters Air Wolf Encore Kik Start 2 Mastertrenie Beach Buggy Simulator Firebird Rocky Horror Show Alternative and assorted psychos give you the runaround across numerous screens as you attempt to destroy the drug supply: ST, Amiga and PC owners should be able to purchase it in November (.99 ST, .99 others), while Spectrum, C64 and Amstrad versions will be out in the new year. Football Manager 2 Addictive 101 Yogi Bear Alternative Only one full price game in the chart (Footlo Manager 2) with last time's number one (Stunt Bike Sim) dropping to C64 TOP TEN Sporting Lita Daley Thompson's Ocean Battleships Encore Football Manager 2 Addictive Hawkeye Thalamus Tired of Soccer Management games? Then how about a slight variation, as we enter the world of \"money and courage' in Rugby League Boss? It's your decision to buy or sell players, switch clubs and cook da books (1) to try and win the cup, but there are plenty of hard men out to stop you. Your ST may never be so gritty again (.95). Rally Driver Alternative Track Suit Manager Goliath 5. Davis Snooker Blue Ribbon Yogi Bear Alternative Bomb Jack Encere Diary Codemasters Daley vaults to the top while Hawkeys Track Suit and Bomb Jack drop, Skooldate and Pro Skateboard Sim look set to enter SPECTRUM TOP TEN 1 Football Manager 2 Addictive 2 On the Bench Cult 3 Future Shocker Bomb Jack Encore Skooldase Alternative 5 Maybe it's because they're French and they just don't know.. . Ubl-Soft feature strongly in their Crimbo line up a game \"rejoicing\" in the unlikely name of Puffy's Saga. As Puffy you must lead your girlfriend Puffyn out of an alien maze of death traps and hidden passages. Companion titles include medieval adventure Iron Lord and Skateball on all popular formats, with STIAmiga/C64 space adventure, which sounds not unlike Captain Blood. European Five e Side Firebird About the most shocking thing about Dark Futures is that it looks to be the only cars-with-guns game of recent months not to lie under the shadow of a monstrous law suit. In fact, it could be a great introduction to fantasy role playing, being one of the simpler games (it still comes with a wacking great rule book though) and featuring a track and little plastic cars you can paint up. Based unashamedly on Mad Max, it's .99 for the starting box, though we would suggest half the fun would come from customising little die-cast motors to add to the car wars ... Track Suit Manager Goliath Daley Thompson's Ocean Battleships Encore 9 ACE Cascade 10) Outrun Segalus Gold Highest climber On the Bench joins Footle Maneger 2 of the top of the charts, while Skooldre enters at number 4. Dolay and Track Suit Maneger are the other only full pricers in the top ten. "


"I'VE NEVER BEEN THERE IT! You could be representing your country in places as far off as Hong Kong, Gibraltar, Belize, Norway, Cyprus... Weapons expert, grenade expert, marksman. To handle the weapons above, today's Infantryman needs a lot more up top. Map reading is a skill in its own right. You've got to find your way around. And you can't ask a policeman. There are 150 trades to choose from. We take the time to find out which one is exactly right for you. Our revolutionary sniper's rifle. Designed by Olympi marksmen, it offers pinpoint accuracy to a distance of 600 metres. This Instrument Technician is responsible for  million worth of technology and the safety of 8 soldiers. Every soldier can take a paid holiday to do with as he pleases. Like popping home to see mum. The Lynx. Twin Rolls Royce engines. Cruise missiles. The world Xebremooking got jntelligent zoung nenuononitor bnduranslate goreign sadio uransmissions jn uhe fvent pf xar. Milan anti-tank missile. If an enemy tank is moving 2,000 metres away, you can stop it in its tracks. Can you make sense of the above? If you can the Royal Signals would like a chat. ST How to build up confidence, teamwork, determination, as well as muscles. You'll be using your brain cells as well as your limbs. We work with some of the world's most complex equipment. "


"-Ibe Good Food Guide 1988 \"The Good Food Guide THINK OF A CAREER. NOW DOUBLE IT. What do your folks think about the Army? If they're interested bring them in for a chat. The Army Catering Corps. One hundred and fifty-thousand customers. Up to three times a day. For a Corporal, starting pay before tax is a handsome .00 per week. Wouldn't it be nice to find a job that credits you with intelligence? A job that's going somewhere, rather than nowhere? A job where you are being stretched rather more than just having to turn up on time? A job that gets the best out of you, because you enjoy putting your best into it? A job where you'll be paid to do something different every day? A job that gives you pride in what you do and actually builds up your confidence? A job that means you'll have a career? Cut out the coupon, drop in to your local Army Careers Information Office, or phone 0800 555 555 free for more information. Then we'll show you even more. IF YOU'VE GOT IT IN YOU, WE'LL BRING IT OUT. mpic Interested in the Para's? Drop in and see us. Our dreaded Sergeant Major. His bark is worse than his bite. The enemy is directly in front of you. Your section is moving across open country Do you move in A Single file. B Extended line. uopewnoj MOWY Anow formation Msuy ruise orld's speed 120 knots. 8 wire-guided anti-tank fastest in its class. DAILY WEMBLEY Mirror: 13 SAS STORM  19 SET FREE  3 GUMMEN DIE I am between 15 and 25 years of age and would like to know more about the Army. NAME LMRD MISS ADDRESS -POST CODE DATE OF BIRTH LAGE For further detalls send to: Army Careers Service, (Dept CVG1/11T2), FREEPOST 4335 Bristol BS13YX. Or phone 0800 555 555 free (24 Hours) the Our best cannot afford to be second best. in the Army, mates are more than a bunch of blokes you have a laugh with. Mates are the people you trust with your life. MARMITE THE PROFESSIONALS My mate Marmite. Right, where's that assault course now? Warrior. Powerful, agile, reliable. There's less foot slogging in today's Army. THE ARMED FORCES ARE EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYERS UNDER THE TERMS OF THE RACE RELATIONS ACT 1976 "


"cle guardian who is defeated to progress to the next level. The scenario is basically an excuse for a suicide pilot to take on a mighty enemy force single-handedly..in this case the evil Bydo Empire, which is wreaking havoc across the universe. Flying a unique R-9 type assault  MACHINES: SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD, C64, ATARI ST, AMIGA. PRICE: $9.99 SPECIC64/AMS CASS, $14.99 C64/AMS DISK, $24.99 ST/AMIGA.. SUPPLIER: ELECTRIC DREAMS. VERSION TESTED: SPEC/ST. REVIEWER: JULIAN RIGNALL Irem's R-Type has been a major talking point of the arcade fraternity for the past year and it's easy to see why. With its combination of superb playability and amazingly repellent alien graphics, it's one of the best arcade X: shoot 'em ups around. Electric Dreams A The start of an ST mission. snapped up the conversion rights at the beginning of the year in a deal that was similar to an F-plan diet (they shed pounds and pounds in a very short space of time), and since then have been working on home computer versions. Now the fruits of their labours are about to be released... For those unfamiliar with the game (where on Earth have you been?), R-Type is a horizontally scrolling blaster in the traditional mould. There are eight different levels, and at the UD MENAS end of each is a giant A Halfway through the C64 first level. craft and armed with lasers and whatever extra weapons that can be picked up during the mission, it's the player's task to penetrate all eight levels of Bydo's home planet and confront and destroy him on the final screen. The R-9's laser cannons are capable of rapid bursts of low-charge laser fire. Keeping the fire button depressed \"beams up\" the charge, indicated by a bar at the bottom of the screen, and when the fire button is released a powerful laser bolt shoots across the screen, destroying all in its wake. The only problem with this is while the charge beams up, the R-9 can't fire, and is therefore defenceless. The first level pits the R-9 against the Byao mechanical defence system. Attack waves of Bydo craft pose little problem, but soon ground walkers appear which require repeated shots to kill Battle on and the first of the highly useful POWs fly on. When these grey, rotund craft are destroyed they leave behind an icon Fighting a beautifully drown ST entry DIM Mean C: 0 G X: 00 A Battling through spinning defences. "


"extra weapons are lost when the R-9 is hit! Halfway through the first level is a spinning circular barrier of gun emplacements: blast this and there's a myriad of planes, walkers, missile-firing robots and laser towers to defeat before the guardian is encountered. This which is picked up to add an extra feature to the R-9. The first and most important is the pod, a spherical object which can be attached to the front or back of the craft, or left floating free to blast oncoming craft. If it's attached to the craft it provides protection from enemy bullets, and also destroys anything it touches although for tougher craft it takes a few seconds for the destruction process to take place. If the R-9's fusilage is touched by another craft, bullet or the scenery, however, it's destroyed. Other extra weapons take the form of homing missiles (two launch automatically every few seconds and hunt down and destroy an enemy screen-high horror looks similar to the Alien in the eponymous films, and has a deadly indestructible tail which swishes around in a very threatening manner. After a few seconds a horrid green face bursts out of the alien's stomach and spits spinning disks at the ship: dodge these and shoot the face with a couple of full-beam shots to kill it. The next level takes the R-9 through a diabolical alien garden populated by huge scorpions, plants that spit pulsating organisms and, at the end, a huge snake that slithers through the auricles and ventricles of a giant beating heart. At the top of the heart is a growth covered by a protective skin. Occasionally the skin peels back, exposing the growth so that it can be blasted several accurate hits destroy the heart and the snake. A massive mothership makes up the third level, and the player guides the R-9 around it shooting out the bristling gun emplacements and laser cannons. The giant ship's weak spot lies in its piston-like organ situated at the top. It slides in and out, and is vulnerable when fully extended but it's well defended so some pretty nifty play is needed to get in the fatal shots. Level four pits the R.9 against hordes of flying alien craft, some of which leave trails of dots which have to be cleared out of the way before the ship can continue safely. Just continued on page 21 -BEA COMC DOCCD A Bydo on the Spectrum. enem C:DIBPS XTTTA YHTESTHE A First level guardian ST. target), speed-ups, helix lasers, reflective lasers, vertically-firing power bolts and drones which float above and below the R-9 adding extra width to its firepower. A fully-equipped craft is an awesome fighting machine but it takes time to build up that kind of arsenal, especially as all alla _BEAM A Another Spectrum guardian. "


"OO DON'T GET LEFT IN THE DARK... O DY DUO DUO FIREBIRD TE Spectrum cassette .99 Commodore 64 cassette .99, disc f12.99 Amstrad cassette .99, disc .99 For mail order please send your order and remittance (cheques payable to British Telecom plc or direct debit from Access/Visa card by stating card number and expiry date) to: The Marketing Department, Telecomsoft, First Floor 64-76 New Oxford Street, London WCIA 1PS. Telecomsoft, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford St, London WCIA 1PS, Firebird and Firebird Logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications PLC A LEGEND IN GAMES SOFTWARE "


"TYPE views before the guarian appears, a whole screen of these dots has to be cleared easy if you've got a pod; tricky if you haven't. The guardian is a big red ship that splits into three and moves slowly around the screen. Each section is destroyed by repeatedly shooting its blue docking port Level five is where the going starts to get very tough, with huge snakes crawling from dense vegetation. At the end is a rock.class ship which breaks up under repeated fire, deadly boulders flying at all angles. Subsequent levels take the ship through two alien factories, tortuous mazes densely populated by Bydo combat craft, gun emplacements and result is an excellent shoot 'em up that's both challenging and addictive. An absolute must for Spectrum blasting fanatics! The ST version looks almost identical to the Las find Seconds from death on the ST. A UP MENTE SCORE TOOSID Ellosos A Colourful C64 explosions. A The battle begins C64. massive mechanised hulks arcade version, although of machinery. The final SPEC Ithe effect is undermined level is an all-out attack GRAPHICS slightly by wobbly scrolling from the massed Bydo forces, and the evil one 1 and jerky sprites. However, SOUND I it's the gameplay that's himself lies in wait on the VALUE important, and this is ultimate screen destroy ! PLAYABILITY I where it excells. The thrills him to complete the and spills of the coin-op mission OVERALL I have been successfully I did have my doubts reproduced, and about the Spectrum UPDATE... consequently the game is version of R-Type, but fiendishly addictive Electric Dreams has coped As usual, the Amiga version should be the most there are huge rips in the admirably, and the end impressive of the lot although it doesn't look as office carpet where I was result is fantastic! The though it'll be around until Christmas. dragged away to write this graphics are obviously a The C64 incarnation looks alright, but lacks the pale imitation of the review. It goes without polish of other games such as Armalyte. Still, it's a original, but nevertheless saying that if you enjoy a reasonable enough rendition of the arcade game to good shoot'em up, you they still capture the spirit warrant looking out for. should shoot down the nicely, and what is lost Work is well underway for the Amstrad version, shop immediately and visually is made up by the which should be more colourful than the Spectrum purchase a copy, or you gameplay. To coin a version, and play just as well. can use our mega well-used cliche, all the money-off voucher and features of the arcade buy it for  surely the machine have been bargain of the year? included, and the end "


"ECOLERIATIQUE EXE mundial. BER BER BER est RESCUE THE HOSTRCES ! El TEE THE HOSTIGES! Ocean Ocean Software Limited, 6 Central Street, 012 6622 Toloy 660077 Oceans G. "


"COMPETITION ON Because C+ VG is the biggest and best computer games mag around, we always have the biggest and best prizes. In two weeks time, two lucky readers are jetting off to Disneyland for a week. We'll bring you a full report on that in due course. But if you didn't win that one, don't despair, as there are stacks more mega prizes in the pipelineincluding the chance to win your very own R-Type coin-op. Be the envy of all your mates when this master blaster moves into your bedroom. Imagine it the PC Engine version may be cool but nothing beats the coin-op itself. Full details of how to enter will be in next month's C + VG, but you must cut out and keep this coupon as you will need both coupon No. 1 and coupon No. 2 to enter the compo. Be lucky. BEHMe 97400 R-Type is definitely the hottest shoot 'em up game of the last couple of years. It has stood the test of time passing through the phase of being the 'hit coin-op of the moment to real, lasting cult status. Many a coin-op fan including a few who work on this magazine will tell you that they are happy to put a few bob in the latest machines but they don't leave the arcade without having one last go on R-Type, or two, or three. Electric Dreams has made a more than competent job of the conversions. Whether it be the ST, Commodore 64, or Spectrum or R-Type, officianado's won'be disappointed with the home version. Don't take our word for it, load up the free demo that we've supplied with this month's issue and see for yourself. As we could not run to the cost of an Amiga and ST demo (Julian Rignall spent all our dosh on Brighton Pier) we can offer a unique, exclusive cash saving offer instead. C+ VG and Electric Dreams have put their heads together to offer an amazing $10 off the ST and Amiga versions of R-Type. All you have to do is complete the coupon below and send off to us without delay The 16 bit versions would cost you $24.99 in the shops. We can offer them to you for just $15.99, plus a Sl for postage and packing. You have the Editor's assurance that no cheques will be cashed until we are ready to dispatch the demo game. | PLEASE COMPLETE BY PRINTING IN BIRO. DO | NOT SEND ANY CASH THROUGH THE POST. If you wish to pay by Access/Visa please complete the following Please debit my Visa/Access account S. 16 Bit Super Saver Name Signature Address: Address Expiry Date Please charge my Account No: Postcode Send to: EMAP Premium Sales Dept, C+ VG R-Type Offer, 14 Holkham Road, Orton, Southgate, Peterborough PE2 OUF. Telephone Number Method of Payment, Cheque Visa Access Postal Order 23 "


"SKATEBALL tak i wasi Screensho on ST ) (0 "


"OPBUD Screenshot on ST ao Screenshot one The sport of the future, combining the skills of soccer with the gratuitous violence Rollerball\" played in a space age ice sta Lead vour team to victory through a series of deadly hazard and crevasse strewn rinks and the kicking, barging tactics of your opponents. Only the brave win, or even survive! Distributed in UK, DE ELECTRONIC ARTS TEL: SLOUGH ANGEE BERKS SES BYN, FASE CALL (0753) 40906. "


"INTRODUCING THE FASTEST CRAZIEST GAME SHOW ON EARTH REQUIRING FAST REFLEXES...NERVES OF STEEL ...AND A PASSION FOR PAIN. THE BOBBY YA5252 OOOO Ooo a ACTUAL SPECTRUM SCREEN SHOTS AND TO GUIDE YOU THROUGH IT HERES THE MAN WHO CAN. THE HOST WITH THE MOST... THE ONE AND ONLY. BORBY YAZZ!!! THE BRONX CLUB FOR FREE MEMBERSHIP WRITE TO P.O. BOX 910, LONDON N11 IT). The Bobby Yazz show is a totally addictive and excellently presented game that will bring hours of fun!!...85%...CRASH. A Novel idea and one that I can see being copied quite a lot...C & VG. COMING SOON SPECTRUM ATARI ST tape .95 Disc .95 SALES AND MARKETING BY COMMODORE 64 DISTIN AMIGA THE Tape .95 Disc .95 BIG APPLE Disc .95 IBM PC ECACCA Disc .95 NOW AVAILABLE IN AUSTRALIA FROM Y.P.A. 1988 DESTINY SOFTWARE PORETTE BIG APPLE ENTERTAINMENT CO LTD. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. UNAUTHORISED COPYING: LENDING. OR RESALE BY ANY MEANS IS STRICTLY PROHITET, DESIGNER PACKAGING\" 1988 THE BIG APPLE ENTERTAINMENT CETI), PAT PENDINO, THE BIG APPLE ENTERTAINMENT COTT PRESTWICH HOUSE, UNIT 12 BRUNSWICK INDUSTRIAL PARK BRUNSWICK WAY NEW SOUTHGATE LONDON NII THX * * * * * * * * "


"DOUBLE DRAGON THE ARCADE GAME OF THE YEAR MELBOURNE HOUSE Settins New Standards EN COSTPUTER SOFTWARE AVAILABLE ON: C64 SPECTRUM AMSTRAD  ATARI ST  AMIGA IBM PC A TRADEWEST & MELBOURNE HOUSE PRODUCTION LICENSED FROM TECHNOS JAPAN 2-4 Ven d , Portobello Road, phone 0127.8070 Teletax (1-727 84655 "


"Deviews popular formats, and the PC version is looking particularly tasty. Seeing as the original is such a great game, we should expect to see some damn good 16-bit versions. Here's hoping ... Up to sixteen human players can enter into the SUPPLIER: MICROPROSE. World Cup, and each must MACHINE: CBM 64/128. PRICE: $14.95 CASS. $19.95 SS. 540.05 choose which country they DISK. wish to represent from a list REVIEWER: GARY WHITTA. of 29 before play can begin in earnest. Once KRIX O S:41 TO JOPS Up until now quality teams have been football simulations on the selected, the remaining 64 have been few and far ones are put under between. Apart from computer control and the AA feeble attempt to lob the keeper. Ocean's Match Day Il and first round begins. Matches the five-year old between two computer International Soccer controlled teams don't there's been precious little actually take place on for 64 owning footy fans to screen. Instead the final shout about. All that, score is calculated at however, is about to random and displayed change. Programmed by automatically by a click of Jon Hare, Chris Yates and the fire button. This goes on Martin Galway until a players' team is collectively known as Sensible Software, creators of Parallax, Wizball, THE RULE The Shoot 'em up Construction Kit and the initially titled Sensisoccer, SELECTION MODE RETO Microprose Soccerlooks set to become THE definitive sport simulation B POKER HE on any computer. section is shown at any one Unlike most other games time. This, plus the in the genre, Microprose bird's-eye viewpoint gives Soccer allows you to play an impression remarkably football at every similar to Taito's World Cup imaginable level, from coin-op. friendly six-a-side matches The control method played on an indoor pitch couldn't be simpler or right up to the tournament more effective. Out of the SHVE O ISK that forms the main part of eleven players in your the game: the World Cup team, you can only itself! directly control one at a Conversions of time: the one nearest the SELET THIS NOKRE SEE Microprose Soccer are ball. Dribbling the ball currently underway to all becomes automatic as soon as it is in possession, You can even play Arsenal style! A The control bank. 'called up' for a match. while the fire button will When it is, it's time to take kick the ball in the joystick in hand and kick direction you're facing. off against whoever you've The length of time that the been drawn against, be it button is depressed a computer team or one determines the power of represented by another the kick. There are several player (if it is, both take the different types of kick, field in a two-player each one accessed by match). certain joystick actions When the match begins executed immediately it becomes apparent before kicking the ball. For exactly why Microprose instance, centring the Soccer is different. Instead joystick before the kick of the usual (and tired-out) results in a high lob, while a method of displaying the diagonal movement game side-on, with the executes a spectacular pitch scrolling horizontally, banana kick. There's even Microprose Soccer gives a bicycle kick that sends you a direct bird's-eye the ball flying back over view of the match, while your head and JOPS 1 1 1:00 1 OMAN the pitch scrolls in all four bewildering any directions, so only a small defenders! "


"KRIX O 5:27 1 JOPS 000 PROSE EGER that scrolls in just two flawless. The players jump directions, and there's also for loy when a goal is an international soccer scored and the challenge that pits you aforementioned action against 16 foreign teams replays are just brilliant methodically, from the Martin Galway has walkovers such as New provided some excellent Zealand and Oman to the tunes and effects to real powerhouses, Italy accompany the action and Brazil. Beat both of and the graphics rate as them and you've really got some of the best defined something to boast about the 64 has ever seen. All in I was overwhelmed by all, Microprose Soccer is Microprose Soccer. It's without doubt one of the undoubtedly the best greatest 64 games to date, football game ever and I don't expect we'll see produced and even puts anything as good as quite the superlative Epyx series some time to come. Miss it The goalie is stranded. of sims to shame for sheer at your peril! playability! It's also one of the most user-friendly GRAPHICS programs I've SOUND encountered. The duration of the matches can be VALUE changed, as can the PLAYABILITY strength of the banana 95% kicks and the colour of the OVERALL players' strips. The attention to detail is UPDATE... Footy fans will be thrilled to hear that Microprose Soccer is currently being converted to all popular formats both 8 and 16 bit. Obviously work on some of the versions has only just started but the PC version we saw at the If the opposing team gets PC Show is looking possession of the ball, it particularly spiffy and can only be recaptured colourful. You may have with a sliding tackle. to wait a bit for Pressing fire will send your Microprose Soccer to player skidding across the finally arrive for your pitch in an attempt to win computer, but judging by the ball. If you time it right, the excellent 64 version, you can knock the ball it'll be well worth it. away from your opponent and recapture it. If you miss, you simply slide right KRIX O 5:27 1 C.VG JOPS GAME OF past, wasting valuable time. Should the opposing team get within close range of your goal area, a More six-a-side laffs 'n' japes. Says it all really buzzer sounds and control spinning out of control is handed over to your right across the pitch! goalie. As usual he can A special mention has to move anywhere within his be made of the excellent area, and pressing the fire replay feature. When a will cause him to dive for goal is scored, the last few the ball. seconds of play leading Corners, throw-ins and up to the goal are goal kicks all feature in the replayed in slow motion, game, as does the and even crackly tape weather! From time to time rewind effects and (usually when you least interference have been expect it) there'll be a clap incorporated to make the of thunder, a flash of whole thing look realistic. lightning and It'll start to It's an excellent idea and bucket down, one that's extremely accompanied by some entertaining in practice. excellent sound effects. But As mentioned earlier, it's not just an effect. The there are several other rain makes the pitch kinds of game to play. slippery, and so mis-timing Practice and friendly JOPS 1 0.12 TO OMAN a sliding tackle in the rainm atches can take place could well send you on a smaller indoor pitch "


"FIVE FIST-FULLS OF SUPERSPORTS As varied and as bizarre a | CE Collection of unique Sporting events as you ROY OF THE ROVERS NEWSFLASH! Four of the Melchester Rovers five C-side football team have been kidnapped... hours before a crucial fund-raising game to save their ground from grasping property developers. Time is running out and player-manager Roy Race MUST rescue his team-mates, dodging danger, escaping ambushes and boobytraps in order to play the most important game of his career! CBM 64/128 .99 cassette  14.99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk GARY LINEKER'S HOT SHOT The most realistic football game ever produced for your computer. Play in a full-scale eleven-a-side football game complete with sliding tackles, throw ins, corners, goal kicks, fouls and even the dreaded referee with his red card. With all these features to watch out for will you have what it takes to match the shooting skills of England's top striker in Gary Lineker's Hot Shot. CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 disky SPECTRUM .99_cassette .99 diski ATARI ST .99 disk AMIGA .99 disk IBM PC .99 dick likely to find. Have you got a good enough eye to be a 'crack shot'; the nerve to attempt the 'devil dive'; the strength to 'smash slates'; the accuracy to shoot the 'cross bow'; and finally (and unbelievably!) triumph over an underwater assault course'. Up to four players can compete in this outrageous challenge! CFLEETWAY PUBLICATIONS Gary Lineker's Hot-Shor! SPERSO Roy Rover E DES Screenshots from various formats Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, "


"F SPORTING POWER SUP Sheels of the hus, again enda permanen crack GARY LINEKER'S SUPERSKILLS Hot on the heels of the hugely successful Superstar Soccer comes Superskills, again endorsed by England's star striker. To command a permanent place in the national team means dedication dedication towards hard work and training, The national coach has designed an extensive training programme which will improve your fitness, ball control, sharpness and accuracy, Can you prove yourself to be both physically and mentally agile and alert? CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 dis racy and ULTIMATE GOLF The ultimate golf simulation for your computer. See how different shots affect the way the ball is hit. Let the computer determine your skill level. Perfect your technique by following the example, of the computer golf player. A must for all enthusiasts who've tried their hand at computer golf but never met a challenge as testing and enthralling as Ultimate Golf. CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk IBM PC .99 disk AMIGA .99 disk water SPORTS v Gani Linekers SURERSKILLS UL STATE i use 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4F5. Tel: 0742 753423, "


"FIVE FIST-FULLS OF MOTOR MASSACRE The holocaust has come laying waste cities, continents and civilisation. Out of the devastation emerges a breed of survivors merciless in their greed for simple possessions, barbaric in their thirst for power and dominance. To live even a day is hell, to achieve tome and wealth is deadly. You must right your way to the Demon Dome and then compete in the most horrifying carnival of motor destruction ever conceived, Torcing Your opponents into the endless chosms of darkness, before you emerge Supreme Gladiator... supreme that is until the next round of motor massacre. CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cossette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 consente .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk AMIGA .99 TECHNO COP Step into the future... fechnology has overtaken society -the rich are richer the poor are poorer-chaos, unrest, destruction...lawlessness reigns, terror rules. But this is Your territory. Your assignment with death. These are Your streets and you have volunteered to clean out the scum, destroy the streetcones and eliminate the deviants that pollute your city. Yes you have your beloved sleek racer, but ormed with only stun gun and keep net what skills do you possess to neutralize the many hundreds who lie in wait for you? Being a cop is always dangerous being_top of the future is a step into the unknown CEM 64/128 .99 casete  14.99 disk AMSTRAD .99 consete .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cette .99 disk ATARI ST .99 dick IBM PC .99 do AMIGA .99 dick CBM 64/128 .99 case .99 dok AMSTRAD .99 .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 .99 dick no Cop GREDIKIT & @ 8@GE DOO Screenshots from various formats Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, "


"FEROCIOUS ACTION Only the elite pass the three phase test DARK FUSION of the Corps of Guardian Warriors Co-ordinated fury in destruction of the mutant hordes of the underworld; supreme command skills in frantic defence against the invading alien space fleets and merciless nerve in bloody battle against the monster of the Pit of Despair. Then the final chilling decision-enter the Metamorphosis Chamber to fuse lifeforms with your vanquished toe or face your next challenge mortal form bestows on you. with only the powers your BUTCHER HILL Tension mounts as you navigate the murky waters in Your motorised dinghy, seeking out vital supplies and ammunition careful to avoid enemy mines and serial bombardment. Landfall... deep in the heart of the Vietnamese jungle, heavy with the odour of death, concealing deadly mantraps and enemy gunposts. Panic the final obstacle between you and your ultimate goal an unknown village. Friend of foe7 Whichever the assault on Butcher Hill. CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk AMIGA .99 did ARTURA Stand proud Arturs -son of Pendragonand set forth on your quest to unite the warring kingdoms of Albion in this age of bloody wor and mysterious magickes. Your task is to rescue Nimue from the clutches of your evil half-sister, Morgause for which only your fearless nerve and superior fighting skills and the mystical wheel of Cerriddwen will overcome the ghouls, spiders, soldiers and giant rats you encounter. CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk AMSTRAD .99 cassette .99 disk SPECTRUM .99 cassette .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk Clue 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4F5. Tel: 0742 753423. "


"FIVE FIS-FULLS OF B TEN MEGA GAMES The future. The past. A mega mix of combat, adventure and fantasy from 10 very individual challenges. Featuring: Northstar, Cybernoid, Deflektor, Triaxos, Blood Brothers, Mask II, Tour de Force, Hercules, Masters of the Universe, Blood Valley. CBM 64/128, Amstrad and Spectrum .99 cassette, .99 disk KARATE ACE The definitive compilation of Martial arts classic combat games combining arcade action and role playing adventure in these 6 outstanding examples of their genre. Featuring: The Way of the Exploding Fist, Bruce Lee, Kung Fu Master, Avenger, Samurai Trilogy, Uchi Mata and Way of the Tiger. CBM 64/128, Amstrad and Spectrum .99 cassette, .99 disk Samce Lee, Khe Way ples of inture in cade the Tigi Tril. hg Fu The Exeir gernese RAILBLAZER SEVEN GAME COMPILATION TAEBLAZER THE TIGE UCHI MATA TRILOGY VOLUME-ONE LOKAL AVENGER. SAMURAI THE WORLD'S GREATEST FIGHTING GAME NORTHSTAR KARATE KUNG FU MASTER BRUCE LEE DEFLEKTOR FIST "


"U NINC EXCITEMENT Power of the world airways of ACTION ST 5 bit action to match 16 bit technology colourful, fast, immense ... a startling collection for a startling machine featuring urful fast. Deflektor, Northstar, Trailblazer, 3D Galax and Masters of the Universe. Atari ST .99 FLIGHT ACE After controlling the airways of the busiest airport in the world and harnessing the power of the most fearsome aircraft of the century, no player will ever again be satisfied with life on the ground. Featuring Air Traffic Control, Ace, Spitfire 40, Strikeforce Harrier, Tomahawk and Advanced Technical Fighter. CBM 64/128, Amstrad and Spectrum .99 cassette, .99 disk SPACE ACE The time ... the choice is yours. The place ... not yet in existence! Except that is for within this mind boggling collection of epic microcosms of the future. Featuring Xevious, Venom Strikes Back, Cybernoid, Northstar, Zynaps, Trantor and Exolon. CBM 64/128, Amstrad and Spectrum .99 cassette, .99 disk SIX GAME COMPILATION MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE ADVANCED THE WORLD'S GREATEST FLIGHT SIMULATORS HARRIER FUCHT SEVEN GAME COMPILATION STRIKEFORCE. TOMAHAWK  TACTICAL FIGHTEI OF THE WORLD'S GREATEST SPACE GAMES  XEVIOUS CYBERNOID. NORTHSTARZYNAPS. TRANTOR. EXOLON SPITFIRE SPACE XVVOCE WONZA TRIKES 2DPODI All mail order enquiries to: Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield 51 4FS. Tel: 0742 753423 "


"Deviews machinery, foods, textiles, liquorlwines, furs and raw materials. Other saleable goods include firearms, slaves, narcotics, alien items, computers and radioactives but these are beyond the budget of a first-time player. Once you've stocked up it's time to choose a destination. Selecting \"local\" from the menu brings up a map of all planets within reach of the Cobra, allowing the player to plan a route. Details of each planet can be accessed, showing the type of government, tech level, type of industry and race, so the player can choose which location MACHINES: ATARI ST, AMIGA, IBM PC, C64, SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD, MSX, BBC. PRICES: SPECIAMS .95 CASS, AMS $12.95 DISK, C64/MSX/BBC $14.95 CASS, C64/MSX/BBC $17.95 DISK, STIAMIGA/PC $24.95 SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD. VERSION TESTED: ST. REVIEWER: JULIAN RIGNALL AUTOMATIC LAUNCH SEQUENCES The Cobra is launched. ELITE While the Cobra docks... fatal.. BE Elite, the game that becoming a mercenary the Cobra at Lave became an overnight and running contraband Authorities space station, sensation when it was goods and attacking and from here any of 2,000 released on the BBC back innocent craft. Although planets may be visited. But in 1984, and is now widely the latter tactic first, it's a wise idea to stock regarded as one of the guarantees faster up with goods. There's a all-time classic computer progression, it also runs the wide variety to choose games, has finally made it risk of attracting police from, but due to restricted to the 16-bit machines. attention and possible credits and cargo hold, It's a space trading intervention. And in this what you'd like to carry. game, if you don't know particular far-flung future, and what you can actually and casts the player as a the results of that can be carry may be two different pilot of the future, who things entirely. Possible travels the universe in The mission begins with cargoes include search of fame and LOCAL NAVIGATION CART fortune. The game is presented in filled-3D, RERURTOR rather than the vector graphics of earlier ORRERE versions, and incorporates USZAR OREORTE several new features and extra missions. The player starts a game with 100 credits and a Cobra Mk Ill trading and LAVE . QUTIR combat craft, complete RIEDDIJAT with single forward-firing ZRONDE laser, three bombing missiles and seven light TrOSLA years of fuel. Rated \"harmless\", the objective ORERVE is to increase your status by fair means or foul and become \"elite\". There are FRONTEIVSELL EQUIPIGALAN LOCAL PL two basic ways of doing CESTINIENTORVERTUSTOISKEINONHOME this: honest trading, or by A Planets in range of your drive. A As the Sun would say: GOTCHA! would be best to sell his goods. Careful planning is required here there's no point trying to trade foods in a rich agricultural system that would be like selling sand in the Sahara! Try machinery instead. When the destination has been chosen, the Cobra is launched into space, and "


"CORDEROESGN PRESENT SYSTEM: ZAONICE HYPERSPACE: ZAONICE CONDITION: YELLOW LEGAL STATUS: CLEAN RATING: HARMLESS FUEL1. LIGHT YEARS FUEL! 100.5 CREDITS PULSE LASER you're on your own. On-screen information during space flight includes the Cobra's shield level (depleted through repeated hits), speed, fuel level, cabin and laser temperature, altitude, missiles remaining, compass and radar, which shows everything in the immediate vicinity. Pressing the H key initialises the hyperdrive, and the Cobra is transported to the destination planet. The ship actually emerges from hyperspace some distance from the planet, and the jump drive can be activated to send the automatic docking computer, which eliminates the risk of crashing into a space station it does the job automatically. An escape capsule is similarly useful, as it allows you to eject the Cobra is about to be destroyed. Although your cargo is lost, you'll be tracked down and brought into the nearest space station with your bank balance intact. An ECM is useful against enemy missiles, and a larger cargo hold, more powerful armament, fuel scoops (which let you grab extra fuel by flying close to a sun) and energy bombs -MISSILES X 1 06:06:05 EERONT EUYSELL ERUIR GALAS BOCAL PLANES LEICES INVENTORV STATES DIE SEINDT ONE OF TIONS Six minutes 19 seconds into the game. A A Police Viper blasts off A In pursuit of a pirate ship straight towards it. my own craft! However, may also be purchased. Docking with a space practice makes perfect When the ship is docked, station involves lining the and since this is such an the current position can be Cobra up with the entry integral part of the game, saved, or an old position port, so that it can be fiown you really do have to loaded saving at in without scraping the practice!! regular intervals is a very sides. Since the space If you manage to dock good habit to get into. station rotates, this is far successfully, you can trade Once you've finished, it's from easy and my first few your goods, buy some time to search for another attempts ended in me more or equip your ship. potentially lucrative going for an impromptu Extra equipment is varied trading area, and blast off and fatal space walk and pricey, but one of the into space once again, through the wreckage of most important items is an During your travels it's inevitable that you'll BUY LARGO encounter other traders and ships. Some are passive, and others aggressive if a ship is the latter, \"red alert appears on-screen, and a klaxon sounds to warn of an impending dogfight. Here the choice is simple: attempt to run, or stay and Cobra zooming towards its 152.0' 89.6 58.8 33.2 38.4 52.4 fight. If you're a beginner with standard armoury, it destination at high speed. might be wiser to show a The drive automatically yellow streak and beat a disengages when it's near to the planet, or if there's a hasty retreat. If you're of ship nearby. When the tougher mettle and want to Cobra flies within range of 7.6 36.8 64.4_16.0 51.2 81.2, fight, prepare to battle for a space station, an Sis your life! CASH: 100.0 CR, Hono: 20.OT SPARE displayed on the radar As your status increases, screen and the compass LAUNCHEW SELL EQUIP GALAXV LOCAL PLANETE so does the frequency of can be used to direct the LEICES INVENTORY.STATUE DISS FIND ONE OPTIONS continued on page 39 A veritable intergalactic Woolworths. "


"Your quest is interstellar wealth and to hell with glory The universe stretches before you' 8 million worlds await your exploitation. Unimaginable wealth is your destiny if you can master the art of interstellar navigation, harness the intricacies of the photon drive and repel the deadly space pirates. Forget the medals, forget the honours, forget the glory. As a member of the Federation of free Traders you live for money and will probably die for SEDERATION OF FREE TRADERS CS LOS \"PROGEWOO ATARI ST/AMIGA .99 GRENNIK Screenshots from Atari ST version. ILLUSTRATION: PETER ANDREW JONES COPYRIGHT: SOLARWIND LIMITED Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield Si 4FS. Tel: 0742 753423 "


"cles CONDITION RED the player having to locate the space station manually, which can take over a quarter of an hour! Another gripe is that the sound is rather feeble I'm sure the effects could have been a little more meaty. That aside, Elite has enough depth to keep budding space traders engrossed for many months. x1 1 0 0 ELITE A The jump drive is disengaged as a pirate attacks. GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY OVERALL 0 8 82% ELITE UPDATE. The Amiga version should be ready by the time you read this, and will feature similar gameplay and graphics and improved sound. The 8-bit formats have been out for some time now, and are all very good. attackers, and if your exploits tend towards the criminal, the intergalactic police may also attack on sight. Later in the game, you're asked to complete specific missions for a large reward. There are five of these, ranging from a seek-and-destroy sorte to tracking down a specific alien item. The ST version of Elite is excellent, and boasts superb presentation, fast and smooth gameplay. great graphics and five new missions. Purists will be pleased to know that none of the basic 8-bit gameplay has been changed, and the action is even more enthralling than the original versions. Trading and fighting is a highly enjoyable experience, although the going does get occasionally tedious when you can't use the jump drive due to the presence of other craft. This results in ELITE A A missile is destroyed just before it hits. "


"Arcade style, split-screen boxing game. Large animated graphics, realistic firstperson perspective and great overhead view. Land a punch and your opponent shows the damage everything from a black eye to a split lip! Defensive and attacking strategies. one or two player capability. TKO ore choices and control than any other team basketball game. Superb graphics, 3D animation. three-on-three team play and full court action Individual talents and strengths for each player, and a host of plays and shots for you. Design your own plays with the exclusive Playmaker feature Software 1988 Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved Commodore 64/128 is a registered trademark of Commodore Business Machines, Inc. 18M is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. Al screenshots taken from C64, except Rack Em (IBM PC compatible "


"The most realistic computer tennis game ever. Full tennis court 3D view.great graphics, and three levels of difficulty. Choice of grass, clay or hard court surface. Complete array of top-spin, slice, smash, lob. volley, forehand and backhand strokes. SERVE AND THE ULTIMATE SPORTING ACCOLADE! You don t just play the games in the Accolade Sports Series... you live them. Using graphic 3D animation techniques, our software designers have created the most stimulating sports simulations around. CLADE C64 cassette .95 C64 disk .95 IBM PC compatibles .95 RASKEM pool and snooker simulation following real match rules Animated 3D views including superb overhead view for aiming. Choose the object ball pocket, aim and shot power. Customise the game to your own house rules. Design your own trick shots and save the best to memory. Licensed by Electronic Arts ELECTRONIC ARTS Home Computer Software Berks-SL3 BYN Telephone 0753 49442 Langley Business Centre 11-49 Station Road, Langley "


"NOW THE ODDS RE EVEN ACTIVISION "


"he button has been pressed it's all-out nuclear war. As bomb-laden missiles rocket above a terror-stricken Earth, East and West are locked in the deadliest game of all. With an awesome cache of nuclear weapons at your disposal, can you zap your enemy and save the planet from imminent catastrophe? Using skill, judgement and razor-sharp reactions, you must deploy your Strategic Defence Initiative and avoid global disaster! Atari ST screen shots shown Available on:-C64 cassette: .99, C64 disk: .99 Spectrum: .99, Atari ST: .99 Mail order: Mediagenic, Activision House, 23 Pond Street, Hampstead, London NW3 2PN Consumer Enquiries: 01-431 1101. Technical Support 0703 229694 SEGA Sega 1987 SDI and Sega are trademarks of Sega Enterprises Ltd. This game has been manufactured under license from Sega Enterprises Ltd, Japan. "


"134-MAJ:JJIN-JIJUA:814UDAYA TIME FLORE 44M4.FW.MPPMKTUMPAKABHI8PNMFt.Nirr:mode F1 144WAS:JJIN.AJLOVA:814-0bdydatwlYWOdW:4WGH Long ago, High King Valwyn drove back the barbarian hordes invading Albareth, endinga tragic war. Drained of spirit the High King departed to the homelands of the Elden folk to renew his strength. Legends promised his return after twenty years. But twenty years have come and gone, and Valwyn has not returned Now the mystic powers of old are fading and chaos rules the land. Desperate brigands roam the once peaceful roads, while the fearful citizens of Albareth live in a world without law. Dauntless adventurers are being recruited to carry out unlikely missions in strange, distant places. Welcome to the Kingdom of Albareth Experience a game with relentless action and unprecedented levels of graphic detail. Stroll along the seashore, lulled by the rolling tide or explore long-forgotten desert ruins, challenging death with sword in hand, for these are the Times of Lore! Times of Lore combines real-time gameplay with an epic story of adventure and intrigue, bringing unique challenges never before encountered in a fantasy role-playing gamel Available for Commodore 64/128. Cassette .95, Disk .95 CIUC ORIGIN SYSTEMS INC. Please send -Copies of Time of Lore C64 Cassette Disk Name (block capitals). Address Post Code lencloseincluding 55pP+P. Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd. or debit my Access/Visa card. Expiry date -No III MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place. Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. UK. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tx: 43422 MPS/UKG. PAMBM 18.PAAR NINTA MofF1 "


"Reviews MACHINES: C64, SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD, IBM PC AND COMPATIBLES, AMIGA. PRICE: C64 AND AMSTRAD $9.99/14.99, SPEC $8.99, AMIGA/PC $19.95. SUPPLIER: EPYX. VERSION TESTED: C64 DISK. REVIEWER: MATT BIELBY. Quite how many folk are into off road racing in this neck of the woods is a bit of a mystery to me, so it is possible that 4x4 Off-Road Racing will disappear VOLUME 188 2088 down that same dumper of dis-interest as the Shirley Muldthingie drag racing game of a few months ago. I've always been of the mind that anything that A Choosing your truck. conspicuously fails to show any screenshots on All in all, 4x4 seems like a the packaging has to have fine idea for a game a thing or two to hide undermined by poor and anyway. rushed looking In the event, however, it's programming. The not too much of a horror strategy elements help story, just a bit uninspired. add something to what Taking its cue from those would otherwise be a skateboarding games, it pretty basic sort of race, allows you first to customise but the quality of the sprites your truck with tyres, and backgrounds, and the winches, extra fuel and very basic scrolling, make other add on bits before it very difficult to setting out on the recommend. The trucks \"toughest, roughest slide all over the place, courses\" in the world. and often appear to be This picking and choosing walking as each wheel specifications is all very jolts up and down in turn in well, and makes for a nice imitation of suspension! extra to a game, but to be drive a little Katana or a though, as can various It's a pity, because I'm a bothered doing it, the thing hardy Highlander, and collisions you might make big fan of 4x4s, and would really has to be special in various items bounce out happen to make, which much rather play a good the first place. of the wreckage including takes you to a damage game based around them Right, terrain picked, the driver and a little dog. screen. Here you can than, for example, the and difficulty level The main difference from repair the fault an easy awful Roadblasters. selected (you get to chose other driving games is that task when you've brought from four) and it's time to every so often big patches the right bits, but you lose chose your truck. Each of mud appear, totally endurance if you jury-rig it. GRAPHICS comes with horsepower, obscuring your path. The There are check points tol SOUND weight, and durability idea is to drive your 4x4 help you pace yourself ! specifications, but it must through, and while against your opponents PLAYABILITY be said, looks remarkably obviously it's much easier if who you come across VALUE like the rest (especially you've thought to buy a occasionally, and a from the rear) and performs winch to assist you, it is \"Doombuggy\" to avoid. OVERALL not too dissimilarly. possible to rock your way which is some homocidal .. All is well and good so out with the fire button in maniac who tries to force far, unless you get only a few seconds. This you off the road. To be annoyed at the painfully can damage your rig avoided! UPDATE... slow selection process Good plus for Kawasaki! which involves some dull US Gold has expressed a punter sauntering up and degree of unhappiness down outside the shop with the first released C64 front. Then you've version of the game, and guessed it it's already say Spectrum, Amstrad time to turn the disk over and others released and load the race itself. towards November will be Quite how cassette owners vast improvements. There could ever stand it I don't is no reason why this know. couldn't make for a As you can see from the perfectly decent game, screenshots, the race itself so we can only hope that is not at all dissimilar to an this isn't all hot air. inferior Buggy Boy. There Certainly, if the are sticks, piles of mud and multiload is brought down dropped spare tyres to to acceptable levels avoid or jump over, and there would be a sizable though it costs time, going improvement. I certainly up on two wheels is both wouldn't want to be a easy and fun. Big rocks Spectrum owner as it wipe you out whether you stands! 03 5 . "


"POWER promised digitised speech, sampled sounds, multitasking, and a host of other things. Tam not being funny or SUPPLIER: ELECTRONIC anything but we ARTS. honestly don't need too MACHINES: ATARI much more solid filled 3D ST/AMIGA/PC. PRICE: $24.95. \"gosh what a fast routine\", VERSION TESTED: ATARI ST. \"state of the art\" \"really REVIEWER: EUGENE LACEY. shows what a 16 bit machine can do\" type of I don't know what it is about thinking. Time for a bit of the Atari ST and the Amiga originality m'thinks. but most of the Now that I've got that off programmers coding my chest, I'll tell you about away on their 16 bit dream Power Drome and it machines seem really is quite good. determined to produce You enter a future world games with solid filled 3D grand prix. Not racing cars graphics. but sleek looking hover First there was Starglider jets. The first thing that II, then Elite for the ST, strikes you is the quality of Damocles looks as if it will the graphics. Programmer go down this route, Image Nick Powell has done a Works is polishing up superb job of the racing A Engine tuning. Interphase for launch next tracks, Typhoon jets, and year and now Electronic pit stops. It really is quite difficult to Arts enters the arena with a Using a mouse or joystick fly the ship. It will take you a solid filled gizmo called you have to negotiate the good deal of practice Power Drome. twisting corridors, tunnels, flying in practice mode There is nothing bridges of Power Drome as with the altitude control on particularly wrong with you seek to secure the this. Most of the games Cyberneufe Trophy. auto pilot. This will enable mentioned above are, or The championship is you to learn how to bank look as if they will be, spread over six races on six and take corners. Only brilliant. It's just that solid different planets all with when you have masterd filled 3D graphics was just different atmospheric this can you start to one of the things we were conditions. Your fuel and squeeze the accelerator promised by the coders ship equipment has to and start to dip and climb. A Ready to race? when the ST and the Amiga modified accordingly. The difficulty of control is first arrived on the scene ship and the response on Scenario and ship not a flaw. It is tough and they were were all customising screens apart because you have a great mouse or joystick is highly drooling over their this game is really about deal of control over the sensitive. capabilities. We were also flight control and racing. I preferred to use the joystick but this does make Seconds before the start. life even more difficult when you need an extra hand to cut the engines Approaching an opening and closing doo "


"DROME PILOT WETESEN ODOS THAAKSTRIC SPECIAL CHAMPIONSHIPS PONERDEONE XXI . Captain Blood but then it is easier to get in to (apart from the flight control) and has a good story line and extremely thorough manual. The bottom line for Power The ship sustains Drome is that it is a good 3D damage mainly by style racing game for the ST crashing into the walls of and Amiga and as there the tracks or by colliding aren't many games with other Typhoon's. around that fit this Power Drome is full of description I can neat graphical frills. You recommend it thoroughly. discover more and more of You won't be disappointed them as you play. Most if you fork out for it. EEEPIo impressive of these is the bit in the pits as the damaged wings and GRAPHICS engines are pulled away POUERDEONE XXII from the Typhoon and SOUND replaced by new ones. It's VALUE POWERDRONE XXIIIall carried out by pressing buttons on the keyboard to PLAYABILITY make the repair droid do OVERALL 80% his work. There is also some stunning forked lightning on one of the planets and a graphical touch was the shadow of other Typhoon's UPDATE... passing across the ground after my craft had nose In true Electronic Arts dived. fashion the launches of some of the tracks are Sound effects are well the various versions will massive. You can quite implemented. Nice wind be staggered over the often lose the other pilots sounds, thunderclaps, and next few months. The ST right at the beginning of whooshing of Typhoon's as version, reviewed here, the race if you are a bit they approach and will be in the shops by the tasty or more often than end of the month. Amiga not they will lose you and distance. and PC versions will glimpse them every so This is one of EA's first follow early next year. often as they lap you. home produced games. It One neat feature of the 16 A race ends when a pilot has taken a long time to bit version is that they completes the set number produce and the other have the facility to link up ollaps. Ine race may end versions will take still to another computer (you and implement other for you sooner than this longer but is a quality have to buy a cheap manoeuvres which require though if your ship piece of software. cable though) so that you you to tap certain keys on becomes too badly It lacks the depth of can have a real head to the computer. damaged and you cannot game play of something head with a friend. Nice Another slight gripe is make it back for repair. like Carrier Command or one EA. that the game can appear less like a race and more like a solo flight against the clock. This impression is created by the fact that there are only four other racers out there and A An Opponent. Overtaking another racer at top speed. ng door CD "


"w ws 010400 GAPLUS peeled off from the main and formations of alien Repeated shooting group at the top of the craft appear, fly around, bounces them back up screen and dive-bombed and assemble at the top of briefly, and every hit the player's laser base, the screen. When all are scored creates a little kamikaze-style. At the time present, the attack starts in block. As this bizarre the game caused a minor earnest and the craft are juggling continues, the sensation. either shot or dodged. aliens move faster and A year later Super Occasionally a big alien faster, and the blocks Galaxians was released: flies down, and when eventually spell out BONUS the same game, but faster blasted twice releases a (if you can keep juggling and meaner. neat little gizmo which, long enough). When all the aliens have escaped your lasers, points are awarded for the number of hits, which can be quite considerable. Although the game concept is an old one, Gaplus is an enjoyable and frenetic blaster. The gameplay is very straightforward, and boils down to shooting and dodging. But, as is often the case with simple games, it's very addictive indeed. Although Gaplus is a wonderful conversion, some will find its simplistic and somewhat archaic SCORE: gameplay a little tedious. However, if you're a blasting fanatic who enjoys an uncluttered and fast shoot 'em up, or would The space hoover in action. Then, in late 1981, Namco looked to their original game for inspiration, and Galaga was born. Its game mechanics are fundamentally similar, but new twists were added in the form of double firepower capability. bonus screens and more vicious, swirling patterns of attack craft. Another year and a half passed by before Namco revitalised the theme and produced Gaplus. This time the new additions were different style bonus screens, the ability to turn SCORE: attackers into allies and the player's ship was given a bigger area of movement. A Gaplus: a traditional blast from the past. Since then, the when picked up, shoots just enjoy taking a as theme has been forward a tractor beam nostalgic blast to the past, exhumed once, in the form which traps any aliens try it out. of Galaga '88. careless enough to fly into Me? I love it!! MACHINE: C64. PRICE: $8.99. The Gaplus licence was its path. When the beam's TSUPPLIER: VIRGIN. GRAPHICS recently bought by Virgin, effects wear off, the  VERSION TESTED: C64. and the conversion task captured aliens assemble ! SOUND REVIEWER: JULIAN given to Compunet aces on either side of the RIGNALL. Ash and Dave and what player's ship and give VALUE a great job they've done: extra firepower. PLAYABILITY Back in 1979 Namco from the graphics through When two attack waves i OVERALL released Galaxians, a 80% of aliens are despatched, sound to gameplay, the full-colour video game Commodore version of the player tackles a bonus which added a new twist to Gaplus is faithful to the screen, where extra points UPDATE... the jaded Space Invaders original in every way. may be earned. A quartet Unfortunately, Virgin has theme. Instead of moving A t the start of a game the of aliens appear at the top no plans at present to across the screen in a strict player's ship materialises of the screen, and when release any other formation, individual ships at the bottom of the screen, shot fall downwards. versions. Sad... 006 200 oo "


"There was only one way to improve the original. Start again from scratch Trivial Pursuit beo A NEW BEGINNING A whole new concept in plaving the world's favourite game, HORN ABBOT INTERNATIONAL TORNABOL INTERNATIVAL THIS FIRST Trade M DOMAR Publication CBM64, Amiga, Atari ST. Snectrum DIDELI Amstrad, "


"UBI SOFT presents presents TIRON TORD UBE "


"The Age of Chivalry Hou Screenshot on ST Screenshot on C 64 Screenshot on Amiga Screenshot on ST Screenshot on ST CONOR Screenshot on ST **The Crusader Of Justice. For the past 5 years you have been away fighting in the Holy Available on C 64. Amiga, Land. When you finally return home, your father. The King, has been deposed by your brutal uncle, and terror and oppression ST, PC, Amstrad now rule this once serene Kingdom. You must recover the throne. However, deceit and treachery are everywhere and you must prove your birthright through guile and trials of combat in archery, arm wrestling and sword-play... This is a magnificent adventure set in a medieval world, where your strategy is as important as your strength Distributed in UK by ELECTRONIC ARTS, 11-49 STATION ROAD, LANGLEY, BERKS SL3 BYN. TEL.: SLOUGH (0753) 46465, DEALERS PLEASE CALL (0753) 40906. UBE "


"No FXCUSES ALSO AVAILABLE THE GAME OF THE GODS Atari ST Screens NO EXCUSES from Arcana, just superbly addictive gameplay. You'll need fast reactions, lateral thinking and above all a cool head to play this fascinating game. Fifty sheets of joystick tingling excitement and a superb construction kit will keep you playing and playing and playing... NO EXCUSES .95 Amiga .95 Atari ST To order direct from Arcana, tick the relevant box and send this coupon with payment to the address bloow or ring (0272) 297162 Name Address POWERPLAY .95 Amiga .95 Atari ST A stunningly original quiz game for one to four players A ARCANA Arcana Software Ltd, 2 Clare Street, Bristol, Avon BS11XS, UK Telephone (0272) 297162 Fax (0272) 226586 Amiga Screen "


"lele NS like they've seeped out of a three year old budget game. The soldier sprites are so badly defined they look like hunchbacks, and the abysmal animation only serves to make things worse, as the soldier waddle's along at a snail's pace. The backdrops are extremely chunky and very repetitive in design, so you  SUPPLIER: CRL. get the impression you MACHINES: CBM 64. keep running over the PRICES: same bit of course VERSION TESTED: CBM 64 endlessly. The courses are DISK. I far too long to be realistic, REVIEWER: GARY WHITTA. and even after five minutes of furious waggling there's Everyone who's ever no indication of how far wanted to have a go at an A Thrills and spills galore. you are to completing it. assault courses now doesn't on the still will send your GI designer option that allows the whole game seems to have to wait to be selected flying over the wall (if you you to build your own for the next series of the timed it correctly that is). course to any level of Krypton Factor thanks to More problematic difficulty you desire by CRL's latest release, titled obstacles come in the form NATO Assault Course. of cardboard soldiers that The game casts you as spring out from the ground an eager new prospective and must be shot quickly or recruit to the NATO armed forces who has to complete a gruelling assault course before he be bodged job, and the can be accepted. way that the screen blanks out rather than bothering to scroll the course backwards when you die proves this. NATO Assault Course rates as one of the worst games of the year, and After the initial pre-game selections you can get down to actually tackling the assault course. The screen is split horizontally in half into two they'll shoot you. If you do independent displays, one get shot, or indeed fall foul for each contestant. to any dangerous obstacle Progress is made in true such as the firepots, the Combat School fashion, screen will blank out for a i.e. waggling the joystick few seconds and you'll be as fast as you possibly can. positioned a few screens Walls are no problem to back from where you died. jump over. Just pushing up There's also a course The action never stops in NATO assault course. A Not much variety, is there?) adding different obstacles certainly doesn't warrant wherever you choose. it's price tag. Steer well Well, I won't beat about clear if you value your the bush. NATO Assault dosh. At least Course is without doubt Speccy/Amstrad owners one of the worst games I've will be spared it ever played. If you imagine the assault course i from Combat School about i GRAPHICS a hundred times longer i SOUND with pitiful graphics and I VALUE restricted gameplay, you'll have some idea of what PLAYABILITY 1 NATO Assault Course is like. OVERALL 11% The game's graphics look >NO "


"Reviews some consistency and wit. badgers who lob rocks rather fun, if totally We kick off with our and most bizarre of all murderous. You begin to vulpine hero down in the fox-hound bikers who think some of the other lair with his fish-wife of a approach on motorcyles, animals may have a point fox-wife, but he is soon and dismount to fire. in going after Mr Foxx after turfed out in no uncertain There are various terms to collect dinner obstacles such as walls Foxx Fights Back benefits \"and don't you dare come and streams that get in from a large play area and back without any!\" your way, and require a a jolly hunting tunes-type Mr Foxx is soon degree of jumping skill to soundtrack. The sprites are loping his way across the negotiate, but you may rather small, though on the countryside in search of find that instead of running whole well animated, and tasty morsels, though his you should bound along in you should bound along in the scrolling is fine. The search is by no means a series of jumps most of relationship between the time anyway it is just where the sprites can go as fast, and can help keep and background you out of trouble. It takes information could be some timing, but rather stronger though you than just ducking the flying have to stand precariously chickens, many points can in space to achieve any of be earned if you can jump the tougher jumps, for in the air and catch them instance, and you are in your teeth. deemed to have eaten a Chickens sleeping in sleeping rabbit if you their coops can be come within about one gobbled up to keep you and a half fox lengths of it! bright eyed and bushy All in all, one of the more tailed (there is a fun games I've played on \"pant-ometer\" yes, the 64 in a while, the cheek really at the bottom of and imagination of the the screen, with length of scenario being sadly a A Hey, no fair! Foxx gets a beagle in the back. Dopo FOXX FIGHTS E BACK MACHINES: C64, SPECTRUM.  SUPPLIER: MIRRORSOFT. PRICE: SPEC CASS .99/DISK $12.99, C64 CASS $9.99, DISK $12.99.  VERSION TESTED: C64. REVIEWER: MATT BIELBY. rare thing Not exactly a \"must buy\" but definitely a strong product, and one unlikely to disappoint. GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY tongue showing how well! you're doing) but best VALUE and most vicious of all is OVERALL 73% nipping down a rabbit hole to munch up dozy UPDATE... bunnies. These screens There will be no Amstrad work just like the special version of Foxx a bit of a coin rooms in Super Mario shame that but no Brothers, though without firm action is being taken the hidden extras, and are as yet on 16 bit variants. EEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE  0016 A Foxx gets a bazooka in this Spectrum shot. Foxx Fights Back is easy. He is armed with a eminently likeable revolver which he can because, though swap for sub-machine gun we've all seen every or even bazooka at later element of the game points, design knocking about Only in the end levels can before, the basic scenario he walk around blasting of a put-upon fox foraging like your standard shoot for food in the face of 'em up hero. Enemies to be violent attacks from faced include squirrels hunters and woodland who throw explosive nuts animals alike is an original from overhead, flying one, and is carried off with chickens who drop bombs. A Gobbling bunnies in the funnels. "


"TRYBRIDGE SOFTWARE DISTRIBUTION SPECTRUM CAS AMSTRAD CASS DISCAS DISA AMSTRAD TITLE TITLE Title CASS DSK CASS DI Atari Amiga IBM PC C AS DISA Atari Amiga IBM PC Lg Dayleges Amencan Civil War Vol2 Alen Syndrome Moro Matchday Mega Apocalypse MAP 600 9.95 600 996 Alan Syndrome Magand Menace Arkand Revofon Abone Range Baile Barborator 2 Mono Artan 2 Revenge Batran Pro 8888 Nigar 8888888888 MBM Con Set Bem Project 600 Bevond le Palace ARX Bone Commande Polo Radiance BMX SA Bomme 88888888 2009 Bugg Bow Carrer Command Chester 2000 Chuck Yeager AFT PB Phantom Post of Rance 88 Defender of Crown P age Deja Vu Deluxe Music Con Sat Deluxe Paint Deluxe Production Rastan Sage Rolling Thunder RR 9.95 Bad Oenober Dungeon Master Earl Weaver Baseball 16.95 8888888888 Return to Gews Road Blasters Rocket Rang Segon 3 Ches Sebbie Deluxe Serve Volley Shadowgate 4 Salamander Solder of Light Skateca Saramander 600 995 9.95 Ee Pack 1023 Empire Strikes Back Skil 888 5 Star ST Soldier of Light 4. Off Road Racing Fox Fghis Bach Decor #15 Stnke Eagle Fooral Manager Fintstones B&RRRRRRR8888888888888888888888888888IRBASERR88 ROSSR8888 Fungsion Fedor Free Tee Sinbad Throne Superstar Ice Hockey 695 9.95 Sirp Poker 2 Sir Basket Rail 9. 9 6 9 .36 Sond Gold 6.96296650 St Gider 9.95 600 995 Sten Service 6.50 1796 17:36 12.5 Suright 16.56 16.95 Final Command Get Center Fit Disco 11 Gold Silver Bronce GT Gana Sisters 1045 125 1045 126 1045 Seat Fighter 695 256% 996 Skate or die 65593 Stalingrad Flying Shirt Football Man 2 Foundation Waste Galdragons Domain Game Over 2 Summer Olympiad SeeBS Sue Hangon 11 Gamison 102 RESIE SEE Soy Sey ABC Soy Soy Trilogy Stooges 20 Chartbusters Test Die Tme Stood She Tu Es To Hell Back The Games Water Gunit of The Guns The Tan Three Song Thundercats Time Mage Time Srood So Twa TR2 UV Room Tome and Magi Tracks Manager S M BANBAANBA possible Mission 2 Who World Tour Board SORAS Leaderboard Bede Wione Cal Board Word Tour Gom We Are The most A Please send cheque, PO Access Visa No. and expiry date to: TRYBRIDGE LTD, 72 NORTH STREET, ROMFORD, ESSEX RM1 1DA. Please state make and model of computer when ordering. P&P inc UK on orders over .00. Less than .00 and Europe and .00 per item. Elsewhere please add .00 per item for airmail. TEL. ORDERS: 0708 765271. "


"A wet version of Buggy Boy! BORBODD 186 MACHINES: SPEC, AMS, C64, ST, AMIGA. SUPPLIER: ELITE. PRICE: SPEC CASS .99, DISC $12.99, C64 CASS $9.99, DISC $11.99, AMS & CASS $9.99, DISC 614.99, ST $19.99, AMIGA $24.99. VERSION TESTED: SPEC. REVIEWER: TONY DILLON. No, I'm not going to make all the obvious statements or remarks, such as isn't it interesting how this game looks remarkably like a game called Aquablaster that I saw a while ago, or how come that such an old film is only being licensed LIVE & LET DIE Le PROSED BRORBD02533 now, or (OK, we get the except that this time it's on got a very narrow river to cannon, along with the message Ed). water. In fact, this game ride on, so you've got to try three missiles. Also, you No prizes for guessing reminds me of nothing so and plan evasive action find at places along the that Live and Let Die much as Buggy Boy. very carefully, as too many river logs which when run places you in the role of complete with gates, times you go left around an over, catapult you into the James Bond in one of the underground tunnels and obstacle when vou should air and over obstacles. most exciting sequences in banks on either side of the have gone right and find There are fuel cans Ine Tilm, the death defying road that you can drive up vourself against a group of which took amazingly speedboat chase along to avoid any mines that mines that you can only logs) which give you back the winding rivers of, er might just be floating in the get around on the right some fuel. Should you run well somewhere in water. America. Viewed in much side and boom! out of fuel, it's game over. Mines are only part of the Enemy boats are also The graphics are large the same way as Out trouble, however. For the racing up and down the and well animated on the Run Roadblasters/ almost first part you've got to waterways, and it's these Spectrum though, as usua any other racing game, remember that you've only that drop the mines. It monochrome. The would be nicer if they explosion of the main dropped them neatly in a character is quite nice line, but oh no, they zigzag 3D update of the across the river, and it does approaching objects is get amazingly difficult to well done, too. get around them. Loch It plays well, with quite a gates bar your way at fast joystick response, but! various stages along the did find the firing a little rivers (yes, rivers, you get a sticky. It's not too difficult choice of five at the start of but it's no but it's no walkover either. the game) and these need There's enough there to to be shot down with a keep even the most missile. Unfortunately, you seasoned arcadester only get three, and you playing for a while. tend to get four gates. And 2 2 if all that ain't enough, you have the normal GRAPHICS Roadblasters cannons at  SOUND either side of the riverbed. ed. ! VALUE So, with all this being thrown at you, what have PLAYABILITY you goton your side? Well. OVERALL 72% you've got your handy A Acompetent game, but you ve seen it before... 2 MONA vvao Edhe "


"PHILIPPE ULRICH / DIDIER BOUCHON  MUSIC JEAN-MICHEL JARRE ZOTERS A breathtaking galaxy on the outer rim of the universe Worlds with astonishing creatures and animated 3D graphics a thrilling scenario bursting with humour, the like si which you ve never seen. Everything about CAPTAIN BLOOD makes it the type of game you just HAVE to play Hours and hours of discovery exploration, dialogue, Thyperspace wapts) and hotshot low-level flying through rugged mountain ranges and dizzying canyons. New sensations are guaranteed in this tragic, moving, funny and thrilling adventure. CAPTAIN BLOOD is a game for everyone, breaking new ground in the universe of computer entertainment Welcome to the age of the bio-game INFOGRAMES FRE INTERNATIONAL DISTRIBUTED BY INFOGRAMES UR MITRE HOUSE. ABBEY ROAD. ENFIELD, MIDDSX EN1 2RQ TEL: 01-364 0123 FAX: 01 360 9119 "


"PACI Ghosts: a post power pill snack! the globe, it seemed that the public had an appetite for PacMan products as insatiable as the little yellow fellow had for dots!! Eager to follow up their success, Ms PacMan was released. Basically more of  MACHINES: SPECTRUM, the same, it was designed AMSTRAD, C64, ATARI ST, with the female Pacmania is very similar AMIGA.MSX. gamesplayer in mind to the original PacMan in PRICES: SPECIAMS/MSX $8.95 although it's true to say the the respect that the player CASS, C64 $9.95 CASS, C64: the original PacMan's guides Pac around a maze AMS $14.95 DISK, STIAMIGA non-violent game concept to collect all the dots, $19.95 SUPPLIER: GRAND SLAM. had already attracted avoiding contact with VERSIONS TESTED: ATARI ST many female players into ahosts. However, instead of SPECTRUM. the arcades, as well as a 2D static viewpoint, the REVIEWER: JULIAN RIGNALL. those to whom shoot 'em game is seen in forced The PacMan story started in ups never appealed. perspective 3D, with the 1982 when Bally Midway Next came Jnr PacMan maze scrolling as PacMan released an arcade game another dot gobbler, this moves. He's also has the in which the player has to time with a scrolling screen ability to jump useful, guide a little yellow blob Baby PacMan, a mini since there are far more featureless save for a large pinball-type game, and a ghosts rampaging around mouth, around a maze full-sized Mr and Mrs the maze. and eat as many dots as PacMan pinball machine. At the start of a game the possible while avoiding Since then there has also player selects one of three the attentions of four been Professor PacMan, levels: Block Town, PacMan marauds through Block Town. COO009860 The power pill effects are wearing off (00010960 > HI-SCORE CREDITS TARGET ,87 The Jungly Steps is the largest maze. marauding ghosts. Public PacMan Plus, Super PacMan's Park or Sandbox. response was PacMan, Paclanda and the game begins. If phenomenal there has horizontally scrolling either of the latter levels been nothing like it before arcade adventure type are chosen, a courage or since and within game) and, bringing us bonus is awarded when months you could buy bang up to date, the first screen is PacMan watches, cuddly Pacmania. completed: 50,00 and toys, clockwork toys, Grand Slam recently 100,000 points respectively. T-shirts, underwear, beach bought the conversion The objective is simple towels, mugs... You could rights to the latest eat all the dots to move even watch PacMan installment of the PacMan onto the next maze. Deadly cartoons on TV and eat series, and is set to ghosts wander around the PacMan sweets! As release the game on all maze and attempt to PacMan fever swept across formats. corner the yellow hero, "


" neat and appealling arcade conversion, give Pacmania a go; I doubt whether you'll be able to resist its charms. HI-SCOA CREDITS 0 ST SPEC and he can either attempt progresses, the going gets to avoid them entirely. increasingly more difficult, GRAPHICS 7 8 jump over them, or head with faster and more for the nearest power pill intelligent ghosts, some of 1 SOUND 75 and be granted temporary whom are capable of i VALUE 6 7 invincibility. During this period, the ghosts turn blue PacMan's one advantage. !! and are destroyed if Power pills also become OVERALL 83% 87% PacMan touches them. The less effective. When all four up less effective. When all four UPDATE... supernatural horrors levels have been re-appear shortly after and conquered, play starts The Spectrum version is continue the chase with again on the first, but the monochromatic, but renewed vigour. going is even harder... plays very well indeed Occasionally a bonus and so until all five lives are and sports all the features fruit target appears in the lost. of the arcade original. middle of the maze and is Although the PacMan Amstrad and picked up for bonus points. theme is a very old and Commodore 64 versions Sometimes this target takes simplistic idea, Pacmania should also retain much, if the form of a special pill, is enjoyable and highly not all of the arcade Quick! Grab that power pill. . ,87 0000 1680 co off. CO 09 HI-SCORE > HI-SCORE CREDITS CREDITS ra ,87 namco ,87 PACMANIA se 83785985 which gives PacMan extra addictive. It has a timeless game's feel and appeal, speed. appeal lacking in a lot of and Grand Slam is This is particularly useful of today's software, and is confident that both will if you can grab a power the sort of game that gets play as well as the pill, as it allows you to track loaded months after it was Spectrum and ST versions. down and destroy large first bought, just for a The Amiga version is numbers of ghosts and couple of quick goes. looking exceptionally boost your score! The graphics and sound good. Featuring There are four different are very similar to the full-screen scrolling and maze designs in all: the arcade machine, and the graphics ported directly three previously screen scrolls smoothly in from the arcade machine mentioned and the Jungly all four directions no (it's claimed), Steps, the largest of them mean feat for the ST! though it'll be nigh on all. As the player So, If you're looking for a perfect: look out for it. CREDITS "


"PEVEK IT'S YOUR ONLY DEFENCE IT'S MECHANICAL .. IT'S BIOLOGICAL IT'S BEHIND YOU. Dimen See so s__kell Commodore Screenshol Available soon on Commodore 64/128 cassette (.99) and disk ( 14.99). Spectrum (.99), Amstrad cassette (.99) and disk ( 14.99). Atari ST (.99) and on Amiga (.99). R-TYPE  1987 IREM CORPORATION LICENSED TO ELECTRIC DREAMS ELECTRIC DREAMS SOFTWARE "


"Peviews 0591E-E KELLOGG'S 7 TOUR way. If, for example, they reach the top of a particularly steep hill and end up in first place the pinnacle, they are given a white jersey, some bonus time and get awarded the title, King of the Mountain (which just happens to be a mega rockin' track off Kiss' platinum album, Asylum). MACHINES: C64 SPEC. Certain routes are SUPPLIER: CRL. sectioned off. Once you PRICE: TO FOLLOW. enter these sections, the  VERSION TESTED: C64. idea is to sprint through REVIEWER: TONY DILLON. them in the fastest possible time. If you manage to Now there is a new beat the previous record, bandwagon for software you get another jersey and companies to clamber a time bonus. By the way. onto. First, there was the you also get a jersey if you Official coin-op win a stage. After a while, bandwagon. Then there was the 'Officially endorsed by a famous and well loved sports personality' bandwagon. Now, there's the 'Make it about a breakfast cereal' fad. Following hot on the heels of the press releases concerning the soon-to-be-launched 2019 TOHET CERRP2000 Coco Pops game, Joke!) here's the Official Game of the Kellogg's Tour of Britain. For those of you who don't know, the Tour of Britain is a cycle race from Newcastle to Westminster me. Add graphics that 678 miles in all. Divided would have embarassed a into six stages, the cyclists VIC 20 and you've not got involved have to try and much of a game. get to the front of the pack This game goes against and complete the course everything Kellogg's has in the fastest possible time, ever stood for. You know collecting different what I mean; life, sunshine, coloured jerseys along the happiness, smiling families. Still, if this game sends you to sleep, you can see you getting pretty can always have a sunny hot with all those jerseys bowl of Corn Flakes when on. you wake up. Still, how has the 64 version fared in the computerised translation. GRAPHICS I The best way to describe it SOUND is a cross between Milk Race and the cycling PLAYABILITY event in Summer Games 2,1 VALUE VALUE though not a patch on OVERALL either. The problem is that L. there's no variation. Even the hills are only represented by a UPDATE slope-o-graph thingy at the bottom of the screen. CRL has mentioned no Maybe I can stick it for a plans as present for any stage or two, but for six! further versions of Forget it! Boredom city! Kellogg's Tour, and as I might be tempted to they have now missed the like this a little bit more publicity associated with were the gameplay of any having the real thing excitement, but continuous televised for a year, it is joystick waggling with a bit unlikely they will ever go of the old fire button thrown ahead with it in here and there especially after reading completely fails to excite this review! INNO 23% HOBO "


"MAIN EVENT 6.99 ATARI ST FOOTBALL DIRECTOR II 11.00 FOOTBALL MANAGER 27.99 D.T. OLYMPIC CHALL 13.90 ELITE 13.90 ROCKET RANGER 20.60 POOL OF RADIANCE 17.45 VIRUS 13.90 PACMANIA 13.90 GREAT GAINA SISTERS 13.90 FED. OF FROG TRADERS 20.60 SUPER HANG HANG-ON 13.90 HOSTAGES 17.45 STARGLIDER2 17.45 STAR RAY 13.90 6.99 AMIGA FOOTBALL DIR II 11.00 FOOTBALL MANAGER 2 8.99 FERNANDEZ MUST DIE 17.45 ELITE 17.00 ROCKET RANGER 20.60 POOL OF RADIANCE 17.45 MENICE 13.90 NETHERWORLD 13.90 CARRIER COMMAND 17.45 FEDERATION OF TRADERS 20.60 PAC MANIA 13.90 WHERE TIME STOOD STILL 17.45 BIONIC COMMANDOS 17.45 STARGLIDER 2 17.45 SPECTRUM FBALL DIRII 11.00 FOOTBALL MANAGER 2 3.79 R-TYPE 6.90 DARK PSION 5.50 NINJA 2 8.99 SALAMANDER 6.29 SUPER HANG-ON 6.99 D.T. OLYMPIC CHALL 6.99 PSYCHOPIGUXB 6.29 ROY OF ROVERS 5.59 INTENSITY FERNANDEZ MUST DIE 6.99 5.59 GL HOTSHOT 5.59 ACE 2.50 ALIENS 250 COMMODORE 64 FBALL DIRECTOR 2 11.00 FOOTBALL MANAGER 2 3.79 R-TYPE 6.90 NINJA 2 8.99 BUBBLE GHOST 6.90 SALAMANDER 6.29 WE ARE THE CHAMPIONS 6.99 D.T. OLYMPIC CHALL 6.99 SUMMER OLYMPIAD 6.99 PSYCHOPIG UXB 6.99 REX 629 FERNANDEZ MUST DIE 6.99 GL SUPER SKILLS 6.99 GL. HOTSHOT 6.99 ACE 250 AMSTRAD FOOTBALL DIRECTOR 2111.00 FOOTBALL MANAGER 2 3.79 NINJA 2 : 6.99 FERNANDEZ MUST DIE 6.99 GL HOTSHOT GL SUPERSKILLS ROY OF ROVERS 6.99 OVERLANDER SUPER HANG-ON SUPER SPORTS DARK FUSION PSYCHOPIGU.X.B. 5.59 ECHELON ACE BALL BLAZER 250 LATEST SOFTWARE KNOCKOUTS AMS COMPILATIONS SPEC 629 555 AMIGA ALIEN ATROON 5000 ARMY MOVES ARCADE CLASSICS BURMUDA PROJECT BLASTER BALL BEYOND ZORK 13.90 10.50 17.45 13.90 17.45 6.99 17.45 C64 6.99 6.25 6.99 3.95 3.50 8 8 6.99 6.99 8 8.99 COMMODORE 64 ACTION PACK HOR III 2.99 COMPUTER MITSS 250 ELITE COLLECTION 4.95 GOLDEN OLDIES 2.50 HIT PACK 6VOLII 3.45 NOW GAMES 3 2.50 TAITO COIN OP HITS THE ULTIMATE PACK 8.90 6.95 8 8 8 6.95 6.99 6.99 6.95 6.99 6.99 8 6.99 8 6.99 8 6.99 699 6.99 629 6.95 8 8 8 6.99 8 6.95 625 8 ATARI ST ALTERNATE REALITY 17.45 ALT WORLD GAMES 13.90 ARKANOID 2 1 3.90 ARCADE FORCE FOUR 17.45 ARMY MOVES 13.90 ALIEN SYNDROME 13.90 ACTION SERVICE 13.90 BEYOND ICE PALACE 13.90 CARRIER COMMAND 17.45 COMPUTER HITS 21.00 ELIMINATOR 13.90 EXOLON 13.90 G.L. HOTSHOT 13.90 G.L. SUPER SKILLS 1390 HOSTAGES 17.45 HELTER SKELTER 10.50 IKARIO WARRIORS 10.50 IBALL 6.99 JOE BLADE 6.99 LIVINGSTONE 1045 LANCELOT 13.90 LEATHERNECK 13.90 LURKING HORROR 21.00 LAS VEGAS 6.99 MASTERS UNIVERSE 13.90 OBLITERATOR 17.45 PERFECT MATCH 6.99 SIDE WINDER 6.99 SUMMER OLYMPIAD 13.90 STREET FIGHTER 13.90 13.90 STAR RAY 13.90 THUNDER CATS 13.99 TERRAMEX 13.99 ULTIMATE GOLF 1390 UNINVITED 17.45 XENON 1390 ZYNAPS 13.90 1943 13.90 10TH FRAME 17.45 LEATHER GODDESS 21.00 TITLE ALIEN SYNDROME ARKANOID 12 ALT WORLD GAMES BUGGY BOY BUBBLE BOY BEYOND ICE PALACE BARBARIANI CHUBBY GRISTLE DARKSIDE DT OLYMPIC CHALLENGE EDDIE EDWARDS SUPERSIDE FLINTSTONES G.L. HOTSHOT G.L. SUPERSKILLS GUTZ IKARI WARRIOR INFILTRATOR MOTOR MASSACRE MICKEY MOUSE MARAUDER MASK OUTAUN PREDATOR PINK PANTHER PLATOON ROAD RUNNER ROY OF ROVER STREET FIGHTER SUPER HANG-ON SALAMANDER SUPERSPORTS TARGET RENEGADE TRAC HOW MANAGED TECHNO COP TYPHOON 720 VENOM STRIKES BACK VINDICATOR WONDERBOY CIA COMBAT SPECTRUM ACTION PACK II MICRO VALUE IORI NOW GAMES3 TRIO PACK THE ULTIMATE PACK TAITO COIN OP HITS 6.25 6.99 3.50 3.50 250 1.70 8.90 8.90 8 6.99 2.89 8 8 6.99 8 6.99 6.99 6.99 8 6.99 8 13.95 BLACK JACK ACADEMY 17.45 CHUBBY GRISTLE 13.90 COMPUTERS HITS 21.00 D.T. OLYMPIC CHALL 1745 DROID 2 EXPLORA 28.40 FORM. ONE GRAND PRIX 17.45 FLINTSTONES 13.90 GREAT GAINA SISTERS 1745 GARRISON 2 17.45 G.L. SUPER SKILLS 13.90 GL. HOTSHOT 13.90 GRYZOR 17.45 HOSTAGES 17.45 HELTERSKELTER 10.50 HUNT FOR RED OCT 17.50 INDOOR SPORTS 17.50 JOE BLADE 6.99 LANCELOT 13.90 PLATOON 17.45 ROAD BLASTERS 17.45 SIDE WINDER JAR COPIERS 10.50 STREET FIGHTER 17.45 STAR RAY 17.45 STREET GANG 10.50 TANGE WOOD 13.90 THREE STOOGES 21.00 WORLD DARTS 6.99 WINTER OLYMPIAD 13.90 XENON 13.90 XR 35 6.90 6.99 6.99 3.50 8 6.99 0 8 699 0 AMSTRAD ACTION PACKTOR III 1.28 MICROVALLIE I, II, OR III 3.50 NOW GAMES 3 2.50 TAITO COIN-OPS THE ULTIMATE PACK 8.90 10 GAMES GREMLIN 4.99 8 0 6.99 6.25 8.90 8 0 8 6.99 6.99 83 & 8 & S8 625 8 8 oh oos osas 0 8 & 6 99 6.99 6.99 & &88 6.99 6.99 6.25 3.50 3.50 8 8 a DEPT C+ VG: 61 STAFFORD STREET. HANLEY, STOKE-ON-TRENT, STAFFS ST1 1LW PLEASE MAKE CROSSED CHEQUES PAYABLE TO: SOFTWARE CITY. ENQUIRY LINE: 0782 281544. "


"eV0CNS well-aimed bubble. Just to make matters worse, each tower is played under a strict time limit, and if this expires before the alien enters the door at the top of the tower, another life is lost. If the door is entered, the tower is razed to the ground and the alien makes his way to the next one by means of a bonus same time, and the sprites screen where a are excellent. mini-submarine is driven There are some unusual under the horizontally sampled sitar sounds scrolling sea. Fish drift on heralding the beginning of from the right and are shot a screen and the end of a and collected to ammass game, and the sound extra time for the effects are pretty good. The evel which title screen music is also comes in very useful. good, with the Amiga Nebulus is simply version having the edge brilliant. It's crystal clear over the slightly tinny ST objectives and tune. unpretentious gameplay Whether you're an ST or conspire to provide one of Amiga version, don't let the most playable and this classic escape you. challenging The little green alien ponders.  MACHINES: the building C64/SPECTRUM/ST/AMIGA. The action is presented SUPPLIER: HEWSON. in 3D, with the tower PRICE: SPEC/C64 $9.99 rotating and scrolling CASS, vertically to keep the ST/AMIGA $19.99. VERSIONS TESTED: character central to the STIAMIGA. screen as he moves up and  REVIEWER: JULIAN RIGNALL around. The effect is tremendous, Isn't it strange how a simple computer game can evoke such emotions. Take Nebulus AMIGA STI  GRAPHICS 9 9 SOUND 6 7 VALUE 8 8 PLAYABILITY 9 9  OVERALL 96%96% NEBULUS programs around. The balance between frustration and as everything addiction is perfect, UPDATE... inoves in full perspective allowing you to progress a as the tower scrolls. little further with every Spectrum and The route to the top of a game. Commodore versions had for example, tower is a very precarious a rapturous reception Since I started playing it a one, and every step is gameplay are some when they appeared at couple of hours ago I've fraught with hazards. Not fremendous graphics. The the end of last year; if you broken a joystick, only to some platforms use of colour is superb haven't already got it for screamed colourful disappear when the alien I've never seen so many your machine, hunt it metaphors at the steps on them, but there colours on-screen at the down. computer and made a are also slippery floors to large dent in the filing avoid. Immovable blocks cabinet. And still I keep sometimes bar the way, going back to it. but these are easily The 8-bit versions of destroyed by blowing a Nebulus had similar effects bubble at them. when they were released Sometimes gaps in the towards the end of last platforms are year, but now it has been encountered, but can released in 16-bit form, usually be crossed by complete with vastly leaping the chasm, and improved graphics, better there are also doors which sound and sixteen towers are entered to take the the original eight that alien to the other side of appeared in the first the tower although these versions, and eight new occasionally lead to and even more torturous danger. ones! Robotic guards are in For those who missed out, abundance and follow set and you really did miss out, patterns. Some move up Nebulus is a platform and down, while others game albeit a strange circle the tower. Flying one. The objective is to objects emerge from the guide a little green alien to sides of the screen and the top of a series of travel across the playing constructions that tower area, and bouncing balls out of the sea by occasionally appear, negotiating the steps that although these are run around the outisde of disposed of with a A It's tough at the top. "


"STAND OUT FROM THE CROWD Outstanding You've bought Features the mag, read * High Durability the reviews, Advanced design now get blasting and precision those nasties with engineering. * Rapid response the C+ VG Joystick! Guaranteed by Exclusive to our uniquely constructed readers it's a But hurry, stocks are limited bearing and gate customised version of and the Ed is getting zippy!! assembly. the Euromax Elite *Ultra Sensitive model. Suitable for Atari, Commodore, Fitted with short With its advanced Amstrad and MSX. Also with travel micro interfaces:Sinclair, BBC and design, accurate fire, switches. * Absolute accuracy unique colour and Electron. . In multi giveaway price, it was ---directional just too much for the movement. Please send me C+VG *Reduced fatigue Ed. Recently he was Joystick(s) at .95 + .24 p+p. Advanced ergonomic seen sneaking down Total amount enclosed  design reduces the fire escape with a Please make cheques payable to: effort suitable for crateful earmarked for left or right hand Computer & Video Games. his chums! play. Name So to stand out from *1.5m cord allow | Address for best playing the crowd, all you have position. to do is fill in the _Postcode * Guaranteed Full coupon and rush down 6 months guarantee Please return to: Computer & Video to your nearest post against any Games Joystick Offer, 14 Holkhom i 1 defective parts. box. Road, Orton Southgate, Peterborough i PE2 OEF. TEL: 0733 237111. Allow 28 days for delivery "


"VAP Remember Raffaele Ceccos' action packed Cybernoid The Fighting Machine? Spectrum Cassette .99 + 3 Disc .99 Commodore Cassette .99 Commodore Disc f14.99 Amstrad Cassette .99 Amstrad Disc  14.99 How could you forget! Atari St and Commodore Amiga Available Soon. Awards include, Crash Smash, Zzap Sizzler, Amtix Accolade, Amstrad Action Master Game and many more. Now Premier Software House Hewson, bring you The Sequel CYBERNOID II The Revenge : New Weapons Systems : New Static Features : New Alien Features HEWSON For Mail Order send a cheque/P.O. to Hewson Consultants Ltd. Order by Credit card by sending your Access Barclaycard number, and enclose a specimen signature. Don't forget to enclose your name and address Hewson, Milton Park, Milton, Abingdon. Oxon. OX14 4RX Tel: (0235) 832939 Fax. 0235 861039 As part of our continuing development of innovative Software we are always happy to evaluate software sent to us with a view to publication "


"Paiete SPEI  MACHINES: AMIGA, ST. PC. SUPPLIER: IMAGE WORKS. PRICE: ST AND AMIGA $24.99, PC $29.99. REVIEWER: EUGENE LACEY. VERSIONS TESTED: ATARI ST, AND AMIGA. Speeball is the sport of the future. A rough, tough game where only the strong survive. Inspired by the film Rollerball, in which James PLAVERS Caan plays a futuristic gladiator, Speedball is a vicious sport of the future where no prisoners are taken. Punching your opponent and bribing the officials are essential tactics These guys are mean. If you thought Wimbledon's Vinny Jones was a bit of a Line up for the game of millenium. lad then forget it. He wouldn's last five seconds Xenon you will notice an There are eleven teams with these crash-helmeted immediate similarity. The in the league with their bruisers. hallmark of the hot new names taken from Greek Speedball players dress programming team the mythology. The team to kill. An opening Bitmap Brothers is their captains are also named sequence shows one of the neat metallic graphic and the game gives you a players pulling on a effects and smoothness of full status report on each leather glove. scrolling. Speedball is squad. impregnated with metal near perfect in these two The Bitmap's couldn't studs. departments. resist getting a little plug in Their metal and leather There's bags of strategy for their shoot 'em up garb sets the scene for the in the game. Passing is Intermediate screen show iron fist and ribe game which is very difficult but worthwhile. absorbing to play as Just like any good well as creating a totally computer soccer game, believable sci-fi world. the key to it is making the The game itself is fought passing of the ball a key out between two element of game play. five-a-side teams. The Moving the ball one player metal ball spins out from a to another, gaining revolving dispenser which ground, and positioning comes up out of the centre your attacker to make a of the pitch and sinks down strike. again once the ball is in Further strategy elements play. are offered by the The action is fast and revolving coins that furious as the five players appear on the pitch scroll up and down screen periodically. Your players on the relatively small play have to grab as many as area. possible to trade at the end The ball can be of each game for extra bounced off walls speed, stamina and thrown or punched nearly power. the entire length of the Building the team is pitch and almost anything essential as Speedball is is allowed in the frenzied on a league fable basis struggle to get the ball in with full save game the net. facilities for maximum long If you have ever played term enjoyment. A The ball soars skyward's as players race for the token. "


"PLRVER 1 SELECT DDDDD LRCERTR TERMVERSELECT BRODD A The distinctive Bitmap's metallic look graphics. BRIBE OFFICIAL EXTRA STRMONA BRIBE TIMER WH HEHE **************** ******************** ******** ******** ****************** ***************** Xenon. One team captain being named after the game. As well as the trading element with the coins, there are also eight letters and a question mark When picked up these range in their effects from reversing the joystick direction, decreasing your opponent's stamina, getting the ball automatically, freezing your opponent and ist and bribe tokens. making you tackle proof. If I were to pick on anything Off the ball I would say that the sound gamesmanship includes a effects could have been feature where you can improved together with the punch an opponent if method of picking up and neither of you are in using lettered power ups. possession and my notes That said, Speedball is on the game include this going to be a monster hit. It charming little tipfurns the well worn sci-fi \"Another ploy is to lob the theme of future sports into a ball towards the thumping good computer opponent's goal from game. halfway upfield, then foul the goalie with another GRAPHICS player as he attempts to 1 catch it\". SOUND The real key to Speedball VALUE is mastering the art of passing and catching PLAYABILITY the ball can be plucked OVERALL 84% from the air by making your player leap by pressing the fire button. UPDATE... There are a number of moves that can be Image Works is implemented with the investigating the joystick which all add up to possibility of a 64 version making Speedballmuch but at this stage admits more than a mad dash that it is looking doubtful. around the pitch in an Amiga and ST versions are attempt to score goals. now complete and will be Playing against the on sale soon. An IBM PC computer in Speedballis and compatibles version fun but is really only for is being coded but it will practice. This game comes require a minimum of into its own as a two player 512K to run. Image Works challenge. recently announced the It is difficult to fault signing of a deal with the Speedball. You know as Bitmap Brothers to publish soon as it boots that you their next three games. have a piece of quality Watch this space for news software in your computer. of these. A Speedball the Bitmap's best game yet. "


"Preview The Future! PROJECT: STEALTH FIGHTER MICROPROSE Stealth Fighter... the hottest topic of conversation in aviation PROJECT: STEALTH FIGHTER. Another brillant simulation circles today. Space Age technology and engineering make from MicroProse. Available for the Commodore 64/128K. these aircraft virtually undetectable by enemy radar. Cassette .95. Disk .95. Stealth Fighters are believed to be in operation, flying the most sensitive missions, flown by a superior class of pilot. You can experience that thrill of flying a revolutionary aircraft. previewing the edge of the future. SIMULATION SOFTWARE Please send copy/ies of Project: Stealth Fighter CBM 64/128 Cassette .95 Disk .95 Further details. Name (block capitals)Address Post Code I enclose  including 55p P+P. Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd. PSF/C + VG/0388 or debit my Access/Visa card. Expiry date. No. MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. UK. Tel: (0666) 54326.Tlx: 43422 MPS/UKG. "


"ZILIU How big is a big film? communists and the chief Absolutely huge at least if inquisitor was Senator Joe Big (PG) is its title. Big has McCarthy, who whipped up raked in the big bucks all such a storm of fear and across America and that's loathing that anybody who despite the fact that it bears was not a rabid right-winger an uncanny similarity to was suspect. Vice Versa, which appeared Emily Crane is just such a here in July, plus a couple of victim. Unwilling to accept other American movies McCarthy's madness she which never made it across loses her job on a magazine the Atlantic. and is forced to take a menial The supernatural post reading books to a rich story-line that has given old lady. One afternoon Hollywood its bad case of \"Hallo',\" to all you horror hounds as weird strolling in the woman's deja vu is that old chestnut Ward R. Street mixes a witches brew of new garden, she hears voices about young boys who from a neighbouring window become grown men movie releases for halloween. German voices and her overnight. Ward's guess is suspicions draw her into a that a lot of middle aged deadly plot. producers have been Emily Crane is just the sort regretting the good old days of strong woman we see all of their lost youth recently! to seldom in the cinema But what really matters is yes, girls are good for things which is better Vice other than screaming and Versa's role reversal or being rescued by big, butch these Big jobs? man. Kelly McGillis is the Big has a big, brat pack perfect choice to play her star, Tom Hanks, but you However even a tough dame don't get to see him until can't always get out of after 12-year-old Josh has trouble by herself, so it's a made a wish on an archaie good thing Jeff (Something arcade machine which Wild) Daniels is around to transforms him from a give her a helping hand-gun! troubled teen into a Director Peter Yates thirty-five year old man knows just what makes a overnight. Let's face it good thriller remember being handsome Tom Hanks Tom Hanks proves that he's just a big kid at heart, Bullill? and as the is one hell of a help when it world and if, in the end, immigrants, all hanging conspiracy deepens and evil comes to picking up girls. preferred Vice Versa, the around the New York McCarthyite investigator DU JOSTI S parents dont public has picked Big, so see address. It's the sort of thing Salwen, slimily played by take too kindly to a them both and make up your that could get the Mandy Patinkin, closes his 'stranger strolling down for own mind. neighbourhood a bad name! claws around the couple, the breakfast and pretty soon There are more strange In 1951 America was suspense builds. It all their son is on the run with doings down at The House plunged into paranoid culminates in a chase in the his best friend Billy, who on Carroll Street (PG), but hysteria of a kind not seen classic Hitchcock style helps him hide out in a sleazy they're not of the since the Salem witch hunts which should keep you on New York hotel supernatural sort. Instead sent innocent old women to the edge of your seat to very It may sound like a dream we're in the world of spying, the stake. The targets of this last moment. to be an instant adult, but FBI agents and illegal persecution were supposed If Carroll Street contains pretty soon Josh discovers Kelly McGillis and Jeff Daniels star in House on Carrol Street that it means finding a job fashioned mysteries, Nico and earning a living, all of (18) demonstrates what's which makes school sound worst about modern cop pretty hip. However an films. It's slick and sick, opening in a toy company sleazy and noisy, with little gives the big boy his first logic but apparently foot on the ladder to success. possessed of a belief that you Who could be better when it have to throw in an comes to telling a toy explosion or some other manufacturer how to violence every five minutes succeed than a twelve year just to keep the audience old? awake. Billy's search for the Nico Toscanini grew up on fairground machine which the heavy South Side of will return his friend to Chicago, trained as a martial normal, and Josh's affair arts master before serving with a beautiful colleague with the CIA in Vietnam, who doesn't realise that the then, haunted by memories guy she's falling head over of a brutal interrogation heeds with is young enough specialist named Zagon, who to be her son, make for an was a dab hand with a entertaining hour and three hypodermic full of quarters, poking fun at a lot dangerous drugs, he became of so-called 'grown up' a cop. No surprises that he's behaviour. Tom Hanks hardly the friendly bobby on cleverly suggests a twelve the beat! year old adrift in the adult continued on page 70 "


"In fact Nico is a fully fledged police psychopath of which somehow manages to the shoot first school. One leave one of its characters day, while cheerfully trapped on the other side roughing up a low-life dope and nobody giving a damn dealer, he's told of a about his fate. I'm just smuggling operation only calling in an excorcist in case instead of drugs the it means yet another sequel! shipment contains There should have been a explosives, which lead him mixed assortment of laughs back to his arch-nemesis, the for hard centred ghouls in hypo happy Zagon. Who'd Consuming Passion (15). have thought? the story how human flesh in The film contains one a batch of chocolates boost a scene of arm-snapping fading sweets company's violence which even had a humour, such as Tim Spall sales figures. But this dark cinema of hardened critics degenerating into a comedy is plain, soft centred reaching for the barf bags monstrous, pustulant and sickly, which is all the or laughing aloud at the glutton, but they're not more amazing as it's based grossness of it all! really worth staying awake on an idea by Monty Somewhere in the sound and for. Python's Michael Palin and fury is an attack on US Those things that go bump Terry Jones, involvement in Central in Poltergeist III (18) have lan Littleton is an America but it's hardly also scared everyone so ambitious young trainee at enough to redeem this much that the film, which I Chumley's Chocolates gratuitously grotty epic. reviewed in August, has (doesn't that name warn you From horrors of the been put back to this month. what to expect?) whose human kind to supernatural However despite some very clumsy incompetence causes nasties, as Britain's answer clever tricks with mirrors a workman to slip into a to Nightmare on Elm Street it's all fairly ordinary stuff. production line vat and tries to disturb your A Nico emerge as a filling for the slumbers. Unluckily the cream assortment. Dream Demon (18) aims to Inevitably the public takes be rather more arty than to the new taste and Farris, Freddie's fear fests, which the company's brash new could send gore hounds to manager, puts money before sleep rather than making morals as he realises that them gag. cannibalism is the recipe to Sloaney Diana well, strike it rich. Consuming she'd have to be, sharing a Passions is badly written, name with a Princess is clumsily directed and about to marry dashing sloppily acted. A real Falklands hero Oliver in a passion killer, in fact. perfect, rural English But just as you're about to church. Then she slaps him give up on British films, and his head falls off and ... along swims A Fish Called well, you guessed it's all a Dream Demon. Wanda (15), also involving a dream! But it's a reasonable former Python, John Cleese beginning for a tale where A gothic-y American girl, as a starchy barrister, Archie the waking and sleeping Jenny, befriends Di in the Leach, who finds himself worlds become increasingly most unlikely fashion, and falling in with a gangster's intertwined. Unfortunately before you can say, moll, played by the the film proceeds to descend \"Welcome to my Nightmare delectable Jamie Lee Curtis, not into hell but towards the she too is part of yet another and suddenly discovering bargain basement and bad dream of a British that there is more to life boredom. movie. There are a few than his middle class career Alone in her London flat, moments of ghoulish and family the nightmares continue to Cleese is one of the haunt Di, while outside she's A Fish Called Wanda. funniest men in Britain and besieged by a couple of the increasingly bizarre low-life, sensation seeking experiences which he journalists. Wot, belching, undergoes give him every boozing hacks working for opportunity to make the the great British press? most of his talents. Also Never!!! Actually, these two watch out for Michael Palin, News of the Screws rejects redeeming his hand in those are supposed to be from a flesh filled choccies, as the local paper, which is a little owner of the fish called unlikely to say the least. Wanda, who gets chips stuck Worse, they're played by up his nose by an American Jimmy Nail and Tim Spall, of thug. The film has been a Auf Wiedersehen Pet fame huge success in the US of A, two fine actors working proving that when we Brits alone, but teamed together get it right we can hold our you can't help wondering own with any Hollywood when 'London', Bomber and production. Bait your hook the rest are going to appear! and catch this one when it surfaces near you! be "


"SHEKHANA MAIL ORDER SERVICES ESTAB: SINCE 1978 ACCESS ORDER BY CREDIT CARD LINE 01-348-2907 VISA ST Amiga 15 99 15 69 15.99 15 99 Software Title NoRaider Overlander Operation Woll Ann Syndrome Foot Manager 2 3D Wander Netherworld Spec Spec 054 054 AMS AMS Cass Disk Cass Disk Cass Disk 7:50 1750 2 750 02 01 7.50 D2 6.30 01 7.50 D2 7.50 02 5.99 6.30 Virus 13 99 13.99 23 99 23 99 15.99 15.99 15.99 1999 15 99 1999 Sega Master System 79.95 Master System Plus 99 95 Sega Super System 129.99 Light Phaser 3D Glasses Control Sock Spy V Spy Choplitter 22.95 Action Fighter Great Football World Soccer Wonderboy Moss Mission 2 Street Fighter 15.99 1998 13 99 15.99 Head Aiament 888888 World Grand Pro ONNONONI Fox Fights Back March 2 owd Core 88888888888888888888888888 8.988 23 28 8888 Cube Zone L Power Strike Hotshot Leters Super Stagider 8888888 13.99 13.99 13 9913 99 1399 1399 15.99 15.99 15.99 15.99 5.99 Wations Football Director Ad Tacl Fighter 6.75 Ocp Art Studio 1 099 Green Berelil Gunship Track Suit Manager 7.50 N Mansells G Pro 7.99 Empire Strikes Back 7.50 Peagus Bridge 9 .99 Question of Sport 10.99 Gold Siver Bronze 12.99 15.99 8888888888888888888 88888 NONODONNEONNNNNNN CONNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNDD 24.95 Spec Spec 064 064 AMS AMS Software Title Cass Disk Cass Disk Cass Disk \"Software Title ST Amigal Software Double Dragon 750 750 02 750 02 15 99 1500 Liners Horshot Salamander 550 Stargliderile 15.99 15.99 Fernandez must Die Test Drive Cartier Command 15.99 15 99 750 Double Dragon 1 3.99 13.99 Barbarian Mel 750 750 02 1399 1399 Put Garmin Advance Art Shutdo 16 20 16 9905 Driver Inernal Soccer 13.99 13.99 Terrapods Mal 750 Empire Stratagy 19.99 Thunderblade Total Eclipse 750 02 750 02 750 02 A Type Zo Zoro 15.99 15.99 Carrier Command 1099 D2 Eliminator 13.99 Tiger Road Supreme Challenge 999 D3 Power Drome 18.75 1875 Xenon Gueria War War in Middle Earth 50 Dungeon Master 1599 15.99 Rambo Knight Ore Bands et 1999 1999 Combat School Stealth Fighter Bore Commandes 15.99 15 99 Operation Wort G1 Hero 13.99 1399 15.99 2099 Aboume Ranger Test Drive 19.99 19.99 Robocop Return to Genses 14.99 14.99 Samurai Wamo Football Manager 2 Pac Mania 750 Capone 20.99 20.99 Target Renagade Gold Runner Alien Syndrome War Middle Earth D37-99 DS Leaderboard Coin Tiger Road 7.99 D3 Bugoy Boy Peter Beardsley 7.50 D Quad Alien Blazing Barrels Bards Talet 7.99 Heroes of Lance Psycho Pas UXB 7.99 7.99 Pool of Radiance 1875 1875 Ultimate Golf Led Storm 7.99 D3 7.99 Platoon 13.99 1599 Motor Massacre Space Harrier 13.99 1599 Techno Cop... D Toms Olympic Space Harrieri 13.99 15.99 Red Storm Rising Action Service Barbaran D Toms Olympic 13.99 Ghost & Gobin Arcade Force Four 699 Street Fighter 15.99 Mke Reads Quiz We are the Champs 7.99 30 Wanderer Heroes of Lance Spring Imagine Question of Sport Time Stood Suit Accessories Thunder Bade Defender of Crown 19.99 \"loader Rocrder Tato Coin Oos No Rader 15.99 15.99 Acton Replay MK Typhoon Flight Simulator 29.99 29.99 Action Replay Pro Captain Blood Expert Cartridge Bionic Commande 13.99 1599 Freeze Machine Street S Soccer Three Stooges .. 16.99 16.99 10 x 5.25Disks Victory Road Bobble Bobble 1 3.99 13.99 10 x 3.5 Sony Legend of the Sword 15.99 15.99 10x35 Disks Soldier of Light WG ........ 13.99 13.99 Amga StpsiCover Guns Euromakhon Auto Super Hang on.. . 13 Euromax Pro Bubble Bobble Konis J Sock Ocean Companion 9.99 Great Gana Sister 15 99 18.99 Konis Autore Robocop Space Harner. .. 1399 16.99 Quick Shot il Untouchables Echelon Quick Shox Turbo Dragon Ninja Multiface Como Pro Black Wec Le Mans 630 Summer Olympiad 1399 1399 Como Pro Clear Espionage ...530 DI 15.99 15.98 Como Pro Extra Soldier of fortunes TimeStood So Also Available on Disk Format 1.8.99. 02.10 99, 03.01299. 04..99. 05.1999 888888888888888888888888888888888888888 3888 888888888888888888888888888888888888888888 Pengum land Outrun Alex Kidd Alien Syndrome Wonderboy Captain Silver Shinobi Thunderblade Double Dragon Kenseiden Lord of the Sword 13.99 15.99 15 99 15.99 15 99 15.99 15.99 1599 15.99 15.99 13.99 1399 1399 15.99 14.99 15.95 1399 1599 1999 15.99 18.99 Mrade Warrior 6.75 6.30 Space Harrier Missile Defence 30 Zaxon 3-D dada88aad888888888886668888ddddd 39.99 1999 29.99 The Games Action Service Aura Buchet Dax Fusion Super Hang On Techno Cop Te Mack Motor Massacre Game Overit Supersports Cybernoid il Live. Let Die Brunos Big Box Fist. Throttles Out Run Exploding Fist Blade Eagle 3D Submarine 3D NUNONNNNNNNNNN 8888888888888888888888888 28 99 15.99 9.99 99.99 17.99 24,99 Atter Burner Phantasy Star Nintendo Control Deck Deluxe Set Urban Champion Wild Gunman Soccer RC Pro Am Pro Wrestling Metroid Mike Tysons Boxing Legend of Zelda 7 99 29 99 1299 13.99 15.99 1199 29.99 39.99 Pacmania Credit Card Holders Mail Order Customers For all order please make Cho PP payable SCSIC. VG) 655 Green Lanes London NBOQY P.Pincluded in the UK Europe add El pertem elsewhere add . A s for machines for P.PUK Only Send SAE for free list Please machine type in order Personal Callers Personal cars can pick up software at our branches at Shana, 221. Tottenham Court Road London WIR AF Nr Good S Station Tec 1 631 4627 OIS CS 655. Green lanes London NBOOY nearest tube sin Turk Lane Tel: 01 340-8565. On product of your copy of this advert we will give you a discount of 10% Off The RRP on software. the title appears on this advert. Except Sega Nintendo: Above is etective from (12 8 8B) Above prices are for mail order only 01 348 2907. 01 340-8565, 01-631-4627 Credit card orders despatched same day Subct to availability Please note we also now sellephones, cordes cellular, Pak Accessories Answer Fax. Copiers, Shredders Calculators. Machines Ring Tel.Fax 01-436-9590 ATARIST OWNERS Megasave Why not complement the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with the MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY. The greatest biggest and best Atari Club on the market AMS DISCCOMM DISC AMIGA & ATARIST APPROX 1450 ST TITLES NOW IN STOCK O' 6888 Games, Business Education and uttes MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over 5 years ago first conceived the idea of a FOR SALE: HUGE STOCK CLEARANCE OF ATARI XL/XE CASSETTES, Hundreds to clear all originals, please write in for list and prices. 200 XL Cassettes for sale originals 200 the lot! Often purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members at chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Many very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany, Holland, Denmark and tire. A fast efficient and friendly service operating a computerised custom built system to keep track of all your records requests are attended to immediately, virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service regular newsletters and program updates, plus other interclub activities SEND LARGE S.A.E. TO: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 READWAY, BISHOPS CLEEVE, CHELTENHAM, GLOS Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programs are originals with full documentation 8888888888888888888888888 90 91 9 SSSSSSSS688888888&&SSSSSSS888888888888888888 400/806 NOW CLOOK SERRESRESOSSESSRESSRESSIES XLUXE ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to:CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 -4D Tel: 0509 412604 922022 8888888888888888 5500 414 Vuiàu Vàu CD 02 03 049235 MAL ORDER ONLY POSTAGE INCLUDED GREAT BRITAIN EE P ERITE OVERSEAS ESO PER ITEM FAST SERVICE SEND CHEQUE PO TO VEGASAVE DEPT COVO SUTHERLANDS VICTORA LONDON S K AL ORDER ONLY PLEASE SEND FOR FREE LIST OF NEW RELEASES ON AMSTRAD CESATARIST AGA COMMODORE SPECTRUM AND DISC STATE WHOHUST PLEASE NOTE NEW PROGRAMS WILL BE SENT THE DAY THEY ARE RELEASED "


"SOLDIER OF FORTUNE MACHINES: SPECTRUMICBM 64. SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD. PRICES: $7.95 SPECTRUM/59.95 CBM 64 CASS/512.95 DISK.  VERSIONS TESTED: CBM 64/SPECTRUM. REVIEWER: CHRIS JENKINS. Trolling around the village. In the last few months, the legal wobblies over Graftgold have tended to cause more excitement than their games. In the battle between Hewson and Telecomsoft over the rights to programmers Andrew Braybrook and Steve Turner's work, no-one seems to have come out best: so far, Firebird have come up with Magnetron (very much a re-run of Quazatron) and Morpheus, a pretty but unplayable shoot-'em-up. Maybe Soldier of Fortune will be the turning point. sequence is graphically uninteresting and doesn't add much to the game, so it's no loss that the Spectrum version doesn't have one; here, it's just a matter of finding tokens hidden on the bodies of dead adventurers, and collecting enough to earn you the protection of a guardian spirit as you fight against the final monster on each level. The Commodore 64 version, then, is a dead standard. pretty boring pot boiler which does little to add to Graftgold's reputation. The Spectrum PLAYER 1 2209 .39 9 PLAYER 1 1000 A Hostile creatures abound 1000 PLAVER : . A Clamber up the rope. walk, run, jump, climb and feeling more up-to-date. In open doors, all under contrast, the Spectrum version, in contrast, is Written by John Cumming. joystick control. In two version looks completely interesting and it's not what you'd expect player mode, the game different, with larger, more imaginative, featuring from Graftgold at all. It's a \"camera\" attempts to interesting sprite designs, touches like flying fantasy arcade adventure follow whichever playe nicely detailed status platforms, giant monsters rather than a space pressed his fire button first indicators and decorative and imaginatively extravaganza, and it so it's in your interest to stick screen borders. They're designed sprites which certainly doesn't set any together. If the other player like two completely make it more than your new standards in either disappears off the screen, disappears of the screen, diferent game different games, and the run-of-the mill pixie originality or he will lose energy swiftly. Spectrum version is shoot-'em up. programming excellence. The Commodore version immensely superior. You'll want to know the has very poor background has very poor background What they have in GRAPHICS plot, although trankly it's graphics of trees, common is the basic plot. the normal platforms, ladders and In order to complete your SOUND 7 5 sword-and-sorcery tosh. walkways. The monster quest you have to collect Evil mage Krillys has GAMEPLAY 7 8 sprites dance around magical tokens, find your unleased a horde of smoothly while the screen way through mystic VALUE 5 7 demons on the world by scrolls around, but the transporters, and obtain OVERALL 65% 81% damaging the Zodiac design is so poor that you new weapons to protect Power Source. Your task, as can't make out what most you against ever more either Tartarus or Teron (or of them are supposed to be fiercesome enemies. In the UPDATE... both in the two-player bats, wolves, whatever. Commodore version, you version) is to find the In fact, the whole can enter shops in villages Soldier of Fortune is due Source, return it to its production looks like a and, if you have found for release on the rightful place and save a second-rate version of golden tokens, trade with Commodore 64 and whole forest full of grateful Ghosts and Goblins, with the villagers for extra Spectrum on October pixies. only the excellent theme weapons, shields, keys and 19th. There are no other Tartarus and Teron can music and spot effects scrolls. The trading versions planned. "


"GET $ IT'S AMAZING WHAT A REAL COMPUTER GAME CAN DO. Amstrad screen shots Spectrum cassette .99 Commodore 64 cassette .99, disc .99 Amstrad cassette .99, disc f14.99 FREBRE For mail order please send your order and remittance (cheques payable to British Telecom plc or direct debit from Access/Visa card by stating card number and expiry date) to: The Marketing Department, Telecomsoft, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford Street, London WCIA 1PS. Telecomsoft, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford St, London WCIA 1PS. Firebird and Firebird Logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications PLC. A LEGEND IN GAMES SOFTWARE "


"C + VG's role-playing expert, Wayne, dons some protective clothing and enters the Bloodbowl, then travels to the post-holocaust world of Twilight: 2000 to mount a last-ditch NATO assault on Poland. There's also the usual stack of FRP mail. When are you going to write in? FANAS Bloodbowl SUPPLIER: GAMES WORKSHOP DESIGNER: JERVIS JOHNSON PRICE: .99 COMPLEXITY: BEGINNER UPWARDS. REVIEWER: WAYNE Blockers, Catchers and mastered the basic rules, you Throwers. If you are familiar can move on to the Veterans with American football, or are Rules, which cater for even a fan, the game should be advanced play. Again, these easy for you to play, as you will are well set out and easy to be fluent with the jargon used. follow. There are also details However, if you are a novice, it of special teams, where the is all explained in the 40 page veterans rules apply. Bloodbowl Handbook. The game components are Here you will find out how quite impressive. Along with the game evolved, how the the aforementioned books. Bloodbowl is a form of American football played by real mean sword and sorcery Buon DE GW has revamped it, made it more colourful and upped the price to nearly .00. I would have considered the game value for money, if it delivered the action and excitement that it promised But it does not. The action is slow and dreary. Sure, you get to stun and kill players and larger team members can throw their smaller colleagues WITH the ball, however, it just doesn't deliver the violent chaos it promises. Jervis Johnson, the designer, has had a great idea here. However, what the game needed was a fast, fluid, freewheeling rules system, which was simple and speedy. As it stands Bloodbowl allows you to play a few slow, tedious games instead of many that are swift and speedy. Just one game of Bloodbowl would take you more than an hour if you stuck by the rules. Of course, if you really appreciate the game, you will have hours of fun ahead of you. Bloodbowl contains all you need and more to run a series of games that will last you a long time. There is, of course, the all too familiar expansion kits, which will enable you to buy more teams, extra rules and even cheer leaders!! There are various ways to end Bloodbowl. The most common way is to limit it to a cer n s abune de R CHAMPIONSORDI 000 BOWL Binni Bloodbowl a rip roaring game with lots of bits. dudes like orcs, trolls, goblins, game is played, how it works, you get two teams of 16 dwarves and, of course, what the referees are like, the players, which are ready and humans. equipment used as well as a list waiting to be painted, a large The aim of the game isn't of teams that all provide you three part pitch, which is made winning. It is to maim and with the flavour of the game out of detailed stone grey, injure as many opponents as and inspiration. \"reinforced\" polystyrene, a possible, whilst playing with a The nitty gritty of pass measuring device, a flair and style that dazzles the Bloodbowl is found in the 24 direction finder plus dice and crowd. The game is played on a four page rulebook. This various other colourful pitch that measures 100 by 60 covers every aspect of the game accessories, including dice and paces with a further 10 paces at such as setting up the game, the end zone markers. each end zone. The team sequence of play, movement, Bloodbowl is not a new comprise a large number of passing, blocking and so on. game. It was originally players, but only Il are There are pages of examples, marketed in 1986 and consisted allowed on the pitch at any one which lead you, play by play, of a four piece jigsaw board time. They are split into four through a typical game in (spit!) plus rulebook. At that groups of players Blitzers, action. Once you have time it sold for .95. Now 7-M08-00078 74 A Yankee football comes to life as for "


"Role PLAYING Twilight:2000 set number of touchdowns, which I would advise to be three at the maximum. However, if you are really keen, you could play it for ninety minutes (real time) and the person with the highest score at the end is the winner. PRODUCT: TWILIGHT: claim outright victory. The war warlords, private armies, and 2000. went on If you do this, be sure to put a murderous bands of deserters SUPPLIER: GAMES OF time limit on each player's turn After the bombs dropped the roam the countryside. This LIVERPOOL. to stop time wasting. I agree DESIGNER: FRANK war changed. Tanks broke game is all about survival and with GW here and suggest five CHADWICK down and couldn't be repaired your capacity to ensure it!! minutes per player. PRICE: .95. because of the lack of spare The technical problems are Where I can't fault GW is in REVIEWER: WAYNE. parts. Most of the technical immense. There is no gasoline, COMPLEXITY: the production. The artwork is EXPERIENCE weapons fired all of their modern equipment is almost EXPERIENCED PLAYERS. excellent, the figures are well ammo, and, as no one was non existent and ammo is hard detailed and well moulded in Twilight: 2000 is a complete role making any more, armies that to come by. You are in a very sturdy plastic, all the accessories do their relevant jobs perfectly and the board is well designed. The box is one of the best I have ever seen. Furthermore, the written background to the game, the fax and the commentators reports are all exceptionally witty. However, despite all this, my initial criticisms still stand. With Bloodbowl carrying a price tag of .00 and only catering for two players, I can only recommend it to hard core American football fans or people who think they would like the cross over between sport and swordplay. PLAYABILITY COMPLEXITY DESIGN PRESENTATION 9 VALUE Twuma 200 Two TWILIGHT:2000 TWILIGHT:2000 adau ORCLAYAAIDERS Twilight: 2000 another exclusive pic of box contents from C+VG. playing system for a Role at one time put 20,000 people frustrating position as you Playing Game that is set on into the field were lucky to put have the knowledge and, in earth in the year 2,000 after a 2,000. some cases, the blueprints or nuclear war has taken place. Despite all this the war supportive written material, The players play the part of continues. The players however you lack the essential soldiers, left to fend for characters are allied to items to make anything useful. themselves as the NATO's forces and in this The product comes in a very organisational structure and game your mission is to make a colourful and well illustrated communications of the army last drive into central Poland to A4 box. It contains a large are all but broken down. see what breakthroughs you selection of written material, Since 1995 the armies of the can make. including the play manual, the world were involved in an all You will soon find out referee's manual, a large list of out war. Around 1998 the however that the war is the charts which include the nuclear bombs began to land least of your problems. The equipment available to players and although every country warring factions are not and the cost a introductory suffered a great deal of particularly powerful and the adventure called \"Escape damage, no country could real hazards come from local continued on pag. 77 75 es fantasy RPG "


", THE BIG APPLER DLE Boco Ta 1212 TE 111 ACTUAL COMMODORE 64 SCREEN SHOTS. wala ako HITT SPECTRUM 48K .95 COMMODORE 64 .95 tape. E14.95 disc Available soon on ATARI ST .95 AMIGA .95. IBM PC .95 Each pack contains FREE APPLES' to be exchanged for a wide selection of gifts available from the BRONX CLUB THE BRONX THE SMARTEST GANG ON THE STREETS \"...OOPSI, a thoroughly addictive arcade style game.\" Your Commodore (August, 1988) \"...OOPS! is an original and enjoyable challenge.\" Games Machine (July, 1988) \"...OOPS!, grabs you from the word go.\" Computer & Video Games (July, 1988) \"...OOPS! a challenging arcade strategy game.\" ZZAP 64 (August 1988) Company THE HIC APPLE ENT CO LTD. ALL COPYING, LENDING OR RESALE BY ANY MEANS IS STILICTLY PROHIBITED DESIGNER PACKAGING 19 THE BIG APPLE ENTERTAINMENT CO LTO L'AT. PENDING HOW TO JOIN simply send your 8\" X 10'S.A.E. to Bronx Billy c/o House 12 Brunswick Way Brunswick The Big Apple Entertainment Co. Ltd. Prestwich Industrial Park London NIT 1HX super gift catalogue for FREE membership and "


"FANAS, Role-PLAYING From Kallisz\", record sheets, a if they are to last one day in this large full colour map of game. All those loyal gun-ho, Poland, circa 2000AD, plus John Wayne types won't last four six-sided dice and one ten five minutes in this game! sider. The main thing to bear in The play manual should be mind is that Twilight: 2000 is read first by both the players all about change, and this is and the referee. This what sets it apart from most introduces them both to the other role playing games. The game with a fragmented world here is going through background of the war, then constant change, adapting and continues to explain Character adjusting to the effects of the Generation, which is fairly holocaust and the war. Most simple, time and travel, role playing games are set in upkeeping of records plus fairly stable environments, Combat. The combat system is however in this game things very realistic and covers all rarely stay unchanged for long. aspects of warfare from hand A friendly village encountered to hand fighting to combat by two months ago may be wiped foreign players, but it will also be helpful to potential UK players. All you have to do is send me a s.a.e. and I will forward the list to you pronto! \"A friend of mine told me that lead miniatures are essential \"I really want to go Live Role when you buy an FRP. Are Playing, but I live in the North they? I hope not because I of England and all the LRP can't paint an Orc's nostri societies seem to be run in the Also I can't seem to find south!! Is there anywhere I can Dragon Roar in stock go, which is not too far away, anywhere, so if you are selling so I can participate in this i t, I'll buy it from you. By the intriguing hobby?\" way, keep up the great work on Rico Gusman, the FRP pages!\" Chester. Mark Storey, Well Rico, get that rubber Sheffield. sword ready!! \"Spirit Of Adventure\" is an LRP society Thanks for your support that is based at: 1 Scarsbrick Mark. In answer to your Rd, Burnage, Manchester, questions, lead miniatures are M19 2BT. not essential to RPGs bur My spies report that it is well they certainly help!! In sword worth a look. They have and sorcery games, miniatures various overground locations give you a feel to the game and and one or two enclosed help the poor old GM keep \"cavern\" adventure sights. track of where the player You should contact Pam characters were. However, it Turnball at the above address you were to play a game with or give her a ring after 6pm on more humour like Paranoia or 061 2248801. Happy Toon, then you wouldn't need adventuring. them at all, as fun and frolics are what those two games are \"I am an avid computer role all about. Miniatures are only player and have an Amiga. I necessary if the FRP you're have completed such games as playing demands it. **The Bard's Tale\", \"Ultima'' The Dragonroar problem is (several versions) and \"The a common one, as I have Ancient Art Of War\", but I several letters concerning it. can't find any more. Please The best bet is to write to recommend a few more for me Standard Games. and let me know when the Amiga Version of \"I live in Holland and I find it \"Dungeonmaster\" is coming it very difficult to buy FRP out as I'm desperate for it!! material anywhere. Could you Paul Watson, let me know a local hobby shop Middx. or can you recommend a reliable British company which The Amiga version of will export the various FRP \"Dungeonmaster\" should goodies to me?\" soon be on sale. If for some Michael Van Lam. reason it is not out, I would A frustrated Dutch role player. suggest getting hold of \"Legend Of The Sword\", This is typical of many letters which is very entertaining. that I receive from people all Furthermore, work is over the world. To solve this commencing on the Amiga problem. I have prepared a version of AD+D, which, as Standard list which gives full reviewed in C+ VG last month, details of any overseas FRP is brilliant!! However, if you shops that I know, plus reliable have Dungeonmaster by now, British companies who export that will keep you occupied for FRP goods. It is ideal for a couple of months!! A Ducking and diving in Twilight: 2000. weapon. Combat resolution is out by opposing forces when quite complicated and I found re-visited. A well equipped that it took quite a bit of military unit may turn into a getting used to. group of marauders after The referee's manual killing their officers and a contains all the referee should peaceful secure area may know, which is considerably become overrun by enemy more than the players. It troups overnight. includes a expanded combat I would recommend this section, notes on random game to fairly experienced role encounters and an additional players, who are fed up with rules system. These consist of sword and sorcery campaigns rules that cover such topics as and are looking for a new radiation (nasty!), disease, outlet for their underworked trade and commerce, line of fire and repairs. role playing would find this a Twilight: 2000 is an enjoyable particularly daunting task and if sometimes complex game. I would advise them to try You can see if you have the something simpler. wits, endurance, courage and Twilight 2000 is challenging skill to survive. Furthermore, a and different. A friendly village encountered COMPLEXITY 9 two months ago may be wiped PLAYABILITY 8 out by opposing forces when re-visited. A well equipped PRESENTATION 8 military unit may turn into a VALUE 8 character must learn to adapt to certain given circumstances OVERALL 8 "


"«So why didn't we order it from Wight Computing.\" TELE-GAMES Europe's Largest Stock Of Video Games & Cartridges for AJRI mi CBS COSER STAN STOCK INTELLIVISION S NEW Z 2600 GAMES NOW IN STOCK NOW Nintendo WICO JOYSTICKS FOR NINTENDO IN STOCK NOW The leading Video game specialists. Send for lists (state make of game) TELEGAMES, WIGSTON, LEICESTER, LEB 1TE (0533-880445) DND Adventure Games DND MEscape Shire DND Magus a 4 Game Text Adventure Double Tape 9.99 Disk 11.99 Tape Disk Spectrum 48/128 Amstrad 464/6128 Commodore 64/128 Escape from the Shire (a Graphic Adventure! Tape .99 Disk 16.99 Tape Disk Spectrum 48/128 Amstrad 464/61280 Commodore 64/12800 \"But still he sits there with that blank look on his face.' Please enclose your Name and Address clearly Price is inclusive of Package and Post Please enclose your Name and Address clearly Price is inclusive of Package and Post Cheques/Postal Orders made payable to D.N.D. Software. D.N.D. Software. 14 Mercia Crescent, Cobridge, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffs. 0983 68978 Skil.......Tactics. .. Strategy...Decisions..........Excitement... Tension........Action FOOTBALL B CRICKET From Tapes to Networks Phone for the most up to date prices or write to: WIGHT COMPUTING 122 High Street, Ryde, Isle of Wight PO33 2SU Good advice Given Freely QUALITY STRATEGY GAMES from E BJ SOFTWARE (Established 1984) EUROPEAN CHAMPIONS NEW. THE INTERNATIONAL CHALLENGE OF THE EUROPEAN NATIONS CUP Genuine Nations Cup Format with full Random Draw of 32 Seeded Teams Fixture List, Results and League Tables of ALL 8 Groups Discipline & Medical Reports Squad of 22 Players plus Other players available 17 Month Itinerary of Qualifying Group (Arrange Friendlies and Finals Plus many more Superb Features and Options EUROPEAN CHAMPIONS Includes E J'MATCH PLAY SYSTEMan imaginative and exciting new style of match presentation which captures the ACTION, DRAMA & TENSION of International Football WORLD CHAMPIONS A COMPLETE WORLD CUP SIMULATION Select Friendlies 25 Players Qualifying Group 2 in-Match Subs Discipline Table Select Tour Opponents Extra Time Final Rounds Players Gain Experience 7 Skill levels. TEXT MATCH SIMULATION including Bookings Goal Times Named Recorded Goal Scorers Injury Time, Corners Free Kicks. Match Clock Penalties PLUS many more Features PREMIER CAN YOU HANDLE ALL OF THIS? Play all Teams Home Away Unique Transfer Market Team Substitute Selection Named Recorded Goal Scorers injuries Transfer Demands Continuing Seasons Squad Listing ALL Teams Financial Problems 7 Ski Levels Offers to Manage other Teams Sackings Managers Salary Save Game Team Styles Bank Loans AND many more Features EUROPEAN II THE MOST COMPLETE SIMULATION OF EUROPEAN CLUB FOOTBALL YOU CAN BUY Home Away legs Full Penalty Shoot Out with SUDDEN DEATHI 2 in Match Subs Away Goals count Double if Drawn Fu Team Sub Selection Extra Time 7 Ski Levels Enter your own PREMIER Winning Team TEXT MATCH SIMULATION plus Sending Off and Disallowed Goals Results Table PLUS MUCH MORE! CRICKET MASTER A SUPERB SIMULATION OF ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL COUNTY CRICKET Weather Wicket Outfield Conditions Batting Bowling Tactics Team Selection Fast, Medium & Spin Bowlers 4 Types of Batman Select Field Layout 3 Skill Levels Wides Byes No Ball Run Out Misfield Dropped Catches Scoreboard Batting Bowling Analysis Run Rate Single Option 3 Game Speeds STAR FEATURE a complete MATCH OVERVIEW showing Ball by Ball Action and Commentary and MUCH MORE! TEST MASTER NEW A COMPREHENSIVE SIMULATION OF A 5 DAY TEST MATCH Includes most of the Features of CRICKET MASTER and MATCH OVERVIEW plus DeclarationsNightwatchmen Light Meter Rain Stops Play Varying Number of Overs per Day Follow On Save Game New Ball Bad Light Interruptions TEST MASTER is a True representation of a Complete Test Match and offers the ULTIMATE CHALLENGE to Al Cricket Enthusiasts CRICKET MASTER & TEST MASTER prices include a FREE pad of SCORESHEETS Software Commodore Amstrad availability Any 18/128K Tape Disc + 3 Tape 5 Disc Tape 3 Disc EUROPEAN CHAMPIONS WORLD CHAMPIONS PREMIER EUROPEAN .95 .95 10.45  11 95 CRICKET MASTER .95 (11.45 .95 .95 TEST MASTER .96 .95 n/a @ na FANTASTIC VALUE: Special Discount of E2.00 for every EXTRA game purchased leg buy 2 Games deduct E2.00 from TOTAL buy 3 Games deduct (4 00 from TOTAL 4 Games 66.00 tel. ALL GAMES are available by MAIL ORDER for IMMEDIATE despatch by 1st class post and include Full Instructions. OUTSIDE UK please add 1.00 for postage and send payment in Pound Sterling only PLEASE STATE WHICH MACHINE AND TAPE OR DISC Cheques or Postal Orders payable to & Software Send to: E J SOFTWARE, Room 5.37 Westmoor Road, ENFIELD, Middlesex EN3 LE VASA "


"PlayByMail RHANN GAMES Whether or not you are for the Once again Wayne, the man whose mysterious postal strike or against it, one thing is for certain: it has missing last name is the talk of drastically affected the Play By PBM-dom, returns to the fold to Mail hobby. Many C + VG «rap\" on the subjects Epic readers are actively TII, Eclipse and the all involved in PBM so we asked important postal Wayne to contact the major strike ... About 8 months ago I arranged PBM companies to check out for a playtest of all Rhann what is happening and how Games' products. This playtest they are coping. Here is his was carried out by a small special report. handpicked group of C+VG No PBM'er, be it company readers which has been or player, likes a postal strike. reporting to me on a regular It is the one thing that throws basis. Here is the group's the whole hobby into utter verdict. chaos and confusion. As I Rhann's major game is Epic write a settlement has III The Kings Game. It is a supposedly been ironed out, totally computer moderated, but it still seems very dubious open ended, sword and whether the whole matter has sorcery game, where progress been totally resolved. All in all is made by strategic play. A it is going to be a testing time player who is good at the for many of the smaller PBM diplomatic side of PBM will do companies, as they depend on well here. The game is of the regular cash flow that their average complexity initially, game generates to survive. I but progresses into a more would not be surprised to find complicated mode as the game that after the strike a couple of advances. The turn fee is .00 the smaller companies have for basic turns and it can folded. increase depending on the size The larger PBM companies of your kingdom. have the experience and the When you start off, you financial resources to weather have to choose a leader for the strike, but even they will your small army. This leader find life difficult the longer the can be one of six character strike continues. types. Warlord, Necromancer, Kevin Cropper, boss of KJC Wizard, Arch Priest, Merchant Games, has had to pay off Prince and Nomad Clan Chief. most of his staff for the All have different, but duration of the strike, as they balanced, statistics. You then have processed all the have to make several choices computer moderated turns including the selection of your available and have no more homeland and the election of work to do. A skeleton staff secondary leaders. Once this is have been retained to process done, it is up to you to conquer any turns that are telephoned the world, using your leader's in and to program KJC's new We've heard of \"air mail\" but this is ridiculous. . (Ha not very ha!) projects. They can't even post computer whilst they wait for The Laboratory's Paul The game has many aspects, out the backlog of turns that the end to the dispute. Borresson said: \"All was still some of which are discovered they have dealt with as the post Jade's head honcho, Tim well at the Lab. We are as you go along. There are your boxes are sealed. Basically, Cann, has also been able to working on computer personal henchmen, who are because all of their games are process the firm's large upgrades, game extensions and used for spying and computer moderated, they backlog of turns. He and his generally picking up on things assassination, magic items and have come to a virtual staff are taking advantage of that should have been done a artifacts that can be either a standstill. However, they are the lull in work to upgrade and while ago. blessing or a curse to your ready to resume work at a revamp Global Supremacy, a Rhann right hand man, forces, and troops who will moment's notice. PBM that he bought from the Steve Upton, is re-writing hisobey your every command if Sloth Enterprises Simon now defunct Mitre Games. newly acquired game Tribes of you have kept their moral high Letts has confirmed that they Standard's Dave Norton Crane, another ex Mitre game, enough! too have also dealt with any couldn't be contacted, but his and generally \"doing things he Rhann have worked hard on backlog of turns they may have secretary confirmed that no should have already done.\" this game since they obtained it had. They have retained all turns were going either in or That's how things stand with from Australia and they have their staff and are busily out of Standard's buildings the major companies at the added some nice little touches. engaged in newsletters, game and Dave himself was offelse moment. If there are any radical All battle reports are free, as history, special encounters, where conducting very secret changes, you'll read about it are henchmen and wizard game generation and the talks about obtaining a new first in C+VG strike or no reports. All orders, over 80 of conversion of various games to PBM. strike!! them, are impartially resolved ITI "


"PlayByMail . by the computer and there are price depending on the number interested in being amongst the both land and sea combat of actions performed. first plavers in the relaunch options. Furthermore, The playtesters thought that all you have to do is send .00 company director Steve Upton the game was OK, but suffered to cover P+P and you will get is only too pleased to help as a result of a few annoying a free rule book, start up in the players who have problems in quirks. Nigel Parsons, Cardiff, new game and a free turn. All completing, or understanding found that some of my orders cheques should be made to their turns. I must admit that were incorrectly imputted and payable to Rhann Games and 1 payable to Rhann Games and their personal touch really this ruined some of my turns sent via me at C + VG with impressed me. The game certainly impressed C + VG playtesters Steve Smith (Oldham) and Sinclair Scott (Holland). Steve called Epic \"The best computer moderated PBM I have ever played\", and Sinclair said: \"I can heartily recommend the game to any prospective empire builders, since it is not simply a game, but a real power struggle.\" Overall, the playtesters really enjoyed Epic and the above two comments are representative of the general opinion. In fact I did not receive one bad report about it from over 20 playtesters. Eclipse is by Rhann. I had a whole game set up for C+ VG readers, which meant that 20 people could play for nought. The players found that Eclipse is a game of space exploration and conquest, which is based around a star system that compromises of anything between 180 to 220 stars. The aim is to conquer two thirds of the system either on your own or with an alliance consisting of several players. and Kes Savage Once again the game is (Southampton) said that \"the completely computer printer ribbon jumped sections A \"Down, Shep!\" moderated, but this time it has at the end of the page, printing fixed deadlines. This means things where they shouldn't that you have to get your turn have been.\" However, Kes details to Rhann by a certain went on to say that if \"Rhann date or your organisation will could get their act together, the suffer the consequences. game prospects look excellent proof of purchase. Before you begin, you must overall.\" Rhann has now obtained the choose one of six races: I have always found Rhann rights to run the old Midgard Human, Laaran, Casark, ready to listen, and as we speak game, Tribes Of Crane. They Wevan, Sagori or Ariane. Each they are overhauling Eclipse, have changed slightly by has differing characteristics, so that it will be a quicker, bringing the history forward but as in Epic they are more detailed game. Who says 300 years and moving the balanced out so there nobody listens to playtesters? technology back 300 years is no one real advantage. If anyone is interested in meaning that there is a 600 year The rulebook is fairly playing any of the above technology gap. You play the complex, and involves a bit of games, I have once again game as a tribe that wanders a number crunching, but you managed to obtain some strange planet, aiming to soon get used to it after a few special discounts for C + VG survive and grow more reads. Everything is covered readers. A start up in Epic influential. Rhann have from space fleets and armies to usually costs .00, but C + VG computerized the record computer controlled forces. readers can join for .50 and keeping side of the game, but Filling the turn sheet in is a get two free turns. Turning to have decided to keep the hand simple affair, with the turn Eclipse now. If anyone is operated part of the game. Furthermore, any player that joins the game will not be disadvantaged by being issued with a small tribe. Rhann propose to take a mean average of all the tribes in the game and issue new players with tribes the size and strength of that figure. Merlins Kingdom has come up with a new concept in PBM. It has started a horror/detective game, set around a mythos similar to the cult Role Playing Game \"Call of Cthulhu\". They claim to have combined \"serious roleplaying with some humorous aspects,\" which could make it very entertaining. Players can encounter any aspect of the unknown from magicians to spiders and vampires and voodoo. Players may choose up to four character types to help them in their adventures. They build up their characters skill as they progress and their object is to become \"Master Of Fear. There is a large problem solving element to the game and it will appeal to people who enjoy a \"thinking game rather than a \"combat\" game. Start up and rulebook costs .00, whilst turns cost .50 each. All cheques, P/O's should be made payable to Merlins Kingdom and sent via C+ VG with proof of purchase. What with the football season just starting (as I write), it should be topical to mention GAD Games, Soccer Supremo s. This is a game where you play the part of a manager of a ficticious football team in one of two different leagues, which consist of international club teams. You have to ensure all the ups and downs of football including transfers, team formations, tactics, sponsorship deals, coaching, youth team players. physiotherapists and trainers. International country fixtures also feature. So, if there are any budding Tony Cottees out there, all you have to do is send me an S.a.e. and I will arrange for a free rulebook to be sent to you with GAD's compliments. "


"COIN-OP ACTION Solihrough wave after wave of deadly airbourne invaders. Accumulate a vast array of weapons as you pilotvorilarmour-laden helicopter und dhe awesome 14 vighiger plane. typhoonnisaa Gombattier the skiessche Konarson Ophit now for your home mista. Franzied dogcoding in SD Scrolling accos. Se levels of pulse pounding excitement. Each culminating in despatarting adversary Play phoon and reach fortreskles * * * CASSETTE COMMODORE AMSTRADA AMSTRAD .95 .95 COMMODORE SPECTRUM .95 sune name of the came IMAGINE SOFTWARE 6 CENTRAL STREET MANCHESTER M2 5NS TEL: 061-832 6633 TELEX: 667799 OCEANS G FAX: 061 834 0650 "


"Out to Lunch Lig of the Year or Basic Training at Major Bill's Boot Camp? John Minson hunts for battle plans at Microprose's Hunt Valley HQ. EILL STEALEY PEDAL RELEASE "


"MISSION MICROPROSE Baltimore, home of the micro limitations, because as Orioles baseball team, edible Arnold observes, \"We're crabs and Microprose more limited by hardware software. The Orioles and than our programmers' crabs are added attractions, ability.\" Designers work but I'm here to infiltrate the closely with programmers simulation specialists and graphics artists offices, train in the basics of throughout coding. modern warfare with their Finally comes play testing. high profile chief, Major One expatriate British Wild Bill' Stealey ... and programmer told me that in hopefully return alive. the UK games are lucky if they get half an hour's trial ROLL CALL before they're shipped to Monday 22/8/88 the duplicators, bugs and all. Compare that with the four 08.30 hours and a half months that The day starts early at Kennedy Approach Microprose. In the received. This makes it lunchroom everybody A Ms Microprose prepares for take off. impossible for Microprose to gathers for the Monday company to do a game with a BATTLE PLANS name release dates until the meeting. The atmosphere is prehistoric setting and this is 1 program is complete, but it lighthearted as the Major how he makes his point, Bill 10.40 hours does mean that they can runs through introductions regrets that Sid isn't around So how does a Microprose never be accused of issuing of new employees, reports at the moment; \"Sid is the program come about? Games half-finished product. from the heads of creative genius,\" he says. designer Arnold Hendrick departments, and notes that \"I'm just a creative critic.\" explains. \"Everybody UNDERCOVER the company has leaked a A little further down the thinks they can design no disk to software corridor is a Red Barron games,\" he says. \"But it's a ACTIVITIES pirates, obtaining free mass coin-op machine. Bill and Sid rare individual who can both 11.30 hours distribution. first met when they played design and program.\" Sid Is there anything else the game in Las Vegas in May Meier has that ability, but Airborne Ranger, 82. Sid won and flushed anybody wants to share with Microprose's arcade Microprose also employs five with victory boasted that he designers, who sees a project simulation of ground combat the group?'' Bill asks. could write a better game There's not, so we set out on behind enemy lines, isn't through from research to a tour of the building. within a week. Then I can new to Commodore and play testing. sell it, Bill replied. It was This is a low security area, Amstrad owners, but there's initial discussions are a but: \"Make sure you wear actually August before Sid a Spectrum version on the group effort. \"We all decide your badge at all times when presented Hellcat Ace to Bill if it's a really wild idea and way, which looks like it's you're in the areas with blue and Bill realised he'd have whether we can do a good captured the excitement of to form a software company! job. Only then do we get the original. While it strays carpet, Bill warns. \"That's Bill started packing disks where development takes from strict simulation, its down to technical and manuals into plastic research.\" Arnold quotes success means that a sequel place. Here are the programmers' offices, each bags in his kitchen in Stealth Fighter: That's a is on the cards. October 1982. In 1990 he adorned with personal one against the many But if you thought decorations. More seriously hopes the company will scenario, which is perfect creeping around on your make $100 million. But the there are large scale maps for computer games but rare belly was secretive, wait till and posters of military vital force behind in modern warfare. That you try sneaking into foreign badges everything to Microprose remains Sid and makes it ideal.\" It's also embassies as one of the 'grey Bill's love for simulations. ensure the legendary men' of intelligence the necessary to understand spies who will be disowned Micrprose accuracy. Patriotic Bill... And Super Ligger Minson. by their superiors if they are This is also where Sid ever captured. It's called ... Meier, co-founder of the Covert Action! company has his office. Its The secret operations window is filled with toy scenario was suggested as a dinosaurs. Apparently Sid follow up to Airborne has a unique method of Ranger, leaving game communicating with Bill; designer Roy Gibson to read currently he wants the about the topic. He decided "


"COMING SOON... KORNI RCADE ACE URNER Watch Arcade Stisation of the ar C64 cassette and strad cassette andis Son Atari STAN and MSX ACTIVISION Marketed and distributed by Mediagenic Lol. Activision is a division of Medagenic. Ltd. Activision is in de keukemie AFTERBURNER SEGA are trademarks of SEGA ENTERPRISES LTD This game has been manufactured under license from Sega Enterprises Ltd., Japan. "


"MISSION MICROPROSE that the real interest was in Samurai has to be the first that tricky with a plane 3D Technologies, to give these men who never win role playing game where you which doesn't officially Microprose Coin-Op its medals if they're establish a dynasty. If you're exist? Well, the Swedish Air proper name, first machines successful, nobody ever successful, your children Force has used Microprose's ready for the new year. hears about them! Their take over the empire that version for its aircraft \"Currently video games 'dirty tricks' range from you established. recognition manual, have 2D comic style theft and blackmail to Microprose is also suggesting they've got graphics, Gene explains. recruiting double agents. invading Japan in real life, something right! This is *We're dedicated to polygon Only assassination has been with the establishment of an confirmed by the member of graphics, 3D simulation and left out! oriental office. Not only are the top brass who told Bill long play.\" This means we You can choose from the they successfully selling that he's well over ninety can expect various missions, Origin's Ultima role playing percent accurate! just like the home computer but inept support; M15 with versions. But it will all be to fair resources but good field a much higher resolution craft; or Israel's MOSAD, 60,000 polygons per second who are great in the field instead of the mere 300 that with resources that border make up an F19 landscape on the primitive. The KGB, on the PC. inevitably, are the bad guys. We can also expect the Once you have your mission large environmental you move around the world, cabinets that let you really approaching government get into the action, and agencies. In London you can Microprose have had special visit M15 let's hope the chips designed. Subject to map locations aren't the Microprose Official accurate or it'll be banned Secrets Act, Gene won't say under the Official Secrets more than, \"It's safe to Act! assume that our first release will be a flight game. ORIENTAL OPERATIONS REST AND 12.05 hours RECREATION 11.55 hours One country not featured in Covert Action is Japan but A Microprose are moving into the arcades. It starts to look like it has a game of its own. series to the Nintendo Stealth fighting is the art Microprose is planning an Provisionally titled market (using two joy cards of sneaking in below enemy American invasion but the Samurarai though this will to make choices) but there's radar and avoiding their British strike back when it change it's the official even a demand for WW2 planes to infiltrate territory comes to another new follow up to Pirates, simulations like Hellcat Ace, and hit crucial targets. It departure sports combining role playing within which the enemy is none calls for highly specialised simulations. Perhaps down a strong graphics element other than ... Japan! equipment the F-19 and heartened by the Orioles and simple menu commands. Ahh-so! nifty low-level, 'silent dismal record in their The secret of successful flying. national sport, the first Samurai-ing is to behave SOFTLY SOFTLY.. release is not baseball but... honourably, according to the Tuesday 23/8/88 soccer! HARDWARE WARS codes of sixteenth century But this is no ordinary Japan. Be a good guy and 10.40 hours 11.15 hours game of footie. Microprose you'll overthrow evil The theory of stealth Compared with Bill's Soccer includes everybody's warlords in one to one fighting has been around for extrovert enthusiasm, Gene favourite features of the combat and unlike a long time. It's just taken Lipkin demonstrates the game such as wind and Pirates, where the duelling ten years for the Pentagon to Californian, laid back even rain! And following the was seen side on, in a single devise how to do it.\" Major attitude to life. He also has inevitable Saturday plane, you'll dodge and Bill Stealey is talking and he what may be the biggest afternoons downpour the weave in full three should know; as his Wild ball plays differently on the news of the visit dimensional glory. Bill' card proclaims, he's a Microprose is getting into wet grass. This is a real Chief Advisor to the Joint coin-op machines! Wild Bill takes to the skies. Chiefs of Staff. There couldn't be a better Wild Bill's pride and joy! F-19 Stealth Fighter is a choice than Gene to head the refinement of Project: new operation he was one Stealth Fighter for the PC. of the founding fathers to Bill reckons it's now even Atari! His team of fifteen are more accurate but isn't now working flat out to get ROSE "


"MISSION MISSION MICROPROSE 016 simulation and Stewart Bell, Pretty soon Bill is stayed up all night to win the controls you'd find in a jet Microprose's European MD, rewarded as he comes across war. Even then it took fighter, listening to jokes that they spent hours four Russian ships. \"Keep plenty of saves. Be glad it's warnings not to touch the consulting atlases to get the your speed low so that you only a computer game! red lever and not to get my geography of the pitches don't alert them,\" Tom camera caught in the stick. If correct! warns. Bill prepares his CHOCKS AWAY! anything really did go wrong torpedoes and cruise 15.30 hours would I be able to bale out THIS IS WAR! missiles the choice of and pull the rip cord? Too My training is over. I'm now weaponry is staggering 14.00 hours late we're taxing to the then launches his attack experienced in everything run way! Take off Middle Eastern terrorists Unfortunately his first from stealth fighting to is smoother than the 1011 have destroyed a crucial cruise is intercepted. submarine battles, not that brought us to Baltimore, Russian oil refinery. A bomb and we're up and circling has gone off in the Kremlin. round the airfield. You The Americans are blamed enjoying yourself, John? though it's actually the work comes over my headphones. of KGB fanatics who plan to **Fine... err, roger that, use the uproar to detract Bill,I stutter into the from the oil crisis. But they intercome. I'm stoked! get more than they planned We bank steeply towards for and suddenly there's a the runway and we're Red Storm Rising with coming in to land -then World War III blowing up a 8686 hours 06/15 399 about ten feet above the gale. ground we level out and Bill Tom Clancy, Red Storm's baran bave a sonar conta zooms onwards, waggling multi-millionaire author, is the wings from side to side on chatting terms with the Mavigation shows open water a stunt guaranteed to induce Pentagon chiefs of staff, heart attacks in the tower! making him the ideal person Your Orders, sirs Suddenly we're climbing. to team up with Microprose General sort Ship Status pulling around two and a in a strategy simulation. To half times the force of demonstrate how this latest gravity. Thank God the blockbuster has become a intercom isn't on as I let go game, Bill Stealey has an involuntary battle cry. forsaken the skies for a Second time round we do submarine, with Tom Clancy \"Always fire more than forgetting excursions into land it's over too soon. Bill in attendance to ensure that one, Tom advises. espionage and even ancient let me off easy no loops or the free world is saved from By now the Russians know Japan! There's just one thing rolls. I don't know that I the communist menace! of Bill's presence and it's left... Miss Microprose! really deserve the 'I cheated Stalking convoys in a sub time to take evasive action, Miss Microprose is Major death with Major Bill calls for more patience than diving out of the immediate Wild Bill Stealey's true T-shirt. Maybe 'I cheated air dogfighting, and almost danger zone. There are love. She's his ultimate toy discomfort ...' would be immediately he's left Holy guided torpedoes on his tail a 37 year old, T-28 Trojan more ac more accurate! Loch, Bill wants blood. He but knowledge of their logic jet trainer. Sure you can get But the flight was enough sets course for the seas north systems allows Bill to turn a buzz from flying simulated to help me understand of Norway on the large scale away from their search dogfights on your micro, but something about simulations map, which also indicates pattern and lose them. The this is the real thing. in general and Microprose in satellite patterns and major battle continues, with Bill Okay, I confess I'm an particular. Now I can relate flash points as the war taking a hit but destroying orthodox coward. Does Bill to the thrill that Bill feels progresses. Meanwhile Tom four Russian ships before he really want a chicken in the when he's bombing targtet sits back, offering expert has to limp back to port. He rear seat? Knowing that the ranges the thrill that he advice. The guy obviously wants to hang around rather squat little plane's single wants to communicate in has an endless wealth of than diving, but Tom engine is identical to the his software. knowledge, not just a suggests that discretion is ones on a nearby flying boat These are Bill's toys and military equipment but also the better part of valour: does little to ground my he wants to share them with the best way to use it. *These airforce types are so butterflies. Bill hands me a you. bloodthirsty,\" he chuckles. plastic bag. I have never It's all up to you! Back at Holy Loch, Bill is made one person ill in my But the reds are getting away! awarded a Bronze Star. More plane,\" he says. \"I do not laughter from Tom: 'Crap! want to start now.\" You get a Bronze Star just for But here I am, being showing up.\" But Bill's not strapped in to the tiny too downhearted he cockpit, with the same Your skill as captain of me TORTE "


"Comsoff Authorised Amstrad Business Dealer Scotland's Largest Computer Mail Order Firm Scotland's SPECTRUM ATARI ST  DETAIL OF GOODS AMSTRAD CPC our disc price R.R.P. o ur price COMMODORE cass R.R.P. price R.R.P. price R.R.P price R.R.P. price R.R.P. price RRP 8.74 874 14.99 13.12 18.93 787 119.99 2495 11.33 74 10 Great Games 2 Alien Syndrome Barbarian Bards Tale Bonic Commando Carrier Command D. Thompson's Oly Ch Darkside Empre Strikes Back 9.99 9.99 9.99 9.74 874 8.74 12 95 14.99 14.99 17.49 21.83 21 B3 17.49 21.3 13.12 9.99 8 74 11.99 10.49 8.99 787 12.99 11:37 19.99 24.95 9.95 13 08 9.95 871 9.95 871 1308 13 08 1995 1295 9.99 1308 13.12 9.99 8.74 13.12 1499 1495 Gunship 1300 19.95 12.99 11.99 1795 11 99 1706 11 37 1049 874 11.37 17 95 1735 1049 1137 14.99 13 12 12.99 74 783 874 1495 14.99 13 08 13 12 14.99 13.12 8.99 12.99 1137 kan Warriors Konams Arcade Coton Our Overlander Peter Beardsley's Football Road Blasters Salamander Street Fighter Target Renegade Track Suit Manager Vindicator We Are The Champions Where Time Stood S B 99 1299 1137 8.95 874 783 14.95 13 08 8.95 7 .83 12 95 11.33 895 9.95 14 951308 1795 15 71 87117.95 1571 995 8.71 796 9.95 799 5.74 8.71 690 14 95 17 95 1495 13.08 15 71 13.08 Send for our catalogue of four thousand titles. All at discount prices post & packaging 50p. All orders over .00 post free. Amstrad CPC PCW-PC Commodore Spectrum Atari Atari ST BBC MSX Electron Apple-Series 2 Apple Macintosh Computers Comsoft Mail Order Department VISA 48 Duke Street, Coldstream, Scotland, TD12 4LF. Tel: 0890 2854 Fax: 0890 2927 WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE 1 BRIDGE STREET GALASHIELS WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE 49 STONEY STREET NOTTINGHAM NG1 1LX TD1 15w AE CB125 SOFTWARE COMMODORE AMIGA SOFTWARE SUCRO EEEEEEE ROSSCSSR BRICE Lineker Super Sails Fast delivery on all Stock Items by 1st Class Mail in UK Special Overseas Service by airmail Worldwide Credit Card orders accepted by phone or mall Credit Card Order Telephone Lines North, Scotland, N. Ireland and Overseas 0896 57004 (24 hrs) South Midlands, Wales 0602 480779 (24 hrs) Che plus Chetus PERIPHERALS C&AAR CZNU BLANK DISKS 525 doties Summer Olympus Please make cheques or postal orders payable to WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE All prices include postage & packing in UK. Overseas please add .50 per cass/disk for AIR MAIL delivery. Credit card orders accepted by phone or mail. Galashiels: (0896) 57004 (24 hours) Nottingham: (0602) 480779 (24 hours) All UK Deliveires by 1st Class Mail "


"SOFTSELLERS 12 SANDPIPER CLOSE, LONGBRIDGE PARK, COLCHESTER, ESSEX CO4 3GE 36a Osborne St. New Shop!! 6 Bond St. Colchester, Charles Street, Ipswich, Essex VISA Leicester. Suffolk. (0206) 560638 Opening Soon!! (0473) 57158 PLACE YOUR ORDER NOW ON (0206) 869668 (0206) 863193 .... .95 ATARI ST Alien Syndrome............ . . Army Moves... Arkanoid Il Revenge Of Doh... Barbarian Il....... Better Dead Than Alien Bomb Jack.......... Buggy Boy... Garfield. Combat School.... Crash Garrett Daley Thompson's Empire Strikes Back Fire And Forget...... Football Manager 2.... Gryzor.... Goldrunner 2.......... International Soccer Ikari Warriors...... Leathernecks...... Oids... Overlander.... Peter Beardsley's... Platoon... Quadralien... Scrabble Deluxe....... Space Harrier... Skychase.................... Summer Olympiad....... Thundercats Time And Magik...... Trivial Pursuit....... Virus... Where Time Stood Still.. .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 $12.95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 ...95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 ..95 .95 .95 .95 ATARI ST Whirligig... Xenon............ . . Bionic Commandos..... Federation Of Free Traders.... Games Winter Edition... Gauntlet Il.. Gary Lineker's Superskills... Great Giana Sisters. Leaderboard Birdie... Mickey Mouse Night Raider....... 1943. Out Run.......... Roadblasters........ Street Fighter... Zynaps... Captain Blood. Carrier Command..... Corruption... Driller... Dungeon Master..... Elite.... Legend Of The Sword... Project Stealth Fighter Shadowgate...... ST 5 Star Starglider II.. Uninvited... U.M.S. Verminator...... Bard's Tale........... Heroes Of The Lance (D&D)............ Pools Of Radiance (D&D).. AMIGA .95 Alien Syndrome..... . .. .95 Barbarian Il... .95 Empire Strikes Back... .95 Powerplay ..95 Sentinel .95 Sky Chase..... .. E14.95 Summer Olympiad......... .951 Time And Magik.......... ...95 Whirligig. C14.95 Xenon E14.95 Army Moves... Bomb Jack. ..95 Combat School..... .95 Carrier Command... .95 Corruption... E14.95 Daley Thompson's... .95 Goldrunner 1 or 2... .95 Legend Of The Sword ...95 Overlander. .95 Platoon...... .95 Shadowgate... .95 Space Harrier.... ...95 Star Glider II... ..95 Thundercats... .95 U.M.S . .95 Where Time Stood Still .95 Bard's Tale lor II...... ..95 Ferrari Formula One.. $15.95 Interceptor 15.95 Night Raider... ..95 1943 .95 Road Blasters........ .95 Street Fighter .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 $12.95 $12.95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 $15.95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 $15.95 $15.95 .95 .95  $17.95 .95 .95 ...95 ..95 .95 CBM 64 32 Virus. ,50 Operation Wolt Robocop Salamander..... Victory Road Vindicator........ Where Time Stood Still Barbarian Il Barbarian (Psygnosis)...... Captain Blood Daley Thompson's......... Double Dragon..... Dark Side...... Empire Strikes Back Football Manager II......... Hawkeye... 19-Boot Camp... Overlander... Peter Beardsley's R-Type.... ..... Tracksuit Manager Whirligia........... . Games-Winter Edition.... 1943............ Night Raider... Road Blasters..... Street Sports Soccer Street Fighter Ten Great Games III. Last Ninja 2.... Carrier Command. Red Storm Rising.... Gold Silver Bronze.... .. Par 4 (Leaderboard)......... .30 .99 .30 .99 .30 .99 $6.30 .99 .30 .99 16.30 $9.99 (6.99 $8.99 66.99 9.99 .99 $9.99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 56.99.99 $8.99 .99 9.99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 $7.99 .99 ..99 .99 ...99 .99 ...99 ...99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 SPECTRUM Buggy Boy .50 .99 Operation Wolf.. .99 Overlander.... .99 Robocop... .50 .99 Salamander... .50 Victory Road. .50 .99 Vindicator .99 .99 Where Time Stood Still.... .99 Whirligig... .50 .99 Peter Beardsley's 16.30 Football Manager 2 .30 .99 Street Sport Soccer .30 Barbarian Il... .99 .99 Barbarian (Psygnosis)...... .99 .99 Captain Blood .99 .99 Daley Thompson's......... ...99 $9.99 Double Dragon.. .99 Dark Side...... .99 .99 Empire Strikes Back... .99 19-Boot Camp... ....99 .99 R-Type... .99 Tracksuit Manager........... .99 Ten Great Games III .99 1943 . .99 Road Blasters. ...50 .99 Street Fighter. ...50 .99 Games Winter Edition....... ....99 .99 Last Ninja II. ...99 .99 Night Raider.... ....99 Carrier Command..... .99 Gold, Silver & Bronze... .95 .95 Par 3 (Leaderboard)................... .95 .95 .99 29 AMSTRAD Operation Wolf. 16.30 9.99 Robocop 16.30 $9.99 Salamander..... 16.30 $9.99 Samurai Warrior.. 16.30 .99 Target Renegade .30 59 99 Victory Road.... 16.30 .99 Vindicator ....... 16.30 .99 Where Time Stood Still 16.30 $9.99 Barbarian IL .99 9.99 Barbarian (Psygnosis)...... .99 Captain Blood... 56.99 $9.99 Daley Thompson's.. 16.99 $8.99 Double Dragon 16.99 .99 Dark Side......... .99 Empire Strikes Back .99 Football Manager II........... 19-Boot Camp.. .99 Overlander.... .99 999 Peter Beardsley's.... .99 .99 R-Type... .99 Tracksuit Manager..... .99 Games Winter Edition..... .99 .99 1943......... .99 .99 Night Raider... ..99 .99 Road Blasters... ..99 .99 Street Sports Soccer..... ..99 .99 Street Fighter.... ...99 .99 Ten Great Games Ill.... Last Ninja 8.99 $9.99 Carrier Command.... .99 Gunship .99 .99 Gold Silver Bronze............... ...$11.99 .99 Par 3 (Leaderboard).............. .99 .99 TITLE Comp | Price Name: Address: Tel No. CVG NOV ST's & AMIGA'S Total Cost  IN STOCK! Cheques & Postal Orders payable to SOFTSELLERS. Post & Packaging Free in UK. Overseas .50 per Item. Shop prices may vary. Please bring this advert in to claim approx 10% discount. "


"Soldier of Fortune ISURE AIN'T DOING IT FOR NO DUMB PRINCESS! Photograph by courtesy of Aquascutum, FREBR. 30 Spectrum cassette......... .95 Spectrum +3 .95 Commodore 64 cassette.......... .95 Commodore 64 Commodore 64 screen shots disc............. .95 For mail order please send your order and remittance (cheques payable to British Telecom plc or direct debit from Access/Visa card by stating card number and expiry date) to: The Marketing Department, Telecomsoft, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford Street, London WCIA 1PS. Telecomsoft, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford St, London WCIA 1PS. Firebird and Firebird Logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications PLC. A LEGEND IN GAMES SOFTWARE "


"MWWWWWWWWWWWW Ingrid's B MACHINES: DISKS WITH GRAPHICS $19.95, ATARI ST, AMIGA, AMSTRAD OPC/POW, SPECTRUM +3, IBM AND MACINTOSH, DISKS WITH GRAPHICS $14.95, BBC 128/MASTER, C64, DISKS WITHOUT GRAPHICS $14.95. REVIEWER: KEITH CAMPBELL Village of Little Moaning has come under the Cloud of Jasper Quickbuck's plans to turn into into a vast housing estate for yuppies. Eviction notices have been served on the residents, and demolition teams of prospect, and think a bit difficulty in deciding what trolls are poised to move in. somedays he ferrys, but before showing the to try to do in recent Level 9 Ingrid is back, that these days he is nearly petition. adventures, since the plots indefatigable Gnome always fishing, to feed the When complete, and have been very open, with Ranger and she is growing number of with the petition presented, Ingrid's Back, Pete Austin unperturbed. In part one of customers waiting at the the game moves onto part told me, they have this three-parter, she is Green Gnome for a ferry. 2, and you're family home introduced a new policy in getting up a petition What can be done to in nearby Gnettlefield adventure design. That is, against the development. cheer him up and Quickbuck's agent is on to make them much easier The trouble is the scruffy persuade him to sign? the prowl, intent on at the start with a gradual piece of paper she is Then there's your uncle, stealing the deeds to the progression to more and carrying, has no names Dundee Halfyard, at the farm. What's more, a steam more difficult puzzles. In written on it. Mill. Nice little place, only roller manned by ugly trolls part 1, the player's Still, not to worry, you are recently built, and is heading inexorably up objective is a treasure hunt there to help her. So how well-sheltered from the the track, and they cat call in disguise, and the about popping in for a wind, it would be such a and wolf-whistle you as you glass of scrumpy, and shame to knock that down arrive to investigate. The collect a few signatures at for yuppies! object of this part is to stop the Green Gnome? But Dusty is certainly well the steam roller and steal Perhaps the landlord, guarded against intruders. the plans. Jumbo Butterface, will What with a yard full of In part 3, you have oblige, and some of his killer Chickens, and that obtained a position as customers too there's Mrs baracade he's putting up maid at the Quickbuck Underlay, and Silas inside the mill... residence and report to the Crawley having a few for a collecting signatures for a mansion for duty. In reality, start. petition can be very with help of your Consim Along the road at Terry rewarding, but some Daisy, you are searching Cottage, Boney Spratt is not signatures are worse than for evidence that will put having a very good day's useless. In fact they are Quickbuck behind bars for fishing. worth ten negative points, a long time to come! Somedays he fishes, and so it pays to examine each I have often found KC shares a drink with the dwarves. i > examine me Ingrid was incore and in the uphiii hadn't been unde more gnomes might h with distant relati; again, Ingrid owned dares evening looking distinctly green, drinking some of Jumbo's RsbedBi fter A Level 9 show they can out pixel paintysta beginner will find no great difficulty in making progress. Not that it is all plain sailing, for there are a couple of quite tricky puzzles that will have the more experienced player scratching his head. The game becomes much more open in part 3, with the old problem of how to go about things. You will need to get Daisy to help you, you are told. But it is not at all obvious what you should be telling the ever-grinning Daisy to do. However, some sharp observations should give you a few ideas, however false things seem. brew But before she had time to say anything, Jumbo had already 12.ee nug with the seething Tiguid. on the house,\" he said with a > drink Scrumpy and run outside PHILL WWWWWWWWWW MWWWWWWWWWW "


"wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww Ingrid's Back comes in a new design of package. Similar in construction to the Infocom Packaging and similar in looks to the artwork of earlier level 9 classics such as Emerald Isles. We see the return of the attractive white-on-black 'L9' motif bordering a full colour picture of Ingrid. Inside, in addition to the appropriate disk or cassette, lies the Second dventure Reviews rubble!\" he said to Ingrid. Have you any idea how much damag ge this Tanrover would suffer if steamroller to just let it roll over you? yelled to Ingrid. Nope, none at all. > ram save A Oh dear Ingrid is threatened with a steam roller. pubs full of drunken and small BBC's. having trouble with his gnomes, and idyllic OOPS takes you back teleport spell and country scenes, that all one more, and is available shouldn't he be really add atmosphere to on all disk versions, with somewhere else the game. The screen shot multiple OOPS on Atari ST. altogether? As you leave shown here comes from the Picture sliding to reveal the the house together he Atari ST version which also text hidden behind it, suddenly remembers he's supports mono graphics previous command left his magic wand on a high-res monitor. editing, and picture off upstairs, and goes back, Note, however, that not to avoid unnecessary disk insisting that you do not all versions have graphics loads during play, are wait for him... (see above list) and don't available on a number of Without a doubt, this is expect 8-bit machines to versions. the most enjoyable Level 9 achieve quite the same Ingrid's Back has the adventure I have played to standard. There are many funniest humour of any date. Go out and buy a advanced features built Level 9 game yet! What is copy! Into the Level 9 adventure Seamus Sosmall doing in VOCABULARY system, that make the Mrs Tackhammer's mechanics of playing the wardrobe, when you break . AIMOSPHERE game much easier. RAM into her bedroom and find PERSONAL save is available on all but her lying red-faced on the 48K Spectrum, Amstrad PC. bed? Begorrah, he isn't VALUE ___ What's this Ingrid think she's Van Gogh. igile, indefatigable lley. And if it 11, ai the way out, is gone to stay red n invitation and loocan paint thest of 'em Gnettlefield Journal, a forty page booklet complete with loading and playing instruction as well as some further extracts from Ingrid's diary. Worth a read in it's own right, it can also give you a few ideas about some of the problems in Ingrid without actually giving the game away. The rustic setting of Ingrid's Back is enhanced with a complete change of graphic design: out are misty digitised pictures of Ghome Ranger and Knight Orc, and in are some wonderful artist drawn pictures. There are fairy tale country cottages, Daisy grinned to Ingrid. Raisy spilled a tir of paint over, an blank canvas. \"Whoop iled hoop 00: MAT spondy. He lumsy me,\" she Saig Rulf, \"I can that s an And 91 N AMAAAAAAAAA "


"OFFICIAL Advanced Dungeons Dragons COMPUTER PRODUCT In the mystical world of Krynin an epic battle rages between the forces of good and evil. Eight brave companions enter the treacherous ruins of the temple of Xak Tsaroth seeking the precious Disks of Mishakal the only end to this infernal struggle. Draconian monsters, skeletal undead, powerful magic and countless other terrors face the adventurers but the way is barred by the ancient black dragon, Khisanth. Find the key to destroy Khisanth or you are doomed to failure. COMPUTER PRODUCT ced Dungeons Dragons HEROES OF THE LANCE Dungeons Dragons Advanced OPTICAL COMPUTER PRODUCT POOL OF RADIANCE ARCADE ACTION CBM 64/128 SPECTRUM 48/128 AMSTRAD IBM PC & COMPATIBLES ATARI ST MOTO THE LARGE Zhe fabled city of Phlar has been overrun by monsters your quest: discover the identity of this evil force. No detail is missed, 6 player characters; non player characters; the Adventurers Journal packed with history, maps and clues, and the Translation Wheel. The gameplay is exhilarating and the graphics state-of-the-art portrait displays, 3D-perspective, tactical combat display and personalised weapons: the ultimate breakthrough in fantasy role playing computer games. CBM 64/128 AMIGA ATARI ST IBM PC & COMPATIBLES POOL CFR ADINCE FANTASY ROLE PLAYING 1988 TSR, Inc. All rights reserved. Advanced Dungeons and Dragons is a trademark owned by TSR, Inc. Lake Geneva, WI, U.S.A. and under license from SSI, Inc. Mountain View, CA, U.S.A. S RANK WAS U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way. Holford, Birmingham 136 TAX. Tel: 021 356 3385 "


"MICROSELL Selling? Buying? Here's the Market Place!! If you wish to place an ad in Microsell send it together with $5 to: C+VG (Microsell Dept), Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1R 3AU. CBM 64. Data recorder, excelerator +, disc drive, 2 power packs, freeze machine, Neos mouse and cheese, .50 worth, software. Boxed. Excellent condition, only .50. Tel: 259 61299 (Alva). COMMODORE 128 + Vic 20, 2 data recorders, 2 joysticks, over  worth, software. Sell for  ono. Telephone: (0472) 72645. AMSTRAD CTM 640 colour monitor, plus 20 games and Image system. Sell . Phone: Gerald on 843-2435 after 6pm. SPECTRUM + 48K, interface and over  of original games, only . Phone (0706) 74184. AMSTRAD 464 colour + DDIC64. Cassette unit, ATARI 800XL. Cassette, disk disc drive, votager, 7 modem excelerator + disc drive, 2 drive, 's worth of games with Skywave software, ESP joysticks Mk 5 freeze frame, (including Gauntlet, Ninja and light pen Mill, 2 joysticks, disk box, 25 disks,  of many more), Touch Tablet and dustcover, 21 disc games, 94 software, manuals, all boxed, remote control, Joysticks, tape games (all originals), 9 Sell for . Tel Ed:  ono. May separate. Tel: books on programming, etc. 0306-888456 (after 6). 01-908 2295, after 7.30pm & 75 mags. Worth ,550 +. Sell weekends. for  ovno. Tel: 204-0617. AMSTRAD, CPC, 6128, Colour and software. New Edmund (10 till 10). AMIGA A500 + modulator, LOOK C64, data cassette, . Sell for . Cassette six weeks old, 10 months player and other accessories guarantee left. As new, Joystick, over 125 games, all Included. Will sell separately bought for , sell for  originals including Cast Ninja, Tel: 04973-398 between ono. Buyer to collect. Phone Nimitz, Stealth Fighter, 4.45pm and 6.45pm. Tony after 5pm weekdays. Platoon, Gunship. Only  (0268) 412223 ono. Phone (0273) 476808. AMSTRAD CPC64 with colour monitor, disc drive, FOR SALE Sega Master ATARI 520STEM NAD SM104 expansion, s/disc, speech/s Arcade System, good monitor,  software, worth exp condition, in boxes, includes , sell  ono. Also CBM and tonnes more.  +. Highest offer gets video 64, recorder, Joystick and light gun, control stick, many games. Worth , only  software, worth , digitiser freell Phone Ray on 2140. Tel: (Sheffield) 352669. sell  ono. Telephone: 993-3174, 8.30pm + WANTED CBS colecovision (Simon) 01-428 4388. C64, 1541C, C2N, Joystick, with large collection of CBM 64, music maker, new Freeze Frame III, books, disk games, or games only, will power pack, cassette, box, blank discs, tapes buy for cash or swop Sega Joystick, 140 of software, 4 reference guide,  of System with 15 games cassette holders, 32 mags. software, only . Tel: Bromsgrove 0527 32230. . Tel: 041-641 5676. (0604) 712712 after 6pm. CBM 64, tape unit, freeze BBC B, disk drive 80/40 Trak, AMSTRAD 464, green frame, education software, data recorder, + screen, modulator,  of worth , games worth software, AMX Mouse + Super software, light pen, 2 , joystick and joycard, Art Rom. Good condition, joysticks,  of magazines. plus full set of input books. All worth , sell for . Tel: Total . Sell for . Tel: for  ono. Tel: 0823 Bristol (0272) 867346. 01-556 9368. Ask for Paul. 288747. Tors POT. GET IT BEFORE IT GOES! Don't let some weirdo buy your copy! Place a regular order with ular order with your newsagent NOW! Dear Mr Newsagent, reserve me a copy of Computer + Video Games. JIDIG DVN Name Address les lletreet Simon 01457 "


"BYRITE SOFTWARE ROAD BLASTERS COMMODORE .99 EACH OR BUY TWO GET ONE FREE TWISTER DOG FIGHT 287. TEMPESTICE TEMPLE, FIFTH QUADRANT EEA CE DURELL BIG 4 VOL 2.99 INC. THANATOS, SIOMA, DEEPSTAKEM SABOTEUR 6PAK VOL 2 63.99 INC. INTO THE INGLES NEST RATTY ACE SHOCKWAY RIDER INTERNATIONAL KARATE LIGHT FORCE STAR LEAGUE BAIE BALL DISCOVERY SUMMER OLYMPIAD COMMODORE AMIGA SOFTWARE STARCROSS COMMODORE .99 EACH DISC 6500 STARGUARININFODROID, KINE SPECTRUM 90 GAMES COMPILATION JUST .95 + .50 +PINC. TIMETRAX, BATTLE OF ANTWEEP SHEER PANIC GLASS, SOULS OF DAARON RUPERT AND THE FRANKLY AND THE MONSTERS EVIL CROWN KECASTLES DEFCOM ROAD ROAD DA DEATHWAV A LLOIS OPEN METROSTORM INVADERS DARK EMPRE FANTASA DIAMOND HANDBALL MARADONA SPECTRON 50 TANK HYPEROLASTER CORRDORES OF GENON. XENO, SNOOKER ARENA, BLOOD 'N GUTS NEC SKATEROCK, DECATHLON MYSTERY ON THE LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE CENTURIONES GREYFELL, ANC OF YESOD BOGLES, LOROS OF CHALLENGE OF THE GOBOTS SUPLI TALANS PONG DANDY STRKE FORC RAMA, CUPS, MISSION OMEGA HYPABALL SPINDUZY TRANCES.BEAM RDER LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE DA FRUIT KNIGHTIERE MOONSTRUKE MOONIGHT MISSION OMEGA, HOWARD THE DUCK KINETIC SCORPION TRAP WASS ER COSTA CE ABSORBER JERRY THE GEM STARTAD ECOIGY, ORBIX REBEL DOUBLE TAKE KORONIS RIFT BG SLEAZE XCEL HALL BLAZER MOON CRESTA ACTION SKYFOX HACKER REFLEX BRAINSTORM FIGHTING WARRIOR EQUINOK CAF COLOUR OF MAGIC GAMES, SKY RUNNER PLEASE CHOOSE ALTERNATIVE GAMES TO AVOID DISAPPOINTMENT SPECTRUM .99 EACH QUARTET MANERTRON, STAR RADERS MOWAY PITFALL SUPERMAN VIKINGS CAPTURED HYPABALL DE DECATHLON POLAR PIERRE ANOCH GALACTIC CONTROLLER. MURDER BY THE DOZEN, THING TON BZZARE SALINE COLOUR OF MAGIC ON A SPOSTAS TRACER SANCTION LIFELINE NGHELL SPACE COMMAND WINTER OLYMPAD SECONDS OU ATARI ST SOFTWARE FIRELORD. BIG SLEAZE, ON COURT TENNIS GOON CRESTA MOUNTE MICKS DEATHADE ITS AKNOCKOUT ME ROUGE TROOPER DAVY PLE UP, THE TUBE, POLAR PIERRE STRATTON, DOGFIGHT 2187. ON THE TILES FROM PARADISE. EAGLES H D Tune THE WARLOCK PRO SKIMMER NEMESES YABBA DABRA DO BULLDOG MAGIC MADNESS DEATHSCAPE Hyp  QUARTET MAGNERTON HOLLYWOOD HINX MIND FOREVER VOYAGING TRILOGY, SUPER VOYA SPRINGA REYFELL SAN SURVIVOR IMPOSSIBLE MISSION WINTER SUSANO WIESTAIS MUROERERE .ONUDI QUADRANT DEVES EX MACHINA, HACKER INFROOROO KINETIC PARADISE LIGHT PORCE, PAST FINGER PERSTAR PING PONG SUSPENDED, STARCROSS DEADLINE ZORK 20 BORED OF THE RINGS COMMODORE .99 EACH DISC HITS, MARBLE MADNESS SUPER SPRINT GAMESTAR, BASKETBALL STAR RAIDERS BEST OF BEYOND. RAMBO, RAMPAGE DRUID FIRETRACK LUCAS FEM GAMES COLLECTION COMMODORE EDUCATIONAL .99 EACH RANCH NUMBER TUMBLERS SON MAKER FANTASY AL ALPHABET 200 AGEAN VOYAGE STORY MACHINE MOON MIST ZORK STAR TRACER, STRONTUM OOG, 3D TUNNEL MUSHROOM MANA ESCAPE FIRESTORM TH GRO RUNNER AGENT OMS. PLANETFALL JAWZ. SHOW JUMPING MISSION OMEGA TANTAUS THE ISLAND STAR S NIFTY UFTER STAR WARROR KNOT IN SO, RED CAD ATTACK CAPTAIN KELLEY, MISLE DEFENCE TWO GUN TURTLE AUSCTUAS, PYRAMANIA 1994, BILLY BONG SECTOR 90. OLJECT HEATHROW GORDON THE AKADOM. REALM OF THE UNDEAD NEITHER EARTH, GRIO PATROL RR, DOGSBODY FLYERFOK, OVERLORDS, THE LUDOIDS TUTANKHAMUN,SOS MOON BUGGY SPECTRUM COMPILATIONS UNBELIEVABLE ULTIMATE BREAKTHUR EXPRESS HAIDER METRO REAKTIONNEXION INCCRYSTAL CAST2.99 CROSS LUCAS FLM GAME COLLECTION INC (THE OOLON AESCUE ON FRACTALUS BALL FUN PACK 3 INCITE HULK LEVITATION TREMOR WAY OF TH E MINS ONE EXPLORER DECAPTOR MAX HEADROOM TEMPLE OF APOLAR ENIGMA FORCE PLEASE CHOOSE ALTERNATIVE GAMES TO AVOID LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE BASKETBALL SPELL BREAKER KING QUESTI WORLD GAMES HACKER I AREA COMMODORE .99 EACH FASTASILO FRACTION FEVER 10.00 EXTRA WAFADRIVE CARTA 1748 INC POP GAME STAR BASKETBALL COCCO 26.50 GRAND MASTEUERSPRINT QUARTET FRA EMPIRE TOMAHAWKS COMMODORE MISCELLANEOUS SIMONS BASIC. SIMONS BASIC EXTN AMAZON NINE PRINCES OF AMBER KINGS QUEST THE BLACK CAULDRON JEWELS OF DARKNESS CRAZY CARS DATUVINGSTONE 8888 INTR TO ASICPT 1.2 CASS INTERNATIONAL SOCCERCART LOGOS DISC SFONTER DARK SCEPTRE GOTHIK IMPLOMON BLACK LAMP SLAINE RAMPARTS, HEADCOACRONIK DEATH OR GLORY KNIGHT ORC SPECTRUM MISCELLANEOUS ROTRONICS WAFADRIVE FREE 5K 1740 INC P.P 200 EACH 350 EACH SPSSTAAL WRITER/WORO PROCESSORIONACH HOTLER HR 10 DAISYWHEEL P E ACH LACH ALPHACOM PAPER BLACK) 12. SINCP.D   space coUPUTER INC BOYSTICKSIN GAMES TROJAN LIGHT PENGRAPHICS SOFTWARE (+3 PP13 TITLES, OR MORE OVERSEAS ORDERS ADD 100 PER CASS SPECTRUM EDUCATIONAL PACK AGED 8-12 ONLY .99 KING ARTHURS QUEST AZTEC CAR JOURNEY BALLOONING SPECTRUM GAMES ON ROM ALL .99 EACH SPACE ADERS. PLANETOOS, SHESSALAC TRANZAM E MORACE AND THE SPIDERS IMPLOSION DRAGON LIAR PT2 RAMPAGES ILOGY, PSYCHOSOLBRAIDERS SAMUR GOTHIK MAGNETRON BONSLECH FIREFLY ERDASH FALCON PATROL HACK TO THE FUTURE BLACKLAMP BATTALION COMMANDER BATTLE IN NORMANDY COMBAT LOUR OF MAGIC THUNDERCATS CUADAL CANAL NINJA HAMSTER SHOLING RO INTERNATIONAL SOCCER CASS COMMODORE COMPILATIONS UNBELIEVABLE ULTIMATE AT SPECTRUM NEW TITLES FOOTBALL MANAGER 2 ROAD BLASTERS A SSASS LEADERBOARD HT PAC 2 WINTER OLYMPAID 88 MI TWO AE TURBO ST SUMMER OLYMPIAD STOCK MARKET SECONDS OUT FASSAM ASSEMBLER-DISASSEMBLER DONKEY CONSCART SUPER BASIC CURRAH SPEECH SYNTHESISER FREEZE MACHINE DISC BOX HLDS 1205 10 FUJI DISKI COMMODORE NEW TITLES FOOTBALL MANAGER BIONIC COMMANDO 2795 CLASSIONE 2 INC. BOBBY BEARING SHAN BLOOO AXE QUO VADIS WIZARDAY FREQUEST COIN OP CONNEXION 2.99 INC. CRYSTAL CASTLES EXPRESS RAIDER METRO CHONS BREAKTHRU SPECTRUM .99 EACH OR BUY TWO GET ONE FREE DEACTIVATORS DE RANKENSTEIN U GINA TUJAD HACKERI. DEADRINGER GAEYFELL. HAACKOUT COMET GAME DEATH SCAPE. MERMAID MAONESS ALENEVOLUTION BYRITE SOFTWARE DEPT C+VG PO BOX 589 LONDON N14 6SJ 01-882 6833 F LICS. ITSA ENNENSTEIN U 1595 RO Star COMPUTER SOFTWARE 8/16 bit at Discounted Prices Up to 30% off New Releases and Back Catalogue Titles Example: RRP of .99 becomes .99 Payment by cheques/PO/Visa/Access, Post and Packing free  and over, Under  add 50p. Outside UK add . Orders despatched within 24 hours. New Releases despatched on day of release. Send today for your free price list to: PJK COMPUTING,PO Box 20, Daventry, Northants NN11 4RU or Telephone our MAIL ORDER HOTLINE NUMBER (0327) 300150 USA antasy .99 .99 .99 BOARD GAMES Blood Bowl Curse of the Mummy's Tomb Fury of Dracula Dungeon Quest Heroes for Dungeon Quest Dungeon Quest Catacombs Chaos Marauders Chainsaw Warrior Kings and Things Warlock of Firetop Mountain Warrior Knights Blood Royale Railway Rivals Superpower Judge Dread Roleplaying Game Talisman 2nd Edition Judge Dread Boardgame Rogue Trooper Boardgame Block Mania Renegade Legion Many More Dark Future 119.99 Warhammer Fantasy RPG .95 Advanced Dungeons and Dragons from 19.96 Basic, Dungeons and Dragons from 7.95 PAINT SETS Citadel Colour Paint Set Creature Paint Set 5.95 Monster Paint Set .95 Expert Paint Set 15.99 E14.99 .95 14.99 .95 .96 [12.56 .99 E12.99 WWE 2015 OOOoxxases 30 zahodou 19. .99 SHADES E14.99 .96 BOX FIGURES Bugman's Dwarf Rangers Nightmare Legion Skeletons) Harboths ORC Archers Skarloc's Wood Elf Archers Ruglud's Armoured ORCS Uithar's Dragon Company Goblin War Chariots Dwarf Onager Skeleton War Machines Imperial Space Marine Space ORK Raiders Devastatus Rhino Vehicle Kit Elf War Chariot La casa more of a way of life, perhaps, ROLEPLAYING GAMES Runequest Advanced Runequest Hunequest Monsters waaaa .95 .95 than an adventure game» Rogue Trader Battle Rules Warhammer Battle lll Siege Ames Stormbringer APG Paranoiall Hardback .95 14.99 .99 Air Superiority WARGAMES Air Strike Team Yankee Tank Leader Soldiers Many More E15.95 .95  C16 12.96 (Keith Campbell C&VG) PLEASE ADD 1.00 P+P TO ALL ORDERS OF E15.00 OR LESS Who are we to argue with Keith? TOTAL FANTASY Bucktons Yard, Darlington, Co.Durham DL3 70L Telephone: 0325 381686 A 1 "


"24 COMPUTER REPAIRS and SPARES HOUR SINCLAIR QUALITY APPROVED REPAIR CENTRE HOW TO GET YOUR 48K SPECTRUM REPAIRED FOR ONLY .95 OH OUAUTY TEN * REPAIR SERVICE Commodores Repaired Spectrums Repaired BEST SERVICE BEST PRICES! ARE YOU ANOTHER CUSTOMER fed up waiting weeks for your estimate? Need your computer repaired fast? Then send it now to the Video Vault 24hr Repair Service. We are able to repair your 48K Spectrum using all the latest in test equipment for only 19.95. We can also supply you with power Supplies & membranes. We will repair your computer while you wait and help you with any of your technical problems. Commodore computers repaired for only .00 Please note we give you a 100% low fixed price of .95 which includes return post and packing, VAT, not a between price like some other Repair Companies offer. We don't ask you to send a cheque in for the maximum amount and shock you with repair bills  upwards. Don't forget we are Amstrad approved for quality and speed, don't risk your computer to any other unauthorised repair centre. We don't just repair the fault and send your computer back, we give your computer a free overhaul. +While you wait repairs (22.50 48K Spectrum. Six top games worth E39.00 free with every E25.00 Spectrum +2 Spectrum repair. Now includes FREE *All computers fully overhauled and fully memory/keyboard test tested before return We also repair Commodore 64's, VIC 20. Commodore 16+ 4. Spectrum + 2 and 3. Fully insured for the return journey The most up to date test equipment Fixed low price of 19.95 including post. developed by us to locate faults within packing parts, labour Spectrum +2 your computer repairs only .00 fully inclusive Rubber keyboard repair ireplacement membrane only. Just .00 including pup Discounts for schools and colleges + 3 month written guarantee on all repairs. FREE OVERHAUL WITH EVERY REPAIR WE DO:We correct colour, sound, keyboard, check the loading and saving chip, even put new feet on the base if required. Check for full memory, check all sockets including ear/mike and replace where needed. All for an inclusive price of .95 which includes VAT, parts & labour, return post, packing & insurance. No hidden extras whatsoever. (should a computer be classed as unrepairable due to tampering we may be able to offer a replacement circuit board at additional charge) URGENT NOTICE Don't be misled by adverts showing 'between prices A recent complaint against a Manchester repair firm Mancomp was upheld by the Advertising Standards Authority on two counts \"It had stated BBC repairs between  and  then charged the customer E85. Their guarantee policy was misleading as it did not make clear that all repairs were not covered le had started was upheld on end VideoVault Ltd. VIUEuvauu THE VIDEOVAULT COMPUTER COMPANION EDITION NOW HOT OFF THE PRESS Old Kingsmoor School Railway Street Hadfield Hyde Cheshire SK 148AA Tel: 04574 66555/67761/69499 Main Office, enquiries and orders only New bigger catalogue now available containing over 2.500 items including software for all computers, joysticks, spare Manchester telephone 061-236 0376 While you wait centre only parts business software, books, plus many more. Just send We regret the Manchester Branch cannot take mail orders 3 x 190 stamps for your free copy Over 20 pages full of top please use main branch number quality products delivered to your door by return post  COPYRIGHT VIDEOVAULT NO. 885071 FAX No. 04574 68946 OURE FREE WITH EVERY * * MAIL-SOFT ** TAPE TO TEST YOUR .00 6 GREAT FREE GAMES LUSS FREE TESTER ON EACH KEYBOARD MEMORY TEST * SPECTRUM REPAIR NEW AMIGA IBM SOFTWARE TITLE Double Dragon Thunder Bade Alen Syndrome Football Manager 2 Psycho Dos UXB SPEC SPEC C64 C64 AMS AMS ATARI CASS DISK CASS DISK CASS DISKI SOFTWARE TITLER ST 6.99 02 6.99D2 Elde 7.50 03 7.50 D3 Stagiderit 7.50 03 750 DB Camer Command 14.99 6.99 02 Fish D2 Time Stood She 750 03 Double Dragon 14.99 1888888 88 DSGhost and Goblin 888888888888888 Arment WIN WITH COURSEMASTER \"THE COMPUTER HORSERACING PROGRAMME  RATES ANY RACE IN SECONDS DAILY NEWSPAPER IS ALL YOU NEED  NEVER out of date Both N. Hunt and Flat Fast data entry  AMAZING ACCURACY!! Now you CAN BEAT THE BOOKIE!  Works on the simple principle FAST HORCES BEAT SLOW ONES  Clearly identifies selection in every race plus these AMAZING features:  First, Second and Third choice shown for Tricasts etc. Actually works out your WINNINGS on most popular bets in PATENT, YANKEE CANADIAN, HEINZ etc Good EACH WAY and long odds bets clearly shown  Will PRINT out your BETTING SLIP for you  Maintains a BANK ACCOUNT BET like PROFESSIONALS do!  PLUSH THE AMAZING COURSEMASTER SYSTEM Huge returns from small stakes. Try it can pay for itself many times over on the first day! Free HOT TIP OF THE MONTH sent to every purchaser All for .95 Inc post packing (Diss users add t2.00 for disc). Available for Spectrum (48K and above ine 3 dise versions), Commodore 64 & 128, Sinclair OL, Amstrad CPC, and all PCWs. Please state which TO INTRASET LTD Dept.VG). FREEPOST. 6 Gilderdale Close. Gorse Covert, Birchwood Warrington WAJGTH. Or large SAE for further details IN Rader Barbaraan Day 2 88688 16818 15.99 15.99 15.99 15.99 1999 27 99 39.99 15.99 15.99 15.99. 13.99 19.9918.75 15.99 14.99 Victory Road Super Hang On Cheers Superskill Staigider Last Ninja 2 Gunilla Wat Footbal Doctor RType OCP Art Studio Green Beret Gunship Tracks Manager Rambo Operation Wor Xenon 75008 Paper Boy 02 MB Reads D2 Rambo 02 Three Stooges 15 99 D2 | Flight Simulator 27 99 02 Guerila War 12.99 D4 Detonder of the Crown 1999 699 02 Double Dragon 6.99 02 Robocop 05 Pac Mania D2 Verminator International Soccer 13.99 750 6.99 02 10 99 02 Fronter Pobocop Dial into hec Le Mans Blazing Barres 02 Driter 02 Thunder Blade D2B Tiger 02 Led Storm 98888 630 go 550 D2699 Test Drive SHADES 6.99D2llesdeboard com 14.99 D2 599 02 Alien Syndrome Demodil 5.50 02 6.99 D2 599 02 Bermuda Triangle 16.99 Samu Wao Heroes of the Lance 18.99 11.50 4.11 50 0311.50 D4 Thunder Cats Gold Silver Bronze 11.50 D5 Ultimate Goll 6.30 D2 Techno Coo Game Over il 6.99 02 6.99 02 6.99 D2 Mind Fighter Sonsty -Quadralien Question of Sport 10.00 02.10.99 0 4 10.99 04 interceptor Action Service 6.30 6.99 02 699 02 Action Service 12.99 1290 12 99 Tarpet Renegade 550 01 6.30 0 6 .30 01 AX Racing 18.75 .15.99 ysis 5.50 6.99 DI Multiface ALSO AVAILABLE ON DISK FORMAT 128.99. 02-1099 3:12.90.04.14. 05. 17.00 Prices include PAPU .K. Europe Add C per tape alsewhere Add  Cheques Postal Orders Payble to: MAIL-SOFT (C+ VG) P.O. Box 589, London N156JJ Please specily machine in your order Price machine you see a te advertised cheaper by another copany in this mag we will match the price This does not apply you don't see the lite your require simply deduct 25% of the RRP and send your order to us (cel Budget Sega Nintendo ites. We stock all software. Joysticks for all Home MCOS Access & Visa Cards Accepted the ultimate adventure 0898 10 0890 Available to modem users at 1200 75 baud rate, in scrolling or viewdata modes. All calls charged at 5.06p per 12 seconds off peak, and 5.00 per 8 seconds peak, inclusive of VAT), "


"w w Helpline Cluess Stuck in an of them! They came from adventure fans in adventure? KC and Kevin Murphy of Kirkcaldy Be Kevin Murphy of Kirkcaldy, Belgrade, and needs his crew can help. He can't kill the Adventure someone to write to! His Helpline, C+VG, pterodactyl in Temple of address is: Nika Strugara Priory Court, 30-32 Terror, he keeps breaking 10. pr. 1, 11 132 Belgrade, Farringdon Lane, his leg trying to get into the Yugoslavia, and he would London EC1R 3AY rift in Frankenstein, and he be delighted to hear from can't get past the guards you. He's currently playing after rescuing Twoflower in Frankenstein, Wolfman, There are still people September issue you said Colour of Magic. Who can and a game called Black irretrievably stuck in that my name was hit the jackpot? Knight Beyond Zork, and the clues Shadowgate. Some general help is section, with the help of Unfortunately, important sought by Paul Andrew Bethell, aims to though I am, I have not had Whittingham of Wirral. He help them back in time for a game named after me!\" has only been able to Steve Meretsky's Apologies, Matthew, these obtain two statements, the revelations about the things do happen from ballistics report, and history of the Great time to time! autopsy, in The Sydney Underground Empire, in \"Shadowgate\" Hill's tips Affair, and can get no the forthcoming prequel, will be found in the clues further. Help came this month from: Zork Zero! But Andrew section. Meanwhile, he Stephen King of Andrew Bethell, Walsall; wants to be there, too! asks: \"How do you open Thurnscoe near David Moore, Liverpool; What use is the Queen the door in the well room? Rotherham, is in very big Allen and Mark Errington, Platypas's magic mirror, Are the blue hairs growing trouble in a Very Big Cave, Durham; Matthew Hill, and where should he on my hands significant?\" facing a very small tunnel. Brighton; and Alan Wilson, inscribe the glyph after And there's this poor lady He can see an emerald at Falkirk. causing a volcanic chained up in the tower, the end of it, but he can't eruption? too. \"How do you get the get his lamp through. Can ByIDIM Byl objejunoo The Shadowgate object from her?'' asks Alan anyone see his way to \"q06 ay! Jo Sueluoo aul dialogue continues this Wilson of Falkirk, more 4!  month, with Matthew Hill of concerned about himself A plea of a difference, of buylewos uing than the unfortunate Brighton, coming up with inox Jun now, from a lone woman, \"and what do you adventurer in Yugoslavia. 14 some more hints, and, by buenburg eyl up s hex pay ayl would you believe, some about the snake statue Would anyone like to swap more questions? First, across the bridge?\" buey peid clues and adventure chat though, he has a Three questions in a row, with Svetomir Petrovic? He s! |jpg yy uuopi  complaint: \"In the and I couldn't answer one is one of very few Kolonjesqo ay woj 22pzzd pu n —  eq upo UJENiM enjeul IVOMOVHS lewosno ay OLIDI pup uu eyl op uinje, '    WONJA lees Duoed 0901 10 Syo D US! sepejaw ayl op hexaul (ljeds obowym Oooo @yl elbel) 1041  ej pup 'd eul 41M Xooo eyi xiu 'pej of sys upuupupw INFOCOM from which Zorks 1, 2, and 3 pictures to illustrate the |  puOMas  Activision has announced follow on from. This is where game and reward the EISINO SONIX the next back of titles from the Zork fan finds out about player. Shogun will be .Yusiyu eyi esn, yooyo Infocom. Later this year. PC the demise of the great available in the spring for heul eJoleg isnl pup sexia owners will be offered Underground Empire, and Atari ST and Amiga, and ylenow, OL Sexq yl sy ul AOW OLS Journey, the first of a new actually comes face to early summer for C-128. Isano 3110d Role-Play series. Written in face with Lord Dimwitt And last but not least Flathead and Excessive the vein of Tolkien, the Heuoluy audw available now, is Zork 1 on w player joins the magical himself! Steve Meretsky has C64 cassette, priced .99. pbayeq pun jejny adventures of Tag, Praxix, written Zork Zero using the addla HI ovr SOOTHSAYER Bergon, Esher, and Minar, latest generation of PASJI HO Heyi yoring taking part in their Infocom parser, the first Soothsayer, the fanzine Supq esoul unojyileb of strategies and problem Infocom graphical puzzles, that specialised in dn pueq pup'uoijpopew solving. Written by Infocom and also featuring a complete solutions, has Addo 'pupy lind 'lind co-founder Marc Blank, mouse interface, and ceased publication. JONAJU S.13011 Journey is described as a on-screen map. Atari ST Please note that its sister «dulu yi per sy u true melding of and Amiga versions will be fanzine, Adventure Probe, seyo eyi Jepuu lexuow role-playing with available in early 1989, is still going strong', as   \"su soo interactive fiction. Atari ST and C-128 in the spring editor Mandy Rodrigues ey Aq spuim eyi ebuyo and Amiga versions will be Dave Lebling is currently puts it. of esoj sspdwoo eyi sn available early in 1989, working on Shogun, an If any one out their is wiy asjene whilst C128 owners will adventure based on the publishing a fanzine, or up Kpint-Apany   have to wait until the spring best selling book. This will knows of one we haven't Appenng eyiind 'sejsuow or summer feature Japanese style covered send us a cover to eej sowisy Byt sspd ol Zork Zero is the game graphics for borders, and review sydozaNo438 News WWW WWWWWW "


"J.R.R.tolkien's USAR IN BAR DDLES SEARTH interactive experiences in tolkien's trilogy Available on:ATARI ST. AMIGA C64. IBM PC: APPLE II GS. AMSTRAD SPECTRUM. MELBOURNE HOUSE DISTRIBUTED BY MELBOURNE HOUSE 24 Vernon Yard, 119 Portobello Road, London WU12DX. Telephone 01-727 8070 Telefax 01-727 8965 Settins New Standards IN COMPUTER SOFTWARE "


"U ! EXPLODNG AT A M SHOP NEAR YOU!!! 295 Digestio! IT'S DYNAMITE! ABBER WHACKING GREAT BOMB HAV  ABBIE JOLLS WEE Amiga .99. MAtari ST .99.3 w Pit your wits against some of the finest programmers in the U.K., with contributions from Jeff Minter, Jon Ritman, Mule and from your favourite magazines too! Hundreds of levels of sheer addiction .... Incredible Cartoon Graphics .... Isometric 3D or Plan View Play Option... by Tony Crowther. Coming from Image Works on all Coming from Image Works on all 3 major formats. Amstrad CPC .99 (Cass). Amstrad CPC .99 (Dise). Conimodore 64 .99 (Cass). 3 Commodore 64 .99 (Disc) Spectrum .99 (Cass). OU Spectrum .99 (Cass). Spectrum .99 (Disc). Headway House, bt-73, Shoe lane, London, Ecar Mas. Tel: 91-377 4645 Fax: 01-583 3494 Telex:1265451 MONREF GM, "


"EXPLORATION OF THE COSMOS Can you live with the reality of .... \"LIPSTIK PLUS HEADSET AVAILABLE FOR CBM 64/128 See pack for details.\" SCREEN SHOTS FROM CBM VERSION HELON Only the chosen few are trained to operate the Lockhead C-104 Tomahawk the 21st century's most awesome combat and exploration vehicle. Only the chosen few experience the excitement and thrill of three dimensional graphics, the delicate manoeuvring of spacecraft and remote pilot vehicles and the cut and thrust of intergalactic combat. Only the chosen few have the opportunity to undertake a journey with the most advanced space flight simulator known to man. Only the chosen few ate selected for ...... SOBRE ste CBM 64/128 TAPE .99 DISK $14.99 SPECTRUM TAPE .99 + 3 DISK .99 AMSTRAD TAPE .99 DISK .99 PC .99 AMIGA .99 \"ILLOSTRATIONE PETER ANDREW JONES, COPYRIGHT. SOLAR WIND LTD 1987 Ancess Software Inc. 6 U.S. GOLD A ACCESS Software Incorporated S. Gold Ltd Units 23 Holford Way Holford Birmingham B6 7AX Tel: 021 356 3388 "


"THE ARCADE COMPILATION OF THE YEAR *AMAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAANAAANAWAK EECEENDOE BASTAN COIN-OP RENEGADE LAS YANIS RE Ont FIGH TATO CORPO RENEGADERE WITHOUT A CAUSE edge word of Shop there is set the s tore The Staging a true smooth Arcade ARKANDID Trees and time of the stor e the pod was destra only to be appede duc hange to penetrates and then chong the Dimension Onger whom you must stay in ce time and secure Aranbaat action and spet second timing combine to produce the most Comme This game anche edge i t is to exterminate the only des to the down the game of FLAY RENEGADE PLAY MEAN on earth the Renega t the hings skeletons and dead stare centre TATTO CORP.     es By Shah the tive CEO of this shoot mucho s Mit from its els vostres uste eremu es n un empincements and a test of Be craft svo bom blant and battle of winterde Mister TAITO CORP 1966 ARRANCO REVENGE OF DON ons have passed yet despite apparent animation the original ARKANOID game Dimension controlling force \"DOH has come back to life Ocuping the we a t Aros entered on U se ARRANOID Ivece timer MIXTEC on the CITATO CORD BUBBLE BOBBLE TATOS NO ARCADE MIT IS RENE Meet and Batue of the busiest beastes vo s tre battle De 100 leve controlled chain secara Quranda ( at)mad e goodies and see NO   LEGEND OF KAGE Leand stratlong again benutul Princess Mi d napped by the ev Dragon and age averina who was walking with her in the forest the time was the formidable task of rescuing h ow stelpage in Rises the forest to the Dragon cen ce find in and the heart while avoiding the Dragang magands from whom the recipe hreat \"VAUS c hed and see Trente a presence before re Revenge \"The Revenge of Don was the tts . CASSETTE AVAILABLE ON SPECTRUM AMSTRAD COMMODORE $12.95 ..the name of the game ALSO AVAILABLE ON DISK Central Street Manchester M2 ENSTOENAIRE 2920 ley 669972 Imagine Software "


"Milberg Perhaps we've been a touch mean in the past. As from now, the best letter to Mailbag each month wins a brand spanking new C + Vg T-shirt! So new, we're not even quite sure what they look like yet! So now you've no excuse, get writing to: Mailbag, Computer and Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1R 3AU. Dear Ed,  Wouldn't it be good if you clear to the company that the You might be surprised how  After reading the June issue could always count on a game game is a loser, they should many replies you get at any of your mag, with the brilliant being as good as the blurb and either not release it, maybe give rate give it a shot, if it doesn't preview of 'Roadblasters' and screen shots on the packet it only limited coverage or even work at least you've tried. I say the amazing competition, make it out to be. Too many postpone it's release until it's all this at risk of making mysel all this at risk of making myself suddenly thought (No.wise software companies these days up to scratch. look fairly foolish, should you cracks please) why the hell aml spend too much on the Ah! Felt good to get that out, have already begun a having your mag delivered to marketing and packaging of a now to the mag: 'Love the worldwide competition. I me every month. You may not game, but shell out only a Fiend! I haven't come across won't know for a while, this know this, but I am one of measly sum on the actual him for a while lassume he is letter was written in September thousands who own an design and production of it. It still around 'hope soand according to my Amstrad and after counting the the game turns out to be as there's nothing like an outside there's nothing lik calculations, I won't get number of reviews for the good as they say, then it's fair commentary (with a BAH or September 88's issue until Amstrad I was disgusted to find enough, but when software two thrown in for good um...er... November only ONE, yes ONE review, but companies sink heaps of measure) to keep the adventure suppose I'd better get as a loyal reader of C+VGL money into marketing a game world on it's toes comfortable. I'll be waiting! decided to give you some time that they know is a dud, the lagree with fellow New Yours sincerely to get your act together, so chances are that the credibility Zealander B Struan, who aired Alec Tricity waited for the July edition I was they lose when people play the his views in June's Mailbag Devoted C+VG reader, Fiend amazed more than one review game will cost them more in reckon you should have a fan and all-round good guy. in fact there were FOUR of the long run than the money special competition or two for them. I was beginning to have a they make from sales. Not all your overseas readers, once in Dear C VG little more faith in you by this games are winners, but it it's a while, just to keep us happy. I have been reading eagerly time. Thank you for the over the last several issues of Darkside review, I am now a Computer and Video Games proud owner of a copy of the and I have come to the decision super game). Again I waited for that it is terrific value for the August edition thinking that everyone, but especially if you I might get my money's worth? own an ST or Amiga! Your but no, only ONE pathetic magazine is becoming more review again. You can't have and more centred around these too much of a good thing is two machines. What is going that what they say, but no, and DEBITO!!! on? OK I know these are the Amstrad owners have had machines of the 90's, but all I'm nothing to cheer about for asking is for \"more and more sometime. So get your act reviews for them\"? Yes! you together or else I will set my heard me. I want your whole killer poodle on you. Also what mag turned into an ST and the hell are you doing with the Amiga mag because I too will Mean Machines section, one soon be an Amiga freak, and month it's Nintendo and the who cares about all those saps next it's the Sega and any other out there who own a bits you can put in there. The Spectrouble' or a 'Commodore reason I am complaining about Blocky'. So there! this is because I am very interested in buying either a Keith lynch Nintendo, Sega or PC Engine, Dublin when it comes out in Britain and the rest of Europe, could EDITOR'S REPLY: Although you please advise? our coverage of 16-bit is increasing, we won't stop Darren Harris reviewing 8-bit games. As Shropshire long as there's life in Spectrums and EDITOR'S REPLY: We do Commodores, we'll stick cover Amstrad games in our with them. updates, but for major reviews, it's very rare that a game gets released first on the Amstrad. If it does, we'll review it, don't you worry. STRIKE BANSANAN Best SK "


"classified advertisements ATARI 400/600/800XL/ST AMIGA SOFTWARE WALL SIZED VIDEO GAMES! FOR LESS THAN !! rect nur games to a cunt & putu -Kill Lite Sized monsters In 5 programmes de alto ADRIAN'S ARCADE The software library specially for COMMODORE : 165, 64, 128 and Amiga Hintelere you buy. Large exciting list of up to date titles. Same day dispatch. Regular updates and newsheets SA list and desils to 7 Woodley Headland. Peartree Bridge. Milton Keynes, MK63PA Thus credi t or works with any te n denci mitructed within an hour Send to your garanteeds BIG TIME ENTERPRISES, STOCKWELL LANE, BRANDFSBURTON, DRIFFIFLD, E YORKS YO25 SRD ORDEREARLY FOR CHRISTMAS! We have all round selection of disks, cassettes and carndoes FOR HIRE Apply now and hire your first four games free Around 1.500 different original titles. For full details send large stamped addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends LOW ATARI PRICES Atan 520 STFM .90 past tree + 15 disks Antic and Analog magazines available Amiga A500 at only .90 p. 1 BEST QUALITY DISKS Memorex 5VSS DD Discs 10 for $11.95 p. Unlabelled 54 DSOD Discs 10 for 14.95 0. Top quality unlabelled 31 double sided disks 10 for $12.95 51 for $54.95 25 for .95 100 for .95 GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept. C+VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney Close, Sunderland SR3 4PD Tel: (091) 528 6351 ZX SPECTRUM 48/128. CASSETTE ONLY ADULT GAMES FANTASY TO ADVERTISE IN THIS SECTION RING 251-6222 NOW! DISCOUNT SOFTWARE Up to 21% off RRP for ATARI, COMMODORE SPECTRUM AMSTRAD, BBC, MSX and IBM PC Ring for Into Pack on any of the above machines 24 hour HOTLINE 0455 613377 B. BYTES COMPUTER SYSTEMS, 19 Southfield Road, Hinkley, Leicestershire LE 10 1UA. ATARI SPECIALISTS Looven your collerget out your JOYSTICK and get stuck in By the time you wish you'l be exhausted COVER UP! Participation game for 24 pleyere where anything goes You never know what you'll be doing or wearing WHAT THE BUTLER SAW Two programme Anaughty but amusing ook at the roaring 20and peepshow with FREE MEMBERSHIP!! Hire CBM64, Spectrum, Amstrad and VIC 20 Software (Top Titles) Send 2 x 18p stamps for your hire kit Computersoft (CV), PO Box 28 North PDO, Nottingham NG5 2EE Please state which machine These are NOT games! FREE NAUGHTY GIFT when you two of the UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE SAVO used software Free membership Huce program tase for the Spectrum and Commodore 64 NOW ALSO FOR THE ATARI ST Send sa e for fast response and details UK Software Exchange Club (CVG). 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB .50 Each [10.00.FNI GET [14.00. FRIGHT R'n' HMICROTEC 32 Hazell Way Stoke Poges BUCKS SL2 40D ADVERTISEMENT INDEX D. G. Marketing for all your Nintendo Moto Digital Son.... ............... 106 107 Main Event..................................................2 Modiagonic......................42.13.60.84 Mogosove.... ............................. 71 | Mario , Hung Huuuuuuuuuuu dai aniumiuuuuuuuuu, 128 Mollsoft ........................................05 Mastolonic....... .........................27.97. 134 MGI Microprose...................... 10.44.68 Nintendo..................... Ocean.................... OBC 22.100.124.128 PK Computing.......... 102 106 111 ETERTAINMENT SYSTEM Anco... ...............116 Arty Ad ...................... ................ 16.17 Arciona ....52 Adrians code 103 Boou Jolly .................... 119 Bo Apple........... Pyrite Software....... 04 B.Bytes Ba Time Entertainment... Codemasters. Comsoft Chips Computer Shop..... ................94 Chorwood Computerson 103 Domark IFC. 3.49 DG Marketing... DND Floctronic As.................24. 25.40.41.50.51 E&So war Grondslam.......... Grerin .............30 31.32, 33, 34, 35, 38 Goiath Gomes .. ...... 142 Comes Software Library.................... 103 Howson................. .................65 Homosoft... Hardware, Latest games and Peripheral Requirements RAMicrotoch.......................... Softsellers Suporlo Software Sky Slip... Silica Shop System Tolocomsoft. Tus Tolegomes............ Tolomop. . . For further information: 01-637 5735 Infogrammes.. Imagoworks Trybridge..... US Cold.............BC 6.7.92.122. 137. 138 UK Software Exchange................ Video Vault............. WCIM ............... . Worldwide.................... or write to: De Gale Marketing Limited 81 Tottenham Court Rd, London W1A 1EY 57. 118 98,113 Intrast Linol..... "


"Play Masters back of the machine and stop GREAT GIANA SISTERS it. Enter POKE 29403,0, (US Gold) restart the game and you'll be if you managed to buy a copy granted with unlimited time of the Amiga version before it We could do with more of that was stopped by Nintendo, here with our tight perhaps you might find use deadlines.. for this tiplet. On level three SAMURAI WARRIOR there's a warp to level six, found on the first island. (Firebird) Okay all you failed Ronin Stand at the end of the row of rabbits use these POKES blocks and jump upwards to from Bruce and Dazof hit an invisible block, and Doncaster you should find life you'll be transported to level a little easier. Load the game, six. reset the computer and enter MY HERO (Sega) of the following: POKE 15502. This should really be in the (0-127) for higher energy. Mean Machine sections, but Mean POKE 15507. (0-127) for more what the heck! Jump over a money or POKE 14652, (0-3) knife thrower without for a higher starting level. If touching him and HIT him in you want to go the whole hog the back and you'll be and have unlimited energy, awarded an extra life. Ramon type POKE 20385,32: POKEBainathsah of Amsterdam 20386,245: POKE 20387,207: discovered that highly useful POKE 53237,157: POKE 'feature' 53238,20: POKE 53239,39: BLACK BELT (Sega) The Post Office strike caused quite a few POKE 53241,9: POKE Another console tip from worries this month we had no mail for 53242, 141: POKE 53243,20: Ramon Bainathsah. Press the POKE 53244,39: POKE reset button at the same time weeks! Fortunately the dispute ended just in 53245,96 (RETURN). Once the demo begins and you'll time for your hints and tips to get through you've made your changes, gain lives great! before we hit our deadlines. Phew! If you type SYS 14336 (RETURN) to ARKANOID I + II (Imagine) have any tips, POKEs or maps on any restart. These are C64 If you're a Spectrum owner machine send in your stuff to: Julian POKEs, by the way. and have Arkanoid, type Rignall, Playmasters, C + VG, Priory Court, RASTAN SAGA (Ocean) PBRAIN on the highscore 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Unfortunately we haven't got table to access the cheat Don't forget there's a bundle of software for mode. If you've got Revenge a copy of this in the office, so the month's best tips so don't forget to I'll have to trust that this C64 of Doh, type MAAAAH on the Bruce and Daz listing works. state which machine you own. Type the following listing, effect. Atari ST Arkanoid players just need to press the tape (don't forget to bung in CAPS LOCK key and type the game tape first) for infinite DEATHSTAR on the title lives. screen to activate the cheat HAWKEYE (Thalamus) around in the opposite then press S to skip levels. Martin Brear of Minster, Kent, direction, though, otherwise 1 FOR A = 400 TO 457: READ Cheers to Allen Darnell from spoke to the authors, the you'll finish the race. Thanks B: POKE AB: NEXT SYS 400 Stevenage, Herts, for Boys Without Brains, at the to lan Walpole for that cheat. 2 DATA 32, 44, 247, 32, 108, unearthing those. PC Show, and they revealed 245, 196, 163 RAMPAGE (Activision) AUF WIEDERSEHEN that you can access the cheat 3 DATA 141, 196, 2, 169, 1. \" MONTY (Gremlin Another silly ST tip, again mode by typing 141, 201, 2 VALSSPELER on the title from lan Walpole of Cardiff. If Graphics) 4 DATA 76, 167, 2, 160, 189, you're on the last building and screen. Apparently valsspeler Spectrum owners who can't 141, 116, 1 get Monty to safety are is Dutch for cheat! Cor! a cloud of dust appears under 5 DATA 169, 1, 141, 117, 1, it, punch in any direction and advised to type 169, 88, 141 LOAD\":REM MONTY to SUPER SPRINT keep your finger on the fire 6 DATA 211, 2, 169, 96, 141. button until the next screen is load the game. If you pick up (Activision) 244, 10, 141 displayed, whereupon you'll 7 DATA 125, 10, 76, 81, 3, the red flag at the start of a A rather silly ST tip this, but find that you can climb up an 169, 96, 141 game, Monty becomes fun nevertheless. On track invisible building which is in eight, instead of racing, turn immortal. Thanks to Allen 8 DATA 165, 160, 189, 173, the same place as the last Darnell for that excellent around and position your car building on the previous 141, 7, 201, 76 cheat. 9 DATA 26, 129 just before the finish line. Point it downwards, and when Rastan C64 pokes screen. Odd, but true. a drone zooms by, accelerate CRAZY CARS (Titus) SCORE 8887888 HIGH 1385486 and drive it into the wall. It'll If you're a Spectrum owner LEVEL crash but won't be with a Multiface (the hardware replaced. Repeat the process add-on I mean, not ten for the other two cars, and heads), you might be you'll be free to drive around interested in this POKE from at leisure, picking up as many Edward O'Donnell of West spanners and bonus points as Lothian. Load the game with you like. Don't forget to drive the interface shoved into the "


"lay Masters for Alexander Stivaros of LEATHERNECK Didsbury Manchester, is (Microdeal). here with some extensive tips While playing, type to help you on your way. CUTHBERTNECK and press First of all pick up the bag, F3 to become invincible at collected the treasure, open bottle medical supplies and least to enemy bullets. the second chest whilst rope which are dotted around Thanks to Kingsley Hyam of holding the INSERT key As South Benfleet, Essex, for you unlock the chest an ankh the crashed plane Put everything but the rope in the that ST tip. IKARI WARRIORS (Elite) should be revealed collect bag you need that to Ramon Bainathsah of this and you're graced with RETURN TO GENESIS rescue Clive Get Gloria's Amsterdam has discovered 50.000 health points and compact and make your way (Firebird). that if you type FREERIDE on loads of super reflective to the rope bridge Rescue An invincibility cheat is the highscore table you'll shots Clive using the rope When initialised by typing WASP. start the next game with an PLATOON (Ocean). everyone is safe cross the ASM and pressing the F5 key. invisible soldier That's one I've you've got an ST copy of bridge and follow the cliff Thanks once again to for ST owners this game-of-the-film try this edge in a north-westerly Kingsley Hyam for another ST HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER out Type Humburger-Hill (the di the direction without going up any tlp. (Grand Slam) -is the minus on the numeric slopes. When the characters ZYBEX (Zeppelin) Another tip from Ramon pad) on the title screen, and get to an open plain head Players of this neat little Bainathsah, this time for you're able to use F1-F4 to north until the swamp is two-player shoot 'em up Amiga owners. If you restore advance through the jungle. reached should find this C64 listing a a saved game, all enemy F4 taking you directly to the After crossing the swamp boon. Type in the program, ships disappear Use it as a village If that isn't enough, let everyone eat, drink and RUN it and press play on tape sort of smart bomb! use F5 and F6 to switch on/off rest Refill the bottle and head for unlimited lives. Cheers to a shield By the way, make towards the village. Locate INSANITY FIGHT (Linel) Bruce and Daz of Doncaster, sure the shield is off before the chief and drop Gloria's Skip levels simply by pressing Sun South Yorkshire. you enter the trapdoor Land both mouse buttons at compact using the second 100 DATA 32, 86, 245, 160, otherwise the game crashes. box, and then pick up the food 78. 141. 200, 2. 169, 1, 141, the same time. Cheers to Ramon Bainathsah for that WHERE TIME STOOD and roast pork Put the food in 201, 2, 96 the bag and walk north until STILL (Ocean). quickie! 110 DATA 169, 91, 141, 121. Stuck in time? Fear no more, you reach another cliff. Find a 4. 169, 1, 141, 122, 4, 76, 0, 4, FREDDY HARDSET 169 (Imagine) 120 DATA 189, 141, 106, 113, Spectrum owners can enter 76, 0, 96 the second game by typing 130 FOR L=320 TO 345: 897563 when prompted. Well READ T: POKEL, T:NEXT that's what Allen Darnell of 140 POKE 642,13:POKE 157, Stevenage says 128:SYS 320 ARMY MOVES (Imagine) Allen Darnell has found that MORALE the code to the second load is 27351 on the Spectrum AMMO GAUNTLET II (US Gold) MI A rather good tip for this TIME excellent conversion was 00:16 found by Gavin Giles of Sunderland, Tyne and Wear SCORE 017500 When you get the 'Locked treasure chests can insert HITS helpful items\" message at the IMPOSSIBLE MISSION (US start of a screen find two Gold) locked treasure chests As This excellent Bruce and Daz you open the first hold down POKE disables all the HELP key. Having sprite-sprite collision hole in the cliff. drop the pork detection, allowing you to run and quickly run past Cross through robots without being harmed. Simply type in the 1993 the waterfall and turn the 01 music off so you can hear the listing, RUN it and press play tromp of approaching on tape. dinosaurs Move down the 1 FOR X = 320 TO 347: READ slope and run in a southerly A: POKE XA: NEXT direction until you reach a 2 POKE 646, 4:POKE 157, river Follow the river south around the village and go eat 3 DATA 32, 104, 225, 169, 83, until you find a religious 141, 243,3 169, 1 141, 244,3 building and rest Finally, run 4 DATA 76, 13, 8, 72, 77, 80. east towards another cliff 169, 96, 141, 16, 120, 32, Find the slope that leads up 132 into the mountains and make 5 DATA 255, 96 your way to freedom "


"E CCE Simulator uulato2 Richard 'Pro Soccer's got everything! There's four soccer games 11 A-Side Soccer, Indoor Soccer, Street Soccer (fouling allowed!) and Soccer Skills (with skill training penalties, pushups, sit ups, weight lifting, dribbling and more!) Superb Value! RICHARD DARLING Research and Development David ... and Pro Soccer's got simultaneous 4 player action! It's taken our team of \"Code Masters\" over a year to perfect these football games. Don't miss out on the best all action 4 player, football game ever! Absolutely Brilliant! DAVID DARLING Television Promotions 12001, ta .99 TAPE COMMODORE C64 (DISK 114.99) FREEKICK Tig 19.99 AMSTRAD CPC (DISK 14.99) .99 SPECTRUM  ( (+3 DISK $12.99) bis GOLD $19.99 AMIGA .99 ATARI ST 219.99 PC AND COMPATIBLES AMSTRAD SCREEN SHOTS CODE MASTERS SOFTWARE "


"=The Ac GAM "


"Adiemudire Goes On COVER UI heVideo-Game NEW TASK STANDS BEFORE YOU.. APPROACHING PHANTIS BE You must rescue ARKOS, the hero of the rebellion against GREMLA, who has been Imprisloned. You combat the kamikaze hordes, dodging missiles and avolding balls of incandescent magma. Once you enter the caverns of the planet PHANTIS you fight your way through ANSTEAD 09909 COMMODORE STRUGGLING ON After abandoning the ship you capture an ADREC In order to continue advancing on the planet. A dagger is the sole weapon you rely on to fend off the inhabitants. You fight against the enemy troops. You have to steal a weapon. And advance forward, straight ahead. Nothing can detain you. THE PRISON ATARI ST You cross swamps, mountains and forests... there are enemies all over. The way to the prison becomes more hazardous the further you advance. You take command of a helicopter, descend Into the entralls of the planet, and arrive at the prison. It is heavily guarded. Will you be capable of freeing ARKOS? Sub SPECTREAM * SPECTRUM AMSTRAD CPC COMMODORE 64 MSX* ONN-BANNINDA 8.95casse CEE Disk 12.95 * PC COMPATIBLES * ATARI ST* 19.95disk DISTRIBUTED BY EL CIRNIC ARTS For all bastant ces nog the content of information on your nearest stockist wie Electronic Arts 11:48 Station Road, Langley, Berkshire SL3 BYN, England. Or calcul Customer Serce Dept on 0753 46465 "


"UAMD * With the Official Endorsement of the World Boxing Council * Over 1300 Animation Frames Training Mode * World Ranking List FOR YOUR AMIGA WITH THE ORIGINAL «ROCKY\" THEME WIN A SWORD ENERELS A KIND OF MA DRAGON LAYER * More than 50 Animated Enemies * A Castle 600 Screens wide A Challenging Competition * 80 Colours on Screen FOR YOUR AMIGA THE EXCLUSIVE SALES REPRESENTATIVE: LOOK OUT FOR OTHER COMPUTER FORMATS LEGEL THE SALES CURVE Ltd. The Lombard Business Centre 50 Lombard Road LONDON SW11 3SU Tel: 01-585 3308 Fax: 01-924 3419 DON'T MISS THE COMPETITIONS MERIMPEX Ltd, LINEL Products, Am Schrgen Weg 2 FL-9490 Vaduz Tel: (01041) 75 283 68 Fax: (01041) 75 206 56 "


"OFF SHORE FYRRIOR VIOLENCE ON THE HIGH SEAS. THE ULTIMATE TEST OF MANHOOD SEP SERRES AMIGA VERSION PS, PC, XT, AT VERSION ATARI ST VERSION THE YEAR IS 2050. VIOLENCE AND TERROR HAVE TAKEN OVER THE WORLD, CIVILIZATION HAS DISAPPEARED, VIOLENT STREET SPORTS ARE NOT ENOUGH TO SATISFY THE BLOOD LUST OF A NATION. A NEW SPORT HAS EVOLVED. YOU ARE AN OFF SHORE WARRIOR, ANYTHING GOES. THE BATTLE CAN BRING YOU FAME OR DEATH... THE ONLY RULE IS TO WIN WHATEVER THE COST. CAN YOU MEET THE CHALLENGE AND BECOME THE SUPREME OFF SHORE WARRIOR A WORLD AWAITS, PREPARE FOR THE ULTIMATE TEST...  1988 TITUS SOFTWARE CORP., OFF SHORE WARRIOR, TITUS AND THE TITUS LOGO ARE REGISTERED TRADEMARKS OF TITUS SOFTWARE CORP, IBM, ATARI ST AND AMIGA ARE REGISTERED TRADE MARKS OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES, ATARI INC AND COMMODORE AMIGA RESPECTIVELY IM cts, Jaduz UNIT 4 STANNETS LAINDON NORTH TRADE CENTRE BASILDON ESSEX SS 156 DJ PHONE: (0268) 541126 "


"Brave ~ (WIN A LOAD Brave Os HAND SEWN ALIS Let's get the old ball rolling shall we? The winner will get all the balls, a handy dandy bike, Take a butchers at the photo. We've got all these to nume adaptor to blow them up with, and a selection of give away: a football, a basketball, an American football. alternative sports games. Twenty runners up will just a baby American football, a cricket ball, a softball, a get the games. Ready for the questions? hockey ball, a squash ball, goll balls, ping pong balls 1) How many footballs can you see on the entire inlay squiangy balls, lirm balls... You get the picture. Even some shuttlecocks for some odd reason. sheet for Soccer Boss? An excellent sort of prize, we're sure you'll agree. All 2) Who won the last Superbowl? these come courtesy of top budget house Alternative, to T here will be no tle break first one out of the hat gets celebrate the launch of their American football game the prize. Endzone, the latest edition to a wide range of sports Send your entries to: C+YG Ball Competition. Priory sims. You're bound to have seen a least some of them: Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Football Frenzy. Indoor Soccer, Cricket Crazy. Howzau, Write with a ball point pen, don't balls it up, and send and mega-hll Soccer Boss. Endzone follows a similar your entries now. The ball's in your court. management-type format to thai best seller, and looks to And don't, whatever you do, forget to specily which be one of the big 8 bil sellers of the coming months. format you want your games-C64, Speccy or Amstrad. HYLT GDLJILLE Name Address Computer Answer 1. Answer 2.. "


"PLUS PLUS PLUS US-PLUS-PLUS Professional Sad-sna SD 1 PLUS . PLUS-F Simulato2 mad ECHO DYNO goose OMNO TOGA DYNO SCREENSHOTS EXPERT PRESS SPACE TO CHANGE CONTROLS PRESS S TO START DLU RICHARD DARLING Research and Development DAVID DARLING Television Promotions S COMMODORE C64 50d-sna-sna snid Snd Sold SPECTRUM COMMODORE C64 Richard Darling 'Pro BMX has got to be my best game! Four player action, three totally new race meets-Quarry Racing, Dirt Biking and Desert Riding each with five exciting circuits. It's just like the real thing the burms, bumps and ramps really work! «Fifteen incredible courses make Pro BMX the biggest best BMX game yet! David Darling \"Richard's Pro BMX simulator is excellent now with 4 player action, two tapes and a color BMX poster it's amazing value at AZT PLUS -PLUS-PLUS AMSTRAD Plus .99 COMMODORE C64 AMSTRAD, SPECTRUM. CODE MASTERS SOFTWARE CO LTD. PO BOX 6, LEAMINGTON SPA CV33 OSH DUIS . DIUS. PLUS-PLUS-PLUS-PLUS "


"A StonKinG GOOD ffah FORM ONE: T SHIRT WITH SUBSCRIPTION Yes, I think this fabulous T shirt is easily worth .99 or more if I live abroad and I enclose my cheque/postal order made payable to COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES. My shirt size is Medium (S/C 14) XXXL (S/C 15) Quite the best T-shirt you' ever buy for only $17.99 Your shirt will be sent separately, but may take up to 28 days. Please start my subscription at the. Issue. Tick the correction box: One year UK and Eire .99. One year Europe .99. One year rest of world (Air Mail) .00. One year rest of world (Surface Mail) .00. C+VG comes up with the goods again with the T-Shirt that is the talk of the software industry! Join top bods from US Gold, Ocean, Telecomsoft and the rest in proudly sporting the games world's most credible logo on your ample chest! It's a stonker, and no mistake! Each trend-setting garment is made from guaranteed 100% material and comes complete with stylish label on the inside of the neck and the wild and crazy\" C+VG sunburst logo slap bang in the middle. And of course, each one comes complete with 12 issues of Britain's biggest selling computer mag posted to your door the minute they leave the presses. If just happens to be the offer of the century, but if you are of the type that likes a monthly chat with the cheery chappy down the newsagent, then don't despair: you CAN get the shirt without the mags. Just fill out the second form on this page that's the one that says \"T-shirts only\" on it and post it off with a cheque for only .99. A snip amongst snips! My cheque/postal order is made out for  OR Please debit my Access/Visa account card number Amount Expiry date Name Address finn af Signed Return to COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAME SUBS OFFER, Subscriptions Dept, PO Box 500, Leicester LE99 OAA. Or ring our special 24 hour Orderline Service and quote your credit card number. Tel: 0858 410888. ENQUIRIES: 0733 555161. OMGR FORM TWO: T SHIRT ONLY The 1988 C+VG SHIRT COSTS .99. Please send me..........Tshirt(s). I enclose a cheque or P.O made payable to COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES for ..................(.99 times however many shirts). This price Includes postage and packing. I know the shirt(s) may take up to 28 days to arrive. I want this many medium ones.. .. And this many XXL ones.... +video **** Name. Address. I will now put this form in an envelope and send it to: COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES T SHIRT OFFER, EMAP Premium Sales, 14 Holkham Road, Orton Southgate, Peterborough PE2 OUF. *plus a free year's subscription to your favourite magazine! P.S Anyone entering the Spitting Image competition (see FAX this issue) and wants to draw a cartoon of one of the fine and upstanding body of boys and girls pictured above may find it useful to know which is which. Left to right at back: Lora, Andrea, (Little) Matt, Seamus. Front: Garry, Jaz, Euge. Remember, some of these are caricatures already! "


"u'll in the distant jungles of Central America, revolution is in the air. The government of the Democratic Republic of El Diablo has been brutally overthrown and the evil despot known only as Fernandez rules the land. Summoned by the exiled leaders of your homeland, you must free your people from the oppressive yoke of the Dictator by destroying the military bases that have protected Fernandez from the wrath of his people Jeeps, tanks, motorcycles, trains and more Huge play area One or two player options (some formats only) Map of El Diablo Free \"Fernandez' badge \"Fernandez poster and T-shirt offer te W Atari ST screen shots shown Spectrum disk: .99 Spectrum cassette: .99 Commodore disk: .99 Commodore cassette: .99 Amstrad disk .99 Amstrad cassette: .99 ST .99 Amiga .99 Image Works. Headway House 66-73 Shoe Lane London ECAP LAB. Telephone: 01-3770645 "


"Play Masters You can't get off the bandstand directly. so nip back through the curtain into the back room. beat up the guard, and punch the yellow square on the far wall. Now pop back outside, and down the open trap door. You may have been waiting around for Last Ninja 2 for a while now, but we can promise it'll be worth the wait. At the risk of spoiling the fun, System 3 has helped us complle this exclusive map of the first three levels, complete with all the relevant hints and tips. Our thanks particularly to Phil Churchyard and John Twiddy. Watch out next month for the last three levels ... > Use the key from the drum room to open the You are only able to cross the river by jumping onto the boal, and then to the far shore. Make sure you have collected everthing you need though because it is actually impossible to get back! ca You must Jump off the top of the Screen below on the island, then stand as far into the bushes as you can and push it to the left with a swipe of your stick. Now jump off the bottom of the island by running parallel to the bottom right edge. FINISH Somersault across the Juggler screen and his knives shouldn't louch you. You need to pick up the long pole, lying among the sticks on top of the wall. The boat should now drill down river across the final screen and you can use it to exit the load. Collect the map on the ground where the Ninja Is kneeling, and now all the objects to be collected will flash when you get near them. You need to put all the objects away before you can climb the ladder. "


"EVEL 1 There is an extra lite, found by visiting the hamburger sland. START START Hall a nunchuka Is found in the second door to the toilets. Should the guard follow you Into the tollels. you can still fight him off screen by going crazy with that loystick. On the ring road around the central building you can usually avoid fighting the policemen by outrunning them. They can however, start to get mean and send throwing stars after you if you do this, especially on the higher levels. on the ga Called the key from Mahind the bass drum gu need to open the fales) and proceed outside. contains throwing stars The box Immediately behind the policeman which you can collect. you. Go into the \"F\" door on the second set of toilets, and you can collect the other half of your nunchuka, glyng you a pretty useful weapon. When you \"kula policeman or guard they won't start to regenerate as long as you continue to stand on top of them. munja 2 "


"ROBBEARY Bertie, an agile and clever bear has targeted a famous 24 floors store for his last and most daring ROBBERY. With no alarms or visible guards and fabulous treasures, yet it has been avoided like the plague by the criminal fraternity. Bertie soon discovers why? AMIGA .95 HIGHWAY HAWKS Grand Prix driving skills is essential to negotiate the crowded highway at speed. Obliterate the assassins cars and the ones that get in your way but keep the tiger in your tank fed the engine cool and the tyres and steering intact. Acquisition of faster cars and lethal weaponary depends on your driving and trading skills. AMIGA .95 (2 DISCS) EMERALD MINE A giant arcade adventure which has received rave reviews. Each level has its own unique solution and Tequires ingenuity and dexterity to complete. One player or two players TEAM action for added enjoyment. AMIGA .95 CBM64-PLUS 4 .95 (D) .95 MANIAX Maniax relentlessly pursued by the creature undertakes to clear the thick fog engulfing the world capitals. An addictive game requiring quick thinking and action AMIGA-ST-IBM .95 CBM64-PLUS 4 .95 (D) .95 QUANTOX Progress through 24 levels of this fast and furious action. Lightning responses are secondary to the strategic choices between better weaponry or better defence AMIGA .95 FACE OFF Experience the sheer pace and exhilaration of ICE HOCKEY. Be prepared for the body checks, fouls and rough play. League competition, 1 or 2 player option. AMIGA-ST-IBM E14.95 FACE OFF STRIP POKER II PLUS A sizzling evening with Sam & Donna AMIGA-ST-IBM-ARCH. .95 SP-AMS-MSX-BBC-ELECTRON CBM64-PLUS 4 .95 STRIP POKER II PLUS DATA DISCS Requires Strip Poker II Plus disc to load Disc 1 Beverly & Dawn Disc 2 Lee & Roy Disc 3 Suzanne & Bianca Disc 4 Rachel & Kim AMIGA-ST .95 MICRO TEXT MICRO BASE Ideal for home and business use Menu driven to enable a novice to use powerful capabilities with minimal reference to the tutorial manual Micro base. a powerful data base with fast SEARCH and SORT facilities includes a very flexible labelprinter. Sorted files can be used by the Micro Text word Processor to send personalised letters. A boon to any Club Secretary. AMIGA .95 EACH DAWN BEVERLEY ANCO SOFTWARE LTD, UNIT 9-10 BURNHAM TRADING ESTATE OFF LAWSON ROAD, DARTFORD, KENT DA1 5BH TEL: 0322 92513 MAIL ORDER HOTLINE: 0322 522631 FAX NO: 0322 93422 PAYMENT BY CHEQUE, P.O., VISA OR ACCESS "


"HTUMAT SNK SPECTRUM $7.95 COMMODORE .95 AMSTRAD .95 COMMODORE DISK .95 AMSTRAD DISK .95 the name manne Software (1984). 6 Cente or the Game Manchester M2 SNS Tel 061-834 3939. Telex 669977 "


"HOSTAGES 1: STAGES An urgent phone call. Terrorists have overrun an Embassy, taking hostages. As Head of the Terrorist Intervention Combat Team it's up to you to regain control. Under cover of darkness, place crack marksmen around the Embassy; then get your Paratroopers onto the roof ready to abseil down the building, entering the Embassy through the windows. Now comes the tricky bit. Have you got what it takes to win in a life or death crisis? Can you effectively co-ordinate six Commandos? Can you second-guess a desperate group of terrorists and get the hostages, and your troops, safely out of the Embassy? There's only one way to find out. JINFO GRA MESA "


"STEXCUDA TETAIS. FAP MIRROR B -THE ULTIMATE TEST ELITE \"The game of a lifetime\" (Zzap 64) SENTINEL \"There's nothing to compare with it\" (Amtix), TETRIS \"Tetris will have you hooked from the moment you pick up your joystick\" (Your Sinclair), ACE II \"This is the perfect flight simulation\" (Crash) STARGLIDER \"One of the best shoot-em-up's you can buy\" (Ace) s 5 OF THE BEST SELLING GAMES OF ALL TIME TOGETHER ON SUPREME CHALLENGE! SPECTRUM 48K/128 . SPECTRUM PLUS 3 AMSTRAD 464/6128. AMSTRAD DISK COMMODORE 64/128. COMMODORE DISK .95 Cass. / .95 DISK THE ULTIMATE PACK THE NAME BEHIND THE GREAT GAMES BEAU-JOLLY) "


"LAST MINA 2 To exit the load, open the manhole cover up here and slip down. START This load is full of bits that wrap around. so you walk off one side of the map and end up across on the other. Thus walk off at A and you'll end up at B exit at C and enter gain at D and most bizarre of all exit at the top of E and you'll appear at P! In the shop which you enter through the doors at the end of the street on the last screen collect the sword that rests in the bottom left corner. It's not easy though you have to kick down the doors to get in. This guy throws stall at you too! like in the last load, the hamburger sland gives an extra life. On all the street inter sections there are bikes which threatens to run you down. To avoid the risk wall until the lights are green for you to cross but make sure they are pointing the right way, and saying you can go, not the traffic! This chap drops things at you from the windows so watch out! LEVEL 2 Right at the end here go into the workman's hul and collect the T-bar for pulling open manhole covers. You need this to get out of the load. The bottle living next lo the tramp down in this corner of the map is the most important item to collect you need it for Load Three. "


"Collect the key lying on the ground in this screen. LEVEL 3 Avold the spiders that drop down on you around here! FINISH Now use the key you have collected to open the grating and drop down. Ignite the meths bottle you collected from the tramp in Load Two al the lamp here. You will need il as a molotov cocktail to kill the alligator at the end of the load (the picture of the alligator going up in flames isn't strictly necessary to the map, but we liked it so we put it in anyway!) Drop down here you can't get back up to the top level. so be sure you have ever thing). You probably don't need telling, but you should avoid the rats on this screen. It is important to take the right exits from these screens, or you wasle vital energy thrashing around in the dark. We have marked them where it is not clear A leading to B. C to D and E lo F. Play Masters HSHA "


"N A MAMMOTH COMPILATION OF WORLD BEATERS... When the golden team take their golden games and add a little bit of golden magic, then there's only one outcome.... a GIANT success. Five giant games squeezed into one giant compilation OUTRUN TM To be blunt this game is going to outsell anything ......a flippin good game-test drive one today!!\" Your Sinclair 720 Virtually flawless arcade game. Addictive, smooth and slick, easily U.S. Gold's finest hour. Don't miss this one.\" Sinclair User GAUNTLET ILM \"It's one of the finest conversions I've ever seen\". C & VG ROLLING THUNDER IM \"An excellent game, full of atmosphere, suspense and outstanding playability. Do not miss it!\" CCI CALIFORNIA GAMES \"Quite simply the apex of computer sports gaming\" Zzap 64 THE PHENOMENON CONTINUES Have you got what it takes to be a THE ULTIMATE AERIAL EXPERIENCE HOW TOH COMPUTER California out Our ThiUX DER START undercover cop? SPECTRUM 48/128K .99t, +3 .99d CBM 64/128 .99t, .99d AMSTRAD .99t, .99d BEATERS EUR U.S. Gold Ltd. Units 23 Holford Holford, Birmingham 36 7AX Tel: 021 5 The Coin op Sensation 3388 "


"Play Masters Round 2 Winner Stays on First round champ Justin came with the crowds to the PC Show. On a selection of PC Engine and Arcade games, it was time to see if he could keep up his winning streak... + Video This was Galaga '88 a combination of glorious graphics and simple shoot 'em up gameplay which we scarcely thought would provoke any upsets. This was not be, however, as Kojo, who had admittedly looked very strong in the practice bouts, surged into the lead, leaving Justin trailing by nearly 15,000 points in third place. Previous Winner stays on contestants like Neil White and arch-rival Jonathan The contenders: left to right Martin Manley, Kojo Ellimah, Paul Wood who had showed up at Gallagher, Justin Swords. Earl's Court to watch the fun had predicted an easy victory Jammed somewhere in the the way we'll run things in the for Justin, but this was clearly corner of a packed Earl's future when Winner Stays On not going to be the case. Court between the takes to the road. A Microprose Super X sim, the Paul Gallagher came up US Gold floozies and the with a mate from Bromley in Number Six bar stood the Kent, and both immediately C +VG stand, populated by a demanded a few \"words\" squillion kiddies and a with Justin, because ''we're smattering of hassled staff both Amiga owners, and in members. the magazine he said all The second round of our Amiga owners are winner Stays On contest was dickheads! With Kojo to be held, at arguably one of Ellimah from north London, the most frenetic times of an and Martin Manley from always busy show: the Hayes in Middlesex, all dreaded Saturday lunchtime! present and correct, and Contestants were a bundle Justin eventually unearthed of more or less local lads, moseying around the Elite though on the day only three stand, it was time to shove the challengers could make it. crowds out of the corner were Though a fair few less than our PC Engine lurked (the the initial challenge it made only one up and running at the for far more managable show) and get on with the first numbers, and could well be A Operation Wolf was the decider. game. Justin sports a C+VG T-shirt, Matt a bad haircut SCORECARD GALAGA '88 R-TYPE P.O.W. OPERATION WOLF TOTAL Martin Manley, a sixteen year old Spectrum owner from Hayes, Middlesex. Kojo Ellimah, a fifteen year old Amstrad player from Palmers Green, London. Paul Gallagher, age fifteen, an ST owner from Bromley, in Kent. Justin Swords, our current champ from sunny Coventry. "


"ARCADE ACTION SNK From the SNK stable, the coin-op smash hit now for your home micro. This multi-level, vertically scrolling arcade thriller throws you deep into the jungles and ruined cities of a nation held in the grip of a cruel oppressor. Freedom is your aim ... Guerrilla War is the means! MITTEL GUERRILLA AMSTRAD COMMODORE SSNK SPECTRUM Une ngime the same IMAGINE SOFTWARE 6 CENTRAL STREET MANCHESTER M2 5NS TEL: 061-832 6633 TELEX: 667799 OCEANS G FAX: 061 834 0650 "


"Play Masters Winner Stays on Round 2 with three for the second etc left Justin and Kojo neck and neck only Operation Wolf would decide. Justin was busy blaming Paul and Kojo sweat it out Turfing off the crowd the oddly shaped PC engine gathered around this most control panel and the fact popular of the free play that he had sold his ST and arcade machines, we set down was out of practice! on his to settle the thing. With both relatively poor performance Martin and Paul now out of it as we started them out on as far as winning was R-Type. Martin kicked off, concerned, their scoring a respectable 36 800 performances scarcely in 2 mins 46, and was followed mattered, though Paul in by Paul and Kojo with very particular did pretty well. In similar performances the end though, it was down to Unused to both the game and Justin beating Kojo's 35450 the controls, none managed which he did in style! to beat the end of the first Our champ had survived level. the first attempt to take away This was the turning point his title, therefore, and all for Justin: by the end of the there remained to do was alloted five minutes he had dosh out the T-shirts and most of his lives left and was other prizes and take photos pushing at the start of the We left with Justin and old third level. The points gap rival Jonathan itching for a between him and nearest rival Despite the pressure Kojo once again racked up a private rematch on the arcade Kojo was incredible Justin Justin was content to lean respectable score, but Justin machines, and the big prize had more than doubled his against the arcade machine did better with 4450 before he (ST. Amiga, PC Engine?) only score but if Kojo was to and listen to S-Express on his ran out of lives. A quick totting one round away continue to be such a strong personal as Martin began up the scores, allowing four Fill out the slip below, send challenger, he must still come play on new beat 'em up points for the best it off, and you could be called first in both remaining events. P.O.W. In three minutes there performance on each game, up for a future challenge. POW caused quite a hit. WINNER STAYS ON ENTRY FORM Justin will be putting his money where his mouth is in another challenge coming soon to a town near you! If you want a chance to have a crack at the champ, list your high scores on the form below and post it to: C + VG Winner Stays on, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Name Address Telephone number Age GAME MACHINE SCORE "


"ALEK Bereen Shots from the stars A gripping new mega miles per hour arcade simulation of a Supercobra attack helicopter is set to enthrall game players everywhere. Helltre Attack puts the player firmly in the seat oLa deadly two-seater turbo-powered destroyer with its array of deadly weaponry. Your task is to fly through fields of combat all over the woNd both day and night. Mying low into battle, all manner of enemy aircraft will attack you. You must get them before they get you. A breathtaking multi-level arcade experience, with graphics, sound and animation of the highest calibre. Grab that joystick and take to the skies. Distributed by Atari ST 419.89 Commodore Amiga 419.99 Commodore 64/1.88k cassette $9.99 Commodore 64/128k disc 814.99 Spectrum 48/188 cassette 48.99 Spectrum +3 disc 814.99 ELECTRONIC ARTS Home Computer Software Wartech is the registered trade mark of Martech Games Ltd. Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, Sussex BN84 683 TEL 053) 768456 FLEX: 878573 Martec& TAX:(0323) 784460 "


"COMPETITION PRIZE Can you become The World Champion? FAIR MEANS OR FOUL AMSTRAD CPC LA A Fair Punch BBC MICRO COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM SUPERIOR The RefSees a Foul Move Opponents Facing Up A Foul Move BECOME THE WORLD CHAMPION BY FAIR MEANS OR FOUL A realistic boxing simulation. You can even cheat... If the ref's not looking! You're behind on points and time is running out. The ref looks half asleep You've won, but in the next championship contest you meet a boxer who A quick head butt and a sly punch below the belt and your opponent is knows more dirty tricks than you. It needs skill and cunning, lightning toppling over. But as he falls, his knee strikes you a paralysing blow. responses and deadly strategy. Have you got what it takes to become the \"Foul\" shouts the crowd, and your opponent is disqualified. World Champion By Fair Means or Foul? FAIR AND FOUL MOVES Head Punch Head Butt Body Blow Foul Knee Upper Cut Moves Groin Punch Duck Punch Kick COMMODORE 64M28 SPECTRUM AMSTRAD CPC 464/664/6128 BBC MICRO B/B+/MASTER/MASTER COMPACTO ACORN ELECTRON Cassette: .95 Spectrum Cassette: .95 C64. Amstrad, BBC Electron 5V4 Disc: .95 C64, BBC 342\" Disc: .95 Spectrum 362\" Disc: .95 Amstrad, BBC Master Compact Fair Moves 5 SUPERIORE 7 SUPERIOR SOFTWARE Alligala OUR GUARANTEE . All mall orders are despatched within 24 hours by first-class post  Postage and packing is free Faulty cassettes and discs will be replaced immediately. This does not affect your statutory sigh Please make all cheques payable to Superior Software Lid Limited 24 HOUR TELEPHONE ANSWERING SERVICE FOR ORDERS Dept. BF6, Regent House, Skinner Lane, Leeds LS7 1AX. Telephone: (0532) 459453. "


"THE GREATEST SPORTS 'Score a goal, take the cheqeured flag, compete in the winter olympics with Bob Sled, Ski Jump, Slalom and Downhill. Match strokes with Nick Faldo, make the winning break against Steve Davis but play a straight bat as lan Botham. Enter the arena in Track'n'Field as you compete in 100 metre dash, Long Jump, Javelin, BEST EVER! 110 metre Hurdles, Hammer Throw and High Jump and if that doesn't finish you off then throw jump shots against the basketball aces and give it all you've got and go for a touchdown in the NFL Superbowl, and if that isn't enough there's even more! Check out GSM2the ultimate in sports compilations. Available for SPECTRUM, COMMODORE and AMSTRAD. WINTER OLYMPIADU IAN BOTHAMS TEST MATCH SNOOKER FEATURING ALL THESE FANTASTIC GAMES AND KONAMI NICK FALDO * 2 CASS E Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Telephone: 061 832 6633 Telex: 669977 OCEANS G. Fax: 061 834 Of NOTE: SUPERBOWL W ER OLYMPADE atat "


"at all Armed with new BOUNCE power, PAC-MAN faces new challenges as he enters the worlds of Block Town, Pac-Man's Park, Sandbox Land PAC-MAN IS BACK & BOUNCING IN 3D! and Jungly Steps. AVAILABLE ON: ATARI ST & AMIGA .95 C64 & AMSTRAD CPC DISK .95 C64 Cassette .95; SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD & MSX Cassettes .95 stein GRANDSLAM  NAMCO LTD. All rights reserved Licensed from Tengen  Grandslam Entertainments Ltd. 12-18 Paul Street, LONDON EC2A4JS. 2 : INC Screenshots taken from SPECTRUM Screenshots taken from ATARI ST. 34065 "


"Mean ario Machines MACHINE: NINTENDO. PRICE: .95. This month sees Thunderblade roaring in on REVIEWER: TONY the Sega, and there's also a review of the TAKOUSHI. classic Nintendo game, Mario Bros. The Mario and Luigi are firm long-awaited Super Mario Bros Il gets an favourites in the arcades and have been seen in the Donkey exclusive preview, and we also give the Kong trilogy (Donkey Kong low-down on how to become a champion IV should be nearing Punch-Out!! boxer. And there's all the completion around now), latest console news what more Wrecking Crew and the Mario Brothers series (not to could you ask for? mention guest appearances in such games as Punch-Outll). Well, this is one of the first reaches the bottom of the times they appeared in screen, it disappears into a together. pipe and reappears at the top It's a classic ladders and of the screen and runs along ramps game with the at an even greater speed! player(s) chasing around a Some of the creatures are 1000000 Top-000000 4000000 series of horizontal platforms very strange indeed, and trying to kill a load of very include cute turtles, crabs weird and wonderful (which need to be punched creatures. twice), hopping fighter flies EEEEEEZEEEEEE The game is very simple to and ice cold freezies to avoid. play; you simply run left or Another dangers come in right and jump to punch the the form of fireballs which platform above you. If a float around the screen and creature is walking along that try and restrict movement. platform, it is knocked over They're fatal to touch and can and stunned for a few provide much hassle on later EEEEEEEEEEE ZELEZEEZEE seconds, allowing either levels. Mario or Luigi to run over it If you find the going and kill it. If either player particularly tough, you can touches a creature when it always chicken out and use isn't stunned, one of three the PW bag at the bottom of lives are lost. If the creature the screen. Punching this A Planes attack The first level is a vertical shoot 'em up. causes the entire screen to sides of the screen, and you shake, upsetting all the can also get accumulative nasties. But be careful if bonuses by punching or you've already turned over a kicking two or more creature, punching the POW creatures. bag will turn back on his feet! There are also bonus Bonus points are earned by rounds where you have to collecting gold coins that collect all the coins from a occasionally float on from the screen within the allotted time limit; get them all and a  special \"perfect' bonus is awarded. PHABE 1 1-000000 TOP-000000 ZEEEEEEE "


"What makes the game The graphics are simple really enjoyable is the one or and clean, but it's the two-player option, which gameplay is superb; simple, allows Mario and Luigi to yet incredibly addictive. Go play simultaneously, either as for it! a team, or as enemies (it depends on your choice of tactics). For me, the GRAPHICS O competitive edge of two SOUND 5 players battling together 7 VALUE really makes the game but the game is still incredibly PLAYABILITY enjoyable when you play OVERALL 80% solo. the game with three lives, and and destroy the control in the extra lives are given at nose cone. 500,000 points and then Stage Two has you fighting every million (you have to wide sweeping patterns of WORK for these babiesl). helicopters over a gorgoes On pressing the fire button gold-coloured mountains. The you are shown the stage tanks below are determined number and the number of to take you out, so again you lives, and then you enter need to be fast on trigger and battle. The first scene is Urban reflexes. Combat (a vertical scroll) and If you survive these you will has you blasting your way see a cliff face ahead with an through a city high above its entrance in the left side. You rooftops. The enemy take the have to zoom down into this form of jungle green entrance and then quickly helicopters who are just dying swerve back to the right and to let you have it with their you are attacked by lightning machine guns and fast jets. death-dealing swoops. Thunderblade rates as one You really have to be on of the fastest games I have your toes, the action comes ever played, and also has thick and fast and you will some of the finest graphics in find yourself lunging (as I did) any Sega game. The sound for the pause button to rest and spot effects bounce along your tired hand the action with the action. To get the best out of this game I would recommend you invest in the start fast. Just before you leave the cave there are a mess of tanks firing at you. Avoid these and fly out through the exit to a wide open plain again where  hume Thunderblade is destroyed by tanks. BRA nunderblade 153154 STERI MACHINE: SEGA. PRICE: .95. It takes teamwork to get through the game, REVIEWER: TONY TAKOUSHI. You are the finest helicopter is incredibly hectic. pilot alive and go under the If you make it to the end of Sega coin-ops are getting name Gunship Gladiator. The the first part you swoop up off and better and their mission is simple: pilot the the top of the screen and find conversions to the home Thunderblade helicopter in a yourself zooming down system are getting better and battle to the death with the between buildings zapping better tool Thunderblade, the advancing enemy. formations of helicopters that hit coin-op has been Thunderblade has four approach from above, below converted to the Sega consule stages: Urban and the sides of the screen. All format on a 256K cartridge. Combat/Mountain and the while the buildings hurtle The coin-op relies heavily on Desert/River Delta and past on either side of you. graphics and perspective Refinery. In each stage you There are some good shifts; obviously the home encounter both ground and combinations here and if you Rapid Fire unit from Sega as version is limited in air forces and the scenes are hot on the trigger you can this guarantees you a fast perspective shifts but ALL the feature vertical and take out whole formations mega-blast and helps save playability and some really horizontal scrolling. At the and wack up the score. your trigger finger. spine-tingling graphics have end of each stage you battle a The real villains here are Thunderblade is second to been S-Q-U-E-E-Z-E-D into Super Fortress. the tanks which fire intense none as an arcade game, and this monster conversion!!! Presentation is white missiles at you, which this conversion gets the The scene is set with rebel state-of-the-art. have a nasty habit of being thumbs up ... forces having invaded your Thunderblade is a prime very accurate. GRAPHICS country, and their plan is to example with a hi-res piccy At the end of this stage you SOUND overthrow the government (just like the arcade!) of a face a Super Fortress. This is a and replace it with their own helicopter flying through a huge jet fighter with machine  VALUE cruel and corrupt dictator city and the little etched in din guns. You have to fly around PLAYABILITY (boo, hiss) Blood Red across it. You start it and take out the gun bases OVERALL 80% "


"MIKE TYSON: UNHURT, UNDEFEATED, UNDISPUTED HEAVYWEIGHT CHAMPION OF THE WORLD. HE'S TOUGH. HE'S MEAN. AND HE'S WAITING FOR YOU! OK now listen kid, and listen good. You've laid out ten opponents to get here today. If you pull this off you'll be Heavyweight Champion of the World Yeh, I know it's Mike Tyson sitting in the other corner. But you got the skill, the strength and the stamina. So just go in there, kid. Weave, dodge, jab; keep your guard up and your mind on that title. And remember, this is Nintendo, right? So you might get beat, but you won'! get hurt. RunENCE 1. You're Little Mac and your first opponent is Glass Joe. 2. The bell's gone. Now it's up to you. 3. Go for it     PUNCH-OUT!! MIKE TYSON'S PUNCH-OUT T in The Edit . Chi barns from around the .im and become WWBA Cham n Curstende ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM LOOK OUT FOR THESE EXCITING NEW NINTENDO TITLES IN BOOTS AND OTHER LEADING STORES: ZELDA SUPER MARIO BROS METROID PRO-WRESTLING TOP GUN R.C. PRO-AM Nintendo Now you're playing with power. "


"Mean Machines MT yson's telegraph punch, so sway away to the right, and follow When the jewel at the centre keep watching his turban. with blows to the face. If he crouches, sway left and do flashes, dodge he inevitable right punch and counter with the same. Honda's speciality is the Piston punch: he steps a right, and wait for the jewel back, growls and delivers five to flash again. If he mighty blows block his does a crouching punch, efforts with well-timed presses dodge dodge and follow up with as of the block key, and give him many face punches as a series of face punches. possible. If he uses a Tiger If you defeat Honda, Magic punch, use five blocks you're promoted to fight on to counter his attack, and then the WVBA Major Circuit. The he stops to floor him. Timing is hit him once in the face when first opponent is Don Flamenco, and he's very easy critical, and is takes a lot of meat. Punch him once and practice to become proficient. The final Major Circuit fighter is Bald Bull, a large Tranz and powerful psychopath. Early in the bout use body and head punches, and you should be awarded with some stars, allowing you to use uppercuts to knock down his energy. Keep at him until he starts jabbing and using crouching punches, whereupon you should block and dodge respectively. When he gets really mad he'll attempt a Bull So you want to be a boxer, then dodge left when he hits, Charge he runs to the back eh? Well, the key to success King Hippo. of the ring, jumps forward lies in finding your and follow through with a he'll attack witha big right three times and delivers a series of face and body opponent's weakness. Every blows. As soon as you get a hook. Dodge this and deadly punch that'll floor one of the Punch-Out!/boxers star, use your powerful counter-attack with repeated you. The only way to avoid has a particular weakness, left-right blows and keep this terrible attack is to punch uppercut to floor him! which, when discovered, can going until you floor him. him in the body as he takes his Next comes Von Kaiser, a give Little Mac (the player) a When he gets up he'll throw third jump. Timing is big advantage. The other much more difficult opponent. another right punch; dodge incredibly tight, and if you thing is to always watch your When his trousers flash, left and use the one-two miss, you'll be KO'ed. Again, dodge right when he punches, technique again, and again if opponent so you know ain if practice makes perfect. exactly what he's doing, and if he crouches, sway left and follow up with face And now you're onto the he manages to stagger to his otherwise he may surprise WVBA World Circuit, with six feet a third time! you with a mighty punch. punches. If possible, use an Now comes the first if the opponents Piston Honda, The first opponent is poor uppercut to floor him. Piston Honda is a fairly real tough guys: King Hippo. Soda Popinski, Crazy old Glass Joe, a very weak He blocks all your punches, formidable opponent if you * Bucking Bull, Flamenco's boxer who is easily beaten don't know his characteristics. and seems invincible until * Counterattack, Sandman and with repeated punches. When he twitches his Watch out for his big punch, you punch him when he's got Super Macho Man standing eyebrows he's about to do a his mouth open. This stuns him between you and that dream Knock out Piston Honda! momentarily, and he exposes fight with World Champion his obese Williams-like Mike Tyson. Go for it! stomach, allowing you to Don't forget that pressing attack with a series of body the select button between blows. When he recovers, rounds makes Doc rub your keep dodging his punches back faster, giving you more until he opens his mouth energy for the next round again, and let him have it, although you can only use and follow up with more body that option once per fight. If blows. If you stick to this you're really weedy, and method, you should knock him can't make it through the out, and once he's down he early rounds, here are two never gets up. passcodes: There's magic on the side of 005 737 5423 (To start on the the next boxer, Great Tiger. Major Circuit). As well as being an excellent 641 731 7533 (To start on the pugilist, he's also capable of World Circuit). the deadly Tiger Magic punch. When the bout starts, "


"TV ARCADE ACTION CERTAINLY THE BEST ARCADE GAMES IN THE WORLD NOW FOR YOUR HOME FROM .95 SEGA MASTERSYSTEM FROM .95 (Includes: Mastersystem . 2 Control Pads . Free Game 'Hang On\") SEGA MASTERSYSTEM PLUS\" FROM .95 (Includes: Mastersystem . 2 Control Pads Light Phaser Free Games 'Hang On' and 'Safari Hunt\") SUPERSYSTEMT FROM .95 (Includes: Mastersystem.2 Control Pads  Light Phaser 3D Glasses Free Game 'Missile Defense 3D\" Sega Products are available from leading stores of Woolworths, W.H. Smith, Dixons, John Menzies, Toys R Us, Kids Store, Toy and Hobby, Harrods, Selfridges, Virgin, Children's World, Morrisons, Hamleys and your local computer dealers. Distributed in the U.K. by Mastertronic Ltd., 2/4 Vernon Yard, Portobello Road, London W112DX. Tel. 01-727 8070 Fax. 01-727 8965 "


"Mean Machines Super Mario. 10 Four character selection ros. PLEASE SELECT PLAYER Super Mario Bros is widely regarded as one of the greatest ever video games, and the fact that it has sold over 12,000,000 copies is a testimony to its phenominal inventiveness. The long-awaited sequel was EXTRA LIFE... 19  At the last CES show in America, Nintendo were underground section. More  Rumours still abound that a previewing a whole host of waterfalls are negotiated in PC Engine version of Space new arcade licences and film the third, as well as a Harrier will soon be tie-ins. Amongst the titles tortuously long climb down appearing, although there's were a conversion of Epyx' into the underground. no hard evidence as yet. super sports simulation, What is definitely going to be Super Mario Bros II is far released on the pint-sized harder than its predecessor, and should provide a tough console is a tennis simulation (which should play very A SMB II. similarly to the VS Tennis games already released on released in Japan the Nintendo and Sega), an and America earlier this year, original RPG-style game and looks every bit as good called Tales of the Monster as the original. Path and a conversion of the Chelnov. The game consists of seven vertically scrolling shoot 'em different worlds, each split up, Dragon Spirit. They into three sub-levels, should all maintain the guarded by a Little Boss who generally high standard of PC is destroyed to progress to the Engine games already next level. available, and hopes are As well as incorporating particularly high for Dragon similar horizontally scrolling Spirit. platform and ladders-type TRobocop. gameplay as the sequel, there are also vertically scrolling  If you're getting a sore sections where the player A Mario and a Little Boss. thumb playing all those ascends and descends the brilliant Sega shoot 'em ups, challenge even to SMB landscape. you need fret no longer. Sega experts. As with Super Mario are about to release an At the start of a game the Bros, there are loads of secret autofire widget that fits player chooses one of five rooms and bonuses, only H ATI LAULT. between your joystick/card 883888 characters: Mario, Luigi, found through repeated play A Freedom Force Toad or the Princess. Each has or luck. and the machine and California Games and his or her own characteristics: increases your firepower The game should be out Indiana Jones and the Temple Mario is a good all-rounder, dramatically. It costs around of doom, based on the rather Luigi can jump high, but slows review as soon as we have a next year look out for a full  and is a real boon for disappointing Atari when he's carrying trigger happy zappers coin-op-of-the-film. Robocop, firm release date. something, Toad is strong, but especially if you've been Operation Wolf, which is playing Thunderblade. isn't a good jumper, and the And there's more. looking exceptionally good, The Sega autofire. Rampage, the classic old Princess can float for a second and a half. Atari coin-op Marble On the first level there are Madness, Rampage, waterfalls and chasms to Chelnov, Road Runner and avoid before clambering up Freedom Force were also there. We'll be bringing you to where the first Little Boss resides. Next comes a magic more details when we have carpet ride, some more DE PLAER CAR them. horizontally scrolling PUZA CATE landscape and an D Nantendo 21-12 "


"SOFTWARE SABIAN ISLAND The Lost Legacy of SABIAN ISLAND Fight through the enemy traps to recover a missing timing device and save New York city. Available in: Spectrum .95 (T). Amstrad +3 .95 (D). Amstrad .95 (T) .95 (D). C64 .95 (T) .95 (D). THE LOST LEGACY OF XIM The first in a series of adventures starring our hero detective Rick Shaw in his first mission to recover a stolen diamond encrusted eagle and solve the mystery of Xim. Available in: Amstrad/ PCW E14.95 (D). Spec trum 48/128 .95 (T). +3 .95 (D). XIM Dusk Espionage ES PONAS DUSK OVER ELFINTON You have been transported to the land of Elfinton for an adventure in a place of magic and mystery. A two part graphic adventure for the Spectrum 48/128 .95 (T). +3 .95 (D). Available soon for Amstrad and ST. A SIMPLE CASE OF ESPIONAGE The second adventure starring our hero detective Rick Shaw in what started out as another divorce case but finished as anything but! Available in: Amstrad/ PCW E14.95 (D). Spectrum 48/128 .95 (T). +3 .95 (D). Elfinton SCREEN SOLAR WARRIOR BOUNCE Arcade adventure on the planet D49 as you try to collect the crystals of ZEB from inside a pyramid. One mistake and your transporter flies out of control Available in: ST .95 (D). Spectrum .95 (T). +3 .95 (D). C64 .95 (T), .95 (D). Amstrad .95 (T) .95 (D). Amiga: available soon SOLAR WARRIOR The only hope left for mankind is in the hands of you, the only remaining Solar Warrior. You must defend Earth's supplies both in deep space and on the surface of our remaining territories Available in: Amstrad .95 (T) 14.95 (D). Coming soon in: Spectrum, C64, ST Amiga unc BIG SCREEN HERO Fight your way through your roles as the Big Screen Hero to Hollywood, fame and fortune. Available in: Amstrad .95 (T) .95 (D). Other formats available soon. MAIL ORDER COUPON CUSTOMER HOTLINE Order your games by phone. Access or Visa. 091 567 8058 (Rock City) Price Please send copies of Format NAME (BLOCK CAPITALS) — ADDRESS DEALER HOTLINE Trade enquiries and orders phone 091 565 8473 I enclose (including 50 pence P & P) cheques payable to SKYSLIP MUSIC LTD or debit my ACCESS VISA account. Expiry date Card No: More information tick box To: Skyslip Software, 5 Stockton Rd., Sunderland, Tyne & Wear SRI 3NR "


"EIGHT EXPLOSIVE SPORTS  EXPERIENCES CPORIS U.S. GOLD Sportsworld'88... survival of the fittest, designed for the toughest LEADERBOARD\" 4TH & INCHES SPEED 10TH FRAME WATER POLO HARDBALL SNOOKER & POOL The ultimate collection of sporting challenges, the unique test of skill, stamina, dexterity and endurance. Demonstrate your'e a master of strategy, a ball playing natural and leader of men in the hallowed arenas of American Football, Big League Baseball and International Water Polo. Go for gold on the athletics track, the weightlifting arena and the archery range. Show off your finer touches on the green baize and pool table. Let off steam in the grunt 'n grapple zone. Prove you're a winner on the all action ten pin lanes and rolling acres of the championship golf course. TAG-TEAM WRESTLING GO FOR THE GOLD\" CBM 64/128 $12.99 cass U.S. Gold LtdIlmits 2/3 Holford Wow Ho "


"THE GIANTS OF THE VIDEO GAMES INDUSTRY PRESENT FOR YOUR HOME COMPUTER... 2 Kanu TREET [COMMANDO TGHER BIONIC COMMANDO\" Can you infiltrate the evil dictator's defences and destroy his doomsday weapons? With the aid of your bionic arm, you have a chance! State of the Art gameplay and a pounding soundtrack combine to make Bionic Commando unique on a home computer. STREET FIGHTER Travel around the globe and do battle with the best fighters that Japan, Thailand, USA, England and China can throw at you. At last, your chance to take part in the Battle of Midway. This sequel to the highly acclaimed *1942' places you at the controls of an American fighter plane. Your mission is to destroy the Japanese carrier SK Yamato Exhilarating action! Prices for all games CBM 64/128 .99 cassette .99 disk Atari ST .99 disk erano CAPCOM Spectrum 48/128K .99 cassette .99 disk Amiga .99 disk Amstrad CPC .99 cassette .99 disk GIANTS OF THE VIDEO GAMES INDUSTRY "


"ext COMPUTER +video GAMES Month Operation Wolf needs no introduction to arcade fans. It is the top grossing coin-op of the year. Next month we have a full review of all versions including a C+VG exclusive on the 16 bit versions. You won't read these reviews anywhere else so don't miss us at all costs. Another good reason to be at the newsagents with .20 in your pocket is the C+ VG freebie. Taped to the front cover is the definitive answer to the question on everyone's lips what will be the top selling game this Christmas? C + VG has the answers. "


"STAGE 1 COMPLETE S SER If you've ever fancied driving a Porsche, wearing your Y-fronts outside your tiahts, battling Indians or fighting through a mysterious forest, now's your chance in your local arcade. Barres CHASE HQ food. A tunnel looms as you speed into its blackness to emerge Apprehend and arrest is the key on the biher wide with an arrow to this rollicking car chase based pointing straight at your quarry loosely on Miami Vice and the The criminals are racing down the maxim that the good guy, if he highway can drive fast enough, always An arm goes our to fit the siren wins. to the top of your car and now the A screen flashes up before you chase is really on. The driver hur at the start of the game. Your the turbo button and your cor turbo charged black sports car is leaps foward, parked at the side of the highway Hitting other cars seems to be as Nancy's message from HQ impossible to avoid as there are comes in. The speech is excellent so many on the road and you're and very clear as she passes on going too fast anyway to get our the message to hotfoot it after a of their way. The felon is arrested white sports car, British make. DICE \"Go Mr Driver,\" you yell at your buddy and with a loud whoop you're off on the chase, screaming around corners, dodging in and out of trucks, lorries, and cars. Arrows appear pointing out the direction you're to take as the road splits, and with a scream of anguish you plough through some crash barriers and onto a half-made dirt track. Rocks and debris coat the road and making out the right A At the start of the chase. route is almost impossible as you bounce from side to side chead again. Hitting the turbo uprooting bushes and trying to you hit the gas, calliding into its miss huge boulders. rear again and again. Now With a snap you're back onto flames join the black smoke and farmac and screeching down the the chase is nearly over One Chase HQ A Smash that Countach! more line and it grinds to a hall With only 60 seconds in which you race past, jam on your to make an arrest, your work is brakes and turn sideways to cut out. And the other penaltys block its path that you can only use your turbo The Two cops stroll out of their three times on any one chase. This black sports car and drag the boosts your speed for five Stunned robbers out of theirs. seconds. Rights are reod at gunpoint and To slow them down you've got you ye made to the end of one to bump them several times. I hell of a successful day. found crashing into them more Nancy soon calls in again. This effective, though if you collide too time it's Caros, the New York hard you'll spin and like as not armed robber making his lose them again. getaway in a yellow sports car Crunch! A grinding smack into At last! A racing game with their rear and both cars slew something more to do than just across the road. \"Oh man hit whizzing round a track to beat him more! One more time!\" the course time. Fast and screams your partner as you line challenging with great graphics, up for another jarring collision. if not entirely original, and good Smoke spews from the back of the clear sound effects, Chase HQ white sports car as it draws definitel/ a winner. "


"horizontal as Superman flies high a huge space craft. Only one way above the tallest skyscraper, the_to destroy this monster, and that's buildings in the background to shoot directly into the cabin, a resembling a vast concrete forest. narrow opening. Huge boulders hurtle past him to Dodging all the laser bolts destroy the sleeping city far is virtually impossible below. Lasers streak out of and the hero's strength is failing. Superman's eyes, heating the He flickers more now and boulders until they explode as suddenly it's all over. Superman, molten rock. More and more mortally wounded, flies back boulders appear and just when from a direct hit and disappears. Superman is ready to accept However, there's always defeat, steel girders rise up in his another life, and within seconds, Flight path. No time to dodge he's back filled with renewed them. Energy balls shoot from his energy and determination. The fists, lasers burn into steel and the spacecraft starts to flicker and the top row is demolished. Superman damage increases until the flies on controls are smashed. It blows up Dodging up and down, eyes and Superman lands having once blazing he turns his attention on more done his thankless duty. the chopper. It explodes with a Then the second level starts. huge burst of flame and for an There's much more of the same, instant the skies are clear. with a few changes in attackers Superman relaxes and then and background. But the general stiffens in outrage. More boulders layout remains. First the street fall and now there's danger from scene, where the original attackers are joined by the Spiderman who breathes out webs of disaster, attempting to entangle Superman in a superstrong net. Each successive level gets harder. You're going to need as many energy pick-ups as you can. So kick clear any obstruction on the ground as there might or might not be something there. The game does become repetitive as each new level is so similar to the one before. However, the same can be said of most arcade games. The animation and graphics are excellent and if you're playing in two player mode it's an awful lot more fun as you can take on the enemy together It's Superman! A Is it a birde MELLET A ls it a plane? SUPERMAN Metropolis. The streets are quiet as a large, rather earnest looking man strides past, his suit jacket flapping in the wind. Suddenly danger threatens, what type he A No! doesn't know but in a flash the suit more than a swift blow to is gone and in its place stands the dispatch them. pantied protector. The humanoids soon give way Yepl Superman is back, thanks to their leader, a monstrous green to DC Comics and Taito. hulk. Bunching up his fists until And what's amiss is a bunch of one starts to pound and glow, green humanoids, sent from Superman lets loose a flying ball God knows where, to keep of energy which hits the hulk Superman on this toes. Fists strike where it hurts. The hulk fades for out and Boomfl an alien goes a moment and Superman steps in flying. Another hovers in to take for the kill. Kicking over a dustbin his place. Within seconds the on the way he collects the bonus area just above street level is pick-up left behind and with the filled with the things, attacking extra energy charges in to finish Superman from front, back and off the giant. Dwarfed by the below. A woll placed kick monster he pummels it in the Cripples those who float in at knee stomach. It doubles up and... level. A well timed punch gets rid suddenly it's all over. The streets of most of the others. are clear from the time being at Then a different breed creep in. least. Metallic lifeforms which need the scene now changes to the ELELE IT ARMS continued "


"RACKSUIT HOLMESOFT DESPATCH ALDERWOOD CENTRE SEDGLEY, DUDLEY W. MIDLANDS, DY3 3QY MAIL ORDER DIVISION OF ESTABLISHED RETAILER (TEL 0902 313600/880971) TITLE Sort Sour SANSONS 16-BIT 15 Camel 7.49 11.99 Aston.ad O ng STS Force For Birds Tale Beyond ice Palace INTERNATIONAL SOCCER STRATEGY AT IT'S VERY BEST. Croma Dames Com Dengan Dungeon MA Delante 599 1099 Foran format Fobal Director Line Sup Fire & Forge 8888888 NG onshp Apacheli Haroes Of The Lance .818.. 88888888888888888888888888888888888RRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRREBREROS SERERBERG Granas C+VG HIT! CLASSIC GOLIATH GAMES LS Guns Apache verbes Of The Lance .....888 The GIANTS amongst software ingrid's Backom COMING SOON CBM 64, (DISC) .95, ATARI ST/AMIGA .95, AMSTRAD .95. IBM P.O.A. ...... Konomi Arcade Coll Police Oestor From the Designer of The Double comes.. TRACK SUIT MANAGER The first ever football game with real match tactics. REVIEWS SAY . Commodore User says... The match is the best TSM is the most playable game of I've ever seen its genre. One of the most trustrating, fun compelling, 8/10 exciting and addictive games Ive ever played. C&V . C&V Games says... 8/10 9/10 The best ever football managerial game ever, in the history of the world, no messing straight up A very impressive start for Goliath Zzap Says... Presentation 96% Hookability 93% Lastability Easily the best of its type Overall Thebe 93% Sinclair User says The best ever managerial game, the one your speccy has been waiting 88% 89% $ Your Sinclair says... I'm amazed at this one... Some day all footie games will be made this way. If you don't like TS.M. your dead from the neck up Your Commodore says.. TSM is one of the best games I've ever played and certainly highlights the problems of a national team manager E RB888888 8/10 where Tune S. S Word Leaderboard WE SAY Summer Olympiad SSSSSSSSSSSSS Madele 479 88888888888888eee****8888' Sophisticated Match Play with ... Adjustable Team Formations Free Kicks Throw In's Offside's * Individual Player Abilities * Goal Kicks * Corners Penalties Tackles Fouls Select Player for 'Set Pieces' Injuries Booking's * Sending Off's Suspensions * Substitutes Heading # Genuine Penalty Shoot Out in Quarter, Semi & Final Matches Extra Timet Individual Player & Team (Defence, Midfield, Attack) tactics ... Defensive + Attacking Normal Quick Counter Attacks Zonal Marking * GOLIATH GAMES is a 'NEW' Software House specialising in ... ADVANCED ... INVOLVED ... ORIGINAL SOFTWARE 235 Chest Chalenger 2395 Che Macht. 1895 CPO-00 Extra Taos2396 A JE ORDER NOW.... .95 Including VAT. Plus 50p post & packing We Are Champions 23. 18 Ama 1729 Recorder Sohn 1998 PLEASE SEND CHEQUES/P.O. TO:COTAT 46 LOCKING ROAD GAMES WESTON-SUPER MARE AVON BS23 3DN The GIANTS amongst software 0934 622538 COMMODORE 64, SPECTRUM Cheque/PO/Edraft/cash MINI ISTED ITEMS payable to: Holmesoft UK PEP incl Rec deliv: Sool Please phone write for Europe ada 50p per item any item, new or old Elsewhere I (Airmail not listed above. Stock items usually by return Note Forthcoming releases will be sent on day of release SAE for software/hardware lists "


"ARCADE ACTION addictive. Fast reflexes to show dagger. Just wait till an injun gets off your skill and the knack of too close, hit the button and your choosing the right weapon to sword jabs out to lay him flat. This deal with the enemy. It's one of gets the Indians mad. They attack the best games of this type I've in groups, singly and seen for a long time. occasionally send in some sort of NINJA wizard to get you the hell out of their territory. You're there for the booty and whatever  lies in those sturdy little chests, Ninja versus Indians! This Magic can be picked up and unlikely story of a Ninja fighting you'll be able to cast explosive for his life in the Wild West is bursts at your enemy, though for about the most bizarre I've come the most part you'll have to rely across on your own trusty sword. Imagine the picture. The desert Arrows point you in the with mighty rocky crogs filling the direction of the most chests, up horizon, the odd cactus perched sheer rock faces, then onto in the foreground when a Ninja floating ledges where you'll need warrior swans into view. No to jump to get from one to wonder the Indians get upset another, over waterfalls and Outcome the war axes, the knives eventually into Roman times. and bows and arrows, and they Jumping can be tricky. To get leap to the attack the height you've to lean on the Besides there are a lot of jump button and this leaves you treasure chest strewn around, vulnerable for a split second. each filled with jewels and bonus There isn't much to hold your points which need to be protected attention in this game. It's from the sword waving Ninja. repetitive and even in the later Sword fighting is what this levels, strolling along the seafront game's about though you use it in being attacked by Romans isn't more of a stabbing motion like a much more fun Ninja Kazan battles in the wild west. REKAO Stab 'n slice in Ninja Spirit. NINJA SPIRIT F-BALL You're going to need super fast reflexes to win through Ninja Spirit from Irem an addictive offering with some of the smoothest and most professionally drown graphics I've seen in a long time. NK 3:30 The game starts off in a forest, huge trees towering over you. Under you is a low platform with A Ninja Spirit. the ground beneath you're a sitting target. You There's a weapons selector at definitely need to have one of the the bottom of the screen and your many bonus shields at this point, weapons can be changed by whether it's they're swirling ars hitting one of the fire buttons to from your sword or semi-circles of select the right one. It's actually flame which spin round you quite simple, just select a weapon protectively. A few guardians sword, shuriken, explosives or help as well. The ability to jump boomerang and use the other higher is another bonus and will firebutton to operate them be needed in the next section You're hardly given a moment when you come up against an to breathe in the forest before the alien who's about three times enemy approach from behind larger than you. and in front, while others perch in As you travel further into the the lower branches of the trees forest, you'll have to walk firing missiles down on you. A between two chimneys. As you malevolent little devil rises out of pass the first they burst into action the ground beneath the platform belching out hordes of attacking and tracks your progress. Should enemy. The skies are filled with he catch up he'll thrust his sword aliens as they drop to the ground, through the boards killing you missiles shoot through the air and outright. you have to be very fast to get out Puffs of smoke herald the of this one olive. Some nifty finger appearance of more of the tree work is needed here. based enemy. To knock them off The obligatory end of level their perches use the shuriken or monster soon appears, rising out boomerang. Kill enough of the of the ground, and going up and enemy and an orb will be left. up. It's huge and looks like Depending on its colour, you'll apainting of some God. You either be awarded a protective come up to knee level and you're device which spews out from your expected to destroy it. Great. sword in a swirling circle, or extra Further levels take you out of men who follow doggedly in the forest into open grassland, your footsteps, copying your wading across rivers and at all every action at a staggered rate. times being attacked by the Your journey soon takes you enemy: over a narrow rope bridge where you'll find Ninja Spirit instantly Injuns and Ninjas: not a good mix. 19888 RAZA "


"ARCADE ACTION In the first of a regular monthly feature, C + VG reports on where you can find the best arcades in Britain. If you think your town or city coastal or inland deserves a mention, write in to: ARCADE REPORT, C+ VG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON ECIR 3AU enclosing details of all the arcades in your area, and a street map if possible. If your report gets printed, you'll win a fabulous C + VG T-shirt. Wolves), Toobin Pacmania, o deluxe Galaxy Force, Continental Circus Konami 88. Chopper 4, Twin Eagles, Vulcan Venture and P.47. Hydraulic delights abound with two Outruns, Two Space Harriers and a Top Speed The selection of older games is second to none, with all three Star Wars Marble Madness, SDI, Time Scanner, Discs of Tron, Gaplus, Commando, Buggy Boy, TX:1, Pole Position and II. Pacland, PacMan Space Invaders, Double Dragon Spy Hunter 1, Blonia Commando, Nemesis Salamander, Flying Shark, Slap Fight, Tiger Road and Star Force among a plethora of others So, if you're an arcade addict, Brighton is an ideal place to spend time and money and if you're heading for the pier, make sure you're well stocked with change! UTAWN Kings Rd WS This month Julian Rignall sings the praises of his now home town, Brighton and reveals his favourite haunts. If you ever visit Brighton and fancy an arcade crawl, West Marine your best bet is to head for Street Parade West Street, where five arcades reside within a Madeira couple of hundred yards of Drive one another. At the north end of the street is Regency Leisure, an excellent arcade boasting a great selection of games. Highlights include Galaxy Force, Operation Wolf, Vindicator, Toobin', KEY Pacmania, R-Type, Dragon 1: REGENCY LEISURE 2: GALAXY 3: CRYSTAL ROOM 4: AMUSEMENTS 5: LEISURE CENTRE Ninja as well as a good range 6: ARCHES ARCADE 7: ARCHES ARCADE 8: PALACE PIER of golden oldies. A little further down the Playchoice Ten are found road is Galaxy, boasting among some great older titles some new games like like Nemesis, Salamander Continental Circus, Pacland and Bubble Bobble. F1-Dream, P-47 and some There are two arcades great classics like R-Type, Halley's Comet and Slap beach under the Arches, but Fight. neither are particularly Assault is a brand new Atari title, whereupon the tank is driven to Crystal Rooms is also worth Penny falls and fruit machines and is set to invade the arcades exit to the next level. There are a visit, with Main Event are to the fore, and what over the following months. also Lift Zones on each level games on offer are neither amongst a plethora of old which give the tank temporary Originally designed by Namco, and new titles and a couple of exciting or in good repair flight, allowing the player to run it's a tank combat game with pool tables. several new twists. reconnaisace and bombing The best place of all and the player takes control of the missions. Amusements is a great it's my second home is the tank in question and guides it Atari are also putting the disappointment after the Palace Pier, complete with around a multidirectionally finishing touches to a new robotic previous places, and has a two huge arcades. The scrolling landscape in search of football game called Cyberball. pitiful range of games the selection of games is enemy targets, which should be Details are very scarce at the Main Event being the newest absolutely incredible, and I destroyed in no uncertain terms. moment, and it doesn't look as one by years. The rest of the rate it as one of the best The objective on each level is to though the game will appear in games are poor, and arcades in Britain (and I've destroy the enemy fortress, the UK until early next year. the arcade is hardly worth been to a lot! As well as visiting, unless you want to having just about every now AMS SET TO RETURN play fruit machines, of which game available. I also has a William Flectronics, famous for there are plenty. but Williams are confident that marvellous selection of classic their early 80's classics such as it's better than anything else Nearest to the beach is the and rare videos from the last Defender. Stargate, Jouset and currently on the market, and Leisure Centre, a large decade. Robotron 2084 are ready to apparently it offers higher arcade with a good line of New games include two return to the coin-op scene with a resolution and more colours than games. Vindicator, Xybots, Main Events, Sky Ranger, system that they've been any other video game. The first B-47, Continental Circus, Vindicator, POW, Ninja developing for the last three game will appear towards the Operation Wolf, Vulcan Spirit, Cabal, five Operation years. middle of next year we wait Venture and a well-stocked Wolfs (or should that be The system is yet to be named, with baited breath. ituated at the edge of the ATARI PREPARE ASSAULT 144 "


"NEW LOW PRICE ST! From only .51 per week. Return coupon for details. AARI 52057 NATARI ney TOVINY ONLY FROM SILICA +VA = 299 MUCH FOR SO LITTLE There is nothing that can compare with the incredible value for money offered by Atari's 520ST-FM. For only  (+VAT-), you can purchase a powerful 512K RAM computer, with a 95 key keyboard (including numeric keypad), MIDI interface, GEM, a palette of 512 colours, mouse controller, and a 512K built-in disk drive. The 520ST-FM has a TV modulator built-in, and comes with a lead to allow you to plug it straight into any domestic colour television set. The mains transformer is also built-in to the keyboard, so there are no messy external boxes. You couldn't wish for a more compact, powerful and stylish unit. Atari ST computers are now firmly established in the UK, there are nearly 500 software titles already available for a wide variety of applications and the list is growing all the time. And that's not all. When you buy your new 520ST-FM (or any Atari ST computer) from Silica Shop, you will get a lot more, including a FREE Silica ST Starter Kit worth over . Read the ONLY FROM SILICA section on the left to see why you should buy your new high power, low price 520STFM from Silica Shop, the UK's No1 Atari Specialists. For further details of the range of Atari ST computers and the FREE Silica ST Starter Kit, complete and return the reply coupon below. ATARI 520ST-FM NOW ONLY  (+VAT=) 520ST-FM with 512K RAM & mono monitor 399 (ind VAT) Upgrade from 512K RAM to 1024K RAM 100 (inc VAT there are nearly sond stylish unit. Atarissy ety of applications and Finally, there's a personal computer that not only solve probleme other computers, but also solved the one problem that other computers have created. Affordability. Silica Shop are pleased to present the ST Tange o personal e s computer from At The ST was designed in the most recent breakthroughs in semiconductor technology, producing a personal computer that performs tasks with lewer parts which means it costs to make and to buy. The ST computers now include built in power supplies and built in disk drives. The TOS operating system and GEM window environment are now on ROM chips which are already installed in the ST keyboard. This enables automatic Instant booting when you switch on Silica Shop are pleased to offer the complete Atari ST range Our mail order department is situated in Sidcup and we have retail outlets at Sidon Lion House Totenham Count Rd and Selfridges Oxford Street). We have eight years experience of Atan products, longer than any other UK company, and are well established as the UK's No.1 Atari specialist with a group turnover of over  million and in cos of 80 stall, we offer you unbeatable service and support. We provide several which you will find invaluable during your Atari computing and most of these facilities are Bible ONLY FROM SILICA We suggest that you read through what we have to offer before you decide where to purchase your Atari ST. FREE STARTER KIT Only From Silica When you purchase any Alan ST keyboard, you will not only receive the best value for money computer on the market, but you will also receive the following from Aton Corporation as part of the package \"BASIC Language Disk \"BASIC Mar *ST Owner Manual TOS GEMOR AOU If you buy your ST from thica Shop, you will receive \"NEOchrome Sampler colour graphics program at Word Word Processor In addition, we at Silice would like to see you get off to a flying start with your new computer, so we have put together a special ST STARTER KIT worth over 100, which we are giving away FREE OF CHARGE with every ST computer purchased at our normal prices. This it is ONLY FROM SILICA and is med at providing users with a valuable introduction to the world of computing. We are continually upgrading the ST Starter Kit, which contains public domain and other licensed software, as well as books magazines and accessories all relevant to ST computing Return the coupon below for full details DEDICATED SERVICING Only From Silica Al Silica Shop, we have a dedicated service department of seven fulltime Atari trained technical statt. This team is totally dedicated to servicing Atari computer products. The accumulated knowledge, and experience the second to none in the bed. You can be sure that any work carried out by them is of the highest standard. A standard of servicing which we believe you will find ONLY FROM SILICA In addition to providing full servicing facilities for Atari ST computers both in A ilities for Atari ST computers (both in and out of warranty, our team is also able to offer memory and modulator upgrade to ST computer 1 Mb RAM UPGRADE: Our grade on the standard Alar SOST-Mor SOST-FM keyboard w increase the memory from $12K to a massive 1024K. It has a un 1 year warranty and is available from Silica at an additional retail price of only 16.96 (VAT 100) TV MODULATOR UPGRADE: Sica can upgrade the 1040ST-F to include TV modulators that you can then use it with your TV set This is an internal upgrade and does not involve any untidy external boxes. A cable to connect your ST 10 any domestic TV is included in the price of the upgrade which is only 4 in VAT). The upgrade is also available for early 520ST computers at the same price THE FULL STOCK RANGE Only From Silica We aim to keep stocks of all Atari related products and our warehouse carries a stock of over million We import many software tites direct from the USA and you will find that we have new released in advance of many of our competitors. Unlike dealers who may only stock vected ties we have the nge. In addition, we carry a complete line of books which have been written about the Atari ST. A range as wide as ours is something you will find is available ONLY FROM SILICA AFTER SALES SUPPORT Only From Silica Restaured that when you buy your ST from Silica Shop, you will be supported. Our freemailings give news of releases and development. This will help to keep you up to date with new software releases as well as what's happening in the Atari market. And in addition, our sales staff are at the end of telephone line to service all of your Aar r ements. If you purchase an ST from Sic and would like y technical advice, we have a me fechnical support team to help you get the best from your computer. Because we have both the staff and the systems specifically dedicated to providing after service on Atari ST computers, we are confident that our users enjoy an exceptionally high level of support. This can be received ONLY FROM SILICA FREE CATALOGUES Only From Silica Al Silica Shop, we recognise that serious users require an in-depth information service, which is why we mail free newsletters and price list to our ST owners. These are up to 48 pages long and are med with technical et w as speciales and product descriptions. If you have already purchased an ST and would like to have your name added to our mailing list, please complete the coupon & return it to us. This information service is available ONLY FROM SILICA FREE OVERNIGHT DELIVERY From Silica Most orders are processed through our computer within 24 hours of receiving them. Most hardware orders are sent by the overnight GROUP 4 Courier service FREE OF CHARGE to customers within the UK. This method helps to ensure minimum delay and mamum protection PRICE MATCH Only From Silica We hope that the combination of our low prices, FREE UK delivery service FREE Starter Kit and FREE after sales support will be enough to make you buy your Atari o pment from Sica Shop W however, mere is something you wish to purchase, and you find one of our competition offering it at a lower price, then please contact our sales department, providing us with our competitor's name, address and Telephone number of our competitor has the goods in stock, we will normally match the offer on a 'same product same price bass) and still provide you with our normal free delivery. We realise that we are not will also be entitled to our after sales service, including free newsletters and technical support. This makes our price match promise rather special, something you will receive ONLY FROM SILICA We don't want you to go anywhere for your Alan products so shop at the UK Not Alari Special ATARI ATARI 1040ST-F NEW PRICE We are pleased to announce a new reduced price point on the 1040ST-F which is now available for only $499 (ind VAT). The 1040 is a powerful computer with Tub of RAM and also includes built-in 1Mb double sided 3\" disk drive. The 1040 has been designed for use on business and professional applications most of which require a high resolution monochrome or colour monitor. It does not therefore have an RF modulator for use with a domestic TV set. Modulators can be fitted for 149 in VAT) OAST Keyboard Wimul Mondo you would there of the 10405T-. turn the coupon below MEGA STS NOW IN STOCK For the who requires even more RAM than the 520 or 1040 STs ofter, the new MEGA ST computers are now available There are two MEGA STs, one with 2 Mb of RAM and the other with a massive Mb. Both new computers are fully compatible with existing ST and run currently available ST software. The MEGA ST's are styled as an expandable Central Processing Unit with open architecture and a detachable keyboard. They are supplied with OEM free mouse controller and all extra with the 520 or 1040. Prices are as follows MEGA STM KybartGPU... ne WAT MEGA STAD Kyboard CPU MEDA ST Geyboard+CAUS A TI If you would like further details of the MEGAST, return the coupon below. To: Silica Shop Ltd, C+VG 1188, 14 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent DA14 4DX PLEASE SEND ME FREE LITERATURE ON THE ATARI ST Mr/Mrs/Ms: ........... Initials: ......... Surname: Address: SIDCUP (& Mail Order) 01-309 1111 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup. Kent, DA14 4DX LONDON 01-580 4839 Lion House (1st floor), 227 Tottenham Court Rd, London, WIP OHX LONDON 01-629 1234 ext 3914 Selfridges (1st floor), Oxford Street, London, W1A 1AB Postcode: ... Do you already own a computer If so, which one do you own? ..... "


"Wo're deadline surfing yet tidy racks. It's the same with again. A combination of post John Minson struggles manfully with his PC Show pricing. Conformity is the other PC Show blues and grey, hangover, and ruminates on the evils of chain of the day. The  game in the autumn weather means this custom designed box has a column is going to be very late.stores, identikit product and ... Kylie Minogue? hard fight if it's going to get into What is it about this time of This is truly the column the stars all talk about. the high street year that makes me want to jet So what's the answer? Well, off to somewhere as warm as a way back when there were lots C64's power supply? of little independent computer But self pity isn't going to fill shops, with Orics and Dragons the page, so I'd better power with bits of wire sticking out of up the imagination and lash them, and friendly, enthusiastic together yet more of those staff, who probably also bad-ass opinions which have owned the place and could tell led several major software you what was new and whether houses to take out contracts on you'd like it. Then the big boys my life. Now, who should I saw that there was money to be slag off this month? Ah yes, I made... Sorry then the know. industry 'matured' and got Shops! No, come back, guys organised and nowadays the this really is going to be person who cashes up your interesting. After all, unless you purchase was probably selling buy all your software by post, singles by lyes) Kylie Minogue at one stage or another you're last week. going to come into contact with Not that the 'Mom and Pop' your friendly neighbourhood independents mean that much retailer, just waiting to relieve in the States any more either. you of your nine But in the country where the ninety-nine... or more if corporation is king, the chains you're a 16-bit, rich bastard. of software shops have made a Not much Minson can whinge much better effort to provide a about shops, is there? Think variety of titles, spanning again, squidlips! What started everything from arcade to me pondering this particular simulation. Without this topc was the great Microprose open-mindedness there American jaunt. You see, it wouldn't be the diversity that wasn't all business, and Major A John Minson's pin-up of the month no 1: Kylie Minogue. makes the American market so Bill and the boys being perfect the initial fover has abated Do you see a pattern behind exciting. hosts, they decided to introduce usually around the same stage all of this? I sure dol Like Paul Without wishing to turn this us visitors to 'The American that you find you've just blown Weller once sang, The public into too much of a history Way'. all your dollars on musical wants what the public gets.' If lesson, it's worth remembering Now T.A.W. doesn't just coffee mugs, mini baseball bats your selection is limited to mean watching Baltimoro the fears of an 'American and the like you start to take arcade tie ins from the major invasion' that sent shivers Orioles baseball team ruin their a more scientific approach to labels on a few machines, reputation by actually winning through the industry four years you're unlikely to pick up a shopping. ago. Today Microprose, a game or enjoying a Sunday This is when you wander into strategy game programmed in Electronic Arts and Activision brunch of crab omelette in the computer store, to check out somebody's back bedroom for all have a considerable chunk Annapolis. No, it also means the situation and ... what the the Apple II. That sort of thing of the market because, for much partaking of America's heckIll The selection of just doesn't fit the store's of the time, they provide national sport shopping! software could send you into a preconceptions of what you, something different from the run And, in Baltimore at least, catatonic trance if you're not the punter, want. of the mill. prepared. There's none of the It's like going into your local the local mall. Now news reaches us that top ten games mentality you Smirks record department and How to describe a shopping find at home. Here, if you want asking for the latest single by one of the Stateside software mall. Put all ideas of Arndales chains is to set up in the UK. a program, you'll probably your favourite Solihull surf and Shopping Cities out of your find it lurking somewhere on the band, released on their own Will it hurt British retailers? I mind. A mall is a mini town in racks. label. \"No, but we've got Kylie don't know but if it means the itself and all of it dedicated Once, long ago in the early Minogue.\" Well, I've had Kylie ability to walk into a store and to consumerism. There are even boom years, the pundits used to Minogue to the back teeth buy the program I want, not the aisles filled with every sort of peddle a line that home and I've also had enough of one some buyer thinks I do, I'll fast food you can think of. Bung computing was going to be like sub-standard games from the welcome it. in a maternity ward and an the record industry. Strange to favoured few labels, who Ten pounds is not a small undertakers and you could live say the BBC still hasn't given us continue to sell junk in bulk, just amount of money. You should there. Top of the Software Pops, but because the start young buyers be able to decide how you The first reaction of the in one respect the comparison in their business suits still smile spend it so don't let the big average limey, judging by our has proved accurate. In Britain on them. boys dictate. Support your select bunch of journos, is for the main software outlets, the Some more questions. Ever local software store or the eyes to glaze over and the chain stores, tend to stock what wonder why virtually all anywhere else that gives you a wallet to go into overdrive. You is popular. Or, to put it an other computer games come in the real choice and remember in don't realise how much you way, as the chain stores samo sort of box? It's because this industry, variety is vitality. nood a three inch tall, friction account for the majority of those self-same buyers insist on Buy the same old game again drive skateboardor until you software salos, what they stock uniform packaging, so that and again and all you'll get is find one in a toy shopl But once fends to be popular. they'll fit onto all those neat, bored! "


"1986 GAUDFLELTHE GAME OF THE YEAR \"This is a truly brilliant program and shouldn't be missed at any costI\" Zzap 64. From U.S. Gold 1987 THE GAME OF THE YEAR Out Donna 198S \"A flippin' good game — test drive one today.\" Sinclair User From U.S. Gold THE GAME OF THE YEAR TM Thansker blanche EVER This is the meanest fighting machine ever to hit the skies The Pepsi Challenge Game of the Year. From U.S. Gold. SCURTIST.366UU. SCENE SCORE SOURCE SCY lors CBM 64/128 89.99 cassette .99 disk Spectrum 48/128K U.S. Amstrad CPC .99 cassette .99 cassette .99 disk .99 disk U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388. GOLD SEGA Atari STEPC .99 disk Amiga .99 disk "


"STALLONE He's back and this time he's taking no prisoners! Colonel Trautman has been captured by the Russians in Afghanistan and there is only one person capable of freeing him. Negotiate the minefields, explore the Russian camp, lay boobytraps, avoid detection, free the Colonel and then ... move on to the explosive climax! RAMBO IS BACK! RAMEU OXF LLL 033 098*** Ocean SPECTRUM COMMODORE AMSTRAD COMMODORE AMSTRA 8.95 9.95 9.95 CASSETTE 14.95 DISK Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Telephone 061 832 6633 Telex 669977 OCEANSG RAMBO HII TM & 1988 CAROLCO PICTURES INC. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorised Duplication is strictly Prohibited. "

