" MARCH 1987 S$4.60 Dm5.50 285pta HFL 5.50 + COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES CUTIITTI UIO JOJOIN THE RATPACK *... GERRY ANDERSON INTERVIEW 200 FREE GAMES THE HULK SOLVED/WIN TOP VIDEOS LEVIATHAN MAP/MEET LIEUT LAWW/WIN DUNJUNZ WIN AMERICAN FOOTBALL TICKETS WITH NEXUS! "


"JACK'S BACK! .95 .95 .95 .95 Cassette Cassette Disc Cassette Disc Cassette Spectrum Amstrad Amstrad Commodore Commodore .95 .95 C16 FREE GAME GAME FREE with The original coin-op smash hit: every copy of Bombjack II Mail Order, just send a cheque or postal order payable to Elite, or quote your Credit Card number Access VISA A VISA BOMBAK Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands, WS9 8PW. Telephone: (0922) 59165. Telex: 336130 ELITE.G. On sale Feb. 9th Europe Feb. 23rd, U.K. Fresh from pinging around the screen in his first caper, Jack's back in a brand new arcade game. This time it's a great new combat game -in fact you could call it a Jack Attack! The very best Elite Titles are available at selected branches of: Boole.WHSMITH, Tandy John Menzies LASKYS Officially licenced from Tecmo, Ltd of Japan Amstrad Spectrum RECHT Elite beats CBM-64 LENLE Screen shots taken from various computer formats "


"Massive Spe HITS/ HIT PAK MAN ARTU AVAILABLE ON Spectrum Commodore Amstrad/ Schneider C16 Cassette .95 Commodore Amstrad/ Schneider Disk f14.95 look out for the next BOMSACK HIT  | PIAKI coming soon... Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall WS9 8PW. West Midlands. Tel: (0922)59165 "


"FEATURES JUST LIKE THE MOVIES/ 50 CONTENTS 42 SCOOBY DOO MAP 48 WIN AMERICAN FOOTBALL TICKETS WITH NEXUS 50 JUST LIKE THE MOVIES. .. NEW GAMES 52 I.D.E.A.S CENTRAL 55 PLAY-BY-MAIL 58 LEVIATHAN MAP 66 THE INCREDIBLE HULK SOLVED 74 CHOLO — JOIN THE RATPACK 75 THE LAST STARFIGHTER/ THUNDERBIRDS COMPETITION 80 GERRY ANDERSON INTERVIEW 84 HIGH-TECH LIFE-ENHANCERS 86 COMPETITION RESULTS 89 FREEZE FRAME — VIDEO REVIEWS 92 ARCADE ACTION 95 EXTRA BITS 100 STREET SEEN 102 MAILBAG 106 PEN PALS 109 INTRODUCING LIEUT LAWW 114 HOT GOSSIP KAILLIBER-MAILBAG/102 NEWS & REVIEWS 8 NEWS It's Scoop time. Check out the first pictures of Arkenoid, Gauntlet, the mysterious Project X. These games are so hot, it's a wonder the pages aren't singed. Win 200 free Games and meet C+VG's Adventurer of the Year. Check out the AMAZING screen art work sent to us by our readers. Unbelievable! 13 REVIEWS THIS ISSUE: Nemesis and 10th Frame get the ultimate accolade for March. And the hits keep on coming Super Soccer and Super Sunday both score. Not to mention Sky Runner, Highway Encounter, Dunjunz and Strike Force Harrier. 61 ADVENTURE Keith Campbell and his team get to grips with Labyrinth NEMESIS/13 "


"You are going to be glad you picked up this really wicked issue of C+VG. We've got features and competitions that will knock you right into next month! Win tickets to the NFL's American Football exhibition match due to be this summer. Meet Gerry Anderson, the puppet master who created such vintage sci-fi shows as Thunderbirds and Captain Scarlet. Read about his new TV project and win copies of classic Thunderbirds episodes. Talking of videos to win you can also pick up copies of The Last Starfighter, an exciting space movie in the Star Wars tradition, which inspired the Star Raiders II game soon to be released by Electric Dreams. Read about the incredible Cinemaware software which makes you the star of the silver screen. Our cover story features Cholo the new Firebird game setting out to challenge Elite's cult status. Join the Ratpack and beat the droids with our exclusive players guide. The Edge's Arcade Action features all the hottest games from the recent arcade trade exhibition. See what will be hitting your local arcade action BEFORE it arrives. Talking of arrivals our new comic hero Lieut Laww starts laying down this month. And before I go, I'd just like to thank everyone who sent Christmas cards and seasonal greetings. Better late than never I guess! Now, turn the page and be amazed... PALETRON pause pause pause pause 10TH   SONUN you! HACKIPRG Reg er Reg FRAME CHOLO.POVERS GURU C + VG READY! [C1986 ACCESS 50F 10TH FRAME/13 BLOOD 'N' GUTS/30 CE**G NEOCCUCC6603 #6666666666 *446001L001000 mahn Batu EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John DESIGN Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Steve Donoghue Matthew Woodley AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeley SOFTWARE CONSULTANTS Tony Takoushi PUBLICITY Marcus Rich ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Garry Williams ADVERTISEMENT EXECUTIVE Katherine Lee AD PRODUCTION Debbie Pearson PUBLISHER Rita Lewis COVER Craig Kennedy EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222 July-December 98,258 ABC GERRY ANDERSON INTERVIEW/80 HULK SOLVED/66 "


"With monitor, data  of software yo (Until mummy catc Wien purchasing an TH Saltware With the Amstrad 464 home computer the fun starts as soon as you get it home. Because unlike many other home computers the 464 comes complete with its own green screen or full colour monitor. It also comes with a convenient built-in datacorder. And you get  worth  of software with games like Harrier Attack and Sultan's Maze. Not to mention Oh Mummy. 64K of RAM WITH COLOUR MONITOR AROUND means you have plenty of memory to play with. And there are over 200 Amstrad games you can play, many exclusive to Amstrad. But games are only half the fun on the 464. The kids can learn spelling and arithmetic with software like Wordhang and  Happy Numbers. Whilst adults will love the way that it helps around the house with budgeting and accounts. WITH GREEN SCREEN AROUND AVAILABLE AT: ALLDERS. BOOTS CLYDESDALE. COMET CONNECT CO-OP CURRYS. DIXONS ELECTRIC SUPREME LASKYS JOHN LEWIS JOHN MENZIES. POWER CITY. RUMBELOWS "


"corder and ou can't lose. hes you.) \"OH MUMMY\" @ 1984 GEM SOFTWARE \"C\" TO CONTINUE aga CVG.3.87 Please send me more information. Name. To help you make the most of your 464, you can join the Amstrad User Club. And there are lots of books and magazines devoted to it as well. What's more you can buy joysticks, printers, disc drives, speech synthesisers and light pens to make it even more fun. But perhaps the most pleasurable thing about the Address 464 is the price. The complete home computer costs just  with green screen or  with colour monitor. Not much to pay for a chance to get away from mummy. The Amstrad 464. The complete home computer. Amstrad P.O. Box 462, Brentwood, Essex CM14 4EF. ULTIMATE W.H. SMITH WIGFALLS AND GOOD INDEPENDENT COMPUTER STORES "


"Giant animated characters inhabit the world of Doc the Destroyer a new D&D style game. on the way from the Wizards of Oz Melbourne House. If you've played games like Ultima and Bard's Tale you'll know the sort of thing. But Doc features giant animated characters. Watch out for more news. It's not often we talk about utilities within the pages of C+VG but here's one you should NOT miss. It's called Microrhythm and it's simply mega-fab. It turns your 64 into a drum machine for just .99. Firebird must be mad MERORHY-EA Air Hockey is one of the seeing your name on the front more unusual games on this sports page. Now you can have a crack compilation from Mindscape, at writing the story of the year Appologies are due to all you released in the UK by Advance all about a mysterious murder. Commodore 64 owners who the people who brought you the Mike Lewis, half of the team ordered Ikari Warriors with conversions of Hardball. who brought you the innovative the recent Computer + Video Indoor Sports consists of 10 adventures Redhawk and Games subscription offer. Pin Bowling, Darts, Ping Pong as KWAH! is currently working on a Elite will not now be producing well as Air Hockey. The game, new detective style adventure the game for your computer. which should be available now, is called Murder at Arkham However we can offer you a great value at just .95. Hall. In it you'll play a reporter choice of Ghost'n'Goblins, SPECCY 03 who uncovers a dastardly murder 1942 or Paperboy. Please and sets out to find out who-dunnit! write to Carl Dunne, Computer + This exciting two part adventure Video Games Subscription Offer, will be out soon from Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Melbourne House. Lane, London ECIR 3AU. selling it for this price! Write whole songs on it or just play around making neat noises which sound as good as anything you'll hear from the cheaper drum machines. All we've got to say is hip, hop don't stop! GAME THOMAS DE GOAL. por COL IN SPECCY OT Creative Sparks releases four new budget titles this month Little Alien (Spectrum), about a little green thing's search for a lookalike imposter; Smudge and the Moonees (Spectrum), involving chimney sweep antics; Super Shuffle (Spectrum), about a slot machine with a brain. All these will sell for .99. Cyber I (Commodore 64) is a space shoot 'em up, selling at .99. OBS Peel your peepers for these exclusive looks at Arkenoid, Quartet, Enduro Racer and the mysteriously named Project X all being written by Probe Software. Arkenoid, to be released by Ocean, is of the Breakout-type coin-op smash. It's fast, addictive and plays like a dream. The screen shot is from the Amstrad version. It has 32 rounds, the same as the original, and contains all the same features such as extra lives, slow motion, enlarged bat and a laser gun to blast the bricks to pieces. Quartet and Enduro Racer, on the Activision label, are again arcade classics. In Quartet you control a three man and a girl team out to destroy a colony of space pirates. It will be a two player game but there will be a four player option. Enduro Racer is an all action bike race thriller. The shot for Enduro Racer is from the Spectrum version. The action is super fast as the biker Ever wanted to be a hot shot reporter? Course you have. There's nothing more exciting than tracking down that scoop story and "


"| FAX He gdt 7 :* : \"LITE I HUDEO C LIDEO G..!!!! ! CER A couple of classic Jeff Minter games, Voidrunner and Hellgate are to be released on the C16 by Ariolasoft, price .95. Other new Ariolasoft releases will be Blitzkreig, a strategy and action game based on Len Deighton's best-selilng book of the same name. Lead the German forces against Britain in this \"historically and geographically accurate game,\" says Ariolasoft. It will be out first on the Commodore 64/128 cassette and disk soon. C + UG MELISS* DNETELMITE Konix, makers of the Speed King joystick, has won the New Enterprise Award in the Welsh National Business Awards 1986. Wyn Holloway, managing director of the Tredegar-based company received the award from Sir John Harvey-Jones, chairman of ICI. Freeze! Or your lust HOLICE The Growing Pains of Adrian Mole is due for release any day now by Virgin Games and Mosaic. The game, like its predecessor, The Diary of Adrian Mole, has been programmed by Level 9. 1073 Ce 90CC TECE SCORE SHOGE SO SPEED EG Blas That Big Red screen by Mika suggests that we have a computer an Electron. All this artwork and Kuulusa has inspired quite a few art competition and that's just the massive response to our art readers to sit down at the screen what we'll be doing in a couple of competitions has made us think that and come up with some ace months time. Just let us sort the you'd like to see a computer art artwork. Sam Mohabull from prizes out! Meanwhile David page in our forthcoming issues with North London has been drooling Sowerby, from Leeds is software prizes for the best stuff. over the lovely Melissa obviously a Lt. Laww fan going by _ So if you've got some graphics you Ravenflame and produced this this stunning pic produced on want to show off then send them neat portrait of his 64. Sam you probably won't believe this — into Computer and Video Games. TCE BOODS TE STORE E 6 SCORE Being SPEED SOS en HAMPION BYAUSS playing Galaga. Now he other will be printed in our April probably wouldn't be seen dead in issue in just 28 days time so a C+VG t-shirt but it just goes to there's not long to wait. Order your show that reading this magazine copy from your local newsagent to can change your life. avoid disappointment. Send these two tokens to Academy Offer, CRL, CRL House, We did it in October and 9 King's Yard London E15 2HD. November of last year and you and don't forget to send it with the love it. Now we're going to do in coupon below. March and April. And it'll drive you When we ran a similar offer for crazy. CRL's Cyborg around 2000 of you Thanks to our pals at CRL, we've sent in tokens. So the quicker your got 200 copies of Pete Cooke's tokens arrive the more chance fantastic Academy up for grabs you'll have of getting a copy. on a first come, first served basis. And that's on opportunity not to be ACADEMY OFFER missed. Name ......... In January we made Academy Game of the Month. In February Address. Address....... . .. .. we put the game on our front cover and brought you an exclusive players guide. As you may have guessed we like I enclose two Academy coupons Academy. And you will too. for C+VG. All you have to do is to collect Please indicate which computer you TWO Academy C+VG tokens. One is printed on this page and the Spectrum Amstrad. races against the clock across some rough, tough terrain, avoiding rocks and water-traps. Project X to be released by Probe is the final game but it deals with the exploits of Trantor Anacreon in his quest to find vital plans in alien hands. The plans are hidden among a 45 screen complex. Trantor has around 45 seconds to get to each level and gain extra time to survive. The graphics and these are not the finished ones — are already extremely impressive. Probe is also working on Slapfighter and Rampage for Ocean, and Metro-Cross for US Gold. More news and pics on these next month. GYRUSS Who's this fresh faced chap with a sensible haircut and healthy complexion? Yes, it's none other than Julian Rignall, whose words of wisdom now grace the pages of Zzap! Back in 1983 our Jools was a regular C+VG arcade reader and entered our Arcade Championship which he won, own TOKEN 1 "


"Sinclair TRUE INV VIDEO VIDEO Na ming GRAPH < RUN BREAK CODE S   ; & W ERY DEREK Mao    B AMO -LOAD CAPS LOCK ENTERSYMB SHIFT CAPS SHIFT SYMB SHIFT MONSTER MEM "


"GET YOUR HANDS ON THE NEW SINCLAIR 128K+2. BEFORE EVERYBODY ELSE DOES. K ZX Spectrum +2 The new 128K ZX Spectrum +2 is more than just a monster memory. It's the ultimate family computer. With a built-in datacorder for easier loading, superb graphics capability, two joystick ports, a proper typewriter keyboard and more games available than you can shake a joystick at (well over 1000 software titles, in fact). Better get your hands on the new 128K ZX Spectrum +2 soon. Before they do. ORY. MONSTER VALUE To: Sinclair, P.O.Box 462, Brentwood, Essex C14 4ES. Please send me more information about the Sinclair 128K ZX Spectrum +2. Name Address CVG 4 Available from: Allders, Boots, Clydesdale, Comet, Connect, Co-op, Currys, Dixons, Electric Supreme, Laskys, John Lewis, John Menzies, Power City, Rumbelows, Ultimate, WH Smith, Wigfalls, and good independent stores. We recommend Sinclair Quality Control Software. SINCE "


"the BBC film their smash hit TV series Grange Hull, now an adventure game from Argus Press Software. Paul saw future episodes being filmed. machines at .99 for cassette and .99 for disk. Spectrum, Amstrad CBM64/128, and following soon on BBC/Electron and C16/Plus 4. 17 171717 Here's a value for money package for 64 adventurers. Incentive have repackaged the Ket Trilogy, stuck it all onto one tape and built in a map drawing program so you can do away with all that messing about with pens and paper. This three for the price of one package sells for just .95. 2000 NEXT MONTH I'd meticulously followed the instructions from London. I'd opened the parcel containing map, compass and emergency rations as I left the M40 and here I was. I had arrived. Or at least I thought I had, writes Steve Zucker. Here I stood in something resembling the set for Dark Crystal, wizened wizards, dragons breaking out of shells and trolls surrounded me. And they told me I was going to visit a pottery. Well I suppose it was really, but then owner Graham Piggott is no ordinary potter. It was Graham after all who created the amazing wizard for C+VG's 'Adventurer of the Year  prize. When he began his pottery some 19-years ago, in Bladon near Oxford, plates, pots and pans were his staple fare. But it wasn't long before his imagination was in overdrive and he was turning out the most extraordinary fantasy figures ... and they just got weirder and weirder. Recently he's been busy making models for a forthcoming feature film along the lines of Dark Crystal and Labyrinth. \"It's great doing film work\" said Graham. \"There's tremendous scope for plumbing those dark recesses of one's imagination\". Nemesis or Delta. While will be the top shoot'em up over the next few months. Nemesis is reviewed in full later on so here's a look at Delta from Thalamus. It's superb fast action crash, bash and wallop in space. Your trigger finger will have to develop extra muscles to cope with the action. Delta will cost .95 on cassette and .95 A man's head appears in the sights of a gun. A shot rings out. A bullet hole blooms on the man's forehead. He falls to the floor. Sirens wail. The scene changes to the man lyng dead in the street. That's the dramatic and blood-thirsty start to The Sidney Affair from Infogramme. Yes, it's another criminal investigation in the form of Vera Cruz. You must take statements and interview witnesses and suspects before making an arrest. The Sidney Affair will be out on Spectrum, Amstrad, CBM 64, MSX, and IBM. Meanwhile France's best-selling cartoon book series is Passengers on the wind, a swash-buckling adventure packed with galleons, battles and romance. A computer game based on the book is now out in France and the English version should be out in this country during March. on disk. PLAYER The Liberty Star is apparently the hottest fighter in the galaxy. You can find out if it's true in Electric Dreams Star Raider II, out soon on Amstrad, Spectrum and Commodore 64 (.99). The future of the Atarian federation is in your hands. But Chut, the evil Zylon Master has other plans. Other up and coming Activision/ Electric Dream games are Koronis Rift on the Spectrum, 500CC Grand Prix, Bactron and Firetrack on the BBC and CBM 64. Meet Paul Exley, C+VG's Adventurer of the Year. He pictured receiving his unique Dungeon Master trophy from Deputy Editor Paul Boughton. Paul, 16, from Bury, Lancashire, triumphed over all other contenders with his wide and expert knowledge of adventure games. As part of his prize Paul was taken to Elstree Film Studios where 'Allo, 'Allo, 'Allo. What eez all thees? Yes Inspector Gadget is on the trail of those crafty MAD agents in the Circus of Fear. Gadget has to use all his technological trickery elastic legs, roller skates, hammer and a helicopter to overcome these villains. More on this French hero next month's C+VG. See the Next Month column on this page. I The C+VG office was suddenly plunged into darkness. A shot rang out followed by a hideous scream. Panic. The lights came back on. The Ed was sprawled on the floor, a bullethole through the padding of the right shoulder of his rather exclusive Dynasty-style jacket. Who had tried to murder Metcalfe while he was drinking his coffee? There were four people in the office all with opportunity and motive. Was it Paul, the Dep Ed, after quick promotion? Was it designer Craig, driven to a fury after Metcalfe refused to allow him to use blood red throughout the mag? Was it Seamus the sub, upset because Tim was drinking coffee out of HIS cup? And what about the lovely Lesly? What dark secret was she hiding behind those big, baby blue eyes? This was clearly a case for Inspector Gadget. And next month this famous French detective will be under investigation as we check out his latest adventure The Circus of Fear. In fact next month's C+VG is packed with corpses and detectives. There's an invitation to Marshal M. Rosethal's Murder Party, a map of Sam Cruise and Keith Campbell's solution to Sherlock. There's also a 16 page adventure supplement with the latest on Guild of Thieves. April's C+VG will also contain the full results of the Golden Joysticks, the awards software houses will kill for, a report on the latest US games, news from the 2nd British Play-By-Mail conference, an extremely stylish American Football poster, a look at high-tech life enhancers, video reviews. And that's all in addition to the reviews, news, I.D.E.A.S Central, Arcade Action, competitions and anything else we can squeeze in. Whodunnit? Wedunnit and we'll be doing it every month. Make sure your doing it with us. EOS1992 353 NOK FICUS TOSHTWEEN YOU ARE HERE SMUI SOMME FREESID ENVIRONMENT Tesettete LHAS Remember spaghetti westerns? They were wild west films made by Italians in Spain. Well Gremlin 10 have come up with their version West Bank, a wild west game made in Spain. Butch Hardguy. Is he the man to It features life-like animation of finally prove that Rambo is really a the citizens of a Wild West town. sissy? Advance Software You play the hero collect money hope he is as they launch from the citizens of Soft City and Hardguy, what should be a shoot the baddies who try to steal it humorous and tongue-in-cheek from you both on your way to the take off of the Sly Stallone tough bank and in it. guy. His motto is \"Who Cares Who WEST BANK will now retail Wins.\" Out soon on the Spectrum across the following different for .95. "


"STATUS SOFTWARE THE GILT EDGED LABEL Now the Status Software label brings you games you can rely on. Superb sounds, great graphics, fast action. Cassette .95 The gilt edged label for people who demand the best. Just arrived. The Vikings full of action packed fun Coming soon Amstrad/ with challenges for all levels. Tipped to soar up the Spectrum charts. Get your copy now. TDCVIKINGS KELE LINE A/S we WERE WRITUNNUS DUBLINNEN soome 1000000 OL Also available from Status Software on IBM PC, AMSTRAD PC1512, TANDY 1000 con FORTINE Status Software, Unit B11, Armstrong Mall, The Summit Centre, Southwood, Farnborough, Hants. GU14 ONP Tel. 0252 543303 "


"DATHE Entreten NICK CSOM REVIEWS } SPEED H00 FRAME THE 79622 HI 97aa This is C+VG's highest honour. It's granted to the game which, in our honest opinion, is the most playable, original and exciting game released during the month. We look for all the key points listed below -but also that extra added ingredient which makes the game stand head and shoulders above the rest. C+V 1:2011: DOUBLE This symbol is C+VG's way of telling you a game is the BUSINESS! \"Who writes your reviews?\" That's a question our readers often ask. Name the guilty ones, they demand. So that's what we're doing. Satisfied now? TIM METCALFE: C+VG's veteran editor enjoys shoot 'em ups, arcade adventures and basket weaving. PAUL\"Man at C&A BOUGHTON: Slick sports simulations are Paul's thing because he can wear his smooth tracksuits at the same time. LESLY WALKER: Sorcery was still is Lesly's favourite. Will anything ever match up to? LEE BRAITHWAITE: Star of Radio Lancashire and ace reviewer, Lee will tackly any type of game. What a man! CHRIS\"bodgy\" CAIN: The man who owns an Amiga but still plays C64 games for fun! HAKAN AKBUS: C+VG's Atari addict knows a dodgy game when he sees one... NICKY TREVITT: The enigmatic Nicky is our reclusive BBC expert. DAVID BISHOP: Our man with an Amstrad and a wicked way with words. Nemesis arcade cousin but it's just as MACHINES: SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD/C64/MSX playable. SUPPLIER: KONAMI If you've not seen the arcade PRICES: .95 (Spec) .95 (Ams/ game-where have you been | hiding?you won't know that REVIEWER: TIM it's a sort of super-Defender. Lots of action, combined with total addictiveness make the It's here! The Number One computer version of Nemesis a Arcade Game of 1986 is now on must for true gamesters. YOUR home computer. Konami Seven levels of increasingly have released this coin-op difficult zapping with some truly classic on their own label and spectacular nasties await you, it's a real blast. You begin the game in the It may not be as fast as its sedate surroundings of deep space. Suddenly some swirling blue gizmos come at you in waves. Destroy an entire wave and a pod appears which contains an extra device essential to success. And that's just the beginning of a whole new adventure. Collect a pod and one of the six icons or boxes light up. The boxes are Speed-up, Missiles, Double, Laser, Multiple and the mysterious'?'. Speed-up is obvious, it enables you to duck and weave faster than normal. "


"MACHINE: CBM 64/SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD  SUPPLIER: US GOLD PRICE: .99 (SPECTRUM) .99 are adequate for the game. To bowling option you have to (CBM 64, AMSTRAD) help you decide on where to enter the names of two different VERSION TESTED: CBM 64 bowl the ball, there is a view teams, with up to four players in REVIEWER: BRIAN WEBBER from above, above the bowling each team. This section also alley. This can help you get allows for any skill level and the Roger and Bruce Carver are some of the almost impossible choice of up to three games. already famous for their golf + Each man wears a different simulation on the CBM 64, To bowl the ball you have to colour so you can tell who go it which is starting to become the position the man from where is without looking at the names. standard of sport simulations the run-up starts then on the At the end of a round a on the computers. This game bowling fine you want to take. scoreboard is dispalyed in has been based on the After all this has been done you Leaderboard fashion so you can characteristic values of have to decide on the speed and see who is leading the Leaderboard. The way you bowl hook of the ball in the same way competition. the ball is very similar to the you do in Leaderboard. If you fancy having a sneakway you hit the ball in Now I hear you asking \"How practice game to improve your leaderboard. many players can use 10th skill then the practice option will The man involved in 10th Frame at any one time? Well if come in handy. At the end of Frame also looks similiar to the you select the Open bowling each game you are given the golfer. The animation for the option then you can have up to option to dump the scoreboard run-up to bowl the ball is off the eight players involved. After to a printer, so that you can highest quality. The movement you have chosen you get the keep a record of any high scores of the ball moving down the chance to select the skill levles, you get. This game has to be bowling alley can be a bit jerky, kids, Amateur and Professional. the best thing to come out of but this does not spoil the Then you are given the choice America since Leaderboard was enjoyment of the game. The of one to five games. released. If you have got the skittles may look a bit small but If you chose the League right computer then rush out REVIEWS and get a copy of it quick, but do and not pester your local software shop too much for it. GRAPHICS VALUE PLAYABILITY DO SCORE 9002900 @@@2809 BAR Missile equips you with a ground to air projectile which knocks out ground emplacements. Double gives you another gun which fires at 45 degress-useful for KO ing nasties at the top of the screen. Laser wipes out everything in your line of fire although you can't have it as well as Double and Missile,) it's either one or the other I'm afraid. Most of the time it's better to make use of Double and Missile-Laser is useful when you're knocking out end of level motherships. The '?' gives you a random device some pods act as 'Smash' bombs zapping everything in sight! All the elements of the arcade version are here the deadly Easter Island statues, skeleton dinosaurs, swirling amoeba things, and of course, the horrible brain waiting right at the very end. Pick up enough of the pods and build up a big arsenal of weapons you can get a whole lot of stuff happening on screen and nothing slows down. Amazin'. Graphics are colourful and sound effects pretty good. The theme tune could be a bit punchier however. Playability — well MSX and C64 owners couldn't really ask for much more. The Amstrad demo version I saw looked a bit slower and amazingly colourful. Spectrum versions weren't available at the time C+VG went to press. The game scrolls along smoothly—the computer determines the speed but you can zap backwards and forwards at will shooting, dodging and weaving. Neat stuff! Not much more can be said about this coin-op conversion, except that it's FUN with a big F. MOBIL MEASERE MORSIAMIESTAI GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE  PLAYABILITY "


"hhi Lesser bolts will not kill powerful meanies. Secret Doors: Not all are obvious. Watch for the enemy walking through walls or tunnels and lead nowhere. You can use a Find spell to find them in any room. Generators: Various objects generate meanies. Many Minions: The evil wizards and minions move about intelligently on each dungeon level on their own but will not change levels. There are 12 wizards on each level to find and destroy. Magical Transfer Points: On the floor can be found magical signs. These can be used ot MMMM WWWWWW the . ANARAMA * XXXX XXXX x x D MACHINES, SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD/CBM 64 > SUPPLER: HEWSON D> PRICE: .95 (SPECTRUM)/.95 (AMSTRADI CBM CASSETTE}} .95 (CBM DISK)/ .95 D (AMSTRAD DISK). D VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM > REVIEWER: PAUL Ranarama sees Steve Turner's return to his unique world of magic, spells, runes, potionsand frogs! A It's tough being a frog in this company! The Dragontorc man serves up more of the same but in a far which allows you to build up strengths. more accessible form. The your magical spells. Basically the missiles, power and problems are still there to be this is sorting out the jumbled shields you gain are all graded solved but in RanaRama they up words of Rana Rama against to match the nasties on don't bring the game to a halt the clock. It simple but you different levels. while you spend a frustrating always find yourself panicking. Some of the game features few hours trying to solve them. Unscramble the jumble and you are: Magic Bolts: Eight kinds of You control Mervyn, a are rewarded with extra bolts of increasing power. Sorceror's apprentice, who has inadvertantly turned himself Corridors of power make RanaRama a winner into a frog while trying to brew a portion to make him, tall, muscular and handsome. Some mistake, eh? But it has allowed him to escape capture during an invasion by evil warlocks. The aim of the game is for Mervyn to tackle 12 wizards found on each level of the game. guarded by evil troops scattered around the many rooms. There are eight levels in all. The rooms are viewed from above — Gauntlet-style but they only become illuminated when you enter them. On average you get around five rooms to a screen. Succeed in capturing a wizard and you enter a sub-game transfer to other levels. Power Points: You can use these to attack all meanines within the room. Magical Spell Points: You can cast spells to increase your power on these points. Clairvoyance Points: These can be used to obtain a map of the current level. Only the places you have been are revealed Meanies can be killed by colliding with them but you lose energy in the process. Energy levels can be loose by collecting spinning energy crystals or by firing up another power spell. When your energy drops low the frog sparks and flashes. On the floor fo all the rooms are various \"glyphs\" which are activated by stepping on them and pressing the fire button. GLYPH OF SEEING: All rooms explores so far will be shown on a map. If you have the SEE spell warlocks will be shown in red. GLYPH OF SORCERY: Shows your spell status, rune list and allows you to scroll through available spells. GLYPH OF POWER: Will disappear when used. It activates a random attack spell which is often deadly to all in the room except yourself. WAY GLYPH: Will transport you up or down a ley to a different level. In Ranarama you have a short shoot'm up plus lots, lots more. Great fun, thoroughly absorbing game play and very addictive. Turner triumphs again. * foto * x D SOUND >> VALUE > PLAYABILITY x "


"ACORNSOFT X MACHINES: BBC MICRO, explore the mazes which make MASTER, ELECTRON up the security system of a rival  SUPPLIER: ACORNSOFT company. One of the best of its >> PRICE: .95 (disk), .95 (tape) type. > VERSION TESTED: BBC MICRO Planetoid is an excellent copy REVIEWER: NICKY of an actual arcade game with brilliant graphics, animation, For anyone who missed them sound and colour. It's classic first time around, these shoot-'em-up action in which Acornsoft gems are NOT to be you fight off an alien invasion. missed. On one disk you get Like Planetoid, Rocket Raid is Magic Mushrooms, Maze, a copy of an actual arcade Planetoid and Rocket Raid in a game. Here you are flying low superb value-for-money arcade in the final approach to your action package. target--the Martians' supply In Magic Mushrooms you base, protected by anti-rocket send Murphy leaping, bouncing missiles and a host of other and sliding around nine hazards. Again, good graphics, screens, collecting mushrooms animation and colour. and dodging monsters. You can in the second of the two also design your own games. Acornsoft compilations Good graphics, some borrowed launched in collaboration with from Monsters. Superior, and like volume one Maze is a fast-moving, real it's worth every penny. time action game with realistic In this volume you get four 3D graphics in which you classics, Starship Command, Arcadians, Labyrinth and Meteors, early trail-blazers which have been much imitated but rarely bettered. Starship Command is an exciting punch-up against attacking alien ships which is best played with a joystick. Arcadians is a good version of an actual arcade machine in which you have to defend yourself against the lethal divebombing tactics of a convoy of aliens. The graphics are slick, and the game can be played by one or two players. In Meteors, you must glide your laser-ship through a deluge of meteors, not to mention missiles from unfriendly flying saucers. It's another copy of an arcade machine with fast, smooth graphics and good sound. Meteors and Arcadians, together with Planetoid and VIEWS Rocket Raid from volume one, form the pillar of the BBC's reputation for arcade games. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY MACHINE: SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: LEISURE GENIUS PRICE: .95 > REVIEWER: TIM SCALEXTRIC Blament SEO into two — as in Pitstop II. In fact this game is the closest you'll get to Pitstop on the Spectrum. The race sequence looks OK but it's a bit slow and it seems pretty easy to beat the computer controlled car. The growling engine sound efects get a bit monotonous as well. It's fun attempting to beat lap records and controlling the car is tricky at higher speeds. There's simulated G-force when you corner, and yes, you can skid off the track if you go too wild! Not a bad game but not a instant hit either. My guess is that if you are a slot car racing fan you'll have more fun with the real thing. But if you're after a well put together race game for your Spectrum than at least have a look at this offering. Baltaiset Another game we've all been waiting ages for. The Spectrum version of the legendary slot car racing game. There was a time whn everyone who was anyone had their front room full of bits of track, cars and trailing wires. Now you can forget all the mess and bent bits of track and play the whole thing on your trusty Speccy. Not quite the same as the real thing — but at least you can build your own tracks, complete with chicanes and skid patches. After you've built a track or simply chosen one of the 17 famous Formula One tracks included ready made on the tape. Building the track is done by using a simple object menu and the program even finishes off your track for you if you've got everything in the right place. Very user friendly. The actual race screen is split *** ANDY BERT SCALEXTRIC MPH MPH COB ele GRAPHICS VALUE PLAYABILITY MACHINE: SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD/64 SUPPLIER: MASTERTRONIC PRICE: .99 VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM REVIEWER: TIM NINJA armed opponents to win idols dropped by DI. Each screen contains a different challenge opponents gather in numbers as you progress and they are armed with swords and death stars as well. Use the seven different movements available to kick, punch and slash your way through the many and varied If you're a budget Ninja do you only get half the lessons from your guru? Do you find yourself short of spinning death stars at crucial moments? Is your animation a bit dodgy? Not if you're a Mastertronic Ninja you don't. This is yet another in the long, long line of martial arts games threatening to bore you all silly. But at least Ninja isn't boring. You may have seen and played it all before, but it isn't dull. It's a sort of Kung Fu Master clone. Our hero has to rescue Princess Di who apparently is being held prisoner in the Palace of Pearls. Does Charles know about this? Anyway, our Ninja has to battle heavily levels of the palace. Use your weapons carefully and watch your strengh meter at the bottom left hand side of the screen. Early screens are easy with only one opponent to defeat later screens get more difficult. Graphics on the Spectrum version are pretty basic — the Amstrad version looks more detailed, as you'd expect. Animation isn't bad. Sound likewise. The game is also mapable with nice captions under each screen to give you an idea where you are in the palace. Ninja is a basic martial arts bash-nothing new, but if you enjoy this type of game then it's great value at under two quid. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY HERO THUG KARATER "


"H E . ... THE STATE OF THE MARTIAL ARTS FOOD NOLDING wount G2 Ge NINA HOLDING HOLDER How GO GO G@ INA actual CBM 64 screens SYSTEM Available for: CBM 64/128, AMSTRAD CPC, SPECTRUM 48K/128 & ATARI: For further informati "


"LA S T ST on 30th January 1987 ATARI 800/130XE available 28th February 1987 pn ring 01954 1909 "


"TM from Nintendo RRING SNORT! Donkey Kong HELP! 005900 007600 14500 The Beautiful Girl FIGHT! 4900 The Brave Carpenter mit ! (003) STIM ATTI @abanga Classic arcade action with this all time coin-op favourite. Outwit the giant gorilla and save the girl in this historic rescue. Mario is armed with only his wits and his trusty hammer as he climbs the girders in down town New York. Multiple screens and fast moving action, dodge boards, fireballs and much much more. In the final screen remove the rivets in the structure to finally bring the beast crashing down. Screen shots taken from various computer formats. SPECTRUM COMMODORE M TITUTID TA AT 73389 Ocean EACH SPECTRUM EACH AMSTRAD  Nintendo TM indicates Trademark of Nintendo, licensed by Ocean Software Limited, authorised user. All Rights Reserved. Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street Manchester M2 SNS. Telephone: 061 832 6633 Telex: 669977 "


"THE DUCK Howard PVC MACHINE: C64  SUPPLIER: ACTIVISION > PRICE: .99/.99 REVIEWER: TIM unscathed and you get to have a crack at the Dark Overlord with your handy Neutron Disintegrator. Zap him three times and he'll disappear. Then rush for the volcano switch and shut the thing down. Howard is an uninspiring on a flight on a micro-lite. You have to help Howard reach the top of the volcano so he can get on with the next part of his adventure. Which is? A horizontally scrolling duck and dodge effort. Get through this part This is an example of taking a good subject and turning it into a naff game. Howard the Duck ISN'T a kiddies character but the game is definitely aimed at the under eights! Howard first saw the light of day in an American Marvel comic book in the late 70s. His creator, Steve Gerber, made Howard a cynical and witty commentator on the modern condition. And the comic rapidly picked up cult following in the States and over here. It was a sort of cartoon Spitting Image of its day. Not really the stuff of computer games — not until George Lucas decided to make and you get singed as the Dark a movie based on the far from Overlord's volcano erupts. daffy duck. If you manage the island The cigar smoking Duck section within the time allowed around town has been turned you have to cross a bridge into web-footed wimp. OK, SO without getting hit by rocks he does get to practice a bit of rolled at you by a mutant. KO Quack-Fu on a few assorted this final mutant and you're off gremlins but this rapidly becomes as boring as a rainy day in Frinton. The game comes in several parts some more playable than others. And some just fillers to make you think you're getting a BIG game. You get to play these different parts depending on the skill level you decided to attempt. These range from novice to expert—but only on the advanced and expert levels do  MACHINE: SPECTRUM you get to have a crack at the >> SUPPLIER: U.S GOLD Dark Overlord and complete the REVIEWER: TIM game. The skill levels also determine Vrooom! If TT Racer was too the number of mutants which complicated for you or if Speed attack our feathered hero King was too wimpish for you, during his quest. just check out the Speccy The game begins on an conversion of Super Cycle It's island. Howard parachutes in brill! and must discover the allIt's the home micro version of purpose backpack. Without it he the arcade smash Hang On! won't anywhere as it contains Wheel to wheel bike racing the equipment he needs to against the clock on a variety of progress through the game. demanding tracks. First Howard needs his solarThe screen shows your bike powered jet pack to negotiate and the smoothly scrolling the many channels of the track. Beneath the main paly island. He has to fly over the window are your instruments rock filled rapids. There's speedometer, rev-counter, trouble on the ground as well in points scored, elapsed time and the shape of the Dark Overlord's which gear you are in. mutant minions. Each track has a time limit. He has to practice a bit of Beat it and you get a bonus Quack-Fu on these little beasts score based on the number of and stamp on the mounds they seconds left. As you progress appear from to keep them off through the tracks obstacles like his tail. puddles, ice pools, road works The island is a rambling maze and bumps begin to appear. of jungle pathways. The The further you go the more undergrowth appears to be obstacles you have to inhabited too lots of evil negotiate. looking eyes gaze out of the Riding the bike is fairly easy bushes. There are also patches but watch those gear of slime to jump over and changes it's crucial to get them there's a time limit as well. Fail Super CYCLE offering from Activision which doesn't do the character justice. An Infocom adventure with Howard as the star would be a different subject... The game looks pretty, but the different sections take ages to load and the island sequence gets horribly tedious after the first few attempts. And you always have to start off from this part even on the higher skill levels. BORING! No tunes either. A game for younger gamesters is the most polite way to describe this offering. If you are an addict or even a Howard fan-don't bother with the first turkey of the New Year. right. Get up to 8,000 revs before you hit the fire button to change gear. There are three skill levels the first is a bit of a doddle frankly, treat it as a training mode, especially if you've played the C64 version. Talking of that 64 version you'll find the Speccy a bit slower-but this doesn't make the game any less playable. Background graphics change so you get the impression you're racing across the desert or over water on an elevated track. Race through storms or frozen wastes. Unlike the Commodore version the Spectrum games loads up in one go but you don't get the option to change the colour of your rider or his bike. Super Cycle is an excellent conversion. If you like race games you won't find better than this on the Spectrum. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY 03 toto GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY NO "


"objecte Weapons UDBU DI CU Way REVIEWS MACHINE: AMSTRAD CPC464/ 664/6128/SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: ELECTRIC DREAMS PRICE: $14.99 (disk)  VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD DISK  REVIEWER: DAVID Explorer I am always sceptical of any game whose inlay card promises zillions of different screens because, in most cases this \"technical innovation\" is either camouflage or the reason for a very thin game. Fortunately there have been games of this ilk that have actually delivered the goods notably the Doomdark series from Beyond. Unfortunately Explorer is not one of those happy exceptions to the rule. Stranded 30-billion light years from the nearest service station, your inertial stablizers have inconveniently cut out. The only thing to do is crash land on the Emerald planet below you. Just prior to impact, your ships sensors told you that the planet consisted of 40 billion mappable locations. That's the good news. The bad news is that the impact of the crash has scattered fragments of your ship into nine of them. You must find all nine bits of your ship before escaping the Emerald planet. To help you in your quest you have various bits of equipment at your disposal, including a jet pack, nine radio beacons, nine than treking over the planets anit-grav drones for sending surface. any spacecraft bits you have An even faster way of getting found to the nearest beacon, about is found inside strange object sonar, radio direction red and yellow checked finder, a compass, and a laser structures that seem to act as pulse gun which is used to kill some kind of transporter points. off any robotic bugs you may Once you have entered one find a tedious addition to the you will be asked where you game. want to go. You can enter Radio beacons can be anything from London to dropped anywhere and then Metcalfesuille-every place used whenever you want to get exists on the Emerald planet, your bearings by using but every time you enter a triangulation. transporter point and type in The jet pack allows you to the same place thats where hover 1,000 or 2,000 feet above you'll be taken so at least its the planets surface in order to consistent. survey the surrounding terrain. All the locations are shown as You can also move in any full screen graphics built up direction with the jet pack. This from a number of graphical is a much faster way to travel primitives giving an effective atmospheric feel to the proceedings. Such features as palm trees, running water, temples, and other dwellings are visible, but very little of the surface feature can be interacted with. As you alter your compass heading so your view flicks round to reflect the new direction in which you're heading. The trouble is that, after a while, each new location looks the same as the last one. Explorer is a brave attempt at creating something a little different on computer, but it turns out to be little more than a triangulation exercise with graphics bolted on to obscure the fact that it's a tediously boring exercise at that! If you want to get your bearingssteer clear of this one.  GRAPHICS: SOUND: VALUE: PLAYABLITY: HowzaT included. When batting you can choose to run or stay at the crease and yes, you can get run out if you're not careful. If you decide to field you can place your men, select bowlers etc. Just like the real thing. Each player has a skill rating which you can alter at will. Howzat! isn't a spectacular game — just very good value for money. It's more a strategy game than an out and out arcade thrash — but if you're into cricket then you won't want to miss this neat budget release. MACHINE: SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: ALTERNATIVE SOFTWARE PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: TIM If you were inspired by England's victory against Australia in the Ashes series over Christmas, then here's the game for you —it's a horribly addictive cheapo from a new budget label, Alternative Software. or two player game, select any It's an accurate one of the 17 county squads or representation of our national seven test teams, enter your summer game and all for under own special team, play test . OK, so the graphics aren't matches, one day matches, up to much the display of the league matches you name it! field is inhabited by little pin You can call up a detailed men but the strategy element scoreboard, detailed analysis of is there in full as is the little batting, bowling statistics, and random bits of luck or print out of the scoreboard or misfortune which happen in all scorecard at any time on your real cricket matches. trusty Speccy printer. Random You can choose to play a one extras, like byes, wides etc are  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABLITY o com o "


"SABALL Spectrum Cassette Amstrad Cassette Amstrad Disk .95 .95 .95 Do you have the nerve and skill to guide your bouncing Impossaball through the Corridor of Doom? Time is running out. Bounce onto a spike and Impossaball is obliterated, touch a column and Impossaball will rebound at electric speeds. Against this constantly moving background of death dealing obstacles you must squash all the cylinders to complete the game. Are you good enough? ps with a view to publication. happy to evaluate software sent innovative software we are always Consultants Ltd. Order by Credit Card sending your As part of our continuing development of Access/Barclaycard number, and a specimen signature. Don't forget to enclose For Mail Order send a cheque/P.O. to Hewson your name and address. HEWSON 56b Milton Trading Estate "


"C+VG UPER O DOCCER MACHINE: SPECTRUM 48/128 SUPPLIER: IMAGINE PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: TIM SPEED ENERGY FORCE MAN UTD 04:41 SPEED ENERGY SREE FORCE EWERTON LOE Super Soccer is probably the closest you'll get to the real thing in terms of player controls the only thing that's missing from the pitch is the ref and linesmen! If you're looking for an accurate and playable computer soccer game then you won't find better for the Spectrum than Super Soccer. All that and really neat sliding tackles which help you win back the ball in tight situations. But you can foul the opposition so beware of giving away too many free kicks and penalties when you begin to play. And watch the energy level of the player you are controlling switching to a new player could give you a bit more speed in certain situations. The player under your control is indicated by a little halo affair -but it's up to you whether your player is a saint or a an Da-da-dada-da da da dum-de-dum dum dum. Hello, and welcome to the Priory Court ground for the first round in the C+VG Challenge Cup. The two teams, captained by Paul \"Do I have to wear these shorts\" Boughton and Tim \"I played in a charity match once' Metcalfe, are just kicking off the first game in this prestigious challenge series which will determine who'll get the sandwiches for lunch... Yup, here's yet another soccer game to delight indoor football fans. It's a sort of enhanced Match Day complete with bigger players, more complex control options You can perform all sorts of it doesn't seem to matter that and improved, more accurate, stunts like 90 and 45 degree much. Wrestling with the playability. Plus options galore. turns, chip shots, lobs and controls will make you glad of Up to eight players can take driving shots at goal. the relative slowness of the part in the tournament game, your team in strategic positions. game. and there are single game and Use the joystick or keyboard to The keeper is a bit limited in practice options to choose position your man for throw his actions in goal kick from. You can select the colour ins. situations but otherwise can of the border, pitch and team The key to success is learning behave like a normal player and strip at will, define your own how to pass the ball among can head shots away from goal team names, and set the time your team and getting used to if the ball is in the air. for each game. the complex controls which If you decide to play a The practice mode allows you allow you to duck and dive tournament-against the to try out the controls. Which is around the pitch at will. computer or other live players useful as the joystick The players are nicely then the computer will make the combinations are pretty tricky. animated although they all draw for you and display a When taking free kicks and look a bit like Charlie George, scorechart after each game. corners a plan view of the pitch complete with flowing hair. Any combination of computer comes up on screen and you Game action isn't that fast controlled/player teams can have thirty seconds to place but once you get into the game take part in the tournament. sinner. You can switch between your players by simply hitting the fire-button otherwise the nearest member of your team to the ball will be the \"active\" player. If you commit a foul your player notches up penalty points and yes, if you exceed the bounds of sportsmanship you'll get shown the red card and sent off for an early bath. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY OW pretty comprehensive and explain things in detail. Once you've keyed in the actions you've decided on the scene switches to a view of the MACHINE: C64 game. And you have to be up two player game or simply put field complete with animated SUPPLIER: NEXUS on the rules, regulations and the thing on auto — which is players raring to put your play PRICE: .95 (TAPE) .95 jargon to get the most out of like a glorified demo mode into action. (DISC) Super Sunday. except the computer calls on all The result of your strategy REVIEWER: TIM But as everyone is an the back-up knowledge the can be spectacular run for a Nexus kick off the New Year American Football fan these software contains on touchdown, a simple couple of with this excellent American days that shouldn't be a statististics (skill levels) for the yards gained or a horrible Football simulation. Now you problem. And there's no doubt teams playing. fumble. Just like the real thing. can re-live the excitment of the that Super Sunday is the best If you decide to play a friend The graphics aren't Superbowl by pitting the top simulation of the increasingly or the computer you find spectacular and the sound is teams from the last 20 years popular sport so far. yourself either attacking or minimal but if you're an against each other. The game is totally keyboard defending and are presented American Football fan then You can chose to mastermind controlled you select offence with numerous play options. you'll find Super Sunday totally the 1966 Superbowl champs and defensive plays from a This is where your knowledge addictive. Kansas City or the 1984 winners comprehensive options menu. of the game comes in. If you're Super Sunday is the best US San Fransisco. Or any number However if you are playing not familiar with all the terms Football simulation around — of top teams from the against a friend you can use the used in the game you could find go for a touch-down with it on intervening years. joystick to control the defence yourself baffled by it all. After your 64 today! Now, it has been said, that options to prevent all, Sweep Top, Tackle Bottom, GRAPHICS although Super Sunday overcrowding at the keyboard. Punt etc aren't words in regular SOUND includes an animated sequence Once loaded the game asks everyday use. Are they? The VALUE this is an out and out strategy you if you want to play a one or instructions do help — they are PLAYABILITY Nico "


" MACHINES: ATARI ST  SUPPLIER: MIRRORSOFT PRICE .95 REVIEW: DAVID CAVA One of the best combat flight simulators to appear on eight bit machines was Mirrorsoft's Strike Force Harrier which combined the accuracy and realism of a pure flight simulator with the excitement of a first person comabt game without sacrificing the intergrity of the flying routines. After a lot of hard work SFH REVIEWS Study MAPS SIMULATION SPD 18 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER SILENT SERVICE Silent Service puts you in MACHINES: ATARI ST charge of the American World SUPPLIER: MICROPROSE War Il submarine on patrol in PRICE .95 the Pacific. The primary REVIEW: DAVID function of the American Secret Service in WW II was to It is an interesting observation confront the Japanese navy in that a number of prominent their own waters and to software companies owe their neutralise the Japanese success to finding what they are Merchant fleet. As a submarine good at and then sticking to it. commander you will be A perfect example of this is evaluated based on the number Infocom who only met with and types of ship you sink. financial difficulties when they The battle stations are the tried, unsuccessfully, to periscope, bridge, instruments diversify into the business and gauges, maps and charts, software market. Another and damage reports. Each is a company that has stuck to its separate well designed screen guns in more ways than one is with real-time animation where Microprose, founded by ex-pilot necessary. At the bottom of Bill Stealey. Stealey, who most battle station screens quickly surrounded himself there are also a number of icons with others who shared his giving you control over rudders, passion for flying, gradually depth, periscope up/down and built Microprose into the State's rotate, throttle, and time scale leading producer of home which lets you speed up the micro simulations with such action to a maximum of 32 titles as F-15 Strike Eagle and times normal real-time. Gunship. A well illustrated and The company's success lay in comprehensive manual, the authenticity of their containing much historical and simulations that came equally background data, completes from the enthusiasm of the this professionally designed programmers and the simulation which captures the exhaustive research that went tension and claustrophobia that in to each project. must have been experienced by It wasn't long before these submarine officers during the qualities were applied to other war. forms of simulation resulting in Decision in the Desert, the GRAPHICS excelelnt Kennedy Approach SOUND and, more recently, Silent VALUE Service. PLAYABILITY has finally taken off for the ST below the clouds you can and very impressive it looks alternative between the two at too. Unlike many conversions will. When at altitudes of 16,000 from eight bit games where feet and agbove you can take little or no effort is made to take special surveillance photos of advantage of the ST's extra the ground immediately below memory and processing power, thus identifying all ground the programmers of SFH have targets making it far easier to taken the eight bit game to bits locate and destroy them. (no pun intended) and rebuilt a The enemy may fire heat16 bit version enhancing and seeking or rader guided improving over the original missiles at you, both of which wherever possible. must be dealt with in a different All the graphics for the game way. Heat seeking missiles can were redesigned to take be distracted by the use of advantage of the ST's low flares which fool the missile resolution mode, and much of into thinking you are elsewhere. this work was done on The chaf (basically just a cloud Mirrorsoft's own graphics of silver foil) used to fool rader package Art Director (reviewed guided missiles works in much in last months C+VG). New the same way giving them a flying features have also been large and tempting target at added, the most impressive of which to aim. This is the which allows you to to actually method used successfully in the fly through mountain ranges — Falklands to overcome the doing 750 knots down a valley dreaded Exocet. Hint; if you use at 450 feet with mountain peakschaf while hovering, don't hang towering either side of you is around to see if works! really quite exhilarating. The The area over which all the result of all these innovations is action takes place has five a fast moving, smooth scrolling landing sites that are used for game that exudes atmosphere. refueling and re-arming. Being Once the program has loaded a Harrier you can land and you can choose between take-off vertically which makes combat, combat practice, or life much easier. Apart from the flying practice. You are 'down' flight vector used for recommended to select the vertical take offs and hovering, latter to start with to get the feel there are two others, horizontal of the Harrier's controls. It also which let you fly the Harrier like gives you the chance to fly a normal jet, and 45 degrees around and admire the view. a kind of mixture of the two. You can fly combat missions The engine sound is very at a pilot, commander, or, if you realistic although its a while fancy yourself as a 'Top since I flew real Harriers! Gunner', you can try the 'Ace' Control is by joystick or setting, but be warned Aces will keyboard although sudden, flap find the enemy MIGs much and weapons are always more of a handful and may keyboard controlled. Each time suffer from blackouts or even you fail a message appears red-outs. The Harrier is also telling you the reason for the most difficult to control when premature ending to the game, flying in Ace mode. Another with such gems as your wings nice feature on the option were ripped off because you screen is the demo mode which were flying too fast' — beats allows you to 'log' your flight being stopped by the police! into the demo buffer and play it for those who fancy blowing back time and again until your up tanks and picking off MIG friends are stick of seeing how fighters while experiencing a good a pilot you are. state of the art flight simulator, You have two discreet tasks Strike Force Harrier is for you. in combat mode. One is to liquidate all enemy tanks, and  GRAPHICS the other is to shoot down any SOUND VALUE MIG fighters you encounter. By PLAYABILITY climbing above and diving COCO tetlen con Bearing:288 Target Range 139 Target Speed Target Course 133 Angle on Boy Lead Angle 8. Sonar Reports Distant Explosions 01234 in DEP 42 TDE 2 25 "


"SAILING You'll need your life-jacket for this battle against the elements! Based on the world-famous Americas Cup Race, Sailing gives you hours of thrills (and hopefully no spills) on the ocean wave. First, you design your own yacht-choosing the specifications you think will win the day. Then it's tactics all the way as the battle commences. Choose the nation you want to represent, then challenge the yachts two places above you in the table. With them out of the way, you're ready to beat the next ones and the next, until you're the winner. Out there on the ocean you'll need all your skills as a seaman to steer youryacht around the buoys on the course, and to put up and take down the spinnaker (winding the joystick). Don't forget to watch out for the weather. Just one gust of wind can blow in your chances of winning. And remember. Only the strongest can survive the course and beat fifteen other nations in one of the greatest ocean races of all time. 2214 A-1555 22077 KROSS ACTIVISION ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE Available on Commodore 64/128 cassette (.99) and disk (.99 Soon to be available on Amstrad CPC cassette (.99) and disk (.99) and Spectrum 48K128K+ (.99) Mail Order: Activision (UK) Ltd., 23 Pond Street, London NW3 2PNI "


"BARGAIN SOFTWARE: Dept. C+VG : Unit 1:1 Esmond Road; London W4 1JG 2 BUY BY PHONE PRICE PROMISE If you wish to purchase any product from our list and find that you can buy the same product cheaper from another mail order company, simply enclose the lower amount, stating the name of the other company and where you saw the advert. (It must be a current issue). Price Promise does not apply to other companies \"Special Offers\". ORDERS OVER  DEDUCT 10% RING 01-995 2763 COMMODORE 64 COIN OP HITS GREEN BERET MKIE YIE AR KUNG FU HYPER SPORTS PING PONG COMPILATIONS SPEC. AND COM. 64. NOW GAMES III EITHER SORCERY PACKS CODE NAME MAT 11 ONLY E'ONES A WALLY <.45 VIEW TO A KILL NICK FALDO'S GOLF OUR PRICE 11.20 7.45 7.45 7.45 6.70 OUR PRICE 7.45 6.70 6.70 6.70 5.90 6.70 7.45 6.70 5.90 4.99 6.70 5.90 7.45 6.70 5.90 5.90 6.50 6.70 5.90 6.50 FIVE STAR SPINDIZZY BATALYX ZOIDS SCARABAEUS EQUINOX SPEC AND COM. 64. SEITHER NOW GAMES II > PACK AIR WOLF > ONLY CHUCKIE EGGHI > .45 TIR NANOG CAULDRON WORLD CUP II 6.70 7.45 7.45 4.99 11.20 11.20 7.45 7.45 7.45 7.45 9.95 SPEC. AND COM. 64. SOLD A MILLION 111 EITHER FIGHTER PILOT PACK RAMBO ONLY GHOSTBUSTERS .45 KUNG FU MASTER SOLD A MILLION DALEYS DECATHLON SABRE WULF JET SET WILLY SPY HUNTER 4.99  O 4.99 11.20 9.95 6.70 . 6.50 6.70 5.90 10.99 5.99 5.90 5.90 SPEC 128. STARS ON 128. INTER. MATCHDAY DALEY'S SUPERTEST YIE AR KUNG FU NEVER ENDING STORY M EITHER PACK ONLY > .45 SPEC. AND COM. 64. STAR GAMES 1 WAY OF THE TIGER B. MCGUIGANS BOXING BEACH HEAD 11 RESCUE ON FRACTULUS 4.50 SPECTRUM R.R.P. STAR RAIDER 9.99 IMPOSSABALL 8.95 EXPRESS RAIDER 8.99 SHOCK WAY RIDER 8.99 NEMESIS (FINAL CHALLENGE) 7.95 AGENT ORANGE 8.95 INHERITANCE 9.95 ELEVATOR ACTION 8.95 BUTCH HARD GUY 7.95 GAUNTLET II (DEEPER DUNGEONS) 4.99 10TH FRAME 8.99 SHORT CIRCUIT 7.95 BANGKOK KNIGHTS 9.99 SILENT SERVICE 8.95 SUPER SOCCER 7.95 TOP GUN 7.95 FIST II 8.95 THE LAST NINJA 8.95 BALL BREAKER 7.95 ACADEMY (TAUCETI II) 8.95 TAU CETI 9.95 DRACULA 9.95 BRIAN CLOUGHS FOOTBALL FORTUNES 14.95 URIDIUM 8.95 DOUBLE TAKE 7.95 FOOTBALL MANAGER 8.95 S.A.S. STRIKE FORCE 8.95 GREAT ESCAPE 7.95 TRIVIA PURSUIT 14.95 JAIL BREAK 7.95 PAPERBOY 7.95 IKARI WARRIORS 7.95 WINTER SALE* YIE AR KUNG FU II 7.95 GALAXIAN 7.99 MC PACMAN 7.99 STAINLESS STEEL 8.95 FROST BYTE 8.95 PACMAN 8.95 COBRA 7.95 FRIDAY 13TH 8.95 CODE NAME MAT II 8.95 VIEW TO A KILL 8.99 SPLIT PERSONALITIES 8.95 DALEY'S SUPERTEST (128) 9.95 INTERNATIONAL MATCH DAY (128) 9.95 SNOOKER BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK 7.95 SIR FRED 9.95 DEFENDER 7.95 PROJECT FUTURE (CRASH SMASH) 7.95 THE PLANETS 9.95 MIAMI VICE 7.95 SUPERBOWL 9.95 WORLD CUP FOOTBALL 7.95 SPIDERMAN 7.95 PANZERDROME 7.95 THINK? 7.95 EQUINOX 9.95 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE GHOSTBUSTERS WINTER SPORTS GREEN BERET COP OUT 8.95 TARZAN 7.95 REVOLUTION 9.95 POLE POSITION 7.99 LEGEND OF KAGE 7.95 MOONCRESTA 7.95 SUPERMAN 9.95 INT. KARATE 6.50 GLADIATOR 8.95 * WHILE STOCKS LAST R.R.P. GUNSHIP (D1) 14.95 SHANGHI 9.99 SUPER SUNDAY (D3) 9.95 JAILBREAK 9.95 SHORT CIRCUIT 8.95 DOUBLE TAKE 8.95 ALIENS 9.95 DODGY GEEZERS (D2) 9.95 HANDBALL MARADONNA 6.95 STARGLIDER (D1) 14.95 TRIVIAL PURSUITS (D1) 14.95 SPY VS SPY III (ARTIC) 9.95 EXPRESS RAIDERS (D2) 9.95 10TH FRAME (D2) 9.95 STAR RAIDERS (D2) 9.95 PAPERBOY (D2) SCOOBY DOO (D2) SPACE HARRIER (D2) THE LAST NINJA BOMB JACK II (D2) NEMESIS (THE FINAL CHALLENGE) (D2) 8.95 CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING (D2) CYBORG 9.95 DRAGONS LAIRS II (D3) 9.95 LEVIATHAN 9.95 DEATH OR GLORY (D2) 8.95 TOMAHAWK (D2) 9.95 GREAT ESCAPE 8.95 TOP GUN 8.95 FOOTBALL MANAGER 8.95 SUPER HUEY II (D2) 9.95 BIG TROUBLE IN LITTLE CHINA 9.95 LIGHTFORCE 8.95 MARBLE MADNESS (D2) 9.95 DELTA 9.99 ELITE (D1) YIE AR KUNG FU II 8.95 ACE OF ACES (D2) 9.95 TERRA CRESTA 8.95 SENTINEL 9.95 IKARI WARRIORS 9.95 WORLD GAMES (D2) 9.95 MASTER OF THE UNIVERSE (D2) 9.95 THEY STOLE A MILLION (D2) 9.95 GAUNTLET (D2) 9.95 SUPER CYCLE (D2) 9.95 WINTER SALE* SNOOKER 7.95 COMBAT LEADER 14.95 WAY OF THE TIGER 9.95 MIAMI VICE 8.95 BIGGLES 9.95 DOOMDARKS REVENGE 9.95 TRAP DOOR 7.95 MOONCRESTA 8.95 SKYRUNNER URIDIUM + PARADROID CLUEDO 12.95 ELECTRO GLIDE 9.95 COBRA SKYFOX DEACTIVATORS HERBERTS DUMMY RUN ZZAP SIZZLERS (4 TOP GAMES) FIST II GHOSTCHASER JACK THE NIPPER MASTERMIND KENSINGTON SUPERBOWL COMP. HITS 2 SUPER PIPLINE 2 MUTANT MONTY HENRYS HOUSE GRIBBLY'S DAY OUT SNOOKER MAMA LLAMA RASKEL AQUA RACER FRENZY CIRCUS 14.95 6.70 7.45 6.70 6.70 6.70 7.45 7.45 6.70 7.45 7.45 11.20 6.70 7.45 6.70 7.45 7.45 7.45 SPEC. AND COM. 64 COMP. HITS 3 G. CAPES STRONGMAN ELIDON EITHERS BLAGGER GOES TO HLLYWD CAULDRON PACKS 3D LUNAR ATTACK > ONLY .45 CRAZY COMETS DYNAMITE DAN w HERBERTS DUMMY RUN ATTACK OF MUTANT CAMELS BASILDON BOND 2.99 2.99 7.45 7.45 7.95 4.99 4.99 2.99 3.99 3.99 2.99 3.99 3.99 3.99 2.99 SPEC AND COM. 64. GAMES PACK VIEW TO A KILL SEITHER FRIDAY THE 13TH >PACK CODENAME MATI! ONLY THE PYRAMID .99 TEST MATCH W BEAKY & EGG SNATCHERS 2 99 3.99 SPORTS PACK WORLD CUP DERBY DAY OLYMPICS SNOOKER\" GOLF DARTS 2.99 4.99 4.50 2.99 3.99 3.99 3.99 9.95 8.95 COMP. HITS SPEC. AND COM. 64. B. JACKS SUPERSTAR ANCIPITAL HIT PACK SEASIDE SPECIAL BOMB JACK JINN GENIE COMMANDO SPECIAL OPERATIONS FRANK BRUNOS BOXING EITHER AIRWOLF HUSTLER SPACE PILOT PACKS HARRIER ATTACK CHUCKIE EGG < ONLY SORCEROR OF .45 CLAYMORGUE CASTLE 8,95 3.99 9.95 7.95 3.99 2.99 3.99 3.99 2.99 3.99 4.99 2.99 2.99 di didicicicininiai  2.99 3.99 3.99 SPEC. AND COM. 64. DURELL PACK SABOTEUR TURBO ESPRIT CRITICAL MASS COMBAT LYNX ONLY .45 COM. 64 SPORT FOR ALL ICE HOCKEY WATER SPORTS BURNING RUBBER 2.99 6.50 3.99 3.99 ONLY .90 * WHILE STOCKS LAST. (D1) = 16.50 (D2) = 11.20 (D3) = 10.50 Date.... | BARGAIN SOFTWARE ORDER FORM Please send me the following titles. BLOCK capitals please! Type of computer Name Title: Amount Address Tel. No. Total Enclosed  Please make cheques or postal orders payable to BARGAIN SOFTWARE. Prices include P&P within the U.K: Europe please add .75 per tape: Elsewhere please add .00 extra per tape "


"| CAMG  Di REVIEW NORTH 004.Son A Unbelievable value for Ultimate fanatics. forerunner of a thousand arcade adventures. Of the three, this game shows its age the most, but it still represents good entertainment value for first time players. Set in a tropical rain forest, you look down on our hero as you try to guide him out of the maze of creepers and exotic flowers in which he has become trapped. Each screen is a rich tapestry of colour and is quickly filled with all manner of animals that are all quite deadly unless you can kill them with your sword first. Magic orchids grow wild in the jungle and can be eaten to give you extra powers including immunity from animals and the ability to zoom through the jungle at double speed. Apart from the orchids, there are many other objects that can be picked up and used. Mysterious cubes, sacks of cash, rings, and swords are amongst the things you may find. Alien 8 and, to a certain extent, Night Shade still stand up in today's market especially at a budget price. Sabre Wulfis more interesting for its nostalgia value although it's fun for all that. So, yet another compilation, and only three games on this one. Nevertheless the package represents good value for money if you're an Ultimate fan, especially one who missed any of these first time round. Unbelievable US ULTIMA TE  MACHINE: AMSTRAD  SUPPLIER: ULTIMATE/US GOLD PRICE: .99 VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD REVIEWER: DAVE disease which has caused all its was first released, is the way in inhabitants to mutate into a which the exteriors of the number of different creatures, houses disappear when you all hideously evil and foul. enter them so that you can see Night Shade is another of what's going on inside. A line Ultimate's isometric games, but remains on the floor to tell you is substantially different from a wall exists, and a gap in the Alien in that your character line shows the exit. stays in the centre of the screen The creatures range from and the background scrolls as floating fireballs to rabid you move around the village (as gargoyles and squidgy yellow in The Great Escape). things that wriggle along the The other feature which made ground. Night Shade unique when it Sabre Wulf: this is the CON  GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE >> PLAYABILITY BONUS AHARDED 51500 LOSTER MACHINES: CBM 641 SPECTRUM/ATARI SUPPLIER: CASCADE PRICE: .95 (CBM/SPECTRUM CASSETTE), .95 (CBM DISK)  VERSION TESTED: CMB 64  REVIEWER: PAUL RUNNER US Gold has bought together three Ultimate classics launched in those heady days when thousands ordered the next Ultimate game long before its release simply because it was the next Ultimate game. Sadly those days are passed but this compilation will give many new Amstrad owners the chance to experience at first hand just what made Ultimate so good. Alien 8: A starship hurtles towards a pre-ordained destination. Inside a robot, created by a civilisation long since dead, goes about his business as if he had only started his duties yesterday. The robot, an Alien 8 unit, is still in perfect working order. even after the passage of so many centuries. As the Alien 8 unit, your task is to prepare the ship and its frozen cargo for landing on the new home planet. Once the ship slows down below sub-hyperwarp speed it is open to attack, and sensors report alien intrusions in many parts of the ship causing all life support systems to become damaged. All systems must be repaired before final approach to the planet is made. The Amstrad conversion of this vintage game is every bit as good as the original Spectrum version, which was launched in the earliest days of the isometric game while many people were still trying to catch their breath after having seen Knight Lore. Considering Alien 8 was one of the very first isometrics it has aged extremely well and still confronts the new player with many seemingly impossible logic or co-ordination problems as befits this kind of game. Night Shade: The once peaceful village of Night Shade has been overrun by a terrible *mam The reputation of Cascade has so far rested on the first class flight simulation Ace. That and the 50 game compilation A secret department was set The forest scene. packages which sell for next to up to handle this solution to the nothing (and you get a digital control problem. They flying through the trees, were watch). Now Cascade has voiced the recruited to defend the running. organised agents, to recruit Ace was mainly flight intention of putting out more bands of men to harvest, simulation. Sky Runner is \"quality\" games. Sky Runner is process, and smuggle the new control drug, no called SKY. primarily a shoot 'em up. I one of them. favour Sky Runner to be honest. It's again from the mind of The agents, known as Sky I loved the sound of the Ace programmer lan Martin and Runners, set up huge he's very frank about where he where he harvesters, and began mining skimmer. It sounds like a rogue the Sky from the forests of vacuum cleaner. A hit. got his inspiriation the movies Return of the Jedi and Naibmoloc. Dune. To defend the Harvesters,  GRAPHICS Remember the Jedi scene gun towers were built around  SOUND VALUE where the the flying motorthe sector being cleared, and a PLAYABILITY cycles hurtle through the trees? s2 squad of ruthless Sky Bikers, That really sums the game's V An excellent and entertaining follow-up to Ace. action sequences. The story is about inter-planetary drugbusting. PAUSE SWIMWER POWER SXYBIKE The setting is the 24th FUEL PRESSED SKVBIKE Century. Street corner drug BLASTER SNVBUS:E pushers are a thing of the past. All was joy. Life goes on, spreading throughout the galaxy. The rich get richer and poor get poorer — and angry. And when people get angry trouble can occur. Some governments took to introducing control drugs into the water supply. After a 20 year experiment, the programme had reduced both crime AND production. Everybody faced economic ruin, until the discovery, and settlement of Vega 3, named Naibmoloc. "


"STARGLIDER PROGRAM OF THE YEAR Popular Computing Weekly 'One of the finest games ever' Crash Smash 'The ultimate in blasters'. Amtix Accolade 'The best 3D line graphic game ever Sinclair User Classic 'Best arcade shoot 'em up with vector graphics' Commodore User Screen Star 'The gameplay is out of this world' Amstrad Action Mastergame 'Stands cockpit and laser gun above previous 3D games' Your Sinclair Megagame SENT TO CONQUER MACHINE VERSUS MAN Air to air and air to ground combat flight simulation Defeat the elusive Starglider in an amazing all-action combat flight simulation. The planet Novenia has been devastated by an evil tide of invading Egrons; single-handed, you must wipe out the enemy in explosive one-to-one combat. Swooping down with lasers blazing, you'll need to take fast evasive action to avoid the barrage of enemy missiles. Exhilarating low-level attack and defence flight manoeuvres, coupled with a cunning strategic element, make STARGLIDER a classic among classics. Spectrum 48/128 cassette CBM 64/128 cassette Amstrad CPC cassette CBM 64/128 disc .95 .95 .95 Amstrad CPC disc Energy towers lie dead ahead defended by heavily armed Egron battle tanks A Stomper and Walker close in. Laser fire is futile against these metal monsters The Walker attacks. Bank your craft to evade the lasers and prepare to fire RAINEIRD Missile launched! Steer your TVguided missile on target to annihilate the invader The Starglider swoops in to attack. Several direct hits are needed to destroy it A special mission. A devastating super missile has been located in the ruins of Novenia Rainbird Software, Wellington House, -Upper St Martins Lane, London WC2H 9DL Tel: 01-240 8838 Rainbird Software is a division of British Telecommunications plc Screenshots taken from Spectrum 48/128 version "


"C+VG . KNORR O DROID A Blood 'n' Guts is a humorous and well presented game. MACHINE: C64  SUPPLIER: AMERICAN ACTION PRICE: .95 (tape) .95 (disc) REVIEWER: TIM With a name like Blood 'n Guts you'd expect this game to be really nasty lots of dripping gore and stuff like that. But no. The violence is all a bit jokey in this barbarian equivalent of Summer Games. There are ten \"events\" in the ancient decathlon. You can play the computer or a friend. Take on the character of a muscle Blood have to fight with a club and knock your opponent off the log. Another pretty simple game this except the two figures are a bit small. Cat Throwing is a tasteless addition to the game. It's a discus style event in which you have to get your barbarian spinning and hit the fire button to throw the \"cat\" as far as possible. Mountain Walk is a tricky tight-rope walking game. You have to \"walk\" your barbarian over the rope using left/right movements on the stock to keep him upright. Axe Throwing is what it says it is. You and your opponent take turns at throwing axes at each other. The loser is the one who gets a sharp pain in the head! You can jump and duck the avoid the axes which come at you low or high-nothing in-between. It's only a matter of time before someone gets the chop. Arm Wrestling is a computer version of that old macho pub pastime. Except here it's difficult to tell what's going on as the action is viewed from above. More stick wiggling is required to move the arm. Lose, and a bird flies over and \"marks\" you as the instructions quaintly point out. The game is multi-load from tape or disc and our review copy worked perfectly with minumal delays between loading events. Blood 'n Guts looks good, is well presented — but the barbarians lack that all important grip factor to make you want to play. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY bound barbarian with a daft news is that to get a rating from name. Names like Nop, Knorr the judges you have to land on as in the soup Hawk and Dog. your head! One for Status Quo The option screen which fans this. displays these characters also in Rock Roller you have to roll includes their ages for some a rock up a slope-racing strange reason. against your opponent. Waggle The events are, in order, Tug the stick to take steps up the of War, Tower Jump, Rock slope. Like the Tower Jump this Roller, Beer Drinking, Human is a \"best of three\" event. Hit, Pole Fight, Cat Throwing (!), Beer Drinking is fun! You Mountain Walk, Axe Throwing have to help your barbarian and Arm Wrestling. All the drain his tankard before the events require a certain amount other guy. of Decathlon style joystick Next up is the Human Hit in wiggling. which you have to hit coloured Tug of War is self targets on a poor chap locked explanatory, wiggle the stick into a stocks in the quickest and pull the opponent into the time possible. A simple line up water. In Tower Jump you have the sight and fire game. to leap from the top of yes Pole Fight sees your you guessed it! a tower and barbarian sitting on a log jump as far as possible. The bad suspended over a chasm. You KNORR AXES 02 18 ONCO A Axe throwing! MACHINE: AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: THE EDGE PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: PETER ALITRO in the form of Infra-Class Beast floors, great pits that go down Mark 3 Robots, which look like seven levels, tleportation tiles, little red mushrooms. You don't one-way doors and horrid little stand a chance of finishing the skittering vellow things. some game until you learn how to of the many rooms are so program these little critters, and dangerous that I've been taking send them into the parts that the easy way out: dropping a other robots cannot reach. But bomb to clear the place then don't forget to carry a spare hiding until it explodes. battery! It's a good idea to go Extremely accurate into training mode and find out positioning before jumping is how to do this before you start often critical, and on this game the proper game. my joystick seemed far too The city is a wild and sensitive. You've only got to wonderful place, with electrified breathe on it to move one I'm not feeling very human these days. Every time Iload up a game I seem to be a robot, and frankly, I'm worried about what this will do to my mental health. It is not the first time I've found myself stuck in a city entirely populated by lethals who always seem to move faster than I do, and it's not the first time I've been given a very silly job to do. This time, somebody has carelessly left 16 very pretty, rainbow-coloured, rectangular crystals lying about in a variety of inaccessible situations, and I have to find and destroy them. The method of destruction is surprisingly crude for this hightech world: I drop things on them. I'm thinking of complaining to the Robot Union about job security, though. I've only got six lives, and I don't even get worker's compensation when I lose them, which is often. Without help I'd never manage, but the new slant in this game is that help is at hand, centimetre too far. In fact the game is tough going, and takes a long time to get into. It's a toss up whether you lose patience or gradually get involved, but once you do, you may well get hooked. Experienced arcade adventurers will probably reach this stage, but beginnners are likely to be put off. Visually, as in most of the Edge's games, it's a rather complicated and cubic 3-D. In fact the design is reminiscent of Ocean's Bat Man though I wish it had Bat Man's save facility. Some of the rooms are so elaborately decorated that the robot you conrol tends to merge with the background; it can be difficult to tell exactly where you are. The game requires a nice balance of thoughtfulness and dexterity from the player, but I have to say that the concept is a bit tired, even with the new elements of the programmable robots and the bombs. All in all it's packed with action and variety, but next time, please, can I be a human? GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY Palitron requires a blend of strategy and joystick dexterity "


"TRACKER TERRIFIC VALUE FOR MONEY 'Tracker could top the addiction charts... 10 out of 10 for sheer playability... terrific value for money' Commodore Computing International 'Controlling several craft at once will put your mind into warp mode' Computer Gamer 'Presentation is excellent Commodore User MISSION TERMINATE RENEGADE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE Tactical Remote Assault Corps VS Cycloid Al Resistance Tracker heralds a new dimension in strategic battle simulations. An intelligent life force has infiltrated the central computer on Zeugma IV causing the Cycloid police droids to run renegade. You must take simultaneous command of up to eight TRAC units which form a special TRAC force to intercept the Cycloids and regain control of the Centrepoint computer. Its fast pace and devious strategic challenges make Tracker the ultimate in artificially intelligent strategy games. CBM 64/128 cassette Sio 2016 S 6 jejejoje 0313 je ovo CBM 64/128 disc .95 .95 Cycloids swarm the Centrepoint complex to attack your Skimmer TRAC Squad A glance at the long range scanner shows four Cycloids homing in on your Skimmers Attack! Attack! A Cycloid rounds a bend. Blast it before it wipes you out lale 18Bele B lojalla.510 Olele 166 RALNBURD Don't shoot this one! A Skimmer exits the node that you're about to enter Back to the scanner, to work out the location of the nearest communication centre Drop a timebomb in the communication centre and get out before it explodes! Rainbird Software, Wellington House, Upper St. Martins Lane, London WC2H 9DL Tel: 01-240 8838 Rainbird Software is a division of British Telecommunications plc Screenshots taken from Commodore 64 version "


"MDO00 SHOHHO C+VG DET AGENT A Yet another budget winner from Mastertronic highway towards the mine where the Mad Prof is holding the President. You have to avoid lorries, cars and obstacles. Luckily your car can jump the hazards useful when you are faced with a rumbling tank. Once at the mine entrance, it's time to load in the next section which gives you the first chance to see what Agent X actually looks like. He's a trenchcoat clad chap with a trilby hat. This section is a bit like Wally goes underground our hero has to beat off the Mad Prof's minions and reach the door to his lab. Inside the lab Agent X whips out his trusty laser rifle and zaps away at objects being thrown at him by the prof. Shoot enough of these and you get a crack at the professor. Fail and it's back to the beginning again. If you zap the prof and save the president you have to fly him through tunnels and out to the top secret oil rig and safety. But there's still more to come! Agent X has to get back to the lab and destroy it for good. Nice graphics, reasonable sound and varied gameplay make Agent X a nice budget offering. The multi-load works well and is easy to use. Prompts appear on screen when it's time to load in the next bit. Might be a bit too easy after a couple of plays though—but terrific value none the less. And old Agent X could just become a bit of a cult like Magic Knight. He definitely should get another starring role in any event! WOW HHOFUROL MACHINE: SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: MASTERTRONIC PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: TIM Here's a nice multi-part arcade adventure style game from the budget masters. Agent X is a super spy character who has to track down the President who has been captured by a Mad Professor who aims to brainwash the President and get him to start World War IIT! Gaspo! The game begins with Agent Xin his car heading for the BOHIN SESTI GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY A Multi-part adventure that's well worth  outlay. MACHINE: BBC SUPPLIER: BUG-BYTE PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: NICKY E DUNJUNZ Then you go on loading the very lengthy tape until you are asked for the number of players. You can have up to four, taking the parts of the Ranger, the Magic-User, the Barbarian or the Warrior. They all have different attributes some can use magic, some have better armour than others and so on. Then you turn the tape over, rewind, and load again until level one (of 25) is in. If you succeed in level two, you run the tape on until level two is loaded, and so on. Fail and you have to run the tape back and reload level one. Phew! The game itself is ingenious. Each character has a quarter of the screen to himself in which he always appears as he moves around the complex. Naturally you frequently bump into the characters controlled by your fellow players. This does mean, however, that your playing area is uncomfortably small and it's sometimes hard to make out what's going on. With four players, it's also a fight for possession of the keyboard you each have a block of keys for your own use, but you inevitably get in each other's way. But once you've got used to these constraints, it's all good clean fun. The graphics are BugByte's favourite Mode two-type, rather blocky and crude, but the action is reasonably smooth and fast. Shock horror! Mackscrane, the Great Demon of Supreme Evilness (a pretty comprehensive title) has stolen the Chalice of Binding, and stashed it away in the Dunjunz complex. Four heroes have been appointed to penetrate this vastness and win it back, collecting whatever treasure they can along the way. Features to add interest include teleporters, food to increase a character's health rating, magic swords and helmets, boots to make you move at twice the speed, healing potions, keys, trapdoors and more. This is a vast game, a very meaty package for the price, which is really too vast to store conveniently on tape. Loading and playing it each time is a drag. You first have to load the opening screen, a very flashy digitized portrait of a sinister character one assumes to be Mackscrane himself. DUNGEON  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY N/A Loading Dungeon4 00 OO "


"Donkey E Kong $12 H ELP! 003800 L=0 EDW13 4700 A Ocean are obviously hard-up for some original software ...  MACHINE: CBM64+128/ should be left to Rest in Peace. SPECTRUM/AMSTRAD Kong games, are older than the  SUPPLIER: OCEAN 64, and that's saying PRICE: .95 (CBM/Amstrad)/ something! .95 (Spectrum) VERSION TESTED: CBM64 As if that wasn't bad enough, REVIEWER: CHRIS on tracing Ocean roots, discovered that one of their first Good Grief! I don't believe it, games on the Spectrum was a after all Tony Takoushi said Kong game. Just because it about the games industry, sold well in 1983, doesn't mean Ocean has the gall to release a it'll do well today. Kong game. Well! Now, I always have to do this. Yes folks, it's true. Ocean, one For those of you who don't of the biggest and best software know what kong game is, I will houses, has dug up a game that tell you. In the game you play a guy along. If anyone dies on this called Mario, who has a very sheet, shame! difficult task ahead of him. He Screen three is slightly must rescue his girlfriend from harder, consisting of more the clutches of a terrible ogre ladders and platforms. It also Kong! has lifts and fireballs. And just Kong is not so daft, and with to make it interesting, Kong captive in hand proceeds to now throws steel girders! climb a very tall building. You Screen four is the last one must follow Kong, using and Kong is now at the top various Platforms and ladders getting a little bit worried. Your to help you on your heroic way. task on this screen is to remove Should you reach your girl, the locking pins from the Kong grabs her and climbs even scaffolding, making Kong fall to higher up the building. So again the ground. you follow. While this is all happening, Kong can go up three times, the graphics are faithful to the which means there are four original arcade, if a bit small. screens. The first is pretty I don't know why Ocean straight forward, but can be a released such a game, but if you little difficult if you get too are looking for a good Kong many barrels chasing you. game on the 64, try another Barrels? I forgot to mention that Ocean release Kong Strikes Back. in all kong games, that nasty ape will throw barrels at you. GRAPHICS Just for fun you understand. SOUND Screen two is so simple, it's a VALUE crime. This is a Pie factory PLAYABILITY where conveyer belts move you Ravenskull crucifix. MACHINE: BBC Of course, should you see any Repton, though. You can carry SUPPLIER: SUPERIOR treasure that might happen to up to three objects and use PRICE: $11.95 (disk) REVIEWER: NICKY be lying around, no reason why them open a door with a key you shouldn't have that too.... bash a wall down with a The Baron's castle is strongly pickaxe, and so on. Apart from You are the village of reminiscent of the tortuous the treasure, there are loads of Austburg's last hope. No, don't maze in Repton, but none the things to pick up, including run away... you see, there are worse for that. Like Repton, dynamite, scythes, bows and these zombies in the swamp, there are puzzles to solve, arrows, food, scrolls and and unless you can retrieve the creepy-crawlies to dodge potions. silver crucifix stolen by rotten (Ravensbees), things to avoid Trouble is, not all of these old Baron Strieg, said zombies (acid pools, man-eating plants things are necessarily helpful will engulf the village. and so on) and things to pick some of the scrolls are So off you go, in the guise of up. Also like Repton, the game obstructive, if not downright warrior, adventurer, elf or is difficult, frustrating and lethal, for example. It takes a lot wizard, to explore the four totally addictive. of time, persistence and luck to levels of the Baron's cstle, You can do more in work out how to put everything seeking out the pieces of the Ravenskull than you can in to good use in order to clear each level. After a brilliant opening screen, the graphics are a bit disappointing, perhaps because the game looks so much like Repton and there have been three Reptons! The jolly background tune gets a bit wearing after a while, too. But the scrolling's smooth, as we have come to expect, and the whole thing is well put together and presented. If you enjoyed Repton, you'll enjoy GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE  PLAYABILITY NOO "


"P+VG E HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER ENC taken to Zone Zero to complete Each zone has different your mission. hazards and obstacles to Your five Vortons are overcome and each needs a vulnerable to alien attack and different strategy. can be destroyed in any number Some problems demand of horrible ways. You'll need to forward-or is backward? work out a strategy to succeed thinking as you have to bring in this highway patrol. objects from one zone into Fortunately for you, C+VG another in order to move printed a players guide to forward. That's where that Highway Encounter complete players guide comes in useful! with map way back in Each Vorton is equipped with December '85 — so check out a blasterbut only the lead those back issues. Vorton is under your control You guide the Vortons — who and he's the only one that can push the Lasertron in front of blast things and help the others them — through the infested beat the aliens. Zones of the alien highway. You'll need as many Vortons MACHINE: C64  SUPPLIER: GREMLIN GRAPHICS/VORTEX PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: TIM as you can help survive to complete the trip to Zone Zero but early patrols will see you losing these cute little robots with monotonous regularity. But unlike some games, the challenge keeps your interest and you won't rest until you've actually seen Zone Zero with your own eyes. A demo option allows you to see the zones up to the final one without playing this allows you to work out a strategy because you know what's coming. Graphics are simple but very effective. And although the game uses a screen flipping technique instead of scrolling, there aren't any horrible waits between screens, as in games like Tarzan for instance. Sounds are good and as I've already said the game is extremely addictive. Want to get the new games playing year off to a good start? Then take a trip on the alien highway you won't regret paying the fare.. And remember you only have to write in and send a pound to get the back issue. It's been a long, long wait. But it's been worth it! The conversion of Vortex's classic Highway for the 64 looks good and plays even better. In case you didn't see the Amstrad/Spectrum original here's a brief rundown of the plot. Aliens have invaded earth. There's only one road left to travel, before they reach their final goal — total world domination. Your mission is to halt their advance and destroy their alien stronghold in Zone Zero. Under your control are five Vortans. And the Lasertron the world's most advanced weapon system, which must be ZONE POWER SCORE 00 GRAPHICS SOUND HIGH BEDODO it ES THEY STOLE A MILLION MACHINES: SPECTRUMI AMSTRAD C64/128 SUPPLIER: ARIOLASOFT PRICE: .95 (SPECTRUM) .95 (C64/AMSTRAD) VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM REVIEWER: BRIAN \"OK John, I want you to climb in through the window and switch off the alarm so you can let Jim in. After that I want you to let Jim into the office to blow the safe. While Jim is working on the safe you can empty out the cabinets into the van. Jim. You'll have to work fast to get that lolly out of the safe and get away in time. \"I hope you two know what you're doing 'cos I want this to go right. Especially after the way you messed up the sweet shop caper!\" This is the way you're going to have to start thinking if you want to become a successful criminal in Ariolasoft's original and intriguing offering They Stole a Million. If you've watched and enjoyed things like Minder and The Sweeney and thought that you could outwit the police then this is the game for you. But Four criminal types make up You can check on each don't think it's going to turn you, the team plus a fence. The member of the team and leg-it if into a Great Train Robber computer keeps a check on your things look like there are about overnight! spending. to go reels-of cotton. The game comes in two parts. Once you are happy it's time If you succeed, the game In the first you decide what job to load-up part two. This is gives you the option to save you're going to attempt and where you plan the robbery and your winning team and go back who you're going to use in your stage it. to try another job. team. You use the Crimenet The planning stage involves The graphics are pretty good database, which comes giving each member of your lots of nice pop up windows complete with S.W.A.G. team a route or track through in the planning stage. The Software for Aspiring the building plus his tasks. You actual robbery screens are a bit Gangsters! It's a sort of must make sure that they don't sparse and could have Compunet for the Arthur get in each others' way and that benefited from a few more Daley's of this world.. every action is timed correctly graphic frills. There's a nice All this costs money — and down to the last split second. intro tune as well. you've only got a ,000 This section is all icon They Stole a Million is an budge to play with. ONLY? controlled and you can preview original and entertaining game The blueprints of your chosen and edit all the team members for strategists and arcade target there are five in all — moves. Once you are happy adventurers alike. come free but you have to buy that Fingers isn't going to bump You'll have to think about details on the alarm system and into Scarface at a crucial point what you're doing and spend what loot is hidden away. Then in the operation and that Adamsome time setting things up. you have to sign up the villains Prost (!) the \"wheels\" man is But don't you just love it when a for your own special A-team. ready for a quick getaway you plan comes together? You can access the files of 18 can hit the button that puts \"OK, OK. Stop rabbiting and top criminals. Each old lag has a everything into operation. It's a lets get on with the job, John. special skill which you may good idea to check every move You know every second counts need. You also have to select a thoroughly before you go for it! in this business!\" \"fence\". No, not something that As the boss you get the goes around your front garden, lookout job. If the cops cruise GRAPHICS stupid. He's the guy who gets past in their panda car you can SOUND  VALUE rid of your ill-gotten gains for freeze the action until it's safe to > PLAYABILITY you if the raid is successful. proceed again. NO) SS "


"FOR A GREAT COMPETITION! MONTH'S C+VG SEE NEXT : TERROR \"It is a strange craft that Icontrol. The task before me is colossal, the dangers immense. The loch awaits...\" MIRROR V Soft OUT NOW ON COMMODORE 64/128 .95 tape/.95 disk OUT IN MARCH ON SPECTRUM & AMSTRAD Maxwell House, 74 Worship Street, London EC2A 2EN Tel: 01-377 4645 "


"GVC 23 ONE YEAR ONE YEAR AFTER REVIEWS planes which will fly like a bat out of hell towards you. When you finally reach the end, apparently stage 999, you must destroy Admiral Yamoto once and for all. Your plane, a P-38 Lightning Fighter, has the ability to perform these rolls. These are useful for getting out of sticky situations were your trapped by bullets. You can get extra stuff by collecting PoW signs. Well I think you have to collect them. Everytime I thought I'd got one, then there are other large grey I exploded. So do you really planes. have to pick them up? Also you Oh, I mustn't forget the small only have a certain amount of white enemy plane which turns time to grab them and, on top of into a PoW sign when shot. all that, if your not careful you These planes fly out of control can shoot them! and mainly come to rest on Your plane, as it flys up the your wings, so watch out. screen, is very small and fires This game apparently has six missiles at the rate of one per hours of scrolling backdrops, hour. Maybe this is a slight but don't get excited. It exaggeration but when you see probably has the same amount how slow the game is you'll as 1942, but the scrolling is so understand. slow that it takes six hours to Enemy aircraft are mostly reach the end. small black planes which look With terrible graphics, naff more like half-defined sound and too slow gameplay, characters than sprites, and this game 'One year after' should be '13 Million years before'. Or at least the programming skills were. One of the worst games! have ever played. MACHINE: C64  SUPPLIER: ACTION PRICE: .95 > REVIEWER: CHRIS > GRAPHICS After reviewing 1942, the Ed gave me this one, thinking it was the sequel. Thank God, it's not! 1942 is a very playable, addictive game, with good sound and graphics. 1943 has none of these qualities. It's just a very poor imitation. To give an example of what! mean, take the backdrops. On '42 they scroll smooth, fast, and seem to vary. On '43 they are small and scroll very slowly across the screen. Anyway, the plot for 43 goes like this: Destroy the enemy vo PLAYABILITY ONE YEAR AFTER Gre Graphics  MACHINE: ATARI SUPPLIER: RED RAT  REVIEWER: BRIAN WEBBER SCREAMING WINGS If you are a fan of the arcade game 1942 and you think yourself unlucky in owning an Atari, then you want to rush out and buy this as soon as you have finished reading this review. Screaming Wings is based upon 1942 and turns out to be one of the better Atari Right, let's get on with the games that are on the market. review. The graphics may be a Atari usually gets left out when little bit simpler but I have not it comes to software but Red seen a lot better on the Atari Rat are changing that. They yet. The planes are small and have released eight games over the animation has been well the Christmas period and are designed. Some of the planes continuing to do so. that you have to destroy are Not only are the releasing the bombers which take a hell of a software but it is good quality hammering to destroy. In later as well. Let's hope that other stages some of the enemy do firms will take notice and realise not look like planes but do not that the Atari is one of the best be deceived, they require as computers around and needs a much shooting as a bomber little bit of support. does. use any of these loops and complete the stage then you are given a bonus of 1000 points for each loop left. The sound effects during the game are good except for the annoying background music. The music must be the simplest tune to have to write for any computer and just gets on your nerves after a while. Luckily an option has been included to turn the music off. The high score table has been limited to one entry so if you have competitions with friends you are constantly writing the scores down. Overall this has to be a must for any Atari user out there, just a shame about the music really. One tip for the game is to stay on the right hand side of the bomber as he is always firing from his left side. Now you've read the review you can rush out and buy it. Some planes that you shoot can give you extra fire power or a bonus, the extra fire is more valuable. At 10,000 points you are given an extra life to continue your mission. The scrolling is very smooth with some nice background graphics to go by from time to time. You are able to perform a loop three times to help you getting out of a little bit of bother, but you have to press the space-bar for these so it is unlikely that you will have time to. If you do not  GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY 36 "


"The KONIX SPEEDKING packs more punch. That's why it's fast overtaking ordinary joysticks to become one of the world's most popular hand control. As it's name suggests it's built for fast handling to give you lightening fast control. Micro switches await your slightest movement, on -ZAP, POW, SPLAT, BLAMgiving you instar standards, the KNIXSPEEDKING comes with a twelve month guarantee. Available for:Spectrum and Spectrum Plus, Commodore 64. 128 Vic20. All Atari Computers, Electron, M.S.X. ad and Oricat.99. modore C18, Plus 4, and Dragon at .99. uiries Contact Or Sandh on 04952559 reactions to every com made to the very Please send Te Speedkings at  Price includes postage and packing in the u.K.Overseas orders please send .50 per Speedking.) Computer make and model lenclose a Cheque/Postal Order for. made payable to KONIX Please charge my Access/isa No. ard holders can telephone on 049525 913 Senate Postcode elepnO Send to Konlx Computer Produ units. Sirhow "


"* ** * 000000 TEE GIO GOYANG then on's it's into a winter wonderland of delights. Great fun. Amstrad Spectrum GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE > PLAYABLITY THUNDERSTRUCK THAI BOXING MACHINE: AMSTRAD 484/664 AND 6126 TAPE OR DISK SUPPLIER: ANCO PRICE: .95 VERSION TESTED:AMSTRAD TAPE REVIEWER DAVID   FROST-BYTE ELEVATOR ACTION directly after Otto has just been In The Last of the Free, the into a red room. hero is Clement the Ordanoid On the Spectrum, Elevator Droid, who is the last of his kind Action was good fun to play but his companions have been graphically it's not stunning and wiped out by the aggressive if it were cheaper, probably and defective Proleoids. worth buying. Unknown to their human Overall Elevator Action is fun creators back on Earth, the of the mindless variety but as Proleoids are now running such succeeds in as much as amok, and it's up to Clement to you keep wanting to go back for get back and warn them. just one more try. As in Thunderstruck, the hero can run, jump and pick up and Amstrad/Spectrum use objects (using the same GRAPHICS SOUND keys play one game and VALUE you've virtually learned the PLAYABILTY other). There are puzzles to solve, distributed throughout the 55 different screens, and aliens to avoid. But there are enough MACHINE: BBC/ELECTRON SUPPLIER: AUDIOGENIC differences to make the Last of PRICE: (.95) the Free a different game. There VERSION TESTED: BBC is much more emphasis on REVIEWER NICKY arcade action the pace is considerably more frenetic, the Thunderstruck is an arcade screens much livelier and more SC 000000 A 000000 adventure game with puzzles. busy, with moving platforms, Spreco, the Space Refuse electric currents, ladders, and Collector, has fallen foul of a loads of Proleoids scurrying freak timestorm and wound up about. it's played as a much in a weirdo medieval castle, faster speed and requires fast complete with suits of armour, reflexes as well as wits. assorted weaponry on the GRAPHICS walls, and a lift. Alift? Well, SOUND maybe it's not so medieval. VALUE There are 100 screens to be PLAYABILITY explored and various puzzles to be solved before he can get out, not to mention assorted objects to be picked up and used, and a MACHINE: SPECTRUM/ selection of nasties to dodge. AMSTRAD/COMMODORE There are also eight SUPPLIER: MIKRO-GEN characters, including a King, a PRICE: .95 (.95 AMSTRAD Queen, a Wizard and a DISC) MACHINE: AMSTRAD Revolting Hag, who may or may REVIEWER: PAUL SUPPLIER: QUICKSILVA not help you out. Depends if I'm suffering from Frost-Byte. PRICE: .95 you can offer them something It's a chiller thriller for cool VERSION TESTED: AMSTRADI SPECTRUM they want. Wonder who needs dudes. REVIEWER: DAVID the skin cream? Must be the Don't be put off by the awful Hag... advertisement or the cassette Is no coin-op aloud to Rest In The objects tend to be the cover, this is a great game. Peace without being dug up, familiar kindanlit candles, I have never been a great fan dusted down, and converted to various keys, you know the sort of Mikro-Gen's seemingly the computer? Apparently not. of thing. But the scenario is never-ending series of Wally This time it's Taito's Elevator more atmospheric than most, games so I wasn't particularly Action, and the software house problems are reasonably overjoyed at the prospect of responsible is Quicksilva. demanding How to light that Frost-Byte. Wrong. There's The game involves you unlit candle, for instance. nothing Wallyish about this. guiding secret agent Otto There seem to be occasional This is an extremely through successive high rise glitches in the program if you enjoyable and addictive game. buildings, investigating every jump high enough by the well, Not devastatingly original but room with a red door en route. another location appears briefly nevertheless well put together, Of course, nothing in this on the screen. graphically tasty and well worth world is easy, and just to prove There's enough here to keep the time of day on a winter's it, all the buildings are crawling you amused indefinitely, and night. with gangsters who are hell the graphics are smoother than The game stars a slinky bent on bringing your spying most. spring-like creature called career to an abrupt end. Hickey, who is apparently a Each building is viewed from GRAPHICS Kreezer whose fellow creatures the side, up to four stories can SOUND are held captive deep within the VALUE be seen at once. Each floor has PLAYABLITY planet Cosima. up to six rooms, shown by blue Hickey has escaped and must or red doors. The gangsters free five other Kreezers. He seem to have booked almost must work his way through the every blue room in the place as perilous caverns, avoiding the they are continually poping out numerous monsters. into the landings trying to blow I found the game fiendisly Otto's block off. MACHINE: BBC/ELECTRON difficult to get into. Completing Although a little dated,  SUPPLIER: AUDIOGENIC the first screen is fairly Elevator Action on the Amstrad PRICE: (.95) straightforward but I became VERSION TESTED: BBC has some nice touches and an REVIEWER NICKY stuck on the second for ages. addictive sondtrack. The Hickey enters this screen graphics, while not stunning, The Last of the Free is the work from the bottom left hand are effective and work well for of the author of Thunderstruck, corner. A fearsome snowman the game. Gameplay is good released at the same time, and stands guard, protected by a except for a frustrating two to it shows. Someone has saved lethal drip which drops from the three second period when themselves a lot of cavern roof. It took literally ages joystick control is suspended programming time. for me to beat this drip. From The games software industry is often alarmingly leechlike in its inability to let go of a subject once in it's grasp. So here is yet another martial arts game. This time Thai Boxing which combines the speed of the karate black belt with the brute strength of the boxer. Although the blurb on the box would have you believe otherwise \"eight levels with superbly detailed backdrops\" there are in fact four different backdrops, each of which is used for two skill levels. The graphics are in four colour mode and possess a kind of rugged, back street quality, which may well reflect the type of individual who indulges in this \"sport\". Thai Boxing features the usual kick, punch-block types moves but the quality of sprite animation falls far short of the Amstrad version of Fist for example, There are, though, some nice touches including a more \"3D\" approach to a combat game where you can stand directly behind or in front of your opponent rather than just to either side. You can also graphically see the facial damage being inflicted on each player as bruises and then blood start to appear to close-ups of their faces shown at the top of the screen. Each players stamina is shown as a scrolling bar at the top of the screen and you lose if your stamina decreases to zero, but for an eight level game, level one is surprisingly difficult which may stop many players wanting, or being able to reach even levels two and three. Despite having good atmospheric backdrops, Thai Boxing is let down by poor animation and sound. THE LAST OF THE FREE GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY "


"SpecDrum Digital Drum system for the Spectrum 48K/128K/+2 Sweet Talker Compatible with Interface & ll and Spectrum 16K, 48K, 128K, +2. Mega-Sound For 48K Spectrum and ZX Spectrum+. Achieve amazing sound capabilities that your Spectrum has been lacking. Complete with cassette and full instructions. Spectrum Joystick Interface For Spectrum 48K/128K/+2. Accepts any Atari style joystick including Cheetah 125+, Mach 1+. For Kempston ** Compatability Sosbe .95 .95 .95 \\ IIIIIIIIIIII Midi Interface Cassette/Data Recorder .75 TILITZ77, MK5 Midi Keyboard Sound Sampler 17-5 KHz Bandwidth War INTUITIT Mitinerface High quality cassette/data recorders for your home computer will allow easy loading of even the most stubborn programs. TE A full size 5 octave polyphonic keyboard containing a sophisticated and very powerful computer, suitable for a wide range of uses Compatible with Spectrum 48K, 128K, +2. Compatible with Spectrum 48K, 128K, +2. .95 .95 .95 W, .95 Peripheral Power Mach I+ Joystick Action Transmitter W. Connector for 5 JE Probably the best Joystick in the world.  Auto Fire  Metal Shaft . +2 Selector Connector . 12 Month warranty. 125+ Joystick  4 extremely sensitive fire buttons  Auto fire switch . +2 Selector connector  Uniquely styled hand grip  12 Month warranty. R.A.T. Remote Action Transmitter Infra Red transmission Touch control . No extra software required 2. Compatible with all Sinclair/Cheetah peripherals via the rear edge connector. +2 Selector Connector Sinclair Joystick Adaptor for connecting ZX Spectrum +2 computers to most joysticks including Cheetah 125 and Mach I .95 .95 .99 .95 ZUITITILLITIIIIII Spectrum 128/ +2|| Split Extension to Midi Lead Connector HAH 56 Way Extension Connector Cheetah's 6\" long extension cable enables Spectrum peripherals to be distanced from your computer. Aerial Splitter Cheetah's neat splitter unit complete with self-adhesive pad allows you to keep your T.V. and computer aerial leads plugged in without disturbing the picture. Midi control lead for Spectrum 128K/+2 computer. Enables 2 Spectrum peripherals to be connected to the computer bus. 7 .95 .25 .75 | .99 Prices include VAT, postage & packing. Delivery normally 14 days Export orders at no extra cost. Dealer enquiries welcome. Cheetah, products available from branches of Dixons John Menzies WHSMITH High St Stores and all good computer shops .. Mar Dept CVG1 CHEETAH MARKETING LTD. 1 WILLOWBROOK SCIENCE PARK CRICKHOWELL ROAD, St. MELLONS, CARDIFF Tel: CARDIFF (0222) 777337 Telex: 497455 FAX: 0222 779404 "


"GVG COMPETITION DUNIUNZ DUNJUNZ COMPETITION Name: Age: Address: Down in the Dunjunz dirty deeds are being done. Evil tries to conquer good as the heroes battle it ont with the villians. The corrupt soul behind these devilish doings is Mackscrane, the Great Demon of Supreme Evilness. His main crime has been the theft of the Chalice of Binding, now hidden in the Dunjunz complex. Four heroes have been sent into this complex to win back the chalice. Each has special skills -Magic-User, Barbarian, Ranger and Warrior. Now in a special competition, C+VG and Bug-Byte want to send you into the Dunjunz with these heroes. You can do this by winning one of 50 copies of this BBC game. All you have to do is draw or paint your top hero. It could be an actor, singer, computer character or even programmer. Send your entry together with the coupon to Dunjunz Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is March 16th and the Dunjunz Master's decision is final. C+VG COMPETITION cosmic shock abs ot Killer carrots with machine guns can cause quite a shock to the system. Bouncing balls which attack you are no less disconcerting. Only a fourth division superhero could cope with this Cosmic Shock Absorber. Sounds weird? Blame Martech. These crazy ideas are featured in their new 3D shoot 'em up, written by Chris Frayer. And Martech do not see why you shouldn't share in this madness. So we present our crazy Cosmic Shock Absorber Competition. What we want you to do is draw or paint what you think a fourth division superhero looks like. Now for the prizes. Top prize is a trip for two to Combat Zone, the outdoor war and strategy team game. It's great fun and the C+VG team have been twice. To go you must be over 18. Thirty runners-up will receive copies of the game which is available on Amstrad (cassette and disk), Spectrum, Commodore (cassette and disk) and MSX. Send your entry together with the printed coupon to Cosmic Shock Absorber Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. The closing date is March 16th and our very own fourth division superhero (the Ed, to you) has the final say. 1963) Cosmic Shock Absorber Name: Age: Address: My computer is: "


"ALL SOFTWARE CHECKED Som l ed to one only per cust FREE large (100 disk capacity) lockable disk storage box worth .95 When you buy 25 disks for only .95 including postage and VAT! Maros Computers Ltd 42 Market St, Longton, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffs Tel: 0782 319144 COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD, MSX, ACORN, HOME and BUSINESS 30% DISCOUNT e.g. 9.95 will be 6.95 7.95 will be 5.50 ANY ENQURIES PLEASE PHONE. SEND SAE FOR FULL LIST *Apologies to people waiting for \"Fight Night\" and \"The Artist\". THIS MONTH'S LIMITED OFFERS OUR R.R.P. PRICE Dragons Skulle (64) 9.95 1.99 Combat Leader (C64) 14.95 2.99 Football Manager (C64) 9.95 Football Manager (48) 9.95 5.95 Superman (48) 8.95 3.50 Alien 8 (Amst) 9.95 1.99 Football Manager (Amst) 9.95 5.95 Drelbs (Atari) 9.95 1.99 Fort Apocalypse (Atari) 9.95 1.99 Football Manager (Atari) 9.95 5.95 Gun Fright (MSX) 9.95 1.99 Trivial Pursuits (C64, Amst, 48) 14.95 9.50 Eureka (C64) 14.95 1.99 Super Huey (C64) 9.95 Pole Position (Spec) 7.95 2.99 Battle of Britain (Amst. disc) 12.95 3.99 Beach-Head 2 (Spec.) 7.95 2.99 Battle of Britain (Spec.) 7.95 1.99 World Cup Football (spec. C64) 1.99 Tau Ceti (Spec) 2.99 Tasword 2 (Spec) 2.99 Mouse/Cheese (C64) 54.00 26.00 Incl. p+p Head cleaners 50p with any purchase while stocks last. All MSX Cartridges .99 Disks are high quality 51/4' Double Sided/ Double density. Add 15% if you want quadruple density. Nebulae, Dept MF, FREEPOST, Kilroot Park 7 Day Delivery, Industrial Estates, Carrickfergus, Co Antrim, One year guarantee, BT38 7BR TEL (09603) 65020 & 14 day money back period. We accept orders from all government bodies, schools, universities, PLC's etc. We despatch on receipt of an offical purchase order. 5.95 14.50 4.50 5.50 8895 BEST BYTE SOFTWARE SPECIAL OFFERS TO C+VG READERS SPECTRUM RRP OUR COMMODORE 64 TAPE DISK AMSTRAD TAPE Ace 9.95 6.70 Championship Wrestling 6.70 10.75 Art Studio 6128 Battle of the Planets 9.95 4.95 Dragons Lair or II 6.70 10.15 Battle of the Planets 4.95 Brax Bluff 7.95 2.95 Elite's Hit Pak 6.70 10.75 Dun-darach 4.25 Chequered flag 7.95 2.95 Fight Night 5.50 Elite 10.75 Durells Big 4 9.95 6.70 Five Star Games 6.70 10.75 Football Manager Elite 14.95 10.75 Gauntlet 6.70 10.75 Graphics ADV. Creator Elite Hit Pak 9.95 6.70 Gunship 10.75 14.50 International karate Five Star Games 9.95 6.70 Hits 10 Volume 3 6.70 10.75 Jewels of Darkness Gauntlet 8.99 6.35 Konamis Coin Op Hits Lords of Midnight Gift from the Gods 9.95 2.95 Leaderboard Machine Code Tutor Hits 10 Volumes 3 9.95 6.70 Lords of Midnight Mar Sport Impossabali 7.95 5.45 Master of the Lamps 3.50 Mermaid Madness International karate 7.95 3.50 Nemesis 6.35 10.75 Pyraword 10.75 Jasper 7.95 2.95 Now Games 1 or 2 5.50 Silicon Dream 10.75 Kat Trap 6.35 Paperboy 10.75 Split Personalities 3.50 Konami's Coin Op Hits 6.70 Red Max 6.70 10.75 Star Glider 10.75 Leaderboard 8.95 6.35 Rolands Rat Race Starion 5.50 Nemesis 5.45 Silicon Dreams 2.75 14.50 The Young Ones 4.95 N.O.M.A.D. 2.95 Sky Runner 6.70 10.75 Trivial Pursuits 10.75 Now Games 1 or 2 5.50 Sold a Million 1.11.111 6.70 10.75 Paperboy 5.45 Space Harrier 6.70 10.75 HARDWARE RRP Sold a Million 1,11,111 9.95 6.70 Split Personalities 3.50 Amstrad 6128 colour 399.00 Space Harrier 7.95 5.45 Star Games 6.70 10.75 Atari 520 STM 259.95 Split Personalities 7.95 3.50 Staff of Kamath 4.50 Atari 520 STEM 399.95 Star Games One 9.95 6.70 Star Glider 10.75 14.50 Atari 1040 STF System 699.95 Star Glider 14.95 10.70 Stole a Million 6.70 10.75 3\" discs (per 10) 40.00 Super Soccer 7.95 5.45 Super Sunday 6.70 9.50 Music Machine (Spc/Ams) 49.95 Tir Na Nog 9.95 3.50 10th Frame 6.70 10.75 Music Machine (Ams disc) 59.95 Top Gun 7.95 5.45 Last Ninja 6.70 10.75 Cheetah Mach 1 + 14.95 Trivial Pursuits 14.95 10.75 Trivial Pursuits 10.75 14.50 Konix Speedking 12.99 Twister 7.95 3.50 World Series Baseball 4.25 Quickshot II + 12.95 All items include 1st class postage. Fast despatch. Send S.A.E. for full list. Up to 75% off Software and books. Overseas orders add .00 per item. Send cheques/P.O.'s to:Best Byte (Dept C), 104 Elmshurst Gardens, Tonbridge TN10 302 *181938 111881118 8.95 6.70 1 9.95 2.95 195 7.95 8.95 7.95 OUR 365.00 235.00 359.00 525.00 29.00 44.50 53.95 12.95 11.95 9.95 Prices incl P&P. please allow 10 days delivery, Overseas add 75p per cartridge Cheques Postal Orders made payable to: Maros Computers Ltd Credit card phone orders welcome VISA HARDBALL TAPPER Hardball Soft 06063/07063 (Keyboard or Joystick) Tapper Soft 06007/07007 (Keyboardor Joystick) L? + STEAL 2nd OUT 11HNING O 20225 STEAL HOME UTSI TORO BONY AMSTRAD For your CPC6128/464 Hardball puts you in the field as both player and manager with control of physical play and strategic decisions, testing your split second reactions and your planned approach to the game. You are the frenzied bartender trying to keep the never ending flow of thirsty customers well watered. Keep the sodas coming, but not too fast. Send coupon to: Marketing Dept. Amstrad Consumer Electronics Plc, Brentwood House, 169 Kings Road, Brentwood, Essex. CM14 4EF Order your copies now at only .95 on tape and .95 on disc Name Address ....................... Available from good Amstrad computer stockists. Or send coupon to Marketing Dept, Amstrad, Brentwood House, 169 King's Road, Brentwood. Essex. CM144EF. Postcode Tel. No. ....... AMSTRAD HARDBALL TAPE (06063) HARDBALL DISC (07063) TAPPER TAPE (06007) TAPPER DISC (07007) Brentwood House, 169 King's Road, Brentwood Essex. CM14 4EF. Tel. 0277 230222 (PLEASE DO NOT SEND ANY MONEY WITH THIS COUPON) CVG/3 "


"DDG0000000020D 00.000 2 LO000000000,00 ODDO OOOOOOOOOO PASSAPSRSRSRSRF28828928898.SERSEASE:8888888888888SSA KAISESSA ODOODOOL AERTER SER HERRER BERSERER REPRENDRESSER Fale BRASSERIE HITTERHESS Scooby Doo is proving to be a howling success. But it's no pushover to complete. You may even be in the doghouse because you've been spending so much time trying to crack it. Thanks to Elite, C+VG has got its paws on this excellent map of the game. It could lead you to success. HEHEHEHH SERATI DESEMBRE BEREIDEN TENERE ENEBEREITERHITEHERRSCHTER HOBB Basebna S alonas Scooby Doo. The first two are There are four levels in printed here. You don't expect us to do everything do you! The idea of Scooby Doo is quite simple. Scooby must rescue Shaggy, Velma, Daphne and Fred from the clutches of a mad professor. This cranky prof hides out in a weird castle infested with ghosts, monks, bats and other creepy, horrible and scary things. hidden in flasks. But to get to Scooby's pals have been them Scooby must overcome all these nasties. Elite has supplied these playing In a further fit of generosity, hints and tips to help you. you are sure of the screen layPlay the practice modes until outs. with Scooby punching. As soon To pass a door, stand by it as the ghost comes out of the door he will be killed. You then have plenty of time to dash past the door. No other ghost will come out for five seconds. ghosts can move up and down On later levels, when the levels and into holes, repeat this tactic beneath the holes and at the bottom of the stairs. But don't stand directly under the holes or on the stairs. Don't try and outrun the ghosts. Stop, turn round and kill them. If you get stuck in a tricky positon it also pays to follow this tactic. Not only will lots of nasties get killed but your score also increases. down holes on later levels. Don't be surprised if you fall Make sure you can jump holes D+VG MAP C+VG MAP "


"MAP C-IG MAP CAVG MAP Scooby  OO QO   S8828986 TES THE   DOOD OD  838885238SSSSSSS     U    OD  Oout «  OOOO nang  ages    Scooby do DO Hata ODDOOL       15   , HEMELTEHERA BERTESE55 without problems. It's very frustrating to lose lots of lives if you fall two or three levels. walk right up to them and then To jump skulls it's best to jump. With other methods you usually land on top of them. CHESTER SORG Sosy of "


"DIGITAL  INTEGRATION V ocea ACTIVISION Thermo de NEND The Gold G AMSON LINT RAMBO FIRST BLOOD PART II FIGHTER FOUR No.1 BLOCKBUSTERS in this NEW games compilation GHOSTBUSTERS 905 ULS GOLDE KUNGSFUL MASTER Featuring: ARIEL DOGFIGHTS JUNGLE COMBAT MARTIAL ARTS and of course. GHOSTBUSTING!! All in one special twin cassette pack for your COMMODORE SPECTRUM WOON JAMSTRAD ] KUNG-FU MASTER Ghostbusters is a trademark of Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc. ACTIVISION FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE DEALERS THE FINEST FROM THE BEST SPECTRUM .95 COMMODORE AMSTRAD CASSETTE DISK CASSETTE DISK .95 14.95 .95 14.95 SQUAD SQUAD "


"The word from the streets is that C16 games are still selling like hot cakes. C+VG's Hot GosROUND-UP as heated as his computer in this round-up of the good, the bad and the the ugly C16 games. I approached this C16 games feature expecting the worst, and boy I wasn't disappointed! ploughed my way through 18 games and came close to giving games and came close to giving up. The technical standard was OK but the game designs were OK but the game designs were generally bog-standard BORING. Before I delve into the games 1 need to say that I have written two games for the C16/Plus 4, Hyperforce and Starburst. I will not break one of my own rules and review them. All I will say is and review them. All I will say is that Hyperforce received 48 out of 50 points in Commodore User, and 8 out of 10 in CCI— the two main C16 mags. The general concensus on Starburst from mags is that it is better. C16 owners can decide for themselves... There are five games that stand out from the rest and these are Voidrunner, Speed King, Tombs of Tarrabash, Street Olympics and Matrix Laserzone. Voidrunner shows just what can be achieved on the C16. Great colours, VERY fast action and loads of different levels to work through. It's the follow up to Gridrunner and Matrix two of Mr Minter's classics. You control blasters on a grid with aliens coming at you every which way and then some! You have to take out those aliens'. Only one criticism of this game. It is two cluttered onscreen. The aliens are frequently lost in the backdrops. After a few games it was easier to spot them. But the basic problem still remains ... Speed King is a goody. It's a motorbike racing simulator and I expected this to be very crude and unplayable but I actually enjoyed playing it. Eat your words TAK! The graphics are good, sound grates a bit, but it IS playable. There's a choice of tracks for long term interest. For all my hang-ups with ladders and ramps I did enjoy Tombs of Tarrabash. It is L+R, pure and simple. The graphics are very good with a nice little jingle and sound effects. You have to work your way through four levels to free a princess (yawn). Each level is littered with puzzles to solve and guardians to shoot. I always say there is room for definitive versions of arcade classics and Street Olympics fits the bill perfectly for Konami's Hypersports. There are four events, 200 metres, 800 metre jog, long jump MPICS O SPEED KING O VOID RUNNE MATRIX O STREET OLY and putting the shot — a very wierd looking shot this, it may have been a brick! Very tasty graphics slick smooth scrolling backdrops and it plays quite well. If you want a sports-sim then go for this one. The last goody is Matrix and Laserzone, two of Jeff Minter's golden oldies. Both are good shoot 'em ups with Matrix standing out as the better of the two. They come on one tape and it's very good value for cash. In the six to two star ratings there is a mixed bag of poor to mediocre software. Finders Keepers goes back to ladders and ramps. You are trapped in a castle and have to collect as much loot as possible whilst avoiding the nasties. It has good graphics, horrible sound and reasonable playability, not brilliant. Pod is a classic shoot 'em up. You are on a grid with zillions of aliens attackng you from all sides. Sound familiar? You have to survive a time limit before advancing to the next round. This has good sound, reasonable graphics although playability was a bit iffy in places. My only real gripe with this was that it is a blatant rip-off of Gridrunner, even the character was virtually identical. BORING! Video Meanies is another L+R offering from Mastertronics. You have to move from room to room switching off videos the master of the house has left on. Graphics are fairly simple but neat on the eye, sound is commphy and it plays at a fair old pace. Again nothing special to draw you back. Auriga is a shoot 'em up with pretty colours and good sound. You control a ship on the bottom of the screen and move left and right shooting at aliens coming down the screen at you. After a couple of screens it gets unplayable. It's fun for a while Qo Qomam 0 on 000 WWTM0 JUMP THROH DISTANCE 9°HISESRE 3-888888 tri contRBE ; Rev SPEED MATRIX PLZ OO904 "


"ARAS POD LASER ZONE THR Imagine title called Jumpin' Jack. You have to work your way up the screen jumping from platform to platform to the top row where you switch on a series of lights. Very simple to play but absorbing and fun. At least the original was. Again, there were joystick/ keyboard problems and it was impossible to play properly. Why Mastertronic released the game Kane on the C16 is beyond me. It features two quite basic Wild West backdrops and you fire at birds flyng past with the aid of a cursor and then take on outlaws in a town. This is real crud stuff, boring, repetitive and totally mindless. Leaping Louie will have you leaping around wondering why you bought it! It is a platform game with poor graphics and playability. Less said the better. The final offering is Jailbreak from Bug-Byte. This is a copy of the grand-daddy of all videogames, Breakout. This version is jerky, dull and very boring. Keep away from this one. I'm sorry to be so negative on the vast majority of the games. I have looked at. BUT they really are so very poor. Software houses have released just about anything they can to make a killing. The good news is that 90 per cent of all C16 titles sell at .99 or .99. ARE 20000M, MASTER TRONICS IDEO MEANIES Rating 7 but lacks the grab factor. I enjoy a good game of Mr Do on my Colecovision and I quite look forward to playing Tutti Frutti on the C16. It is a close copy of the arcade original. From the demo it had quite a few screens to work through and it is very well presented. I had one slight problem with the game. The joystick would not move to the left of the screen. I changed joysticks and later reloaded the tape but still no change. So for those of you who like playing on half the screen, GO FOR IT! Winter Olympics! Could this challenge Street Olympics for the gold medal for C16 sports simulation? NO! It offers six events: Speed Skating, Ski-Jump, Cresta Run, Ski Slalom, Curling and, appropriately enough, Downhill. Barring the odd pretty backdrop this has very little to offer. Playability is virtually nonexistent and sound is poor. Steer clear of this one. International Karate was always going to be a let down after the superlative C64 version. The graphics are relatively poor and the animation on the characters is very slow and hard to distinguish/implement. Dirty Den conjured up pictures of the man himself doing dastardly deeds to his ever suffering wife Angie. No such luck. In fact this game has nothing to do with EastEnders and the title is misleading. It's good old L+R with you working your way through various rooms trying to find your fair maiden (yawn). Crude graphics, painful sound and bad playability. Buy this at your peril. Gremlin's Exellor 8 is a riping little maze game easily mapped in which you zap the baddies. Good Fun. Leaper is a copy of an old NA NA 7 O LEAPER RIWI Title Company Voidrunner Llamasoft Speed King Mastertronic Tarrabash Audiogenic Hyperforce Ariolasoft Starburst Ariolasoft Matrix Lazerzone Ariolasoft Street Olympics Mastertronic Finders Keepers Mastertronic Pod Mastertronic Video Meanies Mastertronic Auriga Players Tutti Futti Mastertronic Winter Olympics Tynesoft International Karate Endurance Dirty Den Probe Leaper Bug-Byte Kane Mastertronic Leapin' Louie Audiogenic Jailbreak Bug-Byte Myriad Atlantis Powerball Mastertronic Xcellor 8 Gremlin Spiky Harold Firebird Magician's Curse Gremmlin Cops 'n' Robbers Atlantis Aarduark Bug-Byte League Challenge Atlantis WWAAI Faulty ****** LEAPING LOUIE Faulty maum e n TEORE1000300 Faulty "


"! NATIONAL COMPUTER LIBRARY Hire Software Before You Buy It HIHIR YFREE 70% SU MO TU WE TH FR SA BESARE U UP TO \" 8O9 000 T FITTEL WATCH TO ANYONE TAKING OUT LIFE 8 DIGIT ALARM CALCULATOR R.R.P. ON SOFTWARE OVER 8,000 different titles available for hire for the COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, ELECTRON, BBC, AMSTRAD all models, ATARI, and MSX computers. ARCADE, ADVENTURE, EDUCATIONAL and BUSINESS software too. HIRE PRICES from only 75p INC. P&P. 20% DISCOUNT off all purchase software. LIFE MEMBERSHIP .00. Hire your first title FOC. FREE CATALOGUE. FAST RETURN OF POST SERVICE (if reserves are given). ALL GAMES manufactured ORIGINALS with full documentation. OVER 25,000 satisfied members. EUROPEAN members welcome. UP TO 65% OFF software, regular sales lists sent to all members. Full computerised system keeps track of your order. We pride ourselves in being the most professional Hire Library in the United Kingdom, with staff of 14 who know what the word service means. Backed by our own software company and programmers. Join ISM's software club now and for just five pounds you get: Life I WHO DARES WINS II ALLIGATA membership, entry to a regular COMMODORE 64 F: EXAMPLES OF OUR EXTENSIVE LIST SPECTRUM prize draw, entry to future SKY FOX members only competitions in RIVER RAID ISM news, a regular copy of ISM ARIOLASOFT news, membership card, extra ACTIVISION R.R.P. I.S.M. EQUINOX discount on certain software STAINLESS STEEL 9.95 z 9.99 2.99 titles, priority service WHO DARES WINS II ALLIGATA MICRO GEN 2.99 PITSPOT 7.95 and the calculator AMSTRAD ALLIGATA 2.50 alarm watch 9.95 FEU MONTY ON THE RUN 3 WEEKS IN PARADISEMicro Gen U.S. GOLD 2.99 8.95 9.95 2.75 Micro Gen 2.99 9.95 CRACKSHOT Joysticks AMST/SPEC/C64 12.95 4.99 2.99 8.95 8.95 2.50 8.95 2.50 2.50 ABSOLUTELY FREE! Send large S.A.E. now for free catalogue. NATIONAL COMPUTER LIBRARY Unit 4, M.E.B. Works, Windsor Road, Enfield, Redditch, B97 6DJ. Tel: Redditch 65671. CVG NAME. NAME ........................................................ ADDRESS ............. Here's what you do. Send your name, address and computer type together with a cheque or postal order for  made payable to 'ISM to the address below. Membership is not necessary if you just wish to receive ISM news and benefit from the low prices. To go on our mailing list simply send your name and address to: ISM FREEPOST, 33 ALBERT STREET, MANSFIELD, NOTTS NG18 1BR No stamp required no obligation to buy We guarantee all software to be originals. .................... Access VISA COMPUTER MODEL Send for ISM news for large discounts on hundreds of titles. SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES OUR PRICE 6.95 6.45 7.50 6.95 ***SPECTRUM*** IMPOSSABALL-(HEWSON) NEMISIS THE LAST NINJA DRAGONS LAIR 11 DONKEY KONG HIVE STAR REAIDERS 11 BRIAN CLOUGHS FOOTBALL AIRWOLF II EASTENDERS THE PRESIDENT SIGMA 7 STAR GAMES ONE 4 GAMES SKY RUNNER SAS STRIKE FORCE MARBLE MADNESS KIT BATTLE OF BRITAIN ELITE TOBRUK FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR STARGLIDER TT RACER TOMAHAWK GALLIPOLI DEEP STRIKE ACEDEMY ACE OF ACES LIGHTFORCE ANIMATOR 1 BISMARK JAILBREAK 10TH FRAME KONAMI COIN HITS THANATOS THEATRE EUROPE THE BIG 4-DURELL TRAP DOOR WORLD GAMES TRIVIAL PURSUITS T.P. YOUNG PLAYERS TP. QUESTION PACK ELITE HIT PACK KONAMI GOLF MERCENARY CYRUSS 2 CHESS DRUID COBRA ANNALS OF ROME BATTLEFIELD GERMANY URIDIUM FIRELORD 5.95 7.50 7.95 14.95 5.95 7.50 6.95 7.50 7.95 7.50 6.95 6.95 7.95 11.95 7.95 5.95 12.95 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 5.95 88888888 6.95 OUR OUR OUR OUR OUR ***SPECTRUM *** PRICE ***COMMODORE*** PRICE ***COMMODORE *** PRICE ***AMSTRAD*** PRICE ******BBC****** PRICE ARTISTI! 12.95 STAR RAIDERS 1 D2 7.50 WORLD GAMES D2 7.50 ELITE HIT PACK 7.95 YIE AR KING FU 11 D2 7.95 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 7.95 NEMISES --02 6.95 SCOOBY DOO D2 7.50 IMPOSSABALL-D2 6.955 STAR HITS (5 TOP GAMES) 7.95 CHOLO 12.95 THE DOUBLE 9.95 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-D4 12.95 PAPER BOY-D2 6.95 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-D4 12.95 SILENT SERVICE 7.50 NUCLEAR EMBARGO-D2 7.50 T.P. YOUNG PLAYERS-04 12.95 SCRABBLE-D2 7.95 DALEY THOMPSON SUPERTEST-D2 7.95 SAM CRUISE 6.45 DRAGONS LAIR II 7.50 YOUNG PLAYERS QUESTIONS 7.95 TOMAHAWK D2 7.50 FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR D2 7.95 GLIDER RIDER 6.75 SIGMA 7 7.50 ACE OF ACES-D2 7.95 ACROJET-02 7.50 HITS VOL 3-10 GAMES 7.95 EXPLODING FIST 11 6.95 SKY RUNNER-D2 795 SAIGON 02 7.95 ELITE -04 12.95 WAR-02 7.95 FAIRLIGHT II 7.50 FROST BYTE 7.50 MASTER OF UNIVERSE-D2 7.50 NEMESIS-02 6.95 KONA KONAMI COIN-OPS HITS-02 7.95 SHAOLINS ROAD 5.95 GUNSHIP-04 12.95 ACE-02 7.95 ALIENS-D2 7.95 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION -D2 7.95 LEADER BOARD 6.95 URIDIUM + PARADROID-D2 7.50 10TH FRAME 7.95 MERCENARY 7.95 ELITE DISK 17.50 1942 5.95 SPY V SPY ARTIC ANTIC-02 7.50 6.95 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-04 12.95 BEACHHEAD GAUNTLET 6.95 VIETNAM-D2 7.50 STOLE A MILLION-D2 7.50 T.P. YOUNG PLAYERS -D4 12.95 REBEL PLANET GAUNTLET-EXTRA DUNGEONS 4.99 RAID 2000-D2 7.50 LASER GENIUS-04 12.95 T.P. QUESTION PACK 7.95 KAYLETH COMMANDO 87 5.95 SPACE HARRIER-D2 7.50 LASER BASIC 04 12 95 SUPER SOCCER-D2 6.95 ****ATARI**** BOMB JACK II 5.95 B. CLOUGH FOOTBALL-04 14.95 SOLD A MILLION 3-D2 7.95 IKARI WARRIOR-D2 6.95 SPY V SPY (AA)-02 KARI WARRIORS 5.95 SHAO LINS ROAD-02 7.50 ELITE HIT PACK-D2 FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR -02 7.50 GAUNTLET --D2 FUTURE KNIGHT 5.95 MARBLE MADNESS-D2 7.50 PAPER BOY-D2 7.50 WINTER GAMES-D2 7.50 LEADER BOARD 02 TRAILBLAZER 5.95 STAR GAMES ONE-4 GAMES-D2 7.95 THE GREAT ESCAPE 6.95 THE SCARED ANTRIAD-D2 6.95 FOOTBALLER OF YEAR SUPER SOCCER 5.95 LIGHTFORCE 6.95 LDERBOARD TORM (DISK 26.99) 4.99 SAS STAR STRIKE D2 SKY RUNNER D2 SPACE HARRIER 5,95 DELTA-D2 7.95 DANDY D2 7.50 THE ART STUDIO (DISK) 17.50 SPITFIRE 40 D2 NAPOLIAN AT WAR 7.50 FUTURE KNIGHT-D2 7.50 RAMBO DISK 4.99 SPACE HARRIER-D2 6.95 SILENT SERVICE-D2 7.50 VULCAN 7.95 JEWELS OF DARKNESS-D2 12.95 NICK FALDOS GOLF-CASS 4.99 + MINI OFFICE II -D4 12.95 TOMAHAWK-D2 7.50 VERA CRUZ 7.50 TRAILBLAZER-D2 7.50 NICK FALDOS GOLF-DISK 6.99 + PLAN-IT-04 12.95 ALTERNATE REALITY II 17.50 SOLD A MILLION 3 7.50 YIE AR KING FU II 6.95 *****C64/DISKS/UTILITIES**** LEADER BOARD-D2 7.95 FIGHTNIGHT-D2 7.50 HARDBALL 6.95 LEVIATHAN D2 7.95 LEATHER GODDESS OF PHOBAS 24.95 HIVE 03 7.50 *****ATARI ST***** SCALEXTRIC 7.95 ALIENS-D2 7.50 ALTERNATE REALITY II-DUNGEONS 16.95 STAR RAIDERS 11 D2 12.95 MERCENARY COMPENDIUM 19.99 SCOOBY DOO 5.95 LEADERBOARD EXECUTIVE-02 7.95 HITCHHIKERS GUIDE DISK 24.95 MARBLE MADNESS KIT 7.95 CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING 19.99 SWORDS OF BANE 6.95 LEADER BOARD-D2 7.50 NEWSROOM DISK 39.95 SCOOBY DOO-D2 ALTER'ATE REALITY II 19.99 SPECTRUM PLUS 2 LEAD 4.99 GAUNTLET-D2 7.50 DESTROYER 12.95 SILENT SERVICE D2 7.95 WORLD GAMES COMP PRO INTERFACE 9.95 GAUNTLET-DUNGEONS D=.99) 4.99 FLIGHT SIMULATOR 11 DISK 45.00 500cc GRAND PRIX 02 7.95 SUPER CYCLE INTERFACE III 39.95 BATTLEFIELD GERMANY D3 10.95 + FAST HACK'EM 19.95 HARDBALL-D2 7.50 GAUNTLET RAM TURBO INTERFACE 18.00 TOBRUK-02 7.50 + ACTION REPLAY MKII 24.95 DONKEY KONG-D2 6.95 STAR GLIDER MULTIFACE 1 + 44.95 THE LAST NINJA 7.50 + THE FINAL CARTRIDGE 39.95 SIGMA 7 7.50 LEADER BOARD ROCK AND WRESTLE 4.99 DEEP STRIKE 7.50 THE POWER CARTRIDGE 39.95 ACE OF ACES-D2 7.50 ********BSX******* NICK FALDOS GOLF 4.99 SHORT CIRCUITS D2 6.95 THE EXPERT CARTRIDGE + ESM 37.50 FIST II --D2 7.50 FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR POLE POSITION 2.95 TOMAHAWK-02 7.50 FREEZE FRAME II 39.95 GAUNTLET D2 7.50 SPITFIRE 40 7.95 MS PACMAN 2.95 ELEVATOR ACTION-D2 6.95 THE DOUBLER 12.95 GAUNTLET DUNGEONS D=.99 4.99 WINTER GAMES 7.95 ***SPECTRUM 128K TITLES*** DONKEY KONG 02 6.95 QUICK DISK + 19.95 BATTLEFIELD GERMANY D3 10.95 GAUNTLET 7.95 ARTISTII 14.95 BISMARK-D2 7.95 1541 PHYSICAL EXAM 39.95 INTO THE EAGLES NEST-D2 6.95 ANY KONAMI CARTRIDGES 15.95 B. MCGUIGANS BOXING 7.95 AIRWOLF II 02 7.50 DISC DISCETOR V5.0 29.95 TT RACER -02 7.50 INHERITANCE 7.95 + THE WRITER 12.95 SUPER HUEY 11 D2 7.50 DOLPHIN DOS 69.95 MULTIFACE 11 46.95 ***** JOYSTICKS ***** WATERLOO 7.95 DURELL BIG 4 7.95 *****C16*** + ACTION REPLAY MK !!! 34.95 QUICK SHOT II PLUS 12.95 AUSTERLITZ 7.95 CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING-D2 7.50 BEACH HEAD 3.99 *****PCW/8256/8512***** QUICK SHOT II TURBO 14.95 STARS ON 128 4 GAMES 7.95 1942-D2 7.50 COMPUTER HITS VOL 3 7.95 TRIVIAL PURSUIT (PCW) 17.50 KONIXS JOYSTICK 12.99 LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE 7.95 COMMANDO 87-02 7.50 FIGHTING WARRIOR 6.95 JEWELS OF DARKNESS-6128/PCW 17.50 COMP PRO 5000 14.95 STARGLIDER 12.95 ELITE-03 12.95 KONAMI COIN-OP HITS 7.95 TOMAHAWK (PCW) 17.50 EUROMAX PROFESSIONAL PLUS 19.95 INTERNATIONAL MATCHDAY 7.95 BOMB JACK II D2 BOMB JA 7.50 GREMLINS 3.99 GODDESS OF PHOBAS-6128/PCW 24.95 EUROMAX PROFESSIONAL 16.95 FAIRLIGHT I OR II 7.95 KARI WARRIORS-D2 7.50 5 STAR GAMES 7.95 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER PCW 17.50 CHEETAH MACH 1 14.95 CALL ME TROOPER 7.95 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT 8.95 ELITE HIT PACK 7.95 LORD OF THE RINGS PCW 22.50 CHEETAH 125 + 8.95 WINTER GAMES 7.95 FOOTBALLER OF YEAR-02 7.50 SCOOBY DOO 6.95 HITCHHIKERS GUIDE-6128/PCW 24.95 COMP PRO 5000-BBC 16.95 GHOUSTBUSTERS 7.95 THANATOS 7.50 EXPLODING FIST 6.95 SCRABBLE 16.95 PHASOR ONE 12.95 ACCESS AND VISA CARD ORDERS FOR MAIL ORDER CUSTOMERS PERSONAL CALLERS PLEASE PRODUCE THIS ADVERT AT 01-809 4843 CREDIT CARD LINE 24 HOUR ANSAPHONE, PLEASE SEND CHEQ P.O. TO: S.C.S. (DEPT CVG1) OUR SHOP FOR ABOVE DISCOUNTS TO: 01-800-3156 01-631-4627 CREDIT CARD ORDERS P.O. BOX 394 LONDON N15 6JT. SHEKHANA AT COMPUCENTRE. UNIT 5. 221. TOTTENHAM DESPATCHED SAME DAY SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY P&P INCLUDED IN U.K. EUROPE ADD 11 PER ITEM. COURT ROAD, LONDON W1R 9AF. (NEAREST TUBE STN *ALL NEW RELEASES ARE SUBJECT TO RELEASE DATES ELSEWHERE ADD 12 PER ITEM. SEND A SAE FOR FREE LIST GOODGE ST.) OPEN 6 DAYS A WEEK 10.00AM — 18.00PM. FROM SOFTWARE HOUSES. C64/C16 SPEC AMSTRAD BBC/MSX/ATARI. (DENOTES ITEMS ONLY AVAILABLE ON MAIL ORDER) PLEASE RING TO CONFIRM AVAILABILITY 19.99 7.95 5.95 7.50 7.95 7.50 7.95 7.95 5.95 6.95 6.95 12.95 7.95 7.95 5.95 7.95 9.95 5.95 5.95 10.95 10.95 6.95 6.95 ALSO AVAILABLE ON DISK FORMAT D1 111.95. D2 .95. D3 (14.95 04 $17.50. D5 122.50 VISA Order by credit line 01-809 4843 a "


"C#VG COMPETITION Are you tough? Are you rough? Do you play to win? Then keep reading. This competition is just for you. No wimps are allowed to enter. How do you fancy a Super Sunday? No, we're not talking picnics by the river, we're talking American Football. And in particular we're talking about Nexus Super Sunday action and strategy game based on the US of A's favourite sport. Up for grabs are two tickets to the 1987 preseason AMERICAN AN FOOTBALL HIT SQUAD Raw PHOTO SNUINT mi.. NFL American Football game. This amazing sporting fixture will be at a mystery location. The 10 runners-up will get special American Football caps and the next 20 people will get a copy of the game which is available on the Commodore. What we want you to do is design a special C+VG/ Nexus American Football strip. Printed on this page is the outline of an American football player. Just get out your pens, crayons, inks or paints and get designing. When you have completed your C+VG/ Nexus American Football strip send it with the coupon to Nexus Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. The closing date is March 16th and the head coach's decision is final. 2. Like get desigueu haveva NEXUS COMPETITION Name Age Address "


"MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS CUT PRICE SOFTWARE ................ ........ ............50 5.50 Silent Service Bangkok N g IS.*** 7.95 ..... Top Gun ....... SPECTRUM Deep Strike................7.50 Bismark D1................ 7.50 Fist II. .7.50 Star Glider ................ 12.50 Lightforce. ................. 6.75 Super Cycle ....6.95 Konami's Hits .............7.50 Short Circuit. 6.95 Battle of Britain ....... .7.50 Jail Break. 5.95 Dragons Lair II ............ 7.95 Paper Boy...... 5.95 Nosferatu.. 7.50 Rogue Trooper ...........7.50 TT Racer .... .7.50 Last Ninja. 7.95 1942 D1............ ..7.50 Strike Force Harrier ....7.50 Nemesis. 5.95 Ace of Aces D1. 7.50 Theatre Europe.. .7.50 Hive. 7.95 Shao-Lins Road....... 7.50 ..7.50 Bangkok Knights.........7.95 Paper Boy............... .7.50 Strike Force Cobra...... 7.50 L. Computer People....7.95 America's Cup D1...... 7.50 Trivial Persuits...... 12.50 Agent Orange .............6.95 Bombjack Two............7.50 Ace of Aces.. 6.75 S.A.S. Strikeforce .......6.95 Aiwolf Two .................. .7.50 Short Circuit. 5.95 Elevator Action ...........6.95 Super Huie Il D1 ......... 7.50 Samurai 7.95 Express Raider ...........7.95 Xevious .7.50 Mercenary.... 7.95 Deeper Dungeons ......4.95 Ikari Warriors ..............7.50 Bazooka Bill. 6.75 Grey Fell....................7.95 ......7.95 Avenger...................... Avenger .7.50 Footballer of Year.... .... 12.50 Last Ninja ..... 1942 5.95 Silicon Dream .......... 12.95 World Games ............. 7.50 Shao-lins Road....... .6.75 Stingers.... 7.95 Breakthru'...................7.50 Light Force ... 5.95 Butch Hardguy. 5.95 Boulderdash Con. Kit ... 7.50 Dragons Lair 11. 5.95 Acro Jet ...... 7.95 Champ. Wrestling ....... 7.50 Super Soccer........ 5.95 Wib Stars............ 6.95 Sacred Armour ...........6.75 Commando 86.... 5.95 Mutants... 5.95 Space Harrier ......... 7.50 Hypa Ball...... .7.95 Impossaball ........... 6.95 Scooby Doo ............. 7.50 Academy.. .6.75 Sigma 7................. 7.50 Nightmare Rally ...... 5.95 COMMODORE 64 Hypa Ball... 7.95 Cobra (Rambo II) ........5.95 Headcoach.. .7.95 Jail Break. 7.50 10th Frame...... .6.95 Sky Runner D3 ... 6.75 SAS Strikeforce ..........6.75 Judge Dredd .......... 6.75 Gauntlet .... 7.50 Death or Glory ........... .6.95 Sam Cruise.. .5.95 Judge Dredd... 7.50 Star Soldier.................6.75 Gauntlet ...... .5.95 Sentinel D1. 7.50 Arctic Antics........... 7.50 Shadow Skimmer. .5.95 Dan Dare. .7.50 The Double. 8.95 Sky Runner............. .7.50 Glider Rider. .6.75 Clough's Football D4 12.50 Bombjack Two....... .5.95 Strikeforce Cobra..... 7.50 Raid 2000 D3............. 7.95 Airwolf Two............ -5.95 Blitz Krieg D1 .............7.50 Deeper Dungeons ......4.95 B. Clough's Football 12.95 Trivial Pursuits D4..... 12.50 Delta D1 ..................... 7.95 Scalectrix. 7.95 Fist II D1 .....................7.50 10th Frame D1............7.95 Top Gun ........ .5.95 Knuckle Busters.......... 7.50 Bard's Tale Disk Only 12.95 Eastenders ...........7.50 Destroyer Disk Only 12.50 L'board Exec Edit. 01 7.95 Shock Absorber..........5.95 Great Escape .6.75 Express Raider D1......7.95 Ikari Warriors .............. ..5.95 Double Take .6.75 B. Trouble L. China D1 7.95 Xevious ......................5.95 ..........5.95 Sold a M Sold a Million III...........7.50 Elevator Action ...........6.95 Leaderboard...............6.75 Cobra (Rambo II)........6.75 Apache Gunship D4 12.95 World Games .............6.75 Top Gun .....................6.75 Agent Orange lange ...........6.95 Hand Ball Maradona ...5.95 Hand Ball Maradona ...6.00 Chameleon D1........... 7.95 Marble Mad. Con. Set 6.75 Konami's Arcade Hits 7.50 Leviathan D1. 7.95 Big Trouble in L. China 7.95 Footballer of Year .......7.50 Bangkok Knights.........7.95 Space Harrier .............5.95 Marble Madness D1....7.50 Nemesis D1................6.95 Scooby Doo................5.95 Yie Ar Kung Full D1 ... 6.75 Tomahawk D1 ............7.95 Cop-Out ........ ..6.75 Firelord D3. ......................6.95 Postage included UK. Please state which micro. Fast service. Send cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept CVG, 49H Sutherland Street, Victoria, London SW1 V4JX MAIL ORDER ONLY: Send for FREE list Amstrad, C16, MSX, Commodore, Spectrum. D=Disks Available: D1 at .95, D3 at .95, D4 at .50. SPECTRUM RRP OUR SPECTRUM OUR PRICE COMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK Elite .............. 14.95 10.95 Xeno. 8.95 6.50 Commando 86.........6.95 11.95 Stars On 128 ...........9.95 6.95 Terra Cresta ............ 7.95 5.50 Freeze Frame 3.......... Cart 35.95 Starglider ............. 14.95 11.95 Masters of Universe... 8.95 6.50 Howard The Duck .....6.95 11.95 It's A Knockout........ 7.95 5.50 Sky Runner........... .7.95 5.50 It's A kOut............. 6.50 NA Konami's Golf.......... 7.95 5.50 Sold Million 3..........9.95 6.95 6.50 10.95 Cobra... ..7.95 5.50 Shockway Rider ....... 7.95 Double Take.......... .8.95 11.95 Paperboy .............. 5.50 Super Cycle 7.95 5.50 Expert Cart ......... ..NA 28.95 Samurai.............. 9.95 6.95 Fist 2 8.95 6.50 Five Star ............ .6.95 11.95 Konami Coin Op .......9.95 6.95 Avenger........... 9.95 6.95 Destroyer ......... NA 11.95 Great Escape ........... 7.95 5.50 Cobra........... ..6.50 10.95 Uchi Marta..............8.95 6.95 COMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK Butch Hard Guy........7.95 6.50 Great Escape .......... 6.50 10.95 AMSTRAD TOP 10 CASS DISK Now Games 3 ..........9.95 6.95 Laurel & Hardey ....... 6.95 11.95 Sold Million 2 ..........6.95 11.95 Hit Pak .................9.95 6.95 Masters of Universe... 6.95 11.95 Triv Pursuit........... 11.95 16.95 Triv Pursuit........... 14.95 11.95 Durell's Big 4 ..........6.95 11.95 Mini Office 2.......... 11.95 14.95 Space Harrier .......... 7.95 5.50 Leaderboard EE........ 6.95 11.95 Starglider ............. 11.95 16.95 1942. .............7.95 5.50 Indoor Sports .......... 6.50 10.95 Winter Games.......... 7.25 11.95 Bomb Jack 2 ..... 7.95 5.50 Super Huey 2 ..........6.95 10.95 Elite 11.00 17.95 Double Take 7.95 5.50 Now Games 3....... ..6.95 11.95 Plan It. 11.95 15.95 Commando 86........ 7.95 5.50 Triv Pursuit.... 11.95 14.95 Scooby Doo ............6.95 11.95 Airwolf 2 7.95 5.50 Short Circuit........ .6.50 10.95 Prospell. .NA 19.95 Donky Kong... 7.95 5.50 Space Harrier ..... .6.95 11.95 Protext.. NA 21.95 Scooby Doo ..... 7.95 5.50 Bomb Jack 2...... ..6.95 11.95 7.95 5.50 Sigma 7............ 9.95 NA ATARI ST TOP 10 Ikari Warrior.. ........7.95 5.50 Judge Dredd ........... 6.95 11.95 Stargilder. .. 19.95 Indoor Sports ......... 8.95 6.95 Hit Pak. .6.95 11.95 ST Karate ..... 19.95 Sigma 7......... 9.95 6.95 Express Raider......... 7.25 11.95 The Pawn.... 19.95 Deep Strike..... 9.95 6.95 Elite. ............ 11.95 14.95 Winter Games.. 19.95 Dynamite Dan 2... 7.95 5.50 Rogue Trooper......... 6.95 11.95 Silent Service Xevious 7.99 5.50 Championship Wres .. 6.95 11.95 Super Cycle 19.95 Ace 9.95 7.25 Zap 2 ..6.95 NA Little Com People...... 10th Frame..... 8.99 6.95 Fist 2. .6.95 11.95 Alternate Reality 24.95 Jail Break ....... Donkey Kong........... 6.50 10.95 Leaderboard... 19.95 Uridium........ 8.95 6.50 Graphic Ad Creator.. 17.00 22.00 Star Trex.... 19.95 Firelord .............. 8.95 6.50 Hype Ball ............... 7.25 11.95 Yie Kung Fu 2 .......... 7.95 5.50 Sold Million 3.......... 6.95 11.95 AMSTRAD P.C.W. 8256 8512 Dragons Lair ........... 9.95 6.95 1942.. .................6.95 11.95 Batman 14.95 Judge Dredd ........... 8.95 6.50 Star Games One ....... 7.25 11.95 S.A.S Raid. Graphic Crea ......... 22.95 18.00 Raid 2000 .............. 6.95 11.95 Triv Pursuit 16.95 Theatre Europe ........9.95 7.25 Bomb Jack 2 ........... 6.95 11.95 Lord of The Rings ........... 24.95 Cauldron 2.............. 8.95 6.50 Terra Cresta ............ 6.50 10.95 Colossus Chess.. 19.95 Post & Packing Inc. Overseas Orders please add 75p per tape Cheques/post orders (Sterling only please). Made payable to: Cut Price Software Unit 6, Stort House, Riverway, Harlow, Essex CM20 2DW 24 HOUR ANSWER PHONE (0279) 24433 OR (0279) 31956 7.95 5.50 ***.......... 14.95 Access WE ALSO STOCK IBMAMSTRAD 1512 PC COMPATIBLE SOFTWARE VISA RS232C Serial Interface e V21/23 Modem . .95 inc VAT ZNOVU SIUS SUSSEL V2123 Modem byly AMSTRAD RS232C Serial Interface PACE APPROVED 6 Telecomunicato in the naturen W the consent hection to specified Sidect to to them T S/S INO 5498273/G/500472 COMMSTX FREE! Send coupon to: Marketing Dept. Amstrad Consumer Electronics Plc, Brentwood House, 169 Kings Road, Brentwood, Essex. CM14 4EF Registration to MICROLINK in association with TELECOM GOLD and 1st quarter subscriptions to MICRONET 800 and PRESTEL. Name Address Available from good Amstrad computer stockists. Or send coupon to Marketing Dept, Amstrad, Brentwood House, 169 King's Road, Brentwood. Essex. CM144EF. Postcode Tel. No. AMSTRAD RS2320 INTERFACE V21/23 MODEM Brentwood House, 169 King's Road, Brentwood Essex. CM144EF. Tel. 0277 230222 *Micronet Boo is the trading style of Telemap Lid and British Telecom. Prestel and the Prestol symbol are trademarks of British Telecommunications. (PLEASE DO NOT SEND ANY MONEY WITH THIS COUPON) CVG/3 "


"220 Great graphics. strive for fame and glory (the Terrific sound. computer takes on the roles of all the other characters). Each Fantastic game-play. knight has attributes that Those words are used dictate his life, as well as a countless times to describe castle and small army to start. games that are \"almost\" ready Wolfric the Wild is good at to be released. Unfortunately, jousting. Wilfred of Ivanhoe is few live up to the claims. only so-so with a sword. Cinemaware, however, has Cedric of Rotherwood is a kept their word and delivered strong and able leader. great adventures that match Through boldness and any action movie with strategy, you must increase arcade action, strategy, state your holdings, defeat the other of the art graphics and sound knights, and take on the that'll knock your socks off, Norman conquerors as well. plus a story line sure to keep Leadership is a quality to you involved. improve upon as well. Never Defender of the Crown has forego the opportunity to set a standard that others will rescue a fair damsel in be hard pressed to meet. Role distress. Besides certain playing has never been easier, rewards (which are or more fun. Simply put, it's graphically portrayed when 1491, the King of England has the time is right), this will been assassinated and all the make your men proud of you. land is now up for grabs. Being admired means having a It falls on you to become one stronger and more efficient of four Saxon knights and army. This can make all the JUST The new buzz word for computer game players in America is 'movie* program.\" The action is supposed to be as nearly as good as that of the silver screen. CEVG's ever-vigilant: US corespondent, Marshall M. Rosenthal, has been checking out the first wave of Cinemaware. And he likes what he sees.  Ike it too Wolfric the Wild Leadership Average Jousting: Strong  dp  Huerque Your income is 4 Your treasure is 8 like December 1149 the movies.. 0:00 The Old Man is gettin real old. He's no 9000 any more. ww "


"difference during your Organisation. You'll also have himself. Every decision is Quickly return to the US struggle to restore order to the to try and swing Ben over to cause and effect. Station and activate the land. land. your side (a crafty and devious A map shows the territories particle beam defence system. But the game-play's the old bird whose advice can be to fight for; the North, West, Watch the ICBM trajectory thing (to paraphrase the Bard helpful). Plus build the right South, and the downtown area. blossom over the US, set coso badly as to incur the wrath rapport with Bull, the loyal On screen, a small fly buzzes ordinates for the beam. hit the of all the literary world). thug with the brain power of a around. Position the fly over system switch and let 'er rip! Jousting in the Tournament flea, and Peepers, one of the the choice desired when the Remember, disabled is accompanied by the Northside boys. thought balloons appear. There satellites create \"holes\" which digitised sound of horses — will also be times when Pinky the missiles can safely fall you almost don't notice your leads off with Tony Santucci, will think about drawing his through. Also, there are still opponent's lance working its Capone's heir and a devious rod (gun to you, folks). It will plenty of fighters out there way towards your nose (make and deadly man, Only slightly then be up to you whether he trying their best to reduce sure that yours is aimed at his less so is his sidekick Guido threatens with it, or pumps the your operation to rubble. head or chest knocking less devious that is, but just as target with lead. You might receive a down the horse is a black dangerous. Now we move onward in message from Tayla asking 1 deed against the code of Tom Malone is a flatfoot, a time, and upward. Sloan for help. If so, dock with the chivalry). cop you grew up with and a McCendrik is having and V.I. Lenin and prepare your The castle is beautifully \"average\" day on board the US trigger finger. KGB goons will rendered, by the way, with bought. Adding to your grief is Space Station, some 23,000 pop up from doorway or floor little touches like fog in the your overly sentimental Mama, miles above the Earth. As panels. Quickly aim your distance and reflections in the the corrupt Westside Ward Sloan, you are in charge of target scope and laze them out water. Everything is controlled \"Boss, Alderman Burke, and maintaining and protecting then run to the end of the by moving the mouse and Andy the kid. America's 12 orbiting weapon corridor. Just hope none using one button (the left). No Finally, there's Lola, your satellites which form the SDI remains to blast at you keyboard or complicated girl, a brash gun moll with a (Strategic Defence Initiative). (lowering your strength sequences to learn. soft touch (like a pickpocket Suddenly a warning comes meter). Complete this highTwo disks ensure a lot of that is) combined with a through the comm-link from tech gauntlet and enjoy the action on the Amiga. My only dangerous temper. Everyone Washington; a squadron of rewards of freeing her. complaint is that a disk swap is has their own distinct KGB fanatics have taken over The most arcade oriented of necessary during the love personality which changes the Kremlin and are preparing all three games, SDI places the scene (it's the purist in me). depending on their feelings to to attack the US. emphasis on action. All Defenders has a lot going for what is going on, as well as to At this moment, a fleet of controls are handled by the it, so get going and get it. how they are treated by Pinky. deadly space fighter-ships are joystick (which could be a From one battlefield to You must learn how to take storming Russia's nearby touch more responsive in the another we go. Steeds are advantage of these feelings, space base, the VI Lenin, flying scenes), and there are replaced by black sedans, and probing for weaknesses and Which means that Lenin's many incidental screens to sword and mace give way to ways to control people. This Commander, Natayla (Tayla) add to the excitement. Sloan the Tommygun. It's the 1920s, can be effected through such Kazarian is in big trouble. This ducking behind a bulkhead to the era of the Flapper, art \"tools of the trade\" as bribery, makes you very angry since avoid a laser blast is just one of deco, prohibition. You are murder and betrayal. you and her go way back (yes, the many nice touches Pinky Callahan, a smart young Being in black and white (on I do mean in \"that\" way). What popping up in the game. tough in the Northside the Macintosh) has its makes it even worse is that a Another is that a Ramdisk can organisation. With a little luck advantages. Old mobster squadron of fighters are now also be created which holds (and some violent behaviour), movies of the '30s and '40s on their way towards you. the contents of the second you intend to take over first the didn't go for long shots of Enter your space ship, disk and speeds up data leadership of the Northside scenary. check systems (fuel, shields, transfer (on the Atari 1040ST). and then all of Chicago. The They concentrated on closeradio, scanner, engines) and Graphics are crisp and 3-D next year 1934 will see a ups and small details; a hand launch. The Satellites must be perspectives abound. meeting of all the crime heads snapping the brim of a hat, protected from destruction! Two new interactive games in New York, and the light falling across a brow, a Switching to an overview planned are Sinbad and the establishment of Murder Inc. If creased pants leg dirty with map lets you scan a radar-like Throne of the Falcons and you can become Overlord of dark blood. view of the entire area, as well Star Rush. Sinbad features the city's territories within the King distills this down as readjusting your position dueling sequences for the three year time limit, the Big further to the most important of relative to the US Space hard-core action fan (and the Boys will let you keep the city details, the faces: Station. Princess at her bath for Your first objective will be Thought balloons convey Suddenly a missile strike is everyone else), while Star to eliminate the Old Man, choices, and you must select detected, and the countdown Rush sends you out amidst the present head of the Northside one quickly or Pinky will do it begins of impending impact. galaxy. DAMAGED PRIM 2923 SEC "


"Hi Melissa here. This month we have some pretty good hints, tips and pokes along with maps of Dandy levels 4, 5, 6 and Storm for the Spectrum. So what are you waiting for, get reading! Remember to send your letters to Melissa Ravenflame, I.D.E.A.S Central, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. And don't forget to enclose a recent photograph of yourself. See you next issue! SPECTRUM Mastertronic's budget game of food and armour untouched snake broach. Anthony also opponents, as they only come Storm has been given the just in case you run low on sent in these games tips for in one or twos. Soon you will breakdown by Anthony Dixon energy. Cobra. have an empty screen and of the West Midlands. With the It is best to study the route On level one you play from you will go onto level 2. Play help of this detailed map and you are going to go along. The left to right. When you have from left to right. The third pill his hints, you should have no blue route is easy, but on the the Laser machine gun, go you come to is the Invincible problem with the game. In yellow route you need to go and get the Invincible pill as pill, remember where it is and order to free your girlfriend and collect food/energy from soon as you can. Then you will go and get the Laser machine from Una's Lair you have to other squares, so that you be able to shoot the nasties gun. Then fight your way back collect the three snake have enough to finish the without being harmed by to where the Invincible pill broaches. game. The Green route is them. When you get to the was. When you are in the Yellow awkward you need to castle scene you get up to and Drop onto the ledge on your route you will see a trap that collect the Gold key, BUT, you then climb along the ledge. right. No nasty can attack you must be released or you won't must open the trap first. Then From there drop down and get from behind so just be careful be able to finish the green go back the way you came the knife pill. As soon as you of your front. There are two route. Also you can collect the and open the White Door lock, have this drop down and getledges to defend yourself and Green route Snake Broach before you can go into the back up to the ledge. Go to the your girlfriend from. Watch out and escape along the Yellow Gold key square. After that it is gap and stay there. You can for the missiles. In time the route so, it is best to leave a bit a straight forward run to the easily head butt your nasties will give up and you MAP OF STORM = GREEN Route S/B by Mostertronic = YELLOW ROUTE WA 2 AR AKMF 1. 1 Blue ROUTE SSCROLLS A = Amulet M. MASK AR ARMOUR wir + U/M = USE Mask F = Food K LILLE ECTRAP RELEASE E = ENERGY RESTORER Cannot Eat File S/B SNAKE BROACH W/K WHITE KEY STEFT I I I . Tec TFT FT R/K = RED KEY GAME G/K = GOLD KEY IN HERE AR WIKIL) THE Lock THAT THE COLOUR SF R/K/L KEY WILL OPEN (ONCE SIK/L) OPENED IT WILL STAY OPEN C = COFFIN MOVES This is the escape route when you have UNA'S LAIR ENTRANCE the Green Route Snake Broach \\III = BROKEN LINES INDICATE THAT AN OPENING APPEARS WHEN A TRAP IS RELEASED MF AR JTSA WIKT SB EXCI T IUM WIK of H. F Food in F Here F I ARI s takri Al START WIK S lee 1:7 ENDS Wklu IAR EC AR lente this trapon Yellow Raket the Route WK MWAKIL S F E 52 SF LAR lowik L Release trap and go backround to W/K/LO toenter next square fex Cold key EWKL AF SUCCESTIONS O GO BY YELLOW ROUTE FIRST THEN GREEN ROUTE THEN BLUE ROUTE M *TF by A E Dixon WATCH OUT FOR THE NASTIES! "


"SPECTRUM SPECTRUM SPECTRUM ka XXXD safe from the nasties on your completed the game and right. It is not too difficult to ready for a fresh one-watch keep disposing of the nasties out it is much faster. that come from your left. Once Last month we published again watch out for the the first three levels to Dandy missiles. In time the nasties which was compiled by C+VG will give up. Then the Slasher readers Danny Blakman and appears. Use the Invincible pill Nigel Davies. Here are the and jump down and head butt next three levels. After that the Slasher. You have you are on your own!! XWIR XXF 2 EXXXO Ex:7 W ba 13 ATARI 0 UZD XXXX). En DAL 4 10 Dandy Level 4 TUOWANY X X XOK *XX OTOKKE In * * * 20002200 X X X X X    Klaus Wagner comes from a paint roller press three and very unusual sounding place hold down to warp to level 22. Amanzimtoti — but he does Klaus also has the first six have some tips for Atari users. passwords on One Man and First one up is Bounty Bob His Droid. They are bubble, Strikes Back. On level one immediately after picking up atari, finders, genetic, zapped, the flower pot hold down four and megasonic. and start to warp to level four. Someone else with a cheat In level three immediately mode for the Atari is Luke after picking up the coffee pot Smith of St Albans which hold down eight to warp to seems a bit nearer home. His level eight. On level 10 cheat is for the Last V8immediately after picking up press break during loading the pitch fork hold down five when the tape counter is at and start to warp to level 14. about 187. The title page will After picking up the goblet on appear. Start the game and level three hold down one and travel along the road as start to warp to level 15. In normal. The road should level 16 set tube one to the left disappear, speed up to full and after picking up the pie, and move very slowly down. A press nine and hold down start message should flash to warp to level 19, and then \"Entering Inner-City' and on level two, kill all the aliens believe it or not you will be in and then after picking up the the ... Inner-City. Easy isn't it! XXX DXw XXX X X TOX X X X X X X X X X vara XO Kxx xxx X XXX X X nuersion | B. X X X X WXXX X X X W X X X X X X X X X5 X X XF MRVU XXXX O xxx XX X X X X X XX X XXXX WX X XXX KB Mauno 1000ml nemende . Dandy Level 5 BBC |MIT Meet another one of our readers Neil Walker of Stockport. Neil received a copy of Yie Ar Kung Fu ll for Xmas and noticed that you could get extra energy while drinking Oo-long Tea. To do this you need five leafs of tea, then press T. To finish the eight scenes and go on, all you need to do is keep your finger on T and your energy will stay high until you take your finger off. This will not register on the high score table. ELITE 7 Dandy Level 6 instructions. Enter your name as \"ABC\". Then to load each boxer move onto Level three. This time you play from right to left. The third weapon is the Invincible pill, but you will find it is better to leave that alone and go left and get the last weapon pill. Then fight your way back to the Invincible pill. Do not use it yet! Stand to the left of this pill and you are Elite has been in touch with 1.C. and asked us to pass the following information on to you. Some of their Hit Pak's for the CBM 64 appear to be causing problems with the loading of boxer number two on Frank Bruno's Boxing. You should follow the following Canadian Crusher A6CAAACAK Fling Long Chop AA6AAALAK Andra Punceredov A4AAAAZAK Tribal Trouble A84AAAAK Frenchie A28AAABAK Ravioli Mafiosi A58AAACAK Antipodean Andy A95AAA4AK Peter Perfect A39AAAZAK "


"MAIL-SOFT 5.50 1942..... 5.50 or 11.25  11.25 11.25 ELITE D3 88888888 cococo 5.50 5.50 5.50 6.50 6.50 10.95 .6.25 5.50 6.50 5.50 6.99 G-TEN LIMITED DEPT. C+VG, 1st Floor, Commerce House, 146/150 Commercial Street, London E1 6NU THE Mail-Order Software House AMSTRAD Tape Disc IKARI WARRIORS 6.75 11.25 GALVAN 6.50 NA SPINDIZZY 6.75 11.25 GHOSTS 'N' GOBLINS 6.75 11.25 BAZOOKA BILL 6.75 11.25 DESERT FOX 6.75 N.A. STALLONE COBRA 6.50 N.A. THEY SOLD A MILLION 3 6.75 11.75 TOMAHAWK 6.75 NA MIAMI VICE 6.50 N.A. GUNSHIP 11.75 14.50 COMMANDO 6.75 11.25 PARALAX 6.50 10.50 IT'S A KNOCKOUT 6.00 NA WORLD CUP CARNIVAL 6.75 11.25 GAUNTLET 7.25 11.25 POWERPLAY 7.25 11.25 SHOGUN 6.75 11.25 POWER PLAY 7.25 11.50 COLOUR OF MAGIC 6.75 NA KUNG FU MASTER 6.75 11.25 GREEN BERET 6.50 11.25 SENTINEL 7.25 11.25 GREEN BERET 6.50 11.25 LEADERBOARD 6.75 10.75 KNUCKLEBUSTERS TOP GUN 6.50 NA TERRA CRESTA 6.50 NA XEVIOUS STALLONE COBRA 6.50 NA TOP GUN 6.50 N.A. MOVIE MONSTER GAME SAI COMBAT 6.50 11.25 ACE 7.50 NA SHANGHAI 11.25 GHOSTS 'N' GOBLINS 6.50 11.25 TRAP 6.75 7.50 BBC MICRO MIAMI VICE 6.50 NA DRAGONS LAIR 6.75 10.75 COMMANDO 6.75 11.25 HIGHLANDER 6.50 N.A. ROCKY HORROR SHOW 6.75 NA YIE AR KUNG FU 6.75 PAPERBOY 6.50 11.25 INFILTRATOR 6.75 11.25 REPTON 2 6.75 DRUID 6.75 10.75 SANXION 6.75 11.25 CITEDAL 6.75 9.75 NOW GAMES 3 6.75 N.A. HOT WHEELS 6.75 11.25 SPEECH 6.75 9.75 REVOLUTION 6.75 11.25 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 6.75 10.50 AIRWOLF 6.75 11.25 COMPUTER HITS 10 6.75 N.A. NOW GAMES 3 6.75 N.A. STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 6.75 10.50 EIDOLON 6.50 NA DEACTIVATORS 6.75 11.25 REPTON 3 7.25 9.75 INFILTRATOR 6.75 11.75 WORLD GAMES 6.90 11.75 THRUST 6.50 9.75 MARBLE MADNESS 6.75 NA STARGLIDER 11.75 15.50 KONAMI COIN-OP HIT 7.25 11.25 ICON JON 6.50 NA JUDGE DREDD 6.75 NA STRYKERS RUN 6.75 N.A. GAUNTLET 6.75 11.75 SUPERSTAR PING PONG 6.75 NA TRIVIAL PURSUIT 13.50 15.50 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 7.25 N.A. SKYRUNNER 6.75 10.50 RAVENSKULL 6.75 9.50 THEY SOLD A MILLION 3 7.25 11.25 ASSAULT MACHINE 6.75 10.50 CRYSTAL CASTLES 6.75 9.50 ALIENS 6.75 11.75 DODGY GEEZERS 6.75 NA COMMODORE 64/128 STAR RAIDER II 6.75 11.75 YIE AR KUNG FU II 6.75 11.25 PAPERBOY 7.25 11.25 1942 6.75 11.75 Please specily machine. Please allow 14-28 days delivery. Please add 75p P&P per item (UK or BFPO only) Overseas add $1.50 P&P per item. Please make Cheques/Postal Orders (sterling only made payable to G-Ten Limited. UK or BFPO orders, please send to: G-TEN LTD, DEPT. C+VG2, FREEPOST (no stamp required) London, E1 6BR PLEASE NOTE ANY GAME NOT RELEASED WHEN ORDERED, WILL BE SENT ON RELEASE DATE 11.25 9.75 6.99 4.99 6.99 6.99 6.50 Coco 888888888888888888888888 cocco 838 10.95 6.99 4.99 6.99 5.50 12.95 6.99 6.99 5.50 5.50 co 6.99 * COMMODORE 64 IKARI WARRIORS D2 ........ NEMISES -D2 ............ DRAGONS LIAR 11 D2 ...... SKY RUNNER D2...... PAPER BOY 02 SHAOLINS ROAD... LORD OF RINGS 03 DELTA-D2 .............. KUNG FU MASTER. TRIVIAL PURSUIT--04 10.95 FIST II D2.. 6.99 SPACE HARRIER-D2. ALIENS D2. 6.99 COMMANDO 87-02 B.CLOUGHS FOOTBALL YIE AR KUNG FU IL... BOMB JACK 11 D2 GAUNTLET-D2......... GAUNTLET DUNGEONS.... LEADER EXECUTIVE D2. 6.99 ELEVATOR ACTION D2. .6.50 DONKEY KONG D2... BOMB JACK 11 D2...... TEMPLE OF TERROR 6.99 CRYSTAL CASTLE D2. 6.99 FIRELORD D2... 6.50 TOMAHAWK D2 FROST BYTE-D2. LIGHT FORCE 6.50 SANXIONS D2. SOLD A MILLION 3 D2 ELITE HIT PACK.. THE DOUBLE 1942-D2 FOOTBALLER YEAR-02.. 6.99 ACE OF ACES-D2 JAILBREAK D2... STRIKE FORCE COBRA .6.99 THE PAWN DISK 14.95 A.REALITY II DISK. WORLD GAMES D2. DANDY.. .6.99 TOP GUN D2. GREAT ESCAPE-02 .6.50 EXPERT PLUS ESM. 34.95 FREEZE FRAME 3. 37.95 FINAL CARTRIDGE. ** SPECTRUM ** PAPER BOY. COMMANDO 87 SCOOBY DOO.. SHAOLINS ROAD FIST II. IMPOSSABALL ARTIST 11 URIDIUM.. JAIL BREAK HEAD COACH NEMISIS. ACADEMY SIGMA 7. HARD BALL ELITE WINTER GAMES B. CLOUGHS FOOTBALL. DEEP STRIKE TOMAHAWK. FOOTBALLER OF YEAR..... LIGHTFORCE ACRO-JET.. ACE OF ACES SILENT SERVICE TRIVIAL PURSUIT EXPLORER FIRELORD. WORLD GAMES TT RACER 10TH FRAME GALLIPOLI. THANTOS THEATRE EUROPE. SUPER SOCCER DURELL BIG 4. DRAGONS LAIR II. KONAMI COIN-OP HITS... HIVE BATTLEFIELD GERMANY. THE PRESIDENT FAIRLIGHT II. ANNALS OF ROME. SCALEXTRIC.. SPACE HARRIER KNIGHTMARE RALLEY SOLD A MILLION 3. DESERT RATS.. LEADER BOARD. 6.50 6.99 6.99 ****AMSTRAD**** LEADER BOARD-02... ELITE-D4.............. IMPOSSABALL-D2 TOMAHAWK D2.... ALIENS-02 ...... KONAMI GOLF-D2. SCOOBY DOO D2... FOOTBALLER YEAR-02 NEMESIS D2............ TRIVIAL PURSUIT-D4. THANATOS-D2.. SUPER SOCER D2.. GAUNTLET 02. DANDY D2. 1942-02 IKARI WARRIOR-D2. SPACE HARRIER-D2. SILENT SERVICE D2. SIGMA 7.. THE ART STUDIO Disk.. HITCHHIKERS-6128/PCW...... ELITE HIT PACK D2 GAUNTLET DUNGEONS SACRED ANTRIAD-D2.. HARDBALL-D2.... BOMB JACK || D2. ***** ATARI ***** TRIVIAL PURSUIT — 04 ..... SKY RUNNER-D2... SPITFIRE 40-D2...... GAUNTLET D2... FIGHT NIGHT 02. LEADER BOARD 02. TOMAHAWK D2......... * ATARI ST* HACKER II.. TRINITY SUPER CYCLE.. LEADER BOARD. GAUNTLET ....... STRIKE FORCE HARRIER WINTER GAMES * JOYSTICKS * EUROMAX PROF PLUS QUICKSHOT II PLUS. QUICK SHOT II TURBO. KONIXS SPEEDKING COMP PRO 5000. 13.99 CHEETAH MACHI. 13.99 6.99 6.99 FOOTBALL MANAGEMENT de coco 10.95 6.99 6.50 6.50 6.99 6.50 6.99 6.99 6.99 5.50 6.99 6.99 0001 6.99 SCOOBY DOO-02 6.90 6.99 6.50 6.99 018 88888888888888888888 388 6.99 3 Classic Football Management Strategy Games for all football enthusiasts. Each of these Quality games is packed with GENUINE FEATURES to make them the most REALISTIC around. PREMIER II A COMPREHENSIVE LEAGUE GAME Play all teams home & away. Full squad details all teams, Injuries, Team styles, In-match substitutes, Named & recorded goal scorers, Comprehensive transfer market, 7 Skill levels, Financial problems, Job Offers, Morale, Save game and MUCH MUCH MORE! Price 48/128K Spectrum .95 Also available on the 64/128K Commodore PREMIER LEAGUE Includes many of the features of Premier II Price .50. WORLD CHAMPIONS — A COMPLETE WORLD CUP SIMULATION From the first friendlies, qualifying stages, tour matches and onto the FINALS Select from squad of 25 players, 2 In-Match substitutes allowed, Discipline table, 7 Skill levels and MUCH MUCH MORE! Incudes a full text match simulation with Injuries, Bookings, Sending off, Corners, Free kicks, Match timer, Injury time, Extra time, Goal times and MORE! Price 48/128K Spectrum .95 64/128K Commodore .95 EUROPEAN II-CAPTURES THE FULL ATMOSPHERE OF EUROPEAN COMPETITION Home & away legs, Away goals count double (if drawn), Full penalty shoot out (with SUDDEN DEATH), 7 Skill levels, 2 subs allowed, Pre-match team news, Discipline table, Full team & susbstitute selection. Disallowed Goals and MUCH MUCH MORE! Plus FULL TEXT MATCH SIMULATION. Price 48/128K Spectrum .95 64/128K Commodore .95 FANTASTIC VALUE Buy any 2 games Deduct .00 Buy all 3 games Deduct .00 All games are available for IMMEDIATE DESPATCH by 1st Class Post and include FULL Instructions. (add .00 outside UK). From: E & J Software, Room 5, 37 Westmoor Road, Enfield, Middlesex, EN3 7LE. .6.50 5.50 5.50 6.99 6.99 38.00 6.75 Disk version available: D1 .95, D2 .95, D3 .95, D4 .95. Post & Packing included in UK. Europe add  per tape. Elsewhere at cost. Chq/PO to: VISA Mail-Soft. PO Box 589, London N15 6JJ. Access and Visa orders welcomed If you do not see the game you want, simply deduct 30% of the RRP and we will send to you. (Except Budget Titles) Denotes new releases will be sent to you as soon as the game is released from the software house COMMODORE TITLES BEHERA UTILITIES & PERIPHERALS PEOPLE, MIG ALLEY ACE, JET SET WILLY II, ADVENTURE QUEST, LORDS OF TIME, INTERNATIONAL SOCCER, FOREST OF DOOM BOOK & TAPE, BIG CAVE ADVENTURE, SOUTHERN BELLE. .95 EACH WINTER GAMES, WHITE LIGHTNING, SUMMER GAMES II. .99 .95 EACH 0-BERT (CART), AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT. .95 EACH CHINESE JUGGLER, FASSEM, SUICIDE EXPRESS, WHIRLNURD, TONY HARTS ART MASTER, TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY, HEROES OF KARN, JUMPMAN, JACK ATTACK, TOY BIZZARE, BASILDON BOND, LUNAR OUTPOST, ROCK 'N' BOLT, DOUGHBOY, MASTER OF LAMPS, WORLD CUP II, WEB DIMENSION, ACTIVE COMPUTER LEARNING .95 EACH ONE ON ONE, MATCHFISHING, TOUCH TYPE, ARK PANDORA, BEAMRIDER, POTTY PIDGEON, CRAZY COMETS, MONTY MOLE, ZAXXON, KONG STRIKES BACK, TAPPER, SPIDERMAN/ HULK, BOMBO, WHO DARES WINS II. GYROSCOPE, FIGHTING WARRIOR, FLAK, MOTOCROSS, DARK TOWER, STAR TROOPER, JET SET WILLY, MONTY ON RUN, BEACHEAD, STARION, ROCK 'N' WRESTLE, MUGSYS REVENGE, ZORRO, BC'S QUEST FOR TYRES, MANIC MINER, SPELLUNKER, COMBAT LEADER, WIZARD OF WOR, QUAKE MINUS 1, JOURNEY. EDDIE KIDDS, GEOFF CAPES, DUMMY RUN, FRAK, SUICIDE STRIKE, JUICE, DRELBS. MOEBIUS, GHOST CHASER, IMHOTEP, BLACKWYTCH, OUTLAWS, PITSTOP. .95 EACH .95 .95 NEOS MOUSE & CHEESE Normally .95 Fantastic Value at .95 ZORK II .95 AM/FM TRIVIA MUSIC CHALLENGE  9.95 + 1.00 p&p ZORK III .95 SIMONS BASIC EXTENSION (DISC O CASS. STARCROSS .95 .95 DEADLINE .95 1551 DISC DRIVERS FOR C16 and +4 .95 SUSPENDED .95 FASSCM M/C LANG. ASS. LOGO LANGUAGE .95 TOUCH TYPE (CASS.) FIGHTING WARRIER .95 INTRO TO BASIC PT. II (CASS. REDHAWK .95 EASY FILE (DISC) ULTIMA III .95 PROGRAMMES REF GUIDES .95 CHIMERA WILLOW PATTERN .95 MACRO ASSEMBLER DEVELOPMENT (DISC) SOLD A MILLION .95 .95 GHOSTBUSTERS .95 FUTURE FINANCE (DISC) .99 CRITICAL MASS COMBAT LYNX .95 EASY SCRIPT .99 MURDER BY THE DOZEN .92 EASY SPELL DISC .99 COMMODORE 64 M/MAKER .50 BARGAINS BREDENS BASIC DISC & CASS. .95 FROM 1st PUBLISHING SCRIPT & WORD PROC. CART FOR C16 & +4 .95 8 BOOKS FOR JUST .95 + .50 p&p COMPANY PACK 123 ACCOUNTING CONTROL Normal RRP over .00 SYSTEM FOR +4 ON DISC .95 YOUR 64 CASSETTE BOOK, GRAPHICS BOOK FOR THE COMMODORE 64, PEAKS & POKES ASSEMBLER TUTOR DISC .95 C64, TRICKS & TIPS FOR YOUR COMMODORE PROGRAMMERS UTILITY DISC .95 64. ADVANCED MACHINE LANGUAGE BOOK HANDIC VIC SWITCH MULTI USER SYSTEM FOR THE C64, IDEA BOOK C64, MACHINE .95 LANGUAGE BOOK FOR THE C64 EPSON P40 PRINTERS .95 1st PUBLISHING PROGRAMS ON DISC.ALL JUST .95 EACH DISCS 10 FOR .95 FIRSTWORD (WORD PROC. FIRSTBASE (DATABASE) BASIC 64 p&p 1 3 titles 75p PASCAL (LANGUAGE 3 or more  1.00 ADA TRAINING COURSE Overseas .20 per tape McGRAW HILL CHEQUES PAYABLE TO EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE LOGIC MAIL ORDER LTD Min Order 5 Pieces ALL .50 EACH ALGEBRAIC RELATIONS, PROBLEM SOLVING I & II, Department 4 SKILL TESTER, SHAPES, COUNTING, FRACTIONS 17 Leofric Square I & II, WATER CYCLE, DECIMAL FRACTIONS PLACE VALUE MULTIPICATION I & II, ADDITION Eastern Industry & SUBTRACTION, MEMORY TRAINER Peterborough DICTIONARY USE, BALLOON GAME, ALPHABET Cambs. KNOW HOW, WORD POWER, HANGMAN 3. 4. 5. 6. GRAPHS 1. 2. DIVISION 1. 2. SET THEORY Tel: 0733 313870 .95 COMMODORE 64 DISCS MASTER OF LAMPS .95 DECATHALON RED ARROWS .95 RIVER RAID .95 RESCUE ON FRACTALUS PARK PATROL .95 PITFALL .95 PITFALL II .95 THING ON A STRING .95 PASTFINDER .95 WILLIAM WOBBLER .95 WEB DIMENSION BEAMRIDER .95 THE TRACER SANCTION DESIGNERS PENCIL .95 BALLBLAZER .95 GALACTIC CONTROLLER HIGH FLYER AZTEC CHALLENGE .93 NUMBER LEARNING .95 MONTY ON THE RUN .95 ARCADE EXTRAVAGANZA .95 MONEY MANAGER .95 SUPERMAN .95 RAILBOSS .95 ZORK 1 .95 DRAGONSKULLE, FIGHT NIGHT, TIGERS IN SNOW, KNIGHTS OF DESERT, LAW OF THE WEST. SELECT 1 (12 TITLES), HENRYS HOUSE VOL. I, HENRYS HOUSE VOL. II, SOLO FLIGHT, CONGO BONGO, MUSIC STUDIO, MERMAID MADNESS, WIZARDRY, MOON CRESTA, SPACE SHUTTLE, SKYFOX, CRITICAL MASS, QUESTPROBE, AMAZON WOMEN, BALL BLAZER RED ARROWS, MACADAM BUMPER, .95 CONTINUED THING ON A STRING, ZOIDS, BOUNDER, WILLIAM WOBBLER, REDHAWK, PARANOID. COMBAT LYNX, WORLD SERIES BASEBALL, HAMPSTEAD, TIME TUNNEL, BRIDGE PLAYER II PINBALL WIZARD, BOUNCES VIDCOM 64. ADVENTURELAND, SECRET MISSION, PIRATE ADVENTURE, VOODOO CASTLE .95 EACH DEVS EX MACHINA. THE FORCE, LITTLE COMP .95 .95 "


"PLAY BY MAIL Hi there! Wayne here again with another report about the wonderful world of PBM — that's Play-By-Mail for those of you who don't know. I'm chairman of the Play-by-Mail Players Association and each month I'll be teling you about the new games available, offering FREE play tests, news and, of course, Wayne's Wonder Offer. Plus lots more! Thanks to all you C+VG the planet's population and I readers who turned up at the devastated almost all of the land PBM conference last month. I masses. hope you had a great time and Once the dust had settled, it was look forward to meeting you all discovered that among the next year. mountains of rubble a few cities If you have any comments, good miraculously survived. or bad, about the conference, One of these cities is the once please feel free to drop me a line mighty city of Endlethorn. It was via the mag. A couple of FREE assumed by the powers that this start-ups will be forthcoming to city would be in the front line the writers of the most interesting when the war began, so it was letters. reinforced and fortified to survive As witnessed at the conference, the worst. although Play By Mail games are However, due to bad springing up all over the place, intelligence reports, enemy forces very few break the traditional never arrived and although it mould of the sword and sorcery received some bomb damage from stereotype. so-called conventional bombs, After a while, no matter how structural damage was minimal. It good the game is, most players get was missed totally by the nuclear frustrated continually bashing bombs, but it did receive its fair goblins and whacking gnomes, so they look for a new challenge to stretch their imaginations. They should find it in a new game called The Hunting that has recently appeared on the market, which to my mind is one of the most original and entertaining games that I have ever played. The Hunting is a game set in a fictional violent, vicious society, the actions of which are often bloody and shocking. Anyone of high morals or easily offended should steer away from this game as they may find it distasteful. THE HUNTING: IN PURSUIT OF EXCELLENCE? The Hunting is set on a planet called Felbin where 15 years ago the struggle for world supremacy led to the strategic use of nuclear weapons, which quite understandably, destroyed most of share of radiation and fall out. Crime is phenomenally high as The war was then \"won\" by the would be expected, with criminals new government who realised that on the rampage because shops, Endlethorn would make a perfect local services, pubs and hotels try place to imprison all the POWs, to continue as they did in the past. vagrants, outcasts, murderers and To stem this tide of rising crime, all the other law breakers. The the government recruited reason behind his logic is the fact Exterminators, men and women that the city is completely who have been trained in the art of surrounded by a 300ft high wall, survival and whose job is to enter which is 80ft thick and is patrolled the city and capture or kill the by many government troops who \"criminals\". This is where you are heavily armed. come in ... Furthermore the only way in or As a player, you can decide to out is via one of the 12 large gates become either a Criminal or an which are randomly spread around Exterminator and once you are the walls. put in the city you must initially The city, once used to keep survive on your own!! CHARACTER CLASS The Exterminator is basically a bounty hunter, who enters the city with money and weapons to sort out the criminals in whatever way you see fit. The most common way is to kill them and take their heads to one of the cities 12 gates and claim the bounty! With this you can buy better armour and weapons to go on our next hunt. You also receive a communicator with a secret preset wavelength. This enables you to contact Sweet Home, a female computer that is orbiting above the city. She can provide you with info, news, rumours and other useful statistics. The Criminal, meanwhile, is a people out, is now used to keep person who has been thrown into people in and to date no one has the city for their crimes against escaped! Many of the buildings society. You start off with some have been rebuilt and the original al money and the clothes on your citizens of the city who still have to back. It is your job to fight to live there (because they were not survive in the city, steal as much as allowed out by the new you can to protect yourself from government when the city became both other Criminals and a prison) try to live an ordinary\" Exterminators as well as life, pretending nothing has eventually rise to such a position! happened, but this is virtually to be able to track down and impossible as law and order is exterminate the non-existent. Exterminators!! continued "


"C+VG PLAY BY MAIL droids and cyborgs in abundance. Also, there is a sword and sorcery area for all you fantasy fanatics so you have no need to worry. There is a regular monthly newsletter whch is full of interesting helpful articles and if you like films like Mad Max (all parts), Westworld, Aliens, The Thing, Outland, Escape from New York (especially) then this game will be right up your street. WAYNE'S WONDER OFFER The usual price of joining The Hunting is .00 and you get three free turns. However C+VG readers will be able to get their CHARACTER Be very cagey about who and start up package for a REDUCED what you are. Never give this away PRICE of .50 and five Free CREATION unless you are 110 per cent sure rounds if you clip out and send the Once you have decided what to you can trust that person. token, plus a cheque/postal order be, you then have 300 points to When you start off in the city payable to DMC Games to this allocate as you wish between six you will usually meet a Non-Player column via the C+VG-magazine. major attributes, ranging from Character (NPC) on your first Further turns are priced at a Combat to Speed. round. Team up with them, find competitive .50. You then have to decide out what their skills are and STOP PRESS: The first ten whether or not you require a exploit them to the full. If you are readers who write in will have mutation. This is where the fun a criminal and your NPC is a car their cheques/postal orders really starts. You can take one of thief, get them to try to steal you a returned and get their start up the 20 mutations listed in the car. package plus initial rounds for rulebook or make up your own. Never wander the streets at ABSOLUTELY NOTHING. So For example, you can have an night on your own. Get shelter get writing!! extra limb or be a giant. You must even if it is in a derelict building. bear in mind, however, that Get away from the main gates PBM LONDON PUB although a mutation can have it's as soon as you enter the city. MEET advantages, it can also have disadvantages. Having an extra WAYNE'S VERDICT On the first Friday in every arm may make you better in Overall, having played this game month, PBM players from all over combat, but it will also make you for many rounds, I found this London and the surrounding stand out in a crowd and make you game to be one of the most counties meet upstairs in The more easily recognisable. The enjoyable I have ever played. Crown public house to chat about same can be said in respect of There are more than 750 A4 what's going on in all different becoming a giant. maps to collect (which are well games, learn about new PBMs as Once this is done all you have to drawn), over 100 weapons to use, well as meet different people and do is choose a couple of secondary 25-plus vehicles to find and 1,000s have a few beers. skills, which range from Car Theft of Non-Player Characters and The pub is situated in the to Gambling, as well as a previous monsters to interact with middle of Brewer Street, profession and away you go. You The Game Master's handPiccadilly, London W1. Of course send your start up sheet in and in a written replies are very descriptive all C+VG readers 18 and over are couple of days you will receive and exciting, combining hints with welcome to attend and buy me a your first round. It's then up to clues and interesting situations. beer) as new faces are always you to survive in the hostile world The city itself is really welcome. out there. wild. Parts of it are like a If you've never played before it doesn't matter, the experienced HINTS wild west town, with real cowboys, while players and GM's who attend are If you get a mutation, get one others are like more than willing to chat to you that doesn't show. Try and create Futureworld with about PBM in general to explain one of your own. Think of all the anything you are unclear about. sci-fi films you have seen. PLAYER OF THE MONTH From the next issue I will be running a Player of the Month competition, so I need all you PBM'ers out there to write into me nominating your selection. It can be for any reason. Your nomination could be because: The player is the number one in your game. The player is the most respected/disrespected you know. The player has achieved outstanding results in the least time. C+VG will print their picture along with a brief character description. Mail Domination, C+VG's very own PlayBy-Mail game, is now running very smoothly, reports Game Master David Bolton. A total of 31 games are now in play. Here's David's latest update Over Christmas and the New Year festivities, some deadlines were extended giving us a week-and-a/half free. At the start of 1987 the most advanced game is game 10 which has now had seven turns processed. Apart from a couple of 21 turn games, all of the other games have passed turn one. On the subject of Victory points, four more players had 62 points at the end of turn one and we picked two of these at random. Congratulations to Tom Coleman of Harrow, Middlesex (game 22) and F. Baxter of Becknell, (game 31) who both get five free turns and T-shirts from C+VG. Sixteen games have now passed turn three and John Neilson of East Kilbride game six leads the field with a creditable 92 points on this turn. Well done, your prize will get to you soon. One of the test games finished recently with the winner having 847 points so that gives you something to aim for! The highest number of cities owned by any player so far is five, only 15 to go to win. Two players have formed the 'Edge of the world club' having crossed the East/West edge and are now getting a full width map. All games are now precessed on the day after the deadline date, regular as clockwork. Over Christmas we did some time-travelling and managed to process some games several days in the future. This had the effect that players received results for a turn a day or two before that turn was processed. It also moved deadlines forward past Christmas the effect we really wanted. "


"WARNING LUT TOO LATE! 66000090 ill 30050001 00000000 BROSC000013 DOBS0000 Un TATING EFFECT OF WARN O OF THE euvre the and of colourful enough YOU OR PU OF_H DE ASTATTA, WE WERE ABOUT TO WARN KRAKOU, A two way test of skill and nerve-can you out manoeuvre the awesome ogre and blast a path through the myriad of colourful blocks and on the return, are your reflexes fast enough to retrieve the speeding missile, deflected from its block shattering journey or regurgitated contemptuously from the ogre's mouth. Graphically brilliant. Compulsively absorbing. At the highest levels your skill and speed must be exceptional.  BUT WE MISTIMED IT! DON'T LET THAT HAPPEN TO YOU-GET TO IT BEFORE IT'S TOO LATE! CBM64/128, Amstrad CBM64/128, Amstrad Por n Spectrum 48/128k, MSX TAPE .99 DISK .99 LATION TAPE .99 Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield Si 4DS. Tel: 0742 753423 DANGER: 100 ACTION PACKED SCREENS MEANS THIS GAME IS OVERLOADED WITH FUN!! "


"C+VG MAP C+VG Let the good times scroll. Welcome to the colossal world of Leviathan, English Software's Commodore 64/128 smash. And I.D.E.A.S Central proudly presents this exclusive map of the first two levels of this gigantic game. Next month we will print the third and final level of the game. You must negotiate the Leviathan ship through three different planet zones, facing the wrath and fire power of 10 different alien attack waves on each level. Your ship can bank, turn, climb, swoop, roll, reverse direction and land to refuel. The Leviathan can fly behind buildings, missile launchers and other hazardous structures. Game designer Philip Morris reckons he's produced a \"classic space game' where \"manoeuvrability of your ship is as important to survival as the shooting itself.\" If you cast your mind back to C+VG's February issue you'll remember we published a full colour poster of Leviathan. We had quite a number of people wanted to know if they could get copies. The answer is nounless you enter C+VG's Leviathan Competition. English Software has five large framed full colour copies of the artwork to give away. How can you get in with a chance of getting your hands on one? Simple. Just answer the following questions and send the answers to Leviathan Competition, Computer+Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1 3AU. Question. 1 What is a leviathan? Answer. 2 What has a man called Jonah go to do with it? Answer level one CASA ARENA A level "


"W level two . < level one 2 LEVIATHAN COMPETITION Name Address two    "


" The Final Challenge Launching soon on: For mail order enquiries please write to: Spectrum .95 Amstrad, Commodore tape .95 Amstrad, Commodore disc .95 NMC Limited, PO Box 67 London SW11 1BS or call on 01-228 6730 "


"Your warning not to send money to The Adventurer's Club Ltd was too late for me, as I had already sent off the money. After I read your warning I began to worry you tea-drinking Englishmen. slightly, but all was soon well. You see we are stuck with 60 The ACL have now got their points. We hear you laughing! act together. Although their Here in Iceland stop that lapse was unforgivable, laughing — we don't have an perhaps you could mention Adventure Helpline (your tea their return in the magazine. is getting cold) so we thought Paul Gilbert, warmly of good old Keith Nottingham. Campbell at C+VG. Keith's reply: Consider it We have just blown the mentioned, Paul! wind out of the adventure (a common thing but usually it In my life I've had, or rather happens to the man at the suffered, many lessons on keyboard) and are now riding humility. Like for instance, about on a horse. By clear way when I took my skateboard to of thinking we moved the the skating bowl, making an boulders — just took us a almost successful attempt at week to find out how — but breaking my neck. Or when I now we are stuck at the tried to impress that girl with Snowman. my knowledge of advanced It is a sad thing how many mathematics, demonstrating a magazines keep publishing topology theorem with the pictures from The Pawn we help of my shoelaces, tying have not yet met. We are both shoes together in the dying to get there. process, and denting the Can you help us poor pavement with my nose Pawns? Your tea probably has shortly afterwards. an ice-crust by now. Playing But humble, real humble I adventures is our only excuse mean, I only learned to be for being alive, so please stop when I received your postcard laughing and answer us. with the answer to Zork 2's Alvar Sverrisson and Ulfar riddle! Erlinesson, Question: You wrote about Hafnarfirdi, packing and leaving. Did you Iceland. mean you are leaving the job Keith's reply: White heat will and retiring — after all, you disable the white man! It aren't so old are you? might even bring my cold cup Javier Candeira, of tea back to life! Madrid. Keith's reply: No, of course I would like to pass not! Just my cunning way of comment on Malcolm getting Metcalfe in a good Harden's letter (December). I enough mood to let me go on play adventures for the fun (?) holiday! of solving the puzzles, and the contentment of finishing a We are two ice cold game. I do not play them to adventurers who both own pick petty holes in the logic of Atari STs and love them the game. dearly. Now those who own an I would be very pleased if I Atari ST know it is their duty had a spacesuit that stopped to own The Pawn. This game me from becoming is the reason we are writing to decomposed and thereby finishing the game, I would Rainbird recently unveiled not care if I were supposed to the Amstrad PCW8256 die through cold and lack of version of The Pawn, priced at oxygen before I decomposed. .95. It comes on both sides Anyway, one point I do o f one disk, and, with agree with this fellow on is monochrome graphics, mis-spelling. It can be very supports the Dither and frustrating, publishers and Stipple commands, which programmers should sort out changes the way the picture is their games before they are presented. As in previous published. If they are working graphics versions, the roller to a deadline, I am sure the blind effect is used for display. public would prefer to wait a A new feature to appear in this few weeks extra rather than version, is an extended RAM try and struggle through an SAVE option. Up to three adventure with atrocious different positions may be spelling, making the game saved in memory at a time, virtually unplayable. giving the player the ability to Gavin McNamara, instantly recover within a Bristol. session, without the need to Keith's reply: I suppose it resort to disk. depends on how much credibility one wants in an adventure. But I always Guild Of Thieves, the next understood that blood boils in adventure scheduled by space due to zero pressure, Rainbird from Magnetic and that's what gets you first! Scrolls, is due out any time now. It will be less difficult For Malcolm Harden's than The Pawn, but with sake, I know two people who \"superb graphics\", claims spell manoeuvre Anita Sinclair. Magnetic \"MANOEVEOR\"; one of Scrolls has a hectic schedule them is a 2'1\" pygmy who lives ahead of it. A third at the bottom of my compost adventure is planned for heap, and the other is a nine release in March. Upon legged Martian currently Westminster Bridge — a title employed as a programmer at openly stolen from Software Projects ... Wordsworth, it will be a Finally, I urge you never, mystery of sorts, but with a EVER, to print any matter very novel approach. \"I'm relating to an abysmally very excited about it, but some terrible game called The Code, people might not even like it published by Soft Concern, ...» Anita told me. If you unless it is an epitaph. It is the find you don't you won't have most infuriatingly illogical to wait long for their next game ever. In it, north equals offering — planned for release south unless of course you in July know what the hell you're doing, which is about as common as catching a cold Incentive's Graphic from a strawberry-flavoured Adventure Creator is now oak tree! available for the BBC and Matthew Conway, Electron. On tape only, it is Lambourn, Berkshire. priced at .95, and offers a Keith's reply: Sorry, I already unique CHAIN feature, which mentioned The Code — in a enables the user to create review in November 1984. I massive multi-part adventures. quoted Kevin Plunkett as This adds to the existing range saying: \"... the instructions of computers supported by tell you that nothing is what it GAC Amstrad, Spectrum, seems.' and Commodore 64. "


"G+VG 2HELPLINE try. What are the better of her, and she gets tell Metcalfe -the way things the three killed off by Maxwell's Silver are going this month I'm objects you Hammer, and the need of a heading for the sack!) Helen would most certain substance. Stoddart writes to say, that like to take into an If you can help to give her a contrary to the advice given in adventure game? new lease of life, let me know. the November issue, it IS Lamps and keys seem to And then it will be up to possible to escape from the be the favourite items, but Mandy to swap one answer for dungeon in Zim Sala Bim, some unusual objects, as well, would like: A C+VG with a another! providing you have the featured in the lists that came complete solution in it. A Meet two victims of scimitar. pouring into the Penthouse. skeleton key to enable him to hypothermia. \"How the deuce Examine the door, and cut Paul Exley came up with a get through any locked door. do I keep from freezing in the the bars. The you should be very strange selection! To start A bottle of Perrier — just in coach in Dracula? I can't come able to open the door and with, he would like a spell case! up with anything!\" complains continue on your way, says book that Paul Coppins has Up to now we have not Rex Barnes of Bromley. Helen. finished with. indulged in printing complete He's obviously in the same Who's hiding the Dymethium Believe me, Paul, when solutions to adventures. coach as Andrew Gurr, also Crystals in Marie Celeste? Coppins has finished with a However, so many people shivering away and getting Steven Robinson of Watford spell book, you can guarantee have been requesting them, nowhere. Look closely Rex — can't find them — but he's got that every last bit of magic has that we thought we'd give it a right into her eyes! all the rest. Come on, tell him been used up! Help for Robert Saunders, where you've put them! Next Paul chose a Swiss But where to begin? From who was stuck in See Ka, Henry Mueller runs the army knife, and some chewing the mail and the calls we get comes from Declan Malone of Adventurers' Club Ltd., and gum, useful, he reckons, for from the Adventure Club Tralee. You must fit the recently came across a game getting past unfriendly phone-in Helpline, we thought blowpipe in the mesh, and for the TRS-80 on which he dragons. Eh??? it was about time to help then breath through it after keeps the club records. Phil Davidson of people suffering from ants, getting the casket. Xenos is not a widely played Fraserburgh, as well as a lamp, domes, and hi-grav! Daniel Livingstone has three adventure. It is on disk only, would like a towel. This would So elsewhere in these things to say about a Snowball and was published by Tandy. I be very important for those Adventure pages you will find clue printed in the January '86 reviewed it in August '83, but called Arthur Dent, he thinks. all the secrets of Hulk, at last. issue. «I don't understand», never completed it. Also for throwing in, Phil, Next month, we hope to bring \"Eh?\", and \"arfle Barfle Now Henry is stuck, in the when you get stuck! you the lowdown on The Gloop!\" alien spaceship. He has Phil's third most useful Boggit! January '86 issue, Daniel? explored the inside quite object to take into an Write and let us know Where did you come across thoroughly, but doesn't know adventure is Paul Coppins. whether you like plainthat — in a museum? I what he should do next. You think so? Drop him in an speaking solutions, or whether consulted the archives, and Can the combined might of adventure, and he's burrow off you would prefer a more thought that was one of my C+VG readers beat the into the nearest pile of cryptic approach. more informative clues! Adventurers Club members in methane snow, and escape People never let you forget, being the first to come up with with all the treasures, Phil! do they? Yes, Mr Atkinson, I an answer for Henry? From Gregory Quinn of DID make a blunder back in Portadown comes this list. April! But I will not give in to Grup Some wine, so if you get blackmail so you will NOT get frustrated you can get stoned Mandy Rodrigues of the t-shirt, nor the ,000 that out of your brain and forget Llandudno knows the TRUE you demanded! about everything. A light — identity of The Fiend! But she You can tell Gordo no adventure is complete won't tell me! «Don't let him Greatbelly all about it, for all I How do you make the stake in without one. A Leather upset you. He isn't worth it,\" care! Castle Of Terror? It is a Goddess comic book «to keep she says. Now, can any player of popular question, and the up the moral\"! I think you Oh well, the Big Red t-shirt Causes Of Chaos help this popular answer is: Break the really meant \"morale\" there, bribe didn't get her to tell me, dastardly reader to get into the spear to make the stake. 'But Gregory, but then again, but perhaps her thirst for clues cave at the top of the slimy it doesn't work!\" you all cry. seeing as it's the Leather will get the better of her! steps. It sounds like the best Well, here is Mike Thomas of Goddesses, perhaps not ... Mandy is going bananas! place for him! Caerphilly, with a definite Finally, Gavin McNamara Playing Beatle Quest is getting Another boob (shh! don't tone in his voice: \"Attack the hose 62 "


"DVENTURE CLUES Count with the spear and he will become a vampire bat. THEN break the spear into the stake.\" Thanks Mike! Now, is THAT any better? wlqoid Ayols e — pALOSSIP q isnu drsuey yL412vy \"Tbu, 4s  ISIA put oio e dros  rewel jo ino lydienis 08 Tel jo ino oSuazaag K8poa pl   q isnu sdop yL :I yoz \"Ukxo stl 01 ALLA Jylo yi udo Uyi 'se: yi 148!1 'se8 srf. oj s i J0  do *J! y yw 148! 1 jo po yi v OL :Yp?ssy fo vy ds !128 01 Seja y: ur st[edAO Inok noway vuueds y1 Y!M Shoq joyuew yi opun :snisyl balold inox jopq v) 108 vvwos sdequad ceispd yi vpun Suryjkue puy 1 uro UMOJ OYL MOJE UP 101 t kino pue'moq e 1oj kY V upofunp ay deys 01 '! nd uyi pue 'I MOJL 11880g ayl ifr nok jeym njaney q pue Alinleo woo ipq yi u! Fury1.jR wex onopia quoqy1 Y!M ofld, A01 11!y uyi fryun! yi yory ppjuo difvw Allydiary'sewoyl ! pe pionem fuosuqo UIS : Wolj 'yuou sy dpy yi joj syuey Santo TNINGAV Apologies to our Australian readers, whose copies of C+VG arrived too late even for the two-month period allowed to enter the competition. Margot Stuckley of Marayong, NSW, sent an entry despite this, saying that the issue arrived 13 days after the competition had closed. We didn't realise that you were so far behind the times down there! experienced adventure player to man or woman the telephone on Friday afternoons when we run our Adventure Helpline Phone-In. Although we've got literally thousands of clues for hundreds of games, a personal knowledge of adventures would be an advantage. The qualities we're looking for are some one who stays cool and calm when bombarded with the most obscure questions and a good telephone manner. And because C+VG's offices are in London, it would be convenient if you lived locally. EN9 The mysteriously named Fudge writes from the depths of North London, according to a snow smudged postmark, pleading for help with Heroes of Karn. How do you get rid of the Barrowight, asks Mr, Mrs, Master or Miss Fudge. There are two answers both of which have been known to work — but not always! Either say to Beren:\" Read bible to barrowight\" or to say to Beren \"Attack barrowight with bible.\" A recent stint on the Adventure Helpline phone-in (for club members only) produce a crop of Morden's Quest questions. Due to a mental block bombined with a mis-placed file, I couldn't help at the time. I hope the following is still of use. Finding and filling the aqualung was causing some headaches — not to say a shortage of breath. To get the tough, fearless people, afraid aqualung swin N aqualung swin North as far as of nothing. I never thought possible and then North West. you were all shy. Yes, that's To fill it move NNN SE USE the conclusion I'm forced to DNE. come up with since my appeal Where is the cigar? It's in to you — couple of months the space age. And to pass the back. invisible barrier you have to spray it. Eureka continues to hold its fascination for a lot of people. So here's a blast from the past with a few clues from Roman Times. To escape the leper I wanted you to send me colony you must give the egg photographs of yourselves to the mad leper. Don't try along with the letters, hints and mix it with the lion. Leave and help you send me. The it alone and it will not try to response, quite frankly, was underwhelming and yet the kill you. And before you go to Nero's party have a bath first number of letters I receive and buy the sandles after you each month remains the same have met Nero. overwhelming! What's wrong? Don't you want to be a star in your home, school or office? Get those photographs sent in. Here's looking at you, kids I hope. Craig Walker, from Edinburgh, wants to know how to cure the black death in Kentilla. First get the red scroll from the chest, and then some dried moss. Cast Cure. He also wants to know how How would you like to join to escape from the dungeon. C+VG's adventure review Get Kentilla and kill the Urga team? Yes, you did read that Maul when he enters. When correctly. We're offering you you kill Urga Maul examine the chance to join the world's him three times. best adventure team and the I always thought of all you world's best computer mag. adventurers out there as We're still looking for an Interested? Write to C+VG and in not more than 50 words tell us why you think you would be suitable. Apologies to US Gold/ Adventuresoft are due. In last month's C+VG I reviewed the brilliant\" to quote myself Kayleth and said it was a pity there was no RAM save. I was wrong there is a RAM save. It hadn't been included on the preproduction copy I was supplied with. "


"COMPUTER REPAIR CENTRE The only AMSTRAD SPECIALISTS recommended by Amstrad Repairs also undertaken for all the following computers: SPECTRUM, COMMODORE, ATARI, BBC, IBM NO HIGH FREE The established company with a proven reputation NO HIGH FIXED PRICE REPAIR! SOFTWARE WORTH  WITH EVERY WITH EVERY SPECTRUM REPAIR Over the years we have built up an enviable reputation in the UK for computer repairs, which is second to none. This is based on many years experience in repairing Spectrum, Commodore, BBC and other leading makes and we were the first AMSTRAD repair centre anywhere. This is why we have customers all over the world. We are the best forget the rest, look what we offer DON'T DELAY ACT TODAY It's as easy as ABCI A Si No high fixed price you only pay what the repair actually costs. While-U-Wait Service spare parts for all leading computers available over the counter. State of the art test equipment to provide comprehensive test report and locate faults. Repairs to all leading makes of computer. Amstrad specialist. Spectrum rubber keyboards repaired for only .95. Commodore 64's, Vic 20's, Atari, Commodore 16's and Plus 4's repaired. Discounts for colleges, schools etc. Every computer repaired by us is completely overhauled and tested before return. All computers returned carriage paid and covered by insurance. Three months guarantee included. Free Software worth  with every Spectrum repair. DISCOUNT COMPONENTS e.g. Power Transformers Simply send your computer securely packed, together with a cheque or postal order for the maximum fee to the address below. Your computer will be repaired and returned to you within 24 hours together with the balance of the fee and your FREE  worth of software. Or if you prefer a written quotation just send .50 to cover post & packing. Alternatively just quote your Access or Visa card number. BBC AMSTRAD REPAIRS AMSTRAD REPAIRS from REPAIRS SPECTRUM REPAIRS from Jf7 to .90 from 635f12 to  Commodore .00 +.50 p.p. Spectrum .95 + .50 p.p. COMMODORE REPAIRS from  to V  to  SAA 12 VISA SPECIALIST COMPUTER I N REPAIR CENTRE Dept. 18, Unit 4, M.E.B.Works, Windsor Road, Enfield, Redditch, B97 6DJ. Tel:Redditch 65671. WE SET THE STANDARD BY WHICH EVERYONE ELSE IS JUDGED Access Trade orders welcome 64 "


"KONAMI'S COIN-OP HITS GREAT ARCADE GAMES FOR THE PRICE OFONE Voted...BEST COMPILATION OF THE YEAR\" Vie ATKUNG-FU  Kuonami Konami  PING PONG   NOT INCLUDED FOR THE C16 Gonami Konami NOT INCLUDED FOR THE BBC MICRO Konami SCORE 900400 HO od ACC 8,3528 %97E. * 35836 SIGYSSORE 381 8: 183 ARE 39° 45° | 110 > Konamai PITICES CPU YOU BEO BRRRRRRR NI 0910 25 SERVKE TIME KONAMI COIN-OP HITS SPECTRUM COMMODORE AMSTRAD C16. BBC CASSETTE DISK TWIN CASSETTE PACK PACK Haemme GlaerGlo Screen shots taken from various computer formats .95 14.95 Imagine Software (1984) Limited, 6 Central Street, Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone: 061-834 3939 Telex: 669977. Distributed in France by Ocean France Telephone: 93-42-7144. Distributed in Germany by Rushware Telephone: 2101-70040, "


"+VG I.D.E.A.s Central Warning: Reading this could damage your sense of adventure. C+VG Keith Campbell probably knows more about adventures than any other person. Each month he will bring you all the clues and help needed to solve a top adventure. Now read on for Campbell's Complete Solution No 1— The Incredible Hulk. The Incredible Hulk was the employed in many adventures BITE LIP will cause him pain, and first adventure in Scott today), short text, few locations achieve his release. An alternative Adams' Marvel Comics and little character interaction, to command is ROCK CHAIR, Questprobe series. Written in be appreciated it has to be taken in which will cause him to fall and hit 1984, it was developed on the the context of Scott Adams own his head. TRS-80, as were all of Scott's special brand of adventure. Dome 1: \"original\" series. A Scott Adams adventure is Objects present: Broken chair, Hulk was quickly converted to typically a series of logical puzzles Mirror. Gem, Metal Hand Fan, UK formats, and the larger set around a theme, rather than a Large ring set into the floor. memory machines, such as the narrative story with puzzles Exits: East. Spectrum, allowed graphics to be introduced along the way. Actions: Since gas has seeped into added and held in memory for The puzzles are highly the room, Bruce cannot maintain instant display. interlocked, and together form his Hulk alter-ego, and neither Originally priced at around the one big puzzle leading to the possesses nor knows how to get  mark, it was later sold in a solation of the game. sufficient strength to pull the ring cut-price twin-pack with Perhaps this is more true of at this stage. GET FAN and GET Spiderman, and more recently was Hulk than of any other, in which GEM. The mirror is not essential, re-released on the Americana many of the problems are rather but can be used to check whether lable, for a budget .99. abstract, and where a mere 18 or not Bruce Banner is Hulk. GET Many of the reviewers of the locations serve to conceal 17 gems, MIRROR, GO EAST. day had seen little, if any, of which must be obtained and TUNNEL 1: Scott's work before, conversions stored. There's a twist in the tail. Objects present: Sign, Button. of his games to micros like the too! Exits: West (back to the dome) Go Spectrum and BBC were only just Out (from the tunnel) appearing. Heavily criticised by Actions: The sign warns that there some for employing what was seen is a Hi-Grav area ahead. as an obsolete (two-word) parser SOLUTION Therefore, Bruce must be Hulk to (although still very successfully BOUND IN A CHAIR: withstand the forces, or else he will be killed and transported to Pitching the player right into a Limbo. But every time he tries to problem at the start, Bruce become Hulk, gas flows into the Banner must escape his bonds room, and he reverts to Bruce. before any progress can be made. Experimentation with the button, Those who are familiar with will reveal that it is a toggle switch Bruce's strange powers, will between «Delay On\" and Delay realise that he transforms to the Off\". This refers to a delay in the massive and powerful Hulk, when appearance of the gas. PRESS he becomes angry. Therefore BUTTON, BITE LIP, and GO OUT. LIMBO: This is the location where Bruce Banner/Hulk is always transported when killed. The game can be continued from here, by going down (D) which leads to the first dome. However, a death which leads to the destruction of the Bio Gem makes the game impossible to complete without a fresh start. FIELD 1: Objects present: Large Dome Gem. Exits: North, South, East West. Actions: Reached by successfully GOing OUT from the dome. GET GEM. Due to the enormous strength of Hulk, the dome can be lifted to reveal another GEM. LIFT DOME, GET GEM. A hole can be dug, and on entering the whole, digging once more will reveal another Gem. Further digging will lead to death in the molten care of the earth. DIG. GO HOLE, GET GEM, U, and then on to the next location, E (ALL of the compass points lead to the same location. To return to the dome, GODOME must be used.) FUZZY AREA: Objects present: Sign. Exits: North, South, East, West. Actions: READ SIGN reveals that this is where the Gems must be dropped. So DROP GEMs. "


"MYSTERY IN sweet .WOONVB N,SE,W RANDOM Solution Map by Keith Campbell RANDOM NIS.E.W RANDOM RANDOM S.E.W RANDOM NS,E,W S.E,W FIELD EXPLANATION OF NECESSARY OBJECTS LIMBO STRATEGY: From the fuzzy area, movement in METAL HAND FAN any direction EXCEPT NORTH leads to a random location. Once WAX and once only, Hulk is transported BOUND IN 16 GEMS IN to the office of the Chief Examiner START IN DOME TUNNEL FIELD (Scott Adams.) BIO SEM CHAIR O * O At other times, he finds himself * DENOTES LOCATION in a FIELD by a DOME. This is something of an optical illusion, OF GEMS leading to the conclusion that UNDERHOLE there is only one field, and only GROUND one dome. ROOM O BIO In fact there are three of each, and the field to which Hulk moves NORTH is random. FUZZY CAVERN RANDOM To distinguish between each CHIEF S.E.W field: The field through which AREA EXAMINER'S * * OFFICE Hulk has passed has now a LARGE HOLE Field 2 looks identical, but with no hole. Field 3 DOME TUNNEL FIELD DOME TUNNEL has lots of tiny holes. To move to the required field involves repeatedly moving from the fuzzy area, in any direction except north, until Hulk is in the HOLE HOLE right place. (2) Going north from the fuzzy area leads to an underground room. bees have gone), E, and return to This should not be entered yet, or room as Hulk now, EAT EGG, pointing to the baseboard. SCRATCH WALLS. A crack it will be impossible to complete the field via the tunnel, and thence EXAMNE BASEBOARD reveals a gas outlet. PLUG the fuzzy area. DROP GEMs. the game. appears in the floor. GO CRACK. OUTLET, WITH WAX. FIELD 3: CHIEF EXAMINER'S OFFICE: IN A CAVERN: HIT HEAD now allows Bruce Objects present: Large Dome, Objects present: Chief Examiner, Objects present: Ultron, Cage, Desk, Door to remain Hulk inside the dome, Gem, Tiny holes. and the projection of Dr Strange Gem. Exits: North, South, East, West, Exits: None. Exits: Go crack. Action: EXAMINE DESK to find remains. SPEAK STRANGE. He and Go Dome. Actions: This is where you need a Gem. GET GEM and GO Actions: Remaining in this area for replies: \"Remember your worst the ants, but you cannot now DOOR. At this point the Chief more than one move, results in the enemy \"SPEAK STRANGE next escape from these two rooms, Examiner will banish Hulk from produces an ad for Spiderman. emergence of an army of alien ants unless you have opened up an exit through the tiny holes. These his office, returning him to the SPEAK STRANGE once more in the roof of the underground fuzzy area. DROP GEM. causes him to give you another attack Hulk's eyes. It is therefore Gem before disappearing. GET room by pulling the ring in the first necessary to repeatedly move FIELD 2: dome. Objects present: Large Dome, GEM and GET WAX before between here and the fuzzy area. This can be achieved returning to the fuzzy area to Gem. to store the Gems. GET GEM. E beforehand, by using the DROP GEMs. Exits: North, South, East, West. to fuzzy, DROP GEM. Then THE UNDERGROUND ROOM: Nightmare command before Actions: EXAMINE DOME here return to field, LIFT DOME, E. entering the dome. To carry the Objects present: Bio Gem, Natter will show that there is a mesh built Return again, GET GEM, E, ants CLOSE EYES. They then Energy Egg into the wall, a fact which can DROP GEM. Return and DIG, attack the nose, so HOLD NOSE. GO HOLE, DIG-four times Exits: None apparently. henceforth be used to identify this p To stop them then entering your here! — GET GEM, U, E, DROP Actions: This room is always dome. Inside the dome are bees, ears, PLUG EARS, WITH WAX. reached by going north from the which must be got rid of. WAVE GEM. Return once more, GO fuzzy area. Gas reduces Hulk to Now Bruce must carry them FAN will produce the question DOME. Bruce, who soon dies if he remains from their field to Antman, and all \"At what?\" AT DOME will send TUNNEL 3: in the room. EXAMINE WALLS this must be done \"blindfold\", as a gale at it, and on arrival in the Objects present: Sign, Gem. reveals scratch marks, but Bruce he daren't open his eyes whilst dome, the bees will be gone. Exits: West to dome, Go out to has insufficient strength to scratch carrying the ants. On releasing Meanwhile, do the same as at the field. Antman, another Gem appears. the walls. previous dome: LIFT DOME, Actions: GET GEM, W. On Moreover, the natter energy egg GET GEM GET GEM, DIG, GO HOLE, return, don't forget to HIT explodes, taking Bruce and the COMPLETING THE GAME: DIG — seven times here! — GET HEAD before entering the field. Bio Gem with it. Without the Bio All that remains is to return to the GEM, U. Then GO DOME. Gem, the game cannot be fuzzy area, and drop the Gems TUNNEL 2: Objects present: Gem. completed. currently being carried. Then the Objects present: Sign. Exits: East to tunnel. Hulk needs extra rage to be able Bio-Gem can be collected and Exits: West (to the dome), Go Out Actions: GET GEM. There seems to withstand the gas long enough stored. But this must be the last (to the field) to be nothing else to do here. But to survive in this room. action, or the Bio Gem will Actions: W into the dome. On the surely the dome wouldn't be here . The clue to this was given by Dr disappear before the rest of the way back, don't forget to BITE for no purpose other than to house Strange — REMEMBER gems are stored, and the score will LIP before entering the field, to a Gem? Try HIT HEAD. An NIGHTMARE, which should be not reach 100. withstand the gravity. astral projection of Dr Strange, commanded from the fuzzy area The fuzzy area should finally DOME 2: appears, and then vanishes. Hulk before going north. house 16 Gems and one Bio Gem. Objects present: Bees (if not reverts to Banner due to the gas. In fact, this works even if Type SCORE to receive the endalready vanquished) and Wax. After doing this a number of Strange hasn't passed the of-game password — but you'll Exits: East. times, at random, a message will message. have to sort that out for Actions: GET WAX (providing appear, saying that Strange is Immediately on entry to the yourselves. DOME 3: Ends "


"Boot REVIEWS LABYRINTH som The next scenario then loads discovered, you walk through  SUPPLIER: The Labyrinth. Now the to find yourself in the Brick ACTIVISION/ text description screen turns Hallway. The picture of your LUCASFILM  MACHINE: CBM 64 into a graphics screen, in character (dressed in your PRICE: .99 which, by moving the joystick, favourite colour) is as you VERSION TESTED: you control the characters' would expect from Lucasfilm AMSTRAD REVIEWER: MATTHEW movements both across the large and well defined. It him in his hidden world, or screen, and into and out of it, gets bigger and smaller as you After reading the preview of forever to be in his thrall. as you run around looking for move in and out of the screen, Labyrinth in December's Naturally you decide to find objects and characters. giving the graphics a degree of C+VG, I was quite excited him, and defeat this terrible The exit from here is perspective, which along with when I eventually got my man. cleverly disguised, but when the animation of the character, hands on a copy. makes it look as though it were Once loaded, the game asks an actual film. you some questions to In each scenario, by using establish your sex, name, and the word wheels, you take your favourite colour, before various objects which help in taking you into the first of 23 scenarios. Most of these are the same Is as in the film, but although the characters are the same, the story itself is different. You begin in your home town, outside a cigar store. The screen is split into two sections. The top describes the area in adequate text, while the lower section contains two your adventure word-wheels. You view the Although, as the title wheels edge on, and their suggests, the game is a rotation is controlled through labyrinth, it is no boring maze the keyboard. One has a large game, as new ideas are selection of verbs, and the cleverly added for extra other has various nouns. The variety. Deeper into the vocabulary available in each ask nerd labyrinth you need to play wheel is constantly changing, arcade-type games to achieve enabling you to carry out a certain goal, including the commands suitable to the final defeat of Jareth. These situation in hand. give the game another exciting The system of word-wheels aspect, along with the word only allows two-word input, wheels and joystick control. but it can be used very quickly This is a terrific game, only and gets rid of the problem of spoiled by delay whilst loading finding the correct up each new scenario a combination of words. The small price to play for such a answer is there you just brilliant game. have to learn how different object and characters respond. VOCABULARY  ATMOSPHERE The first scenario ends at  PERSONAL the cinema. Here you see VALUE Jareth, the Goblin King on the film screen, in glorious animated graphics. He challenges you to find "


"SCORCHING IDEAS FROM HI-TECH TRILOGIC MADE SPECIALLY FOR YOUR COMMODORE 64/128 BACK-UP! TRANSFER! CONVERT! ANY PROGRAM TO TAPE OR DISK WITH THIS 9xper CARTRIDGE NOW WITH BUILT IN E.S.M.! TAPE TO DISK ONLY 137.50 DISK TO TAPE  DISK TO DISK  TAPE TO TAPE Easy to use plug-in system that outperforms all other similar products.  Programs are saved in one file Freezes and saves programs to disk or tape  Now handles some Multipart programs Programs compacted to reduce diskspace used You can save 3 or more programs per disk Reloads most programs in less than 30 seconds (disk) The cartridge is not needed for loading back Cartridge uses RAM and disk-based software  Instant upgrading. Only $2.00 exchange disk/tape  Use the machine code monitor to cheat, gain extra lives or restart the program, etc, etc. The Expert & ESM transfers even 'Expert Proof games. Including games no other similar cartridge can handle. THE ORIGINAL EXPERT IS STILL AVAILABLE FOR .95 DOES ALL BUT 6 GAMES! OTHER HI-TECH TRILOGIC PRODUCTS The SoundSplitter for your C64 / 0128. PLUG IN 80 COLUMNS THE I-CON COLUMN RGB1 INTERFACES FOR C128 TRILOGIC have done the impossible! Converted RGB1 into RGB. Your RGB TV/monitor becomes a 128 compatible RGBl monitor when you use an l-Con interface. ONLY .95 ESM ADD-ON MAKES YOUR OLD EXPERT EQUAL TO THE NEW AVAILABLE FOR EXPERT + ESM. ONLY .95! INCLUDES FREE UP GRADE DISK 5 FREE CATALOGUE SEND 18p STAMP MAIL ORDER Dept 29 HOLME LANE BRADFORD BD4 OQA CALLERS 329 TONG STREET BRADFORD BD4 9QY Tel (0274) 684289 SPECIFY DISK OR TAPE Please send equipment as ordered SEND S.A.E. FOR DETAILS OF EITHER. Name ................. Name Address.... FAST MAIL ORDER SERVICE O PROMPT DESPATCH ALL PRICES FULLY INCLUSIVE PLUS 10 DAY MONEY BACK GUARANTEE ON ALL BACK-UP DEVICES. ORDERING: WRITE OR 'PHONE X PAYMENT BY CASH CHEQUES PAYABLE TO TRILOGIC POSTAL ORDER OR ACCESS EXPORT ADD .OO EXTRA PAYMENT IN STERLING ONLY PLEASE All prices include VAT & P&P Complete this coupon with your name/address etc and attach to your order and payment/cheque. Post off to Trilogic Dept CVG29 HOLME LANE BRADFORD BD4 OQA "


"GVG B REVIEWS  SUPPLIER: COMPASS SOFTWARE  MACHINE: SPECTRUM 48K/ AMSTRAD PRICE: .50 MAIL ORDER ONLY FROM COMPASS SOFTWARE, 36 GLOBE PLACE, NORWICH, NORFOLK NR2 25Q VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM REVIEWER: KEITH do not wish to view urinals, there is a \"picture off» command available. The text (I did notice a couple of minor slips in Starting grammar and spelling) is off in the Prof's nicely laid out, attractive and laboratory, you discover that easily read. A different colour the computer is programmed is used for location, exits, to self destruct, taking you and objects and messages text. the laboratory with it. This is There is also a useful STORE with a turbo-load, this Quilled and Illustrated adventure claims to be the first to use The Press, Quill's textcompression add-on, before it became commercially available. There is certainly plenty of text, but it is the detail and colour in the graphics, particularly the really smart 2 THE O ZONE Tim Kemp and Jon Lemon wrote Project X Microman, (reviewed November 1985; Paul Coppins personal rating 7) which later became (the best) part of the Fourmost Adventure compilation. The O'Zone is a sequel by the same authors, although there is no need to have played its forerunner. Professor Richards, the scientist involved in Project X, has disappeared. Your task is to solve the mystery of his disappearance, and to recover the secret Project X papers. the first problem you must overcome. and RECALL command for Events soon lead you to the in-memory saves. airport, and a fraught flight, in The vocabulary is continuation of your search — reasonable, with an not before some fun in the explanatory screen displayed departure lounge and a visit to each time the game is the gents' toilets' though! restarted. If you need to get Here, as in all the graphics, back to it, all you have to do is the details are impeccable. STORE, QUIT, and play Four urinals are shown in a again, RECALLing your neat row, with an open cubicle original position. in the distance, but for the I played the Spectrum benefit of maiden aunts who version. Very quick to start up loading screen, which gives the game a polish worthy of a more commercial launch than I suspect Compass Software is able to mount. An interesting adventure, with plenty of problems, but not too difficult. A must at .50! 00 VOCABULARY ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL VALUE SUPPLIER: INCENTIVE SOFTWARE MACHINE: CBM 64/ SPECTRUM 48K/AMSTRAD PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: KEITH Your Cessna light aircraft crash lands near the Himalayas, and after managing to free yourself, you struggle across the frozen waste in search of help. Your mission had been to meet a Professor of Archeology, who sought your opinion on evidence he had discovered of a lost Tibetan civilisation. Before long, in your efforts to find help and shelter, you stumble across it. This is the setting for a seasonal piece of rather contrived puzzles, set amidst ice and snow. As you walk on, but it is apparent that you have no money. Being in possession of a rare egg, and bumping into a Professor of Ornithology. I felt it worth trying for some cash. Unfortunately, every way I tried to interest the Prof in the egg, showed him to be a very wooden figure indeed. This is the second game in Incentive's Medallion series, and has plenty of nice snowy graphics, although many of them are very similar to each other Not a bad game overall, but I found it difficult to get on the same wavelength, and reached a personal maximum at 14 per cent.  VOCABULARY  ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL PERSONAL VALUE about the paths in the town, an walk by.\" But if you try any attempt to convey the form of interaction with them, atmosphere is made by it falls flat, apparently random messages Visiting the different shops, like: \"A kid throws a snowball you notice items for sale which you notice items for sale which at you,\" and \"Some skiers could prove very useful later    70 "


"SUPPLIER: INCENTIVE SOFTWARE MACHINE: CBM 64/ SPECTRUM 48K/AMSTRAD CPC PRICE: $7.95 REVIEWER: KEITH 11 Legend has it that when an Indian chief dies, his gold is buried with him. Down at the Skintsville saloon, rumour says one such has just kicked the bean can. Not knowing where your next drink is coming from. you, Luke Warme (second cousin twice removed from Ed Lines) decide to go in search of the grave. Aboard your wagon, with a daft flick of the reins, your faithful horse trots off clip, clop, down the trail. Unfortunately, some Apaches are waiting in ambush, and before long you find yourself in a wigwam, with an Indian guard between you and the open flap of the tent. Escaping from your captors (well, of course you do!) you find the settlement is deserted all the Apaches have gone off to hunt for lunch. This is convenient, for there're some mightly useful things lying around in the other tents. The only snag is, your wagon's busted. Eventually you hit the trail again, and start the exploration proper. Near a water hole lies the town of Jakesville, inhabited, it seems, entirely by Jakes. of disappearing text behind the graphic has been largely overcome by having been deliberately written to fit the text area, although dropping a number of objects in the same place can cause problems even then. The vocabulary is adequate, and response, with pictures, fairly fast. On the Amstrad version I played, you can also type ahead, which is useful The desert thins out to SCRUBLANDS when wanting to make a outside the entrance to an OLD RICKETY TOWN known as \"JAKESVILLE\". A number of predetermined path leads EAST and the Desert AEST You can also see \"DOCTOR DODGY moves. MIRACLE CURE WAGON, \"DOCTOR DODG Written by Peter Torrance, What now then partner?.. I enjoyed it more than Peter's previous efforts. Subsunk and Sebase Delta. While retaining humour, the THANKS BUT NO THANKS message has (thankfully) been replaced with the rater more subdued THANK YOU KINDLY.. What secret property does help with the mine. But BUT NO SIREE! the tree hold-and can you how do you get it? How do This is the first adventure exhume Wyatt Burp? What you use the tom tom, and what released by Incentive Software use is the eagle out in the will put paid to the croc whose written using Incentive's own desert, and how can you enter beady eyes never stray from Graphic Adventure Creator. the mine? the handy canoe? It is on the special Back at the settlement This is a graphic adventure Medallion label, reserved for everything is not yet settled, with a WORDS/PICTURES \"... the very best though, for there is something option, although there is not a adventures...\" using the strange at the top of the totem picture to go with every GAC. It is certainly the best GAC'd adventure I have yet location. The GAC problem pole, which could, perhaps, seen, with a range of problems from basic to head-scratching. Recommended as a good lighthearted gamepity about the price! VOCABULARY ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL & CAFE RIMS VALUE You are in the back of your WAGON on a WILD OPEN PLAIN. The Bountain rallies ahead. YOU filLyour lungs with the rich ON SPLASH! You are in SHALLOU POOL near Sparkling WATER FALLA Path leads SOUTHEA CANOE nearby Shisers and DISAPPEARS that now the partner  SUPPLIER: WRIGHTCHOICE SOFTWARE MACHINE: SPECTRUM 48K PRICE: .95 MAIL ORDER ONLY FROM: PO BOX 100, 159 WELBECK CRESCENT, operates outside the law, it is TROON, AYRSHIRE, KA10 6BD now up to you to destroy the REVIEWER: STEVE smuggling ring within a mere 17 hours. Everyone today is aware of the The adventure begins back problems of drug abuse, in at your headquarters, where, particular, heroin addiction. It in the privacy of your own comes as no surprise, then, office, you begin the game by that sooner or later, an finding some useful adventure would appear that accessories which will help you tackles one aspect of this very later. Suddenly the phone important topic. rings (in fact, it was so realistic Operation Stallion is such an that my wife actually went to adventure. Your task is to answer it!) and upon break up a heroin smuggling answering, your immediate ring — so well put together superior, the mysterious «CJ», that the normal forces of law summons you to the and justice are totally conference room for a briefing ineffective. The scene is on your mission. therefore set, and as the killer Once there, you are arm of an agency which informed of your task, and led to a small room, where from a choice of 20 various weapons and aids, you are allowed to select a number of them to take with you. At this point Part 1 of the game is concluded, and you must save your position to load into Part 2 Here you begin your task in earnest to penetrate the mansion which is the nerve centre of the operation. It was about here in the game that I became aware of some very serious shortcomings. Some of the simplest commands were not recognised, and it was extremely hard convincing what I wanted to do. Perhaps of even greater importance is the time limit. Each move ticks six minutes up on the clock, and you only have those 17 hours to begin with. Even if you type in total rubbish which the program has no chance of interpreting, another six minutes is lost. Still, Operation Stallion is not too bad. If you can live with its idiosyncrasies, rewards can be yours. VOCABULARY ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL  VALUE ANA "


"GOLDEN OLDIES 4.99 SPECTRUM PRICE COMMODORE 64 PRICE AMSTRAD PRICE Valkyrie 17 3.99 Devs Ex Machina. 4.99 Sario..... 5.99 Strip Poker.... 3.99 Thing On A Spring Lucky Fruits.. 3.99 Football Manager 6.99 Now Games 2... 5.99 Hunchback 4.99 Underwurde 3.99 Off The Hook 4.99 Skyfox (D) 9.99 Spy vs Spy 4.99 Fight Night... 5.99 Strip Poker 3.99 Friday 13th 4.99 Kong Strikes Back 3.99 American Football 4.99 Tau Ceti.... 4.99 The Music Studio. 4.99 Centre Court 4.99 Robin of Sherlock 4.99 Valkyrie 17 (Advent) 3.99 Strangeloop.. The Hobbit 7.99 Twin Kingdom Valley 4.99 Dynamite Dan 4.99 Panzadrome 4.99 Football Manager 6.99 Panzerdrome 4.99 International Karate 3.99 Sherlock Holmes 6.99 Friday 13th... 4.99 Gift From Gods ...... 3.99 Archon............ Pajamarama 3.99 Sorderon's Shadow 4.99 Hunchback !... 4.99 Hunter Killer 4.99 My Chess 4.99 View To A Kill.. 3.99 ATARI 2600 PRICE INTELLIVISION PRICE ACCESSORIES PRICE Outlaw.... 5.99 Frogger 7.99 Joysticks Yars Revenge.. 5.99 Popeye... 7.99 Quickshot 2.. Joust 9.99 Beauty & The Beast 8.99 Quickshot 2+ Boing..... 8.99 Novablast .. 8.99 (Microswitch) Centipede 9.99 White Water .. Magnum... 11.99 Space Shuttle 11.99 Venture 8.99 H.E.R.O 11.99 ATARI ST 51/4\" Disks Boxes of 10 Pitfall Il 11.99 Mud Pies .. 12.99 High Qaultiy...... 9.99 Air Sea Battle 9.99 Lands of Havoc.. . 12.99 Robot Tank.. 11.99 NEW LINE PC COMPATABLES PRICE UK P&P 75p any parcel Asterix 9.99 Boulder Dash (D). 11.99 Orders over  FREE Kangaroo.. 9.99 Boulder Dash II (D)... 11.99 Overseas .00 per tape Pele Soccer .. 9.99 Mind Dance (D)...... 10.99 .50 per parcel (D) DISC. Many other titles available for these and other machines. Send large SAE. for current list, please state machine Cheques & PO payable to: TREASURE CHEST. Dept C, 220 Beverley Road, Hull, N. Humberside HU5 1AH ..7.99 8.99 'Have You Had Enough Of Arcade Games Or Spreadsheets ? 'There Is An Alternative. STRATEGIC PLUS 400/806 NOW vom LOOK ATARI XLIXE C.64 ATARI ST IBM APPLE II AND NOW AMIGA XLINE ST ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to:CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 SPECIALISTS IN QUALITY COMPUTER GAMES FOR THE DISCERNING GAMER All programmes are on disc only Ring for our FREE Catalogue AND DISCOVER A WORLD OF ENTERTAINMENT BARCLAYCARD VISA T 01-979 2987 A STRATEGIC PLUS SOFTWARE PO BOX 8 HAMPTON MIDDX TW12 3XA ATARI ST/800XL/XE OWNERS HINTS_POKES-MAPS Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with the MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY. The greatest, biggest and best Atari Club on the market. Now incorporating ST software into our stocks and approaching 300 titles MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over 4 years ago first conceived the idea of a software library. Now over 1,700 titles on disc, cassette and Rom (games, business, education and utilties;. Often purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly. Over 2,500 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany. Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast efficient and friendly service operating a computerised custom built system to keep track of all your records. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities. Important: Midland Games Library are in no way connected with or responsible for Midland Computers Ltd. of Worcester. SEND LARGE S.A.E. TO: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos. Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programs are originals with full documentation CLASSIFIEDS Stunning Value Tony Bridge, Popular Computing Weekly The monthly handbooks, packed with tips, pokes, hints, maps, solutions, gossip, latest reviews, competitions, plus much more. Adventurers Handbook (CBM/SPEC) .00 C16/Plus 4 Handbook .00 Amstrad Handbook .00 BBC Handbook .00 Commodore (64/128) Arcade Handbook .00 Spectrum (48/128) Arcade Handbook .00 Or for even better value take advantage of our reduced subscription rates. 3 issues .75, 6 issues .00, 12 issues .00. Send cheque or P.O. to: H&D Services (CVG), 1338 Ashton Old Road, Higher Openshaw, Manchester, M11 1JG Tel: 061-370 5666 ATARI 400/600/800XL/ST SOFTWARE UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64. Send s.a.e. for fast response and details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG), 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB ATTENTION ALL CBM 64/128 USERS SIMON'S BASIC 19\" +$1.00 p&p (ROM CARTRIDGE) (SPECIAL OFFER) 114 Additional Programming Commands. R.R.P. .00 Send cheque or postal orders to: Simply Software Ltd, 241 Hull Road, Anlaby Common, Hull, North Humberside, HU4 7RY Tel: (0482) 565516 Other incredible software bargains always stocked for all machines. We have all all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE. Apply now and hire your first four games free. Around 1,000 different original titles. For full details send large stamp addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm 10pm or weekends LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 Disc Drive .95 post free Atari 5205STM .90 post free + 10 free disks Casio C2230S .90 post free Antic and Analog magazines available. BEST QUALITY DISCS Memorex 51/4\" S.S./DD Discs 10 for .95 p.f. Unlabelled 514\" S.S./DD Discs 10 for .95 p.f. Unlabelled 5V4\" S.S./DD Discs 25 for .95 p.f. Unlabelled 5V/4\" S.S./DD Disc 50 for .95 p.f. Unlabelled 5V4\" S.S./DD Discs. 100 for .95p.f. Memorex 312\" Discs. Boxes of 10 S.S./DD .95 p.f. Unlabelled 3V2' S.S./DD Discs 10 for .95 p.. Atari 520 STM with 12 Megabyte Drive .00 + 23 discs Happy enhancement for the 1050 Drive with revision 7. .95 post free GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB DEPT. C+VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thornex Close, Sunderland SR3 4PD. Tel: (091) 5286351. FREE MEMBERSHIP!!! Hire CBM64, Spectrum, Vic-20 software! Write now for free exciting details! COMPUTERSOFT (cv) PO Box 28, North PDO, Nottingham NG5 2EE (Please state machine. Stamp appreciated) STOP PLAYING GAMES Use your computer to make money. Turn your hobby into a homebased income. Full and part time opportunities to cash in on this tremendous market. High earnings easily possible. Openm to any amatuer micro user and gamer. Write for free details. Westlink Promotions 108 George Street Edinburgh EH2 4LH "


"DEER PECTRUM 27.95 GAMES FOR ALL SEASONS Konami's GOLF TM e SPECTRUM AMSTRAD me 4795 .95 e-Gle Imagine Software (1984) Limited 6 Central Street. Manchester M25NS. Tel:061 834 3939.Telex: 669977 "


"JOIN THE The future is a nuclear shelter deep below ground, safe from the fallout. Rogue droids keep a cowed people trapped in a twilight zone. This is the world of Firebird's Cholo. Dare you take on the task of trying to liberate your fellow man? With this exclusive Cholo Players' Guide C+VG and programmers Glyn Williams and Joey give you the chance to become a warrior of the wasteland. ROBIN 8993&JAP PASSETTO PR JOHN R elare BRA. ANNEKA THE FLYEYE RESINA ROBE PASSETTORE FELIN THE CAMERA Welcome to the wasteland that is Data and \"live\" video Cholo, a ravaged planet whose information can be transmitted surface smoulders and glows in the back to the operator. The city is aftermath of a nuclear holocaust seen as simple three dimensional Confined to bunkers and vector graphics. shelters deep below the scarred. The rogue robots are and shattered surface, generations constrained to a square area of of people have grown up to a land and sea by bands of lethal subterranean existance, afraid to radiation. This is Cholo City. It set foot on the planet. contains hundreds of buildings and But it is not fear of lethal structures including an airport, radiation that keeps these people harbour and evil citadel. This in their twilight world. citadel is the control centre for the So-called «Guardian» robots, deviant robots. self-perpetuating, repairing A catalogue of problems faces themselves and acting on their own the player who dares to take on the pre programmed artificial task of defeating the robots and intelligence were designed to liberating his fellow humans. repair, re-build, protect, detoxify SCREEN DISPLAY and maintain their designated part The screen is divided into three of the city. They were also main sections. entrusted to inform the sheltering Communication screen: This humans when the surface was safe shows messages sent to and fro for re-colonization the robots. It has a cursor. Tex But liberation day has not appears as the cursor and the dawned. The robots have turned window scrolls upwards. The rogue, deciding to keep the surface vocabulary is tiny. One word for themselves, to re build a new commands are best. world, safe from human intrusion Telltale screen: At-a-glance and their self-destructive traits indicators, most importantly the which led to the planet's near radiation level and the list of skills annihilation in the first place. the robot has installed. For the people trapped below Video screen: This shows \"live\" ground life ebbs away in pointless video pictures from the robot banality. You pass your time currently in use or the \"quick working at a terminal listening to select\" menu which provides a fast reports from the surface. Slowly it means of switching between dawns on you that perhaps — just robots. perhaps -you could liberate your ROBOT NAMES AND TYPES fellow humans. Rizzo the Rat. The chance for freedom lies with At the start of the game the a robot remote control device. This player has access of only one robot offers the possibility of gaining on the surface of Cholo — Rizzo control over the robots. Initially the Rat. Rizzo is a general purpose you only have control over one droid capable of various jobs. For robot, Rizzo, of the type known as example, sewer maintenance the Rat. Using this rather humble through to security patrol. Rizzo is droid it is possible to start to armed with a \"modest\" ion\"recruit\" errant robots to your cannon. He resembles a squat, liberation crusade. trundling pyramid. But Yare EYD B T O AVIAIA THE PLANE Igor the Hacker. The hacker droid is the last of a class of computer maintenance robots, unique in that it is fitted with hardware which enables it to crack computer access codes. This facility makes it vital to the successful completion of the game. Igor is intended for indoor operation and has no offensive capability and only the weakest of protection. Gort the Leadie. Gort was constructed in anticipation of a global nuclear war and, hence, is heavily armoured. The thick lead shielding offers its circuits maximum protection from ionizing radiation. It is fitted with an ion cannon which can be used to deal with possible civil disturbances. To look at, Gort Regallane Robestupe RASSETTO 2  QUEEN THE SHIP "


"RATPACK GORT THULEADIE Closely modelled on tanks, Grundons are lethal. If you see one then RUN. A single blast from their ion-cannons can destroy most robots. Fifteen centimeters of abaltive shielding ensure it can endure hundreds of direct hits. Raplano Ridley and Felini Cameras. Rost Typo These cameras can be used for surveying. They can turn in circles and cannot move. RPETOTHE PAT Aviaia — Plane. Not strictly a droid, Aviaia provides transport Queen Ship. As with Aviaia, the ship provides a means of transport. Koke Kola. This is an unknown element. Roma. Mame Information as to its function and READI capabilities are still a mystery. A clue to its use is in the game. It has a brain — but why? Problems, Solutions and Hints. The first problem to overcome is how to gain control of the more powerful and, therefore, more useful droids. Rizzo the Rat is armed with an ion cannon. By locating and repeatedly shooting at a robot it is Rekha RS eventually possible to stun the Robotte droid. During this brief spell, move Rizzo until he bumps into his \"victim\". By doing this the operator will be able to access the password level of the robot. Enter the correct code and it instantly becomes a willing slave of the operator and the liberation movement. Finding the correct code is, however, a different matter. Rovare Robots have an internal RA memory device for carrying useful programs or data. Programs add new talents to their native skills. O IGOR THE HACKER For instance the program «RadarPRG» enables a robot to generate a plan view of the robots and buildings in the immediate vicinity. Another problem is how to cross the bridge which links the east and west halves of the city. The bridge Rabat is zealously protected by a quartet ROLAMENTOS of Guards. Only by using a clever continued on page 77) ORIDLEY THE CAMERA 22212 2 231 KOKE KOLA resembles a huge humanoid. An . awesome sight. Anneka the FlyEye. In the years before the war, the FlyEye was built to monitor traffic flow in Cholo City. This camera platform uses state of the-art levitation impellors. It provides the operator with a full three dimensional view and is ideal for reconnaisance. Anneke is, of course, unarmed. Dr John the Doctor. In the run-up to the war it became clear that the many surface droids would breakdown, often miles away from surface maintenance centrés. This droid was built in attempt to provide a mobile repair service. All files have been lost on this machine and numbers are unknown. Guard Droids. Guard droids are the crudest and most numerous of the robots. Easily recongisable by their coffinlike shape, Guards are tough and extremely well-armed. Such is the construction of their loyalty circuits, there is little point in taking over these machines. Grundon. ASSETTO "


"For the COMMODORE, AMSTRAD, BBC MICRO, ELECTRON REPTON 3 THE ULTIMATE CHALLENGE 1 M. HIN The Screen Editor. do The Character Editor. @DO ON would Being pursued by a Monster The Time Bomb is located The Poisonous Fungus grows insidiously Collecting a Golden Crown Are you ready for the ultimate challenge? Our original Repton game was immediately acclaimed as a refreshingly new concept: a game requiring dexterity to complete its arcade-style elements, and clear logical thinking to solve its strategic puzzles. Repton involves retrieving treasure from cleverly-constructed traps of falling rocks whilst avoiding the fearsome monsters and haunting spirits. \"This is an astounding game reaching new heights in BBC arcade adventures,\" enthused the Micro User magazine. Last Christmas saw the release of Repton 2, larger and much more challenging than before. Acorn User's Technical Editor Bruce Smith wrote: \"Repton 2 is better than anything I've played on the BBC Micro or Electron. Brilliant!\" Now, completely rewritten and improved for the Commodore, Amstrad, BBC Micro and Electron, we proudly present Repton 3. For the first time, a screen-designer is included: try to devise screens that will perplex your friends, then see if you can solve their newly-designed screens. Another innovation is the character-designer which enables you to design your own monsters, rocks, eggs, spirits, diamonds... any or all of the game's characters can be redefined as you wish. Repton 3 is much larger than its predecessors it has 24 fascinating screens, and players who are skilful enough to complete them all can enter our prize competition described below. All the favourite Repton characters have been retained, together with several new features: a creeping poisonous fungus which grows at an alarming rate; time bombs and time capsules (for puzzles in the 4th dimension); and golden crowns as well-deserved rewards for your endeavours. Can YOU complete Repton 3? PRIZE COMPETITION If you complete Repton 3, you can enter our competition. Prizes include over  in cash, with T-shirts, mugs, badges and pens for runners-up. COMMODORE 64/128 AMSTRAD CPC 464/664/6128 BBC MICROS: B, B+, MASTER, MASTER COMPACT ELECTRON Commodore Cassette........59.95 BBC Micro Cassette............19.95 Commodore Disc..............$11.95 BBC Micro Disc.................. $11.95 Amstrad Cassette..............$9.95 Master Compact Disc.......$14.95 Amstrad Disc......... $14.95 Electron Cassette...............$9.95 Access ACORNSOFT 7 SUPERIOR The screen pictures SOFTWARE VISA above show the BBC Micro version of Limited Repton 3. 24 HOUR TELEPHONE Dept. R14, Regent House, Skinner Lane, Leeds LS7 1AX. Telephone: 0532 459453.A S71AY Talenhone: 0529450452 ANSWERING SERVICE FOR ORDERS OUR GUARANTEE . All mail orders are despatched within 24 hours by first-class post. . Postage and packing is free  Faulty cassettes and discs will be replaced immediately. "


"CNG COMPETITION combination of shots and weaves can a single robot stand a chance of reaching the opposite side of the bridge. Buildings are always worth investigating, especially those with doors, entering these will always be profitable. It is not a good idea to take pot shots at robots just for the fun of it. Most robots will take an instant dislike to this type of violence. Use FlyEye to get a good understanding of the lay of the land. Features will often become clearer when viewed from the air. Teleport pads appear as diamonds within squares. All these pads are in working order but some require special circumstances before they operate. Be careful when near the coast. It is very easy to fall in the water. If in doubt which is the coast check the coastline with the map display or use FlyEye. The Programmers. Cholo is being programmed for Firebird by Solid Image's Glyn Williams and the mysteriously named «Joey.\" Glyn, 24, describes himself at 5ft Sins, with hazel eyes and grey hair. Unusually for a computer programmer, Glyn is totally innumerate but claims that a \"visual imagination\" helps make up for it. Likes include Yorkshire bitter, Phoebe Cates (actress), Ridley Scott (film director), William Gibson (writer) and Ray-Ban sunglasses. He dislikes Y-fronts, rich people and anoraks of all types. Joey is a pen-name and there are apparently very few \"privileged» people to know his real name. Manchester-born Joey is 6ft 4ins and currently has long brown hair. Now in his late 20s, Joey went to Manchester University to study law and came away with a degree in computer science. He came up with the idea of Cholo while sitting with a depression in a pub near Piccadilly Circus. The original name for the game was Skrobfelklagoor. Joey's hobby is being rude to people he doesn't like and doesn't have any favourite music. Likes include Directors bitter, Kathleen Turner, the England Cricket team and The Residents. Dislikes no Directors bitter, people (especially computer people), the Australian Cricket team, the SDP, CND and IBM. DROID ALERT... DROID ALERT... DROID ALERT.. Computer + Video Games is about to be invaded with thousands of droids — that is if you enter our Cholo Competition. Take a look at our Cholo front cover. That is C+VG designer Craig Kennedy's concept of Rizzo the Rat. What we want you to do is take one of the other droids featured in the game and send us your artistic interpretation of it. Judging from past C+VG art competitions we can expect some really sensational ideas. Our Firebird friends are prepared to give away a special robot plus 10 runners up prizes of the Cholo game on the Commodore 64 and BBC. Send your entries to Cholo Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is March 16th and the C+VG Big Rat's decision is final. CHOLO COMPETITION Name.. Address. Please indicate which computer you have CBM64 O BBC O "


"C+VG COMPETITION By now you may have readabout the revival in popularity of Gerry Anderson's Thunderbirds puppet show on video and our review of The Last Starfighter also on video. Now's your chance to win a copy in our Spot-the-Difference competition. Thanks to Channel 5 — the people who release the videos — we've got 10 tapes to give away of either The Last Starfighter or the latest Thunderbirds release. Printed on this page are two drawings of The Last Starfighter. At first glance they look exactly the same. But on closer inspection you'll find there are some differences 10 in all. All you have to do is mark clearly the differences and send the drawing together with the printed coupon to Channel Computer+Video Games, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. 5 The closing date is March 16 and the Video editor's decision is final. Don't forget to tick the box indicating which title you Competition, want. Channel 5 Video Competition CHANNEL Name Addresss — Thunderbirds The Last Starfighter CHANNEL "


"21st CENTURY WARRIOR: Apache GUNSHIP dolor si t por los CUN HIE The Apache Fierce and elusive, like its warrior namesake . Capable See your software dealer today and become a part of the GUNSHIP of defeating enemy tanks, infantry, and hostile aircraft on the modern adventure! Challenge the enemy, the shy and YOURSELF with this electronic battlefield. extraordinary simulation. Gunship's revolutionary 3-D graphics enable you, the pilot, to fly into the GUNSHIP for Commodore 64/128. Cassette .95, Disk .95. world's hottest trouble spots. You'll use an unbelievable array of high tech information and weapon systems, including lasers, video cameras night viewers, radar warnings, jammers, computers, missiles, rockets. flares and a 30mm cannon! Successful missions will be rewarded with medals and rank promotions. Experience the danger and excitement of attack helicopter action your latest adventure in the ever-growing line of MicroProse Simulation SIMULATION SOFTWARE Software MICROPROSE Please send copy/ies of GUNSHIP CBM 64/128 Cassette CBM 64/128 Disk Details of the full Microprose range Name (Block Caps) — Address Postcode Which magazine have you cut this coupon from? Please debit my Access/Visa Card No. Expiry Date Cheques payable to MICROPROSE SOFTWARE LIMITED, 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Glos GL8 8DA lenclose 55p postage and packing. "


"wenty years after first being screened on British television, Thunderbirds Are Go again. Gerry Anderson's brilliant science fiction puppet shows are proving a phenomenon of the video sales market. As a new generation becomes aquainted with the exploits of International Rescue, the Tracy family, Lady Penelope, Parker and a pink Rolls-Royce, C+VG's Deputy Editor Paul Boughton visited Bray film studios to meet the man who has thrilled and entertained millions across the world. Pulling the strings proud. Anderson, sitting in the offices of Anderson Burr Pictures at Bray Film studios, Thunderbirds even think Thunderbirds had a prodund effect on chilren at screen for a full length that time. Those kids are now feature film, Thunderbirds Are near Windsor, Berkshire.\" I Thunderbirds, first adults with children of their Go, in 1966. own. If they see a title they screened in Britain in 1965, is ventured on to the silver Now, nearly 20 years later, remember, you're on your way probably one of the most to selling a video.\" successful children's bang. In June 1986 Channel 5 For more than 30 years If you weren't around in the television series ever Gerry Anderson has been a 1960s, go up to your dad and produced. The 32 hour-long constant factor in the lives of say one word to him: one of the Thunderbird's children brought up with \"Thunderbirds.\" of International Rescue, a episodes was their fastest Check his reaction. Do his television. His success and secretive organisation readyVideo were stunned to learn selling title. It was even reputation mainly lies on his eyes go all dreamy and to zoom anywhere in the world that Countdown to Disaster, beating Sophie's Choice, puppet show series. The last distant? Does he start walking episodes followed the exploits Thunderbirds are back with a McVicar, David Bowie's to be screened was around in a strange, jerky injustice. Serious Moonlight and The Terrahawks. manner as though he's got Return of Pink Panther. His latest project is Space strings attached to his arms Such was the sudden Police about a rough, tough and legs? Chances are he may to fight against disaster and upsurge in Thunderbirds' cop posted to a space station. just say: \"F.A.B.\" popularity, Terry Wogan It combines, actors, recently interviewed Parker puppets and models. on his chat show. Apparently A one hour pilot the excitement of fame a programme has second time around proved already been too much for the ageing made and it just marionette (I mean Parker, remains to not Terry Wogan) and an see what electro magnet in his head the television used to control facial movements blew up. Thunderbirds One and Two were even the stars of a Firebird budget game a while back. The game wasn't exactly a disaster but it didn't Scott, do International Rescue The puppet characters, the Further Thunderbird five Tracy brothers releases from Channel 5 Virgil, Alan, Gordon and John proved equally successful. Lady Penelope, her Thunderbirds in Outer Space manservant Parker, became shot into the video charts. O Gerry Anderson. stars in the 66 countries Thunderbirds to the Rescue where the shows were entered the charts straight at screened. number one. Then there were the Equally surprised at the the magnificent Thunderbirds continuing success of themselves. Five brilliant Thunderbirds is their creator technological creations Gerry Anderson. designed to cope with any \"The videos are a disaster on land, in the air, remarkable success. Top underwater and in space. three for twenty weeks,\" says And, of course, the Lady Penelope's huge pink RollsRoyce. Once seen, never forgotten. Gerry's latest projes Space Pilot. OL 80 Pulling the strings "


"Pulling the strings made to appear he could talk by means of a small solenoid which carried electronic impulses from pre-recorded dialogue, making the jaws of the sheriff open and close. Anderson finally hit his stride in 1959/60 with Supercar. It featured Mike Mercury, Professor Popkiss and a marvellous car which could not only use roads but fly and go underwater. Its 26 episodes were sold to more than 100 American television stations. It was really the first Anderson show to be backed by merchandising deals which helped reinforce the popularity of the shows. I myself was the proud owner of a Supercar pilot's licence. Anderson, however, seems quite dismissive of the success. «I was trying to make something worthwhile Continued on page 83 hand and Anderson became involved with puppets. He was with end-of-the-pier asked to make the Adventures of Twizzle, a 52 proud of,\" he says, «but you can't get people to back you. Associated Rediffusion There's not a Hollywood Television about a puppet Thunderbird TWO attitude here.\" Even though all Anderson's programme series for his arms and legs, at will. series are produced with the \"We said yes,\" says main aim of getting onto the Anderson, «but we would have American networks, Anderson character who could elongate said yes to anything. Frankly has never seriously was horrified at the idea. considered leaving Britain What a way to spend six and setting up on the other months of my life. We took a side of the Atlantic. \"I don't think I'd like life in Beverley I deliberately tried to make Hills, endlessly proving you the pictures as good as can make millions.\" possible, as un-puppetlike Gerry Anderson was born in puppet series to pay the rent. just to show we could make London in 1929. His first job pictures with people.\" in the film industry was as a Twizzle was a success and trainee with the Colonial Film Anderson agreed to make Unit. He was just 14. another puppet series, Torchy Later he joined the Battery Boy, for Gainsborough Pictures, first as an assistant editor and for 26 episodes. then dubbing editor. He After Torchy, Anderson had \"made a few bob\" and Wicked Lady, Caravan and So Associated Rediffusion. It ran produced his own puppet networks think of it. If they Long at the Fair. series for Granada Television, dy Penelope and Jeff Tracy Thunderbirds. like it, a series could follow. In the mid-1950s Anderson Four Feather Falls, starring For a man with a huge and worked on films such as the had what he calls \"the crazy successfull track record, notion I could form my own success. It also marked a step Gerry Anderson appears company.\" forward in the art of Marina from Stingray. dismissive about his work. In 1956 he co-founded AP \"I'm not really fond of Films with Arthur Provis \"and Sheriff Tex Tucker. It was a anything I've done. I tend to wondered what the hell to be ashamed of it,\" he says. do.\" Producing an independent it was then that fate took a marionettes. Tucker was television series in Britain is always a battle, mainly for money and a free hand. \"I'd like to do something I'm really Pulling the strings Pulling the strings "


"DEATH OR GLORY .95 CBM, AMS, SPEC CASSETTE .95 CBM, AMS DISC DEATH OR GLORY URL lang CRL A Hot Line: 01-533 2918 CBM SCREENSHOTS CRL Group PLC, CRL House, 9 Kings Yard, Carpenters Road, London E15 2HD "


"Pulling the strings technology,\" he says. Another hit series followed in 1961, Fireball XL5 (26 episodes). The following year came Stingray, the first colour television series made in the UK. It sold worldwide. Between 1964 and 1966 Thunderbirds dominated Anderson's thinking. Next came Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons (1967), Joe 90 (1968) and the same year saw a return to Thunderbirds with a new feature film, Thunderbird 6. Over the next few years Anderson tried to break with the puppet format. The Secret Service in 1969 featured live action although it remained mainly puppets. UFO (1969/ also be recognisable to the present.\" Hopefully, Space Pilot will 70) and The Protectors (1971) --starring Robert do just that. Meanwhile, if you fancy «Man from Uncle\" Vaughan and Nyree Dawn Porter trying to break into the film continued the trend to live business, Gerry Anderson has two pieces of advice. \"The action, altough he also found time to produce an first piece of advice is don't come into the industry at all. experimental puppet film This industry is booming by called The Investigator. The use of people in August and dead by Christmas. It's tough to Anderson's productions survive it. The only way to get culminated with two series of in these days is through a film Space 1999 (1973-76). For school or by saying I don't me, Space 1999 is probably the best science fiction series paid. If someone comes in as I've seen. Technically and in the dogsbody and they're plots I think it made Star Trek care what I do or what I'm look amateurish (Watch out for the hate mail.) The ITV networks for some bright they will be recognised If your want to sample Gerry Anderson's work on strange reason failed to give a and shoved up the ladder.\" regular slot in the programme schedules. Each week it following on offer at .99. Thunderbirds Countdown seemed to be on at a different video Channel 5 has the to Disaster. time, sometimes a different Terrahawks. day. \"We, the British, wrecked Terrahawks 2: The Invisible Menace from Mars. it,\" says Anderson. \"They The Incredible Voyage of didn't intend to wreck it, they Stingray. just didn't care. There was a The Amazing Adventures of hole (in the schedules) so they filled it.\" One day televisin chiefs (Space 1999). may come to their senses and Joe 90. give the series a re-run. Don't Destination Moonbase Alpha from Mars (Captain Scarlett). miss it if they do. In 1982 Anderson returned Revenge of the Mysterons Terrahawks 3: Terror from to puppets with 39 episodes Thunderbirds in Outer Space. of Terrahawks. Other titles are due for Now the future of the release so check out your Anderson legend rests with local video score. Space Pilot. Finding a new If you also want to know concept in science fiction is extemely difficult. As Anderson says: \"The future must be futuristic but it must more about Gerry Anderson Do ptain Scarlet. and his work in minute detail, it's well worth buying SiG magazine. It's run by a 30year-old Blackpool policeman called Dave Nightingale, and is packed with information, news, pictures and interviews. It costs .50 plus 40p post and packaging per issue and can be obtained from Engale Marketing, 13 Primrose Avenue, Squires Gate, South Shore, Blackpool, Lancashire, FY4 20. Oh, by the way, if you or you dad wants to know what F.A.B. Thunderbird pilots signed off messages it means with just short for FABulous. F.A.B. Mars. C+VG ENDS Joe 90. ursuit "


"WHO WANTS TO BE If you had all the money under the sun what would you spend it on? What bits of hi-tech would you fill up your home with? Our American correspondent Marshal M. Rosenthal has been daydreaming. Pumg ou've all read about the fun you can have at reallive space battle games like Planet Photon and Starblazer; blasting away at each other with harmless lightguns. Well, thanks to a San Fransico based company, you can state space gunfights in your own back yard! Lazer Tag is a portable version of these games and duplicates the experience anywhere. There is the spacegun, imposing and menacing. Adjust the focus of the beam of infrared light from wide (tame) to narrow (expert skill). Set it for silent kill — or allow your opponent to hear the buzz of impending doom. The sensor reacts to a direct hit from the beam both indoors as well as outside (anything short of bright sunlight). The range is about 60 feet. An electronic counter can be adjusted so that a specific number of hits will sound the klaxon and announce the winner in a burst of multicoloured lights. A broad velcro strip lets the sensor be attached to the optional vest, star cap or helmet. Each set consists of a spacegun and sensor, and they both require batteries. Get a few friends together and light up the night! Lazer Tag retails for $69.00. O A shoe with a brain. That's an apt description for the Puma RS Computer Shoe There's more here than meets the heel! A backpack rides piggy-back behind the heel of this speciallyadapted running shoe. Inside is a sophisticated circuit board powered by a lithium battery. A monitor measures the stride between touch-down of the shoe, and continuously records information on your running Marshal M. Rosenthal meets a Puma style. Turn it on (it'll beep), and take off. A programmable timer will inform you when you've reached your running goal for the day as well. Turn off your shoes and return home. Attach one end of the connecting cord to the shoe's interface and the other end to your computer. Run the enclosed software and discover just how effectively you exercised. The program will hold up to six years of information for a single runner, or up to a year for six people. Find out how many calories were burned up as a personalised report indicates just how well you're doing overall. The entire unit is modular, so if the shoe wears out just unscrew the backpack and attach it to a new one. They come in an assortment of sizes, are a nifty silver-grey with reflective stripes, and retail for $200.00. Nothing is more annoying "


" A MILLIONAIRE. than searching/researching and buying some electronic gizmoonly to find out within a few weeks or months that a better model has come along with more features for only a few pennies more. Nowhere does this seem more true than with printers. There are literally dozens of them, with all types of features and styles. What can be worse that being stuck with that \"old\" model, and forced to gnash your teeth over those new features that your printer just can't do. Salvation is here, at least for Epson owners, because now there's Dots Perfect. Dots-Perfect is a kit of 3 ROM (Read-Only Memory) chips that replace those in any of the Epson MX/FX/JX series. The installation is simple, well documented with photos, and doesn't require any soldering. What is the result? Your Epson will now become a IBM clone on command. Or an Apple Imagewriter duplicating the text/graphics of the MacIntosh or Apple computers. But that's just the tip of the firing pins. A re-defined character set enables near letter quality at the touch of a button, as well as over 17 special print functions, such as proportional, doublewide, fine print and condensed (with over 160 print styles). All without having to master complicated printer codes. Those fortunate to have a JX-80 colour printer can now also regulate colour sequences. DP retails for a mere $79.95, and is worth it. Speaking of printers, Canon's PJ-1980 colour model is one hot item. It uses ink technology to produce a multitude of colour combinations that look really great. Subtractive colours are mixed and forced out under pressure onto the paper to form the coloured image. The snap-in cartridge costs $10.00 and lasts for hundreds of prints, and using a black cartridge reproduces correspondence quality text. Software is supplied to enable a palette of over 24 colour combinations on a singe sheet of 842\" x 11\" paper, and we're not talking thermal paper either you can use ordinary pin-fed or single sheets with excellent results. A print out costs less than 60 cents a sheet, and the printer a mere $250.00. One of the great questions of modern life is: «Where do I put all this stuff?\" Every new purchase adds to the clutter and confusion, and if you're into computers that means computers under modems on top of disk drives, cables jutting out like Palm trees, and a safari every time a plug needs to be pulled. Maybe the solution is the Hydraulic Hide-Away Credenza. (What? Ed) The solid wood cabinet is unobtrusive but activate the remote control and a hydraulic lift springs to life. A moment later, your computer console is revealed. Or put a TV and complete stereo system out of sight, but within easy reach. The 25\" X 44\" shelf will support up to 350 pounds, and uses a quiet 385 watt motor to raise the shelf up into the world (the motor plugs into any conventional outlet). $1995.00 isn't too steep when you set your sights to the heights! Product information: CANON PJ 1080 COLOUR PRINTER: Canon Corporation, USA New Jersey DOTS-PERFECT Dresselhaus Computer Products 837 East Alosta Avenue Glendora, California 91740 HYDRAULIC HIDE-AWAY CREDENZA: Hammacher Schlemmer 147 East 57th Street New York, New York 10022 LAZER TAG Sharper Image P.O. Box 26823 San Francisco, California 94126 PUMA RS COMPUTER SHOE: PUMA USA 492 Old Connecticut Path/P.O Box 1369 Framingham, Massachusitts 01701 This is Marshal's idea of a hi-tech home. But how about YOU? We'd like you to tell us what you'd like to see in a room of your own. And not just computer stuff either. After all you have to take a break from the keyboard sometimes. We'd like to know what sort of books you like to line up on the bookshelves. What sort of music you'd like to listen to. What sort of films you'd liked stored away on videotape. What sort of pictures or posters you'd have on the walls and even what sort of clothes you'd like to wear when you're off duty. Why do we want to know all this? Because in a future issue we'd like to create the ultimate C+VG reader's room. The quicker you let your mind run riot and let us know about it the better. The five most interesting descriptions will get a FREE Big Red t-shirt. Now there's something no well dressed C+VG reader would want to be without! Send your letters to Computer and Video Games A Room of My Own, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. 8.8Sto Sotto Ho Ho Ho H. Authors bio: Marshal M. Rosenthal is photographer based in New York. He also writes for a number of domestic and overseas publications on topics dealing with computers, video and high technology. "


"E RESULTS It was the competition catch you couldn't resist. In December C+VG and Advance Software offered 25 American baseballs as prizes in our Hardball competition. The answers were The Yankees, Pitcher and Home Run. Simple. Read on for the winners. BALL J Walker, Herts; Paulo Miguel CustoLee Bennett, Northampton; K GrzeLondon; James Howarth, Bolton; O'Leary, Dublin 18; Andrew Birkitt, dio, Portugal; Eitaro Arakawa, Birm-sik, Rotherham; Jon Sendel, ShefRalph Caton, London; Roy Davidson, Hillam; Kevin Bennett, Berkshire; ingham; Richard van Sils, The field; Alistair May, Moray; Derek Birmingham; Mr C Roberts, Alex Clunie, Glasgow; David Netherlands; Darren Williams, Jenkins, Cardiff; Paul Serbert, Ashchurch Gardens; Richard van Roberts, Swindon; Allan Batchelor, Worcester; Richard Cartwright, StafHarrogate; PJ Martin, Exmouth; Gils, The Netherlands; Julian London; Craig Rickbaby, ford; Ali Hanafi, Rickmansworth; Tristan Millin, Tewkesbury; Mr E T Davies, Swansea; Colm Andrew, via Co Durham; Matthew Craig Nicholson, Northants; Darren Jones, North Yorkshire; lan BerriHyde; Matthew Lyon, Basingstoke; Coulson, Cheshire; Dean, London; Anthony Hunter, man, Hull; E. Greenough, ManchesPhil Irish, Shrewsbury; Steven Simon Harris, Kent; Dean Reeves, Surrey; Simon ter; Mark Smith, Manchester; Nick Neaves, Middlesex; Richard GoslSwansea. Clarke, Reading; Adam Neale, Herts; Felton, Leeds 16; B Mawson, ing, Berkshire; Angus Lee, AberMr JB Soutar, Livingston; G. ZazzarSlough; Craig Withycombe, S Gladeen; Oliver Cooper, Germany; ino, Cheshire; Kevin Mitchell, Abermorgan; Mr MED Huszcza, MidStephen Cohen, Manchester; Wayne deenshire; Alan Bishop, Seaford; dlesex; Christian Jackson, CleveBirch, Lincs; Darren Rahaman, Jonathan Savage, Essex; lan Harriland; Jon Sendel, Sheffield; L MontLancs; Mark Docherty, Lancashire; son, Gwynedd; Richard Gosling, gomery, London; Mr C Roberts, TewDavid Young, Dublin 11; Brendan Berkshire; John G Brines, Renfrew; kesbury; Clive Lindus, LittlehampJudge, Merseyside; Jonathan EggleDean Taylor, Cheshire; Mrs C ton; Rodney Tregale, Slough; Martin ton, Milton Keynes; Elliot Sudbury, Moore, Sheffield; Andrew Learoyd, Wilkes, Coventry; Matthew Doyle, W Sussex; Henrik Hansen, Denmark; Leeds; Mrs C Moore, Sheffield; Banbury; William Hern, Inverurie; Dylan Wyn Owen, Gwynedd; Andrew Horborx, West Yorks; James Mark Watkins, Bucks; Hazel Miller, Har Rai, Kent; Henri Pulla, Clarke, London; Simon Davies, London; P Lindley, Sheffield; GraFinland; Redmond Neath; Mr L Walker, Liverpool; ham Grainger, Stoke on Trent; Ruth Jonathan Middleton, Sheffield; CaroNewbury, Shefford; B C Steel, Midline Middleton, Sheffield; Gunner J dlesex; Paul Greenough, Manchester Brien, Iceland; Thomas Griffin, Kent; 26; Jo Chatterton, Hull; Jason Ford, RESULTS COMPETITION SUPA SOFT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE 675 Year Konship SPECTRUM Starglider Space harrier Miami Vice It's A Knockout Cobra Elite Paperboy Dan Dare Kon Coin-op Great Escape Uchi Marta Now Games 3 Leaderboard Elites Hit Pak Triv Pursuit Ghost & Goblins 1942 Bomb Jack 2 Double Take Commando 86 Airwolf 2 Indoor Sports Scooby Doo Batman Ikari Warrior Galvan Fairlight 2 Shao Lins Road Dynamite Dan 2 Revolution Ace Konami's Golf War Uridium Fireload Avenger Dracular Sky Runner Scalextric The Fat Worm Dragons Lair Present the Following Special Offers to C&VG Readers, Boring Statement But Just Check The Rest And Come Back to The Real Bargain Software) RRP OUR SPECTRUM RRP OUR CMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK COMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK ATARIST RRP OUR AMSTRAD PC1512 RRP OUR 14.95 10.95 Thantos 9.95 6.75 Starglider 10.95 14.95 Master Universe 6.50 10.95 Starglider 24.95 19.99 Winter Games 19.95 16.95 7.95 5.25 Trap Door 7.95 5.25 Leaderboard 6.50 10.95 Sentinal 6.50 10.95 World Games 24.95 19.99 Summer G (2) 19.95 16.95 7.95 5.25 Infiltrator 9.95 6.75 Aliens 6.50 10.95 Big 4 6.50 10.95 Leaderboard 24.95 19.99 Pitstop (2) 19.95 16.95 7.95 5.25 Ice temple 7.95 5.25 Xevious 6.50 10.95 Lightforce 6.00 10.00 Leaderboard (T) 9.95 6.95 D. Desert 24.95 22.95 7.95 5.00 Sold a million 3 9.95 6.75 Triv Pursuit 10.00 14.95 Sigma 7 6.50 NA The Pawn 24.95 19.99 Silent Serv 19.95 16.95 14.95 10.95 Top Gun 7.95 5.25 Paperboy 6.50 10.95 Tau Ceti 2 6.50 10.95 Silent Serv 24.95 19.99 Higgins Snok 19.95 16.95 7.95 5.25 Hardball 8.95 5.99 Championship Wrest 6.50 10.95 Donkey kong 6.00 10.00 Baseball 29.95 24.95 Solo Fli (2) 19.95 16.95 9.95 6.75 Fist 2 8.95 6.00 Yie ar Kung Fu 2 6.00 10.00 Great escape 6.00 10.00 Arena 29.95 24.95 Champ Golf 19.95 16.95 9.95 6.50 Durell's Big 4 9.95 6.75 Alleycat 6.00 10.00 Jack Nipper 6.50 10.95 Deep Space 29.95 24.95 Hellcat Ace 19.95 16.95 7.95 5.25 Xevious 7.95 5.25 Highlander 6.00 10.00 World games 6.50 10.95 St Karate 19.99 15.95 Mindshadow 24.95 19.99 8.95 6.00 Xeno 8.95 6.00 Spy v Spy 3 6.50 10.95 Judge Dred 6.50 10.95 Int Karate 19.99 15.95 Strip Poker 19.99 16.95 9.95 6.50 Aliens 9.99 6.50 Galvan 6.00 10.00 Bobby bearing 6.00 10.00 L.C.P. 34.95 29.95 Spitfire Ace 19.99 16.95 7.95 5.40 Footballer Year 7.95 5.25 Elite 10.95 14.95 Five star 6.50 10.95 Gauntlet(Feb) 24.95 19.99 Pinball Con 24.95 22.95 9.95 6.50 Terra cresta 7.95 5.25 Sky Runner 6.50 10.95 Ghost & goblins 6.50 10.95 Champ Wres (6) 24.95 19.99 Music Con 24.95 22.95 14.95 10.00 Tau-Ceti(2)Academy 9.95 6.50 Bolderdash Cons 6.50 10.95 Future Knight 6.59 10.95 Shanghai 24.99 19.99 Mean 18 19.95 16.95 7.95 5.25 Silent Service 9.95 6.75 Coin-op 6.50 10.95 Firelord 6.00 10.00 Jewels Dark 24.95 19.99 Cyrus 2 Chess 19.95 16.95 7.95 5.25 Psi 5 Trading 9.95 6.75 Fist 2 6.50 10.95 Amour Antirid 6.50 10.95 (FULL INFOCOM RANGE IN STOCK PLEASE RING FOR DETAILS) 7.95 5.25 Butch Hard Guy 7.95 5.25 Xeno 6.00 10.00 Super Cycle 6.50 10.95 (WE TAKE ACCESS OR VISA FOR ATARI ST. & AMSTRAD 15127.95 5.25 Double Take 7.95 5.25 Top Gun 6.00 10.00 Acro Jet 6.50 10.95 PRODUCT ONLY RING FOR DETAILS)(1512 BUSINESS PRODUCT) 7.95 5.25 Donkey kong 7.95 5.25 Gauntlet 6.50 10.95 Super Huey 2 6.50 10.95 ALSO IN STOCK RING FOR FULL LIST & PRICE.) 7.95 5.25 Legend of Kage 7.95 5.25 Sold a million 3 6.50 10.95 Trailblazer 6.50 10.95 AMSTRAD 6128/464 CASS DISK (SPECIAL OFFERS) 8.95 6.50 Super soccer 7.95 5.25 1942 6.50 10.95 Ikari Warriors 6.50 10.95 Mini Office 2 12.00 14.95 DOUBLE PACKS SPECTRUM 7.95 5.25 Superbowl 9.95 6.50 Space harrier 6.50 10.95 Indoor Sport 6.50 10.95 Trivial Pursuit 11.95 16.95 Dan Dare/Hardball .00 7.95 5.25 Int Matchday(128) 9.95 6.50 Scooby Doo 6.50 10.95 Big trouble(LC) 6.50 10.95 Sold a Million 3 6.95 10.95 Batman Topgun .00 7.95 5.25 Winter games(128) 9.95 6.50 Bomb jack 2 6.50 10.95 Shockway Rider 6.00 10.00 1942 6.95 10.95 Footbaler of year+ 7.95 5.25 Jail Break 7.95 5.50 Ace 6.50 10.95 Dracular 6.50 NA Konami Coin op 6.95 10.95 Super Soccer .00 9.95 6.50 Super Cycle 7.95 5.25 Commando 86 6.50 10.95 Ninja 6.50 10.95 Scooby Doo 6.95 10.95 Fat Worm/Thantos .00 7.95 5.25 Masters Universe 8.95 6.25 Infiltrator 6.50 10.95 Jailbreak 6.50 10.95 Dan Dare 6.95 NA Paperboy/Great Esc .00 7.95 5.25 Eastenders 8.95 6.25 Freeze frame 3 (Cart) 33.95 Howard the Duck 6.50 10.95 Starglider 11.95 16.95 Space Harri/Scobby .00 8.95 4.99 Shockway Rider 7.95 5.25 X-Pert Cartride (Disk) 25.95 Destroyer N/A 10.95 Trivial Pursuit (PCW) 16.95 Donkey Kong/Xevious .00 9.95 7.00 Gauntlet 8.99 6.25 It's A Knockout 6.00 10.00 Trap Door 5.50 NA Batman 6.50 10.00 (SPECIAL OFFERS) 7.95 5.25 Xevious 7.995.25 Dan Dare 6.50 NA Sort Circuit 6.00 10.00 Green Beret 6.50 10.00 DOUBLE PACKS/COMMODORE 7.95 5.25 Sky Runner 7.95 5.25 Double take 6.00 10.00 Legend of kage 6.00 10.00 Prospell NA 19.95 Scobby Doo + 8.95 6.00 Dandy 7.99 5.25 The Pawn NA 13.95 Elite Hit Pak 6.50 10.95 Prospell (PCW) N/A 24.95 Space Harrier .00 8.95 6.00 Yie Kung Fu 2 7.95 5.25 Marble madness 6.50 10.95 Rouge tropper 6.50 N/A Gauntlet 7.25 11.95 World Games + 9.95 6.50 Ninja 9.95 6.50 W.A.R. 4.99 NA Zap 2 6.50 NA Plan It 12.00 15.95 Cobra .00 9.95 6.75 Judge Dredd 8.95 6.25 Cobra 6.00 10.00 Graphic Ad Cre 17.95 22.95 Plan It (PCW) NA 20.95 Gauntlet + 9.95 6.50 Deep Strike 9.95 6.50 Ace of Aces 6.50 10.95 Uridium/Paradroid 6.00 NA Sold Million 2 6.95 10.00 Vchi Marta .00 9.95 6.75 Sigma 7 9.95 6.50 Avenger 6.50 10.95 Shao Lins Road 6.00 10.00 9.95 6.75 Dan Dare 9.95 6.50 Footballer year 6.50 10.95 Silicon Dreams 10.95 14.95 Protext N/A 21.95 (All of the above on9.95 6.50 Price of magick 9.95 6.00 Terra cresta 6.00 10.00 Jewels Darkness 10.95 14.95 Heartland 6.95 10.95 Cassette only) Post & Packing Inc. Overseas Orders Please Add 75p per tape, Mail Order only. Cheques/psotal orders (Sterling only please) Made Payable to: DISCOUNT SOFTWARE, Dept 3, 210 Nicholls Tower, Harlow, Essex, CM18 6EF TELEPHONE (0279 29076) WEEKDAYS ONLY PLEASE "


"lévi'athan (livi'ÀbÀn). ME. [a. L. (Vulg.), a. Heb. livythn. Ult. origin unkn.] n. huge ship; anything very large of its kind. Commodore C64 COMMODORE C128 D 28 1650 1 DEM OOOOOO DU DEEL PRETO | 00000) 30 ENGLISHI CASSETTE .95 Disk .95 SOFTWARET 1 North Parade, Parsonage Gardens, Manchester M3 2NH. Tel: 061-835 1358 U.S. GOLD COMPUTERSPIELE GMBH, Daimlerstrasse 11, 4044 Kaarst 2, Holzbttgen. Tel: 02101 600425 "


"HAE: BUT THE SCHOOLS CONG TOBAEAAEN OO:: 5. IS A REAL WASTE OF TIME. Solano MENU EXISSEN GRANGE HILLTHE GAME Victory House, Leicester Place, London, WC2H 7NB. Telephone 01-439 0666 Available for Spectrum, Commodore 64 and Amstrad: .95 Argus Press Software Group Grange Hill  Phil Redmond Enterprises Ltd. "


"Welcome to C+VG regular video page hosted by Ferdy Hamilton, the computer world's answer to Barry Norman. (And why not?) He'll be telling you about the latest video releases heading your way. Stay tuned to this page for Ferdy's favourites. THE LAST STAR learns that he has no choice as Xur has sent some guards down FIGHTER. Channel to earth to kill him if he returns. CERT PG Alex befriends the lizardlooking creature Grigg. Alex Rogan is an average Together they go on a seemingly teenage boy who adores video impossible mission; to singlegames. His favoUrite arcade handedly defend Rylos and machine is \"Starfighter\" which defeat the powerful Armada. he's excellent at. The Last Star Fighter is very One night Alex breaks the similar to the Star Wars previously unbroken Starfighter triology. Great effects, loads of record. Down from the depths of space battles and good ol' Alex space comes Centauri, who Rogan every bit as cool as Luke introduce himself to Alex as an Skywalker. inter-galectic talent scout, who The film is relies on the has come to recruit Alex because special effects, the plot is of his Starfighter talent. extremely weak, and could've Alex is then flown up to space been written on the back of a to become a Starfighter and cornflakes packet. defend the planet Rylos against The acting is mediocre, the evil Xur and Ko-dan although Lance Guest, who armada. plays Alex Rogan, could be seen At first he is reluctant to in a lot better films than this. become a Starfighter, but soon Most of the cast made the best FERDY HAMILTON they could out of the weak script, although no-one was outstanding. As I previously mentioned, the effects are excellent. The colossal Starfighter ships are great and the blasting scenes with the armada are the best we've seen this side of Star Wars. The effects however do not make up for the weak storyline. I enjoyed this film up to a certian extent, although I got bored after the first half an hour. I'm sure this film will be adored by younger viewers but most people over the age of ten will probably expect more than just good effects and a loveable hero. VIDEOSI ROCKY IV. WARNER VIDEO. CERT PG. THE LAST STARFIGHTER  ROCKY IV  IRON EAGLE Take two men, one good, one bad. Make the good one come from America and the bad one from Russia. Call the bad one Drago and the good one Rocky. There you have it, the complex plot of Rocky IV. The film gets in its stride when Rocky's best chum exworld champion Apollo Creed is playing happily in his swimming pool. On the T.V. comes the astounding news that Russia are about to enter the world of professional boxing, in the form of Russian champion, the gigantic Ivan Drago Apollo who is patriot naturally wants to fight him. Despite strong protests from Rocky the fight goes ahead. Poor old Apollo, to say the least suffers a severe defeat. This is where the ItalianStallion Rocky Balboa, steps in. Rocky wants to avenge buddy THE LAST STARFIGHTER OLANCE GUEST I continued on page 90 "


"G+VG COMPETITION Ten lucky people will find themselves with a copy of Iron Eagle, CIC blockbuster, by just answering the three questions. Ready film buffs? 1) Name the two stars of recent Air Force Blockbuster, Top Gun. Was it? A) Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers B) Henry Fonda and Meryl Streep C) Tom Cruise and Kelly McGillis 2) Name the character played by Louis Gosset Jr in An Officer and a Gentleman? Was it? A) John Rambo B) Seargent Lacey C) Seargent Foley 3) Name the title of the tacky American film in which a group of teenagers defeated the Russian army after the holocaust? Was it? A) On Golden Pond B) The Fourth Protocol C) Red Dawn Send your answers on the coupon printed below to Iron Eagle competition. Computer + Video Games, Priory Court. 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London. ECIR 3AU. The closing date is March 16th and the editor's decision is final. IRON EAGLE COMPETITON Name Address: O IRON EAGLE Apollo and wants to fight this home, when Ted is shot down invincible giant. Rocky's wife is while on air exercises when he against this fight, and quite accidently invades a small rightly doesn't want to see her Middle Eastern country's husband battered to death in airspace. This nasty little Moscow on Christmas Day. But country imprisons him and despite this Rocky fights him sentences him to death. and ... well, I won't spoil it. The United States Air Force This fourth epic in the Rocky seems to be doing nothing of any saga has bettered the lot. Better value about this, except acting, better fight scenes, and «negotiating\". probably a lot more of cash to An upset Doug befriends pilot make. ace \"Chappy\" Sinclair who The only problem with the Together with Doug and his film are the political morals Sly gang \"the Eagles\" plan a raid to throws at us all. get his father out. they acquire The film is totally based on two fully-armed F16s, and in go the U.S.A. vs Russia concept. Doug and chappy. Remember Rocky I where the About six months ago I faintly only moral Balboa had was not remember seeing a trailer for to punch below the belt. One can Iron Eagle, but it never made hardly decipher his speech, what any serious impact in the chance can he have of becoming cinema. A great pity really, as a politician? the film would have had much Apart from Stallone, the two more atmosphere on the big actors that shine are the Russian screen. duet Drago and his wife. Drago Although the script is is played extremely well by abysmal in parts, this is quickly Swedish newcomer Dolph recovered by some excellent Lungdren and the delicious acting, especially by Brigette Neilson, who recently outstanding Louis Gosset Jnr, wed Sly. who plays the big-hearted The high points in the film are Chappy Sinclair. He gives the as would be expected from the sort of peformance that earned Rocky series; the training and him an Oscar for his brutal role fight scenes. Excellently shot in an Officer and a Gentlmen. with great sound-effects of Jason Gedrick also shows a someone's brain beig rattled credible performance as the about. Great camera work heroic Doug Masters. catching the shine On Rocky's Another prominent picture is gum-shield just right. Throw in Doug's personal stereo cassette, a great music to beat along with which Doug is extremely it, and you have an almost attatched to. This gives the perfect bit of action. director an excuse for the dynamic soundtrack, including IRON EAGLE, Queen's One Vision, which Doug RCA/COLUMBIA enjoys at 40,000 feet. Iron Eagle has all the PICTURES. CERT makings of a blockbuster; many 15. perfectly executed flight scenes, great acting, great music, and it Doug Masters is a teenage boy obviously cost a fortune to make who can fly jets better than most It is very much in the Rambo of us can ride a bike. All he's mould of films, in which \"the ever wanted to do is become a goody\" goes in to get a loved one fighter pilot like his father, imprisoned by \"the baddies\" Colonel Ted Masters. killing all \"the baddies\" on his Disaster strikes the Master's way. Each month I'll be telling you about my favourite videos. But I also want to know what yours are so we can compile the C+VG Video Top Ten. Just fill in the form printed below and send it to C+VG Video Top Ten, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. C+VG VIDEO TOP TEN My video vote is for. Name "


"A GREAT DOUBLE ACT FROM DATA EAST:  TAG TEAM: WRESTLING 206666666666666666666 Teamwork and stamina are the keys, as you and your partner battle your way through the Title Matches on your quest for the Belt. Attack your opponents with Body Slams, Drop Kicks, Backbreakers, Flying Head Butts, or even throwing them out of the ring! Screen as seen on Arcade version PLUS? more Your karate championship is at stake! Can you master all the kicks, spins, reverse punches, and defensive blocks needed to retain your title? Compete against a friend, or challenge the computer. Nine different picturesque settings-plus three especially challenging bonus screens! CHAMP Ananas TAG-TEAM WRESTLING AND KARATE CHAMP TWO FOR THE PRICE OF ONE Cassette Disk AVAILABLE FOR COMMODORE 64 U.S. GOLD-WE'RE AT HOME WITH THE ARCADE THRILLERS U.S. Gold Limited, 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. No. 1 ARCADE HIT "


"0 0 In her continual quest for everything that is new and exciting in the world of arcades, C+VG's Clare Edgeley braves the hustle and bustle of the Amusement Trades Exhibition and checks out Danger Zone, Side Arms and Rolling Thunder to name but a few. Was she impressed? Read on and all will be revealed. OO O 2X The game itself is pretty much like all the others of this ilk. Fly your craft from left to right down a long tunnel featuring many terrains. Fight off the baddies as they stream towards you, pick up objects to give you extra protection, firepower etc, and bombing stationary targets on the ceiling and floor of the tunnel. At the end of each level you'll have to defeat a huge battle cruiser and this is when you really need a second person sitting in the copilot's seat. Two against the battle cruisers are much easier than one. The graphics are excellent and the 3D effect really works as you can disappear behind objects, though that can be dangerous as too often you are hit while out of sight. Darius is a dedicated game which means that you won't find any other games using this particular sit-in booth and vibrating seat. Is great fun and worth looking out for. DANGER ZONE It's the morning of the Amusement Atari's 720°, the skateboarding swivel your anti-aircraft guns to Trades Exhibition International simulation was out in force and track the fighters (ATEI) which was held in London was also attracting lots of attention. Konami's Rock 'n' Rage is also recently, and at 10.00am all is However, I've described these something a little out of the quiet in the great hall other than games in past issues, and by now ordinary in that I'd give it a prize the rush and bustle as arcade they should be in the arcades so for the daftest storyline. It's all manufacturers and distributors set you can try them out for about a rock band and a groupie up their stands for the day's yourselves who's stolen from the stage by a trading. The games that we can great hand which descends from expect to see in the the ceiling. A bit of imagination coming months are here methinks. Anyway, you leap many and varied, after the hand when there's a big though there were no flash and you find yourself in more biggies touting Ancient Egypt wielding your guitar hydraulics and as a group of marauding massive sit-in Mummies. Swipe at the Mummies cockpits. That with your prized Gibson to knock doesn't mean to say them out, pick up hamburgers and the new ones aren't Coke cans for refreshment and as good, in fact, search through the maze of Danger Zone from sphinxes for the kidnapped fan. Cinematronics Every so often a break in the music really caught my occurs and you'll hear her plaintive eye as an voicing whimpering 'Help Me'l At unusual and the end of your quest you'll chance superfast shoot upon Cleopatra who you'll have to 'em up. defeat before moving on to the It's a game of quick reflexes, the Middle Ages, the French ability to look in two places at once Revolution.... and I'll leave you to Seconds later a switch is to assess the odds and an untiring discover the remaining flicked and an explosion of noise trigger finger! You control a locations. You do get a breaks out as one by one arcade machine gun emplacement and little extra help from machines of every imaginable must shoof enemy planes as they musical notes which variety are turned on. The sound is scream towards you from the appear at random. Would tremendous as the scream of horizon. One moment they're tiny you believe it? These give racing cars whizzing round circuits dots in the distance, the next your guitar extra fire competes with the boom, boom of you've got six or seven fighters power! Actually your guitar war games, and over the top can wheeling around and dropping fires notes in waves wiping be heard hundreds of disjointed bombs on your outpost. out everything which comes jingles from a multitude of games. The idea is to shoot them with near you. It's a cute little game It seems only a few weeks ago tracer bullets before they get you. and the music is excellent that I reported on Preview '87, the Not so easy though as they split up though I couldn't remember the coin-op show held in September as soon as they re in range and names of the songs. And in terms of the 'stars of the whizz off to left and right, and After the success of Nemesis ATEI' little has changed. Konami's sometimes straight up into the skies, and Salamander, there were WEC Le Mans which stands for only to drop and catch you several Defender-ish games on World Endurance Championships unawares a second or two later. A show, all bearing much the same and Sega's Out Run stole the radar tells you from which themes, but each with a different January show and were among direction the next squadron's hoard of monsters to defeat. One the most exciting games to be seen. approaching, but in later stages, of the most unusual was Taito's Both are brilliant racing simulations two or three may appear almost Darius featuring three monitors in made extra special by their simultaneously. It's hard but line. The beauty of the game, other movement patterns. Le Mans is a tremendously exciting. than the vibrating seat!, is the racing car on a circular base which the cabinet's an eye catcher too. panoramic view as the scene swings in circles as you turn the As you move your twin joysticks, unrolls before you. Taito has wheel, and Out Run slides from the monitor moves too, up and managed to put the monitors side to side, tilting the car at the down, left and right, giving a together in such a way that there's same time. fantastic feel of being able to no break in the picture. SIDE ARMS DARIUS "


"O  ? monitor ° 0 OXO KO o SOLDIER OF THE NIGHT Capcom's Side Arms also has a Defender type scenario, though, instead of a ship you control Lieutenant Henry and Sergeant Sanders who are out to defeat the evil Bozon--a dastardly enemy who intends to destroy the human race. The two heroes both wear Mobilsuits which enable them to fly along quite happily until they are punctured by nasties, then they can be a bit of a let down The idea is to bomb along from left to right killing waves of nasties and picking up assorted goodies which increase or reduce speed, increase firepower and give extra weapons. The response to the joystick is very fast and action is hectic. Every so often you'll get the equivalent of a battle cruiser which has to be beaten to get onto the next stage. Your one major weapon is the ability to combine both characters to form one super hero who is virtually indestructible. The trouble is you have to find the right object which allows you to make the metamorphosis. Tatsumi's Lock-On is a shoot 'em up which requires quite a bit of co-ordination. You play a member of the Tatsumi airforce flying high above the ground ready to repel attacking land and air forces. In the middle of the screen is a grid which you must use to sight and hit your targets. Waves of enemy fighters swarm towards you and the pace is fast and furious. As if that weren't enough you also have to cope with tanks and the like which let loose some uncannily accurate tracers. These fireballs swirl up from the ground at amazing speeds and you've got to be very quick to dudge them. At the same time keep an eye on the grid and as soon as a number of yellow squares appear in the middle each holding an enemy fighter you can lock-on your missiles which, hopefully, will home in and finish them off. Meanwhile, as soon as the missiles have been fired, you can continue firing lasers at the remaining fighters and tanks. Warning messages appear telling of extreme danger, though! found that by the time I'd noticed them, a fireball had already come into range and there was no time to dodge. There are two versions of Lock-Onand upright and a cabinet version. I enjoyed the upright but would much prefer to sit down and bomb the enemy to Smithereens in comfort. Bally/Sente has come up with an unusual idea in Night Stocker which must be the first game ever to incorporate a driving game with a shoot 'em up. You have to get the hang of this one as the cabinet contains a steering wheel as well as a rifle. The game itself is fairly simple, though it's hard to play as you have to steer and shoot at the same time. The idea is to drive along a rocky landscape picking up crystals while at the same time shooting the host of outsize nasties as they swarm towards you. Picking up the coloured crystals is relatively simple just steer into them and the claws on the front of your car scoop them up. These are vital as they give you extra firepower to blast the enemy. At the end of each level you'll come across a robot hideout and it's at this stage you find out how good a shot you are. The robots pop up into windows and fire at you, and, while they're in sight you've got to take them out. As you progress through each of the 16 levels, the robot hideouts get large with more sniper robots. Getting through each stage depends largely on your speed of aim and fire. In later levels on the driving side, you'll notice that the aliens drop mines which are an added centre. This is the tricky bit each junction is guarded by an electified fence, and from the other end of the corridor, the Eagles jump out and take pot shots at you. It takes a bit of stamina and a lot of blasting but eventually you'll hit the fence's control panel and nullify it. Then it's onto the next trouble spot. As you get deeper into the maze, the scenario changes and once again you'll enter open areas which are heavily guarded Lots of shooting and no time for a breather makes Gryzor one hell of a firing game to play Soldier of Light must have the weirdest cut out graphics I've ever seen in an arcade game. It's another shoot'em up in which you've got to clear out the baddies which have taken over some of the planets in your galaxy Your special suit enables you to run and jump actions which are hazard. It is possible to kill them vital if you're going to surmount before they lay the minefields, but some of the obstacles and flying as they're further away at this monsters. Extra weapon power stage, and much smaller, your aim can be found en route each of has to be spot on. I really enjoyed which lasts until you die, and it's Night Stocker and this new every much a case of shoot combination of steering wheel and everything which moves. gun is a winner. One planet has, in the Rolling Thunder from Namco is background, a Saturn shaped a 'beat off the baddies and rescue moon which seems to have a crush the hostage type game. On Yo. There are a number of levels Wherevand each takes you into different er you areas where the going becomes travel, harder and the nasties more this weird numerous. There are many doors cutout en route, some of which open into moon rooms containing bullets and extra goes with weapons. It's farily easy to kill the you baddies, just drop on one knee to even if shoot them, and if they happen to you jump shoot first, the bullet will pass over into the your head. Your only problem is air it'll getting surrounded, and then you hop up to don't stand a chance the follow masked monsters just thump you a None of couple of times and you end up flat the other on your back planets The game play is rather slow had such and I really wouldn't recommend an Rolling Thunder to anyone who's unusual keen on a bit of fast action. feature Apart from WEC Le Mans, thought! Konami's next 'big games was looked long Gryzor which is a Ramboesque and hard! one-man-against-the-world-type. However, it You start off above ground to does lack that get you into the swing of things. certain Just blast everyone who addictive approaches and use the various quality which levels to gain height and then jump make games down on the unwary. Soon you'll like Nemesis find yourself underground where stand out you next task is to work your way from the through a maze of corridors to the crowd.   ROLLING THUNDER LOCK-ON "


"W S Y S T E M 3 PRESENTS BANGKOK KNIGHT hathi TRIQ TAPI MORE THAN JUST A SIMULATION BIG FIGHT SPECIAL Largest moving characters ever seen on a home computer 5 exiting backgrounds 8 directional smooth scrolling Playing soon S Y S T E M . 3 CBM 64,Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, Atari 800/130 XE & ST TEL 01954 1909 "


"Bitmainian con °C 0°  Ciridiruotisivuje prite juurvinen Just how good are you on your favourite game? Just think! Wouldn't you like to know whether you're King of the Joysticks? Well, here's your chance. Cast your eye down the following list and let us know if you could do better, or if you've got high scores on games we haven't even mentioned. The newer the game the better, but keep sending in your scores for all those golden oldies. Alarm clock — This will freeze all enemy for a limited time. Flashing heart This paralyses the enemy, you can kill them on contact. Blue ring This will give you 10 points for every step you take. Skull This will decrease your time limit. Paul also writes: \"If you reach screen 20 without losing a life then you will come across a door which takes you to a secret room. There you can collect 360,000 points. These doors occur every ten screens after screen 20 until you lose a life.\" PAPERBOY Hall of Fame Ikari Warriors 1,750,500 Keith Bradley, Lancashire Bubble Bobble 2,870,000 Paul Clare, Leicester Gauntlet II 6,758,000 James Washburn, Essex Quartet 8,576,750 James Washburn, Essex Yie Ar Kung Fu 1,698,600 I Dan, Surrey Rhygar 1,527,600 Keith Bradley, Lancashire Out Run 16,240,900 Romano Lindhout, Amsterdam Space Harrier 27,106,820 Joseph Rossi, Wiltshire Gun Smoke 1,669,450 Mark Verrier, Devon Salamander 1,091,100 Michael Clarke, Wakefield Green Beret 750,320 Keith Bradley, Lancashire Nemesis 841,500 David Stein, Leicester Commando 1142,800 Colin Miller, Perthshire Bombjack 12,602,110 Mark Verrier, Devon Defender 1,384,400 Alan Medlen, Cambridgeshire Knowing how to cheat on Atari's Paperboy can give you some pretty mega scores — in fact, Jeremy Walt from Cornwall claims to have scored an impossible sounding 1,079,855,981 using the following method. \"On the 'Easy Way' in Paperboy, first complete the day and finish the training course. At the end of the training course you'll see a bush and next to it a small fence at the right hand side of the screen. Taking the middle lane, cycle as close as possible to the bush and turn right. This will take you past the fence and onto another training course. Cycle straight through the Specator Stadium and you'll come to a third training course. This time cycle for the bush and fence and onto more training courses, alternating your route each time. If you get tired of cheating, just crash and then carry on the game as normal.\" BUBBLE BOBBLE Bubble Bobble is a fairly new game to the arcades and is proving very popular. Paul Clare from Leicester has sent in the following helpful descriptions of the many objects you'll encounter in the game. He reached Level 56 with a high score of 2,870,000. Can anyone beat that? And can anyone tell Paul what the Red Ring, Purple Ring, Lock and Chest do? Hints and Tips for Bubble Bobble OBJECT DESCRIPTION Yellow sweet Faster fire. Blue sweet Speeds bubble up. Purple sweet Increases distance travelled by bubble. Slipper Increases character speed. Gold trophy Gives you the power of all three sweets. Purple trophy Destroys all enemy. Walking sticks A large fruit will appear at the end of the screen these are (Various colours) worth between 10,000 and 60,000 points. Bottles This will fill the screen with objects, the object depends on (Various colours) what colour the bottle is. If all of the objects are collected in the time limit then you get a bonus of 100,000 points. Blue cross Fills the screen with water. This will kill all enemy on the screen. Red cross You will shoot fireballs instead of bubbles. These kill on contact. Yellow cross This causes lightning which will kill all enemy on contact. Book -Destroys all enemy on the screen. Bomb Destroys all enemy on the screen. Necklace This causes stars to fall which kills all enemy on contact Circle This causes a ball to bounce around the screen. This will kill all enemy on contact. SPACE HARRIER After much practice (amounting to some ) Kenton Price reckons he knows just about all there is to know about Space Harrier and has decided to pass on a few morsels on keeping alive in this fast paced game. The trick of the game is to keep moving everything fires at your present position so if you keep on the move, nothing should hit you. This is particularly true of the dragons at the end of each level. While they're coming at you, circle the screen, moving round each corner, the moment it turns its back on you go to the centre of the screen and blast as fast as you can. When you're on a screen with indestructibles like plant towers or castle turrets, make it top priority to blast the skulls, planes, giant frogs etc as soon as they start firing at you. If you're not quick the huge towers will zoom in on you making your task even harder. The spinning skull wheel at the end of some levels can be fairly easily avoided. If you find you can't shoot all the sections, decide which side it's going to do it's final swing and go to the other side of the screen. It should pass without harming you. On spinning dodecahedron levels, you always get one phase at the top of the screen with the second phase following at the bottom. Just dodge between top and bottom of the screen to let them pass above or below you. If you can map out difficult sections of your favourite game, showing routes and hazards, all the better. We'd like to print a few maps as well as your tips. Send your maps to Clare Edgeley, Arcade Action, C+VG, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. "


"BY VAN DUERDEN Welcome to C+VG's Extra Bits column which again will give you the low down, not only on any new hardware that's around but will keep you informed about any specialist software that's either on general release or seen to be released. Not only that, the column will sometimes include review of hardware or software items such as the The Artist 2 reviewed this month, which is out for the Spectrum, there is talk of producing a Commodore version. So watch this space for any further news. program as well as in machine business package which will contact Softechnics 36/38 code, for example typing 'call not only run on the Amstrad Southampton Street, Covent &bb9c' will swap the pen and PC but on any IBM compatible Garden, London WC2E 7HE. paper inks over. Simple!! The machine with 5 14 inch disc The second of the two manual is full of such drive and CP/M. programs comes from wonderful information and if Rainbird and is called The you have any plans to write SPELLING Advanced OCP Art Studio software the manual is a must. PROGRAM which is quite a mouthful. At .95 it's not cheap but it It is available for the 128 could save you many hours Next comes LocoSpell for and 128+2 machines and is work and should be available the Amstrad PCW 8256 and basically an upgrade of the at any retail outlet, otherwise 8512 machines and as you OCP Art Studio released for contact AMSOFT on 0783 can well imagine is a spelling the Spectrum in 1985. It 673395. checker for LocoScript contains a few additional containing two separate features such as multiple sets SUPER CALC 3 dictionaries one with 32,000 of fill paterns, define and save Next something for Amstrad words the other with 77,000 any window, define own PC owners. Super Calc 3 words. The program looks brushes, paints and which is released through similar to many on the market scrapbook and save them for Amstrad, produced by Sorcim and retails at .95. future use, Ramdisk facility for and claims to have over one superfast access to name but THE ARTIST 2. million users worldwide. a few. SuperCalc 3 is a powerful tool The original version Just released for the for solving all types of received a number of awards Spectrum are two new financial, business or drawing packages. The first is so it has quite a good mathematical problems and pedigree. It isn't cheap at The Artist 2 from Softechnics allows you to manipulate data .95, but what is these and is available for any either in the shape of graphs, days, and is out now. Spectrum. There are four bar charts or pie charts or just Commodore 64/128. Amstrad individual programs. Artist 2 is 6128 and Atari ST versions as a column of numbers. The manual contains nearly the first and allows the user to draw design or create any will be released early in the draw, design or create any 400 fun packed new year. For futher type of picture using either a pages of information contact Rainbird series of icons or menus or a information, hints Software, 74 New Oxford mouse if you have one. The Street, London WC1A 1PS. other programs include a appendicees, Sprite and Font Designer, a PLAN IT what else Page Maker and a Screen would you Compressor, there is also a Finally, again returning to expect from a fairly comprehensive 30 page the Amstrad, PLAN IT, nothing package manual to go with it. I don't to do with Patrick Moore, from costing .95. know how much it will retail at Database Software. Their last There is no but for further information claim to fame was Mini Office doubt that this 2 for the Amstrad and BBC is a true machines now they have released a program to manage your personal accounts, sort out your financial diary and finally create your own card index. I must apologise in advance for this month's offering, it might look to some of you like a page out of an Amstrad magazine but most of the new material around is for the Amstrad machines, although hope to rectify this in the future. PROGRAMMING HELP Probably the most useful item this month is the new Firmware manual for the complete CPC range 464/664/ 6128. Before you had to buy an individual manual for each machine now one manual covers all three. The manual describes the \"Firmware' or program resident in the lower ROM of the machine as well as details of the Disc controlling ROM. It is possible to use the Firmware commands within a Basic and 18/YES TINE Wednesday APPOINTMENTS / NOTES idget Areting Play golf with the less Heet with the sales per Finish sales projections with Mark Callest roses for Rury Kahe appointant to service the car EEEE: Notes .. Lisa luput dared Kari Transfer aplicate Inlet 5.60 Use Curser Keys to Select : 40 to Confira: to Exit "


"BARRY PAUL Prices include P&P within the UK 67/Leather Lane, London, EC1 7TS Tel: 01-405 1515 Visit Our Shop Mon to Fri n 888888888 6.50 5.50 22.00 5.99 5.50 6.50 6.50 8.50 6.50 6.50 5.99 13.99 8.99 11.99 13.95 13.95 11.99 6.50 5.50 5.50 5.50 5.99 5.99 5.50 Spectrum 48K Kat Trap Thanatos Fat Worm Big Four Durell Druid Scooby Doo Space Harrier Mag Max Star Glider Ikari Warriors Gauntlet East Enders Growing Pains of Adrian Mole Nemesis Fist 11 Jail Brek Inheritance They Call Me Trooper Brian Clough's Football Fortunes Bazooka Bill Background Noise Judge Dredd Enduno Racer Ranarama Legend of Kage East Enders Ace of Aces Shadow Skimmer Greyfell Agent Orange Little Computer People 6.50 6.50 5.99 5.99 6.50 6.50 5.99 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 5.50 5.99 6.50 6.47 5.17 5.82 5.17 6.47 5.82 9.72 5.82 5.82 5.82 8.50 8.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 5.99 5.99 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.00 9.99 9.99 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 9.99 9.99 9.99 6.50 9.99 9.99 9.99 6.50 6.50 1.75 2.50 4.99 4.99 6.50 6.50 6.50 5.17 Commodore 64 Repton 3 Hit Pack Alleykat Unidium & Paradroid Xevious Scooby Doo Donkey Kong Zarjaz Masters of the Universe Hypaball Judge Dread Space Harrier Paperboy Boulderdash Con. Kit Ace of Aces Sam III, Rambo, Kung Fu, Master Fighter Pilot, Ghostbuster Glider Rider Graphic Ad. Creator 10 Computer Hits 1942 Acro Jet Aliens Armour of Antriad Avenger. Way of Tiger Il Best of Beyond Beyond For. Forest Camelot Warriors Zork! Zork II Zork III Any Level 9 Game Killer Inheritance Blitz Kries Zapp Sizzlers! Zapp Sizzlers II Zapp sizzlers III Computer Hits II Computer Hits Legend of Sinbad Tau Ceti 6.47 5.50 6.50 5.50 Spectrum 48K Colour of Magic Jail Break Graphic Adventure Creator Tarzan Fairlight 11 Scalextric Bazooka BiH Artist II 5 Star Games 10 Computer Hits 1, 2 or 3 Crash Smashes 1.2 or 3 Ram Turbo Interface Dual Port DK Tronics Dual Port Interface QS II Plus (Micro Switched) Comp Pro 5000 Joystick Cheetah Machi Konix Speedking Archers Donkey Kong Legend of Kage Psi-5 Trading Co Leaderboard Firelord Footballer of the Year Future Knight Trailblazer Avenger Terra Cresta Great Escape Armour of Antiriad Xeno Uridium Shadow Skimmer Orbix Trivial Pursuit Any Mastertronic Any Mastertronic MAD Camelot Warriors Hypaball Sky Runner Double Take Aliens 1942 Mailstrom Top Gun Hard Ball Fairlight Il Kayleth Supa Soccer Cosmic Shock Absorber Paper Boy Elite Light Force Cyborg Dandy Explorer They Stole a Million Yie Ar Kung Full Konami's Golf Dark Sceptre Xevious Bobby Bearing Shaolins Road Konamis Coin Op Hits Nemesis Breakthru     5.85 6.50 Commodore 64 Cluedo Scalextrix Infodroid Super Cycle Super Huey II Tarzan Terra Cresta Highlander Sold a Million ! Sold a Million II Trailblazer Trapdoor Trivial Pursuit Trivial Pursuit (Young Edit) Uchi Mata Vierra Cruz Vietnam World Games Xevious Zarjaz Jewels of Darkness Sillicon Dreams Tracker Sentinel Art Studio Music System Advanced Music System Summer Games ! Summer Games !! Any Mastertronic Any Mastertronic Mad Int. Soccer (Capt) QSII Plus Championship Wrestling Breakthrough Colour of Magic Cops 'n' Robbers Crystal Castles Dan Dare Dantes Inferno Dempsey & Makepeace Druid Fist 11 Star Games Footballer of the Year Galvan Gauntlet Ghosts 'n' Goblins Infiltrator Iridis Alpha Jack the Nipper Kayleth Leaderboard Light Force Mag Max Marble Madness Marble Madness Con. Set Movie Monster Now Games 3 Pub Games Power Play Parallax Sanxion Space Harrier Speech Spy vs Spy Arctic 5.99 5.99 5.50 5.50 9.99 1.75 2.50 5.99 00 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 5.99 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.00 5.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 14.99 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 5.99 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 3.50 3.50 3.50 -4.99 4.99 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 5.50 4.99 5.99 6.50 6.50 6.50 5.99 3.99 5.99 6.50 4.99 6.50 6.00 6.00 6.50 9.99 9.99 1.75 6.50 5.50 5.50 9.99 8.99 6.50 5.50 6.50 5.50 5.50 Ace 50 6.50 6.50 Commodore 64 They Stole a Million Howard The Duck Nemesis Donkey Kong Cosmic Shock Absorber Konamis Coin Op Hits Strike Force Cobra Transformers Great Escape Sports 4 All They Stole A Million Bobby Bearing Blockbusters Blockbusters Gold Run Bazooka Bill Shao Lins Road Bismark Future Knight Tobruk Dandy Cyborg Commando '86 Elite Bomb Jack II Top Gun Head Alignment Kit Zeno Fire Lord Sigma 7 Monte Zumas Revenge Scrabble Monopoly 6.50 6.50 o C 5.50 6.50 6.50  _  _ _ ganggangguan OU 88888888888   88888888 och noon Super Bowl Ping Pong Biggles Mercenary & 2nd City Spy vs Spy II Nuclear Embargo Rogue Trooper Cobra Jail Break Tommahawk Reus Paddles Micro Rhythm Sky Runner Highway Encounter Star Glider Tracker Dragons Lair 11 Indoor Sports Destroyer Delta Future Knight 888888 DON 6.50 6.50 6.50 00000 88888 J Short of Floppy Disc storage ? 3\" Discs now available HMSort 4 New low price for these top quality discs. Suitable for all Amstrad disc based computers. Except the PC1512. CF-2 DISC DISC SC FC C LULU COMPACT FLOPPY DISC Douto Soch For Sre story nu DSR 5  A BIZ Order your CF-2 Discs now Coupon to: Marketing Dept. Amstrad Consumer Electronics Plc, Brentwood House, 169 Kings Road, Brentwood, Essex. CM14 4EF Name ONLY .99 each Address ............................................... Address Available from good Amstrad computer stockists. Or send coupon to Marketing Dept, Amstrad, Brentwood House, 169 King's Road, Brentwood. Essex. CM144EF. Post code Tel. No. AMSTRAD CF-2 CF-2 PACK OF 5 PACK OF 10 Other quantity (please state) ..... Brentwood House, 169 King's Road, Brentwood Essex. CM144EF. Tel. 0277 230222 | (PLEASE DO NOT SEND ANY MONEY WITH THIS COUPON) CVG/3 "


"OX XXX X Spectrum in October, Amstrad in November, Commodore 64 in December. All .95 DURELL Sales dept., Castle Lodge, Castle Green, Taunton, Somerset TA1 4AB England Telephone (0823) 54489 & 54029 software getting harder. "


"SIGMA TUT Commodore 64 available November 20th Spectrum & Amstrad available February Sales dept., Castle Lodge, Castle Green, Taunton, Somerset TA1 4AB England Telephone (0823) 54489 & 54029 R.R.P. .95 DURELLES Trade enquiries to Centresoft on 021 356 3388 software getting harder., "


"GE-DELETLEFICIELLEISEN C+VG DUIETID--HOTEL-NJ:5 133815 MS F this page could talk it would scream \"Scoop\" and \"Exclusive.\" Here is the cream of the crop of chart contenders waiting to stun your senses. Set a course for Sailing, turn the spotlight on Shadow Skimmer, get mixed up in a Feud, sit down on the Throne of Fire and get hitched to the Bride of Frankenstein. Don't gasp too loud, you'll annoy the neighbours. UN UNEN LOIN li BENDA CONVUD ESSEN lang ang The Edge, well known for their classy arcade adventures, make a bid to hook shoot 'em up fans with Shadow Skimmer a nice looking, fast scrolling, Spectrum spectacular. The Edge say Shadow features \"astoundingly smooth and extremely fast graphics, the like of which have never been seen before on the Spectrum\". Oh yeah?! What about Uridium? Meanwhile, back at the scenario. As second flight officer on an interstellar liner, your life is usually pretty cosy. With the sophistication of the ship's computers, and automated defence system, a flight officer's lot was more one of keeping comfortable in plush quarters than of actually being involved in the process of getting from Earth to the Centura colony. But you do have some responsibilities as an officer, and one is to take your turn in checking the exterior defence and control systems, in your Shadow Skimmer, a personal scout vehicle. And on this trip things have gone very wrong. The ship's computer has malfunctioned and trapped you outside. Your own defence systems are treating you as an alien body to be destroyed! Your only chance is to fly through all three surface sections of your liner to reach the main entry-point near the ship's control room and safety. The skimmer can pass under and over the different structures, but to get past some, it's necessary to flip your craft over, in order to fly lower. While you are inverted your fire power is lowered, and you can only move half as fast as usuall Skimmer should be out now for the Spectrum, at .95. BORBEL RON BEARIG Long SHAPED CARIS wag SPELL BOOK CEMBJES 185 BRCK HOMEWHELLO LOVE SAYS YOUR MUM. TEAS READY W LOOKS LIKE SHEAS FORGOTTENEMOH YES SHE CONTINUES, WHERES YOUR CASSETTE PLAYÉRZYou SHUDDER AND AURIT THE INEVITABLE YOU HUM IS GOING TO KILL YOU. , battle toho is the for Sncards tes Down in Wizardville the folks are fussin' and feudin'. Old Learic and Leanoric isn't that the name of a water softener? are batting it out to decide who is the top Wiz of all time. It's a battle to the death as the wizards test their knowledge of spells, speed and strength. You have to collect objects to make up the death-dealing spells required to beat the Wiz! There are villagers and the stubborn gardener Kieke who also get in the way of your magical conflict Villagers can be transformed into Wizardclones to confuse your opponent. Feud will be available for the Amstrad and Spectrum on the Firebird label at .99. It's not much fun being an Orc. Everyone who rates himself as a bit of a good guy wants to take a swipe at you to prove just how irritatingly GOOD they are. But now is the time to fight back and strike a blow for Orc-kind thanks to Level 9 and their new adventure Knight Orc. Is this some kind of adventurish pun we wonder? Knight Orc, released by Rainbird, is an interactive adventure. Each of the many characters lead totally independent lives and their actions will affect you and the outcome of the adventure. Leaming spells and communication with other characters are vital if you want to escape the mystical world and revenge yourself on all goodie-two-shoes everywhere. Knight Orc features an improved language interpreter with multiple command sentences and a huge 1000 word vocabulary. But the thing that will strike you first are the amazing graphics. Level 9 have taken a leaf out of Magnetic Scrolls book and produced some really neat \"impressionist\" style pictures to accompany their new adventure. Knight Orc will be available on the Amiga and Atari ST in March, both at .95. Versions for the 64, Spectrum, Amstrad, Atari 800, Apple, IBM MSX and Mac will follow. Problems for Luke \"Gonch\" Gardner. His walkman has been confiscated by Sir and his mum will kill him. Not only that. The school's closed and there is only one way to get it back and avert mum's wrath steal it. Welcome to the world of Grange Hill, the Argus Press Software game based on the BBC TV series. The game is an arcade adventure based on the book Grange Hill After Hours by the creator of the series, Phil Redmond. You have to find a way into the school, negotiate the maze of heating pipes and avoid dangerous situations "


"DDDDDDDD ODDSODDI 013 Son 144+14+4+11+1+148 . SCORE: ZECCED HIGH: 000000 MENSE: EOCCO It's going to be a really monster wedding if you can help old Frankie's bride get the groom together for the big day. As soon as he proposed old Frankenstein went completely to pieces. But the bride has the technology to rebuild her horrible husband-to-be. She has to rob graves and crypts for Frankie's internal organs but first you have to find the tools for your grave robbing activities. Lost souls want to stop you, zombies likewise. There are 60 rooms to search and a special \"cardiac arrest\" feature?! Nice! Bride of Frankenstein, released on Ariolasoft's 39 Steps label, will be out in March for the Spectrum and Amstrad. Is this the end of Monty Mole? Gremlin releases Auf Weidersehen Monty in March, follow up to Wanted Monty Mole, Monty is Innocent and Monty on the Run. This time our hero flees for his life across Europe after lying low in Gibraltar, raise enough money to buy a Greek Island. This latest Monty game is more of the same only better, says Gremlin. C+VG's all-seeing eye says this is true. Auf Weidersehen will be out on Commodore, Spectrum and Amstrad very soon. Debede laod0 OG CECOC de dealt Laugardades SCORE: DOGOD HIGH: DEOEDD S HENDET E BEBE Norman the Wise is a humble cat with seek out Moron in his deadly lair and no great ambition in life. One Saturreturn the orb to its rightful place in day night, Norman stumbles out of the cup of sorrows, the terrible reign his local — his mind buzzing with the of Moron would finally end. Now stories of Greyfell the curious land Norman, being slightly the worse for of long ago, tragically caught in the drink, at once decides his life of grasp of the Evil Moron. The great aimlessness has come to an end Wizard Hitormis, has been telling of he himself will take on the challenge how Moron the Evil One stole the and embark on the mighty quest. precious orb of life, thus banishing all Hitormis is wildly excited, and fills peace and love forever from the land. Norman in on vital information he Hitormis speaks boldly of the quest must know before setting off ... This that would return Greyfell to a land of is the plot of Greyfell an exciting light and laughter. He proudly proc. looking 3D Ultimate style arcade laims that were one brave enough to adventure. Watch out for it! COBEK SPTNKAKER IS UP KEEL MAST BOAT CHALLENGER SOUNTRYGAMERUSA L: 1318 L.0.A. FREEBOARD: 1108 WINES 14 TRACES) FREEBOARD COMBAT MODE MOVEMENO MODE L.0.A. L.W.L. SRE IS THE LONG-RANGE WEATHER FORECAST TU Following in the wake of US Gold's America's Cup Challenge comes Activision's Sailing also based on the America's Cup Race. First, you design your own yacht choosing the overall length, waterline length, freeboard and mast length as well as adding wings to the keel and changing the hull material. Then you have to choose the nation you want to represent and then select your prospective opponent up to two places above you in the table to help you decide who to challenge you may look at the blue prints of other competitors' boats. The display throughout the race is split into two halves. The top half shows the view from the prow out over the sea where you can see your opponent (if he is ahead of you). The bottom half contains your gauges which are vital to getting the best from your boat. There are two wind gauges: the absolute wind speedometer and the relative wind direction meter; in the centre are the two gauges which show your heading and boat speed while on the right the radar shows the position of your boat, your opponent's boat and the buoys around which you have to sail trying to turn the boat one way or the other. Sailing will be available on Amstrad CPC cassette (.99), Amstrad CPC disk (.99), Commodore 64/128 cassette (.99), Commodore 64/128 disk (.99) and Sinclair ZX Spectrum 48K/128K/+ (.99). It's been a long time since we've seen anything from Mike Doomdark\" Singleton. But now Mike's many fans can look forward to Throne of Fire which is truly something completely different. Throne of Fire is a classic three-sided power struggle between ruthless and ambitious princes, sons of the late King Atherik. It is played out against the dramatic back-cloth of the Burning Citadel, a towering edifice built around the rim of a smouldering volcano. Each prince aims to seize the now vacant Throne of Fire, by slaying his brothers and their men-at-arms, and then channel the mind-wrenching powers of the Throne to his own dark ends. The action is controlled by dual joysticks, or joystick and computer, with each player adopting the persona of one of the rival princes, and the computer taking on the role of the third. All three play at once, moving the main characters and the members of the supporting forces through the many chambers and connecting stairways of the Citadel, discovering arms and magical objects, and killing all who oppose them. Throne of Fire will be released on Commodore 64 and Amstrad at .95, Spectrum at .95 and Comrada A L 014 OK STREET SEEN C+VG "


"Sirbags COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU them. Right, I'm here to cut the Small-talk. Mailbag is Big-Talk. Okay? But before you get to grips with the letters, here is an I.D.E.A.S. Central Public Service Information Message. A few months back C+VG ran a competition to find the Paperboy of the Year. The winner did not give us his full address. So if your name is Randeep and your newsagent is Mr Patterson write to us and tell your story again. That's to make sure we get the right Randeep. And don't forget to include your full address. Onto the letters ... It has been a few months since November. Why do you do this? If last bought your magazine, mainly a magazine says December on the e due to the fact that my telly broke front, shouldn't it be released on . down and Ataris don't work very the 1st of December and not on the well if you can not see what's going 16th November?! on. But, I was bored and wanted But, enough about that. Over something to read. those few months, the magazine Lo and behold, C+VG almost has changed even if my telly jumped off the shelf and into my situation hasn't and not for the arms. I think it was the free stickers! worse I may say! On getting it home I realised it was More reviews, more Mailbag the December issue and it had pages (best part in my opinion), been in the shops since mid more of everything. Apart from Atari mentions. I think I saw the buyers to the problem but you word twice outside advertisments ! should also write to the software and letters. But overall it is great, house concerned and moan to especially the Pen Pal section. So them. They are the people much so that I might start buying it responsible. Try and get your again. money back. You wouldn't accept Oh, by the way I am looking for a new car that doesn't go or a a Penpal — female, male between music tape which has one track 17 and 20 chewed up, would you? Software Kenneth Jardine houses would soon get the Castle Douglas message if everybody wrote to Scotland I agree it can be a little confusing seeing the December issue on the Having watched and enjoyed magazine stands in mid-November the film Top Gun, and go through or indeed the July issue in midthe training, shooting the enemy up June. It all comes down to our and saving Dad, I ended up feeling cheated by Ocean. production schedules, distribution When I first loaded the tape onto date. Most magazines tend to my Spectrum and saw the graphics appear a few days if not weeks before the date on their covers. of the aircraft carrier, my heart When you consider the thousands surged with delight. But No! The of magazines available it would be screen split into two and a black and white game produced to impossible, for instance, for all their December issues to appear unfold. on December 1. Just imagine how Maybe it's me but after playing confusing it is for us. Right now Ace and Ace of Aces, I feel it is a I'm dictating this reply into I.C.'s fault and not my doing dicta-droid in January for the My last comment, which I hope March issue which will be out in Ocean bosses do not read for February! obvious reasons — is that I feel the game was released far too quickly I have just been suckered into and slightly conned the computer buying the Space Harrier and paying public into parting with Gauntlet discs for my new Amstrad their money. CPM 6128 with built in disc drive All the people I know who have (brag, brag) and to my horror I find bought or, as myself had it as a a major fault with Gauntlet and a Xmas present, have felt they have major let down with Space Harrier. not only been conned, but robbed Within the intellectual bounds of of a very expensive game. It should my vast knowledge having have sold for .99 not .98. I checked with other users, there is a hope in the future big companies fault on all Amstrad discs for do not take the computer public for Gauntlet. a ride. As you know, after level seven C Forrest all the screens are random, but London some of the screens have some sort A lot of what you say comes down of defect on them which causes to personal taste. I might like them to break down or not load. something which you don't. That's I know this isn't the fault of my life. What you really should try to computer and I know it wasn't just do is see the game before you buy one faulty disc becaused I have it. I know that's difficult because a replaced it several times and the lot of the big stores would refuse. shop is getting fed up with this. In that case why not refuse to buy As for Space Harrier what the game. If enough people do happened to the giant robots and this, stores will soon see sense and the fearsome two-headed dragon? provided a little customer service. What's the point of spending If you're lucky enough to live near .95 on a disc just to discover a small specialist computer shop that you can complete the game why not shop there. They should and knock up a score of 5,234272 if they're any good — have and not meet even a baby robot more time for you. with a pop-gun? C/ Tunbridge, In your last issue a certain Ashraf Lanarkshire Alhager wrote to tell you that he Lashing out .95 on a game buys your mag for .00, well let which contains some pretty me tell you that I buy it for just serious bugs is infuriating. Writing above .00. to Mailbag alerts other potential You probably think that us kids Anh "


"Oxon in the Emirates miss out on Arcade Creche (no one seems to have used the Jan issue. And while I have months delay as the game was not Action. Well, recently some friends that one yet, I hereby give it to you, your attention, where are those yet available. and I went to an arcade place and Melissa, to use anytime you like, tantalising glimpses of stocking top So now it is January and no game they had Gauntlet, Space Harrier, free of charge. (Look upon it as a that I demanded in my last letter? from CRL. It seems to be Quartet, Hang-On, Ikari Warriors, late Christmas gift from a loyal fan) That's what we want from our contending for the most Hyper Buggy Boy and many more (keep You see the true difference Melissa, not all this running about Game of 86 award surely. Okay, this a secret from my Mum 'cause between your good self and in a jump suit. so maybe they're having problems me and my friends spent around Haggard Smudge is that where as Tffgapn, with the program, but shouldn't  on Gauntlet. Hungover Smirk is only a Hanner Faringden they, through mags such as yours, Your mag is fab, but I have a Barbera animation, YOU are a keep us informed? complaint, when will you print a Howard Hawks woman. I am sure Yes, Matthew, there is a reason No letter, phone call, refund or Melissa poster (she's gorgeous). you know enough about this fine and it's quite complicated. C+VG any attempt by the mail order Here are our ratings for the mag. film director to realise this is printed in several sections but company to tell me about the Value 9, Quality of Paper 9, compliment when it is paid to you not all at the same time. The size delay. Okay so the amount was Enjoyment 10, Bug Hunters 8, Tips but we must remember that even of these sections can change only .50, I can handle loosing 9 and Reviews 10. ol' Hatchet Smells knows virtually overnight if, as there that amount, but I am not going to Haythem Kishtaini something of the movie world, usually is, a sudden rush of start wasting time and money in the Abu Dhabi being the subject of a recent film companies wanting to put meantime. You spent  on Gauntlet! I'm herself \"Hannah and her advertisments in. You can imagine But, what about the kids who shocked but don't worry I won't Blisters'. how difficult it is trying to keep all aren't working, guess .50 is tell your mum. Even as I write, If the whereabouts of these the page numbers right. quite a bit for them to throw away. plans are underway for a Melissa blisters are, at present, unknown And as for you, TFFGAPN, don't So this is it. Your mag, must have poster. Paris the Pen is gazing in let me prophesy that they will soon you know that stockings are out some say in the adverts that are adoration at her fine form, seeking be upon her knees for that what this year and jump suits are in. booked in, their credibility should inspiration. When he's truly she'll be grovelling on the second be checked by you, no? inspired we'll lock him back in his she is ushered into your august Consider yourselves as THE If nothing can be done by you cell with pens, paints, inks and a presence. computer magazine at the present then I am sure the Advertising few scraps of paper and see what time. As it is, yours is the most Standards Authorities would be happens. adult to date and the best interested why companies are informed. Just leave out the selling items that don't even exist!! So, Hannah Smith, who can be bitching. Let other magazines do Their address escapes me at the symbolically represented by a TV that. moment, so, if they, the managers, screen bearing the doleful message Onto more important matters. of companies are reading I'll give \"loading error'' is coming to One that is quite important is that you until I see this letter published London to sort Melissa out once someone is deceiving and lying to get your act together. and for all, is she? and it is getting quite ridiculous. No You have either option oneDon't worry overmuch, doubt CRL are having trouble some form of letter or postcard marvellous one, for as soon as waking their programmers up? explaining the delay or two Spannah Quiff reaches the big City Anyway I sent off to a mail order offering after a time limit an She will fall prey to the company expecting to wait a alternative game of senders choice. bewilderment and awe that always couple of weeks or maybe a continued overleaf overcomes country bumpkins when they visit anything larger than the grim collection of mud huts that I also enclose a photo of myself also anclace a photo of mycolf they emanate from ie Ludlow, from the last time I was in CarterSalop. Follis land. You asked for photos of The poor deluded creature will your tip suppliers and as you know be far too pre-occupied with the I have given you a few useful ones. wonders of civilisation to bother This is me as Mad Monk of Clava you. Hamster Smug will be turning Cairns, Culloden. taps on and off, trying to work out Fie Fight the good fight where the water comes from. She Rex V Barnes, will unscrew lightbulbs and expect Bromle them to still shine when out of their croche Creche. Ha! I like that. I always sockets. She will indeed, probably thought Ludlow was really the thought become lost on the underground, cradle of civilization. Seriously, thinking it is a real .99 budget Melissa remains above all this. And arcade game dungeon and happily another thing, Rex, I know how disappear for all time. Miss Hannah must feel having a Should this happen please don't permanent cold. My dicta-droid is take mercy on her and give her the suffering from perioidic flu of the tip that will get her out (board micro curcuits. Dumtimes it dakes elevator) or send her the map that me dound as if I've dot a dold and could help her — the London a blocked dup dose. Transport one. No, she thinks she's the tipster, let her sort it all out. I think your mag is quite fab, In the case of Haddock Sniff cool, supercali ... osious, etc, (well, there's definitely something etc. BUT I have one minor fishy about her and she's always complaint. It is the lack of page whinging about her ruddy cold), I numbers. They seem to be on advise you to paraphrase the every page at the front end of the words of a very wise man and say mag, but, they fizzle out. Then to her — \"Tipster, tip thyself. they come back at the end of the Preferably off a very high cliff\". I mag. Confused, I am! Any mean, quite seriously, a fall from a explanations? great height, ending in being Matthew Hobson brought back to earth with a bang Northants is only a physical version of what she would experience It is no good, I cannot hold back metaphorically should she meet any longer. Ahhhh, that's better. you anyway and its far more Right, now to get down to it. What merciful, in the long run, than was the point of having an index, letting poor old Hammock Sleep when none of the pages had any return to the silly little clique at numbers on? I refer, of course, to "


"Maulbagh COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON, EC1R 3AU armed with cruise missiles?\" I would like to point out that the aircraft which the film is based on was the F14 Tomcat, not the F16 If this service is already carried out by any companies I apologise for discrediting your names. I hope someone will see the sense in my argument. Sorry to moan but that's how it is. This is not open to argument from minors! Constructive criticism is welcome, gentlemen. Consider the Gauntlet to be thrown down. A Purnell Bristol It really is annoying when a software or a mail order company takes your money and doesn't send the game or bother to tell you there might be a delay. That's bad. Very bad. Let me try and explain about the advertisments. C+VG and all the other monthly computer magazines work a long way in advance. As I've already said, I'm writing this in January for the March issue. Companies wishing to advertise games due to release around late February and March have to book their ads a long way in advance. In that time something might go wrong with the games production. For example, the programmers quit, or they physically can't complete the game in time. The result is the advert appears but no game. These delays can go on for months. So it is not surprising that many people pirate games. They know that the games are not worth the money they would have had to pay. Then we get people prophesing that these pirates will bring the end to the market (Takoushi). What rubbish! The companies are ensuring their own doom. Certainly at this rate the software market, like Wall Street, will crash. No doubt the main companies would have shouted \"So Long, Suckers!' and cleared off long before. We must also look at other's points of view; let us imagine that everybody stops pirating (maybe because a successful anti-pirate system will be developed). The games would, as many say, get better but that would only happen if the companies got more money. They would not — people would stop buying games, only a dramatic fall in prices would prevent this. So the companies would still go bust, if the prices remained stable nobody would buy, if they dropped the companies would not make enough money. It appears that only the companies themselves can stop the imminent crash. And how? By producing BETTER and CHEAPER games and being quick about it. To pirate or not to pirate the choice is yours; maybe the above will help you to decide. I now rest my case in the hope that half of the authors of the letters on this theme in the large Mailbag section will. Ben Halligan Harrogate There really is no argument which can defend or justfy piracy. The case is clear. Piracy is theft. Theft is a crime. Pirates are thieves. Tomcat as there is no such aircraft but there is a F16 Fighting Falcon. In a previous edition you got it right you put an F14 Tomcat. What happened this time? Paul Billany, Hull. It was a mistake, okay? Sorry. A certain member of the team is sitting in the corner hanging his head in shame. The Ed's strutting around yelling and Big Red's looking smug because it wasn't his fault. Once again, sorry. In your review of the C64 Xeno (C+VG February) you remark that Xeno \"could have been a really nifty game if the programmers had decided to make it scroll instead of using an irritating screen fliping technique\". All three versions of Xeno on the market (Amstrad, C64, Spectrum) are continuous smooth scrolling with no \"screen flipping\" whatsoever. Nick Vincent, Binary Design, Manchester Tim looks puzzles. \"It's not what I call scrolling,\" he says. Okay chaps, laser guns at dawn should settle the issue. I write regarding January 1987 edition's remarks about the computer game based on the film Top Gun. The question in the Top Gun competition asked \"What is the difference between a F16 Tomcat strike aircraft and ...? Again on page 147 you put \"You will learn to cope with flying an F16 Tomcat Strike Aircraft. Later again in the review you remark \"we wonder if the F16 is The software market is currently in a sorry state. Many games are conversions from the arcades and so are merely graphical shoot-'emups (Space Harrier, Ghosts 'n' Goblins) which have very little substance and so do not sustain interest. Some games are original and lasting (Sky Runner, Tau Ceti II) but why should someone pay - when he knows that in a few months the game will be on a compilation with several others for the same price? Other games are immitations of good games as the author is so gormless he cannot think of an original. Big companies who are now rolling in money release these unzarjaz games (US Gold, Elite), they can afford to. "


"canic martech.... LIVE THE GAME! SHOCK absorber 2010201 moitach MUL..PULSATOR 'ech Coming Soon "


"PPP ows you may still be and would in the world. We corterite the file name on a Here are the latest batch of touch with any Spectrum Calling all you lovely ladies female then write to. Pen Pal letters. Have a look owners from all over the world. out there, don't stay out in the Chris Gin through and see if you find the His other interest is swimming. cold. Why don't you communi154 Panama Road pen pal you are looking for. If Ben Laidler cate with me using the miniOtahuhu not, why not drop us a line. Just Newcastle. office word processor for the Auckland let the other readers know Amstrad CPC 464. If you send New Zealand what computer you own and  We are two Commodore me your introductory tape I will some of your other interests. and MSX owners in Iceland reply using the same tape Who knows you may still be and would like a pen pal from which can be re-used for fut I'm a 14 year old boy and I writing to each other at the end anywhere in the world. We correspondence. Don't forget own a CBM 64. I would like to of me century and I will all be collect all kinds of software on of the century and it will all be to write the file name on a have penpals all over the To write the file name on a ha due to C+VG's Pen Pal pages. disks and cassettes. piece of paper with your name world. I have many new titles If there is not a complete Hermann and Tomas and address. and would like to swap softaddress, just write to the reader Vidivangur 18 Mike Harman ware. Write soon all letters c/o C+VG. What could be 220 Hafnar Fjrjur N. Humberside answered. simpler. Iceland. Svein tore Holsether Beiteveien 3 Are there any other Electron . I am interested in corres2600 Lillehammer I'm a 14 year old Spectrum users who read C+VG, if you ponding with a Commodore owner and would like to have are an Electron owner and you 128 owner with disc drive. a penpal from England. I have are looking for a penpal then am 15 and like any good games. I also like Queen and many programs and 40/50 write to me! Calling all Enterprise owners Dire Straits. Valdie Werbel top games. who want to get in touch with Sherif Gohar 51 Oakleigh Road James Laurie Stratford upon Avon other owners and join the En150 Sharia Marasli Northmapton. terprise club. Write to Zamalek Warwickshire 1.E.U.G. am a 21 year old ComCV37 ODP Cairo 60 Holdenhust Ave Egypt modore 64 owner and I would Finchley like to hear from any other . Would like to swap all kinds London CBM owners around the world I'm a 15 year old C16 of programs for the Atari, N12 OHX. with views to talking, pokeing owner and I would like to get adventures clues, books etc. So Don't forget to enclose a and just general computer talk. in touch with other C16 owners if you want an Atari penpal stamped addressed envelope. Write to for swapping pokes, hints, softfrom Iceland write to me. Damien Jardine ware etc. If you write to me Arnar Thor Oskarsson PO Box 899 please enclose a list of your Alfheimar 3 I'm a lonely 14 year old Ingham, Qld 48540 games. 104 Reykjavik CBM 64 owner who has just Australia. Barry Celie Iceland moved from America to EngRaasdorperweg 80 land. If anyone is interested in I am a boy from Holland 1067 T.L. Olown an Enterprise 128 and trading games, trading games, etc get in touch and I would like to write to Amsterdam I want to find a friend with an with me through C+VG. everybody who is the best in Netherlands Enterprise to swap ideas, Chris Brown arcade machines in his city or games etc. so if you own an Worcester town. My favourite game is o Kees and Willem, 2 MSX-2 Enterprise 64 or 128, please Gauntlet from Atari. We could users in the Netherlands would get in touch. write about tips, tricks and hilike to get in touch with other Kuldip Pardesi o I'm a 13 year old Spectrum scores for every game. MSX users all over the world. If London owner living in Spain and I Romano Linohout you are interested please send would like to have a penpal Brederodestraat 100 them a letter and they promise from any country. Please write 1054 VG Amsterdam to reply. Olam a 14 year old boy with to me. The Netherlands. Kees Maas an Amstrad CPC 6128. I have Carlos Fernandez Arco van Pedestraat 14 over 50 games on disc and 19 Jimenez de la Espada 4th B Benn Laidler is seven years 5622 BG Eindhoven cassette and still getting more. Cartagena (Murcia) old and would like to get in The Netherlands If you are 14—16 male or Spain "


" I'm a 15 year old Atari a BBC B+ and a 40 track disk of the world who would like to Ol am a Spectrum 48k owner owner who would like to swop drive. I am looking for someswap hints, tips, programs etc. and I love all games apart from games and tips. So if you have one around my age who Dumini Patrice text adventures. I would like to a cassette player, write to me. speaks English and lives in the 66 Rue au Prunier make contact with other SpecDarren Hind Channel Islands or France. 55240 Bouligny trum owneres anywhere, to Leics. David Ince France write about games, maps, Bas de L'Allee pokes, high scores anything Trinity about Spectrums. Please enOlam a Spectrum owner from Jersey I own an MSX and where I close a list of all your games. Finland. I am interested in findC.I. live there are not many people Der many people Derrick Watson ing a penpal who would like to to swap games and ideas with. Cheshire swap software. I have over myself so write to arcode So, if your lonely in your area I am a 14 year old arcade addict. I own an Atari and a and and own an MSX please conme with your software list. I'm waiting for your letter. CBM 64. I would love to hear tact me. Hello Atari owners, I have Vilam Vuong from a male or female who Jukka Kosonen an Atari 800 with disk drive lives abroad, especially AmerCharlton Kumpu and over 1000 titles of softica — a blonde female Amer58700 Sulkava London ware on disk. Willing to swap Finland. ican would be great. with anyone interested. Please Phil Chambers send a list with your letter. Warwks I am an Acorn Electron Robert Bronstein  I am 14 years old and I owner and I would like to hear 191 Rokeby Road from other Electron owners in Hobart would like a penpal who owns We would like to draw the the world. I would like to exTasmania a C64 or as I do a C128. I attention of your readers to change games. I have over Australia would like to trade games, SMG S.M.U.G. — the Southampton 150 games and I am 12 years _ the Southampton 150 cames and I am 12v hints etc. Micro Users Group. This is a old. Cliff Nobrega new group for users of Atari, Shaun Flannigan 68 Roseville St Amstrad, Acorn and CommodNorthern Ireland I am an Amstrad CPC 6128 St helier ore micros, who live in and owner who would like to have Jersey around the Southampton area. penpals from all over the C.I. We intend to have the group Olam a Spectrum 48k owner world world. I also have nearly 200 running by March '87, so, if and I would like to hear from titles and would like to swap Does anyone know of a hire you are interested then grab a other Spectrum cassettes or disks. Users anyclub which specialises in hiring pen and write to our man where in the world. I have 250 Amid D Tamimi games for Memotech MTX S.M.U.G. c/o C+VG. A reply games and would like to swap PO Box 467 paid envelope would be Jeddah 21411 512 and also wants a penpal! games and pokes. I am 14. from Malta then get in touch appreciated. Maurice Dobson Saudi Arabia Mr I Campbell with Northumberland Alfred Bezzina Southampton No 4 St Christopher Flats I am a 14 year old British Kuiiard Street I am o Commodore 64 Hi I'm a CBM 64 owner and Spectrum owner who would St Julians owner who would like to exwould like to trade pokes, hints like to swap letters, software, Malta change programs, cheat and games — cassette only. I hints and pokes preferably with pokes, hints etc. If you are am really looking for Karate overseas readers. interested write to me at:games. All letters answered. Alex Symons I am a 15 year old girl who Barry Compston Barry Roberts Glos. owns a C64 and needs help Belfast Clwyd finding penpals. If any mere mortals wish to exchange . I am a Danish CBM 64 views or just wants to chat, get Hi, my name is Emma WebsI own an Amstrad 6128 + owner and I would like to get in touch. All replies answered, ter and I own a C16. I would 5V/4\" drive and I would like to in touch with someone who from any country. like to get in touch with another hear from other users to exwould like to swap software, Diane Kemp C16 owner from anywhere in change hints, tips or swap softhints, tips and pokes. I have got West Yorkshire the world. I would also like to ware. I have quite a large a 1541 disk drive and a 1530 swap games and tips. collection. Please write to datasette. Emma Webster Tom Fiers Jacob Stalfors  I have recently bought an Wiltshire Beokendreef 3 Enighedsvej 40 Amstrad CPC 6128 and I B-9120 Destelbergen 2920 Charlottenlund would like to correspond with Belgium Denmark other Amstrad users. Here in One Amiga freak looking Portugal there is no support at for other freaks all over the all for the Amstrad and I would world! I also have the newest like some penpals to swap stuff available. Please write to software hints and ideas. me. Sergio Vasques Markus Luehe Rua General Silva Freire 151Moselstr. 170 4D 6086 Riedstadt 1 1800 Lisboa Germany Portugal PPP I own a C64 computer with  I am 12 years old and disk drive and would like to looking for a penpal who owns find penpals from any corner "


"STRETCH YOUR MIND AS INNEN SUPERWERS COLLE Baltic 1985 CORRIDOR TO ETERLIV USAAR UNITED STATES ARMY AIR FORCE Take the next step forward into a dimension of computer entertainment where action and excitement take on a new meaning. From the world's greatest creator or simulation software comes an unbelievable collection of war games, Fantasies and adventurous challenges. No longer are you restricted to the confines of a gameplan, no longer are you reliant upon the abilities and limitations of a remote software programmer for your enjoyment. Here is a challenge in which you take complete control. You make the decisions and you manipulate the circumstances to meet your objectives. Here you are the true master your destiny is not simply in the speed of your reflexes, it's in the power of your mind as well. CBM 64/ APPLE CBM 64/ APPLE ATARI BALTIC 1985 Can you lead the West Germans into West Berlin and free it from Soviet domination .99 USAAF As a General in charge of 8th and 15th Air Forces plan your assaults over 90 possible targets .99 BROADSIDES COLONIAL MEN SUPERPOWERS COLLIDE RDF 1985 CBM 64/ APPLE ATARI CBM 64/ APPLE/ATARII ST CBM 64/ APPLE ATARI/ IBM ST CBM 64/ APPLE BROADSIDES Captain an 18th Century warship in this game. Return to the Swash Buckling battles against Pirates 5 2499 COLONIAL CONQUEST This Award Winning Simulation lets you right for World domination during the Age of Imperialism. .99/629.99 They knew it as Hell You knew it as ROF 1985 Defend Saudi Arabia from attack by Soviet Forces using the US Rapid Deployment Forces .99 PHANTASIE Transform your character from a thief to a wizard while you track down the Nine Rings .99/.99   , WHEN SUPERPOWERS COLLIDE Germany 1985 CAM64 128 CBM 64/ APPLE ATARI ST CBM 64 */ APPLE/ATARI CBM 64*/ APPLE CBM 64*/ APPLE ATARI* ATARI PHANTASIE II Remove the Curse of the Dark Lord, to do 50. you need the Evil Orb .99/.99 VIETNAM Controi the US Army through historic Vietnamese operations. .99/.99 GERMANY 1985 When \"Superpowers\" colide Nato forces must repe! the Soviet invasion of West Germany .99/.99 BATTALION COMMANDER Command a modern armoured Battalion against the computers real-life simulation .99/.99 FIGHTER COMMAND THE BATTLE OF BRITAIN CARRIER FORCE CBM 64/ APPLE ATARI AMIGA NO 3 CBM 64*/APPLE/ATAR, MECH BRIGADE CBM 64/ APPLEI ATARI CBM 64/ APPLE/ATARI AMIGA Sug MECH BRIGADE This is the most modern armour warfare program which features 70 different weapon types .99 FIELD OF FIRE Asume command of the First Infantry and relive the storming of Omaha Beach on D-Day .99/.99 STIL CARRIER FORCE Encounter the real drama of 4 famous battles during w il in the Pacific .99 FIGHTER COMMAND Defend your country during the Battle of Britain using this superb strategic-level simulation. .99 THE ESSERT TIGERS ROADWAR ne NORTH ASICAS CAMPAIGN OF 19.1.4 CBM 64/ APPLE ATARI * /IBM CBM 64/ APPLE/ATARI IBM CBM 641 APPLE/IBMI ST CBM 64/ ATARI CONSTRUCTION SITUATIONS ARAM KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT TIGERS IN THE SNOW Battle with armoured tanks against Hiers Final desperate attempt opposing enemies dunng the North WWII is recreated during hilation of Amencan Campaign 1941-42 the Battle of the .99/.994224.99 .00 w 19.95/.99 ROADWAR 2000 Travel Forward in time all you search the gang lands for p osts. The roads are treacherous .velis in short supply. .99 .99 TE: WARGAME CONSTRUCTION SET Unleash your imagination and now create your own scenarios histoncol modern. Fantasy or even Battle for the Stars. .99 "


"WELL AS YOUR FINGERTIPS  CBM 64/ APPLE, ATARI/ AMIGA/IBM CBM 64/ APPLE CBM 64/ APPLE ATARI*/IBM APPLE/ ATARI BATTLEGROUP The Western Front is being threatened, could you take control and repel an attack .99 KAMPFGRUPPE This is a tactical game of armoured warfare on the Soviet Front From 1941-45 WAR IN RUSSIA This game requires skili in controlling every division of the Russian Campaign during WWW. .99 U.S. GOLDE TEL. BATTLE FOR NORMANDY Guide the troops during that furious day in June 1944 on a French Beach, D-Day .99/.99/.99 GEOPOLITIQUE 1990 .99 GETTYSBURG E TURNING POINT PANZER GRENADIER CBM 64/ APPLE/ ATARI/IBM CBM 64/ ATARI CBM 64/ APPLE/ATARI CBM 64/ APPLE SL PRO SEL GETTYSBURG The outcome to this game could change the course of American History from the Civil War .99 WARSHIP Control sides during this surface naval warfare simulation in the Pacific during WWII. .99 PANZER GRENADIER This program puts you in charge of an elite regiment of infantry attacking Russia under Hitler's direct orders. 624 99 GEOPOLITIQUE Outwit the computer in a political economical and military struggle for world dominance .99 GEMSTONE WARRIOR Norway 1985 BATTLE OF  CBM 64/ APPLE ATARI AMINO CBM 64/ APPLE CBM 641 APPLE/ATARI/IBM CBM 64/ APPLE ATARI SEL COMPUTER AMBUSH Hand to hand combat is the only way to win the war in this WWI game. .99 NORWAY 1985 Nato's ski infantry try to regain Norway from Soviet control, can you plan the attack .99 BATTLE OF ANTIETAM Relive the bloodiest day in American History, the Rebels threaten to escape, so you must stop them .99 GEMSTONE WARRIOR Search the deadly Netherworld for the magical Gemstone in this exciting action strategy game .99 GEMStore BAN UZARDS RINGS ZILFIN Sharder Spring HEALER CBM 64/ APPLE/ATARII AMIGA IBMIST CBM 64/ APPLE/ IBM/ ST CBM 64/ APPLE ATARI/ IBMI ST CBM 64/ APPLE WIZARDS CROWN Guide a valiant band of Adventurers to recover the precious Wizards Crown .99/.99 RINGS OF ZILFIN Search for the lost ning of the Wizard Zafin to become Grand Master Wizard .99/.99 SHARD OF SPRING Hunt the Sorceress for the stolen Shard and bring prosperity back to your island .99/.99 GEMSTONE HEALER Recover the healing tool and revive the Gemstone's power but beware one mistake could be catastrophic .99 QUESTKON REALMS OF DARKNESS U.S. GOLD: PHANTASIE III Amei CBM 64/ APPLE ATARI CBM 64/128/APPLE ATARI WAR IN THE SOUTH PACIFIC U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way. Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Telephone: 021 356 3388 Telex: 337258 BATTLECRUISER Loming soon .99 QUESTRON Defeat the Wizard Mantor and recover the Evil Book but beware of his hideous defence .99 STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS INC * Available on Cassette .99 "


"MANCHESTER 5.13 AM A \"THAT'S AN AFFIRM) LIEUT.\" AUDIOVISUAL NICE, AND CLEAN...\" CONFIRMED BANDE... PROCEEDING INSIDE WAREHOUSE... VTS6558100 TWITQUAM TTH FAINT GLOWS.. NO POSITIVE TRACES... BIOMA SWITCHING TO INFRA-SCAN... ADMF1002N ADMF1002N SI S AID MOVING TO UPPER LEVEL... WAWNE CONDITION RED! UNDER ATTACK... LOWER LEFT ARM IMMOBILIZED. ASSUMING OFFENSIVE MODE... PICKING UP MOVEMENT... SUSPECT IN CLOSE PROXIMITY... SOMETHINGS WRONG HERE... \"WHAT THE HELLS HAPPENING THERE. THEREN SITUATION CRITICAL! REQUESTING IMMEDIATE BACK-UP... 1. Von will TINTOS ARMS IMMOBILIZED! CANNOT RETURN FIRE... HAVE VISUAL CONTACT... CABLES SNARING ME... ODDAM... IT'S A ROACH...\" "


"\"A-V DOWN... CAN YOU RESPOND? LIEUT..? MANCHESTER 5.19AM LONDON POLICE VMETRO SCRIPT by JERRY PARIS & GARRY LEACH ARTWORK by JERRY PARIS PARIS 1987 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. ARO03413521 XENOLOGICAL PROFILE NAME: QU-SS UR ROCA LITAN TACHAR 305 TACHAR 306 DOB: N/K AGE: 139 EARTH STANDARD (APPROX) HEIGHT: 1.70M WEIGHT: 280 KILOS GENDER: AUTOSEXUAL I.Q.: 190 (APPROX) SYSTEM OF ORIGIN: KRAYA, 4TH PLANET, BARNARD'S STAR. (RED DWARF) GRAV: 5.4 E.S. DISTANCE: 6 LIGHT YEARS OBSERVATIONS: 6 LIMBS AND HANDS. EXCEPTIONALLY TOUGH BLUE CHITINOUS EXOSKELETON. VERTIBRATE. 320 DEGREES FIELD OF VISION. IMMUNE TO DISEASE, CELLULAR DETERIORATION OR MALFUNCTION. KRAYANS ONLY SUFFER ACCIDENTAL DEATH. 68% OXYGEN REQUIREMENT. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION ACCESS p11055AR... LONDON 7.32 AM 732 101 THIS IS TOP PRIORITY 50 JUST LISTEN... "


"AT 3.39 AM LIEUT.JUSTICE WAS TERMINATED AS HE LEFT GLASGOW CENTRAL CRIMINAL COURTS. LIEUT.ORDER OF THE MANCHESTER CONSTABULARY FOLLOWED IHR 40MIN LATER, HAD HIS FOOL HEAD BLOWN CLEAN OFF... IN 3 HRS THIS ONE, LONE, PRIMATIVE E.T. HAS JUNKED 40 MILLION HI-TEC DOLLARS OF TAX PAYERS MONEY. PERSONALLY, I DON'T CARE EITHER WAY... YOU'RE ONLY CIRCUITS AND CIRCUITS AREN'T FLESH, BUT IT'S BAD PR... AND I'M THE ONE WHOSE SMEARED BY MEDIA FLACK IF YOU'RE GREASED! AS OF NOW YOU'RE ON HOLD TILL I NAIL THIS SONOVABITCH... CHIEF MASON, WITH ALL DUE RESPECT-DOVT INTERRUPT! YOU'RE GOING INTO HIDING... I CAN'T AFFORD ANYMORE OF YOUR SCREW-UPS! DISMISSED. LIEUTS. B320AM LOOK AT THOSE STREETS, SWARMING WITH CRIME AND CORRUPTION. WE SHOULD BE OUT THERE, BUSTING AND BOOKING. THIS IS RIDICULOUS, SPILLANE! US... CONFINED TO A SAFE HOUSE! LEM WOW! NOW HE'S TURNED INTO A GIANT HOOVER!.. HEY, QUIT MOANING, LAWW... COME AND WATCH THIS, ITS-OH GREAT!.. CONVERTABOTS! MY FAVOURITE... Pril : B WITHE nil (SPILLANE!! SEB "


"LAWW! DOWN HERE, I'M ALRIGHT.. HEY! WHERE'S THE REST OF ME..? MUST BE IN ONE OF THE APARTMENTS BELOW -COME ON, SPILLANE... TIME FOR A STRATEGIC WITHDRAWAL.., POLICE THE ROACH... IT TRACKED US HERE SOMEHOW... WINGED WOULDNT WE'RE ON THE S3RD FLOOR... OH NO.. WHERE WE GONNA GO..? TELL ME YOU'RE NOT... AW, HELL, YOU DID 14 09 TO BE CONTINUED... 113 "


"+VG's Hot Gossip ace Tony Takoushi has the biggest eyes, nose and mighty mouth in computer games. He sees all, hears all and he then shouts about it each month exclusively in your favourite computer mag. So read on for the man o who shoots from the lipe at the good, the bad and the ugly in the software world. ou brute, you brute,\" she sobbed trying to slap my face. Take it easy, honey. I didn't kill him. But I'll find out who did!\" I flipped open my pack of TicTac and half way through bouncing it off my forearm she lunged wildly trying to slap me round the head. Ileant over the corpse and decided it was time to boot up Killed Until Dead. This case was getting out of hand!! This month's offering is a VERY classy who-is-gonna-do-it! No! don't have a screw loose! Just keep reading. You take on the role of top detective Hercule Holmes. You have to discover the would-bemurderer. Potential victim, weapon, location and motive BEFORE the act is committed. It's a fun slant on a tried and trusted theme. Killed Until Dead comes from that classy U.S. outfit Accolade. As with all their previous releases, it is very well presented and oozes quality You start the game with a hi-res screen and the game title set against an eerie mansion. There is a digitised thunder-clap and a bolt of lightning flashes down the screen. You are then given a brief scenario explaining the scene and your role in the events to come. You are given the choice of entering the Hercule School of suspects. You have monitor (video), Sleuthdom (honest!) or going tape (conversations) and break-in. straight into the game. The second section is a stack of If you play the game you choose files which give you a run-down on one of four difficulty levels (from the five characters in the mystery. Elementary, my dear Watxon, Mike Stammer, Claudia Von Bulow Murder Medium Rare, Cases for and Agatha Maypole. the Cunning and Super Sleuth!) To help you along the telephone and then get an actual mystery to occasionally rings and drops you solve. pointers where you should be On the easy level (well what did looking for answers. ya expect!) there are seven cases It's one of the slickest adventures available, Weight Watchers, Mars did I really use that word? — to Needs Women (huh?), Beaujolais worm its way into my drive. or Bust, Hold the Mustard, Banana Falls, A Case for the Birds and Fast Food Fight. I chose Weight Watchers (ahhmm) and was presented with a tasty pic of a man sitting behind a desk with his hand outstreched. From here on the sleuthing begins. You can choose any one of four main sections on the table to investigate. Surveillance lets you look over the house keeping tabs on the ASATHA HAYPOL here was a time when just about anyone could sit down and write a game and given a little skill and imagination, make a living. Today the market has become VERY professional. And this is not all good news folks... Take a typical professional game that received excellent ratings for graphics and sound but still did not deliver in the playability stakes. A number spring to mind, the most recent being Cosmic Bakery. The attention to detail was almost faultless BUT there was virtually no gameplay or lasting interest built into the design. Why am I harping on about programming this month? The main reason is that I took three months out and decided to write a game back in December 1985. I made a vow to write totally finding the right company to DO IT! But beware of original arcade games, that market my games. This, I conversions. These tend to be were heavy on playability and would imagine, is one of the soul-destroying, repetitive had an exciting design. biggest problems facing other work. Strangely enough, I really authors. Another major area to watch was not sure whether I could A lot of people have asked out for is to make sure that the write a game. I was very lucky why I did not market my own company buying your game and was given a flying start by games since I have been will do it justice. In the form of Richard Leinfellner (he of around the micro scene for press launches, adverts, Cauldron fame) who taught me years. demos to mags and selling to the basics. The answer is simple and stores. I have now written two painfully obvious. It costs a It would be nice to write games for me C16/+4 great deal of money, and time, AND sell my own games. But Starburstand have bought to market a game properly. the reality today is that this is myself a BMW 628 sports Today if you cannot get your virtually impossible. coupe with the royalties. game into the big chain stores, Tim tells me that I can do a What is the moral of all this? odds are it will bomb out and full blown feature on my Well, there is money to be not achieve anything like its experiences with designing made even if you don't have potential sales. and marketing games in a super graphic and sound I had decided quite simply to future issue. people to enhance your design and write games and Drop me a line if you have games, PROVIDING you know let someone else market them had some bad encoutners with the market you are aiming for while I put my energies into software companies, or if and can produce something developing new, original and what YOU would like to see in people want to play. exciting concepts. C+VG's feature on writing and The biggest problem If you can write an original marketing your own games. encountered to date has been game then take a chance and omy Foto "


"THE COIN-OP SENSATION FROM DATA EAST... DATA EAST DATA EAST O ER RANKI U.S.. (GOLD) LILIT BE an Softw Just like in the classic wild west films of old, you'll be in the thick of the action right from the Available in the following formats: Cassette Disk start! Hold-ups, robberies and Commodore. .99 $14.99 rooftop fights, Express Raider Amstrad .. .99 $14.99 has them all! Spectrum .......... ............ .99 U.S. GOLD-WE'RE AT HOME WITH THE ARCADE THRILLERS! U.S. GOLD LIMITED, 2/3 HOLFORD WAY, HOLFORD, BIRMINGHAM B6 7AX. "


"ATARI-ST AMSTRAD .95 -95 I COMMODORE 48-95 SPECTRUM $7.95 ee TATTO COIN-OP IN MINI COINSAU: Licensed from  Taito Corp., 1986, Programmed for Amstrad, Spectrum, Commodore, Atari by Imagine Software. ne agaa Imagine Software (1984) Limited 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 SNS Screen shots taken from Arcade version. Talu210242020. Taley2O077 "

