"13 tah's been selec JOU t azéne Dec82 Still only  GO FOR IT. WITH RACE ACE MANSELL! canon Tobi PLAY PLANET OF DOOM WITH C+VG'S FREE GAMES FIGURES WIN BUGGY BOY'S GO-KART! WIN A KNIGHTMARE ADVENTURE ARCADE ACTION IN JAPAN FREE FANTASY ROLE-PLAYING SUPPLEMENT "


"OWNERATI CUTZ TM Spectrum 48k Cassette .95 Spectrum 128k Cassette .95 Spectrum 128k Disc .95 Commodore 64 Cassette .95 Commodore 64 Disc .95 Amstrad 64k Cassette .95 Amstrad 64k Disc .95 Amstrad 128k Disc .95 Coming soon: Atari ST/ Nintendo Screenshots taken from various computer formats WW 1985 Telepictures Corporation, Leisure Concepts, Inc. and Ted Wolf. All rights reserved. Elite Systems Limited, Eastern Avenue, Lichfield, Staffs WS13 6RX Telex: 336130 ELITE G "


"START Spectrum Cassette .95 Spectrum DSC .95 Amstrad Cassette .95 Amstrad Disc .95 Commodore 64 Cassette .95 Commodore 64 Disc .95 Atari ST .95 Screenshots taken from vanous computer formats \"\"Licensed from Taito Corp. Original game developed by Tatsumi Electronics IM Buggy Boy Owned by Taito Corp Export outside Europe and Australia prohibited elite TETSUMI. Elite Systems Limited, Eastern Avenue, Lichfield, Staffs WS13 6RX Telex: 336130 ELITE G "


"O Features 46 WIN A KART COMPETITION 49 GOING FOR GOLD 50 US GOLD NEWS | 52 OUTRUN | 57 GO! | 60 COIN IT 63 GAUNTLET II | 64 SCREEN STARS | 68 KNIGHTMARE COMPETITION | 70 STAR TREK THE NEXT GENERATION | 74 FAST LANE NIGEL MANSELL | 83 FANTASY ROLE PLAYING SPECIAL | 98 PLANET OF DOOM BOARD GAME | 103 COMPETITION RESULTS | 104 ALTERNATIVE WORLD GAMES COMP. | 109 GRAFITTI RESULTS | 111 THUNDERCATS CARTOON | 132 WIN AN AMIGA | 145 COMPUTER HITS COMPETITION | 164 KONAMI T-SHIRT OFFER | 168 BUGGY BOY PLAYERS GUIDE NIGEL MANSELL/P74 DO YOUR FOLKS KNOH WHAT YOU'RE UP TO?! Contents ONews & Reviews, w NEWS REVIEWS: GAMES OF THE MONTH: THUNDERCATS AND NEBULUS. C+VG HITS: JACK THE NIPPER II, TERRORPODS, BUGGY BOY CZ DONIZE STREET SEEN/P180 PPPPP LEO SCORE LEG 89965 PAR REGULARS | 77 IDEAS CENTRAL | 122 FRAME UP | 126 BIG SCREEN | 136 ARCADE ACTION | 140 COMIX | 146 ADVENTURE | 174 THE MEAN MACHINES | 180 STREET SEEN | 185 MAILBAG | 194 HOT GOSSIP OCHVG team EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John ART | EDITOR Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Steve Donoghue Matthew Woodley AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeley SOFTWARE | CONSULTANT Tony Takoushi PUBLICITY Clive Pembridge ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Garry Williams SENIOR ADVERTISEMENT EXECUTIVE Katherine Lee AD PRODUCTION Lora Clark PUBLISHER Terry Pratt COVER Lee Sullivan EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1R 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222. JulyDecember 106,571 1. BUGGY BOY/P168 "


"-Contents POISET mon 5 ACCOMFORCE  ACTION FORCE/P45 THUNDERCATS/P16 ED B01 1 TLOCRTOR 93707232E TRAP DOOR/P25 KNIGHT GAMES 2/P8 Inside Story ROLE-PLAYING/P83 If this is the first time you've picked up C+VG then you've chosen the right month! Not only are there tons of really great games about at the moment which we've packed into our reviews section, but also we've got many mega-competitions. On the front of this issue you'll find your FREE miniature role-playing figures for you to use playing our exclusive Planet Doom fantasy board game. Talking of fantasy figures, Wayne has been hard at work to bring you C + VG's special Fantasy Role Playing supplement. We take an in depth look at what US Gold have up their sleeves for Christmas, offer you the chance to win an awesome Electronic Arts Amiga and check out our Buggy Boy Players Guide. All this plus our executive Nigel Mansell Grand Prix preview. The figures FREE with the issue of C+ VG contain lead, which may be harmful if chewed or swallowed. BIG SCREEN/P126 MEAN MACHINES/P174 | DEFCON 3 YOU SUCCEEDED IN DENOL ISHIN THE COMMUNICATIONS FROM RESCUE 104200 ARCADE ACTION/P136 . FRAME UP/P122  TERRORPODS/P29 -Contents "


"Youre cool, the engine's hot the girls gorgeous, a tank full of gas and an open road... the rest is up to you..! Screenshot from Amstrad version. Screenshot from CBM 64/128 version BAR 2 CD BD e STAGE 3 Qut poeng ISTART SEORE EVENTO 0 IN SCORE 1856 LAP 338 STAGE Screenshot from Spectrum version. 50. STACE Screenshot from Atari ST version. JPO 00 S22 TE-E"


"EIE The ultimate experience in motor sports simulation, the absolute challenge to nerve and reflexes. Feel the wind in your hair and the pull of the G-force as you power your way along the highways and byeways, a girl by your side and open country before you. Experience the exhilaration and excitement of driving a high performance sports car in this teasing time trial where your co-ordination and nerve will be tested to unbelievable limits. Out Run the coin op starred as an arcade sensation. Out Run the computer simulation mirrors this exciting all action spectacle. CBM 64/128 CASSETTE .99 DISK .99 SPECTRUM CASSETTE .99 AMSTRAD CASSETTE .99 DISK .99 ATARI ST DISK .99 UIT TITUD 2100T The machine becomes a home computer reality on December 10th. Atari ST version will be available Later in December INCLUDES ORIGINAL Sound Tracke FROM COIN OPI VERSION Sound frame o En SEGA ....... SEGA U.S. U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford. EI GOLD: Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388. "


"underground levels where they are in anybody's guess! Remove the last data bus and you'll trigger a total shutdown of all mechanical and computerised services inside the terminal. Stratton CRL will be available on the Commodore 64/128 cassette .95, disc .95. Battle Zone fared in the battle with Leather Fun! Vroom! We reviewed the Amstrad version of this French bike racing game, 500 Grand Prix, some time ago. But here it is on the Atari ST. Looks pretty huhAvailable through Loriciels very soon with IBM, C64 and the released Amstrad version following on. fared in the battle with Napoleon? Or Alexander the Universal Military Great versus Montgomery's Simulator is the game which Desert Rats? has apparently got wargamers Interglalactic frothing at the mouth with Development's USM will be anticipation. It allows you to published by Rainbird on the re-enact the battles of Hastings, Atari ST at .95. Marston Moor, Arbella, Waterloo and Gettysburg. Each conflict is enacted on a 3D grid explodes on a shuttle. The terminal's moorings are smashed and the life-support system cut off. The shuttle crashes through three levels of Stratton and triggers of fall defence units. Survivors are trapped, cut off from rescue services. You are sent to de-activate the Stratton Central Control, rescue those trapped and make the system which can be viewed from terminal safe again. any angle. Play is either against Unfortunately the simple entry computer or friend. You can use code was lost when Dr Hans the map creator facility to design Stratton Air Terminal Rasver, the terminal's inventor, your own battlefields, and then the latest in space passenger died aboard the shuttle. The only create your armies. Or place, in comfort. Advanced controls, other method of shutdown is a combat, two armies from machinery, waste disposal. The systematic de-activation by different time periods. How lot. And then, on the official removing all of the circuit would Ethelred the Unready have opening, a terrorist bomb breakers scattered about the TUP 0001200 3 01 2UP 1000000 33 0055503 543 2uF 00003 system which can be viewed from Take off Hunk of the month By the year 3987, the Galactic spot on the space map, the Zone Octapolis is a simply brilliant Imperium was mightier than ever of the Evil Eye, as they called it new game for the 64 from One by one it had swallowed up No one even dared to talk about English Software. Il features all solar systems and alien races Octopolis anymore, but in the split screen iwo way scrolling, the The dreaded fleets of the deep secrecy of the Galactic hottest shoot em up action Imperium were feared all over Intelligence Agency (GIA) a most you've seen since Uridium, PLU the Galaxy, and with good cruel and desperole series of exciting platform screens. Like reason: one fully armed battle experiments was carried out Uridium you start by shooting up Cruiser was enough to blow up a They kidnapped innocent space space craft and sneaky aliens, whole planet. No one was strong pilots, and sent them inside the score enough and you can land enough to resist the power of the zone, and hoped that somehow, and enter the platform sequence apt for a small somewhere they could find one of the game. Five platform defiant planet called Octapolis. who was immune to the immense screens packed with awesomely The Imperium hodn't attacked the mental power of Octapolis. In detaild monsters separate you planet of Octapolis for centuries they could get close enough to from the next shool 'em up level To space pilots it was just a black wipe out the planet. I TOOK The Created by a mysterious Finnish Urrrrrgh! Horrible isn't it. Designer's Knees exposed horror Still, the boxer shorts Craig is modelling arn't half bad. And there's no dodgy fastenings which could possibly let you down so they are pretty good as cool shorts too. Fancy a pair? Then just answer the simple question and rush your answers on postcards only please, to "


"DEPTH L75 270 A Engineering Changing heading to 180 degrees Engineering 13 Reached heading of This is The Hunt for Red surprisingly the Americans want October on the Atari ST which Red October. And the promises to be the best Argus Russians want her back even release well, possibly more. Tension mounts and the ever. It's based on the world heads for all-out war. international best selling book of in the game you play the par the same name by Tom Clancy of the sub's skipper. The officer's The Red October is the are on your side but the crew Soviet Union's most advanced doesn't know about the submarine brand new and detection. With both the almost undetectable. The captain Americans and Russians hunting and officers have decided to you plot a course to freedom. The detect to the West. Having set out game is icon-driven, so it's quite from Russia, the sub is now easy to select directions, engine heading towards America. Not speed and navigate. But whether Teet entering locaisade eet entering attack mode ESIT you make the right decisions is laughed and the Prol another matter disappeared in huff. Well, 20 The Hunt for Red years on the comet has appeared October, being programmed and only the Prof can save the by Oxford Digital, will cost world but where is he? .95 on ST, Amiga and PC. You have a choice of five Spectrum, Amstrad and explorers British, German, Commodore versions will follow Japanese, French and American Meanwhile there's another to pick from From then on it's Argus game this time due out the exploring caves, clouds and the Quicksilva label land. It is the normal mix of Twenty years ago Professor problem solving but good fun Albert Eyestroin predicted a nevertheless great comel would hit and Watch for more Red October destroy the earth. Everybody next month ugly Knees Comparison, Priory Over the Moon three ventilator shafts. Dr Fruit must tunnel his way into the orchards moving from tree to free to strip them bare of all fruit SLick Zapper reprogrammed. GIVE away. They come in small Computer and Video Games, Ugly Knees Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. We've got Don't expect Pirahna's Roy 30 pairs of these elegant boxers, of the Rovers to appear made specially for before the New Year. Word is Infogrames, that classy that the game is being French software company, to GIVE away. They come in small, The storyline is that the medium and Garry Williams sizes Melchester Rovers' football team so don't forget to put what size has been kidnapped just hours you want on the card as well. The before a fund-raising match to question we want you to answer save their ground. is: What is the small creature used Will Roy Race rescue them? as a company logo by Will they make the match? Will Infogrames called? Is it a) A frog they win? Will you buy it? b) a snail c) an armadillo? Roy of the Rovers will be out on Spectrum, Amstrad, CMB 64 at .95 and .95 on disk. Archimedes will make an even bigger dent in your pocket money. If you can find one that out on Spectrum, Amstrad, CM Amiga Magic Knight Knight Knight Games Two, the Arch Zarch Knight Games Two, the sequel to, you've guessed it already, English Software's Knight Games is due soon. But don't expect another simple combat game. This follow-up is set in the future and is a compilation of several different new games. Lots of action but C+VG's favourite sequence was the 3D space invader part! Nah, Archimedes isn't just a wrinkly old philosophers or Merlin's wise old owl. It is a bit mystical though as there's only a few of them about. The Archimedes is Acorn's new micro and already there's a mega-game for this machine, sought after by techo-freaks everywhere. David Braben, co-author of that all time classic Elite, has produced Zarch, a shoot 'em up with added strategy. Zarch features filled-in vector graphics, super-fast movement and looks v-e-e-ry interesting. Zarch from Superior Software will set you back .95 and K 07:30 0000 10000 This is Leviathan No Amiga software? Tony English Software's 3D T. raves about the latest stuff in scrolling shoot em' up on the Hot Gossip this issue and Atari ST and Amiga. The we've got a whole bunch of stuff diagonal scrolling on the ST has planned for the next Amiga/ST to be seen to be believed os do Special coming your way in the incredibly detailed January's C+VG. Meanwhile backgrounds. A very slick and check out these Anco products. playable game on both Sky Fighter is for the Amiga machines. More details in next and ST and will set you back . issue's Amiaa/ST special. But Anco are also releasing a bunch of budget priced Amiga games all at .95. They are Dr Fruit, Final Trip and Vader. In Sky Fighter you have to attack a central power If you gasped at Starglider, station. There are nine sectors to then don't miss out on Realtime's be flown across, intelligence to be next game for Rainbird, gathered, and passed to the Carrier Command. command control before the It puts you in charge of a target is in sight. The target lies futuristic aircraft carrier. fifty metres below ground and the The 3D solid graphics look only way to destroy it is to drop a amazing on the first Atari ST bomb accurately into one of the version. "


"DRE INTRODUCING FREESCAPE SPECTRUM COMMODORE AMSTRAD CPC Cassette .95 Disc .95 GRANHAS. Mitral An abandoned Moon An unstable Moon about to blow A defence system set on automaticLasers that don't miss-Scanners that hunt you out. Mitral is MASSIVE.. \"The 3D presentation is Spectacular\" SINCLAIR USER. \"A Major Breakthrough \"AMSTRAD USER \"A New 3 Dimensional Reality... WOW!\"CRASH. THE DRILLER EXPERIENCE IT'S JUST LIKE BEING THERE!  1987 INCENTIVE SOFTWARE LTD. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. FREESCAPE IS A TRADEMARK OF INCENTIVE SOFTWARE LTD. "


"ZER incentive SOFTWARE 2 MINERVA HOUSE, CALLEVA PARK, ALDERMASTON, BERKSHIRE RG740W (07356) 77288 "


"Olympiad 88 which the Menos Piranha's new Berk game, Through the Trapdoor, which is reviewed this issue. Snow Joke Fangtastic Competition ! Groverovel Werewolves Christmas and the Superior game Pac is Back Bobble hats at the ready, chaps. The season of chill thrills and frostbite is on as the winter sports simulations slip and slide Tynesiders have released to cash New year. onto the games scene. The pics in on the XV Winter Olympics in John, whose first novel, The are from Tynesoft's Winter Calgary next February. Devil's Children, will also be published in Britain next year, The All Because the Lady was not available for comment Loves Milk Tray chocolate ads because nobody was prepared are to be turned into a computer to talk to him afterwards. game of the same name by There is no truth in the rumour Superior Software. Sounds that the C+VG team were later bizarre, doesn't it. But Superior have taken the seen trying to persuade John to take up swimming in the tank of themes of the all-action ads, piranha fish on Piranha's stand at where the mysterious Man in the PCW Show. Black performs all sorts of amazing stunts just to deliver a box of chocs to a lady, and is using them as backdrops for an arcade game spiced up with a little problem solving. The game will last over five Okay, it's grovelling time. levels. The actions will include Alligata's hugely addictive skiing, bike riding, powerboats Addictaball on the Atari ST etc. In the final level the Man in sells for .95 and not .95 Black must deliver the chocs. as stated in as stated in C+ VG's review of the sreviewo Those who make it to the end of game in the October issue. Sorry the game are promised a special etc etc ... treat! Cadbury's are running a A thick fog has descended on Old London Town. A new series of the ads over full moon can occassionally be glimpsed. From out of Christmas and the Superior game la the dank, dark depths of C+ VG's office a horrible available on Commodore, howling can be heard. It turns the blood of all those Spectrum and probably Amstrad Pac's back in Pac-Land. The will be released in the New n the New dot-munching, ghost-crunching who hear it to ice. It can only mean one thing Year. PAC has been snapped up by werewolves are about! Quicksilva for release in time Strange that such off noises should coincide with the for Christmas. release of Viz Design's Werewolves of Set on his home island, Pac must help a lost fairy home to London game and C+VG's Out Howl a WereFairyland. To succeed, Pac must wolf Competition. To roars of \"fix,\" \"'fiddle\" pass through towns, forge Pictured here is Viz Design's Paul Smith the man and \"shame,\" C+VG writer and through rugged mountains, cross behind Werewolves of London and that other soon-to-be horror author John dangerous ravines and trek horror game Bride of Frankenstein. He's Gilbert won a personal across deserts. clutching a poster of the game and we've now got two ompact disc player in a prize Throughout the adventure, Pac draw run during Pirahna's first is hindered by his enemies Blinky, of those posters PLUS 10 copies of the game to give Pinky, Inky and Clyde. away to the readers with the best howl! Versions under production Just send us a tape of your very best bloodinclude Commodore 64/128, curdling werewolf howl to Out Howl a Werewolf Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, MSX, competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, Atari ST and Amiga for 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The Christmas. closing date is December 16 and editor's decision is final. And we're sorry but we can't return the tapes. The two best howls will get the signed poster plus a copy of the game and the eight runners up will get the game. Don't forget to fill in the printed form and say which computer you have. birthday party. C+VG's editor Tim OUT HOWLA WEREWOLF COMPETITION Metcalfe, mightily peeved at not winning was heard yelling. \"You'll never work for me again, Name............ Gilbert.\" The outrage of the assembled Address 150 odd assorted magazine Berk and his friends will return journalists, programmers, artists in a new series of the popular and distributors, was further television series Trapdoor late compounded by the news that in 1988. Meanwhile you can Pirahna is to be release a John catch the re-runs of the first series, Gilbert designed horror game right up to March every Saturday called Coven sometime in the morning. Or you can play Fiddled Giblets must help a lost fairy home to non pour la never work for me again. New B erk!! Spectrum CBM 64 Amstrad "


"Preview The Future! PROJECT:STEALTH FIGHTER MICROPROSE Stealth Fighter... the hottest topic of conversation in aviation PROJECT: STEALTH FIGHTER. Another brillant simulation circles today. Space Age technology and engineering make from MicroProse. Available for the Commodore 64/128K. these aircraft virtually undetectable by enemy radar. Cassette .95. Disk .95. Stealth Fighters are believed to be in operation, flying the most sensitive missions, flown by a superior class of pilot. You can experience that thrill of flying a revolutionary aircraft, previewing the edge of the future. SIMULATION SOFTWARE Please send copy/ies of Project: Stealth Fighter CBM 64/128 Cassette .95 Disk .95 Further details. Name (block capitals) Address Post Code I enclose  including 55p P+P. Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd. PSFIC + VG/1287 or debit my Access/Visa card. Expiry date_No. No. TIT MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. UK. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tlx: 43422 MPS/UKG. "


"THE NEW SINCLAIR HAS ONE BIG DISKZX Spectru es SHIFT SIMB FLOPPY DISC DRIVE SIDE 2 Transmission distributor A LOADINGSE hs of OCEAN SOFTY SUPERTEST 1 COSMIC WARTOAD work are re SUPERTEST 2 Song, Lending Broadcasting Hung ed without our express permis CTION BOOKLET SED BY THE SINCLAIR ZX SPECTRUM + 3 WITH 6 FREE GAMES AND A JOYSTICK. "


"ADVANTAGE. ZX SPECTRUM +3.  rum The new Sinclair ZX Spectrum +3 is a real hero because it helps you to be one. While you're a daring motorbike rider or the all-conquering intergalactic warrior, you're gaining priceless experience in handling computers. Loading games is quick and easy with the built-in disk-drive. You'll be in the thick of the action in seconds. And the fantastic 128K memory gives you the power to outsmart the most sophisticated enemy. Get to grips with the latest high-tec graphics on the vast universe of games available (six of which come free). And there's a free joystick to give you ultimate control. But the real hero is the person who buys it. For the ZX Spectrum +3 is only , so they've really saved the earth. ZX SPECTRUM + 2.  DECORDS The amazing ZX Spectrum +2 has a built-in datacorder-to save you the bother of tape recorders and leads. The advanced 128K memory helps you get the most from the vast universe of games available. Every model comes complete with six free games to start you off, and a free joystick to make you super agile. With the advanced Sinclair technology you can afford to let your imagination go wild. Because at , only your enemies pay heavily. BE WHO YOU WANT TO BE. Available at: Allders, Boots, Clydesdale, Comet, Connect, Currys. Dixons, John Lewis, John Menzies, Lasky's, Tandy.\" W.H. Smith. Visionhire. Wigfalls, and all good independent stores. *ZX Spectrum +2 only. Recommended retail price Sinclair ZX Spectrum +2 2139 including VAT, Sinclair Spectrum +38199 including VAL. at 1.10.87. Prices subject to change without prior notice ZX Spectrum +30 Sinclair Please tell me more about the SINCLAIR ZX Spectrum +2 Name Address: Amstrad plc, Brentwood House, 169 Kings Road, Brentwood, Essex CM14 4EF. Tel: (0277) 262326 "


"s REVIEWS o Reviews this issue Thundercats  MACHINES: SPECTRUM/C64/ Thundera, the last remnant of 128/AMSTRAD 464/6128 the Thundercats' once proud PRICES: .95 (SPECTRUM planet to Lion-O, the T-Cats 48/128) main man by the elders. .95 (AMSTRAD) .95 (C64) .95 The jewel gives Lion-O's (all discs Sword of Omens all its powers  VERSIONS TESTED: C54/ AMSTRAD/SPECTRUM so you can guess he's pretty mad REVIEWER: TIM with Mum-Ra. On top of all that Lion-O's mates, Tygra, Panthro Thundercats Ho! If you've been and and Wilykit have been disappointed by cartoon imprisoned by old Mum-Ra and character games in the past then Mr L wants to save them as well. you could be in for a big surprise. This is the task that confronts These cats are definately cool you when you've loaded up the and the game is addictive game. Easy? You're joking. enough to make you purr with You're going to have to move pleasure! fast, be quick on your feet, as Thundercats is a Rygar like agile as a cat and quick on the scrolling hack 'n' slash epic. draw with the mystic sword if Fast-moving and packed with you're going to succeed. action, the game grabs you from There are no less than 14 levels the moment you load it.up. in this game, levels of varying Attractive graphics, nice difficulty and packed with animation and good sound and different hazards. From the gameplay that gets you grabbing Amstrad the joystick for more, more, more! The Amstrad and Spectrum versions have been created by none other than the highly-experienced team at Gargoyle Games and true to form they have come up with a little gem. And the C64 version is pretty neat too! If you're a fan of the TV cartoon you'll know all about the team of cat-like folk who inhabit a fantasy world and bat the evil Mum-Ra and his nasty henchmen, the Mole Men. In the game Mum-Ra has stolen the Mystic Eye of LEVEL 2 Nebulus A Commodore 64 Buggy Boy Captain America Through the Trap Door 8 Jack the Nipper! Terrorpods MACHINE: CBM 64/SPECTRUM be the most original game this SUPPLIER: HEWSON month and what will probably be PRICE: .95/.95 (CBM) the most original game released .95 (SPECTRUM) this year. Morpheus  VERSION TESTED: CBM64 And that game is Nebulus /SPECTRUM from the mind of 24-year-old > REVIEWER: PAUL John Phillips, who you may remember was responsible for When programmers Steve Impossaball. That game Thunderceptor/Rygar RanaRama' Turner and Andrew attracted good reviews but \"Uridium' Braybrook suddenly probably didn't get the attention quit Hewson back in September, from the public it deserved. Well, it must have hit the software hopefully, that won't happen company for six. Turner and with Nebulus. Braybrook were responsible for So just what is Nebulus? Well Trantor their most highly praised games. the central feature is a 3D Would this mean the glory days scrolling tower with steps were over? Did it hell! around the edge and doorways Even in the depths of their which allow you to enter the Implosion/Complete darkest hour doesn't this tug tower and cross to the other your heartstrings?) a new star side. As you enter, the tower Bastard rises. With it comes what must spins to reveal the hidden face. Thunderceptor/Rygar Uridium' Braybrook September, from the public The idea is to climb to the top of the tower, avoiding the traps and monsters. Then into a sub-game before encountering another tower. PLayer One 00000000 Shoot'em-up Construction Kit! Zig Zag Flight Trainer! Cruncher Action Force "


"2 lercats REVIEWS Fertile Plain to the Final Battle you'll have lots to do and I'm betting you're going to need and infinite lives POKE to see the end of this awesomely challenging game. Watch out for the Mole Men and other assorted baddies, beware of vanishing bridges and the useful Nosediver a high-powered jetbike in the Garden of the Fire Elementals, level four to you! Enemies come at you from all sides-beware those that chase you. Don't hang about waiting to Kill them keep moving On the Spectrum version you generally outrun these nasties but the Amstrad and C64 baddies seem to move faster! Maybe my reactions are slowing down .. Don't forget to collect the extra lives/weapons etc hidden in various objects dotted along the way. You'll recognise these objects when you see them they are about the only things that aren't behaving in a hostile fashion! They are disguised as shields, vases and even skulls. You'll need all the extra lives you can get your paws on SO build them up earlier, easier If you like the Arcade games levels in preparation for the Rastan Saga and Rygar then horrors to come. you're going to want to add Brilliant graphics, a driving Thundercats to your collection soundtrack by Rob Hubbard and all the versions are well superb action make Thundercats wicked. I reckon it could soon a real winner and we're not collect the same cult following as just saying that because we had Ghosts and Goblins and we a tape on the front cover last can't wait for your maps and tips issue either! to start flooding in SPEC AMS 28430 Spectrum GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY The Levels 1: The Fertile Plain 2: In the case of the Mole Men 3: Rescue TYGRA 4: Gardens of the Elementals: Fire Find the Nosediver 5: Water Bubbles 6: Air Packbats and Eyes! 7: Earth Beware of Mum-Ra 8: Rescue Panthru 9: More Mole Men 10: Passengers beneath Plunn-Dar 11: Mum-Ra's Bird Warriors 12: Hunting Plains 13: Rescue Wilycat 14: The Final Battle It sounds a simple concept but it is brilliantly executed, magnificently programmed and a sheer joy to play. Okay, let's backtrack for the plot. The game is set on the planet Nebulus where someone or something has been building towers in the sea. The character you play, Pogo, works for Destructo Inc. a demolition company given the job of demolishing the towers. And guess what? You've got the job. So the game opens as you emerge from a Mk7 Minisub at the foot of the first tower the Tower of Eyes. This character reminds me in some ways of that other Hewson creation Gribbly from Gribbly's Day out. Remember him? Anyway, you have to climb the tower in the set time limit. The towers are covered with various ledges, tunnels and lifts. 1983:5 PHIT THIS 00000000 0000000 Some of these ledges dissolve destroyed you get back in your when you stand on them and submarine and travel underwater slippery ledges which will push to the next tower. In the you left or right. Commodore version you can Flashing blocks and bouncing pick up bonuses by catching balls can be destroyed by fish. This is done by shooting air shooting them but the silver bubbles to capture the fish, rolling balls can only be stopped which are then collected in their tracks for a few seconds. The points are 100 for a All other creatures are bouncing ball, 50 for a flashing indestructible. If hit by a block, extra points for climbing creature, you tumble off the the tower and an extra life every ledge and land a few levels 5.000 points. down. If you fall in the sea, you I have a feeling that from just lose a life. reading the straight forward Entering the final door at the description of Nebulus you top of the tower sets off the might say it doesn't sound all destruction sequence. You are that thrilling. But it really is. This awarded bonuses for the time is a game you have to play. left and for technique and the The graphics are stunning, the tower will crumble into the sea. sound effects brilliant -the When a tower has been sound of the characters feet is a PLAYer wonderful feat (hal). 0000000 I have no hesitation in whole-heartedly recommending both the Commodore 64 and Spectrum versions of the game to you. There may be an Amstrad version released later on but the word from Hewson is that will depend if the programmers can speed up the action 0000170 CBM 64 10 10 SPEC 9  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY 10 10 "


"\"SUDDENLY, the jet plunged into a sea of flashing lights -Chuche gasped with horror he had entered the Other World...\" .....: FIGHT TO survive in a hostile alien world. Collect energy-giving power pods as you fly through eight action-packed levels, and seven brilliant bonus levels. D Features seven different weapons, including Quark Cannon Wide Beam and Lazer. Amstrad 'Smooth Scroll\". Available on Spectrum, Amstrad and Commodore. "


"DFFROAD UP PPPP LES SCORE 211K C+VG wheels to squeeze through seemingly impossible gaps, pick up bonus points and extra time by collecting flags and driving through special \"gates\" Jump obstacles by launching your buggy off tree trunks just love that bounce! Drive up banking to get up more speed but steer clear of fakes other drivers and hard brick walls! And when you've done all that, check out C+VG's special players guide for more hints and tips. There are five different tracks to test your driving skills; Offroad, North South, East and West. Offroad is a closed circuit and really simply shows you what to expect on the other tracks, Stuff like the bonus flags arcade machine showing the which have to be collected in flags and the order in which the order shown at the top of they have to be collected, a map the screen, and the bonus showing your location on the \"gates\" plus many of the track, hi-lo gear settings, score hazards. and time left. Everything you After a couple of attempts at could possible want on one this you'll probably find you can small screen. complete the track and it's time At the end of each game you to move on to the REAL test. see your score plus any North features snow. walls bonuses plus another map of and banked corners, South is the track showing how far you had left to go. The game features high score charts for EACH of the five tracks, nice sound FX, but strangely, on our review copy REVIEWS  MACHINE: C64 SUPPLIER: ELITE PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: TIM Veroooom! There was burning rubber around this big banked bend when all of a sudden what do I see? A**ling great rockin the road in front of mel Hello, thought to myself, I'm in for a wonderful. What is it? Buggy Boy of coursel That tried and tested coin-op hits the small screen at last. And Elite has its best game of '871 If it's playability and lastability plus great value you're after then look no further. Buggy Boy has all of these and more. All the conversion lacks is the steering wheel from the arcade machine. If you've never played Buggy Boy or Buggy Boy Junior in the Buggy Boy your orden and you bit of an accident here. But no! just in front of the rock there's a well-placed tree trunk! So it's up and over the great granite lump and safely down on the arcades before, you've not road again. lived. It puts you in the driving Did I say safely? How wrongseat of one of those VW Beetle can you be. I may have missed Buggies much-loved by offthe rock but what I didn't know road racers in the US of A. You was that there's a whole buch of compete against the clock over water the other side and the five demanding tracks packed bridge wasn't where it with hazards and opportunities should've been. Still, the buggy to put big dents into your needed a wash... vehicle. Yes, it's here and it's truly Avoid rocks, drive on two here: ww buga see Buggies much those VW Beng sort of desert-like with palm trees as an added hazard; East anyway, no front end music. is very green and you'll see The graphics are good and your first fellow buggyboy playability, well reckon it driver here; West features more almost goes off the old C+VG's mountains and another buggy, ometer. Addictive isn't the North, South, East and West word. If you're a Buggy Boy fan, also features Outrun-style or even if you aren't, then beg, extended play-reach a certain borrow or steal a copy. spot on the map and you can GRAPHICS continue driving. Fail and it's SOUND C+VG back to the pits.. VALUE HIT! Screen display is just like the PLAYABILITY HIRE PPPPP LEG SCORE 039 AAR N° IME PPPPP GALEG SCORE 225 . A tou TIME "


". the best racing played — even be agy Commodore 64/128 Cassette (.99) and Disk (.99) ZX Spectrum 48k/128k/+ (.99) Amstrad CPC Cassette (.99) and D SEGA Mail Order: Activision (UK) Ltd, Units 3 & 4 Lloyds Close, Finedon Road Industrial Estate, Wellingborough, Northampto "


"g game we've ever etter than Out Run!» ZZAP! 64 'ANOTHER DAY AT THE ARCADES' SURG Officially licensed from the greatest motorcycle racing game, the thrills are so real we considered making a helmet compulsory. Four skill levels. Four music tracks. Push your turbo charged racing machine into 18 progressive stages racing across Asia, Africa, America and Europe. UNE and Dick (.99) Amiga Disk (.99) Copyright 1986 Sega Enterprises Inc. (USA). All rights reserved. Electric Dreams Software. Authorised User. Home =D impton NN& 4SR. Tel: (0933) 76768 ELECTRIC DREAMS "


"BEADHEST SAPNAIR PREPARE FORSIE. SEEEEE   * Captain America situated in the Mojave desert, disarm the missile and destroy the deadly virus. The missile is known to be sited on the lowest deck of the Doom Tube, which is sunk deep beneath the surface of the desert. Each deck contains several rooms or Quadrants, which emit a high level of psionic energy. This psionic energy is the only form of energy which is capable of penetrating Captain America's shield, although recent modifications to the shield have given it a certain amount of tolerance. The further down the tube you go, the higher the level of psionic energy is present, so caution must be maintained throughout the journey downward. Your shield is one of two prime defensive weapons that you have in your possession, the other is Cybo Grenades. The shield is virtually indestructible and is able to slice through the air when thrown. The Cybo Grenades have been designed to destroy electronic circuits and are only effective at close range. To travel to each deck an elevator has to be used. Once on the last deck, you must discover which room the missile and virus are kept, once found they must be destroyed. Although the graphics and sound are quite attractive, the game itself is a bit of a disappointment. Playability isn't too bad, the characters respond well to each  MACHINES: C64, AMSTRAD, pictures made about their emerge triumphant. The new in every condition that may SPECTRUM, ATARI ST adventures and confrontations game is entitled, Captain occur. SUPPLIER: GOI MEDIA HOLDING with the forces of evil. Software America in The Doom Tube Music and sound effects are LTD PRICE: C64/AMSTRAD, .99, companies have also realised Dr. Megalomann (Phew!). The good as are the graphics, the SPECTRUM .99 (CASSETTE) that there is a substantial profit plot behind the game is as back drops especially. The only ATARI ST .99, C64 DISC to be made from these heroic follows; Dr. Megalomann has bad point about Captain .99, AMSTRAD DISC .99 beings, and have recently returned from the grave, and America is its lack of lastability.  REVIEWER: IAN produced a succession of has told that the president of Captain America will need a games to tempt the younger the United States of America lot of considering before you Ever since I can remember, generation into buying their has until midnight to stand actually buy it. That's the best superheroes made up a large product. So far it has been a down, and pass his authority advice I can give to all you part of my childhood fantasies. Success, and their games have over to the Doctor, otherwise he unsuspecting superhero fans Heroes like The Hulk, the shot up to the top of the charts. will launch a missile, which out there. Fantastic Four, Spiderman and, Now it is Captain America's contains a deadly virus, onto of course, Captain America. turn in the front seat, and prove the nation.  GRAPHICS Even when they first appeared that he is also capable of Captain America's task is to SOUND in comic form, there have been standing on his own two feet, in penetrate Dr. Megalomann's VALUE a series of cartoons and motion his own computer game... and underground bunker, which is PLAYABILITY B BEBE BEBE | TOX660T CORE TOXICITY 01008 CORE TOXICITY 04000 IMMUNITY 00506 VINE IMMUNITY 02172 YANG 8 h PAL LAUNCH LAUNCH "


"FIREBird ENLIGHTENMENT DRUIDII ENLIGHTESKOLESA 500 SINCE THE DRUID'S LAST VICTORY, ACAMANTOR HAS RETURNED TO BELORN, DEMON PRINCES RULE THE LAND, AND ZOMBIE'S ARE THEIR LEGIONS; WAITING FOR BATTLE. Spectrum .95 Commodore & Amstrad .95 (.95 & .95 d), PUBLISHED BY FIREBIRD SOFTWARE, A DIVISION OF BRITISH TELECOM PLC. FIRST FLOOR, 64-76 NEW OXFORD ST. LONDON WCIA IPS "


"Garfield \"BIG, FAT, HAIRY DEAL\" JIM DAVOS SPECTRUM .99 19 AMSTRAD COMMODORE .99 DISC .99 2999 $19.99 AMIGA ATARI ST .99 GARFIELD  1978 United Feature Syndicate Inc. "


"REVIEWS ough the same as the original Trap Door game, simple, but effective. The use of colour and sound is of average standard, and could have been different to the original. The game is extremely hard to complete, and will require a lot of trial and error practice to actually get off the first region. Getting to the second region is a feat in itself. Through the Trap Door is a game where you must like arcade adventures to really appreciate it. The multitude of problems and puzzles are extremely taxing. But once solved, leave you with a feeling of satisfaction. Through the Trap Door is an ideal game for all of you who love a challenge now and then. GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY  MACHINES: SPECTRUM, C64, AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: PIRANHA PRICE: C64, SPEC, AMSTRAD (.95 cass). C64, AMSTRAD .95 VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM REVIEWER: IAN Berk is back in his most daring adventure yet! Together with Drutt, he must go down through resting place. potion in each one is the Trap Door and rescue Boni When he's got it, proceed to essential. Each magic the skull from the evil clutches the next couple of screens potion comes in the of the skeleton which has where an enormous pit is form of a particular item, which kidnapped him. located. Once across it, the first Berk must eat. They include The aim of the game is to find of the exit doors is found on the sausages, eyeballs (that's Boni, and escape. next screen. The following three disgusting, EDI), sweets and There are four different areas regions are played the same mushrooms. to the game, each requiring way, and the use of a magic The graphics are exactly the several tasks to be performed before you can exit through a door, to the next one. You can play either Berk or Drutt, swapping between characters whenever the game demands it. Berk will come across a variety of magic potions while on his travels which give him special powers and will help him considerably. Certain tasks, during the game, will have to be performed by either Berk or Drutt. Most of the time Drutt will be responsible for achieving a lot of the given tasks that are presented to them. The main task in each region is to retrieve a key, which is needed to open the exit door to the next region, and key. A whole host of the most uncanny and evil creatures roam each region, and are intent on preventing you, completing your quest. Only quick reactions and logical thinking can ensure old Boni's release. The game begins with you witnessing the abduction of Boni by a headless, winged skeleton. You, as Berk, pick up Drutt and head down into the gloomy depths of the Trap Door. Down there, you must take control of Drutt, and search for the first key. Once found, Berk must retrieve it from its 953 BOOK PO TERRA "


" RANTA TM ..the game that's going to become the biggest cult game of the YEAR It's going to be a monster... Arcade Action COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES "


"ACTIVISION Mail Order: Activision (UK) Lid, Units 3 & 4 Lloyds Close, Finedon Road Industrial Estate, Wellingborough, Northampton NN& 4SR Tel: (0933) 76768. TM &  1986 Bally Midway MFG Co. All rights reserved. Activision Inc. Authorised User Commodore 64/128 Cassette ($9.99) and Disk ($12.99) ZX Spectrum 48K/ 128+(8999). Annstrud CPC Cossette ($9.99) and Disk ($14.99). An S ($14.99). Ngô XE/XL COSSET (59.99) and Disk ($14.99). Officially licenced from one of the most original and popular arcade games ever created, Rampage is the game where the nice guys don't get a look in. Grab your way through Chicago, punch up New York and jump on San Francisco. This is your chance to become one of three indescribably monsterous characters on a rampage through 85 cities in an enduring 768 different days of destruction. Bally MIDWAY MEG.CO "


"COLLECTION Vol. 1 ME PALERBI Bellite Vol.2 PEERBOY HIT PAK VOL 1 FRANK BRUNO clito ery opponents the long e ren 13 Game The technically excellent righting fantasy story which puts you the har centrum the end Conversion of the Year Super hoe the crack combat salien C UK Collecting your bomb and deleting the enemy you go make this o p convened the most high caring and ti m es a 1906 TECNOLTO ARWOLF You are Hawe pilot of the billion dollari t need your skills and t ogal thinking 1954 Uh r Shuttle in A SPACE HARRIER Antinpechadadventure that you in inertal licence from Seg Em SPACE HARRIER Bademo a de il t hat helps where singo Galorit Shringfellow  Acx COLTO JAPAN Spectrum Cassette Amstrad Cassette Amstrad Disc Commodore 64 Cassette Commodore 64 Disc Commodore 16 Cassette HIT PAIK ELITE SYSTEMS LIMITED, Eastern Avenue, Lichfield, Staffs WS13 6RX Telex: 336130 ELITE G "


"Jack the Nipper II C+VG REVIEWS MACHINES: AMSTRAD/ SPECTRUM/CBM 64 SUPPLIER: GREMLIN GRAPHICS PRICE: .99 (SPECTRUM)/ .99/E14.99 (AMSTRAD/CBM CASS/DISK) VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD/ SPECTRUM/CBM64 REVIEWER: PAUL The bad lad's back going nuts in the Coconut Capers. Naughty but nice. Gremlin's little Nipper is certainly a ripper gripper of jungle jollity There was a time when I thought I would scream if I saw another platform and laddersstyle game. They seemed to be everywhere. But now...okay. I really got into this one. Jack the Nipper's first adventure ended with the troublesome tot and his family flying to Australia following a deportation order on them. Jack's not pleased with the prospect of going down under so he jumps plane using his nappy as a parachute. The idea of the game is simply to survive in the jungle of screens to explore, traps to until he reaches a score of 100 avoid, puzzles to solve. Both the per cent on the Naughtyometer. Spectrum and Amstrad have But he musn't get caught by great graphics. So, to sum up. If you're fed up dad. And there are plenty of ways with the millions of shoot-'emfor Jack to be naughty ups around and hanker for hurling coconuts at natives and some good, old fashioned animals, firing blowpipes and platform and ladders fun, you generally creating all sorts of could do worse than Jack the mayhem. Nipper II. All along the way he can pick AM SP CB up weapons and some really GRAPHICS useful items such as grease, CHO SOUND honey and wood worms. VALUE There's an amazing number PLAYABILITY niin NAUGHTYONETE mas En coon on Terrorpods MACHINE: ATARI ST/AMIGA hardest metal known to man SUPPLIER: PSYGNOSIS ideal for the production of PRICE: .95 weapons. VERSION TESTED: AMIGA REVIEWER: DAVID Ten mining colonies were set up to exploit Colian's mineral Stuck out on the edge of deposits. Each had its own System 7, Colian was not the mines, dumps, stores and most hospital of places, but it resource centres inter-linked by did have one of the richest a complex network of shuttles, deposits of rare minerals in the to transport minerals between galaxy. the various installations within Foremost amongst these are each colony and between Detonite, a powerful explosive, colonies. Quaza, an energy giving crystal Everything worked like useful for regenerating clockwork until one day...IT molecular structures, Zenite, a happened. metalicore good at storing Out there in stationary orbit magnetic fields, and Aluma, the was an Empire Mother Ship, the enemy's most potent fighting machine. Missile attacks quickly took out Colian's defences, and the colonies waited for the end to come. But come it didn't, for the enemy fully intended to keep various installations inter the colonies producing, but relate. now it was for the production of To help you get started, components for the most Psygnosis has supplied a map awesome of weaponswith the game, with one of the Terrorpod Fighting Machines. ten colonies already marked, These components were to be showing the shuttle routes taken back up to the mother between each installation, ship, for final assembly off the Once you know where planet surface. everything is on Colian, you Your mission is to discover must then become a master of the secrets of Terrorpod trade, learning where different manufacture, by obtaining minerals are considered components. You start with a valuable or cheap Defence Strategy Vehicle (DSV). Combine this aspect of the a small trading drover, and an game with the requirement for incomplete map of the area. fast reactions when avoiding or Everything was OK for a dishing out missile fire, and while. You kept a low profile, quick thinking when working trading a little here and there, but what to do next, and you top build up your mineral have a game that will not be supply. Then the Mother Ship cracked over night. detected you and the enemy's Congratulations are due to strategy changed immediately. Psygnosis. In the past there Now they were intent only on games have been pretty but the destruction of every colony somehow lacked that vital on Colian, together with the playability. With Terrapods, secrets they held. everything has come right. To succeed in Terrorpods, you will need to map all ten colonies, and gain an  GRAPHICS understanding as to how to use SOUND C G the many and varied game VAKUE features, as well as how the PLAYABILITY uns IS NJAW.MUA. US NR "


"STOP PLA GAMES.SK ORDJE! ELECTRONIC ARTS TAIEO ARTO HEST "


"orget about games. Learn about events. Events are about competition. The Pool Joust, Downhill Race, Freestyle Ramp, High Jump and the Downhill Jam. Play alone, with a friend or pit your skills against Lester. Skate or die it may be fun but its serious. SMOKIN' THE HALF PIPE Roar down the ramp and fly up the other side. Live on the edge where you go for rock 'n rolls, hand plants (shown here), leg plants, railslides, even methods. Get airborne for 720's, ollies, front & backside aerials, and tweaks KAVE TURQUNCH 0:51 O=DE ELCTRONIC Ri S SKATE & DESTROY Karate chop your way down the baddest alley in the neighborhood. Smash up trash cans, bottles, fences, and the other guy. Rad skaters ramp off the cop car. 3 4 BY MICHAEL KOSAKA STEPHEN LANDRUM DAVIO BUNCH EL MCTRONIC ARTS UNLEASH THE POWER OF YOUR IMAGINATION Electronic Arts software is available on a wide range of home computers including Commodore C84 Commodore Amiga, Atari ST, IBM, Spectrum and Amstrad. Not lies are available on every machine format Electronic Arts products are available from good software stockists and especially where you see this sign ELECTRONIC ARTS AUTHORISED DEALER For a full broadsheet describing the complete range of information on your nearest stockist write to Electronic Arts, 11-49 Station Rd., Langley, Slough, Berkshire SLI BYN. Or call our Customer Services Dept. on 0753 46465. "


"GAVG Morpheus Overall, Morpheus is visually very good, only it's playability and lack of back drops let it down. If you had set your heart on buying Morpheus when you first read the previews, suggest that you actually try the game out for yourself, before you decide. I'm not saying that the game isn't good, it's just that it didn't appeal to me and this may go for you as well. Give the game a test before you shell out your hard earned pennies.  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY 3. Cortimission SYSTEM completely disintegrated, your ship is transported back to the docking bay. As you progress through each level, the quantity of sound effects. Steve Turner has orbitals that have to be done a neat job on these, the destroyed increases and all the music has a good ryhthm to it time the morphai become more and the sound effects up to and more aggressive and begin Uridium and Alleykat quality. to be less susceptible to your Morpheus is more of an older weapons. arcade/strategy game, not the When back at the docking usual arcade shootem'-up bay, the points which were just that Andrew has been MACHINE: CBM 64 gained are converted into associated with in the past.  SUPPLIER: RAINBIRD guineas. Graphics are of the usual PRICE: .95/.95 DISC If you were lucky enough to Braybrook quality, playability is REVIEWER: IAN have gained quite a tough but after a considerable Andrew Braybrook has earned considerable amount of points, amount of practice, playable. himself the right to be named you may be able to commission For those of you who are your ship with a selection of strategically minded, then one of the top games systems and weapons to programmers. Ever since Morpheus could be quite a Andrew's first two major enhance your capabilities. challenge for you. If you're a releases, Paradroid and Uridium, there has always been much impatient finger-tapping going on as Braybrook addicts wait for his next block-buster. The wait is over, for his latest offering is called Morpheus. The objective is incredibly simple, enter the chargedominated universe, attack and destroy the orbitals, and shut down the nucleus. You begin with a standard spaceship, equipped with a short range plasma-beam. You are able to build and develop your ship by purchasing and earning extra weapons and systems. Points scored are converted into guineas, which in turn permit you to purchase your extra requirements. In all, there are fifty levels. The mysterious Morpheus is located on the final level. The screen display is split in two. The top display has player one's total points on the far left, and player two's to the front. A radar display is situated at the top centre of the screen and Each item has a menu, within only shows the nucleus and the this menu is a selection of charged orbitals that are alternative add-ons which scatterd around the universe include onboard systems, The bottom display shows the replacement hulls and extra playing area. On each and every weaponry. level you must attack and It is essential that you equip destroy the charged orbitals your ship with as many add-ons which are defended by morphai as you can, and as early as you particles can. The morphai escape from the The correct choice of add-on Orbital once it's under attack is also essential, as you will find Attacking the Morphai gives out. The best way to get as far you valuable extra points. as you can in the game is to Immediately after the orbital blast everything that you come has been destroyed, it collapses across so that you get as many to become a Neutron Dwarf and points as possible. the Radar display will turn red. Then when you return to the As soon as the orbital has docking bay you will have collapsed, you must whizz back plenty of guineas to splash out to the Nucleus at the centre of on whatever your heart desires. the universe and destroy some To tell you the truth, I was of the bonus Morpheus very disappointed with symbols which are emitted by Morpheus. The originality of the follower of the Braybrook the decaying nucleus. game is great but the game play arcade shoot-em-up series The points gained from is extremely laborious and were hoping for another destroying these is invaluable. Probably the best thing about then Morpheus may not be Once the nucleus has the game was the music and what you expected. UFIIT 3 AT 200 . "


"..NOW Fill in the coupon for FREE SOFTWARE Join the Electronic Arts 100 Gamers software test panel, EL CIRNIC ARTS Are you a games fanatic? If you are, read this, we may need your help. Electronic Arts are setting up the most exclusive group of gamers in the UK. The EA Software Test Panel. It's simple. Every month you'll be asked to test a new piece of software (FREE!) and tell us what you think about it. Your views are important they will help us to develop better products. No charges, no catches and no obligations. No matter which machine you own, no matter which type of game you prefer or where you live you may be eligible to join our panel. Just complete the coupon below and we'll contact you early in the new year. ALL APPLICANTS WILL BE INCLUDED ON THE ELECTRONIC ARTS MAILING LIST. NAME *If you have already applied for a position on the Electronic Arts software test panel please do not respond to this ad. as your application is being dealt with. ADDRESS POSTCODE AGE Send coupon to The Software Test Panel, Electronic Arts, 11-49 Station Road, Langley, Slough, Berkshire SL3 SYN. Which computer do you own? How many games do you buy per month? Which type of game do you prefer? Choose one or more at: action arcade fantasy role playing stimulation creativity (drawing, painting. Where to you normally buy your software? adventure Strategy How many hours per week do you spend playing games? How much do you spend on software games per month? E10 or less 11-15 E16-20 What computer magazines do you read regularly? "


"Thunderceptor -FASER. ENODE1. BOL FASES LEVEL 01 2. SUPER FASER  MACHINE: SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: GO! SCORE 0156 00 PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: TIM driven menus and a load/save a series of icons which allow feature. Ever seen that on a you to load/save your hi-score Thunderceptor is an interesting zap-to-kill game before? No, and position in the game, check attempt to turn the shoot-'emneither have we. And it almost out your hi-score and any up into a sort of arcade works if only the shoot-'emmedals you may have won, look adventure. Thunderceptor, up part had been just a smidgen at the configuration of the developed by Ernieware in the faster. enemy fleet and the number of Netherlands, features icon Load in the game and you see these craft you have knocked out of the sky and finally re-arm your ship between levels. All nice touches which make Thunderceptor stand above the normal shoot'em up in terms of presentation. Graphically, the shoot 'em part is pretty good. Big ships, nice animation but it lacks the sort of urgency that a classic zapper needs to keep you coming back for more. It's a scrolling shoot'em up in the Defender/Salamander style but falls short of the classiness of those two games. The action seems a mite slow -although it is difficult to zap the approaching enemy craft, which come in many and varied forms. Shame all the neat icon driven additions weren't coupled with a hotter game. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY CO O 00  MACHINE: SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: US GOLD PRICES: .99 REVIEWER: TIM  Yeah! Rygar, at last! Get the tape loaded up NOW! Nice loading screen but what about the game! Hmmm. Graphics ain't that impressive. Rygar looks a bit wimpish and moves a bit oddly for my liking. And was that the first level? I've completed it without losing a life! Shock horror! On to level two which is a bit more difficult. I'm starting to enjoy The Spectrum version, we way through the assorted this a bit more now despite the haven't seen any others yet, monsters you'll find some dodgy graphics. crept into our office just before things are transformed into And some of the effects we went to press with this objects or weapons which will like the three creatures doing issue, and initially it looks very be useful to you in the future. acrobatics, leaping on each disappointing. But ignore the Objects like: others shoulders are a bit graphics maybe we're being The Star-gives you extra neat. spoilt by all those ST gamesIf you've not seen the coin-op and play the game. Soon you'll The Crown-gives you extra you won't know that Rygar is a be hooked. firepower. You can kill more barbarian character trapped in a Although the first couple of than one monster at a time. world full of larger than life levels are reasonably easy to The Tiger Head allows you monsters, objects and weapons complete you soon work out to kill monsters by jumping on to be collected and, more that almost all the elements of their heads. Without this you importantly, a lot of fun to be the coin-op are present so if can only stun them using this had! you have played the arcade technique. The coin-op is a multi-level, version, you'll be able to use all The Shield makes you horizontally scrolling game with those hard-learnt tricks in the invulnerable for a short time. stunning graphics, huge computer version. The Sun allows you to characters and great gameplay. As you hack'n' slash your jump higher and have a crack at 0000200 2.IME 0100000 0011500 flying monsters. Each level has to be completed within a set time limit-ticking away at the top of the screen. So don't hang around killing monsters for too long. You can go back on yourself to pick up objects but beware wasting too much time. If you reveal a question mark don't pick it up-shoot it first to uncover what the real object its hiding. Ignore the graphics and enjoy the game is my message. We've yet to see the other versionsbut we know you've been waiting for this game with itchy joystick fingers, so watch out for more Rygar reviews in upcoming issues. Overall, Spectrum Rygar is slightly disappointing compared with Elite's Thundercats, which is, we have to say it, a similar type of game. Spectrum owners should take a look at the game before they buy this version could be for hardened Rygar fans only.  GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY 0142800 haben Lorem ES-NOOI ROUND-01TES-AIITROUND-02 "


"Play the NEMESIS sequel...) SALAMANDER AMSTRAD CASSETTE  8.95 AMSTRAD DISC .95 COMMODORE CASSETTE  8.95 COMMODORE DISC .95 SPECTRUM CASSETTE  7.95 If you've ever had nightmares about falling helplessly into the depths of space, then imagine that space dominated by a tyrannical creature whose evil surpasses even your deadliest dreams. The Salamander. The subjects of its cruel regime await desperately to be freed from the horrors of the Salamander's slavery. DISTRIBUTED BY You can free these unfortunate creatures only by annihilating this force of evil and destruction N.M.C. LTD., 2 IFFLEY ROAD,  that lurks so monstrously over the edge of LONDON W6 OPA. TEL: 01-846 9701 infinity TELEX: 94013766 NMCL G. FAX: 01-741 2283 But if you don't KONAMI W HITE For subscription details please send a S.A.E. to: KONAMI SOFTWARE CLUB KONAMI HELPLINE Bank Building, Bank Street, Newton Abbot, Devon TQ12 2JL. 0626 56789 KONAMI Another gripping Arcade Conversion "


"C+VGU0EBIE REVIEWS AMSTRAD 02.02 BILDE SPECTRUM TRANTOR The Last Storm-trooper MACHINES: SPECTRUM 48/128/ Someone sabotaged the hoardes of droid defenders and most colourful and action +3/AMSTRAD/C64/ATARI ST stormtroopers' ship which was some awesome looking Alienpacked that machine has ever SUPPLIER: GO! destroyed as soon as it landed type creatures. seen. PRICE:.99 (SPECTRUM/E12.99 in the underground complex Run, shoot, duck and dodge Watch out for the animated +3) .99 (C64/AMS) .99/E14.99 (C64/AMS DISCS) where the bomb is hidden. your way through the ever loading sequence which shows VERSIONS TESTED: SPECTRUM/ Trantor escaped—but faces changing tunnel complex. Trantor's ship slowly landingAMSTRAD an additional hazard apart from Search the lockers for extra and then detonating, leaving REVIEWER: TIM the alien defence systems. His equipment and watch out for our hero all alone on the planet. bosses implanted all the troops the eight computer terminals. At the end of each attempt Where's that terminall The with a special bionic bodyWithout the code you're you get a percentage rating and clock is running down too fast bomb just to make sure they dead. It's easy to access the a cute comment on your there've too many damn aliens completed the mission and terminals-no fiddling about performance. See if you can in the way my ammo and came back without pinching the with keyboard controls. spot the rude remark about energy are running low and I'm bomb for their own evil Just position Trantor in front Fergus McGovern -the boss of real close to destroying the schemes. of the terminal and pull down the programming team Probe bomb! It's action all the way as This means that Trantor has on the joystick. The screen software. the Go/label kicks off with a to dash between security changes and you see a print out Sound isn't bad, specially on real winner. terminals in the underground of the code letter you've the +3. Trantor is a fine debut Trantor gives you arcade complex resetting the timer on discovered as your time clock for a new label-and if this is action with a capital Al And it's his body bomb. He gets just 90 resets. the shape of things to come probably the best game the seconds to dash between the Access the lockers and the expect big things from Go! Amstrad has seen for a long terminals which also dish out game freezes while the time. other goodies-like energy contenets are displayed in the The scenario goes like this. giving food, ammo and the allCHVO status readout at the top of the Trantor is the sole survivor from important security letters screen. a team of stormtroopers sent to which, made up into a whole Animation and graphics are SPEC/AMS the planet Nebulithon to password, will give you your excellent on both Spectrum and GRAPHICS destroy the deadly Quark Mk3 beam code used to escape this Amstrad versions. And SOUND bomb and restore peace and hostile environment. gameplay is totally addictive. VALUE harmony to the galaxy. In between you must fight off The Amstrad game is one of the PLAYABILITY SPECTRUM AMSTRAD "


"COMING SOON... RAINBIRD Atari ST version ICK SPECIAL: The Search for Spook by Solid Software, Cartoon graphics of TV quality, Dick Special is the first fully animated Amiga version computer generated character. Join Dick in his search for Spook the dog. avoid hazards and solve infuriating visual puzzles, Graphics and gameplay are out of this world. Play it and you still won't believe it. are our phics and \"lating and you Atari ST version TINXTER by Magnetic Scrolls. Jinxter is destined to be another magical hit from Magnetic Scrolls. Full of charm and humour, this bewitching adventure will enthral you with its breathtaking graphics, imaginative puzzles and sophisticated parser. wit Atari ST version NIVERSAL MILITARY SIMULATOR by Intergalactic Development. Enter a world of Battle Strategy and re-enact some of the world's greatest military conflicts such as Hastings or Waterloo on a sophisticated 3D landscape. Create your own scenarios, or even pittwo armies from any time period against each other; the combinations of battle are almost infinite. DE DEC IME AND MAGIK by Level 9. Three outstanding adventures in the Time and Magik trilogy comprising Lords of Time, Red Moon and Price of Magik. Featuring an advanced parser with easy to use commands as well as captivating digitised graphics on most disc versions. Scorer 73094500 INSA ARRIER COMMAND by Realtime Software Al the helm of a futuristic aircraft carrier equipped with fighter planes and amphibious lanks, battle to overthrow the enemy by conquering a huge island complex. An addictive game of strategic warfare, frenetic arcade action and stunning 3D graphics Atari ST version AMIGA ATARI EM PC MAC APPLE AMSTRAD ATARI COMMODORE SPECTRUM ST Cmptis 512/Plus CPCC C 464/CPC 464/B00/130 300/130 64/128 64/128 128 48/128 6124 1664/612 664/6128 DISC DISC DISC DISC DISC DISC DISC DISC TAPE DISC TAPE DISC TAPE TAPETAPE TAPE UNIVERSAL MILITARY SIMULATOR MILITARY 24.95 24.95 24.95 JINOCTER 24.95 24.95 24.95 34.95 19.95 24.95 19.95 19.95 CAPSUIR COMMAND 24.95 24.95 24.95 34.95 19.95 14.95 14.95 TIME AND MAGIK 19.95 19.95 19.95 29.95 19.95 19.95 19.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 17.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 DICKEL The Search for Spook 24.95 24.95 All prices are correct as the time of going tops Rainbird Software and the Rainbird logo are trademarks of artisti Telecomunicationsple For further information contact Rainbird Softwar. First Floor, 74 New Oxford Street, London WCIA IPS 01 631-5373 "


"THEY'RE HEREN TM HIT Spooku graphics and a name your S O NS mere maluch anore! AMSTRAD 28.95 OMNOHORE R: 195 SPEETRUNAS Oceanhouse Central Surge Telephone 068328635 Telex: 660977 Oceans G 986 those characters from Cleveland loc Ocean "


"Implosion Some nasty intelligence has managed to harness the power of a White Dwarf star and created an artificial planet around it. That planet is now on a collision course with good old mother earth. And guess what? You must save the world. You do this by flying in and around the planet's protecting MACHINE: CBM 64/SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: CASCADE PRICE: .96/.95 (CBM)/.95 (SPECTRUM)  VERSION TESTED: CBM 64 REVIEWER: PAUL Implosion is from the mind of 16 year old Joe Booth, aided by graphics from John Cassells and sound by Fred Gray. It promises great things to come but, for me, it lacks that vital, almost indefinable ingredient which makes a good game. To be honest, I can't quite put my finger on the reason for it, but it fails to satisfy. The plot is weak. The Earth is under threat (yes, again) from a peril from deepest space. Nothing new and original about that, is there? It's the same as a hundred other games. 10 it goes as follows: grey-extra life; green-extra energy brown-extra points; pink-extra time; blue-saps energy; blacksmart bomb. Eventually the grid will begin to break up and you must find the portal to gain entry to the next level. In all there are eight levels to penetrate. Of course there are various \"anti-bodies\" zipping in and out of the grid which must be destroyed before they destroy you. The game does look nice though, with its colourful grids, 360 degree scrolling action, and the sound is nice. It's just that. well, I didn't get a great deal of fun out of it. But Joe Booth obviously has a lot of good ideas whizzing REVIEWS around his brain. We look forward to his next one. out of the grid which is very impressive. What you have to do is locate and destroy energy cells on the grid and collect the crystals of energy which are released. TO get these you must duck and dive under the grid. But you must learn which are beneficial to your mission and those which will hinder it. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY 0 000 000000 000200 TODO Complete Bastard get used to it, it works exceptionally well. Graphics, although monochromatic, are very detailed and fit well into the overall structure of the game. I enjoyed it, and although it's fairly simple it's definitely one for your software wanted list. Watch out! Paul's coming back to sum up. Paul: I don't understand Lee liking this but that's his decision. In my view HTBACB is crude, tasteless and, even worse, unfunny. MACHINE: SPECTRUM/CBM 64/ AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: VIRGIN PRICE: .95 (SPECTRUM)/.95 (CBM)/.95 (AMSTRAD)  VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM/ CBM 64/AMSTRAD REVIEWER: AMSTRAD (PAUL)/ SPECTRUM AND CBM 64 (LEE) are four meters. The Weee and Drunkometers speak for themselves, as does the Fart and the Smellometers, but these can be revealed by pressing the Fkey, and letting out a pretty whiffy poo! At first, the game is quite difficult to get the hang of, due to the slightly strange screen layout that lets you view the same room from two different angles, hence the new display feature, \"Bastavision\": As I've said, it's slightly confusing at first, but once you Okay, I'm getting too angry. So let's go over to Lee for his views Hi, it's Lee here. Enough of the outbursts. This is what I think: Have you ever fancied being a complete and utter illegitimate SPECTRUM CBM 64 AMSTRAD GRAPHICS 7 SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY 8 SEB It wasn't long ago that Virgin's not to use that certain word Richard Branson undertook a very often). Have you ever Government crusade to clean wanted to gatecrash a yuppie up Britain's litter. A noble party, and throw up over cause. So, I ask myself, how someone? Well, I can't say that come he allows this piece of it has ever occurred to me, but rubbish onto the streets? apparently the gang at Virgin, This game, writes Paul, made and in particular, Ade, think you me so angry. I found it crude, have, which is why they've vile trash designed to cash in on released this game. Ade Edmondson's book of the It's basically a cross between same name. It's even worse The Young Ones from than The Young Ones from Orpheus, and Spy Vs Spy from Orpheus and that's saying Beyond. The overall object of something. Come to think of it, the game, is to be as vulgar and that featured good old Ade as as nasty as possible, and light well. I wonder how he feels up the phrase COMPLETE about putting his name to a BASTARD, (sorry Tim, I didn't couple of the worst games in mean to use it!). existance? At the bottom of the screen DI 000000 HOW TO BE A COMPLETE-BASTARD COMP, HOW TO DEAL "


"GET TO GRIPS WITH DEFLEKTOR CBM 64/128 .99 .99 D AMSTRAD .99 .99 SPECTRUM .99 ATARI ST  19.9 HEGN 40000 DEFLEKTOR No heroes. No Foe. Only pure skill and technology as you guide your lazer beams through a sea of danger, a pyramid af obstacles reflect it from mirrors, bounce it off walls. deflect it through lenses, ever calculating the angles, carefully judging it's path towards the home receiver and then....another 59 levels of frustration and mind boggling Intrigue. Addictive. Compulsive. Only for those who can withstand defeat BASILTHEGREAT MOUSE DETECTIVE BASIL THE GREAT MOUSE DETECTIVE From the basement of 221b Baker Street Basil and his faithful bloodhound Toby venture forward in search of the dastardly Ratigans hideout where poor Dr. Dawson Is held against his will. What clues do they uncover amongst London's famous landmarks? What disguises do they adopt in moving around the rodent underworld? It's elementary my dear enthusiast the answers are in the game. The question is do you have the skill to unearth them! CBM 64/128 .99 D AMSTRAD .99  .99 D SPECTRUM ITS A SHATTERING EXF Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd. Alpha House. 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423 "


"HA GREMLIN GAME!! CBM 64/128 .99 .99 D AMSTRAD .99 C E14.99 D SPECTRUM .99 MSX .99 c MASK SS MASK II Action packed adventure of the herolc Mask team in more danger filled missions against the evil forces of Venorn. Man and machine in valiant defence of the world and it's treasures. An exhilarating challenge to all gamers whatever their interests TOUR DE FORCE From the instant the starter shouts \"Gentlemen start your pedals\" to the last grueling moments, you'll be banging heads with five of the meanost, toughest bikers to ever pump pedals. And if that's not enough the course is something special too:Potholes, Manholes, Cakeholes, Aceholes, Bolders, Skunks Snakes, Chasms, Ollslicks, Icepatches, Bridges, Bear traps and much more. So climb aboard your Velo Mark IV and set off in pursuit of that coveted Yellow Jersey and experience the agony and ecstasy of International cycling as it really happens CBM 64/128 BGEDE SUR-DE-FORCE .99 D AMSTRAD 59.99 C.99 D SPECTRUM .99 ATARI ST $19.99 *PERIENCE LA PERISCE ZATO "


"GVG | REVIEWS has facilities which enable you to slide, mirror and copy. Background Editor: This allows you to design characters, build them into blocks and position them on a map of the game. Object Editor: Makes even the most complex sprite placing and animation simple. Sound Effects System: With this you can produce the weirdest firing, explosion and other incidental effects you will ever need. This is tremendous fun. I spent ages just listening to S EE own games. cost $14.95 on Commodore Simplicity is the key word for cassette, you're talking about a The Kit. All you need to use is value for money buy as well. the joystick and space bar. The T he whole thing is controlled manual is not too long to tax your powers of concentration Shoot'em-up Construction Kit from a main menu which gives you options to edit sprites, and is clearly written. backgrounds, sound effects,  MACHINES: CBM 64 It's from the minds of those attack waves etc. Choosing one SUPPLIER: OUTLAW Wizball wonders, Sensible of these options brings up a PRICES: .95 cass/.95 disk Software, and will be marketed sub-menu with further options. REVIEWER: PAUL by Outlaw Productions, a new The sound effects available label from Palace Software, the are truly amazing. Hearing is There are some products which people who brought you believing. almost make you tremble with Barbarian the Ultimate The set comes with four their power and potential. The Warrior. That pedigree alone games which demonstrate just Shoot 'Em Up Construction Kit should set you tingling with what you can achieve with it. is one of them. anticipation about this Right, obviously there is not Just imagine it. I am to construction set the space here for a detailed computer programming what It's so good that the brains at rundown of what you get, so our Ad man Garry Williams is to Outlaw think other software here are the key facilities. healthy living. Yes, I admit. I just houses will use the set to Sprite designer: for those turn the machines on and play. produce their own games. who don't already know, these But now, thanks to this That says something for the are the things you see moving wonderful product, I actually powers of the program. And round the screen-ships, have the power to create my when you consider that it will bullets, aliens, etc. The designer the most wonderful noises. It is also simple to design a game messages and credits with the Front End Designer. You can also use the Storage System to save and load at any stage. Hopefully, the guys from Outlaw will find ways of converting this to other machines. Meanwhile, if you have ever had any desire to create a game, then get this. Quite simply, it's brilliant. There are no ratings because they don't really apply. Hopefully, you'll be seeing my first game shooting to the top of the charts. It's provisionally called Kaptain Kid Krushes the Killer Kreatures. Software houses know where to contact me.  MACHINE: CBM 64 SUPPLIER: MIRRORSOFT PRICE: .95  REVIEWER: IAN making your escape by finding the End Zone. There are two different built. in versions of the game, an arcade version and an arcade adventure version. This gives you the choice of being an all round blaster or an intrepid be revealed by passing over explorer. In each version, you small touch pads, which are will come across a variety of found scattered along the corridors, junctions and prisms chequered floors. Successfully which should be approached operating the correct touch with great care and accuracy. pads will ensure that you are You control your ship down able to delve deeper into the four-way, diagonal scrolling maze and achieve your goal. corridors which are connected All junctions of the maze are by cross and t-junctions. The open, and all hidden prisms are single, double and triple revealed. There are no logical grouped prisms are positioned problems to solve, just pure at right angles at the alien zapping from start to appropriate junctions. finish. There are seven types of The arcade adventure version aliens, each with three unique consists of a host of logical ways of attack. Each time you problems to solve. These come kill of an alien, you get a certain in the form of hidden junctions, amount of points and cash. corridors and prisms. These can When you have accumulated enough cash, you'll be able to stop off at your nearest shop. You can buy anything from extra power to weapons. Zig-Zag is one of those games where it has to be played first before buying it. It will probably appeal to people who like games that are original and full of new ideas. Don't worry, Zig-Zag isn't a rerelease of the infamous DK'Tronics game which was written on the Speccy all those aeons ago! The game is set in a 3D landscape, with plenty of puzzles to solve and aliens to zap. You are in control of a small, elongated ship which moves across the Zaxxon-style, scrolling playing area. Your tasks include collecting all eight crystal fragments which are scattered across a quantity of 16 different zones, and then GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY 000 "


"SEGA COMMODORE SPECTRUM WOOLWORTHS Podle clance World Class LENDER SPECTRUM SPECTRUM A TOKES TEMPLE OF DOOM The-Ultimate Ljolj Challenge SEGA COMPUTER SOFTWARE CBM 64/128 POSITION NOVEMBER 1987 TITLE SOFTWARE MACHINE PRICE HOUSE TYPE MERCENARY 8.99 9.99 U.S. Gold U.S. Gold Imagine Novogen Imagine Ocean 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. Spectrum C64 Spectrum Spectrum C64 Spectrum SEGA SEGA 8.95 7.99 COMMODORE 8.95 FOTO Spectrum Spectrum C64 ECTRUM 49-128 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. Indiana Jones World Class Leaderboard Renegade Mercenary Renegade Taipan Bubble Bobble World Class Leaderboard Exolon Super Sprint Last Ninja Indiana Jones Mega Apocalypse Taipan Bubble Bobble Solomon's Key Epyx Epics Barbarians Road Runner Summer Gold Computer Hits 4 Rood Runner Super Sprint Living Daylights Summer Gold Xecutor Sidewize Ace2 Renegade Enduro Racer U.S. Gold Hewson Activision System 3 U.S. Gold Martech Ocean Firebird U.S. Gold U.S. Gold Palace U.S. Gold U.S. Gold Beau Jolly U.S. Gold Activision Domark U.S. Gold 8.99 7.99 9.99 9.99 9.99 8.95 8.95 8.95 9.99 9.99 9.99 9.99 9.99 9.95 9.99 COMMODORE COMMODORE 064 C64 Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum C64 Spectrum Spectrum Ocea SEGA The Seda Master System, RE 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. C64 9.95 9.99 7.99 9.99 Putrun Space Harrier Spectrum Spectrum C64 Amstrad Spectrum . Firebird Cascade Imagine Activision IR 8.95 9.99 Shooting Gallery Choplifter Mastertranic games at .99 and .99 WOOLWORTHS A Great Deal in Entertainme et FIREBIRD SEGA SPECTRUM SEGA = SEGA COMMODORE SPECTRUM SEGA \"items subject to availability "


"GVG 5 Cruncher game, software houses would famous Amiga Ball'. Because the disk is protected it forget all about this classic and it This has no real use, but means that you can only save would be lost forever. This nevertheless it is quite fun to see your mazes on the original disk, Pac-Man is not the original as an Atari logo legging it away very dodgy. What Anco should produced by Atari, but it's by from a little red and white ball have done is offer a Anco and is called Cruncher which has just consumed a non-protected version for a few Factory. power pill. pounds more if you send them Your aim in Pac-Man is to A power pill? Yes, a power pill the original disk. A number of guide your little yellow 'ball with is a small green pulsating dot companies are already practising a gob' around a maze and eat all which will give Pac-Man super! this including Electronic Arts, of the little white dots or pills. munching strength for around 15 authors of the fantastic Deluxe This would be quite boring on its seconds, more than enough time Paint. own, so you also have to watch to get his revenge. Still, that's only a little out for the ghosts. Woooooh! There are four power pills per problem, nothing to affect The ghosts are nasty creatures level, well at the start anyway gameplay. MACHINE: AMIGA who like nothing better than to You see, one of the interesting SUPPLIER: ANCO So, what have we got. A really PRICE: .95 chomp on your bones. There are things about this great version is neat and extremely fast version REVIEWER: CHRIS four ghosts in Pac-Man and so the fact that, if you wish, you of the arcade classic with extra there are four in Cruncher. But can create your own Pac-Mazes, bits like a screen editor. Nice Hurray! What am I cheering Cruncher has one special or edit an existing one. The disk graphics, although not what you about? Well, one of my all time feature. Well, it's not exactlky a comes supplied with 30 different call Amiga standard, and favourites has finally been feature, more a gimmick. With mazes and an extra 40 can be the sound isnt much cop either produced on the Amiga. What is the press of a few keys, the added. This brings me to the but it has it where it counts. it? Pac-Man of course. ghosts will all transform only sour note. Yes, they've finally brought themselves into nastly little Atari The game disk is copy-editied GRAPHICS REALISM out a Pac-Man for the Amigal logos, and your little yellow to protect piracy and the like. PLAYABILITY thought that being such an old spheroid will turn into the Smart move, right? Wrong. VALUE Flight Trainer  MACHINES: CBM 64/IBM TANDY SUPPLIER: ELECTRONIC ARTS PRICE .95 disc VERSION TESTED: CBM 64 REVIEWER: STEVE Often when somebody famous endorses a computer game, the game isn't very good. The legendary Brigadier-General Charles Yeager, US Air Force first man to break the sound barrier, is an exception, and so is this game. It is demanding and difficult, and you won't master it in a week, but like flying it's well worth the effort. This is a flight simulator, not a combat simulator or wargame (we are promised those later). The only things you really need to think about are the joystick and throttle. But anyone trying to fly like an arcade game soon learns differently the controls are very sensitive and very realistically tuned. Part of the program actually teaches you the basic manoeuvres of flying in a Cessna trainer, first with the 'instructor' in control, then with you coping solo. The core of the program is a Flight Test simulator which allows you to test fly any one of fourteen different aircraft, ranging from World War One ABOUT fighters to modern powerhouses capable of over three times the speed of sound. You are not told how they perform, it is your job to find out and record it. Particular fun are three fictional aircraft, all similar-looking modern jets with very different ways of behaving in the air. The program works in real time in a 'world' that has three different airports and a number of aircraft 'obstacle courses'. These can also be used for aircraft racing at below 100 feet in one case and for formation flying stunts. These are not to be attempted until you've really worked out how to fly. Some of the options offered seem unecessary, like the ability to look through the aircraft's floor or tail, or move outside it in flight to see yourself from a chase plane or a satellite, or employ an eight-times zoom to look at an object. Altogether this is the best, the most realistic, and the most comprehensive flight simulator that I've seen on the market. GRAPHICS REALISM PLAYABILITY VALUE sono "


"many embarrasing questions to answer about just how this was allowed to happen. Botsneda's closeness to the mainland is of great strategic advantage to the enemy. Cobra carinot be allowed to consolidate their position, nor must they have the time to retrieve and analyse the classified information left behind on the installation Time is of the essence; but conventional forces cannot be used because their planning and deployment will take time. The eastern sector of the military installation was a spy base which collected information about COBRA personnel and tactics. The main database is on hard disc attached to the computer. Gun-happy Dreadnoks may REVIEWS FUEL 10019 10000 ACTION FORCE SC:003750 AO 042 -049  MACHINES: C64/SPECTRUM/ The small island of Botsneda, AMSTRAD just off the mainland, was  SUPPLIER: VIRGIN GAMES heavily populated by civilian and PRICE: .95 (Spec) .95 (Ams) 9.95 (C64) military personnel. A ruthless VERSIONS TESTED: C64 attack by COBRA, the enemy, SPECTRUM meant the evacuation of civilians REVIEWER: TIM from the tourist resorts of Botsneda. The military istallation was not This is, quite simply, Virgin's so lucky. Despite the latest early best release since Dan Dare. And warning systems guarding the it comes as no surprise that, like installation, they only realised DD, Action Force has been put they were being attacked after it together by The Gang of Five. was too late to retaliate. It's based on the comic/toys of The only sensible option was ActionSC:000000 00000000 TACTIONVORCEE DEL E2000 Force the same name but don't let that put you off. Like Thundercats, also reviewed this ish, the game stands up in its own right as a good, solid blaster But there's a bit of arcade adventure and strategy thrown in for good measure making Action Force one of the few games around right now that will last beyond the first few plays. True to form Gang has to withdraw, which was carried put together two completely out swiftly. However, the allied different games on the Spectrum forces destroyed much of the and 54. OK, so some of the installation to prevent it falling elements are the same but if into enemy hands. The eastern you've got a 64 don't expect to sector of the installation could be able to beat the game on your not be destroyed during the mate's Spectrum. attack as there wasn't time, and Meanwhile on with the review, certain classified information First we'll take a look at the may now be in the evil clutches scenario. of COBRA! The allies will have L -00000000 The Spectrum version has detailed buildings and tanks and gun emplacements which reminded me a bit of Green Beret, although the game is totally different The Striker and the Dragonfly chopper look different in both games, although the basic principle of protecting the Striker by flying the Dragonfly around well have destroyed it, but the blasting a clear path while at the risk cannot be taken. If the same time moving bits of bridge enemy studies the itelligence around are the same. information they will know how I found the C64 easier initially to change their tactics and for although the Spectrum defence systems to defeat the version is more challenging it allied forces. Alas, the takes more time to get into. information will take years to You have to move quick in replace. both versions dodging enemy A crack squad is needed to fire while making sure the mount an immediate raid to get bridges are in place for the back the information (if it is still Striker to cross. intact) and get out again. There are eight challenging The Action Force squad will levels to complete each with land on the western sector of the different hazards and enemies to island, cutting straight through overcome, lots of tactics to be enemy defences. A.W.E. Striker learned and plenty of and Dragonfly are to carry out opportunities for all you tipsters the raid. to be learned and plenty of The All Weather and opportunities for all you tipsters Environment Striker has to get you maps and tips printed four-wheel drive and is capable in ideas central! of speeds of 60 MPH cross Great presentation, with info country. Roll bars protect both screens appearing between passengers. Its biggest assests levels giving details about the are its manoeuvrability, speed next set of enemies you'll and smooth passage over rough encounter, nice hi-score charts, terrain. nice sound effects the works! A.W.E. Striker carries delicate Great to see Virgin come up tapping equipment necessary to with a winner after so many retrieve the classified disappointing games this year. information from the hard disc. Graphics vary in all versions. SPEC 054 The 64 version has jets, GRAPHICS mini-copters, energy barriers all SOUND on a background of iron girder VALUE type constructions. PLAYABILITY 10 oon OK FORGE "


"long Verooom! One of these incredible Karts could be yours if you are the winner of our absolutely amazing Buggy Boy competition! Elite will present the first prize winner with a brand new Cadet class or Britain class kart from top manufacturers Zip Karts. Each kart is worth over  and will be ready to race! Karting is an extremely popular form of motorsport many top Grand Prix racing stars, including Britain's best Nigel Mansell, started their racing careers in karts like tha machines we';re giving away. There are full championship race series for both classes of kart held in the UK and the final for the Cadet class will be held at Silverstone as part of the British Kart Grand Prix meeting. Who knows, YOU could be on the starting grid next year!  The top prize a ready to race Zip Kart will presented to the winner at a special ceremony early next year. . Ten runners up will get a copy of Elite's brilliant Buggy Boy game. "


"HOW TO Craig's designer Wheels? Super Mario Bros. Adieta ball, Nebulus e Outran playable on computer during traffic jams _Drag fign 0.27 Best Driver at CTVG (me) V12 engine with 600 bhp   WIN! What we'd like you to do is design your very own personal customised buggy. C+VG's car crazy designer Craig Kennedy has come up with his perfect vehicle just to give you some idea what we want. Feel free to pinch some of Craig's ideas but we'd prefer you to use your own imagination to design a set of hot wheels for the Computer Age. You can use anything you like to create your picture but don't forget to fix the special entry coupon firmly to your picture. Send your entry to Computer and Video Ganes, Buggy Boy Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Normal C+ VG rules apply, closing date is December 16th and the Ed's decision is as final as the chequered flag! I wisman y Machine guns to shoot all computer fanatics Door's designed to keep out Secret panel hidina (chabbie poisonous darts Williams to fire at thiefs or Traffic Wordlens! Spikes to puncture bicycles e scratch badly driwen taxis Hedgehoy scoops to pick up the poor wee beastie's 'safely deposit them at the roadside Fow wheel drive e steening + ACTIVE RIDE suspension C+VG/ELITE KOP A KART KOMPETITION! Name....... Address........ . .......................... Age............... Computer owned C64) Spectrum Amstrado (tick box) Please fix this coupon securely to your entry "


"A MEDIEVAL SMASH EM UP. .OF DEMOLITION & DESTRUCTION SCREENSHOTS FROM CBM5-U128 VERSIO 590 Knights in shining armour Jou certainly are not, more like black hearted villains as your marauding trio run riot through countless nedieval landscapes, laying to waste fortress after fortress, castle after castle. Obviously you can't expect to have it all your own way, there'll be resistance from the peasants and gentlefolk and Middle Age master's but let that not deter three evil minded rogues on a path of demolition and destruction. Compulsive, fast moving action that'll keep bringing you back time after time. CBM64/128 AMSTRAD SPECTRUM TOMORRUUS SOFTULARE T009 .99 CASS .99 CASS $8.99 Media Holcings of 23 Mart 2 Sinn 8572X TETY 356 3388 .99 DISK .99DISK TAPE Ramparte la an original development from Future Concepts. Copyright from . D d worldwide by Gol Media Holdings Limited "


"COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES D goud 83 STAGE UTRUN the ultimate drivingP52 Going for Gold? Then read on. Here we CONTENTS reveal just some of the glittering goodies on the way from the Birmingham boys at US Gold. Read all P63 GAUNTLET II Enter the geme? about Out Run, a potential Christmas Numero uno.check outcoinco Dresen! conversons [keGountiet 1770\" Sic Am P5760-sciencdventure.ne and Speed Rumbler. Learn the secrets of entertainment! mpossible Mission  nd yourself silly P60ACADE BLAsss ein with Laser Tag on the new Go! label. But conversions. first, burn rubberwith theyears most P64 MOVE MONS:;s-meet exciting driving game Out Run! Charlie Chaplin. "


"IT'LL TURN YOU INSIDE OUT! INGINE OUTING TEDE AMSTRAD, COMMODORE .99 tape, .99 disc SPECTRUM .99 ST, AMIGA .99 Never before have you seen a 3D game as Impressive as this! You play a burolar hunting around an astoundingly realistic house in which every object is carefully defined in 3D-space you can even look behind pictures, play snooker and open Ilds of cupboardsSeek the gems hidden within the house, or you may never get out... One of those rare games that will keep you coming back for one more try for the solution months after you buy it. THE EDGE, 36/38 Southampton Street, London WCZE 7HE. Amstrad Screenshots "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES Order by Credit line 01-348 2907 (24 hrs) PRICE **SPECTRUM TATARIB BIT GNOME RANGER KNOAT ORC-02 JINXTER DISK ACE OF ACES DRUID-D2 GUILD OF THEVES-02 **SPECTRUM BUBBLE DOBELE FLYING SHARK DRUID 5.95 7.50 THUNDERCATS SPY SPY CONFUCTI NEBULUS  THE TRAP DOOR ROY OF THE ROVERS BRAVESTARR RAMPARTS FIRETRAP 12.99 TRIVIAL PURSUIT 1235 GAUNTLET SUPER SPRINT RAM TURBO -RAN MUSIC MACHINE 10X3 DSKS SSSSSSSS NEUSES RYGAR & KEPSTON INTERFACE RED LED 19.95 ***SPECIAL OFFERS CHA CONNOISSEUR COLLECTION CBM 64C COMPUTER CON DATA RECORDER NEOS MOUSE AND CHEESE GX SOFTWARE GRAND MASTER CHESS CLUEDO, MONOPOLY, SCRABBLE PITMAN TYPING TUTOR AND RENAISSANCE PLUS FREE 2 GAMES CASSETTES BRP 199.99 189.95 THEATRE EUROPE AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT BATTLE OF BRITAN GAME SET & MATCH BUTTKRIEG WOALD GAMES WORLD CLASSL BOARD FREDDY HARDEST 795 2495 LIGHTPEN INTERFACE AMSTRADA 795 FOOTBALL DIRECTOR 4.99 GAME SETS MATCH 10.95 AZIMUTH HEAD AUGNVENT 795 MONOPOLY-02 8.99 SCRABBLE-02 6.99 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-D4 | 9 | TL THA THU -09 595 GAUNTLET 1-02 10 AAAgeopoM MAN 7.50 UERLE CABLE-02      FANTASTICK JOYSTICK PLUS FIVE FREE GAME CASSETTES 168.35 750 WORLD CLASS US-02 10.15 EUTE 6 PACK 2 SCALEXTRIC  ETE TRouT PACK TT RACER CALIFORNIA CAES-DISK CALFORNIA GAMES JENELS OF DRESS SILICON DREAMS STARSLIDER LAST NINUA ANIMATORI ENDURO RACER FOOTBALL DIRECTOR ROAD RUNNER 1995 128 COMPUTER COMPENDIUM PACK  12 compuTEA COMMODORE DATA RECORDER COMMODORE JOYSTICK MUSIC MAKER KEYBOARD FREE SOFTWARE SPIRIT OF THE STONES CASSETTE JACK ATTACK CARTRIDGE INTERNATIONAL SOCCER CARTRIDGE RRP 6279.95 20.05 OCP ART STUDIO 115 INDIANA JONES-02 11.95 URDUN 7.50 DEATH WISH3-02 7.95 TAI PAN-D2 7.50 RENEGADE -12 6.95 MIN OFFICE 6.99 OUT RUN-02 12.95 SUPER SPRINT-12 11.95 TANK-02 795 GUILD OF THIEVES-DISK 595 KNIGHT OAC -04 750 SILICON DREAMS-04 7.50 EWELS OF DARKNESS-D4 595 THE MUSIC SYSTEM-04 596 AOV MUSIC SYSTEM OCP ART STUDIO ADV ART STUDIO-DISK STAR GUDER-D4 1995 RENEGADE GUNSHP 11.95 1195 11 1941C DISK DRIVE PLUS FREE 20 BLANK DESKS PLUS FREE GAMES DE RRP 1.00 PAPER BOY THE PAWN 17 ARTIST -12 COMMODORESC COMPUTER SEKOSKA SP100 VC PRINTER RP 3.95 309.95 MASTERSYSTEM BUBBLE BOBBLE-DI LIGHT PHASER FLYING SHARK-01 SPY CATCHER DJ 3-0 GLASSES ELITE 6 PACKI-02 LEATHER NECKS-03 PES PLUS FORTRESS AMERICA 03 GHOST HOUSE BARBARIAN-02 YOG BER 2 TEDDY BOY RENEGADE-02 SHOOT EM UPCONS KIT-D4 TRANSBOT 1495 SOLOMONS KEY-02 GEEDEE AIR RALLY-D2 SUPER TENNIS SOUD GOLD-02 FIGHTER ANS OF ROME 03 CNDATA RECORDER VISSUE DEFENCE SO 2495 MECA CALYPSE-D2 NEOS MOUSE CHEESE SPACE MARRIER 2495 OUT RUND 750 PHANTOM 245 WORLD CLASSLBOARD-02 750 EXPERT. ES ADVANCED ART STUDO-OS 19 ACTIONREPLAY 2498 GULD OF THEVES DISKONEY 5495 FREEZE MACHINE DOPUFTER QUEDEX-OP SUMLINE 54 KEYBOARD FANTASY ZONE GAUNTLET 2 BLACK BELT STAR WARS ActioNHOTER NOTA PENNY MORE 1295 BARBARIAN PYGNOSIS PRO WRESTUNG INDIANA JONES-D2 750 HITCHHIKERS GUCE GREAT GOLF 1995 BARDS TALE DISK 12.99 CALIFORNIA GAMES WORLD SOCCER 750 DEFENDER OF THE CROWN TRACKERELD-02 695 KNIGHT ORC 19 BATTLE OF GUARDALCANAL-D2 750 JEWELS OF DARKNESS WONDER BOY ARMAGEDDON MAN-D2 10.95 STARGUDER QUARTET JACK THE NPPER-D2 750 GUELD OF THIEVES 1995 HIGHFRONTIER-D2 750 THE PAWN ENOURO RACER DEATH WISH)-02 7.30 SIL CON DREAMS ORLD CAAD PR THE LASTNINA-02 TO INTER SECRET COMMAND TRANTORASTROAAAAOAT Por ON THE TILES -01 TUES MAGIK ALEXICON MRACLE WORLD 1945 CALIFORLA GAMES OOTINO GALLERY TERROOS GANGSTER TOWN 19.95 OFFICE-4 54 LEISURE SUIT HARRY BISMARK-02 3OHELICOPTER SIMULATION NINTENDOSYSTEM MARBLE MADNESS POUCE OUEST DELUXE SET 350 99 ENDURO RACER-D2 595 THEXDER CONTROL DECK 99 95 TRACKER GYROMITE 3295 EARL WEAVERS BASEBALL SILICON DREAMS-02 SKYFOX DUCK HUNT WYSTERY OF THE NILE-1 GNOME RANGER SIDE WZE-01 MARBLE MADNESS HOGANS ALLEY TRIVIAL PURSUIT-D4 CHAMPIONSHIP FOOTBALL BOITE BE MAGNATRON-D2 FLIGHT SIMULATORI WACHADER ACE2-02 AgPPPr WRECKING CREW TANK-01 LEADERBOARD PHANTASIES BASEBALL KNIGHT ORC -09 SOCCER JEWELS OF DARKNESS-02 ULTIMA  -02 CAUNTLET  FOOTBALL DIRECTOR LUANG HORROR DAN PON OCP ART STUDIO SUPER MARIO BROTHERS OS OSS WARGAMES CONS-DISK CARRER FORCE DISK CECLIMBER ARBOURNE RANGER-04 STAR TREK KUNG FU DEFENDER OF CROWN-DISK 12.99 SUS BATTLE SIMULATION 1999 STEALTH FIGHTER-DE ALT WORLD GAMES-02 7.50 MERCENARY COMPENDIUM 799 LEADERBOARD SPITAE 40-De GUNEKERS FOOTBALL-D2 JOYSTICK EXTENSION LEAD ARKANDID 750 SORCEROA LORD-D3 10.35 GETTYSBURO SIDE AMS-01 TRVAL PURSUIT CRAZY RIDER DI COMBAT SCHOOL-02 SKULLDIGGERY TRIVIAL PURSUIT-04 FLASH POINT -02 BLACK LAMD ELITE -04 GNOME RANGER ELITE-OS DISKO MAD BALLS-02 BAROS TALE REVS-02 PHANTYS-02 DEFENo   EVS-OS DOO 15.95 PSYCHO SOLDIER-02 ELITE-ELECTRON RASTAN-2 DEGAS BUTE  AOA-02 CAPTAIN AMERICA LUCASES-02 WIZAROS WARZ ***CIPLUS BRAVE STARR AGE 2ONLY 795 GALACTIC GAMES-02 ENDURO RACER 7.95 CHARLIE CHAPLIN-02 OUNSLINGER-C1 FLYING SHARK GREMUNS-C16 RYGAR-02 BEACHEAD-C1684 GAUNTLETII ELITE HT PAOK-C16 SUPER HAND ON-02 BACKLASH SCOOBY DOO-C16 PEGASUS GADGE-03 10.05 JET SET WILLYC168 +41 THUNDERCATS-2 7.50 GUNEKER FOOTBALL BOMB JACK 2-C16 696 DAILLER-D2 PANA RAMA BCLOUGHS FOOTBALL COMPENDIUM-12 THE EA 1395 BLOOO VALLEY-02 POLICE QUEST PAPER BOY-C18 895 NEBULUS-02 3D HELICOPTER SIMULATION MORPHEUS-02 LEISURESUIT HARRY THROUGH THE TRAPOOOR pg 250 BARBARAN PALACE) SUCON DREAMS 1399 ROY OF THE ROVERS-02 BARBARANI PONOSIS INTERAMES BRAVESTARR-02 TERRUPOS RAMPARTS WORLD GAMES SEPTEMBER FRETRP FUGHT SIMULATORE NOVE RANGER THANTOR VAMPREKLER -SX2 STREET BASEBALL-D2 TAIPAN MAZE OF QALIOUS GNOME RANGER 2 THE GOONIES DELUXE SCRABBLE-D3 10.95 BUBBLE BOBBLE PENGUIN ADVENTURE LIVE AMMO HTS-02 7.95 SENTINAL CUBERT FOOTBALL MANAGER -02 750 DICK SPECIAL ACK THf NippER IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 02 750 TIME & MAGK TRAL BLAZER 795 JINXTER DISK CARRER COMMAND FUTUREWNIGHT RED LED-02 595 JUNCTER 7.50 UNIV'L MILITARY SIMULATOR GAME SET & MATCH-04 ADVANCED ART STUDIO MONKEY ACADEMY 17.95 DESTROYER-DISK ONLY 12.99 TRACKER JEWELS OF DARONESS FIREZONE-03 STARGLIDER 1295 EWELS OF DARKNESS TAI PANWORLD TOUR GOUD 799 THE PAWN 7.50 GUILD OF THEVES NTERKUATE PLUS-02 7.50 SU CON DREAMS ENCOUNTER-02 ARBALL CONSTIT CHESS MASTER 2000 SLENT SERVICE MERCENARY ERIDONGEST STAR WARS NOTA PENNY MORE NAPOLEAN AT WAR DESERTRATS SOLD GOLD-02 BRAVESTARR-02 19.95 COLOUR COMMODORE 1001 MONITOR RGB. PAL SWITCH R.R.P 2 .95 SOLOMANS KEY DESERTRATS GAUNTLETISK1091 VULCAN 28.95 SEIKOSHA SP180 VC PRINTER WITH SERIAL CABLE AND EASY SCRIPT WORD PROCESSOR 173.98 ACE 1-128K DARK SEPTRE SOLID GOLD JOSK 10.05 HEADCOACH GRYZOR 5 STREET BASKETBALL ANNALS OF ROVE  PLUS FREE CAME 148.95 BUGGY BOY-02 FIREZONE-03 JINXTER DISK CARRIER COMMAND-04 TIME MAGK-4 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION-02 890 FOOTBALL MANAGER-D2 7:50 OCEANS 5 HITS-02 595 BUBBLE BOERLE-02 7.95 ENLIGHTENMENT AUDI-02 895 DELUXE SCRABBLE-DISK 595 GNOME RANGER-02 7955 STREET BASKETBALL-02 FIRETRAPCALFORNIA GAMES-02 SEPTEMBER-02 SLAINE 92 RAMPARTS-12 BRAVESTARR-02 ROY OF THE ROVERS-02 THROUGH THE TRAP DOOR-D2750 BLOOD VALLEY-02 DRILLER-D2 GUNSHIP-03 1995 THUNDER CATS-02 19.95 PEGASUS BRIDGE-03 750 SUPER HANG ON-02 795 FLYING SHARK 12 RYGAR-02 70-99 coupoon ce couvre R.R.P 0199.95 17.95 LEADERBOARD COMMODORE PLUS 4 COMPUTER PLUS & COMPUTER PLS CORDER. JOYSTICK THREE CARTRIDGE SOFTWARE R.R.P .95 BATTLEFIELD GERMANY ARXANOD COMET GAME SLENT SERVICE MERCENARY GRAPHC CREATOR ADVART STUDIO 128K FOOTBALL MANAGER OCEANS 5 HITS KARI WARRIORS ALT WORLD GAVES G LINEXER FOOTBALL SECOND CITY SORCERER LORO COVRAT SCHOOL FLASH POINT MAD BALLS MATCHDAY PHANTYS PSYCHO SOLDIER RASTAN VICTORY ROAD LUCAS FILMA RAMPAGE GALACTIC GAMES KNGHTMAAE CHARLIE CHAPLIN EXCELERATOR AND GEOS RRP 1995 159 EXCELERATOR GEOS PLUS FREEZE MACHINE RUPEITE95 175.95 ZX SPECTRUM PLUS 3 PLUS JOYSTICK PLUS 6 GAMES 100 GTAE  595 GALACTIC GAMES-02 595 RAMPAGE-02 595 LUCAS FILMS-02 595 VICTORY ROAD-02 595 RASTANDO 595 PSYCHO SOLDIER-02 595 PHANTYS-D2 596 MATCH DAY-D2 7 MAD BALLS-02 7 GRYZOR-02 59 FLASH POINT -02 7.50 COMBAT SCHOOL-02 7.50 SDE ARMS-D2 SORCERORLORO-D SECOND CITY GUNEKER FOOTBALL10.95 ALTWORLD GAMES 199.00 1995 AMIGA 500 MOUSE + DELUXE PAINT PLUS FREE 10 X DESKS BRP 75.00 525.00 ATARI 50 STEM. MOUSE CHAIN REACTION SUPER HANG ON PEGASUS BRIDGE THUNDERCATS DRILLER S BLOOD VALLEY 5 OX DISKS DISCOVERY PLUS 19.95 12.95 1595 ABOVE HARDWARE AVAILABLE FROM OUR BRANON ATAS GAFEN LANES LONDON ROOY OR BY MALL ORDER PLEASE ADD ES PER MACHINE FOR ALSO AVAILABLE ON DISK FORMAT D1 = .95, D2 = .95, D3 = .95, D4 = .95, D5 = .95 RE FOR MALORDER: PLEASE MAKE CHGP.O PAYABLE TO: S.CSIC-VG| 655. GREEN LANES LONDON NS OGY P.PINCLUDED IN UK EUROPE ADD 1 PER ITEM, ELSEWHERE ADO 2 PER ITEM ADO ESPER MACHINE SEND SALE FOR FREE LIST PLEASE SPECIFY MACHINE TYPE IN YOUR ORDER PERSONAL CALLERS PRODUCE THIS ADVERT ATEITHER SHOP FOR ABOVE ACCESS AND VISA CARO HOLDERS HING DISCOUNTS TO: S.C SUNITS. 221 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD LONDON WIR SAF01-34829807 NEAR GOODGEST TUBE STATION 01-3408565 OR ATS.CSSSS GREENLANES LONDON NS OGY INEAR TURNPIKE LANE TUBE STATION ITEMS ONLY AVAILABLE FROM 655 CREDIT CARD ORDERS DESPATCHED SAME DAY SUBJECT TO AVAILABIUTY. GREENLANES LONDON NG ODY * ALL NEW RELEASES ARE SUBJECT TO RELEASE DATEPLEASE RING FOR AVALA BUTY "


"28 tone up your reflexes or go car will somersault through for the sweat of a long haul to the air as it carries you off into Lakeside which takes you oblivion. through almost all of the If you can stay in one piece, locations in the game. the road dips and rises under This challenge to squeeze your wheels as you motor this well wicked game into a along, The hilly sections of the home computer is a severe game make it very difficult to test for a programmer but see what's in front of you. It U.S. Gold are past masters gets very hairy when your're when it comes to taking up the surrounded by towering Gauntlet. Geddit? rocks. Enough of these in-jokes. This is a realistic landscape Let's check out the game plan. not one of those flat, boring Take the wheel of your red computer circuits of the past. roadster at Coconut Beach, The perspiration and choose your route and hit the excitement may be real but road. prepare yourself for possible You can almost feel the hallucinations. Your joystick The Christmas number one with a bullet? wind blasting through your may seem to turn into a Well, that's up to YOU, the games playing hair as you race against time steering wheel and your public. But one thing is for sure, the through the breathtaking computer could take on the computer conversion of the year's most landscapes of Death Valley, appearance of a dashboard successful coin-op is the game that Desolution Hill, Cloudy as you race along. Mountain and a host of other Purists, who simply can't everyone is waiting for! locations. live without the car module, UTRUN hit the arcades takes the state of the art one from the heat of the desert might like to build their own like a steam-roller! As step further. to the frozen roads of the simulator. soon as the hydraulic in the arcades the game is Alpine section, your driving First acquire four good cabinet appeared it was housed in a moving facsimile skills are stretched to the limit strong springs, an old car seat swamped by hoardes of of a Ferrari which hurls the as you feud with juggernauts and the obligatory Squeezy enthusiastic gamesters willing occupant from side to side as for your right of way. bottle... to part with their cash to drive each bend is taken at A collision may do no more But those of you who aren't a roaring red Ferrari. breakneck speed. than dent your bodywork and into DIY might just like to wait Now the thrills of Sega's The computer conversion your ego but wrap yourself for the January issue of sensational coin-op are due can't hope to give you this! around a tree or collide with C+VG when we'll be to race onto the small screen degree of realism, but it the walls of a tunnel and the GIVING away a genuine of YOUR games machine. DOES promise greater thrill hydraulic Outrun arcade Will it be good? You Betcha. power than anything machinel Betcha can't wait! Here at C+VG we've seen you've ever played some early versions and before on a home reckon that you won't be computer. disappointed. You can settle Outrun is the successor to for a short trip to Sega's Enduro Racer and the Vineyard to ESTARK Three different Outrun machines for the car conscious driver. BEBE "


"THE PHENOMENON CONTINUES The mind blowing sequel to the No. 1 smash hit. Addictive, frantic and packed with so many new features it's a totally new gare. Over 100 levels of pulsating action as you take on the powers of your favourite player, even if they're already in play, Discover the hidden gifts of the Secret Room, come face to face with the fearsome Dragon and watch out for the Death Curse of the evil IT. Santiles acid puddles, forcefields and moving exits make your progress all the more difficult. But there are mystical amulets to be gained which will enhance your powers to repel the monsters, walk through walls or increase your fire power. You may even move some of the maze walls to your advantage. Gauntlet II is not justafurther episode in this enthralling crusade, it is a whole new experience in action packed adventure. The mind blowing sequel to the No.1 smash hit! U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 23 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX Tel: 021 356 3388 ATARI GAMES 1563388 ATARIX SCREENSHOTS FROM ATARI ST VERSION *(All features available on Atari ST version). SPECTRUM 48/128K .99 TAPE CBM 64/128 .99 TAPE $11.99 DISK ATARI ST $19.99 DISK AMSTRAD .99 TAPE .99 DISK "


"THEULTIMATE AE THE ULTIMATE 'AERIAL EXPERIENCE NOW AVAILABLE FOR YOUR COMPUTER All the thrills and skills of real skateboarding in this unique challenge to become champion of the skating world. Starting out from **Skate City\" test your abilities amongst the numerous skateparks improving your techniques in both freestyle and competitive action as you attempt to complete the ultimate manoeuvre the 720 degree twist while soaring through the air TA 70, Spectrum -99 Tape ATARI GAMES "


"ERIAL EXPERIENCE! 10.100 CBM64/128 -99 Disk -99 Tape TIL AMATEUR PRO AMATEUR NOVICE Amstrad -99 Disk -99 Tape Screenshots from arcade version U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 TAX. Tel: 021 356 3388 E GOLD "


"You have found treasure beyond. your wildest are anis SOLID GOLD A classic compilation of software's greatest hits GAUNTLET ... this No.1 smash hit recreates all the excitement and gameplay of the arcade sensation. ACE OF ACES... a magnificent and enthralling blend of flight simulation and arcade \"shoot 'em up\" action. LEADERBOARD... \"the sports simulation of the year, if not the decade, that makes all other Golf simulations look clumsy\"Zzap. WINTER GAMES ... an outstanding location for a competition, a superb combination of testing events, an unrivalled classic No.l. INFILTRATOR ... action, strategy and simulation in one spy action thriller, \"Like being in an action film\"Sinclair User. SOFTWARES GREATEST HIS GAUNTLET ACE OF ACES LEADERBOARD WINTER GAMES INFLORATOR. U.S. Gold Ltd., U.S Units 2/3 Holford Way, (GOLD: Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX Reansor Tel: 021 356 3388 Al CBM 64/128 SPECTRUM SPECTRUM +3 AMSTRAD .99 TAPE .99 TAPE .99 DISK .99 TAPE .99 DISK .99 DISK "


"COIN IT har4 who intends to exterminate all living things on earth. First you must shoot your way through until you reach the entrance to the gigantic underground empire. Once inside, Bozons attack gets harder. You then find yourself in a cave where huge rocks are floating The current romance with coin-op board will be faster. All the through the air. You will conversions looks set to continue into better to help you on your encounter a lot of hidden the New Year and the US Gold guys way but have you got the articles and enemies, have snapped up some of the best of the talent to use them wisely and especially when the cave mean machines, including the epic complete all twenty levels? narrows and you are skateboarding fantasy 720°. And C+VG's arcade ace attacked from the water. Clare Edgeley, talking Eventually, after much that's not all ... about 720 said: \"This fighting, you will come HE most difficult Prizes are awarded for would make a fabulous across Bozon's ultimate skateboarding move negotiating special courses conversion to home weapon, 'The Mobile is called a 720°. It's which depend on the class of computers and I wouldn't be Armour Sentipeet' which at sort of twisting jump the park chosen. The easiest surprised if the licence is must be destroyed at all sort of manoeuvre you see course is a simple downhill snapped up over the next costs. arcade players make when run where you make your few months.\" She was right! Throughout the game you they are trying to play a way down the twisting Another coin-op coming will be given the choice of game and get more coins course by jumping from your way is Sidearms this various kinds of additional out of their pocket at the ramp to ramp. If you time on the Gol label. fire power. same time complete the course within 720° is also the name of the time limit you'll win some the most demanding arcade cash and an Olympic style skateboarding game yet medal depending on your seen. It puts you right in the skill. The most difficult run is middle of Skate City the slalom where skill, paradise for street surfers. dexterity and suppleness You play the part of a are tested to the full. The likely young lad aiming to rise to the top of the skateboarding league. In your snazzy gear you certainly look the part but there's room for improvement. Better equipment is out there for the taking. The catch is that 720° ARCADE VERSION 720° SPECTRUM VERSION Sidearms is a superb this costs money and the big shoot'em up game with cash prizes come from the large impressive graphics in-park competitions but that keep you trigger you're on the outside happy! without a ticket! Speed Rumbler, the The scourge of the city is a second game from Capcom, swarm of killer bees that on the Go! label, is set in the appeared from time to time. 21st Century where a They seem to have it in for terrorist group mercilessly skateboarders, but can't attack peaceful towns. With enter parks (probably only 24 hours left, your goal because they haven't got is to free your family and tickets!). The solution is restore peace in your home simple: before the bees town. appear get a ticket and You control a car that will zoom into a park. Did I say travel through towns, desert simple? lands and across oceans. Skate City is a tough and LAZER TAG As you travel you must dangerous town. As you rewards are greater for a shoot the enemy and release kick along you're assailed successful slalom run but the hostages. by flying frisbies, kamikaze your nerves will be jangling! When rescued, you will cyclists, careering cars and by the end. receive extra power and manic musclemen. You'll When you have enough bonus points. You must also meet the other cash you can buy new gear develop a technique to competitors who are also at the skateboard shop. break the enemies' traps hustling for tickets. Hit any Shoes let you jump higher, and avoid at all costs their one of these obstacles and pads let you recover from a LAZER TAG trailers and evade the you'll suffer a spill and lose fall more quickly, with a new Sidearms is a ambushers. valuable time as bee time helmet you can be more desperate battle between Eventually, you will approaches. Skate or die! adventurous and a new the human race and 'Bozon' Continued on Page 58 "


"NA COIN ITES monster thorns, growing like snaps off from the tree. A strange orchids on the tree plunge to the death is the branches and hornets' nest. result. The answer is not to Both are deadly. Avoid the stay for too long in any one thorns at all costs and shoot place and have your arm at the nests and resulting the ready to catch onto a swarms of irate hornets as branch or ledge above you. is a levels game with the you come across them. Flying mutants are a further enemy base high out of \"At least if the nests are hazard, either knock them sight. You'll have to swing empty you won't have to out in mid-flight or shoot from branch to branch using worry about being stung to them. \"After the first level the scenery changes the going gets tougher and the hazards more numerous. But that's only to be expected and adds to the enjoyment of this highly addictive game. Once again Capcom has come up with the goods.\" Watch out for Shackled from Data East, this time on the US Gold label. Shackled describes the state in which your comrades in arms find themselves and your job is to free them. The enemy has locked them in dungeons BIONIC COMMANDOS and you have to fight your Continued from Page 57 arrive in the enemies' town. A once beautiful town that has now been taken over. Here they will use every possible way to kill you. If you succeed in battle, you will free the hostages and restore peace in the town but it's going to be tough, some of the enemies you will encounter are armed buggies which will obstruct you car by using stretchable horns which hook onto the car and create havoc! Also shelling trucks move in on you and shoot in eight varying directions. You will encounter over twenty different kinds of enemy. Bionic Commandos was recently reviewed in our C+ VG arcade action special. Clare Edgeley wrote: \"Capcom's latest release, Bionic Commandos, is a simple but thoroughly enjoyable shoot'em up with one innovative feature a bionic arm which plays a major role in the game. Your mission is to infiltrate enemy lines, destroy their super missiles which threaten your country and discover the secret plans which detail where and how their next attack will be made. Simple! \"Armed with absolutely no useful knowledge about the habits of the enemy you swing into action. Swing is the operative word as your bionic arm shoots out to grab onto a tree branch high above your head. A tap of the fire button and it starts to reel in dragging you up with it. Quick as a flash, hop onto the branch machine gun ready to knock out any attackers. \"Some of the enemy are content to fire at you from a safe distance, others charge onsight and you'd better have that arm ready if you're to escape being flattened and finally others give chase in a desperate attempt to stop you getting near their base. \"Bionic Commandos CAR SPEED RUMBLER your arm to get you over impassable gaps and to BIONIC COMMANDOS way through all the floors of escape the enemy. the bastion unlocking doors \"Apart from being able in your search. to hoist you up, your arm, if Each of the 112 levels attached at an angle to a gives you a 3D bird's eye ledge on your left and right view of the action. The acts like a rope. deeper you penetrate the \"You can swing on it enemy defences the meaner Tarzan style and even use it they become so you'll need to knock out the enemy. a range of weapons to take Unfortunately, a blow from the attacking hoardes. the arm only stuns them A special feature of the momentarily, but it gives game is that you can take a you time to get your friend into this hell to help machine gun ready to shoot you out. This doubles your them. firepower and naturally, \"The action is fast and your chances of success. highly entertaining. death in the middle of The Speed Rumbler is Weapons can be collected battle. the second Capcom game en route that is, if you grab \"Another tip for the flat from Go! It's set in the 21st them as they float past on footed: not all branches are century and you play a road parachutes. Again use your safe, and more often than warrior attempting to free bionic arm. not you'll be standing on the hostages using a heavily \"Hazards include beds of wrong end of one when it armed car. "


"Hlas Biff& Bones \"ello there Bones, How's the old ST goin' then ?\" \"Fantastic I took your advice and went down to the computer shop in town and to be honest with you Biff I was amazed!\" \"Why's that then?\" \"Well, when I got there, every US Gold game was sold out!\" \"They must be pretty good then eh!'ere, 'ave you played Indiana Jones yet?\" \"Yeah, and ever since the missus caught me playing it instead of doing the decorating, our house has been like the Temple of Doom!\" \"I bet you can't wait to play Solomon's Key, Charlie Chaplin, Gauntlet Il or what's that new arcade game they're doing?\" \"Oh you mean Out Run. Of course, I know what it's like to race down the open road in a flashy red sports car with a gorgeous blonde by my side.\" \"Where was that then Cricklewood High Street ? They do say though there's more to come on the new Go! label. I dunno Biff, they're always one step ahead of the competition aren't they!\" | \"What? with games like their's, whose the competition then?\" NEW U.S.GOLDS NEW LATEST HITS FOR GO--FOR --ATARIST. PRANI@G 4 uns VARD TEMPLE OF DOOM SUBBATTLE SIMULATOR GRAVEYAL GREAT NEW GAMES CHGA OF THE PHENOMENON CONTINUES $56622 GO GOLD: U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3, Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B67AX. Tel: 021 356 3388. 6522 Glede koos l as 23 er ore. S TEL 02 356 338807 356 32235 TELEX 337768450G "


"GO! displaying the map and action as it happens. As you lose health or become weak, the map screen will shrink. If a visual spell is used this screen will increase in size thus greatly enhancing your view. When you are in combat, the monster's spells will be himself worthy Go! is the newest addition to the US by battle Gold software scene -and it promises to bring YOU some truly spectacular games. Witness Trantor The Last Stormtrooper reviewed this issue. More U h ree good home grown stuff is on the way. HOROS Here's a quick run down on what you can expect to see in the next few through the end months. battlin ainst horrific monste o gain experience IRST up is a computer VANGIOTSCORET9143UIMTUNET YES125 version of Laser Tag, the best selling light-gun game. Laser Tag from Worlds of Wonder, is a totally new concept and the best selling toy in the USA. It is a futuristic game using infra-red technology which gives a whole new dimension to the backyard game of tag. The uniquely designed Lazer Tag Starlyte hand laser gun' sends an infra-red light beam to the Lazer Tag Starsensor and, if the beam connects with the starsensor, sound and LED lights register the 'tag. The computer game is set in the year 3010, and you, the player, become a rookie cadet at the Lazer Tag Captain America training school who must Lazer Tag is a fast arcade attempt to gain a higher shoot'em style of game set status level and therefore against a detailed verticle progress through six ranks; scrolling background. Neophyte, Beamer, Lance, Wizard Warz will take Armsman, Professional and you back to the mystical finally Duellist. medieval dark ages when All the same rules as the wizards and warlocks ruled Lazer Tag toy apply in order the world. to earn promotion through the This is a fantasy role ranks, the rookie must Capt America playing game with a complete target shooting and difference. You will and collect spells to Rabbitoid. The target experience as much graphical fill your spell book, shooting test is where the representation as adventure ready for the later rookie follows a fixed path and strategy. stages of the game. through the Lazer Tag Arena See the action as you and must aim the gun to tag as command it and do real battle hele The screen will be many targets as possible. You with the opposition. See the split into various will be awarded a score once ce effect of your spells as they effect of your spells as they sections, on the test has been completed. hurtle across the screen. information section, In the Rabbitoid test, you when you enter the game it the characteristics must tag out as many is at a time when the world is and spells of your computer controlled players to elect a new Chief Wizard. many battle opponents without being tagged first. The new chief will have to and a larger.section Gauntlet !! 107444 le le "


"displayed so you may use your spells to counteract them. For instance, if the wizard or monster you are doing battle against is using fire spells you will have to use ice spells to win. In the second stage, you RENA will visit the towns to start may use precious energy, thus the beginning of each level. entering contests to prove reducing your health and One of the most famous and your worthiness to contend in vision. enduring Marvel comic book the ultimate contests. Also in Once all seven wizards heroes is brought to you by the towns you may be able to have been fought you will Gol Follow the adventures of buy spells and food to have become Chief Wizard Captain America as he increase your health. and rule the World! tackles one of his most The third stage will be the It's back to the time of flying dangerous enemies yet in final contests. You will be carpets and the mystical cityCaptain America and of old Baghdad when you get the Doom Tube of Dr to grips with Meglomann. Fast'n'Furious. It is the fourth of July and You take the role of a flying the whole of America is carpet mechanic, more geared for the biggest commonly known in the trade celebration since the as a carpet beater, who is fed bicentennial. At dawn, up of being on the poverty however, the President has an line and decides to earn uninvited visitor a figure himself some extra money. clad in black who has An opportunity arises to alternative suggestions to the work in the USA (Undercover planned celebrations. Security Agency). Your first Dr Meglomann issues his mission is to transport some ultimatum, either the valuable documents to a President abdicates his hiah military installation which just office in favour of the doctor happens to be the other side or the unsuspecting nation will of a vast desert full of be plunged into terror and Spectrum Trantor outlaws, monsters and other suffering supplied by a virus flying carpets. The President has just four You must board your magic hours to make an impossible carpet and begin your decision, to either stand down mission watch out for the and condemn America's pillars and buildings these citizens to a rule under Dr flying carpets can be tricky! Meglomann's insanity or The enemy are onto you inflict upon them the horific straight away and you will be consequences of a deadly confronted with scores of virus. What else can the other flying carpets, the President do but summon the Amstrad Trantor brighter they are in colour help of Captain America. challenged by seven other the more dangerous! Responding instantly to his wizards competing for the Look out for the three big country's call, Captain honour of Chief Wizard. In scorpions and the four-eyed America boards the this stage you will visit their monster which must be hit four Avenger's sky cycle and castles and lairs to do battle. times before they are dead arrives within moments for a let alone the huge dragon and full briefing. killer centipede! The President has Once you have flown information that the mad across the desert and have doctor is operating out of the outwitted the outlaws and Majave Desert in California. monsters you will have to land the deadly missile is and do a deal with the leader er encapsulated in an of the gang, or the Desert katinpenetrable undergroung to make the next stage of your bunker. The man who is the journey a little easier going. symbol of freedom and the You will have 60 seconds to American dream leaves for complete the sub-games the bunker site knowing that where you must select the the toughest task of his career right icons and hand over lies before him. those you have already You must navigate the collected revolving Doom Tube which is If you satisfy the Desert Rat housed within six your stamina will be underground decks. Through Not only will you have had increased, but if you should the centre of the tube runs a to build up a large store of fail to keep him happy, the core which is the missile's spells in your spell book but flying carpets in the next level access to the outside world. you will need your skills of will be more fast and furious The first five decks contain arcade fighting, as they will than ever! your quadrants which revolve be tested to the limits. Once you have satisfied the round the sinister core. If you are a good action desert leader you can You must desperately fighter you will not need as proceed on your way to the search for a way to descend many spells, as you will have military base. You will play to the sixth and lowest deck the speed and agility to through five levels of fast which houses the missile. If dodge the oncoming spells shoot'em up action and will you locate the missile in time with ease, but beware you have to play the sub-game at you must destroy it. a Gauntlet Il CHOLTZ BA "


"21st CENTURY WARRIOR APACHE FREE! W GUNSHIP FLYING LESSONS WITH MAJOR \"WILD\" BILL STEALE Major Wild Bill Stealey, Microprose founder and President, ex-USAF Fighter Pilot Ace, Strategic adviser to the U.S. Military at the Pentagon, says: \"I'm gonna teach you how to fly like a real AH-64 Apache Gunship Pilot! And, because everyone's a winner with Major Bill, there's a prize for you with your flying lesson you could even come flying with me in my own fighter-trainer airplane, Ms Microprose-in Americal\" FREE! MMAN WWW And, as if that wan't enough, there's a prize for every \"Graduate\" of Major Bill's Flying Academy! On each tape Major Bill awards a gift, which, for one lucky winner, is a free trip to MicroProse Software's American Headquarters, for a flight in Ms. MicroProse, Major Bill's F28 Trojan Fighter-Trainer aircraft-with Major Bill at the joystick! For more Information Please write to the address WWW below. below. A free trip to MicroProse Software's INSIDE EVERY C64 GUNSHIP BOX! 3 American Headquarters, for a flight in Ms. MicroProse, Major Bill's F28 Every C64 Gunship box (disk and cassette) bearing a \"Learn To Fly with 'Wild'Bill\" sticker contains a special Trojan Fighter-Trainer aircraft-with flying lesson, recorded by Major \"Wild\" Bill Stealey Major Bill at the joystick! onto audio cassette. This easy to follow play-as-youlisten flying lesson enables trainee C64 Gunship Simulation Pilots to acquire basic helicopter flight, navigation and combat skills in double-quick time, over just one of the many realistic scenarios contained in C64 Gunship. SIMULATION SOFTWARE  Carrying Special Offer Sticker MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA.UK. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tlx: 43422 MPS/UKG. muut MICROPROSE "


"GAUNTLET I L 4 The success of Gauntlet will pass into legend. not, the wall could turn into the oncoming monsters. But the powers-that-be at US Gold were not another attacking monster! Also beware of locked content to sit back on their laurels. They You will also need to keep treasure chests that can only threw down a fresh challenge to their a watchful eye open for stun be opened with a key. programmers: Do it again only better! The tiles and acid puddles. Stun Gauntlet Il does have result is Gauntlet II. Will you take up the tiles will be hidden in the some new features to help challenge? floor but will be spotted as your crusade however! HEY said it couldn't permanent potion and a they pulsate. If you step on These take the form of extra be done. But Gauntlet bag of treasure. one, it will stun you for a amulets which last for the turned out to be a real At the start of the next time leaving you a sitting duration of one level. winner especially on the level, there will be a hint on duck for a hungry monster! These include: Atari ST. The four-player how to find the secret room. Acid puddles also travel  Temporary coin-up was the first of its Another new creature is around the maze and will Repulsiveness Garry kind and spawned quite a the IT creature. You will be again do you damage if you Williams has this few imitators. Atari followed around the mazestep on them. permanently where a themselves had another by this creature and then it Even leaving a level is no monster will run away from crack at the game, will tag you. longer straightforward you for a short time. producing a sequel called, Once this happens, you Exits now tend to move, just Transportability imaginatively, Gauntlet II. will become 'it' resulting in as you are about to reach when wearing this amulet No ordinary sequal this, the monsters homing in on them. They will close up, you will be able to walk however, lots of new you, regardless of the other disappear but reappear through walls, but you will features were added to the player. somewhere else. not be able to pick up food frantic gameplay and total Look out for the Super Traps are set again in the or treasure. addictivenes of the original Sorcerer who will teleport various levels but can now  Super Shots This and most of them are around you, shoot and then be up to three in a row. amulet gives you ten super included in US Gold's new disappear. For instance, if a wall is shots that will keep computer conversion, As you fight your way blocking in a number of travelling and killing heading your way very through the complex mazes, mean monsters, or chests monsters until it hits a wall. soon. you will now be able to overflowing with treasure,  Reflective Shots Over 100 different levels actually move walls. This or even a room full of these will bounce off the have been created with will enable you to block in potions and food, if you walls up to a maximum of more randomising maze Demons or any of the other tread on the trap it could three times. features to provide further enemies you come across. remove any one of those  Invulnerability variety. Secret walls are also walls. monsters can't hurt you but You will be able to choose incorporated, but do not Hopefully, you will be your health does tick down your favourite original always turn out to your able to spot the poisoned twice as fast. Gauntlet character, even if advantage. food and potions. If you eat The many new game play! that hero is already in play. If you shoot the wall, it or drink it you could lose features of Gauntlet II, So you can get lots of can turn into food or 100 health points, but if you make it a whole new wizards or barbarians treasure if you are lucky if shoot it you will slow down experience. playing together. Another major new feature is the additional game play objective of Gauntlet il's Secret Room whilst the other player is temporary suspended from play. If you complete the task given, you are rewarded with a large bonus score as well as permanent portions and food. All of the original Gauntlet opponents remain with the addition of many new creatures Among the newest adversaries is the Dragon. The fire-breathing Dragon is found guarding the exit to the maze and requires several direct hits to overcome. By slaying the Dragon, you are rewarded with a Vy AA FM "


"SCREENSTARS ************** Charlie Chaplin, James Dean and you are ready to release it on If you have not gone over Marilyn Monroe unlikely subjects for the eagerly awaiting public budget and have high box You will see the cinema on the office earnings you can make computer games? Not according to US opening night with the name a sequel, with more scenes, Gold. Boss man Geoff Brown has of your film up in lights. more action and more! snapped up the rights to these famous Once inside the cinema the entertainment. As long as names. What we all want to know is crowd quieten, the curtains you're making money, you what he is going to do with them. Start will be making movies. finding out here.. The disk version will have the facility to store your silent movie classics, so you may play them back at anytime. The Atari ST version will give you a review from a celebrated film critic in the Variety News Charlie Chaplin will be available for the Commodore 64, Spectrum, IBM PC, Amstrad and Atari ST. No news on the James Dean or Marilyn games HARLIE CHAPLIN is a but, as always, watch this totally unique game space! with a whole new concept. This is your chance to become a silent movie director and produce the world's greatest slapstick comedian Charlie Chaplin in an epic production To start the game, you have a choice of hilarious scripts to recreate. Each script will tell you how many scenes you will have to produce, the characters and backdrops. The next step is to select from a large choice your backdrop scene, investigate the props room discovering the various articles you will need and then cast your film from a choice of budding actors. Now you are set for scene one and action. it, then it's on to the next The action sequence plays scene, if you don't it will hit like a level in a fast-moving the cutting room floor and you arcade game. will have the chance to do a You control the amazing re-take. But beware, as antics of Charlie Chaplin with mentioned before time is your joystick and avoid money and you will have getting caught by the been given a budget for the draw back and your very inevitable baddie. production of this film. own silent movie will be If you do get caught, the Obviously, if you have to recreated before your eyes. baddie will hold on to you for re-shoot a scene, it will be Between each scene, a a certain length of time acting more costly and you could risk storyboard caption will as a penalty because each going over budget, turning appear and your black and scene is timed and in the success into a failure. white silent movie is complete! movie business time is money. Remember you have to Now all that's left is the And you don't have much. produce a box office hit! reaction from the audience if Once your scene has been Just like working on C+VG the applause is loud and long, recorded you may retire to really you will be awarded higher the edit suite. Here the scene Once all the scenes have box office earnings. This is the you have just directed will be been shot, depending on the crucial time when you know if played back to you, if you like requirements of the script, you've made it! "


"NO AMOUNT OF BUDGET GAMES NO OTHER COIN-OP LICENCE NO FAMILIAR FILM TIE-IN NO ORIGINAL GAME CAN COME CLOSE MAY THE FORCE BE WITH YOU. ALWAYS..... "


"D STAR « A long time ago.... Spectrum CBM 64 I OOUUU At last! The most famous coin-op Arcade Game and one of the most successful films of our era come together in this Domark publication. Atari ST Faithful to the original, the home computer version of STAR WARS will win first place in your games collection, and be the one you go back to time after time. Spectrum Atari ST Atari ST. CBM 64/128K Spectrum 48/128K Amstrad CPC BBC 'B' VASTER + Electron PUBLISHED BY VEKTOR  &  1978 Lucasfilm Ltd & Atari Game ATARI  &  1978 Lucasfilm Ltd & Atari Games A All rights reserved. Used under Authorisation. A DOMARK DOMARK 22 Hartfield Rd, London, SW19 3TA GAMES MAY. THE FORCE "


"-WARS . in a galaxy far away » E/BE WITH YOU. ALWAYS "


"KNIGHTMARE, Anglia TV's magical mix of adventure game and ultra-sophisticated computer graphics, is the television hit of the year. Did you catch C+ VG's feature on it last month? The series has now ended but, hopefully, a new one will be dazzling our screens next year. Activision has snapped up the rights to the television idea and has now released the game, The arcade adventure is set as is the TV programme-in a mysterious castle, We can't arrange for you to appear on the television show but, thanks to our friends at Activision, we've fixed up the next best thing the chance to encounter the exciting live role playing world of The Labyrinthe. The Labyrinthe Club is run by former civil engineer Pete Garner. It operates in two locations one location is some mysterious caves, the other is an island known as The Isle of the Dead. Adventurers-usually of four elasses, Warrior, Wizard, Priest and Pathfinder-are approached to undertake a quest. How long will it take? About three hours for the standard adventure. In the first hour you will be taught safe combat with our weapons and briefed on your chosen character class. However, behind the scenes deep within the caves system, strange forces will be operating Hordes of psyehopathic ores will be massing, evil necromancers will be recalling vicious incantations, dark priests will be mustering their undead armies, generally the monsters, will be getting ready to meet you. We've got 12 places for winners of our competition to experience the Labyrinthe caves and the next 50 runners-up will get a copy of Knightmare. But to go to the caves you must be 12 or over. KNIGHTMARE COMPETITION 1) Activision released a game called Labyrinth based on a film starring a famous pop singer. Who was he? Answer 2) What is the name of Knightmare's dungeon master? Is it: A-Treguard. B-Trellis. CTrefriend. Answer 3) Activision is bringing out a game based on Muscleman Arnold Schwartzeneggar. What is it called? Answer COURTYARD CORRIDOR Send in your answers together with the printed form to Knightmare Competition, Computer+Video Games, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR SAU. The closing date is December 16th and C+VG's Dungeon Master will have the final decision. Don't forget to say which computer you own. NAME.. ADDRESS SPECTRUMO CBM 64 AMSTRADO "


"THE WORLD'S LEADING BRAND EUROMAX games player For the sophisticated --Contact your nearest computer store for details on full range or clip the coupon. Prices from .95 — .95 Euromax Electronics Ltd., FREEPOST Bessingby Ind. Estate Bridlington YO16 453 0262 602541 A Access Accepted CVG. Please send me full details.... Name ..... Address ............. "


"STARTREK Captain's Log. Stardate 16.12.87. C+VG's John Gilbertt, who boldly goes where many people can't be bothered to go, reports on Star Trek The New Generation now being filmed in Hollywood. What will the final frontiers of space be like without Captain Kirk, Mr Spock, Bones and Scotty?   Four successful movies, a non-stop deluge of fan mail and the continued popularity of science fiction prompted Paramount Pictures to reincarnate Star Trek, the television series. It's taken ten years for the moguls to reach their decision and, because the original cast has grown older and technology has overtaken fiction, they have set the new series amongst The Next Generation of Star Fleet officers and crew. More than 75 years have passed since the original USS Enterprise was launched for its five year mission of exploration. Captain Kirk, Scotty and even Mr Spock are dead, the Federation has inaugurated seven consecutive versions of the legendary Enterprise, and the implements of exploration and warfare have changed. But, the Federation has not found the edges of the universe, despite Kirk's early efforts, and continues the search for new life forms. minerals and phenomena. The Enterprise still has that job and the way in which its new captain and crew go about it is the central strand of the new series. the 'States, started Pre-flight Check discussions with the new Gene Roddenberry, creator Paramount regime about of Star Trek and now in his another series. Preliminary mid-sixties, is the man behind details were finalised in late The Next Generation. He was 1986 and Roddenberry was Paramount's obvious choice given a free creative hand as Executive Producer but as Executive Producer but and a budget of was initially sceptical about approximately a million the project. dollars for each episode. The company has in the past treated him shabbily. Crew Cut Roddenberry sold Paramount A fresh, fairly young, the complete package, production team was put scripts, crew and rights, in together but Roddenberry order to get the company to wanted some continuity with take the series and push it for the old series so he brought prime viewing time slot in two older-times advisors. Paramount was not David Gerrold was convinced that the show responsible for the famous would work and, during its first Trouble With Tribbles episode two seasons, Gene was and, more recently, wrote the constantly at war with original short story for the film television executives and Enemy Mine. Bob Justin, eventually resigned as original Associate Producer producer when he'd had of Star Trek, was also brought enough. in to balance Gerrold's He returned to Star Trek as writer's eye with expertise of Executive Consultant when film making. the series hit the big screen Both joined a brainand, when Wrath of Khan was storming team who's job it! doing the cinema circuit in was to come up with not only story ideas but also a new future reality. According to Roddenberry the creation process was made worse because they had to move the futuristic technology of Star Trek forward nearly one century rather than looking forward from the reality of the 1980s. The original sets have been updated, rather than redesigned, to keep continuity with the old series. The bridge of the Enterprise with its Captain's chair and surrounding control stations and panels do not look a great deal different from those you'll have seen in the movies. . The crew's costumes have gravitated towards boiler suits, the living quarters are much more outlandishbecause of the increase of strange creatures on the staff and the production team has been able to buy different looking corridors, rather than having to use the same one to race or walk down every time, in an effort to make the ship look larger. The special effects, from spaceship propulsion to phaser fire will be at the forefront of movie technology. Roddenberry has hired California-based Industrial Light and Magic, an outfit created by Steven Spielberg to produce the effects on Poltergeist and other movies including the Star Wars pre-quel, Clone Wars, which is about to start filming at Pinewood. "


"which was never shown but you can now buy on video. The jobs of second in command and science The result puts officer have been splitthe big movie because there's more money effects of Wrath of to spread around. A head of Khan and Search for security has been added as Spock onto the small well as a number of Star Fleet screen. It also personnel. ensures that the The case is headed by planet exteriors, British Shakespearian actor which in some episodes Patrick Stewart, who recently out-number views of the starred in Dune and, two Enterprise's interior, are as years ago, took to UK realistic as present day television in a BBC tv series earth, and as imaginative as called Maybury. He plays the landscapes produced at Jean-Luc Pichard, who is the Pinewood for Ridley Scott's only normal earthling in the fantasy film Legend. series. The series has a scientific, One criticism of the old rather than military, basis so, series was that the Captain rather than use the constant put himself into too many States for his theatrical work will like the new, more alien 'shoot to kill' directive of the dangerous situations and he original series, the Captain lead characters, and it's also and has appeared several beamed down to planets times on Broadway. not certain whether Trekkie has to rely on thought, rather when he should have stayed The second brainy fans will continue to support than weapons and a big with his vessel. The criticism mouth, to escape disasters. has been heeded and, while Enterprise passenger is a 15the movie voyages but avoid He's also more of a co Pichard does step into year old math's genius called the series which could be Wes Crusher. The boy is too seen as a cynical inquisitive for his own good manipulation in order to and, in most of the first series make more money. episode requires rescuing But, the signs are also from situations over which his there. Each week's story will brain but not his body has contain human interest as control. Wes is played by the well as action and special new Hollywood discovery Wil effects. Also, the science on Wheaton the show is very possible His mother, Dr Beverly within the context of the 24th Crusher, is the ship's medical Century, and the story lines officer who has little time for are fluid enough to be sleep. When she's not at her believable within the 24th post in Sick Bay she's keeping century setting the writers Wes, the spoiled brat, in have been careful not to use check. She's played by any present day Cheryl McFadden, a director Americanisms which and actress who works mainly appeared in, and dated, the on American television. first series. Women play an important Unfortunately, it will be the role in the running of the USS American public who will Enterprise. The female officer decide the success or failure is joined by Ship's Security of Star Trek The Next Officer Natasha Yar. Generation. The show started Her job has changed and in the last week of October expanded since the original with a two-hour Teleplay series and she now has the called Encounter At Far Point, ordinator than the leader danger on occasion, it's power to order an alert, be written by Gene Roddenberry James Kirk was and allows his usually the wonderfully consulted about all planetary and the late DC Fontana crew the luxury of solving created characters amongst missions and, unless the script editor of the original problems themselves. The his crew who are always in Captain has a preference, show. The BBC has not yet cast extra who you know will the firing line. choose landing parties. She's picked up the rights to the always be killed by the aliens One of those unfortunates played by Denise Crosby, series and if it doesn't show is also gone and replaced by is Commander William Riker, who's main claim to fame is a an interest soon Paramount the alarming possibility that played by Jonathan Frakes. co-starring role in Eddie may sell it to ITV. the main characters may be He's called Number One Murphy's 48 Hours Latest so-called press seriously injured-a the original Mr Spock in The leaks claim that the series will possibility explored in the Cage pilotand is Captain The Search For not arrive in Britain until movies but not the original Pichard's heir apparent. December 1990. Success Spock's science officer's series. Still, who knows? We could job goes to Lieutenant Gene Roddenberry doesn't Cast All Set see The Next Generation Commander Data, played by pretend to believe he's onto when it has already flopped As Leonard Nimoy and Brent Spiner. The character's a sure fire winner. The series, and been dropped in the William Shatner step back to an android with Spock's like any other, will have to States. It's a sad state of consider the possibility of fabulous head for facts and prove itself before affairs, but if you want to see directing a few episodes of logic, combined with the Paramount supplies more Star Trek over here before the new series' a new cast, strength of the Six Million money for the next one. you grow old take the advice which includes a 15 year old Dollar Man that was how it The elements of failure are Gene Roddenberry gave boy, takes control of the was described to me! You there. It cannot rely on the fans when they wanted a new Enterprise. may remember Brent Spiner old series for success Star Trek series in the late '60s. Roddenberry has gone from appearances in Hill because it uses a different Write to your local television back to the original Star Trek Street Blues and Cheers, but formula and characters. It's ideals, set out in the Cage, he's most renowned in the not certain whether viewers the two-hour pilot episode "


"NOW TAKEN na Castle Computers CASTLE HOUSE 11 NEWCASTLE STREET BURSLEM STOKE-ON-TRENT TEL: 0782 575043 (10 LINES) WE'RE GETTING READY FOR XMAS! SPECTRUM SPECIAL OFFERS COMBAT SCHOOL MAD RALLIS 2.99 GAME SET & MATCH PANTIS RASTAN NAVY MOVES MATCHDAY IL PSYCHO SOLDIER VICTORY ROAD THUNDERCATS BUGGY BOY OUTRUN CM SPECIAL OFFERS ALLEYCAT BOULDERDASH CON KIT NOMAD GLIDER RIDER MUTANTS BICOLES SHORT CIRCUIT ASTERIX PS15 TRADING CO ASSAULT MACHINE 5.25 RASTAN PARALLAX ACTION FORCE JACKAL DANOY DEACTIVATORS TAG TEAM WRESTLING GOLF CONST SET NUCLEAR EMBARGO VISSION ELEVATOR BAZOOKA BILL SPECTRUM SPECIAL OFFERS C64 SPECIAL OFFERS SPECTRUM SPECIAL OFFERS + SCALEXTRIC 6.95 MADBALLS 6.25 * CATCH 23 6.50 MATCHDAYIB JUDGE DREDD 6.25 INTERNATIONAL KARATE 2.75 STEALTH FIGHTER 10.95 HEAD COACH AIRBOURNE RANGER FOOTBALL MANAGER 2016 BISMARK PSYCHO SOLIDER FA CUP FOOTBALL TOBRUK COMBAT SCHOOL GROWING PA MOLE 1.99 THEATRE EUROPE VICTORY ROAD BATTLE OF BRITAIN VIRGIN ATLANTIC CHALL 1.99 BATTLEFIELD GERMANY 1.95 SUPER SPRINT 6.75 BUT I HA HD CV SOREDONS SHADOW 2.99 AGAR ORBIX THE TERRORBALL 2.99 GRYZOR ELITE STARGLIDER 10.50 7.50 PHANTYS 8.25 F15 STRIKE EAGLE 6.95 49. THE PAWN THUNDERCATS 6.75 SHOCKWAY RIDER 10.95 BUGGY BOY 8.75 FALCON PATROL COBRA 3.95 These Prices Only Apply If KILLED UNTIL DEAD CUPS Games Ordered is Advance STAINLESS STEEL 20. WYSTERY ARAM MANOR t Possvg in 8.95 BREAKTHROUGH . 5.95 SUPER SPRINT TAIPAN 8.50 CRYSTAL CASTLES 8.50 RENEGADE 8.50 6.50 BANGKOKKNIGHTS CONECTS W CLASS LBOARD CALIFORNIA GAMES 8.95 695 DEEP STRIKE DURREL BIG SOLOMONS KEY 6.95 6.95 DAN DARE DEATH WISH 3 CENTURIONS ARMAGEDDON MAN RYGAR 6.95 RED LED RODE RUNNER 5.95 HIGHLANDER 2.99 CHALLENGE GOHOTS SURVIVOR 6.95 LEADERBOARD 000 GHT 2107 2.99 ELITE 7.50 EXPLORER ARMY MOVES 2.99 GUNSHIP 10.50 GAME OVER CAMELOT WARRIORS 2.99 EXELON 8.50 JAILBREAK MUST GO! SILLY PRICES! STAR PAWS 4.96 NEMESIS FINAL CHALL STAR GAMES II DFATH SCAPE 8.95 RANA RAMA LIFE AMMO GUN RUNNER SUPER HANG-ON DONKEY KONG FREDDY HARDEST BRIDE FRANKSTEIN 299 MASK 2 2.99 FLYING SHARK TRANTOR RENEGADE BUBBLE BOBBLE LASTNINUA W CLASS LBOARD TAIPAN ACKNPPER CENTURIONS RODE RUNNER HIT PACK 5 VOLI  u EXELON WIZ BALL NINJA HAMPSTER INDIANA JONES C64 SPECIAL OFFERS BORED OF RINGS 2 THE BOGGIT FOOTBALL MANAGER  INTERNATIONAL KARATE 2.99 BREAKTHROUGH 299 + + CRYSTAL CASTLES KING FU MASTER SIGMA 7 TOMAHAWK 2.99 NOW GAMES 4 LORDS OF MIONIGHT 299 DOMAS BEVENCE MOVIE MONSTER 295 SHAOLINS ROAD FA CUP FOOTBALL 299 BALL BLAZER NODES OF YESOD 299 ICUPS THING BOUNCES BACK KONIGHT GAMES SILENT SERVICE FIST SPACE HARRIER SENTINEL TIGER MISSION JUDGE DREDD JAILBREAK -NEMISIS FINAL CHAL EAGLES RANA RAMA NEMISIS WARLOCK CHOLO GREAT ESCAPE 2.99 WERNER 2.99 CALIFORNIA GAMES COVIC BAKERY TAU CETI SPUT PERSONALITIES TIGERS IN THE SNOW BORN OF THE WOOD JACK THE NIPPER YIE AR KUNG FU I SURVIVOR PAPERBOY ATHENA LAST MISSION SENTINEL PEGASUS BRIDGE GAME OVER ENDURO RACER BISMARA CYBORG DEATH OR GLORY CONVOY RAIDER KAYLETH SABOTEUR LIVING STONE DOUBLE TAKE DONKEY KONG DOG FIGHT 2107 DEATH SCAPE 2000 SALE NOW ON! C64 DISCS BORED OF RINGS WOLRO TOUR GOLF W CLAS LEBOARD THE INHERITANCE SHAOLINS ROAD BOBBY BEARING CAMELOT WARRIORS DANDY 17.95 17.95 21.95 VERA CRUZ GANDALF THE SORCERER CUPS VISSION ELEVATOR JUDGE DREDD AH FATTP DRAGONS LAR SKY RUNNER FISTE CHAMP WRESTLING ROCK N' WRESTLE RAMBO INFODROID TAIPAN RENEGADE EPIC  GUNSHIP DEFENDER OF CROWN TEMPLE OF APSHI (Trin BISMARK RODE RUNNER GUILD OF THIEVES THEY'RE ALL SSI DISCS TO CLEARI GETTYSBURG REBEL CHARGE OF CHICAMAURA AMSTRAD SPECIAL OFFERS ST SPECIAL OFFERS 3.95 BARBARIAN (PALACE) 11.95 EXELON 8.50 TNT 13.05 GUILD OF THIEVES 6.50 EAGLES NEXT 13.95 BALANCE OF POWER RENEGADE 8.50 BOUDERDACH 175 PRAIAN ENDURO RACER 5.95 ROAD RUNNER 17.99 TERRORPOOS 395 DEATH STRIKE 12295 GOLD RUNNER  395 GUILD OF THIEVES 17,95 DRENOER OF THE CROWN 505 DEGAS ELTE 455 NODES OF YESOO 22.55 FAIRYTALE ADVENTURE 72.95 GUD OF THIEVES 22285 MEAN 18 GOLF 22.95 SUPER HUEY 49 MAMAK 195 STRATREY 14 SWAROS CROWN SS GRANGE HILL 2799 BALANCE OF POWER 22. ROADWAA 2000 STRIP POKER SPACE BATTLE SHOCKWAY RIDER 2.99 SUPER HUEY SHORT CIRCUIT WINTER GAMES 17.95 DEMOLITION FAIRLICHT STARGLIDER STATIONFALL STRIKE FORCE COBRA 2.99 TAIPAN 14.75 HARDBALL 5.95 CITY SLICKER RENEGADE SHANGHAI 5.95 ELEVATOR ACTION ELEVATOR ACTION ARMY MOVES 14,75 BUREAUCRACY 4.95 NOW GAMES 3 FLIGHT SIMULATOR 1 42.50 STARGLIDER 3.95 OUTRUN 17.95 ADVENTURE CON SET 2.99 SABOUTERII TERRORPODS 17.95 UNINVITED TEMPLE OF APSKAIT 10.50 NEMESIS THE WARLOCK NINJA MISSION NEMISIS FINAL CHALLENGE SILENT SERVICE 17.95 EARL WEAVER BASEBALL 17.95 CHESSMASTER 2000 6.50 HITCHHIKERS GUIDE 22.95 TADERBOARD TOP GUN 14.75 CHALLENGER 4.95 ELECTRO GLIDE 2.99 SLAP FIGHT 14.75 ARCTIC FOX 10.50 GAME SET & MATCH 9.50 PERRY MASON 14. BORPOWED TIME 10.50 KUNG FUN MASTER LURKING HORROR 22.95 SORCERER 14.95 THE BAROS TALE 22.95 DEADLINE AMSTRAD DISCS THE PAWN 17.95 ENCHANGER W CLASS LBOARD 10.05 WORLD GAMES 17.95 WITNESS RENEGADE 10.95 GOLD RUNNER POA STARCROSS 12.95 TAIPAN 14.99 DELUXE PAINT 10.95 AIRBALL 17.5 DE LUXE MUSIC KIT 5 TACKEA 17.99 NINA MISSION PING PONG 395 DEFENDER OF CROWN 305 FLIGHT SIMULATORI 9.95 STELESS STEEL 45 MORTVILLE MANOR 1309 WINTER GAMES 12. SHAQUINS ROAD 10.95 AMIGA A500 14.95 JACKORCE AMIGA SPECIAL OFFERS HARDWARE BARGAINS SPECTRUM +2 .95 SPECTRUM +3 .95 AMSTRAD 464 MONO .95 AMSTRAD 464 COLOUR .95 ATARI 520 STM .00 21,95 ATARI 520 STEM .00 AMIGA 500 +MOD .00 AMIGA 500 +SOFTWARE .00 8 AMSTRAD 1512 FROM .00 19 AMSTRAD 1640 FROM .00 243 ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT CARRIAGE  EXTRA VSEGA MASTER SYSTEM .95 LIGHT PHASER .95 THE NINJA 18.95 SUPER TENNIS 13.95 ENDURO RACER 18.95 MY HERO 13.95 WORLD SOCCER 18.95 TRANSBOT 13.95 51.56 QUARTET 18.95 ROCKY 23.95 OUT RUN 23.95 SPACE HARRIER 23.95 CHOPLIFTER 18.95 WONDER BOY 18.95 GEMSTONE HEALER 7.50 GANGSTERTOWN 18.95 ASTRO WARRIOR 18.95 PANZER GRENADIER 00 BLACK BELT 18.95 WLD GRAND PRIX 18.95 ANY GAME NOT RELEASED WILL BE SENT ON DAY OF RELEASE BEST SERVICE, BEST PRICES PHONE US NOW. WE WON'T BE BEATEN P.P. Free on order over . Under  add 50p. Overseas  per game (MAIL ORDER PRICES ONLY) $1.95 "


"PIRATES! UCHASE FAME & FORTUNE ON THE HIGH SEAS The Action Adventure Simulation 1721 Pirates! The world's first swashbuckling simulation. Non-stop action and Raid treasure-laden historical drama take place 1-negotiate the greatest profits. galleons and plunder rich ou the Spanish Main during Success will determine ports. Learn to navigate, to the I tb century and you play your status in later life. How fence and to avoid mutiny: the leading role-Privateer will you end your days? A. Uniquely; Pirates! prosperous noble or common Captain a pirate in all but combines the excitement of scoundrel? name an adventure story with the — \"Pirates! will be landing in Leap into this era of challenge of simulation turbulence and change-a all good software stores soon. decision-making. You must time when daring choose the most lucrative adventurers can gain power expeditions, forge the most and wealth. fruitful alliances and Commodore 64/128. Disk .95. Cassette .95. MicroProse Software Ltd. 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tlx: 434222 MPS/UKG "


"By the time you read this, Nigel Mansell, Britain's fastest man, could just be the Formula One World Champion. The last Grand Prix of the season takes place in Australia and our Nige will have been going all out to make sure he comes out on top down under! What ever the result, YOU can be sure that Martech's new Fl racing game will be on pole position when all the driving games line up on the starting grid this Christmas. We've been taking a stroll around the pits to bring you this exclusive preview... Nigel Mansell Grand Prix racing gamit Before you take to the track however promises to be the most accurate you'll be asked to \"set-up\" your car. That representation of Formula One racing yelmeans you can choose which tyres you seen on computer. The programmers, father want, adjust the wing settings those and son team Dave and John Looker, have berodynamic devices on the nose of the car submerged themselves in technical data -and play around with the ride height also being built into the game. You could supplied by the Canon Williams-Honda how far the car runs above the track end up driving in torrential rain in team to make sure every aspect of the game surface. If you're not into all this fiddling England or watching your engine is as close to real Formula One racing as around you'll be able to select a standard temperature soar to danger level in Brazil. they can possibly get setting and simply blast away! During each race you'll be able to call up The game will put you in the cockpit of During During a race you'll also be able to drop re alhesha ta m map of the circuit -a facility unavailable an the Canon Williams-Honda Fl racer -in on the pits to change tyres if you find to even the most hi-tech drivers -which complete with mega-powerful turbo your car losing grip or if you receive a radio shows you your position in the race. Useful charged engine. You'll be able to practice, message from your team to come in. to check on the opposition. Also useful are race in full length Grand Prix events for You can ignore their advice however if the wing mirrors which show who is championship points, experience the thrill you reckon you can last until the end of the attempting to overtake and grab that first of pit stops, take on the world's top racing race on the same set of rubber. place away from you! drivers and, just maybe, win the World Like the real thing, your computerised \"We wanted to make the game as FASTLE was too much really-much of it we won't be able to use! \"We also went down to Brands Hatch for one of their racing school sessions to get the feel of driving a single seater.\" Many hours and lots of technical work has gone into producing Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix--and it shows. You'll really feel like you're competing in a Grand Prix Driving games are IN this year but you won't get one that's more realistic than Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix! LATER TEMP HOTEL TEN TURBO TENP IGE OIL PRES TURID BLOST CLER LBP TIME MPH | FUEL RESERVE SECI CONSUNFTION EE MPN PRICE IN FUEL FUEL DTL TEMP DIL PRES Championship Load up the game and you are presented with a view of the track and all the cockpit instrumentation OK, so a real racing driver wouldn't see such a bewildering array of read-outs but he would have all the info about fuel consumption, laps left, fastest lap, and how near the nearest rival is on the radio link modern drivers have with their teams in the pits If you're serious about going for the World Champ title, you're going to have to take notice of this info--but forget it for a while and just experience the thrill of driving a turbo-racer around any one of the 16 Grand Prix circuits in Europe, the US, 16. the Japan and Australia The scrolling is fast and silky smoothand there's added realism thanks to the trackside scenery and competing cars on the track REUSE1000 D-OAPE COMPUTER AND TELEHET PY OF SPEED 183.65 MPH FUEL LAP TIME 3 12 SEC I CONSULT RU SPEED 15038 MPH | RANGE BEST LAP 19.49 SEC FUEL CONSUMPTION CRITAL Williams-Honda has a six speed gear boxoperated via the joystick-and a turboboost button. You use the turbo to gain greater speed but it uses up fuel sta horrendous rate, so watch that fuel guage while you are racing It has been known for racing drivers to run out of fuel on the last lap of a race just as they were about to win the race--you don't want that to happen to you! Watch your gear changes too-if you over-rew the engine once too often you might just end up with a pile of mangled accurate as possible -but without making metal where your engine used to be. The it so technical it puts people off,\" said game is that realistie! Worn tyres are programmer Dave Looker. \"You can either another hazard you might just end up play the game as if it was, say a Pole spinning off if you've abused your tyres by Position, or you can go the whole way and overbraking into corners and so on. compete in a World Championship season.\" Weather conditions are another random \"We got a lot of technical back up from factor in Grand Prix racing-rain and heat the Canon Williams-Honn team. Details affect the performance of cars. And this is about the car and how it was set up. There LRP TIRE CPSS wwwwwww "


"200 MPH CHIPS The modern Formula One car is almost a 200 mph computer! Microprocessors control many aspects of the modern Grand Prix carthe fuel consumption, engine management and recently even the suspension system. In the pits the Fl teams monitor the performance of the car throughout the race via a radio link to all these chips, relaying the information back to the driver via his helmet radio. Outside the cockpit complex computer systems run the highly advanced timing devices used to check speeds of the cars-splitting Want to win a VIP day out at next year's British Grand Prix at Silverstone? With grandstand tickets, pit passes, AND a free lunch? You bet you do! Well Martech want to make sure YOU can attend the premier event in the UK's motor racing calendar, so they've given us two tickets for a C+VG reader and a friend. And they'll make sure you'll get that VIP treatment we were talking about earlier! Then 20 runners-up will get a copy of Martech's Mansell game, available for the Commodore, Spectrum and Amstrad. Just answer the high octane Formula One quiz, fill in the coupon and burn rubber to get it to Computer and Video Games, Martech Grand Prix Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is December 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and the editor's decision is final 'cos he thinks he knows everything! about Grand Prix racing and is upset he can't win. WATER TENP TURAD TEMP TURAD TEMP HOT them down to fractions of a second. And it's these fractions which can separate the cars on the front row of a Grand Prix grid that's how competitive F1 racing is. How will you measure up the computer World Championship? TURBO BODET DUER DATA FROK PITS COMPUTEP EL REJERVE 89.55 LTS NSUMPTION 2.93 NGE Q FUEL 195.25 TO FISH 146 38 CRITIO C+VG/MARTECH GRAND PRIX QUIZ 1) Name the driver who has won the most Grand Prix races. 2) Name the team Nigel Mansell drove for BEFORE the Canon Williams Honda team. 3) Name the owner of the Canon Williams team. 4) Name Nigel Mansell's team mate in the Canon Williams Honda team. 5) In what year did Nigel Mansell last win the British Grand Prix? | C+VG/MARTECH GRAND PRIX COMPETITION Mobil Name: Address: | My answers are: 085 ei o DUER ABOUT NIGEL MANSELL Nationality: British Age: 33 Home: Isle of Man F1 Teams: Lotus 1980-4, 1985 onwards Canon WilliamsHonda First Grand Prix: Austria 1980 Number of Grand Prix Wins in 1987: Six World Championship Placings: 1981-14th, 1982-14th, 1983-12th, 1984-9th, 1985-6th, 1986-2nd. Favourite track: Monaco. TELEHEN LATA FROM PIIS COMPUTER Computer owned: Spectrum C64 D Amstrad "


"OVER 10 GREATEST EVERHIT MES SPORTS PACK EXCITING GAMES EXCITING EVENTS AND AVAILABLE FOR AMSTRAD COMMODOR SPECTRUM SPECTRUM + CASSETTE OVER 10 EXCITING EVENTS GAMES .95 .95 DISK Ocean FROM YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE DEALER NOW! FEATURING BASKETBALL SOCCER VAULT SWIMMING SHOOTING ARCHERY TRIPLE JUMP WEIGHT LIFTING PING PONG PISTOL SHOOTING CYCLING SPRING BOARD DIVING GIANT SLALOM ROWING PENALTIES SKI JUMPTUG OF WAR TENNIS BASEBALL BOXING SQUASH SNOOKER/POOL Ocean Software Limited Ocean House 6 Central Street Manchester M25NS Telephone 061812663 Telex 669977 Oceans "


"Toc vg Readers. who I am doesn't matter — YET But if you want to See Melissa R again then you better start sending in hints, tips and lots more Pokes! Or else, DEAS. CENTR w and lot mic un The Kid na hnarS RED L.E.D. ALERT... ALERT... ALERT... ALERT...! yourself. Always try to enter ALERT. Melissa Ravenflame has been the next grid level with all the kidnapped. Send help to IDEAs Central, time you can get your hands Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 on. The BONUS is a critical part Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Until this of playing RED L.E.D. collect on the level. A good crisis resolved IDEAs Central is operating on Sometimes even that extra 70 trick on a few landscapes is to remote control. minutes is not enough. An shoot all generators you meet extra bonus letter is awarded and then carry a smart bomb every 10,000 provided you to the exit, when there is both picked up the last one, and another generator and your For success at Reaktor's RED game as the other two droids. only one is given for each last pod. Fire the smart bomb, L.E.D. you must get to know A good choice for the most of hexagon. Learn where the and you're all alone and the abilities of the three droids the \"dry\" landscapes and bonus letter appears, so you completely safe. and a good few maps usually safe anywhere else can take it as soon as it's Droid freeze devices are a intimately once you find the ice switches. there and get out for the next handy breather at any time, 1 FANG sticks to slopes Learn the maps. Each of the one. but like smart bombs, can be a very useful for the centre (red) hexagons will always go to the Always try to collect the S real droid-saver on higher hexagon and for the top right same landscape and on level on the top and bottom blue grids if you can save them and bottom left green one there are fourteen timehexagons, as the bonus until just before collecting the hexagons, but is plus capsules. Ever needed phase starts you next to the last pod. Again learn where uncontrollable on acid lakes an extra seventy minutes? exit for a massive 28,000 they are. even when they are ice. You'll find a couple of handy points and seven very handy The most crucial thing to Take him to an acid world at ones in the hexagon just minutes. Decide on your remember about RED L.E.D. your peril. below centre. Just make sure favourites and save them for is that you can save alot of 2 HOVER floats over the you can tell the difference that S. time by getting to really know surface and so is immune to between the positive and The Smart bomb really the maps. acid. Isn't so manouevrable as negative ones. It's a good idea comes into its own on grids A lot of landscapes have FANG or BALL but is a lot to have a route across the two onwards. After level one, short cuts over the edge of safer until you learn where the hexagon grid which takes you the enemy droids really go for cliffs which can make the ice switches are. Very useful through as many landscapes you once you have collected difference between a good for bottom right and top left as possible, with time plus your last energy pod. Try top your last energy pod. Try top bonus and a poor bonus, and green hexagons and many capsules in. You can always make the last one you collect between life and death as your others. A very handy droid. just dive in to grab the others. the one nearest the exit. last ice freeze is running out. 3 BALL doesn't have the Don't be afraid of aborting a Having a smart bomb on The teleport network can abilities of either FANG or level if it doesn't harm your boards can make all the also save a lot of running HOVER, but can manoeuvre route. It can be worth going in difference, as you dash for the around but isn't always the anywhere if the acid does not just to get some time or to get exit. quickest route-a pod that is kill him. Also he does not take energy for a weak droid, Always leave the last pod three or four teleports away as much damage from the where you know a safe spot until after you have collected may be just over the edge of nasties trying to end your where you can sit and defend anything else you want to that cliff you are standing on FOR AD RE JM + 3 TE THE LAST NINJA Following on from where lan Walker left you hanging about on level 6 of the Last Ninja, Trevor Fox of Norfolk has come to the rescue with the final solution. start at the beginning of level 6 and go NW to NE and get the blue bottle of sleeping potion, go SW, NW, NE and then follow the path up to the room full vases. Open the door by putting the flower in the blue/ white vase nearest the door. Go through and stun the dog by using the sleeping position fire button/stick left to right -but you must not be holding any weapons. Go NE through with your sword. You are then the door. In this room there is sent to the room with the a giant stone archer. To get scrolls in, there are two past him touch the small squares on the floor, jump in brown patch on the floor to to the inner one. The outer gain Ninja Magic and just walk one kills you. Once in the inner past. Keep going until you square pick up the scrolls and reach the evil Shogun, kill him you have finished. "


"A.I.S. DISTRIBUTION CLEAR OUT SPEC C64. Ams .99 or 5 for  SEGA SOLDIER ONE EAGLES HYPABALL CAPTURED MAX HEADROOM THE FORCE SOCCER BOSS TAI BOXING CLASSIC SNOOKER POLICE CADET KNIGHT GAMES COMET GAME DIZZY DICE SHANGHIA STRIKEFORCE COBRA TAGTEAM/KARATE CHAMP DESERT FOX KRAKOUT BOUNTY BOB INFILTRATOR ALIENS GRAND PRIX BMX SIM DRUID NEMIS THE WARLOCK STRIKE FORCE COBRA ROGUE TROOPER SABATEUR II PULSATOR COSMIC SHOCK ABSORBER FIRELORD CITY SLICKER SPECTRUM URIDIUM QUAZATRON GUN RUNNER RANA RANA SPORT OF KINGS PSI TRADING CO BUBBLER GOONIES SPY HUNTER HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER FAT WORM THANATONOS DEEP STRIKE NEMESIS THE WARLOCK JAILBREAK NEMESIS STRIKE FORCE COBRA INFILTRATOR KRAKOUT KUNG FU MASTER KICK BOXING B.M.X. SIMULATOR GRAND PRIX SKI SIMULULATOR FRUIT MACHINE JOE BLADE MARTIONOIDS REVOLUTION STAR GAMES DANDY HYACK DRUID SOCCER BOSS VECTRON 3D HYPARBALL BREAKTHROUGH SNOOKER XEVIOUS PARK PATROL SMASH OUT DIZZY PRICE HEADCOACH FOOTBALL MANAGER CHESS INDOOR SOCCER FIRELORD SAM CRUISE CITY SLICKER PYRACRUISE ACROJET SKYFOX CONSUL + HANGON .95 TWO MEGA .95 ASTROWARRIER OUTRUN SPACE HARRIER ROCKY ONE MEGA .95 ALEX KIDD BLACK BELT THE NINJA ACTION FIGHTER WORLD GRAND PRIX SECRET COMMAND FANTASY ZONE QUARTET WONDERBOY CHOPLIFTER PRO WRESTLING ENDURO RACER SEGA CARD .95 F.16 FIGHTER MY HERO SUPERTENNIS GHOST HOUSE TRANS BOT TEDDY BOY NEW RELEASES PLEASE PHONE PULSATOR COSMIC SHOCK ABSORBER HEARTLAND XARO UCH. MATA GUNFRIGHT PENTAGRAM TARZAN TEM PEST TEMPLE OF TERROR ZOIDS 1.C.C.U.P.S. COMET GAME EXPRESS RAIDER ICE TEMPLE MOONLIGHT MADNESS RESCUE ON FRACTULAS SIGMA 7 COMMODORE 64 URIDIUM VIETNAM AMERICAN ROAD RACE DECEPTOR DANDY DELTA SENTINAL 100 GAMES (ROBTEC) SKATE ROCK DRUID TRANSFORMERS NEMESIS JAILBREAK SHAO LINS ROAD INFODROID MISSION A.D. ALLEYCAT FIRELORD CHAMELION EXPLORER HEADCOACH FOOTBALL MANAGER MICRYTHUM UBIK MUSIC JOE BLADE CYBORG RANA RANA SHOOT 'EM UP (4 GAMES) PLATFORM (4 GAMES) INDOOR SPORTS TRACKER CHOLLO When ordering from clear out, to keep our high standard of delivery we advise: For SINGLE order, 2 alternatives; for 5 PACK order, 3 alternatives. KILLER CARTRIDGE STAR GAMES MOONLIGHT MADNESS HEARTLAND APACHE GOLD KINECTIC ACROJET MASTER OF UNIVERSE TARZAN PARK PATROL KRAKOUT RMS. TITANIC TEMPLE OF TERROR ZORRO ALIENS 1.C.C.U.P.S. XEVIOUS EXCAPE FROM PARADISE MUTANTS TIME TUNNEL AMSTRAD TT. RACER JAILBREAK NEMESIS PRO TENNIS TURBO TAPE TURBO TEXT HEART LAND STAR GAMES XARO PARK PATROL SOCCER BOSS SNOOKER TARZAN JOE BLADE TAI BOXING IMPOSSIBLE MOVIE ITS A KNOCKOUT ELECTRIA GLIDE GT ESCAPE MBROS GALVAN A.I.S. DISTRIBUTION, 202/203 Shopping Hall, Myrtle Road, East Ham, London E.6 Tel: 01-471 8900 REPAIRS BY PROFESSIONALS WITH FOUR YEARS COMPUTER REPAIR EXPERIENCE TO THE TRADE NOW OFFERING A NEW SERVICE DIRECT TO END-USERS * REALISTIC PRICES SPECTRUM  QL  AMSTRAD  COMMODORE  (464 664 6128) (64, 128, C16 +4) BBC  ELECTRON  ALSO: DISK DRIVES, PRINTERS & MONITOR REPAIRS. CALL FOR QUOTATION * ABSOLUTELY NO FURTHER CHARGES  12 MONTH GUARANTEE ON ALL REPAIRS PLUS * 12 MONTH REPAIR CONTRACT FREE! YES! ALL REPARIS FOR FOLLOWING 12 MONTHS COVERED ABSOLUTELY FREE! COMPUTER ANGLE The leading 16 bit Software/Hardware dealer NOW IN STOCK AMIGA A500 With free Software including free modulator, mouse mat, Startkit and deluxe paint, all for the amazing price of .00 inc VAT ALSO IN STOCK ATARI STEM 520 with free software for .00 inc VAT Amiga Software Atari Software Our Price Our Price Marble Madness 24.00 Gold Runner Karate Kidd 1 20.95 Karate Kid Il Indiana Jones 17.95 Indiana Jones Pack Boy 9.95 T.N.T. Mindbreaker 9.95 Road Runner Space Fighter 9.95 Int. Karate Shooting Star 9.95 F15 Strike Eagle Rocket Attack 9.95 Airball Con. Kit Barbarian 20.00 Barbarian Terrorpods 20.00 Terrorpods Ancient Mariner 19.00 Ancint Mariner Knight Orc 18.00 Tai-Pan Space Battle 7.00 Adictaball OGRE 17.00 Perfect Match Moebius 17.00 Gauntlet Tai-Pan 17.00 Hades Nebula Faery Tale 20.00 Star Trek Road Runner 19.95 M.G.T. Gauntlet 18.95 Alternate Reality 20.00 Cinema Ware Software SDI 26.00 Sinbad Throne of Falcon 26.00 Defender of the Crown 26.00 King of Chicago 26.00 All titles available on Amiga. SDI available on Atari Infocom adventures in stock. American Software available. Full range of business products backup utilities. Commodore 64s and software in stock For price lists and information ring. Harlow (0279) 639567 Cheques postal orders made payable to: COMPUTER ANGLE Unit A, 31 Amherst Lodge, Bramble Rise,  Hodings Road Harlow, Essex CM20 1EE 88888888888888888 Midland Computer Repair Services Unit 1, North Street, Melton Mowbray, Leics., LE13 1NL. Tel: (0664) 410148 "


"IDEAS CENTRAL ARMY MOVESI Okay guys, moan over get ship. If you attack one of the on with the tips. The first thing dark characters that carry a you have to do is go to the stick around the restaurant and not to a meal. Bannerman-you will go to You will then be lent Gaol for 30 days, so be careful $300,000, by your benefactor who you attack. You can also and must repay it in six go to the Inn and after buying months time. This done you or refusing a drink you will be placed outside the can buy crews for $100 a man. restaurant, but don't go and Don't drink too much-or buy a ship just yet. visit the ladies chambers! Chris Redding of Birmingham seem suicidal, but by Go back inside the as after three visits you will be has spent the last few weeks continuously pressing fire one restaurant and refuse the to weak to resist being press seriously pounding his joystick and fire two one after the other meal, you will then be offered ganged and so end the game. and German pilsner pinching, you will not be gunned down the chance to gamble on a If you attack a ship make and has finally completed nor crash. Use this tactic al strange game. Accept the sure that you don't fire your Dynamic's Army Moves, but the time even though it may offer and you will be able to cannon(s) and hit it after it had as he says \"rather than waste become exhausting. When a gamble. Put the largest stopped still. If you do then it my time giving you hints and gap appears wait until it is amount you are allowed to bet will sink. As soon as he ship tips I'll just tell you to expect directly in front then drop the ($10,000) onto the Green has stopped then press space the sequel to be Navy Moves jeep back to the left, still firing. animal which is a 25 to 1 bet. and get into the plan and the first important part of until the screen scrolls enough It does not matter how many you do it quickly enough you the code on the Amstrad in for you to jump across, landing times you lose, keep having will not be boarded. 15372 as far right as possible. another bet and always bet If you are near enough to Another quick tip from Chris The best strategy at the the maximum amount, as you the other ship, then you press if the code on the Spectrum for 2nd, 3rd and 4th stages is to will win $250,000 every time fire and you have boarded the Game Over. It is 18024. When keep the helicopter roughly you win. ship. The captain is at the far you are to the Helicopter and centralised on the screen. No matter how many times left of the ship, but you have to Jeep stages of Army Moves Drop bombs continuously and you lose, keep having another go through a type of maze to you will find them annoying destroy aircraft before they bet. You will win more than get yo him. The crew will be difficult. However, A touch the missiles. once with your $300,000 so it out to stop you, and there are O'Donnell of Barnsley had Finally-don't use a is well worth being patient as lots of them, so good luck. found this way to complete joystickunless it's a you can soon get the money If you have boarded, the stage one-after jumping the quickshot. Operating two fire you have been loaned in only advice to give you is to first gap move the jeep as far buttons on joystick and winnings and then have all the get to the far right of the right as possible. This may keyboard is impossible. extra money to play the game. screen and use your gun to As you walk around the shoot the invading crew. If you town you will see something lose too many of your men's on the ground. This is a lives, then even if you repell truncheon and when you have the invading crew you will Help from Lee Foulser of to retry, type No if your picked it up you can knock finsd they have mutinied and Herts on Gunship, where he mission status says you are sailors on the head and your you will have to restart the has worked his way up to seriously wounded behind son will carry them off to your game! Captain level and has got the enemy lines then your likely to medals to prove it. Start off by become 'missing in action', so getting used to your aircraft, you would do better to switch always try yo get used to off and start again. But, if it Miss R Monument of there a special route or a realistic flight, it helps later on. says you are dead, don't Norfolk writes: Recently statue to go up or down?'' Also in practice, fiddle around switch off, wait and review bought the game Flunky. can't find any gemstones or with your engines. When you your record you may get a have played it but cannot get torches or monkeys. I found a are a couple of hundred feetcampaign medal as a past the first problem. I have rhombus shape in a tree but up and have translational lift, consolation and at least some tried every possible way and could not obtain it. what on try to shut down one engine, it points for your record. have not succeeded. In the earth do I do?\" he writes. saves fuel. So, it may be better to die second room there is what Now the real missions, this fighting than go 'M.I.A'. Also looks like a spring board and Finally, Level 9 Computing is important if you have something obviously but have tried using this but when has just printed their own, full acquired some points. Keep helpful, copy out your counter I attempt to go through the cluesheet for Knight Orc. updating your saved status. If signs and stick them up and door with it I am immediately Players who would like a free you act bravely and destroy at copy your objectives and their blown up by a ferocious guard. copy should send a stamped, least one of your objectives position off one of those 'wipe I was wondering if anyone can self-addressed envelope to: do not just quit. off plastic sheets it saves help me how to get past this — PO Box 39, Weston-superWhen it gives you the option time. even Paul who reviewed it Mare, Avon BS24 9UR. could help me. Eh, go on Paul, why don't you write to me.\" Toc vg Readers... GUNSHIP HELP TAI-PAND Before we start with hints for Town section when you get Tai-Pan, Anthony Dixon and killed. Or sail into a port and his friend Andrew have a few then having to load the Sailing complaints. The biggest is that section to get to sea. They it is a right pain in the backside think it ruins the game to have to keep on loading the completely. Michael Noble, of Dundee, is also looking for help. His problem is on Tarzan for the Amstrad 464. First up-how do you get on and off the ropes? How do you get into the caves and temple? Is who I am doesn't matter YE But if you want to Ste welissa R agai then you better start sendime in hints, tips and 10t* more POKES! Or else. The Kidnappers "


"To order and receive up to date list of available stock please send cheque/Postal order/Access/ Visa No: payable to Software Supersavers. Please be careful to quote your full name and address, the make and model of your computer, and your selection in block capitals to avoid any errors. P&P inc UK:  per tape overseas. SOFTWARE SUPERSAVERS 102 HIGH STREET, BRENTWOOD ESSEX CM14 4AP 0277-211702 Hydrata 500 1000 kg 5.00 St & Co 30 Simons Key 5.6 5.50 incy Jones Temple of Doom il SPECTRUM Andy Cage Aterne World Games Auf Monty Av Tacho 5.00 10.00 Evening Star 400 700 nightment Druid in Forrecto State 250 Jack Nipper Action Forca 1050 6.00 10.00 Fool Manager 2 2. 400 Fool of Year Army Moves Armageddon Man 700 Warriors 5.00 impossabal 9.00 inyons Temple of Doom 200 The Tube 6.00 Knight Orc $ 00 KM 5.00 10.00 Dan Sel Match 0.00 0.00 Gary Liner Socor 520 Toadrunner 4.00 The Pursuit 5.0 10.0 Balance of Power Backlash .6.50 10.00 Bu y 10,00 Bolderas Con Set ... 6.00 10.00 Charle Chaplin 14.00 CheckMate 10.00 Chess Master 2000 8.01 10. Colour Winter 8.90 Captain America ACE 11 (128) Art Studio 14 .....1.50 M S AD ....... 2.50 4.00 Gauntlet il Arkanoid ......6.50 Ja break .....00 Jewels af Darkness 9.00 jutge Death 8.00 Knightmare 5.00 Knight Orc 6.00 10.00 Great Escape 2.50 Magnetros. 5.00 Merak 2.50 Marriage Madness 9.00 Thing Bounces Back 1.00 Tournament Snooker Defender of Crow Brood Valley Bag Mouse Der Bugo Boy Seu desh 5 Can Cos 6.00 0.00 Menchache 520 Morpheus 5.00 per Bards Tale 3.50 Through the Trag Door 5.50 T ( W en time stood 6.50 They Sold A Million S. On the Tiles 15.00 Indy Jones Temple of Doom 5.50 Pardod 61015bMS 750 Kn 7.00 L ei Pesume 5.00 L Ammo idisk 10 501 6.29 Lazer Tag 90 ( Hà Duy Phits. 5.50 Leaderboard (Town) 2.50 Lghelore 4.00 Legend of Kage. 4.00 Mastrom 8.00 10.00 Enduro Racer 6.00 im Director 6.50 10.50 Football Manager Flying Shark Bubble Bobble Battie Guadalcanal Bomback il+Bomback 6.50 Tempest 4.00 Unduh 5.00 Pirates ber Battle at Britain Battle for Midway 3.00 Vectra 10 2.50 Vetory Road 3.00 Werwolves of London 6.00 10.00 anal Karate 10.50 15.00 Jack N per il 15.00 Judge Dean là 10 M là 8.00 10.00 Knight Ore 8.50 10 50 F15 Strike Eagle Gary Lineker 2.50 400 Gundell 150 Guld of Thieves 118 Golden Pom Barry McGigan Compendium Co of Magic Come Sched Cara Games disk Captain America 6.00 10700 Body SO Merak 400 Hades Nebul ... Convoy Rader Champ Footbal Chalo of Gobots. Canelo Warriors Computer Hits 3 Computer Hits 4 8.00 More 5.00 Martialds 6.00 Mystery of Ne 3.00 Marble Mad Cons Sel... 8.50 Mountie Micks Drathride 8.50 Mag Max 6.00 10.00 Hollywood Poker ..9.00 14.00 Hollywood ..6.00 10.00 Imposso Masonil Indy Jones Temple of Doom........ 3.095.00 imoact 6.00 10.00 Jewels of Darkness 5.0 10.50 Karate Kidil 10,50 KnightOre 6.50 19.0 Kn Drudil Enlightenment Deuse Scrabble disk 12.00 6.50 10.50 Tag SN N ames 500 XR 500 Yes Prime Mini 5.00 7.00 Mermaid Madness 6.50 Ye Ar Kung F2 3.00 Barry McGigan (128). 10.00 15.00 Match Day 1 ...5.20 Ball Blazer (125)... ... 3.00 Sient Service.............6.50 10.50 MSK 2.5D Hacker (128)... .... 8.00 9.00 Mus System . 5.00 3 Week in Paradise (1281... 3.00 Supersprint 5.00 Ut Camp Prople (128) 5.50 Rampants 5.54 Super Z oom Sold Gold C D Street Basketball 8.00 9.00 O n 00 9.00 Puche Sider 6.50 10.50 siderns 2.00 Ative Word Games 11.50 Atv Must System 23 Secon Dreams 5.00 Art Sube 17.00 16.00 Surin 9.00 12.00 R 11.00 1400 Superrungos 5.50 10.50 a Runner 7.50 Alley ..2.00 4.00 Stealth Fighter 10.00 15.00 Renegade 8.00 10.50 Red Led 17.00 B 4 Volll ................ 6.50 6.50 Thundercan ....... 6.50 10.50 Tepan 6.00 10.00 Roy of Rovers 5.00 Barbras... ... 6.50 10.50 Tour De Force 6,0 10 00 Trà 0.00 Sam Fox Strip Poker 500 B ar 6.00 9.00 Uma Vor V 2.50 Basil Mouse Detective 6.00 10.00 Vetory Road 5.20 Battleships 6.00 9.00 Scon Dreams 8.00 9.00 W. C Leaderboard 09.00 SA 2.50 Bars Tale 0.80 12.00 Wizard War Set Basta 5.00 Nightshade 300 Nota Penny More 2 the Worlock 2.50 Ne Can Read Dog2167 Descape Deathwish Dragna Unie 6.90 Leaderboard (Town) 5.00 10700 Leher Goos 6.00 10.00 Ume Domputer People 11.0 Marble Madness 6,00 10.00 Music Cons Set 5.50 10.50 Missing one Droid 3.00 Pro Adv W er 3.50 Phantom Club 2.50 Psycho Border 6:50 P os 8.50 Pusator Mercross 9.00 Mercenary Compendium Et 6 Pack Enduro Racer Equine Eston Ex Raider 1.50 Prodigy S. Pastrading E 500 R 700 17002 Sell 5.50 Compendium 885 C Salomonsky 22.00 w Games .... 6.00 10.00 Side Wa 5.50 Casc Collection 2.00 Char Chapin 6.50 10.50 Prahbbon 9.00 Ady Musc System Alemative World Games 00 900 Action Force 250 400 Arland..... 5.50 9.00 ACE 6.40 Oud 6.00 Oud Enlightenment. 2.50 Death Wishil 520 Decathlon $ 50 Evening Star Med October Road Runner Panarama ita 10 Threumatec 2.00 3.50 Bangkok Knights R Pool Director 6.00 Ribei 2.50 Renegade Thunderceptor 6.00 Road Runner 15 Strike Eagle 6.50 Rescue on Fractulus 50 Runestone 3.00 Hoy of Rovers Fredey Hardest 5.20 Re Bounder Five Star 2 5.00 Rana Rana....... Football Manager 250e urel) Fool Manager Five Computer Hits 350 Super Hangon 8.00 San Fox Siro Poker Graphic Ad Creator Gara Games 5.00 San Show Sule Breaker Gautiet Deep Dungeons 5.50 Sales Steel Game Over 5.00 Sword of the Samurai Game Set Match disk 12.00)........ 8.50 Side Arms Goonies, 2.50 Streetsports Basketball 7.00 Epis 850 TB Boomer 6.50 10.50 V 5.50 9.00 Victory Road Son Dreams 250 4 Star Trek 1.00 5.00 Strike Force Harrier 500 1018 Supersport 6.00 10.00 Space Piet 4.00 Sp the 40 6.00 10.00 Sient Service 250 00 Site Walk SU Battle Sim Gunsinger 70 11. Ele Vol2 3.00 in 1.50 Frostbyte Bure of Punes.... 250 Freddy Hardest 6.00 10 0 Barry Mega 800 Reap 5.00 Football Manager 2...............6.50 10.50 Combat School, 5.50 Game Set Match ......... 9.00 13.00 Caittomia Games 100 Ariana 5.20 Date 9.00 cc Games 6.50 10.50 Compendium 4.00 W. C Leaderboard 4.00 Wintersports Gunship 6.40 Stargider Terrapeds 15.00 Slap Fight 6.00 10.00 Advanced Art Studio Add cabal Guinner 3.00 deWise 5.00 och Al Sarrot 13.50720 Arctic Fox Hersand Higher 6.50 G 5.20 Guld of Thieves 15 To Puri 17 50 Tai Apache uns 15.00 Doomsday Blues Hard How to be a complete bastard Head over Heels 3.00 Heartland .00 Show Rider 5.00 Sapthe 3.00 Sabonell 3.00 Scon Dreams 2.50 4.0D Explorer 6.00 10.00 16 Pak 2.50 600 6 Pak2.... 8.50 10.90 Art Director 10.50 Arena B acus... 9.00 Apshai Trio 1050 Tapan 35.00 Tee up to 24.50 Thai Boxing 12.00 Track 0.00 kari Warriors SOFTWARE AVAILABLE FOR ALL OTHER MACHINES. PLEASE WRITE FOR LISTS "


"The big event of 1987... Atari User Christmas Show Organised by Database Exhibitions Champagne Suite, Novotel, Hammersmith, London W6 10am-6pm Friday November 20 10am-6pm Saturday November 21 10am-4pm Sunday November 22 The record-breaking Atari User Show is back with three action-packed days devoted to the ever-expanding Atari market. * Try out the very latest UK and US 8-bit software * See the full ST range, including the new mega-ST * Snap up the never-to-be-repeated bargains * Expand your system with powerful new add-ons * Get helpful advice from Atari User's own experts * Experience the fascinating world of communications ... and much, much more! This is the one show you mustn't miss! Advance ticket order order Post to: Atari User Christmas Show Tickets, Europa House, 68 Chester Road, Hazel Grove, Stockport SK7 5NY. Porte de Porto Venere le horen ATARI USER CHRISTMAS Champagne Suite, Novotel, Hammersmith, London W6. November 20-22, 1987 SHOW Please supply: Adult tickets at  (save ).......  Under-16s tickets at  (save )........ Total  Cheque enclosed made payable to Database Publications Ltd. Please debit my credit card account Access Visa Send for your advance tickets now and SAVE l a head! Name Address Signed PHONE ORDERS: Ring Show Hotline: 061-480 0171 PRESTEL ORDERS: KEY *89, THEN 614568383 A196 MICROLINK ORDERS: MAILBOX 72:MAG001 Please quote credit card number and full address + address Admission at door  (adults), E2 (under 16s) "


"NIGEL MANSELLS FIN DE Just over half the race completed and you're lying second to your main rival 0.8 seconds ahead of you. \"NIGEL MANSELL'S GRAND PRIX\" is ready to take you and your computer into the fast lane of game excitement. As well as capturing the speed and adrenalin pumping danger of the world's greatest sporting spectacle, the game is the first racing simulation to reflect some of the enormous advances in car design and technology that have taken place recently. And yet the game still offers an excellent opportunity for even the most inexperienced novice to blast round the track at excessive speeds with the turbo on maximum boost and not a care in the world for fuel consumption, tyre wear or racing line. However, for those who know, or want to know a little more, there is an opportunity to race a selection of the world's greatest circuits in the quest for valuable championship points. The red lights are on you snap into gear. The engine roars your grip tightens on the steering wheel The crowd goes wild as the lights flash to green. 900 brake horsepower is suddenly unleashed and the Williams hurtles to the first bend. Ahead of you lies 31 weeks of the world's most gruelling and spectacular sporting championship. -Your pit crew are in constant contact with you throughout the race. Correct gear selection is vital. Use your Turbo for extra powerbut watch that fuel. This panel gives you vital information on your race performance. Wing mirrors. Nosign of the third place car yet! (Technical Consultants Nigel Mansell, Peter Windsor, Williams Grand Prix Engineering Ltd.) Nigel Mansell celebrating victory. 011 Lorch Produced by Spectrum 48/128 Cassette Commodore 64/128 Cassette Martech is the registered trade mark of Martech Games Limited, Disc Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE Amstrad CPC Cassette TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME. PHONE (0323) 768456 TELEX: 878373 Martec G Disc Available from all leading software retailers or order today by mail. Prices include postage and packing plus VAT, .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 "


"DREAMS COME TRUE! HORROR MAN MAN Fiskeolis Go Over the table This is where it all where you have to find the started. The first solution to crimes caused by thing you should do mysterious beings; superhero type games, where you play the is have a word with a few superhero who has powers of your of your friends who are own creation; holocaust games, interested in playing and where the dreaded A-bomb has decide what kind of been dropped and you have to survive. F.R.P. game you would all Once you have decided what like to play. game you wish to play, you either The list is almost infinite, but go out and buy (or order by post) the most popular games played the relevant F.R.P. system or join over the table are of the Swords a local F.R.P. club so that you can and Sorcery type. give it a try to see if you like it. However the type of games vary A few hints here. Any shop immensely. For instance there are worth its salt will let you have a sci-fi games, where you can play good look inside the books or anything from a 50 foot tall robot boxes, so that you can see what to a weird, exotic alien. There are you are buying. Don't be put off supernatural detective games, by what you see, it may seem all gibberish at first, but after a referee who is loyal to neither couple of reads and a couple of side, can make unbiased decisions. practice games you will find that it There is an art to this and it is as all falls into place. enjoyable as playing the game See what kind of dice you need itself. to play the game a well The G.M. shapes the world packaged game will have dice where all the adventures take included with it --but buy some place. They are allowed access to more, as you'll need them. every piece of information, whereas the players are not. You, in a few metal figures and other as G.M., must know the games metal items -monsters, boxes of system inside out so you are able treasure or vehicles that are to tell the players what dice to roll, relevant to your game. These will work out the combat situation enhance your enjoyment from the charts provided and immensely, as it's easier to relate generally enforce the rules. your character to a paintea lead The players play a game you figure than a piece of paper. create and it is your task to play Once you have your game and Once you have your game and the part of every person that your before you read anything in detail, characters meet. decide between yourself who is to For example, if the players become Games Master (G.M.). either meet a barmaid, a fifteen The duties of a G.M. are many foot bug eyed monster, a zombie and varied, but the main one is to lord or a king, it is your task to become a sort of umpire. Just as in play the part of these characters. football F.R.P. games require a continued on page 85 "


"The supreme multi-rôle arcade fantasy game! Warlock O O The Doomlord as WARLOCK The Doomlord as TROLL The Doomlord as GOBLIN 2012 ZDA Entera realmofdamsels, dragons, ghouls and dwarves; of castles, dungeons, caves; and of magic. As The Doomlord, you take the form of a Warlock to do battle with the forces of good. Use your magical powers to change into Goblin or Troll forms and seek the Orb of Power which will assure you of victory in final confrontation with the White Wizard! NOW OUT! C64/AMSTRAD CPC/SPECTRUM/ATARI ST Tape versions .95 Disc versions .95 "


"DREAMS COME TRUE The Living Sword a This is the chance for you to your own costume that's fine, it actually show your skill-or the can be as outlandish as you want, lack of it with a sword. You get but no armour is allowed at first as newsletters, source books, notes AF.R.P. game is only as good of historical interest or current as the G.M. that runs it. To give events plus various piec events plus various pieces of you some idea what characteristics background info. a good G.M. should have they The next step is to read the should like to see their friends rulebook several times to make squirm with fear, they should have sure you understand the rules. an inventive and imaginative Then, you create your character or mind, they should be able to think team, adding a full background of on their feet, making decisions at your choice. This may include the drop of a hat. aims, attitudes, beliefs, morals Once the G.M. is decided upon. and history, to name but a few the other players read the books things. that they are allowed to and then You keep a copy of this create their characters as allowed information, called a start-up by the rules. You should put as sheet, for your own reference and much background, detail and send the original to the company. personality into your character After about a week or so you creation as you can. The closer should receive your turn sheet and you are to your character, the it should contain detailed more you will role play it information of your starting correctly. Again this is an position, rumours of happenings important process, as ultimately, that you may care to investigate when your character gets killed a plus additional info that your little bit of your heart should be character or team may have broken. discovered Just imagine the G.M. telling Then it is up to you to use your you this; \"You are sitting in a dark, skills to explore the unknown, dingy tavern which is thick with develop your team, make friends smoke. There are about seventeen or enemies — use your other people in here who all look diplomatic skill and generally very shady to say the least! Some of these folk are small squat humanoids, some are dark skinned and reptilian looking, whilst the majority are tall, humans who are wearing armour and carrying a variety of lethal looking weapons. Whilst you are supping your ale, you see a small, old, craggy looking man approaching you. He is dressed in black robes and looks like he is going to pull something out of his pocket. What are your reactions?\" As your character, you decide what would you do. You could attack him, talk to him, run away or do anything else that may come in your mind This is the gateway to adventure and now you hold the key! Pantasy Role-plauzing Special Tribes of Crane you have to \"earn it and the ability to wear it. You get instruction on the use of various pieces of weaponry, safety regulations, the rules of the game and how they are applied. Then, as is the way in F.R.P., you are asked to stat what character you want to play. Then you are informed about your powers, abilities and weaknesses. You usually get the chance to play either a warrior, scout, magician or priest. Once everything has been explained and all your questions have been answered, you are set an adventure. This can be done in many ways, but here is just one example. You will be approached by a merchant, who tells you that his the chance to play the part of a daughter has been kidnapped by hero or heroine you create in a live an evil magician. He will pay you situation. a princely sum if you will rescue If you fancy dressing up in her and return her safely. The armour, wielding a sword-made money he pays is real in game of wood, wrapped in a lot of foam terms and with this you can buy and covered in gaffa tape better armour, magic potions or running around in dark, damp. more vicious weapons. cold, wet caves getting totally If you agree, he takes you to a covered in mud then fighting dungeon entrance and your party zombies, skeletons and goblins, is left to investigate. You usually Live Role Playing is for you! have three real candles between It's your chance to see if you are the ten of you and this means that as mighty as Conan or as wimpy as you cannot see more than two feet Ukko the Dwarf. in any direction! You then amble The way to get involved in this is along a maze of passages and it is to telephone a live role playing up to you how you deal with the company. Make a booking, send real life monsters, traps, and your money off on average people that you encounter. .00 an adventure and within a A typical adventure lasts two to couple of days you will receive full three hours. It is advisable to wear details of what the game is all some old warm clothing that you about, where to go and when. don't mind getting filthy dirty or You can book individually or damaged. Boots are a must. If you for up to a group of ten people. are under 18 years of age, you On the appointed day you travel MUST get a letter of approval to the caves or castle where you signed by your parents before you are kitted out with all the go. accessories. If you want to bring Continued on page 87 This is a form of F.R.P. by post, which also can include diplomacy, tactics and strategy. The G.M. here is the P.B.M. company and they send you all the information you need. You are spoiled for choice at the moment as there are P.B.M. games covering all the following topics; gangland warfare, supremacy of the galaxy, Swords and Sorcery, football, gangster, Sci-fi and world domination! When you have made your choice, you may have to send off an amount of money-ranging from 50p up to .00. However .00 is the average for a start-up and some companies charge nothing at all. Within a few days you should receive a rulebook plus any additional info about the game. This usually consists of survive. The main aim IS to survive in the hostile environment out there. Once you have entered your ideas and decisions on the turn sheet you return it to the G.M. In doing this you have completed your first turn. In about two weeks time the G.M. be it human or a computer then examines your turn and using dice, imagination, ancient mystic formulae or computer programs, analyses it, enters various comments and returns it to you. Each time a G.M. analyses your turn, you pay a charge for this service. You are informed of this when you get your start up package and it is usually a fixed price. The average price of a turn at the moment is approx between .50 and .00. "


"GET INTO CRIME! In the late 1990's the streets of New York are a jungle. You are the ice cool leader of a gang of drug crazed terrorists. Your main goal is to become the richest, toughest and most notorious gang in the city. DARE YOU PLAY..... FREE OFFER FREE!\" SEND YOUR NAME AND ADDRESS TODAY FOR YOUR FREE TRIAL OF IT'S A CRIME THE WORLDS MOST POPULAR PLAY-BY-MAIL GAME Write to:KJC GAMES. PO BOX 11. CLEVELEYS, BLACKPOOL. LANCS FY5 2UL. "


"DREAMS COME TRUE bayon sa kanyang locket Board games Solo role-playing books back into the past to stop a This has got to be the ultimate in renegade Time Lord meddeling solo roleplaying! You need with history. nothing else except a pencil, a Indeed the list goes on, but out couple of dice and some paper. of all these solo adventures there Ever since the introduction of has only been one best seller to E.R.P. there have been solo rival the Fighting Fantasy to date roleplaying books. But at first they and this was the Lone Wolf series were just a written form of over by Joe Dever and Gary Chalk the table gaming and you needed the series was in fact so good that to have the large rulebooks handy, it won the game book of the year or a very good memory, to award three years running in 1985, remember all the rules. 1986 and 1987. The first break from the mould The Wolf series allowed you a was Tunnels And Trolls a Swords lot more control over your and Sorcery solo game from a character. After your character company called Flying Buffalo. reached a certain level you could They produced a game that could choose his weapon skills, psionic be played fairly simply with lots of powers and various other abilities. hack and slay involvement to keep you get the feeling that you were and that gives your attributes in weapon skill, stamina, luck etc. These final attributes tell you how well balanced your character is. You are then allowed to pick These are probably the most your characters' magical spells and restrictive forms of role playing, equipment. Then you read how to but nevertheless very enjoyable. operate the combat system when They vary enormously from solo you meet monsters and the like. board games, where you play a This is very simple. predetermined character but make Usually you compare your the decisions yourself, to games weapon skill plus a random where up to ten people can play at number you roll on a six sided dice once. to that of a monsters. If your total The rulebooks are usually number is higher than the simple-to-read and easy to monsters, then you do a certain understand. There is a good amount of damage to it and you possibility of \"option cards\" being note that down. After the monster involved and you have to place has taken a certain amount of these on certain parts of the damage it is dead. board. You usually get a brief history One of the first board games I of your land and you are set some played many years ago, which task, like obtaining a magic crown involved an element of role to ensure the unity amongst your playing was the Battle Of The Litte leaders. You then turn to Big Horn. It was a game for two paragraph one where you'll read people where you reinacted this something like this: \"As you make famous battle, one taking the your way down the corridor a guise of General Custer and the portcullis descends with a loud other of Chief Sitting Bull. clang blocking off the southerly However, times have changed and way behind you. Unimpressed, Standard Games have lead the you walk down the dark, cold, way for many years, with games dirty corridor and finally you come such as Cry Havoc and Dark to the end. Here you can see a Blades. See Board Battles for a full strong looking wooden door in review. front of you to the north, the first Games Workshop has also come steps of a set of descending stairs to up with the solo board game the east and a stone wall to the Chainsaw Warrior, where you play Tantasy Kole-playing Special Tifolio EDES MAN TOMAN AUS Niat Arutiner DADK RIANGC PINSON SE the player happy. This was not actually running the character and exactly a challenging task and that you were not being shuffled when you had done several of from one part of the book to the them, they became a bit tedious. other by random chance. However, solo gaming reIf you survived a Wolf emerged as a force to be reckoned adventure, you were allowed to with when The Warlock Of Firetop take your character onto the next Mountain was relased in late 1982. book, where not only could you This solo book had its own unique start off a new adventure at ana role playing system, called dvantage, but you could continue Fighting Fantasy which was to develop your character further. simple, easy to play and very fast. The latest craze in adventure It not only contained the hack and gaming though is nothing to do slay element, but there were with playing solo, believe it or not. problems to be solved, puzzles to You play an adventure against answer and traps to be negotiated. your best friend. You buy a set of Steve Jackson and lan two books, then one person plays Livingstone, who wrote and a goodie and the other a baddie. produced the game immediately Then, you call out to each other realized that they had a mega best a number on the bottom of the seller on their hands, so they went page you are on, and then each of on to produce many others, you turns to a page where you see including another notable a picture of where you are in a adventure called Deathtrap dungeon. Dungeon. Since then there have If you call out certain been many other solo adventures, paragraphs you will meet your written by many different authors. opponent and perhaps catch them Mark Smith and Jamie off guard. Thompson produced Falcon: The The way most adventures are Renegade Lord, which was played though are dead easy. The eventually turned into a computer book gives you a system whereby game. you \"roll up\" a character using a It was an adventure set in 3033 six sided dice. You add your dice A.D. and your aim was to travel rool to certain present numbers west. Will you try to open the door a special forces operative who has to the north (29), go down the twenty four hours to kill a stairs to the east (87) or examine powerful extra dimensional being the wall to the west for secret which is threatening to pull the passages (69)?\" whole of New York through a time The book is divided up into warp, destroying it totally. hundreds of numbered paragraphs The same company has also and the figures in brackets relate produced a game called Blood to those. So, if you wish to take a Bowl which is a cross between certain course of action your turn American Football and Swords to the appropriate paragraph, and Sorcery! You create teams of where apart from a possible orcs, trolls or any other creatures encounter with a monster, which for that matter and you put them you resolve via the combat system, on a typical American football you are given another chance. pitch, where they batter hell out of The game goes on like this until each other most of the time, with you achieve your objective or die vague thoughts of a mystical thing trying. If you die, no problem, a called a touchdown crossing their couple of dice rolls and a new minds occassionally. character is formed to fight again. Continued on page 88 OF ME "


"DREAMS COME TRUE! Computer role-playing leader have started issuing figures with plastic detachable bases and shields. You can also buy figures that have the ability to wield a varied array of weapons that are included with the model. For many years the nearest the computer companies have come to creating role playing games was via the adventure. However, although they were very popular, they left a lot to be desired as far as role playing was concerned. The games were based on obtaining certain items or passwords and using them at the Fantasy Role-playing Special but here at C+GV we confidently predict that '88 will be the year of the role-playing game. We reckon that Gauntlet and all it's clones will have given you the wounded, then retreat, get healed taste for the real thing. And up at a village and come back for computers are the ideal medium more or you can press on for FRP's solo games or regardless, losing a couple of your otherwise. party on the way, hoping that you Dedicated adventurers will can strive on and achieve your enjoy them, arcade players with a objective. desire to try out something more Games can be saved at certain demanding will enjoy them -and stages to stop repetition and the most of all this type of game respresents great value for money and will last for a long, long time. The biggest release of the New Year will be S.S.I.'s AD&D computerised FRP-we've seen some early screens from the game and it looks tryly awesome. Watch this space for more news on this impending release! Shardo Spring LA appropriate time to progress worst thing that can happen to you further in the game. is that you can get wiped out! If Recently though, there has been this is the case, no cause for tears a new style of computer games because all you do is create a new entering the market and through party of characters and off you go one company. That company is again!! S.S.I. They have released over 10 The best F.R.P. computer roleplaying games, which are games are at present coming out totally unique. True, they have on disc for both the Commodore only a limited form of role playing. 64/128 and the I.B.M. I suspect but their games get better and that in the not so distant future better. They have also taken the you will see a mass of these type of initiative by snapping up the rights games swamping the market for to T.S.R.'s Dungeons and the Atari ST and Amiga. People Dragons F.R.P. game and they are at present saying that the are busing producing the Amiga has the better capacity to computerized version as I write. run games, but it will take time for As in F.R.P. in general the way the programmers to get to grips the games work are as follows. with it. You create a team of characters There are other companies out with randomly selected abilities, there at the moment issuing which range from the magical F.R.P. type games and it will be These are an essential aid to powers of a wizard to the sowrd nice to see how they take them up. F.R.P. as they give the over the arm of a fighter For example Moebius from Origin table games a greater depth and You then set out exploring the was an attempt at making a sense of involvement. There are world, picking up tasks and quests computerized F.R.P. now thousands of figures to as you go. French software company choose from ranging from fighters You usually move your group Infogrames also produce a role in full plate armour weilding huge until you get to a combat situation, playing game called Mandragore swords to detectives in raincoats where you can move each which is a big over the Channel menacingly pointing huge character independently and select but wasn't received well here in magnums. various options which can include the UK. Most figures in the F.R.P. world fighting, moving, spell casting or US Gold has been released all 25mm scale and are usually made issuing forth a divine power. the Ultima series of FRP's all of of a soft metal plus a liberal You meet various monster on which have a big cult following in quantity of lead. Most of the the way, find magic items and this country. figures come completely meet various interesting people. But as yet computerised RFP's assembled in certain poses with You can fight until you are badly have yet to take off in a big way fixed bases, but some companies Collecting these models has now become a hobby in its own right. Some people like nothing more than to buy the figures and paint them, collecting them to make one vast, impressive, army. Other people make \"dioramas\" with them. Basically this means painting your models and, mounting them in highly detailed model dungeons or villages. This takes a lot of time and dedication. "


"FREAR ITO AR DR HOT FROM THE ARCADES, FLYING SHARK IS THE ULTIMATE SHOOT-EM-UP FROM TAITO. BOMB AND BLAST YOUR WAY INTO ARCADE HISTORY. Spectrum .95 Commodore & Amstrad .95 (.95 & .95 d) Atari ST .95 ( PUBLISHED BY FIREBIRD SOFTWARE, A DIVISION OF BRITISH TELECOM PLC, FIRST FLOOR, 64-76 NEW OXFORD ST. LONDON WCIA IPS "


"REVIEWS & Table top games Tighting miniaterres us : GAME: FANTASY MASTER: For the uninitiated, Tabletop Games (formerly TOWN OF BALDEMAR M.E.R.P. is a F.R.P. system Asguard Miniatures) have sent AUTHOR: ROBERT J. based on J. R. R. Tolkien's me most of the figures in their BLAKE PUBLISHER: NEW The Hobbit and Lord of the aptly named 'Torture INFINITIES PRODUCTIONS Rings. It provides the Chamber range amongst INC structure and framework for others. These little beauties PRICE: .95 role-playing in Tolkien's vary from The Rack, where mystical mythical world, so you get a victim, a torturer, a He's back! Yes, E. Gary you can play characters and sadistic onlooker and the Gygax, the grandfather of enjoy the universe that he so actual rack itself, to the Iron F.R.P. has returned with a stylishly wrote about. Maiden, where you just get new company and even newer If you have read any of the spiked maiden and product. Tolkien's book you will really screaming victim. The first thing that catches appreciate the work that has There are 12 models in the your eye when you open this gone into this supplement. Torture Chamber Range and book is the detachable, well Basically, what it does is allow they vary from 75p to .50. produced, full-colour 17in by you to have at your fingertips The set I got did not include 22 in town map. It is divided up access to almost all of the assembly instructions and into four major areas with a humanoid that occupied the without them an river and a major road Middle Earth realm. inexperienced modeller could responsible for this divide. On Spread over 108 detailed run into a few minor the reverse side is a chart on pages are hundreds of problems. which you recall the current descriptions of the most All the figures are relatively political situation of the town prominent or powerful flash free and only a small and a list of the most individuals Tolkien created amount of tidying up work was important townspeople. The descriptions are written in necessary. It gives an in-depth two formats either long or Some figures have to be description of over 125 citizens short (short being up to 50 g lued together, so a small plus the shops and the guilds words). They contain detailed amount of modelling skill with they run. It has a helpful notes on the character's lead figures would be an introduction which contains personality, as well as their advantage, but not essential. many useful hints and tips. It history, traits, abilities, I was also sent a selection of even has a section so you can magical powers and special Tabletops' Ore range and create your own political weapons, if any. Furthermore, you'll have a hard time finding! power struggle between it gives a full breakdown of a a more nastier, evil looking! whatever section of society character's statistics from level bunch of characters. The you want, be it the church, the rating to Skill bonuses and is models come armed with a guilds or the ordinary cross-referenced with the frightening array of weapons populace. Tolkien's actual books and with massive maces to My only criticism of the other M.E.R.P. aids. whopping whips. Well worth a booklet is that the artwork You also get a fairly lengthy look! The cost is anything leaves a lot to be desired and precis of the history of the from 45p upwards. some of the statistical charts Middle Earth plus a very Turning now to Prince are complex. However, if you handy abbreviation table. To August Gaming. They sent me are feeling lazy and want a top this all off, it gives a a selection of figures from companies is that they give complete town setting in a massive 25-page spread to the their Fantasy Armies range, you the chance to mould your medieval-style which is Nine Nardgul, which is worth their catalogue and a poster. own models. compatible with any F.R.P. reading on its own. The poster, which can be You can buy casts, moulds system and that is good value To be honest, when I first obtained by sending an s.s.a.e. and soft metal at very for money, then this role read it. The Mannish Races and three backing cards to any reasonable prices, so you can playing accessory is for you. took my breath away. From of their models, shows the full create your own figures. As the man said, you can have the minute you look at the range of their products. Their handbook (which is this converted to your system exceptional artwork on the Out of all the figures they free) shows you step by step within an hour. cover to the time you finish the sent me I was most impressed how you can turn lumps of soft E. Gary Gygax is back and last page, you can appreciate with their ranger. It is posed in lead into crisp sharp painted it's good to see him. the awesome amount of work an all action fashion, sword f igures in a fairly short time. RATING: 88% that has gone into researching drawn and ready to swing this. The artwork throughout whilst his ankle length cape finding table to tell you what GAME: LORDS OF THE (and there is a lot of it) is of a flutters behind him. happens if, your moulds go MIDDLE EARTH-Vol. II; THE high quality. The tables A neat touch that I liked wrong. MANNISH RACES: A FANTASY provided are easy to was the addition of They have a large range of GAME CHARACTER understand and the family groundwork to the base. It fantasy moulds ready and COMPENDIUM PUBLISHER: IRON CROWN trees of the most important means that even if you are waiting to be used. If you want ENTERPRISES humans are a sheer joy to inexperienced at modelling, really big armies then this is PRICE: .95 read. It is also written in a very you can still give the ngurea for you, because after you friendly manner, which makes presentable base setting with a make the initial outlay for the This book is NOT a game in you want to get up and play few strokes of a brush. All moulding start up set, figures itself. It is a source of immediately. models come in a blister pack, cost around 10p each to make. subsidiary information for a If you play M.E.R.P. it is an with a foam backing. For full details of start up role-playing system called essential buy, if you play One thing that makes Prince packs etc, please contact Middle Earth Role Playing another F.R.P. system buy it August different from the Prince August at the address (M.E.R.P. for short). anyway, you'll get years of use majority of the modelling below. "


"Board games Live vole 3 Tantasy Role-playing so reviewed above. It includes the full rules of C.H. and use the same basic system, but it goes much, much further,  CRY HAVOC two players (or more if you introducing the element of SUPPLIER: STANDARD play team games) controlling fantasy by bringing you a GAMES magic system, mythical beasts various counters, that can PRICE: .95 represent anything from a and monsters by the score. mounted knight to a peasant, In the tradition of Standard which either fight until they Games, D.B. is simple to play surrender or die. and easy to learn. If you can You move your counters master the C.H. system you over the two full-coloured are half-way there. In this set The Labyrinthe has done it MASTERPIECE maps that are supplied you only get one booklet again! Not being content with through the use of hexagons EDITIONS called, naturally enough Dark having two of the most (or hexes for short). Using the Blades. unusual places to run live role hex system it's easy to keep Basically, mankind strived playing adventures, namely a G track just how far up your to make the world perfect by massive countryside dungeon characters can move in one developing all the land. Some complex and an island in the turn. It is also possible to non-humans regarded certain middle of the Medway, it has re-arrange the maps in 10 places sacred, but mankind obtained the rights to use an different terrains and this gives ignored them. They then intricate cave system under you various options to change started to use non-human Dover Castle! the game. creatures for only menial jobs Needless to say, the location There are three easy-to-read and this made them change is ideal, being a series of rough booklets supplied with the even more in attitude and hewn caves that were game. These are: The Rules of appearance. Finally, the nonplay; Historical Background humans became fed up with as a part of the castle's defence and Playing Pieces; and The being second-class citizens and system. Scenarios. revolted. The humans tried to The adventure we went on The Historical Background wipe out the creatures, now was up to Labyrinthe's usual and Playing Pieces booklets called monsters, but some good standards. gives you a detailed escaped and hid from man. In The seven of us were hired background of 13th-century their exile they adapted to the by a merchant woman, who life, full details of the environment they were forced had had her identical sister characters involved and the to live in and after the years kidnapped by an evil demon. way to use the playing pieces. they became Mon-Ogres, a We were asked to rescue her You learn the way the world mighty creation of man and she came up front with the was run then and how each crossed with ogres. Once the cash, we agreed. character was respected or Mon-Ogres had sufficient At first we trekked above feared. numbers, they launched a ground on Dover castle itself series of attacks against taking on very powerful castle humans and led by their most guards. powerful warrior The Black We at last found one guard Fox, they quickly turned the half asleep at his post, so tables on the humans. quickly swarmed over him like Fortress of the There were many, many ants and disposed of him. Sirelord battles and the humans lost From this encounter I most of them. The only \"obtained\" a rather tasty long FALCON successful human general was sword! We entered the gate a warrior called Tristan, who behind him and entered the fought with a mighty black sword, that legend has it, can F inally we came to the last The Dungeons cut through any armour. As he room and found the captive reputation grew he became maiden. Two evil people were known as Dark Blade. casting spells at us, but I This game, for two players, managed to get in and attack is suitable for those who enjoy the main man himself. a good deal of Hack and Slay I started attacking the other on a regular basis. You need man and disposed of him not play one of the two leaders quickly, freed the maiden and all the time, as you can play then we all made a run for it. majors of certain forces and That was our big mistake, as Have you ever thought of If you have never played a fight for strategic places, we got lost in the maze of playing board-based F.R.P. role-playing board game paving the way for The Fox caves and, separated, we were games, but been put off by the before, then you should give and The Blade to meet in a easy meat. look of the awesome size C.H. a go, as it is just what grand finale. I understand that the rulebook and the complex you want to start you off. Overall, I thought it was a Labyrinthe will be running combat tables? Well, don't be RATING: 81% great game for a novice to start fully residential holidays based put off any longer. off with as it is very playable on the location and you can Cry Havoc is a simple game DARK BLADES and highly enjoyable. get more details from the aimed at beginners. The idea  SUPPLIER: STANDARD RATING: 87% address below. is to slowly, but surely, get GAMES Standard Games can be involved in a tremendous PRICE: .50 contacted at: Arion House, Write to: The Labyrinthe hobby, step by step. C.H. is Dark Blades is the expansion Scation Road, King's Langley, Club, 77 Hinton Rd, Herne based in medieval times with of the Cry Havoc board game Herts WD4 LE. Hill, London, SE24OHT. of Torgar "


"Tiitinen 191 The latest adventure in the award wi Ultima saga Gabus Quest the Avatar Ultima V Warriors of Destiny An Adventure of Epic Proportions Origin Systems Lord British, one of fantasm a desperate all to arms yollare summoned scaming's most imaginative and respected on bato n to discover the late of Lord brings you Ultima V: Warriors of Destiny, the island to defeat the self-righteous yranny latest in the award-winning Ultima series. that is founded in misgaided virtues, Over four nian-years have been spent developing The Ultima series of kintasy role-playing games, Ultima V. making this labyrinth of mystéry and Trom Origin Systems, Inc, is brought to you by intrigue your greatest challenge yet! Mickprose Software Limited. The fantastic discovery of the new underworld entices Lord British from Britannia to explore the vast reaches of the unknowns Mysteriously, all contact with the good kingad his companions is SYSTEMS INC lost. In Britannia, fear turns to panic when the group's sole survivor returns with dreadedales of THE START OF SOMETHING NEW the expeditioue tte. ZHORIGIN ULTIMA I: CBM 64/128 .95; IBM, APPLE E24.95. ULTIMA III: CBM 64/128, ATARI XE/XL ,95; MC, IBM, APPLE, ATARI SI, AMIGA ,95, ULTIMA IV: CBM 64/128, ATARI XE/XL ,95; IBM, APPLE, ATARI ST, AMIGA Ultima V .95. ULTIMA V CBM 64/128 .95; APPLE .95. Please send _copy/ies of Format Price Name (block capitals) Address Post Code I enclose including .00 P&P. UK Only. (Overseas .00) Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd. or debit my Access/Visa card. Expiry date For more information on the Origin range please tick box MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. UK. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tx: 43422 MPS/UKG. Each Ultima game is a self-contained fantasy, requiring no experience of the other Ultima games, For your copy or a free catalogue, complete and post the coupon to the address shown. No. "


"In a major coup KJ.C. Games has obtained the rights with inter-league European to run Trolls Bottom from Knock Out tournaments and Project Basilisk. representative World Cup It would appear Basilisk is matches are about to going into the development commence. I've looked at the side of P.B.M. and is more rulebook and will be reviewing interested in creating games it shortly. Meanwhile here is a rather than running them. This selection of options. Aggression: You can get leaves K.J.C. with the two most enjoyable computerised your team to play harder in P.B.M.s in the country. certain areas and you have a KJ.C. players can expect an increased chance of injuring announcement about the one of the oposing teams matter in their It's A Crime start players by getting turns shortly. Meanwhile, stuck in. But with this tactic check November's C+VG for you also stand a better the review of Trolls Bottom. chance of getting booked Now for an update on Schoolboys and C+VG's It's A Crime Game apprentices: You can create 14. The colburnites (102) and a Maradona by training The Sons Of Batman (689) him and giving him first have slipped dramatically hand experience in a league down the notoriety table. The game. Your teams Numero Uno gang is now The performance may suffer at Killer Hawks (184) with 332 first, but as time goes on the points, but they are closely youngsters get better. followed by the Bogie Men Transfer Markets: Can (512) with 329 points and the you play Big Ron Atkinson Satanfists with 328. Less than and make a killing on the 50 points separate the top ten transfer market? gangs. Spellbinder's traditional Legend Incorporated Ltd policy of freebies for all, Hi, everybody, Wayne here again. Signed, sealed, the company which runs continues. They are giving A.E's, apologise to players for delivered, I'm yours! The Play-By-Mail pages have a away copies of their the delays in the turn around new look this month. Hope you like them. Meanwhile, rulebooks for FREE to time. Despite taking on more as the festive season approaches, I'd like to wish people who write into me G.Ms they are still everybody a Merry Christmas and a PBM New Year. via the mag and enclose a overworked and some delays S.A.E. When all the start the game in the not to competition, P.B.M. were inevitable. But by the distant future. It will also be applications are in they will seminars, computer time you read this they should computerised, but he has the pull two names from the hat competitions, bookstalls, the have all their problems nearly advantage of having a welland they will be entitled to solved. However, they do British Play By Mail Players play the first season free. known programmer, who has NOT want any more new Association will have a stall, to remain nameless at the and there will be a licenced bar players to apply for playing moment, at his disposal. Also, positions as there are none and mini cafe. You will also being a man who likes to give left. It is pointless sending in get your chance to vote for the value for money, Richard is various coveted P.B.M. GAME: Starship Commander applications for rule books, set more than likely going to have awards, including magazine SUPPLIER: Mitre Games ups etc, as they will take ages a stall at the Third British REVIEWER: The Devout Despot with the best P.B.M. to be processed. I will let you P.B.M. conference in coverage. JUDGE; Ladies and Gentlemen 1 normal service will rebruary and he will hand out Entry on the door will cost of the jury, do you find Mitre be resumed. questionaires to find out what Two Fantasy role playing Games guilty or not guilty of .00, but if you apply to: The kind of game YOU want. This British Play By Mail producing top quality, companies are moving into is a highly original move and P.B.M. Games Workshop is Association, 2 David Court, affordable and very playable one that could really pay 200 Lansdown Road, contemplating running a JURY; Guilty, your Honour!! dividends. P.B.M. on Warhammer! Edmonton, London N17 JUDGE; Mitre Games, you The Third British P.B.M. 9XW, enclosing the logo have been found guilty of the It will be fully computerised Conference takes place at the aforementioned crime. It is my and should be running by late Porchester Centre, judgement that you shall be summer 1988. They envisage for .50, you will receive your taken from this place to a Queensway, London, W2 on large player attended meets advance ticket. All cheques/ February 20 between 10.30 building full of computers and POs should be made payable when two major armies face data bases, pens and paper, a.m. and 5.00p.m. and we are to the organisation. stamps and envelopes, where each other in the game and expecting a near sell out. A few copies of the you will be chained to a swivel want to re-inact the actual People with advance tickets chair and shall produce, booklet \"The B.P.B.M.P.A. battle over the table with the will be given priority entrance correlate, assign and deliver to Guide to P.B.M.' are still appropriate figures. This could on the day. the general public a brilliant be very interesting, but also available. The booklet is free concept that is affordable by Not only are at least 20 of and if you are interested in anyone with a weekly income costly and hard to present. the major P.B.M. companies obtaining a copy, cut out the PBM over .00. Meanwhile, Standard taking part, but there are at logo and send it to me at And so into the sunset, Games, the company who least 20 small ones. We have surrounded by armed guards produced the excellent C+VG with a large S.A.E. the usual attractions of the goes the creator of the new miniaturised figures for First come, first served. budget game Starship ed figures for Labyrinthe. U.K's leading Commander. But wait a minute, Spellbinder has just taken C+VG, have also decided to Live Role Playing company, run a P.B.M. based on their did I say \"BUDGET\" game? If over a Football game called will be running mini-dungeons Kickabout. In fact it is the so, surely that means lack of board games, Dark Blades and for free, a leading Fantasy role biggest football P.B.M. in the quality, quantity and Quark Cry Havoc. I was talking to playing and board game torpedoes? Richard Cockerill of Standard world. The first full season has company displaying their Well, not really, because if just finished and a new Games, and he is very keen to you examine exactly what you latest wares, an open AD+D enhanced version of the game Continued on page 95 gossos brasilnod-soy hazred games? "


"LOGIC SALES B ADOLATORI 33888 SABATOUER 3 FORSIS ARBAR888888888 E12.99 INCH ARKANDID 10 50 BOULDERDASH CONSTRUCTION KIT, POLAR PIERRE, COMMODORE 64 CASSETTES NEW SPECTRUM TITLES ALL .99 EACH TOMAHAWK, NEMISIS THE WARLOCK BUBBLE BOBBLE SIDEWALK 30% Off RRP RENEGADE SIGMA 7, SPIDERMANHULK, SURFCHAMP FASSEM MC COMM 64 SPINNAKER INDIANA JONES NEW AMIGA TITLES LANG ASS, GRANDMASTER CHESS OTHELLO, PITMAN TAI-PAN TYPING TUTOR, CHUCKIE EGG 2, FIRELORO CHIMERA EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE JACK NIPPER II 65 55 GOLD RUNNER THING ON A SPRING. ENIMA FORCE. IRIDIS ALPHA EXECUTOR 55.55 BARBARAN MUGSYS REVENGE PARADROID, BEACHHEAD. HIGHWAY ALF AEGEAN VOYAGE, SONGMAKER, RANCH SEASPELLER HYSTERIA TERRORPODS NUMBER TUMBLERS FRACTION FEVER MAKE A INCE STORY ENCOUNTER ARC PANDORA, DRAGONSKULLE, KETTLE GAME OVER BULLDOG, ADRIAN MOLE, SHERLOCK KRYSTALS OF : MACHINE ALPHA BUILD, DANCE FANTASY, LOGIC LEVELS. SIDE WIZE ALPHABET 200 ZONG, NEOCLYPS, WILLOW PATTERN OUT ON A LIMB GUILD OF THEVES MASK E17.50 DEFENDER CROWN E20.95 EVIL CROWN HYPER BIKER EMPIRE BOMBO TRANTOR HAMPSTEAD. PSYTRON, LITTLE COMP PEOPLE COMMODORE 64 UTILITYS PAPERBOY .55 MOUSE TRAP BEAMRIDER. TOUCH TYPE DEVS EX MACHINA, SPIRIT OF ,55 FUGHT SIMULATOR II E34 95 STONES, .99 TEMPLE OF APSHAI TRILOGY, GT SCRABBLE CLUEDO MONOPOLY AMERICAN ROAD RACE, GHOSTBUSTERS, KORONIS RIFT FUTURF FINANCE F15 STRIKE EAGLE SPECTRUM SOFTWARE ON THE EIDDLON, TRANSFORMERS, MUSIC STUDIO, DANDY EASY FILE AVENGER, ICUPS, BOULDERDASH, INFOOROID C64 VUSIC MAKER KEYBOARDS COMPUTER HITS 4 CASSETTE ALL .99 EACH RARRARIAN HEADCOACH, HIGHLANDER THE FORCE, MAX PROGRAMMERS UTILTYS DISC WORLD CLASS LEADERSD HEADROOM.SUPERBOWL, PARRALLAX, HYPABALL BALLBLAZER LESFLICS, FRANKENSTEIN. SORDERONS 520 00 NEOS MOUSE CASSETTE BOULDERDASH CONST KIT, SUPER HUEY 2. SUPERBASIC DEATH WISH IN 26.99 SHADOW. PITFALL 2. RESCUE ON FRACTALUS. BATTLE OF BOULDERDASH 2. UCHI MATA PRODIGY RMS TITANIC NEOS MOUSE OISC 123.00 SUPER SPRINT INTRO TO BASIC PT 1 28.29 THE PLANETS 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE. XCEL. BIZZICOM HACKER. BARRY MCGUIGANS BOXING, XEVIDUS RED LED 8 BOOKS FROM IST PUBLISHING SMALL TRADER, REVOLUTION ROBIN OF SHERLOCK CHAMELEON, DRAGONS LAIR, EXPLORER BACK TO THE EQUINOX, COP-OUT, H.U.R.G. GERRY THE GERM. THE FUTURE, CLASSIC SNOOKER, WAY OF THE TIGER, COMET WORLD GAMES EVIL CROWN, FIGHTING WARRIOR, MERMAID MADNESS GAME JACK THE NIPPER KINETIK, SKOOLDATE 64 COMMODORE 64 TITLES GAME SET & MATCH STAINLESS STEEL POLE POSITION 1299 MARTIONOIDS AMERICAS CUP CHALLENGE. FIGHTER PILOT. BEACH INFILTRATOR, BACK TO THE FUTURE, KRAKOUT, ITSA HEAD 2, HOT WHEELS, MONTY ON THE RUN, ROBIN OF a .99 EACH NEW COMMODORE 64 TITLES KNOCKOUT. HIGHLANDER. HEARTLAND, MOONLIGHT THE WOOD, SYSTEM 1500 2ND EDITION, RETURN TO OZ. MADNESS, DONKEY KONG, BOULDERDASH RENEGADE MAGIC MADNESS, ESCAPE FROM PARADISE, MASTERS OF OIL WELLS BY SIERRA (Cartridge) BOULDERDASH 2. EMPIRE DRAGONS LAIR, LEGEND OF UNIV ARC, MASTERS OF UNIV ADV, WAR, FOOTBALL MR COOL BY SIERRA (Cartridge) HYSTERIA KAGE ARC OF YESOD, SOUTHERN BELLE, VISIONS MANAGER, ON COURT TENNIS, MOON CRISIS IGGY SNOOKER, MARIO BROS. MISSION AD. ORUID, MARIO BROS COMM 64 COMPILATIONS RANARAMA, TEN COMPUTER HITS VOL 3, NEMISIS THE BUBBLE BOBBLE WARLOCK, URIDIUM, EAGLES ALL .99 EACH QUEDEX .99 COMPILATIONS SUPERSPRINT COMMODORE 64 DISCS ACTION PACK INC ROCKET RODGER, 30 WATERSKI GAURDIAN BEST OF BEYOND INC, SHADOWFIRE, DOOMDARKS RED LED HYPERCIRCUIT REVENGE, ENIGMA FORCE, SORDERONS SHADOW @ .99 EACH ZAPP SIZZLERS\"2\" INC MONTY ON THE RUN. \"Z\". STARQUAKE .99 TAPES LEADERBOARD TRACK & FIELD BOUNDER ALTER EGO MALE, ALTER EGO FEMALE THE HOBBIT BEST OF BEYOND INC PSI WARRIOR, QUAKE MINUS I. ENIGMA FORCE SHADOW FIRE STARR GAMES ONE INC WAY OF THE TIGER. DEACHEAD 2 WORLD CLASS LEADERBD SPECTRUM UTILITYS & BARRY MCGUIGANS BOONG RESCUE FRACTALUS LAST NINJA PERIPHERALS COMPILATION DISCS INDOOR SPORTS INC AIR HOCKEY BOWLING, DARTS. HEAD OVER HEALS a .99 EACH BIG NANE BONANTA INC STELLAR 7 FORBIDDEN FOREST FIGHT NITE TALLEDEGA ARKANOLO CALIFORNIA GAMES D595 SPECDRUMS 25.00 SHOOT EM UPS INC SUPER ZAKON, BLUE MAX 2001, DROP DISC 1. INC TURBO 64, DERBY DAY, HANDICAP GOLF HIT PACK VOL 11 16.95 ROTRONICS WARFADRIVES (17.49 INCL FREE 54K WAFA 20NE, FORT APOCALYPSE ALSO INC P&P. WORLD CUP, TESTMATCH PILOT 64 NEW ATARI ST TITLES CURRAH MICRO-SLOTS C2.99 EACH DISC 2 INC VIEW TO KILL FRIDAY 13TH. CODENAME MATT 2. THE PYRAMID, TEST MATCH, BEAKY AND THE p&p 1-3 titles 75p 3 or more .00. TERRORPODS ALPHACOM PAPER .95 FOR 5 ROLLS, MICRO-DRIVE  CARTS .99 EACH, JOYSTICK + INTERFACE .95 EGG SNATCHAS Overseas .20 per tape F15 STRIKE EAGLE DEFENDER CROWN 117 50 WAFADRIVE CENTRONICS OR RS232 LEADS .50 EACH CHEQUES PAYABLE TO INDIANA JONES E17 50 GUILD OF THIEVES 11750 COMMODORE 64 DISCS BARBARIAN SPINNAKER EDUCATIONAL 117.50 a .99 EACH LOGIC SALES LTD SOFTWARE ALL .99 EACH AIRBALL E17.50 BALANCE OF POWER HEARTLAND, MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE. DRUID Department 4 TAIPAN .95 RANCH, AEGEAN VOYAGE UP & ADO EM DANCE HYPABALL, PRODIGY, MURDER ON THE MISSISIPI GT AMERICAN ROAD RACE, HACKER EXPLORER 17 Leotric Square, Eastern Industry TRIVIAL PURSUIT .95 FANTASY NUMBER TUMBLERS, ALPHABET 200 CHAMELEON BATTLE FOR MIOWAY, KORONIS RIFT, RMS Peterborough, Cambs. .95 KINDERKOMP. MAKE A FACE, LOGIC LEVELS, KIDS ON 30 GALAX 11395 TITANIC TRANSFORMERS, SPINDIZZY, LITTLE IMPACT 110 50 KEYS, FRACTION FEVER. COMPUTER PEOPLE, 10TH FRAME, CHOLO, Tel: 0733 313870 LINGSTONE I PRESUME  ANA JONES PACK NIPPER BISMARK Veiled.Star STANDARDGAMES STANDARD MINIATURES is an imaginative, 3-Dimensional Play by Mail game set in a Gothic 23rd century. The Holy Empire has all but collapsed and anarchy reigns. You will start with an Imperial, feudal or barbarian state spanning a number of solar systems. Gunboat diplomacy, interstellar trade and hard-nosed Machiavellian power politics may just ensure your dynasty's future. Set-up is  for rules, 2 funs, charts and weekly War Correspondent newsletter. Further furns cost 2 or send S.A.E. for info Ghetto Games. 26 Speedwell Re. Old Heath. Colchester. CO2 SDS DADADADADADAS We produced the miniatures that you received with this issue and have an extensive range of our own miniatures and gaming accessories. Please send 50p and an s.a.e. to receive a catalogue and order form. Standard Games produces the well known Cry Havoc series of board games featuring man to man combat. Cry Havoc ........ 9.95 (postage free) ........ 9.95 (postage free) Samurai Blades ......... 9.95 (postage free) Outremer ...............11.50 (postage free) Viking Raiders .........11.50 (postage free) Dark Blades ............11.50 (postage free) Send your postal order or cheque to Standard Games, Arlon House, Station Road, Kings Langley, Herts. UUUUUUUU ALBATROS PLAY BY MAIL Dark Blades is being launched as a computer moderated play by mail game with up to 100 players per game and a prize for the winner! By sending a s.a.e. envelope to us NOW, early in 1988 you will receive the offer of a special start-up package, which will give you two extra free turns. STANDARD GAMES PLAY BY MAIL Arlon House, Station Road, Kings Langley, Herts RESTRICTED INFORMATION its no game! We are interested in computer software for the BBC micro range of computers, or books on any computer subject. Please send submissions for evaluation to IAN BISHOP at the above address. "


"PAY BYM Rough 86 Continued from page 93 P.B.M. game that we both a background and history, plus Cautious get for your .00 set up fee and played and through the game traits and hbits. You are Alert .00 per turn, you will be we met at a pub meet. While encouraged to go into great Guarded pleasantly surprised. chatting, he casually mentioned detail, as this gives the G.M. the First you receive a rulebook he was starting up a new P.B.M. idea what kind of character you V5 that isn't really a rulebook, but with a partner called Simon are trying to play. You can also Strong is a secret document designed Letts, under the banner of Sloth worship one of the 14 gods that V. Strong more than 24 as your mission briefing. It Enterprises and he invited me rule Saturnalia, straight away. Too Strong more than 42 starts off telling you that as a to try it out. To date, over three but I would advise you to read Invulnerable more than newly promoted commander years have passed and I am still about the gods below, before you'll ever have! you have been given command playing the game. I think this you do! of a X-71 scout ship. speaks for itself! Once you have created your This table is approximate It then explains how parallel Admittedly I do have a soft character and you get your first and success is not guaranteed! time space areas were spot for the game and wanted turn back you are then set loose discovered more than 50 years to review it for some time. on one of Saturnalia's eight For high notoriety ago and finally colonised by the However, Sloth had declined islands and expected to survive. Firebomb Churches, ambush Home System. Unfortunately, my offer of a review on several When you start wandering other gangs and issue Control these were already occupied occasions because they had as about actually doing things orders for other blcoks that not only by humans, but by many players as they could which call upon you to use your other gangs own. aliens as well. Some of these handle and they did not want major abilities, you discover The minimum criteria for aliens are good, some fair, becoming a boss is: At least 30 some not so fair and some attitude. Now, times have to drop. For example, if you diabolical. Further reading changed as they have employed were a thief and you creep blocks; five sub-machine guns; shows a new parallel area has quite a few new G.M's and they around someone's back yard 13 pros; 400 notoriety points; been discovered, namely shift have spaces available for new and suss out their house for a 5000. D. They cleverly use a players. potential future robbery, you You also have to be the hexagonal diagram to show The world of Saturnalia is one would find that you lost points most notorious gang within a these shift locations. It is up to of monsters and magic. Great from your PER and SA overall square of blocks not exceeding you as Starship Commander to dragons abound. Magic Casters total. What you have actually 300. go back/forward/across to shift are common, monsters of all done is \"used\" them up with When robbing try sending D and set up bases, colonies, different kinds roam the planet, the effort you have put into factories and trading mighty warriors clash for glory spying and sneaking about only one pro, one punk and embargoes with humans and and you have to try and survive These losses are dependant on two recruits and make it the aliens alike. amongst all this! the GM, who decides what you first order on your card. This You then have to teleport The mechanics behind this have lost through a usually has the effect of materials and power crystals game are simple and are as combination of personal obtaining a lot of money back to your mother system for follows. You control a single opinion and random dice Finally, never rob with your credits, which can be used to character, whose personality rolling. raise the level of your via trade walkie-talkies on. The police Magic spells are quite easy to listen in and have a greater and background you create, from a penny farthing to a then each turn you decide upon learn as they are usually megaplanet shattering allied the actions your character available cheaply from temples, s. chance of catching you. destroying craft. The problem is wished to take. You can send in wisemen and sages throughout There is still time to join in that everybody else has the your turns whenever you want. the world. The magic system the C+VG It's A Crime game. same goal! This game has an \"open\" and divine system are one and Just send me your name and The set up has examples of format, so it is really up to you the same, being very easy to address, which I will pass onto moves and results which help how much you play. This is a handle. Basically, you need 100 K.J.C. They will send you: a with the first move good option for people of MP to \"learn\" a 10 point scroll, considerably, as this move is limited finances or live abroad. FREE rule book, two FREE 200 to learn a 20 point scroll, Rounds and a FREE Start up. always the hardest. Of course, the more turns you etc, up to a maximum 400 Once the briefing section of send in, the more powerful your points, which can learn' you WAYNE'S WONDERFUL OFFER the rulebook is read, you then character becomes, so there is a the most powerful spells. The cost of a start up in get onto the How to Play slight disadvantage to not Saturnalia is usually .00 and section. This part of the WAYNE'S VERDICT sending in regular turns. rulebook is excellent because it future rounds are .75. Saturnalia is my favourite You are given a total of 250 reinforces the briefing section points to create your character game. However, when I started However, after negotiating with with. These can be divided you in a nice easy flowing manner. the peopleat Sloth, I have come playing, it was the only game of up with the following offers: This game is fully run by among the five various it's kind and there were not Sloth will pull 20 applicants computer and you put your many people playing. Now it is attributes your character has, which are: orders in via a special code names out of a hat and they will bigger and more commercial. I Combat Ability (CA): A explained in the rulebook! personally do not think the get their cheque/PO sent back to measure of your offensive and game's expansion has made them, with a FREE start-up VERDICT defensive weapon skill plus package and rule book. the quality of it deteriorate. Anybody else who applies will The only criticism of the overall strength. get a REDUCED start-up for game is the results sheets get to Magic Power (MP): This Magic Power (MP): This .00 and will also get three be a bit samey, but as it only determines what spells you are FREE turns which is a SAVING costs a .00 a time I can able to cast, what divine powers of .25. Anybody who overlook that. It is the kind of you are able to learn and how game that would appeal to a resistant to certain magic spells already plays Saturnalia can set you are. It can also determine person who had given great up a second character for FREE Good news for all you It's A and also get three FREE rounds. thought to starting up in a Sci Fi how mentally stable/unstable Crime players who are not in computer moderated game, but you are. the top 100 or are struggling was undecided what to go for. Vitality (VIT):This gives you to find your feet in this game. If you are interested in joining an indication of your characters Jason Gilbert, who plays a Starship Commander, it costs overall health and physical bunch of hooligans called .00, but if you write to Wayne, condition. If you go to 0 or less enclosing the logo above, he vitality you are dead! A score of Dark Justice in game seven of will pass your money onto around 500 vitality means that Crime, has written enclosing a Mitre and they will credit you you are very healthy. few hints and tips for the with two free turns. All cheques Scouting Ability (SA): This C+VG game. I have added a and POs payable to Mitre guages your ability to hide in few of my own and I hope they Games. the shadows, pick pockets and will be of use.  GAME: Saturnalia climb walls. If you want to make sure  SUPPLIER: Sloth Enterprises Perception (PER): This that you take over a certain  REVIEWER: Wayne measures how observant you block, work out how many are, how much you can see, Saturnalia is without doubt the men and machine guns you longest running single way places. A score of O PER need from the following table: character fantasy P.B.M. in the means you are blind. A score of Block Type Combat Value U.K. I can remember starting 500 means you would spot a Needed the game way back in late 1984, needle on the floor of a room Pitiful less than 7 because one of the G.M's, Neil the minute you entered it. V. Weak less than 7 Packer, had a party in another You then give your character Weak Weak posods Breilnod-zy hagreed "


"NEWS EVERYTHING MUST GO! 'zine scene and have been around for many years. They Yes, you can win a copy of any have music columns, P.B.M. item that has been revealed on reviews, articles on F.R.P. and these pages if you write and science fiction. It also runs a tell me what you think of the P.B.M. itself, which is unique C+VG Fantasy Role Playing to say the least. It is well Special. I want your thoughts printed and the front cover is on what was written and absolutely brilliant. Well reviewed. Do you think that worth buying. the fantasy special is a good Bone Of Contention (50p): thing? Do you want a fantasy This 'zine was the funniest. It problem page, a letters page takes the micky out of a rather or both? I want to know infamous daily gutter press YOUR views, so I can shape paper very well indeed. the next special into what However, it also does a great YOU want to read. So write to job of parodying D+D. My me via the mag and I will pick favourite article was the out the most interesting letters interview with a imaginary and send the lucky winners Thrash/speed metal band. It one item of their choice. Be makes the Comic Strip's Bad sure to list your name, News band look stylish. It also address, age and also give me covers F.P.B. and P.B.M. and a list of what items you would has very good artwork. To my like to receive in order of mind the best out of the lot. priority. I look forward very Buy it! much to hearing from you all The Blue Shaboo (40p): Not soon! my cup of tea at all I'm afraid. Talking about giving things Badly printed, lack of away. I have a couple of items interesting content and too of fantasy metalware to give diverse for my liking. It has away as well. Rieder Design, two redeeming features, had sent me a necklace and a namely the review of the couple of earings! For those of F.R.P. Warhammer Fantasy you that do not know Rieder Rules and the discussion on Design, they are the UK's Anarchy, but overall it's pretty leading fantasy jewellery poor. manufacturers. Brain Damage (50p): Good They produce a large F.R.P. coverage, it even has selection of rings, badges, belt it's own fantasy continent and buckles, pendants, clasps and the rules to run it. A very key rings. Rieder hand make interesting read, but the all their items, using printing quality varies from traditional methods combined page to page, making it hard with the ancient metals of to read at times. I agreed with pewter and bronze. Their a lot of what was said and like designs are unique and highly the style of the short, chatty original. in the U.K. and it takes place Games, Sloth and Ae's all reviews jumping from records All item range from .00 once a year. It's run by Games chatting away. to fanzines on one page. It has up to .00, so if you are Workshop and is the place The hall was quite full and a silly game called Sheep Killer interested further, please where you can come and look getting a place in a game was Fiends and after a cursory contact: Rieder Design Ltd, 5 at all the new games, play difficult, but not impossible. glance it looks like it could Brainstone Gate, Leicester games you have never seen After three days, I felt that, well be fun to play. It also has LE35LH. before, meet loads of people on the whole, Gamesday was a a few quizzes that are I've got a necklace with a with similar hobbies and much disappointment. There were enjoyable. Highly intricately designed tombstone more. There are also not many tables where active recommended. hanging on it, with the words demonstrations of live role participation was possible. Daughters Of Dool (30p): I playing, painting The food was as bad as ever liked this zine a lot. Good engraved upon the stone and competitions, artists drawing and even the independent cover, excellent letters page two earrings, one which is in your favourite F.R.P. trade stands had been vastly and quite a few stories of a the form of a large vicious characters and competitions to reduced in numbers, but to be high quality. It has a Call of looking battleaxe and the enter. Furthermore, you will honest that came as no Cthulhu scenario, which is set other which is the shape of a find that Games Workshop try surprise taking into account in India and quite unique. small grinning skull. to sell you as many of their Games Workshop's policy Reading the scenario made me Reider Design have also products as it possibly can. towards their rivals. want to play it immediately. gone into 25mm miniature This year it took place on One of the highlights of GLARG! (60p): The smallest figures suitable for F.R.P. the weekend of the 9/10/11 Gamesday for me was meeting and wackiest of them all. The Their range is called Dungeon October at the Royal the editors of various fanzines Young Ones of fanzines!! I Dwellers and they include a Horticultural Hall, Victoria, and chatting to them for a loved the solo adventure What blister pack of basic London. while. I managed to \"acquire\" The Hell Do I Do With These adventurers, consisting of a Over the weekend there a couple and promised them a Hippy Trousers, which is magic user, cleric, thief and were a lot of C+VG readers review, so here goes: crazy. The editor must be two fighters, plus Orc around and I had a chat to U.D. (90p): The biggest mad, honest! The reviews of Wolvery, consisting of two most of them. fanzine of the lot with 60 the F.R.P. material on the charging wolves with separate One major event of note interestingly filled pages. other hand are well written orc riders. was that there was the Editors, Ben Gooddale and and informative. The artwork Gamesday is one of the unofficial P.B.M. meet with a Gordon McLennan are is weird to say the least, but largest meetings for F.R.P.ers lot of players from K.J.C. certainly no strangers to the understandable. "


"NERULUS The ng Hewson blockbuster stunning rotational 3D graphics and probably the most outstanding game from Hewson in 1987. Available on Commodore and Spectrum Spectrum Cassette 7.95 Commorodore Cassette 8.95 Disc 12.95 HEW SON Fox Mail Order send a cheque/P,. 19 Hewson Consultants/ 566 Milton Trading Estate, Milzn, Abingdon, Oxop. Ox14 4RX Lid. Order by Credit Card sending your Access/Barclaycard Hewson Consultants Ltd number and a specimen signature. Don't forget to enclose As part of our gartinuing developmenu of innovative software we ase always happy to evaluate software your name and address. sento us with a view to publication, "


"WHAT A BEAUTY! MUTATED INSECT HTTACK! RETREAT 3 SPACES YOU FIND A CAR THAT WORK MOVE AHEAD TE THE NEAREST < SAFETY ZONE LOAD THE ORE AND BLAST OFF! ARE LOST! LL POSSESIONS BY EVIL GRIFFINS. HUNCHEAD MCGURK YOU ARE ATTACKED NOW YOU HAVE A GO FOR THAT ORE! SHIELDED BOX Artwork. Marshal M. Rosenthal nyde ubojoud/paonpoid < SAFETY ZONE THE SWAMP TREE YOU'VE DONE ! IS TOUGHE N OL HEAD FOR RETREAT 5 SPACES THE SPACESHIP E BLACK MARSHAL "


"RADIATION DETECTO ALERT! LOSE 1 TURN A STRHNGE WINU BLOWS YOU HIGH IN THE AIR CHANGE PLACES WITH ANYONE ON THE BOARD. TORKS TO EST DEEZE NE > LAVA BLOCKS THE PATH. GO BACK 3 SPACES. A ROCK SLIDE REVEAL LADY CRUSHFIST A HIDDEN PATH! TAKE FREE TURN Qp! Computer OR HIP < SAFETY ZONE Games A SECRET LUELL GIVE DEKE BENZETON WHOOPS! YOU FRESH WATER YOU'RE CAUGHT IN A ZERO GRAVITY MOVE AHEAD ZONE 3 SPACES. LOSE A TURN. + "


"MIRROR Soft Z.1.G.Z:A:G VERUR «Tony Crowther's best game to date\" Zzap 64 .95 Mirrorsoft Limited Athene House, 66-73 Shoe Lane, London EC4P 4AB Telephone: 01-377 4645 "


"How to play PLANET OF DOOM C+VG's Role-playing Game NTERGEIFICIRC DOSSIER Hotel They said it couldn't be done! The C+VG team transformed into miniature figures and stuck in a plastic bag on the front cover! Please rescue them before they suffocate! Then save them from certain death on the planet of doom by playing our exclusive fantasy role-playing board game, created by none other than Marshal M. Rosenthal! Marshal transported the C+VG's into the 31st Century by digitising them using a neat bit of hi-tech machinery at his New York headquarters. He also made up the rules, designed the board and took all the pictures. Pretty good for a miniature figure you'll agree! Read the rules and play the game. Meanwhile, the boffins at IDEAS Central are hurriedly attempting to find a way to deminiaturise the C+VG team in time for the next ish. But meanwhile your mini-figures of Lesley, Tim, Paul, Craig and Marshal M. come complete with heavy-duty weaponry, designer space-wear and various silly hats ready for you to play around on the Planet of Doom! Just like having the whole team always available to use and abuse. Go to it! TERCAFICTIC DOSSIER DOSSIER RGAI NOTIC Here's the lowdown and it isn't good! Being a criminal in the 34th century is no better than any other time. There are good days and bad days. Good days mean getting away with a planetful of plunder. A bad day means getting caught. Which is just what's happened. But even that's not so bad! You've got a chance for a quick parole. All you have to do is zip down to a good for nothing planet out in the sticks and pick up this special ore that the Federation of Mining Planets want to take a look at. What's the catch? Well, seems that the place is radioactive, overgrown with mutated jungle creatures, and is definitely not the vacation spot of the Galaxy. Plus there's one other slight catch to the whole affair. Four other slobs have been offered the same chance for parole. The first to get the ore and blast off wins freedom. Everybody else gets to stay! DOSSIER TERGARCTIC --00000000000000000000000 RULES Place your figure on the corresponding picture of the character. Use a dice to take turns as you move counterclockwise on the squares. The object is to be the first person to recover the ore and blast off in the spaceship. To do this you must: First land ON the shielded box square. Then land ON the ORE square (if no box, then no ORE). Finally land ON the spaceship. If you should land on a square occupied by another character, you can force him/her to: Take the next turn going backwards. Exchange places with anyone else on the board. A Safety Zone protects whoever is on it from any harm. No one can do ANYTHING to a person while he/she is on a Safety Zone. NTERGEI ACTIC DOSSIER M . FK YOUR FREE FIGURES! Just a few words about the figures which come FREE with this issue of C+VG. There are FIVE figures to complete the Planet Doom set. You get two different figures with each issue. Why not swap them with your friends to get the exact team YOU want? If you want to play the game with more than two people you can always use coloured counters or simply cut out the dossiers to opposite and use them to represent your character. Please write and tell us what you think about this board game idea. Would you like to see more games like this? How about getting more figures to play with? We're waiting for. your letters and phone calls ... "


"  LUI CUILRI IIII ind HOURT SINCLAIR LUI INUIL COMPUTER AMSTRAD APPROVED REPAIR CENTRE QUALITY APPROVED REPAIR CENTRE TITRLJ HOW TO GET YOUR SPECTRUM REPAIRED FOR ONLY .95 QUALITY TO SPECIAL OFFER! SPECIAL OFFER! SEAL OF OU ORDER NOW USING ACCESS the fantastico ordinary Spectrum into SPECTRUM (only) KEYBOARD CALL IN AT OUR MANCHESTER CITY CENTRE BRANCH FOR WHILE YOU WAIT REPAIRS AND SPARES REPAIRS CR AROUND CUKRADERKIT THE NO.1 REPAIR CENTRES IN THE U.K. OTHERS FOLLOW ZX81 SPARES STOCK NOW IN EXTENSION RIBBON want better sound on tore? Then unbelievable mega sound TRADE REPAIRS Festie up INJOYSTICK & INTERFACE  PACK A TERCEIRO why not upgrade your Anary Snertruimint the fantastic OK Tronics Typewnter keyboard Why not upgrade your 10K Spectrum to a 48K for only .50 including fitting VAT and forrie as .95 including VAT post and packing return post and packing # You would be us to hit the it for Normal recommended retail price You just send us .95 annis .95 Replacement printed THE CHS $10.00 DK Tronics key costs including return sets .50 postage including post Fullting instructions Suppled with every no issue and only GB 220 Tas Update Your Rubber Keyboard to a WHILE YOU New Spectrum+ Fitted for only .95 + .50 WAIT SERVICE post & packing. (Also D.I.Y. Kit available for only E NES CALL FOR APPOINTMENT Same day service .95 + .50 p&p) LIMITED OFFER ATEN REPAIR SERVICE SOUND THROUGH YOUR T.V. WITH MEGASOUND * While you wait Spectrum repairs E22.50. + Six top games worth E39.00 for you to sounds you ve never heard before? Then you need MEGA SOUND Puy games with Also spare parts over the counter enjoy and play with every Spectrum repair. * All computers fully overhauled and fully 56 way E10.95 plus 61.50 p&p We repair Commodore 64's, Vic 20's. ribbon cable to tested before return. Commodore 16's and Plus 4's. /extend your ports for REPLACEMENT * Fully insured for the return journey. + The most up to date test equipment your peripherals POWER SUPPLY * Fixed low price of .95 including post. developed by us to fully test and find all e .95 packing and VAT. (Not a between price faults within your computer. Spectrum replacement plus  p&p of really up to .00 which some of our power transformer keyboard repairs, Spectrum rubber key suitable for all makes competitors are quotingi.Mail order only) boards only .00. of computer 69 95 * Discounts for schools and colleges. NCZI) 3 month written guarantee on all repairs. plus  D&D BEST SERVICE BEST PRICES! JOYST KEYBOARD MEMBRANES ARE YOU ANOTHER CUSTOMER fed up waiting weeks for your estimate? The Cheetah 125+ Rapid Fire Need your computer repaired fast? Then send it now to the Number One Repair joystick and competition pro 200 Dual Port interface normal Spectrum keyboard Company in the U.K., or call in and see us at our fully equipped 2.500 square foot workshop recommended retail price membranes with all the latest test equipment available. You are more than welcome .90 purchase together Special offer price .25 .50 plus  50 D&D We will repair your computer while you wait and help you with any of your technical problems. Joystick available as separate item Spectrum Plus spare Commodore computers repaired for only .00. Please note we gove you a 100% low fixed E8.95 or interface available as separate price of .95 which includes return post and packing, VAT not a between price like some item .95 plus 1.50 p&D le keyboard membranes other Repair Companies offer. We don't ask you to send a cheque in for the maximum amount and .90 plus 1 50 p&p shock you with repair bills E30 upwards. Don't forget we are Amstrad aproved for quality and Rais Zx 81 membranes speed don't risk your computer to any other unauthorised repair centre. We dont just repair the S ES 00 plus 150 p&p fault and send your computer back, we give your computer a. OVERHAUL WITH EVERY REPAIR WE DO:ON-OFF SWITCHES . We correct colour, sound, Keyboard, Check the loading and saving chip. Put new feet on FOR THE SPECTRUM the base if required. Check for full memory, check all sockets including ear/mike and replace Commodore AND SPECTRUM + where needed. All for an inclusive price of .95 including VAT, all parts, insurance and post replacement power and packing. No hidden extras whatsoever. We don't have to boast too much about our transformer 29 00 ORDER NO service as we have thousands of customers from all over the world highly delighted with our plus .50 D&D 1067 SPECTRUM service. A first class reputation for speed and accuracy. Don't forget, we also now have a 1067A SPECTRUM Service Branch in Manchester City Centre for while you wait service. USE ANY .95 + 150 p + P URGENT NOTICE Don't be misled by adverts showina 'between prices.' A recent JOYSTICK WITH complaint against a Manchester repair firm, Mancomp, was upheld by the Advertising | YOUR SPECTRUM + 2 Standards Authority on two counts, \"It had stated BBC repairs between  and  SINCLAIR JOYSTICK ADAPTOR FOR then charged the customer .\" Their guarantee policy was misleading as it did not CONNECTING SPECTRUM +2 make clear that all repairs were not covered. COMPUTERS TO MOST JOYSTICKS Video Vault THE VIDEOVAULT COMPUTER COMPANION EDITION NOW HOT OFF THE PRESS New bigger catalogue now available containing over 2,500 items including software for all computers, joysticks, spare parts, business software, books, plus many more. Just send 2x 18p stamps for your free copy. Over 20 pages full of top quality products delivered to your door by return post.  -POST + PACKING opoMUS CHARGES UK ONLY Fru OVERSEAS POST + PACKING CHARGES PLEASE WRITE FOR QUOTE COMMODORE POWER SUPPLY ORDER No 10624 SELECTOR RRP  OST JOYSTICKS sy + ISOP W HICOMPUTER H COMPANION 11N WAN TPLF OF FULLY REPAIRED AND TESTED ON MOST ADVANCED TEST EQUIPMENT IN EUROPE Bule VIUCUVau. Ltd. OPEN 7 DAYS A WEEK. MANCHESTER MON-SAT ONLY MON 140 High Street West Glossop Derbyshire SK13 8HJ Tel: 04574-66555/67761 Head Office & Access orders, queries (MON. Manchester 061-236 0376 while you wait repair centre only.  COPYRIGHT VIDEOVAULT LTD NO. 789003 FAX NO. 04574 68946 SOFFIAT GGREAT FREE GAMES NORMAL RECOMMENDED RETAIL PRICE YOURS FREE WITH EVERY SPECTRUM REPAIR "


"COMPETITION RESULTS BALLBREAKER Anthony Connelly, Lanarkshire; CODEMASTERS Lothian; Per Johansson, Sweden; Trevor Page, Kent: Jon Morris, Anthony Clapham, Somerset; Jason Watts, Gwent; Derek Wong, Dean Jarman, Hants. Daniel Tudball, Twickenham; D. Lancs; Rodney Tregale, Slough; Vince, Birmingham; Alin Shelton, Alistair May, Moray; Simon Holt, Surrey; Chris Andrews, Sheffield; Andrew Hawley, Manchester, London, Owen Williams, Bath; Rotherham; lain McDougall, Wayne Robson, Dundee; lan William Callaghan, W. Midlands; Daniel Hondle, Bucks; Paul Duree, Glasgow; Gareth Houghton, Lucas, Gateshead; Nathan Hruzik, Scott Watson, Clydebank; Adam Bradford; D. Thompson, Cheshire. Dyfed; Matt Sears, Worcester, Bolton, Surrey; C. G. Roland, Newcastle; Mark Smith, London; Matthew Davies, Sheffield; Craig Spencer, Bradford; David Lincoln; Simon Sharp, Surrey, Sean Adam Penn, Luton. Michael Fox, Wilts; Patrick Oliver, Menzies, Manchester. Drury, W. Yorks; Darren Perry, Steve Lee, Surrey, Glenn Rivers, Birmingham, Jonathan Kane, Lee Godley, Stockton; Tom J. Ryan, Stockport; Sammy Barber, Rosshire. Perth; David Connor, Liverpool; Leicester; Fergus Mullins, Ireland; Surrey, Ben Steele, Nr Hailsham; Tony Kidney, Co. Cork; Derek Julian Smith East Sussex; Michael Karim Bovali, London. A.M. Barnes, BFPO 32; David Jenkins, Cardiff; Delvin Suleyman, Hughes, Swansea; Paul Sawyer, Dean Betts, Kent; Richard Beavis, Somerset; David Lupton, E. Herts; Richard Ramsden, Bradford; South Glamorgan; David Jones, Ramsden, West Yorks; Martin Sussex, Tobias King, Wilts; J. Adrian Holmes, Coventry; Leon Worcs; Richard Spence, N. Wicker, Herts; Graeme Napier, Ryland, Lancs; Andrew Bull, Quinn, Birmingham; Mark Ireland; Robert Johnson, Gwent. Newcastle upon Tyne; T. L. London. Clapham, Harrogate; Nader Lucy Grzesik, Rotherham; Anthony Bahalim, London: Benn Webber, Peter Burman, Lincoln; Mark Adamali, U.A.E.; Mark P.J. Miles, Casel, Oxford; Alan Pullen, Worcs; Wiltshire; Simon Rider, West Hatrich, Lincs; Anon, Richard Burton, Cornwall; John W. Sussex. Worcestershire; H. Schiffelers, The Yorkshire; Philip Cahill, Inchicore; David Jones, Worcs; Stuart Scott, Yeung, Glasgow; Kevan Gelling, Andrew Little, Merseyside. Netherlands; Mark Davidson, Walsall, David Bone, Tyne & Isle of Man; Edward Newiss, West David Heath, Staffs; Andrew Lincs; Stewart Campion, Herts; Wear, Paul Crocker, Middlesex; Yorks. Griffiths, Surrey, John Summers, Michael Wheeler, Lewis; Roy Stephen Crawford, Wiltshire; G. Jon Sendel, Sheffield; Martin Riley, Merseyside; Neville Matthews, Lewis, Lancs; Paul Seamark, Shirodkar, West Midlands. Eastleigh; lan Sherwin, Beds; Nathan Taylor, Hull; Kieron Bedfordshire. David Imrie, Caithness; Filis Manchester, Guy Watford, Melton Telford, Mid Lothian; Marc Davies, Kenneth Ball, Uttoxeter, Stuart Toumanidis, Greece; L. Smith, Hull; Mowbray; Stephen Clark, N. Wrexham; Steven Devlin, Kemp, Leicester, James M. Tebbutt, Mike Seuters, Holland; Finlay Bell, Yorks; Mr. J. M. Berman, Dorset; Aberdeenshire; Adam Penn, Luton. Stoke on Trent; James McAllister, Northumberland; Nicholas Twinn, Julian Blake, East Sussex, Itaen William Knapp, Exeter, K. Grzesik, Herts; Leon Quinn, Birmingham; Co. Durham; Roar Tunes, Norway, Beardmore, Staffs; Michael Burton, Rotherham; Mark Smith, Essex James A. McLelland, Airdrie; J. Wright, W. Midlands. Cleveland. Trevor C. Moore, Staffs; Jamie Marcus W. Hartup, Lincoln; David Brett Patterson, Sheffield; Gavin Gareth Williams, Leicestershire; A. Jenkyn, Cheshire; Chris Roynham, Hanik, Coventry; Colm Andrew, Cassie, Aberdeenshire; Mr D. G. C. Pearson, Newcastle upon Tyne; Hyde: L. C. Sendel, Sheffield; P. A. Belper. Thow, Gwent; Mark Smith, Herts; Mat Seddon, York; Andrew and Richmond, Co. Durham; Adam Simon Baxet, N. Humberside; Lynsey Learoyd, Leeds; A. Milsom, David Stephenson, Liverpool; Seb John Pack, Herts; Chris Raynham, Horton, Notts. Derbys; Martin Owen, Gwynedd; Herts; Glen White, Essex; C. A. Geddes, Caithness; Andrew Boyce, Lee Bennett, Northampton, James Macleod, London West Sussex; Danny Robjohns, Richard Lang, Surrey; R. G. PROHIBITION Riley, Hull North Yorkshire; Kelvin Hones, Messenger, Perth; Richard Walker, Brian Brooks, London; lan B. Platts, Port Talbot;lan Ramdhany, Dudley; G. Nichol, N. Ireland; London; Gunnlauger Briem, London; Anthony Goodey, Kent; GOBOTS Stephen Russell, Dorset; Russell Iceland; Aidan Loughridge, Co. Paul Feltham, Dorset. Wai Hong Tsang, Beds; Jason Lo, Cushion, Norfolk; Jonathan Ewert, Antrim; Michael Bland, Leeds; Tipu Kevin Liu, Liverpool; lan Adams, Manchester, Stuart Thomson, Guernsey, Duncan Tarrett, Sultan, London, Nicholas Twinn, Manchester, Ricky Hoad, London; Aberdeenshire; Mark Lee, Cheltenham; Robert Horton, West Co. Durham; Karl Drinkwater, Craig Cooper, Stoke on Trent, P. Merseyside; Spencer L. Denniston, Midlands. Manchester, David Menzies, Meanwell, Herts. London; Benjamin Early, Manchester Maidenhead; Andrew Hall, Chris Neiger, Cheshire; Agusti THING Peterborough; Mr. T. Saxon, Malave, Spain; Robert Bell, Swindon; Robert Byers, Warks. Jason T. Derbyshire, Gwynedd; Cheshire; Simon Wendt, Beds; Neil BOUNCES Marc Couget, Birmingham; Ling Des Albrighton, Bucks; Nabeel Drew, Cornwall; Michael J. Dexter, Lo, Southampton; Christopher Lin BACK Ahmed, Bristol; Malcolm Jeckell, Sheffield. in On, London; Adam Solomon, Norfolk; Craig Dors, Cheltenham; Richard Pargeter, Coventry; Mark Roger Takenarine, Wembley, A. J. Kent; Philip Corbett, Warks; Lee Lyndon Saunders, Mid Wilson, Staffs; Louk Smeets, Whitehead, S. Glamorgan; Watson, Middlesex; Kamal Glamorgan; Stuart Smith, Gwent; Holland; Robert J. Honkey, Stephen Barker, Staffs: Brian Lakhiani, U. A.E.; Simon Gallagher, Steven Wheller, Bridgend; Gabriel Cheshire; Robert Douglas, N. Scofield, Gwent; Mr. A. Dolan, Nottingham; Allan Norris, South Leong, Berks. Ireland; James Marshall, Essex. Cheshire; David Bannatyre, W. Glamorgan MILK RACE "


"Q140040 D4OODOODI Alternative WORLD GAMES Competition They're weird, they're wacky. What are they? Alternative World Games, that's what. Everybody seems to have got very serious about their sports simulations. But not the Gremlin guys. They've put the humour in to sport by coming up with some really strange events set against some exotic backdrops. So, how do you fancy log throwing or boot hauling? You do? Well read on. For the first prize, Gremlin will arrange for you to have six professional coaching lessons for one of the following sports football, cricket, tennis, swimming, squash, badminton or table-tennis. So when you fill in the entry coupon don't forget to say which sport you are interested in. The 50 runners-up will get a copy of Alternative World Games. All you have to do is answer the following Gremlin Graphics questions and send your answers to Alternative World Games Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is December 16th and the referee's decision is final. Questions is based on which character? Is it A) He-Haw. B) Ho-Hum. C) He-Man. Answer: OL 1) What is the name of the evil organisation featured in Gremlin's Mask and Mask II? Is it A) VENOM. B) SPIT. C) BILE. Alternative World Games Competition Answer: Name: 2) What is the name of Jack the Nipper's second adventure? Address: Answer: 3) What animal is Monty? is he A) Mole. B) Badger. C) Rabbit. The sport I want coaching in is Answer: Amstrado 4) Gremlin's expected Christmas smash My computer is Spectrum CBM 640 "


"ARBARIAN The Ultimate Warrior OADOVOVAOV AOVO A NOW AVAILABLE FOR THE ATARI ST THE ULTIMATE WARRIOR THE ULTIMATE GAME OVOO4OAVOA 2001 AVAILABLE FOR: COMMODORE 64 48k SPECTRUM AMSTRAD CPC RARBARIAN SPECTRUM VERSION Available from all good computer game stockists, or by mail order from: Palace Software, 275 Pentonville Road, London N1 9NL. AMSTRAD VERSION Send cheque or postal order for .99 (Cassette), PALACE SOFTWARE or .99 (Commodore or Amstrad Disk) plus 80p P&P Access and Barclaycard holders telephone 01-278 0751. "


"BE FAST...BE ALERT...ORBE DEAD! RISK. PEDIE COMMODORE I didn'texpect to geta'R.I.S.K. order ... none of us ever does imean. Galactic Command doesn't call for a Rapid Intercept, Seek and kill operative unless all else has failed...but why dolget this feeling I'm gonna be on my own this time? 8.95 DISC 12.95 THE EDGE, 36/38 Southampton Street, London WC2E 7HE "


"THE HUNT FOR PED OCTOBER RE THE ULTIMATZ-SUBMARINE COMBAT SIMULATION Argus Press Based on the Best Selling Book by Software Group   Available for Atari ST, Amiga, Amstrad 1512 pc, Amstrad CPC, Spectrum, Commodore Tape and Disk ALL TE BIT PRODUCTS RRP $24.95, 8 BIT CASSETTES 13.8. DISC 19.95 95 "


"RED LED RED L.E.D. IS A CHALLENGE NOT TO BE MISSED. COMMODORE USER «GO OUT AND GET THIS GAME IT'S SOMETHING REALLY SPECIAL JULIAN RIGNALL: ZAPP 64 C.U. Screen Star : :245 REAL ARCADE ACTION AT ITS BEST! STARLIGHT SPECIAL FEATURES The year is 2379: Earth's vast resources are finally running out (again!). You must bridge the path to the much needed matter supplies, using three ZMX all-purpose battle-droids to link up the vital cosmic-interface grid. . Full 30 mooth scrolling action 37 different landucapes  Bonus level, teleport pada and nerwy generators Gruphie by Pete James Sound FX by Tony Crowther. C64/128 cass .99 C64/128 disk .99 AMSTRAD cass .99 AMSTRAD disk .99 SPECTRUM .99 "


"CUPERARE WWW HIT! IC SKATE TAGH Graffiti Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1R 3AU. And the prize? An all expenses paid trip to New York to see graffiti artists at work! Remember to secure the coupon to your entry. ere's the first person to win his way through to the final of our wicked Graffiti Comp. The winner from October's issue is Nick Adams of Plymouth. If you think you can match Nick's graffiti skills, or perhaps you think you can do better, start working, now!! In case you've forgotten the rules, I'll quickly remind you. Just create your own original piece of graffiti the only restrictions on your creation are that it MUST include the Top Ten and C+VG logos somewhere. You can either send a photo of your work or simply send your completed artwork to Computer and Video Games, Top Ten C+VG/Top Ten Graffiti Competition. Name Address Age Computer owned "


"HOLMESOFT FREEPOST (No Stamp In UK) SEDGLEY, DUDLEY WEST MIDLANDS DY3 3QY Tel: 0902-880971 CHEQUE P.O. E DRAFT TO: HOLMESOFT C.O.D SERVICE 13 In Advance) UK P&P INCL. (Add Sop for Rec Delivery EUROPE ADD 500 PER ITEM ELSEWHERE add 75p per item PHONE WRITE PROMPT DESPATCH MAIL ORDER DIVISION OF ESTABLISHED RETAILER AND PUBLISHERS SPECTRUM OUR PRICE SPECTRUM OUR PRICE ATARI ST OUR PRICE COMMODRE 64 OUR PRICE Liveoma 107 ID 1095 Acoso Adv Tactical Fighter All Word Games Apache urshig Arctic Fox AMSTRAD OUR PRICE 10.956.75 Art Word Games D 10 95 6.75 Bangkok Knights Barbarian Blood Valley (6 10 95 6.75 Bubbig Boobie Bangkis Barbara Palace) Barbara Psygnosis Bubble Boobie Charlie Chan Magnet Mandrod Masas-2 Mean Seak Morpheus ( 10 951 6.75 (D 10.95) 875 Lucasm, 4-Coll Live Ammo Mad Bals Magnetron EACH D 10 05 875 109.95) COMMODRE 64 OUR PRICE Action for 1095 673 Airborne Ranger 01495 105 3-24 Flight Sim 16 14 10  splay Bangkok Knights VO Bod Valley D 1095 65 Bubble Bobble 109.951650 Bugny Boy D 10.95 6.75 Burn Out 09.95 675 SERIKIEM Each N. Mansel Grand Prix Ninten Pegasus Bridge P Pent Pirates Pro S hoes Blood Valley Big 4 V Bobsleigh Bubble Bob Fyn Short GU Soccer Guild Of Theves Impossible Mission Indiannes STOD Last Ninja Capitan America Compendum El B-Collection Eps fpcs Enlight. Orudil Evening Star Room Manager Freddy Hardesi Moon Mike Nebus 109951 D 9.95) 1095856 Psyche Sider DISC ONLY 1005  Rastan Sage Red October ID 9.95) Chems 2000 Combal School Compendium Dear Wish Defender Crown 10.95675 Red LED Renegade Captain America Charlie Chaplin Combat School Compendium 109.95 83 ID 9.95) 650 10.95 6.50 0 10 95 65 Gauteil Scrabble De-lu DISC ONLY 1095 Hey of the Roar ARABARASTRU Download BRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRR Guada Cana eeeeeee00eeceebeeeeeeeeeeee 0000Deeeeeeee Red October 1251015  ID 10.95 650 Etes-Collection Roy Of The Rovers Sun Bae Simulation Super Sprint 1095 6.75 Scrable DeLuxe Shoot 'em up Const S de Arms Solid Gold Solomon's Key Speed Rumber B-Colton (  Farlight The Legend Flying Shark Football Manager il ack Mepper II D1495) 10.50 (0 9.951 6.75 D 10.95 6.75 10.95 6.75 Sde Arms 109.951 6.50 Mask Mask 2 Matchday 1 Wizal ALL OTHER CURRENT PRODUCTS Scar Fire Emblon Fairlight, Legend Firetrap Football Manager 0995) 6.75 Phat Freddy Hardes Gooch Al Star Cricket Un 's Soccer Game Over Game Set & March Gaudei (10.95 6.75 10.95 5.50 09.986.50 D1095675 D 10 951 6.75 Gooch Lineers Soccer Game Set & Match Street Basebal Street Basketball Summer Gold Super Hang-One Super Sprint HARDWARE ADD-ONS, BLANKS ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT & POSTAGE Overseas Security Add 15 Arar: 520 STEM 6,25 Street Hassie Super Hang-un Super Sonne Road Runner Roy Of The Rovers SK DRIVE Indiana Jones Intrattori Scruples 0695 (10.95 5.50 3.75 6.75 Gunbo High Frontier B 10 50 650 D10 95) 6.15 10 10.956.74 Through Trap Thundercats Tour De Force Trator Victory Road WC Caderboard Through The Trap Door Thundercats Tour De Force 109.50) Victory Road WC Leaderboard 50 Amiga 500. Sarter Comm 4 ZON Case ONLY 159 00 Excelerator fine free Mahine etc Star NL-10,80 Col 17400 Solid Gold Jack the Niger il Judge Death kari Warriors impossible Mission II D 10 951 679 10.955 09.05) 650 mare N Jackal 1650 Superang Through Trap Door Thundercats Victory Road WC Leaderboard Wizard War Wiza D 10.95 6.75 SOFTWARE ADD-ONS FOR BRC ELECTRON CI V CS. SEGA NINTENDO, MSX OL IBM SPECTRUM 3. Vic met SEBA Game System Compte ame System Sometru -2 Compe Expert Carte ESM Quickshot Torto Konx Speeding Cheetan 125 X-15 Alpha Mison 1 1095675 Yes Prime Min i D 14.98 10.95 AMIGA SOFTWARE 100 S PHONE WRITE 100s of .99 2.99 GAMES BULK DISCOUNTS INVOICES X-15 Apr Mission Yes Prime Minister Zynas D 1095875 Forthcoming Releases Sent on Release Day SAE for Software Hardware List UNLISTED PRODUCT NEW/OLD SOFTWARE DEDUCT 20% From RRP HARDWARE: DEDUCT 10% WE GUAI INTEE 2 DAY SERVICE Forthcoming the Senato Release Dav PRODUCT) nove CUT PRICE SOFTWARE I NATIONAL COMPUTER LIBRARY Hire Software www Before You Buy It NV ATARI ST TITLES NOW AVAILABLE SPECTRUM RRP OUR COMMODORE 64/128 OUR PRICE ATARIST CASS DISK Jack No Tow Pust Stars On 128 Freeze Frame 3. Cart 35.96 Sential Superstar Socc 7.95 5.50 Rypar................... 7.25 11.95 Knight Orc. 24.95 15.95 Gauntlet II . 8.95 6.50 Epyx Epics............7 25 11.95 Gauntie 1 or 2..... 19.95 13.95 Trantor.............. 8.99 6.50 Roy of the Rovers.7 25 11.95 Alt World Game 1 9.95 13.96 Triaxos ... 8.99 6.50 Out Run 7 25 11.95 Barbarian 24.95 15.95 Paperboy ......7.95 5.50 Battle Ships .... 725 11.95 Terrorpods 2 4.95 15.96 Kit Ore . 14.95 11.95 Expert Cart N A 28.95 Guild Thieves 24.95 15.95 Live Ammo Flying Shark 5.50 10.95 Indiana Jones 19.95 13.95 Wizball ...7.95 5.50 Destroyer NA 11.95 Tai-Pan 1995 12.95 Renegade.. 7.95 5.50 Stealth Fighter....1195 14.95 Defender Crown 29.9519.95 Saboteur 2 7 .95 5.75 Mega-Apocalypse 6.50 11.95 TNT 19.95 13 95 Alt World Games 7.95 5.50 Road Runner 7.25 11.95 AW Games 19.99 1395 Road Runner 8.995.50 VA 16.96 Blood Valley 1999 1395 Try Pursuit 1495 11.95 Durer's Bg4 ........... 6.95 11.96 Flying Shark 795 5.50 W.C. Leaderboard. 725 11.95 Mercenary com 24.95 15.95 Hit 61 or 2 9 95 7.25 Ace 2 .7 25 11.95 AMIGA RRPOUR Calatomia Game.....8.99 6.50 Wer Ball... . 6.50 10.95 California Game 24.0519.95 Super Sprint 995 225 Defender of Crown NA 11.95 Terrorpods 24.95 19.95 Battle Ships............ 7.95 5.50 Try Pursuit 11.95 14.95 Barbarian Ace2 Kor 128K .8.95 7.25 11.95 Defender Crown. 2495 19.99 Gauntie 1 or 2 7 2511.95 Sent Service 2 4.95 19.95 Five Star 2..........9.95 7.25 Death Wish 3...... 7.25 11.95 Guild Thieves 249519.95 Bubble Bobble 7.95 5.50 Barbarian 7.25 11.95 Karate Kid ll ......... 24.95 19.95 Game, Set, Match... 12 95 Superstar Soccer 7.25 11.95 Mean 18 2999 2495 Enduro Racer ...9.95 7.25 Alt World Games 7.25 11.95 Swooper 19.95 15.95 Jack Nipo Il ...7.995 .50 Gryzo 5.50 11.95 Super Huey 1999 15.95 750 14.96 SOL 29.95 24 95 Explon 5.50 ..... 7.25 11.95 Winter Games........ 24.99 1999 Roy Of Rovers.... 9.95 7.25 725 11.95 Gold Runner..........24,95 19.99 9.95 7.25 Compendium ........... 7.25 11.95 Hollywood Poker 19.96 15.95 WC Leaderboard. 995 7.25 Pirates 11.95 15.95 Hardball Zynaps 7.95 5.50 Tentor 725 11.95 AMSTRAD TOP 10 CASS DISK Graphic Ad Creator 17 00 22.00 102 PAW 22.95 17.95 Renegade California Games Survivor Sold Million 3.. Mini Office 2...... 11.95 14.96 Barbarien 9.95 7.25 Hit Pak 61 62 7.25 11.95 Explon . .. 6.50 11.95 Stealth Fighter ..........7.95 5.50 11.95 14.95 Paperboy 6.50 10.95 Living Daylight.........9.95 7.25 Ta Pan W.C. Leaderboard 6.50 10.95 Bismark 9.95 7.25 .....6.95 11.95 11.95 11.95 Gauntie 12 7 .25 11.95 -9.95 6.95 Out Run 7.25 11.95 Head O Hees.........7.2$ 5.50 Bubble Bobbie 6.50 10.95 Knight Orc. 7.25 11.95 Jack Nipper + Bubble Bobble .00 each Post & Packing Inc. Overseas Orders please add  per tape Cheques/post orders (Sterling only please). Made payable to: Cut Price Software Unit 6, Stort House, Riverway, Harlow, Essex CM20 2DW 24 HOUR ANSWER PHONE (0279) 24433 OR (0279) 31956 (SEGA GAMES MACHINE NOW AVAILABLE ONLY .95 PLUS FREE NEXT DAY DELEVERY UK. PLUS FREE GAME, FULL RANGE OF SOFTWARE + LIST AVAILABLE) NOW UNDER new management OVER 8.000 different titles available for hire for the COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, ELECTRON, BBC, AMSTRAD all models, ATARI, and MSX computers and now ATARI ST. VERY SOON CBM AMIGA. ARCADE, ADVENTURE, EDUCATIONAL and BUSINESS software too. HIRE PRICES from only .00 INC. P&P. 20% DISCOUNT off all purchase software. LIFE MEMBERSHIP .00. Hire your first title FOC. FREE CATALOGUE. FAST RETURN OF POST SERVICE (if reserves are given). ALL GAMES manufactured ORIGINALS with full documentation. LARGE DISCOUNTS ON ALL PURCHASES for members. UP TO 65% OFF software, regular sales lists sent to all members. Full computerised system keeps track of your order. We pride ourselves in being the most professional Hire Library in the United Kingdom, with experienced staff who know what the word service means. Gunsho Send large S.A.E. now for free catalogue. NATIONAL COMPUTER LIBRARY 1 Walkers Road, North Moons Moat, Redditch 139B 9HE 0527 591450 NAME ADDRESS ........... COMPUTER MODEL "


"JUSIES \"DID I REALLY JUST DIVE THROUGH A MONITOR SCREEN.. \"THE OLD SPACESHIP WE FOUND IN THE FOREST WAS REAL WASN'T IT? AND HADN'T THERE BEEN SOME WEIRD ENERGY FIELD..? \"A SCREEN THAT SEEMED TO HAVE SWALLOWED LION-0 JUST SECONDS EARLIER..? ...HPluckEO THE EYE OF THUNDERA FROM LION-O'S SWORD... \"AND DIDN'T WE RUSH ON BOARD AFTER THE EYE. AND SEE THE SCREEN..?\" THUNDERCATS IF ALL THAT HAPPENED, AND I REALLY DID DIVE THROUGH THE SCREEN... WHERE HAS LION-O GOT TO..?\" ... AND WHERE IN THUNDERA'S NAME AMI? IN THE MACHINE PART TWO y IT'S A GOOD QUESTION, TYGRA-BUT I HAVEN'T HAD TIME TO COME UP WITH ANY ANSWERS  ! YES BUT IS THE EYE..? LOOK! THE THUNDERCAT SYMBOL WARNS OF DANGER LION-0! YOU'RE SAFE! EVEN IF WE DON'T KNOW WHERE WE ARE WE AT LEAST KNOW WHERE WE'RE HEADED! COME ON..! "


"SIMINE AS THEY RACE ACROSS THE STRANGE LANDSCAPE. THE EXCITEMENT'S MAKING YOU TONGUE TIED, LION-0... THE CAT'S LAIR \"YES. IT'S ALMOST LIKE A... VID-SCREEN WORLD. IT RESEMBLES THIRD EARTH...ONLY IT'S AN ELECTRONIC VERSION OF IT... BUT LOOK CLOSER... SEE THE DIFFERENCES? IT ISN'T A PERFECT COPY! LOOK THE LAIR OF THE CATS! .I'VE HAD TO USE THE OMEN'S SWORD ALREADY BEFORE YOU ARRIVED HERE... UH-OH! A ROCKMAN. AND I GET THE FEELING HE ISN'T FROM A WELCOMING COMMITTEE ! L'IL HANDLE THIS, TYGRA... WATCH... OMEN'S SWORD..? LION-O'S SO WORKED UP HE KEEPS MIXING HIS WORDS... IM SHI Lou DVO NOTHING'S WRONG WITH HIS ACTIONS, THOUGH. I'D 4 SAY HE'S... ...GOT LOOK, TYGRA. HE'S SHATTERED LIKE HE WAS MADE OF GLASS..! "


"KNIGHT GAMES 2 CASSETTE .95 SPACETRILOGY CBM 64 PL DISK .95 COMMODORE 64/128 ENGLISH SOFTWAREM LEVIATHAN Q-BALL LEVIATHAN ** REAL COMMODORE AMIGA S12R Ball L O DODOMAIG LOBAL 53 COMMODORE AMIGA 512K ENGLISH COMMODORE AMIGA 512K COMMODORE AMIGA 512K 650 G .95 .95 \"I advise all game starved Amiga owners to buy this, the most ATARI ST .95 original and challenging piece of software on their machine.\" ENGLISH COMMODORE USER SCREENSTAR. SOFTWARE ENGLISH SOFTWARE 1 NORTH PARADE. PARSONAGE GARDENS, MANCHESTER M3 2NH TEL: 061-835 1358 "


"A DOZEN GOOD REASONS V 1 C64 CONNOISSEUR PACK C64C, C2N, MOUSE AND CHEESE (PAINTIART SOFTWARE). CLUEDO, MONOPOLY, SCRABBLE, CHESS RENAISSANCE, TYPING TUTOR, PLUS 2 JOYSTICKS 5 BOOKS, 10 BLANK DATA CASSETTES AND 10 PIECES NO 99 OF EXTRA SOFTWARE (6 64 WWW 2 128 COMPENDIUM PACK COMMODORE 128, C2N, MUSIC MAKER, INTERNATIONAL SOCCER, JACK ATTACK, SPIRIT OF THE STONES, PLUS 2 JOYSTICKS AND ITB 1 AND 2 .00 .99 52204 3 PLUS 4 PRESENTATION PACK PLUS 4 C2N DATASSETTE 10 CASSETTE GAMES, 3 CARTRIDGE GAMES, SCRIPT PLUS WORDPROCESSOR, BUILT IN Script Plus BIBIR .95 PLUS JOYSTICK USER MAN 4 COMPLETE MUSIC PACK C64C COMPUTER, CAN DATASSETTE, 5 OCTAVE KEYBOARD, SOUND STUDIO CASSETTE, SOUND EXPANDER CASSETTE, PLUS 3 PLAYALONG ALBUM CASSETTES. A PROFESSIONAL SYNTHESISER IN YOUR OWN HOME .00 .95  5 MUSIC EXPANSION SYSTEM FOR USE WITH C84, C64C, C128 INCLUDES 5 OCTAVE KEYBOARD, SOUND STUDIO CASSETTE, SOUND EXPANDER CASSETTE, 3 PLAYALONG ALBUMS CASSETTE OR DISC. PLAYALONG ALBUMS AVAILABLE SEPARATELY AT .99 EACH 375.00 6 SEIKOSHA PRINTER COMPATIBLE WITH MOST MAKES OF COMMODORE COMPUTERS. FEATURES VARIETY OF FONTS INCLUDING GRAPHICS AND NEAR LETTER QUALITY, REVERSE PRINTING, ITALICS, TRACTOR FEED AND PAPER SEPARATOR. COMES COMPLETE WITH SERIAL CABLE AND FREE EASY SCRIPT WORD O OO PROCESSOR PACKAGE 2169.99 7 COMMODORE 64C AND C2N DATASETTE (DATASETTES ARE AVAILABLE ONLY .99) .99 8 COMMODORE 1901 COLOUR MONITOR COMPATIBLE WITH MOST COMMODORE HOME COMPUTERS HIGH QUALITY RESOLUTION AND SOUND RGB AND PA SWITCH. ALLOWS FOR 80 COLUMN MODE .00 .99 . "


"WHY YOU SHOULD READ THIS FUTURE FUTURE 9 COMMODORE 1541c DISK DRIVE THIS NEW STYLE 1541 DISK DRIVE COMES WITH 20 BLANK DISKS, LOCKABLE DISKETTE STORAGE BOX AND 5 PIECES OF DISK BASED SOFTWARE ALL INCLUDED IN THE OFFER $189.99 10 EVESHAM EXCELERATOR PLUS DISK DRIVE COMPATIBLE WITH COMMODORE HOME COMPUTERS COMES WITH 20 BLANK DISKS, LOCKABLE DISKETTE STORAGE BOX PLUS 5 PIECES OF DISK BASED SOFTWARE $159.99 AS FEATURED 11 XSL PHASER COMMAND THE INFRARED GAME SYSTEM XSL PHASER GUN SHOOTS SAFE INVISIBLE LIGHT BEAMS 150 FEET AND MORE AUTOMATIC LASERTAG TARGET SENSOR: ACCELERATED SOUND AND LIGHT SYSTEM ELECTRONICALLY INDICATES HITS SENSOR CAN ALSO BE CLIPPED ONTO BELTS SHIRTS, AND HUNG ON THE WALL, AS WELL AS WORN ON THE BODY HARNESS SUPPLIED SINGLE PACK INCLUDES: 1 XSL PHASER GUN 1 HEAVY DUTY BODY HARNESS, 1 HOLSTER 1 $29.99 TARGET UNIT SPECIAL OFFER 2 PAOKS ONLY $50.00 220.04 .99 $159.99 INFRARED GAME SYSTEM THE NEW AMIGA 500 WITH OVER .00 WORTH OF FREE SOFTWARE & ACCESSORIES HACKERI 215.00 SIGNATURE PLEASE DEBIT AT CATOIT CARD Please send me REGNO 09261 NORMANTS NEART WELLINGBOROUGH FARADAY COUNT POSTRONEX LTE SEND YOUR ORDER TO Postronix TITLE OVERSEAS CARD HOLDERS PLEASE STATE EAPWT DAT Teen VERY SPECIAL OFFER! CHEQUE PARABLE ENCLOSE CODE ALL THIS FOR 3450 Privileged Purchase Card When you participate in this unique offer from Postron, you will also receive a privileged purchaser card enabling you to add to you collection of Amiga software, accessories and hardware plus many other products available from Postronix, all at incredible discount prios JUST SHOWN AND SEND TO ADDRESS FILL IN THIS COUPON LIKE A FREE CATALOGUE TO ORDER BUT WOULD IF YOU DO NOT WISH 2 HOUR ORDERVICE PRIVILEGED PURCHASE CARD OFFER INCLUDES: AMIGA 500 COMPUTER MOUSE DISC STORAGE BOX-10 BLANK DISCS-2 JOYSTICKS DE LUXE PAINT SHANGHAI 00 HACKER II. MUSIC STUDIO Offer applies to U.K. Mainland only. All products guaranteed for 12 months. TO ALL PRICES ADD 5.00 POST & PACKAGE ORIO FOR NEXT DAY DELIVERY "


"AMIGA AMG Thai Boxing PHALLANK BATTLE THROUGH AMG-ST Commodore AMIGA JUMP JET RNCO AMG AMG Commodore AMIGA AMG AMG FACTORY LAS-VEGAS CARNICO Commodore AMIGA RNCO COMUNICAT ANCO AMG KUICO AMG-ST GRAND PRIX CAMIGA ANCO Strip Poker Station Games Chic CÔ ATARI ST AMG AMG KECO LH: MIGA GST Commodore AMIGA AMG-ST 74.95 SILVERED CREDITION .95 GOLD ED ANCO SOFTWARE LTD. 35 WEST HILL, DARTFORD, KENT DA1 2EL. TEL: 032292513 FAX NO: 0322 93422. MAIL ORDER HOTLINE: 0322 522631 PAYMENT BY CHEQUE P.O., VISA OR ACCESS "


"MAKE THAT BRITTIEMAN! THE SAME THING'S HAPPENED WITH ALL THE FOES I'VE DEALT WITH AND HERE COMES ANOTHER! e Miss THEY'RE JUST LIKE THIS ELECTRONIC LANDSCAPE JUST COPIES OF THIRD EARTH CREATURES.. MUTANT VULTUREMAN! AND... (NEARLY THROUGH... HELLO ANOTHER ROCKMAN ON OUR (TAIL. I WON'T BOTHER LION-0IT'S TIME ! SHATTERED A FEW 7 ILLUSIONS! ...AND THEY'RE USELESS AGAINST REAL BEINGS LIKE US. THE EYE-BEAM'S JUST OVER THAT RISE, THOUGH THAT ROCKY PASS. LET'S GO... TH-THIS ROCKMAN'S REAL! AND SO IS HIS AXE..!! SO DI ONE GOOD CLEAN PUNCH SHOULD-OWW! MY HAND! "


"CASES IS TIME! HUH!? WHERE'D HE GO..? WASN'T HERE JUST HOPE MY CAMOUFLAGE SKILLS ARE STILL EFFECTIVE IN THIS ENVIRONMENT! SIT WORKED BLENDING IN TO THE BACKGROUND HAS Z MADE ME INVISIBLE.I'!! STAY THAT WAY UNTIL C I'MWELL CLEAR... GUESS HE CAME HERE THE SAME WAY WE DID. BUT... IF THERE ARE FAKE AND REAL ROCKMEN... ... THEN IT MIGHT 4 BE POSSIBLE FOR ... TYGRA! HOW COME YOU'RE WITH THIS COPY OF ME?... UNLESS... OH NO! ...UNLESS YOU'RE A copy foo! A TRUE AND A FAKE LION-0, BOTH READY TO USE THEIR 7 SWORDS ON ME TO SEE IF I'M REAL! YEAH, WAIT A SECOND...I KNOW I'M THE REAL LION-0. BuT M B   A FAKE TYGRA ALONGSIDE ME AIL THE WAY../ THINK FAST, TYGRA WHILE YOU CAN STILL THINK AT ALL! NEXT CHOICES "


"COMMODORE AMIGA Brian Cloughs Football 16.95 Challenger 6.65 5.00 6.65 SPECTRUM Indiana Jones... Gryzor Through the Trap Door Freddy Harvest Bubble Bobble Football Director, Durrell Spectrum 4 Big 4 Vol 2 Gunship 6.65 5.00 Dr Fruit Final Trip.... Goldrunner Gunship Kricht Orc Nome & Burt 16.95 6.65 COMMODORE 64 Gary Linekers S/Soccer D3 6.65 AR World Games 3 Compendium D3 Blood Valley 03 Rygar D3 6.65 Live Ammo D3 Morpheus D2 Nebulus 2 Druid 202 Int. Karate Plus 3 Bubble Bobbie D2 Game Set & Match D4 .......65 Athena D2 Shoot em up Const. Set 5 9.95 Yogi Bears Through the Trap Door DB 6.00 Roy of the Rover D3 5.65 Judige Death Gunboat 3.... ..............6.00 16.95 Ace 2 (BK) Ace 2 (128K) Ikan Warriors Last Ninja Slane. Menstreak Trator Driller Pyar Phantasie 3. Plundered Heart Sky Fighter Soace Quest Super Terrapods 16.95 5.35 16.95 Of course its only a game, nme Minister'sut in ad probity we can hardly say so! Barbarian Demontion....... 600 x Magic software by mail Sidewe 5.35 YES PRIME MINISTER wds Play ..........5.35 Galactic Games D3...........6.65 Faery Tale... 33.95 September 5.35 Renegade D2.... Kampfgruppe Wizard War 5.00 Super Hang On 03 Karate Kid 2 Supersprint Mean Streak 02 6.65 Red Led Ramparts 1 Roadwar 2000 Victory Road Captain America D1 665 Space Battle Wurzball. Red LED 026 .65 Silent Service 16.95 Moonstnike Sidewire 02 Hysteria..... September 03 Starglider 16.95 Roy of the Rovers Street Sport Basketball D3 6.65 California Games 16.95 Judge Death Street Sport Baseball 3 6 .85 Gunboat 5.00 Wizard War 01 ATARI ST Yogi Bear .......... F15 Strike Eagle D3 6 .65 3D Galaxy Mercenary... Pirates D5 Addictaball Eine 6 Pack Vol 2 Airborne Ranger DS Advanced Art Studio... 16.95 California Games Project Stealth Fighter 5 9 .95 Airbal Construction Set Bangkok Knights 6.65 Amazon 13.45 Street Sport Basketball 720 degrees Di Easy Calc 19.95 Gary Lineker Super Soccer 5.35 Quedex 03 Trivial Pursuit Alternative World Games 5.35 Eye D3 Tracker Compendium Victory Road D2 Fahrenheit 451 Live Ammo......... Gauntlet 201... F15 Strike Eagle... 16.95 Nebulus Hysteria D2 Indiana Jones Orud2 Trantor 1 Terrapods 16.95 Game Set & Match Indiana Jones 3 Mail Manor Galactic Games Bangkok Knights 3. Hollywood Strip Poker Super Hang On Supersprint 3 Gunship 16.95 Ramparts. Football Director.. ......... 6.00 Barbarian 16 96 Captain America... 6.00 Ace 2 D3 TNT 13 45 720 degrees 6.00 Evening Star 2 Bubble Bobble 13.45 82405 Renegade Gauntlet 2 Wargame Cons Set D5 9.95 F15 Strike Eagle Exte 6 Pack Vol 203......... 6.65 Battle of Guadalcanal........6.65 Gunship 05 Wizard War....................... 13.45 Star Games 2......................6.65 California Games 1..........6.65 Captain America............... 13.45 Simp & Co...... ... ..6.65 Boxton DS/DO 3 Discs....1395 Mail Order only. Die prices 01 -8 25 02-8.75 D3-995 04-11.95 DS-13.45 Cheques and postal orders to MICRO MAGIC Sumon Place 49 Stoney Street, Nomingham, NG1 1LX You're the Rt. Hon. James Hacker MP, Prime Minister. You have the world at your feet, the future ahead of you, and Sir Humphrey and Bernard behind you. Can you carry the Party, the Electorate, the Can and the Day? Maybe. But for five days. Britain's premier computer game! Program by Oxford Digital Enterprises Spectrum, Commodore, Amstrad and BBC Cassette .95 Disk .95. IBM PC and compatibles, Amstrad PCW .95. Available from W. H. Smiths, Boots and other leading stockists Mosaic Publishing Ltd. Gorley Firs, South Gorley, Hants SP6 2PS Tel: 0425 57077 MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS 400/806 NOW mwe LOOK Wor SPECTRUM Game Set & Match ........10.95 Starship D1.. Gnome Ranger 7.95 Druid Il 5.95 Buggy Boy 01. J. Archer's Not A Penny Gauntlet II. 5.95 Thundercats 01. . . ............. 12.95 Ikari Warriors .95 Jacka 01 6.95 Starwars ........... ........ 7.95 Last Ninja 7.95 Roy of Rovers 01 7.95 Gary Lineker's S. Soccer 5.95 Tai-Pan 5.95 Gauntlet il 03 Ater Word Games 5.95 Pende 5.95 Sidearms D3 Saine... 6.95 Wild Class L Board 7.95 720-03 7.95 Compendium Gremlin) 5.95 Indiana Jones 6 .95 Solid Gold D1 7.95 Deflektor 5.95 Mask il 5.95 Outrun D3 Base Detective 5.95 Super Sorint..... ...7.95 Bravestar D3 ... Tour De France 5.95 Jack Nipper il 5.95 Captain America D3 Werewolves of London 7.95 Judge Death.... 7.95 Lazer Tag 03 Pegasus Bridge 10.95 Gryzor.. 5.99 Platoon 5.95 Sorcerer's Lord. 10.95 Mean Streak 5.95 Combat School 5.95 Rampage............. ........ 7.95 Yogi Bear... 7.95 Rastan in Karate + 7.95 Caldornia Games ..... 7.95 Psycho Soldier ... Airbourne Ranger 7.95 Adv. Tactical Fighter 7.95 Victory Road 03 6.95 Stealth Fighter .. 7.95 The Double 12.95 7.95 Bubble Bobble 5.95 Hysteria Action Force 7.95 Trantor 5.95 Freddy Hardest Scruples 01 7.95 Moon Strike ... . 5.95 Rygar 01 Starship... 7.95 Be A complete B .............5.95 Executor.. ............6.95 Buggy Boy D1 5.95 Guadal Canal..... 7.95 Gryzor. Thundercats 01 5.95  Hit Pack Volume 5.95 Game Set & Match 05 10.95 XLUXE ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to:CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE 12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 HOLD ON A SEC JUST GOT TO FINISH THIS ROUND I WON'T BE LONG, HONEST Roy of Rovers 7.95 COMMODORE 64 Tobruk 01 7.95 Trap Door l 6.95 Gnome Ranger ........ 7.95 Diplomacy D1.............10.95 Gunbaot 6.95 J. Archer Not A Penny More Track & Field D1 Sidearms 6.95 04.... 12.95 Shoot 'Em Up Con. Set 04 12.95 720 8.95 Starwars 01.. .........7.95 . 7.95 Subbattle Di Subbattie D1 ....... Solid Gold D .....7.95 Gary Lineker S. Soccer D1 7.95 Apache Gunship D4 ........ 12.95 6.95 At World Games D1 ........ 7.95 Barbarian D3. Bravesta . 5.95 Slaine D1 7.95 Colonial Quest OK Only 17.50 Captain America. 6.95 Compendium D1 7 .95 World Cls L'Board D17.95 Wizard Warz 5.95 Deflektor 01 7.95 Pirates D4. ........ 12.95 Lazer Tag 5.95 Basil Detective D1 7.95 Defender of Crown DK Platoon 5.95 Tour De France D1 7.95 Only 12.95 ... 5.95 Werewolves London D1...7.95 Street Basketball D1 5.95 Pegasus Bridge D5 10.95 Street Baseball 01 Psycho Soldier................5.95 Sorcerer's Lord 05..... 10.95 Bangkok Knight D1... Victory Road ... 5.95 Rampage D1 ..... ... 7.95 6 Hit Pack Volume Il D1 ... 7.95 Madballs 5.95 Int. karate+ D1 7.95 Indiana Jones D1 7.95 Phantasie 5.95 Airbourne Ranger D4 .... 12.95 32401 .... 12.95 Stealth Fighter 04 ... ..12.95 Guadal Canal 1 Hysteria 5.95 Bobsleigh D1.. 7.95 Judge Death .. Freddy Hardest................ 5.95 Adv. Tactical Fighter D1 5 .95 California Games D1. 7.95 Rygar.. ...............6.95 Action Force....... 7.95 Super Sprint D1..... 7.95 Executor........... ...5.95 Be A Complete B. 7.95 Renegade D3 6.95 Apache Gunship..... .7.95 Scruples D1 ..........10.95 Postage included UK. Please state which micro. Fast service. Send cheque PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept CVG, 49H Sutherland Street, Victoria, London SW1 V4JX MAIL ORDER ONLY: Send for FREE list Amstrad, C16, MSX, Atari ST Commodore, Spectrum. D-Disks Available D1 at .95, D3 af C1095, 04 at .50, DS at .95 JUST ONE MORE GO... PLEASE? MIRRORSOFT 1987 What ARE they playing ? "


"AMIGA SPECIALS OFFICIAL COMMODORE DEALERS JAZA ATARI ST SPECIALS SYSTEMS ARCHITECTS COMMERCIAL AND COMPUTER SERVICES LTD 01-549 3028 AMIGA 500 Barbarian (Palace) Defender of the Crown Flight Simulator || Faery Tale Adventure Impact Arbzales Tombs Barbarian (Psygnosis) Deja Vu Digipaint Aegus Sonics Guild of Thieves Hollywood Poker Uninvited Pluto's Portal Pawn Silent Service Starglider Mouse Trap .50 $22.00 $35.00 $37.00 $11.50 $28.00 $20.00 $24.00 .00 .00 $20.00 $15.00 $24.00 .50 .00 $20.00 $20.00 $20.00 $12.00  STRAIGHT .00 A500 + Deluxe Paint  SPECIAL .00 A500 + Modulator + Textcraft Word Processor or Goldrunner + Deluxe Paint  MEGA $575.00 A500 + 1Mb Upgrade + Modulator + Text Craft Wordprocessor or Goldrunner + Deluxe Paint  JUMBO .00 A500 + Monitor + Textcraft Word Processor or Goldrunner + Deluxe Paint  MEGA JUMBO .00 A500 + IMb Upgrade + Monitor + Text Craft word processor or Goldrunner 1 Mb upgrade $99.00 1081 Monitor $299.00 Barbarian (Palace) .50 Defender of the Crown $22.00 Flight Simulator II .00 Impact .50 Barbarian (Psygnosis) $22.00 Colonial Conquest $25.00 Guild of Thieves $20.00 Hollywood Poker $15.00 Leaderboard $20.00 Pluto's $11.50 Portal $28.00 Pawn $20.00 Silent Service $20.00 Star Glider .00 Mouse Trap $12.00 Cumana IBM Disk Drive .95 Atari 520 STEM $275 Atari 1040 ST  Atari 1040 ST+SM 125 Mono Monitor  A  ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT TELEPHONE ORDERS ON 549 3028  CALLERS WELCOME AT SHOP  ITEMS DESPATCHED WITHIN 10 DAYS (but please allow 10 days for delivery)  PLEASE ADD 50p P+P  PLEASE MAKE CHEQUES PAYABLE TO SYSTEMS ARCHITECTS H Systems Architects, (C+VG), Syndicate Store, 6-9 Market Place, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey KTI 4BR Tel: 549 3028 (24 hr ansaphone) nr 45 YOUR MICRO DESERVES THE BEST OFF ALL TRADE PRICES SPECTRUM $1995 .95 When your home or business micro costs several hundreds of pounds, it deserves the finest repair facilities in Europe. And the finest prices  off trade rates for a limited period only * How? At Verran we use our own range of advanced automatic test equipment (now sold worldwide), backed by stringent 2-8 hours soak-rack testing. That means speed, ultra-low prices and, most important, guaranteed reliability. For the first three months we'll repair any fault free. For the next three, at half these quoted prices. It's the finest service available. EUROPE'S LEADING COMMODORE 64 24 ang COMPUTER REPAIR CENTRE AND UNBEATABLE DISCOUNTS ON ALL COMPONENTS AMSTRAD 464 BBC SPECTRUM SPARES 280 CPU ULA 6C001 Power Supply ROM 4116 RAMS ZTX 650 ZTX 213 2.50 700 6.50 700 B STD BRD 325 COMMODORE SPARES 6510 Processor 12.00 6525 CIA 12.00 6581 Sid Chip 15.00 901225 Graphic ROM 10.00 901226 Basic ROM 10.00 901227 Kernal ROM 15.00 906114 House Keeper 10.00 6569 VIC 18.00 4164 RAMS Memory 1.00 Power Supplies C64 19.50 C16 15.00 All the above prices include VAT but please enclose a further .50 post and packing on all component orders. HOW TO CONTACT US *For quotes on computers not listed or on any component, telephone 0276 66266. (Quoting VID/127). *To send us your micro for repair, mail it securely packed, accompanied by cheque, postal order (made out to Verran Micro Maintenance Limited) or quote your Access or Barclaycard number. *And to obtain your special discount quote VID/127. ELECTRON Keyboard Membrane Spectrum Spectrum Plus QL Metal Templates 3.00 8.00 9.00 3.00 Verran Verran Micro Maintenance Limited, Unit 2H & 2J. Albany Park, Frimley Road, Camberley, Surrey GU15 2PL. Telephone 0276 66266. . AMSTRAD Recommended and Approved by ATARI ACORN SINCLAIR COMMODORE  Merry Christmas from all of us at Verran "


"IN THE LAND OF THE BLIND THE ONEEYE'D MAN IS KING «More challenging and complex than Chess» (Lee Rodwell The Times, September 1987) RUM .95 Actual Atari ST screen shots Graphics vary according to format Spectrum .95 Atari ST .95 Commodore 64/128 .95 (.95 Disk) Amstrad .95 (.95 Disk) DDORE ENDURANCE GAMES ENDURANCE GAMES PUBLISHED BY ENDURANCE GAMES UNDER LICENCE FROM FINGER PRODUCTS LTD. ENDURANCE GAMES. UNIT 1. BAIRD ROAD. ENFIELD, MIDDLESEX. 01-804 8100, TLX 295944 ENDURANCE GAMES IS A DIVISION OF PRISM LEISURE CORP PLC. "


"trame Welcome to the part of C+VG where we get to the art of the matter. Your screen gems revealed in all their glory for all to admire. And remember the top pics we print get a stupendous price from Rainbird Software in the shape of their Advanced Art Studio! This ish we kick off with ST Art from P. Morley of High Wycombe who sent us the stunning skull (I) and the B-a-ad looking troll (2). He's the winner of our ST prize this month. More ST art from Mike Watson of Forres, Scotland who produced the nice picture of his new car (3) and a Stifflip loading screen (4). On to the 61 with this pin-up of Miami Vice favourites Sonny and Tubbs from Rob Jackson of Sudbury in Suffolk our Commodore Art Studio winner (5). Overseas readers flood C+VG's offices with neat ples and Klaus Adamovsky from Germany is one winner Francis Lee's passion going by these screens he sent us, a moody Jimmy Dean, (7), and a classy Diva poster 18). Finally more 64 ples from the mean team by Mad and Josh from Christchurch, Dorset. They sent us a whole bunch of neat ples but despite threats we picked the Dream Machine (9). If you are a master of the computer arts then send your masterpieces to Frame Up, Computer and Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. We're waiting for them! SIREN pen "


"----Tari Beneix Un Filmide presente rene Silbermann -"


"SPECIAL OFFER Free Watch With Every Joystick SHOOT A PATH TO THE STARS Phasor One .95 APPROD GOLDE Reg des. Pat pending PRODU 2 years unconditional guarantee for normal use. Extra long cable for additional mobility Any problems in obtaining your \"Phasor One\" joysticks you can contact us at: Zap the opposition with the Phasor One Joystick. Microswitch mechanism gives swift response making play fast and accurate. With a two year guarantee, the Phasor One is Number One for winners. Pistol grip design for all ages. Left or right hand-it is as effective in either. Longlife micro switches give precision control. Hardwearing steel shaft and ball bearing pivot. Ultra sensitive control level for faster responses tannia Britannia Software Limited Cardiff Workshops, Lewis Road Cardiff CF1 SEB Telephone: 0222 481135 Trade enquiries welcome "


"MAIL-SOFT ****** SIMPLY THE CHEAPEST MAIL ORDER COMPANY ****** ALT WORLD GAMES BUBBLE BORBLE SPY V SPY CONFLICT 1 MASKI COMBAT SCHOOL FLASH POINT SUPER SPRINT RYGAR GRYZOT BLOOO VALLEY ELITE THEATRE EUROPE MAD BALLS. BATTLE OF BRITAIN CAME SET VATCH PECASTS BRIDGE WORLD GAMES WORLD CLASS BOARD FREDDY HARDEST JACKEL SCALEXTRIC BANKOK KNIGHTS THR T TRAP DOOR ROY OF THE ROVERS BRAVE STARR RAMPARTS ARBARIAN ... SEGA SYSTEN *** COMMODORE 64 GB CUMMONEN 2. AMSTRAD ... 650 EXPLODING FISTIL SEGA MASTER SYSTEM 96.95 .6.40 ORU OR01 6.99 STAR WARS LUGHT PHASER CART 5.99 FLASHPOINT01 3-0 GLASSES 6.40 ENCOUNTER-02 .6.99 SUPER SPRINT02 5.50 FLYING SHARK 540 CONTROL STICK 10.95 KNIGHTMARE 02 5.40 SORCERER LORD 1395 GAUNTLET 02 6.99 ST TH FIGHTER 4 GRYZOR02 6.99 GHOST HOUSE 13.95 SORCERER LORD04 9.95 FREDOY HARDESTD2 ..6.50 GS + MATCH-04 ....6.99 PHANTYS 5.50 TEDDY BOY. 1795 SIDE AAMS-02 5.99 A BORNE RANGER-04 10.96 OUT RUN-D2 9.99 LINEKERS FOOTBALL 5.50 TRANSBOT 13.95 GIRLD OF THIEVESO 13.95RYGARD2 5.99 FREDDY HARDEST .-5.75 PSYCHO SOLDIER......... 5.50 SUPER TENNIS 13.95 ELITE 6 PACXI02 6 99 MAD BALLS-01 5.40 JACKFL02 ..6.60 7.16 FIGHTER 13.95 OCEANS 5 HITS D2 6.40 TIME MAGIK-04 550 ACE 12 6.99 MISSILE DEFENCE30 COMBAT SCHOOL -01 650 FINAL FRONTIER 04 9.95 CAL GAMES 02 RASTAN 550 SPACE HARRIER. JACK NIPPER02... 6.99 FORTRESS AMERICA-04 9.99 BUBBLE BOSALE01 6.99 VICTORY ROAD 2396 GRYZOR -01..... 6.90 LIGHTMARE 02 LUCAS FILMS 4 MP MISSION 2-D2 ELITE MIT PACK 12 550 RAMPAGE TANK 01 FLYING SHARK 02 6.50 6.50 CHOP EFTER 18.95 PSYCHO SOLDIER 1 6 .50 FREEZE MACHINE 27.95 SUPER HANG ON-02 5.50 BLITZKREIG 6.99 FANTASY ZONE 18.95 TAI-PAN 01 5.30 SLIMLINE KEYBOARD 18.95 PEGASUS BRIDGE 04 ANNALS OF ROME 9.99 BLACK BELT 18.95 LAST NINJA 02. 6,99 EXPERT-ESM CART. 2799 TAI-PAND2 . 550 BUGGIE BOY 5.50 ACTION FIGHTER 18.95 CAL'NIA GAMES 02 .6,99 CON DATA RECORDER 28.95 RENAGADE D2. ...... 7.95 SUPER HANG ON... ..6.99 PRO WRESTLING 18.95 RASTAN02 5.50 NEOS MOUSE CHEESE 28.95 G'LD OF THIEVES 0 4.99 DURRELL 4 VOL II. 6.99 GREAT GOLF 18.95 GUNSHIPD4.. 10.95 DOLPHIN DOS 65.95 ART STUDIO DISK... 5.50 THUNDER CATS 5.50 WORLD SOCCER VICTORY ROAD-02 KNIGHT ORC04 4.95 DRILLER 6.99 THE NINJA 95 DEFER OF CROWN-D 73196 JEWELS DNESS-04 9.90 BATTLEFIELD CERMANY VASK 02 18.75 SILICON DREAMS06 999 MAGNETRON 5.40 AKIN VIRACLE WORLD BARBARIAN 02 6 99 CALIFORNIA GAMES 18.75 THE PAWN DISK... 5.0 WONDER BOY... 6.99 CARRIER COMMAND .......... 16.75 18.75 MINI OFFICE 04............ 10 650 SILENT SERVICE 6.99 JINXTER 23 95 GAUNTLET II 02 5.50 OURELL 4 VOL .... SUPER HANG ON-02 18.75 10 BLANK DISKS... 5.50 GRAPHIC CREATOR 18,95 ENDURO RACER ENDURO RACER .......... 18.95 PEGASUS BRIDGE-D4 9 .95 PAWN 18.95 MULTIFACE ............. ...4 6.99 JACK NIPPER II 5.50 WORLD GRAND PRIX 18.95 THUNDER CATS 02 6 .99 TIME + MAGIK 14.95 DRILLER 02.... ... 6.99 FOOTBALL MANAGER 2 6 .99 SECRET COMMAND .18.96 BISMARK02 6 .99 TRACKER 19.95 ROY OF ROVERS-02 ... 6.99 MPOSS MISSION 2. .99 ASTRO WARRIOR 6.99 DEFENDER OF CROWN 19.95 BRAVESTARR02 .. 6.99 HYSTERIA 5.99 HYSTERIA ...........550 SHOOTING GALLERY 18.95 STREET RASKETBALL-02 9 9 STARGLIDER 6.50 DESERT RATS 6.99 GANGSTER TOWN 18.95 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGN 695 CUD OF THIEVES SEPTEMBER 02 6 50 JEWELS OF DARKNESS 9.95 SILICON DREAM 02 ... 9.95 SILICON DREAMS STREET BASKETBALL 02 699 SILICON DREAMS STREET BASEBALL 02. 5.99 x DISKS F. MANAGER 2 02.. DELUXE SCRABBLE OSK 125 DELUXE SYSTEM 159 95 GNOME RANGER-01 ...........6.99 IMP MISSION 2-D2... 2.99 STARGLIDER... .............9.95 CONTROL DECK... 99 95 SHOOT-FM KIT 14 11.95 RENAGADE 13.95 RAMPAGE 02...................6.92 CHARLIE CHAPLIN............... 6.99 GYROMITE................ ... 31.95 INT KARATE PLUS-02.......6.99 TRANTOR... 13.95 MAD BALLS-02 6.50 TRIVIAL PURSUIT 10.56 STACK-UP 31.95 JACKEL-D2 6.50 GAUNTLETI 14.95 FLASHPOINT-02 6.50 ..6.99 SOLID GOLD. . 7.25 DUCK HUNT DURRELL VOL II -01 6.99 TIME + MAGIK COMBAT SCHOOL-02... GUM SHOE 29.95 ..6.99 SUPER SPRINT SIDE ARMS02 MAGNETRON-01 6.40 STARGLIDER UNENEAS FOOTBALL 02 10.95 10X DISKS 24.95 SOCCER NEBULUS_01 6.40 OEFENDER OF CROWN RAM TURBO MORPHEUSD1 ROY OF ROVERS-02 6.99 ADV ART STUDIO 55 KEPSTON INTERFACE 6.95 SUPER MARIO BROS...... RING WORLD 02 6.99 FLYING SHARK CHEETAH 125 SPECIAL 725 PLUS 2 LEAD BKOK KNIGHTS-D2 COMP PRO EXTRA 43.95 ATARBITD SUPER SPRINT02 6,99 CARRIER COMMAND 18.95 EUROMAX PROF PLUS 5.45 RAMPRINTRAMWRITE ... 29.99 DRUID D2....................... 6.99 RAMPARTS 02. .6.99 FLIGHT SIMULATOR II. ...34 95 MICRO HANDLER .99 DKTRONS LIGHTPEN.... 18.95 AUTODUEL-DISK............. 14.99 BRAVESTARR 02. .6.99 GUILD OF THIEVES 18.95 COMP PRO 5000 5995 KNIGHT ORC -02 SLAINE-02... .9.95 .6.99 DISK SPECIAL AMX MOUSE CHEETAH 125+ 13.95 G. S 9.95 12.95 MATCH-04 CHEETAH MACH 1 STAR TREK (Avi Oct 6.99 0 CENTE INTERFACE GUILD OF THIEVES 14.95 34 5 BUGGY BOY02 6.99 BARBARIAN-PALACE 11.99 KONIXS SPEEDKING 899 RAM MUSIC MACHINE 5 SILICON DREAMS-02 .9.95 JINXTERDISK 14.95 BUBBLE BOBBLE QUICK SHOT 11 TURBO ..... 6.50 SPEC DRUM 28.95 PAWNORSK .......... . 14.95 FOOTBALL MAN 2-D2 6.99 JSTICK EXT LEAD QUICK SHOT 11 AVAILABLE ON DISK FORMAT-11-29.95, 02-10.95, 03-.95, D414.95 29 95 1195 CLUCLU LAND SEPTEMBER PRESIDENT \"LAST NINJA ENDURO RACER FOOTBALL DIRECTOR PLUS 2 DUST COVER ARTIST 11 AOV ART STUDIO LIVE AVVO RENAGADE SENTINAL TAI-PAN GNONE RANGER . THE PAWN128K ARTISTI 12BK....... S STREET BASKETBALL FIRE TRAP CALIFORNIA GAMES CALIFORNIA GAMES...... PRICES INCLUDE P PIN UK, EUROPE ADD EI PER TAPE ELSEWHERE ADDI.50 ADD ES FOR P P FOR MACHINES (UK ONLY) CHOPO PAYABLE TO MAILSOFT IC VG) PO BOX 589 LONDON N15 6JJ, ACCESS AND VISA ORDERS WELCOME PLEASE SPECIFY COMPUTER TYPE IN YOUR ORDER. PLEASE NOTE: DENOTES NEW RELEASES WHICH WILL BE SENT TO YOU AS SOON AS THEY ARE RELEASED BY THE SOFTWARE HOUSES CONCERNED. *** PRICE MATCHING IF YOU SEE ANY SOFTWARE YOU WANT ADVERTISED CHEAPER THAN OUR PRICE IN THIS MAGAZINE JUST ENCLOSE THE LOWER AMOUNT TO US AND TELL US WHICH COMPANY IT IS AND WE WILL MATCH THE PRICE THIS ONLY APPLIES TO CURRENT TITLES AND NOT TO OTHER COMPANIES SPECIAL OFFERS. IF YOU DO NOT SEE THE TAPE YOU WANT SIMPLY DEDUCT 30% OFF THE R.R.P. AND WE WILL SEND IT TO YOU. EXCEPT BUDGET, SEGA NINTENDO 2600 SOFTWARE.) NOW AVAILABLE-the official Spectrum Upgrade to eat Turn your Spectrum int la Spectrum + for just .95 Makes a Christmas great present ORDER + .50 p + p ORDER NOW!  ACCESS WELCOME  Professional full-size keyboard -includes 17 extra keys.  Responsive typewriter-style action Accepts all current Spectrum software and peripherals True video Inverse video Graphics Edit Caps lock Sitele TE TUDelete Extended mode Full stop Caps shift SemicolonInverted comma Cursor controls The official Spectrum Upgrade. Naturally your upgraded computer will accept all the peripherals in your Sinclair systemInterface 1, Microdrives and so on. as well as all Spectrum software, Just as important, new Spectrum software and peripherals will be designed with the Spectrum + in mind. So the Sinclair upgrade adds stylish looks, new capabilities ... and new potential for the future. HOW TO ORDER BY MAIL 1. If you require us to do the upgrade for you please send .90 +.50 p + p. Total .40. 2. Should you require the do-it-yourself it just send .95 +.50 p +. Total .45. 3. If you require your Spectrum to be repaired and upgraded to a Spectrum Plus we have a special offer price of just E50.00 complete. Orders can be placed by using your Access Card on the numbers below. Here's some exciting news for Spectrum owners ... the official Spectrum Upgrade Kit. The Upgrade has everything you SA need to turn your Spectrum into the stylish new Spectrum +. You don't even A need an understanding of electronics, just the ability to solder a few wires together! The leaflet in the kit gives clear step by step instructions. If you're not sure about doing it yourself, don't worry. Simply return your 48K Spectrum to us and for .90 +  D + D We'll upgrade it for you. The bigger, better Spectrum keyboard The Spectrum + measures 121/2\" X 6'. It has a large typewriter-style keyboard, with hard, moulded keys. You'll find the new keyboard has a smooth positive action ideal for touch typing, word processing, simulation programs, and extended programming sessions. Two retractable legs give a perfect typing position. There are 58 keys in all, including 17 new keys. Programmers will be pleased to see dedicated punctuation keys, a space bar, and separate shift keys for graphics and extended modes. And a reset button allows you to clear a program from your computer's memory without disconnecting the power supply with hard, moulded keys. you find the news key and his brograme parlame Video Vault a la u G W Upgrade Dept. 140 High Street West, Glossop, Derbyshire SK13 8H) Tel: 04574-66555/67761 Head Office & access orders. Manchester 061-236 0376 while you wait repair centre only  Copyright Videovault Ltd. No. 789003 "


"IIIIIII 000OOT Dennehy as the cop and James Woods, There are thrills-a-plenty as Ward R. Street neurotically superb as the creepy killer. hunts for his film of the month and finally They play psychological games, circling finds it in heaven! best-selling writer of police procedurallike suspicious dogs, sniffing at each novels, though he remains on the force. other. And what is the truth? You'll Beware! Ward's weather forecast is for goes to 211 Beaumont Street, the Then, into his life comes Cleve, a have to stay to the last page to find pelting rain and icy winds this month. 'House of Games', to talk to the hood. weirdo's weirdo who claims to have out! Better shelter in a nice warm cinema But instead of the poker players and been an assassin for a top After this terrific trio, SLAM then, with a thriller to startle you out petty criminals she expects, she finds businessman. He wants Meechum to DANCE (15) waltzes in and drops with of hiberation herself drawn into the elaborate world write his story, uncover the criminality a dull thud. There are so many twists Remember all those heist movies of confidence tricksters. in the big corporations ... and portray and turns to its plot that it ends up that were so popular in the seventies From this point the film is like an him in a sympathetic light while ne Slam Dance: Tom Hulce is where some big star would plan a bank onion, and every time she thinks she's does so! quick on the draw raid in minute detail and almost get reached the truth there's another skin Meechum takes a little convincing at away with it? You do! Boring weren't to be peeled away, more lies to be first. After all, Cleve appears to be they? Bellman and True: Lesson three in how to make a BELLMAN AND TRUE is a heist Spectrum movie too but you won't fall asleep on this job! There's no raid on Fort Knox, just a bank outside Heathrow Airport. There are no big American names but Bernard (Yosser) Hill proves yet again what a brilliant actor he is. And superheroics and unlikely stunts are replaced with computers and electronic trickery for this is crime as business -crime for the eighties! Hiller arrives at Paddington station with his young son, and from the moment he steps off the train he's a marked man. A systems operator for a GAMES bank, he promised a criminal syndicate details of a security system but failed to deliver. To force him to complete the job, they take the boy hostage. Slowly he's drawn into their plot, and when he becomes invaluable he's forced to accompany them on the raid. So this ordinary, honest man is drawn deeper into a world which he hates, but from which he can't escape. Everyday scenery, from London to the Suffolk coast, becomes hostile as the story unfolds. And as the promise of wealth tempts him. Hiller tries to remain close to his son. Bellman and True will hold you hostage because it's not just about an House of Games: Okay, ingenious robbery, it's about people hand over my copy of people you really care for. It cranks up Barbarian the tension until it's almost uncovered. By the time Margaret unbearable. It'll be appearing on TV discovers the truth it is too late, and eventually, but it'd be a crime to miss she's been drawn into the dark heart of this great British thriller in the cinema the confidence ring. Corruption of a different sort rears If BELLMAN revives the heist tied in knots and chokes itself. its ugly head in HOUSE OF GAMES movie, HOUSE OF GAMES takes a Tom Hulce is C. C. Drood, an (15), a low-budget American movie set fresh, less sentimental look at the avant-garde cartoonist whose carefree in Seattle which appears to be the territory worked by The Sting. It's an lifestyle is ripped apart like one of his Stateside equivalent of Manchester, if intelligent movie with several small drawings when a casual liaison with a the weather is anything to go by! faults, but the revelation of trick after mysterious blonde catches up on him. Margaret Ford is a successful trick is spellbinding, like watching a A Best Seller: Honest, guv, With the police on one side and violent psychotherapist who's just published a master conjuror at work. I never nicked that C+VG criminals on the other he has every best selling book, but is still worried But that's not all. The thriller's a totally whacked out. But slowly events reason to feel paranoid everyone in that she's not really experiencing life, mighty versatile form, and the third piece together and an uneasy trust LA appears to be out to get him. and that for all the listening, she's variation on the theme is a guaranteed grows between the two men, until a Unfortunately director Wayne Wang unable to do anything positive to help sudden revelation reveals a link has opted for style over content, but her patients. In 1972 LA COP. Dennis Meechum between the present and that fatal instead of adding to the sense of When one of them, a compulsive survives a raid by masked intruders raid. confusion it merely serves to cut-off gambler, claims that a local gangster is which leaves two of his colleagues The film is held together by the two any real interest in the labyrinthine going to kill him because of a debt, she dead. Fifteen years later he's become a central performances of big Brian conspiracy on screen. Still, three out of DITIO basa o adow serves TITIIII "


"IIIIII four ain't bad, and any one of them in the 1940s Mike Shea (Timothy Luckily for Mike it's possible to be gore hounds out there, so for you could have been my film of the month, Hutton), young and unemployed, reincarnated, and he manages to there's CREEPSHOW 2, sequel to the but for... decides to look for a new life in persuade Emmett, God's manager, to collection of Stephen King stories from Just before my deadline, I saw a California. But only a hundred miles let him be reborn. But he only has until a couple of years back. This new movie which is a fantasy (aww), a love from his home he rescues a family from his thirtieth birthday to find Annie compilation has got a harder edge. story (aww www) and unlike anything a wrecked car... and loses his own and she could be anywhere in America! though, and earned itself an 18 I've ever seen before! In fact it's so life. Suddenly he is standing naked in a Okay, so it all sounds pretty soppy. certificate. fresh and imaginative it's hard to palatial room as his dead aunt comes but don't give up, because director The three tales are no great shakes, believe that it wasn't actually MADE to greet him. This is the afterlife. Alan Rudolph is clever enough to give but they do have a ghoulish glee as IN HEAVEN (PG). Heaven is a place where anything the whole confection a rich centre, to they tell of a wooden Indian which Made in Heaven: can come true and that includes balance out the airiness of its icing, the comes to life, an unspeakable thing in a \"What's a girl like you falling in love, which Mike promptly result is exquisite witty, funny and lake and a hitchhiker who just won't doing in a mag like this?\" does with Annie (Kelly McGillis), a clever. take no as an answer. beautiful soul who has never been sent But most of all it's daringly Actually, the 18 seems unfair to earth. Everything is — well, imaginative in the way it tackles considering that it's all played for fun, heavenly until the time comes for what's been called the last great taboo and there are enough rough edges to her to depart to be born. death! Mike's reaction soon turns keep any hint of nightmarish realism at Creepshow 2: Well, don't you enjoy biting your bay. But I actually preferred this to the toenails? original. Creep in if you want some lightweight laughs in the jugular vein! This month's other comedy offering is produced by Aaron Spelling of Dynasty fame, written and directed by Jerry Belson, a veteran of US sitcoms, and features Sally Field, who started her career as TV teenager Gidget. With credits like that your reaction may well be to SURRENDER! SURRENDER's a smart-ass comedy about love, money and divorce in LA. It also stars Michael Caine, looking somewhat out of place as a muchdivorced best-selling author who breaks his vow of celibacy when he meets Miss Field, but decides to keep his riches a secret to test her. The pace is roller coaster hectic and it's all silly stuff, packed with one liners, a few of which are very funny, the others raising a smile or just falling flat. Whether you surrender to its Surrender: No Michael, I won't let you make more outlandish plot will depend on your than two films a day tolerance to American television comedy. At the other extreme there's BLISS (18), a very odd Australian allegory about a happily middle-class man who dies for four minutes after a heart attack, then discovers that life can never be the same again. He finds out the truth about his company's involvement with dangerous products, his wife's infidelity and the rest of his rotten world -all of which makes him suspect that hell is, in fact, on earth. This is truly weird, unlike any of Hollywood's attempts at wackiness. But it rambles too much for its own good, and individual parts tend to be better than the whole. But if you're out of an adventurous nature give it a go at times it's blissfully bizarre. At the other extreme you could spend A MONTH IN THE COUNTRY from dismay to delight as he realises (PG), one of those nostalgic tales, that here is a place where all his bathed in the golden glow of the years long dead friends are still alive, and following the First World War, which Clike the Land of Oz) where dreams the British do so well. really do come true. If heaven does It's not all pretty pictures though. exist, I sure hope it's like this! Two ex-soldiers are brought together Next month there'll be a festive mix in a small Yorkshire village to excavate of blood, guts and adventure, but for for an ancient burial site and uncover a now I have no hesitation in medieval mural. But during the long, recommending this brilliant, mind hot summer the scars left by the Great expanding, tender and funny -yes, War are re-opened. It's a small-scale truly divine movie! picture, but it's none the worse for A Bliss: You'd look furtive if you read Games Machine Of course there are still plenty of that. IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII "


"SUPA SOFT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE Present the Following Special Offers to C&VG Readers SPECTRUM Superstar Soc Space harrier Barbanan Head over Heels Enduro Racer Paperboy Bubble Bobble Kon Coin-op ARW. Games Compendium Arkanoid WC. Leaderboard Hit 6 1 2 To Pursuit Ghost & Gobling Blood Valley Super Sprint Knight Ore Road Runner Catch 23 Out Run Flying Shark Trantor Califor Games Stars on 128 RRP OUR SPECTRUM 7.95 6.50 F-15 Eagle 7.95 5.25 Trap Door 9.95 6.75 Hyrdofool 7.95 5.40 Death Wish 3 995 6.75 Solda MI 3 9.95 700 Star Games Il 7.95 525 25 Live Ammo 9.95 6.50 B41012 7.95 5.25 Side Wize 7.95 5.25 7.95 525 Silent Service 9.95 6.50 Roy of Rovers 9.95 6.50 Footballer Year 14.95 10.95 Starfox 7.95 525 7.95 5.25 9.95 850 Game. Set Match 14.95 11 95 Slain 8.99 625 Hybrid 7.95 5.25 Stealth Fight 9.95 8.50 SOLO & Co 7.95 525 Super Soccer 8.99 625 Eagle Nest 8.99 6.25 Judge Death RRP OUR COMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK COMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK ATARIST 9.95 7.00 Superstar Socc 6.50 10.95 Deathscape 6.75 10.95 Tri Pursuit 7.95 5.25 Leaderboard 6.50 10.95 Death Wish 3 6.75 10.95 Guild Thieves 795 5.25 Super Sprint 6.50 10.95 Ba 41 or 2 6.50 10.95 Leaderboard 7.99 5.50 Renegade 6.50 10.95 Rebel 6.75 10.95 Knight Ore 9.95 6.75 Out Run 6.50 10.95 Red LED 6.75 10.95 The Pawn 790 550 Paperboy 6.50 10.95 Uving Daylights 6.75 10.95 Salent Ser 9.95 8.75 Flying Shark 6.00 10.90 Side Wize 6.75 10.95 Road Runner 8 99 6.00 World Leaderboard 6.50 10.95 Hysteria 6.50 10.95 Subbattle 9.95 6.75 Mask 6.75 10.95 Gryzor 6.50 10.95 Deep Space 795 5.25 California Games 6.50 10.95 Stealth Fighter 11.95 14.95 Star Trex 9.96 6.75 Compendium 650 10.95 Champ Water S 695 10.95 Arkanoid 995 6.50 AR World Games 6.50 10.95 Epyx Epics 6.75 10.95 Solomans Key 7.96 5.25 Elite 750 14.95 Five star 2 6.50 10.95 Gauntlet1 or 2 8.99 5.50 Blood Valley 6.50 10.95 Ghost & goblins 6501095 Sentinel 7.96 5.25 Roy of the Rovers 6.50 10.95 Wizball 625 10.00 Silicon Dream 9.95 6.75 Live Ammo 6.50 10.95 Subbattie NA 11.95 Jewels Dark 12 95 750 Xor 6.75 10.95 Rygar 6.75 10.95 Tai-Pan 8.99 6.50 Barbarian 6.75 10.95 Salent Service 6.75 10.95 Balance Power 8.995.50 Judge Death 6.7 10.95 Acro Jet 7.95 5.25 Gauntlet 1 of 2 6.50 10.95 Head Over Heels 625 10.00 Ghost Gods 9.99 6.75 Sold a M 3 6.50 10.95 Indiana Jones 6.75 10 95 AW Games 7.95 525 RoadRunner 6.75 10.95 Ta Pan 6.25 10.00 Blood Valley 9.95 6.75 Yogi Bear 6.50 10.95 Game Over 6 25 1000 Superstar Soc 9.95 6.75 Catch 23 6.25 10.95 Sold A Million 3 695 1095 Str Poker Funky 6.SO 10.95 9.95 6.50 NA 25.00 5.50 10.95 Indiana Jones 7.99 5.25 Dracular 550 7.00 10.95 NA Terrorpods 795550 Pirates 11.95 15 95 6.50 10 95 Barbarian Cart 3395 Jack Nige 795 525 Expert Cartride 10.95 1495 Mercenary Com 8.95 5.25 Solomans Key 6.75 10.95 Destroyer NA 10 95 At Director 8.99 625 Bubble Bobble 6.50 10.95 Blazer 6.75 10 95 Renegade 7.95 5.25 Slap Fight 6.25 10.95 Knight Orc 11 95 11.95 Sentinel 795 525 California Games 1200 Nemises 6.25 10.95 Goldrunner 7.95 595 Bubble Bobble 5.25 1200 El Pak 6 6.50 10.95 Auto Duel 9.95 6.75 The Pawn 6.75 1095 Side Walk 6 Pak 1 or 2 9.95 6.50 10 Star Games 1 Arkanoid 6.00 10.00 6 .75 11.95 Mean 18 8.99 625 Game Set Match 11.95 1495 Graphic Ad Cre 17.95 2295 SDI 7.95 5.25 Defender C N A405Uridium Paradroid 6.00 NA Peon Chess 6.75 10 95 Mega Apocalypse 6.75 10 5 Arbal 8.99 625 Zynaps 6.25 10.00 Slicon Dreams 10.95 14.95 Hades Nebula 7.95 5.50 Shadow Mordor 5.25 10.95 Jewels Darkness 10.95 14.95 Film Director RAPOUR AMSTRAD PC1512 RAP OUR 19.09 15.05 Mini Office 2 12.00 14.95 24.96 19.95 Bubble Bobble 6.00 10.95 24.95 19.00 Sold a Million 3 6.95 1095 19.95 14.95 Hit 6 1 2 -6.95 10.95 24.95 15.09 Uve Ammo 6.95 10.95 24.95 19,99 California Games 725 1196 24.95 19.95 Silent Service 6.95 10.95 24.99 1999 Out Run 6.95 10 95 29 95 24.05 Tai-Pan 6.50 11.95 24 95 15.95 Head over Heels 6.50 10.00 14 95 11.95 Flying Shark 6.00 10.95 1999 13.95 Exolon 6.50 10.95 2495 1590 Super Sprint 6.50 10.95 24.95 19.99 Gauntlet 7.25 11.95 24.99 1999 Shadows Mordor 6.50 10.95 24.95 19.99 Gryzor 6.00 10.95 1999 1595 Sabater 2 6.25 10.00 24.95 15 95 Arkanoid 6.50 11.95 19.95 1395 Paperboy 2495 1595 Big Four 1 or 2 6.95 10.95 1995 1395 AMIGA SOFTWARE RRP OUR 19.99 1395 California Games 24.95 19.95 19.95 13.95 Defender of Crown 45.95 39.95 14.959.95 Mean 18 29.99 24.95 24 96 1995 2495 19.95 Knight Orc 19.95 15.95 24.95 1595 The Pawn 24.95 19.95 29.95 24.95 24.95 1595 World Games 24.99 19.95 24.95 19.95 1995 1395 Goldrunner 24.95 1995 19.99 15.95 24.95 1995 Leaderboard 24.95 1995 2495 1595 Winter Games 24.99 19.99 1995 13.95 Barbarian 24.95 1995 2999 1995 Terrorpods 24 95 19.95 29.95 19.95 Swooper 1995 15.95 24.95 15.95 B. Clough Footbal 24.95 19.95 24.95 15.95 Karate Kid 24.95 1995 1995 13 95 Music Studio 34.99 30.95 59.95 44.95 Hollywood Poker 19.95 15.95 Indiana Jones Hysteria Renegade 7.95 525 Mask 899625 Ahora 795 5.25 Uving Daylight 7.95 5.252 Zynaps 9.95 700 Gunboat Ace 2 (125) 9.95 7.00 Shadow Mordor Yoo Bear Game Over 7.95 5.25 NA 1495 Tranto Ta Pan Worball Dracula Red LED High Frontier Elite 6 Pak 8.9982 Last Ninja 9.99 650 Solomans Keys 9.95 6.75 Moonstrike 795 5.25 Karya Survivor Jack Nipper 2 Bubble Bobble ,00 Elon (Sega machines now available only .99. Plus free next day delivery UK. Plus free game, full range of software + price list available) Post & Packing Inc. Overseas Orders Please Add 75p per tape, Mail Order only. Cheques/postal orders (Sterling only please) Made Payable to: DISCOUNT SOFTWARE, Dept 3, 210 Nicholls Tower, Harlow, Essex, CM18 6EF VE TELEPHONE (0279 29076) WEEKDAYS ONLY PLEASE VISA TELE-GAMES FOOTBALL A CRICKET SPORTS SIMULATIONS FROM E&J SOFTWARE (Established 3 Years) Europe's Largest Stock Of Video Games & Cartridges 100s of cartridges for CES VER CBS CASES Nintendo THE ARCADE QUALITY VIDEO GAME SYSTEM 4 Classic Strategy games from EAJ Software, packed with GENUINE A REALISTIC FEATURES CRICKET MASTER A SUPERB SIMULATION OF ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL CRICKET Features: Weather Wicket Outfied Conditions, Batting Bowling Tactics, Team Selection Select Fid Layout 3 Types Bowler, 4 Types Batman Batting Bowling Analysis Scoreboard, Wides, No Ball Mister Dropped Catches Cow appeals Lavel STAR FEATURE Complete Match Overview including baby all commentary . MANY MORE FEATURES. PRICE SPECTRUM 48 126K ONLY 7.6 including FREE SET OF SCORESHEETS PREMIER AN EXCITING FOOTBALL LEAGUE GAME Features Select Team Play al teams Home and Away Full Squad Details ALL TEAMS. Irures Team wyies inch subs, Goalscorers recorded Transfermarket allows approach to any player in a b Offers Team Morate Financial problems. Transfer Demands. 7 Sail Loves PRECE 481 Spectrum 6.5: 64/128 Commodore 7.: Amstrad CPC 7.85 WORLD CHAMPIONS A COMPLETE WORLD CUP SIMULATION From the first trendies, qualitying stages, tour matches and onto the FINALS Select from wad of 25 players in Manch w Discpline table Sko Laves Select Friendlies & Tour opponents. COMPREHENSIVE TEXT MATCH SIMULATION includes Goal Times, Bookings Named Recorded Goal Scorers Sending Comes Free Parties juryme Match Clock, and MORE PRICE 43120 Spectrum (5.85: 128K Commodore 67.45: Amatred CPC 7.95 EUROPEAN # CAPTURES THE FULL ATMOSPHERE OF EUROPEAN FOOTBALL Features Home & St r .goscount double drewn2in mach Subes Love FULL PENALTY SHOOT OUT WITH Named Recorded Goal Scorr Fiskos comer. Person TEXT MATCHI SIMULATION INCLUDES Time, Sending ORA MORE PRICE-48128 pecum 128K Commodore 67.95 Amstrad CPC dec . 00 10 tape price FANTASTIC VALUE BUY ANY 2 GAMES DEDUCT FROM TOTAL, BUY ANY 3 GAMES DEDUCT FROM TOTAL, BUY ALL GAMES DEDUCT ES FROM TOTAL ALL GAMES AVAILABLE ON TAPE FOR IMMEDIATE DESPATCH BY FIRST CLASS POST INTELIVISION ATARI 2600 (SEGA From: E & J SOFTWARE, Room 5,37 Westmoor Road, ENFIELD, Middlesex EN37LE SPECIAL PRICE .95* with 2 FREE GAMES — DONKEY KONG and SMURF .....STOP PRESS..... 2 NEW COLECO GAMES ARRIVING SOON Plus .00 P&P ATARI ST/800xLXE OWNERS Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with the MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY. The greatest, biggest and best Atari Club on the market. WICO JOYSTICK FOR .95 PLUS .00 APPROX 675 ST TITLES NOW IN STOCK Nintendo P&P IN STOCK NOW (Trade welcome) MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY: The company who nearly 5 years ago first conceived the idea of a software library Now approximately 2,000 titles on disc, cassette and Rom (games, business, education and utilties; Often purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Several thousand very satisfied members, many as far away as lonland, Sweden, West Germany. Holland, Denmark and Eire A fast efficient and friendly service operating a computerised custom built system to keep track of all your records. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other interclub activities SEND LARGE S.A.E. TO: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos, Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programs are originals with full documentation Send for lists (state make of game) to TELEGAMES, WIGSTON, LEICESTER, LES 1TE (0533-880445) "


"Leisure enius H COMPUTER SCRABBLE DE LUXE presents.. sure presents COMPUTER SCRABBLE COMPUTER EDITION Genius GGREPPICO PURE GENIUS Exercise your powers of deduction with CLUEDO, race Formula One (and even design your own circuits) with SCALEXTRIC Wheel and deal as a property magnate with MONOPOLY and extend your word power with SCRABBLE or the 'genius' edition SCRABBLE DE LUXE These four popular family games have been translated to a wide range of computers and, like the originals, appeal to game-players, young and old. The whole family can join in, or you can play alone against clever computer-generated opponents. The rules of the original game are followed and special computer enhancements are included, the computer adds up for you, and even throws your dice and times your moves in some games! als The MOTO Waddingtons Waddingtons Leisure Gleisure MONOPOLY Leisure Genius Genius The Great Detective Game MONOPOLY CLUEDO TRADEMARK AND COPYRIGHT LICENSED BY WADDINGTONS GAMES LTD MONOPOLY THIS PRODUCTIS PRODUCED UNDER LICENCE FROM PARKER BROTHERS AND WADDINGTONS GAMES LTD ALL COPYRIGHTS RESERVED SCRABBLET TRADE MARK AND COPYRIGHT LICENSED BY W SPEAR & SONS PLC SCALEXTRIC IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF HORNBY HOBBIES LTD ALL COPYRIGHTS RESERVED Leisure Genius games are available from all good software stockists or directly from Virgin Games Look at the table for machine types and prices. Please circle the software you require Make cheques or postal orders payable to Virgin Games Ltd, please do not post notes or coins. Send your order to Virgin Games, 2/4 Vernon Yard, Portobello Road, London W11 2DX Monopoly Cluedo Scalextric Scrabble Scrabble De Luxe Available for cass discass disccass disccass disc cass disc Commodore 64/128 C D Spectrum 48 Spectrum 128/+2/+3 A Amstrad CPC 464 A Amstrad CPC6128 A D Amstrad PCW8256 IBM PC(+ compatible) NAME BBCB ADDRESS MSX Sinclair QL Einstein Atari ST A = .95 B = 10.95 C-.95D=.95 E = .95 F=.95 G = .95 H Coming 1988! "


"ACE2 The ULTIMATE Head to Head Conflict . IN class of its own Commode Oro B7 fabuloustling of speed and rein \"Zap! 64 Oben 87 ACE2 IS A WORY SERCESSOR CACE \"C +VG Hit! DANGER AND EXC MENTORERIRE GLI FYING THE LIMATE i Military Rd , OU MUST PROTECI luiendly shipping from the onsiglu o ENEMY FIGHTERS FEATURING ONE OG pilot actiON, PLAVER ONE Mese defend luis le FROM Player lwo who, ARMED will AN ARRAY Ol sophisticated weaponty, will do leis UIMOSI 10 PENETRATE YOUR SELENCES. Commodore 64 CASSETTE .95 Disk E14.95 SPECTRUM CASSETTE E8.95 IBM PC Disk .95 Implosion WHEN Your World Is Under ATTACK Fight Back Without doubt the latest MULTI-SCREEN Action blast-MEVER FANG: 360 de HEE SCRolling ACTION-Dual Play FieldArcade sile multi colour Graphics and sound, Implosion will dely completion by EVEN THE MOST and NT GAME played WE CHALLENGE YOU.... Commodore 64 CASSETTE .95 Disk E14.95 SPECTRUM CASSETTE .95 19 PART 1 —   The Viet NAM EXPERIENCE SCARRED A GENERATION of YOUNG AMERICANS for life. SOME World Survive IN 19 PARI -Boot Camp. WE TRAIN YOU TO SURVIVE. SURVIVE The Vie NAM EXPERIENCE. LakiNG ACTUAL EXERCISES used in US Military BAINING AS INSPIRATION, 19 Part 1 Boot Camp RECREATES THE TENSION, INESTRATION AND ARE EXPERIENCED by YOUNG AMERICAN APTEES Watch out for 19 PART 2 Viet Nam. COMING SOON Commodore 64 CASSETTE .95 Disk .95 SPECTRUM CASSETTE E8.95 You may onder by telephone ON OUR 24 HOUR Onderline by calling 0423 504663 QUOTING ANY MAJOR Credit Card on by post Onders ARE despatched SAME day and you will RECEIVE A FANTASTIC CASCADE POSTER Pack completely free of CHARGE All of these titles ARE Available All Good son suppliers on "


"TRAZ A New Twist To A GREAT GAME ENCING ONE OR TWO PIER ACTION AS YOU lulpit R bol PRISONERS ESCape Tom captivity A changing durl with YOUR COMPUTER TRAZ will keep you COMING bucklor MORE UNIQ Isido NAN 8x8 grid And with SANOMENIRU 10 plus, AREA, IRAZ SANW MISTOAN de class Commodore 64 CASSETTE .95 Disk E14.95 SPECTRUM CASSETTE .95 AMSTRAD CASSETTE E8.95 SADE CASCADE GAMES 1-3 HAWRA CHESCENT, HARROGATE North Yorkshin HGT SBG lelephone: 0425 5253257504526 AN ONE: 0423 504665 blex 265871 MONREFG (Oon 12: MAG31320 i liseline ol ) FAX: 0423 530054. SCADA CASCADIA...COMPUTER ENTERTAINMENT SECOND TO NONE. "


"WIN AN AWESOME ELECTRONIC ARTS Wanna win an awesome Amiga 500, one of the new generation of mega machines that bring games like you've only dreamed about into YOUR home? Thanks to leading US software company Electric Arts, C + VG can offer one of our readers this incredible package!  An Amiga 500 plus EA's excellent Deluxe Paint Il graphics package AND Deluxe Music!  Five runners-up will get a copy of Deluxe Paint II OR Deluxe Music for the Amiga worth around ! And all you have to do to win these incredible prizes is answer some simple questions based on Electronic Arts products. Fill in the coupon and rush it to Computer and Video Games, Awesome Amiga Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is December 16th, normal C+VGrules apply and the Ed's decision is utterly final. Now for the questions: 1. Electronic Arts has just released a new flight simulator put together with the help of a top test pilot who had more than his fair share of the Right Stuff. Name that pilot! 2. Name the pharoah who has his golden image in the front of EA's Deluxe Paint Il box. MIN NOISSA BY DANIEL SILVA "


"AMICA C+VG/ELECTRONIC ARTS COMPETITION Name. Address......... ........ If I'm a runner-up I'd like Deluxe Paint 11/Deluxe Musix (delete where applicable) My answers are: 3. Last year EA translated one of the really popular arcade games on to computer. Was it A) Pacman B) Marble Madness C) Space Harrier? 4. Name the odd one out and say why. A) SkyFox B) Arctic Fox C) FireFox D) StarFox. 2.......... AWN "


"HOMESOFT A 'If you wish to advertise in our classified section the cost is .50 + VAT per single column centimetre. For further details call Katherine Lee 01-251 6222 Ex 2479 SOFTWARE AND HARDWARE WE OFFER ALL THE LATEST SOFTWARE AT DISCOUNT PRICES ON ALL MACHINES!! COMMODORE 64/128/AMIGA AMSTRAD..APPLE..BBC.. ATARI 8 BIT..ATARI 528 ST ELECTRON.IBM..SPECTRUM HARDWARE OFFER A TARI 520 STEM  PHONE NOW FOR OUR FAX-PACK, PLEASE STATE WHICH MACHINE 0772-452414 24-HOUR SERVICE CLASSIFIEDS MSX SOFTWARE For one of the widest selections of MSX products in the south of England. Write, phone, or call in for our 400 title mail order price list D.L. Chittenden Ltd. 59-61 The Broadway Chesham Bucks HP5 IBX Tel: 0494 784441 CLASSIFIEDS LIVERPOOL (48K) Featuring a full 42 game League season. FA, League and European Cups, team and tactics selection, spying missions, etc. BOTH C64 versions and Atari Disc have 4 Divisions, transfer market. income, expenditure, UEFA and Cup Winners Cups (if you qualify!), etc. Cassette .95 Disc .95 A.I.S. DISTRIBUTION FREE MEMBERSHIP!! Hire CBM64, Spectrum, Amstrad and VIC 20 Software (Top Titles) Send 2 x 18p stamps for your hire kit Computersoft (CV), PO Box 20, North PDO, Nottingham NG5 2EE (Please state which machine) are now becoming the leading back catalogue games suppliers to shops & market traders WORLD CUP 1986 (48K) Replay the Mexico Finals, with scouts reports, injuries, suspensions, extra time, penalties Substitution etc. Cassette .49 Disc .99 PHONE 01-471 8900 NOW!  ENGLAND'S GLORY (48K) 1966 and all that! Play up to 3 friendly fixtures to refine your squad before the big test. Uses the same game play system as World Cup 1986. Cassette .49 Disc .99 All games are available for the Spectrum Commodore 64 and Atari. Please state make of computer when ordering P. M. CORBISHLEY, 212 WALMERSLEY OLD ROAD, BURY, LANCS D19 6SA USED HARDWARE Spectrum 48K  Spectrum + Spectrum 128K  Spectrum + 2 499 Commodore 64  Others: Please phone A wide range of peripherals always in stock. Please phone for prices etc. USED SOFTWARE BARGAIN PACKS (Spec & 64) 10 Different  20 Different  Please state machine when ordering State preferences Arcade, Adventure, Moed) Send a list of your own collection so we know what not to UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64 NOW ALSO FOR THE ATARIST Send s.a.e. for fast response and details to UK Software Exchange Club (CVG) 15 Tunwell Greve. Sheffield $5 GB SOFTWARE 48 Cheap games all original but low prices for the spectrum 48 CBM 64 g Renegade $2.50 Send S.A.L. for it to Software 48, PO Box 94, Radleft Herts WD7 7UX OR CALL 09276 2673 FOR DETAILS REPAIRS. SPECTRUM  OTHERS: PHONE All our used products are in good to excellent condition and include a 3 month warranty. Send cheques/PO's to: Software City (CV) 173 Mansfield Road, Nottingham NG1 3FR Telephone (0602) 410493 Allow 10 cry for hvery Overses Add 5 MATRIX HIRE The cheapest way to play them all. Top games titles for Spectrum, Commodore and Amstrad. Please state system, Details from: Matrix Leisure Club 271 Stanstead Road, Bishop's Stortiord, Herts CM23 2BT FREE MEMBERSHIP We are the biggest and the best. Top titles only. Hire CBM 64. Spectrum, Amstrad, BBC Electron, C16, Atari software. Send S.A.E. to Spectrohire Software Library, 23 Curzon Street, Derby THE MAIL ORDER SOFTWARE SOCIETY THE BEST THING SINCE SLICED BREAD 'Try Before You Buy' ATARI 400/600/800XL/ST AMIGA SOFTWARE We have all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE Apply now and hire your first four games free Around 1500 different original titles. For full details send large stamp addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends LOW ATARI PRICES Atari 520 STFM .90 post free + 15 disks Antic and Analog magazines available BEST QUALITY DISCS Memorex 5\" S.S.DD Discs 10 for 11.95 pt Unlabelled 5\" SS.IDD Discs 10 for 9.95 pt. Unlabelled 3; S.S/DD Discs 10 for 14.95 pt 25 for 131.95 50 for .95 Amiga A500 at only .90 Happy enhancement for the 1050 Drive with revision 7 .90 post tree GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB DEPT. C+VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney Close, Sunderland SR3 4PD Tel: (091) 528 6351 GAMES FOR SPECTRUM MSX AMSTRAD COMMODORE ATARI Computer Software Exchange Have the games you ve stopped playing gathered dust? Then why not swap them through CSE For the AMSTRAD CPC COMMODORE SEGA Card and Cardige For FREE membership and Quarterly Club magazine send SAE 10 C.S.E.CVG), 270, DIXON LANE, WORTLY, LEEDS 12. YORKSHIRE Send your name, address and which computer(s) you have to M.S.S. P.O. Box 57, Doncaster, South Yorkshire DN4 5HZ 134 "


"CAMERA!... ACTION!... ENTER THE SLAPSTICK WORLD OF SILENT MOVIES! Attention all you budding film directors! Here's your opportunity to become a movie mogul directing none other than the legendary Charlie Chaplin! Choose scripts, cast characters, select scenery, props and backdrops. Then it's SCENE ONE-TAKE ONE... CAMERA... ACTION! Direct the crazy antics of Charlie as he performs stunts and plays the fool with the rest of the cast. Replay each scene in the editing suite; but be warned-a reshoot will be costly and you could go over budget! Attend the premiere of your film! The critical acclaim of the audience will determine whether your box office earnings allow you the budget for another film, or leave you with a flop and a trip along skid row! STARRING UMAUIRILIE APLINZ *ORANLARA TM UNIQUE .GAME CONCEPT  Bubbles Inc. 1985 U.S. CBM 64/128 Spectrum 48K Amstrad CPC Atari ST IBM PC .99 Cassette .99 Disk .99 Cassette .99 Cassette .99 Disk .99 Disk .99 Disk Screenshot from Atari ST GOLD! Software "


"BOSS This year's arcade show brought a whole be picked up by shooting at them restore your strength by clearing it new crop of games that will be hitting your when they appear Your other of the enemy, the Concentration local arcade before Christmas. bonus is a power drink which Camp where you can free the Clare Edgeley also reports on the hottest restores five units of damage. Very hostages and the Airport where helpful when you're on your last you and the hostages can leap new games previewed at the Japanese legs and can give you the tired and thankful onto a plane arcade show held a few weeks ago. necessary time to finish a screen home A panel down the side of the Operation Wolf is a powerful OPERATION Choppers fly in and turn to bear on screen tells you at a glance how game and one of fost action, you with cannons blazing. These much ammo you have left, what requiring a good aim and swift WOLF need at least ten bullets before damage you've suffered, how reflexes. they'll explode. Trucks and tanks many hostages have been rescued, are slightly easier bul again have and the numbers of the enemy still Sheer, unadulterated violence is the main theme in Taito's to be hit more than once. And then at large. there are the paras. Descending There are six scenarios in all Operation Wolf. And much as hate to say it, this game is from the clouds, they reach the the Communications Depot in extremely playable and was ground and instantly open fire. which you have to kill all the And all the time your ammo's probably one of the best now enemy, the Jungle where you have games to be shown of the recent decreasing Luckily, magazines are to extract the exact location of the arcade show, dropped, and if you can hit these concentration camps from the You're in the middle of a war. you'll be awarded another 30 enemy, the Village where you can One man against an army. Your bullets. It's frightening how quickly objective is to free some hostages one mogazine can be emptied. Taking careful aim and shooting in and get them safety. How many SCORE short bursts to conserve your times have we heard this 15900 hackneyed story line? ammunition is the only way to get through each screen, Spraying Your only weapon is a mean looking machine gun perched on bullets wildly will get you nowhere, the outside of the cabinet and a though the rat-a-tat-tot of the gun LLLLLLLL limited supply of bullets and is very satisfying. Extra ammunition grenades is only found when you hit LETTI Starting at the Communications coconuts, condors, chickens, wild LITTLE Depot, finger quivering on the pigs and other innocent obects. trigger, you steady the gun for the Just don't make the mistake of hitting an civilian and then expect first shot. In no time bullets are a bonus or a thank you! Aying Enemy snipers zip on and off the screen, some hiding in One piece of ammo is a mortar buildings, others running in ata rocket which acts in the manner of asmort bomb. Hit the button on the crouch for a snipe at you. You've got to hit them all. Some run nozzle of your snub nosed straight into the foreground of the machine and you'll let loose one of HOSTAGES SCTOR, Opeering ghi these killers. You've only got a few underneath your nose. but they're devastating, wiping out all the ememy, their trucks, tanks R FEW BUZET LEFT The appearance of depth on this battlefield has been extremely well and choppers on the screen. Like the magazines, extra rockets can done as those soldiers appearing closer to you are obviously larger SCORE than those hiding of the far end of the screen behind oil drums. Watch out for the knives and grenades which will be chucked at you. There's not a lot you can do to dodge a bullet except gun down the enemy before he has a chance to fire. However, getting hit by a knife or cotching a grenade of close quarters is not my idea of fun and if your are quick off the mark and a good shot, you should be able to hit these with a bullet, deflecting the knife and blowing up the grenade before it gets too close to do any damage. The actions non-stop and doesn't let up for a second. FENEMIES E DAMAGE HENENIES HOSTAGES A FEH FHYSICAL STRENGTH LEFTL DAMAGE Yo "


"WARDNER worry about is the width of the track which alternates between multi-laned and single lane. Top Speed from Taito is a five Bill-boards now line the route, stage driving game with slick and and, with rocky cliffs tightly to one sensitive handling and a game side of the road, there's no place to perspective exactly like that of Out make a mistake. Normally in these Run. What's more, like Out Run it games you can use the brakes to comes packaged as a huge sit in good effect, but in Top Speed, to driving machine as well as your stamp on the brake to slow down normal upright. The upright version tends to stop you dead which is great fun and initially reviewed doesn't help your time. the game on this format. However, if you get the chance, go for the monster version which moves left, right, backwards and forwards. A whole lot of fun. Peering over the dashboard as you cresta hill at top speed is nerve racking it's anybody's guess as to what's over the brow of the hill Platforms, ladders, moving elevators and ropes, monster bashing and gold collecting — all the ingredients are here for a notously enjoyable arcade game. Wardner is cute, addicitive and immensely playable. While taking astroll in a magical forest, Wardner the evil Guardian swoops down from her castle eyrie and turns your girlfriend into a crystal ball. This is promptly spirited away by a dragon, leaving you seething with rage and determined to put all to rights, Playing o knight in shining armour means fighting your way through the magical forest, blasting baddies, avoiding traps and sneeking into the castle lo do your rescue bit. The game starts off in the forest. On the ground level ore swamps in which lurk sundry nasties. Climb up the trees and there you'll find chests glinting with gold, witches, warlocks and other baddies. Use your flamethrower to hit the baddies and jumping to the platforms, collect the gold you'll need this later on in the level. Even this early on in the game, the going can be tricky. Shooting the witches, who are hidden behind leafy branches, can be a problem, especially as they shoot back and dodging a ball of fire while perched precariously on a branch isn't easy. You'll often have to jump and then fire to get the baddies. This saves you climbing to their height and into trouble. When the attackers are killed, golden crystals are left behind. Make sure you pick these up as they add extra fire balls to your flame thrower. On starting the game, the flame thrower only spits out one ball of fire, but as you go further into it, you'll soon be able to shoot out a barrage of fire which will sizzle your opponents. At the end of the level, a shop comes into sight where you can use the gold you've found to buy extra weapons such as a solar sword or magical cloak. The prices all vary, and if you haven't got the money you'll be turned away empty handed, further levels have been brilliantly designed, and the timing element is perhaps one of the most important parts of this great little game. On top of that, the areas you have to negotiate must have been designed by a particularly tortured mind. Traps are sprung the forest becomes deeper, more nasties appear and you'll certainly need those more powerful weapons, Magic cloaks are in short supply and are found rarely, Birds can be used at times to carry you across difficult terrains, like flowing rivers of burning lava However to hitch a ride on a bird you must be in the right spot and be ready to jump for its talons at the right time. If you're really lucky, the bird will carry you through a whole screen to the shop of the far end. Flying dragons appear at regular intervals and these have to be defeated to continue the game. Hit them a number of times and they'll eventually dissolve into a ball of flame. While doing this, however, be ready to jump or duck their fire which can be uncomfortably accurate, There's no way Wardner could be termed an original game as bits have been borrowed from 50 many others of this type, Ghosts 'n Goblins and the like. Still, only the best features have been used and I'd recommend you to try this one out for yourself Racing games have been done to death, but manufacturers keep belting out new ones. It would be unfair to compare Top Speed with classics like Wec Le Mans and Out Run as these are dedicated games built and designed round sit-in cabinets, Top Speed is in an upright cabinet and for its kind, it must rank amongst the top os a realistic racing game with great graphics and smooth handling. It's also addictive and offers quite a challenge. 209470 The idea in Top Speed is to get through all five stages in the shortest possible time. The tracks are tortuous and wind all over the place with many circular diversions which add extra miles and time to the course. At the end of each level, study the track for the next stage and work out the shortest route. It's the only way you'll make it in the time allowed. The first stage is fairly straightforward, no diversions, no loops, and the track itself is a multi-lane highway. Using your Nitro-switch on the straight, you can turbo charge your car and zoom forward at a much greater speed for a short while. Use this feature sporingly though, it only works three times on every stage. The second stage is a little more tricky. Although the track splits, the length of each section of road is the same. What you do have to 910 "


"THEALLTIME GREATEST Game COMPILATIONS An outstanding collection of the best hits from the best software houses. Not just a good buy be cause of its amazing value for money, but also because the proceeds of all sales are to be donated to the National Society and the Royal Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children. 10 GREAT GAMES FOR SPECTRUM 48K .99 / THE BACK PACK COMPILATION BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK MAILSTROM Ocean Software) (US Gold) 10 GREAT GAMES FOR CBM 64 STARSTRIKE (Realtime) XENO (ANF Software) .99 LUNAR JETMAN (Ultimate Play the Game) DEACTIVATORS (Ariolasoft) NIGHT GUNNER (Digital Integration) MARSPORT (Gargoyle Games) STARION (Melbourne House) MONTY ON THE RUN (Gremlin Graphics) ALL PROCEEDS TO THE NSPCC & RSSPCC A FUN FILLED WAY TO HELP,OTHERS..... ITS KIDSPLAY THE BACK PACK COMPILATION XENO (ANF Software) BARRY MCGUIGAN'S BOXING (Activision) DEACTIVATORS (Ariolasoft) BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK (US Gold) STARION (Melbourne House) SPINDIZZY (Electric Dreams) BOUNCES (Beyond Software) ELECTROGLIDE (English Software) MONTY ON THE RUN ALL PROCEEDS TO THE NSPCC&RSSPCC SKYFOX (Electronic Arts) (Gremlin Graphics) JAM GREAT GAMES FOR AMSTRAD .99 THE BACK PACK COMPILATION KNIGHTSHARE Game) (Ultimate Play the Game) NOMAD (Ocean Software) MARSPORT (Gargoyle Games) XENO (ANF Software) STARSTRIKE (Realtime) DEACTIVATORS (Arlolasoft) NIGHT GUNNER (Digital Integration) YOU HAVE THE FUN..! THE NSPCC/RSSPCC HAVE THE PROCEEDS TEMPEST (Electric Dreams) STARION (Melbourne House) MONTY ON THE RUN (Gremlin Graphics) ALL PROCEEDS TO THE NSPCC&RSSPCC BACK Battle Against Cruelty to Kids. The 1987 software industry charity promotion in support of the NSPCC&RSSPOC BACKPACK A compilation of 10 first class software games donated free by software companies KIDSPLAY thanks this magazine and the following companies for the generous donation of their services CAMEL ADVERTISING G6 L SERVICES, ROWLEY STUDIO FRIARSGATE STUDIOS, PRE-PRESS SERVICES. CRYSTAL DESIGN. AMPERSAND. STEEL SPLASH, PRINTING CENTRE. LYNE PRINTERS WILLBOND ARTISTS. PAUL CANNY.DJ.ROWE and INTERMEDIATE "


"* AKTATEA NA  PREVIEW 188 must send the football back into controls. It's a one or two player the football team which is game and you must smash Preview '88 was held last weaving intricate patterns eight mean looking opponents round the screen. The ball, as month and follows hot on the from Japan, USA, England, usual, cannons off the players, heels of the Japanese Coin'op China and Thailand. Each game knocking some out instantly, Show, JAMMA. It's at about this other have to be hit more than is won by winning the best of time of every year that the show three rounds and the is staged to inform distributors TOP 2018 competition is intense. Puches, kicks, stoop kicks, flip kicks and and dealers what are going to be the new biggies in the backward flips are just a few of the moves to master. The coming year. A Sky Wolf. cabinet comes as a standard Sadly there wasn't a huge to air rockets fired left to right number of new games to be upright with the usual joystick and though it's resonably seen, and the really good ones and button controls, or a Deluxe playable, the sprites are minute were pretty thin on the ground. version which is much more and the movement of the fun. Operation Wolf, Wardner, chopper must be about the and Full Throttle have been Road Racer from Euromax most unrealistic I've ever seen. is a bicycle simulation which Charge is a one man in a covered in some depth and you are more likely to find in Sega's After Burner is already tank against the enemy' type. Guide your tank into the emeny filtering through to selected arcades. territory, shooting down the attacking forces. Re-equip your tank with extra weapons and A Free Kick thread your way through a maze of tunnels and track ways. once. New screens can only be Aaargh! and Road Wars reached when you've are two newies from Arcadia eliminated all the players or by Mastertronic's coin-op arm and scoring enought goal points. If you are luckly, and skill does S ZER come into it, a goal can be scored though you have to get the ball past the goalie first Moles appear, digging up the A Road Racer. pitch and then quickly recreation and shopping A After Burner. disappearing, though apart from centres, gyms and the like. It's In fact, After Burner's already deflecting the ball I couldn't an exercise bicycle with a built been updated to include some work out what they were for. in bike game and seems to be new features which are a Break Out clones have been creating quite a bit of interest. welcome addition. The most done to death, but Free Kick is No longer do you have to look important feature which I felt well worth playing. at a blank wall while pedalling A Aaargh! was missing on the early model Taito's Rainbow Islands is away like mad to keep fit. Just the're both a lot more slick than I played was the lack of a Bubble Bobble Il and is just get up on Road Racer and play Rockford. Whoever throttle whereby your jet's as cute. The game is made up of the arcade game. The faster you programmed Aaargh! must speed could be reduced slightly seven islands and there are four pedal, the faster your bike will have played Rampage in to negotiate some of the more scenes to clear on each island. move on the screen--and it which you have to raze whole tortuous screens. That has now Climb to the summit of each keeps an accurate account of cities to the ground with your been added and works in the island by jumping from ledge to your speed. Whizz round a track fists. The same seems to be true same way to that of a gear stick ledge and climbing rainbows. strewn with obstacles and beat of Aaargh! It is a two player or racing sims. Push forwards Rainbows can be made to the other riders to the winning game in which you play a to slow down or backwards to appear and you can structure post while keeping a watch for dragon or giant. Both are pretty speed up. The graphics have them in steps to cross large puddles, oil slicks and maniac mean though the dragon seems been turned upside down on gaps. Pick fruit to increase your car drivers to have the edge as he can snort the new version too. Now there stamina and kill a myriad of Sky Wolf is a very mediocre out flames to torch attacking are night scenes in which you nasties by using the rainbows chopper game and in many nasties. The graphics are pretty hurtle through the skies in the as weapons. Trap a nastie in a ways similar to Choplifter. slick though a little cramped. In pitch black and all you see in the rainbow and it won't be able to Steer your chopper through Road Wars you control a distance are the burning jet move for a short while, or spell enemy skies shooting down battle sphere making its streams of enemy fighters a rainbow into the path of a squadrons of attacking untiring way up a never ending zooming towards you. Landing monster to kill it. And you can helicopters and jets. These highway. The idea is to become strips now appear and you can even use the rainbow as a smart don't shoot at you in early King of the Road and to do that watch as tankers trundle out to bomb to kill all the nasties levels but if you hit one you're a you must clear the track of killer refuel and ground crew patch creeping up from behind. gonner. Next comes sparks, spikes and other up the damage. Amazingly bright and colourful parachutists which must be obstacles. To get onto new A great game which comes in graphics, Rainbow Island treated in the same way and levels, certain panels at the side three models, upright, the looks set to be yet another hit. then you're attacked by surface of the road must be blasted out. Commander version which Capcom's Street Fighter is incorporates a seat but has only yet another of the martial arts two-way cockpit rotation and genre with some huge sprites. the Super Delux model which The characters are among the features all mod-cons plus fourmost realistic I've seen and the 1) 1942 Capcom way cockpit motion. Enough to action is intense. At least it is 2) Wonder Boy Sega make you air sick but it's a hell when you've mastered the of a ride. 3) Arkanoid Taito Street Fighter Free Kick from Sega/Niha is 4) Tiger Hali Taito an idea ripped off from 5) Ghosts 'n' Goblins Capcom Arkanoid/Breakout. Still, 6) Bubble Bobble Taito whatever form this game takes 7) Rygar it's always addictive and Free Techmo Kick is based on football. You 8) Choplifter BLOCK HEADS Sega still control a moving base 9) Star Force Tehkan which must be used to catch 10) Commando Capcom and bounce the ball back up the screen. However, instead of knocking out a brick wall, you The Top Ten is compiled by Euromax and shows the most popular games nationwide. ch comes in Paks set to be yet a fiahter is 1970 "


"Comix «When titans clash... \"That must be the incidentally, has recently been remaindered by biggest cliche in the entire history of Marvel Marvel in the States, and may be available at Comics. How many times has that title been your local comic ship for as little as $3.95. used to tip off eager Marvelites that two of their During this time, Wrightson shared a studio favourite super-heroes are beating tar out of imaginatively known as \"The Studio) with each other? More than I can be bothered to fellow ex-comic-artists Jeff Jones, Mike Kaluta count. And more than once it's been used to and Barry Smith. Wrightson, though, In short, quite against my original describe a confrontation between The maintained rather closer links with the comics expectations, I find myself recommending this Incredible Hulk and The ever-lovin' blue eyed) world, contributing the occasional cover to, book. The full title is \"The Incredible Hulk and Thing say, a reprint of his Swamp Thing stories. A The Thing: The Big Change and it should cost All of which is my long-winded way of saying year or so ago came his first Marvel Graphic you around $4.25 at your nearest comic shop. that Greenskin and Rockhead are at it again. Novel, \"Hooky\" a largely unsatisfying Britain's most popular comics... Just in case This is a titanic clash with a difference or two, depiction of Spider-Man up against a classic you weren't at the UK Comic Art Convention in however. gruesome Wrightson monster in full ghastly London in September, here's a rundown of the This time around, it takes place in the colour. winners in the Eagle Awards, voted for by rarefied (not to mention expensive) That brings us to his latest work, the British comic fans: surroundings of a Marvel Graphic Novel a aforementioned Hulk Thing \"story\" (if you can large-format, high-quality printing call it that). Here his portrayal of two very well UK CATEGORIES square-bound book of the same kind as the known characters is much more convincing.  Comic: 2000 AD Moebius albums I raved about last month.  Album: DR & Quinch's Totally Awesome Another unusual aspect is that this particular another typical meaningless Marvel slugfest Guide To Life *battle royal' is scripted by Jim Starlin, doing must have seemed as big a turn-off to  Character: Judge Dredd his first Marvel super-hero story for quite a Starlin and Wrightson as it did to me because  Villain: Torquemada while. Starlin, better known as an artist, was they've pulled out all the stops to find a new  Supporting character: Ukko The Dwarf responsible for the very first Marvel Graphic approach to a tired old idea. In fact, they've . Most worthy of own title: Captain Britain Novel, The Death of Captain Marvel\", which chosen to play it mainly for laughs, and in so  Continued story: Halo Jones Book Three he wrote and drew as a fond farewell to the hero doing have come up with unusual and satisfying  New comic: Redfox whose adventures he'd chronicled for some satire on that old Marvel standy, the all-battle  Cover: 2000 AD no 500 years, on and off. In this latest work, however issue when you've run out of plot ideas,  Specialist comic publication: Speakeasy perhaps because he's already drawn one or spend a whole issue on a pointless fight  Roll of honour: Frank Miller two Hulk Thing confrontations Starlin has between two heroes and call it a change of provided only the script, leaving the artwork to pace\"). US CATEGORIES his occasional collaborator of the mid-1970s. What is it about this story that transcends the Comic: Watchmen Berni Wrightson. cliches, then? Not the plot; that's a simple affair  Graphic novel: Dark Knight Wrightson, of course, is best known for being concerning our heroes being teleported across . Character: Batman the co-creator, with Len Wein, of the Swamp the galaxy to a distant planet where they must  Group or team: X-Men Thing (Drat! And I thought I could keep Alan track down a kidnapped scientists. After facing  Villain: The Joker Moore out of the column this month...). He a series of obstacles, they succeed and are sent  Supporting character: John Constantine was one of the first fan-acclaimed superstars of back to Earth. Most worthy of own series: Wolverine comics in the late 60s/early 70s, and one of the Fortunately, there's rather more to it than . Continued story: Dark Knight 1-4 first to depart from comics for the more that, as we realise early in the story when the New title: Watchmen lucrative pastures of limited edition prints, narrator informs us.  Cover: Dark Knight 1 portfolios and book illustrations. Probably his \"I am the Watcher. I see all and record it for Specialist comic publication: Amazing finest work during this period is his magnificent future generations. Some believe that I am only Heroes illustration edition of Frankenstein\" which, interested in tales of cosmic proportions. This is Penciller: Frank Miller not so! I am also a keeper of small stories.  Inker: Terry Austin Human stories.  Writer: Alan Moore (surprise, surprise...) \"By the time you finish reading this time you If any of those sound unfamiliar to you, what shall realise that I even save silly and trivial are you waiting for? Find your nearest purveyor stories. of fine comics and give them a try. \"No one's perfect.\" My favourite comic shop... is London's There's a future used staff and onbiddion Planet Book such as Wrightson ever mor Londen we 0-836179 you live ioner Bialetlened sound effects Ameetharacter the southeast, sou lead to the deserves a special mentional terbroll somew Poder Planeta en worskered ones The Walk and Sycinery Street, chito 03-680 used as a bass. Give that copia is the latest necks well aslasest imports "


"FOR AS LITTLE AS  YOU CAN BE THE HOME SECRETARY. There's more to home computers than fun and games. Just add a printer (and the necessary software) and your computer becomes a word processor. And you become a very efficient secretary If the printer you add is the Amstrad DMP 2000 your efficiency will even extend to saving quite a lot of money. Because the DMP 2000 costs just $159 (incl. VAT). Yet it will print draft quality text at up to 105 characters per second. And Near Letter Quality at up to 26 characters per second As you would expect it is compatible with all Amstrad home computers. But it is also compatible with Epson and any other make that has the same Centronics Parallel Interface. this and cost op. ase on in I the f tain If you've already graduated to a PCthere's the new Amstrad DMP 3160 printer It's compatible with all Amstrad PC's as well as Epson and all other IBM compatible PC's. It costs just $199 (plus VAT): Both printers have easy front loading and both will take ordinary A4 paper. One of them is bound to be right for your particular home office. NEW AMSTRAD DMP SEO ..) hat yor CVG12 Please send me further information on the DMP 2000 and the DMP 31600 NAME COMPANY TELEPHONE AMSTRAD ADDRESS AVAILABLE AT: ALLDERS COMET CURRYS. DIXONS LASKYS. JOHN LEWIS AND GOOD INDEPENDENT COMPUTER STORES \"Recommended retail price including VAT, .85. Prices correct at 1-9.87 but may change without notice. Amstrad plc, PO Box 462 Brentwood, Essex CM14 4EF. Telephone: (0277) 262326. "


"| IN RA YOGI BEAR Hey Hey Hey! Are you smarter than the average bear? You'll need to be to get out of this one. Boo-Boo's been bear-napped and must be rescued before hibernation time. Hunters, mooses, vultures, bees, caverns, geysers as well as good old Ranger Smith are determined to stop you! Spectrum commodore Amstrad Cassettes .95 Discs .95 Berk is back! Now you can actually explore the dark and nasty regions for yourself as you try to rescue your friend Boni, trapped in the murky depths. Along the way all sorts of creepy critters will try to spook you in exciting arcade action! Spectrum Commodore Amstrad Cassette .95 Discs E14.95 FLUNKY The Royal Family as they have never been seen before! This is your chance to work at Buck House as a menial manservant. Your job is to cater to the residents' every whim, but you'll need cunning, strong nerves and quick reactions if you are going to avoid a nasty end. Spectrum Commodore Amstrad Cassettes .95 Discs .95 Coming soon for the Atari ST. "


"HATTACK! HOW ROYRETHE OF THE RUUGR2 Melchester Rovers is under threat of closure from greedy property developers. On the eve of a special celebrity match organised to save the club, Roy's team mysteriously disappears. Unless he rescues them he may end up facing the opposition alone! Spectrum commodore Amstrad Cassettes .95 Discs .95 JUGE DEALS Megacity is being terrorised by the Dark Judges Death himself and his cronies Fear, Fire and Mortis. They are dedicated to putting an end to life itself. As Judge Anderson you stand alone. Only your psychic powers and blazing gun can save Megacity! Spectrum Commodore Amstrad Cassettes .95 Discs .95 AUNOT Powerful manoeuvrable and deadly, the Gunboat under your command carries the most lethal waterborn weaponry to date. Deep in the complex maze of fjords and canal systems are your targets huge submarine pens. Your mission to seek and destroy! Spectrum Commodore Amstrad Cassettes .95 Discs .95 For release schedules, please contact Helen Holland at the address below. Piranha games are available from all good stockists or, in case of difficulty, direct from Helen Holland, Piranha, 4 Little Essex Street, London WC2R 3FL. Tel: 01-836 6633. Biranha "


"Puick Shot JOYSTICKS ONE THING MAKES THEM BETTER THAN THE REST... 22 Amance SPECTRAVIDEO LTD. 165 Garth Road, Morden, Surrey SM4 4., England, "


"COMPUTER COMPETITION HMPIA games feast is coming YOUR way! We've got a real mega-mix of raves from the grave and up to date blasters piled up in the C+VG penthouse just waiting for YOU! Thanks to Beau-Jolly we can offer THREE top prize winners complete sets that's volumes one to fourof the sought after Commodore Hits compilations. That's a total of 42 games for the Commodore, Spectrum, Amstrad or BBC/Electron. The compilations include classics like School Daze, Who Dares Wins, Astroclone, Wizard's Lair, How do you get your hands on this giant Superpipeline, Bride of grap-bag of good games? Simple, just Frankenstein and ESENTI answer the questions below and rush Sacred Armour of your completed coupon to Computer Antiriad! Plus loads PLER and Video Games, Computer Hits more great Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 games. Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. And there's more. Closing date is December 16th, 50 runners-up normal C+ VG rules apply and the will get a copy of editor's decision is final. the latest So whaddaya waiting for?! Computer Hits compilation that's C+VG COMPUTER HITS 4 Mutant Monty Volume Four. COMPETITION SPECTRUM 48%  All you have to do is complete the names of these famous games, some of which can be found on the Computer Hits compilations. 1. Chuckie..............? 2. Give My Regards To...............? 4. Codename...............? 5. Contact Sam...............? 6. How to be a Complete..... 7. Solomon's. 8. Mario...............? 9. Road.. 10. Bubble.............. 1 Codename Mat 2 Weards Lair 3 Technician Ted How PERUM 128 COMPLU BRANAS SUPERSTAR MURERETAN DHOUE 36 BRATI BLUFF JASPER PROIECT RUTURE SORCERERSO N 1 Forbidden Planets Dewgn Design Aligota 2 Who Dares Wins 3 Cauldron Pace Software 4 Juggernauto 5 30 Lunattack owo 6 Herberts Dummy Run Mikrogen 7 Geoff Capes Strongman Mertech 10 ORIGINAL HIT GAMES READSHOOR BUY-KAUFEN \"COMPU ES C+VG/BEAU JOLLY COMPUTER HITS COMPETITION Name................ Address............. My Answers are: 1.............. 2.............. 3.............. 4........ 5............... 6................ 7.............. 8................ 9.... 10..................... Computer owned (tick box) Spectrum Amstrad C64 BBC/Electron 145 "


"ADVENTURE ZONE news Way. Welcome to the Adventure Zone! Anything Organised by Clubspot, the Prestel arm of the can happen within the next few pages Association of London and probably will as Keith Cambell, Computer Clubs, together The eighth and final C+VG's master of the mystic arts, brings with Sutton Library Infocom title to be you news, reviews and helpful hints from Computer Club, the event launched this year, commences at 9.30 am will be Border Zone, the wacky world of adventuring. So please and admission costs .50 Infocom's first adventure don't adjust your magazine reality will be on the door. Sutton library with a spy scenario. resumed as soon as possible... is situated in St. Njcholas It was written by Mark Blanc, co-founder and co-author of Zork. No early next year, it is set in had omitted a complete There w nething longer working at Infocom, present day London. data file from the illicit not quite right about Mark wrote the game on Meanwhile, Anita copy, Kostas decided the this particular visitor the Infocom computer, Sinclair's own \"special\" only way to get Adventure to our live Helpline at the working remotely via a adventure, Upon games, not easily PCW Show. Smiling and modem. Westminster Bridge, has available in Greece, was chatty, but starting to get Release is expected been postponed until late by mail order from the UK. up my nose. Don't you during November in the 1988. Kostas is a lone come here and pick my USA, and a few weeks later adventurer, for all his brains, and then start in Europe and the UK. Colleagues in the friends play arcade getting nasty, \"I thought. Eight releases in one States commonly games. \"Write to me if you And then he did it. His year is a record for A have underground can, so I do not feel so smile turning to an ugly Infocom, and it is expected tunnels linking the lonely when I am playing sneer, his lips curled, and that a similar number of buildings on campus. They an adventure!\" wrote he slowly reached for the new titles will be produced are built for use in the very Kostas. zipper of his jacket. ''I shall in 1988. One of these will be cold weather often To help him with his mailundo it now!\" he a Sherlock Holmes experienced in America. ordering, Kostas will now announced, mockingly. Of adventure. It will be unlike those in Lurking Horror are get the benefit of discount course I knew in that last the Deadline/Witness a close copy of the tunnels software through ACL, and split second what horror split second what horror Suspect series, having at the Massachusets a bi-monthly dosier. would be revealed THAT more object manipulation. Institute of Technology, You too can win an ACL t-shirt. Two new Infocom games says author Dave Lebling, subscription! Write an I fled in terror, lest are reviewed this issue. who co-wrote the original interesting letter to me at became the object of his Zork on a DEC at MIT, the Adventure Helpline, disgustingly evig gropings From Darkness into before moving on to found and you're in with a And he calmly walked Light is the working Infocom, and put Zork on chance! But no begging onto the stand, donned his title of a new game micros. letters, please! Only letters paper bag, and took over being written by Judith \"Lurking Horrors should not mentioning that the the Helpline if you please! Childs, previously of Delta really have been written in writer would like the That was my first and last 4. Playing the part of a the Interactive Fiction Plus award, will be considered sighting of the Fiend, when woman, your task is to system,\" explained eligible! I plucked up courage return a chalice stolen Lebling. He would have enough to return, he had from the local church. liked to incorporate a lot disappeared. I still don't Written on the Quill, and to more choices for the know who he is, and so be published by CRL player, such as being able Pete Moreland and frighteningly ordinary are around November, the to repair the floor waxer, John Jones-Steel are his his features, I doubt if I game will be available for and then being able to discussing plans for a would recognise him if C64, Spectrum, and ride it. However, he was 16-bit version of the classic ever I saw him again. He everso Amstrad half way through when it text adventure Mordon's might even be standing ing the success of became apparent that to Quest. Details are not yet behind you in the Rod Pike's Dracula and do this would mean finalsed, but is likely that newsagents this very Frankenstein adventures, moving iy over on to the Atari Mordon will have minute, reding this copy of CRL has three more tales of larger 'plus' system for 128k graphics C+VG over your shoulder! horror in the pipeline. Rod machines, delaying the is working on Wolf Man, project by some months. A belated 'congrats and Jack the Ripper is on Count yourselves lucky, 64 Sutton public library to Fergus McNeill the way for St. Brides. An owners! is to be the venue of and Anna Popkess, adventure based on Jekyll an Adventure of Delta 4 and Abstract and Hyde is also planned. LA letter from Kostas Convention, on Saturday Concepts, who recently Pollizos of Athens, 28th November. Seminars became engaged, and Two new nonwon him C+VG's on Multi-user adventures, plan to marry next year. Kerovnian monthly award of a free adventure games, will form One honeymoon adventures from subscription to the the background to an possibility, a cruise in the Magnetic Scrolls will Adventurer's Club. Cured all-day workshop featuring Florida area, has been follow Jinxter. of buying cheap pirated on-line demos of multi-user ruled out, because it's Assasin is the working software after discovering adventures, with other murder off Miami. (KC's title of the next Scrolls that he couldn't play games running on a been playing far too release via Rainbird. Due Portal because the pirate variety of micros. much Nord and Bert! Ed). 146 "


"| Werewolves In A OF LONDON NEIGHBOURHOOD NEAR YOU No000w) WESTMINSTER STATION Viz, C6A/SPECTRUM/AMSTRAD Cal Storiew/ARTA DESIGN Vize "


"WAS MELBOURNE HOUSE Setting New Standards IN. COMPUTER SOFTWARE AMIGA .95 ATARIST .95 8-10 Paul Street, London EC2A 4H Telephone 01-377 8411. Telefax 01-377 5569 "


"ADVENTURE PASSENGERS reviews aps you're \" MACHINES: ATARI STCBM books, all the main and more than 15 other 64/128 see King Kpengla. You  SUPPLIER: INFOGRAMES charcters were eighteenth-century must decide by living this PRICE: $24.95 (Atari Sty/ introduced. Basically the characters. adventure in which you $14.95 (CBM disk) game is set on the eve of After many adventures will learn the mysteries REVIEWER: PAUL the French Revolution. in France and a tough of voodoo when meeting Isa, an adventure girl Ifyou can remember who turned out to be a back to C+VG's August countess whose title had issue and the review of been usurped. Hoel a the first Passengers on the young sailor unjustly Wind game, you'll know accused of murder who that Keith is very hostle to fell in love with Isa. Mary, the style of this adventure, a young English girl Indeed, he would expecting a child who probably argue that it is fled from her father and not a true country. John, an English problem-solving Officer and the father of adventure Mary's unborn child. St. That's a good point. It's It's Quentin, the ship's more like a role-playing surgeon and also a good book where at the end of friend of Isa. Boisboeuf, a a paragraph you have to captain of a slave ship. make a decision. The wrong choice can send you off on the wrong track. With Passengers you have to decide on the correct sequence of the king and upon visiting people to talk to and the Savannah. making the right decision Despite the fact that the when confronted with a operation of the game is choice. Getting the fairly complex and, at correct sequence right is times, confusing. I do vitally important to enjoy playing it, although progressing into the I'm not sure how much game. sense the second game In Passengers /based Help me makes if you haven't on Francois Bourgeon's played the first. The best-selling French comic graphics are truly impressive. Before buying this game, I would advise you crossing on board a slave to try and see the game ship, the group reach working first. The ideas Africa. Still with me? You behind it are, I think, new are forgiven if you think and exciting and deserve this sounds more like a encouragement. The soap opera than a game. execution of the concept Right from now on it's doesn't match this. Passenger 2. The Passengers on the Unfortunately, fate is Wind series runs, as far as I against them John know, to about five goes mad; Hoel becomes volumes so there is the ill and the two women are chance we will be seeing exposed to the designs of more Passengers games The King Must know that my the evil Viaroux and husband is suffering from a Montaguere. Deciding to ere Deciding to VOCABULARY N/A very Mysterious illness. ng help Hoel, Isa goes to ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL Dahomey's kingdom to PACKAGE VALUE "


"PAC-LAND TM and  1984 NAMCO Ltd PAC'S BACK 12400 50000 0 0 BREAK TIME PAC the world's most famous computer character is back. There are many imitations but only one original PAC-LAND. This superb conversion of the internationally famous coin-op is not to be missed. CERDIT OO ROUND Két 0810 100516 KOYUVA AVAILABLE ON: SPECTRUM; AMSTRAD; MSX Cassette 28.95. COMMODORE Cassette .95; Disk $14.95. ATARI ST; AMIGA .95. Victory House Leicester Place London WC27NB You can obtain your copy of PACLAND direct from Argus Press Software Post and packaging FREE!!! Write now or send with a cheque or postal order to: B & L Distribution, Units 1 & 2, Conlon Development, Water Lane, Darwen, Lancs. BB3 2ET. Name ........ Address ........ Town or Phone: 01-439 0666 our Credit Card Hotline "


"ADVENTURE reviews PLUNDERED HEARTS MACHINES: C64/128 DISK ($24.99); ATARI ST; AMIGA; by King Lafont. He sends APPLE II; MACKINTOSH; IBM you a letter begging you PC (.99) to trust The Falcon. SUPPLIER: ACTIVISION All this takes place at INFOCOM REVIEWER: KEITH the beginning of the game, and there is very The schooner Lafond little else to do but to sit Deux is heading for the back and read the text, West Indies, supposedly and press RETURN every taking you to visit your now and again. But soon ailing father. But before the player finds herself reaching her destination, able to control her she is attacked by actions, and the game pirates, and Captain proper gets under way. Davis is only too eager to There is, of course, a hand a beautiful young place for easy lady like yourself over to adventures after all, them. everyone has got to start Narrowly escaping the somewhere. clutches of the randy Plundered Hearts, pirate Crulley. you are written by new Infocom rescued by the pirate Storyteller, Amy Briggs, is captain, the dreaded too romantic for my tastes Falcon. Your father, it but should suit beginners. turns out, has commissioned The Falcon to rescue him from VOCABULARY a dungeon in which he ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL has been incarcerated C+VG HIT! NORD & BERT may not get a chance particular are great fun. with many more. In Buy the Farm, you must The Shopping Bizarre guess the well-known MACHINES: C64/128 DISKunravel, to break the story find you cast is a phase or saying. So when ($24.99); ATARI ST; AMIGA; dessert aisle in a plague. The stories I had taught an old dog APPLE IT; MACKINTOSH; IBM supermarket. So far, so some new tricks, and he PC (.99) mainly involve word play, e word play, good. This one involves ran off and knocked over  SUPPLIER: ACTIVISION but each in a different INFOCOM puns. You see a man with a milk churn, I was soon way. REVIEWER; KEITH In Eat Your Words, you bad breath, so you hop not crying over the result. The little town of Punster is find yourself in the Teapot and type MINTS when you of spoonerisms, and that Voras, you over to the Meets aisle, Shake A Tower is a story suffering from an Cate. Here you must use spot the mince. Thus you outbreak of a plague of well-known sayings within too proved highly verbicide. Language the context of the story. can cure the bad playable. Easy prey was itself is in danger. Here The trouble is, this plotis breather. the queer old dean, and are eight short stories set rather linear, and if you In Play Jacks, you are quickly spotted was a in Punster, for you to miss out on a saying, you confronted by a shoving leopard. contraption with many Treat Nord and Bertas a ART Brom is hors sorted Sick the cows come controls, and using each parlour game, play it in a one in turn converts it into group and you'll get a lot something else of fun out of it, even if you beginning with the word do speak English. It's nice JACK to see Infocom branching For example, Jack in out with new ideas. the box, Jack-knife, Jaccuzzi ... and you have to use the different ATMOSPHERE objects obtainable, to VOCABULARY solve the puzzles. PERSONAL Two sections in VALUE "


"08 BOXERS FORMELY MUSIC BY MAIL DECEMBER '87 P.O. BOX 1035, ENFIELD, MIDDLESEX,ENI IPG XMAS EDITION MAIL WE WOULD LIKE TO WISH EVERYBODY A MERRY XMAS OUT AND A HAPPY NEW YEAR SPECTRUM SPECTRUM COMMODORE AMSTRAD ON 2.99 1.65 3.50 1.65              OOOO 1.65 giggong ini 3.50 8888 3.50 3.50 1.65 1.65 1.65 1.65                          1.65 1.65 1.65 1.65 5.75 1.65 1.65 7.99 ALL OR NOTHING 1.65 MOUNTIE MICKS DEATHRIDE 2.99 ARCADE ACTION RANA RAMA TIRAXOS 1.65 GREYFELL 2.99 2.99 EAGLES KILLING RING DOGFIGHT ARMAGEDDON 1.65 2.99 TRANSFORMERS TUJAD BEAKEY & THE EGG SNATCHERS1.65 DEATHSCAPE 2.99 2.99 BRAIN DAMAGE THE FOURTH PROTOCOL DEACTIVATORS TOAD RUNNER 2.99 1.65 2.99 ACE BULLSEYE CAMELOT WARRIORS 3.50 CHALLENGE OF THE GOBOTS 2.99 ACROJET CASEY JONES ACE HYBRID 3.50 1.65 3.50 ALIENS BRIDE OF FRANKENSTEIN CASINO ROYALE 3.50 AVENGER 1.65 DAN DARE BATTLE OF THE PLANETS CHEQUERED FLAG MOUNTIE MICKS DEATHRIDE 3.50 1.65 DANDY THE FORCE CHESS TRIAXOS 3.50 3.50 DECEPTOR CHESS THE TURK FRIDAY THE 13TH 1.65 KILLER RING COMPUTER COOKBOOK (2tps) ELEVATOR ACTION TUJAD FUTURE KNIGHT 1.65 3.50 FUTURE KNIGHT GREAT ESCAPE TOADRUNNER CONFUSION GRANGE HILL CAMELOT WARRIORS COSMIC DEBRIS 1.65 MIND SHADOW CYBER RATS NEXUS GREAT ESCAPE WERNER 1.65 3.50 HYPABALL BLITZKRIEG DIMENSION DESTRUCTORS OFF THE HOOK LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE PROHIBITION XARO DODO 1.65 RIVER RAID MARBLE MADNESS DOOMSDAY CASTLE PRODIGY SEPULCRI DRIVE IN NUCLEAR EMBARGO SHADOW SKIMMER ENIGMA FORCE SHERLOCK ON COURT FOOTBALL WINTER SPORTS 3.50 VIKINGS EXTERMINATOR ANIMATOR STARFOX 1.65 3.50 3.50 F.A. FOOTBALL '87 THING BOUNCES BACK AVENGER 4.25 DANDY 3.50 FREEZE BEES THE YOUNG ONES SHAOLINS ROAD 4.25 FUTURE KNIGHT 1.65 3.50 PILE-UP (DISC) GRANGE HILL GOLF 4.99 ZYNAPS 3.50 GREAT SPACE RACE IMPOSSABALL BRIDE OF FRANKENSTEIN (DISC) 4.99 FRANKIE GOES HOLLYWOOD 1.65 3.76 TRIAXOS (DISC) M.G.T. 4.99 PACMAN ICICLE WORKS 3.75 WERNER (DISC) JOHNNY REB 2 PITFALL 2 TRAILBLAZER 4.99 1.65 3.75 KILLER KONG DEACTIVATORS (DISC) SKY FOX MICROVALUE (6 GAMES) 4.99 1.65 3.75 KRAKATOA CAMELOT WARRIORS (DISC) SPACE SHUTTLE 4.99 WINTER SPORTS 1.65 3.75 GREYFELL (DISC) MAX HEADROOM 4.99 MISSION IMPOSSIBLE FINAL MATRIX 3.75 MONEY MANAGER DOGFIGHT 2187 (DISC) MICRO VALUE (6 GAMES) 4.99 DEACTIVATORS 1.65 3.75 DEATHSCAPE (DISC) MERMAID MADNESS MOTHER SHIP 4.99 BALLBLAZER 4.25 CHALLENGE OF THE GOBOTS(D) 4.99 GHOSTBUSTERS AUF WIEDERSEHEN MONTY ON THE OCHE 4.25 HYBRID (DISC) GO TO HELL ONE ON ONE BACK TO THE FUTURE 4.99 4.25 ACE 2 ORBITER HACKER COMPUTER HITS 3 5.75 4.25 PANZADROME INTERN'L KARATE DISK THREE WEEKS IN PARADISE 5.75 COMPUTER HITS 5 1.65 4.25 THE PYRAMID ROAD RUNNER TRAILBLAZER FIVE STAR GAMES 2 1.65 5.75 4.25 WORLD CLASS LEADERBOARD CLUEDO PSI GAMES INTERN'L KARATE DISK 7.99 RAPSCALLION MONOPOLY BOMB JACK 2 7.95 LEADERBOARD 7.99 REALM OF IMPOSSIBILITY GAUNTLET SCRABBLE 7.95 MAG MAX 1.65 LEADERBOARD SCALEXTRIX ROAD RACERS SKYFOX 7.95 1.65 7.99 PAPER BOY LEADERBOARD 7.95 SPACE HARRIER RUPERT 1.65 7.99 SCRABBLE PAPERBOY 11.95 TRIVIAL PURSUIT SAM SPADE 7.99 SCHIZOFRENIA MONOPOLY GAUNTLET 11.95 DEACTIVATORS (DISC) 1.65 6.99 7.99 CLUEDO SLIPPERY SID 11.95 CAMELOT WARRIORS (DISC) 1.65 SCALEXTRIX WERNER (DISC) 11.95 SNOOKER 6.99 1.65 TIME TUNNELS THEY STOLE A MILLION (DISC) 6.99 1.65 AMSTRAD GREYFELL (DISC) TITANIC 6.99 1.65 VALKYRIE 17 GOLF 6.99 1.65 DOGFIGHT 2187 (DISC) 1.65 FA FOOTBALL '87 1.65 F.A. FOOTBALL '87 DEATHSCAPE (DISC) VIDEO POOL 6.99 1.65 ON THE OCHE (DARTS) 1.65 WORLD CUP FOOTBALL CHALLENGE OF THE GOBOTS(D) 6.99 WORLD CUP FOOTBALL 1.65 ALIEN 2.99 BOULDERDASH HYBRID (DISC) BROAD STREET 2.99 BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK CODE NAME MATT II BOULDERDASHI 2.99 BRIDE OF FRANKENSTEIN (DISC) 6.99 2.99 G CAPES STRONGMAN 2.99 ENDURO CODE NAME MATT II TRIAXOS (DISC) 2.99 2.99 6.99 CHOPPER SQUAD 2.99 GROWING PAINS OF ADRIAN MOLE2.99 FOOTBALL MANAGER 2.99 GAUNTLET 7.95 CODE NAME MATI GROWING PAINS OF ADRIAN MOLE2.99 2.99 LEADERBOARD HEADCOACH ELECTRO FREDDY 7.95 2.99 HEADCOACH HERO WORLD CLASS LEADERBOARD 7.95 2.99 FIGHTING WARRIOR INTERNATIONAL KARATE 2.99 SCRABBLE PRESIDENT 2.99 FOOTBALL MANAGER 7.99 2.99 MONOPOLY PSYTRON PILOT 64 2.99 FRIDAY THE 13TH 7.99 2.99 SKY RUNNER PRESIDENT CLUEDO 2.99 GLADIATORS 7.99 SPLIT PERSONALITIES SUPERMAN 2.99 SCALEXTRIX 2.99 7.99 HAUNTED HEDGES TRANS-ATLANTIC TRANS-ATLANTIC 2.99 BALLOON HUNCHBACK 2.99 CHALLENGE IBM PC BALLOON CHALLENGE 2.99 2.99 INTERNATIONAL KARATE 2.99 TWISTER 2.99 TURBO 64 2.99 JET BOOT JACK 2.99 AMFM TRIVIA 1 VIEW TO A KILL 2.99 BLITZKREIG 2.99 MANIC MINER 2.99 AM/FM TRIVIA 2 VIRGIN ATLANTIC CHALLENGE MRS. MOP 2.99 2.99 MASTER OF THE LAMPS AM/FM TRIVIA 3 2.99 WAR ON WANT 2.99 CHALLENGE OF THE GOBOTS 2.99 PRESIDENT ARCHON 2.99 12.95 INTERNATIONAL KARATE 2.99 HYBRID 2.99 PUNCHY BOULDERDASHI 2.99 BOULDERDASH BRIDE OF FRANKENSTEIN 2.99 2.99 SPLIT PERSONALITIES BOULDERDASH | 2.99 7.95 BOULDERDASH DEADRINGER 2.99 STAR COMMANDO WHEEL OF FORTUNE 2.99 7.95 SUPERMAN 2.99 MOUNTIE MICKS DEATHRIDE 2.99 SUPERMAN BACKGAMMON 7.99 2.99 FOOTBALL MANAGER TRIAXOS 2.99 KAT TRAP BLACKJACK 2.99 7.99 THEY STOLE A MILLION 2.99 KILLER RING NEXOR 2.99 ARMCHAIR QUARTER BACK 7.99 GREYFELL 2.99 GOLF CONSTRUCTION SET 2.99 THE BIG SLEEZE POKER 2.99 7.99 DOGFIGHT 2 2.99 GREYFELL 2.99 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT GREETING CARD MAKER 2.99 7.99 DEATHSCAPE DOGFIGHT 2187 2.99 2.99 G. HODDLE SOCCER 2.99 SIGN BANNER MAKER 7.99 DEACTIVATORS DEATHSCAPE 2.99 2.99 CALENDAR & STATIMAKER AIRWOLF 2.99 7.99 CHALLENGE OF THE GOBOTS 2.99 PILE-UP 2.99 THEY STOLE A MILLION FOOTBALL MANAGER 2.99 12.95 HYBRID 2.99 MIND DANCE 7.95 BRIDE OF FRANKENSTEIN ALL PRICES INCLIUDE V.A.T. 2.99 MUSIC CONSTRUCTION 12.05 DEAD RINGER 2.99 AND DELIVERY WITHIN THE U.K. PINBALL CONSTRUCTION 12.95 SUPER SUNDAY 12.95 PLEASE PRINT YOUR NAME ADDRESS,GAMES REQUIRED & FORMAT ALLOW 21 DAYS FOR DELIVERY EXPORT CUSTOMERS,PLEASE ADD .50 TO COVER POSTAGE.PAYMENT MUST BE IN STERLING 1.65 6.99 COMMODORE 1.65 1.65 6.99 8888888888 7.96 7.95 7.95 2.99 2.99 2.99 PLEASE MAKE CHEQUES/POSTAL ORDERS TO BOXERS MAIL OUT "


"KNIGHTMARE: Kaiohitman ITV's adventure game show OFFICIAL COMPUTER VERSION OF 2.99 2.99 299 2.99 2.99 2.99 99 299 99 99 99 .99 199 99 99 LOLOTOVOOOOOO88888888cadou YOUR BEST EVER NIGHTMARE!! Knightmare the computer game uniquely combines the best elements of traditional adventuring with some hot arcade action and provides puzzles and riddles of a varying nature not found before in computer games Mail Order: Activision (UK) Ltd, Units 3 & 4 Lloyds Close, Finedon Road Industrial Estate, Wellingborough, Northampton NNS 4SR. Tel: (0933) 76768 Commodore 64/128 Cassette (.99) and Disk (.99) ZX Spectrum 48k/128k/+ (.99) Amstrad CPC Cassette (49.99) and Disk (814.99) Atari ST (14.99). ACTIVISION W Copyright 1987 Anglia Television. Game copyright 1987 Activision (UK) Ltd. All rights reserved. "


"ddich ddict THE NEW AUTUMN BLOCKBUSTER ddictive END TO END KEVIN TOMS ddictive TRAINING COACHING CENA NCED TACTICAL DECISIONS CREALISTIC GRAPHICS TRANSFER MARKET BARGAINING VARYING PLAYING SKILLS OPLUS MANY MORE KEVIN TOMS, THE DESIGNER SPECTRUM 48k GAME WORTH ANSFER FEE .95 (DIS .95) .95 .95 SPECTRUM .95 COMMODORE 64/128 .95 (DISC 14.95 .95 AMSTRAD CPC IBM ATARI ST AMIGA MATCHES IN STUNNING 3D SCREEN SHOTS TAKEN FROM THE ATARI ST VERSION ADDICTIVE GAMES LTD, UNIT 1. BAIRD ROAD, ENFIELD, MIDDLESEX ENI IST TEL: 01-804 8100 FAX: 01-805 8001 TELEX: 295944 PRISM G 1ddictive ADDICTIVE GAMES LTDS A DIVISION OF PRISM LEISURE CORPORATION "


" Keith Campbell's deadly adversary, The Fiend of Faringdon, traditionally makes a furtive and unobserved visit to the C+VG stand at the PCW Show. Did he turn up this year? You bet he did! The Friend.... SO you wish you had Porn with longing. BAH! been to the PCW All was not a total loss. I Show? Someone wishes enjoyed a nice chat on the he hadn't! Here's a rundown Level 9 stand, and of what was on offer for elsewhere saw Rebel Planet adventure players, from a a on sale for a mere $2.50. All Fiendish point of view! those of you who didn't Those of you who were in snap up this bargain, hang the vicinity of the C+VG your heads in shame, for this stand on Friday afternoon, s THE one game that alone may have been aware of a FIEND has received the Fiend's slight altercation. stamp of approval this Now, I ask you, what else twelve months gone. did that nice Mr Campbell If you haven't played it, expect? After all, he did ask then do yourself a big me to expose myself on the favour, for I have seen it C+VG stand. What a thing recently as part of a to say to a Fiend! compilation, and it must be KC rushed off in a panic, good value. probably to fortity himself in In summary, then, was the the nearest bar, having show for adventurers at all? suffered the ordeal of Or was it for arcade freaks, meeting The Fiend face to and an excuse for those face. And for ten glorious involved in adventure minutes the Fiend found writing to get together in himself in sole charge of order to quaft ale? The the Helpline! latter, I suspect. There can only be half a Had it not been for the dozen games that have Helpline, any pure eluded the Fiend's great adventurer would have intellect, and blow me been badly served. down if those who came to If anything, the whole beg my aid didn't ask about show resembled one huge those very games! games arcade, complete \"Stuck at the river, sonny? with sweaty, shoving bodies, So am I?\" This was swiftly flashing lights and followed by a \"Don't ask intolerable zapping noises. me,\" and a final \"Push off!\". Add to this the queues for Oh, the joy! Not only did! reveal the t-shirt, made it all lady of last year who sold the indifferent and get ten minutes of sheer seem worthwhile. me no less than eight expensive refreshments. unadulterated public At first I thought the adventure games for the In desperation I was nuisancing, but I managed moisture on his brow was paltry sum of $1.50 each? forced to take refuge in one to shatter the Helpline's caused by fear, but in Mind you, this bundle did or two of the inner sancta, reputation simultaneously! retrospect it was probably include Seas of Blood. 'Nuff those closed off little areas Mind you, even if I had snow melting. said. that the bigger stands known the answers, my Tended up with a stift Oh yes, it was all right for boast. replies would have been neck from looking up, and all you strutting about with If you have ever the same. sore feet from trying to your ST's and Amigas. There wondered what goes on Those of you who suffered stand on tiptoe. were parsers for you to behind the curtains the should consider yourselves So what did the Fiend choose from, and lots of 'Invited Guests only' notices, deeply honoured, for after make of the show? As a pretty graphics, too. But then eat your heart out. For all these years the Fiend Spectrum-owning such are not for the poor the Fiend has seen, and chose to make a public adventure player, I found it relation, your Spectrum what he has seen defies appearance. the most disappointing owner. I could only fondle words. The look upon KC's face PCW ever. the Leather Goddesses So I am not going to tell as I unzipped my jacket to Where was that lovely wistfullty, and caress The you. LTD IS RISM RATION "


"ADVENTURE n me USA, ADVENTU Who can help cartridges on a Vic-20, the make the game morning, and so were both \"Benedetto Dell'Olmo, code needed to start the unplayable, says Bing. able to join me for an presently languishing game is SYS 32592. Thanks Finally, a message hurled impromptu lunch. in Rome? He needs help to the many readers who in the general direction of Gareth had a long with the meaning of the wrote in with this C+VG's Matthew Woodley, enough journey he left message from the information, including and The Fiend. \"Get stuffed\" Swansea at 6.30am to get to resistance, in Rebel Planet Adrian Smith and Andrew says David Picking, of the show. But if you think And where can he find the Bethell would like to know Upminster, attacking the that's keen, spare a thought wire he needs to disable where to find the Mark of duo who have attacked for William, who left the fence? the Snake, in Ultima 3. Savage Island! Aberdeen at 7pm on the Inferno is another game Simon Percival, of Don't forget that you can previous day, aiming to stumping Benedetto he Colchester, is a bit of a write to the C+VG return on the 8.45pm coach! is trying to pass through the do-gooder. He has this urge Adventure Helpline, for We were joined in the great barrier. to dig the vicar's garden, help in an adventure, or to pub by Mike Austin and \"How do you get through but can't find a tool to use! help some other poor John Jones-Steel, and so the door into the basement He's playing Shrewsbury sufferer out, or to simply Gareth and Williams were of the Carfax Estate?\" asks Key, and also wonders if the insult us! There's Paul able to find out all they Dracula player Lewis sneaker is a red herring? Coppins, our long-standing wanted to know but never McNiece. And is there Are you wondering where adventure expert, and had the chance to ask, anyone in the world, he Bard's Tale 2 has got to? It myself, to help you. about Level 9 adventures. asks, who knows how to get is about in the USA, Write to me at the The highlight of the week, ANYWHERE in Twice Shy? according to K. G. (Bing) Adventure Helpline, adventure-wise, was an Help is at hand for Mrs Taylor, of Dyfed. But don't Computer + Video Games, Adventurers Night Out, Samuels of Gillingham. To start getting excited yet! Priory Court, 30-32 when a party of 20, all run her old Scott Adams Bugs in the review copies Farringdon Lane, London connected with the world of ECIR 3AU — and we'll get adventure games, went out back to you. for a meal after the show. Infocom, Level 9, The Adventure Helpline Magnetic Scrolls, St. Brides, was \"live\" at the recent PCW Abstact Concepts, Rainbird Show in London. Among the and Gilsoft, were visitors to the stand, was represented. We were all Dave Lebling, co-founderdelighted to be joined by of Infocom and author of visitors to the UK, Dave Help came this month from the famous Zork trilogy, whoLebling and his wife Janet, the following adventurers: popped in to find out how to and Christian Martensen, Aage Christoffersen, solve one of the more adventure columnist and Denmark; Lewis McNiece, difficult puzzles in his latest deputy editor of the Danish game, The Lurking Horror. WIMS \"Wouluehol 'PIDMADH magazine, COMputer. Just as welcome were the Joj pion6 eyl pues eppey uljoo 'soup 'COMIDO The remains of the beer many readers who popped eljeno peyspa Buje 44M JD Boqoje snbepud kitty (yes, there was about in with a problem, or just to  left over, so eat your is I  dn pej-NIN  ' q  dn udo item uEym fSDO say 'hello'. Mike Thomas, heart out, Fiend!) was Russell Mills (thanks for the 144 SDY 7 OLHOULOH ONIXANT aloq jsnu pup'sesn donated to the NSPCC on Perrier, Russell, it's real our behalf, by Anna ito ay peej SS!18 371SV5 anoJOWAVTO thirsty work at Olympia!). JO JOJOS Popkess, of Abstract ps poo DJOJOValids John \"Loony\" Yeates, Paul i1!1135 ISH N3DOOM BHI SNIJO Concepts. —     4uoa VALOW B''S! ! sey Cunningham (of Sherlock Don't forget the C+VG ANVISNOM DINIM jo edeyi equosep 'jseyo solving fame), Stephen Phone-In Helpline! we're eswoid Aup uedo Oj 'SNOLSONNA Englhout and Colin about to relaunch our wiy expw ueyi pup AllDjel! OOP! Mattews, were all regular Friday afternoon adventurers I felt I knew, 'ou wly let opaws of Wepi Sa3a39 10000 problem solving sessions from letters written to the wsdiq MIOJOW HO SMOGVHS with the help of our trusty Helpline over the years. auf uoysenb pup Atari ST, KC's computerised jejnpou   UDOJu yonis.HETAVX \"sewy Belyi lAUD HIH OSO7 There were so many more version of the awesome jedidos 001 pudis ,uopinq ADMD familiar names, that I lost adventure database as track-please forgive me constructed by his own fair q   jgnoli sejqnoznox Moja pup |jpA if you feel left out! OIOVW O ano105 epeyi ana NIPISNE INVO: hand. We've got extra help Two runners-up in last in the C+VG office, and year's Adventurer of the once our switchboard has Year competition, Gareth been sorted out we'll be Williams and William Hern, announcing the data for the called in on the Saturday first phone-in session. "


"O LEADERBOARD ACCESS Famous CoursesOf The World VOLUME 1 ALL THE FEATURES OF WORLDCLASS LEADERBOARD IN THIS GREAT NEW 4 COURSE COMPILATION PEBBLE BEACH Length: 6799 yards Par: 72 Record: Tom Kite 62 GLENMOOR Length: 7131 yards Par: 72 COLONIAL Length: 7100 yards Par: 70 Record: Joey Sindelar 62 MUIRFIELD Length: 6894 yards Par: 71 Record: Peter Butler 65 SUNNINGDALE PAR 72 >>722222 DORADO BEACH PAR 72 Following the amazing success of the now legendary Leaderboard series of products, Famous Courses of the World presents four superb new challengers for the joystick golf fanatic. From the infamous Pebble Beach Course on the California coastline to the historical course of Muirfield, Edinburgh, the oldest golf club in the world. From the beautiful Colonial Country Club built by Texas oil baron Martin Leonard to the designed for computer\" challenge of Access's Glenmoor course, Great Courses of the World is a must for anyone hooked on computer golf. HARBOUR TOWN PAR 71 COMING SOON FOR CBM 64/128 ONLY INDEPENDENT VOLUME NO PREVIOUS LEADERBOARD REQUIRED PINE RIDGE PAR 72 IBM AMIGA 24.99 LEADERBOARD PRODUCT INDEX SPECTRUM AMSTRAD CBM 64 A TARI ATARI ST 9.999.999.99 LEADERBOARD 9.99 14.99 14.99 14.99 24.990 EXECUTIVE 9.990 LEADERBOARD 14.990 LEADERBOARD 499c. 4.99 TOURNAMENT 4.99 4.99c9.99d 9.990 6.99d6.99d WORLD CLASS 8.99c9.99 9.990 LEADERBOARD 12.99d* 14.99d 11.99d 4.990 FAMOUS COURSES 4,99c 4.99 9.990 6.990 4.990 FAMOUS COURSES 2 6.990 24.990 * SPECTRUM +3 U.S. Gold Ltd. Units 2/3 Holford Way. Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 "


"CALL IT A SEQUEL. AND YOU'LL LAND UP FLAT ON YOUR BACK. Commodore Screens They called International Karate the best beat-em-up so far. And who are we to argue? But Archer Maclean has come up with a stunner: A Third Fighter, Amazing animated background. New moves. Re-mixed music, And Balls! Commodore 64/128 Cassette (.99) and Disk (.99). Coming soon for Spectrum and Amstrad home computers. Mail Order: Activision (UK) Ltd, Units 3 & 4 Lloyds Close, Finedon Road Industrial Estate, Wellingborough, Northampton NN 4FR. Tel: (0933) 76768 Access, Visa and American Express Cards welcome. Distributed by Activision (UK) Ltd. "


"HMI "


"ON THE 15th DECEMBER COMPUTEA +VIDEO It's Out Run month in Computer and Video Games next issue! The game that's a sure fire Christmas number one will be getting the special C+VG treatment. We'll have a genuine hydraulic Out Run arcade machine to GIVE away! GAMES We'll have a special FREE audio tape of the Out Run coin-op soundtrack, PLUS 720° sounds on the B-side, stuck to the front of the mag. A cool-spool for your personal stereo! We'll have an in depth look at the computer version of Sega's arcade classic! Here's ANOTHER one to check out Brains! C+VG checks out the latest joysticks in one of our legendary guides to the wacky world of game controllers! ext  He-Man storms in with the launch of Gremlin's Masters of the Universe Game. C+VG's very own muscle-bound blond hunk, Paul Boughton, brings you a preview of the fiftest game around in the January issue of C+VG. Atari ST and Amiga owners can't afford to miss the January issue of everyone's favourite games magazine. We'll have a whole host of 16-bit hits to blow you away plus news and gossip from the mega-machine scene, Movie mayhem in the shape of the new Star Wars game! Win a bunch of Star Wars videos and a hi-tech TV/video outfit to watch them on! Check out the year ahead with our exclusive Electronic Arts poster calendar! All the dates you could possibly want on a giant full colour poster FREE with the January issue of Computer and Video Games! 1 Nebulus, that totally addictive game from John Phillips and Hewson, gets the C+VG players guide treatment. Tips on the towers from the programmer himself in Jan's C+VG. *All items correct at time of going to press. Dear Mr Newsagent, Avoid a visit from Lt. Laww and reserve me a copy of Computer + Video Games, December issue! COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES Name Address 1 KICK OFF THE NEW YEAR TO STYLE GET JANUARY'S COMPUTER+VIDEO GAMES THE HOTTEST GAMES MAG IN THE KNOWN UNIVERSEL! "


"E Little does he realise the awesome power he holds. Thinking it to be a musical Instrument he fails to realise that every note he plays attracts the ruthless Skeletor and his develish army led by the frightening powerful Evil-Lyn. With the key in their possesion who can stop them escaping downtown America and returning to create chaos in Eternia? Only one man can save earth from this evil domination as HE MAN meets Skeletor in the battle for Eternia, the final chapter that will seal the fate of mankind forever. CBM 64/128 .99 Cassette .99 b yad ned Reserved Disk ATARIST .99 39 E32 adema Mattel le 1986. All character under lose from Mantel in Master of the Universe and h MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE HAS COME TO LIFE!! Now you can live it, as the conflict between good and evil continues  MAITERS UNIVERSE The Movie CARDIN TAJUTILI Sp Sha Gremlin Graphics Software Limited, Alpha House, 10 Car ShE) 3 . Slipping through a vortex in time the KEY has fallen into the hands of an unsuspecting American college student KEY to time travel and with it the title Master of the Universe. the computer game of the film allows you to control the forces of good to do battle with the forces of evil, the prize being the Masters of the Universe, the Movie, brings to life the deadly, eternal conflict between good and evil, Masters of the Universe AMSTRAD 66°63 Cassette .99 Disk SPECTRUM .99 Cassette 181982 1981 SE! "


"MIND BLOWING BBC 2. MONSTCT Zapping GAMES US from PHS, the NEW name in Software MISSION ICARUS by Julian Avis FAST! DEADLY! Interactive game for 1 to 2 players, with over 19 levels of fast and furious droid zapping arcade type action SITUATION -Spacecraft Titan II, it's crew members eliminated by malfunctioning droids, is on a collision course with the Sun. YOU ARE -One of 2 mercenaries teleported onto the craft. YOUR MISSION STOP and RID the craft of marauding, droids and destroy the main computer, your only chance to avert impending disaster! CUTE TO KILL by Jason Chown IMPENDING NUCLEAR ATTACK O MINUS 30 MINUTES AND COUNTING... YOUR ORDERS Curb the rebellion on Planet Cute and prevent the attack taking place, or die in the attempt! YOUR DEFENCE Standard issue blaster plus any weapons found en route. Using faulty teleports, beam your way through 128 catacombs and holds, eliminating the fire spitting, jaw snapping monsters, At all times be on your guard against the enormous deadly mega-monsters who lurk menacingly in the depths of the holds. YOUR DEADLIEST ENEMY TIME IT'S RUNNING OUT FAST! Powerhouse Software Limited, Newells Green, Newells Lane, West Ashling, Chichester, West Sussex PO18 8DF. Available for BBC B and MASTER 128 on cassette at only .99 ea. or 80/40T disc at .99 ea. (inc. post and packing U.K. only). Please supply the following BBC games: Mission Icarus Disc .990 Cute to Kill Disc .99 Tenclose cheque for  Cassette .99 Cassette .99 Name Signature Address (Please make cheques payable to Powerhouse Software Limited. All orders will be despatched within 10-14 days) "


"THE ACTION-SIMULATION AIRBORNE RANGER MICROPROSE You are one of the elite ... parachuting alone behind enemy AIRBORNE RANGER.Achallenging combination of danger lines. The enemy controls the terrain, hidden in bunkers and and suspense. Available for the Commodore 64/128K. machine gun nests ...you may be surrounded. The action is Cassette .95 Disk .95. fierce as you control one soldier's battle against overwhelming odds. You'll need skill and strategy to outmanoeuvre your enemy, plus courage and some luck to make your escape. Airborne Ranger is an exciting fastpaced simulation with 12 desperate missions in 3 different SIMULATION SOFTWARE regions of the world. The possibilities are endless! Please send _copy/ies of Airborne Ranger CBM 64/128 Cassette .95 Disk .95 Further details. Name (block capitals) Address : _Post Code ARIC +VG/1287 lenclose . including 55p P+P. Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd, or debit my Access/Visa card. Expiry date. I _No. D MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place. Tetbury. Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. UK Tal: 1066ALKA29A TIADA MARIA CVG "


"Kompetition Konami T-Shirt Cool dudes in the coin-op jungle will be wearing these ultra-trendy Tshirts to match their fave games. These shirts come from Konami, The converters of classic coinop machines. They are big, baggy and extremely stylish. On the front you can stun your friends with Salamander, dazzle them with Gryzor, look tough with Jackal, come on like the Drill Instructor with Combat School, look mystical wearing the Maze of Gallious or go all wild and woolly with Iron Horse. Well'ard! We've got 25 of these dazzling garments to GIVE away in our special Konami Kompetition. But if you don't win one-never fear, the C+VG Saver Squad is here! Yup, you can get nearly  off one of the above mentioned T-shirts for just .95—they normally sell for over ! So, if you don't fancy your chances in the Komp, just send a cheque or postal order made payable to W+V Supplies, together with the special C+VG coupon on this page, to W+V Supplies, Bank Buildings, Bank Street, Newton Abbot, Devon, TQ12 2JL. Allow 28 days C+VG/KONAMI KOMPETITION Name Address KONAMI! QUIZ! 1) How many troopers parachute down at the beginning of Konami's Jackal coin-op. 2) What is a Salamander? Is it a) a snake, b) a lizard, c) a small green furry creature that sneaks out of the C+VG office at 5.30 every afternoon? 3) Name ALL the weapons used by the Nemesis ship. for delivery. Meanwhile, why not have a go at getting a FREE Konami T-shirt by answering the extremely easy questions. Once you've done that send your coupon to Computer and Video Games, Konami Kompetition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The FIRST 25 correct entries we receive will get a free t-shirt. My answers are: 2.. T-shirt size: SMALL O MED O LARGE O XLARGE XLARGE O tick tick b box ox "


"MATCH 1 DAY I \"AT LAST AWORTHY SUCCESSOR TO THE EVER POPULAR MATCH DAY FOOTBALL SIMULATION A GAME WHICH HAS REMAINED IN THE READERS CHARTS FOR 3 YEARS! Written once again by Jon Ritman this NEW Match Day is the result of all the customer feedback and advice on how to create the pinnacle in computer soccer. Pit yourself against the CPU or with 2 players full league or cup competition with unique code -save facility. Jump, head, volley and kick (using the kick meter) to move the ball from player to player with automatic deadball set ups and goalkeeper control. SPECTRUM 7.95 COMMODORE 8.95 AMSTRAD DIAMOND DEFLECTION SYSTEM ensures realistic ball ricochet and the action comes with full music and sound FX. If you want the very best in football for your micro then there's only one choice... MATCH DAY II with multi-menu system makes the home computer come alive. Ocean House 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS. Tel: 061-832 6633. Telex: 669977 "


"ELO. GOOD MOANINS, JE M'APPLE RAOUL AND I'M LUCKING FOR MA FIANCE CHRISTINE WHO AZ DISPARUDE ON THE WAY TO ZEE BOTCHER TO GET ZUM ZOSSAGE AND ZUM MATE RSST. IT IS I, LE BERK, ZINC ZAT WOAMAN IN ZEE CORNEUR AZ ZEEN YOUR UZER ARF! THE WOAMAN AT THE TABLE WAS MORE INFORMATIVE... MASSEUR LISTEN CAREFULLY FOR SHALL SAY ZIS ONLY WIERNCE RUMEUR AS IT T HE AS BIN KEEDNAPPED BY LE PHANTOME DE L'OPERA'... .. UZERWISE KNOWN AS ERIK! ERIK: PHANTOM OF THE DE OPERA DOMOT KOUVON WHERE EES YOR FIANCE. ALLER Asx toMMMER ELSE MON MUCKER! ZANKYOU VERY MERCH, I WILL CHAT HER UP ABOUT IT THEN. NOW. ZUT ALORS! MUST GAY ZERE IN MY CITROEN ... TO SAVE HER LOAF! 2 CV... ..CHEZ RONNIE 2CY OR NOT 2CY ZAT EES ZE QUESTION ZERE EES NUTA SICKHOUND TO WASTE. SOON MY LOVELY .. SOON I SHALL RESCUE YOU FROM ZEE TERRIBUL FAKE ZAT AWAITS YOU. yeye !!* BOFT ..ZAT EES WHY I CALLEET ZEE SCRAPEBOARD. TIME WILL PROBE ZATI AM RIGHT! AM RIGHT! TO BUT I HAVE. INVENTED A BUT ZAT ES IMPOSSEEBAL NOO FOAM OF TRANSPORE LE MOTEUR CAR HAS NOT BIN COLLED ZEE SCRAPE BOARD. INVENTED YET MASSEUR I AM SHOWER ZAT IT WILL CATCH ON WOAN DAY. UNFORTUNATELY AVUNT INVENTED ZEE BRAKES YET... WILL RAOUL RESCUE CHRISTINE? WILL HE TERMINATE ERIK THE PHANTOM OF THE OPERA'S,FTENDISH PLAN? TO FIND OUT MORE (IF YOU CAN STAND IT) TUNE IN TO THE NEXT EPISODE. THIS MONTH THIS ISSUE! ERIK: PHANTOM OF THE OPERA SPECTRUM 48/128 .95 SPECTRUM +3 .95 Available from all leading software stores Software Publishing Associates Lower Ground Floor 197-199 City Road London EC1V 1JN KEEP TURNING THOSE PAGES TO FIND A COMPETITION SOMETHING HORRIFYING AND INE SCHWARZENEGGER PRED "


"OPPORTUNITIES S-O.T.E. Snow direct strate throu assembler de In-House and Free-Lance Technical Staff Having established the key elements of a well organised and equipped 'in-house software development team, the company has the following opportunities to Offer in Entertainment Software Development. Senior Programmers O.T.E. K Having been responsible for at least one technically excellent (though not necessarily commercially successful entertainment software product you will be experienced in 280, 6502 and/or 68000 assembler. You will be looking for an opportunity to join an in-house' environment committed to the development of original products and conversions of the very highest quality and will expect to call on graphics, music and other support functions of the highest callbre. Programmers-O.T.E. K Though not necessarily able to show direct involvement in any commercially available entertainment software products, you will be able to demonstrate through specific routines and demo programs, a high degree of technical ability in 280, 6502 or 68000 assemblerYou will be looking for an opportunity to realise your ambition to be responsible for the development of technically excellent entertainment software products and will expect to call on graphics, music and other support functions of the highest calibre. Graphic Artists/Musicians/Game Designer-O.T.E. -K With or without formal qualifications you will already be working in a free-lance or in f o house capacity supporting programmers in your specialist discipline in the development of commercially available/to be published entertainment software products. You will be able to demonstrate a number of different examples of your work and will be looking to put your experience to use whilst developing it further in the production of commercially available products All appointees to the above positions will be offered an attractive working environment, substantial basic salary and an opportunity to develop their ambitions with the full support of the company's management and financial strength In addition to the above opportunities the company has a regular how of program Conversion contracts available at attractive rates to free-lancers and is particularly keen to support proven programmers and development houses wishing to write and have published by a major brand name original games for all popular machines. you would like to arrange an interview to discuss any of the above opportunities please write, giving full details of your relevant experience to: Steve Wilcox Director Elite Systems Ltd, Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall WS9 BPW INKPLICABLE IS GOING TO HAPPEN.... TM ATER ACTIVISION  1987 Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp. All rights reserved. Trademarks owned by Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp and used by Activision Inc. under authorisation "


"TESTART A TENE PPP.PP L $8865 na YSTART TENE PPPPP LEC $1955 26 WR Yeee-ha! Buggy Boy is about to to Elite's talented map makers. start burnin' rubber around the This isn't quite a map of the circuit boards of YOUR computer game more of a pictorial pretty soon. Here we proudly reference guide to the major present another of C+VG's hazards you'll encounter on the legendary players guides thanks road with the bouncing buggy. "


"PPPP PPPPP. Lo Spa 215 FINISH Hazards like walls, split-lane bridges, wooden barriers, rocks, free frunks and footballs!? Use this as a sort of route map before you start racing. Check out! the different sorts of terrain you'll find in the five different! tracks from desert to snow capped peaks.\" Apart from that, our Buggy Boy map will look great stuck on your wall. Enjoy! "


"SURVIVE TO KONAMI BECOME CAPTAIN ASSAULT | COURSE | FIRING BANGE1 IRON MAN RACE FIRING BANGE2 DJI COMBAT SCHOOL TM and Konami are trademarks of KONAMI  KONAMI 1987 "


"GRUELLING EVENTS USA PENALTY STAGE ** ARM WRESTLING FIRING RANGE 3 FIGHT INSTRUCTOR CHIN-UPS PENALTY SPECTRUM AMSTRAD 7.95 8.95 SPECTRUM COMMODORE COMMODORE AMSTRAD 14.95 12.95 DISK DISK Ocean Doen Software: 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS elephone: 061 832 6633 Telex: 669977 Oceans G "


"ACTION-EXCITEMENT-DESTRUCTION IT IS THE WAY OF THE JACKAT 2 KONAMI TM  KONAMI 1986 Win an Actual Tackal Arcade Machine See pack for details COMMODORE DISC .95 COMMODORECASSETTE .95 SPECTRUM CASSETTE .95 AMSTRAD DISC .95 AMSTRAD CASSETTE .95 ATARI DISC .95 ATARI CASSETTE .95 QUINT GREY DECKAR BOB KONAMI Another gripping Arcade Conversion DISTRIBUTED BY: N.M.C. LTD., 2 IFFLEY ROAD, LONDON W6 OPA. TEL: 01-846 9701 KONAMI STVAREC RONAMIENDA For subscription details please send a S.A.E. to: KONAMI SOFTWARE CLUB Bank Building, Bank Street, Newton Abbot, Devon TQ122JL. KONAMI HELPLINE 0626 56789 "


"AND SO HOW WILL I EVER FIND ERR IN ZIS PLACE IT EEZ SO LODGE. SHE COLD BE ANYWEER! PSST!! EET IS LE JERK. LISTEN VARY CARFOOLY AZ ISHALL SAY THIS ONLY TWICE. \"THIS THIS TAV ZEEN A SHADOWY FIGURE MAKING FOR ZE CELLEUR. ERIK: PHANTOM OF THE OPERA BOKING OEFTES CONTINUEDA SACRED BLUES NOW I KNOW WER EE EEZ 'DING.... EE AS TAKEN MY LOAF TO ZER ZOOERS UNDER ZE OPERA 'OUSE. LITTLE DOES RAOUL KNOW. BUT KNOW HE KNOWS WHERE I AM AND SHELL BE WETTING, THEN AND ONLY THEN SHELL I TEACH CHRISTINE TO SING BETTER THAN THE GREATEST OPERA SINGER OF OLE TIME LITTLE DOES ERIK KNOW BUT I KNOW 'E KNOWS ZATI KNOW. * COMPETITION * D Let us have your ending to this story in a cartoon strip. The best 25 entries received by Crysys, Software Publishing Associates will receive a free copy of Erik: Phantom of the Opera. Please state Spectrum 48:128 or +3. Judges decision is final. No cash alternative. Closing date for entries 31st December. Winners notified by post. LITTLE DOES RAOUL... IF WE KERRY ON LIKE ZIS FER MERCH LONGEUR ZIS ADVERT WILL BECALM MERCH TOO PRICEE. AVAILABLE FROM ALL LEADING SOFTWARE STORES TOO IZ THEEZ GEEZER KIDDEENG!! 1 AV TROUBLE WIZ ZEE 'APPY BIRSDAY ALREADY! HELD CHRISTINE (AND US) TO ESCAPE FROM THIS DASTARDLY PLOT. ERIK: PHANTOM OF THE OPERA SPECTRUM 48/128 .95 SPECTRUM +3 .95 Software Publishing Associates Lower Ground Floor 197-199 City Road London EC1V 1JN GET IT BEFORE IT GOES! Don't let some mi buy your copy! en place a regular order with your newsagent NOW! our a Dear Mr Newsagent, reserve me a copy of Computer + Video Games. I Name Address Sumon 1987 "


"REVIEWS Over the next few months I will be svigyiga. Als dbe.Nintendo.Augus well as reviewing the hot stuff to be released in the near future on these machines. But first here's a rundown on the first batch of Nintendo releases. GOLF: By its very nature golf is a slow, thoughtful game. And to be entertaining on a console-or micro for that matterit must have great attention to detail and presentation. MEAN MACHINES Tony Takoushi will be pulling out all the stops to bring you all the latest, hoftest news and reviews from the console scene-not only in the UK but wouldwidie w orteeraidetbie Clu Land plus a red-hot news on new games coming soon from the US/Japan. So stay with C+VG, it's where the NEWS is! Peripherals tend to be full-on you lose one of your regarded as novelties when it three laser bases. The game comes to consoles, but both is over when all three are Sega and Nintendo seem destroyed. determined to establish their At the end of this scene you light guns and 3-D glasses as see a count of the missiles major players in the console launched and those you have buying concept. destroyed. You are then told Despite the trendy look of you have two more chances the Sega 3D Glasses! to destroy the missiles before had assumed they would be they reach their destination in like most of the previous the East city. efforts at 3Dnice idea, Scene two is over the shame about the product. North Pole. Here missiles are I was surprised! large or small depending on There are currently two flight angle, and they get real games for the glasses, tough to take out. Zaxxon 3D and Missile The final scene is a real Defence 3D. I couldn't get very tough one. You have to my mits on the Zaxxon but destroy the missiles as they fly Mastertronic did shove a down over you, heading for Missile Defence under the city in the distance. Don't my nose!! be nervous, just slip that The glasses are large and finger round the fire button shaped so that even people and blast the mothers out of with glasses can fit them over the sky! their specs. They are wired If you fail there is a into an adaptor which then destruction scene where the fits into the card input on the city explodes. console. Your game card The West city defence then fits into its slot and away follows the same pattern with you go. a launch scene, a space Initially when the game is scene and the final city played, it does take a little scene-this scene is HARD. time to adjust to the If you complete all six perspective and I imagine it scenes you start over at a does depend on your own faster speed. vision as to how strong the The graphics and sound 3D image is. are good with some scenes Missile Defence is working better than others, basically a game with six but again I stress that the stages. You have to destroy image depends on your missiles that are launched at perception. either an Eastern or Western It is a good game although city. once you have clocked the There are three stages to six scenes it starts to get the defence of each city. First repetitive. you are faced with the launch Still, this is an early game sequence. Here missiles pop and new titles will develop out of silos on either side of the 3D format into something the screen and zoom out at worthwhile. you. Some will head out of The glasses are not cheap the sides of the screen, others at  a throw, but they do will come straight at you. represent something new These must be destroyed and different. because they hit the screen And it works! wed Nintendo Golf is a good game. It offers one player stroke game, two player stroke game and two player match game. A full range of woods and irons are available and you can control the swing, power and flight curve readily from the controller. Sound is basic-to say the least-but then what sound DO you get playing golf! There are variable factors to make the round tougher, wind direction needs to be watched and a keen eye to be kept on the part of the swing controlling the curve of the ball. Bunkers abound, and\" "


"VEWS are all too easy to fall into. The only problem with reviewing Golf on the Nintendo is that I have played Leaderboard on the Commodorel Of course that is the definitive version, but you can still while away the odd hour on this offering. It plays well and is challenging enough even for the hardened golfers among you. SOCCER: This is a real gem of a simulation. Most team sport simulations tend to be a bit dodgy when it comes to controlling players, but not this little beauty! There are plenty of options to choose from, length of the match, skill level, two player option and team colours. Control is nice and tight when you have mastered the art of passing and switching control to another player. This will take around a couple of minutes. Gameplay is nice and smooth with some bone crunching tackles if you should feel the urge. All the elements from the sport are there with throw-ins, goal kicks, corner kicks, penalty shoot outs and offsides. At halftime you get a zippy display of girls in ra-ra skirts doing their dance routines before the teams trundle back out to start the second half. This is a very polished game with good graphics and tunes. Above all it is playable and FUN. Go for it! CLU CLU LAND: I almost switched this one off after a minute or so, but I re-read the instructions and sussed the gameplay. I could have kicked myself because this game is excellent. Simple concept, simple play, simple(ish) graphics and sound yet! was hooked. Clu Clu is a cross between the arcade golden oldies Ladybird and Pacman. It also boasts some novel gameplay and design elements. You control a girl called Bubbles, who looks like a fish to me, and you have to discover all the gold bars hidden over 20 screens. Each screen has to be solved within a time limit and while zapping/ramming the standard issue nasties which roam at will over each maze. To expose the gold you have to guide Bubbles around a maze and get her to look around various pillars scattered about. As she goes through pillar posts she exposes any gold hidden between them. There are bonus point to be had by picking up fruit and extra lives. when will WE see them?) and they can be used with a game called Highway Star. The game has more than a The arcade hit Salamander has now been Outrun with its rolling hills passing resemblance to converted to the Nintendo. As and twisty roads (more on this you can see from the in the future) in fact in 3-D it screenshots, the graphics are could well be something superb. All the arcade features special, watch this space... have been included with both The arcade licenses to vertical and horizontal attack Rygar and Solomon's waves. Key were snapped up by US Gold for the 8-bit formats. Well Nintendo console owners haven't been forgotten as they are available on the console, but only in Japan. Both Sega and Nintendo third party UK and European Licenses come up for grabs in 1988. This should mean that companies like Capcom, DataEast, SNK and Konami will be negotiating the releasef their games into our markets. Super Marios Bros is so popular that in Japan and the US there are official Super Marios Bros fan Clubs, with a handbook (detailing all the features) and tee-shirts of the Salamander and other characters. Konami titles should be in the Anyone over here willing to UK from January 1988 do the same? onwards. There are currently 30 titles Xevious fans of the world due for release on the Sega unite. Apparently there was a before Christmas with another follow up to Xevious called 60 to follow next year. (wait for it) Super Xevious! Nintendo has 27 at present It has been released in Japan with the third party stuff to for the Nintendo and from all follow next year. accounts it is a hot item. Come on let's be having all Not missing out on a good your favourite tips for console thing you can now save up all games. This month's tip is for your hard earned YEN and go Kung Fu Master on the out and buy a model kit of the Nintendo. crafts from the arcade game The usual place to get stuck (shame it's only 1/48th of the is on level three, at the end of real thing?). the level you face a large sumo It is quite rare for a UK game wrestler who with very few to make it in Japan, but blows can wipe out your Gremlin has scored a success energy. To destroy him wait with Monty on the Run. until he has just kicked then Apparently there was a bit of a step forward and, while culture difference when it was kneeling, punch rapidly to his converted to the Japanese stomach. format and they couldn't relate At the end of level four you to moles the way we do. are faced with a bomb So... they changed Monty throwing midget, to destroy to a cute bearded criminal on him simply wait until he has the run, or maybe they just lost thrown a bomb then step in a little in the translation...? and punch to the head rapidly, If all you Nintendo owners as he dies step back and are a little disheartened at repeat the process on his Sega 3-D glasses, then don't reincarnation. bel The Nintendo system does Has anyone out there have glasses (although just conquered level five? DROOOOOOOOOOOO "


"GET TO GRIPS WITH W WW. ENCE CBM 64/128 .99 .99 D AMSTRAD .99 .99 D SPECTRUM .99  ATARI ST E 19.99 wa GARY LU LINEN GARY LINEKER'S SUPERSTAR SOCCER Take the brain teasing demands of football management, the mysterious qualities of team coach and add the explosive talents of a star striking centre forward and you've got Superstar Soccer an original and innovative approach to the game of football that's every bit as breathtaking, every bit as exciting as Gary Lineker, England's premier striker. Alternative LVORLD GALES ALTERNATIVE WORLD GAMES Why be serious when there's so much fun in taking an alternative view on things. Represent the country of your choice in such events as Sack Racing. Log Flogging. Running up wall's, Pole climbing and Boot Throwing. This ingenious but hilarious spoof will have you in stitches, not to mention Rivers, Sacks, Piles of sand......come to think of it, It may get serious after all. CBM 64/128 .990 .99 D AMSTRAD .99 .990 SPECTRUM .99  ATARI ST .99 ITS A SHATTERINGEN Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423 "


"HA GREMEIN GAME!! CBM 64/128 59.99 .99 D AMSTRAD .99  .99 D SPECTRUM COMPENDIUM Wacky, Wacky, Wacky is the best way to describe this adaption of the traditional board games compendium. Your hosts are the Winks, father Tiddly Wink and his wife, Mavis Wink. Up to four players can compete by taking the role of elther one of the Wink children, the baby or the Wink dog. Play Snakes and Hartards where real snakes wriggle across the board, or the pub game where a rather drunk Tiddly Wink filps his beer glasses in > the air for the rest of his long suffering family to catch! Old favourites Ludo and Bingo are not forgotten in this hilarious game for one to four players. BLOOD VALLEY Archveult the hideous and mighty leader of the Firedrake has decreed that you must be hunted down like an animal and brought to sentence. Your only chance of survival is to escape the valley. Do you have the will and resourcefulness to succeed not only against your opponent but the creatures and serie beings of the fantasy world of Orb as well Based on the Duelmaster Series of fantasy books by Mark Smith and Jamie Thompson, authors of The Way of the Tiger. CBM 64/128 .99 c $14.99 D AMSTRAD .99 .99 D SPECTRUM .99  ATARI ST .99 SERIENCETTATO LEA LUULI "


"PLAY MENETADE TAITO Licensed from Taito Corp., 1986 Programmed for Amstrad Spectrum, Commodore by imagine Software   ZE MEANIE SPECTRUM 7.95 SPECTRUM COMMODORE COMMODO 8.95 AMSTRAD AMSTRAL 12.95 14.99 DISK In the knife-edge world of the vigilante there is no place to rest, no time DISK to think-but look sharp-there is always time to die! From the city subways to the gangland ghettos you will always encounter the disciples of evil whose mission it is to exterminate the only man on earth who dares to throw down the gauntlet in their path-the Renegade, A breathtaking conversion of the arcade hit by Taito now for your home computer, With all the original play features. PLAY RENEGADE...PLAY MEAN! RIMMAGINE SOFTWARE 8 CENTRAL STRE MANCHESTER M 25NS TELEPHONE 061 8 34 39 39 TELEX 6 6 997 T "


"Now the Summer will surely last forever! The smell of the surf, the sun on your back, the sand between your toes... This isn't California Dreamin' this is for all Sur of the best West out sports designed to set your pulserung Wow your friends with you incredible flying skateboard fests, or show your goal hacking at the sack Skate down the boardwalk flip the Prisbee and whole the HMX. And then the ultimate the King of Curnian sparta shooting the cupl you battle with those cant Pacific roers to decide which surfer truly is the waves! Prisbee Haey Sack Money Boope Burton Snowboards and Bluebird and contained in each pack you'll find a fun to enter competition to win quality products made by these companie plages ou take purt. All the quality you expect from a y product is here od so much more. World tell you more but instead let's hear what the critics have to say \"California Gumas is quite simply the apex of computer sports gaming Even in purely technical terms Apyx have somehow managed to purpuss their own high standards the pleures and sounds generated by this programare atmosphere beyond beliet If you there all the late frems t and add them together, you just might go halfway towards describing California Dames ZAP 54 \"California Games has to be the best release this year so far. Some of the individual fames are almost worth the asking price their own\" --COMMODORE COMPUTING INTERNATIONAL Stare superb praphies, the Atmosphere of the West Out and one to echt California **** Hollywood STOP TO ODORI RAD TRAD DELFIE BESKIS JPLUS CBM64/128 9 SETTE 11% SPECTRUM SITE SPECTRUM+3  AMSTRAD STE 14 MSX  AMIGA 24 CBM 64 9 SETE TRIZES TO BE WON IN EVERY PACK! TO BE WON IN IBM Manufacture and distributed under Home from pyx The sold 2/3 Hot Hot Print by Red Trademark No 1125270 All apped by Marcode EPYX "


"Street Scene..... 382 SCORE: SCORE:6 BE Mm. MI-A Here's one really radical game that's going to give 720° a run for its money. Skate or Die is hot from Electronic Arts and puts you in charge of a set of hot wheels a skateboard that is. Take your board out on the ramp and perform a well wicked set of moves, complete on the downhill speed course complete with the nifty concrete tube manoeuvre. Take on a street punk on his own turf race down mean streets packed with hazards. And beware, 'cos you can get involved in a bit of martial artistry with your opponent. All this and the epic pool joust this could start a whole new real life sport! It's set in a deserted pool two skaters joust against each other with special poles the one who takes three falls first loses, Fun with a big F! Lots of extremely nice touches, great graphics and a Rob Hubbard soundtrack. What more could you want? Out soon on the 64 from EA at .95 on tape, .95 on disc. Our screen shows the ramp game and the streetrace. TIME 1035  27071964. ENERGY_065 SES Once the hunter, now you are the hunted. In CRL's I, Alien the tables have been turned following the unexpected arrival of a starship from earth. The humans on board said they had come in peace, in search of previous minerals. But the real purpose of their journey is soon discovered. A violent and catastrophic nuclear war has wiped out earth's entire animal population. The humans have no livestock and have been forced to search space for new laboratory specimens to cultivate a new food source. The alien is intended to become one of the guinea pigs. Your only means of escape is in your pod. Take this to a friendly planet for help. But beware, to reach the pod you will have to overcome vicious threats from all kinds of foes mutants, droids, ice dragons and numerous other forces. Once conquered your task is to find the pod hidden somewhere in a vast labyrinth. 1 Alien, will be released for the CBM C64 in on cassette at .95 and on disc at .95. No rest for the wicked. Especially if you're a the rim of his world zapping attackers. Lots of Palace programmer. Steve Brown wasn't amusing animation as you'd expect from Mr B allowed to rest on his success with Barbarian and his boys. Rimrunner can be knocked from his Along with his team he's been hard at work on dino and falls to the floor rubbing his insect Rimrunner a wacky scrolling shoot 'em up. head. Then he whistles the cutest computer But don't expect boring old space ships from whistle you've ever heard to summon up a Steve. Here you get a strange ant like replacement mount! Fun and frolics in the creature riding an alien dinosaur protecting Palace fashion and neat sounds from that cities from the evil Arachnoids. Rimrunneris other regular Palace soundsmith Richard an insectold soldier who patrols the borders of Joseph. Insectold cities making sure the generators The C64 version of Rimrunnershould be out which run the force shields are kept fuelled as you read this, with Spectrum Amstrad and and operational. He dashed frantically around Amiga versions to come. 180 "


"  ce  1 KONAMI Last month we brought you a wonderful Jackal poster thanks to Konami and this is a glimpse of the Spectrum conversion of the coin-op smash, heading your way soon. Watch out for a full review next month. Mega City is living in fear. The four dark Judges, Fire envelops his victims in a prism of flame Death, Fear, Fire and Mortis have arrived and Mortis brings instant decay to his victims judging the living and absolving them of their by just touching them. guiit by killing them! You play Judge Anderson and because she Step forward that 2000AD curvy cutie Judge has been out of services for some time there is Anderson, elite Psi Judge, and the woman to a practice gallery for perfecting shooting save Mega City. These are early shots from skills before going into attack against the Dark Piranha's game which should be out on all Judges. But your arm must be true because formats before Christmas at .95 and .95 Innocent citizens and the city itself can easily Judge Death kill people by thrusting his be destroyed. hand through the bodies of his victims. Fear You must battle through four sectors of opens the gate on his face mask and orders his Mega City then out into the mutant chosen victim to \"gaze into the face of FEAR\" wastelands before the final confrontation. SENSE ORACLE Introducing Captain Chuck Harrison, fighter \"other world\" he is faced with alien hordes and pilot extraordinaire, star of Reaktor's Out of must force the enemy to surrender. the World. Chuck jet enters another world Out for the Spectrum (.99), CBM and when he goes faster than anybody else. In this Amstrad (.99/.95 in November Knightmare and Predator head Activision's attack on the Christmas charts this year. Knightmare, based on Anglia TV's brilliant television show, provides puzzles of it, it's claimed a varying nature not found before in computer games. The game will be available for the Commodore 64/128, Spectrum, and Amstrad CPC. priced at .99 on cassette and .99 for Commodore 64/128 and Amstrad disks. An Atari ST version is due to be released in January next year. Predator, starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, grossed $12,000,000 after three days when released in America in June, and is now set to be premiered in the UK in January next year. Currently being developed by System 3, the game follows the film's plot, placing you in control of Schaefer with a mission to destroy the predator. Before confronting the predator, Schaefer has to pass through numerous screens of treacherous jungle terrain, swarming with enemy guerillas. Extra equipment can be acquired along the way. The game will be released to coincide with the film premiere, and will be available for the Commodore 64/128, Spectrum and Amstrad CPC at a price of .99 on cassette and .99 for the Commodore 64/128 and Amstrad disks. Gasp at the graphics and swoon at the sound this is Rainbird's Dick Special The Search for Spook on the amazing Amiga. It's got the best cartoon graphics we've ever seen... You must move Dick through scrolling landscapes, solve puzzles and collect together items which will help locate and free his faithful hound. Spook has been kidnapped on the eve of the Mr. Doggiverse show. Dick is hit on the head and wakes up to find Spook missing. Setting off in pursuit his first task is to search the hotel, while overcoming hostility from the staff, inanimate objects and broken equipment. It's programmed by Sandy White and Angela Sutherland, who were responsible for 3D Ant Attack. It should be available in the New Year on the Amiga and Atari ST at .95. Street Scene..... "


"Strip Poker Atari ST .95 ANCO SOFTWARE LTD. 35 WEST HILL, DARTFORD, KENT TEL: 0322 92513/18 FAX: 0322 93422 MAIL ORDER HOTLINE: 0322 522631 "


"VENTURE INTO THE MYSTICAL MEDIEVAL DARK AGES IN A game that takes fantasy role playing one step further. You will experience all the action as you do real battle with your opponents. To prove yourself worthy of becoming chief wizard you must do combat with horrific monsters and cleverly outwit devious wizards with your spells collected through time. Witness the superb graphics that set Wizard Warz apart from other strategy games and view through a circular screen that diminishes as your health weakens and makes your goal harder to achieve. See the effect of your spells as they hurtle across the screen in Wizard Warz combining fast moving action with depth of gameplay in a true fantasy role playing game that's a real strategical challenge. WARZ ut Bring Me The Powers of Vision & Combat a GGGU rol A unnus emri wa LOS WW104 2 PLN COPYRIGHT 1987 CANVAS SOFTWARE GOL CBM 64/128 $11.99 DISK $9.99 TAPE AMSTRAD $14.99 DISK $9.99 TAPE SPECTRUM 48/128K .99 ATARI ST $19.99 TOMORROWS SOFTLURE TODAY 50 Media Holdings Ltd.. Units 213. Holford Way Holford. Birmingham B6 7AX. TEL: 027 356 3388 "


"Mailbage Computer + Video Games 30-32 Farringdon lane   \"horrific\" examples of racism in computer games. The only overtly racist games I have seen are the usual \"kill the nasty aliens\" type. All games are 'racist' towards  In your October issue you the fantasy section is very the enemy of the piece. They said you wanted to hear from interesting would you have to be to justify the girls who read C+VG. Cue me happen to know if anyone is  Congratulations on an gameplay. I'm 16 years old and I've been planning to make a game of The absolutely mega November If you play a war game, reading C+ VG since Belgariad by David Eddings? If issue of C+VG a tape, taking the side of the British September 1983. not, why not? posters, lots of funny against the Germans we must Basically, C+VG is the best advertising bits which fall out, a have some racist feelings computer magazine around find the 1986 yearbook: 1 million pages (well, almost) against them, wanting to Not perfect, but then, who is? sought it here, I sought it there, and all that for . How come beat/defeat them because they The Books of Games are great, in fact, I sought it pretty well all the other mags put the prices are our enemies (in the game) as are the occasional Adventure everywhere, to no avail. What up for much less? or the whole exercise would be Extras, talking of which, Mr. happened? But what has happened to pointless. Campbell's Adventure column Complaint two: I can't read our dear, sweet, divinely This is not real racism, but a is brilliant the best part of the Adventure column when beautiful Melissa R at IDEAS deep rooted desire to protect C + VG, if I may say so. No you put it on a dark coloured Central? She's changed beyond our own against invaders or prizes for guessing yes, I'm background. Could you belief. Was it anything to do trouble makers. It may be right, an adventurer you can tell by perhaps sort that out? with her holiday? In October, it may be wrong but it is part the spidery handwriting and my Sophia Chan, there was the Melissa we know of the human nature and continual muttering of \"Follow Surbiton, and love, boasting about going Gandalf\". Surrey. to a \"sun drenched beach\" for That aside, sexism is a None of my games were Editors reply: So that is her holidays. And then in different matter. Sexism always bought without a shining where all our stickers went! November she's totally brings out strong emotion in review from your team, and Answering your moans changed. Was it the Harvey those who see it as an recently bought the computer Sophia. 1) There was no Wallbangers? The hard overwhelming attack on the of my dreams, the Atari ST, yearbook in 1986 nightlife? Or did she swim in a position of women in society. which I have yearned for ever 2) Sometimes Craig's artistic radioactive sea? I know people There maybe many examples since that fateful review of the nature gets the better of him do change but this is silly. of male dominance and female Pawn (a copy of which I am the then WE sort him out! Explanations please. degradation in the outside proud owner, not to mention Please don't praise KC too George Brain, world but as a whole there is The Guild of Thieves). much he's too expensive Sheffield. really very little real sexism in Last weekend, with great already ... Editor's reply: Would you computer software. A very effort and even greater believe a new hair-do? No, large proportion of expense, I translocated myself didn't think you would. software programming to the PCW show at Olympia Hmmm. Okay, it's own up is performed by where I confess I visited and time. The picture was of males, with a revisited the C+VG stand, Melissa's mum. You see the e the male orientated each time asking a real Ms M disappeared. She's different person for a sheet not been seen since her of stickers thanks! holiday. And we've received I also managed to get my a ransom note (see IDEAS view. Central). Frankly we're grubby paws on a cheerfully Therefore is it frantic! yellow C+VG bag, complete not unusual that with Big Red 'n' all! games will be programmed with a male lead. A male character in a game does not automatically mean the game is sexist. If the male character has to rescue a female within that game, that is (to non-sexists at least) a romantic and pleasurable experience.  In reply to the over stressed This male rescues female remarks from the lads at Bug role is not new, fairy tales magazine about racism and hundreds of years old tell much sexism in the computer the same story. Can this be software market I would like to called sexist? If so most of add my thoughts on the matter. human literature must be I agree with C+VG in that I labelled in the same way. cannot think of any truly I believe much of it reflects "


"The Pro's Choice Ompetition PRO 1000 real life, life as it is, and was in And as the largest proportion of the past. Sexist, no! Realistic, gameplayers are male the yes. profits would still fall. No that The lads state that female argument doesn't wash with editors of computer magazines me. have the chance to censor The reason more lads than so-called sexist material. I'm lassies play computer games is sure they do this without their more fundamental than that ... help, or with the insisting of any but that's another story! hothead group with a bee in T. Worrall, their bonnet. Preston Some advertisers or software Editor's reply: And this houses may push the barriers of intelligent, thoughtful epic good taste, but they know if ends the sexism debate. they went too far their adverts OK?! would be banned with a drastic  I am writing to inform your loss in software sales. readers of a home base Female persons adorning the connection service. Not to jackets of computer games are swap software but write there to enhance the \"good software. If any of your readers looks\" of the product. I am sure are talented musicians, graphic that most men and women artists, sprite designers and would agree that a female body wish to be put on a is more attractive than a male programmers data base please one (and I say that as a write and send a S.A.E. to the compliment). address below. I myself do not really agree This service is free all it'll with the use of bodies faces cost is the price of stamps and yes. Very often a female is envelopes. The service I'll put shown in an advert to brighten your readers in touch with the up the product, very rarely as a type of people they want eg tool to exploit or degrade as so coder needs graphic many people think. desginers/artist. And through How many of those when this hopefully we'll have a lot protesting loudly about the more software teams, Teaming women in the bathing costume up. And a better chance of on the cover of Barbarian also freelance software being complained about the presence published. of a less covered male? I have Richard Johnson, heard non up to date. 20 Lauder Close, Those complaints must in themselves be sexist for not mentioning that! Are we then to Arcade quality joystick fitted with super sensitive microswitches for the ultimate in joystick control. Features include dual fire buttons for left or right hand operation; firm base pads for non-slip control and a robust steel shaft with rubber return for a smoother operation. .95 Ompetition PRO CLEAR quality joystick with all features of the Competition Pro 5000 but with an exciting clear case. SCORE LIKE A PRO! .95 @mpetition PRO EXTRA A brand new fully microswitched arcade quality joystick. Features include RAPID FIRE; UNIQUE SLOW MOTION; dual fire buttons; firm base pads, for non-slip control and a robust steel shaft with rubber return for a smoother operation. .49 Willenhall be ashamed of a half clothed Wolverhampton female but a less than half W. Midlands naked male is okay. WV13 3QH There was no doubting that I thought I would write to ask the Barbarian exercise was a why you employ an Australian marketing gimmick, but it was designer. Before you say you tastefully done. don't think about how you are Let's all rush off to the nearest going to explain all the screen nearest art gallery or museum shots that you print upside and deface all the works of art down. featuring women (you know, There are at least two an all the naughty ones). issue, is this a secret That seems to be where the competition that you haven't lads from Bug are leading us told the readers about. Final point. 52 percent of the Please explain. population may be female, but Gerry Murray, what percent are programmers Kentish Town. or gameplayers? If women are Editor's reply: Not Australian turned off by male orientated designers Australian games (going by the lads layout artists at our argument) and losing profit typesetters. And yes it is a because of it, surely it follows secret competition that the lads will be turned off unfortunately the prize is a by female dominated games. secret too. Tough! The Competition Pro range of joysticks carry a two year guarantee The Competition Pro 5000 and Pro Extra are suitable for use with the following computers: Amstrad/Schneider ZX Spectrum (when used with an interface MSX computers; Atari: Commodore 64 and VIC 20. Amstrad: ZX Spectrum: Atars and Commodore are trademarks respectively of Amstrad Consumer Electronicsple. Atari International, Commodore International Lid DYNAMICS marketing Ltd Burgess COIN HOUSE NEW COIN STREET ROYTON OLDHAM OL26JZ ENGLAND TELEPHONE: 031 626 7222 TELEX: 669705 COING "


"JUST THINKI FRANKIE SPECTRUM 48 -128 COMMODORE 64-128 ocea =Ocea SO What if you could buy all these hit games in a special pack for the price of one...Wouldn't that be fantastic? And what if there was an extra FREE game included — say the best selling martial-arts simulation \"Yie Ar Kung Fu\". Wouldn't that be sensational? Kon se reme WELL NOW YOU CAN! It's called... The MAGNIFICENT And of course it's courtesy of Ocean 9.95 Box 17.95 Ocean SPECTRUM You AMSTRAD, COMMODORE can buy CASSETTE it on December 1st DISK  O.K.? Ocean House 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone: 061-832 6633. Telex: 669977 "


"Computer + Video Games 30-32 Farringdon Lane  ecr344 Mailbage Slayer is a Death Metal band, and you can't get more HM hard core than them. One simple page in a computer mag and you start  Here are some serious winging. Look at us, we're the comments regarding the Bugs character in any game. It is an majority and we only get two comments. To him I say, so object I am controlling in order helpful to all the boys and girls hours a week, on one radio what if most characters in to play the game. station from 10-midnight. You with tips and help and I noticed games are male? Are we to the player becomes the lot get non-stop pulp from that you didn't hassle them. believe that young lads playing character. So the sex is that of morning till dusk on five these games will grow up the player. As for Strip Poker, if I am a mother of three boys, channels, seven days a week. one husband, two dogs and believing that women are the you think it is degrading for I know its hard for you wimps three computers. So, inferior sex, just because there women, don't buy the game. to comprehend that your really sometimes I feel a bit left out, is male cat in Greyfell. I think How many women do you in the minority. Hard luck, and until I can get my hands on a not. know who would like to be if you don't like HM then game or two. My favourite is I would like to hear what the capable of being as cold you know what you can do. Rockford and Boulder Dash. Bug thinks, the consequences blooded as a Ninja or Rambo? Wayne, take no notice, they Are there any other mums and are going to be if male Anyway you asked us girls to know not what they say or dads out there who feel the characters in games continue to write in. Although I am no listen to. I was so angry, I wrote same? If so why don't you ask dominate. Would we all longer a young girl I hope this at two in the morning. all the kids what their parents including the girls be qualify. I've read your mag, for Phil Napolitano, love/hate. subconsciously trained into three years and enjoy it. AC Smith Berks. being sexist? Mrs / Brartingham Editor's reply: Tough talkin' London I doubt it, and I reckon Dover from Phil anyone, wimps P.S. Someone has to tell the people like the Bug are totally ke mne pug are totally  Being an avid reader of your included, got anything to directors what a great team they O.T.T. say? have in C+VG! Another point to be raised, is mag. I was well pleased with T.T's remarks last issue.  After being a devoted selling software through sexist Won Women are women. They I am sick and tired of hearing Amstrad CPC owner for a adverts/posters with the game. le same. should not and need not be these no good trendy oiks, couple of years, I suddenly He insinuated that the sole portrayed as sex objects for the always saying the H.M. is dead realised that Alan Sugars reason Barbarian got to brainchild was pile of **** likes of men. Yours after all is a and old hat. HM unlike the 'number one was that Maria computer magazine and not pulp musak that exists from Whittaker was scantily clad on so I decided to buy an Atari ST. Playboy! time to time, and rears its ugly As you seem to quite like this the cover. Rubbish!! Who A good friend of mine head, lives on and will never computer, I was wondering would pay  for a poster! recently wrote to C.U. about die. Being the natural heir to what C+VG's top ten Especially if you could get one Page 3 girls and the effect on classical music it has produced ST games are, as I am a very similar in C+VG but women, as well as in computer more musical classics than any he more musical classics than any newcomer to this ST thing, I bigger, for !! Barbarian got to the top slot games. She is a good person to other form of music. Stairway to don't know what to buy. write such a thing as an Heaven, Stargazer and Heaven Also, why on ST game because it is a damm good ex-Penthouse girl, she can look and Hell to name but a few. reviews are the screen shots all game! Also does the Bug think at this issue form both sides. If it wasn't for HM bands blurred and horrible? Every that females don't buy a game There are loads of computer today, there wouldn't be a other computer is OK, even the with a male character in it? mad females all over the world guitar industry. Just look at all Spectrum. So, why are they Preposterous! Ludicrous! Has the new guitar lines the the new guitar lines the and I bet most feel a bit peeved blurred ie. Addictaball, Road he ever talked to anyone with at having to buy Barbarian with companies produce, all for the Runner etc. normal views? HM industry. a Page 3 girl on the front. Also which is the best And I think, Jaron and Jeffrey, On the subject of Barbarian, Musicians they are, and Impact, Addictball or that women can do their own didn't you think it was a bit of a Gods of their craft, not pulp Arkanoid? talking. degradation to men as well? wimps that mime \"cause they Justin Mason, Isle of Wight. Come on girls, let's show this can't play\". Derbyshire. Editor's reply: Our top ten ST sexist computer world what it is If HM's so bad then why  After reading the letter in doing to us. If C+VG and C.U. are the old punk bands games? Difficult, but it would your mailbag column, about support us, we're gonna make switching over, and thousands go something like this not sexism, I had to put pen to an impact. of new bands forming each in order of merit The paper. I've never read such a Katherine James, year? Two massive festivals a Pawn, Addictaball, Arkanoid, load of rubbish. There's Doncaster. year, in Britain alone, shows Road Runner, Leviathan, nothing more annoying, or that HM is alive and kicking. Karate Kid II, Backlash, sexist, than a male trying to Shows how much your car Mercenary, Indiana Jones, defend females against sexism. I must write to say how I and badge stealing trendies know Super Sprint. As for It seems like that sort of person sons enjoyed the PCW show. about music. It may have not Addictaball vs Arkanoid it feels we can't defend ourselves. We used your stand as a crossed your little mind but the is a split decision here at As for sexism in computer meeting point, a very wise Beastie Boys claim to like HM C+VG. Play them first is our games, I can honestly say ! choice in my opinion. Your and have Slayer guitarist advice and make your own don't think of the sex of a team were so friendly and playing on their pièce of vinyl mind up! Chirry, 187 . "


"IN A VAST, EXPANDING UNIVERSE THE CHALLENGE IS SURVIVAL CAPCOM ULIV The ultimate experience for | trigger happyarcade astronauts... under atackers Landle you mean sende Theme so The threat the tyrannical Boon, who aims to exterminate the earth and it's people. The Lieutenant Henry and Sergeant Sanders must the Blue Globe. Battle your way through the waves aben attackers forcing a path into their gigant underground empire where the attack intenso from all quarters-the underground sea as wel as hidden enemy positions in the cavem Finally, face Boaon's ultimate weapon, Th Mobi Armour Sentipetina desperate fight to the death Classic \"shoot 'em up actie combined with brilliant graphics and outstanding test of reflexes. Capcom USA Incorporated 1987. All rights reserved Manufactured and distribe under licence from Capool USA by Go! Media Hold Unita 2/3 Holford Way. Holford, BIRMINGHAN B6 TAX. Screenshots from Commodore version CBM 64/128 .99 TAPE .99 DISK AMSTRAD .99 TAPE .99 DISK SPECTRUM .99 TAPE TOMORROLU SOFTWARE TODAY GO/ Media Holdings Ltd. Units 23. Hollord Way Holford Birmingham B6 TAX. TEL 02/356 3588 "


"NEW LOW PRICE ST! ATARI 5205 ATARI ST TUVIVY Mission: must save he waves of gigantic intensies as well care wall The  erate fight up action ocs and an ONLY FROM SILICA SILIGA 60 +VA=5299 SO MUCH FOR SO LITTLE erred distributed Capcom La Holding INGRAM There is nothing that can compare with the incredible value for money offered by Atari's 520ST-FM. For only  (+VAT=), you can purchase a powerful 512K RAM computer, with a 95 key keyboard (including numeric keypad), MIDI interface, GEM, a palette of 512 colours, mouse controller, and a 512K built-in disk drive. The 520ST-FM has a TV modulator built-in, and comes with a lead to allow you to plug it straight into any domestic colour television set. The mains transformer is also built-in to the keyboard, so there are no messy external boxes. You couldn't wish for a more compact, powerful and stylish unit. Atari ST computers are now firmly established in the UK, there are nearly 500 software titles already available for a wide variety of applications and the list is growing all the time. And that's not all. When you buy your new 520ST-FM (or any Atari ST computer) from Silica Shop, you will got a lot more, including a FREE Silica ST Starter Kit worth over . Read the ONLY FROM SILICA section on the left to see why you should buy your new high power, low price 520ST FM from Silica Shop, the UK's No1 Atari Specialists. For further details of the range of Atari ST computers and the FREE Silica ST Starter Kit, complete and return the reply coupon below. ATARI 520ST-FM NOW ONLY  (+VAT=) 520ST-FM with 512K RAM & mono monitor  (inc VAT) Upgrade from 512K RAM to 1024K RAM  (inc VAT Finally, there's a personal computer that not only problems the other computer, but solves the one problem that other computers have created. Alordability. Sinca Shop are pleased to present the ST range of personal/business computers from Atarl, The ST was designed utilizing the most recent breakthroughs in semiconductor technology, producing #personal computer that performs tasks with fewer parts which means it costs less to make and less to buy. The rest ST computers now include built in power supplies and built in Cadre The TOS operating system and GEMwindore environment Now on ROM chips which are already installed in the ST keyboard. This enables automatic instant booting when you switch on Silica Shop are pled to offer the complete Atari ST range. Our mail order department is rated in Sidcup and we have retail outlets at Sidcup, Lion House (Tottenham Court Rd and Selfridges (Oxford Street). We have eight years experience of Atari products, longer than any other UK company, and are well established as the UK's No.1 Alari specialist with a group turnover of over 9 million and in exces of staff, we offer you unbeatable service and support We provide several facilities which you will find invaluable during your Atar computing and most of these facts are v e ONLY FROM SILICA We suggest that you read through what we have to offer, before you decide where to purchase your Atari ST FREE STARTER KITOnly From Silica When you purchase any Atari ST kayboard, you will not only receive the best value for money computer on the market, but you will receive the following from An Corporation as part of the package BASIC Language \"BASIC Manuel ST One Man \"TOS GEM ON ROM If you buy your ST from S a Shop, you will also receive MEOchrome Sampler colour graphics program \"tar Word Word Processor In addition, we al Saca would like to see you get off to a flying start with your new computer, so we have put together a special ST STARTER KIT worth over 100, which we are giving away FREE OF CHARGE with every ST computer purchased at our normale prices. Th e ONLY FROM SILICA and is aimed at providing with a vube introduction to the world of computing We are continually upgrading the ST Starter Kit, which containe public domain and other licensed software, as well as books, magazines and accessories All relevant to ST computing Return the coupon below for full details DEDICATED SERVICING Only From Silica This team is totally dedicated to servicing Atan computer products. The accumulated knowledge, and experience makes them second to none in their field. You can be sure that any work carried out by them is of the highest standard. A standard of servicing which we believe you will find ONLY FROM SILICA. In addition to providing full servicing facilities for Atari ST computers (both in and out of warranty, our team is also able to offer memory and modulator upgrades to ST computers 1 Mb RAM UPGRADE: Our upgrade on the standard A SOST-Mor SPOST-FM keyboard increase the memory from 512K to a massive 24K It has a full year warranty and is available from Silica at an additional retail price of only 6 VAT + 100) TV MODULATOR UPGRADE: Silica can upgrade the 1040ST.F to include a TV modulator so that you can then use it with your TV set. This is an internal upgrade and does not involve any untidy external boxes. A cable to connect your ST to any dete TV is included in the price of the upgrade which is only VAT). The upgrade is for enty5205T computers at the same price THE FULL STOCK RANGE Only From Silica We aim to keep stocks of all Atan related products and our warehouse carries a stock of over million We import many software totes direct from the USA and you will find that we have new releases in tance of many of our competitors. Unlike dealers who may only wock Selected as we have the range. In addition, we carry a completene of books which have been written about the Atari ST. A range as wide as ours is something you will find is available ONLY FROM SILICA AFTER SALES SUPPORT Only From Silica Rest assured that when you buy your ST from Silica Shop, you will be fully supported. Our free mailings give news of releases and developments. This will help to keep you up to date with software releases well as what's happening in the Atlant. And in addition, our staff are at the end of a lephone line to service of your Atar requirements. If you purchase an ST from Silica and would like any technical advice, we have a full time technical support team to help you get the best from your computer. Because we have both the staff and the systems specifically dedicated to providing after sales service on Atari ST computers, we are confident that our users enjoy an exceptional high level of support. This can be received ONLY FROM SILICA FREE CATALOGUES Only From Silica Al Silica Shop, we recognise that serious users require an in-depth information service, which is why we mail free newsletters and price lists to our ST owners. These are up to 48 pages long and are crammed with technical details as well as special offers and product descriptions. If you have already purchased an ST and would like to have your name added to our mailing list, please complete the coupon rumit to This information service is ONLY FROM SICA FREE OVERNIGHT DELIVERY From Silica Most orders are processed through our computer within 24 hours of receiving them. Most hardware orders are sent by the overnight GROUP 4 courier service FREE OF CHARGE 1o customers within the UK. This method helps to ensure minimum delay and maximum protection PRICE MATCH Only From Silica We hope that the combination of our low prices. FREE UK delivery service, FREE Starter Kit and FREE after sales support will be enough to make you buy your Atari equipment from Sica Shop. If however, there is something you wish to purchase, and you find one of our competitors offering it at a lower price, then please contact our sales department providing us with our competitor's name, address and lephone number of our competitor has the goods ockw orm match the offer on me product same price bal and provide you with our normal free delivery. We realise that we are not me only company who will match a competitor's price. However, if you come to us for a price match you will also be entitled to our after sales service, including free newsletters and technical support. This makes our price match promise rather special, something you will receive ONLY FROM SILICA We don't want you to go anywhere else for your Alart product So shop at Silica, the UK's Not Alar Specialist ATARI 1040ST-F NEW PRICE We are pleased to announce a new reduced price point on the 10405T-F which is now available for only  in VAT). The 1040 is a powerful computer with 1Mb of RAM and also includes a built-in 1Mb double sided 3\" disk drive. The 1040 has been designed for use on business and professional applications most of which require a high resolution monochrome or colour monitor. It does not therefore have an RF modulator for use with a domestie TV set. Modulations can be fined for 149 in VAT) O ST-F kayboard without Monitor WATI OOST-F Kaynard ASUS Mane Mont Cine A7) If you would like further details of the 100ST, return the coupon below ATARI MEGA STs NOW IN STOCK For the user who requires even more RAM than the 520 or 1040 ST's offer the new MEGA ST computers are now available There are two MEGA ST', one with 2Mb of RAM and the other with a massive 4Mb. Both new computers are fully compatible with existing STS and run currently available ST software. The MEGA STs are styled as an expandable Central Processing Unit with open architecture and detachable keyboard. They are supplied with GEM, a free mouse controller and all extras as with the 520 or 1040. Prices are as follows MEGA STM Kyboard CPU MEGA ST Krytre CPU SMO Man Mo .......... Fine AT you would like further details of the MEGA ST return the upon below To: Silica Shop Ltd, Dept CVG 1287, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX PLEASE SEND ME FREE LITERATURE ON THE ATARI ST Mr/Mrs/Ms: .......... Initials: ........... Surname: Address: 1 ... .. ... ... .. .. ...  4 5 2.8.24  8 8 8 8 8 6 2 8 6 6 4 8 8 8 6 5 7 8 9  SIDCUP (& Mail Order) 01-309 1111 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX LONDON 01-580 4839 Lion House (Ist floor), 227 Tottenham Court Rd, London, WIP OHX LONDON 01-629 1234 ext 3914 Selfridges (1st floor), Oxford Street, London, WTA TAB Postcode: Do you already own a computer If so, which one do you own? "


"Pai Pal Pages  Hi, I'm a 14-year-old CBM64 owner who would like to get in touch with anyone male or female from all over the world. I like Karate games. Please write to me. Gary Ledsham Clwyd  I am an Amiga User looking for others from every part of the world. My interests are programming, games and designing. Please write to: Stefan Didak Doelstraat 147 3011 Aj Rotterdam The Netherlands . I would like to tell your readers of a new computer club. The club will have news letters printed bi-monthly and will include info. relating to news, tips for new disc users, articles on computer related subjects, members letters, etc, etc. All enquiries should be sent to Spectrum Users Disc Society (S.P.U.D.S.). clo Ken Sutherland 16 Second Ave Bearsden Glasgow G61 2LR preferably in Australia, New Zealand, USA, UK and the Pacific. Tomasz Wilusz ul. Olsztynska29 m. 203 26 600 Radom Poland  I am a 24-year-old Amstrad CPC 6128 owner looking for anyone regardless of sex anywhere in the world, who are avid adventure players. I wish to swap ideas and tips. Bryan Roberts 17 Chedworth Way Eden Hill 6054 Perth West Australia  Hi, I am 12 and would like a male pen pal aged between 11 and 13. I own a BBC model B with a double 40/80 disc drive. I also like pop music especially Queen, and playing the keyboards. I would prefer a penpal from England. Andrew Breeze Leeds  Hi, I am a 12-year-old kid. I speak English and German and I am a very lonely Amstrad user. If anyone out there has an Amstrad, and would like to chat or anything like that, just write to me. Tarek Elk-Semman Hillingdon  Yoh! Any humans want a CPC 464 penpal? Male/female I don't mind and I don't mind if you live abroad. I'm 12 years old and I am a computer freak and I hope you will swap news, etc. Well, my name's Neil and I hope to hear from you soon. Neil Taylor West Midlands I am a computer freak, who likes to write with everyone from all over the world. If you're interested write to: Eddy Van Hoeserlande St-Donaasstraat 30 8380 Zeebrugge Belgium Oh yes, I own a CBM . I am a 17-year-old boy who would like to have some female pen pals all over the world. I own a C64 computer and I am a member of the CCF-Team. I am waiting for your letters. Dimitri van Middelkoop Mahlerrode 29 2717 CL Zoetermeer The Netherlands  Amiga User wants penpals. All letters will be answered. Erik Nilsen Fullriggervn 33 N-4056 Tanager Norway  My name is Ann. I am 18-years-old and own a Spectrum +. I also like chart music. I would like male pen pals aged 16 to 21. Please send photo if possible. Ann Corcoran Scotland  Greetings from Canada. I am a 16-year-old Amiga user interested in meeting any other Amiga users who want to swap tips, ideas, info and basically anything else interesting. I have several friends who might want to be penpals also. Jim Pun 575 Bathurst St Toronto, On Canada M5S 2P8  I own an Atari 65 XE and I'm looking for pen friends. I'd like to exchange game clues and programming tips. My other hobbies are rock music, films and sport. I'm hoping to find pen pals between the ages of 12 and 18,  Hi there all you Amstrad CPC 464 owners. I am 12% years old and would like and Amstrad owner as a pen pal 11 to 13 years old. Willing to swap pokes, maps, ideas, etc. I'll write back to any letters. Graeme Appleton Bucks  I am a boy from Finland and I would like a pen pal who owns a C64 or, as do, a C128. I have got a disk drive and 1530 datasette and I would like to swap hints, tips etc. I await letters from every corner of the world. Reijo Pentinmaki 61270 Lupajarvi Finland  I am an Australian CBM64 owner who lurves Arcade Adventures. I would like a penpal from any country who enjoys Marvel and DC comics, Crowded House, Inxs, Paul King, Eastenders and going out. C.R.I.T.C. is coming. Write now. Luke 5/115 Pacific Pde Dee Why Sydney, 2099 NSW, Australia . I am a 16 year old MSX 64K owner who would like to swap letters, maps, pokes etc. with any owners all over the world. I promise to answer all letters. David Harkins Newcastle upon Tyne "


"ITS THE 4TH JULY AND THE NATION IS SET FOR AN ALMIGHT) CELEBRATION. INTO THE COMPARENT CALM OF THE WHITE HOUSE BURSTS THE MANIC DR. MEGALOMANN. \"STEP DOWN MR PRESIDENT, SUBMIT TO MY RULE OR TODAY AMERICA WILL KNOW A PLAGUE FROM WHICH DEATH WILL SEEM A HAPPY RELEASE\". SCREENSHOTS FROM COMMODORE VERSION My nd Own rom e ters uld HI KIDS! NO TIME TO LOSE. C./.A. SAY THERE'S AN UNIDENTIFIED MISSILE LOCATED IN AN UNDERGROUND SILO IN THE MIDDLE OF THE CALIFORNIAN DESERT MUST BE THE ONE! CLIMB ABOARD THE SKY CYCLE. TOGETHER WE CAN SAVE THE FREE WORLD. GOD SAVE AMERICA! CBM 64/128 .99 .99 TAPE DISK AMSTRAD .99 .99 TAPE DISK SPECTRUM .99 ATARI ST .99 IN DOOM THE TUBE OF DR MEGALOMANN 601 Media Holdings Lid. Units 213. Holford Way Melford Birmingham BS TRX. TEL: 021 356 3388  1977 by Marvel Comics Group. All rights reserved. 1987 by Marvel Entertainments Groun Inc. All rights and "


"Hands up Gringos! Justice waits on the old Iron Horse express. Capture the thrills and spills of the old prairie. The action is dynamite as bandits attack the train you guard. COMMODORE DISC .95 COMMODORE CASSETTE  8.95 SPECTRUM CASSETTE  7.95 AMSTRAD DISC .95 AMSTRAD CASSETTE  8.95 KONAMI Another gripping Arcade Conversion the DISTRIBUTED BY: N.M.C. LTD., 2 IFFLEY ROAD, LONDON, W6 OPA TELEPHONE: 01-846 9701 TELEX: 94013766 NMCL G. FAX: 01-741 2283 SC WARECT RONAM HELPLINE 184 For subscription details please send a S.A.E. to: KONAMI SOFTWARE CLUB Bank Building, Bank Street, Newton Abbot, Devon TQ12 2JL. KONAMI HELPLINE 0626 56789 "


"At last the real McCoy FOOTBALL DIRECTOR AMIGA Barbarian (Psyg) Brian Cough Fibt Calon Ganes Defender of the Crown ATARI All Word Games Bacash Barbarian Palace Barbarian Psydi Bubble Bobble 18. 2295 3795 C64/128 cass disk Action Force 7.25 NA Ady Art Studio 1995 1995 Airborne Ranger 11 20 14 9 An World Games 7.25 11.20 Bangkok Knights 725 11.20 Bas Detective 7 25 11.20 Bube Bobbe8 .55 11 20 14 95 California Game 7 25 11 20 Captain America 7 25 11 20 Compendium 7 25 11 20 Este 6 Pack Il 7.25 1120 7.25 1120 18.95 14.95 Guld of Thieves Hollywood Strip Poker Karate Kid Night Ore. Defender of the Crown Flight Sim F15 Strike Eagle GLS/Soccer FOOTBALL DIRECTOR 18.95 Silent Service Sinbad Starglider Station Ranorama Sentinel Subbattle Simulator Terrapods 14.95 18 95 18.95 Fball Director OL S/Soccer Galactic Games 5.55 725 11 20 7.25 11.20 THE ULTIMATE FOOTBALL CHALLEN 1895 Uninvited Trivial Pursuit 30 Galaxy 14.95 Mail Order Software service for Britain WORLDWIDE -SOFTWARE Europe, Middle East USA, Alrica Australia and many other countries ETBALL DIRECTO FOOTBALLER C64/128 cass disk C64/128 cass disk C64/128 disk Game Ser Match 975 13 50 Ramparts 725 900 Art Realty 14.95 Gauntlet 7.25 900 Red LED Autodiel 1495 Red October 11 20 14.95 Baie Course 19.95 Gunboat 5.55 11 20 Roy of Rovers Camers at War 24.95 Hysteria 5.55 9.75 Indiana Jones September Defender of the Crown in Karate Shoot Cons Set 11 20 14.95 Destroyer 6.55 11 20 Silent Service 7 25 11.20 Europe Ablaze Judge Death 7 25 11 20 Stealth Fighter 11 20 14 95 Flight Simil 7 25 11.20 Sin Baseball 725 11 20 Guild of Thieves Live Amino 7.25 11.20 Subtatte Sim 7 25 11.20 Hitchhikers Guide Maniac Mansion 7.25 11.20 Super Hang bn 7 25 11 20 Hollywood Hi Jinx Mean Streak 7.25 11 20 Super Sprint Leather Goddess 19.95 Mini Office 12.75 14.95 The Trap Door Moebius 14.95 Morpheus 6.55 9.75 Thundercats 7.25 11 20 Ogre 14.95 Nebulus 655 975 Trator Program Tool Box 28 95 Our 7.25 9.00 Victory Road 11.20 14.95 Ward Warz 7 25 11 20 Rampage CHEETA 125 sc   1051 Blank Disk All prices include postage and packing in UK Overseas orders please add .00 per Cassidisk for AIR MAIL delivery. Please phone for discount prices of software not advertised. Credit card orders accepted by phone or letter Cheques or postal orders payable to WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE 1 Bridge Street, Galashiels TD1 15W Tel: 0896 57004 Most Com THE MOST REALISTIC FOOTBALL STRATEGY GAME YOU CAN BUY AVAILABLE FROM ALL LEADING RETAILERS FEATURES Four Lea International Europe Tour LMTG Counter Sacking Bela lurpees Cup Manager Range Print Option Promotion Pas Pa halte FEATURES THET WITH DIFFERENT COMPUTERE Scouts Ceath: Physio Youth Team Cambe Substituto Seedings of Next Game Sean Counter ORDER A COPY TODAY Crowd Violence War Buy Sell the WP ADVERTISEMENT INDEX SPECTRUM SCREENSHOTS Activision...................20.21.25.27, 58,159,166, 167 Amstrad Sinclair......... 14.15.141 116.182 78.134 ...107.150 18.108.147 Nailsoft Wartech. Mastertronic... TIME SE MIN FULL TIME Anco Arcade... Argus... Ariolasoft AWAY NOTTS FOR (113 DERBY (2) ULTAN 24 HIN MILLS 60 MIN HONLACE 9 HIN WAGE. BILL WEEKLY NEWS GATE HONEY GENERAL RUNNING COSTS e INTEREST FROM BANK 729 Brittania... ... 124 Melbourne House...... Melriga Microprose Midland Computer Repairs Midland Games Library Mirrorsoft Mosaic Music by Mail 130.131 Castle Computers. Chartwood Computer Angle Compuersoft Computer Software Exchange...... Cutprice...... EVERTON RSTONU WEST HAM MAN UTD CRYSTAL P BOOOOO BANK REPAYMENTS 28325 HORTGAGE BEPAMENTS 220350 WEEKS PROFITE-11739 SCOUHLONJURED FOR UEERS THE PLYMOUTH MANAGER APPROACHES YOU AND OFFERS  PER VESKER DE ARCTRANSFER BANK 2243664 SEASON 14 H MENU 5 TOTTENHAM BARNSLEY CHARLTON NORWICH C National Computer Library.... LIVERP Ocean..............0BC,38,76,165,178,186,170,171 SOUTHPTON    ...142.143 D.L. Chittendon...... D.PM Corbishley... D. H Games Database Domark Dynamics Marketing.............. Palace Praha Postronie Power House Software Prism Rainbird. E.JSoftware......... Electronic Arts..................... Elite... English Software... Euromax CHCHEESECU 30,3133 FC 3.28.157 YA 1) VEEB BAND HELL CHAND Firebird 23.89 Shekhana... Silica Shop..... Soltek Software City... Software Supersavers. Software Soectravideo Spectrohire... Standard Games... Supersoft ............ Systems Architects..... Games Software Library Ghetto Games Gremlin...... 40.41.161 WIR VOUTH TEA ESTE PO AD CORD SACK 10 SACH SCOUT BENFOR SCOUT OF PLAVER WANTED CURRENTLY SEENING Hewson.... Homesoft... Telegames... EUROPEAN Nthos Incentive 94 ...10.11 UK Software Exchange..... US Gold IBC.6.7.48.53,54,55,56.59.135.157.179 CURRENT POS 2004 KJC Games 35. 172-192 Verran Video Vault Virgin.... 102.125 Logic Sales Mail Order Software Soc..... Watchdog Home Ent. Worldwide... ...... 119.193 SPECTRUM .95 . COMMODORE .95 . AMSTRAD .95 This game also available by mail order at .95 per cassette. Send your cheque/ PO made out to D& H Games plus a large SAE, with 25p stamp attached. Please write your name and address on reverse side of cheque. (72 hours delivery). 19. Meine Road, Stevenage, Herts SG2 8LL GAMES (0438) 728042 "


"chccahoeft Loud and proud and ready to shock. Yes, C + VG's very own Mr T Tony Takoushi is back to rant and rave about computer games. Love or hate him, just read him. couple of months ago Jeff Minter, they need you! said Amiga games The first three planets are software was called Zyphoor, Jospoor and beginning to arrive in quality Carvix. To get the lowdown and volume. Some of the on these worlds the instruction better games to hit the UK manual explains via a recently are Impact, rather wild storyline what Mousetrap, Mission, you have to collect and Elevator, Bad Cats, Dr destroy. Fruit (Mr Do), The Final On entering the first level Trip, Garrison and City the first thing to grab your eye Defence an absolutely is the speed at which the BRILLIANT version of Missile action takes place. Don't Command. hang around nothing if for This month I'm taking a look free here! at a game called Space You can fly or walk to the Ranger previously titled left or right as the screen TASAR, weird huh? for the scrolls straight out of Amiga 500 from Mastertronic. Defender. A scaled down version from The obvious difference is their coin-op division Space that the backdrop is a three Ranger is a Defender-style layered scroll which is finely game with some tasty detailed and absolutely pixel touches. smooth. Nice one guys! You control a Space There are various nasties Environmental Protection flying around which try to Ranger (SEPR to you) which pick up the creatures from the has to zip around various surface. Creatures including planets rescuing animals from dinosaurs, turtles, weird the clutches of beastly aliens running eyeballs and bouncing squids. Once captured the animals are taken to a mother ship which teleports them into her hold via a beam. You can make the ship drop the creatures by shooting it. But avoid taking too many shots as this can release pounding fists which batter you around the screen. The enemy aliens come in strange forms, there are rolling hands, pronged Wasps, which like to sting yellow flying jokers and the dreaded Skull which follows you around firing vicious looking hook bombs. To aid your mission there is a scanner at the bottom of the screen which clearly details the enemy and where the creatures are on the planet. You must use this to get anywhere in the game. At the end of a wave you are given a tally of the creatures rescued extra life at 25 and progress to the next wave. The game should be available by the time you read this and on balance recommend it. It takes the Defender idea and enhances it. Action is fast, sound is good and it's a real mean shoot'em up. THE FINAL TRIP SOFTONG ne of the dodgier companies to sully their Take a long hard look at the areas of the reputations with shoddy, games for the ST and Amiga. software industry rushed programs which They are getting better but I are conversions of arcade barely resemble the original. still feel that the machines are games. The main reason all this is not being used to anything It really is worrying that bubbling up in my brain at the like their processor or design software houses are content moment is that with increasing potential. to simply hack across code popularity of the ST and Name me just one real without eye for detail or the Amiga machines, software classy classic shoot'em up for capabilities of the machines houses are, it seems, content the Amiga or ST that blows they are converting coin-ops to simply port 68000 code you away with presentation on to across from ST to Amiga and sheer heart thumping To date there have been WITHOUT using the extra action? some horrific conversions of power of the Commodore There really isn't that much hit arcade-titles from leading machine. This is such a waste! more effort needed to software companies. I can The ironic part of it is that enhance ST to Amiga product understand the commercial the Amiga is incredibly so software houses PLEASE reality of releasing a game to powerful and should be take time out to vamp it up. coincide with a hit movie or LEADING the way, but as the It will increase sales and arcade machine. But what I ST now has the mass presence your coders ability to cannot understand is the it leads the software market produce hot 68000 apparent willingness of for product. product... a "


"EN NEW TEXAS SCREAMED FOR AN ARMY EARTH SENT ONE MAN BRAVENTARZ On the far-flung wastelands of the plane New Texas the discovery of Kerium. brings a rush of fortune seekers from all corners of the galaxy. Some are good, but most are bad... laws and gamblers, terrorising the merchants and robbing the milers Out went the cry for an army of lawmen, but in reply the Earth Council sent but one STRENGTH OF THE BEAR! SPEED OF THE PUMA! HE WAS ENOUGH! EYES OF THE HAWK! EARS OF THE WOLF! SCREENSHOTS FROM AMSTRAD VERSION Marshall Bravestarr a man of determination, strength, justice and bravery. A man blessed with amazing animal powers that give him unimaginable capabilities and he needs them all in taming a world of rejects and scum. Overcome them he does, all that is but one malicious and greedy. individual. That' outlaw is Tex Hex, who also possesses magical powersthe powers of darkness and evil, inherited from a time long ago when New Texas was. inhabited by the monstrous Broncosaurs. In an era of imitations Bravestarr is an original. A compelling mis of the exciting and unusual bringing into one, the legendary old West and the space frontiers of the future. CBM 64/128 .99 Disk .99 CASSETTE AMSTRAD .99 Disk .99 CASSETTE SPECTRUM .99 CASSETTE  Copyright greed Marshall Bravesan, Tes He, Share, Thirty Ty pe Stampede and the recours and the distinctive a s there are deal of Filmati IM, for Kerium, Mark Mustawed and debuted under licence from Fimation L. by Gel Media Holdings Limited Units 25 Holland Wey, Halford, Birmingham NTAL. Tel.621356 EL GI GOI Media Holdings Lid. Units 213 Holford Way Holford, Birmingham B67AX TEL: 021 356 3388 "


"KONAMI AN ARCADE NIGHTMARE NOW FOR YOUR HOME-MICROInfiltrate the Alien Rebel's headquarters in Konami's smash coin-op game for your home computer, Negotiate the electric force field and then overcome wave upon wave of fanatical guerillas as you make your way inexorably towards their base. Split second timing and nerves of steel are a must for this exciting fun packed program with all the features of the arcade original. ocen SPECTRUM COMMODORE A STRAD Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS . Tel: 061832 6633 Telex: 669977 "

