"MAY 1985 95p S$4.70 Dm6 THE WORLD'S GREATEST COMIC HEROES! COMPUTER ADVENTURE EXCLUSIVE: TAIGAVIESa Fantastic Four. FARIS'85, REVIEWS, LISTINGS, huLT.COMPETITION, SORCERY MAP! o SUPERSTAR WILNIOSPORTS GEAR! WINO FEVER SURVIVAL KIT! WINO GOLDEN BROOMSTICK! WIN SPORTS GEAR, WINOINTERCEPTOR'S BREAK WIM. CAULDRON'S UM THE JAMES BOND VARY | ALIENSMAPPED! "


"* The Fight Continues... On The Spectrum. NOW AVAILABLE ON THE 48K SPECTRUM Earth is the sented by an Empire Deadlistar, can you penetrate its defence destroy it before it destrous vou? ... Deathstar Intercoo lesvou 12 screen 3D graphics, super smooth 3D animan unbelievable som id effects. music. 4 skills and table... this is the ultimate hallenge! HIC Availble noutal 1295 Also Wailable on CBM 499 HOW TO ORDER To purchase Deathstar Interceptor, simply fill your name and address on a piece of paper, enclosing your cheque Pomade payable to: S) STEM 3 SOFTWARE, and post to the address below. Please allow 7 to 14 days for delivery. OVERSEAS ORDERS Please add .00 per game ordered. System 3 Software South Bank House, Black Prince Road, London SE1 Tel: (01) 587 0873 "


"...25 FEATURES ALIEN 8 MAP. C&VG and Dimension Graphics have teamed up to bring you an exclusive screen-by.screen breakdown of Ultimate's classic Alien 8. Not to be missed! THE BOND DIARY.. Bond is back on the small screen too! CATCH BREAK FEVER............................29 No, it's not fatal but it's one way of working up a sweat! CAN YOU BEAT BRIAN JACKS?............33 If you can beat Brian Jacks then you really are a superstar! PROFESSOR VIDEO'S WORKSHOP......43 The Prof. was inundated with hints from all you Pyjamarama freaks out there. THE FANTASTIC FOUR ARE COMING!.49 Yes, they're on their way and you could win yourself a copy of their Adventure Questprobe 3, by Scott Adams! AMSTRAVAGANZA!. We proudly present a whole 12 pages devoted entirely to the Amstrad news, reviews and an amazing Sorcery map. THE HOBBIT CONTEST.... We've got 50 copies of the Adventure game plus the paperback to give away to those who can answer Bilbo's questions. Cover illustration and lettering: Jerry Paris You could win yourself a copy of Scott Adams latest Adventure Questprobe 3 if you turn to page 49. Fantastic Four copyright  1985 by Marvel Comics Group, a division of Cadence Industries Corporation. ..53 JOZEOzos NEXT ISSUE *--..92 ON SALE 16th MAY CAULDRON COMPETITION. Wouldn't you like to win The Golden Broomstick? Be the envy of all your friends. Turn the page to find out how! BUG HUNTER... MEGA HITS SPECIAL OFFER.............99 ADVENTURE........ .............. 106 Moves are afoot at Level 9 in more ways than one! Plus details of Amazon from Telarium and Suspect from Infocom. ADVENTURE HELPLINE. ADVENTURE REVIEWS.... Our Adventure reviews are going to appear every month from now on due to popular demand. There's service for you! Editor Tim Metcalfe ***.. 108 .........112 .66 Deputy Editor Wendie Pearson Editorial Assistant Lesley Walker Staff Writer/Reader Services Seamus St. John Designer Brian Cookman Production Editor Mary Morton Advertisement Manager Louise Matthews Assistant Advertisement Manager Bernard Dugdale Advertising Executive Sean Brennan Production Assistant Melanie Paulo Publisher Rita Lewis Editorial and Advertisement Offices: Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane London EC1R 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222 LISTINGS SMARTY BERTY/BBC......... Q Bert with a difference! Tom Sato, our MSXpert, has had a bash at converting Bert to the Beeb. DOTMANIAMSTRAD. Pac-Man lives again! But watch out for the spirits who didn't make it out of the maze. TANX 64/CBM 64.. You are about to graduate from the army's crack tank regiment. To claim your red beret, though, you must complete this final gruelling test... PYRAMIDS OF AARONI SPECTRUM.....82 The legendary lost Pyramids of Aaron rise above you. You have heard that one of them contains the famed Aaron diamond. But will you succeed in finding it? DEFENDER/ VIC 20....... Can you repel the advancing Aridis squadrons as they attempt to invade Earth in their search for a new home? ...90 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES POSTAL SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE. By using the special Postal Subscription Service, copies of COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES can be mailed direct from our offices each month to any address throughout the world. All subscription applications should be sent for processing to COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES Subscription Department). Competition House, Fanndon Road, Market Harborough, Leicestershire. All orders should include the appropriate remittance, made payable to COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES. Annual sub scription rates (12 issues: UK and Eire . Additional service information, including individual overseas airmail rates. available upon request. Circulation Department: EMAP National Publications. Published and distributed by EMAP National Publications Ltd. Printed by Severn Valley Press. Typeset by In-Step Ltd. NEWS AND REVIEWS GAMES NEWS... Urgent! Join our Bring Back the Doctor campaign now! There is no time to lose! Plus more juicy gossip from Tony Takoushi. REVIEWS .... 21/100 Firebird alias British Telecom certainly have hit the big time with Gyron, our Game of the Month. Plus many more star games for you to read about. ARCADE ACTION... This is obviously the month for champs! James Thomas, of Juno First fame, sets a new record on Robotron and Julian Rignall, our 1983 Arcade Champ, gives the game away on Game of the Month Galaga NEXT MONTH.... .120 ..94 Gyron "


"Spij ine NO CHOCKS THE BEST THING SINCE THE REAL THING A Spitfire flight simulation set in 1940. Ground features and realistic air combat. A VERY SPECIAL COMPETITION Target: To rise through the ranks of the RAF elite to Group Captain, VC, DSO, DFC MIRRORSOFT, Mirror Group Newspapers Ltd Reward: For the lucky few, a day out at the Battle of Britain Museum plus a test flight in a high performance aircraft. Details in every Spitfire o pack Spitfire40 is available from good software stores everywhere. Holborn Circus, London EC1P 100 Tel: 01-822 3580 COMMODORE 64 JOYSTICK ONLY) DISK .95 CASSETTE .95 "


"TAKE CARE WITH TOP SCORES addictiveness out of this WHERE ARE ALL addictiveness. world! There's only one FOR THE TEXAS The maze is set out in 3D THE WOMEN THEN? criticism that I can think and there are different of: why is it so hard to Dear Sir, types of ghosts on each Dear Sir, obtain a copy of this Two years ago I bought a screen. This makes you Over the last year I have game? I had to search for TI-99/4A. At the same time want to keep playing the become more and more two months in all of the TI announced they were game and getting further disappointed by the lack major retailers before I ceasing production of the to see different ghosts. of women in your managed to track down a machine. But, as I knew I now intend to purchase Adventure pages and copy in Boots! nothing about computers all the cartridges from reviews pages. Are they Am I the first person you and read no magazines, I Parco (gradually). Please all male reviewers? Are know of who has achieved had no idea of what was print this letter in your you all male chauvinists? this major feat? happening. magazine as not every I think it is about time Matthew Barratt I bought a Texas Texas owner knows about more women were Bedfordshire. because it was large, these excellent games. encouraged to use Editor's reply: Great stuff, looked strong, robust and Also, could you try and computers, whether it is Matthew! We haven't had a \"proper keyboard\". review more of the for pleasure or business. I heard of anyone else The shop assistant also cartridges as you did with for one enjoy playing completing the mission so told me that it had a lot of Buck Rogers? You gave it Adventure games and I am you could well be the support it did at the a score of 9 for everything. good at them, if I might first. Why not give CBS a time and still has now. A V Battle say so myself. call and check it out? But it was mostly the Preston I enjoy your Adventure look of it that made me Editor's reply: Watch out page very much and will buy it. I refused to buy a for a Texas review special for a Texas review special continue to buy this \"doorwedge\" Spectrum coming your way very magazine as it is good COMPUTER CLUBS and I refused to buy a value for money. Dear Sir, \"suitcase\" CBM 64. Sandra L. Saunders, I just thought I would write A few weeks later, after FRANKIE REALLY Suffolk. to inform your readers learning Basic fairly well, I IS THAT CODI Editor's reply: What about IS THAT GOOD! about a recent experience bought several games our Arcade spy, Clare I had with one of the many written in basic on Dear Sir, Edgeley, then Sandra? We computer hire clubs now cassette. I thought they How can you doubt? I was would like to see more in existence. were great until I saw a shocked, terrified, amazed female interest in I ordered a cassette for Spectrum game. It was and depressed all at the computers reflected in the my CBM 64 from MCL fast, exciting and most of same time when I read magazine. How about it When it arrived I tried to all addictive! your article on Frankie girls? load it but could not. Even After seeing the game, I Goes To Hollywood in the thought up ways of selling January issue. You wanted Hvir OIDLCN after cleaning and IMPOSSIBLE NO! ! demagnetising the tape my Texas and buying a feedback about whether ELUSIVE — YES! head, I still could not load Spectrum. But, as the days F.G.T.H. were THAT good. went by, I carried on I think Frankie is the I returned the cassette playing basic games, most revolutionary band I am just writing to inform the same day, and reading C&VG and that has ever been seen or you that Impossible received a letter from looking for the cheapest heard! They make THE Mission by Epyx isn't. MCL a couple of days after extended Basic I could music, no doubt about Impossible, I mean. After that. Their reply a find. that. The only ones who two-and-a-half hours of photo-copy letter stated By this time, I was disapprove are too solid playing, I finally that the cassette had been getting cheesed off and conservative to see the fun. cornered the snivelling tested and found to be this Christmas I got Frankie's only mission is Elvin Atombender in his working and put the blame cartridges instead of tapes. to shock the bourgeoisie, control room. Full marks on user error or I got Munchman and Buck and they do that well. I go to Epyx, who have magnetised tape heads. Rogers from Parco. believe it's a great idea to produced a game that has As I have had no trouble I popped in Munchman let bands make computer got everything: great loading any other program and I couldn't believe my games. So RELAX speech, fantastic in my collection, I feel I eyes. The graphics were Frankie is the best! animation, a mindbending have been ripped off, as fantastic, the sound Michael Steinmetz, puzzle and that precious the company said I could brilliant and the Denmark ingredient not have any alternative it. Please drop us a line at: Computer & Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. ALY 9.95 "


"FOR THE ADVERTS game or even credit. At .75 per cassette for one week's hire, I feel disappointed at the company's response. Needless to say, I won't be ordering any more cassettes from them. So remember, anyone thinking about joining a club with the top prices you may not always be getting the top service. M Steele, Liverpool. SAVE US FROM THE SHARKS! Dear Sir, I think your mag, is first class, but it could do with a column on sharks and how to watch out for them. I have in the past been had, done, whatever you want to call it, by such people and I think your mag. could do a lot to help. We little people are conned by these sharks who are out to make a fast buck. I think I would be right in saying that I am not alone many people have had just such an experience. I for one have learned my lesson when buying programs and books for my TI-99/4a. So why not have a space set aside for just that? You could call it Micro Watchdog maybe! I would also like to praise Parco Electrics. They not only have everything for the Texas but have a fantastic mag. that's a must for all Texas owners. Thanks, C&VG, for supporting the TI. W Fairbairn, Fort William Editor's reply: OK, Mr Fairbairn and anyone else who has had problems send us I'll remind you that the Now it is fair to say that I details and we'll attempt MTX series is WORTH the tell them that what they to check them out. Can't investment. It has sprite are doing is illegal and say fairer than that, can and hi-res graphics, a built immoral, but this does not we! in Z80 Assembler/Monitor, stop them. They will take a Basic and Noddy (for text copy of a friend's program THREE CHEERS applications), up to eight no matter what the price windows, 16 colours, three is. To them it makes sense tone plus one noise sound to copy a program rather Dear Sir, capability and almost all of than buy it even if it does Having just read your its 32k (64?) is available to only cost .99. February edition, I was the user and NOT gobbled Copying by young users annoyed to find Mr A. up when using hi-res is done for one reason Haynes of Stoubridge graphics because of its to save money. The game saying that there were too dedicated 16k video RAM. is not pirated to sell, but to many adverts. I personally You can expand it to run swap. If the small group of think that advertising is a CP/M and use up to 512k six people buy a game . good idea because it of RAM! each and a blank tape shows you games which It's a disgrace for each, they do a swap so are up to date and shows anyone to ignore a that all six end up with the you new games which computer that offers so same games (they even have been brought out by much. Please DO went to the bother of new companies. something about it! copying out the Jet Set I first learnt about Raid I'll be buying the MTX Willy colour card). Over Moscow, FIS Eagle, 500 for  when I've No game seems to be Beachhead, Indiana saved up and I'm hoping safe. They'll take a game Jones and many more that for Memotech users' like Lords of Midnight and because of sake there will be more copy it, make their own advertisements. It also support for it. Finally, I'd overlay and copy the gives you an idea of what like to see more Texas relevant sections out of the they look like and tell you reviews and programs. booklet. sometimes about They've faded out since I must, therefore, them. I also find that they last October disagree with one of your make good posters P.J. Hutchison, letter writers. The pirates especially the Ultimate Mytholmroyd, copy a game because it's ones. W. Yorks. there. It is nice to get I think that adverts make Editor's reply: something for nothing, a good magazine and one Continental Software, Unit even if you are only saving of the reasons I changed 23, Station Lane, Witney, 90p. my computer magazine to Oxon, make a huge range I think we've got to yours was because your of games for the MTX, Mr accept the fact that people advertising was good. A Hutchison, and it might are going to pirate games, number of people agree be worth your while to no matter what the cost is. with me and we are contact them. Their There are born pirates. I extremely pleased with telephone number is 0993 know. I've met them. the magazine. It is way 5071. Nothing I say will stop ahead of any other. Keep it ONCE A PIRATE them. up! Allow me to put in one D.R. Hank, ALWAYS A PIRATE last thought. If the software Nr Stafford houses assume that games WHAT ABOUT Dear Sir, are going to be copied, I don't know how many maybe they \"overprice\" times I have either read or the games (I don't really heard that \"games are think I can say whether a Dear Sir, overpriced\" and if the game is overpriced or not) As a regular reader of price of the game was to recover some of the C&VG, I want to say lowered, this would cut money they expect to WHEN is someone going down on piracy. lose. It's a thought, isn't it! to produce quality As a teacher at a school, John McLean, software for the Memotech I see pupils bringing in Kirkcaldy, MTX 500/512? pirate copies of games. Fife. THE MTX THEN? Please drop us a line at: Computer & Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. "


"SPECTRESS WORLD SERIES BASEBALL Nae name aerGe Imagine Software is available from: WOOLWORTH, WHSMITH,John Menzies ,LASKYS, Rumbelows, COMET. GREENS, Spectrum Shops and all good dealers. "


"his is it! The ultimate Alien-8 map! It's a screen-by-screen breakdown of the latest instant classic from Ultimate Play the Game just as you see it as you play. C&VG has teamed up with Dimension Graphics to produce this impressive guide to the game. Dimension use sophisticated printing techniques to transfer computer graphics to paper — and you've probably already noticed examples of this technique on our Reviews pages. This is a first for C&VG and we hope you like it! Many of our regular readers have sent us maps which we've used to help put our screen by screen guide together. Our thanks to everyone who sent a map in. Games playing tips also came our way and we've enlisted the help of Professor Video's top student, Aonghus de Barra from Dublin, and Timothy and James Closs from Shepperton to bring you hints on how to get the best out of the game... S Start Cryogenie Immersion Chamber Thermoles Valve Chem 50 14 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P "


"ALIEN 8 "


"GATES DAWN ...A STEP OVER THE THRESHOLD For time immemorial man bas been challenged by the mystery of bis dreams. Deep within each dream lies an emigma as yet unsolved. Go now througb the Gates of Dawn and experience the recreation of the surreal world of dreams in this vibrant arcade adventure. Enter these portals and lose yourself in a dazzling and perplexing world where nothing is foo fantastic. AN EXPERIENCE NOT TO BE MISSED! * 64 SCREENS OF MYSTERY AND CHALLENGE! $INNOYATIVE GRAPHICS AND ANIMATION ATMOSPHERIC SOUND. . 9 COMBINES STRATEGY WITH ACTION * JOYSTICK CONTROI. SO PREPARE YOURSELF FOR A SUBLIMINAL EXPERIENCE Gates of Dawn is available for the Commodore 64 from all good software retail outlets from 15th April. R.R.P. .95 CBM 64 Also available from Virgin Games Limited, 2-4 Vernon Yard, 119 Portobello Road, London WIL 2DX. Telephone: 01-727 8070 "


"GOOD BYTE SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 DDINDARKS REVINE WORLD SERIES BASEBALL DALLY THOMPSON DECATHLON W HENSDIAN NIGHTS RAM MAKE MORE | OF YOUR SPECTRUM... QUASIMODOS REVENGE KONG STRIKES BACK $888888888888888888888888 GRAND NATIONAL GE OF THE GODS MOSSIBLE MISSION 8 EVERYONES A WALLY HERTS DUMY RON 8888 BAGGER GOES TO RUROPE Two great new add-ons to boost the power of your Spectrum (and Spectrum Plus). The Ram Interface Mk.II JOYSTICK is Kempston INTERFACE MK II compatible. It lets you get the best out of your action games, with all the best joysticks around even the Quickshot Il rapid fire joystick. Electrify your enemies, with real power and lightning-fast reactions at your fingertips. WORLD SERIES BASEBALL AMSTRAD FIGHTER PLOT FOREST AT WORLDS END (.95 DEATH STAR INTERCEPro HERBERTS DUMMY RUN KONG STRIKES BACK BBC/ELECTRON TALES OF ARABIAN NIGHTS (.95 CASTLE QUESTIC ONLY SABRE WULFIBEC ONLY WO Then there's our Spectrum Upgrade Kit. Boost your 16K memory to a fantastic 48K and run all the latest superb action software. ATARI 400/600/800/800XL SPACE SPECTRUM UPGRADE KIT Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY The greatest, biggest and best Atari library on the market. An ideal present for old and new Atari owners MIDLANDS GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over 2 years ago, first conceived the idea of a software library Now approaching nearly 1.000 titles on disc, cassette and Ram games, business. educational and utilities. Often purchasing popular programmers in multiples of 5 or 6 to give all our members a fair change. Always adding approximately 40 new programmes monthly Over 1.000 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany. Holland, Denmark and Eire A fast, efficient and friendly service Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities. Now introducing original software written by existing members. Send large s.a.e. to: .FOR LESS. MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos. Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programmes are originals with full documentation (Both Ram products are made to last. And fully guaranteed.) Get some real action into your Spectrum Games today! Simply return the coupon below to Ram Electronics (Fleet), Ltd., Dept. CVG ,106 Fleet Road, Fleet, Hampshire GU13 8PA, Or call our credit card hot line on 02514 25252. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES ABC FIGURE JULY-DEC 1984 Please send me Spectrum Joystick Mk.IlInterface(s) at .95 Quickshot Il rapid fire joystick(s) at .95 (only when purchased with interface Normally [1295) Spectrum Upgrade Kit(s) at .95 or 3 Please state issue 2 (Please add 1p+ptor UK orders pp for Europe) I enclose cheque postal order or change my Access Visator Expiry date A Name.. Address... Postcode 95,247 Telephone To Dept CVG Ram Electronics Fiet) LIO 106 Fleet Road Fleet. Hampshire GU13 BPA Trade and export enquiries welcome 11 "


"ALIEN 8 PLAYING TIPS irst find yourself on the will move towards the to go wherever you want it There are 33 valves map. As with Knight socket. In some chambers to! scattered throughout the Lore you begin each this can be used to your Cyberats are a pain unless starship. A valve can always game from a different advantage drop the valve you know how to get past be found in the same room, location. Use a small marker and let it carry you to the them, so read on. As soon as although the shape of the or counter to mark your socket! you enter the room, drop and valve changes for each play. starting point. The random in the cryogenic chambers stand on a valve. The The table shows that valve starting points are marked on where fatal objects are susCyberats may push you rooms are grouped in four the map with an S. pended from the roof, make around, but shouldn't kill sets — three with 8 valves When entering a room be sure you drop no valve other you. When you see a space and one with 9. Depending careful, and use the pause than the right one, as this will in front of you, pick up the on which valve you find first, button to plan your moves if result in the objects falling valve again. Repeat this it is possible to deduce in there is an alien or Cyberat in down on top of you. procedure until you reach the which rooms other valves the room. Space dust often needs to exit. can be found. For example, if In some rooms you will be jumped on if a valve is to To pass a Plasmic Usher you found a cube in M9, you find a group of blocks with be reached. By dropping a safely, run right up to it find a hemisphere in G2 and a arrows on them together Valve on top of the space before jumping as far as pyramid in K10. as you with one or two Robodroids. dust and standing on top of possible. would be playing with Jumping onto a block will it, the dust can be controlled How to use the valve table: sequence four. make the Robodroids move in the corresponding direction. Using this technique you can move any B13 The obiect lies underneath the centre blocks, but before it can be picked up two moveable obstacles using the blocks must be shifted. To avoid losing a lite, the object should be moved from under the blocks Robodroids — clearing exits, before being picked up, as the upturned egg shell will fall when the object is taken. moving dangerous objects C9 The block in this room is presumably a red herring as the Life Support Socket can be reached etc. Where there are two by walking under the arch. F9 Push the object off the blocks before you pick it up as the egg shells surround and kill you Robodroids, one will be conwhen you pick it up. trolled until you jump off the F15/N9 To avoid the intelligent object, it often helps if you go to one side of him, then double back blocks — the other will come and go round the other side. This has the effect of fooling him into thinking you are going a different way to the one you are. under your control when you H14 -Using your object to jump over the pyramids, take the route around the outside right of the jump on to another arrow room. It is easier and quicker than taking the intended route. block J4 Got to the protruding block of the platform you are on, and jump onto the block amongst the In one room the exit is egg shells. This will then rise to the level of the other door. L9 There is no need to turn at all here. Simply jump onto the block immediately in front of you, do a blocked by a double row of short jump onto the next and then a long jump should see you on the other side of the room. obstacles. The Robodroid can only destroy the bottom ones so what do you do? Simple. Just put one of the valves you are carrying onto the droid then begin to control him this way you destroy both top and bottom obstacles. Those of you who are really new to this sort of game might like to know that you can jump higher by standing on an object you are carrying. But remember to press the pick-up\" key at the same time as \"jump\" so you take the object with you. If you are not carrying anything, here's how to cross obstacles which are just one block high. Walk as close as you can to the obstacle then turn right around and walk one space back. Turn to face the obstacle again and press the \"jump\" key — and keep it pressed, otherwise yo won't make it! In one room there is a \"hidden circuit'. This means the control blocks are hidden underneath a tower of disappearing blocks which must be destroyed if you wish to control the robot. If the right valve is dropped in a cryogenic chamber, it VALVE TABLE D1 A6 J6 C1 G11 L8 K12 E6 18 C16 H6 N1 O D15 J11 D8 D5 J13 F7 C8 A14 M9 D10 E7 G12 F9 B12 A5 K10 A12H12 B6 111 G2 PYRAMID 1 2 3 4 CUBE 4 1 2 3 CYLINDER 3 4 1 2 droppe HEMISPHERE 2 3 4 1 G2 12 "


"PALACE SOFTWARE PROUDLY PRESENTS CAULDRON SCREEN-SHOTS FROM THE COMMODORE VERSION HAGE * W A spectacular new arcade adventure game from Palace Software that sets a new standard in graphic realism. Commodore 64 and 48K Spectrum .99. F \"... will be one of THE games of 1985. S This one is HOT so don't miss it!» BIG K Explore an entire world in Cauldron' The first game ever to feature scrolling shoot-'em-up and platform jumping. Available from all good Computer Games Shops or direct from Palace Software, 275 Pentonville Road, London N1 9NL. Dear Palace Software, Please add 80p P&P to your order. Payment Please send me the following cassette(s):by cheque to Palace Software, Postal Order Cauldron (CBM 64  .99 or by Access/Barclaycard No. Cauldron (Spectrum) @.99 Evil Dead (CBM 64) @.99 Name: Evil Dead (BBC) @ .99 Address: Valkyrie 17 (CBM 64) @.99 Valkyrie 17 (Spectrum) @.99 Postal Code PALACE software "


"Instead of computers catc) technology now has to cat ENTERPRISE The way we see it, technology has suddenly got quite a race on its hands. There's no other home computer in the world that's so expandable or so updatable as the new Enterprise 64. And if you're wondering quite how we've managed that, kindly take a closer look at the outputs on our remarkable new machine. You'll notice that amongst all the usual sockets and terminals, we've gone and incorporated a special 66-way expansion port. This will accept a whole range of new peripherals that are in the pipeline. Including those that are a mere twinkle in the eyes of our hardware designers. We thought this expandability principle was such a good idea, we applied it to the Enterprise's memory, too. Even in its most basic 64K form, this puts more user RAM at your disposal than almost any other competitor. But plug in our special Rampacks to the base unit, and you can progressively increase that figure to a truly extraordinary 3,900K. "


"ching up with technology, atch up with a computer. NTLIKS TAMINS  BIL Not that that's the only challenge we present to today's ambitious programmers. With a screen resolution of up to 672 x 512 pixels, 256 colours and a high speed video processor, the Enterprise will outgun all but the highest quality TV monitors. And the sophisticated sound chip generates no fewer than 4 voices across 8 octaves in full stereo. Combine the two and you can create effects that leave today's games looking like pub video tennis of the mid-seventies. For anyone with literary aspirations, the Enterprise also comes complete with an integrated word processor. Whilst the really serious user will be delighted to discover analogue RGB and TV outputs, as well as parallel, RS423 serial and network ports. Both Cobol and C will be available with CP/M running, and you can even use Lisp, Forth and Z80 assembly language on cartridge without encroaching on user RAM. The new Enterprise 64. It hasn't just overtaken technology. It's left every other home computer straggling in the distance. ENTERPRISE COMPUTERS WITH OBSOLESCENCE BUILT-OUT "


"SOFTWARE DURELL SNHOAAD EES Doo COMMODORE A A fully animated 3D adventure for 1 to 4 players extending over 64 colourful locations. REQUIRES A JOYSTICK. R.R.P. .95 IIIIIIIIIIIIIIII ITUITIUIT III DURELL sales dept., Castle Lodge,Castle Green, Taunton, Somerset,TA14AB "


"G.A.M.E:S NEWS I.N.B.RIEF ducts you don't want so Bored with plodding we can add them to the through the games listings in C&VG? Fed up with sale, or send them making mistakes and is it a bird? Is it a Sinclair C5? The C&VG/Computer direct to us here at the having to start proNo It's SUPER GRAN! Yes that Trade Weel lv Auction Onice. gramming in the listings OAP with super powers will soon * aid of * * all over again? Well help be coming to save the computer and Sale in eip gamesters of the worldl Tynesoft Ethiopia will be held on Creative Sparks are is at hand. If you own a have signed a deal with Tyne Saturday June 15 at all set to light up the Micronet modem, you'll Tees TV to make the extremely be able to download popular granny the star of a County Hall, With pocket-money games computer game which will be various celebrities, market with a new programs for the released on April 2nd. The game Spectrum and BBC and which Tynesoft say is like five singer singers and representarange of games tapes hopefully soon -for the original games in one package — tives from the home under the collective CBM 64 direct from the will initially run on the C64, C16, computer industry Spectrum and Amstrad with name of Sparklers. Micronet 8000 system. versions for the BBC, Electron, expected to attend. We As from this issue, the Atari and Einstein following. want you lot out there pe The games will sell at programs we feature for C&VG will be running a special to come and join us! .50 and will cover all to come and join us! these machines will be Super Gran competition next issue don't miss it! Bring along any the popular home going onto Micronet. computer-related procomputer. Titles will * * * be announced soon. SAVE DR WHO! | DESIGNER OF THE MONTH | NAME: Stephen Redman BORN: Sunderland, 1964 GAME: Day in the Life So the BBC reckon that they can get away with removing Dr Who from our screens, do they! Well, here at C&VG we're sure that many of our readers will be as upset as us at the news of the good Doctor's banishment from the airwaves. Has The Master finally found a way to get at our hero by taking on the appearance of a BBC executive? In any event, we're sure that you will want to join with all the rest of the Time Lords in an appeal to the Beeb not to get rid of our hero and support C&VGs Bring Back the Doctor campaign. All we want you to do is put your name and address on the coupon below send it to use at Computer & Video Games, Bring Back the Doctor, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU and we'll pass your protests on to the powers that be at the BBC. You can also get a friend to sign using the second coupon! Come on, don't let the Beeb do what the Daleks. Cybermen, Ice Warriors and The Master have all failed to do over the years. Write to us TODAY! COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES BRING BACK THE DOCTOR CAMPAIGN Mild-mannered Stephen Redman has gone right for the throat of the computer business with his first ever game-based on a day in the life of the man who could be said to have started the whole thing off, Sir Clive Sinclair. You can read about the game elsewhere in this issue. But now read about my flatmates in Newcastle all of them the 21-year old student of computer are into computers.\" science who created this controversial Stephen intends to follow a career in game. computing with games continuing as a Stephen is studying at Newcastle hobby. \"We'll just have to wait and see University, and has been working on the what happens,\" he says. Sir Clive game in his spare time over the In the meantime, anyone who can get past 18 months. But why make Sir Clive a Stephen a ticket for the Milk Cup final, character in a computer game? \"I when Sunderland take on Norwich, can needed a character and he fitted the be assured of a few good hints and tips on bill!\" says Stephen. Day in the Life! He approached Micromega, the people Favourite Food: Gold old English grub! behind Code Name Mat and Jasper, with Favourite Drink: McEwan's Eighty the game and they were quick to realise a Shillings good game when they saw one! Favourite TV Programme: Hill Street It was after meetings with the people at Blues Micromega that Stephen came up with Favourite Computer Game: Match Day the general theme of the game. You take from Ocean Sir Clive through the day in which he has Countries visited: France a very important appointment with a very Favourite Music: Dire Straits, Joan important person at Buckingham Palace. Armatrading He even managed to squeeze in a C5 at The thing I hate most about the the last minute! \"I got a lot of help from computer industry: Acorn Computers! Name.... Address. Signature.. Name..... Address. Signature. "


"H-O-T G-O-S-S-IP CE_3 PETALS OF DOOM SCORE 881448 ARTY POR olette fetele GIBBO! Tony Gibson alias Gibbo age 37 has local R'n'B band, Generator. He designed been writing games for four years. He graphics for Roze and Seaside Special as a helped write The Pil, Wizz, and Pipeline for hobby and hopes son to set up as a free the arcade market and then devised and lance graphics artist. He also arranged the programmed Jammin', Bazo's Night Out and music for Jammin There were two new inspiring rewrite of the Seaside Special for Taskset. After learning Mark is married with three children Commodore 16 games I first). electronics at Skillcentre, he built Synthia 2, Matt aged 10 (top games tester), Anna aged received this month from It is a cross between a micro music synth. He played one gig with 1 and Lee aged 3 months, who has yet to Gremlin Graphics. Jet Pac and a scaled Eileen's Tea Towel when the computer nail his first space invader. packed up -so he decided to write rock'n Ghettoblaster is the first real computer Petals of Doom and down version of roll games instead! Now he uses Synthia to rock musical and the pair intend to produce Tycoon Tex. Of the two, Defender. The graphics develop music for games. Gibbo is a motown, more software of this type, as well as some Petals of Doom was are good and the use of soul and reggae fanatic. games and a special super secret project Mark Harrison, age 32, met Gibbo at the which is expected to be finished in clearly the better colour reasonable but it ill fated gig. He plays ace lead guitar in a September. (Tycoon Tex being a nonlacked a little in terms of A GET ON DOWN WITH whom have their own who have to dance is five T ON DOWN WITH Karma Chameleons, all of age!). The number of people special properties (no I will times the number of tapes CHETTOBLASTER not reveal all you can you have already delivered work at it!). and the screen border will \"Allo dere, de name is shoulder blaring out music The tapes are behind the flash as soon as they are all Rodney and I's gotta get de (as long as you have a tape red, gold and green flashing dancing. tapes from all de funkiest and batteries!) This music doors spread around the As you try to enter mix masters in Funkytown. can be directed at the town, but to deliver the various shops around the When I's got dem tapes, inhabitants of Funkytown tapes you must also get a town (electrical repairs, pub dey gotta be deleevered to to make them dance and set number of people etc), various messages de Interdeesc Studio.\" thus not hinder you in your \"Dancing In The Street\" appear to advise you of your Tony Gibbons assures work. However (and there's (sorry, I'm revealing my status, so you cannot me that the above (albeit always a \"however'') not all SCORE 000000 HI SCORE 000000 brief!) description is the the townsfolk respond to basis for his new game the musical notes you fire called Ghettoblaster. at them. Ghettoblaster has you The worst bods to look travelling around the town's out for are the Fun Angels 250 screen locations who love to dance but picking up the tapes and possess 'a fatal touch and delivering them safely to the Park Werewolves who Interdisc offices. There are you can cuddle at your ten tapes in all to collect peril. with the last tape in There are nine other Itchycoo Park (I'll let YOU forms of nasty cruising the puzzle this one out). town, like Jack Flash, To help you along the Gangsters of the Groove, way, you have a ghettoBandits of the Beat, The blaster hoisted on your Tone Deaf Walkers and the GHETTOBLBS.BR "


"H-O-T G-O-S:SI:PAI playability although it  Do any of you out there remember the fracas over Colin Stokes leaving the old Imagine team to must be said that by join Software Projects last year? Well I am reliably current standards this is informed he has joined Ocean (although David Ward, the MD, has denied it) and a good game for the C16. may be involved in the relaunch of the Imagine lo A spaceman is trapped Ocean management. It's a strange old world... 1. After my telephone call to Bug Byte last month, I now hear they have signed a in a cave and has to deal with Quicksilva involving seven new games. This deal gives Quicksilva the defend alien flowers as rights to the seven new titles and is said to allow Bug Byte to concentrate on they grow. When they producing games. On the other hand, it could be that Bug Byte has cash flow reach full height, he can problems and was bailed problems and was bailed out by its old friend Rod Cousens at Quicksilva....... teleport to the next Does Jeff Minter TRULY feel for this fellow sheep? I can exclusively reveal that he does, and HOW do I know? Well at a recent trade dinner, Jeff was famished as phase. Each phase has he had not eaten all day BUT, on picking up the menu for that evening, he saw more aliens but with the the following SADDLE OF LAMB and, despite his hunger pangs, he refused sa me basic aim of to eat the lamb. PS Guess who ate his portion..? zapping aliens and Two golden oldies are, or shortly will be, no longer with us. Visions, those staying alive. There are people with the large number of colour ads, and Oric have been put under compulsory liquidation. power gauges to watch Dare I say that you should hold on to the games and micros as they may be and mindless zapping collector's items in years to come? will leave you defence  I'm quite an Atari fan BUT a recent call to their Slough offices proved painfully less until the batteries funny. I had a query over their new DOS3 disk drives and rang to get some clarification recharge. on the hardware. This is a good game \"..Hello, can I speak to someone in technical please?\" bearing in mind the Five minutes later and it was still ringing! current lack of top \"I'm sorry he's in a meeting.' quality software for the \"You only have ONE man to answer all technical queries in Atari's UK headquarters?\" C16 which hopefully will \"(sigh) No two, it's silly isn't it? Have you tried Silica Shop..?\" (fits of laughter at end as other companies both ends of the line....). enter the scene.  US Gold. An awfully large amount of money has been spent in promoting the US Gold logo and I hear that Vanguard leisure was due to enter the software dawdle in the pub or hide in | scene with a similar GB Gold log. Well US Gold was not going to have any of it and took out an injunction to stop Vanguard sending out any games under the the park too long without logo. being given the Order of the I'll keep you posted on developments as they arise. Boot. CHANNEL The music in this game is enjoyable as it fits the Mike Singleton scene well and does not irritate. In fact, there is an reviewed the option to use the Spectrum version last Commodore Music Maker issue — so check Package by placing the your back issues for If you were watching Channel 4's music keyboard over the 64 more details on the new computer programme 4 and pressing the shift lock Computer Buffs on March 4th, you key down you can play game! will have seen CEVG's ace along with the soundtrack. D-DAY FOR D-Day for the QL Adventurer, Keith Campbell, talkThere is also the option will sell at .95. ing all about our Adventure Helpto turn the volume level of THE OL! line! Yes, he is very tall isn't he! The game has also the ghettoblaster upor The Channel 4 series, which goes down for those late night Games Workshop been converted for out at 5.30 pm on Mondays, aims have upgraded their the 64, priced sessions. to bring you up-to-the-minute news at and gossip from the wonderful The graphics are slick, D-Day wargame for .95. world of computers. And like the the town large and the the QL. BBC's Chip Shop programme, challenge ever present so Channel 4 will also be broadcasting you should not find this an The workshop free software. easy nut to crack. It's a very people are claiming The program is also pioneering strong effort from a new that this is the first the transmission of software by light solo programmer (exand will be showing how to original graphic Taskset, see profile) and construct the circuitry for a light pen which can be used to capture suggest you keep an eye game for the the lightsoft\" programs. out for his future games. machine. "


"AARI T D I EUROPES LEADING 'ATARI MAIL ORDER SPECIALISTS EUROPES LEADING SOFTWARE EXPRESS | HOTLINE (121) 384 5080 800XL + 1050 DISK DRIVE 800XL + 1010 PROGRAM RECORDER INCLUDES DISK OPERATING SYSTEM PACK INCLUDES SOUND & GRAPHICS DEMO PACK SOUND & GRAPHICS DEMO CE INVITATION TO PROGRAMING CREE HOME FILING MANAGER FREE + POLE POSITION THE PAYOFF ADVENTURE NORMAL OUR NORMAL OUR SAVE SAVE PRICE PRICE .00 PRICE  .00 [194.96 MICE 2  96 PRICE  WHILE STOCKS LAST INFOCOMS INVISICLUES .10 PER TITLE THE AIARI XL HANDBOOK  95 NOW OPEN DE REAIARI  ATARI MAPPING THE ATARI  MINER 2049ER .95ROM YOUR AIARI COMPUTER NG XL  SERVICE DEPARTMENT TECHNICAL REFERENCE NOTES .00 THE SEQUEL TO MINER 2049ER THE XL GRAPHICS HANDBOOK  NEW U.S. GOLD' TITLES BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK DROP ZONE C/D .95/12.95 FROM O.S.S. ROM MR DO C/D. PERSONAL  95/14 95 MAC/65 (ROM) & TOOLKIT DISK) COMBAT LEADER CD  IMPORT PHONE FOR AVAILABILITY BASIC XL (ROM) & TOOLKIT (DISK) DIG DUG C/D .95/E14 95 GHOSTBUSTERS .95 DISC ACTION (ROM) & TOOLKIT (DISK) PAC-MAN C/D EXPORT .95/14 95 F15-STRIKE EAGLE C/D $14.95 SERVICE AVAILABLE SEND SAE FOR PRICE LIST COMING SOON! ATARI 520 ST MAGAZINES 31 STONEYHURST ROAD, ANTIC PAGE 6 ERDINGTON, PHONE FOR DETAILS ANALOG ATARI USER (NEW) BIRMINGHAM. ADD .00 P+P TO 800XL PACKS AND 75p TO BOOKS P+P REG ATARI CORPORATION (U.K.) LTD Telephone: (021) 384 5080 YOU CAN'T MISS THIS UP TO 75% DISCOUNT MILES BETTER SOFTWARE 221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffs WA11 2DD. Tel: 05435 3577 U.S. GOLD SOFTWARE ON OUR VAST RANGE OF SOFTWARE & ACCESSORIES Just a few examples: MAPF .D.D. VALHALLA Spectrum .95 .75 GREAT SPACE RACE Spectrum .95 .75 BRISTLES Com 64  8.95 .25 Plus ALL other current & new releases at amazingly low prices. When you become a member of Flix Direct Discount Club you will receive: Your own Personal Membership Certificate.  Our very latest software catalogue containing 100s of top titles for the Spectrum, C64, C16 & + 4, VIC 20, BBC Electron, Atari & Amstrad.  Details of incredible offers on a wide range of joysticks, Interfaces & other accessories.  Regular new release information pack.  Your free  voucher to use against any future FDD purchase. To become a member and receive all the above benefits simply send cheque or P.O. for .50 made payable to 'Flix' together with your name, address and computer type to:Flix Direct Discount Club FREEPOST Congleton, Cheshire CW 12 1BR (NO STAMP REQUIRED) If you wish to take immediate advantage of any of the above offers please add cost of purchase to your Registration Fee. All registrations and orders will receive our immediate attention. Title & Machine Cass Diak Nato Commander (64) .... 8.95 .95 Beach-head (A)................ N/A .95 Indiana Jones (64) 895 N/A Beach-head (64).............95 11.95 Tapper (64).......... 19.05 .95 Beach-head (Amstrad)... 18.95 N/A Tapper (Z )... NA Beach-head (Z)............ 66.95 N/A Congo Bongo (64)........ 68.95 $11.95 Conan (A) (8.95 $12.95 Congo Bongo izx)..........95 N/A Conan (64) .... 68.95 .95 Spy Hunter (64) ............. 18.95 $11.95 Pole Position (A).............95 .95 Spy Hunter (Zx)............. 16.95 N/A Pole Position (64)........... 18.95 TH A fi295 Up and Down (64)... 8.95 $11.95 Mr Do (A)... (8.95 $12.95 Up and Down (Z )......... 16.95 N/A Mr Do (64) . ..........18.95 .95 Buck Rogers (64) ........... 68.95 .95 Pacman (A) ........ 8.95 $12.95 Buck Rogers Zx)..........66.95 N/A .95 .95 Wizard and the Princess (64) Digdug (A). 08.95 C12.95 N/A .95 Digdug (64) .95 $12.95 Mission Astroid (64) .........N/A .95 Dropzone (64)................95 11.95 Exodus: Ultima ll (64)......N/A .95 Raid over Moscow (64) 08.95 11.95 Dough Boy (64) 68.95 .95 Raid over Moscow (Z)... .95 N/A Quasimodo (64) ............. 68.95 $12.95 Strip Poker (64)............ 68.95 18.95 .95 $11.95 Sentimal (64) 18.95 12.95 Aztec Challenge (A) (7.95 N/A Ulysses and the Golden Forbidden Forest (A) .... (7.95 N/A Fleece (54) .................. N/A [11.95 Slinky (A) ................ .95 N/A Combat Leader (64)....... 12.05 .95 Caverns of Kalka (A)... .95 N/A Battle for Normandy (64) Super Huey (64)... .95 $11.95 . .........95 $12.95 Talladega (64)................ 68.95 $11.95 Grogs Revenge (64)........ 28.95 11.95 Bruce Lee (64)..............19.95 .95 Fort Apocalypse (64) ...... 68.95 .95 Bruce Lee (A)... ....95 [12.95 Fort Apocalypse A) ..... 68.95 .95 Dallas Quest (A) ........N/A .95 Drelbs (A). 08.95 .95 Dallas Quest (64) .............N/A .95 Drelbs (64) .................... 68.95 $12.95 Stellar 7 (64)................... 28.95 .95 Blue Max A)...............18.95 .95 Solo Flight (A) ............. 12.95 .95 Blue Max (64) A95 (1295 Solo Flight (64) ............612.95 .95 Blue Max ZX)................66.95 N/A F15 Strike Eagle (A). C12.95 .95 Zaxxon (A) ......12.95 NIA F15 Strike Eagle (64) [12.95 .95 Zaxxon 64) 8.95 C12.95 Nato Commander (A) .... 18.95 .95 Zaxxon (Z )........... N/A Please phone for stocks availability on all items. Add  per item for overseas orders. Access and Visa welcome. PLEASE PHONE FOR ATARI SOFTWARE LISTS 20 "


"Continue R.E.V.T.EW:S Graphics: Are they really as mind-blowing as the adverts say they are? Does the screen scroll effectively? Do those aliens really leap out of the screen at you? This is how this category is judged GYRON Porsche 924 or cash equivalent as a prize for the first person who cracks the Necropolis maze version of the game first. You notice I said Necropolis version. On the Bside of the tape there will be an easier version of the game alled the Atrium. This is great for practising — or for those of you who like a faster game. But no prizes for solving it! Oh yes — there is a time limit built into the hard version. Expert opinion says that if you've spent around 20 minutes trying you might as well start another game! Graphics — as you can see from our shots are vector line style. But don't let the simplicity fool you. The MACHINE: Spectrum SUPPLIER: Firebird PRICE: .95 Now here's a really DIFFERENT game! You may not think that a 3D maze game could be different but Gyron, the latest full price game from Firebird, most definitely is. The idea of the game is to penetrate the defences of a vast maze-like structure created by a sorceror scientist to protect his knowledge. The maze is confusing enough on its own but the sorcerer also decided to make it deadly by constructing laser towers to zap any intruders. plus a radar screen Faced with this formidable illustrating your surroundings. task, the sorceror's enemies Colour bars of red and gathered to discuss just how green which appear at the they could break into the sides of the main display are system. The result was a used to indicate side Hedroid a remote passages — your Hedroid controlled probe robot armed can only see in the direction it with a high-intensity optical is facing. laser. You can control the And this is where you come Hedroid using a joystick or in! Take control of the keyboard user definable Hedroid, guide it through the keys are a feature of the deadly maze and discover the game too! sorceror's secrets which Gyron is an immensely is not as easy as it sounds. challenging game and just The Hedroid can be to make it more interesting damaged by collisions with Firebird are offering a the walls and can be totally wiped out by the giant Prisoner-type \"rovers\" which trundle through the maze. The laser towers are multidirectional and totally featureless when viewed from the outside. Fortunately, your Hedroid is armed with radar and it can check out which way the tower is likely to be pointing its deadly weapon. You can either destroy the tower or make it turn by zapping it with the Hedroid's laser. The screen display shows a main view of the maze plus an image of the Hedroid itself which changes colour as you progress through the various zones of the maze, a \"viability\" or energy indicator FIRE programmers, two mathematicians and two computer boffins, have developed a neat way of moving things behind other things on screen — if you follow me! Just watch the giant robot rovers and you'll see what I mean. Once you've got the hang of driving the Hedroid around the maze and it does take a bit of getting used to you'll be hooked. Don't fail to have a look at Firebird's best full price game yet. 00  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability "


"balone R-E.V.I.E.W.S Sound: Does the game sound like a Duran Duran LP played at half speed or does the noise from your micro knock you half-way across the room? The C&VG review team don't judge games with their ears plugged up, we can tell you! beach avoiding mutant WHY didn't you include a guards and jellyfish — and to player vs computer option, take it to Downing Street Anirog! where you must chuck it OK. Griping over with. Now through the windows at well onto the good news. Slapshot known members of the is an accurate represen Cabinet who pop up at the of that rough tough sport, ice windows. hockey. Just to distance the game a The aim of the game is bit from real life, the scenario simple — to score goals. for the game says that the It's got nice 3D Style Achieving that aim involves a 2 SHOOT THE RAPIDS pollution has been caused by graphics and good sound mixture of ice skating skill, a nasty bunch of aliens called and it's fun to play, too. strategy and brute strength MACHINE: CBM 64 Polytikians who have invaded The idea is to race your I've heard that the real life SUPPLIER: New earth and taken over the powerboat against the clock game is a bit like that too! Generation government, taking on the over a series of different The simulation follows the PRICE: .95 appearance of the real courses. Lots of other boats rules of the game closely, An interesting Sports Cabinet ministers. attempt to stop you claiming Each game consists of three simulation from New The hero of the game is the power boat three-minute periods and Gen. The graphics are Radium Rodney, who has championship. yes, you do earn a penalty if pretty basic but game stumbled on the awful truth There are 20 courses to you deliberately chop an play is enthralling. You and realises that the only way race on plus a qualifying opposing player down! just have to get your paddling to stop the insane Polytikians round in true Pole Position The graphics are simple action right to get your canoe is to bombard them with the style. but effective and the game right way round across the atomic seaweed! Aqua Racer is a nice twist also features speech. You finishing line. I spent a lot of on the Pole Position theme. A hear the roar of the crowd time going backwards down game for race fans. when you score a goal and an the river! announcer at the start of The object of the game is to each period. The crowd complete a series of slalom Graphics sounds are terrific! courses against the clock Sound I particularly enjoyed the avoiding hazards like rocks Value considerable joystick skills and motor boats along the Playability you MUST develop to get your way. Each river flows at a skaters performing different speed So you effectively. A real challenge have to be on the ball to beat the evil Polytikians are o SLAPSHOT this. the clock. easily recognisable in the Overall, Slapshot must rate A Decathlon-style joystick \"Downing Street\" screen. MACHINE: CBM 64 as one of Anirog's best action won't help you to Pick your least favourite Tory SUPPLIER: Anirog games to date. Great fun and succeed in Shoot the Rapids minister and chuck somePRICE: .95 cass./ great value. you must be cool calm and thing at him. Very satisfying .95 disc collected unless of course you are a There's only one thing A novel and interesting Young Conservative! wrong with this superb  Graphics game for water sports fans. Seaside Special is a sports simulation from  Sound novelty game and its last Anirog. You have to have  Value ing appeal could be limited.  Graphics two people to play it.  Playability  Sound But if you fancy a laugh have  Value a look at it. Playability  Graphics  Sound SEASIDE SPECIAL Value  Playability MACHINE: CBM 64 SUPPLIER: Taskset AM PRICE: .90 cass./ AQUA RACER .99 disc MACHINE: CBM 64 Here's the antidote to SUPPLIER: Bubble Bus Raid Over Moscow for PRICE: .99 peace people and con Ever wondered what Pole servationists every Position with boats where. instead of cars would be The general idea of the like? Then check out THE PERIOD 2 SHIDONCIC 0 game is to collect radio-active Aqua Racer from Bubble seaweed from a polluted Bus. 000000 22 "


"9117= .95 CBM 64 AVAILABLE NOW! SPECTRUM .95 ROAD CLOSED Produced with technical assistance from: D DUNLOP TYRES SP TYRES UK LIMITED A mean evening. The world's leading sports car. A blocked road, and an uncharted maze of hillside lanes. The ingredients of the thrilling new rally simulation '911 TS'. Drive it..... NOW! Every single 'ELITE' product carries the unique ELITE Holographic Sticker Make sure your copy does, it's your guarantee of quality. Mail Order: Just send a cheque or PO, payable to ELITE' or quote your visa number slite Elite Systems Limited Anchor House Anchor Road Aldridge Walsall West Midlands Telephone 092255852 Telex 3350.22 SPETELG! "


"sapore R-E-V.T.E.W.S AND 22 no Value: Is the game really worth all those pennies? How long will its attraction last? Is it worth going without Computer & Video Games for a month because your parents won't give you any extra pocket money or could you write a better listing? You can race on all the swimming around to the Jaws arcade adventure style. He'll major Grand Prix circuits of theme in a third. need them all before comthe world except. This is the best Blagger pleting this challenge. strangely, Silverstone — the game yet. Don't fail to catch The graphics are terrific home of British motor sport. the opening night! similar in style to Atic Atic and You can also compete in Sabre Wulf. Animation is the Grand Circuit, racing on each track over a \"season\". smooth and flicker free and  Graphics Sound the sound is good too. Some There is a championship  Value screens have Sabre Wulfstyle table which flashes up after  Playability 10 jungle while others have rocks each race, and several skill or Atic Atac rooms. PITSTOP II levels from rookie to pro. Now, where did I put my MACHINE: CBM 64 crash helmet SUPPLIER: CBS/Epyx H STAR ENERGY WEBPONRY COLD PY GAME 004400 PRICE: .95  Graphics Sound Slip into the driving seat  Value and prepare for the best Playability Formula One racing game since Pole Position! HOLLYWOOD Pitstop ll not only features the usual race MACHINE: CBM64 sequence but also an exciting SUPPLIER: Alligata pitstop screen where you PRICE: .95 have to refuel and change the tyres on your highAlligata's software star, performance race car before Blagger, heads for Tinsel the other racers get too far in Town and the biggest job front! of his career so far in As you race against the Blagger Goes to opposition, you have to keep a Hollywood an allEach of the nasties has its 8 action, arcade Adventure. WIZARD'S LAIR an eye on the condition of own particular characteristics Set among the many which you must learn before MACHINE: Spectrum your tyres and fuel. The studios of a giant Hollywood engaging them SUPPLIER: Bubble Bus harder you drive, the more in battle, film company's headquarters, your tyres wear and you could which adds to the challenge of PRICE: .99 end up stuck out on the circuit the game sets Blagger a the game. This must be the best tough task. He has to reach with a blown tyre if you don't the office of ace producer A worthy sequel to Atic Atac. game yet from Bubble Wizard's Lair is extremely well take care Bus! Programmer presented, great fun to play Race against the computer his epic action movies Teeth Spielbum best known for Stephen Crow readily and terrific value for money. or a friend in this terrific race and Close Encounters of the admits that he was simulation. Pitstop Il features N a split screen, Spy Vs Spy Nasty Kind and steal the inspired by Ultimate's Atic Atac when writing the  Graphics only copy of his latest film! style. Each part of the screen game but what's wrong  Sound shows the scrolling track and with taking an idea and  Value the other race cars until developing it? Just look at all  Playability you decide to make a pitstop the JSW clones around. that is. Then the display Anyway, on to the game switches to the pits where which revolves around the your crew wait to refuel and adventures of a character WITCH SWITCH change the tyres on your called Pothole Pete who has racer. This can get pretty MACHINE: CBM 64 accidentally discovered the frantic as the computer Wizard's Lair while on a potSUPPLIER: English Software controlled car or your holing expedition. PRICE: .95 friend's racer gets further Theme tunes for various Pete has heard rumours Suddenly everyone is in front! movies associated with the about this place and knows making games about You can check on your tyre characters you find in each that scattered around are bits witches and it's nowear by watching for a colour studio play as you enter of a magical golden lion — where near Halloween! change when they turn different screen. For and sets out to discover them. Still, English Software's white you are in big trouble. example, you get the Star But the Lair is inhabited by Witch Switch was one of The graphics are excellent Wars theme and a little Darth some really horrible monsters the first and an entertainand the sound is great lots Vadar in one studio, the who guard the golden lion. ing romp it is too! of roaring engine sounds Superman theme and the Pete can collect weapons You take on various forms best of all, though, Pitstop Il is Man of Steel himself in food, spells, keys and gold during the game a monkey, great fun to play. another, and a giant shark during his quest in true continued on page 100 30 so aowa 24 "


"The BOND DIARY COMING SOON TO A C&VG NEAR YOU! \"My name is Bond. James Bond...\" How many times have you thrilled to these words! They mean that action and adventure are just a few short film frames away. Now Bond is back in town and soon to be seen saving td world again in a brand new 007 epic called A View to a Kill. And, at last nere's a Bond computer game to go along with it! Yes, 007 comes to e small screen thanks to the people who brought you Eureka! Over the next couple of issues C&VG will be tracing the development of the Bond game bringing you all the inside information on how it came to be in THE BOND DIARY. It promises to be just as intriguing as one of the Bond plots. This issue we'll be telling you a bit about the background to the game. Next issue we'll bring you exclusive screen shots of the game itself and then in July C&VG will proudly present an 007 extravaganza with competitions and much more. Bet you can't wait! In the meantime, on with the main feature ... T all started when Mark Strachen and Dominic Wheatley. the people who master-minded the 125,000 prize adventure game Eureka! began looking around for a follow-up. They learned about the new Bond movie A View to a Kill and immediately saw the great potential for a computerised version of 007's adventures. But this time they wanted an arcade game -not an adventure. After all Bond movies are packed with action! They set about acquiring the licence to the movie for an as yet undisclosed fee and began looking around for a software company good enough to come up with the goods. They chose Softstone, a relatively unknown company with the advantage of having a team of very talented programmers. Another company, called Special K who specialise in game design and production, created the storyboards for the game which Softstone then began to turn into data and graphics. The brief to Special K and Softstone was to produce four arcade style games based on stunts featured in the movie. Domark struck lucky when they discovered that a friend was a film editor actually working on the Bond movie. He was quickly snapped up to help make sure that the games look as dose to the film as possible. Meanwhile, that supergroup Duran Duran had been chosen to write the theme music to A View to a Kill and Domark decided that they wanted to use the same music on the game and set out on yet another quest for a licence. It proved successful and the Duran Duran sound will be featured for the first time on a computer game. Another first for Domark is that the game will be released at the same time as the Bond movie hits the cinema screens. The Ghostbusters game came along sometime after the movie. And talking of Ghostbustere!, ace programmer and head of Activision, David Crane, has seen storyboards of the game and loves the look of it! Activision will be handling the game in the US. The A Tew to a Kill game is being written for the spectrum, Commodore 64, Amstrad and MS9| and an Enterprise version could be on the cards. The royal premier of the movie will take place in London on June 12th. What would Bond think about all this? Well, according to Mark and Dominic, the current James Bond in the elegant form of Roger Moore enjoys playing computer games. We hope to bring you his vieux of the 007 game! Next issue well bring you some exclusive screen shots of A View to a Kill plus an inside view of the programmers at work. Don't miss it! 25 "


"SOFTWARE v Epyx 6ee HEYZONIE WWE "


"HYOU DRIVE FAST AND THINK FAST, YOU'LL LAP UP ^PITSTOP IL 'Pitstop II' is here. And with it comes all the thrills, spills and nerve-jangling action of competitive motor racing. But there's much more to Pitstop II than just foot down, flat out and hope for the best. Because Pitstop II' demands fast thinking as well as fast driving. You've got to watch your tyres; watch your fuel; watch that car coming up behind. You've got to decide whether you can afford to make a pit stop. Or whether you can afford not to. With 'Pitstop II' you not only drive your race, you plan it as well. And the pressure's really on. If you think you've got action games licked, try a few laps with 'Pitstop II. You may have to think again. ICBS Also out now on Epyx: IMPOSSIBLE MISSION PITSTOP I BREAKDANCE TEMPLE OF APSHAI SILICON WARRIOR JUMPMAN DRAGONRIDERS OF PERN. LUNAR OUTPOST Plus new releases: STARFIRE AND FIRE ONE. MURDER BY THE DOZEN ELECTRONICS SOFTWARE FOR COMMODORE 64 Available from all good software outlets. Authorised dealers order from: The Software Sales Service. Tel: 01-636 6433/4. CBS Computer Software, Ashbrook House, 3-5 Rathbone Place, London W1. EPYX COMPUTER SOFTWARE "


"COMMODORE 64/AMSTRAD/MSX USERS MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY AMSTRAD THE TOMB OF KUSLAK The first and the largest Commodore 64 library in the world. Often copied but never equalled 1) All the latest titles on cassette, disc and cartridge 2) Hire your first game absolutely free up to the value of .50. 3) Life membership 16. 4) Hire charge from only  inc p&p for full 7 days 51 No limit to the amount of games you can hire. 6) All games originals with full documentation, 7) Games, Business and Educational software. 8 Return of post service. 9) Lowest new hard and software prices in the UK 10) Join now on 14 day money back guarantee. Over 1050 different titles in stock. Send cheque or postal order for  with your two selections or large SAE. Due to continual expansion we are moving to much larger premises at: 28 COLLEGE STREET, Dept CVG, WORCESTER, WR 1 2LF. TELEPHONE: Worcester 0905 611072 v A graphic and text adventure with the following features: OVER 240 LOCATIONS. 5 SKILL LEVELS DIFFERENT EACH GAME. FULL COLOUR SCREEN DISPLAY  FIGHT SCENES  AMAZING PUZZLE OF KUSLAK . CAN YOU SURVIVE AND FIND KUSLAKS TOMB. Full colour Audio Pack .50 Trade Enquiries welcome Mail Order by first class return post. Cheques/PO to: 3 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES ABC FIGURE JULY-DEC 1984 INTRIGUE SOFTWARE Telephone your order now Cranbrook Road, Tenterden, Kent TN 30 GUJ Telephone 05806 4726 95,247 ZOOMSOF COMPUTER SOFTWARE SPECIALISTS COMMODORE 64T ATARI 400/800/XL ATARI 400/800/XL disk ROM disk COMMODORE 64 Pacman Pole Position Teleink 24.95 1495 14.95 12.95 11.95 11.95 .11.95 11.95 2200 23.00 Mask of the Sun Star Bowl Football Star League Baseball Cutthroats Enchanter 23.00 9.95 9.95 Zork Ill Starcross Suspended Centipede Jungle Hunt Pacman Pengo... NIA... 11.95 9.95 1495 37.95 35 95 2875 29.95 29 95 Donkey Kong Junior 14.95 14.95 Cutthroats Suspect Boulder Dach Flip Flop Dig Dug Pitstop 29.95 39.95 9.95 9.95 1495 NA NIA Seasta Graphics Art Department Arcade Construction Set Summer Games Ultima Ill... Dancing Feats music util Combat Leader 50 Mission Crush My Pacman Pole Position Roborton Dig Dug 47.95 21.55 7.25 14 95 14.95 12.95 33.95 En O's Well BC's Ouest for Tyres 41.95 41.95 9.95 1495.. 1495 14 95 Tigers in the Snow.... Battle for Normandy. Combat Leader Knights of the Desert 12.95 14.95 14.95 14 95 18.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 9.99 Flight Simulator II SAM speech PM Animator Dark Crystal Night Vision Pinbal US Double Decathlon Space Shuttle Bounty Bob Strikes Back Buck Rogers Jaw Breaker 9.99 19.95 14.95 cass 69.75 39.95 ..25 95 disk NIA .12.55 ACE Enhancer Fort Apocalypse Basic Debugger... Basic Commander Data Manager 11.95 995 34 95 39 95 73.75 39.95 12 55 Protector Bruce Lee Dallas Ouest.. Solo Fight.. Spitfe Ace Nate Commander 9.95 .12.55 ...NA...... 12.50 8.45 1255 66 95 11.45 11.45 Spelunker 12.95 Lode Runner 12.95 Duvids Midnight Magic.. 9.95 12.95 Operation Whirlwind Rad on Bungaling Bay 12.95 Dheplies 1295 Hard Hat Mack .12.95 Realm of Impossibility 9.95 12.95 Archon. 11.95 14.95 Murder on the Zindereut. 14.95 One on One 12 95 MULE 11.95 14 95 Pitstop 11.95 Dragon Riders of Pern. 11.95 Jumpman 11.95 Impossible Mission... 8.95 ...... .. 11.95 Flyer Fox ... 14.95 Jetboot Jack Superbase 54 Flight Simulator 41.95 SAM speechi.... 41.95 Master Type ...ROM.........32.75 Master Type 32.75 Al activdion and U.S. Golddisk castitles in stock Data Perfect Atari Writer Home Word... Basic XL ROM ACTION ROM Mec 65 with OS AL ROM Atari 850 interface...... The Protect write to both sides of diskl. Disk Collector Catalogue disks............NIA... 99.95 14.95 ...14.95 14.95 ... 8.45 35.95 Boulder Dash Attack of the Mutant Camels Encounter Ghostbusters Conan The Barbarian F15 Stride Eagle Atari Smash Hits Colossus Chess 3.0 Combat Ladder....... Zato Tale of Beraya 12.69 14 95 9.95 14.95 .1255 14.95 12 69 17.95 12.95 ATARI SOFTWARE Trade enquires welcome 12.55 ZOOMSOFT Plus 100's more titles available. Send S.A.E. for free catalogue or telephone 01-723 0562 between 10am and 7pm. All cheques, 46 HUNTSWORTH MEWS, LONDON NW1 6DB P/O made payable to Zoomsoft. 28 "


"COMPE79790N Barat Movie ZEVER group lined up to spell their name KRAZIEST. Being out of puff and rapidly running out of bars, they'd like to repeat this move as few times as possible. Can you work it out for them? To record your effort, simply name the pair who are to jump each time and whether they are to jump right or left, as you look at them. Put your best answer on the coupon and post it to Break Fever, Computer & Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Road, London ECIR 3AV. Closing date is May 16th and the editor's decision is final. The winners will be chosen from those sending in an answer which This up and coming group of break requires the least number of moves. dancers are near the end of a routine in which they have tried to screw HERE'S WHAT themselves into the pavement and have proved that you can ski without YOU CAN WIN! snow. They now need a big finish The first prize winner in our great which will impress the judges at the Break Fever contest will get a Ellava Wallop Modern Dance complete Breaking kit. This consists Contest. of a set of Breakdancing clothes, They have planned a move in including trainers etc, a video of the which one member in the line drops movie Breakdance, the soundtrack down onto a shoulder and spins album from the film and a copy of the round while two others next door Break Fever game of course! jump over him. There will be 25 runners up who The two who jump land in the same will get a copy of Break Fever, for the order that they take off in. Commodore 64, plus a Breakdance They want to repeat this move poster and free membership of the enough times to end up with the Interceptor Software Club. So what are you waiting for start Breaking NOW! C&VG/INTERCEPTOR BREAK FEVER COMPETITION My answer is..... BREAK FEVER SUITABLE FOR THE commodoret po Name. Address......... "


"Now Amstrad gives you over  to play with Ansoft SOZ Enso Free EASIAMSWORD Flusuri ANIMAL VEGETABLE MINERAL HANG Computer word processor ASA Software 'over  value BRIDGE-IT Roland eit the Ropes con Rygo Ansoft MOZ OH MUMMY Ave Galactic plague Free SULTAN'S MAZE Whier way Now Sengeeeeeeeeee FREE! when purchasing an AMSTRAD CPC464 Roland in the Caves "


"29 These complete with green screen VDU (GT64)  complete with colour monitor (CTM640) SCORE 7 LIUES 1 Join in the fun. Our CPC 464 User Club is a must for all owners. As a member, you'll be the first to know about the additions to the CPC464| range. Hardware and software. complete We'll provide you with your own with privilege card and send you free, a monitor year's subscription to the Amstrad datacorder User magazine packed with programs, features and information. You can enter competitions for valuable prizes and keep up with all the latest Amstrad developments. And with the free software pack, we think that's pretty good for starters. 95p CPC464 USER The OFFICIAL Mer Magazine Dis die PRO First issue 164 sale on general AMSTRAD User CPC 464 MEMBERSHIP NUMBER REGISTERED NAME Expany  Free software worth over  is revision for exams, cataloguing and the name of the game. budgeting. Along with your new CPC 464 And it comes complete and ready(colour monitor or green screen to-go. VDU) you'll receive a software starter pack of 12 (yes, twelve) Amsoft. A ton of software. cassettes absolutely free. There's something for everyone. Yes. Now there are over 100 titles From Roland-on-the-Ropes to Easi from Amsoft and independent pubAmsword word processing. lishers. And the list is still growing. That's one good reason for making Arcade games, educational proAmstrad's CPC 464 your new home grams and business applications computer. they're all designed to make the most of the CPC 464's impressive graphics, stereo sound and processing abilities. And with Amstrad's speedloading User HIVIO INAU club club capability, even complex programs can be loaded quickly. The optional disc system will load a game in around 6 seconds. When you feel the need to upgrade. your Amstrad system to disc drive, just send your favourite Amsoft cassettes to us and we'll send you back CPC 464 green screen VDU (GT64) the same Amsoft proHere are the others. grams on Amsoft disc for just .95 The CPC 464 comes complete with per cassette, the price of a blank disc. ONE GREAT IDEA AFTER ANOTHER its own colour monitor or green BOOTS COMET Currys Dixons screen VDU and built-in cassette data recorder. (Optional disc drives Greens John Menzies RU BELOWS spectrum are now available with CP/M* and AND OTHER DR. LOGO* supplied as standard.) WHSMITH WIGFALLS WOOLWORTH COMPUTER It has a typewriter-style keyboard STORES and numeric keypad. 64K of RAM, *CP/M and DR LOGO are Trade Marks of Digital Research 32K of ROM and a very fast extended I'd like to know more about the exciting CPC 464 complete computer system. BASIC with real time features. Please send me literature right away. NAME And it costs a great deal less than ADDRESS the price of a comparable system. The CPC 464 can handle the trickPOSTCODE iest computer games (if you can), To: Amstrad Consumer Electronics PLC, Brentwood House, 169 King's Road, Brentwood, Essex CM14 4EE PRICES CORRECT AT TIME OF GOING TO PRESS. NOT ALL STORES STOCK ALL PRODUCTS. | CVG 5/85. NOTRAWERANSSF MEMBERSHIP CONDITIONS FOR TERMS OF USE STRAN "


"MSX AMSTRAD-SPECTRUM ELECTRON: BBC MySQUIU Rensen BEMARE CHRYSALIS... Super smooth full colour classic arcade action. BBC....95 Electron....95 MSX....95 Spectrum....95 BUGFRANKENSTEIN 2000. Multi-screen fantasy micro voyage through monsters body. BBC....95 MSX....95 Spectrum....95 Amstrad....95 SK SPECTRUM CONTRAPTION.. Zany Hi-res all action arcade extravaganza Electron....95 MSX....95 Spectrum....95 CAVEMAN CAPERS Addictive smooth scrolling fast action arcade fun. Electron....95 MSX....95 Spectrum....95 BBC....95 BBC....95 Available from most major stockists, all good computer shops or direct from us. To order direct from us: Send cheque or P.O. payable to ICON or quote your Access No. VAT Incl ICON Tel: (091) 2846966 SOFTWARE 65 HIGH STREET, GOSFORTH, TYNE & WEAR, NE3 4AA. NEW "


"************ CAN YOU BEAT SUPER BRIAN * JACKS? hallenges ***.2333 important thing SPECTRUM So you fancy yourself as a sporting superstar do you? Well now Computer & Video Games has teamed up with Martech and Rucanor Sporting Goods to make sure you really look the part when you play at your favourite sport. We're offering a complete set of sports gear to the top prize winner in our terrific Brian Jacks Superstar Challenge competition! Martech are releasing a new sports simulation based around the exploits of Brian Jacks, Olympics judo ace and star of many a TV Superstars programme. You could own a Rucanor sports kit, suitable for your favourite sport, just like the gear Brian wears when he's throwing people around in the gym or going for yet another record for arm-dips on TV! The Brian Jacks Superstar Challenge will be available for the Spectrum, CBM 64, BBC, Electron and Amstrad. Ten copies of each version of the game will go to the best ten runners-up who own these machines. All you have to do is answer the five questions about Brian below, fill in the coupon and rush it to Computer & Video Games, Superstar Competition Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, THE GAME C&VG/MARTECH BRIAN JACKS London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is Martech's new game features eight SUPERSTAR COMPETITION April 16th. Normal C&VG comJobs of Brian Jacks' favourite Superstar My answers are: petition rules apply. The editor's events. These are arm-dips, squatl 1 decision is final and no corresthrusts, canoeing, cycling, football, pondence will be entered into. swimming, archery and the 100 2 ... So what are you waiting for! metres. Each involves a new ABOUT BRIAN JACKS challenge to your computer sport Brian Jacks has been British Tudo skills. You'll need fast reactions andl 4 Champion an amazing 11 times and plenty of stamina to beat Brian at hisl Open Champion five times. He has own game! Reckon you are up to it won Olympic and European medals Then enter our competition today! Then enter our competition today! Name:.... for his sport. He was the youngest THE QUESTIONS Address: sixth Dan in this country and has 1. What grade does Brian Jacks captained the British International hold in Judo? Judo team on several occasions. He 2. What is Brian Jacks' World Tol. Tel:..... became British and European Superrecord for arm-dips on the parallel stars Champion in 1979 and 1980 bars in one minute? If I win the top prize, I would like following BBC TV's popular sports 3. How many times has Brian repre Rucanor sports gear suitable for (tick challenge. sented Britain in the Olympic box): He now regularly appears on Games? Athletics | Judo o Football a children's TV shows, writes for 4. Brian has appeared regularly on Computer I own (tick box) magazines, and performs many fund TV over the last few years. Name Spectrum C64 BBC O raising activities, as well as training three programmes in which he has Electron D Amstrad D young would-be judo Superstars. He appeared. My favourite sport is: . is a true sporting Superstar! 5. What is Brian's favourite fruit? "


"NV. GAME OF ? THE  MONTH Sgch 118 Tom Sato, the man behind the MSX supplement in our December issue, has turned his hand to programming the BBC computer and has come up with some pretty amazin' results. Smarty Berty is Tom's adaptation of the successful arcade game Q*Bert. Tom's game differs from the original in that, instead of having the same shape to jump across a pyramid in Q/bert's case, the program presents an ever varying selection of different shapes which you must cross changing the colour of the squares. Bonus points can also be scored by picking up objects. 10DIM IX<5), JK5), K%4), H%C3) ,S$( 3 ),W% 130, R%C3),0% 3), U%C4), U$(4) 20*K.10 OLD MMRUNAM 300N ERROR GOT070 40*TV255 5OMODE2 60PROCINIT: GOT080 7PROCXX 80PROCST 90X%=576: Y%=580 100Z$=INKEY$( 10 ) 110*FX15,1 120IF Z$=\"\" THEN250 130MOVEX%, Y%: PRINTAS : SOUND1, 1, 100.3 140IF Z$=\"/\" X%=X%-D% Y%=Y%-D% 150IF Z$=\"Z\" X%=X%+D%Y%=Y%-D% 160IF Z$=\"A\" X%=X%-D% Y%=Y%+D% 170IF Z$=\",\" X%=X%+D%: Y%=Y%+D% 180P%=POINT(X%+4,Y%-32> 190MOVEX%Y%: PRINTD$ 200G%=C(D%*(CY MOD128 X>0 ) )+X% > DIV 128+1+(Y% DIV D%-1)*9: IFW% ?G%< >OPROCM 210IFP%=@THEN IF FNDC) THEN70 220S%=S%-(P%=7): T%=T%-(P%=7) 230VDU4 PRINTTABC 6,1); T%\"0\":VD U5 240IFS%=F%PROCLP 250IF H%C1 >ANDRNDC a%)=1 PROCSC 1 ,K% 1 >> 2601F H%C2 ANDRNDC%)=1PROCSC 2 K%C2 >> 270IF H%(3 ANDRND(%)=1PROCSC 3 K%C3) 280IF H%( 1 ) AND 1%( 1 )=X% AND Y %=J%(1) THEN IF FNDC 1 ) THEN70 290IF H%(2) AND 1%( 2 )=X% AND Y %=J%(2) THEN IF FND( 2 ) THEN70 300IF H%(3) AND I%( 3 )=X% AND Y %=J%(3) THEN IF FND( 3 ) THEN70 3101F C240 THENCK=C2-1 IF6%=0 THENPROCSICM%) 320IFT%>9% PROCXB 330GOT0100 340DEFPROCS(B%, N%) 350ON N% GOSUB380, 390,400 360SOUNDN%, 1, 120+N%*25,2 370ENDPROC 380PROCSAC B%, N%); RETURN 390PROCSBCB%, N%): RETURN 400PROCSCCB%, N%): RETURN 410DEFPROCSAC B%,N%): MOVEIXB%) J%B%): PRINTS$(NZ): J%B%)=JXB% >-64 420IFRND( 2 >=1 THENA%=-DXELSEA%= D% 430IFPOINT(IXCB%)+32+A%, JXCB%) -32 )=0 THEN470 4401%<B%)=I%B%)+A% 450MOVEIX(B%), J%C3%): PRINTS$(N 460ENDPROC 470IFJXB%)=68THENIX<B%)=640 %B%)=900: GOTO450 ELSE A%=-A%:GO T0440 480DEFPROCSBB%,N%): IF RND( 2 )= 1 PROCSCCB%, N%): ENDPROC 490PROCSAC B%, N%): ENDPROC 500DEFPROCSCCB%,N% 34 "


"RUNS ON A BBC RUNS ON A BBC SMARTY BERTY BY TOM SATO 510IF X%=I%B%) OR Y%=JXB%) P ROCSAC B%, N%): ENDPROC 520A%=D%*(CI%B%>>X%)-(IXCB%X X%)):Q%3D%*((J% B%>>Y%)J% B%X Y%)) 530IF POINTCI%CB%)+32+A%, JXCB% »-32+0%)=0 PROCSAC B%, N%):ENDPROC 540MOVEIXB%), J%C3%): PRINTS$CN 780DEFPROCXB9%=9%+1000: SOUND3 ,5,100,30: IFV%=5 T%=T%+50+9%/100 ENDPROC 790V%=V%+1 : PROCFL ENDPROC 800DEFPROCINIT 810VDU23, 224,1,3,7,15,31,63,12 7,255 820VDU23,225,255, 127,63,31,15) 7.3,1 830VDU23,226, 128, 192,224,240,2 48, 252, 254, 255 840VDU23, 227,255,254,252, 248,2 40, 224, 192, 128 850VDU23, 228,0,0,0,0,0,0,54,73 860VDU23, 229, 137, 137, 137, 157,9 8, 126, 36, 198 87VDU23, 230,0,0,0,0,0,0,0.52 880VDU23, 231, 100,64,64,64, 28,0 550IXBZ)=I%B%)+A%: JXBX)=JZC B%)+Q% 560MOVEIXB%), JXCB%): PRINTS$(N %) 570ENDPROC 580DEFPROCM 0% 1 )=0%(2): 0% 2 )= 0%(3):O%( 3 )=WZ?G%+241 590IF R%(1)=0%(1) AND R%(2)=0% (2) AND R%( 3 )=0%(3) THEN T%=T%+ R%(1)-239 )*(R%C2)-239 )*(R%C3)-23 9): SOUND3, 5, 100, 10 ELSE T%=T%+W% 7G%: SOUND1,4, 100.5 600VDU4 : COLOUR7: COLOUR132 PRIN TTABC 10,2)CHR$0% 1 CHR$OX 2 CHR$ 0%C3: COLOUR3: COLOUR128 : VDUS 610W%?G%=0: ENDPROC 620DEFPROCLP:LX=L%+1 : PROCPYCL% >: PROCFL PROCSIC1 ):X%=576: Y%=580 MOVEX%,Y% PRINTD$ : PROCMU ENDPRO 890VDU23, 232,18,54,54,34,0,0,0 900VDU23, 233,0.56, 76, 190, 190,2 54,124,0 91VDU23, 234,0.0.48.64.64.0.0, 920VDU23,235,0,0,68,40,0,40,68 93VDU23, 236,0,0.16,56,56,16,0 630DEFPROCSICA%):M%EA%I%CA%)= 640J%CA%)=900: MOVEI%CA%), J%CA%) 640PRINTS$(K%CA%)):H%CA%)=TRUE M%=M%+1 :IF K%CM%)=0 C%=0 ENDPRO 650IF A%=1 C%=d% %( 2 )=FALSE:H %( 3 )=FALSE 660IF A%=2 C%=d%H%( 3 )=FALSE 670IF A%=3 C%=0 680ENDPROC 690DEFFNDCWZ): MOVEX%Y%: PRINTF $: PROCDEC 50 ): MOVEX%Y% PRINTGS:P ROCDE(50): MOVEX%Y% PRINTH$PROC DE( 50 ): MOVEX%Y% PRINTAS: PROCDE 50 ) 700IF W%=0 MOVEX%Y%: PRINTE$ 710IF H%( 1 ) AND W%<>1 MOVEI%1 ), JK(1): PRINTS$(K%( 1 ) ) 7201F H%(2) AND WX< >2 MOVEIX 2 >, J%C2): PRINTS$(K%2>> 730IF HX3) AND WX< >3 MOVEI%3 >, JX3): PRINTS$CK%3)) 740PROCFRUITY 75 PROCSI(1) 760IF V%=0 THEN : =TRUE 779=FALSE 94OVDU23, 237,0,56, 124, 84, 124,6 8.56,0 95VDU23,238,254,252, 248, 252,2 54, 255, 206, 132 960VDU23, 239, 127, 63, 31,63,127 255, 115,33 97VDU23, 240, 132, 206, 255, 254,2 52, 248, 252, 254 98%VDU23, 241, 33, 115, 255, 127,63 , 31.63, 127 990VDU23, 242,8,8,8,28,119,28,8 ,8 100%VDU23,243,0,28,8,73, 119,73, 8,28 101VDU23, 244,0,20,20,20,54,54, 119,0 1020VDU23, 245,0,20,54,119,9, 119. 54,20 103VDU23, 246,0,8,28,28,62,62,1 27.8 1940VDU23, 247,0.99, 103,40:20.10 : 115.99 105@VDU23,248,0,8,28,20,54, 34, 1 19.62 1060VDU23, 249,0.38,73, 84,42,21, 73,50 35 "


"1320COLOUR2: PRINTTABCO, 1 \"Score 1070A$=CHR$ 18+CHR$0+CHR$1+CHR$2 24+CHR%25E+CHE$18+CHE%8+CH +CH R$225+CHR$227 1080B$=CHR$18+CHR$+CHR$4+CHR$2 24+CHE%25E+CHE$18+CHE%8+CHEER+CH R$225+CHR$227+CHR$18+CHR$3+CHR$3 +CHR$8+CHR$8+CHR$226+CHR$18+CHR$ 3+CHR$2+CHR$224+CHR$ 18+CHR$3+CHR $3+CHE$18+HR%8+ H265+TH%225+CH R$ 18+CHR$3+CHR$2+CHR$227+CHR$11+ CHR$11 1090C$=CHR$ 18+CHR$O+CHR$3+CHR$2 Z3+CHE%8+CHE1CHE%223+CHRk5+ H. R$ 11+CHR$ 18+CHR$O+CHR$1+CHR$230+ CHR$8+CHR$10+CHR$231+CHR$8+CHR$1 8+CHR$O+CHR$4+CHR$232 1100D$=A$+CHR$25+CHR$O+CHR$169+ CHR$255+CHR$48+CHR$0+C$ 111@E$=CHR$ 18+CHR$0+CHR$O+CHR$2 34+CHE%225+CHE$13+CHES8+[HES8+CH R$225+CHR$227 1120F$=A$+CHR$10+CHR$25+CHR$O+C HR$160+CHR$255+CHR$48+CHR$+CHR$ 18+CHR$0+CHR$6+CHR$237 1130G$=A$+CHR$10+CHR$25+CHR$O+C HR$160+CHR$255+CHR$48+CHR$O+CHR$ 18+CHR$O+CHR$7+CHR$236 1140H$=A$+CHR$10+CHR$25+CHR$0+C HR$160+CHR$255+CHR$48+CHR$0+CHR$ 18+CHR$0+CHR$3+CHR$235 1150VDU19,14,3,0,0,0, 1160VDU19,11,3,0,0,0, 1170VDU19, 13.6.0.0.0 1180VDU19.8.6.0.0.0, 1190VDU19,15,7,0,0,0, 1200VDU19, 10, 7,0,0,0, 1210S$( 1 )=CHR$25+CHR$6+CHR$32+C HR$+CHR$246+CHR$255+CHR$18+CHR$ 3+CHR$18+CHRs233+CHR58+CHR18+CH R$3+CHR$8+CHR$234 1220S$(2)=CHR$25+CHR$6+CHR$32+C HR$+CHR$246+CHR$255+CHR$18+CHR$ 3+CHR$9+CHR$233+CHR$8+CHR$18+CHR $3+CHR$8+CHR$234 1230S$(3)=CHR$25+CHR$0+CHR$32+C HR$0+CHR$246+CHR$255+CHR$18+CHR$ 3+CHR511+CHR5233+CHE%8+CHR818+CH R$3+CHR$8+CHR$234 1240PROCXI 1250ENDPROC 1260DEFPROCST:CLS: PROCTT: T%0:S %=0:V%=6:D%=64:9%=1000 1270L%=GET-48: IF L%<=0 OR L%>=1 @ THEN 1270 1280PROCPYCL%): PROCFRUITY: PROCS I(1): PROCMU: ENDPROC 1290DEFPROCPYCA): A=A*2-1.CLS:VD U4 1300COLOURS: PRINTTAB0,0%\"Level 1330COLOUR3: PRINT; T%\"0\"TABC0,2) \"Match\"; 1340F%-15%=0: VDUS 135FOR X=A TO A+11 1360Z=X MOD 9 1370IF (CX DIV 9) MOD 2)=1 THEN Z=9-Z 1380MOVE640-64*Z.960-64*(X-A+1 ) 1390FORI=1 TOZ: PRINTB$; :F%EF%+1 1400NEXT: NEXT 1410PROCSHA 1420VDU4: COLOUR7: COLOUR132: PRIN TTABC 6,2 CHR$R%C1 CHR$R%C2 CHR$R %(3): COLOUR128: PRINTTAB(9,27\" \": COLOUR3: COLOUR128 : VDU5 1430A=L% RESTORE 1500 1440IF A>10 A=4+CCA-10) MOD 6) 145FORX=1 TOA: READ K%1), K%2), K%C3): NEXT 1460A=L% DIV10: RESTORE1500 1470IF A>10 A=4+CCA-10 > MOD 6) 1480FORX=1 TOA: READ c b%, a%: NEX Ta%=5-a%:b%=5-b% c%=5-c%d%=a * b%*c%/2 1496ENDPROC 1500DATA1,1,0,1,2,0,1,1.1.1.1.2 2,1,1,1,2,2,1,2,3,2,2,3,2,3,3,3 13,3 151@DEFPROCFRUITY:V%=V%-1 : PROCF 1520x7=576:7%=580: MOVEX%,Y%: PRI NTDS ENDPROC 1530DEFPROCFL 1540*FX15,1 1550VDU4 156@PRINTTAB( 13.0\" \"TABC 131\" 157OVDUS 1580IFV%=1ENDPROC 1590FORX=1 TOV%-1: MOVE800+80*X,1 020 PRINTCS : NEXT 1600ENDPROC 1610DEF PROCSHA: DT%=0: DN%=0:0%( 1 >=00% 2 )=0.0% 3)=0: GCOLO, 7 1620FORI=OTO130 :WZ?I=0: NEXT 1630IFLXK11 THEN1650 1640FORI=1 T019: AS%=RND( 8 ): PROCO S: NEXT : ENDPROC 1650H%=1 : RESTORE1720 166REPEAT 167READ AS% 1680IF AS%=-1 H%=H%+1 GOTO1670 1690IFL%=H%PROCOS 170OUNTIL H%=L%+1 1719ENDPROC 1720DATA1,1,1,2,-1,1,1,2,3,-1.1 ,2,2,3,-1,1,2,3,4,-1,2,2,3,4,5,1,2,3,4,5,5,-1,3,4,5,5,5,6,-1.3, 4,5,6,7,8,-1,4,5,6,7,8,1,2,-1,5, 6,7,8,1,1,1,1,-1 1310COLOUR6: PRINT:L% 36 "


"Ho per rendes Rat race VERIS Yeh, it's me, your favourite Superstar, in my first supa-game! I'll need all your help to find my furry friends in the nasty Rodent World where all kinds of monster meanies live. Hurry now and I'll see you on your screen, from your cuddly, adorable me, Roland Rat, Superstar, SPECTRUM48k COMMODORE 64 NEU 6.90 ocean 290 Ocean House 6 Central Street Manchester M2 SNS Telephone 061832 6633 Telex 669977 Der Sweatromected trands of WOOLIVORTH HSMITH C L ASKYS Rumbelows COMET Spectrum Show all good wwe Trade en weko "


"Big Five Software and U.S.Gold proudly present the sequel to the world's most popular arcade game. Bounty Bob returns in this new and exciting follow-up adventure to Miner 2049er. This time around it's even tougher than before and Bob needs your help more than ever to guide him through the mines. The mutant organisms have multiplied and over-run the mine entirely, making it extremely difficult to survive the hazards of the underground passageways! Using the high-powered special equipment is Bob's only hope of achieving his objective of securing the mine and defeating the plans of the evil Yukon Yohan! Bounty Bob Strikes Back features 25 of the greatest platform screens ever produced including: Grain Elevators, Super Energy Food Bars, Gravity Lifts, Acid Rain. Suction Tubes, Hydraulic Lifts, Mobile Suction Units, Transporters, Cannons, Utility Hoists, Pulverisers, Moving Welrdos, Mutant Organisms, Theats, the greatest High Score Factory in computer history and much, much more! Special features include: Multi-Channel Music, Game Adjustment Screen Automatic Demo Mode, TWO-Player Mode with dunt joystick capability, Level Warp ability. Available for Atari and Commodore Coming soon on Amstrad, BBC and Spectrum LIIT This is what they said about Miner 2049er.. When I saw the result Miner 2049er-I said at me take it to everybody in the world. The response has been amazing. We collected the biggest advance orders ever Barty FriedmanInternational Computer Group USA \"Miner 2049er emerged as the unequalled popular choice among Arkle (like Oscars) voters. Going strictly by the popular vote it would have, or come close to, copping no fewer than three \"Game of the Year Arcade Awards. \"The Arcade Awards Judging Committee having heard the voice of the gaming nation, recommended that a new award be created this year and given to Miner 2049er. If therefore gives us great pleasure to announce the institution of the 1984 Grand Arcade Award for the Best Electronic Game of the Year Editors of Electronic Games \"Last year Miner 2049er won a landslide victory as Electronic Game or the Year. Now this delightful multi-screen climbing and jumping game has ascended the next rung on the ladder of fame in the same high style by coasting to a triumph in the Hall of Fame voting. Miner 2049er has historical significance as well as intrinsic value. It was the first electronic game designed for the home market which could be played on almost every videogame and computer system. The multipublisher licensing made Miner the first home game to acquire a hobby-wide reputation on a par with leading games found in the family amusement centres. Bounty Pub Lives! Electronic Gates Hall of Fame Bounty Bob will leave then speechless! *** U.S. Gold is available from alleading computer stores, and selected branches of: BOOTS-W.H.SMITH. JOHN MENZIES WOOLWORTH-WILDINGS Dealers! For information on how to become a U.S. Gold Stockist contact Centresoft, Lightning. Microdealer, Tiger and other leading distributors or write to U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Estate, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. Telex: 337268. LD can Softw Tiware "


"BOUNTY BOB STRASSBACK! Yukon Yohon STARRING BOUNTY BOB. BIGFIVE SOFTWARE "


"Could YOU bea Software Star? SOFTWARE STAR SOFTWARE In SOFTWARE STAR you take control of a software company and aim to take it along the precarious path to success. On the way you meet with staff problems, decisions regarding advertising, expenditure, finance and game launches, but your business awareness together with a few gambles paying 7 off will make you a SOFTWARE STAR. \"It carries the Kevin Toms hallmarks of attention to detail and carefully tuned difficulty\" Popular Computing Weekly, February 1985 \"The game can be incredibly subtle\" Pot of the Week Popular Computing Wooky, February 1985 Available... Spectrum 48K .95... Commodore 64 .95... Amstrad CPC 64 .95. Software Star is a strategy game not a graphical game ALSO AVAILABLE STRINGER FOOTBALL MANAGERThe All Time Classic Stringer is an arcade adventure game in which Available... Spectrum 48K .95.. you are a press photographer set the task of Commodore 64 .95... Amstrad CPC 84 snatching a shot of a Film Star in an hotel. The .95...BBC 'B' .95 .. Electron .95.. game is fantaisingly playable, graphically Oric-1/Almos 67.95... Dragon C5.95... Vic 20 excellent and, of course-Addictivel 25.95...ZX 81 CS 95 Available... Commodore 64 .95 ddictive To: Addictive Games Lid, 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth, Dorset BH2 6HE When you openan Addictive Game, there's a new world of discovery waiting for you. cassette(s) of Software Star for .............................. (computer) cassette(s) of Stringer for .. .. ...............(computer) cassette(s) of Football Manager for (computer) lenclose cheque/postal order for ... Please debit my Access card No.. Delete as applicable Name Address Postcode.. Tel: Accessorders can be telephoned through on (0202) 296404 Addictive Games 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth BH2 6HE Telephone: 0202 296404. "


"1730 1740DEFPROCOS 1750AXXERND(8): AY%=RND( 11 ) 1760IF POINT( 64+AX%*128+64*C CAY % MOD 2 )=0), 58+AY%*64 )=0 OR WZ?( AX%+AY%*9X ORCAX%=5 AND AY%=8 > THEN1750 1770MOVE32+AX%*128+64*(CAY% MOD 2)=0), 58+AY%#64: PRINTCHR$( 241 +A 1780WZ?(AX%+AY%*9)=AS% 1790IFDT%C3THENDT%=D1%+1 : RDT% >=AS%+241 1800ENDPROC 1810 1820DEFPROCXI : RESTORE1830 FORI= OT04: READUXI), U$CI >: NEXT ENDPRO 1830DATA2000, ALPHA, 1500, BETA, 10 00, GAMMA, 500, DELTA, 100, EPSILON 1840DEFPROCXX CLS: VDUS GCOLO, 2: FORI=1T09: MOVE50, 1052-I*96: PLOT1 , 1200,9: MOVE50, 1944-I*96 : PLOT1,1 2009: NEXT 1850I=-1 : REPEAT: I = I +1 UNTILI=4 OR T%UXI) 1860IFUX4 >>T% THENA%=TRUE GOTO 1920 ELSEA%=FALSE 1870IF I=4 THEN1910 1880FOR A=3 TO 1-1 STEP-1 IF A= -1 THEN1900 1890UXCA+1 )=UKA): U$CA+1)=U$CA) 1900NEXT 1910UW ID=T%: U$( I )=\"\" 1920MOVE250, 810: GCOLO, 1 PRINT\"S MARTY BERTY\" : MOVE258,818 GCOLO, 3 :PRINT \"SMARTY BERTY\" 1930FORA=1 TO3STEP2 : FORX=0T04: GC OLO, A : MOVE110+A*3,619-X*96+A*3:P RINT; X+1;\" \"UXCX)\"0\":MOVE720+A* 3.610-X*96+A*3: PRINTU$(X): NEXT:N EXT 1940GCOLO, 2 1950IFAZ THEN1990 1960MOVE100,150 : PRINT\"InPut you. rname\" 1970MOVE 109.89 : INPUTS: IF LENCn $ >>8 n$=LEFT$ n$,8 1980U$( I )=n$: T%=0 1990MOVE300.59: PRINT \"Press a ke y\": A=GET: ENDPROC 2000DEFPROCDE(X): T=TIME REPEAT: UNTILTIME=T+X: ENDPROC 2010 2020DEFPROCTT:VDUS GCOLO,2 2030FORI=1T06 MOVE200, 1052-I*96 PLOT1,880,0: MOVE200, 1044-I*96 :P LOT1.880.0: NEXT 2040MOVE250,900: GCOLO, 1: PRINTS MARTY BERTY\" 2050MOVE570, 710: PRINT \"by\" 2060MOVE400,514 : PRINT\"T . Sato\" 2070MOVE258,908 GCOLO, 3: PRINTS MARTY BERTY\" 2080MOVE578,718 : PRINT\" by\" 2090MOVE408,522:PRINT\"T . Sato\" 2100MOVE580,350 : PRINTB$ : MOVE610 , 375: PRINTC$ 211@VDU4 2120COLOUR7: COLOUR132: PRINTTABC 4:21 >\"A\"TABC 15,21 >\"*\"TABC 8, 26/\"Z \"TABC 11,26)\"/\" 2130COLOUR2: COLOUR128: PRINTTABC 5,22 >CHR$238TABC 14,22 )CHR$239TAB (7,25 CHR$241 TABC 12,25 >CHR$240 2140COLOURS: PRINTTABC 3, 29)\"Inpu t level 1-9\" 2150ENDPROC 2160DEFPROCMU 217@ENVELOPE1,1,3,2,-2,6,6,6,10 0.0.0,-5,190,0 2180ENVELOPE3,4,0,0,0,0,0,0, 126 ,-5,-3,-1, 126, 110 2190ENVELOPE4,3,-32,-14,-49,75, 63,73,9,5, -8,-4,126, 126 2200ENVELOPES, 3,27.7.43, 67, 74,2 16,10,1,0, -5,126, 126 22100N RND(4) GOTO2220.2230,224 0, 2250 222RESTORE2330 GOT02260 2230RESTORE2340: GOTO2260 224RESTORE2350 GOT02269 225RESTORE2360 226REPEAT: READ AZ 2270IFA%=9THEN2290 2280SOUND1,3,A%, 4: SOUND2,3,A%3 SOUND2,0,2%, 1: SOUND3, 3, A%+1.3: S OUND3.0, A2,1 229@UNTIL A%=0 2300PROCDE( 57 ) 2310*FX15,0 2320ENDPROC 2330DATA 101,109,101,109,101,10 9,101,109,117,121,117,121,117,12 1,117,121, 129, 137, 129, 137, 129,13 7. 129, 137, 149, 149, 145, 129, 149,0 2340DATA 101, 149, 101, 149, 101.14 9, 145, 109, 145, 109, 145, 109, 117, 13 7,117,137,117,137, 129, 121, 117, 10 9, 101, 149, 101,0 2350DATA 101,117,129,117,109,12 1,137, 121, 101, 117, 129, 117, 101,0 2360DATA 149, 101, 149, 101, 149, 10 1,109, 145, 109, 145, 109, 145, 117, 13 7, 117, 137, 117, 137, 149, 149, 145, 13 7, 129, 149, 101,0 237REM SMARTY BERTY 2380REM (C) T. SATO 1983 41 "


"Minder Available across a range of micro computers. ktronICS THAMES The aames name Minder is a Euston Films Production for THAMES TELEVISION  Created by Leon Griffiths. Produced by Lloyd Shirley and George Taylor "


"PROFESSOR VIDEOS PYJAMARAMA Welcome to the workshop! Hundreds of you  The shields on the lowest level can only be rushed to Richard Napier's aid after last reached by knocking down the teachers and issue's Pyjamarama hints. Richard couldn't bouncing a pellet from the catapult off their work out the final stages of the game. But heads! Please don't attempt this in real life ... now, with your help, he should be well on the way to waking Wally up! AIRWOLF D. Messenger, C. Smith and M. Trinder from Enysham, Oxfordshire have been zapping around The Prof had to choose just one person from the in Airwolf. many Pyjamarama maniacs out there for the . Obstacle 1 (Screen 2 \"wall\"): Don't try to shoot purposes of the workshop and he is Rupert the top row of bricks. Shoot the three rows below. Hinds of Lower Sunbury, Middlesex. . Obstacle 2 (Screen 3 \"wall\"): Position your Rupert says that, in order to de-activate the Airwoll with its nose facing out of the screen magnetic lock, you must first get the magnet before you start firing. You need to remove three which can be found in the chest under the kitchen rows of bricks. table.  Obstacle 3 (Screen 6 \"rays\"): Enter screen six . Get the driving licence from the first room you and hover between the two rays. As soon as the enter on level one. Then go out onto the roof via one on the right has fired once, go diagonally the room with a pyramid of tea chests. Walk right down to the right to enter screen five. until you pick up the ignition key.  Obstacle 4 (Screen 5 \"red box\"): When you  Go to level four and slide down the bannistersenter screen five, you will think that you have to by grabbing a rope. This will exchange the key go into the small cave to shoot the small red boxfor a crash helmet. DON'T! . With the crash helmet and the library book go . Obstacle 5 (Screen 6 \"rays'): Re-enter screen to the library on level two (just before the lift six diagonally upwards. Go straight past the room) and jump onto the table. You can now walk second ray and enter screen seven. across the table and pick up the scissors.  Obstacle 6 (Screen 7 \"lasers'): As soon as you . Go to level four and get the conveyor belt enter screen seven, go diagonally past the first controller. You should now have the scissors and laser and wait for the second laser to light up. the controller, OK? . Obstacle 7 (Screens 8 and 10 \"cannons'): Enter  Enter the room with the HELP button and turn screen 10 and hover near to the left side of the the HELP button ON. cannon until it lowers its barrel toward you. Make  Now, as quickly as possible, take the lift from sure it is shooting to the left before you move over level four to level three. Enter the room with the it. Once you are clear of the first cannon, go plants and fall through the hole in the floor. straight past the second cannon and hover at the . You should now be standing next to a balloon. bottom of the screen and shoot the red box. Go Walk towards it and you will be taken up a series back up to screen seven and then straight back of ledges. Move along these until you can jump down to screen 10. onto a tea chest, which has been activated by the  Obstacle 8 (Screen 10 the hardest!): Shoot HELP button. Jump from the chest and you will be away the wall below the laser and get ready to go able to collect the chest key. Go to the kitchen on down. Hover near the centre of the screen with level two and walk past the chest. You should now the cannon firing upwards. have the magnet. . Obstacle 9 (Screens 12 \"rays, laser and red  Take the magnet with a full can of fuel, as box'): Go down until you are between two rays explained by Richard last issue and go to the wait until the second one stops firing then moon on the rocket. continue down. Shoot the red box and hover until . When you arrive on the moon, walk to the door the second ray stops again. Go up until you reach on the far right. Enter and switch off the magnetic the laser, hover close to it and wait until it has lock by jumping towards the button. Now, with fired three times before moving up. the lock switched off, collect the clock key and . Obstacle 10 (Screen 9 \"laser'): Go back past return home. the two cannons in the same way as before. Wait  Go to level four and enter the bedroom with the until the laser goes out and enter screen eight. alarm clock in. Walk to the alarm clock and ... . Obstacle 11 (Screen 8 \"robot wall\"): Wait in the YOU'VE DONE IT! entrance of screen eight until the \"robot\" fires. Thanks Rupert! Quickly go to the other side of the room and fire away two bricks. Go back to the entrance. You SKOOL DAZE must remove eight bricks from the four rows nearest on the left. David Leak from Chasetown, Staffordshire has  Obstacle 12: Pass the laser, wait until the flying been doing his homework on Skool Daze. saucer has passed and then go into the space  To collect all the shields on the top floor, above the saucer's range. Go to the right and simply jump at them while the teachers are while firing move left. Before you do this, remove looking elsewhere. the two layers of bricks you can blast from your  All the shields on the second level can be starting position. You must then go down to hover reached by knocking down your fellow pupils near the bottom of the screen. When you have and jumping onto them to get the extra height to done this, you must collect the scientist. reach them. It's up to you to find your way out! GAMES WORKSHOP 43 "


"MOUNT CHALLENGE SURVIVE THE JOB JUNGLE! I PRACTICAL GUIDE TO SURVIS DREBBINGIE The story so far: 48K SPECTRUM Earth, 1987. A strange protrusion emerges from shark infested waters amidst a group of islands in the South Pacific. Nobody has yet reached this object, which is possessed by an evil force and guarded by deadly plants, murals, pigmen, chasing ghouls and yellow horned demons. Prof. Burk arrives on the scene, resplendent in his newly invented space suit and jet pack able to withstand the forces emanating from the green and red blocks which cover the Mount. He intends to be first to the summit. Woefully the jet pack cannot withstand all of the effects of the coloured blocks and therefore great care has to be taken when jumping from block to block, so as to ensure correct coordination of the ENERGY LEVEL (On/Off) with the coloured block being stood on. Ignoring all advice against attempting his objective, the fearless mountaineer states, \"people risked their lives to conquer Mount Everest, why not this challenge? Your mission is to help guide the determined Prof. Burk to the top of Mount Challenge (you'll need to draw a rough map as you go along). Good luck! Extra info: 100% Machine Code 89 Screens Keyboard OR Kempston Joystick Available from: Aasvoguelle Productions (B). Blakemoor. Marshbrook, Nr. Church Stretton, Shropshire SY6 6QA. Tel: (069 46) 345 Cheques/P.O.'s for .95 PS: The first 1,000 tapes sold will receive a FREE GAME on the B-side. Written by the same author. Take on three aliens at dominoes and try and get to the final of 'Point-a-Spot'. INCLUDES THE COMPLETE A—Z OF JOBS Choosing the right job Writing application letters Setting up your own business College courses and further education How to handle job interviews Plus the complete A-Z of jobs Available from all good bookshops from May Oh or write to EMAP Books. Bushfield House, Orton Centre, Peterborough, PE2 OUW, enclosing cheque or postal order made payable to EMAP Books for .50 per copy (post free UK & Eire only, others add 55p) A practical guide to jobs from the makers of Just Seventeen OUT NOW ISBN No.1 8506 004 6 WE'RE SERIOUS ABOUT GAMES At the VIRGIN GAMES CENTRES, we've worked long and hard to put together the UK'S BIGGEST RANGE of COMPUTER SOFTWARE GAMES. We've got an unrivalled selection of... Arcade Games, Adventure Games, War Games, Classic Games, Family Games, Sports Games, Business and Educational Software. For Spectrum, QL, Atari, BBC, Electron, Commodore 64, Commodore C16, Enterprise, MSX and Amstrad machines. Plus a large stock of utilities, peripherals, chess computers, books and magazines -and a range of Sinclair, Commodore and Amstrad hardware. And if you find choosing software hard, we have a team of knowledgeable staff to help you. GAMES CENTRE 172 Union Street, Aberdeen. 94/96 Briggate. Leeds. 22 Oxford Street, London W1 "


"A Tony Crowther/Quicksilva Production GRYPHON RAPINOU. 00000600 0000 3.Disk .95 Available exclusively from QUICKSILVA COMMODO COOOOOO in association with The Wizard Development Company Ltd. assette .95 Actual screen shots  Quicksilva Mail Order, P.O.Box 6, Wimbome, Dorset BA21 7PY. Telephone (0202) 891744. "


"THE SMASH HIT COMPUTERGAMES PACK GREAT HIT GAMES ALL GAMES FAST LOAD SPECTRUM 48K COMMODORE 64  3D STARSTRIKE Realtime Software BLUE THUNDER Emel SON OF BLAGGER Aligata AUTOMANIA Mikro Geni BUGA-BOO Quicksilva!   PSYTRON Beyond WHEELIE Microghere FALL GUY Elite BLADE ALLEY PSS PENETRATOR Melbourne Mousel    TALES OF THE SUPER PIPELINE Taska Lid ARABIAN NIGHTS reto Meros TROLLIE WALLIE Interceptor Micros POSTER PASTER (Tankset Lad AUTOMANIA Mikro Gent FLIGHT PATH 737 Antrag GHOULS Micropower PSYTRON Beyond BOOGA-BOO (Quicksilva) SON OF BLAGGER Aligata) BEAU-JOLLY) AVAILABLE AT: WH SMITH BOOTS MENZIES FW WOOLWORTH GREENS RUMBELOWS LASKY'S CURRY'S H.M.V. ASDA TESCO GRANADA CO-OP TIGER DEALERS AND ALL GOOD COMPUTER SHOPS "


"GET YOUR HANDS ON A... RISDEUL CBM 64 CBM 64 AZTEC TOMB CBM 64 SON OF REVISITED HAUNTEA CBM HOUSE (DISK EAGLE BLAGGER LOCO EMPIRE CBM BBc BBC GUARDIAN UNCLE TARZAN BBC BBC 3D SPACE CLAUDIN GROWING PAINS RAIDERS BUGBLASTER NV E GAMES I CBM64% BBC Model B AND YOUR FINGERS WILL NEVER STOP FIRING! Firing in all directions because Fistful of Fun is the latest compilation special from Alligata that brings together the action-packed excitement of 'shoot up' spectaculars with the nerve jangling demands of platform classics. Only Alligata compiles so many hit titles in one bargain buy that's sure to prove a hit with all the family. TAPE $9.95 ,95 Aligatz .95 DISK 211.95 Software Ltd Send for full colour product brochure (enclose a stamp) Alligata Software Ltd., 1 Orange Street, Sheffield S1 4DW Tel: (0742) 755796 "


"BLULKBUSTERS BLOCKBUSTERS MACSEN SOFTWARE om SPECTRUM CENTRAL "


"ITSL id you bring it?\" 85 New Summer Street, Birmingham I asked anxiously, B19 3TE. \"Have you got Savage Island Part 1 is still it, you know the defeating many players, including THING?\" Steve Donoghue. In fact it still \"Sure,\" said bothers me a bit! Having completed Scott. \"Well, sort the game once, I cannot seem to of!\" He grinned repeat getting through the hurricane! and pointed me There is obviously a random element in the in Hurricane Alexis the time it direction of starts, how long before the an IBM PC. logs fall, and so on. And suddenly there I was, in the \"To survive the hurrishape of Ben Grimm, alias the Thing cane, you must get that log stuck in a tar-pit and slowly sinking! I as soon as you possibly was in at the deep-end, or would be can,\" said Scott. \"The within a few moves, I guessed. So I sooner you get it, the transferred my ego to the Human Torch, for already I was aflame with being able to complete an idea. the tasks you need to do *This will impress before Hurricane Alexis the Chief Examiner,\" reaches its peak. It is thought I! possible that on some You've probably occasions you may not be guessed what able to survive long I was enough and will die, but *THINGKING\" those occasions will be (Ugh!), but I very rare.\" don't believe \"Hyperventilate\" is a it impressed the word that has troubled CE one little some of our sneakier readers who have been It certainly didn't impress the tar peeking the text in Claypit which continued slowly to engulf morgue Castle. \"Perhaps the poor old Thing. you could ask Scott why 12 Scott had not finished writing he included this most Questprobe 3, based on the Fantastic obscure command?\" asked Four, but I am sure that there was a John English of Northway out of the tar pit from the fiendish field, Birmingham. So I did! look on his face! \"Hyperventilate' is the con7 \"I don't quite know how much he's cise expression for breathing written yet,\" said Mike Woodroffe, in and out deeply to absorb head of Adventure International, oxygen,\" explained Scott. \"But, behind his hand so that Scott of course, there are other more wouldn't hear, \"but when I tried it, it obvious commands in the game that looked like only two locations.\" I will achieve the same result!\" he ually, to get on the right track. \"In knew exactly what Mike meant, but added. that case, I'll have to change my then Return to Pirate's Island looked Another obscure word, this time reference source from now on, to like only one location for ages when I used in open text in Return to Pirate's fool you!\" he joked. played it but it was complete! Island, is \"Funori\". Scott laughed As I departed to catch the last train I had to leave the Thing to languish when I described my attempts to sail home, I left Mike Woodroffe explainin the pit for a while. I will be back to the ship there. \"It's all in the Encycloing to a horrified Scott what wheeltell you if (but not how!) I managed to paedia Britannica. All you have to do clamps are and how they can get release him within the next couple of is look it up!\" he exclaimed. I said attached even to hire-cars that are months just as soon as the that's just what I had done, eventparked in the wrong place! Adventure is finished. A meeting with Want to get your hands on one of own TV series? NOT cartoons! Scott is always the first copies of Scott's new 3. Name two Marvel Comics. a good Questprobe Adventure? We've super-villains! opportunity got 20 copies of the game to give to ask a few away thanks to Scott and C&VG FANTASTIC FOUR questions on Adventure International all you COMPETITION have to do is answer the behalf of some Name.... the questions below, fill in of the many coupon and get it to us before Address. people who June 15th — that's when the write in to game will be released. the C&VG Computer you own (tick box) Adventure THE QUESTIONS Commodore 64 Spectrum Helpline. 1. Name the four original BBC O Scott's advice to Dwayne members of the Fantastic Four. Carnadam of New Zealand, who can't We've already given you a big My answers are: clue but beware! get hold of most of his games, is to try 2. Which Marvel superheroes Commodore International, or, failing featured in Scott Adams that, Adventure International UK, at Adventures have starred in their .C "


"VIC 20/CBM 64 SOFTWARE HIRE Free membership, top titles from 50p per week. Two first class stamps for your hirekit to VSH(CV), 242 Ransom Road, Mapperley, Nottingham. Please state which machine. FAST COMPUTER REPAIRS VIDEO VAULT INTERNATIONAL 10 * REPAIR SERVICE A SPECIAL DEAL FOR ATARI 400/600/800 OWNERS Spectrums repaired for .95 inc. Parts, Insurance and P & P No Hidden Extras. BBC. Commodore 64, Vic 20. Atari, Quoted for. Are you fed up with waiting weeks for your Home Computer to be repaired!!! Why not try the Experts, we offer a full repair service on any Home Computer. All repairs carry a full 3 months guarantee, plus on every Spectrum repaired we send you a free game worth .95 for your enjoyment and pleasure. * While you wait Service by Professional Computer Engineers. * 3 Months written guarantee on all repairs. * International repair company. *All computers sent by mail order turned around in 24 hrs. Most Spectrums repaired within 45 minutes. * All Micros insured for return journey. Open 7 days a week. * School repairs undertaken-discounts available. * Free software with each Spectrum repaired worth .95. * Over 8 years experience working with computers. ONLY GENUINE SINCLAIR PARTS USED. Phone today for your free estimate or send your computer to us with .75 (UK EIRE L.O.M.C.L.) or .50 (Europe/Scandinavia) we will contact you the same day by phone or 1st class Mail should you require quotation first. TRADE ENQUIRIES MOST WELCOME ACCESS WELCOMED VIDEO VAULT LTD DEPT R10 THE LOGICAL CHOICE E No. 1. Hire your first 2 games FREE from our extensive range of software. Up to the minute releases available No. 2. Buy all the latest software titles at best possible prices (New releases available direct from US) Atari hardware and modems now available at discount prices. For further details send s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD GAMES 27 Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Leicestershire Tel: 0509 412604 o Video Vault VIUEO Vauul Telephone: Glossop (STD 04574) 66555 140 High St. West. Glossop. Derbyshire, England. es FREE GAME WORTH .95 WITH REPAIR EACH SPECTRUM ATARI COMPUTR OWNERS Make the most of your Atari 400/600/800 by hiring from our Software Library. We offer a wide selection of the many games and adventures on the market for your computer. For full details send a S. A.E. to: Star Hire, P.O. Box 48, Bracknell, Berks. RG12 4WD. CG69 EXPRESS JOYSTICK REPAIRS Joysticks repaired and returned within 24 hours e.g. Atari, Vic, Quickshot. Triga Command etc. Send joystick and .95 + 50p. ATARI/COMMODORE SPARES Strong replacement joystick handle inserts at .50 pair. Atari C2.75 pair Commodore. Joystick handle top fire button kit includes insert and grip at .95 each Atari or Commodore. JOYSTICK FOR OL Plugs straight into control port 1 or 2. No interface required. .99 each or two for . Add 50p p&p. BULK JOYSTICK PURCHASE Shop soiled, as new. .95 for 5, .95 for 10 inclusive! COMPUTER SUPPLIES, 146 CHURCH ROAD BOSTON, LINCS PE21 OJX ATARI UTILITIES PAGES MAGAZINE THE IROH FOR ALL ATARI COMPUTER OWNERS ATAR *400/800/600XL.800X1 THE BEST NEWS PROGRAM LISTINGS REVIEWS from USA TUTORIALS UK UTILITIES AUSTRALIA PUBLIC HINTS & DOMAIN SOFTWARE LIBRARY plus more SPECIAL OFFERS PAGE 6 is published bi-monthly. Annual Subscription is .00. Send TODAY to: PAGE 6, P.O.BOX 54, STAFFORD, ST16 1DR Tel. 0785 41163 E AUTOMENU-Automatically lists every file on disc (Basic or binary) and will run them at the press of a button .95. HOWSEN DOS-A new disc file management system 7 functions Inc. tape to disc (sinale doublel disc to tape, disc to disc, tape to tape 119.95 DISK DOKTOR-With this utility you can examine and alter the contents of any Atari disk .95 TAPE INSPECTOR-With this utility you can examine and alter the contents of any Atari tape .95. Also KT4-.95; DD2-.95; KK-.95. For full details of this range of tape/disc/cartridge utilities send large sae to: AWG 145 Bankside, West Houghton, Bolton, Lancs THE SOFTWARE LENDING AND EXCHANGE LIBRARY SPECTRUM, COMMODORE 64, DRAGON, VIC 20. BBC & ZX-81 YES! We have programs for your computer. We hire programs from 50p. ZX-811. Two weeks .00 LIFE MEMBERSHIP Less than the cost of a single game) brings you our membership kit, including hire listings, software exchange catalogue and introductory letter. We now have OVER 300 HIRE TITLES. and 500 EXCHANGE TITLES with large Spectrum and Commodore sections. All mail dealt with on a daily basis and OVERSEAS MEMBERS VERY WELCOME. New software discounted to our members at impressive rates. Send cheque PO for (5.00 to THE SOFTWARE LENDING UBRARY. PO Box 3. CASTLEFORD WEST YORKSHIRE WF10 1UX Stating name, address and computer type FORGET THE REST AND JOW THE BEST! REPAIRS For all computers + T.V. games. Good rates. Insured delivery. Fast turnaround. Trust the people who know Parts replacement despatch. ce ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE MERLIN GAMES 111 DOVER RD., DEAL, KENT. Telephone: 0304-361541. CARTRIDGE CITY Simply the best cartridge rental service for Atari Computers. We have an all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE. Apply now and hire your first 4 games free. Well over 800 different original titles. For full details send stamped addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends. LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 DISC DRIVES [192.95 Purchasers of the above receive free membership BEST QUALITY DISCS, BOXES OF 10 Single density discs E16.50 Double density discs .00 Antic & Analog magazines available GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept C&VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney Close Sunderland SR3 4PO. Tel: 0783 286351 ARCADE SOFTWARE (UK) No. 1 Mail Order in UK For Commodore 16 and 16+4; Commodore 64; Spectrum; MSX; BBC 'B' Electron; Amstrad; Dragon; Tandy; Vic 20; Atari 2600 Cartidges. Prices start from .99 Fast service Over 6,000 titles in stock Send large stamped addressed envelope (please state micro). Arcade Software (UK) 202/203 Shopping Hall Myrtle Road, East Ham London E6. Tel: 01-471 8900 Full information pack from CARTRIDGE CITY 25 Gaitside Drive, Aberdeen, AB1 7BH. Tel. (0224) 37348 50 "


"ATARI 400/600/800XL OWNERS UTILITIES FUZE FUZED DEFUZED CONFUZED CONFUZION FOR SALE SHARP EQUIPMENT eg: Inc. VAT — Exc. P&P MZ-80A. .. Twin Drives..  P5/P6 printer (711 compatible).....  MZ8OB... ........  Also interfaces, cables, single drives, expansion boxes, MZ-711 full systems to your requirements. PERSONAL COMPUTER SERVICES (Sharp approved Service Agent) Unit 14, Alpha Court, Windmill Ind. Estate, Denton, M34 3RB Tel: 061 320 5011 BACK UPS Tapes or Disks. SAE for Lists CRACKER Will list M/C progs to screen, you edit, download your personalised version with or without mic knowledge. Hours of fun changing text to leave personal messages on screen Stuck on an adventure search for clues. Also acts to back up Vour Alari tapes All for only (10 on TDK Tape 116K) Post Free GHOST BUSTERS By Activision. Seen the film? Now play the game, just in on disk [15 Post Free BINO Moves binary files to auto boot tape or disk Comes on double sided disk at E10 Post Free XL-FIXER Will allow you to play games written for 400, BOO range on your XL-tape E10 PICTURE DISKS 4 Disks crammed with graphics, pictures and demo's to show the world Atari's No. 1 comes on two double sided disks at only THE TRANS-PAC Bought a disk drive, stuck with programs on tape? THE TRANS-PAC solves it. Multi tape to disk, disk to tape, tape to disk, disk to disk, multi mover. etc. Comes on two double sided Memorex disks C25 All orders post free. Mail order only 24 hour despatch STOCK SOFT 15 Woodbrooke Road, Birmingham B30 1UE 15 NEW CONCEPTS IN SOFTWARE BBC SPECTRUM SOFTWARE HIRE FREE membership! All top titles available, for hire details send s.a.e. to: S.S.H. (CVG), 21 Chaceley Way. Wilford, Nottingham NG11 7EG. Computer aided learning template system for teachers Enables any teacher to quickly acquire a library of personalised teaching software Price .00  64 Dr. John and the battle of the entropy: The Energy Rce Educational fun game for and A Level Technician courses. Teaches fundamental concepts of engineering and heat. A revolutionary new approach to teaching with an emphasis on learning through play with full back up material Price [9.95 SPECTRUM O and A Level Physics packages: NEWTONS LAWS VORK AND ENERGY.................................95 Super BASIC EDITOR. RESERVES space for code in REM, FIND AND REPLACE everything, variable speed TRACE, DELETE blocks of BASIC, and much more Send to NEW CONCEPTS CVG Rosenython, St. Keverne, Helston, Cornwall TR12 6OR GP (6.95 LEAD BLANK DISKS 54\" Blank Disks — price per box of 10 Single Side/Double Density SCOTCH 3M.... ...............95 DYSAN........ ...95 MEMOREX (with free case)......95 Double Side/Double Density SCOTCH 3M.. ..95 DYSAN.... .95 MEMOREX (with free case)......95 SJB SUPER SAVERS 50 Memorex single side/double density blank disks in a perspex storage box only .95. SECOND T199/4A USERS SHOW 28th April 1985 11am-5pm Corn Exchange, Royal Pavillion, Brighton. Extensive range of hardware, software and books. See the demo. Meet fellow users. Share in the swop shop and special show offers. Refreshments and meals available. Organised by the nationwide user group. T199/4A EXCHANGE, 40 BARRHILL, PATCHAM, BRIGHTON BNI SUF. Tel: 0273 503968. SAE for details of advance admission and bumper quarterly magazine. ZOOMSOFT FOR THE VERY BEST SPECTRUM, COMMODORE 64 AND ATARI GAMES (including U.S. SOFTWARE) See page 105 50 Memorex double side/double density blank disks in a perspex storage box only .95 All prices INCLUDE VAT. Delivery in UK is FREE. Please send cheque/PO to: SJB DISK SUPPLIES, Dept 01, 11 Oundle Road, Nottingham NG8 1BN. A Tel: 0602 782310 VA ATOMIC STRUCTURE A COMPUTER VIEW Award winning 48k Spectrum program illustrated. 13 important physics experiment with high-res graphics and text. Suitable for 'A' level. Price .50. Send cheque/PO to: NEW CONCEPTS SOFTWARE, C&VG, ROSENYTHON, ST. KEVERNE, HELSTON, CORNWALL TR12 6QR A PERSONAL SOFTWARE USERS ASSOCIATION Benefit from our huge library of cassettes for exchange or hire. More than 1000 titles for the Spectrum, CBM 64, Vic 20, BBC, Dragon, Atari, T.I., and Oric. Cheap hires and exchanges and special sale lines. For details send large SAE to P.S.U.A., 19 Lammerton Terrace, Dundee DD4 7BR stating which micro. SOFTWARE EXCHANGE. Swap your used software, free membership, Spectrum/ Dragon, huge program base, sae please to UK Software Exchange Club (CVG). 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB. BEL-SOFT Mail order software *PANCOM ATARI SOFTWARE ATARI SOFTWARE ATARI HARDWARE SJB SUPER SAVERS ATARI 800XL + ATARI 1050 DISK DRIVE .95 includes home filing manager and pay off adv. and demo disks) ATARI 800XL + ATARI 1010 RECORDER...95 (includes Pole Position + Introduction to Programming cassettes) ATARI 800XL COMPUTER.....169.95 ATARI 1050 DISK DRIVE........ .95 All prices include VAT FREE, fast delivery in UK Send cheque/PO to: SJB DISK SUPPLIES Dept 01. 11 Oundle Road, Nottingham NGS 1BN Tel: 0602 782310 All top titles at Low, Low prices. Just ring today for our list of special offers. All leading titles at least 1 off recommended retail. A chance you must not miss ring today. This month's special: Everyone's a Wally, Spectrum .99 Knight Love, Spectrum .99 Impossible Mission, CBM 64 .99 Lords of Midnight, CBM 64 .99 Ghostbusters, Spectrum .99 Ghostbusters, CBM 64 .99 All subject to availability For further details telephone: (0743) 61493 (best after 6pm)  THE LATEST  THE BEST AT discounted prices Send stamp for current catalogue PANCOM PO Box 49, Grimsby DN32 8QN Tel: (0472) 694196 "


"MYRDDIN 3D LANDMARKS YOU CAN FLY AROUND SUPERB REAL TIME SIMULATION MYRDDIN FLIGHT SIMULATION AMSTRAD CPC 464 FLIGHT CHART WYRODIN FLIGHT BIMULATION FOR THE AMSTRAD MANUAL FULL SCREEN welcome . DISPLAY 00420P Here are some screens from a typical flight showing the view from the cockpit (top half of screen) produced as printouts of the actual simulator. A real time simulation with 3D graphics uses a massive 64000 x 64000 longitude & latitude flying area, making each flight completely different. Developed under pilot instruction to give realistic flight effect. The view through the cockpit gives moving 3D graphics. Comprehensive instrument panel with moving needle meters & digital displays. 15 aircraft types with varying control sensitivities & speeds of between 100 500 knots. 3 runways available for refuelling, take off & landing. Ground and landmark orientation correct with all flying attitudes (rolls etc.). The 3D graphics are still accurate when you fly upside down. MYRDDIN SOFTWARE, PO BOX 61, SWINDON, WILTS. Telephone: (0793) 40661 Please send me....... Flight Simulator(s) by return of post for the Amstrad CPC 464 3D landmarks you can fly around. Comes complete with manual & fully detailed chart of landmarks & airfields. Name ........... Joystick or keyboard operation Address......... ......Postcode .......... Cheque enclosed for .95 (in. P.P.) OR Debit my Access A/C No.: TI I MI I OR Telephone through your Access Order. If your local dealer doesn't have it in stock yet, order from us direct. For despatch within 48 hrs. (usually 24 hrs.). Signed....................... . "


"GANZA! AMSTRAVAGAN THE C&VG GUIDE TO THE AMSTRAD AMSTRAD KAFE MECA TOO 22 NEWS, REVIEWS, LISTINGS AND SORCERY MAP WITH HINTS & TIPS "


"YOU ARE I THE WOODS. YOU ARE NEAR THE VILLAGE CU ARE NEAR THE VILLAGE IME THE THE YOU ARE ABOVE THE CHATEAU. 6 ARE AEQUE THE CHATEAU. 5 1) YOU ARE IN THE CASTLE YOU ARE OUTSIDE THE CASTLE. 22  YOU ARE IN THE WASTELANDS, 39 C YOU ARE IN THE WASTELANDS. 40 YOU ARE OUTSIDE THE CASTLE 19 LUMETATE, NEAR STONEHENCE 0  THE EASTE: OU ARE IN THE WASTELANDS. SA "


"n Virgin's Sorcery, you play the part of a sorceror set the task of releasing eight of his fellow sorcerors from imprisonment. There are 40 rooms to explore and, in addition to eight special objects you need to help you release the sorcerors, there are ten assorted weapons and aids to help you in your quest. EN IU  THE Tunel: YOU ARE THE TUNNEL. ETHE  THE UmmEL: 33 | in THE TLE, YOU ARE IN THE STRONcroon. 16 TU  THE FALUE, WE ARE AT THE ATERFALL. 25 YOU ARE AT THE TUTINEL DOUTH. 35 ddddddddddd                     YOU ARE NEAR THE FALALE. 30 YOU ARE IN THE FALACE. YOU ARE IN THE PALACE. 28 White YOU ARE THE DUNGEONS. 3Musinance) is HER HER  In THE DLINUETn58 55 "


"*** *************************** KAMYON FORT APOCALYPSE BEACH MEA POLE POSITION SPITFIRE ACE SAL ERICHT  \"H PON SPY HUNTER   PROP THE BLUE MAY RAID OVER STELLA MASCA  E STRIME SEMTIME? EAGLE MR. FLAW MATOV > REHBS COMMANDER MMIGHTS OF BUCK ROGERS THE BEST   COMAN SLIMMY YAPPER FORBIDDEN FORESY DALLAS QUESY GOLD STRIKE GUARANTEED PAYMENTS FOR FIRST CLASS ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE PROGRAMMERS Translation work on the chart-topping U.S. Gold Commodore games to the Amstrad CPC 464. ********* Become part of the best motivated team in the U.K. ... one-off or long term contracts available Original game and software concepts also required for World Wide publication. ********* For fame and fortune from U.S. Gold write in confidence to: Software Development, U.S. Gold, 6 Central Street, Manchester M2 5NS, or phone 061-832 6633 for details. ************************** "


"There are five types of deadly sorceror who can be released using hand corner to enter the Strongroom. creatures, but each one can be killed the golden chalice seen two screens Open the trap-door with the key. It is by at least one or more of the earlier. a good idea to clear this room with a weapons that can be found in parts of Each sorceror can only be released convenient sack of spells. To release the game. It doesn't take long to find by using a certain object. For the sorceror, you must now go all the that a sack of spells or a shooting star instance, you can use the Sorceror's way back for the coat of arms in the will kill anything, but you must also Moon to release your colleague at Castle, then back through the find out which weapon kills which Stonehenge. A harp will free the Dungeon to the room where you monsters because you can only carry sorceror cooped up in the palace and picked up the key. one object at a time. The many other a goblet of wine will do the trick for Go through the left-hand door into objects used in the game, including the sorceror stuck out in the Wastethe Wastelands. This is where you keys, bottles and fleur de lis, will lands. These are fairly straightwill find the crown to release the final enable you to enter locked rooms forward cases of hunting down the sorceror, but you can't go from the and open trap doors. object. The last two sorcerors, Wastelands back to the Dungeon You will have to use almost all the however, are linked together and without first using the coat of arms to magical objects to rescue all of the prove very difficult to release. open the door. Once you've done sorcerors and, with your energy level When you are in the Castle you'll this, simply take the crown into the falling everytime you're attacked, find a room with a scroll and a coat of Strongroom and release the sorceror. you will have to move very quickly to arms. Bearing your coat of arms. Whatever order you release the survive. leave the Castle by the right hand sorcerors in, when you have released For instance, in the Chateau, when door and you will be able to open the all eight of them, don't forget to go you see the magic wand, you need a door halfway down the cliff face. back to The Sanctuary and join your key to open the trap-door and a key Once you've opened this door, fellow sorcerors on your pedestal. to get the magic wand but there's return to the Castle and pick up the You've then beaten the game! only one key in the room. In order to scroll. Returning via the cliff into the In order to get higher scores, get another key, you have to go out of dungeons, use the scroll to release though, you must pick up as many the door on the top left. You will find another sorceror, making use of an objects, kill as many creatures and yourself near the Chateau with two axe in his cage to kill the monster in visit as many rooms as possible. the room. You must leave by the left Releasing all the sorcerors will win get back to the magic wand, you hand door, picking up a bottle as you you the game but it won't necessarily open the door with the fleur de lis. go. This particular bottle is used to get you the most points. Once the door is open, you can go open a trap door, but first use a I hope I haven't given too much n, pick up the key, return to nearby sword to kill the warrior in the away but there's lots the room containing the magic wand, way. Pick up the key in the top left Sorcery for you to discover yourself. release the trap door, pick up the hand corner and use the bottom right Have fun! spare key, release and pick up the wand and escape through the left SORCERY MAP hand door into the Tunnel. Now take FOR AMSTRAD CPC 464 the wand through the bottom left hand door. You will now be in the SECTION 1 Tunnel with two creatures, a key, a river and an energy-giving cauldron but, unless you have a shooting star or a bag of spells, you can't kill both of the monsters. So, from here it is a desperate rush to free the sorceror and escape as quickly as possible, leaving the Tunnel by the door you came in. The easiest sorceror to release is SECTION 2 the one in a room above the Chateau, who is released by a book of spells found in the same room. You will find that this reveals another door which you cannot get through. If you leave this room by the top right hand door, you will find yourself in a room with a floating eye, a warrior, a sword and a bottle. The warrior can be killed with the sword if you like, but you must take the bottle with you on your way out. You will now be near the Chateau G again with two creatures and two objects including the golden SECTION 3 chalice but to open the mystery door you must carry on towards the woods carrying the bottle. Use the bottle to open the door, kill both monsters with the shooting star, replenish your energy from the cauldron but, most importantly, pick G up the fleur de lis. Retrace your steps to the mystery door and Open Make your own map of Virgin's Sorcery for the Amstrad CPC 464 out of actual screen shots Just cut out the Screens on pages 54 and 55 and paste them up in the layout above and give yourselves hours of endless un Sesame! this reveals another AUTO 631072 492 8.313 2 22 E El 2221 Et 194 6 14.13.12.2011 1389 1395 5.400 36 _[377385 L.35 .34 33 * 32 ] "


"AMSTRAD NEWS BACKPACKER'S GUIDE TO THE UNIVERSE antasy Software's very successful trilogy of arcade Adventure games is to be converted to run on the Amstrad CPC 464 computer. The Backpacker's Guide to the Universe, a series of three Adventure games featuring the character Ziggy who starred in Fantasy's other game The Pyramid, is loosely based on the hugely successful book and TV series The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy. The unique feature of the game is that it contains an information program at the end of the tape which gives you hints and advice on how to complete some of the puzzles in the game, similar to the Encyclopaedia Galactica in Hitch Hiker's. The first program on the tape also contains a mini version of the guide but to access the whole of the second program you have to stop playing the game and load the second program — making sure that you don't have the chance to keep referring back to it. The first part of the trilogy, entitled The Caverns of Exile, will be available in the next few weeks and should sell for around .00. DECATHLON rankenstein 2000 is a futuristic H game based on the legend of 1 the monster created by Doctor Frankenstein. You are a renowned scientist of the 21st century who has been work ing on a project to develop revolutionary new surgery that allows bionic limbs to be added to even lifeless bodies. Spurred on by the challenge of resurrecting Frankenstein's ss have launched one of their most successful war simulations, Battle for Midway, on the Amstrad CPC 464.. Battle for Midway puts you in command of the US Pacific fleet six months after the Japanese bombing raid on Pearl Harbour in 1942 which finally brought America into the second world war. FRANKENSTEIN cean Software's best selling trio of programs is being converted to run on the Amstrad. Daley Thompson's Decathlon, Hunchback Il and Kong's Revenge are all presently Ocean's top sellers at the moment and are riding high in the charts. Daley was probably the most successful game of last year apart from perhaps Software Project's Jet Set Willy. Street Hawk a new series on Independent Television is also going to have a computer version on the Amstrad, Spectrum, Atari 800 and Commodore 64. Ocean have purchased the full licensing rights to the game which will be on sale in mid-May. The new TV programme is very like an old one called Knight Rider. The star is an electronic motorcycle equipped with an astonishing array of high-tech weapons which are used in the pursuit of criminals. Ocean have also scooped up the rights to the popular series Knight Rider a computerised car this time. The game will be available on the same machines as Street Hawk and should be released in September. All Ocean's titles for the Amstrad, including Decathlon, will sell for .95 each on cassette. monster, you decide to use a new micro surgical technique in which you are shrunk down to a microscopic size together with a submarine-like capsule and then injected into the body of the patient. You must fight off the attacks of the monster's defence systems on the way towards the brain to repair the damage that has been caused by his years in suspended animation. ye Frankenstein 2000 will be available from Icon Software for .95. The Battle of Midway marks the turning point of the battle for the Pacific. If the Japanese are allowed to invade the Midway Islands, they would have a base from which to attack firstly Hawaii and then mainland USA, possibly changing the whole outcome of World War II. Battle for Midway is one of the new breed of wargames that actually place you in a life. like situation where you have to make decisions on when to attack or retreat and how many troops to send into each battle so the buck stops with you! The game is played on three levels. First, you are given a large scale map showing on overview of your own forces. Second, you have constantly updated details of those forces down to the last fighter. Third, you get a visual representation of the battle and your forces of every stage. This way you are kept well briefed on your exact position. Battle for Midway is available for the Amstrad, MSX, Commodore 64 and Atari computers. 58 "


"DALEY SPOT THOMPSON'S THE DIFFERENCE CONTEST HEY AN: Daley Thompson's Decathlon, the smash hit game which sprinted its way to the top of the charts during last summer, is on the starting blocks and is almost ready for the Amstrad. As always, C&VG are a stop ahead of the competition and we have 50 advance copies of Ocean Software's Daley Thompson's Decathlon for the Amstrad to be won in our spot the difference Competion. Just check both of the pictures of Daley and try to spot the four differences in the illustration at the bottom. All you have to do then is fill in the missing items in the spaces on the coupon and send it off to Computer & Video Ganes, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Daley is a complete simulation of the two day Olympic event in which you must excel at ten different sports ranging from the pole vault to the 110 metres hurdles. DALEY THOMPSON SPOT THE DIFFERENCE COMPETITION The differences are: 1).. FALLERY Name ........... Address..  shreathahhhhh, "


"AUSTRAR-E-V-LE-W.S -pen Playability: Will the game keep you up until the early hours of the morning, as you attempt to complete just one more screen in a desperate attempt to beat it? Or does it send you to sleep the moment the introscreen appears? Could you spend hours locked away in your bedroom with it? same way in certain situathe engine or I came into land quay. As soon as his ship WORLD CUP tions. Once you have learned too fast and had my underdocks at the quay, your ship is these programmed moves, carriage ripped away from attacked with cannon fire and MACHINE: Amstrad it becomes very easy to run me. you must guide Roland SUPPLIER: Artic Software rings around the computer Fighter Pilot is an through the mayhem to PRICE: .95 controlled teams and I had incredibly complex program collect a box of cannon balls England's surprisingly soon won the World Cup four to do it full justice this Once you have loaded up the good form in their recent times on the trot with a little review would have to take up armaments, you can set sail world cup qualifying practice. several pages of the for the Gold Harbour the matches has created a magazine. It is, in my opinion, centre of trading for this part resurgence in football  Graphics the game with the most play of the world and a town filled support and even  Sound ability and the longest lasting with prosperous merchants computer addicts, not known  Value appeal I have played on the and business men. for their athletic prowess, are Playability Amstrad. getting itchy feet and yearnThis, of course, doesn't ing for the sight of acres of FIGHTER PILOT mean that I would muddy grass. recommend it to every The Amstrad has its very MACHINE: Amstrad Amstrad owner. If you like to own version called World Cup get straight into a SUPPLIER: Digital by Artic Computing which on game first appearance looks very hardly even needing to glance Integration like Commodore's Inter. at the instructions, just pick PRICE: 6.50 up your joystick and start national Soccer cartridge. Fighter Pilot was the first firing, then Fighter Pilot is not The game begins by asking true aeroplane flying the game for you. On the you to choose one of the 12 simulation available on other hand, if you are willing When you have tied your teams on offer, ranging from the market which was a to spare quite a few hours ship up in the harbour, you Brazil to Wales truly realistic representa getting to know the game, you have to sneak into the town The game then goes tion of flying a jet aircraft. will have guaranteed yourself 4 and steal as much treasure through the preamble of reamble of The man behind the game, months of flying fun. as you can carry. Not having all the players trot designer and part owner of surprisingly the town's onto the pitch in pairs and Digital Integration Dave inhabitants are less than Graphics stand in their proper Marshall, is a qualified pilot happy about this arrangement Sound positions. After this and has made every effort to and you have to run back to Value performance, which lasts make the program as life-like your ship dodging a hail of Playability several minutes, the whistle is as possible. bullets. From here, you must blown and your off. Fighter Pilot is an travel to the nearest desert incredibly complex program island to bury your treasure. though. There are for 3 ROLAND AHOY And this is where Roland instance, 23 different keys Ahoy and I parted company. that are used during a full MACHINE: Amstrad At the beginning of this game. The game is based on SUPPLIER: Amsoft review said that the game the McDonnell Douglas F15 PRICE: .90 had a certain addictiveness Eagle fighter plane and Roland Ahoy is an addic. The only reason the game has includes air-to-air combat tive if not particularly any addictive qualities is options in the program's sophisticated release because you know that the menu. from Amsolt. It is one of game is dead easy to At the beginning of the those games which you complete and all you want to You then have a game game you are given a list of know you can beat quite do is just that to prove how lasting around 15 minutes different options ranging from easily but fail repeatedly to do bad the game is which includes a change of take off and landing practice so Unfortunately, you can't even ends at half time. At the to airborne combat. There are You play the part of do this because Roland Ahoy beginning the computer also four levels of difficulty — Roland, a vicious and ruthless has so many annoying slaughters you every time. sensibly I chose trainee level captain of a pirate ship, on features and unexpected Wingers dash along the touch and the practice landing the look out for any unbugs. line dancing past your options. attended treasure that he can There is no skill in the defenders, dummy the Predictably, I crashed fairly bury on some remote desert game or enjoyment to be got keepers and smash the ball rapidly on my first few island from this piece of software. It into the back of the net attempts. Soon I was able Sailing across the ocean is is, in fact, an absolute dead Typical score lines are: 7:0, to keep the plane under never an easy job at the best loss! 8:0 and 12:1 a lucky shot in reasonable control but still of times but sea monsters the last game hadn't mastered the art of and rocks don't make Graphics But once you have played landing in one piece. Either! Roland's life any easier. Sound the game several times, you was descending too quickly to get to the treasure, you Value notice that the computer and hit the ground before I must first help Roland steal  Playability players always behave the could get more thrust from cannon balls from the powder OM 60 "


"GHOSTBUSTERS\" THE COMPUTER GAME. BY DAVID CRANE 1994 COLUMBIA PICTURES NOW AVAILABLE ON AMSTRAD AND MSX! STILL RUNNING ON COMMODORE C64 CASSETTE AND DISK, SPECTRUM AND ATARI DISK. ACTIVISION HOME COMPUTER SOFTWARE AVAILABLE FROM SELECTED BRANCHES OF BOOTS, WH SMITH, JOHN MENZIES, LASKY'S, SPECTRUM, RUMBELOWS, WOOLWORTH AND GOOD COMPUTER SOFTWARE STORES EVERYWHERE. "


"semester) R-E.V.T.EW.S AMSTRAD Graphics: Are they really as mind-blowing as the adverts say they are? Does the screen scroll effectively? Do those aliens really leap out of the screen at you? This is how this category is judged of Manic Miner, but is a bit of across the maze. If Rodney there is also a cheering a bummer if you do. happens to run into one while crowd, an umpire and line It's fast becoming repetihe is carrying a musical judges which are all animated tive the amount of times instrument, he instantly drops beautifully. The representahave given the same advice to the instrument which returns tion of the players and the ball people interested in buying to its original position in the which is just too small — new software buy it bemaze. is a little disappointing. OtherFT cause it's a good game, but to move on to the wise the game is comparable don't buy 20 other games escalators, Rodney must wait with the best tennis simulabecause they are all exactly for a coloured square of the tions on other machines and alike. same colour as the one he is is more reliant on skill than BLAGGER Blagger is a well written standing on, then the joystick most in not letting the and professionally produced is pushed in the direction in computer do most of the work MACHINE: Amstrad game. But I think it would be a which he wants to move for you. SUPPLIER: Alligata shame to see it in the same The game has 20 different Serving is made much Software software collection as Manic levels and should provide more difficult than in most PRICE: .95 Miner. I mean — why waste several weeks of hair-pulling other games because you your money when you could sessions. Consider yourself have to hit the ball while it's in Computer games fall into bus buy a copy of Virgin's an expert if you manage to the air. If it's too high, it will several different Sorcery. finish the game without a overshoot the line or hit the categories of programs, receding hairline. net if it is too low. for instance, adventures, Jammin' is an unusual and You can vary the speed, shoot'-em-ups and  Graphics very entertaining game. Well height and direction of shot strategy games all of Sound worth the pennies it costs. So, just like the real game, which are very popular. A new Value too. you can lob, smash, volley game for the Amstrad, Playability into a corner or play a gentle Blagger, is in the most  Graphics 8 drop shot over the net. popular category the  Sound One big drawback of the climbing games.  Value JAMMIN' game is the size of the ball Blagger is one of the many 5  Playability used it's tiny. True, it may games which has been MACHINE: Amstrad be in proportion to the size of spawned from the American game, Miner 2049'er, the players but it would only SUPPLIER: Taskset have improved the game if primarily Manic Miner, a PRICE: .90 this small alteration had been game which Blagger re Jammin' is anything but made. sembles in many ways. an ordinary game. All round, a well produced The basic theme of the In the game, you play game which, in spite of a few game is roughly the same as the part of \"Rankin niggles, still rates as one of MM. You have to guide your Rodney'', a street my favourite simulations on character through many musician who is trying to the Amstrad. Well worth dangerous and tricky make it into the big time. adding to your software caverns, collecting sets of Unfortunately for Rodney, he collection keys that will open a door to is having a lot of problems the next level of the game. getting all his instruments Monsters and hunter Killer together in the same place.  Graphics robots patrol each of the Bad notes and bum chords 6 CENTRE COURT  Sound levels making sure that no trouble Rodney and, if he  Value fortune seeker who enters happens to run into one, he MACHINE: Amstrad  Playability their cavern emerges alive. drops everything at the shock SUPPLIER: Amsoft Like MM, the monsters don't of hearing such an awful PRICE: .90 chase you, but move in a noise. The only thing in fixed route preventing you The game is played on a Amsoft's Centre Court 7 MANIC/JSW from making an easy escape, multi-coloured maze which which has been left out The game does sound has part of the screen moving is the odd tantrum from MACHINE: Amstrad similar to Manic Miner and, in four separate directions, one of the players -but SUPPLIER: Software for my taste at any rate, it is a like coloured escalators. I suppose you could Projects little too close in some parts Rodney must hop onto the supply that yourself. PRICE: .50 be a mere COcoloured escalators and iump Centre Court is a simula Manic Miner and Jet Set incidence. The crumbling off at the right point to collect tion of the lawn tennis game Willy have probably platforms are straight out of the particular musical and includes options for made Miner Willy the Manic Miner as are the instrument he wants which he either a two player game or a best known computer poison plants and some of the then brings home. single person againsta games character in screen lay-outs. Rodney has a couple of computer opponent. Britain. If you have been This is, of course, fine if enemies who try to halt his Not only is the grass court unfortunate enough to own a you don't already own a copy progress. Bum notes travel all represented on the screen, computer that doesn't have 62 "


"COMBAT LYNX From DURELL Technical Support from Westland Helicopters) NEW! BBC/ELECTRON AMSTRAD Spectrum-Commodore 64-BBC/Electron-Amstrad The ultimate flying experience AMSTRAD BBC/ELECTRON DURELL sales dept., sales dept., Castle Lodge, Castle Green, Taunton, Somerset,TA14AB "


"NOW AVAILABLE ON THE AMSTRAD * ** t*** BRIAN JACKS PERSHA Erhallenge **** * Winning's not the most important thing it's the only thing\" Brian Jacks, world famous Judo and TV Superstars champion made it very clear. \"It better be good,\" he said. We didn't feel like arguing the point, so we just got to work. The result is one of the most exciting, addictive and challenging games you will ever have attempted. We feel it only fair to warn you though-challenge Brian Jacks to anything and YOU'D better be good! Brian Jacks challenges you to these eight events: *ARM DIPS SQUAT THRUSTS * CANOEING * CYCLING * FOOTBALL * SWIMMING * ARCHERY * 100 METRES * Available from all leading software retailers OR order today by mail CBM-64  95 fast load cassette .95 disc 48K Spectrum BBC-B/Electror Amstrad .95 prices include VAT & pip **** marte Martech is the registered trade mark of Software Communications Limited Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME.PHONE: (0323) 768456 TELEX: 87465 EXIM Brighton 48K SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 BBC 'B' ELECTRON AMSTRAD, "


"anestas R.EVIEW.S AMSTRAD Sound: Does the game sound like a Duran Duran LP played at half speed or does the noise from your micro knock you half-way across the room? The C&VG review team don't judge games with their ears plugged up, we can tell you! LIN 0000 frustrating time as thousands automated defences to of Spectrum and Commodore destroy it. owners did. Even after nearly The program also allows two years on the market, you to jump through any of Manic Miner is still as exciting ten or so levels of the game, and novel as the day it was so you can practice playing a released particularly difficult or tricky The sequel, Jet Set Willy. part. High Score 000000 Score also stayed at the top of My first big disappointment C&VG's charts throughout the with the game is that the summer and was almost controls are solely confined universally praisedI to the keyboard. It is American Inca stones which, its own adaptation of the personally thought the game ridiculous that no provision apparently, have astonishing game, or you don't own a was quite an anti-climax has been made for gamers magical powers. computer at all, then you've following all the speculation with joysticks, especially in a Many other adventurers never played a real computer before its release. Software game like Star Avenger, have tried to remove the game. Projects have reproduced the where a lot of very fine adjustjewels from the mansion but Both games are now avail-game very accurately. ments in direction are often none have ever emerged able on the Amstrad though, and I'm sure it will be necessary. alive. It's up to you to enter computer and are almost sailing quite high up the Graphically the game is the house, find your way exactly the same as the charts again. fairly impressive. Lots of through the many trap-filled Spectrum original. All the colour and rapidly changing rooms and remove the platforms and crumbling scenery help to give the game fabulous treasure. ledges are there, as well as Graphics the touch of an arcade game. The insane owner has built Sound the man-eating toilets, mutant Although the animation of the in some novel, and horrifying telephones boxes and Value ship is of the same quality. alterations into the house boncing penguins. Playability the jerkiness of the moveincluding poison-smeared The aim of the game is ment makes it difficult to spikes, moving floor boards fairly simple. You must guide negotiate tight corners and and shrinking floors. Miner Willy through 20 levels 8 also makes hitting rockets The house is also filled with of a disused mine which is STAR AVENGER and fuel dumps even harder malevolent ghosts and ghouls being run by a workforce of MACHINE: Amstrad Star Avenger is a reason which track you down in each robots. Sounds simple. It isn't. able shoot-'em-up. It is well room. These can be made to On each and every level SUPPLIER: Kuma worth grabbing a copy for the disappear if you find one of there are several different Computing odd zapping session, the odd gems which have flashing keys which have to PRICE: .95 although I'm sure that this been strewn around the be collected before the door Unlike most computers game is not going to become house. This will give you just to the next level opens up. that have emerged a classic on the Amstrad. enough time to make your exit Things are made difficult by during the past three or from the room. monsters patrolling the mine four years, the Amstrad Graphics Each level is constructed shafts, platforms that is almost the only Sound to give you as little chance of crumble under your feet. computer to have a subreaching the top of the screen sending you crashing to the stantial software catalogue  Playability as possible. bottom of the mine and already available for it at the Ghouls is certainly a tough poisonous mushrooms which launch of the machine. nut to crack and I could kill Willy on the slightest test This means that imagine myself playing for contact conversions of well known 9 GHOULS several weeks before computer and arcade games becoming even nearly take some time to appear. MACHINE: Amstrad Star Avenger is typical of the competent. This game does SUPPLIER: Micro Power have its drawbacks. Often it fast movement in Amstrad PRICE: .95 becomes extremely games and is a complete Ghouls, the latest frustrating because you need conversion of the arcade release from Micro a lot of luck and very little skill game Scramble with lots of Power, is likely to send in some parts of the game. extra features added, too. shivers down even the Overall, the game scores The aim of the game is most experienced highly in my ratings and guide your rocket ship gamer's spine would recommend it to any. through a guarded under the scene is a long one looking for a good climb It took several months for ground fortress. First you deserted and reputedlying game. the first person to crack the must break through the outer haunted house on top of an Spectrum version of the defences of the city, following eerie hill. Local gossip says  Graphics game and discover the up with a bombing run over that the last owner of the game's secret. I'm sure the city, and then onto the house was an insane  Sound Amstrad owners will have as hidden lair of the robot millionaire who hoarded a  Value much of an entertaining and controlling the city's collection of precious South  Playability Value CO COCO "


"RUNS ON AN AMSTRAD DOTMAN BY STEPHEN SUTHERLAND The Amstrad CPC 464 has only been available in large numbers since just before Christmas. Even so, the support from software companies has been magnificent, with games of a very high quality appearing in the shops already. This isn't only confined to the professional software houses either. The software that we have been receiving from you, our readers, has been among some of the best we have ever seen. Stephen Sutherland's Dotman is a classic adaptation of Pac-Man and It is certainly the best version of the game we have played on any computer You are a hungry little Pac-Man running around a maze filled with protein-packed dots. Unfortunately for you, the more is filled with the spirits of people who died without finding their way out of the more. These ghosts follow you constantly around the maze trying to make sure you don't eat all the dots. Happy chomping, but remember not to let the guests eat YOU! 10 REM************************** *********** 20 REM DOTMAN (C) 1984 Stephen S utherland 30 REM************************** ************ 40 GOSUB 1309 : REM START 50 GOSUB 1880: REM INSTRUCTIONS 60 GOSUB 1600 : REM SCREEN 79 FOR F=1 TO liv: LOCATE 7+(2*f) 12 PRINT a 1$(1):LOCATE 7+(2*f), 13: PRINT a2$( 1 ) : NEXT F 80 9=10:p=16:91=2:92=2c=2:0=2:t =19: s=2: Mo=1: OP=P : 09=9ot=tosos da=1 : RESTORE 90 ON ser GOTO 100.150.200 100 GOSUB 940 110 IF C=9 AND DEP THEN 799 120 GOSUB 350 130 IF sc!<> AND sc!/0! =INT(SC! o!) THEN CLS:O!=sc! +5150: scresc +1:GOTO 60 ELSE 100 140 IF C=AND d=P THEN 790 150 GOSUB 1190 160 IF PES AND 9=t THEN 790 179 GOSUB 350 180 IF P-s AND 9=t THEN 790 190 IF sc!<>0 AND sc!/0!=INT(sc! 0!THEN CLS:O!=sc!+5159: scr=sc +1:GOTO 60 ELSE 150 200 GOSUB 1100 219 IF (C=4 AND DEP) OR (s=P AND t=9) THEN 799 220 GOSUB 350 230 IF (C= AND d=P) OR (s=P AND t=9) THEN 790 240 IF sc!<0 AND sc!/0!=INT( Sc! 10!) THEN CLS:O!=sc! +5159: scr=1: IF liv3 THEN liv =liv+1 250 IF SCN=1 THEN 60 269 GOSUB 1100 270 IF (C=4 AND DEP) OR (s=P AND t=4) THEN 790 280 GOSUB 350 290 IF (C=4 AND d=P) OR (S=P AND t= ) THEN 790 300 GOSUB 940 310 IF (= AND DEP > OR S=D AND t=4 ) THEN 790 66 "


"320 IF Sc!<> AND sc!/0!=INT(Sc! 10!) THEN CLSO! =Sc! +5150: scr=1: IF liv<3 THEN liv=liv+1 330 IF scr=1 THEN 60 ELSE 200 340 REM *** MOVE DOTMAN *** 350 PEN 4 LOCATE 9, P: PRINT a 1$CM o): LOCATE 9, P+1: PRINT 22$(MO) 360 OP=p:09=9 370 IF JOY(0)1 THEN Xp:y=4GOS UB 580 IF col=0 THEN P=P-2 380 IF JOYC)=2 THEN X=p:y=9GOS UB 660: IF col=0 THEN PEP+2 390 IF JOYCO )=4 THEN 9=4-1:a 1$(1 D=CHR$( 216 ): 2.2$( 1 )=CHR$(217): ox= OP Oy=09 GOSUB 530: IF col=1 THE N 9=9+1 400 IF JOYC)=8 THEN 9=9+1:a 1$( 1 )=CHR$( 212 ): 12$( 1 )=CHR$( 213 ) che =1Ox=OP : Oy=09: GOSUB 530 che=0 IF col=1 THEN 9=4-1 410 IF OP=P AND 09= THEN MO=1:G OTO 440 420 Mo=( 2-mo)+1 430 PEN 1. LOCATE 1.25: PRINT \"Scor e :-\";USING\"\"; sc! LOCATE O 9, OP: PRINT\" \":LOCATE 09, OP+1 : PRI NT\" \" 440 IF t=C AND s=d AND scr<>2 TH EN 91=92 450 IF P=12 AND 9=21 THEN 9=1 : SO UND 2.200, 25,7,9,1 460 IF P=12 AND 1=THEN 9=20:SO UND 2, 200, 25,7,0,1 470 IF OP=P AND 09=4 THEN 510 480 x=P:y=9 490 GOSUB 740 500 IF Po=1 THEN SOUND 1,100,2 s c!-sc! +50 510 RETURN 520 REM ***TESTS*** 530 Px=(Coy-1 )*32)-1:Py=((26-ox) *16)-22 540 IF che=1 THEN PX=PX+36 550 IF TEST (PX,PY XO THEN col= 1 : RETURN 560 col=0 579 RETURN 580 PX=((y-1)*32): Py=((26-x)*16) +1 590 Px1=PX+24 600 PX2=PX+12 610 IF TEST (PX,Py X>THEN col= 1: RETURN 620 IF TEST (PX2.Py XO THEN col =1 : RETURN 630 IF TEST (Px1,py X) THEN col =1 : RETURN 640 col=0 650 RETURN 660 PX=((-1)*32):Py=((26-x)*16) -33 670 PX1=PX+24 680 PX2=PX+12 690 IF TEST (PX,Py X0 THEN col= 1 : RETURN 700 IF TEST (Px1.Py X) THEN col =1 : RETURN 710 IF TEST (PX2,py X0 THEN col =1 : RETURN 720 col=0 730 RETURN 740 PX=((-1)*32 )+12:Py=((26-X)* 16 )-16 750 IF TEST (Px,py X>0 AND TEST (PX+12, Py)=0 THEN PO=1: RETURN 760 Po=0 770 RETURN 780 REM *** KILLED *** 790 IF scr<>1 THEN PEN 1. LOCATE ot, os: PRINT b1$(91): LOCATE ot, os +1 : PRINT b2$(91) 800 LOCATE 09, OP : PRINT\" \": LOCATE 09, OP+1: PRINT\" \" 810 LOCATE ,P: PRINT a1$(2): LOCA TE 9, P+1 : PRINT a2$(2) 820 1=((4-1)*32)+16: M=((26-P )*16 >-16 830 DEG 840 SOUND 1,100, 200, 7.0.2 850 FOR f=180 TO O STEP -8 860 PLOT 1..0: DRAWR 14*COS(-90 , 14*SINCf-90), 870 PLOT Lm.: DRAWR -C16*COSC90 ), 14*SINCf-90), 880 NEXT 890 FOR f=1 TO 500: NEXT 900 liv=liv-1: IF liv> THEN O!=s c! +5150 : GOTO 60 910 PAPER 2: PEN : LOCATE 4,1: PRI NT\"HIT SPACE BAR\": PEN 1 : PAPER O 920 WHILE INKEY$<>\" \":WEND 930 scr=1:sc!= liv=3:0!=5159 : GO TO 60 940 REM *** ROBOT GHOST *** 950 PEN 1 : LOCATE Cd PRINT 51$(9 2): LOCATE cd+1: PRINT b2$(92) 67 "


"1120 IF t>9 THEN OX=s: oyrt che=0 GOSUB 530: IF col=0 THEN t=t-1: GOTO 1260 1130 IF < THEN ox=soyut che=1 GOSUB 530 che=0: IF col=0 THEN t=t+1: GOTO 1260 1140 IF S>P THEN x=sy=t: GOSUB 580: IF col=0 THEN S=s-2 GOTO 126 1150 IF s<P THEN X=s:y=t: GOSUB 660: IF col=0 THEN S=s+2:GOTO 126 960 READ Cud 970 da=da+1 IF da=259 THEN RESTO RE 1019:da=1 980 IF c=t AND d=s AND scr=3 THE N 92=91 ELSE x=d: y=C: GOSUB 740:9 2=P0+1 990 PEN 2: LOCATE Cd: PRINT CHR$ (210): LOCATE Cd+1: PRINT CHR$( 21 1):PEN 4 1000 RETURN 1010 DATA 2,2,3,2,4,2,4,4,4,6,4, 8:5,8,5,10,5,12,5,14,5,16,6,16,7 16,8,16,9,16, 10, 16, 11, 16, 12, 16, 13,16,14,16, 15, 16, 17, 16, 18,16,19 , 16, 19, 18, 19, 20,19,22 1020 DATA 18, 22,17.22, 17, 20, 17, 1 8,17,16,16,16,16,14,16,12,16,10, 16.8.17.8. 18.8.19,8, 19,6,19,4,19 .2. 182.17, 2, 16,2,15,2,14,2,13,2 , 12,2,12.4,12,6,11,6,10,6,9,6,8, 6.8.8 1039 DATA 7,8,6,8,5,8,5,10,5,12, 5. 14,5, 16,4,16,3,16,2, 16:2,18,2 20.2.22,3,22,4.22,4,20.5.20.6,20 7,29,7,22,8,22,9,22,19,22,11:22 , 12:22,13,22,14,22, 14, 20, 15, 2011 6.2017.20 1040 DATA 17, 18, 17, 16, 16, 16, 16,1 4,16, 12, 17, 12, 18, 12, 19, 12,20, 12, 1, 12,2 12,3,12,4,12,5,12,5,10,5) 8,4,8,4,6,4,4,4,2.5,2,6,27,28, 2.9.2.9,4,9,6,10,6,11,6,12,6,12) 4,12,2,13,2,14,2,15,2,16,2, 17,2, 18,2,19,2.19,4,19,6,19,8,18,8,17 , 8, 16, 8, 16, 19 1050 DATA 16,12,16,14,16,16,17,1 6,18,16,19,16,19, 18, 19, 20,19,22, 18, 22,17.22, 17, 20,16,2015,2014 20,14,22,13,22,12,22.11.22,10,2 2.9.22822,7,22,720,6,20,5, 20, 4,20,4, 18,4,16,5, 16,5, 14,5,12,4, 12,3,12,2,12,1,12 1060 DATA 20,12,19,12,18,12,17,1 2.16, 12, 16, 10, 16,8, 15, 8, 14, 8, 13, 8,13,6,12,6,11,6,10,6,9,6,9,4,9, 2.8, 2.72625,2,4,2,3,2,2,2,2, 4.2.6.2.838,4,8,5,8,5,10,5,12, 5, 14,5, 16,6,16.7.16,8,16,9,16,10 ,16,11,16,12,16, 13, 16, 14, 16, 15, 1 6,16,16,16,14,16,12,16,10,16,8 1070 DATA 15, 8, 14, 8, 13,8,13,6,12 ,6,12,4,12.2, 13, 2, 14, 215, 2 16,2 , 17.2.17,4, 17,6,17,8,16,8,16,10 1980 DATA 16, 12, 16, 14, 16, 16, 15, 1 6,14,16,13,16,12,16,11,16,10,16, 9, 16, 8, 16, 7, 16,6,16,5,16,5, 14,5 12,5 10,5,8,4,8,3,82 ,8 2 ,6,2.4 1099 REM *** FOLLOWING GHOST *** 1100 flag=0 1110 IF RND<0.5 THEN fla9=1: GOTO 1140 1160 IF t+1=4 AND S=P THEN t=t+1 GOTO 1260 1170 IF S-1 =P AND E= GOTO 1260 THEN s=s-1 1180 IF t-1=9 AND S=P THEN t=t-1 GOTO 1260 1190 IF S+1=P AND t= GOTO 1260 THEN S=s+1 1200 IF flag=1 THEN flag=0. GOTO 1120 1210 IF sros AND trot THEN ra=RN D*3 ELSE 1260 1229 IF ra=0 THEN Ox=soy=t: GOSU B 530: IF col=0 THEN t=t-1 1230 IF ra=1 THEN ox=soy=tcher 1 : GOSUB 539 che=9IF col=0 THEN t=t+1 1240 IF La=2 THEN X=Sy=t: GOSUB 580: IF col=0 THEN S=s-2 1250 IF ra=3 THEN X=s:y=t GOSUB 660: IF col=D THEN S=s+2 1260 IF t< Sot OR s os THEN PEN 1 : LOCATE otos: PRINT 619(91): LOC ATE ot,os+1 :PRINT b2$(91):=s:y= t: GOSUB 740:91=P0+1 : PEN 3: LOCAT E tis:PRINT CHR$( 210 ) : LOCATE tis +1:PRINT CHR$( 211 ) 1270 ot=tos=s 1280 RETURN 1290 REM *** START *** 1300 DEFINT a-z 1319 ENT 2.100.10,2 1320 ENT 1,25,-8,1 1330 SYMBOL AFTER 200 1340 SYMBOL 200, 129, 129, 129, 129, 129, 129, 129, 129 1350 SYMBOL 201,255,0.0,0,0,0,0, 255 1360 SYMBOL 202,224,24,4,2,2,1,1 ,129 1370 SYMBOL 203, 129,1,1,2,2,4,24 224 1380 SYMBOL 204,7,24,32,64,64,12 8, 128, 129 1390 SYMBOL 205, 129, 128, 128,64,6 4,32,24,7 1480 SYMBOL 206,0,0,0,0,0,0,24,2 1410 SYMBOL 207,24,24,0,0,0,0,0, "


"One of America's most popular games THE ULTIMATE IN BATTLE ACTION... TM BEACH-HEAD AMSTRAD 64 Incredible 3-D Graphics Unbelievable Sound Effects Unique Games Concept Multiple Screens High Resolution Scenario 100% Machine Language Voted by U.S. Billboard magazine as the best game for sound and graphics on the Commodore 64 It's a unique arcade experience in sound and vision and a stunning display of Amstrad capabilities. Another quality product from ACCESS Software. ANPUNITION Available on CASSETTE OO for THE ULTIMATE IN AMERICAN SOFTWARE FOR YOU ON U.S. GOLD U.S. Gold is stocked by all leading computer stores including: BOOTS WHSMITH JOHN MENZIES WILDINGS WOOLWORTH DEALERS! For information on how to become a U.S. Gold Stockist write to: Centre Soft Ltd., Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4L. Telephone: 021-359 3020. Telex: 337268. Overseas enquiries welcome. WLS GOLD All American Software "


"BA ANG! EN OA GRANT G . BANG .4 BAN : 2.1 BANG! . NG! .2. G! NG! BAN NG! ..+.. ..+ K-BANDS BAN He.. -+ + + ANC [I. NG! 2:1 BANG!» A BANG! .1 (P là ]. BANG! BANG! .1 8: 4 . 3.BANG NG! N 2.1.4) BAG! ANG! G! *.<LANG! 2.1. BANCAKE 61K BA Y BAN STREET Daley Thompson's as SPECTRUM 48 K COMMODORE "


"* BRAND DAN .. GOES TO HOLLYWOOD + . --BANG BANG OR . ! + RBA G!. NG! ANG! ... +ANG! BIG NAMES BIG GAMES * Fecting* UPER times ahead* from the crew at.... TESTS ocean E 64 AMSTRAD . ATARI 80 O "


"Amessage from ENGLISH SOFTWARE ATARI, COMMODORE 64, BBCB, ACORN ELECTRON and AMSTRAD Computers... ATARI .95 Clectron ) (Wit Software companies grow on trees ... at least that's the way it seems from the number of new companies springing up every ATARI SMASH HITS ATARI week! SMASH HITS SATARI ENGLISH SOFTWARE was launched three years ago with a SMASH HITS smashing little game for Atari Computers called AIRSTRIKE 1, which quickly became one of the most popular U.K. programmed games for the Atari. ATARI ATARI Then, as now, Atari Computers were amongst the most BO. RANGE NOW advanced on the planet, but they were a TRIFLE expensive! AVAILABLE But we knew that prices would come down, and that more AT SELECTED BRANCHES OF .959 people would soon appreciate the great range of .95 W.H. SMITH Atari software produced by ENGLISH SOFTWARE. (48K Disk 32K Cas But Atari owners used to be a funny lot, being heard COLOSSUS CHESS 3-0 to utter such gems as: \"It can't be any cop, If it costs less than \" Honestly, that's what they used to sayl Anyway, in the face of this rather strange attitude, we went 48K Disk) ahead and committed the ultimate sin: ATARI GAMES AT .95! .95 We expected some slight resistance to these 48K Cas .95 .95 prices from Atari owners who only equated high BBCBI Amstrad Electron CBM64, 68CBI quality with high prices, but we were wrong: Everybody thought the prices were great, and the .95 N NEW! games too! We even produced the fantastic ATARI CASSETTE ENHANCER at .95, a superb utility program for BIENTESE Fortune BASIC programmers. So now, for those of you who might have missed out on all our excellent Atari titles, we are releasing something very, very special: ATARI SMASH HITS Volumes 1, 2 and 3 from ENGLISH SOFTWARE. .95 .95 .95 Five great games on one cassette for only $14.95, CBM64 CBM64 CBM64 or on disk at .951 Each cassette features our top-rated JET-BOOT JACK plus four other popular titles. So now you have no excuse to miss out on the best range of U.K. produced Atari 400/800/600XL/BOOXL software for 3K machines. If your dealer does not yet have them in stock, ask him to order them from his nearest Atari wholesaler. It will be the best Atari buy YOU will make all year! We have also just released COLOSSUS CHESS 3.0, the best chess program available anywhere for Atari 400/800/600XL/800XL computers with 48K. Very powerful, with lots of excellent features. For our good friends with other home computers, our programmers are busy producing original games for you as well. They are all illustrated on this page. HENRY'S HOUSE on the Commodore 64, and JET-BOOT JACK on the Electron are now available at selected branches of W.H. SMITH. Selected English Software titles are available at: HARRODS and ENGLISH SOFTWARE, selected branches of: LASKY'S, BOOTS, GRANADA COMPUTER ENGLISH SOFTWARE STORES, CO-OP STORES, THE SILICA SHOP Mail Order and Retail and all good software stores. ENGLISH SOFTWARE.. THE ENGLISH SOFTWARE COMPANY ENGLISH SOFTWARE... 1 North Parade, Parsonage Gardens, Manchester M60 1BX ENGLISH SOFTWARE.. TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME: 061-835 1358 ENGLISH SOFTWARE.. "


"1740 PRINT \"IIIJNH HNLIII \" with 1750 PRINT \"LI IKOMIIIIIIIIKOMIIJ 1760 PRINT \"HNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNH 1770 PRINT \"H000000000000000000H 1780 PRINT \"HNPNLIIIIIIIIIIJNPNH \"? CTRL (K) 1790 PRINT \"HOHOMIIJLIIKOHOH 1800 PRINT \"HNHNNNNH HNNNNHNH \"! character 1810 PRINT \"HOQ0O0OMIIIIKO000QOH 1820 PRINT \"HNNNLJNNNNNNNNLJNNNH \" Cupwards 1830 PRINT \"HOOOHH00000000HHOOOH 1420 SYMBOL 208,24, 36,56,66,129, 129, 129, 129 1430 SYMBOL 209, 129, 129, 129, 12 66, 66, 36, 24 1448 SYMBOL 210,0,24,60,126, 126, 255, 219,219 1450 SYMBOL 211,255,255,255,255, 219, 73, 73,0 1460 SYMBOL 212,0,24, 126, 126,255 , 254, 252, 248 1470 SYMBOL 213, 248, 252, 254, 255, 126, 126,24,0 1480 SYMBOL 214,0,24, 126, 126,255 ,255,255,255 1490 SYMBOL 215,255,255,255,255, 126, 126,24,0 1500 SYMBOL 216,0,24, 126, 126,255 , 127,63,31 1510 SYMBOL 217,31, 63, 127,255, 12 6,126,24,0 1520 INK 0.0: INK 1,26: INK 2,11,2 1530 INK 3,11:INK 4,24 1540 DIM a 15(2), a2$(2),b1$(2), b2 $(2):sc!=0 1550 o !=5150 1560 a 1$( 1 )=CHR$(212): 22$( 1 )=CHR $(213):a1$(2)=CHR$( 214 ): 22$(2)=C HR$( 215 ):61$( 1 )=\"\":52$( 1 )=\"\":b 1$(2)=\"N\":b2$( 2 )=\"0\" 1570 scr=1:liv=3 1580 RETURN 1590 REM *** SCREEN *** : BORDER 1: MODE 1600 PEN 1: PAPER 1610 PRINT \"LIIIIIIIIJLIIIIIIIIJ 1620 PRINT \"HNNNNNNNNHHNNNNNNNNH \"! Precede 1630 PRINT \"H00000000HH00000000H 1640 PRINT \"HNPNLI IJNHHNLI IJNPNH 1650 PRINT \" LKOMKOM  1660 PRINT \"HNHNH HNNNNNNH HNHNH 1670 PRINT \"HOQOMIKOOOOOOMIKOQOH 1680 PRINT \"HNNNNNNNLI IJNNNNNNNH these 1690 PRINT \"H0000000H HO000000H 1700 PRINT \"MIIJNLIIK MIIJNLIIK # PRINTS HOMIII 1710 PRINT \"IIIKOH HNNNN 1720 PRINT\" NNNNH (1620-1840) H0000 1730 PRINT\" 0000H ts.\" 1840 PRINT \"MIIIKMIIIIIIIIKMILIK arrow) 1850 PEN 4: LOCATE 1,25: PRINT\"SC ore :-\";USING\"\"; sc! 1860 RETURN 1870 REM ***INSTRUCTIONS*** 1880 MODE 1 1890 PAPER :PEN 2: LOCATE 17,2:P RINT\"DOTMAN\" 1900 PEN 1 1910 PRINT: PRINT\" Use the joysti ck to move the 'dotman'\" 1920 PRINT\"around the maze, eatin 9 the dots,\" 1930 PRINT\" and avoiding the shos 1940 PRINT PRINT\" Each dot eaten scores 50 points.\" 1950 PRINT PRINT\" After all the dots have been eaten.\" 1960 PRINT\"you move on to the ne xt stage, until,\" 1970 PRINT\"after the 3rd stage, t he game repeats.\" 1980 PRINT: PRINT\" The 3 stages a re as follows:-\" 1990 PRINT: PRINT\" 1 A 'robot ghost Patrols the maze.\" 2000 PRINT:PRINT\" 2) A ghost will chase you about the Maze.\" 2010 PRINT: PRINT\" 3} Both sho sts together.\" 2020 PEN : PAPER 2 2030 LOCATE 7,25: PRINT \"HIT THE SPACE BAR TO START\" 2040 WHILE INKEY$<>\" \": WEND: PEN 1 : PAPERO 2950 RETURN 2060 SPEED WRITE 1: SAVE \"DOTMAN\" :SPEED WRITE O: SAVE \"DOTMAN each JUOUOH LKOMKOMJ "


"14 2.CLRW=INT RND 1) 5e G= 5C=2 PRINT\":POKE 53281 2 SOKE 53280,2 2 PRINTE D . ... . ME 41 A 45 PRINT\" . . 46 PRINT\" 3 PRINT\" 2. ! ! 47 PRINTER 4 PRINT\" 5 PRINT\" BE3 TO \" 55 IF LEV=2 THENK=INT (RND(1*58 68 PRINT\" IND FORCE 51 INPUT TYPE IN AIMA 62 G=G+1 : IFG) PTHEN GOTO2858 65 GOSUB 1218: GOSUB2300 2018 POKE 54296, 15 620 POKE 54277,1: POKE 54276.255 POKE 76 129 POKE54273,1: POKE 54272 10 230 FORI=1 TO 100 NEXT: FORK= 15 TO@STEP-5:P 554298 K: NEXTK: POKE54292.aOKE542 228 ORE 1464 +A+W-156 132 POWE55739 A. e 8 FORI=701822 NEXT 25 IF1464+A+W+158=1618 HENGOSU37208 GO BUB12011 GOSUB8800 GOSUB30808. GOSUB 29999 2018 GOSUB1080 FOR I= 1 TO 1080: NEXT GOTO 2 19 6 PRINT\" LF \" 7 PRINT\" BY MARTYN JOYCE 3 PRINT INPUT HOW MANY GOES 18 INPUT VON LEVEL (1/2\" LEV 11 GOSUB 4500 25 PRINT\" ORE \", SC 25 PRINT\" RES SOR 27 PRINTERS DES 28 PRINT0909090 MASA 29 PRINTENDEDOR 38 PRINTERS D ADOS: 0 2942 PRINT\" . . ORE\";SC FOR I=1701208 : NEXT GOT011 2850 POKE 53281,0 : PONE5328.@:PRINT RUNS ON A COMMODORE 64 BY MARTYN JOYCE You have finished your three year training course in the army's finest tank regiment. Today is the final part of your assessment exams and is the final, and hardest, hurdle you have to clear to claim the famous red beret. Strapped into the gunners' seat, you must destroy a mock up of a small village in central Europe. Your ultimate target is a large house on a hill overlooking the village which has been taken over by enemy troops, and is being used as a permanent headquarters. Your job is made more difficult by the changing speed of the wind. You must work the target and take into account the wind before you fire the shell, because the wind speed and direction can change so rapidly. There are two levels in level one there is a constant wind speed and direction and in level two there is a constantly shifting wind speed and direction. The number you enter into the guidance computer of your gun can be positive or negative. "


"75 9808 POKE54296,15 POKE54276. POKE54276 29 FORI=1 TO 10STEP.2 POKE54273, 1: NEXT: 9881 FOR I=30TOOSTEP-.5 : POKE54273, 1 NEXT 9882 FORI=1T0300 NEXT POKE54273, 90B3 RETURN 1880B POKE 1464 +A+W+150,32 RETURN 12211 PRINT . ....... ...... 12922 PRINT 12621 PRINT\" YOU SCORED 50 2868 PRINT\".........ANOTHER GO? 2078 GET K$: IFK$=\"THEN 2070 2030 IFK$=\"Y\" THEN RUN 2090 IFK$( \"N\" THEN END 3807 PRINT\" POKEV+4, 150 POKEV +5,419.FO R!= 1T0100: NEXT: POKE 53280 INT (RND (1)#15 3888 POKE 53281 INT (RND (1) #15 4800 GETAS: IFA$=\"\" THEN3287 4812 FA$) \"\" THEN CLE RUN 4560 PRINT 4581 V=53248 : POKEV+2: 4:POKE2042, 13 4582 FORNET062 READO POKE832+N, Q: NEXT 4503 POKEV +4,24 : POKEV +5188 4524 POKE V +23,4 POKEV +29 4: POKEV +4112 58 DATAB,0,0,0,0.2, 0.0.0..2.2..0.0.0 .8.2,2,2,4,2,0,8,0,0. 16 . 32.0 30.64 5881 DATA 3.255 123.3 255 128.124, 126.8 12 255 252,64,0,2.43 109 148, 19 5ee2 DATA 189, 136, 15.255.248.2.2.2.2.2.3 5188 RETURN 7280 Z=24:X=188 7281 FORI=1 TO 15@STEP.5 POKEV+4 Z+I NEXT 7882 POKEV +4.Z POKEV +5,X POKEV +41.12 RET 8888 POKE 53281, 1: POKE 52188, 1: POKE53281 2 POKE53280,2 12838 SC=SC+10 : RETURN 12500 REM **** 12585 REM **** 125@6 REM ** 22512 REM ** TAN X 64 12511 REM 528 REM ** BY MARTYN JOYCE 538 REM 12548 REM 12545 REM 1260B END 29999 POKE 54296, 15 38800 POKE54276,33 :FORINT0255STEP 10 FOR T=T0188 : POKE54273, INEXTI S8801 POKE 54296, AOKE54273, RETURN | TANNI "


"THE HOBBITCONTEST HOBBIT J.R.R.TOLKIEN C64 Melbourne House 11:10 HOBBiH C&VG/MELBOURNE HOUSE HOBBIT COMPETITION. My answers are: m ..................................... The Hobbit is a classic book — and a classic Adventure game! Philip Mitchell's computerised version of Tolkien's fantasy has become the standard for other graphic Adventures to reach since its release a couple of years ago. Now the game is available for most popular home computers and our mates at Melbourne House have offered us 50 copies of the game for the winners of our grand Hobbit Closing date for the competition is competition. Not only do you get the May 16th, normal C&VG rules aply game but also a copy of the paper and the editor's decision is final. As back Hobbit book complete with usual! Tolkien's own illustrations. Not bad eh? BILBO'S QUESTIONS Disc versions of the game for the 1. Name three of the dwarves who Beeb and CBM 64 are now available set out on the Adventure to the and both have a few new tweaks Lonely Mountain with Bilbo. added. There are also new versions 2. What creatures did Bilbo and the for MSX and Amstrad as well as dwarves get tangled up with while cassette-based games for the BBC, travelling through Mirkwood? CBM 64, Spectrum, and Oric/Atmos. 3. What did Bilbo find in the How do you get your hands on_goblin's tunnels and what powers one? Just answer Bilbo's questions did this object have? below. fill in the coupon and rush it to 4. What is the name of Bilbo's Computer & Video Games, Hobbit nephew and main character in Lord Competition. Priory Court. 30-32 of the Rings, the epic sequel to The Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Hobbit? Name ................................... Address........... Computer I own: CBM 64, Spectrum, BBC, MSX, Oric/Atmos, Amstrad. Would you prefer disc or cassette?. 76 "


"THE LIVING ADVENTURE MOVIE With SENSORY ANIMATION DRAGONTORO THE LOST (REALMS OF THE LOST KINGDOM of the BRIGAN TROLLSTONES THE DRUIDS LAST SANCTUARY CAVCE WISPOD FOREST W E THE LOST WILTS OF gun 08 LACUS NE MEN STONEWAYS WITCHWOODS WEIRDHENGE RO DOVIC HEDRAG TEET A 200 AINED FORTRESS DREAMPOWNS OF THE CARTI LOST REALM DV TORHENGE \"  HIDDENLIES THE SANCTUARY OF HALDOR THE GREAT WOU TOO LOST KINGDOM U CANTI THE CURSED CRYPT OF THE WESTERN WINGS LAY WITHIN Morag the Shapeshifter has siezed the Crown Merlyn from her evil spell. of Dumnovia and is out to find the other four on your travels through the strife tom crowns that make up the Kingdom of Britain kingdoms you can develop magical powers to The five crowns were struck from the help you understand and master the legendary Dragontorc of Avalon in the mysteries of landmarks like the Giant Ring of distant past, and if brought together again Stones, and the Secret Crypts. will allow the keeper fantastic power. Morag The leylines, which can be plotted on the interids to control this Torc of Power and accompanying map, will be your main route subject Saxon Britain to decades of tyranny to the crowns However, you can take the role of Maroc and And for the first time in any adventure game Mage, seek out the remaining crowns, you'll encounter Sensory Animation This combat Morag and release your old tutor programming break-through has given lifelike emotions to the multitude of characters in the game-cross them too often and any chance you have of beating Morag to the crowns may be dashed forever. Add to this a FREE map and scenario full of clues, hundreds of locations, all in 3D, over 200 different discoveries to make, and you have a stunning adventure it could take you a lifetime to completel Dragontorc of Avalon The Living Adventure Movie Avaliable for the 48K Spectrum and Spectrum +. Only .95. (GSH Arcade Adventure with TECHNICIAN TED Try to work through 50 screens of varying complexity but watch out for the most unhelpful workmates you ever came across. Remember, you are working in a factory where nothing is quite what it seems A unique animated loading screen with perfected Collison detection plus detailed and colourful graphics has made Technician Ted one of 1985's top games Clock in with Ted now. For the 48K Spectrum and Spectrum +, .95. For the Amstrad CPC 464, 67.95. AVALON The 3D Adventure Movie Can you get your astral projection Maroc past the Gate House Level, through the Mines of Madness, and onwards to meet the Lord of Chaos himself? Astounding 3D graphics over 223 rooms 27 spells and over 100 animated characters make this the adventure game of the decade. Can you master it sooner? For the 48K Spectrum and Spectrum +. 67.95 HEWSON CONSULTANTS 568 Miton Trading Estate, MiltonAbingdon Oxon X14 4RX As part of our continuing development of innovative software we are always happy to evaluate software sent to us with a view to publication "


"... 7 busy characters, 10 lost chords, 12 hours, 48 Traffic Wardens, 95 London Tube Stations, 126,720 square feet of London, 7 million Londoners ... 943 action filled screens. PAUL MCCARTI my My Lo ards BROAD STREET When the music stops, the mystery begins... MUND GAMES COMMODORE 64 .99 Argus Press Software Group 1985 "


"THE FUTURE OF MANKIND IS IN YOUR HANDS! It's the year 2085. Only a handful of people have survived the robot wars that rocked the Solar System. In a final desperate bid for survival a Tacheon propelled star cruiser has been developed on Earth to transport survivors to new star system. But the cruiser relies on rare lonian crystals for its power: crystals which are only abundant on Jupiter's second moon lo. A moonbase established on lo is under constant attack by aliens from Jupiter. It is your mission tb escort the men and their precious crystals safely from the surface of lo to the Dropzone where the landing pad is located. You are equipped with the latest pulse-laser back-pack system which will make you invisible and indestructible for sbort periods of time. You must succeed, the future of the human race depends on you alone! E doen Supersmooth scrolling screen High resolution graphics Nine different alien attackers Scrolling high speed scanning Exploding volcanoes Ultra fast action Cassette .95 Disk  XXXZ XAXS U.S. GOLDI U.S. GOLD Ltd., Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. Telex: 337268. "


"COMPETITION Stir the Cauldron if you dare, Who knows what you'll find in there! But one thing is for sure, Should you play the game your reward Could be a lot more than just a high score! The mighty wizards of C&VG Have a great treasure in store For the first gamester to crack The Mystery of the Witch's cauldron, So hurry up and get your skates on... SP384 the tie-breaker question below correctly will be the proud owner of the very special Palace Software Dwarf artist Steve Brown, is to help the Golden Broomstick! witch ridher planet of the evilC auldron will be released for the Pumpkins and rescue the Golden Spectrum and Commodore 64 in early OK, so our verse writing isn't up to Broomstick, April and retails at .99. much! But we have got a pretty neat The graphics are simply amazing Don't miss out on this extremely prize on offer for the first person to we can guarantee that you ve not seen exclusive prize, Rush out and grab a complete Palace Software's latest and anything like them on the 64! Our copy of Cauldron now. You know it greatest game, called Cauldron. screen shots just don't do the game makes sense .. Together with Palace Software, justice. Computer & Video Games is proud to The action takes place on, around C&VG/PALACE SOFTWARE announce the greatest Golden Broomand within a planeta self-contained CAULDRON COMPETITION stick Competition! \"world\" packed with nasties and (Please attach this coupon to your Yes, the first person to complete hazards. Your witch can actually ilyentry) Cauldron and contact Computer & around her planet-crossing oceans, Video Games with the proof of their forests and islands before venturing Name. success will soon be the proud owner beneath the surface to do battle with Address ........... of the very same Golden Broomstick the Pumpkins, which is the object of the witch's Cauldron really is a mega-arcade quest in the game. Adventure not to be missed by We revealed exclusive information adventurers and zappers alike. about this great new game for the To win the mighty Golden Broom Tie-breaker quiz: Commodore 64 and Spectrum last stick, all you have to do is get a copy What is the name of the Russian witch issue. The basic idea of the game, pro of the game complete it and bash who has a house built on stilts made grammed by Richard \"Evil Dead out a map of the game. The first out of chicken-legs? Leinfellner and designed by White person to get us a map and answer 80 "


"SPELECOM Link to Giant Mainframes and network to thousands of Micro users via your phone with free Modems and Comms software in the British Telecom Modem competition. MODEM COMPETITION British Telecom is offering 1000 free gift packs to plug direct into your home 'phone line. 1000 FREE MODEMS OFFICIAL ENTRY FORM A. Your answers: 01144144H 500 for Spectrum/Spectrum + 350 for BBC Model B 150 for Commodore 64 And if you haven't got a squaretype BT phone socket, British Telecom will arrange to alter your installation at no charge! IQ5 B. Tiebreaker Sentence complete (25 words or less in total): C. If I win, I would like the prize pack for the SPECTRUM/SPECTRUM + BBC MODEL B (Tick Choice) 0 COMMODORE 64 HOW TO ENTER (Monday 22nd April to Sunday 5th May 6pm to midnight) For the 5 questions 'phone 01-627 3000 or 021-449 9944 or 031-225 8999 To get the Tiebreaker Sentence 'phone 01-627 1199 or 0532 455030 or 0632 324444 Complete the entry form using your skill and judgement, and send it off in the next post. D. My home telephone line (* Delete as appropriate) (a) already has a square-type BT 'phone socket * or (b) would need converting to square-type BT phone socket If(b), the person renting the line from British Telecom must fill in this declarationIf this is a winning entry, I agree to ask British Telecom to convert my line to square-type BT phone socket at a convenient date before 1st July 1985. My line is on Residential rental, is not a coinbox and is not shared service Tunderstand British Telecom will not charge for doing the work. Name Name ....... .......... ....... (Block Capitals) Telephone number... Signature Date 1985 E Thave read the rules of the British Telecom Modem competition and agree to abide by them. I am over 18 years old. Signature of entrant Date Name .............. .. (Block Capitals) Address. RULES OF THE BRITISH TELECOM MODEM COMPETITION 1) The dial.in is available from opm Monday 22nd April to midnight Sunday 5th May 1985, when the competition closes 2) Entries must be postmarked the next working day after the questions and tiebreaker were obtained 3) Entries con only be mode on the official entry forms and become the property of British Telecommunications plc. 4) The competition is open only to residents of the United Kingdom over the age of 18 years. Employees of the Network Marketing Unit of British Tele communications pic and PARKER REDMILE LTD, and their dependents are excluded. Only one winning entry per household 5) Entries not reaching the competition address before midnight on Thursday 9th May 1985 will not be considered 6) A list of winners will be provided at the competition address. Please sendon SAE if you wish to receive it 7) The winners will be picked as follows from entries received on time and property completedThe entries for each type of prize pock with all correct answers to the 5 questions and with the fiebreaker sentences judged most opt ond humorous by the competition organisers will be chosen, subject to the stock of appro priate prize pocks 8) The decision of the competition organisers is final and no correspondence will be entered into Winners will be notified automatically 9) British Telecommunications plc offers winners requesting BT phone socket conversion on entry forms to waive the charge normally made for such work 10) Details of how to get on Prestel/Micronet 800/Telecom Gold will be sent to winners Subscriptions not included in prize Postcode ...... POST IMMEDIATELY TO:British Telecom Modem Competition PO BOX 73 MITCHAM SURREY CR4 2XU (Postage stamp required) WINNERS WILL BE NOTIFIED AUTOMATICALLY British Telecommunications pic. Registered Office 81 Newgate Street LONDON ECIA 7AJ. Registered in England no 1800000 "


"PYRA On an archaeological expedition in North Africa you were separated from the rest of your party by a huge sand storm. After several days of stumbling through the desert on the point of dying of thirst, you found a small oasis and, after drinking as much as you could, you slumped to the ground in a deep sleep. The dust cloud had cleared when you woke and you are now facing three enormous Pyramids. These Pyramids are, as you have recognized from your training, the lost Pyramids of Aaron. No one has seen them for over four thousand years and legends circulate through the whole of North Africa that one of these three pyramids contains the Aaron diamond, a perfect gem the size of a child's head. Fame and fortune will be yours if you can search each of the pyramids in turn and recover the diamond. Unfortunately, the pyramids contain many devious traps and you will have to use your ingenuity to survive. Full instructions are included in the listing. RUNS ON A 48K SPECTRUM BY RICHARD EVANS 10 PAPERINK BORDER C S PRINT AT 21. 0 INK 7: \"UELCO TO THE PYRAMIDS OF AARON 20 FOR f = -80 TO 80: PLOT 150. 1 75: DRAW f-150+ 20 AND 1=-301 PLOT 40 150: DRAW f/2,-65+ (10 ANT Df3-80): PLOT 200 160 DRAW F3 -50+(15 AND 1=-80: LET TE+130 AND = -80: NEXT 25 PRINT AT 210 INK 6 TA GAM E OF SKILL, DEXTERITY RESTORE 31: FOR F CIRCLE 15, 160, Of: NEXT: FORF a, b,c,d: PLOT ab: D . OE noch 0 0 nors 0 220120 A 00 55,0.70 0 DO 0 IN O -10 H: YU1 1 E NEXT : FOR = 1: AT 10 INK DER 2: INPUT : PAUSE 1 O: BEEP .110: INK 7 18 TO 14 STEP -1: PRI 19 PAPER 6: \" \" BEER HOC 2X-ZOV: ZHDEH-: . LIL Udann EU: WHITO Ilu oll in 0 0 HIDTIMH KS COMIHONCH DDON OTODOKLISMO T: 100k HUXH IH HUUTODO DA FUOS -FAITHU1 m 1 H2O THC2DOM I XOIO2020-MO, rimo:\"T --17 TO SU S 11 Drmmm-mm DMTG DOH TROIT Dnorrrr OHHOHXR +mza 56 PRINT AT 21.0; \"DO YOU REQUI 57 IF INKEY $=\" OR INKEYSETY THEN GO SUB 9900: GO TO 50 \"5\" AND INKEY $? R 4: PAPER 4 INKO EFD\": LET li .: LET (LEV=1 LET 5 WN TO OCCO. UO. 1020 00HZ 9 UD EUHID B SO 0000 2 OUTOA NOAO 400 ZOH H0 F QUOS SICH WO A TI RYYOHL th> CIJU O TO: NO FQ | || . T. HEHEH BORDER 4: PAPER 4 mrr Il 10 OOR mus Illustration: Steven Bramble GO SUB 8990+! NT PT X:9; \"D\": RESTO f = 1 TO 7: READ b: NEXT 6 DATA 1.0.2.2.1,0.2,-3,2.-5 T time=time-dif: LET n5=I IF time <=@ THEN GO TO 5000 2 PRINT HOIAT0.0\"TIME LEFT NT line, \"SCORE SCAT 110 VES: \"; 1 $ TO LILET 10)+$1 TO 91 31 LSOOHD "


"AMIDS TRON X FH-04 F 11 110 PRINT AT X,9;\" : LET X LET 91=y: LET Y = y +! $= 3 ) \"5\" AND > 0): IF ATT RX9=3 EN LET X=X 1LET Y=y1 111 IF 9=32 OR (y=31 AND ATTR ix,y)=32) THEN LET I 1LET Sc=INT SE+ILIEW+ti EWELLE +1. GO TO 80 F ATT B (x +1,9 < >8 THEN GO =\"9\" THEN GO SUB 6000 ** THEN GOSUB 6100 =ATTR (x,y!: LET 1 EAT ME WIDZ OM OOHH OHSXSWRRDEORDZOT OSSOLGOSON POWWE H HUUHH THHOHTAI SINGSORS OTSIOS.C DODUITM Tom II TUTTI 11 11 EITTHHIH 0 0a) 32 THEN GO SUB 2003 1 =22 THEN GO TO 5000 AT x,y; \"D\" AND PI \" ET PENOT P fall10 THEN GO TO Sana 1 =32 THEN LET fail=fall :01,20: PRINT AT X, Y; \" eft t oti. CC 1020 V X + HLLXHHS II TI ILLUHOD ZUL 0000 -I H Z 01,10 LET fall = D GO THEN LET : 1 =3: LET X .: RETURN 08 THEN GO TO 5000 2 THEN GO TO à: STOP HT 1: FOR F=1 PRINT AT X, .03,4 PRINT AT X,Y: 03, 7 PRINT AT X, YA\" 10: PRINT AT X, \"F\": COM --MOU SO . GUIT . . . 5010 PRINT AT x 9\" FORTE TO 10 STEP-1: BEER.01.: NEXT 5020 LET liuli-1: IF Tin THEN G O TO 5040 5030 FOR f = TO 10 STEP.3 BEEP 5040 FOR P = TO 4 EP.1 : BORDE Rf: BEEP 03,-f*10: NEXT F 595@OLSLET ESE\" THE PYRAMID : 5060 FOR F=1 TO_100: BEEP 01 AN D*10+30: LET SEINT (RND+32) +1: Ei RINT AT 10,9-1; _INVERSE 1:59: BOSE D DODGE 5070 PRINT AT 10. INVERSE 5080 PRINT AT 12,2 INVERSE 1: OU SCORED *;50;\" POINTS\" 5090 PRINT AT 210 \"PRESS ANY KE Y TO START AGAIN....\": PAUSE 1: PAUSE 0:30 TO 50 6000 LET Yd=1: LET D=\"F\" GO TO 8190 LET 4d=-1: LET $=\"E\". GOT 0: PRINT AT X,Y : D : RESTORE 6390 FO =1 TO 5 LET ME=MES PR TX9\"\": LET X1 EX: LET 1 EAD XX:94: IF X+XX <0 OR Y + 31 OR yyy < THEN RETURN 6.301 IF ATTR (X+XX, yyy 32 THE N LET X=X+XX: LET Y=y+yy: RETURN 6910 LET X =X+XX: LET Y=y+99: PRI 6320 EEE 01. JEJ NEXT TO RETUR 8390 DATA -1,0,-1,0,-1,4d.o.40,1 1,0 1,0 8000 RESTORE 8001: FORTED TO 63 ! READ SPOKE USR \"\"+18 NEXT f: RETURN 8001 DATA BIN 11000, SIN 100100 00 BIN 1111100. BIN 11011 BIN 110 00,BIN 100100, BIN 1000010 8002 DATA 255 170,85 170.85 170 85 255 8003 DATA BIN 100, BIN 1001010BI N 1101001 BIN 1910031 BIN 100000 1 BIN 10010011, BIN 10011010, BIN ini 8004 DATA BIN 11000 BIN 1001.B IN 111110 BIN 11011000 BIN 1100 BIN 100100, BIN 1000010 83 MENU "


"Z SS 00, BIN 99-19 00 DOO . wo 0 U:: 000 RINT ASS=19: FOR PRINT AT F INK ; \" : 9041 FOR F=17 TO 3 STEP -5: PRIN T AT 18; INK @ PAPER 1: \"BB\"; AT 9042 FOR F=4 TO 17PRINT AT INK 6; PAPER 2 \"cccccccc\": NE 1 9043 FOR F=2 TO 10: PRINT AT 11 2;\" : NEXT F: PRINT AT 11, 12 \";AT 12, 12INK ; PAPER 1 Dat 1851-.PRINFPER 1) + * DORTH 002 OH : 21 . M 8005 DATA BIN 10110 BIN 101100 0,BIN 101000, BIN 11 BIN 11 01 , BIN 10001000, BIN 8006 DATA BT a, BIN 10100 BIN 1111000, BIN 10011110 BIN 100 01 BIN 100000, BIN 1000000 8007 DATA 0,0,0,BIN 11000, a.. 8008 DATA BIN 10000, BIN 101000 B IN 1100101, BIN 10000110, BIN 1101 000, BIN 19000, a, a 9000 LET time =55: LET X=1 FOR ! =2 TO 19 STEP 2: FOR DEO TO 1: P RINT AT 1+1,0; INK | PAPER 1; \"B BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB\" ( TO 1/2+7); AT n+ 26-f/2, \"BBBBBBBBBBBBBBB \" NE XT : NEXT F 9001 FOR FED TO 31 STEP 3: PRINT PAPER 2; INK 6; AT 0,f;\"\": NEXT 9002 PRINT AT 20.0 INK 6; PAPER 2; \"cccccccccccccccccccccccccccc 9009 RETURN 9010 LET time =58: LE =2 TO 21: PRINT AT INK : \"BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB BBBBBBBB\": NEXT I 9011 LET X2=9: LET 42 1: FOR n=1 TO 10 R FOR F=1 TO 4: READ XX =X2+XX: LET Y 2 =y2 +9y: INT (RND *2); INK 6 PA AND F=2): NEXT LET LET Y 2 =y2 +1: NEXT 2 FOR 1 = 1 TO 7: PRINT AT ; **: NEXT F 9013 PRINT AT 17,30;\" \";AT 18,3 9019 RETURN 9020 LET tim e = 110: LET X=19: FOR f=10 TO 20 STEP 5: PRINT AT F ; INK : 1 \"BBBBBBBBBBBBBB PRINT AT F.3 1; \"B\": NEXT 7: PRINT AT (RND +7 INT (RND +17) +5; INK 5 PA 23 PRINT AT 21,0 INK 6; PAPER Cocccccccccccccccccccccccccc TAD THI ZD. Hm DX SC 600 CMT NT AT [42-1; INK 0; PAPER NEXT AT 10,26; \"B\"; AT 8, 29; \"B\"; AT 6, 26 PRINT INK \"B\"; AT 4,29; \"B\" ; 9047 PRINT AT 21, .: \"  INK 61 PAPER 9048 PRINT AT 0,31; \"\"; AT 1,10 \";AT 19,0\" ..\";AT 9:17 AT 2:1 M AT O RET SANOAT 3SINE 6 PBER TO NEAT DET X2 2013 PNEXT 9050 LET time=43: LET XE : FORF FOTO 28 STEP 2: LET AND EP 4: PRINT INKO; PAPER 1 AT : FOR n=f/2+4 TO 20 ST = + (RND >.5 fi \"B\": NEXT 9051 PRINT AT 19,28; PAPER 1; IN : NEXT F 9052 PRINT AT 20, 2; cccccccccccccccccccco INK 5 PAPER 9059 RETURN 9060 LET time = 87 F=20 TO 2 STEP-1: PRINT AT 23-1 LET X=17: FOR fi INK @ 9061 FOR PAPER 1: \"B\" PAPER 2: AT 1,28= 1 TO 18: PRINT INK 6; NEXT cccccccccccccccccccc\" \"cccccccccccc TO +41 cccc muz -OOTO in 1 || IL X. 9 0.00 0 00 SOX 00 OLX. DO 11x OX X I II || tu tu tu 17 : DHE E + L + CUCO. x + + Z TI 9 TI TI 0.99 OSZ IH + H I 0 DOS 000 0 . SHO Z ZON JI 4 III + 1 CHI + 00 W : O : | 0000 TI T . 00 ZE 0 0 0 0 cu: : OSS | | | 0 WIE MSIM I TI |-E 0. 2. 0 0 cm on WMOZ II NEEZ 200.00 0 0 11.000 0 m* IMHOW XO IDIO 000: OH 0 EX000 HOOOH 000 0. YU 1 OF 0 00 0 0 . LIZ II 100 m. H. ZO-000 JOHOHOL: 0 .00 1000 ZOOL 00 .. 0 0 H 1000 02OX 0000 PE Z X = . 1 | Won (OHOWO E ZOO Z O + O ! H 1. [ |... 0 0 OZIL Z: HELE O .... . EZAZE 0 TI TI W H S C ] Z H [ 0. H TI pu i th . 0 . 0 00: 00 Hi j IN UEF 0 H LOU II = 20 . -AT 2 E 0 INK ; P 4,21; ; \"BBBBBBBBB it;   . Q. H: OZIL: IHOLO AT20 T FOR 2018 To 13STER AT 8:17; \".\" PRINTY NEX 16 14 OD: mm 11DUS 'DOO 00 -TO roo EllHHHO zzazo -DELENO 699918 00 EL: 0.= COUNOH 300 5; INK 0; PAPE T 20, 10 \"BB AT 17,21; \"B\"; Blistedicetcétcentcétebetes -100: UOSE EW ZZ T000 BB 8831FOR NEXTBBBBBBBBBBBAS PAPER HV 00 00 OI TU UTOZDRD EXT, 10OBRINI, 17 1: NEXT f STEP-1 PRINT AT FOR_f=10 TO 1 =17 TO 19: PRINT AT NEXT PRINT AT 1 PRINT INK 6: PAPER 2; \"AT 19,26 \"CCAT INT INK O PAPE ; AT 12:26; \"B\"; AT FOR 1 =18 TO 11 STE f-1; INK : DAB -2,1 \"B : NEXT F STEP 6 70 LET time = 150 FOR =11 TO 1 PRINT INK 6 fi; \"CC\", AT 9071 PRINT AT 21, +3,2; \" PAPER 2: A 2; \"cccccccccccccccccccccccccccc o\": NEXT INK 6; PAPER 9972 FOR AT 20,f; INK ; PAPER_1; \"B\": LE =3 TO 31 STEP 3: PRINT Tf=f+INT (RND #3): NEXT 9073 FOR 1; INK O = 1 TO 21: PRINT AT 1,3 9074 FOR PAPER 1, \"B\": NEXT F INK O = 4 TO 17 STEP 4: PRINT +2,30; \"B\": NEXT F PAPER 1; AT 7.27; \"B\"; AT 9075 PRINT AT 1,3; INK 1; \"BBBBBBBBAT 116BBBBBBBBBB BBBBBB : PAPER D ZOO 00 00 MU 1) "


"SPRING INTO ACTION FOR TODOH :ZEM Z Welcome to Blabgor, home of Gribbly Grobbly, one of a race of peaceful creatures who have developed their brain to such an extent that they can move around entirely by thought power alone, their intelligence or Psi being stored in their Psi banks which must be topped up regularly The hills around them are infested with more primitive creatures who are out to attack and carry off the younger Blabgorians, known as Gribblets. In this exotic world the Gribblets lead a carefree life and can be found playing behind rocks, over the lakes and on mystical floating islands. Can you herd the threatened Gribblets to the safety of the cave? Trying to stop you is Seon, a wayward Blabgorian, who is now imprisoned in the skies behind the energy web. But for how long? Played over 16 colourful and titled screens, each 30 times the on screen display this highly original game incorporates detailed graphics, smooth all direction multispeed scrolling, stunning sound effects and is controlled entirely by joystick for quick response. You'll see how well you're doing by Gribbly's expressions too many frowns means that you need more practice! Bounce out and get your copy now! Only .95 For the Commodore 64 LUNATTACK (GSH 3D Lunattack Flying your Luna Hover Fighter, try and penetrate the 3 successive Seiddab zones to destroy their command base. Up to the minute status reports on your fighter's condition and the Seiddab defences make Lunattack the space adventure of the decade. May the power be with you! For the Commodore 64 .95 Heathrow International ATC Use your detailed radar screen to guide incoming aircraft including Concorde safely down from holding stacks to the runway at Heathrow Emergencies such as unknown aircraft Intrusion and radio failure call for ice-cool concentration For the Commodore 64 .95 HEWOO CONSULEAnt 568 Milton Trading Estate, Milton Abingdon Oxon OX14 4RX As part of our continuing development of innovative software we are always happy to evaluate software sent to us with a view to publication "


"PLAY THE GAME 48K SINCLAIR ZX SPECTRUM 48K SINCLAIR ZX SPECTRUM SIST, SUSISIKISS 5STE BBC MODEL B 1:2 OS 48K SINCLAIR ZX SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 Oy Staffel KERETA CANJE \"KNIGHTLORE\", \"UNDERWURLDE\", \"SABRE WULF\", and \"STAFF OF KARNATH\" recommended retail price .95 inc VAT. Available from W.H.SMITH, BOOTS, J.MENZIES, WOOLWORTHS and all good software retail outlets. Also available from ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME, The Green, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire LE6 5JU (P&P are included Tel: 0530 411485 "


"HOT SEGA FROM THE ARCADE WINNERS released *NOW* SPY HUNTER NEW! U.S. Gold is stocked by Bob John Menzies WILDINGS WOOLWORTH, WHSMITH, Rumbelows and Spectrum Shops HUNTER THE OFFICIAL HOME VERSION OF BALLY MIDWAY'S ARCADE HIT . You control the turbo charged race carlhydro spy boat. . You control a deadly arsenal of missiles, machine guns, oil slicks and smoke screens. Sophisticated spy-challenging graphics. ARCADEGA Bali/MIDWAY Tontown OFFICIAL ARCADE BUCKROGERS * * * OFFICIAL OFFICIAL By/MIDWAY OTADE NEW! ARCADE ot COMMODORE CASSETTE 9.95 12.95 SPECTRUM CASSETTE Exclusive manufacturers for SULA and Belly DWAY. 7.95 OFFICIAL For release schedule and trade details contact: Centre Soft, Unit 10. The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. Telex: 337268. "


"UUE Meet the Gang! Wilma Tom Dick Herbert STEVE ST EVER MULTI-ROLE ARCADE ADVENTURE Includes Hit Single on reverse \"Everyone's A Wally\" performed by Mike Berry Spectrum 48K .95 Commodore 64 .95 Available shortly on Amstrad CPC 464 44 The Broadway, Bracknell, Berks. 0344 427317 MIKRO-GEN "


"D 132 FOR PAPETOS ies T Duro O PAPERT 20 9976 PRINT INK Di PAPER 1; AT 6.1 2; B\"; AT 4,15; \"B A 14, 16; T 12, 13; \"B AT 10,10; \"B\";AT 6,4; \"B\"; AT 4 9077 FOR F=5 TO 18 PRINT AT | INK 6; PAPER 2; \"0\", NEXT 9078 FOR =4 TO 14 INT AT fi 6; INK 0; PAPER 1 \"B\" NEXT : L ET X=4: PRINT INK ; PAPER 1; AT 10,0; \"B\";AT 20,0; \"BBBBB\"; AT 20,2 7; \"BBBBB 9679 RETURN 9080 LET time=43: LET X=0: FORF \"; INR =O TO 69: PRINT PAPER 1; \"B\";: NEXT | 9081 PRINT AT 21,0 INK 6: PAPER 2: \"cccccccccccccccccccccccccoco 9082 FOR PEO TO 21: PRINT AT 7.3 1; INK 5 PAPER 2; \"C\": NEXT 9083 PRINT AT 16,31;\" \"AT 17:31 ; INK PAPER 1 \"B\" 9089 RETURN 9090 LET time = 126: 9110 FOR FEO TO 50 S 128, 144: DRAW INK 25: DRAU INK 6;P 2: PLOT DRAW INK 6: PAPER INK 6 PAPER 1: 9111 FOR F=9 TO 10 STEP 2: PLOT 25 NEXT F fif: DRAW 255-f*2.0: DRAU f*2 DRAW (255-*2), (175-*2): NEXT , 1759112 FOR F=2 TO 170 STEP 10: PLO DRAW 0,T F : DRAW PAPER 2; INK 7:20, DRAW PAPER 2; INK 2; -20.5: PL 255, F 5: DRAW PAPER 2; INK 7:20,5 DRAW PAPER 2 TF: FOR f =2 TO 250 STEP 10 INK 7; T10: DRAW PAPER 2; INK 7; NEX DRAW PAPER 2) INK 7:5,-20 f. 175: DRAW PAPER 2 : DRAL PAPER 2; INK 7; 5,20NEX INK 7:5,PLOT TF 9114 RESTORE 9111: FOR FEL TO 20 SOHOOOHH OH O ... A UNDSFO OCUM HNX-Croc cu 50000 WA HOTUOTT. ADOT TIOMICE DODITI 100 & FUNZ JHA OA ONEIDZ :3 DO D . 0 U U . :DDUHE Um DIMENE m G DH EVO -20. I DHOU XOXO II 2092 PRINT AT 17,0;\"\";AT 18,0; . DES BEEP Coloni 20 ZOO in 0 + HOCNO --. 0 HOO . 0.00 0 H00 0 00 O 000 JEHO 0 ELo 11-0009 0 WIL 20 HE0 o 0 0 0 IHU Qu90HOX005 N 0OZHO 1 : OF OS 0.02OH-000000 .. DO Z 0 UK. 0 0 000E OZDO . 0 .00 003 000 t . 0 0 . : : 0009 0 -09 0 00 cu 1 : .01 009OHI HIDHE : S 0 5 z : I .. T. 4. : : -: : 3 : I 6 : 0 0 : oz O: NO EN IN : EE1010 HS T-00 $ 01 . :00 U TIJ CU SITE N = 10 : +: . . : 0 : SM F-Z | . U H X L T Ch. Z. 2000 0.00 (:00 i tu 110 O 003 HO : 09. O l S . : 0 = : -. 0 1 O Ch 0 000 LOH CE + +1: 5 + .. Z .. . CCN +0: SECUNZONOUT . NII I. H C WILL 100 OH W 0 ILI H . W . . Cu c CUEIL ZU Il on O .DOC CO HU XQUIZIS EXOTFUL : EUWE DO 0 : T XHO Z -0 O 0 : 900. 0LX0... : HOLIDA OF HIS ON 4.2 Z .. . \" AT 12, 16; \" AT 15, 14 AT 1 \" AT 18, 14;\" \" AT 19, 15;\" 94 FOR I = 10 TO 19: PRINT AT \" NEXT 1; AT 13 BB; AT 13,20\" : \"BHAT T 16,197 000 DTU HD D OLUI: 00. SEEG: . 1. DO BEEP .03 XOODS I 12: PRINT AT 1 ; INK ; P \" AND F< > 121: NEXT F: PRINT AT 1 $109AT16 9121 PRINT AT 17, 3: PRESS ANY KE Y TO TRY AGAIN\"; AT 18, 7, WAT A HA 9122 GO SUB 9125+INT (RND+7) 9123 IF INKEY $=\"* THEN GO TO 912 9124 LET ile = LET S CES C +1000 LET li =li + (li S1 Llev +1: LET lev=1: O: LET difudif+1.1 AND dif(1): _ GO TO 9000 25 PRINT AT 10.5; G\" 24: PRINT AT 10.6\"#\" 126 PRINT AT 4,25\"G\": BEEP. RETURN 31: PRINT AT 425 7 PRINT AT 1620; \"G\": BEEP . H 3,36: PRINT AT 16 20:\"H RETURN 9128 PRINT AT 18, 3: RETURN 40 PRINT AT 18 G\" 9129 PRINT AT 3,3; BEEP 03 H: RETURN 43: PRINT AT 3,3; H 9130 PRINT AT 3,28; ETURN 43: PRINT AT 3, 28; \" 9131 PRINT AT 18,28; \"G\": BEEP . : RETURN 3.28: PRINT AT 18, 28; 9900 PAPER 4: INK RETURN : BORDER 4 9910 PRINT AT 0,0; PAPER 2 0 7; \"INSTRUCTIONS: -\" 9920 PRINT INK ed the lost Pyramids Of AARON. YOU have discover Legand says that somewhere isni de the many rgest most rooms the is the la all the valuable diamond in various tombs you will disco galaxy\" In th PoisonouSTOCKS (\"; INK 5; PAPE R2;\"C\"; INK at mean instant death if you sh PAPER 4;\") ould touch one.\" 9930 PRINT to 10 times YOU May fall UP y only walk or jump onto the wood your height and ma en beams 4;\"), \"; PAPER 1: \"B\" 9940 PRINT ? PAPER mp left, 5-Walkleit, 8-Walk right To Move Use 4-JU & 9-Jump right\" 9950 PRINT #0; AT 1,0; \"PRESS ANY KEY TO START PLAY... 9950 IF INKEYS THEN GO TO 996 9970 RETURN : 6069 RETURN 9100 LET time=93: LET 17 TO 4 STEP -2 uramewhere ne a X 9102 FOR 10 TO 13: PRINT AT PA APER 1; \"B\"; INK 25 OH AT 1:27\" \"; INK ; PAPER INT INK | PAPE AT 15, 25: \"B\"; 9103 PRINT AT 21,0 INK 6; PA 2; \"cccccccccccccccccccccccco FOR 3 TO 21: PRINT AT 1,3 \"C\": NEXT F PRINT INK PAPER 1; AT 5.3 AT 7.30; \"BB\": AT 8.28; \"B A T 10,25 \"B; AT 18:29 \"B\"; AT 21 2 9106 PRINT AT 4,29;\" \"; AT 6, \"\", AT 11, 27; AT 13,25 9109 RETURN S OVDE : ) -Oll D HDCOD CODURI DO O DO U "


"WAMEO DEFENDE RUNS ON VIC 20 IN 3.5K BY SHAUN MULLINS REM DEFENDER REM BY SHAUN MULLINS FEM UNEXPANDED VIO EREN INSTRUCTIONS GOSUB1030 12 BA=4* (PEEK (36868 AND 129 -64* PEEK (368 AND120) POKE36879.47 POKE36867,44 RINT INTEIN THIS GAME YOU MUST RINTUS TOP AN ALIEN INVASION 100 PRINT ONE ALIEN LANDS. 10 PRINT YOUR SCORE 18 SHOWN -PRINTS GOOD LUCK 128 PRINT R INPUT DIFFICULTY PRINT 1-HARD TO 3-EASY 128 GETAS: IFVAL A CORVEL 3 STHEN:23 235 FORW=370202 NEXT 136 REM GAME 139 POKE 36869.255 1-B PRINTS FORI=3 +505 POREI, 60 NEXT HEVAL CAS +1 BY:=1 Y2=5Y3= 19 SEBA431 Li R=27 0=26 F=28C= 250 A1= INT(RND (TI #28 T) A2=INT RND (TI* 20BI=INT (RND (TI 3 B2=INT (RND (TI*3-21) POKEY YAPOKEY+ 42: POKEY+2, 43 188 LEPEEK ( PIFLOFANDLORANDLOOT-EN22 TE! 15 IL IL LILLL PRINT BT SHOOTING T PRINT I TH YOUR RINT CONTROL RINT LEFTE RINT RIGHT= RINT LAZERSEN GOSUB 1288 PRINTO THE ALIENS MOVE IN 3 PINT DIRECTIONS RINT DOW Illustration: Dorian Cross 20 IFL=FTHENSBO 200 I FLERANDY CR 1 THENPOKEOV=Y+1 POKEY Y POKEY+1, 42 POKE-2 73 GO TO220 213 IFL=OANDYOL 1 THENPOKE+20YEVPOKE + 1 POKEY +1,42 POKE +2 43 222 G=G+1:1FGH THENGE 1 238 ONGGOTO240 250 280 138, 180, 180, 188.1 SO 180, 180, 180 PRINT | DISON-EL INT LEFT AND RIGHT\" FRINTO THE GAME ENDS WHEN "


"Verb Aridis, a planet on the far side of the Milky Way, has slowly, over the last hundred years, been becoming drier and drier. Almost the entire planet's surface has now become inhospitable desert and scrub land, and the Aridians are now threatened with extinction. Desperate to save their race, they launch into space on a mission to invade Earth known throughout the galaxy as the \"ocean planet\" -and resettle the population of Aridis. Obviously, the governments of Earth are less than happy about this arrangement and have banded together their defence systems in an attempt to stop the advancing Aridis squadrons. You have been drafted in to handle one of the laser gun turrets based on the ground. Your job is to destroy all the Aridian ships which escape through the first lines of defence. But you will have to be fast because they are only in range for a few seconds and, even if only one ship touches down, Earth will be finished. Full instructions are included in the game. HE 243 A=41 B=B1: GOSUB268 1=A GOTO1SC 25 8 A=A2 B=32 GOSUB250 A2=GOT0188 268 A=A+B IFPEEK (A) =CORPEEK A = 24 THENPOK ERS.POKEA, 24RETURN 26 POKE36869.255 28 PRINT THE ALIE LANDED EEX 986+H POKE 368 240 1 POKE36878,15 FORL= 1T028 FORM=220-L TO 69-2 TEP-4 POKE36876.M NEXTM 22 FORM=168-LTO220-LS TEP4 POKE36876, MEN ETM NEXTL POKE36878 PORE 36876, 280 PRINT YOU ZAPPED PRINT GINVADER 29: PRINT SKILL LEVEL\" H-1 IFSHATHENA -101 348 GOT0238 650 POKE36877 128 FORX=15 TO@STEP-1 POKES 6878, X 368 FORZ=1T020 NEXTENEXTX 378 POKE36877, POKE36878.8 386 RETURN 1080 PRINT PRINTHIT A KEY 1818 GETAIFAS=\"THEN1210 1820 PRINT\"; RETURN 1226 REM GRAPHICS 1838 DATA126,219,25 55 68 102.66, 195 1948 FORA=7360T073 ADB:POKEA, B NEXT 1858 DATAB,0,0,0,1 15 15 1869 FORC=7176 T071 READD POKEC.D: NEXT 1078 DATA24 24,68 255 255.255.255 2880 FORE=7208T072.15 READF POKEEF NEXT 1998 DATAB,0,0.6,248 248 248 249 2188 FORG=7320707327 READH POKEG, H NEXT 1118 DATA24 24,24,24 24 24, 24, 24 1120 FORI=7376 T07383 READJ POKEI,J NEXT 1130 DATA126,219, 126 126.60.36,66, 36 240 FORK=7168 T07175 READL POKEK, L NEXT 1.68 PKE55,255 POKE56, 27 1.78 FOR 1 =7424T07431 POKE1, NEXTI 1888 RETURN PRINT TETOHIGH SCORE B ENE H1 POK 1836 +H, H1 IFSH 1 THENHINS H1=H1(S) 295 S=2 GOTO 128 380 N=Y-21 FORI=MTOTSTEP-22 IFPEEKI)=CT HENPOKEI, 26 NEXT: GO TO 338 310 S=S + 1 POKE! GOSUB35 IFIA1 THENA 15 INTRND (TI)*20+T) B1= INT(RND (TI) *3 +21) G OT0838 328 A2=INT (RND (TI)*20-T B2=INT (RND (TI) 9-21 538 J=1 FORI=MTOJSTEP-22 FOKEI, O NEXT: G= G-1 FG 2 THENG= 1 READY "


"BUG HUNTERS WRITE TO HEAT COMPUTER& VIDEOGAMES PRORY COURT, 30-32 FARRING DON LANE, LONDON ECIR 3AU.OR PHONE ME ON:Q1-2516222. Almost half of my monthly mailbag hear that Keith is in the process of consists of letters containing cheat getting online, Gareth, and will soon HELP FOR THE VIC codes for various games. You know, have his own mailbox number. those secret POKES that let you get Maurice Poole says \"On Sherlock, MJ Davies, like many others, straight to the hardest screen, or type 255 spaces and see what complains about the lack of Vic tips. code words to give you unlimited happens\". To remedy the situation, he's sent me lives. This month, Bug Hunter, the following very useful list. So, all Enterprises brings you a host of CODENAME CHEAT! you Vic owners, get your digits cheating POKEs so, if you're stuck tapping and try these: at level one on your favourite game, Now, all you potential cheaters, Perils of Willy: For infinite lives, read on. We may have just the here goes... reset the Vic then POKE 36879,8: information you're looking for. Ian Farrelly says that for 255 lives on POKE 646,1. Rewind the tape and Zalaga for the BBC, type *LOAD VERIFY. When the cursor appears, FALL GUY PROBLEM \"ZALAG3\", then ?&301B=&FF and type SYS 64802. Then type LOAD and CALL &4522. For the equivalent on press PLAY. After a while, the word First, though, a note about the Fall FRAK, *LOAD \"FRAK22\" READY will be printed. Press Guy for the Spectrum, from Elite. The ?&305B=&FF then CALL &468A. RUN/STOP and RESTORE then POKE turbo loader used on early copies of If you have the CBM Ghostbusters 11020,204. SYS 12269 should start the the game has been causing problems with many cassettes, and the game is game and want some more money, game. For Vic Jet Pac, rewind the here's a name and account number now sold without the fast loader. If you still have an early copy and are which will give you $260,500. Bray. cassette and LOAD the loader having problems, return it to your Chris is the name, and the number is program. Change lines 50 and 110 to dealer who should be able to get it 110 DATA 160, 31, 32, 66, 2435, 160, 05005211. JG Gunning says that, for endless 255, 140, 232, 35, 136, 140, 219, 35, 76, replaced for you. lives on Motor Mania for the 64, POKE 29, 32 DISKS FOR THE 64 8646,255 and then SYS 8000. Type Run. The game will load and Still on Motor Mania, Kamal Farmah both players will have 255 lives. Paul Filmer writes from Kent in suggests that when you get out of the suggests that, when you get out of the Next, Abductor. Reset the Vic, reply to an earlier letter about gas station, turn left instead of going rewind the tape, VERIFY the loader copying cassette-based games to straight on. You will disappear to and stop the cassette. LOAD the main disk on the 64. Paul recommends where the police car usually comes program then POKE 6869,255 and DOSOFT which costs .99 from 2 9 from 2 from. Push the joysuck TOE WA from. Push the joystick forward and type RUN. Oakmoor Avenue, Blackpool. I you'll find that whatever comes near Finally, Myriad. Reset the VIC, haven't tried the program myself but, can't kill you. rewind the tape, VERIFY the loader if you're looking for such a program, Next, US Gold's Zaxxon for the 64.and LOAD the main program. POKE write to the company and ensure that courtesy of Paul Smith. Type the 1512,255 and then SYS 1175. Again, it will do what you want BEFORE you word RED at the start of the program you'll have 255 lives. Thanks, Mr send off any money. to enter cheat mode. You are now Davies, the cheque's in the post! immortal MICRONET There's a bug in Roland In The DIY WITH C&VG! MAILBOX Caves for the Amstrad, according to Ian Leitch. When you fall in the cave, Next, here are some of the hit the down-arrow key as soon as Redmond O'Leary says he actually messages I received this month via you appear. The machine thinks that likes all the adverts that appear in Micronet. If you're a member, my you have jumped out of the cave and C&VG. He says that they're so colourmailbox number is 012 786 556. David multiplies your points total by 10. ful, he papers his bedroom wall with them. And, because there are so Thomas says that, when playing On Crazy Kong for the 64, says Match Day, it is possible to stand with Andrew Mills, stop the program by many, he can change them every the ball just bouncing up and down pressing RUN/STOP and RESTORE. month, saving him the cost of the on your head. It's a useful way of Then, LIST 400 and look for a statepaint. So you see, what other magazine lets you paper your wasting time, he says. Hmmm! ment that says L=L+1. Change the l PR Russell simply writes to tell me to a 9 and this will change the level of bedroom for just 95p a month?! that he's Elite, while Leigh Hoyte says play. there's a bug in Fred for the Bonde offers the following tip for Finally this month, a word to the Spectrum. Fire at a ghost while it's Mr E on the BBC. First. *LOAD person who sent me a mailbox on passing through a wall, says Leigh, \"MAIN PROGRAM\" 1900 then enter: Micronet asking what I do on and your score increases dramatic ?&IECB = &EA. Then use CALL Saturday nights. Open letters, ally. &4300 to start the game, and you will usually! And write Bug Hunter. Gareth Clegg asks if he can write to be immortal. Keith Campbell through Micronet. I BY ROBERT SCHIFREEN 92 "


"SGPCriencedze thepillop Formula One 7207oracing PHIE. POSITION!! ATARI ha EAT AT This genuine reproduction of one of the worlds most popular arcade classics gives you the chance to experience the thrill of Formula One motor racing! Enter the practice sessions. Race against the clock to quality. Dice with other drivers for the lead. Only your skill and endurance see you to the chequered flag first! CASSETTE -95 DISK 14-95 GOLD. Premier Arcades from pat "


"ARCADE IT'S A RECORD FOR ROBOTRON! INBALL James Thomas has done it determined not to use his again! After a marathon secret weapon caffeine attempt to play Robotron into tablets until they were the ground, we believe that a absolutely necessary. new British record now During short restbreaks to stands. give him time to recharge his MR DO CLOWNS James is a second year batteries, James' trusty lieugeology student at Leicester tenant, Paul Westmore, took AROUND For a change, this month let University and a very keen over to prevent Robotrons Some games are instant hits us look at the people who alien basher. Just over a year from taking over. Twentyin the arcades and fizzle out ago, he scored a magnificent four hours from the start play pinball players who after a few short months. have established themselves 80 million on Juno First James had picked up a score Other games are known as (C&VG July 1984) and of 120 million. as a little bit special. \"steady earners' and those First, let's be under no illusmashed the world record in By midnight on Saturday, are the ones like the Mr Do sions. Luck, both good and an amazing 30% hours. muscle fatigue and boredom series from Universal that Friday, February 8th was set in, although a change in bad, can play a major part in catch your eye, are easy to the day picked for nailing the music helped. He carried a game of pinball. play and always remain Now, let's stir up the popuRobotron and started with an on for a while longer but, by popular. lation north of Watford. All of All of early delivery of the machine, 2.00 am on Sunday morning, any de Mr Do's Wild Ride is the the players I am about to donated by Keeday Leisure James had to stop with a third in the series and has mention come from the who fitted it with two brand score of 196 million which proved itself to be universally south of England. I honestly new super deluxe joysticks took an incredible 42 hours to liked. Pun ... Sorry! You don't know of any outstandespecially for the marathon. accumulate. play the part of Mr Do who's ing northerners. Maybe you Camp was set up with sleep. The world record still a cute little clown having the know differently ... ing bags, blankets, food and stands at 348 million but time of his life on a roller London-based, Geoff lots of music to offset boreJames has brought the British coaster. \"Arcade Attack\" Harvey, is dom. record closer to this massive The aim of the game is to a superb player. Geoff plays get to the goal at the top of very much in the American the screen which means that style, very animated and Mr Do has to make a hair highly self-critical. When raising climb using the roller watching Geoff play, stand coaster as a sort of ladder. well back. Take great care to ensure From a small Norfolk that a coaster doesn't whizz village comes Phil \"The by and flatten him. Greek\" Oakley. The nickIf a coaster does come name doesn't denote his shooting round a bend, there nationality, but his uncanny are escape ladders that will ability to pull off a shot called take him out of danger. \"Greeking\". However, if his feet are Steve Dyer, of Slough, is a safely off the track on one fine player with a style that level, his head may well be contrasts with that of Geoff. poking above the track on He stands very upright, uses the level above. total concentration and the Fruit and a wide variety of only movement is the flipper objects let slip by happy fingers. Photo: Michael Mullray passengers can be collected Last, but not least, there is Play started at 10.00 am figure. The photo of the deadto earn extra points but the legendary Graham and James describes the first beat duo was taken 34 hours don't get too enthusiastic «Fourth Ball\" Goose from few hours: \"The scoring was into the marathon with James over these and lose sight of Norwich so called because slower than was hoped and at the helm. your goal! of the wicked consistency doom, gloom and desponAlthough he found out a Unlike the majority of with which he destroys his dency set in after 12 hours few days later, James didn't games where the aim is to opponent on ball four. He is with a score of only 60 realise that he had glandular increase your score, Mr Do also famous for his unusual million.\" fever at the time and did very starts off with 4,500 points stance, feet well away from With a heavy snowfall, the well keeping going for 42 which decrease when the the machine. temperature dropped rapidly hours. game starts. The longer you These are just four of the throughout the night but hot If you think you have take, the lower your score. country's very best. There food and drinks were in conbeaten a world or British score Speed and strategy are very are others, of course, and stant supply. at your favourite game, write important. An accelerator hopefully some of them live Fatigue began to take its into Arcade Action and we'll button can be used in up north ... So let's hear toll towards dawn of Saturdo our best to verify your emergencies to hasten Mr Do from some of you up there! day but James kept going, score for you. out of sticky patches 94 "


"ACTION although this causes the join your current fighter as a stage two and on every fourth Mexico is a little strange but, score to decrease faster. tandem team with double fire stage there e stage thereafter. These conwhen playing Sega's Bank When the letters EXTRA power. sist of 40 aliens which appear Panic, you'll understand. appear over the goal and if All Galagas shoot very separately in five groups of At one time, the bank in you can remove those, you accurately to where your ship eight. They don't drop bombs will be awarded an extra life. is positioned so it is important and come in patterns which Likewise, if you get to the never to stay too long in one are easily memorised. goal while a diamond is in place. It is essential to memorise residence, you will earn a When starting a game, the these waves to achieve maxireplay. Galagas always come from mum bonus points from each The game ends when your the top and sides in lines wave because, after each score reaches zero. Mr Do is making a formation at the top one, it states how many a colourful and snappy game of the screen. They always aliens were hit and multiplies which generates a lot of skill create the same formation but the sum by 100 points, ie 20 on later levels. have three different patterns. aliens give 2,000 points. If all These are always consecutive 40 aliens are killed, then a and are essential to learn so special 10,000 points are question was well known to you know where the next given. This is the key to the bandits as easy money and Galagas are coming from high scores as it is possible to they attacked repeatedly, On screen one, these lines obtain 36,000 from one chalbursting in, brandishing a of Galagas don't drop bombs lenging wave. Also the last shooter and walking off with but on screen two they do. alien shot in the line is worth the loot. After wave one, there are between 1,000 and 3,000 One day the bank manager more Galagas in the formation points depending on where it woke up to the fact that more than needed so the excess is. money was flowing out of his Galagas peel off and make A few other points to bank than was being death dives towards you. At remember try not to shoot deposited and installed an screen 16, there are the maxithe Boss Galagas until they early warning system. mum numbers of Galagas in come down the screen after You play the bank clerk the formation with up to six of formation because of their and, as the citizens come in to them making dives at your point value. They might also deposit their money, you have fighters. beam. Memorize the line to make a split second deciGET TO GRIPS When the formation is compatterns prior to formation sion as to whether they are plete, some Galagas start to and the challenging wave genuine. break away from the group to patterns. Also remember Galaga has always been a dive bomb your craft not wave ten and 18 are exactly WOODS DOO favourite of those players many on screen one but up to the same as screen one, apart desperate for a fast, colourful 12 or more from screen 20. from the fact that screen 18 shoot-'em-up. Julian Rignall, By screen 12, it is now that is twice the speed. super champ of C&VG's your memory of the lines of Finally, listen out for Bonus 1983 Arcade Championship, Galagas in formation becomes Galagas and keep up a conshows you how to beat the essential. Try to blast them all stant barrage or else you Galagas at their own game. before they form at the top won't last long! By the way. Over to you, Julian. and have a chance to attack. after screen 30 the game There are three types of keeping up a constant bardoesn't get any harder. aliens in Galaga: blue, red and rage of double firepower will You sit facing the 12 Boss Galagas. Blue ones leave only a few Galagas left entrances, keeping a watchful always loop back at the to kill. Another point worth eye on the warning grid above bottom of the screen, mentioning from this screen each door which warns of describing a circle before onwards any Galaga anyone approaching. Using going past your fighter, and goes past your fighter will the joystick, you scroll right red ones swerve crazily down dive again as usual, but this and left until you have three the screen straight past you time at twice the speed. doors filling the screen and to return to the top. Both From screen four onwards wait for them to open. these aliens are worth twice there is a Bonus Galaga. The key to success is quick as much in the air. During a wave, a red or blue reflexes. As someone opens The Boss Galagas are the Galaga will flash a few times the doors, you have to wait to most important apart from and mutate into three aliens UAN TUU DRAVC see whether they will pull a being the key to high scores the destruction of all three TUC DANDIT DANVO gun on you. Only then can gun on you. Only then can worth 400, 800 or 1,600 will result in a 1,000, 2,000 ini you open fire. Shooting points depending on the size or 3,000 points bonus. The Bank Clerk needed before a gun is pulled could of escort, they also do somemutation is always heralded immediately. mean that you murder an thing special. Every second by a noise so keep an ear out $1000 per month. innocent citizen. The game Boss which comes down the for this as they will help to MUST shoot straight and has been well designed in that screen emits a tractor beam boost your score. have steel nerves. some bandits delay a moment to capture your fighter. If you The special feature of those of a nervous disposibefore pulling their pistols. It hit the Boss who captured Galaga is its \"challenging tion need not apply. The job leaves you gripping the joyyour fighter, it descends to waves\" these appear after description for a bank clerk in stick sweatily in anticipation. WITH GALAGA 95 "


NA


"You should see what he's just seen. For only  a quarter and just a local' telephone call whenever you want to connect up (that's only 22p per half hour at cheap rates) you could be part of Micronet. The only accessory you need is a Modem. A small price to pay to join the other visionaries on this exciting new system. Fill in the coupon for more details and send to Micronet 800, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5EJ. But be warned, Micronet 800's features are almost limitless and constantly updating. So maybe you'd be better to call in at Laskys, John Lewis, main Boots or your local Micronet 800 Action Station. To feast your eyes on all the amazing things it can do. Micronet 800. Stretching the mind of your micro far beyond its limits. Micro evolution continues with this unique communications, information and software system. Set on our mainframes nationwide. Includes 30,000 pages and access to Prestel\" with its full range of services. A tremendous Communications section that networks you to thousands of other members across the country. Send and receive electronic messages and graphics at a touch of a button. And there's the Chatline service, Swapshop and Teleshopping. Check with daily updates on the very latest computer news. Micronet also has its own huge facts data base. And a choice of up-to-the-minute software to download absolutely free Micronet To: MICRONET 800, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR SEJ. Telephone 01-278 3143 Please send me the full facts about Micronet 800 800 Name Make/Model of Micro Address Telephone CVGS For 97% of telephone users Prestel is a trademark of British Telecommunications "


"See Micronet 800 in action. AVON Bath Boots, 1 Marchants Passage, Seaton. Curtis Computer Services, Sittingbourne. Computer Plus Hounslow. Boots, 193-199 High WALES Southgate. Tel: 0225 64402. Seaton Computer Shop 65 High Street. Tel 0795 25677 Street. Tel: 01-570 0156. 51c Harbour Road Tel: 0297 22347. Tunbridge Wells. Modata Aberdare. Inkey Computer Bristol Avon Computer Rentals Southall Twillstar Computers Ltd, Tiverton. Actron Microcomputers, Computer Centre, 28-30 St. Johns Services, 70 Mill Street, The Square, 16 West Street, Old Market. 17 Regina Road Tel: 01-574 5271. 37 Bampton Street. Tel: 0884 252854. Road Tel: 0892 41555. Trecynon. Tel: 0685 881828. Tel: 0272 550600. Teddington. Andrews, Broad Aberystwyth. Aberdata at Bristol Boots, 59 Broadmead. _ DORSET LANCASHIRE Street. Tel: 01-997 4716. Galloways 23 Pier Street Tel 0272 293631. Bournemouth. Lansdowne Blackburn. Tempo Computers, Twickenham. Twickenham Tel: 0970 615522. Bristol Laskys, 16-20 Penn Street. Crescent, Lansdowne. Computer Centre, 1 Lansdowne 9 Railway Road. Tel: 0254 691333. Computer Centre, 72 Heath Road. Cardiff. Boots, 26 Queens Street Tel: 0272 20431 Blackpool Blackpool Computers Tel 01-892 7896. & 105 Frederick Street. Clevedon. Computer Centre, Tel: 0202 20165. Store, 179 Church Street. Uxbridge. JKL Computers Tel: 0222 31291. 12A Old Street, Clevedon Dorchester. The Paper Shop Tel 0253 20239. 7 Windsor Street. Tel: 0895 51815. Cardiff. Cardiff Microcomputers, Tel. 0272 879514. Kings Road Tel: 0305 64564 Burnley. IMO Business Systems, NORFOLK 46 Charles Street. Tel: 0222 373072 Poole. Lansdowne Computer 39-43 Standish Street. BEDFORDSHIRE Norwich. Adams, 125-129 King Cardiff. The Computer Shop Centre, 14 Arndale Centre Tel 0282 54299. Bedford. Boots, The Harpur Centre, Street. Tel: 0603 22129 41 The Hayes. Tel: 0222 26666 Tel: 0202 670901. Preston. 4Mat Computing Harpur Street Tel: 0234 56231. __NOTTINGHAMSHIRE Cardiff. Laskys, 32-36 Town Wall, Dunstable. Dormans, 7-11 Broad ESSEX 67 Friargate, tel 0772 561952. Sutton in Ashfield. HN & L Fisher, Basildon. Basildon Software St. Davids Centre. Tel 0222 41619. Preston. Laskys, 1-4 Guildhall Walk Tel: 0582 38302. 87 Outram Street. Tel: 0623 54734. Cardiff. Randall Cox, 18/22 High Arcade. Tel 0772 59264. Centre78-80 Liberty Shopping Leighton Buzzard. Datasine, OXFORDSHIRE Street Arcade. Tel 0222 397162. 59 North Street. Tel: 0525 374200 Hall, East Square Tel: 0268 27022. Wigan Wildings Computer Centre an: Mold. Clwyd Personal Computers Leighton Buzzard. Milton Keynes Ltd, 24 Bank Street. TeL: 0376 48321. Braintree. Mirage Microcomputers Abingdon. Ivor Fields Computers 11 Mesnes Street. Tel 0942 22382 Unit 19, Daniel Owen Precinct. 21 Stern Street. tel: 0235 21207. LEICESTERSHIRE Music & Computers, 17 Bridge Banbury. Computer Plus, Tel: 0352 56842. Chelmsford. Maxton Hayman, Street. TeL: 055 382504. Leicester. Boots, 30-36 Gallowtree 2 Church lane. Tel: 0295 55890. Newport. Gwent Computers Luton. Hobbyte, Unit 16, The 5 Bromfield Road. Tel: 0245 354595. Gate. Tel: 0533 21641. Chelmsford. Way In Computers, Market Harborough. Harborough 19 Old High Street, Headington. Oxford. Absolute Sound & Video, 92 Chepstow Road. Tel:0633 841760 Amdale Centre. TeL: 0582 457195. Swansea. Boots, 17 St Marys Luton. Terry More, 49 George 7 Village Square, Chelmer Village Home Computers, 7 Church Street Tel: 086565661. Arcade, \"The Quadrant Shopping Tel: 0245 467858. Street. Tel: 0582 23391. Tel: 085863656. Oxford. Science Studio, 7 Little Colchester. Boots, 5-6 Lion Walk Centre. Tel: 0792 43461. BERKSHIRE LONDON Swansea. The Microstore, 35-36 Clarendon Street. Tel: 0865 54022 Tel 0206 577303. Slough. MV Games, 245 High Singleton Street. TeL: 0792 467980. W1. Computers of Wigmore Colchester. Colchester Computer SCOTLAND Street. Tel: 75 21594. Street, 104 Wigmore Street Aberdeen. Boots, 133-141 Union Centre, 3a Short Wyre Street WARWICKSHIRE BUCKINGHAMSHIRE Tel: 01 486 0373. Tel: 0206 47242 Street. Tel: 0224 585349. Coventry. Coventry Micro Centre, Bletchley. RAMS Computer Grays. H. Reynolds, 28a Southend Road. Tel 01-636 0845. W1. Laskys, 42 Tottenham Court Edinburgh. Boots, 101-103 Princes 33 Far Gosford Street Centre, 117 Queensway. Road. Tel 0375 31641. Street. Tel: 031-225 8331. Tel: 0203 58942. W1. Lion House, 227 Tottenham Harlow. Harlow Computer Centre Court Road Tel: 01-637 1601. Tel: 0908 647744. Coventry. Impulse Computer Glasgow. Boots, 200 Sauchiehall Chesham. Reed Photo & 17 Staple Tye. Tel: 0279 22846. Street. Tel: 041-332 1925. World, 60 Hertford Street Precinct. W1. Sonic Foto Micro Center, Computers, 113 High Street Tel: 0203 553701 Glasgow. Boots, Union Street Hornchurch. Comptel Computer Tel: 0494 783373 256 Tottenham Court Road. Coventry. JBC Micro Services, 200 Systems, 112a North Street. and Argyle Street. Tel: 041-2487387. Tel: 01-580 5826. CAMBRIDGESHIRE Earlsdon Avenue, North Earlsdon Tel: 0402 446741. W1. Tomorrows World Today, Glasgow. Tom Dixon Cameras, Cambridge. Boots, 65-67 Sidney Tel: 0203 73813 Ilford. Boots, 177-185 High Road. 27 Oxford Street. Tel 01-439 7799, 15-17 Queen Street Tel: 01-553 2116. Tel: 041-2040826. Street and 28 Petty Curry Street Coventry. Laskys, Lower Precinct wi. Walters Computers, DH Evans Tel: 0203 27712. Tel: 0223 350213 Romford. Software Plus, Oxford Street Tel: 01-629 8800. SHROPSHIRE 72 North Street. Tel: 70 65271. Cambridge. Cambridge Computer Leamington Spa, IC Computers, Shrewsbury. Clairmont WC1. Transam Micro Systems, 43 Russell Street. Tel: 092636244. Store, 4 Emmanuel Street Southend-on-Sea. Computerama, 59-61 Theobalds Road Enterprises, Hills Lane. Leamington Spa. Leamington Tel: 0223 358264 88 London Road. Tel 0702 335443 Tel: 01-405 5240. Tel: 3647 52949. Hobby Centre, 121 Regent Street Cambridge. Logic Sales, Unit 6, Southend-on-Sea. Computer WS. Laskys, 18-19 Ealing Broadway Shrewsbury. Computerama, 13 Tel: 0926 29211. Midgate Parade, Peterborough Centre, 336 London Road Shopping Centre. Tel: 01-567 4717. Castlegate. Tel: 0743 60528. Nuneaton. Micro City, 1a Queens Tel: 0733 49696. Tel: 0702 337161. W8. Walters Computers, Barkers Telford. Computer Village Ltd. Road. Tel: 0203 382049. Peterborough. Boots Southend-on-Sea. Estuary 2/3 Hazeldine House, Central Kensington High Street Personal Computers, 318 Chartwell Tel 01-937 5432 40-42 Bridge Street, Queensgate. Rugby. O.E.M., 9-11 Regent Street Square. Tel: 0952 506771. Tel 0788 70522 Tel: 0733 65352. North, Victoria Circus Shopping SE7. Vic Oddens Micros Telford. Telford Electronics, Centre. Tel: 0702 614131. CHESHIRE WEST MIDLANDS 38 Mall 4. Tel: 0952 504911. 5 London Bridge Walk Chester. Boots, 47-55 Foregate GLOUCESTER Birmingham. Boots, City Centre STAFFORDSHIRE Tel 01-403 1988. Cheltenham. Laskys 206 High Street. Tel: 0244 28421 House, 16-17 New Street. Newcastle-under-Lyme. SE9. Square Deal, Tel: 021-643 7582. Chester. Computer Link, 21 SL Street. Tel: 0242 570282. 373-375 Footscray Road, Computer Cabin, 24 The Parade, Birmingham. Laskys 19-21 Werburgh Street. Tel: 0244 316516. Cheltenham. Screen Scene, 144 New Eltham Tel: 01-859 1516. Silverdale. Tel: 0782 636911. Corporation Street Chester. Laskys 7 The Forum, SE15. Castlehurst Ltd, 152 Rye Stafford. Computerama, 59 Northgate Street. Tel: 0244 317667. Georges Road. Tel: 0242 528979. Tel: 021-632 6303 Foregate Street. Tel: 0785 41899. Lane, Peckham. Tet 01-639 2205. Dudley. Central Computers, Crewe. Midshires Computer Gloucester. Boots, 38-46 Eastgate EC2. Devron Computer Centre, Stoke-on-Trent. Computerama, 35 Churchill Precinct. Centre, 68-78 Nantwich Road. Street. Tel 0452 423501. 155 Moorgate, tel 01-638 3339. 11 Market Square Arcade, Hanley. Tel: 0384 238169. Tel: 0270 211086 HAMPSHIRE N14. Logic Sales, 19 The Bourne, Tel: 0782 268324. Stourbridge. Walters Computer Ellesmere Port. RFR TV & Audio, Basingstoke. Fishers, 2-3 Market The Broadway, Southgate. SUFFOLK Systems 12 Hagley Road 1 Pooltown Road, Whitby. Place. Tel 0256 22079. Tel: 01-882 4942 Bury St Edmunds. Boots Tel: 0384 370811. Tel: 051-356 4150 Southampton. Business N22. Boots, 38-40 High Road, 11-13 Cornhill Tel: 0284 701516. Walsall New Horizon, 1 Goodall Hyde. C Tech Computers, 184 Electronics, Micromagic At Atkins, Wood Green Tel: 01-881 0101. Bury St Edmunds. Suffolk Street. Tel: 0922 24821. Market Street. TeL: 061-366 8223. 7 Civic Centre Road. TeL: 0703 25903. NW3. Maycraft Micros, Computer Centre 1-3 Garland West Bromwich. DS Peakman, Macclesfield. Camera Computer Waterlooville, GB Microland, 58 Rosslyn Hill, Hampstead. Street Tel: 0284 705 503. Centre, 118 Mill Street 7 Queens Square. Tel: 021-525 7910 7 Queens Parade, London Road Tel: 01-431 1300. SURREY Tel: 0625 27468 NW4. Davinci Computer Store, YORKSHIRE Tel 0705 259911. Bagshot. P & H Electronics, 22-24 Bradford. Boots, 11 Darley Street Macclesfield. Computer Centre, HERTFORD 112 Brent Street, Hendon. Guildford Road. Tel: 0276 73078. 68 Chestergate. Tel: 0625 618827. Tel 0274 390891 Hitchin. County Computers Tel: 01-202 2272 Croydon. Laskys, 77-81 North End Leeds Boots, 19 Albion Arcade, Marple. Marple Computer Centre 13 Bucklesbury. Tel: 0462 36757. NW7. Computers Inc, 86 Golders Tel: 01-681 8443. 30-31 Market Street Bond Street Centre. Potters Bar, the Computer Shop, Green. Tel: 01209 0401. Croydon. The Vision Store, Tel 061-427 4328 Tel: 0532 33551. NW10. Technomatic, 17 Burley 107 High Street. Tel: 0707 44417. 53-59 High Street. Tel: 01-686 6362 Sheffield. Laskys, 58 Leopold Stockport. National Micro Centres Stevenage. DJ Computers Road, Wembley. Tel: 01-208 1177. Croydon. The Vision Store, 36 St Petersgate. Tel: 061-429 8080 Street. Tel: 0742 750971. 11 Town Square. Tel 0438 65501. MANCHESTER 96-98 North End. Tel: 01-681 7539. York York Computer Centre, Widnes. Computer City, 78 Watford. SRS Microsystems, Bolton. Computer World UK Ltd, South Croydon, Concise Victoria Road. TeL: 051-420 3333. 7 Stonegate Arcade 94 The Parade, High Street. 208 Chorley Old Road. Computer Consultants, 1 Carlton Tel: 0904 641862 Wilmslow. Wilmslow Micro Tel: 0923 26602. Tel: 0204 494304. Road. Tel 01-681 6842. Centre. 62 Grove Street Watford. Watford Electronics, Manchester. Boots, 32 Market Epsom. The Micro Workshop, Tel: 0625 530890. Cardiff Road Tel: 0923 405588. Street. Tel: 061-832 6533 12 Station Approach. CLEVELAND Welwyn Garden City. DJ Manchester. Laskys, 12-14 St. Tel: 0372 721533. Middlesbrough. Boots Computers, 40 Fretherne Road. Marys Gate. Tel: 061-833 0268. Guildford. Walters Computers, 88-90 Linthorpe Road, Tel: 96 28444 Manchester. Mighty Micro, Army & Navy, 105-111 High Street The Cleveland Centre. HUMBERSIDE Sherwood Centre, 268 Wilmslow Tel: 0483 68171. Tel: 0642 24%16. Beverley. Computing World, Road, Fallowfield. Tel: 061-2248117. Wallington. Surrey Micro Systems, CUMBRIA 10 Swabys Yard, Dyer Lane. Manchester. NSC Computer 53 Woodcote Road. TeL: 01-6475636. Kendal. The Kendal Computer Tel: 0482 881831. Shops, 29 Hanging Ditch. Woking. Harpers, 71-73 Centre, Stramongate. KENT Tel: 061-832 2269. Commercial Way. Tel: 0486 225657, Tel: Os 39 22559 Ashford. DGH, 10 North Street. Manchester. Walters Computers, SUSSEX Penrith. Penrith Communications Tel: 0233 32597. Kendal Milne, Deansgate. Bexhill-on-Sea. Computerware, 14 Castlegate. TeL: 0768 67146. Tel: 061-832 3414 Ashford. Geerings of Ashford, 22 St Leonards Road. Whitehaven. P D Hendren, 80 High Street. Tel 0233 33366 Oldham. Home & Business Tel: 0424 223340. 15 King Street. Tel 0946 2063. Bromley. Boots, 148-154 High Computers, 54 Yorkshire Street Brighton. Boots, 129 North Street. Workington. Technology Store, Tel: 061-633 1608. Street. Tel 01-460 6688. Tel 0273 27088. 12 Finkle Street. Tel: 0900 66972. Swinton. Mr Micro, 69 Partington Bromley. Computers Today. Brighton. Gamer, 71 East Street DERBYSHIRE Lane. Tel: 061-728 2282. 31 Market Square. Tel: 01-290 5652. Tel 0273 728681. Bromley. Walters Computers, MERSEYSIDE Brighton. Laskys, 151-152 Westem Alfreton. Gordon Harwood, Army & Navy, 64 High Street. Heswall. Thornguard Computer 67-71 High Street. Tel 0733 836781. TeL: 01-460 9991. Road. Tel: 0273 725625. Systems, 46 Pensby Road. Crawley. Gatwick Computers, Chesterfield. Boots, 35-37 Low Chatham. Boots, 30-34 Wilmott Tel 051-342 7516. 62 The Boulevard. Tel: 0293 37842. Pavement, Market Place. Liverpool. Hargreaves, 31-37 Square, Pentagon Centre, Crawley. Laskys, 6-8 Queensway. Tel: 0246 203591. Tél 0634 405471. Warbreck Moor, Walton. Tel: 0293 544622. Chesterfield. Computer Stores Gravesend. Gravesend Home Tel 051-525 1782 Eastbourne. Boots, 15 Eastboume 14 Stephenson Place. Computers, 39 The Terrace. Liverpool. Laskys, Dale Street. Arndale Centre. Tel 03232 7742. Tel: 0246 208802. Derby. Boots, 1 Devonshire Tel: 031-236 3298. Tel: 0474 23871. TYNE & WEAR St. Helens. Microman Computers, Gillingham. Regal Software Walk Tel: 0322 45886. Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Boots, Supplies, 49 High Street Rainford Industrial Estate, Mill Eldon Square Tel: 0632 329844. Lane Rainford. TeL: 0744 885242. Tel: 0634 579634 Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Laskys, Southport. Central Studios, Maidstone. Kent Micros, 51 Union Exeter. Boots, 251 High Street, 38 Eastbank Street. Tel: 0704 31881. Tel 0632617224 6 Northumberland Street Street. Tel: 0622 52784. Tel 0392 32244 Rainham. Microway Computers MIDDLESEX Exeter. Open Channel, Newcastle-upon-Tyne. 39 High Street Tek 0634 376702. Enfield. Laskys, 44-48 Palace Central Station, Queen Street. Sevenoaks. Emest Fielder Garden Shopping Centre. RE Computing, 12 Jesmond Road. Tel: 0392 218187. Computers, Dorset Street. Tel 01-363 6627. Tel: 0637 815580. Paignton, Computer Systems Lid Tel: 0732 456800. Harrow. Camera Arts, 42 St. Anns 35 Hyde Road Tel: 0803 524284. Shortlands. The Village House Road. TeL01-427 5469. Road. Tet 01-427 469 Plymouth. Syntax, 76 Cornwall of Computers. 87 Beckenham Lane Harrow. Harrow Micro, 24 Street. Tel: 0752 28705. Tel 01-'460 7122 Springfield Road Tel: 01-427 0098. Micronet DEVON "


"COMMODORE 64 COMMODOREE BERNOS 10 GREAT HIT GAMES RECA MEGA HITS SPECTRUM 48K NE TRAP MEGA LUETUIMBER TAPEA 30 STARS NO BAGGER MEGA HITS AUTOMANA | GREAT HIT GAMES GREAT PEATRUM LOR MEGA HITS SPECIAL OFFER ere's an offer you just can't refuse. C&VG, your favourite computer games magazine, has teamed up with Beau Jolly to bring you an EXCLUSIVE money saving offer. Beau-Jolly are releasing sphere. All the games order/credit card number Flight Path 737, Psytron, two tapes, for the have featured highly in the to the address shown. Son of Blagger, Super Commodore 64 and the C&VG Top 30 charts. Then just 28 days later a Pipeline, Trollie Wallie, Spectrum, called Mega And we're offering you bumper bundle of the top Automania, Ghouls and Hits. Each games tape the chance to get your games of 84 will come Booga-Boo. features 10 top games hands on one of these crashing through your Games on the Spectrum from top software houses tapes for the special letter-box. Don't delay Mega Hits tape are: 3D like Quicksilva, Beyond, C&VG reader's price of rush your order form off Starstrike, Blue Thunder, Alligata, Anirog, Interjust .49! A genuine today! Son of Blagger, Autoceptor, Taskset, Microbargain! Games on the Commo-mania, Booga-Boo, power, Micro-Gen, Elite, All you have to do is fill dore 64 Mega Hits tape Psytron, Wheelie, Fall Melbourne House, PSS, in the coupon and send it are: Tales of the Arabian Guy, Blade Alley, and Realtime and Micro with your cheque/postal Nights, Poster Paster, Penetrator. To: Mega Hits Special Offer, Computer & Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. BLOCK CAPITALS PLEASE Please send me: Qty Total Mega Hits Machine @ .49 I enclose a cheque/postal order for ............................made payable to Computer & Video Games magazine. Please debity my Access/Visa account no. for ........... Signed. Date. Name Address ...Tel. Offer applies to UK readers only. Allow 28 days for delivery. Offer applies while stocks last. 99 "


"Sophone R-E-V.I.E.W Playability: Will the game keep you up until the early hours of the morning, as you attempt to complete just one more screen in a desperate attempt to beat it? Or does it send you to sleep the moment the introscreen appears? Could you spend hours locked away in your bedroom with it? continued from page 24 Lee perform on TV, it ain't mixture of arcade and an owl and finally the witch GANDALF bad either Adventure in which you send herself as she bids to save the MACHINE: CBM 64 The basic idea of the game Banjax scurrying around a village from an erupting vol SUPPLIER: Tymac goes like this. The Dukes series of locations, including cano. There are four screens need cash to pay off Boss hedge mazes, woods, packed with neat \"cute\" style PRICE: .95/.95 Hogg — and to get it they mountains and castles 240 graphics and several skill The great white wizard decide to enter a road race screens in all — in search of levels. Gandalf leaps from the which has a $5,000 prize. But the elusive Inner Sanctum. To say much more about pages of The Hobbit and they have to get to the start of Needless to say, there are the plot would be to give the Lord of the Rings to take the race first — and the Boss various nasties to contend game away the cassette part in a small skirmish and other assorted baddies with — birds, spiders, snakes inlay instructions don't give with an evil bunch of are out to stop the General and blobs which kill if you much away either. You have Lizard men who are about to Lee getting there! touch them, but they're a bit to work out what the witch make off with some of his best You have to drive the slow and not very fearsome. must do to progress to the apprentices. Tymac have General across some rugged The graphics are simple next screen by solving the come up with a novel advencountryside avoiding other and effective and the game riddles that the instructions ture style shoot-'em-up in vehicles, dodging bombs from has an attractive slick feel, set! which you control Gandalf helicopters, bi-planes and but it falls rather uneasily and his deadly spells to blast even a hot air balloon between arcade and  Graphics the Lizard men who are Dukes is basically a scroll Adventure without being one Sound ing scramble-type game or the other, and there's not  Value Hordes of the creepy green with cars instead of spacereally enough mystery and Playability things swarm towards you craft. The graphics are nice variety to keep you coming from the forest which surand the scrolling pretty back for more. rounds your castle. Blast them smooth. It takes a while to DAY IN THE LIFE with a spell and they turn into get used to the controls  Graphics gold coins you can nip out you can make the General 1. Sound MACHINE: Spectrum and pick these up if you are jump and swerve around the  Value SUPPLIER: Micromega brave enough! The Lizard roads — but once you've Playability PRICE: .95 men have a nasty friend in the done this you can get stuck Programmer Stephen shape of a poisonous spider in. BRUCE LEE Redman picked a conwho sneaks into the castle particularly enjoyed the troversial subiect for his and attacks our hero in a particrash' sequence. The MACHINE: Spectrum first game — Sir Clive cularly cularly nasty fashion. General does a neat three SUPPLIER: US Gold/ Sinclair It's inevitable that the point spin before coming to DataSoft You have to guide Sir Sir Lizard men eventually get rest! PRICE: .95 Clive through a very through your defences and Hazzard fans will enjoy the Bruce Lee haunted the important day in his life the drag away an apprenticegame. The rest of you should pages of C&VG s reviews day he has to pick up his though you can follow him in take a look at a demo first. section for months after knighthood from Buck House! an attempt at rescue. the CBM 64 version first He has to brave the Gandalf the Sorceror is a musical airhorn at the start of difficulties of getting dressed difficulties of getting dressed two screen game with nice each game. A nice touch... appeared. And now he's w back — on the Spectrum. in his computerised house, graphics and good sound. A Briefly, the idea of the the terrors of commuting, the nice change from blasting  Graphics game is to help Bruce get to a problems of making a cashaliens from beyond the stars Sound wizard who is hiding inside a card machine actually cough Addictive too! Value vast fortress protected by up and the perils of shopping  Playability Ninja soldiers and the inThe game isn't just good  Graphics destructible Green Yamo. because of its novelty value Bruce has to kick and it is playable too. Lots of  Value BANJAX chop, leap and hop his way puzzles to be solved and lots Playability through the fortress in this of fun to be had doing them! MACHINE: BBC neat twist on the regulation The graphics are big and bold SUPPLIER: Robico and platform game theme. The the little \"Sir DUKES OF HAZZARD Clive' Software animation of the characters is character is really neat! PRICE: .95 No, we don't yet know what MACHINE: Spectrum great, the graphics bold and Legend has it that any colourful and the game the man himself thinks about SUPPLIER: Elite bear intelligent enough to features some unique the game. But watch C&VGto PRICE: .95 reach the Inner Sanctum multiple player/player VS. find out At last! The long awaited of the Golden Temple computer options. debut of the Duke boys shall become Lord of the  Graphics hits the computer scene. Lands of Mystery. Will Banjax  Graphics  Sound And although the game prove to be such a bear?  Sound  Value isn't as spectacular as He might well, because this  Value  Playability one of those amazing is not the hardest game  Playability stunts you see the General you've ever played. It's a 0 0 0 100 "


"SUPER SUPA HUEY UH-IX WAKELI. SOLO FLIGHT-Computer controlled flight training teaches the techniques of flying and familiarization with instruments. RESCUE Your assignment is to locate and attempt pick up of stranded military personnel EXPLORE -Fly a survey mission over previously unexplored, territory and map the terrain. COMBAT Use your rockets and machine guns to defend, a secret desert installation from unknown hostile forces U.S. HELICOPTER FLIGHT SIMULATOR GOLDI e Alame scanso Cassette .95 Disk .95 Software 6 U.S. Gold Ltd., Unit 10. The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Tel: 021-359 3020 ATARI "


"REVIE:W:S the rest of his family and CAULDRON friends in this latest graphical ENDURANCE: NEN: 2 extravaganza from the MicroMACHINE: CBM64/ Gen programmers. Spectrum You'll meet Wally's wife, SUPPLIER: Palace the lovely Wilma, plus Tom Software the Punk, Harry the Hippy, PRICE: .99 Dick the Plumber and Herbert You've already read the baby — Wally's pride and about the fantastic joy. graphics in last month's Micro-Gen claim this is the C&VG. Now read how the T.BONE BUTCHER first fully animated interactive game is great fun to play! arcade Adventure. You can The basic idea of Cauldron control any one of the six is to help the witch defeat the characters — except baby evil Pumpkins and rescue the Herbert at any stage Golden Broomstick. To do during the game. this, the witch must brew up The object of the game is to an evil potion in her cottage help Wally open the safe in cauldron and find the Pumpthe bank in order to pay the kin leader in his hide-out deep game, quick reactions are is one thing world records game some wages, in order within the mysterious planet. required in the Skeetshooting are another, but at least you ou to do this, certain tasks have The Witch's quest takes (clay pigeon) event. can move on to the Weightplace in, over and around her et Vertical elevation of your lifting event. home world. The proa Progun sight is automatically set it goes without saying that grammers have created an \"up by the computer and is here is another graphical entire planet with forests, she shown by two small squares treat. In addition to the seas and islands above on the wove on the screen which move up already familiar information ground and weird caverns and and down. To get proper at the top of the screen, there underground horizontal aim, match the are two further items showing There are lots of things to swing of your gun with the a countdown from 30 discover and puzzles to be flying targets, firing with seconds to zero and the solved -and the first C&VG either the space bar or weight being lifted in kilos. reader to complete the game i joystick button. When all three events have to be done and certain and send us a map will win been successfully completed, puzzles solved. the real Golden Broomstick. you return to Skeetshooting. Each member of the gang So we're not giving too much but this time the qualifying has different characteristics away here! scores in all events will be and abilities and you must higher. decide which one can solve  Graphics Hypersports // has all the certain puzzles and complete  Sound essential ingredients, from certain tasks as you play the  Value the judgement necessary for game.  Playability the first two events, to the Each character has three sheer necessity of pounding lives to begin with and you the keys for the weightlifting. must keep everyone \"alive\" The marksman grins or throughout the game to frowns according to his . Graphics 10 succeed. success, leading to the Sound The graphics are excellent. second event, Archery.  Value The characters are drawn in In essence, by looking  Playability true \"cartoon style\" and the at the target display, you can backgrounds are packed with see if you are high or low, left detail. or right and adjust 11 E UNE SAVALLT 11 E'ONE'S A WALLY As in Pyjamarama, Wally's accordingly with the following latest Adventure, the game 10 HYPERSPORTS 2 arrow. At the bottom right MACHINE: Spectrum/ includes both arcade style hand corner, the score of the CBM 64 shoot-'em-up screens as well MACHINE: All MSX last arrow is shown and the SUPPLIER: Micro-Gen as arcade Adventure SUPPLIER: Konami amount of arrows remaining PRICE: .95 sequences. PRICE: .00 are shown in a slot next to the The adventures of Wally Everyone's a Wally will Here is yet another archer. The upper screen Week, videogame superkeep you busy for hours — offering from the Konami display is in the same format star, continue in the only and when you've solved it you house for the sports as the previous event. Quite a game to come with a can still admire the pretty enthusiasts. With the degree of skill and judgement \"hit\" single on the graphics. usual detail and superb needs to be exercised to B-side! The song. by Mike Berry, use of graphics. achieve consistent results. Wally, star of Automania will have you humming along In the first part of the Qualifying for the next event and Pyjamarama, introduces too but, beware, prolonged 10 102 "


"REVlEW.SO y = 2 10 10 12 SUPPLIER: Konami GAME STAR 12 O exposure to the music could opponent and deliver a flying haven't got an MSX, beg or was caught by a mob of green cause a severe case of head kick, but again timing borrow one just to play this hairbrushes and thrown into terminal whistling! and the point of contact need game. prison. It took me ages to to be spot on. work out how to escape from  Graphics The scoring is quite  Graphics the prison by experimenting  Sound complex, ranging from 100  Sound with some of the objects  Value points for a straight punch, to  Value found inside the cell. The  Playability a flying kick or footsweep at  Playability solution was perfectly logical 500 points. but, since the execution of it It all sounds great so far. is in an arcade format, it took \"199\" DAT but until you see the speed 13 CASTLE QUEST a lot of attempts to finally and moves that your work out the timing. Once opponents can make you MACHINE: BBC B you've made your escape, don't realise what you are in SUPPLIER: Micropower you will be able to do a fair bit for. If you back him into a PRICE: .95 cassette of exploration. corner at either side of the .95 disc As I said, this game is screen, he simply nips round I have not played any difficult but it is one of the few you and starts attacking from thing like this before. It is games which was SO the other side. All opponents fabulous. Let me explain. addictive I couldn't stop have the same striking power Castle Quest is an playing it. It is not for those YIE AR KUNG-FU as Lee and most have arcade Adventure who are new to arcade additional weapons. game set in a large castle adventures but is a must for MACHINE: All MSX made of colourful bricks, anyone who can cope with HE8681 FOYS planks and ladders with many games like Elite. Go and buy it PRICE: Not Known objects, such as a torch, gold if you like a challenge. Yie Ar, I am reliably bar and an aqualung. informed, means onescattered around. Like tradi  Graphics two, and in this terrific tional Adventure games, the  Sound object of the game is to solve  Value game everybody gets the one-two treatment. This many puzzles and ultimately  Playability game will surely become to find the wizard's treasure. a classic among those of us The thing is, all this is played who have fancied themselves On stage one, Wang has a IN SPACE as exponents of the martial large stick which he wields arts. The background is an very freely in addition to his MACHINE: CBM 16 oriental setting where comother moves. The second SUPPLIER: Microdeal petitors traditionally knock stage has Tao spitting PRICE: .95 ten kinds of bells out of each fireballs at you if you retreat Microdeal's freckleother. too far. Chen, your third faced hero comes to the The top of the screen adversary, has a nasty length C16 with a colourful, well displays the score of Lee of chain which reaches out presented game. (yourself) and his particular towards you and, incidentally, SL Cuthbert is on a looting opponent at that scene, looks like Pluto in a green in beautifully animated real mission. He has to together with a long bar which leotard! At stage four Lang is time arcade action which collect fuel pods from several shows the \"ki\" or energy armed with throwing spikes requires a high degree of platform-style planets and remaining for each. When the and stage five has Lou digital dexterity. return them individually\"ki\" starts turning red, either springing through the air to There are many monsters to his space-shuttle. Avoiding you or your aggressor are in connect with you. patrolling various passages, various nasties, of course! trouble and it's nearly You can hit the fireballs usually in twos and threes. As Sometimes Cuthbert's knockout time. Beginning the and throwing spikes at high you are not allowed to zap shuttle has engine trouble game with three Lees, you get and low levels to score extra these creatures, you have to and he has to hunt for vital an additional life at 30,000 points. Between stages there find a way to avoid them or spares before the ships blows and 50,000 points are also bonus points to be fend them off with some of up. The remaining Lees are scored by hitting lamps, the objects found. The finding An action-packed game shown after the indicator bottles and bricks moving at of objects will not score you with keyboard or joystick \"Rest' and control of the various levels. When you any points, however. You are options available. Nice bold, action is either by joystick or have reached stage five, you awarded points when you colourful graphics and good keyboard. return to your first opponent solve the puzzles which are sound all go to make this one The controllable actions and start amassing more all fairly tricky, almost to the of the better C16 games are vertical jump, high kick, points. standard of text based around. advance and retreat, low kick. This game is very Adventures. punch and duck. The fire challenging The Superb Therefore  Graphics button must be activated to graphics and background not an easy game to play. I  Sound score a hit while using any of oriental music add authenexpect many of you will be  Value these techniques. You can ticity to what, I am sure, will stuck for a long time without  Playability also jump clean over your be a very popular game. If you scoring a thing. Many times 1 00 00 103 "


"MAMA LLAMA commodore A Price .50 Lamosoft ORIGINAHOWARE DESIG AVAILABLE FROM W.H. SMITHS, BOOTS, WOOLWORTHS AND MOST COMPUTER RETAILERS OR FROM LLAMASOFT 49 MOUNT PLEASANT, TADLEY, HANTS (TEL. 07356 4478) SAE FOR CATALOGUE & NEWSLETTER 'THE NATURE OF THE BEAST! "


"of honey R-E-V.T.E.W.S LEN Ono Sound: Does the game sound like a Duran Duran LP played at half speed — or does the noise from your micro knock you half-way across the room. The C&VG review team don't judge games with their ears plugged up, we can tell you! points is identical to the real Computer Trade Weekly. Softswoop down and help the game. The joystick moveaid is a compilation tape of humans reach the ments controlling the player some of the best games \"dropzone\" and safety are self evident, but you start around for the Spectrum and Fast smooth scrolling-as to use your skill from the CBM 64 serving aspect. A quick blip of you'd expect from the Atari The Spectrum version comthe fire button (or spacebar) is prises Spellbound (Beyond), attackers and superb moon nine different alien all that's needed for the ball Star Bike (The Edge). landscape graphics go to to leave the player's hand for Kokotoni Wilf (Elite). Ant make this the best Atari game serving. It is the time lag Attack (Quicksilva). Sorcery around right now. between this and the second (Virgin). Gilligan's Gold blip that determines whether (Ocean). Horace Goes Skiing miss this one! Atari owners can't afford to TENNIS or not you clear the net and (Melbourne House/Psion), 3D MACHINE: All MSX the distance you are able to Tank Duel (Real Time). Jack hit it. Should you net it, the and the Beanstalk (Thor) and  Graphics SUPPLIER: Konami ballboy crouched on the The Pyramid (Fantasy).  Sound PRICE: .00 sideline dashes out and  Value To me, having to watch retrieves it. Some games version comprises Pitfall The Commodore 64  Playability tennis on television is a allow room for error (Activision). China Miner punishment and, when inasmuch as a near miss is (Interceptor). Star Trader the family turn it on, I turn enough to connect. Not so (Bug Byte). Falcon Patrol OSPREY! off! with this game, where you (Virgin). Fred (Quicksilva), MACHINE: Amstrad However, I was soon must be correctly positioned, Flak (US Gold), Gumshoe (A to find Konami's Tennis a getting your racket behind the 'N' F) and Gyropod (Taskset), SUPPLIER: Amsoft/BES whole different ball game! ball to move it. Players only along with Gilligan's Gold and PRICE: .95 The game can be played change ends in the two player Kokotoni Wilf. Here's a game for the either by a single player version and in the other ornithologists and conagainst the computer, two options you control the player upwards will go directly to the For each tape sold,  servationists among our players against each other or or players at the near end of Ethiopian Appeal. readers. It's already availtwo players against the the court. able for the Beeb, so you computer in doubles. There The tape is great value for Altogether, this game is money — even if you have Osprey! at school. might well have seen are three levels of difficulty, very engrossing and requires one or two of the games on it from deciding the speed of lots of skill and co-ordination, already The basic idea of the prothe ball, to the style and I believe that the majority of gram — which is more of a movement of your opponent purchasers will find this game  Graphics strategy game than anything A single player can good family entertainment. else — is to help protect and Sound participate using the cursors The only details omitted were increase the breeding pairs of  Value and space bar and two abusing the umpire, breaking  Playability Ospreys at their only nesting players the keyboard, rackets and destroying the site in this country. Loch although I would suspect this soft drinks stand! Garten in Scotland. method would create 16 You are told — domestic pandemonium DROPZONE each  Graphics season how many people (imagine it on a Spectrum)!  Sound MACHINE: Atari you have to work at protecting My own standard of playing  Value SUPPLIER: US Gold/ the birds. You have to allocate leaves a lot of room for  Playability your team to jobs like nest improvement, so I found the Datasoft watching to prevent egg joystick a real help in handling PRICE: .95 (Cass) stealers sneaking in and stealthis game. .95 (Disc) ing eggs, working at the site or The player is treated to an 15 SOFTAID This must be THE game informing the public about the excellent perspective view of of the moment for Ospreys and their fight for sura tennis court, with grandMACHINE: Spectrum/ frustrated Atari owners vival. The way to utilise your stands on both sides and a CBM 64 with no new games to resources reflects on the display board showing SUPPLIER: Ouicksilva/Crw play. It's a fast moving success of the Ospreys breedgames, sets and match at the PRICE: .99 combination of Defender and ing. end. The correct court layout, Softaid, the .99 games and sound Jet-Pack with terrific graphics Overall a nice game sort complete with umpire, ballboy and a really of educational tape consisting of ten neat line in explosions but don't let and nets, adds to the best selling games for that put you off. You get a authenticity. The points for The genberal idea is to use really nice booklet telling you the price of one, was your spaceman/jetman to all about ospreys with the each player are displayed on launched in the right hand side and a at the LET show at Olympia February help protect some poor little package too! small window by the umpire humans desperately Based on the Band Aid proattempting to reach home appears at the right moment ject founded by Bob Geldof base on a hostile planet.  Graphics to show \"In\": \"Fault\" or and Midge Ure, Softaid was Defender-style alien nasties  Sound \"Net\". launched jointly by Quicksilva are attempting to get them  Value The system of scoring and industry newspaper and you Use your jetman to  Playability 10 105 "


"AMAZIN? wa BD LEVEL 9 ON THE MOVE Level 9 are moving on to bigger different countries. If, in the game, the Adventures! Having gone as far as player left London and flew to New they can with their sophisticated text York, then a tape user would get a compression techniques, the next message \"Insert Tape 3 and press move will be towards disc-based Play on recorder\". games, according to Pete Austin. In the meantime, Level 9 are on the That does not mean that Level 9 verge of releasing The Red Moon and Adventures will no longer be availWorm in Paradise. able on cassette! Disc will be more As well as moving to a new format, convenient to use, but adventurers the Austins will be moving from their with cassette systems will be able to base at High Wycombe. They have run the new games. At certain points found premises in Weston-Superin a game, the player will be asked to Mare which will give them more room fied by the comin which to spread out their business puter. activities. So mail-order adventurers For example, suppose such an watch out for announcements of a Adventure were set in a number of change of address! Your mission: extremely hazardous. Your clearance: top secret. Your chances of survival: minimal. So starts Amazon from Trillium (now renamed Telarium, by the way). As an agent of NSRT (National Satellite Resource Technology), you are sent to the Amazon to discover what happened to cause the death of a recent expedition there. The natives are hostile, the army corrupt and the volcanoes erupting. The action starts at NSRT headquarters in Washington, where you are just in time to watch the last transmission from the beleaguered team. The satellite transmission is just coming in and you are invited to tune it in using your joystick. The screen changes to display a receiving screen, with interference and a hissing noise. Movement of the joystick changes the tone of the hissing and eventually you get clear visual reception, alternating with spells of interference. You are then summoned to the boss's office for briefing and a text conversation follows, in which you are asked your name. I called myself Supremo, of course! At the end of this session, you are asked if the assignment is OK-if you answer NO, the game ends with you getting booted out. Now follows a series of airplane journeys, including a call on Professor Beneker, where you team up with a friendly parrot called Paco. From then on, PACO is the word for HELP, but he sometimes gets a bit insulting! All sorts of pitfalls confront you and, if you make the wrong choice, it's curtains from getting beaten up in a parking lot to making a tasty casserole for cannibals. Therein lies the drawback of this game. The story is narrative in its approach and the player is fairly firmly led along the chosen storyline, with minor deviations, leading in the direction of death. It tends to be almost a multiple choice type of CHIEF EXAMINER FOR PRESIDENT No club is complete without a issue and send it off to us President, and we at C&VG are marked \"Adventure Club\" to proud to announce that SCOTT guarantee you receive the biADAMS has agreed to become monthly newsletter and ours. become eligible for the phone. There is still plenty of time to in Helpline service not to join the club, so fill in the form mention fantastic special which appeared in our March offers and events!! 106 "


"A LAMAZON us. pur urts ed telare that ca ves the you nsam. rust ane pen ng pying ual NUMBER ONE murdered! Shortly afterwards, Sergeant Duffy clamped my shoulder SUSPECT-ME? in a vice-like grip, and I was under arrest! I was subsequently convicted Veronica Ashcroft, owner of Ashcroft and, believe it or not, my actions at the Farm since the death of her father, was party were brought up in court and determined to keep faith with a tradiheld against me! I was virtually told tion going back 110 years. So she held how I played the game. My movethe Annual Halloween Ball as usual ments certainly seemed suspicious! Too bad I was invited along! The next few times I played the This was a fancy dress ball -they game, I tried different tactics, and always have sinister undertones, don't each time I could see the same events they? There were guests there re-enacted from a different viewpoint. dressed in all manner of strange The murder seemed inevitable, so costumes from a peanut butter sandmaybe I had better do a bit of wich to a six foot invisible rabbit snooping to prove my innocence? name of Harvey no doubt! Looking through this vast mansion There was I, dressed as a cowboy, revealed nothing at a first pass. Perleaning against the bar listening to the haps there was a clue in the tape on local scandal, when what should the video? I tried to turn it on, but was Veronica do than spill a drink all told: \"This is a type you haven't seen down her Fairy Queen outfit? She left before and you can't fathom its the ballroom to clean herself up and controls. It is made by the Frobozz that was the last I ever saw of her Magic VCR Company.\" Thanks a lot! alive! I swear it! I think that my next course of action But guess what was tightly wrapped is to carefully record the movements round her neck when her body was of the guests as they wander around discovered? My lasso! If only Smythe, the house and farm and they do the damned butler (a gorilla of noble seem to wander a lot! The house is bearing), hadn't got in the way when I huge, with \"wings\" in all directions. tried to follow her, then maybe I There are many interconnecting hallwouldn't be in the fix I am now! ways the long hall, the east hall, the This is the setting for Suspect which front hall and so on. follows Infocom's Witness and Dead Of course, if my name was Paul line mysteries. This time you are not Coppins, I'd be smugly telling you by the detective but a reporter and, as now how difficult I found it to the title suggests, you are also the complete the game. But then it's prime suspect. So prime, in fact, that it rumoured that Paul solves an Infocom is very likely you will be arrested and Adventure before breakfast each convicted. morning! I said \"setting\" and I mean just that, for it is not just background. It all hapMOSAIC'S pened while I was there! The ballroom was crowded with guests in fancy dress, all moving around the house at will. I started off having a chat Watch out in a few months' time for with Veronica about her favourite Mosaic Publishing's release of the racing horse \"Lurking Grue\", a steed next most famous diary in the world so black that it can hardly be seen in after that of Samuel Pepys. The Diary the dark! Then Veronica left to clean of Adrian Mole (aged 13.5 years) will up her dress. be coming to your computer screens I had a dance or two with Alicia, but as an Adventure game in the early she seemed rather cold, so I returned autumn. to bar-propping. Mosaic have commissioned those The band was playing Breathless purveyors of popular problems and this was followed, during the Level 9 to create the game around break, with Stairway to Heaven on the the Mole diary. stereo. I danced that one with Linda. Around the same time, Mosaic will Shortly after leaving the bar to settle be bringing you a computer game an argument about the price of horses, based on the popular TV series Yes Colonel Marston returned to Minister. announce our hostess had been Adventure, only in a discreet way. For example, in Beneker's office, having befriended the parrot, if you try to leave without having taken all the objects that will be useful to you, Paco will squawk in your ear \"Better take some more stuff!\" and you will not be able to exit the room until you have done so! The narrative sections are well presented, but are displayed with timing delays for reading and dramatic effect. This means that a replay is slow, with a lot of waiting during events that are repeated. Hence a SAVE disc is a must and saving must be done quite frequently to avoid the frustrations of the narrative delay. Three levels of play are offered Novice, Explorer and Leader so I went into the game from the start at different levels quite a few times to observe the differences. There were none that I could detect up to the point I played, which I judge to be about the half-way mark. I did discover, though, that the joystick has absolutely no effect on tuning in the signal from the expedition other than changing the sound slightly. The message you are given is a con! The best thing to do is to sit back and let it play. The packaging is similar to that of Rendezvous With Rama and inside the Amazon sleeve comes two diskettes, a sheaf of top secret papers telling you how to play the game and a map with coded references on. There are a few sound effects and some music, plus some of the best graphics I have seen on the Commodore they really are good. However, graphics alone do not make a good Adventure game and I'm afraid I wasn't over-impressed with this one. It left me feeling that, with the apparently limited choices open to me, I would have been just as well off reading the game in book form. Amazon is from Telarium for the Commodore 64 and Apple II, both on disc only, priced .95.  om in DIARY his its 107 "


"DON'T LET THE GREMLINS GET THE BETTER OF YOU, WRITE TO... ha HELP FOR FROGGERS! to give help in a lot of cases, as each Steven Dix, T. Smith, Adrian Cox (who version has its own peculiar variawins this month's tipster's T-shirt), tions. Gordon Scammell of Basildon is Owen Davies of Woking. Psi & Temp. playing on a Honeywell which he Mark Ryan of Manchester, Frank Andy Jennings of Blackburn wins a Tdescribes as a \"rather naff machine to Fearns of Crawley, and Matthew shirt for solving a problem with say the least!\" Colossal is its saving Fletcher of Gloucester. Crystal Frog. \"On the strength of grace, he says, and asks: how do we Simon Marsh's review, I bought the open the door with the supposed Taurey fear e as nok-Jy exis game and agree with him that it has an \"walk in\" safe and what is the use of TUYYS NYONY excellent atmosphere about it. But the vial? Any other players on naff  there is one slight problem with my machines able to help? uore presino-Hop spinesourpul Spectrum version you cannot finish Goblin Towers has yielded a wand, L  it!\" necklace, emerald, diamond and Ayon The difficulty starts on trying to sapphire to Katwevn Tones of Co. ays !! laddey e ProM YIM BUL open a door, says Andy a simple Londonderry. She's killed a goblin (NVWO vaana task especially as the program tells and got a key, but still she and her Yeas Sex! you it is locked with a four-digit code husband cannot find the remaining ose y un sy spaeu podexo aul IWYH IO WOONIX which he had already found. Getting treasures. \"Are there any smart-arses suspicious. Andy investigated with around who have managed to get    Kes up UMOn sbunn too O pe an APM the aid of the Quill and here's his them all?\" she asks. NOLV NSATOO diagnosis. How do you escape the Sahara poo you An entry has not been removed Desert in African Safari, asks Nicholas ou bugee ueeq jou say sdeysed juyor from the direction table for Location Phillips of Merton Park, how can su pure 'yinou s jablay ur si yoo ayL 49 (Vampire Room) which means Andrew Bonser pick the jade flower WIL JO SCHOT certain flags are not cleared by the in Zim Sala Bim, and how do you get \"PIOMS eyi eney teneq P non inq event table on leaving the room. Thus, past the statue of the archer, in em ay ur sem ey Jr epos or eynol there is no way to open the door. To Mystery of Munroe Manor, asks lan ANS S.ATHOM LY ISSUOJ cure the problem, using the Quill, Harrison of Romford? erreure ur apeur suodeem delete the movement table entry for Help!! Does nobody know how to esn Aruo oprey Konsep o quoq eyes pue seqor lezh ur veur ay ojies ay ang Loc. 49 and amend the last entry as get beyond the boat in the CommoYWNYX JO SCHOT follows: dore Quest? That's a plea from pretty \" No pue MONIVU NEW OLD nearly everyone who has played the ed jxe ay de pue ynon ob no se dn AT 49 AT 49 game including myself! sburyi yold 'M'IN ''MN'S'S 'N M-SI CLEAR 11 CLEAR 11 Brian Shortland has got expensive ezew Yeg snoureur ey ynon em CLEAR 5 CLEAR 5 tastes! He wants to go up in a lift, but STA JO TISYO DONE GOTO 48 the attendant wants five gold coins reyoue op 40 DESC which Brian doesn't have! Davlight paur euo uloy non sjeb ssed ang eu.. ONI SHL JONINIS and all will be OK! robbery, I call it Brian calls it Ring Andy hopes this cure will stop many of Power. ssefey? -auou eessed in Tyssesons Areje duro people staying up till 3 am before Peter Billington writes from behind eq jou keur sioe jeuoduisou as jo auros finally going out of their minds! the locked gates in a dungeon in NYWAIDS Castle of Terror. He just went in and europeur ybnou HELP the gate slammed behind him! \"I can e Sano Deur sry repped oy aroub find nothing here to help me,\" says mjesn sy seped wybu yl op peiseped yere wo. um ue buOW Peter, \"Can you, please?\" NOS JHL JO MSVW How long do you go on playing an ju Adventure in which you're stuck? AND HELP parquos ayi jab uuedies ay ised jab oi Isabel Turner of Ilkeston has got NYX JO SJONSH stumped in Sphinx and she has been OFFERED    d s   oq playing it for two years! She can't find dn-pop ur sdears ay dep gury pugue INNOO JHL the castle or the mouse. I think she Don't forget to turn the page upside deserves a bit of help after all that time down if you have a problem and really Two a Ourar nok jeym pue seppet ay Apienoored 'Aryaret who will gallantly step forward to want a good clue! Your problem yn ur burin einurexa 'enses ou our Jab OL help a lady in distress? might be answered here! Sharing their HOUSL DO FILSYO There are so many mini and maingood fortune and adventuring suoppaip te ur frame versions of Colossal Adventure expertise with you this month are: Yopy Pue yoo op Oi jeym eas oj ured . these days that it is almost impossible Michael Spiteri of Victoria, Australia, TUISYO ONOWAYTOJO JONUOS WANTED... 108 "


"master of the lamps. another piece of magic from activiSION. You are the heir to a great fortune. But the crown that was once your father's is almost beyond your grasp. How can you win it back? First you must fly down an ever-changing corridor in space. Here is flying as it was meant to be. Just you and your magic carpet, flying literally by the seat of your pants. Reach the end of the corridor and you will meet the first of three Genies who will set you a complex puzzle needing all your skill in colour and sound co-ordination to DINS solve. Do this and the first secret of the lamps will be yours. But you have only just begun. Another twenty levels of intense challenge, with no less than seven HOME COMPUTER SOFTWARE different musical themes are waiting... ACTIVISION AVAILABLE ON COMMODORE C64 CASSETTE AND DISK, AVAILABLE SOON ON OTHER SYSTEMS, ACTIVISION (UK) INC., 15 HARLEY HOUSE, MARYLEBONE RD, LONDON NWI. FROM SELECTED BRANCHES OF BOOTS, WH SMITH, JOHN MENZIES, LASKY'S, SPECTRUM, RUMBELOWS, WOOLWORTH AND GOOD COMPUTER SOFTWARE STORES EVERYWHERE "


"THE At 21.15 hours on the evening of May 16th 1943 a flight of specially prepared Lancaster bombers left Scampton Airfield for Germany. After months of planning and preparation Wing Commander Guy Gibson and his 617 Squadron were at last embarking on & mission so daring that it would guarantee them a place in the annals of history. The mission would strike at Germany's industrial heartland. If the giant dams of Moehne, Eder and Sorpe could be breached, millions of tons of water would flood the Ruhr, cutting vital water supplies HORIZON LIGHTS to steelworks and homes, flooding factories, power stations and farmland, and ALTIMETER DIRECTIONAL SPOTLIGHT BALLOON ARTIFICIAL AIRSPEED HORIZON COMPASS bring the important Mittelland Canal to & virtual standstill. Of course the successful conclusion of this raid is now legendary, the young men who took part are acknowledged as heroes; and now U.S. Gold in conjunction with Sydney Development Corporation and the International Computer Group are giving you the opportunity to relive the excitement, tension and drama of this famous mission. You will be able to play the part of PILOT, flying the Lancaster from Scampton to the target, NAVIGATOR using screens maps of Europe, "


"FRONT GUNNER, REAR GUNNER, BOMBARDIER and FLIGHT ENGINEER You will have to fly across Europe at low level to avoid radar; lookout for the deadly ME109 night fighters, dodge barrage balloons, spotlights and flak. At the target you will need all your nerve and skill to control the aircraft and release your deadly payload at just the right moment while avoiding enemy attack. BOOSTER GAUGES o&CO RPM GAUGES C TERS EXTINGUISHER CONTROL BOOSTERS THROTTLES tid 2170  CONTROL DOT Game Features: Superb graphics and sound, realistic joystick control, Pilot's screen and indicators, multiple screen navigators maps, front and rear gunners screens, bomb sighting screens, engineer's indicators, and much much more. The package comes complete with comprehensive flight instructions, maps, and confidential LANCASTER B. MK1/III (DAM BUSTER) YZOP documents including authentic material by Barnes Wallace and wing Commander Guy Gibson. Officially endorsed by 617 Squadron of the R.A.F. Dambusters is available for Atari and Commodore 64 computers with versions for Spectrum, BBC and Amstrad coming soon. ***** U.S. GOLD erican Sot n software WAKELN U.S. Gold is available from all leading computer stores and selected branches of BOOTS-W.H. SMITH-JOHN MENZIES-WOOLWORTH-WILDINGS Dealers! For information on how to become & U.S. Gold stockist contact Centre oft, Lightning. Microdealer, Tiger and all other leading distributors or write to: U.S. Gold Limted, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneago Street, Birmingham BY 4LY. Telephone 021-369 3020. Telex 337268. "


"RE HVIEWS MSCMCOD PAUL'S STATEMENT asleep on the floor. Linder handed me a note: \"Read It is said that in every barrel of apples this, it's clearly a death threat by that there is at least one rotten one, and I man Stiles.\" Sounded ominous I have just found Infocom's. Although checked it over for dabs, but no dice. it retains the usual Infocom style of Just then Linder's daughter Monica excellent text and full sentence looked in to say somethin' about input, the plot of this standard level going to the movies with her boydetective story unfortunately does friend. Good lookin' broad, smart not with it, as well. In places it appears so weak and Just as a screech of tyres told me transparent as to resemble the Monica had left, there's this almighty Invisible Man. To give you some idea bang and the window explodes, how simple it is, I managed, to my shards of glass flyin' everywhere. surprise and disbelief, to completely When the dust settles, Linder is lyin' solve the mystery in just under two dead on the floor. hours.' While I was searching the house, in The setting is Los Angeles on a came Sergeant Duffy, my trusty aide, cold Friday evening in 1938. You with a man in tow. \"I caught this guy have been invited to the home of a Mr in the woods outside, calls himself Linder, who claims that his life is Stiles. Says Mr Linder asked him to being threatend by a Mr Ralph Stiles. come over tonight.\" Duffy handYou are to establish some basic facts cuffed Stiles to the sofa while I behind Linder's claim. questioned him. This was going to be You gather that some time ago a piece of cake, I thought. Stiles was having an affair with It wasn't nothing seemed to fit. Linder's wife Virginia who, it is As my searching and questioning claimed, committed suicide when continued, it became clear that every Linder found out. Stiles is holding What does our \"Personal member of the household had a Linder responsible and is out for motive to commit the murder. Rating\" factor mean? We use it vengeance. Whilst you are sitting in as a measure of the enjoyment Somethin' told me that Stiles had Linder's office having this chat, a been set up. My mind was reeling, an individual reviewer derives dark shadow appears at the window the mystery was getting deeper. from a game. Because and blows Linder away, or so it But what do you do when the only Adventures, like fiction, are so appears. person to see the crime committed is diverse, a reviewer's option is So far the plot seems good, but it's yourself and you have only 12 hours often very much a matter of when you actually start investigating to find the killer? You see folks, I am the case that things just don't quite personal taste, providing that The Witness. come together. The characters in the the game is competently Personal Rating: 10 story number only four, not counting presented. As we have a Steve Donoghue yourself and your sidekick, Sergeant regular team of reviewers, by Duffy. This means, of course, that it's naming the author of each not going to take an awful lot of effort review, it is hoped that the to work out who is the guilty party. reader will be able to judge The DUFFY HELP command causes whether a particular game is Duffy to come straight out and tell his or her type. Of course, any you where the next clue is to be particularly good or bad found, instead of giving a gentle hint. features will be mentioned in In my opinion this spoils the whole the review, in any case. point of the game which surely must An illustration of how this be to solve the mystery yourself. works is well demonstrated by What is the point of shelling out two reviews of The Witness, a good money for a puzzling game, if detective Adventure from EMPIRE OF KARN you are given the answer to almost Infocom. PAUL COPPINS and every puzzle by typing just two The sequel to Heroes of Karn is a STEVE DONOGHUE, both well words? much snappier game than its foreknown to regular C&VG Personal Rating: 2 runner. Starting off at your place, the readers, have very different Paul Coppins Hall of Callastheon, accompanied by views on the game... Darin, thirty-seventh direct STEVE'S STATEMENT descendent of our old friend Beren, time to give her any attention. I you set off to stop your empire from It had been a normal day in the office picked up my coat and headed off to falling. Zheff, the corrupt king of until I received a telegram from some Linder's house. I had this gut feelin' it Vorzdeshaa, is plotting your crazy Joe who called himself Linder. was gonna be a long night. downfall. He was a hot shot in the business When I arrived at Linder's house, it Your arrival at Vorzdeshaa enables world, plenty of cash and no worries, was the Chinese butler, Phong, who you to start the main part of your or so it seemed. But here in my hand answered the door. I aimed a few quest and, after trekking across the was a message sayin' his life was sharp questions and was eventually desert, you come to the capital city, being threatened by a guy called ushered into Linder's office. Stiles. Linder sat in a well worn leather The text responses are instant, I remembered a newspaper article chair and beckoned me to take a albeit a trifle dense in the presence of I had read recently. Yeah! Mrs Linder seat. There was a large window to the such words as EXAMINE and GET. had committed suicide and she'd rear of the office and a back-door The only response to an unknown been foolin' around with this Stiles exit. In one corner stood a beautiful word is \"Sorry, I don't understand\" guy because her husband had little grandfather clock. A cat was lyin' which gives little help to the player. 112 "


"On the other hand, I did not find I was Cybernetics Corporation creations, and that all-important, go-anywhere groping around for words for too all with Genuine People Personalities. pocket fluff. long, so the vocab must be adequate These include the over-protective The puzzles to be found in the for the plot. shipboard computer, a Nutri-matic Adventure are somewhat like its The fact that you can't examine anydrinks machine and some very self-humour, that is, as rich and nutty as my thing, I always think, spoils a game centred doors. mother's fruit cake and that's great! somewhat. On the other hand, there The latter, I discovered to my To solve them you must throw feasible are some multi-word commands frustration, won't let you pass through logic out of the window and start which allow you to put things in unless you can prove without a thinking in terms of the unthinkable, and speak to the characters you shadow of a doubt that you can the seemingly impossible. In a galaxy come across on your journey. reconcile totally contradictory of improbability drive ships and The graphics are above average in situations without going completely whacky robots, anything can happen, detail and realism, but just a little bonkers. However, once you have and usually does! slower than some to draw and fill. mastered the science of Improbability One final thought. Whoever it was at They are worth watching and they Physics, you will get the opportunity Infocom that called this a standard don't become a bore, as they display to play the part of anything from a level Adventure, should, as the guide only on the first visit to a location. sperm whale to the president of the itself has declared, \"... be the first All in all, I found Empire very galaxy. against the wall when the revolution pleasant to play and its music had my comes\". foot a-tappin' non-stop! Personal Rating: 12,877,431. Empire of Karn is from Interceptor Paul Coppins Software for the CBM 64 and Amstrad. TRIAL OF ARNOLD BLACKWOOD Personal Rating: 9 Keith Campbell Another game for Adventure-starved Dragon owners this month and this HITCH HIKER'S GUIDE time it's from a small company called Nemesis. The game revolves around Before you are put off buying a copy Arnold Blackwood, a private eye who of the game of the book of the TV has been hired by Lord Erebus, but series by Douglas Adams, let me the problem is that he has lost his correct one small point. It does not memory and cannot remember what cost the ,780,000,004.95 (incl. p&p) he was hired for! It is your task to quoted, but a mere .50 (Atari help him regain his memory. version). And it does have an From waking up dazed on the advantage over any other form of this Erebus Estate, you progress round great work. You actually get to play and round and round, and not very the part of the greatest hitch hiker of easily forward! This game is very all time Arthur Dent. difficult to get into, even with a hint If you think things are going to be sheet! After a few hours hard slog, I easy because you've read the book, managed to amass a fine collection of seen it on TV, and heard it on radio, There is another unusual feature in objects, ranging from a blowlamp to forget it! Douglas Adams, the mind this game which really adds to the a half-eaten kipper. behind the original guide, has joined humour. Let's face it, it's not every day On my journeys I met up with a forces with Infocom's Steve Meretzky, one comes across an Adventure that rampaging Triffid, who was no blow the intellect behind Sorceror and will lie and argue with you, just for the over, and the cat Bonzo, who was also Planetfall, to create a totally new game sheer hell of it! a pain. Regular readers will know that scenario that will delight even the The guide itself is rather like a dataThe Pink Fairy laughs out loud at most jaded adventurer. In fact, to be base from which you can glean such things and sure as taxes I ended successful in Hitch Hiker you must information at any time simply by up finishing the game with a score of forget all that has been written before asking. It even contains footnotes that 48%. and approch this extraordinary make good reading in themselves. It is not necessary to score 100% to Adventure with a clear and unclutMind you, they do seem to have held complete the Adventure, but if you tered mind. some rather wild parties in the guide's do you will have had a very hard The game introduces new concepts technical department, the outcome of game. You will have had many more into Adventuring which I found to be which was that some entries have tasks to perform than just the main absorbing, pleasantly amusing and, in been deleted. As a result, no-one can one which is to return the Gold one instance, humiliating! I refer to a remember where the back-up tapes Amulet to Lord Erebus. certain door that defied all the laws of are kept, nor indeed, if there ever The Dragon has been used to common logic and just refused to were any! almost its full capabilities, with the open. On consulting the Master for As with all Infocom Adventures, the character set having been redefined suggestions, Keith only laughed, packaging contains lots of little extras and sound used extensively. If you gloating over the fact that for once I that add to the fun. With Hitch Hiker get to the piano, play it and listen to was stuck comes two sets of demolition orders, what makes the Dragon's sound As you play Hitch Hiker, you will one on your beloved dwelling, the functions so good it's enough to come across most of the characters to other, written in Vogon text, orders turn Spectrum owners green with be found in the book. There is Ford the total destruction of a little planet envy! Prefect with a satchel full of hitch somewhere in the uncharted backThe Trial of Arnold Blackwood is hiking goodies. Trillian, still as waters of the unfashionable end of the for Dragon and Amstrad computers, captivating as ever. Zaphod Beeblewestern spiral arm of the galaxy. price .50 inc p&p, from Nemesis, 10 brox, as always, in two minds about You also get a Don't Panic button Carlow Road, Ringstead, Kettering, everything. And, even more selfbadge, peril sensitive sunglasses Northants. I look forward to more righteous than in the book, Marvin the (which are impossible to see through!) Dragon releases from Nemesis! Paranoid Android. a microscopic space fleet for Personal Rating: 7.5 There is also a whole host of Syrius attacking microscopic civilizations, Simon Marsh 113 "


"<A>WZHPeu ADVENTURE PLANNER graphics on and off. I found I needed been created. to use these in a number of locations I can recommend this as a well For a long time now arcade freaks where the text description was thought out and well written game. I have had joysticks, and hackers have longer than the space below the hope to see more from Spoof soon! had modems, but there have been no graphics window. Unfortunately, the The Prisoner is for the 48K real accessories for the cream of the words don't stop scrolling when the Spectrum priced .50, including micro-users, that A-team of the keynew message reaches the top line of postage and packing, and in case board — the Adventurers! the text window, so one either has to you have difficulty in locating Spoof Print and Plotter, the company that read very quickly, or type WORDS to they are at 58 Railway Road, Urmston, became famous for its graphics be able to follow the descriptions. Manchester M31 IXT. planners for the ZX81 and Spectrum, I think Pete Austin was being Personal Rating: 7 have changed all this with the modest when he described this Simon Marsh introduction of the Adventure game as easier than usual, judging by Planner. This is a tool that no serious the size of the map and number of NUCLEAR WAR GAMES would-be hero should be without. It objects I ha be without. It objects I had amassed compared 1 obtain treasure just as with my score out of 1.000. All in all. Severn Software are well known for easily as it can help to free a beautiful another offering from Level 9 of the their Mystery of Munroe Manor and princess. high standard we've come to expect. King Solomon's Mines. There is In the good old days before Manic Emerald Isle is available for BBC. something peculiarly frustrating Miner got to Surbiton, the only CBM 64, Spectrum, Amstrad, Atari, about Severn's games and, in playing planner available was a scrap of Memotech and MSX at .95 on Nuclear War Games, I think I have paper on which to draw a map. In our cassette and for BBC and CBM 64 at got to the bottom of it. rush to progress with the Adventure .95 on disc. Here, as in the other games, the in hand, the map inevitably becomes Personal Rating: 8 graphics are very effective and covered in a criss-cross collection of Keith Campbell extremely speedy. Sound, too, is lines that would need a road planner used effectively. The problem is the to unravel. THE PRISONER problems! The Adventure Planner is a large By that, I mean the player is given (11 inches by 16 inches) pad of 50 Many of the smaller software no leads, for instance which words pages, each one of which has over companies cannot afford large are not recognised, nor allowed to 150 squares, so that your Adventure advertisements and tend to go carry out actions which would seem can be mapped or planned with relatively unnoticed. That doesn't logical unless they are part of the one ease. With the pad comes some mean that their Adventure games are true route to success. Couple with useful hints on how to plan and necessarily inferior, as I discovered this a slightly \"off-track\" logic and construct maps. It costs .50. when I played The Prisoner, from one soon gives up. Personal Rating: Can I have another Spoof Software. This is a pity, for I think Nuclear one? The Prisoner is based on the War Games has some very good Simon Marsh television series of the same name points. The presentation I have and many of the locations in it will be already mentioned. The plot, too, is EMERALD ISLE instantly recognisable to followers of interesting. You have to stop a Norad the programmes. computer from initiating a nuclear Before offering the third part of the The character you assume is No. 6,war and it has already taken over Snowball trilogy to the world, Level 9 surely the most famous number ever! control and started the countdown! have taken time out to squeeze in a You wake up in a village — really a Let me give an example of the \"quickie\". Described by Pete Austin high security prison for ex-secretdifficulties I encountered. On a highas a slightly easier Adventure than service personnel, to ensure they way running north/south, I am their usual style, Emerald Isle is  don't spill the beans! From your blocked at one end since that leads cheaper than the rest of the Level 9 room, you progress outside where to Munroe Manor (a nice touch to range. you see many weird things — a explain an invalid exit on an open The action takes place in and statue, a rock boat and a taxi tohighway!) and, after a few moves around tree-top cities of wooden nowhere! south, I am blocked by security gates buildings, where a contest for the The first real problem is to at Norad. There is a garage en-route heir to the throne is about to take overcome your hunger which which yields various tools and an place. Presumably it is your object to develops to fatality after 30 moves. unmanned army truck further up the win and take over from the existing Not a brilliantly original trap, but its road. king! How you set about this task is a problem in itself, since the rules and where, during the course of a meal, takenly, that I couldn't get through or conditions don't seem to be around you may come across the Book of the over the security gate and fence, my But first you must escape the Village. Reading this transports you own logic suggested that if I drove parachute from which you are to some very original problems the truck, the gate might be opened dangling at tree-top level, for you based on various episodes in the to let me through with no more than a have bailed out of your plane series. On the way to your goal, you cursory check. In any event, the somewhere over the Bermuda are confronted with such things as truck was there for some purpose, so triangle. Once down, you find exploding cricket balls and poisoned I investigated. yourself confronted by a maze of ale. Despite LOOK TRUCK saying YOU branches, through which you must The Prisoner has been written CAN'T SEE A DRIVER, I could not fight your way to enter the city. using the Quill plus the new ENTER, CLIMB, GO TRUCK or CAB, The usual style of Level 9 text is Illustrator. The graphics produced nor could I DRIVE, START, MEND, accompanied by what is becoming with the Illustrator are just simple line REPAIR ... you name it! the familiar look of Level 9 graphics. drawings which do not add to the Nuclear War Games is for the These are fast to draw and quite game and, like most Adventures with Commodore 64 from Severn pleasant to look at without being graphics, a larger vocabulary would Software. exceptional. have been preferable! On the other Personal Rating: 3 (but could There are two commands, WORDS hand, good use is made of colour and improve with time) and PICTURES, which toggle the sound and a new character set has Keith Campbell 114 "


"FREE 16 X 24 FULL COLOUR POSTER TYNE TEES COLOUR THE ADVENTURE COMING SOON SUPER GRAN SPECIALLY WRITTEN FOR KIDS This great new game is C16 and Amstrad on April based on the Tyne Tees 2nd with versions for the series Super Gran and BBC/B Electron, MSX, produced in association Atari and Einstein to follow. with Tyne Tees Television. Super Gran will Ring Tynesoft on be available for (091) 414 4611 the CBM 64, for your local Spectrum 48K, COMPUTER SOFTWARE stockist. "


"boldoldoldog PUER cococobloldoldo PLAYER 243 time states Constant challenge Ik celelele bolde AMEROODDODObold BLAUER PSOE Spaceflight epic For the 48K SPECTRUM Arcade space battles, 3D flight simulation, and mind-stretching strategy problems -take on these challenges and become ace space duellist STARION. As pilot of the world's first space time transmuter, the USS Stardate, your quest is to fearlessly travel through the space time continuum. Recover the secret cargo, a feat which will not only test your fighting skills, but your wits; and escape through the inter-dimensional timewarp and forward onto another time state. But be warned! Your dexterity, cunning and combative skills will be tested to the full when battling against the enemy fleets and other hazards you will encounter. STARION has it all amazing 3D space action, stunning graphics and high resolution colour. A game of almost unbelievable complexity, designed to stretch your Spectrum beyond its limits to undreamt of capabilities. Don't just play it, experience it! STARION is available for your 48K Spectrum and Spectrum+ at .95. Barclaycard and Access orders can be accepted on our 24 hour ansaphone, just call (0235) 835001. "


"Thrilling space battles LRVER 1 00000000000OCLAVER PLEVER 1000000000000KPL rne House IM ed on "


"BEYOND CHALLENGING SOFTWARE Now for Spectrum 48K and Commodore 64 CHALLENGING SOFTWARE NOMINATED FOR MICRO FIRST MAR SOCOMPUTINGLO BRITISH Spy vs Spy is two player cartoon fun! The black and white spies chase each other around the embassy. They steal secrets and plant traps, playing against each other on a split screen display. Available from software dealers everywhere or direct from Beyond Competition House, Farndon Road, Market Harborough, Leicester LE 16 9NR. Access/Barclaycard telephone: 0858 34567. Price .95 inc. P&P "


"SOFTWARE WORLD 12 ETHEL STREET, BIRMINGHAM B2. TEL: 021 643 7559 FOR ALL POPULAR MICRO HARDWARE, PERIPHERALS & SOFTWARE Birmingham's largest stockists of: AMSTRAD, ATARI, COMMODORE, DRAGON, ELECTRON, MSX, ORIC, SPECTRUM AND TEXAS ETHEL SOET WARE WORLD 602 75522 TURSES MUFTSE 10 SOFTWARE AT AMAZING PRICES! (i.e. Atari from .00) SEND S.A.E. FOR FREE LISTS (SPECIFY MACHINE) BACK IN STOCK Atari Technical Ref. Notes De Re Atari Atari Roots Your Atari Computer 17.00 17.00 17.20 17.50 ATARI COMPUTERS 800XL/1050 DISK DRIVE PACK inc. Home Filing Manager Pay off: Text Adventure Sound & Graphics Demo .99 ATARI BOOKS & MAGAZINES ANTIC ANALOG PAGE 6 ATARI USER (inc BACK ISSUES) PLACE YOUR REGULAR ORDER WITH US NOW MANY ATARI BOOKS IN STOCK 800XL/1010 RECORDER PACK inc. Pole Position Inv to Programming Sound & Graphics Demo .99 ATARI STOP PRESS! M.P.P. PRINTER I/FACE 69.99 R-VERTER RS 232 l/FACE 59.99 U.S. DOUBLER 79.95 (converts 1050 to d/d) MINOR MIRACLES WS MODEM 149.99 MINER 2049'er (cart) 17.95 BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK (cart) 49.95 GHOSTBUSTERS (disk) 14.95 DROPZONE (c/d) 9.95/14.95 POLE POSITION (c/d) 9.95/14.95 MR. DO (c/d) 9.95/14.95 SPIDERMAN W. GRAPHICS (d) 17.95 800XL COMPUTER inc. Joystick, Pacman .99 ALL LATEST ATARI SOFTWARE INCLUDING V.C.S. CARTRIDGES, IN OUR NEW 1ST FLOOR ATARI CENTRE PLEASE PHONE TO CHECK STOCK AVAILABILITY BEFORE SENDING MONEY REMEMBER IF WE DO NOT HAVE WHAT YOU REQUIRE IN STOCK WE CAN NORMALLY 'OBTAIN IT FAST! U.K. & AMERICAN SOFTWARE IS AVAILABLE MAIL ORDER U.K. POST FREE (EXCLUDING BOOKS & MAGAZINES). GOODS DESPATCHED BY RETURN POST, SEND FOR UP TO DATE LISTS ATARI SELECTED CARTRIDGES e.g. STAR RAIDERS, PAC-MAN .50 each .00 for two please f 18.00 for three phone MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS SPECTRUM DORCAS SOFTWARE NEW RELEASE Emerald Isle....... 5.85 Penetrator....... 5.95 Slap Shot..................7.85 Software Star......... 6.85 Tri Na Nog..............8.50 Shades... Gryphon.............. 6.85 Frak. 7.85 5.95 6.00 THE RUNES OF ZENDOS 5.85 Subterranean Striker... 5.85 Soft Air.....................4.95 Flak .6.85 Quick Shot Il plus interface...... ... 18.50 Flightpath 737... Brian Jacks........ 6.85 Gremlins............ 8.50 Day in a Life........... 5.85 Komplex................. 8.50 Wizards Lair...... 5.85 Gyron. 8.50 Formula 1... Grand National....... 5.85 Stay Cool... 5.85 Fantastic Voyage.....5.85 Chockie Egg5.85 Contuzion..... Dragontorc............. ... 6.85 Mighty Magnus.........5.85 Mega Hits............ Minder........ . Sina Rock 'n' Bolt.... ..6.85 911/TS.. Frankie Goes to....... 8.50 Swords and Scorcery 8.50 Automan....... .6.85 Rocky Horror Show. 8.75 Buck Rogers....... 6.85 Moon Cresta 5.95 Dig Dug 16.00 8.50 6.85 Kong Strikes Back...5.90 Alien 8.................... 8.50 Skooldaze... ... 4.95 Sam Stoat. 5.85 Star Strike.................4.95 in Dam Trouble.......5.85 Air Wolf........... Underwuride..... ....8.50 Knight Lore... 8.50 Doomdark's Revenge........... 8.50 Combat Lynx.. .7.85 American Football...8.50 Ghostbusters 8.75 Shadow Fire..............8.50 World Baseball.........5.95 Zombie Zombie......5.85 Pyjamarama.............. 5.85 Fall Guy.....................5.95 Sabre Wull................8.25 Beach Head...........6.95 Lords of Midnight... 8.50 Football Manager.....5.85 White Lightning...... 12.50 Dev. Pac 3........... 10.50 Tasword ll...............11.75 Hampstead.... 8.50 Match Day.................6.85 Blue Max................... 6.85 Gift from the Gods...8.50 Hunchback II............5.80 Monty's Innocent.....5.85 Death Star................6.85 Zaxxon... ... 6.85 Raid over Moscow...6.85 Everyone's a Wally 8.50 Duke's of Hazzard..5.85 Software Star....... 5.85 Technician Ted. 4.95 Brian Bloodaxe.........6.85 Proiect Future 6.00 Airwulf....................... 5.50 Quill Illustrator... 12.50 Emerald Isle..............5.85 Buggy Blast..... 4,95 Toy Bazarre... ...6.85 Tapper.............. 6.85 Soy Hunter 6.85 Bruce Lee..... 6.85 6.85 8.50 Impossible Mission..7.85 Knightmare.. Lords of Midnight....8.50 Automan....... .8.00 Stella 7............... Buck Rogers....... 6.85 Soft Aid 4.99 Up and Down 8.50 Super Huey............. 10.50 Dough Boy...... 8.50 Talladega..... .8.50 Pacman........... 8.50 Mr Do... 8.50 8.50 Dark Tower......... ..6.85 Almazz 8.50 Mama Llama.... 6.50 Brian Jacks..............7.85 Gremlins Fistful of Fun...... 8.50 Rocket Ball.... .6.85 Mega Hits 16.00 Pipeline Il....... Grand National.........6.85 Airwulf .6.85 Pitfall II.... 7.85 Kong Strikes Back...6.90 8.50 Front Line......... Flyerfox 6.85 Gandall 6.85 Joust..... .6.85 Ciphold 9.... Pastfinder.......... Rock 'n' Bolt. 911/TS Aqua Racer............ Music Studio........... 12.50 Bounty Bob.............,8.50 Skull Island........... 12.50 Murder Water Front 12.50 Confuzion.... ..5.95 Frankie Hollywood...8.50 Blagger Hollywood. 7.95 7.75 Archon.. This fascinating animated graphic and text adventure game with the challenging RUNIC PUZZLE is now available for: AMSTRAD CPC464 As well as for the 48K Spectrum. Its many features include: 12 different adventures, ful! sentence input, continuously displayed graphics. \"Addictive' — Micro Adventurer (Jan 85) \"A very fine game'' Crash Christmas Special \"Compulsive fun\" — HCW (Jan 1985) Available from Boots and other leading retailers or direct from: DORCAS SOFTWARE 3 THE OASIS, GLENFIELD, LEICESTER PRICE: .95 inc. p&p COMMODORE Staff of Kamath........8.50 Indiana Jones...........8.50 Conan the Barbarian8.50 Zaxxon.... Hunchback 1.......... 6.95 Give my Regards... 6.85 One on One..............8.50 Bungleing Bay.........8.50 Choplifter...... .... 8.50 World Baseball.........6.85 Quo Vadis 8.75 Everyone's a Wally... 8.50 Cliff Hanger..............6.85 Football Manager..... 6.85 Beach Head..............8.50 Pole Position............8.50 8.75 8.50 5.85 Postage included UK. Please state which micro. Fast Service. Send cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept. CVG, 76 Westbourne Terrace, London W2 119 "


"Mw COMPETITION RESULTS  NEXT MONTHS Get ready to change up to top gear for next issue's very special Pitstop Il competition. You could be at one of this season's Grand Prix races thanks to CBS and C&VG! So grab your skid-lid and prepare to qualify for the June issue of Computer & Video Games. You'll need to be quick to catch a copy ... Hello John, got a new game? Find out about how Mr Daley and our Tel got tangled up in the software business in your favourite computer magazine. 'Er indoors won't like it at all! Did Morkin destroy the evil Shareth Enfield; Tony Jeffries, Kent; Richard with the Ice Shards in your version of Johnston, Banffshire; I Murphy, Doomdark's Revenge? Liverpool; Andrew Paynter, WrexIf you successfully completed the ham; Vincent de Sanctis, Luxemthree \"Fighting Fantasy\" episodes bourg; M J Davies, Dyfed; Stephen based around Beyond's best-selling Jones, Chester; R Price, Cornwall; game Doomdark's Revenge in the Paul Goodman, London. December, January and February issues of Computer & Video Games, 20 people are going to help Alex the three questions should have Rogan The Last Starfighter save caused no problems. the universe and their Survival Kits In part one we asked which will be winging towards them very treasure of Luxor's was the most shortly. valuable. The answer was The In the meantime here are the Crystal Ball which allowed Luxor his names of the winners: Shaun Wong, first glimpse of his adversary. N Humberside; Neal Addison Leeds; Part two asked which of Tarithel the Adam Parry, Stevenage; Karen Dreamer's three Fey runes was the Saxton, N Yorkshire; Stuart Douglas, most useful in her quest to find Hull; Martin Knespel, Vienna; Morkin. The answer was the rune of Andrew Davies, Clwyd; Hans the Sun it is the only spell which Lauring, Denmark, Darren Rutherwould defeat Shareth the Heartford, Co Durham; Christopher Carr, stealer in her guise as a wolf. Preston, David Collins, Part three requested that you find Bournemouth; Jason Stevens, the most useful of Morkin's three Broxtowe: John Palmer, Louth, Barry magical possessions. The Cup of Pope, Cheshire; Conrad Lucas, S Dreams was the best as it allowed Wales; Robert Crowther, Leeds; Morkin to revive the all-important Neil Punton, Fife; John Adams Dragon. Powell, London; Richard Wilkinson, There are 20 copies of Beyond's Epsom; Justin O'Brien, Eastbourne. Lords of Midnight awaiting the The three winners of our February winners. This first of the Midnight crossword are: Miles Chidlow, trilogy, by C&VG columnist Mike Gwent; David Alan Biggs, Co Singleton, featuring 32,000 screens of Durham; Andrew Hulcoop, action, independently moving Cornwall. enemies, treasures, traps, dark lords There will be a slight delay in the and wizards has just been converted arrivals of the T-shirts as we are awaitto the Commodore 64. ing a new batch in the office but, For Spectrum owners who already don't despair lads, they will arrive. have Midnight, we can offer Doomdark's Revenge for the A couple of months ago we asked winners. you to send in your ghost stories, Ian Drury. Ashford; Colin Roger, and 50 winners would win a copy fo Aberdeen; M Eaden, Sheffield; M the Ghostbusters game by Bagshaw, Staffs; Ian Greener, Here Activision. Next month we'll be ford; W M Chua, London; David printing a couple of the best. So Naylor, Leeds; Geoffrey Herhert, watch this space! PS. Could Darren Worcestershire; Clay Willing, AylesBroughton, one of the winners, bury: A Wales, Northwich; M Bergh, please send us his full address? Find out all about the people who put the word special into special effects in blockbuster movies like Tron and The Last Starfighter. And it's definitely not all done with mirrors.... C&VG's special agent has been going undercover to bring you the inside story on the new James Bond game A View to a Kill — with some EXCLUSIVE pictures of the game. Discover some secrets next issue. RAPID ROUND-UP OF NEW RELEASES AMSTRAD C16 Amsoft Centrecourt Melbourne Detective House Games Pack Anirog Survivor Games Pack 11 Solid Software The House of Horrors Roller Kong Amsoft Splat Anirog Flight Path 737 Blagger Pyjamarama DRAGON Classic Racing Design Design Rommel's Revenge Dragon's Gold Addictive Software Star MSX Activision River Raid ATARI Pitfall 11 English Hero Software Atari Smash Hits 1, 2 & 3 Beamrider Colossus Chess 3.0 Mr Wong's Loopy Laundry BBC ORICIATMOS Visions Apple Pie Severn Hubert Software Chopper ash Hits 1.2 8 Artic Solve the mystery of Electric Software's The Wreck and win yourself an MSX computer. Worth getting your feet wet for! BBC & ELECTRON Kosmos Identity Europe VIC 20 Interceptor Villain 120 "


"The art of making msic. U TILE Studio, The old way. The new way. How many of us have the feeling that if we will help you create your own sounds, step by step, could only write down music in the same way that with no previous knowledge of music whatsoever we can write words, there would be no holding us. There's even a menu of fifteen assorted Well, now you can. melodies, ranging from Ravel to With Activision's Music Studio. Joplin, for you to experiment with Note by note, you can build a (Try scoring Mapleleaf Rag for melody from the music in your Keyboard and Steam Train. It takes head. And see it on your TV screen two seconds with Music Studio! as well as hear it. If you are a musician, you'll You can add harmonies. wonder how you ever lived without Lyrics. Change key. Change tempo. the Music Studio. Change instruments (from a choice If you're not a musician, you of 15 including keyboard!) You can soon will be scroll the melody through the TV $14.99 for the cassette and screen and then print out the result. $19.99 for the disk from all good You can do all this with your software stores. computer and a joystick.' If, musically, you're a beginner, don't worry. Music Studio HOME COMPUTER SOFTWARE FROM SELECTED BRANCHES OF BOOTS, WH SMITH,JOHN MENZIES, LASKYS, SPECTRUM.RUMBELOWS, WOOLWORTH AND GOOD COMPUTER SOFTWARE STORES EVERYWHERE. ACTIVISION "


"CHALLEN QUE OFTWARE WE'VE DESIGNED AN ADVENTURE AND DESTROYED THE TEXTI SHADOWFIRE USES PICTURES NOT WORDS TO ISSUE COMMANDS. O COMING SOON FOR SPECTRUM 48K AND COMMODORE 64 "


"INCENTIVE CONFUZION THE FUZION OF MIND AND MACHINE * AMSTRAD * SPECTRUM * COMMODORE 64 * BBCB * ELECTRON * Price .95 Trade and Credit Card orders: Telephone (0734) 591678, INCENTIVE, 54 London Street, Reading RG1 4SQ "


"SUPER SKETCH A Remarkable Innovation in Video Graphics RAINFALL AND LANDUS Until now, creating computer graphics in colour has been both a demanding and expensive endeavor. The Super Sketch Graphics Tablet provides a totally unique and simple medium for creating video graphics at a surprisingly low cost. By simply moving the stylus control arm, as you would a pencil, Super Sketch reproduces the movement on the video screen. Four control buttons at the top of the tablet assist in operating the graphic functions of the software. Graphics may be created by \"free hand\" or by \"tracing\" from drawings clipped to the pad. Compared with other computer graphic products, it is much easier to use than keyboard controls, does more than joysticks, paddle con trollers and mouse controllers, and is less expensive than touch pad products. A brief demonstration instantly proves the remarkable features of Super Sketch. This product makes an excellent \"Demo Display\" in retail stores because anyone can immediately produce graphics with little or no instructions. SIPASTUR TIL MONTHS OF YEAR S OTHER SUPER. SKETCH  Cassette Software Includes Printer Utility and Starter Art Programs  Tracing & Free Hand Drawing On One To One Ratio To Video Screen NOW   Four Easy To Use Menus: Main, Brush, Design, Expert  Custom Brush & Design Capability  Keyboard Text Entry Capability  Easy To Use Push Button Controls  Graphics Can Be Saved To Cassette And Reproduced On A Printer  Zoom Window Creates Super Video Graphics  Absolutely Simple To Use Cassette Software Included  Printer Utility Included Starter Kit Included Compatibility Screen Resolution Color Selection Unit Dimensions (In Gift Box) Commodore 64 160 x 200 16 16/2\"x12/4\"x21/2\" ANADOG Trade Enquiries Unit 10 Victoria Industrial Park, Victoria Road, Dartford, Kent DA1 SAJ Tel: 0322 92513/8 "

