"95p OCTOBER 1985 S$4.60 Dm6 COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES WIN OUR EXCLUSIVE LORD OF THE RINGS TREASURE TROVE! SHATTER THE WORLD'S FIRST COMPUTER COMIC ENTER THE GREAT M.U.D. CHALLENGE /WIN SUMMER GAMES II EXCLUSIVE PREVIEWS-BEYOND'S NEXUS AND MINTER'S BATALYX! FIND YOUR WAY TO THE TOYMAKER'S PARTY WITH OUR BIG SCREEN RUPERT MAP "


"AND ON THE EIGHTH SUMMER Experience the thrill of top international competition in your own homel Summer Games II brings it all to you with eight challenging new events. You and up to seven other contestants can compete in your favourite individual event or go for it all in the grand competition. Some events, like cycling, rowing and fencing even challenge you with realistic head-to-head competition. First, decide which of the 18 different countries you're going to represent. Then, in true Olympic fashion, you will need the proper strategy and mental toughness, not just speed and agility to excel in each of the eight events. That's why we included a feature that lets you practice each event until you're ready for the real competition. Remember, it's not too early to get ready for 1988. With the right diet. proper training and lots of practice you just might make it. In the meantime, put on your sweatsuit, grab that joystick and let Summer Games II give you eight new ways to Go For The Gold!  Includes Cycling, Fencing, Kayaking, Triple Jump, Rowing, High Jump, Javelin and Equestrian Events Opening, Closing and Awards Ceremony With National Anthems Compete Against The Computer or Your Friends  Individual and Head-To-Head Competition . One to Eight Players \"SUMMER GAMES II DOESN'T LOOK SET TO BECOME A CLASSICIT IS A CLASSIC!' -ZZAP 64 ZZAP 64 PRESENTATION 99% ALI COMMODORE N:99% MS REPHICS SOUND .........96% ......97% HOOKABILITY...98% LASTABILITY...97% VALUE ........98% OVERALL.....97% EpYxUJER "


"4DAY EPYX CREATED... GAMES II \"Summer Games Il now takes the Gold as the greatest sports simulation ever created for the 64. -Commodore User 'Summer Games II is eight outstanding games rolled into one piece of software -100% value for money.\" -Computer Gamer TRY THESE OTHER GREAT GAMES FROM EPYX SUMMER GAMES IMPOSSIBLE MISSION MERASOLS USEIN. AOpening Ceremony High Jump PACER 0:00.0 Equestrian Kayaking V PITSTOPI BREAKDANCE Cycling Screen shots as seen on the Commodore 64 AVAILABLE AUGUST for Commodore 64/128 CASSETTE .95 DISK .95 EDYX TEMEL Kavel PITSTOP II BREAKDANCE AND COMING SOON...WINTER GAMES U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham. Telephone 021-359 3020 Telex 337268 KAI U.S. GOLD COMPUTER SOFTWARE Software "


"PRACTICE | 03 DO 00 FEATURES 15 THE GREAT MUD CHALLENGE 30 SHATTER 34 THE LORD OF THE RINGS 39 DEAR BUGHUNTERS 43 RUPERT AND THE TOYMAKER'S PARTY 45 THE BUGHUNTERS 76 SUMMER GAMES CHALLENGE 86 ADVENTURE HELPLINE 101 C+VG SOFTWARE CHARTS 102 IDEAS CENTRAL 104 HALL OF FAME 109 MAILBAG 112 PSI WARRIOR HUBSN SMO DOCE SUMMER GAMES CHALLENGE/76 THE GREAT MUD CHALLENGE/16 117 DIARY OF A GAME NEWS + REVIEWS 8 NEWS  ACE REPORTER MISSING...DRUGS RACKET INVESTIGATION... UNDERGROUND ORGANISATION...NEXUS THE NAME. 18 REVIEWS  Frankie Goes to Hollywood is finally here! And having played it, what else could we do but make it Game of the Month? 94 ARCADE ACTION  IDEAS Corporation's arcade spy, Clare Edgeley, brings you the lowdown on Nemesis. Plus, for all you romantics out there, how to be a knight in shining armour and win the lady of your dreams! 80 ADVENTURE REVIEWS  Enthar Seven, the latest adventure from Robico, is an absolute knock-out we couldn't have given it more marks if we tried! Also, win yourself a copy of the latest smash from Melbourne House, Mordon's Quest. GAMES BOOK 56 MOON BUGGY/Spectrum . Before you can hope to achieve anything in this game, you've got to get to grips with your Moon Buggy. COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES POSTAL SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE By using the special Postal Subscription Service copies of COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES can be mailed direct from our offices each month to any oddress throughout the world. All subscription applications should be sent for processing to COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES (Subscription Department). Competition House Farmdon Road, Market Harborough Lescestershire All orders should include the appropriate remittance mode payable to COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES Annual subscription rates (12 issues) UK and Eire . Additional service informaron, including individual overseas airmail roles available upon request Circulation Department EMAP National Publications Publshed and distributed by EMAP National Publicahons uid. Printed by Severn Valley Press. Typeset by In-Step Ltd 60 MANIC PACMAN/Spectrum  Yes! The giant blob is back! Pac-man is his name and ghost baiting is his game. The graphics on this version are pretty neat, too! 66 ASTEROID LANDER/Amstrad  You've simply got to rescue all the inhabitants of a small planet before they get burnt to a crisp. 68 DAY AT THE RACES/Atari This game is a punter's dream. All the thrills and spills of a day at the races and you don't get rained on! C+UG TOP 30 CHARTS PAGE 101 "


"THIS ISSUE KLOWNS TEST LEVEL  Welcome to a whole new era of Computer + Video Games! The world's greatest games magazine is now looking even better thanks to those wonderful people who run the IDEAS CORPORATION. We hope all our regular readers like the new look C+VG and that we've attracted a few new ones along for the ride. So what have we got in store for you this issue? Well, first and foremost there's the Bug Hunters. The oddest bunch of robots you ve ever seen. Meet them for the first time on page 45. Then we've got an exclusive sneak preview of this year's hottest adventure Lord of the Rings from Philip Mitchell that ace Aussie programmer. We talked to Phil in Australia and discovered a few secrets about his up and coming Tolkien translation. And there's a chance that YOU might win a copy of the game We've also got a stunning full colour map of the new Rupert game plus exclusive game tips from the man who created the game, Martin Walker. We're looking for the C+VG reader who can take on the world and become the all-time M.U.D. champion, we're giving away Epyx games by the dozen, we've got pages packed full of reviews, news and your letters and, oh yes, Keith Campbell reports on the world of adventure from his penthouse suite in the IDEAS building. All that and more inside the first new look C+VG. Enjoy! HIDE SUB SPY VS. SPY II >REVIEWS/18 SCORE 90000100 BATALYX > NEWS/8 No 1 OCTOBER EDITOR Tim Metcalfo DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton STAFF WRITER Seamus St John EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker PRODUCTION EDITOR Mary Morton DESIGN/EDITORIAL CONSULTANTS Steve Bush Viel MacDonald ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Paul Coppins Simon Marsh Jim Douglas AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeloy READER SERVICES Marcus Jeffery PUBLICITY Marcus Rich ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Louise Matthews ASSISTANT ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Bernard Dugdale ADVERTISING EXECUTIVE Sean Brennan PRODUCTION ASSISTANT Melanie Paulo PUBLISHER Rita Lewis GAMES BOOK ... and the Bug Hunters! EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECTR 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222 MEET THE BUGHUNTERS/45 PLUS FREE PULL-OUT POSTER GAMES BOOK/55 "


"THE GAME OF A LIFETIME* FEATED Available for Commodore 64. Spectrum 48K and Spectrum +. Coming soon: Amstrad and MSX, FIREBIRE FIREBIRD FIREBIRD SOFTWARE WELLINGTON HOUSE UPPER ST MARTIN SLANE LONDON WC2H 9DL 100 EDITION S intesa trade Mark of British Telecommunications pic Eteisaade Mark of Acornsoft Lid Acorso 1964 BT 1985 *Zzap! 64 Magazine "


"3D Stuntrider .95 Tape .95 Disc 3D Grand PIN .95 Tape .95 Dise When it comes to computer games you can't beat an Amstrad. 3D Boxing .95 Tape .95 Disc Cyrus ll Chess 19.95 Tape .95 Dise drive and again, it's own colour monitor or green screen. Both are available at an all-inclusive price you'll find hard to match. In fact, with Amstrad's unbeatable software, unbeatable hardware and unbeatable prices, how can you lose? CVG-S1 I Tell me more about the Amstrad range of software. We've enlisted the help of some particularly wicked program designers to put our entertainment software range together. They've come up with over 200 Arcade and Adventure games. Many of them exclusive to Amstrad (like those shown above). All of them mindbenders you'll find hard to beat. And all at prices that are as competitive as the games, from .95 on disc and .95 on tape. But the software is only one of many good reasons for buying an Amstrad computer. The 64k CPC 464 computer comes complete with built-in datacorder and a choice of green screen or full colour monitor. The CPC 6128 is a big memory 128k computer with built-in, fast-loading disc AVAILABLE AT BOOTS. CURRYS. DIXONS RUMBELOWS LASKYS. WH. SMITH TANDY Name Address. | Amstrad.Loads more fun. | Amstrad, P.O. Box 462, Brentwood, Essex CM14 4EF SUPREME DISCOUNT STORES COMET AND GOOD INDEPENDENT COMPUTER STORES "


"KONAN THE BARBE QUE WIZARD SAD 00. B Ariolasoft has released Wizard, a 100 screen adventure from Progressive Peripherals and Software, on the Commodore 64 (.95 cassette and .95 disk) and the Spectrum (.95). The Amstrad version will follow shortly and cost .95 for cassette. The disk price has yet to be fixed. Chess game White Knight Mk12 is now available on disc for the BBC Model B, price .95. White Knight's features include save game, tournament problem modes, colour and sound options, elapsed-time clocks. Arnhem, the factical wargame simulating the Second World War operation to capture vital bridges behind enemy lines, has been released by CCS for the Amstrad, price .95. Beyond has become the first UK software house to license its games in the US market and on its own terms The deal has been struck with Mindscapes, the software division of US publishers SFN Companies. Mindscapes entered the US market at the recent Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago, The three games involved are: Lords of Midnight, Shadowfire and Quake Minus One. Beyond's brand identity will be preserved under the deal. The company's logo will have equal prominence with that of Mindscapes. A VIEW TO A KILL So CK \"111 Swashbuckling hero, Zorro leaps onto the screen of your C64 this month in a superb new game from Datasoft. Written by the same team who brought you the original marshal arts classic, Zorro is a fun arcade adventure with lots of puzzles to solve during a quest to rescue a captured senorital Also from Datasoft is Goonies a great spin-off from the soon-to-be-released Spielberg movie of the same name. We've briefly played the game here at C&VG and we can reveal that it had us hooked instantly! The game faithfully follows the plot of the film with eight fun packed platform style screens. Game play is so complex that you need a hint sheet to help you solve each screen! The game also features a unique control system. You can control any one of the two characters on screen at any time simply by pressing the fire button. In two player mode you each get a character to control. Goonies will be available for the 64, Spectrum, Amstrad and Atari fairly soon. Watch out for the film and the game. And watch out for our great ZORRO competition next issue! A View To A Kill, Domark's arcade adventure, based on the latest James Bond film, is now available on Amstrad. It will cost .99 on cassette and .99 for the disk Programmed by Software Technicians, the Amstrad version of A View To A Kill will consist of the same games as the other programs, although they will be in a different order: The Silicon Mine, The City Hall Fire and, finally, The Paris Chase. The first two have a points accumulation system, thus providing an incentive to players to finish each game. What new arcade war game makes Beach Head look like a Sunday school outing? Well, it's based on a current arcade classic called Commando. It's for the Commodore 64 and it comes from Alligata, the people who sent one C&VG reader to Hollywood! The game is called Who Dares Wins, or Death and Glory Alligata aren't quite sure yet. What you have to do is pretty simple. You must guide your SAS man through a deadly battlefield, fighting off enemy troops and rescuing captured friendly soldiers. You are armed with a machine gun and grenades which you have to replenish by raiding enemy ammo dumps as you go. It's just like an assault course on screen NEVER stand still or you'll be taken out by the crack enemy divisions! Lots of surprises and lots of addictive action. Our advice is to get into training now. You'll need it to survive! its enoughto make you ent! IN You can read all about Shatter, the world's first computerised comic, on page 30 of this issue. Shatter was created on a v. expensive Apple Macintosh computer. But just look at what you can do with your Spectrum and a Graf Pad from British Microl Konan the Barbeque was created by ace artist lan Ellery using his trusty Spectrum, a Graf Pad and a lot of talent. We transferred lan's screens to paper thanks to our mates at Dimension Graphics, the screen dump specialists. This is the first of many Foul-Ups from lan. We hope you like them! Avast there, me hearties, it's treasure time. Many moons ago the cursed pirate ship Amovak sank while carrying The Devil's Crown. Now after years of research the ship has been located. Your task is to find the seven jewels of the crown which have been scattered throughout the ship and replace them in the golden crown. But the crown is cursed and protected by pirate ghosts, creatures. The Devil's Crown from Probe is for the Amstrad CPC 464 and 664, .99 cassette and .99 (disc). Delta 4's adventure Bored of the Rings, a parody of JRR Tolkien's classic, Lord of the Rings, is being re-launched by SilverSoft. It will be an expanded version of the original and feature new locations and graphic scenes. The game will initially be available for the Spectrum and BBC computers, with further versions soon to follow for the Amstrad and Sinclair QL. Launch date for the new Bored of the Rings is set for September 16th, with a recommended retail price of .95 BE 091659 HEH311 "


"ACE REPORTER MISSING! Here is a screen shot from Steven \"Wizard's Lair\" Crow's latest game soon to be released for the Spectrum, C64 and Amstrad by Bubblebus priced at .95. Called Star Quake, the game features a bio-robot. 450 different locations and a doomed planet. Review next issue! CENTRAL PANEL The function of this area is to make the game user friendly and to provide \"adventure interaction\" MAIN DISPLAY The display tracks you as you move about the complex or automatically views TEXT DISPLAY All speech you hear is scrolled up into the text window whether or not it is directed at you. FACE DISPLAY When people are on the main display, their faces will be shown here. If there are more than two people, they will be shown in turn DATA RECORDER There will be a way of reviewing the text, with arrows lighting up to show fast forward, play etc. SCAN People and doors will be shown for four screens in front of you and the levels above and below you. People: white. Doors, lifts: grey LOCATOR Co-ordinates are placed in the locator by your friends. The arrows will light up to indicate the general direction of either a person or place. Hewson Consultants is celebrating its fifth successful year in the games software business with an impressive and balanced range of releases due for the autumn. A first offering will be the Amstrad conversion of Dragontorc, 1985's chart topping Spectrum hit. To complement this conversion the company is releasing Southern Belle for the Spectrum, the first authentic steam engine simulator. Paradroid for the Commodore 64, the successor to Gribbly's Day Out, appeared in early September, and is followed by an original Amstrad arcade adventure and AstroClone, the Spectrum successor to Dragontorc. Two more Spectrum titles and an Amstrad conversion are due out later in October to complete the most ambitious launch schedule in the company's history DATELINE: Columbia have an audio recorder which of that particular character. From Our Special records spoken information and At any time you may obtain Correspondent a camera for photographing a code which contains a check The Daily Planet's top documents, drug stores and on your name, the capabilities reporter, Jim Hopper, is still suspicious characters. You can you have amassed, who your missing. Hopper disappeared use your recorder to transmit friends are and also in broad while on a special assignment messages back to your boss. terms how alert the guards are in Columbia. He is thought to But the recorder has a to your presence. This code allows you to restart a game limited memory capability. To have been investigating a drugs racket ... maximise the value of each of with the skills and friends you your transmissions have earned. hat story sends you off (communications rooms are The game will end if Nexus on a dangerous mission to well guarded), you must consider you a threat to their infiltrate a drugs factory in estimate the worth of each organisation because of the Columbia, locate your friend piece and erase those you feel number of times you have and enlist the help of an are least important. been caught and interrogated. underground organisation You won't be able to infiltrate The game includes some called Nexus — which is any of the more secure areas innovative and exciting features dedicated to destroying the without the help of Nexus. So like the digitised video drugs racket. you need to quickly discover a images of the \"faces\" you meet With their help you just member of this underground while exploring the eight levels might get your friend out organisation and enlist their of the factory complex. and get a good story for your aid. The animation of the central newspaper at the same time! You start the game with only character was also created So starts the latest game run, walk and punch options using the digitised video from Beyond Software called open to you. To obtain greater technique. The programmers Nexus. capabilities, key members of spent ages walking and The game was created by a Nexus must be located, each of jumping about in front of a new software development whom may have one or more video camera so they could house called you guessed it specialties. Such as explosives, transform their movements Nexus! This new company is knife throwing, firearms, accurately into computer headed by Paul Voysey and gymnastics, unarmed combat, graphics. Tayo Olowu authors of Psytron lock picking, forging. The text displays which and Psi-Warrior. After finding someone who appear during the game do The game is a kind of hybrid is prepared to teach you their away with the need for a mixture between Shadowfire skill, you will follow them to a massive instruction bookand Exploding Fist -if you \"training room, or arrange a and in turn this makes the can imagine that. It represents game a lot easier to get into a real leap forward for graphic in the \"training room the You can simply sit down and adventure games. Our screen joystick controls for particular play. shot explains more than words skills will be explained to you We've seen a demo version can here! and you can do exercises to of this exciting new game — The objective of the game is familiarise yourself with their and can confidently predict that to gather evidence of the operation. you're going to love it. Nexus activities at the drugs factory A rendezvous may be broken will be available for the and to get the evidence back by unforseen circumstances (eg Commodore 64 and Spectrum to your editor. guards detaining your teacher) in October, priced at a very To help your mission, you or through sheer unreliability reasonable .95. WOW, wow,wow Wow,Wow, wow, WOW.Wow,WowWow Wow Wow. \"Yaa-hoooooo you're all clear kid.. It's Zappa-rooooony time with Jeff Minter's latest game called Batalyx. It will knock your socks off with its sheer ESALES EX5 SCORC 0000010 mega-funky urge to surge. I have completely flipped over this game, it is a landmark in my game playing career and I will tell you why. continued page 13 "


"THE COUNTDOWN HAS BEGUN From DURELL R.R.P. .95 DURELL sales dept., Castle Lodge, Castle Green, Taunton TA14AB "


"INTERNATIONAL KARATE o Sustem 3 o ..And you thought you'd seen a Karate game For the spectrum, C.64, Amstrad and all 48k Ataris at ONLY As you know, like the Martial Arts, Perfection Is the only accepted standard, so play nothing until you play SYSTEM 3's INTERNATIONAL KARATE SYSTEM 3 SOFTWARE. SOUTHBANK HOUSE, BLACK PRINCE ROAD. LONDON SE1 TEL: 01-735 8171. Ex. 68 E 6.50 "


"NEW COMMODORE 64 CASSETTES OUT NOW FROM ARIOLASOFT ateka from Broderbund KARATEKA A Karateka is one trained in the Way of Karate, the centuries old martial art of Japan. In this classic story of one man's battle against insurmountable odds, your mission is to rescue a beautiful princess from a dungeon deep inside the palace of the evil warlord Akuma. Brederbund have created an arcade action game as close to an interactive movie as computer game players are likely to see. Extremely large and realistically animated figures come alive against beautifully detailed scrolling backgrounds. You are in full control of the hero's every movement. Walking, running, bowing and all fighting movements including the strategic timing and placement of kicks, thrusts, jabs and punches are an integral part of the gameplay. The story progresses through a series of increasingly more challenging encounters with the enemy, until you finally meet the ultimate opponent. Built-in surprises make trying to rescue the princess difficult and addictive. Suspenseful, move-like story Run, Punch & Kick ability Smoothly animated characters 3D scrolling backgrounds Realistic Karate fights to the death STEALIT Fast Load Chrome Tape 128 Copc The Incredible 3D Ka U.S. No. .HR from Broderbund A FABULOUS 3D MARTIAL ARTS KARATE PROGRAM STEALTH STEALTH has everything the arcade action player dreams of. You are right at the heart of the action as you pilot a powerful Stealth Starfighter on a mission of utmost importance-to destroy the Dark Tower and with it the Merciless Council of Nine. The sky is alive with warp-fighters closing in from all directions. The landscape bristles with automated radar towers firing heat-seeking projectiles of doom. Robot-controlled photon tanks... high energy laser artillery ... all of this and more await players of STEALTH. Stunning 3D effects Deadly Enemy Attack Planes 5 Levels of Skill Vicious Heat-Seeking Missiles Ominous Dormant Active Volcanoes Positive/Negative Energy Fields the Castles of DOCTOR CREEP. Brodertund from Broderbund Fast Load Chrome Tape COMMODORE 64 128 Compatible A Stunning Visual Action Program U.S. CHART HIT STE A LONE FIGHTER AGAINST DEADLY ALIENS THE CASTLES OF DOCTOR CREEP Broderbund Thirteen castles containing over 200 rooms await inspection. You will find each room filled with challenging puzzles and sinister surprises. Force fields, electrostatic generators, death rays and wandering mummies are only a few of the treats in store. THE CASTLES OF DOCTOR CREEP is a very challenging arcade strategy game, full of surprises and the Doctor's rather weird sense of humour. There's no turning back on a tour of the good Doctor's home. You will want to keep coming back for more of the Creepy hospitality. 2 Player interactive action Deadly Lightning Machines 13 Separate Castles and Trapdoors Over 200 Rooms Perilous Moving Ray Gun Mummies and Frankensteins 1 or 2 Players. Fast Load Chrome Tape COMMODORE 64 A Chilling Action Strategy Program 128 Compatible U.S. CHART HIT arinlasni A CHILLING ACTION STRATEGY PROGRAM Available from all good software retailers if its not there, please order it or in case of difficulty send your crossed cheque/P.0. made out to Ariolasoft U.K. Ltd., including your own name and address, to Ariolasoft U.K. Ltd. Suite 105 106. Asphalte House, Palace Street, London SW1E 5HS. KARATEKA STEALTH CASTLES OF DOCTOR CREEP-Commodore 64 cassettes .95 each. (Please allow 28 days from release for delivery) ariola HIGH PERFORMANCE PROGRAMS "


"continued from page 9 IMACADAM BUMPER It's your chance to be a pinball wizard with Macadam Bumper, a new release from PSS for the Spectrum and Amstrad (.95). Macadam Bumper, originally from the French software house, Ere Informatique, allows you to design your own pinball table. And to tie in with the game's release, PSS is running a competition for the best pinball table design. The winner will receive his or her very own pinball machine together with a gold cassette containing the winning design. To date, Jeff Minter has had a string of hit games to his credit. His early games were classics items like Gridrunner, Matrix and Lazerzone. Then came Revenge of the Mutant Camels and from here in the games got freakier, Technically the coding was superb and the design exemplary BUT the games as a whole got very ESOTERIC. The Minter fans loved them but the general public shyed away. Jeff Minter has now gone back to his roots and Batalyx is a combination of all the skills he has learnt along the way. The theme of Batalyx is that an attack is taking place on the planet Zzyax Prime and you get to perform on different parts of the mission. There are five games and a pause mode which is actually a version of Psychedelia. You can play the games in any order and at any time, even cutting between games in mid-battles the machine remembers where you left off. The player has no lives and you must try to complete all the sections of the game before a master timer runs out. At the time of review only five of the six game parts had been finished, the offending stage being an asteroid derivative where the player uses bullets as reaction mass to move a ship. You must zoom your small manoeuvrable fighter across the planet surface zapping the robot camels. An amazing amount has been learnt since Psychedelia was written and boy does it show in the use of colour in Batalyx. The AMC stage has superb Buck Rogerstype scrolling and a stunningly coloured backdrop of pyramids and planets to fly against as you take the camels on. There are nine warps to get through, each warp having more camels who spit those dreaded bonios at you. The waves are not structured you can warp from one stage to another simply by accelerating continuously to warp speed (the warp sequence is incredible, making the original AMC warp look like Noddy in comparison). There are also ways to score big bonus points but you will have to discover them ... The next stage is The Activation of Iridis Base. This is a reaction type game where you must push the joystick in a direction shown to you by a small indicator on screen. As you move, a trail of spheroids fall out behind you. If you do the sequence correctly, you get points if you do it wrong. you lose a spheroid (there being seven). If you complete the sequence without error, you get a 106,000 point bonus. Visually this is very strong, and again colour is used to maximum effect. Cippy on the Run is one of my favourites. Here the little Ancipital creature runs along a grey corridor. He can walk on the floor or ceiling and jump between them. The aim is to change the colours of the floor and ceiling by walking on them. You have a scanner to help you and spheroids appear to uncolour the parts you colour. They do this by bouncing from surface to surface. You are constantly firing bullets which destroy the spheres temporarily. Every two levels there are bonus phases. Stage five is called Synchro 2 and is a follow-on from a game Jeff Minter put up on Compunet. In this game you must try to match the speed of tiles on the screen with the speed of spheres which move at random around the screen. When both are moving at the correct speed, the sphere stands still and a bonus is given for time left on a timer. Go out and buy this game Batalyx and Commodore 645 were made for each other. Welcome back to the fold, Jeff Minter.  I hear Gary Liddon, an exemployee of Domark, put a little message into the disk version of A View To A Kill from Domark Software. This chap said hello and various other bits of drivel in a scrolling message. When asked Dominic Wheatley if he knew about this message, he said: \"Gary Liddon would have been sacked if we still employed him! It was a very silly thing to do. Mind you he did play around like a kid in our offices.\" So what did Gary Liddon do at Domark? Dominic Wheatley tells me: \"In the main, he did odd chores in the office and some filing. He also made tea for everyone.\" Seems about right .. Former Olympic shot putter, World Strongman and Highland Games champion, Geoff Capes, is assisting Martech in the development of a new game based on his exploits. Unlike many previous sporting simulations, the game will not be dominated by \"joystick bashing\" Players will need to adopt a strategic approach to bring Geoff to the peak of physical fitness for each of the demanding events, then once an event is underway, timing and quick reactions will be needed for success. CORRECTION Chop Suey, English Software's martial arts game for the Atari, sells on cassette for .95 not .95 as was printed in the September issue of C+VG.  Isn't that music on Hyper Olympics (C64) from Ocean amazing? I can reveal that it was written by the nephew of a famous flautist. James Galway's nephew works for Ocean and writes the music for their games. RAMBO II Movie hit Rambo.First Blood is now a computer game from Ocean. Rambo played by Sylvester Stallone is a Vietnam veteran who returns to the south-east Asian jungles to free American prisoners of war. He is described as a mean killing machine.\" The film has been criticised for its excessive violence but this does not worry Ocean director Jon Woods who negotiated the Rambo deal. He says: \"The story-line provides enormous scope for computer graphic scenarios -scenes like the slime pit when Rambo dangles over a mud pit will make a superb arcade secuence \"We are not worried about the publicity surrounding the launch of the film in the UK Games of this kind are a fantasy addictive and entertaining but still only a fantasy.\" Rambo will sell for  on the Spectrum and .95 on the Commodore and Amstrad. Tea for two with Super Gran at London's world-famous Ritz Hotel. That was the treat for 16-year-old Nick Withey as winner of Computer + Video Games Super Gran competition run in conjunction with Tynesoft. Nick, of Whittington Road, Westlea, Swindon, chatted with television's most popular superheroine played by actress Gudran Ure over tea, sandwiches, scones and cakes about her exciting adventures.  For all you Thing On A Spring fans there is a cheat mode. If you hold down the letters THING and INSTDEL and left arrow (top left hand corner) all at the same time you become invincible! RAMS "


NA


"just destroved Herbie Briggs has e myth that all floppy discs are created equal. floppy stiffer. Stronger. And your data safer. To resist bulging, warping, puckering, or opening up. MEMOREX SOLID-SEAM BONDING: Every inch of every seam is sealed shut. Tight as a drum. They seem equal. Until you look at the seams. That's where equality ends. Most companies seal their discs with a spot here, a spot there. Leaving most of each seam not sealed at all. Sooner or later, the seams might do what comes naturally: they bulge. Warp. Pucker. Open up. Pens, pencils, fingernails-even a fouryear-old's, like Herbie-can catch and snag in those wide open spaces. That's sloppy. And dangerous. Because if you put a sloppy floppy into your disc drive, it can jam your drive. Ruin your drive head. Lose your data. So much for their seams. Ours are different. THE SLOPPY FLOPPY: Sealed with a spot here, a spot there. Leaving unsealed seams everywhere. To resist all the things that can jam your drive, ruin your drive head, or lose your data. Which proves that a Memorex floppy disc isn't equal to all the others. It's better. Solid-Seam Bonding is just one example of the extra care that goes into every Memorex floppy disc. Be it 8\" 514\" or the new 312\" Extra care that lets us guarantee every Memorex disc to be 100% error-free. The next time you're buying a floppy disc-or a few hundred of them-just remember this: It's always better to be safe than sloppy. For more information on the full line of Memorex quality computer media products, including computer MEMOREX tape, call Memorex U.K. Ltd., 96-104 Church Street, MBAOREX Staines, Middlesex. Tel: 0784 51488 Memorex uses a process we developed, called Solid-Seam Bonding. Solid-Seam Bonding seals shut every inch of every seam of every Memorex*floppy disc. Tight as a drum. That makes the Memorex Your Data. When it matters, make it Memorex MEMOREX Memorex is a registered trademark of Memorex Corporation 1984 Memorex Corporation "


"C+VG COMPETITION THE GREAT M.U.D. CHALLENGE! What Is M.U.D.? M.U.D. or Multi-User Dungeon is a unique interactive adventure game which can be played by several people at once using modem links to a special central computer. The game was created by computer buffs at Essex University and has since gathered a huge cult following. British Telecom have decided to let more of you in on the Are you a champion act and make M.U.D. available to everyone with a modem! adventurer? Could Unlike normal computer adventures you actually play you brave the the game with other REAL characters who are as dangers of the unpredictable and frustrating as real people which is amazing Multi-User probably because they are real people! If you fancy your Dungeon and come chances in the world of M.U.D., enter the C+VG up with a sack full challenge today! of treasures? Are you up to The Great The Challenge M.U.D. Challenge? Here at Computer + Video Games we're looking for one of our readers who is tough enough, brave enough and quick thinking enough to represent C + VG at The First M.U.D. Spectacular due to be held at the London Dungeon in November Ten other computer mags will be choosing their champ but we're sure that C+VGs adventure ace will be the one to defeat the best of the rest. So you've got to be good! The C+VG champ will win a special M.U.D. pack, worth , which contains a map, a security card and full instructions on how to play this unique interactive adventure game. The champ will also get free on-line tuition from an ArchWizard on the intricacies of playing M.U.D. Suitably trained, the various champs will then enjoy an all expenses paid trip to the London Dungeon for the M.U.D. Spectacular. The overall first prize will be 1000 M.U.D. credits approximately 100 hours playing time plus  in crisp banknotes! Second and third place winners will also get credits. And the winning magazine will get the first ever full colour map of the entire land of M.U.D. to publish in the New Year. Great prizes and a great competition! But what do we want you to do? Read on, oh wise ones. The thing about interactive adventures like M.U.D. is that you can invent an entirely different character for yourself. If you're a seven stone weakling you can suddenly become a musclebound barbarian in seconds and without having to pump iron for months and months! So that's what we want you to do Create your own character. If you are familiar with role playing games like Dungeons and Dragons or the Fighting Fantasy novels, then you'll be familiar with the routine. However we're dispensing with all that dice throwing business and giving you 20 C+VG Dungeon Points to play with You have to decide how you want to split these points up when you come to fill in your C+VG Character Coupon on this page. We'll give you a free hand when it comes to choosing a weapon for your character but he, she or it is only allowed ONE bit of hardware. For example if you wanted your character to have amazing magical powers, you'd give him, say, 10 points under the magical ability, but that would mean you'd have to make him a seven stone weakling or a bit stupid! Then again you might want to make him, her or it extremely strong but that would leave you fewer points to play with in the intelligence department. So think carefully before you start throwing those points around. Give your character a good name too the more original, the better. You might like to draw your character for us too if you're a dab hand with pencils or brushes. Once you've filled in the coupon, cut it out and send it to Computer + Video Games, The Great M.U.D. Challenge, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The winner will get the special M.U.D. pack and 25 runners up will get Firebird games for their computers plus a C+VG t-shirt. Entries must reach us no later than October 16th. Normal C+VG competition rules apply and employees of BTE/MUSE are not permitted to enter. The Bad News To enter The Great M.U.D. Challenge, you must already own a modem and the correct terminal software for your particular computer. We're afraid there's no point in entering unless you have the right hardware unless you REALLY want to that is. THE GREAT M.U.D. CHALLENGE/C+VG's SEARCH FOR A CHAMPION Use your 20 C+VG Dungeon points carefully and don't exceed your quota. We'll be counting!! Name of character....... Character type (Wizard/Warrior/Mystic etc)........ Weapon (just one remember!)...... Strength points...... Magical ability points.................. Intelligence points......... Language points..... Fighting skill points....... \"TOTAL 20 Tie-breaker: Name the inventor of Dungeons and Dragons........ Name.... Address.... Computer owned.... Tel. No........ "


"WATCH OUT! IT'S DYNAMITE DAN 94% \"What makes the game is the graphics large, witty, bizarre and beautifully animated ... each screen has something remarkable, and horribly difficult puzzles ... Dynamite Dan is not just another Miner surrogate and is at least as essential to your collection.' Popular Computing Weekly. 48K Spectrum/Spectrum + .95 Coming soon on Amstrad and Commodore 64 s Popular Computing Weekly Pick of the Week Crash Smash Maxwell House, Worship Street, London EC2A 2EN. Tel 01-377 4600 Trade orders to: Purnell Book Centre, Paulton, Bristol BS18 5LQ. Tel 0761 413301 "


"CHVG OCT software REVIEWS FRANKIE GOES TO GAME OF THE GRAPHICS Are they really mind-blowing 3D technicolour visions like the adverts tell you or does it look like someone has simply scribbled on the screen with a magic marker? SOUND Does the game sound like a Duran Duran LP played at half speed? Or does the noise from your micro knock you half way across the room? The C+VG review team don't play games with their ears blocked up you know! MIHIUI! Frankie makes you feel so at home VALUE is the game really worth all those pennies? Will the novelty last? Is it worth going without C+VG for a month because your parents won't come up with the extra pocket money? Or could YOU write a better game? PLAYABILITY Will you be playing until the early hours of the morning as you attempt to complete just one more screen? Or do you fall asleep the minute the intro screen appears? Put your feet uplar with Frankie! BLITZ GAME BLITZ GAME C+VG's way of telling you that the game must not be missed! Fancy fighting it out with Ronnie Reagan? HR WHILE DIT BEER BELLY BERT'S BREW BIZ Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: US Gold Price: .95 Beer Belly Bert has been caught on the hop. His brewing business is going to pot and that's not a reference to Bert's pot-belly. On top of that, Bert's partner, Clyde, has hired hundreds of gunmen to shoot him on sight. But Bert can shoot back and leap over speeding bullets. That leads to another dose of platform pandemonium as Bert battles bravely through the 32 screens of his Brew Biz covering shipping, production and quality control. The aim of the game is to move Bert through all the screens as fast as possible and collect the maximum number of points. On the way, he must collect various keys to allow him access to the next screen. Besides avoiding the gunmen, Bert must ride wagons, avoid spark generators, use air vents, escalators and lifts. Lovers of platform games should be able to work up a thirst over his frantic antics. Graphics 7 Value Sound 7 Playability  STARTS HERE "


"CAVG OCT software REVIEWS 2 TO HOLLYWOOD PLOMOS DUDE Machine: CBM 64 Ultimate Experience the Supplier: Ocean Pleasure Dome. You can carry up to eight Price: .95 objects at the same time and Frankie Goes to Hollywood the can check your inventory by game has finally arrived in the pushing your joystick shops and, like everything linked downwards. If you want to use with the group, seems set to any of the items in the race to the top of the charts. inventory, you just have to move FGTH is an arcade adventure the cursor icon to point at it. game in which the adventure and then just press the fire element is the most dominant, button. though the graphics are of the One of the most important excellent quality we have come mysteries that you must solve to expect from Ocean. during the game is a murder. The challenge that has been Once you have found the body. set you in the game is to you must progress through the become a \"real person. You game and collect the 23 clues must progress through the game which will point to the identity exploring and discovering to of the killer. increase your personality rating The game also includes ten at 99% you have completed screens of original arcade the game and attained personal sequences which are hidden throughout the game. They include the War Room, Raid over Merseyside and Cybernetic Breakout, each of which are similar to the arcade sections in some of Mikro-Gen's more recent programs. The icon-driven displays, the fantastic backing music, the depth of play and the stunningly lifelike graphics all add up to what must be Ocean's best perfection game for the CBM 64 to date. Objects like power pills, Even if you hated all of videos, security passes and Frankie's records, you'll love this floppy discs must be collected game and used to their best Bound to be one of the all advantage in the game. There time classics on the CBM 64. are 60 different tasks to be completed ranging from the relatively simple to extremely  Graphics involved and complicated tests.  Sound Once these have been completed you must then go in Value search of the Door to the  Playability BLITZ SPY vs SPY GAME THE ISLAND CAPER up and tax with Machine CBM 64 Supplier: Beyond Price: .95 Those MADcap spies are back again with their cut-throat tactics in Spy vs Spy The Island Caper and look destined to repeat the success of Spy vs Spy. The game is set on the deserted tropical paradise of Spy Island. A top secret XJ4% missile has crash landed. You must find the three parts of the missile, re-build it, and then escape from the island by submarine. The mission is hampered by the rival spy and the fact that the island is dominated by an active volcano which is about to erupt. As with the original Spy vs Spy game, the Black and White spies are constantly at each other's throats. With bombs and booby traps, they cause each other untold grief. The game again features \"Simulvision\", a split screen display showing the activities of each of the spies. Occasionally they move onto the same part of the island and then a punch-up usually starts. The cartoon graphics are every bit as good as on Spy vs Spy and, with seven levels of action, you'll find it a real challenge. Graphics Sound Value Playability DOS TOUR DE FRANCE ESTLI TO Machine CBM 64 Supplier: Activision Price: .95 Activision's record with successful sports simulations is impressive Decathlon, Tennis and now Tour de France And what a tour de force it is! Graphics, animation and attention to race details are fantastically realistic. Even road signs and cheering spectators are included in this painstakingly accurate sports simulation. You can begin the game by either choosing a practice circuit or a competition option. In the competition option at least two players must take part and you may choose to complete one étape a single stage in the Tour de France or race the entire circuit across France After having chosen the circuit that you wish to race, you must then choose from the range of  CONTINUES ON PAGE 20 "


"CAVG OCT software REVIEWS 3 ROAD RACE TOUR DE FRANCE CONTINUED different bikes and coloured strips that you will wear during the race. Each individual bike has its own qualities and weaknesses So choosing carefully is important. In the great tradition of games like Decathlon the forward movement of the bike is created by you moving the joystick from side to side with increasing speed. You can steer the bike using the fire button and change gear and brake by either pushing the joystick forwards or backwards. Getting into the game is relatively simple once you have completed the preliminary questions and options that every Activision game seems to contain. Controlling the bike is not that difficult unless you want to go fast round a corner or are trying to change gear cycling up a steep hill. Once you have mastered the basics of good computer cycling, Tour de France becomes an exciting and enthralling game to play with a friend or group of friends. I imagine it would lose some of its magic if it was used only as a single player game, though. Tour de France is a slick and very professional sports simulation and deserves to grace the software collection of any sports enthusiast. Sos odg making regular fuel stops AND beating the clock at the same time. The game is a mixture of arcade action and strategy. First you must judge the best route to take between cities taking into account road conditions etc. by using the map screen. This shows major roads and cities in the USA Once you've selected your route, it's out onto the highway where natural hazards may well slow your progress and stop you reaching your goal. Unnatural ones like the high speed cop cars out to book you! Control of the car comes close to the real thing you have to watch your revs and change gear smoothly otherwise your engine blows -and it's a long push to the next service station. Yes, you can push by hitting the joystick Decathlon fashion but it's not recommended! You probably won't make it to your destination in time. You are equipped with a fuel gauge, rev counter, milage gauge, clock and the all the important radar warning device. Road Race is an enthralling game. Value 7 Playability 8 Machine: CBM64 Supplier: Activision Price: .99 Ever seen the American movie called The Cannonball Run? It's packed full of stars, car chases and mega accidents. Well, The Great American Cross Country Road Race is a bit like that! The aim of the game is to race across America travelling from city to city avoiding police speed traps, dealing with nasty weather conditions, Graphics 7 Sound 7 Graphics Sound Value . Playability TINE 150 TALOS SCORE 001910 TIME IB OF FIN Machine: BBC/Electron Supplier: Addictive Games Price: .95 A very strange world awaits the cassette. Original Boffin, which intrepid explorer in Boffin, a world in features 20 caverns and highwhich pet dishes petridishes and resolution graphics, is exclusively for tripods must be destroyed, in which the BBC while Boffin 2 on the other unlucky horseshoes must be collected, side boasts 25 screens, all different mysterious owls touched, giant buffer from original Bolin, and can be run on blimps outwitted. the Electron as well. This is a quest not unlike Knight It's difficult to get involved in the Lore, although to my mind Knight Lore game. This kind of quest really far exceeds it in quality of graphics, demands a properly throught out plot and problems to be solved. Here, scenario, along the lines of Knight you must pass through a series of Lore, and a goal to hold it together. It's Caves by destroying all the horseshoes no longer enough to throw in a few which are for reasons best known to tasks\" (why must you collect themselves, hanging around upside horseshoes?) and some ill-assorted down. Having done that you must hazards (why should these caves be touch the enigmatic resident owl. the full of hydraulic rams?) for no quardian of the cave, who then allows particular reason you through to the next cave. On the whole, there is nothing much There are actually two games on the to hold your interest Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Silver Soft Price: .95 With Talos you take a crash course in body building to the theme tune of \"I ain't got no body\". Battle robot Talos has been smashed into seven pieces and his metallic remains lie mouldering across the countryside. But one hand still has some life in it. And that's the starting point for this arcade adventure where your quest is to rebuild Talos and find the Crown of Eternity. Using the joystick or keyboard, you must control the hand and try and find the remaining six pieces of the battle robot's remains which are scattered across 200 screens. But he must be reassembled in the correct order. For example, hand, arm, body etc. To complicate matters, the countryside is full of energy-draining creatures which sap Talos if they touch him. He can fight back by firing force bolts at them. Some pieces of his body will be located underwater which presents him with a pretty problem because he can't swim. In his rambles around the countryside, Talos will also encounter a number of white gates CONTINUES ON PAGE 23  Graphics 8 Sound 7 Value 6 Playability 7 <CONTINUED FROM PAGE 19 "


"Post Haste Software RAPID ROUND-UP! Our problem is space! Too many goodies, not enough room! Here's a rapid round-up but we've still left dozens out! SUMMER GAMES II (Epyx/US Gold) Another sure-fire smash-hit. How can it fail after the phenomenal success of Summer Games? Amazing animation, eight new events, running medal score. national anthems! And up to 12 can play! A winner! \"What I like is that more skill is required to master it than with other similar games. It's more than just shaking the living daylights out of the joystick. Summer Games II must now take the gold\" Commodore User. .95 [C] Commodore 64 .95 [D] Commodore 64 MR DO (Datasoft/US Gold) \"The arcade game at home. Homibly addictive!\" .95 (C) Atari and Commodore 64. NICK FALDO'S OPEN (Mind Games) \"The finest golf simulation ever. Brilliant graphics.\" .95 [C] Spectrum and Commodore 64 The total postal software service! Post Haste is part of GB Microland, the South of England's unique software shop. Thousands of titles. Lots of experience. But not everyone lives near us. So we created Post Haste Software. To bring the best to your door. With top service. Here's how There's no \"Club\" to join and no subscription\" to pay. Not now, not ever. We don't charge admission to our shop. Why should we if you buy by mail? The catalogue is free. Over 100 top programs described In detail. With pack pictures. And review quotes. Sent regularly. No charge. Our pleasure. The software choice covers five major micros. Not two or three. Five. Amstrad, Atari, BBC, Commodore 64 and Spectrum. No frustration Postage is free in the UK and Europe. Want it super-fast overseas? Add 75p. For the whole order, not for each program. We hate hidden extras! All software is mailed in special cartons. No padded bags. No used boxes. We don like getting crushed programs. That's why you won't All orders are mailed right away. If we're out of stock, we'll tell you. It lets you cancel if you wish. And that keeps us on our foes. Your satisfaction is important. We hope you'll reorder. So we choose programs with care. Just like our retail shop. So customers come back. Order by post or phone. Day or night. Tell us your name, address, what you'd like. Number and expiry date for credit card. Then relax. We're fast Pay by cheque, bank draft postal order, Access Barclaycard, Visa, Mastercard or Eurocard. Any of those will do nicely, thank you. MURDER ON THE ZINDERNEUF (Electronic Arts/Ariolasoft) \"Be one of many detectives! Incredibly well done!\" .95 (C) or .95 Atari and Commodore 64 POST HASTE'S UNIQUE FRUSTRATION CURE! How do you feel when a program comes out but not for your computer? You know it will. But it hasn't yet. You feel frustrated. Right? You keep phoning the shops. Have you got so-and-so? They keep saying soon. But when? You want it when it's out. Fast. But it's like you have to check every day to make sure. Frustrating? You bet! So here's our one-stop no-cost answer. Simply order it in advance with cheque or credit card. Your cheque won't be banked or your credit charge actioned until the program's arrived. packed, and about to be mailed to you. We get software virtually within hours of release so you could have it days ahead of schedule. Nothing's faster than Post Haste! How's that for a frustration cure? BOUNTY BOB STIKES BACK (Big Five/US Gold) \"A masterpiece from the creators of Miner 2049er\" .95 (C) or .95 [D] Atari and Commodore 64 REVS (Acornsoft) \"Race your heart out on your Beebl Amazingly good! .95 (C) or .65 [D] BBC SKY FOX (Electronic Arts/Ariola) \"Graphically extraordinary! The finest I've seen!\" .95 [Dj Commodore 64 WANT TO ORDER NOW? CAN'T WAIT FOR THE CATALOGUE? You're in good company. Browse through the software shown here. (There's much more in the catalogue which comes with your order). When you've chosen, complete the coupon and mail it. Or call us. There's a 24-hour service. then relax. The postman will arrive in no time! BEACH-HEAD II (Access/US Gold) As good as you were hoping. Now with the added impact of top-quality synthesised speech. Incredible animation the screen action takes your computer graphics near to the outer limits! \"Outstanding animation that made me stare in amazement. Must be of the best games to make its way across the Atlantic\" Zzap 64 \"Voice synthesis of the same high quality as Impossible Mission. The game you've been waiting for. Computer & Video Games .95 [C] Commodore 64 .95 [D] Commodore 64 FRANK BRUNO'S BOXING (Elite) An excellent sports simulation, with your choice of eight opponents nearly all nasty. Clever touch-after each fight, providing you win, you're given a code to load the next bout. Saves you punching through the same fight over and over again. Good thinking! \"The graphics are some of the best around\"Computer & Video Games .95 (CJ Amstrad .95 (CJ Commodore 64 .95 (C) Spectrum FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLWOOD (Ocean) Your're in Everydaysville, a boring place until a murder is done! Behind is the pleasuredome with adventures. games, riddles and paradoxes. To get there, you'll need clues from Everydaysville. Stunning graphics, utterly addictive. \"Quite unique. It impressed me as it has the best of both worlds-action and strategy and a number of slick touches to keep you on your toes\" Computer & Video Games .95 [C] Commodore 64 .95 (C) Spectrum Phone Orders (24 hrs) (0705) 269333 ORDERING SOFTWARE? WANT A CATALOGUE? USE THIS COUPON! Write instead if you prefer but include all the details! Your name Your address. Postcode Postcode Computer I on the phone? So we can ring you if need be? Phone number NOW PLEASE PRINT BELOW FULL DETAILS OF WHAT YOU'D LIKE! COMPUTER PROGRAM NAME PRICE KENNEDY APPROACH (Microprose/US Gold) An air-traffic control simulation with very impressive speech synthesis from the team that made Impossible Mission speak. Forget other simulations in this you'll literally talk the planes down. Be warned: it's likely to make your palms sweat! \"An excellent strategy game. You begin to feel some of the power and tension of a real traffic controller\". Your Commodore. .95 [C] Commodore 64 .95 Dj Commodore 64 THE POST HASTE CATALOGUE It's free! 40 pages crammed with over one hundred program descriptions. Recreation, utility, strategy, adventure, arcade-they're all there! Pictures of the software packs, screen shots, quotes from the reviews, and much more. Programs of every type for 5 computers: Amstrad, Atari, BBC, Commodore 64 and Spectrum. And the catalogue is your gateway to the astonishing program range which backs Post Haste Software: over 2,300 different titles spanning 10 major micros! A full list of all the programs available for your computer is sent on request when you get the catalogue! DROPZONE (US Gold) You're on a planet in a space suit that lets you hover or flit back and forth. Surrounded by things which spell death at a touch, you must collect enough spheroids (not easyother things keep pinching them) to get you to the next screen. Life gets ever more tough! \"The graphics are superb and the play is utterly addictive Popular Computing Weekly. \"The combination of fast action, brilliant effects and alien variety make this a masterpiece Zzap 64. .95 [C] Atari .95 C] Commodore 64 .95 (D) Atari .95 [D] Commodore 64 THE 4TH PROTOCOL (Hutchinson) Fredrick Forsyth's latest is now a superb computer adventure. Using icons to avoid typing text, it's actually three adventures, you can move on only by completing each. It's intriguing and brilliant! \"The icon graphics are excellent; on of the most enjoyable games I've played in a long time. Sinclair User .95 [C] Commodore 64 .95 [D] Commodore 64 .95 [C] Spectrum Postage is totally free in TOTAL the UK and Europe. Surface mail overseas is free too. AIRMAIL. 75 If you'd like fast airmail delivery, add just 75p. FINAL TOTAL | PAYING BY CHEQUE OR POSTAL ORDER? Please make it payable to Post Haste Software I and cross it for safety's sake! CHARGING IT TO YOUR VISA, ACCESS. MASTERCARD, EUROCARD? May we have your card number, expiry date and signature? ITIIIIIIIIII Expiry date -Signature Now mail your order to POST HASTE SOFTWARE GB MICROLAND, 7 QUEENS PARADE LONDON ROAD, WATERLOOVILLE HAMPSHIRE PO7 7EB, UNITED KINGDOM Or phone (24 hours) 0705 269333 RED MOON (Level 9). It's been said that any Level 9 release marks a flag day for computer adventurers, and Red Moon does nothing to change that. They've gone back to myth and magic for this great graphic adventure, so now the darker evenings are arriving this is just the thing! \"If only more adventure houses could achieve Level 9. Crash. \"Renowned for high standards of plot and literate description\" . Sinclair User. .95 [C] Amstrad .95 [C] Atari .95 (C] BBC .95 (CJ Spectrum .95 (CJ Commodore 64 ADVENTURESI SPECIAL EXTRA SECTION! There are dozens of adventures in the Post Haste catalogue including nearly every one of the superb Infocom range. And Post Haste carries the full range of Infocom Invisiclues! Answers to those problems that kept you awakel The catalogue lists the range in full! put ore SOFTWUEENGVILLE GDOM "


"TO COMPUTR GAMES SOFTWARE SERVICE Don't Miss Out C&VG have set up their own Mail Order Software a really simple way to order all the latest games. Each month we will be offering you the chance to buy any of the games that are listed in the Gallup Top 30, have been mentioned in Games News or reviewed in this or any of the last six issues. All you have to do is fill in the coupon below, entering the titles of the games you would like to buy and the type of computer you have, then send it to us all postage and packing is FREE!! PLUS * 50p discount on games over  * In each issue there will be a special competition or offer open to all those who take part in the Software Service. This month we have 50 great games to give away everyone ordering a game will be automatically entered into our prize draw. FEE PAAN II1 IIIIIIIIIIIIIIII PRIZE DRAW Amstrad Spectrum Commodore Please send your orders together with a cheque/P.O. payable to the Computer & Video Games Software Service to: Computer & Video Games FREEPOST, London ECIB IAA. DALEY THOMPSON SUPERTEST Ocean a aj HYPERSPORTS Imagine HYPERSPORTS D O O All prices are as quoted in C&VG remember to deduct 50p off the RRP for each games costing over . Minimum order . NAME ADDRESS COMPUTER TOTAL  OM DERE "


"C+VG OCT software REVIENSO TALOS CONTINUED which he is unable to enter unless he can find the white pearl. Score is displayed at the top of the screen and a candle indicates Talos's strength. He can make the candle grow by collecting objects around the countryside. HYPERDRIVE 2889 9 900  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability Machine: OL Supplier: English Software Price: $14.95 Vrooom goes the OLI At last, a Pole Position for the gamestarved OL. It's fast and lots of fun with some nice looking graphics and neat sound effects. Hyperdrive follows in the Pole Position/Enduro race game format. You race against the clock and other opponents dodging slower cars, oil slicks and other hazards on the track. There are day and night-time screens plus some really nice graphic \"landscaping' touches. Like mountains and bridges.  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability RED ARROWS ESE o ocoon A ABATRON MAD DOCTOR Machine: Spectrum/CBM 64 Amstrad Supplier: Database Software Price: .95 (Spec) .95/11.95 (Amstrad disks) Great idea. Shame about the game. That just about sums up this brave effort to put you in the hot seat of a Red Arrows Hawk jet. Database has obviously spent a lot of time developing the program which is very well presented in packaging terms. But and it's a big but the actual graphic representation of the Red Arrows, on the Spectrum version is awful. Database say that the program uses \"3D graphics to soar to heights of realism never achieved before\". If you make claims like that, you have to be sure the finished product lives up to them, right? Well there doesn't appear to be any 3D effects on the Spectrum Red Arrows game. What you see through the cockpit of your Hawk is the usual blue slabs for the sky, green slab for the ground and superimposed red aircraft to represent the Arrows formation. Now, everyone knows about the colour clash problems on the Spectrum. But should half the aircraft you are following disappear when it banks and have half in the sky slab, half in the ground. Or is this just a simulation of what happens to your eyesight when you are subjected to high G-forces? Database say they created the program with the help of the Arrows pilots and have a special high-score competition running with the game. You could win an all-expenses-paid trip to the Red Arrows' base. But I don't think even the prospect of a day out with the Arrows would make me want to shell out nearly  for this game. Machine: BBC/Electron Supplier: Bevan Technology Price: .95 Your mission: to save planet Earth from an infestation of assorted mutants. Yes, upon you, brave young cadet Shiff Loc, depends the fate of the civilized universe. Only you can clear the Aabatron Central Planet Control of \"mean Puon aliens\", armed with nothing but your trusty blaster buggy. Unless you can get hold of the rapid-fire machine gun, that is This is an entertaining version of the old maze games, where each location consists of differently arranged rooms around which you move up, down, left and right, blasting the various nasties inhabiting the place. You have to watch out how you zap them some of them act as protection from the flak of the more active baddies. There are 20 different screens altogether, and eight aliens, including the ubiquitous Rammers and Invulnos (who turn up in Bevan Technology's One Last Gamel, Harkers, Ceptives, Vilox and Nogrobs. One thing I didn't like was the unpleasant flickery movement of the graphics which marred an otherwise polished display. Graphics  Sound Value  Playability Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Creative Sparks Price: .95 Creative Sparks breathe new life into the old Frankenstein myth with a cute graphic arcade adventure. The idea is to help Dr Blockenspiel create a monster. But it's not any old monster the Mad Doc wants to make. He wants his monster to be loved!! He wants his monster to be so NICE so that the people of the little village of Strudelburg will accept it as a friend which is not an easy task. First you have to help the Doc find bits for his monster in the local graveyard or cemetery or you can go around killing the villagers for spare parts. This often leads to nasty scenes in the village inn, however, and isn't recommended! Then you have to animate the monster by taking it up to the mystic stone circle and getting it struck by lightning. If you've succeeded in putting together a monster from all the right parts, he will be quite friendly. If not, you'll have a rampaging beast on your hands who will set about turning you into a collection of spare parts! You have to do all this without arousing the curiosity or hatred of the villagers. If you do then your project is doomed. All the irritating peasants turn on you if they find out exactly what you're up to! The game is in the Grand Larceny Zim Sala Bim mode of arcade adventure. You use a joystick and there are text commands to be used too. Mad Doctor is great value and will keep you hooked for ages. But remember don't forget the bolt!  Graphics 7  Sound 7  Value 8 Playability 9 HIJACK Machine: Atari Supplier: English Software Price: .95 cassette/E10.95 disc Hostage drama aboard a speeding train. Ten VIPs are among the passengers. Your task is to rescue them by helicopter and take them to the safety of the train's rear security carriage. The VIPs appear one by one on the roof of the train The helicopter must be carefully manoeuvred into position above them and, by pressing the joystick fire button, lowering a rope to the hostage. Getting the helicopter in position is hard enough but there is also gun and cannon fire from the hills to dodge, plus the risk of flying into trackside trees. There are three skill levels per game.  Graphics  Value  Sound Playability Graphics Sound  Value  Playability nese CONTINUED FROM PAGE 20 CONTINUES ON PAGE 24 "


"C+VG OCT software REVIEWS 6 BIO-DEFENCE LUTET Machine: Atari 400/800 Supplier: Tymac Price: .95 cassette .95 disc This is a sick game. Or rather it's a game about the sick. A lethal infection is raging through your body. The temperature is rising and your fever is high. To combat the bacteria, you must use an Electroscan. This enables you to analyse the body and obtain vital information on the bacteria's activity. Pressing the fire button allows you to enter the body at its cellular level. Using the joystick, you can direct a white blood cell to engulf the bacteria. The more bacteria destroyed, the more points notched up. Tymac's press release boasts that the game would make computers \"come alive with voices and sounds.\" But on our copy of the game the voice was so muffled that it could be hardly understood. Apart from my dislike of Tymac's dubious taste in producing a game about raging infections, I found the game pretty unexciting. Machine: Spectrum Supplier: US Gold Price: .95 The Dambusters, the well known film classic depicting the bombing raid on the dams in the German Ruhr Valley by the heroic 617 Squadron, is now a computer game. In the game you take on the rôles of navigator, rear and front gunner and the bouncing bomb dropper all at the same time Which, as soon as you reach hostile airspace over Europe, turns into a chaotic battle just to keep your aircraft in the air all thoughts of actually successfully bombing the dams leaves your mind completely. Controlling the plane with enemy planes zooming in from all directions and gun emplacements trying to blast you out of the sky is quite enough to contend with. The pilot's controls are quite complex and need thorough use to get you accustomed to using them during the game. Though, for the most part, I left the more \"serious controls\" alone. There are three levels of play. The first involves you manoeuvring your aircraft across a runway and taking-off. The second starts the game with you at the controls of the plane flying over the English Channel. The third places you over the Ruhr Valley on a practice bombing-run without enemy fire to distract your concentration. Dambusters is basically a shoot'em-up and not a flight simulator. Though that is no disgrace and the game is well worth buying Graphics 7 Sound 9 Value 8 Playability & ONE LAST GAME Machine: BBC Electron Supplier: Bevan Technology Price: .95 Still not tired of zapping aliens? Here's another nononsense fast-moving zap'em game clearly aimed at addicts. One of a set of five new games releases from Bevan Technology, One Last Game features horizontal rather than vertical action with moving landscape hillside alternating with city and a whole host of aliens boasting varying degrees of speed and cunning, Your mission is simple. You must destroy the aliens, variously named Slimeys, Rapiers, Zits, Rammers, Invulnos and Vogons, before they destroy you, and before your fuel runs out. When you collapse in your seat, exhausted, after battling your way through the first screen, you can't afford to relax there are 19 more screens to come! If you get frustrated at your inability to get past the first two screens, you can opt at the start for a later screen, just to get a taste of the action to come. And that's it. A slick, unpretentious little arcade action game with neat graphics and enough variety in the individuality of the aliens to redeem it from tedium. Graphics  Sound Value . Playability  Graphics Sound  Value Playability JUM P JET over your communications ROBIN HOOD APRIL SHOWERS Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Anirog Price: .95 cassette/E13.95 disc The Amstrad version of Anirog's Jump Jet takes off hoping to follow the Commodore version high into the charts. Written by former jump jet pilot Vaughan Dow, Jump Jet combines flight simulation with the thrills and spills of combat. There is a practice level and four other combat mode flight lieutenant, squardron leader, wing commander and group captain. As with the Commodore version, the instrument panel is on view all the time. The initial screen is a bird's eye view of the jet on its aircraft. As the jet rises to above 50 feet, the screen is split into two views one showing a side view of the carrier and jet, the other a rear view. Above 200 feet the view is from the cockpit and you are free to track, pursue and, hopefully, destroy the enemy aircraft. Graphics  Sound Value  Playability Machine: Dragon 32 Supplier: Pocket Money Software Price: .99 At last, a good game has been released for the Dragon at a sensible price. It seems that not only does Robin Hood rob the rich to feed the poor but he also provides one of the best games to appear on the Dragon. The main idea behind this game is that you have to save Maid Marion from the evil Sheriff and collect a few bags of gold on the way. The gameplay is very similar to Hunchback but without all the rimmings. What more could you ask for at .99?  Graphics  Sound Value  Playability Machine: BBC Supplier: Bevan Technology Price: .95 Cloud, rain and umbrellas might seem distinctly unpromising as a topic for entertainment, but Bevan Technology has managed to make them seem fun. Well, almost. April Showers is a peculiar little game that takes time to master not because it is particularly difficult, but because it takes a while to work out the strategy. Basically, you are a cloud, and your object in life is to rain on the plant on the ground below you. If you don't, the plant wilts and dies, and you lose a life. The complication is that while you're watering it, you're running out of water yourself, so you have to replenish your supplies. This is done by bumping into other clouds which pass by, which has the added advantage of adding greatly to your score. The skill required for this game is not immediately apparent, but there is in fact a lot involved you must chase clouds, zap umbrellas (but not too manyl, keep that plant watered, watch your water level and, if you've got the time, catch raindrops. Once the clouds have gone, your days are numbered, and then you've got to decide whether to keep the plant wet or go after the umbrellas in your remaining time. When you've lost three \"lives\", that's it. It's an offbeat idea and could keep you amused for quite a while, but in the end the lack of a facility to speed up the rather slow action as you improve is frustrating. Graphics 9 Sound 7 Value 8 Playability 8 CONTINUED FROM PAGE 23  CONTINUES ON PAGE 26 "


"FROM PAUL WOAKES AUTHOR OF ENCOUNTER! YOU CHOOSE THE ACTION IN A NEW CLASSIC MERCENARY Mercenary a unique combination of flight simulation, adventure and arcade fun. You choose the action. There is complete freedom of movement in a truly three-dimensional vector-graphic environment. Graphics of exceptional speed create a very realistic experience. You'll never play the same game twice. Random elements attempt to seal your fate. Your interaction is crucial. Mercenary presents an absorbing challenge, that you will accept again and again. MERCENARY ESCAPE FROM TARG Investigate the multitude of structures on Fly above the planet Targ in a variety of craft. the planet surface in your quest for essential supplies. Search the mysterious subterranean complex in pursuit of your fortune. between the Palyars and Mechanoids. Accept Become embroiled in the continuing conflict their paid assignments or work independently to gain wealth. reliable Benson, an almost human PC, who guides You only have one true friend the everyou in your travels. succeed you have to escape from Targ. Pursue your objective as you will : To allol NOVAG EN CASSETTE 30 9 INITIAL RELEASE FOR COMMODORE 64 ATARI 48K 800 XL 130 HE CASSETTE .95 DISK .95 NOVAGEN SOFTWARE LTD: SALES 142 ALCESTER ROAD BIRMINGHAM B13 8HS, "


"CAVG OCT software REVIEHS 6 RACING DESTRUCTION SET SCERE 00000020 Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Arolasoft Price: .95 cassette [ 14.95 disk The city INEO CU GED 051 Put your crash helmet on and prepare yourself for a bumpy ride with Ariolasoft's Racing Destruction Set. A spit screen enables two player action covering 19 world wide Grand Prix Circuits plus 31 other tracks built in The game allows you to Choose and customise your ow Vrtule for a choice of eight from Formula racers to dirt kes You can also pick your une size and tyres. Race Tracks but also be created The game is good fun but the graphics are a little crude, and at .95 for the cassette, perhaps a little overpriced. CODENAME MAT II  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability Machine: Spectrum Amstrad/CBM64 Supplier: Domark Price: .95 Derek Brewster's Codename Mat was one of last year's surprise hits and the sequel is set to become a smash too! Mat has resumed his battle with the Myons in his new ship Centurion II and is defending crucial Karillium mines. Karillium is the most precious substance in the universe. It is the bringer of life. One small pinch can turn a barren desert into a steaming jungle! The mines are found in the planet Vesta and are supplied with energy by a vast grid of satellites surrounding the planet. If the satellites are damaged or destroyed then the Karillium mines will be destroyed. Mat has to protect the satellite grid by destroying the Myon ships out to destroy the only source of Karillium available to Earth. He also has to police the vast network of satellites and move them around to keep the energy grid operative if any become damaged in the numerous Myon attacks. So you've got a mixture of arcade action and battle strategy here with a hint of that old Atari classic Star Raiders thrown in. You have to use the instrumentation on your ship which includes scanners, a battle computer, shields and two kinds of weapon to zap the aliens! You must warp from sector to sector to defend the grid Star Raider style using the Quadrant Grid Chart that you can call up on your Centurion II dashboard Controls are a mixture of keyboard and joystick and quite complex. It'll take you a bit of time to master them effectively. But the documentation which comes with the game is extremely thorough and all your questions will be answered after studying the operating instructions for Centurion II. The screen display shows your view from Centurion Il's cockpit. You have a whole bunch of instruments to watch while battling it out with the Myons and some useful damage reports flash up to tell you just what bits are being blasted off your craft! But never fear help is at hand in the shape of two droids which you can send off to repair the various damaged parts of your ship when and if you get a quiet moment! A really nice touch this. But beware the droids can be damaged in battle too. Codename Mat II is an exciting mixture of action and strategy and will keep you stuck in front of your Spectrum or Amstrad or C64 for many hours of happy zapping. Don't miss this one! Graphics  Sound Playability SOUTHERN BELLE Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Hewson Consultants Price: .95 I was really chuffed to get this game. Chuff, chuff, chuffed in fact. There are flight simulators, motor racing simulators, space simulators but never a steam train simulator. Until now, that is Hewson Consultants better known for the Avalon/Dragontorc arcade adventures have gone out on a limb to produce Southern Belle, an authentic recreation of what it was like to drive a steam train from London to Brighton! You couldn't really get more original than that now, could you? The object of the game is to drive the Southern Belle in real life a King Arthur Class 4-6-0 steam engine from the 1930s from Victoria Station to Brighton, keeping to the timetable, watching out for hazards and making sure that you don't blow the poor old Belle's boiler up! Now, that might sound a trifle ordinary to those of you out there not into steam engines but far from it. Once you've loaded the game into your steam-powered Spectrum and marvelled at the neat graphics, you'll be hooked for at least the next hour. That's how long it should take you to reach Brighton in computer time anyway. Remember \"We're getting there'l There are seven levels of play ranging from a training run where you learn all about stoking the boiler and the use of the various controls you find on the footplate. The program enables you to take charge of any number of these controls. So you could just look after the stoking and the whistle or go all out for total control on any of the game options. But beware! You'll need to spend some time reading the comprehensive instructions that come with the game to get the most out of it. The graphics are vector line style and very effective. The footplate of the loco looks good too with the firedoor opening and closing to reveal a blazing fire. At the bottom of the screen is a message board which informs you of any important happenings on the track ahead and on the right hand side you see information such as the time, signals and the state of your coal and water supplies. The signal icon toggles between a gradient indicator So you can tell when to get a bit more speed up. Overall Southern Belle is a brave attempt at producing an original game. If you've always wanted to drive a steam train and who hasn't this is a good way to fulfill your dreams. .  Graphics  Sound Value (for train buffs)  Playability LE CONTINUED FROM PAGE 24 "


"software REVIEUSO Et SP TOGELO JOURNEY SCO  orld SCRCONS 03 LIUCS 10 own ht lirt Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: CRL Price: .95 Eleven of the world's most famous treasures have been buried in a myriad of underground chambers. In Journey your task is to find those treasures and bring them safely to the surface Various objects are scattered throughout the caverns to help you including guns, oxygen pills, boomerangs, guns, dynamite and detonators. There are also transporters, bridges and mystery boxes. But danger also lurks in this underground world in the shape of vampire bats, pits of acid, underground rivers, sheer drops and other nameless terrors. The treasure hunter is controlled by the joystick. He can jump, scramble and run. One hint to help on the hunt don't wait until you have several of the treasures before bringing them to the surface. It's better to bring them up one by one. That way if you lose a life only one treasure is lost. Graphics Value  Sound  Playability GAME PROFANATION ut the and, KENNEDY APPROACH Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Gremlin Graphics Price: .95 The spirit of Indiana Jones is alive and well and living inside the lost Temple of Abu Simbel created for the Spectrum by those innovative Spanish programmers at Dinamic and brought to you lucky people by Gremlin. Yes, it's another platform arcade, collect-all-the-treasures game but with extra added style, fun and addictiveness. You play the part of Johnny Jones, Indiana's third cousin twice removed, I suppose who is a general all-purpose superstar and explorer. Poor old Johnny has fallen victim to the curse of Pharoah Ramses II who built the Temple of Abu Simbel over 3000 years ago. Our hero must free himself from the spell which appears to have turned him into a Gribbly-like character a round purple body and big feet! To do this, he has to explore the many levels of the mysterious temple and discover the mortuary chamber where a secret is hidden. You have to guide Johnny through the labyrinth of chambers packed with traps and puzzles. Beware of the deadly spike filled pits and dead ends you could end up staying in the temple until you rot! Profanation is best played with a joystick but there are keyboard options of course. The graphics are interesting and well produced, the hero is a cute little character and the sound effects are good a nice impression of dripping water is featured on some screens. The puzzles are quite tricky but not impossible to solve. This makes the game easy to get into. You'll soon be hooked and want to solve the harder riddles later in the game. Overall an extremely well presented and entertaining game. Graphics Value Sound Playability All this can be complicated by bad weather, emergencies and instrument failures. Kennedy Approach allows you to build up your air traffic skills by progressing through different airports from the relatively easy Atlanta to the more testing Denver, Dallas-Fort Worth, Washington and finally to New York where you have the nightmarish job of looking after the John F Kennedy International and La Guardia International airports. The best thing about the game is the speech. Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: MicroProse Software Price: .95 Test your nerve with this simulation of one of the most demanding and stressful jobs in the world air traffic control. With up to 20 different aircraft taking off, landing or circling it's no easy task to avoid a major air disaster. Graphics . Sound  Value  Playability ON METABOL cassette cover! Anyway you've been changed into a bird by the evil Kremins. Your job is to search for the serum which will change you back into a man, collect nuclear fuel and then destroy the Kremin complex without getting wiped out yourself. You travel from screen to screen there are 150 of them collecting useful items like heart pills. The transformation has left you with a weak heart and the pills are the only way you'll survive to complete the game, There's a wizard who will help you out too. But only once you are back to your man-shape. The Kremins hound your Machine: Spectrum Amstrad/ CBM64 Supplier: Gremlin Graphics Price: .95 You really get the bird in Gremlin's neat new arcade adventure but don't let that ruffle your feathers because Metabolis will soon get you reaching for the budgie's sunflower seeds! It's the only way you'll get to eat once you've been hooked by the challenge of this platform/ maze/arcade adventure. You have been transformed into a cute little bird don't be fooled by the packaging. You look more like Buzby than the amazing man-hawk on the every move and they come in different shapes and sizes. I particularly liked the Alien-style creature lots of teeth and a big swishing tail! The graphics are good with a few really nice touches. Like the way your bird gets scrunched up if he gets hit by a ton weight! One minor criticism is the packaging. Not enough instructions to help you get into the game, Keyboard and joystick options are included plus you get a hall of fame and a nice screen which flashes up when you \"die\".  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playbility COCO  ENDS HERE HE THE HEART "


"Cast Includes Scooby Daphne Mrs McUrloch 10 CO. Special Guest Appearance: Shaggy Velma Sam Shark Just send a cheque or po payable to 'Elite or quote your visa number Every single Elite product carries the unique Elite Holographic Sticker Make sure your copy does. It's your guarantee of quality Elit "


"SCOOBY the castelmusterty In the castle \"Scooby Doo\" The First Ever Computer Cartoon! Whether he's being hotly pursued at midnight over an eerie castle rooftop, or scrabbling around in the darkness of a creepy old dungeon the hapless Scooby is always at the centre of the action in his first computer cartoon Scooby goes hurting through underground caverns in a run-away coal truck and finds that even a leisurely paddle with shaggy in a rickety old rowing boat can turn out to be an unofficial attempt at the waterspeed record when he's pursued by an angry Shark Scooby Doo the computer cartoon contains over 100.sometimes creepy often crazy scenes of startling animated action. We think it's going to start a whole new craze in computer games. What do you sav Scooby Scooby Dooby-Door b0105ECE SPECTRUM &6.95 COMMODORE .95 AMSTRAD .95 Elite Systems, Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, England. Tel:(0922)59165 \"Consumer Hotline\" "


"STATE OTHE FIRST COMIC BOOK WRITTEN, . hatter is the work of a young Chicago artist called Mike Saenz pronounced \"science\" who got his hands on an Apple Macintosh one day and began creating a whole new sci-fi world. The comic is named after the main character, Shatter. \"Shatter is a bum,\" says his creator. Really he is a futuristic bounty hunter in the Blade Runner style -except he gets caught up in a web of intrigue and evil which he sets out to destroy. In Mike's future world an organisation called the Executariat is stealing people's minds — Shatter finds out and becomes a reluctant hero. | up an early Mac. So I borrowed it Shatter is published by First and worked with it for about a Comics, a company also based in month and came up with some Chicago which prints several other sample pages. I got very excited. I books, including a comic version of saw that I could do just about Moorcock's Elric of Melnibone series everything that you need for the and the cult comic American Flagg. How did Shatter come about? on the machine.\" Mike explains: \"I wanted to get And so Shatter was born. And into computer graphics and had he's still evolving. Mike has just got been introduced to the Commodore his hands on MacVision, a video 64 and the Koala Pad. A lot of the digitising system which can take drudgery was cut out by drawing images from a video tape or camera on the bit pad with a stylus. I and break it up into pixels on the talked to a friend of mine, Mark Mac's screen. Canter, who is president of a All the drawing even the company called Macromind, about really detailed stuff is done bigger computers and he said: using a Mouse a sort of track\"What you need is the Macintosh.\" ball with a button. \"Another friend of mine picked Mike also uses some software adapted for him by his friends at Macromind. Art Thief enables him to pick up images from panels he has already drawn and play around with them. Enlarging or inverting or turning inside out! Then he uses these \"new\" images in other drawings. \"Say if I was working on page six of the comic and wanted to use the background or a characters face from page one, with Art Thief you can go directly to that document.\" Thief enables Mike to store images on disc that he can call up and, using the edit mode, transfer details or images to new drawings. He can also enlarge drawings to work on detailed sections of his work. I Mike reckons that the Mac is the "


"You are in Daley City, the heart of Chicagoland, in the 21st century. A sniper bugbomb, thrown by a Veteran of the Vietnam Reconquest, just misses you. Worse, the latest Interbank entry on your pocket computer tells you that you have only $20,000 in your account not enough to buy the $75,000 canister of rare, pure Coca Cola syrup you crave. Nothing else to do but bid on the police contract and find the beautiful mass-murderer but she's mixed up in the deadly traffic of RNA transfer. One injection of that stuff and anyone can steal your skills and talents for himself. And naturally, someone is out to stop you ... LAUREL ANDERSON TRYFOROS tracked down the futuristic bounty bunter and sent C+VG a special dispatch. 1, DRAWN AND INSPIRED BY COMPUTER only computer he could use to produce Shatter. \"Other computers wouldn't be so cost effective. There are systems you could use but they cost $400,000. But personal computers are getting more \"user chummy\". more inexpensive and Apple recently gave First a LaserWriter, with which they will print Shatter and do all of their typesetting. The art which illustrates this article is the first that was run off the new LaserWriter Will the computer replace artists like Mike Saenz? Said Gould: \"The Mac helps you draw. But it won't draw for you. It is NOT an artist. It's like a word processor. It won't write for you, but it can make it casier for you to manage your thoughts and organise your language.\" The look of Shatter is high-tech, which is the Mac's strength. But since Mike Saenz continues to experiment, you can look for ne things in Shatter in every installment. \"Some of the stuff that's coming up in Shatter has a really architectural look to it.\" Gould says. \"The back-up stories in Jon Sable, Freelance are very experimental, and that's important, because there's so much to work out in Shatter.\" Dimensionality has improved, and surfaces are becoming nicely rounded, for example. Saenz can even do \"cheesecake\" now, as you'll see when Shatter encounters a Playboy bunny in an upcoming issue! \"We can go a lot further,\" Mile Gould says. \"This is only six months after we finished the first issue, and the difference is like night and day. What you saw in high hopes for the future of personal computers and their relation to commercial art.\" Mike Gould is managing editor of First Comics and the man who gave Mr Saenz, Shatter and the 128K Mac their first big break. Mike Gould says: \"Sbatter wasn't really influenced by anything more than the Mac. You'd have to spend another $3-4,000 jury-rigging a PC to do two thirds of what the Mac does. But then the PC is not built for that kind of thing, and you can't really get involved on a pixel by-pixel basis the way you can on a Mac. And that makes all the difference in the world.\" The difference is the ease of use and graphic orientation of the Mac's Motorola 68000 microprocessor.\" How did Apple respond to a comic being created on their wonder machine? \"They were astonished, and some of them were thrilled,\" Gould says. But some of the Apple executives were not so pleased at first. \"There are some people at Apple who were a little embarrassed by Shatter because it was a comic book. But we got such a tremendous amount of publicity in all kinds of areas that it was very clear that we were bringing Macintosh a lot of attention.\" the first Shatter was embryonic. It was the first time anyone had done any of this stuff. And if it looks impressive now, you ain't seen nothing yet. And if it doesn't look impressive enough for you wait. This is the beginning. We want to keep Shatter on the cutting edge.\" Gould does not believe that all comics will be, or should be drawn on computer. \"The Mac is going to give you a very high-tech look and will continue to do so until they can come up with a program that will allow you to work twice as large as you do now, for more detailed work. Even then it will be inappropriate for certain things. \"It is another medium, and as such it's a gimmick, and you can overuse it.\" Gould warns. «But any gimmick can be just spectacular if you know how to use it.\" The Macintosh presents another medium for artists in which to work and opens up a lot of new options Saenz and Gould are experimenting, discovering what the Mac's limits are and then finding ways to exceed them. Shatter has never been done before. Pick up a copy and join the experiment. For those of you who would like to know exactly how it's done, artist Mile Saenz gives a step-by-step demonstration and share some of his art secrets in Comics Interview 21. available at specialist comic stores. Shatter and other First Comics products are also available at your local comic book store C+VG "


"THE LORD OP An exclusive preview of the new adventie The world awaits the coming of the Dark Lord with dread in their hearts. Will there be an adventurer brave enough to confront the forces of evil and bring the Dark Lord to his knees? Will there be an adventurer tough enough to spend night after night battling with the mystic keyboard in an attempt to overthrow the latest threat to the well being of the world? The Dark Lord is Philip Mitchell. His latest attack on your sanity comes in the shape of his new long awaited adventure based on Tolkien's Lord of the Rings trilogy. C&VG's editor TIM METCALFE talked to Melbourne House's ace programmer about his latest and greatest game. EMDYCPHENIDA BANHERAP HATINIAMKE "


"OF THE RINGS nture based on Tolkien's Middle Earth trilogy In the book the Black Riders play a minor part in the game they get a bigger part!\" There will be lots of pretty graphics too but maybe in a narrower \"window\" than The Hobbit. \"At some stage there will have to be a trade-off between the complexity of the ou probably couldn't provides a basis for the game. get a greater contrast Michael O'Rourke is the man between Tolkien's who is translating Tolkien's rolling green words into a plot. Philip then countryside dotted with forests, works with two other mysterious lakes and dark Melbourne House programmers towers and the sun-soaked land on the code using his specially of Australia developed code program. But that's where Tolkien's The first Lord of the Rings imaginary and magical world of game is based on the first part the Lord of the Rings is being of the trilogy, Fellowship of the translated into computer Ring, in which Frodo discovers language by the man who put the secret of the mysterious ring graphics into the adventurer's which old Bilbo has carried vocabulary Philip Mitchell around for years and sets out Philip's first major adventure on his dangerous quest to success was The Hobbit, the destroy the Ring and defeat the game which took the world by Dark Lord's evil plans. storm and turned more The first adventure is split gamesters onto adventure into two parts and will be games. released this month Looking back on the success (September). Solve the first part of The Hobbit which and you'll be able to load part continues to sell in its many and two. The second and third parts of had no idea when we released the Ring trilogy will be released The Hobbit that it would go on at 12 month intervals, says this long. It really has turned Philip. Each will come with a into a little monster!\" copy of the relevant Tolkien The long awaited sequel, Lord novel. of the Rings, is nearing \"Part of the problem with the completion. Philip has been first part of Lord of the Rings is working on the program for the that not a lot happens!\" Philip last six months but people told me. \"So what we've done have been developing the game is take the basic goal to for at least nine months, reach Rivendell and use the Just like a movie, an characters and basic situations adventure game needs a featured in the book to create screenplay or storyline which problems within the adventure. Philip. \"The limitations we're working within the limited capacity of the machines doesn't allow us to do justice to both at present.\" But Philip is still determined to improve on The Hobbit and on his controversial Sherlock adventure. \"Sherlock was an attempt to improve the vocabulary of The Hobbit. But we found ourselves going down a bit of a blind alley. So, for Lord of the Rings we went back to The Hobbit and began again. We've effectively improved on the vocabulary and communication between characters in The Hobbit. It's completely different from Sherlock.\" \"In Lord of the Rings it will be possible to ask questions and answer questions and talk to the other characters in a fairly sophisticated way. We've attempted to make the program deal with as many different kinds of conversation as possible.\" \"People have waited a long PROGRAMMER PROFILE record of Lord of the Rings MENERO programmer Philip Mitchell Can he make it five out of 01 HER five with Lord of the Rings? Only time will tell but Philip's reputation must mean that there's every chance that LOR will be a top ten smash. Philip began his programming career with Melbourne House after taking a computer science degree at university. He's stayed with the company ever since creating one of the best Scramble-clones ever seen on the Spectrum in Penetrator, breaking new ground with The Hobbit and Mugsy and getting involved with a bit of controversy with Sherlock an adventure you either loved or Name: Philip Mitchell loathed. Born: Melbourne, Australia, Now everyone is waiting for 1961 the launch of his latest and Games: Penetrator, The Hobbit, perhaps greatest game Mugsy, Sherlock, Lord of the based on the Tolkien trilogy. But he's not a total Tolkien Four games four smash hits.addict \"I liked the book. But That's the astonishing track I'm not a total fanatic,\" he says. Mugsy Favourite food: Anything Italian, apricots and oysters. Favourite drink: Coffee. Favourite computer game: Classic Adventure on mainframes, Manic Miner. Favourite pop groups: Fleetwood Mac, Eagles. Favourite pastimes: Bushwalking, sitting on the beach. Ambitions: To retire rich and be young enough to enjoy the money! Favourite books: Sci-fi books and authors like Asimov. The thing about computing that makes me want to throw up: \"Nobody makes the computer that I really want. It should have at least one megabyte, a 68000 chip and very high-resolution graphics.\" Rings Hobbit NIKE MYNYCPNANDABAMHERAP: HATIMUL "


"Cassette: SPECTRUM 48K .95 ALL OTHERS .95 Disk: CBM 64 .95 Available from all leading software retailers OR order today by mail. Prices include postage and packing plus VAT Zoidstar is gripped by war. Blue Zoid fights Red Zoid in a merciless battle for supremacy. Mighty Zoidzilla, Blue Zoid combat leader, lies dormant in the hold of your craft, ready for you to climb into its command capsule to merge minds with the powerful machine and take control of this bitter confrontation. Somewhere in the desolate landscape, the Red Zoids lie in wait! Landing preparations are complete. The descent begins. The task which follows will take you to the very limits of your capabilities and imagination. LIVE THE GAME. BECOME THE MACHINE! Lai Martech is the registered trade mark of Software Communications Limited, Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME PHONE: (0323) 768456 TELEX: 87465 EXIM Brighton 48K SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 BBC'B'  AMSTRAD  MSX  ATARI TOMY "


"THE LORD OF THE RINGS, . CONTINUED FROM PAGE 35 COMPETITION CO DRAW A HOBBIT time for the sequel to The Hobbit and I'm sure they won't be disappointed. I feel that Lord of the Rings is going to be a really good game,\" Philip adds. At the end of the first book, The Fellowship of the Ring. Frodo and his trusty friend Sam Gamgee set off into the Land of Shadow. Part two, The Two Towers, tells of the deeds of the different members of the Fellowship and of the coming of the Great Darkness. Part three. The Return of the Ring relates the story of the last defence against Saruman and the end of Frodo's quest to destroy the ruling Ring. It's certainly a massive task to translate Tolkien's books and turn them into an adventure while retaining their magical quality. But we're sure that Philip Mitchell is the man for the job. If he thinks The Hobbit is a monster just wait until the Dark Lord of Melbourne House unleashes lord of the Rings on an expectant world.  Now, win a very special edition of the Lord of the Rings trilogy plus a copy of the Melbourne House game hot off the press! ABOUT THE ILLUSTRATOR Chris Achilleos is the artist who created our stunning front cover illustration and the other pictures you'll find on this page. Chris began his artistic life at Hornsey Art College where strangely enough he was following a technical illustration course. Even then he was interested in fantasy art and was soon breaking all the rules and indulging in his favourite style of work, which needless to say wasn't technical illustration! His work can be seen on several Games Workshop roleplaying game packages and on the Star Trek and Dr Who paperbacks. Among his other claims to fame is his design work on the cult animated movie Heavy Metal which if you haven't seen you should look out for. Chris has a burning ambition. To create an illustrated book based on the Siege of Troy. His advice to budding artists is to decide what field you want to get into very early and keep drawing at home! the Rings and draw him — or even just draw us a scene from the books. It's really quite simple! Normal C&VG competition rules apply, the editor's decision is final. Please get all entries to us by October 16th for judging. Don't delay enter today. You never know, it could be the start of a really bad Hobbit ... or some really bad jokes. What does a Hobbit look like? Do you know? Here at C&VG opinions are divided so to stop all the arguments we decided to ask YOU. And to make your answer a bit more interesting we've come up with some great prizes for the best Hobbit pics! What do you get for all your artistic endeavour? A mega-prize that's what! We've got three very special editions of Tolkien's Lord of the Rings trilogy to give away absolutely free to the lucky people we think have drawn us the best looking Hobbit. The book is embossed with gold 1000000HH!) and printed on special paper (AAAAAHHHHH!) and comes in a special box (WHO0000000!). And the three winners get even more goodies thanks to those lovable people from Melbourne House each one will receive a copy of the first Lord of the Rings adventure hot off the press! We'll throw in three of our brand new C&VG t-shirts too. Well, if you're one of our 20 runners-up you could ask for a free copy of the game. If you don't fancy drawing a Hobbit why not pick your favourite part or character from Please fix this coupon to your entry! C&VG/MELBOURNE HOUSE LORD OF THE RINGS COMPETITION Name Address .95 .95 $14.95 tailers ostage us VAT. Computer I own (tick box) Spectrum Amstrad C64 BBC ftware House, 224 6EE COME 68456 ighton 1ATFAIALTIXEMNYCPNARIMA BAKTNN "


"IKI "


"Nice Password. Shame about the Identity. It's a unique combination. Your Special Identity Number and Personal Password. The valuable key to huge databases teeming with activity, set on our Mainframes across the nation. On Micronet 800, you're a valued individual, adding your own special flavour and personality to the database. Take our exciting new \"Gallery\"You control your personal screens for all to see. The intriguing «Chatline\" public conversation service gives you freedom to express your views and meet some remarkable people. All part of a tremendous Communications section that networks you to 60,000 Micronet and Prestel users across the country. Try Teleshopping, or interview celebrities live on \"Celebrity Chatline» every Wednesday night. And there's FREE (& instant) National Electronic Mail, plus International Telex, and the Contact and SwapShop bulletin boards. Get computer news first on Micronet's daily (and controversial) \"Newsflashes\" and read up on the special local* rate calls whenever latest reviews and courses. Feast you connect up that's around 40p from our regularly changing menu of for a whole hours entertainment programs to download straight into each evening. your microabsolutely free. The only accessory you need is You also get access to Educaa Modem, to get the best value for tional Computing's \"School Link\" | money around in micro communiand Prestel's huge 300,000 page cations. database, including world news, Fill in the coupon for the full business & share bulletins and facts and send to Micronet 800, 8 optional homebanking. For only Herbal Hill, London ECIR SEJ. But .50 per quarter, that's less than be warned, Micronet 800 is a 'living the price of a daily paper! service with ever-expanding feaMicronet is unique amongst tures. So maybe you'd be better to networks and bulletin boards as it call in at your local Micronet 800 keeps your phone costs very low with Action Station. There are thousands of Micronetters waiting to meet you! Micronet To MICRONET 800, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill London ECIR SEJ. Telephone 01-278 3143. Please send me the full facts about Micronet 800. Name Make/Model of Micro Address Telephone C&VG10  For 98% of telephone users Prestel is a trademark of British Telecommunications plc. On Prestel "


"SEE MICRONET 800 IN ACTION At selected Boots Laskys John Lewis & your local computer store 82333 AVON Dorchester. The Paper Shop Tunbridge Wells. Modata Bath Boots, 1 Marchants Passage, Kings Road Tel 030564564. Nottingham. Boots 11-19 Victoria Bognor Regis Bits & Bytes, High Computer Centre, 28-30 St. Johns Poole. Lansdowne Computer Southgate. Tet 0225 64402. Centre. TeL: 0602 470676. Road Tel: 0892 41555. Strect. Tet 0243 867143, Nottingham Bristol Boots 59 Broadmead Centre, 14 Amdale Centre Testar, 280 Huntingdon Eastbourne Boots 15 Eastboume Tel: 0272 293631. Tel: 0212 670901. LANCASHIRE Street. TeL: 0602 505585. Amdale Centre. Tel 0323 27742 Blackpool Boots, 28-38 Bank Hey Worksop. Computer Graphix, Weston Super Mare. Peter ESSEX Horsham Boots, 1 Swan Walk, Castell Lid. 28 Orchard Street St & Victoria SL Tel: 0253 22276. 32 Bridge Street. Tel: 0909 472248. Tel: 0403 53053. Basildon. Basildon Software Blackpool Blackpool Computer Te0934 24778. Centre 78-80 Liberty Shopping NORTHAMPTONSHIRE Store, 179 Church Street Horsham. Orchard Computer BEDFORDSHIRE Hall, East Square. Tel 0268 27022. Kettering Boots 35 Gold Centre, 34 East Street. Tel: 0253 20239. Street. Tet 0536 514675. Tel 0603 64884 Braintree. Mirage Micros Bedford. Boots, The Harpur Centre, Bolton. Computer World UK Northampton. Boots 9 The Worthine Boots 48-52 Montague Harpur Street Tel: 0234 56231. 24 Bank Street. Tet 0376 48321. 208 Chorley Old Road Bedford. Software Centre, Chelmsford. Maxton Hayman, Parade. Te 0604 22573 Tel: 0204 494304 Street. Tel 0903 207106. 5 Broomfield Road. Tet 0245 354595 Burnley. IMO Computer Centre, 52a Bromham Road, NORTHUMBERLAND TYNE & WEAR Tel 0234 44733. Colchester. Boots, 5-6 Lion 39-43 Standish Street ney. Mocomputer Centre, Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Boots Morpeth. Telerents (Northern) Leighton Buzzard. DJ Computers Walk. Tel: 0206 577303. Tel 0282 54299. Ltd, 31 New Gate Street Eldon Square. Tel: 0632 329844. 17 Bridge Street, Tel: 0$25 383929. Colchester. Colchester Computer Lancaster. Northern Lights Tel 0607 513537. Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Luton. Boots, 82-86 Amdale Centre, Centre, 3a Short Wyre Street. 89 Scotforth Road Tel: 052462634. OXFORDSHIRE RE Computing Parkview House, Tel: 0582 20592. Tel: 020647242 Preston. 4 Mat Computing Abingdon. Ivor Fields Front Street, 41 ane Ends BERKSHIRE Grays. H. Reynolds, 79 Orsett 67 Friargate, tel: 0772 561952. Computers, 21 Stert Street, Tel 091 2701740 Slough. Boots 178-184 High Road. Tel 0375 5948. Rochdale Boots SO Market Tel 0235 2107. Sunderland Business Micro Street, Tel 0753.27267. Harlow. Harlow Computer Centre Way. Tet 0706 53225. Banbury. Computer Plus Communications Ltd, Refuge Maidenhead. Boots, 54-58 High 17 Staple Tye. Tel: 0279 22846. Assurance Buildings Saint Thomas 2 Church lane. Tel. 0295 55890. LEICESTERSHIRE Hornchurch. Comptel Computer Street. Tel 0628 27892. Street, West Sunniside. Oxford. Science Studio, 7 Little Leicester. Boots, 30-36 Gallowtree Systems, 112a North Street. Tel: 0783 654916 BUCKINGHAMSHIRE Clarenden Street. Tel: 0865 54022 Gate Tel: 0533 21641. Tel: 0402 446741. Milton Keynes. Boots WALES Oxford. Absolute Sound and Video, Leicester. DA Computers 18 Crown Walk, Secklow Gate Wed Tel: 01-553 2116. Tlford. Boots, 177-185 High Road 104 London Road. Tel 0533 549407. 19 Old High Street, Headington, Aberdare. Inkey Computer Tel: 0908 607327. Market Harborough. Harborough Tet 0865 5661. Services, 70 Mill Street The Square, Romford. Software Plus, Milton Keynes. Depson Business Home Computers. 7 Church Street SCOTLAND Trecynon. Tel 0685 881828 72 North Street. Tel 7065271. Systems, 65 Aylesbury Street, Aberystwyth. Aberdata at Aberdeen Boots 133-141 Union Tel 0858 63056. Bletchley. Tel 0908 367446. Southend-on-Sea. Computerama, Galloways 23 Pier Street. Street. Tet 0224 585349. 88 London Road Tel: 0702 335443. LONDON Aylesbury. Boots, 69-70 Friars Tel 0971 61552 Dundee Boots, 49-53 High Street, W1. Computers of Wigmore Southend-on-Sea. Computer Square. Tel 0296 83661. Cardifl. Boots, 36 Queens Street Tel: 0382 21756. Street, 104 Wigmore Street. Centre 336 London Road Chesham. Reed Photo & burgh Boots 101-103 Princes Edinburgh. Boots 101-103 Princes & 105 Frederick Street Tel: 01 486 0873. Tel 0702 337161. Computers, 113 High Street. Tel 09319. Street. TeL: 031-225 8331. W1. Galaxy. 230 Tottenham Southend-on-Sea. Estuary Tel: 0494 783373. Cardiff. The Computer Shop Edinburgh. Microworld Computer Court Road Tel: 01-636 6500. Personal Computers, 318 Chartwell 41 The Hayes Tel: 0222 26666. Group 12 Leven Street CAMBRIDGESHIRE North, Victoria Circus Shopping W1. Sonic Foto Micro Center, Tel 031 228 1111 Cardiff Cardiff Microcomputers Cambridge. Boots, 65-67 Sidney Centre. Tel: 0702 614131. 256 Tottenham Court Road 46 Charles Street Tet 0272 373072. Edinburgh Edinburgh Computers, Street and 28 Petty Curry Street GLOUCESTER Tel 01-580 5826. 51-57 Lothian Road Newport. Gwent Computers, W1. Tomorrows World Today, Tel: 0223 350213 Cheltenham. Screen Scene, 144 SL Cambridge. Cambridge Computer Georges Road Tel: 0242 528979. Tel 031 229 4418. 92 Chrostow Road 27 Oxford Street. Tel 01-439 7799. Tel: 0633 841760. Edinburgh. Silicon Centre, Store, 4 Emmanuel Street WC1. Transam Micro Systems, Gloucester, Boots, 38 46 Eastgate Tel: 0223 358264 59-61 Theobalds Road 7 Antigua Street. Tet 031 537 4546. Newport Boots, 155-156 Street Tel: 0452 423501. Peterborough. Boots, 40-42 Bridge Commercial Street. Tet 0633 51212. Glasgow. Boots 200 Sauchichall Tel 01-405 5240.. HAMPSHIRE Street. Tet 0733 65352. W8. Boots, 127a Kensington High Street. Tel: 041 332 1925. Swansea Boots, 17 St Marys Basingstoke. Boots, 15 Old Glasgow. Microworld Computer Peterborough. Logic Sales, Arcade, The Quadrant Shopping Street. Tel 01-937 6882 Basing Mall Tel 0256 51611. Unit 6 Midgate Parade, Centre. Tel: 0792 43461. Group 11 Bath Street SE7. Vic Oddens Micros, Bournemouth Boots, 18-20 Te: 0733 4696. Swansea. The Micro Storc, 35-36 Tel: 041 332 1116. 6 London Bridge Walk St Neots. Compute 3 Cross Commercial Road. Tel 0202 21713. Tet 01-403 1988 Singleton Street. Tel: 0792 46980. Glasgow. Boots, Union Street and Fareham. Electronequip, 36-38 Keys Tel: 0480 72013 WARWICKSHIRE SE15. Castlehurst Lud, 152 Rye Argyle Street Tet 041 248 7387. West Street Tel: 0329 230670. Glasgow. Tom Dixon Cameras, Lane, Peckham. Tet 01-639 2205. Coventry. Boots, 38-42 Corporation CHESHIRE Fareham. Boots, 21 Westbury EC2. Devron Computer Centre, Chester. Boots, 47-55 Foregate 15-17 Queen Street Street. Tel 0203 26561. Mall. Tek 0329 232011 Street. Tet 0244 28421 155 Moorgate. Tel: 01-638 3339. Tel 044 045 Leamington Spa. Boots, Portsmouth. Micro Choice, N14. Logic Sales, 19 The Bourne, Chester. Computer Link, 21 St. Glasgow. Commscot Ltd 31 Parade. Tet 0926 24945. 159 Havant Road, Drayton. The Broadway, Southgate, 30 Gordon Street. Tel 041 226 4878. Leamington Spa. Leamington Werburgh Street Tet 0244 316516. Tel: 0705 327591 East Kilbride Boots 33-37 The Tel: 01-882 4942 Crewe. Midshires Computer Hobby Centre 121 Regent Street Portsmouth. RDS Electrical Plaza. Tel: 035 52 20629. Tel: 0926 29211. N22. Boots, 38-40 High Road, Centre, 57 Earle Street. (Portsmouth) Ltd, 157-161 Falkirk. Boots, 79-91 High Wood Green. Tet 01-881 0101 Nuneaton, Micro City, 1a Queens Tel 0270 589191. Kingston Road Tel: 0705 812478. Street. Tel 0324 20535. Macclesfield. Computer Centre, Road Tel: 0203 382049 NW4. Davinci Computer Store, Portsmouth. Boots, 194/204 112 Brent Street, Hendon Hamilton, Tom Dixon Cameras Rugby. O.EM, 9-11 Regent Street 68 Chestergate. Tel 0625 618827. Commercial Road Tel: 0705 825248. TeL: 01-202 2272 8 Cadzou Street. Tel 0698 283193. Warrington. Boots, 39-45 Bridge TeE0788 70522 Southampton. Boots, 23-29 Street. Tel: 0925 574825 NW4. Boots, Brent Cross Peterhead. North East WEST MIDLANDS Above Bar Street. TeL: 0703 333983. Shopping Centre Tet 01-202 5256/7. Computers. 1 Ellis Street. Birmingham. Boots City Centre CLEVELAND Waterlooville. GB Microland, NW11. Computers Inc, 86 Golders Tel: 0779 79900. House, 16-17 New Street Middlesborough. Boots 7 Queens Parade, London Rd Green Tel: 01209 0401. SHROPSHIRE Tel: 021-643 7582. 88-90 Linthorpe Road, The Tel 0705 259911. GREATER MANCHESTER Shrewsbury. Computerama Dudley. Central Computers, Cleveland Centre. Tet 0642 249616. HERTFORDSHIRE Darlington, Darlington Computer Potters Bar. The Computer Shop 13 Castlegate. Tel 6743 60528. Altrincham Boots, 13-17 35 Churchill Precinct. Tel 0384 238169. Telford. Computer Village, Shop, 75 Bondgate George Sreet. Tel: 061-928 4471 197 High Street. Tel: 0767 44417. Tel: 6325 487478 2/3 Hazeldine House, Central Hyde. C Tech Computers, 184 Stourbridge. Walters Computer Stevenage DJ Computers, Square Tel 0952 506771. Market Street. Tel: 061-366 8223 Systems. 17 Hagley Road CORNWALL 11 Town Square. Tel 0438 65501. Telford. Telford Electronics, Manchester. Boots, 32 Market St. Austell AH&C Computers, Watford. SRS Microsystems, Street. Tel: 061-8326533. 38 Mall 4. Tel: 0952 504911. Walsall New Horizon, 1 Goodall Duchy House, 6 Lower Aylmer 94 The Parade, High Street. SOMERSET Street. Tel 0922 24821. Manchester. Mighty Micro, Square, Tet 0726 64463. Tel 0923 26602 Sherwood Centre 268 Wilmslow Taunton. Boots 64-65 High WILTSHIRE Bodmin. Microtest, Welwyn Garden City. DJ Road, Fallowfield. Tel 061-224 8117. Street. Tet 082376061. Trowbridge. West Wiltshire 18 Normandy Way Computers. 40 Fretherne Road. Manchester. NSC Computer Tel: 0208 3171/3182 Micros, Whiteheart Yard Tel: 46 28444 Shops, 29 Hanging Ditch STAFFORDSHIRE Tel: 02214 67259. CUMBRIA HUMBERSIDE Tel: 061-832 2269, Newcastle-under-Lyme Kendal The Kendal Computer Beverley. Computing World, Marple. Marple Computer Centre, Computer Cabin, 24 The Parade, YORKSHIRE Centre Stramongate. 10 Swabys Yard, Dyer Lane. 106 Church Lane. Tet 061-449 9933 Silverdale Tel: 0782 636911. Bradford. Boots, 11 Darley Street Tel 0539 22559. Tel: 0482 881831. Oldham. Home & Business Stoke on Trent Town Computer Tet 0274 390891. Whitehaven. PD Hendren, 15 King Grimsby. RC. Johnson Ltd, Computers 54 Yorkshire Street Storc, 30 Town Road, Hanley Doncaster. Boots, 13-15 French Street. Tel: 0946 2063. 22 Friargate, River Head Centre, Tel: 061-633 1608. Tel 0782 287540 Gate, Tel 0302 62238 Workington. Technology Store, Tel: 0472 42031. Oldham. Boots, 1 Town Square Stoke on Trent Boots, 3-5 Market Barnsley. Boots, 34-40 Cheapside 12 Finkle Street Hull Boots, 48-58 Prospect Shopping Centre. Tel: 061-624 2525 Square, Hanley. Tet 0782 23271. Tel 0226 82616. Tel 0900 66972. Centre. Tel 0482 22334 Stockport. National Micro SUFFOLK Huddersfield. Micro World Penrith. Penrith Communications, Hull Computer Centre, 26 Analby Centres, 36 St Peters Gate. Bury St Edmunds Boots Computers 1006-1010 Manchester 14 Castlegate. Tel: 0768 67146 Road. Tel: 0482 26297. Tel: 061-429 8080 11-13 Comhill Tel: 0284 701516 Road, Linthwaite. Tel: 0484 846117. DERBYSHIRE ISLE OF MAN MERSEYSIDE Bury St Edmunds. The Suffolk Huddersfield. Boots, 22 King Alfreton. Gordon Harwood, Douglas. T.H. Colebour, Computer Centre, 1-3 Garland Street. Tel 0484 21756. 69-71 High Street. Tel: 0773 836781.57-6f Victoria Street. Warbreck Moor, Walton. Street. Tel 0284 705503. Leeds. Boots 19 Albion Arcade, Chesterfield. Boots, 35-37 Low Tel 0624 73482 Tek 051-525 1782 Ipswich. Computer Magic, Bond Street Centre. Tel 0532 33551. Pavement, Market Place St Helens Microman Computers, 24 Crown Street Tet 0473 50965. Leeds. Micro Power, Northwood TeL: 0246 203591. Derby. Boots, 1 Devonshire House, North Street Rainford Industrial Estate, Mill Ashford. DGH, 10 North Street Tct 0532 458800. Walk Tel 0332 45886. Tel: 0233 32597. Lanc, Rainford. Tel 0744 885242. South Croydon, Concise Sheffield. PIP Micro Beckenham. Supa Computers Southport. Boots, 31-39 Chapel Computer Consultants 1 Carlton Derby. First Byte Computers, Street. Tel 0704 33907. 425 Croydon Road. Communications 9 Taptown Road Tel: 01-681 6842. 10 Main Centre, London Road Tel: 01-650 3569. Crescent, Broomhill Croydon. The Vision Store, St. Helens. Boots, 8 Church Tel: 0332 365280. Bromley. Boots, 148-154 High Street, 24 La Grange Arcade Tel: 0742 661096. 53-59 High Street. Tel: 01-686 6362 Sheffield. Boots, 4-6 High Tel: 0744 25488. Street. Tel 01-460 6688. DEVON Croydon. Boots, The Mall, Street. Tel 0742 78333. Chatham. Boots, 30-34 Wilmott MIDDLESEX 12-18 Whitgift Centre Wakefield. Boots, 26-28 Upper Exeter. Boots, 251 High Street, Square, Pentagon Centre. Harrow. Camera Arts, 42 St. Tel: 01-688 6021. Kirkgate. Tel: 0924 376181. Tel: 0392 32244 Tel: 0634 405471. Anns Road, Tel 01-427 5469. Epsom. The Micro Workshop, Exeter. Open Channel, Central Gravesend. Gravesend Home York York Computer Centre, Hounslow. Boots, 193-199 High 12 Station Approach 7 Stonggate Arcade Computers, 39 The Terrace. Station, Queen Street Street. TeL: 01-5700156. Tel: 0372 721533. Te094 641862 Tel: 0392 218187. Tel 74 28871, Guildford. Guildford Computer Southall. Twillstar Computers Lid. Folkstone. Boots, 24-26 Sandgate Paignton. Computer Systems Ltd, 7 Regina Road Tel: 01-574 5271. Centre, 5 The Quadrant, Bridge Road. Tel 0303 54007 35 Hyde Road. Tel: 0803 524284. Teddington. Andrews, Broad Street. Tel 0483 578848. Plymouth. Syntax 76 Cornwall, Maidstone. Boots, 56-62 King Wallington. Surrey Micro Street. Tel 01-977 4716. Street Tel: 0622 53912. Street. Tel: 0752 28705. Systems, 53 Woodcote Road. Twickenham. Productive Maidstone. Kent Micros, 52 Union Plymouth. Computer Base, Tel 01-647 5636. Computers Ltd, 72 Heath Road. 21 Market Avenue Tet 0752 672128. Street. Tel: 0622 52784. Tel 01-891 4991 Woking Harpers, 71-73 Plymouth. Boots, 2-6 New Geo Rainham. Microway Computers Commercial Way. Tet 0486 225657. Uxbridge. JKL Computers, 3 Street. TeL: 0752 266271. 39 High Street. Tel: 0634 376702. 7 Windsor Street. Tet 0895 $1815. SUSSEX Seaton. Curtis Computer Services Sevenoaks. Emest Fielder Brighton. Boots, 129 North Street Seaton Computer Shop Computers Dorset Street NORFOLK Tel 0273 27088 Sic Harbour Road. Tel 0297 22347. Tel: 0732 456800 Norwich. Adams 125-129 King Brighton, Gamer, 71 East Street Street, Tel 0603 7129 Tiverton. Actron Microcomputers. Shortlands. The Village House Tel73 728681. Thetford. Thetford CB & Micros, 37 Bampton Street, Tel: OR8452854 of Computers 87 Beckenham Lane. 21 Guildhall Street Tel 0842 61645 DORSET Tel 01-460 712 Bournemouth. Lansdowne Sittingbourne. Computer Plus, NOTTINGHAMSHIRE Mansfield. Boots, 39 Four 65 High Street. Tel: 0795 256771 Computer Centre, 1 Lansdowne Crescent. Lansdowne. 0202 20165. Tunbridge Wells Boots, 7-11 Seasons Shopping Centre, Calverley Road. Tel: 0892 26486. Tel 0623 23089. Tet 0384 dagley Road verpool Hargreaves, 31-37 SURREY micronet Phone 01-278 3143 for your free information pack now ! Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1. "


"DEAR BUG HUNTERS BYE BYE B! And so we bid fond farewell to the original Bug magazine. The Bug Hunters will be looking after you Hunter. But never fear, help is still here! Instead of from now on and how! If you need help from the just one BH, we've got several in the shape of Bug Hunters, write to them at IDEAS CENTRAL, OTISS, Big Red, X and B-Con who you may_Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 already have met in the centre pages of this Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. I've been told both programs work — almost! The only real problem we were able to find was on the program POWERBOAT. In this, when you hit an obstacle, there is a jump to near the end of the program, where the print statements in lines 5140, 5150 and 5180 are executed. If the obstacle was near the base of the screen, Mr. Downs found that the printing continued over the bottom of the screen, giving a \"cursor out of range\" error message. Now I must admit that I didn't have this problem when I was playing the game, but being a Bug Hunter, I very rarely crashed! However, if you have the same problem, then it is easily fixed by adding a POSITION statement at line 5135. Something like: If anybody else is finding the same problem, you now have a cure. Having said this. I must admit that I didn't have any difficulty when I was playing Rockfall. Therefore I can only assume that an error crept into the listing between our tape copy and the printer. It surely couldn't be that I didn't reach screen two, could it? Is this Bug Hunter really losing his touch? versions of the Commodore 64 do not automatically set the ink colour when you POKE a character to the screen. You'll be all right PRINTing characters, but try POKEing an ASCII character to a screen location and see (or not) whether it is visible. The only way around this is to manually POKE the colour byte. Hot off the press, Dave has sent us the following corrections for anybody else with the same problem: 115 IFX=2THENX=0: READA,B,C:D=54272 120 FIRI=1984TO1984+34: POKEI,160:POKEI+D,2:NEXTI 125 FORI=1984+ATO1984+A +5:POKEI 32:POKEI+D,2: NEXTI 130 FORI=1984+BTO1984+B +5:POKEI,32:POKEI+D,2: NEXTI 135 FORI=1984+CTO1984+C +5:POKEI 32:POKEI+D 2: NEXTI This code places a base to the colour byte area into the variable 'D. The following four loops (previously just using lines 120 and 130) set up the screen as before, but additionally POKE a colour to the appropriate byte in the colour display area. 5135 POSITION 4,8 I asked if any of you. whizz kids had been adding your own improvements to our listings? Well, sitting on my desk the day after wrote that (long before any of you lot had a chance to read it) was a letter from Mr M. Criddle, with the following improvements for ROCKFALL (Book of Games, July 1985). Mr. Criddle thought the program was excellent, but found that the scores obliterated the top two lines of the display. This was okay for the first screen, but made the second screen rather difficult, because one of the diamonds was hidden under the top two score lines! We've since had exactly the same complaint from Martin Cowley in Luton, so it must be true. The remedy is to make the following changes: 470 ...: FOR n=2 TO 21: ... 490 LET X=INT (RND 10) *2+2: ... 550 LET X=INT (RND 10) *2+2: .. 3020 IF nmh<2 OR .. 3510 IF nmh<2 OR ... 4010 IF nh<2 OR ... should be about right. So, both programs should now be okay, shouldn't they? Not quite. Only a couple of days later, Paul Rixon was kind enough to send me the following alterations: Now to the August issue, and the game Parachute for the Commodore 64. Some of you may have already tried out this program and had no problems whatsoever. If this is the case, then you're just lucky enough to have a Commodore which it will work on. Dave Mansfield from St. Ives had no end of trouble. Having spent all that time typing in the listing, he found himself desperately trying to guide his parachute through an invisible maze of caverns not too easy! The probable reason for this seems to be that some 800 TIME=0 605 SOUND 0,121,6,4:SOUND 2,10,4,6 5140 SOUND 0,0,0,0:SOUND 2,0,0,0 5150 POSITION 0,0:?# 6; \"Score=\";SC;\"points 150 GRAPHICS 17:POKE 756, 40:POKE 712,146 5180 (delete this line) Last month's issue, when I was going over the problems which had cropped up in the July Book of Games, mentioned that we'd had a few enquiries concerning the two Atari programs, SHOWJUMPING and POWERBOAT. However, it seemed impossible to tell whether there were really any errors in the listings. The good news is that As you can see, Paul has corrected the scoring, mentioned earlier, set the TIME to zero (he found the game rather boring if you didn't do this), and also improved the sound on the game I'd like to thank Paul for "


"the corrections, and the other readers who let me know when they managed to get the listings working. Whilst on the subject, let me remind the rest of you that we like to hear when you manage to get a listing to work, as well as when things go wrong. by the way, and would like to hear from any other Atari owners with disk drives. If you fit the bill, why not drop him a line. ZX PROGRAMMER  Now onto a few of your letters just as if you had used the CHRS function to print them out and that was what all those strange graphics characters were. So, I'm afraid that you'll still have to buy that cartridge if you want machine code games. Incidentally, an assembler is a program that helps you to write your own games in machine code. A compiler takes programs already written in BASIC and converts them to machine code. bought your 64 or Vic then drop me a line. And, if you want to nominate another piece of kit for Big Red's Most Unreliable Peripheral of the Month Award then let me know. Incidentally, I'm keeping a file of all C2N letters so, it Commodore would like to verify them, you only have to let me know. Dear BH, I'm a video games programmer for the Spectrum, and am currently trying to market one of my programs. The problem is that I do all my work on a Spectrum with a cassette recorder and a ZX Printer. I seem to spend most of my time just loading and saving. How do professional programmers cut down this time? What sort of equipment do they use? Eugene Smith Canvey Island ATARI AGAIN COMPETITION TIME Dear BH, I am on the verge of a worldwide breakthrough in computing. On Sunday last, while reading my Atari BASIC reference manual came across a new device, named device S: which is the TV screen. Out of curiosity, I tried saving my BASIC program that I was writing at the time to device S:. To my surprise, it came out on the screen in machine code! I knew that it was machine code as I had been using my machine code copier earlier. Just like my. copier, the words like PRINT, GET and OPEN all come out. in graphics symbols. You've probably realised that I have almost found out how to make BASIC programs come out in machine code without buying the  assembler cartridge. All I need to do now is to get the machine code from the screen into memory. Can you help please? Mark Corcoran Dundee Scotland  I'm afraid that I have some bad news for you. Those strange characters you saw were your BASIC program, all right, but it was still in BASIC. What you saw on the screen is what normally gets recorded on the cassette The reason words like GET and PRINT came out as graphics characters is a matter of economy. What the Atari does, and most other computers for that matter, is to use a system known as tokens. When you type in a program and use the word PRINT, for example, the Atari stores it as just one character. This character has a high ASCII code, usually in the range 150-200 or so. This means that five characters of your program can be saved in just 1 character in memory and on tape. When you LIST the program, the tokens are expanded into the correct words. When you saved the program to the screen, you saw the characters represented by the tokens,  After the earlier letter on saving Atari programs to the screen, here's one about listing them to disk! Mark Iremonger from Dublin does this all the time, and it's not as silly as it seems when you think about it. If you list the program to a disk file, you have a text file on the disk that looks exactly like a screen listing. The advantage of this is that you can then use a word processor to edit the program. If you have both Atari standard BASIC and the Atari Microsoft BASIC, you can even use the Microsoft renumber command on Atari BASIC programs. List the program to disk, then load Microsoft BASIC and load in the Atari BASIC from the disk file. Renumber it and save it again by listing it to disk. Finally, load the program back into Atari BASIC and save it as normal. Mark's at Elm Grove House, Milltown, Dublin 6.  Just because the program you are writing is for the Spectrum doesn't mean you have to write it on one. Most professional Speccy programmers use a professional word processor to write their machine code programs. This has the advantage of a better keyboard, fast disk drives and powerful commands for editing programs. To test the program, they download it into a Spectrum through an RS232 interface. Some development machines will simulate a Spectrum so that you can write and test a program without even laying hands on a Spectrum For an immediate and relatively cheap way of speeding things up, Eugene, why not upgrade to a microdrive? You'll really notice the difference.  After our recent moans about Commodore's C2N cassette deck, more letters have been flooding in on the subject. Mr Rolfe from Morecambe in Lancs uses one with his Vic, but it only loads some of his games which he finds annoying. Mrs V Crisp bought one for her son's machine, and has so far got through two of them. Neither would load or save programs properly and the latest word is that it's currently in the post on its way back to Commodore again. Christopher Jones is 15 and lives in Ravenshead. His C2N was faulty and he took it back to the shop where he bought it. The manager said that there was nothing that he could do, and suggested that Chris buy another one. I can't say for sure that the manager was in the wrong. as I don't have the full story. But, if what you say is the way it happened, then you are certainly entitled to a new C2N or a free repair. Despite what you may be told by a shop manager (he says, putting on his Esther Rantzen hat), it is the retailer's responsibility if a piece of hardware goes wrong. If he tells you that you have to send it back to the manufacturer then tell him he's mistaken. And so to the competition. David Bremerkamp from Plumstead in London is currently on his third C2N. He has bought the Azimuth Alignment Kit from Interceptor, which solved a few of the problems, but some games still don't load. If you've been through more than three Commodore cassette recorders since you "


"TM RAMBO FIRST BLOOD PARTII STALLONE 295 Ocea 8.95 COMING SOON Ocean House 6 Central Street  Manchester-M25NS Telephone 061 832 6633. Telex 669977 Ocean Software is available from selected branches of: BE WHSMITH,John Menzies, WOOLWORTH, LASKYS, Rumbelows,Greens, Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Trade enquiries welcome "


"um - &  =  J _---1:|: 1:|: :  -X ] ] = ALL "


"C+VG MAP RUPERT TOYMAKER'S PARTY AND THE rogrammer Martin Walker is nuts about Rupert the Bear. So nutty that he's even named his home in Lincolnshire Nutwood Cottage! He's just completed a new game based on his cartoon hero called Rupert and the Toymaker's Party. On the page opposite we present an exclusive screen by screen map created by Dimension Graphics of the new Quicksilva game. And who better than to give you some hot hints and tips on playing the game than the author himself, Martin Walker. He's written some special rhyming clues to help C&VG readers get the most out of the first Rupert game! Rupert finds the castle stairs very steep for little bears. But he soon chances on a way to help himself this party day. Upon his travels Rupert finds obstacles of many kinds. Sometimes he must work alone (when the friendly birds have flown). First he jumps up in the air If he cannot hitch a ride and tries to land on the third stair. some running jumps must then be tried. From here he's safe from passing toys Walk towards the yawning gap and waits to carry on just poised. then at the edge the button tap. Then staying on this self same stair he bounces up and down right there times his jump from down below then pushes left or right to go, Too soon he'll never make the ledge, Too late he'll just drop off the edge. And do watch out for what's below since if you slip that's where you'll go. In the castle may be found many objects on the ground. If they're sturdy and quite strong they can be used to jump up on Finally — just two short hints you may find help your joystick stints. Always look for special places, Safe to stop and watch toy's paces. Some are useful in a scrape to clamber up and then escape. Others you may find annoy. if you slip and touch a toy. Careful study lets you see their turning times and strategy. Remember also I designed each screen with special skills in mind. Barrels, plantpots and the rest can be useful in your quest. But always look before you leap or you'll end up in a heap! But every time I play the game I find a route that's not the same. Puzzles yes but don't despair, after all you're Rupert Bear! Thouse. "


"T. OF THE MASK *KRK Featuring a new generation of advanced 3D graphic techniques by Sandy White. Available on the 48K Spectrum from Electric Dreams Software, 31 Carlton Crescent, Southampton. Tel:(0703) 225282 "


"23RCENTURY LONDON... ONCE, THERE WAS A LITTLE OUTFIT HERE CALLED the INSTITUTE for the DEVELOPMENT and EXPANSION of ADVANCED SYSTEMS... BUT ABOUT THIRTY YEARS AGO, IDEAS INVENTED THE ULTIMATE ADDICTIVE COMPUTER GAME. THEY CALLED IT GOD.M NOW IDEAS CORP.15 A BIG OUTFIT. BIG ENOUGH TO TAKE COMPLETE CONTROL OF AN ENTIRELY GAMES-ORIENTED WORLD... GOD WAS MADE ILLEGAL A FEW YEARS BACK.BUT PEOPLE STILL PLAY IT ANYWAY. NOT THAT IDEAS CENTRAL WORRIES ABOUT A LITTLE QUIBBLE LIKE THAT. IDEAS CENTRAL IS THE NERVE CENTRE OF THE CORPORATIONS DAY-TO-DAY OPERATIONS. I.C.15 WHERE MELISSA RAVENFLAME WORKS. SHE'S SUST BEEN LANDED WITH A NEW PROJECT... UNTERS AND SHE ISNT SURE SHE'S GOING TO LIKE IT! SCRIPT:PEDRO HENRY ART:JERRY PARIS AND NOW THEY'VE PUT YOU ON A CONSUMER SERVICE PROJECT? MISS RAVENFLAME... SOMEONE UP THERE DOESN'T LIKE ME. WHA...OH, Z YOU'RE KALLIBER, RIGHT? I DIDN'T HEAR YOU... IDERS GEL PO000 YOU WOULDN'T THIS JACKSON T. KALLIBER OUGHT TO BE PUNCTUAL... SAYS HERE HE'S AN EX-MILITARY MAN.. I SEE YOU USED TO HEAD THE ROGUE ROBOT RUS-OUT SQUAD... "


"I GATHER YOU'VE PUT A TEAM TOGETHER. LET'S SEE WHAT YOU'VE GOT... OTISS... FROM THE IDEAS DEVELOPMENT LABS, 50 HE SHOULD BE ALRIGHT. OVERT TECHNICAL INFORMATION SUBURBAN SYSTEM... \"DESIGNED FOR FAST PROBLEM ANALYSIS...\" \"HIGH ORGANISATIONAL CAPABILITY...\" LOOK, I CAN'T STAND THIS ...OUT OF THE WAY AND I'LL DO IT MYSELF... YOUVE CONNECTED THE FIRING BUTTON TO THE AUTOPISTE CAREFUL EVERYBODY\" OUT OF HERE!! \"AND MAIN COMMUNICATIONS CHANNEL TO THE 1.C. MAINFRAME...\" NOW, LET'S SEE WHAT YOUVE DONE... OH, NO... YOU PAIR OF complete TERKS! NOW SEE WHAT YOU MADE ME DO! WELL, I GUESS EVEN IDEAS AREN'T PERFECT... NOW, THE REST YOU'VE ACQUIRED YOURSELF... DIDN'T GIVE YOU MUCH OF A BUDGET, DID THEY? \"I'M SURPRISED BIG RED WAS 50 CHEAP... LET'S SEE... RELOCATION OF EXPLOSIVES FOR DEMOLITION..! \"HE LANDED ON A CHILDREN'S HOME AND CAUSED MORE CASUALTIES THAN THE TIME-BOMB ITSELF...\" UH...WHERE D'YOU WANT ME TO PUT THIS..? PUT IT ANYWHERE YOU IDIOT! IT'S A TIME-BOMB... AND IT COULD GO... POOR LITTLE LAMBS hom apto A HAPPY HOME \"WORKED FOR AN IDEAS SUBSIDIARY TILL HE GOT AN EMERGENCY CALL FROM THE ANTI-TERRORIST SQUAD... \"NO WONDER THEY SOLD HIM OFF...\" "


"AND YOU'RE GOING TO BE USING THAT? \"50 B-COW WAS AT THE ISLE OF DOGS SECURITY PEN TILL THE BIG BREAK-OUT. WHAT'S THIS? HE HELPED IN IT?! LIKE YOU SAID, HE WAS CHEAP... POLICE AUCTION OT N95bbilal NOT US.NUMBSKULL! You SPOTLIGHT THE PRISONERS!! ALRIGHT... THESE OTHER TWO... X AND B-CON... CAME UP AS A PAIR IN A POLICE AUCTION AFTER A RAID ON GARIBALDI'S GAME OF GOD PARLOUR... I CAN'T SEE! I'M BLIND! I'M BLIND! POLICE RULTON SB-CON3 SLOT N9 3112 STUPID! \"THEY DIDN'T KNOW IF IT WAS...WELL... CORRUPTION OR INCOMPETENCE, CERT SOLD HIM TO GARIBALDI... \"WHO USED HIM AS A SPOTLIGHT IN THE GAME HALL... AMONGST OTHER THINGS... \"AND THAT'S WHERE HE MET X. ONE OF THE BOUNCER-BOTS... YOU'RE JOKINO, AREN'T YOU, KALLIBER? THESE GUYS HAVE \"X WAS A FACSIM-DROID.PRODUCING COPIES OF ANYTHING,LEGAL OR NOT...\" HEY, YOU'RE SHOWING IT TOO FAST... PHYSICAL REACTIONS! X...HELP! THEY DON'T LIKE THE MOVIE! I DON'T MAKE JOKES... WE CAN'T SEE WHAT SHE'S DOING... AND I'M SUPPOSED TO BE THEIR INFORMATION CONTROLLER? NO THANKS! I DON'T WANT THEM WITHIN TWENTY MILES OF ME!! 50? THIS 15 DULL. WAIT TILL SHE ACTUALLY PUTS THE PLUGIN THE SOCKET... YOU TOLD ME TO PIRATE IT FOR YOU... MAYBE YOU SHOULD GET YOURSELF OUT OF TROUBLE FOR A CHANGE... TOO LATE, LADY...THEY'RE ALREADY HERE... NOW THATS ELECTRIFYING! OW GOOD GRIEF... "


"THERE ARE JOCKS AND THERE ARE EUROMAX FROM .-.95 ROMAX TURBO Top and bottom fire buttons. * Extremely responsive and positive. * Built to last. EUROMAX ARCADE * Rated by 'BIG K' as 'The cheapest stick one can get really enthusiastic about'. * Positive micro switched action. * Fully self-centering. EUROMAX COMP PRO * Top U.K. micro switched joystick. * Very responsive. * Highly rated by 'Crash'. EUR MAX Ask you local computer store for details on full range or phone us direct FORGET THE REST — GET THE BEST ACCEPTED USE EUROMAX JOYSTICKS SUITABLE FOR ALL POPULAR MICROS THE U.K.'S LEADING QUALITY BRAND. ELECTRONICS LTD. Pinfold Lane, Bridlington, North Humberside Y016 5XR, England. Telephone: 0262 601006/602541 Telex: 527381 EMAX G. ------Please send me further details of the Euromax Joystick range. NAME. | ADDRESS. ACCESS CMG "


"Souls of SPECTRUM 48K .95 AMSTRAD CPC464 .90 commodore 64 .90 A text adventure with graphics Taskset: TASKSET LTD., 13 HIGH STREET, BRIDLINGTON Y016 APR TEL: (0262) 673798/602668 "


"BEYOND CHALLENGING SOFTWARE Warning i lep row upafter midnight This Ganie w 4100 Locations More than 32000 Screen views Beyond's first Landscaping and Text Adventure! Game Characters have artificial intelligence Specification: Character graphics Denton Designs Landscaping after Mike Singleton's Lords of Midnight Full text Editor, 3sentence  Sarderons Shadow... recall 750word vocabulary and MORE! Ks on Spectrum and Spectrumt Mail Order: Beyond 3rd Floor, Lector Court, 151 Farringdon Road, London EC1R 3AD. Price .95 inc. P&P. Cheques/POs payable to Beyond. Credit cards call 01-837 2899. "


"Spaceflight epic FLAVET DODOCOLO DE FLEUTE VE PITCH urne House NOW AVAILABLE FOR COMMODORE 64, AMSTRAD & SPECTRUM 48K a * \"Melbourne House show us what vector graphics are all about.\" -YOUR COMPUTER  \"Complex, challenging, highly addictive and featuring some of the fastest, smoothest 3-D effect vector graphics ever seen.\" EAGLE  \"The realism of sound and vision is amazing.\" CHAMP \"A Commodore expert was seen openly weeping when he saw the quality of the graphics compared to the Commodore Elite, and with very good reason... fun packed, all action, thinking game... the speed and movement of the 3-D wire frame objects is marvellous.\" -CRASH COMMODORE 64 AND AMSTRAD .95, SPECTRUM 48K .95 "


"|_ Zaxxon is back! IS THIS THE ULTIMATE CHALLENGE? C SUDER EGOLDE ATARI 48K SEGA Atar on loenced from SEGA Commodore version licenced from Me Ware SEGA obstacles or they wil eliminate you THE TUNNEL...Enter with caution Fast and furious enemy back planes matto fight off your fack INSIDE THE TUNNEL The onslaught is never ending. Follow the approach path carefully the enemy doesn't get you THE APPROACH... Bare as you entet Use all your skills to move through this tricky entrance into the non AVAILABLE AUGUST 1985 THE DRAGON..This is it after all you've been through the ultimate enemy THE ULTIMATE CHALLENGE of Super Zaxxon is here. Based on the arcade classic, you knew this challenge was coming, but now we'll see if you're ready for it. Selected U.S. Gold titles are available from all leading computer stores. U.S. Gold Ltd., Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. CASSETTE $9.95 DISK *14:95 "


"GEOFF CAPES TM Endorsed by Geoff Capes, * TRUCK PULL Olympic shot putter, World OR TUG OF WAR. and European Strongman and CAR ROLLING World Highland Games BARREL LOADING Champion * On-screen training on weights or * FAIRGROUND BELL. iron bars. * LOG CHOPPING * Continuous individual muscle fitness display * WRESTLING * Skill Levels and Hall of Fame. Available from all leading software retailers OR order today by mail * SIX exciting and demanding challenges 48K Spectrum .95 ALL OTHERS .95 to be overcome. CBM 64 disc E14.95 Martech is the registered trade mark of Software Communications Limited Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME. PHONE: (0323) 768456 TELEX: 87465 EXIM Brighton O 48K SPECTRUM  COMMODORE 64 BBC'B'  ELECTRON  AMSTRAD  MSX SKILL, STRATEGY, TIMING... NOT JUST ANOTHER JOYSTICK BASH! "


"THE BUGHUNTERS COPYRIGHT 1985 JERRY PARIS. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. THIS... REGRET OLONIOS WION1335 I'VE A "


"No.1 OCTOBER 1985 GAMES BOOK , 20 MIT MOON BUGGY/A DAY AT THE RACES/ASTEROID LANDER/MANIC PACMAN "


"c+vg/games book/moon buggy/1 MOON  SPECTRUM Mastery of your high powered Moon Buggy is the key to getting high scores in this simple but challenging game. As you zoom across the moon's surface beware of the craters. Jump them successfully and you score points. There are two levels of play. The program enables you to define your own keyboard control keys, and full instructions are included. By Adrian Robson RAU 12,-12: DRAU -19-12: DRAU 12,12 15 FOR A=128 TO 133: PLOT 228, A: DRAW 12, 12: PLOT 228,A: DRAW -12, 12: NEXT A: PRINT AT 3,28; \" 16 PRINT AT 21,9; Z$ (U TO U+31) 17 LET U=U+1 18 PAUSE 5 19 IF U=417 THEN GO TO 4 20 F INKEY $=\"1\" THEN GO TO 21 IF INKEYS=\"2\" THEN GO TO 16 22 IF INKEY $=\"3\" THEN GO TO 24 23 GO TO 16 24 CLS 25 RESTORE 44: READ B 26 LET X$=\"\" 27 PRINT \"PRESS THE KEYS THAT YOU WANT\" 28 FOR A=1 TO B 29 LET X$=X$+CHR$ 30 READ T$ 31 PRINT T$; 32 FOR C=1 TO 16-LEN T$ 33 NEXT C 34 PRINT \"-?\"; CHR$ 8; 35 PAUSE 1: PAUSE 36 LET R$=INKEY$: LET S=0 37 FOR C=1 TO LEN X$ 38 IF X$(C) =R$ THEN LET S=1 39 NEXT C 40 IF S THEN GO TO 24 41 LET X$ (A) =R$ 42 PRINT R$: NEXT A 43 PRINT #e;\" PRESS ANY KEY T O CONTINUE\": PAUSE 6: GO TO 4 44 DATA 3, \"LEFT\", \"RIGHT\", \"JUMP 45 PAPER : INK 7: BORDER 6: C LS 46 POKE 23675,88: POKE 23676,2 55 47 REM SCREEN DATA FOR BUGGY G LS 1 GO TO 109: REM THE PROGRAM WAS WRITTEN BY ADRIAN ROBSON 2 DIM X$ (3): LET X$(1) =\"O\": L ET X$ (2) =\"U\". LET X$ (3) =\"M\": LET LEV=1: LET TI=500: LET LIVE =3: LET SC=0 3 GO SUB 206 4 INK 7: PAPER : BORDER : C 5 LET Z$=\" Moon Buggy is written by Adrian Robson for Co Bputer and Video gases. ...Press the key that you require.\" 6 LET Z$=Z$ + Copyright 198 5 Guide your Buggy across the BO ons rough landscape JURPing the big craters that lie before you, if you hit one of the craters yo U will fall down it. Once you hav e got to the end you Vill be giv en a bonus and put in the lift f or level tvo Upon CORpleting thi s you will be bought back to tev el 1. Good LUCK!!!!!\" 7 LET Z$=Z$+\" 8 LET U=1 9 PRINT TAB (10); \"MAIN MENU\" 19 POKE 23658,8 11 PRINT AT 4,1;\"1....PLAY GAM E\";AT 6,1; \"2... LOOK AT HIGH SCO RES\"; AT 8,1; \"3.... RED IFINE THE G AMES KEYS 12 PLOT 208, 140: DRAW 29,20: D RAW 29,-29: DRAW -20,-29: DRAU 20,20: DRAU ,-5: DRAW 20,-20: D RAW 2,5: PLOT 208, 140: DRU 20,2 O: DRAU ,5 13 FOR A=115 TO 120: PLOT 228, A: DRAU 20,20: PLOT 228,A: DRAU -20,20: NEXT A 14 PL0T 216,145: 14 i2,12:  AME 48 LET AL . 49 LET AREAS 50 LET ASEA$+\" "


"IBUGGY 51 LET BIE\" 52 LET BIEBE 76 PRINT AT ,@; \"TIHE:; INT TI \"\";AT , 10; \"SCORE:\"; INT SC 77 60 TO 61 79 BEEP.1,48: FOR A=1 TO 10: NEXT A 189 CLEAR 65199 110 PRINT \"PLEASE WAIT SETTING UP GRAPHICS\" 111 RESTORE 116 112 FOR A=65368 TO 65495 113 READ B: POKE A,B 114 NEXT A 115 GO TO 118 116 DATA 3,7,15,29,53, 117,213,2 55,192,224,248, 196, 195, 255, 131 55,0,0,0,0, 128, 224,248, 252,2 24,267, 223, 217, 89, 31,15,255, 12 57, 147, 131, 131, 131,1,254, 15,23 247,54,52, 240, 224 2,2547255 ,1,3,3,2,13, 31, 123, 157,255,255,255,255,255,255,255 273,195,15,225,112, 248, 198, 195, 255, 0,6,8,8,9,6,198 53 LET B9=83+. in 313,255,255,222,249,0,0, 128 9 28 iasis 221,211, beni 54. CLS : FOR A=1 TO LIVE: PRIN AT 1,A#4-4; \" \";AT 2,A+4-4;\" GO\": NEXT A 55 LET X=15: LET Y=3 56 LET FE: LET E=: LET J=1 57 PRINT AT 190; i 19.0; INK 6; 58 PRINT AT 20,0; INK 6; 59 PRINT AT 21,0; INK 61 68 PRINT AT 10,11; \"GET READY\": FOR A=1 TO 300: NEXT A: PRINT A T 10,11;\" 51 LET CX=X: LET CY=Y 52 PRINT INK 6; PAPER ;AT 17, @;A$ (J TO J+31); AT 18,0; INK 6; PAPER @;B$ (J TO J+31) 63 IF INKEY=X$ (2) AND Y<15 TH EN LET Y=Y+1 64 IF INKEY $=X$ (1) AND Y>3 THE N LET Y=Y-1 *65 IF INKEYSEX$(3) AND E<>1 TH EN LET E=-1 66 IF X<=15-(Y/2) THEN LET E=1 67 LET X=X+E 68 IF J) =480 THEN FOR A=1 TO 2 00: NEXT A: LET LEV=2: GO TO 177 69 PRINT AT CX, CY;\" \";AT CX+ 1,CY; \" \";AT XY; BRIGHT 1; \" \", AT X+1,Y, BRIGH 1; \"O 70 IF *=15 AND E=i' THEN LET E= @: PRINT AT CX, CY; \" \";AT CX+1, CY;\" \";AT X,Y; BRIGHT 1;; ; AT X+1,Y; BRIGHT 1; \"AA\" BEEP 71 IF E= THEN IF A$(J+Y) < \"\" AND J<475 OR A$(J+Y+2) <> 1\" AND J<475 THEN GO TO 123 72 IF LEV=2 AND J) =370 THEN LE T LEV=1: 60 TO 177 73 LET J=J+1 74 IF TI<=@ THEN GO TO 166 75 LET SC=SC+.1: LET TIETI-.2 118 CLEAR 64429 119 RESTORE 122 120 FOR A=65268 TO 65227: READ B: POKE A,B: NEXT A 121 RANDOMIZE USR 65200: GO TO 122 DATA 33,0,61,17,174,251,1 ,3, 126,293,41, 182, 18, 19, 35, 11, 12 1,176, 32,244, 33,124, 250, 34,54, 92 ,201 123 CLS 124 PAPER : BORDER : INK 7: C LS 125 LET X=: LET Y=15 126 PRINT AT X,Y; BRIGHT 1; \" ;AT X+1,Y; \"O 127 PRINT AT X-1,Y;\" ** 128 BEEP. 5, X 129 LET X=X+1 130 IF X)=20 THEN GO TO 132 131 GO TO 126 132 PR NT AT 19,15;\" 133 LET X=18: LÉT=14 134. LET C=18: LET D=18 135 LET E=18: LET F=16 136 LET X=X-1: LET Y=Y-1 137 L C=C-1: LET D=D+1 138 LET Eti 139 IF X=4 AND Y=@ THEN PRINT A T 5,1; \": LET X=5: LET Y=1 140 PRINT AT C,D;\"\";AT C+1,D-1 141 PRINT AT X,Y;\"4\";AT X+1, 4+1 142 F C=5 AND D=31 THEN PRINT AT 6, * LET C=6: LET D=30 moon buggy continues p58 "


"c+vg/games book/moon buggy/2 cm MOON 12 BUGGY 189 BEEP 91,TI/100 181 LET SC=S+2+TI 182 PRINT AT 12,10; \"BONUS=\"; INT SC 183 FOR A=1 TO 50: NEXT A: CLS 184. PRINT AT 16,8; \"A\" AT 17,8 ; \"90\"; AT 18,4; INK 6; **; AT 19,9; ;AT 20,9; \" \";A T 21,9; 185 FR A TO 175 186 PLOT ,A: DRAU INK 6; 30,0 187 NEXT A 188 FOR A=2 TO 31 189 PLOT ,A: DRAU INK 6; 255,: NEXT A 199 FOR A=8 TO 28 191 PRINT AT 16, A; \" \";AT 17, A; \" O \" 192 BEEP .002,A/2+4 193 NEXT A 194 LET TI=500 195 IF LEV=1 THEN GO TO 48 196 REM L$(178): REM H (179) 197 LET A =\") 19 LETA 199 LET ASEA + 209 LET AEAE 201 LET B5 E\" 143 PRINT AT E,F;\"4\";AT E+1,F;\" 144 IF E=@ AND F=16 THEN PRINT AT 1,16; \" \": LET E=1: LET F=16 145 IF E=1 THEN GO TO 147 146 GO TO 136 147 PAUSE 42: BORDER 6 148 LET LIVE=LIVE-1 149 IF LIVE<=THEN GO TO 153 150 IF LEV=1 THEN GO TO 45 151 IF LEV=2 THEN GO TO 197 152 60 TO 150 153 PRINT AT 10,11; \"GAME OVER\" 154 FOR A=1 TO 300: NEXT A 155 LET I=14 156 CLS 157 IF I THEN IF N(I) <INT SC THEN LET N(I+1) = N(I): LET N$ (I+1 )=N$ (I): LET I=I-1: GO TO 158 LET NI+1) =SC: IF I<15 THEN PRINT \"Congratulations you have reachedone of todays high score Please enter your name ( axi 12 letters): 159 INPUT \"\"; N$ (I+1) 160 CLS 161 PLOT 10,0: DRAW 235,9: DRAW 0,175: DRAU -235, @: DRAU -175 162 PRINT AT 1,10; \"HALL OF FAME 163 PRINT AT 4,4; \"SCORE NAH 164. FOR A=1 TO_15: PRINT AT 5+A ,4; INT NIA); AT S+A, 14; N$(A): NEX 165 PRINT #9;\" PRESS ANY KEY TO CONTINUE\": PAUSE O: LET LIVE: 3: LET SC=@: LET TI=500: LET LEV =1: 60 TO 4 166 PAUSE 167 CLS 168 PRINT \"Hard luck it looks ike you ran out of tiae but i do n't know howyou did it because y Bu had enough tire for two trips 169 PRINT : PRINT \"We will take away one of your lifes for th 170 LET LIVE-LIVE-1: LET TI=500 171 IF LIVE<=THEN GO TO 153 172 PRINT #e;\" PRESS ANY KEY TO CONTINUE\": PAUSE @ 173 IF LEV=2 THEN GO TO 197 174 IF LEV=1 THEN GO TO 45 175 GO TO 173 176 STOP 177 CLS 178 PRINT \"UELL DONE YOU HAVE C OMPLETED THIS LEVEL WE WILL G IVE YOU A BONUS SCORE FOR YOUR TIME IN WHICH YOU COMPLETED IT FIRST.\" 179 PRINT AT 19, 10; \"TIME TAKEN: ** ;   262 LET BEB$+ 283 LET BEBE 204 LET BEBE at. 285 60 TO 52 265 DIH N$ (15,18): DIH N (15) 207 LET N$ (1) = \"ADY ROBSON\" LET N$ (2) =\"DEAN (BEAN)\" 209 LET N$ (3) =\"RICKY PM (4) =\"ERANT\" N$ (5) =\"ST CLAIR\" N$ (6) =\"VARREN\" N$ (7) = \"HODGY\" N$ (8) =\"RICHARD\" N${9) =\"PETER\" N$ (10) =\"JOHN E\" 217 LET N$ (11) =\"ANDREU N$ (12) =\"PAUL C\" 219 LET N$ (12) =\"ROWY 220 LET N$(13) =\"GUERNAN\" 221 LET N$ (14) =\"COLIN.C\" 222 LET N$ (15) =\"HICK GREEN\" 223 FOR A=1 TO 15: LET N(A) =500 : NEXT  224 RETURN   HHHHHH Do you ASUS moon buggy ends "


"MASTERTRONE  IND RS. KEPT Mr. Software Commodore 64 MASTERTRONIK FORMULAI ISIMULATOR Commodore fastback FREE GAMES! MASTERTRONIK KIKSTART YES....place an order for our Spectrum or Commodore 64 Magazine and we will send, you one of the above games absolutely free. We will also enrol you in our Discount Software Club enabling you to purchase software at huge savings over shop prices. We offer all the latest titles at substantial discounts such as, Frank Bruno's Boxing at .95 (saving f3.00), Frankie Goes To Hollywood at .95 (saving another .00) or Spy Versus Spy Il at .95 (saving yet another .00). We also have a number of older titles at even bigger discounts, such as, Attack of the Mutant Camels for the Com modore at .95, or Alchemist for the Spectrum at just 95p. In all we have over 200 titles available for your computer. Software SIX MAGAZINES A YEAR A subscription of just .00 will bring you six magazines a year through the post. Each magazine is packed with reviews of all the latest software, reader's game playing tips, competitions to enter, our reviewer's personal choices and a summary of how the other magazines rate the new releases. HARDWARE AND UTILITIES SUPPLEMENT Every new subscriber to the magazine gets a 32-page review of some of the more popular utilities such as word processing software — and hardware including joysticks and Spectrum interfaces HOTLINE KEEPS YOU UP TO DATE Subscribers to the magazine can phone our 24 hour Hotline for up to the minute news of the latest releases. A three minute recording, updated weekly, details the new titles and their prices. Club members may order by phone too! EASY ORDERING You can order from our substantial range as and when you like. There are no minimum order requirements you don't have to buy anything at all. When you do order we do our best to despatch your goods within a week often quicker. to the magazine  You 'm DONT TAKE OUR WORD...... Here's what some of our subscribers say:\"I am very pleased at your quick response. I know that the enclosed order will be dealt with quickly and efficiently as always J. Mann, Wallsend, Staffs. \"I think your Club is sensational, terrific who else could offer such bargains.\" David Barrows, Northampton. SUBSCRIPTION FORM CVG 10/85 I wish to become a subscriber to the Mr Software: Spectrum Magazine Commodore 64 Magazine for the next 12 months, for which I enclose * ( if you want both magazines). I understand you will send me your most recent Club Magazine by return and that if I'm not completely satisfied within two weeks I can return the game & magazine for a refund. I would like as my FREE game: Finders Keepers Formula One k ik Start (Spectrum/C-64) (Spectrum Only) (C-64 only! Name (BLOCK CAPS)..... Address (Origin letters we for me Mr. Software ...Cheque/Postal Order No. Or charge my Access/Visa account KELVIN HOUSE, TOTTERIDGE AVENUE, HIGH WYCOMBE. HP13 6XG. (0494) 450587 DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD (* applies to UK & BFPO only. Other rates are  Europe, 19 USA & Middle East,  Australia, Far East LISA & S. Africa) "


"c+vg/games book/manic pacman/1 UTILIT MANICI "


"PACMAN . COMMODORE 64 Arrgghh! it's that giant yellow blob with the bottomless appetite again! Why can't he leave us ghosts alone? After all, we've never done anything to him except for the odd bit of haunting here and there. Yes, It's the return of that old arcade favourite Pacman and his friendly foes the Ghosts. If you've never played the game before then you must have been hiding under a stone for the last few years — but here's your chance to catch up with this excellent version from C&VG reader James Davis. And James has come up with some pretty neat graphics to add to the fun of chasing around the Pac-maze eating the Pac-pills and avoiding the Pac-gobbling Ghosts. Don't delay program this one in today! By James Davis O DATA162, 8, 160,0,173,0, 208,141,0,48,238 80 FORINOT012: READCH (I): NEXT: DATA96,96,9 , 69, 3, 238, 72, 3, 136, 208, 241, 238 6, 101, 101, 117, 117, 97, 97, 246, 246, 234, 234 1 DATA70, 3,238, 73,3, 202, 208, 232,96 90 FORI=49152 T049257: READA: POKEI, A: NEXT 2 DATA60, 124, 240, 224, 240, 124, 60,0 95 FORI=OT062: READA: POKE 16256+I, A: NEXT:F 3 DATA60, 62, 31,7, 31, 62, 60,0 ORIOT062: READA: POKE16320+I, A: NEXT 4 DATAO, 99,99, 119, 127,62,60,0 99 GOTO30000 5 DATAO, 60, 62, 127, 119,99,99,0 100 PO$=STR$ (PO): PO$=RIGHT$ (PO$, LEN (POS) 10 PRINT\" CHR$(142): VI=53248: POKEVI+33, -1) 0: POKEVI+32, 2:SI54272: C0=55296 110 IFLEN (PO$) <5THENPO$=\"0\"+PO$: GOT0110 20 SC-1024: HI$=\"02000\": POKEVI+21,0: POKEV 120 PRINT\" :\"SPC (34) PO$: RETURN I+28, 7: POKEVI+38,0: POKEVI+37,1 200 AC=12: POKESO+4,0: POKESO+4, 17 25 POKEVI+41, 6: POKE2042, 254 201 POKESC+AI, CH (AC): AC=AC-4: PO=P0+10:GO 28 FORI=832T0860: READA: POKEI, A: NEXT: POKE SUB100: IFAC OTHENAC=12: AI-AI-1 56334,0: POKE1,51: SYS832 202 POKESO+4,0:POKESO+4, 17:POKESO+1, AI+A 30 FORIDOTO31: READB: POKE12976+1,B: NEXT C-960: POKESO, 25 31 A=12288: FORI=OT07: POKEI+A+528,0: NEXT: 203 IFAIK >967 THEN201 FORI=OTO3: POKEI +512+A, 255: NEXT 205 PRINT\" :LV=LV+1:KE=0: POKEVI+21,0 32 FORI=4T07: POKEI +512+A, 0: NEXT: POKE520+ 206 IFLVK 11 THEN215 A, 255: POKES21+A, 255 207 PRINT\" SINALONGRATULATIONS, YOU HAVE R 33 FORI-2T07: POKE I+520+A, 0: NEXT: POKE528+ ID THE CAVERNS\" A, 255: FORI=1 T07:POKES28+A+I, 0: NEXT 208 PRINT\"OF THE MONSTERS AND AMASED\"PO\" 34 FORIOTO7: READB: POKE560+I+A, B: NEXT: DA POINTS.\" TA7,9,9, 110,56, 176, 224, 192 209 PRINT\" MUNIRISTATRY AGAIN (Y/N)\" 35 FORI=OT07: POKE568+I+A, PEEK (VI+I+336): 210 GETA$: IFA$<> \"N\"ANDA$<>\"Y\"THEN210 NEXT 211 IFA$=\"Y\" THENRUN 36 FORIMOT07: READB: POKE576+I+A, B: NEXT: DA 212 POKE53280, 14:POKES3281, 6: POKESO+24,0 TA255, 231, 153, 231, 153, 231, 153, 255 : PRINT\"2\"; : END 37 FORISOT07: READB: POKE536+I+A, B: NEXT:CB 215 READA: IFA-99 THEN250 =O:DATA255, 254, 254, 255,0,0,0,0 220 READB,C,D: IFD=5THEN290 38 FORIOT07: READB: POKE544+I+A, B: POKE552 230 FORI=OTOC:POKESC+A+40+B+I, D(D): POKEC +I+A, B: NEXT:CB-O:DATAS1,204,51, 204,51, 20 0+A+40+B+I,C(D): NEXT 4,51, 204 240 GOTO215 39 FORI=OT07: READB:POKEA+I+608, B: NEXT: DA 250 READKK: FORI=1 TOKK: READX, Y: POKESC+X*4 TA255, 127, 124, 56,48,96, 192, 192 O+Y, D (7): POKECO+X+40+Y, C(7): NEXT 40 FORIOT07: READB: POKEA+I +616, B: NEXT: DA 260 READA: FOR I = 1 TOA: READX, Y: POKESC+X*40+ TA255, 127, 124, 56, 24, 12,6,6 Y,D(8): POKECO+X*40+Y, C(8): NEXT 50 POKE1,55: POKE56334, 1: POKE53272, 29:SO 270 READE: POKESC+E, D(9): POKECO+E, C (9) 54272: FORI=SOTOSO+24: POKEI, O: NEXT 280 READMM: MAMM: POKESC+MA, 81: POKECO+MA, 60 LV=O:J-1:DIMCH (12): POKESO+24, 15: POKE 7: READX1,Y1, L1, R1, N1,M1, X2, Y2, L2, R2, N2,M S0+5,9:LI=3 70 FOR I = 1 T010:D(I) =[+63: READC (I): NEXT: DA 281 PRINT\" SINIRIATETRISTINIAI TATA KIIRIRIGIRIORITOIRE DXYG TA2,2,2,5,7,7,10,6, 1,7 EN ANAS manic pacman continues p62 "


"c+vg/games book/manic pacman/2 PACMAN 282 IFLI< >1 THENFOR I =OTOLI-2:POKE56293+I, 7: NEXT 283 POKEVI+21, 1: IFX2<>OTHENPOKEVI+21, 3: I FLV=9THENPOKEVI+21,7 284 POKEVI, X1: POKEVI+1, Y1: POKEVI+2, X2: PO KEVI+3, Y2: POKE2040, 254: POKE2041, 254 285 POKEVI+39, 2: POKEVI+40, 6: IFLV=9THENPO KEVI+4, PEEK (VI+2) +100 289 AC-12: AI=995: CH=32: J=O: JU=0: POKEVI+3 1,0: SYS49152: GOSUB100: GOTO300 290 FORI=OTOC: POKESC+ ((A+I) *40) +B, D (5):P OKECO+ (A+I) *40+B,C(5): NEXT: GOTO215 300 A-PEEK (56320): X=O: Z=81 310 POKE12825, 255-2 CB: POKE12826, PEEK (12 825): CB-CB+2: IFCB6 THENCHO 320 IFKE=KKTHENPOKECO+E, 1: EX=EX+1: IFEX>2 THENPOKECO+E, 0:EX=0 330 IF (A=1110RA=107ORA=103) ANDJU=OTHENJU 3-40: J=0 340 IFA=119ORA=103 THENX=1: IFJU=OTHENZ=86 350 IFA-123ORA=107 THENX-1: IFJU=OTHENZ=8 710 X2=X2+N2: IFX2=L20RX2=R2THENN2=-N2 720 Y2=Y2+M2: IFY2LZORY2=R2 THENM2=-M2 730 IFPEEK (VI+31) < >OTHEN20000 740 POKEVI+2, X2: POKEVI+3, Y2 800 POKESC+AI, CH (AC) : AC=AC-1: IFAC=OTHENA C=12: AI-AI-1 810 IFAI=966THEN20000 900 IFPEEK (2040) =254 THENPOKE 2040, 255: POK E2041, 255: GOT01000 910 POKE2040, 254: POKE2041, 254 1000 IFLV< >STHEN1 100 1010 IFKE4THENM2=8:L2=196: R2=L2: POKEVI+ 40, 14:KE=5: GOTO1100 1020 IFKE<>STHEN1100 1030 IFPEEK (VI+3) =196 THENM2=0 1040 IFPEEK (VI+40) =254THENPOKEVI+40, 6:GO TO1100 1050 POKEVI+40, 14 1100 IFLV<>THEN1200 1110 IFKE-2ANDPEEK (SC+48)<>76ANDPEEK (SC+ 48) < >77 THENPOKESC+48, 76: POKECO+48, 1 1120 IFCH=76 THENCH=77: POKESC+740, 32: POKE SC+780, 32: POKESC+820, 32:R1=184 1200 IFLVK >9THEN1300 1210 POKEVI+5, PEEK (VI+3) 1220 IFPEEK (2042) =254 THENPOKE2042, 255:GO TO1300 1230 POKE2042, 254 1300 REM 10000 GOTO300 20000 POKE56293,2: POKE56294,2 20005 POKEVI+33, 2: POKEVI+40, 2: POKEVI+41, 2: FORI=200TOOSTEP-3: POKESO+4,0 20010 POKESO+4,33: POKESO+1, 1: POKESO, 25:N EXT:LIELI-1 20020 POKES6293, 0: POKE56294,0: IFLI=OTHEN 30000 20030 POKEVI+33,0: POKESC+MA, CH: POKECO+MA ,CC: POKEVI+40, 6: POKEVI+41,6:SYS49205: KE* 360 IFXO THEN400 370 A=PEEK TSC+MA+X): IFA >32AND (A< 700RA>7 2) THENX=0: GOT0400 380 POKESC+MA, CH: POKECO+MA, CC:MAMA+X:CH =PEEK (SC+MA): CC-PEEK (CO+MA): POKESC+MA, Z: POKECO+MA, 7 390 IFPEEK (SC+MA+40)=32ANDJU=OTHENJU=40: J-4 400 IFJU=OTHENS00 410 POKESC+MA, CH: POKECO+MA, CC:MA=MA+JU:J =J+1:CH PEEK (SC+MA): CC-PEEK (CO+MA) 422 IFJU=-4OTHENZ-88 424 IFJU=40 THENZ-89 430 POKESC+MA, Z: POKECO+MA, 7: IFMAC 40 THENJ 440 IFJ-40RPEEK (SC+MA-40) -680RPEEK (SC+MA -40) =69 THENJU=40 450 IFJ>THENA=PEEK (SC+MA+40) :IFAC >32AND A>72 THEN20000 500 POKE2021, PEEK (SC+MA): POKE2022, PEEK (2 021) 501 IFPEEK (SC+MA+40)<>67THEN530 510 POKESC+MA, CH:MA=MA-1: CHPEEK (SC+MA): CC=PEEK (CO+MA): POKESC+MA, Z: POKECO+MA, 7 520 IFPEEK (SC+MA+40) =32 THENJU=40: J=4 530 IFPEEK (SC+MA+40) =65 THENPOKESC+MA+40, 66: JU=O:J=-1: GOTO550 540 IFPEEK (SC+MA+40)=96 THENJU=40: J-3 541 IFPEEK (SC+MA+40) =66THENPOKESC+MA+40, 96 550 IFCH=71 THEN20000 560 IFCH=70 THENKE-KE+1: CH=32:PO=P0+100:G OSUB100: POKES044, 0:POKESO+4, 17:POKESO+1, 108: POKESO, 25 580 IFCH-72ANDKE<>KKTHEN20000 590 IFCH=72 THEN200 595 POKESC+MA, 81: POKE2021, PEEK (SC+MA): PO KE2022, PEEK (2021) 598 A PEEK (SC+MA+40): IFA>63ANDA< 70ANDJUK > --40THENJU=0:J=-1 600 X1 X1+N1: IFX1 L10RX1 R1 THENN1=-N1 610 Y1 =Y1+M1: IFY1 =L10RY 1 =R1 THENM1=-M1 620 IFPEEK (VI+31) < >OTHEN20000 630 POKEVI, X1: POKEVI+1, Y1 700 IFX2-OTHEN800 20040 IFLV=OTHENX1=136: Y1=197: L1=136: R1= 160: N1=4:M1=O: POKEVI, X1: POKEVI+1, Y1 20050 MA=MM: POKESC+MA, 81: POKECO+MA, 7: GOT 0281 30000 PRINT\"\"\":POKE53280,2: POKE53281,0:P OKES3269,0 30010 FORI=1T05: POKE646, A: A=A+1:PRINTTAB (12+I) \"MANIC PACMAN\" 30020 PRINTTAB (12+I). **: PRINT : NEXTI 30030 POKE646, A: A=A+1:PRINT\" MTIHINTAISI\" TAB (1 O) \"PRESS ANY KEY TO START.\" 30040 IFA>250 THENPRINT\" :FORI=1 T050: NEX TI:A=0 30050 PRINT\" :GETA$: IFA$=\"\" THEN30010 30060 GOTO205 40000 END 50000 PRINTPEEK (56320); : GOTO50000 60000 DATA162,0, 189,0,4, 157, 248, 55, 232, 2 24,240, 208, 245, 162,0, 189, 240, 4, 157, 232 60001 DATAS6, 232, 224, 240, 208, 245, 162,0,1 89, 224,5, 157, 216,57, 232, 224, 240, 208, 245 60002 DATA162,0, 189, 208,6, 157, 200, 58, 232 ,224, 200, 208, 245, 96 60100 DATA162,0, 189, 248, 55, 157,0,4, 232, 2 24, 240, 208, 245, 162,0, 189, 232, 56, 157, 240 60101 DATA4, 232, 224, 240, 208, 245, 162,0,18 9,216,57, 157,224,5, 232, 224, 240, 208, 245 60102 DATA162,0, 189, 200, 58, 157, 208,6,232 , 224, 200, 208, 245, 96 60500 DATAO, 170,0, 10, 170, 160, 42, 170, 168, 42, 170, 168, 42, 170, 168, 169, 170, 106 manic pacman continues p65 "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES OUR 7.95 8.95 8.95 5.95 7.50 750 9.95 9.95 750 995 6.95 6.95 OUR OUR RRP PRICE SPECTRUM PRICE ***COMMODORE*** RRP PRICE *COMMODORE BRP PRICE F. BRUNO'S BOXING 6.95 525 ARNHEM 7.50 ELITE 14.95 11.00 ELITE DISK 17.95 14.95 ROCCO ROCKY 795 595 WAY OF EXPLOOING FIST 9.95 750 GRIBBLY'S DAY OUT 9.99 SOWRDERONS 250 9.95 750 CLUEDO 7.95 EXPLODING FIST DISKI 7.95 5.90 WAY OF EXPLODING FIST 8.95 6.75 STEVE DAVIS SNOOKER QUAKE MINUS 1 9.95 750 HOBBIT 14.959.99 FAIRLIGHT 9.95 7.50 THAT'S THE SPIRIT WIZARORY STRIP POKER 9.95 7.50 DUN DARACH DAMBUSTERS 9.95 7.50 SUMMER GAMES CASSI PACMAN 9.95 7.95 SHADOWFIRE TUNER DALEY TOMS SUPERTEST SUMMER GAMES DISK) 14.95 11.25 COMBAT LYNX SPY HUNTER 7.95 5.90 FANTASTIC 4 9.95 750 BEACH HEAD LORDS OF MIDNIGHT 9.99 750 ROCKFORD RIOT 750 ROCKY HORROR SHOW BEACH HEAD DISKI 14.95 11.25 THE FOURTH PROTOCOL 12 95 10.99 NICK FALDO'S GOLF TERRORMOLINOS 7.95 BACKNYTCH ULTIMATE SHADOWFIRE 9.95 7.50 MATCHPOINT CODE NAME MATTI WIZARD PRINCESS DISKI 14 95 11.95 KNIGHTSHADES Ultimatel EXODUS ULTIMA 3 COLSKI 19.99 17.50 5 A SIDE FOOTBALL 595 499 SHADOWFIRE 9.95 7.50 AMSTRAD ** BEACH-HEAD 9.95 7.50 RACING DESTRUCTION SET 12.95 10.99 FRANKIE GOES TO H'WOOD 9.95 7.25 FIGHTER PILOT OISKI 13.95 11.95 F. BRUNO'S BOXING THING ON A SPRING 7.95 5.95 STAR STRIKE HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER 795 5.95 GAC C. ROAD RACE ARCHON 11.959.99 ANIMATED STRIP POKER GLENN HODOLE FOOTBALL 8.95 7.50 FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD 9.95 7,50 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 9.95 250 KNIGHT LORE INTER BASKETBALL DALEY TOMS SUPERTEST CASTLE OF TERROR 9.95 7.50 NOW GAMES 8.95 5.75 CODENAME MATTI 8.95 6.75 SINH10N. 9.95 7.50 MERCENARY AIRWOLF 6.95 5.25 RAID OVER MOSCOW 9.95 7.50  9.95 7.50 5.95 4.75 OYNAMITE DAN 6.95 5.25 ARNHEM SUPER ZAXXON 9.95 7.50 RAID ON BUNGLING BAY 9.95 RUPERT TOYMAKERS PARTY 7.99 5.99 GREMLINS 9.95 9.99 RED ARROWS 9.95 7,50 F15 STRIKE EAGLE 14.95 11.25 POLE POSITION (US GOLDI SPY V SPY 9.95 750 BLUE MAX 2001 9.95 7.50 MIG ALLEY ACE 7.50 RAID OVER MOSCOW SHADOWFIRE INTERNATIONAL SOCCER 14.95 11.25 BOUNTY BOB    8.95 7.50 MARSPORT THE ROCKY HORROR SHOW 8.95 6.75 COLOSSUS CHESS 9.95 THE FOURTH PROTOCOL 12.95 10.99 WAY OF EXPLODING FIST 9.95 7.50 DAM BUSTERS 9.95 7.50 ENTOMBED 9.95 SOUTHERN BELLE 7.95 5.95 ONE ON ONE HYPERSPORTS 8.95 6.75 SPEED KING ONE ON ONE 8.95 750 ARCHON 11.95 RAID OVER MOSCOW 9.95 7.50 DALEY TOMS STAR EVENT (C16) CAULDRON EVERYONE'S A WALLY 9.95 LUCIFERS REALM OISKI THE BOSS IC161 HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER 7.995.99 BEACH HEAD 9.95 750 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT 8.95 750 FIGHTER PILOT 7.95 5.90 HARD HAT MAC NODES OF YESOD WORLD SERIES BASKETBALL 8 95 5.50 DALEY TOMS SUPERTEST STOP THE EXPRESS 5.95 4.99 GHOSTBUSTERS 10.00 INTER, KARATE 6.50 4.75 OUN DARACH SHADOWFIRE TUNER OECATHON BEACH HEAD 7.95 5.80 COMBAT LYNXS 6.90 KENNEDY APPROACH CASSI 14.95 11.25 HOBBITT HYPERSPORTS 795 ROCCO ROCKY KENNEDY APPROACH DISK) 17.95 14.95 RED MOON LORDS OF MIDNIGHT 7.50 ALIEN 9.95 ROBIN OF SHERWOOD 9.95 7.50 CLADIATOR KNIGHTLORE DALEY THOMP. DECATHLON ATARI 1095 9.99 PROJECT FUTURE 6.75 DONALD DUCK 9.95 SHIN STREET HAWKS ZORRO 995 7.50 STRIP POKER 9.95 MARSPORT 9.95 750 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT 2.50 SPY V SPY 9.95 750 LOCIFERS REALM DISK 14.95 11.95 POLE POSITION IUS GOLDI 7.95 $95 JUMP JET SKY FOX CASS 9.95 7.50 INTER. KARATE CASS 6.50 4.50 7.50 7.50 SKY FOX DESK BOUNTY BOB CASSI RED ARROWS 995 7.50 INTER, KARATE FIGHTER PILOT 750 AIRWOLF CASS 9.95 250 WORLD SERIES BASEBALL DRAGONTORC BRUCE LEE CASS DISK 14.05 1195 JET SET WILLY 525 RED ARROWS JET SET WILLY 8.95 6.75 DROPZONE DISKI 14.95 1195 INTERNATIONAL BASKETBALL 5.99 VINI OFFICE INTER KARATE DROPZONE CASS) 9.95 7.50 ZATION 795 590 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT SHIRT 9.95 7.50 POLE POSITION CASSI JUGGERNAUT 7.95 5.90 STREFT HAS 7.95 590 WHIRLY NURDS CASSI 9.95 750 BRUCE LEE TERROMOLINAS 795 5.95 SUPER ZAXXON CASS) 9.95 750 ALIEN 995 7.50 ***BBC ELECTRON*** TOUR DE FRANCE SUPER ZAXXON DISKI ARTIST 12.95 10.50 BEACH HEAD ELECTRONI SPY HUNTER 9.95750 CODENAME MATT BEACH HEAD BBCI 7.50 WORLD SERIES BASEBALL SUMMER GAMES DISK) 1495   11.50 7.95 MATCH DAY 595 FLIGHT SIMULATOR CASSI UP AND DOWN CASS) 9.95 750 VINI OFFICE 5.95 4.75 BOFFIN 7.95 BARRY MCGUIGAN BOXING 9.99 7.50 ONE ON ONE CASSI 9.95 795 ABU SIMBEL PROFANATIONI 795 595 KNIGHTLORE 7.50 RESCUE ON FRACTALUS 9.99 750 ARCHON CASSI 11.959.99 HOBBIT 14.95999 ALIEN 8 750 QUICK SHOT JOYSTICK 8.50 ZORRO 14.95 11.95 ALL PRICES INCLUDE P&P IN U.K. EUROPE ADD .00 PER TAPE. ELSEWHERE AT COST CHEQUES/POS PAYABLE TO: S.C.S., DEPT, CV, 653 GREEN LANES, LONDON NS OGY. TEL: 01-800 3156 SAE FOR LIST. PLEASE STATE MACHINE TYPE COME AND PICK UP YOUR SOFTWARE AT MARBLES SHOPPING CENTRE, UNIT 11-12, 527-531 OXFORD STREET, LONDON WIR 10D 11 MIN FROM MARBLE ARCH TUBE STATION). FURTHER TITLES AND OFFERS AVAILABLE AT OUR SHOP, WHICH IS OPEN 7 DAYS A WEEK FROM 10.00-19.00, SUNDAY 11.00-18.00. PLEASE BRING COPY OF ADVERT TO THE SHOP FOR ABOVE DISCOUNTS, BARCLAYCARD AND ACCESS ORDERS TAKEN. 8.95 5.95 995 1495 8.95 12.95 9.95 Bio 8888888 4.75 7.50 7.50 7.50 88 ... with the Multi-Viewterm/Datatari modem serial interface plus software package from Miracle Technology HIRE SPECTRUM SOFTWARE This unique comms package gives ATARI* users full Prestel* facilities, including graphics, and allows access to Micronet, Viewdata systems, telex, electronic mail, bulletin boards and databases. Datatari handles baud rates of 1200/75, 75/1200, 1200/1200, 300/300. 850 interface not required. FULL PRESTEL FOR ATARI USERS! * OVER 500 different titles available for hire including ARCADE, ADVENTURE BUSINESS, EDUCATIONAL etc.  OVER 10,000 tapes in stock All publisher's originals  LOWEST HIRE CHARGES -hire up to 3 tapes at a time, from only 63p (plus P&P and VAT) for 2 weeks hire. * FREE printed CATALOGUE  FREE newsletter with hints, tips, reviews, etc. * TAPES for sale at DISCOUNT prices, (eg MANIC MINER 12.00).  FAST, FAST SERVICE. All tapes sent by 1st class postage * HALF-PRICE OFFER LIFE membership ONLY 13.00 (normally .00). * FREE first hire tape. (For limited period). * EUROPEAN MEMBERS WELCOME (Payment in Sterling) Have you ever been disappointed with software you've purchased? Now you can hire it first. If you like it, buy it at ,00 off our already discounted prices. If you don't send it back and it will only cost you the hire fee. NSL is the best SPECTRUM library, with over 8,000 delighted members, the largest range of tapes and controlled by our computer with 22 mb hard disc. JOIN TODAY, or, if you don't believe our claims write or 'phone 01-661 9240 for a catalogue, and check our competitors. We're confident you'll join NSL For models 400, 800, 600XL, 800XL, 65XE, 65XEM and 130XE used with suitable modems. To get your ATARI on-line, all the way, clip the coupon today. you don't believed by our compu belighted members Please send me Multi-Viewterm/Datatari packages @ .95 inc VAT + .15 UK P/P. I enclose cheque/postal order charge my Access/Visa card no: NATIONAL SOFTWARE LIBRARY 42 Harefield Avenue, Cheam, Surrey SM2 7NE. I enclose .00 for LIFE MEMBERSHIP. Please rush my membership kit to me. If, within 28 days, I'm not delighted with your service you'll refund my membership fee. expiry date..../..../.... Name Address ............. Name Address .......... Postcode ... send to: Atari Support 5. Miracle Technology (UK) Ltd, St Peters Street, Ipswich IP11XB Tel 0473-50304 regid trademarks of the companies concomod CVG10 MIRACLE TECHNOLOGY "


"DO YOU FIND CHOOSING At the VIRGIN GAMES CENTRES, we've worked long and hard to put together the UK'S BIGGEST RANGE of COMPUTER SOFTWARE GAMES. We've got an unrivalled selection of... Arcade Games, Adventure Games, War Games, Classic Games, Family Games, Sports Games, Business and Educational Software. For Spectrum, QL, Atari, BBC, Electron, Commodore 64, Commodore C16, Enterprise, MSX and Amstrad machines. Plus a large stock of utilities, peripherals, chess computers, books and magazines and a range of Sinclair Commodore and Amstrad hardware. And if you find choosing software hard, we have a team of knowledgeable staff to help you. HARD? GAMES CENTRE 172 Union Street, Aberdeen  94/96 Briggate, Leeds 100 Oxford Street, London W1 MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS SPECTRUM 5.95 NF Open Golf..........7.50 Match Fishing ........5.85 Red Arrows............7.50 Karate...................5.50 Dynamic Dan..........5.50 The Artist............. 10.50 Exploding Fist........6.95 Nightshade. 7.50 Morden's Quest......5.25 Roland Rat..............5.50 Abu Simbell.. 5.95 Juggernaut 6 .85 Southern Belle.........6.85 Highway Encounter.. 5.95 Leonardo........ .6.85 Metabolis............... 5.50 Basketball Int Elite14.95 Rupert Bear..............6.75 Fairlight... 7.50 That's the Spirit......6.50 Code Name Mat......6.75 Terremolinos.. 5.95 Now Games .6.75 Bounty Bob..... .6.75 STILL Skooldaze...............4.95 Underwurde...........6.95 Knight Lore............6.95 Doordark's Rev... 6.95 Shadow Fire...........6.95 World Baseball........5.25 Beach Head...............5.95 Lords of Midnight....6.95 White Lightning..... 12.50 Gift of Gods........... 7.25 One on One... 7.50 Everyone's a Wally 7.50 Technician Ted. 5.25 Quill..................... 11.25 Emerald Isle............5.50 Tapper.................. 5.50 Spy Hunter............. 5.50 Bruce Lee..... .5.95 Gremlins................. 7.25 Wizards Lair.........5.50 Formula 1......... .6.85 Grand National........5.85 Dragontorc ............. 5.95 Minder ........ ...... 7.50 Station Mua Hàng 5 95 Frankie Hollywood...7.50 Rocky Horror Show 6.50 Cauldron................ 6.85 Dummy Run............7.50 Nodes of Yesod...... 7.50 Daley's Supertest....5.85 Soft Aid.... .....4.99 Fourth Protocol..... 10.50 James Bond............ 7.50 Rockfords Riot....... 7.50 Jet Set Willy II........5.50 Dun Darach.........7.50 Streethawk.............5.25 Spy vs Spy.............6.95 Falcon Patrol 2........5.85 Bulge. . 7.50 Pipeline il.............6.85 Dambusters........... 7.50 Pole Position.........6.85 Glass 5.95 Hyper Sports. .... 5.95 Go to Hell......... ...5.85 ROCCO .........5.95   Boxing 525 The Covenant..........5.95 On the Run 5.85 Streethawk.. 5.95 Dambustersid)....... 12.50 The Bulge...............7.50 Daley's Supertest. 5.95 Entombed. 7.25 Int. Tennis..... 4.95 Hyper Sports.... 6.50 FB Boxing Mig Alley................7.50 Ghost Chase...........7.50 Dough Boy. 7.50 Exploding Fist..... . 7.50 Ghetto Blaster.......7.75 Mini Office...... 4.75 Rockfords Riot.. .7.50 Botham's Cricket 7.50 NF Open Golf 7.50 Match Fishing .........5.85 Red Arrows 7.50 G. Gooch's Cricket.. 7.50 Red Moon.... 5.85 Five-a-Side Out on a Limb..... 4.95 Blackwyche. 7.50 Karate............. .... 5.50 Beach-head Il....... 7.50 Summer Games Il....7.50 Thing on a Spring...6.85 Sky Fox................7.50 G.T. Am. R.D. Race. 7.50 Tour de France........ 7.50 Wizardry.................7.50 McGuigan..............8.00 Rupert Bear...........5.95 Fractalus................. 7.50 Kennedy Approach 12.00 Mercenary. .. 7.50 Terromolinos...........5.50 Blue Max 2001.......7.50 Super Zaxxon........7.50 Speed King.............7.50 Now Games.. 6.75 Wirley Nurd............ 7.50 Code Name Mat Il...6.75 Donald Duck 7.50 F15 Strike Eagle... 12.00 Zorro Hacker COMMODORE World Baseball........5.90 Everyone's a Wally.. 7.50 Pole Position... 7.50 Tri na Nog..............7.50 Impossible Mission.. 7.75 Soft Aid.................4.99 Archon...................8.50 Frankie Hollywood... 7.50 Shadowfire.............6.95 Breakdance............. 7.75 Cauldron................. 5.95 Dropzone................ 7.50 Elite..................... 11.00 Elite (disk)............ 15.50 Basketball................4.95 Dummy Run. 7.50 Strangeloop.. ... 6.85 Dambusters......... 7.50 Pitstop 1............... 7.85 Nodes of Yesod......8.50 Fourth Protocol..... 10.50 James Bond............8.50 Rocky Horror Show. 6.95 Quake-1....... ...7.50 Jump Jet................ 8.50 Jet Set Willy 6.95 Other new title -WIZARD'S LAIR for Commodore 64, Amstrad and Spectrum bubble bus software 87 High Street, Tonbridge, Kent TNS 1RX Telephone: 0732 355962 Telex: 95151 7.50 Postage included U.K. Please state which micro. Fast Service. Send cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept. CVG, 76 Westbourne Terrace. London W2 "


"c+vg/games book/manic pacman/3 An s tvogames bol PACMAN 60501 DATA169, 106, 90, 175, 107, 218, 175, 107 ,218, 169, 106, 90, 169, 170, 106, 170, 170, 170 60502 DATA170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 17 0, 170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 170 60503 DATA170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 168, 17 0, 138, 160, 42,2 60510 DATAO, 170,0, 10, 170, 160, 42, 170, 168, 42, 170, 168, 42, 170, 168, 169, 170, 106 60511 DATA165, 169, 106, 167, 233,250, 167, 23 3,250, 165, 169, 106, 169, 170, 106 60512 DATA170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 17 0, 170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 170 60513 DATA170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 17 0, 170, 168, 170, 138, 160, 42,2 61000 DATAO,0, 22,5,0, 39,22,5, 4, 1, 17, 1,4, 17, 10, 2, 4, 27, 11, 1,8,1,4, 1,8, 12, 4,2 61001 DATA12,1, 7, 1, 14, 10, 20,4, 16, 1,6, 1, 1 3,21,2,6, 17, 35, 3, 1, 19, 32,6,2, 19, 30, 2,6 61002 DATA20,9, 23, 1,23,0, 39, 1,99,4, 0,5, 1 ,20, 12,33,0, 33, 5,0,7,0, 20, 3, 29, 3, 32 61003 DATA13, 24, 758,882, 167, 140, 167, 111, -8,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 61010 DATAO,0, 22,5, 7, 35, 12,5, 0,39,21,5,5 ,1,30, 1,8, 1,4, 1,8,4,6,2,3, 34,2 61011 DATA2, 3, 37, 1, 1, 16, 2, 7, 4, 12, 11, 11, 1 , 19, 12, 2, 2, 17, 22,3,1,6, 34, 1, 1, 7, 36, 2,2 61012 DATA11, 36,2,2, 15, 36,2,2,19,36,2,2, 23, 0, 39,1,22,14,0,6,22,32,0,6,99,5, 0,3 A13, 3, 18, 31,9, 37, 0, 35,1,0,37,91 9,881, 255, 69, 39,255,-8,0, 147, 213, 147 61014 DATA251, 8,0 61020 DATAO, 0,22,5,0,39,22,5,5, 1,6,1,5,8 , 30, 2,8, 33, 5, 1,9, 1, 10, 1, 13,8,6,4 61021 DATA15, 16,4,1, 12, 30, 8, 1, 16, 27,11,1 ,20,24,14,1, 23,0, 39,1,99 61022 DATAS, 0,5, 1,21,0, 30, 6, 38, 10,23,5,0 , 6,0,21,0, 33, 10, 24, 17, 1,798,894 61023 DATA195, 213, 147, 195,-8,0, 39,69, 39, 255,8,0 61030 DATAO, 0,22,5,0,39,22,5,0, 20, 18, 6,3 , 22,8,1,5,8,0,1,4,12,1,1,4, 17,0,1 61031 DATA4, 34,4,1,5,1,0,1,8,1,2,2,8, 30, 2,1, 9, 12,7, 1, 10,19,2,6,11, 21,4,6 61032 DATA12, 1, 3, 4, 12, 34,1,1,13,7,0,1,15 , 17,6, 1, 16, 32,0,6, 17, 10,4, 1, 17, 33, 0,6 61033 DATA18, 34,0,6, 18, 37,1,1,19,27,3,1, 21,17,1,5,23,0, 39, 1,99,5,0,1,0, 17, 1, 33 61034 DATA12, 15, 17, 38,6, 0, 11,0, 14, 1, 11, 1 , 14, 20, 33, 11, 1, 118, 913 61035 DATA160, 149, 160, 192,8,0, 171, 213, 17 1,251,8,0 61040 DATAO, 0,22,5, 0,39,22,5, 5, 2,5,1,5,1 2,3,1,5, 23, 7, 2,5, 31,2,1,5, 34, 4,2 61041 DATA9, 37, 1, 1, 11,2, 13, 1, 11, 23, 5, 4, 1 1,30, 0, 2, 11, 34,1,1,14,1,2,2,17,1,2,2 61042 DATA17, 4, 11,1, 17, 23,8, 1, 17, 38,0, 1, 20,1,0,1,18,8,4,5, 21, 17, 1,5 61043 DATA21, 18,1,5, 21, 20,1,5, 21, 21,1,5, 22, 22,7,6,23, 0,39,1, 99, 4, 2, 38, 12,38 61044 DATA18, 7, 18,9,18,0,29,1,29,2,29,3, 29,4, 31, 10, 26, 10, 27, 10, 28, 22,3,22,30 61045 DATA22, 31, 22, 32, 22, 33, 22, 34, 22, 3s, 22, 36, 22, 37, 22, 38,899, 162 61046 DATA128, 117, 40, 128,-8,0, 170,52,52, 196,0,8 61050 DATAO, 0,22,5, 0, 39,22,5, 3, 34,4,4,6, 12,3,2, 7, 34, 4, 1, 10, 3, 5, 1, 10, 18, 0,2 61051 DATA10, 19,1,5, 10, 20,1,5, 11, 26,4, 1, 12,1,1,2,15,1,0,1,15,2,2,2, 15, 10,19,1 61052 DATA14, 28,0, 6, 16, 19, 3,5, 16, 20,3,5, 18,33,5, 1,20,3,3,4, 20, 28, 2,1 61053 DATA23,0, 39,1,99, 4, 11, 18, 11,21, 13, 38, 18,1,2,2, 34,19,3, 38, 379 61054 DATA168, 149, 168, 224,8,0, 104, 149, 10 4,160,8,0 61060 DATAO,0, 22,5, 0, 39, 22,5,0,19,19,6,4 , 21, 16,5, 21,19,2,6,22,19,0,6 61061 DATA4,20,0,1,8,1,2,1, 8, 10, 7, 4, 12, 1 ,0,1, 16, 1, 10, 1, 17, 18, 2, 1, 21,8, 3,1 61062 DATA4, 22, 16, 2,5, 22, 16, 2, 6, 22, 16, 2, 7, 22, 16, 2,8, 22,16,2,9,22,16,2,10 61063 DATA22, 16, 2,11, 22,16,2,12,22,16,2, 16, 22,2,1, 16, 29,2,1, 15, 36,2,1,19,25,3 61064 DATA1,19,32,3,1, 23,0, 18, 1, 33, 19, 20 ,6,99,5, 4, 38, 7, 24,8,33,11,27, 12, 38, 12 61065 DATA7, 14, 22,12,22,13,22,14, 22,15,2 2,16, 22, 17, 22, 18, 6,35,9, 30,11,36, 12, 30 61066 DATA900, 881,255,61, 183, 255, -8,0, 34 , 157, 34, 98,8,0 61070 DATAO,0, 22,5, 0, 20, 22,5, 0,23,1,5, 0, 39,22,5,6, 1,3,1, 6, 12,5,1,10,1,0,1 61071 DATA10, 10,3,1, 14, 2, 2, 2, 14, 15,2,1,1 7,3,1,2,18,12,1,1,20,5,3,1,21,14,3,4 61072 DATA21,18,1,5, 22,19,0,6,5, 38,0, 1,6 ,21,1, 1,7, 27,4,1,9, 36,0,1,11,21,8,1 61073 DATA14,33,5, 1,18,25,5, 1, 21, 21,1,1, 23,0,39,1,99,4,0, 38, 9, 8, 9, 17, 22, 38, 6,1 61074 DATA4,0,0,1,12,0,21,1, 21, 22, 28,859 ,883 61075 DATA136, 197, 136,160,4,0, 240, 117,19 2, 240,-8,0 61090 DATAO,0,22,5, 0, 39,22,5,5,5, 0,1,5,7 ,2,1,5, 17,5,1,5, 30,2,1,5, 34,1,1 61091 DATA7, 36,0,2, 9, 37, 1, 1, 13,4, 1, 1, 13, 7,2,1, 13, 17,0,1, 13, 18,4,4, 13, 30, 2,1 61092 DATA13, 34,1,1,14,1,1,1,18,4,1,1,18 ,7,2,1, 18, 17,5, 1, 18, 30,2,1, 18, 34,1,1 61093 DATA19,37,1,1,23,0, 39,1, 99,1,0,19, 1,0, 18, 1, 881 61094 DATA160,69,160,184,2,0, 120, 200, 56, 200, 0, -16 61100 DATAO, 0,22,5, 0,39,22,5, 0, 1,7,6,5,1 ,4,1, 6, 13,0,2,7, 20,1,1,7,22,6,2 61101 DATA7, 29,1,1, 7, 36,2,1,8,8,3,1,10,1 ,1,1,11,7,2,4,11,37,1,1,13, 13, 7,1 61102 DATA15,6,5, 2, 15, 11,0,1,15,35,0,1,1 7,23,3,1,19,1,1,1,19,34,4, 1, 21, 28, 1, 1 61103 DATA23,0, 39,1, 99,5, 2, 33, 2, 38,6, 1,8 , 23, 20, 38,25,0, 24,0,25, 0,26,1,24 61104 DATA1,25,1,26,2, 24, 2, 25, 2, 26,0, 33, 1,33,0, 38, 1, 38,8, 28,9, 28,10,28, 11,28 61105 DATA12, 28, 13, 28, 14, 14, 15, 14, 16, 14, 17, 14, 14, 20, 15, 20, 41, 163 61106 DATA168, 133, 128, 168,-8,0,184, 85, 18 4, 248, 8,0 20624 36937 T 20624 65280 56583 LYTAB (/VERIFYGOSUBON/DEFGOSUBONSTE Pqosubonstep Wa r mamem Abnprint #di mnot +/def*notrun lleft$gosub printprint#I 57000 34171 cinput#dfnktolinput Zinput#+ Y 8320 stop -fndimZinput#+ S 8370 Xfnhin h Sys/H S Hg sin>Close manic pacman ends 65 "


"c+vg/games book/asteroid lander/ 10 GOSUB 300: HI=100 20 GOSUB 240: LOCATEP1, 1,2: PRINTP 1, \"DAMAGE:\" . ENV 1,15,1,3,15,-1,2 ENV 2,5,1,1,15,-1,15: LEVEL=5: DA =0: SCHWINDOWR3, 1,40,4,21 30 ORIGIN 0.0.X=312: Y=368: FUEL=1 00 TAGPOKE 33793, LEVEL:IY-4.GOS UB 290 CLSM3 40 CHR=239:XP=X: YP=YY=Y-IY: IF I NKEY( 18 )=0 THEN IF FUEL > THEN S OUND 129,0,30,7,0,0,3: FUEL=FUEL1: YY+4. MOVE 528+FUEL, 399 DRAWR 0,-14,0: CHR=241 ELSE SOUND 130,1 00,0,0,1 50 IF Y<44 THEN 200 60 IF INKEY( 8 ) THEN XX-2 70 IF INKEY( 1 )=0 THEN X=X+2 80 TAGOFF : PEN 3: CALL 33792.PEN 1 : TAG TL-TEST(X, Y): TR=TEST(X+16, Y BLOTEST(X,Y-16 ) BR=TEST(X+16, Y -16): IF (TR OR BR OR TL OR BL. >>1 THEN 140 90 MOVE XP, YP: PRINT\" \"; : PLOT -10 ,-10,1:MOVE X,Y: PRINT CHRS(CHR); 100 IF Y>368 THEN IF X<300 OR X> 330 THEN 200 ELSE 120 110 GOTO 40 120 FOR O=1 TO 5: SOUND 1,12*0: NE XT SC=SC+50 130 LEVEL=LEVEL-(LEVEL<26): MOVE X,Y: TAG: PRINT\" \"; GOTO 30 140 MOVE XP, YP: IF BR=2 AND BL=2 THEN 160 150 PRINT CHR$( 238 ); DA=DA+1. IF DA=17 GOTO 200 ELSE LOCATEP1, 1.3 PRINTP1, STRING( DA, 233 ) SOUND 1 29,800,0,0,1. GOTO 40 160 PRINT CHRS( 241 ); IF Y=60 THE N SC+SC+50 ELSE IF Y=64 THEN SC= SC+100 ELSE IF Y=76 THEN SC=SC+2 00 170 TAGOFF LOCATE 13, 10:PRINT\"CO NGRATULATIONS!\" 180 SC=SC+FUEL PRINT CHR$( 23 )CHR $(1): TAG: FOR T=0 TO X STEP 4.MOV ET 16 : PRINT CHR$(248); MOVE T1 6: SOUND 1.0.1.7.1.0.15: FOR K=1 T 0 5 NEXT: PRINT CHR$( 248 ); : NEXT T AGOFF:PRINT CHR$( 23 )CHR$(0); 190 LOCATE 13,10:PRINT SPACES 20 ): IY=-2: Y=Y+4. GOTO 40 200 SOUND 135,1,0,0,2,0, 14 210 FOR R=20 TO 160 STEP 20: FOR U=1 TO 360 STEP 60: MOVE X, Y:PLOT R R*COSCU),R*SINCU),1: MOVE X,Y:P LOTR (R-20)*COSCU),(R-20 >*SINCU) 0: NEXT: NEXT 220 T=TIME:WHILE TIME-T 300: A$=I NKEYS : WEND: CLSM3: PRINTP3, TAB( 13 ) CHRS( 24 )\"ASTEROID LANDER\"CHR$( 24 "


"> LOCATEM3,5,5: IF SC>HI THEN HISC EROIDS AMSTRAD A small planet faces destruction as their sun is about to go nova! Your mission is to rescue the planet's population before they get micro-waved. To complicate matters you must pilot your landing aircraft through a perilous asteroid belt to reach the planet's surface. Only one person can be carried by the lander to the mother ship per trip and the rescue craft can only sustain a limited amount of asteroid damage. Add to this the need to conserve fuel and you have a mission which is not for the faint-hearted. Craft control is either by joystick or keyboard, using the left and right cursor keys and Enter for thrust. By Paul Burke 230 PRINTP3, \"SCORE\"SC; TAB( 23 )\"HI -SCORE\"HI: LOCATER3, 10, 15: PRINTP3 , \"PRESS A KEY TO PLAY\":WHILE INK EYS=\"\"WEND SOUND 7,30 : GOTO 20 240 MODE 1BORDER 13: INK 0,0: INK 1,24: INK 2.12 250 DEG:ORIGIN 320,366 : FOR T=270 TO 450 STEP 10: MOVE 30+30*COSCT ), 15*SINCT): DRAW 30, 15*SINCT), 1: MOVE -30-30*COS(T), 15*SINCT): DRA W-30, 15*SINCT): NEXT: ORIGIN 0.0. MOVE 290, 382: DRAW 350, 382 260 ORIGIN 0,16 : RESTORE 279 : FOR Z=1 TO 3: READ A,B,C FOR TEA-4 TO 2+2 MOVE T, -16 DRAW TB, 2 NEXT: FOR T=B-4 TO B: MOVE A-C-2. T DRAW A+C, T: NEXT: NEXT 270 DATA 96, 46,8, 320, 30, 12,512,3 4,14 280 FOR T=1 TO 640 STEP 2MOVE T ,-16 DRAW T, 10*COSCPI*T*3)*SINC 2 *T), 1: DRAWR 0,8, 3: NEXT: RETURN 290 PEN 1 LOCATEP1,1,1PRINTM1,8 TRINGSC LEVEL-5,248): LOCATEP1, 29, 1.PRINTM1, \"FUEL : \"STRINGS( 6,233 ) LOCATEP1, 29, 2: PRINTP1, \"SCORE\", SC : RETURN 300 RANDOMIZE TIME RESTORE 300 310 MEMORY 32767 320 FOR ROCK=0 TO 28 S=32768+ROC K*5: POKE S, 240: POKE S+1. INTCRND* 39 )+1: POKE S+2.(RND*16 )+5 330 POKE S+3,1: IF RND>0.5 THEN P OKE S+3,255 340 POKE S+4,0: NEXT 350 FOR T=33536 TO 33553: READ A: POKE TA: NEXT 360 FOR T=33280 TO 33326 READ A: POKE TA: NEXT 370 FOR T=33792 TO 33809: READ A: POKE T.A: NEXT 380 SYMBOL 240.56, 126, 127, 127, 25 5,254, 124, 16: SYMBOL 241.8, 20,119 ,85, 119, 28, 62, 107 390 RETURN 400 DATA &3E, 31, &CD,&5A, &BB. &DD, &7E, 1. &CD, &5A, &BB, &DD, &7E, 2, &CD, 8.5A, &BB, 8.09 410 DATA &DD, 8.7E, 0, &FE, 0,820, 1,& C9,&CD, 0, 131, &3E, 32, &CD, &SA, &BB, &DD,&7E, 1. &DD, &86.3.&FE, 41,820,2 , &3E, 1, &FE, 0, 820.2.&3E, 40. &DD,&7 7,1 420 DATA &CD, 0,131, &DD, &75,0. &CD ,&5A, &BB, &C9 430 DATA &QE, 28&DD, &21,0, 128, &C 0.. 130,&11,5,9,&DD, &19,&0D, &20, 245, &C9 IDER asteroid lander ends "


"c+vg/games book/a day at the races/1 A DAY AT ANY ATARI Enjoy the thrill and excitement of a day Factors which will determine the at the races without losing your shirt. outcome of each race are the odds and Up to four people can play this race the going. simulation game which is written in At the end of each meeting each Atari Basic and uses just under 8k of punter's total is shown. memory. On a few of the program's lines Each punter starts off with . The characters are set in heavy type. This winner will be the person who has made indicates that they and the spaces in most money at the end of the six race between — should be entered in meetings. INVERSE video.  By Tom Wharton Ma WOO . de wy 3 min . (Cipse when "


"THE RACES 1 REM 2 REM 3 REM 4 REM 440 GET #1, HS:HSHS-48:? HS:HOR (M)=HS 450 IF HOR (M)<1 OR HOR (M)>5 THEN 420 460 POSITION 33,15+(INT (M*1.8)):? S$ 470 POSITION 28,15+(INT (M*1.8)):? \"stake 10 CLR:CLOSE #1:OPEN #1,4,0,\"K:\" 20 DIM WINNER$(17), SURF$(4), $(4) 30 DIM HOR (5),STAK (5), TOT (5) 40 DIM NAGA$(13), NAGB$(17), NAGC $(17) 50 DIM NAGD$(17),NAGE$ (16), NAMA$(6) 60 DIM NAMB$(6), NAMC$(6), NAMD$ (6) 70 S$=\" \":REM Four Spaces 80 GOSUB 3000:REM * INSTRUCTIONS * 90 GOSUB 4000: REM * ENTER NAMES * 100 RESTORE 2000: RACE =C:FOR M=1 TO I: TOT (M)=100:NEXT M 110 RACE=RACE+1: GRAPHICS O 120 POKE 752,1:POKE 756,204 130 SETCOLOR 2,15,0: SETCOLOR 4,12,0 140 G-INT (RND (0)*3)+1 150 IF G=1 THEN SURF$=\"FIRM\" 160 IF G=2 THEN SURF $=\"GOOD\" 170 IF G=3 THEN SURF$=\"SOFT\" 180 IF RACE-6 THEN ? \"FINAL RACE\" 190 IF RACEC6 THEN ? \" RACE NO.\"; RACE 200 POSITION 18,0:? \"the going is \"; SURF 480 TRAP 460: INPUT STAK:STAK (M)=STAK 490 IF STAK (M)<>INT (STAK(M)) OR STAK (M)< O OR STAK (M)>TOT (M) THEN 460 500 NEXT M 510 FOR N=1 TO ISTOT (N) =TOT (N)-STAK (N):N   520 A=610:B=620:C=630: D=640: E =650 530 X=INT(RND (0)*16) +1 540 ON G GOSUB 550,570,590:GOTO 660 550 ON X GOSUB A,A,A,A,A,B,B,B,B,B,C,C,C ,D,E,E 560 RETURN 570 ON X GOSUB A,A,A,A,A,A,A,B,B,B,C,C,C ,0,0,E 580 RETURN 590 ON X GOSUB A,A,A,A,A,A,B,B,B,C,C,C,D ,D,D,E 600 RETURN 610 Y=1:WINNER$=NAGA$: RETURN 620 Y=2: WINNER$=NAGB$: RETURN 630 Y=3:WINNER$-NAGC$: RETURN 640 Y=4:WINNER$=NAGD$: RETURN 650 Y=5:WINNER$=NAGE$: RETURN 660 FOR Z=1 TO I 670 IF Y=1 AND HOR (Z)=1 THEN TOT (Z)=TOT Z) +STAK (Z) +STAK (Z) 680 IF Y=2 AND HOR (2)=2 THEN TOT (Z)=TOT Z)+STAK (Z)+(STAK (Z)*2) 690 IF Y=3 AND HOR(Z) =3 THEN TOT (Z) =TOT Z)+STAK (Z)+(STAK (Z)*5) 700 IF Y=4 AND HOR (Z) =4 THEN TOT (Z) TOT Z) +STAK (Z)+(STAK (Z)*7) 710 IF Y=5 AND HOR(Z)=5 THEN TOT (Z) =TOT Z) +STAK (2)+(STAK (Z)*10) 720 NEXT Z 730 FOR D=1 TO 100: NEXT D 740 GRAPHICS 2: SETCOLOR 2,0,0 750 SETCOLOR 0,5,6:POSITION 6,3 760 ? #6; \"under\":POSITION 2,6 770 ? #6;\"starters orders\" 780 FOR P=225 TO O STEP-1 790 SOUND 0,P,10,8 800 NEXT P: SOUND 0,0,0,0 810 FOR T=0 TO 12:SOUND 0,50,50,8 820 POSITION 1,3:? #6:\" THEY'RE 830 POSITION T, 6:? #6;\" OFF!\" 840 SOUND 0,0,0,0:FOR D=1 TO 15:NEXT D 850 NEXT T:FOR D=1 TO 30:NEXT D 860 POSITION 12,3:? #6;S$;S$ 19 210 ?:? S$;\" ** THE RUNNERS ARE 220 FOR P=1 TO 100: SOUND 0,50,10,10 230 NEXT P:SOUND 0,0,0,0. 240 READ NAGA$, NAGB$, NAGC $, NAGD$, NAGE$ 250 ?:? NAGA$;\"Fav. EVENS prefers GOOD\" 260 ?:? NAGB$; \"at 2-1 prefers FIRM\":? 270 ? NAGC $;\"at 5-1 prefers GOOD\":? 280 ? NAGD$; \"at 7-1 prefers SOFT\":? 290 ? NAGE$; \"at 10-1 prefers FIRM\":? 300 ? S$,\" * PLACE YOUR BETS ** \":? 310 FOR N=1 TO I 320 POSITION 2,15+(INT(N+1.8) 330 ON N GOSUB 340, 350,360,370:GOTO 380 340 ? NAMA$: RETURN 350 ? NAMB$: RETURN 360 ? NAMC $: RETURN 370 ? NAMD$: RETURN 380 POSITION 9,15+(INT (N*1.8)):? \"has \"; CHR$(8); TOT (N) 390 NEXT N 400 FOR M=1 TO I 410 IF TOT (M)< =0 THEN STAK (M)=0: POSITION 13,15+(INT (M*1.8)):? \"gone to the dogs. .......\":GOTO 500 420 POSITION 26,15+(INT(M*1.8)):? S$ 430 POSITION 20,15+(INT (M*1.8)):? \"horse holt ?\"; a day at the races continues p70 "


"c+vg/games book/a day at the races/2 A DAY AT THE RACES .,3.PERFECT CRIME..,4.BOX OF TRICKS..,5. HOORAY HENRY. 2050 DATA 1. SOLID GOLD.,2.EASY STREET... .,3.MOTHERS RUIN...,4.IRISH HOPE.....,5. THE JOKER..... 870 POSITION 12,6:? #6;S$; S$ 880 POSITION 2,2:? #6; \"the winner is\" 890 FOR N=240 TO 1 STEP-3 900 SOUND O,N,10,8:NEXT N 910 SOUND 0,0,0,0: SETCOLOR 0,7,8 920 SETCOLOR 2,X,Y: SETCOLOR 4,X,Y 930 POSITION 2,5:? #6;WINNER 940 FOR N=1 TO 240 STEP 3 950 SOUND 0,1,10,8 960 NEXT N 970 SOUND 0,0,0,0 980 FOR D=1 TO 200: NEXT D 990 IF RACE< THEN 110 3000 GRAPHICS 0:POKE 752,1 3010 SETCOLOR 2,0,4: SETCOLOR 4,6,2 3020 ? S$;S$;\"** Welcome to **\" 3030 ?:? S$;\" # A DAY AT THE RACES \" 3040 ?:? S$; \"The meeting contains six ra ces,\" 3050 ? \"the race card is shown before ev ery\" 3060 ? \"race begins.\" 3070 ? S$; \"Study the going and the odds 3080 ? \"from it choose a likely winner t and\" hen\" 1000 FOR P=1 TO 10: SOUND 0,30,10,12 1010 NEXT P: SOUND 0,0,0,0 1020 FOR P=1 TO 10: SOUND 0,50,10,10 1030 NEXT P: SOUND 0,0,0,0 1040 GRAPHICS 1:POKE 752,1 1050 SETCOLOR 2,0,4:SETCOLOR 4,4,4: SETCO LOR 0,12,2:POSITION 0,1 1060 ? #6; \"the meeting is over\" 1070 POSITION 1,5:? #6;NAMA$;\" HAS \", TOT (1) 1080 IF I>1 THEN POSITION 1,8:? #6; NAMB $ \" HAS \", TOT (2) 1090 IF I>2 THEN POSITION 1,11:? #6; NAMC $\" HAS \"; TOT (3) 1100 IF 1-4 THEN POSITION 1,14:? #6; NAMD $\" HAS \", TOT (4) 1110 ? \"Press: Restart from the beginnin 3090 ? \"enter its number and your stake when\" 3100 ? \"prompted to do so.\" 3110 ? S$;\"Once all bets are placed, sit 3120 ? \"back and wait for the winner to be\" 3130 ? \"announced.\":? 3140 FOR D=1 TO 100: NEXT D 3150 FOR S=1 TO 15: SOUND 0,40,10,10 3160 NEXT S: SOUND 0,0,0,0 3170 RETURN 9,\" 4000 ? \" How many punters are there (1/4 )?\" 1120 ?\" or: Start again with same pun ters,\" 1130 ?\" or: To quit.\" 1140 GET #1,KEY 1150 KEY=KEY-81 1160 IF KEY1 OR KEY>3 THEN 1140 1170 ON KEY GOTO 10,100,1180 1180 CLR:GRAPHICS 0: END 4010 GET #1,1:1=1-48 4020 IF KI OR I>4 THEN 4010 4030 IF I=1 THEN ?:? \"Enter your name lo ne punter, no more than six letters ple ase:\";: INPUT NAMA: GOTO 4090 4040 POSITION 2,15:? \"Please enter their names with no more than six letters per name....\":? 4050 ? S$;\"1st punters name\";: INPUT NAMA 2000 DATA 1.BOB BOY....,2.DARK SECRET.. .,3.AFRICAN DREAM..,4.ROYAL PARADE...,5. THE OUTSIDER.. 2010 DATA 1.LIKELY LAD.,2. TROTTING TOM.. .,3.DADDYS BOY.....,4.YOUNG PRINCE...,5. NO HOPER...... 2020 DATA 1.LOCAL HERO.,2. RUNNING WILD.. .,3.AUSTRIAN STAR..,4.FINAL FLING....,5. UNLUCKY LOSER. 2030 DATA 1.DICTATOR...,2.DISTANT COUSIN .,3.JOEYS NIGHT....,4.OFF THE RAILS..,5. COR BLIMEY.... 2040 DATA 1.CHATTERBOX.,2.DREAMY LADY... 4060 ? S$;\" 2nd punters name\"; : INPUT N AMB$ 4070 IF I>2 THEN ? S$; $;\" 3rd punters name\"; : INPUT NAMC$ 4080 IF I =4 THEN ? S$;S$; $;\" 4th punter s name\"; : INPUT NAMD $ 4090 POSITION 6,22:? \"..PRESS ANY KEY TO BEGIN..\" 4100 GET #1. KEY 4110 RETURN a day at the races ends "


". "


"SCHIZOFRENIA or how to be in two minds about paranoia .99 SPECTRUM 48K COMMODORE 64 SEORE DO0000 EH LEV Alphonse T. Nurd needs help. His alter-ego has discovered the meaning of independence. If you can discover the secrets of sub-atomic particle separators and clean lifts, this is the game for you. The puzzle of a liftetime... or two. TEKLA The most powerful games in the Universe! Available from all good software shops. In case of difficulty write to: QUICKSILVA Ltd. Liberty House, 222 Regent Street, London W1R 7DB tel: 01 439 0666 Stware Girme "


"Could YOU win the FA.Cup? Over 100,000 Computer Game Fanatics are trying! FOOTBALL MANAGER FOOTBALL MANAGER Football Manager \"Absorbing and realistic Highly recommended Sunday Times February, 1984 \"Completely fantastic I want one!\" Charlie Nicholas, Arsenal Striker in Big K, April 1984 This all-time classic Is now available for the following computers: Amstrad CPC 464 .95... Commodore 64 .95... Spectrum 48K .95... Electron .95... BBC Model B .95... Dragon .95 ... ZX81 16K .95... Vic 20 .95 ALSO AVAILABLE STEETECT GAME OF THE GOLDEN OTTICK AWARD 3K 64 STRINGER Stringer is an arcade adventure game in which you are a press photographer set the task of snatching a shot of a Film Star in an hotel, The game is fantaisingly playable, graphically excellent and, of course Addictivel Available... Commodore 64 .95 Software Star carries the Kevin Toms hallmarks of attention to detail and carefully tuned culty Popular Computing Weekly, February 1985 The game can be incredibly subtle Price of the Week Popular Computing Weekly, February 1985 Available... Spectrum 48K .96 Commodore 648 95. Amstrad CPC 64 18.95 To: Addictive Games Ltd. 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth. Dorset BH2 6HE 1 When you openan Addictive Game, there's new world of discovery Waiting for you. ddictive Please send me: cassette(s) of Football Manager for ............................... (computer) cassette(s) of Stringer for ....................... (computer) cassette(s) of Software Star for... (computer) i enclose cheque postal order for ........ Please debit my Access card No........ Delete as applicable Name. Address Postcode Tel: Accessorders can be telephoned through on 10202 i 296404 For overseas orders, please add .  Addictive Games 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth BH2 6HE Telephone: 0202  296404. "


"HACKER You've stumbled into an unknown computer system. Now what? EQE DIY \"Logon». One word appears on your screen, What do you do now? You don't know the password. You don't even know what computer system, you've hacked into. But you do know that you must find out more. There are no instructions. No rules. No clues. You're completely on your own. ACTIVISION You've found your way in. But is there a way out? HOME COMPUTER SOFTWARE Available on Commodore C64/128 Cassette & Disc, Attari 800. XE XL Cassette & Disc Sinclair ZX Spectrum Cassette Amstrad 464 Cassette Activision UK Ltd, 15 Harley House, Marylebone Road, London NW1 Tel: 01-935 1428 From selected branches of Boots WH Smith, John Menzies, Lasky's Spectrum Greens, Woolworth, Littlewoods and good computer software stores everywhere "


"An Andrew Spencer Elite Joint production AVAILABLE NOW Previously available only from Commodore UK for the CM64, the author Adrian Spencer and Elite now combine to bring you the spectacular ational Intern. BASKETBALL GAME FEATURES Realistic animation with jump, black and steal manoeuvres ball into the basket .Nine fierce skill levels from the utterly pathetic to the For SPECTRUM .99 and AMSTRAD .99 Three fiery opponents with unique intelligent player characteristics Multisection game with end of match presentation sequence Sequel to mensely successful International Soccer JUMAYUN CODE CBM64 SCREEN SHOT International Basketball is from Andrew Spencer author of the Sensational BestSeller' International Soccer Every single Elite product carries the unique 'Elite Holographic Sticker. Make sure your copy does. It's your guarantee of quality Andrew Spencer Mail Order Just send a cheque or PO, payable to Ente' or quote your Visa number EULE -Joint Production Elite Systems Limited Anchor House Anchor Road Aldridge Walsall West Midlands Telephone (0922)55852 Telex 335622 SPETEL G "


"CONTESTANT SET BAR HEIGHT 1.5OM ummer Games II is THE sports simulation of which others have been striving to reach ever since. nent. You've read the rave reviews, Pitstop II is an exciting two player, player v. ad at the amazing graphics and computer motor racing game complete with an gasped at the realistic animation. Now here's your exciting pitstop feature. Fast and furious fun for chance to get your hands on a copy of the game! race fans. And not only that. Our mates at U.S. Gold have FIVE top prize winners will get all THREE classic agreed to throw in some more classic Epyx games Epyx games for their Commodore 64 plus a brand for our top prize winners the amazing Impossible new C+VG Big Red t-shirt. 20 runners-up will get Mission and the incredible Pitstop II! a copy of Summer Games II. Summer Games Il includes events like Cycling, What do you have to do to get your hands on Triple Jump, Fencing, and Kayaking. The aim of the these mega-prizes? Simple. Just identify the game is to make your national team Olympic champictures of the top U.K. athletes, fill in the coupon pions in every sport. One to eight players can and mail it to Computer + Video Games, Summer compete and the program features some neat Games Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringtouches like the opening and closing ceremonies. don Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is What can you say about Impossible Mission that October 16th, normal C+VG competition rules hasn't already been said? This game set a standard apply and the editor's decision is, as ever, final. "


"inne "


"BARGAIN SOFTWARE Dept. CVG9, Unit 1, 1 Esmond Road, London W4 1JG Phone orders welcome. Ring 01-995 2763 GOOD BYTE SKY OK Disc only SPECTRUM Our Price 7.50 11.20 BLACKWYCHE PSI WARRIOR INTERNATIONAL KARATE WIZARDS LAIR BRIAN BLOODAXE HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER 7.50 FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD A VIEW TO A LL  FANTASTIC FOUR  . START 995 WIZARDRY CODE NAME MAT RACING DESTRUCTION SET FRANK BRUNO BORING NIGHTSHADE THEATRE EUROPE 7.50 7.50 7.50 7:50 9.99 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 6.70 5.95 -7.50 7.50 5.95 7.50 795 AMSTRAD WAY OF THE EX FIST  f JUOGERNAUT 750 THAT'S THE SPIRIT SOUTHERN BELLE GAME SORCERY COMBAT LYNX OUN DARACH DALEY THOMPSON DECATHLON FRANK BRUNO EXPLODING FIST A VIEW TO A KILL INTERNATIONAL KARATE 995 INT BASKETBALL 5.95 BORD OF THE RINGS SPECTRUM RRP Price COMMODORE 64 RRP NIGHTSHADE SUMMER CASSI DAMBUSTERS 9.95 FAIRLIGHT 7.50 GAMES II DISK ROBIN OF SHERWOOD 7.50 BEACH HEAD 9.95 NOW GAMES 6 TOP TITLES 8.95 6.70 JUMP JET 9.95 QUAKE MINUS 1 ROCKFORD'S RIOT RAMBO 7.95 5.95 KENNEDY APPROACH NEVER ENDING STORY 9.95 7.50 TOUR DE FRANCE 9.99 STREET HAWK 6.95 5.20 RACING DESTRUCTION SET 12.95 DALEY'S SUPERTEST 6.95 5.25 SPY VS SPY ABU SIMBEL PROFANATION SPEED KING EXPLODING FIST 8.95 6.70 MERCENARY SOUTHERN BELLE 7.95 595 WIZARORY SH ROAD RACE SHADOWFIRE 9.95 750 RAMBO RED MOON DALEY'S SUPERTEST NODES OF YESOD NEVER ENDING STORY MORDEN'S QUEST 6.95 SKY FOX MONOPOLY 9.95 750 TERROMOLINOS 795 METABOLIS 6.95 520 SUPER ZAXXON MEGAHITS (10 TOP TITLES) 19.959.99 F. BRUNO'S BOXING 7.95 JET SET WILLY 6.95 THE BULGE INTERNATIONAL KARATE 6.50 DROPZONE 9.95 INTERNATIONAL BASKETBALL 5.99 4.50 ELITE HYPERSPORTS 7.95 5.95 EXPLODING FIST 9.95 HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER 7.95 5.95 FOURTH PROTOCOL 12 99 HERBERT'S DUMMY RUN 9.95 750 G. GOOCH'S CRICKET 9.95 FRANKIE HOLLYWOOD 9.95 750 HERBERT'S DUMMY RUN FOURTH PROTOCOL 12.95 9.70 HYPERSPORTS 8.95 EMERALD ISLE 6.95 5.99 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 9.95 DYNAMITE DAN 6.95 520 MEGAHITS (10 TOP TITLES) 19.95 DUN DARACH 9.95 750 PITSTOP THE BULGE 9.95 750 THING ON A SPRING 8.95 FRANK BRUNO'S BOXING 6.95 5.20 SUPER HUEY THE ARTIST 12.95 9.99 SHADOWNFIRE 9.95 ALIEN 9.95 750 SPITFIRE 40 NOW GAMES 16 TOP TITLESI 8.95 POLE POSITION 799 299 WIRLEY NURD COMMODORE 64 FIVE A SIDE SOCCER NICK FALDO'S GOLF SPY HUNTER 9.95 WORLD SERIES BASEBALL 7.95 5.95 BLACKWITCH 9.95 GREMLINS 9.95 7.50 INTERNATIONAL SOCCER 14.95 ALL PRICES INCLUDE P&P. OVERSEAS ORDERS PLEASE ADD E1 PER TAPE 9.95 50 7 5 CODE NAME MATHI EVERYONES A WALLY 7.50 7.50 11.20 7.50 9.75 7.50 7.50 6.70 uos WORLD SERIES BALL CAULDRON Sw  9.95 ONE ON ONE Y Aocco.. WIZARD'S LAIR PROJECT FUTURE BEAN JACKS THEATRE EUROPE EXPLODING FIST VIEW TO A KILL DRAGONTORC BRIAN BLOODANE 750 COMMODORE 64 999 650 GAME 670 6.70 7.50 FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST ELITE Goooou rer  HYPERSPORTS SHADOWE SHADOWED m i ted for the most up-to-date 7.50 9.95 7.50 750 11.20 FRANK BRUNO ROBIN OF SHERWOOD NODES OF YESOO BATTLE OF BRITAIN THING ON A SPRING YOU GET 10 FURTHER DISCOUNT SEND CHEQUEPO TO GOODBYTE 94 LEATHER LANE, LONDON ECE ITEL: 01.604 42451 BEWARE. SHE'S COMING.. Compumart LATARI HARDWARE WISTER Atan 800XL Computer & Atari 1050 Disk Drive Home Fing Manager & Pay off Adventure & Atoll Demo 2234 Atari 800XL Computer  Atari 1050 Disk Drive With FREE DOS 2.5) 5159 NEW Atari 130XE Computer (With Lyr. Warranty) . *NEW Atari 130XE Computer & Atari 1050 Disk Drive (with 10 Blank Disks FREE) BLANK DISKS Top Quality 5 Single Sided Double Density Blank Disks Buying in bulk has enabled us to supply these disks at the Best Prices in the U.K. With a LIFETIME WARRANTY Box of 10 5\" SSDD Blank Disks including labels and write protect tabs & Atari 1050 Disk 5989 The mother of harlots System 3 Software Buy 5 Boxes and get a FREE Storage Case worth over  50 SISS/DD Blank Disks in a FREE Perspex Storage Case ONLY . Goode despatched same day. Disks to class post, Hardware-parcel port Please send cheque postal order to CompumartDept. ) 1 Gracedond, Loboru Leics. LET OF Tel: (05099 "


"C+VG ADVENTURE NEWS  Watch out for the RATS! on the game whether they Yes, James Herbert's famous were caused by the horrible novel all about our furry friends nature of RATS or the pressure is the latest book to get the of deadlines we'll probably computer adventure treatment. never know! Andy has also Herbert's novel has been been closely involved in the adapted by a new development development of the Lone Wolf team known as Five Ways series of adventures. The RATS Software. Designer Andy should be coming your way Halliday has apparently suffered very soon watch these pages awful nightmares while working for their paw prints! Come Helbimely speciook of Adyou soon. Te for vite advents, plus all mber issue It's FREE Amazing is egter. Ands and a test games be packout Dack, therAdventures, forums for abof great es, up to the Feason not also be club where of you ly nothi Petitions Coming to a C+VG near you soon. The third Computer + Video Games Book of Adventure! It's FREE with our extremely special December issue. It will be packed with Helpline Hints, plus all the latest games reviews, up to the minute adventure news and a couple of great competitions for you to enter. And it's yours for absolutely nothing. Amazing isn't it? Oh yes, for those of you who missed out on the C+ VG Adventure Club when we launched it a while back, there will also be another chance to join up. Another good reason not to miss Computer + Video Games PIMANIA THE SUNDIAL IS REVEALED! The Golden Sundial of Pi has been claimed and an era in computer gaming has ended On July 22nd 1985, Sue Cooper and Lizi Newman, both of Ilkley in Yorkshire, stood at the mouth of a horse cut into the chalk hill of High and Over, near the villages of Alfriston and Litlington, in the Sussex Downs. As they waited, soaking wet in the pouring rain, the famous Piman clambered out from a clump of bushes and, to the strains of his own signature tune, presented the two lucky ladies with the coveted Golden Sundial. The Piman was, of course, the infamous Christian Penfold in uniform. After drying out, the two ladies were treated to dinner at the Seven Sisters Hotel in Seaford, a couple of miles down the hill. The successful Pimaniacs Sue and Lizi make no bones about having been hooked on the treasure hunt couldn't be called teenage gamesters. Sue is a teacher at Guisley Infants School, and Lizi the proprietor of a music shop in Ilkley. Not normally addicted to computer games, they have been playing Pimania since early 1983 on a Spectrum. When I asked Sue for an estimate of the number of keyboard hours they had put in, she replied: \"Very little, we knew it had to be a horse fairly early on, so most of our time was spent in researching where!\" The horse clue comes from the Pimania map, in the shape of the constellation of Pegasus, the horse. So Sue and Lizi visited public libraries, and consulted books such as Collins Field Guide and Hill Figures, to try to decide on the correct \"horse\" location. They visited quite a few, including one at Westbury, and this was their second attempt at a claim, the first being at its own reward!\" Uffington. I wasn't in Sue's good books The clue that pointed them to when I spoke to her, for my July the correct geographical article had upset her. \"It wasn't location was the fact that fair to suggest it was a rip-off,\" Pegasus is near the Seven she protested. OK apologies Sisters of the Plough. Their for any such implication, I take search, after a misleading it all back. pointer to Cambridgeshire in Although I now live 20 miles the Field Guide, finally put away, I know the area very them on to the Seven Sisters well, for I once lived in cliffs between Seaford Head and Seaford, less than two miles Beachy Head, near to High and away, and my local was the Over. Seven Sisters where Sue and However, they were not Lizi dined. convinced that they had the There's a wonderful view from right spot until they made a High and Over on a clear day, pre-visit the day before. They but although it's a local beauty saw the large compass mounted spot, the horse must have been on a pillar, close to the car park difficult to research, for it is not entrance at this local beauty an ancient monument. It was spot. created by Canadians during They also noticed the the First World War. It has inscription of Psalm 33 on a recently been restored. metal plate set in stone (and \"What will you do with the adjacent to Psalm 34 in the prize?\" I asked. \"That's exactly game) nearby. what we're beginning to But it wasn't until they saw wonder, because never really the view down into the thinking we would win it, we Cuckmere Valley, where the hadn't planned how we could river meanders to its outlet at share it!\" Cuckmere Haven, that they became convinced that this was At the moment, the sundial is indeed the view shown in the swapping mantlepieces every Pimania graphic when looking couple of days, and being through the telescope. shown off to friends and \"We both got immense neighbours. One thing is pleasure from the game, and certain, it will never be melted the research we did leading down and divided Sue and from it,\" she explained. \"We Lizi are quite certain about that! have learned an awful lot about What a wonderful ending to our country in the process,\" the most talked about adventure said Sue. game of all time so far? What about the unlucky ones, There's GOT to be another, and those Pimaniacs who had I can only think of two people gathered for the annual ritual at who could do it. Mel and various spots around the Christian, get your heads countryside in vain? together again fast! I'll never \"If we hadn't won the sundial, doubt you again! it would still have been The full solution to Pimania worthwhile, for the pleasure has been produced in the form gained from Pimania depended of a booklet, and is available to on how much you put into it. Pimaniacs everywhere, by Other Pimaniacs, I am sure, will sending l to Automata, PO agree that their effort brought B ox 78, Portsmouth, Hants. "


"REVIEWS/1 ENTHAR SEVEN Enthar Seven is the latest incredibly atmospheric Lorvox family. adventure from Robico, and the The game is truly huge, with I have yet to complete the most enjoyable and exciting that I 450 locations and 80 objects. I've game, having done about 73%. have played to date. only seen half of the objects, but am determined to do so. Let's BBC cassette owners go out and cannot imagine what the face it I'm hooked! One part I and buy a disk drive now. Disk rest consist of! particularly enjoyed was sneaking owners read on, then go and buy There is so much to say about up on an extremely unfriendly the game! the game in such a short space, security camera and rendering it The program comes in two that I'll have to give you only a useless great fun! formats, a twin disk pack for 40 brief idea of game play. If your input isn't understood track users, and a single floppy The planet is split into seven and you repeat the same on 80 tracks. I played a pre sections and by use of the command, the program will get production version in the 40 teleport, instead of a clock as in quite upset! This is all part of the track format. Lords of Time, you can jaunt fun, and in keeping with the On loading, a colourful title around the planet, solving bits of humour that runs throughout the page invites you to either play the each section before making your game. adventure, or to read other way back to the metal cubicle. LOOK AT is permissible, along information about Robico. This is It seems that each section can with many other sentence really rather good advertising, as be partially solved with objects commands. This is particularly the spare space on the program found in that sector, before well implemented, for if the word disk is filled with screen shots of coming across a more sticky following LOOK AT is not other games. Inventive stuff! problem. understood, the general A detailed introduction to I can't guarantee this, as surroundings are described Enthar Seven explains that you the author Robert O'Leary has instead. This is a lot better than a have, er ... \"borrowed\" a space moved some of the objects around \"I can't see a...\" message. hopper, and then realised that you for the final version. Typing USE (always a sign of can't fly it! Remember the Martian desperation!) produces a very Things seem to be going well Chronicles by Rad Bradbury on helpful message, and SCORE until the hopper's orbit around telly, with those wonderful shots of produces an hilarious one! Enthar Seven begins to decay. wind-swept plains, and huge There is good use of Mode 7 That is the first problem. Getting Martian constructions? This is just colour (which can be switched off off the space ship before you spiral what comes to mind when you by people who like b&w eye into the planet is the second find yourself staggering blindly strain!) and the INVENTORY and This is fairly easy to achieve, through a barren wilderness with LOOK commands handle objects but when you end up in pitch only eight moves before you very well; a paragraph is darkness with just a space suit and explode! presented instead of a long list helmet to keep you company, you There are caverns, houses, even AND is inserted before the realise that something is seriously forests, swamplands, high-security final item. wrong. areas, a barren wilderness, vast You can do some very complex It took me about 20 minutes to radiation poisoned wastelands, a things with some of the objects. sort that out, but once done, the dried-up lake, a river, and an For example, should you need a fun really begins! The text is acid pool, and even a storyline vacuum cleaner, and find one that lengthy, interesting and other than your own, about the doesn't work, you will have to remove the bag and repair it with another object, and attach a power cell, before you can proceed with the task in hand! The \"nuts and bolts\" of the programming are good, with useful commands such as \"@BUFFSAVE\" which will store your current position in memory. It works like a saved game on disk, but is much faster and very useful for poor old single-drive owners like me! Unlike another disk adventure I recently reviewed, this one doesn't \"hang up\" if you have the wrong disk in at any time, it simply informs you something is wrong, and asks you to insert the correct disk before continuing. The response times are not all that fast, and the longest is 24 seconds. However, all the commands can be abbreviated, and this speeds up the access time to an average of about five seconds. Enthar Seven comes in a very professional looking package, with an SOS card, an adventurer's notepad, and detailed instructions, all titled with Robico's smart gold on black logo. It's available for BBC B on disk only, from Robico Software of Mid-Glamorgan, and costs .95 for 40 track version, .95 for the 80 track version. Jim Douglas Personal Rating: 10 doesn't start to say it! SUPER GRAN This adventure is released by With some help from a younger bedroom. puzzles that take months to solve. Tynesoft, but written by those well cousin who was really into Super Despite the starting difficulties. The graphics are of the same known characters from Adventure Gran, I soon found myself outside all was not lost, for at this point high standard as those seen in International, Brian Howarth and Seunner Campbell's house, where the adventure started to show its Gremlins, and the text input Mike Woodroffe, who recently cries for help were coming from true class. As the plot unfolds, it allows for more than one wrote Gremlins. an upstairs window. places one puzzle after another in command to be entered on one This adventure follows very This, I thought, would be the your path. Finding the right line. The whole thing is rounded closely the format used with trigger that would send Super answer may mean a lot of running off with a light hearted sense of Gremlins, down to the same style Gran leaping into action and save about, and getting your timing humour. split screen graphics and text whoever was in distress! But just right. Super Gran The Adventure display. absolutely nothing happened! The puzzles are of an easy is available for the Spectrum, As I took my first steps as Super I just knew that somehow Super level, and best suited to young Commodore 64 and Amstrad, with Gran, I found myself in the town Gran could use that pole to vault adventurers or perhaps those full colour graphics and of Chisleton on a quest to recover up into the window, but how? I looking for a small fun adventure Animation, and in text only for the the Mayor's chain of office and a was just about to call it a day to help while away a few hours. BBC, Electron, and Commodore valuable art treasure, stolen by when I found VAULT POLE After a shaky start, I found it very 16. 5 Scunner Campbell and his bunch worked, and there I was standing enjoyable to play, even though it Paul Coppins of cronies. inside Scunner Campbell's does not contain the type of Personal Rating: 7 "


"C+VG ADVENTURE REVIEWS/2 TERRORMOLINOSI Terrormolinos is the product of political spoofs Denis Through two twisted minds. They the Drinking Glass, and The belong to Peter Jones and Tebbit. Trevor Leever, who brought Roger called on 17 year old you the ultimate social James to help him out with climbing game, Hampstead. some machine code on the Pete and Trev, as they like BBC version of Hampstead. to be called, enjoy a good James converted the BBC joke and hate adventure Basic program for Denis into games based on swords and 6502 code, and on this they sorcery. \"There're so many have since based their own other things people could Adventure writing system. write games about.\" said Pete, As time passed their \"But they don't!\" conversion system has been They also don't like refined and by the time computer programmers as a Terrormolinos came up. \"we breed: \"They all wear anoraks had a system that worked and have spots!\" much more efficiently than the Pete and Trev like to think original.\" said James. of themselves as all Its advantage over the Quill roundmulti-media is that of memory entertainers. Both have been requirements. for by using involved in a comedy duo compressed text and much called the Three Ronnies. smaller tables, space becomes groups called The Dave available for reasonable because all the band members graphics to be added. were called Dave and The James added: \"The only real Self-Righteous Brothers. They problem we can foresee is the also produced a stunning pictures. At the time of video all about their home writing, they are being town of Slough. Which is designed and programmed in where their latest game Australia, and no one in begins. Britain has yet seen them. Nor The odd couple developed do we know how much the game using the Quill and memory they will occupy!\" then handed it over to the I always thought saucy Melbourne House boffins to postcard humour was convert into machine code. essentially British, and after Terrormolinos is being re learning that the inclusion of programmed in machine code \"Leather Head\" in Sherlock from the Leever and Jones was purely accidental, as it Quill, prototype by James was thought to be a fictitious Byrne and Roger Taylor. town, I wonder how much the Roger's own games have Aussies know about picture already been enjoyed by posted many. He is the anthor of Regret having taken that Peach, are having a whale of a package holiday to Spain? Still time but can you, and did you nursing an overdose of sun and a remember your swimsuit? gippy tummy? Now that the hols There's plenty to do other than are over, you can relive those bathing though a visit to the happy(7) moments spent with your red-light district maybe, a coach wife Beryl and kids Ken and trip or two, or perhaps some Doreen by visiting Terrormolinos souvenir hunting in the tourist everyone's nightmare holiday quarter. resort. The restaurant is to be sniffed Starting off in the smelly at. A typical menu might be: Hot hallway of your exotic abode in Lancashire Pot, Patatas Fritas, Slough, it's not long before the Spotty Disks and Smoke taxi is hooting out front to take Salmonella. How could you resist? you to your holiday flight, and As you can see, Terrormolinos you're just about to miss it. has a lot of laughs hidden within Chances are you're still it, but it has problems too. packing, and trying to remember I played a pre-production where you left the passport. Spectrum version of There're other essentials too, such Terrormolinos, written on the as tickets, camera the photos, Quill and without graphics. remember? and the rest of the The final game will feature family. If you can find them! graphics some of which you Once these little problems are can see on this page. Not to be sorted out, and some careful outdone by \"landscaping\" and planning of moves is needed to \"scrolling 3D graphics\", the succeed, you're up and away, authors Trevor Leever and Peter economy class, in a 747. Jones have invented the ultimate Your holiday really starts when graphics system that present you arrive, after a horrendous technology can support coach journey, in the Plaza of Saucivision! your resort. At last you can begin This enables snapshots you take to relax after the hectic last during the game to develop on minute problems back at home. screen before your very eyes, an Or can you? innovative and potentially As you enter the lobby of your hilarious approach, since not all chosen hotel you are greeted by a of the snaps are likely to turn out friendly Spaniard: \"Many nice as you expect ... time is for you! Go wine-tasting, Terrormolinos is a fun see vinegar pumps into big lorry, adventure. It's only a game, but go to Ingelese supermarket!\" ... not having taken my holiday You can almost see the famous at the time of writing, I'm glad it's Manuel from Fawlty Towers time Italy for me this year! and time again as you continue Keith Campbell through the game! At the hotel, two of your fellow Personal Rating: (so passengers, Mr Snargsby and Miss far) 8 "


"C+VG ADVENTURE REVIEWS/3 MORDON'S QUEST Once in a while, along comes penetrate the swirling clouds! confidently. \"Not in THIS jungle command is recognised, then the an adventure which halts family Arriving coldfoot in the jungle, he isn't!\" says Tarzan. computer will reply PARDON? If life for a few weeks, the sort that the way leads along a twisting. On and on through the jungle, one word is recognised and the demands attention night and day turning path. As the path narrows, and soon the adventure appears to other is not, then the reply is until all its secrets are unfolded, the plot thickens like Daddy's close up at a dead end. But YOU CAN'T. all its locations explored, and all Sauce (and you know who is HIS something quite revolutionary lies Since this is also the reply to its treasures safely stored! favourite) as two simultaneous in wait, pointed to by an apparent fully valid commands that are Mordon's Quest is one of that problems prevent onward flaw in directional logic. invalid actions in the game, it rare breed. It is a game with so movement for the explorer. Before long I was applying becomes a little confusing in much text and so many locations This is the point where one some pressure to the problem, trying to sort out whether it is the that it is difficult to believe that it family, at least, was all set to stay and was soon enjoying a intended action that is not comes on tape. up for the night, until the errant refreshing if dangerous swim, and possible, or whether different The objective, which you are son Neil arrived home from a exploring a complex of metallic vocabulary is required. called upon to fulfill by Mordon school trip to the Commodity corridors. HELP always produces TRY himself, should you find him, is to Exchange and I think the A nice feature is that the player DRAWING A MAP, and would retrieve the seven component commodity was lager! is allowed six lives, so if killed best be removed altogether, for it parts of a machine designed to \"Solve the problem, Neil!\" I through some foolhardy deed, the is rarely want of a map that halts perpetuate reality, which was commanded wearing my all game can be continued from that an adventurer's progress! broken up by Bostater in a greedy powerful wizard's hat. And he did point just as if it had been saved. Mordon's Quest is an exciting attempt to gain immortality. As just like that! There are over 150 locations in and humourous adventure with a well as finding parts of the As well has having plenty of this text only game, and all of range of problems from the \"think machine, there are treasures to be text, Mordon's Quest also has them well described. Although not a bit\" to the \"head banger\" collected en route as your reward. many of those deliciously funny all are useful by way of being variety The game commences in a and exciting surprises that make essential to the problems, they do It is from Melbourne House, fairly ordinary house with an an adventure a pleasure to play. contribute to a very realistic and available for 48K Spectrum, unusual bathroom. There are a always interesting and never atmosphere, painting the picture Amstrad and Commodore 64, couple of locked doors that predictable. far more effectively than any priced .95. A very reasonable provide frustration, and since After the brush with the little graphics could do. Oh happy price for an adventure of this there seems to be little of interest chef and his lethal cuisine, I was purist! quality. I have no hesitation in other than a blanket and a all set to relax for a while. But The response is machine-code recommending it to hardened newspaper, outside is where the suddenly, \"A muscular bronze fast, and the vocabulary large. adventurers. action must be. Trouble is, the skinned man wearing a loin cloth Over 400 words are claimed. Most Oh, and by the way -if you weather is rather inclement and leaps from the trees and, holding commands can be of two words still can't unlock that door south the house is enveloped in all a knife at your throat, says: \"Hello only, but some full sentences are of the landing, don't worry! You varieties of mist, fog, and mist ducks! You must be the new possible too, although I have the may have better luck in Bostafer's mixed with fog. adventurer I've heard so much feeling that the trailing words are Revenge, the sequel which is The adventurer is well advised about.\" stripped off and the sense derived promised shortly, and which to take shelter again after He goes on to demand that I from the first two. you're sure to want after playing thoroughly exploring the exterior, guess who is the king of the This leads me to my only this one! for then a chink of light may jungle three wronguns and it's criticism the replies, or some of Personal Rating: 10 appear to help the player heads he wins! \"The lion!\" I reply them. If neither word of a Keith Campbell AND NOW WIN A COPYIII THE QUESTIONS 1. Name the famous Melbourne House adventure featuring Thorin and Gandalf: 2. What arcade game featuring Karate was released by Melbourne House during the summer: C&VG/MELBOURNE HOUSE MORDON'S QUEST COMPETITION My answers are: Name Address Melbourne House are offering 30 copies of Mordon's Quest to Computer + Video Games Adventurers, absolutely free! To win one of these coveted prizes, simply answer the questions on the form, and send it to Computer + Video Games. Mordon's Quest Competition, Priory Court. 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU to arrive no later than October 16th. The first 10 correct solutions opened on 17th October from Spectrum, Amstrad and Commodore owners respectively, will receive a free copy of Mordon's Quest. 3. What doctor featured as the companion to a famous detective in a Melbourne House adventure released last year? Computer you own (tick box) Spectrum C64 D Amstrado 4. Name a famous heath near London that lends its name to a spoof adventure game for people who wish to climb the social ladder? "


"COMMODORE SOFTWARE THROUGH THE POST. ( WITHOUT PAYING THROUGH THE NOSE. Simply send off this page PLUS ONE OF THESE PROGRAMS FR and you'll get: SOFT POST MAGAZINE FREE. PLUS ONE OF THESE PROGRAMS FREE. Tick the box against the software of your choice. COMMODORE 64 VIC 20 Robert Carrier's Menu Sargon Il Chess (cart.) A Planner (cass.) Omega Race (cart.) Know your Own IQ (cass.) Road Race (cart.) Patrick Moore's COMMODORE 16/Plus 4 Astronomy (cass.) Harbour Attack (cass.) Space Sweep (cass.) I would like to receive a regular issue of Soft Post. Town a Commodore (delete as applicable): VIC 20/64/16/Plus 4. Title (tick): Initials Mr. Mrs. Miss Surname OR, IF YOU INTRODUCE A FRIEND. Fill in your name and address and your friend's below. Now you can choose one item from either list, just tick a box. VIC 20 COMMODORE 64 Programmer's Reference Programmer's Reference Guide (book) Guide (book) Introduction to BASIC II Fantasy Five (cassette) (cassette) COMMODORE 16/Plus 4 Jack Attack (cartridge) I would like to introduce my friend who owns a Commodore (delete as applicable): VIC 20/64/16/Plus 4. Title (tick): Initials Mr. Mrs. Miss Surname OFTWARE Address Address No more traipsing around the shops trying to find the software you want. Let Commodore post it to you. Simply make your selection from our Soft Post magazines which we'll send you every few months (they're packed full of software information) SUA BELA but there's no obligation to buy anything, if you don't want to WIDEST CHOICE OF COMMODORE SOFTWARE ANYWHERE. In every magazine there'll be special offers: an enormous selection of great software at amazing prices-and not just games, but educational, business and home use, too. (Sometimes you'll even find peripherals at special prices.) Postcode STD. Code Telephone Postcode STD. Code Telephone ONLY ONE APPLICATION PER HOUSEHOLD. PLEASE ALLOW 28 DAYS FOR DELIVERY. commodore HARD SOFT TO BEAT Post to: SOFT POST,FREEPOST,Commodore Business Machines (UK) Ltd., Corby, Northamptonshire NN1Z IBR 80 "


"THE LIVING ADVENTURE MOVIE With SENSORY ANIMATION DRAGONITE MOVIE ULTO naruto THE LOST REALMS OF THE THUT LOST KINGPOM I BRIGA HE DRUIDS LAST SANCTUARY TROLLSTONES TODO HELLS CAVERN D 99. I WISP WOOD FOREST QUOD E ONS MERDEN THE LOST VAULTS OF STONEWAYS 08 WEIRDHENGE WITCHWOODS COVIC HE DRAC TEETH 60 sain LOST REALM TORHENGE ADO HIDDENLIES THE SANCT OF HALGOR THE GREAT WOOD or THE WEST THE CURSED CRYPT OF THE WESTERN KINOS LAY WITHIN At last, it's been released! Dragontorc of Avalon, the chart-topping Spectrum adventure movie is now available for the Amstrad CPC 464 and CPC 664. The story so far-Evil Morag the Shapeshifter has snatched the crown of Dumnovia, struck from the legendary Dragontorc of Avalon, and now only needs the remaining four to gain total mastery of Saxon Britain. As Maroc the Mage you must challenge Morag through strife torn kingdoms to reach the crowns first and release Merlyn, your old tutor, from Morag's dark spell. You'll stumble across secret crypts, magic circles of stone and ancient leylines which will be your main route to the crowns. A free map included with the adventure will help you plot your course and a scenario full of clues will prove invaluable in your desperate fight against Morag.But be prepared for Sensory Animation This programming breakthrough gives lifelike emotions to the many characters you'll meet on your journey. Upset them and any chance you have of reaching the crowns may be dashed forever. Hundreds of breathtaking 3D locations myriads of creatures ana over 200 discoveries to make add up to an adventure that could take you a lifetime to completel Dragontorc of Avalon-The living adventure movie. Now available for the Amstrad CPC 464 and CPC 664 .95. Also available for all 48K Spectrums .95 (GSH) S M HEWSON CONSULTANTS o come . Fantasia Diamond Graphic Adventure Anstrad CAC 44 and CPC 664-67.95 For all 4K Spectrums, BBC Model B. Acom Electron 67.95 Technician Ted Arcade Adventure Amstrad CPC 464-67.95 For all 48% Spectrums .95 56b Milton Trading Estate, Milton, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RX For a mail order send cheque/postal order made payable to Hewson Consultants. For credit card sales state your Access Barclaycard number and enclose a specimen signature. Don't forget to include your own name and address Heathrow International Simulation Amerado 4 and CRC 664-.95 For all 48% Spectrums .95 Zapp Machine Code Utility For Amstrad CRC 464 and CPC 664 .95 As part of our continuing development of innovative software we are always happy to evaluate programs sent to us with a view to publication "


"C+VG ADVENTURE REVIEWS/4 CASTLE DRACULA PRED MOON This is a light hearted little they are seemingly at random adventure, with simple but Once, after only one move, I entertaining problems. The local received TYPE MISMATCH AT town is being terrorised, you must LINE nnn. After receiving such a get into the castle and finish off message the only way to play on, the bloodsucker. is to reload, a tiresome task. The author, with questionable There are various errors which wisdom, has decided that only do not bring the game to a three letters of each command screaming halt, but are errors in shall be accepted. This is fine, the logic. For example, after but it makes it hard for the player entering the castle and having the to decide whether it is possible to portcullis slam down behind you FEED or to FEEL! a la Castle of Riddles it is Unfortunately there is a rather quite possible to lower a rope and tragic error in the program. The climb down outside the castle, first hint appeared when I was then walk back in through the told: MISTAKE AT LINE 10, but closed portcullis! when I pressed the key, the These problems seem to be all message HA HA, THAT HAD the more sad when you take into YOU WORRIED! was shown, and account that the game itself is the game resumed. All very really rather good. clever, until the game had been there are some truly gruesome in progress for some time, when a puns, and some quite exciting relatively simple command LOOK moments. There are three mazes produced: TOO MANY FORs AT of the drop-an-item variety, and LINE nnn. some very interesting puzzle \"Ho hum,\" I thought, and hit a objects. Having seen only about key. Imagine my horror to find 75% of the locations I spent that this was a bona fide, 24 carat, too much time having to reload! 100%, grade A ERROR! I can't really tell you about the Now, being a true adventurer, I ending, except to say that it looks tried to cheat! The listing has fun. Yes, I managed to cheat a been tampered with, however, to little! prevent more than a few Jim Douglas consecutive lines to be viewed, and my attempts to correct the Personal rating: 7 errors were fruitless. I can't really (for a working copy). 1 explain why the faults occur, and for one like mine! Once upon a time, when the this point has not been overlooked moon was still red, there lived a either. magician. He, or she, for you can The adventure hots up when you never be quite sure when sorcery find yourself inside a cave system is involved, was not the best which leads inside an abandoned magician in the world. But it was castle. As you enter the pothole, already the age of failing powers, something hisses SATARH and, when simple spells worked best. going down to investigate, I found This is the tale of how that myself face to face with giants, the magician kept Magik alive.\" wizard Zuix (who is quite a coward) Another near classic storyline and an enormous rat. has been manipulated and turned As with all the latest Level 9 into an excellent adventure by the adventures, this one contains Level 9 crew. graphics for all locations and, This adventure concerns a time considering there are over 200 when Magik was still rise in the locations, that makes for a lot of world, a time when the moon was pictures! red and filled the plains of earth With so many of them you might with a mystical radiance. expect the text to be somewhat Unfortunately, the moon has limited, but it is more than since lost its splendour, and Magik adequate. The quality of the has faded from the earth. A few graphics is fairly high, too, magicians, though, constructed the although they do tend to become Moon Crystal, which radiates somewhat repetitive. Magik all around Baskalos, but it This game MUST rate as the best has been stolen and it is your task adventure I have played this year. to find it and replace it in its It is streets ahead of Level 9's cradle in the Moon Tower. previous games, and they are good The use of Magik is necessary enough! I can't wait to see what to complete various parts of the they will produce when they start game, and you are thus equipped writing games for disk users! with a number of spells, and a list of their functions. For example, to use the FIND spell you need a lamp, or the Simon Marsh Magik has no point to focus. It is well known that iron prevents the use of Magik, and  Personal Rating: 10 CASTLES AND The presentation is on near A4 THE AMSTRAD player to a remote location. KINGDOMS size pages of good quality paper, PENTACLE Valid verbs are built into the and each game comes complete program and are rather limited ADVENTURE By Bob Liddil with a short introduction to its in scope. They consist of Take, Virgin Books/.99 scenario. CREATOR Drop, Lock, Unlock, Kill, Wait, Castles and Veteran C&VG readers are By Clive Gifford Read, Help, Quit, Inventory, Kingdoms contains 15 you still there, Bill Stanton?) may Interface Publications/.99 Score, and Jump, so it can be adventure listings in Basic for the think this sounds vaguely familiar, Not an adventure game, but seen that a game built using this Commodore 64. Each adventure is and so they might. a book consisting mainly of the program will consist mainly of complete in itself, and the I was very much reminded of adventure generator program fighting monsters and not collection is loosely tied together The Captain 80 Book of listing in Basic. The program contain subtle problems. under the theme of Graylock lore, Basic Adventures allows the user to enter location The creator listing is set in the mythical kingdom of (reviewed February 1983) so I dug and object descriptions, accompanied with instructions Graylock. out the said work and discovered together with exits, monsters, on how to use it and some The titles, most of which are that the author of both books is strength etc. advice on how to get the most written by Dan and Ed Gaggiani, Robert Bob Liddil. The would be adventure out of it. A sample adventure is range from The Brass Helm Two of the games in Castles writer is aivan options to specify writer is given options to specify provided in data form that can through Revenge of Balrog, to and Kingdoms (Revenge of the number of locked doors be input to the program. The Blue-Eyed Thief. Balrog, and Fortress at Time's between locations and where The print used for the listing The listings are clearly printed End) are translations from original they are to be placed, the is quite large and easily legible, with double spacing, and are so TRS-80 adventures by Don and player's starting strength and so it should not deter those who legible as to be as easy to enter as Freda Boner, in Captain 80. the weight of each object. Many have the patience to type in you are ever likely to find. Being If adventures are your game, monsters must be killed and relatively long listings. The for the Commodore, the lines are the Commodore 64 your treasures collected before the textual part of this book is well short (the maximum length of a computer, and you're happy to game is won. An object can be written and easy to follow program line on the Commodore type in listings to save a bob or classified as weapon, treasure I think the Amstrad is 80 characters) and they are two, then this book will keep you or unlocking device if desired Pentacle Adventure uncomplicated with the word happily occupied during the There is also a magic word Creator represents good ELSE, a powerful word unknown winter months! facility and a jump command value at .99. to this computer. Keith Campbell that can rapidly transport the Keith Campbell "


"C+VG ADVENTURE HELPLINE HELP! was buy funneds sols from Darte establiship Got a problem? Don't suffer in silence. Write to Keith Campbell's Adventure Helpline, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The Adventure Helpline (tm) is a service provided by the IDEAs Corp Valley. \"I'm going to send some of my maps to Tony In his penthouse HANDS ACROSS Bridge...\" adds Geoff, not apartment in the wanting to put his eggs all in one basket! You traitor IDEAs Central THE WATER Geoffrey! And you dare to ask building Keith for a t-shirt! Well I hope it Campbell, one of doesn't fit! the few survivors \"My plea, beg, demand, Marco van Slageren, from request, appeal, desire is that of the corporate Amsterdam, has been on an you exercise your considerable purges which interplanetary tour from Sonex influence over Pete Austin and swept throught the towarten, via Jubilex, Brenon the all-seeing Mr Scott the first, 1, Earth, Koranth and to produce their adventures on software industry tware industry Metropolis. CARTRIDGE! It would make when the IDEAs He needs sols from Darten to them so much quicker to load, Corp was buy fuel to reach Valkyron, and and stop (almost) pirating.\" establishing itself. can't find any! And he's a bit I don't know about my busies himself upset by a man on Sonex who influence, I think the great god keeps throwing him out of his Market Forces might be a little with an intricate house! He's trying to trace stronger somehow, for who and time someone who can help with would buy it in preference to a consuming task. The Tracer Sanction. tape? After all, people wouldn't His job is to collect Marco Pendino writes from be able to 'swap' a copy with Milan with some clues and a and collate all the their friends, would they? Come plea. On Titan, in Gruds in on. I know you're all at it! data relevant to Space, he has the box and adventure games bomb what shall he do next? A message from Norway and dispense brings news of Message words of wisdom from Andromeda. You to people with can't open the plate in the TALES OF problems. Using mirror room, but if you point ANCIENT BUGS his vast database the rod at it something will happen. \"It seems to be an and his IDEAS ultrasonic key,\"explains Jan Corp mainframe Tore Nordeng of Bardufoss. Keith supplies Interesting eh? Troubled in Tir Na Nog? adventure addicts Sending in some tips on The complete solution is Eureka. Matthew Fletcher of hampered by an error, writes with instant cures Gloucester, who has solved all Andrew Hartley of Carnforth. five adventures, says he is no The ancient script found in the other related nearer to that elusive phone library has an error in the diseases. Here is number! inscription. When decoded it Is there anyone out there who should read CROSS ROAD TEN the latest print-out has not solved the adventures, N. from the top but has any ideas how to go Craig Davis was recently floor... about obtaining the number, stuck trying to unblock the ice asks Matthew? Hurry if you tunnel in Pharoah's have, for time is running out! Tomb. Rainer Fuchs of \"Catface\" from Bexley asks: Frankfurt writes: \"Although the \"Is there a bug in Commodore description tells us that there is Eureka Arthurian? He can't a tunnel, I doubt that it really get back from the abbey, and exists. wonders if he is just paranoid? \"You can move freely south, Tim Hughes is bursting with west and down. Of course, you good adventure ideas, but can melt the ice, but that admits he has no skill in doesn't seem to have any effect, programming. Is there anyone and is unnecessary to solve the living near his home in adventure. Dovecot, Liverpool, who can \"By the way, you asked what knock out a bit of code with we, the readers, think of your ease, and would like to join hints. I like them the way they forces with him? are not too easy so there C. Smith of Wigan wants a remains some work to be done!\" small loaf from the grocer's and In answer to Robert Robinson some way of illuminating his who was troubled by a possible shelter in Ground Zero, as bug in Eureka. Glen Terlouw he keeps tripping up. of Ridderkerk in Holland writes: Please tell us someone, \"No, your tape is OK. There is please, in Pub Quest, how no error that stops you do you cross the road? completing the game, but it will Geoffrey Pickard of Great not help to walk through the Mistley, Basildon, sent in a map village quickly you need an of Twin Kingdom object from there.\" Werner is an Austrian student who has several adventures behind him, and if I could decipher his signature, I could tell you his surname! Having solved such classics as Claymorgue Castle, Knight's Quest, and Kentilla, he claims he finds difficulty playing in English \"But,\" he says, \"I feel that English is probably the best language for adventures because German would be too complicated.\" Werner comes up with his own method of ranking adventures. Claymorgue has 40 \"genuine riddles' and is one of the best after Knight's Quest (55) and Kentilla (43) although his favourites are the Mysterious Adventures (riddle average 22) Hulk, he says, was disappoint only had 16! Now before anyone suggests that we use his method to rate games instead of our \"personal rating system, just remember that, using this method, the game must be completed before remainot to ng band "


"of course, ourselves! Callaghan of Birmingham. Plus, Colwyn Bay, and Eddie Brecon, Timothy Smith of Ridderkerk, K. Taylor of of Bexley, Glen Terlouw of Cowan of Hamilton, M. Criddle Shuttleworth of Orpington, Scott Karen Steven of Brecon, Lenny Cheam, Ann Martin of Arisaig, Dingwall, Debra Long of Park, Don MacLeod of Milan, Nick Phillips of Merton Carnforth, Marco Pendini of to: Andrew Hartley of Thanks for the help this month, EUREKA ARTHURIAN: You cannot enter the village until the man in black has been killed in the woods. CARIBBEAN: In the crusher? Do nothing until reduced to one third, then use pump. The way off the conveyor belt is EEUW JUMP GERMAN: To pass the guard who shouts HEIDI, make sure that you are carrying one, and wear the uniform! Being generous with cigarettes at bedtime could help stain a blanket. ROMAN: Distract Nero by lighting a fire under this bedroom window, then nip into the palace via the secret passage to get the Talisman. ADVENTURE QUEST: If the Djinn is troubling you, just blow your troubles away! AFRICAN SAFARI: Don't take the iron bar on the boat to avoid a lightning strike. RETURN TO EDEN: To avoid being thrown off the autoscythe, get off before it dumps its load. Climb the weeder after it unloads, for a free ride through the (deadly) wheatfield. HOBBIT: Get caught by goblins to find the small curious key. AZTEC TOMB: Cross the river by dropping the plank. Not found it? Try to aspire to great heights! FANTASIA DIAMOND: For a musical opening, make sure the musicians have the tools of their trade, and some music to play! TIR NA NOG: If touched by a Sidhe, press SYMBOL SHIFT 6 at once, and repeat if necessary, to restart the game from the current position. The Sidhe are put in their place if Cuchlainn is carrying two or more weapons. By selecting one of them and lunging at the Sidhe's advance, it is dissipated for a few seconds. QUEST: If yours is a 40 foot two-headed . problem, just say YES and SWORD! No more! Examine the globe of light for an aMACRing experience! CASTLE OF TERROR: For a maiden, push brick by skeleton, and on up to the banqueting hall. Throw the rope across the pit. (Did you forget to bring it from the mill?) After you have bought the old man a drink, it's not your round any more, so hang about awhile... More than you thirst may be quenched! VALKYRIE 17: A key is needed to enter Room 20, get it from the blonde. A strong vest is useful to avoid sniper fire. SHERLOCK: You can only get to Old Mill Road when taken for a free ride, and that comes right at the end! ZIM ZALA BIM: Flint and plank are not useful. SPHINX: To pass the goblins, throw the dragon's teeth at them. SEDATIVES SELECTED problems start to get difficult!\" always loses interest when the with this one. The trouble is, he brother David won't be helping claims Paul, but adds: \"My with the game later though,\" going \"I'm sure it will help admit to finding it pretty hard preparation, although they reading the books in So Paul and a friend are with Sherlock. copy on hearing of their success promised Paul and David a free the Rings! Melbourne House for the next biggy Lord of Paul is getting all geared up run at about 10.45! has now been re-scheduled to explain that the required train Paul Cunningham wrote to they wrote up the solution, for exact time of the train when Seems like they forgot the brothers are so brainy he asked. How come the two Cunningham Leatherhead to King's Cross. in vain for the 11.15 from sleuth Paul Wadsworth waiting Last month we left Sherlock CLUES ADVENTURE TIMETABLE LEATHERHEAD each issue? you only want one review in not be a bad thing, but would it can be judged! That might "


"September 13th sees the launch of a new age in computing. A brand new magazine for the serious computer user... COMPUTING AGE Issue one will include \"The leap to 16 bits\", how compact discs will revolutionise data storage, elctronic mail, how and why? And much more. If you take your computing seriously, order Computing Age now! 6. ZE ol CUT PRICE SOFTWARE UnitSoft HARDWARE AFFORDABLE PRODUCTS GEWI LTD Gunshot Joycare If you order 50 or over 104 136 GRAM STREET GLASGOW GI COMMODORE 64 Nodes of Yesod Spectrum RRP PRICE Commodore PRICE Amstrad 14 95 10.00 Elite 14.95 10 00 Exploding Fist A Unte ASUS Geld 795 5.90 Blackwitche Dambusters 995 7.00 Pitstop 2 9.95 700 Dun Daragh Daley Supertest 6.90 5.00 Exploding Fist 995 7.00 F Bruno Boxing 8.95 6.50 Street Hawk 6 90 5.00 Frankie to Hwood 9 95 700 Hypersports 9.95 7.00 Nodes of Yesod 9.95 7.00 Sorcery Spy vs Soy 9.95 6.50 F Bruno Boxing 7.95 5.75 Beach head Rockford's Riot 9.95 6.50 Quske Minus 1 995 700 Raid Over Moscow 95 7.00 Frank Bruno's 695 5.00 Beach had 2 Our Darah 995 6.50 Sky FOR 9 957 00 Stanon Exploding Fist 8.95 6.25 Sabre Wu Nic Faida Golf 995 7.25 Underwurde 9.95 700 Arnhem Robin of Sherwood 995 7.25 Me Do 9.95 7.25 DT Decathlon Impossible Mission 9.95 7.25 Daley's Supertest 7.90 6.00 Boulderdash 9.95 200 Hysports 7.95 5.50 Robin of Sherwood 995 7.25 Ashkeron 6.95 5.00 JS W2 6.95 5.20 Summer 2 disc 14.95 10.00 Code Name Mat 2 8 .95 6.95 in Karate 650 5.00 Soy Say 9.95 6.50 Dragonto 7.95 5.50 Select 1 12.50 5.00 Dropzone 9.95 7.25 Int Basketball 5.95 4.95 Cauldron 7.99 5.99 Shadow Shadow 9.95 Spectrum CBM64Amstrad Southern Belle 795 5.95 McGgBong 9.99 8.00 ders over 20 tree game will Eve of the Moon 9.95 6.95 Speed King 9.95 725 be sent with order P&P included Overseas ordur 50 per Tape For mail order please send cheques POS payable to CPS Visa Accessorders by phone welcome to CUT PRICE SOFTWARE, 4 Slacksbury Hatch, Harlow, Essex CM19 4ET Tel: (0279) 24433 (24 hr ansaphone Shadowfee Hypersons Lords of Midnight 750. G Gooch's Test Cricket 7.50 Exploding Fist 7.50 5.95 Terromainos Nodes of Yesoda Ghost 7.50 16.85 7.50 Kemaston Interface Turbo Interface Nightshade ww Exploding Fist Highway Encounter 750 Ente a 11 20 Mercenary 5.95 Ra Destruction Set 11 20 7.50 Thona Song Robin of Sherwood FGTH Frank Bruno 750 7.50 Music Construction Set Profanan Southern Beli Robin of Sherwood Terromolinos AMSTRAD Exploding Fist Mordens Ouest Pinball Construction Set 7 Cities of Gold diskt 11 20 750 8.95 750 5.70 7 D . Rockford's Riot On Court Tennis Gt American Race inter Basketba 4 Dropzone Star League Baseball On Field Football | | | A Bay Harda 11 20 Castle of Di Creep Robin of Sherwood: Cylu 50 7.50 Alien Sorcery Elidon Knightore Frank Bruno Hypersports .45 7.50 7.50 7.50 750 7.50 670 ATARI 400/600/800/800XL/XE SPECTRUM 185 750 7.50 David's Midnight Mags Lode Runner Choplifter Murder Zinderneut 5.20 4.45 Frank Bruno Hypersports Cauldron Dun Darach Dynamite Dan FGTH Quake Minus One 520 7.50 8.95 8.25 895 7.50 7.50 8.95 7.50 Realm of Impossibility Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY The greatest, biggest and best Atari library on the market. An ideal present for old and new Atari owners. MIDLANDS GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over two years ago first conceived the idea of a software library Now over 1.000 titles on disc, cassette and Rom (games, business, educational and utilities. Often purchasing popular programmers in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programmes monthly Over 1,000 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany. Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast, efficient and friendly service Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates plus other inter-club activities. Now introducing original software written by existing members. Send large s.a.e. to: 7.50 Dun Dach Nodes of Yesod Sr Lancelot 3D Starstrike ATARI MULE One on One Hand Hat Mack Murder andere Archon Realm of Impossibility Dropzone Ghostchaser Quasimodo Bounty Bob Mr Do Da Dug 8.95 7.50 Chuck Egg Buch Rogers Soy Hunter Reaim of impossibility 5.95 7.50 750 Chemoblaster Grand National Mordons O ut Beach Part Blackwitch Summer Games Strange LOOD 6.70 5.20 7.50 750 7.50 Archon Mordons Quest Staron 7.50 750 520 5.95 9.70 Doomdar's Revenge 750 NATO Commander . 7.50 MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos. Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programmes are originals with full documentation Postage included UK Please state which micro Overseas orders add 1.00 pertem All cheques payable to Affordable Products GLWI Lid Send 1.00 for our exclusive catalogue with up to the minute new releases for the Amstrad Atan BBC CAM64 ZX Spec MSX "


"The \"The most amazing arcade adventure to be released for the Amstrad .99 cassette 299 disk For LANSERE 664 heyailable soon for SPECTROS Mail order to: \"Soon to be released The Adventures of Bond.. Bewildon Bond starring RUSS ABBOT PREDBE EOFTWARE 155 Mitcham Road, London SW17. Tel: 672 9179 dealer enquiries welcome Bak "


"RUPERT and the TOYMAKER'S PARTY 111 Jolly old Rupert can walk, jump, leap, climb stairsand even fly-but can you get him to the party? 32 challenging screens of animation and fun. TLLK TEVA The most powerful games in the Universe Spectrum 48K CBM64 Quicksilva Ltd, Liberty House, 222 Regent Street, London WIR 7DB. Telephone 01-439 0666 .99 Rupert Bear  Express Newspapers PLC "


"C&VG SOFTWARE SERVICE PHONE 01-731 4607 (see p.22) FOR AVAILABILITY OF YOUR SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS   RETAILERS ASK YOUR LOCAL EXPERT 318 Chartwell No Every month selected computer specialist shops will be listed in your favourite magazine. If you want to buy anything you've seen in the magazine, go and see your nearest specialist. AVON KENT MICRO COMPUTERS VIDEO WORLD 57 Union Street Rentals SOFTWARE PLUS Maidstone 282 Harrow Road 12 York Street Kent 0622 52784 London W2 01-289 3102 Bath 0225 61676 MICROWAY COMPUTERS STAFFORDSHIRE 39 High Street BERKSHIRE Rainham MICROTRONICS Kent 0634 376702 BRACKNELL COMPUTERS 27a Market Street 44 Broadway MODATA COMPUTERS LTD Tamworth Bracknell 0344 427317 30 St John's Road Staffs 0827 51480 Tunbridge Wells 0892 41555 Tatung Einstein Specialist DORSET SUFFOLK DENSHAM COMPUTERS LEICESTERSHIRE 329 Ashley Road COMPUTER MAGIC DIMENSION COMPUTERS LTD 24 Crown Street Parkstone Poole 0202 737493 27-29 High Street Ipswich Leicester 0533 57479 Suffolk MBX 91999 2473 ESSEX WARWICKSHIRE ESTUARY PERSONAL COMPUTERS LINCOLNSHIRE OEM COMPUTER CENTRE MKD COMPUTERS Rugby Micro Centre Victoria Circus Shopping Centre 24 Newlands 9-11 Regents Street Southend on Sea 0702 614131 Lincoln 0522 25907 Rugby 0788 70522 H. REYNOLDS 79 Orsett Road WEST MIDLANDS Grays 0375 5948 LONDON MBC COMPUTER CENTRE CHROMASONIC COMPUTERS 17-19 Lichfield Street HAMPSHIRE 48 Junction Road 0902 29907/29021 RAM ELECTRONICS Archway London N19 106 Fleet Road | YORKSHIRE 01 263 9493 Fleet 02514 5858 GAMES WORLD THE COMPUTER CENTRE 129 King Street 26 Anlaby Road HEREFORDSHIRE Hammersmith Hull London W6 01-741 4467 North Humberside 0482 26297 HONEY SETT COMPUTERS LOGIC SALES LOOK & SEE 36 Widemarsh Street 19 The Broadway 45 Belmont Bridge Hereford The Bourne HR4 9EP 0756 60078 0432 279404 Skipton Southgate MICRO FUN London N14 01 882 4942 11 Shefield Road KENT SHEKANA COMPUTERS Barnsley (phone Rotherham branch) ANIROG COMPUTERS Marbles Shopping Centre MICRO FUN 29 West Hill Unit 11, 12 Unit 12 Dartford 527-531 Oxford Street The Guardian Centre Kent 0322 91649 London WIR IDD 01-800 3156 Rotherham 0709 60000 CANTERBURY SOFTWARE CENTRE VIC ODDENS YORK COMPUTER CENTRE 9 The Friars 6 London Bridge Walk 7 Stonegate Arcade Canterbury 0227 453531 London SE1 01 403 1988 York 0904 641862 DEALERS: If you would like to see your shop included in this new service, please call 01 251 6222 EXT 2461. MICRO RETAILERS "


"OM I CROA DS ATARI 40/60/800 XL XE OWNERS UTILITIES SPECIAL DEAL FOR ATARI 400/800/XL/XE OWNERS COMPUTER REPAIRS All machines dispatched within 72 hours of receipt Spectrum 16-48K. Rom upgrade. Down to . Includes parts, VAT and return postage) For a fast and reliable service, send machine, brief description of fault and cheque or postal order to the experts: CAPITAL COMPUTER SERVICES Dept. C&VG, 44 Rich's Road, Cardiff CF4 4AA Tel: (0222) 614401 We also service Acorn, Dragon and Commodore systems. Please telephone for quote. No. 1. Hire your first two games FREE from our extensive range of software. Up to the minute releases available. No. 2. Buy all the latest software titles at best possible prices (new releases available direct from US). Atari hardware and modems now available at discount prices. For further details send s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD GAMES 30a Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Leicestershire Tel: 0509 412604 BANKRUPT STOCK FROM 99p!!! A few examples: SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 Black Planet Blue Moon. In Search of ORB......990 Pixie Peter Finance Manager........2.99 World Cup... Timegate Planet of Death I'm Shock.. . 1.99 Labyrinth... 1:49 Crystal Frog... Survival . .......... 99p P yramid... 1.99 Make-a-Chip .... .. 990 Hovver Bovver BBC Also VIC 20 ....99 ELECTRON Bumble Bee.............2.99 DRAGON ZX81 Mined Out..... ...... 1.49 Send PO/Cheque 350 p&pl and/or SAE for list: ALIEN SOFTWARE (CV3) 46 Watling Ave., Edgware, Middx Tel: 01-951 4641 Inca Curse FREE MEMBERSHIP SOFTWARE HIRE  VIC-20 COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM Send an sae for your hirekit to: VSH (CV), PO Box 65, Nottingham NG1 Please state which micro BOUGHT A DISK DRIVE? Stuck with programs on tape. TRANSPAC solves it. TRANS-PAC, REV 2. Now released! Six disks with more progs, more up-dates, including multi-tape to auto-bout disk, multi-tape to menu, disk to tape, tape to tape, disk to disk. Multimove of files comes packaged on three double-sided Memorex disks.  post free *N.B. If you are one of the 3,000 people who bought TRANS-PAC One, return it in original packaging plus  and we will exchange it for TRANS-PAC TWO. BACK-UPS Tapes or disks. SAE for lists. CRACKER Will list M/C progs to screen, you edit download your personalised version with or without M/C knowledge. Hours of fun changing text to leave personal messages on screen. Stuck on an adventure search for clues. Also acts to back-up your Atari tapes. All for only  on T.D.K. tape (16K) post free. DOS 2.5 Having trouble getting it? Send blank disk + 50p in stamps. Free service by return. 130XE DISK DUPLICATOR Uses 128Kwill copy disk in one pass. N.B. will not copy commercial protected disks.  post free DISK UTILITY PAC No 1 4 disk pack with over 60 progs for beginners or advanced works out at less than 50p a program. Power without the price. Comes on two double sided disks.  post free DISK CRUSHER Disassembles disks. Lists to screen, and or printer. Single sided disk.  10 post free BOOSTER ROOSTER Is a cassette booster that sits in ram. Load only once — before typing in that mag listing or working on that prog will then download copy at 900 Baud Rate instead of 600 — 50% saving in reload rate on cassette.  SPEED LOADER Reduce loading time. Re-record most of your single or multi tapes at a faster Baud Rate. 50% easily achieved. Basic or M/C progs. On cassette.  ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE PAGES MAGAZINE ATARI FOR ALL ATARI COMPUTER OWNERS 400ROOBOOXL.BOOXL NEWS THE BEST PROGRAM LISTINGS from USA REVIEWS TUTORIALS We have an all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE. Apply now and hire your first four games free. Around 1,000 different original titles. For full details send large stamped addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm 10pm or weekends. LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 DISC DRIVE [173.90 post free 800 XL 82.90 past free ABOVE TWO ITEMS TOGETHER 245.90 post free 30 X 1280 post free Antic and Analog magazines available BEST QUALITY DISCS Unlabelled SDIS.S. 11.95 for 10 post free  for 100 post free Memorex SDIS S. [ 16.50 for 10 post free ODIS.S. 18 for 10 post free Memorex 3% discs S.S.D.D. Boxes of 10 [37.95 TRADE ENQUIRIES INVITED FOR ALL THE ABOVE GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept. C&VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney close Sunderland SRJ 4PD, Tel: 0783 286351 UTILITIES AUSTRALIA PUBLIC HINTS & DOMAIN TIPS SOFTWARE LIBRARY phis more SPECIAL HEM OFFERS PAGE 6 is published bi-monthly. Annual Subscription is .00. Send TODAY to: PAGE 6, P.O.BOX 54, STAFFORD, ST16 1DR Tel. 0785 41153 HENRIOUSE ATARI USERS. Feel left out? Our system will make you many new friends. SAE for details to VIADUCT, 71 Hillwood Road, Halesowen, West Midlands. ... and friends! VOLUMES 064 ONE COMMODORE AND TWO C128 COMING SOON! FUN WITHOUT THE PRICE GAMES PAC No 1 8 Pinball games on 2 double sided disks only  a game.  post free GAMES PAC No 2 For 1 to 4 players: Winter Ski Games, scrolling fun, 6 games on a double sided disk.  post free GAMES PAC No 3 10 arcade type games only .50 each comes on double sided disk.  15 post free GAMES PAC No 4 Double sided disk full of text adventures.  post free All post free Mail order only For full lists send sae 24 hour despatch STOCKSOFT 15 Woodbrooke Road, Birmingham B30 10E UNEXTENDED VIC-20 SOFTWARE. Oilfield Business simulation survey, build rigs, sell oil and pay loans. Shuttle Landing Watch you don't burn up, crash or run out of fuel. Three skill levels. Each game .95, both games .95. cheques payable to B.Brass, Sunnyside, Oakamoor, Stoke on Trent, Staffordshire. SNOWY SOFTWARE, Sensational bargains on Commodore 64, Amstrad, Atari, Spectrum, MSX, Dragon, Electron, BBC, Commodore 16, Oric and Vic 20. For list state which computer. No sae needed within Britain. 36 Curzon Street, London WIY 7AF ATARI OWNERS: Character Set Designer (superb). Phone for details. Also Atari 400 good condition  ono Phone Steve on 07072 67331. I'm also interested in software swaps with other owners. "


"MICRO ADS FAST COMPUTER REPAIRS AMSTRAD/BBC, COMMODORE, SPECTRUM Are you a manic arcade player; a dedicated adventurer/strategist; or do you want an independent. no nonsense critical review of current software/utilities? Whichever, we have the brochures for youl Based on the formula which has already produced the highly successful Hints and Pokes brochures, we are now able to offer not one but seven individually tailored brochures specific to your machines and interests. For further information on the above and our other computing services send s.a.e. to: H&D SERVICES ICVG), Freepost (no stamp required), Manchester M11 ZFA Tel: 061 370 5666 VIDEO VAULT INTERNATIONAL E 10 REPAIR SERVICE A Spectrums repaired for .95 inc. Parts, Insurance and P & P No Hidden Extras. BBC. Commodore 64, Vic 20. Atari, Quoted for. Are you fed up with waiting weeks for your Home Computer to be repaired!!! Why not try the Experts, we offer a full repair service on any Home Computer. All repairs carry a full 3 months guarantee, plus on every Spectrum repaired we send you a free game worth .95 for your enjoyment and pleasure. * While you wait Service by Professional Computer Engineers. * 3 Months written guarantee on all repairs. * International repair company. * All computers sent by mail order turned around in 24 hrs. + Most Spectrums repaired within 45 minutes. # All Micros insured for return journey. * Open 7 days a week./Keyboard faults only .95 AN AVERAGE PRICE * School repairs undertaken-discounts available. + Free software with each Spectrum repaired worth .95. + Over 8 years experience working with computers. ONLY GENUINE SINCLAIR PARTS USED. Phone today for your free estimate or send your computer to us with .75 (UK EIREL.O.M.C.L) or .40 (Europe Scandinavia) we will contact you the same day by phone or 1st class Mail should you require quotation first. TRADE ENQUIRIES MOST WELCOME ACCESS WELCOMED VIDEO VAULT LTD THE LOGICAL CHOICE WE DO NOT CHARGE TOPPER KOPPER THE VIDEO Vauu WILL BE A WHOPPER!!! Telephone: Glossop (STD 04574) 66555/67761 140 High St, West, Glossop, Derbyshire, England FREE GAME WORTH $5.95 WITH REPAIR EACH SPECTRUM BOOKS, BOOKS, BOOKS FOR ALL COMPUTERS SAE for lists. Mail order only PEARCES, 8 York Road, Kings Heath, Birmingham B14 7RZ SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and the Dragon Send s.a.e for details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG). 5 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB SOFTWARE EXCHANGE. Swap your used software, free membership Spectrum/Dragon, huge program base, sae please to UK Software Exchange Club (C&VG). 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB. PEARCES: :York Road, Kings uk saling grote hoeveel Adult Literacy -the first decade °OD FUZE FUZED DEFUZED CONFUZED CONFUZION AMSTRAD HIRE CLUB PLAY THE GAME! TRY THE PACKAGE! Before you buy. The Hire Club with a difference, run by a programmer. At last you do have a choice! The finest and most reliable Amstrad Hire Club, surpassing all others for variety of facilities. We provide an In-House PROFESSIONAL PROGRAMMER to help with hints and tips, machine code and basic lessons and supply highly discounted software. Hundreds of original titles available now! From Games to Business on cassette or disc. All the latest releases AND MORE. 24-hour return of service. Send large sae for full details to: NEW CONCEPTS IN SOFTWARE AMSTRAD HIRE CLUB (CVG) 25 EMERALD CLOSE, TUFFLEY GLOUCESTER In 1975 the adult literacy campaign was launched to help the 2,000,000 adults who had difficulty with reading and writing. By 1985 350,000 adults had received help with literacy. For further information Adult Literacy & Basic Skills Unit PO Box 213 London WCIV ZET For help with Reading and Writing 01-405 4017 BBC Computer aided learning template system for teachers. Enables any teacher to quickly acquire a library of personalised teaching software Price M64 Dr. John and the battle of the entropy: The Energy Rce. Educational fun game for and A Level Technician courses. Teaches fundamental concepts of engineering and heat A revolutionary new approach to teaching with an emphasis on learning through play with full back Up material Price SPECTRUM O and A Level Physics packages: NEWTONS LAWS...... ...... ........16.95 WORK AND ENERGY............................16.95 Super BASIC EDITOR, RESERVES space for code in REMS FIND AND REPLACE everything, variable speed TRACE, DELETE blocks of BASIC, and much Send to NEW CONCEPTS CVG Rosenython, St. Keverne. Helston Cornwall TR12 GOR ATOMIC STRUCTURE A COMPUTER VIEW Award winning 48k Spectrum program illustrated. 13 important physics experiment with high-res graphics and text. Suitable for 'A' level. Price .50. Send cheque/PO to: NEW CONCEPTS SOFTWARE, C&VG. ROSENYTHON, ST. KEVERNE, HELSTON, CORNWALL TR12 6QR "


"MI CROS E L MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell!  MSX GAMES to sell or swap, Blagger, Chiller, Antartic Adventure, Jetset Willy, Punchy, Les Flies, Disc Warrior, Oh Mummy, Chuckie, The Wreck. All originals write to P. Jess, 58 Legacurry Road, Lisburn, Co. Antrim, Northern Ireland. . CBS COLECOVISION, Roller Controller, Super Action Controllers over 20 cartridges  each. Item or swap for 1541 Commodore Disk Drive or 1525 Commodore Printer. Telephone (0252) 24461 Ex 5063 (am) (0252) 521005 (pm) ask for Andrew. . CBM 64 software to swap or sell, tape only, including Hypersports, exploding Fist, every US Gold, Activision title, American titles such as Archon II. Tel Andrew (01) 550 5075 after 5pm.  SPECTRUM 48K, ZX81 16K. Plus cassette recorder with lots of games worth  sell for  or swap for Atari 130 XE. 180 Brooklands Terrace, New York, North Shields, Tyne and Wear NE29 SEP. Write to Tim..  SPECTRUM, DK Tronics programmable joystick interface, excellent condition,  also much Spectrum software for sale, amazing prices! eg. Backpackers ! Ring 01 520 5125 after 4.30pm ask for Jim. .WANTED SOFTWARE for Spectrum, I also have software which I would like to sell or swap, games include Monty is Innocent, Matchday etc. If interested phone (0764) 2586 and ask for Clarke. . CBM SOFTWARE: Pitstop Il .50, Impossible Mission .50, Solo Flight .50, Frak 64 .00, Monty Mole .50, Suicide Express .50, Nato Commander .00, Staff of Karnath .00, Battle of Midway .50, Match Point .00. Telephone 051 678 7830.. . CBM 64 user would like to exchange ideas, experiences, software and computer reviews with English users. Please write to: Rainer Umbach, Schulweb 6, 3507 Espenau 2, West Germany.  ELECTRON BBC software. Gamemaker 2 .00, Pettigrews Diary. The Count, Voodoo Castle, Strange Odyssey, Pyramids of Doom, Stolen Lamp, Labyrinths of La Cosme. .50 each. Tel 01 903 7002 6pm to 8pm. COMMODORE 64 owner wants to swap software and ideas. Disk only send your list to Michael Lacey, Ferns Post Office, Co. Wexford, Ireland.  SPECTRUM HARDWARE: Datel Electronics, Joystick Interface . 48K Spectrum Rubber Keyboard plus free dustcover  sell separately or both for . Phone Fakenham (Norfolk) 701622 after 6pm if possible.  COLECOVISION WITH turbo wheel and foot pedal, Roller Controller plus 14 games  ovno. Telephone 0256 468526.  WANTED. COMMODORE 64 or any reasonable offer in exchange for Atari VCS, 10 Atari games, Keyboard Controller, Paddles, Joysticks, Booklets, Spectrum 48K,  worth of software, Tape Recorder, Cassette Case and all leads. Worth . If interested phone (0764) 2586 and ask for Clarke.  DRAGON 32 perfect working order, leads, 2 joysticks, 25 issues Dragon User, 6 books, 15 games, 3 utilities. All for  ono. Telephone 046 12 4545 evenings. . COMMODORE 64 software to swap/sell. Over 350 titles including Beachhead 2, Skyfox and many new games from England and America. Write to 33 Kentwell, Riverside, Tamworth, Staffs B79 7UB. . CBM 64, over 400 games to swap or sell. New titles include Beachead 2, and Skyfox. Write to Stephen, 12 Windsor Close, Tamworth, Staffs B79 8UH or ring (0827) 53006. Reliable people only please. SPECTRUM 48K + Ram Turbo + Quickshot II + mags and loads software, everything under guarantee, all worth + sell  ono + Data Recorder. Telephone Marshland Smeeth 276 Please!!!!!Call!!!!!  16K VIC 20 adventures: Amazonian Quest, Haunted House, Swordquest and Spy Story. All include Save Game feature. Only .95 each from T. Runeckles, 2 Warners Avenue, Hoddesdon, Herts.  PANASONIC MSX brand new never used with some games unwanted gift  also new Spectrum Reset Switch Joystick Interface and some games  call Ronnie 01-203 4545 evenings.  SPECTRUM 48K/Kempston Joystick + interface, Amstrad cassette recorder, about 60 games.  ono. Ring Southampton 812177.  COMMODORE MPS 801 printer, perfect condition. Phone Antrim 60709 ask for Donald. Quick sale is required  OWN A BBC B and would like a penpal to swap news and software with. I have over 150 games on cassette send list of software to 12, Harrington Street, Gorton, Manchester M18 BUQ. Tel Dave (061) 231 1895.  WANTED ATARI 810 disk drive with some software will pay up to . Phone Penzance 69838 after 6pm. . COMMODORE 64, disk drive, C2N, joysticks, 70 cassettes, 18 disks, 9 books, 4 cartridges. Only 2 months old. Cost .  ono. Telephone 0790 53161. Ask for Jason.  WANTED DISC drive 1541 kip to $115). Also like to swap/sell software write to: Kjetil Pettersson, SKJ Mark, 7520 Hegra, Norway.  ATARI GAMES for sale Smash Hits volumes 1 and 3, Dropzone, Preppiet, Spitfire Ace, Fort Apocalypse, Jet Boot Jack, Atari Computing  ono. All originals, wanted back issues of Antic Analog and Page 6 magazines. Tel Dartford 330411.  CBM 64 GAMES for sale: Daley Thompsons Decathlon, Beach Head, Raid Over Moscow, Tapper, Pooyan, Frantic Freddie, Encounter, Sheep in Space, Sherlock, Indiana Jones, Bruce Lee, Twin Kingdom Valley, .50 each. Armageddon, Falcon Patrol, .50 each. Telephone (03573) 439 after 7pm.  SPECTRUM 48K, Wafadrive, Lo-Profile keyboard, some games, contact Norman Maccoy telephone Washington 4173758 281 Donvale Road, Donwell, Washington, Tyne and Wear. ATARI 64K 600XL (Atari expansion), 410 cassette, nine games on cassette and cartridge, two books. All in very good condition. Approximately 18 months old. Only . Call Stevenage (0438) 355034 ask for Phil.  ATARI 400/800 software for sale. Includes cassettes, cartridges and discs. Telephone (0273) 502143. ATARI 400 48K professional keyboard. 410 recorder, 100's of games and utilities many originals. Also magazines, joysticks, books, blank tapes etc. Ring Luton (0582) 504508 after 8pm and weekends. .48K SPECTRUM PLUS with 7 month guarantee, Data Recorder, Kempston Joystick Interface and  of software. Hardly used. Sell for . Phone 01-644 5547 anytime after August 24th.  SWAP 800XL 1010 recorder + games from abroad for any MSX. Phone 021 440 8091.  DALLAS QUEST. Step by step instructions to solve this adventure from US Gold, in UK. Only  elsewhere  make cheque/PO payable to Richard Taylor and send to 55 Vicarage Lane, Horley, Surrey RH6 BBA. SPECTRUM+ with 8 month guarantee. New tape recorder. Much original software. Spare wires, magazines, books. Worth over . Sell for . Phone Barnsley (0226) 385774.  48K ORIC ATMOS, cassette recorder, boxed as new. Also software/games including Zenon 2. Zorgon's Revenge, Frigate Commander, Probe 3, Super Meteors, Gravitor, Marc, Scuba Dive. Cost  will accept  ono. Richard Fisher, 8 Melton St, Kettering, Northants (0536) 510719. HI FREAKSI! I'm interested in swapping the latest US and GB software for my Commodore 64. I have a large collection but I need more! Write to Roger Zens, Waldheideweb 70A, 4224 Huenxe 1, West Germany. Hey! Lazy Yank! Wake Up!  48K SPECTRUM, cassette recorder, Kempston interface, books, magazines,  of software,  the lot. Telephone 01-647 2044, many latest games. VIC 20 + recorder + 16K expansion + super expander + joystick, Introduction to Basic parts 1 and 2, 5 cartridges, 22 tape games, 8 books . Telephone 05436 2839. . COMMODORE 64. Originals to swap or sell. Titles include Theatre Europe . Raid on B Bay . Plus stacks more. Also American games to swap ring Neil on Slough 39462 or write 7 Vaughan Way, Slough, Berkshire SL2 2ND.  BBC 32K 1.205 (nearly Model B). Over 150 games. 4 books, magazines, all leads and user guide. All excellent condition. Value of games is over  alone. Everything for . Phone Steve 01-594 7322 after 6pm (Barking).  COMMODORE 64, 1541 disk drive, 1701 colour monitor, 2 joysticks, easy script, white lighting, BBC & Spectrum emulators and nearly 50 discs containing over 800 games and utilities. Total value over . Sale price only . Phone (05827) 69152 "


"MICROSELL  WANTED COLECOVISION Super Action Controllers and Rocky cartridge. Tel 0685 874399. Ask for Steven.  AMSTRAD CPC-464, mono screen + DK'Tronics Speech Synthesizer Amplifier + 3\" single Amstrad disc drive + Kaga Taxan KP-810 matrix printer + over  software + magazines, books, discs. (Tasword, Masterfile, top games, Knightlore, Dun Duragh, Ghostbusters, Starstrike, Minder, Decathlon etc.). Very good condition  Ovno. Phone Rick 4449132 T1994A FOR SALE computer, joysticks, cassette, leads, manual and twelve games including Parsec, Football, Golf and Chess. All in good condition. Selling at  ono. Phone 0602 2410.  SONY HITBIT MSX computer excellent condition including data recorder, joystick, manuals, magazines, software worth  including Manic Miner, Jetset Willy, Blagger, Maxima etc + cartridge games. Fully boxed overall cost  sell for  ono. Call David on 0602 653563 or write to 5, The Grove, Calverton, Nottingham NG14 6PG,  ALPHACOM 32 printer with paper, excellent condition for sale with any Spectrum  ono. Write to J. O. Kirk, Highfield, Eastgate, Sleaford, Lincs NG34 7EE. Phone (0529) 303133. ATARI 600XL, 1010 recorder, joystick,  worth of games, programs, excellent condition, worth when new , sell for . Telephone Hook Norton, 737714. Near Banbury, Oxfordshire.  10 CHEAP SPECTRUM software titles. Only one of each. Including Eureka, Chess. First come first served.  for the lot. Send sae to Con Lehane, Lissacreasig P.O., Macroom, Co. Cork, Eire. SPECTRUM 48K cassette recorder, joystick, speech unit, over 100 original programs, 8 books and keyboard. All worth over  or swap Commodore 64 and extras. Phone 01-883 1711. COMMODORE 64 software to swap. Cassette only. I have over 300 games including Impossible Mission, Grog's Revenge, Ghostbusters. Send your list to M. Groenewegen, Vossenlaan 32 3735 kn Boschen Duin, Holland. K SPECTRUM, AGF interface with 20 top hit original games all in good condition. Altogether worth , going for the bargain price of . Ring 0872 lif outside Truro) 863199.  FOR SALE ZX Spectrum 48K over 20 original games and twin socket DK'Tronics interface. With cassette recorder. Worth over .80 my price is . Phone Upminster (04022) 24273 ask for John. ATARI SOFTWARE to swap Crystal Castles, Landscape, Behind Jagg Lines, Boulder Dash, Encounter, Dropzone,+ more. Cassette only. Phone 0943 862016 or Martin, 16 East Garth, Platt Bridge, Wigan, Lancs.  ATTENTION CBM 64 owners! I want to swap software on disk. Send your list to Janne Nieminen, Petkeltie 4D 122, 20540 Turku 54, Finland. All letters will be answered! Hurry Up!  COMMODORE 64 software to swap. I have many titles from England, USA and Holland. Phone 01 715427 ask for Henrik or send a list to Henrik Lassen, Roskildevej 134 TTV 2500 Valby, Denmark. ACORN ELECTRON + joystick and interface + over  of software including, Elite, Twin Kingdom Valley. All in original packing and all in very good condition. Original guarantee. Selling for only  (worth over ). Phone between 11am and 3pm 01-582 7490.  SPECTRUM 48K, Loprofile keyboard,  of software, magazines, leads, manuals,  ono. Also Alphacom 32 Printer with five rolls of paper . Ram-Turbo joystick and Rom Interface, Quickshot II, two Rom cartridges . Ideal early Christmas present. Telephone Cardiff (0222) 388000.  SPECTRUM GAMES: (Beach Head, Fighter Pilot Timegate, Derby Day Dictator) . (Red Baron, Football Manager, Code-Name Mat, Chiller, Stonkers) . Alien 8 . M. Griffin, 1 McDonagh Avenue, Mervue, Galway, Ireland. .NEW SPECTRUM+ and printer (unused). Also Alien 8, Return of the Jedi, Vu-3D, Chess, Space Raiders  ono or swap for Atari 1050 disk drive. Telephone 021 705 4340 after 6pm and ask for Kevin. C&VG, ONLY MICROSELL COUPON TO SELL YOUR OLD COMPUTER OR PERIPHERALS OR SWAP UNWANTED SOFTARE (ORIGINALS) FILL IN THIS FORM \" 16 TERMS AND CONDITIONS 1. Trade advertisers will appear in the MicroAds section, private advertisers in the Microsell Section. All free MicroSell ads are subject to space availability 3. The Publishers reserve the right to refuse an advertisement. 28 29 PLEASE PRINT IN BLOCK CAPITALS ONLY ONE INSERTION PER COUPON Minimum number of words is 15, maximum 40 (continue on a separate sheet where necessary). TOTAL number of words for ALL insertions COST: Micro Sell (Private) Micro Ads (Trade) .00 40p per word 50p per additional bold word I enclose a cheque/P.O. for ............ made payable to Computer & Video Games Name Address....... POST TO: AD. DEPT, C&VG, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU "


"5 *ARCA Clare Edgeley, IDEAs Corporation's arcade spy, regularly brings you news from the public gaming booths in C+VG. This issue she reports on a terrific new Defender clone called Nemesis plus a video love story for those of you who like a game with added kicks! » NEMESIS TOP GEAR S E BESSTLE DOUBLE URSER MULTIPLE Universal's Top Gear is a racing game which wouldn't even complete a practice lap it in competition with Pole Position. There are two laps to choose from. If you are really good, you will be able to go round each lap twice — and all for 20 pence. But, you are more likely to end up in a ditch at the first bend! In Pole Position and other racing games of that calibre, it is quite easy to hold the road when cornering but no amount of practice will prepare you for Top Gear. The steering wheel seems to have no connection with the wheels. A flick of the wrist is likely to send the car careering all over the road and into a noticeboard instead of cruising coolly past an opponent. Trying to overtake other cars is hair-raising! The track is futuristic. Once out of a cityscape, it tends to rise and fall in a most unnatural way. One moment you are waving to the seagulls and the next plunging back to earth and level ground. The track sometimes seems to be suspended in mid-air. Racing to the top of an enormous hill you come across is not a good idea. There is a blind spot at the top and you will probably run straight into the back of another car. Tunnels can be chaotic. Care must be taken not to drive into walls by mistake. It's easy to do and you'll end up as a small explosion Pole Position style. If you've got money to spare and you're keen on racing games, don't waste it on this one. A dodgem car is much more fun! A crowd at one end of the arcade can mean only one of two things. Either someone has fainted or a new game has just arrived Konami's Nemesis is one of those crowd pullers. To play. I had to join the queue, jingling 30p noisily along with everyone else to show I meant business. Eventually my turn came and watched by a horde of experienced players. I proceeded to dispatch all my space ships in the shortest possible time. I was under the impression that the days of Defender were long gone. Yet Nemesis has taken the best features from Defender and combined them with several new ones to produce a first rate game. Speed, quick reflexes and non-stop action will keep you on your toes for as long as you can stand the pace. Nemesis scrolls from right to left as you control a space ship in its flight down a tunnel. A tunnel strewn with enemy strongholds and floating aliens. Gone are the humanoids just shoot anything that moves and stationary objects as well. Your aim seems to be to get from one end to the other unscathed. Shades of Gyrus float into the game with strings of swirling aliens whizzing round the screen which must be shot to pick up extra points. If you manage to knock off the whole string a burning fireball is left behind which should be collected Your plane banks as you move up and down and you can accelerate, hover and move backwards to a certain degree. though not turn round and fly in the opposite direction. The first real obstacle you'll meet is a massive floating rock with only a small space to squeeze round. This fires bolts of lasers, five at a time which must be dodged tricky, as there are other nasties to avoid and shoot as well. There is barely enough time to breathe before you come across a pair of volcanoes. Don't fly past, hover between the two and wait a few moments. They'll wake up in unison and fling great balls of lava into the tunnel. You can shoot at these but your best bet is to hide high in the ceiling and pray you don't get hit. A huge space ship exactly like Star Wars' Millenium Falcon rises from the valley and proceeds to spit out lasers in The same manner as the rock. To blow up the space ship dodge the lasers and try to fire directly into the mouth of the craft. It's difficult but possible, and after several direct hits it will blow up. Another fleet of aliens stationary, swirling and just plain old flying ones come next and then onto a rock like formation which you must blast your way through. More points are scored for blasting the many guns that lie in wait and which swivel towards you with unnerving accuracy. Onto a pink wall of marbles through which you will have to knock a hole and quickly past a line of deadly blue fuzzy objects. Another ship rises and should be dispatched in the same way as the first There's no chance to rest you're rushed from one deathtrap to another as the objects get harder to bypass. Colin Ho. 18. from London spent over .00 with a friend in three days to get this for into the game, and there's more to come. \"It's unique.\" says Colin. \"I think this is the first game that allows you to choose your weapons. Multiple weapons are the best as they multiply your firepower.\" A grid along the bottom of the screen has boxes which light up as you progress. Whenever the box with the weapon of your choice lights up just press a button and you will be armed with shields, double lasers or missiles. Nemesis is one of the most addictive games I've seen for a long time. Defender fanatics have the upper hand as they are already used to the style of play but anyone can learn it easily. SOEEDUD 1105SILE DOUBLE "


"DE ACTION MY HERO! 431388 SISEKM FREE Sega's latest game apparently has two names and both are singularly inappropriate. Walking into an arcade! decided to play My Hero as billed by the machine's artwork, but after putting in the money the screen display declared Love Passion! (Sensitive readers stop here! Ed.) Of the two, I prefer Love Passion mostly because there isn't a single sign of it, though presumably if you get to the end of the game the hero Takashi might receive a tender kiss from his kidnapped Bichiriend Mari. manner of kidnappers everywhere. Tokoshi, after stopping to gape for a second, decides to give chase. This is where you come in. My Hero turns out to be another of those martial arts games which have mushroomed in the arcades since the success of Karate Champ. Single handed, Takashi must take on all the gangsters and ultimately The Boss before being reunited with Mari. You can punch, kick, leap into the air and generally behave like Bruce Lee to outwit the baddies. The baddies have the advantage of numbers and generally attack in threes there's barely time to recover your breath before the next lot approach. They also fight dirty. Lurking in the buildings above the street, they lie in wait to drop a bottle or some other object onto your head. If you are quick enough and see these coming you can dodge or kick them out of the way but it's curtains for you if they hit their forget. More often than not, you'll end up flat on your back overwhelmed by the opposition. I got nowhere near The Boss! CITY CONNECTION This game is for the chivalrous and for those who have longed to battle against a bunch of toughs to protect the girl you love! A word of warning. Practice firstit's a lot harder being a knight in shining armour than you think. Back to the game. Takashi and Mari are walking hand in hand down a street when she is suddenly torn from his grasp by a bunch of tip-toeing hoodlums, dressed in black trousers and black and white striped prison shirts in the Every arcade has a mixture of interesting and silly games. Some are saved from total obscurity as, despite a weak story line, the game itself is challenging. I wish I could say the same for Jaleco's latest offering No amount of jazzing up will make City Connection anything but boring. However there are some compensations, it does allow you to see the world's famous cities in Clarice, a flying Mini Metro! The idea is to drive up and down highways, autobahns and motorways, bumping police cars off the roads by tossing the odd oil can into the air. Start off point for this highly unexciting game is Manhattan, New York. Travelling past a back drop of skyscrapers, down a three lane highway the lanes are stacked one on top of the other run over any oil cans you come across As soon as you have one. press a button and it will take to the air, hopefully hitting a police car before disappearing off the edge of the screen. The police driver then spins out of control probably with surprise at being hit by a can of beans from a passing Metro This is your big moment drive up behind and nudge it off the road. Onto the next car. The roads are only partially built and there are gaps in them at regular intervals though these can be jumped. Jump them so that you land on the same lane on the other side of the gap or drop onto the next lane in the stack. It's possible to turn Clarice in mid-air so that you land on the next lane down in the direction you were coming from. This is tricky but often necessary especially if there's the slightest chance of landing on one of the many police cars, in which cose Clorice bursts into pieces. Not to worry. British Leyland will provide you with another.. Watch out for little blobs waving flags, and monoliths which sprout up in your path. Avoid these by jumping them or taking an abrupt about turn, After you've killed the cops in New York, Clarice takes off on a space hop to land at random in another city. Take your pick there's Egypt, Japan and even the Easter Islands. Personally, I found City Connection a waste of time and money but it just might appeal to someone. SUN RSER MLTIPLE E "


"RUN FOR YOUR LIFE WITH DARIOR arber shop FOR D eep in the steamy Amazon jungle danger lurks amongst the swamps and creepers. Armed only with a blowpipe and a limited number of poisoned darts, your journey takes you through some of the last unexplored areas of Rainforest. Look out for treacherous headhunters and scorpions, while above you deadly tree snakes wait to strike at easy prey. Try and outrun them, but you'll have to stop, load and shoot eventually! Your adventures take you through dank, eerie caves echoing with the sound of bloodsucking, vampire bats. Wierd wraithes chase you out to face the climax of the game around a ruined temple. Dodging the crumbling masonry you must combat giant spiders waiting to entwine you in their deadly webs. But are you accurate enough with your blowpipe to face the final conflict? There are 4 levels of difficulty spread over 3 incredibly detailed 3D scrolling landscapes and should you be caught out, the end you face is definitely not for the faint hearted Realistic sound adds to the thrill of the chase make sure the screams aren't yours if you are dragged away by the awesome Quetzalcoatus. Load up, and be ready to shoot! Commodore 64. Price .95 Hot Line Mail Order Service 0225-316924 New Generation Software (GSH New Generation products are sold according to their terms of trade and conditions of sale. FREEPOST, Bath BA2 4TD. "


"_ S An of the UNICORN THE FIRST EVER MIKRO-PLUS GAME Nearly 50%bigger and better game for the Spectrum Shadow of the Unicorn a 120 page illustrated book, 64K of programme, and Mikro-Plus interface all for .95 Built-in joystick port Back-up facility to Microdrive Back-up facility to Tape Tape alignment routine for trouble free loading "


": FUVA In ONLY .95 EACH LIEVE Just add yourself and stir well for a perfect mix of arcade action Will you be in the thick of it as the dreaded Custard Monsters try and stop the Kid finding the 12 parts of the special recipe! For all 48K Spectrums .95 Western Adventure Cartoon style As Cliff, stop the ol' banditos shooting up the canyon in the wackiest western ever! For all 48K Spectrums .95 New Generation Software CGSH New Generation products are sold according to their terms of trade and conditions of sale. FREEPOST Bath BA2 4TD. "


"the software charts  BER  Compiled by Gallup TOP 30 /ALL FORMATS THIS MONTH LAST MONTH  GAME  WEEKS IN CHART COU Hypersports Way of the Exploding Fist Frank Bruno's Boxing Soft Aid Action Biker Elite Spy Hunter Frankie Goes to Hollywood Jet Set Willy Dynamite Dan Spy Vs Spy Cauldron Finders Keepers Pitstop 2 Combat Lynx BMX Racers SP 16 30  MACHINE  MANUFACTURER SP C64 Imagine SP C64, AMS Melbourne SP. C64 Elite SP, C64 Various | C64 Mastertronic SP C64, BBC Acornsoft SP C64 US Gold SP, C64 Ocean SP C64, AMS Software Projects Mirrorsoft SP C64 Beyond SP. C64 Palace SP, C64, AMS Mastertronic C64 Epyx/US Gold SP C64,AMS,BBC ELECI Durell SP, C64 Mastertronic Gremlin Graphics SP C64 AMS US Gold SP AMS Gargoyle Games SP C64, AMS ENT Domark SP C64 Mind Games SP C64, AMS AT US Gold SP, C64, AT US Gold C64, AT US Gold SP C64 Odin C64 Mastertronic SP C64, AMS Ocean SP BBC Ultimate C64 Mastertronic SP C64, AMS Imagine UASA--OWUN WAWANGSA SP 20 21 23 24 25 26 27 Beach Head Dun Darach View To A Kill Nick Faldo's Open Golf Bruce Lee Pole Position Dambusters Nodes of Yesod Kik Start Daley Thompson's Decathlon Alien 8 Vegas Jackpot World Series Baseball 12 30 C64/TOP 30 SPECTRUM/TOP 30 AMSTRAD/TOP 30 Way of the Exploding Fist MH Beach Head Ocean Alien 8 Ultimate Dun Darach Gargoyle Games Finders Keepers Mastertronic Chiller Mastertronic Knight Lore Ultimate Ghostbusters Activision D. Thompson's Decathlon Ocean Rocky Horror Show CRL 10 10 10 11 12 13 12 14 15 16 Way of the Exploding Fist MH Hypersports Imagine Elite/Firebird Soft Aid Various Action Biker Mastertronic Pitstop 2 Epyx/US Gold Kik Start Mastertronic Frankie Goes to H'wood Ocean International Tennis Commodore G. Gooch Test Cricket Audiogenic Dambusters US Gold Thing on a Spring Gremlin View To A Kill Domark International B'ball Commodore Impossible Mission/Epyx/US Gold N. Faldo Open Golf/Mind Games Five a Side Anirog Rockford's Riot Monolith Finders Keepers Mastertronic Spy Hunter US Gold Drop Zone US Gold Shadowfire Beyond Software Tour de France Activision Entombed/Ultimate Cauldron Palace Jet Set Willy 2 Software Projects Ghostbusters Activision Mr Do US Gold D. Thompson's Decathlon Ocean World Series Baseball Imagine Frank Bruno's Boxing Elite Hypersports Imagine Soft Aid Various Dynamite Dan Mirrorsoft Spy Vs Spy Beyond Rocco Gremlin Graphics Spy Hunter US Gold Jet Set Willy 2 Software Projects Action Biker Mastertronic Nodes of Yesod Odin Cauldron Palace Pole Position US Gold Bruce Lee US Gold Dun Darach Gargoyle Games World Series Baseball Imagine Frankie Goes to H'wood Ocean Highway Encounter Vortex Glass Quicksilva N. Faldo Open Golf Mind Games Empire Fights Back Mastertronic Tapper US Gold View To A Kill Domark Shadowfire Beyond Software Nonterraquecus Mastertronic Finders Keepers Mastertronic D. Thompson's Decathlon Ocean BMX Racers Mastertronic Monopoly Leisure Genius Rocky Horror Show CRL Red Moon Level 9 17 18 18 19 20 20 21 22 23 MACHINE KEY SP = SPECTRUM C64 = COMMODORE 64 AMS = AMSTRAD BBC = BBC AT = ATARI ELEC = ELECTRON ENT = ENTERPRISE 24 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 25 26 27 29 30 "


"IDEAS LEAN the others have been completed. You will see clouds which will sap your energy. The key to doing the final room is in the boulder. And that is all the clues otherwise we will finish the game for you. and in the red pool you will lose your energy UNLESS you have touched the pools in a certain order and I shall leave you to work that one out! Once you have done this, you will find the exit to Level 6. Level 6 Room O: Once again you need the Torch. Room P: Here you will find \"The Knot of Iris\". This is in the chest behind the big Idol, Whip the small fat jar on your right, it will move onto the platform. Then whip the other jar along until it falls off which will move the platform down, and the Idol will move. Take it to Room DUN DARACH Seems as though the \"Tipmaster\" has set up his own rival company to I.C. We now have some tips on Dun Darach from the 'Hint Helper'. First make more money by stealing or buying peppers from the grocers in Market Street. Watch out for Ryde, though, if you are stealing. Take the peppers to the broker in Marsh Street, RathaDe. You can also get some gold bars from the Assayer in West Way and take them to the Broker in Cross Street There is a secret entrance in Park Row, six paces from the sign at the far east end. Press enter and you will find Dain inside. In return for the lyre he will give you a shield labelled \"Midu\". Take this to \"Hail Midlin\" and deposit it on the altar. The \"M\" key will then appear put this in a depository. Give Mohr a book from the Archivist in King Street, Mercer Welcome to IDEAS CENTRAL. My name is Melissa Ravenflame, 1.C. co-ordinator. IDEAS CENTRAL is where you'll find the Bug Hunters' HQ and the man who keeps those rogue robots in order Jackson T. Kalliber. Jackson makes sure OTISS, Big Red, X and B-Con got out there to find the hints, tips and pokes you all so desperately nood for a happy existence. Don't tell them but I can't rely on them to make a good job of it. So the IDEAS CORPORATION and yours truly, Melissa R., need YOUR help. Remember, the IDEAS CORP will pay a large amount of credits to anyone assisting our enquiries. So send your game hints and cheats to Melissa Ravenflame, IDEAS CENTRAL, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Now let's take a look at what the BH squad have come up with ... Room Q: This room is a maze, BUT, when you enter you and the whip turn invisible. You must get to the chest. How, hear you asking? Listen to your footsteps!! The chest contains another Scroll. Room R: You will need the \"Book of the Dead\" to complete this room. When you enter, the grate behind will close, and the one in front opens to reveal a giant Cobra to kill him you must go to the chest in the left top corner and open it (this is when having \"Book of the Dead\" comes in useful), the snake should disappear, allowing you onto Level 7. Level 7 Room S: Once again you need the Torch. One extra clue, leave this room until the very last, otherwise you might find that the chest won't open.Room T: As you enter you will see a sleeping crocodile. He will not harm you. Go to the small boulder and whip it onto the platform (you should also be on the platform). Once you start going down, the croc will awaken and you will have to move fast or he will block off your exit. Go to the chest and you should receive five extra lives. Get back on the platform and whip the boulder off do this quickly and you will be out before the croc gets ENTOMBED In August we published the map of Entombed along with some hints to play the game but only to Level 4 as Big Red sat on the mainframe before we could go any further. Well, wait no longer, for here are the rest of the clues, sent in by Adam Trotman of Wolverhampton. On Level 4: You have to make your way to Room K which is the connecting room to Level 5. As you enter, you will notice a boulder blocking the Exit. To remove this, go up the ramp on the left to where you see the eye on the wall. Keep jumping at the eye, and eventually the boulder will move. It does take some time. One word of warning though -Watch Your Air! Level 5: Have your ship ready! When you reach gong number one whip it once and then go round the rest of the gongs in sequence. Under gong five is the Torch. Room M: You will need your torch to read in this room. Room N: This contains three lava pools. The white pool makes you visible, green pool makes you invisible He will give you another book with a message. Deposit this book also. Get a moleskin from the Skinner, in Long Lane and give it to Bren, who will give you a map with a clue \"Gold in ashes\". Put the map somewhere safe and then give Bren some platinas, in Silver Street Argot, in return for a map, with clue \"Galicia it Far\". Give this to Ryde who will give you the \"Hail Beltemos\" shield which you take to the \"Hail Beltemos\" building. \"54\" will appear in the picture frame. Get a \"rat statue\" from the Gallery, North Wall, Old Quarter and take it to Teth the Jailor, who can be bound by following a rat in the Soke who you. Room U (Hidden Room): this room only appears after all "


" JERRY PARIS. will disappear in Claw Lane. Keep following the rat and you will appear in Darach Down (press enter). In exchange for the rat statue, you will get the D-Key which will open the locked door in \"The Castle\". Pick up the script from the altar and a message will appear. Then type RUN. When loading has finished enter these POKES. POKE 29719,169: POKE 29720,0: POKE 29721,141: POKE 29722,119:POKE 29723,0:SYS 11877 All of these POKES came from S.O. Kane of Northern Ireland, who definitely deserves a free C64 game. goes back, duck straight away and you will dodge it. Does anyone know how to beat the others? POKES Okay, Kalliber, that's enough of this. Let's see how those robots have got on with the Pokes we asked them to collect AIRWOLF (C64) Type LOAD instead of Run Stop/Shift. When Ready appears, type POKE 1010,141:POKE 1011,5:POKE 1012,128:POKE 1013,76:POKE 1015,252. Then type RUN. The computer will reset itself. Stop the tape here and use the following pokes. For infinite shields: POKE 13013,169:POKE 13014,6:POKE 13015,141:POKE 13016,143:POKE 13018,234. To fly through walls: POKE 5026,252. Avoid killing any sprites: POKE 5019,221:POKE 5020,248. To start game after entering POKES, type SYS 4096 (Return). ENTOMBED (C64) POKES for Entombed from lan Duncan of Hemel Hempstead. Type: OPEN 1 (Return). Then press play on tape and press the CBM key as usual. When FOUND ENTOMBED is displayed, enter POKE 783,1:POKE 830,34:POKE 832,48:SYS 62828 (Return). Loading will commence for a while and then enter FOR K= 679 TO 767:POKE K, PEEK(K+8,192):NEXT (Return). FOR K= 828 TO 1023:POKE K PEEK(K+8192):NEXT(Return) POKE 816,60:POKE 817,3(Return). Now Type: LOAD \"NOVA\" (Return) The ready prompt will appear and then enter POKE 2208,1:POKE2213,141:POKE2214,2 31:POKE2215,108.SYS2128 (Return). The game will now finish loading and when you start playing you will notice that you have unlimited lives/energy  WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST (C64). Here are a few tips from Ben Vickerman, Newcastle upon Tyne. Always use leg sweeps when possible because they are more effective than other kicks. Other kicks can be blocked. If your opponent gets too close and your leg sweeps are not getting through then crouch and execute a low punch. Your opponent often karate kicks while you are in crouch position to get close so he can give you a low kick. If you think he is going to use this manoeuvre then stop, crouch as soon as he reaches ground, leg sweep him, this way you can dispose of him before he disposes of you. On DAN 5 he somersaults if you keep leg sweeping, so get ready with the high back kick, this will catch him off guard as he hits the ground. This manoeuvre is worth 500 points if executed properly, so get practising. On DANS 9 and 10 fight like mad for full moon then play defensive. If you try to get a second moon your opponent could equalize with you or even beat you. One final tip, on NOVICE creep up to him and execute a roundabout kick this will earn you a 1,000 points and he does hardly anything to stop you. if coming up to curves, otherwise you will find yourself straying to the other side and eventually grinding out your tyres. When tyre-changing, if you take off a damaged tyre, be sure to move away from the car, before going to the spare tyre files, or you must keep putting on and taking off the damaged tyre. When racing. watch the other computercontrolled cars and their race patterns. YELLOW this car is very unpredictable, sometimes crossing on both straights and curves. LIGHT GREY this one mostly stays in the middle of any track, but sometimes crosses any lanes. Very difficult to get past. GREY the most difficult to get past. If you run into this one, it crosses over to the side you would have used to speed away. ORANGE same as the purple. LIGHT GREEN same as grey. OTHERS easy to pass. When you catch up with the robodriver and it is passing another car, move to the edge where there is space and blaze past. SUICIDE EXPRESS: Type LOAD (Return) When ready appears enter POKE 1010,76: POKE 1011 248:POKE 1012,252 (Return). Now type RUN. When loading has finished enter this ofter it resets. POKE 26222,234:POKE 26223,234 POKE 26224.234:POKE 26225,234 POKE 26225,234:POKE 26227.234. Then SYS 33792. (NB: if ammo>50 game will freeze). FRANK BRUNO'S BOXING (Spectrum). David Allsop of Chesterfield has written in with tips on how to defeat the first two boxers. Canadian Crusher: To get at Canadian Crusher you must start with body punches this brings his guard down. Then quickly put your own guard up and start jabbing his head until the KO counter is flashing so you can give him the big punch. When he is knocked down, be ready on the duck button. Press this when he has got up and outstretched his arms to crush your head. Andrei Puncheredov: This man certainly goes to your head. To avoid this when his head BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK (C64). To avoid Sprite Collision. Type LOAD (Return). When READY appears enter these pokes: POKE 1010,76: POKE 1011,248:POKE 1012 252 PITSTOP II Another regular to these pages is Kenneth Henry of Enfield. This time he has some tips for Pitstop II. Remember that on circuits like Hockenheim, Vallelunge and Rouen Les Essarts you don't have to make pitstops at all if you are good enough with car control. Keep to the inside lane "


"(SO HALL OF FAME QHI-SCORES HOTSHOTS BRUCE LEE 1 Julian Gostelow, Stourport, Worcs 2,132,219 2 Jawaid Ali, Glasgow, Scotland 2,123,450 3 Jian Hua Jerng, Molenhoeekus, Holland 999,925 4 M. Easton, Westerham, Kent — 938,175 5 Owen Greenwood, Farnham, Surrey 895,590 Jian Hua Jerng Julian Gostelow VG SHOT 1985 ber not go away empty-handed. He also received a smaller package of Atari games. Simon and Cameron were the two highest scores in the July Hot Shot spot. Simon's high score was 1,452,860 and Cameron's was 1.970,000. Each of these scores was achieved after several hours of play. For the face-to-face challenge, Simon and Cameron each played three ten minute sessions. Their scores were eet Computer + added up and averaged out. Video Games first Simon won with 167,106 Hot Shot Hero against Cameron's 163,286. 16-year-old Simon Stokes, of A triumphant Simon said Birmingham. afterwards: \"It was very He triumphed in a face-to difficult. The last game was face Dropzone battle with terrible.\" Cameron McDade, 19. of The Hot Shot game for Wakefield, at our offices in November is Frank Bruno's London recently. Boxing on the Spectrum by Simon won the first prize at Elite. Send your score on the a highly-prized and exclusive coupon printed below. We are still running the Hall of Fame, of Atari games. so don't stop sending in those But runner-up Cameron did high scores. Simon Stokes boosts his score while Cameron McDade looks on A SPY HUNTER 1 Robert Pugh, George St Lee 1,360,300 2 Paul Parker, Liversedge, W. Yorks 628,530 3 Patrick Graham, Poplar, London 421,235 4 Tiernan Kelly, Glasgow, Scotland 391,455 5 William Flint, Thetford, Norfolk — 355,000 MITIMI HYPER SPORTS 1 Scott Donaldson, Hamilton 465,871 2 Adrian Moore, Newbown Park 304,380 3 Graham Osborne, Newton Abbot, Devon 221,749 4 Gary Walvin, Sutton-in-Ash 217,593 5 Michael Jordon, Exeter, Devon 160,433 OCTOBER HOTSHOTS OCTOBER HI-SCORES Name: Address: Name: Address: Name of game: My score on FRANK BRUNO'S BOXING was: I scored: Date: Machine: T-shirt size (S,M,L): Witnessed by: Witnessed by: "


"The return of the legendary crusader skilfully fencing his way through twenty screens of mystery and danger! DISK CASSETTE Available for Commodore 64 & Atari ZONO. Datasoft U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, GOLD. Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Datasoft is a registered trademark of Datoft, Inc. Zorre is a registered trademark of Zom Productions 1985 Zorro Productions All rights reserved. 1985 Datasoft loc "


"ANSTRAD 19-SSB MECTS CONTENTIODORE 6 9 :9 Vie ATKUNG-FU neame Konami ner-Glue Imagine Software is available from: S .WHSMITH.John Menzies , WOOLWORTH, LASKYS, Rumbelows,Greens Spectrum Shops and all good dealers. Imagine Software (1984) Limited 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS. Tel:061 834 3939.Telex: 6699771 "


"RIDDLERS DEN Available on the 48K Spectrum from Electric Dreams Software. 31 Carlton Crescent, Southampton. Tel:(0703) 225282 Dream SOFT WAR 977 "


"THE FIRST PART OF THE EPIC SPACE ACTION ADVENTURE TRILOGY THE SIEGE OF EARTH GARGOVLE GANIES ARGOYLE SPECTRUM 48K AMSTRAD 464 .95 GARGOYLE GAMES LTD., 74 KING STREET, DUDLEY, WEST MIDLANDS DY2 8QB Telephone: (Sales) 0384 238777 (General) 0384 237222 More "


"+0 Maulbag into machine code, make mine C+VG Nicholas Coles, Hants. magazine again my brother only bought it by mistake but I am amazed your magazine is still published. I just hope that your secret project can you be serious about anything? makes the magazine worthwhile for once in its existence just so that you are no longer robbing readers of money that could have been well spent. Stephen A Graham, Carlisle Editor's reply: Sorry about the black and white screen shots, Nicholas, but we sometimes want to use our colour pages for other features. Get your mates to buy a few more copies and we'll be allowed some more colour! Dear C+VG On purchasing an Amstrad at Xmas, I was very pleased with it, but now after six months 1 am not so sure. Why is it that all the popular games which are advertised when sent for are not available i.e. Brian Jacks, Daley Thompson, Super Test, Hyper Sports? J. O'Gorman, Edmonton Dear C+VG I'm not one to moan but gripe ! must, as I can suppress myself no longer \"Boy, Is your magazine awful!!\" (1) Your letters pages are very poor with hardly a good answer in any case. A bit more personality and space would help vastly, (2) Wot, no Top 10? — That the top 30 was back last issue is no excuse, seeing as it wasn't even in the issue it was supposed to be in that the one right after that issue July which had the top 10. (3) Your reviews are terrible? Not only are they reviewing old games (occasionally new star games to keep appearances) do you know how old Web Dimension is? — but they are often marked too high and very often too short. Also a mark out of 10 is as bad as using stars etc. as other magazines do except Crash and Zzap!64 which, as far as I know, are the ONLY magazines which review and mark games properly. (4) The competitions are not very good fair enough there are some good prizes but who wants Don't Buy This or Master of the Lamps? they are rubbish. Also is it just too hard to think up something different than question/answer and spot the difference competitions? (5) I was disgusted to read that you were bringing out a new feature on a programmer's diary Zzap!64 used this idea two months ago. Don't you know its cheating and wrong to copy — anything!! (6) Your maps and tips are not only old but rubbish Technician Ted was mapped (properly) over three months ago by Crash. Also note Zzap!64 mapped Entombed one month ago with six levels (not 4). Also a few pokes would help instead of playing tips which an 8 year old could have worked out. (7) Why on earth do you still print type-in programs — they are not only mostly basic rubbish (at least Your Spectrum, Your 64 print machine code games) but waste space listings went out years ago. (8) Layout your magazine has the worst layout ever with (seemingly) no regular space it is just slotted in between the numerous colour advertisements. (9) Games News (indeed) some of the games still in the news have already been fully reviewed by Crash and Zzap!64 while your magazine was still unsure of what the game was about. (10) I read the column Games They Refuse to Release. Refuse? I don't think so — it just wasn't worthwhile. However the writer went back on the title a bit by saying when some of the games were going to be released here. (11) The cover picture and similar review of Frank Bruno's boxing your magazine had an \"exclusive\" review of this game. So did Your Computer. Also why did you review a preproduction copy especially when the graphics have been changed? An exclusive means little unless it is the only review on the complete working game what you did was a preview. (12) Max Headroom interview that was an interview? All I could see was two photos covering the page with large text filling the gap it looked to me like a three minute telephone call, the depth that was reached. (13) Graphics package review pictures of the working program help BUT a shot of the loading screen? Also a few more pages of such packages for other companies would have been a whole lot better. (14) That's a major problem everything you do either covers too few or too many pagese.g. too little content and too much advertising, Zzap!64 and Crash do not seem to have as much advertising but have at least 89/100 pages of editorial while your magazine has around 70/120 (15) Hall of Fame where did it go it's hard enough entering a competition to get the highest score on a game, but even harder when you don't know any present high scores. (16) I never will buy your Editor's reply: It's really down to the software companies not having their product ready, Mr O'Gorman. If you watch our review pages, you'll see when games are actually ready but in the meantime have you got Knight Lore or Sorcery for you Amstrad? Theyll keep you happy! Editor's reply: Another satisfied \"reader\"! Well, as you don't like the replies, Stephen, we'll throw open these pages to our readers and ask them their views about your epic letter. Dear C+VG In August's issue D Mitchell of Southampton wrote to you about several different matters. One of them was about the special effects in Tron and The Last Starfighter. Well, that section explained and showed what the big computers are capable of. After all, he did say he wanted more about computers! I know there were bits in between about how special effects were used in other films, but that made it more interesting. Anyway, I for one thought that section was great! 1. Oliver, S. Yorkshire Dear C+VG I am a desperate mega-loony. In an attempt to get my letter in your mega magazine, in praise of your mag. I have a review points panel.  Graphics 9 Nice 'n' colourful  Sound 9 Sounds great to me!  Value 10 — Great value! . Readability 9 I loved it! I have just bought July's issue and loved it. I've entered all three competitions. Thanks also for two posters AND a free book of games. Dare I say it, I have one teeny weeny complaint. Why were all the screen shots in yuck black and white? In past issues they were all colour. (Oops, I've just realised, there were six competitons 'er, 'um, 'er). All in all, until someone makes a POKE to turn Basic Dear C+VG After purchasing your magazine for the first time, I found within its pages several excellent competitions. However, on further examination, it would appear that these competitions were only open to an entry submitted on the relevant coupon. This coupon is usually placed in such a position that on the reverse of the page there is a games review or an article, both of which the reader may require further reference. Can you clarify this situation for me? I can appreciate the fact that a coupon is needed to stop people who have not bought the magazine entering, but, for genuine readers, this presents a problem. Could you not print all the coupons on pages with an advert on the back to allow cutting out without loss of the said reviews or articles? Please 109 CONTINUED OVER PAGE "


"Maibang could you tell me if a written reply is acceptable as I wish to enter your competitions? Stephen Webb, Staffs. separate piece of paper? You have your faults, but, thanks for the meatiest magazine around. Richard Scott, Essex. Editor's reply: I'm afraid we can't accept written entries, Stephen, but a photocopy of the coupon will do if you don't want to cut up your issue. competitions impossible to enter, but the waiting is pure agony! As for the costs, British magazines and computer software are considered cheap if you can buy them at even more than double the recommended British retail price. I can easily sympathize with those Australian software pirates due to the above problems, yet as for those people in easily accessed countries well need I say more! With the Australian dollar not worth the metal it is printed on and the possibility of new taxes, prices will rise. Anyway a loyal citizen shouldn't whinge, so I'll given enough information about any games to persuade us to buy them. Now onto a different note, I would like to thank Imagine for their brilliant game Wizadore. It's great the graphics and scrolling are out of this world and as for that silly little tune it plays, it's driving me crazy! Also I was hoping you would print a map or clues to this game or some more on Castle Quest. Jason King, Leicester Editor's reply: Thanks for your comments, Richard. But If you didn't get a Book of Games with the July issue you've been robbed! Editor's reply: Anyone out there got a Wizadore map? Send it to us this instant! Watch for more hints on Castle Quest. There were some in our July issue. stop. I hope very much to end these problems by purchasing these goods direct from the manufacturer. Could you please advise me on buying software cheaply and safely from overseas? Please help me and prevent a 15 year old from going grey prematurely. Warren Leicester, W. Australia. Dear C+VG I am writing to you as I have discovered a devious plot going on within the covers of C+VG. The story behind this is briefly told below. Far, far away in the days of primaeval man, before the arrival of the micro-chip adapted technological society, were born two creatures; two creatures destined to have a massive influence upon poor unsuspecting computerholics, two creatures drudged from a slime bath by a caring beast and taught the ways of the wild and survival. First there was young Metcalfe, a right devious character, not to be trusted by anyone. Then there was, of course, young(!) Campbell, once a fine young Adventurer who enjoyed many a quest. Throughout the ages they schemed and planned together, well financed by a certain computer magazine, slowly taking revenge upon the community which had left them for dead in the slime bath. And so, in the cunning disguise of an adventure column, they continue their slow torture on the public to this very day!!!! So please, please warn everyone of the dangers before it is too late!! Philip Griffiths, Gwent. Dear C+VG I own an issue one 48k Spectrum which had an upgrade board made by East London Robotics. A couple of months ago the upgrade stopped working and I took it in for repair at a local computer center who could not fix it. So, I decided to write to the firm who made the 32k board and they said they could not fix it because the engineer who designed it had left. I am now looking for a firm who could supply me with an upgrade for my Spectrum Writing to Sinclair Research did no good, as they have stopped the upgrade service. Please could you print this letter in your magazine because I feel that there could be other issue one Spectrum owners who are having difficulty in finding an upgrade for these computers. Glyn Jones, Preston Editor's reply: Before you reach for a bottle of Ronnie Reagan's favourite hair restorer, write to Goodbyte, Units 10/11 Imperial Studios, Imperial Road, London SW6. Editor's reply: Can anyone help Glyn get a good grade? Dear C+VG, I do not agree with D Mitchell (C+VG, August). I think the general interest articles are very interesting. I especially liked the one on the American game Photon. He said he buys the mag to hear about computers — and presumably computer games as well — so why doesn't he want to know of computer games that are based on a film? I was interested to know how the special effects of the films Tron and The Last Starfighter were produced. I hope you will keep doing these sort of articles. Stephen Herman, Devon. Dear C+VG, Despite recent letters, I think that as long as a magazine is more than 50% free from ads, then there is nothing to worry about. Your July issue was the best C+VG ever, choc-a-bloc full of news, reviews, competitions and no listings. Listings may be a source of cheap software but if they are just re-hashes of Pac-Man and Space Invaders they are a waste of space which should be devoted to bigger reviews. I don't know whether you have dropped listings altogether or not, but if you haven't I would keep the magazine free of listings and keep the pick of the bunch original, fast and comparable with decent commercial software for a Book of Games every three months or SO. Your reviews are generally good, but the standards can vary! I think that someone who actually knows about computer games should check your typesetting. The person who reviewed Knight Lore for the Beeb, obviously didn't know that you had to drop the object shown by the spell in the cauldron in the wizard's room to get a charm. Why not give an overall, or value for money mark as well as the others, and games over a certain mark could be a Blitz Game? Now for my biggest complaint — why can't you put your competition entry form on the back of an advert, or on a Dear C+VG I am writing to ask you about the new Atari games called Daley Thompson Super Test and Street Hawk. If I am going to buy one of these I would like to know if I am getting value for money. Could you review one or even both — these games in your pages? The thing that I like about your magazine is all the latest news on games. One thing, though, why aren't there many letters from girls in your Mailbag? Claudia Woodley. Wembley. Dear C+VG After buying your magazine over the last year or so, I am pleased to say it is of the highest standard. However, life would be bliss if the postal service to Australia were of the same standard. It is quite common to receive your magazine some three months after it was printed. This not only makes your many Dear C+VG, I am writing to say how much I enjoy your magazine, but, I am disappointed in your reviews recently. The problem with them is they've been getting smaller and smaller. This means that we, the readers, are not being Editor's reply: As soon as we see these long-awaited games from Ocean we'll bring our reviews to you! And why aren't there letters from girls — you tell us! END "


"This is the one for you The Commodore show HORIZONS Saturday 26th and Sunday 27th October The Novotel Exhibition Centre Hammersmith Events  competitions  Advice  Bargains More an experience than just a show! We're organising a weekend of fun, information and bargains. There will be events for everyone to join in, advice centres to answer all your questions, competitions with great prizes, discount schemes and personalities. We're providing extra catering and rest areas for those tired exhibition feet. ernseerernas Plenty of bargains We're encouraging all our exhibitors to bring lots of bargains and special offers for you. A show with pedigree The Commodore Horizons show is sponsored by Sunshine Publications, (publishers of your favourite Commodore magazine and Popular Computer Weekly) and Computer Marketplace Ltd., organisers of the Acorn User, 6809 Colour and Amstrad User Shows. So you can be sure its going to be a great show. Miss the queues, save money. Win a Koala Touch Pad Use the coupon below and not only will you get into our 'fast' lanes and miss the queues but you save 61 per ticket as well. You also enter the prize draw and could win a Koala Pad Touch Tablet too! Editions Scheme Ltd., Hr House, Finchley, London N12 OAF 2025??SEAZ22 To: Editions Scheme Ltd., Hr House, Finchley, London N12 DAF Please rush me (Qnty) adult tickets at  and _(Qnty) under sixteen tickets at  for the Commodore Horizons Show. Tunderstandiam eligible for the prize draw. I enclose my cheque/P.O. payable to Editions Scheme Ltd., for  Name: Address: Postcode: Editions Scheme Ltd. 01-346 6566 "


"PSI UNDER PSI CONTROL, VON STROHEIM LAUNCHES THE SSSC. ROCKETS AGAINST EARTH... 000 WARRIOR BILLIONS WILL DIE! EARTH'S ONLY CHANCE 15 IF THE ROCKETS DESTRUCT IN SPACE, BUT THAT CAN ONLY BE DONE FROM INSIDE THUNDER MOUNTAIN! EMERGENCY ALERT! INCOMING MISSILES, BUT...BUT THEY'RE OURS, SIR! WE'VE LOST, IT'S IMPOSSIBLE! IMPOSSIBLE OR NOT. I'M NOT GOING TO SIT HERE AND DO NOTHING: LOAD THE CO-ORDINATES INTO THE HOVER BOARD'S COMPUTER, AND LETS... THUNDER MOUNTAIN AHEAD... POW PTOO PPOO I'M INSIDE, PROFESSOR, THE GUARDS ARE DEAD AND THE SECURITY DOORS ARE OPEN. AN INTRUDER! I DON'T KNOW WHO YOU ARE, BUT THAT'S NOT IMPORTANT BECAUSE YOU ARE ABOUT TO DIE SECURITY TYR, THE MISSILE DESTRUCTS UNIT IS IN THE MAIN CONTROL ROOM ON LEVEL NINE. STRANGE, I THOUGHT IT WOULD BE HARDERThe "


"RPHEUS The Tujad is a Josephson supercomputer that controls a fusion reactor orbiting Earth. It has gone berserk and the future of half the known galaxy is in the balance. You take control of one of the new GEN 19 multidroids, capable of running and flying and equipped with the latest weapons and neutron defensive shields. Your task is to search through the reactor, overcoming the automatic defensive mechanisms and piece together the circuit board needed to stop Tujad. TUJAD NEVER LOOK BACK... Orpheus Ltd., The Smithy, Unit 1, Church Farm, Hatley St. George, Nr. Sandy, Beds. SG193HP Tel. Gamlingay (0767) 51481/91 Telex 817117 ETHGENG Commodore 64 Amstrad Spectrum .95 Tujadian from Orpheus ORPHEUS HER FANTASIES WILL OBSESS YOU... MILES BETTER SOFTWARE 221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffs WA11 2DD Tel: 05435 3577 * SUMMER SALE* STER Title & Machine Cass Disk Beach-head (AT)..............N/A .95 Beach-head II 164)...........95 .95 Conan (AT)........ .........NIA 10.95 Pole Position (AT)...........7.95 .95 Mr Do (AT).... ........95 NIA Mr Do (64)... .27.95 N/A Dropzone (64).................95 N/A Dropzone (AT)...... ......17.95 .95 Super Huey (64).............27.95 .95 Bruce Lee (AT).............E10.95 .95 F15 Strike Eagle (AT)....E10.95 .95 F15 Strike Eagle (64).......95 .95 Tapper (Z). [6.95 NIA Spy Hunter 1641............ ..95 .95 Spy Hunter (ZX.......... .95 N/A Quasimodo (AT)........ .95 N/A Bounty Bob (AT)...... .95 N/A Bounty Bob (64)......... .95 .95 Blue Max (AT)............ Zaxxon (AT).................95 N/A Fort Apoc. (AT)............ ..95 .95 Dambusters 164)............67.95 .95 Dambusters 12X)..........06.95 NIA Miner 2049er (AT) ROM.....NIA .95 Ultimata il 164).................NIA .95 Ultimata Ill (AT)...............N/A 16.95 DoughBoy (64)................95 .95 Impossible Mission (64)....95 .95 Pitstop II (64).................95 .95 Pole Position iZx)............6.95 N/A Ulysess (AT)..... ......N/A .95 Ulysess (64)......................N/A .95 Summer Games 1 164).... 17.95 .95 Mig Alley Ace (64)........E7.95 .95 Mig Alley Ace (AT)..........95 .95 Ghost Chaser (64)...........95 .95 Ghost Chaser (AT)...........95 .95 Strip Poker (AT)..............95 .95 Wurley Nurds 164).. .....95 E10.95 Wurley Nurds ATI.. .7.95 .95 Super Zaxxon 164)...........95 .95 Super Zaxxon LATI..........95 E10.95 Blue Max 2001 (64)........95 E10.95 Blue Max 2001 (AT)........ 7.95 .95 Lucifer's Realm 164).........95 .95 Lucifer's Realm (AT).......95 .95 Spy Hunter (AT)..............95 .95 Kennedy Approach (64)....95 .95 Up & Down (AT).............95 .95 Zorro (64)..... .95 .95 Zorro (AT)................... 17.95 .95 Tapper (AT).......... ....95 .95 Summer Games (AT)..........NIA E10.95 The mother of Harlots System 3 Software Access/Visa welcome. Please telephone for software availability and software lists for 64, Atari and Spectrum. Add .00 for overseas orders. * Phone for new range of music CDs at discount prices. "


"CRU SIMBE IK BROFA NAFIONE APRE Johnny Jones, modern day hero and explorer extraordinaire, has finally discovered the lost Temple of Abu Simbel, built by the great Pharaoh Ramses II over 3000 years ago. In frenzied desperation he enters this secret world and is drawn into a frightening adventure, threatened by the Pharaoh's curse, in constant danger until he can reach the inner mortuary chamber. SEITE ERAUKIMAS ProsaivatieN ProsatiN ProsavaTION SPECTRUM 48K .95 OS Gremlin Gremlin Graphics, Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield Si 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423 "


"Don't miss it! The first-ever show to be devoted to the most talked about micros of 1985! JAMSTRAD COMPUTER SHOW LOOK WHAT'S WAITING FOR YOU... * SEE and try out for yourself the whole range of Amstrad computers, including the latest CPC6128 and PCW8256. * TALK to some of Britain's leading Amstrad experts, who'll be on hand throughout the show giving free advice on hardware and software problems. An independent show organised by Database Publications with the cooperation of the two leading Amstrad magazines Amstrad User and Computing with the Amstrad * DISCOVER for yourself the latest exciting ways of linking your Amstrad to the outside world including a satellite hook-up to a giant American database. * BE AMONG the first to see the fantastic collection of new-season products that users everywhere will be raving about between now and Christmas. Novotel Exhibition Centre Hammersmith, London W6 Saturday-Sunday, October 5-6, 1985 * CASH IN on the biggest bargains ever offered for Amstrad hardware and software never before have users been presented with such a wide range of money-saving offers. OUT GOLDHALK RD SHEPHERDS BUSH GREEN HSMITH GROVE SONTHS BUSHROAD KING ST BROADWAY HAMMERSMITH ROAD West End Alx Hotel Car Park A3 Airbus Stod How to get there BY TUBE: Hammersmith station. (District, Piccadilly & Metropolitan lines). BY BUS: Bus station opposite the Novotel. (Frequent services from Central London). BY CAR: Make for the Hammersmith Flyover (A4/M4). (Extensive car parking within easy reach). SHORTLANDS UVOH ON HAMMERSMITH FLYOVER TALGARTH Z CAROLINE ST WEST CROMWELL ROAD Central London PALACE CVG By handing in this Q Additional vouchers can be obtained by sending a stamped addressed envelope to: Amstrad Computer Show Europa House 68 Chester Road Hazel Grove Stockport SK7 5NY Tel: 061-456 8500 This voucher is worth 50p per head! AMSTRAD voucher at the door MPUTER you save 50p off the SHOW normal admission price of  (adults) and .50 (children). (Valid for a maximum of 4 people) 10am-6pm Saturday, October 5, 1985 10am-6pm Sunday, October 6. 1985 Novotel Exhibition Centre, Hammersmith, London W6 (Nearest tube Hammersmith) Number attending 1 2 3 @ "


"COMPUTER GAMES A NEW EXCITING ADVENTURE GAME By Tony Crowther (to be available for Amstrad)  Treasure to be won & a free disk with every game Available for Commodore 64, Spectrum 48 (from October 85) WILLIAM YWOBBER The quest youll find is long and hard, The caverns dark and dire. With many dangers but great reward, To fulfill your hearts desire. Into the cave which has no guard, Seek and ye shall find, The shining ball to lead you to the hard mind. William Wobbler is the latest game from Tony Crowthera most exciting adventure game. Through the underworld of dark powers in search of golden treasure William struggles against all odds to vanquish foes and reach his goal. A game of skill and excitement. tax thmud o cortir Wizard Computer Games, Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield Si 4FS. Telephone: (0742) 752912 "


"PART TWO DIARY OFA GAME This month sees the final part of the Computer between earth and another planet which is in + Video Games Diary of a Game a month by need of food. A meteor storm damages the month look at how a software company ship, allowing aliens to enter the craft and start produces a game from scratch. eating the food. The game is Space Doubt for the Commodore The hero of the game must get rid of the 64 from CRL, the people who brought you the aliens and patch up his space ship. Rocky Horror Show. The action ranges over 18 rooms of the craft, Space Doubt is about a ship travelling giving 36 screens of action. going fine. Just getting the aliens moving was a bit of a pain. But it's going according to plan.\" SEPTEMBER posters, T-shirts and, of course, review copies for magazines. A price for the game is fixed .95 Pressure is mounting on programmer Jay Derrett. His work must be completed by the end of September, including at least one week to make sure the program is completely free of bugs. One scare happens when repeated disc errors force Jay to work right through the night \"I worked through the night to help keep to schedule,\" says Jay. \"I am pacing myself. I don't want a mad rush in the last two weeks.\" Jay has been working on Space Doubt since April. Is he still as enthusiastic about it now as he was in the beginning? \"I'm not fed up with it,\" he says,\" just a bit frustrated. It's \"It's coming along nicely.\" says lan. A final price for the game has yet to be decided The hard work is over. Space Doubt is about to go on sale. It's too late to worry what might have been. Work will now start on converting the game for other machines in time for Christmas. Whether the game is a success is up to the gamesplaying public. It must sell in the region of 8,000 copies to recover production costs and pay the team's woges. But there is no me for lan and the CRL team to relax. There's always the next game to be produced. AUGUST Work on Space Doubt is progressing satisfactorily. The cassette cover has been finalised and a detailed\" rough of the artwork has been produced by lan Ellery, CRL'S Software Manager. lan Ellery is now working on ways of promoting Space Doubt which is due in the shops on October 14, Ideas include C+VG SPECIAL OFFER The lifts connect floors + levels. food cells go down one at a time. Calling all Commodore 64 owners! Get l off the price of a copy of Space Doubt with this fantastic offer from Computer + Video Games and CRL. Space Doubt will sell in the shops for .95. But if you cut the coupon below and send it to CRL you can buy the game for just .95 Send the coupon and cheque for .95 to the following address SPACE DOUBT OFFER CRL CRL HOUSE 9 KINGS YARD CARPENTERS ROAD, LONDON E15 2HD. GRIBBLES devide when they est food cells. Name s hows Address GRIEBLIES eating food celle "


"Explore the world of Sinclair Sinclair User, the monthly magazine, will ensure that all ZX81, Spectrum and QL users get the most from their computers. Every month we include exciting games programs, reviews on the latest software, bench tests on hardware and peripherals, as well as technical advice and development news on Sinclair products. Sinclair User interviews key people within Sinclair Research, authors of top selling games plus regular features on the developments in the fast moving computer industry. We cover all aspects of Sinclair, for beginners to enthusiasts right through to business users Sinclair User will keep you informed. So, don't miss out place an order with your newsagent or complete and return the coupon below and we will ensure that your personal monthly issue is sent to you direct. Name Address . Signed... Cheques should Date... Please send to EMAP Bus depavabo 30 32 tanden Lane London & Computer Sinclair User Please send me SINCLAIR USER each month for the next twelve months. I enclose a contact Subscriptions Department. cheque PO to the value of  UK rate incucing p&pl. For overseas rate please YOUR MIND WILL BE POSSESSED BY... IF YOU'RE BUYING A BIKE, WECANHELP YOUGETA GOODDEAL. I WISTER WINTER ISSUE OUT NOW! Available from leading High Street newsagents. Olympia show surprises Winter clothing and How to buy a second-hand 2 stroke accessories review. Bike tests from big to small Yamaha FJ1100/ Kawasaki Z1100R/ Yamaha RD500LC/ Honda MBX125F/ Yamaha RD125LC/ Kawasaki AR125LC/ Yamaha DT8OMKII/ Big wheel mopeds. . Plus all new and used bike prices. WIN a Kawasaki AR125LC! The mother of harlots System 3 Software 118 Buver The Motorcycle Buyers Friend "


"STRIKE EAGLE MAJOR BILL Hold Onto Your Headgear This F-15 Is For Real! You'll get all the sophistication and thrills of an actual fighter mission. This simulation will keep you excited for a long time. GREAT REVIEWS! F-15 COMPARISON ANALOG -F-15 STRIKE EAGLE \"Real\" F15 Strike \"Fighter ...\"Don't wait. RUN down to your local software merchant and buy a copy of F-15 Strike Eagle today. Tomorrow may be too late!\" Patrick J. Kelley 1 Multiple Weapon Systems U.S.A. TODAY F-15 STRIKE EAGLE  Cannon Yes Yes \"...this is more than the right stuff. Once you've gotten used to flying these banks it MK-82 Bombs  Air Air Missiles No will be hard to go back to just cruising from La Guardia to Logan. F-15 is definitely 2. Sophisticated Electronics the only way to fly.\" Marc Randolph.  Heads Up Display Yes  Radar ANTIC-F-15 STRIKE EAGLE No  Electronic Counter Measures \"Launch into the most exciting aerial combat since Star Raiders with the F-15 Strike  Inertial Navigation Yes No Eagle...F-15 is an engrossing game which challenges pilots of all skill levels...\" 3. Real Combat Missions Yes No Charles Jackson 4. Developed and tested by Real Fighter Pilots No RUN F-15 STRIKE EAGLE 5. Aerobatic Flying \"... The F-15 Strike Eagle is not an arcade (Loops, Splits and Yo Yos) No game, but, rather, one of the most realistic EXPERIENCE THE 64/ ATARI CASSETTE 64/ATARI DISK combat flight simulators I've ever seen. REALITY OF THESE If you're looking for a chance to experience OTHER GREAT some high adventure and danger in a realistic SIMULATIONS FROM and challenging format, F-15 Strike Eagle is for MICROPROSE: you.\" Peter Paplaskas. MIG ALLEY \"KENNEDY ACE COMMANDER APPROACH... Feature F-15 Eagle Pilot Yes No Yes Yes .95  17.95 and changement og tomat, mis erika Eagles for MICROPROSE\" MICROPROSE SIMULATION. SOFTWARE 120 Lakefront Drive, Hunt Valley, Maryland 21030 COMMODORE 64, ATARI, APPLE, MACINTOSH, and IBM are registered trademarks of Thrilling Combat! Heart Pounding Exciting speech As close to the Commodore Business Inc., Atari Inc., Apple Computer Inc., and International Business accelerated realand Graphic Air real thrill of flying Machines Inc., respectively. Software Speech by Electronic Speech Systems of time defense! Traffic Control as you can Berkeley, Ca. action! handle! Dealers! For information on how to become a a sadance U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Transatlantic Simulations stockist telephone Centresoft Estate, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. S T EARIOS 021-359 8881. Telex: 337268 "


"NEXT MONTH INS The future has now been seen. You've all had time to read and enjoy the new look Computer + Video Games. But it doesn't end here. Next month will be even better. BOOK OF MAPS WHEN YOUVE QUE ANNED B-CON... TO MY OFFICE WHY DO 1 BOTHER! . Don't miss our FREE Book of Maps. Help is at hand if you're dazed, confused and trapped in a dead end. Let C+VG show you the way out. PLUS Wooo!  A FREE pull-out poster of the new Blade Runner game from CRL. Dan Dare. Learn about this legendary space hero and the new game. . More thrills and spills with Psi-Warrior. . Find out more about the Bug Hunters, C+VG's computer heroes.  JERRY Paris. Loads of reviews, colour screen shots, news, features, hints and tips. ENERGY ON SALE OCT 16 PSI WARRIOR OFFER T-SHIRT OFFER If you sayed last month's token, the lucky Commodore 64 owners amongst you can get Psi Warrior for only .99. Just send this month's coupon (below) and last month's, along with a cheque of postal order for .99, made payable to Beyond Software. If you missed last month's coupon, you can still get a 60% discount send .75 and coupon number 2 to Beyond, and Psi Warrior will wing its way to you. .Oops... Big Red strikes again If you collected either coupon 1 or 2 from the previous two issues of C+VG, then send it off with coupon number 3 to get  off our great new T-shirt. Send a cheque or postal order made payable to Computer + Video Games T-shirt offer. If you missed the coupons but don't want to miss out on our ultra brilliant T-shirt, just send .50. I enclose coupons 1 and 2 and a cheque/postal order for .99 for Psi Warrior. Tick box I enclose coupons 1 or 2 and 3 and a cheque/postal order for .50. Tick box I enclose coupon 2 and a cheque/postal order for .75 for Psi Warrior. Tick box I enclose coupon 3 and a cheque/postal order for .50 Tick box T-shirt required: Medium Large Name CHVG PSI-WARRIOR T-SHIRT T \"ON NODQ03 SRO Address Tel Name Address Tel No. Send to. Beyond, Psi Warrior Offer, 153 Lector Court, Farringdon Road, London EC1. Allow 28 days for delivery (overseas readers add  p&p). C-UG/SPECIAL OFFER/L1 OFF Send to: C+VG T-Shirt offer, Ward Lester, 14 Hertford Road, London N1. Allow 28 days for delivery (overseas readers add  p&p). "


"SO YOU'VE BLASTED THE ALIENS AND SAVED THE WORLD!! BUT CAN YOU COPE WITH BLOPPERS, GLOBS AND SPUDNIKS AND FACE THE TERRIFYING NIPPLE OF DEATH?!! 64/ATARI FLPPY\" AVAILABLE SEPTEMBER ON CASSETTE AND DISK HIRLINURD COPYRIRT CHRIS GRAY WAKELIN Screens as seen on Commodore 64 U.S. (GOLD) your encouters with the Nipple of Enter the dangerous world of the Nurds where you meet hungry companions Naples Yerty, Hooseby Nurd, Hamish Pupkin and Melvin Lugby. Join them in their insatiable quest for sustenance, negotiating 50 rooms full of deadly obstacles. And beware! Siinky snakes, Jump Bugs, Bug Eyes and Bouncing Baby Billiard Balls are just some of the foes that lurk ready to blop the unwaryl Negotiate these; avold deadly force walls, dodge the Blinking Bonkers and escape your encouters with the Nipple of Death and the Ultimate Feasts might just be your delight! CASSETTE DISK Selected U.S. Gold software is avallable from good computer stores and selected branches of: BOOTS-JOHN MENZIES-WH SMITH-WILDINGS-WOOLWORTH In case of difficulty contact U.S. Gold Ltd., Unit 10, Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone 021-359 8881. .95 $19.95 tware dney SCORE POBODO "


"CTRUITE SOSI : : -: CLEE BASKETBALL -11:11 SCORE ANOTHER WORLD SERIES WINNERY Gle Ter-Gate Imagine Software is available from: BUZEWHSMITH,John Menzies , WOOLWORTH, LASKYS, Rumbelows, Greens Spectrum Shops and all good dealers. Imagine Software (1984) Limited 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS. Tel:061 834 3939.Telex: 66997 "


"A family game for 2 to 4 players in which mum is just as much at home as the sports crazy son. Over 2000 questions on six subjects like Entertainment Sports History. C64 Amstrad Atari BBC Spectrum .95 FITEASIDE A soccer game with real pace in which passing skills are as essential as speed. Penalty shoot out truly tests your anticipation. One or two player option. C64 .95 Spectrum Amstrad Atari BBC MSX SOON SLAP SHOT A fast and furious game which requires skill and fast reactions. Ice Hockey is a tough game but persistent rough game is punished by roughing penalties. One player or two player option. C64 Amstrad MSX .95 JUMP Assume control of this unique fighting machine. Take care that you practice take off and landing thoroughly before you embark on a combat mission to seek and destroy the enemy aircrafts. Use your radar to locate the carrier and land in worsening weather conditions as you progressthrough the ranks. C64 Amstrad BBC .95. Atari Spect Electron SOON Ez VOICE MASTER .95 VOICE MASTER A unique three in one package. Speech Reproduction Speaks in your own voice. Easy to incorporate speech in your own programmes. Recorded speech does not require Voice Master for reproduction. Speech Recognition Imagine your computer actually understanding what you say. Voice Harp Just whistle or hum to produce music THE ULTIMATE HUMAN TO COMPUTER INTERFACE TRADE ENQUIRIES ANIROG Unit 10 Victoria Industrial Estate Dartford Kent 0322-92513/18 MAIL ORDER 8 High Street, Horley, Surrey. 029 378 6083 24 Hour Credit Card Service or pay by Cheque, P.O., Visa or Access on Dise ANROGI 9977 "


"Daley Thompson's PISTOL SHOOTING SPRING BOARD DIVING TUG O WAR GIANT SLALOM CYCLING ROWING PENALTIES SKI JUMP WAKEUN Summon every ounce of strength and stamina ...rise to the challenge of my SCORE 00000 WORLD RECORDS 00M Bis 1933 100 SPECTRUM 48k COMMODORE 64 AMSTRAD 6-95 7.95 8-95 Ocean Software is available from selected branches of: (BOOL, WHSMITH, John Menzies WOOLWORTH LASKYS, Rumbelows,Greens Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Ocean House 6 Central Street Manchester M2 SNSTelephone 061 832 6633 Telex 669977 Oceans G "

