"JUNE 1985 95p S$4.70 WIN TICKETS TO THE Dm6 COMPUTER GRAND PRIX IN OUR PITSTOP II CHALLENGE TELAS BEVIEWS SPECIAL WIN AN MSX FLY WITH BLAGGS COMPETITION ON PAGE 10 GGER IN «'THE VRECK\" COMPETITION HOLLYWOOD ONI GRANKIE AND GAMES ITION WIN SIGNED LPs AND GAMES OUR 2 MINDE Ardaar's ce line 7 COMP3 "


"INCENTIVE CONFUZIO THE FUZION OF MIND AND MACHINE * AMSTRAD * SPECTRUM * COMMODORE 64 * BBCB * ELECTRON * Price .95 Trade and Credit Card orders: Telephone (0734) 591678 INCENTIVE, 54 London Street, Reading RG1 4SQ "


"It's no laughing matter being pursued around an underground on slaying is back in style! Namco are trying to revive the "


"commodore COME ENJOY the most EXCITING 'LONG WEEKEND' to hit * computing * _ 6th COMMODORE COMPUTER SHOW NOVOTEL LONDON 7,8 & 9 JUNE 1985 M The greatest event in the Commodore Calender. M Brand New COMMODORE 128 Official Launch Official launch of the brand new Commodore, 128. Twice as powerful as the Commodore 64. w See the 128's own whole new range of software including the standard CP/M business programme. of sofware Biggest Selection The 1 of COMMODORE COMPUTER GAMES ARCADE The biggest selection of Commodore hardware and software to be gathered in one place. Educational, Professional and games. Play the exciting new 'International Tennis' game. outer games puter kills W W C OMPETITIONS Computer games arcade for younger computer enthusiasts. Pit your skills against some of the latest and most challenging games available. Competitions and treasure hunts. Fabulous prizes     CELEBRITY APPEARANCES lor all the lamily msar ali W   SEE THE NEW COMMODORE PC See the New Commodore PC in the special business section, and all the most recent software developments. Music Maker Orchestra to ensure a lively atmosphere. 6th COMMODORE COMPUTER SHOW Novotel, Shortlands, Hammersmith, London W6 commodore Opening times: 7th & 8th June 1985 10am-6pm 9th June 1985 10am-5pm. Admission: Adults .00, Children (under 14) . "


"18 XZAP HAS BEEN ZAPPED! THINGS ARE SLOW deserved second place in and a black belt level six. I purchased Scott Jack's brief appearance, Has anyone beaten this? Adam's Ghost Town in IN OLD CAIRO! but none were printed! Ian Hudson, December 1980 from an Why is this? Middlesex. English software house. I Dear Sir, Still, enough I really enjoy reading your complaining. Now, a seem to remember that SPELLING TROUBLE the Spectrum, on which magazine. It's just great, I question. When someone FOR GHOST TOWN even though it costs John Pickford's Ghost gets a letter printed on the run M T Town was written, was double and comes 15 days Mailbag page, do they Dear Keith, introduced around August later here in Egypt. It receive a prize? Is it not Have you ever heard of 1981. really helps me solve true that Bug Hunter and Ziggural? It's an Adventures, know all Hall of Fame both award Adventure written by my about new games from prizes ie.  postal order brother Paul and his friend Europe and the States and ope and the states and or an ace T-Shirt? John Pickford. Rings a also get more information Karl Fitzhugh bell, does it? Yes, I Dear Sir, about the C64. (ace person) thought it would, you I have a challenge for any My friends and myself Northampton reviewed a game that he of the C16 owners who own C64s and have called Editor's reply: In answer wrote Ghost Town read your magazine. With ourselves the CCS which to all the many readers published by Virgin. the starter pack you stands for Cairo Computer who have asked about the It's not so much the should have received a Service. We would like to Bugs we're giving them review (John himself thinks game called Xzap. After know if anyone has an a bit of a rest right now it's rubbish) but you had many hours of practice, I address of someone but expect some sort of the cheek to say, and I finally managed to get selling software here in Christmas Bugs Special quote, \"Ghost Town is onto the 84th level in one Egypt. We have searched toward the end of the written by a game. I do not know if high and low, but to no year. And we've a new TEENYBPPER with no anyone has beaten this avail. cartoon strip starting in dictionary\". How on earth but my final score was U. Scheuermann, October so please be are programmers meant to 465,078. Cairo, patient! start? One last thing I'd Mark Austin, Egypt. High scores for our Hall like to point out is that Lancs. Editor's reply: Can of Fame are chosen each John's Ghost Town was anyone help our Egyptian SPARE A THOUGHT issue, Karl. It could be written and finished before friend? that your scores reached Scott's Ghost Town was WHAT'S THE SCORE us too late for inclusion in ever heard of in England. the issue which featured It's just that you were Dear Sir, good old JBJ. We select extremely late to review it. I am a mother in desperate games for the Hall of I will still continue to need of HELP!! I am Dear Sir, Fame purely on a read your column, so no steadily declining in my Boo hoo. I could've cried! popularity basis if we young daughter's You see, there were no don't get enough people Peter J. Ranson, estimation, as I cannot Bugs cartoons in sending in scores for one Stockport. show her how a computer February's C&VG. SO particular game then we Keith's reply: As I game works. It is a Fisher WHERE HAVE THEY simply don't run it in that remember it, John Price program for the GONE??? That's what I issue. So you'll have to Pickford was one of Spectrum called Logic want to know. Of course, encourage more JBJ fans Virgin's \"pop-star Levels for 7-12 year olds. these creatures are a pain to write in! programmers\" and his Yes, you have guessed it in the neck. But surely T-shirts go to the top age in his teens) was on I am older than that. they deserve to keep their scorers in each Hall of the inlay. I'm afraid I In fact, neither my page in your ace mag. Fame category and some have no time for games husband or my brother And, that's not the only Adventure Helpline released commercially can. thing that's gone missing!!! tipsters but not Bug (and therefore taken to be Are we just three Where is Jack? For six Hunter or Mailbag a little authoritative) that dimwitted adults not issues you have been contributors. are full of spelling errors knowing what the hell promising Jet Boot Jack a (one can usually they are doing? BUG BYTE TAKES place in your high-score distinguish these from the Mrs S. Sewell table in the Hall Of Fame. IA BEATING forgivable odd typing Surrey He did make an error). It sets a bad Editor's reply: Anyone out appearance, once, for the Dear Sir, example and can cause there with the answer? If record period of one I recently purchased Bug players to think that the so, let Mrs Sewell know issue!!! I have sent in five Byte's Kung Fu and my misspelling is actually the as part of C&VGs \"Be high scores, one of which I highest score so far is 471 I correct spelling. After all, I kind to Adults\" campaign! FOR POOR ADULTS! ON JET BOOT JACK? Please drop us a line at: Computer & Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. "


"Instead of computers cato technology now has to ca <? ? ENTERPRISE The way we see it, technology has suddenly got quite a race on its hands. There's no other home computer in the world that's so expandable or so updatable as the new Enterprise 64. And if you're wondering quite how we've managed that, kindly take a closer look at the outputs on our remarkable new machine. You'll notice that amongst all the usual sockets and terminals, we've gone and incorporated a special 66-way expansion port. This will accept a whole range of new peripherals that are in the pipeline. Including those that are a mere twinkle in the eyes of our hardware designers. We thought this expandability principle was such a good idea, we applied it to the Enterprise's memory, too. Even in its most basic 64K form, this puts more user RAM at your disposal than almost any other competitor. But plug in our special Rampacks to the base unit, and you can progressively increase that figure to a truly extraordinary 3,900K "


"Eching up with technology, atch up with a computer. EAM LERE 9090909090 3 INCHLIK CRIVE as HDMIK BRIVE at Not that that's the only challenge we present to today's ambitious programmers. With a screen resolution of up to 672 x 512 pixels, 256 colours and a high speed video processor, the Enterprise will outgun all but the highest quality TV monitors. And the sophisticated sound chip generates no fewer than 4 voices across 8 octaves in full stereo. Combine the two and you can create effects that leave today's games looking like pub video tennis of the mid-seventies. For anyone with literary aspirations, the Enterprise also comes complete with an integrated word processor. Whilst the really serious user will be delighted to discover analogue RGB and TV outputs, as well as parallel, RS423 serial and network ports. Both Cobol and C will be available with CP/M running, and you can even use Lisp, Forth and Z80 assembly language on cartridge without encroaching on user RAM. The new Enterprise 64. It hasn't just overtaken technology. It's left every other home computer straggling in the distance. ENTERPRISE COMPUTERS WITH OBSOLESCENCE BUILT-OUT "


"VA 22 COMING BACK JET SET WILLY LET'S HEAR IT READ ABOUT IT | Mark Copping | but distributed by people to swop typed-up Bath. Software Projects and debugged versions of IN C&VG FIRST! Editor's reply: Just goes Mark Pearson, game listings. to show the powers of Consett, Roger Musson, Dear Sir, C&VG's reviewers, Mark. Co. Durham. Edinburgh. One Friday afternoon (15 We KNOW a good game Editor's reply: That's Editor's reply: We're March, in fact) I noticed a when we see one. Are you fighting talk, Mark! Let's always looking for better copy of Impossible the first? I'm afraid we're hear what the rest of our ways to present our Mission on a shelf of a well not sure -but maybe readers think. listings, Roger. We've known high street store. someone out there knows even considered printing I looked at the back of different? THE CHARTS ARE them in the form of a \"bar the package, saw the GIVING UP ON screen picture and code\" like you see on supermarket frozen foods. returned the game (silly Dear Sir, But we feel that, with the boy!) to the shelf. Has it been busted by the increasing price of The following day Dear Sir, Ghostbusters? Has it been software, listings still (Saturday) I picked up a I am writing to you after fixed by the Gremlins? Or provide a source of cheap copy of C&VG at my being very frustrated did the Editor just forget to software. We're always newsagent around 10 am, about Software Projects put it in? YES, I am talking open to suggestions, read the review of Jet Set Willy. Not only is about the Top 30 Chart. though. What do the rest Impossible Mission (11 am) Surely THE computer of you feel about our kicked myself and rushed Cellar but they have also games magazine should listings. Too long? Too into town to see if the made it harder by not have a top 20, or at least a short? Too many of them! game I had put down as allowing you to pass, top 10. If there is none, it Let me know! Your \"mediocre\" was still there. through the drive. might just put me off exchange idea sounds It was, so I did the only I have found this very buying the next copy ... good too anyone else sensible thing after frustrating and eventually I then again it might not. interested? reading a C&VG review have given this game up Tony & Thomas O'Neill, and bought it eager to as a very unwise Co. Cork see if your reviewer's investment Ireland statements of \"outstanding This type of slack FOR THE HEROES! Editor's reply: A brand sound effects\" and programming is another new C&VG Top 30 Dear Sir, \"astonishing voice example of why the UK's compiled by Gallup starts I always read the Mailbag synthesis\" were justified, top games all come from next issue, Tony and section with great interest, and how right he was!! US Gold and other such Thomas! but not once have I read Anyway, having bought software distributors. Now software distributors. Now C&VG SOFTWARE anywhere how good the the game, I avidly started it seems as though the Adventure game Heroes of to attempt to complete the lake of UK software has all SWOP SHOP? Karn is. mission, which I have but dried up. It was very well thought (Tuesday, 19 March). A high standard of Dear Sir, out and I think you should The end comes when software must be I would like to take this review it to let everyone you open the doorway to produced if a battle is to opportunity of expressing know how good this be confronted with a full be fought between US and a few opinions on C&VG. Adventure is. screen picture of Elvin at UK software houses. I have First -it's streets ahead of By the way, Manic Miner his controls. He turns his found all the US games to the opposition. Second fans, here are some C64 head and opens his mouth be of a very high level of does anyone really type in pokes to give you and shouts \"No... No... programming nothing all those long programs? everlasting lives. Enter the No!\" in stunning voice sloppy here. In this day and age of following program as synthesis. The screen then If anyone out there is technological marvels, it shown: clears to reveal your score thinking of producing a seems an unnecessarily VERIFY: RET and a woman's voice takes game, try to think of the tedious way to transmit When \"Ready\" is shown over! The woman player as well as the data. Have you looked into LOAD \" \",1,1:RET announces ... \"Mission complexity of the game. A possible alternatives, eg, When \"Ready\" is shown completed, game must have a certain scrapping the program again, enter these congratulations\" and says degree of ease about it pages in favour of a plastic commands it perfectly! then as the player \"record of the sort you POKE 16573,234 I must ask the obvious progresses the difficulty used for the Thompson POKE 16572,234 question of \"Am I the first must increase. The best Twins Adventure? POKE 16571,234 to complete the game?\" example of this that I can I Another possibility SYS 16384 especially so quickly after think of is BC's Quest for would be a C&VG games Michael J. Fickle, reading the review I Tires, yet another US game exchange a forum for hange a forum for 1 Oldham. Please drop us a line at: Computer & Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. "


"ORIC? VIC 20? CBM64? AMSTRAD? SOFTWARE? DRAGON? BBC? ELECTRON? SPECTRUM? WHERE? TOUCHMASTER FOR OUR FREE FULL BROCHURE CLIP OUT THE COUPON BELOW AND POST TO:TOUCHMASTER LTD., P.O. BOX 45, MARGAM, PORT TALBOT, W. GLAM. SA13 1WD. ---XPLEASE SEND ME YOUR FULL SOFTWARE BROCHURE NAME ADDRESS..... ...... . ................ CUI CBM64 VIC 20 *I AM INTERESTED IN SOFTWARE FOR THE:BBC ELECTRON AMSTRAD ORICO DRAGON * PLEASE TICK WHERE APPROPRIATE SPECTRUM "


"TAKE THE TRIP OF A LIFETIME! THE COMPETITION game. Closing date for entries is 31st July The competition is sponsored by 1985. Alligata Software Ltd. and is exclusive to readers of Computer & Video Games. THE PRIZE To enter, you must complete the answers Alligata Software Ltd will present to to the questions appearing on the entry the winner a travel voucher to the value form of this month's and next month's of ,000 that can be used towards the copies of Computer & Video Games. reservation of a holiday in Hollywood. The answers can be determined from PLUS: Ten runners up prizes of Alligata playing Blagger Goes to Hollywood. In Software packages valued at over  addition, you must describe in not more each. than 15 words why you would like to visit Hollywood. In the event of a tie, this will THE QUESTIONS be used to select the overall winner. 1) Loaded to kill, what's the final Entries are only valid if they contain the ingredient needed to destroy the killer of unique number printed on the game the deep? description/order form card to be found 2) Who's not in the can until you've got in every Blagger Goes to Hollywood the can? Hi there C&VG readers! I'm the Blagger and I want YOU to fly with me to Hollywood for the holiday of a lifetime! Hollywood is the movie centre of the world — and all the stars of TV and cinema can be seen in action. If you get to fly with Blagger to sunny California, you'll be able to see the stars in action and have enough adventures of your own to make your own movie! But first you have to help Blagger steal a copy of the latest movie blockbuster in his latest computer adventure, Blagger Goes to Hollywood. Blagger has decided that his true path to fame and fortune lies in the movies not appearing in them but in capturing the master copy of the latest megabuck spectacular now in production. But, when he reaches Hollywood, he soon realises that the heroes of the movies are not celluloid frauds and can put their talents to good use in defence of their reputations. In Alligata's latest hit game you have to assist Blagger through these dangerous movie sets, making full use of the four way scrolling action to find your route to the final film location, the opportunity for Blagger to make his most famous snatch of all. As in every truly great spectacular, the plot isn't quite as simple as it seems and the scriptwriters of Hollywood have set a few brainteasers on the way. Once you've solved a number of them then you'll have the clues to complete and enter the competition for the opportunity of the holiday of a lifetime. 10 RUNNERS UP PRIZES WORTH 250 eebi BLAGGER IS BACK ACTION .95 Allinals jebul i C&VG/ALLIGATA BLAGGER i COMPETITION FLY WITH BLAGGER  NAME ADDRESS Unique Blogger Goes to Hollywood Number:..... (supplied with every game) My answers are: 1...... I should like to go to Hollywood because (complete in not more than 15 words) ano TITIO All entries must be returned by 31st July 1985 to Alligata Alligata Software Lid. 1 Orange Street Sheffield S1 40W / CITIN Software Limited COMP3 "


"COMPUTER SPORTS from Activision ACTIVISION HOME COMPUTER SOFTWARE American Foowair Star League Baseball On-Court Tennis Activision Decathlon ALL AVAILABLE ON COMMODORE C64 CASSETTE. ACTIVISION DECATHLON ALSO AVAILABLE ON ATARI HOME COMPUTER AND MSX ACTIVISION UK LTD., 15 HARLEY HOUSE, MARYLEBONE ROAD, LONDON NW1. SELECTED TITLES AVAILABLE FROM SELECTED BRANCHES OF BOOTS, WH SMITH, JOHN MENZIES, LASKY'S, SPECTRUM, GREENS, WOOLWORTH AND GOOD COMPUTER SOFTWARE STORES EVERYWHERE. "


"WINGS OF WAR decreased altitude and simulations, there are three DAMBUSTERS banked from side to side SPITFIRE 40 levels of difficulty one is a when necessary MACHINE: Atari leaving practice flight the second is most of the more mysterious MACHINE: CBM 64 SUPPLIER: US Gold combat practice and the last controls alone. SUPPLIER: Mirrorsoft PRICE: .95 is a full scale mission in which As soon as you hit land PRICE: ,95 you must take off and destroy Dambusters a new after flying across the The blurb on the cassette the incoming enemy planes game from US Gold for Channel you are immediately cover of Spitfire 40 and return to the landing strip the Commodore 64 and surrounded by enemy lighter claims that the game is before you run out of fuel. If Alari re-enacts the plans and you have to flick the most realistic simuyou choose the third level daring raids by 617 between the front and rear lation of a wartime fighter your successes, and defeats squadron on the Ruhr gunner to mount an effective p lane on sale. I would are recorded at the end of the valley to drop the now famous defence disagree with that, but I would tape into a kind of electronic bouncing bombs on the Dropping bombs is no easy certainly propose that it's one logbook where you can hydro-electrodams matter. as anyone who of the most enjoyable I have monitor your progress in your supplying electricity to the watched the film The Damplayed to date. A quest to pick up as many industrial heartland 01 busters will know. Your plane I have played many flying military decorations for wartime Germany must be travelling at the right simulations in the past and bravery as is possible as well You play the part of the speed and height for the have always done disas a cushy office Job pilot, navigator, rear and front bombs to bounce into their astrously badly. Either I've somewhere in the RAF gunner and the bouncing correct position on the dam's never been able to take off or The instruction manual that bomb dropper Controlling all wall. If I manage that, I always dive is supplied with the cassette these different parts of the It would have been a straight back into the ground struck me as being extremely plane is quite a struggle, with disappointment if this game because I've forgotten one of well presented the enemy planes screaming in had been just another version the 25 different things I have instructions and diagrams are from all directions, barrage of Fighter Pilot. Fortunately to do in the 30 seconds after simple, concise and easily balloons blocking your path the game doesn't lean too the plane has left the ground understood which in and floodlights. Trying to stay heavily towards being a flight Mirrorsoft's Spitfire 40 on comparison to most similar in the air is no easy task simulator, although it does the other hand is a little more programs, is a minor miracle. There are three levels of require skill and concenforgiving than most games of Overall Spitfire 40 lsa play. The first includes taking tration to keep the plane in its ilk graphically excellent game off from England and flying the air. Dambusters is really a Things like the speed at that allows \"normal\" people into central Germany. The shoot-'em-up of the best kind which you are travelling are the chance of a flight in a second starts you off flying and should keep trigger still important but the spitfire without having to pass across the Channel, sparing happy computer owners smallest mistake doesn't an exam in reading badly you the difficulty of taking off contented for quite some mean instantaneous death. Written, 100-page instruction The third places you over the time. Certain mistakes, though, like booklets. Ruhr valley on a practice not lifting up your underbombing run. . Graphics carriage as soon as you have The pilot's controls  Graphics are  Sound left the ground, will cause the fairly complicated and Spitfire to crash land you  Sound  Value numerous and for most of the  Value  Playability don't usually survive. game l only increased and  Playability As with most flight 000 000 12 "


"Before you go mad at Silverstone, let David Hunt drive you round the bends. WWMMMMMMMMMM? Tal ... 18 -START WOODCOTE COPSE CORNER 7. CHICANE. Throw out the anchors Change down to Ith. Flick left then right. Come out, at around 117mph. Get the first bend wrong and you lose a lot of time correcting later on. 1. COPSE CORNER. Brake and drop into th.Turn in, then hit the accelerator Watch the kerb in wet weather The painted surface makes it slippery David Hunt, brother of ex-World Champion James. began racing 100ce go-karts at 16. Now aged 24 and with two successful Formula Ford seasons behind him, David is a member of the Eddie Jordan Formula Three team. MAGGOTS ABBEY SILVERSTONE MAX. NO. STARTERS: Grand Prix, 36. LENGTH: Grand Prix (with chicane): 2.932 miles. SURFACE: Asphalt 2. MAGGOTS. Easily taken flat-out. That's around 6000rpm in Sth. The power in an F3 car peaks between 5000 and 5,600 rpm. If you put your foot down at less you'll blow your engine up BECKETTS CHAPEL. 6. CLUB Arrive with 5,700 rpm up, to get through in Sth gear. Avoid the apex kerb. It'll flick you into the cateh-fencing, STOWE 3. BECKETTS. Approach at 5,700 rpm in Sth (132 mph). Keep left. 60 yards out, hit brake and drop down through 5th and th to 3rd. 5. STOWE Supreme test of courage to keep your foot on the loud pedal through this critical bend. 4. HANGER STRAIGHT. Drive diagonally across the straight. Clock 5.800 rpm in 5th as you approach Stowe Corner That's around 139 mph. HUMIMITIIMIITTI REVS is far and away the most realistic simulation of motor racing ever devised. Technically, of course, it's a computer game for the BBC Micro. But somewhere in the middle of your first practice lap you'll realise that game has nothing to do with it. Instead, you'll experience how it feels to drive every bend. straight and gradient of the world's fastest Grand Prix circuit. In a machine that accelerates from 0 to 100 mph in just 3.2 seconds. Gear ratios, engine tuning and handling they're all accurate in their finest detail and faithfully programmed into REVS. You can even pre-set the aerodynamic profile of the car to suit your driving style. So take our advice: before you try for the lap record at Silverstone, study David Hunt's circuit diagram. After all, when was the last time you had a free driving lesson from a professional? For the address of your nearest Acornsoft stockist, or to order REVS on credit card, call 0933 79300 during office hours. Or send the coupon below to: Acornsoft, c/o Vector Marketing, London Road, Wellingborough, Northants NN8 2RL. Please allow 28 days for delivery. To: Acornsoft.clo Vector Marketing. London Road, Wellingborough. Northants NN8 2RL. Please send me REVS for The BBC Microcomputer. No. of Discs at .65 ine VAT No. of Cassettes at $14.95 ine VAT I enclose PO/Cheque payable to Acornsoft Ltd. Or charge my credit card Card Number: Barclaycard/Access (delete) Name. Address Postcode Signature Z E US FROM ACORNSOFT FROM ACORNSOFT. "


"SILVER RANGE... Seeing H1000000 7 SCORE 000000-200 book THE HELM Adventure An amusing, stylish text adventure HELICHOPPER Arcade Fast and smooth multi-screen action MR FREEZE Arcade/Strategy Six compartments, each tougher to de-ice CH SEORES 273110 CHICKIN CHASE Arcade Ruling the roost can be a hard life EXODUS Arcade Strange creatures emerging from the pits DUCK! Arcade Comedy and music in this novel duck shoot r1 L 3 ESTRA Arcade Recover the sacred statue of Estra the Snake God MICROCOSM Arcade Addictive and challenging multi-level arcade action SUBSUNK Adventure with Graphics Trapped on the sea bed in a scuppered submarine BULE 00050 156 aroma Eger VIKING RAIDERS War Game A test of strategy against the computer or friends 63001 soside assess RUN BABY RUN Arcade Multi-car cop chase and shoot-out ZULU Arcade 100 golden masks hidden in a magic maze DON'T PANIC Arcade/Strategy Amusing and challenging, a game with a difference DON'T BUY THIS! Compilation Five of the worst games you have ever seen THE HACKER Arcade/Strategy Terminal to modem, telephone network to mainframe Firebird and the Firebird logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications pic "


"1 is believing .50 each. 5132235222 @ 01 45 RECE SCORE: PASSWORD 0000-1248 ROOMINUMER: 005 CE VALUES LEFT 52 RADIATION FAHRENHEIT 3000 Arcade/Strategy Sixty four screens to meltdown GOGO THE GHOST Arcade/Adventure 150 different haunted castle chambers CIRCUS CIRCUS Arcade Twenty circus rings to escape SDR0002 SCOREN 900000 ONE N25688650 JON RNDRE HE ARACHE HEADACHE Arcade Nervous Ned's quest to serve the Brain BIRD STRIKE Arcade Wing the planes and shoot the pigeons THE WILD BUNCH Strategy/Adventure Accused of murder, hunt the real killer BONUS J06 QILIL MICKEY THE BRICKY Arcade Four screens packed with fun FIREBIRD SILVER CATALOGUE AMSTRAD CPC 464 COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM 16K/48K 026 MR. FREEZE 015 MR. FREEZE 006 RUN BABY RUN 029 THE WILD BUNCH 017 BOOTY 035 DON'T PANIC 042 SHORTS FUSE 018 EXODUS SPECTRUM 48K 044 SUBSUNK 019 HEADACHE 008 VIKING RAIDERS 020 ZULU BBC MODELB 012 THE WILD BUNCH 003 BIRD STRIKE 024 GOGO 014 MR.FREEZE 005 DUCK! 028 ESTRA 016 BOOTY 022 ESTRA 032 SUBSUNK 031 SUBSUNK 023 THE HACKER 034 THE HELM 033 THE HELM 025 MR. FREEZE 038 CHICKIN CHASE 036 SHORTS FUSE 039 MICROCOSM 041 CIRCUS CIRCUS 037 HELICHOPPER ELECTRON VIC 20 (UNEXPANDED) 040 DONT BUY THIS! 002 MICKEY THE BRICKY 043 FAHRENHEIT 3000 027 BIRD STRIKE 030 THE HACKER MAIL ORDER Please state name of game (and machine) and numbers required. Enclose crossed cheque/PO made payable to FIREBIRD SOFTWARE All offers are subject to availability. Orders are despatched promptly. All prices inclusive of VAT and postage. MAIL ORDER: *FREEPOST FIREBIRD, WELLINGTON HOUSE, UPPER ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON WC2H 9BR \"No stamps BOOTY S TREASURE 120 BOOTY Arcade/Adventure Twenty holds full of pirate loot ODOGDO LITERCOOL FAA SHORT'S FUSE Arcade/Strategy Sam Short secret agent versus Boris and his bombs FIREBIRD FIREBIRD SOFTWARE, WELLINGTON HOUSE, UPPER ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON WC2H 9DL. TEL: 01-379 6755/5626 "


"FORMULA drivers or whether you have and drivers and cars get an established team or are improved efficiency ratings, starting from scratch with a there is still no real indication new team. why the efficiency improves \"You also don't know — short of simply doing well about the regulations. All the in races. F1 teams have to work to y the time you read regulations governing fuel, this, the very first tyres, car construction, for Grand Prix of the example. new Formula One World \"The race parts are OK Championship season Except they are a bit too will have taken place in random. Some drivers are EFFATUIELIPERS ** Brazil. It's the first of a heavier on tyres than others gruelling series of races So, for instance, I'd put which take place in Keke on harder slicks at the The lack of documentation exotic locations all start of a race. There seems is terrible for such a complex to be no allowance for this around the world. sort of thing. It's really just game ist game as this and does the It takes a combination of many things to make a like throwing a dice. There's program no favours at all. Basically Formula One is World Champion racing Peter Collins not enough of a skill element. driver. He must be sponsors and then go on to \"You should be able to bid a an entertaining game for for sponsorship at the start of # Strategy fans well extremely fast and build up a championship team each season — which is what presented despite the lack of talented, he must have a sby spending money wisely on actually happens. The budget instructions and information good car and a good your cars, drivers and pit should be more detailed. given with the cassette. But team of expert crews. More attention should have Grand Prix enthusiasts will mechanics to back him The game takes you been paid also to the actual soon find the novelty wearing up. The person who has through a full 16 race abilities of the drivers and off! to make sure that the championship season with their various styles of driving. drivers get that perfect a graphic display for each \"I think people who know a  Graphics mix is the team manager. race. You have to make pit bit about the sport would be  Sound CRL have just stops for tyre changes or disappointed with this. But  Value released a game for the repairs which is where your maybe I'm being a bit hard on Playability pit crew and your joystick Spectrum called skills come in! Formula One which There are several skill casts you in the un. levels, ranging from novice to enviable role of a Grand expert succeed in one Prix team manager. So, season and your rank with the new season improves in the next. There is approaching, it seemed also a \"save\" game feature like a good opportunity essential if you want to to find out just what a make it to the \"expert\" grade. REAL Grand Prix team manager thought of the HONDA game. C&VG visited the home of the Williams Canon Grand Prix team in Oxfordshire to meet Peter Collins, the man who saw Keke Rosberg and Williams take the it looking at it from a Williams have won two World Championship in THE EXPERT'S professional point of view! World Championships 1982. Peter has also VIEW think that there's a first with Alan Jones and worked with Lotus and per fantastic game to be made then more recently with Peter took a break from a out of the sport — but this ATS Formula One teams Keke Rosberg. Peter busy schedule preparing one misses out all the Collins hopes that this year so he's well qualified the Williams cars for the first import could see another World to give an opinion on important bits!\" CRL's attempt to Championship coming his race of the new season — to way. The team have a new take a look at the game. He THE ENTHUSIAST'S recreate the fast moving swapped his place in the pits VIEW car, designed by Patrick world of F1 Grand Prix Head, and two top drivers. for an armchair in front of a Keke Rosberg, champ in racing. TV screen. plugged in the At first glance, and tirst play. 1982. and former Lotus Spectrum and set about Formula One is an entertaindriver, Nigel Mansell, THE GAME winning his first computerised ing strategy game. But after a complete the picture at CRL's Formula One Grand Prix. couple of seasons, the Williams for the 1985 challenges you to win the first he commented on the enthusiast may well become season. We wish them all Drivers' Championship and lack of documentation. \"No a bit annoyed with the details a bit annoved with the details the very best of luck. And don't forget, you could be the Constructors' Championvalues have been put on the that are missing from the watching the Williams team ship for your team. You pick various aspects of the game game details already in action if you enter our the team you wish to manage you're not told how much outlined by Peter Collins. fabulous Pitstop competiup to six people can play cash each sponsor puts in. Although your team does tion on page 26 of this select your drivers and the relative merits of the progress season after season magazine! Mobil10 16 "


"OFFICIALLY LICENSED FROM M.C.A. ARNOLF Stringfellow Hawke, a former Vietnam chopper pilot is the only man in the free world trained to fly the billiondollar helicopter AIRWOLF! You are Stringfellow Hawke... AVAILABLE NOW FOR COMMODORE 64 ALSO AVAILABLE FOR C16 AT .95 AMSTRAD AT .95 ATARI 800 AT .95 48K SPECTRUM EINSTEIN T.B.A. .95 COMMODORE 64 .95 Elite Systems Ltd., 55 Bradford Street, Walsall W5130D. Telephone: (09221 611215. Telex 335622 SPETEL G. Attn. Elite. Elite Every single Elite product carries the unique Elite Holograph Sticker Make sure your copy does it is your guarantee of quality "


"REVIEW.S Spe used to save planets in this bit These are just little pictures of time and work out a which appear on the screen to password to get into the next represent various items, such time grid ... Sounds a bit as a character, a weapon, complicated but once you movement, and so on. Conget into the game you'll be sequently, it's possible to play hooked. the entire game with a single You get a ranking as you joystick. progress through the game. So if you wanted one of the The ultimate award is Creator characters to pick up the laser as at the very end of the rifle, you just move the cursor game and by the odd logic of over the character you want FLEVER1 000000000000 PLAVES time travel you've ended up at and press fire. This takes you the beginning of time and, to the character's personal well, you're all there is! screen, showing strength, Programmer David Webb, stamina and such like. Now a 19-year old student, spent move the cursor to the yellow nine months working on monitor icon and press fire Starion -and if there's any again to get the weapons justice in the world he will be screen. You can then move rewarded with a number one the cursor to the pick-up icon, hit! followed by the laser rifle icon to get the weapon. Easy isn't  Graphics it? engage and destroy enemy  Sound Now to the game itself. The STARION ships in each of the time Value bad guy. General Zoff, and his MACHINE: Spectrum zones. But it doesn't stop  Playability cronies have stolen the plans to a revolutionary new spacethere. Each ship is carrying a SUPPLIER: Melbourne ship Shadowfire which you cargo which materialises in House space as a giant letter of the must retrieve. PRICE: .95 earth alphabet. At your disposal are six Calling all Spectrum You must collect all the characters making up the owners! Don't hang letters from each time zone Enigma team: Zark Montor, about waiting for Elite to until your on-board computer Syylk, Sevrina Maris, Torik, appear for your micro asks you to unscramble them Maul, and Manto. rush out now and grab a to identify the original cargo The mission of this rather copy of Starion from Meldislodged in time by the odd assortment, who look as bourne House! enemy. though they have walked The company which has Once you've done this, you SHADOWFIRE straight out of a comic book, is made its name with megamust find a time warp and fly to recapture the plans. adventures like The Hobbit into it. Then the time grid is MACHINE: CBM-64 To do this, you teleport the and Sherlock takes a bold displayed. Now you have to SUPPLIER: Beyond team to various parts of Zoff's step forward in arcade-style decide in which of the eight PRICE: .95 sky fortress, where you dash game technology with an neighbouring time zones your Beyond's new Adventure about, battling with the innovative and addictive unscrambled cargo belongs. game for the Commodore baddies and collecting game. You then jump to the 64 can best be described objects for later use. Having The scenario goes like this selected time zone, land on as different. Since they six characters to manipulate The year is 2010 but the planet you find and then have a history of prosomething to do. independently, there's always there's no sign of a star-child see if your cargo can solve ducing not-so-adventureanywhere! You are Starion, the particular problem being type Adventure games incluThe game itself is fresh out of the space experienced on the planet. ding The Lords of Midnight thoroughly enjoyable with academy and rated as one of Get it right and your fuel and Doomdark's Revenge, excellent sound and graphics the top new pilots. Your and oxygen supplies will be you'd expect Shadowfire to be and is no doubt the forerunner mission is to fly the first ever replenished and it's off into a bit special. of many more of its ilk. Though Timeship, the S.S. Stardate battle again. Get it wrong and Although it's not an arcade the die-hard text adventurers and to boldly go back in time you have to destroy enough game, everything's against will probably ridicule it, the to correct the devastation enemy ships, mines and the clock. You know, just 100 game is well worth trying. I created by — you guessed it missiles to create a new time minutes to save the universe! can't wait for the further an evil race of aliens. warp in order to make good Ah, you're thinking, but what adventures of the E-team The game is big 243 your escape. about those of us who can't promised by Beyond. screens of space-time filled Once you have corrected type very quickly. Fear not. with exciting wire graphic history in all nine zones of the Beyond have solved this pro. Graphics ships and other dangers. first time grid, you'll be asked blem by using icons — oft  Sound To save the universe from to take the first letters of each talked about in Apple Mackin Value collapse, Starion has to particular bit of cargo you've tosh circles.  Playability 18 "


"REV.I.E.W. S ) = 9 I 2 game. Check it out — before tory of the items you are the thieves check out of the carrying, the scrolling text 5 hotel and get away with those menu of commands, the plans! sections of the ice crown that you have discovered, your  Graphics good/evil alignment and the  Sound time you have left to complete  Value the quest.  Playability The text menu is extensive and includes commands like pick-up, use, unlock, open etc be solved along the way and GRAND LARCENY and a useful \"Help\" various creatures to be MACHINE: CBM-64 ICE PALACE command which prompts avoided. But at least there's SUPPLIER: Melbourne MACHINE: CBM-64 cryptic clues. Your good/evil lots of cups of tea to be had House SUPPLIER: Creative Sparks rating changes as the game along the way! PRICE: .95 goes on and if you become the graphics and sound PRICE: .95 totally evil the game ends with are excellent and the game is There I was stuck on the Like Shadowfire, Ice you in the power of the evil Ice totally addictive. fire-escape outside one Palace is an Adventure Queen. But you can find the particularly liked the way of the world's most excluwhich doesn't need any old king and touch him for the Wriggler \"dies' when you sive hotels wondering just text input from the player. added goodness! run out of energy — or into a how to sneak in through Unlike Shadowfire, the Ice Palace is a really difnasty. He is reduced to a the open window and steal the Creative Sparks game ferent game one of a growcrumbling pile of dinosaur-like secret plans. doesn't use icons — but a ing number of hybrid interbones! Frustrating but fun! That's simpler text menu which you active Adventures The This Is Romantic HODOTS Grand Larceny the latest in a scroll around and select graphics are good, the sound first venture into the games series of innovative and options from. But it's just as excellent and game play excellent and game play market — and if this is an under-rated scrolling joystickaddictive! totally addictive. example of the quality of their controlled graphic Adventures The game has a basic product then they are a name from Melbourne House. fantasy scenario. You play the  Graphics to be watched. You take on the role of a Sound Government agent sent after  Value  Graphics a bunch of thieves who stole  Playability  Sound the plans to a top secret super  Value computer.  Playability You have tracked them down to their hide-out in a WRIGGLER posh hotel and have until midnight to get the plans and MACHINE: Spectrum ANDROID ONE make good your escape. SUPPLIER: Romantic Robot The screen is split into a part of a brave warrior on a PRICE: .95 MACHINE: Amstrad graphic \"window\" which quest within the wicked Ice Not only do you get a SUPPLIER: Vortex shows your spy and his Queen's palace a quest for great game when you get PRICE: .95 immediate surroundings. the seven Dits of the Ice your hands on the Can you destroy the reBelow is the text area which Crown which once belonged Wriggler you also get actor before the reactor gives a written description of to your father. Jean-Michel Jarre-style destroys the world? where your character finds the game has two screens music to play as you play! Android One sets you this himself and any other interestthe game screen which The Wriggler is a cute task. ing information shows you a bird's-eye view of maggot and he's comYour android is armed The hotel has many floors the palace and the assorted peting in the great Annual with a brick-blasting laser and and a good few surprises. evil nasties who attack you. Maggot Marathon, the most must shoot his way through You must use the joystick — The palace consists of dangerous and spectacular barriers, avoid the lethal quaror keyboard — to move your many hexagon shaped event in the insect sporting dians of the reactor, and find character around the graphic chambers. You can maniworld. his way to the core. screen and, as in all good pulate the chambers using You have to guide your Not a very original game — Adventures, you have to input your joystick — rotating the maggot through a massive but fairly playable. Graphics text commands. walls to alter entrances and maze-like course of 256 are adequate but by no means You can issue text comexits as you make your way screens which begin peacestunning. Overall, a bit overarch, through the maze like fully enough in the garden, priced for what you get. examine or get various structure, move on the scrubland, into objects for example. Some chambers contain the underground then finally  Graphics The unique combination of useful objects others conto a mansion and lift shaft. But  Sound scrolling graphics and Adventain deadly dangers. whatever you do don't go  Value ture makes Grand Larceny an The second Adventure to Hell!  Playability intriguing and challenging screen shows you an invenThere are lots of puzzles to 0 00 00 00 "


"REV.I.E.W.S REVIEWS DIE 00 00 00 no CYCLING is to play against a friend to version better than the CBM ROCKETBALL practise your batting and field64 — they have a slightly MACHINE: CBM-64 ing techniques because the more finished\" look about SUPPLIER: IJK Software computer opponent doesn't them. But game play on both take any prisoners. versions is great fun. You'll PRICE: .95 soon find yourself hooked on IJK Software better trying to beat the computerknown in the past for proised Superstar champ. ducing games for the bar A worthy successor to Oric, have turned their Daley's Decathlon for all armattentions to the Commolearn that the game has been chair sports fans. The game dore 64 and produced a produced by an English comdemands a great deal of fantastic new game based on pany with British protactical thinking as well as the cult film Rollerball which grammers. stamina and of course a thrilled thousands with its Odd as it may seem that the tough joystick! action-packed skating scenes. best baseball simulation 1 Rocketball begins with a have seen to date should be  Graphics  Graphics metal ball being shot into the from an English  Sound Software rink. Two teams of five players house, the programmers have  Sound  Value  Value must chase after the ball, pick kept the game's American  Playability  Playability it up and throw it into the origins well and truly in the opposition's goal tube. foreground of the game. The Controlling your player is US's national anthem plays at SQUASH not only a feat of dexterity — it the beginning of the game, the is also a feat of memory stars and stripes flutters MACHINE: CBM64/ because the joystick controls gently over the stadium and Spectrum are so complicated you need the cheerleaders, vitally SUPPLIER: New to be a near genius to important to every genuine Generation Software remember them all. The joyAmerican sporting occasion, PRICE: .95 stick is used to skate up and frequently rush onto the pitch It's a smash! new Genedown, move faster or slower, shouting and waving. SUPERSTAR ration Software has jump, crouch, scoop up the As in real baseball, your come up with a winner ball, elbow an opponent and aim in World Series Baseball MACHINES: Spectrum/ with Jonah Barrington's throw the ball at the goal tube. is to outscore your opponent BBC/Electron/ Squash. fared better against a in C64/Amstrad nine innings Fast and furious action, human opponent rather than innings are played if the game extra SUPPLIER: Martech superb graphics, topped off the computer and I think is drawn after nine. PRICE: C64 (.95 cass./ by one of the best systems of prefer the two player option. The game begins by asking .95 disc). voice reproduction C&VG has not because sometimes win you to choose how many Rest, .95 ever heard. that way but because it's such players are taking part and a nice feeling knocking the what colour strips you want Brian Jacks' Superstar The game can be played by Challenge must be the one or two players. They can stuffing out of one of your the teams to wear. You first sports simulation where be moved left, right, backfriends and still being able to usually begin the game as the thrashing madly about with wards and forwards. buy him a drink afterwards. fielding side, pitching the ball the joystick doesn't always Depressing the fire button at the opposition's batters. get you anywhere! enables the player to make Graphics The game enables you to Martech's new game forehand or backhand  Sound throw the ball in several difwhich follows the Decathlon/ S  Value ferent ways, including fast and Hyper Sports style --includes By timing the stroke, you Playability slow balls, curving slow and a new feature on the CBM 64 can alter the angle at which fast balls and low and high version called Powersync. the ball leaves the racquet. balls. This means that you have to And throughout the match, WORLD BASEBALL Actually hitting the ball, as follow closely the action on Jonah Barrington calls the you've probably guessed, isn't the screen and gradually build score MACHINE: CBM-64 scores. straightforward SUPPLIER: Imagine New Generation has either. You up the power levels as you Software can choose a fast, slow or swim or runjust like real achieved this amazing voice ordinary swing, although most life. reproduction using a system PRICE: .95 of my attempts ended up with The game challenges you can called Reprosound, a hardOn first appearances, me fouling three times in a to beat Brian Jacks over a ware sampling system which World Series Baseball row or being caught by one of series of eight events. These ese enables the voice to be reproappears to be an the fielders without moving are canoeing, cycling ng duced using software only. accurate, entertaining from the first base. archery, football, 100 meter and very professional  Graphics Overall the game is enjoysprint, squat thrusts and arm adaptation of the popular able to play and a treat to  Sound dips. American sport. This may all watch. One piece of advice  Value Perhaps surprisingly I found sound very ordinary until you for would-be baseball champs the graphics on the Spectrum  Playability OO 20 "


"REVIEW.S 9 5 24 10 outside a tube station, in BROAD STREET which case you get a detailed 9 NORSEMAN MACHINE: CBM-64/ view of the station entrance MACHINE: All MSX, Spectrum and some neat London skyline Einstein SUPPLIER: Argus Press graphics in the background. I particularly liked the graphic Software SUPPLIER: Electric of St Paul's Cathedral. Software PRICE: .99 The bottom of the screen is PRICE: .95 You'll have no more split into three parts. One Saving mankind is the lonely nights with your shows you where a certain theme of many games. CBM-64 or Spectrum if character is and at what time An extra useful feature is Norseman combines this you splash out on the he or she used a particular noted in the loading. Side one in an arcade and strategy game of the Paul McCartney tube. In the centre there is a of the cassette loads at 1200 stvle game set in days of vore movie Give My Regards to larger scale scan of your locabaud, side two at 2400 baud. The task set our Nordic Broad Street. tion in London surrounding Although quality recorders are fighter is to defend the roads, stations etc. Finally recommended for the higher Helmets of Power from the there is another read-out rate, I tried a fairly cheap one hellish hordes. There are ten which shows the time and the wich loaded in approx 240 levels of play which can be number of musical notes secs every time. Options give selected from the attractive you've collected a choice between one or two title screen. The monsters The package includes a players, keyboard or joysticks arrive in waves of five and poster sized map of inner and a selection of four skill there are five waves per London and the tube network levels. round. you'll need when the fuel gauge is shown on To do battle, move into a starting to play the game to the bottom right hand side and monster's \"hex\" and have a The theme of the game is find out just where you are, you will notice that it falls at an close encounter leaving a similar to the movie. You have Car control can be a bit alarming rate the only way monster dead, or if you lose, a to chase around after parts of tricky to start with but you to sustain flight is to shoot fuel cross in the spot you have a lost song each part is should soon get the hang of it. tanks to top it up. Watch for vacated. held by a different friend. You You need to think fast and base missiles, gun turrets, and have to dash around the learn your way around the the smart robot missiles. streets of London in hot streets to get the most out of the craft is very responsive pursuit of these people who Broad Street which is ultiwith the stick or keys, in fact are all travelling about on the mately a fast paced strategy far better than most flight tube. game simulators I've tried. Wiping If you are outside the right The graphics are good and out installations and missiles tube station at the right time the sound is nice too — but of any description scores then you'll get a note and you I'm not sure how many times I points, as outlined in the any times I points, as outlined in the Monsters and hero move can dash on to find the next could listen to the CBM-64's excellent instructions supalternately, random choice person until you've got the version of Band on the Run! plied. selecting the monster to move entire song. Overall, the McCartney When you leave the next. Depending on the levels, Then it's back to Abbey game should be a top ten hit. asteroid, you encounter a monster's moves are single Road studios to mix the tune enemy fighters armed with or multi-directional and present it to your  Graphics guided missiles. These look The movement of the manager who is threatening  Sound good, silhouetted against the monsters and Norseman is all sorts of nasty things unless  Value black sky quite quick, SO the game you get that hit single to him  Playability Once past these, you arrive needs all your attention, by midnight! at the next asteroid, which is coupled with quick decisions. Each person they guarded by robots who hurl That Golden Helmet can be include Linda, Ringo and 9 ZAXXON missiles. Get past these and left carrying it slows down former Beatles producer you are confronted by the progress but of course it is George Martin has difMACHINE: All MSX Mighty Zaxxon. then prey to the marauding ferent computer personSUPPLIER: Electric Scores and remaining craft monsters. alities and likes to be at difSoftware are shown at the top left hand This is not an easy game to ferent places in London at difPRICE: .95 screen. Excellent graphics play. But if it was that easy, ferent times. There has been much and every effective sound are there wouldn't be much point! You must read their bio talk in the press about old the order of the day in Zaxxon. The smooth graphics and graphies and work out which games being re-hashed This is definitely one to look good animation are supported station they are likely to use for new machines, but out for. by excellent music, and be there on time! classics such as Zaxxon The main screen display should not be denied any  Graphics  Graphics shows your car and a bird's micro owner.  Sound  Sound eye view of the streets of This Sega version is one  Value  Value London. That is unless you've that all MSX owners will want  Playability  Playability hit the fire button when you're to add to their collection. continued on page 112 Oona "


NA


"Herbie Briggs has just destroyed the myth that all floppy discs are created equal. floppy stiffer. Stronger. And your data safer. To resist bulging, warping, puckering, or opening up. MEMOREX SOLID-SEAM BONDING: Every inch of every seam is sealed shut. Tight as a drum. They seem equal. Until you look at the seams. That's where equality ends. Most companies seal their discs with a spot here, a spot there. Leaving most of each seam not sealed at all. Sooner or later, the seams might do what comes naturally: they bulge. Warp. Pucker. Open up. Pens, pencils, fingernails-even a fouryear-old's, like Herbie-can catch and snag in those wide open spaces. That's sloppy. And dangerous. Because if you put a sloppy floppy into your disc drive, it can jam your drive. Ruin your drive head. Lose your data. So much for their seams. Ours are different. THE SLOPPY FLOPPY: Sealed with a spot here, a spot there. Leaving unsealed seams everywhere. To resist all the things that can jam your drive, ruin your drive head, or lose your data. Which proves that a Memorex floppy disc isn't equal to all the others. It's better. Solid-Seam Bonding is just one example of the extra care that goes into every Memorex floppy disc. Be it 8, 544\" or the new 32\" Extra care that lets us guarantee every Memorex disc to be 100% error-free. The next time you're buying a floppy disc-or a few hundred of themjust remember this: It's always better to be safe than sloppy. For more information on the full line of Memorex quality computer media products, including computer MEMOREX tape, call Memorex U.K. Ltd., 96-104 Church Street, Memorex uses a process we developed, called Solid-Seam Bonding. Solid-Seam Bonding seals shut every inch of every seam of every Memorex*floppy disc. Tight as a drum. That makes the Memorex MEMOREX Tel: 0784 51488 Your Data. When it matters, make it Memorex MEMOREX Memorex is a registered trademark of Memorex Corporation 1984 Memorex Corporation A Burroughs Company "


"GHOSTWRITERS! A couple of months ago we asked you to send in your ghost stories, and 50 winners would win a copy of the Ghostbusters game by Activision. Maybe it was the cold winter nights that got your imaginations working, but for us here in the office it was a scary experience reading them while the winds howled outside and the rest of the building was in darkness. A full list of winners is available from the C&VG offices, but, in the meantime here are a couple of stories to whet your appetite. ELLERY As a chill wind blew over Standton, a frail white sheet blew from a washing line and up into the bedroom of number 54 Ringfield Road. It landed on the chair in the warm corner of the room and it was there that the sheet took on its paranormal shape, a ghostly figure that lay horrible slumped in the chair. It roused to the sound of a computer game. It was intrigued. He noticed at once that the game was Pac-Man. After a while he became bored of playing the game and decided to get in on the act. He slid down in between the holes which were at the back of the television. To his surprise, the ghost found himself inside the maze. He was thrilled until he saw a yellow blob, mouth open, coming in his direction. Then it struck him, the blob was Pac-Man and Pac-Man ate ghosts. The amazed ghost looked at the blob and realised he must move. Jasper, the ghost, shot upwards passing an amazed red ghost, which was then unfortunately chomped by Pac-Man who was in a foul mood by now. Jasper turned the corner just avoiding a power pill. He got to where he had come in, raced out of the back of the television and down the wire. He arrived at the plug, happy that he was still in one piece. At least Jasper was safe!! Paul Hewett It was a quiet evening. I was sitting in my favourite chair, watching my favourite television programme, munching my favourite chocolates. It's a hard life being a student 'specially in the holidays. JR had just been shot again when there was a screech of tyres outside, a burst of disco music and ... and ... Silence. Then my front window caved in! There was a brief pause, then a stocky youth clambered through. He was dressed in black overalls with no-smoking signs stuck all over them and he was carrying a large backpack. The music started up again. There was a pause, then. \"GHOSTBUSTERS!\" he screamed. I choked on my coffee cream. He waited patiently until I recovered, then in a cool, brisk, professional manner he asked me, \"Is this 12 Windmill Close?\" \"No!\" I replied in a somewhat less cool manner, \"It's 173 Hove Crescent\". Another pause. He appeared to be listening for something, some sort of cue. \"GHOSTBUSTERS!\" he bellowed again. \"Oh absolutely\"I commented knowledgeably. In truth I was getting slightly irritated with the conversation. I don't object when people smash in the double-glazing at 8.30 pm on Wednesday evening. but I do get annoyed when they have nothing intelligent to say. We regarded each other silently for a few moments. Something stirred behind him on the sofa. What was it? What could it be? I had just remembered when he spun round to face the sofa and in one smooth, professional, practised movement, he fired ... and blew up the cat!! As the fur drifted down, he turned to face me again. \"Ah well, wrong address. Happens all the time. Sorry about the mess. Nice meeting you\". He disappeared out of the window, then a few seconds later his head poked round the corner. \"And remember: if you're seeing things running through your head, who you gonna call?\" \"Interflora!\" I muttered absentmindedly, wondering how I was f going to phrase the insurance claim. PS Who was the mysterious stranger Richard Stevens who burst in while JR was being ventilated? Did he ever really exist? Was it all just a figment of my imagine ation? The cat thinks not! 41 Apa de AIDE "


"WINA PORSCHE 924 (or cash equivalent) see pack for details  TAKE THE CHALLENGE. GYRON FIREBIRD FIREBIRD SOFTWARE WELLINGTON HOUSE UPPER ST MARTIN SLANE LONDON WC2H9DL (109 (1) FIREBIRD IS A TRADEMARK OF BRITISH TELECOMMUNICATIONS PLG EDITION 48K SPECTRUM .95 "


"PITSTOPI TIME: 1.30 SPEED 130 FUEL There's nothing quite like the and tapes from CBS. 4. Name two CURRENT British colour, noise and spectacle CBS have games like Impossible drivers who will be competing in the surrounding a Formula One Mission, Dragonriders of Pern, Jump1985 Grand Prix season. Grand Prix. And there's nothing quite man and, of course, Pitstop. They Tie-breaker: Name the British Grand like actually being at the trackside also have pop stars like Paul Young Prix team who once raced a car with when 24 high powered racing cars and Alison Moyet on their record six wheels. blast away from the grid! label. You'll be able to choose from And now, thanks to CBS and the extensive CBS record and softC&VG, YOU can experience the thrill ware collection if you're one of our of a World Championship race at first lucky winners! C&VG/CBS PITSTOP II hand. We're offering you the chance And all you have to do is answer COMPETITION to win tickets to the British Grand Prix the simple Grand Prix quiz and rush at Silverstone in July in our exclusive your coupon to Computer & Video My answers are: Pitstop II competition Games, Pitstop Competition, Priory First prize winner will get a pair of Court30-32 Farringdon Lane, tickets to the Grand Prix, plus a London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is choice of six items of CBS products June 16th and normal C&VG 3..... software OR records! The race competition rules apply. tickets will include a special pit pass so you'll be able to see how the THE QUESTIONS Tie-breaker:.... real racing pit crews work. 1. Name the last British driver to hold Second prize winner will get race the World Championship title. ............. tickets, plus pit passes and a choice 2. Name the Grand Prix team which Address.................... of three items of CBS products. Third has won the greatest number of prize winner will get race tickets only Grand Prix races. plus one item of CBS products. 3. Name the 1984 World I would like CBS software/ And 20 runners up will be able to Champion. What team does he drive records/audio cassette (delete choose between software or records for? where applicable) Name. "


"Can you solve the mystery of AROMSDONI featuring the unique new WALK-THRU GRAPHICS SYSTEM Keyboard or Kempston joystick compatible 48K Spectrum/ Spectrum Plus out now Amstrad version out in May  Cassette .95 Disk .95 ASHKERON! is a 100% machine code real-time adventure featuring the unique new WALK-THRU, GRAPHICS SYSTEM-where, you go is what you see. Whichever way you turn, your new location opens out in perspective before your very eyes! Available from good software stockists everywhere, or direct from: MIRRORSOFT, Mirror Group Newspapers Ltd, Holborn Circus, London EC1P 1DQ. Tel: 01-822 3800 or 01-822 3580 "


"BA ANG BANG! FRANKLESS <BANO BANG G! < BA BANG   BN ! 14 BAN BAN NG! BANG! OR-BAN < BANG! ANG! GOES TO HOLLYWOOD ANG! 3.1. NG! Welcome to the Pleasuredome, my friends! Frankie has allowed me, a mere mortal by the name of Tony Takoushi, to enter his abode and bring you an exclusive peek of the game called Frankie Goes To Hollywood. NG! NG! ANG (2 ) 2B NG! BANG (2 <LANG! SANCTAEG! K.BA 210) BANG! 12. 11.<BANG BAN < BAG! HHH! HINI [21:-+|--BANG Frankie wants you to be a what hole to step into and well rounded and complete where it leads to on the person and to this end he screen. has set a challenge. To enter the Pleasuredome, The Maze is exactly that you must first pass through wander through. If you with a 3D maze to the outer chambers. These complete its mysteries, it chambers require you to possess true control of leave by. This one is diffiwill open up exits for you to both your mental and cult to solve although there physical abilities. You start your journey along the way. are landmarks to help you through one of the four doors which represent Love, Hate, Sex and War. All four doors give access to the same nucleus of rooms, although each door leads to a different room within that nucleus. The challenges involve both strategy and a fair measure of zapping in some respects it is close in The ZTT puzzle is also style to Pyjamarama. As involves you choosing the wickedly tricky to crack. It you solve the task set in right combination of each room, a doorway buttons to create the ZTT opens to the next room. symbol on a six piece map. This is done by a window opening up. You step into it ing after a good who dunnit, For those of you hanker. and the window again and it then re-opens mystery to solve. You have closes there is also a murdery in the next room. Your character, Frankle.and suspects taking special to investigate all the clues can walk around each room either pointing his \"Zap\" note of the surroundings finger to examine objects and personalities. I still or blast enemies. think the butler did it! Take When you have to solve a a CLOSER look at that strategy puzzle, you are kettle. presented with a menu of to investigate and you have There are over 60 rooms choices in a \"window\" and can select an action by one unlimited life in which pressing a cursor key. to reach the status allowing Certain rooms will give dome. you entry to the Pleasure. you a higher rating in one of the four qualities Love, Hate, Sex and War. When these ratings reach a set level, you can enter the Pleasuredome and its secrets will be revealed to you. I promise they will be more than a little controversial! Rooms you will encounter along the way Hollywood is quite unique Frankie Goes to include The Sea of Holes in its concept and you can (shades of the cartoon enter the game's earlier movie Yellow Submarine stages from one of four featuring those other portals (Love, Hate, Sex and Liverpool Superstars here!). War). This is a strategy room where you have to judge The better you are at 28 "


"+1-8-BANG! [2.1 playing the game, the more exits you can open from room to room. The more rooms you have access to, the greater the possible ratings you can earn, thus achieving ZTT faster through the correct balance of the four ratings. The game impressed me as it has the best of both worlds action and strategy and there are a number of slick touches that will keep you on your toes. Many games taking the name of famous characters or groups have tended to be quite poor relying on the name to sell the game. It's nice to see a game that can match the quality and the style of the group. Frankie Goes to Hollywood comes from Ocean and is available on tape for the Spectrum and the Commodore 64 at .95. Finally, I must be the only Frankie fan in the known universe who does not have one of THOSE T-shirts. Frankie, if you should be reading this ..! 2.1.6.1]: 6-BANG! Welcome to the pleasure Zone! This is the part of your favourite computer magazine devoted to giving YOU the chance to win a very special Frankie prize! We've persuaded the band to sign three copies of their latest LP, Welcome to the Pleasuredome, exclusively for C&VG readers. Ocean are also giving away copies of the first ever Frankie computer game being released for a wide range of computers. What do you have to do to win? Simple below, fill in the coupon and mail it to Computer & just answer the Frankie quiz Video Games, Frankie Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1B Closing date for the competition is June 16th, 3AU. normal C&VG competition rules apply and the editor's decision is final. Three first prize winners will get a signed Frankie LP, a sweatshirt plus a copy of the new game. 20 runners-up will get a copy of the Frankie game for their computer. Keep the vampires from your door enter today! THE QUESTIONS 1. What was Frankie's first number one hit? 2. Name the members of the band. 3. Which American rock superstar wrote a song featured on Frankie's Pleasuredome LP? 4. Name the other supergroup who started life in Liverpool. 5. Frankie's producer, Trevor Horn, used to play in a group. What was it called? Name.... Address.......... Computer owned. My answers are: 1........ ai  Other games worthy of Nog, is due to be released . Are you BORED, feel list I recently had the good mention this month are by Gargoyle Games on May less, tired and generally fortune to interview an Super Pipeline 2 from 30. FED-UP with playing American called Bill Taskset. The original Super games? Stealey, president of an Pipeline became a classic Now there is an answer, American software house on the 64 and Pipeline 2 is a thanks to ace programmer called Microprose, of F-15 worthy follow up. Tony Crowther. Tony told Strike Eagle, NATO tttt me in his latest game, Commander and Solo  I am not too enthusiastic Gryphon, he found he had Flight fame. over MSX — but Konami 10k of memory to spare, so He is really quite an have released Yie Ar Kung not to be wasteful he wrote amazing character and I Fu and Kings Valley on a boredom routine. have picked a quote from cartridge for the MSX By pressing B you can the interview to illustrate micros. They are SUPERB. Described as a \"prequel\" flick the screen to show a my point! \"The If you own an MSX machine to Tir Na Nog, Dun Darach well known television test Spectrum? Well, Jeeesee, buy them! is said to contain \"startling card. To get back to the we in the US looked at it as film-type animation\". It will game, simply press N. some kinda doorjam!\" be available for the SpecThanks Tony, but we don't Dun Darach, the longtrum and Amstrad, price get bored playing your **** awaited follow-up to Tir Na .95. games! "


"SH-0-1 0-0-S-SHIP V V 3N T.N.B.R.IE.F. CHALLENGING SOFTWARE NOW SPECTRUM Atari are gearing up to launch a revolutionary range of new computers in the next few months. The first of the new computers to arrive in this country will be the XE range of micros. These are basically 800 XLs, but have a re-styled keyboard, extra programming languages and a massive 128k memory as a standard feature for only .99 each. The second launch will be Atari's new range of ST computers. The first, the ST 520, is a 32 bit processor and has comprehensive graphics routines, moveable icons graphics characters and an interface which allows you to connect the computer to a synthesiser and to store music and sound effects in its memory for .99, or ,000 including a colour monitor. The second, the ST 130, will be a 16 bit processor which again includes comprehensive graphics commands, icons and the choice of 255 different colours on the screen at the same time. Micromega have jumped on the \"let's sling a couple of old games together for a couple of quid\" bandwagon. They have produced a compilation of three games written by the programmer Derek Brewster and are selling it for .99 each. The value packs consist of successes such as Code Name Mat, Kentilla and the arcade adventure, Jasper. The Derek Brewster Collec tion will be on sale at most software stockists. The TV programmes, Brookside, Grange Hill and Tucker's Luck are all about to be turned into computer Adventure games. Software Express, a Birmingham based software company, have signed up a deal with Phil Redmond, the writer of the three programmes, to produce Adventures based on the scripts of the new series. Soap fans will soon be able to get more than their twice weekly dose of their favourite soapie. Trivial Pursuit, a board game that tests your general knowledge has become the new fashionable pasttime in America. Trivial Pursuit is now sweeping this country and there is already a version for the Atari called Trivia Quest which includes the knowledge questions and the chance of the board and dice as well as a little animated dragon fighting in between. The game's available on disc for the Atari from Software Express (021-384 5080) for around . Automata have stuck 10 of their best loved Spectrum games in a 10-pack which they are selling at the bargain price of . The games are Crusoe, Piromania, Olympimania, Yakzee, Morris meets the Bikers, Dartz, Pi-Balled, New Wheels John, Pi-in-'ere and Pi-Eyed. Quite a collection! Morris meets the Bikers is being released for the Amstrad at just 16.00 The innovative Deus Ex Machina is also being released at last for the C64. If it's anything like the Spectrum original then you won't want to miss out -a ship at .  STAR MORE FROM BEYOND Watch out for the Spectrum version of Spy Vs Spy from Beyond. It promises to be closer to the actual Mad magazine cartoon strip than the C64 original as it features some unique black and white graphics. Beyond say that the playability has been improved too.. Beyond also will be releasing Boulderdash Il for the C64 very soon. The sequel to this classic arcade game will again feature Rockford. But beware, the screens are much more devious and challenging if that's possible! You'll get both Boulderdash 1 and 2 on the same tape. A genuine bargain! WIN A TRIP TO THE U.S. OF A. BUGHUNTER GETS BUSTED! Sinclair, Quicksilva and the Observer Magazine have teamed up to stage a Home Computer Championship which has a trip to the Disney Epcot Center in America as first prize. Entrants will have to answer questions featured in the Observer colour magazine before going on to a grand final being held at a London Hotel later this year. Finalists will have to play a game and write a program on the Spectrum. The winner will get the trip and runners up will receive QL machines or software. Robert Schifreen, former C&VG Bugnumbers, it is possible to enter restricted hunter and Micronet columnist, has been areas, as happened when & hacker disarrested for suspected computer covered Prince Philip's personal mailbox \"hacking\" breaking into computer an electronic notice board where systems. It has been alleged that messages can be left and tampered with Schifreen hacked into Prestel's tele-softits contents. ware computer which broadcasts Robert Schifreen and another Micronet Micronet 800 and School Link journalist, Steve Gold, author of the Computer systems, like Prestel's, Micromouse column, have been charged which are broadcast along the telephone under the Forgery and Counterfeiting wires can be accessed with a microAct. This will be a test case because no computer and an add-on called a modem. other individual has been accused of By cracking the passwords and security forging a piece of electronic equipment. 30 "


"FIGHT 'S LAIR Unexpanded VIC 20 G WIZAR CRASH  and C64 Arcade Game ORDELI BOAR MSX and Arcade Adventure for Spectrum 48K Einstein Original Board Game CUSTLES HUS RACER Pool Game now on C16, MSX, C64 Einstein and Spectrum BIG MONEY for Good Programs Send your Program Today AQUA C64 3D SPEED BOAT C RACE Send Stamped Addressed Envelope for FFER Catalogue Trade Enquiries Welcome SPECIAT OFF AQUA RACER or SI-RISS Amstrad Coming Soon WIZARD'S LAIR Send .99 and this Bubble post and packing free bubble bus software A 87 High Street Tonbridge, Kent Tel: 0732 355962 Telex: 95151 "


"IS A EUSTON FILMS PRODUCTION Arthur Daley, North London's most notorious small time crook, has turned a once reputable software house into a dealer of rubber wet suits, rat traps and adult magazines. DK 'Tronics have decided to turn their back on the law and launch Minder, a game that lets you take Arthur's place in the shady second-hand car market and dabble in free market trading in other words selling 100 stolen garden gnomes. Seamus St John slipped into his camelhair coat, found a spare trilby and some dark glasses and set off in search of our Arthur ... and Dangermouse. In the beginning, important character in the programme he would have preferred to have he controls Terry\". written a game based on DangerExplaining the lack of a two mouse but the rights had already been character option, he said: \"A two sold to Creative Sparks. But now he's character game was considered, but glad that he had to work on Minder. We shelved it because it would have Deciding to write an Adventure taken up so much memory that it simulation instead of an arcade game would have ruined the game. There's was easy for Don. \"The TV pronot really much point in it anyway. gramme is about people's characters. Terry does nothing on his own It's not an action packed programme initiative apart from getting Arthur like the A Team, for instance, and out of trouble every now and then.\" wouldn't have worked as a ladders Trying to get the humour and and platforms game.\" He added, with dialogue right was a very big problem in Minder's early stages. Once the \"zap' game. I would have refused if I'd first \"draft\" of the game had been been asked.\" finished, it was tested by a panel of six He is quick to point out, however, games players. After all trying the that Minder is not an Adventure game game for several weeks, they each in the normal sense and has more in came up with the same criticism. common with the simulation game Minder was probably the most mindDictator, which Don also wrote, than numbingly boring game that they had games like The Hobbit or the Hulk. ever played! So it was back to the In most Adventures, once you have drawing board. The other big solved a problem or puzzle you can problem with the first version was that solve it every time. Minder does have the conversations and remarks in the some of these \"adventure qualities\" game became very repetitive and the but relies mostly on your skill at jokes weren't funny. By the sixth time striking up bargains with dealers, you see them, they start to get on your making sure you don't land up in nerves. hospital by double-crossing someone So Don incorporated a huge \"dicor letting Detective Chisholm find any tionary\" of replies into the game. No stolen gear at your lock-up. character will repeat the same thing One detail of the game which may twice to you. Also Minder will never disappoint many Minder fans is that tell you that it doesn't understand a Arthur is the main character and not word or phrase that you have typed in Terry McCann. There is no option to an annoying feature of many Haven take on the part of Terry. ture games. Instead, the person you Priestly is quite adamant that he was are talking to will carry on with the right to use Arthur as the central figure conversation and eventually become for the game. \"Arthur is the most more and more tired by your nonT suppose it was inevitable. After all, computers are a big earner and no respectable con-man would be seen without \"the latest on the market, hardly ever used, made in Taiwan, 100% genuine rubber computer with all the paraphernalia, not forgetting yer low-tech wobbly discs and a couple of crates of Space Invaders. For you guy, and I'm cutting my own throat here, just a monkey\". Don Priestly, author of the Minder game, spent several weeks studying Thames Television's broadcast catalogue a list of all the programmes Thames have produced over the last few years -trying to choose a TV programme to convert into a game. In his mind there were only two which really fitted the bill Minder 32 "


"moved most of it after studying all e past episodes, convinced that ere was very little swearing in the rogramme anyway. Don's hard work and research has ertainly paid dividends and prouced a smooth, slick and profesonal program. He seems to have hit pon the magic something that makes game special. His recipe for a uccessful game like Minder — \"a ilend of meaningfull graphics and nformative and interesting text\". He nd DK Tronics seem to be onto a nice ittle earner! sensical requests and will threaten to Even if you quit a game and start leave unless you stop gibbering like again it is not unlikely that a dealer an idiot. will approach you and accuse you of Quite simply, the basic idea of the double crossing him so there's no game is to buy and sell goods, trying getting away from the consequences to make the biggest mark-up possible. f your actions. \"Minder's all about wheeling and dealing,\" commented Priestly. \"You OUT OF THE have to learn the skills of bargaining if you want to turn yourself into a second Arthur Daley.\" quipped the ex-school teacher. Not only can you sell merchandise that you already have, you can arrange to supply someone with 60 pairs of WHT DON'T YOU TRY SUICIDE ? boots even though you haven't actually got any. The dealer will WE 0422 usually ask you to deliver in a couple of days, giving you the chance to find All this wheeling and dealing may someone else who is willing to sell the seem to be fairly complicated stuff boots at a lower price than you and many would perhaps class this as arranged to sell them for — and a difficult strategy game, limited to a there's your profit. small minority of dedicated gamers. You can of course decide not to Don Priestly disagrees, \"I think honour a deal for say 50 rat traps and Minder will appeal to a wider range of try to find 30 videos for another of your people than any normal computer customers. If you do this, the other game. Once the simple rules are dealers are likely to get quite annoyed learnt, the game becomes interesting with you and refuse to buy anything to play but is not easily beaten. I also else from you. It's best just to let them think that, because it is based on a cool down for a couple of days before well known television series, it will you try to approach them again. make it more accessible to people\". What is worse for your reputation is He does admit, though, that Minder selling stolen property. If you flog isn't a game with \"instant appeal\". some hot sheepskin coats to an unsusOne aspect of the game which pecting purchaser and Chisholm worried Don was the use of bad finds the stuff in their warehouse, language in the program and whether they'll be given a big fine. If you meet it might deter some people, especisomeone in the Winchester Club who ally parents, from buying the game. you've double crossed, he is more The earlier versions of Minder did than likely going to put you in hospital include quite a lot of swearing, but for a couple of days, so it's always after a while he decided that it only wise to bring Terry along to mind you detracted from the game and if you think a dealer's after your blood. Inside Terry's flat on Day 2 of the game. THE GAME The main aim for the player is to make as much money in 14 days as he can. You start off at Arthur's lock-up with ,000 in your pocket and some stock that's in the garage, which can be anything from sheepskin coats to 20 boxes of plastic spots or even Blue Peter presenters. And this is where the skill of the game comes in how much Is a Blue Peter presenter worth From here, you can go to one of a number of places, either the winchester Club, Terry's tat, to one of the dealer's places, back to the lock-up or back home to 'er indoors. The best place to begin is at the Winchester Club. Most of the people you do business with go there for a drink some time during the day and many of the local sharks also pop in now and then to do some business. Each of the people in the club is represented in eight portrait frames on the screen. Each one has a number, the one with the lowest number will be the first person to approach you, although if you're quick you can get to the person you want to speak to without being sidetracked by a stranger or being buttonholed by Detective Chisholm looking for a hundredweight of stolen trouser zips. Each one of these meetings or conversations, no matter how short, takes up an hour of your time. So it's important to plan your day carefully because if you hang around too long talking to strangers the person you came to see is quite likely to have left. Your first aim is to find a dealer who is ready to do business. There are eight dealers in Minder who regularly sell to and buy from you. You'll need to be able to identify their faces because there are so many other people who crop up while you are playing. Minder incorporates a face generator in the game which can create 35,000 different faces, so you are hardly likely to see the same person, apart from the dealers, during the course of a game. This obviously makes it much more difficult, and again prevents the repetitiveness common to most Adventures. CHESTER CLUB OUT 000 a MR DALEY ? R DALE? A screen of the Winchester club featuring some of the local sharks. "


"Captain Slog 17.48pm \"WILLY to bridge, beam me up Spotty\" What is our hero up to now? Sunning himself on tropical islands, exploring space, cleaning the sewers and partying the whole night long. Our Willy continues in his search of the mansion having discovered many, many more rooms and hidden recesses. JET SET WILLY was probably the best selling game of 1984 imitated by many and excelled by none. This is the official follow-up and has well in excess of 100 rooms to explore JET SET WILLY WAS JUST THE START THIS COULD BE YOUR END. FULL SCREEN COMMODORE 64. .95 SPECTRUM/SPECTRUM PLUS .95 ALL MSX COMPUTERS .95 "


"FIRST CLASS SPECIAL OFFER! For all mail-order customers we are offering ten 12\" X 16\" glossy posters of the cassette inserts plus our 1985 Poster Calendar Pure Collectors Items SOFTWARE PROSES Spectrum CBM 64 MSX Amstrad .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 Spectrum CBM 64 Dragon BBC MSX Amstrad Oric/Atmos Memotech Einstein AND ALL FREE!!! Dragon Einstein Memotech  7.95 .95  7.95 __ 7.95  7.95 .95 NEW tttisetre ANCIRAOKE ER UNE .95 CBM 64 CBM 64 Spectrum MSX .95 .95 $8.95 Spectrum BBC (Coming soon) Dragon .95 NEW CBM 64 (Coming soon) Spectrum .95 .95 .95 C & VG 5.85 GAME MACHINE PRICE CBM 64 BBC .95 .95 NEW Please add .00 for all orders outside U.K. ACCESS CARD No.: .... NAME: ADDRESS: enils ARTIR PROJECTS Software Projects Ltd., Bear Brand Complex, Allerton Road, Woolton, Liverpool L25 7SF Telephone: 051-428 9393 (4 Lines) Telex: 627520 L VIC 20 & 16K .95 "


"COMPETITIO If you want to get your hands on some of the buried treasure which the C&VG salvage team have brought up from the murky depths then keep reading! Electric Software the company behind the first arcade adventure for the MSX machines — are offering a JVC MSX micro as a prize to a Computer & Video Games reader who can solve our Wreck competition. And 100 runners-up will get a copy of The Wreck arcadeadventure as a consolation prize. Interested? Then slip into your underwater gear and answer the seafaring questions we've set you. Fill in the coupon and mail it to Computer & Video Games, Wreck Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Closing date for the competition is June 16th and normal C&VG competition rules apply. The editor's decision is final. antik SOFTWARE 14:41 East 36 "


"Tentered the waterfront bar with just enough money left to buy a miserable couple of drinks. Tomorrow I'd have to sell the boat and the rest of my salvage gear just to pay of my debts and I can't even afford to drown my sorrows properly! If only I'd had another week to explore that wreck I found out on the reef. There's something fishy about the wreck of the Beaulieu Anne and it ain't just the cargo of cod it was carrying! The old man I sat down next to at employed by Mr Yes and he's built the bar looked in the same sorry state like an express train. And it looked as as me. Just to be friendly I ordered if his first stop was at the bar! The screen displays shows the him a drink. \"Mr Yes wants to see you view through your face mask-with As the barman poured the drinks, NOW!\" he growled, grabbing the old score details and oxygen level the old man started to talk. I really guy by the collar. He was about to indicators etc. wasn't listening until I heard him haul the old man away when some You also get a 15 page illustrated mention a narrow escape from a thing clicked in my mind. Bully Anne booklet with the game, the wipe foreign treasure ship when it went Beaulieu Anne! clean diver's chart, a special pencil down out on the reef. I never did like Barclay much. The and the Captain's handkerchief The ship was carrying gold and only casualty of the ensuing rumble covered in clues! Great value for naturally greed ran riot among the was the bottle I broke over his head.MSX owners with .95 to spare crew when they found out. The crew It was an expensive weapon — but even better value if you win one in started a mutiny and began chasing who cares. Me and the old guy are our competition. the Captain for the combination of partners now.... the ship's three safes. The gold was locked in one of them. THE GAME THE QUESTIONS The old man said he had told the The Wreck is the latest arcade 1. Which wreck caused massive skipper to hide but the Captain, Adventure from Electric Software, oil pollution in the English who wasn't at all shipshape in the the people who take care of all you channel and was bombed by jet region of the brain, rushed about his MSX owners out there! The game fighters? tub writing things on the walls! takes place in a sunken ship that is 2. Which wreck had a royal When the crew found him, he was located on the edge of an undersea visitor, Prince Charles, who dived calmly mopping his brow with a ridge and is in danger of slipping down to see the ship before it was handkerchief. The ringleaders off! recently raised? tortured the skipper but he You have to go for gold through 3. Which passenger liner hit an revealed nothing. the side of the wrecked ship and iceberg and sank on its maiden At the first chance he got, the old tackle the maze-like decks until you vovage? man helped the Captain into one of find what you're looking for-theTIÉ-BREAKER: Which famous the lifeboats and they both escaped clues left by the Captain and the safe French undersea explorer and TV into the night. Suddenly there was a where the gold is hidden. personality designed the modern massive explosion — the ship was There are three safes on board the aqualung? doomed! The captain, still holding on wreck so you must pick the right grimly to his pocket handkerchief, one. And, of course, you only have a smiled as the ship sank beneath the limited amount of air to use. waves. Each deck is literally a maze! Map Three days later the old man and making is essential and to help C&V GI ELECTRIC SOFTWARET the Captain were still drifting about you log all your movements Electric WRECK COMPETITION The skipper was in bad shape but are giving away a special write 'n' before he went he pressed the blood wipe diver's-style pad with every My answers are: stained handerchief into the old copy of the game. So you can use it man's hand and whispered: over and over again. \"You can't read or write so the You are armed with a harpoon secret's safe with you. Keep the cloth and you'll need it to defend yourself 12. it might make you rich one against the awesome Guardians of day...\" Those were his last words, the wreck horrible blue creatures \"What happened to the bullion?\"I with tentacles. asked. \"It's still on the Bully Anne. I Each safe has to be opened using a Tie-breaker told you she went down with all the special combination which you gold on board! should get by discovering various \"Now I'm in trouble with Mr Yes. clues on each deck but beware the Name .................. He wants the handkerchief and says Captain has left a few surprises Address ................. Captain has left a few surprises . he'll kill me to get it. I don't know behind him to protect the bullion. why it's only covered in letters.\" The graphics are striking and the I was just ordering us both more sounds are pretty neat too. You drinks when there was a commotion \"hear\" yourself breathing as you at the door and Big Barclay crashed move through the wreck. If danger ....... in. is near then your breathing rate Barclay is an American heavy increases. — "


"SPACE ODDITIES government establishment where they are being kept prisoner. Graham becomes the Morons' manager as they become international celebrities on a crash course for earth. Bernard is and pop superstars. left floating helplessly above the Eventually the trio are signed up to mother-ship. stage a big pop concert at Shea Desmond, his wife Sandra and the Stadium in New York which is fourth Moron, called Julian, manage to where the fourth alien, Bernard, They came not to inform or crash land the podule on the comes back in. instruct but just to do a bit of Ml-motorway just outside London. While the other Morons have been shopping! The Morons from They get the usual B-movie welcome, having a great time, poor old Bernard, Outer Space should be invading with scientists and the heavily berescued from space by a passing ship your local cinema very soon. weaponed army awaiting only to and then thrown out in California, has C&VG thought you might like discover the aliens are extremely not been enjoying himself at all. prior warning of their arrival — ordinary Because he hasn't got pointed ears so here it is! Scientists carry out interviews and or three heads no-one on earth tests and come to the conclusion that believes him when he tells them he's earth's first visitors from outer space an alien. Well, would you? Tf you thought caravan holidays are completely stupid and moronic. After escaping from a mental instiwere boring — wait until you've The same could be said about tute, Bernard eventually makes his seen Morons from Outer Space, the Graham Sweetley. the junior TVway to New York and you guessed brainchild of Mel Smith and Griff Rhys reporter, played by Griff Rhys Jones, it — Shea Stadium where his fellow Jones. who helps them escape from the aliens are about to stage their big show... And that's where we have to leave the Morons for now — catch them when they land in your High Street if you can spot them that is! From the ridiculous to the sublime with the long awaited sequel to Arthur C. Clarke's sci-fi epic 2001. Back in 1968, 2001: A Space Odyssey was the most ambitious and sophisticated sci-fi film ever made. It looked very pretty and left everyone baffled with a wierd ending. Morons from Outer Space. The Morons a bunch of the most ordinary aliens you've ever seen are taking a holiday cruise around the universe in a worn out hired space ship. They take a wrong turn somewhere out on the Milky Way and realise that they're lost in space. And there's not a Little Chef anywhere in sight! The usual family argument develops we've all seen it before haven't we! While everyone is arguing about what to do next, one of their number called Bernard, played by Mel Smith, goes outside for a game of spaceball. Inside, Desmond irritably bashes the control panel and inadvertently launches the little podule inhabited by the rest of the group and sends it 38 "


"In 2001, scientists discovered that a strange \"spaceprobe\" in the shape of a mysterious jet black Monolith was having a profound affect on the evolution of mankind. A Monolith found on the moon sparked off an ill fated flight to Jupiter and the ultimate creation of the Star-Child. 2010 picks up the story with an international team of space experts taking off to Jupiter once more to attempt to find out just what happened to the crew of the Discovery and the supercomputer on board called Hal 9000. They find Discovery — and the mysterious Monolith that swallowed the last remaining crewman from that Marie Celeste of the stars. What happens next is as mind-blowing as the original and features some amazing special effects created by Richard Edlund, the man who did the business on such films as Star Wars and Close Encounters. Don't miss it! Finally, a film with a game attached. Ocean have already got the rights to produce a game based on The Neverending Story, a new fantasy film in the Dark Crystal mould. It's all about a boy called Bastian who discovers a book called The Neverending Story in a bookshop. As he reads it, he finds himself being drawn into the land described in the book a land called Fantasia, inhabited by many weird and wonder2010: The year we made contact. ful creatures including Teeny Weeny and his racing snail and Falcor the Luckdragon. Ta. Fantasia is being threatened by a destructive force known only as The Nothing and of course Bastian has to come to the rescue! The film, made in Germany at a cost of $27 million, features some stunning models with more than a passing resemblance to those you've probably seen in Dark Crystal. All three films should be heading your way very soon but meanwhile lots of sequels are on the way too. There's Terminator II with the very busy muscle-man Arnold Schwarzenegger who is also working on Conan III. The Robert E. Howard heroine, Red Sonja, featured in several Conan stories, will also be getting her very own movie. Then there's Alien II in preparation ... Fantasy fans are going to be spending a lot of time in the dark this year! The Neverending Story. 39 "


"RECORDMANIA MILES BETTER SOFTWARE 221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffs WA11 2DD Tel: 05435 3577 U.S. GOLD SOFTWARE 14 DAVYGATE CENTRE, YORK (0904) 33993 Beat these prices minimum order  .49 [2.49 12.49 12.99 1299 .99 12.49 ..[2.99 (2.49 1999 [3.99 12.99 12.99 12.49 12.49 [2.49 [2.49 1249 12.49 13.99 [1.99 1249 2.49 Terminal Invaders Terminal Meteor Blaster Terminal Log Run Terminal Kiss the Werewolf Terminal...... Rescue from Castle Dread Terminal Magic Mirror Terminal Nosheratu Terminal Vix Plode Abrasca. Cops and Robbers Abresca... Sub Space Striker Quicksilva.... Trader Quicksilva... Star Ouest Owicksilva Harvester Quicksilva Pixel Palace Cucksilva... Cosmiads Bug Byrt. Envahi Virgin Mission Mercury Vo.. Annihilator-Mogul Earthquake Mogul Super Trak -Mogul Pyramid Mogul..... Polywog Mogut.... Great Adventure Pack Mogul. Metamorphosis Magul Sea Woll-Mogul.. Chomper Man Magul..... Ludwig's Lemon Magul Panic Bug Byte..... Asteroids Bug Byte Title & Machine Cass Disk Tapper (64)...................95 .95 Beach-head (A). ................N/A .95 Tapper (ZX)...... .. .95 N/A Beach-head 164)........18.95 .95 Congo Bongo (64)...........95 .95 Beach-head (Amstrad)....95 NIA Spy Hunter (64)... ...95 .95 Beach-head (ZX). ..95 NIA Spy Hunter (ZX)...........16.95 NIA Conan (A)....... .95 Up and Down (64)...........95 .95 Conan 164)....... .95 Up and Down (ZXI .95 NIA Pole Position (A)... .95 .95 Buck Rogers (64).............95 .95 Pole Position (64). .95 .95 Buck Rogers (ZX)............95 N/A Mr Do (Al... [8.95 .95 Wizard and the Princess Mr Do 1641... 18.95 [12.95 164).............................. N/A 11.95 Pacman (A)....... .95 .95 Mission Astroid 164)..........NIA .95 Pacman 1647.... 8.95 .95 Exodus: Ultima H (64)........N/A .95 Digdug (A).......... .95 .95 Dough Boy (64)...............95 .95 Digdug (64)..... ..95 .95 Quasimodo (64)..............95 .95 Dropzone 164) .95 .95 Quasimodo (A)................[8.95 .95 Raid Over Moscow (64)....95 .95 Sentimal 164).....................95  12.95 Raid over Moscow (Z ). [6.95 N/A Ulysses and the Golden Strip Poker (64)... .95 .95 Fleece (64)...... N/A 11.95 Aztec Challenge (A)........95 N/A Combat Leader (64).......95 .95 Forbidden Forest (A).... 27.95 NIA Battle for Normandy Slinky A).......... .........95 .........95 N/A (64).. [12.95 [12.95 Caverns of Khafka (A)... 7.95 NIA Grogs Revenge (64).........95 .95 Super Kuey (64).............95 .95 Fort Apocalypse 164)... 8.95 .95 Talladega 164)... .95 .95 fort Apocalypse (A).......95  12.95 Bruce Lee (64).... ....19.95 [12.95 Drelbs (A)..... .95 .95 Bruce Lee (A)................95 .95 Drelbs 1641. ..95 .95 Dallas Quest (A)................N/A [12.95 Blue Max (A)...............95 .95 Dallas Quest (64)..............NIA .95 Blue Max (64) .95 E1295 Stellar 7 (64).................95 .95 Blue Max (ZX)......... .95 N/A Solo Flight (A)...............95 .95 Zaxxon (A)............... .95 NIA Solo flight 164)..............[12.95 .95 Zaxxon (64)....................95 [1295 F15 Strike Eagle (A).... 12.95 .95 Zaxxon (2x)........... .....95 NIA F15 Strike Eagle (64)... [12.95 [12.95 Bounty Bob Strikes Nato Commander (A)...... .95 Back 164)....................95 .95 Nato Commander (64)..... 12.95 Bounty Bob Strikes Indiana Jones (64)...........95 N/A Back (A)......................95 .95 Please phone for stocks availability on all items. Add  per item for overseas orders. Access and Visa welcome. Please write or phone for Atari, Commodore 64, or Spectrum catalogue. PLEASE PHONE FOR ATARI SOFTWARE LISTS SPECTRUM Valhalla Legend... Great Space Race Legend Hunter Kiler Proteck.... Manic Miner Bog Byte... Black Crystal Carmel...... Splat Incentive Sherlock Melbourne House War of the Worlds CRL... Beaky and the Egg Snatchers Fantasy The Pyramid Fantasy.... Matchpoint Sinclair....... Dynamic Graphics Procom Alchemist Beau Jolly Oracle's Cave Dorcas...... Empires Imperial Spectrum Virgin Lost Virgin Angler Virgin Quetzcost-Virgin Time Gate Quicksilva Gridrunner Quicksilva Traxx Quicksilva Boogie Boo the Flea Quicksuva Cavern Fighter Bug Byte Transylvanion Tower Richard Shepard Invincible Island Richard Shopard Devil's of the Deep Richard Shepard Super Spy Richard Shopard The Code Soft Concern VIC 20 Scramble Bug Byte..... Bricks Palace... Squish Palace Reversi Terminal 249 A 15 12.49 12.49 (15 .50 each (2 49 COMMODORE 64 Hall of the Things Crystal The Evil Dead Mr Power...... Oracle's Cave Darcos... American Football Mind Games [2.49 [2.49 [2.49 17.99 12.49 Make cheques and postal orders payable to: Recordmania. Please allow at least 7 days for delivery. P&P free. EUROPES LEADING 'ATARI MAIL ORDER SPECIALISTS EUROPES LEADING SOFTWARE EXPRESS INTERNATIONAL MATHS FOR SENIOR SCHOOLS. A series of five learning programs NEW ATARI 130XE COMPUTER (128k). ....99 (available individually). Which follow the CSE and GCE 'O' level Phone for availability syllabus, with many excellent features. Year 1, 2, 3, 4 and Revision C/D .95/.95 per year. BOOKS COMPUTES GUIDE TO ADVENTURE GAMES 10.95 ENTERTAINMENT THE XL HANDBOOK 5.95 EASY PROGRAMMING FOR ATARI MICRO'S 6.95 DE-RE ATARI 17.00 ATARI GRAPHICS AND ARCADE DESIGN 13.95 MAPPING THE ATARI 12.95 CONAN (D) 14.95 MR. DO (C) 9.95 TECHNICAL USER NOTES 17.00 ANTIC ANTHOLOGY 6.95 QUASIMODO (C/D) 9.95/14.95 DIG DUG (C) 9.95 POST AND PACKING 75p COLOSUSS CHESS (C/D) 9.95/12.95 PAC MAN (C) 9.95 FIELD OF FIRE (D) UTILITIES 34.95 POLE POSITION (C/D) 9.95/14.95 BASIC XL (ROM) 68.99 BASIC XL TOOL KIT (D) ASYLUM (D) 34.99 25.90 MASK OF THE SUN (D) 35.95 ACTION (ROM) 86.99 ACTION TOOL KIT (D) 34.99 MINER 2049er (ROM) 12.95 BOUNTY BOB (ROM) PHONE MAC/65 (ROM) 86.99 MAC 65 TOOL KIT (D) 34.99 DOS XL (DISK) 34.99 MONKEY WRENCH 800 (ROM) 39.95 MAGAZINES MMG BASIC COMPILER (DISK) 69.99 MONKEY WRENCH II (XL) (ROM)39.95 ANTIC 3.50 PAGE 6 90p PROGRAMMER PACK U.S. DOUBLER (INC SPARTA DOS) TRUE DOUBLE DENSITY FOR 1050 DRIVE 79.95 ANALOG 3.00 ATARI USER 90p INVITATION TO PROGRAMMING 1 INVITATION TO PROGRAMMING 2 | INFOCOMS INVISICLUES .10 PER TITLE + 25p POST & PACKING COMING SOON INVITATION TO PROGRAMMING 3 ATARI 520 ST COMPANION CASSETTE PERIPHERALS PHONE FOR DETAILS INSIDE ATARI BASIC 101 TIPS .95 OKIMATE 20 (7 COLOUR PRINTER) 299.00 PERSONAL IMPORT & EXPORT SERVICE AVAILABLE MIRACLE TECHNOLOGY RS232 INTERFACE C/W SOFTWARE 59.95 MIRACLE TECHNOLOGY WS2000 MODEM 149.99 ATARI SERVICE DEPARTMENT NOW OPEN PADDLES 9.99 HOTLINE SEND SAE FOR OUR PRICE LIST. 31 STONEYHURST ROAD ERDINGTON, BIRMINGHAM B24 8HA  (021) 384 5080 40 "


"PALACE SOFTWARE PROUDLY PRESENTS CAULDRON non SCREEN-SHOTS FROM THE COMMODORE VERSION funt A spectacular new arcade adventure game from Palace Software that sets a new standard in graphic realism. Commodore 64 and 48K Spectrum .99. S TUS que que immine «...will be one of THE games of 1985. s This one is HOT so don't miss it!» BIGK Explore an entire world in Cauldron?The first game ever to feature scrolling shoot-'em-up and platform jumping. Available from all good Computer Games Shops or direct from Palace Software, 275 Pentonville Road, London N1 9NL. Dear Palace Software, Please add 80p P&P to your order. Payment Please send me the following cassette(s):by cheque to Palace Software, Postal Order Cauldron (CBM 64) .99 or by Access/Barclaycard No. Cauldron (Spectrum @.99 Evil Dead (CBM 64) @.99 Name: Evil Dead (BBC) @.99 Address: Valkyrie 17 (CBM 64) @.99 Valkyrie 17 (Spectrum) @.99 Postal Code PALACE "


"THE MAGICAL WORLD OF CAULDRON START DOOR LEADING TO PUMPKIN'S LAIR DOOR LEADING TO HEMLOCK CAVERNS DOO LEADIN 1 THE CRP DOOR LEADING TO THE LAVA CHAMBERS EXIT DOOR FROM THE LAVA CHAMBERS Sreve BROWN & "


"THE HEMLOCK CAVERNS Y THE CRYPT DOR NG TO CRYPT THE LAVA CHAMBERS THE PUMPKIN'S LAIR "


"001, IS "


"Nice Password. Shame about the Identity. It's a unique combination. | «Newsflashes\" and read up on the Your Special Identity Number latest reviews and courses. Feast and Personal Password. The valu from our regularly changing menu of able key to huge databases teeming programs to download straight into with activity, set on our Mainframes your microabsolutely free. across the nation. You also get access to EducaOn Micronet 800, you're a tional Computing's \"School Link\" valued individual, adding your own and Prestel's huge 300,000 page special flavour and personality to database, including world news, the database. business & share bulletins and Take our exciting new \"Gallery\" optional homebanking. For only You control your personal screens .50 per quarter, that's less than for all to see. The intriguing \"Chatline\" the price of a daily paper! public conversation service gives Micronet is unique amongst you freedom to express your views networks and bulletin boards as it and meet some remarkable people. keeps your phone costs very low with All part of a tremendous Communications section that networks you to 50,000 Micronet and Prestel users across the country. Try Teleshopping, or interview celebrities live on \"Celebrity Chatline\" every Wednesday night. And there's FREE (& instant) National Electronic Mail, plus International Telex, and the Contact and SwapShop bulletin boards. Get computer news first on Micronet's daily (and controversial) special local* rate calls whenever you connect up that's around 40p for a whole hours entertainment each evening. The only accessory you need is a Modem, to get the best value for money around in micro communications. Fill in the coupon for the full facts and send to Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1RSEJ. But be warned, Micronet 800 is a 'living service with ever-expanding features. So maybe you'd be better to call in at your local Micronet 800 Action Station. There are thousands of Micronetters waiting to meet you! To: MICRONET 800, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5EJ. Telephone 01-278 3143. Please send me the full facts about Micronet 800. Micronet ANN Name Make/Model of Micro Address Telephone CVG6 For 98% of telephone users. Prestel is a trademark of British Telecommunications plc. On Prestel "


"See Micronet 800 in action! See Micronet at John Lewis, main Boots, Laskys or your local computer store. AVON Bath. Boots, 1 Marchants Passage, ESSEX Preston 4Mat Computing Basildon. Basildon Software 67 Friargate, tel: 0772 561952. NOTTINGHAMSHIRE Cardiff. Randall Cox, 18/22 High Southgate. Tel: 0225 64402. Centre, 78-80 Liberty Shopping Preston. Laskys, 1-4 Guildhall Newark Jacobs Computers Street Arcade. TeL: 0222 397162 Bristol Avon Computer Rentals, 13 Middle Gate. Tel: 0636 72594. Hall, East Square Tel: 0268 27922 16 West Street, Old Market. Mold. Clwyd Personal Computers, Arcade. Tel: 0772 59264. Braintree. Mirage Microcomputers Wigan Wildings Computer Centre Street. Tel: 0602 SOS585. Nottingham. Telstar, 280 Huntingdon Unit 19, Daniel Owen Precinct. Tel 0272 550600. Ltd, 24 Bank Street. Tel: 037648321. 11 Mesnes Street. Tel: 0942 22382. Bristol Boots, 59 Broadmead. Tel: 0352 56842. Chelmsford. Maxton Hayman, Sutton in Ashfield. HN & L Fisher, Newport. Gwent Computers Tel 0272 293631. LEICESTERSHIRE 5 Bromfield Road. Tel: 0245 354395. Leicester. Boots, 30-36 Gallowtree Worksop. Computer Grafix, 87 Outram Street. Tel 0623 54734. 92 Chepstow Road. Tel:0633 841760. Bristol Laskys, 16-20 Penn Street Chelmsford. Way In Computers, Gate Tel: 0533 21641. Tel: 0272 20421. Swansea Boots, 17 St Marys 7 Village Square, Tel: 0245 467858. 32 Bridge Street. Tel: 0909 472248. Clevedon. Computer Centre, Market Harborough. Harborough Arcade, The Quadrant Shopping Colchester. Boots, 5-6 Lion Walk OXFORDSHIRE Centre. Tel 0792 43461. 12A Old Street, Clevedon. Home Computers, 7 Church Street. Abingdon, Ivor Fields Computers Tel. 0272 879514. Tel: 0206 577303. Swansea. The Microstore, 35-36 Tel: 0858 63656. Colchester. Colchester Computer 21 Stern Street tel 0235 21207. Singleton Street. Tel: 0792 467980. BEDFORDSHIRE LONDON Centre, 3a Short Wyre Street. Banbury. Computer Plus, WARWICKSHIRE Bedford. Boots, The Harpur Centre, Tel: 0206 47242 W1. Computers of Wigmore 2 Church lane. Tel: 0295 55890. Harpur Street. Tel: 0234'56231. Coventry. Coventry Micro Centre, Street, 104 Wigmore Street Grays. H. Reynolds, 28a Southend Oxford. Absolute Sound & Video, 33 Far Gosford Street. Luton Datasine, Delaport House, Tel: 01 486 0373. Road. Tel: 0375 31641. 19 Old High Street, Headington. Tel: 0203 58942. 57 Guildford Street. TeL: 0582455860. Set Te0582455860, Harlow. Harlow Computer Centre Road. Tel 01-636 0845. wi. Laskys, 42 Tottenham Court Tel 086565661. Coventry. Impulse Computer BERKSHIRE 17 Staple Tye. Tel: 0279 22846. 1 W1. Lion House 227 Tottenham Oxford. Science Studio, 7 Little World, 60 Hertford Street Precinct. Slough. MV Games, 245 High Hornchurch. Comptel Computer Clarendon Street. Tel: 0865 54022. Tel: 0203 553701. Court Road Tel: 01-637 1601. Street. Tel 75 21594. Systems, 112a North Street. Coventry. JBC Micro Services, 200 SCOTLAND W1. Sonic Foto Micro Center, BUCKINGHAMSHIRE Tel: 0402 446741 Aberdeen. Boots, 133-141 Union Earlsdon Avenue, North Earlsdon. 256 Tottenham Court Road. Ilford. Boots, 177-185 High Road Bletchley. RAMS Computer Tel: 01-580 5826 Street. Tel: 0224 585349. Tel: 0203 73813. Centre, 117 Queensway. Tel 01-553 2116. Coventry. Laskys, Lower Precinct Edinburgh. Boots, 101-103 Princes W1. Tomorrows World Today, Romford. Software Plus Tel: 0908 647744. Tel: 0203 27712. Street. TeL031-225 8331. 27 Oxford Street. TeL: 01-439 7799. Glasgow. Boots, 200 Sauchiehall Chesham. Reed Photo & 72 North Street. Tel: 70 65271. Leamington Spa. IC Computers, WI. Walters Computers, DH Evans Street. Tel: 041-332 1925. Computers, 113 High Street. Southend-on-Sea. Computerama, Oxford Street. Tel: 01-629 8800. 43 Russell Street Tet 0926 36244. Tel 0494 783373. 88 London Road. Tel 0702 335443. Glasgow. Boots, Union Street WC1. Transam Micro Systems, Southend-on-Sea. Computer Leamington Spa. Leamington and Argyle Street. Tel: 041-2487387. Hobby Centre, 121 Regent Street. CAMBRIDGESHIRE 59-61 Theobalds Road. Centre, 336 London Road. Cambridge, Boots, 65-67 Sidnt Tel: 0926 29211. Glasgow. Tom Dixon Cameras, Tel: 01-405 5240. Tel: 0702 337161. Street and 28 Petty Curry Street. W5. Laskys, 18-19 Ealing Broadway Tet 041-204 0826. Nuneaton. Micro City, 1a Queens 15-17 Queen Street Southend-on-Sea. Estuary Road. Tel: 0203 382049. Tel: 0223 350213 Personal Computers, 318 Chartwell W8. Walters Computers, Barkers, Shopping Centre. Tel: 01-567 4717. Cambridge, Cambridge Computer North, Victoria Circus Shopping SHROPSHIRE Rugby.O.E.M., 9-11 Regent Street. Tel: 0788 70522 Store, 4 Emmanuel Street Shrewsbury. Clairmont Kensington High Street Tel: 0223 358264 Centre Tel: 0702 614131. Tel 01-937 5432 Enterprises, Hills Lane. WEST MIDLANDS Peterborough.Logic Sales, Unit 6, GLOUCESTER SE7. Vic Oddens Micros, Tel: 3647 52949 Birmingham. Boots, City Centre Midgate Parade, Peterborough. Cheltenham. Laskys, 206 High 5 London Bridge Walk Shrewsbury. Computerama, 13 House, 16-17 New Street. Tel 0733 49696 Street. TeL: 0242 570282 Tel: 01-403 1988. Castlegate. Tel: 0743 60528. Tel: 021-643 7582. Peterborough. Boots, Cheltenham. Screen Scene. Telford. Computer Village Ltd, SE9. Square Deal, Birmingham. Laskys, 19-21 144 St. Georges Road. 40-42 Bridge Street, Queensgate. 2/3 Hazeldine House, Central 373-375 Footscray Road, Corporation Street Tel: 0733 65352 Tel: 0242 528979. New Eltham. Tel 01-859 1516. Square. Tel: 0952 506771. Tel: 021-632 6303. Gloucester. Boots, 38-46 Eastgate Telford. Telford Electronics, CHESHIRE SE15. Castlehurst Ltd, 152 Rye Dudley. Central Computers, Street. Tel: 0452 423501. Chester. Boots, 47-55 Foregate Lane, Peckham. Tel: 01-639 2205. 35 Churchill Precinct. 38 Mall 4. Tel: 0952 504911. HAMPSHIRE Street. Tel: 0244 28421 EC2. Devron Computer Centre, STAFFORDSHIRE Tel: 0384 238169. Chester. Computer Link, 21 St. Basingstoke. Fishers, 2-3 Market 155 Moorgate. tel: 01-638 3339. Stourbridge. Walters Computer Newcastle-under-Lyme. Werburgh Street Tel: 0244 316516. Place. Tel 0256 22079. N14. Logic Sales, 19 The Boume, Computer Cabin, 24 The Parade, Systems. 12 Hagley Road. Crewe. Midshires Computer Petersfield. Foly Micros The Broadway, Southgate. Silverdale. Tel: 0782 636911. Tel: 0384 370811. Centre, 68-78 Nantwich' Road. 45 Chapel Street. Tel: 0730 66841. Tel: 01-882 4942. Stafford. Computerama, 59 Walsall New Horizon, 1 Goodall Portsmouth. Micro Choice, Tel 0270 211086 N22. Boots, 38-40 High Road, Foregate Street Tel: 0785 41899. Street. Tel: 0922 24821. 159 Havant Road, Drayton. Hyde. C Tech Computers, 184 Wood Green. Tel: 01-881 0101. Stoke-on-Trent. Computerama, West Bromwich. DS Peakman, Market Street. Tel: 061-366 8223. Tel 0705 327591. NW3. Maycraft Micros, 11 Market Square Arcade, Hanley. 7 Queens Square. Tel: 021-525 7910. Macclesfield. Camera Computer Portsmouth. RDS Electrical, 157-58 Rosslyn Hill, Hampstead. TeL: 0782 268524. YORKSHIRE Centre, 118 Mill Street, 161 Kingston Road, Tel:0705 812478. Tel 01-431 1300. SUFFOLK Bradford. Boots, 11 Darley Street Tel: 0625 27468 Southampton. Business NW4. Davinci Computer Store, Bury St Edmunds. Boots Tel: 0274 390891 Macclesfield. Computer Centre, Electronics, Micromagic At Atkins 112 Brent Street, Hendon. 11-13 Cornhill Tel: 0284 701516. Leeds. Boots, 19 Albion Arcade, 68 Chestergate. Tel 0625 618827. 7 Civic Centre Road. Tel: 0703 25903. Tel: 01-202 2272. Bury St Edmunds. Suffolk Bond Street Centre. Marple. Marple Computer Centre, Waterlooville. GB Microland, NW7. Computers Inc, 86 Golders Tel: 0532 33551. Computer Centre 1-3 Garland 106 Church Lane. TeL: 061-447 9933) Queens Parade, London Road Green. Tel: 01209 0401. Sheffield. Laskys, 58 Leopold Street. Tel: 0284 705 503 Wilmslow. Wilmslow Micro Te: 0705 259911. NW10. Technomatic, 17 Burnley Street. Tel: 0742 750971. SURREY Centre. 62 Grove Street HERTFORD Road, Wembley. TeL: 01-208 1177. Bagshot. P & H Electronics, 22-24 York. York Computer Centre, Tel: 0625 530890. Potters Bar, the Computer Shop MANCHESTER 7 Stonegate Arcade. Guildford Road. Tel: 0276 73078. 107 High Street. Tel 0707 44417. CLEVELAND Bolton. Computer World UK Ltd, Tel: 0904 641862. Croydon. Laskys, 77-81 North End. Darlington, Darlington Computer Stevenage. DJ Computers, 208 Chorley Old Road Tel 01-681 8443. Shop 75 Bondgate. Tel: 0325 487478. 11 Town Square. Tel: 0438 65501. Tel: 0204 494304. Croydon. The Vision Store, Middlesbrough. Boots Watford. SRS Microsystems, Manchester. Boots, 32 Market 53-59 High Street. Tel 01-686 6362 88-90 Linthorpe Road, 94 The Parade, High Street. Street. Tet 061-8326533. Croydon. The Vision Store, The Cleveland Centre Tel: 0923 26602 Manchester. Laskys, 12-14 St. Tel: 0642 249616. Welwyn Garden City. DJ 96-98 North End. TeL01-681 7539. Marys Gate. Tel: 061-833 0268. South Croydon, Concise CUMBRIA Computers, 40 Fretherne Road Manchester. Mighty Micro Computer Consultants, 1 Carlton Kendal. The Kendal Computer Tel: 0707 32844. Sherwood Centre, 268 Wilmslow Road. Tel: 01-681 6842. Centre, Stramongate. HUMBERSIDE Road, Fallowfield. Tel: 061-2248117. Epsom. The Micro Workshop Tel: 0539 22559. Beverley. Computing World, Manchester. NSC Computer 12 Station Approach Penrith. Penrith Communications 10 Swabys Yard Dyer Lane. Shops, 29 Hanging Ditch Tel: 0372 721533. 14 Castlegate. Tel: 0768 67146. Tel: 0482 881831. Tel: 061-832 2769. Guildford. Walters Computers, Whitehaven. P D Hendren, KENT Manchester. Walters Computers, Army & Navy, 105-111 High Street. 15 King Street. Tel: 0946 2063. Ashford. DGH, 10 North Street. Kendal Milne, Deansgate. Tel: 0483 68171. Workington. Technology Store, Tel: 0233 32597. Tel: 061-832 3414. Wallington Surrey Micro Systems, 12 Finkle Street. Tel: 0900 66972 Ashford. Geerings of Ashford, Oldham. Home & Business 53 Woodcote Road. Tel: 01-6475636. Computers, 54 Yorkshire Street. 80 High Street. Tel: 0233 33366. DERBYSHIRE Woking. Harpers, 71-73 Bromley. Boots, 148-154 High Alfreton. Gordon Harwood, Tel: 061-633 1608. Commercial Way. Tel: 0486 225657 Swinton. Mr Micro, 69 Partington 67-71 High Street. Tel 0733 832078. Street. Tel 01-460 6688 Lane. TeL: 061-728 2282. SUSSEX Chesterfield. Boots, 35-37 Low Bromley. Computers Today. Bexhill-on-Sea. Computerware, Pavement, Market Place. MERSEYSIDE 31 Market Square 22'St Leonards Road. Tel 0246 203591. Chatham. Boots, 30-34 Wilmott Heswall Thornguard Computer Tel: 0424 223340. Chesterfield. Computer Stores, Square, Pentagon Centre Systems, 46 Pensby Road Brighton Boots, 129 North Street. 14 Stephenson Place, Tel: 0634 405471. TeL: 051-342 7516. Tel 0273 27088 Tel: 0246 208802 Gravesend. Gravesend Home Liverpool. Hargreaves, 31-37 Brighton. Gamer, 71 East Street Derby. Boots, 1 Devonshire Computers, 39 The Terrace Warbreck Moor, Walton. Tel: 0273 728681. Walk Tel: 0332 45886. Tel: 0474 23871. Tel: 051-525 1782 Brighton. Laskys, 151-152 Western Gillingham, Regal Software St. Helens. Microman Computers, DEVON Road. Tel 0273 725625. Supplies, 49 High Street Rainford Industrial Estate, Mill Crawley. Gatwick Computers, Exeter. Boots, 251 High Street, Tel: 0634 579634. Lane Rainford. Tel: 0744 885242. 62 The Boulevard. Tel: 0293 37842 Maidstone. Boots, 56-62 King Tel: 0392 32244. Southport Central Studios, Crawley. Laskys, 6-8 Queensway. Exeter. Open Channel, Street. TeL: 0622 53912. 38 Eastbank Street. Tel: 0704 31881. Tel: 0293 544622. Central Station, Queen Street. Maidstone. Kent Micros, 51 Union MIDDLESEX Eastbourne. Boots, 15 Eastboume Tel 0392 218187 Street. Tel 0622 52784. Enfield. Laskys, 44 48 Palace Amdale Centre. Tel 03232 7742. Paignton. Computer Systems Ltd Rainham. Microway Computers Garden Shopping Centre. 39 High Street. Tel: 0634 376702. 35 Hyde Road. Tel 0803 524284. TYNE & WEAR Tel: 01-363 6627. Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Boots, Plymouth. Syntax, 76 Cornwall Sevenoaks. Emest Fielder Harrow. Harrow Micro, 24 Computers, Dorset Street Eldon Square. Tel: 0632 329844. Street. Tel: 0732 28705. Springfield Road Tel: 01-427 0098. Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Laskys Seaton. Curtis Computer Services, Shortlands. The Village House Tel: 0732 456800. Hounslow. Boots, 193-199 High 16 Northumberland Street. Scaton Computer Shop Street. Tel: 01-570 0156. Tel: 0632 617224 of Computers, 87 Beckenham Lane Southall. Twillstar Computers Ltd, Newcastle upon Tyne. Sic Harbour Road . et 1297 22547. Tel: 01-460 7122. 51c Harbour Road Tel: 0297 22347. Tiverton. Actron Microcomputers 7 Regina Road. Tel 01-514 5271. RE Computing 12 Jesmond Road. 37 Bampton Street. TeL: 0884 252854. Sittingbourne. Computer Plus, Teddington. Andrews, Broad Tel: 0632 815550. 65 High Street. Tel: 0795 25677. DORSET Street. Tel 01-997 4716 Tunbridge Wells. Modata Bournemouth. Lansdowne Twickenham. Twickenham WALES Computer Centre, 28-30 St. Johns Computer Centre, 72 Heath Road Computer Centre, 1 Lansdowne Crescent, Lansdowne. Road. Tet 0892 41555. Tel: 01-892 78%. Aberdare. Inkey Computer Services, 70 Mill Street, The Square, Uxbridge. JKL Computers LANCASHIRE Tel: 0202 290165. Blackpool Blackpool Computers Dorchester. The Paper Shop 7 Windsor Street. Tel 0895 $1815. Trecynon. Tet 0685 881828. Aberystwyth. Aberdata at Kings Road Tel: 030564564. Store, 179 Church Street. NORFOLK Galloways 23 Pier Street. Poole. Lansdowne Computer Tel: 0253 20239. Norwich. Adams, 125-129 King TeL: 0970 615522 Centre, 14 Arndale Centre Burnley. IMO Business Systems, Street. Tel: 0603 22129. Cardiff. Boots, 26 Queens Street Tel: 0202 670901. 39-43 Standish Street. Thetford. Thetford CB & Micros, Tel: 0942 44382 & 105 Frederick Street. 21 Guildhall Street. Tel: 0842 61645. Tel: 0222 31291. micronet Phone 01-278 3143 for your free information pack now! Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1 "


"NW Ao avo Games Limited and Langs Supreme Whisky with help from Stakis Hotels, the Turing Institute and Strathclyde University. The Championship formed part of the centenary celebrations of the Scottish Chess Association which organises play for At any one time, half the mere humans north of the border. manufacturers of chess computers They held other commemorative will be telling you that their machines events throughout the year including are the strongest in the world while a tournament won by the Soviet the other half are telling you that grand master Lev Psakhis and a four strength is not the thing to go for at player contest on the summit of Ben a b c d e f g h all. Look instead, they cry, at the Nevis. impressive range of features our Meanwhile, back at the hotel, the the vital a2-g8 diagonal for the machines offer, admire their elegant early leader was Richard Lang's moment, but it soon threatens to styling in Nicaraguan Badger wood, Psion program running on a Sage II. come to c4 and so wins the rook in thrill as they hum selections from The In round one, it defeated the exchange for itself. Sound of Music Spracklens' Private Line with some 44 Be4-c6 c4-c3 45 Bc6-b5 Ra5xb5 46 This second group have a point, incisive play in a level looking a 4xb5 c3-c2 47 Rd8-c8 c2-cl= 48 even if they are only making it position. In round two, it dethroned Rc8xcl Bg8-f7 49 Rcl-c7 Bf7-e8 50 because they know their machines L'Empereur with some cool Rc7-c8 Kh8-98 are not the strongest around. For the retreating and accurate tactics after a Now most computers and most average buyer strength should not be dodgy opening. humans) would take off the bishop everything. There are a lot of other The tournament was played under and allow Black to struggle on a little factors to be considered although I the Swiss system where competitors longer. Instead, Psion sees that by have never been that keen on Julie with the same score are paired in doing nothing for a couple of moves Andrews myself. each round. This ensures that most of he can force Black to walk straight All this may be true, but you cannot the top players will get to play each into checkmate. get away from the fact that in the other and often produces a clear 51 Kf5-16 Kg8-f8 52 e5-e6 K18-58 53 world of chess computers there is winner from a large field in only a few Rc8xe8 mate. nothing more intriguing than pitting rounds. So in round three, Psion was Exhausted by this notable effort, one machine against another and faced with Ulf Rathsman's Princhess Psion stumbled in round four and lost sitting back to watch the result. So it X which had also won its first two to the Elite X, another Spracklen is not suprising that there have been games. The result was the best game production, which itself went into a many official and unofficial computer of the week. clear lead with 3/2 points. championships held over the last 15 White: Psion At the other end of the tournament, years. Black: Princhess X the play was a lot less refined but The latest of the official English Opening there was still a lot of fun to be had. tournaments is the Fourth World 1 c2-c4 e7-e5 2 Nbl-c3 Ng8-f6 3 Take a look at this clash between two Microcomputer Chess Ngl-f3 Nb8-c6 4 e2-e3 d7-d6 5 d2-d4 back markers from round five. Championship held at the Stakis Bc8-f5 6 Bfl-e2 Qd8-d7 7 0-0 Bf8-e7 White: Intelligent Chess Software Ingram Hotel, Glasgow in the autumn 8 d4xe5 d6xe5 9 Qdlxd7+ Bf5xd7 10 Black: Chessnut 3 of last year. Almost all the big names Nc3-d5 Be7-d8 11 b2-b3 0-0 12 Bcl-b2 Queen's Gambit, Chigorin Defence in micro-chess were there the only White has a nice bind on the 1d2-d4 d7-d52c2-c4 Nb8-c6 3 important absentees were the Novag position and the knight on d5 is hisNbl-c3 d5xc4 4 04-05 Nc6-e5 5 machines from Hong Kong which star piece. Black must strive to get Ngl-f3 f7-16 6 Nf3xe5 f6xe5 7 e2-e4 would certainly have been in with a shot of it without making too many Ng8-f6 8 Bflxc4 Bc8-94 chance of some of the top prizes. The concessions elsewhere: This game could be subtitled \"How manufacturers gave no less than 12... Bd7-94 13 h2-h3 Bg4-e6 14 to get a lost position in eight moves seven reasons for not entering which Nf3xe5 Nc6xe5 15 Bb2xe5 Nf6xd5 16 without really trying\". With 9 Qdl-b3, makes you wonder how anybody c4xd5 Be6xd5 17 Ral-cl c7-c6 18 probably followed by 10 d5-d6, else could have decided to turn up! Be2-d3 Bd8-95 White might have brought the roof To be fair, Novag have been very The knight has gone, but White down even more quickly. Still, he active in entering their machines for now has the better posted bishops does not do badly. human tournaments. This may well and a mobile king's side pawn 9f2-f3 Bg4-h5 10 Qdl-b3 b7-b6 11 provide a sterner test of strength as majority to work with. Qb3-a4+ Qd8-d7 12 Bc4-b5 0-0-0 well as better publicity. 19 f2-f4 Bg5-d8 20 92-94 Bd8-b6 21 The final line-up in Glasgow Kgl-f2 Rf8-e8 22 g4-g5 Bb6xe3+ 23 featured 19 entries from half a dozen Kf2xe3 f7-56 24 g5xf6 g7xf6 25 8121 countries. No fewer than six entries Rfl-gl + Kg8-h8 26 Rgl-g5 Re8xe5+ came from the redoubtable 27 Rg5xe5 f6xe5 28 f4xe5 Americans Dan and Kathe Spracklen, Black has recovered his material who had their Sargon III program after some tactical adventures but 5. 24 running on three different White's passed king's pawn and computers, while Ulf Rathsman of active king give him a big advantage. Sweden provided three assorted 28... Ra8-g8 29 Bd3-f5 a7-a5 30 h3-h4 competitors. Others confined Rg8-g3+ 31 Ke3-f4 Rg3-f3+ 32 11 themselves to one effort which, when Kf4-g5 a5-a4 33 b3xa4 Bd5xa2 34 you think of the work involved in h4-h5 Rf3-g3+ 35 Kg5-f6 Rg3-98 36 8 giving birth to a halfway decent h7-h6 Rg8-88 + 37 Kf6-g5 Rf8-g8+ 38 chess program, is no surprise. Kg5-f4 Rg8-a8 39 Bf5-c2 c6-C5 40 a b c d e f g h Any event of this magnitude needs Bc2-e4 Ra8-a5 41 Kf4-f5b7-b6 42 Rclfinancial backing. In this case the di Ba2-98 43 Rdl-d8 c5-c4 White could just take the queen major sponsors were Computer Black keeps the white bishop off now, but why not threaten -Wav DO 47 "


"-NWAga checkmate and force the lady to give Nd2-e4 g7-96 31 Rc7-d7 Bf6-h8 32 Rel-al g7-96 50 h2-h3 Kd6-c7 51 herself up voluntarily instead? Rc2-c7 Bh8-f6 33 Rd7xh7 Qd5-d1 + 34 92-94 f5xg4 52 h3xg4 Kc7-b7 53 13 Qa4-xa7 Qd7xb5 14 Nc3xb5 Qg4xd1 Bf6-e7 Ral-bl+ Kb7-c6 54 Rbl-al Kc6-b6 55 Nf6xd5 15 Qa7-a8+ Kc8-d7 16 There is something rather Ral-bl+ Kb6xa7 56 Kgl-f2 Ra8-f8+ Qa8xd5+ Kd7-c8 17 Qd5-c6 Rd8-d1+ endearing about the way in which a 57 Kf2-g3 Rf8-f7 58 g4-g5 Rf7-f5 59 18 Kelxdl Kc8-d8 19 Nb5xc7 Bh5-f7 computer will suffer any indignity Kg3-54 Ka7-a6 60 Rbl-dl Rf5-f7 61 20 Kdl-c2 Kd8-c8 21 Nc7-a6+ Kc8-d8 rather than resign. Rdl-bl 22 Rhl-dl+ Bf7-d5 23 Rdlxd5 mate. 35 Rc7xe7 Rf8-f5 36 Re7-g7+ Kg8-f8 Black gave up every piece that he 37 Odlxd6+ Kf8-e8 38 Qd6-e7 mate. got into play to stop checkmate. He So going into the last round the failed. Things could have been worse leader board looked like this. Sharing however in the next round the lead on 4were Princhess X, Chessnut got itself mated in 16 Psion and Mephisto A followed half a moves. point behind by Conchess X and At the more accomplished end of Elite X. Thanks to the Swiss system, the table, the start of round six saw the leaders were paired together Elite X, Psion and the German entry, guaranteeing a tense finish. Mephisto A, tying for the lead with As events developed, the last four points apiece. Elite X found round began to bear a strange Princhess X a tougher opponent than resemblance to the closing stages of had Psion. a human tournament where the a b c d e f g h White: Princhess X leaders take quick draws to ensure Black: Elite X some share of the prize money rather Sicilian Defence, Morra Gambit than go for a glorious win and risk Black has been a pawn up for some Declined ending up with nothing. First time but with no realistic hope of 1 e2-e4 c7-c5 2 d2.d4 c5xd4 3 c2-c3 Princhess X v Mephisto A then Psion gaining more than a draw. Now he d4-d3 4 Bflxd3 Nb8-c6 5 Ngl-f3 v Conchess X were agreed drawn, so finds the only way of losingNg8-f6 6 Bcl-f4 d7-d6 7 0-0 e7-e5 attention turned to Elite X v Mephisto exchanging rooks. The black king is 8 Bf4-g3 Bf8-e7 9 Nbl-a3 Nf6-h5 10 B. a spectator for the rest of the game. Qdl-e2 Nh5xg3 11 h2xg3 0-0 12 Ral-dl White: Elite X 61... Rf7-b7 62 Rblxb7 Ka7xb7 63 Bc8-e6 13 b2-b4 a 7-a6 14 Bd3-c4 Black: Mephisto B Kg4-f4 Kb7-c6 64 Kf4-e5 Kc6-c5 65 Qd8-d7 15 Bc4xe6 f7xe6 16 Na3-c4 French Defence, Advance Variation Ke5-f6 Kc5-d4 66 Kf6-97 Kd4-e4 67 Qd7-c7 17 Qe2-e3 1 e2-e4 e7-e6 2 d2-d4 d7-d5 3 e4-e5 Kg7xh7 Ke4-f5 68 Kh7-h6 Kf5-e5 69 White is pressing hard, particularly c7-c5 4 d4xc5 Nb8-c6 5 Ng1-f3 Bf8xc5 Kh6xg6 Ke5-e6 70 Kg6-h7 Ke6-d5 71 against the weak b6 square. Black 6 Bfl-d3 f7-f5 7 0-0 Ng8-e7 8 a 2-a3 0-0 g5-g6 Kd5-e6 72 g6-g7 Black resigns now tries to break free by 9 b2-b4 Bc5-b6 10 Bcl-b2 Ne7-g6 11 Not a classic game, not even a complicating matters but he comes b4-b5 Nc6-e7 12 Qdl-d2 Qd8-c7 13 particularly good one, but typical of off a very definite second-best. Rfl-cl a 7-a6 14 c2-c4 d5-d4 15 c4-c5 the fighting chess found throughout 17... Nc6xb4 18 Nc4-b6 Nb4xa2 19 Bb6-a5 16 Qd2-e2 Ng6-14 17 Qe2-c2 the tournament. It seems that the Nb6xa8 Rf8xa8 20 Rd1-d2 Ba5-c3 18 Nblxc3 d4xc3 19 Qc2xc3 endgame is still a big weakness with Ne7-d5 20 Qc3-b3 Nf4xd3 21 Qb3xd3 most programs. Rf8-d8 So the final result of the tournament In return for the sacrificed pawn, was a four way tie between Elite X, Black has a strong knight and a lot of Mephisto A, Princhess X and Psion. active play. White's queen's side Each winning programmer received pawns look over extended. a Caithness Glass Bowl from 22 a3-a4 Nd5-f4 23 Qd3-c2 Rd8-d5 24 Professor Monroe Newborn, the Bb2-d4 Bc8-d7 25 c5-c6 b7xc6 26 President of the International b5xc6 Oc7xc6 27 Qc2xc6 Bd7xc6 28 Computer Chess Association. At the Rclxc6 Nf4-e2+29 Kgl-h1 Ne2xd4 30 time of the tournament the only one Nf3xd4 Rd5xd4 31 Rc6xe6 of the four winners available in the The smoke has cleared and White shops was the Mephisto A. Now $ is a pawn up in a double rook ending there is a version of Psion available with slight winning chances. His king for the Sinclair QL and the Princhess a b c d e f g h should have gone to fl rather than hi X is available for the Conchess on move 29. In the ending the king machines. must be used actively. There was a special prize for the Black has a bishop and two pawns 31... Kg8-f7 32 Re6-c6 Rd4-e4 33 best amateur program in the event. for his rook but, unfortunately for Rc6-c7+ Kf7-f8 34 62-f4 Re4xf4 35 This was won for Scotland, him, his knight is trapped and 20... Rc7-c5 Ra8-e8 36 Rc5-c6 Re8xe5 37 appropriately in their centenary year, Na2xc3 would be met by 21 Rfl-cl Rc6xa6 Re5-e2 38 Ra6-a8+ Kf8-f7 39 by Geoffrey Bulmer of Dunfermline and 22 Rd2-c2 sending the horse to Ra8-a7+ Kf7-f6 40 Ral-bl Rf4-e4 41 with our old friend Chessnut 3. It the knacker's yard. Khl-gl Re4-e7 42 Ra7xe7 Kf6xe7 43 would be churlish of anyone to 20... Qc7-c4 Rfl-al Na2xc3 22 Rd2-c2 Rbl-al Ke 7-d6 mention that this was the only entry Qc4xe4 23 Qe3xc3 Qe4-d5 24 Qc3-b4 With the material balanced again, eligible for the prize. b7-b5 25 Ral-cl a 7-a5 Black should have no trouble Full results: 1-4 Elite X, Mephisto A, Black is now a whole rook down, drawing. His active king can cope Princhess X, Psion Chess 5; 5-7 although he has four pawns as with the white a-pawn. Conchess X, Elegance, Elite Y 412; compensation. As it turns out, the 44 a4-a5 Kd6-c7 45 a5-a6 Re2-e8 46 8-10 Mephisto C, Private Line, Sargon pawns are soon stopped in their Ral-bl Ra8-b8 47 Rbl-el III (Apple Ile) 4; 11-12 Mephisto B, tracks as White gets his rooks A double mistake. Black should not Sargon III (Macintosh) 3/2; 13-15 working together and goes for the have offered to exchange rooks and Conchess Y, Intelligent Chess jugular. White should have accepted once he Software, Sargon III (Compag) 272; 26 Qb4-g4 Ra8-f8 27 Rc2-c7 Be7-f6 28 had. We shall see why a little later. 16-18 Colossus 2.1, L'Empereur, Rcl-c2 Qd5-b3 29 Nf3-d2 Qb3-d5 30 47... Kc7-d6 48 a6-a7 Rb8-a8 49 Orwell 2: 19 Chessnut 3. -NW Ana 48 "


"| BEYOND ENGING SOFTWARE THE FIRST ADVENTURE GAME WITHOUT TEXT YOU ISSUE SPAN13 COMMANDS THROUGH CHALLENGESOFTWARE FOR LIGHT PEN IS LAMBASSADOR KRYXIXIS HELD CAPTIVE ABOARD GENERALZOEPS STARSHIP YOU HAVE SIXFUTURE HEROES AND FOO MINUTESOR REAL TIME TO RESCUE HIM GASP AT THE RELENTLESS PACE TO THE GRAPHICS BE INSPIRED.IS BY THE SOUZASIDA MUSIC ON THE COMMODORE 64 LIST SHADOWFIRE IS AVAILABLE NOW FROM BETTER SOFTWARE DEALERS EVERYWHERE MAIL ORDER: BEYOND COMPETITION HOUSE PARNDON ROAD, MARKET HARBOROUGH LEICESTERSHIRE LE 16 9NR PRICE .95 FOR SPECTRUM 48K & COMMODORE 64 INCLUDING P&P ACCESS & BARCLAYCARD RING 085834567 CHEQUES&P/Os MADE PAYABLE TO BEYOND "


"Nowafter the gloryofgold enter omkosong SUPER TEST PISTOL SHOOTING SPRING BOARD DIVING TUG O' WAR GIANT SLALOM CYCLING ROWING PENALTIES SKI JUMP SPECTRUM48k COMMODORE64 AMSTRAD Ocean Software is available from selected branches of WOOLIVORTH, WHSMITH, BEL John Menzies. LASKYS, Rumbelows. COMET Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. 6.95 795 3.9 Oceas Ocean Software Ocean House 6 Central Street Manchester M2 SNS Telephone 061 832 6633. Telex 669977 Oceans G "


"Meet the Gang! Wilma Tom Dick Harry Herbert Everyone's a Wor ST EVER MULTI-ROLE ARCADE ADVENTURE Includes Hit Single on reverse \"Everyone's A Wally\" performed by Mike Berry Spectrum 48K .95 Commodore 64 .95 Available shortly on Amstrad CPC 464 44 The Broadway, Bracknell, Berks. 0344 427317 MIKRO-GEN "


"SFX IN SPACE Gunstar moving through Rylosian Clouds. ma Gunstar chasing Xuian Cargo Ship. Gunstar and Target Lights. Digital Scene Simulation (sm) by Digital Productions, Los Angeles, CA. (c) 1984. All Rights Reserved. "


"Our man in America, Marshal M. Rosenthal, has been delving into the magical world of computer animation and visited the company who put the word special into special effects for TRON and The Last Starfighter Tused to love making my own Super-8 movies as a kid. My friends and I would dress up and run around screaming and shouting, playing spacemen and gladiators from the future. Sometimes we'd try to do special effects, like turning the camera on and off to make people appear and disappear. Our \"show-stopper\" was the time we moved a set of playing cards from one place to another, while passing coloured acetates over the lens. Shot at single frame, the cards moved all by themselves, while mysterious lights seemed to dance around them. We didn't know it then, but our foray into \"animation\" was a prelude of the future, when not just lights, but entire sets would be created artificially. Animation effects have been used for almost as long as films have been around. Early movies used models, even puppets, for spaceships and monsters the serials of the 30s and 40s could never have gotten along without them! Others turned to the cartoon artist/animator to create that which only existed as fantasy. Animation could be used to bypass a difficult effect such as the flying sequences of the rarely seen Superman serial of the 1930s. Here, animators were called into levitate the Left, Gary Demos, Sr. VP and Right, John Whitney, Jr. Pres. Co-founders Man of Steel because the directors of Digital Prods. had been told that live action was out of the question. So whenever \"planets\", and other forms weren't nova, or as mundane as a beer can. Superman flew, it was actually an ani tangible models or miniatures. In a The heart of all this is the liquidmated figure that went up, up and sense, they weren't there at all. Yet cooled Cray X-MP computer. Don't away. the film creates a belief in their reality expect one of these next birthdayYears later came Star Wars which John Whitney Jr. is president of this baby costs about 12 million revived many of the old serial sci-fi Digital Productions based in Los dollars! Which is why Digitaltechniques of matt paintings, minia Angeles, California. His interest in sensibly -rents it. tures and models. Jaded fans continue films and computers comes from 20 Previously only available for to demand the Moon and so years of on hand experience. His government and other military-type computers have stepped in with new father was an experimental filmmaker applications, the Cray can do about ways for animators to create. and the first to use a mechanical ONE BILLION calculations a second. Standing at the peak of this analog computer to manipulate A full A full array of data entry, encoding technology is Digital Productions, the and movie previewing workstations company that designed the awesome Whitney Jr. conceived and laid out are also part of the set-up. A Ramtek computer-generated effects for the the construction for a hybrid optical RM9460 imaging/graphics display Last Starfighter. printer which was the forerunner of system allows technical directors to For those unfamilier with the movie, the film printer Digital uses today. Co view rendered images before they we watch boy-meets-girl, boy-meets founder Gary Demos used to be a are committed to film. alien, boy-gets-girl and saves the Uni consultant with a large corporation in The amount of data that can be disverse. In a Star Wars-like scenario, the US and wrote the firm's software. played is pretty amazing 12809 by aliens battle each other amidst the He also developed the two-dimen1024 pixels x 24 bits per pixel, stars and space destroyers blast at sional data input used on the Nasa approximately four megabytes per planets and fighting ships. A Space Shuttle. frame. Hardware also includes a pedestrian automobile even turns into Together, their process, the \"Digital 1560 x 2084 pixel by 10 bit/color film an intergalactic vehicle! Scene Simulation\", enables the recorder and a high speed custom What makes Starfighter different computer to generate wholly realistic interface to the Cray. from those that went before is that 3D images. Digital Productions can To most people, TRON was a these effects were created totally in turn out 12 minutes of film a month cornucopia of computer-graphic the computer. The 'Starfighter\", scenes as exciting as a star going special effects. In fact, there was less 53 "


"MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS MOUNT CHALLENGE Pacman... Me Do Almazz SPECTRUM Kong Strikes Back...5.90 Alien 8.... .8.50 Skooldaze..... ..........4.95 Sam Stoat...............5.85 Star Strike... 4.95 In Dam Trouble.......5.85 Air Wolf 5.95 Underwurde... 8.50 Knight Lore..... .8.50 Doordark's Revenge..... 8.50 American Football....8.50 Ghostbusters 8.75 Shadow Fire.. 8.50 World Baseball .5.95 Pyjamarama... 5.85 Fall Guy 5.95 Beach Head...........6.95 Lords of Midnight....8.50 White Lightning..... 12.50 Dev-Pac 3 Tasword ............ 11.75 Hampstead.............8.50 Blue Max.............6.85 Gift from the Gods.8.50 HUnchback II..........5.80 Monty's Innocent....5.85 Death Star...............6.85 Zaxxon................6.85 Raid over Moscow...6.85 Everyone's a Wally 8.50 Duke's of Hazzard...5.85 Software Star.. ..5.85 Technician Ted........4.95 Brian Bloodaxe........6.85 Project Future. 16.00 Airwulf 5.50 11.25 ilustrator 12.50 Emerald Isle... Buggy Blast...... 4.95 Tapper .6.85 Spy Hunter 6.85 Bruce Lee ...6.85 Quick Shot Il plus interface .18.50 Flightpath 737...___.6.85 Brian Jacks. ..6.85 Gremlins......... 8.50 Day in a Life.. 5.85 Komplex.. Wizards Lair............5.85 Gyron....................8.55 Formula 1... .......6.85 Grand National........5.85 Stay Cool...............5.85 Fantastic Voyage.....5.85 Chuckie Egg.........5.85 Confuzion..... 5.85 Dragontorc ...6.85 Mighty Magnus.......5.85 Mega Hits.......... 16.00 Minder . ........8.50 Star Long Hoàng Rock 'n' Bolt...........6.85 911/TS..................6.85 Frankie Goes to....... 8.50 Swords and Scorcery 8.50 Automan................6.85 Rocky Horror Show.7.75 Buck Rogers.. .6.85 Moon Cresta...........5.94 Super Gran...........8.50 Cauldron...............6.85 Icicle Works..........5.85 Jo B'ton's Squash...6.85 Dummy Run............5.85 Nodes of Yesod...... 8.50 Daley's Supertest....5.85 Soft Aid.... ......4.99 10.50 Up and Down.........8.50 Super Huey..... ... 10.50 Dough Boy........ ..8.50 Talladega........ .8.50 8.50 8.50 Dark Tower.. .6.85 8.50 Mama Llama...... ..6.55 Brian Jacks.... .-7.85 Gremlins...... 8.50 Fistful of Fun..........8.50 Rocket Ball 6.85 Mega Hits....... 16.00 Pipeline Il....... .7.75 Grand National... -.6.85 Airwulf ...6.85 Kong Strikes Back .6.90 Archon 8.50 Ciphoid 9...... 8.50 Pastinder .8.50 Rock 'n' Bolt.......... 8.50 911/TS. 8.50 Music Studio 12.50 Bounty Bob...........8.50 Skull Island............ 12.50 Murder Water Front 12.50 Frankie Hollywood...8.50 Blagger Hollywood...7.95 Shadowfire... .8.50 Breakdance.... . .7.75 Moon Cresta... 5.85 Super Gran.............8.50 Gates of Dawn........7.75 Cauldron................6.85 Grog's Revenge.......8.50 Dropzone... 8.50 Stringer ..5.85 Master of Lamp .9.50 Elite Elite idisk) 15.50 Basket Ball 5.00 Strange Loop..... ..6.85 Dummy Run.... .8.50 Spitfire 40..... -8.50 Dambusters 8.50 Ice Palace.. 6.85 Brian Jacks... .7.75 Theatre Europe........8.50 Pitstop .. .8.50 Nodes of Yesod......8.50 The story so far: 48K SPECTRUM Earth, 1987. A strange protrusion emerges from shark infested waters amidst a group of islands in the South Pacific. Nobody has yet reached this object, which is possessed by an evil force and guarded by deadly plants, murals, pigmen, chasing ghouls and yellow horned demons. Prof. Burk arrives on the scene, resplendent in his newly invented space suit and jet pack able to withstand the forces emanating from the green and red blocks which cover the Mount. He intends to be first to the summit. Woefully the jet pack cannot withstand all of the effects of the coloured blocks and therefore great care has to be taken when jumping from block to block, so as to ensure correct coordination of the ENERGY LEVEL (On/Off) with the coloured block being stood on. Ignoring all advice against attempting his objective, the fearless mountaineer states, \"people risked their lives to conquer Mount Everest, why not this challenge?\" Your mission is to help guide the determined Prof. Burk to the top of Mount Challenge (you'll need to draw a rough map as you go along). Good luck! Extra info: 100% Machine Code 89 Screens Keyboard OR Kempston Joystick Available from: Aasvoguelle Productions (B), Blakemoor, Marshbrook, Church Stretton, Shropshire SY6 6QA Tel: Marshbrook (069 46) 345 Cheques/P.O.'s for .95 PS: The first 1,000 tapes sold will receive a FREE GAME on the B-side. Written by the same author. Take on three aliens at dominoes and try and get to the final of 'Point-a-Spot'. COMMODORE 11.00 -.5.85 Staff of Karnath..... 8.50 Zaxxon...............8.75 One on One............8.50 Bungleing Bay.........8.50 Choplifter ..............8.50 World Baseball........6.85 Everyone's a Wally 8.50 Cit Hanger. 6.85 Beach Head.. .8.50 Pole Position........... 8.50 Slap Shot 7.85 Software Star.........6.85 Tri Na Nog..........8.50 onon. ..6.85 Impossible Mission 7.85 Knightmare...........6.00 Lords of Midnight....8.50 Soft Aid..................4.99 ..... .4.99 8.50 Postage included U.K. Please state which micro. Fast Service. Send cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept. CVG. 76 Westbourne Terrace, London W2 12. SOFTWARE WORLD 12 ETHEL STREET, BIRMINGHAM B2. TEL: 021 643 7559 FOR ALL POPULAR MICRO HARDWARE, PERIPHERALS & SOFTWARE Birmingham's largest stockists of: AMSTRAD, ATARI, COMMODORE, DRAGON, ELECTRON, MSX, ORIC, SPECTRUM AND TEXAS SE IS TURNE LUS ILISED SOFTWARE AT AMAZING PRICES! (i.e. Atari from .00) SEND S.A.E. FOR FREE LISTS (SPECIFY MACHINE) BACK IN STOCK Atari Technical Ref. Notes De Re Atari Atari Roots Your Atari Computer 17.00 17.00 17.20 17.50 ATARI COMPUTERS 800XL/1050 DISK DRIVE PACK inc. Home Filing Manager Pay off: Text Adventure Sound & Graphics Demo .99 ATARI BOOKS & MAGAZINES ANTIC ANALOG PAGE 6 ATARI USER (inc BACK ISSUES) PLACE YOUR REGULAR ORDER WITH US NOW MANY ATARI BOOKS IN STOCK 800XL/1010 RECORDER PACK inc. Pole Position Inv to Programming Sound & Graphics Demo .99 ATARI STOP PRESS! M.P.P. PRINTER I/FACE 69.99 R-VERTER RS 232 1/FACE 59.99 U.S. DOUBLER 79.95 (converts 1050 to d/d) MINOR MIRACLES WS MODEM 149.99 MINER 2049'er (cart) 17.95 BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK (cart) 49.95 GHOSTBUSTERS (disk) 14.95 DROPZONE (c/d) 9.95/14.95 POLE POSITION (c/d) 9.95/14.95 MR. DO (c/d) 9.95/14.95 SPIDERMAN W. GRAPHICS (d) 17.95 800XL COMPUTER inc. Joystick, Pacman .99 ALL LATEST ATARI SOFTWARE INCLUDING V.C.S. CARTRIDGES, IN OUR NEW 1ST FLOOR ATARI CENTRE PLEASE PHONE TO CHECK STOCK AVAILABILITY BEFORE SENDING MONEY REMEMBER IF WE DO NOT HAVE WHAT YOU REQUIRE IN STOCK WE CAN NORMALLY 'OBTAIN IT' FAST! U.K. & AMERICAN SOFTWARE IS AVAILABLE MAIL ORDER U.K. POST FREE (EXCLUDING BOOKS & MAGAZINES). GOODS DESPATCHED BY RETURN POST, SEND FOR UP TO DATE LISTS ATARI SELECTED CARTRIDGES e.g. STAR RAIDERS, PAC-MAN .50 each 15.00 for two please .00 for three phone "


"images. It took a lot of time and cost gons per ame, each polygon repre Software being created for \"The last Starfighter'' HOW IT WORKS development of a printer that will "


"O 005 EGGS CERERE veesuu RUNS ON AN ATARI 400-16K BY ANDREW BLAKE es Mei This more game for the Atari has you, as the intrepid explorer, dashing around an underground labyrinth, pursued by Oggs (use joystick In port one). To stay alive. you'll have to eat the multitude of nutritional eggs which the Oggs lay, but be wary of their sticky slime which they have a tendency to leave to leave in tunnels. The eggs are worth: Blue eggs 1 point + 1 unit of energy Red eggs 10 points + 1 unit of energy Gold eggs 100 points + 2 units of energy If you have to go through the slime, make sure you have at least 100 units of energy. If things get too eggeiting, then take a rest in one of the safe tunnels at the sides of the screen which the Oggs are too big to fit into. Finally, if all else fails, the fire button drops Ogg Repelant, but this isn't always very reliable. 5 REM OGGS EGGS 6 REM ** BY A.M. BLAKE 7 REM* 7-9-12 8 REM ** NEEDS JOYSTICK ** 10 GOSUB 900:SETCOLOR 0,12,6:SETCOLOR 1.8.6:SETCOLOR 2,1.8: SETCOLOR 3,3,6:SETCOLOR 4,0,0:GOSUB 800 19 REM **MAIN LOOP** 20 IF OM-01 OR OM 02 THEN 500 22 B-E-ED:NM-OM+PEEK(636)-PEEK(637): A PEEK(632): IF A=6 OR A=10 OR A-14 THEN NM NM-20 25 SOUND 0.0.0.0: SOUND 1.0.0.0:IF A=5 OR A9 OR A-13 THEN NM NM+20 30 GOSUB 600:T=T+1:IF TOTD THEN T=0:GOSUB 400 40 Q=PEER(NM):IF Q=1 THEN NM=OM:GOTO 66 41 IF Q-MC THEN SOUND 0,200, 10, 8:GOTO 70 45 IF 0-66 THEN EE+1:S-S+1: SOUND 0.50, 10, 8:GOTO 70 50 IF Q=194 THEN EE+1:SS+10:SOUND 0,25, 10.8:GOTO 70 55 IF Q=130 THEN EE+2:S=S+100: GOSUB 350:0P-OP+RI:GOTO 70 60 IF ORC THEN OP-OP+1:SOUND 0, 10, 10,8:GOTO 70 62 IF Q=OC THEN 500 65 IF Q-SL THEN 550 66 SOUND 0, 200, 10,8 70 W=0:IF STRIG(O)=0 THEN GOSUB 80 75 GOSUB 650: POKE OM.W:POKE NM.MC:OM-NM: GOSUB 100:COTO 20 79 REM **DROP REPELANT** 80 IF OP<=0 THEN RETURN 81 W-RC:OPOP-1:IF OMNM THEN 90 82 RETURN 90 Q-PEEKCOM+1):IF Q-O THEN OM OM+1: RETURN 91 Q-PEEKCOM-1):IF Q=0 THEN OM OM-1:RETURN 92 QEPEEKCOM-20):IF Q=O THEN OM=OM-20: RETURN 93 Q=PEEK(OM+20):IF QED THEN OM-OM+20: RETURN 94 OP-OP+1: RETURN 99 REM **OGG MOVEMENT** 100 IF OM=01 OR OM=02 THEN 500 110 01-01+M1:Q-PEEK(01):IF Q-1 THEN 150 120 IF Q-OC OR (Q=RC AND PEEK(53770) >SP) THEN 01-01--M1:MI=-M1:GOTO 200 130 GOSUB 300: POKE 01-M1, EC:POKE 01, OC: IF EC-130 THEN SOUND 0,10,10,8 140 GOTO 200 150 01-01-M1:ON RH1+2+(ABS(M1)-20)+1 GOTO 160.170.180.190 160 ML-20-40*(PEEK(53770) >128):GOTO 195 170 Ml=1-2*(PEEK( 53770) >128):GOTO 195 180 MI=20*SGNOM-01):GOTO 195 190 M1-SGNCCCOM-SC)/20-INT(COM-SC)/20))-((01-SC)/20-INT( (01-SC)/2 0))):IF M1=0 THEN 170 195 IF PEEK(01+M1)-1 THEN MI--M1 200 IF OM=01 OR OM=02 THEN 500 210 02-02+M2: Q=PEEK(02):IF Q=1 THEN 250 220 IF Q-OC OR (QRC AND PEEK(53770)>SP) THEN 02=02-M2:M2=-M2: RETURN 230 GOSUB 300: POKE 02-M2, EC:POKE 02,OC: IF EC-130 THEN SOUND 0, 10, 10,8 240 RETURN is genoeg Illustration: Dorian Cross "


"ATARI 600XL ENTERTAINMENT ENT PACK Great news for games addicts who appreciate high quality graphics and sensational arcade action gameplayFor Only 169. you can buy a 16K Atari 600XL Computer with two top arcade ROM cartridge titles and a joystick. These two ROM titles are the famous arcade hit Donkey Kong and another favourite Qx (We only have a limited number of packs with Q When these run out Qix may be substituted for an arcade entertainment cartridge of the same value) The 500XL Entertainment Pack offers real value for money and enables you to save .96, nearly half of the normal RRPs of the pack tems when purchased individually. Silica Shop have a wide range of ROM cartridges available including arcade favourites such as Asteroids, Centipede. Missile Command Popeye. O'Bert Star Raiders, Super Cobra for only 1995 eachi The 600XL is a programmable home computer with the Basic Programming Language built in and if you later add a 1010 Program Recorder (XLP 1010 ), a range of hundreds of cassette programs will become available to you. The Atari BOOXL is recommended as a first class games machine ATARI PACKS POWER WITHOUT THE PRICE! ATARI 600XL ENTERTAINMENT PACK 16K Atari 600XL .99 Donkey Kong (R). .99 Qix (R) ........ $9.99 Single CX40 Joystick .99 Total of purchased separately .96 Less Discount approx 1 ... .96 PACKAGE PRICE (XLC 1600) .00 ) ATARI 800XL AND RECORDER PACK The B4K 800XL is packaged here with the 1010 recorder an economical storage and retrieval unit a smash hit arcade game and programming aid all for a package price of only  fret XLC 1010), a saving of 65.96 off the ARP's of the individual items which total [194.96. The game included in this pack Pole Position Now on cassette from Atari Pole Position is an accurate reproduction of Atari's own highly successful arcade driving game which has all the thrills and spills of the grand-prix racetrack On the reverse of this cassette is a demonstration program of Atan's amazing sound and graphics capabilities giving an example of the high quality performance of the Atan BOOXL. Also included is an Invitation to Programming 1 cassette which takes you step by step through the first stages of programming in Atari Basic using Atari's unique sound through facility which allows prerecorded human speech to be played through your TV speaker. All you need is a joystick (ATJ 0400 67.90 for Pole Position to be up and running with this package. The Atari BOOXL in this pack comes with a Silica two year guarantee ATARI 800XL + PROG. RECORDER PACK 64K Atari 800XL an 800XL . ..............99 1010 Program Recorder ........ .99 Pole Position + Demo Prog (C) ... .99 Invitation to Programming 1 ... 19.99 Total cit purchased separatelyl ....... .96 Less Discount (approx 33 ) ...... $65.96 PACKAGE PRICE (XLC 1010) .00 ATARI PACKS POWER WITHOUT THE PRICE! 800XL AND DISK DRIVE PACK This pack includes the 54K 800XL with a 1050 Disk Drive for mass storage and speedy information retrieval as well as a brand new adventure game and a powerful home help program, all for only  (ref: XLC 1050), a saving of .96 of the RAP's of the individual items which total 364.96 The Tirst of these programs is The Payoll on disk, a new adventure game which is a fantasy simulation in which you play the leading role. An exciting introduction to adventure programs which are always popular with a demonstration program of Atari's amazing sound and graphics on the reverse) Also included in this pack is Home Filing Manager to help you organise your files. It allows you to catalogue and file details of birthdays books your stamp collection or anything else which would normally require you to use filing cards. The instructions for Home Filing Manager are on the reverse of the disk and all the disks which come in this package are in protective paper wallets You get an extended two year quarantee on the 800XL and 100 free programs with the disk drive when you buy this package from Silica. ATARI PACKS POWER WITHOUT THE PRICE! ATARI 800XL + DISK DRIVE PACK 64K Atari 800XL ...............99 1050 Disk Drive ...99 Home Filing Manager (D) ....... .99 The Payoff + Demo Prog (D) .....99 Total of purchased separately) ....... .96 Less Discount (approx 25.35 ... .96 PACKAGE PRICE (XLC 1050) .00  130XE 109 NOW IN STOCK Atan's new 126K computer, the Atari 130XE offers an enormous 131,072 bytes of RAM for only  The 130XE comes with built in Basic and full operating instructions and is now in a newly designed Case with a modern full stroke keyboard. The XE is fully compatible with both the 400/800 and the XL Tanges of machines, this means that it can run approximately 90% of all Atari Computer software on the market. This provides a range of over 1,000 software tities as well as a large selection of accessory and peripheral items. Initial stock of the 130XE will be limited, so it's first come first served SILICA SHOP LTD, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Tel: 01-309 1111 ORDER NOW-OR SEND FOR OUR FREE ATARI BROCHURES To: SILICA SHOP LTD, Dept CVG 0685, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Telephone: 01-309 1111 LITERATURE REQUEST: Please send me your FREE brochures on Atari Home Computers. O I already own a ................... Videogame I already own a. Computer Initials: ........ Surname: Mr/Mrs/Ms: ............... Address: WE ARE THE UK'S No1 ATARI SPECIALISTS Since the introduction of Atari Video Games into the UK Six years ago, Silica Shop has been selling Atari products and supporting Atari owners with a specialist mailing Service which we believe is unbeatable. We stock Over 1,000 Atari related product lines and have a mailing list including over 300.000 Atari 2500 VCS Owners and over 50.000 Atari Home Computer Owners. Because we specialise in Atari, we aim to keep stocks of all the available Atari hardware, software peripherals and accessories. We also stock wide range of Atant dedicated books and through us, the owners on our list can subscribe to several American Atari dedicated magazines We can provide a full service to all Atari owners and are now firmly established as the UK'S NUMBER ONE Atari specialists Here are just some of the things we can offer you: FREE POST & PACKING ON MAIL ORDERS FREE CLUBS & INFORMATION SERVICE HIGHLY COMPETITIVE PRICES AFTER SALES SUPPORT SERVICE REPAIR SERVICE ON ATARI PRODUCTS If you would like to register on our mailing list as an Atari computer owner, or just because you are interested in buying an Atari machine let us know. We will be pleased to keep you up to date with all new developments on the Atari scene free of charge. So, post off the coupon with your order or enquiry and begin experiencing an Atari service that is second to none Postcode:................ ORDER REQUEST: PLEASE SEND ME: 0 16K 600XL Entertainment Pack ........  All prices include VAT O 64K 800XL & 1010 Recorder Pack ..  0 64K 800XL & 1050 Disk Drive Pack ...  Post & Packing O 128K 130XE Home Computer ...  is Free Or Charge O lenciose Cheque/P.O. payable to Silica Shop Limited for the following amount O CREDIT CARD Please debit my: Access/Barclaycard/Visa/American Express/Diners Club My Card No is: ... @ 01-309 1111 "


"THE IT At 21.15 hours on the evening of May 16th 1943 & flight of specially prepared Lancaster bombers left Scampton Airfield for Germany. After months of planning and preparation Wing Commander Guy Gibson and his 617 Squadron were at last embarking on a mission so daring that it would guarantee them a place in the annals of history. The mission would strike at Germany's industrial heartland. If the giant dams of Moehne, Eder and Sorpe could be breached, millions of tons of water would flood the Ruhr, cutting vital water supplies HORIZON LIGHTS to steelworks and homes, flooding factories, power stations and farmland, and SPOTLIGHT BALLOON ALTIMETER DIRECTIONAL COMPASS ARTIFICIAL AIR SPEED HORIZON bring the important Mittelland Canal to a virtual standstill. Of course the successful conclusion of this raid is now legendary, the young men who took part are acknowledged as heroes; and now U.S. Gold in conjunction with Sydney Development Corporation and the International Computer Group are giving you the opportunity to relive the excitement, tension and drama of this famous mission. You will be able to play the part of PILOI, flying the Lancaster from Sca.mpton to the target, NAVIGATOR using screens maps of Europe, "


"FRONT GUNNER, REAR GUNNER, BOMBARDIER and FLIGHT ENGDEER. You will have to fly across Europe at low level to avoid radar; lookout for the deadly ME109 night fighters, dodge barrage balloons, spotlights and flak. At the target you will need all your nerve and skill to control the aircraft and release your deadly payload at just the right moment while avoiding enemy attack. BOOSTER GAUGES RPM GAUGES 0 0 0 EXTINGUISHER CONTROL ROOSTERS THROTTLES . CONTROL DOT Game Features: Superb graphics and sound, realistic joystick control, Pilot's screen and indicators, multiple screen navigators maps, front and rear gunners screens, bomb sighting screens, engineer's indicators, and much much more. The package comes complete with comprehensive flight instructions, maps, and confidential LANCASTER B. MK1/III (DAM BUSTER) HEA documents including authentic material by Barnes Wallace and Wing Commander Guy Gibson. Officially endorsed by 617 Squadron of the R.A.F., Dambusters is available for Atari and Commodore 64 computers with versions for Spectrum, BBC and Amstrad coming soon. ***** U.S. GOLD Software WAKELN U.S. Gold is available from all leading computer stores and selected branches of BOOTS-W.H. SMITH-JOHN MENZIES-WOOLWORTH-WILDINGS Dealersi For information on how to become & U.S. Gold stockist contact CentreSoft, Lightning, Microdealer, Tiger and all other leading distributors or write to: U.S. Gold Limted, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone 021-389 3020. Telex 337268. "


"THE CHART TOPPING. ACTION/STRATEGY ACA U S NO1 HITI LODE RUNNER OUT NOW NOW AVAILABLE FOR YOUR CBM 64 The Bungaling Empire Strikes again! Your mission is to recover the gold they stole. ON CASSETTE AND DISK Lode Runner INCLUDES SPECIAL DISCOUNT AND PRIZE DRAW VOUCHER FEATURES WORTH OVER  Lode Runner is very user-friendly great fun! Lode Runner is a very well thought-out package and is extremely playable. A must for POPULAR game connoisseurs. Tom Hussey CO   , WEEKLY 150 CHALLENGING SCREENS CHEAT KEYS PROVIDING UNLIMITED LIVES & ACCESS TO ANY SCREEN VARIABLE GAME SPEED & FREEZE FRAME HIGH SCORE TABLE JOYSTICK OR KEYBOARD CONTROL PLUS PLUS PLUS ALSO INCLUDES SCREEN GENERATOR ENABLES YOU TO CREATE YOUR OWN SCREEN DESIGNS LODE RUNNER COMPETITION The famous addictive action program for the COMMODORE 64 LOAD Send us your best screen design, on cassette or disk, by 30th June 1985, to the address below. It may become one of the best British screens to be included on \"CHAMPIONSHIP LODE RUNNER', for release by Ariolasoft later this year. A prize of a Mini Krugerrand will also be awarded for each screen used. VAMARLE FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE RETAILERS l's not there, please order it or in case of difficulty send your heque/P.O. made out to Ariolasoft U.K. Ltd. including your own name and address, to Artolasoft U.K. Ltd., Suite 1051106, sphalte House, Palace Street, London SWIE 5HS. Lode Runner Cassette .95. Lode Runner Disk .95 includes VAT & p&p. U.K. orders only HIGH PERFORMANCE PROGRAMS "


"MUN ITU AMCASSETT CANDO 250 02-02-M2:ON RH2.2+(ABS(M2)-20)+1 GOTO 260,270,280,290 809 ? 260 M2=20-40*(PEEK(53770)>128):GOTO 295 #6:\"! (INV)( CTRL] B[INV)(CTRL] B[INV[CTRL]B[INVICTRL] B[INVICT 270 M2-1-2.(PEEK(53770) >128):GOTO 295 RL]B[INV][CTRL] B[ INVICTRL] B[INV][CTRL]B[INV][CTRL] B[INV][CTR 280 M2-20 SGNCOM-02):GOTO 295 L]B[INVICTRL]B[INV[CTRL]B[ INV][CTRL] B[INVICTRL] B[ INVICTRL 290 JB[INV][CTRL] B[INV] [CTRL]B[INV][CTRL]BI\": M2-SON (COM-SC)/20-INT(COM-SC)/20))-((02-SC)/20-INT((02-SC)/2 0))):IF M2-0 THEN 270 810 ? 295 IF PEEKCO2+M2)-1 THEN M2-M2 #6:\"(INV][CTRL]B!!!111(INVICTRL]BI (INV][CTRL]BILITI(INV][ 298 RETURN CTRL]B!\": 299 REM **NEXT EGG COLOUR 811 ? 300 REPEEK(53770):IF RC-BE THEN EC-66: RETURN #6:\"1(INV][CTRL]B!!!!!INV] CTRL]BI (INV] CTRL]B!!!!11(INVI 310 IF RC-RE THEN EC-194: RETURN CTRL]BI\"; 320 IF RC-SD THEN ECHSL: RETURN 812 ? 330 IF OP 5 THEN EC-66: RETURN #6:\"(INV][CTRL] B[ INVICTRL] B[ INV][CTRL]B INV][CTRL] B[ INV] [CT 340 EC-130:RETURN RL]B[INV] [CTRL]B[INV] CTRL JB INV] [CTRLIBI INVICTRL] B[ INVICTR 349 REM **GOLD EGG SOUND L]BCINV1[CTRL]B INV][CTRL] B[ INVICTRLB[ INV][CTRL]B[ INVICTRL 350 FOR I-1 TO 10: SOUND O, INT(RND(0) 10+5), 10, 8:NEXT I: RETURN 1B[INV][CTRL] B[INV][CTRL]B[ INV][CTRL]BI\"; 399 REM **CHANGE OF LEVEL 813 ? 400 SP-SP+13:IF SP>234 THEN SP-234 #5;\"! (INVICTRL)B111111(INV][CTRL]BI 1 INVICTRL]B111111(INV] 410 L-L+1:IF L>5 THEN RETURN CTRL]B!\": 420 314 ? ED=L*0.1+0.2: TD=50*(9-L):BE-216-L 16:RE-BE+38-L*4:SD=RE+L*20: #6:\"![INVICTRL]B INV][CTRL] B[INV][CTRL]D[ INV][CTRL] B[ INV][CT RHI=1:RH2=(L>3):RI-(3/L>1)+1 RL] B[INVICTRL] B[ INVICTRL] B[INVICTRL]B! (INV][CTRL] B[INVIC 430 POSITION 13, 1:? #6:\"LEVEL:\":L: RETURN 499 REM DEAD MAN. TRL]B[ INV][CTRL] B[ INVICTRL] B[ INVICTRL)B[ INVICTRL] B[ INVICT RL]B[INVICTRL]BI\": 500 POKE OM, O: POKE NM, OC:POSITION 0,0:? #6:\"(INV Jeaten by an 815 ? OGGI INV) 510 FOR I=1 TO 21: SOUND 0, 128+INT(RND(0)*128), 4.10: POKE #6:\"!!! INV][CTRL]BI 1 INVICTRL]BI INVICTRL]B!! (INV][CTRL]B! PP+40, 129:IF INT(1/2)-1/2 THEN POKE PP-40,36 [INV][CTRL]B!!(INV][CTRL]B111\": 816 ? 515 NEXT I 520 POP :IF S>HI THEN HI-S #6:\"(INV][CTRL]BE INV][CTRL] B[INV][CTRL] B[ INVICTRL] B[ INVICTR LBINVICTRL]B[INVICTRL]BI (INVICTRL]BI (INV][CTRL]B! (INV] 530 SOUND 0.0.0.0: SOUND 1,0,0,0: FOR I=1 TO 300: NEXT I:GOSUB 800:GOTO 20 CTRL] B[ INV][CTRL] B[ INV (CTRL]B[ INV][CTRLB[ INVICTRL] B[ INVIC TRL]B[INVICTRL]B\": 550 SOUND 0,255, 12, 8:IF E>=100 THEN EINT(E*0.9)-10:GOTO 70 817 ? 560 POKE OM, O:POKE NM, SL+64:POSITION 0.0:? #6;\"INV] TRAPPED BY (INV]slime \":GOTO 520 #6;\"! INVICTRL]BI INVICTRL]BI (INV][CTRL]BI (INV][CTRL]B!![I 570 POKE OM,MC-128:POSITION O, 0:? #6:\"out of INV]energyINVI NVICTRL]B! INVICTRL]BI (INV][CTRL]BI (INVICTRL]B!\": 818 ? \":COTO 520 599 REM **TUNNELS** #6;\":[INVICTRL]BI (INV [CTRL]B[INV][CTRL]BI INV1[CTRL] B[INVIC 600 IF NM-SC+139 THEN NM-NM+20: RETURN TRL)B(INV][CTRL][INVICTRL]B! (INV) (CTRL] B[INV ) [CTRL]B[INV1 CTRL]BINV1[CTRL] B[ INVICTRL]B[ INVICTRL]BI (INVICTRL]B!\": 610 IF NM=SC+160 THEN NM-NM-20:RETURN 819 ? 620 IF NM=SC+359 THEN NM-NM+20: RETURN 630 IF NM-SC+380 THEN NM-NM-20: RETURN #6:\"(INVICTRL]B111111(INV] (CTRL)BI INVICTRL]B1!1!1! (INVI CTRL]BI\": 640 RETURN 820 ? 649 REM **UPDATE SCORE & ENERGY** 650 POSITION 7, 1:? #6:S:POSITION 19,0:? #6:OP:POSITION 7.0:? #6;\":( INV][CTRL] B[ INV][CTRL] B[ INV1[CTRL]BINV11 CTRL] B[ INVICT #6: INT(E);\" RL]B(INVICTRLJBL INV][CTRL]BC INV] (CTRL]BCINVICTRL) B INV][CTR 660 IF ECHO THEN POSITION 7.0:? #6:\"0\":POP GOTO 570 L]B[ INV][CTRL]BCINV1 CTRLJB INV][CTRL] B[ INV (CTRL]BC INVICTRL 665 IF E<=20 THEN SOUND 1,15,10,8 IBC INV][CTRL] B[INVICTRL]B[INV][CTRL]BI\": 821 ? #6;\"!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!111\": 670 RETURN 798 REM *DRAW MAZE** 839 REM **SET VARIABLES** 840 POKE 764, 255 799 REM **USE CTRL B** 850 POSITION 0,0:? #6:\"INPUT LEVEL (INV11( INV1INV5[INV] 800 POSITION 0,2:? #6;\"11111111!!!!!!!!!!!!\"; \":POSITION 0,1:? #6; \"HI-SCORE W:HI:POSITION 13, 1:? #6;\" 801 ? #6:\"(INV(CTRL B INV1[CTRL]BCINV1[CTRL] B[ INVICTRL] B[ INVICT855 GET #1. K:IF K< 49 OR K>53 THEN 855 RL]B INVICTRL]BINVICTRL]BINVICTRL]BINVICTRL]B[ INVICTR 860 L=K-48:POSITION 0,0:? #6: \"PRESS (INVITRIG[INV) TO START L]B INVICTRL]BI INVICTRL]B[ INVICTRL]B INV (CTRL]B INVECTRL\":E-50+(1=1) 10: ED-L*0.1+0.2 TD50(9-L) JBC INV][CTRL] B[INVICTRL]B[INV][CTRL]B!\"; 870 802 ? BE=216-1*16:RE=BE+38-1.4:SD-RE L 20:RH1-(L>1): RH2-(L>3):OP=3: #6;\":[INVICTRL]BIITTI (INV] [CTRL]BIT INV][CTRL]B!!!!!! (INVI RI-(3/L>1)+1:SP-13L CTRL]B!\": 871 IF PEEK( 644 )=1 THEN 871 803 ? 872 IF PEEK(644)=0 THEN 872 #6;\":[INV][CTRL]BI (INVICTRL]B[INVICTRL]BI INVICTRL]3[INVC 875 POSITION 0.0:? #6:\"(INV Jenergy(INV1 \":E;\" TRLJB[INVICTRL] B[ INV][CTRL]BI (INV][CTRL]BCINV1[CTRL]BCINV1I OR::OP:POSITION 0,1:? #6:\"(INV] SCORE INV) 0 CTRL]BI INVICTRL] B[ INVICTRL] B[ INVICTRL]B! (INVICTRL]B!\"; 876 POSITION 13, 1:? #6: \"LEVEL:\":L 804 ? 880 #6;\":[INVICTRL]BI INV][CTRL]BI (INV][CTRL]BI INV][CTRL]B!![I 3=O:MC=196:00=133: EC-66:SL=134: RC-3:T-0:0M-SC+61:NM-OM:01-SC+ N1[CTRL]BI( INV]CTRL]B11(INV][CTRL]BI (INV][CTRL]B!\": 441:02=SC+458 805 ? 885 Mi=1:M2=-20:POKE OM, MC:POKE 01,0C: POKE 02,OC: RETURN #6:\"INV | CTRL B INVICTRL] B[ INV] [CTRL]B[ INV][CTRL]BC INVICTR 899 REM REDEFINE CHARACTERS + L]B[INV1 [CTRL]B[INV][CTRL]BI (INVICTRL]B! I (INV][CTRL]B! (INVIO 900 GRAPHICS 17:POSITION 4, 11:? #6;\"(INV please CTRL]B INVICTRL) BE INV][CTRL]B[ INV][CTRL] B[ INVICTRL] B[ INV][C wait(INV]\":POSITION 5,9:? #6:\"oggs TRL] B[INVICTRL]B\": eggs\":SC-PEEK(88)+256 PEEK(89) 806 ? 910 PP=(PEEK(106)-8) 256:CP-57344:FOR I-O TO 511:POKE #6:\"111 INVICTRL]B!! INVICTRL) BI (INV][CTRL]B!! INVICTRL]B! PP+I, PEEK(CP+I):NEXT I [INVICTRL]BI (INVICTRL]B! 11\": 920 FOR I=0 TO 55: READ A:POKE I+PP, A:NEXT I:POKE 807 ? 756, PP/256:OPEN #1.4.0,\"K:\": RETURN #6;\":[INVICTRL] B[ INVICTRL)B[INVICTRL]B[ INV][CTRL] B[ INVICT L]B[INVICTRL]B(INV] [CTRL]B! ! (INV1[CTRL]B[INV]IC 930 DATA TRL]BCINV][CTRL] B[ INVICTRL) BCINVCTRL) INVICTRL) BCINV1OCT 0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,0...24,60,60, RL]BCINV1[CTRL]BI\": 24,0,0,0,0,0, 24, 24,0,0,0 808 ? 940 DATA #6;\"1(INVICTRL]B111111(INV (CTRL]BI INVICTRL]B!!!!!! INV]I 60,60, 24, 255,60,60, 36, 36, 129,66,66,126,90, 126, 126,255,72,18,6 CTRL]B!\": 5,20,136, 33, 132,34 zo "


"What NUCLEAR REACTOR DANC Illustration: Ivan Allen "


"70 SYMBOL 243,31,31,7,7,7,7,63.63 80 SYMBOL 244, 248, 248, 224, 224, 224, 224,25 2,252 99 SYMBOL 245,63,63,127, 127, 127,35,35,19 100 SYMBOL 246,255,255,255,255.255.60.24 110 SYMBOL 247,252, 252, 254.254.254,196,1 96, 200 120 SYMBOL 248,19,11,11,7,7,3,15,255 130 SYMBOL 249,0,0.60,60.60.60.0.0 140 SYMBOL 250, 200,208,208,224,224,192,2 40,255 150 SYMBOL 251,24,24,129,90.24, 24, 36, 36 160 SYMBOL 253,126, 189,219.231,231,219,1 89, 126 170 SYMBOL. 254.255.0.0.0.0.0.0.0 180 BORDER 0 190 MODE 1 GOSUB 210: IF DEMO=1 THEN SK=2 GOSUB 380 200 MODE 9: GOSUB 410: GOSUB 700: GOSUB 970 GOTO 199 210 DEMO=0: PAPER OPEN 3 220 LOCATE 16,2 PRINT \"DEFUSE\" 230 LOCATE 5,6 PRINT \"PRESS I FOR INSTRU CTIONS\" 240 LOCATE 5,9 PRINT \"PRESS D FOR A DEMO NSTRATION\" 250 LOCATE 5,12 PRINT \"PRESS S TO START GAME\" 260 IF INKEY( 35 )=0 THEN CLS: GOSUB 1010:0 LS: GOTO 220 27@ IF INKEY( 61 )= 0 THEN DEMO=1 RETURN 280 IF INKEY( 60 )=0 THEN SK=0: GOSUB 300 R ETURN 290 GOTO 260 300 CLS LOCATE 1,2 PRINT \"INPUT SKILL LE VEL (1-EASY TO 5-HARD)\"; 31@ IF INKEY( 64 )= 0 THEN SK=2 320 IF INKEY( 65 )=0 THEN SK=3 330 IF INKEY( 57 )= 0 THEN SK=4 340 IF INKEY( 56 )= 0 THEN SK=5 350 IF INKEY( 49 )=0 THEN SK=6 360 IF SK=0 THEN GOTO 310 379 GOSUB 389: RETURN 380 SYMBOL 249.0.0.69,60.60.60.0.0 390 IF SK-2 OR SK=3 OR SK=4 THEN SYMBOL 249,0, 126, 126, 126, 126, 126, 126.0 400 RETURN 410 N=0 D=1: R=1: FIN=0: RE=0 42 x 072: 4CC1=2x = = 430 RESTORE 440: FOR G=1 TO 14 READ CCG), RCG): NEXT 440 DATA 13.9.2, 15,6,4,14,20.4.20.3.9.15 ,5,16,15,2,3,7,15,11,4,9,21,8, 10, 12, 14 450 CLS PEN 10 LOCATE 1,2 PRINT STRING 20. CHR$( 254 ) 460 G=INTCRND*(14-SK): IF DEMO=1 THEN G= RUNS ON AN AMSTRAD MUZZ 0022 BY DAVID CRESSWELL NATURE You have kindly \"volunteered\" for the job of Chief Bomb Disposer in this game of skill and strategy. Use the ZX; and / keys to defuse the bombs in order, but be careful where you leave your radioactive trail. The program contains all the instructions to play the game, and even has a demonstration mode, so just type in the listing and you're away. 10 INK 9.9 INK 1.26: INK 2.23: INK 3,25 IN K 4,1: INK 5.4: INK 6,2 ITIK 7.13 INK 8.3: I NK 9.5: INK 19,9: INK 11.6 INK 12,7 20 DIM R(14), C(14) 30 SYMBOL AFTER 249 40 SYMBOL 240.9.9.9.9,7,7,31,31 50 SYMBOL 241.9.9.36.60.255,255,255,255 60 SYMBOL 242,0,0.9.9.224.224,248, 248 470 FOR REA=1 TO SK 480 RE=RE+1:G=G+1: PEN 4 490 LOCATE CCG), RCG): PRINT CHR$(240) 500 LOCATE C(G)+1,R(G) PRINT CHR$( 241 ) 510 LOCATE CCG)+2.R(G): PRINT CHR$(242) 520 LOCATE CCG),R(G)+1 : PRINT CHR$( 243 ) 530 LOCATE CCG)+2.R(G)+1 PRINT CHR$( 244 ) 540 LOCATE CCG),R(G)+2 PRINT CHR$( 245 ) 550 LOCATE C(G)+1, RCG)+2:PRINT CHR$(246) 560 LOCATE CCG)+2, RKG)+2:PRINT CHR$(247) 570 LOCATE CCG),R(G)+3:PRINT CHR$(248) 580 LOCATE CCG)+2,R(G)+3:PRINT CHR$(250) "


"DEFUSE! 590 IF RE=1 THEN K=3 600 IF RE=2 THEN K=5 610 IF RE=3 THEN K6 620 IF RE=4 THEN K=8 630 IF RE=5 THEN K=9 640 IF RE=6 THEN K=12 650 PEN K LOCATE CCG)+1, RCG)+3 PRINT CHR $( 249 ) 660 PEN 8 PAPER 3: CH=48+REA LOCATE CXG)+ 1.R(G)+1 PRINT CHR$(CH) PAPER 9 679 NEXT REA 689 PEN 10 LOCATE 2,1 PRINT \"DEFUSE\" 690 FOR F=1 TO SKLOCATE 6+ 2*F), 1: PRINT F: NEXT F RETURN 700 TI=TIME 710 IF DEMO=1 THEN GOSUB 1370 GOTO 760 720 IF INKEY( 28 ) THEN X=0:y=2 GOTO 760 730 IF INKEY( 63 ) THEN X+4:9 :GOTO 760 740 IF INKEY( 71 )=0 THEN 4y= GOTO 76 750 IF INKEY( 30 )=0 THEN X= y=-2 GOTO 76 760 XCO=CO+xyco=ycoty 770 IF XCOCO OR XCO>639 OR yco<0 OR yco) 380 THEN GOSUB 960: GOTO 900 780 P%=TESTCXCO, YCO) 790 IF A=1 AND P%=3 THEN GOSUB 1240 GOTO 900 800 IF (A=1 OR A=2) AND P=5 THEN GOSUB 1260: GOTO 900 810 IF (AX AND A<4) AND P%=6 THEN GOSUB 1280 GOTO 900 829 IF (A> AND AC5) AND PX-8 THEN GOSUB 1300: GOTO 900 830 IF (A AND A<6) AND P%-9 THEN GOSUB 1320 COTO 910 840 IF (A) AND A 7) AND P%=12 THEN GOSU B 1340: GOTO 900 850 IF P=1 THEN GOSUB 950 GOTO 909 860 IF P%=4 THEN GOSUB 1230 GOTO 900 870 PLOT XCO, YCO 880 SOUND 1, XC0/4,3,7 890 SOUND 2,900/4,37 900 IF FIN=1 THEN GOSUB 1000: GOTO 943 910 IF DESK+1 THEN SK-SK+1: GOSUB 410: TI TIME-80 920 IF N=1 THEN RETURN 930 IF DEMO 1 THEN 710 ELSE GOTO 720 940 RETURN 950 GOSUB 1210 LOCATE 12,8 PRINT \"YOU RA N INTO YOUR\" LOCATE 13,10 PRINT \"OWN RAD IOACTIVE\": LOCATE 13,12 PRINT \"TRAIL AND DIED\"RETURN 960 GOSUB 1219 LOCATE 14,8 PRINT \"YOU RA N INTO\" LOCATE 13,10: PRINT \"THE ELECTRIF IED\" LOCATE 13, 12:PRINT \"FENCE AND DIED\" RETURN 970 PRINT:PRINT: PRINT: PRINT PRINT 980 LOCATE 11.19: PRINT \"PRESS THE SPACE BAR\"; 990 IF INKEY 47 )=0 THEN RETURN ELSE GOTO 990 1000 MODE 1. LOCATE 15,9 PRINT \"WELL DONE !\" LOCATE 13,11 PRINT \"YOU JUST SAVED\":L OCATE 15,13 PRINT \"THE NATION RETURN 1010 CLS LOCATE 16,1 PRINT \"DEFUSE\" 1920 PRINT PRINT\" YOUR TASK AS CHIEF BO MB DISPOSER\" 1030 PRINT\" IS TO DEFUSE ALL THE BOMBS PLACED 1040 PRINT\" UNDER EACH OF THE NUCLEAR R EACTORS.\" 1050 PRINT PRINT\" YOU DO THIS BY DIRECT ING YOUR MAN\" 1060 PRINT\" (SHOWN AS A WHITE LINE IN AN 'n'\" 1070 PRINT\" SHAPE THROUGH EACH OF THE B OMBS.\" 1080 PRINT PRINT\" DO NOT DEFUSE THE BOM BS IN THE WRONG\" 1090 PRINT\" ORDER, HIT ANY OF THE REACT ORS OR RUN\" 1100 PRINT\" INTO YOUR OWN RADIOACTIVE T RAIL.\" 1110 PRINT PRINT YOU CAN START WITH AN Y NUMBER OF 1120 PRINT\" BOMBS UP TO A MAXIMUM OF SI X. EACH\" 1130 PRINT\" TIME YOU CLEAR A SCREEN THE NUMBER.\" 1140 PRINT\" OF BOMBS INCREASES.\" 1150 PRINT PRINT \" YOUR CONTROLS ARE\" 1160 PRINT PRINT\" Z = LEFT X = RIGHT\" 1170 PRINT = UP = DOWN\" 1180 LOCATE 9, 25:PRINT \"PRESS THE SPACE BAR\"; 1199 IF INKEY( 47 X THEN 1190 1200 RETURN 1210 MODE 1: SOUND 3,500,20.7.0.0.3 1220 FOR J%=1 TO 10:X=INTCRND#7) PAPER X CLS: NEXT J% N=1: PAPER OPEN 3:CLS RETUR 1230 GOSUB 1210 CLS LOCATE 12,8 PRINT \"Y OU RAN INTO ONE\" LOCATE 11.10: PRINT \"OF THE REACTORS AND\" LOCATE 12.12 PRINT \"SE T THE BOMBS OFF\" : RETURN 1240 IF DK >1 THEN GOSUB 1210 GOSUB 1360 RETURN 1250 LOCATE 9,1 PRINT\" \"D=D+1 A-2 RETU PN 1260 IF D< >2 THEN GOSUB 1210 GOSUB 1360: RETURN 1270 LOCATE 11,1 PRINT\" \"D=D+1 A3: RET URN 1280 IF DC>3 THEN GOSUB 1210: GOSUB 1360 RETURN 1290 LOCATE 13,1: PRINT\" \"D=1+1:34 RET URN 1300 IF 4 THEN GOSUB 1210. GOSUB 1360: RETURN 1310 LOCATE 15, 1: PRINT\" \"D=D+1A=SRET URN 1320 IF DK5 THEN GOSUB 1210: GOSUB 1360: RETURN 1330 LOCATE 17,1 PRINT\" \" DED+1A=6 RET URN 1340 IF D< >6 THEN GOSUB 1210 GOSUB 1360 RETURN 1350 LOCATE 19,1 PRINT\" \":FIN=1 RETURN 1360 LOCATE 3,6 PRINT \"YOU SET OFF THE\": LOCATE 3,8 PRINT \"BOMBS BY TRYING\" LOCAT E 2,10 PRINT \"TO DEFUSE THEM IN LOCATE 3,12 PRINT \"THE WRONG ORDER\" RETURN 1370 IF TIME>TI+1150 THEN 4 ya 1380 IF TIME>TI+1520 THEN X y =2 1390 IF TIME>TI+1750 THEN a4y=0 1400 IF TIME>TI+1840 THEN X -2 1410 IF TIME>TI+2100 THEN 24 y 1420 IF TIMETI +2900 THEN :y=2 1430 RETURN 64 "


"COMBAT LYNX From DURELL Technical Support from Westland Helicopters) NEW! BBC/ELECTRON AMSTRAD Spectrum-Commodore 64-BBC/Electron-Amstrad The ultimate flying experience AMSTRAD BBC/ELECTRON DURELL sales dept., Castle Lodge,Castle Green, Taunton, Somerset,TA14AB "


"BEYOND CHALLENGING SOFTWARE Now for Spectrum 48K and Commodore 64 CHALLENGING SOFTWARE NOMINATED FOR MICRO EBRITISH COMPUTING2) Spy vs Spy is two player cartoon fun! The black and white spies chase each other around the embassy. They steal secrets and plant traps, playing against each other on a split screen display. Available from software dealers everywhere or direct from Beyond Competition House, Farndon Road, Market Harborough, Leicester LE 16 9NR. Access/Barclaycard telephone: 0858 34567. Price .95 inc. P&P "


"t Quasimodo likes bells. They make him feel good-they make him happy-they are his friends. All Quasi wants is to be left alone, but those nasty soldiers think that he stole the royal jewels. Quasi didn't steal them! Quasi wants the soldiers to leave him alone. They fire nasty arrows at him. Quasi doesn't want to, but Quasi will throw big rocks at the nasty soldiers. Quasi knows a secret! Quasi knows where the jewels have been hidden in the castle and only Quasi can climb there. They better leave Quasi alone, 'cause Quasi is getting mad. Quasi better hurry and find the jewels. Not much time. Quasi sees lots of soldiers. Quasi has lots of rocks. Now the noise has stirred up the bats in the belfry. The bats are mean, they make Quasi fall down. Quasi better jump away from those bats. Quasi thinks he got up on the wrong side of the bed today. m BVEZ 64 arte DISK .95 CASSETTE .95 U.S. BONUS SED LEDED GOLD Can Software U.S. Gold is available from all leading computer stores, and selected branches of: BOOTS WH SMITH. JOHN MENZIES WOOLWORTH WILDINGS Dealers! For information on how to become a US, Gold Stockist contact Centresoft, Lightning Microdealer, Tiger and other leading distributors or write to: U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10. The Parkway Industrial Centre, Meneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. Telex: 337268. Ocean A U.S. GOLD/OCEAN JOINT PRODUCTION "


"We'll take you beyond the Spectrum QUICKSHOT II AUTO RAPID-FIRE JOYSTICK SPECTRUM UPGRADE KIT SPECTRUM INTERFACE TURBO INTERFACE Four great new add-ons from Ram, Number One in everything for the Spectrum... TURBO INTERFACE Outperforms any other Spectrum interface. Supports Kempston, Protek, Interface 2 and ROM cartridge software, with a full expansion bus at the rear. The Turbo works with two standard joysticks, making the most of the Quickshot Il's rapid-fire action. Features a unique built-in power safety device. Amazing value at .95. QUICKSHOT II AUTO RAPID-FIRE JOYSTICK The top games joystick with its sleek trigger fire button and an auto-fire switch for continuous shooting a snip at only .95. SPECTRUM INTERFACE This Kempston-compatible interface adds real games power to your Spectrum. Costs just .95. SPECTRUM UPGRADE KIT Boost your 16K Spectrum to a full 48K, allowing you to run all the latest and greatest software. Only .95 Where can you get your hands on Ram's amazing Spectrum add-ons? You can see them at branches of Boots, Menzies, Greens, Spectrum Group computer centres, and good computer stores everywhere. Please send me Spectrum Turbo Interface(s) at .95. Quickshot II Joystick(s) at .95. Spectrum Interface(s) at .95. Spectrum Upgrade Kit(s) at .95. (Please state issue 2 or 30) + per order P+P ( Overseas) TOTAL  Dl enclose cheque/postal order charge my Access/Visa AEIIIIIIIIIIIIII Expiry Date_1_1_ Name Address Postcode Telephone 24 Hour despatch for credit cards and postal orders (7 days for cheques.) All products are fully compatible with the Spectrum, Spectrum + and Sinclair Microdrives Ram Electronics (Fleet) Ltd (Dept CVG), 106 Fleet Road, Fleet, Hampshire GU13 8PA. Credit Card hot line: 02514 25252. (Access & Visa). Ram Electronics (Fleet) Ltd (Dept CVG), 106 Fleet Road, Fleet, Hampshire GU13 8PA Trade and Export enquiries welcome "


"PROFESSOR VIDEOS Welcome to my corner of the world, pupils. how d unils how to do it? So there's a challenge who has Get those brain cells working, 'cos here we done it and who has the key to the mystery of have June's batch of hints, tips and pokes. Backpacker's? You know the address so get writing. POKE CORNER TAPPER Another new game to enter the Prof's pages this I think after that we need a breather so, while I month is Tapper for the C64. This collection of tips have a rest, look over these pokes and see what's comes from Roger Duckworth, Lancashire. Roger useful. says he had to give up, with nine lives left, as he SABRE WULF: POKE 43575,225:POKE 45520,255 had sore fingers after continuous play. Don't you infinite Sabremen! POKE 44929,0 Watch and know, Roger, a bit of vinegar on the fingertips see ..... (will someone please tell me what this soon hardens them up and you are able to play for one does?). hours and hours! Try it and see. PSYTRON: POKE 28624,0:POKE 28626,0 for lots Only collect tips when there are a lot of of fun (LOAD all the parts except the last one, type customers at the far end of each bar. Learn the BORDER 7 and the POKES). patterns that the Soda Bandit uses as these could JET SET WILLY: POKE 38207,24 Maria will let be useful when you progress further and the cans you go into the bedroom POKE 37874,0 when move faster. you enter each room, the objects will jump in to Men drink faster than women (don't they always your sack. Roger?). To collect the glasses faster, run Tapper JET PAC: POKE 36966,224 infinite lives. down the bar. ATIC ATAC: POKE 36519,0 infinite lives. On the bottom bars, don't let the customers get Big round of thanks to Nir Gendler from Israel. too near the end of the bar as it will take a lot of soda to push them through the doors. In the Space STAFF OF KARNATH Bar, watch out for the glasses because they move a lot faster. More tricks on Staff of Karnath, this time from Alec Fu of Wembley. Got to the upper guardroom and shoot the shield once with THROBIN and hit it BACKPACKER'S again with OMPHALOS, then walk over the cross. GUIDE In the treasury, shoot the snake with KNOSSOS. To get the Pentacle in the great hall, shoot the fireNow is the time to get pen to paper and help out a place with AEOLUS. fellow student. Matthew Waldron from High Once in the morning room, go to the left of the Wycombe has been trying to play the Backflowerpot and shoot with the IBRAHIM spell until packer's Guide to the Universe since the the pot falls off the table. Most of the creatures can beginning of the year. He has written to these be destroyed with FORTHRIN and when in the pages in desperation as his problem seems to be waiting room just wait! that whenever he plays the game he ends up in Alec tells me that he is trying to get the Pentacle the same old place. in the library after the Skeleton hits him. He does Does anyone out there know how to help him? know how to get it, as you have to be in a certain Indeed has anyone out there completed the position but won't tell me. Now that's not a very game, 'cos I have never had any letters telling me nice way to treat the Prof, Alec, so come on all you other readers tell me the secrets to the Staff of Karnath GAMES WORKSHOP BEACH HEAD Now for a new one to the Prof's pencil Beach Head. These tips come from an old friend to these pages, Michael King. Michael recommends you go through the Secret Passage, as with practice you can steer your vessels through. One trick is to stay low and, once the first two torpedoes pass, make a dash to the left side of the screen. You gain 3,000 points per boat, so start practising. Move on to the airplanes. Whichever way the planes move, you follow and ALWAYS keep your guns at 52' 0° plus keeping your finger on the fire button as it auto-repeats very quickly. Next thing on the horizon is three ships. DON'T go for the largest 'cos if you do the others will bombard you. Remember to always watch how far you are from hitting the boat. Only aim for the ship which is aiming for you. That's all for this month, but, I shall return next month with more tips. "


"Hunch FUNCHY RUNS ON A SPECTRUM BY DAVID LYTTLE illustration: Ivan Allen "


"71 It's rescue Esmeralda time again, but you'll find some new hazards in this month's Spectrum listing which is in two parts. Use: CAPS SHIFT for Left for Right for Jump In order to move Hunchy to the right-hand side of 30 different screens to ring the bell. It's all against the clock and everything is hazardous to Hunchy's health. Youll see below a table of all the user-defined graphic characters used in this program. Instead of confusing the listing by leaving them in, we've changed them to underlined upper case letters. So, for instance, If you see 'A' in the listing. go into graphics mode (CAPS SHIFT + 9), then press the 'A' key (you'll see a graphic character), then press CAPS SHIFT + 9 again to return to normal text. Be very careful in lines 1050 and 1060 where graphics characters alternate with the underline symbol. Line 6520 uses symbol graphics (the ones on the number keys). When in graphics mode, type SHIFT+'1', then 3, then 7, to give a table-like shape. If this type of listing is a success, then we'll continue to use it in future Issues, so we would welcome any comments. 155 DATA 0, 32, 32, 36, 84, 74, 149, 1 156 DATA 0,4,20,42,82, 73,149,17 157 DATA 63, 64, 63, 64, 32, 32, 88, 1 35 158 DATA 252,2, 252,2,4,4,26,225 159 DATA 85, 85, 84, 20,1, 85, 85, 85 160 DATA 0, 32, 67,254,67,32,0,0 161 DATA 15, 16, 224, 166, 127, 28,2 4,0 162 DATA 255,0,0,0,255,0,0,0 163 DATA 240,8,5, 98, 252, 56, 24,0 164 DATA 24, 24, 126, 126, 24, 24, 24 , 24 UKS AKA t 1 || + PART 1 1 BORDER O: INK 7: PAPER O: C LS 5 LET t=0 10 FOR i=USR \"a\" TO USR \"U\"+7 20 READ a: POKE i, a: LET t=t+a 30 NEXT i 40 IF t<>9806 THEN PRINT \"THE GRAPHICS HAVE BEEN TYPED IN WRO NGLY\": BEEP 0.5, 0: STOP 144 DATA 56, 116, 126, 96,60, 24, 25 2,124 145 DATA 52,26,29, 28, 36,68,130, 67 146 DATA 14,31,31,31,14,0,0,0 147 DATA 0,127,56, 46, 124,0,0,0 148 DATA 1,1,1,1,1,1,1,255 149 DATA 16, 16, 16, 16, 16, 16, 16,2 55 150 DATA 0,4, 130, 127,130,4,0,0 151 DATA 28, 46, 126, 6, 60, 24, 63,6 200 REM titles 205 INK 3: BRIGHT 1 210 PLOT 8, 167: DRAW 0,-16: DRA W 16,-8: DRAW 0,-32: DPAW -8,-8: DRAW 24,0: DRAW 0,16: DRAW 8,0: DRAW 0,-16: DRAW 24,0: DRAW -8, 8: DRAW 0,48: DRAW 8,8: DRAW -32 ,0: DRAW 8,-8: DRAW 0,-24: DRAW -8,0: DRAW 0,16: DRAW -32,16 220 PLOT 72,159: DRAW 16,0: DRA W 0,-48: DRAW 8,0: DRAW 0,48: DR AW 16,0: DRAW -8,-8: DRAW 0,-40: DRAW -8,-8: DRAW -8,0: DRAW -8, 8: DRAW 0,40: DRAW -8,8 230 PLOT 120, 159: DRAW -8,-8: D RAW 0,-40: DRAW -8,-8: DRAW 16,0 : DRAW 0,40: DRAW 8,8: DRAW 8,0: DRAW O, -40: DRAW -8,-8: DRAW 16 ,0: DRAW 0,48: DRAW -8,8: DRAW 8,0: DRAW -8,-8: DRAW 0,8 240 PLOT 160, 159: DRAW 8,0: DRA W 8,-8: DRAW 0,-8: DRAW -8,0: DR AW 0,8: DRAW -8,0: DRAW 0, -40: D RAW 8,0: DRAW 0,8: DRAW 8,0: DRA W 0,-8: DRAW -8,-8: DRAW RAW -8,8: DRAW 0,40: DRAW 8,8 -8,0: D 250 PLOT 184,159: DRAW 8,0: DRA W 0,-24: DRAW 8,8: DRAW 8,-8: DR AW 0,-32: DRAW -8,0: DRAW 0,32: DRAW -8,-8: DRAW 0,-24: DRAW -16 ,0: DRAW 8,8: DRAW 0,48 260 PLOT 216, 135: DRAW 8,0: DRA W 6,-16: DRAW 8,16: DRAW 8,0: DR AW -32,-56: DRAW -32,8: DRAW 24, O: DRAW 16,24: DRAW -8,24 999 INK 7: BRIGHT O 1000 FOR i=1 TO 3 1010 FOR j=1 TO 7: PAUSE 2: PRIN TAT 13,0; INK j; D.LYTTLE CO ncepts and program S. LYTTLE pa tience\" 1020 NEXT j: NEXT i 1030 PRINT AT 21,0; FLASH 1; \"NOW LOADING PROGRAM PLEASE WAIT \" 1040 INK O: PRINT AT 19,0; 1050 LOAD \" 152 DATA 20,44,92, 28, 36, 34, 65, 1 94 153 DATA 28, 28, 28,28, 12,8,8,24 154 DATA 56,56,56,56,48, 16, 16,2 "


"1 LET hs=1000: LET n$=\"D.LYTT LE\": GO TO 3 2 RETURN 3 INK 7: LET CO=1: LET co1=15 : LET ms=30 20 IF PEEK (USR \"a\") <>56 THEN LOAD *\"m\"; 1: \"hchar \"CODE 29 LET ac=1 30 GO SUB 1000 40 GO SUB 900 50 GO SUB 1020 60 PRINT # 1; \"HI SCORE = \";hs; \". by \":n$: LET ca=1: LET cy=8: GO SUB 1090 75 LET i=1: LET bon=1000: LET br=1: LET bx=245: LET by=159: GO SUB 1500 80 LET a=IN 65278: LET b=IN 61 438 90 PRINT AT Yx;\" \";AT y-1,x;\" 926 DATA \"dfb\" 927 DATA \"dag\" 928 DATA \"bag\" 929 DATA \"had\" 930 DATA \"dif\" 963 DIM S(3) 964 RESTORE 901+ 965 READ at 967 FOR i=1 TO 3 968 IF a $(1) THEN \"1\" AND as (i) LET S (i) = (CODE =\"a\" )*100 (a$(1))-36 969 NEXT i 970 RETURN 1005 LET h$=\"\": LET S$=\"\" 1010 DIM d$ (2, 2): DIM C$ (2, 2): D IM s(3): LET X=0: LET y=8: LET C =O: LET 1=3: LET SC=0: LET scr=1 : FOR i=1 TO LET 2: LET c$(1,1)=\"#\": $(1,2)=\"A\": NEXT 1: LET d$ (1,1)=\"B\": LET d$ (2,1)=\"K\": LET d$(1,2)=\"IT: LET d$(2,2)=\"J\": RE TURN 1025 BORDER 0: BEEP 0.1,0: PAPER O: CLS 1030 FOR i=9 TO 21 1050 IF 1/2=INT (1/2) THEN TAT 1,0; PAPER 2; INK 7; \"EEE PRIN EEEEEEEEEEEEE\": GO TO 1070 1060 PRINT AT 1,0; PAPER 2; INK 7; \"FFFFFFFFFFFFFFF F 1070 NEXT i 1080 RETURN 1100 FOR j=1 TO 3 1110 IF s(j)=6500 THEN 500 GO SUB 3 IF 100 IF a=254 OR a=190 THEN x>O THEN LET X=x-1: LET h$=c$(i ,1): LET s$=d$(1, 2): LET i=i-1: IF 1=0 THEN LET i=2 IF 110 IF a=253 OR a=189 THEN x<31 THEN LET X=x+1: LET h$=c$( 1,2): LET S$=$(1,1): LET i=i+1: IF 1=3 THEN LET i=1 120 IF b=190 OR b=254 THEN BEE P0.01,60: IF INT Y=B THEN LET y=y-1.75: BEEP 0.01, 40: BEEP 0.0 3,50 130 IF y 8 THEN LET y=y+1/4 140 PRINT BRIGHT 1; INK 7; AT Y , X: S$; AT Y-1,x;h$ IF AT 145 IF INT (y+.5)=8 THEN TR (y+1, x)<>44 THEN IF ATTR (y+ 1,x) (>23 THEN GO TO 7000 150 FOR j=1 TO 3: GO SUB S(j) +2 : NEXT j 160 LET CO=CO+1: IF Co=29 THEN LET CO=0 165 LET col=c01-1: IF col=O THE N LEI col=2%. 170 LET bon=bon-10: PRINT AT 0, O; \"SC-\"; SC: FLASH (bon<100); AT O ,9: \"BONUS\";bon;\" \"; FLASH O:AT 0,20; \"LIVES \"; 1; AT 17, 12; INVERS E 1; \"PHASE \":C+1 180 IF bon<=U THEN GO TO 7000 190 IF x=31 THEN GO TO 2000 890 GO TO BO 899 STOP 901 DATA \"111\" 902 DATA \"hll\" 903 DATA \"all\" 904 DATA \"ell\" 905 DATA \"ahl\" 906 DATA \"bhl\" 907 DATA \"fhl\" 908 DATA \"b1l\" 909 DATA \"dfl\" 910 DATA \"efl\" 911 DATA \"eba\" 912 DATA \"111 913 DATA \"aii\" 914 DATA \"dif\" 915 DATA \"gll 916 DATA \"bhf\" 917 DATA \"gfl\" 918 DATA \"edf\" 919 DATA \"ebh\" 920 DATA \"ebf\" 921 DATA \"dgf\" 922 DATA \"bg\" 923 DATA \"dbi\" 924 DATA \"ehf 925 DATA \"edh\" 1130 IF S(I) =6700 THEN GO SUB 3 700 1140 IF 5 800: LET s(j) =0 ) =6800 THEN GO SUB 3 1150 IF 5(j) =6900 THEN GO SUB 3 800: GO SUB 3900 1160 NEXT j 1170 RETURN 1510 PLOT bx, by 1520 DRAW 2,-2: PLOT bx, by: DRAW -2,-2 1530 PLOT bx-4,by-2: DRAW 8,0: D RAW 2,-3: DRAW 0,-9: DRAW 1,-3: DRAW 2.-2: DRAW -17.0: DRAW 2,2: DRAW 1.3: DRAW 0,9: DRAW 2,3 1540 PLOT bx, by-4: DRAW -2,-2: D RAW 0,-10: DRAW -1,-1 1550 IF br=1 THEN 19: DRAW 0, -25 PLOT bx +4, by1560 RETURN 2010 BEEP .5.0: BEEP.5, -5: BEEP .5, -3: BEEP .75,-10 2020 PRINT AT 2,10; FLASH 1: \"BO NUS\" 2030 FOR krbon TO O STEP-10 2040 PRINT AT 0,0; \"SC-\"; SC;\" \";A T 0,9; \"BONUS\";bon;\" \";AT 0,20;\" LIVES \";1 2045 IF sc/5000=INT (sc/5000) TH EN LET 1=1+1: PRINT AT 3,10: \"EX TRA MAN\": BEEP.5, 20: BEEP.1, 30 : PRINT AT 3, 10;\" 2050 LET SC=SC+10: LET bon-bon-1 2060 BEEP 0.005, bon*.0869: NEXT 2070 LET X=0: LET CO=0: LET coi= 15: LET y=8: LET C=C+1: THEN GO TO 9000 IF C=ms 2090 GO TO 40 3510 FOR i=9 TO 12: PRINT AT 1,4 "


"Herbert's Dummy con Trouble In Store for Herbert MIKRO-GEN Spectrum 48K .95 Commodore 64 .95 Amstrad CPC 464 .95 44 The Broadway, Bracknell, Berks. 0344 427317 "


"Could YOU get a Newspaper Scoop? Addictive launch STRINGER Reporter Extraordinaire in 'The Hotel Caper' Stringer StringerBLURB THREE Press PASS 28/2+ Stringer TV PASS 20 0 Heils yacht. bri STRINGER is an arcade adventure game in which you are a press photographer for the \"Daily Blurb\" set the task of snatching a shot of a Film Star, Polly Platinum in an hotel. To hinder your attempts your camera, flashbulb, press pass and the key to the lady's room have been hidden in the hotel and these items have to be recovered before the all important shot can be taken. To add to your troubles the hotel staff are bent on catching you before you reach your goal and your Editor has set you a strict deadline for the completion of the task. The game has 5 skill levels and 10 screens of increasing difficulty. It is tantalisingly playable, graphically excellent and, of course Addictive! Available.... Commodore 64 .95 ALSO AVAILABLE ddictive Football Manager. The All Time Classic Available for.. Spectrum 48K 6.95.. Commodore 64 .95.Amstrad CPC 64 17.95... BBC 'B' $7.95 Electron 17.95 Oric 1 Almos 67.95 Dragon 65.95 Vic 20 .95 ZX 81 .95 Software Star \"It carries the Kevin Toms halimarks of attention to detail and carefully tuned o culty Popular Computing Weekly, February 1985 The game can be incredibly subtle Pick of the Week Popular Computing Weekly, February 1985 Available Spectrum 4K 65.95 Commodore 647.95 Amstrad CPC 54 17 95 When you openan Addictive Game, there's a new world of discovery waiting for you. ddictive To: Addictive Games Ltd, 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth, Dorset BH2 6HE Please send me: cassette(s) of Stringer for (computer) cassette(s) of Software Star for (computer) cassette(s) of Football Manager for ....... (computer) I enclose cheque postal order for .............. Please debit my Access card No.................. Delete as applicable Name ... Address..... Postcode Access orders can be telephoned through on (0202) 296404  Addictive Games 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth BH2 6HE Telephone: 0202296404. "


"JONAH BARRINGTON'S SQUASH FEATURING Reprosound Il the speed and excitement of championship squash is now available at your fingertips in a game so realistic you'll need a shower afterwards! Written with the help of Jonah Barrington, former World Squash Champion, the game keeps to the International Squash Racquet Federation rules as far as is possible. You serve in a 3D glass-backed court to play against your computer, or, using the game's two player option you can challenge a friend. There are 4 levels of difficulty, and depending how fit you are you can play 1, 3 or 5 game matches! Check your score with the on screen display, but as your eyes are too busy watching the ball. Jonah Barrington acting as marker calls out the score for you. All this is due to a programming breakthrough that enables your computer to accurately reproduce the human voice without any hardware add-ons! The game also incorporates a User Defined Joystick/Keys option which means that you can set your keyboard to suit you, or play with just about any make of joystick So get in training for this high-powered action game now. It's your service next! FOR Commodore 64 and all 48K Spectrums .95 New3. Generation Tes your service next! Software (GSH New Generation products are sold according to their terms of trade and conditions of sale. FREEPOST, Bath BA2 4TD. Tel: 0225 316924 "


"SPRING INTO ACTION Gribbly's Day Welcome to Blabgor, home of Gribbly Grobbly, one of a race of peaceful creatures who have developed their brain to such an extent that they can move around entirely by thought power alone, their intelligence-or Psi being stored in their Psi banks which must be topped up regularly The hills around them are infested with more primitive creatures who are out to attack and carry off the younger Blabgorians, known as Gribblets In this exotic world the Gribblets lead a carefree life and can be found playing behind rocks, over the lakes and on mystical floating islands. Can you herd the threatened Gribblets to the safety of the cave? Trying to stop you is Seon, a wayward Blabgorian, who is now imprisoned in the skies behind the energy web. But for how long? Played over 16 colourful and titled screens, each 30 times the on screen display this highly original game incorporates detailed graphics, smooth all direction multispeed scrolling stunning sound effects and is controlled entirely by joystick for quick response. You'll see how well you're doing by Gribbly's expressions too many frowns means that you need more practice! Bounce out and get your copy now! Only .95 For the Commodore 64 Lund 3D Lunattack Flying your Luna Hover Fighter, try and penetrate the 3 successive Seiddab zones to destroy their command base. Up to the minute status reports on your fighter's condition and the Seiddab defences make Lunattack the space adventure of the decade. May the power be with you! For the Commodore 64 .95 (GSH CAD HEWSON CONSULTANTS Heathrow International ATC Use your detailed radar screen to guide incoming aircraft including Concorde safely down from holding stacks to the runway at Heathrow. Emergencies such as unknown aircraft intrusion and radio failure call for ice-cool concentration For the Commodore 64 .95 568 Milton Trading Estate Milton Abingdon Oxon OX 14 4RX As part of our continuing development of innovative software we are always happy to evaluate software sent to us with a view to publication "


"\": NEXT 1 3520 LET f$=\"MLMLMLLMMML\" 3530 PRINT INK 6;AT 1,4;f$ 3540 RETURN 3710 FOR i=9 TO 12: PRINT AT 1,7 ; PAPER 5;\" NEXT i 3720 LET t$=\"RST 3730 RETURN 3810 FOR 1 =9 TO 12: PRINT AT 1,7 ;\" \";AT 1,22;\" \": NEXT i 3820 RETURN 3910 LET i=12: PRINT AT i, 7:\" NO INK \";AT i, 22:\" NO\": AT 1-1,7; 6;\" PP\";AT 1-1,22;\" PP\" 3920 LET f$=\"ML\" 3930 RETURN 6110 LET fx=29-CO 6120 IF ATTR (8, fx) >64 OR ATTR ( 8, f5 +1) >64 THEN GO TO 7000 6130 PRINT AT 8, fx: INK 2; \"C\"; I NK 6: \"D\":\"\" 6140 IF fx=1 THEN PRINT AT 8, fx 6150 IF fx=X THEN BEEP 0.06, 10: BEEP 0.06, 20: LET SC=SC+10 6160 RETURN 6210 LET ax=co1 6220 IF ATTR (6, ax) 64 OR ATTR ( 6, ax+1) >64 THEN GO TO 7000 6230 PRINT AT 6, ax: INK 4: \"Q\" 6240 IF ax=1 THEN PRINT AT 6, ax 6250 RETURN 6410 IF ATTR (8,co+1) 64 OR ATTR (B.CO) >64 THEN GO TO 7000 6420 PRINT AT 8, CO; INK 4;\" G\" 6430 IF Co=28 THEN PRINT AT 8,0 0+1; 6440 RETURN 6510 LET px=co/4 6520 PRINT AT 9,px +4;\" \"; INK 7; PAPER 2: \"sh137\" 6530 IF Co=28 THEN PRINT AT 9,P x +S: 6540 LET f$=f$ (LEN f$)+f$( TO LE Nf$-1): PRINT AT 13,4; INK 6; f$ : RETURN 6605 IF Cy+.1 >=8 THEN LET ca=1: BEEP 0.05, 20 6610 LET bax=29-CO: LET Cy=cy-ca G 6620 IF ATTR (cy, bax) > 64 THEN OTO 7000 6630 PRINT AT 6, bax +1:\" \";AT 7,6 ax+1; \" \";AT 8, bax+1;\"\" 6640 PRINT AT CY,bax;\"C\" 6650 LET carca-1/3 6660 IF bax=1 THEN PRINT AT CY, bax:\"\" 6690 RETURN 6708 LET tu=0 6710 IF CO>1 THEN IF CO 9 THEN LET tu=1 6720 IF CO9 THEN IF COC18 THEN LET tu=2 6730 IF COX18 THEN IF COX 27 THE N LET tu=3 6740 IF tu=1 THEN PRINT PAPER 5: AT 9,9;\" \";AT 10,9; INK 4:t$ : GO TO 6760 6750 PRINT PAPER 5; INK 4; AT 9, \" 9:5$: AT 10,9; PAPER 5;\" 6760 IF tu=2 THEN PRINT PAPER 5: AT 9,14;\" \";AT 10, 14; INK 4; t$: GO TO 6780 6770 PRINT PAPER 5; INK 4:AT 9. \" 14; t$;AT 10, 14; PAPER 5;\" 6780 IF tu=3 THEN PRINT PAPER 5:AT 9, 19:\" \";AT 10, 19; INK 4; t$: GO TO 6795 6790 PRINT PAPER 5; INK 4; AT 9, 19:t$;AT 10,19; PAPER 5;\" 6795 RETURN 6910 IF CO 22 THEN LET fi=1: GO TO 6930 6920 LET fi=2 6930 IF fi=2 THEN GO TO 6950 6935 PRINT INK 6;AT 11,8; \"PP\";A T 10,8; \"PP\";AT 9,8; \"PP\";AT 8,8;\" PP\";AT 7,8; f$: IF x=8 OR X=9 THE IN GO TO 7000 6940 PRINT AT 7.23;\" \" \";AT 8,23; \"HAT 9,23; \" \";AT 10,25: INK 6:f$: GO TO 6980 6950 PRINT INK 6 AT 11,23; AT 10, 23:\" AT 9,23;\" 23:\"IT:AT7.23:f$: IF X=25 ORY AT 8. *24 THEN GO TO 7000 6960 PRINT AT 7.8:\" \";AT 8.8:\" \";AT 9.0:\" \"AT 10.8; INK 6;fo 6980 LET fo=f$(2) + $(1) 6990 RETURN 7010 IF ATTR (+1. 2 THEN L ET yay+1: FOR 2=1 TO 5: BEEP 0.0 05, 2*6: NEXT Z: GO TO 7030 7020 GO TO 7090 7030 PRINT AT Y-2,x: PAPER 5*((s (1) =6700 OR s (2) 6700 OR S(3) =67 00) AND Y>10);\"\";AT Y-1, \"$\"A TY,x;\"X\": BEEP 0.04, 20-y: GO TO 7010 7090 PRINT AT 3, 10; FLASH 1: EAD  D 7100 FOR g=1 TO 40 7110 PRINT INK INT (RND*8): OVE R1;AT Y,X;\" \";AT -1,x:\" 7120 BEEP 0.01,9: BEEP 0.01,40-9 \"  NEXT G 7130 PRINT AT Y, X; INK 7; BRIGHT 1:\" +\":AT -1.x 7150 BEEP 1.0: BEEP 1, -30: BEEP 1,-1 7160 LET 1 =1-1: IF 1=0 THEN GO   7190 LET TO: LET y=8: LET CORO: LET col=15: GO TO 40 3000 CLS : PRINT AT 10,0; \"POOR H UNCHBACK YOU FAILED !!!!!! B010 FOR 1=1 TO 60: BEEP 0.01.1: BEEP 0.01,1-30: NEXT 1 8020 GO TO 9500 9000 LET SC=SC+1000: FOR 1=1 TO 30: FOR =O TO 7: BORDER 0.01-1/6000,i+j: NEXT j: NEXT 1 : BEEP 9010 BORDER O 9020 BEEP 0.5, 20: CLS : PRINT AT 10,0: FLASH 1:\"YOU SUCCEEDED IN YOUR MISSION ! ! YOU MANAGED TO F REE ESMERELDA I 9030 GO TO 9500 9500 IF Sc>hs THEN PRINT# 1: FL ASH 1: BRIGHT 1:\"YOUR SCORE IS T HE HIGHEST SO FAR\": FOR 1-1 TO 1 O: BEEP 0.1, 1*6: NEXT 1: GO TO 9 520 9510 GO TO 9540 9520 INPUT \"WHAT IS YOUR NAME\": n$ 9530 IF LEN n$ 8 THEN PRINT#1: \"TOO LONG\": BEEP 1,-40: GO TO 95 20 9535 LET hs=sc 9540 PRINT#1: \"PRESS ANY KEY FOR ANOTHER GAME 9550 FOR z=1 TO 30: BEEP 0.005.2 *2: NEXT 2: IF INKEY $=\"\" THEN 0 TO 9550 G 9560 GO TO 3 "


"RUNS ON A COMMODORE 64 BY PAUL HAMMOND You guessed It, It's Pengl the penguin in the ice field. The idea of the game is to guide Pengi around a maze of Ice blocks, avoiding the rampaging snow bees to reach the next level. You can get to the next of the 30 different levels by moving the bonus ice block (that's the funny. coloured one) to the bottom of the screen and by killing the snow bees. You have to kill eight snow bees plus two snow bees per level to reach the next screen. This is done by pushing an ice block onto them, but take care, because as fast as you try to squash them, they'll try to melt the Ice to get at you. You score 20 points per snow bee squashed, and 50 points every time you drop the bonus ice block by one level. Oh, and there's an extra life if you ever have the good fortune to reach level nine. 10 PRINT\" (CLEAR)\": POKE53281.0: POKE53280, The listing will probably look a little unusual this month. Instead of all those confusing control symbols, we've substituted mnemonics inside square brackets. Don't type these in, but press the key they represent. So, if you: SEE PRESS (GREEN) Green key [DOWN) Cursor Down key (HOME) CLR/HOME key Is V] Shift + 'V' IcCommodore key + and so on. Of course, you won't actually see any of this displayed you'll just got those confusing symbols on the screen. If this method is a success, then we'll continue to use it in future listings, so we would welcome any comments. 20 POKE52, 48: POKE56, 48: CLR: POKE56334, PEE K(56334 ) AND254: POKE1. PEEK (1) AND251 30 FORI-OTO511: POKE12288+I. PEEK(53248 I) : NEXT: POKE1. PEEK(1) OR4 40 POKE56334. PEEK (56334) OR1 61 POKE53272. (PEEK (53272) AND240) +12 70 FORI-12784 T012983+48:READA: POKEI. A: NE XT 100 DATAO. 31.51.111.95.95. 127. 127.0.248. 204.246, 250, 250, 254, 254.127.127 101 DATA95.95.111.51.31.0, 254, 254, 250, 25 0.246, 204, 248.0 102 DATAO. 0.3.7.15.25.49.51.0.0.192, 224. 240,152,140, 204, 121, 127.127.255.240, 255 103 DATA127.63.158.254.254.255.15.255.25 4.252 104 DATAO, 3.7.7.15. 12. 12.8.0.192.224. 240 . 184.254.240, 224.9.11.11.7.4.4 105 DATA, 8. 14.224, 224, 224, 192, 136, 80.32. si lustration: Terry Rogers "


"106 DATAO. 192, 224, 224.240.48.48.16.0.3.7 . 15.29.127.15.7.144. 208. 208. 224.32.32 107 DATA16.112.7.7.7.3.17.10.4.0 108 DATAO. 3.77.15.29.29.29.0.192, 224, 224 .240, 184, 184, 184.29.27.27 109 DATA 31, 23.2.6.0.184.216. 216. 248.232. 64. 96.0 110 DATAO.3.5.6.10.22. 23. 23.0, 192, 160.96 .80, 232, 232, 232, 23.23.23.31.23.2.6.0 111 DATA232.232.232.248.232.64.96.0 112 DATA 204.51. 204.51. 204.51. 204.51 114 DATA255.255.255.255.255.195. 207.195. 243.195.255.255.255.255.255.255 115 DATA255.255.255.255.255.3.51.51.51.3 .255.255.255.255.255.255 116 DATA56. 120, 112.96.96.102,63.30. 28.54 . 98, 102, 120, 190.70, 124.56 170 GOTO1000 180 POKE 54 296.15: POKE54278. 128: POKE54276 .0: POKE54273. 20: POKE54272,100 190 DIMD ( 30),3( 30),Y( 30): LI=3:sc=0 200 M-2: FX=8 201 POKE53265. PEEK(53265 ) AND 239: PRINT\"[C LEAR) (DOWN) [DOWN) [GREEN) [sv][sv][sv] SV] (s v][sv] (s v] [sv][sv][sv] [sv] [ sv] [sv] [sv] [sv][sv] [sv] [sv][sv] [ s V][sv][sv][sv] [SV] [SV] [sv][sv] [ SV][sv] [sv][sv] [sv] [sv][sv] [sv] [ s V] [sv] [sv] [sv] [SV]\": 202 FORI-OTO9: PRINT\"[s V (BLUE) >?>?>?>?> ?>?>?>?>?>?>?>?>?>?>???>?>?>? (GREEN) (s v ]\": 203 PRINT\"[sv] (BLUE) (S *] (s Al(s *][SA ] [8 *](SA) [S *][SA) (S *] [SA] [S *][s A [s*][SA][ *] [SA][s*][s Al(s*) (sA [s *][3 A] [3 *] [S A ] [8 * [S A ] [s *) (s A (*[SA] [S *] (SA)(S *] [SA] [*] (s A Its *] (A) (GREEN) (s V]\":: NEXT 204 PRINT\"[sv] [sv][sv] (s V][sv] [SV] [sv] [sv][sv] [sv] (s V][sv] [sv][sv] (s v][sv] [sv][sv] [sv] [sv] [sv] [sv] [sv][sv][sv] [sv][sv] [sv] [sv] [sv] [sv] [sv][sv][sv][sv] [sv] [sv] [sv] [s V][sv]\": 210 BE$=\"(GREEN) (SB) (SC) (DOWN) [LEFT] [L FT) (SD) [SE]\": P$ (1) -\"(RED) [ F] [BG] [Y ELLOW] [DOWN] [LEFT] (LEFT) (SH) [SI]\": P$ (2 ) -\"[RED) (S K) (SJ) (YELLOW) [DOWN) [LEFT][L EFT][BM] [s L]\":P$ (3) -\"[RED] [SN] [sO] [D OWN) [LEFT] [LEFT][SP] [S Q]\" 211 P$ (4) -\"[RED] (9 R] (SS) (DOWN] [LEFT] [L EFT) (YELLOW) [ST][SU)\": BL$=\"[WHITE] [D OWN] (LEFT) (LEFT) \":UP$-\"[HOME] (DOWN] [DO WN) [DOWN) [DOWN) [DOWN) [DOWN) [DOWN) [DOWN] [ DOWN) [DOWN) (DOWN) [DOWN) [DOWN] [DOWN) (DOWN 1 [DOWN) [DOWN) [DOWN] [DOWN) [DOWN) [DOWN) [DO WN) [DOWN) (DOWN) (DOWN)\" 212 CUS=\"[BLUE]>? (DOWN) [LEFT] [LEFT][s *] (3 A)\" 214 PRINT\" (HOME) (DOWN) [DOWN)\": FORI-OT017 : PRINT\" [UP] (RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RIGHT I (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT] (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RIGHT 1 (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT] (RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [DOWN)\"; med. "


"215 NEXT: PRINT\" [HOME] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN)\". 216 FORI-OT01: PRINT\" (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [RIGHT J [RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RIGHT] [R IGHT] [RIGHT] (RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RI GHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT I (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [R IGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT)\": : NEXT 217 PRINT\" (HOME) (DOWN] [DOWN] (DOWN] [DOWN ) [ DOWN] [DOWN) [DOWN] [DOWN) [DOWN] [DOWN) [DOW N] (DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] (DOWN] [D OWN] [DOWN]\": 218 FORI-OT01: PRINT\"[RIGHT) (RIGHT] [RIGHT J[RIGHT][RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RIGHT] [R IGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RI GHT) (RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RIGHT ] [RIGHT] (RIGHT) (RIGHT] (RIGHT] [RIGHT] [R IGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT]\"; : NEXT 220 X-19:Y-12: Y1 =U:SB-0:X1INT (RND (1)*8) +1:11%81% 14:11=11+1 222 H-4: PRINTLEFTS (UP$.Y)SPC(X): P$ (H) 223 FORI=OTO30 224 U-INT (RND (1)*18) +1: R=INT(RND (1)*9) +2 : U=U*2+1: R=R*2 225 IFPEEK (1024+R+U*40 ) = 32 THEN 224 226 PRINTLEFT$ (UP$. R)SPC(U): BL$: NEXT 230 FORI=1 TOM 234 X(I)-INT(RND (1) *18) +1:Y(I)-INT(RND (1 )*9)+2:X(I)=X(1)*2 +1:Y(I) -Y(I)*2 235 IFPEEK(1024+X(I) +Y(I)*40)<>32 THEN 234 236 IFPEEK (1024X(I) +Y(I)*10+1)<>32 THEN2 34 238 PRINTLEFTS (UP$. Y(I) )SPC(X(ID): BE$: NE XT 250 PRINT\" (WHITE) [HOME] [RIGHT) (RIGHT] [RI GHT] [ ] CORE (s + ) EVEL\"M-1\" [ + ]IVES\"LI 251 POKE53265. PEEK (53265 ) OR 16: FORT-01050 O: NEXT 300 FOR I = 1 TOM: PEPEEK (56320) 301 IFPEEK(55296+X+Y*40) = 5 THEN960 303 IFPE=127 THENUOO 305 PRINTLEFT$ (UP$.Y) SPC(X): BL$ 310 IFPE=123THENH=2: A-2: B=0: IFPEEK (1024 +X+Y*40-1)=32 THENXX-2 312 IFPE=119 THENH=1:A-2: B=0:IFPEEK (1024+ X+Y*40+3) = 32 THENX=X+2 314 IFPE=125 THENH-4: B=2: A-0:IFPEEK (1024+ X+Y*40+80) = 32 THENY=Y+2 316 IFPE-126THENH-3: B=-2: A=0: IFPEEK (1024 +X+Y*40-80)32 THENYY-2 320 IFPE>112 THEN380 321 PRINT LEFT$ (UP$.Y) SPC(X): P$ (H) 322 IFB-2ANDY-4<3 THEN380 323 IFB-2 ANDY+2>21 THEN380 324 IFA=-2 ANDX-1<3THEN 380 325 IFA 2 ANDX+2>36THEN380 326 IFPEEK(55296+X+A+Y*40+B*40)<>6THEN38 327 PRINTLEFT$ (UP$. Y+B) SPC(X+A): BL$ 328 PRINTLEFT$ (UP$. Y+B+B) SPC (X+A+A): CU$ 330 FORT=1 TOM 335 IFPEEK (55296+X(T) +Y(T)*40) = 6 THEN POKE 54276, 17:D(T)=1: SC-SC+20: FORU=OTO30: NEXT 620 NEXT: GOTO300 700 X(I)-INT(RND(1)*18)+1:Y(I)-INT (RND (1 )*9)+2:X(I)=X(I)*2+1:Y(I) =Y (I)*2 705 IFPEEK(55296+X(I) +Y(I)*40)<>6THEN700 710 PRINTLEFT$ (UP$. Y(I) )SPC(X(I)):\"(WHIT E]>? (DOWN) [LEFT] [LEFT][ *][s 711 PRINTLEFT$ (UP$. 25 )\" A)\" BEE HATCHES!\":: FORT=OTO400: NEXTT A NEW 714 PRINTLEFT$ (UPS, 25 )\" :: SB=SB+1 715 PRINTLEFT$ (UPS.Y(I)SPC(X(ID): BE$ 720 D(I)=0: GOTO510 900 LV=LV-1: FX-FX 2: IFLV=8THENLIELI+1 910 SC-SC+100: IFM<30 THENM=M-1 911 PRINT\" (HOME) (DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN) [DOWN) [ DOWN (DOWN) (DOWN] [DOWN) (DOWN] (DOWN) (DOW N] [DOWN) (DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN) [DOWN) [DOWN) [D OWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] (DOWN) [DOWN) (DOWN] [DOWN) WHITE WELL DONE PREPARE FOR LEVEL\" M-1: 912 POKE54276. 17: FORI-OTO1OOSTEP.3: POKE5 4273. I: NEXTI: POKE54276.0: POKE54273.20 915 FOR I = OTO1000: NEXT 950 GOTO201 960 LIELI-1: PRINT\" (HOME) (RIGHT] (RIGHT) (R IGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGH T][RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RI GHT) (RIGHT] (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [ RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [RIGHT I (RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT] (RIGHT) (RIG HT)\"LI 962 POKE54276.17 963 FORINO TOLO:FORT-1104: PRINTLEFT$ (UP$. Y) SPC(X): P$(T): POKE54273. I: NEXT: NEXT 965 POKE54276.0: FORT=OT01000: NEXT 966 IFLI=OTHEN1000 975 GOTO 201 1000 PRINT\"CLEAR) (BLUE)\" 1001 PRINT\"[RIGHT) (RIGHT] >?>?? >?>?>? > ? >? >?>?>? >? >?\" 1002 PRINT\" (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [S *] (3 A)(S *] [SA] [8 *] [SA] [8 *] (SA)(S *] (SA(s * ][SA] [s *] (SA) (s A) (S *][SA] [8 *][s A) [8 * *] (s A] [s *] [s [s A \" [SA) (s *] 1003 PRINT\" (RIGHT) (RIGHT]>? >? ?>? >? >? >? > >? >?\" 1004 PRINT\" (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [8 *] (SA) *][8 A) [8 *][SA] (s [s *][SA A] [8 *] (SA) (s *] (SA) ] [S *] [s 1 (s*) (SA)\" (s *] (s A 1005 PRINT\" (RIGHT) (RIGHT]>???? >>?>? > ? > ?>? >? >?\" 1006 PRINT\" (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (s *][8 A)(*] [SA] [8 *][SA) [S *][SA] [8 *] (SA) (s * 1 [SA] [8 *] (SA) (s *] [A) (s *] (SA [s *][8 A) ) (s *)(8 A)\" 1007 PRINT\" (RIGHT) (RIGHT] >? ? >? > ? >? >? > >?\" 1008 PRINT\" (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [8 *] (s A) (s *][8 A (s *][S A ) [8 *][SA] (s *] [s (s *][SA] A) [8 *] [SA]\" 1009 PRINT\"[RIGHT) (RIGHT]>? ? >? >?>?>? >?>?>? >?\" > 1010 PRINT\" (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (s *] (SA) (s *] (SA) (s *][SA] [S *][SA] [s *] (s A ] [*)(SA) [s *][SA] [8 *][SA) (* (SA) (s *](8 A) 1011 PRINT\" (DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN) (GREEN) (s B] [sc] [ B] [sc] [ [RED] [SF] [SG] (BLUE) >? B] [sc] \" 1012 PRINT\" (GREEN) (3 D) (SE] [SD] [S E (s D] [SE] (YELLOW) (s His I][BLUE) (S *][SA] 1013 PRINT\" (WHITE) (DOWN) (RIGHT] (RIGHT) (R IGHT) (RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) USE JOYSTICK IN PORT 2\" 1014 PRINT\" (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) RIGHT] (RIGHT] [RIGHT] (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT (RIGHT) FIRE TO PUSH ICE\" 1015 PRINT\"[DOWN) (DOWN) [RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RI GHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) [ RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RIGHT) FIRE TO START 1020 IFPEEK (56320)<>111THEN1020 1030 RUN180 336 POKE54276.0: NEXTT 380 PRINTLEFT$ (UP$.Y) SPC(X): P$ (H) 400 IFD(I) = 1 THEN700 405 PRINTLEFT$ (UP$.Y(I))SPC (X(ID): BL$ 410 IFX>X(I) AND PEEK(55296+X(I) +Y(I)*40+2 )<>6THENX(I)=X(I)+2 415 IFX<X(I) AND PEEK (55296+X(I) +Y(I)*40-2 ><>6THENX (I) =X(I)-2 420 IFY>Y (I) AND PEEK (55296+X(I) +Y(I)*40+8 0)<>6THENY (I)=Y (I) +2 425 IFY<Y (I) AND PEEK (55296+X(I) +Y(I)*40-8 0 ) <>6THENY (I) =Y(I)-2 500 PRINTLEFT$ (UP$.Y(I)SPC(X(I)):BES 510 IFPEEK (1024X1+Y1*40+80)<>32 THEN530 520 POKE54276. 17: POKE54273. Y1+6: PRINTLEF T$ (UP$. Y1) SPC (X1): BL$: Y1=Y1+2 525 SC-SC+50: POKE 54276.0: POKE54273.20 530 PRINTLEFT$ (UP$, Y1 ) SPC (X1)\"(BLUE) [SW [s Y] [DOWN) [LEFT] (LEFT) (s X] [s2]\" 540 IFY1-20ANDSB>FXTHEN900 610 PRINT\" (HOME) (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RI GHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [RIGHT) (WHITE)\" SC "


"BLAGGER GOES TO ONLY .95 .95 TAPE DISK INCLUDING FREE 'T SHIRT & BADGE OFFER! BLAGGER GOES TO HOLLYWOOD Each screen image represents only 1/70th of total playing area. Software Ltd Has our dapper little thief overstepped the mark this time or can he truly outcon the best conmerchants in the business. Dazzled by the bright lights, stunned by the stars., Blagger has decided his way to fame and fortune is in the movies he's off to nick the next megadrama to hit the big screen. Guide him through 12 loony film sets as he gathers the objects that will open room 13. Arcade fanatics and Adventure buffs alike, BGTH has something for all only skill at the joystick and determined brainpower in the unique use of the movie props, will solve this intricate puzzle for you Alligata Software Ltd. 1 Orange Street Sheffield S1 40W Tel: (0742) 75579 Send for full colou product brochun lendose a stam LIVES SCORE 1120 In classic movie tradition, simulated 3D and big sound soundtrack with 4 way scrolling action "


"PLAY THE GAME 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM AMSTRAD BBC MODEL B 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM BBC MODEL B 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM BBC MODEL B 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM AMSTRAD BBC MODEL B R$ 0, SIT Decal COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM AMSTRAD CPC 464 GUSSETTES \"ALIEN 8\", \"KNIGHTLORE\", \"UNDERWURLDE\", \"SABRE WULF\", \"ENTOMBED\", & \"STAFF OF KARNATH\" recommended retail price .95 inc VAT. «ATIC ATAC\" recommended retail price .95 inc VAT. Available from W.H.SMITHS, BOOTS, J.MENZIES, WOOLWORTHS and all good software retail outlets. Also available from ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME, The Green, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire LE6 5JU (P&P are included) Tel: 0530 411485 "


"NEW RELEASES 000225 MOUTH TINE IRPE (P&P are included) Tel: 0530 411485 48 K SPECTRUM The game of the film by QUICKSILA Quicksilva Mail Order, P.O.Box 6, Wimbome, Dorset BA24 7PY. Telephone (0202) 891744. EST MightyMagus Selected titles available at WHSMITH John Menzies WOOLWORTH and leading multiple retailers and specialist computer stores. "


"A CHALLENGING 3D ACTION STRATEGY PROGRAM FOR YOUR COM 64 REALM OF IMPOSSIBILITY U.S. NU. MIT NO.5 HIT! REALM OF IMPOSSIBILITY OUT NOW ON CASSETTE AND DIS INCLUDES Special Discount Prize Draw Voucher Orbs in hot pursuit in the Mines of Minos. FEATURES OBJECTIVE The evil cleric, Dramatic 3D Wistrik, has stolen the Graphics & Fast 7 crowns of the middle Kingdoms Action Unique He has hidden them 2-Player Co-op all among his 13 Dungeon Strongholds erative Mode YOUR TASK enter 4 Levels of the dungeons, find the crowns, and get out alive! Difficulty 13 Different atch out for the zombies, snakes, spiders & orbs get Dungeons 129 hit too many times and you're Different Rooms dead. Joystick Protect yourself with magic < Control crosses and spells. XXXX AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE RETAILERS If it's not there, please order it-or in case of difficulty send your crossed cheque P.O. made out to Ariolasoft U.K. Ltd. including your own name and address, to Ariolasoft UK Ltd. Suite 105 106, Asphalte House, Palace Street, London SWIE 5HS. REALM OF IMPOSSIBILITY Cassette .95. Disk .95-includes VAT & p&p. U.K. orders only U.S. NO.5 HIT Fast Load Chrome lope COMMODORE 64 U.S. TOP 5 HIT ariolas Trapped in the Pits of Gehenna. ariolasal 23 HIGH PERFORMANCE PROGRAMS "


"U.S. N0.5 HITY MEREVLE-WS Suddenly a whole bunch of software for the dear old Texas materialised in the office. So we dusted off our machine, sat our long standing Texas reviewer, DENNIS HEMMINGS, down in front of the TV screen and told him to get on with it! So here's a run down of some of the hottest games around for the TI. And you just won't believe some of them... STAR TREK JLN0.5 HIT! DEMON ATTACK PIRATE'S ISLE SUPPLIER: Parco Electrics SUPPLIER: Parco Electrics PRICE: .50 (ROM) PRICE: .50 (ROM) While waves of demons My first introduction to attacking the outposts of Adventure games was via our planet would seem the Scott Adams \"text old hat, occasionally a only\" games, and how ! rare spark in prowished for something gramming comes up with with some visuals! This something that lifts a particular game fulfills game out of the ordinary. M*A*S*H this dream and is a sequel to Imagic have certainly Pirate's Adventure. Starting Optional speech synthesizer Optional speech with a rather strange jumbled managed this, with smooth SUPPLIER: Parco Electrics image from the inside of a synthesizer graphics and the most PRICE: .80 (ROM) boat, the object is to locate 13 SUPPLIER: Parco Electrics imaginative demons I've yet seen. This is an opportunity for hidden treasures and deposit PRICE: .95 (ROM) Using a laser cannon Trekkies to fight the them in a secret place to Following on the success moving across the bottom of Klingon fleet in the obtain points. of the popular TV series, the screen, you are battling privacy of their own Scott's humour is liberally this module should be against six waves of attack by home. After an impressprinkled throughout the popular with all ten different species. Each sive view of the Entergame which has interesting M*A*S*H fans generation gets faster and prise, we are welcomed visual locations for you to The object of the game is to more agile and since they aboard by the voice of our become confused in. There collect the wounded men with are armed with fairly smart logical, long-eared friend, are also clues for those who a helicopter and lift them to missiles, you need to be very spock. have not played Pirate's MASH HQ for surgery, using quick. Commanding from the Adventure, so you can get keyboard or joystick Having succeeded in bridge of the Enterprise, you straight in at the deep end, so Among the options are defeating the irate beings the have sight of three screens, to speak. If you have a printer. rescue with tank fire and cannon moves across a giving you an overall impresthere are options to use this to surgery, rescue with cease starry background to their sion of what you've got to hit plan moves and partly played fire and surgery, rescue only base Pandemonium. on the 'em with. games can be saved to with tank fire, and rescue only lunar surface A demon The top left hand screen cassette, or, if you are more with cease fire. flanked on either side of what displays score, shields, fortunate, disc drive. Helicopter graphics and seems to be two giant cobras photon, and warp top right sound are well simulated and appears. Eagle-like creatures shows radar scan scores for both Trapper and descend at speed and they lower screen 3D viewer. Hawkeye are displayed at the also need fast bursts with the Control of all weapons and top of the screen during both trusty laser. warp drive is either by joystick rescue and surgery. or keyboard, as is movement If you are using a speech of the ship. You must bear in synthesizer, then comments mind not to miss the amount like \"butterfingers, and of photon torpedoes, energy other caustic comments are shield or warp left on the top heard, depending on your left hand screen, while you're abilities in the surgery. blasting away at all and If you've limbered up on sundry. Points are awarded Making a map of your Microsurgeon, this kind of for Klingons, anti-matter movements will aid your event should be commonsaucers, Nomads and used travels in the search for place. I did find that the and unused starbases. As treasures, but don't forget scalpel response to the joyeach sector number inthat some of the clues are in stick was not as good as the Having overcome these creases, so certain multiplythe graphics which give very keyboard which got all the obstacles, the demon's head ing factors increase your good perspective views running comments. detaches itself, but is score. To those of you who like a Points are awarded for protected by suicidal This is a fast response little more than the text Adveneach man collected from the patrollers which proceed to game that will keep you intertures offered for the TI — take battlezone hurl everything at you. ested. a serious look at this one. 1.5. NO.5 HIT!  Graphics Sound  Value  Playability 000  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability    Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability  Graphics Sound  Value  Playability AMS "


"Oo oo effective, ranging from tyre around, while he can punch squeal and explosions, to marauding vultures which 9 TUNNELS OF DOOM bumping over the verge, and swoop down. Incidentally. realistic engine noises. Atari Brutus has the ability to swing SUPPLIER: Parco Electrics have also been thoughtful a punch from the floor above PRICE: .00 enough to provide alternative to KO Popeye. (ROM + cassette) key selections for both left The music is excellent, the Tunnels of Doom is the handed and right handed graphics are the tops, and the first fantasy offering availplayers. game is an authentic copy of able for the TI owner and the arcade version. offers two games.  Graphics The price might seem a Pennies and Prizes is a  Sound game designed for little heavy but, when you calMICROSURGEON  Value culate how much you drop in children and demonstration Optional speech synthesizer  Playability the coin slots, it all becomes SUPPLIER: Parco Electrics relative! PRICE: .50 (ROM) Imagic developed this  Graphics Sound game for Texas which Value uses the speech synthesizer to good effect. If Playability ea you have fancied your chances as a part time surgeon, now is the time to FATHOM put your skills to the test. Optional speech synthesizer purposes. The dungeon is Selecting from student, intern or surgeon expertise, you then SUPPLIER: Parco Electrics comprised of one to four have a choice from up to a PRICE: .50 (ROM) POPEYE floors and there are eight 1,000 patients! Fathom is certainly difquest objects to find. Various symbols identify the JOYSTICK ONLY ferent. You transform The game is for one player following conditions tar SUPPLIER: Parco Electrics from a seagull into a and options are given to condeposits, cholesterol, gall PRICE: .80 (ROM) dolphin to carry out a struct a new dungeon or restones, kidney stones, tapequest for bits of a magical stock a previously prepared You play the part of worms yuck!), and tumours. trident. one. Using ultrasonic rays, antiPopeye, and the object is Motion as a seagull is susMovements are made to catch all of Olive's fair biotics, or aspirin by selecting tained by pressing the fire through the keys and \"M\" dishearts, notes, and cries button to flap the wings or plays the unexplored and 1, 2 or 3 on the keyboard, you for help before they hit can then decide on the alternatively Q.Y or V on the chartered areas. Party status the water and sink, while keyboard with left and right reports are surgical probe speed by keyavoiding Brutus — I always stick, or SK and D,K on the selections are available and ing 7 or 8. thought it was Bluto Sea ke Movement of the probe is Hags, and vultures. bed keys for left and right movelevels of difficulty. made by either keyboard or Popeye has three levels ment. While flying, touching Quest of the King is the joystick, the medication Sweet Hearts, Love Notes, hitting ravens depletes it. In tain monsters, weapons, and clouds gains you energy and main adventure and does conchosen being released by fireand H-E-L-P. We'll deal with the volcanic area the lava magical items. For a sample button or key. the standard assets Popeye los the volcanic area, the lava magical hems The multi-screen graphics can use on each level, the first so loses energy at certain levels, quest, select \"continue are superb and display the being spinach. This appears against a droonino figure on play. Three characters, Eric so you are constantly fighting current game\" from the disfollowing position of robot randomly on each screen the screen. plus a female Seablade, Mauve a against a dropping figure on play. probe in body, status of and to use its power, place voice warnina Beware your and Forestall Grimm are dis patient with condition of indiviour nautical hero over it and energy. mortal\". dual organs and close up depress the fire button. He played and are given the scanner with magnified can then attack Brutus and opportunity to purchase position of probe and hospital knock him overboard. rations and weapons from the room. store. They then continue to move  Graphics as directed by the player. The  Sound characters are able to fight,  Value negotiate and change  Playability weapons. Quest objects have time limitations and throughout the Adventure a \"clock\" 6 POLE POSITION counts the steps taken by the trio. If you do not locate SUPPLIER: Parco Electrics For the transition from the PRICE: .50 (ROM) form of a seagull to that of a objects within a certain time, This now they are destroyed. legendary dolphin, press For L key to On level one, there is near pull th motor-racing game by the centre of the screen a while pull the joystick towards you Secret doors, vaults, in fact on while pressing the fire button. Atari gives realistic racing punch bag and bucket. Should While moving through the sea involved in Tunnels of Doom the whole gamut of fantasy is effects using either joyPopeye thump the bag when try to avoid iellyfish crabs which is an Adventure stick or keyboard control. Brutus is underneath, the Select from either novice, bucket falls, stopping Brutus sharks and the octopus quard-requiring lots of dedication. ing the wreck, as they all take experienced or advanced in his tracks and gaining extra You are able to select from level, choose the number of points. the amount of floors in the energy away, as do encounters with the coral. dungeon and are asked a laps between one and eight. On level two, a different series of questions as to difand you are away! scenario is set in the shape of  Graphics ficulty, armament, and nature You must qualify before a house. See-saws, bouncing  Sound of the player (fighter, wizard, actually participating in a race Sweetpeas and Brutus attack  Value hero or rogue). and achieve a lap time of 73 Popeye. At level three, sliding  Playability seconds or better. Sounds are platforms help him However, the sample quest move will enable you to establish the OO. 10 10 86 "


"Ooo 9 10 no feel of the game. tioners) help you to get the Should three Slymoids get Moody background music 11 SUPERSKETCH most from your Supersketch. together in the same area, a and superb graphics really The manual provided is new show the Texas at its best. SUPPLIER: Parco Electrics Slymoid is generated. good and some pictures are Mary Whitehouse won't like PRICE: .95 supplied which clip straight on this!  Graphics This particular sketchpad the pad to get you started. A lively game with  Sound has been around in the Lots of fun for all the family in certainly different ideas.  Value States for some time and this flexible package. There are the usual excellent  Playability will now be welcomed by Texas graphics, with good TI owners. It comprises a  Graphics use of sound and a joystick or module which is con. Sound n/a keyboard option. MOON MINE nected to the graphics  Value tablet by a cable. The tablet  Playability  Graphics Optional speech synthesizer has various selection buttons  Sound SUPPLIER: Parco Electrics at the top and the arm and  Value PRICE: $14.95 (ROM) pointer is utilised as you would SLYMOIDS  Playability This cartridge game is a a brush. On loading, the menu worthy successor to options are shown on the left SUPPLIER: Parco Electrics Parsec which is regarded hand side of the screen. By PRICE: .95 (ROM) by many Texas owners as sliding the arm up and down, This game presents three a classic. The screen is a the cursor is also moved like. battlefields for our view through the window wise on the menu. Selecting from of the USS Recovery, moving the cowboy hero — grassy 15 slopes overlooking the through a mine shaft on the colours, you can opt to make sea, a castle, and some moon. Beneath the screen your screen border, or start mountainous terrain as a are the status gauges showoutlining from a range of nine ing the temperature of the the brushes. backdrop. A well created lasers, the water level, and Lift allows you to place your 3D effect is the background \"brush\" number of crew members for hordes of black nasties to anywhere on the d screen before starting and appear from all over remaining. The level of playthe any clanger you make can be screen. SUPERHOD altered, thanks to the Erase option. The Fill and Swap Extended Basic required commands are great, SUPPLIER: Parco Electrics enabling areas outlined by the PRICE: .95 (Cass.) brush to be coloured in, or Superhod's job is to shift colours exchanged as your materials from the store artistic whim takes you. A to his brickie on the warning. Be sure that all lines scaffolding of a semiare joined properly before finished house. On the using fill or, to your horror, you way he is under threat there are 60 levels will have wall to wall colour! from kamikaze dozers and together with current and high You can select from levels dumpers which shunt backscore is also shown. one to five and the aim is to ward and forward at alarming Red cones on four sides of shoot the Slymoids who speeds on the site. the screen represent lasers. gradually get larger and move While you are able to use The vertical lasers have faster. Another danger is the either joysticks or keyboard limited mobility and unlimited species which looks like a flyto make Superhod airborne, range and conversely the horiing jellyfish which appears at this is very temporary and is zontal ones have unlimited the top of the screen before usually accompanied by the mobility and limited range. swooping lower and lower. sound and attendance of an Since the lasers are water On clearing the screen, the ambulance resulting in a lost cooled, it is necessary to graphics move smoothly left life. replenish the supply which is or right, at your discretion. Whenever he successfully done by ejecting a crew The Texture facility allows You cannot enter the castle delivers his bricks, another member into the mine shaft. mixture of colours in a cross until the little beasts, arriving two layers are added to the While he is out there he only hatch effect, giving more from every nook and cranny, structure at high speed by has 12 shots against possibilities. The option Expert are wiped out. Likewise for Superbrick, then it's back to monsters. selects yet another menu, the grass area. You then the store for more The placement of the crew giving Box (creating rectmove into the caves, where punishment. is achieved by pressing the angles and squares of any even the stalactites are unPoints are gained by space bar, as is the removal. size) and Horv (horizontal and trustworthy, dropping from negotiating obstacles, There are also opportunities vertical lines). Another feature the roof and oozing towards dumpers and dozers, and by to retrieve stolen treasures from the menu, Rays, gives you. each layer built on the house. back from the Zygonaut, using straight lines from any point. From the back of the cave When the house is the space bar and fire button. fanning out at lengths and hordes of bats arrive which completed, the next screen If you are fortunate enough angles of your choice. must be dealt with in the adds more obstacles, and so to have a speech module, this Load and Save are the two same way. Points are scored on works in both English and remaining choices on the by the location and types of While the graphics are Spanish. When you hear menu, giving you a chance to Slymoid hit the more rather Lego-like, they add to \"Monstro ha destruido store your Rembrandts for difficult the shot, the more the appeal of this quite buque\", you know you're in posterity — or further points you earn. addictive game. trouble! improvement. When you Load Each type of Slymoid has a previously saved design, the its own sound, so you have an  Graphics formation of the picture is early warning system. A little entertainment itself. For a biology here. If spores escape  Graphics  Sound  Sound  Value user who wishes to repeat lots off screen or land on the  Value  Playability of circles etc., plastic stencils ground, they change into  Playability (available from most stathree new Slymoids. one "


"Bug Dear BH, I was going to type in Gold Rush for the Spectrum from your February Book of Games but there were some characters that I couldn't get on my Spectrum keyboard. Please help. CJ Ackers The characters you mention are user defined graphics, which are used to represent the players and other objects. You enter these by pressing a capital letter from A to U while in graphics mode, which you enter with CAPS SHIFT-9. The problem is that you won't know which characters correspond to which letters until the program is run. So, enter the listing and leave spaces where the graphics should be. Type RUN and, after a few seconds, break in to the game. The characters should now be defined, so enter graphics mode and press the capital letters from A to U. You should find that they produce graphics, so you can go back to the listing and enter the correct characters. Once everything is complete, don't forget to save the game to tape again. Incidentally, Program Express now has a competitor. Soft Store is based on a similar principle, but no modems are used. All the games are held in a special ticket operated machine. You buy a ticket and stick it in the machine along with a blank tape. Rosetech, who make the machines, say that instead of updating by telephone, someone will come round to the shop with a special disk and update the machine whenever new games come out. Seems a step in the wrong direction, if you ask me. Dear BH, Please can you tell me how some programmers manage to make the 64 display a picture while it's loading a tape. Ian Kennedy Computers can only do one task at a time, but they work so fast that it looks as if they are doing more than one thing at a time. For example, if a picture is on the screen while a tape is loading, the computer has to keep reading data from the cassette port and also update the screen at the same time. Obviously, the less things that the 64 is doing, the faster it can complete the one thing that it is actually doing. So, the machine turns off the screen while loading tapes to save time. However, some programs load in a small loader program which actually rewrites part of the routine that tells the 64 how to load a tape. That routine is almost the same as the original, but manages to keep the display alive while loading a tape. I don't know of any utilities that let you do the same with your own programs, though you could try adapting one of the cassettes you already have. Dear BH, Is it possible to save machine code bytes that exist in memory without having to convert them back to data statements first? IR Newton Yes, it is. Use the CODE statement in the SAVE command. Type SAVE \"name\" CODE xxxx,yyyy. This will save the area of memory starting at address xxxxx and continuing for yyyy bytes. The name of the file on tape or microdrive will be \"name\". So, for example, to save a block of 5000 bytes starting from address 30,000 under the name of TEST, type SAVE \"TEST\" CODE 30000, 5000 Dear BH, Last year you wrote an article about buying software through modems. I don't know much about this, so can you please explain it again? Thank you. Asif Khan. Program Express launched a machine in the middle of last year which was based on a system known as EDOS, which stands for Electronic Distribution of Software. The idea is that the micro shop has a machine connected to the EDOS computer in Edinburgh by a modem. If you want to buy a game, you load a blank cassette into the machine, pay your money and a copy of the game is transferred to your tape. This means that the shops can always have the latest games in stock, but never be overstocked, which costs money. Not a lot happened on the EDOS scene and everyone lost interest. But it seems that the company is well and truly convinced of the idea, and they told me at the recent LET show that you will see EDOS machines in the shops any day now. Dear BH, My 64 won't load games. Well actually it will load about half of the games I buy but the rest won't load. They load on my friends' computers. I have had my cassette recorder replaced but still nothing works. Please help. Timothy Miller If you've replaced the cassette recorder, then it probably isn't that that's at fault. If the tapes load into a friend's computer then it can't be that you have faulty copies. Therefore, I suspect that it's actually your micro that has the problem. It's a fairly common problem which your dealer should be able to fix. If the machine is under guarantee then you're lucky. If it's not, then phone around some local shops first and get the best price. And make sure that the shop will guarantee its work. Dear BH, Since I bought a Currah MicroSpeech for my Spectrum, I have had a lot of problems loading programs. Can you give me some advice as to what I can do about it? Brian Thorpe It depends on how bad the problem really is, Brian. If it means that some games will take two or three attempts before they load completely, then I could live with the problem. If it makes most of your software totally unusable then you could contact Welwyn Systems of Tunbridge Wells, who have taken over the Currah range, and ask them for a replacement. That's it for another month. Remember, if your micro's getting you down, we're here to give you advice. Write to C&VG at Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECI. Our Micronet mailbox number is 012 786 556. 88 "


"Become the hunter and then hunted STREET and burntread on the streets SPECTRUM 48k COMMODORE 64 AMSTRAD 6-95 8.95 7.95 ocean Ocean Software is available from selected branches of WOOLWORTH. WHSMITH,Band John Menzies . LASKYS, Rumbelows. COMET Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Ocean Software Ocean House 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Telephone 061 832 6633 Telex 669977 Oceans G "


"ARCADE ACTION DRAGONBUSTERS! Take a leaf out of St You have three fireballs George's book and try your and should use them hand at a bit of dragon sparingly they will help to slaying. After all, dragon get you out of most tight busting used to be a sport spots. You can also leap with handsome young men forward, backwards and who killed a few dragons for crouch a great help when fun, rescued pretty maids as battling with a dinosaur that an afterthought and lived is several hundred times happily ever after. larger than yourself. REACH FOR THE SKY Aerial acrobatics that would affect this dogfight. make even Red Arrow pilots Should you be unlucky shake in their flying boots are enough to be hit, your plane the only way to win will start to cough and belch Acrobatic Dogfight from black smoke. As it drops into Data East. a nosedive, you must eject VITALITY 107 VITALITY 56 You take the part of a dareand open your parachute if devil flying ace who you don't want to end up as ROUND resembles Dastardly Dick, a squashed blob on the though unfortunately Mutley ground. If you reach the doesn't figure in this game. ground safely, you can leap They were sometimes a bit Killing the dragon seems to Hee, Hee, Hee! Even the into another plane to contoo keen and somewhere be more a question of luck graphics are down in whacky tinue the flight. This time a along the line dragons than skill, but when he finally cartoon style. new breed of enemy planes became extinct. However, disappears a door Bravely you stroll towards will be waiting which are Namco has given you the materialises to lead you onto your waiting plane. A faster and more dangerous. chance to breathe life back the path to the next castle. committee of generals salute Quicker reactions will be into a dragon for only 30 At each stage it becomes as you climb into the plane to needed to catch these tigers pence! For a few exciting harder to despatch the rid the skies of the enemy in the sky. moments you too can try you dragon but the thought that single handed. The plane hand at dragon busting. there must be a prize to claim gathers speed and slowly You start off at the at the end of your journey you nudge the joystick to entrance to a map portraying goads you on to greater ascend instead you push it three castles and a mountain endeavour. the wrong way and make a hide-out. The path you spectacular nosedive from choose will dictate which the grand height of two feet. castle you reach first. On One life lost before you are entering a castle you make even airborne! straight for the dungeons, Once you're in the skies, that is where dragons are events happen very fast. known to hang out, and lookEnemy aircraft whizz past ing ahead notice a skeleton from all directions and you'll coming towards you and have to do some neat Running out of fuel in no escape route! Sword at normal circumstances is the ready, you leap forward Dragon Buster is colourful, usually considered highly and the skeleton disappears. easy to play and is dangerous but if that A wall opens, leading you apparently a great hitin happens in Dogfight, nothing deeper into the labyrinths Japan. I didn't have to fight could be easier. Just jump beneath the castle. my way through a throng to out of your plane and into Bats, birds and fireballs all play but it is one of the best one of the enemy's as it try to drain you of vitality in a very mediocre range of passes beneath you. Sounds thus preventing you from games that are soon to hit simple? Wait until you try it! finding the dragon. But at the arcades. Dogfight is one of those last, stumbling from exhausgames that is instantly playtion, you round a corner to able and does not need a come face to face with a acrobatics to get in line to fire great amount of skill. Its roaring, fire breathing at them and dodge their pace is fast, the graphics are dinosaur. At least, that is bombs. You can loop the colourful and well defined what it looks like. The loop, fly upside down and and I'd recommend this Japanese graphics artist even vertically upwards with game to anyone who needs a obviously had trouble with a 2009 the greatest of ease. The break from fast, dedicated dragon. laws of aerodynamics do not shoot-'em-ups. 90 "


"WORLD SERIES BASEBALL D aerogle es-Gme Imagine Software is available from: WOOLWORTH, WHSMITH,John Menzies ,LASKYS, Rumbelows, Spectrum Shops and all good dealers. GREENS "


"SPECTRUM 48K  COMMODORE 64 . G BAN FRANKIE o 1111H II 11 11 11 11 HOLLYWOOD ocean SAYS RELAX AND WELCOME TO THE PLEASUREGAME Ocean Software is available from selected branches of: WOOLWORTH WHSMITH, John Mures, .LASKYS. Rumbelows. COMET. Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street, Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone: 061-832 6633 "


"ENTERPRISE The micro's futuristic looks tend to immediately set it apart from the competition. The black moulded case contains a built-in joystick and four-colour keyboard, based on the rubber-mat, Sinclair QLtype keys. A hinged plastic strip along the top of the keyboard holds details of the eight function keys which, combined with \"Shift\", \"Ctrl\" and \"Alt\", allow The first few models of a new microcomputer, called The up to 32 functions. Enterprise, are now starting to appear. Initially launched about 18 A ROM port on the left of the months ago, the computer has been plagued by delays and a machine will initially contain the ISchange of name. Nevertheless, with superb sound and graphics BASIC cartridge, but leaves the way capabilities, the Enterprise should fare well against more recent clear for other plug-in language and arrivals, such as the Commodore 16 and Amstrad. MARCUS game cartridges at a later date. JEFFERY investigates. Along the back are a number of connectors for control of up to two cassette recorders, TV, monitor and hi-fi output, a power socket (for an external transformer), serial and parallel ports, and edge connectors for two joysticks. Unfortunately, the choice of mainly edge connectors, rather than more standard sockets, is probably going to imply the necessity for interfaces, as on the Spectrum. The first interface most people will need will be to allow Atari-type joysticks to be connected. Finally, to the right of the machine is an expansion port for extra memory (up to a staggering 4Mbytes!), disc drives, and the like. The basic processor is a Z80A running at 4MHz. The two most impressive chips on the board are, however, two custom-built chips to handle the sound and graphics. Additionally, the machine comes complete with a word-processor chip. If there are no cartridges plugged into the machine, then it will power up to the word processor. Those people wanting to write their This software has its faults and is own games will find the Enterprise not particularly special, however, it is very helpful. The IS-BASIC used is simple to use and has all the essential highly structured, having many as displaying a sequence of pages for features, so it will no doubt prove to similarities to Pascal, and contains cartoon animation, giving a very be very useful. The programmer will many commands not normally found flexible graphics system. also find life easier by using the word Typical structures include a What game would be complete processor functions to edit BASIC DO..LOOP, which may have the test without sound? Here again, the programs. conditions, WHILE and UNTIL at the Enterprise contains a custom-built The graphics are all handled by a start or end of the loop. Multi-line chip, this time called Dave, to deal custom-built chip, called Nick, which IF.. THEN.. ELSE.. ENDIF, and with things. With three sound and offers a bewildering variety of ing variety of SELECT CASE structures are also one noise channel, the Enterprise is colours and resolutions. A two-colour supported. immediately a rival to the BBC and graphics screen gives either 40 or 80 For graphics programming, the Commodore 64 machines, but with columns (the latter using twice as main command to draw lines and multi-phase envelopes, ring modulamuch memory), but the number of move the cursor is PUOT. This can move the cursor is PLOT. This can tion and separate stereo output colours displayed can be increased then be combined with such channels when sent through a hi-fi to 4, 16 or 256 by halving the commands as ELLIPSE and PAINT, system the Enterprise leaps ahead horizontal resolution each time. Addifor filling shapes, or FORWARD of the rest of the field. As with the tionally, there are two text modes and BACK, LEFT and RIGHT tor turtle graphics, all the parameters are availa Spectrum-like Attribute mode, but graphics. able through IS-BASIC, making the on the Enterprise, each eight-pixel Also, when defining the number of programmer's job as easy as row of a character cell can have its colours and resolution, they are possible. own independent colours. given a particular page (channel) Though an excellent machine for number. This page could be very both the programmer and the gamesmall and just be shown on part of the player, the success of the Enterprise TV screen, possibly with other will undoubtedly lie in the range of independent pages, with different software available for it. At present colours and resolutions. this looks pretty bleak, but a number Alternatively a very large page of companies are supposedly work could be defined and the screen then ing on games, and it is hoped that used as a window to show part of it. Spectrum and BBC BASIC conversion Then by redefining which part is to programs will soon be available, be shown, scrolling can be achieved. opening up a wide range of Many other possibilities exist, such additional software. 93 "


"DON'T LET THE GREMLINS GET THE BETTER OF YOU, WRITE TO... TWO YEARS ON! playing Sabre Wulf So there's us poor Hendry. How do you pass the guards adventurers struggling for months to in the tunnel, he asks? The Adventure Helpline went into get a score of 100 in Hulk, while joyColette Mason of Droitwich poured action officially two years ago and stick freaks are running up millions in out all her Hulk frustrations when she since then your letters have been mere days! Is it fair? No, arcaders wrote to Helpline. \"I have solved arriving in ever increasing numbers. cheat too! Paul admits he had the many Adventures, but this one I just Following the March Book of \"infinite lives\" poke in! can't fathom out. And another thing Adventure, there was a five-fold Talking of cheating, Paul Coppins I HATE GAS!\" A question that has increase overnight! So please excuse asks: please don't write in asking for been cropping up frequently is: How the delay if your reply was a little late the charts for Starcross. If you have a do you get through the Chief in arriving! I still (just) managed to genuine copy, you will have all the Examiner's door in Hulk? Answer: read all your letters, and I loved them! necessary paperwork in the package. Paul and Simon helped take the So don't ask us to help you use an Pharoah's Tomb player Craig Davis strain and, along with some secretarial illicit copy! of Atherstone asks how do you help from Veronica Campbell (aged unblock the ice-tunnel, while Mrs 15, and not a coincidence!), all your Woods of Croydon knows how to kill letters (well, nearly all) got answered. PAINFUL the pirate in Heroes of Karn, but can't But to help us help you in future, we're do it as she can't find Khadim. Will doing something and ask you for PROBLEMS whoever had him last please put him something in return! back? Please make sure your mail is solely Recent deaths at Leatherhead are Paul Clifford of Walsall says Spoof for the Helpline if you address it to us baffling a veritable constabulary! The has got to be the funniest game ever, (no competition entry forms) and most frequent problem is how to but he can't give the grail to Lancelot PLEASE write clearly! There's nothing continue playing Sherlock into and gets drowned every time he worse than struggling through a Tuesday. Lestrade has the nasty habit attempts to swim from the island. microscopic scrawl! of wrapping the case up on Monday Our old friend the Rev Dave Byrne Our contribution will be to evening, just as you were doing quite has been spending a lot of time on introduce to you, next month, a new well! So go along to Lestrade and the beach recently and he's not just member to the Helpline team! You've challenge his conclusions. Beware! enjoying the sun! The truth is, he heard of him now who could it be? He will ask for proof, so you will have can't get away. He says he's playing to trot off and get it! what one reviewer described as the Kentilla player Pauline Garnett \"easy\" part of Macbeth, which CHEATS CORNER wants to find the right key to open the \"shouldn't take more than an hour or chest in Tyler's bedroom. She has the so for an experienced adventurer. To Niall O'Niell of County Kildare, a Tblanket, but the key doesn't seem to \"Just who is the idiot who makes shirt. From Niall, this gem about the be within its folds, she finds. Come on these grades up?\" asks Dave. hitherto unknown commands ZMOVE now — who's got it? And, while we're Ground Zero from Artic is coming and ZTAKE. If, in Philosopher's on the subject, who can help Mark under attack from B Humphreys who Quest, you follow one of these Barnfield across the moat? can't get a word out of his next door commands with an object, you will go \"What are the shaving foam and neighbour, nor enter his house. immediately to the place where the bullet proof vest for in Valkyrie 17\", Whenever he builds his shelter the object is. asks David Leech of Forest Hill, \"and house falls down on him and when he Chris Merchant, like many others, is how do you get past the border guard tries to dig he can't as he has no having great difficulty getting into the in Carpathia? It's better than any other spade and he can't find one either! Castle of Terror. But he has found his game!\" Robert Stanley of Aintree was still appetite for soup improves his score! Fantasia Diamond is troubling W awaiting his plea to be mentioned in Every time he types GET SOUP in the Meek of Grimsby who cannot do another Helpline column when he humble cottage, he gains five points. anything with the silver statue in the read the March C&VG. \"95% letters \"I got 291 out of 290 before ceasing woodland, whilst Jack Lockerby of answered?\" he thought, \"sounds this pointless activity!\" exclaims Aylesham is through the window, but promising!\" So he put pen to paper Chris. now he can't escape because he has again and, although I replied, I \"Remind Waldroid of Firetop no weapon! couldn't help! So who can send him a Mountain,\" says Paul Heyes of Eye of Zolton is killing Anthony Message From Andromeda? He is Sheffield, \"that if an arcade game has Jones of Eaglescliffe when he rows the trying to open the square plate next a pause button, it is possible to play boat to the island. He can't get over to the panel in the mirror room. over a period of days.\" Paul claims to the castle wall either. Another castle, Gwyn Owen from Wembley has have scored 57 million in three weeks, one full of terror, is troubling Paul received a knighthood from Lord 94 "


"\"Chubby\" Fish and can't think of old.\" Obstacles appear at random what to do next? High attainers, and Dave is hindered by an impenewhere are you? trable ring of fire. D Parkes is worried about a friend Eureka! is a game posing more than of his who has completed Quo Vadis? the conventional problems for the After finding the much fabled golden Helpline! There are five separate sceptre and ,000, he took it to the Adventures and anyone who is stuck starting shaft and was confronted in one seems to be stuck in the lot! with a message to the effect that he The pleas are too numerous to hadn't really finished. \"Press the mention, the clues available too few Return button\", it continued. So he to help! did and found himself back at the start! Mr Parkes is concerned that his friend, now standing on the ledge of a tall building, will jump! Is this yet PROBLEMS WITH another of those \"non-prize prize games\"? POSTCARDS! \"Has the magical lamp got anything to do with getting the map in napin Apoligies to anyone who has written Apoligies to anyone who has written Hewson's Quest?\" asks Stephen in to the Helpline recently, and had to Randall of Co. Antrim. Help Stephen wait a long time for a reply! The find it and he will be able to complete recent heavy increase in mail caused the whole Adventure. such a drain on our reply postcards Somewhere in the middle of a that they completely ran out before thicket there is a cannibal village and more supplies could be obtained! the cannibals have a horrible habit of Coupled with that, the Tandy had to eating Bela Lund of Ross on Wye. go to hospital for a few days, leaving \"How do I get past them to find the me without letter cataloguing Babylon Jewels?\" pleads Bela. facilities and no Helpline Database! If you haven't tried Asylum (1 or 2), At the time of writing, the Tandy don't ever call an Adventure difficult! has returned from convalescence Read this from a stricken player: and a crate of new cards has arrived, \"How do I get the axe and stuff from So Paul, Simon and I are now busy the circular passageway? What about clearing the backlog! those doors, ten on each side-some set off alarms and they all lead to nowhere? Who do the footsteps belong to, the ones you hear while A CLUE OR A looking round the doors? And what about the noise you hear when you CONUNDRUM? are heading to the Doctor's only door is it a coin dropping and, if so, do Can you make head or tail of my you use it in the pay-phone?\" Can hints? Some like 'em easy, others any brain surgeon help Martin Ward plead for a mere hint the pleasure of Farnborough out of the ward in they get from working out the answer Asylum 2? for themselves is worth the effort, so T-shirt for clues this month to Tony they just want a little nudge! What do Longworth of South Wirral who YOU think? Clearer and easier, or covers a whole range of Adventures. some of each? Thanks, Tony, and if we ever meet Meanwhile, see what you make of you'll have to strain your neck a little these. With thanks to: Eliot Hatton, more! Haven't you heard I'm Thetford; A J Norris; Geoff Davis, nearly nine feet tall! Bridgwater (did I get it right, Geoff?); Dave Barker of Nunhead writes Graham Rae, Falkirk; Russell Wear, about Faust's Folly. \"The aforemenSwindon; Ronald Lee, Grimsby; and tioned disaster is for the 16k thanks to the hundreds of other Spectrum and is now three years readers who sent in clues!  Kuo pue breu pre kurey forquoz e aq luod 13X JO SNIV.INNOW Teq ay UITM Xoq au raygn ayi ant sier ay prone OL 2 IULYTYA ibbe ay reau o 1, og erogo NYWdlds 2n0 e sznok pre 1 orey eyi esnobreb oyi uo sure ay find 'apseo suot doop au uado oL VTTILNSX  ay asn pup jepuneb a Ivom uylapour dean,, ua Pue sea ob 'roopden ay ynony ob'saire au sou 'uead jo pabuy ay ssed oL DIVdS30 JO MOL do ay oj non ,  ogenb kirv o r n u / fouo ou reas s uro qond ou inq'uognos Ayol JOJ panya lew opeureur Inox TSV 3NJJOWAVTO JO NOSIUOS        p ssos nod dy pnoys s r    dn of pue s   \"punoj st joururey ay araymador ay Mom 3100 S. 23799NWS 2s p o pob       r p u d  ey) jeb ured ise ay od burpm yaang ay 4onorys oor By ur sayo ou o sea pue aurer \"but ay are readde flads ey? Jo sured axeur OL ISIWISTHOTY  pro   uod  un jo uoppururexe ure uo que jo sedoymol und HOMIL JO TISYO xon OIN    Arqquys jo y ejeyi kes szayo ing 'Niy sies oym jury au ojur um ua ITM OH OIN ses Oym y Bry ay on Iran uay pue ano freqeseq moi Team    Xo1 LSand   —    s oz KaNI  10  amirum ayi asrrepues eoq ay redat oL ONIXIA SHL 13 yduru   q pre sumfur m  pue subis Jo sexo ay ur Seafom lq peypene aq isnur nok 'buu ay 106 OL buujue ajojaq Aajerp «    ou s   ol ONS S.ATOM LY ISSO y suup epuex  arua au wo lay ay bumab inoqe YUTUL INIU JHL JONINIS hay op 'sean uo o , u uognos neapela \"s mydley eq ueo erold ALT ay ssono of POON N303 OL NUOLU \"O! dn sjab ay JeyM aas pue buruana kepuowane werd s, igled punoje buey y Jo Yury e 10: XOOTSHS 95 "


"ADVE HACKING AWAY ON MULTIVAX! to LOGIN to Multivax as a valid user, he will wear it with pride as he thinks rather than the way you did to start that the C&VG Adventure column and with. review section is \"by far the best of Security isn't all it might be, though, all\". Just as I was kitting out my Beeb with for with perseverance Rover and I He is well pleased with the the necessary hardware to become a found a terminal that someone had left reviews, for he reckons he has saved Micronetter, along came an logged on. It didn't provide too much a lot of money by buying on our Adventure called Hacker 2000. But in information, but was useful in other recommendations. Hacker, it is not Dryden nor Enter respects. Markuu Ilmanen of Turku in Finland prise that is the host computer but So it was that I penetrated the rates a tiger with toothache and a Multivax, an altogether bigger System Manager's office and eventu-mammoth jumping out of its skin, in machine. ally managed to enter the Multivax Lords of Time, high in the AdventureMultivax is a massive computer that Control Room or rather Rover did, funnies stakes. Not so funny, though, controls all mankind in a world on my behalf. is what to give the jester, thinks dominated by Androids and Thought I have also managed to LOGIN to Markuu. I disagree! Perhaps the Police. People are either Proles or Multivax and this illicit operation gave answer is more than a joke, Markuu? Programmers. me just as big a thrill as if I had broken Kerry Savage turned arsonist as a You are a Prole and, determined to into a real system! Unfortunately, result of a recent Claymorgue clue I become a Programmer, you illegally though, the thought Police have gave. Trying to dry the towel, he has hook an ancient micro into a Multivax removed the HELP facility and dis been burning everything in sight, with line with the objective of changing covering a valid command, let alone no success towel-wise. Ashes and the your status. Beware detection how to use it, is just one more in the charred remains of bits of wood are means immediate extermination! long queue of tasks waiting to be lying around all over the place and The game starts with a Security Alert processed. still that towel is too damp for Kerry's warning that hackers have broken into All this is implemented in a very liking! If Kerry takes much longer the system. The screen then clears to realistic way, with a cursor scanning puzzling over it, I fear what he needs the words: Insert USER IDENTITY the screen ahead of the text, menu may have turned to pumice! Martin CODE. That's it! You're on your own! entry options when a computer Chadderton of Selly Oak sent in some What follows simulates logging on confronts you, and a fair sprinkling of confronts you, and a fair sprinking on clues, one of which read: \"Don't pull to a mainframe computer. Even if you sound effects throughout the game. I the lever!\" Oh-ho! Depends what know a valid ID (most unlikely when found it great fun and a very refreshyou're pulling the lever for! you start), you must also know the ing change. Mr Gibson passes on some password to get any further. But there Hacker 2000 is by Andy Mitchell. comments about the trend towards is a way in and it leads to a remote For the BBC B, it is from Micrograf and complex and increasingly difficult conversation with Rover V, a friendly I thoroughly recommend it. games. This is no bad thing, he goes Android with a sympathetic leaning on, but too many have a very difficult towards hackers. Rover will work on ADVENTURE problem shortly into the game. He your behalf from within the Multivax feels that the player should be drawn complex, feeding you back inform CHAT into the game and encouraged until ation that will eventually enable you to he is well into a game, to create a feelcomplete your quest. Sometimes readers are so keen to put ing of achievement. Examples of You control Rover with Adventure their problems that they forget to games with hard early problems are type text commands, and he is your mention the game that's troubling Pub Quest (\"a disgraceful game'). puppet. If you LOGOUT, you are them! I pride myself on usually being Mountain of Ket and Heroes of Karn, returned to the screen asking for your able to name the game from the suggests Mr Gibson, who knows ID and no puppet to help! Thus, the problem. So when Dominick Hardy many people who have paid out simulation of operating a terminal asked how to get down from the - only to see the opening scenes seems very real. window ledge and how to get past the before stopping dead. Within the complex housing block in the cave, I replied with some There's an interesting talking point! Multivax are unfriendly Droids who Pirate answers. Well, wouldn't you? I In fact, the Adventure Helpline was zap poor Rover at the very slightest got caught out! Colditz, a remarkably originally set up with just the aim in provocation. Rover must tread warily different game from Pirate, has two mind of helping people get the full along the corridors, in the hope of similar problems though with value out of their software, when they finding something that may be of entirely different solutions, of course! had become genuinely stuck and interest, something that will yield Vaughan Price from Neath wins a Ttherefore unable to complete the enough vital information to enable you shirt for an interesting letter and says game for which they'd paid.  96 "


"THE ONLY REALISTIC FOR YOUR ACTION PROGRAM AVAILABLE ON SPECTRUM 48K AMSTRAD CPC464 ATARI 600/800XL CASSETTE & DISK including FREE OFFER ENAMEL METAL BADGE OUT NOW ON CASSETTE & RISK ONE-ON-ONE HIS PROGRAM HAS BEEN PERSONALLY DESIGNED BY TOPUS BASKETBALL SUPERSTARSDR JULIUS ERVING & LARRY BIRD AND IS BASED ON THEIR REAL GAME MOVEMENTS STAR Fast Load Chrome Tape GAME It has Basketball fans should love this simulation of the game some of the most lifelike animation ever seen in a sports game To see your player spin 180 degrees, dribble past the defender and shoot close in, gives a vicarious any other sports thrill quite unmatched in simulation I've seen. Bob Chappell Personal All this adds up to one heck of a great game Computer News Action program for the A Basketball COMMODORE 64 U.S. No. 2 HIT INCLUDES SPECIAL DISCOUNT VOUCHER FEATURES  PLAY THE COMPUTER OR A FRIEND 4 SKILL LEVELS BUILT IN FATIGUE.FACTORS HOT & COLD STREAKS FOULS A STOP CLOCK AND A REFEREE INSTANT ACTION REPLAY JOYSTICK CONTROL \"and or keyboard control (Spectrum & Amstrad versions) AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE RETAILERS IF IT'S NOT THERE PLEASE ORDER IT HIGH PERFORMANCE PROGRAMS "


"Bally/MIDWAY. NEW! Up Down OFFICIAL SEGA ARCADE OFFICIAL ARCADE OUR ARCADE CAN HITS WE BROUG az Dow Here at Sega, we like to think we know a thing or two about quality. Our reputation has been forged in the World's most competitive market, the American arcades. Discerning arcade players: and they know a thing or two as well: have voted our games some of Like chasing the mighty ape up Monkey Mountain in CONGO BONGO number 3 in the Billboard Chartin 1984. You'll ride hippos, dodge charging rhinos and do battle with Jungle creatures: but make sure you don't end up as a lunch time treat for a man eating fish! Or you can have a smashing time with Bally Midway's UP'N DOWN. This is a frustrated motorists dream; you bash your way over rough roads, SURSO innovation as one chart-topper has followed another But why should the arcade players have all the fun we were asked. of course there was no reason at all: and so we decided to bring our games! home and let all the family have a piece of the action. We have re-written the programs for many of the popular home computers and now everyone from junior to grandma can have a gol the best of all time. They've enjbyed high speed action, breathtaking graphics, thrills and spills, variety and Commodore 64 Spectrum Amstrad leap dead ends, canyons and crush anyone who gets in the wayl No. 1 in SPY HUNTER NOW NOW SOON the Play Meter Conversions Poll, UP'N'DOWN is one smash hit that TAPPER NOW NOW | SOON really is a smash! UP'N'DOWN NOW SOON SOON And if all that doesn't drive you to drink then TAPPER will. This has got CONGO BONGO NOW SOON SOON to be the loudest, wackiest saloon bar ZAXXON** NOW* NOW SOON there's ever been. The action gets truly out of hand as the overworked BUCK ROGERS NOW NOW SOON bar tender scrambles to serve his unruly (and very thirsty) customers. Published by Synapse Software Corp. under licence from Sega interprises Ltd. **Alari version of ZAXXON available on cassette and published by Datasoft in under licence from Sega Kateprises Ltd Videogame copyright 1983 Sega Enterprises Ltd. Bally Midway is a trademark of Bally Midway Mfg.Co. Package and progrand copyright 1984 Seda Enterprises, Inc. TAPPER and SPYHUNTER are trade "


"DWAY      syasof Bally/MIDWAY CDU NEW BUCKROGER. HUNTER PLANET OF ZOOM EDU OFFICIAL OFFICIAL ARS VES WERE SUCHBIC HT THM HOME destroy deadly space hoppers and alien saucers. Your race against death has just begunl Prepare for battle with your most powerful enemy.. the mother ship. You must hit her dead centre-anything less will only waste fuel. Aim steady, but hurry...your fuel is dangerously low! And finally there's the legendary ZAXXON-the ultimate experience. You'll pilot a space fighter through forde-fields and enemy fire on your PLAYER 11398 Work your way through the wild Western Saloon to the Sports Bar. From there to the slam dancing Punk Bar and into the Space Bar where the customers really are out of this world! Down to earth with SPYHUNTER from Bally Midway. But don't expect any chance of a rest. After all, this was. the number 1 arcade game of 1984 and now you're in the hot-seat of the deadliest machine on four wheels. You're after enemy spies. The situation is life and death. You'll need every weapon you've got machine guns and guided missiles, oil slicks and smoke creens. But the enemy is everywhere. On the road, in the water, even in the air. So you'll have to be more than fast to stay alive in SPYHUNTER: you'll need brains and guts as well! Fly into the 25th Century and bear the mantle of the legendary BUCK ROGERS. Skillfully slip through deadly electron posts. Dodge and ENEMY PLANES FCERE 049370 We're bringing all this action home to you and now under the U.S. Gold label you'll find versions for the Spectrum and Amstrad too. With U.S. Gold and Sega, the arcade winners, you'll be a winner too. Hands down! RRRRR U.S. GOLDI 67798 mission to do battle with the deadly ZAXXON. Countless others have gone before: now it's your turn to do battle. You'll quickly see why ZAXXON is one of only ten games that have made it into Electtonic Games' American Hall of Fame. SEGA THE ARCADE WINNERS Commodore 64 Cassette .95 Manufactured in the U.K. by U.S. Gold Commodore 64 Disk .95 Limited. Unit 10. Parkway Industrial Centre. 2900 Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY Spectrum 48K .95 Telephone: 021-359 8581 AXXON is a trademark of Sega Enterprises Inc. Copyright  1984 Sega Enterprises Inc UP'N'DOWN is a trademark of Sega Enterprises Ltd. manufactured under licence from Sega Esterprises Ltd.. Japan barks of Billy Midway Mfg.Co. Videogame copyright  1983 Bally Midway Mfg.Co. All rights reserved. CONGO BONGO is a trademark of bega Enterprises. Inc. Copyright 1983. Sega Enterprises Inc. ade "


"COD REVIEWS don't forget to take Gizmo with you! separate mystery to solve. Up to four Gremlins is from Adventure people can play simultaneously, International, and has graphics on racing to be the first to solve the the Commodore 64, Spectrum and crime. A player making a false accusAmstrad versions (price .95) and ation is out of the game. in text only on the Commodore 16, After selecting the number of the BBC and Electron versions (price case to be attempted, the would be .95). detective sets out with a note sheet Personal Rating: 9 from a pad provided in the package. Keith Campbell On this is printed a map of the town, together with space to scribble notes under general headings such as Interviews, Suspects, and Motives. MURDER BY THE DOZEN The action commences in a preWhodunnits seem to be all the rage at determined location, after a brief the moment. Recently we've had had introduction to the facts surrounding Witness, Deadline, Suspect, Murder the murder. I was investigating the on the Zinderneuf, and Sherlock. The dea The death of Otto Telcher, an industrialist latest in this growing range of found run down in a parking lot, and detective mysteries is Murder by the is Murder by the found myself in his house. I had a GREMLINS Dozen. choice of interviewing his widow, son, or housekeeper; searching his If you enjoyed the film there's little study, garage or kitchen; or moving to doubt that you will equally enjoy the another location. To choose which, Adventure! If you missed the film, the appropriate option number is the next best thing is to play the selected. game! The computer's response to any of Gremlins, written by Brian the first six options is to display a list Howarth, follows the theme of the of clue numbers which are then film fairly closely, especially at the looked up in a book containing 700 beginning. It will therefore be two-line clues. After a set amount of easier to play if you HAVE seen the time elapses based on the number of film if not, then you will find an clues offered, there is the additional adventure that is just that little bit option of making an accusation. If this more difficult. is selected, in a multi-player game, Your aim is to rid the world of you announce who you think \"dunnit\" Gremlins, and, of course, everyone and explain why. You then look up the knows there are some definite ways answer in a book of solutions, by to deal with them. This is a classical placing a transparent sheet of red text adventure in its own right, but plastic over the appropriate page to with the addition of some really render the text legible. If you are superb detailed graphics that are wrong, you're out and play continues enough to convert the text purist without you. Otherwise, the case is into an arcade fan! They display dead. instantaneously, interact with the Personally, I see no good reason plot, and have the added attraction why this should be a computer game. of animation which is applied in an It would be far more relaxing played imaginative and often humourous away from a keyboard, sitting in the way. comfort of an armchair. In the Tavern, for example, you Murder by the Dozen is from CBS are likely to meet up with the Software for Apple II/IIe, IBM PC and \"flasher\"gremlin, who stands on the Games of detection are not quite Commodore 64. bar-top opening and closing his Adventures in the ordinary sense, but Personal Rating: 3 coat! Did I imagine it, or did he require similar powers of logic and Keith Campbell occasionally have a dirty leer on his deduction to solve. face? into two distinct categories: the orthoLEGEND Then there is the \"poor taste\" dox Adventure-type approach with side of the game, which I greatly conversational text-in/text out and the The instruction book read \"Legend, enjoyed of course! Like the menu-driven game, where a selection the game, is not based on or inspired gremlin in the blender, who, when is made from a fixed list of options. by Legend, the book.\" This raised a you start it, falls in head first. His One of the appeals of Adventure is big question in my mind as I loaded legs stick out of the top, and start its conversational approach because the game into my Spectrum. Why use revolving! It quite reminded me of this means that the player's potential the title Legend and then why include the time I ran over a frog with the game actions are limited only by his the 380 page book? hover-mower! imagination. The game will accept These questions were answered There are plenty of other and act upon a rather more limited just a few moves into the Adventure locations to explore, including the range of commands, but the player for, as I was bidding Horeb the inndepartment store, cinema, swimsets out feeling that the possibilities keeper farewell, he beckoned me ming pool, and oil station are limitless. Nevertheless, quite a over to kiss his three daughters, The game has a nice easy feel to it competent game can result from using saying \"You remember their names, being amusing and fairly easy at the fixed option technique, as in of course?\" Although the game does first, but becoming progressively Zinderneuf. not follow the plot of the book, it is set more difficult towards the end. Murder by the Dozen is a collection in the world of Legend and the So if you fancy your chances of of 12 crimes, all committed in the town characters are the same. You must killing gremlins, off you go but of Micropolis and each providing a therefore read the book to find out 100 "


"who's who and to answer some historical questions. You take the part of Rek, adopted son of Horeb, with the task of becoming the Eagle of Bronze and raise an army to defend Dros Delnoch against the Nadir barbarians from the north. Not an easy task for, as well as trying to do all that, you must search the kingdom for the magic armour and sword of the Eagle. The method of input and output is unusual, with full text used to describe the locations and answer the more complex puzzles, whilst multichoice input is used for movement. Graphics come into play when you enter into combat with other characters, or run the length of a Cave of Doom. To negotiate these caves is rather like driving north up the southbound carriageway of the Mi. found that coming to grips with some of the objects takes some thinking about. In a large number of locations you are given the option to search and in most cases get a reply like: \"What would you like to find?\" If, for example, you can deduce what you need to gain entry into a tower in the Valley of Tears that item will then turn up! Should you become tired of playing the Adventure, you can flip the tape and play part two which is an arcade game. This recreates the final battle at Dors Drenai but, finding it somewhat repetitive, I soon gave up in favour of part one. Personal Rating: 6 Paul Coppins weaponry and got a few tips on killing play. But it is so easy to get yourself Medusa. killed, and thereby get the option to As usual, Pink Fairy eventually got restart, that it's a problem easily overstumped and was puzzling over an come! ivory pedestal in the Temple of Personal Rating: 9 Hermes. A small push in the right Keith Campbell direction soon got me on my way! Progressing further than the temple takes some guess work, but the solu-CONFIDENTIAL tion to the problem is very original || and very cruel! I finally got to another Confidential has been written using land and found a whole host of new the Quill and is well presented onproblems. screen with clear colours, plus an This time there was a hungry interesting folder full of information. beggar, but satisfying him was not so The game begins in your office easy as with the thirsty one, for there The Craig Adams Detective Agency was a wild hyena around who had the Ooh! What's that noise? I can't stop it! nasty habit of stealing the food right EXAMINE DESK. Ah, there's a phone out of his mouth. on it. At the other end of the line is a The game gets harder and harder as distraught Mrs Richards who explains you progress a welcome change that she needs your help urgently. So from the trend that seems to be off you go, or try to go, to her home. developing, where the poor player is As a good private eye, you always faced with an almost insoluble keep your important belongings in a problem at the very beginning. I safe place. Car keys in the filing Perseus and Andromeda is for a cabinet, for example. range of machines and is available After the slight problem and the from Adventure International. annoyance of having to OPEN CAR, Personal Rating: 9 ENTER CAR all the time) you soon Simon Marsh arrive at Mrs Richards house The Gables. It turns out that hubby has vanished leaving her most upset and ISLAND OF XAAN the local constabulary totally indifferent. Without any mention of the Near naked and clad only in a dirty usual \" a day plus expenses\", you ragged sack, you cry through your are thrown headlong into the case! parched lips as you are thrown into Here I would like to give a warning your prison cell by the king for to anyone considering buying this stealing water. game and wanting to test it firstThe cell reeks of death and decay don't! You need to spend quite a few and you scan the windowless granite hours getting into the case before you walls in vain for some way of escape. begin to enjoy it. I was stuck for days For escape you must, not only from trying to raise my score from zero the prison, but the island on which it is which can become so frustrating that situated. And to do this, you must not it almost puts you in a certifiable state! only be able to disguise yourself, but Once this barrier has been broken, it find enough treasure to pay for your is really quite easy to go from place to passage. place, taking notes and trying to solve A pretty powerful scenario and the whodunnit. game matches up to it. This is a text A nice touch, I thought, was getting machine code Adventure for the BBC, my car impounded for parkang on and the great decree-er that text only double yellow lines! On the other Adventures are a non-runner these hand, the input in the bank and days should think again. I don't want department store is so skull-crushmediocre illustrations here I can ingly daft that I can't understand how imagine myself sneaking out into the anyone would guess the correct freezing corridor and shivering words! In the bank, for example, there through lack of clothes! I can see the is a clerk behind the counter, and you evil guards in my mind's eye, even if I have to cash a cheque. CASH can't get the better of them yet! CHEQUE would have been easy to The problems are hard right from use with the Quill's \"fall through\" I the start, but the sheer desperation of method of decoding, but the phrase my plight soon got me wild enough to actually needed is CLERK CHEQUE!! try anything and something turned The scoring is slightly erratic, as I up! A nice feature of the game is that found when at a score of 55% I when the program does not recognise stumbled across Mr Richards and it either word of your two-word jumped to 100% although there was command, it tells you about both! For clearly a good deal of the case example, if you type UNLOCK unsolved. Incidentally. Radaris WINDOW, the reply you get is I offering a prize for the first person DON'T UNDERSTAND HOW TO who gives the most satisfactory \"UNLOCK\" OR WHAT \"WINDOW solution to the case. MEANS. I've never seen that before! Confidential is for the 48k Spectrum My sole criticism is that if you QUIT, from Radar Games, priced .95. you don't get the chance to resume Personal Rating: 6 Jim Douglas 101 PERSEUS AND ANDROMEDA This is one of the Mysterious Adventures and is a veritable thoroughbred. The author is, of course, Brian Howarth, who sticks to short text, hard problems and superb style. The command format is verb/noun and it is very comprehensive. Almost all the words and synonyms you would want to use whilst playing the game are recognised. The game even knows the meaning of some choice words that shouldn't be used and replies with a suitable put-down! The story starts in King Polydectes' palace where you discover your mission which is to slay Medusa and rescue Andromeda. Being too weak to accomplish the task on my own, I called upon the services of the Pink Fairy to help me in this world of Greek mythology. Leaving the palace, I first came across a thirsty beggar and, on quenching his thirst, was rewarded with a discussion which came in useful further on in the game. I prayed at various temples and some prayers were answered by the Gods. After a while, I had built up quite a large "


"DO YOU FIND CHOOSING SOFTWARE HARD? At the VIRGIN GAMES CENTRES, we've worked long and hard to put together the UK'S BIGGEST RANGE of COMPUTER SOFTWARE GAMES. We've got an unrivalled selection of... Arcade Games, Adventure Games, War Games, Classic Games, Family Games, Sports Games, Business and Educational Software. For Spectrum, QL, Atari, BBC, Electron, Commodore 64, Commodore C16, Enterprise, MSX and Amstrad machines. Plus a large stock of utilities, peripherals, chess computers, books and magazines and a range of Sinclair Commodore and Amstrad hardware. And if you find choosing software hard, we have a team of knowledgeable staff to help you. GAMES CENTRE 172 Union Street, Aberdeen  94/96 Briggate, Leeds. 22 Oxford Street, London W1 COMPUTER SOFTWARE SPECIALISTS ATARI 400/800/XL ATARI 400/800/XL COMMODORE 64 ROM COMMODORE 64 Pacman Pole Position Zork cass ...NIA...... disk 1495 24.95 disk 9.95 ...14.95 9.95......... 12.95 11.95 11.95 Telelink Frogger 29.95 0 Bert 14.95 14.95 9.95 Lode Runner....... Mask of the Sun Star Bowl Football Su Le Baseball Cutthroats Enchante... Sorcerer 23.00 23.00 9.95 . 11.95 11.95 11.95 28.95 Jungle Hunt Pacman Pengo Donkey Kong Donkey Kong Junior 9.95 14.95 29.95 3795 35.95 28.75 29.95 14.95 9.95 NA Ms Pacman Pole Position Robortion Dig Dug Miner 0429 29 95 47.95 21 55 14.95 a 14.95 14 95 1295 18.95 18.95 14.95 Graphics Art Department Arcade Construction Set Summer Games Ultima II Dancing Feats music utility..... Combat Leader 50 Mission Crush Rais West Flight Simulator 1 SAM speech.... PM Animator Dark Crystal Night Vision Pinball 23.95 41.95 41.95 25 95 1495 1495 1495 BCS Ouest for Tyres Pitfall Decathlon Space Shuttle Bounty Bob Strikes Back Back Rogers Jew Breaker $38 14.95 24 95 24.95 19.95 14.95 cass 7.95 StarCros Suspended... NIA..... Deadline Mask of the Sun Cutthroats Suspect Boulder Dash 7.25 Flo Flop 7.25 Dig Dug.... Pitstop Il 9.95 Fooyan Encounter Tigers in the Snow 14.95 Battle for Normandy. 14.95. Combat Leader... Knights of the Desert Shamus Spelunker 9.95 Lode Runner..... Davids Midnight Magic Operation Whirlwind... 11.95 Raidon Bungaling Bay Choplifter Hard Hat Mack 9.95 Realm of Impossibility... Archon... 11.95 Murder on the Zindereul 11.95 One on One VULE 11.95 Pasto Dragon Riders of Pern 8.95 Jumpman Impossible Mission Flyer For Jetboot Jack Superbase 64... Flight Simulator IL... SAM speechi... Master Type ROM Master Type Al activision and U.S. Gold disk ass titles in stock 2496 69.75 39.95 25 95 25.95 34.95 disk 12.95 12.95 12.95 14.95 12.95 12.95 12.95 12.95 ACE Enhancer Fort Apache 1255 Sparta Dos Basic Debugger Basic Commander Data Manager Data Manger Data Perfect Atari Writer Home Word... 10.95 9.95 12.55 73.75 39.95 Protector Bruce Lee Dallas Ouest Sole Flight Spitfire Ace 12.55 12.55 12.60 1280 48 95 66.95 66.95 12.95 ROM ACTION Mac 55 Mac 65 with OSIAL Atari 850 Interface... The Protect write to both sides of disk Disk Collector Catalogue disks. 11.95 ..11.95 11.95 14.95 Mr. Robot Boulder Dash... Attack of the Mutant Camels Encounter 57.95 99,95 9.95 9.95 14.95 6.25 8.45 9.95 14.95 84.95 41.95 41.95 Conan The Barbarian F15 Strike Eagle... Atari Smash Hits....... Colossus Chess 30. Combat Ladder Zam Tale of Berabyra ..14.95 9.95 17.95 1295 ATARI SOFTWARE Trade enquires welcome 32.75 12.55 ZOOMSOFT Plus 100's more titles available. Send S.A.E. for free catalogue or telephone 01-723 0562 between 10am and 7pm. All cheques, 46 HUNTSWORTH MEWS, LONDON NW1 6DB P/O made payable to Zoomsoft. 102 "


"REVIEWS: A>OZE COUNTRY QUEST developed in quite an interesting way to drop from the trees onto your and so did some of the events, like shoulder, or a water snake give you This is a text Adventure running at helping a servant with a crossword the once over as you battle your way machine code speed, enhanced with puzzle. Given a bit more thought, across a swamp. Most of the time, colour with a \"Quilled\" feel about it. more memory and less graphics, such encounters are just for fun, but On holiday at a farm in Black Tower could have proved quite there is always that chance that the Herefordshire, you hear rumours that interesting and enjoyable. spider will sink its fangs into your the previous owner buried his wealth Black Tower is from Dollarsoft for neck! in boxes under the fields. the 48k Spectrum. Most of the puzzles seem to be the From the farmhouse, you make your Personal Rating: 4 \"find your way around\" or \"get past way outside to visit cowsheds, vegeKeith Campbell something\" type and, although they table fields, and many other places all seem to have logical answers, it's heavily laden with a country atmosgetting the right words in the right phere. In fact, you can almost smell order that's the real trick. That made the silage! playing Babylon a little on the difficult Despite the detail, much doesn't side at times, but still a very interest ring true! I've been through fields and ing Adventure with lots of action. farms, day and night, countless times, Personal Rating: 6 and not once been attacked by a cow Paul Coppins I was in Country Quest. There are locked gates at many field entrances in the game. With no key, I \"can't go THE TRACER SANCTION in that direction,\" yet five-bar gates You find yourself at the headquarters just ask to be climbed! of the STA on the planet Mongo, However, the main trouble with the game is its limited understanding of facing a man who greets you with the what is actually going on! warmth of a Jovian winter. He gives A GINGER CAT IS HERE. you your assignment as head agent A GINGER CAT ATTACKS YOU. capture \"Wing\", the notorious inter\"GET CAT\" planetary criminal IT'S NOT HERE. A space-ship is at your disposal Not exactly the sort of dialogue to and, after sorting out a few problems, inspire confidence, is it? you are all set for the galaxy trail, One other grizzle while I am at it! tracking down your quarry. The problems involve learning how to The Quit command takes you straight back to the beginning without pilot your ship and how to get it fuelled up for the journey! question, and a valid abbreviation is Q. Q is next to W (for West) on the The game comes on a double sided keyboard. I rest my case. disc and has full sentence input which Country Quest is for the allows abbreviations and multiple commands. This means that, Commodore 64 from Wye Valley Software. JEWELS OF BABYLON providing you know your galaxy Personal Rating: 3 (within the game!), you are able to Keith Campbell 3,000 years ago some fabulous jewels travel around and land on annesent were created by master craftsmen in planets which can be explored or the old city of Babylon. They came exploited to further your quest. BLACK TOWER into English hands in the 19th century, A novel feature is the provision of a but were lost to pirates who left all but \"living tutorial\" which is loaded in Your quest is to find three keys and a one of the crew of the boat that was separately from the game. This scroll and return them to the hut carrying them for dead. This is where contains full information, with an onwhere you started. the Adventure begins, for you are the screen demonstration or what form With one or two exceptions, the one who survived and have vowed to your input should take and how to graphics are not worth viewing. The reclaim the jewels. play the Adventure. text scrolls smoothly on a split screen So it is that you find yourself on a There is a four-line text window under the graphics, but the response bright pink ship off some remote below the graphics and, if a response is painfully slow at about 10 seconds island. Yes, it's bright pink, and no doesn't fit, a \"ping\" announces that which is a long wait. Worse is the fact amount of fiddling with the TV will more will follow when you hit a key. that key location details disappear make it go the colour you thought 19th The graphics lack, The graphics lack the full use of under the graphics by the time the century ships were supposed to have colour, but are detailed and very last response is complete. Although there been. The island itself is a place of to display. The response time when is time enough to read all the text, a golden sand and clear blue skies, just moving (when the graphics are quick look aside to jot down details on tails on the place to spend a holiday-except the place to spend a holiday except redrawn) is a mere four seconds and, your map and you'll miss other vital for the cannibals! during this period, the graphics clear information. The graphics are more or less to a full text screen showing the most Other shortcomings include a QUIT instant and are among the best I have recent conversation. with no RESTART?, a failed TAKE that seen on a Spectrum. The text allows I found this a very enjoyable gets no response at all, and a blanket full-sentence input, although in most Adventure to play, giving the satisfac reply YOU CAN'T DO THAT... YET! cases you have to get the wording just tion of being able to get around a fair to commands that are unrecognised. right. number of places without any unduly Any attempt to examine either a Babylon is said to have over 100 difficult early problems. character called Josh, who might be locations, although most of them are The Tracer Sanction is from man or beast for all I know, or any maze rooms, making pen and paper a Activision for Apple II, IBM PC and otner feature results in the hilarious must for this Adventure. So is a \"save\" Por, and Commodore or on aisc. reply: CURIOSITY KILLED THE CAT. tape, for there is plenty of wildlife or there is plenty of wildlife Personal Rating: 8 This is a pity, since the map about and a spider might just happen Keith Campbell 103 "


"BUG HUNTER WRITE TO HEAT COMPUTER& VIDEOGAMES PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRING DON LANE, LONDON EC/R 3AU.OR PHONE ME ON Q1-2516222. We are constantly trying to AMSTRAD LAUNCH Languages: improve both the program quality Any printed programs must be and production quality of our listAmstrad, the producers of the CPC printed using a machine's host ings. If you look at the Spectrum 464, the computer with a built-in language, which will almost always and Commodore listings in this monitor and cassette deck, have be either Basic or machine code. issue, you'll notice that we've launched a new computer with a Even humble Basic programs can adopted a new approach to try to built-in three inch disc drive named be difficult to type in at times. You improve matters, and we hope the Amstrad CPC 664. Apart from a should bear this in mind when write things will get even better over few changes to the graphics ing the program. Try to structure the the next few months. Neverthecommand and an enhancement of the program, use meaningful names, less, one or two errors have still disc operating system, the micro is don't let the line lengths get too long. found their way into the final exactly the same as the previous and try to keep the unusual symbols pages. cassette-based CPC 464. to a minimum. Most typing errors Although all programs written by tend to occur in the middle of a long Amsoft for the CPC 464 will run on line which is full of user-defined PORTRAIT the new computers, some games and graphics, cursor movements, or the DUNGEON utilities produced by independent software houses will not run on bothWe receive quite a number of Eagle-eyed readers spotted that the the computers. machine code programs, and some instructions to this listing in our April So, if you've bought or are planning of them are excellent games which issue, referred to \"both programs\" to buy an Amstrad CPC 664 then can't be published because of the but could only see one. Listed below check with the manufacturers to way they have been written. Any are the missing lines from the header make sure that their software works machine code programs or routines should be presented as a Basic program. We've also reprinted line with your computer. loader. This can load either decimal io of the main program for people data or character data, which is then with poor copies. In addition there FUTURE PROGS converted. are a couple of alterations: If there is a lot of data (this applies (a) Change CLOSE / 2 with A massive selection of reader's CLOSE# N1 in line 2520. programs come into the office each to ANY data, not just machine code). (b) Add line 1585 as . month for possible publication. then include a checksum this is 1586 IF OC(42.N<>N5 THEN Unfortunately, many of these, though just a counter which adds up the R$(M.MI) = 'What and get my hands almost good enough to publish, are value of all the data to ensure that it dirty!!\":GOTO RT let down by trivial matters which finishes with the correct total. could easily be rectified. Listed below are a few points which you Presentation: SUPER CLOWN may like to consider before it's surprising just how much the way submitting a program. a program is presented can affect its chances. It should go without saying We've had quite a few enquiries Type of Game: that your program should be totally about this program in March. Most games tend to be of the arcade error free. Doesn't it? However, after consultation with the type, simply because we receive In addition, try to make the programmer himself, there appears more of these than any other. We program enjoyable. This can be done to be only one error. This is the POKE sometimes print a good strategy by making it \"user friendly\", ensurstatement in line 1010, which should game, or two player game, especially ing that the user knows exactly what read: if it's an original idea. to do. POKE 756,P(1) Adventure games don't, on the This doesn't mean that the It seems that the original program whole, fare too well. The most instructions have to be included in was designed to work on a 16k obvious reason being that if somethe program after all somebody machine, and this poke wouldn't body has gone to the trouble of will have to type them in but make allow it to work on any other, but P(1) typing in the program, they have sure that the user knows what to type is set to the correct value in line probably read all the solutions. One when you prompt him. Also check 30055. way around this is to code the data, manually for any mistakes in the which may also help the other main user's input, don't just leave it up to drawback of Adventure programs the computer to give an error HERO their size. message. We don't often print utility Finally, though we realise many We wrongly stated that this program programs after all, who wants yet people use monochrome televisions would work on a 3.5k unexpanded another sprite designer? Neverthefor their micros, try to make good use Vic but 16k expansion is actually less, we will consider any good, of colour wherever possible. Multineeded. We would like to apologise original programs in this category, if hued graphics and a colourful titleto all our readers with sore fingers they would be useful to the games screen can give a program that because of this! programmer. professional touch. 104 "


"A message from ENGLISH SOFTWARE to all owners of ATARI, COMMODORE 64, BBCB, ACORN ELECTRON and AMSTRAD Computers... Atari Smash Hits and Colossus Chess 3.0 are Atari 130XE compatible Anthem have number o pties-Sary , Chru 70, David Kinger's HD Myches, Parkeres Che-hut except for the wall Atri Che cartridge, the are all Aneke prices, ie, very expensive. The fact that this British, peshably enter and third a fifth of the price makes it be buy on either peor die Highly recommendest YOUR COMPUTER, MAY 1985 Software companies grow on trees... at least that's the way it seems from the number of new companies springing up every ATARI weekl SMASH HITS NATARI ENGLISH SOFTWARE was launched three years ago with a SMASH HITSATARI smashing little game for Atari Computers called AIRSTRIKE 1, SMASH HITS which quickly became one of the most popular U.K. programmed games for the Atari. Then, as now, Atari Computers were amongst the most ATARI RANGE NOW advanced on the planet, but they were a TRIFLE expensive! AVAILABLE But we knew that prices would come down, and that more AT SELECTED people would soon appreciate the great range of BRANCHES OF $14.95 .95 Atari software produced by ENGLISH SOFTWARE. W.H. SMITH 32K Cas (48K Disk EACH But Atari owners used to be a funny lot, being heard EACH COLOSSUS CHESS 3-0 to utter such gems as: \"It can't be any cop, if it costs less than \" .95 Honestly, that's what they used to sayl Anyway, 48 Cas .95 in the face of this rather strange attitude, we went 48K Disk ahead and committed the ultimate sin: ATARI 48K ATARI GAMES AT .95! .95 We expected some slight resistance to these .95 prices from Atari owners who only equated high BBC B/ quality with high prices, but we were wrong. Electron Everybody thought the prices were great, and the NEW! games tool We even produced the fantastic ATARI CASSETTE ENHANCER at .95, a superb utility program for Soldier of Fortune BASIC programmers. So now, for those of you who might have missed out on all our excellent Atari titles, we are releasing something very, very special: ATARI SMASH HITS Volumes 1, 2 and 3 from ENGLISH SOFTWARE .95 .95 .95 Five great games on one cassette for only .95, CBM64 CBM64 CBM64 oron disk at .95! Each cassette features our top-rated JET-BOOT JACK plus four other popular titles. So now you have no excuse to miss out on the best range of U.K. produced Atari 400/800/600XL/800XL software for 32 machines. If your dealer does not yet have them in stock, ask him to order them from his nearest Atari wholesaler. It will be the best Atari buy YOU will make all year! We have also just released COLOSSUS CHESS 3.0, the best chess program available anywhere for Atari 400/800/600XL/800XL computers with 48K. Very powerful, with lots of excellent features. For our good friends with other home computers, our programmers are busy producing original games for you as well. They are all illustrated on this page. HENRY'S HOUSE on the Commodore 64, and JET-BOOT JACK on the Electron are now available at selected branches of W.H. SMITH. PROGRAMMERS AND PROGRAMS Selected English Software titles are available at: HARRODS and URGENTLY REQUIRED! selected branches of: LASKY'S, BOOTS, GRANADA COMPUTER CONTACT US NOW STORES, CO-OP STORES, THE SILICA SHOP Mail Order and Retail and all good software stores. ENGLISH SOFTWARE ENGUSH SOFTWARE THE ENGLISH SOFTWARE COMPANY 1 North Parade, Parsonage Gardens, Manchester M60 1BX ENGLISH SOFTWARE TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME: 061-835 1358 ENGLISH SOFTWARE 105 "


"The BOND DIARY The game plans followed this scenario pretty closely Bond's computer car could even make handbrake turns to avoid police road blocks! The screen display also included a tracking device based on secret service design. How did these guys get their information! In reality, Bond reached the place where the girl was going to land and captured her. In the game, if you miss the landing, the girl known as Mayday gets into a car and Bond must chase her through the streets with yet more French cobs on his tail! Well, there's one thing they got wrong. Bond ALWAYS gets the girl. Still, in this case, Bond extracted some secrets from Mayday before she escaped him again and as a result he dashed off to San Francisco where more mayhem awaited him. He got trapped in City Hall which had been set on fire by another evil villain! The game got this bit right too. The designers call it an arcade adventure. Bond called it something else afterurards unprintable, of course. The game plan follows Bond's bid to escape from the burning building pretty dosely even down to having him help a beautiful blonde escape from the flames. Programmer's notes say that the girl may well talk. Someone has been talking already! Bond had to find the security code to escape from the building and this part of the game includes that. Too close to the real thing. vya as ecurity was tight but not tight was having lunch in the Eiffel Tower with enough. I found an unlocked skya detective when suddenly this girl bursts in light and sneaked into the building. and blasts the guy. Bond takes off in hot Finding the Softstone office was easy pursuit only to see the girl leap off the top of after that and my trusty set of skeleton the tower. Even 007 was surprised at this keys did the rest. Sifting through the paperwork I found sort of behaviour. But he was even more in the wall safe, I soon had what I wanted. astonished to see the girl floating down on I slipped out the micro-camera and a parachute. snapped the plans of their new project. Bond rushed to the lit and once on Swiftly I replaced the papers and left ground level grabbed a taxi, hauling the the office. I could examine the plans in driver out of his seat: he set of after the comfort later. Back through the skylight girl, who by this time was floating gently and down the fire escape — narrowly over the streets of Paris. avoiding a guard walking a vicious lookOne-way systems and the French police ing dog. In the car I sat back and relaxed don't make for the best conditions for a fast for a moment 007 would have been proud of the way I handled this chase. And soon Bond had a bunch of mission... cobs after him. Back at the flat I quickly developed the film and sat studying the plans for a new video game! Had I risked life and limb for this! But soon I realised why Mhad sent me the so called \"game\" was a bit too close to 007 last secret mission for comfort. As I examined the film, i remembered how Bond had saved the world once again. It all started in Paris and the game followed the wents pretty accurately. Bond From the information he picked up at City Hall, Bond knew he had to get to a mine where there was a bomb. If the bomb went off the whole world would be endangered. Frue to form he dashed into the unknown and down the mine and that's where the programmer's notes went into a code I couldn't crack. This was a job four our code-breakers back at 12 So what had we got? A video game in three parts based on some real exploits of the world's best secret agent with great graphics and sound. Who was dose enough to Bond to know all this? There must be a Mole in MI6! My next job must be to find him... NEXT: ALL IS REVEALED! 106 "


"4 . al Fans Rat race   NISMA Yeh, it's Te, your favourite Superstar, in my first-supa-game! need all your help to find my furry friends in the nasty Rodent World where all kinds of monster meanies live. Hurry now, and I'll see you on your Screen, from your Cuddly, adorable me, Roland Rat, Superstar. | SECTRUk cooDORE 6 NEW 6.90 Ocea 790 Ocean House 6 Central Street Manchester M2 SNS Telephone 061 8326633 Telex 6699771 Ocean Software able from selected baches of WDOURORTH. HSMITH C L ASKYS Rumbelows. COMIT Spectrum Shops and a good software dealers Trade enquiries welcome "


"THE WINNER CLASSIFIED: EYES ONLY VRGAN FIGHTER sonic thermic sonar 10k mile range bazooka ENGINE 1 single turbo ionic ARMAMENT: six snub lazers, three per wing twin disruptor cannons, cockpit mounted, sonic bazooka scale: 1cm/1m Nicholas Smith, 35 Rectory Road, Clowne, Chesterfield, Derbyshire Jonathan Eggelton 92 Melrose Avenue Bletchley Milton Keynes A full list of all the winners is available from the C&VG offices. Could the author of the above drawing please send us his full name and address. Paul Armatage 13 Longridge Drive Whitley Bay Tyne and Wear SEE RE ERA WNebul P AF EN 108 "


"109 ME FROM GELOW B FORE VIEW Hundreds of you under standably wanted to win System 3 games for life in our great painta-space-ship contest. We liked your work so much that we decided to print just some of the entries we received. It's just a shame we can't print more examples of your work. Thanks for putting so much effort into your entries -not a duti one among them! The C&VG Spacecraft Construction Company is now going into business with a few of your designs! Michael Kukielka 43 Clarendon Road West Chorlton cum Hardy Manchester  9 Stuart Kingdom, 152 Ringland Circle, Newport, Gwent ((( MANUAL GLASTE Neil Porter 242 Carters Mead Harlow Essex Nicholas Bagley 62 Frank Avenue Deneside Seaham Co. Durham oes ADA O Onn Lee 125 Arnold Road Bestwood Estate Nottingham o umid T most 125 C 8 Dynevor Gardens S. Kemp Leigh-on-Sea Essex PDV Chris Cooke The Willows Woolley Dam Mill Lane Notton Wakefield "


"BY MIKE SINGLETON, AUTHOR OF THE BEST STRATEGY GAME, 1985 RASPBERRY SEASON able advice before wasting a lot of time, money and effort trying to promote a disaster. What's worse, they expect Spectrum owners to cough up .95 for something that would have been more entertaining if it had remained a blank cassette! A CASE OF LISTITUS Competition is fierce between the six Weyrs, up to four of which may be controlled by human players. This should make for an interesting game of Machiavellian manouevre but the fact that any of your actions, at best, results in a number or word in one of the many lists dramatically changing to another number or word makes the intrigue about as interesting as dishwater. So little attention has been paid to creating \"atmosphere that you might as well be manipulating school timetables or laundry lists. In fact, you might as well forsake your computer and play the board game Diplomacy, yet to be equalled for back-stabbing intrigue. U.S. MOULD It's quite appropriate that the season for raspberries is almost upon us because this month I have a number of them to hand out. The loudest must go to a game that's grandly called Superpower — The Final Strategy. Foisted upon the unsuspecting public by Howard Marketing, it is without doubt a strong contender for the coveted Worst Game Of All Time award. The principal elements of the game are highly derivative. There are 24 countries, each of which has different numbers of factories, armies, missiles and shelters. The aim is to conquer the lot. Ex-readers of the mourned Personal Computer Games magazine will be familiar with this scenario it's the basis of PCG's Final Conflict, their multi-player postal game. In Superpower, however, all the subtleties of Final Conflict have been lost. With an unfailing knack for tedium, the designer of Superpower has even restricted the orders you can give to one country per turn. Since the orders you can give are simple build armies, missiles, shelters, factories or attack a neighbour (but only one of these) — the player is faced with making a series of Noddy choices. Although Final Conflict's options per country were equally simple, the fact that you had to give orders for all your countries in a single turn presented the player with true strategic choices, for each combin. ation of orders would have a complex effect. Apart from all this, the presentation of the game is awful. The continent you are supposed to conquer is a 4x6 rectangle of squares and you've guessed it each country is a square. No attempt has been made at graphic frills a nice little picture of a missile or factory for example. It's all bare words and numbers. Input of orders is equally annoying; if you make an illegal order, the computer doesn't bother to tell you, it just waits dumbly for you to try again. I do wish people like Howard Marketing would seek some professional or at least knowledg. Now it's the turn of the C64 to have the odour of raspberries wafting in its direction. I speak of the Dragonriders of Pern, released by CBS Software in conjunction with Epyx. It's an arcade-strategy game of the sort where you do a bit of strategy, then you get a bit of action and so on. The arcade section is very well done although it seems to lack the variety a true arcade freak pines for. Perched on the back of your pet dragon, you roam the skies of Pern trying to incinerate the deadly Threads that assail your planet. The Threads, which look like pieces of string to me, are microorganisms that burn flesh and consume all living matter. If you don't manage to stop them, your lands will become a barren waste. High quality graphics and action to be found here. The designer of the strategy section, however, seems to have had a severe attack of lists. To quote, \"a vivid map of Pern is displayed randomly throughout the Negotiation/Intrigue phase\", but since this is used mainly to determine who is going to intercept the latest Threadfall, it has little relevance to strategy. The strategy phase is played entirely by manipulating lists and menus. The event screen is a table outlining the current events associated with each Weyr. A Weyr is a habitation of Dragonriders, so we are told. The action menu/status screen lists eight different actions open to you and gives more details of your own particular Weyr. There is another screen which the instructions simply refer to as the list of major holds, craft halls and Weyrs, and lastly there is the attitude screen which lists the five attitudes you may select during negotiation. The politics of Pern makes the Balkans look like a piece of cake and the strategic options open to you are almost all to do with diplomacy (although you can opt to fight a duel). Battle for Normandy is another game for the 64 from the seemingly bottomless coffers of US Gold. I hesitate to say from the bottom of the barrel because, like most American software, the game is superficially slick and wellpresented. However, it lacks in that most important ingredient, playability. The format is familiar larger than screen hex map in glorious technicolour that scrolls as you move the cursor, coloured squares with a variety of symbols to represent the different units, a small section of the screen devoted to messages and unit data. All this works and works well, looking good at the same time. Unfortunately, it's not so much Rommel's bombardment that makes you quail as the barrage of statistics flung at you by the computer, all in garbage-out mode (you know, so many abbreviations and numbers flung together that it looks like a high-security code). This alphanumeric nightmare occurs every time you look at a different unit. When it comes to giving orders to units, all input is in garbage-in mode. As you might guess, this is the reverse of garbage-out mode; instead of trying to decode abbreviated data, you have to type it in! For example, you may choose a defence level from one to nine. Each of the digits has a different meaning and it's a better memory. bank than I who wouldn't be able to play sensibly without the rule-book permanently to hand. 110 "


"nised as the stroke of genius it was Power is the variable that deteralways intended to be. mines which star rules which. The We all know how some clever influence one star exerts over clogs invented Rugby Football by another is calculated from that star's actually picking up the ball and power and the distance involved. If a running with it instead of sticking to star exerts more influence than any the stodgy old rules. other star over the target (this Chess, in its long history, has includes the target's own influence been no exception. Indeed, it over itself), then it becomes the ruler wouldn't be the game it is today of the target star. Because of the unless a few brave souls had had distance factor, some stars may be the courage to defy tradition. rulers of nearby stars but be ruled What's more, chess variants such as themselves by a vastly more rifle chess (you shoot pieces instead powerful but more distant neighbour. of moving to take them) and losing The power of a star depends on its chess (you must take if you can and In fact, the rule-book gives two win by getting yourself in checkstrength plus a proportion of the important clues as to the reason for mate) are well-known and popular. strength of stars it rules and minus a this statistician's paradise. First, the But, if you think that cl proportion of its own strength game is designed by SSI. Second, surely have reached the end of its (strength that it lends to its own ruler). four pages consist entirely of charts, long road of refinement and This proportion is the centralisation lists and varieties of combat elaboration, you ain't seen nothing factor. resolution tables. Conclusion: SSI, a yet! Now, sociotype and epoch. well-known board wargame Archon from Ariolasoft, via Sociotype is the only thing that company, have simply taken their Electronic Arts, does for chess what remains constant about a star. standard board game techniques Busby Berkeley did for swimming Basically, its sociotype determines and grafted them onto the C64. Will pools and what Hollywood did for how and when a star's epoch will someone please tell them that one the Olympics last year. change. For instance, a Zero Normal of the joys of playing wargames on a It gives it the full treatment with star can only have two epochs, computer is that you no longer have zip, verve and razzamatazz. As it Imperial and Communal. The Zero to bother with all those dreadfully happens, I thought the opening Normal sociotype subroutine will boring combat resolution tables, all ceremonies of the LA Olympics the finicky calculations and all the determine at what thresholds of went wildly over the top and could welter of naked numbers? This sort strength, centralisation, power and do nothing but laugh when they growth the switch from one political of game makes log tables light wheeled out all those grand pianos, reading. but Archon, thankfully, stays firmly system to another will be made. So far, so good; Archon could still within the pale. Epochs simply determine how a be just a run-of-the-mill chess The board, whilst remaining an star's growth and centralisation variant, but now it takes off at a eight by eight array, has had a change with time. From last column's tangent. If you so desire, you can considerable facelift. Certain listing you will notice that an Imperial miss out on an ordinary move and squares change colour rhythmically star's centralisation diminishes as its instead cast a spell. Six different throughout the game, lending more power increases whilst a Communal spells are possible but they must be or less power to the pieces that star's centralisation every phase. used with care since each can be occupy them. In addition, five of the Now comes the big question used only once. This is just as well squares have become power points what does the player actually do? because some of them are pretty which can heal the wounds your Every phase he has the option (as powerful pieces have suffered and can also Seldon planned for his psychoFinally, and to the horror of all win you the game if you capture historians) of intervening in galactic dedicated purists, there is arcade them all. history and changing the epoch of action. Instead of simply moving to The pieces have been completely just one star system. His aim is to take a piece, the display switches to transmogrified. Wizards, shorten the time it takes for a single a combat arena where the two phoenixes, dragons, unicorns and a host of other fantastic creatures star to dominate all the others, thus pieces battle it out in real-time. Since each of the pieces has its re-establishing the Galactic Empire. replace the familiar kings, rooks As a yardstick for his degree of own individual way of fighting and and pawns. Each piece, as you its own vulnerabilities, this is far would expect, has its own particular success, he can first let the game (or from a simple shoot-'em-up. Even if modes of movement and attack, but history, if you like) run without interyou lose, the wounds you have to make things more intriguing, ference, to see how long it would inflicted on the victorious piece will each player has a completely have taken without his intervention. make it less effective the next time different crew. He can also compete with his fellow round. It certainly adds to the fun, if psycho-historians (if he's got any not to the meditation, but the drawSELDON'S GAME friends) to see if they could have back is that you must have two joydone better with same galactic sticks to play. Those of you with weary fingers will scenario. If you do have two joysticks and be glad to know there's no more This month, I'm going to ask for you own a Commodore 64, you listing to be typed in this month. suggestions. We'll re-name the Zero really should try Archon. It's rare, Instead, I'm going to take some time Normal type stars after the person original and unusual and, as a fun out to explain the mechanics of the who sends in the best subroutine for strategy game, it's not to be missed. game in more detail. determining when Zero Normal star First, let's look at the four numerical switches from Imperial epoch to YOU AIN'T SEEN NOTHING YET variables associated with each starCommunal and vice-versa. There will growth, centralisation, strength and be similar fame for the person who Since games were first played, power. A star's strength is a measure designs the best new sociotype of certain creative individuals have of its intrinsic economic/military star, complete with a fresh set of always been tempted to tinker with status and changes each turn in epochs and associated routines the rules; usually, this is called accord with the star's growth rate. It (although you can include the ones cheating. On rare occasions, does not, however, directly influence given already if you wish). Good however, the new angle is recogthe star's political status. thinking, till next time! 111 "


"settore R-E.V.I.E.W.S REVIEWS Graphics: Are they really as mind-blowing as the adverts say they are? Does the screen scroll effectively? Do those aliens really leap out of the screen at you? This is how this category is judged continued from page 21 11 IMPOSSIBILITY MACHINE: CBM-64 SUPPLIER: Ariolasoft/ Broderbund PRICE: .95 (cass.) .95 (disc) Nice game shame about the graphics! Realm, along with the classic Archon, must be one of Ariolasoft's most interesting games to date. The basic idea comes direct from Dungeons and Dragons you have to go on a quest through 13 dangerous dungeons in search of the seven crowns of the Middle Kingdoms, stolen by the evil cleric Wistrik Zombies, snakes and other nasties inhabit the dungeons but you can pick up various spells along the way which are useful when fighting off these horrors. The dungeons are drawn with a Berserk-style shoot-out. 3D style and don't look that The Berks have arrived 12 bad but the rest of the protected by their faithful characters you find look not homing drones who cannot be unlike pin-men! killed, only stunned. The sound is good, the Your mission is to pilot your program well presented — expanding Terror Tank and with an extensive set of destroy each Berk-infested instruction screens on the area. 32 screens of mindless disc version and the list of destruction great isn't it! game options is impressive. In Berks II, subtitled Major You can select which Blink, you'll find yourself doing dungeon you wish to explore a bit of painting. and the difficulty level. You have to guide Major There is a neat two player Blink around various screens, game which features a unique filling in the squares with your \"resurrection option. paintbrush and avoiding the nasties. The further you get  Graphics into the game, the more com Sound plicated it gets  Value Berks 3 is perhaps the most  Playability complex of the three games, chambers, stuffed with It's an arcade Adventure style 12 ENTOMBED treasure, secrets and some game with a good deal of nasty surprises MACHINE: CBM-64 zapping involved. Excellent graphics and BERKS TRILOGY SUPPLIER: Ultimate All the Berks games feature clever puzzles add up to PRICE: .95 MACHINE: CBM-16 colourful graphics and good another smash for Ultimate. SUPPLIER: CRL sound, but you really need a Sir Arthur Pendragon, The only gripe is that hero of the PRICE: .95 (each) joystick to play them as the Staff of Entombed is a little too close action gets fast and furious! Karnath, is back in action Arrghh! The Berks have to Indiana Jones. in Ultimate's second arrived in force! Three Graphics offering for the 64. action-packed arcade Graphics  Sound This time he's trapped  Sound games from programmer  Value 9 underground in an Jon Williams  Value archaeologist's paradise, a  Playability The trilogy kicks off  Playability labyrinth of connecting 3 BOWMAN NO CO 112 "


"NOW AVAILABLE ON THE AMSTRAD ** *** 11 SHA UD C ***** Winning's not the most important thing it's the only thing\" Brian Jacks challenges you to these eight events: * ARM DIPS * SQUAT THRUSTS * CANOEING * CYCLING * FOOTBALL SWIMMING * ARCHERY * 100 METRES said. Brian Jacks, world famous Judo and TV Superstars champion made it very clear. \"It better be good,\" he said. We didn't feel like arguing the point, so we just got to work The result is one of the most exciting, addictive and challenging games you will ever have attempted. We feel it only fair to warn you though-challenge Brian Jacks to anything and YOU'D better be good! we just like aro The ***** Available from all leading software retailers OR order today by mal CBM-64  95 fast load cassette .95 disc 4BK Spectrum BBC-B/Electron/Amstrad .95 prices include VAT & pip Loa Martech is the registered trade mark of Software Communications Limited Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE RIES WELCOME. PHONE: (0323) 768456 TELEX: 87465 EXIM Brighton 48K SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64. BBC 'B' ELECTRON. AMSTRAD, "


"110100100 stone R-EVIEWS 0 11 Playability: Will the game keep you up until the early hours of the morning, as you attempt to complete just one more screen in a desperate attempt to beat it? Or does it send you to sleep the moment the introscreen appears? Could you spend hours locked away in your bedroom with it? A EzzzzzE because hey are so hard 13 FANTASTIC VOYAGE MACHINE: Spectrum SUPPLIER: Quicksilva PRICE: .95 IEEEEEEE Although Fantastic Voyage was a fairly chronic film, the program from Quicksilva is far rr from that. TOITEE Cast your mind back to Raquel Welch and Donald Pleasance in charge of a submarine which was miniaturised and injected, along with its occupants, into the comatose body of a scientist suffering from brain damage. Quicksilva hasn't followed the plot to the letter, but almost. Your submarine couldn't stand the shock of The BCA homeWORLD miniaturisation and disintegIRIUS rated into six parts throughout the scientist's body. You have to put it back together again by finding all the bits and taking them to the brain. KillDroid facility. If your knowledge of MAMA LLAMA Jeff's continuing fascinaFRANKENSTEIN anatomy isn't that hot, don't worry because a complete tion with gravity also gets a MACHINE: CBM-64 MACHINE: BBC look in as the different locabody shows where you are. SUPPLIER: Llamasoft SUPPLIER: Icon tions have varying gravity So, if you've never heard of PRICE: .50 factors. PRICE: .95 the hepatic artery and you find We make no excuses for The game comes in two With Frankenstein, Icon yourself in it, at least you can delaying our review of parts — the initial \"grid\" have managed to do the see where it is in relation to Jeff Minter's new game. phase in which you select impossible and come up the rest. He has been a harsh which wave location you wish with an original idea for Unfortunately, this particritic of reviewers who Mama Llama to visit and the an arcade game. It could, cular scientist is a sickly chap, don't read game instrucmain \"wave\" screens themhowever, have been prone to infections, viruses tions before they write and selves. Some waves are better executed. and growths. Fortunately, you before you start playing Mama simply shoot-'em-up screens The scenario is strongly are equipped with a laser Llama you have to read Jeff's but others are puzzles. reminiscent of Fantastic which blasts these nasties very own version of War and The graphics are bright and Voyage, the movie in which a away as you swim across Peace before you can load up bold and the sound with submarine is injected into a them. the game. musical arrangements man's body to save his life. Swimming is a pretty He describes it as a very credited to James Lisney — Here, you're inside Frankenexhausting activity at the best unusual video game. And it is. are nice too. stein's monster's body, a lurid of times, but in Fantastic It must be the only game Mama Llama is a game for assembly of human parts, Voyage you can top up your around which gives the player dedicated Minterites. Lesser only the object is to do him in energy levels by absorbing the chance to change the mortals might find it a mite too It's a great idea, but the oxygen the red blobs. structure around quite so complex for them. It's essen-graphics aren't that hot, the Don't expect really specmuch. tial to read the detailed movement is jerky and a bittacular graphics with FanYou can set up each game instructions BEFORE vou slow, and above all, it's too tastic Adventure but you you play exactly as you wish even think about playing. Me? easy to dispose of the have a great excuse that which gives the beginner a I still reckon Ancipital is Jeff's hazards. You won't feel you're doing something worthchance to get into the game best game to date. challenged for very long. while with your Spectrum if and an expert the chance to your mum asks! really show off. The basic idea of the game  Graphics Graphics is to protect Mama Llama and  Graphics  Sound Sound Sound her twin babies, who find  Value Value  Value themselves in various hostile  Playability Playability locations, using the unique Playability 114 "


"ENTES Wizavart  to be WON EACH MONTH m erah er-Glare EACH MONTH UP TO 31-8-85 G Available from all good software dealers. Imagine Software (1984) Limited-6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS-Tel: 061 834 3939 "


"The Gremlin's always got i JOIN TODAY Only .99 ARGON WARS GREMI GANG The Gremlin ang isa software club whose membership have the opportunity through the regular newsletter to get a direct insight into one of the premier software houses, to exchange ideas with other members and to benefit from many exclusive offers. Every new member will receive an official enrolment certificate, personally authorised by the Gremlin master, along with the amazing Gremlin Gang sweatshirt. If you're looking to get ahead of your friends. Join the Gremlin Gang today. O Order Form Please complete the following and return with a cheque or postal order for .74 (includes 75p for post and packing), made payable to Gremlin Graphics Ltd. Allow 21 days for delivery of goods. Name Address Post Code Chest Size 28\" 30\" 32\" Age34\" 35\") Other A battle spectacular in the classic mould defend your mother planet from the allen hordes. Put to test your skills as gunnery commander as the space invaders launch wave after wave of laser bombs. Will your nerve last out and reflexes quicken as each success you attain is met by an even faster attack the following level. Trapped within an eface plantation reach full gth. finally disappear. But, to all out to stamp your flowto th try fin GUMPHREYWANTNO SIPERSTEUTI Spectrum 48K CRASH AVAILABLE Spectrum 48K Commodore 64 COMING SOON Amstrad The original adventure of this famous friendly mole. Searching out coal he encounters enormous dangers, mechanical and human, and bravely faces the awesome challenge of the mighty King Arthur and his personal bodyguard, armed to the teeth with mammal repellants. Ageing. losing his sight and panic stricken with overwork can Grumpum the geriatric store detective, hold down his position in this departht st fantasia. A kind assistant is needed to help round-up the thieves, the and tidy the warehouse. Would you fit the bur? The Gremlin master enjoys his computer entertainment just as much as ebry helpers have devised this classic collection that'll guarantee hours of furand Colour, Outstanding, Graphics and lots of intrigue are the features bj w reputation for quality softya So when you next sit down at your keyboard, follow the Gem fingers over a Gremlin speial Available from all good softuar "


"his finger on the buttons... ETALS ALL GAMES neerle pacavern, the only way home is to help the flower full grosit Only then will energy curtains blocking your way ut true to lassic space shoot outs, the plant-eating bugs are Powen to the ground. See the free world again only if your trigo fuper can match the challenge. Tycoon Tex is a 'rootin', oil tycoon in the true wild west tradition. Guns blazing, the faster he can make his pipeline patrol the quicker he can add to his bank balance Sand, Ice or snow can't halt Tex's speedy draw as he rights off the dangers of falling bombs, arrows, surface missiles, and crash explosives. BEAVER BOB INDAM TROUBLEI WHERE IS HE NOW? MONTY'S ON THE RUN. dont le Monty \"Mole 1985 BEAVER umpy Shrey. Chased by sharks, crocodiles and a host of underwater rastie Hounded by Imate townsfolk, angered at the drought his dams are causing, Bob seems destined for a life of havoc, not the peaceful rest he has always longed for. The Underworld are rallying round to help this Innocent folkhero throw off the chains of oppression and find a new life in a sunnler dimate. But even the best kept secrets can be betrayed and Monty must surface at some time on his journey to the channel ports, cage the porilla everyone else that's why he and his team of specialist fun and absorbing challenge from your computer. Skill, by which the Gremlin master has established his oftv vare. Gremlin master's example and run your pecial. w are stockists. Alpha House, 10 Carrer Street, Sheffield SI 4FS Tel: (0742) 75342 "


"SER-E.V.I.E.W.S E AND DISK Sound: Does the game sound like a Duran Duran LP played at half speed or does the noise from your micro knock you half-way across the room? The C&VG review team don't judge games with their ears plugged up, we can tell you! But what is encountered in you have to direct the 13 GATES OF DAWN this surreal world of dreams? character, who's standing on BUCK ROGERS MACHINE: CBM 64_^ ... bats and giant spiders, something that looks like a MACHINE: All MSX bottomless pits, an army of hedgehog across a preSUPPLIER: Virgin TAR knights, ghostly visions and historic screen which SUPPLIER: Electric PRICE: .95 losts more! continually scrolls past you Software Stand on the threshold of Gates of Dawn, with even when you're standing PRICE: $11.95 a dream. Take one step superb graphics, animation still. Buck Rogers has been over ... and try to and sound, combines joystick It starts easy. The first available on a few other discover the \"enigma as action with strategy, enabling thing you have to do is jump machines, but there are yet unsolved.\" you to pit your wits in an effort over a hollow in the ground, several features on this That's the perplexing to solve the mystery of the and as you can still move left MSX version which are lure of Gates of Dawn, the 64 dream and the \"mystery of and right even though the new. The theme music from screen challenge from Virgin the mind.\" landscape's moving past you the TV series is a nice introGames. And just what is that it's not too hard. Then things duction to the game, which is the detail lacking for example, on the Texas cartridge. This version gives Buck's star fighter a rear laser to shoot aggressors approaching from behind. As the surface of the planet moves underneath you, the object is to steer between the pylons. An indicator at the top right of the screen shows the amount of pylons left, together facing with remaining craft. Push the stick forward, or hit the cursor key, and the sword craft will accelerate, making negotiating the pylons more difficult. After the first run through the pylons, the second is Lives made more difficult, with strength saucer mines approaching 8888 from all angles, and this is SCORE where the rear firing laser ... PAUSE pre helps. key to restart 20. The third run involves the space hoppers as well as the saucers and is more difficult. After successfully running this It's set in the shadowy central mystery? That would get a little more fraught as gauntlet, the battle continues world between sleep and be telling. you have to cope with such in space, with wave after waking a world of pleasant nasties as crows and snakes wave of saucers needing to dreams or of ghastly  Graphics while attempting to clear be shot, before a final connightmares. Sound tougher obstacles, like frontation with the large Your quest, as an armour Value ditches and some wretched mother ship. This needs a real clad knight from a bygone  Playability mushrooms. pounding to destroy it! age, is to travel through these It's all good fun and the The same sequence is folendless, timeless passages in graphics are above average, lowed, but this time the pylons search of what Virgin calls CAVEMAN CAPERS with particularly smooth, emit bolts of energy and the \"the subliminal experience.\" judder-free movement. The hoppers fire back. Progress through this MACHINE: BBC sound is tolerable, too, but in Good sound effects and arcade-style game is charted SUPPLIER: Icon general I feel the game is a title theme and smooth, on a chess board map. PRICE: .95 shade overpriced. colourful graphics make use Objects encountered may be Caveman Capers is a of all the MSX has to offer. collected and an inventory is significant improvement displayed below the map.  Graphics  Graphics over some of Icon's  Sound Another column shows earlier efforts 1  Sound  Value lives and strength left plus remember Space Station  Value  Playability current score. Alpha in particular. Here  Playability ARSIMI ODT NO en DO 0 000 118 "


"THE U.S. THE FORCES OF LIGHT & DARK BATTLE IT OUT IN CASSETTE AND DISK ARCHON THE ULTIMATE ACTION STRATEGY PROGRAM FOR YOUR CBM 64, AVAILABLE ON SPECTRUM 48K AMSTRAD CPC464 ATARI 600/800XL ICASSETTE & DISK) including FREE OFFER ENAMEL METAL BADGE 10 HIT THT BECA ME A CULT OUT A STAR GAME ARCHON is brilliant. There's something in it for all games addicts; arcade, adventure and strategy are all here. My only complaint is that it's best played against a human opponent the computer's just too good and you can't give it a handicap Bryan Skinner Personal Computer News ARCHON INCLUDES VOUCHER Features Play the computer or a friend Computer player gets tougher as you do 64 Battle combinations Separate battleground screen Medieval pieces like the wizard and the sorceress magic spells and a board that changes as you play Deluxe boxed package includes full instruction and hints manual Joystick controlled * *andlor keyboard control (Spectrum & Amstrad versions) AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE RETAILERS IF IT'S NOT THERE, PLEASE ORDER IT ariola HIGH PERFORMANCE PROGRAMS "


"mW FASTEPOTTE ANDRERIT TI 99/4a EXCHANGE UK TI USER GROUP Good Tidings We Won't Desert You Still working hard bringing you all that's BEST, to get the best from your T1 99/4a Home Computer. 7 GOOD REASONS TO JOIN US *TI*MES a regular quarterly magazine. No less than 60 pages of news, reviews, hints, tips, programs and articles on all Tl languages SOFTWARE a unique collection of public domain software exclusive to members. USER SHOWS so far two major shows have been successfully organised by the group. Free Admission to Members DISCOUNTS-on software books hardware. *HELPLINE Personal Contacts to help out with your problems. GUARANTEE Value-for-money or refund. We'll even supply you with a gold-embossed plastic MEMBERSHIP CARD. SEND CHEQUE PO FOR 16 to TI 99/4a EXCHANGE, 40 BARRHILL PATCHAM, BRIGHTON BNI BUF Tel. No. 0273 503968 NOW CELEBRATING OUR 3rd YEAR First company in all UK. to introduce while-u-wait: service. Now first to offer an international repair service, I have come across a firm that will be more than willing to advise you as to how to remedy your problem. They are called MANCOMP, and as well as repairing faulty Spectrums, are also quite willing to discuss your problems with you, and offer reasonably cheap, and more importantly) correct cures PHIL ROGERS 'Peek & Poke Thanks for your \"POPULAR COMPUTING WEEKLY Feasonably priced speedy service / Your delighted January 1985 (Vol IV No 1). TONKS PRESTON \"Prompt... service still C. TOWNEND KEIGHLEY J. BOURNE BEXHILL ON.SEA) only posted it on it back on Thursday two days later! EXC BP I've never \"Thank you for your excellent service. A. WALLACE BEDLINGTON LEEDS AVERAGE \"Excellent and quick. B. P. ANDERTON MAIDSTONE) Fast service... had such send not too pricey! KI CAIRNS J. TANT PHONE/SEND SPECTRUM (WOKINGHAM FOR FREE ESTIMATES. ENC .80 (U.K. 1.O.M. EIRE, C.I.) .50 (EUROPEAN/SCANDINAVIA) NO HIDDEN HANDLING CHARGES 24 HOUR TURNAROUND OPEN TILL 7PM MON-SAT KEYBOARD FAULTS  MANCOMP LTD 280 .95 (p&p 20p) anders 41161.10 200) Enig (Dept PCW). Printworks Lane, 4532 3.00 p&p 20p) Manchester M19 3JP. Upgrade Kit-$27.00 (p&p tI) NEW FOR THE ATARI ZAPPING-ZOMBIES See if you can get the last Zombie! Available on: disk .95 cassette .95 COMPUTER SUPPORT 26 Seacourt Road, Abbeywood, London SE2 9UW Tel: 01-311 7339 Tel: 061-224 1888 Tel061-224 Oso GP IR TATOTT ATARI HARDWARE SJB SUPER SAVERS ATARI BOOXL + ATARI 1050 DISK DRIVE .95 includes home filing manager and pay off adv. and demo disks) ATARI 800XL + ATARI 1010 RECORDER .95 (includes Pole Position + Introduction) to Programming cassettes) ATARI BOOXL COMPUTER........95 ATARI 1050 DISK DRIVE........95 finc. free box of discs) All prices include VAT FREE, fast delivery in UK Send cheque/PO to: SJB DISK SUPPLIES Dept. 01.. 11 Oundle Drive, Nottingham NGB 1BN Tel: 0602 782310 APOLOGY In the May issue of Computer & Video Games, there was a major printing error on an advertisement by SJB DISK SUPPLIES. The Atari 1050 Disk Drive was printed at a price of .95 when it should have been .50. Computer & Video Games apologise for any inconvenience caused to the SJB DISK SUPPLIES and our readers. ATARI 400/600/800XL OWNERS UTILITIES A SPECTRUM 48K ADVENTURE THE MARIE CELESTE COMPUTER REPAIRS All machines dispatched within 72 hours of receipt Spectrum: .00 ZX-81: ,00 Spectrum 16-48K Upgrade: .50 Includes parts, VAT and return postage) For a fast and reliable service, send machine, brief description of fault and cheque or postal order to the experts: CAPITAL COMPUTER SERVICES Dept. C&VG, 44 Rich's Road, Cardiff CF4 4AA Tel: 102221 614401 We also service Acorn, Dragon and Commodore systems. Please telephone for quote. Can you discover the secret of this strange ship and its missing crew? Or will you suffer the same fate on The Marie Celeste! To find out send: 1.99 per tape plus 500 postage to WALRUS COMP., 73 LANDOR DRIVE, GLANYMOR PARK, LOUGHOR, SWANSEA SA42GL Ce Also available on Micronet 800 BACK-UPS Tapes or Disks SAE for Lists CRACKER will list M/C progs to screen, you edit, download your personalised version with or without mic knowledge. Hours of fun changing text to leave personal messages on screen. Stuck on an adventure search for clues. Also acts to back up Your Atari tapes All for only  on T.DK Tape (16K) Post Free GHOST BUSTERS By Activision. Seen the film? Now play the game. just in on disk [15 Post Free BINO Moves binary files to auto boot tape or disk Comes on double sided disk at C10 Post Free XL-FIXER will allow you to play games written for 400, 800 range on your XL tape Disk version PICTURE DISKS 4 Disks crammed with graphics, pictures and demo's to show the world Atari's No. 1 comes on two double sided disks at only THE TRANS-PAC Bought a disk drive, stuck with programs on tape? THE TRANS-PAC solves it. Multi tape to disk, disk to tape, tape to disk, disk to disk, multi mover etc. Comes on two double sided Memorex disks 25 All orders post free. Mail order only 24 hour despatch. STOCKSOFT 15 Woodbrooke Road, Birmingham B30 1UE (10 SPECIAL DEAL FOR ATARI 400/800/XL/XE 0WNERS TI-99/4A BARGAINS Munchman 3.50 invaders (7.50 Parsec 11.50 Amazing .50 Addition/Subtraction 05.50 BOOK-Getting started with the TI 99.4A (4.95 Console dust covers (3.25 Please add 50p postage and packing COMPUTER HOME SERVICE. 40 BARRHILL AVE, BRIGHTON BN1 BUF C15 SPECTRUM OWNERS LOOK! No. 1. Hire your first two games FREE from our extensive range of software. Up to the minute releases available No. 2. Buy all the latest software titles at best possible prices (new releases available direct from US). Atari hardware and modems now available at discount prices. For further details send s.a. CHARNWOOD GAMES 27 Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Leicestershire Tel: 0509 412604 Are you bored of BASIC? Then why not learn machine code? We offer a monthly machine code for beginners course which will also contain a section on writing adventures and 20% off selected games + much more! Send SAE +  for information or  for 10 issues Icomplete coursel or E6 for five issues. Make cheques or PO's payable to: P. DAVIES Victoria Inn, Bradwell Village, Milton Keynes MK 13 9A ATARI original software required. Anything considered. Phone (0509) 412604 or write to 27 Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough, Leicestershire. 120 "


"CARTRIDGE CITY Simply the best cartridge rental service for Atari Computers. L COMMODORE 64/AMSTRAD/MSX/ATARI USERS MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY The first and the largest Commodore 64 library in the world. Often copied but never equalled. 1) All the latest titles on cassette, disc and cartridge 21 Hire your first game absolutely free up to the value of .50. 3) Life membership . 4) Hire charge from only [1.25 inc p&p for full 7 days 51 No limit to the amount of games you can hire. 6) All games originals with full documentation. 7) Games, Business and Educational software. 81 Return of post service. 9) Lowest new hard and software prices in the UK 10) Join now on 14 day money back guarantee. Over 1200 different titles in stock. Send cheque or postal order for  with your two selections or large SAE. Due to continual expansion we are moving to much larger premises at: 28 COLLEGE STREET, Dept. CVG WORCESTER WR1 2LF Telephone: Worcester 0905 611072 Full information pack from CARTRIDGE CITY 25 Gaitside Drive, Aberdeen, AB1 7BH. Tel. (0224) 37348 WORLD SERIES CRICKET Captain England against West Indies or World XI. Includes speech. 48K Spectrum. .95, Bosft, Dept 2, Borth, Dyfed. REPAIRS PAGES MAGAZINE ATAR For all computers + T.V. games. Good rates, Insured delivery. Fast turnaround. Trust the people who know Parts replacement despatch. FOR ALL ATARI COMPUTER OWNERS 40B600XL SCOXI. NEWS ARCADE SOFTWARE (UK) No. 1 Mail Order in UK For Commodore 16 and 16+4; Commodore 64; Spectrum; MSX; BBC 'B' Electron; Amstrad; Dragon; Tandy: Vic 20; Atari 2600 Cartidges. Prices start from .99 Fast service Over 6,000 titles in stock Send large stamped addressed envelope (please state micro). Arcade Software (UK) 202/203 Shopping Hall Myrtle Road, East Ham London E6. Tel: 01-471 8900 THE BEST PROGRAM LISTINGS from USA o GD REVIEWS MERLIN GAMES 111 DOVER RD., DEAL, KENT. Telephone: 0304-361541. TUTORIALS TIPS SPECTRUM SOFTWARE HIRE FREE membership! All top titles available, for hire details send s.a.e. to: S.S.H. (CVG), 21 Chaceley Way, Wilford, Nottingham NG11 7EG. UTILITIES AUSTRALIA PUBLIC DOMAIN SOFTWARE LIBRARY plus more SPECIAL .. . OFFERS PAGE 6 is published bi-monthly. Annual Subscription is .00. Send TODAY to: PAGE 6, P.O. BOX 54, STAFFORD, ST16 1DK Tel. 0785 41153 HIRE Oric-mico software  membership, games  fortnight. Details to GL 12th Garth, Yardley Wood, Birmingham. e FUZE FUZED DEFUZED CONFUZED CONFUZION ZOOMSOFT FOR THE VERY BEST SPECTRUM, COMMODORE 64 AND ATARI GAMES (including U.S. SOFTWARE) See page 102 ATOMIC STRUCTURE A COMPUTER VIEW Award winning 48k Spectrum program illustrated, 13 important physics experiment with high-res graphics and text. Suitable for 'A' level. Price .50. Send cheque/PO to: NEW CONCEPTS SOFTWARE, C&VG. ROSENYTHON, ST. KEVERNE, HELSTON, CORNWALL TR12 6QR VIC 20/CBM 64 SOFTWARE HIRE Free membership, top titles from 50p per week. Two first class stamps for your hirekit to VSH(CV), 242 Ransom Road, Mapperley, Nottingham. Please state which machine. BLANK DISKS 5%\" Blank Disks price per box of 10 Single Side/Double Density SCOTCH 3. ...95 DYSAN .95 MEMOREX (with free case)......95 Double Side/Double Density SCOTCH 3. ..95 DYSAN .95 MEMOREX (with free case)......95 ATARI COMPUTR OWNERS Make the most of your Atari 400 600/800_by hiring from our Software Library. We offer a wide selection of the many games and adventures on the market for your computer For full details send a S.A. E. to: Star Hire, P.O. Box 48, Bracknell, Berks. RG12 4WD. CG69 SJB SUPER SAVERS 50 Memorex single side/double density blank disks in a perspex storage box, only .95. ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE a NEW CONCEPTS IN SOFTWARE BBC Computer aided learning template system for teachers. Enables any teacher to quickly acquire a library of personalised teaching software Price [25.00 We have an all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE. Apply now and hire your first 4 games free. Well over 800 different original titles. For full details send stamped addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm 10pm or weekends. LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 DISC DRIVES E192.95 Purchasers of the above receive free membership BEST QUALITY DISCS, BOXES OF 10 Single density discs (16.50 Double density discs (18.00 Antic & Analog magazines available GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept CAVG 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney Close Sunderland SR3 APO Tel: 0783 286351 50 Memorex double side/double density blank disks in a perspex storage box, only .95. All prices INCLUDE VAT. Delivery in UK is FREE. Please send cheque/PO to: SJB DISK SUPPLIES, Dept. 01, 11 Oundle Drive, Nottingham NG8 1BN Tel: 0602 782310 Dr. John and the battle of the entropy: The Energy Rce Educational fun game for and A Level Technician courses. Teaches fundamental concepts of engineering and heat. Arevolutionary new approach to teaching with an emphasis on learning through play with full back up material Price [9.95 SPECTRUM O and A Level Physics packages: NEWTONS LAWS [6.95 WORK AND ENERGY ......16.95 Super BASIC EDITOR RESERVES space for code in REMS, FIND AND REPLACE everything, variable speed TRACE, DELETE blocks of RASIC, and much more Send to: NEW CONCEPTS CVO Rosenython, St. Keverne. Helston, Cornwa TR12 GOR 121 "


"COMG's Golden Joystick Awaras The Beyond winners with Tim Metcalfe. C&VG GOLDEN JOYSTICK AWARDS Ultimate swept the board at the second Computer & Video Games Golden Joysticks Award ceremony, The company collected the Game of the Year, Software House of the Year and Programmer of the Year awards at a special awards luncheon held in London. Louise Stamper collected the awards on behalf of Ultimate and thanked the many readers of C&VG who voted for them. The C&VG awards are unique in that you decide who wins the prizes — not a panel of experts. Several thousand C&VG readers voted in our annual poll and threw up a few surprises in the process. You'll find full results detailed on this page but don't forget to look out for voting forms for the 1985 awards, coming soon to these pages! GAME OF THE YEAR: Knight Lore by Ultimate Play the Game. RUNNER-UP: Ghostbusters by Activision. COMMENDED: Avalon by Hewson Consultants, Impossible Mission by CBS/EPYX. SOFTWARE HOUSE OF THE YEAR: Ultimate Play the Game. RUNNER-UP: Beyond. COMMENDED: Hewson Consultants/MicroGen. BEST ORIGINAL GAME: Elite by Acornsoft. RUNNER-UP: Deus Ex Machina by Ultimate. COMMENDED: Ancipital by Llamasoft, Pyjamarama by MicroGen. John Woods of Ocean Software. Rod Cousens wins the C&VG Special Award for Softaid. BEST ADVENTURE GAME: Claymorgue Castle by Adventure International. RUNNER-UP: Erik the Viking by Mosaic/Level 9. COMMENDED: Eureka by Domark, Tir Na Nog by Gargoyle Games. BEST STRATEGY GAME: Lords of Midnight by Beyond. RUNNER-UP: Beach Head by U.S. Gold. COMMENDED: Battle for Midway by PSS, Nato Commander by Microprose/U.S. Gold. Christian Penfold of Ultimate. Tim Chaney of US Gold with Jools Holland. BEST ARCADE STYLE GAME: Daley Thompson's Decathlon by Ocean. RUNNER-UP: Boulderdash by Statesoft. COMMENDED: Monty Mole by Gremlin Graphics, Starstrike by Realtime. PROGRAMMER OF THE YEAR: The Ultimate team. RUNNER-UP: Mike Singleton. COMMENDED: Tony Crowther, Acornsoft. Shelley Saddler of Acornsoft. Louise Stamper of Ultimate. 122 "


"BOUNTY DOS STRAKSSPACK! THE MOST ADDICTIVE LATFORM GAME YET DEVISED Twenty-five all-new levels Multi-channel music Automatic Demo Mode Level Warp' ability T DW Available for AMSTRAD 64 SPECTRUM BBC Nukon Nohon super slippery $114\" Levet se STARRING BOUNTY BOB! Bounty Bob returns in this new and exciting follow-up adventure to Miner 2049er. This time around it's even tougher than before and Bob needs your help more than ever to guide him through the mine. The mutant organisms have multiplied and over-run the mine entirely, making it extremely difficult to survive the hazards of the underground passageways. Using the high-powered special equipment in the twenty-five new caverns is Bob's only hope of achieving his objective of securing the mine and defeating the plans of the evil Yukon YohanIT en CASSETTE .95 (US. DISK .95 U HEALTH WARNING: BOUNTY BOB CAN SERIOUSLY DAMAGE YOUR SANITY! "


"TEXAS INSTRUMENTS TI-99/4A Why Splash out on fancy adverts When the products Speak for themselves? PARCO Electrics For free price list etc. send s.a.e. to:PARCO ELECTRICS, 4 DORSET PLACE. NEW STREET, HONITON, DEVON, EX14 40S. TELEPHONE (0404) 44425 GOOD BYTE UnitSoft AFFORDABLE PRODUCTS IGERILTO HARDWARE Graphics Tablet Koalal........59.95 CBM/ZX Music Keyboard....................24.95 CBM Kempton Interface.......... 1. 79% ) Pixsix flight pen 4.95 CBM ZX Quickshot 9.50 Memorex SSSD 12 pkl... (10 ) 18.95 SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 136 GRAM STREET GLASGOW G1 DOOMARKS REVENGE WORLD SERIES MASERALL SPECTRUM AMSTRAD Sorcery DALEY THOMPSON DECATHLON GHOSTBUSTERS UNDERWURDE   Cauldron Dambusters Music Studio Pastfinder.... Rock Bolt Master of the Lamps Enduro Shadowice 7.75 7.75 TALES OF ARABIAN NIGHTS Lords of Midnight. Buck Rogers 911/TS Raid Over Mosco Strip Poker Bounty Bob Bruce Lee Pole Position MATODAY QUADMODOS REVENGE SUMMER GAMES SWYODOS REVENGE Mindshadow 911/TS Shades Mi Do Pacman Soft Aid 6.95 4.75 6.25 MOON 50888823& RE&R380R888888888 Spy Hunter Impossible Mission..........6.95 Lords of Midnight....... AQUA RACER 5.25 30 STAR STRIKE RAM TURBO INTERFACE KONG STRIKES BACK TECHNICIAN TEO PROJECT FUTUE Soft Aid Up'n' Down. Super Huey.............. Doughboy........... Mega Hits.................. 14.95 Ciphoid 9...... Grog's Revenge........ Whirurds... 7.75 Bounty Bob........ ... 7.75 ORDITS ION Whirlinurds Zaxon Spy Hunter Tapper Up'n' Down Buck Rogers Congo Bongo... Dambusters.... B.C's Quest/Tyres Grog's Revenge Hunchback.......... Ghostbusters.... Combat Lynx.. ....9.25 7.75 875 Toy Bare Emerald Isle Raid Over Moscow Zakon 6.25 Hunchback H... Gift from the Gods.. . 7.75 Flak.......... Conturion ..5.25 Mega Hits 14.95 Rocky Horror Show......625 Grog's Revenge.............. 6.25 Whirlinurds...................... 6.25 Bounty Bob.................. 6.25 Darbusters... Conan Up'n' Down.... F15-Strike Eagle.... .. 7.75 FGTH Street Hawk...... ... 6.25 Daley's Super Test....... 6.25 Moon Cresta Wizards Lait BRIAN JACKS EVERYONES A WALLY EMERALD SE LORDS OF MIDNIGHT . 7.75 RAID OVER MOSCOW WORLD SERIES BASEBALL Brew Biz..... Ollies Follies Inter Boxing Blue Max 2001, Return to Eden............... 7.75 Lords of Time Mutant Monty Snowball E'Ones a Wally...... 7.75 11.25 A DAY IN THE LIFE 6.25 AMSTRAD GRAND NATIONAL Daley's Super Test Confusion Quasimodo FIGHTER PLOT DARK STAR Day's Super E\"Ones a Wally 888888888888 DEATH STAR NTERCEPTOR Brew B Olles Follies. Ghostbusters CHOPPER SQUAD STAR COMMANDO Confusion 5.25 Ghost Chaser Moon Cresta New York City Blogger Hollywood....... 7.75 Blue Max 2001 Shadow tire.................. 7.75 River Raid Quasimodo Mi Wong's Laundry Mission Asteroid....... BBC Impossible Mission 6.95 Flight 737 F.G.T.H. 7.75 Castle Quest Chuckie Egg Street Hawk Confusion.... Games Designer Dalley's Super Test Bounty Bob................. 7.75 3D Ant Attack 6.25 Emerald Isle 5.25 Grog's Revenue....... 7.75 Fred...... Dallas Quest..... 11.25 Darbusters 9.25 Champ... Beach Head... Postage included UK. Please state which micro Overseas orders add [1.00 per item. All cheques payable to: Affordable Products IGLW) Ltd. Send .00 for our exclusive catalogue with up to the minute new releases for the Amstrad Atari BBC/CBM64 ZX Spec/MSX PLEASE NOTE OF YOUR GROER ** EXCEEDS EN YOU GET . 10 FURTHER DISCOUNT GOODBYE LEATHER LANE LONDON EC1 Tel 01-404 4245 BBC/ELECTRON   TALES OF ARABIAN NONTS &8* SAME WULFO ONLY BRIAN JACKS 124 "


"HALL OF FAME OUR HALL OF FAME GAMES Since we relaunched our Hall of Fame with some new games, your hi-scores have been flooding in. Keep it up! If you look below, you'll see we've added a few more new games for you to try your skill at. There's Starbike the space game with a difference from The Edge Acornsoft's Elite, a very sophisticated trading game and Micro-Gen's Pyjamarama a sort of Jet Set Wally! PARSEC 1) Mark Gibson, Crewe, Cheshire 8,990,750 2) Paul Walker, Rockingham Park, Western Australia 2,468,200 3) Neville Harrington, Dagenham, Essex 2,196,300 4) Andrew Scott, ANDREW SCOTT Sheffield — 519,800 BRUCE LEE 1) Fergus Hynes, Rathfarnham, Dublin 734,275 2) S. Pullum, Luton, Bedfordshire 147,475 3) Trevor Anderson, Wick, Caithness 103,000 CBM 64 GHOSTBUSTERS 1) Don Murray, Tooting, London $149,800 2) Andrew McDermott, Sutton Coldfield, W. Midlands — $125,100 3) Paul Robinson, Connah's Quay $43,000 3D STARSTRIKE 1) Jonathan French, Great Yarmouth, Norfolk — 1,470,030 2) Justin McNaughton, Eastcote, Middlesex 1,135,200 3) Andrew Perry, Wimborne, Dorset 607,000 JET PAC 1) Simon Hughes, Chepstow, Gwent 57,423,585 2) Craig Humphries, Staines, Middlesex 48,948,540 3) Janne Nerg, Lahti, Finland 26,246,500 ELITE 1) Paul Guirdham, Sheffield 20,182,50.9 (Elite) 2) D M Butler, Ilford, Essex 10,106,43.9 (Elite) 3) Mark Earshaw, Preston, Lancashire -2,189,302.2 (Elite) 4) John Finney, Feather Dell, Hatfield JOHN FINNEY 842,791.4 SABRE WULF 1) Richard Brown, Grovelands, Kidlington 17,999,860 2) Peter Coldbourne, Cwmbran, Gwent 15,975,965 3) Asle Davidsen, Fredrikstad, Norway 5,653,325 4) Christopher Ramsbottom, Radcliffe, Manchester 4,528,344 JET BOOT JACK English Software's excellent platforn adventure starring the man with the jet-powered boots. STARSTRIKE Classic space shoot-out based on the Star Wars theme. For ace blasters only! JET PAC Fly Jet Man around the screen collecting the three sections of his space ship. DONKEY KONG. The king of climbing games. The ape, the carpenter, and the blonde are now available on Atari, Vic 20, 64, and TI-99/4a. MANIC MINER The zany 20-screen climbing game that introduced Miner Willy. JET SET WILLY What Miner Willy did next. This time there are 60 screens. D.T.'s DECATHLON 1) Simon Baylis, Stevenage, Herts — 624,801 2) Lee Sargeant, Newcastle upon Tyne 618,755 3) Richard Thomas, Camarthen, Dyfed — 568,216 4) Andrew Sharp, Ely, Cambridgeshire ANDREW SHARP 443,246 PYJAMARAMA (Amstrad) 1) Mark Buttle, Earlsfield, London 100% (719 paces) 2) Rob Willock, Trentham, Staffordshire — 98% (3,783) 3) Tony Skinner, Newbury, Berkshire 97% (3,987) 4) Mark Howe, Moretonhampstead, Devon 91% (5,552 paces) (Spectrum) 1) Stuart Wright, Sheldon, Birmingham 100% (1,918 paces) 2) Philip Norris, Farnborough, Hants 100% (3,665 paces) 3) Derek Grubb, Fife, Scotland 100% (3,554 paces) 4) A Lawson, Forest ANDREW LAWSON Hall, Newcastle upon Tyne 100% (4,715) (Commodore 64) 1) Andrew McDermott, Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands 100% (4,589 paces) 2) Nicholas Coffey, Droylsden, Manchester 100% (4,850 paces) 3) Michael Phillips, Warlingham, Surrey 100% (5,612 paces) 4) Damien Drabble, Sheffield 100% (6,100 paces) THE PYRAMID The Pyramid has Fantasy's unique high score verification system. ZALAGA Splendid arcade clone for the BBC. SABRE WULF Similar to Atic Atac but twice as tough and thrice as pretty. PSYTRON Beyond's first big hit for the Spectrum. The Psytron is a computerised defence system for the planet Betula 5. ELITE Acornsoft's sophisticated space trading game. Great graphics and action. STARBIKE The Edge promise a gold BMX bike to the highest scorer on their new game. JUMP CHALLENGE Eddie Kidd's brand new computer game which features buses, barrels and bikes. Even Eddie found it difficult! PYJAMARAMA Wally steps into a nightmare and into C&VG's Hall of Fame. HALL OF FAME Name...................... Address...... T-shirt size sm med lge I scored..... Time taken............ Game......................... Computer ................. Witness's signature......... 125 "


"ATARI 400/800/XL software to sell or swap roms, cassettes and disks. Telephone Burnley 0282 72799 ask for Simon after 6pm. CBS COLECOVISION includes Roller Controllers with Slither also Super Controllers with Rocky and Turbo with Steering Wheel also 21 other games . Phone Darlington 57994 after 3.30pm. STUCK on these adventures? M1 Hulk, No 3 Mission Impossible, No 5 Count, No 2 Pirate Adventure and others. Then send  and sae for our comprehensive Hint 'N' Tips sheets. Cheques payable C. Harrop, State Adventure. Skarab Hints. 6 Edgewood Road, Meols, Wirral, Merseyside L47 8AL. ATARI 800XL sell for . 1010 program recorder sell for  Pole Position cartridge sell for . Quickshot Il joystick sell for . Ring 789 8248 9am to 4pm, Monday to Saturday VIC 20, C2N recorder, 16K rampack, joystick, 7 games,  ono. Telephone Market Harborough (0858) 32954 ATTENTION all Apple 2 Users! 10 great programs on one disk for only .50. From Silvasoft, 'Pax' House, Dingle, Co. Kerry, Ireland. COLECOVISION,  inclusive, Carnival, Space Panic, Mousetrap, Space Fury, Gorf, Cosmic Avenger, all  each, Mr Do!, Looping, Pepper 11, all  each. All items brand new and still wrapped in cellophane. Kevin Rustill, 55 Uplands Avenue, Connah's Quay, Deeside, Clwyd, CH5 4LF. SPECTRUM 48K, new March 1984. Complete with ten games including Pole Position, Decathion ill, Suba Dive also Horizons tape and book of games.  ono. Tel Leighton Buzzard (0525) 377822 after 5pm. ZX SPECTRUM 48K with over  worth of original games including Chiller Monty is Innocent, Star Strike also joystick interface and sound amplified with tape recorder. Ring Chester 314827 evenings between 4 and 8pm. Will sell for  ono. GAMES, books, magazines and lightpen for sale for Dragon 32. Phone after 6pm 578 0106 (+ accessories). ATARI 400/800XL games for sale or swap. Also blank cassettes at very cheap prices and back issues of Antic Analog and Computer & Video Games. Phone Dean Hedges 7771842. CBM 64. I have now over 800 great games to swap with your latest titles on disk. Send your complete list to T. Blanchot, 57 rue des Fougeres, 57070 Metz, France FREE SPECTRUM software. Over 175 Spectrum games, including Psytron, Sabre Wulf and Jet Set Willy, absolutely free, when you buy cassette recorder for . Phone Darlington 56580 after 6pm. 48K SPECTRUM, Kemston joystick and interface, cassette player, 32 games lots of magazines and manuals worth . Will sell for  ring after 4.15pm 01-888 6506. ATARI text graphic adventures wanted. Dark Crystal, Sands of Egypt, Scott Adams Saga Adventures number 3 to 12 and others. Prepared to pay reasonable prices. Phone anytime 0703 420016. CURRAH SPEECH UNIT for CBM 64. Unwanted gift 1 year guaranteed. Complete with manual etc.  ono. Contact Andrew Philpot, 115 Fordwich Rise, Hertford, Herts SG 14 2DF. Tel Hertford 57671 SPECTRUM 48K plus DK Tronics keyboard, Interface 2, Quickshot 2 also several originals, TLL, Wheelie, Pedro etc. other tapes included. All almost new, boxed with receipts and guarantee worth  sell for  ono. 107 Grove Road, Grays, Essex RM17 6LA. FREE. Joining Commodore 64 Library 100's of titles. Send s.a.e. to Southern Software 14 Shorts Road, Fair Oak, Hants SO5 7EH. SPECTRUM 48K, interface two, quickshot two  software including Beach-Head, Psytron, Combat Lynx, Boxed as new. Magazines. Book on machine code.  ono. Call Keith on Stirling 814805 after 5pm. MATTEL Intellivision Intellivoice plus 18 good games,  each for details, 11 Lindfield Road, Reddish, Stockport, Cheshire SK5 6SD. BBC B For Sale. Cassette Recorder and Joystick. 15 games. Excellent condition.  ono. Call Missenden 4581 and ask for Sean. COLECOVISION, Atari and Turbo modules, ten Colecovision cartridges, including Tutankham, Zaxxon, Mr Do!, Pepper 11, Looping and four V.C.S. cartridges including Laser Blast and Reactor, making 14 cartridges altogether! Cost over  sell for  ono. Kevin Rustill, 55 Uplands Avenue, Connah's Quay, Clwyd. SPECTRUM games to sell or swap. Many titles including Valkyrie 17, Knight Lore, Tech Ted. Will sell, or swap for any games like Tir-Na-Nog. etc. Telephone 0858 62510 or 0158 34902 and ask for Ellis. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE to swap, Daleys, JSW, Fall Guy. Beach Head, Delta Wing, J & B's, System 15000 for Deux Ex Machina, Knight Lore, Match Day, Wilf or others. Tel Adam on 710784. SHARP MZ-80 A 48K personal computer integral tape deck, monitor, keyboard. Much software plus books, . Tel: Southend 341856. FOR SALE 48K ZX Spectrum, tape deck, Kempston interface, over 50 software titles, magazines  ono. Tel (091) 250 1800 evenings. BEAMRIDER, RIVERRAID games for any MSX. Worth  each. Sell for  each ono. Good condition: unwanted competition prize. Ring Colchester (0206) 868812 evenings only. DISCOUNT SOFTWARE for Spectrum bargains:  cassette 50,  Fighter Pilot,  each Trans-Am, Birds & Bees, Galaxians, .50 each Chiller, Booty, Byte Bitten. All originals. Send s.a.e. and list of games requires + cash to A. Mohammed, 29 Amherst Road, Withington, Manchester M14 GUR. WILL SWAP 48K Spectrum & Kempston interface & Quickshot Il joystick & kisho cassette recorder +  worth of software for a Commodore 64 + cassette recorder + games. Can meet anywhere in Yorkshire. Tel 090 484 414. T199/4A owners ever wished you had proper lower-case instead of those small capitals? Well, now the solution is here. Just send .50 to Tristan Driver, 54 Bournville Avenue, Chatham, Kent. 0634 43542. WANTED T199/4A mini-memory module must be in good condition with instructions. Also other T199/4A hardware and software considered. Contact Adrian, 61 Tollbar Road, Gleadless, Sheffield 5122QZ. ACORN ELECTRON 5 months old. New cassette recorder. Top magazine +  of great software including Micro Olympics. Total price . Will sell for  ono. Tel Peter on Burford 0993-82-3511. ACORN ELECTRON 5 months old. New cassette recorder. Top magazine +  of great software including Micro Olympics. Total price . Will sell for  ono. Tel Peter on Burford 0993-82-3511. SPECTRUM ORIGINAL games for sale also Currah microspeech and joystick interface. Send s.a.e. Highfield, Eastgate, Sleaford, Lincs NG34 2EE A. Kirk. MINO AND vision compendium Oil Strike, Noughts and Crosses Mind. Snake, Fungus, Breakup vision. Five games only .50 cheques and P.O. to Brian Brass, 33 kellett Middle, Crewe and Alsager College of Higher Education, Hassal Road, Alsager, Stoke on Trent. ATARI SOFTWARE, all originals for sale or swap, includes Star Raiders, Missile Command, Donkey Kong, plus others. Offers to C.K. Man, 299 Southend Lane, Catford, London. COMMODORE 64, and Colecovision software originals most at half price or less, , Coleco's Zaxxon. .50 C64's Mega Hits. SAE to Alan Chapman, 176 Ramsay Road, Forest Gate, London E7 9ET. COLECOVISION, TURBODRIVE module, Atari adaptor, Superaction controller, Rollecontroller, seventeen games in excellent condition . Telephone 01 555 9506. 48K SPECTRUM. Excellent condition, plus joystick interface and 50 top games including Knightlore, Skooldaze, Pyjamarama, Matchpoint and many others worth over  sell for  ono. Phone Truro 0872 71669. COMMODORE 64 owner wishes to swap software. Many American and English titles such as Track and Field. Contact Peter, 150 St Georges Road, Stoke, Coventry CV1 2DF or phone Coventry 25402. 48K SPECTRUM Spectrum and 19 games, including Jet Set Willy, Snooker, Hunchback and Scrabble, and many other good games, 15 months old, worth , will sell for . Telephone 0723 360778. DRAGON 32 (guaranteed). Quickshot 2 joystick, books, manuals and leads. Over  worth of software including Cashman, Time Bandit and Hulk. Bargain only , phone Southampton 813228. SHARP MZ-80A personal computer for sale, built in monitor and cassette recorder plus 23 programs including games, educational and database.  ono phone 0387 61702 after 6pm and ask for Richard. 64 OWNERS 1 month old Koalapad for sale with Combat Lynx, Raid Over Moscow, Valhalla, Danger Mouse in DT when bought total cost  bargain at . Write to Paul Manning, 10 Park Avenue, Craigy, Don, Llandudno, Gwynedd. COMMODORE, 64 cassette Football program forecasts results consistently well from your database, send .99 or .99 with database to D. Gown, 8 Olivers Mill, New Ash Green, Kent DA3 8RE. MICRODRIVE + interface 1, 10 cartridges, DK Tronics, Lightpen and Cheetah sweet talker. Swap for Atari 810 or offers around , phone 0634 62792 after six ask for Adam. HINTS AND pokes brochure on the top arcade and adventure games, send  to C. B. Dinneen, 15 Gordon Street, Gorton, Manchester M18 85L. ATARI 48K, 1050 disk drive, Dosz recorder, basic, assembler, plus over  of software including Flight Simulator 2. Total cost of system . Bargain at  or possible swap for BBC B. All super condition, hardly used. Tel Bristol 631770. 48K SPECTRUM with Jetpac, Manic Miner and many more. . Tel Winscombe (84) 3868. CBM 64 I have the best and the more recent games of all the East of France. Send your list to T. Blanchot, 57 rue des Fougeres, 57070 Metz, France. ORIC 1/ATMOS software for sale too many to name, send for list to 37 Guanock Terrace, King's Lynn, Norfolk PE305QT. R I Standring (0553) 765880. 48K ATARI 400 computer with basic and assembler cartridges and manuals.  worth of books including de-re-Atari with a selection of top quality software  ono. Call Chris Humphries on (0993) 850961. EASY SCRIPT disk based word processors for the Commodore 64 brand new, cost  but will sell for  phone (0642) 608713 evenings only ask for Tom. COMMODORE VIC 20 plus CN2 for sale 16k ram pack included  worth of software plus introduction to Basic, Vic games programs.  phone 0322 345628 for information. Ask for Jim. Phone after 3.30pm. Would cost new  + MODEM VTX 5000 + 48K Spectrum. Dixons datarecorder, Quickshot joystick, Kempston interface, 80 games including Knightlore T.L.L. The lot for only  ono or will sell modem separately. Contact Raj Panjawani, 0458252329. BBC MICRO model B including tape deck, Quickshot joystick, software, books, manual and lots of magazines. Worth over  will sell for . Ring on Hollingbourne 259. ATARI 800XL, cassette, 1 joystick, 2 books, software. Sell for  ono or swap for CBM 64 Tel 01-231 9593 5pm-7pm weekdays. COMMODORE 64 originals Ghostbusters, Gridtrap. Sheep in Space, Death Star Interceptor, Galaxy swap for Matchpoint, Black Thunder or others plus many Atari disk games to swap ring West Wratting (022029) 830 ask for Michael BBC, COMMODORE 64, Electron, Spectrum. Four friends selling originals never used brand new. Have huge amount of software write to No 3 Malvern College, Malvern, Worcs in TERM time for list I'll try and return quickly, also Club .50 membership cheap games. SNOWY SOFTWARE. Sensational bargains on Commodore 64, Amstrad, Atari, Spectrum, Electron, BBC, Commodore 16. Oric and Vic 20. Best prices ever. For list state which computer. We'll even cover postage for post and software within Britain. 36 Curzon Street, London W1Y 7AF. rosell ... Microsell... Microsell... Microsell... Microsell ...N 126 "


"Lothlorien BUICE BATTLE FOR ANTWERP For Spectrum 48K and Commodore 64 Accurate strategic simulation. Real-time combat with full scrolling graphics Mi hamiais Liberty House, 222 Regent Street, London W1R 7DB Telephone 01-439 0666 LOTHLORIEN Argus Press "


"COMMODORE ser Just 95p Free Games to type in by: Jeff Minter, Tony Crowther, Tony Gibson, Mike Singleton, Charles Goodwin, Mark Harrison Richard Leinfellner, and Jon Williams. FREE GAMES FROM THE TOP NAMES On To make sure of getting your Book of Games from the Top Names ch out this coupon and take it to your newsagent. Dear newsagent, please order me a copy of the June issue of Commodore Userand every month after that as well. (Delete if not approriate.) sale 26th May Signed... Address.... This bumper games supplement is COMPLETELY FREE WITH Commodore User:the U.K.'s favourite Commodore magazine. "


"| NEX-I M-ON-TH : NEX-I | MAPS My name is Bond. James Bond are where it's at says Prof Video! And next issue we'll have a whole bunch of readers' maps for you to study. The secrets of the top games at your fingertips in July's C&VG. And in next month's C&VG I'll be revealing a few top secrets from the View to a Kill files. Find out how YOU can win a copy of the new Bond game based on my new movie. PLUS A FREE BOND POSTER! Don't miss it I won't miss you... o O-N-THH : N-EX-T g M-O-N-T-H 1 We've got fairies at the end of the C&VG office — and an enchanted competition thanks to the people at Orpheus who want to give you copies of their stunning new game! Get C&VG next month it's magic! | 0 M-O-N-T-H NEX-T o M-O-NAIRWOLF that super-copter zaps back to your TV screens for a new series very soon. In July you can win a special Airwolf Kit — with posters and games and watches thanks to our friends at Elite the software house named by C&VG readers. Fancy going out for tea with Supergran? You could be enjoying some cream cakes with TV's most popular heroine if you grab a copy of C&VG next month! ANOTHER ACTION PACKED BOOK OF GAMES! C&VG has become rightly famous for these collections of top listings for top computers. And there's another one coming your way in July featuring games for the Spectrum, C64, Amstrad, BBC, Atari and many more. Don't delay place an order with your newsagent today! L M -O-N-T:H-N-E.X.T.M-O-N-T-H 13. Visual Display Unit (3) 16. Name of the speaking clock (3) 17. Code cracking computer enthusiasts 18. Bad magic spell (5) 20. Evil Norse god (4) 21. Vault in Barchester Chronicles? (4) 23. BASIC statement for adding comments (3) LIIT 10. Building in which software is written? (5) 11. Places where public records are kept 14. The subconscious (2) 15. Space bus like Challenger (7) Chemical symbol for mercury (2) 19. Calendars like Whitakers (8) 22. Push that could be unlimited in fruitmachine style game (5) 23. First colour of RBG monitor! (3) Space warrior in game and 'The Last\" film (11) 25. Most significant bit (3) 24 ESCORE CROSSWORD MIRAGES CLUES DOWN \"GHOSTBUSTERS APRIL SOLUTION 2. Micro for mad rats? (anag. X7) 3. Stir up in the recording studio? (3) 4. Author of Lord of the Rings (1.1.7) 5. Rooks play a major part in this game (5) 7. Prefix for tenth (4) 8. BASIC statement to follow IF ... THEN... (4) 12. Bar chart (9) CLUES ACROSS 1. Computer memory that can be written to (3) 6. Centre of the World of Hobbits? (6,3) 9. New standard of Japanese microcomputers (3) .Io IDOMACIZESS CORC ONTHOUGHT ADAMGAME ELITE 129 "


"ATARI 400/600/800/800XL Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY The greatest, biggest and best Atari library on the market. An ideal present for old and new Atari owners. MIDLANDS GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over 2 years ago, first conceived the idea of a software library Now approaching nearly 1,000 titles on disc, cassette and Ram games, business educational and utilities). Often purchasing popular programmers in multiples of 5 or 6 to give all our members a fair change. Always adding approximately 40 new programmes monthly Over 1.000 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany, Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast, efficient and friendly service Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities. Now introducing original software written by existing members. Send large sa.e. to: TI-99/4A SPECIAL OFFER TEXAS CARTRIDGES CASSETTE SOFTWARE MUNCH MAN ADVENTUREMANIA b.95 MANIA b 3.95 VIDEO GAMES! (5.95 ATLANTIS HUNT THE WUMPAS (5.95 ATTACK BUILDER MINEFIELD b .95 [5.95 DADDIES HOTROD b.95 BLASTO (5.95 HUNCHBACK HAVOC b .95 TOMBSTONE CITY (5.95 HONKY WARLOCK b 3.95 AMAZING [5.95 TROLL KING b 3 95 ZERO ZAP EDUCL) (5.95 QUASIMODO HELP eb 3.95 ALIEN ADDITION EDUC'LI (5.95 INTRIGUE PENTATHLON NUMBER MAGIC EDUC'L) eb 3.95 LIONEL & LADDERS 3 95 MIND CHALLENGERS EDUC'L) eb 6.50 CRAZY CAVER eb 3.95 TI INVADERS [7.50 BATTLESTAR ATTACK eb 3.95 SOCCER FIVE A SIDE (7,95 SNOUT OF SPOUT HOUSEHOLD MANAGEMENT eb .95 QUICKSHOT 1 TI VERSION [11.95 VIDEO CHESS 11.95 CASSETTE INTERFACE .00 TEXAS CASSETTES JOYSTICK INTERFACE (double) .95 OLDIES BUT GOODIES 1 (5.95 OLDIES BUT GOODIES-2 (5.95 ORDERS SENT BY RETURN POST 12 PAGE CATALOGUES SOP ACCESS BY TELEPHONE OR SEND POICHEQUES PAYABLE TO: INTRIGUE SOFTWARE, CRANBROOK RD TENTERDEN, KENT, TN30 GUJ LIMITED OFFER WHILE ER STING STOCKS LAST OVERSEAS ORDERS [150 PER ITEM MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos, Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programmes are originals with full documentation INTRIGUE SOFTWARE TI-99/4A BASIC Computer Support PRESENTS A whole new range of affordable software and hardware products for every Atari user HARDWARE: SOFTWARE: 80 column pack........... .95 Cass Disk Ultimon .95 Super Disassembler....... .95 The Gap........ . .95 File Loader... Rom Emulator.................. 29.95 Boot Loader.................... E14.95 Over Write... .. (14.95 Biorhythm ........ 26.95 .95 Badsector Mailing List....... .95 Portprint................... .. 29.95 Utility Pac One.........(8.95 .95 Monitor Connection Lead.... .. 8.95 Disk Duplicator ... . .95 Hi-Fi Connection Lead................95 Disk Duplicator 128k...... .95 Replacement Arial Lead.. ..........2.95 Cartridge Duplicator..... .95 .95 Serial Flylead (1 metre) C11.95 Cassette Duplicator......9.95 (10.95 Serial Flylead 12 metres).......... 12.95 Macro Library IMAC65\") .95 Serial to plug.............................99 Zapping Zombies...........95 .95 We are continually adding new products to our range. Please send S.A.E. for full details. COMPUTER SUPPORT 26 Seacourt Road, Abbey Wood, London SE2 90W Tel: 01-311 7339 *ATARI is a registered trademark of ATARI CORPORATION \"MAC65 is a trademark of O.S.S. Inc. \"SPECIAL OFFER\" E2 OFF FEATURES Take off in St. Flying into t he Space Flight Lots of ward gauge View through it window when Space States that grow fra ck into detailed craft Sound Joystickor Keyboard The most authentic Flight Emulation game for TI on Cassette (7.95 Post Free Sent by return or return this advert with .95 .. 2 discount) to us Access by phone Tel: 05806 4726 INTRIGUE SOFTWARE CRANBROOK ROAD, TENTERDEN, KENT, TN30 GUJ. Trade enquiries ring 05806 4726 INTRIGUE SOFTWARE ADVERTISEMENT INDEX ..... Aasvoguelle Productions Acornsoft.......... Activision Addictive Games.. Affordable Products..... Alligata Software....... Ariolasoft..................60,8 Argus Press Software..... ......76 127 Beyond Software............. Bubble Bus.. 49,66 ...31 Goodbyte... 124 Ocean 50,89,92, 107 Gremlin Graphics...............1 16-117 Palace............  Hewson Consultants....... Parco Electrics..... Quicksilva...... Imagine.. 91,115 Incentive IFC Ram Electronics... Intrigue..... 130 Realtime. Martech, ... 113 Silica Shop........... Software Express..... ... 54 Megasave... 22-23 Memorex Software Projects............. 34-35 Micro-Ads.... 20-121 Software World.... Micronet 800..... 44.46 Microsell....... Touchmaster Midland Games Library... 130 Miles Better Software. Ultimate..... ...40 .................82 Mikrogen... 51,73 US Gold..........58-59,67.98-99,123 Mirrorsoft. 27 Virgin ........ 102.0BC New Generation.... ..75 Zoomsoft.. ........ 102 ....4 128 Commodore Show..... *** Commodore User... Computer Support... Durrell... 30 126 ...9 Elite. English.... Enterprise. 105 Firebird Software..............14-15,25 130 "


"REALTIME 7SOFTWARE STARSTRIKE SCORE 00 16500 SELLOT OS SCORE 0018400 OS SCORE 0341000 ACADE STD AMSTRAD CPC 464 ZX SPECTRUM 48K .95  .95 BRSTAR VOTED BY THE READERS OF COMPUTERS Contended VOTES LB GAME SCORE 0034400 YELLOW sitten COMPUTER on OBN JOYS * STEREO SOUND * FAST 3D GRAPHICS * GREAT VALUE FOR MONEY VARDS Actual Screen Shots (Amstrad) PLEASE Starstrike (Amstrad) .95 RUSH ME! O Starstrike (Spectrum) .95 Name.... AMSTRAD Address... In the shops NOW! Cheques/P.O.s to: Realtime Softwear, Prospect House, 32 Sovereign Street, Leeds LS1 4BT STARSTRIKE "


"Now by public demand the screen-scorching Falcon Patrol II is available on the Spectrum 48K as well as the CBM 64. NOW ON SPECTRUM! \"It's Unique, Graphically Impressive, Vast and Devious; in short, BRILL\"... PCW Not only all this but it's NOW available on the Commodore 64. STRANGELOOP IS A MASSIVE ARCADE ADVENTURE WITH A WEALTH OF RICH AND COLOURFUL GRAPHICS. FALCON PATROL 2 Cho n Commodore ESTRANGELOOP SPECTRUM 48K ch COMMANDING YOUR HARRIER JUMP JET YOU MUST SINGLEHANDEDLY DEFEND YOUR BATTERED TOWN AGAINST THE FEROCIOUS ONSLAUGHT OF ENEMY HELICOPTERS. THEY ARE USING EVERY TRICK IN THE BOOK, BARRAGES OF LETHAL MISSILES AND DEADLY GROUND-BASED FLAK-BATTERIES, RADAR JAMMERS BLIND YOUR VISION ON YOUR SOLE MISSION TO THE ROBOT FACTORY ON THE EDGE OF A DISTANT SOLAR SYSTEM, YOU WILL UNCOVER MANY MYSTERIES AND CHALLENGES. YOU WILL MEET ROBOTS, SOME FRIENDLY SOME HOSTILE, SOME LETHAL AND SOME FUNNY, COUNTLESS PUZZLES LIE BETWEEN YOU AND THE SINISTER ALIEN FORCES IN THE CONTROL ROOM YOUR ULTIMATE DESTINATION. HERE YOU MUST RE-PROGRAM THE ROBOTS TO STOP THE DESTRUCTION OF THE EARTH NOTHING WwKESP COOL STAY ON TOP 30 ZONNING DARE YOU ACCEPT THIS MISSION 222 Es schon ACTION PACKER 13 AERIAL COMBAT 250 SCREENS OF TOUGH AND CHALLENGNG SAME PLAY AUTHENTIC HAVEER SIMULATION A FEAST OF STUWING GeAAMICS. DEVIOUS CHOPPER ATTACKS GAME SAVE ROUTY. PURE INTERACTIVE Rogors. ADRENALIN PICK UP DUE, DOPFACIUTY \"FPI is Virgin's best game yet\" Computer and Video Games TELEPORTEes. SPECTRUM 48K VERSION AVAILABLE FROM 29th APRIL FROM ALL LEADING COMPUTER STOCKISTS. CBM 64 version R.R.P. .95 SPECTRUM 48K version .95 CBM 64 VERSION AVAILABLE FROM 29TH APRIL FROM ALL LEADING COMPUTER STOCKISTS. CBM 64 VERSION RRP .95; SPECTRUM 48K VERSION RRP .95 Bay ANY 2 GAMES AND YOU WIL BE ELIGIBLE FOR 1 OFF EACH GAME "

