"THE MAG REAL GAMAEAD... OS COMPUTER DONKEY KONG VIDEO COURT AMAZING 64-BIT POWER ON A 16-BIT MACHINE!!!! GAMES EVERY NEW GAME REVIEWED AND RATED 2 MORTAL KOMBAT II EVERY VERSION REVIEWED EXCLUSIVE! LION KING SCOOP PREVIEWS! Al-formats o eview of the next big Disnejsmash Mickey Mania, Super Return of the Jedi Jelly Boy, Street Racer, Clayfighters II, Lemmings 3 EXPOSED! First screen shots RSNK's brilliantiewonsule AND complete guide to all the latest aquar games BRAND NEW GAMES ON BRILLIANT NEW SYSTEMS! 100% SEPTEMBER 1994 ISSUE NO 154 68.00 ASCH DM 12.50 S$ 13.50 $5.95 7000 L ISSN 0261-3697 09 > COMPREHENSIVE BEST FOR NEW MACHINES 100% Gail Racer on Sega Saturn it'll blow your socks off!!!!! INDEPENDENT Tale of Poporokuroisu on Sony PlayStation Wow! Kombat killer? Way of the Warrior bloodfest on 3D0! 9 1770261\"369062\" "


"THE 7TH GUEST.TM Beware of the ghostly guests and creepy characters in this interactive thriller and enter the bizarre hilltop mansion of reclusive toy maker Henry Stauf. The game features beautiful three dimensional graphics, live action video, an original soundtrack and sophisticated puzzle games which must be solved in order to stop the menace looming over the small town of Harley. The 7th Guest will be available during the third quarter of 1994. .99 Cat. No: 811 004 0  1994 PHILIPS INTERACTIVE MEDIA INTERNATIONAL LIMITED.  1994 DON BLUTH LIMITED. "


"ALL REQUIRE DIGITAL VIDEO CARTRIDGES. | 2 iril Divil DRAGONS LA 000 PHILIPS LITTLE DIVILOM In this humorous adventure, game, guide the Divil Mutt through the Labyrinth of Chaos to bring back the Mystic Pizza of Plenty. Along the way, you'll also have to free the unfortunate divils who were unsuccessful on previous pizza missions, collect various artefacts, and avoid The Entity, that nefarious being who's out to send Mutt to the torture chamber. Litil Divil will be avail. able summer 1994. .99 Cat. No: 810 016 9 MAD DOG McCREE (with gun). Mad Dog McCree is a live-action videogame set in the fabled days of the American Old West. Your mission through a series of hair raising gunfights, free the town's sheriff who's been kidnapped by Mad Dog's nasty gang and, finally, face down Mad Dog himself. Reflexes and timing are critical, or you'll wind up in the undertaker's parlour. Mad Dog McCree will be available in summer 1994. .99 Cat. No: 810 008 9 DRAGON'S LAIR 1. Following the success of Space Ace, this is the second Don Bluth game to appear on CD-1. An evil wizard has captured the king's daughter and imprisoned her in the caverns below his castle. The king's champion, Dirk the Daring, must fight his way past the wizard's traps and monsters and finally slay the dragon to rescue the princess. Dragon's Lair I will be available in summer 1994. 149.99 Cat. No: 810 0181 YOU WON'T BELIEVE YOUR CO-IS. PHILIPS MEDIA "


"CVG CONTENTS COVER STORY Nintendo's latest swinger FEATURES the ultimate in games 36 Donkey Kong Country is set clean-up this Christmas. We take an in-depth look at why this game is going to be so big on SNES 20 The Saturn, PlayStation and Mega Drive 32X are all launched in November. We sum up their chances and take a look at all the games that make up the opening salvos of the 32-Bit war. Metal Head (above) and Shadow of Atlantis (right) are two new games for the MD32X, and are featured in our new machines spesh. SEPT 1994 ISSUE 154 58 STAR WARS MANIA We give you the low-down on six hot new Star Wars games, with exclusive shots of Super Return Of The Jedi and a preview of LucasArts' amazing new DoomCOMPUTER VIDEO GAMES Editorial and advertising enquiries: 071-972 6700 Subscription and Back Issues enquiries (9.30-5.30 Mon-Fri): 0858 468888 EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISING GREENHOUSE: CVG. Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU TEL: 071-972 6700 FAX: 071-972 6701 ADVERTISING MANAGER: Simon Hamer ADVERTISING EXECUTIVE: Holly Eadie PRODUCTION ASST: Vicki Jacobs MARKETING DIRECTOR: Marcus Rich MARKETING MANAGER: Karen Williams PRODUCT MANAGER: Sarah Ewing PRODUCT MANAGER ELECT: Nichola Bentley PUBLISHING DIRECTOR: David Kelly MANAGING DIRECTOR: Terry Pratt SUBSCRIPTION ENQUIRIES: CVG Subscriptions, Tower Publishing, Tower House, Sovereign Place, Lathkill Street, Market Harborough, Leicestershire LE16 9ES TEL: 0858 468811 RATES: 12 ISSUES UK: .00, AIRMAIL EUROPE: .00, AIRMAIL REST OF WORLD ZONE 1: .00, AIRMAIL REST OF WORLD ZONE 2: .00, REST OF WORLD SURFACE: .00, BFPO: .00 EIRE: .00 PRINTED IN THE UK BY: St Ives, Peterborough COLOUR BY: PrePress and our fab Sarah-Jane Leavey, London EC1 DISTRIBUTED BY: Frontline (c) COPYRIGHT: Computer and Video Games 1994 ISBN NO: 0261-3597 CVG DISCLAIMER: Although we take great care to ensure as far as reasonably possible the accuracy of the information contained in this magazine, CVG and the publishers cannot be held responsible for omissions, errors, misprints or mistakes which may occur. MANAGING EDITOR: STEVE JAMES DEPUTY EDITOR: GARY LORD ART EDITOR: JULIE HEAP STAFF WRITERS: DENIZ AHMET RIK SKEWS DESIGNER: PETREA DOYLE CONTRIBUTING WRITERS: MARK PATTERSON ROSS SHEIL DEAN EVANS RADION AUTOMATIC ROVING SUB: NICK KELLY ILLUSTRATIONS: STUART HARRISON COVER ILLUSTRATION: SEBASTIAN QUIGLEY 013 REGULARS 6 Ed's Comment 8 News 64 Arcade Action 96 Yob's Mailbag 103 Big Eds 104 Help 112 The CVG Charts 114 Next month Super Return Of The Jedi exclusive pix galore.  25 MILLION READERS SINCE 1982... "


"CONTENTS CVG CONTENTS EVERY NEW GAME REVIEWED AND RATED REVIEWS SUPER SHORTS 76 Burning Soldier 3DO Texture mapping and FMV in this latest 3DO release 79 Shockwave 3DO Could this be the best 3DO Reviewed and rated on pages 78,83,89: The Jaguar's first sports game is here, and it's hyper-violent too! 84 Aladdin Game Boy More mystical platform action as the Game Boy finally gets its version of Aladdin. 86 Brutal Mega-CD Rabbits, bears and panthers scrap it out in this cartoon combat CD. 87 World Heroes 2 SNES The third SNES combat game this month, how does it rate against the competition? 88 Outpost PC CD-ROM Silicon Graphics a-plenty in Sierra's sci-fi opus. 90 Legacy Of Sorasil CD32 Top-notch RPG action in this CD32 disk-to-disc conversion. 92 Wolfenstien Jaguar shoot-'em-up? It certainly looks the part. 80 On The Ball Amiga Ascon's revolutionary football management sim takes you to the World Cup. 81 Fire And Ice CD32 CD platform action from veteran codester Andrew Braybrook. 82 Brutal Sports Football Jaguar Fighter's History: SNES Super Adventure Island 2: SNES Lucle: Game Boy Wargame Construction Set 2 Tanks: PC Theatre Of Death: PC D-Day: PC Asterix And The Great Escape: Master System Fifa International Soccer: Mega-CD Kick Off 3: PC Out To Lunch: Amiga Empire Soccer: Amiga Jammit: NES Pirates Of Dark Water: Mega Drive Combat Cars: Mega Drive World Cup USA `94: PC Planet Football: PC Incredible Crash Dummies: Amiga Delta V: PC Central Intelligence: PC Traps And Treasures: Amiga Impossible Mission 2029: Amiga World Cup USA '94: Game Gear Litil Divil: CDVal D'isere Championship: Mindscape 36 48 Mortal Kombat II SNES/Mega Drive/ Game Boy/Game Gear Could this turn out to be the best arcade conversion ever? 54 Chaos Engine PC Renegade's Gothic Commando clone finally arrives on PC. 57 Putty Squad A1200 System 3's flexible hero returns in full AGA colour. 58 Tie Fighter PC The PC cult classic comes to the Jag with all the gore of the original. It's one of the most eagerly awaited games of the year but does it top the previous X-wing? 62 Rebel Assault Mega-CD Take on the Empire with JVC's CD sensation. 69 Pocky And Rocky 2 SNES The cutesy duo strike back, bigger and better than before. 71 FIFA PC A console beater? You'd better believe it! 72 Heimdall 2 CD32 Core's Viking saga makes a welcome debut on CD32. 74 Fatal Fury 2 SNES Super Streetfighter 2 missed the mark, can this do any better? 75 Wild Cup Soccer Amiga The third instalment in Millennium's Brutal Sports series. WORK IN PROGRESS 28 Street Racer SNES 30 Dreamweb PC/Amiga 31 The Smurfs SNES 32 Super Kart PC 34 Super Bomberman 2 SNES 35 Sylvester and Tweety Mega Drive 41 Mickey Mania Mega Drive 42 Super Stardust CD32 43 The Lion King All formats 44 Mega SWIV Mega Drive 46 Boogerman Mega Drive 47 Cyberia PC CD-ROM Q AND STILL THE MAGAZINE REAL GAMERS READ! "


"CVG ED'S COMMENT WHY YOU'RE ACVG takes an exclusive peak at Super Return of the Jedi on page 60. 've been working on games magazines for almost six years now and if one thing's crystal clear it's that every magazine has a special sort of reader. What makes you unique is your wide range of interests. We've analysed the reader survey we ran in the June issue and once again the readers of Computer And Video Games are way out in front when it comes to being die-hard games fans. We know from the phone calls that you're far more open-minded than others CVG readers are far more likely to appreciate a quality game no matter whether it's a beat-'em-up, a football game or a flight sim. More and more of you now own more than one machine and have access to others. The numbers of you who own both a computer and a console has leapt upwards yet the vast majority of you intend to buy one of the next generation of games machines. And it seems like the old tribal lines are about to break up: Nintendo owners are just as likely to buy a Sega machine next time round and vice versa. You are going to change things. None of this surprises me a magazine which is 100% dedicated to the whole wide world of games will attract readers who know their stuff and will use the mass of information available to decide for themselves what to buy next. You're the most committed games players and it's you who will let the hardware manufacturers know what you'll be buying next. It's good to have you aboard. STEVE OUR REVIEWS sake of those who want to POLICY refer to back issues, if we Here at CVG we're inderecommend an alternative pendent of any hardware game we'll keep its original manufacturer, so we'll let score, but obviously times you know whether a change and what may have game is available on been a great game a couother formats, whether ple of years ago, now may there are better exambe a bit passe. However in ples of the game on that the past five years alone system, and most imporwe've reviewed around tantly whether it's any 1,000 games, so you can good. Unlike other magabe sure that our recomzines which base their mendations come with an scores on the views of accumulated wealth of one person, our ratings gameplaying experience. are arrived at after lengthy discussion between the CVG team about each title's good or bad points, with the overall score being a separate mark based on the quality of the game NOT an average of the other marks. For the The Sega Saturn is just one of a whole range of new machines and add-ons that aim to satisfy the increased sophistication you're demanding. If a game scores more than 90% we'll award it a sought-after CVG HIT!. DELIVERING ON PC Someone asked me the other day why we cover more PC games now it's the same argument, really: it's because things are changing and because today's Amiga and Mega Drive gamer might be tomorrow's PC and PlayStation owner, and because like you we don't get on our high horse when it comes to playing games. There are some decent action and platform games on PC Mortal Kombat, Cool Spot and Chaos Engine. Some of the more egghead PC mags won't do these games justice, we will. WORLDBEATER SNES Streetfighter Il Turbo Nintendo/.99 Still the best one-on-one combat game for the SNES. If you've already got a copy try Ranma 1/2 from Ocean or Capcom's Art of Fighting Issue 134: 81% A Lemmings 3 sure to be a smash but a high-value entertainment game that'll be out on PC first. Whenever you see one of these we'll be referring to the best game of its type, irrespective of which games machine it's on. You won't be seeing many of these only games scoring 95% or over will be granted this accolade. "


"THE LATE NIGHT KEBAB PROVIDER Lloyds PC Bank Headyvay Cas cirt Car 14921 B345 6789 OLOL PLUS 0479 05/94 MR THOMAS M GREY 30-18-251732109 FREEPHONE: 0800 710 723. Or fill out the coupon below, and send it in an envelope to our freepost address now. You will receive details of our Youth Doal within 7 days. PLEASE PRINT CLEARLY. THE YOUTH DEAL First Name (in full): .... ..Title: Mr/Miss/Ms Surname:.... ...........Date of Birth:.................../19... The Cashpoint* card. Where would we be without it? Probably walking home through the pouring rain, kebabless, on a Saturday night. That's where. But don't sweat. The Lloyds Bank Headway Account comes with a Cashpoint card. And plenty more goodies besides. Such as a  Mercury phonecard. And a pack stuffed with discount vouchers, special offers and the chance to win a mountain bike. If you're aged 11-17 and want to find out more freephone 0800 710 723, Lloyds fill in the coupon or pop into your local branch. Address:...... ....Post Code:... Please tell us which of these will apply to you in September Still at School. Going to College/University. Starting/have just started my first job or None of these apply to me. vocational training. Please send to: Lloyds Bank Plc, The Youth Deal, Freepost CV2870, Stratford. upon-Avon, Warwickshire, CV37 9BR. CVG/2/H Bank IF YOU ARE UNDER 16 WE WILL NEED YOUR PARENTS SIGNATURE BEFORE SUPPLYING YOU WITH A CARD. HEADWAY IS A TRADEMARK OF LLOYDS BANK PLC. \"CASHPOINT SA TRADEMARK OF LLOYDS BANK PLC. THE HEADWAY ACCOUNT IS ONLY AVAILABLE FOR 11-17 YEAR OLDS LLOYDS BANK PLC IS A MEMBER OF IMRO AND THE BANKING OMBUDSMEN SCHEME AND A SIGNATORY TO THE CODE OF BANKING PRACTICE LLOYDS BANK PLC 71 LOMBARD STREET, LONDON EC3P 385 "


"CVG CVE NEWS NEWS PANASONIC AND PHILIPS LAUNCH THEIR MACHINES NEWS THEY'RE HERE! 32-bit consoles blast Panasonic the High Street! anasonic and Philips are aiming to spoil us for choice and have announced September 1st release dates for their super new machines and substantial price cuts. Philips has announced that its new games-only CD-i 450 will retail for  while the recommended retail price for Panasonic's REAL FZ-1 300 Interactive Multiplayer System has been confirmed at .95. The 450 will be minus 3DO'S FMV capability. However Philips will also be releasing a 550 unit with a DV cart for . In terms of the bundles the Multiplayer will come with Crystal Dynamic's Total Eclipse, the 450 with a new twoplayer version of International Tennis and the 550 with Tennis plus 7th Guest. Philips and Panasonic will be putting big bucks behind the launches watch out for TV ads from Philips and check out the Panasonic Road Tour, which will be visiting loads of venues across the country. 3 DO REAL A Panasonic's 3DO Multiplayer is set for a September 1 UK launch date. make a date CC Each visitor to the Panasonic juggernaut will be given a demonstration of the 3DO machine followed by a chance to play a variety of games on the fourteen FZ-1 players inside the truck. If you haven't already caught the tour we highly recommend it. The dates are as follows: 12-14 August Northampton Balloon Festival 17-21 August Airbourne '94, Eastbourne 24-27 August Dartmouth Royal Regatta 29-30 August Aintree Show 1 September American Adventure, Derbyshire 3-4 Sheffield Show 7-11 September Chessington World of Adventures 20-25 September LIVE '94, Earl's Court, London 28 Sept-4 Oct Lakeside, Thurrock, Essex 9 October East of England Autumn Exhibition, Peterborough Finally you're going to 11-15 October Meadowhall Centre, Sheffield get chance to see the 3DO 17-22 October Woburn Safari Park, Woburn and its software. 24-29 October Fairfield Halls, Croydon 2 November City of Portsmouth Firework Display 4 November 26th Big Night Out, Suffolk 7-12 November Clifton Moor Centre, York 14-18 November Metrocentre, Gateshead 20-25 November Covent Garden Piazza, London. A Philips is out to steal Panasonic's thunder with its games-only 450 Cd-i. check out the quality.. A game such as FIFA Soccer on 3DO shows just what the machine is capable of. The colour details like the shading on the footballers, and the sheer professionalism of the game has had everyone in the office standing around and gawping. Here's just a foretaste of the game, expect a red-hot preview soon... SPORTS COVERAGE Attack "


"WHILE ATARI HITS THE GAMES ARENA NEWS CVG BAB Dato Jag attack... tari is gearing up for the UK onslaught for its awesome Jaguar console with a large chunk of its 100,000 European shipment landing in a shop near you by August, and with the promise of 25 games out before Christmas. If you can't wait any longer, Rumbelows is currently giving the system a big push with a retail tag of .99 and six games at around  each. As you'll be seeing and hearing a lot more on Jag soon here's an update on what games will be heading your way this side of Christmas. eyes down flashback Flashback has converted superbly to numerous formats already, so there's no reason why this shouldn't be improved in the process to Jag. Although it's getting on a bit now, this game is still an excellent platform adventure and will give the Jag its first taste of rotoscoped animation. The plot has you battling for escape from a strange land after being zapped in a gonewrong experiment. The best version so far? alien vs predator The game everyone's waiting for will see its debut review next issue. Owing much to Doom in its game style, AVP looks totally jawdropping thanks to its moody graphics and translucent effects. This 112M-bit game enables you to play the Alien, Predator or Marine, but with the Alien you can scroll twice as fast and use the air ducts strategically. This game could make the Jag fly. doom If this is as big as the PC version it'll be a hit for Atari. Hunt out the exit for each stage while causing death and double dragon This game is going to appear on more formats than you can count So look out for our unique multi-format review soon. DD is a purist oneon-one beat-'em-up. We're keen to see how well it'll handle on a three-button pad. And keep those peepers peeled for more big news on these Jaguar games in the pipeline... Demolition Man Highlander Dragon: Bruce Lee Story Pinball Dreams Gunship 2000 Lester the Unlikely Cannon Fodder Zool 2 Kickoff 3 Starbattle Theme Park Soccer Kid Syndicate Galactic Gladiators Dragon's Lair Rayman Creature Shocks Robinson's Requiem Hosenose and Booger Bios Fear BattleWheels Ultra Vortex Droppings Commando Evidence Air cars Dungeon Depths Wild Cup Soccer White Men Can't Jump Indiana Jag destruction Jag-style. Doom's appeal is its uninhibited use of violence and devastating array of collectable weapons and there's no change with the Atari version. Doom is the sequel to Wolfenstein 3D reviewed on Jaguar on page 92. checkered flag 2 Atari's answer to Sega's Virtua Racing is looking very coin-opish indeed thanks to the Jag's 16.7 million colours. Plenty of tracks and opponents should ensure it does favourably in the play stakes too. GONE SETUP TE "


"CVG NEWS NEO GEO-CD NEWS AND NEW SNES PACK NEWS machine mania... Up-to-date info on two new machines, including SNK's blistering new console plus a bargain from Nintendo! SPEEDY SKATEBOARDS more news on neo geo-CD He's supposed to be a Tyrannosaurus Rex but he's far too cute if you ask us! He's Radical Rex, a dinosaur who, according to Activision, is too hip to be extinct, and he'll be starring in a new platform game coming soon on Mega Drive, Mega-CD and SNES. Radical Rex is a platformer in the Sonic mould with the emphasis on speed. And that's achieved by Rex bounding about the screen on his trusty skateboard and taking out baddies with his fiery breath. Radical Rex is due out in October so watch out for the full review in CVG soon. mega SNES pack for christmas Nintendo is aiming to arewell expensive Neo Geo carts. As revealed last month SNK has unveiled a stand-alone Neo Geo CD console, with all the power of the cartridge machine, that will retail for $450 (). Best of all, the games will cost from just $45 upwards! All the older titles will be converted to CD, while the new ones releases will retail at $80 over $100 cheaper than the carts. SNK plan to release new titles on CD around three months after they hit the arcades, and 24 new developers have been signed up to produce games for it! Being big Neo Geo fans we can't wait to get our hands on one of these, although we hear that it does take quite a while to load the games. Still, that's a small price to pay for arcade perfect versions of such excellent games as Art Of Fighting 2 and Samurai Showdown. oh yes, lemmings clean up sales-wise this Christmas with a new ultra-value SNES and Super Game Boy pack. For a bargain .99 you get a SNES, Super Game Boy, Super Mario World and a voucher for a free Game Boy cart. Perfect for cashstrapped gamers. o we're not talking Mortal Kombat. Those suicidal furry critters the Lemmings are back for more pain and suffering courtesy of Psygnosis. They're so hard and cruel those Liverpudlians, aren't they? This time round there's 120 brand new levels for them to survive with new traps and monsters trying to do their bit to control the Lemming population. To help save themselves the Lemmings will have new objects and tools to manipulate, but perhaps the most noticeable difference is that they are now larger and more fluidly animated than before. PC engine goes 32-bit NEC, maker of the excellent PC Engine, has unveiled a new 32-Bit super machine. Although it looks more like a PC, the FX-32, as it's known, is a fullblown CD console. The tech-spec makes it look like a promising machine, although it's unlikely to be launched over here. Still, if it turns out to be a NEC has announsuccess you ced four games never know for the FX-32, what might including FX happen. NEC expects it to be Fighter and around for a while, since it's look Street Fight. ing at making a FX-32/PC-9800 combo unit for release in 1997! Lemmings 3 is to hit the shelves in November on PC, PC-CD and Amiga. The eponymous Lemmings return in what must be Psygnosis' strongest title. WE TRABARBRO. 10 "


"CLAYFIGHTERS 2 NEWS CVG nintendo dreams it's claytime again konami snatch In the same stable as the classic fantasy adventures Zelda and Secret of Mana, Illusion of Gaia will be out in the USA nice baby soon courtesy of Nintendo. Expect in-depth gameplay backed with high definition graphics. And apart from anything else the onami has plot is refreshingly different, nabbed a involving telekinetic powers. beaut of a With battery back-up and feagame. Snatcher has all turing locations which include the standard CD game the great Wall of China and the features and promises Tower of Babel, Illusion of Gaia to be a darned good sounds great in both senses of game to boot. It's a text the word. /graphics-based BladeAlso bouncing its way down runner-esque detective the pipeline from Nintendo adventure with Japanis Uniracers from the award Illusion of Gaia is going ese-style cartoon aniwinning DMA Design Ltd, to be Nintendo's latest mation. You have to (responsible for the classic Zelda-style game. track down and destroy Lemmings amongst others). Snatchers, bio-robots The game has been designed on Silicon Graphics work gone mad who survive by killing humans and replacing Those pudgy lumps of stations using the same software that helped create the spe them. Snatcher is compatible with the Lethal Enforcers putty are back in cial effects in films like Terminator 2 and Jurassic Park. The Justifier gun and is a classic on the PC Engine CD. It another 24meg of game sounds like a cross between Stunt Race FX and Marble should do just the same on the Mega-CD, although with fighting action from Madness and knowing Nintendo it'll probably play as well as its adult theme it's likely to come in with a 16 rating. Interplay. Clayfighter 2: those classics as well. Judgment Clay will star nine new fighting characters including Hoppy the bouncing rabbit, Octo the purple octopus and Banana Man. for the last year or so LucasArts has Only The Blob and been collaborating with its sister Mr Frosty return from company and special effects legends the original cast and Industrial Light & Magic to create the special they, like the other new Fresh from their success with effects for The Dig, a CD ROM adventure cocharacters, will now the official World Cup designed by Stephen Spielberg. The game have twice the charac License US Gold are looking itself puts you ter animation of the for more with their two latest in the magnetic first game. With digi products. First up is World boots of Boston tised sound, super Cup Golf which is, believe it Low, commanattacks and a training or not, a golf game. What's der of a small mode, Clayfighter 2 more of a surprise is that it's team of space looks like matching the going to be a CD-only game explorers who number one success of and will appear on 3DO, set out to blast the original. CD32, CD-I, PC CD-ROM and an asteroid out Mega CD. It needs to be on of Earth's orbit LucasArts and special CD because only to be swept effects company there's D CU COU Industrial Light & Magic 800 away by an megabytes of prehave teamed up to proalien booby trap rendered images duce The Dig. to a distant world. Stranded on a hostile planet of the official light years away from Earth and sifting through World Cup Hyatt the ruins of a lost civilisation, Low's crew Dorado course in OTEL TRUTHAIENT unearths an astounding discovery. Puerto Rico to be The majority of the game will require included. The you to deal with the turmoil and treachery of the game will also be crew as you struggle to find the key to the alien released on the technology that will send them home. Saturn and A Fairway out! Watch the Spielberg's name alone should as good as guarbirdie on CD with World Cup Playstation early next year antee the game's success but from what we've and is looking very smart, we Golf. seen it deserves to succeed on its own merits. can reveal. US GOLD HIT TWO HOLES IN ONE digging for gold O HIYATI "


"CVG NEWS OCEAN TURNS TO JELLY NEWS codemasters sick spheres jellyboy Mev stands by some early drawings of his fledgling CD game that has the working title of 'Hodger'. VIVID IMAGE TO THE RESCUE Straight from the Micro Machines stable (or garage) comes Psycho Pinball. There's going to be five tables to play and 12 different surface types that will affect the flow of the ball. This is Mega Drive-only at the moment but if it's a Success, expect it to be converted to all major formats. It'll be out in October. y now you've probably seen the advertisements for Jellyboy, and Ocean has big plans for its latest platformer on SNES and Game Boy. Coded by Probe (the team behind Mortal Kombat I and II in case you need Ocean's Jellyboy is set to reminding) Jellyboy metamorphasise on Game reminds us a little of Boy and SNES. Putty Squad in that the hero can morph into other shapes, 27 in fact. For instance, where there's a wall Jellyboy can find an icon nearby which will turn him into a hammer and allow him to break through. The platform worlds that Jellyboy must traverse include Toy Land, Cold World, The Outer Limits and Sky High. All the usual platform japery like secret rooms, exits and bonus games will be included. Sweet! michael jordan adventure chaos in the windy city While the CVG team was visiting the programmers of the new Mario Kart-style game, Street Racer, they noticed some early drawings of a new game based on Hodger, the magic-carpet flying character from the aforementioned game. Mev Dinc, the main man at gaming house Vivid Image has high hopes for 'Hodger the game'. \"It will be our first CD product, and I want to prove the point that a CD game doesn't have to be just a good looking demo; and that a decent game is a craft and that it's not just down to a SiliconGraphics machine.\" Mev wants to create a mini-cartoon movie that you can fully interact with. To aid him in this task he's enlisted ex-Disney and Hollywood animator Bill Hajee (whose credits include the Rescuers), and although the project's still in its infancy, Bill has already completed 2,000 frames of animation. ridge racer 2 arrives! A and Deniz h, now this one really does look the business. Rik and Deniz were ready for yet another routine basketball license when they saw Jordan, but it turns out to be a combined platform game/Final Fight style beat-'em-up. As Jordan you'll have to rescue 20 of the world's greatest basketball players by bashing the baddies with your basketball. Add decent graphics (especially the brilliant digitised animation of Jordan himself) and sound to the already strong gameplay and Jordan looks like being one of the best SNES games we've seen for for a while. No news on the Mega Drive version being developed by EA as yet. The sequel to Namco's highly successful Ridge Race coin-op is about to hit these shores. It features better graphics, a rear-view mirror and a serial link to connect up to eight machines together for multiplayer games. PRIMAL RAGE Just when you thought it was safe to venture back into the primordial soup, the arcade floors have begun to tremble once more to the sound of a serious new coin-op beat 'em up, courtesy of Time Warner/Atari and some extraordinary backroom wizardry. Sneak previews of Primal Rage reveal stunningly drawn large lizards batting it out in spectacular style, and with some of the most superb animation yet seen on any games machine. How have they done it? We'll be telling you in detail next issue, but in the meantime reast yer peepers on these exclusive pix. 12 "


"THE MES ARENA SOFTULARE CLEARANCE MEGA DRIVE STREET FIGHTER 2 WAS .99, .99 LOWEST EVER PRICES MEGA-CD ECCO THE DOLPHIN WAS .99 LOWEST EVER PRICES SAVEC Master System JURASSIC PARK WAS .99 MESED LOWEST EVER PRICES SAVE $29.99 SAVE $19.99 JURASSIC PARK  .99  .99 JURASSIC PARK F10 Liu FIFA INTERNATIONAL SOCCER was .99 SAVE  .99 WORLD CUP USA 94 WAS .99 SAVE  .99 COOL SPOT WAS .99 SAVE  .99 GaME GEZA SONIGA CHAOS SONIC CHAOS WAS .99, .99 ROAD AVENGER WAS $39.99 SAVE  .99 SONIC CD WAS .99, .99 SAVE  .99 | SHERLOCK HOLMES WAS .99, .99 SAVE  .99 SUPER NINTENDO FIFA INTERNATIONAL SOCCER WAS .99 SPORTS LOWEST EVER PRICES BATMAN RETURNS WAS .99 SAVE  .99 SONIC CHAOS WAS .99 WAS .99 SAVE  .99 .99 JUNGLE BOOK WAS 427.99 SAVE  .99 GAME BOY MORTAL KOMBAT WAS .99 LOWEST EVER PRICES LOWEST EVER PRICES SAVE IS ELFA SAVE LOWEST EVER PRICE GAME BOY INTERNATIONAL SOCCER Banesa  .99  .99 Aclaim GAME GESA ALIEN 3 WAS .99, .99 .99 JUNGLE BOOK WAS $24.99 SAVE  .99 SUPER KICK OFF was .99, .99, $20.99 SAVE  .99 STRIKER WAS .99 SAVE  .99 NBA ALL-STAR CHALLENGE WAS $49.99 SAVE  .99 WORLD CUP USA 94 WORLD CUP USA 694 WAS .99 SAVE  .99 AL KOMBAT 0 Aklaim e Li DR. FRANKEN 2 WAS .99 WAS .99 PINBALL DREAMS WAS E19.99 JURASSIC PARK WAS .99 SAVE  .99 .99 SAVE  .99 SAVE  .99 COME IN-STORE HUNT DOWN JAGUAR AND PLAY GAMES FOR AT THE FREEEER MEGADRIVE SUPER NINTENDO GAMEBOY GAMEGEAR WAS .99 WAS .99 WAS .99 WAS E24.99 WAS .99 WAS .99 WAS E14.99 SAVE  .99 .99 SAVE  .99 SAVE  .99 .99 .99 SAVE  .99 NES NOW MANY MORE PRICES RUMBELOWS SLASHED IN-STORE ROHO se HURRY WHILE STOCKS LAST. OFFERS VALID UNTIL 31.8.94. RUMBELOWS LTD, BATRD HOUSE, ARLINGTON BUSINESS PARK, THEALE, BERKS, RG745A. "


"CVG NEWS ALL THE NEW GAMES NEWS I HAVEN'T SEEN THAT BEFORE! VIDEO We've got on our hands and knees to bring you first shots of the all games you need to know about they're real hot stuff. Enjoy! Loadstar(above) is an FMVstyle game on PC-CD and Probotector (right) should look pretty fierce on Super Game Boy. and more of those gorgeous graphics we've come to expect in Disney games. Samurai Showdown Takara  MD Top Hunter SNK  Neo Geo Another high-quality action game loaded with hefty weapons, four planets to conquer and a pair of hyper-cute central characters. The Incredible Machine Panasonic  3DO Original? Certainly. Weird? Definitely. Basically the aim is to manoeuvre a ball from one side of the screen to the other by building a machine from all sorts of odd parts. Bonkers Capcom  SNES Based on the Disney Bonkers cartoon, which we've never heard of, this sideways scrolling comedy combat game casts you as a cop out to kick the villains out of town. If it's anything like Capcom's Mickey Mouse game you'll be bonkers to miss it. This top Neo-Geo game has had a remarkable translation to MD. What makes this beat-'em-up so good is the versatility of the characters even their pets join in the fight! Rocko's Modern Life Viacom  SNES Produced by the animators of Ren 'N' Stimpy, this Nickelodeon's smash-hit cartoon adaptation calls on you to make sure Rocko the dog doesn't fall foul of whatever it is that can happen to dogs these days. Graphically, it looks close to the Ren 'n Stimpy games -and that's no bad thing. Burn Cycle Philips  CD-i Philips is making a fuss over this game, and it could well turn out to be the best thing to appear on CD-i. It's a moody sci-fi game where you have to find the person who's infected your brain with a killer virus. Akira  THQ SNES/MD/GG/GB Mutant Rampage Philips  CD-i Waste smelly mutants in the CD-i's first ever beat-'em-up. It uses the Digital Video Cartridge, so there's no danger of low-quality graphics. There'll be plenty of opponents, but we haven't seen any sign of blood yet. Hmm. Sea Quest DSV THO  SNES/MD/GB Based on the TV show this smartlooking game plunges you in control of seven under water vessels for 24 missions-worth of exploration and shooting fun. You can even play as a Dolphin! A relative of Ecco perhaps? The film which started the Manga boom. The game features violent play and lots of different styles such as driving, fighting and a Doom bit too. Ten levels are promised along with numerous characters to select. Aero Fighters McO'River  SNES It's been ages since the SNES last saw a really good shoot-'em-up and this could be the game to change that. It's got all the right ingredients: big sprites, fast scrolling, hefty weapons and loads of levels. We can't wait. Jelly Boy 2 Sony SNES As we wait for the UK release of Ocean's Jelly Boy, the sequel's almost here. Again it's a platformer, but this one is more along the lines Super Mario World in its ideas and challenges. Descent Interplay  PC The Great Circus Mystery Capcom SNES Set in and around a circus, Mickey Mouse's latest Super NES adventure will feature a simultaneous two-player mode Dynamite Headdy Sega  MD/GG Sega's latest star who is being built up to be as big as Sonic. Looking totally cute, one original aspect of the game is Headdy's ability to change his head to take care of different tasks. Out September. Doom style game where you pilot a spaceship which is plunging into the depths of Earth. It seems to be much faster however and reeks of atmosphere. 14 "


"QUIE CODE HOLDS ONTO THE TITLE OF BIG BOUNCE CHAMPION! VO og OLYMPICS As our team coach win the race you just sure... too late now... oh, look said to me just before lose your life.» That's should I there's my mate, I entered the 100 the whole shooting have Frimpston... I'm not so Qbits Sprint \"It's match with the Alien MIDI entered sure he's competition easy... just run as fast Olympics... you're for the Lunge, Leap & fit for the Flob Flob.\" as you racing to be a hero, or Splat?... Or maybe my can. to die in front of your greatest five seconds RF 88 = If you PINTARAM devoted fans. And were pencilled in for don't now I'm just not so the Jetpack Tag. It's GAME BOY Ocean OCEAN SOFTWARE LID. 2 CASTLE STREET. CASTLEFIELD. MANCHESTER. M3 4LZ . TELEPHONE: 061 832 6633. FAX: 061 834 0650 "


"CVG NEWS UNIVERSAL SOLDIER NEWS YOU WANT A FIGHT, YOU'VE GOT IT.. All the talk this month may be about Mortal Kombat II, but, as good as it is, it's got a real fight on its hands to keep the 'bloodiest videogame crown' in the face of two brand new hi-tech challengers on Jaguar and 3DO... way of the warrior HOPUTACE 2018 GAINES . 3DO  BEAT-'EM-UP .99 OUT AUGUST The graphics are, frankly, massive, and, combined with the camera panning, make way of the warrior the most handsome beat'em-up we've ever seen. ovie giant Universal Studios is the latest film company to make inroads into computer gaming, but unlike companies such as Paramount and Fox it has opted to stick to a far more traditional format. With Way Of The Warrior it has created a beat-'em-up which, technically at least, surpasses anything we've seen on a home system. The digitised characters may be nothing new, but what it does offer is movie-style camera panning and closeups of the action. Providing these aren't included at the expense of speed and fluid gameplay this could live up to Universal's high expectations. Besides the 11 characters' 80 standard moves apiece, each also has certain 'termination moves at their disposal, the goriness of which suggests an almost inevitable 18-rating for WOTW over here. Whatever happens, all the ingredients are in place for the creation of the best combat game ever seen on console. 24 You can play with nine of the game's 11 characters, the last two being 3D modelled bosses which you encounter at the end of the game. GU WS The boss characters are unconventional to say the least. We've also heard rumours of a hidden character more powerful than both the bosses combined! There's a head-to-head mode for you to rumble with your mates. It's also a good way of mastering the dozens of moves you need to complete the game. A Fox is the game's token fat bloke, not that you'd call him that to his face! He's capable of devastating throws and lethal power moves like the backbreaker. The moves are over the top to say the least. Shaky Jake's alcoholic fireblast makes Dhalsim's fireball look like a wiffy belch. Each fighter has six standard death moves, plus some ultra-secret ones. 16 "


"JAG-ED EDGE NEWS CVG at the flicks Never mind whatever happened to the British film industry, whatever happened to the great British film licence? Rik Skews pops into the back seats of the cinema to take a look at three of the few that'll be premiering soon... As with most combat games, the larger the character, the slower they tend to move but the harder they hit. Like life really if you ever fight with a fat kid, kick him, then run away before he can hit back. A This weird Dungeon Master bit is where you select the character you want to fight with. It's unnecessary, but it makes a nice change all the same. The death moves are gratuitously violent, but fun. Here we see the unfortunate loser now in two pieces requiring two coffins following an inadequate performance in the arena. THE FLINTSTONES SONY / IMAGESOFT SNES/Mega Drive/Game Boy Go see the film and find out how Steven Spielberg gets involved in funnier films than Schindler's List then get your Piltdown man brain wrapped around a dino-sized slab of bright 'n' breezy platform entertainment. By Sony Imagesoft, out soon... kasumi-ninja JAGUAR PLATFORM .99 OUT SEPTEMBER eadlines permitting, this September will see the release of the Jaguar's first beat-'emup, Kasumi Ninja, which looks like being one of the major games on the console. The programmers have taken more than a few leaves out of the Mortal Kombat book, combining digitised characters, death moves and gallons of blood in a formidable fighting game which looks like being more than a match for anything else out there. The version we played was almost complete, bar the absence of a couple of characters and music. And boy, is it bloody. When you land a good shot the gore sprays everywhere, but unlike other games, the puddles it forms stay on the screen, so if you have a real strengthsapping battle lasting several minutes, your fighters are literally swimming in the stuff. THE SHADOW OCEAN / SNES The film based on the original 1930s radio serial and starring Alec Baldwin (The Getaway) is doing the biz in the States at present. The game is still at an early stage but looks decidedly Streets of Rage-ish. Mastering special moves is vital. If you can't hurl fireballs or teleport around the screen you won't last long in the combat arena. A good blow is rewarded with an equally evil sounding noise. Best of all is the way they double up and groan when you land them a hard shot in the gut. The animation is exceptionally smooth, and the characters well-defined, set against the best backdrops yet seen in a beat-'em-up. ADDAMS FAMILY VALUES OCEAN / SNES / MEGA DRIVE Addams Family Values has come on a long way since our exclusive February sneak preview. To recap, it's something like the classic Zelda, although not as puzzle intensive. Baby Pubert has been kidnapped by evil nanny Debbie Jellinsky and it's up to Uncle Fester (you) to rescue him. Previous Addams games have been decent-ish so here's hoping... Throws aren't particularly damaging, but they are a useful way of getting your opponent out of punching distance. That should get the landscape swimming in gore. "


"SELLER TEMPEST 2000 Atari THEME PARK\" Ocean BATTLEWHEELS Beyond Games Bios FEAR ASG Technologies ANDICE NEL FOOTDALE BRUTAL SPORTS FOOTBALL Telegames HARD BALL III Accolade TROY AIKMAN FOOTBALL Williams Entertainment ULTIMATE BRAIN GAMES Telegames E LET CLUB DRIVE Atari BARKLEY BASKETBALL: SHUT UP AND JAM!\" Accolade D GAMES SYNDICATE Ocean This is just the beginning for the Atari Jaguar 64-bit system. There are a ton of new games on the way for '94 designed to harness Jaguar's insane power. A power that's rapidly making other video game systems history. Experience sports games so intense you'll feel the turf burn, combat games that'll drain pints of your blood, and dizzying virtual reality games like Doom and Alien vs Predator. Can you stomach a few thousand body blows? You'd better because in Ultra WOLFENSTEIN 3D\" Id Software ATARI and the Atari logo are the registered trademarks of Atari Corporation. Jaguar, Kami Ninja Club Drive, Checkered Flag, Tempest XXI and Balcone 3 are trademarks of Atari Corporation. All rights reserved. TINY TOON ADVENTURES, characters, names and all related indicia are trademarks of Warner Bros, licemed to Atin Corporation 1993. Alion and Predator & Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation. All rights reserved. Used under sublicense from Activision Charles Barkley's likenew and name are well under liceme by Accolade. Inc Shut up and Janul na trademark of Accolade, Inc. 22 RISE OF THE ROBOTS Time Warner Interactive ROBINSON'S REQUIEM Silmarils PINBALL FANTASIES\" 21st Century ULTRA VORTEX Beyond Games "


"FLASHBACK US Gold 13 92 HOSENOSE AND BOOGER ASG Technologies AIR CAR WARS Midnight Software ARENA FOOTBALL\" V-Real BATTLEZONE DOOM\" Id Software BRET HULL HOCKEY\" Accolade BATTLEZONE 2000 Atari DRAGON'S LAIR\" Readysoft THE DOUBLE DRAGON V: THE SHADOW FALLS Williams Entertainment ASSAULT Midnight Software BEGIN. A DUNGEON DEPTHS Midnight Software Vortex, Kasumi Ninja and Double Dragon V, we've taken brawling to the 64th level. What makes Jaguar games so awesome? The raw power of 64-bit technology that adds CD-quality stereo sound, 16 million colors, and incredible 3D animation. No wonder it was voted the best hardware system in Europe and America. And it's the only system made in America. This is just a preview of what's to come. The Atari Jaguar. 64 bits. Do the Math. 1994 Accolade Inc. Brett Hall Hockey is a trademark of Accolade, Inc. and is officially licensed by Brett Hull and the National Hockey League Players Association, NHLPA is a trademark of the National Hockey League Players Association and is used under license by Accolade, Inc. Logo and name 1994 NHLPA. Doom Copyright  1993 by id Software. Inc. All rights reserved. All other trademurks and copynights are the properties of their respective owners. KASUMI NINJA Atari 1316 MATARI JAGUAR DO THE DO+THE @ @ O BO O MATHI INTERACTIVE MULTIMEDIA SYSTEM CHECKERED FLAG Atari ALIEN VS. PREDATOR\" Atari "


"CVG FEATURE THE X-MACHINE the ultimate In games 32 November will bring with it the biggest change in videogaming for seven years as the Big Guns blast their way into the 32-bit war. We'll be sizing up three of the biggest entrants in the next eight screenshot-packed pages. Game on... metal head sega cyber brawl sega For this release Sega have put the Mega Drive 32X's polygon processors into overdrive. It's based on the slightly dated Mech Warrior Robot Jox giant battle robot scenario, with you at the controls of a huge metal maniac demolishing a city and battling equally massive creations. Of all the polygon-based games on show, this was technically the most impressive. By now you've probably heard that Virtua Fighter isn't coming out on the 32X. What Sega do have in production though is an ace-looking beat-'em-up in the guise of Cyber Brawl. It doesn't offer the amazing 3D of Virtua Fighter, but it does feature the largest character graphics we've seen in any beat-'em-up. As with the Virtua games Metal Head features countless different camera angles. e Nintendo is rationing info on its new Ultra-64, arch-rival Sega is gearing up for its twopronged assault on the European and Japanese markets. November will see the UK launch of the Mega Drive 32x, the  bitbooster which will open the gateway to 32-bit gaming for Mega Drive owners. Although there aren't any finished games viewable yet, what we've seen so far certainly looks impressive. In Japan, however, because the Mega Drive's fortunes of late haven't been so good, rumour has been rife that Sega would make the jump straight to the Saturn. Well we can tell you that they'll both be arriving at the same time in Japan, while us Brits will have to wait as long as a year before we'll be able to get our hands on the Satum. So where should you put your money? The Saturn's clearly the superior machine, with the greater range of games. However, the 32X boasts some very smart titles, it's much cheaper and before long you could be playing official releases with English speech and text instead of imports. If you want to upgrade now and buy a new machine later you'll have to wait until about Easter next year to decide if you want an imported Saturn. That way you get the best of both worlds with plenty of time to put cash away for hardware and games and see how the other 32-bit machines progress in the interim. If one thing's for certain it's that Sega is going all-out to avoid the problems that have plagued the first 32 -bit consoles software. Despite having over 150 third-party developers for 32X and Saturn, Sega's first releases for both machines will be home-grown products. Sega wants to make sure it doesn't fall into the trap of having low quality, rushed releases when the machine is launched. Instead it has spent plenty of time and money developing the first wave of titles to make optimum use of the technology with the aim of producing some mind-bog. gling games. We've seen a good deal of software at the recent CES and Tokyo Toy shows and are convinced there's room for both machines alongside the other 32-bit console machines, especially in the light of Sega's new policy of controlled releases. The basic aim of Metal Head is to kill things in the most violent way you possibly can... ...what exactly is a giant robot supposed to do? Identical to the PC version in every way O which is a very good thing. Even better, we've also heard that Doom 2 will be converted. What more could you ask for? For some reason this early version is set in a city on top of a skyscraper. 20 "


"THE X-MACHINE FEATURE CVG virtua racing deluxe, sega star wars arcade sega Despite being at an earlier stage of development than Virtua Racing, Star Wars is already looking very impressive. There's still a lot of work to be done, but what's there at the moment runs at a fair lick. Even better, we've also heard that this version will feature six levels instead of the coin-op's meagre four. You can read more about that on page 64. Again, there's still a very long way to go before it's ready to be launched, but the 32X seems more than capable of delivering the power needed to make this a very hot cart indeed. You're briefed before the missions by 026 Admiral FREUD Ackbar, but basically if you shoot any imperial SETESTES ships you find, you'll be OK. pore to nye bro Rather than go all-out and produce a faithful replica of the Virtua Racing coin-op Sega has taken the original game and added several new elements. There are more tracks and two new types of car a sleek futuristic roadster and a rather normal family saloon. The version Sega demoed at CES was supposedly 60% complete, with only half the number of polygons of the finished version and no other cars. However, what is in place is the speed and smoothness of the coin-op version It's certainly in a different league to the standard Mega Drive version. o AORT ALL W The behindthe-ship view is a nice touch, allowing you to view more of the star field. It's much harder like this. A This massive frigate is the largest single element in the game so far. As you fly past it there's no detectable flickering or slow down. All the different view-points from the coin-op are featured... Sound effects sampled from the movies will be used to accompany the action along with the film's soundtrack The game culminates with the attack on the Death Star's exhaust port. Again, this section is far from complete. ...although the cockpit view hasn't yet been included in this version. shadow of atlantis-sega As you can see it's far more colourful and take our word for it... Even at this early stage, Virtua Racing Deluxe matches the coinop for speed. The 32X's graphic shifting abilities are put to good use in this undersea adventure. Shadow Of Atlantis is real 20,000 Leagues Under The Sea stuff, combining adventuring with puzzle solving. The graphics are amazingly colourful and update smoothly as you negotiate submarines and sunken wrecks. The bad news is Sega hasn't yet pencilled this in is as an official release. Although Sega claims that there are still loads of polygons to be added, this version already looks amazing A ...much smoother than its M-CD rival. Please release this here, Sega! A This kind of thing is impossible to do well on 16bit machines 32x graphics in action. The update is similar to Mansion of Lost Souls on Mega-CD. Eat your heart out Seaquest DSV. What is missing, at the mo, are the other cars although it's tough enough without them. "


"CVG FEATURE SATURN'S LOOKING HOT deadlus the ultimate in games dream house Essentially a conversion of the Mega-CD game, this adventure looks much better on Saturn and the programmers have added multiple gamepaths. Sega Saturn One of the few shoot'em-ups in development for the Saturn. It's a first person perspective blast which makes full use of the machine's polygon handling capabilities. chinese detective virtua fighter This is the one! Virtua Fighter in all its polygon glory will be coming to the Saturn and our sources tell us that it's going to be almost arcade perfect. However, we also hear that it's going to be a conversion of the original game, not the new Maniax version. SE SATURN Apparently quite a lot of money has been invested in this detective thriller game, much being spent on location shoots in Hong Kong. Again, there's not much chance of it being released over here. Golf games are hugely popular in Japan, so it's understandable, that Sega has one as one of the company's first Saturn releases. It features digitised characters and courses taken from the Pebble Beach complex. clockwork knight Technically the animation is better than anything we've seen in a platform game... This is one of the first Saturn games we saw, and it really proves the machine's capabilities. It's a platform game set in a toy room where the occupants come to life at midnight to embark on a quest to find their missing mate. The camera panning and multi-layer graphics make this look more like a cartoon than a game. We've seen this running and believe us, it could turn out to be one of the best games ever. ...with loads of movie-style camera angles and special graphic effects. 22 "


"SATURN'S LOOKING HOT FEATURE CVG Shinobi X Sega stalwart Shinobi will also be appearing on Saturn. The graphics are made up from digitised characters instead of conventional sprites. It's not a revolutionary title, but it looks like it plays very well indeed. Game for hardcore baseball nuts. It looks good, but we'd be surprised if it ever saw a European release. greatest nine Mega Drive 32X Spc CPU: 2X32-Bit RISC Speed: 40 MIPS Colour: 16-Bit Graphic Capabilities: Video Digital Processor, texture mapping. Storage: CD/Cartridge Availability: November Sega's stop-gap offering is shaping up to be an essential Mega Drive purchase. Naturally there are plenty of big name releases for it, and while, technically, it's quite a modest machine it does have plenty of plus points. For one thing it gives the Mega-CD TruVideo capabilities, which is Sega's equivalent of the M-Peg standard. Best of all it's only going to cost . At that price it's even worth buying a Mega Drive to own one. sim city CARP The Saturn version of what could well turn out to be the PC game of the year should be a conversion of the forthcoming PC CD-ROM version. This features Full Motion Video clips for disasters and other events in the game. panzar dragon Based on the 1991 coin-op smash Rad Mobile, Gail Racer's fast enough to give Daytona and Ridge Racer a run for their money. Still, the proof is in the gameplay and it's far to early to judge yet. Turkagran intis Bil The other Saturn shoot-'em-up is an unconventional affair, with the player taking a seat on the back of a dragon. The texture mapping is exceptional, with mist effects and objects fading in from the distance. It has two view points: behind the dragon or first-person. WWW . rasil Saturn Spec Finally, proof Daytona is coming to the Saturn. This demo was on display at the recent Tokyo show, though all we saw was a bit of ground with \"Saturn' sprayed on it. daytona usa CPU: 2X32-Bit RISC Speed: 27Mhz Colour: 24-Bit Graphics Capabilities: 900,000 polygons per second, texture mapping, four sprite levels plus full manipulation including transparency, scaling and Gourad shading. M-Peg FMV likely. Storage: CD and cartridge. UK Availability: Mid-1995 on import The fact that it also has a cartridge slot suggests that Sega might one day release a Mega Drive adaptor for the machine. victory goal When we first featured this it went under the title of Saturn Soccer. Now it's got a real name and it's shaping up to be real good. Hopefully Sega will be bundling Clockwork Knight with the Saturn... blue speed This is another game we might not see here. Blue Seed is an RPG pencilled in for release early next year. It's shaping up to be very good, although you'll need to be able to read Japanese to play it. A... as it's heading up our top-10 most wanted games at the moment. 23 "


"CVG FEATURE CATCH THE GAMES AT THE PLAYSTATION the ultimate in games Setting the globe on fire ridge racer -namco While Saturn owners will be able to get their hands on Daytona US, Namco's equally smart driving sim will be coming to the PlayStation. It's still not clear whether it will be multi-play, though. Sony wants the whole world in its hands with its revolutionary PlayStation they just might get it... Watch this space: a volcano is about to erupt. Since its glitzy debut at the Tokyo Toy Show, the PlayStation has become arguably the most talked about machine in the Japanese games press. Everything here comes from that show, and some of the games might not make it to the SON UK, but they're a taste of what will happen when the machine launches here next year. And in the meantime expect PlayStation coverage to lie dormant under a Sony security blanket so enjoy the screenshots while you can... Sony has big plans for its wonder console. It predicts almost one million machines will be sold in the first 12 months and can't put a figure on the software. The PlayStation is more than hype. It's a big effort by PlayStation Sony to capture a giant slice of the world videogaming market. And it has got off on the right foot. Already over 170 third-party developers have been signed to produce software for the machine The RAM cards can store 1Mbit of information (256K), with the machine itself being home to 8 megabytes of on-board RAM for video, sound, data storage and the operating, plus a 256K buffer for the CD-ROM drive. Larger cards will be available next year, although they won't be cheap. SONY CROISSOS The machine itself isn't that big it's only 5cm thick and about the size of this magazine. It's designed to be as simple to use as possible with the only controls being the open, power and reset buttons. So far only mock-ups (such as this one) have been shown to the media, but we've just heard the press will be allowed to get their hands on the real thing at Sony Japan this August. Including directional controls, the PlayStation joypad has 14 buttons. Despite being on the chunky side, it's apparently very comfortable and easy to use. 24 "


"CATCH THE GAMES AT THE PLAYSTATION FEATURE CVG cyber slednamco star blade-namco The third Namco coin-op conversion for PlayStation. It's a polygon-based blaster which features all manner of giant robot and alien space craft. derby stallionascii 8200 Another Namco arcade conversion, this one's a 3D blaster which is similar in many ways to Sega's Virtua Star Wars. powerful professional baseball-konami A horse racing game doesn't sound the most exciting thing on Earth, but there's one coming to the PlayStation any how. Don't expect to see this getting a European release, though. (not including Sony's own ever-growing development houses). There's much more to this story than mere company rhetoric. Chip for chip, the PlayStation will be the most powerful games console ever made. Its graphic engine alone is capable for shifting 1.5 million standard polygons, or 500,000 texture mapped polygons every second. The advanced graphic architecture can also rotate and scale up to 4,000 8x8 pixel sprites in high-resolution mode plus support M-Peg and J-Peg compression For all this technical excellence, the console still holds one or two comparatively archaic features which have impressed us as much as anything. The designers haven't concentrated solely on polygons, Gourad shading, texture mapping and other such features. They've also managed to incorporate powerful 2D scrolling and sprite functions which, when you consider the number of classic games which could be converted to this system, is a very good thing indeed. It's also a very expandable system. RAM cards can be Big, cute graphics, lots of action and a running commentary plays throughout It's not likely to be released in Europe though. plugged in letting you save games or characters and then take them round to your mate's house and play them on their machine. The RS232C socket will allow multiple machines to be zero device Zoom linked up, along with devices such as hard drives; it could also be used to hook a PlayStation up to two monitors for multi-player games. A key weapon in the PlayStation's arsenal is the wave of discontent with Sega and Nintendo that has swept through software companies. The latter make games to make money, and the fact is, unless your SNES or Mega Drive game hits the top 30, you're not going to see much cash from it. It's not just the high-price of carts, they have to pay royalties on game sales and often break their budgets redeveloping games because they've been refused on quality grounds. But when you look at some of the releases that have cropped up in the last two years, this doesn't seem to be consistent policy. All of which is why the softcos are looking for an alternative system, one which will give them the freedom to design games with less constraints and without a big brother third-party manager breathing down their necks. What Sony is going to Stunning polygon-based beat 'em up. It's fast, the graphics are detailed and with an infinite num ber of viewpoints made possible by the PlayStation's realtime modelling hardware. ultimate parodiusTweuoy One of the biggest name games coming to the PlayStation. Details are scarce, but it should turn out to be an enhanced version of the coin-op. a-train iv While Sim City became a massive hit here, the equally excellent A-Train didn't quite have the same impact. However, it's one of the most popular PC games in train-mad Japan, which explains why it's coming to the PlayStation Pue 25 "


"CVG FEATURE CATCH THE GAMES AT THE PLAYSTATION CVE FEATURE the ultimate in games pori pori circus grand prix sony raidenseibu formation soccer human 1901 Not getting carried away with the PlayStation's graphic technology, Jap firm Seibu has this vertically scrolling shoot-'em-up amongst its first batch of releases. Regarded in Japan as one of the best footy games on the market, this is another title scheduled for release in the first half of 1995. Ultra-cute comedy race game with cartoon-quality graphics and outrageous tracks. Looks like being one of the most heavily pushed early releases. white book movie video However, Sony claims the compression standard, and average game will cost you  red prismthere's a suspiciously Digital -40, making them sony Video Cartridge-shaped slot. cheaper than most Mega-CD This, they believe, is an releases. Currently around important point especially 30 titles are slated for r metal when the term 'multimedia' release over a 16-week perijacket means so little to so many. od. with six hitting the Development costs for a shelves the same time as DO V PlayStation game are high. the console. The machine canvon Even for a conversion of an will also be coming with a great pains to stress is that old game, the basic developgame, although which one it the PlayStation is a games ment toolkit is needed and is hasn't yet been decided. Awesome-looking machine, pure and simple. that clocks in at a cool What is certain is that Battletech-style game. It looks like It's not intended to be a ,000. Add to that the there's room enough for being the most set-top home entertainment inevitable movie sequences, Saturn, 32X, Ultra 64, 3DO, graphically imprescentre, or a device for play cartoon sections, recorded Jaguar CD and PlayStation. sive of the ing movies on even music and voice talent and When you look at the huge PlayStation's early though the machine can be you've got a recipe for potensales of Mega Drives, Amigas releases adapted to decode the tially expensive software. and SNESes, it's easy to see all three machines doing very princess maker 3 well. The proof, though, will be in how playable the games ga are, not the tech specs of the consoles. And, with software Another Japan-only release. It's a bizarre simu companies' new-found qualilation where you raise a girl to become a ty-awareness, the future's princess or, ahem, a lady of disreputable virtue, looking very rosy. If you get what we mean. Multiplayer robot combat sim which makes full use of the serial connection facilities on the PlayStation charlotte's castle asmic ganbare morikawa-kun sony Based on the obscure cartoon series, this action adventure is due for a Japanese launch mid-1995. This strange strategy game has you building robots and solving puzzles. Bizarre, but certainly original. 26 "


"CATCH THE GAMES AT THE PLAYSTATION FEATURE CVG twin goddesspolygram PlayStation Spec blue forest lightstuff Thanks to its compression hardware, doublespeed CD drive and large memory buffer, Full Motion Video is a doddie for the PlayStation. And that's exactly what's put into use for this movie-style fantasy combat game. SONY Typical Jap-style RPG which will probably be loaded with Japanese text and speech, rendering it unplayable to us Brits. race drivin' tengen The follow-up to Hard Drivin' could have a tough time when faced with rivals such as Namco's Ridge Racer. CPU: 3000A 32-Bit RISC Speed: 33Mhz Colour: 24-Bit Graphic Capabilities: Up to 500,000 texture mapped polygons per second. The most powerful graphic engine ever seen on a home machine. Storage System: CD Availability: November launch in Japan. Of all the new machines, the PlayStation easily has the best technical specifications. If Sony delivers the goods on this machine, it could well prove to be the dominant console when it's released in this country. However, expect to pay up to  on import and -70 for the games. ora-164 sony Despite looking like a normal horizontally scrolling shoot-'emup, Ora-164 makes use of multiple graphic planes and highresolution images to create, potentially at least, a game capable of reviving this flagging genre. V-zonesony It looks like pinball, but in fact this is a pachinko sim. As the game holds no appeal outside of Japan and Hong Kong, we doubt very much if we'll see an official version of this. The name makes this promising RPG sound like an East London kebab shop, but in truth this is likely to be one of the strongest titles in the first batch of PlayStation discs. ark the redsony sony tale of poporokuroisuIt's clear that the programmers have set out to create a different type of RPG with Ark the Red. The onus is as much on action as puzzle solving and exploration 22 "


"CVG WORK IN PROGRESS WACKY RACES WORK Vine 000156 CASAS 7 PROGRESS ISNES RACING GAME TBA TOUT NOVEMBER INO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE MEGA DRIVE AND SONY PLAYSTATION VERSIONS PLANNED Sydney's a pretty place, but your opponents couldn't give a XXXX for the Opera House they're too busy trying to run you into the drink, mate! HODJA RAPHAEL Ubisoft hopes to stall Mario Kart with its four-player alternative which is so hard that none of the drivers wear helmets! SUZULU HELMUT Frank has a bat mobile to help himself round his Addams Fam-style track. COURSE SELECT PAGE PRESS START TO SELECT All the characters have their own little idiosyncrasies; Raphael, for example, won't pick on Surf 'cos he's got the hots for her. t's about time 8 meg cart this could be someone had something big. the guts to The basic idea is just come up with an like Mario Kart, with alternative to eight characters out to Nintendo's superb Mario win by any means at Kart. It was one of the their disposal. Each car's first games to use the driver has his or her own DSP chip, resulting in distinctive personalised incredible speed in the tactics for outwitting graphics department. But opponents and winning it's the cost of this chip the race. Surf, for examwhich has probably put ple, is a real babe and many developers off bet has a nasty habit of tering the Mario Kart for magnetically attracting mula. Imagine our the other players close suprise, then, when enough so that she can Ubisoft turns up with a whiplash them out of the Mode-7 game which is way with her beach faster and doesn't use towel. Check out the rest any special chips at all. of the page for the other Street Racer is also the characters', erm, pecufirst racing game to sup liarities, and expect a port four players simulta full review in a couple of neously on screen, and issues' time... with eight cars and 32 tracks squeezed into an STREET RACER O2052 ESE) & Lap 2 A The clouds in the backdrops are on a par with Virtua Racing's. This is Raphael's track, his armoury comprises a grapple for frontal attacks, a scary in-car stereo and a mean punch should your motor interfere with his. GAME BY VIVID IMAGE CONTACT UBISOFT (081-343 9055) FOR INFORMATION SMEG CART 20 "


"WACKY RACES WORK IN PROGRESS CVG W 000243 SEAT LET'S SEE THAT ONE MORE TIME. is 1 Coming first isn't paramount, as the final scoring also depends on the number of pick-ups and power-ups that you've managed to acquire along the way. This is Hodja's track, he's from Turkey, so you'd better steer clear of his Ottoman weapon and beware of his magic carpet which can levitate him over other players. Lap 1  : Sex A By keeping the ball in play and dispensing with the ref, this bumper-soccer game is going to be fast and flippin' furious, and no mistake. Don't get sumo-smashed in the land of the rising roadwrecker. A Aside from the main racing game there's two other games included, one of which is Rumble where, WWF-style, you have to eject your opponents from the ring. What a godsend for the resolution of sporting arguments, the action replay has been. Off-side? In or out? Did the cars' wheels hit one another? Now thanks to Vivid Image you can replay each Street Race you've taken part in. So when you're racing your mates and an argument arises over what precisely went on you can just re-live the whole event. And you don't just get the standard perspective thanks to a unique 'all-angle' option (developed incidentally to demo the game at the CES), you can view the action from a variety of vantages, from worm's eye to head-on! IMPROVING THEIR IMAGE... COMING SOON Vivid Image is the programming team behind the rather gorgesome looking Street Racer. Mev Dinc, the man responsible for the likes of First and Second Samurai and, is dead proud of his new baby, and especially of the fact that there's no slowdown, \"...not even on the four player mode\". Certainly the four-way split screen is quite a marvel to behold, and after deciding that they were getting a tad overcompetent on the Hard level, the Vivid team have just decided to add a Crazy level, which even they find nearly impossible to beat. MEGA DRIVE/PLAYSTATION When CVG visited Vivid Image's HQ Mev was excitedly awaiting the arrival of his PlayStation development kit. \"The possiblities for Street Racer on that machine will be incredible.\" Much closer in the pipeline, though, is the Mega Drive version which should be ready early in the new year. EXPECTED RELEASE: EARLY '95/UNCONFIRMED PULL UP TO THE BUMPER BABY...  A CHARACTER FROM THIS GAME, HODJA, IS TO STAR IN HIS VERY OWN GAME, SEE NEWS FOR DETAILS. 29 "


"CVG WORK IN PROGRESS I HAVE A DREAM.., WORK PROGRESS IPCAMIGA ADVENTURE .99/.99 OUT SEPTEMBER NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE 1200 AND PC.CD VERSIONS PLANNED Dreamweb is rude in the parts other games dare not reach. It's an adult adventure aimed at kids, DREAMWEB Your inventory is always just a click away. You'll even be able to mix and match some objects to create a more useful item. DROP Ryan's inuentory mpire could well and boasts 4000 frames find themselves of animation, 200, embroiled in explorable locations and controversy on account 80 characters to of Dreamweb's blatent encounter, flaunting of violence, bad One of the game's language and hot lurve. top features are the It's a point-and-click choreographed combat adventure, your mission sequences which are like being to assasinate mini reaction tests. And seven people. You'll with violence so promineed to examine every nent in this game, if your thing to do the job clues don't help you past some objects are just a a scene you'll usually be pixel big! able to draw your gun Dreamweb has taken and shoot your way two years to develop, through. Most of the game is played in a small area of the screen, with the background, as you can see, only there for effect. V Louis's Flat Takeutch SON EBER'S GARAGE A Naked flesh alert! We couldn't print the best bit, though just expect to be shocked by this game. Walk to car On the bottom left screen you get to see an enlarged view of the cursor position. This is important as some objects can't be spotted without it. Your gun comes in very > handy if people don't want to co-operate in your investigations. EBERITA LAEROTERMED Here's the Dramweb in your dream you've been told to kill a bunch of people COMING SOON SNES/MEGA DRIVE Syndicate I EA/ Also set in the future, here you need to control eight secret agents across 3D isometric surroundings as you attempt to win over countries. A PC conversion. EXPECTED RELEASE: NOVEMBER who threaten the Web The game's all point-and-click with the aid of this hand. GAME BY EMPIRE CONTACT EMPIRE (081 343 7337) FOR INFORMATION 386 MINIMUM PC 30 "


"YOU'VE BEEN SMURFED! WORK IN PROGRESS CVG WORK THE SMURFS SPROGRESS GAME BOY SNES/GAME BOY PLATFORM ILUNCONFIRMED OUT SEPTEMBER INO OTHER VERSION AVAILABLE MEGA DRIVE VERSION PLANNED SNES Smurfs are making a comeback, from club culture to video domain. It's time to swing your pants and wear big hats, apparently... Constant action will be a a big plus point and the controls are responsive. Here's one of the bosses. You have to use the spring to bounce on to the heads of the plant. GAME BOY hundred male Smufs and one female Smurf sounds like a good time, and it would be if you weren't constantly interrupted by the likes of Gargamel and his cat. Well, it's Smurf to the rescue in this game. Garg' has managed to capture a number of your pals and you need to Smurf them free. Rescue one and you then play as that Smurf until you find the next. Predictably, Smurfs is a platform game and as such you can expect all the customary jumps, climbs, disappearing blocks and jumping on opponents' heads that you've seen elsewhere, but this time it's been done in a far more elegant way. Look out for some impressive, rotating Mode 7 graphics too, which hasn't been seen since Konami's Axelay. SNES In the Game Boy version you only play one of the Smurfs but at least it's the one with a weapon. SNES 00000 ISNES Here you need to guide the Smurf along the correct mine tracks to get to the bottom. The correct switches need to be activated quickly. All the animals are friends with the Smurfs, so use them to get around safely. COMING SOON GAME BOY A One of the nice things about the game is the use of hefty sprites. Very smoothly animated too. MEGA DRIVE The Smurfs Infogrames The 16-bit Sega version is expected to be no different to the SNES game previewed and seen here. But the use of colour probably isn't going to be quite as vivid as these grabs show. EXPECTED RELEASE: SEPTEMBER Even the Game Boy version will feature massive sprites. Killing Garg is really hard, we might add. SCORE DUE GAME BY INFOGRAMES CONTACT INFOGRAMES (071-738 8199) FOR INFORMATION. CART: 8 MEG ON THE SNES 31 "


"CVG WORK IN PROGRESS THE WHEELS OF FORTUNE? WORK SPROGRESS IPC RACING  OUT OCTOBER INO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED It may resemble Mario Kart in concept but this PC racing game uses the slickest 3D graphics engine to date. SUPERRARTS HET BEBE LEGO anic Media Proda realistic simulation of uctions has a the sport with believnew RT3D graphable kart handling, mulics engine which runs tiple camera perspecsuper-fast texture mapp tives and replay modes. ed worlds at 50 plus While playing you'll be frames per second. Supable to pick up tokens erkarts is based on this such as turbo, extra code and promises to grip and oil to enhance provide the best racing your performance. fun that the PC has seen C onclusion? Well let's for yonks. just say that we're batThere'll be eight 3D tling to bring you the tracks playable in split super exclusive on this screen mode or through one. This could be the a network for up to start of a whole new eight people. The series of race games. game's aim is to create As in the real thing, winning the opening scramble for position is allimportant, so be prepared for a jostle-fest. D'02\" There are plenty of short cuts available on the courses. In the finished version you'll have ramps to jump too. 0'07\"63 IDUMED MEE MED DE, TODIR MEDIR MEDINI I DOO TON OMC MONIC MRNICI By using the side view you can quickly check what's in front of and behind you. Particularly good on corners. A Aside from the first person, there's a whole range of alternative perspectives on offer. You lucky people! BEBE MONIC MIC NAMIC MIONIC Yep, there's a split screen ICO C TO IC ICC ICC MONICC MONIO mode as well! Different perspectives in each window will be available, but you don't get the background graphics at present. COMING SOON SNES Street Racer Ubisoft/TBA Wow! This could actually be better than Mario Kart with 32 tracks, zippy Mode 7 graphics and four-player simultaneous action. Bonus games too. EXPECTED RELEASE: NOVEMBER A Select different-sized engines for your kart In practice mode and try your luck on an obstacle course. GAME BY MANIC MEDIA PRODUCTIONS CONTACT MMP (0865 726544) FOR INFORMATION 386 PC MINIMUM 32 "


"SCHE DAY ALL WARS WILL BE FOUGHT THIS WA ) TURNAND BURN LICENCE Nintendo TURKANDBURN NO FLY ZOXN E 35. N O FLY ZONE 316,5 SUPER NINTENDO. LPTEASERTSTER PAL VERSION ASOLITE Superbly realistic, and ultra-playable air combat simulation featuring the US Navy's F-14 Tomcat Jet Fighter. Authentic computer, navigational and combat systems. 16 Meg cartridge packed with digitised sound and video, and stunning animated sequences. Relentless swarms of Mig-29s, Sea-to-Air Missiles, and heavily defended ground targets. SUPER Nintendo SUPER BATTLETAN BATTLETANK Features the US Army's ultimate war machine the M1A2 battletank. Engage authentic enemy tanks, helicopters, in day and night missions. SUPER NINTENDO.  ASSLITE mexim. N EITEFFENSEUTIESTEN PAL VERSION Switch to turret views for fast-paced, actionpacked assaults on enemy strongholds. No other game provides a closer simulation of mechanised warfare in a desert environment. ALL NEW: SONY SUPER NINTENDO. MIE OF POWER ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM IPAL VERSION FLECTRONIC ABSOLUTE TURN AND RURN NO-FLY ZONE IS A TRADEMARK OF ABSOLUTE ENTERTAINMENT INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 1993 ABSOLUTE ENTERTAINMENT INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. PUBLISHED BY ABSOLUTE ENTERTAINMENT INC DISTRIBUTED BY SONY ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING LTO, UNDER EXCLUSIVE LICENSE SUPER BATTLETAK 2 IS A TRADEMARK OF ABSOLUTE ENTERTAINMENT, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED ABSOLUTE ENTERTAINMENT IS A TRADEMARK OF ABSOLUTE ENTERTAINMENT INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 1993 ABSOLUTE ENTERTAINMENT, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. DISTRIHUTED BY SONY ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING LTD UNDER EXCLUSIVE LICENSE FROM ABSOLUTE ENTERTAINMENT INC "


"CVG WORK IN PROGRESS BOMBASTIC! FORK BOMBERMAN IN PROGRESS be O o el ISNES PUZZLE ETBAOUT NOVEMBER INO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED One of the most playable games of recent years makes an explosive return in a bigger and better incarnation... One of the better features in Bomberman 2 is better use made of being able to walk in and out of the screen to escape dangers. 1:42 O es we know this game's already out on import but here's the official British version which'll no doubt be a hot one for Christmas. Bomberman 2, like its predecessor, is set to be one of those essential games for anyone owning a multitap. With four players, or even one, Bomberman's trademark is addiction. The game's style is probably best described as hide-and-seek in a maze. Your character has to dash around setting bombs to make certain walls, while keeping away from baddies wander ing around the level. There are 40 new levels set against the clock, but where Bomberman 2 will differ from the original is in the scope of dangers and power-ups littering each maze. There's much more imagination in this version and it's been beefed up in the difficulty department too. Let's see how... The game design has been retained, but with loads of neat added extras. 1:48 Go e 2 0:32 A One of the best power-ups in the original was punching bombs along a row, but now you can pick them up and chuck them instead! DRUOMA HELENNARO HOND ORIGINAL VERSION PC ENGINE Bomberman Hudson Soft/ The first game in this series is still one of the best in this genre. Some top graphics and the same blend of complex stages and puzzles. Essential. ISSUE 112: 93% A In Battle Mode you can now define the difficulty of the opposition. You can also change colours of the characters. A The Tag Mode is a new feature in this version, so you can switch players. A You need to complete each stage before the ticker runs out. Fail, and a spiral of blocks will start to form, crushing you in its path. A Expect to encounter quite a few of these scrolling mazes. It makes things a bit more tricky if you're playing with four players. GAME BY HUDSON SOFT CONTACT VIRGIN (081-960 2255) FOR INFORMATION 34 "


"THAT'S NOT ALL FOLKS WORK IN PROGRESS CVG WORK SYLVESTER & TWEETY PROGRESS MEGA DRIVE PLATFORM UNCONFIRMED LOUT SEPT NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED A Sylvester has to manipulate and carry various objects to help him around the levels. By climbing on the box he can then balance on the fence. I tawt I taw a puddy cat! You did, you did. It's Sylvester, and he's having Tweety pie round for dinner... uos are really in Pie and turn him into a at the moment, canary pastie. The graphespecially as ics large and recognisthey give softcos a new able, fully retaining the spin on the platform style of the cartoon. game genre. Instead of Various characone cute creature runters are out to stop ning round level after you though, like level, you now have two Granny and her maraudof the little bleeders. ing broom, or the stereoSylvester & Tweety being typed cartoon bulldog. the latest. The game is best Warner's classic described as explorative characters star in their rather than fast and furiown platformer, with the ous, with you searching idea for the game based through the level at your on the traditional catown pace, collecting the eat-bird storyline. You objects you need to take control of Sylvester catch Tweety and move in a bid to catch Tweety on to the next level. A Sylvester has the kind of agility that you would expect of the local feline, walking along thin wires being one of his talents. Shame a resistance to electricity isn't part of his repertoire too. 10832 16,200 15.2 A A few useful pointers help you locate your little feathered friend/lunch. Subtle aren't they? Remember to collect certain items along the way; what would come in (very) handy right now would be the boxing glove. ALTERNATIVE SNES | Pink Goes To Hollywood Bandai/.99 The Pink Panther's eponymous outing on the SNES is a platform caper which is similar in style to the above. A fun, but not exactly taxing, platform romp. NOT REVIEWED That'll stop that peskey mutt from interfering in your quest to get the hell out of this level. Now no guesses as to where Tweety's mate is hiding. Tune in next month for the full review folks. GAME BY TIME WARNER CONTACT TIME WARNER(0604 602800) FOR MORE INFORMATION 35 "


"WORK IN PROGRESS HEY, HEY IT'S THE MONKEYS WORK IN ROGRESS DONKEY COUNTRY ISNES PLATFORM TBA TOUT DECEMBER INO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE INO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED A revolution in console games? That's what Nintendo is promising, with the spectacular platformer Donkey Kong Country... t's all change ally seen it running you'll for Nintendo just have to take our this Christmas word for it that this is it's move over the business. Mario and make The animation is like way for Donkey Kong, something out of a comthe Nin's long-forgotten puter generated cartoon. hero. Thank's to the All this is crammed into Super Game Boy he's a 32-meg cart, already started back on which its rumothe road to stardom, ured will be and now Nintendo is set priced around to launch him again in a the  game which will rede mark. It's fine your concept of 16this cheap bit gaming. for two reaDonkey Kong Country sons-firstis set to hit the SNES this Yule, but in fact it's wants himore like the kind of tech games game we'd expect to be such as this playing on a 32 or even to bridge 64-bit machine several the gap beyears from now. It overtween 16 shadowed everything and 64-bit, else at the recent CES and seconshow in Chicago and it's dly its out to going to wow SNES ownsteal Sega's ers all over the world. thunder when it The key to the game's launches the imminent success is its graphics. They've been developed on the same kind of Silicon Graphics system that will be used for the Ultra-64 and it shows! You've never seen anything like this before. Until you've actuWhen you see the game running it's hard to accept that what you're seeing is actually being produced by a SNES. For all its excellence, Donkey Kong does rely on several platform game stalwarts, such as the old hanging on a rope routine. GAME BY RARE CONTACT NINTENDO (0329 822565) FOR INFORMATION CART 24 MEG 26 "


"HEY. HEY IT'S THE MONKEYS WORK IN PROGRESS CVG KING OF THE SWINGERS Mega Drive 32-X later this year. Before you think we've been suckered in by the head-shatteringly amazing visuals and forgotten the gameplay, we can tell you that this is going to play as well as it looks. It's got all the features common to Nintendo's best platformers, it's jam packed with over 100 levels, plus bonus rooms and hidden stages and so many features it's impossible to list them all. Kong isn't alone, though, helping him is Diddy Kong, his chimp sidekick, who has his A Being a platform game, there's plenty of jumping involved, but there are very few areas where you're required to time a jump to pixel perfection. own set of levels as well as ones where he teams up with his big buddy. In fact, unlike most games, the action doesn't depend on the core character's abilities, Kong and Diddy are very much at the mercy of the game and your skills, or indeed lack of them. There are no special moves, no fireballs, no super flying capes. All Kong and Diddy can do is hitch a lift on the back of a rhino or ostrich, hurl barrels, run jump and roll. The rest is down to how you get them to negotiate the scenery and any useful items that are lying around. Your enemies attack from all sides. Here Diddy Kong, embittered by such a childish name, plans to extract his revenge on a low-flying buzzard. THE RARE ART OF ORIGINAL GAMES Leave Kong or Diddy alone for a few seconds and they do their best to be appallingly cute with a large amount of success. Amazingly, Donkey Kong Country isn't being programmed in Japan, it's being produced on home turf in old blighty by veteran codesters Rare. This team also contains the people responsible for developing the Advanced Computer Modelling (ACM) system used for the graphics. In its former guise of 8-bit developers Ultimate, Rare was also responsible for some of the most innovative games the computer world has ever seen. With Knightlore it created the first isometric adventure, Jetpac, which for a long time was the best shoot-'em-up anywhere and stack-load of other landmark titles including Trans-am, Sabre Wulf, Underworlde and Lunar Jetman. Despite being on the small side, the rhino takes no crap from the jungle's residents. It's a spike up the backside for anything that doesn't get out of the way in time or makes fun of its size. A Conclusive proof that worms do explode when you hit them with a barrel of Grolsch extra. Occasionally such an act will also release a bonus icon, but that's only if you're playing Donkey Kong Country. Do it in real life and you'll be pumped full of Thorazine and locked up for being mental. A As well as banana bonuses, there are also letters to collect. Spell KONG and you get to a bonus strange. THE VERY FIRST KING KONG MOVIE EVER MADE WAS WAY BACK IN 1933, AND IT WAS BEYOND A REASONABLE DOUBT THE BEST VERSION EVER, BUT EVEN IN THEM THERE DAYS OF HOLLYWOOD THEY WERE QUICK TO FOLLOW IT UP WITH A SEQUEL, IMAGINATIVELY TITLED 'SON OF KONG'. 37 "


"CUB WORK IN PROGRESS HEY, HEY IT'S THE MONKEYS WALK THIS WAY Working on the principle of why walk when you can get a lacky to carry you, Kong employs a variety of objects and mates as improvised taxis. Ostrich: Looking suspiciously like unfunny 70s kids 'entertainer' Bernie Clifton, the Ostrich provides the fastest way to get through the jungle. Sexy 3D rendered intros are no longer the domain of tiresome CD-ROM games: oh no, in Donkey Kong you'll go ape over this bonkers frontend to the game. V NO Rhino: If your idea of hard is two tons of armour and muscle pushing an extremely sharp spike at 30mph, you'll want to track down the rhino as soon as poss. Many of the game's concepts aren't what you'd term original. But when it does come to borrowing ideas, the programmers have covered the lot. It's hard to think of any platform game cliche they've missed. 0157 Barrel: He won't make it on to Viva Cabaret, but the sight of a large chimp rolling through a forest on a beer barrel is enough to upset any of the local fauna. When Kong's on a barrel the game accelerates to near Sonic speeds and taxes your reflexes to the limit. Tyre: Now this is more natural behaviour for a chimp. Well, the tyre is at least. Bouncing on it, in a mine shaft, collect ing levitating bananas is definitely one for The Twilight Times. Gathering bonuses is an integral part of the game, especially if you want to find all the secret stages. Mine car: All right, so this is about as original as a Bernard Manning joke, but it wouldn't be a platform game without a mine The barrels aren't just there for japes, they're an excellent way of getting from a to b squashing everything on the way. They also contain bonuses and can be picked up and lobbed at enemies. The jungle's inhabitants look friendly enough, until you touch them. It's like they've been swimming by a sewage outfall. As soon as Kong comes into contact with them he screws up his face and flies backwards. cart sequence. 38 THE BEST REMAKE OF KING KONG WAS UNDOUBTEDLY CIRCA 1976 AND STARRED THE THEN NOT-SO-WELL-KNOWN JEFF BRIDGES, JESSICA LANGE AND CHARLES GRODIN, AND THE SPECIAL EFFECTS WON AN OSCAR "


"YOU WON'T SEE ME WITH SPOTS That's it. That's all you need to know about how to get clean, healthy skin. And how to keep it that way. Of course, even when I'm really careful a persistent spot can slip through the FACIAL WASH DISP net. And if one does, I just use some FACIAL WASH Oxy 10. But I hardly ever have to. Helps pret Unblocksport Antica Helps prevent Unblocksport With added moistui Antibacterial with added moisturiser HARDLY EVER. Twice a day, morning and night — no more soap and water for me. Getting spots was no big deal. But given First, I wet my hands and clean them UNBEATABLE TREATMENT FOR STUBBORN SPOTS AND ACNE the choice, I can live without them. thoroughly with Oxy Clean Facial Wash. It's been a while since I've had one. Then I lather up some more and rub it Clinically Tested Nowadays I use Oxy* Clean Facial Wash. all over my face before rinsing it off. Always read the label. Oxy 10 contains Benzoyl Peroxide. *OXY and OXYCUTE 'EM are trademarks. OXY10 OXYCUTE M! COLOURLESS LOTION MAXIMUM STRENGTH "


"0 ZAP COMPUTER GAMES TECHNO HOUSE.LOW LANE.HORSFORTH LS18 4DF MAIL ORDER SIZZLINGLY HOT LINE 0532 5.9.0.0-77 532 590011 LOW LOW PRICES ALL THE LATEST GAMES & MACHINES SUPER QUICK DELIVERY NO SILLY MEMBERSHIP FEES REQUIRED TO BUY. OUR MOST FRIENDLY STAFF ARE WAITING FOR YOUR CALL. ZAP HOURS: 9am-7pm Mon-Fri 9am-5pm Sat. and Sun. FAX NO: 0532 586523 OPEN FOR SERVICE AND PRICE DAYS A WEEK SUPER NES FAMICOM JAPAN 3-D-O USA SUPER STREET FIGHTER ............................CALL SUPER BOMBERMAN II .................. ...99 RANMA 3 (BEAT EM UP) ... .CALL MYSTICAL NINJA II....... ...CALL KING OF THE MONSTERS II.. ..99 SAMURAI SHOWDOWN.... .CALL WORLD HEROES II ........ CALL DRAGON BALL 2 IT........ ..................449.99 SUPER SOCCER II ........00 MUSCLE BOMBER................. ..................CALL 3-D-O SYSTEM......... ...00 TOTAL ECLIPSE. .99 JOHN MADDEN..... .99 JURASSIC PARK ..... .99 ANOTHER WORLD .99 SEWAR SHARK....... .99 ROAD RASH........... .CALL PGA GOLF ..... ...CALL FIFA SOCCER............. .CALL THE HARDE .............. 249.99 PEBBLE BEACH GOLF....... 149.99 ULTRAMAN (JAP)...... .CALL WACKY RACES (JAP).. .CALL SEAL OF PHAROAH (JAP).... .......................CALL BOMBERMAN HARDWARE There ATARI JAGUAR SNES US CONSOLE ......................+$7.50 P&P NEO GEO CONSOLE.............. ..300.50 P&P NEO GEO USED CONSOLE ........+.50 P&P 3-D-O CONSOLE & CRASH & BURN...+$7.50 P&P ATARI JAGUAR UK CONSOLE.................... ATARI JAGUAR US CONSOLE ....+.50 P&P SNES MULTITAP ......................99+.50 P&P SNES PAL BOOSTER..................99+.50 P&P TRISTAR (NES TO SNES CONVERTER)............. ............99+.00 P&P SNES MOUSE ....99+.50 P&P ASCU FIGHTER STICK (SNES)..99+.00 P&P TOP FIGHTER JOYSTICK (SNES)..99+.00 P&P NTSC GAME CONVERTER (SNES)...520.00+ .50 P&P NEO GEO JOYSTICK ...............250.00+.00 P&P NEO GEO MEMORY CARD.......00+.50 P&P 3-D-O PAD... ...............99+.50 P&P JAGUAR PAD ......... ..$24.99+.50 POP NEO GEO STYLE JOYSTICK (SNES) .99+.00 P&P SUPER STREET FIGHTER SUPER METROID (NINTENDO) ................ SLAM MASTERS (CAPCOM .... .99 STUNT RACE FX (NINTENDO) .......... ......99 STAR TREK (SPECTRUM HOLY BYTE) .......99 SUPER STREET FIGHTER (CAPCOM..........CALL EYE OF THE BEHOLDER (CAPCOM) .........254.99 KNIGHT OF THE ROUND TABLE (CAPCOM) .99 FATAL FURY II (TAKARA).............. ....99 LORD OF THE RINGS (INTERPLAY)..........$49.99 SOS (VIC TOKET) .............. ..99 FIFA SOCCER (OCEANEA).......... ..99 KICK OFF II (IMAGINEER .................. $49.99 WORLD CUP STRIKER (ELITE) ................ ..99 RYAN GIGGS SOCCER (ACCLAIM)................99 WORLD CUP SOCCER US 94 (US GOLD) .....99 SOCCER SHOOTOUT (CAPCOM)................. ..99 KING OF THE DRAGONS (CAPCOM)...... -.99 PINBALL DREAMS (GAMETEK) ........ ..99 NINJA WARRIORS (TAITO).................. ...254.99 MEGAMAN SOCCER (CAPCOM)............ ..99 MEGAMAN X (CAPCOM)...... .99 LEGEND (SEIRA) ............ $49.99 TIME TRAX (THQ)...... .99 GS (REMCO) ....... .99 HARDBALL ITI (ACCOLADE). ..99 GHT & MAGIC  ()... .-4.99 ULTIMA RUNES OF VIRTUE II .......... ..99 KING OF THE MONSTERS II..... ..99 SPELLCRAFT (ASC II...... .99 SPEEDY GONZALES (SUNSOFT) ................149.99 SUPER MAN (SUNSOFT) ......................... ..99 SPIDERMAN & VENOM (ACCLAIM)............99 VIRTUAL BART (ACCLAIM) ................ .99 OPERATION EUROPE (KOED.............. ..99 CLAYMATES (INTERPLAY) ................ .99 SECRET OF MANA (SQUARE). ..99 FINAL FANTASY II (SQUARE)....... ...249.99 WIZARDRY S (CAPCOM)... .99 JOE & MAC II (DATA EAST) .................. ....99 BUGS BUNNY (SUNSOFT). ....99 LETHAL ENFORCERS + GUN .................. .99 BATTLE CARS (NAMCO) ..... ..99 MARIOS TIME MACHINE.... .99 NBA JAM (ACCLAIM.... .99 FLASHBACK (US GOLD). .99 AERO THE ACROBAT (SUNSOFT)......... $24.99 ACTRAISER II (ENIX)...... ..99 COOL SPOT (VIRGIN)... .99 GOOF TROOP (CAPCOM ........ .99 NHL 94 (EA) ................... ..99 J MADDEN 94 (EA). ..99 STANLEY CUP HOCKEY (NINTENDO)........99 SENSIBLE SOCCER... .99 SPORTS BASEBALL/FOOTBALL (MALIBU) $14.99 KEN GRIFFEY BASEBALL (NINTENDO).....99 OPERATION LOGIC BOMB.. ...99 MECAROBOT GOLF... .00 TECMO SUPER BOWL (TECMO) ........ $24.99 EVO (ENIX) ......... .99 RED LINE F1 RACER ...... .99 PEACE KEEPERS (ALECO). .99 T-2 THE ARCADE GAME (ACCLAIM)........ ...99 OLYMPIC GAMES (US GOLD).......................99 ROMANCE OF THE III KINGDOM MI..........39.99 NOBUNAGA'S AMBITION. ****...........39.99 KENDO RAGE .24.99 BUSBY... ... $24.99 DARIUS III....... .......99 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION (MICROPROSE) .......CALL PIRATES OF THE DARK WATER (SUNSOFT) 249.99 ANDRE AGASSI TENNIS (TECMAGIK) ......249.99 SPECTRE (GAMETER . .........99 SENSIBLE SOCCER (SONY)..........................99 BATTLE CARS (TECMO) .... ...99 UK MACHINE. US MACHINE .... RAIDEN CRESCENT GALAXY. DINO DINO DUDES. TEMPEST 2000 ................ ALIEN VS PREDATOR........ WOLFENSTEIN 3D......... DOOM .... KASUMI NINJA ............... ..CALL .00 ..229.99 .99 .CALL .99 .CALL .CALL CALL CALL CALL SPECIAL OFFER NEO-GEO MD WHEN BUYING A UK SNES CONVERTOR FOR .50 AND AUS JAP NINTENDO GAME YOU CAN KNOCK A WHOLE e 10 OFF 1'34'05 SIDE KICK SOCCER IT..... ........CALL TOP HUNTER ....... .. . ..CAT WIND JAMMERS........... .............00 SPIN MASTERS.............. . ... .........00 ART OF FIGHTING II ..............................00 SUMURAI SHOWDOWN ....00 OVER 100 USED CARTRIDGES FROM  CALL EST DAMAGE SPEED THE PRICE OF THE GAME, NOW THAT'S WHAT I CALL AN OFFER!!! EXAMPLE IF YOU BUY THE CONVERTER & GOOF TROOP THE TOTAL COST WOULD BE A MERE .49 + (P&P)OUCHII SAID OUR BANK MANAGER! STUNT RACE FX CUT HERE CUT HERE CALL ORDER FORM NAME Send to this address: ZAP ADDRESS TECHNO HOUSE LOW LANE, HORSFORTH  LEEDS LS18 4DF Please rush me the following TELEPHONE NO. ITEM PRICE POST/P TOTAL POSTCODE Credit card number Expiry Date Cheque Credit Card SUPER METROID Postal Order Our premises are bulging with games, so if you don't see what you want do not despair Just call! All Postal orders and credit card purchases will be whisked to you the same day. All prices subject to change and availability. Post and packaging Games VISA .99  Please make cheques/PO's payable to ZAP GRAND TOTAL Switchcards welcome. Please quote issue no. for Switch "


"HEY MICKEY WORK IN PROGRESS CVG WORK SPROGRESS MICKEY MANIA MEGA DRIVE PLATFORM .99 OUT DECEMBER NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE SNES AND MEGA-CD VERSIONS PLANNED One of the headon 3D sections has Mickey escape a stampede of forest animals. What's he got to worry about? It's not as if he's real or anything. He's back, circle ears and all, in what looks like being his greatest computer game yet. ickey Mouse Willie it drops in at varihas been lying ous points during low recently. No Mickey's 60-year career new cartoons, no games of any note, just dropiving at one out French ex-students of his last dressed up as him outings, parading round Euro Disthe Prince mal. But that's set to and the change for console own-Pauper. ers this Christmas as he The finishresurfaces in what is ed item will potentially his greatest feature thrgame yet. ee differRather than come up ent game with a whole new plot for styles a Mickey game, Sony platform, first-person has instead borrowed 3D and a cylindrical scenarios from six of his rotating stage much like most popular cartoons. the old Amiga puzzle Starting with Steamboat game, Nebulus. A Mickey Mania has been produced in conjunction with Disney Software whose recent achievements include Aladdin, Jungle Book and The Lion King. A Much of the cartridge space will taken up by graphics. The artists have had to capture different animation styles from each period the levels were taken from, so there are few sprites which can be used across different stages. No, there's nothing wrong with the picture, this just hearkens back to black-andwhite cinema. Give me 75mm technicolour with THX sound any day. This is the first game Disney cartoon artists have been let loose on. They've had quite a task reproducing the styles of their predecessors, but they've managed to do a superb job. MICKEY IN THE HOUSE A The levels are based on key stages in Mickey's career, such as his first colour picture and his first talkie. Other characters, such as Pluto, guest star in the game, but what we want to know is when are we going to see a new full-length Mickey cartoon? We've heard a whisper that there's one in production but haven't heard any details yet. Any road, SNES owners should have their version of Mickey Mania around about the same time as their Mega Drive counterparts, while Mega-CD users might have to wait a little longer. Quelle surprise, enemies are disposed of by jumping on them. Remember Nebulus? Well this stage plays in much the same way. GAME BY SONY IMAGESOFT CONTACT SONY (071 734 5151) FOR MORE INFORMATION 41 "


"CVG WORK IN PROGRESS OH NO, NOT ALVIN WORK WORK SUPER STARDUST PROGRESS 00000000 AMIGA 1200/CD 3 2 ISHOOT-'EM-UP .99 OUT OCTOBER A500/600 VERSION AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED Team 17 team up with the Finnish programmers Bloodhouse to produce a spangling shoot-'em-up... emember Stavroids-type blasting with ros Fasoulos? 3D head-on stages. But Can't blame you for these versions you if you don't. He was a get 256-colour graphics, major league 8-bit pro12 channel music and grammer during the effects, ray-traced bossEighties, and the best es and Team-17's guarthing for computer antee that the game has games ever to come out been 100% redesigned of Finland. Until now that from the original, is. Bloodhouse, who so fans will be made their debut with in for a few the excellent 16-bit surprises. Amiga version of Stardust, has laid the ground work for its 32bit brother, and boy, is it going to be good. It stays faithful to the original, combing Aste0000000 It's these amazing 3D segments which is really going to make this game look so cool. Although the basic game engine is the same, all the levels have changed from the original. So if you've upgraded to a CD32 from an A500, you won't find your self playing the same game. As in Asteroids, you can fly off the screen in a sort of space-time wrap-around way. It makes things confusing, which, in turn, is what helps make the game so much fun. This is the sort of thing that we expect to see on a 32-bit powerhouse like the CD32. It's quite awesome. Another changed-for this-version is the size of the aliens you face. Most of them dwarf your ship, but are very slow. It's the fast, small ones you've got to watch out for. The only potential downer on this game is that there will be only four of these amazing tunnel levels. While the Asteroids-style stages are excellent, they're completely overshadowed by the technical excellence of these intermediate levels. OTHER VERSIONS The 16-bit version, while technically inferior, is still one of the best blasters of the last 12 months. You'd be mental to miss it, especially since it only costs .99. AMIGA ISSUE 146 88% GAME BY BLOODHOUSE CONTACT TEAM-17 (0924 385903, EMAIL TEAM17@CIX.COMPULINK.CO.UK) FOR MORE INFORMATION. 42 "


"HE'S SLEEPING TONIGHT WORK IN PROGRESS CVG WORK THE LION KING PROGRESS ISNES, MEGA DRIVE, PC, A1200, MASTER SYSTEM GAME GEAR, NES, GAME BOY I PLATFORM UNCONFIRMED HOUT NOW NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED Can the kings of animation, Disney, create yet another platform genre gem when they team up with that far from virginal softco? The game's enemy sprites are going to be 'dynamic', so that as Simba approaches a gorilla or hyena the way he reacts each time will change. an you feel the love tonight?\" Well if you can't eight tion in a game, and then don't worry different formats, and this was all down to the because you'll certainly which they confidentlyhandiwork of Digicel's be humming this theme predict to be as com (TM) state-of-the-art tune from Disney's forthmercially successful as technique. The Lion King coming cinematic block the Aladdin licence (two looks set to follow this buster come October million sales and still trend. Well over 2,000 The Lion King is forecast going strong). frames of artwork have to be as big as last What was so remarkbeen used to create a year's Aladdin. And able about the recent 12-level platform advenVirgin has high hopes for Jungle Book and Aladdin ture. The Lion King the videogame, which is games were the graph review will be taking planned for release ics. Never before had we pride of place in a couple simultaneously across seen such fluid anima of issue's time. The Lion King game is divided into two halves: in the first you take on the role of Simba the lion cub and you have to battle against the wicked (and no doubt laughing) hyenas in the Elephants' Graveyard. The second half of the game sees you as Simba the lion prince, and encompasses four levels as you head back to reclaim the Pride Lands from your dastardly Uncle Scar. The cartridge versions of the game are going to be a massive 24 megabytes and some unusual angles of play have been adopted for example, in the buffalo stampede section the action is faced head on. Virgin and Disney appear to be on to another platforming winner, and although it doesn't look particularly sparkling here no doubt the finished game will look \"Grrreattt', to quote another famous feline. There are two extra levels included in the game, involving Samba's faithful sidekicks, Pumba, a muir cat (a sort of Jimminy Cricket character) and Timon the warthog (a cheery Baloo-alike). JUNGLE FEVER Miller No doubt top luwie Tim Rice and top baldie and rug, wearer Elton John will be receiving academy awards for their score, but fret not because you don't LION KING have to rush out to buy the CD. All five of the original songs feature on the game soundtrack, and two new musical sequences inspired by the original film score have also been adapted for the game. GAME BY VIRGIN INTERACTIVE ENTRTAINMENT CONTACT VIE081-954 2255) FOR INFORMATION THE MEGA DRIVE VERSION SERSENSHOT TAKAV FROM 43 "


"CVG WORK IN PROGRESS THE WHIRLYBIRD AND THE JEEPSTER IOAK MEGA SWIV PROGRESS MEGA DRIVE SHOOT 'EM-UP TBA LOUT NOVEMBER SNES AND AMIGA VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED Batter the enemy with one war machine, bury him with two... This is the first big mother that you're going to be up against, so make sure that your Interdiction Vehicle has acquired plenty of them thar power-ups. wo hands are you're going as you have better than one, to avoid things like large and certainly two cannons and armoured guns are better than one trains, but you do have when it comes to Time the advantage of multiWarner's latest shoot directional shooting. The 'em-up. SWIV made its first level we've seen is debut a massive four looking more than on a years ago on the Amiga par with the other verand was in fact the folsions, and as soon as low up to Silkworm, one Time Warner's finished of the major differences packing the other six being that SWIV was a stages with a multitude vertical scroller. The of power-ups, bosses acronym, by the way, and obstacles we'll let stood for Special you know... Weapons Interdiction (eh?) Vehicle. What makes SWIV such a thoroughly good blastfest is the two player mode, where you and a mate can take charge of either the chopper or the jeep. Both have differing abilities. If your mate goes for the helicoptor then he can fly freely over any It's handy when two of ground-based installa you can take on the enemy, tions, whereas in the but it's a real sod when your mate steals all the jeep you have to be a bit power-ups before you even more careful where get a look-in. HELI There are various shields littered along the landscape, these should help you take some flak. Position yourself in an apt location and the swarm of attacking 'copters can be disposed of in one fell swoop. Explosions abound as the 'copter (with its shadow) ploughs its armoury into the new superstore: Big Guns 'R' Us. OTHER VERSION An addictive, highly detailed, very playable, smoothscrolling blastfest that you'd have to go a long way (possibly Angola) to beat. Attack any other transport vehicles, even if they are unarmed, so that includes trains and monorails. Time passes slowly when you're a train-driver except when you're being attacked by a SWIV chopper. AMIGA ISSUE 113 93% ORIGINAL GAME BY STORM CONTACT TIME WARNER (0604 602800) FOR INFORMATION 8 MEG CART. "


"DOMAN * REFLECTIONS OF FASHION Domani shoes available from: Russell & Bromley, Charles Clinkard Ltd, Domani Retail Shops also Domani at Childrens World, Jones Bootmaker, John Lewis Partnership stores, Milwards Shoes, Gordon Scott and main Start-rite stockists. Style shown: Axel. "


"CVG WORK IN PROGRESS BUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUURP! WORK IN PROGRESS BOOGERMAN 6096 MEGA DRIVE PLATFORM UNCONFIRMED IOUT DECEMBER INO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED He burps, he farts, he chucks mucus. Staff writer Rik's better qualified than most to look at Interplay's new platform character... K, it's a platform the world had been game, but one in cleaner than a copy of which you disBig Girl's Blouse Monpense with baddies by thly, but now Booger using the by-products of Meister has stolen their your least pleasant bodienvironment-cleaning ly functions. Disgusting. Crystal Fuse, so it's true, but it's the only starting to smell like a way to fight back against giant sweaty sock again. the thieving sneeze-genCue Boogerman, a platerated Booger Meister form game similar in Thanks to ECO-LAB look and feel to Bubba 'n' Stix, although purely action-based and lacking the puzzles of Core's classic. Still our first impressions are good, and if Interplay can get the gameplay up to the humour-level, it should be a winner. The quality of the graphics in Boogerman are already excellent. This baddie is beautifully animated as he climbs up the ledge. THE BOGIE MAN'S COMING Leave Boogerman alone for long enough and he'll go through this revolting, and highly amusing, sequence where he picks his nose, rolls it up and flicks it before looking very guilty indeed. And I should think so too! Collect as many plungers as possible. You need them to build a ladder at the end of the level. 2010 A For moving tougher obstacles Boogerman can let rip with a killer fart! Boogerman quickly dispenses with baddies by belching at them. Not exactly Mr table manners, is he? A A disgusting creature like Boogerman deserves a disgusting finish and he gets it by melting away into a gooey heap. fra dem BÀ 30 Consume a couple of chillis and Boogerman will be blessed with the ability to fly. Get to higher levels by using those trampolines that always pop up at handy moments in platform games. GAME BY INTERPLAY. CONTACT INTERPLAY (0235 821666) FOR MORE INFORMATION. 46 "


"IT'S SNOW JOKE WORK IN PROGRESS CVG WORK Paw PROGRESS CONVERTER IPC CD-ROM ARCADE ADVENTURE UNCONFIRMED OUT DECEMBER INO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED ONN CYBERIA All the game's graphics are drawn in 256 colour mode, so you'll need a decent graphics card to run it. The game's characters are produced by \"motion capture' techniques, where the movements of real people are digitised. The label 'Interactive Movie' usually sets alarm bells off but in Cyberia's case it might have more than a ring of truth... yberia certainly picked up plenty of interest at CES, mainly because, unlike most CD-ROM movie-style titles, it possesses a level of interactivity rarely seen in a game of this style. It's set in the near future where your mission is to avert the potentially catastrophic activation of a weapon code-named Cyberia, while at the same time making sure you don't end up on a mortuary slab. The action is a combiV Programming team Xatrix nation of adventure, has concentrated its efforts on making Cyberia as non blasting and some very linear as possible. Its solu original-looking action tion has been to include sequences. You only multiple plots and variable have to watch it running story lines. to see how much effort has gone into making Cyberia look good and play well, and combined with the gameplay it makes for a pretty unique product. Needless to say, Cyberia promises to be something very different from what we're used to. The question is will the finished product live up to what the preview versions promise? Er, watch this space to find out... Cyberia features generous amounts of death and explosions as you total ecoterrorists in the name of world peace. Instead of opting for one game style, Cyberia's programmers have tried to cram in as many different gameplay aspects as possible from adventure to flight-sim. HE'S AN AIR HEAD The music for Cyberia was created by Thomas Dolby, who also dipped a toe into the computer world last year with the unveiling of his 'virtual orchestra'. It turned out to be as crap as it sounds, featuring four virtual musicians, made entirely out of cubes, playing completely random notes which can't even be loosely termed as music. Back to computer class for him. Pencil illustrations were used to plan the action sequences and ensure the artists kept the look of the game consistent. As standard with CD games, there are loads and loads of cinematic cutscenes relaying the plot. GAME BY XATRIX CONTACT INTERPLAY (0235 821666) FOR MORE INFORMATION 42 "


"CVG REVIEW MEET THE CREW What a month! The World Cup's finished, England's cricket squad has been crap again, and still no League, footy. However, seeing as only one of us really appreciates sport, this is a pretty selfish intro. Anyway, here's what the humanoids have been up to this month. It's totally unbelievable, and probably won't make you laugh. I don't know why I bother really... ISNES, MEGA DRIVE, GAME GEAR, GAME BOY BEAT-'EM-UP TBA. ETBA, .99, TBA OUT SEPTEMBER NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE SEGA 32X, PLAYSTATION VERSIONS PLANNED AMIGA AND PC VERSIONS TO BE ANNOUNCED STEVE It's been a busy month for Steve since the Publishers kicked him out of their ivory tower. We found him shivering on our doorstep giving out orders to a collection of sparrows. Being soft, we took him in, but little did we know it was all a sinister plot to take over the magazine. Now we're paying the price with enforced trips up to Bader Al-Shami's AlAkbar's house of kebabs for crusty humus in pitta bread to keep him happy. Doh! You may be too young to watch violence at the movies, but who cares when you can beat the living hell out of your opponents in Mortal Kombat Il? A year after Mortal Monday, Acclaim and top developers Probe present the most incredible and arcade-perfect conversion ever. Prepare to meet your doom Street Fighter II... GARY Being a sporty chap, Gaz has been taking on all-comers on the tennis courts and losing. Losing his way back into work after lunch, losing his car, losing his musical taste, los, ing his contact lenses down the u-bend and losing the ability to ask people if they want anything from the shop. We forgive him. Really. No we do. Honest. He bought me a Feast yesterday, I had to pay for it, but at least he asked this time. DENIZ We haven't seen Den since some suspicious men in dark glasses whisked him away to a secret government installation. We believe he's being held in connection with his hat, and the fact that it's impervious to rain, bullets, washing. neutron death rays and all other forms of attack. Latest reports suggest he's escaped after using his incredible Ganstaaaa trainers to leap over the electrified fences. If anyone's seen him could they please post him back to us at the usual address. he Mary Whitehouse (woman who watches lots of sex and violence on TV and proclaims 'it's going to traumatise everyone', apart from her, natch) Brigade won't be pleased. Acclaim seems to have decided despite their protestations that CVG readers and their ilk can distinguish between videogame violence and the real thing, thus Mortal Kombat II hasn't been censored to the hilt, and it's dripping with more gore than ever before. The MK II conversion features everything that was in the coin-op. and developer Probe has thought up some even more imaginative ways of murdering Kombateers. And that's the main appeal of this beat-'em-up, and it's enough to make it quite unique. It's easy to get into and appreciate the amount of moves, combos and variety of characters in MKII, so be assured of plenty of scope for attack patterns. What was never expected in the home versions were the 'Friendship' and 'Babality' moves which are included as secret moves and also to inject some humour into the game. Toasty! RIK Rik's had a moving experience this month he's moved all the way over to Arkwright's all-day grub vending emporium and hasn't come back yet. While that leaves a sizeable hole in our draught exclusion system, the sounds of his Jabba-esque form digesting Lo-bars by the thousand is enough to keep the local population away, and thus the burglars who keep kicking in our windows and blagging our macs. MARK After discovering he's not human at all, but instead a king prawn who lost his memory while at the controls of a robotic human suit, Mark has returned to the ocean for a break. In fact, that's not entirely true. As Mark moans: \"I haven't had a break in months. I want a holiday now. NOW, do you hear me, It's not fair. I don't know, you work your fingers to the bone and what do you get?\" He does that a lot you know. ISNES Slice 'n' dice the Baraka way. Miss with this move and you'll end up cutting thin air. MEGA DRIVE JULIE. While the rest of the team have been off saving the world or scoffing its food reserves, Julie has actually been doing some work this month. It's not for us mind, she's actually been developing a nuclear missile platform which will orbit over the North Pole and open fire if any large asteroids should be heading our way. Actually that's a total lie. She's been bossing us all around telling us to do some real work instead of writing unfunny things about ourselves in this section. PETREA. Arty antipodean Petrea isn't the kind of person to take an anti-Ozzie insult lying down. She's planning to join forces with neo-Australian and former news reader Gordon Honeycombe to wipe the British Isles off the map. After his scathing attack on our country in the Sun (which is, coincidentally, owned by an Australian) she intends to follow-up by destroying the BBC's emergency supplies of Neighbours. And we thought she was deranged. Master the throws. You can do a number in quick succession and they're great for knocking off loads of energy. SNES AND MEGA DRIVE CART SIZE 24MEGS. 48 "


"TOUGHER THAN THE REST REVIEW CVG MEGA DRIVE MEMBIAL A Put a decent combo together and you will be treated to a digitised representation of one of the programmers who yells *Toasty!' at you in a worryingly high voice. SNES 00 HINS MILEEN I GAME BOY Kitana's weapon is a fan which can be used to stun opponents in preparation for the kill. MEGA DRIVE He might not have as many moves as the others but Shang Tsung's ability to morph into all the other characters (and a hidden one) makes him by far the best character available. A It's a death move! Even on the Game Boy's small screen it's perfectly clear what's going on. | GAME GEAR ORRAKG 78.300 GAME GEAR MEGA DRIVE RAME A The Game Gear version of Kombat is just as blood soaked as the others, especially when you unleash one of these upper-cuts. SNES MEGA DRIVE Sub Zero's still got his annoying ice blast which freezes unwary characters, thus setting them up for a devastating combo. Johnny Cage launches one of his devastating looping energy bolts and misses by a mile. I don't know, we thought these guys could fight. Get in close with Jax and he can smash his opponent into the ground repeatedly, causing masses of damage. < Cage can pinch more than an inch thanks to being given the kiss-off fatality by Kitana. SNES AND MEGA DRIVE CART SIZE 24 MEGS 49 "


"CVG REVIEW TOUGHER THAN THE REST MEGA DRIVE BOLINS I GAME BOY Jax wipes the floor with his foe. There are no wimpy friendships here. Oddjob ahoy! Kung Lao can angle his hat toss so it stands more chance of hitting its target. 00 BINS GAME GEAR ISNES TSUNG REPTILE no Because you've only got three buttons to worry about, the special moves are easier to execute in this version. FRIENDLY FIRE They're not easy, but we've mastered them. Here's what they look like and next month we'll tell you how to do some of them and more. We're kind like that. Shang Tsung can morph into any other character in the game and use all their moves and fatalities. Apart from that Shang's main weapon is the ability to launch mul tiple firebolts. FRIENOSHIP | | | FRIENOSHIP FRIENDSHIP Deteness FRIENDSHIP DUELE RALLESS DUELE TALLESS DOUBLE FLAWLESS FRIENDSHIP FRENOSMle FLAULES FRIENDSHIP FRIENDSHIP COUBLE FLAWLESS COUELE FLAWLESS COUELE FLAWLESS BUNGE FRIENDSHIP FRENOSHOP FRENOS HIP I GAME GEAR CAPTEN O TILIARE DOUBLE RULES DOUBLE PLEULESS SCO Each character in this version has one special move but, unfortunately, no friendships or babalities. THE MOST PERFECT COIN-OP CONVERSION EVER! 50 ACCLAIM WILL BE SPENDING MILLIONS ON PROMOTING MORTAL KOMBAT II. A COMMERCIAL HAS ALREADY BEEN MADE FEATURING THE CHARACTERS FROM THE GAME. UNLIKE THE MORTAL KOMBAT CAMPAIGN WHICH FEATURED VINNIE JONES ET AL "


"TOUGHER THAN THE REST REVIEW CVG ISNES VERDICT A One of the many secret moves in the game turns Shang Tsung into Kintaro and that allows you to punch an opponent in half as a fatality GAME BOY SNES It's the bloodiest game Nintendo has ever allowed to be released! Mortal || matches the coin-op for speed and boasts crisper resolution and animation. What makes it so good is that all the characters are potentially excellent, so it's unlikely that you'll stick with just one, which was a problem with the original. Mortal Kombat Il is a much harder game with more intelligent opponents. It's streets ahead of the first Mortal Kombat. DENIZ AHMET A The characters are well balanced when it comes to combat moves. VERDICT MEGA DRIVE ALBEN GRAPHICS 94 SOUND 87 PLAYABILITY 96 VALUE MEGA DRIVE Mortal Kombat II has been my favourite arcade machine of the year. and thankfully Probe has done an incredible job with this conversion. Everything is here, and I mean everything. Although the graphics aren't quite as good as they are on the SNES, the sound here is better, with some great speech. That's about all I can fault it on though. it's really that good a conversion, with all the playability and challenge of the coin-op original. RIK SKEWS 92 OVERALL A Raiden does his best to plug Scorpion into the mains with this searing blast of pure electricity. SNES MEGA DRIVE GRAPHICS 93 SOUND 93 PLAYABILITY 97 VALUE 96 COMING SOON AMIGA, PC Mortal Kombat II Unconfirmed Both the Amiga and PC versions of the original Mortal Kombat were very good indeed, and although a company hasn't scooped up the game yet it's looking like a particularly tasty licence. EXPECTED RELEASE: Unconfirmed OVERALL A Loads of gore. Scorpion gets his mask stained thanks to a stack of punches from Kung Lao. A Mileena is a very fast character who has the best surprise move in the game. She basically slips off the bottom of the screen and drops out of the top of it and on to her opponent. 92 IF YOU'VE PLAYED THE COIN-OP YOU MIGHT KNOW THE MOVE WHICH LETS YOU DROP OPPONENTS OFF THE SPIKES IN THE PIT STAGE. IF YOU DON'T KEEP TRYING, IT CAN BE DONE 51 "


"CVG REVIEW TOUGHER THAN THE REST MEGA DRIVE Reptile's invisibility is a great move. It's partly accessed by a holding block, which means you can enter it safely without fear of being counterattacked. GAME BOY SNES CHOOSE YOUR EIGHTER VERDICT NDO A Although there are only two backdrops, one of them does have the infamous ceiling spike death move. VERDICT MEGA DRIVE A By pressing Up and Start on the selection screen you activate a random-selection mode like the coin-op. ROLL OF HONOUR All the conversions of the original Mortal Kombat were spot on; but the best, rather surprisingly perhaps, was the Amiga version. GAME GEAR If you thought the 16-bit versions were impressive, cop a load of this! Game Gear MKII may only have eight characters, and no babalities or friendships, but it's still the best handheld beat-'em-up. Because it's cut-down it's a little too close to the original Mortal Kombat for comfort. So if you've got that you might want to see if you can play test this latest version before you shell out for it. Still, if this is your first crack at Kombat don't miss it. MARK PATTERSON MEGA DRIVE Mortal Kombat ISSUE 141 . 90% SNES Mortal Kombat ISSUE 142.86% PC Mortal Kombat ISSUE 149.86% AMIGA Mortal Kombat ISSUE 146. 93% GAME BOY It's Mortal ll on the Game Boy and it's GREAT! It really is. Honest. This is fantastic. Probe has managed to cram eight of the characters, two backdrops, nearly all the special moves and a death move for each into just 4M-bits. Although these shots were taken on a Super Game Boy, Mortal is just as good on a portable machine, in fact the graphics look even better at that size. No Game Boy owner should go without this. MARK PATTERSON GRAPHICS 90 SOUND 85 PLAYABILITY 90 VALUE 87 Always remember to keep a finger near the block button because, unlike Street Fighter II. projectiles pass through each other. This can lead to both characters hitting each other as shown here. OVERALL ISNES OS GAME GEAR GRAPHICS 90 SOUND 82 PLAYABILITY 91 VALUE 87 OVERALL ALTERNATIVE AMIGA Elfmania Renegade/.99 It's cute, it's got no gore but it's one of the better beat'em-ups on the Amiga. The graphics are superb too. ISSUE 152: 74% A Look at that blood on the SNES! Finally Nintendo has slackened its stringent censorship rules. Thanks to his peculiar lizard-like powers and the fact he smokes 60 B&H a day. Reptile can gob lumps of acid phlegm at will. CO IF YOU WIN 250 MATCHES IN A ROW YOU GET TO PLAY PONG THE OLD BAT-AND-BALL GAME. 52 "


"SPORTS, TOONS, GHOULS 'N' GUNSHIPS REVIEW CVG OUT NOW O UTNOW ON CARTRIDGE Open your wallets for these, if you want to buy the right cartridge games. ON CD Some products that combine great audiovisuals with gameplay... TEMPEST 2000 / JAGUAR / ATARI PRICE: $54.99 The best Jaguar game at present is a lavish reincarnation of the ancient Atari coin-op. Lethal shoot-'em-up action prevails here, with the sort of addiction you could only match with illegal substances. Turn it up for the stomping rave soundtrack too! Issue 151: 84% ANOTHER WORLD / 3DO / INTERPLAY/ PRICE: .99 Arguably the best 3D0 game yet seen, Interplay's Another World keeps the brilliant gameplay of the classic original and adds some jaw-dropping backdrops. You won't regret getting this, even at import prices. Issue 152: 90% STUNT RACE FX / SNES / NINTENDO PRICE: .99 Nintendo's answer to Sega's Virtua Racing is actually nothing like it, which is probably a good thing. Using the enhanced FX chip it offers complex polygon racing over 15 tracks with loads of wacky cars. Very creative indeed. Issue 153: 91% INTERNATIONAL TENNIS OPEN/PC-CD ROM / INFOGRAMES / PRICE: .99 One of the first and best games on the CD-i format, this PC version is a faithful conversion made all the better as you don't have to use that icky CD-i joypad. Worth a look if you fancy yourself as Pete Sampras on the quiet. Issue 153: 79% B004 O'31\"70 42 THE JUNGLE BOOK / MD / VIRGIN PRICE: .99 Unquestionably the most elegant Disney platformer to date. Perfect graphics and tons of little touches help create a sense of freedom lacking in Aladdin. Kids fun with a grown-up difficulty setting thrown in to keep you lively. Issue 152: 80% GUNSHIP 2000 / CD32 / MICROPROSE / PRICE: .99 The original game was brilliant enough but on CD this is even better, mostly because of the quick loading. The controls have also been implemented superbly on the joypad all the original keyboard functions are there. Along with Liberation, the best CD32 disc yet. Issue 153: 91% SPECTRE / SNES / GAMETEK PRICE: .99 An old Mac game hits the SNES with that same old simplistic Battlezonetype fun that's kept it going for years. Spectre looks boring but the gameplay is uniquely addictive in two-player mode. Issue 152: 84% BATTLECORPS / MCD / CORE DESIGN / PRICE: .99 Core Design is on a mission to save the Mega-CD format, and here's another example. If you take its earlier Thunderhawk engine and stick it in a futuristic scenario you're some way towards imagining how good Battlecorps is. Add even better graphics, sound and playability and you've got an essential purchase. Issue 153: 92% AVOID Er, not exactly purchase of the month... AVOID House of Ho Keep your hands off this Hauzer House of Horror! ULTIMATE SOCCER / MASTER SYSTEM/ SEGA PRICE: .99 It's telepathic football! A soccer game where the scrolling is so bad that you can kick the ball even when it's off the screen. A disgraceful piece of programming, Dultimate Soccer more like. DR HAUZER / 3DO / PANASONIC/ PRICE: .00 Looking like the classic Alone in the Dark series but with all the gameplay mysteriously sucked out. Dee-readful. Issue 153: 32% 53 "


"CVG REVIEW FOLLOW IN MY FOOTSTEPS PC SHOOT-'EM-UP .99 LOUT SEPTEMBER NAMIGA, A1200, CD32, MEGA DRIVE AND SNES VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED THE CHAOS 1932.99 TOUT SEPTEMBER ENGINE The Bitmap Brothers are up in arms, with an assortment of weapons, which means only one thing it's time to power-up! Each level is a maze like structure and there are different mazes at different heights. DONDE umu here's a lot going on here you know; it's the classic tale of a mad scientist messing around with a time-machine which then turns against its creator and sends chaos across the land. For your part in the game there are six meaty-looking characters who are positively desperate to get out there and turn evil into good. Which characters you select is quite important because each has separate abilities and weaponry, so you will have to carefully balance the two characters you control simultaneously in the game, so that you get a mixture of talent and abilities. Chaos Engine is a hardcore shoot-'em-up much akin to Gauntlet in playstakes. Yet, it's rarely a case of mindless blasting because there's an exploratory angle too, and with that a quest for collectibles. Let's see how it all melts together .... Here's the shop where you can spend all those collected tokens. 03 I VERDICT ODDDDD 111310 SILTI 013 On each level you need to blast these beams since they control the time machine. Only then does the exit open (the cave here). PC There's nothing like a bit of death to make a game come alive! If you grew up playing Gauntlet in the arcades this game will have an undeniable blasting appeal; plus there's a bit of strategic shooting required too. It's also nice to find a game which gets you poweredup to potent weapons quickly. However, it works better as a two-player game because the solo alternative is no easier. A sizzling conversion and it's far faster than all the other formats. DENIZ AHMET Using the keys will open secret passages to get deeper into the game. Most of the time their use is essential. The most efficient way to kill opponents is by shooting at them diagonally. UVO ALTERNATIVE GRAPHICS 90 SOUND 87 PLAYABILITY 89 VALUE 87 DUSHU I U2 SNES The animation in this game is excellent, as demonstrated in the detailed sprites such as this scuttling hand. OVERALL SMASH TV THQ /  It's kinda like Chaos but it's played in a series of confined rings. Offers the highest death count per second seen in any game. ISSUE 126: 92% If you select a one player game the computer guides the second character. 09 GAME BY RENEGADE CONTACT RENEGADE (071-481 9214) FOR INFORMATION 2MB INSTALLATION SPACE REQUIRED 54 "


"THE FEARLESS FEASTING SO INVITES YOU TO TING SOCIETY 2 FOR 1 KARTING WITH TWO FEAST WRAPPERS Two people can have a go at Karting for the price of one at any of the Karting Circuits listed, on presentation of two Wall's Feast wrappers. Offer closes on 30th October 1994. Karting Circuits:Bristol Pro Sport Karting, 0275 817011; Burton-on-the-Wolds Formula 1 Karting 0509 881667: Camborne Karting, 0209 711993, Cardiff Welsh Karting Centre, 0222 711475; Chatham Buckmore Park Karting, 0634 201562: Chessington Challenger 2000, 081 241 0123; Chester The Circuit, 0244531652: Clapham Playscape Pro-Racing, 071 498 0916; Co. Antrim kart Valley, 853377, Croydon Atlanta Raceway. 081 688 4215; Feltham Spitfire Karting, 081 893 2104: Gladsmuir Karting Indoors, 031 665 6525: Glasgow Scotkart, 041 641 0222; Gloucester Karting Centre, 0452 311211; Grantham Grid, 0476 76427; Guildford Go Karting for Fun, 0483 440524; Hereford Speed Karting, 0432 340202: Ipswich Anglia Indoor Kart Racing, 0473 240087; Kidderminster Scorpion Indoor Karting, 0562 863411; Leamington Spa Karting Arena, 0926 888112: Liverpool The Kart Circuit, 051 448 0975; Llantwit Major Llandow Motor Leisure Centre, 0446 795173; Maidenhead Kart Trax 2000, 0628 32232; Milton Keynes Magna Karta, 0908 644844, Norwich Indoor Kart Centre, 0603 486655: Oldham Karting North West, 061 624 9221, Reading Premier Karting, 0734 448446: Rochester Fast Lane Leisure, 0634 713383 Rotherham Trax Motor Sport. 0709 837878; Shepherds Bush Daytona Raceway, 081 749 2277: Walsall Grand Prix Karting, 0922 724252; Woolwich Race Pro, 081 317 3657. A VERITABLE BANQUET ON A STICK! Walls This offer will not be available in conjunction with any other discount scheme or special offer Check with circuits for minimum age (normally 8 years), prices and availability Parental or guardian consent is required for under 16's. Normal circuit rules will apply "


"MODE SLOW 2 AUTO TURBO NORMAL SLOW 1 OFF SLOW 2 SLOW OF LMP GAMESTER AUTO TURBO NORMAL GAMESTER VIDEO GAVE ME START START md-6 md-3 MDG 6 Button Joypad Independent Auto and Turbo Fire MD3 -3 Button Joypad Independent Auto and Turbo Fire RAPOPPD AAPAPP Multiplayer AdaptorUp to 5 player action on multi player games for SNES SNS SOMMES UZZSFW59 JAMSTER JOYPAD FOR HESHIN S SNS SUPER NES SUPER NES JOYPAD FOR MEGADRIVE MUU GAMESTER USO AMD AUTORET GBUTTON INDEPENDENT TURBO AND AUTO FJRE SN6 6 Button Joypad MARTTI KYLE & BOUTONS ET Two Extra Buttons for Arcade Style Play  AUTO TURBO  NORMAL sn-6 1:1:1:0:00 LMP GAMESTER LOCOS GAMESTER 8-US OFF 12 SLOW MOTION SELECT START SELECT START SN8 6 Button Joypad Independent Auto and Turbo Fire LMP More Great Products Now available from: The Range of Video Game Accessories GAMESTER VIDEO GAME ACCESSORIES For full details of prices and distributors contact: Leda Media Products Ltd., Stonemason's House, 75 Railway Street, Hertford, Herts. SG14 1 RD Tel: 0992 503133 Fax: 0992 503061 "


"YOUR FLEXIBLE FRIEND REVIEW A1200 PLATFORM .99 OUT NOW NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE ICD32 AND SNES VERSIONS PLANNED PUTTY SQUAD One of the most versatile ever platform characters returns and expands his role... ystem 3 abandoned the floppy market a couple of years back thinking it was dead and concentrated primarily on SNES product. One of their SNES titles was Super Putty, an enhanced version of the brilliant Amiga original; but now they've returned to satisfy the large number of Amiga owners by producing an outstanding sequel in the shape of Putty Squad. Although the original Putty was excellent, it was criticised for its awkward control. The character was very pliable but getting him into different shapes was frustrating and some of the puzzles were a little on the obscure side. Putty Squad solves both these problems by concentrating instead on fast, fluid platforming and while Putty himself can be made to do even more than before, the controls are a lot easier to grasp. U U UGOTER Make yourself into a fist and you can take out the guards. Bam! VERDICT A Pull down on the joystick and Putty is able to absorb pickups. Then it's simply a case of wiggling the joystick to use it (unless it's food which automatically replenishes your energy). A Here's one of the power-ups you can collect. It places a metal shell around you for a short time, making you invincible. A1200 The original Putty game was very successful but I didn't think it was anything special. The fact that it tried to combine puzzles and platforms didn't appeal, neither did the fussy control method. Thankfully both these problems are now gone. Add fantastic AGA graphics, strong music and sound FX and I've got no hesitation in recommend ing the game. It combines great gameplay and excellent ideas putting it in a different league to the last game. Top stuff. RIK SKEWS The main object of the game is to rescue the red putties who are Missing In Action (MIA). Save them by absorbing them. 88 A Smash the crates up whenever you get the chance. At best they'll have a collectable in them, at worst some energy-replenishing food. GRAPHICS 90 SOUND PLAYABILITY 88 VALUE 85 OVERALL ALTERNATIVE AMIGA Bubba 'n' Stix Core Design/.99 A bit slower for sure than Super Putty but this game manages to blend platforms and some cryptic puzzles to great effect. ISSUE 147: 88% Make sure you don't go anywhere near the tongues of these frogs. One lick is instant death. GAME BY SYSTEM 3 CONTACT SYSTEM 3 (081-864 8212) FOR MORE INFORMATION . 52 "


"CVG REVIEW WELCOME TO THE DARK SIDE STAR WARS SPECIAL PC SIMULATION .99 OUT NOW PC VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED TIE FIGHTER. You've been with the rebels in X-Wing, now join the Dark Side of the Force and blow those goody-two-shoes rebel pilots back to Tattooine. Torge1s HR ith the stirring Star Wars theme music and the lavish cinematic intro, TIE Fighter the sequel to the highly acclaimed X-Wing is probably the most atmospheric game you'll play this year. Set after the battle for Hoth (portrayed in The Empire Strikes Back, the second Star Wars movie) the rebels are fleeing from their shattered base and as a young Imperial pilot, you must try to stop them. With new Gouraud-shaded graphics, TIE Fighter allows you to pilot a variety of Imperial hardware ranging from the bog standard TIE Fighter to the Assault Gunboat and the Advanced TIE Starfighter. With three difficulty levels, the new Imperial perspective, the ability to call for reinforcements and intelligent wingmen (i.e. they don't shoot you), TIE Fighter will be one of the success stories of the year. Guaranteed. The training section of TIE Fighter dumps you in a giant space-tube which you must fly down, dodging and shooting various obstacles. A bit of practice never hurt anybody so the Empire has thoughtfully provided a VR combat simulator, where you can dogfight the rebels in complete safety. You will be pileting o TE designrad Alpha 2 You flight leader for the two in our SOUP YOUcraft 3 CORSi missiles install At the mission briefing you don't just sit back and get lectured to, you get the opportunity to put questions to the briefing officer. TIE Interceptor CTD Four loser Cannons Page 1 KNOW YOUR BOSS What are the mission ob What craft I ref A At the top of the hierar. chy is the Emperor, lord and master of all things Imperial. He's not been getting much sleep lately. A With a wheeze and a deep James Earl Jones-type voice, Darth Vader is the Emperor's right hand man. Fail him and he'll kill you. It's as simple as that. Vice Admiral Thrawn is the overall commander of the TIE squadrons, a blue-skinned tactician drawn from the Star Wars novels of Timothy Zahn. In the Tech Room you can view the specifications of any ship included in the game. Star Wars fans please take note that the Millenium Falcon makes an appearance. GAME BY VIRGIN INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT/LUCASARTS (081-960 2255) RELEASE OF TWO MISSION DATA DISKS LUCASARTS PLAN TO QUICKLY FOLLOW TIE FIGHTER WITH THE 58 "


"WELCOME TO THE DARK SIDE REVIEW CVG Capture me staff. The re Commanders or the tranports that they dire during the o During your Imperial career you will get the opportunity to fly secret missions for the Emperor. You will always be briefed by a bloke in a cloak. SECOND OPINION This is more like it. Being the Emperor's top pilot is far more fun than fighting for the good guys. The ships make a better noise for starters. As a game, TIE Fighter is more involving than X-Wing thanks to its strong plot and the myriad sub-missions you have to undertake as a member of the secret order of the Emperor. I know Deniz reckons it's a bit too close to X-Wing (which I've completed), but I found this a completely different challenge. Just give me those data disks now. MARK PATTERSON Helal of Unity 11 le hall Hello ! Last Page Next Page Be successful in your secret missions and you will be inducted into the Secret Order of the Empire complete with free novelty tattoo. GAME Medals Record COC UR 01.061 Towards the end of the game, the Empire develops a big, ger, better starfighter. Far more awesomely powerful than anything the rebels have got. That's all I'm telling you... VERDICT PC DIE HAN SOLO, DIE! As good a game as TIE Fighter undoubtedly is, it doesn't do anything radically different to X-Wing. You fly a TIE Fighter. there's a bit of Gouraud shading and a few new ships to shoot, but that's really about it. However, TIE Fighter oozes atmosphere and is incredibly playable; if you're a Star Wars fan you'll love it. In fact, if you liked X-Wing, you won't be disappointed. X-Wing with a TIE Fighter? Maybe, but it's still the best space sim currently out on the PC. DENIZ AHMET PNCHIME DES. TREDNI CARCO SHL 100 RULL 100 OD (725 92 CONSENT ORDERS: CHICENC HYFERSPACE USRENT DESTINATION STILET POSITION 1 DISTANCE TO DESTINATION 3.60 THE TU DESTINATION 2243 GRAPHICS 88 SOUND PLAYABILITY 94 VALUE 91 IE Boaber Gadd2 hos entered HULL Lomcedirectontecodice OVERALL A The tactical display presents you with all sorts of useful info about your target including ship speed, shield and hull strength and even what its current orders are. TIE Fighter also features a number of external views. Here an Advanced TIE Fighter swoops low over a friendly Star Destroyer. Like X-Wing the battles are fast, frantic and exciting. The TIE Fighters are nimble and quick but only take two hits before shattering into splinters. 92 THE TIE' BIT OF TIE FIGHTER STANDS FOR TWIN ION ENGINE, BUT WITHOUT SHIELDS AND A HYPERDRIVE, THE WORDS \"CANNON' AND *FODDER' SPRING TO MIND. 59 "


"CVG WORK IN PROGRESS CAN YOU FEEL THE FORCE? STAR WARS SUPER SPECIAL RETURN THE JEDI N OF A SNES PLATFORM/ACTION ITBA TOUT NOV DEC NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED The triumvirate of the videogame world? ith both Super Star Wars and Super Empire Strikes Back ranking as two of the best platform games ever released, JVC has pulled out all the stops to make the final instalment of the trilogy the best one yet. The first thing you'll notice when you look at these shots is that the graphics have been drastically improved over the other games. Not an easy task when you compare it to Empire Strikes Back. The backdrops are more varied and colourful, the sprites clearer and the enemies far larger. While the basic format of the game isn't set to change we can expect to see plenty of new features, including new characters to control and different weapons. Already, from these early shots, it's easy to tell that this could well prove to be the best of the bunch. We can't wait! A For the first time in the Super Star Wars series you get to control Princess Leia. She's not exactly dressed for a fight, but we don't care. No prizes for guessing who you face at the end of this level. DARK FORCES IPC CD-ROM SHOOT-'EM-UP TBA OUT EARLY 1995 NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED The Empire meets its Doom... The character animation in Dark Forces has to be seen to believed. Because the game comes on compact disc, Lucasarts has been able to cram in more than enough animation frames to ensure that this is the best-looking 3D blaster yet. ow about this for excellence. Lucasarts has crossed Star Wars with Doom to create a 3D, first-person blast that's literally unlike anything you've seen before. It's set just before the first film, with you playing the role of a Rebel agent on a mission to steal the plans for the Death Star. Confronting you is an army of robot stormtroopers under the command of Admiral Mohc. It's set inside, and outside, Empire installations, with the latter featuring excellent morphing effects. And before you sigh and say 'it's a CD game, it'll be just like Rebel Assault', this is a fully interactive, fully controllable game. You can move your character anywhere, duck, jump, look up and down, turn through 360 degrees. You get the idea. Although this current crop of shots only features stormtroopers, the finished game should feature many of the best, most evil creatures from the movies. As with all games of this ilk (ie Doom, Wolfenstein and Corridor 7) there are plenty of BIG weapons to get your hands on. So far nobody has said whether or not there's a light sabre in the game, but we reckon there must be. It wouldn't be a Star Wars game without one. DARK FORCES GAME BY LUCASARTS, CONTACT 60 SUPER RETURN OF THE JEDI GAME BY LUCASARTS, CONTACT JVC (081-570 6015) VIRGIN (081-960 2255) "


"CAN YOU FEEL THE FORCE? WORK IN PROGRESS CVG Is EDRE IMEGA-CD PUZZLE .99 HOUT OCTOBER PC AND CD-ROM VERSIONS AVAILABLE INO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED STAR 4.99 HOUT OCTOBER WARS CHESS A All the key scenes from the movie are recreated in the game, including the battle on the forest moon of Endor. And, of course, you can't move for Ewoks. Yes! This is it, one-on-one with Emperor Palpatine himself! Luke, armed with his home-made lightsabre has to defend against the Dark One's energy bolts. It's not going to be easy since the Emperor is reckoned to be tougher than anything you've ever faced before in this series. It's chess Jim, but not as we know it... ell, we've had plenty of Star Wars games, now we've got the strangest computer spin-off yet, as the Rebels square off against the Emperor's forces on a chessboard. It's very much in the vein of Interplay's groundbreaking Battle Chess, where the pieces go through an animated battle when they take each other. This is much the same thing, although this time the pieces are all Star Wars characters. If you don't fancy playing on a complicated board like this, there's also a traditional top-down mode. from a normal chess program. When you take a piece the screen cuts to an animated sequence of the two relevant characters slugging and shooting it out, with the programmers opting for cartoon-style graphics. The animated sequences last for about 10 seconds, with the victor being the attacking piece. The finished version should feature 12 multistage worlds, each with its own specific tasks. Along with the music is the occasional bit of digitised speech, although the voices aren't taken from the films. As in Rebel Assault, all the sound effects and music is taken straight out of the movies. Well this never happened in the movie. Although R2 was a bit prone to taking a laser blast in the head. The action is accompanied by liberal amounts of music taken straight from the Star Wars trilogy. STAR WARS CHESS GAME BY MINDSCAPE, CONTACT MINDSCAPE (0444 246333) FOR INFORMATION 61 "


"CVG REVIEW X-WING MARKS THE SPOT STAR WARS SPECIAL REBEL ASSAULT MEGA-CD ISHOOT'-EM-UP .99 OUT SEPTEMBER PC CD-ROM VERSION AVAILABLE INO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED 1993 LucasArts Entertainment Company. Used under authorisation. All Rights Reserved. Star Wars is a registered trademark of LucasFilm Ltd. The LucasArts logo is a registered service mark of LucasArts Entertainment Company. In a galaxy far, far away the MegaCD gets assaulted by Darth and his evil boys... ebel Assault on PC CD-ROM is certainly one of the PC games of this year and one of the few CD games that manages to combine realistic graphics and sound with decent gameplay. On a machine as underpowered as the Mega CD though, can it cope? First impressions are favourable. All the levels from the PC CD-ROM version are here, as are all the FMV, rendered sequences and speech and music scores lifted from the film. The 15 levels include scenes from both Star Wars and The Empire Strikes Back movies, most notably the Snowspeeder attack on the Imperial Walkers and the epic Death Star battle, and they are all linked together with some superb FMV footage. Other levels include a chase through an asteroid field, a battle with a Super Star Destroyer and a gunfight with Stormtroopers. 1 PILOTS 1 SCORE 0000 Unsurprisingly the final level finds you flying down the Death Star trench towards the exhaust port. It's bloody difficult as the guns are the same colour as the trench. One of the hardest levels in the game is where you fly through an asteroid field in an attempt to shake off and destroy three Tie Fighters. This level is certainly one for shoot'em-up fans. It's simply a case of downing all the Tie Fighters before they attempt to do the same to you. Rebel Assault and One of the most graphically impressive sections is the interior of the deserted Hoth base where you have to fight your way past Stormtroopers to your X-Wing. REBEL I PILITS SCORE 0000 GAME BY LUCASARTS. CONTACT MARUBENI (071 826 8816) FOR MORE INFORMATION. 62 "


"X-WING MARKS THE SPOT REVIEW CVG After each level you're treated to some gorgeous FMV and rendered footage. The first level finds you honing your flying skills around Beggars Canyon. It's a pretty poor start to be honest because being a CD game the controls are very unresponsive. I PILOTS TU SCONE SECOND OPINION Anyone who's played the PC CD-ROM version is going to be disappointed with the Mega-CD version, and certain levels (especially fighting inside the deserted Hoth base) are so pixelated they're almost unplayable. Any big Star Wars fans out there though, and methinks that's probably more than one or two, are going to enjoy this simply because it is simply that Star Wars. And this element almost makes you forget about the rather simple shoot'em-up element that dominates the gameplay. GARY LORD The intro and the between level scenes are either real film footage or rendered sequences. They range from the brilliant to the extremely jerky and grainy. A This massive gun is the focus of a few levels. First you have to attack the Tie Fighters guarding it. Later you have to shoot away its shields and finally destroy all its power supplies. VERDICT AA rather long level this one, it involves destroying all the gun and Tie Fighters protecting the Super Star Destroyer before blowing off the command centre on top of the giant spacecraft. MEGA-CD The humble Mega CD shows the strain of incorporating everything from the PC CD-ROM version. Although the graphics are good in places, the majority verge towards the average and some are very poor. The sound is credible, but the gameplay is shallow, with little to do but dodge rendered backdrops and shoot distant objects. On the PC this was like playing a movie but on the Mega CD it's like any other FMV game, most notably Tomcat Alley. RIK SKEWS The graphics on this level are so bad, you'll wonder what's going on. It's an aerial level where you have to pick off ground targets. PILOTS UN SCINE O GRAPHICS 85 SOUND 94 PLAYABILITY 75 VALUE 65 Give the Rebels some time to escape by shooting down e powerful but lumbering walkers. A Another canyon level, this one sees you urgently trying to shoot three Tie Fighters before they escape and tell the Empire the location of your base. Hit them quickly or you're have to endure some tricky and twisting paths. OVERALLE ALTERNATIVE 3DO Shockwave EA/.99 Not brilliant by any means but it's a similar game with great graphics, sound and fun if rather limited gameplay (See page 79). ISSUE 154: 78% WITH A CAUSE STAR WARS IS STILL THE THIRD MOST SUCCESSFUL FILM OF ALL TIME, FOLLOWING GONE WITH THE WIND AND ET. THESE FIGURES DO NOT INCLUDE JURASSIC PARK THOUGH, WHICH IS EXPECTED TO BE NUMBER ONE ONCE THE FINAL FIGURES HAVE BEEN ADDED UP. 63 "


"CVG REVIEW AND THE FORCE GOES ON! ARCADE STAR WARS 69 TARGET 175 ARCADE SHOOT-'EM-UP VARIES OUT NOW INO OTHER VERSION AVAILABLE MD32X VERSION PLANNED DESE# yrit EEEEEEEEE Re-enact the Star Wars movie sensation with Sega's new Model 1 arcade biggie... A Although the control here feels worryingly like a CD game, there's no denying it's an awesome spectacle watching the view as you plunge into the Death Star trench. A Each mission has a highly dangerous objective to complete if you're to progress in the game. VERDICT 123 asting you as a heroic X-Wing pilot, helping to destroy the mighty Empire, this game really needs two people. One person takes on the role of the pilot and shoots via a fixed on-screen cursor, while the other does the majority of the shooting with a controllable on-screen cursor. It's possible to play the game by yourself, but it's hard going as piloting the craft is a job in itself. Like the PC Star Wars games, this is a shoot'em-up with plenty of Tie fighters and gun emplace, ments to blast away at as you battle through the sce, narios. Your flying skills are also called upon when you're flying inside structures, like the Death Star, since there's plenty of contracting corridors and traps that are out to try and crush you. The four levels entail STAR WARS fighting the Empire's fleet, a Super Star Destroyer and flying over the Death Star and finally blowing up the reactor in the latter. A Take that Empire scum! Each level has a certain amount of Tie fighters that have to be disposed of before you can proceed towards your final objective. 146 A Like all the Model 1 games a number of views are available, although in Star Wars' case it's limited to two. an internal view and this third-person perspective. ARCADE Graphically the Model 1 technology used in Star Wars is looking a little dated compared to Daytona's Model 2, and the digitised images are poor. Thankfully the realistic sound compensates for this. Gameplay is too easy with two players though, and too difficult with one. It also feels like a CD game, with the computer trying to pull you where it wants you to go, though you can override it. The controls are uncomfortable too. Excellent fun for a couple of goes, but certainly no classic. RIK SKEWS GLER Flying down this trench is a killer. Not only do you have to contend with Tie Fighters and gun emplacements, but you also have to dodge walls moving up which force you into more dangerous positions. Slow Dashr A Take the seat of your XWing Fighter, and then it's off to destroy the Death Star. GRAPHICS 84 SOUND 91 PLAYABILITY 79 VALUE 83 COMING SOON MEGA DRIVE 32X Star Wars Arcade Sega Sega has listened to complaints about the game's lastability and two more levels should be in the finished game. Expect a solid converSion. EXPECTED RELEASE: DECEMBER OVERALL It's fun to fly fast that's for sure, but sometimes it's a good idea to break hard so that the Tie fighters shoot straight past you and into your sights. BU 64 THANKS TO HAMLEYS METROPOLIS (071-287 3480), REGENT STREET, LONDON FOR LETTING US PLAY ON ONE OF THE FIRST STAR WARS MACHINES IN BRITAIN. CHECK OUT THE SCREENSHOTS OF THE 32-X VERSION ON PAGE 14 THIS ISSUE. "


"What would you say to 5 free cinema vouchers I'm head over heels. 16-20 year olds. I'll be Frank. Open a TSB Interest Cheque Account and as well as : a cash card you can use in over 6,000 cash machines you'll get five  cinema vouchers. You'll also get many other discounts on ... let's say, driving lessons and toiletries. OK? Driving lessons and toiletries. For more details visit your local TSB branch. TSB We want YOU to say YES Offer available to 18-20 year olds opening their first Interest Cheque Account, subject to status. Offer subject to availability, at all participating cinemas. Offer closes 30th April 1995. TSB Bank pic, Victoria House, Victoria Square, Birmingham B11 BZ. Naked Gun 33%  1994 Paramount Pictures. All rights reserved. "


"CVG REVIEW POSITION RCADE ZO-HOO ARCADE RACING GAME VARIES OUT NOW NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE SATURN VERSION PLANNED Fasten your seatbelts as we test drive the best racing game ever... aytona USA combines state-of-theart technology with magnificent gameplay. It uses the new CG Model 2 board technology which takes over from the 180,000 polygon shifting Model 1 board used in Virtua Racing, Fighter and Star Wars. The Model 2 board can shift polygons up to an amazing 300,000 polygons per second while the custom 32-bit processor allows for plenty of depth in the texture mapping to create effects like damage on the bodywork. The arcade game itself is very similar in style to Virtua Racing with three tracks, one based around the famous Daytona track, another similar to the Bay Bridge level in Virtua Racing, and finally a city streetsbased track. As you're about to see though, it's better than even the lofty heights set by Virtua Racing. VAXTON.. 237 STENSIO 2876 M 0°1998 Like Virtua Racing Daytona USA has four different viewpoints to choose from but unlike the Model 1 game the internal views make the game easier to play, not to mention more fun. RACE LEADER RACE LEADER 304 257 10 We saw the demo of this back in January at the ATEI arcade show and thought this quality of graphics would only be this good in the intro sequence. It's hard to believe they stay that way throughout the game. Aargh! That pesky hedgehog gets everywhere! Look out for a Mt Rushmore Sonic tribute on the first level. A statue of Jeffry from Virtua Fighter also makes an appearance on the advanced level. . THANKS TO HAMLEYS METROPOLIS, REGENT STREET, LONDON (071-287 3488) FOR LETTING US TEST DRIVE DAYTONA USA. 66 "


"POLE POSITION REVIEW CVG THE ULTIMATE RIDE? GUGOG 213 O% PIT WORK! 2711 It's tempt ing to enter the pits whenever you feel like it because the graphics are so good here, but be careful because it costs an awful lot of time. 30/30 The expert level lives up to its name. It's hard enough keeping the car on the slippery road surface, let alone trying to win a race. When you finish you're treated to yet another graphics feast in the shape of this aerial flyby. 19%-1 A The steering wheel is among the best I've ever handled in a game. When the car is damaged the wheel bumps and becomes more difficult to control. 31/A ortant Bull soul! VERDICT TRAFFIC /20 298% ARCADE Daytona USA is the best arcade game l've played in years! It's one of the few games where mindblowing graphics and sound add to the gameplay instead of trying to hide a weak product. They're state-of-the-art you've simply got to see the pitstop sequence. The engines roar, the pitcrew chatter and the noises boom. Gameplay is equally jawdropping and though it's tough going, the difficulty is pitched perfectly, you won't want to stop. This one will be a legend. RIK SKEWS It's the start of the race. You've a long way to go to overtake 29 other competitors and claim first place. TRIN 80333i COMING SOON A The sound FX as you travel through are a tunnel are easily the most realistic effect I've ever heard in a racing game. GRAPHICS 97 SOUND 96 PLAYABILITY 96 VALUE 95 Circuit Select BEGINNER SHORT XLAPS ADUANCED XALAPS EXPI SATURN Daytona USA Sega We've high hopes for this one but even a version half as good would probably be a winner! Keep 'em peeled for more news, probably nearer the time the machine is released. EXPECTED RELEASE: DECEMBER OVERALL Texture mapped graphics ahoy. Daytona USA features plenty and despite the complexity and detail there's never even a hint of slowdown. There are three circuits. Beginner is based on the famous Daytona track, Advanced takes place on a bridge while Expert is set on the twisty city streets. DAYTONA USA IS BY A LEGENDARY PROGRAMMING TEAM THAT HAS ALSO BEEN RESPONSIBLE FOR (AMONG OTHERS) THE SEGA ARCADE CLASSICS OUTRUN, VIRTUA RACING AND VIRTUA FORMULA. 62 "


"SEGA MAGAZINE: the only magazine for the discerning Sega player. Only we know exactly what you want from a magazine. Only we have the contacts necessary to bring what you want to the printed page. Take a look at the latest issue, for example... 1. MICKEY MANIA! Sony and Psygnosis team up to bring some of the most outstanding graphics ever to the megadrive. It looks astounding, and we have it first. MEGA PRIVE MEGA-CD Master System Game GEAR 2. MEGADRIVE 32X Only SEGA MAGAZINE has the resources to bring you eight packed pages of 32X-clusive gear. Star Wars, Virtua Racing, Metal Head... we've seen these projects and talked to the man responsible for them. PLUS! Latest news on Doom straight from the creators, id software! SEGA  37   BRITAIN'S ONLY OFFICIAL SEGA MAGAZINE 3. CAPCOM EXCLUSIVE! We all know that Capcom are responsible for some of the greatest videogames ever created. We have full access to their latest line-up of top-quality productsmegaman: The Wily Wars and The Punisher. They're both in SEGA MAG-exclusively! DISNEY'S Onasins et CSIBLY PEDERILE EISI POIS POPUNE SPOON! DIGILDREINLINE DUR 5. .  :1!  U11 BULLET FIGHTERS HALU OF ATLANTIS 4. MORTAL KOMBAT II The ultimate in coverage for what is shaping up to be the most incredible \"kombat\" game ever. Check out our eight page feature plus Megadrive And Game Gear reviews! FTR ! 5. MORE TOP REVIEWS A vast line-up of games are put through their paces in the latest issue. Included: Formula One: Beyond the Limits, Mario Andretti, The Animals, Brutal, Zero Tolerance AND Rebel Assault... plus more! GIANT MORTAL KOMBAT II POSTER INSIDE! So, it's all rather exciting then, really, isn't it? SEGA MAGAZINE: Issue 9, out September 15. The price is a mere .25. SEGA mA GA ZIn E BRITAIN'S ONLY OFFICIAL SEGA MAGAZINE "


"THE LEADER OF THE PACK REVIEW CVG D9373 082220 ISNES ISHOOT-'EM-UP .99 OUT NOW NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE INO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED A gang of cute kids on a shoot-'emup rampage can only mean one thing it's lunchtime. Only kidding, it's the sequel to Pocky & Rocky... A You'll need to find keys to unlock the bonuses in these chests. You'll find keys by walking into parcels scattered around. nly the Japanese have the ability to come up with a game which manages to be both sinister and cute at the same time. Kikikaikai 2 is an arcade adventure and shopping game all in one. Like Mystical Ninja 2 it offers a blend of relentless shooting action with meandering exploration. Your mission is to find the right path to the boss on each stage, stopping occasionally to enter a shop for new weapons and game hints. In the game you control two players simultaneously (even when you play solo) and by shooting tokens you can change your comrade into one of several characters available. Each 'mate' offers different abilities to help you, so it's not just a cosmetic addition to the game. Certainly, the way in which your two characters interact during play gives you a plethora of possible fighting tactics and that might just be a good enough reason to grab this. KIKIKAIKA aka Pocky & Rocky 2 A It's possible to merge with your friend for a short while. You then control your mate for strategic purposes. VERDICT SNES This is an elegant sequel to one of the best overhead blasters on the SNES. The backdrops are gorgeous and there's creativity in the design of baddies. It's exactly the same as before gameplay wise but the addition of several team mates provides different ways to approach the challenge. As usual the two-player game works best and the only real (but major) criticism here is some severe slow-down in places. Not worth it if you've got the first one but otherwise fab. DENIZ AHMET A Here's one of your mates. They do their best to help you out, but they have a habit of getting in your way at awkward moments. A The bosses, while unoriginal, take absolutely ages to kill. The best way to dispose of them is by shooting diagonally. A Often you come across these big gates which need to be shot at to get past. What you can do though, is grab your mate and throw him into the gate to smash it quickly. 20090365 3 82 GRAPHICS 90 SOUND 78 PLAYABILITY 85 I VALUE 65 By blasting these tokens you can change your mate on-the-fly from a selection of three characters. OVERALL ALTERNATIVE A1200 Chaos Engine Renegade/.99 A sort of Gothic version of Pocky & Rocky. Good weapons and fast action make it the smartest modern-day equivalent to Gauntlet. ISSUE 148: 86% To make the most of the shops you'll need to collect these coins which are dropped by dead baddies.  GAME BY NATSUME CONTACT COMPUTER EXCHANGE (071-636 2666) FOR INFORMATION CART SIZE 12MEGS 69 "


"< K.T. KONSOLS = ****.252 144 CONSOLES LOOK SNES SOFTWARE no further for the STUNT RACE FX(USA) ...... FLINTSTONES latest imported & DESERT FIGHTER .................44 WEIRD: SENSIBLE SOCCER INT......... accessories from the TIME TRAX ........................ SUPER STREET FIGHTER II .CALL Far East: Please phone CALL US NOW or write for For Fast for further Friendly Service unbelievable details priees! Tel: 081 386-1454 or Fax: 081 950-6262 E.L.D. P.O. Box 23, Bushey, Watford WD2 3YL Tel/Fax 0847 66949 3 Lines 26 Princes Street, Thurso, Caithness KW14 7BQ Open 6 days a week. Mon-Sat 10.30 6pm We are the largest stockist of Second Hand Game Exchange Service Games in Britain. At present we have the following games in stock: Over 225 Mega Drive, over 225 SNES, Over 60 Neo Geo, Over 100 PC Engine and also a variety of 3DO games. To find out what titles we have in stock, please phone. Once you have chosen your game, we'll reserve it for you then all you have to do is send us your unwanted game and we'll despatch your reserved game immediately by First Class Recorded Delivery It couldn't be easier! WE ALSO SELL SECOND HAND GAMES AT VERY COMPETITIVE PRICES, The machines we cater for are SNES, Megadrive, Neo Geo, Jaguar, 3DO and PC Engine/Turbo Express. NEW GAMES ALSO STOCKED Super Street Fighter........ FX Trax . All latest releases are in stock. You've tried the rest now come to the best! HEARTS LEISURE (LONDON) 125 BOWES ROAD, PALMERS GREEN, LONDON, N13 4SB TEL: 081 889 0811/081 360 5562 FAX: 081 881 9558 Hearts SuperGun \"The Powermaster\" and \"The Voyager\" Joystick The Powermaster (Supergun) * A reinforced detached flexible Jamma Connector. * A voltage adjuster for top quality graphics and sound. * An interface for 6 button games i.e SF II, M/K. * Stereo sound switch. * High powered arcade FSU. * 2 Joystick port inputs. *Scart Lead. * A credit button and 1 player, 2 player start buttons. The Voyager Joystick The Voyager is a six button joystick panel with an original arcade 8 way joystick and six original arcade buttons. It also comes with a start button Complete package for only .99 items also individually sold. 100's of Jamma Boards in stock Part Exchange Welcome IF YOU CAN GET ANY GAME CHEAPER ANYWHERE ELSE, THEN GIVE US A RING AND WE WILL TRY TO MATCH, OR EVEN BEAT, THE PRICE OFFICIAL UK STOCKISTS JAGUAR Daniel Department Store 120-125 Peascod Street Windsor, Berkshire SL4 1DP 0753 8621067 Tempest 2000 .99 Raiden .99 Crescent Galaxy .99 Wolfenstien .99 CALL FOR THE REAL DATES Alien vs Predator Club Drive Brutal Sports Football .99 Prices subject to change, correct as of 06/94 "


"AT THE TOSS OF A COIN.... REVIEW CVG PC I SPORTS SIMULATION .99 OUT NOW ISNES AND MEGA DRIVE VERSIONS ALSO AVAILABLE 3DO AND AMIGA VERSIONS PLANNED FIFA just keeps selling and selling, and EA keeps converting to get everyone football crazy... re we go, 'ere we go, 'ere we go with the PC conversion of FIFA. It's not often that you get a game which converts well to all formats, but this is certainly proving to be one of those 'can't go wrong' type of efforts. For this PC incarnation you get much better speed and smoothness than the other formats, but that's about it unfortunately. What we really need to talk about is what a good simulation FIFA is, irrespective of format. For starters it's got that unique diagonal viewpoint which forces the game into 3D graphics and so looks physically convincing. Secondly, it's got intelligent opponents and sticks firmly to the rules of the sport, so it's easy to get into. But most importantly it's got an arsenal (oops!) of moves to give you enough fancy footwork to put a tap-dancer to shame. Put all that together and you get realism, which is what any simulation should have. FIFA INTERNATIONAL SOCCER VERDICT The PC version is missing the energy bar found on the consoles so you haven't got as much control over the ball. anason The ref is always near by so you have to be careful if you like doing those dives. Even if he's not facing you he'll spot any foul play PC Let's start with the one bad thing in this conversion, it's the lack of multitap play. While you could get up to five players together on a SNES you're limited to two here. Moans aside, FIFA is clearly the best footie game on the PC. As elsewhere, it has incredible atmosphere, thanks to tension on the pitch and detailed little touches like cheering fans jumping out of their seats, yet some will say that you never quite feel you're in true control. DENIZ AHMET BENE desA The PC offers much better speed and smoothness in its use of graphics over other versions. A How's this for product placement! Adidas and Panasonic. COMING SOON GRAPHICS 90 SOUND 85 PLAYABILITY 84 VALUE 85 3DO FIFA EA This version is aiming to be something quite different. Apart from looking even better, the view-point can now be placed freely at your discretion and even your player's shadows are animated. OUT NOV/DECEMBER OVERALL 86 As usual it's far better to let the computer control the goalie. A When it's time for a corner you get a separate little window. You can plan your corner kicks very efficiently in FIFA.  GAME BY EA CONTACT ELECTRONIC ARTS (0753 549442) FOR INFORMATION 21 "


"CVG REVIEW ICD32 ARCADE ADVENTURE .99 OUT NOW AMIGA AND A1200 VERSIONS ALSO AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED Vikings ahoy! Core Design's sumptuous arcade adventure docks on CD32... ust like the first game Heimdall 2 is an isometric, scrolling adventure with astonishing graphics and animation, although this time the adventure side of things feels much more complete, rather than a string of disconnected scenes like the first game. As Heimdall it's your job to return to Earth and battle the evil Loki once again. Not the most inspiring of plots it has to be said, but thankfully Core Design has spent plenty of time on inspiring, gameplay with many challenging puzzles to solve. This version of Heimdall 2 is similar to the CD32 version of Legacy of Sorasil in that very little has changed from its original Amiga version apart from a lengthy and highly competent classical soundtrack to accompany the game. HEIMDALL VERDICT These portals allow access to the different worlds. In the early stages you can only visit Midgard but as you solve puzzles other worlds become available to you. Runes play an important part in the game. You can learn spells and even create your own from scratch. There's even an invincibility rune but will you discover it? CD32 Many comments about Legacy of Sorasil (page 90) on CD32 apply to Heimdall 2. The game is as good as unchanged in its CD incarnation, bar another outstanding CD score (no digital sound FX though). Still, what's here remains a classy product (those graphics are as beautiful as ever) and to my mind Heimdall 2 is one of the few puzzle-heavy games that is as much fun to play for non-arcade adventure fans as it is for the devotee. RIK SKEWS Fry, I can't let you sithout a pass. The weakest area of Heimdall 2 is the fighting There's not a lot of strategy, it's simply a case of hitting the fire-button as quickly as possible and hoping you have more energy than the baddie. 1419 T Heimdall 2's chock-a-block full of puzzles. Here for instance you need a pass before the man will let you into the castle. Thing is, where on Earth do you get one? Talk about rubbing it in! When it's game over time you'll end up in this jail and be rewarded with this GRAPHICS 86 SOUND PLAYABILITY 86 VALUE 84 ALTERNATIVE SNES Equinox Sony/ Another isometric adventure but Equinox is more like Head over Heels on the Spectrum or Monster Max on the Game Boy. ISSUE 137: 80% OVERALL 86 Like the original game one of Heimdall 2's strongest points is its beautiful graphics. It really is like playing a car toon, but thankfully there's plenty of gameplay. GAME BY CORE DESIGN CONTACT CORE DESIGN (0332 297797) 22 "


"GET 'EM WHILE THEY'RE HOT REVIEWS JO UTNOW ON FLOPPY Don't take a risk on buying games which are only worth formatting, read our current recommendations OUTNOW ON HANDHELDS THE HEGNSBELL FIK DET ERES DE Handheld machines are small and neat and so are these games... THEME PARK / PC / EA .99 The idea of this game is to build up a profitable amusement empire and try to poach customers from similar parks. Tons of options and loads of thinking needed to get through this. Lovely graphics add humour to the proceedings. Issue 153: 92% WARIOLAND/GAME BOY/ NINTENDO /.99 The third Marioland game, and this time you take the part of the evil Wario as he plunders around this graphically spectacular Game Boy game, looking for enough coins from each level to build a castle that will outdo the one Mario built at the end of SML 2. Issue 153: 92% ETUSIASM DOST TO BE 0.60000 BANSHEE / A1200 / CORE PRICE: .99 Despite only having four levels, Banshee is an impressive flight of smart backdrops, hardcore shooting and believable action. One of the best shoot-'em-ups we've seen for ages. Nothing new though. Issue 153: 85% @ DROPZONE/GAME GEAR /CODEMASTERS /TBA An old game, but it makes an ideal conversion to the Game Gear as it's a simple no brain required blast. Nowadays it would be considered a rip-off on the consoles but on a handheld it's perfect long train journey material. Issue 153: 76% ZOOL 2 / PC / GREMLIN PRICE: .99 Who says that platform games don't work on the PC, certainly not the Ninja from the Nth dimension. Fast and furious platforming malarkey, with plenty of new levels and a new character Zool's girlie, Zooz. Issue 153: 79% MEGA MAN 3/GAME POL BOY/NINTENDO/.99 Another blast from the past on the Game Boy. Mega Man is probably Capcom's most enduring game. No prizes for originality but it's a large game with a tough difficulty level, so good VFM. Issue 153: 79% BODY BLOWS AGA/ A1200 / TEAM 17 PRICE: $14.99 It's the best Amiga beat-'em-up by far. Excellent graphics, moves, sound and all at a bargain price. Opponents have loads of character and imagination and it all shifts like a console game. Issue 153: 88% MICRO MACHINES/GAME GEAR/ CODEMASTERS/ .99 CodeMasters games are always a worthy buy but this one particularly so since it allows a twoplayer game on just one cart! And it retains the playability of its console cousins. Lovely! Issue 148: 89% AVOID You'll be as sick as a parrot if you buy... AV O ID WEMBLEY INTERNATIONAL SOCCER / A1200 / AUDIOGENIC PRICE: .99 This smells like a pair of socks after the World Cup final. The graphics look like a C64 game and the controls are confused. Even the scrolling lacks realistic speed. But you can play in different perspectives. Issue 153: 56% Smash this into a thousand pieces... MS PACMAN/GAME BOY/NINTENDO/.99 Nostalgia's OK if the game was any cop in the first place but this stinks like a dead kipper. Go back to the 70s, you sorry game. Issue 152: 32% 23 "


"CVG REVIEW DON'T SLEEP IN THE FATAL POSITION... FATAL FURY 2 MEGA DRIVE BEAT-'EM-UP .99 OUT ON IMPORT ISNES VERSION ALSO AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED A Here Andy Bogard gives Kim Kap Hwan a Guile special. game SNK prepares to do battle for the beat-'em-up crown... all me a big softie but I often feel sorry for those beat-'em-ups that sit in the corner of arcades gathering dust instead of money. It's not as though they're all crap either, it's simply that the market dominators Street Fighter II and Mortal Kombat II are just so good. The original arcade Fatal Fury falls into the \"dusty corner' category and made no great ripples in the beat-'em-up pond when first released. Like most fighting games though, the arcade sequel proved much better and it's this version which you now find yourself staring at. Being a sequel there's plenty of new characters to be played and additional moves to be discovered. Among the characters you can choose are brothers Terry and Andy Bogard and Jubei Yamada, a tiny but rather psychotic grandad type. Here we are in the UK setting. Once again use the background to cripple your opponent on the cogs. VERDICT MEGA DRIVE Fatal Fury 2 is another OK beat-'em-up but why bother when you can have Super Street Fighter II or Mortal Kombat Il? Graphically it's OK but unless you select fast mode it crawls along and there's some really bad slowdown when you finish off a character. Sounds are the usual Street Fighter fare and every other recent beat-'em-up rip-off. At this price and with the competition I'd have to say only buy Fatal Fury 2 if you're totally addicted to the genre. RIK SKEWS Some of the backgrounds are interactive. Here for instance, you can throw your opponent on to the electric fence and frazzle him. LOOKS LIKE... A Unless you select the fast setting the game slithers like a dead snail. I'd hate to see it on a PAL machine. Many of the moves, and many of the sound effects come to that, are Street Fighter Il clones. The graphics in Fatal Fury 2 vary from average to very good. One of the better scenes is this neat version of Mt Rushmore. 77 GRAPHICS 84 SOUND PLAYABILITY 80 VALUE 78 OVERALL Mortal Kombat II is often plagiarised too. Note the similarities between this character and Mileena. ALTERNATIVE SNES Mortal Kombat II Acclaim/TBA Forget Super Street Fighter II this is the definitive beat'em-up of the moment and quite simply the most perfect arcade conversion ever. ISSUE 154: 96% Axel Hawk is one of the best characters to start with as his basic moves do a lot of damage by themselves. You can worry about learning the specials later. 80 GAME BY SNK CONVERTED BY TAKARA CONTACT COMPUTER EXCHANGE (071-636 2666) FOR IMPORT COPIES 24 "


"DON'T PLAY FAIR! REVIEW CVG I AMIGA SPORTS SIMULATION .99 OUT NOW NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE CD32 VERSION PLANNED You're gonna need more than shinpads to cope with the players in Millenium's violent new sports sim... ules aren't really important in Wild Cup Soccer, apart from the fact there are 11, players like regular football. Scoring goals is your main concern. In your way are opponents who like to put the boot in (and their fists) to reduce your player's energy. If it's reduced to zero he dies and a header is scored, resulting in a cash prize for the opponent. Watch out for the pick-ups on the pitch too. These includes delights like the firecracker which causes any opposing team member who touches the ball to spontaneously combust. Scoring goals and winning matches results in a cash bonus. This cash can be used to buy armour and weapons. These become essential later in the game when opposing teams become more violent. VCUP SOCCER 03 ODIO A VERDICT EUIL. AMIGA Wild Cup Soccer looks like EA's FIFA Soccer and plays like Mutant League Hockey. Trouble is it's also got FIFA's flaw in that it can lack control and you often end up moving the joystick and pressing the button randomly. Still the graphics are smoother than in Brutal Sports Football and there's no denying that Wild Cup is fun to play (especially in two-player), but personally I'd rather play the ancient but brilliant Speedball 2, especially since it's less than half the price. RIK SKEWS A The main problem with Wild Cup Soccer is that you often don't feel in control, which can result in the buttons being stabbed randomly. 03 ODOS Goals are necessary to win the match but you can earn more cash by playing nasty and killing opponent players. FIFA should check this one out! The ref dishes out lots of lolly for particularly nasty fouls! MAC PLIE A Considering its complexity, the pitch scrolls at a decent pace and is certainly faster than the one in Brutal Sports Football. 202 DODOSO GRAPHICS 80 SOUND 74 PLAYABILITY 82 VALUE 79 Examine the team in more detail and you might notice that some of the players look er... cute. Remember that appearances can be deceptive though. OVERALL ALTERNATIVE MEGA DRIVE Speedball 2 Virgin/.99 The Amiga original is a real all-time classic and this version retains all the brilliant playability. ISSUE 123: 93% WWW . RO WORTAR DU STOLAC ENHE LEAPONS Weapons can also be purchased. Using the mortar is great fun but like all the best things they cost a lot of cash. GAME BY MILLENNIUM CONTACT MILLENNIUM (0223 844894) FOR MORE INFORMATION, 25 "


"CVG REVIEW WHO LIKES PATRICK MOORE, ANYHOW? 3 DO SHOOT-'EM UP .99 OUT ON IMPORT NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED BURNING SOLDIER It looks like Rebel Assault but it's set even further in the future. And it's so much better with two players. importers have been cutting themselves with sharp words of praise for this game it looks great running in shop windows. There are really flash moments with the intro and cutscenes, and then the action settles back into a much more basic blast. Sure, this sort of move-the-cursorand-shoot-things type of challenge leaves a lot to be desired, but it's ideal if you want to whizz impressive background graphics around in a set pattern as in here. There are four missions altogether, with 18 stages in all. The idea is to survive to the end of each stage, and the game is purely about shooting for the best score possible. It's shallow but its simplicity makes it exciting to play. A You only control your cursor in this game the backgrounds swerve and tilt of their own accord. Approaching the city gives you a taste of what to expect. This is one of many cut-scenes in the game, YOUR SCORE .. 86 In Tokyo you have an overhead battle and a headon one as shown here. The bar in the left window is your energy and you can't recharge. You get to view a different explosion sequence depending on where you are when you snuff it. The shattering effect is superb. Your path through the asteroids is governed by the computer but you can blast any asteroids in your path. GAME BY PANASONIC CONTACT COMPUTER EXCHANGE (071 636 2666) FOR INFORMATION TWO PLAYER GAME. 26 "


"WHO LIKES PATRICK MOORE, ANYHOW? REVIEW CVG Occasionally the game switches to overhead perspective. Here you have to blast the enemy barracks. O .0. O Most of the game is spent trying to target these nasty bombs which shoot out at you with super speed. SECOND OPINION I'm sure most people will find this briefly entertaining, but like Rebel Assault it does become repetitive very quickly. The graphics are impressively animated but you have no control over the flight patterns which is a bit annoying. It looks good but the gameplay's samey, Still, it does have a two-player mode. A few more weapons and more than just four missions would have made this excellent. Very well put together but quite tricky in one-player mode. RIK SKEWS A Time to get wet! VERDICT 3DO FANTASY FLIGHT 3D0 Burning Soldier manages to make simplistic cursor shooting (as seen in Rebel Assult and Microcosm) very entertaining. It's the futuristic atmosphere which shines through and there's no noticeable disk access to disjoint the flow of gameplay. But enemy fire comes lightning fast, so sometimes you can't help feeling that it's rather unfair to expect you to see it quick enough. A professional and good fun game, though. DENIZ AHMET The raytraced cut-scenes are there to explain the plot. They're accompanied by a voice over. Having landed on Earth your ship is transformed into a bouncing bug which leaps across the ground as COMING SOON shown here. PC-CD NOVASTORM PSYGNOSIS This is the much, much improved sequel to Microcosm. It looks fab and contains a collection of bosses that'll blow you away. You can Your laser is your only even crash into the weapon for the entire game. scenery. There are no collectables to be found for power-ups of EXPECTED RELEASE: OCTOBER any form. GRAPHICS 90 SOUND 89 PLAYABILITY 78 VALUE 60 OVERALL This cavern bit looks very similar to Rebel Assult, eh? But this one swerves up and down too. 79 GAME BY PANASONIC CONTACT COMPUTER EXCHANGE (071 636 2666) FOR INFORMATION TWO PLAYER GAME. 72 "


"CVG REVIEWS THE MOST REVIEWS FOR THE MOST FORMATS SUPERSHORTS er ont to CVG gives you the whole picture when it comes to games reviews... GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY OVERALL KICK OFF 3 PC .99 BY ANCO Large and quite fastmoving sprites, but no real variety in the backdrop, which let's face it is only to be expected. Adequately footballlike in its aural qualities, but Kick Off 3 just sounds like a lot of other football titles. It all goes wrong under this category. The controls are rubbish, the response is slack and the scrolling reeks. A top notch and chipper footie game 30% OUT TO LUNCH AMIGA O .99 BY MINDSCAPE Looks for all the world like a Super NES game. Colourful, perky sprites and backgrounds coupled with jolly animation. A selection of suitably bouncy tunes tootle in the background, while the effects try hard not to interfere. Out To Lunch is very easy to pick up, but its rapid pace and taxing later levels make it a tough challenge to crack. Enjoyable fast-paced platform caper starring a lairy chef. 88% EMPIRE SOCCER AMIGA — .99 BY EMPIRE SOFTWARE Cartoony sprites cavort around a rarely seen fully overhead pitch environment in a reasonably convincing manner. All the fun of a real game if your ears can handle it. Deafen yourself in the comfort of your own home! What fun! Not much for the old realism, but this is a highly enjoyable and skilful game. Among the best of the current crop. Yes, it's another soccer game but this one's ace. 87% JAMMIT NES UNCONFIRMED BY VIRGIN Goes to show that 'digitised' doesn't always mean 'any good', the sprites and backgrounds on offer are of a very low standard. The crackly speech is just plain annoying, and while the music tries hard to be funky, it's wearily repetitive. It takes so much work to get just the tiniest ounce of fun out of this product, and it really isn't worth the effort. Very bad basketball craze cash-in 43% PIRATES OF DARK WATER MEGA DRIVE  BY SEGA Yet another average platform game. Aieee! The backgrounds are nice and very atmospheric, but the sprites look somewhat flat, although they are quite nicely drawn. The effects are barely audible (which is actually a godsend) and the music lacks any semblance of a tune at all. Good fun for a while, but soon the very ordinariness of the game begins to get on your nerves. 71% COMBAT CARS MEGA DRIVE .99 BY ACCOLADE Whilst the sprites are clearly enough defined, they're a bit on the bland side and could do with some spicing up. If you're into pop techno, you'll scream with delight at the tunes on this number, and the spot effects are pretty good, too. A slidey control system spoils the fun a bit. This just isn't as good as Codemasters' Micro Machines, unfortunately. Average overhead racing game with no thrills. 67% WORLD CUP USA '94 PC .99 BY US GOLD Small but perfectly formed sprites featuring some pretty cool animation. The pitches are, as usual, very green indeed. When it comes to cheers, jeers, thwacks and all the other audio accoutrements of the sport, this game has them. Fast-paced and relying more on analogue-wagling than really skilful strategy, this is best suited to younger gamers. Smashing arcade-stylee soccer title. 81% PLANET FOOTBALL PC O .99 BY INFOGRAMMES Lovely 3D pitch environment and nicelooking player sprites. (Meaning nice in the graphic sense 1 don't fancy them). Once again, a football game which has authentic football sound of a reasonable quality, and that's no bad thing. The 3D view means you can't see to defend when you're playing upscreen, or see to attack when playing down. Potentially ace but sadly flawed sports title. 65% 78 INFOGRAMES (071-738 8199) US GOLD (021-625 3366) IMPRESSIONS (071-351 2133) PSYGNOSIS (051-709 5755) IMAGINEER (0753 671686) OCEAN (061-832 6633) "


"SHOCKED BY THE POWER REVIEW CVG 3DO SHOOT-'EM-UP .99 LOUT NOW INO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED SHOCK WAVE Again the 3DO's technical wizardry is fired up and ready to roll, let's hope there's plenty of gameplay to be had Il right, early 3D0 games were undeniably cack but most new developments start timidly. Electronic Arts is due to release no less than twenty-five 3DO titles between now and next June so it'll be interesting to see how many cherries it'll have in its basket. Either the little techno pixies have visited our Panasonic 3DO and patched it up behind our backs, or this is the first game where it looks like programmers have sussed a way around the machine's much publicised problems with sluggish access time. The game itself, Shockwave, is in fact pretty standard shoot-'em-up fare, although the excellent graphics suggest otherwise. But, importantly, there's no slow-down or painful disc accessing time which has been the case with many of the earlier games. VERDICT The aliens have a variety of craft at their disposal, with new ships appearing every level. Thankfully those nice people who built your fighter remembered to include missiles as well as an airbag. This is where the good guys work. You can tell this because the equipment looks like something out of Space 1999 (ie cheap). 3DO Shock Wave is by far and away the best action game on 3DO. The makers of all of the new machines set great store on the power of their toys, but the texture mapping here is the best I've seen in any game and the sprite scaling is perfect. However, the action is limited, especially with the bosses that vary little throughout the game. It may not have scored a CVG hit, but this one of the better 3D0 games and an essential buy if you own the machine. MARK PATTERSON HEAT SEEKER  Daniel Barton A The texture mapping doesn't really work in cities, they look a bit flat. This is compensated for slightly by sporadic 3D buildings. Like most 3D0 titles, ShockWave is loaded with FMV clips. They drag on a bit, but add immensely to the plot. KILLED GRAPHICS 90 SOUND 65 PLAYABILITY 82 VALUE 75 BAMAGE SCORE 4195 RESUME GIVE UP ALTERNATIVE Mega-CD Battlecorps Core/.99 Core's latest hit is on the Mega-CD and is based on its earlier hit on that machine, Thunderhawk. Plenty of hard core shooting. Nuff said. ISSUE 153: 65% OVERALL The graphics are outstanding, although you can go for periods without encountering anything. A taste of things to come? These spider craft go around the cities nerve gassing the population then hoovering them up. Luckily for you they're unarmed. 78 GAME BY ELECTRONIC ARTS CONTACT ELECTRONIC ARTS (0753 549442) FOR MORE INFORMATION 29 "


"CVG REVIEW ENGLAND-WHO ARE THEY? IPC STRATEGY .99 OUT NOW ON THE BAIL WORLD CUP EDITION AMIGA AND A1200 VERSIONS ALSO AVAILABLE PC-CD VERSIONS PLANNED Date The Germans have come up with a management game so different that you'll kick yourself if you miss it... Nolumbien ootball management games have always been rather notorious for their off-putting user interfaces and complex menu system, so it's a major surprise to find one game which has done something about that. On the Ball has taken a graphical adventure type approach to football management, borrowing the sort of point-and-click interface and multiple-choice questioning that's more accustomed to your standard adventure game. Using your diary you plan day-to-day training, programmes, eating routines, press conferences, team meetings, time off and so forth during the World Cup. What's original here though is the move away from purely statistical-based management to people management, and that means matching player personalities as well as skills. The cinch comes with 'events' which can pop-up at any time and so disrupt your plans. The team might go down with food poisoning or a bomb alert might postpone all training for that day just be prepared to use up any time efficiently. It's not possible to summarise the extensive 112-page game manual on to this page, so read on for the edited highlights... At the World Cup your hotel room is your office. You can access all options by clicking on appropriate objects. Make sure you get enough sleep. You have a different office if you select to play the qualifying phase which lets you develop your player skills more comprehensively. VERDICT A visit to the doctor lets you talk to injured players to boost their mood or you can have a massage your self if you're stressed out. AWON KICKERS PC As a non-strategy fan | was quite impressed at how easy and involving this game is to get in to. The graphical approach is unique and unmatched but it's the sheer comprehensiveness of the options which make it work. The amount of thought which has gone into this game is exhaustive and it's actually quite stressful to play. My only problem is that it's very difficult to tell if you've made a wrong decision until it's too late. DENIZ AHMET To check your personnel's state of mind as a manger you simply click on your barometer to display this screen. At this moment things are going well. During a match you get real-time graphics from different viewpoints and a running text commentary. Quite unique. A Training is the only real way to improve your team. You scroll through this display to find the form of training you want. It's then scheduled in your diary. 8 Day GRAPHICS 84 SOUND 35 PLAYABILITY 87 VALUE 82 9200 8.00 900 PS correc Training Tembeling OVERALL 1100 Half day free the day free Open day ALTERNATIVE AMIGA Premier Manager 2 Gremlin/.99 If you're not into snazzy graphics then this is among the best management games. Tons of options and opportunity for skullduggery. ISSUE 145: 88% Watch The game Using your diary is a simple case of dragand-drop from the list to the right. Meals are only available at certain times. 1500 1800 Stand up Go to bed FOTO Team melina 3.00 MAISE BHITTON GAME BY ASCON CONTACT ASCON (071-328 3144) FOR INFORMATION 386 PC MINIMUM 80 "


"LIKE HOT AND COLD DUDE REVIEW CVG CD32 PLATFORM .99 OUT NOW FIRE AND ICE AMIGA AND GAME GEAR VERSIONS AVAILABLE INO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED Top programmer Andrew Braybrook and the Graftgold team fire up the CD32 with a cool platformer ndrew Braybrook and the Graftgold team have been responsible for some classic games like Paradroid and Uridium, and more recently two superb Amiga platformers, Rainbow Islands and Fire and Ice, the later of which is now on CD32. Casting you as Cool Coyote, Fire and Ice contains all the usual platform storyline cliches as you bound your way across numerous and highly varied lands. The clever thing is 'cos it's called Fire and Ice, right, the levels start off icy and become progressively warmer. It's also one of those horribly cute games, so instead of killing the baddies you freeze them, then run past which shatters them. Freezing baddies is essential because some of them (usually the tougher ones) hide parts of a giant key which is needed to open the door at the end of each level. VERDICT If you like game music you'll love Fire and Ice. There's plenty of brilliant upbeat tunes and great FX throughout the game to drive you on. STEEN SCORSAAMAATTICE CD32 The Game Gear conversion was poor, but that's certainly not the case with this version. Some of the graphics are beautiful, especially the fading backgrounds. As for the music, it's the best I've ever heard in a game apart from Ecco Mega CD. Presentation certainly doesn't make up for gameplay, but it goes a long way towards enhancing it; play the game with the original chip music and you'll see what I mean. Thankfully the game itself is equally polished and top fun to play although it's tough going in places. Hot stuff for the CD32 indeed. RIK SKEWS A Once you have all the pieces of the key it's tempting to leave the level straightaway. Don't! Around many of the exits there are often loads of bonuses. A Shoot the question marks for a variety of different bonuses and power-ups. A In the jungle level you have to contend with the usual quota of nasties plus baddies in the background firing flaming spears at you. GRAPHICS 91 SOUND 95 PLAYABILITY 89 VALUE 90 OTHER VERSION GAME GEAR Fire and Ice Virgin/.99 Oh dear, this is a bit of an insult compared to the Amiga original, let alone the all singing, all dancing CD32 version. One to file in the bargain bin if you should see it in the shops. ISSUE 148: 68% OVERALL Certain baddies hide parts of a key. Complete the key and you can leave the level through a door. The map pops up before each level so that you can see all of the stage you are about to complete.  GAME BY RENEGADE CONTACT RENEGADE 071 481 9214 FOR MORE INFORMATION "


"CVG REVIEW DON'T LOSE YOUR HEAD JAGUAR AMERICAN GRIDIRON SIM I.99 TOUT SEPTEMBER OR Grunt AMIGA VERSION AVAILABLE INO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED O3 It's more brutal than an Eric Cantona boot in the chest, and definitely more sporting. It's the world's most violent footy game... e've seen some amazing examples of footy violence before, such as Arsenal's historic 21-man punch-up with Norwich, but nothing compares to this. The players in Brutal Sports tool up with knives and throwing axes before hitting the field, where the onus is as much on lopping off the other players' heads as scoring goals. So the Jaguar's now got a sports game, and it's not a bad one either. Brutal's fast, loaded with action and very, very bloody. However, like so many sports games, it's best played in two-player mode, especially when you forget about scoring and kill every opposing team member for a default victory. As the pitch gets churned up and the bodies start appearing, things become a little confused, but at that stage in a match there usually isn't much time left on the clock. Top weapons such as bombs, swords, axes and even decapitated heads can be collected to make life tough for you opponents. BRUTAL ESPORTS FOOTBALL I VERDICT A Each player has their own energy rating, when it drops below a certain level the next hit takes their head clean off. HREE HER JAGUAR As good as Brutal Sports is, what I really want is a proper footy game for the Jag. With Imagineer's Kick Off 3 still a fair way off, it doesn't look like we're going to have anything of that ilk for a while. In the mean time, Brutal offers more than enough to tide you over the coming months. The gameplay's fluid, there's enough different tactics and it's fast. But you really need a second joypad and a mate to enjoy it at its best and an agreement to play for kills rather than points. MARK PATTERSON There are two ways of winning, either score more or kill all your opponents. Guess which is more fun? 08 1-2) A Getting the ball straight from the kick off is essential, since a fast player can bomb the length of the pitch and score before the defenders can react. o When a player loses their head, they're not completely out of the game as their departed cranium can be employed as a substitute ball. COMING SOON JAGUAR/SNES/MEGA DRIVE Kick Off 3/Imagineer TBA/.99.99 What the Jag really needs is a good real-world sports sim, so it's just as well then that Imagineer is currently working on a conversion of Kick Off 3. Fortunately it's based on the excellent, but delayed, console versions, not the tacky floppy ones. EXPECTED RELEASE: NOVEMBER/DECEMBER GRAPHICS 80 SOUND 75 PLAYABILITY 83 VALUE 79 OVERALL Scoring a goal is a simple matter of getting the ball through the gate. Well, it would be simple if there wasn't a large, hairy keeper in the way.  CONTACT TELEGAMES (0533 813606) FOR MORE INFORMATION NUMBER OF PLAYERS 1-2 82 "


"THE MOST REVIEWS FOR THE MOST FORMATS REVIEWS CVG S UPERSHORTS sare your phone on Don't let a game review escape your beady eye... pore over this little lot! GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY OVERALL INCREDIBLE CRASH DUMMIES AMIGA .99 BY VIRGIN Horrible, unsightly platform affair, utterly dreadful. Those blimming raytraced backgrounds are back in full effect, and they look as daft as they ever did. The animation is bad, too. The main game tune is infuriatingly irritating. It will make you go mad and kill people. There aren't many effects either. Possibly the least reponsive controls in the whole, wide world. This is one of the worst games of its kind in existence. 12% DELTA V PC .99 BY US GOLD Completely ace looking play environment, but the crappy vector graphics are extremely dated. Sounds much like an old Eighties sci-fi film, lots of lasers and futuristic weapon effects. Probably the game's best feature. As repetitive as Ace of Base's record release schedule, Delta V goes nowhere, slowly. Confused, confusing and boring Regrettably half-hearted shoot-'em-up 48% CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE PC .99 BY OCEAN Tedious strategy-type effort with no thrills. Lots of boring static screens, maps and charts. Probably looks great if you're into accountancy and you like studying graphs. Take a wild guess here as to what you think the sound quality is going to be like. Yes! You're right! It's useless! Ambitious, yes, but that's only a virtue if a game's also visionary. As it is, this is overscaled and the interface is clumsy. 43% TRAPS AND TREASURES AMIGA O .99 BY KRISALIS Uninspired platform game which follows the herd. Tries to look consoley, and nearly pulls it off, but the backgrounds look a little flat against the sprites. You've heard it all before. A selection of standard tunes and effects with absolutely no surprises in store. Guess what, Traps And Treasures is remarkably unremarkable in this department too. No new ideas present. 70% IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 2025 AMIGA O .99 BY MICROPROSE Thoughtful enough platformer, but now looks a bit dated. Detailed sprites, imaginative enemies and a whole ruck of moody backgrounds. A good looking game, but no stunner. Scores solidly in this department. The tunes on offer fit the action well, and the effects enhance the atmosphere. Takes a bit of thought as well as an active joystick hand, but the formula has been seen too often, even if this was the original. 82% WORLD CUP USA GAME GEAR O PRICE US GOLD Distinctly average soccer game which doesn't rise above the crowd. The screen doesn't blur too much, which is a real blessing with this sort of game. Otherwise very average indeed. The tinny Game Gear speaker makes the rather insipid tunes and effects sound even less exciting than they are. It's good enough. Plays at a reasonable pace and is quite good fun, but there are better games of this type already available. 72% LITIL DIVIL  CDI .99 BY PHILIPS Ooh, they're just dreamy. The sprites are well designed and brilliantly drawn and animated, and so are the backdrops. As befits a CD title, the sound for Litil Divil is high-quality. The tunes enhance the mood of the game perfectly. This smacks of Dragon's Lair, great to look at but not a lot there to play with at the end of a long day One of the most talkedabout games of the year. 60% VAL D'ISERE CHAMPIONSHIP SNES .99 BY MINDSCAPE Excellent 3D viewpoint, and some rather top Mode 7 graphics bring the game alive. The effects sound real enough, but the music is gruesome.in the extreme. Only two real game variations and some of the ski courses require very little skill or technique. Winter sports skiing sim with little variation 58% VIRGIN (081-960 2255) US GOLD (021-625 3366) PHILIPS (081-689 4444)  OCEAN (061-832 6633) KRISALIS (0709 372290) MICROPROSE (0666 504326) 83 "


"CVG REVIEW BAGGY TROUSERS ALADDIN SUPER GAME BOY PLATFORM IUNCONFIRMED OUT SEPTEMBER MEGA DRIVE, SNES, GAME GEAR AND MASTER SYSTEM VERSIONS ALSO AVAILABLE 1A1200, PC AND NES VERSIONS PLANNED Aladdin swings his pants as he leaps and bounds his way through the latest Game Boy platform conversion... ool Spot started the trend in Virgin's slick platformers, and since then we've seen Aladdin and Jungle Book using a similar game engine and later in the year we're going to be treated to Beauty and the Beast and The Lion King (see page 43) which are likely to follow similar lines. Aladdin is a platform game pure and simple, but it follows the path of the Mega Drive game rather than the SNES product and most notably by the way Aladdin himself is armed with a sword rather than the ned with a sword rather than the wimpy apples in the Nintendo cart. The young Arab's objective is to jump and swing his way through the desert lands picking up all the usual stuff that seems to populate platform-laden scenes; you know the kind of stuff: energy replenishers, jewels and golden scarabs, along with collecting apples to top up your supply. The things that look like fruit pastilles are actually jewels. Collect them for a hefty bonus. Aladdin can interact with the background scenery like these handy cables which allow him to progress when there are no platforms. VERDICT 1900 SUPER GAME BOY Aladdin's sumptuous graphics were always its strong point on the Mega Drive and SNES. Although they're pretty good in this conversion the striking impact of the original is gone and the standard platform fare reveals itself all too clearly. It plays well and there's quite a lot of variety in the levels, but unless you're an Aladdin fan there's nothing that sets this apart from other platformers over the last year. I reckon you'd be off with Virgin's similar and more playable Cool Spot. RIK SKEWS soolo At the end of every level there's a chance of getting one of a number of bonuses by playing a fruit machine-style sub-game. Aladdin is IACO compatible with the new Super Game Boy. Apart from colour you're also treated to this sickly sweet artwork from the movie. This level sees you trying to collect the scattered pieces of a flute. Also note the apples. Collect them and they can be used as projectiles to take out the baddies. GRAPHICS 80 SOUND 72 PLAYABILITY 77 VALUE 74 OVERALL ALTERNATIVE SNES Cool Spot Virgin/.99 Brilliant graphics, sound and playability make the original use of this game engine the best by far, and the Cool Spot character is incredibly fluid. ISSUE 147: 89% A If you run out of baddies Aladdin can use his sword. Although it means getting close to the baddies it dispenses with them much quicker. GAME BY VIRGIN CONTACT VIRGIN (081-960 2255) FOR MORE INFORMATION 84 "


"CHIRPY, CHIRPY, CHEAP, CHEAP REVIEW VIEW CVG PDGAMES CHEAPOS Quality PD games where you can have a bangin' good blast for less than a fiver... Cheap games won't mean nasty if you use our list to pick wisely. GODS OF THUNDER / PC It looks like an 8-bit game but this Zelda style-arcade adventure romp is one of the more thorough RPGs we've seen on PD. You'll no doubt be familiar with the format of this type of game. Solve the puzzles, find the spells, fight the nasty wizards blah, blah, blah. It's a shame it doesn't make more use of the PC's capabilities, but at the price it's well worth the look. 72% LASER SQUAD / AMIGA / BUZZ PRICE: .99 A space battle game which is actually an old Spectrum game, which is actually quite good. Nothing special visually but you'll play it with care and satisfaction. A great killing game which take some beating. 80% hvaliti Hadio 5050 DEFENDER / PC Arcade classics such as this were made for the PD sector. As you'd expect, it's a good conversion of the blasting original. If there's anyone out there in the universe who doesn't know the plot I'll explain it. Shoot some aliens and then shoot some more. Complex eh? Fun but it runs a little too slowly to be considered perfect. 75% CRUISE FOR A CORPSE / AMIGA / KIXX PRICE: .99 It's a detective game of the point-and-click ilk, but the puzzles are far from linear so it's very involving. Smart graphics provide the atmosphere and good dialogue keeps you interested. Benefits from predictable clues. Get this you won't regret it. 89% DR STRANGE / AMIGA You're bound to be familiar with the concept of this Space Panic clone. It's set around platforms where you dig a hole, wait for an alien to fall in it, then fill it in again. Bury all the aliens and you complete the level and move on to the next more difficult one. Lots of professional, cute graphics and amusing sound effects make this a must. 90% CADAVER / PC / KIXX PRICE: .99 As far as explorative isometric games go this is superb. Lavish graphics and sensible puzzles merge into a medieval quest full of fantasy. The controls take some getting used to but you'll stick with it to see more. 90% GRAVITY FORCE 2 / AMIGA We've had Defender on the PC and now the equally ancient Thrust on the Amiga. Gravity Force 2 sees you trying to complete numerous missions which would be quite easy if not for the fact that you're hampered by gravity-dominated, heavy controls. A fine job indeed and one of the best PD arcade conversions we've seen in a while. 85% FIRST SAMURAI / PC / UBISOFT PRICE: .99 A bargain! This is a brilliant slash-'em-up played over a land of platforms. Good power -ups, sound and detailed graphics make this a particularly exciting console type game. The plot's about time travel, so expect heaps and heaps of varied opponents and lots of atmosphere. 88% AVOID You wouldn't want this even if it was free... Stick this one in the closet DESERT RAID / PC This is a lot like the old arcade game Scramble, except it's set in a desert instead of in space. Oh, and it's utter crud as well, with zero gameplay; there is really nothing nice to say about this at all. God, we can be so ruthless sometimes it's quite scary ! 10% LEISURE SUIT LARRY / AMIGA / KIXX PRICE .99 An antiquated user interface coupled with naff Yank humour spoils this game. Plus it never seems to do what you want and the puzzles are too easy. 40% ENERGY EORDS LEUES CONTACTS: 17-BIT (0924 366982) FOR AMIGA AND TRANSEND (0274 622228) FOR PC 85 "


"CVG REVIEW ANIMAL MANIACS MEGA-CD BEAT-'EM-UP .99 OUT NOW BRUTAL MEGA DRIVE AND SNES VERSIONS PLANNED NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE The animals aren't taking it any more. It's goodbye roadkill and hello jumping axe kicks... t's easy to dismiss a beat-'em-up just because it isn't one of the big names. But with Super Street Fighter Il not living up to expectations, and Mortal Il not coming out on MegaCD, combat fans are going to have to look elsewhere, and where better than this? Brutal takes a different slant on the genre, replacing the traditional hard-bitten ken, Ryu and Chun-Li rip-offs with a collection of off-beat animals. The result is a distinctive beat-'em-up which doesn't break any moulds, but still offers a good challenge, varied tactics and three speeds incorporated in the levels the fastest of which puts almost every other beat-'em-up to shame. TO IVAN VERDICT The animation is a little patchy in places. Sometimes it's very smooth, other times there seems to be a few frames missing. MEGA-CD While it lacks the technical polish of either Street Fighter or Mortal Kombat it does offer something distinctly different enough to make it worthwhile. The graphics are a nice size, there are plenty of moves and characters and the tutorial stages means you don't have to waste hours tracking down the special moves. All those factors, combined with the fact that the MegaCD lacks a decent combat game, make this a worthwhile purchase. MARK PATTERSON This is a particularly dangerous level, take a hit and you could end up falling off the bridge. 30 RAE When you win two fights, you're taken off to combat school to learn a special move. However, your opponents have also brushed up on their skills so the game doesn't get any easier. SPECIAL TAU COMING SOON As your character's abilities increase, you're given codes to revive him. These let you restore him, so you can pop round to your mate's house and trounce him with your arsenal of special attacks. PLAYER CAOOSE A CAI As normal with CD games, there's a healthy dose of animated frivolity laying the background to the plot. GRAPHICS 87 SOUND 88 PLAYABILITY 87 I VALUE 89 SNES/MEGA DRIVE GameTek Brutal on cartridge will, obviously, lack the cartoon sequences of the CD version. Apart from that most of the features will remain intact. Of the two, the SNES version is looking slightly better. But you can find out just how they turn out in a couple of months. EXPECTED RELEASE: NOVEMBER OVERALL Each character has its own set of moves and individual speed and skill ratings. BR GAME BY GAMETEK CONTACT GAMETEK (0753 553445) FOR INFORMATION 86 "


"HERE'S MY FIST RUN INTO IT! REVIEW CVG ISNES WORLD HEROES 2 BEAT-'EM-UP  OUT NOW NEO GEO VERSION ALSO AVAILABLE INO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED Everyone wants to go to heaven but no one wants to die, especially when you're playing a beat-'em-up... f you're reading this you must be the sort of person who's purchased every single version of Street Fighter, but who still can't get enough. Before everyone else calls you boring this isn't just another beat-'em-up. You're spoilt for choice with 16 characters, far more than usual, plus they're original too. All the special moves are much more graphically spectacular than those in Super Street Fighter and there's a massive 22 backdrops for added realism. The one and two-player games follow convention with three-round fights, but they don't have any bonus rounds. There is, however, the Survival Match, in which dangerous obstacles are strewn left, right and centre. I VERDICT A Most of the characters in this game don't use the usual Street Fighter moves, enjoy finding out what moves they do use. A This is Rasputin, who you may remember from the first game. As before, he can grow monster-sized hands and feet. SNES This conversion is actually a welcome addition to the world of fighting games. It's difficult to explain a good fighting game but it really comes down to the 'feel' of the game. World Heroes 2 just feels right: punches land with impact and the characters respond as you'd expect them to. With 16 characters there's combos galore to master and that makes for lastability. In fact, the only real criticism is the slowish running speed. DENIZ AHMET PCB82990 TMF 2P PUSET 87 A Some moves cause too much damage even on the easier levels.... A As always, some characters suit long-range combat, others are better at fighting close-up. The chap shown here is actually good at both. |659 80 75 GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY 81 VALUE 3195293 73 A Select the Survival Match option and try and fight against what't thrown at you. OVERALL ALTERNATIVE NEO GEO Art of Fighting 2 SNK/.99 Possibly the best beat-'emup money can buy. It's very tough but it looks and feels an absolute treat. Fast and smooth with sinister moves. ISSUE 149: 95% The quality of backdrops is varied and nicely drawn. There's plenty of animation and parallax, too. There are three speed settings. The faster ones make pulling off special moves like this quite difficult as they give you less time to react. 81 GAME BY TAKARA CONTACT PLANET CONSOLES (0272 413030) FOR IMPORT COPIES. 87 "


"SUPERUNKNOWN CVG REVIEW IPC CD-ROM STRATEGY .99 LOUT NOW OUTPOST INO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE WPC FLOPPY VERSION PLANNED It's been a long time coming, and now it's here. To tell you the truth, we can't see what all the fuss has been about... n the perfect world all the little bunny-wunnies would live hand-in-hand with nasty Mr Farmer and Outpost would have turned out to be a wuverly lickle game. But this isn't a perfect world. This world is populated by slavering animals, men called Brian who hang around in parks and a potentially wonderful CD game sunk by some stupid, and easily avoidable, problems. In Outpost it's down to you to guide the last 200 members of the human race to another planet and to establish a colony for them. That, in itself, is a piece of cake. Keeping it going is the challenge a challenge made all the tougher by one of the most user-unfriendly games in the history of everything. The interface is sluggish and the instructions unhelpful in the extreme. VERDICT luuhuu gular . Koro Alpha La 70 phiuchi Alphe C B 96 Ophiuch Bama d'estar 36 picha tata dei Procyon na Pavons Rom. 2 fra Eidant sans 2 Endani      et. D 7703 HR 12 As your colony expands it becomes harder to keep track of your buildings and the demands of your factories. In fact, you spend so much time keeping an eye on things that you're not really playing the game. Probes Aviobile: 0 Star 36 Ophiuchi Special Core 2 Distance 182 Hast 27 Travel The 1276 PC-CD ROM When a game fails to appear I'm instantly suspicious. Outpost contains all the flashy visuals you'd expect in a CD game, which masks the lack of playability. This isn't so much down to the design as the useless manual, which goes to great lengths to tell you about the game's features, but not how to use them. This is accompanied with an uninformative on-line help system, and it's this lack of information which ruins what could otherwise have been an excellent game. MARK PATTERSON A The game is full of flashy rendered visuals, which are the game's main hook. Without them the desire to continue playing would disappear faster than a cake into a fat man. A Keeping your colony's population happy is a hard task. But as long as you give them a constant supply of luxury goods and somewhere to hang out they'll love you for it. COMING SOON PC FLOPPY Outpost Sierra You can expect the floppy version later in the year, although most of the rendered graphics will be missing. Hopefully, if there's time, they'll make some changes to the gameplay and rewrite the manual. EXPECTED RELEASE: NOVEMBER/DECEMBER GRAPHICS 90 SOUND 76 PLAYABILITY 68 I VALUE 60 OVERALL There's a text file with the game explaining how certain features, which are covered in the manual, didn't actually make it into the finished game. Rushed product possibly? You decide. A You can't help but have the feeling that if the programmers had spent more time developing the gameplay instead of the graphics, Outpost would have been a far better game. 54 GAME BY SIERRA CONTACT SIERRA UK (0734 303322) FOR MORE INFORMATION 88 "


"THE MOST REVIEWS FOR THE MOST FORMATS REVIEWS CVG SUPERSHORTS The reviews page: aka the good, the bad and the downright ugly... good memories and GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY OVERALL FIGHTER'S HISTORY O SNES UNCONFIRMED NINTENDO The sprites are large and quite detailed, but the animation is useless. Plus the blurry colours uglify things a bit. Loads and loads of speech, but the music and effects are completely and utterly dreadful in the extreme. There are loads and loads of moves, but it's nothing you haven't seen before, and the slow controls are frustrating. Generic fighting game like all the rest. 51% SUPER ADVENTURE ISLAND 2 SNES .99 NINTENDO Another ace platform game, if you don't have 10 already. Big and well defined sprites wander around a range of sumptuous backdrops. No spectacular effects till the end. A bunch of ace samples make it a treat for the old lugholes, although a few of the tunes are a bit on the supermarket side. Absolutely blinking huge, and very professionally put together. If you're not bored of platforms yet, seek this out. 82% LUCLE GAME BOY VIC TOKAI .99 Compelling Marble Madness-esque arcade puzzle thing Clear looking, and it's quite clear to see where you're going, but there's no real variety between levels, which is a shame The music is really, really good, some of the best on the Game Boy, but it sounds completely out of place here. If you can put up with the frustrating restarts and the big challenge, then you'll love this great puzzle challenge. 81% 22 WARGAME CONSTRUCTION SET 2 TANKS PC .99 BY US GOLD Involving and well thought out war-game. Surprisingly good for a war-game, the main screen is functional and it's spiced up by some good presentation. Not much to write home about. This is, after all, a wargame. Some groovy music wouldn't go amiss. One of the most intuitive games of this ilk around. If you're a wargaming fan you'll absolutely love this. 90% THEATRE OF DEATH PC .99 BY PSYGNOSIS Small and blocky, Theatre Of Death looks for all the world like a budget game. On the old C64, though. OK, a little on the bland side and not breaking any new ground, but the atmosphere of death is still present. No brains required. This is a straight-off mouse-controlled shooting experience. Which makes it rather boring to play Not quite as good as Cannon Fodder, sorry. 63% D-DAY PC .99 BY IMPRESSIONS Like most wargames D-Day is somewhat challenged in the visual dept. Small and horrible sprites a-go-go! Like most wargames... oh I've already done that. But you get the idea. It's not much to listen to, let's put it that way. The tactical element of the game is painfully let down by the awful Micro Miniatures Battle System. Clumsily handled war anniversary cash-in. 61% ASTERIX AND THE GREAT RESCUE MASTER SYSTEMO UNCONFIRMED BY SEGA Reasonable platformer just like the first one. There are some quite pleasant characters, all of which are well drawn, even if they are somewhat stiffly animated The tunes and effects are pretty good, although they're not great. At least they don't annoy you to the hilt. No real difference between this and most other platfrom games. It's not bad for a laugh, but it won't amaze you. 74% FIFA INTERNATIONAL SOCCER MEGA-CD .99 BY ELETRONIC ARTS Excellent game, but lacking in new features. Large, clear and well-detailed sprites proudly display some of the best animation going in a soccer, sorry, football, game. The sampled crowd noises really do make a difference to the game, so much so that the limp effects are very disappointing. Still ace, but this really isn't sufficiently different from the cartridge version to warrant purchase if you've already got it. 86% VIC TOKAI (0604 671415) NINTENDO (0329 822565) . MINDSCAPE (0444 246333)  EMPIRE SOFTWARE (081-343 7337)  VIRGIN (081-960 2255)  SEGA (071-373 3000)  US GOLD (021-625 3366)  INFOGRAMES (071-738 8199) 89 "


"CVG REVIEW SWORDS AND SORCERY CD32 RPG .99 HOUT NOW AMIGA VERSION ALSO AVAILABLE INO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED LEGACY OF SORASIL Rattle those skeleton's bones in Gremlin Graphics' latest Amiga-toCD32 conversion... f there's one genre that rarely wins over new fans, it's probably the RPG. Generally, gamesplayers either love (and I mean really love) them or wouldn't touch them with a 50foot barge pole, while wearing an asbestos safety suit. And it's even rarer to please gamesplayers with a game that combines two different styles. All credit to Gremlin then for coming up with a highly enjoyable RPG-cum-arcade game. Although offering nothing new, Legacy of Sorasil is very smartly put together indeed, and what's most refreshing to see in an RPG is humour, which is hard to ignore when two of the leading characters are called Angor the Barbarian and Calorflame the Cleric! New to the CD32 version is some brilliant digital sound FX. The roar of a creature dying is now enough to send shivers down your spine, they're that good. VERDICT Oh dear, one of the characters has died and gone to RPG heaven. Thankfully their equipment stays where they fall so if you have any remaining characters they can pick it up. A Each character has a number of ability points which can be added to them before the adventure commences. So while Ravenslock the wizard has a brilliant mind, his body is a bit feeble so it's probably a good idea to boost that rating. Ouch! Don't think that traps only work once. You can keep walking over them despite the fact that the characters know where they are once activated. They're not very clever these warriors, are they? CD32 RPGs aren't my favourite genre, but Legacy warmed my cockles when it appeared on Amiga and I was happy to have another look. There's no difference in the graphics and gameplay, but the sound has been improved with some realistic spot FX and tons of brilliant classical music pieces. Slap on the wrist for not making more use of the CD, after all massive RPGs seem to be made for the CD format. Overall though, it's still a classy product. RIK SKEWS GRAPHICS 81 SOUND 94 PLAYABILITY 84 VALUE 84 There's a lot of dungeon tomfoolery to plough through, so it's handy the walls dissolve where your character is standing which makes keeping track of them and what's in the corridors a lot easier. OVERALL ALTERNATIVE A1200 Liberation Mindscape/.99 Along with any Zelda game, this is about the best RPG going and a good enough reason to go out and buy a CD32. Probably. ISSUE 150: 92% SEB Control of the characters is achieved by the use of icons, all of which are dead easy to use. :  GAME BY GREMLIN GRAPHICS  CONTACT GREMLIN GRAPHICS (0742 753423) FOR MORE INFORMATION 90 "


"SUBSCRIBE COMPUTER TO COMPUTER VIDEO & VIDEO GAMES COMEC The essential guide for serious gamers THE MAC REALGAMERS READ... FREE STICKERS INSIDE! Computer & Video Games is Britain's longest established video games magazine. Twelve years old and going as strong as ever, CVG is the brightest, brashest games mag around, covering all the popular formats . and we mean all and reviewing every single new game released. COMPUTER Why spend a fortune on a single format magazine when you can get the whole world of games in CVG? If you're serious about gaming you can't afford tomiss it! GAMES SPER STREET FIGHTER II REVIEWED ON SNES AND MELIA DRIVE NEWS For just .00 (UK price) we'll deliver 12 issues of CVG direct to your door so there's no chance of missing any of the vital information CVG provides. In addition, we'll pay all the postage and packing what a bargain! SCOOP PAGE AUTUMN GAMES PREW INCLUDING: IS OF LLORE 2 ON PC BEMOL ET The world of gaming moves mighty fast. if you don't read CVG every issue, it could completely pass you by. Subscribe now and make sure you stay on top... MORE D PLUS! OVERED EVERY NEW GAME REVIEWED AND RATED RTA OMBAT I MORE GORE THAN EVER BEFORE! To subscribe, just fill in the form on this page or call our order hotline on 0858 468 888. (9.30am-5.30pm Mon-Fri) THE BATTLE BEGINS 100% Send to : CVG Subs Offer, Tower House, Sovereign Park, Lathkill Street, Market Harborough, Leics LE16 9EF AWESOMELY COMPREHENSIVE PLATFORM GAMES. ADVENFIRSL TURE GAMES SPORTS GAMES.RACE GAMES FLIGHT GAMES O SHOOT-\"EM-UPS . ROLE PLAYING GAMES ARCADE COIN-OPS. PUZZLE AND STRATEGY GAMES MULTI-PLAYER GAMES SIMS INDEPENDENT BEATSEM UPS. BEST FOR NEW MACHINE COVERAGE SUBSCRIPTION RATES for 12 issues: I would like to subscribe to CVG (the essential guide for serious gamers) for 12 stonking issues! Name :........ Address :......... Post Code :.... Signed :. (Parent or Guardian's signature, if under 18 years) United Kingdom/BFPO. Air Europe/Eire. Air Mail Zone 1.. Air Mail Zone 2... Rest Of World Surface Mail... ..00 ..00 .00 .00 .00 I enclose a cheque/postal order made payable to Emap Images Ltd for . Subscriptions Guarantee : please remember that if you are not completely satisfied with your subscription you may cancel at any time and receive a full refund for all unmailed issues. Source Code : IB99 Subs will be processed as quickly as possible, but you should allow 28 days for the order to be processed and expect to receive the first available issue after that. "


"WALL-10-WALL MAZI CVG REVIEW WALL-TO-WALL NAZ I JAGUAR SHOOT-'EM-UP  OUT NOW IPC AND SNES VERSIONS ALSO AVAILABLE INO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED en WOLFENSTEIN O takesach to things. WolfefullWhile every Jag owner waits impatiently for Alien Vs Predator and Doom, Atari gives you the game that started the craze for 3D carnage... nce in a while a game comes along that takes a completely different graphical approach to things. Wolfenstein was such a great game on the PC, it shifted full-screen, 3D textured graphics with speed and smoothness that had never been seen before. Since then, Doom has come along and achieved something very exciting with the genre, and its success has bred countless clones. For the Jag, Atari has essentially ported over the PC version, jazzed up the graphics on the enemy opponents and speeded the whole thing up (which actually meant slowing it down on the Jag), especially when you compare it to the PC version. What the game involves is dashing around huge mazes in search of a lift to the next one and in the process having a wacky time blasting humans and animals with collectible weapons. It's simple we know, but is it enough to please? Read on and see. opponents actually have a use because you can see where you've already visited in the game. VERDICT A Run out of ammo and your character pulls out a knife, which means you have to get involved in close range combat, which if it doesn't go as planned will endanger your health, permanently. JAGUAR Wolfenstein IS a good game, and it offers one of the best examples of mindless carnage and exploration you'll find. The whole appeal of Wolfenstein when it originally appeared on the PC was its use of fast full screen 3D graphics. This Jaguar version is faster and smoother than the best PCs on the market however this uses so little of the Jaguar's processing ability that ultimately you can't help asking for more of the game. DENIZ AHMET A Here's the lift which marks the end of the level. Finding this is always your objective. Other types of special doors include those you need to find keys for. A Here's one of the bosses who are always really hard to kill if you haven't got a decent weapon. Shoot and run is the best tactic to use. In deeper stages shooting alerts the enemy to your position. When approaching a door shoot at it first and if you hear the enemy chant you'll know they're there. 67 GRAPHICS 71 SOUND PLAYABILITY 78 VALUE 60 OVERALL ALTERNATIVE SNES Wolfenstein 3D Imagineer/.99 It's exactly the same as the Jag version but obviously a lot slower, and close-up the enemy looks terribly blocky. Not so much blood either. ISSUE 145: 80% 13 22 As you progress the opponents become more intelligent often giving chase and opening doors themselves to find you. A One of the weapons to pick up to upgrade your firepower. GAME BY ATARI CONTACT ATARI (0753 533 344) FOR MORE INFORMATION 92 "


"AND IT'S HOT OFFICIAL JT'S HERE! THE WORLD'S FIRST 64-BIT UK CONSOLE AWESOME TAGUAR Look out! There are some stray cats coming into the country! Some USA Jaguars have been imported into the UK unofficially. This imported product has been manufactured for America and is not compatible with UK Jaguar equipment. Look out for the UK sticker above on the Jaguar products you buy. This will ensure it is official product and will work properly in the UK. The 64-bit Jaguar is here to make other games consoles look prehistoric! PRODUC SOFTWARE Atari, the inventors of video games, have developed another world exclusive the FIRST EVER 64-bit games console. Why settle for less, when the Jaguar can deliver arcade quality sound and graphics in games which would be impossible to play on other consoles. Check out Jaguar's impressive specifications, then visit your nearest Silica store for a demonstration. Or, if you can't wait to get your hands on one, call our mail order hotline now. Stock permitting, we can make sure your Jaguar is delivered to you the day after we receive your order (UK mainland). And, delivery (Mon-Fri) is FREE! CD-ROM add-on To provide access to even bigger and better games, plus films and standard music CDs, Atari expects to deliver a CD add-on for Jaguar before Christmas '94. 227484 5 Processors 64-BIT DATA BUS 2Mb 32-BIT RAM Spectacular 32-BIT Graphics including 3D Animation 16.7 Million Colours CD Quality Stereo Sound 17 Button Controller Plugs Straight into a TV Free Cybermorph Game On Cartridge Worth  INC VAT Barvy MATARI RER, CYBERMORPA JAGUAR ngo WORTH 2013 JAGUAR There are almost 100 companies in partnership with Atari for Jaguar software, with over 50 cartridge titles in progress. The following are the current titles, with Atari's release dates. Return the coupon for a full list. Crescent Galaxy NOW  Evolution Dino Dudes NOW  Raiden NOW Tempest 2000 NOW  Wolfenstein 3D AUG 194  Alien v Predator SEPT 94  Club Drive SEPT 94  Kasumi Ninja AUG94 Redline Racing AUG 94  Brutal Sports Football AUG 94  Doom AUG 194 TBC Rise of the Robots SEPT 94  Tiny Toons Adventures OCT '94  ACCESSORIES Jaguar Controller .99 Composite Monitor Cable .99 RF Switch Box inc Cable .99 Scart Cable .99 All Prices include VAT  JAGUAR CONSOLE + CONTROLLER PLUS CYBERMORPH GAME  INCLUDING VAT JAG 1064 SILICA PLUS TECHNICAL THE SILICA SERVICE MAIL ORDER AND HEAD OFFICE 081-309 1111 To: Silica, CVG-0994-217. 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup. Kent, DA14 4DX PLEASE SEND A BROCHURE ON THE ATARI JAGUAR Mr/Mrs/Miss/MS: ......... Initials: I Surname: Company of applicable.... Before you decide when I to buy your Jaguar console, we suggest you think very carefully about WHERE you buy it. Consider what it will be like a few months after you have made your purchase, when you may require additional peripherals and accessories or help and advice. And, will the company you buy from contact you with details of new products? At Silica, we ensure that you will have nothing to worry about. With our unrivalled experience and expertise, we can meet our customers' requirements with an understanding which is second to none. Complete and return the coupon now for our latest FREE literature and begin to experience the \"Silica Service\". FREE OVERNIGHT DELIVERY: On all hardware orders shipped in the UK mainland (there is a small charge for Saturday delivery) TECHNICAL SUPPORT HELPLINE: A team of technical experts will be at your service, PRICE MATCH: We match competitors on a \"Same product Same price basis. ESTABLISHED 16 YEARS: We have a proven track record in professional computer sales PART OF A M A YEAR COMPANY: With over 300 staff We are solid, reliable and profitable. BUSINESS + EDUCATION + GOVERNMENT: Volume discounts are available. Tel: 081-308 0888. SHOWROOMS: We have demonstration facilities at all our stores THE FULL STOCK RANGE: All of your computer requirements are available from one specialist supplier. FREE CATALOGUES: Will be mailed to you, with special reduced price offers, as well as details on all software and peripherals. PAYMENT: We accept most major credit cards, cash, cheque or monthly terms (APR 29.8% written quotes on request), Address: 1-4 THE MEWS, HATHERLEY ROAD, SIDCUP, KENT, DA14 4DX PLUS BRANCHES AT: BRISTOL Debenhams 3rd Floor), St James Barton 0272 291021 CARDIFF Debenhams 46-50 St. David's Way 0222 399789 CHELMSFORD Debenhams 2nd Floor), 27 High Street 0245 355511 CROYDON Debenhams 2nd Floor, 11-31 North End 081-688 4455 GLASGOW Debenhams Ish Floor), 97 Argyle Street 041-221 0088 GUILDFORD Debenhams 3rd Floor), Millbrook 0483 301300 HULL Debenhams and Floor). Prospect Street 0482 25151 IPSWICH Debenhams 2nd Floor), Westgate Street 0473 221313 LONDON 52 Tottenham Court Road 071-580 4000 LONDON Debenhams 3rd Floorl. 334 Oxford St 071-493 3735 LONDON Selfridges (Basement Arena). 369 Oxford St 071-629 1234 LUTON Debenhams (stoor). Arndale Centre 0582 21201 MANCHESTER Debenhams 3rd Floor), Market Street 061-832 8666 PLYMOUTH Debenhams 3rd Floor, Royal Parade0752 266666 SHEFFIELD Debenhams (3rd Floor). The Moor SIDCUP 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road 081-302 8811 SOUTHAMPTON Debenhams Itstoor), Queensway 0703 223888 SOUTHEND Keddies 2nd Roor), High Street 0702 468039 THURROCK Debenhams 1st Floor, Lakeside Centre 0708 860066 ............... Postcode: Tel (Home): Tel (Work): Which computers), if any, do you own? ---2170 EROE Advertised prices and specifications may change. Please reum the coupon for the best information "


"*No DEPOSIT BUY GET SERIOUSLY R.E.A.L FOR 6 MONTHS YOURS FOR 6 MONTHS THEN PAY TODAY'S RETAIL PRICE. TOTAL ECLIPSE Too Good to be True! Not a bit of it. Order the amazing Panasonic 3DO complete with a FREE Copy of the Cult Game Total Eclipse and use it for 6 long months before you pay a penny. After 6 months you pay today's advertised price or easy payment terms, the choice is yours. So, why save up for the most desirable, games system on the planet when you could be using it for 6 months for nothing. Latest CD Technology: the Panasonic 3DO plays State of The Art, CD Games and audio CD Disks in Full Digital Stereo sound. * 32-BIT RISC BASED SYSTEM * PROCESS 6 MILLION INSTRUCTIONS & 64 MILLION PIXELS / SEC * DOUBLE SPEED CD DRIVE + 3MB RAM PANASONIC REAL 3DO CD GAMES SOFTWARE Escape from Monster Manor .99 End the reign of terror with battalions of realistic clay animated grim reapers, ghosts, spiders and bodiless heads. John Madden Football .99 You can call the shots and control the action in this state of the art American football simulation Road Rash: Blood of the Couriers .95 No speed limit. No rules. Lawless high speed motor cycle racing with fierce hand to hand combat Shock Wave .99 Combines motion video, digital sound effects in a high speed animated space fighter epic Twisted .99 The most twisted game show to hit your screens. Voted best software title to take advantage of CD technology Theme Park Challenges you to build the greatest amusement park in the world. Super Wing Commander .99 The interactive movie that revolutionised gaming on personal computers. Fully enhanced to take advantage of 3DO's exciting new speed, graphic and sound capabilities Ring for comprehensive software list. Software titles are subject to change Total Eclipse .95 cchnology 95 FREE CALCULUS GOGEUTEL TOLLE CALCULO ct Option Call into your local Calculus Store or phone our Mail Order number to order your Panasonic 3DO and software titles. Sign our credit form confirming the period over which you wish to pay. (you can change your mind on how to pay after your 6 months ownership) Once we have received a good status report the Panasonic 3DO is yours, enjoy it for 6 Months and then confirm your final payment choice. A. Choose easy payment terms* of your choice from 6 to 60 months. B. OR Pay Calculus Price plus software ordered No Strings attached, no Interest charges. WALSALL 48 Park Mall Saddler Centre Walsall TEL: 0922 21700 WARRINGTON 52 The Mall Golden Square Warrington Cheshire TEL: 0925 575055 WIGAN 18a The Galleries Shopping Centre Market Street Wigan TEL: 0942 323913 PRESTON St Georges Centre, Preston Lancashire TEL: 0543 418666 SHEFFIELD 67 The Moor Sheffield South Yorkshire TEL: 0742 721192 SUTTON COLDFIELD 80 The Parade Sutton Coldfield West Midlands TEL: 021 355 4839 TAMWORTH Unit 34 Ankerside Shopping Centre Tamworth TEL: 0827 67776 On High Streets Nationwide.... ALTRINCHAM HULL 59 George Street Altrincham Unit Il Princes Quay Hull Cheshire TEL: 061 929 7433 TEL: 0482 585100 AYLESBURY LEEDS Friars Square Shopping Centre, Ayelsbury 11 Albion Arcade Bond Street TEL: 0543 418666 Centre Leeds TEL: 0532 454098 BURTON-UPON-TRENT NORTHWICH Unit 30 Octagon Centre New Street 85 Witton Street Northwich Burton upon Trent Staffs TEL: 0283 517505 Cheshire TEL: 0606 47883 COVENTRY OLDHAM Unit 24 Orchard Walk Orchard The Spindles, Oldham. Lancashire Shopping Centre Coventry 0203 520778 TEL: 061 6270822 * Offer Ends 24 October 1994 "


"Now PAY LATER. TAME A JAGUAR FOR 6 MONTHS No INTEREST CHARGES, NO DEPOSIT, NO STRINGS ATTACHED JAGUAR Voted the number 1 games system. The all new UK version Jaguar has at last arrived in Calculus Stores, complete with the latest software direct from the States. Every Jaguar sold by Calculus comes with a FREE copy of Cybermorph. So, don't hesitate when you could be taming a Jaguar for 6 months for nothing, * 64BIT * 16.8 MILLION COLOURS * 16 BIT CD QUALITY SOUND JAGUAR CARTRIDGE GAMES SOFTWARE Crescent Galaxy .99 64 bit Game. Liberate the 4 moons of cosmolite. 3D rendered Graphics. Sideways scrolling shoot 'em up. Raiden .99 Complex parallax scrolling. Excellent coin op conversion. CD quality soundtrack. 8 levels of proven arcade action, fast and furious. Dino Dudes .99 Complex parallax scrolling. Excellent coin op conversion. CD quality soundtrack. 8 levels of proven arcade action, fast and furious. Tempest 2000 .99 200 levels. Hardcore Rave Music. Best software award at CET in America. Jaguar Controller .99 Cybermorph NEW CALCULUS STORES OPENING SOON IN HEMEL HEMPSTEAD, MAIDENHEAD AND MANCHESTER FREE cybermorph .99 Jaguar con nd Option PAY IN FULL Now. We accept Access and Visa Cards or a cheque. put your cheque guarantee card number on the back of your cheque for an instant status cheque otherwise allow 5 days for clearance. Mail order goods are normally dispatched the day that an order is cleared and delivered Nationwide by Securicor HINTS AND TIPS If you are visiting a Calculus Store, bring a cheque guarantee card and proof of identity for Instant credit clearance. Otherwise it can take upto 24 hours but you must be over 23 and in Full Time Employment. APR 29.99 CALCULUS CALCULUS CONTESORIS COMPET 3707F PHONE OUR MAILORDER NUMBER 0543 419999 MAIL ORDER FORM OR PHONE 0543 419999 FOR CREDIT DETAILS PANASONIC REAL 3DO ATARI JAGUAR JAGUAR CONTROLLER 3DO CD SOFTWARE 1. Escape from Monster Manor 2. John Madden Football 3. Road Rash 4. Shock Wave 5. Twisted 6. Theme Park 7. Super Wing Commander CALCULUS COMPUTER STORES, RINGWAY IND. EST., EASTERN AVENUE, LICHFIELD, STAFFS. WS13 7SF Tick appropriate boxes .95 JAGUAR CARTRIDGE SOFTWARE TOTAL .99  24.99 1. Crescent Galaxy .99 2. Raiden .99 Name 3. Dino Dudes .99 .99 Address..... .99 4. Tempest 2000 .99 .95 I enclose my cheque for ....... Postcode..........................TEL. .99 .99 Visa /Access No II Write your cheque guarantee card number and name and address on the back of your cheque and we can normally .95 Expiry Date.................. despatch goods the same day otherwise allow 7 days for .99 cheque clearance. "


"CVG YOB'S MAILBAG YOU WOULDN'T LIKE HIM WHEN HE'S ANGRY YOB'S MAIL BAG de De SPPPLLLAAAAATTIT! Is it a turd? Is it a brain? No, it's another refugee making his mark with a sad, soggy mess disguised as a letter to YOB'S MAILBAG, the end of the line for literature and the centre of all games glory in the universe. This is the place you'll find all the wisdom you need when it comes to games, with a few sad gits put down with my legendary charm. If you think you're tough enough to match the wisdom on these pages, or you just want to know about games, you've come to the right place. Fire your slightly stupid and rather appalling efforts to: I KNOW I'M NO BETTER THAN A BOTTOM BURP, BUT PLEASE DELIVER ME ANYWAY, YOB'S MAILBAG, CVG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON Britain's LANE, LONDON ECIR 3AU. Remember, there's ONE HUNDRED POUNDS for any letter worth a Frenchman's fart, and a kick in the canaries for the rest.. egin favourite mushy I JUST CAN'T SAY NO Dear YOB, Wouldn't it better if all the big games companies agreed on a standard games writing system? Then companies could concentrate on producing bigger, better and cheaper games instead of porting over half-a2 dozen versions of the same one. SEAN O'REILLY Wicklow, Ireland I LIVE IN A SAD COUNTRY Mappaces Site Size Half Coated Dear YOB, Chocolate Biscuits I have just bought a 3DO machine. I love it and I think it's the best. Please can you tell me a few games that are coming out on the 3D0? I have bought your magazine since sanctions were lifted and I think it's the best. I heard about that  you are giving away. Boy, aren't these rough times in South Africa so please could I have them? GIANLUCA MUGNAIONI South Africa YOB: Most of us live in The Real World, where all your superchummy games companies want to grind one another into the dirt and make millions of pounds all to themselves. If everyone made variations of exactly the same games machine, everybody would have a tiny slice of the market and nobody would make any big money. As a result they'd have no cash for research and development, and we'd be stuck with the same outdated technology, and the same tired old games for decades. I'd rather see hardware and software companies fighting tooth-and-nail for my cash, providing the best games and machines and keeping the technology moving. In fact, the Japanese tried to come up with a standard games machine called the MSX 10 years ago. It sank without trace, and good riddance to the bloody thing. In my book there's nothing like a good scrap, and there's going to be one hell of a fight in the near future. Sit back and enjoy it! YOB: I'm afraid that pounds sterling isn't the national currency in South Africa, so there's no point in me sending you the money now is there? 96 "


"YOU WOULDN'T LIKE HIM WHEN HE'S NOT ANGRY YOB'S MAILBAG CVG Good! Com HELP! I'VE FORGOTTEN WHAT MY BRAIN IS FOR... LEJANDREWOY ALL MY FRIENDS BULLY ME V. Dear YOB, I am from the Official YOB Fan cosa Club. It has been running for Jooo three years and already has 239,000 members. Membership costs  per year and that gets you a crappy pin badge, some stickers and a membership card. If you are wondering when you authorised us to use FAN _your mighty name it was in a previous life when you were a frog. Over the last three years we have monitored your every move, including all your steamy passionate sessions with Sadie. Our yearly turnover equals  million and we are all living in luxury. Thank you for making us rich. JACKSON Dear YOB, New Zealand is five months behind England in getting CVG SO could you please send me the latest issue so I can show it off to everyone and become a national celebrity? AARON ROBERTS Auckland, New Zealand CLUB ANDREW JACKSON Stratford Upon Avon YOB: I thought being YOB: Would anyone like to join the Andrew Jackson Fan Club? It's currently got no members and membership is one slow fart per year. For that you get nothing at all, except the satisfaction of knowing that able to write was Andrew Jackson will never bother you again. I'd like to enrol as soon as possible, and I'll be forwarding enough to qualify an envelope with my first five years' subscription inside. Careful how you open it... you for that. UNVANIC FOR How do PGET RID OF UNWANTED HAIR A CRIS! DIY Bow I SOPPORT COVENTRY CITY mtih, Dear YOB. Dear YOB, Excuse the handwritghfle. I'm not going to insult you Yes, it's me again, Shorty from because where I come from (South Africa) people don't Cwmbran, I'm going mad about exchange insults, they exchange bullets. So, answer these Mortal Kombat. I mean, it was only questions or prepare to join Richard Nixon. A yesterday my English teacher gave ELIAS SCAFIDAS Athens, Greece me an essay which was supposed YOB: I've got some news for you. South Africa is at to be about Combing your Hair the bottom of a very big continent. It's not some To Back, but I thought that she said crappy old town bolted on to an even crappier country 1 Mortal Kombat and I wrote about where busloads of sad tourists gawp at a pile of old Maving your testies shoved up your rocks and people in sandals wander around flogging nose by Baraka bits of old tat to make up for the fact that their team DAVID SHORT Cwmbran, Gwent were crap in the World Cup. 1. What is Juice Mode in WBA JAMO @ R OB? did warn you, you can't deny YOB: It's a special mode in which all the players turn that. Now, from this moment on, you into exotic fruits. are condemned to serve not less 2. Don't you think NBA JAM is.cool3 AG CICE than 20 years as Officer of YOB: Isn't that a rather ridiculous question? Tourism for the town of 3. In the Arcade Charts in Issue 150, it says: 'NBA JAM Cwmbran, explaining preciseSpecial Edition.' Is this new? What is the difference ly why a load of slag heaps, between this and the normal version? a bit of slate and loads of YOB: It's a sort of sequel to NBA in the arcades, spepeople who can't even cially programmed to allow proper Tournament play speak English properly 4. Which is your best PC CD-ROM game? have ever been anyYOB: Probably Myst. thing worthwhile to 5. Who do you prefer: Claudia Schiffer or Oindy Crawford? the human race. YOB: Depends who's got the most money I can't deny n a Tesce's 92 "


"CVG YOB'S MAILBAG YOU WOULDN'T LIKE HIM WHEN HE'S ANGRY W.00 YES...Mor.. 2 Y come. The WHY DO I FEEL SO ASHAMED? (UNDERWEAR IZ SYNDROME.. ZMmmm... mu Dear YOB, I am going to tell you something which will offend console owners. Eighty per cent of the greatest games on earth start off on the Amiga and the PC. I could hame loads of examples: Sensible Soccer, Lemmings, Cannon Fodder, Doom, Wolfenstein, Jimmy White's Snooker, the Turrican series, Pinball Fantasies, Monkey Island, F1 Grand Prix (Geoff Crammond), Speedball 2, Another World, I could go on forever. What have consoles got without a couple of fancy custom chips and games like Mario and Sonic2 Here's another thing: all the aforementioned computer games seem to work best in their original format. If the Amiga didn't suffer from the piracy problem then it would have been bigger than the Mega Drive and SNES combined and maybe stayed around a great deal longer NAV Laytonstone I HAVE AN EMBARRASSING ITCH Dear YOB, I can't get Toad or Koopa to go round corners without skidding. Can you help me? ADAM MILLER High Wycombe, Bucks YOB: Eat more fibre, change your underpants regularly and try not to get so excited. CRAWLY GEEK YOB: Saddo alert! Here's a poor, confused soul trying to justify some sort of superiority for his machines by claiming they've got the best games. Now where have I heard that one before? It's true that the PC, and particularly the Amiga, are responsible for SOME of the most original games ever written. However, you can claim this for any machine you care to name. The bloody old Spectrum spawned Manic Miner, a game to which every platform game owes homage. And that game itself was inspired by Miner 49er on the Commodore 64! Going further back than that, I can remember a 3D maze game on the Commodore Pet which wasn't very different in concept than Wolfenstein and Doom! The fact is that great games are developed on all machines, and they inspire programmers to produce bigger and better ones on bigger and better machines. So claiming that the Amiga and PC are somehow 'better than the others only makes you sound like quite a sad man. Of all the whingers who write in to me, I've never heard anyone complain that there are too many good games. players' ultimate dream to STOR BEING SO own an arcade, and after SAD AND ASK the May issue with the feaING IRRITANING ture on arcade machines QUESTIONS? decided to buy one main ly because I'm fed up with upgrading my console. Dear YOB, After selling my Super Please print this letter so NES and making a few perthat other gamesplayers tinent phone calls I bought can see what a wise a three-button machine move it is to buy an with Final-Fight for !! arcade machine. It surely was not disappointed. must be every games Anyway, please could you MY POEMS ARE CACK Dear YOB, Here is a poem for you. It is called The Dead Aardvark... One day I went to the dump I saw a dead Aardvark, it was dead flat It had tyre marks on it, I called the doctor He said it was dead I agree with him. Pretty good, isn't it? The moral of the poem is: please put more Amiga stuff in your mag. SHAYNE FOTHERINGHOME (BEANS) Gingin, Western Australia Dear YOB, I've written to you because | admire your style of cussing people. You are the YOB of all YOBs. would appreciate it if you could tell me the basics. SIMON ROSENBLATT London NW4 YOB: Here is a poem for you. It's called \"Another Bloody Australian -When Will We Be Rid Of Them?' It goes like this... Sad Shayne wrote a poem, a little Aussie farce, YOB told the lad to take his rhyme and shove it up his... YOB: The First Rule of Insults is to make sure you're not a crawly geek with a name which sounds fike a two-day old curry rattling the pan on its way out. 98 "


"YOU WOULDN'T LIKE HIM WHEN HE'S NOT ANGRY YOB'S MAILBAG CVG WHO LOVES YA BABY? (No THANKS, 4 MATE... WINNI EVERYONE LAUGHS AT ME Dear YOB, I'm a small offensive turd called Shorty from Cwmbran and... DAVID SHORT Cwmbran, Gwent V . ANTONY ANTONYU JONES! .. YOB: I've decided to terminate the remainder of this letter on the grounds that prolonged exposure to its contents could result in mass hysteria and acute stupidity, as prohibited by the Dangerous Letters Act of 1983. I have to warn you that a repeat offence will carry the severest penalty known to the law... 7 Jill . : ONE HELP ME? 3. Why is CVG going along with this Jaguar is the best' business? Can't you see all this 64-bit crap is a gimmick? ANTONY JONES Chelmsford, Essex PS Jaguars are crap! I'd rather own an NES. PPS If you don't print this letter I'll publicise the fact that you can't take the TRUTH! no MINGE BAG C YG CREW Dear YOB, will start my letter by saying that you are a joke! You act all hard and get this sad loser 'Stuart' to draw sad cartoon pictures of what you would like people to think you look like shooting people or beating them up. (Don't try printing anything about Stuart being really hard and that he's going to attack me because you're full of it and I don't care!) I can just picture you in my mind right now. You're an overgrown six-year-old with an under-average IQ, blonde curly hair, freckles, pink rimmed glasses and a red bow tie! Why do you act so sad? Did your parents abuse you? Now that I've told you what you really are, try to answer my questions to prove you're not a complete and utter prat. 1. Why is Streetfighter so unoriginal, with all its stupid versions, and why are most of your readers so obsessed with it? 2. If Neo Geo games were as affordable as Mega Drive and SNES games, would they be as popular? (Of course they would.) YOB: Hello, Marwell Zoo? you know you've got that smelly old orangutan that's in desperate need of a mate? I've got just the bloke for you Antony Jones from Chelmsford. Oh, she's turned him down once already? Sorry to trouble you, I'll try Jersey instead. PEOPLE JUST CANYONE FOR WON'T LISTEN TO A CRISP! D.I.Y BOWL CUT.ME Dear YOB, I was sitCAA Nogu ting in my  ting in my Gengroot bedroom reading Cc V G CVG MEWU POIDSO and and 1 I turned to your 300 Mailbag and read some letters. All I FAM read was a total TESCO's load of cobblers about Is The Mega Drive Better Than The SNES? | looked at my Spectrum and wondered why people need these expensive consoles when they could have just as much fun playing on something like my computer or maybe an Acorn Electron. Who wants to play Desert Strike, Alien III or Mortal Kombat when they can play PacMan or Space Invaders? I think all the people who spend their money on crap games are sad, sad people just like you, YOB. JOE BOURNE Newquay, Cornwall answer these arcade-related questions: JACK PANTON West Liss, Hants 1. Is it possible to buy Jamma-compatible Neo Geo games? YOB: 1. Oh yes it is. Give one of the arcade distributors a quick call and they'll probably sell you the relevant kit that you'll need. 2. Do Sega games such as Arabian Fight work on norYOB: There will probamal arcade machines? bly always be a market YOB: Some of the older for them. Arcade ownSega games will work, ers see interchangebut many of them and able cabinets as a lowall the latest ones used risk option, so they'll custom chips and keep installing new boards, making compatigames on to them. bility very difficult. As long as the 3. How long do you think demand is there, the the standard arcade games will keep commachine will last? Thanks ing. We've got one in for your time and such a the office, and bloody fabby mag? handy it is too. YOB: I was sitting in my cardboard box underneath the flyover and I turned to my Mailbag and read your letter. All I read was a total load of old cobblers about sad and outdated computers from a miserable little miser who doesn't understand the meaning of the word 'fun'. Still, if all your neighbours are retired old farts creaking around a seaside town I suppose some of it is going to rub off on to you. 99 "


"LOCAL BUYERS GUIDE WEST MIDLANDS MILTON KEYNES MAD CONSOLES GAME 3DO JAGUAR CD32 SNES MEGADRIVE SEGA CD * IMPORT + OFFICIAL* OVER 9 Corporation Street SPECIALIST IN IMPORT GAMES GAMES Caldmore BOUGHT SOLD + PART EXCHANGE Walsall ON ALL FORMATS West Midlands HUNDREDS OF GAMES NEW AND USED WS1 4HW e.g TOMCAT ALLEY  Tel: 0922 616833 STAR TREK  VIRTUA RACING  Fax: 0922 723444 FIFA SOCCER  (SNES) Latest Imported Accessories and Peripherials available at unbeatable prices. Next day delivery guaranteed. Super SFII + MK II Upgrades Call New 2.8 cc Version Call 32m Double Call Megadrive Super SF II  CALL FOR DETAILS Tel/Fax 0908 379049 Technical Advise Tel 0850 994372 3 1/2\" HD Disk, Grade A 100% 40p Each Trade enquiries welcome Please make all cheques payable to Wild Consoles NATIONWIDE BANBURY C.C.G VISA VISA We stock games for Amiga, Atari ST, IBM and PC compatible, CD ROM, Mega CD, Phillips CDi, Commodore CD32, Sega and Nintendo 3DO and Tecnplus Joysticks. If you want it we can get it. Send your name and address to: 3 Hillside Close, Upper Arncott, Bicester, Oxon OX6 OPF or Telephone 0869 242009 ULTRA mail order only for your: SEGA NINTENDO SOFTWARE PC AMIGA ATARI CALL NOW FOR YOUR FREE CATALOGUE WITH DETAILS OF OUR EXCELLENT SOFTWARE AND SUPPLIES' PRICES WITH FREE UK DELIVERY! (0295) 73 00 60 5 TELL US YOU'RE \"A REAL GAMER\" & SAVE  Ultra Software (CVG 154), Fulling Mill, Broughton, Banbury. OX15 6AP. LONDON SE14 MIDDLESEX Arca de Connection GAME BUS TERS THE SUPER GUN EXPERTS Super Gun Pro  Play Arcade PCB'S At Home With any one of these options FREE! SF11 Interface Variable Power Phono Connectors Headphone Socket A Large Selection of Arcade PCB'S Also In Stock Street Fighter II CE , Crime Fighters  & Many More 081 473 3707 (Open Mon-Sat 10am-8pm) SPECIALIST IMPORTERS FROM THE FAR EAST SUPER STREET FIGHTER UPGRADES AVAILABLE @ ONLY  WE WERE THE FIRST AND STILL THE ONLY COMPANY OFFERING THIS SERVICE 24 HOUR TURN AROUND! SUPER STREET FIGHTER VERSION FOR THE SUPER SNES ONLY . SUPER GAMEBOY ADAPTOR +SUPER GAMEBOY ADAPTOR + SPECIAL GAMEBOY AND GAME GEAR CARTS AVAILABLE PLEASE CALL FOR DETAILS OF ALL OUR PRODUCTS NOW! 081 958 1455 OR 0585 276685. "


"LOCAL BUYERS GUIDE CHESHIRE KENT GAME EXPRESS STOCKPORT CHESHIRE GAME CENTRE OF THE NORTH WEST HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE WE BUY, SELL & 'PX' ALL GOODS HOTLINES 061 476 6630 AND 061 476 6635 MAIL ORDER PC, JAGUAR, GAMEBOY, GAME GEAR, NES, MEGADRIVE & SNES LARGE SELECTION OF SECONDHAND CONSOLE GAMES & CONSOLES ALL OUR NEW GAMES ARE AT DISCOUNT PRICES INCLUDING ALL THE LATEST TITLES Opening hours: 11 am 7.30pm MON/TUES/THUR (9pm FRI) 9 am 5.30pm SAT GAME ZONE SNOWDON PARADE, VINTERS PARK MAIDSTONE, KENT ME14 5NS TEL/FAX 0622 766220 Fast & efficient Mail Order service available Send SAE for list of new & used prices (please state which console) MAIL ORDER The Game Shack 5, Wolverhampton Street, Dudley, West Midlands DY1 1DA Tel: 0384 242513 3DO JAGUR SEGA CD CD32 MEGADRIVE SUPER FAMICON SUPER NINTENDO USA EXCHANGE SERVICE AVAILABLE ALSO MAIL ORDER. FORMAT TO FORMAT SYSTEM TO SYSTEM MEGADRIVES + SUPER NES CONSOLES FROM . CHEAPEST AND BEST IN MIDLANDS. ALL LATEST RELEASES AND IMPORTS, 16 BIT CONSOLE GAMES FROM  FOR NEWS +ORDERS PLEASE CALL IN OUR SHOWROOM OR TELEPHONE THE HOTLINE 021 557 0633 HUNDREDS OF SECOND HAND GAMES IN STOCK! SNES SPECIALS ALL NEW PRICES MEGADRIVE SPECIALS ALL NEW PRICES SUPER STREET FIGHTER.............. .. FIFA SOCCER... ... 35 FX TRAX ... MORTAL KOMBAT SOCCER SHOOT OUT..... $55 SKITCHIN' ROCK N ROLL RACING... .. ETERNAL CHAMPIONS .. CLAY FIGHTER.....  SONIC 3......  MORTAL KOMBAT...  CHAMP STREET FIGHTER...... 133 DO YOU OWN AN ATARI LYNX OR JAGUAR? If you do you should read Atari Entertainment the first dedicated Lynx + Jaguar magazine in the world. Issue 2 has forty pages of news, reviews including the worldwide preview of Ultra Vortex for the Jaguar. We also have reviews of Tempest 2000, Crescent Galaxy + Raiden. For our Lynx users we have reviews of Super Off Road + Ninja Gaiden III Issue 2 is available now. To subscribe to six issues please send your name and address together with  (cheques made payable to Atari Entertainment) to: Atari Entertainment PO Box 7 Riseley Reading For subscription enquiries phone (0734) 885176. JAGUAR ADVERTISERS INDEX .100 ...........101 ............. .70 Phillips ...IFC & 3 Domani ZCL ......94 & 95 Ocean..... LMP .......... .............56 Sony ....... Silica Systems ..93 Arcade Connections Lloyds. ....7 CCG... Rumbelows........ ...........13 Game Express .. Nintendo ......... ..........OBC Game Zone..... Smith Kline Beecham ......... ..............39 Game Busters ....... TSB... .........65 Ultra Software ...... ......55 Mad Consoles ...... .45 Game Over.. ..15 Game Shack. .............33 Hearts Leisure ........... ...........100 Daniels Department Store .. ..100 KT Konsols .... ......... ...101 E.I.D ..... .101 Zap......... ..100 Atari Entertainment ....... .100 ....... ........ Walls ............... 100 "


"ADVERTISING PROMOTION WH SMITH HOT GAME OF THE MONTH TETRIS 2 Take On a Tougher Tetris Challenge! S1ual \"Seven years on and Tetris 2 is here, so what's new? The gameplay's essentially the same (if it's not broke, why fix it?), but this time there's different patterned blocks that have to be matched up before they disappear. A number of patterned flashing blocks at the bottom of the screen also have to be got rid of. It's a good idea to make these your priority before the screen starts filling up. And to make everything that little bit harder, some random blocks have already been deposited on the game screen before you start, whilst the blocks that fall down are much more irregular than before. Trust me, it's much easier and fun to play than it is to describe!\" Rik Skews COMPUTER GAME BOY YOU'VE READ THE REVIEWS. YOU'VE SEEN THE SCORE. NOW TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THIS GREAT OFFER BROUGHT TO YOU BY WH SMITH CVG! Nintendo Tetris 2 This voucher entitles the bearer to save .00 when they purchase the Tetris 2 computer game. (Game Boy version only), Voucher valid until 1st November 1994. This voucher may not be redeemed for cash or any other merchandise. * WH SMITH Staff initials: Till No. OFFE Reciept No. 10/ _VIDED 4% GAMES Cash value 0.0010 Offer exclusive to WH Smith "


"THEY TELL IT LIKE IT IS OPINION CVG BIG EDS THE EDITORS OF BRITAIN'S BEST GAMES MAGAZINES TELL YOU WHAT TO LOOK OUT FOR ON THEIR SPECIALISED FORMATS... ANDY MCVITIE, EDITOR OF NINTENDO MAGAZINE SYSTEM RICHARD LEADBETTER, EDITOR OF SEGA MAGAZINE It's been quiet on the Nintendo front lately, but rest assured this has nothing to do with the lack of quality software around. Quite the reverse; it's merely the calm before the storm and what a storm it is set to be! The big game that is bound to set everyone's pants alight is, of course, Donkey Kong Country. This is going to be the biggest game this year. Also keeping our thumbs warm at night this month is the still brill Stunt Race FX, Mortal Kombat II and Konami's ace new platformer, Sparkster. Now who said it was going to be a quiet summer? There's a veritable avalanche of exciting new projects coming your way over the next couple of months. Just like the movie industry, the Sega market is well into sequels at the moment: Urban Strike, sequel to Jungle Strike looks excellent, while dolphin fans should be well catered for with Ecco II. However, the best news is Sonic and Knuckles an excellent game in its own right, but also compatible with Sonics 2 and 3 enabling you to get even more fun out of your library of old Sonic games! @ ALAN DYKES, EDITOR OF CU AMIGA STEVE JAMES, MANAGING EDITOR OF CVG Well, I've tried everything. Reading chicken bones and tea leaves was no use, even the Financial Times couldn't help me no one knows what's happening to Commodore. Under the circumstances I'd expect software companies to start desert the Amiga, but they're not. In fact, happiness is not a well known brand of cigar, it is the certain knowledge that titles like Dreamweb and Cyberwar are still scheduled to appear on Amiga and CD32, while Ocean will soon launch a ton of Electronic Arts titles, including Jungle Strike and Shaq Fu on to a screen near you. In the meantime watch out for the wonderful Theme Park, Kid Chaos and a rather intriguing adventure from Core Design Universe. This month sees the official launch of the Panasonic Multiplayer and the Jaguar; at long last things are moving in the hardware market. And with the launch of Mega Drive 32-X later this year and the Sony PlayStation, Ultra 64 and Saturn in '95 (check out the screenshots in our eight page feature, starts page 20) there are great times ahead. All of this is very welcome news and will have the software industry gearing up and a-raring to go with some brand-new, powerful software for you to play. Don't get me wrong, a few more games like Donkey Kong Country (see page 36) could sustain 16-bit for some time to comebut it'll pale beside the first set of games on the Ultra 64. DAVID UPCHURCH, EDITOR OF PC GAMES There's been the barest trickle of new releases from the software houses this summer, of which only a few FIFA Soccer, TIE Fighter, Theme Park have been particularly noteworthy. Subsequently industry pundits have been busy trying to predict the next big thing'. As Doom fever continues, most reckon its sequel, Doom 2 (surprise, surprise), will clear up when released in a month or two's time. Maybe, but I've not seen anything yet to persuade me that it's not a jumped-up data disk. My money's on DID's Inferno a stunning 3D space epic and Dark Forces, LucasArts' Star Warsthemed Doom beater (see page 60). Place your bets... CU AMIGA, PC GAMES, NINTENDO MAGAZINE SYSTEM AND THE OFFICIAL SEGA MAGAZINE ARE ALL BROUGHT TO YOU BY THE SAME COMPANY THAT BRINGS YOU COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES, AND THAT'S EMAP IMAGES 103 "


"CVG Q&A Ooood HELP! 000 The Supergun is your best bet if it's arcade classics you're after. Right, you want answers about your gaming hardware and software? Well you got it, after all you can always change your magazine to CVG magazine... JAMMIN' 1. I have  to spend on 5. Though I'm a fairly1. As you've already got a new machine; I want knowledgeable gamer, La Mega Drive, the Mega something more powerful have not seen many differDrive 32 seems like a than my Mega Drive, which ent arcade games (only good bet, especially if it I share with my brothers. the usual SFII, Virtua comes in at the expectAny ideas? Racing); are there any ed  price mark. This 2. I'm torn between the PC Printed Circuit Boards should leave you with a Engine GT and the Supergun. (PCBS) that I should look few quid left to spend on Power handheld gaming and out for? Please remember games. Failing that, how a sizable library of decent have a limited budget about a CD32? At under games, or arcade classics 6. Are the Arcade Power  it's a bargain with on tap in my bedroom? Base and the Supergun the a great variety of cheap 3. Will SNK titles like Fatal same? If not, what are the and quality games. Fury 1/2/Special be availdifferences, and which is 2. Des able on either of these sys the better machine? excellent machine the tems? And what about 7. What is the difference PC Engine GT has only World Heroes 2 Jet? Or between the Supergun really ever managed to Samurai Showdown? Deluxe (.99) and a crack the Japanese mar4. Will I be able to play plain Supergun ()? ket. It's knocking on a games like T2 Judgement 8. What is a swivel joy bit too these days, and Day, Star Blade and other stick? Can I use it for you'll always have to pay first-person perspective games other than Ikari more for games since it's FMV/Polygon shoot-'emWarriors? Is it any good? an imported machine. ups on the Supergun. NO MAN, NO WHERE. Superguns are relatively cheap, but unless you're interested in older PCBs the newer ones can work and racing games are a out very expensive. For safe bet because they're instance Mortal Kombat different every time you Il is around ,200 at play. You'd be lucky to the mo. Also remember pick up anything decent that you need space to for under -. store them, and unlike About  for a golden carts they need a lot of oldie is fairly standard. tender loving care. Still 6. Yep, they're the same. we reckon you'd be better 7. About  by our off with a Supergun as maths. But seriously, you're likely to get more though, the basic Superout of it in the long run. gun model comes with 3. There's no reason why everything you'll need to they shouldn't eventually get those arcade clasbe available on both sics up and running, so machines. why spend more? 4. T2 yes, but would you 8. Yes, other games like want to play without the Midnight Resistance use gun! Starblade isn't Jamit too. It's good for these ma compatible though. but it's no use for games You'd need an extra conthat don't make use of nector called a loom. its more accurate control Chat to Hearts Leisure ability. You can use Ikari on 081889 0811 for Warriors without a swivel more information. joystick, but you won't 5. It's difficult to say be able to move the gun because you don't speciinto so many angles. fy your tastes. However Expect to pay about genres like beat-'em-ups  for one. GAME TIPS AMIGA Hit me HEIMDALL I Just imagine a game like Heimdall ll without any walls it would be doddle, wouldn't it. Unfortunately we don't have a cheat for that. so instead we give you a 57-point plan for completing the game. 1. Get the Circulet from the hut which looks like a storeroom in Rurik's village. It's in the box at the back of the room. 2. Talk to Rurik 3. At Eadric's village give Eadric the circulet 4. Now go to the pub for more information about the quest 5. Back in Rurik's village visit Rurik and give him the letter from Eadric. 6. Rurik should give you a pass for the king's Castle 7. Give the pass to the guard at the castle 8. Try and talk to the servant girl to find out what to do next. 9. Now find the room with the picture that watches you 10. Walk up to the picture and press FIRE to open a secret entrance 11. Go inside the bed man's hut and press fire in front of the cupboard to release the fisherman. 18. Go to Loki's shrine and save the fisherman's daughter. She'll give you a Talisman which opens a portal to the next world. Now go back to the hall you started in. Utgard: Dwaeven Isle 19. Talk to the dying man on the battlefield. Shoot an arrow into the circle of fire to enter the halfworld. Go back to the man and speak with him again. Shoot another arrow into the circle to exit the half-world. Take room and press the bedpost button to reveal a signet ring in the wall. Then take it. 12. Give the ring to the King. His advisor will go away and the force shield at the top of the stairs will vanish. 15. Next, fire arrows into the three holes to make the missing floor appear. 16. Go get the first piece of Ro'Geld the Skull. 17. Go to the fisherguard 13. Kill the Hakrat and then take the letter from the King's brother. 14. Give this letter to the IOS "


"Q&A CVG WHICH ONE FOR WORDS? My dad said I could have a new computer, and he is willing to spend up to  on a machine. I'm looking for a computer that is capable of playing games and running decent word processing programs, but I don't need something that's state-of-the-art. I've seen the Acorn 3010 and am thinking of asking for that so I have some questions on it: If you're after a computer that can do all the serious stuff, plus play loads of games, then the Amiga is it. OOOO PPPMP VAD The good thing about the Amiga is that arcade games like Street Fighter II are available for the machine. 1. Would it be OK for my needs, remember I'm only 14 and don't need anything too wonderful? 2. What's the software for it like, including games? 3. Is it PC compatible? 4. How much can I get one for? 5. Are there any other computers out there that would be more suitable for me? THE HELP! LINE I would be very grateful if you could answer my questions. At the moment I'm stuck with an Amstrad CPC 6128 3. The 1mb A3010 VU isn't PC compatiXO ble but the more expensive machines in the range have PC emulators (ie the Learning Curve 2Mb A3010 package at ) included in the software package. 4. The basic 1mb STRUP A3010 package (the Action Packincludes word processor, couple of games and the usual gumph) is . Add about  for a printer. 5. The Amiga A1200. About . Buy a Panasonic printer ( and upwards and it comes with Wordworth, an excellent word processing package. The Amiga has an awesome and extensive range of games too. Richard Mansfield, Essex This is your magazine, so if you've got a tip or query about a game why not phone it in to the CVG! Help Line. It's open from Friday afternoons right the way through to Sunday evening. All you've got to do is phone 071-972 6720 and leave your message. That's all there is to it so get cracking and remember there's a software prize on offer for any stupendously excellent or unique tips. 1. Yes it's fine for your needs but bear in mind that the standard package doesn't come with a printer. 2. Educational and utility programs for the Acorn, like word processors, are on the whole of a good quality. After all it is used in most of the secondary schools in England! Most of the games stink big time though, and there's little chance of getting conversions of any 'big name' games like Street Fighter Il for instance, because there just isn't the installed user base in homes to make the availability of such games commercially viable. the dying man's armour and put it on. You can now enter the castle. 20. Give the king the let ter from the dying man. He'll give you another letter. 21. Take the rainbow ring from the table. 22. At Giant's Isle go to the Ice God's room and 26. At the Giant's HQ, fill your flask with water. push over the candle and 23. Go to the Fire God's take the Talisman. Go room and throw the back to the hall of water on the fire. worlds. 24. Go back to the Utgard 2 Ice God and then cross 27. On the Lost Clan Isle the bridge, push the piece of bread 25. Throw the rainbow ring over to the rat who will into the sphere of light. open the cell for you. 28. Give the letter to the Dwarven King. He will then give you another letter. Go down the steps and take the second piece of skull from the skeleton. Go back to the hall of worlds. 29. Now go back to UTGARD 1 and give the King the letter. He will give you a Talisman for Her'Ker'yn. Go back to the hall of worlds. Her 'Ker'in 30. At Druids' Grove speak to the druid and go into the map screen. 31. In Dakta Village kill the Dakta inside the armoury. Speak to the man who is making a sword. Take the sword. 32. Kill the Dakta inside the pub. 33. Kill both of the Daktas in the room and then go back to the map screen. 34. At Dakta HQ jump down past the spikey 105 "


"CVG Q&A HELP! GAME BOY STUFF AUSSIE QUESSIES 10. You gave Sonic Spinball 73% but it was in the top 10 for a few weeks. Why? 11. What are the top five games CVG recommends for Mega Drive and Game Boy? 1. Will I be able to play old Game Boy games on the Super Game Boy or just the new ones like Dor Game Boy or just the new ones like Donkey Kong '94 that you mentioned last month? 2. Can I use my SNES pad, or will I have to play the games via my Game Boy? 3. Does the Super Game Boy do anything else? SCOPD2DD ex Scott Gordon, Australia SNES junkie, Aberdeen 1. When will the Game Boy 2 be released in Australia? 2. Which is better, Booster Boy or Handy Boy? 3. Is the Pro Action Replay worth buying? 4. How much is a Pro Action Replay for Mega Drive and Game Boy? 5. Will there be a Sonic 4? 6. My sister wants to know if there will be any more girlbased games on Mega Drive or Game Boy. She has the Little Mermaid and is hoping Beauty and the Beast will be made into a game. 7. Every year in your magazine could you rate and review every new system out on the market? 8. Is the Saturn 64 or 32-bit? 9. If you had a Mega Drive and a Mega-CD, could the game makers make a game which has a CD and a cartridge, making the game 48-bit? 1. We guess you mean the Super Game Boy and it should be out around September, this may slip to nearer Christmas though. 2. We reckon they're both OK, and there's not much in it, so take your pick. 3. Yes. 4. The Mega Drive one is .99 while the Game Boy product comes in at a bargain .99 5. Oh yes and quite soon from what we've been hearing. See News pages. 6. Looks like it's your sister's lucky day. Tell her to watch out for Beauty and the Beast from Virgin, and there's a Barbie game coming out on the Game Boy around September. Check out issue 150 (page 10) for more information. 7. We already do. Comprehensiveness is our middle name. 8. 32-bit. 9. Er, no. Apart from anything else can you imagine how expensive a game would be if they came on both cartridge and CD? 10. We don't believe the hype basically. 11. We reckon the five most essential games on the Game Boy at present are: Wario; Kirby's Pinball, World Cup Striker, Konami's Golf and Donkey Kong '94. On Mega Drive: FIFA Soccer, NBA Jam, PGA European Tour, Sonic 3 and Pete Sampras Tennis. By the way, cheers for the cheats! 1. No you can play the lot. Existing games will only appear in four colours, while the new ones like Donkey Kong '94 will have up to 13. 2. You use your SNES pad. 3. You can actually paint on the screen Mario-paint style while you're playing. It sounds crap but it should allow you to write codes on the screen if you can't find a pen and paper; dead handy! GAME BOY With a Super Game Boy you can add up to four colours to your existing Game Boy games. GAME TIPS clouds. Walk into the and the other man lightning and teleport. before then taking the Take the shield, armour holy symbol. and helmet. Discard 43. Go to the Light the helmet in the main Goddess' room, then room and the bridge will make your way across then appear. Take the the tiles and take the holy symbol. holy symbol. 42. Go into the God of 44. Go into the Nature Weak's room and kill him God's room and take the Go back into the hall of worlds. Talker'Yn 39. This is the hall of gods. Go into the death goddess' room and kill Heimdall and Ursha by walking into the statues. Walk into the light that appears on the wall. Take the crown and the 36. Kill the mirror holy symbol. Walk out of reflection of yourself. the room to bring the Kill the Dakta and take characters back to life. the Talisman. 40. Go into the Judge 37. Get across the tiles God's room and place by using the clues from the crown on to his head. the scroll. You will now be judged. 38. Shoot the arrows Take the holy symbol. into the mouths and take 41. Go into the Air the third piece of skull._ Goddess' room in the ball and go to the alcove where you must press the switch on the wall to make the steps appear. 35. Go into the room that contains a pile of gold and press fire in front of the map on the wall. 106 "


"Q & A CVG THE WORRIED AMERICAN SATURN MEGACD? I was wondering if the Mega 32 would convert both the Mega Drive and Mega-CD so that the Mega-CD can play the new Saturn CDs! Any ideas on whether this is possible? Saturn CDs won't be captible with the Mega-CD, so bad luck to all you Mega-CD owners. Matthew Stone, Dagenham THE HELP! LINE It's an interesting idea but think about it this way, what would be the point of releasing the Saturn if they were compatible! And apart from anything else the Mega-CD is only a single speed CD drive whereas the Saturn is double speed, so there would be an almighty clog-up of data. 1. As I skimmed the pages efficient operating sysof this periodical I noticed tem than the ancient PC the ads for the Amiga and system which allows it to their 2 megs of RAM. Wow! run as fast as a 386. And 4 megs of RAM is standard remember that it's a hell over here and the new 486 of a lot cheaper too. DX 4s have 8 megs while The PC might be a the Pentiums have 16! more powerful machine, Why does the Amiga have but remember that it so little memory? costs a bomb and a lot 2. The CD-i version of 7th of power is lost in the Guest looks just the same hardware and software as the PC version. The CD-i having to be compatible was supposed to have rev with ancient standards. olutionised CD gaming! Anyway, RAM size is no What's going on, I don't indication of quality. My understand? (that's Rik Help! trivia 3. Is 3DO 64bit? fans) all-time favourite 4. What is the RAM size for game is Paradroid on the 3DO and Jaguar and how C64 and that fits quite fast are their CPUs? comfortably into 38k on 5. Will the Jaguar come out the good old C64. with a CD extension? 2. The Philips CD-i verThe Worried American sion may look the same, but it is a lot smoother 1. Despite only having 2 than it is on the PC. The megs of RAM and a clock CD-i is a very capable speed of 14 Mhz the machine, but it's still Amiga 1200 has custom waiting for some revoluhardware and, more to tionary software! the point, a much more 3. No, it's 32 bit. 4. The 3DO has 3Mb of RAM (when launched here it's rumoured that it may have 4Mb) and its CPU is a 32-bit ARM RISC processor that runs at 12Mhz. The Jaguar has 2mb of RAM and its CPU is the trusted 16-bit 68000 which runs 7th Guest on CD-i is a lot smoother at 13.3Mhz. than the PC version. We live in the caring, sharing Nineties, so hey! If you've mapped out a level, found a secret part of a game or you've just got a common or garden hint or tip (and that doesn't mean we want advice on planting sprouts, OK?) then send it in. And if it's any cop we'll print it and share it with the masses. Address your corresspondence to: CVG Help!, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. through the gate in 52. Walk by the dragon's To retrieve the skull, the trees. head and exit the room. turn around so that 50. Walk on to the tur Kill the chief Hakrat and the shadow is facing tle's back and take the go into Loki's room. the skull and press fire sprite. He will tele When you get teleported fire. Leave this section port you to the Hall Of into Baldur's room, and enter the room Worlds. Ander will teleport you where you'll find Nifl'Heim once again. Dakta. 51. Walk towards the Shoker'Yn 54. Kill the Dakta lava and on to the fire 53. Make your way before chopping the boat. Take the dragon's across the tiles (remem rope on the wall. Cross teeth. When you get to ber to save the game the wood plank into Loki's daughter you'll here) when you have Ashok's room. find a secret door to her completed the tile sec55. Ashok is invisible right. Fire arrows into the tion kill the doubles of So just throw the skull three heads. Walk Heimdall and Ursha. at him. through the door and Walk through the gate 56. Go into Loki's place a dragon's teeth and then to the room room for the final conon each red circle on the where you will find a frontation. floor. Walk into the main piece of skull and the 57. Congratulate yourself circle to be teleported. shadow of a character. on a cheat well done! seeds from three of the plants. Drop them on the patch of grass. Take the holy symbol. 45. Go towards the closed door at the end of the corridor. Place the holy symbols on spaces in the floor. 46. Place the shield in front of the laser beam. 47. Take the last piece of skull 48. Go back to Ander in the garden and take another symbol. Go back to the hall of worlds. 49. Return to Her Ker'rn and give the druid the holy symbol. Walk 107 "


"CVG HELP! GAME TIPS screen and you'll see two new options. start when you're about to serve. DISPOSABLE HERO If you'd like to access a hidden cheat screen CRAZY TENNIS The object in Crazy Tennis is to reach a target score before the time runs out or you'll fail to progress to the TOP SHOTS Power Serve: Simply hit the B button, press and hold the joypad in the direction of your opponent and press B again. Smash: Come quite close to the net and press B and push forward when the ball is lobbed above your head. is cutting you up then enter MEMJ TVSY FVPX Options screen and highlight the number of players. Now press UP, A, B and C simultaneously on pad two. Take padone and press RIGHT. You'll now start with nine players! first select the options screen, set the level to arcade and the sound to zero. Next, go to the hi-score option and while holding the right mouse button type Euphoria. Now return to the options screen for the cheats option. REL 001000 MEGA DRIVE PETE SAMPRAS TENNIS SECRET GAMES WORLD TOUR PASSWORDS 1. START STUTTGART 2. CAR TOKYO 3. VEGAN WASHINGTON 4. STAR DUSSELDORF 5. LCD PARIS 6. WALL MONTREAL 7. SINKORSWIM BARCELLONA 8. SHELF SAN FRANCISCO 9. WINDOW BOMBAY next level. The best bit 10. POOL LONDON however, is the addition of tokens which can be ROBOCOP VS gathered for power-ups. TERMINATOR These include speed. For more gore, extra up/down, big ball and lives and new opponents ball control. enter this code after pausing the game: cc, HUGE TOUR AA, BB, CC, AA and BB. As its name probably suggests this mode lets you play a full season's tour around the world. Eight different players with separate passwords are supported. You'll be ranked 35 to start with and obviously you need to get to number one. To abort the game press ABC and START. STREETS OF ARGUE CHEAT RAGE 3 To argue with the umpire To start the game with press down-right and nine players enter the It's also possible to play as Roo the Kangaroo in this game. To do this simply hold UP and B on the title screen and press START. as your password to get GRIND 38 lives and play on to STORMER the final level of the This isn't the easiest of game. You might also shoot-'em-ups at the like to try Xxxx Yyyy Zzzz best of times, but use as a password, which this cheat and you'll earn should let you fight a infinite continues. Hold boss from the original down A, B and C on the Actraiser game. title screen now hit START 100 times. If PAC ATTACK you've done this correctly you should be able to select Free Play on the credit limit option. Here are the five steps that you'll need to access Crazy Tennis and Huge World Tour: 1. Pick World Tour 2. Select any player 3. Do NOT enter your name 4. Select YES to using a password 5. Type Zeppelin as the password Go back to the main SNES ACTRAISER2 If this top slash-'em-up 108 "


"Q & A CVG XTRAS DODD000  JAGUAR CD the DOS prompt: 'Divil Donkey' = Press T for more treasure, 'Divil Grumpy' = Press K for more keys, 'Divil Meaning' = Press Shift-T for more energy. have some of those hologram watches please Atari? You can contact Atari UK on 0753 533344 for both prices and ordering. JAGDAPTOR If you want to skip stages in the Puzzle Mode just press the L button when you're asked to Retry or End the game on the Game Over screen. PINBALL FANTASIES Having trouble with your KING OF DRAGONS Coming at you this side of Christmas is the eagerly awaited CD-ROM drive for the Jaguar (unfortunately dubbed the 'toilet seat', purely for cosmetic reasons). It's a double-speed drive with a data transfer rate of 352.8 KB/second and features a built-in Virtual Light Machine which gives you banks of acid and rave-type visuals to play along with your audio CDs. Using advanced Cinepak technology it will also provide playback of three hour movies off just one CD. Atari has promised a retail price of $199.95. Contact your local importer for more details. This essential little item for the Jag is the JagDaptor which will adapt your Jaguar for just about every possible video output you could want from your machine. it offers composite, video, split composite, RGB and S-VHS in addition to left and right audio plugs too. Not bad for $50. Ask your importer to get one. een SEEING RED be accessed by pressPlay as the same characing C, B, A and START ters by entering DOWN, in a quick sequence R, UP, L, Y, B, X, A as the while the end of game Capcom logo fades. The credits roll. title screen should flash GAME BOY blue instead of red if it has worked. KIRBY'S SUPER DREAM LAND METROID For more lives Here's how to get a and super weapon! If you've got Super Bombs go to the Status Screen via the Map Screen. Now highlight 'charge' and one other weapon before returning to the game. To use the new enerweapon select the greengy in this Super Bomb icon and addictive pinball game press and hold the fire hold DOWN, and hit button to use it. SELECT and A simultaneously for a cheat screen. balls? Well, type in EXTRA BALLS while the selected table is scrolling up and down. Seven new balls will be yours, so to speak. -TEX For total invulnerability in this engrossing flight sim simply type the word PLOP. You can also skip the training missions by holding CTRL and ENTER after typing in your callsign. JAG-WARE Jaguar mayhem is sweeping the States and with it comes the inevitable merchandising bits and pieces. Hats, TShirts, jackets, bike bottles, mugs, watches and glasses are now all available in moody black and-red Jaguar colours. Can we On import from ASG (408 243 5000) lands the infraRAD, a complex looking joystick enhancer for the SNES. Mega Drive and Jaguar at $29.99. InfraRAD promises the fastest response times around and will even turn your console on and off remotely. One for the couch potato we think. MEGA-CD PC GROUND ZERO TEXAS There's a secret scene in this game which can LITIL DIVIL Here's a few very helpful tips for you to type in at 109 "


"\"nem? GET YOUR FINGER ON THE PULSE BE  9W MOUTES JIMITTITUTI "


"o Book your place now for LIVE '94, the most exciting consumer electronics event in the UK. See the latest hi-fi. TV. Video. Computers. Games. Camcorders. In-car. Musical instruments. Cameras. Telecoms. Satellite. Home automation. Experience Capital Radio Live at LIVE 95.8 Capital FM Stage. 1548 AM Capital Gold concerts. Dolby Home Cinema Promenade. Real Hi-Fi Village. TV Times Live Television Studio. Young Newspaper Feature. BPIA Future of Photography. Yamaha/TES National Youth Rock & Pop Awards. Games Arena. Focus on Multimedia. Get your hands on a ticket. Phone the LIVE hotline or return the coupon now. Remember if you're under 16, you must have an adult with you at LIVE '94. THE CONSUMER ELECTRONICS SHOW EARLS COURT  LONDON 20 25 SEPTEMBER 1994 LIVE HOTLINE: 0 891 5 0 0 10 3 Calls cost 39p per minute cheap rate and 49p per minute at all other times. Please tell me more about LIVE '94 and how I can get a ticket to the UK's most electrifying event. Name:.... Address:.... Video His 10x Handycam SND * WALL     o co w ...... Postcode:... Please return this coupon to: LIVE '94, News International Exhibitions Ltd. Europe House, World Trade Centre, St Katharine-by-the-Tower, London El 9AT. # *The top journos from Mean Machines, Sega Magazine, Nintendo Magazine System, Computer and Video Games, PC Review, CU Amiga, The One Amiga and PC Games will all be there. "


"CVG CHARTS ALL THE CHARTS CHART ATTACK WITH Where's your favourite game coming along in the all-formats chart? Well if you stop reading this and look at the chart below you'll find out, and check out the single format charts on the facing page too... KNOW HMV KNOW GAME ALL FORMATS TOP 20 O = Non Mover = New Entry = Move up = Move down TIE FIGHTER PC / Virgin The second in LucasArts' stupendous Star Wars series, and thoroughly reviewed on pages 58 and 59. VIRTUA RACING MEGA DRIVE / Sega A good game but it's not surprising that it's slipped with that hefty price tag. 12 DOOM PC / ID Software 2 THEME PARK PC / PC CD ROM / EA Keep both the staff and the punters of a Theme Park happy in Bullfrog's latest simulation, Down but far from doomed; this distinctive shoot-'em-up is still going strong, and it's the PC game of the year, TIE FIGHTER The sequel to the rather brilliant and much lauded X-Wing. What do we think? See page 58. 13 FIFA INTERNATIONAL SOCCER MEGA DRIVE / SNES/ MEGA CD / EA Expect to see it climb again when released on Amiga and PC later in the year. SENSIBLE SOCCAR INTERNATIONAL AMIGA / PC / SNES / MEGA DRIVE / Mindscape One of the best games ever gets a new lease of life with this International edition. WORLD CUP USA '94 MD /SNES GAME GEAR / PC / US Gold Most of the sales must have been on SNES, the Mega Drive game stinks! MARKO'S MAGIC FOOTBALL 14 MEGA DRIVE / Domark A rip off of Soccer Kid where you have to use a football to aid you round various platforms, but nowhere near as good. 15 PRINCE INTERACTIVE PC CD-ROM / MAC CD-ROM / Grafic Zone Multimedia antics of his purpleness of pop à la Peter Gabriel's X-Plora. WORLD CUP YEAR AMIGA / PC / Empire A brilliant collection of footy games but we reckon you'll have at least one already. THEME PARK Are you a budding entrepreneur? Then go into the theme park business courtesy of Bullfrog and EA. 16 PETE SAMPRAS TENNIS MEGA DRIVE / Codemasters Brilliant fun, but it's got a number of bugs. Doing very well no doubt because of his Wimbledon victory MEGA MAN X SNES Nintendo Another decent old game as Capcom's flagship character is revamped for the 16-bit machine. 17 SUPER METROID SNES / Nintendo A superb update of the old NES classic, a tad easy but the best SNES game for some time, SONIC 3 MEGA DRIVE / Sega It's almost the end of the chart road for the Sega's flagship character's third cart. SUPER METROID Japanese platform shoot-'em-up that has some strikingly original graphics and a whopper of a game to boot. 18 NBA JAM MEGA DRIVE / Acclaim WARIOLAND GAME BOY / Nintendo Another superb Mario platform game, only this time you're playing evil Wario A surprisingly, massive hit for this ultra-playable basketball game from Acclaim. 19 SKIDMARKS AMIGA Acid KICK OFF 3 AMIGA / PC / Anco Stop buying these! They're rubbish compared to the Mega Drive and SNES versions. This great racing game hits the gusset of the chart; great gameplay's back and at a bargain price too. 20 SIM CITY 2000 PC / MAC / Mindscape Like a trampolinist this corker goes straight up and straight back down again. 10 STREETS OF RAGE 3 MEGA DRIVE / Sega A polished and well produced beat-'em-up with some top new characters, not as good as SOR 2 though. SIM CITY 2000 Maxis updates its winning formula, the screen 3D isometric perspective view is a beaut'. Sum certu. 20 cm up and then 112 "


"ON ALL THE FORMATS CHARTS CVG MEGA-CD TOP 5 NES TOP 5 CDTOP 5 1. * FIFA SOCCER TETRIS 2 Nintendo 3 Nintendo WORLD CUP USA '94 US Gold WORLD CUP STRIKER Elite 1. * DRAGON'S LAIR Philips STREETS OF RAGE 3 Sega WORLD CUP USA '94 US Gold MARKO'S MAGIC FOOTBALL Domark VIRTUA RACING Sega EA GAME BOY TOP 5 MASTER SYSTEM TOP 5 2. KIRBY'S DREAMLAND Nintendo MICRO MACHINES Codemasters YOSHI'S COOKIE Nintendo DAYS OF THUNDER Nintendo N w MORTAL KOMBAT Acclaim WORLD CUP USA '94 US Gold SENSIBLE SOCCER INT. Sony NHL HOCKEY '94 EA 4. 7TH GUEST Philips PLAYBOY COMPLETE MASSAGE Philips TOP GUN Philips/ Paramount NAKED GUN 2 Philips Paramount 5. * 1. WARIOLAND Nintendo 2. * WORLD CUP USA '94 US Gold ZELDA: LINK'S AWAKENING Nintendo KONAMI GOLF Konami SUPER MARIO LAND 2 Nintendo MACINTOSH TOP 5 1. MORTAL KOMBAT Acclaim BATMAN RETURNS Sega DESERT STRIKE EA SONIC CHAOS Sega SENSIBLE SOCCER Sony MYST EA GAME GEAR TOP 5 PC TOP 5 AMIGA TOP 5 1. * TIE FIGHTER SIM CITY 2000 Mindscape 3. * SIM CITY SCENARIO Mindscape PETER GABRIEL XPLORA Real World PGA TOUR GOLF 2 Virgin 1. KICK OFF 3 Anco THEME PARK EA WORLD CUP USA '94 US Gold ALADDIN Virgin 3 * REN AND STIMPY Sega 4 * MORTAL KOMBAT Acclaim 5 NBA JAM Acclaim SUPER NINTENDO TOP 5 EA FIFA INTERNATIONAL SOCCER Ocean MEGA DRIVE TOP 5 1. PETE SAMPRAS TENNIS Code Masters SENSIBLE SOCCER INTERNATIONAL Mindscape WORLD CUP USA '94 Empire ARCADE POOL Team 17 BENEATH THE STEEL SKY Virgin 3. * PRINCE INTERACTIVE Grafic Zone PACIFIC AIR WAR MicroProse. WORLD CUP USA '94 US Gold 2. * SUPER METROID Nintendo MEGAMAN X 113 "


"CVG COMING SOON NEXT MONTH LUCASARTS SPECIAL GOB Smacking! Time Warner's forthcoming dino-game, Primal Rage, looks fabulous. It's chock-a-block with mind-blowing stop-motion animation techniques that are on a par with those used in that dino movie to end all dino movies, Jurassic Park. Next month CVG goes behind the scenes and gives you the low-down on this amazing new game. S498 Halk to 33 Longtime purveyor of quality games, LucasArts, has a whole series of top-notch software in the pipeline, including The Dig and Full Throttle. Next month we'll be flying out to the Lucas ranch and heading back with a heapful of hot games news. Ar LUCAS COMPUTER VIDEO GAMES ON SALE 15 SEPTEMBER — THE MAGAZINE THAT REAL GAMERS READ 114 "


"9024650 00 de 9000 1120 13 0 100% arcade action the most addictive shoot 'em up ever to hit the arcades blasts on to your Super Nintendo with the ultraplayable Choplifter III the ultimate war eine going down behind behind CHOP EFTER enemy lines CVG 87% Total Master the awesome weaponry of your GA 27 Thunderlord, take on scores of well-armed, wellorganised foes, and rescue the hostages. Super-smooth scrolling, superb animation / sound effects, and loads of on-screen sprites. SONY SUPER NINTENDO ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM PAL VERSION Ocean ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING Choplifter 18  1983 Broderbund Software Inc. All Rights Reserved.  1993 Beam Software PTY Ltd. Sony Electronic Publishing is a trademark of Sony Electronic Publishing Company "


"GUNS 5 different super missiles, MISSILES, 2 kinds of BOMBS and a change of clothes. 'Well, she is a remember. Samus Aran, the most fearless bounty hunter in the galaxy is back in Nintendo's most challenging game ever; Super Metroid. It's a shooting, grappling, morphing, brain-numbing 24 meg monster of a game. Nincredibly Ninvolving Nintendo SUPER NINTENDO "

