"PLAYSTATION VAR, SATURN, COIN-OPS, NU64, PC, 3DO, MEGA DRIVE, SNES, AMIGA FIRST REVIEW! WIPEOUT ON PLAYSTATION EVIDEN exclusive .25 KILLER GAMES THIS MONTH: VIRTUA STRIKER COIN-OP ACE COMBAT PLAYSTATION SHIN SHINOBI DEN SATURN THEME PARK SATURN ACTUA GOLF PLAYSTATION ULTIMATE DOOM PC CD-ROM DONKEY KONG LAND GAME BOY FIRST SHOTS OF THE MOTHER OF ALL SEQUELS! 12 PAGES OF TIPS 'N' HELP DO WE PLAYTEST SNES DOOM AND GIVE YOU OUR FIRST IMPRESSIONS ALL THE LATEST PIGS FROM SATURN VIRTUA FIGHTER 2! 09 > SEPTEMBER 1995 ISSUE NO 166 68.00 ASCH DM 12.50 SS 13.50 $5.959\"770261369062 7000 L "


"America's favourite morons are now let loose all over Europe! Tswa MUSIC Television  TM REAVIS AND BUTT-HEART mmm Do deals. Do moronk thrge LOSYE LIERTEEN gwar Wreck your room. Get tickets. MEGADRIVE SCREEN SHOTS SHOWN SKULL Become a moron. DEATH ROCB Break the law. Press Quote: \"Play it with your friends. Then play with your self, HEH HEH HEH.\" Beavis two morons THREE Games Press Guote: \"This is like the coolest thing to happen to Europe since America discovered it.\" Beavis VACOM MTV's Beavis and Butt-Head. Available on the MEGADRVE, SNES. & GAMEGEAR.« O 1995 Viacom International inc. «MTV: Music Television,\" \"Beavis and Butt-head\" and all related characters are trademarks of Viacom International Inc. SEGAT and MEGA DRIVETM are trademarks of Sega Enterprises Ltd. "


"CVG PROOF THAT THE BEST CAN GET BETTER. Namco's Tekken on PlayStation is the best beat-'em-up out there, but already the seguel's on its way. CVG brings you the first shots from what could well turn out to be the game which eclipses the Street Fighter dynasty.nasty. "


"CONTENTS CVG CONTENT exclusive, WIPEOUT s o0.0 This is it the first official PlayStation review! Is this really the game that'll get you running down to the shops when the PlayStation's released! Only CVG can tell you that! 00:46,6 O013 contents SEPTEMBER 1995 ISSUE 166 74 VIDEODROME AS VIRTUA STRIKER P 2P BRAZIL BBEENAU It's the latest offering from Sega Japan and it's amazing! Find out what happens when you cross Virtua Fighter with football and remember, you saw the review here first. The greatest beat-'em-up around is about to get better. We bring you the first shots and all the info on one of the biggest sequels ever! "


"CONTENTS CONTENTS CVG REGULARS IN ACE COMBAT 6 Editorial 8 Connected 80 In the bag 84 Help 86 Cheatmode 96 Challenge 97 Charts 98 Next Month The Namco bandwagon keeps rolling on as they come up trumps with yet another PlayStation winner. This time you take to the air to rid the world of terrorist scum. Yes! REVIEWS 32-BIT 42 Ace Combat PlayStation 46 Shin Shinobi Den Saturn 48 Ultimate Doom PC CD-ROM 51 Zhadnost 3D0 52 Action Soccer PC CD-ROM 53 Terminal Velocity PC 54 Wipeout PlayStation SHIN SHINOBI DEN RACY 89 22 It's the It's the followup to Flashback, but you'd never guess from looking at it. It's a full-on 3D action experience and it'll be coming to PlayStation! 16-BIT 60 Primal Rage Mega Drive/SNES 62 Donkey Kong Land Game Boy 64 Gloom Amiga 66 A surprise We've been waiting for this game for a hell of a LAYERS long time BUSS but it was worth it. The question is, do people still want 2D platform games? PREVIEWS 22 Fade To Black PC CD-ROM 24 Syndicate Wars PlayStation 26 Theme Park Saturn 26 Magic Carpet 2 PC CD-ROM 28 Actua Golf PlayStation 30 Loaded PlayStation 32 Jaguar Round-up 35 Daedalus Encounter 3DO 36 Rayman PlayStation 38 Need For Speed PC CD-ROM 40 Captain Quazar 3D0 68 Phantom Mega Drive 70 Killer Instinct SNES 72 Doom SNES "


"EDITORIAL CVG EDITO EDITOR: MARK PATTERSON DEPUTY EDITOR: GARY LORD ART EDITOR: JULIE HEAP DEPUTY ART EDITOR: PETREA DOYLE REVIEWS EDITOR: RAD AUTOMATIC FEATURES EDITOR: SIMON CLAYS CONTRIBUTING WRITERS: RIK SKEWS MARCUS BEER news from t sega/sony slam-masters Editorial and advertising enquiries: 0171-972 6700 Editorial fax: 0171-713 6701 Advertising fax: 0171-216 6219 Subscription and Back Issues enquiries (9.30-5.30 Mon-Fri): 01858 468888 CVG Headquarters: Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Which is best, Saturn or PlayStation? it's the controversial question on everybody's lips, and it looks like it's about to be answered. The dispute between Sega and Sony over machine quality is to be settled in a charity wrestling match betwixt the CEOs of the Japanese parent companies. The kid gloves are off as Howling Mad Musashi of Sega and George Michael of Sony head for a two falls, two submissions or a knockout victory. Profits raised by the -a-ticket event go to Ecco the Dolphin's Lifeguard Programme. ADVERTISING MANAGER: Lisa Hawkes ADVERTISING EXECUTIVE: Marianna Masters PRODUCTION: Tina Gynn SYSTEMS AND PRODUCTION MANAGER: Sarah-Jane Leavey PRODUCT MANAGER: Tina Hicks MARKETING DIRECTOR: Nigel Taylor PUBLISHING DIRECTOR: Graham Taylor hot goss goss! Following the revelation that technomeisters Orbital and Leftfield are contributing all-new tracks to the PlayStation Wipeout soundtrack, Atari have announced that the tunes for their next Jaguar title, Tempest 2001, will be provided by pop stalwarts Bros, who are re-forming for the job. \"Yeah, brilliant!\" stated Matt out of Bros when asked about the deal. \"Yeah, great! It's brilliant!\" added his brother The rising prices of consoles and games have caused worldwide financial panic. \"While most currencies in the world have been taking a battering in the global recession, computer games have steadily increased in value, to the point where they are now more valuable than diamonds.\" said a spokesman for the UN Payola Committee. Moves are now apparently afoot to replace the gold standard system of cash valuation with a mysterious new mechanism as yet! known only as The Sonic Option. SUBSCRIPTION ENQUIRIES: CVG Subscriptions, Tower Publishing, Tower House, Sovereign Place, Lathkill Street, Market Harborough, Leicestershire LE 16 9ES TEL: 01858 468888 RATES (includes postage and packing): 12 ISSUES UK: .00, AIRMAIL EUROPE: .00, AIRMAIL REST OF WORLD ZONE 1: .00, AIRMAIL REST OF WORLD ZONE 2: .00, REST OF WORLD SURFACE: .00, BFPO: .00, EIRE: .00 PRINTED IN THE UK BY: St Ives PLC, Peterborough DISTRIBUTED BY: Frontline (C) COPYRIGHT: Computer and Video Games 1994/5 ISBN NO: 0261-3597 DISCLAIMER: Although we take great care to ensure the accuracy of the information contained in this magazine, CVG and the publishers cannot be held responsible for omissions, errors, misprints or mistakes which may occur. Trev. sinister plot ahoy "


"EDITORIAL EDITORIAL CUG RIAL people bits he front net not: The Internet was this month proven to be a hoax. Star Trek fan Gavin Ferengi admitted that he made the whole thing up \"for a laugh.... It just seemed like a funny idea at the time,\" confessed Gavin. \"I didn't realise people would take it so seriously and start investing thousands of pounds in computers so they could try and use it. I didn't think anyone would believe me. I only did it for a laugh.\" There have been hundreds of reported sightings of the Internet this year alone, but police were quick to dismiss them as copycat hoaxes or Star Trek Fanclub newsletters. Will it be chips or jacket spuds? Will it be salad or frozen peas? Will it be mushrooms? Fried onion rings? Only one man has the answer, and that man is Rissole Grunt, CVG's very own sooth saying astrologer. Once again we're asking him to peer into the mists of time for each of our team, and offer his very own per sonalised horoscope. Hope it's chips. mark A new EU directive limiting the size of pork pies is set to rock your world this month, Mark. A standard McBonio's Breakfast Pie with Egg and Pickle drops from its usual 2.8lbs to a titchy one gram. Rather than pop scores of mini, pies into your cakehole the planets advise you to switch to alternative means of breakfasting such as reverse liposuction, where kilos of pig fat are pumped into your body intravenously. Lucky powdered milk: St Ivel Five Pints gary What a month it's going to be for you. As always there's trouble at the pub, things are getting bad for the allotment committee, weddings are postponed, prisoners re-located. But don't worry none of it's real. You're just watching far too many soap operas, as usual. Try interspersing these with more realistic programmes such as Mighty Morphin' Power Rangers or Ren & Stimpy to avoid going mad. Lucky community association: The Rotary Club rad Your normally laid-back and relaxed attitude is disturbed this month. That is to say, instead of your usual slacking about like a lazy bast' you actually do something constructive. Of course, this has nothing to do with the P45 waved in front of your face periodically. It's obviously your dedication to the job, and not any kind of fear of finding yourself dole-ward bound. Honest. Lucky wheet: BMX mag SI PlayStation Wipeout comes into the office this month. I'll bet that gets you all excited doesn't it? I'I bet you can hardly control your undercrackers just thinking about its Next Generationborne loveliness. Ditto the very notion of Tekken 2 and Donkey Kong Land. You're a games slave, boy. I predict you'll spend a lot of time on your own in the toilets with this month's software collection. Lucky afterlife: reincarnation Julie Your Vulcan work ethic is disturbed this month with an influx of strange Earth humour. Pluto rising in Mercury's sev. enth orbit means your compatriots will be filled with sunny-day playfulness. Smite them. Smite them all. Don't let their positivity get you down they're only a trauma away from deep depres. sion. Try getting them evicted, or arrested, framed for crimes they did not commit. A letter in the post brings good news. Lucky haircut: afro trea Strewth, put another koala on the barbie, it's yet another topsy-turvy Antipodean-stylee month for you. Never one to allow real life to get in the way the next four weeks pass in a haze of barbecues, tinnies, kangaroos and gender stereotyping. But you didn't need me to tell you that. A freak gravitational field destroys your house, but you don't give a toss. Lucky kettle component: heating element Gavin yesterday. \"I did it for a laugh.\" WHERE ARE THEY NOW? THIS MONTH: FLINK Reader Devin Ahmet of Leicester wrote to us requesting info on the whereabouts of one of his favourite platform heroes, Flink. \"He was only in one title, and I thought it was pretty smart. Does Flink have any plans for a sequel?\" he says. Well Dev, the bad news is that the bowl-haired magician's apprentice with the outsized head and the dodgy mediaeval clobber has officially retired from games forever. But you'll still be able to keep up with his adventures as he reprises his role as Welsh berchoirboy Aled Jones. \"It's always been an ambition of mine to be in a game,\" laughs Aled \"so when Psygnosis offered me the starring role in Flink I decided to take a break from singing about God and go for it!\" But Aled's had enough of the high life: «It was really gruelling leaping over falling leaves and dragons and stuff all day. And because I have to have a girl's voice for my day job I wasn't allowed to speak in case made Flink sound like some sort of poof or something. But it was great fun!\" READERS! DO YOU lie awake at night, tortured by uncertainty about the fortunes of your favourite gaming characters? Well dry up those tears and write to us at WHERE ARE THEY NOW? CVG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU and we'll do our best to track them down for you. "


"NEWS the wired-up gaming news section With no Ultra 64 until Atari launch their link-up next year Nintendo preperipheral for head-to-head connected FIVE GO TO * YOSHI ---ISLAND pare to sassy up their in a Doom combat stylee title courtesy of Virtuality, 16-bit titles with the Mindscape start work on a launch of Super Mario Nintendo Ultra 64 title, name Five; Yoshi's Island! of Monster Dunk, and will be a Just when you thought Mario might bite the 16bit bullet we've news of perhaps his greatest triumph yet. Super Mario Bros Five: Yoshi's Island is one of the most eagerly awaited Nintendo products for years, and it has been kept deeply immersed in secrecy... Electronic Arts and basketball game. Team 17 are Origin film their latest one of the many software com interactive movie and panies to climb aboard the But here at CVG our spies are always on the lookout, so here's the spiel. The story is pre the moustachioed one and sees an evil sorcerer, Kamek, discover that it'll be Mario who causes the downfall of the nasty Koopa kingdom. So he plots to see that Mario is never delivered to Mama and Papa via the stork. However, when the stork's intercepted it's Mario's twin, Luigi, who falls into Kamek's clutches. Fortunately, Mario lands on Yoshi, the dinosaur's island and together with Luigi they decide to set the record straight and defeat the evil Kamek. Play features some brilliant Super FX scaling and rotating to give characters that 3D feel and the land itself has been designed with a kind of 'felt-tip' look to it. There's also some crazy sub-games and races against time for Yoshi and baby Mario to contend with. Yoshi's Island should feature some classic Super Mario gaming, and there's 48 separate areas over six levels to uncover. While a date hasn't been announced for the UK version Japanese punters got their Christmas early when Yoshi was released on August 7. Expect a full review next issue even if we have to swim through Japan's sushi-infested waters until we find one. start work in Hollywood Info Super Highway and a new on Wing Commander 4! Playstation hits the shelves! Yoshi's Island. Will it be as a big as Donkey Kong Country? "


"NEWS NEWS CVG THREE TON PLAYSTATION Sony's assault on the console market has just gone into overdrive with the announcement of a  price point for their piece of 32-bit technology. The price falls in line with its US counterpart and must be something of a worry to Sega. The  differential puts immense pressure on the Saturn because the PlayStation will now sit quite comfortably in the same price range as Nintendo's forthcoming Ultra 64. Sega have between now and September 9, which is tipped as the PlayStation's UK release date, to either get their sums right or step up the marketing torrent. The Sony PlayStation is about to join the Saturn on the shop shelves, and for  less it's obvious which of the machines is going to be better value. NA 50122 SATURNDAY RENTAL DREAM SCHEME FOR SEPTEMBER FEVER Gamers could be renting top PlayStation and Saturn titles by the end of September if plans from top games publishers go ahead. Working in conjunction with games trade body ELSPA, industry chiefs from Sega, Nintendo and Sony have all been ironing out wrinkles to formulate a rental plan. Although rental prices haven't been fixed, the plan would see gamers' costs vastly reduced and ask retailers for a licence fee to rent games over the counter. The plan looks brilliant news for you the gamer and as soon as CVG has more info we'll let you know. Despite punters' reservations about which machine's better than the other, Sega's entry into the 32-bit market got off to a storming start. Initial reports indicate that every single unit of hardware and relevant peripheries have been allocated and that immediate demand will not be satisfied until the arrival of two further shipments. Meanwhile Sega kept its aggressive marketing tactics at boiling point by projecting giant Virtua Fighter charac. ters, Wolf and Cage, superimposed with the heads of John Major and John 'no job for me' Redwood on to the House of Commons. The prank also featured a massive Saturn logo with the provocative slogan Come Out Fighting' written on it. BEWARE RAM RAIDER OUT FIGHTING The premature launch of the Saturn has been a real success according to Sega, but Sony, who have spoken to retailers, report a different story altogether. "


"NEWS CVG NEWS connected ONE IN A MILLION EA'S DARK FORGES Sales of the PlayStation have exceeded the million mark in Japan and this has meant that Sony have been able to slash the price of their machine by a massive 25%. The good news for UK punters is that when the machine hits the same sales level across Europe then we can expect similar price cuts too. Hurrah for Uncle Sony! The next interactive movie to come from the EA and Origin stable is currently being filmed at Pinewood studios. It's called The Darkening and has a working budget of approximately  million and stars the rather cool Christopher \"Pulp Fiction' Walken, John 1984' Hurt, Brian \"Gordon's Alive' Blessed and David 'U.N.C.L.E.' McCallum, plus about 500 extras have been employed as well as numerous stunt men. EA's press man, David Wilson, assures us that it will look much, much better than Wing Commander 3 because \"...even in a year the technology has really moved on, certainly the video compression's now a lot better. In WC 3 all the actors were filmed against a green screen, whereas with The Darkening we've built 30 different sets and can now use various cinematic techniques like camera zooming and panning.\" The script's been penned by a true sci-fi professional, Diane Dwayne whose previous credits include episodes of Star Trek the Next Generation and the basic plot involves your hero, played by Clive Owen, waking up in a futuristic world and suffering from amnesia with no one too happy to see you, in fact they all want to kill you. With Wing Commander 4 currently being filmed in Hollywood EA are keeping the acting population well and truly employed. (ULTRA UU DUNKING MONSTER MUNCHIN' MINDSCAPE More news from the secretive lair of Nintendo's Ultra 64 as Mindscape start work on one of the Ultra's first sport sim projects. Well, it's kind of a sports sim, as Monster Dunk will be loosely based on the slammin' world of basketball. We say \"loosely' as the stars of the court are all going to be monsters! Sounds bizarre, but if you look at the size of some of the blokes that 'play' the sport then 'monster' is a pretty apt description. Full lowdown as soon as poss. Origin's interactive movie game The Darkening starts to take shape at Pinewood studios. 10 "


"23:17 you're you dont have VOUC a bank account and you can't drive wonder it's only your mum who picks you up atn You see her across a crowded room. YOUR EYES MEET and you know she's the one. The one person you didn't want to be seen with this evening: your mother waving her car keys. Dear oh dear. If only you'd opened that LLOYDS BANK HEADWAY ACCOUNT. You'd have got a CASHPOINT CARD, 50% off your first driving lesson and  off the others when you pay for 12\". You'd also have been quids in for discount vouchers and special offers from TOP SHOP and a whole host of other places. Well, FEAR NOT, for help is at hand. To rectify this situation simply FREEPHONE 0800 887 888, fill in the FREEPOST coupon below or pop into your local branch. It's just the sort of lift you could use. Please use BLOCK CAPITALS name: phone no: date of birth: address: postcode: HVG 1 The Headway Account is for 11-18year olds still at School. Please send to: Lloyds Bank Plc, Freepost CV2870, Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwickshire, CV37 9BR \"To be eligible for the driving lessons offer you to get 17 or over. If you ever will you brents siture before scelying you Do Card. Roy is a registered tror of Lloyds Bork Plt. Costoint is tror of Loves Bank Plc. Lloyds for Pl is a meter of the Banking Our Schere, and a sigratory to the Code of Borking Practice. Lloyd Bank Plc, 71 L ord Street, London ECS "


"NEWS CVG NEWS connected A ZONE IN THE CANNIBAL DARK LECTURE BONUS In a further attempt to lure customers into the 32-bit world of Sony gaming a new cannibalised version of the much lauded machine has gone on sale in Japan. The SCPH 3000 was launched in late July and has had several non-essential components removed to achieve a  price equivalent. Gamers shouldn't be concerned as machine speed and all things graphical and gamey are not impaired. Atari's virtual reality helmet continues to show the potential required to remove the thorn from the ailing cat's paw with news that Virtuality's Zone Hunter is to be converted. Zone Hunter is a Doom-style shoot-'em-up (reviewed in Videodrome last ish) that asks you to clear levels of a 21st century city against the clock while fending off all manner of nasties. Leicester-based Virtuality are handling the conversion for Atari and if the Jag version plays or looks anything like the excellent Virtuality arcade version then it could be just the saucer of milk Atari's tomcat needs. The new PlayStation's exactly the same all that's missing are a few of the video outputs. UM SAVER BELI It's a Doom fest again folks. Following on from the release of the impressive Ultimate Doom Collection (reviewed within the glossy pages of this ish) comes the Doom Il Screen Saver. Not content with infesting every single format known to gameskind, publishers GT Interactive are intent on all manner of demons and nasties crawling all over your desktop. Ah, well whatever next? A Dragon 32 version or maybe even a Speccy Doom. MISSING FOR JAG K NAMCO IN WORLD OF THEIR OWN Yes, it's the JagLink which enables you to link two machines and go head-to-head with Doom. Jag owners can now take their explorations within the sinister labyrinths that call themselves Doom a tentative step further courtesy of Atari's latest gizmo, the JagLink. For .99 the JagLink allows two machines to go head-tohead and play Doom. At the moment the only other title that has the ability to use the JagLink is Club Drive (can't have everything can we), but Atari America apparently have a number of other projects that will utilise the technology. Atari are also launching their four-player adaptor which also rocks in at .99, that is unless you invest in a copy of Atari's two-on-two basketball title White Men Can't Jump, then it comes bundled absolutely free. Although the opening date on the Namco theme park has not yet been finalised, work on their Leicester Square based unit is progressing well. Rumours are rife that Namco are investing a substantial amount of cash to create an extremely palatial gaming environment. CVG went on a sneaky spy-type mission in search of marble columns and Sistine Chapel-style ceilings. We didn't find any, but we did see some workman's arse and a particularly splintery piece of wood. Ah, the glamour of the games industry. STRUCTION WONDERPARE Aresented by namco CONVERSION INTO INDOOR THEME Geel Wiadill Street, La NAMCO OPERATIONS EUROPE LIM Project design and ma n 12 "


"NEWS CVG STATION AND THE AQUANAUTS CVG SAYS... CLASH Hey, whoever said games can't be educational better think again. The Aquanaut's Holiday is a 3D exploration game which asks you to create underwater ecologies and other big words concerned with the ecosystems. Information is limited as to exactly what occurs, but there's not a harpoon or batter mix in sight and the news is that it's putting bums round consoles all over Japan. KYLIE KICKS ASS ON CONSOLE It's nice to see Sega flexing its marketing muscle again just like the old 16-bit war with Nintendo. Stunts like the Virtua Fighter apparition give the industry that touch of glamour and panache that's been sadly lacking for the last couple of years. Let's hope Sony and Sega have plenty more tricks up their texture-mapped sleeves. JEAN-CLAUDE VAN DAMME RAUL JULIA RENT BOY Acclaim have announced that they are the lucky blighters that will be publishing the home versions of Capcom's coin-op hit Street Fighter: The Movie. The deal will see Jean Claude Van Damme and Kylie performing death moves on Saturn, PlayStation and PC CDRom systems. While a date for release hasn't been even thought of, rest assured just like the coin-op, you'll hear about it here first. The idea's great for gamers and could well be the undoing of the artificially inflated prices of games that's everyone's been suffering. The question is though, will you need mags anymore when you can rent games without having to risk all that cash on a dodgy title. Our guess is that quite a few titles will either have to change their format or face a paper pulp death. FICHIER. PRICE JUST JUST THE TICKET FOR PLATFORM Team 17 have added their name to the list of software companies to establish a presence on the Internet. The site contains hints, tips, demos and generally everything you wanted to know about the Teamies and their products. Surfers can wax their boards and hang-ten all the way to http://www.team 17.com/ It's great to see that the PlayStation has sold a million units in Japan and that the price has tumbled further as a direct result. With a  price assault Sony are putting great pressure on arch-rivals Sega. Sega have proved themselves man enough for any contest and this can only be good news for you lot out there, which in turn is good for us. All those of you surfing the Net out there will be pleased to hear about Team 17's new web site which will allow you to get help and info on all their games. 13 "


"CG  ) COVER STORY TEKKENZ Of all the Next Generation games we've seen, none has impressed us more than Namco's Tekken and as if that wasn't enough they're already lining up a sequel! 14 "


"COVER STORY amco's R&D department must have been working over time lately. As well as producing some of the leading coin-op and PlayStation games, they've also undertaken the mighty task of improving Tekken the game we rate as one of the best beat-'em-ups ever written! These shots are taken from a development version of the coin-op, so you can expect the finished version to look even better. Don't hold your breath for the PlayStation conversion, though, as that isn't even due for release in Japan until March next year. Still, that's hardly a major problem considering how totally fab the original Tekken is, and that you'll be able to pick it up officially real soon. As before, the game will be appearing in the arcades first, so you won't even have to own a PlayStation to find out how good it really is. With Namco's excellent track record of PlayStation conversions, there's no worries about the conversion being anything less than perfect. TUTE THE NEW STUFF Graphics There isn't much that could be done to improve Tekken's superb animation, so for the sequel the artists have concentrated on making the characters far more lifelike and detailed. The backdrops have also been improved, with many new ones being featured Characters Kazuya, the overall winner of the first Tekken tournament has been dropped and three new player characters have been added. One of these is Heihachi, the boss from the first game and the bloke you've just seen on our cover. The two new kids are Lei, a master of Chinese fist-fighting and Jun, a young lass who specialises in joint-snapping Aikido moves. Both look really ace and promise to add even more depth to the playability COMING SOON-OFFICIAL PLAYSTATION TEKKEN NAMCO Moves Most of Tekken's moves have now been radically altered to further improve the gameplay. More rising attacks will be featured, including one which lets your character get up and counterattack almost straight away, and others to roll out of the way of attacks. This is, in our opinion, by far and away the best fighting game available on any system, with the import version scoring a whopping 97%! Make sure this is one of the first PlayStation games you buy. Combos Tekken's incredible 10-hit combos have also been improved on, now they can be varied as you execute them. Throws also come into these increasing their overall damage potential. 15 "


"Out on the 15th of every month XARA STUDIO it's the world's fastest graphics package PC REVIE THE COMPLETE GUIDE TO PC LEISURE AUGUST 1995  .95 CD Edition Music Lives! Unleash the musical power of your PC...and create your own brilliant demos EVERY That man on the shag pile's back major new product  Magic Carpet 2 \"Mine's a pint»down the Virtual pub.. IF YOUR CD-ROM IS MISSING, CONSULT YOUR NEWSAGENT EXCLUSIVE Round up of the fastest and cheapest 6-speed drives See p18 for your CD guide! Don't miss it!! "


"INTRO PAGE CVG Things are really beginning to hot up. We may not have seen the death of 16-bit yet, but when you take at look at this lineup of hot new-wave software, you'll never want to touch a SNES or Mega Drive again! THE NEXT GENERATION 18 Virtug Fighter 2 Saturn Check out all the latest shots from Sega's wonder combat game! The first of many platfomers for Sony's machine, but this one does look pretty. 38 The Need For Speed PC CD-ROM Remember this on 3DO? Well now it's en route to the PC! 22 Fade To Black PC CD-ROM Delphine's awesome follow-up to Flashback. It's 3D and it's mindblowing! 24 Syndicate Wars PlayStation We probe behind the scenes at Bullfrog to check out one of the most impressive PlayStation games currently being developed: their new isometric strategy shoot-'em-up. 40 Captain Quazer 3DO A shoot-'em-up that's a cross between Earth worm Jim and Zombies Ate My Neighbours. 53 Ace Combat PlayStation The Namco bandwagon continues to roll on as the produce yet another stirling PSX title. 26 Magic Carpet 2 PC CD-ROM As if Magic Carpet on Saturn wasn't enough, we also preview the sequel which is due to hit the PC later this year. 46 Shin Shinobi Den Saturn At bloody last. We've only been waiting for, like, ever for this game. Has it been worth it? 26 Theme Park Saturn Bullfrog's theme park sim, and a whole load of other Next Gen 'Frog releases. 28 Actua Golf PlayStation World exclusive preview of Gremlin's beautiful golfing extension to their Actua Sports series. 48 Ultimate Doom PC CD-ROM Would you believe it? Even more Doom, and it's not even Doom 2! 51 Zhodnost 3DO If you liked the quiz show Twisted then you'll like this, probably. 52 Action Soccer PC CD-ROM Ubisoft enter the footie arena on the PC. 54 Terminal Velocity PC CD-ROM US Gold come good in a Star Wars stylee polgonised shoot-'em-up blaster. 32 Jag Special We take a look at the best of the upcoming titles from the Atari stable. 35 Daedalus Encounter 3DO An interactive movie affair starring Wayne's World and True Lies star Tia Carerra. 36 Rayman PlayStation 54 Wipeout PlayStation First review anywhere of Psygnosis' gobsmacking race-sim. snosis\" gob. exclusive "


"PREVIEW CVG and Possibly the greatest fighting game ever is up for possibly the best conversion ever. virtua fighter2 VIRTUA FIGHTER 2 Developed by.......... Released by:............Sega Out.....Sept/Oct (Japan) 457 complete No other versions planned Arcade version rampant I REMEMBER WHEN the first Virtua Fighter came out in the arcades. Everyone had seen pictures of it, but no-one really believed that it would move in true 3D. The general consensus of opinion was that it'd be a regular side-on view beat\"em-up with polygon characters. That's what a massive leap forward it was at the time (not all that long ago), and now here we are playing it at home on the Saturn. And whilst Virtua Fighter 2 didn't quite generate the same level of disbelief and wonderment, the texture mapping represented another advance towards an imagined future of real-time 3D Virtual Reality life experiences. And it played a lot better than the original too. Now, just to illustrate the scary super-speed at which technology is advancing, Virtua Fighter 2 for the Saturn is nearing completion. Progress had been held up by the team reworking VF1 for the American and European markets, but it's back in full swing and before you know it we'll all be acting like drunken baldies in the street (especially Mark, who does that anyway). 18 "


"PREVIEW CVG SO HOW'S IT LOOKING? So far the only shots of Virtua Fighter 2 to hit this country have been from the Pai demo shown in Japan at Easter. This demo was produced with a brand new polygon-loving Saturn operating system designed to allow even inexperienced producers to program ace 3D. However, the actual conversion is being done on the old-style Saturn OS, as was the prequel. While the in-game Virtua Fighters are constructed of fewer polygons than their arcade relatives there isn't really a noticeable difference, thanks to the wonders of texture mapping. In fact, the texture mapping has been refined to look even better than the old demo, just to mask any of those nasty rough edges. SEGA DULULUGIN Sega Europe reckon we could be playing this officially as soon as Christmas. We'll give 'em a big snog if they're right. Most of the characters have now been drawn. THE FASTEST DRAWING IN THE WEST One of the biggest worries about Virtua Fighter 2 was that the Saturn might not be able to shift two large, polygon-heavy and texture-mapped characters around at the same speed as the coin-op. But hold that call to the Samaritans right now, because the latest Saturn demo shown in Japan was moving at a blinding 60 frames per second exactly the same speed as the arcade. Especially impressive given that this features two semi-controllable characters, full background, and even music! LUMU ! LIU Samens 19 "


"PREVIEW THAT 'DIFFICULT SECOND GAME The wire-frame skeletons of the characters have been constructed in the same way as the arcade graphics, so the movements should be accurately converted, although the programmers have admitted having some difficulty with drunken codger Shun and pointy fingered Lion the two most complexly animated protagonists. While most of the VF characters were designed using the same wire-frame skeleton developed for Virtua Fighter 1 and simply updated for the sequel, both Shun and Lion have completely different (and highly distinctive) styles of movement. Virtua fans would easily notice if their moves were translated on to the old-school Virtua skeleton, so AM2 are busily slaving away to ensure that their movements remain faithful to the originals so there won't be room for complaints. UURUUU ! 60 frames a second. Wow, that's fast! SE LAE IN THE FAMILY WAY Aah, look at this a touching, scene. Lau and Pai, father and daughter, united together in Virtua action. Beating each other's faces in. Still, that's inter-familial relationships for you. Pai probably hadn't done the washing-up, or she's stayed out all night with some long-haired no-good Judo expert. Anyway, the point is that these shots demonstrate just how far Virtua Fighter 2 has advanced, developmentwise. The texture mapping is even better than that exhibited by Virtua Remix, which is saying something, and the animation (which we obviously, can't demonstrate) is nothing short of stunning. MY GOD! IT'S NOT OVER YET! Not content with having come up with possibly the best fighting game ever, AM2 are hard at work on a sequel to the sequel of Virtua Fighter. Provisionally entitled Virtua Fighter 3 (which is pretty logical when you think about it) it's still at a very early stage of development. The version Sega Japan have in their grasp is really just an updated Virtua Fighter 2 with new moves and a supposedly more instinctive control system. The final version should feature four new characters (no details yet) and even further improved graphics although Sega are remaining tight-lipped regarding what exact enhancements are in the pipeline. 20 "


"The NEXT GENERATION of gaming MAGAZINES REPLAY OS:00.0 00:S).s BEHT BY 02 CHAU I San LEVEL= CREDITS 26 OVERLOAD Discover the FACTS on 1st SEPTEMBER "


"PREVIEW CVG Knocking the French is one of our favourite passtimes, which means it's bloody irritating when they do something this good so we can't take the piss. Flipping bunch of garlic-bashers. Fade To Black FADE TO BLACK Developed by: ......Delphine Released by...............EA Out ...........September '95 IN THE COMPUTER games business the French are famous for coming up with stylish, highly illogical adventure games. Once in a while they forsake their own brand of humour (which isn't funny) for 98% of creation and produce a truly amazing game. And that's precisely what's happened here with Delphine's Fade to Black Delphine have one of the best track records of any French software house. Everyone remembers their stunning adventure Another World and with this, the follow-up to their award-winning Flashback, they look as though they've firmly established themselves as the top frogs in the pond. The story continues from where Flashback left off. You've escaped from the Morphs, only to find that while you've been away they've gone and captured the Earth. To make things 'worse, they've intercepted your ship and imprisoned you on their moonbase of Doom. The real difference between this and Flashback is the graphics. Whereas the first game used some superb 2D visuals, Fade To Black is a pure 3D graphics-fest which adds a completely new dimension to the gameplay. And best of all, Delphine are looking to convert the game to the PlayStation. We'll bring you more news on that when we get it. 851. complete PlayStation version planned No other versions available PC CD-ROM Looks more than a bit different to Flashback, eh? Didn't I see you in Star Wars? Aieee, you're not original... GULER DATI The yellow thing in the corner is your status panel. Yes, sir, I think you are going to die horribly. 22 "


"PREVIEW THE NEXT DIMENSION What distances Fade To Black from its predecessor, is that Delphine have embraced the wonderful world of 3D graphics. Unlike the Alone In The Dark series which used fixed camera views, FTB uses a floating view-point which adjusts to give you the best view of your character and his environment. THE ALIENS ARE COMING (PHNARG) As well as the Morphs, Fade To Black is populated with plenty of different robots and alien types all of which are out to get you. I don't know, the only alien who really deserved to die was ET, and where's he now? 23 "


"FEATURE A LOAD * * Bullfrog have been responsible for some of the most groundbreaking product to emerge on home computers. They practically invented the god-game with Populous and changed the face of flight-sims with Magic Carpet. The list goes on, and on, but console owners have largely missed out mainly through lack of machine power. The new consoles are changing all that and like the proverbial bull to a red rag the Froggies are responding. Ever eager to find out what's afoot in the games pond CVG donned its facemask to see what Bullfrog are about to err, spawn. * * SE Syndicate Wars SYNDICATE WARS Developed by:......BULLFROG Released by...BULLFROG f you thought Syndicate was a good game, be prepared to have your socks truly blown off by Syndicate Wars. Time has marched on a century in the sequel and the Syndicate world has evolved further into the realms of Blade Runner. Like the first instalment the action centres around an agent who you send on missions in an effort to destabilise enemy powers and gener ally make a nuisance of yourself. Once in a city you'll be able to completely rotate the play area and, unlike the first Syndicate, you'll be able to destroy anything. So, if your feeling completely vindictive you can practically raise a city to the ground. The cities themselves already look pretty nifty and, aside from the giant mutant spider thingies, there'll be 3D vehicles and a kind of hover-rail system to transport the population around. ...JANUARY '96 407. complete No other versions planned No other versions available PLAYSTATION * * 24 "


"FEATURE OF BULL Indestructibles INDESTRUCTIBLES Developed by....BULLFROG ot too much is known about this 3D extravaganza except that it'll appear on PC first and then be converted to the PlayStation and the Saturn. Work really is in that Indestructibles should be like a mixture of strategy and management blended with superhero type action. Sounds too cool to be true at the moment, but it couldn't be in more capable hands. Released by:..EA/BULLFROG its infancy at the moment, but the basic idea makes it sound like the game we've all being waiting for. Your task is to create and control a team of four superheroes, who, having been given their superpowers, must defend a comic book stylee city against all manner of criminals. First impressions give us the feeling Mid '96 20% complete Playstation and Saturn versions planned No other versions available PC CD-ROM IT'S AN, AD, AD, AD, AD WORLD Syndicate Wars will feature stunning ad hoardings like the giant Japanese girl in Blade Runner. They'll all feature proper movement even if you rotate around them and will get louder as your agent gets closer to them. They look amazing and will add that extra touch of atmosphere. 25 "


"FEATURE Magic carpet 2 stas MAGIC CARPET 2 Developed by......BULLFROG Released by: EA/BULLFROG his is one of the few products not actually listed as being converted for the consoles yet, but as Magic Carpet is in its conversion infancy (look out for a full work in progress in coming months and a Christmas release on PlayStation and Saturn alike) there's every chance that this second foray into the woolly world of shag-pile flying should progress further than the underlay Magic Carpet 2 looks an absolute feast of beautiful high-speed texturemapped graphics and explosive action. Expect more plot, more sub-missions and a whole lot more play interwoven into the fabric of this carpet. Out...........September -95 stage. MC2 seats you on the fastest rug in the unknown world, defeating fellow wizards, destroying all-manner of mythical beasts and generally making a pest of yourself in the name of good. And, unlike titles like Panzer Dragoon there's absolutely no restrictions as to where you can fling your rug. The static shots seen here look impressive, but when it's up and running 80% complete Playstation and Saturn versions possible No other versions available PC CD-ROM HEAD HONCHO New bosses and monsters are also featured in MC2. This massive Hydra (working name) has loads of heads and to kill it you've got to remove each and every one of them before it sprouts new ones. LIGHTER SHADE OF PALE MC2 will feature night time levels which allow Bullfrog to use a new lighting system which illuminates specific areas. For example, this fire based spell briefly lights the ground. CARPET REFIT One of the main differences between Magic Carpet 2 and its much trodden older brother is the cavern levels. These twisty turning, underground labyrinths should add extra depth and dimension to play. Bullfrog have also uprated the spell-casting system. DUNGEON HEEPER Developed by:.....BULLFROG Released by: EA/BULLFROG Out ................EARLY '96 Dungeon Keeper 20% complete Expect news of Playstation and Saturn versions No other versions available PC CD-ROM ere's a novel idea, instead of taking on the role of the chinless chuffers that romp around a 3D dungeon inhabited by deranged maniac's intent on setting puzzles for the aforementioned chuffers, you control all the nasty characters that hang around in gloomy places. As 'dungeon master' your job will be to keep the dungeon in good order and keep those pesky goody-goodies out while keeping balance and order among the hordes that hang around your labyrinths. Although how the cockroaches will argue the toss with the big firebreathing dragon is anybodies' guess. All the texture-mapping and light-sourcing will be in there and you'll be able to view first-person (or cockroach) and top view. It sounds refreshing and looks like being a big hit with RPG lovers — especially those who want to join the dark side. 26 "


"FEATURE GET ON, GET ON, GET ON, GET ON, GET ON MY GROOVY TRAIN The Saturn version will also boast all the animated ride sections that the 3DO and PC versions had. Which means you can sit back and enjoy your rides in the luxury of glorious sick-tastic 3D. Theme Park THEME PARH Developed by.......BULLFROG Released by:..ER/BULLFROG Out................SEPTEMBER '95 hat can be said of Theme Park that hasn't been said already. It's sold in big numbers on whatever format its been ported onto and has thrilled gamers the world over. The name of the game is to plan and construct your own little Alton Towers and keep all those greedy punters stuffed full of ice-cream and burgers while maintaining their thrill levels by researching new rides. The main difference with the Saturn version is the speed at which you can play, an enhanced colour pallet and some natty sound effects which is something that you could never say about the Mega Drive. You'll also be able to save your games to Sega's funky save game cart and take 'em round to impress your Saturnowning mates' houses, \"COS it's a great game. 90% complete PlayStation versions planned PC, Jaguar, Amiga. Mega Drive versions available Hi Octane let's hope Sega get their 32-bit botties into gear so y our Saturn-owning mates can all get the best from HI-OCTANE Developed by...BULLFROG Released by...EA/BULLFROG ... October '95 75% complete his futuristic arcadestyle racer is a kind of Mad Max on trax type affair where all of the cars, which float like Luke Skywalker's Landspeeder, battle it out. Winning's the order of the day, although there's no guarantee you'll finish as casualties are high. The closest rival to Hi Octane for the Saturn is the very average Gran Chaser. And, while they're both futuristic racers, Hi Octane will leave Gran Chaser hovering on the start grid. The PC version featured an eight-player linkup and Bullfrog assured us that there's no reason why the Saturn version couldn't have the same feature, but as yet Sega have said nothing about whether a link-up cable is to be launched. Ah well, PlayStation version planned PC CD-ROM version available SATURN TRAX OF MY TEARS The Saturn version should come with six courses. The simpler ones will be bog-standard ovals and loops whereas the harder ones should feature dead-ends, jumps and bizarre, forks which will lead you up dead ends. 21 "


"PREVIEW ACTUA GOLF CVG PREVIEW LATEST Wow, a golf game that not only looks the bog's dollocks, but plays really well and it's coming to a PlayStation near you gert soon and there isn't a Tarby in sight... Developed by: .....In-House Released by.........Gremlin Out...........October '95 75% complete CO-ROM version planned No other version available PLAYSTATION GOLF GAMES YOU'D THINK, had been done to death: from photorealistic ones through to comedy crazy-golf type titles. Anyway, just when you thought the world could sur vive without another Pringlejumpered-pitch-'n' putt frenzy, Gremlin go and design the first one for the PlayStation. A dangerous move by all accounts. You can see the headlines: hot new 32-bit machine gets dullaim-piece-ofmetal-at-planetsimulator! What could make this one different though, is that it could be the best looking, and playing golf game ever, because Gremlin have used the same motion capturing techniques used in their other PlayStation attraction, Actua Soccer. This system allowed real golfers' movements and swings to be replicated exactly, giving the ultimate in realism. The screenshots here don't really show off the slick way the texture-mapped courses rush by as the various cameras track the ball, or show off the commentary or interchangeable weather. Also included will be all the different golf matches like Skins and Matchplay, a pro tour which will allow you to develop your game as you progress and even custom rules like Gimmies and Mulligans (what ever they are). All in all Actua Golf looks like it's going to be an extremely sexy first golf title for the PlayStation And, while it'll never improve your real game (that is unless someone develactua le STRAIGHT DOWN THE MIDDLE 1 DRIVER DRAU 'In Actua golf you'll also be able to walk through each hole and check out exactly what obstacles lie ahead. It's also a perfect opportunity to indulge in an 'actua walk' and smell the 'actua' country air. Marvellous! 28 "


"PREVIEW PREVEN CVG I THINK WE'LL LOOK THROUGH THE... SOUARE WINDOW Gremlin's golfing extravaganza will allow you to view your shot from up to 10 different 'actual cameras with up to three views at one time on the screen. opes a system where you plug your club into a PlayStation), it might keep you out of the 19th. TRAIGHT SCHWING! Gremlin's homage to golf uses the familiar power-bar technique to thwack your little round lump of plastic encased rubber. But, unlike all other outdated golf titles, you can view your swing from any distance or angle you desire. Ah, golfing heaven and such delightful jerseys. "


"PREVIEW LOADED Developed by... INHOUSE Released by.........GREMLIN HELLVIS LIVES This is FUB an intergalactic Elvis impersonator and owner of a belly with a black hole in it (note the lack of fluff). Check out that natty fat Elvis seventies 'Vegas tour'. Ahem, on a cold and loneley... ah, forget it. Out.............. October 95 50% complete No other versions planned No other versions available PLAYSTATION Hurrah! A 32-bit game with lots of blood, big guns and even more blood. In fact Gremlin's latest gore-'em-up's gonna have more blood in it than a greedy leach gorging on a fat bloke's belly. loaded HEY, GAMES ARE BACK and they're sexy, it's official. After the 16-bit whoosh came to an end the games weather went decidedly inclement, in fact it pissed it down for two years with hardly a ray of jolly games sunshine to be seen. But hey, those days are gone and we're about to have a games heatwave. A perfect example is Gremlin's Loaded, and no it's not a mag for people who need stimulation reading about other people's hellraising because they're too crap to do their own. It's a new top-down-Doommeets-Gauntletwith-smart-FXmother-of-allblasters. This is definitely Next Generation stuff with some cool visuals, a soundtrack that'll probably be done by Pop Will Eat Itself and artwork by Dredd artist Greg Staples. The plot, apart from trying to kill everybody, will be to bust one of seven mentally insecure characters out of prison and err, kill everybody, and then find the evil Elvis Impersonator and err, kill him. When it's complete Loaded will have 12 levels, a PlayStation link-up option and, while these shots don't really show off the gore, kids, promise you blood, blood and more blood. And all of it's in glorious 32bit technicolour. Faster pussycat, kill, kill. Well that's the general idea I think you'll find, and killing in 32-bit is so much more fun than 16-bit. Dredd artist, Greg Staples is responsible for the look of the game. 30 "


"PlayStation WHEN YOU OPEN YOUR MIND TO THE POWER OF PLAYSTATION, IT'S HARD TO PUT THE LID BACK ON. SONY COMPUTER ENTERTAINMENT "


"CVG PREVIEWS Atari have been criticised for not exactly flooding the Jaguar software market, but it would appear they've had a change of heart and decided to release billions of the bleeders. So allow us to present the first of our Jag preview round-ups... One & Groovy 1350 DEFENDER 2000 NOT CONTENT with updating the classic Tempest, Atari have now turned their attentions to another of their ancient wonders. Defender is the name of the game, although most of our readers are probably too young to have been born when it was first released back in 27AD. And now it's back in a big way, thanks to mad-as-aloony llama fanatic Jeff Minter. The finished game will feature three play modes. The first is regular primitive-looking Defender, the second features strobing and pulsating psychedelic graphics guaranteed to a) do your eyes in and b) make your parents throw you out of the house for being a druggie. The third play mode (which isn't done yet) is the one everyone's excited by. It has utterly revamped graphics, runs faster and is generally ace and goes on forever. Once again, we'll have a full review as soon as it's finished. BREAKOUT 2000 BREAKOUT 2000 IF YOU'RE A follower of fashion and have a strange retro-obsession at the moment Atari have even more good news Breakout, that oldest of ancient games, is also set for a 90s re-invention. In a Virtuastylee Atari are adding screen depth and an amazing three whole dimensions to the action, as well as brick stacking, powerups and a competitive simultaneous twoplayer mode. Bear in mind that the graphics shown in these shots are set to change quite considerably, so they'll look a lot less 16-bitty. The \"back\" of the screen will also curve upwards to provide a strange antigravity playfield at the top of the monitor, so we're told. Anyway, as old gaming grandads ourselves we're looking forward to this one like excited little puppy dogs in a pet store window upon sighting a small boy with a pocketful of cash. 32 "


"PREVIEWS Cat DAVID BOWIE fans will obviously get the album title connection here, and they'll probably write into us about it as well because David Bowie fans are such pedantic old bores. Anyway, it's got stuff all to do with the lanky famous Lord's Prayerreciting bloke, Black Ice/White Noise is, in fact, an action adventure RPG which mixes elements of puzzling, Doom-style exploration and an isometric-view running about sort of thing which is vaguely reminiscent of MetalHead on 32X with a person instead of a big robot. There's enough imagination on display in the early version we've seen to pique our curiosity, and we're certainly wanting to get a review in v. soon. BLACK ICE/WHITE NOISE VARUNA'S FORCES DO GAMES DESIGNERS the world over are reportedly very jealous of Veruna, because his Forces are widely acknowledged as being a font of gaming genius. Or somesuch similar. Already looking favourably comparable to the PC version, this is a futuristic war death strategy/action game with a healthy injection of mass violence. And that's about all we can tell you about it as yet, because it's still rather early on in development. Should be wicked, though. BATTLEMORPH IT'S THE SEQUEL to Cybermorph and... hey! Come back! Let's not get judgmental, as Battlemorph looks miles better than the rather disappointing prequel. The graphics engine has been completely revamped to get a smoother sense of movement and more responsive and natural controls. Well, that's the idea, anyway, and so far those wily Jag types seem to be on the right track. It's still too early to tell how the finished game will play, but given the grrr POWER of the Jag CD it should be pretty decent. US! BATTLEMORPH "


"SUBSCRIBE TO VIDEO GAMES AND for the price of SAVE ! That's right! No more hiking down to the shops in driving rain to find your local newsie's run out of CVGs. No, you could be basking in the warm glow of our very latest issue delivered to your door before it even hits the stores! I wish to subscripe to Computer & video Games and I enclose a cheque/postal order made payable to Emap Images Ltd for ... UK (Offer Code: B14) Overseas surface Air Europe Air Zone 1 Air Zone 2 Eire : .50 : .00 : .40 : .50 : .20 : .00 Source Code : 1B19 What's more, subscribe now and you'll get 12 issues for the price of 10! We're practically giving them away! Who knows, if enough of you subscribe we could be even cheaper. Yes, we're not above bribing people. It works for us, and it'll work for you as existing subscribers know with CVG you're always ahead of the game. NAME: ........ ADDRESS:... POSTCODE: ........ SIGNED: ......... ...... (Parent or guardians signature if under 18 years) All subscriptions will be processed as quickly as possible, but you should allow 28 days for the order to be processed and expect to receive the first avalible issue after that. To take out a subscription to Computer & Video Games complete the form and send with payment to : Computer & Video Games Subs Dept, Tower Publishing, Tower House, Sovereign Park, Lathkill Street, Market Harbour, Leicester, LE 16 9EF. (or if you want to pay by credit card call our subscriptions hotline on 0858 468888 quoting source and offer codes) Subscriptions guarantee: remember, if you are not completely satisfied with your subscription, you can cancel at any time and get a full refund for any unmailed issues. Tick here if you do not wish to receive any direct mail that Emap Images Ltd feels may be of interest to you. "


"PREVIEW PREVIEW CVG There you are, stranded in deep space with Tia Carrere and all you are is a brain in a box. Oh, the irony of it... daedalusas encounter DAEDALUS ENCOUNTER Developed by Mathedeus Released by... Virgin Out.. . September 95 857 complete PC-CO ROM version available Saturn and PSX planned IN FACT THE BRAIN in a box bit probably serves you right for being dumb enough to get yourself blown up in the closing hours of an interstellar war. Anyway, as punishment for your sins you've been rescued by your former crewmates young Ms Carrere and some bloke who looks like Mr Pink out of Reservoir dogs. All this translates into a rollicking full-motion video adventure set across a whopping four CDs (that's around 2500 megabytes of information, fact fans). So as you can imagine it's rather on the large size. This make for some brilliant visuals which are displayed superbly well considering it runs without an FMV board. The gameplay itself is a mixture of puzzle and adventure with the occasional blob of high drama thrown in to keep you on your toes. Much of the game is very much sit back and watch, but the production designers have done a superb job of matting the live action in with computer generated images and a strong plot to produce which, on the surface, seems like possibly the most entertaining game of its type. Does it work? Find out next ish. BABES IN THE HOOD The programmers must have to admit that the only reason they got Tia Carrere to star in this game wasn't because of her acting talents, or that she's particularly cheap these days. Oh no, it's probably got a lot more to do with a massive build up of testosterone from sitting in front of a monitor for 18 hours a day. Anyway, they've kept her covered-up for the entire game so we're probably wrong. 35 "


"PREVIEW RAYMAN Developed by: ........Ubisoft Released by: ...Ubisoft Out........ October 95 95% complete UbiSoft goes all soft and cutesy for their first foray into the world of the PlayStation platform games... Saturn and Jaquar versions planned No other versions available PLAYSTATION PlayStation WHO SAID THE PLATFORM GAME WAS DEAD? Well the 16-bit platform romps are certainly on their last legs. I mean with our Next Generation consoles it's difficult to muster much enthusiasm for our somewhat long-inthe-tooth Super Nintendoes and Mega Drives, it's a bit like coming home for your tea after a long hot summer's day (rare I know) only to be offered Iceland budget vanilla as your pudding rather than one of those fancy Hagen Dazs or Ben and Jerry's affairs. Well those Frenchies Ubisoft haven't quite gone into ice cream manufacture, but they're quick to translate their Jaguar platformer Rayman to the Sony wonder machine. Looking like a long lost cousin of Sega's platform star of yesteryear (well last year actually), Dynamite Headdy, UbiSoft's latest hero is looking mighty pretty in 32-bit, in fact the whole game's look is particularly gorgesome and shares a similar colour palette to Astal on the Saturn which we reviewed a couple of issues back. Rayman is conventional in its for mat, but where it's going to probably push some gaming barriers back is in its graphical style, the smoothness of the gameplay and the cheeky little character touches à la Earthworm Jim; and we'll be telling you all about it in the next couple of months. rayman Tot in a 36 LOADING "


"PREVIEW PREVIEW CVG IT'S A WONDERFUL WORLD Most platform games are lucky in that there is more than one world, and to reach another world all that is required is to kill a few n'er-do-wells, jump from one platform to another and collect a few objects, whereas man has only one world and to get to another he needs several thousand years of evolution and several million dollars worth of NASA research. A The Dream Forest. Band Land BIG BIRD What would an end of level be if there wasn't some irksome creature to get in your way, and Rayman is no exception, here our Ray has to get rid of Big Bird and then don him for a small flying section. 37 "


"PREVIEW THE NEED FOR SPEED Developed by...............EA Released by: ............ER Out.............. ..September 90% complete No other versions planned? 300 version available ( PC CD-ROM the need for It was the first' Next Generation car racing game, and The Need for a PC version is finally going to happen... Soeeo WHEN WE FIRST SAW EA'S Need for Speed it was on 3DO (see separate box), and this was pre-Ridge Racer and Daytona USA (on console) and we were, to borrow a phrase from our Scouse brethren 'gobsmacked'. The game's main appeal is not only the digitised cars, the FMV, the spectacular crashes and smokin' wreckages, but that the cars you get to drive are real, proper, bonafido super sports cars. Not some hybrid weird Japanese motor. These are the cars you've always wanted to race round town in, and should you win the Lotto then it could become reality, but if you don't then you'll just have to stick with virtual reality and a copy of Need for Speed on PC. Which, funnily enough, is just what EA have planned. How NFS transcends othere racing games is that the driving is so realistic, and the PC version is said to retain this aspect of the game. All the cars from the 3DO version are going to take part in the racing (that's the Porsche, the Ferrari, the 'Vette, the Dodge Viper et al) and there's going to be five tracks as opposed to the 3DO's three. Other new features include more wheel spins and cars spinning on gravel tracks and up to eight players can race head-to-head if the machines are networked. How EA's contender will perform against the flotilla full of racing games on their way to the PC, we'll have to wait (a couple of months in fact) and see. HELPOIN 54 SPLIT TIME :-00062 THREE DEE OH! Along with FIFA Soccer this must be the game responsible for shifting many a 3DO from the shelves of HMV and Virgin, and the main reason being that it's so darned good and managed to muster a massive CVG Hit! and 93% when we reviewed it in our January issue. 2 13:6222 SPLIVE FUUFU2.5 DE 5 **** Thru Traffic Thru Traffic 14. Bad 38 "


"WOWANITA MALMKVIM tilaan on SARANDE HOOD. ALAUDATLAP L734 BCU WEVE COME UP WITH A BRILLIANT NEW WAY TO GET RID OF BLACKHEADS. "


"PREVIEW CVG PREVIEW IPTION D E JUNY SUSPECT TRANSLATION BEWARE THE SHADOWS IN THS MAZE GOT A GRENADE? THROW IT NOW CAPTAIN QUAZER Developed by: ....STUDIO 300 Released by: .....THE 300 CO. Out ...............OCTOBER 95 We know not where he's from (apart from the imagination of 3DO programmers) but he's here to shoot lots of things on a REAL multiplayer near you soon... 80% complete No other versions planned No other versions available captain quazar THROUGHOUT THE RICH RITES of passage of life, before we become fully fledged adults (ie able to pay tax, gas bills, phone bills, Access bills) there are various ceremonies and rituals we have to go through. Now there are many that are no fun and quite daunting: first day of school, first black eye etc, but no kid gets through to adultdom without having a hero to look up to and to some degree emulate. And invariably they have the monicker of 'captain'. I mean throughout my prepubescent years most of my heroes were captains: Captain Kirk, Captain Marvel, Captain America, Captain Scarlet and of course Captain Peacock. Stop the presses, sound the alarm, etc, etc because a new hero's about to hit our screens (albeit 3DO ones) who takes the guise of Captain Quazar, the eponymous character who stars in Studio 3DO's latest foray into the videogame world. The style of this shooter is very much in the Earthworm Jim mould, where the violence is cartoon like and the animation is superb. But that doesn't mean that you don't have plenty of firepower as you scroll your way, at a threequarter angle, through what could well be a storming release when it hits the 3DO shortly... WOT NO FULL MOTION VIDEO BOXOUT? Yes it would seem that 3DO programmers are getting bored of FMV because on your mission briefings the bloke in the top left corner is not animated, only sort of. That is he moves only about twice a minute, but worry ye not as this does not detract from your enjoyment of the game. 40 "


"SANTA SAHAAN SES REMOVES BLACKHEADS QUICKLY AND GENTLY UNBLOCXS PORES NEW O BLACKOUT OXY BLACKOUT IS LESS DRASTIC THAN A JCB, AND BETTER THAN SQUEEZING, IT'S NEW OXY BLACKOUT AND THERE'S NEVER BEEN ANYTHING LIKE BEFORE. NOW YOU CAN GET RID OF BLACK HEADS QUICKLY AND GENTLY, IF YOU SUFFER WITH NASTY, HEAVY-DUTY ONES OXY BLACKOUT WILL SOON SORT THEM OUT. IF YOU'RE PRONE TO BLOCKED PORES, IT2L UNCLOG THEM, USE IT REGULARLY AND YOU'LL BE ABLE TO DELLARE YOURSELF A BLACKHEAD-FREE ZONE. OXY BLACKOUT WORKS IN TWO EASY STAGES. FIRST YOU PAINT ITS UNIQUE BLACKHEAD-REMOVING HQUID ONTO ANY AREA OF SKIN WHERE You HAVE BLACKHEADS. THEN YOU USE ONE OF THE SPECIAL STICKY TAPES TO LIFT THEM OUT. THAT'S ALL THERE 15 To 11. YOU CAN SEE THE RESULTS IMMEDIATELY BY HOLDING THE TAPE UP TO THE LIGHT. THIS CAN BE DONE IN THE PRIVACY OF YOUR OWN BATHROOM, OR WITH FRIENDS, DEPENDING ON THE KIND OF FRIENDS YOU HAVE. BLACKOUT REMOVES BLACKHEADS QUICKLY AND GENTLY UNBLOCKS PORES NEW OXY AND OXY BLACKOUT ARE TRADEMARKS. "


"REVIEW CVG Even SPEED knih MISSILES 39 GUNS When your cursor goes red hit that missile fire button. MISSION FAILURE MSSILES Re-live that Persian Gulf slaughter ambience with Namco's latest PlayStation hit! errorists are nothing but trouble. Don't believe us? Try living next to a couple of them then. They're forever running up and down stairs slamming doors, playing their stereos too loud, letting their cat crap in your garden and burning leaves when your washing's hanging out. At least, it's probably leaves. And as if that isn't enough, just when you're thinking of doing up the garage or building an extension, they go and annex your house, organise an evil coup and take over the country. Which is pretty much the plot for Ace Combat, in which you play the part of a crack elite mercenary fighter pilot chap paid to free the PLAYSTATION small oil-rich territory with the terrorism problem from the clutches of its new masters. SHOOT-\"EM-UP NAMCO EIMPORT OUT NOW ECOMBAT 1-2 PLAYERS NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED ARCADE VERSION AVAILABLE 42 "


"REVIEW REVIEW CVG BOSS! DE 'PLANE! 11111. SPECIAL BRIEFS DESTROY! AHAHAHAAA! ROUND THE OUTSIDE Now you know what you're doing, it's time to select the 'plane for the job. You start the game with two machines (one of which is pretty rubbish), but you're given the opportunity to buy and sell on the international used warplane market. The 'planes on offer are rated according to their engine power, manoeuvrability, attacking power, armour and stability. The better a fighter is the more it costs. Before each sortie you're treated to a mission briefing. Here a disembodied commander explains your mission (in English), outlines the opposition and highlights your primary targets. If you require more info you can select specific enemy units on the map and find out what they are, how dangerous they are and how much moola you'll get. BOSS! SOME OTHER «PLANES! Your first move should always be to take out the airborne defenses. As you near an enemy it's highlighted by a box on your HUD which outlines it's location, tells you what kind of aircraft it is and the range. Once the nearest target is in range the lockon box flashes red and a 'FIRE MISSILE' message appears. If you don't think the chosen target is the most dangerous, you can always switch the lock to another threat. Now you've dispensed with the air cavalry it's time to make a start on the ground targets. With any sense you'll have stayed at a high altitude to dodge the flak and missile sites on the floor, but now you'll have to descend to a dangerously low level. Keep a close eye on your radar, as it's all too easy to fly over a machine-gun site. If sitting in the cockpit sounds a bit simulation-y for you, take heart. Press the Select button and you switch to an outside view, which makes for more arcadetype gameplay. While the graphics look more impressive it actually makes the job harder because you lose most of the instrument displays. MIG-29 CREDIT PRICE RESULT 9340000 150000 9000 BINGO AME "


"CVG REVIEW REVIEW SCORES SPEED AL GROUP VERDICT. GARY LORD OK, so the two-player mode sucks, which makes a bit of a change really, but the one-player mode more than makes up for it. It's fantastic, fast, frantic and really easy to get into. I reckon you should wait for the official version with English text, though, MARK PATTERSON Look, I'm not a spanner, right? But I do like certain flight sims and while this is pure action and almost nil simulation, it's still completely fantastic mainly because of the huge variety in aircraft and missions. Cor, is there no stopping Namco? kash ALL  SIMON CLAYS Unlike Mark, I am a 'plane spanner. In fact, I'm an eighteen inch adjustable spanner with ratchet attachment. So naturally the little propeller on my head spun ten times as fast when I played this. It's just soooo brilliant N009! ACE COMBAT PANZER LOADSTAR... SPEED GRAPHICS Some amazing backdrops and smooth clipping ANIMATION Die, yes you, go on I've shot you, you're dead. PED Not much animation as such, because it's all static machinery. (MUSIC..... Choose your weapon, men. Use the blob graph to tell how good it Some rather awful cod-metal Japanese guitar wailing F-14 F-15 US $15 SOUND EFFECTS 94 is Lots of big explosions and herds of clear speech. 1 BEN EEN KILL A FRIEND Lonely? In need of companionship? Well Ace Combat's two-player mode could be just the thing to get that special someone to take notice of you. It's split-screen, and it places your 'plane in a confined arena with theirs. The object of this unlimitedammo game is to blow the other player out of the skies, although this is easier said than done. in fact, this option is only really impressive in that it handles the two screens with no noticeable slowdown. The lack of geographical features and the tiny amount of space you're afforded make it a bit of a yawn. GAMEPLAY Depth, action and everything else you cold wish for. LOSE VALUE Not just impressive, but challenging and lengthy too. OVERALL Namco further advance their reputation as top PlayStation types with yet another storming arcade conversion. (VERDICT PLAYSTATION Ace Combat reverses the usual trend by being a bit crap in two-player mode but completely brilliant in one-player. Basically because the one-up game is action central, packed with intelligent hostile targets. The missions get tough early on, but the enormous variety between them gives you the impetus to beat each one if only to see the next. The controls for each \"plane are both instinctive and distinctive, there's as much scope for strategy or straight blasting as you want and, generally, it's completely smart. RAD MISSIES GUNS "


"RETURN FIRE SAVE HE UNFIRE BASAVE Membership Card Sales: 01279 600204 SAVE SAVE Special Reserve S The Discount Club WING CMDR 3 29.99 300 SAVE SAVE  HELL (18) RETURN FIRE SYNDICATE TEMPEST 2000 DOOM THEME PARK 32.99 300 24.99 300 29.99 300 27.99 JAG 45.99 JAG 37.99 JAG SECRETE MANA ENAE SAVE SAVE SAVE MORIA, SAVE SAVE   SAINT'L CRICKET THEME PARK ILLUSION OF TIME MORTAL KOMBAT 2 SECRET OF MANA 33.99 SNES 36.99 SNES 36.99 SNES 29.99 SNES 33.99 SNES ALIEN VS PRED 47.99 JAG TE PGA TOUR GOLF MONTHLY 48-PAGE COLOUR CLUB MAGAZINE CHEATS & ROVES RELEASE SCHEDULE CHARTS REVIEWS MUGE RANGE ALL GENUINE UK PRODUCTS HEAVY DISCOUNT XS SAVERS BONUSES WIN A SONY PLAYSTATION SAVE SAVE SUPER B/MAN 17.99 SNES DAYTONA PGA TOUR GOLF 19.99 SNES 10am to 8pm 7 days a week! 01279 600204 Or Fax 01279 726842 we'll confirm receipt Members only but you can order as you join. Annual UK Membership  Includes 12 issues of the club magazine with  worth of XS Savers. ther PARA 19 USA HECHOS INGINE SAVE  SAVE SAVE SAVE SATS SAVE SAVE   DAYTONA USA VICTORY GOAL 41.99 SAT 34.99 SAT SUPER NES BRIAN LARA THEME PARK 32.99 MD 35.99 MD MEGADRIVE SAVE SAVE  CHAOS ENGINE VENFORCERS 22.99 MD 2 4.99 MD SEGA SATURN STAR WARS MORTAL KOMBAT 2 29.99 32X 43.99 32X CD32 TOP 20 .......41.98 LOST EDENUSIONS . .......22.99 ENCARTALET RESPONER ANSAM_415 D0AWIDOWA (NELAVA BUDE SENES BIKSEIF 24.99 Over 250,000 people have joined Special Reserve and we are the largest computer games club in the world. We also have two very impressive club shops which stock our entire range. SPECIAL RESERVE CLUB SHOPS SUPER NES WITH SOFTWARE MEGADRIVE 2 WITH SEGA SATURN WITH CD32 CRITICAL ZONE PACK FROM ONLY 79.99 SOFTWARE FROM ONLY 69.99 VIRTUA FIGHTER 349.99 WITH 7 GAMES 179.99 10am 'til 8pm 7 DAYS A WEEK! CHELMSFORD, ESSEX SUPER NES MEGADRIVE SATURN CD CD32 TOP 20 43 Broomfield Road. Just around the corner from the bus station. SUPER NES PACKS COME WITH ONE MEGADRIVE PACKS COME WITH TWO SEGA SATURN WITH VIRTUA ALIEN BREED TOWER ASSAULT 19.99 SAWBRIDGEWORTH, HERTS NINTENDO CONTROL PAD SEGA CONTROL PADS FIGHTER AND ONE JOYPAD ...349.99 ALIEN BREED 3D ..............22.49 The Maltings, Station Road. A few miles from the M11, near the train station. (UNLESS OTHERWISE STATED) SUPER NES WITH SEGA RF UNIT FOR SATURN 24.99 ARCADE POOL ................9.99 Items bought in the shops carry a 50p surcharge on the Mail Order prices. STREET FIGHTER TURBO ... ...79.99 MEGADRIVE 2 WITH REQUIRED FOR TV WITH NORMAL RF CORE COMPILATION VOL 2 EURO CLUB SOCCER ...........69.99 INPUT AS SATURN IS SUPPLIED WITH (BANSHEE, SKELETON KREW UNLESS STATED ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT & DELIVERY SUPER NES WITH MARIO ALL STARS PACK ...79.99 MEGADRIVE 2 WITH SCART CONNECTOR AS STANDARD HEIMDALL 2. UNIVERSE) .......21.99 SUPER KICK OFF ..................69.99 SEGA EIGHT BUTTON JOYPAD 19.99 CORE COMPILATION VOL 3 GENUINE SOUND BLASTER PRO SOUND CARD WORTH  SUPER NES WITH FIFA SOCCER (BUBBA 'N STIX, PREMIER GENUINE CREATIVE QUAD SPEED IDE CD ROM DRIVE AND MARIO ALL STARS PACK ...94.99 MEGADRIVE 2 WITH SIX GAMES SEGA VIRTUA STICK .............39.99 CHUCK ROCK 1 & 2) ..... . GENUINE SAMSUNG 14\" SVGA 0.28 MONITOR + TILT AND SWIVEL AND ONE SEGA CONTROL PAD 89.99 ...16.99 SUPER NES WITH CLOCKWORK KNIGHT ...........31.99 FRONTIER 1ST ENCOUNTERS 19.49 GENUINE SAMSUNG HIGH SPEED 560 MB HARD DRIVE + SPARE IDE DONKEY KONG COUNTRY ......111.99 MEGADRIVE 2 SPORTS PACK DAYTONA USA ...................41.99 .... 15.99 GENUINE MICROSOFT SOFTWARE BUNDLE WORTH OVER  SUPER GAMEBOY ADAPTOR 44.99 AND ONE SEGA CONTROL PAD 89.99 INTERNATIONAL VICTORY GOAL 34 99 GUNSHIP 2000...... JUNGLE STRIKE ........... 12.99 AND EIGHT GREAT CLASSIC GAMES FREE MEGADRIVE 2 WITH LION KING 99.99 PANZER DRAGOON ... ... ... ... ... 41.99 LOST EDEN .... ANIMANIACS 22.49 PEBBLE BEACH GOLF 34.99 PINBALL ILLUSIONS ......... TRUST QUAD MULTIMEDIA PC EX VAT ANIMANIACS ..19.49 ARCHER MACLEAN'S ......................22.99 VIRTUA FIGHTER ...............41.99 SUPER DROPZONE ............ PIRATES GOLD 14.49 24.99 BALLZ . ...................... 14.99 NEO GEO CD ROAD KILL 20.99 DX4/100 + 4MB RAM 1174.99 ...19.99 BRIAN LARA CRICKET ............32.99 BATMAN RETURNS 999.99 --SHADOW FIGHTER CANNON FODDER 10.99 ...40.99 CANNON FODDER ...36.99 NEO GEO CD WITH DX4/100 + 8MB RAM 1299.99 ...1106.37 SIMON THE SORCERER CARRIER ACES 14.99 ...22.99 TWO CONTROL PADS ...39.99 CHAOS ENGINE .299.99 SIMON THE SORCERER 2 DX4/100 + 16MB RAM 1479.99 ..1259.57 EARTHWORM JIM 44.99 FEVER PITCH ...35.99 23.99 400 2020 WORLD BASEBALL ... ... ...43.99 SPEEDBALL 2 ................ ..12.99 FIFA SOCCER .....................34.99 FIFA INT'L SOCCER '95 ... ... ... ... 24.99 1000 AEROFIGHTERS 2 HURRICANES ..............43.99 SUB WAR 2050 .....................16.49 . ...............24.99 HURRICANES 20 AGGRESSORS OF DARK KOMBAT 50.99 SYNDICATE ..........................23.99 ILLUSION OF TIME ...........36.99 JOHN MADDEN 93 12.99 AGGRESSOMS OF DARK KOMBAT 50.99 SYNDICATE 24.99 ART OF FIGHTING 43.99 THEME PARK ...22.49 LETHAL ENFORCERS (GUN INTL SUPERSTAR SOCCER ... ...39.99 LETHAL ENFORCERS 2 ART OF FIGHTING 2.......... 43.99 UFO ENEMY UNKNOWN .........16.49 EHS 2 ......26.99 ART OF FIGHTING 2 XS IS SOCCER-DEDUCT C3 UNTIL AUG 31 LOTUS TURBO CHALLENGE ......13.99 1800 KARNOV'S REVENGE 50.99 do KING OF FIGHTERS '94 AMIGA TOP 20 JOHN MADDEN '93...................9.99 MEGA BOMBERMAN .... 29.99 NING MUTATION NATION JUNGLE STRIKE 43.99 A-TRAIN CONSTRUCTION SET 10.99 .......36.99 MEGA GAMES 1 KILLER INSTINCT. NINJA COMMANDO 43.99 BEALLY COME 49.99 ( WORLD CUP ITALIA 90. COLUMNS LEGEND OF MYSTICAL NINJA BEAU JOLLY COMP RALLY CHASE ............. ..19.99 SUPER HANG ON) ..............21.99 SAMURAI SHODOWN 2 ... (CANNON FODDER, SETTLERS, LETHAL ENFORCERS (+GUN) 49.99 50.99 CHAOS ENGINE, T2) ....... SCAL LAS NEMANA ...17.99 LOST VIKINGS ..... SAVAGE RAIN S ........ 19.99 MEGA GAMES 2 MAN UNITED CHAMP SOCCER .36.99 (REVENGE OF SHINOBI. STREETS STREET HOOP ... 43.99 BENEATH A STEEL SKY ........19.49 SUPER SIDEKICKS 2 ..... 43.99 COLONIZATION ................22.99 MARIO ALL STARS ...24.99 OF RAGE, GOLDEN AXE) ......24.99 MORTAL KOMBAT 2 50.99 DAILY DOUBLE HORSE RACING ...4.99 29.99 MICRO MACHINES 2 36 99 TOP HUNTER NBA JAM-TE ......... 43.99 DUNE 2BATTLE FOR ARRAKIS 13.99 51.99 MORTAL KOMBAT ............... 24.99 VIEWPOINT PGA TOUR GOLF ..... ................43.99 FRONTIER 1ST ENCOUNTERS 19.99 ...19.99 NHL PA 93 ICE HOCKEY.. ... ... 11.99 WIND JAMMERS 43.99 HISTORYLINE 1914-18 ... POWERDRIVE ...... ..12.99 ...37.99 PETE SAMPRAS TENNIS '96 ... ...36.99 WORLD HEROES 2 JET SECRET OF MANA ..........43.99 INDY FATE OF ATLANTIS .........13.99 WITH ALL THIS AND FREE TWO YEAR ON-SITE WARRANTY . PGA EUROPEAN TOUR ... ...16.99 SPARKSTER K240 ( UTOPIA 2) ................... 12.99 24.99 PSYCHO PINBALL 3DO CD PRICES AND SPECIFICATION SUBJECT TO CHANGE 33.99 PGA EUROPEAN TOUR ......... 12.99 STAR TREK STARFLEET ...37.99 ROAD RASH 2 ..... 19.99 GOLDSTAR 3DO WITH FIFA SOCCER PLAYER MANAGER 2 ............15.99 WE ONLY SUPPLY MEMBERS BUT YOU CAN ORDER AS YOU JOIN STREET RACER ...32.99 ROBOCOD (JAMES POND 2)... ..10.99 AND ONE JOYPAD ...............357.99 SENSIBLE GOLF ....................19.49 SUNSET RIDERS .............. ...19.99 RUGBY WORLD CUP 95 ALONE IN THE DARK SENSIBLE WORLD OF SOCCER 19.49 MEMBERSHIP FEES UK EC ...........30.99 WORLD SUPER BOMBERMAN (4-PLAYER) 17.99 SHAQ FU ... SETTLERS SHINING FORCE 2 35 99 CANNON FODDER .00 8.49 ONE YEAR (12 ISSUES) SPEEDBALL 1 & 2 (512K) .00 ********** .00 PHASE 9 MULTI-PLAYER ADAPTOR 14.99 .........8.49 14.99 SOLEIL 37 99 CREATURE SHOCK SUPER SKID MARKS 2 .............20.99 SIX MONTHS 16 ISSUES) .00 .00 .00 SUPER INTL CRICKET ........33.99 SONIC THE HEDGEHOG 14 99 DIGITAL DREAMWARE SYNDICATE .. ----.12.99 SUPER MARIO KART Each issue includes  of new XS Savers. Members are under no obligation 1999 FIFA SOCCER 33 99 SONIC 2 UFO ENEMY UNKNOWN ... SUPER PUNCH OUT ... ... ... ... ...39.99 SONIC 3 200 FLASHBACK ULTIMATE SOCCER MANAGER 19 991 All prices include VAT and carriage to MOST UK mainland addresses T. M. H. TURTLES SONIC SPINBALL ... 19.00 FLYING NIGHTMARES PC CD ROM TOP 20 -... 26.99 STORY OF THOR GEX 44.99 TOURNAMENT FIGHTERS Overseas orders must be paid by credit card TERMINATOR 2 ARCADE GAME 19.99 STREETRACER 35 99 HELL (HATED 18) CIVIL WAR 29 49 Hardware items (battery or mains) are only supplied to the UK mainland THEME PARK KILLING TIME * **** ...36.99 SUPER MONACO GP ...11.99 COMMAND & CONQUER ........31.49! Overseas surcharge .00 per software item or 25% on other items 35 99 NEED FOR SPEED ****** . ....39.99 SYNDICATE DARK FORCES VORTEX REIN 35 99 OFF WORLD INTERCEPTOR .....29.99 THEME PARK DESERT STRIKE QUARANTINE ............... ...9.99 WORLD LEAGUE BASKETBALL .9.99 URBAN STRIKE BLOCK CAPITALS please) 22.99 .. DISCWORLD 34.99 Name & Address RETURN FIRE ... ..... .. WORLD MASTERS GOLF. ..39.99 VIRTUA RACING FLIGHT UNLIMITED ...... 33.99 1 ROAD RASH 300 ...... WWF RAW AW ...27.99 . .. ..................39.99 WWE RAW SAMURAI SHODOWN FRONTIER 1ST ENCOUNTERS 26.99 ZELDA 3 LINK TO THE PAST .26.99 X-MEN 2 .. . ZOMBIES ....... SLAM AND JAM ...19.99 ZOMBIES ... ... HI OCTANE ATARI LYNX SEGA 32X SPACE HULK INDY CAR RACING ..............9.49 KLIK AND PLAY ATARI LYNX 2 WITH CHAOTIX 39 99 SUPER STREET FIGHTER 2 TURBO51.99 2. PICTURE PERFECT GOLF .....29.49 BATMAN RETURNS ................29.99 CORPSE KILLER 48.99 SUPER WING COMMANDER ......33.99 PRIVATEER MISSIONS & D/D 13.49 Postcode SYNDICATE ....... ..... COSMIC CARNAGE ..............41.99 ......29.99 SIMON THE SORCERER 2 ......27.99 Mac or PC please state DISK Or CD ROM BASKETBRAWL ................9.99 DOOM .. 39 90 THE LOST EDEN 24.99 STAR TREK NEXT GENERATION33.99 Phone No CASINO ........ .. THEME PARK Machine ..15.99 GREATEST 36 HOLES ..........45.99 *** 29.99 SYNDICATE + DATA DISK ... ... 13.491 CHECKERED FLAG ..... ..16.99 METAL HEAD E V A STALKER .. ..... .... 28.99 TRANSPORT TYCOON ... ... ... ... 27.99 i Enter membership number (if applicable) or CHIP'S CHALLENGE ...9.99 MORTAL KOMBAT 2.. 43.99 WAY OF THE WARRIOR .........36.99 ULTIMATE SOCCER MANAGER ...21.99 INEW MEMBERSHIP FEE (ANNUAL UK 7.00) CRYSTAL MINES 2.. .43.48 WING COMMANDER 3.. .....9.99 MOTOCROSS CHAMPIONSHIP ...37.99 W ..29.99 WING COMMANDER 3 HYDRA ...9.99 NBA JAM-TE 35.45 ..41.99 ATARI JAGUAR ISHIDO ...6.99 STAR WARS ARCADE X-WING COLLECTION item 29.99 LEMMINGS... 24.99 STELLAR ASSAULT .................39.99 ATARI JAGUAR WITH CYBERMORPH (X-WING, B-WING, IMPERIAL MS PACMAN ...15.99 SUPER SPACE HARRIER....31.99 99 AND ONE CONTROL PAD......129.99 PURSUIT 6 NEW LEVELS) . 29.49 item PINBALL JAM 14.99 19:59 VIRTUA RACING DELUXE ........37.99 JAGUAR CD ROM DRIVE ... 149.99 PC DISK TOP 10 OIX RAMPAGE ...12.99 AIR CAR WARS .... ............45.99 DOOM COLLECTOR'S DIDISK ..19.99 item S.T.U.N. RUNNER MEGA CD 2 9.99 ALIEN VS PREDATOR ...... 47.99 DUNE 2BATTLE FOR ARRAKIS 13.99 Please use this box to add any optional fast delivery charge SHADOW OF THE BEAST ........9.99 MEGA CD 2 WITH POWER CANNON FODDER ---35.99 FIELDS OF GLORY ........... 13.99 1st Class Post 50p per posted item or  hardware ... 14.99 MONGES ...45.99 FORMULA 1 GRAND PRIX ... ... ... 14.99 10.00 MONGER AND EIGHT GAMES..99,99 CHEQUERED FLAG.... TURBO SUB .... DEMOLITION MAN .. I ALL PRICES INCLUDE UK POSTAGE & VATE ...37.99 FRONTIER 1ST ENCOUNTERS 24.99 ULTIMATE CHESS CHALLENGE 16.99 ROAD AVENGER, SOL FEACE, COBRA DOOM ...45.99 SECRET OF MONKEY ISLAND 2 12.99 Cheque/P.O./Access/Mastercard/Switch/Visa WARBIRDS . . ............25.99 COMMAND, COLUMNS, SUPER DOUBLE DRAGON 5 ...... .46.49 SETTLERS ..16.99 WORLD CLASS SOCCER ......... 12.49 MONACO GP, STREETS OF RAGE, DRAGON 35.99 SPACE HULK ....... .. 12.99 XYBOTS .............................9.99 GOLDEN AXE & REVENGE OF SHINOBI EVOLUTION DINO DUDES .....34.99 SPEEDBALL 1 & 2 HOVERSTRIKE......................46.99 ULTIMATE SOCCER MANAGER.21.99 INTL SENSIBLE SOCCER .... NOKIA 14\" COLOUR TELEVISION ...39.99 MEGA CD TOP 10 CREDIT CARD SWITCH IRON SOLDIER 42.99 IVICA U TURTU EXPIRY DATE __SIGNATURE (ISSUE NO  HIGH QUALITY THE PERFECT PARTNER FOR KASUMI NINJA (AGES 17) ......43.99 EARTHWORM JIM ............. Mail Order address. Cheques payable to: YOUR GAMES CONSOLE PINBALL FANTASIES ...41.99 ECCO 2 THE TIDES OF TIME ...36.99  REMOTE CONTROL NOKIA 14\" POWERDRIVE RALLY ...........38.99 FIFA SOCCER (CHAMP EDITION) 27.99  SQUARE TINTED TUBE COLOUR TV 26.99 RISE OF THE ROBOTS ............45.99 LETHAL ENFORCERS (GUN) .........159.99 SYNDICATE ..... ********** *  HEADPHONE SOCKET ...........39.99 P.O. BOX 847, HARLOW, CM21 9PH NOKIA 14\" (TELETEXT) TEMPEST 2000 27.99 PUGGSY.  SCART INPUT COLOUR TV WITH THEME PARK ...37.99 SENSIBLE SOCCER (CD) ...... ... 19.99 or FAX a credit card order on 01279 726842and we'll FAX back . MADE IN GERMANY NICAM DIGITAL STEREO TINY TOON ADVENTURES .....46.99 SNATCHER ...26.99 Inevitably some games listed may not yet be available. Please phone to check availability TROY AIKMAN (US) FOOTBALL ...48.99 THUNDERHAWK .. AND SOUND DEFLECTORS 23.99! Prices may change without prior notification Time of going to press 20.7.95 E&O.E. SCART LEAD AVAILABLE ALL FOR ONLY SEPARATELY ... 214.99 WOLFENSTEIN 3D ..............34.99 YUMEMI MYSTERY MANSION ...19.99 SAVE -Saving off full retail price Inter-Mediates Lid, The Maltings. Sawbridgeworth, Herts! 388888888888 888888888888888888888 19.99 SLAM AND ...10.99 WWF RAW 8.99 ...35.99 SPECIAL RESERVE ...26.99 "


"CVG. IMPORT REVIEW SHINOBUSINESS LIKE SHOWBUSINESS To tart the game up a bit so you don't feel like you've just shelled out for a platform game with pretty graphics, Shinobi's loaded with superb movie footage of various ninjas doing interesting and creative things to each other with bits of pointy metal. SATURN PLATFORM SEGA EIMPORT OUT TBA ONE PLAYER NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE IMPORTE SHIN SHINOBT DEN BV SSEGA SATURN It's six months late but we don't care. We don't hold grudges though, unless you count the Welsh. 46 "


"IMPORT REVIEW ( ALTERNATIVE PLAYSTATION GUNNERS HEAVEN. SONY A poor man's Gunstar Heroes. What it lacks is a two-player mode and the originality which made Gunstar a classic. Shame, this could have been really good. SHINOBI........ GUNNERS HEAVEN here will probably be quite a few of you looking at this spread while slapping your foreheads and equating that, because this doesn't look very Next Gen, it's probably a load of old goat's droppings. Well carry on slapping because you couldn't be more wrong. Shinobi is, first and foremost, great fun. It's tough, varied (even though it's packed with platform game clichés a mine cart level, honestly) and stylish. What it isn't, though, is a game which reflects the power of the Saturn. As good as it is, when you've just spent your savings on one of the priciest consoles around, you're right to expect a better return for your money than a souped-up Mega Drive title. Despite that, if you're not arsed about your graphics having to be drawn in polygon-intense 3D, or you're just a plain old-fashioned Shinobi fan, you'll enjoy this and certainly find it tougher than your average platform game. CLOCKWORK KNIGHT GRAPHICS REVIEWED ISSUE 164. 787Digitised backgrounds with limited interaction. ANIMATION Decent sprites, but could've been done better. MUSIC NINJA MASTERCLASS Joe Musashi, old Shinobi himself, has learned a few new tricks since his last appearance on the Mega Drive. It's not as if he was short of moves before though.  Shuriken  Dull and not that effective. Joe simply chucks a bit of sharp metal at his enemy and hopes they don't block. Diving Attack Multi-Shuriken Drives three feet of A quick leaping cold steel through spin followed by a  the skull of the tap on the shurikan recipient. Except it button unleashes a. gets blocked most volley of death.  of the time. There's a rather dull background track that plays throughout. SOUND EFFECTS. 85 (VERDICT Excellent samples especially for sword blows. GAMEPLAY Fun, and extremely tough from level four onwards. SATURN Shin Shinobi isn't spectacular in the same way that Tetris wasn't exactly a looker or Hebereke's Popoon wouldn't blow your socks off on first impressions. But I enjoyed it for some perverse reason. Perhaps it was because some of my earliest movie experiences came from bunking into Martial Arts night at the Holloway Odeon, or it could be, gasp, because this is actually a decent game? FMV aside, Shinobi does have all the ingredients of a top-notch platform-cum-slash-'emup, although bar the digitised graphics and few special effects, the game doesn't exactly scream 'Next Gen.' If you can live with that, you'll probably love this, it's well worth looking into. MARK PATTERSON Jumping Slash Handy for roofmounted ninja-types who are too afraid to come down for a proper fight. VALUE Not the kind of game that warrants high import prices. Spinning Attack He obviously learned this little move after playing too many games of Star Wars on the SNES.  Block Bah, if you're hard enough you won't  need this, 'cos you'd have killed everyone already. OVERALL Very playable, and the digitised intro looks really cool but it's just not the kind of game you'd expect on a  super console. Slash Joe's standard attack. Not particularly interesting, but still good enough to chop people in half. Multi-attack Hit the attack button repeatedly and Joe launches himself forwards with a barrage of swipes and slices. Running Attack Kills most ninjas  right out and is  impossible to  block. Needs a good run-up first,  though. 47 "


"REVIEW CVG REVIEW CONSUME THIS, MELONFARMER THE ULTIMATE In a single player game, the only difference between this and the original Doom is the fourth chapter. Thy Flesh Consumed, which has been bolted on to the end. Unlike all the freeware WADs, this gathering of eight levels has been created by iD to be the most chal lenging Doom experience ever devised. Here's what to expect... ...more enemies... ...that are more intelligent... THY FLESH CONSUMED Thy Flesh Consumed? Thy wallet consumed, more like. The question isn't can we stomach more Doom, it's do we want to pay for it? ...and you don't get as many weapons... ...even though the levels are huuuge... ooking at this objectively, Thy Flesh Consumed is a major step back for iD. Despite the success of Doom 2, what's on offer here is the original game, plus one extra chapter and the shareware version of Heretic bundled in with it. For those people lucky enough to have access to a network, the multiplayer features have also been bumped up which is as good a reason as any to buy the game. So it's value for money? Well, kind of. It's kind of worth it if you don't have the original Doom and it's kind of worth it if you were so mad about the original that you want to pay for an extra eight levels rather than use scabby WADs that some spotty Scandinavian student's put together. 02 On the flip side, LTH ABNS Doom is one of the greatest games ever, and there aren't that many people who own a full version of the original. If that's the case for you, then this pack represents good value for money. Providing you don't mind taking a small step back from Doom 2, that is JOGO 309 ...and they have more puzzles... PC CD-ROM... SHOOT-\"EM-UP. GT INTERACTIVE . 2004 .99. OUT NOW ...so it's a bit on the tough side. UP TO 16 PLAYERS NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE. 48 "


"REVIEW REVIEW CVG SCORES TRRRRRRRRRRRE Wwwwwwwwwwwwwwww VERDICT PC CD-ROM Don't get me wrong, Doom is still one of the games! play the most, even now. But if I was Johnny Punter, it would take a lot more than what's on offer here to make me part with the readies even if this is substantially cheaper than most PC games. I still believe, though, that every PC owner in the world should own a copy of Doom, and if you don't, then this is the perfect opportunity to come in from the cold. MARK PATTERSON DOOM 2.. ULTIMATE DOOM 100M[JAG)...... COMING OTHER VERSIONS JAGUAR SOON GRAPHICS Still the same dark, moody visuals. NINTENDO ULTRA 64 DOOM... ATARI / .99 HNIMH NINTENDO Starting to look a bit dated these days. The best console version so far, and if you've got the kit, you can play it head-tohead with a mate. 927 W MUSIC. There hasn't been a bad version of Doom yet, and the NU 64 version could be the best version of the lot, if the programmers decide to really tart things up. 32X Atmospheric and doesn't intrude on the action. SEGA / .99 EXPECTED RELEASE APRIL 196 SOUND EFFECTS..90 A good attempt from Sega, but the game is a little short of levels. But you can't have everything. 917 Brilliant noises throughout. Worth turning the speakers up for. GAMEPLAY PC. There still hasn't been a direct competitor to Doom. VIRGIN / .99 (VALUE New weapons and a few new creatures do help make a difference between this and the original. 947 Good value, but not worth it if you've already got it. OVERALL Doom is still a brilliant game, but it's starting to wear paper-thin now, but if you are Doomless then this is well worth a purchase. 49 "


"RAVEN GAMES LONDON G EDGE .99 34.99 .99 VISA 74 BROMLEY ROAD, BECKENHAM KENT BR3 2NP SWITCH TEL: 0181 663 6810 MAIL ORDER/ CREDIT CARD LINE: 0181 663 6822 FAX: 0181 663 0046 FIRST WITH THE LATEST RELEASES OWN YOUR OWN ARCADE MACHINE GOLDSTAR 3DO (UK). ..E339.99 SUPER GUN DELUXE inc. PAD ..... .99 GOLDSTAR FMV Cart inc. Total Recall .99 X MESEBRIVE AS SEEN ON ITV'S BAD INFLUENCE AND REVIEWED IN THE D Sampler Disc III (shows eleven games) ... HAVE YOUR MACHINE CONVERTED TO RUN EVERY GAME 3DO USA NTSC inc Game + Scart Box .99 50/60 HZ JAP TEXT/UK TEXT 6 BUTTON CAPCOM STICK Panasonic FZ-10..  P&P  .99 AVAILABLE 6 BUTTON PAD. Panasonic Joypad SEGASTURN OTHER EXTRAS AVAILABLE S.A.E. FOR FULL LIST 6 Button Joypad.... . PCB VIDEO (VERSION IT) Scart Box.. .99 SEGA SATURN NTSC/SCART INC VIRTUA FIGHTERS (REMIX). SHOWS LOADS OF OLD CLASSICS .99 P&P .50 Japanese Magazine (Inc. Disk) PLEASE RING USAVUK SATURN ALL GAMES............ ...........PLEASE RING SNES Joypad Adaptors ... .99 SEGA SATURN JAPANESE MAGAZINE................................99 NEO GEO Game Gun .99 ADAPTOR TO RUN ALL UKJAP/USA GAMES...........99 8 Button Pads ......... .99 JOYPADS/JOYSTICKS/STEERING WHEEL.............PLEASE RING NEO GEO CD JOYSTICK ......... .99 * VIRTUA FIGHTERS REMIX .99 * VIRTUA RACING NEO GEO CD (PAL OR SCART) INC. 2 PADS UK/USA + GAME +2 VIDEOS.... SLAM & JAM 95.... .99 * RIGLORD SAGA ASTAL .99 BUG NEO GEO VIDEO SHOWS EVERY GAME WING COMMANDER III .99 P&P .50 GREATEST 9 .99 PANZA GENERAL 139.99 *SHIN SHINOBI GRAN CHASER CLOCKWORK KNIGHT I SOFTWARE STRAHL .99 SAMURAI SHODOWN II (CD) .99 Nintendo/SNES/VIRTUAL BOY KING OF FIGHTERS 94 (CD). .99 SPACE ACE .99 SIDE KICK SOCCER II (CD) .. .99 SPACE HULK .99 HAVE YOUR UK SNES CONVERTED TO 50/60HZ  P&P  FATAL FURY SPECIAL (CD) .99 DRUG WARS .99 RING FOR LATEST USA / JAPANESE RELEASES LAST RESORT (CD) 34.99 ICE BREAKER .99 S.A.E. FOR FULL LIST NAM 5 CD) . .99 KINGDOM OF THE FAR REA .99 ALPHA MISSION II (CD) SONY PLAYSTATION .99 DEADALUS ENCOUNTER JULY TOP PLAYERS GOLF (CD) .99 BALLZ. JULY SONY PLAYSTATION INC. GAME....... BASEBALL STARS II (CD) 14.99 CANNON FODDER JULY ACTION REPLAY .99 WORLD HEROES JET (CD) E54.99 JULY SCART CONVERSION/SCART LEADS AVAILABLE. PLEASE RING VIEWPOINT (CD) DRAGON .99 LOST EDEN.. GHOST PILOTS (CD)... JOYPAD NAMCO PAD/MEMORY CARD/ JOYSTICKS PLEASE RING AUGUST SOCCER BRAWL (CD) .99 4.99 PO'ED PLEASE RING JAPANESE MAGAZINES NIGHT STRIKER DRAGON BALL Z PHILOSOMA FATAL FURY III (CD) .99 DI'S DINER... PLEASE RING KONAMI SOCCER FANTASTIC PINBALL AIR COMBAT SENGEKO II (CD)... .99 FLYING NIGHTMARES PLEASE RING  GUNDAM BASEBALL STARS (CD) .99 CREATURE SHOCK ... PLEASE RING 3 COUNT BOUT (CD). .99 PUZZLE BOBBLE (CD) 54.99 TAGUAR SIDE KICKS III (CD) .99 GALAXY FIGHT (CD) 59.99 JAGUAR VIDEO SHOWING 30 GAMES................99 P&P .50 DOUBLE DRAGON (CD) .99 100'S OF NEW PC ENGINE GAMES FROM .99 JAGUAR CD............ WORLD HEROES PERFECT (CD) ..................PLEASE RING .99 .99 SCART LEAD .99* S/VHS VIDEO COMPOSITE LEAD .........99 MAJONG IT (CD) .99 PC ENGINE DUO R SCART + GAME ........... SAVAGE REIGN(CD) .... BUBSY .99 ZOOL II .99*CLUB DRIVE .99 PC ENGINE FX ... .99 ......................99 SAMURAI SHODOWN II (CART) .99 PC HAND HELD *DRAGON .99 . ..99 GOAL GOAL GOAL (CD)... AUGUST ACCESSORIES IN STOCK WE ALSO STOCK MR. DO! (CD) ......... AUGUST JOYSTICKS 5 PLAYER TAP SYSTEM CARDS LYNX ONLY .99 FM TOWNS MARTY. NES AERO FIGHTERS III (CD) .. SEPTEMBER JAPANESE MAGAZINES TIPS BOOKS CD ROM USA MAGAZINES GAME GEAR GAMEBOY MANGA WORLD TOUR GOLF (CD) PLEASE RING ALL ACCESSORIES IN STOCK MASTERSYSTEM. PC CD ROM JAPANESE MUSIC CDS .99 Engine WE STOCK A MASSIVE SELECTION OF SECOND HAND GAMES OPENING HOURS MONDAY-SATURDAY 10AM-5.30PM WEDNESDAY TOAM IPM P&P GAMES, MAGAZINES, PADS .50, WE ARE NOT JUST A MAIL ORDER COMPANY COME AND SEE US AT THE ABOVE ADDRESS AND SEE ALL THE ABOVE MACHINES ON DISPLAY. S.A.E. FOR FULL LIST. PLEASE MAKE CHEQUES PAYABLE TO: RAVEN GAMES ABOVE PRICES ARE MAIL ORDER ONLY. SHOP PRICES MAY VARY.NEXT DAY DELIVERY. TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME Dream BOVIS HOUSE VICTORIA ROAD HARTLEPOOL CLEVELAND TS26 8DB TEL: 01429 869459 (4 lines) FAX: 01429 274660 MACHINES DREAM MACHINES 2 OPENING HOURS: MON-SAT 10AM-6PM CREDIT CARDS ACCEPTED SEGA SATURN NEW GAMES ARRIVING EVERY WEEK SO CALL FOR OUR LATEST PACK PRICE IF YOU KNOW WHAT YOU'RE LOOKING CALL FOR OUR LATEST PACK PRICE STEERING WHEEL, JOYPADS AND FOR DON'T HESITATE TO CALL! SCART LEADS, JOYPADS AND JOYSTICKS ALL IN STOCK COMING SOON TO YOUR SATURN: JOYSTICKS ALL IN STOCK GAMES INCLUDE: GAMES INCLUDE: SHIN SHINOBI DEN JUNE 20TH GRAND CHASER (NEW!!!), MAGICAL KNIGHT RAYEARTH, BLUE SEED, RYGLORD SAGA RPG JUMPING FLASH, TEKKEN, DAYTONA USA, VICTORY GOAL, VIRTUA FIGHTER 2, X-MEN FIGHTING GUNNER'S HEAVEN, RIDGE RACER, CLOCKWORK KNIGHT, ASTAL, VIRTUA COP, DARIUS GARDEN, RAYFORCE SHOOTING KILEAK THE BLOOD, CYBER SLED, PANZER DRAGOON, DEADALUS, MANY WEIRD & WONDERFUL PLAYSTATION GAMES WHICH MOTOR TOON GP, RAIDEN, HAVE HARD TO SPELL NAMES ARE DUE OUT SHORTLY VIRTUA FIGHTER, GALE RACER TOH SHIN DEN PLEASE CALL FOR DATES IF YOU'RE A MEGA-CD OWNER, YOU'RE PROBABLY FEELING A TAD OUT OF THE PICTURE (YEAH, WE KNOW HOW IT IS!) BECAUSE OF THE COMPLETE LACK OF SOFTWARE COMING OUT. WELL, YOU NEED A CDX CONVERTER. THIS ALLOWS YOU TO PLAY JAPANESE AND, MORE IMPORTANTLY, USA TITLES, WHICH COME OUT LONG BEFORE THEY DO IN THE UK. IN FACT, THERE ARE DOZENS OF TITLES IN STOCK THAT ARE NOT OFFICIALLY AVAILABLE IN THIS COUNTRY CALL FOR DETAILS! LUNAR 2 THE ULTIMATE MEGA-CD GAME IS BEING RELEASED IN USA JUNE 20TH! IF YOU WANT TO FEEL THAT YOUR MEGA-CD WAS A WORTHWHILE PURCHASE, THEN WHY NOT PLACE YOUR PREORDER NOW?! IF YOU'RE STILL SEARCHING FOR THAT ELUSIVE GAME THAT YOU KNOW IS OUT THERE BUT NONE OF THE SHOPS HAVE, DROP US A LINE WE HAVE SOME REALLY OLD TITLES THAT HAVEN'T BEEN BETTERED SINCE THEIR RELEASE. PERHAPS THE ONE YOU'RE LOOKING FOR IS HERE! NEW & USED GAMES ALSO STOCKED FOR THESE FORMATS: 32X, SUPER NES, PC ENGINE, NEO-GEO, NEO-GEO CD, 3DO "


"| REVIEW CVG REVIEW 300 SCORES PUZZLE GAME THE 300 COMPANY .95 OUT NOW RSS 2-4 PLAYERS NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE ZHADNOST. TWISTED PICROSS..... GRAPHICS Excellent digitised graphics make for a visual feast. It's a Twisted lookey likey that involves a capitalist game show in an Eastern Block Commie country. Take it away comrade... ION 89 Not really animation as such but that's not a fault. MUSIC ruce Forsyth was the Game Show. He had catchprases, a string of beautiful assistants, fabulous prizes all before he took The Long Walk... and now he is to be replaced, if the tabloids are to be believed, by Jim Davidson, he of Big Break and 'Nick, Nick' fame. Sad isn't it? Similarly, when the 3DO was released EA launched the quite splendiferous Twisted, it was funny, original and off-the-wall, now post-Twisted we're treated (used in the loosest sense of the word) to Zhadnost, where you are one of the contestants in a game show in a post-revolutionary eastern state. There's loadsa FMV of your game hosts and contestants, whereas the actual game element is quite weak. It consists of seven challenges which range from a mix and match sounds and pictures round to American trivia questions and a kind of spinning draughts game. All of which gets very repetitive. Plenty of wacky tunes to keep your 'lobes contented. SOUND EFFECTS 80 The production quality is just right. Shame it plays like a pig GAMEPLAY Lacklustre puzzles and few gameplay rewards. VALUE I'd spend my money on Twisted if I were you. OOO OVERALL An inferior version of Twisted Gameshow which has added nothing whatsoever to the genre. VERDICT.. WATCH THE MONEY GO ROUND Remember the game Frustration with the popomatic dice? Well I'm afraid it was 18 BMD (before Mega Drive) and this bit of Zhadnost is almost identical, expect they've painstakingly removed the fun element. Twisted was one of the first really decent 3D0 games. Original, funny and well designed. In fact, everything that this isn't. Twisted worked because it brought us a new and novel way of using FMV. This game employs the technique just as well but suffers from a poor script and a kind of plagiarism that doesn't compliment what went before, and subsequently the puzzle games just can't win through alone. In fact, shoot the writers, slap the designers and kidnap their families so they're forced to get it right next time. GARY LORD 51 "


"REVIEW CVG REVIEW This soloth Haco The 391 Games 20 f SCORES ACTION SOCCER Did you know you can see three games at Highbury for the price of this game? Great value or what? PC CO-ROM SUPERSTAR SOC. ACTION SOCCER... FIFA 300... SPORTS UBISOFT. .99. GRAPHICS. The different viewpoints is certainly a good idea. (ANIMATION. 73 OUT SEPTEMBER TWO PLAYERS. NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED. NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE. GOOO Tidy, but unspectacular. Just check out Gremlin's Actua Soc. ootball is very 'lad'. There's no denying it, OK more and more 'birds' are having a go at it, but at the end of the day it's a Saturday afternoon lad culture, and most of the games available mirror this, when you look at the likes of Striker (from Time Warner, see last ish) FIFA Soccer et al. There are a few comedy-like exceptions: Sensible Soccer, and International Superstar Soccer on the SNES has a certain mad Japanese feel to it. So, when you look at Action Soccer, the new PC-CD footie game from Ubi Soft, and you see the team logos and emblems you notice that they resemble something out of a Hanna Barbera cartoon, all of which doesn't set you in the right frame of mind for a serious game of footie. Anyway enough about the naff team names let's go to play... There are various options: one or two player (although you can have an eight player tournament), weather conditions: rain, snow sun commentary is the games piece de resistance since it features Sky Sports Jonathan Pierce (and Capital Gold) who comes out with some choice and bizarre snippets which will encourage you to keep that volume knob cranked up. The controls are simple to grasp although play seems somewhat stilted, regardless of whether you play in 3D iso, metric view or side on. MUSIC Loads of beefy tunes which are read straight from CD. SOUND EFFECTS.. 87 ALTERNATIVE The commentary is the best heard in any sports game. 300. FIFH.. GAMEPLAY Very much kick and run, lacks style and skill. VALUE. This game was launched across most formats, so whatever your mhin u should be able to get hold of a copy, though the 3D0 version is ultimately the best. Save your money, there are better games on the way. REVIEWED ISSUE ....156:927 OVERALL 12 months ago this may have been worth it, but there's plenty of excellent stuff on the way very soon. YEAH BUT YOU WON ON PENALTIES... Well we've bitten many a nail watching a match in the World Cup only for the game to be resolved by penners. And in Act Socc you can do the same but you can also plump for extra time, penalty kicks or sudden death. PEMALL TY KICKS SUDDEN DEATH VERDICT. PC CD-ROM You can't help thinking Action Soccer is a somewhat vain attempt at a footie game for the PC, because there are just so many viable alternatives if you own a PC and you want a decent footie sim. That's not to say that this is necessarily bad, it has excellent commentary, is very easy to play, but the CPU is difficult to beat, the game seems somewhat slow, there's no aftertouch and there's not really a lot of action in the game. Shame. XOXO GARY LORD 52 "


"REVIEW REVIEW CVG THREESOMES Yes there's a massive three differing views for you to try your shootin'-and-a-flyin' skills out, don'tcha know! SCORES Hali TERMINAL TERM, VELOCITY. TIE FIGHTER CYBERMOAPH.. PC CD-ROM... GRAPHICS 90 SHOOT-EM-UP The explosions, and the scaling scenery all add to the atmosphere. US GOLD ANIMATION ANIN 89 .99 Velocity. Defintion: the law that the more distant a nebula the greater is its speed of recession. Well grab hold of your nebulas as this game is terminal... It's all very smooth which adds to playability EIGHT PLAYER MUSIC. Could be a bit more frantic, but has that Star Wars-y feel. NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED. NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE. ever will you be more pleased with yourself that you bought a joystick for your PC than when you play 3D Realms Terminal Velocity, because on keyboard this game is good, but take control of your craft with the joystick and boy this game becomes slick and slicker. The plot is your usual fayre, some tripe about the future, Earth's enemies, blah, blah, you're in command of a squadron, blah, blah, that has to destroy various installations, blah, bla.... Who cares, as basically you're a starfighter whose job it is to dogfight your way out of sticky puddinglike situations and manoeuvre your way through a 3D polygonised landscape. There's nothing more satisfying than watching an adversary bite the dust, and there's no messing around trying to fathom out what the hell you've got to do, your radar points you straight to your targets and handling is a dee-ream, so all you have to spend your time doing is blasting seven shades of the 'S' word out of any 'C' words that get in your way. All in all, it's a gas, gas, gas. Maaan. SOUND EFFECTS.. 85 Plenty of beefy effects for every occasion. B6 wepnx PAC 128 ammo TGT GAMEPLAY Target Des. No tricky controls to master, especially with a joystick. VALUE. The shareware ver sion is particularly great value. OVERALL VERDICT An excellent contender in the world of polygonised shooters, simple but at the same time bloody brilliant. A fantastic game all round. PC Put it this way. If this was a Star Wars licence then it would also be a licence to print money, because this is reminiscent of all those polygonised flying shoot 'em-ups, but it also has an appeal of its own. Twisting and turning your way through numerous dogfights will keep you hooked, and there's plenty of individuality in the game (secret tunnels, Kamikaze ships, hidden enemies) that add to the game's longevity, and the graphics are so smooth that you'll be playing TV for some time to come. GARY LORD 53 "


"CVG REVIEW REVIEW PLAYSTATION RACING PSYGNOSIS. Time to take to your antigravity craft and race in Psygnosis's bid for the best race gaming experience, ever... EUNCONFIRMED 0:46.a OUT SEPT. TWO PLAYER LINK-UP 8 PC CD-ROM VERSION PLANNED NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE AG SVStems pcom  FEISAR Oset  hen Ridge Racer and Daytona USA were released on their respective Next Gen consoles (PlayStation and Saturn, just in case you've been living on Mars) there was no clear winner in producing the best car racing game. While one was graphically more polished, the other had more tracks and slightly superior gameplay. Now the futuristic fly-'em-ups have landed in the form of the lacklustre Gran Chaser on Saturn (and on import) and the superlative Wipeout on PlayStation. As the screenshots show, a lot of work has gone into making this baby look beautiful, and though we can't show you how well the game moves believe us when we say it's smooth of movement and fluid of animation and plays like the best dream you've ever had but can't remember it the next day, 'cos it was that 00:42 good, right? No doubt you're thinking he's being a bit premature here, telling us this game's totally wnderbar and he hasn't even told us what the whole shebang is about. Well basically you're flying and racing (there are eight pilots, though our fave is Paul Jackson from Great Britain) along with six different anti-gravity tracks (there are two classes of fighter however which doubles up the tracks to 12, and a hidden one!) in air-space combat craft that were surely inspired by the Vipers from Battlestar Galactica. You race against seven other craft and each one is vying for supremacy and flying past any of your fellow racers is no easy feat. So it certainly helps to activate a power up which are the starshaped lights that flicker as you fly along the track. 'Longevity' is one word Psygnosis have taken into account with Wipeout because all the crafts' intelligence makes for challenging gameplay (plus there are a few hidden secrets in there), but where this game really excels is in the two player link up mode; hook two machines up and you'll be ecstatic that you've upgraded to the Next Generation of consoling. aG systems AURICOM Diver fesar Middle pic is you looking defeated. WIPEOUT 54 "


"REVIEW REVIEW CVG THOSE POWER-UPS IN FULL-ISH. Rockets Fire these and do a quick 'V' sign as you race on by. Heatseeking Missiles Find their victims relentlessly and leave you to just fly by. Mines When someone's on your tail just drop this little load and you're laughing. Ha ha in fact. G systems avricom Electro Bolt Sends a bolt of blue lightning up your opponent's jacksie. Shields Protects you from any adversary attack, but you can't attack while under a shield. FEISAR l H Turbo Activate this baby and you'll find you cruise past those other racers. SONY AG Systems AURICOM Direr | OO:S8.9 seLec 00-21., The missiles and turbo power-ups add another dimension to the game. 00:03.6 SOUNDS ALRIGHT TO ME 0:18. DUME SEEN AUID ALLES The sound FX for Wipeout are pitched just right, but it's really the soundtrack that needs singling out because it's totally 'mazing. Why? Well Psygnosis have used dance rave gurus Orbital, Leftfield and The Chemical Brothers to produce three of the awesome eleven tracks packed on to this phenomenal game. The Psygies have also employed the talents of the Designers Republic (whose credits include the cover of Pulp's Common People CD) to design the cool looking in-game fonts, character and team icons. Psygnosis approached the Republic because \"we wanted a design to reflect the technological leap forward that the PlayStation represents.\" And luckily for them, it has. O137, 1-03.9 THEYRE HERE tatou PO-S8.9 Even the soundtrack goes all echo-ie when you go through a tunnel. 55 "


"REVIEW CVG REVIEW 0110 THE BOYS (AND GIRLS) TO ENTERTAIN YOU) Each of the craft have their own nuances when playing on the track. For example Paul Jackson's ship is quite heavy so when flying over gaps in the track you have to pull up so that you don't take a time penalty as you collide in to the bottom of the track. UE anastasia cherovoski kel solaar arian tetsuo john nekka paul jackson ariel tetsuo daniel chang sophia de la rente O13 8 The other racers really do vie for position. OO 0:40 00.0 En LET ME TAKE YOU THROUGH IT OK, it's not flowing in all its 32 bit loveliness, but here's what you can roughly expect when you buy (which we strongly recommend) Wipeout and go to the first track. DO-94.3 00.0 III 2:18.6 0 . 56 "


"LP POSITIO REVIEW REVIEW CVG SCORES GROUP VERDICT RADION AUTOMATIC Wipeout is, without a doubt, the sexiest game ever produced. It looks like a Silicon Graphics movie, it sounds like an evil druggy rave and it plays like the slinkiest minxing-est sensationfest ever to grace any computer. You must buy it. Ons MARK PATTERSON This is amazing! It's the first game in years that's actually had me swaying in my chair when I go around a corner (you know, like parents, old people and girls do when they play games). You must buy this. Really. Or I'll beat you up. BWAWA GRAN CHASER RIDGE RACER. NUSSIM SIMON CLAYS Ever fallen in love with a console? If not Wipeout is the game that could change your life. What a soundtrack. The combination of hypnotic tunes merged with the horiest graphics and cool gameplay will leave you in a foaming mess on the floor. It's sex, well-ish. GRAPHICS For an English game it looks very Japanese, which is a real bonus. Shields on! ANIMATION No dodgy clipping à la Daytona, smooth as a Baywatch babe's butt. QOL MUSIC Every track looks awesome. Coming in at an incredible 150bpm, bonafide ravetastic. SOUND EFFECTS.. 87 00:10.5 Decent enough quality, but nothing to get too excited about. GAMEPLAY.... Race by yourself or a mate, just gameplay at its best. VALUE VERDICT PLAYSTATION The time and effort that Psygnosis have put into this game shows. Wipeout truly looks like the best game I've ever seen and no mistake. My main concern when I played an early version was the playability, but in the finished version that competitive element is there big time espesh' in the two player link up. The soundtrack adds to speed of the game, and once you get used to the crafts' handling (the airbrakes activated by the forward control buttons are crucial for cornering) you just can't turn this game off. GARY LORD No confirmed price, but top ace value longevity-wise OVERALL A horny piece of software. This has the gameplay graphics, sound and all-round loveliness that make a classic mind-meld. 0739.) 0:46. 01:27. 01:35.5 "


"Wanna know about SEGA SATURN») Just pop down to the newsagent SEGA BRITAIN'S ONLY OFFICIAL SEGA MAGAZINE GOLDEN GATE EXPORT CO. INTERNATIONAL RETAIL PRICES INCLUDING DELIVERY: 3 THE PARADE NEW GENERATION CONSOLES STONEGATE ROAD 11-7pm Mon-Sat 12-8pm Sun LEEDS LS6 GHZ 0113 230 6007 SEGA MEGADRIVE SATURN SPECIAL OFFERS CONSOLE ECALL PRIMAL PAGE CALL WIZ N' LIZ 14 90 PSYCHO PINBALL GRAN CHASER 59.99 STREET FIGHTER REAL 28.99 NEW SINOAI 2 59.99 BATTLE OTTIFANTS .99 LEMMINGS 2 .99 GREAT 9 BASEBALL CALL CLOCKWORK NIGHT 2 CALL PUGSY 14.99 STREETS OF RAGE 334.90 GLADIATORS PINBALL CALL NOW you can play aus & TAZMANIA .99 KICK OFF 3 14 99 VIRTUAL FIGHTER REMOXCALL Jap Saturn Games on your UK DRAGON .99 YOGI BEAR 14.99 BUG CALL system. Call for details MEGA BOMBERMAN 28.99 TUFF MAN BOXING .99 SYNDICATE SONY PLAYSTATION 28 99 PUTTY SQUAD .99 CANNON FODDER 024 09 ADAMS FAMILY VALUESS CONSOLE ECALL ACE COMBAT CALL WWE RAW GUNNERS HEAVEN  99 CHAOS ENGINE 5099 AQUANOTIC HOLIDAY CALL 159 99 WOPLE SOLDIER URBAN STRIKE 28.99 CALL RIDGE RACER 59 99 VETAL JACKET SNES UK M D IMPORTS ACCESSORIES SUPER BOMBERMAN 2  99 LIGHT CRUSADER CALL 169 99 BOXERS ROAD MORTAL KOMBAT CALL INDIANA JONES GREATEST BEYOND OASIS CALL PHILOSOMA 169 99 RAYMAN .99 NEW HORIZON CALL FANTASTIC PINBALL .99 PRIMAL RANGE CALL MICRO MACHINES 52499 FANTASY STAR4 CALL AMERICAN SNES CANNON FODDER .09 ROMAN NUMERALSCALL FINAL FANTASY 59.99 YOSHIS ISLAND CALL FINAL FIGHT 2 .99 EARTH BOUND 59 99 DONKEY KONG II SPIDERMAN TV  99 BEST DEALS ON PART DRAGON VIEW (59.99 KILLER INSTINCT CALL OGRE BATTLE WWE RAW EXCHANGE ALL SYSTEMS 234.99 59.99 ORTAL KOMBAT CHRONO TRIGGER CALL CALL SIDE POCKET .99 SECRET OF EVERMORECALLBATMAN FOREVER CALL FLINTSTONES .99 WE ALSO HAVE A FRONT MISSION CALL PRIMAL RANGE PUTTY SQUAD 28.99 LARGE RANGE OF 3DO. SECRET OF MANA2 CALL NEW HORIZON SLAM MASTER .99 JAGUAR AND NEO GEO 100'S OF OTHER GAMES POCKY & ROCKY2228.99 CD GAMES AVAILABLE ON ALL SYSTEMS NEW AND OLD, NOT FOR MAIL ORDER AND SERVICE HARDWARE SONY PLAYSTATION INCLUDING TEKKEN SEGA SATURN INCLUDING SHINOBI X 121.00 LAXENO CALL VAMPIRE BETH DEALS INCLUDE CARRIAGE, SCART LEAD. JOYPAD 6 MONTHS WARRANTY AND LISTED GAME  SOFTWARE (PSX) ACE COMBAT (SATURN) SHINOBIX  (PSX) BOXERS ROAD (SATURN) GRANCHASER (PSX) GUNNER'S HEAVEN (SATURN) ASTAL  (PSX) MAGIC BEAST WARRIORS (SATURN) DAYTONA USA (PSX) TWIN BEE (SATURN) PARODIUS DELUXE ...... 148 (SATURN) VIRTUA FIGHTER DELUXE  (PSX) TOHSHIN DEN (SATURN) DAEDALUS ENCOUNTER [48 (PSX) RIDGE RACER (SATURN) BATTLE MONSTERS ......48 (PSX) PARODIUS... (SATURN) X MEN .......... CALL (PSX) GUNDAM (PSX) TEKKEN ES7 (PSX) RAIDEN PROJECT (PSX) GUSSUN OYOYO........ 157 (BDO) ALL NEW SOFTWARE 8595683653&a a SUPER PRO FIGHTER X II  SUPER WILD CARD 2.8CC .2.XCC-2.8CC  SUPER WILD CARD DX . ROM 2.8 CC 24-32M  ACCESSORIES PSX MEMORY CARD ...... PSX JOYPAD... PSX RGB CABLE... SATURN JOYPAD SATURN RGB CABLE  SATURN STEERING WHEEL 24 SATURN RGB CABLE HEARTS LEISURE (LONDON) 125 BOWES ROAD, PALMERS GREEN, LONDON N.13 4SB TEL: 0181 889 0811 / 0181 360 5562 FAX: 0181 881 9558 SPECIAL OFFER EXARCADE FULLY WORKING 2 PLAYER ARCADE MACHINE WITH 20 INCH FULL COLOUR MONITOR INCLUDING ONE OF THE FOLLOWING GAMES: WORLD CUP, EUROLEAGUE, P.O.W OR INSTEAD, MAKE AN OFFER OF ANY OTHER GAME ONLY .00 DELIVERY ARRANGED ANYWHERE AROUND THE WORLD FULLY COMPATIBLE WITH ALL JAMMA P.C.B. GAMES OVER 500 P.C.B. GAMES IN STOCK, P/X WELCOME FOR FULL PRICE LIST OR SPECIFICATION SEND S.A.E. MANY OTHER VIDEO GAME ARCADE MACHINES IN STOCK FULL REPAIR & UPGRADE SERVICE FOR SUPERGUNS AND ARCADE MACHINES. SPARES AVAILABLE & ANIME MODELS: MODELS (STREET FIGHTER II MOVIE...  DRAGON BALL ZSD (12 PCS) ....... PATLABOR MOVIE. MODELS FATAL FURY I AND II (SET) ..  LAMINATED POSTERS (A3 SIZE)...ES ART OF FIGHTING  (SALLOR MOON, YU YU HAKUSHO. DRAGON BALL Z DRAGON BALLS Z) DRAGON BALL Z BATTLE ACTION  VERTICAL WALL SCROLL.  FIGURES (SAILOR MOON, YU YU, HAKUSHO, STREET FIGHTER II SD (12 PCS).... 12 DRAGON BALL Z GREEN LEGEN RAN) ALL CHEQUES AND POSTAL ORDERS TO: GOLDEN GATE EXPORT CO. INTERNATIONAL 55. DICKSON STREET, WIDNESS, CHESHIRE, WAS 6NX, ENGLAND. SEND AN SA E FOR A FREE CATALOGUE TODAY TEL: 0378 190009 FAX: 0151 424 0216 E-MAIL: GGECI@ .CO.UK. "


"16-BIT INTRO Mortal Kombat 3 Acclaim have just signed this monster for 16-bit and we take a major gander at what could well be the Christmas all-formats number one! 16-BIT Things are very quiet at the moment on 16-bit, but with massive conversions such as Primal Rage, Doom and Mortal Kombat 3, who needs the chaff? 60 Primal Rage Time Warner's conversion of this monster coin-op is finally here on the Mega Drive and SNES. Have they done the business and brought this motley collection of rubber dinosaurs to life? Find out here! 66 Batman Forever Despite what the reviews say, the movie's completely ace! And with the 16-bit conversion of the game it looks like Acclaim have done it justice. 68 Phantom Can the Mega Drive stomach another action platformer? The answer's probably yes when it's one as big as this! 70 Consoles USA We check out the console scene Stateside to find out what they're going loopy for at the moment. 62 Donkey Kong Land You will not believe this game when you see it Rare have created a handheld conversion that's actually better than the SNES original! Honest! Turn to page 62 now to find out more about this remarkable game. 64 Gloom Even the SNES has got Doom now, but the poor old Amiga's still struggling on without it. In the meantime we've got Gloom to tide us over. Is it the fix that Doom junkies need? We tell you. 72 Doom Is it really possible to put Doom onto the SNES? Ocean think so and so do we as take an early blast through this completely amazing conversion. Prepare to be dazzled at it hits you blood and all. 59 "


"CVG REVIEW REVIEW RS SNES.. BEAT-EM-UP TIME WARNER. .99. i A That sounds like the title of a Heavy Metal album. Two friendly dinosaurs build a snow monolith. OUT AUGUST 1-2 PLAYERS DERS MEGA DRIVE, GAME BOY GAME GEAR. PC. SATURN MAC, PLAYSTATION, JAGUAR AND 300 VERSIONS PLANNED. ARCADE VERSION AVAILABLE.. That looks rude. Ban these evil games now!  R Murdoch BRAIN FLAKES DIABLO WINS PRIMAL Dino where your children play... Dinosaurs, despite their ginormous girth, have brains about the size and consistency of a pea. As a result they tend to get a bit confused by things like contra-flow systems and video recorders. They also have rather fragile minds which seize up if they take a bit of a battering You can tell how awake your dino is by checking out the Brainergy bar underneath the regular life bar. Once this hits zero your terrible lizard is stunned and incapable until shaken awake with joypad bashing or slapped back into consciousness by an enemy attack. ESSERE inosaurs are pretty blinking scary, as anyone who's ever seen Jurassic Park will tell you. Indeed, none was scarier than the terrifying Tyrannosaurus Rex (King of the Tyrant, Lizards), as anyone who's ever played Dinosaur Top Trumps could tell you, because that was the best card and almost always won. But that was 64-71 million years ago, and now a more terrifying dino has reared its (slightly belated) pink head Barney, King of the Friendly Smiley Hypno-Lizards. The Pied Piper of the reptile world, Barney uses his strange mind powers to control the feeble wills of young children. You can see them following him around, eyes glazed, fixed rictus grins upon their faces, mindlessly repeating his platitudes of goodwill, before being led off to his foul urine-drenched cave to be devoured. It wouldn't be quite so horrifying if he didn't make them sing those awful songs before eating them. Next to him the latex monstrosities of Primal Rage look quite wholesome. I certainly know which ones I'd rather leave my kids with A Aah, primitive Scrabble chips, if I'm not mistak en. From the Benozodiac Age. Honest. NDON 60 "


"REVIEW REVIEW CVG ALTERNATIVE PLAYSTATION RAARGH! ON MEGA DRIVE TOO! Not content with bringing their Paleolithic majesty to the SNES, those wily Primal Ragers are next set to invade the Mega Drive. The conversion is looking every bit as faithful as the SNES job, so Segaowning Primal fans look set for a treat. But don't just take our word for it, have a look at these here, screenshots... TEKKEN (NAMCO. Tekken is both a technical and imaginative tour de force. It might be unfair comparing the two, but life's tough suckers, and it's time you learned that. REVIEWED ISSUE 163: 977 MEET, GREET AND EAT Birds do it, bees do it, even educated fleas do it, let's do it, let's eat some nosh. Yes, we all eat food, and dinosaurs are no exception, the lardy gets. But they don't eat pies, cakes and sandwiches like we do, oh no. They eat people. Luckily for the dinosaurs they've got bunches of human follower slaves (a bit like Barney) for snackage purposes. Every time your opponent is suitably bashed, one of his minions leaps prostrate in front of you and, should you know the required joypad commands, you can bend down and eat them, thus replenishing your energy. VERDICT SCORES THE PRIMAL RAGE COIN-OP GRAPHICS. SNES As a conversion, Primal Rage offers everything you could want. It's as close to the coin-op as is possible, and the feel and controls have been translated perfectly. But then again I always thought the coin-op was a bit pointless. If you're a big Primal fan you won't be disappointed by this, but if you're just gener ally in the market for a new game sixty quid could be better spent. RAD (MUSIC. SOUND EFFECTS..90 GAMEPLAY. VALUE OVERALL ey, you may not be able to win the lottery (who needs it anyway), but you can win an excellent space-hugging Primal Rage coin-op totally gratis! We've teamed up with our sister titles Mean Machines Sega, Sega Magazine and Nintendo Magazine, along with Dixons and Time Warner to bring you this exclusive competition. Entering couldn't be easier. Simply pop along to your local Dixons, purchase a copy of this fine coinop conversion and the cheery little sales person will hand you a scratch card. Then all you have to do is rub off that annoying bit of silver and pick up an October issue of one of the magazines listed above. If your number matches the prize number in that magazine you may have won the coin-op! See? Don't say we don't give you anything, alright? "


"CVG IGREVIEW REVIEW GAME BOY PLATFORM Ooh! Oon! Oon! I want to be like you-00Oo! And you know that's exactly what the Game Boy version does. Escept it plays better than its superb bigger brothers Donkey Kong country... RARE. .99. OUT 18 AUGUST ONE PLAYER NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED SNES VERSION AVAILABLE. BALDONKEY KONG Id Donkey Kong must sit there in his palatial tree-mansion counting the bananas, scratching his bonce in amazement at how exactly this situation arose. All those years back he was the badass who did time for chucking barrels at that plucky little moustachioed plumber, Mario. Can you really blame the gangster gorilla for throwing kegs at a man who insists upon wearing a slug on his top lip? Anyhow, the judge didn't think that way and DK went into the bighouse, until, low and behold he turns up with a driving licence ready to ram Mario off the road for all time in Mariokart. We wish he had because he must have known that the pizza guzzling u-bend repair man would morph into Bob Hoskins and become a movie star. Again the law didn't take to his monkeying around in a motor, and again he ended up caged behind bars. Until those benevolent boys at Rare put up the bail and DK became gainfully employed. Now he's rubbing his dexterous hands and toes together as the Game Boy version gets ready for the shops. With 30 extra levels, groundbreaking graphics and some new enemies, old, DK is truly a brass-ed monkey. 62 "


"REVIEW REVIEW CVG ROLL OUT THE BARREL VERDICT.. GAME BOY If someone accosted you in the high street and said a GB version of the classic DK Country would be superior, you'd have reached for the straightjacket. However, half-an-hour after playing it you'd sheepishly have to undo the straps of the alleged nutter. This game is brilliant and the only difference to the SNES version is the rendered sequences. This is a small price to pay as it's cram-packed with detail, beautiful animation and most precious of all. gameplay. Amazing, one of the best things for the Game Boy ever. SIMON CLAYS NE The Kong family enjoy being shot from barrel to barrel to get through the levels. Although God only knows what kind of flashbacks Kong has reminiscing back to when all he knew to do was throw them. PIGS CAN FLY! NAUGHTY-LUS Hogwash Nautilus the doesn't really crafty crusinterfere with tacean likes to our swinging hang around simians, but he treasure troves doesn't half waiting for apes restrict the with an eye for monkeying loot. around. RAMRAIDER The be-goated Ram Head keeps his head low while waiting for your cheeky monkeys to turn up. He's really rock hard. I FANGFISH. A deadly fillet from the deep that uses ape bones to digest its food and will turn you into battered baboon if he gets too close. All kind of problems for your primates when this psycho womble, Hard Hat, starts throwing his weight, and hat for that matter, around. KILLER GORILLA Top Planet of the Japes action when DK confronts Krusha the bevested muscle-head and duly dispatches him. Be careful because Diddie's liable to get himself caught by the monkey nuts if he takes Krusha on. MUSIC.. SOUND EFFECTS. 74 (GAMEPLAY. VALUE LIKE FATHER LIKE SON M. 63 OVERALL Well-ish. Obviously Kong's a lot stockier with all that thick apely fur whereas his simian sibling, Diddy is faster and more agile, but can't quite pack the punch that Kong can. We'll leave you to argue about who you prefer. "


"REVIEW A1200 SHOOT-\"EM-UP... BLACH MAGIC .99 A Looks a little like Alien vs Predator meets Bloodshot, doesn't it? 1-2 PLAYER NO OTHER VERSIONS PLANNED CD32 VERSION AVAILABLE Has the Amiga finally got a genuine decent Doom clone, or just a steaming pile of dungeon sewage? GLOOM The 'doom' game eh, can we ever escape it? It's been around for blinking ages in various forms, yet still manages to cause a stir in the microswitches of many a joypad when a new version or clone pops up. In fact, you've only got to take a flip through this ish and you'll find a reviews of Ultimate Doom and preview of Doom on the SNES. So it was only a question of time before the Amiga came up with a half-decent clone there have been others, but they've all been pretty dull affairs specialising in fancy wall textures followed by dull 3D walks around dungeons rather than a stiff tonic of double guts 'n' gore on the rocks. In Gloom you play a US Marine on a mission to reap havoc in a labyrinth of baddy infested dungeons. Not the most unusual of plots, but it could be just the medicine Amiga owners badly need, craving for blood as they do. Apart from an abatoir full of dismembered limbs and blood, Gloom also comes with a psychotic two-player splitscreen death-match affair, a two-player you-and-me-against-the-world-pal and a jolly little link-up mode. All in all we think! that's pretty good value for money, on a blood for cash basis you understand. VERDICT. A1200 Gloom has to be the definitive Amiga Doom clone thus far and it's highly unlikely that too many others will materialise before the Amiga (in its present form) splutters off to the home for senile technology. But what we get here is indeed highly playable. What we lose in looks, the enemy get pretty pixilated close up, we regain in pure gore playability. sheer volume of flying entrails and more levels than you could shake a dismembered forearm at. Belting stuff and a definite browny point for the Amiga. Who said it's on it's last monitor stand, ooh, I did, Ah, well kind of strike that from the record, for now. SIMON CLAYS SCORES GRAPHICS ANIMA MUSIC Que @ SOUND EFFECTS GAMEPLAY VALUE OVERALL BLOWN AWAY Gloom comes with two play modes, Messy and Meaty. Neither of which are suitable for anyone in cream Chino's and white loafers, although it's questionable what is suitable for anyone in this attire apart from a good kickin'. Anyhow, Messy just throws limbs and internal organs all over the shop, whereas meaty is the proverbial super-rare fillet steak. Not only does it throw guts and entrails akimbo, but it leaves the rotting chopped liver on your screen and floor for the entirety of the level. Ah, Bisto. 64 "


".. .. MODEL: Philips HCS35 COLOUR MONITORS ONLY  AMIGA, NES, SNES, MEGADRIVE I & II AND ATARI ST COMPATIBLE  FULLY REFURBISHED, TESTED AND BOXED  SCART RGB AND COMPOSITE PHONO INPUTS  INTEGRAL SPEAKER  FOLD AWAY STAND INC VAT NLQ PRINTERS ONLY  FOR AMIGA, ATARI ST, FALCON & IBM  FULLY REFURBISHED, TESTED AND BOXED  EPSON & IBM COMPATIBLE  80 COLUMN 9 PIN DOT MATRIX 120CPS SPEED  NEAR LETTER QUALITY PRINTING  TRACTOR & FRICTION PAPER FEED  PARALLEL CENTRONICS INTERFACE Postage & Packing : Single item , both items .50 CHEQUES OR POSTAL ORDERS ONLY MADE OUT TO \"MICRO-T\" TELEPHONE : 01938 556575 / 556623 FAX : 01938 55550 MICROTRADE THE REDWOOD BUILDING LEIGHTON RD BUTTINGTON WELSHPOOL POWYS SY21 8HE $55 INC VAT MODEL: Philips NMS1436 Latest Japanese products exported from Hong Kong call our Hong Kong office for trade orders. Our Export Deals SEGAJATURN Playstation Machine   Games -50 -45 Silvers   Joypad   FOR GLOBAL IMPORTS/EXPORTS Run Pacific HK 8 Kau Loon Hang Tsuen, Ti PO, NT, Hong Kong Tel: +852 2676 2382 Fax: +852 2677 9976 Hong Kong outlet only for trade exports Run Pacific UK RUN pacific 31 Kingsbury Square, Aylesbury, Bucks HP20 2JA Next day delivery and Tel 01296 331 625 '10370 277 775 pick-ups available from our UK outlet. Fax: 01296 433 437 Part exchange available for your old hardware. Machine  Machine  Ace Combat  SEGATURN Shin Shinobi Den  Vampire Virtua Fighter Remix  Rayman PlayStation Zero Divide  "


"PREVIEW SNES/MEGA DRIVE BEAT-EM-UP.. ACCLAIM ETBA... OUT SEPT 7TH... (1-2 PLAYERS MORE VERSIONS THAN YOU CAN COUNT PLANNED NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE Half bat, half man, all Batman it's Batman! batman forever ou know, if I was Batman, things would be a bit different around Gotham City. Let's face it, Bruce Wayne's got his priorities wrong, How many times have you seen him at some swank party where an attendant posse of glamourous millionairesses are hanging on his every word, only to rush off without explanation in order to save the life of a poor person? Now if that was me I'd leave the paupers of this world to fend for themselves. I'd have museums to open and stuff like that in my role as a great philanthropic charity figurehead. Then I'd swoop into the night, using my uncanny bat-abilities to strike fear into the hearts of expensive off-licenses, dodgy kebab shops and rude supermarket checkout assistants. And I'd leave all the really dangerous-looking types to the police, That's what they're there for, after all. I'm not going to risk my privileged millionaire playboy ass for some ungrateful wretches like the citizens of Gotham, oh no. But that's exactly what Acclaim's forthcoming super-licence asks of you. Don the mantle of the Dark Knight. Save the world from evil and tyrannical domination, they say. Beat up villains. Yeah, and I'd like to see one of their programmers putting their dukes up against Two-Face and his gun. 66 "


"PREVIEW PREVIEW CVG AND WHAT ABOUT THE GAME? He's great, Batman, isn't he? Normal superheroes have to use icky web fluid or eye beams and stuff to impress people, but Batman can do loads. And this versatility is reflected in Batman Forever, where the Batmeister (and the Robinmeister with a second player) runs, jumps, punches and batarangs his way all over the shop. Obviously you've got to know how to use the character properly if you want to get anywhere in the game, but our advice is to learn to fight first, because it's primarily a beat 'em up. HOW DO THEY DO THAT? When you've got a licence like Batman Forever you have to make an effort to do it justice, unlike the usual cartoon conversion where you just put an approximation of the main character into a platform game and hope. To make sure Batman Forever captures the feel of the excellent movie, Acclaim have pulled out all the stops. The sprites featured in the game aren't just ordinary hand-drawn things, they're actual actors in genuine real costumes performing against a green screen, from where their likeness is digitised and put into the code. Alright, so it might not be Val Kilmer pulling off the special moves, but it's someone who certainly dresses like him (in Batman). 67 "


"PREVIEW MEGA DRIVE PLATFORM VIACOM ETBA OUT OCTOBER ONE PLAYER SNES VERSION PLANNED NO OTHER VERSIONS AVAILABLE A More exciting non-stop Phantom-related Techno Trouser action! Can the Mega Drive handle yet another platform game? The answer's a definite maybe when you look at the size of this one. phantom Hmm, that's, umm, interesting. The Phantom was one of those cartoons suffered by sickly kids and them only. That's because it was one of those dodgy cheapo ones that use to appear on whatever regional telly you had just before Rainbow started on a schoolday. And what did you get to see through the mucus-induced haze of your cold/black eye/mum-mystomach-hurts? An animated adventure with some bloke in a spandex cat-suit (sans zip) who looked all the world like Space Ghost (yet another Bgrade cartoon 'celeb'). But this isn't a game based on character, the onus is on value for money. The finished version will feature something in the order of 70 levels and more weapons than a Manchester drug-den. What could hamper the game is that it doesn't appear to be all that original, although the fact that's it's so sodding massive could well make it worth buying if you're one of those who can only afford one game every four or five months. Who knows? Will the Phantom triumph over his low-grade cartoon origins and free cash-strapped Mega Drive gamers from yet another re-run of the original Sonic which came with the machine? We'll tell you next month. 68 EEEEEE Look behind you Mr Phantom, sir. ROPEY-DOPEY Amongst The Phantom's arsenal of weapons is a Bionic Commandos-style grappling hook. Select it and watch him swing, climb walls and get shot when you hit the wrong button. Hours of fun! A Look! Techno Trousers! Where's Grommit? "


"PREVIEW PSESS START PRESS START SNES. SUB-ZERO SHANG TSING BEAT-EM-UP. IS KANO'S EYE STILL THE SAME SIZE? ACCLAIM ETBA. OUT NOVEMBER (1-2 PLAYERS.. ALL MAJOR FORMATS PLANNED ARACADE VERSION AVAILABLE. Probably the biggest question pertaining to the conversion in progress is whether all the secret hidden stuff found (or not, it's secret after all) in the arcade game will make it to the home formats. After all, Mortal 3, with its Babalities, Animalities, Fatalities, Totalities and Hyperealities has the most secret guff ever seen in a beat-'em-up (probably). But with Probe once again taking the coding reigns in their gnarled yet noble fingers, our guess is that there will in fact be more hidden gubbins in the home versions. Go on, bet you 10p w'ere right. It's signed, sealed and almost delivered! Huzzah! limey, INCIN only this morning did a press release land upon my desk telling me that Acclaim have signed up the rights to convert the 16-bit formats of Mortal Kombat 3 than handsome Simon from that very software house walks into the office and shows us how the SNES version is progressing. Which means either... A: Acclaim are prompt and very nice, or... B: The post is crap and the press release is about a million years out of date. Anyway, we might have known about it ages since, but this is probably the first chance all you lovely readers have had to get a load of top-quality screenshots like the ones found on this page. And don't they just look splendid? To think we were all a bit curious as to who would handle the conversions after Williams and Acclaim went their separate ways after the days of their \"special friendship\", and whether the (ace) quality of the previous conversions would survive the transplant (like when you move flowers around). But we needn't have worried, because Acclaim have promised, scout's honour, to include all the groovy gameplay which makes the arcade version the crowd-wowing hit that it is. Anyway, that's enough blithering from us. Just look at those lovely graphics. TER MASTE SHANG TSUN mortal kombat 69 "


"16-BIT ROUND-UP Consoles USA STAR TREK: DEEP SPACE NINE * SNES * Playmates Based around the TV series (which we've heard could be cancelled shortly) the game brings together all the key characters in a mass bundle against the Cardassians, Borg and Ferengi. The press love this little number, which is pretty amazing con sidering the TV show's duller than Wales on a Saturday night. Still there's plenty of variety in the action, a strong story line and plenty of different characters to control. It's the best Star Trek game to hit any console, even if it was licensed from the worst series With the 16-bit console market a little, ahem, quiet at the moment, we cast our abused little eyes across the Atlantic to find out what games are going down well over there. GB BOMBERMAN 2 * Game Boy * Nintendo a on 21 One of the best games ever written and it's so bloody Simple. If you don't already have a copy of Bomberman on any format, it'll be worth shelling out for a Game Boy just to play it. It's just totally superb in any incarnation. Everyone should own a Bomber man game, and that way we can all get together and play multiplayer Bomberman for ever and ever, ending all wars and poverty, or etc. (ar) DAT multiplayer E 9 ever, ending Vevaca 20 Ben 70 "


"16-BIT ROUND-UP EXO SQUAD * Mega Drive * Playmates Based on the popular American cartoon series and money-spinning toy offshoots, this must be one of the toughest games to be released on the Mega Drive this year. The action's a combination of Contra-style platforming, first-person blaster and head-to-head beat-'em-up. The result is a real mixed bag and certainly a game that isn't for novices. 1The main complaint is levelled at the dodgy control system. Still, that's something gamesters have had to put up with in countless titles over the years, and have consistently proved that if the subject's right, and there's plenty to be getting on with, they'll ignore any problems like that. SECRET OF THE STARS * SNES Tecmo EARTHBOUND * SNES * Nintendo Goods Auto Fight Defend Run Ava BRUGERBOXON For some reason the UK is really short of decent console RPGs. Yeah, the few that are out there are amazing, such as Illusion of Time, but once you've gone through the bunch, there's not much else out there. This, at least, is a solid adventure despite the uninspiring plot and crude graphics. Not something you should go out of your way to track down, but at least it's there to bail RPG freaks out of a hole. What will put most people off this is the graphics. You could easily believe you were playing an NES game, which is a travesty these days, especially when you think that Zelda on SNES has been around for ages and still looks good these days. Since Zelda debuted on the SNES, plenty of RPGs have attempted to follow its path to success, making original adventures hard to find. This one, though, is an exception. Not that good to look at, but it's almost completely original and extremely funny. Once you get into it you'll be hard pushed to stop playing. Don't be put off by the kiddie-ish graphics. This isn't a game for junior, though, as it's pretty tough and very absorbing. Let's just keep our fingers crossed  that Nintendo UK TAPAPE decide to launch it officially over here. een soos Autoritet 22 OBESERTA 71 JOHN'S "


"PREVIEW DOOM SNES SHOOT-EM-UP.. OCEAN ETBA Prepare to face your Doom, Super NES die-hard; as iD's phenomenal shoot-to-thrill monsterpiece goes 16-bit! This is a true story. OUT SEPTEMBER ONE PLAYER NINTENDO ULTRA 64 VERSION PLANNED PC.32X AND JAGUAR VERSIONS AVAILABLE. 72 "


"PREVIEW PREVIEW CVG WATCH YOUR BACK EN Game play is viewed from a firstperson perspective, and your every move is carried out real time. This means that you and every thing else on Mars behaves almost exactly as though this were a real life situation. Unlike a typical action game, where the enemy's reactions depend on the hero's placement on screen, adversaries here are just as likely to hunt you down as you are them. With everything viewed as though using your own eyes, this situation gets extremely scary! Protecting your virtual life is made even more difficult by the fact that all foes are able to sneak up from behind. A Blood! Yes, and on a family machine too! The aim of the game is to kill, kill, kill and kill some more. ew could have imagined that the same custom-chip that enabled Nintendo's Stunt Race FX would one day power such a dark spectacle as Doom. Nevertheless, in Doom, the Super NES survives the last step of its macabre transformation from friendly family console, to pseudo-next-generation animal! For the benefit of the uninitiated, allow us to recall what has gone before. One player adopts the role of a disgraced marine. For the crime of assaulting a superior officer, you and your subordinate ass have been found a home on Mars. Your new post. Here you discover two things: there is no life on the red planet, but there is a hell and you're living right next door! Until now this fabled zoo of the diabolical has been closed off to our holy universe. However disastrous Interplanetary Teleportation experiments on a nearby moon have opened the gates. It's feeding time, and your butt is dish of the day. Your buddies already digesting nicely in the stomachs of demons, it seems you are the sole survivor. Mankind's only hope. Straight between the eyes tends to do the trick. Flaming hell fire skulls tend not to be too friendly. 2013 FINISHED AFRAID OF THE DARK As the screen-shots show, the Super NES generates a near perfect representation of Doom running on a 386 PC. And with surprisingly few sacrifices. A massive 22 of the original 27 levels remain perfectly intact, displayed through the same size window as Stunt Race FX (about 70% of the screen.) There's no multi-player option, but tighter control courtesy of the Super NES joypad is a bonus. Of course the key issue is how well the game plays. Those exciting details are coming our way next month, where CVG will be able to call upon its unrivalled expertise to bring you the definitive review. 909 GED 73 "


"ARCADES CVG This month in our Pandora's box of delights we get all virtual on you. Not only do we have the definitive review of Virtua Striker but we also check out the latest VR games from Virtuality. So, slip on your helmet and immerse yourself in our paper alternative to cyberspace. VIDEO Virtua Striker Champion! Sports sim 50p per play Sega 1-2 Players Forget standing in the rain eating a soggy pie watching El Tel's beleaguered bunch get stuffed by the Outer Hebrides. Instead head to your local arcade emporium, find the Virtua Striker cabinet and bung a couple of quid in. You won't regret it because AM2's latest in the Virtua collection is the best to date. Based on the 2002 World Cup, to be hosted in surprise, surprise Japan. Virtua Striker features all the nor mal sides you'd expect to see in a footy sim. However, AM2 have taken a multi-studded step further by actually featuring individual stars from some of the more famous sides. As you'd expect, to render look-a-likey Guillets, Baggios and Valderamas takes some pretty snazzy graphics, a job which Virtua Striker shrugs off with ease. And the attention to detail is incredible with the players all benefiting from skin toning and even boot detail. The animation is undoubtedly the most realistic to appear in a coin-op footy game, and once again it's the attention to realism that pushes Virtua Striker ahead of the rest. Little touches like the way the players defend free-kicks or the way your players celebrate a special goal really add to the all-round playability of the game. There hasn't been a football title that comes anywhere near to Virtua Striker and I doubt there will be for a while. Virtua Striker redefines the genre, it's beautifully playable, terribly addictive and could well become Britain's favourite national sport. Roll on the Saturn conversion. MACHINES STICK SHUFFLER Virtua Striker uses your typical eight-way lever plus three buttons to either turn your players into polygon Peles or reduce them to virtual Vinnies of the Jones variety. Button 1: short pass/ sliding tackle/ heading Button 2: long pass Button 3: shoot the longer the button is depressed the harder and higher it travels 05 1P ARGENTINE TURN AKATU 74 "


"ARCADES CVG DROME OOH! YOU DIRTY BAR-STOOL BRAZIL BRAZIL AM2's soccer incarnation really lets fly with the tackles, but being Virtual there's none of your softarsed out-for-ninemonths-with-anachilles-tendon bull. In fact, you can be the dirtiest rogue from a Sunday league and you still don't get shown a card, or hurt anyone for that matter. SUDDEN DEBI If your match ends in a draw, then it's the dreaded penalty shoot-out. With three pens each you'll have to keep your cool otherwise it'll be an early bath with all those sweaty polygons for you mate, or more credits in the slot, per-lease. NIGERIA BRAZIL SPRITES I ANIMATION CONTROL PLAYABILITY V cpu MULTIPLAYER 18 19 ON YER BIKE Once you get used to the control mechanism some pretty cool moves can be pulled off. By reversing the stick and timing the shoot button you can pull off some Brazilian type bike-kicks. Your best efforts are rewarded by your players performing a rendition of the okey-cokey (that's the legal one, not the Maradona one). WE 20 AZN 96 A SPECIAL THANKS TO THE MEAN MACHINES AMUSEMENT ARCADES, 9 ISLINGTON HIGH STREET, LONDON. 75 "


"ARCADES VIDEO DROME :33 Ridge Raider da (Ridge Raider! DER 24 Driving sim  per play Namco 1-2 Players Cyber Cycles After several cyber successes 441 Namco are back with their piece de resistance. Cyber Cycles is the coin-op king's motorbike equivalent to their rip-roaring hit Ridge Racer. First off it looks absolutely amazing. And, although there are only two courses to race over, they both leave the graphics from Ridge Racer spluttering at the lights. The beginner's course. Greenwood, is very much akin to the opening course from Ridge Racer; a coastal affair with long straights and bends that encourage you to open up. The expert's course, Neo Yokohama is a very different affair though. Set at night you twist and turn your way through the futuristic illuminated blur of a high-rise metropolis battling it out against the other bikes. In fact the whole course is extremely reminiscent of the bike sequences in Akira. The bikes themselves are all geared to experience with the Wild Hog being the fastest and most unstable of beasts, the Anthias handling well but possessing little acceleration and with the NVR750 sitting comfortably as the allrounder. Steering is a combination of handlebars and leaning and your views are either rider, pillion or chase. The riders themselves look, behave and respond to your movements and have a very Tekken flavour to them. Cyber Cyles is outstandingly physical race action. It looks great, plays and feels very good but it doesn't half hurt your knees! Although only two-player units are available as yet, news from overseas is that full comms versions could allow up to an eight-player option, 19 693 SPRITES ANIMATION REALISM PLAYABILITY V cpu MULTIPLAYER 18 19 76 "


"ARCADES CVG 2:28 Driving sim  per play Virtuality 1-4 Players Beat-'em-up 50p per play SNK 1-2 Players The Klash Buggy Ball Kabuki Klash Drivin' you up the wall 01 00 Set in a virtual arena, Buggy Ball's premise is very simple: drive your car into a huge beachball and smash it out of the arena to score a goal. After that you can do what you like. It sounds simple, but believe us it takes some mastering. The control mechanism's simple enough with a joystick controlling forward, reverse and turbo, but it's the VR environment that takes some getting used to. Life inside the helmet means that you actually have to look behind you to reverse and you are always looking sideways out of one of your windows in an attempt to find the ball. Once you get used to having to use the 360-degree world that Virtuality creates then Buggy Ball is great fun. Best played against friends riding in one of the other four cars, Buggy Ball is yet another wheel-spin in the right direction from the Virtuality people, 2D or not 2D, that is the question. Unfortunately for SNK the answer is a resounding not. Now, rumour has it that their R&D boys are now working with polygons à la Tekken, but meanwhile they continue to churn out 2D clones faster than Bruce Rioch can spend cash down at Highbury. This month's variation on a theme is Kabuki Klash which as it turns out is quite a surreal twist on the SNK theme. The fighting is set in a rather bizarre world described as east of Eden where a dozen strange characters battle it out. The mystical mutant fighters, which include an elongated ape, all have some seriously strange specials. For example the monkey can summon a stampede of wild horses which trample the other character in a kind of Rawhide-type of fashion. There's also a bird who randomly flies around the play area dropping power-ups like extra energy, poison bottles and even banana skins for you to slip on if you're not on the ball. You could never say that SNK's titles play poorly, but after so many repetitions of the Street Fighter style and control it's getting really hard to enthuse about. You couldn't describe Kabuki Klash as poor and SNK would justify the extra magic power-ups and other slight additions as enough, but unfortunately we don't. SPRITES ANIMATION REALISM PLAYABILITY V cpu MULTIPLAYER SPRITES ANIMATION SPECIALS PLAYABILITY V cpu MULTIPLAYER inserts... inserts... inserts... inserts... inserts... Ins Inser Desert Dual It's time to throw-up as this latest whip-lash-tastic offering from the Emaginator straps you into the passenger seat of an All Terrain Vehicle (desert buggy). The gear-crunching commences when a rival buggy team challenges you to a race across the dunes and you're stupid enough to rise to the bait. Racing across desert paths and over sandbanks this ride is as rough and ready as you're going to get. The hydraulics really capture the essence of speed as you hurtle along through the dust in chase of the other buggy with the Emaginator throwing you through every bend at breakneck speed. Apart from a sick sodden shirt and whiplash, Desert Duel will leave you in no doubt of the Emaginator's simulation capabilities. And the breathtaking visuals make it about as close as you're probably going to get to the real thing without crossing the Atlantic and buying your own ATV off some halfbreed hillbilly. EMAGINATOR "


"CVG DIRECTORY THE FASTEST WITH NEW GAMES ES FIX W53 282 PlayStation Saturn  with choice of game Stepdown Transformer & Scart Conversion MON SAT 45 47 High St Bloxwich, Walsall 10.00 AM W53 2BZ 8.00 PM (01922) 473 512 WE BUY, SELL & PART EXCHANGE BRAND NEW TITLES MANY USED TITLES UK SATURN USED 3DO SYS WE ALSO STOCK IS HERE!!! + 1 GAME SUPERNES & + VIRTUA FIGHTERS MEGADRIVE .99 WE STOCK BRAND NEW & GAMES .99 USED 3D0 GAMES FROM NEW & USED. DAYTONA USA $44.99 .00 PLEASE RING FOR ANY CLOCKWORK KNIGHT_$39.99 32X (USED) TITLES YOU ARE AFTER VICTORY GOAL .99 (WE WILL STOCK EVERY SATURN .99 MAIL ORDER GAME THAT IS RELEASED. PLEASE PRICES DO NOT RING FOR LATEST TITLES) INCLUDE P&P AVAILABLE 0956 423 48 Scart Leads E20 Games  m-8pm 7 days a week Same day Next day delivery SKILL ACADEMY PO Box 5913, Ealing. London W13 9ZX CONSOLE CITY IMPORTERS OF GAMES, CONSOLES AND ACCESSORIES, REPAIRS, UPGRADES AND CONVERSIONS LONE ROD Soort Conversion .. CALLE SUPPLIERS OF Sega Saturn, Sega 32X, 3DO, Sony Playstation, Jaguar, Nintendo, PC, CD Rom, Amiga Sega Saturn 3DO FZ10 (Virtua Fighter Special Offer (Starblade) .00 .00 WE BUY, SELL & 'PX'ALL GOODS CALL NOW FOR CHEAPEST PRICES 104B Wolverhampton Road, Stafford, ST17 4AH TelFax: 01785 56202 VISA We Will Beat Any Advertised Price Tel/Fax: (0181) 539 9980 DYNAMITE KONSOLES TEL FAX: 01234 342568 9.7 pm Mon-Fri 9-5 pm Sat-Sun Sony Playstation ,00 Sega Saturn .00 Neo Geo CD EASOO FR .99 360.00 SONY PLAYSTATION 5499 Pake Bote .00 3. DO Panasonic .00 Atari Jaguar 44.99 AQUANAUTS HOLIDAY HIN SHINORDEN 49.99 ACE COMBAT 40 FT CARLE PADS 1999 MEMORY CARDS 149.99 NEOCON PADS SATURN BOYPAD \"29.99 PLAYSTATION PADS CALL FOR LATEST PRICES AND NEW RELEASES. NDO HARD SOFTWARE AVAILABLE PLEASE ADD COP.PRECORDED AND INSURED FOR MACHINES ET SO FOR GAMES UNFORTUNATELY SURCHARGE ON CREDIT CARD TRANSACTIONS NOTE ALL MACHINES INC-PSU CAUTO CUT-OFF RGB SCARTOOYPAD I FREE GAME VIRTUA FIGHTER REMIX SEGASATURNIEKEN OR RIDGE RACER PLAYSTATION FREE DELIVERY HOR ALL LOCAL CUSTOMERS LIMITED PERIOD ONLY ALL PRICES CORRECTAT TIME OF GOING TO PRESS Please Phone For Other Titles FREE P&P for Games and 10 P&P for Consoles if delivered in the London Area ACE CONSOLES ACE NO. 1 PO BOX 7269, LONDON, E10 5XA 4 GAMES & FUN Dynamite Konsoles UK 31 Woodstock Road, Bedford MK40 4JY WILD CONSOLES TELE UN GUIGZ TEL: 0250994372 SPECIALIST INIPORTERS  USA GOLDSTAR 3DO ONLY S.W.C.D.X 32 ECALL TO STEP DOWN TRANSFORMER 300 COR A 3 GAMES OF YOUR CHOICE L SEDE L ES BEST PRICE GUATEER. ESCOMBOY CASINO EA SOCCER MAD DOG 520 GOLDSTAR JOYPAD 030 130 300 SCART BOX COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 3DO AMIGA ATARI NINTENDO SEGA PC CD-ROM SONY MANGA SOFTWARE EXCHANGE 9 WILTON PARADE,HIGH STREET,FELTHAM,MIDDX.TW13 4BU 135 BURINI SOLDIER QUARANTINE DAYTON USA ...256 AIR COMBAT 235 TEKEN PANGER DRAGOON 555 VIRTUA FIGER E50 RIDGE RACER JUMPENG FLASH CLOCKWORKGHT E36 BOGERS ROAD VIRTUA FIGHTER RIDE TOSHENDEN 0.1906 640162 L. RIBBLE CRESCENT BLETCHLEY MILTON KEYNES MK3 OF 001812195 x 848 1944 "


"INFO ZONE Welcome to that bit at the back of the mag where we impart some grains of knowledge and give away a few odds and sods. And do we get any thanks? Do we heck. SPEED KUN INFONE LENGING 80 In the bag More bullocks than an Irish ox sale. Well, you wrote it, what do you expect? 09 82 Comp Win loads of stuff courtesy of TecnoPlus and our dead-easy to answer question. 84 Help Struggling with a game or hardware problem? Our invisible experts can help you out. 86 Mortal Kombat 3 Update Version 2 of MK3 is on the streets and we bring you all the moves you need to master it. 90 Ultimate Soccer Manager Don't have a dismal season as our comprehensive guide gets you ready for kick off. 92 Ace Combat If only Tom Cruise had a guide like this, he might not have been such a wimp. 94 Shorts All the best mini-tips from some of the leading games around. 96 Challenge Prove your worth as you challenge for the title of Game Lord of 1995 97 Charts Find out if what's hot has outdone the rot in the only chart that counts. 98 Next Month More best-guesses as to what we may or may not have in store for you next issue. 79 "


"LETTERS Welcome to the Jaguar-free letters page. After the glut of Jag-related missives we've published over the last few months we thought it was about time to change the subject. So if you've got an interesting/amusing point to make, drop us a line at I AM YOUR MAILBAG, CVG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. Thank you. in the WHAT A ROTTEN SWIZZ! DEAR CVG, I recently noticed that more and more programmers are making their games multiplayer rather than two-player on one console. Take Doom 2, Superkarts and the forthcoming Destruction Derby from Psygnosis for example. For the majority of people these might as well be one-player games. In order for me to play a twoplayer game of, say, Destruction Derby, I would have to carry my hefty 21-inch television and PSX round to my mate's house (while probably getting mugged on the way), and then he would need his own copy of the game and a PSX, which he won't be able to afford for a very long time! Andrew Spiretos, Leeds CVG: You've got an incredibly valid point there 'Drew, actually. It's all very well if all your mates have the same console as you (unlikely), but you've still DEAR CVG, got the old TV/monitor difI am writing to ask what it is ficulty. Perhaps it would going to say down the sides be a very good idea to of your magazines. So far it include split-screen and says \"CONSOLES OF THE link-up multiplayer F\". My guess is that it is options in the future. going to say \"CONSOLES OF THE FUTURE\". Is this right? John O'Donnell, Limerick, Eire. DEAR CVG I am writing to say about the Saturn it's nearly arcade CVG: Someone give this perfect, it's a 32-bit machine, it's got some great games man a No-Prize. You're If and it's . Sega have these last five years made outratotally correct, although geous prices. Take the 32X, it's alright, not perfect and it's not going to say that costs over . Despite all these bad things about Sega! at all anymore because e have a Mega Drive and with it I have three joypads and 13 we haven't got a square games. Some of these games are good but also cost a lot. spine anymore because Altogether it costs about . Ever since I heard about we've gone for a more the Saturn I have been going on about it and now it's here trendy stapled tome can't get it with my  a week pocket money. So I have to rather than a book-like say this to Sega: NNNNO00000! IF YOU WANT TO BY UP spine. At least the new AHEAD OF NINTENDO, SONY ETC THEN DECREASE THE stapled image stays open PRICES OF YOUR GAMES, PADS AND YOUR MACHINES on the page that you NOW!! leave it at, which is dead Matthew Hopkins, Crewe Fun City, Cheshire Ma handy if you want to look up a cheat whilst you're CVG: Price is sure to be a major factor in the success playing a game. Or someor failure of the Next Generation. Yes, the games can thing like that. be marvellous, but there's a limit to how much people will pay for a game. Perhaps the new rental licensing arrangements in this country might make non-purchase a more viable option, and then we'll all be out of a job. CREWE DEMANDS LOWER PRICES 80 "


"LETTERS LETTERS CVG ULTRA 64 DOES NOT SUCK SHOEKER DEAR CVG, It's all begun again, which machine is better? Judging by the first batch of releases I'd say the PSX has the edge with its quality software. In time though I believe the Saturn will overcome these teething problems and gradually start to take command of the market, due to Sega's tried and proven track record in the videogame industry. As for the apparent delay in the launch of the Ultra 64, this could be good news, as it shows Nintendo are hesitant to enter the battle until they have perfected their potentially world-beating hardware. The smart money is on the Ultra 64 to top the lot by overpowering all the other superconsoles into submission! K Murray, Riverside, Glasgow. CVG: But will there be enough of the market DEAR CVG, left for them to I would like to say there are a lot of reasons to buy import conquer? Or will machines: the imported Japanese Saturn with a everyone already 1000 300000 SCART lead, for example, offers full-screen, better-defined have their new graphics running at 17.5% faster speed than the UK dream machine machine. I agree that  for a game is too much, but this by the time Ultra won't be forever, as when the official machine is released, hits the shelves? there will probably only be about  difference. If the UK . Given that there's no firm release date Saturn offers full-screen graphics running at 60Hz with a for anyone to anticipate, potential cus. small lag between Japanese and UK games releases the UK: tomers might just plump for a real machine would be worth buying. But since this is unlikely  machine they can touch instead of the Japanese machine would be the best to give you the Nintendo's vapourware. But then most out of your software. again, maybe not. What do other readThe other reason why someone might not want a ers think? Write in and let us know Japanese PlayStation or Saturn is because of the Japanese your thoughts! text which they expect to make the game unplayable, but having played Daytona (all in English) I can only see problems arising with RPGs. But even then someone will probably make a convertor to enable UK games to be played on Japanese machines. Also, with the price of the UK machine coming in at around  with a game, and the price on the import machine about the same, the Jap machine will be a better long-term investment. DEAR CVG, Keep up the good work, I once read that the PlayStation was targeted at 12-22 year-olds, so in other words Richard La Ruina, Cambridge teenagers. Now correct me if I'm wrong but I don't think that the average teenager would have the odd - lying around the house. Now I'm getting a PlayStation (my wonderful dad is buying it for me) when it is officially released over here, and it should cost CVG: All very well, but look at the way the Mega about , so it's a much better idea to wait three months, Drive/SNES Import market has gone. It's pretty hard to  and save , than get an import machine and end up with track down decent Jap games, and world release  possible incompatibility problems. Waiting those three months dates are now pretty close. Plus you need to buy a means  worth of software! new convertor every three months or so as software I don't really think that isten Johan Eide (a previous corhouses Invent new and more complex lock-out mecharespondent) has any concept of life. His statement 'Play today nisms. If you fancy all the hassle for a nominally you might be dead tomorrow' actually leads to unhappiness. faster machine, fine, but our advice is to wait for the You spend all of your money and end up with no knickers. official releases. Sam McGuinnes, Molesey, Surrey. A BLINKING CHENT FC NBR 1239 CVG: So your dad's buying your PlayStation, eh? Where do you think all the other teenies are going to get theirs from? If The Sun is to be believed It's from laundered cash earned by selling crack in school playgrounds, but we think It's more likely that the parents will be footing the bill. Apart from that you've got a very sound argument going. VICE nance Tanco nanca Tanco lamco ERCE PT 0:56\"765 2'50\" 765 81 "


"COMPETITION CVG WIN! LOADS um TEC ey, face it, you've shelled out for your games system, a few topnotch titles that you've read about in CVG and you're now completely and utterly brassic. Thus you have no money to spend on all those extra bits such as joypads for multiplayer games or speakers and CD-ROM drives if you're a lucky so-and-so who's just gone and bought a swanky new PC. Please state if you're after a joypad or multimedia upgrade kit and what system you own. The first lucky names out of the hat can have literally seconds of fun hooking up their new toy before embarking on their latest bit of gaming experience. But help is at hand from TecnoPlus. Their new low-cost range of add-ons and plug in gubbins is cheap enough to help out any financially disadvantaged gamer who's just blown their wad on the latest highpriced bit of kit. Send your answers and stuff to: TecnoPlus, what a great bunch eh? CVG, Priory Court, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is the 18 September, no cash alternative will be offered and the editor's decision is, quite naturally, final. So there. TECNO PLUS Not only that, but to kick things off they've given us a pile of their latest toys to give away totally free. Well, free that is apart from the little bit of mental effort it'll take to answer this dead simple question: What was the name of Sega's doomed Mega Drive light gun? A) The Menacer B) The Rogerer C) The Pathetic Lump Of Plastic With No Software? TECNO PLUS 82 "


"COMPETITION TECNO PLUS OF NOPLUS STUFF! TECNO PLUS TECHO PLUS MEGA DRIVE AND SNES PADS They're grey, they're plastic and they've got lots of buttons and switches! The TecnoPlus Mega Drive and SNES pads come with lots of cable, individual rapid-fire settings for each button and a slow-mo switch. Hey, what more do you want? TECNO PILS PC PADS They're joypads and they're for the PC! Essential for games such as Mortal Kombat II and Super Street Fighter 2 Turbo. The pad comes complete with joypad interface which you can shove into one of those crappy 8bit slots you can never find a use for. TECNO PLIS TECO 13 MULTIMEDIA KITS Everything you could ask for to change your PC into a monster CD-ROM gaming titan. They come with soundcard, CD-ROM drive, joypad and top-excellent speakers. It's easy to install (well that's what it says here) and once up and running you can forget about ever using a floppy disk again. 83 "


"HELP CVG HELP JAG WORRIES HELP! Dear CVG, 1. After thinking for a long time which machine to get I've finally decided to get a Jaguar and a CD-ROM add on. I'm particularly interested in the Jaguar as it is the only console with a planned VR helmet. Then you simply said: 'The Jaguar doesn't have a 64 bit processor'. WHAT! Are you kidding? Well if it's not 64 bit what is it then? CVG: The Jaguar has a 64 bit data bus which means it has 64 'routes' for the various pieces of data to whiz around the hardware. The actual processors in the Jaguar are not 16bit but because they can all access the 64 bit bus it means that data can get around the system much quicker than would other wise be the case. This basically translates into faster games and the ability to use processor intensive activities such as texture mapping with a far less. ODDS AND SODS er risk of the machine slowing down. 2. Will the Ultra 64 have a 64 bit processor, or is it Dear Help, 'fake' too? I would like to seek your help in answering the fol CVG: Nintendo are claiming lowing questions as I am thirsty for knowledge: the machine will be 64 bit 1. Having read all of Terry Pratchett's Discworld, but until we see it in the books I am annoyed to find that the game is only flesh so to speak, it's pretty available to PC owners. Are there any plans for a difficult to confirm. version on any other machine? 3. Does the Jag CD have any CVG: A PlayStation version should be out a short extra processors to upgrade time after the machine's launch. the Jag? 2. If the Jaguar is a 64 bit machine, will it boast CVG: No. better graphics than the Saturn or PlayStation? If 4. Is there any chance that the not, why? Jaguar will end up like the Lynx CVG: ARRRRRRRRRRRRRRR RRRRRRRRRGH!!! with no new games being See answer one in the letter above! released for it? 3. Which version of Doom has the best CVG: It's a problem all new graphics out of the PC, Jag and 32X versions machines face. But hey, of Doom? let's not sit on the fence, if CVG: Certainly not the 32X version. Atari don't get their act Considering the Jag is about  cheap together VERY quickly the Greetings once again er than a PC then the graphics on that Jag and CD drive will buckle version are the most impressive. As is the under the marketing info sponges and game in fact. onslaught from Sony's welcome to another PlayStation, Sega's Saturn and two pages stuffed Dave Stone, Kent next year from Nintendo's Ultra 64. with gaming knowl5. Does the Goldstar 3DO joypad have the same old edge. Want to know NEPTUNE STUFF problems as Panasonic's? CVG: Do you mean is it crap and unresponsive? If more? Then slap your Dear CVG, you do then the answer is yes. question down on I have some questions that I hope you can 6. What sort of future do you think the Jaguar has? some paper or E-mail answer. CVG: If Atari market it properly and get some more us. You'll find both 1. Please could you tell me what games will be killer titles like Doom then it will succeed as an addresses listed bundled with the Neptune? entry level Next Gen machine. If they don't it will CVG: If we knew we would! But seriously a big die very quickly. elsewhere on these name title like Chaotix or Virtua Fighter seems 7. What are the five best games for the Game Boy? pages. Right that's it likely. CVG: My personal choice would have to be Zelda, for now, I'm off to 2. Will there be a CD-ROM drive manufactured for Warioland, Donkey Kong Land, Mario's Picross stick my head in the the Neptune? and Tetris 2. mains to recharge for CVG: No, you'll have to put up with the good old 8. Is the CD-i 450 16 bit or 32 bit? Mega CD we're afraid. CVG: 16 bit next month. Seezya... 3. How much do you think the Neptune will be on 9 Which new machine has the best FMV capabilities? its UK release? CVG: Without any add-ons it's the PlayStation CVG: Probably about  but quite possibly less given the fact that hardly which has a built in JPEG facility. anything 16 bit seems to be selling much at present. 4. Everyone I know thinks the 3D0 will die. What do you think? Ahmad Aref, Jordan CVG: It doesn't look good it has to be said. However, the M2 looks very promising 5. In your opinion what do you think the best games for the Saturn are? CVG: Virtua Fighter, Shin Shinobi Den and Daytona USA. 6. When do you think Sim Isle for the PC will come out? CVG: Maxis reckon it'll be in a couple of months' time 7. Please give us all the Sim City 2000 cheats on the PC. CVG: No, we'd need to write a book and someone else has done so already! agoo o qe. James Hatton, Cornwall 84 "


"HELP CVG I AM CONFUSED! Dear CVG, I am confused. At present I own a SNES and am a great fan of fighting games like MK2 and SSF2. So please answer these related questions. 1. What is FX Fighter on the SNES like? CVG: We haven't seen a finished copy yet, but if it's anything like the PC version it should be pretty good. 2. I am considering either a Saturn or a PlayStation for my birthday and I rate them both on their fighting games. Which should I buy considering the Saturn has Virtua Fighter and obviously its sequel pretty soon while the PlayStation has Toh Shin Den, Tekken and MK3? CVG: Well opinion is divided, Virtua Fighter is an excellent and arcade perfect conversion and VF2 is looking cool also, but Tekken and Toh Shin Den are both brilliant too and word has it that MK3 is looking arcade perfect. There's also a perfect rendition of Street Fighter: The Movie on the way, not forgetting the awesome-looking Zero Divide. 3. Should I sell my SNES and 21 games to raise the cash for these new machines? CVG: Depends how much you like your SNES, what games you have and how badly you want a Next Gen machine. Personally we'd keep the SNES, it's got at least a year left in it and there's some quality stuff like Killer instinct and DKC2 in the pipeline. Duck, Newport Gwent. GAME BOY RIP? I've recently bought a Game Boy and have some questions about it and other systems. 1. Now the Virtual Boy 32 is nearly here how much longer can I expect the Game Boy to be supported? CVG: Ages, the Game Boy has a comfy cosy niche all to itself and seems to be getting more and more popular as the days go by. 2. Will the Ultra 64 ever have a CD drive? CVG: Very probably, yes. 3. I believe there is a portable CD-i with LCD screen. Don't LCD-CD handhelds eat batteries more than the Game Gear or Lynx (R.I.P)? CVG: Sure do but the portable CD-i is designed more for presentations and business meetings where it's assumed it will be plugged into the mains for most of the time. 4. What can I expect in future from handhelds? CVG: Maybe nothing. It seems too expensive to design a sexy colour system that doesn't eat batteries by the roomful. Rumour has it that there's a finished Mega Drive handheld prototype but Sega haven't released it for just this reason. Rumour also has it that Sony have thought about the idea of a cartridge based handheld PlayStation. Now there's a sexy idea... P979797 Mark Bradley, West Mids BIG BOYS HELP! Dear CVG, 1. Are there any exceptional player/manager games for the SNES? CVG: Player Manager's the only one that springs to mind and that's knocking on a bit. 2. Do you have any information on the 32 bit add-on for the SNES? CVG: It's supposed to exist in prototype form but is extremely unlikely to ever see the light of day. 3. How much will it cost? CVG: Probably nothing 'cos it won't ever be released, 4. Will the Virtual Boy be as big a hit as the Game Boy? CVG: It's highly unlikely. Tomas Varley, Eire LLLLL 85 "


"CVG TIPs) TIPS MERCY Before you can perform an Animality it's essential to show Mercy when the Finish Him/Her command first flashes on screen. To show Mercy simply press Down four times followed by Run. Your opponent is now granted a little extra energy, so you'll have to beat them again. Wotcha gameteens welcome to The Great Mortal Kombat 3 Update for all you arcade aficionadoes out there. The response to our request for the new Version 2 moves, combos, Fatalities and the like was overwhelming, and you'll find the pick of the crop across the next four pages. If you've got a special that we haven't printed here, why not write it down and send it to MORTAL 3 UPDATE, UPDATE. CVG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. There's a mention in the mag for every one that we use. Anyway get down your arcade and try out this little lot... JOYSTICK SHORTHAND Just to make everyone's (ie ours) lives easier we've written all the moves out in shorthand, except for the Run and Block commands. The full key is as follows: KEY IIII| IIIIII = FORWARD BACK UP DOWN LOW PUNCH/LOW KICK HIGH PUNCH/HIGH KICK LP/LK HP/HK Two letters in conjunction signify a diagonal (so DF means Down Forward and so on). Two commands joined by a plus [+] should be performed at exactly the same time. MORTAL K 86 "


"TIPS TUPS CVG ICON CODES The icon code entry screen is the easiest way to activate most of the cheats. It features a row of six boxes, each of which displays a different icon. Enter the icons listed in the order in which they're printed. To reach the code entry screen press LP+Block+LK on both Player 1 and 2s controls (even if you're only playing in single player mode). HIDDEN OPPONENTS FIGHT MONTARO: Enter six thunderbolts on the code entry screen. FIGHT GORO: On the Pit 3 stage, run towards your opponent and jump so that you land on top of them. They'll now fall off the ledge and land in the portal below, allowing you to face Goro. FIGHT NOOB SAIBOT: Enter six Raidens on the code entry screen. FIGHT THE GHOST OF JOHNNY CAGE: On the Graveyard stage, wait until the Finish Him/Her message appears on screen. Now stand in front of the headstone marked BOON and press D, D, Block and HP. Johnny Cage's spirit now enters your opponent's body. Win the battle and the wraith is banished back to his grave. COMBAT.PDATES 87 "


"TIPS CVG TIPS HIDDEN PLAYER CHARACTERS PLAY AS SMOKE: Place the character select cursor on Shang Tsung. Now move it in this sequence: Liu Kang, Kabel, Sektor, Sonya, Sub-Zero. Now press left, High Punch, Low Punch and Run simultaneously. Ta-daa, you are now Smoke. WE WANT MORE! This isn't a bad response for our first request as you can see there's loads of ace Mortal 3 cheat-type stuff here. But this is not enough, and we demand sacrifice. There's loads of -Alities still floating around unknown and of no use to anyone, and we've hardly even got started on the combos. So go on get yer lazy arses out of the house and into the arcades, where you can spend all day playing Mortal 3 just so as you can write into us with all the ace secrets you've discovered. The best ones get printed in next month's Mortal Update and might even gasp! win a prize. So memorise the address at the beginning of the Update and get doing something constructive, you lazy games wastrels. RANDOM SELECT RANDOM FIGHTERS: Enter six question marks [?] on the code entry screen. RANDOM 1P CHARACTER: Press Up and Start when the character select box first appears on screen HANDICAPPING DISABLE THROWS: Enter MK logo, dragon, dragon, MK logo, dragon, dragon on the code entry screen. HALF ENERGY PLAYER 2: Enter the following code on the code entry screen 3, Yin Yang, MK logo, Shao Kahn, Shao Kahn, Shao Kahn. DISABLE BLOCKS: Enter six Yin Yang symbols on the code entry screen. Peter Stanley, Croydon FIGHT IN THE DARK: Enter the flowing code on the code entry screen dragon, dragon, MK logo, dragon, dragon, MK logo. HANDICAP BOTH PLAYERS: Enter six Shao Kahns on the code entry screen. HANDICAP PLAYER 1: Enter three Shao Kahns followed by any other three symbols on the code entry screen. MORTAL K 88 "


"TIPS TPS CVG MOVES Air Throw: B, DB, B, DF, F. FINISHCHIMI JAX Air Throw: B, DB, B, DF, F. JAX Back Breaker: Block in mid-air. SONYA Bicycle kick: B, B, D, LK Leg Grab: B+LP, Block. COMBOS JAX COMBO 1: HP, HP, Block, LP, HK, HK, HP, HP. Block, LP, B+HK. JAX COMBO 2:HK, HK, HP, LK, LK, HP+LP, B+LK. NIGHTWOLF COMBO: HK, HK, HP, HP, LP, HK, B+HK. FATALITIES CYRAX FATALITY 1: Up close-B, DB, D, DF, F, HP+LP. CYRAX FATALITY 2: F, DF, D, DB, B, LP. CYRAX FATALITY 3: B, DF, HP+LP. JAX FATALITY 1: F, D, B, U, F, Block. JAX FATALITY 2: Hold LK for three seconds and release. JAX FATALITY 3: D, B, U, F, Block. KABEL ANIMALITY: Show Mercy in the final round, then hold HP for two seconds and release up close. NIGHTWOLF FATALITY: Up close F, B, D, F, HP. SHANG TSUNG FATALITY 1: Just inside sweep range B. B. B. B. LK. SHANG TSUNG FATALITY 2: D, F, D, F, LP. SHEEVA FATALITY 1: Up close-F, D, F, B, F, LP. SHEEVA FATALITY 2: Block, F, D, F, B, F, LP. SINDEL FATALITY 1: F, B, F, B, HP. SINDEL FATALITY 2: Up close F, F, F, F, LK. SONYA ANIMALITY: First, show Mercy in the final round. Now when the Finish Him/Her message appears hold LP, press F, F, B, B and release LP. PIT FATALITY: When fighting in the Bell Tower, wait until the Finish Him/Her command appears on screen. Hit Forward three times and Run towards your opponent. You'll now uppercut them on to a bed of spikes. SUBWAY FATALITY: When fighting in the Subway, stand between the words Boon and Tobias. When the Finish Him/Her message flashes on screen press Forward three times and Run into your opponent. Your foe is knocked on to the rail tracks and a handy train chunders through, running them over. YOU'RE GREAT! We'd like to take this opportunity to thank all the people who helped us put this together. It was impossible to credit individual people for individual cheats as some moves were sent in by three or four different people, so we'll just list the muckers who were the most help here, and send out a hearty 'cheers' in their direction. So come on down Daragh Hayes, Drimnagh, Dublin; Lawrence Barren, London SW1; Luke Croll, Sheerness, Kent; Peter Stanley, Shirley, Croydon; AC Sutheran, Knowle, Solihull: Lee Hutchinson, Hillingdon, Middx; Gareth Slade, Old Colwyn, Colwyn Bay and two anonymous personages who forgot to put their names and addresses on their letters. Thanks very much, you're all wonderful. OMBAT 89 "


"CVG TIPS TIPS ROOMS \"... the game was evenly poised at 2-2, with only a few minutes to go, as the Liverpool Manager pulled an inspired substitution that won him the match. He took off all the Welsh players! He must have seen CVG'S Ultimate Soccer Management Guide!\" CETODE Ultimate Soccer Manager STARTING UP....... The quickest and easiest way to start is to select  million Then go to the players file and check out the stats on your squad. Anyone with low stats in their position (Goalies who can't catch, defenders who can't tackle etc). Stick on the transfer list. Also, get rid of the pensioners! Anyone over the age of 32 is no use so whack them out on a free transfer. You may not get any money for them, but it will cut down your wages bill. Now arrange your friendlies against teams from lower divisions, this gives you a chance to try out different formations and strategies, check out your form players, this gives the players match practice and improves their confidence (if they win). attendances plus building fees tend to go up. One of the quickest ways to make money is to build the biggest merchandise and food stands you can afford, as you will benefit from having more ranges to sell. Spread all your outlets around the ground. One important thing to remember, though, is to make sure that you have an all seater stadium by the time you reach Division 1. Otherwise if you get promoted from Division 2 and you still have terraces, then the FA will condemn the stand(s) in question. potential customers than a little terrace. If you are suffering from low attendance disease, and your gate receipts are looking a bit unhealthy, then try this: build a 10,000-seater stand and give away around 6,000 tickets. You won't get much money from the gate, but the people who are there will buy things like programmes and shirts etc. Another tip is to keep ticket prices low for friendlies, and bump them up for things like cup games against MONEY MAKES THE WORLD GO AROUND...... When planning your outlets, remember that a stand with a big capacity has more TEAM SELECTION 6 MOGOUDATOX SOMWARTZ 200 TUTUR THERE'S ALWAYS ROOM FOR IMPROVEMENTS.... This is also a good time to start upgrading your grounds, because if you wait until mid season, it screws up your SATOOOOOOOO GELLEY 59310 JESEN HILLIER LINIOHAN MARESE 90 "


"TIPS TIPS CVG CHEATS NEVER PROSPER! If you find the elongated method explained below a bit too much like hard work, then this is the section for you! The following cheats make the game so easy that it's not really worth playing tunless you want to crank up loads of money and produce some really spectacular scorelines! Firstly, enter your name as MAKE BELIEVE. Now, the following keys can be pressed during a match to obtain different results: G Has a goal attributed to the last person who passed the ball. E Goes straight to a penalty shoot out, Gives away a foul. Esc Quits the current half, leaving the score as it stands, Ends the match with a 1-0 home win. Ends the match with a 2-0 home win. 3 Ends the match with a 3-0 home win. 4 Ends the match with a 0-1 away win. 5 Ends the match with a 0-2 away win 6 Ends the match with a 0-3 away win. ARSENAL  LEEDS OTD AND.... If you press the + key at any time (except dur ing a match)then you get an extra ,000 in your bank account. You can do this as often as you want to store up loads of wonga! FAUSE < 24 >> St FINAL RESULT LEEDS UTD ARSENAL VIEW FLYER STATS ATTENDANCE :31.294 EXIT ties so you get the best out of them. PLAYER   HARPER BADBURN IN JUETES INJURY BBUISTING DURATION  RECOVERING  FULLED HAMSTRING clubs from a higher division. Another good source of income is advertising and sponsorship. Always take care of this yourself because if you leave it to your assistant manager you'll find that the best deals pass you by. And always increase your ticket and merchandise prices by 10 % every year, because every little helps. MCXE LEVERIN WILSON MORE increases from ume-totime. The happier a coach is, the more effective he will be. This also helps to attract better coaches to your club. A superb coach is around three times better than an average coach so always be on the lookout for better coaches. One option that works well if you've not got much money is to sign a load of youth players on free transfers and put them on an intensive training course. After a few months, their stats begin to grow as they become better players. YOU DIRTY... One of the USM's best features is the 'Bung' option. But how does it work? Well, at the start of the game the computer randomly marks 20% of all the clubs in the game as receptive to bungs. For the rest of the game the other 80% will refuse all bungs and match rigging offers. If you get caught twice for taking a bung you receive a waming which appears in the newspaper. Get spotted a third time and you get an official warning. But if you are really slack and get caught doing it a FOURTH time, then it's off down the job centre for you young man! I'M FINDING IT DIFFICULT TO MANAGE..... SMEEYAEL SCHE PRE TEATRAS Once you've taken care of all the financial and planning malarkey, its on to the real bread-and-butter part of the game managing your team! Firstly, make sure that your Chairman is happy. If his opinion of you falls below 10%, then you'll be sacked on the spot. Furthermore, if your job security rating (an average of the players', fans', chairman and bank's ratings) falls below 20%, you are for the high jump! Training is one of the most valuable parts of the game, so don't neglect it! Keep your coaches happy by giving them wage KICK OFF! However large the temptation may be, don't just make your selections and leave the game to play itself out. Watch the action and don't be afraid to move your players around for things like free kicks, corners etc. If a player has a bad match, it may not be his fault. Make sure that all your players are in positions that suit their abili91 "


"TIPS CVG TIPS Talk about up-to-the-minute, not only is Ace Combat reviewed this ish (page 54-57) but we're also giving you the complete solution to this brillo strategy sim shoot'em-up. So keep hold of these pages as this is the PSX you're going to buy... eye on your fuel and missile levels too, it's easy to run low on both here. MISSION 1 Take out four C-5s. The first two are protected by MIG 31s, the second two by F-4s. You shouldn't have problems here, but the MIG 31's high speed makes it difficult to get a missile lock, so try getting close behind and cannon it instead. MISSION 6 Two mining resource areas and the plant itself need to be taken care of. The resource, areas are protected by two F-16s and two MIG 31s respecti-vely. These fast planes can be difficult to shake off once on your tall so try and take, them out early on. The mining plant is protected by two SU-27s and two F117 Stealths which don't show up on radar but are weakly armoured and not a threat. The plant is very well pro tected by guns so keep your speed up and missile the primary targets from a distance, MISSILES 5 MISSION 2 Protect your base from an impending B-52 attack. The B-52's aren't sitting ducks though, as they feature rear-mounted guns so don't get too close. They're also protected by two TWDF-2s in front and two AV-8s behind so the best bet is to hit them from the side. Keep an eye out for a sluggish C-5, a real sitting duck! MISSION 7 Quite tricky this. You need to fly down a narrow ravine and take out a radar system at the end. Use the external view and a slow but manoeuvrable plane like the A10 for success. Make sure you take out the five RAH 66 helicopters along the way or they'll get behind and missile you. MISSION 3 Intercept and destroy eight unknowns. They're made up of E267s. TWDF-2s and AV-8s, none of which pose any real problem. MISSILES 61 MISSION 4 You've two objectives in this mission. First take out the enemy communication centre protected by a few guns, two F-4s and two TNDF-2s. Easy, but the second objective is much tougher. Destroy an enemy headquarters protected by guns aplenty and two speedy MIG 32s and an F-15. The enemy headquarters is well sheltered by surrounding buildings, so be careful not to crash into any! MISSION 8 Another long mission. First take out the two B-1 and three B-2 bombers which are protected by a couple of speedy MIG 29s. These bombers take more than two hits so don't fly off before they're dead. Now proceed to the ravine, turn to 9pm, break and swing 180° to 3pm. Enter the ravine slowly and try and take out the five ground targets on your first go since it's a pig to return in the other direction! Watch out for the circling YF23 and take it out if necessary. MISSION 5 Take out the central oil refinery plant and surrounding airfields. There's only a couple of F14s in the air to worry about but plenty of well secluded and deadly gun emplacements on the ground. Keep an MISSION 9 Take out the facilities in the port while watching out for the heavy air cover in the shape of two F/A18s, two MIG 29s and two R-COLS. Once you've destroyed the facilities, fly through the ravine, GUNS SSILES SO ACE COMBAT 92 "


"TIPS TIPS CVG blast the ground targets while taking care not to hit the swinging cranes! Finally, take out the docked sub. It's packed with missiles so stay away and give it some of your own missiles from afar. again and pay close attention to the sharp turns One mistake means death! MISSION 10 An escort mission. Keep the escort in your sights, wherever possible and take out the two approach mg F-14s and F-15s. Don't get drawn away from your escort or he'll be shot down. For extra points take out the ground targets. MISSION 17 The final task. Take out the huge enemy plane but don't get too close this mother is packed with missiles! Ignore the other aircraft and concentrate on the biggie, you've got just enough missiles to destroy it. MISSILE MISSION 11 Stop the enemy from recapturing your port by taking out a wing of stealth bombers. Don't get too close though, or you'll risk being hit by huge chunks of falling shrapnel. And don't allow the lone MIG 29 to get behind you 'cos he's very trigger happy. GENERAL TIPS F-14 SKIP MISSION OVERVIEW Skip past the Japanese intro text by pressing TRIANGLE and START together. th MISSION 12 Arguably the toughest mission. Four Ships plus a huge aircraft carrier have to be taken out. They're laden with missiles and guns, so try not to get very close. It's best to make repeated flights over them at top speed and destroy them bit by bit. It's not that easy to do, though, as the ships are protected by E-4 to the west, F-145 to the north and EF-2000s to the east. It's imperative that you take out at least some of these planes or they'll get behind you and pummel you with mis siles. Being sea based there are no ref points in this mission so keep a watch on your map at all times. EXT REMOVE CAPTIONS During a game, hit PAUSE and press either of the top SHOULDER buttons. START the game again and the Jap text that appeared down the right side of the screen will have disappeared, giving a more panoramic view of the proceedings. MISSION 13 A simple recon mission. Take out two YF23 and an F-15 and some ground-based fuel dumps, Score bonus points by taking out the grounded bomber. MISSION 14 Four targets here. A solar power station protected by two SF-33s, a refinery and facilities guarded by two A 10s, another solar power station pro tected by two YF 22s and a fuel base pro tected by two SU-27s. The planes present it lle problem, so stick to the task at hand and watch out for the numerous deadly gun emplacements instead, and take them out whenever necessary. WHICH WINGMAN? Wingmen are fairly useful as they draw enemy fire and planes. Pick a wingman in a fast plane and pay the extra for a veteran. In my opinion Rhio in the F/A-18 delivers the best perfor mance for price. MISSION 15 First take out the two SF 395 and two F-145 on recon or they'll tail you later. Now take out the bridge, watching out for the heavy gun emplace ments and two F-22s. Finally destroy the less pro lected airport while avoiding the covering FA 185, AND FINALLY... Get close and waste baddies with the cannon, it's more satisfying than taking them out with a mis sile! And don't play on Easy mode, 'cos it's just that! MISSION 16 Just like mission seven except the end target is the main enemy base. Use an A-10 and external view The Complete Guide 93 "


"TIPS CVG TIPS (E GAME BOY MARIO'S PICROSS The only game to score a CVG Gold! last issue was Nintendo's teasingly good, Mario-starring (well his mugshot appears on the playing screen) puzzler, and here are some tippettes on how to do rather well... L PLAYSTATION TOH SHIN DEN Here's a move you won't have seen in the manual. Perform this with Sho and it's almost certain that your opponent will lose most of his energy and suffer total humiliation. It's quite complicated but basically pressing Circle, Triangle, Square, X, L, R, L, R, Triangle will cause Sho to bend over and chunder out a cloud of burning march gas from his backside. Great, eh? 1 To start with fill in all the complete rows first, also mark any rows which don't require chipping with Xs to stop you accidentally chipping later. 2 Next take a look at all the obvious spots for blocks and chip these and again if you can see an area that shouldn't be chipped put an X down. 3 Never guess! Always check to see if you can chip, if you're not sure wait as everything will be confirmed as you play. 4 Always put an X after a group of blocks as there is always a gap. 5 When using the hint try and stop it along the sides of the grid. 6 If time is running short make a sketch of where you've got to so that you don't need to start from scratch. 224470 165S STALA MONDO 3460 NNN -UN ANN ON UN LPC JAGUAR TARADINO CASSTATT THI BARRETT DOUG WENDT LORELEI NI AN PAUL FREELEY HOVERSTRIKE If you haven't had enough of this game yet, press 2, 3, 6 and UP together on the missionselect screen. A new stage should be added called 'The Drive For Five'. RISE OF THE TRIAD TOOSAD God mode CHOJIN Invulnerable GOTO Level select SIXTOYS Special items FLYBOY Fly BADTRIP Speaks for itself BOING Elastic mode GOOBERS Restart level WHACK Damage SPEED Auto Run PANIC Restore everything to normal DIMON Light fading on DIMOFF Light fading off LONDON Fog on NODNOL Fog off GOGATES Quit GOARCH Teleport to end of level GOTA386 386 mode SHOOTME Bullet proof armour BURNME Fire proof armour LUNGDUNG Gasmask HUNTPACK Full equipment 86ME 8086 mode REEN Re-enter level JOHNWOO Two pistols PLUGEM MP40 gun VANILLA Bazooka gun HOTTIMES Heat-seeker gun BOOZE Drunk missile gun BONES Flame wall gun FIREBOMB Firebomb gun SEEYA Hand of god RIDE Ride those missiles! WHERE Location These codes work on the registered version only. RECORD Record a demo STOP Stop recording PLAY Play back demo SPLIT Split missile mode WOOF Dog mode Many thank yous go out to: Michael Beddow, Belper 94 "


"TIPS TIPS CVG MEGA DRIVE SECTOR SATURN 66 STORY OF THOR To begin the game with the best characters, go to the title screen, hold down B and press START. There's also a sound test if you press B and START on a blank diary page. und OQQ000 anunu COLLOS 256 kry alone will DAYTONA USA So, a car isn't good enough for you, is it? Well how about a horse? Go to the options screen and set the difficulty level to NORMAL. Then play the game in Saturn mode and come first on the Beginner, Advanced and Expert tracks. Now if you keep 298 scrolling the car list you'll find that you'll be able to select a horse which comes, rather handily, in Manual and Automatic options. 298%. RUTO VSGA SG PALL, it's you! It has been a find    Did    CLOCKWORK KNIGHT OK, so if you need this stage select cheat you must be pretty rough when it comes to playing games. Anyhow, on the title screen where it says \"Press Start', press LEFT, UP, RIGHT, DOWN, RIGHT, RIGHT, UP and R. If that's still not enough of a help for you, on the same screen try entering UP then RIGHT nine times, DOWN six times, LEFT seven times and Z, X, Y, Y, Y and Z. If you've got it right you'll hear the opening song play and when you start the game you'll have 999 lives. PANZER DRAGOON Set the Saturn for German (on the set-up screen when you haven't put a CD in), then load the game. On the title screen press UP, X, RIGHT, X, DOWN, X, LEFT, X, UP, Y and Z. Now when you play the game you'll find you're just flying through mid-air minus your dragon. To play the game with Afterburner-style barrel rolls, press START on the title screen and rotate the D-pad clockwise three times. If you get it right the words \"Rolling Mode' will appear. Now when you're playing the game simply press diagonally twice in any direction to roll. Finally, if you find the game too easy, try this. Press START on the title screen and when the Normal Game and Options settings appear, press L, R, L, R, UP, DOWN, UP, DOWN, LEFT and RIGHT. Now, when you play the game you should find it blasts along at a ridiculous speed. If you fancy playing without a rider set your Saturn to German again and, in the same place as the dragonless rider cheat, press LEFT, LEFT, RIGHT, RIGHT, UP, DOWN, UP, DOWN, L and R. VIRTUA FIGHTER Dural To play as Dural, go to the character select screen and press DOWN, UP, RIGHT, A+LEFT. And that spells Dural and that's who you're going to play. Hidden Options OK, this is an easy one. Press UP 12 times on the title screen, then go to the options screen. Keep pressing DOWN and your cursor will vanish off the bottom of the screen. Then press any button to call up a whole new set of options such as stage select and variable ring sizes. 95 "


"GAMES CHALLENGE | CHG ca THE ULTIMATE GAMES CHALLENGE PART 2 We're still going through the responses from last month, so expect to see the first Game Lord chart appearing next issue. In case you've got the memory of a jellyfish, let us remind you that this is the page where you get to prove just how good you are at games by completing the tasks we set you. All you have to do is prove you've completed the challenge through the criteria we've set. Then, if you're good enough you'll be admitted to the hall of fame and, ultimately, take part in the games challenge here in the CVG offices to prove who is the Game Lord of 1995! NEED FOR SPEED We want to find out just who the fastest, meanest, hardest driver is in this, one of our fave 3D0 games. The track is the City and we want you to send in a pic of what your record time on this track is. The fastest will be heading straight into the hall of fame. PROVE IT! INTERNATIONAL SUPERSTAR SOCCER Remember, we've played all these games to death and can tell straight away if you've been cheating. To prove you've completed the challenge we'll need either photographic or video evidence unless stated differently in the challenge. Hmm, so you think you can play a bit of football, eh? Perhaps you reckon you can get a bit of a decent score playing as Iran against Brazil? That's your challenge and, remember, we can tell if you've cheated and played the game in two player mode! The pick of the gamesplaying bunch will then go on to compete for the title of Game Lord of 1995 where they'll face off against the other competitors and then go head-to-head with us to prove that they can cut the mustard when it really counts. Send your entries and suggestions for challenges to: CVG Ultimate Game Lord Challenge, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1R 3AU. LAST MONTH'S CHALLENGE Complete level 13 of Doom using no weapons, just your bare hands. Finish Panzer Dragoon with 100% hit ratios on all levels and tell us what happens next. 89 km2 We're after the best sub-16 second times on the first course of Daytona. And, if you can do a double flawless against Shao Kahn in MK2, we want to hear from you. 96 "


"CHARTS CHARTS CVG chart attack with HMV all format top 10 She may have had a thirst for knowledge, and studied art at St Martin's College, but I bet she can't predict what's going to be number one in the all formats games chart, eh? Can she? Eh? Eh? Star Trek TNG: A Final Unity MicroProse PC CD-ROM Trekkers and adventure game nuts alike with love this it's closer than any film or TV tie-in has come to keeping the fans of a show happy. md ton 5. _snes ton 5 gb top 5 Street Racer Ubisoft Int. Cricket Nintendo Zelda: Link's Nintendo A Brian Lara Codemasters Fever Pitch US Gold FIFA Soccer THQ Wing Commander 3 EA 3DO The third instalment and an excellent conversion to the 3DO for what is probably the best interactive movie game yet. Stars none other than Mr Mark 'Skywalker' Hamil, who is also set to return for WC4 Fever Pitch I US Gold Hlusion of Time Nintendo Donkey Kong Nintendo PGA Tour 3 Electronic Arts Street Fighter 2 Nintendo Tetris 2 Nintendo FIFA Soccer '95 EA Indiana Jones Virgin The Lion King Virgin Fever Pitch US Gold SNES & MD Finally a soccer game for the Loaded crowd, very arcadey and very fast and the Mega Drive is the best version. go top 5 jag ton 5_ nc top 5 Mortal Kombat 3 Acclaim Iron Soldier Atari Star Trek MicroProse Street Racer Ubisoft Mega Drive In its Mega Drive form this game isn't as good as its SNES counterpart, but it's an excellent racer nonetheless. FIFA Soccer EA Hoverstrike Atari FX Fighter Philips FX Fighter Philips PC CD-ROM A formidable effort from Philips to produce one of the best and most up-to-date beat-'em-ups on the PC market. A Pete Sampras Codemasters A Doom Atari Full Throttle Virgin Hi Octane Electronic Arts PC CD-ROM Bullfrog keep their fans happy with yet another stunning 3D experience this time it's a head-to-head killer race game. NBA Jam TE Acclaim Theme Park Atari Hi Octane EA The Lion King Alien Vs Pred Atari Sega Dark Forces Virgin Full Throttle Virgin PC CD-ROM Those graphical geniuses at LucasArts have managed to come up trumps with this imports amiga top 5 3do top 5 Dark Forces Virgin PC CD-ROM Not as much blood as Doom, but in the same genre and lots of Star Wars types shooting at you. 1 Tekken/PSX Namco Ultimate Soccer Daze Wing Commander 3 EA AIV Networks Ocean PC CD-ROM The only game on the shelves that comes close to catching Sim City 2000 and plenty of people reckon it's better! Ridge Racer/PSX Namco Sensible World Virgin Slam 'N' Jam 95 BMG 3 Jumping Flash/PSX Sony Man Utd Krisalis 3. Syndicate Super International Cricket Nintendo SNES Finally a cricket game gets released on the Super Nintendo, and a pretty good attempt at simulating the sport it is too. A Daytona USA Saturn Colonization MicroProse Hell GameTek key non-mover move down move up new entry Ace Combat Namco Super Skidmarks Guildhall Return Fire 3DO 97 "


"NEXT MONTH Look, we ran out of space, alright? It's not that we got anything wrong on the last next month page, it's just that we've only got a limited number of pages which we have to cram a hell of a lot of stuff into. Got that? Anyhow, here's what we're trying for next month... DESTRUCTION DERBY All things being well and good, and barring natural disasters we should be bringing a whopping great review of this amaz. ing Psygnosis racing game. Is it really better than Daytona and Ridge Racer combined? THE SNES IS DOOMED! 2XL24 O2You've seen the preview now check out the review. Is it as bloody as the PC? Will the cacodemons have you brown-staining your pants again? Find out next month. PLAYSTATION LAUNCH! By the time you see our next issue, the PlayStation will be on the shelves and we'll be bringing you a low down on all the releases and the big name games coming to the Uk before Christmas. If you're after a PlayStation, you can not afford to miss this. KILLER INSTINCT Maybe a review, maybe not. It all depends you see? You'll just have to get hold of a copy of the next issue to find out, won't you? And that isn't a cheeky way of making you buy us, next month, it's the truth, honest. COMIX ZONE A full review on what we reckon to be one of the best Mega Drive titles this year. We reckon it'll be worth buying if you don't have the cash to afford a new console. AND LOADS OF STUFF Yes! Even more 'stuff next month. There's going to be so much 'stuff that we don't even know what it's going to be yet. But rest assured, it'll be the usual mixed bag of Next-Gen exclusives, breaking news stories and all the other wonderful odds and sods which make CVG the best all-round games magazine ever. COMPUTER VIDEO GAMES CVG 167 on sale September 14 98 "


"PRICE! CHOICE! QUALITY! SERVICE! These have made us one of the largest suppliers of computer & video games in the country today! MEGADRIVE SPECIAL SPORTS OFFERS! SEGA SATURN THE FOLLOWING GAMES ARE ALL JUST .99  FIFA SOCCER 95 NBA LIVE 95 NHL 95 PGA TOUR GOLF 3  RUGBY WORLD CUP \"95 WE ONLY HAVE 1000 CBOE GAME SO ODER SAY TO SOVE YOUR CORE NOW Puse 9 GRADUATE PAD 6 BUTTON WITH TURBO Auto FRE & Slow MOTON............ .99 UTA 2N 1 JOYPAD WORKS ON MEGADRIVE & SNES BUTTON WITH TURBO FRE, A FRE & Slow MOTION .99 MEGAMASTER CONVERTER...... .99 AROMS FAMEY VALUES ....... ALONSOIDE..... N & ROBIN.......... MOCHO.... BRIAN LARA CRICKET ... ..99 CANNON FODDER... ..99 Root's MEAN BEAN MACHINE .99 .99 2. THE TOES OF TIME. .99 Dizzy & COSMIC SPACEHEAD 22.92 Woe CHAMPIONSHPETON 39 Huk........ es GESATEST ADVENTURES... Nice MANGE......... Wee's SNOO 388888888888888 .99 .99 CALL .99 WWF RAW ........ X CALIBRE.. 3DO $21.99 $19.50  WWF RAW....... .99 .99 $14.50 L .90 SUPERSKES O WER MAN............. Uro C MP SOCCER MOTOMMAN..... ut Mouse ....... MONES 2 .99 NIGHT TRAP W WOW... .99 $27.99 .99 .99 $42.99 .99 ...99 Sou STAR X SNES AMIGA SECRET OF MONKEY ISLAND... SUPSTREAM 5000..... FX CONVERTOR .99 ALL TERRAIN RACING....... ....99 SPACE HULK ADDAMS FAMILY VALUES..... .99 Bles BROTHERS... .99 SUPER KARTS.. BIER MICE FROM MARS .99 CANNON FOOD 2 .99 SUPER STREET FIGHTER 2. CANNON FOOTER $40.99 COLONIZATION... $22.99 THEME PARK..... CLAYRIGHT 2 $21.99 Desert STKE.......  ULTIMATE SOCCER MANAGE FI CHAMPIONSHE EDMON..... $46.99 DUNGEON MASTER 2 A600) .49 & VIRTUA FIGHTER JAGUAR Fever Pro SOCCE _ FANTASY MANAGER BADDE & Sons .49 HAGATE............. $39.99 $20.99 FIFA INTERNATIONAL SOCCER...... E CALL CD ROM DRIVE................ ..CALL FOR DETAILS INTERNATIONAL SUPERSTAR SOCCB $39.99 FRONT-FRST ENCOUNTERS CIO 09 ATAR JAGUAR CYBE MORPH .99 We now stock the Official $4799 JUDGE DRESO ATAR JAGUAR + VERMORH + TEMPEST 2000 $164.99 FORMULA 1 WORLD CHAP Emon... .99 UK Saturn with all Games & JUNGLE STRIKE..... $36.99 GUAM GOOCH TEST MATCH SPECIAL .99 ALB VS PREDATORI Accessories and we GUARANTEE CANON FOOD $35.99 MAN UTD CHAMP SOCCB $17.49 JUNGLE SKE......... CHEQUERED FLAG the lowest prices!!! POWERDENE .99 Lucas ARTS Cussic COLECTION......... Cus Deve ............ SREET RACER MORTAL KOMBAT 2.... Call for more details!! SUPER TURRICAN 2 .99 ON THE BALL LEAGUE EDMON. .99 DRAGON.......... SUPER BOMBERMAN 2... $25.99 PIZA TYCOON... $22.99 KASUM NRA...... 32X THEME PARK ...CALL PLAYER MANAGE 2 CALL TEMPEST 2000 .99 PREMIER MANAGER 3......... .99 THEME PARK....... ...99 .99 SENSIBLE WORLD OF SOCCER... SENSIBLE SOCCER.. SPECIAL OFFER SENSIBLE GOLF $21.99 SPARE PAD 32X EXPANSION MODULE................ .99 SUPER SKEMARKS..... ...99 SYNDICATE.... SPACE H WOLFENSTEN .99 GOLDSTAR 3DO. FIFA SOCCER.............99 ........... .99 $38.99 PANASONIC FZ-10 + STARBLADE ................99 SINDICATE.... .99 LYNX PANASONIC FZ-1 + STARBLADE.... .99 $46.99 GOLF MAGAZINE 36 HOLES........... THE PAK... $23.99 ATARI LYNX PRE 6 BUTTON Jom /Joystick CD ROM & Boiman Rour NIRE CONTROL PADS (2) $33.99 MOTHERBASE NBA JAM TOURNAMENT EOTON CH PUGH stoho $64.99 Soe Was ACE 3DO SNES CONVERTOR ONE FREE! AWESOME GOU........ STELAR ASSAULT ALONEN THE DARK Buy a copy of Magic Carpet, Fifa Soccer, SUPER AFTERBURNS ANOTHER WORD Theme Park, US Navy Fighters or System BASEBALL HEROS SUPER MOTOCROSS Shock & get another of your choice CAUFORNIA GAMES SUPER SPACE HARRE....... CANNON FOOD absolutely FREE!! CHECKERED FUG.......... TOUGHMAN BORING........ CREATURE SHOCK CHP'S CHALLENGE....... DIGITAL DREAMWARE .99 A4 NETWORKS ECALL DESERT STRE... DRAGON............... .99 BOROGE .99 DIRTY LARRY... BC RACERS.... ELEVENTH Hour............. $32.50 DARK FORCES... ..99 DOUBLE DRAGON...... CORPSE KLER... FLASHBACK... $29.99 DAEDALUS ENCOUNTER..... ,99 EUROPEAN SOCCER ....... FLYING NIGHTMARES ........... ...CALL DOOM 2. ...$29.99 GATES OF ZENDECON...... SIAM CITY FIFA SOCCER......... $29.99 DSCWORLD... HOCKEY..... .99 ...99 DUNGEON MASTER 2 JIMMY CONNORS TENNIS. SUPREME WARRIOR .99 Hall... $29.99 FIFA SOCOR LEMMINGS... JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL...... $34.49 FRONTER-FEST ENCOUNTERS.. MS PACMAN..... GAME GEAR KUNG TIME CALL FUGHT UNUMITED.... NFL FOOTBALL Lost Eden Cool SPOT NEED FOR SPEED FATA FURY SE ETON PASAULJAM.. PANG GOB NOYCAR RAONG FIFA SOCCER Lost EDEN PERBLE BEACH GOUF MEGA MAN  SUPER OFF ROA. QARANTINE MCRO MACHINES 2   2 TETRIS $35.99 Mortal KoMBAT 2 Rae ASSAULT NBA LIVE 95 WARDROS NBA JAM TOURNAMENT EONTON RETURN FRE $33.99 POPLOUS 2 POWONGA WORLD CLASS SOCOR PETE SAMPRAS TENNIS ROAD RASH $35.99 RUGBY 95 MANY MORE AVALANE PUASE CALLI ROAD RASH SAMRASHODOWN .99 SAM & MAX HT THE ROAD SONC DEFT RANG SUPER STREETFIGHTER 2 .99 STAR Trec Next GENERATION FREE MEMBERSHIP SUPER COLUMNS SPACE Huk... ...99 SUPER KARTS All Prices include VAT. SYNDICATE ...99 SUPER STREET FIGHTER 2. THEME PARK $32.99 FREE MEMBERSHIP SIMPLY SEND US YOUR SINDICATE PLUS........... MEGA CD SYSTEM SHOCK DETAILS OR CALL 01924 473157 AND YOU WAY OF THE WARRIOR.... ....99 THEME PARK WILL BECOME A UFETIME MEMBER ENTITLED ANOTHER WORLD 2... ...CALL WING COMMANDER 3.......... TRANSPORT TYCOON............... TO HEAVY DISCOUNTS, FREE CATALOGUES CANNON FODDER .99 WORLD CUP GOLF..........................................99 US NAVY POHTERS AND FREE ADVICE CORPSE Kuer..... ULTIMATE SOCCER MANAGER EXTRA FAST DELIVERY, 23 WORKING DAYS NEO GEO CD VIRTUAL POOL... ON STOCK ITEMS. PLEASE ALLOW 7 DAYS Ecco 2 THE TIDES OF TIME.. .99 WING COMMANDER 2............... FOR CLEARANCE IF SENDING A CHEQUE. EYE OF THE BEHOLDER NEO GEO CD + 2PADS 100's MORE AVAILABLE PLEASE RING ALL ITEMS ORDERED FROM US ARE FULLY FATAL FURY SPECIAL EDMON. AEROFIGHTERS 2 $42.99 INSURED AGAINST LOSS OR DAMAGE LETHAL ENFORCERS 2... PC 3.5\" DISK ART OF FIGHTING 2 ROAD RASH BASEBALL STARS 2 $34.99 ALL GOODS ARE FULLY GUARANTEED. IF Rete Asset Blues Journer AUTOROUTE EXPRESS .3. ANY ITEM DOESNT WORK AS IT SHOULD .99 SHING FORCE CD CROSSED SWORDS WELL REPLACE IT IMMEDIATELY AT NO COST DOOM 2 $42.99 .99 SULKE DUNGEON MASTERS 2 TO YOU. DUNGEON MASTER 2 FATA FURY SPEC .99 SAM C LION KING 1000'S OF TITLES AVAILABLE, IF YOU CANT $42.99 $32.99 SNATCHB.. MAGIGAN LOD Lucas Arts TRPE PAOK-SAMN MAX SEE THE ITEM YOU WANT, PLEASE RING AS SouL STAR .99 NA COMMANDO $42.99 STOCK ARRIVES DALY. SOFTWARE AND DAY OF THE TENTACE, INDIANA JONES SAMURA SHOWDOWN 2 STAR WARS CHESS MAcc CAPI ...27.99 ACCESSORIES AVAILABLE FOR ALL  SUPREME WARRIOR .99 SUPER SEX 2 139.99 MORTAL COMBAT 2 MACHINES SUPER STRIKE....... ...SCALL TOP HUNTER $42.99 PIZA TYCOON... ORDER BY PHONE, FAX OR THROUGH OUR WORLD CUP Gou .99 WORLD HEROES 2 JE.. $48.99 PREMIER MANAGa 3...... EXCLUSIVE FREE POST SERVICE 100's of accessories available E.g. JOYSTICKS, SPEAKERS, SOUND CARDS. Also HARDWARE PLEASE RING 59 \"SA D Cut Out This order form and post to : ITEM MACHINE PRICE GAMEPLAY, FREEPOST LS5924, BATLEY, W. YORKSHIRE WF17 7BR. TOURNAMENT EOTON ALM 95. 525 99 Fue THROME $3509 HOCTANE CALL $22.99 $29.99   STENS 196 POA Tour Gou 3 .50 do Pl L94 & DEATH OF SUPERMAN, .99 .99 .99 ,99 .99 *** ROLL RACING.... RASH 3 Hoy WORLD CUP '95. WORSHODOWN.. ... W SOCCER G FORCE 2... ......99 $21.99 S IT RACER... STREETRGHTER 2 aaaaaaaa .99 .99 OE JAM & EAR 2  $19.99 $29.99 .99 THE PARK MN HUNG Shox WARE GETZ HOCKEY W OTMPCS WWE RAW MEN 2 .99 .99 105 105  AS A HARDWARE A S 01924 473157 SALES HOTLINES OPEN SEVEN DAYS A WEEK GAMEplay Gamer GRAR FAX ORDERS ON 01924 473157 124 HOURS A DAY) NAME: UNES OPEN 9AM 8PM MON FRI, 9AM 7PM SAT, 10.30AM 4PM SUN. ANSWERPHONE ALL OTHER TIMES ......... ORDER BY CREDIT CARD, CHEQUE POSTAL ORDERS OR CASH (PLEASE SEND CASH IN A REGISTERED ENVELOPE FOR YOUR OWN PROTECTION ADDRESS:....  POSTCODE:. SIGNATURE: Postage is FREE on all accessories and P&P  orders of more than one item, Please ADD ..............FAX: ........  for orders of just one software item. TOTAL  CASH I CHEQUE O POSTAL ORDER O CARD VISA ALLA Cheques payable to 'Gameplay! Prices correct at time of going to press. E & OE. CARD NUMBER CARD NUMBER 10100000000 EXPIRY DATE 10/01 EXPIRY DATE CyG 8 TEL:...... NEXT DAY DELIVERY .50 FOR ORDERS UP TO ,  FOR ORDERS OVER , PLEASE ORDER BEFORE 3PM TO ENSURE IMMEDIATE DESPATCH. "


"DOMAN REFLECTIONS ON FASHION Put you-FOOTnit. Style illustrated: Krypton. This or other Domani styles available from Russell & Bromley, Charles Clinkard Ltd, Domani Retail Shops also Domani at Childrens World, Jones Bootmaker, John Lewis Partnership stores, Gordon Scott, Selfridges and main Start-rite stockists. "

